29 August 2024
 
AperTO - Archivio Istituzionale Open Access dell'Università di Torino
Original Citation:Silica Surface Features and Their Role in the Adsorption of Biomolecules: Computational
Modeling and Experiments
Published version:
DOI:10.1021/cr3003054
Terms of use:
Open Access
(Article begins on next page)Anyone can freely access the full text of works made available as "Open Access". Works made available
under a Creative Commons license can be used according to the terms and conditions of said license. Use
of all other works requires consent of the right holder (author or publisher) if not exempted from copyright
protection by the applicable law.Availability:This is the author's manuscript
This version is available http://hdl.handle.net/2318/141894 since 2016-08-08T16:37:22Z1 
 
 
 
 
 
This is an author version of the contribution published on : 
Questa è la versione dell’autore dell’opera:  
Rimola, A.; Costa, D.; Sodupe, M.; Lambert, J. -F.; Ugliengo, P. Silica Surface 
Features and Their Role in the Adsorption of Biomolecules: Comp utational 
Modeling and Experiments. Chemical Reviews 2013, 113, 4216. 
10.1021/cr3003054  
The definitive version is available at:  
La versione definitiva è disponibile alla URL : 
http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/cr3003054?prevSearch=%255BContrib%253
A%2Bugliengo%255D&searchHistoryKey=  
 2 
 
Silica surface features and their role in the 
adsorption of bio -molecules: computational 
modeling and experiments  
 
Albert Rimola1, Dominique Costa2, Mariona Sodupe1, Jean-François  Lambert3 and Piero 
Ugliengo *4 
 
1Departament de Química, Universitat Autònoma  de Barcelona,  
08193 Bellaterra (Cerdanyola del Vallès), Spain  
 
2Laboratoire de Physico -Chimie des Surfaces, UMR CNRS -ENSCP 7045, Ecole Nationale 
Supérieure de Chimie de Paris, Chimie -ParisTech, 11, Rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, 
France  
 
3Laborat oire de Réactivité de Surface, UMR CNRS 7197, Université Pierre et Marie Curie − 
Paris 6 , Case 178, 3 Rue Galilée, 94200 Ivry -sur-Seine, France  
 
4Università di Torino, Dipartimento di Chimica, and NIS – Nanostructured Interfaces and 
Surfaces – Centre of Ex cellence, Via P. Giuria 7, 10125, Torino, Italy  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Corresponding author. E -mail: piero.ugliengo@unito.it  
  3 
 
Contents  
1. Introduction  
2. Structure and Polymorphism  
2.1. Synthesis of silica samples  
2.2. Silica Surfaces – Nomenclature of the surface gr oups  
3. Experimental Data   
3.1. Fetaures of bare silica surface  
3.1.1  Bulk data: TG (thermogravimetry)  and silanol surface densities  
3.1.2  Bulk data: acid —base titration . How many ne gatively charged silanolate 
groups can there be at the interface  ? 
3.1.3 . Vibrational spectroscopies: IR and Raman  
3.1.4. NIR, visible and UV  
3.1.5. Solid -state NMR  
3.1.6. Par amagnetic sites: ESR and related techniques  
3.1.7. Adsorption of probe molecules  
3.1.8. IRAS, STM, LEED: « flat » silica surfaces  
3.1.9. Use of molecular  analogues of silica surface groups  
3.1.10. Silica in aqueous solutions: existence of a modified water region  
           3.2. Adsorption of biomolecules on silica   
3.2.1. X -Ray diffraction  
3.2.2. Bulk adsorption data: geochemical models and adsorption enth alpies  
3.2.3. Vibrational spectroscopies  
3.2.4. NMR techniques  
3.2.5. Flat surface techniques  
                        3.2.6. An overview of experimental studies of small biomolecules/silica systems  
3.2.7. From oligopeptides to proteins : adsorption, second ary structure and 
selectivity  
4. Different Approaches to Model Adsorption at Surfaces   
4.1. The periodic boundary condition approach  
4.2. The cluster approach  
4.3. The embedded cluster approach  
5. Theoretical Methods  and their application to silica surface s modeling  
 5.1. Wave function methods  
 5.2. DFT based methods  
 5.3. Dispersion corrected methods  4 
 
 5.4. Basis sets  
 5.5. Molecular Dynamics simulations  
 5.6. Approximated methods  
5.6.1.  Semiempirical methods  
5.6.2.  SCC -DFTB  
5.6.3.  Classical force fields  
6. Crystalline silica surfaces   
 6.1. Surface sites  
 6.2. Surface reconstruction  
 6.3. Hydroxylated surfaces  
7. Amorphous silica surfaces   
 7.1. The Tielens’s model  
 7.2. The Ugliengo’s model  
 7.3. Other models  
 7.4. The S2R surface defect  
8. Adsorption o f water on silica surfaces   
8.1. The early story: first principles cluster based calculations  
 8.2. Water on crystalline hydroxylated silicas  
  8.2.1. The low coverage case  
  8.2.2. Intermediate coverages  
  8.2.3. The case of the water dimer  
  8.2.4. Water  monolayer  
  8.2.5. Water multi layers  
  8.2.6. Crystalline Silicas -liquid water interface  
  8.2.7. Water on hydrophobic crystalline silicas  
  8.2.8. Adsorption of water on crystalline defects  
  8.3. Water on amorphous hydroxylated silicas  
  8.3.1. Hydroxyl ated amorphous silicas models obtained by classical MD  
  8.3.2. Hydroxylated amorphous silicas models obtained by ab initio  methods  
9. Interaction with Biomolecules   
9.1. Interaction with amino acids  
 9.1.1. The glycine case  5 
 
  9.1.1.1. Gas-phase interactio n 
  9.1.1.2. Interaction with the presence of water  
9.1.2. Other amino acids  
 9.1.2.1. Alanine  
 9.1.2.2. Lysine and Glutamic Acid  
9.1.3. General trends for amino acid adsorption on silica surfaces  
9.1. 4. Thermal -induced transformations of adsorbed amino a cids on silica 
surfaces  
   9.2. Interaction with peptides  
   9.3. Interaction with Nucleic acid -related biomolecules   
   9.4. Interaction with drugs and natural products  
10. Summary and perspective  
11. Acknowledgmnents   
 
 
1. Introduction  
There are many re asons to report on silica interacting with biomolecules. The most 
obvious one is that, on the Earth’s crust, oxygen and silicon are the most abundant atomic 
species, with percentages of 45.5% and 27.2%, respectively, which manifests itself  in a large 
varie ty of silica and silicate minerals so that the contact between living matter and these 
materials is ubiquitous.1 The abundance originates from the stellar evolution of massive stars (>8 
solar mass es) in which Mg, Si and O nuclei are formed in large amount s from the nuclear fusion 
reactions.2 If the star is more massive than 1 0 solar masses it will explode as  a supernova  
inseminating the deep space with its newly -formed  chemical elements. Therefore, silica based 
minerals in the rocky planets, like Earth, derive from the ac cretion of interstellar dust grains 
resulting from chemical reactions between the most electropositive elements  and oxygen. More 
specifically, silica refers to silicon dioxide SiO 2, a solid compound present in many different 
crystalline or amorphous allotr opic forms. In nature, it is usually found as quartz , or sand, but is 
also present in some plants and marine organisms  like Radiolarians in which it is metabolized to 
provide the skeleton structure. The name derives from the L atin Silex  and its use is know n from 
the Stone age, as constituent to manufacture flint tools.  An enormous literature exists on silica 
itself and its applications and excellent books and reviews are available on silica properties. In 
the following, many of the general concepts about s ilica will be borrowed from the classical 
book by Iler3 and the edited book by Legrand ,4 the well -known collection of papers  on 6 
 
adsorption at silica surfaces in the book edited by Papirer5 and, in particular, from contributions 
by El Shafei,6 Morrow and Gay7 and Davydov .8 Another good point of reference is the book by 
Vansant.9  
An additional  reason to focus on the present topic is that silica surfaces have a key role in 
many applications dealing with biomolecules interactions,10 for instance in chromatography,11 
just to mention the most common one. Indeed, silica as stationary phase for liquid 
chromatography system is used, for instance, in the pharmaceutical industr y, in the analysis of 
contaminants, pesticides, bioanalytes, and drug residues in drinks and food samples, medical or 
environmental tests.  
The physico -chemical reasons behind the delicate equilibrium established between the 
adsorbed and the mobile phases are ultimately dictated by the specific interactions between silica 
surface functionalities and the adsorbate, resulting in different adsorption constants . The contact 
between a biomolecule or, more generally, an organic molecule and an inorganic oxide sur face is 
also the key to understand how artificial implants based on bioglasses, a combination of CaO, 
Na2O and SiO 2 oxides (of which the latter is the dominant one), perfectly merge with the body 
bone tissue.12,13 Application s of pure silica in health care are found in porous glass which can be 
designed to encapsulate a specifi c drug which is then released in situ  by a degradation of the 
silica matrix so as to maximize therapeutic effects and reduce toxicological side effects.14 
Mesoporous materials are the main example of a “drug delivery systems” (DDS) with two 
principal aims: the development of systemic -delivery systems, able to release drug at a 
controlled rate avoiding premature degradation of the active agents, and implantable local -
delivery devices, able to release drug as a response to an external stress (for  instance the 
application of a magnetic field) or a change in internal conditions (for instance pH).15,16 
Molecular sieves, particularly MCM -41, have been proposed as DDS  starting from 200117 and 
their interaction with ibuprofen, widely employed as anti -inflammatory and analgesic, has been 
intensively studied. For a DDS to work properly it should show biocompatibility.18 Interestingly, 
the biocompatibility of amorphous silica particles with cellular systems has been proved19,20 
whereas crystalline silica manifests toxic effects in interaction with cellular systems. The t oxicity 
of crystalline silica , derive d from prolonged inhalation of micrometric dust of quartz  and its 
polymorphs of major density, cristobalite and tridymite, that provokes serious lung diseases like 
pulmonary fibrosis and silicosis,21-23 whereas amorphou s silicas and silic ic acid do not show 
pathogenic effects.24 Many hypotheses have been proposed by scientists to explain the origin of 
silicosis, all of them inv olving the role of functionalities exposed at the silica surface in the 
adsorption of endogenous matter. Adsorption of biomolecules may, in principle, trigger toxicity 
by modifying their structure and activating the immune system in a sort of autoimmune de fense 7 
 
mechanism. For instance, the arrangement of silanols and siloxane bridges , which manifests in 
the presence of hydrophilic or hydrophobic areas , can cause  the unfolding of proteins, or the 
adsorption of phospholipids through the hydrophilic phosphate and may provoke cell membrane 
rupture.22 
Less relevant to the present context is the use of silica in heterogeneous catalysis and as a 
sensing device .The possibil ity to modify surface silanols to give Si -O-M, where M may be a 
catalytically active metal as V, W, Mo, Cr or many other elements, or to host nano sized metal 
particles at the surface, makes silica an excellent material in catalysis.25 Sensing with silica 
materials is based on surface binding, or encapsulation of sensitive molecules. The change in one 
or more properties when the silica surface is in contact with the analyte is revealed by the device. 
An interesting feature of silica as a support for sensors is the possibility to manufacture  it in 
various forms a s required, so that doped glasses can be miniaturized and integrated in optics  
fiber26 or arranged in sensor arrays for the detection of multiple an alytes.27 Furthermore, they can 
easily be prepared to be used as selective tagged systems.28 
 Most  forms of divided  silicas are structurally a morphous and,  therefore , few techniques 
can provide atomic resolution information. Exceptions are rare , and only very recently, elegant 
experiments using scanning tunneling microscopy in ultra -high vacuum conditions29 combined 
with quantum mechanical modeling , revealed the atomic structure of a vitreous thin silica bilayer 
film grown on Ru(0001) . The difficulty in getting accurate structural in formation further  
increases when considering the interaction with biomolecules, despite the fact that for the latter 
alone, the Protein Data Bank30 contains > 82000 biomolecule str uctures known with atomic 
accuracy from a variety of  diffraction and NMR spectroscopy  techniques.  It is then clear that 
experiments alone cannot cope with the complexity of the silica/biomolecule interactions. 
Indeed, the missing information about atomis tic details can be provided by computer simulation 
techniques of various kinds , which are becoming essential to provide detailed views of the 
interface regions in which the silica/biomolecule interaction is occurring. Computer experiments 
can be thought as  “virtual microscopes” as they are able to increase our understanding not only 
providing atomic details but, most importantly, also the energetic features of the adsorption 
process, vibrational frequencies, NMR chemical shifts, electron density maps, and e lectrostatic 
potentials which are essential ingredients for the correct interpretation of the experimental data. 
Silica functionalities are mainly surface silanol groups (SiOH) and they interact with the polar 
groups of proteins, nucleic acids or with the phosphate groups of membrane phospholipids 
through relatively strong H -bonds. To reduce the complexity one can resort to a bottom -up 
approach, by studying the isolated biopolymer constituents, i.e. amino acids, DNA bases, 
phosphates etc. As water is also u biquitously present in the biological context it is then very 8 
 
challenging to disentangle the silica/water, water/biomolecule and silica/biomolecule 
components from the resulting interaction strength.31 As it will become clear in this review, a lot 
of exciting work remain to be done in this field, as many important issues stil l need to be fully 
clarified. Just to focus on one of the most common aspects, it is known that silica surface 
features are sensitive to the thermal treatment suffered by the material as silanol groups are 
removed from the surface by mutual condensation. W hat appears to be a rather straightforward 
process is indeed a very complex phenomenon and neither experiments nor computer simulation 
have clarified why the surface of a n amorphous  silica sample heated at high T (>1000 K) will not 
return to the pristine s ituation after water adsorption of the thermally treated material , whereas 
this happen s for lower treatment temperatures .32,33 Despite its being such a  common material, the 
synthesis  of silica, either in gaseous phase as pyrogenic silica or in solution, has only been 
achieved on the first half of the 20th century, with the development of the sol -gel synthesis 
technique.13 Starting from the 1960s, s ilica materials have become the subject of intense 
academic research and industrial application.34 Nowadays silica, in all its diff erent forms and 
possible applications is one of the most studied compounds in the fields of chemistry, physics, 
material science, biomaterials and engineering.35  Indeed, searching for “silica” in the ISI Web of 
Knowledge, within the 2001 -2011 period, a regular increase in the number of ent ries in article 
topics and titles is fou nd during the years (see Figure1 ).  
 
a
b
 9 
 
Figure 1 . (a) Record count vs publication year  (2001 -2011) for the word “silica” in article topic 
(blue bar) and in title (red bar). (b) Record count vs publication year (2001 -2011) for “silica” in 
review’s topic. So urce: ISI Web of Science®, Databases=SCI -EXPANDED, SSCI, A&HCI, 
search date: 07 -08-2012.  
 
The name “silica” is also present  more than 2500 times in review  topics and more than 60 new 
materials have been patented (silica in patent title) in the same period  of time, confirming the 
importance of silica based materials in a wide range of different fields.  
 In the present review we only focus on the interaction between silica, either crystalline or 
amorphous , and biomolecules, restricting our attention to studi es reporting a joint use of 
experiment and modeling techniques. We have also decided to include  water as a special case, as 
H2O is the most common biomolecule by election. In the spirit of a bottom -up approach, it 
resulted  that amino acids, small peptides , nucleic acid and a few important drug related 
molecules have been studied so far in interaction with silica. The situation is similar to other 
materials like hydroxyapatite36 and bioactive glasses.37 Specific cases of molecules which are 
not, strictly speaking, biological  are also included when they can play important r ole in a 
biochemistry context. The pioneering and elegant work developed for a long time to characterize 
the interaction of small molecules like, CO, CO 2, NH 3 etc. with silica surfaces from gas/solid 
adsorption experiments38 is not the focus of the present contribution  as it has already been 
reviewed39 and it has less relevance in the biologi cal context. It will, however, be briefly 
reviewed in Section 3 as some fundamental results on simple molecules are also relevant for the 
case of adsorption of more complex biomolecules.  
 
2. Structure and polymorphism  
In the following we very briefly summa rize the silica surface features common to 
crystalline as well as amorphous silicas without claiming to be  exhaustive (see for instance Ref.40 
for details) . Silica is a solid material with a  density between 2 and 3 g/cm3 and high melting 
point (ca. 1700ºC), whose chemical formula is SiO 2. In the structure  of most crystalline 
polymorphs (except for stishovite, vide infra) , a silicon atom is bound to four oxyg en atoms, and 
each oxygen to two silicon atoms. The silicon atoms are at the centres of regular tetrahedra of 
oxygen atoms, [SiO 4], connected through an oxygen vertex. Already in 1932, Zachariasen 
suggested that vitreous silica also consists of a continuou s random network of corner -sharing  
[SiO 4] tetrahedra.41  The overall SiO 2 structure is neutral because  the formal oxidation numbers 
for silicon and oxygen are (+4) and ( -2), respectively, and each oxygen atom in the structure is 10 
 
the bridge between two [SiO 4] tetrahedra, so that the silicon -oxygen ratio is 1:2. Thus, t he [SiO 4] 
tetrahedron represents the bu ilding block of almost all silica polymorphs  and they only  differ in 
the connectivity of the tetrahedral framework.  The different linking patterns for each polymorph 
translate  into different structural, physical and chemical properties.  
The Si -O bond show s a predominantly covalent character, as proved by the electron 
density maps, obtained from X -ray diffraction, and by the bond population analysis obtained 
from quantum mechanical calculations. Both experimental and computational results assign a 
charge of  ca. +1. 4 on silicon atoms and -0.7 on oxygen atoms.42,43 
Since silicon has empty d orbitals at a relatively low  energy it can expand its coordination 
to become octahedrally coordinated. Stishovite, a high -temperature  and high-pressure polymorph 
of silica, is the only form characterized by a framework in which the silicon atoms are 
octahedrally coordinated by six oxygen atoms and it was discovered in Meteor Crater, Arizona , 
due to the favourable high T and P caused by the body impact,44 and synthesized in the 
laboratory by Stishov and Popova.45 Its X -ray structure revealed a rutile type SiO 2 framework.46 
The [SiO 4] unit is rigid, as changing the O -Si-O angle from the equilibrium value of 109º 
is an energetically expensive process. On the contrary, the Si -O-Si angle that connects two 
tetrahedra can easily change, for instance as a function of temperature or geometrical constraints. 
Indeed the flexibility of the Si -O-Si angle is very high, since it costs virtually no energy to 
change the angle value between 130º and 180º, as demonstrated in the past in a number of 
computational studies.47-49  For instance, the CISD/TZ+2d potential energy surface of H 3Si-O-
SiH 3 as a cluster model ( see Section 3.2 ) of the siloxane Si -O-Si bond gave a minimum at  142º, 
while changing  the angle from 130º to 180º, only costs around 6.7 kJ/mol.47 The exact value of 
the barrier to bring the Si -O-Si to 180° from the actual minimum was shown to be difficult to 
compute as Bär and Sauer 48 showed a large  sensitivity  of the results to the quality of the adopted 
Gaussian basis set. For instance, MP2 calculations with basis set s including up to five d and four 
f  polarization functions showed a minimum potential energy at a Si-O-Si angle value larger than 
145º, and a linearization barrier of only 1.5 kJ/mol. Similar results have been reported in an 
exhaustive work by Tielens et al50 who adopted six different exchange -correlation functionals 
with very large Gaussian basis sets, confirming the extreme flexibility of the Si -O-Si angle in 
full agreement with the MP2 results by Bär and Sauer.48 All these results are at variance with the 
case of organic ether in which the C -O-C angle is almost invariably found around 110° and there 
is a very high energy barrier to linearization. The Lewi s basicity of the Si -O-Si siloxane bridges 
has also long ago51 been proved to be significantly smaller than the corresponding one measured 
for the C -O-C link found in organic ethers. Reasoning based on the oxygen  p orbital back 
donation through the empty d orbitals of Si have been put forward but more recent quantum 11 
 
mechanical calculations did not find any evidence for that and electrostatic interactions have 
been invoked to explain the relatively short Si -O bond length.48 
The high pl iability of the Si -O-Si angle is the reason behind the large number of all -silica 
material s, envisaging all possible silica polymorphs , from dense crystalline and amorphous 
structures (quartz or glasses), non -periodic porous systems (aerogels and sponges) to 
microporous crystalline zeolites and mesoporous materials  (see Figure 2 ). 
 
Figure 2 . Different silica s tructures based on corner -sharing [SiO 4] units.  
  
Just for the limited case of zeolites, the structural database52 reports 201 different kind of 
all-silica frameworks which can be, at least in principle, be synthesized. In practice m ost of them 
have only been synthesized as aluminosilicates (zeolites), as a small amount of substitutional 
aluminium stabilizes the framework. Zeolites are used  as catalysts as well as adsorbent in a large  
number of technological applications.53,54   
The [SiO 4] arrangement that determines the formation of different dense polymorphs 
chiefly depends on the crystallization pr essure (P) and temperature (T), and their relative 
stability chan ge with the values of P and T. The different polymorphic phases can be present out 
of their P and T stability range because the phase transformation between one polymorph and 
another is an ex tremely slow process. A phase that is maintained unaltered outside its stability 
conditions is named metastable. Zeolites are classical examples of metastable phases and their 
stability can also depend on the presence of the template molecule. At room temp erature and low 
pressure the most stable silica phase is α-quartz followed by α-tridymite and α-cristobalite. These 
are the most common high -density crystalline polymorphs. Each one of them can exist also in a 
phase named β, which is stable at higher tempe rature and presents a more symmetric structure. 
At room conditions  α-quartz is the most  stable phase, and every different crystalline or 
amorphous, low or high -density silica phase in these conditions is metastable at best . 
12 
 
The [SiO 4] building block s are j oined via corner -sharing links in the vast majority of 
silica materials. Exceptions to this class of structures are stishovite (vide supra) and fibrous 
silica55,56 consisting of chains of edge -sharing [SiO 4] tetrahedra. The existence of this material is 
important , as it will be shown later , since  two-silicon  membered rings (SiO) 2 (hereafter called 
S2R) like those  constituting the repeating unit in fibrous silica are also formed as isolated defects 
at the surface of amorphous silica subject to thermal temperature at T > 800K , imparting to the 
surface a reactive character.  
 
2.1. Synthesis of silica samples  
The form ation of colloidal silicas, pyrogenic silica, silica xerogels and precipitated silica 
has been  largely studied in order to synthesize products of technological importance with 
reproducible properties. The preparation of silica samples can be made in anhydr ous vapor phase 
at high temperature (such samples are trademarked Carbosil®  in USA or Aerosil® in Europe), 
vaporizing SiO 2 in an arc or plasma jet and condensing it in a stream of dry inert gas or oxidizing 
and hydrolyzing silicon compounds (SiH 4, SiCl 4, HSiCl 3), or in aqueous solution (silica gel or 
precipitated silica) by condensation of simple monomers R xSi(OH) y (x+y = 4). Both methods 
produce porous structures: pyrogenic silica normally presents smaller pores than colloidal silica  
whereas Aerosil®  only exhibits inter -particular porosity . All of these materials have high s urface 
areas as measured by means of the adsorption isotherm obtained with N 2 as adsorbate57 applying 
the Brunauer , Emmett and Teller (BET) theory.58 Such samples are overall amor phous structures 
but pyrogenic silica may present crystal -like order in limited regions. This can be explained 
considering that at the high temperature required by the synthesis the rate of rearrangement of 
[SiO 4] tetrahedra is very  high, and since configu rations with local order similar to those of 
crystals are the most stable, the tetrahedra tend to arrange locally in ordered networks.  
In 1984 Avnir and coworkers59 described the hydrolytic polycondensation of silicon 
alkoxides Si(OR) 4 or R’ nSi(OR) 4-n in solution, to form high ly porous organosilicates, where the 
organofunctional groups R’ modifies the network of the product. The reaction was somehow 
revolutionary because it permits the entrapment of organic and bioinorganic molecules within 
the structure of  glasses at low tempe rature, something that was not possible before due to the 
high temperature that the preparation of glasses normally requires.  
The porosity of the gel structure changes with the organofunctional R and R’ groups and 
other factors like the drying procedure ap plied after the synthesis or the use of drying agents like 
formamide, glycerol, oxalic acid and other organic acids.60 For instance, samples dried by natural 
evaporation ( Xerogels ) present a minor porosity whereas samples dried in an autoclave 
(Aerogels ), where the solvent is removed above its critical point, pre sent a major porosity and a 13 
 
lesser density. The porosity strongly determines the features of the fuctionalities exposed at the 
surfaces and , thereby, the surface properties of the sample.59,61 Clearly, it is not possible within 
this review to report the innumerable applications of these silica -based hybrids especially since 
they involve a surface chemistry potentially very different from bare silica.  
In 199 2, researchers of the Mobile Oil Corporation developed a new family of ordered 
mesoporous silica s with pore diameters tunable between 15 and 300 Å, using liquid crystal 
surfactants with long n -alkyl chains as templat ing agents.62,63 Such highly porous ordered silicas 
present pores  with amorphous silica walls spatially arranged in periodic patterns. These 
compounds were named M41S (molecular sieves) and present very high specific surface areas 
(~700 m2/g) and pore volumes. The M41S consist of a hexagonal phase (P6m) named MCM -41, 
a cubic phase (Ia3d), named MCM -48 and a lamellar phase named MCM -50 (see Figure 3).   
 
Figure 3 . Schematic representation of the process gi ving rise to molecular sieves. Reprinted with 
permission from Ref.64. Copyright 2005 America Chemical So ciety . 
 
The pore dimension depends on the length of the alkyl chain and the pore walls are 
amorphous  overall. The pore diameter essentially determines the dimension of the molecules that 
can be entrapped inside the pores: tuning the pore dimension in a ran ge that varies from a few 
nanometers to several tens of nanometers , it is possible to host small molecules or 
macromolecules as proteins. The presence of additives during the synthesis, which modify the 
functional groups exposed at the wall surfaces, may d etermine the adsorption  properties of the 
molecular sieves. For this reason such structures present a large number of potential applications.  
The list would not be complete without mentioning biogenic silica such as sponge 
spicules, radiolarian tests, and  especially the frustules (silicified cell walls) of diatoms, whose 
accumulation yields « diatomaceous earth » or kieselguhr and « siliceous ooze » sediments. They 
have original middle -range organisations such as the regular nanometric spheres of opal, and  the 
micron -size structures of diatom w alls are especially spectacular.65 Biogenic silicas interact w ith 
biomolecules, almost by definition, but in a different way from what is considered in the present 
paper : specialized biomolecules such as the proteins silaffins and silicateins66 pre-exist to the 14 
 
siliceous phase and strongly contribute to building it from molecular precursors. This is a 
fascinating subject but it falls outside of the scope of this review. The question whether biogenic 
silicas differ  from their synthetic count erparts at the molecular level is largely untouched.   
2.2. Silica surfaces – Nomenclature of surface groups  
While an ideal solid, irrespective of its amorphous or crystalline nature is, by definition, 
infinite, a real solid is always finite and then , chara cterized by external surfaces. The surfaces 
represent the interface between a solid bulk and the external environment so that the physical and 
chemical features characterizing the interaction of (bio)molecules with the silica surfaces should 
be studied  at the atomic level . To achieve that, the first step is to highlight the structural 
properties  of the bare silica surfaces.4,40 
When silica is fractured in the laboratory under ultra -high vacuum conditions a complex 
reconstruction of the broken Si -O bonds occur s in order to self -heal the dangling bonds at the 
surface  (see also Sections 3.1.6 and 6) . This can be attained by the formation of highly strained 
Si-O rings of small nuclearity or unusual  defects like >Si=O ones  (silanones) . It has, however, 
been measured that even a  very low water partial pressure ( of the order of  10-7 torr)  brings  about 
a complete reconstruction of the silica surface giving rise to surface silanol groups, SiOH.67 
Therefore , at the silica surface, in normal laboratory conditions the most common termination is 
given  by two main functional groups: the siloxane links (Si -O-Si) and the silanol groups (Si -
OH). The siloxanes are also pres ent in the bulk structure, although not accessible , and result 
from the vertex sharing of the [SiO 4] tetrahedra . Silanol groups either in the bulk  or at the 
surface are the result of an incomplete condensation during the polymerization that forms the 
massi ve solid . The contact between silica and chemicals of various nature may break Si -O bonds 
at the surface of the material giving rise to unfilled valences . Water is normally present in the 
environment around the material, so that either p roton s or hydroxyl groups (OH) are the most 
suitable candidates to complete the valency of both atoms . Even in cases where the silica derives 
from combustion process, the final material is, nonetheless, exposed to the moisture. Hydrated 
surfaces, characterized by high popula tion of surface hydroxyls, are therefore formed. The usual 
picture of a pure silica surface is, thus, a system composed by regions of siloxane links 
interrupted by sites exposing silanol groups. Silanols are responsible of the hydrophilic 
properties of sil ica, since they can interact with polar groups or molecules via hydrogen bond 
interactions.8,38 
In crystalline silica, ideally, the [SiO 4] tetrahe dra are stacked in an ordered design which 
is repeated regularly, so that a regular distribution of the hydroxyls at the surface has to be 
expected. In spite of this, experiments evidence that silica samples are quite heterogeneous 
because of irregular pac king and incomplete condensation during the synthesis process. On 15 
 
crystallin e silica, the upper layers can present an amorphous character with a loss of the expected 
order.21,68 Nevertheless, within the scope of the present review, only regular surfaces have been 
considered when dealing with crystalline materials so that special  surface features are expected 
due to the repeating nature  of the SiOH groups.   
As mentioned before, Si atoms in the bulk silica are mostly bound to four oxygen atoms . 
This environment, clearly identifiable by NMR,7 is labelled as Q4 in which the superscript  
indicates the number of neighbour ing [SiO 4] group s attached to a given Si . On the other hand, 
silico n at the surface can bind to one or two hydroxyl groups to complete its valence, according 
to whether its binding to the bulk involves three or two Si -O-Si bridges : the corresponding 
environments are therefore denoted as  (Q3) or (Q2), respectively . Surfac e structures like  surface 
silanone  >Si=O and Si -(OH) 3 (Q1), with the silicon bonded to only one bulk oxygen, can exist in 
principle, but the first one is thermodynamically and kinetically unstable towards water 
adsorption69-71 whereas no evidence of the Q1 species has been reported from NMR experiments 
(see also Section 3).72  
 16 
 
Figure 4 . A cartoon of the possible silica surface sites: a) isolated SiOH (I, Q3), geminal SiOH 
(G, Q2), vicinal SiOH (V, Q3) and H -bonded SiOH (H, Q3); b) formation of the (SiO) 3 ring (S3R) 
by condensation of the H pair; c) formation of the (SiO) 2 ring (S2R) by condensation of the V 
pair. Evolution from a) to c) by increasing temperature. Colour coding: oxy gen (red), oxygen of 
the SiOH (blue), hydrogen (white), silicon (yellow).  Molecular graphics rendered by Qutemol.73 
 
Figure 4 a shows a cartoon which helps to visualize differ ent kinds of silanols exposed at 
silica surfaces. A single  or terminal  Si-OH group (Q3) is called  an isolated  silanol SiOH ( I) when 
the distance to the closest  SiOH groups is such that they cannot be involved in H -bond 
interactions. Silanol groups which ar e separated by more than ~3.3 Å can be considered as 
unable to establish mutual hydrogen bond, and therefore as isolated. The isolated silanol groups 
are then free to establish H -bond interactions with adsorbates as both H -bond donors and 
acceptors. Pairs of silanols belonging to tetrahedra that share a common oxygen vertex are 
normally called vicinals  (V). The two silicon atoms of vicinals  are separated by a single  oxygen 
so that the two hydroxyl groups are separated by  less than 3 Å, but in spite of that,  they are 
usually not involved in H -bond , at least according to quantum mechanical calculations on cluster 
models.74,75 Nevertheless, local geometrical constraints may force a vicinal site  to become 
weakly H -bonded. Two silanols, that  do not belong to directly connected tetrahedra, but 
nonetheless are closer than ~3.3 Å, will establish H -bonds and are called interacting  or H -
bonded (H). The optimum O···O distance between the two OH involved in a H-bond lies 
between ~ 2.5 and ~ 2.8 Å. It is worth noting that the position s  in space of surface SiOH groups 
in silica is constrained by the underlying  solid structure,  so that   in many cases, they cannot give 
rise to strong H -bond interactions as would have occurred in a less constrained  environment. 
Two OH groups linked to the same surface silicon atom (Q2) to give the Si -(OH) 2 moiety, are 
called geminals  (G) ) and sin ce the silicon atom is attached in addition to two tetrahedra by Si -O-
Si links, a pair of geminals necessarily correspond to a Q2 Si. Even though they are  very close, 
the two geminal OH are oriented in such a way that they cannot be involved in mutual H -bonds.  
When a highly hydrated silica is heated, the main effect is the progressive condensation 
of pairs of surface silanols involved in H -bond interaction, and the formation of a siloxane 
bridge, as showed in Figure  4b. Depending on the pair of H -bonded si lanol groups the 
condensation bring s about (SiO) n rings of distinct nuclearity n. For instance, in Figure 4b the 
condensation of the H pair gives a three -silicon  membered (SiO) 3 ring (S3R) whereas when 
vicinal V pairs are involved a highly strained two -silicon membered (SiO) 2 ring (S2R) is formed 
(Figure  4c). T heir formation increases the structural tension of the outgassed surface during the 
heating process. As the SiOH groups can give rise  to H-bond interactions with adsorbates and , in 17 
 
particular , with t he ubiquitously present water molecules, outgassing silica at high T decreases 
its hydrophilic character and increases the hydrophobic one. Thus, for high -temperature treated 
silicas, the adsorption processes are dominated by hydrophobic interactions, main ly driven by 
dispersive forces. This means that thermal treatments are  a very simple a nd convenient way to 
fine-tune the adsorption properties of silica based materials. We will see in Section 3 how 
infrared spectroscopy can be used to track the dehydroxyl ation process.  
Silica samples prepared in the gas phase, known as Aerosil , are usually less hydrophilic 
than sol -gel silica s, because the high temperature of the preparation already causes a decrease of 
the number of  OH groups, which condense during the sy nthesis process. In this case, it is 
important to consider the age of the sample to know the degree of surface hydroxylation.6 
Samples of Aerosil tend, upon  aging, to increase the total concentration of silanols, while 
reducing the concentration of isolated silanols. Th is is the result of the cleavage of strained 
siloxane bridges by water molecules in the surrounding environment.76 Wate r breaks Si -O-Si to 
form a pair of mutually H -bonded silanol groups  (apart from the opening of the S2R resulting in 
a vicinal pair) , in the  inverse process of that described in Figure  4, so that the total number of 
silanols increases while the fraction of isolated one s decreases.  
Despite the complexity of silica surface s, Zhuravlev has shown that the average number 
of Si-OH groups per nm2 in a fully hydroxylated surface is a physico -chemical constant 
amounting to 5 OH/nm2, irrespective of the preparation m ethod for a set of about 100 different 
silica aerogel samples.77-80  
More generally, if one considers surfaces that have been thermally activated or are not 
fully hydroxylated for any reason, the total  concentration of silanol terminations ( and their 
distribution between isolated , vicinals  and H -bonded, or between terminals  and  geminals ) can 
vary considerably .8,81,82    However, regularities are observable and  Zhuravlev78 has proposed a 
“master curve” showing the concentrations of the different types of silanols exposed at the 
surface as a function of the sample thermal treatment , which is reproduced  in Figure  5. 
 18 
 
012345
473673873107312731473
T / KOH /nm2
 
Figur e 5. Distribution of the OH surface group per nm2 as a function of the silica sample 
treatment temperature. Empty circle: average concentration of  total OH/nm2; filled square s: 
average concentration Si -O-Si; empty square s: average concentration free OH gr oups;  filled 
circle: average concentration of H-bonded OH group s; empty triangles : average concentration of 
geminal group.  Graph drawn by using raw data from Ref.78 
 
Thus, for instance , for the total density of 4.6 OH/nm2 on asilica sample fully 
hydroxylated at 500K, about 0.6, 1.2 and 2.8 OH/nm2 are due to geminal, isolated and H -bonded  
ones, respectively. Already at 700K all H -bonded silanols have disappeared , while the isolated 
silanols reach their maximum density of 2 OH/nm2.  At about 1000K (see also Figure  5) only 1 
isolated silanol  per nm2 remains , together with a small fraction of geminals , and at about 1500K 
the sample undergoes sintering with the elimi nation of all surface functionalities.  Th is very last 
step brings about a complex restructuring of the silica sample making  subsequent rehydration  by 
water adsorption an extremely slow  process .32,33 It is still unclear how it happens and what are 
the physico -chemical steps controlling that process  which implies some sintering of silica .    
An interesting aspect  of silica surfaces in contact with water solutions of different ionic 
strength and pH is silanol deprotonation, which produces negative ly charged surface groups 
(SiO-), with relevant consequences for the adsorption of ions and polar molecules from the  
solution. What is known about this important point will be detailed in Section 3 .1.2.  
 
3. Experimental Data  
3.1. Features of bare Silica Surface  19 
 
Here we will only be concerned with silica features that can play a role in «  realistic  » 
conditions for biomol ecules adsorption, i.e., in conditions of high water activity.  As discussed in 
Section 2, this excludes some features such as silanone groups. We will list the experimental 
techniques that allow the observation and discrimination of silica surface groups a nd summarize 
the main results that have been safely established so far.  
3.1.1  Bulk data: TG (thermogravimetry) and silanol surface densities  
Thermogravimetric analysis has been applied to amorphous silicas for a long time. TG 
traces usually show the elimi nation of physisorbed water at T ≤100°C, followed by the 
condensation of different types of surface silanols up to 1000°C. A huge amount of data have 
been analysed in great detail and allowed to devise what is sometimes called “Zhuravlev’s 
model” ,78,80 whose main feature is an almost constant value of the silanols surface density  for 
maximally hydroxylate d silicas , at 4.6 to 4.9 nm-2  based on non -porous silicas such as Aerosils. 
For mesoporous silicas a figure of 4 nm-2 has been reported  by Trébosc et al.83 from TG and 29Si 
NMR (see section 3.1.5); also from TG and 29Si NMR, Landmesser et al.84 have evaluated the 
percentage of Si atoms bearing OH groups and while there is some ambiguity regarding the 
surface area of their material, a figure in the range 4.2  to 4.6 nm-2  has been estimated .  
It is generally accepted  that precipitated silicas have significantly higher surface silanol 
densities. For instance, a figure of 7.7 silanols nm-2 (from TG alone) has been reported by Ref.85 
Conver sely, silicas with lower silanol densities86 may be prepared if the thermal 
condensation process is correctly controlled. The only way for silanols to disappear is to 
condense in pairs, producing one siloxane and one water molecule. This generally results in the 
formation of strained cycles  or rings , which can be observed by vibrational spectroscopy (cf. 
Section 3.1.3 ). The evolution of the surface densities of various types of silanols with 
pretreatment temperatures has been mentioned in Section 2, ( Figure  4). Surface silanol densities 
significantly lower than 4 nm-2 have sometimes been reported for fully hydroxylated silicas 
without thermal treatment, e.g. 2.2 to 2.7  nm-2 for precipitated silicas.87 As it turns out, figures in 
this range are calculated from LiAlH 4 titration of the silanols,76 a method which has never been 
proved to be quantitative.  
Note that the (111) face of β-cristobalite has a silanol density very similar  to th e average 
value s mentioned above  (4.55 nm-2): this has s purred interest in the use of this surface as a model 
for that of amorphous silica .88 However,  the β-cristobalite (111) surface also has features 
significant ly differen t from  that of amorphous silicas, as the silanols cannot form H -bonds to 
each other  (cf. Section  3.1.3 ; much more on the topic of model crystalline surfaces will be 
found in Section 6.3,  see especially Table 4 for silanol densities ). 20 
 
Although TG curves could in principle be used to assess the distribution of surface 
silanols between populations of different reactivity toward condensation (such as isolated vs. 
interacting), they are in fac t quite featureless and attempts to extract further information from 
them are not fully convincing. Figure 6 shows the first derivative of the weight l oss for a 
hydrated fumed silica ; the first and most intense event peaking at 50° is due to the desorption  of 
physisorbed water, and it is followed by a very broad feature corresponding to silanols 
condensation, peaking in the 230 -280°C range and tailing smoothly up to 1000°C at least. DTG 
traces of mesoporous silica s are only slightly different (F igure 6). For precipitated silicas, 
sharper peaks in the DTG may sometimes be observed but they are likely due to the elimination 
of residual organic residues on the surface.  
 
a) b)
 
 
Figure 6.   Typical TG traces (presented as first derivative, DTG) of a) a fumed silica, Aerosil 
380 (Degussa), b) a mesoporous silica, MCM -41, under dry air flow,  = 5°C/min.   
 
3.1.2. Bulk data: acid -base titration. How many negatively charged silanolate group s can there 
be at the interface ? 
There are many ways to differentiate the reactivit y of surface silanols, depending on what 
phase is in contact with the silica surface. If one is dealing with a silica -aqueous solution 
interface, simple acid -base titration can be useful. Most early studies chiefly aimed at 
determining  the value of the PZC (point of zero charge) of silica, and titration data were thus 
treated in the “1 site, 2 pK” model .89-91 In this model all surface sites are supposed to be 21 
 
equiv alent, and can be either protonated or deprotonated; thus, the only significant differences 
would be between protonated silanols Si -OH 2+, neutral silanols Si -OH and deprotonated ones Si -
O-. Duval et al.  91 have analysed their O1s XPS  results in this manner. But the appropriateness of 
the 1 site, 2 pK model may be questioned since only negative surface charges are observed for 
all tested pHs ,92,93 besides other techniques amply show the heterogeneity of surface silanols . 
Furthermore, when the to tal amphoteric sites density is considered as an adjustable parametre 
and estimated from the titration curves, it provides values quite different from those estimated 
from TG .93 
Therefore it would seem more fruitful to consider that the silica surface exhibits different 
surface sites, all of them acidic but with different acidity constants, i.e. to use “multisite, 1 pK” 
models .94 Using such models the PAD  (proton affinity distribution)  could be extrac ted from 
acid-base titration curves. In practice, this approach is not widespread and we are not aware of 
PAD curves for pure silica, although they have been reported for silica -containing mixed 
oxides .95 
On the other hand, some authors have observed the evolution of surface ionisation by 
other means than measuring proton consumption. Ong et al.96 follow ed the surface charging of a 
quartz surface by SHG (second harmonic generation) observation of polarised interfacial water. 
This technique does not allow an estimate of the absolute value of the surface charge. However, 
the existence of two successive jumps separated by 4 pH units is unmistakeable (see Figure 7), 
and therefore the existence of two silanol populations with intrinsic acidities separated by a 
factor of 10 000. The first population  represents  15-20% of the total and has  a pKa = 4.5  (about 
the same as for acetic acid) , whereas  the remaining one accounts for 80 -85% and has  a pK a = 
8.5; very similar conclusions were reached by Ostroverkhov et al. f rom SFG (sum frequency 
generation).97 22 
 
 
Figure 7.   Intensity of the electric field (supposed proportional to the surface charg e) at the silica 
– aqueous NaCl solution interface as a function of solution pH.  Adapted with permission from 
Ref.96. Copyright 1992 Elsevier.  
 
Evanescent wave cavity ring -down spectroscopy is another technique allowing to probe 
the chemical state of a solid -liquid interface in situ ,98 and its application to the adsorption of 
cationic dyes on silica prisms as a function of pH confirmed the existence of two populations of 
sites with different acidity in about 3 to 1 ratio .99-101 This is an example of using the adsorption 
of a particular molecule in order to identify a corresponding  site on the surface, i.e., it is an 
instance of probe molecule adsorption at the solid -liquid interface: more will be said on probe 
molecules in Section 3.1.7 .  
While the authors  of these studies did not provide specific assignments  for the two silanol 
populations , a possibility is that the y correspond to geminal and terminal silanols, respectively : 
the percentage of groups with the smaller pKa value (more acidic) is of the same order as the 
percentage of geminal with respect to total silanols as measured by NMR. Other interpretations 
of the two populations could be possible, as the state of H -bonding may also influence the acidity 
of a silanol, and we will propose such an explanation in the conclusions (Section 10). Some 
simplified models of surface groups , such as the MUSIC (MUltiSIte Complexation) model, and 
its refinements, have been proposed to theoretically predict these effects, but they seem to do a 
rather poor job at accounting for silica surfaces.102-104 Therefore, the molecular modeling of the 
surface acidity of silanol groups is currently an active field of research and will be discussed in 
detail in Section 8.2.6 below.  23 
 
Well -defined jumps are not app arent from classic pH -metric data (Figure 7). Whether this 
difference is simply due to an intrinsically lower resolution for the latter data remains unknown.  
A better assignment of pKa values observed on amorphous silica would be possible if we 
knew more about the behavior of silanol groups on crystalline silica faces which should expose 
silanols in well -known, uniform environments. Churchill et al.105 estimated PZCs from AFM 
measurements at variable pH and found small but significant differences between the (100) face  
on the one hand (PZC = 2.9), and the (101) and (011) faces on the other hand (PZC = 2.7). Such 
studies are still rare.  
 A question of significance for modeling silica interfaces in the presence of an aqueous 
solution is the maximum density of negatively c harged groups (silanolates, i.e., Si-O-). If one 
adopts the 1 -site, 2 -pK model, the answer should be fairly simple. In this model all surface 
silanols are supposed to be chemically equivalent, and amphoteric. At a pH value significantly 
superior to pK a2, virtually all of them should be negatively ionized (dissociation rate  
1). If 
one were dealing with a solution of a weak acid,  would be about 0.99 at pH = pK a2 + 2; in fact 
for acid groups on a surface,  is smaller due to the adverse energetic effect o f accumulating 
negative charges in close vicinity upon ionization, but it should still tend toward unity at 
reachable pH values, i.e., the silanolate density should approach the total silanol density. Now 
this type of reasoning is not very helpful in pract ice because there is no independent estimate of 
the pK a2 apart from the proton titration data, and in addition to the 1 -site, 2 -pK model is probably 
inadequate to account for the acido -basic behavior of silica surface sites as mentioned above.  
 What we do  obtain from experience with certainty is a value of the surface charge density 
as a function of pH. To give a few typical examples, for Aerosil300 in KCl electrolyte, the 
surface charge varied from about 0.01 to about 0.08 C.m-2 as the pH was raised from 5 to 8,93 
corresponding respectively to 0.06 and 0.49 silanolates ( SiO-) per nm2. The earliest study by 
Bolt89 reported a value o f about 0.01 C/m2  for a colloidal suspension of silica particles  (with a 
surface area of 180 m2/gr) marketed as Ludox ,106 in a 1x10-3 M (mol.L-1) NaCl solution a t pH=7.  
Sonnefeld107 reported for spherical silica particles in a solution at pH=7 and ion strength = 5x10-3 
M a value of 0.02 C/m2 (0.12 SiO-/nm2).  Behrens and Grier108 measur ed a value of 4000 
effective negative charges per m2 at pH=7 and ion strength = 5x10-6 M for 1 m silica spheres, 
i.e. only 0.004  SiO-/nm2. For comparison, the same authors report for a glass plate in contact 
with a solution at the same pH and ion strength a value of 3000 effective negative SiO-/m2, i.e. 
0.003  SiO-/nm2. Other studies provide silica surface charge data.109-112 Figure 8 shows the 
surface charge density as a function of pH for three different silicas.93 
 24 
 
4 5 7 6 8 9-0.15-0.10-0.050.00
Aerosil
C. mulleri
biosiliceous ooze
pHSurface charge (C m-2)0.7 M NaCl
 
Figure 8 .  Charge densities from proton titration of three different silicas as a function of pH: 
one Aerosil, and two biological silicas. NB: “ C. mulleri ” refers to a biogenic silica  synthesized 
by the diatom Chaetoceros Mulleri . Adapted  with permission from Ref.93. Copyright 2002 
Elsevier.  
 
 These data , while incomplete,  show how  the actual electric state of the silica surface is 
crucially determined by the pH of the solution from which the adsorption is taking place.  It also 
depends on the ion strength, although less sensitively.  This has serious consequences if one 
wishes to model (bio)molecules adsorptio n from a solution: the surface density of negatively 
charged silanolate groups introduced in the model will only have a limited range of validity in 
terms of conditions in the solution. Note that 1H NMR is a possible experimental approach to 
detect water i n the vicinity of a silanolate, which has been reported to resonate at an unusually 
low chemical shift value.113,114 
 
3.1.3. Vibrational spectroscopies: IR and Raman  
IR spectroscopy has been applied to amorphous silica , in contact with either a gas phase 
or vacuum,  for a long time. A comprehensive review of the literature until 1998 may be found in 
Ref.40 A typical evolution of the IR spectrum of an Aerosil silica in the 2750 -3800 cm-1 range is 
shown in Figure 9.  25 
 
 
Figure 9.  Infrared spectra of a sample of Aeros il 300 (A300, a fumed silica sample characterized 
by a surface area of 300 m2/gr)  after sample pretreatment in vacuum at increasing temperatures. 
I: isolated, G: geminal, V: vicinal, H: H -bonded (see Section 2.2 ) 
 
This range  contains  the stretching vibrat ion of OH groups ( O-H). If silica is observed 
under air without any pretreatment , the contribution of the OH of adsorbed water mole cules is 
dominant.  Because water molecules adsorbed in a multilayer are  subject to a large range of 
inhomogeneous H -bond in teractions, one observes a large bathochromic shift of the OH 
stretching frequency of their OH groups, together with a heterogeneous broadening. This results 
in a broad feature extending to about 1000 cm-1 lower than the reference frequency of 3747 -3750 
cm-1 (labelled I+G+V  in Figure 9, since these three types of silanols are indistinguishable, cf. 
infra).  Outgassing at T=300K already removes the largest fraction of the multilayer adsorbed 
water, leaving few adsorbed water molecules at the surface  so that  the absorption is due chiefly 
to silanol O -H, and at 450K dehydration is probably complete . Even then, this region shows  a 
complex band structure. The narrow band at 3747 cm-1 becomes stronger and more distinct after 
outgassing ; it has been assigned to  isolated silanols  (denoted I), not interacting through H -bonds. 
Several red-shifted broad components are observed in addition. They correspond to variously H -
bonded silanols. The ener gy of the stretching vibration is more deeply affected when the O -H 
group ac ts as an H -bond donor, when it falls down to about 3520 cm-1; acting as an H -bond 
acceptor will cause a smaller perturbation, of a few tens of cm-1. It has been claimed that both 
fumed and precipitated silica surfaces exhibit a density of isolated silanols  of about 1.1 nm-2.115 
Other studies, however, would indicate that the balance between isolated and H -bonded silanols 26 
 
is variable and depends on the geometry of the silica particles, and most notab ly on their size as 
the smaller particles have a lesser number of isolated silanols, presumably due to constraints 
imposed by surface curvature,116 whereas on fully hydrated particles with a diameter > 30 nm, 
only H -bonded silanols were obse rved.  
 Sometimes , more precise assignments of t he «  H-bonded silanol bands  » hav e been  
proposed but they remain open to question. Quantification of IR a bsorpt ion results is at best 
relative : the evolution of the densities of a given type of surface silanol  can be  followed along a 
series of tre atments, such as thermal activation or chemical functionalisation, but an absolute 
quantification is difficult due to the high variability of extinction coefficients.  In silicalite, which 
is a kind of microporous silic a, several signals including a strong band at 3500 cm-1 and a 
shoulder at 3450 cm-1 were assigned to small groups of Si -OH mutually interacting in «  silanol 
nests  ».117 These could in principle form the basis for band assignments on silica ( see a similar 
remark below for 1H NMR results).  
Further heating and outgassing at T=1073K entirely removes the H -bonded pairs leaving 
on the surface only terminal ( isolated and geminal ) silanol s. IR alone, in contrast  with 29Si NMR  
(vide infra) , cannot dis criminate between terminal and geminal (G) groups.118,119 Takei et al.120 
attempted to create de novo  geminal groups (corresponding to Q2 Si) as well as “triple silanols” -
O-Si(OH) 3  (corresponding to Q1 Si) by grafting of chlorosilanes on the silica surface followed 
by their hydrolysis; they concluded  that the frequencies of such groups are within 2 and 3 cm-1, 
respectively, of that of isolated terminal silanols (Q3 Si), which is too small a difference for 
ordinary spectrometers to resolve.  
Silica also shows several diagnostic vibrations outside of the  OH stretching range.121 The 
strong Si -O-Si stretching vibrations in the 1000 -1200 cm-1 range, and the bending modes under 
800 cm-1, are usually ill -resolved and mostly due to bulk, not to surface groups. An exception 
can be found in thin silica films obtained by superficial oxidation of Si wafers, where all Si -O-Si 
groups belong t o the surface region. These systems can be observed by a variant of IR 
spectroscopy, namely GA -ATR (grazing incidence attenuated total reflectance).  The 
asymmetrical Si -O-Si stretch undergoes a phonon splitting between longitudinal optic (LO) and 
transvers e optic (TO) components. It has been shown122,123 that in a thin SiO 2 film, the TO 
vibrations are paral lel to the film surface while the LO vibrations are perpendicular to it. Both 
components can be observed in GA -ATR; the band at 1230 cm-1 has been assigned to the LO 
mode, and the band at 1045 cm-1 to the corresponding TO mode.124-128 129,130 
More specific vibrational bands  can also give information on siloxane ring sizes. Strained 
rings give rise to breathing modes conspicuous in Raman spectra, at 60 5-607 cm-1 for 3-rings 
(S3R) , known as D2 defects ,131-133 and  490 cm-1 for 4 -rings (S4R, called D1 defects; the latter is 27 
 
more difficult to interprete due to  the overlap  with another band ). 4-rings are only slightly 
strained. As already mentioned in Section 2, s trained rings can be seen in freshly calcined silicas 
but exposure to water will break the siloxane (Si -O-Si) bond .134 The energy gain provided by 
strain relief seems more than sufficient to cause dissociative chemisorption of water , at least in 
the case of S3R .  This process has been quantified in a thorough study on heat -treated silica 
gels,135 and indeed the disappearance of one D2 defect is accompanied by the appearance of two 
newly -formed silanols. Conversely, heating at high temperatures causes  silano l pairs to condense 
giving rise to strained ring  defect s.  
3-rings  and 4 -rings are found in some little -known naturally crystalline silicates which 
may serve as references (quoted in  Ref.136).  
Then there is the important question of 2 -rings or S2R which have been mentioned in 
section 2 – S2R are especially important for the present review because they have given rise to a 
lot of molecular modeling studies. Two b ands at 8 88-891 and 9 08-910 cm -1 had been observed 
to be present in silicas activated at high temperature (fortuna tely, they lie in a narrow transparent 
window in the silica spectrum, between Si -O-Si bending and stretching modes) and to disappear 
upon adsorption of Lewis bases or Lewis acids137 (see below, Section 3.1.7). Michalske and 
Bunker138 hypothesized that they were specifically attributable t o S2R (which they called «  edge -
shared defects  »), and they were able to substantiate this claim by comparing with the vibrational 
spectra of molecular disiloxanes139 (Figure 10) .  
 
Figure 10.  A molecular disiloxane (left), compared with the local structure of the S2R defect on 
the silica surface  (right).
 
Thus, an experimental basis was available for this assignment, which has first been made 
before the era of molecular modeling. Some attempts have been made to quantify S2R: Grabbe 
et al.140 reported a figure of 0.2 to 0.4 nm-2 on an Aerosil silica treated at 1075°C. Of course, less 
harsh treatments are expected to generate a lesser  S2R concentration. Later, the IR bands typical 
of S2R were also observed on mesoporous silicas pretreated at 600°C 141 and silica thin films 
pretreated at 1130°C in vacuo.142 
3.1.4. NIR, visible and UV  
The NIR region contains overtones and combinations of stretching and bending modes 
involving OH groups of water and silanols. The most specific features associated with silica 28 
 
surface groups are bands at 4550 and 7310 cm-1 (about 2200 and 1368 nm, respectively). The 
first one is a combination band ( OH + SiOH), the second one is the 2 OH harmonic.40 The 
combination band in particular is useful because it can be observed even in the presence of 
adsor bed water, as it is energetically well separated from  the ( OH + HOH) combination of H 2O. 
It then shows two or three components that have been attributed to isolated silanols and H -
bonded ones:40  but some physici sts still argue that the 4550 cm-1 band has a more complex 
origin,143 and this spectral region is not widely used to discriminate surface groups.  
Silica is essentially transparent in the visible range and exhibits charge transfer bands in 
the UV (or band gap, depending on whether a localized or a delocalized bond description is 
adopted), like all solid oxides. It has been claimed144 that the 50% UV cutoff wavelength can 
provide information on the distribution of siloxane ring sizes, but it is doubtful if precise 
information  can be obtained in this way.  
3.1.5. Solid -state NMR  
Since the first stages of its development , solid -state NMR has been a choice technique in 
the study of the local structure of silicates and silica polymorphs ,72 since 29Si is a “good” nucleus 
for NMR  because it has a ½ nuclear spin, it provides well -resolved spectra without the 
complications due to quadrupolar interactions, and 29Si chemical shifts ( δ) are highly sensitive to 
details of the molecular environment (for instance, a correlation between δ and the average Si -O-
T angle was evidenced early on). Thus, 29Si NMR provides valuable information on the bulk 
structure. Whether it allows to specifical ly observe surface groups depends first and foremost on 
the surface area: if this parametre is too low, surface -specific signals will be overwhelmed by 
bulk ones. For many amorphous silicas, the surface area reaches values in the order of several 
hundred m2/g, and in this case the proportion of total Si atoms that are exposed on the surface is 
high enough for their signal to stand out in the spectrum. Bulk Si all belong to Q4 tetrahedra and 
give rise to a broad signal centred at about -110 ppm. On the other  hand, surface Si may belong 
to either Q2, Q3 or Q4 tetrahedra, with maxima at about -90, -100 and  -110 ppm, respectively, 
according to well -known assignments .145 The signals are much broader than e.g. in zeolites 
because of the large distribution of Si -O-Si angles, but they are well -resolved enough to allow 
unequivocal quantification  (Figure 11) . Now this quantification in terms of Qn connectivity is 
correlated with the densities of the different types of silanol groups, since each Q3  Si bear s one 
terminal silanol, while each Q2  Si bear s two geminal ones.  This is the most precise wa y of 
quantifying surface silanols, and the fact that it correlates well with the completely independent 
TG data as far as total silanol densities are concerned is encouraging.  29 
 
 
Figure 11.  Typical (1 -pulse) 29Si MAS -NMR spectrum of a fumed silica (Aerosil 380), with 
band assignments . Adapted from Ref.146 
Some authors have proposed that the Q4 peak could be further decompo sed into 
components corresponding to strained and unstrained rings, the former resonating at lower field, 
but since the hypothesized components of the Q4 peak are never well resolved this probably 
cannot form the basis of a quantification of different size  rings.  
It is possible to selectively enhance the NMR signals of surface Si  if desired. Detecting 
the 29Si signals by proton cross -polar isation  ({1H-29Si} CP) ensures that only those Si atoms in 
close vicinity of a proton will appear in the spectrum. Since  the proton sources are silanols and 
eventually adsorbed water molecules, this technique is surface -selective (it also has the 
advantage of bein g faster than single -pulse NMR) ; however, quantification of CP results is 
difficult since Si atoms in different environments will respond differently, according to the 
intensity of their coupling with protons which determines the dynamics of polar isation  transfer. 
The most relevant d ata on this problem are summaris ed in  Ref.147 which propose s a CP 
quantification technique . Recently, an improvement in surface se lectivity more spectacular than 
that observed with CP was shown using dynamic nuclear polar isation  (DNP), where a 100 -fold 
enhancement of the surface 29Si signals was observed for a mesoporous silica .148 This technique 
involves contacting the sample with a small amount of radical -containing solution , which is not 
chemically innocuous,  and it is too early to te ll what impact it will have on the field.  
17O NMR data are much less frequent than 29Si NMR because the natural abundance of 
the target isotope is lower and makes it difficult to record spectra without isotopic enrichment . 
Natural abundance 17O spectra were recorded for some silica polymorphs, notably in cristobalite 
at high temperature .149 Potentially, signals specific for surface groups could be even more 
obvious than in 29Si NMR, because the oxygen in a silanol lies in a very different environment 30 
 
from that in a siloxane bridge. A very different chemical shift is therefore expe cted, and probably 
also a different quadrupole constant value (a parametre with no analogue for 29Si, which 
determines the line shape ). In addition, it may be possible to specifically enrich the surface 
region by exchange with 17OH 2. 17O spectra have indee d been recorded on 45% enriched sol -gel 
silicas150 but it turned out that the signals originating from silanol groups are difficult to detect 
due to very short relaxation t imes. Thus, 17O NMR has not lived up to its promise so far.  
1H NMR is of course surface -selective as it « sees » silanol  group s, which mostly exist on 
the surface.  However the interpretation of spectra has been complicated by the difficulty to 
record solid -state NMR spectra on fully dried samples without exposure to room humidity. In 
most cases protons from adsorbed water molecules are interfering. This problem was specifically 
discussed in Ref.151 On partially dehydrated silica surfaces, two main signals are g enerally 
observed .83,152 The first one at 1.8 ppm has been assigned to non -interacting silanols and 
progessively becomes prominent upon dehydration – some authors have hypothesized that these 
silanols are internal but actually this is not necessary to explain the weak interaction with water. 
The second signal is observed in the 3 -5 ppm range. As the surfa ce is dehydrated it becomes less 
intense and shifts to lower values. It has been assigned to the protons of silanols in fast 
exchange with water, and therefore to the Si -OH which have the highest affinity for water – as 
will be mentioned in Section 3 .5 they correspond to H -bonded silanols. Thus, the situation is 
reminiscent of that observed by IR in the OH stretching region, with the 1H NMR peak at 1.8 
ppm evolving like the  IR band at 3740 cm-1. It must be  underline d that both techniques are 
basically sen sitive to the «  isolated vs. associated  » silanols dichotomy, while 29Si NMR provides 
information on the «  terminal vs. geminal  » distribution.  
Different protons may be distinguished on the basis of chemical shifts, but also of spin -
spin and spin -lattice r elaxation times .152 Dipolar dephasing experiments allowed Liu and Maciel 
to conclude that associated silanols are indeed strongly coupled to water but not to isolated 
silanols .153 
Some advanced NMR techniques allow «  spin counting  », i.e. an evaluation of the 
number of nuclear spins present in an interacting network .154 In the solid state, MQ (multiple -
quantu m) met hods for spin counting hav e been developed since 1985 .155 On silica, proton MQ -
NMR could be used in principle t o count the number of silanols interacting in a «  silanols 
cluster  ». This technique h as been applied to silica catalyst supports156 but with rather trivial 
results, namely that all 1H spins exist in clusters of less than seven silanols. Yet it probably has 
some potential to identify silanol clusters, as shown by a study o n high -silicic zeolite ZSM -12157 
where proton MQ -NMR revealed defects that were tentatively identified as 3 -silanol clusters.  31 
 
Another intriguing possibility is 2 -D spin -spin correlation, either between protons or 
between proton and 29Si (HETCOR , HETeronuclear CORrelation ). These techniques have the 
potential to unravel neighboring  relations between target nucle i in deta il. They may provide an 
opportunity to overcome the «  short -sightedness  » of single -pulse NMR and other spectroscopic 
methods. In their study focused on MCM -41 mesoporous silica ,83 Trébosc et al. were led to 
propose various arrangements involving surface silanols and water molecules bound toge ther by 
a well -defined lattice of H -bonds. Although the ir data were not sufficiently precise to 
discriminate between these arrangements, evidencing such structures is an attainable goal for 
future research.  
3.1.7. Paramagnetic sites : EPR and related techni ques 
In principle this review is not concerned with high -temperature defects which are 
quenched by exposure to water, as stated in Section 2.2. The question is of course exactly what 
defects are completely healed, and while silanone groups for instance are  rarely claimed to play 
an important role in silica reactivity, there is abundant evidence that some radical defects are an 
essential feature in determining the biotoxicity especially of crystalline silica samples such as 
quartz and cristobalite.158 A few words should therefore be said on these radical defects, which 
can be generated by cleavage of a macroscopic crystal, photochemically,159 or mecanochemically 
(by grinding of a powder), especially since they represent a challenge for molecular modeli ng 
and are therefore discussed to a small extent in Sections 5.2 and 6.1.  
Since they have unpaired electrons, they should be easily observable by EPR (Electron 
Paramagnetic Resonance , or ESR, Electron Spin Resonance) . This technique allows quantifying 
paramagnetic defects, and can also give qualitative information from the lineshape: signal 
anisotropy and hyperfine splitting constant (A) allow identifying the chemical nature of the 
paramagnetic center. Hyperfine splitting can yield valuable information on c oupling with 
neighboring 17O and 29Si.160,161 For instance, hyperfine splittings were correlated with Si -O-Si in 
a recent study.162  
Simple (cw, continuous -wave) EPR is most frequently used. More advanced techniques 
such as Pulsed EPR,163 or ESEEM (Electron Spin -Echo Envelope Modulation)164 have 
occasionally been applied.  
Many radical defects exist and have recei ved names based on their luminescence and 
optical properties. The most relevant ones for the adsorption of biomolecules correspond to ≡Si-
O•, ≡Si•, peroxides and species derived from interaction of the latter with dioxygen – belonging 
to the infamous ROS (reactive oxygen species). The formation of ROS is one consequence of the 
high reactivity of surface radical species. They are also rea ctive toward probe molecules and 
biomolecules themselves, which is the basis for indirect characterization techniques such as spin 32 
 
trapping and SDSL (site -directed spin labelling) which are mentioned in the review by 
Fenoglio.165 
As regards non -crystalline silicas, Inaki et al.141 have observed the EPR spectrum of 
mesoporous silicas activated at high temperatures in the frame of a study of surface sites active 
for photom etathesis. They interpreted them as stemming from (≡Si-O•) defects. They only made 
use of the quantitative evolution of the signal intensity, without analyzing the signal lineshape. It 
should be noted that their work led them to promote an unorthodox assignment of the IR bands at 
890 and 910 cm-1, mentione d in Section 3.2.4 and generally attributed to S2R; in their view they 
can also be attributed to  (≡Si-O•). 
Mesoporous SBA -15 were also investigated by SQUID magnetometry166 and found to exhibit  
a weak  hysteresis  at 2K, indicative of ferromagnetic behavio r. This was interpreted as due to the 
formation o f (≡Si-O•) and/or (≡Si•) defects during the calcination step.  
 
3.1.7 . Adsorption of probe molecules  
 The presen t review exclusively focuses on the interaction between silica and 
biomolecules and does not intend to provide a general view of adsorption on silica. However, 
some adsorption studies are specifically aimed at identifying surface sites and probe molecules 
adsorption can be said to constitute a surface characterisation technique in its own respect. Many 
important details about the structure of silica "surface active site" have been obtained chiefly or  
exclusively from these studies ; furthermore, they can for m a basis for the interpretation of the 
more complex phenomena resulting from the adsorption of biomolecules.  
A probe molecule must have some kind of interactional complementarity with a certain 
type of surface site, giving rise to site adsorption . The dat a may be purely macroscopic: at least 
they must provide quantification of the amount of considered sites, either by volumetry of the 
adsorbed molecules from the gas phase, or by thermal desorption following the adsorption step; 
they may also include an est imate of thermodynamic parametres , by calorimetry  or from the 
temperatures of desorption ; and in many cases they are complemented by spectroscopic 
information, providing a molecular -level view of the probe/site interaction.  The spectroscopic 
technique of c hoice is generally IR.  
In view of the importance of the problem for heterogeneous catalysis,167 the most 
common use of probe  molecules is  to titrate Brönsted acidic sites ( also known as  Brönsted acidic 
centres, BACs)  and in that case they must of course be Brönsted bases . Pure silica does not have 
strong Brönsted acidity. It adsorbs NH 3 by H -bond formation, without protonation.168,169 CO is 
another probe molecule that forms H -bonds with BACs, resulting in a blue shift of the CO 
stretching band proportional to the acid strength, and it also reveals only weakly acidic sites. As 33 
 
CO is adsorbed , the OH stretching band of isolated silanols  undergoes a -79 cm−1 red shift170 and 
they are therefore considered to be the adsorption  sites.  
Interestingly, in opposition, comparing silicas with different thermal treatments showed 
that NH 3 preferentially adsorbs on H -bonded rather than on isolated silanols.117  
Pyridine (Py) has been systematically used for many years as a  probe of surface acidity 
for oxides of catalytic interest (e.g. Refs.171,172), because adsorbed pyridine has several IR bands 
whose wavenumber is highly responsive to the adsorption mechanism: one can discriminate at 
the very least between H -bonded Py, Py interacting with BACs, and Py interacting with LACs 
(Lewis acidic centers). It was actually first observed by Morrow and Cody137 that pyridine binds 
reversibly to LACs on the surface of silica activated at rather high temperatures, and the nature 
of these LACs can even be surmised. In fact, the silica  bands of «  strained siloxane bridges  » 
bands, which were later attributed to S2R (cf. Section 3.1.4). It has been hypothesized that in 
S2R sites the (SiO 4) tetrahedra are strained enough that a Si atom can make an additional bond to 
the doublet of pyridin e (Figure 12).  
 
Figure 12 . Pyridine bound by a coordinative bond to a S2R site  
 
Water is an intriguing molecule whose interaction with silica surfaces plays a key role for 
many applications including biomolecules adsorption. Since this will be the topic of Section 8, 
there is no need to be exhaustive here. There are very precise works combining water adsorption 
volumetry and microcalorimetry  which provide information on the molar adsorption enthalpy for 
different silica surfaces.81 ,82,173 An (absolute) value of the molar adsorption enthalpy in excess of 
the latent heat of liquefaction of water (44 kJ mol-1) indicates a specific interaction with the silica 
surface. In practice, values as high as 170 kJ mol-1 have been reported. These data are further 
discussed in Section 8.1. By combining adsorption isotherms w ith IR, it is shown that the sites 
having strong affinity for water, in other words the hydrophilic sites, consist in patches of H -
bonded silanols; isolated silanols are not hydrophilic40 (the same was observed for NH 3 
adsorption, see above). This may sound paradoxical in view of their better accessibility to 
molecules coming from the gas phase. One must realize however that at least the terminal 
members in a cluster of H -bonded silanols will become a stronger H -bond donor  by cooperative 
effects.  34 
 
At room temperature, water physisorption by H -bonding occurs immediately . Hydrolysis 
of strained bonds, which results in water chemisorption, has both fast and very slow  components . 
They probably correspond respectively to the opening of highly strained S2R, and of somewhat 
larger rings.  
Alcohols share with water the presence of an X -OH moiety. Methanol was one of the first 
molecules whose adsorption on silica was st udied by volumetry, calorimetry and IR.174,175 Like 
water, it can be physisorbed at room temperature by H -bonding, but also opens up strained 
siloxane rings, yielding easily recognizable methoxy groups (the corresponding reaction has also 
been reported with ethanol.176,177 It is interesting to note that in the latter study, the cooperative 
effect of several H -bonds resulted in rat her strong adsorption, with adsorption enthalpies in the 
78-100 kJ mol-1 range.  
The slow chemisorption by siloxane ring opening in S2R involving water or alcohol 
decomposition can be represented as follows (Figure 13):139,178 
+ H2O
+ CH3OH
     
 
Figure 13 . Opening a S2R defect with  water ( upper ) or methanol ( lower ). 
 
This could in principle happen on other siloxanes, but the dissociation of S2R siloxanes is 5 
orders of magnitude faster than that of unstrained siloxanes.178 
Aldehydes, esters, and ketones adsorption was followed by calorimetry and IR 
spectroscopy, evidencing H -bond formation with surface silanols: it was reported that upon 
acceptation o f H-bond(s) from silanols, the C=O stretching vibration of these molecules could be 
weakened by several tens of cm-1 (as high as 80 cm-1 in some cases),179 which p rovides a point of 
comparison for similar studies on biomolecules.  
There are a huge number of studies aiming at the modification of silica surfaces through 
grafting of silanes bearing organic functionalities, or of functional groups based on other metal 
centers such as Ti isopropoxyde. Grafting is a form of chemisorption since it involves the 
formation of covalent bonds, most often with surface silanols,  e.g.: 
(Si-OH)surf   + (Cl-SiR 3)gas   = (Si-O-SiR 3)surf   +  (HCl)gas  35 
 
While we are not concerned in this  review with the hybrid materials surfaces formed 
through these procedures, it has been suggested that grafting, as a selective reaction, might be 
used to obtain information on the specific groups exposed by the starting silica surface. In one 
study, it wa s shown that PTMS (propyltrilethoxysilane) preferably reacts with the hydrophobic 
regions of a mesoporous silica surface, namely those containing only siloxanes and isolated 
silanols.180 Conversely, it seems that Ti isopropoxyde grafting preferenti ally occurs on H -bonded 
rather than isolated SiOH;181  interestingly, to prove th e latter point, the authors made use of two 
silicas, a Stöber microspheric silica which has no isolated silanols, and an Aerosil where 
previous treatment by Si(CH 3)2Cl2 had selectively deactivated the isolated silanols, like in the 
previous case.  
One shoul d not be surprised if some grafting agents exhibited a more stringent selectivity 
towards silica surface sites than simply prefering isolated vs. H -bonded, or vice -versa. Early on, 
it was suggested that t erminal and geminal silanols may have different reac tivities, for instance 
towards TMS  (tetramethylsilane)  grafting .182 In fact, claims of high specificity may be found in 
the old literature: some Russian  workers183 used VOCl 3 grafting to titrate groups of two, and of 
three neighboring silanols. They claimed to be ab le to separately monitor the evolution of 
monografted, digrafted and trigrafted V centers, which followed a logical trend as a function of 
the total silanols density. Unfortunately this line of thought has not been pursued any further.  
 Recently, however, interesting data were obtained by grafting of Ga(CH 3)3 from the gas 
phase on an Aerosil and a mesoporous silica previously heated at 800°C.184 The investigators 
deduced from a precise analysis of Ga K -edge EXAFS (Extended X -Ray Absorption Fine 
Structure) that gallium atoms were preferentially grafted in pairs, these pa irs being connected by 
two bridging silanolate groups. Integrating these results with bulk mass balance data on the 
adsorbed Ga and the methane molecules emitted upon grafting yielded an interesting model of 
the adsorption site, which would consist in a S2 R bearing an additional silanol group, the so -
called «  d3 site » (Figure 14):  
 
Figure 14.  How the reactivity of dimethylgallium allows to evidence the existence of «  d3 
defects  » (S2R bearing one OH group) on the silica surface, according to  Ref.184 36 
 
  
If confirmed, the unequivocally evidencing of d3 defects, experime ntal results would be 
significant, because it would constitute a step towards the identification of surface defects with 
more complicated structures, combining several functionalities. Note that the d3 defects would 
probably be formed at high temperatures from the condensation of Q2-Q3 vicinal silanol 
pairs  (Figure 15).  
 
Figure 15.  Formation of a «  d3 defect  » through high temperature silanol condensation . 
  
It can be inferred from the data that there would be about 0.51 such sites per nm2 on the surface 
of Aerosil380.  
All of the above results refer to adsorption of probe molecules from the gas phase. 
Adsorption from aqueous solutions could also help identify specific adsorption sites.  
Attempts have been made to dose «  completely isolated  » silanols throug h the adsorption 
of a bulky molecule, CV or «  crystal violet ».185 A strong adsorption was assigned to CV cations 
lying flat  on the silica surface, electrostatically bound to a silanolate and unimpaired by 
interaction with other silanol(ate)s. Since one CV molecule occupies an area of 120 Å2, this 
means that CV would dose silanols which are separated by more than 10 Å from thei r nearest 
neighbors, and there are about 0.11 of them per nm2. This figure may be compared with the 
value mentioned above for isolated silanols densities, defined as those lying too far apart from 
other silanols to interact by H -bonding, which is about 10 times higher.  
In a study of NiII complexes adsorption (these are significant as precursors of supported 
catalysts), Boujday et al.186,187 measured adsorption isotherms for several polyamine -aqua 
complexes and observed well -defined and different saturation coverages, which were 
rationalized by postulating cooperative adsorption sites consisting in 1 to 3 silanols able to act as 
ligands to the metal ion, together with H -bond accepting groups in close vicinity.  
 
3.1.8. IRAS, STM, LEED : « flat » silica surfaces  
Thin silica films have been grown on metal single crystal surfaces  as model systems for 
studying the structural properties of SiO 2, provid ing access to  surface science techniques such as 37 
 
IRAS  (Infrared Reflection Attenuation Spectrosc opy), STM  (Scanning Tunneling Microscopy) , 
LEED  (Low Energy Electron Diffraction) , etc. Mo(112) ,188,189 ,190  Ru (0001) and Pt(111)191 have 
been used as substrates for this purpose , and thin «  silica  » films were prepared by  gas phase Si 
deposition followed by oxidation . It can be questioned whether  these surfaces are really 
comparable  with those of pristine silicas as they are often only a few layers thick, and thus 
stron gly influenced by the substrate so that even the stoichiometry may significantly differ from 
SiO 2. However, spectacular results have recently been obtained for 2 -layer thick SiO x films on 
Ru (0001)29 where STM allowed for the first time to visualize in real space the (SiO) n rings that 
were so far only indirectly  postulated, and thus to obtain experimental histograms of ring size 
distribution.  
On silicon wafers, SiO x films can be developped by high -temperature oxidation in an 
oven but also by «wet» methods involving superficial oxidation e.g. by «piranha» treatment128 
and observed by  ordinary FTIR (Si can be obtained in transparent form) or reflection attenua tion 
IR, ellipsometry, contact angle,192 SIMS (secondary ions mass spectroscopy).193,194 Work 
comparing SIMS and XPS and using chemical derivat ization has shown that the m/e = 45 
(SiOH+) SIMS peak may be used to quantify total silanol surface densities, which was thus 
measured at 2.6 nm-2 in Ref.194 Reflection attenuation IR also allowed to observe S2R sites.142 
SiO x films on silicon can gro w up to at least 1 micrometer thick while still allowing the 
use of surface techniques such as specular x -ray reflectivity and SANS (small -angle neutron 
scattering),195 and this would be expected to remove the stru ctural influence of the substrate. 
Here again though, there are indications that the surface of these films may have properties 
substantially different from that of divided silica. SIMS and XPS Si 2p spectra196 of films with 
25 nm thickness indicate a significant amount of Si atoms surroun ded by less than 4 oxygens, 
and they apparently do not belong to the deeply buried SiO x/Si interface since both techniques 
are surface -sensitive. The reactivity of these systems also has peculiarities; for instance, SiO x/Si 
was much more reactive towards m ethanol at RT than a mesoporous silica as decomposition 
reactions were observed instead of simple adsorption.192 In the same way, contacting ethanol 
with thin films surfaces resulted in the formation o f acetaldehyde and ethylene,194 which is quite 
unexpected based on the reactivity of divided silica. Thus, it is possible that flat SiO x films 
present surfaces quite different from divided silicas; at the very least, more work is needed to 
obtain «normalized» silica adlayers.  
 
3.1.9. Use of molecular analogues of silica surface groups  
 We have already mentioned the role of cyclodisiloxanes in validat ing the existence of 
S2R defects on the silica surface. In fact organometallic chemists have synthesized a large 38 
 
variety of molecular compounds containing siloxane and/or silanol groups in well -defined 
geometries. Many of them could serve as molecular anal ogues of postulated silica surface groups 
(see Ref.197 for a good review). This line of thought has indeed been explored, but mostly in the 
field of catalysis, to obtain analogues of silica -supported metal catalysts that are more uniform 
and energetically homogeneous («homogeneous mimics»), especially from the silsesquioxane 
family of compounds198,199 (Figure 16). The similitude with surface groups of silica, especially as 
regards the vibrational properties of silanols in well -defined en vironments, is sometimes put 
forward.200 It must be recognized however that in other respects, such as reactivity and 29Si NMR 
spectroscopy, the existence of Si -C bonds in the silsesquioxane, as opposed to the all -Si-O 
environment on the surface of silica, will lead to very different properties.  
  
  
 
Figure 16.  Left, a silsesquioxane bearing a group of 3 silanols in close vicinity. Right, a 
cyclotrisiloxane that could be used as a molecular mimic of a 3 -ring. 
  
3.1.10. Silica in aqueous solutions: existence of a modified water region  
Physical chemists have long realised that inorganic oxide surfaces are able to induce 
dramatic changes in the structure of water ( Ref.201; this is  a capability that  they share with large 
biomolecules, incidentally). In the presence of silica, 1H NMR relaxation times were used to 
evidence  surface -induced water structures  characterised by a preferred spatial orientation of the 
water molecules, and a lower molecular den sity (as  compared to bulk water) .202 These surface -
induced structures extend at least 8 nm from the surface.  It follows that for a suspension of 
divided silica with a surface area in the range of several hundred m2 g-1, the amount of modified 
water will represent several times the weight of the silica. In fact, it is easy to observe that 
colloidal silica  suspensions tend to form gels when the weight concentration of SiO 2 exceeds 
about 10% by weight. This has undesired consequences when one tries to study the adsorption of 
biomolecules – or any molecules for that matter – on divided silica from an aqueous phase. It 
will not be possible to obtain the pure solid phase by ordinary separation techniques such as 39 
 
filtering or centrifugation:  instead, it will retain a large amount of solution, containing dissolved 
molecules that do not directly interact with the surface. If the resulting gel is dried, these 
molecules will either precipitate as bulk compounds, or establish new interactions with the dry 
surface, and they will interfere with the molecules that were already adsorbed at the 
solid/solution interface.  
3.2. Adsorption of biomolecules on silica   
A highly commendable short monograph on the subject is the one of Basiuk,203 which 
asks many of the right questions especially concerning the biomolecule adsorption mechanisms . 
Other relevant data can be found in sever al more general reviews , such as Parida et al.204 (small 
organic molecules on silica, including some biomolecules), Lambert205 (amino acids  on divided 
oxides, written in a prebiotic perspective) or Fenoglio et al.165 (interaction of biomacromolecules 
with inorganic surfaces) . 
There are many experimental results from the fields of controlled release/controlled 
delivery ,206 chromatography207 biosensors and biocatalysts208 immobilized enzymes.209 Here, as 
for bare silica surfaces (sub section 3.1), we will first discuss the different techniques that have 
been used to study the interaction of small biomolecules with silica, and the type of information 
each one is able to provide; more specific experimental results are discussed in sectio n 9 together 
with relevant molecular modeling studies. We will also give a (hopefully) exhaustive list of the 
research papers that have been devoted to the most frequently studied systems, namely, amino 
acids on silica.  
3.2.1. X -Ray diffraction  
Molecules a dsorbed on divided silica, or on divided matter in general, do not in principle 
give rise to diffraction patterns because the surface of the particles has no 3 -dimensional 
periodicity – this is actually one great difficulty of adsorbed species characterisa tion. However, 
performing XRD on biomolecules/divided silica systems is useful at least in a negative way. The 
amount of biomolecules that can establish a specific interaction with a silica surface is limited 
and a priori unknown. If the deposition procedu re results in retaining a larger amount, excess 
biomolecules will probably form 3 -dimensional crystals. It is necessary to be aware of that if one 
wishes to interprete correctly the results of other characterisation techniques. For instance, bulk 
amino aci d crystals were evidenced both in Gly/SiO 2210 and Glu/SiO 2.211 An interesting 
phenomenon that will be discussed in Section 9.1.1.2 is that in the case of Gly, excess glycine 
precip itated as the metastable  polymorph, while the  form is normally observed upon 
precipitation from a clean solution.  
In contrast to XRD, LEED (low energy electron diffraction) is a surface -specific 
diffraction technique which can only be applied to single crystal surfaces. It is possible to obtain 40 
 
LEED results on crystalline SiO 2 surfaces, notably quartz,212 but this is technically difficult. So 
far, this technique has not been applied to biomolecules on crystalline silica, although on other 
substrates su ch as copper it provides unique information, e.g. on the formation of chiral 
structures213 (see also Section 3.2.5).  
3.2.2 Bulk adsor ption data: geochemical models and adsorption enthalpies.  
Geochemists have long developed models of adsorption on oxide surfaces from aqueous 
solutions, such as the double layer and triple layer models. They are most often u sed to 
rationalize metal ions adsorption but can be applied to biomolecules as well. The decrease of 
amino acid concentration in the solution upon contact with e.g. a divided silica is measured by 
spectrophotometry or HPLC. The evolution of adsorbed quanti ties as a function of pH and ion 
strength can then allow to identify the adsorption mechanism, either physisorption (through H -
bond or electrostatics) or chemisorption (grafting). In this way, Vlasova and Golovkova214 
proposed  for basi c amino acids (Arg, His, Lys, ornithine) the formation of outer -sphere 
complexes with silanolates, Si–O−…(H2X)+, where X denote s the deprotonated form of the amino 
acid.  In a mesoporous silica, the adsorption of Lys was through a combination of electrostat ic 
and outer -sphere Si–O−…(H2Lys)+ complex formation.215 
The measurement of adsorption isotherms (adsorbed amount vs. activity in solution, at 
constant pH and ion strength) can yield interesting information. If they can be fitted by a 
Langmuir model (single site  adsorption without lateral interaction), two parameters can be 
extracted from the isotherm, namely the saturation coverage which is equal to the surface density 
of adsorption sites, and the adsorption equilibrium constant K ads which gives access to the 
adsorption thermodynamics –if isotherms are recorded at different temperatures, the entropic and 
enthalpic parts can be unraveled by plotting ln(K ads) against 1/T (van’t Hoff plot). Adsorption 
isotherms are sometimes recorded (see examples in Table 1) but un fortunately their discussion 
often remains trivial. Neither are there good instances of the application of other model 
isotherms, such as the FFG (Frumkin -Fowler -Guggenheim) model which might account for the 
site adsorption of positively or negatively char ged amino acids accumulating charge on the 
surface.  
Thermodynamic data on biomolecule adsorption reactions have been obtained at the 
silica -water interface however. This was done with the aim to predict separative properties of 
silicas or modified silicas as chromatographic phases: the retention times of different adsorbates 
are directly related to the corresponding K ads values. F ree energies of adsorption were estimated 
by Basiuk207,216 for most amino acids and some oligopeptides on a (bare) chromatographic silica. 
For monomeric amino acids, t hey are almost always positive (0 to + 4 kJ mol−1) and a  
compensati on effect is observed between ΔadsH° and ΔadsS°:216 while the a dsorption of most 41 
 
amino acids i s exotherm ic, the entropic contribution i s unfavora ble. As longer oligopeptides are 
tested, adsorption becomes more and more favorable. For some series of chemically similar 
amino acids, a linear correlation of ΔadsH° with the number of carbon atoms was observed, which 
draws the attention to the possible r ole of dispersion interactions (see section 5.3).  
3.2.3. Vibrational spectroscopies  
Most biomolecules have functional groups with a conspicuous IR signature. However, 
since they normally represent a minority component in biomolecules/silica systems, only t hose 
that fall in a range where the silica support is transparent will be observable. This includes C=O 
stretching and NH 2/NH 3+ bending vibrations that are present in all amino acids and amide ( -CO-
NH-) bands of peptides and proteins. OH and NH stretching vibrations are also observable if the 
surface is dehydrated (otherwise they are lost in the broad background of water OH stretching). 
Conventional, transmission IR spectroscopy has indeed been applied to several amino 
acids/silica systems in the dry state (see Table 1). Technical developments also allow to observe 
in situ vibrational spectra of amino acids at the aqueous solution/silica interface by ATR211,217 or, 
for interfaces with planar silica, by SFG.218 This is extremely important in view of the 
importance of water in defining the amino acid -surface interaction, a point which will be 
discussed in section 9.1.1: the application of a drying step is very likely to  modify the state of the 
adsorbed amino acids.  
Raman spectroscopy does not seem to have been applied to amino acids on silica.  SERS 
(Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering) depends on a resonance with electronic plasma oscillation 
and is not applicable on silic a in principle.  IRAS, which is adapted to planar reflecting surfaces 
(e.g.  Ref.219 for Gly on Cu), would be applicable to SiO 2 thin films deposited on substrates such 
as Mo (see Section 3.1.3), but it has not been a pplied so far to biomolecules adsorption; neither 
has GA -ATR.  
On flat surfaces of fused silica, SFG has recently been used in the hope to detect amino 
acids at the silica -solution interface.218,220 The results are still limited as regards the amino acid 
itself, but the advantage is that this technique allows water in the interfacial region to be 
observed in situ as well during the adsorption phenomenon.220 
Vibrational spectroscopy gives unequivocal results as regards the protonation state of the 
amino acid because –COO- is rather easily distinguished from -COOH, a nd NH 2 from NH 3+. It 
would be expected that it also provide information on the adsorption mechanism, since even 
rather weak bonding with a functional group will affect its characteristic vibrations (cf. Section 
3.1.7). In fact early studies on amino acids adsorption on silica from the gas phase observed 
important shifts of the carbonyl band, which were interpreted, after similar studies on kaolin 
clays,221 as meaning that the carboxylic acid terminal had condensed with surface silanols to give 42 
 
what was variously referred to as « anhydride  with surface  hydroxy l groups », «surface acyl » or 
«surface ester », Si -O-CO-CH(NH 2)-R. It is in fact difficult to reach a definite conclusion from 
IR only, and the conditions of possible formation of such covalently grafted species constitute a 
testing ground for molecular mode ling studies, of which more will be said later. We shall note 
here that according to Basiuk et al., they only form on thoroughly dehydrated surfaces and may 
be destroyed when these surfaces are reexposed to water.222 In other studies, shifts in the –NH x 
and CO bands were interpreted as indicative of H -bond formation with the surface.210,223 
 
3.2.4. NMR techniques  
Biomolecules contain several nuclei amenable to NMR study, the most important of 
which is 13C. 1H, 2H and 15N might also be useful. Multinuclear NMR is a workhorse of organic 
chemistry and one benefits from a considerable amount of accumulated data to help 
interpretations, although solid -state NMR spectra are considerably less well -resolv ed than in the 
solution. In spite of this, the application of solid -state NMR to understand biomolecules 
adsorption on silica is recent.211,224-228 This is due to the low intrinsic sensitivity of the 13C 
nucleus. In conjunction with the fact that the biomolecule is a minority species in the samples, it 
causes NMR signals to be very weak, so that long accum ulation times are necessary – unless one 
uses expensive isotopically enriched biomolecules.  The rewards are high however because the 
13C isotropic shifts are very sensitive to the molecular environment: for instance it has been 
demonstrated that the C=O si gnal position responds in a predictable way to the different H -
bonding states of HGly± zwitterions in the three polymorphs -, - and -glycine,229 and for 
Gly/Aerosil a specific signal was attributed to glycine zwitterions adsorbed by H -bonding.224 A 
word of caution is in order again about the difficulty in quantifying 13C{1H} CP spectra (since 
one-pulse acquisition of 13C spectra would be very slow). If the adsorbed biomolecule is highly 
mobile, its CP signal may be totally undetectable.  
However the potential of NMR techniques goes beyond chemical identification through 
chemical shifts, a s underlined by Ben Shir et al.228 These authors  used REDOR (Rotationally 
enhanced double resonance) NMR to evidence n eighboring relations between nuclei from the 
biomolecule and from the silica surface. More precisely, the joint use of 29Si{15N} and 
15N{29Si}REDOR revealed intermolecular interactions between the ammonium group of alanine  
(Ala)  adsorbed on mesoporous sili ca and three to four predominantly Q3 surface Si species, and 
N-Si distances  could even be evaluated.227 In addition,  15N{13C} REDOR provided information 
on the state of mobility of adsorbed alanine as a function of temperature, allowing to 
discriminate between immobile and rapidly reorientating alanine populations. Later on, for the 
related Gly/mesoporous silica system, the same techniques were applied together with HETCOR, 43 
 
a 2-D NMR technique already mentioned for bare silica surfaces in Section 3.1.5 - 1H{13C}, 
1H{15N} and 13C{15N} HETCOR were investigated here in addition t o 1H{29Si}, giving access to 
the corresponding neighboring relations. Here too, two immobile and one freely reorienting 
glycine populations were evidenced.  
The mobility of the functional groups of adsorbed amino acids is an important question, 
as it will i ndicate what groups, if any, are strongly bound with the surface. Amitay -Rosen et 
al.225 used deuterium lineshape analysis (or rather, for samples rotating at the magic angle, 
sidebands analysis) of CH 3-deuterated alanine on mesoporous silica, in comparison with 1H 
spectra. They rationalized their observations on the basis of a 2 -site exchange model. Although 
their conclusions were not fully compatible with those of Ben Shir et al. on the same system, this 
may be due to a different hydration sta te. 
In spite of these divergences, the studies just mentioned represent a breakthrough in that 
they started investigating dynamic processes in adsorbed biomolecules systems instead of 
provinding a static picture –the very strong dependence of the adsorptio n behavior upon the 
hydration state of the surface revealed in this way, and the experimental determination of new 
observables such as dipolar coupling strengths, represent new challenges for molecular 
modeling.  
For adsorbed peptides, NMR  can provide rich structural information. Advanced NMR 
techniques have long been applied to the in -depth study of proteins and peptides and they can be 
transferred to peptides on surfaces in spite of the additional complexities induced by working in 
the solid state, or in s uspensions. Thus, 2-D NOESY  (2-dimensional nuclear Overhauser ) 
experiments  based on through -space spin -spin coupling  can reveal spatial relations between the 
different residues of a peptide chain. Mirau et al.230 have applied 2 -D NOESY to suspensions 
containing fumed silica particles and specific SiO 2-binding peptides. By use of programs making 
use of distance constraints to determine peptide conformations, they could propose structural 
models of several peptides adsorbed on silica , which contained common structural elements. As 
seen in Figure 17, these common elements were observed to fold in very similar ways on the 
surface, which is a strong argument in favor of the reliability of the results. Note however that 
the techniques use d provide exquisitely detailed information on the adsorbed peptide, but none at 
all on the silica surface which appears as a featureless background.  44 
 
 
Figure 17 . Secondary structures adopted by three related peptides adsorbed on silica . Reprinted 
with perm ission  from Ref.230. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.  
 
3.2.5. Flat surface techniques  
As for bare silica surfaces, one is limited by the non -conducting nature of SiO 2. Thus, in 
keeping with remarks in Section 3.2.1, LEED would be very hard to apply to adsorption on 
crystalline silica phases. Other surface techniques however can be applied to silica overlayers 
deposited on a sensing chip.  
Thus, QCM (quartz crystal microbalance) allows quantifying adsorption phenomena on 
flat surfaces and can provide in -situ kinetic data. The quartz crystals may be covered by a layer 
of amorphous -like silica and the adsorption of «heavy» biomolecules  such as proteins may be 
followed. In this way it was found that streptavidin has a silica ads orption behavior strongly 
different from avidin or neutravidin, two closely related proteins.231 Smaller molecules such as 
penta -232 or heptape ptides,233,234 or longer peptides,235 have occasionally been studied in this 
way; applica tion to monomers such as amino acids exist but are still limited on silica so far.220 In 
a significant study, lysine and proline adsorption on fla t silica were compared with the 
adsorption of the corresponding oligomers both quantitatively by QCM, and qualitatively by 
SFG, which yielded vibrational spectra.236 
The SPR technique that has allowed in -depth thermodynamic studies of peptides 
adsorption on gold237 is not easily applicable on silica. To obtain thermodynamic data for 
peptides adsorption on silica, Thyparambil et al.238 developed a protocol using a special AFM 
(atomic force microscopy) technique: the AFM tip was functionalized with the oligopeptide to be 
investi gated (forming a single -molecule force sensor239), and the desorption force curve allowed 
to extract a adsH° value, on  quartz (100)  and fused glass among other surfaces . 
One study of protein adsorption on surfaces of varying wettability, including SiO x on Si 45 
 
wafers (cf. Section 3.1.8), used contact angle measurements with drops of solutions of the 
biomolec ule to assess the adsorption free energy.240 This study underlined again the role of water 
in adsorption phenomena: on  very hydrophilic surfaces, almost no proteins adsorbed because it 
cost too much energy to displace water molecules.  
3.2.6. An overview of experimental studies of small biomolecules/silica systems  
Table 1 summarizes the most important experimental studies of small biomolecules 
adsorption on silica surfaces, indicating the type of silica surface, the interface from which 
adsorption was carried out, and the main characterization techniques that were used. A quick 
glance at this Table indicates that in spite o f the rather large number of reported studies, a lot 
remains to be done.  
 
Table 1. Most significant experimental studies of small biomolecules/silica adsorption, 
indicating the main techniques /results  used in each case.  
 
Oxide 
mineral  Biomolecules  From 
gas or 
solution  Main results and/or techniques used  Ref. 
SiO 2 Ala,  Gly, Ile, Leu, 
Met, Phe, Val  G IR 241 
SiO 2 Val, Gly, Ala, Leu, 
Ile, Pro, Phe, Met, 
Thr, Trp  G Analysis of organic products after 
desorption, condensation and analysis 
of gaseous products  242 
SiO 2 (Gly) 2,  
Gly-Ala, Gly -Leu, 
Gly-Val, Ala -Ala, 
Val-Val G condensation and analysis of gaseous 
products  222 
SiO 2 (Gly) 2,  
Ala-Ala, Leu -Leu, 
Val-Val, 
Pro-Pro G condensation and analysis of gaseous 
products  243 
 
divided SiO 2 
(Aerosil380)  Gly G IR 223 
SiO 2 (quartz) 
single crystals  Ala, Asp, Glu, Gly, 
Leu, Lys, Tyr  S AFM (atomic force microscopy)  105 
Fused silica 
prism  Asp, Glu, Phe  S SFG 218 46 
 
divided SiO 2 Pyroglutamic acid  S IR 221 
divided SiO 2 
(chromatograp
hic) dipeptides, cyclic 
and l inear  S Free energies of adsorption  242 
divided SiO 2 
(chromatograp
hic) AA, peptides, 
Krebs’ cycle 
molecules, 
nucleosides, 
nucleotides  S Free energies of adsorption  244 
divided SiO 2 
(chromatograp
hic) Ala, Asn, Asp, Cys,  
Gln, Glu, Gly, Ile, 
Leu, Met, Phe, Pro, 
Ser, Tyr, Thr, Trp, 
Val S Free energies of adsorption  216 
divided SiO 2 
(chromatograp
hic) Ala, Asn, Asp, Cys,  
Gln, Glu, Gly, Ser, 
Tyr, Thr, Trp, Val  S Free energies of adsorption  207 
SiO 2 Gly, (Gly) 2 S Wetting -and-drying cycles  245 
SiO 2 Ala 
(Ala + Gly)  
(Ala + (Gly) 2) 
(Ala + DKP)  S Wetting -and-dryin g cycles  245 
SiO 2 Gly, Ala, Pro, Val, 
Leu 
(Ala + Gly),  
(Ala + (Gly) 2) 
 (Pro+ Gly)  
(Pro + (Gly) 2) 
(Val + Gly)  
(Val + (Gly) 2) 
(Leu + Gly)  
(Leu+ (Gly) 2) 
(Ala + Pro),  
(Ala + Val)  
 S Wetting -and-drying cycles  246 47 
 
divided SiO 2 
(Aerosil380)  Gly S IR, macroscopic data  210 
divided SiO 2 
(Kalush A -
300) Arg, His, Lys  S macroscopic modeling  
of adsorption data  214 
divided SiO 2 
(Aerosil380)  Gly, Lys  S IR, ma croscopic data  247 
Modified  
SiO 2 Gly, Leu, His, Lys  S Adsorption isotherms  248 
Glass, 
hydrophilic 
and 
hydrophobic  Leu, Ser  S Isotopic labeling  249 
divided SiO 2 
(Kalush A -
300) Ala, Leu, Phe, Trp, 
Tyr, Val, co -
adsorption with 
Cu2+ S Macroscopic data, adsorption isotherms  250 
“chromato -
graphic grade” 
divided SiO 2 
(SRL)  His, Trp  S Adsorption isotherms, macroscopic 
modeling  251 
Mesoporous 
SiO 2 MCM -41 (Ala) 4 S Deuterium NMR  252 
Mesoporous 
SiO 2 MCM -41 Lys S Adsorption isotherms, macroscopic 
modeling  215 
Mesoporous 
SiO 2 SBA -15 Phe, Glu, Arg, Leu, 
Ala S Adsorption isotherms, effect of pH, ion 
strength  253 
divided SiO 2, 
615 m2/g 
(Wakosil 
25SIL)  Lys S ATR  217 
Mesoporous 
SiO 2 MCM -41 
and SBA15  Ala S 2H NMR on deuterated molec ules 225 
Mesoporous Met (and Ala -Ala) S 1H and 2H MAS NM  226 48 
 
 
 While many studies bear on the essential amino acids (the list of 20 AAs that has been 
selected b y biochemistry for building proteins), far less have been devoted to other small 
biomolecules. In particular, one would expect to find some investigations on the adsorption of 
nucleotides, the monomers of RNA or DNA, since rather long DNA and/or RNA sequen ces have 
occasionnally been adsorbed on silica for technological reasons.259 In fact the only example that 
we are aware of is a comparative study of nucleotides and nucleosides adsorption wi th other 
small molecules possibly involved in prebiotic chemistry,244 where the former were found to 
adsorb more strongly that most AAs at neutral pH.  One communication was also devoted to the 
adsorption on a flat silica surface of adenine ,258 a nucleobase that is a component of the 
corre sponding nucleotide but is not expected to adsorb in the same way, since they have very 
different acido -basic speciations (nucleotides, and their polymers, accumulate negative charges 
due to deprotonation of the polyphosphate groups).  
 Most amino acids on the other hand have been studied at least once, but comparative 
studies are rare. For instance, it is not possible to find adsorption isotherms of all natural AAs on 
silica in controlled conditions, nor systematic studies of pH effects. The most valuable 
comparisons are the extensive thermodynamic data of Basiuk et al. (Ref.207 and references SiO 2 SBA15  
Mesoporous 
SiO2 SBA -15 Ala S NMR: SLF and REDOR  227 
Mesoporous 
SiO 2 SBA -15 Gly S NMR : REDOR, TEDOR, SLF,  
 2D-HETCOR  228 
Mesoporous 
SiO 2, AA -
templated  Pro, Ile, Val, Leu, 
Hyp, Phg  S Macroscopic adsorp tion data  254 
Mesoporous 
SiO 2, AA -
templated  L-Pro, D -Pro S Adsorption isotherms  255 
Mesoporous 
organo silica  Gly, Lys, Ile  S Adsorption  isotherms, effect of pH.  256 
Mesoporous 
SiO 2 Trp (and proteins)  S Adsorption  isotherms  257 
Thin layers on  
silicon (111) 
wafers  Adenine  S XPS, NEXAFS  258 49 
 
therein). Ref. 253 consider ed the hydrophilic/hydrophobic nature of AA; the authors concluded 
that differences in adsorption parametres could be explained by a combination of electrostatic 
attraction/repulsion between the AA and the surface, which is pH -dependent,205 and hydrophobic 
effects.  
 Unsurprisingly, the biomolecule most widely studied in this context is one of the 
simplest, namely, glycine. It is als o for this molecule that the most precise questions start being 
asked in recent publications, e.g. the identification of H -bonding lattices with the surface.  
Other molecules may be worth mentioning which, although they are not biomolecules 
stricto sensu , share some functional group similarities with e.g. amino acids and can therefore 
help explain the adsorption behavior of the latter. Such examples are provided by the field of 
drug delivery, and the most relevant ones will be discussed in Section  9.4.  
3.2.7. From oligopeptide s to proteins : adsorption, secondary structure and selectivity  
 The preceding paragraphs mentioned a few oligopeptides. When the peptide chain grows 
longer, the number of spatial conformations accessible to it grows exponentially. It is  well-
known that the proper functioning of a protein such as an enzyme depends on its adopting the 
right tertiary structure, which corresponds to a tiny fraction of the available phase space and 
whose realization depends on fine details of energetics (inte ractions between amino acid 
residues, and between amino acids and solvent molecules). Therefore it is of crucial importance 
for many biological and biomedical applications to know if the protein structure will be 
conserved upon adsorption.260,261 The conventional answer is negative: adsorption, in particular 
on silica, changes the folding pattern of the protein chain, in other words it causes denaturation. 
We cannot discuss here the many results that have been obtained for proteins/silica systems –a 
good source for  these is a recently published, and already mentioned review paper.165 The 
situation is very complex  for proteins due to their long chains, and computationally they are only 
amenable to low -level modeling, mostly by MD. Short -chain peptides on the other hand may 
achieve some elements of secondary structure such as the -helix or the -sheet, and some of 
them fall within the limits of high -level modeling methods.  
 Techniques used to determine adsorbed peptide structures include NMR (cf. Section 
3.2.4, and Ref.262), CD (circular dichroism263) which is applied directly to colloidal suspensions 
containing the peptide and the silica n anoparticles, IR ( analysis of IR spectra in the amide bands 
region allows to evidence motives such as the -helix264), or ToF -SIMS (time-of-flight 
secondary ion mass spectrometry) , probably better suited for adsorbed prot eins265 –in this 
technique, the protein fragments that are eroded first are those that were furthest removed from 
the silica surface. Ellipsometry and AFM can be used to evidence the formation of larger -scale 
structur es such as fibrils.266 50 
 
 The e ffect of adsorption on the secondary structure  of adsorbed peptides  has been 
investigated for  at least a dozen years.  It is reported that in general there is a loss of -helicity 
(e.g. for the 13 -mer DDDDAAAAA RRRR267,268) and concomitant formation of -sheets.269,270 
 This is no absolute rule however. Some p eptides have been specifically designed t hat 
strongly adsorb to silica particles and form helices on the surface ,235 while they were not 
structured in the solution . This was achieved by introducing at regular spacings in the polymer 
chain amino acids with basi c side chains such as arginine (R), e.g. 
YARQQRAEARQQRAHARQKRAEARQQRA. The basic AA are protonated and since the 
silica surface is negatively charged, the peptide folds in such a way as to direct all arginine 
chains towards the surface.  
In the preceding e xample, the silica binding peptide was designed from first principles 
and chemically synthesized, but there is another approach. Biocombinatorial  techniques  that 
were developped to select the «best» peptide sequences binding to a particular biochemical tar get 
have been applied to choose the best sequences for adsorption on inorganic surfaces.271 In this 
way, q uartz -binding peptides have been engineered272 and sequences specific for amorphous 
silica have also been produced.273 These studies are quickly generating a database of specific 
peptide sequences having more or less strong affinity with silica surfaces. There is of course a 
strong incentive to understand the structural basis for this affinity; at present it seems that many 
results can be understood by combining an electrostatic interaction between positively charged 
amino acid side chains and negatively charged silanolates on the silica surface,  but also 
hydrophobic interactions between apolar side chains273 and siloxanes, a rationalisation similar to 
that put fo rward to explain the silica selectivity of a natural protein which was called a «S i-
tag».274 These explanations are still sketchy: obviously a lot remains to be understood in order to 
understand the interactions of specific protein  moieties with specific silica surface sites, their 
cooperativity, and by way of consequence their effect on protein structuring. Molecular 
modeling techniques can play a precious role in unraveling these phenomena.  
 
4. Different approaches to model adsorp tion at surfaces  
4.1 The periodic boundary conditions approach  
In the context of this review we focus on reporting modeling data obtained for surfaces 
belonging to crystalline and amorphous silica. The starting material, irrespective on its 
aggregation sta te, is a solid so that the most natural approach to model its features in a computer 
is to enforce periodic boundary conditions (PBC) and to solve the corresponding Schrödinger 
equation accordingly.275-277 For a crystalline bulk material this is a rigorous procedure and more 
details are provided in Section 6. In essence, besides the level of the adopted theory, to work 51 
 
with PBC one has to define a unit cell, a str aightforward step for genuine crystalline materials 
like α-quartz, as it is the natural outcome of X -ray or neutron diffraction studies of any 
crystalline material. Crystallographic databases are available , which contain the unit cell atomic 
coordinates of the most important silica polymorphs, both dense and mic roporous.278 The atomic 
positions in the unit cell are related to each other, as a function of the considered system, by 
symmetry elements dictated by the crystallographic space group.279 This, in turn, can be 
exploited to greatly reduce the computational cost as many components of the unit cell total 
energy are related by simple symmetry rules and shou ld not be recomputed. For the particular 
case of silica, o ne element of difficulty is that silica is also found as an amorphous material. In 
that case the fine details of its structure remain inaccessible  as diffraction techniques only 
provides averaged in formation like the radial distribution function.279 The way in which the 
structure of an amorphous bulk silica (but this is in general true for other glass -like materials) is 
arrived at , in a computer simulation , follows strategies that bring a crystalline starting phase 
(whose structure is known) towards the amorphous one by decreasing the long -range atomic 
order.  Silica, as already described in Section 2 , is made of rigid [SiO 4] building blocks joined 
together by very floppy Si -O-Si angle defining the siloxane bond. This means that in the 
amorphous silica, the local order within the [SiO 4] building block is preser ved whereas the long -
range symmetry relationships between [SiO 4] groups are lost. This kind of disorder can be 
achieved with a variety of techniques as for instance a Monte Carlo bond -switching280 or 
molecular dynamics carried  out at very high T in order to melt the material followed by a 
quenching step to kinetically freezes  the structure in a glassy state.281-287 This procedure can be 
repeated a convenient number of times until physico -chemical features of the bulk material 
(density, Si -O-Si ring nuclearity and distribution, radial Si -O distribution function, etc) are  in 
good agreement with experiments. Irrespective on the adopted methods, this is a time consuming 
step which is needed to achieve  the proper topology of the material. To be representative of the 
real amorphous material the simulation should adopt a large enough unit cell to ensure structural 
richness in the local environment of each [SiO 4] block. For these reasons, the simulation of 
amorphous material s is usually much more expensive than that of crystalline ones, particularly 
when quantum mechanical techni ques are adopted. One should also check the dependency of the 
results on the cell size, a task which is rarely done due to the high cost of the calculation. 
Nevertheless, results obtained by optimizing at B3LYP a silica bulk derived from the heat/cool 
procedure gave properties in very good agreement with experiments even for  a unit cell content 
of less than 100 atoms.280,288-290  
The key point within the present context is how to move from silica bulk to surfaces, as 
the properties of the latter are the relevant ones when  adsorption of (bio )molecules is considered. 52 
 
Usually, surfaces are modeled using slabs of fi nite thickness cut out from the bulk structure 
along a given Miller ( hkl) crystallographic plane.276,291 The surface unit cell should then be 
defined accordingly through a matrix transformation of the original bulk one. At variance with 
the bulk, the periodic boundary conditions should only be enforced by translation vectors parallel 
to the surface, as periodi city is now lost in the non -crystallographic direction perpendicular to the 
slab plane. Technical reasons bound to the adoption of plane waves based methods ( vide infra ) 
enforce the adoption of a tridimensional unit cell for slabs as well . Thus, one needs to define a 
large enough empty space above/below the true slab, to avoid mutual fictitious  interactions 
between the periodically repeated slabs This is different from periodic quantum mechanical 
calculations carried out using a Gaussian type basis set , in w hich the definition of the true 
bidimensional slab is completely rigorous, i.e. the electrostatic potential above/below the slab 
decays exponentially with the distance from the slab.276,291 In all cases, the adequacy of the 
adopted slab must be checked by considering convergence of geometry, energy, and  electronic  
properties  as a function of  the increasing   number  of atomic layers included in the slab and, for 
plane -waves based calculations, also of the size of the empty space separating the repeating 
slabs. For both true oxides and metals, the geometrical cut completely defines a given ( hkl) plane 
that can then be modeled by a variety of techniques. For oxides, extra care should be exerted in 
order  to avoid either charged slabs or slabs with a large dipole moment across the slab itself , as 
in this case they are electronically unstable.292,293 For a covalent material like silica, bond  cutting 
brings about the formation of a variety of surfac e defects, the most relevant being: the Q3(•) silyl 
Si• , the Q3(O•) siloxy E’ SiO•, the Q2(:) >Si: and  the Q2(O) silanone >Si=O. The nature and 
stability of these defects has been discussed in the literature69-71,294-305 showing that all of them, 
without exception, are thermodynamically unstable with respect to water hydroxylation. As 
water is ubiquitously  present during biomolecules adsorption these defects should  not play an 
important  role in that case. In practice, the above defective sites are all “healed” by extraction of 
H or OH groups from the water environment in a real material or by manual additio n of H (to 
SiO•) and OH  (to Si•) in the simulated one. The “healing” process does not lead, however, to 
a unique surface termination, as different kind of SiOH groups are known to exist at the silica 
surface (see Section 2)  as a function of their local e nvironment.  For instance, when dealing with 
surfaces derived from a crystalline silica the height at which the geometrical cut is carried out 
does indeed matter, as it defines the resulting type of SiOH, i.e. the sole specification of the ( hkl) 
crystallog raphic family plane does not uniquely define the kind of SiOH termination . 53 
 
 
Figure  18. Different geometrical cut planes defining different silica surface terminations for the 
same (010) crystal plane. Possible cut planes are represented by dotted lines.  
 
As an example, in Figure 18 the same (010) crystallographic fa ce of α -quartz can be 
either terminated by geminal or vicinals SiOH groups as a function of the cut height along the 
axis perpendicular to the slab. Therefore, for a crystalline surface, both the ( hkl) crystallographic 
plane and the kind of SiOH terminatio n chosen should be clearly specified to completely define 
the system under study. Some subtle effects are possible, however, as for instance, the fully 
hydroxylated (001) and (010) surfaces of α -quartz and the (001) and (110) ones for α -cristobalite 
all en visage geminal terminations, but they are all different from each other, as different H -bond 
interactions (defin ing them as “interacting pairs” )306 are taking place  (see Figure 19).  
Q(001) Q(010)
C(110) C(001)
 
Figure 19. Different H -bond pattern between geminal SiOH sites at the surfaces of α -quartz 
(Q(001) and Q(010)) and cristobalite (C(001) and C(110)).  
 
Therefore, a further step is needed in the calculations to find the best arrangement of the 
surface SiOH in order t o maximize the H -bond interaction and, consequently, to reduce the 54 
 
surface formation energy computed as the energy of reaction of the bulk crystal with water 
molecules.  
 The very same approach can be followed to define the surface of an amorphous silica 
material, starting from an “amorphized” bulk prepared with some of the procedures described 
above. In this case, the geometrical meaning of a particular crystallographic ( hkl) plane is lost 
due to the amorphous nature of the material and less freedom is lef t in positioning the cut plane,  
as electro neutrality should always be enforced. As the unit cell is neutral, this can be 
automatically accounted for by using slab thickness which are an integer multiple of the unit cell 
size with geometrical cuts along the  three main (100), (010) and (001) crystal planes.  It is worth 
noting that, contrary  to crystalline surfaces, the upper face is no longer equivalent to the lower 
face of the slab after the hydroxylation step  due to the a morphous nature of the material . Figure 
20 shows the case of the equivalent faces for the (101) cristobalite and the non -equivalent ones 
for a model of amorphous silica surface recently proposed by Colombi Ciacchi and 
coworkers.285,307  
 
Figure 20.  Top: u pper/lower fully hydroxylated (101) faces of crystobalite. Bottom: upper/lower 
fully hydroxylated faces of the silica amorphous surfaces from Ref.285,307 Molecular graphics 
rendered by Qutemol.73 
 
This is an advantage for the simulation of amorphous materials as the two different 
hydroxylated surfaces enrich the variability of the SiOH surface groups to be studied. For 
instance, calculation of the OH vibrational feature s will be improved due to the increasing 
variability of the local surrounding of each OH group at the upper/lower face of the same slab. 
Also, at variance with what happens for the crystalline silica surfaces, for the amorphous ones 
different kind s of SiOH  groups are present in the same surface unit cell.  55 
 
When dealing with adsorption of (bio)molecules there is one important caveat. The 
adopted unit cell, irrespective of whether one is dealing with a crystalline or an amorphous silica 
system, should be larg e enough to avoid lateral interactions between adsorbates. This forces the 
surface unit cell to become very large for even small biomolecules like short peptides, preventing 
the adoption of first principle calculations. For instance Schneider and Colombi C iacchi adopted 
a 44x44 Å2 unit cell size of a partially oxidized Si surface to study the adsorption of a fully 
solvated RKLPDA hexapeptide by classical force field molecular mechanics methods.308 An 
even larger unit cell (98x98 Å2) was used to simulate the adsorption of the NC1(84 -116) domain 
of collagen VIV on the natively oxidised  silicon surface.307 Nevertheless, lateral interactions can 
be easily computed, at least within the local Gaussian basis set approach, and their contribution 
(either repulsive or attractive) can be subtracted to the total adsorption energy.309-312 A number of 
detailed examples on this point will be discussed in the following sections devoted to adsorption 
of water and amino  acids on silica surface models. Care should also be taken to study not only 
the adsorption but also the properties of the pristine surfaces, as the adoption of a too small unit 
cell would impose  geometrical constraints biasing the true potential energy surface. An example 
is the recent study by Sautet and coworkers313 on dehydroxylation processes at the surface of 
crystalline cristobalite as a model of the amorphous silica surface, in which large enough cells 
have been chosen to ensure enough flexibility in the multi -step simulation of the dehydoxylation 
process.   
In the recent past it has been custo mary to adopt a specific surface derived from a 
crystalline silica polymorph to mimic some of the specific features of the hydroxylated 
amorphous silica surfaces. This originates from the seminal work by Peri314 in which the (100) 
hydroxylated surface of -cristobalite was chosen as a model system to i nterprete  the 
dehydroxylation process occurring at the amorphous silica surface either by heating and 
outgassing the sample or by specific re actions. At that time, to reference to a crystalline model 
was a clever idea in order to figure out possible models of the more complex amorphous silica 
whose modeling was technically unfeasible. In the last twenty years the very same idea was 
adapted to t he computer simulation of amorphous silica surface.315,316 As it was recalled  in 
Section 2. 2, the real amorphous silica surface exhibits different kind s of surface silanols, a fact 
which cannot be simulated by a single crystalline surface which exhibits only one kind of OH 
group ( vide supra ). The idea is to consider  different surfaces derived from the  same crystalline 
silica polymorph and then merge the results to mimic the more complex behavior of the real 
amorphous system  (see Figure 21).  56 
 
 
Figure 21. Amorphous silica surface simulated by merging different surface terminations  of the 
edingtonite bul k.  
 
The easiest system to simulate  is an amorphous silica outgassed at high temperature in 
which only isolated silanol groups remain at the surface. In that respect, Civalleri et al.316 were 
the first to propose the (001) surface of edingtonite, a microporous all -silica polymorph 
particularly suitable to quantum mechanical calculations due to its structural rigidity and 
simplicity, to model the i solated silanols on an  amorphous silica  surface . Tosoni et al.317 
extended the model to include the ( 100) surface exhibiting either H -bond interacting or geminal 
sites to model both clean and water interacting surfaces. The infrared spectra were constructed 
by merging the results of  the three independent surfaces  obtaining excellent agreement with the 
experimental ones. The same model ha s been adopted in a number of studies devoted to study 
adsorption of simple molecules to silica318-320 as well as to study the adsorption of glycine309,321-
323 and alanine .324,325 This approach has obvious limitation s and it is preferable to rely on 
amorphous silica models, which is now feasible with the development of highly parallelized 
computer programs326 on the modern high performance c omput ing facilities.  
In summary, the advantage of the PBC approach is that the extended nature of the 
material is naturally taken into account at the expense of using a large enough unit cell for 
modeling amorphous silica or to avoid spurious lateral interactions. The disadvantage is that the 
maximum leve l of theoretical method applicable to periodic systems is limited to the DFT 
approach due to the difficulty of extending the higher correlated methods based on the wave 
function expansion to solid state treatment. Recent progress has, however, been done bo th in the 
direction of the periodic implementation of the MP2 method in its localized definition327 in the 
CRYSCOR program328 and methods based on the random phase approximation associated to 
exact exchange329 coded in the VA SP program.330 In general these approaches are rather 57 
 
expensive and the geometries cannot be coherently optimized as the analytical energy gradient 
has not yet b een implemented. Nonetheless, the applicability of MP2 to molecular crystals of 
chemical interest and medium size has been recently carried out331 as well as r ecent 
parallelization of the CRYSCOR code332 opening the possibility for applications dealing with 
adsorption of large molecules on silica surfaces.  
 
4.2 The cluster approach  
 The P BC approach focus es, first, on the definition of the bulk structure to reach  to a 
specific hydroxylated silica surface, either crystalline or amorphous. The cluster approach , 
instead,  focuses on the surface first and in particular on  the kind of SiOH groups to be modeled 
either by: i) cutting out a representative piece of matter around a specific site from an underneath 
silica material; ii) expand ing the size of the cluster around the active site using topologies 
reminescent of the si lica secondary building units found in microporous all -silica zeolites; iii) 
adopting a tree -like cluster grown around the active site whose extension mimic s the under lying  
solid. In all cases, the Si -O bonds at the border of the cluster are saturated by e ither H or OH 
groups, giving rise to Si -H and Si -OH terminations, respectively.39 Care should be taken to avoid 
spurious structural and electronic effects of the terminations on the core zo ne of the cluster 
where the “active” SiOH is modeled by enforcing structural constrain ts at the frontier atoms and 
bonds.  With all dangling bonds properly healed, the cluster becomes a regular molecule so that 
standard quantum mechanical methods using hig hly sophisticated quantum chemistry computer 
programs can be applied to characterize its physico -chemical features.  This is a real advantage 
over the PBC method, as the level of sophistication in the adopted theoretical method is only 
limited by the avail able computing resources, so that CCSD(T), the golden standard for quantum 
chemical calculations,333 can be adopted. Furthermore, solvation methods based on the 
continuum approach334 can also be included as a first approximation to study solvent effects on 
the adsorptive properties of the surface “active site”, which is particularly important in the 
context of bio molecules adsorption. This is a feature entirely missing from the present computer 
codes devoted to run periodic calculations.  In practice, the cluster method was the only option 
available in the 90s  when computer resources and programs apt to solve the Schrödinger 
equation for crystalline systems were  still in their infancy. The state of this matter until 1994 has 
already been reviewed.39,335 In essence, subminimal and minimal clusters (shell -0 and shell -1 
clusters in Ref .39) were adopted in w hich only the first neighbour atoms around the SiOH group 
were included in the cluster definition. In principle a shell -n cluster, grown in a “tree -like” 
fashion, would provide a better representation of the local environment of the “active” SiOH by 
increa sing the n value. Unfortunately, this approach is impractical, due to the large number of 58 
 
geometrical constraints needed to avoid large distorsion of the cluster geometry caused by the 
interactions between terminus groups. The large number of terminal atom s is also biasing the 
adsorption of molecules, in particular for those of larger size  (see Figure 22).  
 
Figure 22. Tree-like models for the isolated SiOH group at the silica surface terminated by Si -H 
and Si -OH groups. The SiO 3OH moiety representing the surface SiOH group is depicted in blue.  
 
Later on, clusters based on Si -O secondary building units, the main constituents of silica 
frameworks,336 were proposed337 (see Figure  23) 
 59 
 
Figure  23. Cage -like cluster models for the isolated SiOH group at the silica surface.  
 
These studies focused on the dependence of the features of the SiOH on the cluster ring 
topology and geometrical tension meant to model the isolated SiOH at the amorphous silica 
surface. Specifically, they have been succesful  to simulate vibrational features of the Si -OH 
moiety,338 the δ(1H) and δ(29Si) NMR chemical shifts,339 the adsorption of NH 3 on the isolated340 
and interacting hydrogarnet SiOH sites341 or to study H 2O adsorption on external surfaces  of 
zeolite ZSM -5342 and CH 3OH on Ca -rich silica surfaces.343 The advantage of the “cage -like” 
models over the “tree -like” ones are their natural structural rigidity which avoids the use of 
geometrical constraints , and the near absence of spurious effects at the core SiOH site d ue to 
cluster terminations. The isolated cluster method has gradually lost momentum in recent years, 
the PBC approach being now the most widespread one. Neve rtheless, the cluster approach can be 
extremely useful to check whether the specific level of theor y, which is usually limited to DFT in 
PBC calculation s, is adequate by comparing  the DFT results with higher level s of theory run on 
representative clusters cut out from the periodic model. This is particularly important, for 
instance, for open -shell syste ms for which it is known344 that functional s based on the 
generalized gradient approximation (GGA) provide too delocalized spin density with respect to 
well correlated methods. A recent application to modeling crystalline silica surfaces rich in 
radical siloxy SiO• termination s has ad opted this approach to establish the Becke -Half&Half 
functional as the best choice by comparing its performance with CCSD(T) ones run on small 
clusters.345 Anoth er application  is for the development and checking of new empirical potentials 
based on analytical expression. Very recently Colombi Ciacchi and coworkers have run MP2 
calculations on silica clusters cut out from a PBC model to develop a new force -field to  model 
the interaction of water with protonated  (SiOH) and deprotonated (SiO-) amorphous silica 
surface s.285 This is obviously extremely relevant in the presen t context, as the silica surface is 
known to become negatively charged at pH values higher than 6. It should be clear, however, 
that the cluster approach remains physically sound only when the properties under study are 
local in nature and do not depend on  long-range interactions or on structural features specifically 
due to the extended nature of the system (i.e. infinite H -bond chains). Furthermore, collective 
properties of the adsorption , like water restructuring close to the silica surface compared to b ulk 
liquid water, which are extremely important to our understanding of the wettability of silica 
based materials , cannot be simulated by the cluster approach.346 
4.3 The embedded cluster approach  
In the mid 90’, i t was realized that it would be interesting to merge the advantages of the 
cluster approach, in which a high level of theory is applicable, with the geometrical constraints 60 
 
naturally imposed by the PBC , but without actually making use of the periodicity. I n principle 
the PBC can be avoided by adopting a large enough cluster to properly mimic the surrounding s 
of the active site. Unfortunately, this approach brings about an exponential growth in the number 
of atomic orbitals with the cluster size despite the interesting chemistry being localized at one 
particular active site. A number of methods have been developed to describe with a higher level 
of theory the chemical relevant part while leaving the outside region to be described by lower 
(and computationally  cheaper) method. Among others, the connecting bond approach by 
Bakowies and Thiel,347  the pseudobond scheme by Z hang and coworkers348 and the effective 
group potential (EGP) by Poteau et al.349,350 may be mentioned. Another techniques, inspired by 
the pseudobond scheme of Zhang et al.,348 is the transfer Hamiltonian351,352 that employs a newly 
parameterized pseudoatom to describe the short -range interaction.353 Special pseudoatoms have 
been derived to account for the physico -chemical properties of the external chemical part 
connected to the central site. The pseudo -atoms are then used to cap the central site to arrive at a 
classical cluster model (see Secti on 4.2). This has been achieved by defining a pseudo -potential 
for the link atoms in such a way that the properties computed for the smaller capped cluster are 
as close as possible to those for a larger model treated with the highest level of available the ory 
(CCSD(T)). A recent application of the transfer Hamiltonian has been reported87 to model the 
adsorption of H 2O, NH 3 and NO at the silica isolated, geminal and vicinal surface sites obtaining 
excellent agreement with the experimental results for both SiO -H frequency shifts and 
adsorption energies.  The efficiency of the method allowed the authors to treat the capped clust er 
at MP2/6 -311++G(d,p) level. Interestingly, the results computed for the adsorption of NH 3 on 
isolated silanol groups are in excellent agreement with that computed by Armandi et al.169 using 
periodic boundary condition calculation (see Section 4.1) based on the density functional plus 
dispersion corrections PBE -D method (see Section 5.3).   
A more general solution of the problem has been suggested  by Morokuma an d coworkers 
who proposed the “Integrated Molecular Orbital Molecular Mechanics”, IMOMM, in which the 
interesting zone of the cluster was treated at a higher level (quantum mechanics) while adopting 
a low level (classical force fields) for the external part .354 Later on, the method eventually 
became an internal feature of the Gaussian98 program,355 known as the ONIOM2 method in 
which the lower level of theory was no longer restricted to molecular mechanics but can be any 
quantum mechanical method.356-358 It was immediately clear that this approach w as ideal to treat 
active sites present at the silica surfaces. Particularly relevant in that respect is the QMPot 
method developed by Sauer and coworkers, which was specifically designed to model silica and 
zeolite materials.359 In brief, the ONIOM2 approach subdivides the system of interest into two 
parts or layers, each of which is described at a different level of theory.360 The most important 61 
 
part of the system is the innermost layer, the “model system”, which is described at the highest 
level of theory. Obviously,  the values of the computed properties are a function of the size and 
topology of the model system. The whole system is called the “real system”.  One delicate st ep is 
to define the cut between the model system and the rest of the system. Usually this is attained by 
adding a set of fictitious atoms, usually hydrogen atoms (called “link atoms”), along the pre -
existing chemical bonds extending from the model system t oward the exterior layer.  
 
Figure 24. Definition of the ONIOM2 scheme for a cage cluster model representing the isolated 
SiOH group at the silica surface. Color coding identifies the level of calculus. L identifies the 
link atoms.  
 
 In the ONIOM2 approach , the energy E[High:Low] of the system, subdivided into the 
two layers, is written as  (see Figure 24): 
 
E[High:Low]  E[High:Real] = E(High, Model) - E(Low, Model) + E(Low, Real)  
 
in which E(High, Model), E(Low, Model) and E(Low, Real) are the total energi es of the model 
and real system s at the high  and low  level s of theory . The nice feature about the ONIOM2 
formulation is that the method is self -embedding by definition, i.e. if the low level of calcul ation  
is increased to reach the highest adopted level o r if the model system is enlarged up to the real 
system, one rigorously gets E[High:High]=E(High, Real), for Model Real as well as for 
LowHigh.  
The first application of the ONIOM2 method to model the adsorption of NH 3 at the 
isolated hydroxyl groups on a  highly dehydrated silica surface was discussed in Ref.361 The 
purpose was to establish which level of theory, within the ONIOM2 framework, was optimum to 
provide internally consistent data for the prediction of a number of physical observable s like the 
OH vibrational features, the NMR δ(1H) and δ(29Si) chemical shifts and to characterize the 
adsorption of NH 3. A cage -like cluster was adopted, which was considered as the real system , 62 
 
and subportions of different sizes cut out around the SiOH group were adopted to define the 
model system. Results were very satisfactory, as all properties converged quicker than pure 
cluster calculation to those computed for the real system. Other applications of the ONIOM2 
approach to model silica surface features include the adop tion of the same cage cluster used to 
mimic the isolated SiOH in Ref.361 to compare the adsorption energies of N 2, CO, H 2O, NH 3 and 
CH 3CN with clusters representative of Lewis and Brönsted sites in zeolites362 and the simul ation 
of the hydrogarnet in all -silica silicalite.117,363 In the latter case the silica hydrogarnet in the all -
silica silicalite was represented by a Si 56O90H52 real system and by the Si 4O16H4 model zone  
computed with ONIOM[B3LYP/6 -31G(d,p):PM3] (Figure 25) to model the fine vibrational 
features in the O H stretching region of the hydrogarnet.  
 
Figure 25. Model of the hydrogarnet in all -silica silicalite structure. The balls identify the model 
region treated at B3LYP/6 -31G(d,p) level.  
 
The mechanical embedding scheme, in its QMPot implementation  as propo sed by Sauer 
and coworkers ,364 has reached a high popularity in the study of Brönsted sites (both acidic and 
cation exchanged ones) in zeolites.365,366 More recently, thanks to the increased computing 
power, the method has been extended to adopt DFT to treat the real system  within the PBC . In 
the applications , PBE functional and plane waves as implemented  in the VASP code have been 
adopted  as the low level of calculus. The model system is usually treated at  the MP2 high level 
with large Gaussian basis set , which ensures that dispersive interactions are also taken into 
account , at least in the model system.367 Recent applications of this modern version of QMPot 
are the study of H 2 adsorption on Metal Organic Framework368 or the benzene ethylation 
catalyzed by the adsorption in H -ZSM -5.369 To the best of our knowledge, n o applications have 
been published to date to model adsorption at silica surfaces even if nothing should hinder their 
success in that respect. In the original implementation of the ONIOM method neither direct 
charge transfer nor polarization were possible between the exterior layer and the model system. 
Only indirect effects on the model system occur due to the equilibration of energy gradients 63 
 
acting on the link atoms, which force the atoms of the model system to fol low those of the 
exterior layer and vice versa. In the modern implementation of the ONIOM method , the charge 
distribution of the MM region interacts with the actual charge distribution of the QM region. In 
this case, the partial charges from the MM region are included in the QM Hamiltonian, which 
provides a more accurate description of the electrostatic interaction and, in addition, allows the 
wave function to respond to the charge distribution of the MM region. This approach is referred 
to as electronic em bedding.370  
 
5. Theoretical Methods  and their application to silica surfaces modeling  
An accurate description of the properties of silica surfaces and, in part icular, their role on 
adsorption and reactivity processes at the atomic level requires the use of quantum chemistry 
methods.  These methods are based on the resolution of the time -independent, non -relativistic 
Born -Oppenheimer electronic Schr ödinger equati on and can be classified into two major groups: 
methods based on the wave function and those based on the density functional theory. It is not 
our goal  to provide a  detailed  description of the  existing  electronic structure  methods , which can 
be found  in va rious  textbooks371-373 and its current state is nicely reviewed in a recent Chemical 
Review the matic issue devoted to quantum chemistry.374 Instead, we attempt to provide a  general  
overview  of the methods  that have been  and ca n be applied  to study  silica surfaces  and their 
interaction  with biomolecules , while mentioning  their strengths  and weaknesses.  
 
5.1 Wave function  based methods  
The simples t ab initio wave function based method,  the Hartree -Fock (HF) method, is 
based on a single Slater determinant. It has limited accuracy since it neglects the electron 
correlation energy, which  can significantly influence the results, particularly when comparing 
situations with different electron correlations , or when describing radical def ects or H -bond and 
dispersion interactions, aspects that are of great importance to the present topic. Electron 
correlation can be taken into account by expanding the wave  function through the inclusion of 
excited state configurations. Derived methods are called post Hatree -Fock and include, for 
instance, the Configuration Interaction (CI), Møller -Plesset (MPn) and Coupled Cluster (CC) 
methods.371-373 Wave function based methods have the advantage that they can be applied 
hierarchically to obtain increasingly more accurate values converging to the exact solution. 
Among them, the CCSD(T) with single, double and triple T excitations (the latter estimated 
through perturbation theory)  extensively includes electron correlation and, when combined with 
basis sets extrapolation techniques, is considered the “golden standard” in quantum chemistry.333 
Applicability of CCSD(T) is , however, hampered by the size of the modeled system and is 64 
 
limited to the cluster approach.  Indeed, the main disadvantage of wave function based correlated  
methods is the high scaling  of the computational cost with the size of the system. Local 
correlation methods,375-383 allow exploiting the fundamental local character of dynamical 
electr on correlation, leading to methods that may scale linearly with the size of the system and 
thus largely reducing the computational costs of post -Hartree -Fock methods. As already 
anticipated in section 4.1, it is worth mentioning that local -MP2 has been imp lemented for 
extended systems by exploiting the translational and point symmetry poperties of crystalline 
structures384 with the periodic boundary conditions as  implemented in the CRYSCOR 
program,328 and in the VASP program330 through  the random phase approximation associated to 
exact exchange .329 These methods are, in general, very expensive when applied to extended 
systems but the development of codes apt to exploit the power of the high performance 
computing architectures332 will soon make this kind of calculations available to the scie ntific 
community.    
5.2 DFT based methods  
Since the mid -90s, approaches based on electron density  (see Ref.344 for a nice 
introduction to DFT and for the technical nomenclature)  rather than on the wave function have 
become attractive alternatives because, while including electron corr elation, they are 
computationally cheaper than post -Hartree -Fock methods. In general, DFT methods based on 
generalized gradient approximation (GGA) functionals such as  PBE, PW91, BLYP  are usually  
implemented in codes running periodic calculations  based on  plane -waves basis set ( vide infra ). 
Hybrid functionals like B3LYP and PBE0 contain a fraction of exact exchange  in the functional 
definition, which allows improving the already good performance of GGA functionals for 
systems where the self -interaction err or may become important.385 At variance with the GGA 
case, the implementation of hybrid functionals is easier using localized basis functions (G aussian 
type orbitals, vide infra ). To show an example of the DFT performance with respect to the 
present topic, the s tructural data and relative stabilities of -quartz, -cristobalite and -
tridymite386,306 are very well reproduced with B3LYP with a 6 -31G(d) Guassian basis, as 
illustrate d in Table 2.  
 
Table 2.  Structural data and relative stabilities of -quartz, -cristobalite and -tridymite. Cell 
parameters as a, b and c, cell volume as V, <Si -O> and <Si -O-Si> average values.  
 
 -quartz  -cristobalite  -tridymite  
 Expa B3LYP  Expb B3LYP  Expc B3LYP  
Space group  P3121 P3121 P41212 P41212 C222 1 C222 1 65 
 
a (Å)  4.902  4.971  4.969  5.024  8.756  8.869  
b (Å) 4.902  4.971  4.969  5.024  5.024  4.968  
c (Å) 5.399  5.467  6.926  6.989  8.213  8.267  
V (Å3) 112.4  117.0  171.0  176.4  45.2 45.5 
<Si-O> (Å)  1.612  1.632  1.603  1.629  1.559  1.626  
<Si-O-Si> ( °) 142.6  142.7  146.7  144.5  179.7  176.8  
Relative stability  
 Expd B3LYP  Expd B3LYP  Expd B3LYP  
ΔH (k J/mol)  0.0 0.0 10.9 10.5 12.1 12.6 
aRef.387 ICSD# 93974. bRef.388 ICSD# 77452. cRef.389, dRef.390 
 
The agreement between experimental and computational data for the three polymorphs is 
excellent. Even the B3LYP <Si -O-Si> angle inside the cell, whose value is very sensitive to 
small perturbations due to its high flexibility , is in good agreement with experiment al data, the 
largest deviation being 2.9° . Calculated ΔH values associated to the relative stability of the silica 
polymorphs are  also in excellent agreement  with calorimetric  data.390 The GGA PBE and PW91 
functionals provide consistent resul ts,391 but with slightly larger expanded lattices due to larger 
Si-O-Si angles computed at these levels of theory. The hybrid B3LYP  functional also appears to 
be superior to GGA in the calculation of vibrational frequencies of -quartz,392 with mean 
absolute deviations of only 6 cm-1, which validates  the B3LYP functional as a reliable method to 
study silica materials.   
Point defects on silica, such as the common non-bridging oxygen hole center ≡Si-O•, can 
also be reasonably described with DFT methods.345,393-396 In these cases, however, where radic al 
species are present, the use of hybrid functionals is especially important to get accurate results. 
GGA functionals tend to delocalize the spin density because these situations are 
overstabilized397,398 due to a bad cancellation of the self-interaction part by  the exchange 
functionals. This can significantly influence the ≡Si-O• bond length, the computed EPR 
data345,393 or the optical properties.302,396 Indeed, quantitative agreement between measured and 
computed hyperfine coupling constants  and g factors is only found  with hybrid functionals 
including 50% of exact exchange.393 GGA functionals, such as BLYP, fail in describing these  
defects.  Spin density delocalization also influences the H -bonding in a surface containing  radical  
defects and the kinetics of the ≡Si-O• + H 2O  ≡Si-OH + OH•  reaction.345 The energy barrier is 
significantly smaller with GGA than with hybrid functionals, BH&HLYP including 50% of 
exact excha nge being the one that best compares to CCSD(T) calculations.  66 
 
Hydroxylated silica surfaces exhibit H -bonding between surface silanols and with the 
adsorbed molecules. It is, therefore, important to assess whether DFT methods are capable to 
properly describ e H-bonded interactions of medium strength.399 This topic has been largely 
investigated in the last two decades, the water dimer being probably the most intensiv ely studied 
hydrogen bonded system.344 Among the standard density functionals frequently used in periodic 
calculations, B3LYP and BLYP have been shown to slightly underestimate the binding energy 
and the R O-O distance, while both slighthly overestimate the O -H stretching frequency shif t in an 
H-donor OH, compared to MP2 and experimental data.400-404  The PBE functional, while 
providing accurate interaction energies,405 underestimates the R O-O distance somewhat more, 
predicts larger frequency shifts401 and its reliability is closely connected to the bond 
directionality.406 For the most specific case of hydroxyl groups in ionic crystals like -Be(OH) 2 
and Mg(OH) 2 it was proved407 that B3LYP OH frequency shifts are in better agreement with 
experiments than those resulting from PW91 functional, which were definitely overestimated. In 
general, it can be sa fely stated that functionals based on Becke’s exchange formulation provide 
better frequency shifts than those resulting from Perdew’s one for bonds acting as H -bond 
donors.  These results show that, on the whole, the properties (binding, geometry and frequ ency 
shifts) of systems (molecular and crystalline) with moderately strong H -bonds (dominated by 
electrostatics399), are reasonably well described by standard GG A and hybrid functionals.  
5.3 Dispersion corrections  
Standard density functionals are , however, unable  to cope with long-range dispersion 
interactions,408-411 which are essential to properly  describe the adsorption of biomolecules on 
silica surfaces (see for instance Refs.321,412,413).  Moreover, accounting for dispersion interactions 
appears to be important to describe the structure and dynamics of liquid water,414 which 
otherwise becomes overstructured,415,416 especially when using GGA functionals.417   
To account for dispersion, it has been proposed418-421 to use  an atom -atom additive damped 
empirical potential of the form 
6
6)( RCRf  to include long -range dispersion contributions 
to the computed ab initio DFT total energy and gradients:  
 
DISP DFT D DFT E E E 2
 
where 
DISPE  is the empirical potential:  


ji ijij
ij DISPRCRf s E66
6 )(
 67 
 
Here, 
ijC6  is the dispersion coefficient for the pair of atoms i and j, s6 is a scaling factor that 
depends on the adopted DFT method and  
ijR  is the interatomic distance between atoms i 
and j in the molecular system . The damping function 
)1 (11)( 
vdw ijRRd ijeRf  was used 
to avoid near -singularities and double -counting for small interatomic distances by using the 
sum of the van der Waals atomic radius of atoms 
i and
j and the the steepness of the damping  
function  as determined by the value of the 
d parameter. Values of the van der Waals radii, 
atomic 
6C  coefficients from which the 
ijC6 are computed as geometrical mean, and the 
6s  
values for specific functionals are provided in Ref.420 The coding of the above formulae for 
energy and gradient are very simple and the computational cost with respect to a plain DF T 
calculation is negligible. The above formulae have been promptly extended to correct energy 
and gradient for crystalline systems as it was reported in Ref.422  
The beauty of the DFT -D2 approach is that it leaves unaltered the original accuracy of the 
DFT  functional for short -range interactions (bond breaking/making), while  it dramatically 
improves the long -range tail of the interaction dominated by London forces .420,423-425 Inclusion of 
dispersion interactions is mandatory when computing the adsorption energies of biomolecules on 
silica surfaces, since they can account for up to 40 -50 % of the total adsorpt ion energy (see for 
instance Ref.321). Moreover, when adsorption is determined by dispersion interactions with 
siloxane groups and less by H -bonding, such a correction also becomes essential to determine the 
proper geometry and adsorption energy of the adsorbed adduct.  An example o f that  is the work 
of Rimola et al.426  which studied the interaction of benzene , which can be con sidered as a partial 
analogue of the Phe molecule, with a hypothetical hydrophobic silica surface constituted by only 
Si-O-Si bonds; i.e., with no SiOH sur face groups.  Calculations were run adopting periodic 
boundary conditions (see Section 4.1) using B3L YP and B3LYP -D* methods, the latter inclu sive 
of the dispersion contribution properly reparametrized422 to account for the condensed matter 
nature of the system. At  B3LYP level, the calculated BSSE -corrected adsorption energy ( EC) 
was found to be slightly  repulsive  (+2 kJ mol-1), becoming attractive and as large as -32 kJ mol-1 
when dispersion was included at  the B3LYP -D* level . Significant changes also resulted in the 
optimized geometries due to the role of dispersion . That is, at the B3LYP  level , the opt imum 
benzene distance from the surface was about 4. 5 Å, which decreased to 3.3 Å at the B3LYP -D* 
level (see Figure 26a). When  benzene was adsorbed on  a highly hydroxylated (5.2 OH nm-2) 
silica surface model (Figure 26b ) the optimum structure  revealed speci fic OH••• interactions . 
At the B3LYP level, the strength of this interaction, EC, was -10 kJ mol-1, which increased (in 68 
 
absolute term) to -48 kJ mol-1 at the B3LYP -D* level, i.e. dispersion provides an almost five 
times increase in the adsorption energy.  For this system, the geometry differences between 
B3LYP and B3LYP -D* were less accentuated than those observed for the hydrophobic silica 
surface; however, a significant  decrease of the OH•••  distance (0.3 Å) was observed upon  
dispersion inclusion . 
C
OH
Si
C
OH
SiEc
ads= 2.1 ( -31.8)4.51
(3.29)
Ec
ads= -10.0 ( -48.5)a)
b)
2.64
(2.32)OH
 
Figure 26.  Optimized structures and adsorption energies for benzene adsorbed on a) a 
hydrophobic and b) a hydrophilic silica surface at the B3LYP (B3LYP -D*) levels of theory. 
Distances are in Angstroms and energies in kJ mol-1. Draw with structural and  energ etic data 
from Ref.426 
 
The DFT -D2 scheme has recently been reformulated as DFT -D3 method421 by including 
atom -pairwise specific dispersion coefficients and cutoff radii that are both computed from first 
principles.  Moreover, a new non -empirical method to ob tain C 6 coefficients from ground state 
electron density of a molecule or solid has also been proposed.427 Other  approaches to account 
for dispersion corrections have been developed, for instance those based on adding effective 
atom -centered potentials428-430 or explicitly including non -local terms in the correlation 
functional as in the vdW -DF method.431 Alternatively, a new suite of M06 hybrid functionals 
based on meta -generalized gradient approximation, have been proposed by the Thrular’s 
school432,433 and shown to be promising in handling non -covalent interactions. However, these 69 
 
functionals represent an improvement only up to medium range contacts and, to the best of our 
knowledge, are not implemented in codes running periodic calculations.  
5.4 Basi s sets  
Besides the errors associated to the chosen functional, one also must also consider the 
errors due to the basis set expansion of the Kohn Sham orbitals. Two major kinds of basis sets 
are currently used: localized Gaussian Type Orbitals (GTO) and pla ne waves (PW). Gaussian 
orbitals have the advantage that the number of basis functions depends on the number of atoms 
included in the crystalline cell but not on the dimension or shape of the cell. Moreover, due to 
the local nature of Gaussian functions, t he true dimensionality of the system (0D:molecules, 1D: 
chains, 2D: slabs and 3D: crystals) is always obeyed. Transferability of GTO basis functions to 
periodic systems, however, should be done with care, particularly in the case of diffuse 
functions, to a void an exponential increase in the number of bi -electronic integrals to be 
evaluated due to the long -range nature of the tail of diffuse functions. This, in turn, also may lead 
to linear dependence in the definition of the wave function. On the other hand , the use of a 
limited number of basis functions entails the so -called basis set superposition error (BSSE); i.e., 
a spurious stabilizing contribution arising from the improved description of a fragment in a 
complex due to the assistance of the basis sets of the other fragments. This error is normally 
corrected a posteriori , at the uncorrected geometries, with the counterpoise method.434  
Plane wave basis sets are mainly used in solid -state simulations, along with 
pseudopotentials or projector augmented wave method to account for core electrons. Plane wave 
calculations are free of BSSE since they are not centered on the atomic nuclei,  thereby 
describing any point in the supercell with the same quality. Moreover, energy and gradient 
calculations are more efficient than with GTO for GGA functionals. The reverse is true for 
hybrid functionals as the calculation of the exact exchange using  plane waves is very expensive 
and applications of B3LYP based on plane waves started to appear only very recently435 
compared to B3LYP with Gaussian type orbitals, which were first run for studying the relative 
stability of silica polymorphs436 already in 1998. This prevents the use of hybrid functionals 
which, in many ocasions, are more accurate than standard GGA functionals. Another 
disadvantage of PW basis sets is that calculations are intrinsically period ic in three dimensions 
(3D), regardless of whether one is dealing with a molecule, a polymer, a slab or a crystal, the 3D 
box being uniformly filled with plane waves. The quality of PW basis sets is specified by the 
electronic kinetic energy cutoff E kin: the higher E kin the better the basis.  
With the aim of analyzing the differences arising from using GTO and PW basis sets, for 
hydrogen bonded systems, the formic acid molecule, its dimers and the molecular crystal were 
computed with different GGA functiona ls. This study shows that, irrespective of the functional, 70 
 
PW and GTO results converge smoothly as a function of the quality of the basis set.437 
Moreover, in a n attempt to bridge the gap between methods routinely applied in materials 
science using PW basis sets and quantum chemical methods using local GTO basis sets, the 
behavior of PBE and PBE0 (including one quarter of exact exchange to PBE) to determine 
geome tries and atomization energies of molecules in the G2 -1 data set was assessed using both 
basis sets. This study shows that discrepancies are very small. Indeed, both approaches yield 
identical results if convergence is carefully checked and reached for bot h methods.438 
5.5 Molecular Dynamics simulations  
  Exploring the potential energy surface; i.e., solving the electronic Schr ödinger equation at 
different nuclei positions, allows determining thermo dynamically stable structures (minima) and 
transition structures (first order saddle points) at 0K. For non -interacting rigid molecules, 
temperature effects can be reasonably incorporated by assuming the rigid rotor -harmonic 
oscillator approximation and st andard statistical methods from frequency calculations at the 
minimum energy structure. However, for large molecules, with soft torsional modes, or in 
solution, thermal effects must be estimated from a representative sampling of the phase space by 
using si mulation techniques such as Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics. In Monte Carlo 
methods the phase space sampling is attempted by random displacements of the relevant 
coordinate (Cartesian or internal coordinates) with the corresponding energy evaluation. Th e 
exploration is usually conditioned through a Boltzmann weighting scheme (Metropolis Monte 
Carlo) which ensures a reasonable efficiency in the search for local minima.439 Many millions 
steps are, however, needed in order to ensure a statistically meaningful ensemble,  as a result of 
the potential energy sampling.  
The Monte Carlo steps cannot be considered as an evolution in time of the system. The 
latter can be rigorously achieved by a technique known as molecular dynamics. Introduced by 
Alder and Wainwrigth in 1959440 and extended by Rahman in 1964,441 this method allows to 
study the evolution in time -space phase of the atomic positions subject to the internal forces of 
chemical nature and to the kinetic energy due to the temperature of the system. To ensure energy 
conservation, however, the time ste p used to integrate the Newton equations should be smaller 
than that associated to the fastest vibration of the system, resulting in values close to 0.1 fs (10-16 
s). Obviously, realistic applications of molecular dynamics imply a huge computational effort  to 
explore the system behavior even for a very short time window. For that reason, molecular 
dynamics developed to use a description of the internal forces resulting from classical force 
fields (see Section 5.6.3) which ensures a fast evaluation of energy  and forces at the price of 
lower accuracy. The situation dramatically changed when the Car -Parrinello442 (CP) method was 
introduced in 1985. In this method, forces are evaluated “on the fly” as resulting from a plane 71 
 
waves based density functional calculatio n in which electron density is not computed at each 
time step but estimated through the time integration of a cleverly defined Lagrangian operator. 
Since then, the CP method has enjoyed an enormous popularity in many different fields of 
molecular physics a nd chemistry.443  Amon g the cases in which molecular dynamics is beneficial 
are the adsorption of biomolecules on silica surfaces in solution , as this techniques  account s for 
tempera ture effects which are essential to understand their chemical behavior. Indeed, several 
studies presented in the frame of  this review (e.g. Section 9.1.1.2) have used molecular dynamics 
simulations, to study surface reconstruction, water -silica interfaces or biomolecules adsorption. 
While molecular dynamics (MD) simulations may be essential to afford  detailed structural and 
dynamical insights , they can  also become computationally prohibitive for relevant time scales. 
However, due to the continuous improvement of the power of high performance computer, 
molecular dynamics simulations with on -the-fly com putation of interatomic potentials fr om 
electronic structure theory can nowadays reach hundreds of picoseconds  whereas classical 
molecular dynamics, based on predefined classical force fields , derived either from empirical 
data or from quantum c hemical cal culations, can extend up to the microsecond time scale. The 
reliability of these force fields, however, is a critical aspect that should be carefully analyzed, 
particularly when entering into large time scales (see Section 5.6.3).  
5.6 Approximated methods  
As seen in the previous sections, density functional theory is a formidable and general 
tool to treat, at least in principle, any kind of molecular or extended system. Limitations are, 
besides the intrinsic inaccuracy of the DFT itself, due to the rather steep rise in the computational 
resources needed to simulate systems containing hundreds or thousands of atoms. This is 
particularly relevant for the present topic as both biopolymers and silica surfaces imply a large 
number of atoms. For instance, the nee d for realistic models of amorphous silica surface 
inevitably implies the adoption of very large surface unit cells without internal symmetry, which 
prevents the straightforward application of DFT based methods (see Section 7). A further issue is 
the need to run molecular dynamics calculations when configurational entropy becomes a key 
ingredient for describing the system, as in all cases in which liquid water plays a key role. 
Another example in which molecular dynamics is mandatory is when modeling the bu lk 
amorphization process with increasing temperature and reconstructions and relaxation of silica 
surfaces. To address the above points, a number of approaches have been developed in the 
literature to reduce the computational burden.  
5.6.1 Semiempirical me thods  
A possibility to speed up a calculation, by at least three orders of magnitude with respect 
to a DFT reference calculation, is to adopt semiempirical methods which are all based on the 72 
 
neglect of differential overlap approximation by Pople et al.444 The evolution of the earlier 
CNDO and INDO through the MNDO method445 of the early 80’s continued up to the most 
recent PM6 and PM7 methods available in the MOPAC2012 computer code,446 maintained by 
James Stewart. Basically, no applications of the semiempirical methods to adsorption of 
molecules/biomolecules on silica have appeared due to the known weakness of these me thods in 
dealing with H -bond and dispersive interactions, which are the dominant components of the 
adsorption energy for these cases. Nevertheless, the present status of the semiempirical methods 
can change the matter dramatically, due to important improve ments addressed by the PM6 -
DH2447,448 and PM7 model hamiltonians which allow to model both H -bond interactions and 
London dispersive forces much more accurately than in the past.   
 
5.6.2 SCC -DFTB method  
A level of theory which is intermediate between the semiempirical and the  full DFT 
approach is based on the tight -binding approach originally suggested for periodic systems by 
Koster and Slater.449 The modern version is known as self -consistent charge density functional 
tight-binding method (SCC -DFTB) mainly developed by Elstner’s group450-454 and is an 
approximation to density functional theory (DFT), where the Kohn -Sham (KS) total energy is 
expanded up to the second order in the charge density fluctuations, δ n, about a reference density, 
n0. The SCC -DFTB total energy is:  
   
 rep iocc
ii E qq H E21ˆ
0
 
where 
q is the Mulliken net charge on atom 
  and 
 is a function that depends on 
the 
 interatomic distance and on the Hubbard parameters 
U  and 
U , calculated within the 
generalized gradient approximation with the Perdew -Burke -Ernzerhof (PBE) formalism. 
repE  is 
the repulsion e nergy approximated as the sum of pairwise repulsive potentials adjusted to DFT 
calculations on reference systems. SCC -DFTB KS equations are obtained by applying the 
variational principle to the energy functional by expanding the KS orbitals into a suitable  set of 
localized atomic orbitals, 

i
i c . The KS equations are transformed into a set of self -
consistent algebraic equations in which the Hamiltonian and overlap matrix elements are 
approximated in order to evaluate the calculation of bie lectronic integrals. This results in the 
SCC -DFTB approach being comparable to semiempirical methods as far as computational 
efficiency is concerned. The energy can also be supplemented by a dispersion correction term448 
not accounted for by the level of theory. The method has been recently used to study biological 73 
 
systems of large complexity.455 Specific applications to silica/aminoacids interactions323 are 
reviewed in Section 9.  
 
5.6.3 Classical force fields  
Another three orders of magnitude with respect to semiempirical and SCC -DFTB 
methods can be gained by representi ng the molecular structure by means of “mechanical 
springs” whose features (length, strength, etc.) mimic the different interactions occurring within 
the molecule and between different molecules. The set of parameters associated to the springs is 
known as “force field” and the relaxation of the mechanical energy is the result of a “molecular 
mechanics calculation”. The method has enjoyed an enormous success starting from the first 
public force field for hydrocarbons, MM2 by Norman Allinger.456 The same approach has been 
extended to inorganic solids and in particular, to the silica bulk. The compl exity of inorganic 
materials and the paucity of experimental data needed to derive the force field parameters forced 
the adoption of simple two -body potentials for the description of each spring, compared to the 
most sophisticated terms (three -body and fou r-body terms) used for molecular cases.  For silica, 
despite the success of the classical two -body potential by van Beest, Kramer and van Santen 
(BKS),457 the accurate description of the hi ghly flexible Si -O-Si bond (see Section 2) required 3 -
body terms involving O -Si-O and Si -O-Si bending modes.  Also, the semi -ionic nature of the Si -
O bond42,43 suggested to adopt a shell -ion model potential in which the electronic charge on the 
oxyg en atoms is split into an inner (core) and an outer (shell) components linked by a 
mechanical spring458,459 to take the electronic polarizability of the oxygen atom into account.  
Many of the calculations on silica and oxides have been run using the General Utility Lattice 
Program (GULP) developed by Julian Gale.460 Along the above general lines a large number of 
force fields for modeling the silica bulk have been developed and a separate review would be 
needed to describe all of them in details. Here we only summarize the most widely used force 
fields for silica through Table 3, while the interested reader may read the review by Schaible461 
on silicon and silica force fields for more details.  The majority of the studies focused on the 
silica bulk properties, the surfaces being limited to studies de voted to understand the geometrical 
relaxation due to the bond cutting with respect to the bulk; water reactions involving the classical 
SiOH surface terminations were usually not considered (see Section 7.3 and 7.4). In other words, 
the state of the fully  hydroxylated silica surfaces, either crystalline or amorphous, the latter being 
the most common for real silica surfaces (see Section 2) has hardly been addressed with these 
force field (as exceptions see Ref.462-466), as these studies were not concerned with the 
description of the silanol groups and their mutual H -bonding interactions. To specifically address 
the H -bonded features at the silica surface the FF SiOH force field has recently been proposed, 74 
 
demonstrating excellent performances for both the bulk and the surface of silica materials as 
regards structures, energetic and phonon spectra, including the OH stretching region.467 FFSiOH 
is based on a shell -ion model potential to which a specific three -body term has been added to 
describe the H -bonding interaction between SiOH groups.   
Extension of silica force fie lds to model the interaction with adsorbates is much more 
difficult due to the complexity of the potential energy surface characterizing the 
surface/adsorbate interaction. The need for a much more extended set of parameters to deal with 
the interactions be tween the biomolecule and the surface has prevented this kind of studies from 
appearing in the literature. For the silica/water system (see Section 8 for a deeper discussion), 
Garofalini et al464,465 Singer et al462,463 and Du et al466 have extended the silica force field to 
include the interacti on with water. A recent example of the problems which can be addressed 
with such an extended force field is the very recent work by Colombi Ciacchi’s group who 
developed a force field for the interaction of H 2O on a partially deprotonated silica surface.285 
This is particularly relevant as SiOH groups at the hydroxylated silica surfaces transform to Si -
O- in solution as a function of pH and ionic strength (see S ection 3), a kind of situation very 
common when studying protein adsorption.  
The classical force field are not fit for describing chemical reactions as the analytical 
expressions are not flexible enough to allow changes in the atomic connectivity during ch emical 
reactions with the need of “on the fly update” of the corresponding parameters.  Recently, a 
different approach has been suggested by van Duin and coworkers who developed ReaxFF for 
hydrocarbons,468 a reactive force field which was designed to model equi librium structures as 
well as reaction intermediates and activated complexes in chemical reactions. The idea is to 
correlate bond lengths with bond orders and the latter with bond energies, following old insights 
from Linus Pauling’s work.469 The same methodology was then extended to model silicon and 
silica materials.470 At moment, ReaxFF has  been very successfully applied to study the reaction 
of water on a freshly cleaved silica surface471 (see also Table 3). While this approach is very 
powerful a nd promising, the development of new parameters is a rather cumbersome and a time 
consuming process as they have to be calibrated against results from quantum mechanical 
calculations on test systems.  
 
Table 3. Most common classical force fields for modeli ng silica material.  
Potential  Year  Description  Ref. 
BMH  1988  Born -Mayer -Huggins 2 -body potential plus 3 -body terms 
for O -Si-O and Si -O-Si.  472 
TTAM  1988  2-body potential derived from Hartree -Fock calculation 473 75 
 
on SiO 2 model clusters.  
BKS  1990  2-body potential derived from Hartree -Fock calcul ations 
on H 4SiO 4 and supplemented with experimental -quartz 
elastic constants.  457 
SSLCT  1992  2- and 3 -body shell -ion model potential for silica and Al -
substituted zeolites.  474 
HS 1994  Consistent force field from Hartree -Fock calculations on 
small silica clusters.  475 
SS96  1996  Shell -ion model potential for silica and zeolites from 
Hartree -Fock calculations on small silica clusters.  476 
SS97  1997  Shell -ion model potential for silica and zeolites from 
B3LYP calculations on small silica clusters.  477 
ReaxFF  2003  Reactive force field with DFT parametrization based on 
bond length/bond order and bond order/bond energy 
concepts.  470 
FFSiOH  2008  Shell -ion model potential for silica with a 3 -body term for 
H-bonding from periodic B3LYP calculations on -
quartz.  467 
GGMG  2008  Rigid  water m odified Guillot -Giussani model potential478 
merged with specific SiO 2 potential  to allow bond 
breaking/mak ing.  465 
 
6. Crystalline silica surfaces  
6.1 Surface sites  
Crystalline s ilica surfac es are constructed by cutting a slab of a given thickness along a 
chosen crystallographic plane from the corresponding optimized bulk structure  (see Section 4.1) . 
Cutting a silica str ucture involves breaking, homoly tically or heteroly tically, highly covale nt Si -
O bonds to form surface sites294 (see Figure 27 ), which are to  a large extent responsible for the 
physic o-chemical processes o n silica surfaces. In the homolytic cleavage , the pair of electrons of 
the broken chemical bond is divided evenly between the Si and O atoms , leading to the  
formation of two radicals. The possible surface sites generated by homolytic cleavage of Q3 
include the silyl (≡Si•) and siloxy (≡Si-O•) radicals. For Q2, this cleavage can lead to silanone 
(>Si=O ), silylene (>Si••) and siladioxirane  (cyclo - >Si(O 2)) sites. In the heterolytic cleavage, the 
pair of electrons is transferred to the more electronegative oxygen atom , leading to the formation 
of charged species. The cleavage of Q3 sites produces surfaces with silyl (≡Si+) cations and 76 
 
siloxy (≡Si-O-) anions, whereas that of Q2 would lead to silanone sites, doubly charged silylene 
cations (>Si++) and depr otonated ge minal di ols (>Si(O-)2).  
 
Figure 27 . Silica surface sites derived from cleavage. Redraw after  Ref.294  
 
Silica sites have been investigated with ab initio cluster calculations at the B3LYP level 
of theory and its bonding patterns characterized by Natural Bond Order analysis.294 This work 
suggests that silanone sites and a pa ir of silyl/siloxy radicals, resulting from homolytic cleavage, 77 
 
are the most stable Q2 and Q3 sites, respectively, on a pristine silica surface. The h eterolytic 
cleavage, entailing charge separation, is significantly less favorable than the homolytic one.294 
  Surface sites can be invest igated by different experimental techniques. Radical sites such 
as the ≡Si -O• centers, also called Non -Bridging Oxygen (NBO )296,479,480 are characterized by 
photoluminescence481-487 and Electron Spin Resonance ( ESR) spectroscopy.480,488-491 From a 
theoretical point of view, both siloxyl and silyl surface defectiv e centers have been analyzed in 
different surfaces: edingtonite (100), quartz (0001) and cristobalite (111) , using embedded 
cluster models and the B3LYP functional .394,395 DFT (BLYP, B3LYP and BHand HLYP) 
periodic calculations have also been carried out to analyze the siloxyl d efect on three 
hydroxylated quartz surfaces, ((001), (100) and (011)), in cristobalite (101), and tridymite 
(001) .345 For the siloxyl results show that the singl y occupied orbital is mainly centered on one of 
the 2p orbitals of the non -bridging oxygen345,394 and th at theory is able to reproduce the essential 
EPR properties of these centers ,345,395 particularly when u sing hybrid functionals. Moreover, the 
overall absorption spectra calculated with time dependent DFT are in qualitative agreement with 
the experimental data .395  On the other hand, results show that computed properties of siloxyl 
sites are almost independent from the surface structure,345,395 confirming the strong local nature 
of this d efect. If embedded in an hydroxy lated surface, the surface features that change the most 
with the presence of this radical defect are the surface H -bonds, which tend to be come  weaker.345 
For silyl sites, the unpaired electron is also localized in a sp3 orbital of the three co ordinated 
silicon but, the EPR properties, particularly a iso, are more sensitive to the surface structure, 
mostly to the O -Si•-O angle and the Si•-O distance.395 Remarkably, calculations have also shown 
that these two well -known paramagnetic centers of silica surface are deep electron traps able to 
form stable negatively charged surface centers,394 which may have important consequences on 
their physical -chemical properties.  
Silanone  and siladioxirane  surface sites, both diamagnetic, can be identified by optical492 
and vibrational spectroscopies .296,297 Moreover, detailed analysis of the low -lying excitations in 
these surface sites can be obtained from high level ab initio quantum chemical methods,487,493 
which can help identifying the bands on photoadsorption and photolum iniscence spectra. For 
instance, the computed values associated to the lowest fully allowed singlet singlet verti cal 
transitions, found at  ≈3 and ≈5 eV for siladioxirane and at ≈5.7 eV for silanone, are in good 
agreement with the experimental data  (≈3 and ≈5 eV for siladioxirane and 5.65 eV for silanone ), 
thereby providing support to the conclusion that the observed  transitions in the optical spectra of 
the activated silica surface are due to silanone and siladioxirane sites.493 The photoluminescence 
properties of silanone and siladioxirane have also been investigated by quantum chemical 
methods ,302,487 both surface sites constituting  possible candidates for green - and red -light 78 
 
emitters. For silanone, the photoluminesc ence energies from the two lowest excited singlet s tates 
are calculated to appear at 2.3 and 1.6 eV, around 3.4 –4.0 eV lower than the vertical excitation 
energies, due to a significant geometry relaxation in the excited states. Indeed, the Si=O double 
bond is highly elongated in the excited state, being tr ansformed into a single bond, which leads 
to a loss of planarity of the >Si=O fragment. For siladioxirane, the excitation initiates the 
cleavage of the O –O bond and radiative trans itions contribute to photoluminesc ence in the 
ranges 2.1 -2.3 eV and 1.7 –1.8 eV ranges .  
 
6.2 Surface reconstruction  
Freshly  cleaved surfaces contain under -coordinated (also called “coordinatively 
unsaturated”) reactive sites. To investigate surface properties of fractured silica, models of low -
index unrelaxed surfaces of quartz we re constructed and analyzed using periodic density 
functional theory calculations.295,494,495 Surface energies, defined as  
)2/ ( A En E Ebulk slab surf   
with 
slabE  being the energy of a pristine slab, 
bulkE  the energy of SiO 2 in the bulk, n the number 
of SiO 2 in the sup ercell and 2A the total surface area  (top and bottom) , were computed both 
considering spin paired and spin polarized calculations to describe heterolytic and homolytic 
cleavage, respectively. Noticeably, in nine out of ten cases , the specific surface energ y 
differences between results of spin -polarized and spin -paired calculations was less than 2%.495 
This is in contrast to cluster calculations,294 which suggest that the homolytic cleavage of a Si -O 
bond is energetically more favorable than the hetero lytic one. The stabilization of surfaces with 
charged sites was attributed to intersite electrostatic interactions,295,494 which are not taken into 
account in cluster calculations. From this study it was suggested that cuts with a more uniform 
distribution of surface sites at the opposite sides of the cleavage plane were associated with 
lower surface ener gies. Moreover, cuts with a more uniform distribution of oxygen atoms among 
the ruptured geminal surface sites, favoring neutral sites over the charged ones, also exhibited 
lower surface energies. The calculated unrelaxed surface energies of quartz range f rom 0.161 to 
0.200 eV Å-2 (2.6 to 3.2. J m-2)295,495 these  are high  values , rendering these surfaces very reactive. 
As a result, they quickly reconstruct or, in the presence of water, become hydrolyzed leading to 
geminal Q2 >Si(OH) 2 and terminal  Q3 ≡Si-OH silanol groups.  
Several computational studies have been carried out to characterize the major features of 
surface reconstruction on different silica surfaces .295,496,497 First principles DFT (LDA) molecular 
dynamics simulations for (0001) -quartz,497 indicate that the most favourable surface 
reconstruction presents an unexpected densification of the two uppermost layers of SiO 2 
tetrahedral units, with three - and six -membered rings, at 300 K. Similar results are obtained with 
interatomic potential based calculations at 400 K.496 During the reconstruction of the surface, the 79 
 
initial under -coordinated silicon and oxygen atoms of the cleaved surface re cover full 
coordination , forming six -membered rings (S6R) parallel to the surface and three -membered  
rings extending into the bulk (see Figure 28).  
 
 Figure 28.  Most stable reconstruction of (001) -quartz.  a) side view b) top view. Drawn with 
data from  Ref.391 
   
Reconstruction of most common pristine surfaces (101), (102), (112) (100) (111) (110) 
and (001) of -quartz, was also investigated with periodic DFT(GGA) and plane wave 
calculations.295 Four types of reconstruction were found: a) formation of s trained two -membered 
silicon rings (S2R) from silyl and siloxy sites, b) formation of (S2R) 2+ structures with two side 
sharing S2R, c) formation of three membered silicon rings (S3R) and d) transformation of 
silanone sites into siloxane sites. Energies of cleaved unrelaxed surfaces range from 0.161 to 
0.200 eV Å-2 (2.6 to 3.2. J m-2),295,495 whereas those  associated to reconstructed surfaces range 
from 0.071 to 0.142 eV Å-2(1.1 to 2.3 J m-2). Relaxation energies are determined  by the kind of 
reconstruction, the formation of S2R to saturate the valencies of undercoordinated oxygens 
exhibiting larger values than relaxation of silanone sites. Relaxation energies computed in Ref.295 
however, are smaller and thus, reconstructed surface energies are higher, than those reported in 
other studies ,391,497 due to the fact that in the former reference relaxat ion was limited to a single 
silica  tetrahedral layer, while in fact  it can extend as deep as six SiO 2 molecular layers.497 Full 
relaxation, however, can lead to an overstabilization of the slab. Indeed, a recent stud y on the 
(001) -quartz surface has revealed the importance of the slab thickness on the reconstructed 
surface energy, showing that a layer slab made of six [SiO 4]  groups is needed  to achieve 
converged values.391 
DFT(LDA) molecular dynamics simulations have also been performed recently on the 
(011) surface of -quartz at room -temperature.498 Reconstruction leads to the formation of a 
fused seven member ring through the reaction of two adjacent O• radicals, followed by linking 
one of the reactive O with a nearby silicon. Remarkably, in the newly formed structures some of 80 
 
the silicon atoms exhibit a pentacoordinated environment , usually distorted between pure 
trigonal bipyramid and square pyramid  geometries . Moreover, in a few cases, oxygen atoms also 
became tricoordinated  (see Figure 29) .   
 
Figure 29.  Process occ urred during reconstruction of the (011) surface of -quartz. Drawn with 
data from  Ref.498  
 
6.3 Hydroxylated surfaces  
Fractured silica is very hydrophilic so that exposure to water results in the hydrolysis of 
the surface sites with the formation of silanol  groups. In principle, hydrolysis can lead to single 
silanol sites  (Q3(OH) ), to silanediols , i.e.,  geminal silanols  (Q2(OH) 2), and to silanetriol cent ers 
(Q1(OH) 3). The latter ones, however, are thermally unstable and have not been detected in NMR 
studies  as already mentioned .  Previous calculations for (001) -quartz have shown that the 
cleaved surface reacts exothermically with wate r until it becomes fully hydroxy lated .497,499,500 
When a water molecule approaches the surface, its oxygen atom binds to an under -coordinated 
Si atom, while one of its  hydrogen atoms is transferred to a neighboring non -bridging oxygen, 
leading to the formation of two silanols. (see Figure 30 ).500 Car–Parrinello ab initio molecular 
dynamics  (CP–MD) simulations for the  -quartz–water interface at 1000 K and  0.3 GPa  show 
that dissociation of H 2O molecules into H+ and OH- at the Si -terminated  surface takes place on a 
very short time scale of about 2 ps.501 On the other hand, c alculations on cluster models502 
suggest that the energy barrier of this process is only 12-13 kJ mol-1  and thus,  that it will readily 
proceed under ambient conditions of temperature and humidity. As the surface becomes 
hydrated, hydrogen bond chains start appearing . The fully hydroxylated (001) -quartz exhibits 
zig-zag hydrogen bond networks with alternating strong and weak hydrogen bonds. Remarkably, 
the dense (reconstructed) surface, characterized by 3 -membered and 6 membered -rings with 
siloxane bonds  at the top,497 is shown to be hydrophobic, suggesting that surfaces formed by 
non-strained siloxane bonds are essentially hydrophobic.503     
 81 
 
 
 
Figure 30.  Hydration mechanism for the cleaved (0001) -quartz. Drawn with data from  Ref.500 
 
The hydrogen bonding features in the hydroxylated surfaces of quartz,295,306,391,499,500,504 
cristobalite,306,315,492,505,506 tridymite306 and amorphous  silica507-509 have been analyzed in several 
studies with periodic DFT calculations. Am ong them, the study of Musso et al.306 provides a 
very systematic study of many different hyroxylated surfaces of quartz, cristobalite and tridymite 
polymorphs. In particular, five surfaces were considered for quartz, Q(001), Q(100), Q(010), 
Q(011) and Q(101), f our for cristobalite, C(001), C(100), C(101) and C(110) and three for 
tridymite, T(001), T(100) and T(110).  Since hydrolysis of freshly cut surfaces  proceeds very 
quickly in the presence of water vapor, surfaces were generated by cutting a slab of a given 
thickness along the chosen crystallographic plane from the corresponding optimized bulk 
structure and saturating the unfilled valencies with H and OH. This leads to different  kinds of 
silanols (vicinal, ge minal or interacting , see Section 2.2 ) and OH densi ties depending on the 
polymorph and crystallographic plane. The thickness of the slab was carefully chosen to avoid an 
excessive deformation as a result of considering a surface that is too thin. This is important since 
the slab thickness determines its ri gidity and thus, it can largely influence surface H -bonds.306,391 
The distribution and pattern of OH groups as well as the H -bond features of each surface are 
displayed in Figure  31.  82 
 
 
Figure 31.  B3LYP optimized structures of fully hydroxylated -quartz,  -cristobalite, and -
tridymite surfaces (top faces representation). Hydrogen bond distances (H∙∙∙O) in Å as dotted 
lines. Reprinted with permission from Ref.306. Copyr ight 2009 American Chemical Society.  
 
Optimized structures show different H -bond patterns depending on the distribution of the 
hydroxyl groups on the surface. C(100) and T(001) models, with the highest slab rigidity and the 
latter with the smallest OH dens ity as well, only show isolated surface silanols. Q(010), Q(011), 
C(001) and T(100) surfaces exhibit a single H -bond interaction inside the crystalline cell,  83 
 
whereas C(110) shows four silanols interacting thro ugh a four -membered H -bond ring. The 
remaining  surfaces, Q(001), Q(100), Q(101), C(110), C(101) and T(110) present infinitely 
extended H-bond chains.  
In order to evaluate the stability of each slab model, the surface energy, was computed 
according to the following reaction  aBSiO2 + bH 2O  cSSiOH, where BSiO2 refers to the bulk unit 
cell and SSiOH to the slab unit cell . The formation energy per unit cell and the surface energy 
were defined as 
) (
2OHcell
bulkcell
slab cell bE aE cE E   and 
A E Ecell surf 2 , respectively, where A 
is the surface unit cell area.  Compu ted values for each surface, as well as structural data, are 
given in Table 4. It can be observed that in almost all cases surface energies are negative, 
resulting in a thermodynamically favored surface formation. Exceptions are observed for T(001) 
and C(1 00) for which no surface H -bonds are present, thereby suggesting that H -bonding 
between surface silanols is the key factor that drives the surface energy. Indeed, the surface 
energy is the result of three different factors: i) the rupture of Si -O-Si bonds of the bulk followed 
by the formation of surface silanols; ii) the structural relaxation of the interior of the slab  and iii) 
the formation of H -bonds between the surface silanols. Process i) is common to all considered 
surfaces and can be treated as a fix ed contribution per Si -OH group  to the surface energy. Its 
local covalent nature should lead to a near  independence of the corresponding  value on  the 
considered slab. Processes ii) and iii) are intermingled; however, the fact that the bathochromic 
shift of  the OH donor stretching frequency, which can be considered a measure of the H -bond 
strength, exhibits an inverse correlation with the surface energy306 (see Figure 32) suggest s that 
H-bonding is probably the most representative contribution to the differences observed.  
 
 
 84 
 
Figure 32.  Surface energies ESurf  vs the largest bathochromic harmonic OH frequency shift 
(OH) calculated for all polymorph surfaces with respect to the value of 3904 cm-1 for the 
isolated OH groups of the T(001) surface . Reprinted with permission from Ref.306. Copyright 
2009 American Chemical Society.  
 
Overall, hydroxylated silica surfaces are characterized by different types of OH groups 
(geminal, vicinals and isolated) a nd by different H -bonding patterns that result from the 
interaction between hydroxyl groups. The H -bond pattern strongly depends on the disposition 
and on the density  of the OH groups at the surface. Although t he majority of the crystalline 
models exhibit infinitely connected H -bond chains, small local H -bonded rings or isolated  pairs 
through completely free OH group s have also been found, depending on the OH density and the 
rigidity of the silica framework.  85 
 
Table 4 . Structural data for quartz ( Q), cristob alite ( C) and tridymite ( T) slabs. Cell parameters ( a, b, ), cell area ( A), slab thickness ( ), <Si -O> 
and <O -H> bonds,   the surface OH density (ρ ) and surface energy Esurf) 
 
 Q(001)  Q(010)  Q(100)  Q(011)  Q(101)  C(001)  C(100)  C(101)  C(110)  T(001)  T(100)  T(110)  
a (Å)  4.866  4.841  4.972  5.003  10.202  4.969  5.019  8.255  6.856  5.078  5.080  8.030  
b (Å)  4.963  5.565  5.361  7.290  4.983 5.002  6.873  5.014  6.733  5.076  7.923  7.951  
 (°) 119.1  90.0 90.0 110.1  137.3  90.0 89.5 90.0 90.0 121.5  89.9 90.1 
A (Å2) 21.1 26.9 26.7 34.3 34.5 24.9 34.5 41.4 46.2 22.0 40.3 63.9 
 (Å) 11.0 8.6 8.9 8.0 7.4 20.0 13.2 9.3 7.6 9.3 10.7 11.0 
<Si-O> (Å)  1.633  1.635  1.632  1.636  1.636  1.631  1.631  1.633  1.637  1.629  1.630  1.632  
<O-H> (Å)  0.980  0.970  0.980  0.968  0.972  0.973  0.965  0.974  0.979  0.964  0.971  0.979  
(OH/nm2) 9.5 7.4 7.5 5.8 5.8 8.0 5.8 4.8 8.7 4.5 5.0 6.3 
Esurf (J m-2) -0.35 -0.12 -0.27 -0.01 -0.06 -0.21 0.00 -0.06 -0.28 0.01 -0.08 -0.24 86 
 
 7. Amorphous silica surfaces  
As we have seen in Section 4 , the most common way to deal with silica simulation s is to 
adopt the periodic boundary condition method. Still , the problem of model ing the surface of 
amorphous silica is an open one, as no reference to experimental structural data can be made due to 
the lack  of information about the fine details of the bulk and even more s eriously of the surface 
itself. As we hav e already mentioned , a proper combination of different hydroxylated surfaces 
derived from crystalline silica can be used to mimic the complexity of the amorphous silica surface. 
In this section we only focus on models of amorphous silica surface exclusivel y derived from a true 
amorphous bulk within the PBC and which ha ve been characterized in detail  in terms of their 
surface physico -chemical features. We are also referring here to surfaces which have healed  their 
main structural and electronic defects (see Section 2), i.e. surface s only  exhibiting Si -O-Si bridges 
and Si -OH groups, the main functionalities present in water environment. We have singled out  two 
models obtained using quantum mechanical methods based on DFT: the first one from Tielens et 
al510 and the second one  from Ugliengo et al ,509 respectively.  87 
 
7.1 The Tielens  model   
This model derives from an amorphous silica bulk originally propos ed by Garofalini464 who 
adopted molecular dynamics based on a specifically SiO 2 derived empirical potential f or the 
simulation  (see Section 5.6.3) . The usual procedure based on PBC , as described in Section 4 , was 
adopted by the authors who carefully avoid ed unstable defects at the surface by transforming three -
coordinated Si atoms and non -bridging oxygen atoms , derived  from the geometrical cut of the SiO 2 
bulk in SiOH groups, by manual addition of H 2O molecules. To be able to adopt DFT based 
methods the starting slab model was about 10 Å thick, with an in plane cell size of 13 Å  x 17.5 Å, 
which resulted  in Si 26O65H27 composition (1 18 atoms as a whole). Ab initio molecular dynamics 
based on plane waves basis set was carried out at 400 K using PBE functional at  point for 5 ps. 
Spontaneous dehydroxylation was observed, resulting in the formation of small silica rin gs. 
Subsequent optimization at 0 K with higher accuracy in the number of k points and the kinetic 
cutoff was carried out. Results shows that the surface is very thin (about three -layer thick) with 
thickness varying between 5 and 8 Å, respectively (see Figure 33 for details).  
 
Figure 33. The top, lateral and bottom views of the Tielens model. Oxygen atoms of the surface 
OH groups are colored in blue. Molecular graphics rendered by Qutemol.73 
 
The film thickness is not uniform and at the thinnest point the upper side is separated by the lower 
one by just one HO -Si-O-Si-OH link. The full set of harmonic frequencies have been computed as 
well as the NMR shielding constants by mean s of the GIPAW511 approach which ensures good 88 
 
quality of the results. Ring nuclearity peaked around 4, 5 and 6 -membered rings, with 7, 8 , 9 and 
10-membered rings being only a minor feature. Interestingly, the model does not show  either two - 
or three -membered rings, the former being unstable with respect to reaction with H 2O. The Si -O-Si 
angle distribution is very broad, covering a 130 -180 degrees range, without a distin ct maximum, in 
agreement with the high pl iability of this bond (see Section 2  on this point ). The OH density of 5.8 
OH/nm2 is the same for the upper and the lower face and it is higher than the value of 4.5/4.9 
OH/nm2 reported by Zhuravlev.78 A relatively high population of geminal silanols has been found, 
with an uneven distribution between the two surfaces (23% and 46% for the upper/lower face, 
respectively). Due to the high OH density, the population of H -bonded SiOH groups is more t han 
1/3 of the total (38% and 31% for the upper/lower face, respectively). Table 5 shows the 
distribution of the various kinds of SiOH groups. The absolute deprotonation energy of the OH 
groups has been computed , showing a higher acidity of the Q2 sites co mpared to the Q3 ones, 
resulting in a theoretical difference of 2.5 units of pK a in favour of the geminal sites. The NMR 
δ(29Si) chemical shift has been found in nice linear correlation with the Si -O-Si angle for  values 
belonging to the three Q2, Q3 and Q4 families in agreement with experimental data.512,513 In light of 
the relevance of the OH vibrational features for silica surfaces (see Section 2 and 3) , the ab initio 
harmonic OH stretching frequency values have b een computed and shown to linearly correlate with 
the OH bond length. Calculations report a rather high difference between the two internal OH 
stretching frequency values for a Q2 site, about 36 cm-1, large enough to be distinguishable 
experiment ally. This  is in disagreement with both experimental evidence s which show s that the OH 
frequency value s for Q2 and Q3 sites are almost indistinguishable  (Ref.118 and Section 3.1.4) and 
quantum mechanical calculations on the (001) hydroxylated surfaces of edingtonite for which the 
B3LYP (scaled) harmonic frequencies were 3737, 3733 and 3735 cm-1 for the Q3 and Q2 sites, 
respectively. The discrepancy between the amorphous model and the one derived from a crystalline 
bulk is probably due to the high OH density of the amorphous model which forces almost all SiOH 
groups to “feel” their neighboring groups with a consequent perturbation of the OH stretching 
frequency, known to be very sensitive to local electric fields. In light of this re sult, it has to be 
established whether the acidity difference between the Q3 and Q2 sites is not the consequence of 
different intermolecular interactions rather than being an intrinsic electronic effect of the Q2 moiety  
(see also Section 10 on this questio n).   
 In conclusion, the Tielens  model , due to  the addressed limitations,  should be used with some 
caution  to mimic the behavior of a fully hydroxylated amorphous silica surface (4.5/4.9 OH/nm2). 
The number of atoms still allows the adoption of normal com putational resources to run plane 
waves based DFT calculations. Its main weakness is the exceedingly small thickness , which may 
render the model too flexible when adopted to simulate adsorption phenomena.  This model has 89 
 
been used to study the adsorption of  water and glycine and these studies are  reviewed in sections 8 
and 9, respectively.  
 
7.2 The Ugliengo  Model  
This model was derived starting from a bulk cristobalite with 192 atoms in the unit cell. 
Classical empirical partial charge rigid ion model potent ial514 has been used to run molecular 
dynamics at very high T and then cool ed down to room temperature. This process ensured an 
amorphization of the starting ma terial without introducing defects (two -membered rings, >Si=O and 
others) in the final structure. The bulk was then cut along one of the cell ax es and the surface 
unfilled valencies  (above/below) were automatically saturated by an algorithm encoded in the 
graphical program MOLDRAW.515 Basically, a double -bonded Si is transformed in to a Q2 site by 
attaching two OH groups, whereas a single -bonded Si is removed, leaving the only bonded oxygen 
atoms singly -bonded to the underneath slab. This is to avoid the creation of  Q1 sites (by attaching 
three OH groups to the singly -bonded Si atom) as  Q1 are not found at the silica surface (see 
Section s 3.1.4 and 3.1.5 ). A triple -bonded Si atom is transformed in to a Q3 site by attaching a single 
OH group. All singly -bonded oxygen atoms are transformed in to OH groups. As these 
transformation are operate d in a geometrical fashion they do not require any quantum mechanical 
calculations. The healed structure showed a silanol density of 7.2 OH/nm2, typical of values for a 
sol-gel amorphous silica, was 14.5 Å thick and consisted of 222 atoms. It was fully rel axed (internal 
and cell size) at B3LYP/6 -31G(d,p) level using a massive parallel version of CRYSTAL06 
code.291,516 The final structure is shown in Figure 34.  90 
 
 
Figure 34 . Top and bottom views of the Ugliengo  model with variable OH densities. Oxygen atoms 
of the surface OH groups are colored in blue. Unit cell as dashed lines. Molecular graphics 
rendering by Qu temol.73 
 
The number of geminal silanols amount s to 29% of the total OH population , not too far from 
the value for the Tielens  model. Using this structure as a starting model , the dehydration process 
occurring by outgassing the silica at high T was simulated by geometricall y removing  one water 
molecule from the closest OH…OH pairs and making a new Si -O-Si silanol bridge. The new 
resulting structure was fully relaxed and this process was repeated in order to get OH densities of 
5.4, 4.5, 2.4 and 1.5 OH/nm2, respectively. This simulates different stages of the dehydroxylation 
process. Three representative structures are shown in Figure 34 and the corresponding data on the 
SiOH p opulations are reported in Table 5 together with the data for the Tielens  model.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 91 
 
Table 5. Properties of the Ugliengo  amorphous silica surfaces.509  The column labeled as 
OH(geminals) reports the total number of OH groups (for the upper/lower surfaces) and, in 
parentheses, the number of geminal SiOH groups.  
 
[OH nm-2] OH(geminals)  H-bond contactsa Free OH  %Free OH 
  OH…OH OH…OSi 2   
7.2 28(8) 16 1 4 14 
        5.8b          24(6)          7                 1        4         17 
5.4 20(3) 7 1 7 35 
4.5 16(1) 3 3 7 43 
2.4 8(1) 2 0 4 50 
1.5 4(1) 0 1 3 75 
aH-bond cutoff: 2.15 Å. bData for the Tielens surface.510 
 
Data of Table 5 shows that the number of OH…OH H -bonds decreases dramatically with the 
drop in OH density . For the most representative , 4.5 OH/nm2 case, it corresponds to 19% of the 
total OH groups.  Interestingly, the same percentage resulted for the H -bonds between OH and the 
siloxane Si -O-Si bridge. This is somehow surprising as the Si -O-Si is a very weak Lewis base. In 
the present case the distorsion introduced in the structure in the simulated de hydroxylation process 
brings about Si -O-Si angles much smaller than the normal 145° value (see also Section 2 for the 
flexibility of the Si -O-Si bond) thereby  increasing the associated basicity. B3LYP calculations  of 
the dehydroxylation processes that brin g the 7.2 OH/nm2 towards the 1.5 OH/nm2 model confirm 
the expected endothermic nature of the process as schematically shown in Figure 35. 92 
 
 
Figure 35 . Left of the arrow: silica surface OH density (OH/nm2); Within the arrow:  dehydration 
reaction energies (kJ/mol) for reducing the OH density; Right of the arrow: cartoon of the silica 
surface for  (OH/nm2)=7.2, 4.5 and 1.5, respectively. Oxygen atoms of the surface OH groups are 
depicted in blue. Molecular graphics rendering by Qutemol.73 
 
The values also confirm that the endothermicity dramatically increases with the degree of 
dehydroxylation up to 359 kJ/mol to reach the 1.5 OH/nm2 case. The infrared spectrum in the OH 
region  for a hypothetical surface exhibiting 4.5 OH/nm2 is given in Figure 36 (see original work509 
for technical details). In order to account for the non -uniform OH density of a real silica surface, the 
spectral contributions from each of the considered models have been merged, with weights 
reflecting the expected experimental populations, obtaining a very good agreement with the 
experimental spectrum recorded for an Aerosil 300 from Degussa outgassed at 450 K in the OH 
stretching region (see Figure  36).  93 
 
3200 3400 3600 3800A300/423 K
B3LYP
 
Figure 36. Top: experimental infrared spectrum of silica Aerosil 300 outgassed at 423K. Bottom: 
simulated B3LYP infrared spectrum for the Ugliengo models. The ra nge of wavenumbers (units in 
cm-1) covers the OH stretching region.  
 
The 1.5 OH/nm2 Ugliengo model (albeit with some reduction in the slab thickness to 
decrease the computational burden) has been recently chosen to simulate the energetic and 
vibrational fe atures of adsorbed ammonia and compared with experimental results.169 The same 
approach was adopted to define a thinner, 4.5 OH/nm2 surface, and to study the int eraction of 
aspirin and ibuprofen on both surfaces.517 
 
7.3 Other models   
 A number of authors have provided models for the amorphous silica surface. Since many of 
them were focusing on the surfac e defects, we will not discuss all of them  in details. Table  6 
collects a brief summary of the considered models together with the methods for their simulations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 94 
 
Table 6.  Different methods and target for the simulation of amorphous silica surfaces. S2R refers to 
the two -membered (SiO) 2 ring, Si(3) to the three -coordinated Silicon, NBO to the non -bridging 
oxygen of silanone.  
Method  Studied systems  Ref. 
MD with an effective three -body 
potential specific for SiO 2 Bulk silica and surfaces without water reconstruction. 
Detection of S2R only at the surface. NBO defects 
coherent with the experimental SiOH density.  518 
MD with modifi ed TTAM 
potential473 for SiO 2 and SPC519 
for H 2O Simulation of a fully hydrophobic silica surface. The MD 
protocol was tweaked in order to minimize the formation 
of S2R, Si(3) and NBO. Hydrophob icity was defined 
with respect to the heat of liquefaction of H 2O. A silica 
surface free from S2R, Si(3) and NBO was found 
hydrophobic.  520 
MD with van Beest -Kramer -van 
Santen (BKS457) empirical 
potential  Silica clusters (14, 19, 27 Å) and film (29 Å thick). 
Density of surface S2R=0.6/nm2. No surface SiOH.  521 
BLYP CPMD442 on BKS457 
generated surface  Study of the reaction of S2R with H 2O and NH 3 507 
Comparison between MD BKS457 
and BLYP CPMD442  Study of the distribution of rings and geometrical 
parameters as a function of the adopted method. CPMD 
disfa vors the S2R formation over BKS  522 
MD with Born –Mayer–Huggins 
empirical potential523 Silica surface without SiOH groups rich in NBO and 
Si(3). Electrostat ic potential maps of silica surface to 
establish reactivity with H 2O. 524 
MD with Buckingham, Coulomb 
and Morse, three -body term to Si -
O-H  Silica surface with NBO, Si(3) and S2R reacted with 
H2O. Concentration of 4.5 OH/nm2. Surface reactivity: 
separated NBO and Si (3) > NBO+Si(3) > S2R > S 3R. 466 
BLYP CPMD442 on BKS457 
generated periodic SiO 2 surface s. Exothermic reaction of H 2O with S2R at the silica 
surface.  525 
MD with Cerius2 GLASSFF_2.01 
and GLASSFF_1.01526 force 
fields to silica and CHARMM527 
developed parameters for water 
interaction.  Silica slabs and pores produced by annealing an 
amorphous bulk. Care to avoid NBO, Si(3) and S2R at 
the surface and to convert them to SiOH groups. SiO- also 
included in the simulation. Study of the wettabili ty as a 
function of surface hydroxylation.  528 
MD with an extension of BKS457 
and SPC/E529 force fields to 
silica/H 2O interactions  Hydrated and hydroxylated silica surfaces. Ab initio 
parametrization of the force field. Hydroph ilic and 
hydrophobic patches resulted as a function of SiOH 
density. Heat of immersion in good agreement with 
experiment.  462,463 
MD with modified Stillinger -
Weber potential530 for Si and  
Vashishta et al.531 for SiO 2 Oxidized Si surfaces compared to full amorphous SiO 2 
model. Heat of immersion and water structuring higher 
for the oxidized Si surfaces than for the amorphous SiO 2. 307 
MD with a wate r modified 
Guillot -Giussani model 
potential478 merged with specific 
SiO 2 potential  to allow bond 
breaking/ making.  Atomistic mechanism to the healing of Si(3) and NBO. 
Silica surface models with 3.8 OH/nm2. Proton transfer 
allows penetration of water up to 7 Å within the surface.  465 
MD with SiO 2 reactive force field, 
SERIAL -REAX470 Simulation of ve ry large SiO 2 surface unit cells and their 
reaction with H 2O. Spontaneous reconstruction by H 2O 
reaction in 250 ps.  471 
MD using specific SiO 2/H2O force 
field532,533. Simulation of water adsorbe d in Vicor glass nanopores 
with fully hydroxylated internal walls. N o bulk H 2O 
features for 1 -4 nm pores.  534 
MD, a b initio and refinement of 
the Cole et al307 potential for 
SiO 2/H2O system.  Simulation of the fully hydroxylated /H 2O interaction. 
Improved parameters by MP2 calcu lations on clusters to 
treat Si -O-/H2O interaction.  285 95 
 
7.4 The S2R surface defect  
 As it was discussed in Sections 2 and 3, the defects remaining at the sili ca surface are, in 
principle, three -coordinated Si(3), non -bridging oxygen NBO, >Si=O and strained rings S2R, or 
(SiO) 2. At ambient condition, due to the presence of moisture, the Si(3) and NBO defects can hardly 
survive the reaction with H 2O (see also ref erences in Table  6). The S2R is an exception, because it 
naturally results from the vicinal sites condensation during the thermal treatment of silica at T > 900 
K. As already reported in Section 2, 3.1.4 and 3.1.7, the S2R concentration is rather small (in  the 
initial works137,535,536 it was reported to b e around 0.1 S2R/nm2, although more recent data after 
severe activation steps suggests that it can reach up to 0.5 S2R/nm2). Interestingly, the formation of 
S2R surface defects is quite general as they have also been identified by their IR fingerprint in 
crystalline all -silica silicalite.363 S2R defects are very reactive towards molecules with hydrogen 
attached to electronegative elements like oxygen and nitrogen (Section 3.1. 7): H 2O, MeOH and 
NH 3 react very fast with S2R defects, forming new surface functionalities, i.e. two SiOH groups, 
SiOH and Si -O-Me and SiOH and SiNH 2, respectively. Due to their relevance, a number of studies 
have been especially aimed at modeling S2R and  they are summarized in Table 7. 
 
Table  7. Different methods to model the reactivity of S2R defects towards H 2O and glycine. rE 
and aE are the reaction and activation energies for the opening of the S2R defect, respectively. 
Units in kJ/mol.  
 
Model and m ethods  rE aE Ref. 
BLYP/DZP on H 2(SiO) 2H2 as a cluster  model of the 
S2R defect. S2R IR prediction of D2 modes  -134 27 537 
BLYP -cristobalite (111) reconstructed surface with 
periodic formation of S2R defects. Amorphous silica 
model fro m BKS457 simulation to simulate isolated 
S2R defects.  -127 / 506 
ONIOM2[B3LYP/6 -31G*:UHF/STO -3G] on clusters 
containing the S2R defect cut out from SiO 2 silica 
models from MD with polarizable ion model potential 
based on extension of WAC potential538. / 68  
(gas-phase 
molecule)  
107 
(embedded in the 
silica matrix)  502,539 
BLYP CPMD442 on BKS457 generated periodic 
surface s. -168 34 507 
PBE/pl ane waves mechanically embedded  / 40 540 
MD with Buckingham, Coulomb and Morse, three -
body term to Si-O-H. Peri odic surface models.  -458  466 
ONIOM2[B3LYP/6 -31+G(d,p):MNDO]  on 
Si10O16H12(SiO) 2 cluster model.  IR prediction of S2R 
modes.  -122 82 75 
B3LYP/6 -31+G(d,p)// ONIOM2[B3LYP/6 -
31+G(d,p):MNDO]  on Si10O16H12(SiO) 2 cluster model. 
Interaction and reactivity with glycine.  -109 0.5 541 
 96 
 
 
The majority of th ese studies focused on the calculation of the reaction of S2R with H 2O, for which 
both the reaction energy rE and the energy barrier aE have been computed. Data from Table  7 
reveal that there is no general consensus on the values associated to the two qu antities. In our 
opinion there are two main reasons for that: i) different procedures to define the amorphous silica 
surface; ii) different computational methods. The first issue is responsible for a variable degree of 
geometrical tension on the S2R defect , which does not only depend on the internal Si -O-Si angles 
(which are close to 90 degrees) but also on the distortion of [SiO 4] tetrahedra surrounding the S2R 
defect. This, in turn, is determined by the model adopted (cluster or periodic, see Section 4) a nd by 
the procedure to arrive to the S2R defect starting from a given bulk silica model (see Section 4). For 
instance, adoption of small clusters like in Ref.75,537 decreases the tension outside the S2R zone as 
no constraints can be enforced as the rest of the surface is missing. Some further geometrical 
constraints imposed on the larger cluster adopted by Rim ola et al.75 showed their relevance to th e 
computed value of the aE. When PBC are adopted to arrive at a dehydroxylated SiO 2 surface, the 
heat-and-cool MD procedure to arrive at the S2R defect also matters as it is difficult to ensure that 
the internal geometrical tension has been properly equil ibrated. Reproducibility of the calculations 
can also be critical. The second issue is even more critical as the level of adopted theory has a deep 
influence on both rE and aE. Even considering DFT as more reliable than empirical force fields, 
the adopte d functional is very important. For instance, data from Table 7 reveal that functionals 
based on Perdew exchange like PBE and PW91 tend to underestimate the value of -aE as 
compared to MP2 and to Becke based functional like B3LYP and BLYP ones. In summary , what is 
lacking is a systematic investigation of both aspects in order to provide a more robust picture of this 
important class of reactions.  
 The interaction between S2R defects and glycine has been modeled by Rimola et al.541 since 
it has been argued that they may be present at the surface of the silica grains which are the core of 
the interstellar dust particles. This means that glycine, eventually formed u nder prebiotic conditions 
within the icy mantle surrounding the core grain, can react with the S2R defect, thus remaining 
firmly attached to the grain dust. As comets are the results of accretion of dust grains this can be 
one mechanism to seed the primord ial Earth with glycine by comets bombardment. Rimola et al.541 
also showed that glycine can then be released from the grain by the action of at least four water  
molecules at room temperature.  
 
8. Adsorption of water on silica surfaces  
The interaction of silica with water occurs in a great number of situations, either natural, as 
in geochemistry, prebiotic chemistry or biomineralization, because water and silica a re the two most 97 
 
common terrestrial compounds, or derived from human activity, as in the fields of sensors, 
biomedical devices or chromatography . Silicon is spontaneously covered with a SiO 2 layer, so that 
SiO 2-water interactions also occur on electronic de vices. Water adsorption on hydrophilic surfaces 
induces large  differences in the adhesion of species in solution at the nanoscale.  Indeed, at the local 
scale, water organization (or lack of organization) at the surface has a major influence on the 
adsorpti on mode of species in solution. At a larger scale, it can provide surface and dissolved 
species charge screening in the form of a dielectric.542 
Before entering into the details of the main contributions, it is worth mentioning the major 
experimental data that sheds light on the influence of the hard matter (silica) on the soft one,  even at 
short length scales (1 nm or less): Shen et al543 reported that water at the interface w ith Q(0001) 
organizes in an ice -like structure in a certain pH range (Figure 37a ). At the opposite, Engemann et 
al544 evidenced that amorphous silica induces a liquid -like layer at the silica -ice interface (Figure 
37b).  98 
 
 
Figure  37. a) SF vibra tional spectra of water/-quartz (00 1) at various bulk pH values. The 
ice/fused -silica spectrum is shown for comparison ; adapted with permission from Ref.543 Copyright 
2004 Elsevier. b) Real space model of the ice -SiO 2 interface associated with T = Tm - 1 K. Tm = 
melting temperature of ice. The densities used in this re presentation correspond to the values 
deduced from the measurement.  Reprinted with permission from Ref.544 (Engemann,  S.;  Reichert,  
H.;  Dosch,  H.;  Bilgram,  J.;  Honkimaki,  V.;  Snigirev,  A. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 92, 205701). 
Copyright  2004 American Physical Society.  
 
However, experiments do not –or not yet - give information on the local H -bond breaking/making 
between silanols and water. Theoretical works are needed to disentangle those local aspects and 
help interpreting spectroscopic data.  99 
 
Here we focus on the influence of the hydroxylation structure in the energetic s and structure 
of adsorbed water , and on the interplay between the preexisting H -bond network between silanol 
groups and the formation of a new network between silanols an d water . In this chapter, only fully 
hydroxylated surfaces are considered in interaction with water. Theoretical works on the reaction of 
water with defects like S2R  that are known  to be healed in the presence of water507,75,140  are not 
considered (with the exception of the SiO•  species, which is a possible responsible of crystalline 
silicas toxicity), neither are works focusing on the first steps of silica dissolution (see  refs.501,545-549 
for a non -exhaustive list) that can occur for instance on rough surfaces.547,550,551 Complex interface  
processes su ch as dissolution/precipitation and polym erisation reactions in solution552,553 are not 
discussed  here. In addition, whereas crystalline or amorphous plane surfaces are reviewed,  confined 
space s in nano - or mesoporous silicas ( see eg Ref.534) are not treated.  
The bulk of the literature available may be partitioned into several categories that are 
illustrated in Figure 38  and detailed in Tables 8 -12. Two  axes have been considered: they 
correspond to increasing complexity of the s ilica model, and increasing amount of water adsorbed, 
respectively. The zones of intensive research have been the clusters/isolated water/high level of 
theory, the crystalline and amorphous silica/water/classical molecular dynamics, and crystalline 
silica/ isolated to bulk water/ab initio. One may note two facts:  i) there are only two systems that 
have been covered integrally with ab initio methods from the isolated water molecule to bulk liquid 
interface, Q(001) and C(100), and ii) the amorphous silica/liq uid water interface has not yet been 
investigated by means of ab initio techniques. Surprisingly, the reactivity of thin SiO 2 films on Si 
with water (Section 3.1.8) has not been a subject of investigation, with a single exception.307 
 
Figure 38. Main theoretical studies performed on the silica/water system . 100 
 
 
A strong evolution of the research topics and methods with time is noticed: many works 
have been performed i n the last years of the XXth century using cluster calculations at a high level 
of theory. Indeed, the first attempts to study water interactions with silanols were performed using 
cluster calculations. Since 2000, more and more works have been devoted to crystalline surfaces 
with ab initio periodic calculations; meanwhile, force fields have been developed to mimic silica 
(crystalline and amorphous) properties. In the last few years, significant breakthroughs in the 
understanding of crystalline and amorphou s silica water interactions, with discrete molecules and 
with bulk water, have been achieved with DFT based methods.  
For obvious reasons , several  periodic  ab initio  works have been devoted to the interaction of 
crystalline surfaces, mainly quartz surfaces,  with water. In contrast, because several methods have 
been developed to generate bulk amorphous silica with force fields, works on amorphous silica 
surface are more numerous with classical methods.  
Ab initio works on crystalline silica surfaces have b een reviewed by Yang et Wang in 
2006.554 Since then, a significant  number of important  studies based on electronic structure methods  
have appeared, including the comparison of several crystalline polymorphs and terminations, new 
crystalline surfaces  analysis , new ab initio based amorphous silica models and the properties of 
silica -water interface  such as pKa  calculations  (see Section 3.1.2) . 
 
8.1. The early story: first principles cluster based calculations  
In the early days, w ater-silanol interactions were studied using a cluster approach .555 These 
cluster calculations were reviewed39 in 1994 as mentioned in Section 4.2 and continued by some 
authors until the end of the 90’s and early 2000 .223,294,338-340,556,557 Here we do not  aim to perform an 
exhaustive presentation of the work done , but to describe  the average trends. Generally t he 
quantitative data  (adsorption energies) are compared  to experimental calorimetric data8,82,173,342,558-
563 and  gas chromatography.87  The measured heat of water adsorption ha s been reported around  -
60 kJ/mol , but heterogeneity of hydrophilic patch es caused  adsorption enthalpies ranking from -90 
to -44 kJ/mo l. The calculated frequencies were also compared to vibrational spectroscopic data.564 
As a general rule, water  interacts with silanols more strongl y as a H -bond acceptor than as a H -bond  
donor, due to the rather low basicity of sur face OH and Si -O-Si groups. Most studies focus on two 
types of silanols : isolated565 and geminals ,566 as the differences between these two types is  easily 
modeled through cluster calculations . In particular, the reactivity of geminal silanols was addressed 
to understand the c ytotoxic reactivity of quartz, a surface which exhibits a high density of geminal 
silanols.567  101 
 
The configurations obtained for the ad sorption of a  single water molecule on different types 
of silanols with cluster calculations are reported in  Figure 39 . The isolated silanol acts as  H-bond  
donor to water338,339 with a value of Eads = -40 kJ/mol, as compared to  -46.5 kJ/mol on the geminal 
silanols ,339 where H 2O bridges the two species , as calculated at the B3LYP/DZP level . Other 
authors calculated room temperature enthalpies of  -21.4 and -23.2 kJ/mol for water adsorption on 
the isolated and geminal species at the B3LYP/ 6 -311++G(3df,2pd) level.568 Highly accurate 
calculations (MP2/aug -cc-pVTZ) on minimal clusters provide an adsorption energy of water on an 
isolated silanol of -27.3 and  -17.3 kJ/mol, without and with the counterpoise correction fo r BSSE 
included, respectively.338 Note that in the work ZPE cor rection was not accounted for.  Note that the 
BSSE error cannot be neglected. Water adorption enthalpies at the MP2/6 -31++G** level at 350 K 
were calculated to be -45.7, -56.9 and -46.7 kJ/mol on the isolated, vicinal and geminal silanols 
respectively,87 clearly showing the same H -bond donor capability of Q3 and Q2 sites. Water 
adsorption on siloxane is athermic  (calculation s performed at the MP2/6 -311++G ** level).462 To 
the best of our knowledge, cluster calculations of water adsorption o n associated silanols are rare, 
because of t he lack of structural information. Cyprik569 studied the interaction of several silanol 
clusters with water, from th e isolated silanol to H -bonded vicinal silanols. On those silanols, the 
adsorption of water (calculated at the MP4/6 -31G* level) is twice more exothermic ( -60.2 kJ/mol 
and -30.3 kJ/mol with BSSE correction) than that of water on isolated silanol ( -30.1 and  -19.7 
kJ/mol).  
 102 
 
Figure  39. Synthetic view of the interaction of a single water molecule with silica clusters 
representing a) an isolated silanol b) a geminal pair c) vicinal silanols . 
 
8.2. Water on crystalline hydroxylated silicas  
Periodic studies of wa ter at crystalline surfaces originate either from the chemists or  the 
physicists communities; chemists are mostly interested in crystalline surfaces as potential models 
for amorphous silicas, whereas physicists are  interested in the crystalline phases pe r se, for 
example on reactivity at defects. Another difference lies in the studied coverages: in the chemistry 
community, a strong attention has been put on the low water coverage, and frequency calculations, 
in order to assign IR spectra recorded on amorp hous silica polymophs.317,503,566,568,570-572 In contrast, 
even if low coverages are also investigated in the physics community, a strong effort is devoted to 
characterize complete water  layers.346,504,573-576 Whereas  numerous IR data are av ailable on 
amorphous silicas,82,577-581 calculations of  vibration  frequencie s317,346,504,573,575,582 are more difficult 
to com pare with experimental d ata recorded on crystalline samples543 because of the lack of dat a. It 
is interesting to notice that IR can help to estimate the amount of bulk water contained  in a glassy 
silica.581 
Hydroxylated crystalline silica ha s a hydrophilic character. Water always interacts with 
silanol groups through H -bonding. Figure 40 shows the nomenclature generally adopted to describe 
water orientation versus the sur face, which will also be used here.  
 103 
 
Figure  40. Nomenclature adopted for designing water orientation at silica surface. See text for 
description.  
 
There are different possible orientations for water: In t ype I (WI , see Figure 40 ) water is 
adsorbed parall el to the surface. Consequently, water can only act as a H -bond acceptor from the 
surface. In  type II (WII) water is not parallel to the surface; it may be placed either with one H 
pointing away from  the surface (water then acts as a H -bond acceptor) or wi th an H pointing 
towards the surface (water acts as a H -bond donor). In some particular cases water is oriented with 
both H pointing towards the surface, (H down). In other cases water has the two protons directed away 
from the surface (H up).  
Some first pr inciples works have explored the adsorption of water molecules  beyond the 
saturation (full monolayer),542,574,583  and of increasing number s of water molecules on hydroxylated 
silica surfaces , from one isolated water to one monolayer,317,346,504,573,575 from one monolayer to 
several layers501,576 and finally at the interface with bulk water501,582,584-588 (see Tables 8 -11). 
Calculations using force fields have been devoted to the interface with water thin films and bulk 
water,542,559,589-599 with only two exceptions where a single water layer was investigated.594,600  
 
Table 8. Theoretical works based on electronic calculations, using periodic conditions, devoted to 
water at crystalline silicas: nature of the surface studied, method and water coverages inv estigated.  
 
Polymorph  Surface  Method  Water coverage  Ref. 
Q  (001)  
 PW91  UPP 350 eV  Isolated water to monolayer  504 
B3LYP TZ   polarization  Isolated water  574 
PW91  PAW 400eV  One to five water layers  576 
B3LYP Lanl2dz  Isolated water  542 
PBE 400 eV, AIMD  Bulk water  584 
BLYP TZVP2 + AGTH, 
280 Ryd, BOMD  Bulk water  585 
CPMD PBE Vanderbilt 25 
Ry, 1000K  Water film (2 -3 water layers)  501 
(100)  B3LYP TZ   polarization  Isolated water  574 
(011)  B3LYP TZ   polarization  Isolated water  574 
(101)  PBE PAW 400 eV  Isolated water to monolayer  575 
 (0110)  PW91, 680 eV cuto ff Bulk water  587 
C (100)  PW91  UPP 350 eV  Isolated water to monolayer  346 104 
 
 (100)  rPBE and PW91  One water monolayer  600 
(101)  B3LYP TZ   polarization  Isolated water  574 
(111)  PW91 UPP 350 eV  Isolated water to monolayer 
and frequency analysis  573 
E (001)  
(100)  B3LYP GTO  Isolated water and monolayer 
and frequenc y calculations  317 
(001)  B3LYP 6-31G* One and two water molecules 
in acid and basic media  583 
 (100)  DFT -TB MD 15 ps  Bulk water  323,586 
T 001 B3LYP TZ  polarization  Isolated water 574 
 
 
Table 9. Theoreti cal works based on classical force fields, using periodic conditions, devoted to 
water at crystalline silicas: nature of the surface studied, method and water coverages investigated.  
 
Polymorph  Surface  Method  Coverage and water layer 
thickness  and properti es studied  Ref. 
Q (0001)  CLAYSFF  Isolated water to bulk liquid  542 
Q (0001)  PW91  300eV 
cutoff ultrasoft 
pseudopotentials 
and Sanders,  
Baram and Parker 
potentials  
 Dissociative adsorption of water 
on a dry surface  589 
Q (0001)  Sanders,  
Baram and Parker  Bulk water at the non -
hydroxylated and fully 
hydroxylated surface, and quartz 
dissolution  590 
Q (100)  
(0001)  
(011)  CHARMM  Bulk water  591 
Q (100), (001) 
and (011)  CHARMM  Bulk water  595 
Q (111)  COMPASS  Water and oil mixture adsorption 
competition  597 
Q (010)  Cerius2  Bulk water, diffusion coefficient 
study in water near the surface  599 
C (100)  COMPASS  Water monolayer  600 
C (111)  SCP and LJ  Bulk water interaction with 
surfaces of different OH 
coverages  592 
C (100)  
(111)  SPC and PN -TrAZ  Bulk water, simulated adsorption 
isotherm  559 
Q (100)  
(011)  CHARMM  Bulk water  593 
C (100)  CHARMM  Water monolayer  594 105 
 
 
C (111)  ClayFF  Bulk water  596 
C (111)  ClayFF  Bulk water  598 
 
 
8.2.1. The low coverage case  
At low coverage, the water -hydroxyl interaction is predominant . The adsorption of one 
isolated water molecule has a very  local effect.  
- Few crystalline surfaces exhibit isolated silanols, or rather non -interacting ones , E(100) 
and C(111) being the main ones. In the most stable configuration  of E(100) , water acts as a single  
H-bond acceptor, and may be H -donor to a siloxan e oxygen ( Figure 41a ).574 The same wa s found 
using cluster models.340 In contrast, on the C(111) surface which exhibits non -interacting silanols 
(separated by 5Å), water adsorbs in a hollow site a nd is double proton -donor and a proton -
acceptor .573 This example shows the limits of cluster models to mimick non -interacting silanols.  
 
 
Figure  41. Water at low coverage on crystalline silicas (periodic DFT calculations): a) isolated 
silanols on edingtonite ; adapted with permission from Ref.317. Copyright 2008 Institute of Physics  
b) water on geminal s ilanols of Q(001 ); adapted with permission from Ref.574. Copyright 2011 106 
 
American Chemical Society. c) water on ge minal silanols of E(001) ; adapted w ith permission from 
Ref.317. Copyright 2008 Institute of Physics.  d) water on C(100 ); drawn with data from Ref.573.  
 
  Geminal silanols cover the Q(001),295,499 Q(010)499,599 C(100)573 and E(001)317,601 surfaces . 
On Q(0 01) water does not adsorb above a geminal pair but rather in a bridging position between 
two geminal pairs ( Figure 41b and 41c ).306,504 Among the  two possible sites, a weak ly and a  
strong ly H-bonded  site, adsorption is more stable on the weak ly H -bonded  site, as breaking this 
bond is less energetically expensive than breaking a strong H-bond . A similar resu lt is found on 
E(001)317 (Figure 41b and 41c). An even more complex pattern occurs on the C(100) surface with 
water bridging the geminal silanol pairs and accepting a n additional H -bond from a silanol (Figure 
41d).573 The complexity of these surface structures cannot be easily modeled by a cluster approach. 
To our knowledge, no ab initio study is available on the Q(010)/water interaction.  
 
 
-The Q(101)575 surface exhibits vicinal silanols. Water interacts with a vicinal pair as H -
bond donor, and also as a H-bond acceptor from a surface silanol (Figure  42).  
 
 
Figure  42. Snapshot of an  isolated water adsorbed on vicinal silanols of Q(101) surface . Reprinted  
with permission from  Ref.575. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.  
 
-Finally, non -vicinal silanols able to bind to a water molecule are present on all but  the 
E(100) surface. The situation is complex as the possible adsorption sites are not unique, and a 
preexisting H -bond network may be broken. Water  always acts as H -bond  acceptor from a silanol 
and as H-bond  donor to one or two silanols. Water binds to Q2 silanols belonging to  different  107 
 
geminal pairs on Q(001), E(001) and C(100), and Q3 silanols on the other surfaces , with  the 
exception of E(100)  (isolated silanol). Figure 43  illustrates the configuration obtained for the 
Q(011),  Q(100),  C(101) and T(00 1) surfaces.574 Remarkably, i n all cases, rows of H -bond s 
involving silanols and water are formed at the surface. In other words, water on  crystalline surface 
helps the formation of the H -bond network.   
 
Figure  43. Adsorption of water at lo w coverage on adjacent silanols : a) Q(011), b) Q(10 0),  c)  
C(101) and d) T(001 ). Reprinted with  with permission from Ref.574. Copyright 2011 American 
Chemical Society.  
 
The absolute adsorption energies recorded in the literature at low coverage (or isolated in the 
case of cluster calculations) are all within the  48-58 kJ/mol range, when water  forms one or t wo H -
bonds. A higher value of 77 kJ/mol  is obtained for water inside a cycle of silanols , as on the (111) 
cristobalite surface , with the formation of three H-bond s.  
 
8.2.2. Intermediate coverages  
The situation is also intricate at intermedi ate coverages because, on the one hand, stabilizing 
H-bond structures between water molecules and between water and silanols are formed, and on the 
other hand, preexisting H -bonds between silanols must  be broken in order to establish these 108 
 
interactions. Table 10  shows that there is no apparent coherence between the calculated water  
adsorption energy and either the water coverage or the number of H -bonds formed per water 
molecule.  
Table 10. DFT studies of water adsorption on hydroxylated crystalline silicas at low and 
intermediate coverages: energetics and H -bonding.  
 
Polymorph  Surface  Hydroxyl 
type Method  Adsorption 
mode: water 
is: Water density  
Molecule/nm2 Absolute 
adsorption 
energy  
(kJ/mol)  Ref. 
Q  (0001)  geminal  PW91  UPP 
350 eV  1Hacc, 1H don 1.2 52.1  504 
(0001)  geminal  B3LYP  
TZ basis + 
polarization  1 H acc,  
1Hdon 4.5 56.4 574 
(100)  vicinal  B3LYP  
TZ basis + 
polarization  1 H acc,  
1Hdon 3.5 64.9 574 
(011)  Interacting 
silanols  B3LYP  
TZ basis + 
polarization  1 H acc,  
1Hdon 2.8 77.5 574 
(101)  vicinal  PBE PAW 
400 eV  1 H acc,  
2Hdon  0.7 60.8 575 
C 
 (100)  geminal  GGA, 
Vanderbilt, 
350 eV  1 H acc, 
1 H don 1.9 51.1 346,573 
(101)   B3LYP  
TZ basis + 
polarization   2.2 81.4 574 
(111)  isolated  PW91 UPP 
350 eV  1 H acc,  
2Hdon 3.7 74.3  573 
E (001)  geminal  B3LYP 
GTO   3.5 55.0  317 
(100)  isolated  1 H acc,  
1Hdon to a  O  2.2 46.0 
T 001 isolated  B3LYP 
GTO  1 H acc, 2 Hdon 4.3  574 
 
It is not an easy tas k to disentangle this question. This was addressed in Ref.,574 where it is 
shown that the water -surface binding energy shows an inverse correlation with the OH surface 
density ( Figure 44) . This interesting result somewhat contradicts, at least for low water coverages, 
the general view that su rface hydrophilicity increases with the OH density. This study also 
demonstrates that the adsorption occurs at the cost of breaking the preexisting H -bond network 
(Figure 44). For T(001) and Q(011), the adsorption process does not imply the rupture of pre -
existing H -bonds between silanols, which are absent in the former case and maintained on the 
silica/water molecule adduct in the latter, whereas in the case of Q(100) and Q(001), the adsorption 
process implies breaking pre -existing infinite chains of H -bonds. The C(101) surface exhibits an 109 
 
intermediate behavior with a weak H -bond (O ---O distance is equal to 3.363 Å) being disrupted 
upon adsorption of water.  
 
Figure  44. Water -Surfaces Binding energy (kJ/mol) (i.e. total interaction energy minus lateral 
interactions between adsorbates) reported for water on several crystalline surfaces, a) as a function 
of the OH surface density b) as a function of the initial H -bond binding en ergy between surface 
silanols. Reprinted w ith permission f rom Ref.574. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.  
 
The co mputed adsorption enthalpy values for the quartz surfaces (at T=303K), which span 
the -51 to -70 kJ/mol range, are in reasonable agreement with experimental data.82 For c ristobalite 
outgassed at 423 K, an experimental value of -55 kJ/mol for θ(H2O) = 2.2 has been measured,560 to 
be compared with the computed enthalpy value of -73 kJ/mol (at 0 K) for the adsorption on the 
C(101) surfa ce at the same H 2O coverage.  
 
8.2.3. The case of the water dimer  110 
 
Some authors  have studied the interesting case of the water dimer adsorption, as this is the 
simplest case where the lateral water -water interaction s as well as  H-bond  formation with the 
surface contribute  in the adsorption process .  
On Q(0001)504 the water dimer retains its configuratio n and adsorbs on top of two vicinal 
silanols, forming a bridge  (Figure 45a ). As for the monomer, adsorption is stronger on the weak -H-
bond  site. The adsorption is slightly less energetic than in the monomer case, -45.3 kJ/mol , due t o 
the decreased number o f H-bond s between water and the surface. In the adsorbed dimer, the t wo 
types of water molecules  WI and WII are identified . WI, (see Figure 40 ),  adsorbed  parallel to the 
surface, shares  H-bond s with neighbor ing water molecules and acts as H -bond acceptor from 
surface silanols, while WII is either H up (H ponting out of the surface) or H down (H pointing towards 
the surface) directed . The much  reduced O -O distance of 2.63 Å in the adsorbed dimer , as 
compared to the computed value of 2.90 Å for the free dimer clearly indicates that adsorption 
enhances H bonding of  the water dimer.  
 111 
 
 
Figure  45. a) Scheme of water dimer adsorption on Q(0001), showing WI and WII types, b) water 
dimer on Q(101 ); reprinted with permission from Ref.575. Copyright 2011 American Chemical 
Society.  c) water trimer on E , reprinted with permission  from Ref.317. Copyright 2008 Institute of 
Physics.  
 
 
Yang et al346,504 found that on -cristobalite (100), the most stable state for water dimer 
adsorption (with  an adsorption enthalpy of  -72 kJ/mol ) is in a bridge config uration between two 
pairs of ge minal silanols. Interestingly, the H-bond  in the adsorb ed dimer is enhanced as compared 
to the free, gas phase dimer. A similar result was found by Bandura et al575 on Q(101)  for which  the 
most stable water dimer configuration is found  with an adsorption energy of -55 kJ/mol  (Figure 
45b).  
In contrast, Tosoni  et al report the adsorption of a water trimer on ed ingtonite that has no 
increased adsorption energy as compared to a sin gle water molecule adsorption ( -44 kJ/mol)  (Figure 
45c).317 
 
8.2.4. Water monolayer  
At increasin g coverage, a water monolayer may be  formed on the surface. Electron density 
profiles for all measured interfaces are consistent with a single layer of adsorbed water  on (001) and 
(101) quartz surfaces at ambient conditions.602 Etzler and Fagundus603 postulated that interfacial 
structuring of water would result in a decrease of the water density close to the silica surface. 
Schlegel et al602 measured by X -ray reflectivity that t he number of adsorbed water molecules is 
consistent with the number of silanol groups per unit cell, suggesting that the driving force for the 
formation of this l ayer is like ly to be the hydrogen bonding of  water molecules to surface silanol 
groups.  This conclusion fully agrees with calorimetry data604,605 recorded on amorphous and 
crystalline silicas, which conclude that the differences in immersional heats of silicas in water 
significantly  depend on the interaction of hydrogen bonds between water molecules  and surface  
hydroxyl groups.  It was concluded that  hydrogen -bonded hydroxyl groups interact with water  
molecules more strongly than free hydroxyl groups.   
However, if morphologically flat crystal surfaces adsorb only a single layer of water 
(monolayer), it was also p roposed that corrugated surfaces have a disordered and random 
distribution of adsorbed H 2O molecules.606 
The formation of a stable water monolayer on flat surfaces was later confirmed by ab initio 
works w hich characterized the water monolayer on crystalline surfaces as e .g. 112 
 
Q(0001)542,554,574,576,590 (Figure 46ab ) and C (100) ( Figure  47a).346,573 Thanks to a “smooth epitaxy” 
mechanism607 between water and silanols, ice -like structures are formed on the surfaces . The 
WI/WII ratio on quartz  (0001)  and cristobalite  (100)  is 50/50. WII is always found H -down 
orientated . This type of water monolayer ad sorption will fully saturate the hydrogen bonds of water 
molecules and hydroxyl groups on the surface : each water molecule shares three H -bonds with 
neighboring waters and one H -bond with surface silanols. Accordingly , the cohesion in the water 
layer is mo re important than the water -surface interaction.  A WI water molecule is  twice  H-bond  
donor to water neighbors and twice  H-bond  receiver, from  one silanol and one neighbor ing water. 
WII is twice  H-bond  receiver from water, and twice  H-bond  donor, to silanol  and water.  However 
the crystalline structures of the layers formed on the different surfaces are reminiscent of the surface 
hydroxyl structure, as detailed hereafter.  
 113 
 
Figure  46. Water mo nolayer structure on  Q(001 ); adapted with permission from  Ref.576. Copyright 
2011 American Physical Society.  a) side view , and b) view  from above, c) MD vertical water 
profiles for water/ Q(0001) interfaces at coverage 1  H2O/10 Å2; adapted with permission from 
Ref.542. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.   
 114 
 
Figure  47. Water monolayer structures of a -b) C(100) , view from above and side view ; adapted  
with permission from Ref.346. Copyright 2004 Americ an Physical Society , c) Q(101 ); reprinted with 
permission from Ref.575. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.  
 
 
 
Figure  48. Water monolayer structure on E(00 1). R eprinted with permission from Ref.317. 
Copyright 2 008 Institute of Physics.  
 
  Water forms an hexagonal ice layer  on Q(001) .504 The Q(001) surface has a n hexagonal 
lattice constant of 4.91 Å, which is comparable with the periodicity in bulk ice Ih , 4.52 Å.  The 
adsorption energy of this layer is -62.7 kJ/mol , which is higher in absolute value than the value for 
adsorption as isolated molecule s, namely  -55.6 kJ/mol . Most of the adsorption energy gain in the 
layer structure is due to the formation of lateral H -bonding interactions between molecules. 
Accordingly, the water -surface interaction is reduced with respect to the adsorption as single water 
molec ules. An interesting combined DFT (geometry optimization  at the B3LYP/Lanl2DZ ) and 
classical MD (using the CLAYFF force field) study was performed for one water monolayer (10 
H2O/nm2) on hydroxylated (001) quartz.542 The authors studied the effects of temperature (through 
MD simulation) on this monolayer. The dynamic picture has only partial occupation of the stru cture 
obtained at 0K (S1, Figure  46c). Another configuration  (S2), less stable at 0K, with the two water 
hydrogens donating H -bond s to the surface SiOH groups  is clearly thermally accessible.  Water 
molec ules coalescence on the surface, to form a droplet of  water that corresponds to multi layer 
adsorption is also evidenced.  115 
 
-On Q (101)575 Bandura e t al, using the PBE GGA with PAW pseudopotentials, and a cutoff 
of 400 eV, calculated that water adsorption  at the monolayer is exothermic by 59.2 kJ/mol. Several 
stable structures were investigated, with differences  in energy ranging from 5 to 20 kJ/mol with 
respect to the most stable structure. On this surface, as there is no distinct adsorption site on the 
hydroxylated surface, the amount of water adsorbed may reach the density of bulk water.602 In this 
structure, a stable bilayer is found  (Figure 47b ). Again, WI  and WII types  are identified . Type WI 
sits nearly parallel to the  surface by accepting a H -bond  from one lifted surface hydroxyl group, and 
type WII points one of its protons  down to the O atom of another surface hydroxyl. Each H 2O 
molecule is H -bond ed with its three neigh bors and a surface hydroxyl.  
-On cristobalite (100) and (111), a quadrang ular/octagonal ice phase structure was 
evidenced by Yang et al.346,573 The elementary water dimer structure f ormed on geminal silanols, 
with one WI and one WII, is retained at high coverage. The adsorption energy in the water layer is -
68.5 kJ/mol.  A different adsorption energy for the same structure was calculated by Lu et al .600 
This ice tessellation was calculated to be stable  until 150 K by classical MD simulation 
(COMPASS), in contrast to a temperature desorption near 300K calculated by Yang et al. in AIMD 
using the P W91 pure GGA.573 Lu et al600 attribute this discrepancy to the  overestimation of the H -
bond interaction between  water and the surface with PW91  (near -70 kJ/mol) , whereas the value 
calculated with rPBE ( -48.7 kJ/mol) is more realistic. Indeed rPBE accounts better than PW91 for 
bulk water description.608 
 
Table 11. DFT studies of water adsorption on crystalline surfaces at full coverage.  
Poly
morp
h Surface  Nature of 
hydroxyls  Method  Water density  
(H2O/nm2) Water Organisation  Ref. 
Q (0001)  Geminal 
silanols   9.1 Hexagonal, Planar, type I 
paral lel and type II Hdown 504,542,5
74,576 
(101)  No strong 
H bonds   2.8 water/unit 
cell = bulk 
water  Ice-like st ructure similar to 
(0001) 295,575 
C (100)  Zig-zag 
with vicinal 
OH   Quadrangular tessellation 
structu re 346 
E (100)  Isolated  B3LYP  
GTO  10 Monolayer  317 
 116 
 
Few theoretical works using classical MD have been devoted to the adso rption of a single 
water monolayer on crystalline silica surfaces, (see Table 9).  An interesting screening of 40 
cristobalite surfaces was performed by Nangia et al594 who  modeled different cristobalite surfaces 
with the multibody potential proposed by Feuston and Garofalini472 and CHARMM593 and the 
adsorption of water thereon. First, the results using empirical potentials are validated by comparison 
to ab initio results on the C(100) surface346,554 and then, the work is extended to other, less explored, 
cristobalite surfaces. Indeed, quartz and cristobalite surfaces have no preferred crystallographic 
cleavage plane and therefore , grounded  samples have a complex structu re composed of  the 
combination of low index Miller planes. The results indicate that the surfaces with ordered topology  
and hydroxyl groups in planes parallel to the surface, for example, the 100and 111hydroxylated 
surfaces of  cristobalite, have accessible hydroxyl groups that can adsorb water molecules through 
H-bonds.  This result is in agreement with the X -ray reflectivity experimental data reporting that flat 
quartz surfaces adsorb a single water monolayer in a highly oriented way.602 In contrast, surfaces 
that are corrugated or have less  ordered topology do not have the h ydroxyls in one plane to adsorb 
water effectively and thus, to form a stable monolayer. Depending on the local topology of the 
corrugation, the surface can adsorb single water molecules with very different adsorption energies 
and stabilities.  
To the best o f our knowledge, only one study  of water monolayer formation on isolated 
silanols  is reported in literature , for the edingtonite (001) surface ( Figure 48 ).317 Here, t he water -
water interactions are still more important than in the Q and C cases, as the silanol density is lower. 
Adsorbed water molecules form tetramers H -bonded to the surface. The ratio WI/WII is 50/50 as 
for other surfaces, but, interestingly, type II m olecules are now equally distributed in between H up 
and H down orientations. In other words, the lesser silanol density induces a lesser water layer -surface 
interaction, and the first water layer is bulk water -like, although with a more random orientation. 
The adsorption energy ( -43 kJ/mol) in the water layer is also less negative than on other surfaces, as 
the type I molecules do not act as H -bond acceptors from silanol groups.  
 
8.2.5. Water multi layers  
Wander and Clark,542 in a classical MD study of the quartz -water interface, f ound no  drastic 
change of the interfacial water layer when a second water layer is pres ent on the surface. Very 
recently, layer -by-layer water adsorption on fully hydroxylated Q(0001)  was performed by DFT.576 
The first water layer has a strong energy of adsorption ( -63.7 kJ/mol in this work), as shown in the 
preceding paragraph. When the second water layer is deposited on the first water layer on HY -
Q(0001),  the structure of the first water is almost  unaffected ,  the hydrogen bonds between the first 
and second water layer s being  relatively long (about 2 Å)  (Figure 49a ). The adsorption of the 117 
 
second water layer is less exothermic than the first one, -51.4 kJ/ mol, and t he bonding energy 
between the two water layers is only 0.093 J/m2, indicating that the interaction between the two 
water layers is relatively weak and that the first water layer effectively  shields the long -range 
surface -water interaction.  When t he third water layer is deposited onto the water bilayer, the out -of-
plane protons in the second water layer reverse their orientations from pointing down to pointing 
up. As a result, the optimized structure consists of the first layer structure and a wate r bilayer 
structure (Figure 49b). Accordingly, the adsorption energy of the third layer is higher than that of 
the second layer, -68.0 k J/ mol. When the fourth water layer is deposited a trilayer structure is 
obtained  with an adsorption energy of -48.9 kJ/ mol (Figure 49c) . Results of trilayer and quadlayer 
adsorptions confirm that the bilayer -like structure at the silica -water interface effectively shields the 
interaction between the hydroxyl groups on the silica surface and water layers beyond the first 
layer.  118 
 
 
Figure  49. Water multilayers on Q(0001) . Drawn with data from  Ref.576 
 
8.2.6. Crystalline silicas -liquid water interface  
The quartz/water interface has been intensively studied experimentally. Quartz has a point 
of zero charge (PZC) of about 2 (Ref.609 and Section 3.1.2), which implies that at pH > 2, the 
surface is negatively charged.91,102,609-612 A few experimental studies allow characterizing the 
quartz -water interface  at the atomistic level. Measurements of interfacial p Ka (defined as -log 10 Ka, 119 
 
where  Ka is the acid dissociation constant) have been revolutionized  by surface -sensitive second -
harmonic generation (SHG) and sum  frequency vibrational spectroscopy (SFVS , or SFG ) 
techniques.613-614 We may recall here results already mentioned in Section 3.1.2. (Ref.96) 
demonstrating  that 19% of silanol groups on  fused silica surfaces exhibit a p Ka of 4.5  while  the 
remaining  81% exhibit p Ka of 8.5. Other authors185 estimate the density of  strong acid silanols at 
only 0.83 OH nm-2, only about 20% of the total silanol density. SFVS  experiments on -quartz 
reached similar conclusions and further  suggested that the low -acidity silanol groups reside in 
regions  with strong water -water hydrogen b onds.97 As mentioned in Section 3.1.2, many titration 
curves are not precise enough to discriminate silanols of different acid ities, yet at least one  titration 
study  on silica gel (amorphous silica)615 and X -ray photoelectron  spectroscopy measurements on 
quartz91 also independently  suggested  the existence of SiOH groups with p Ka betwe en 4 and 5.5. 
Such qualitative agreement on different forms of silica  is expected because liquid water is known to 
react slowly with crystalline silica to form an amorphous layer.68 Indeed, in the presence of water 
even at pH 7, water molecules slowly generate an amorphous layer, which weakens the strong 
hydrogen b ond network of the near -surface water molecule.  
SFG experiments on the neutral (low pH) quartz -water hydrophilic interface give two bands, 
respectively located at ∼3200 and ∼3400 cm−1.97,543,564,616 The 3200 cm−1 band occurs at the same 
frequency as in  the IR and Raman of ice ,617-618 while the 3400 cm−1 band is found approximately at 
the same frequency as in the IR and Raman spectra of liquid water. Note that the 3200 cm−1 band 
gains in intensity at higher pH. Assignment of these two SFG peaks is still debated,  with two 
conflicting  views in the literat ure: 1) The peak at 3200 cm−1 arises from a H -bond network of water 
molecules with an “ice -like” ordering, representative of O -H stretch of tetrahedrally coordinated  
water molecules , while the peak at 3400 cm−1 comes from a “liquid -like” arrangement of the  water 
molecules, i.e. more disordered H -bond network,  2) Another interpretation is that contributions to 
the 3400 cm−1 band mainly arise  from water molecules directly adjacent to the surface while the 
3200 cm−1 peak comes from water molecules in the more distant  water layers. 
Crystalline silicas -bulk water interactions have been studied by classical methods, and, very 
recently, with AIMD investigations. All the studies mentioned consider a neutral, uncharged 
surface. This is justified as , at pH 7, the surf ace charge is expected to be -1 C/cm2 (Ref.89),  i.e. one 
negative SiO- group every 16 nm2, thus large areas of the surface have a neutral character.   
Force field studies have focused on quartz,68,457,473,499,542,587,588,590-593,619,620 and 
cristobalite .559,594 De Leeuw et  al studied the -(0001) hydroxylated quartz -water interface.590 They 
found that  interfaci al wa ter molecules losely associate  with the surface via hydrogen bonding 
between the oxygen atoms of the interfacial water molecules and hydrogen atoms of the surface Si-120 
 
OH groups. In terms of configuration and bonding, the surface Si -OH groups resemble w ater 
molecules themselves and a relatively disordered 3 -dimensional interfacial water region forms near 
the surface, similar to bulk liquid water. The authors conclude that this liquid -like behavio r is in 
agreement with experimental findings on interfacial  water near the quartz surface at low pH.97,543 
However, experimentally, at neutral pH water w as observed to structuring near the surface.97  
Wander and Clark542 found a loss of water specific orientation for interfacial water layers 
more distant than the first one, in which f or the most part, the H up-oriented waters  are above t he 
SiOH groups, and the H -down are in between. Whe n structure  is present in the second layer , it 
appears to be more diffuse  than that observed in first one.  
Lopes et al. developed a force -field for silica, which was applied to the (011) and (100) 
quartz -water interface.593 Q(011) was modeled with single silanols (hydrophilic side) on one face 
and single silanes (hydrophobic side) on the other face. Q(100) was modeled similarly, having 
geminal silanols instead of single groups. The density profile of water b etween quartz slabs was 
described ( Figure 50) . On the  (011) surface, there is an accumulation of water near the silanol  
groups. Water has some overlap with the surface silanols, and  this is represented by the black area 
of Figure 50a , starting  approximatel y at 0 Å. After this area of accumulation there is  a smaller area 
of depletion followed by a very small area of  accumulation before reaching the bulk density at 
about 7 Å from  the hydroxyl hydrogens. On Q(100)  (Figure  50b), there is a significant penetrati on 
of water in the interstices formed by the surface hydroxyls. These waters form a distinct first layer 
although its density is about half of that of the bulk phase (black region on the bottom left of Figure  
50b). Contrary to (011), the region of strong  water accumulation is not contiguous to the hydroxyl 
hydrogen atoms layer  but is located  about 2 Å away. The regions of accumulation  and depletion are 
more extensive than those on (011) and water  only reaches its bulk density 12 Å from the hydroxyl 
hydroge n layer. These results were explained by considering the differences in surface groups 
densities between quartz (011) and quartz (100): on quartz (011) ( Figure 50 a) the density of silanol 
groups is much higher than on quartz (100). On quartz (011) there is  a significant overlap between 
water and quartz slabs and this is due to the formation of H bonds between surface hydroxyls and 
water molecules. The situation on quartz (100) is reversed. The distribution of surface groups 
allows for sufficiently large areas into which  water molecules can adsorb on  the surface. This 
originates the distinct black peak in Figure  50b. Water  is able to occupy the void spaces bounded by 
the protruding silanols. Interstitial water  molecules  are then stabilized  by water -water and silanol -
water H bonds . 121 
 
 
Figure  50. Top and middle : Density profiles for water adsorbed on quartz A) (011) and B) (100) 
surfaces. Orange represents the surface hydrogen atoms and the black areas mark the layers where 
surface hydrogen atoms coexist with wat er oxygens. Bottom : Probability density of silanols for 
Q(011) (single silanols) and Q(100) (geminal silanols) surfaces.  Reprinted with permission from 
Ref.593 Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.  
 
The dynamic properties of confined water have been  investigated. Water molecules close to 
the surface can travel smaller distances than bulk water molecules, as a result of the increased 
difficulty to break H -bonds with the surface or even leave the confinement areas.  
The interfaces between s everal crystalli ne quartz surf aces (100), (001) and (01 1) and water 
has been investigated by Walsh  et al.591,595 The wate r density and orientation near the surface were 
studied. It was found that water is rather weakly ordered and the orientation of water molecules 122 
 
relative to the plane of the bilayer is always close to random. Common features appear among the 
three crystall ine planes : they include  a favored water orientation WII, with one H pointing  towards  
the surface in the interfacial water layer . This structural effect is lost at around 1.2 nm from the 
surface. Examining the interface in more detail, however, one can not e differences between the 
three cases under study. Water penetrates into interstices between silanols on the (100) surface but 
not on the (001) one, due to a higher silanol density and thus, to the presence of a H -bond network 
on the latter. T he lateral or dering of water on quartz was found to be strongly dependent on the 
surface,  as the positions of water molecules are closely correlated to the positions of the surface 
silanol groups . On the (100) surface, water forms striations  that run diagonally across the surface, 
along the direction of th e [011] vector. Water on the (0 01) surface is arranged in rings that 
correspond to the underlying Si -O rings of the surface. The first water layer is denser on the (01 1) 
than on the other surfaces. Accordingly, the most pronounced lateral ordering occurs  in this surface. 
A contributing factor may be  the interactions of water with the bridging Si -O-Si oxygen atoms, 
which are present in the surface  plane . Lateral diffusion coefficien ts of the first layer of water we re 
found lower than in bulk water, yet the water molecules still have some degree of mobility.  
Puibasset at Pellenq559 studied four different cristobalite surfaces, the (11 -1) and (100) 
surfaces, and the (111) covered with a low (LD) and high (HD) silanol density. They found that the 
heat of adsorption of water at low coverage becomes less negative with increasing silanol content, 
with values of -68, -61, -50 and -45 kJ/mol for silanols densities of 13.5, 7.8, 5.5 and 4.5 OH/nm2 
(surfaces (111 -HD), (11 -1), (100) and (111 -LD).  
Argyris et al592,621 performed a study of the C (111)  water interface using SPC model for 
water and a 12-6 Lennard -Jones potential for Si water interaction. Severa l degrees of hydroxylation 
were considered. In all cases, the perturbation of the water structure due to the surface interaction 
decreases as the distance from the solid substrate increases, bulk water properties being recovered 
for distances greater than ∼14 Å.  The fully hydroxylated surface with 13.6 OH/nm2 is more  
hydrophilic , as evidenced by the first water layer -surface average distance (2.15 Å)  than the 
partially hydroxylated and anhydrous  surfaces  (2.75 and 2.95 Å respectively) . On this surface, the 
first water layer is found massively H down directed towards the surface. The second water layer has 
an opposite orientation. This is  the signature of layering of water molecules with opposite 
orientation and is indicative of an attempt to maximize water -water hydrogen bonds. The solid 
substrate affects the structural properties of water, but also strongly alters its dynamic behavior: 
Interfacial water molecules at the fully hydroxylated surface remain longer on average in the 
interfacial region than water m olecules at partially and nonhydroxylated surfaces. Zeitler et al596 
recently pr oposed a new method to calculate the accessible volume to water for complicated 
surfaces (e.g., those with kinks or hydroxyl groups).  Zhao323,586 used a hybrid approach (DFTB) to 123 
 
model a (100) edingtonite surfa ce in vacuum and at the interface with water. In vacuum, a 
significant reconstruction is observed, where silanols form H-bond s with each other. This is not the 
case in water , which prevents surface deformation.  
More recently  AIMD calculations were perform ed on the (0001) α -quartz surface584,501,582 
and cristobalite surfaces .584 
Adeagbo et al studied the Q(001) water interface with PBE functional and Vanderbilt 
pseudopotentials .501 They showed  that the originally clean quartz surfaces is rapidly  hydroxylated 
by chemical reaction  with the water layer and that g eminal  silanol groups [Si(OH) 2] are formed 
predominantly .  
The bimodal acid -base behavior of the water -silica interface (exhibiting two sites of 
respective pKas of 8.5 and 4.5 with a ratio o f  4:1) was investigated by Leung et al .584 To take into 
account the surface heterogeneity of amorphous silicas, as well as the lack of information of the 
crystalline silica -water structural modifications at the interface,  six different silanol environnements 
were compared:  hydroxylated  cristobalite (100)  (Figure 51 a), hydroxylated  cristobalite (100) with 
one SiOH removed ( Figure 51 b), reconstructed cristobalite (100) ( Figure 51 c), a molecular system 
(Figure 51 e-d), and two distinct SiOH on reconstructed quartz (0001) ( Figure 51 f). 
a) b)
c) d)
e) f)SiH
OO
 
Figure 51. Systems studied in Ref.584 (a) Hydroxylated -cristobalite (100) surface. The SiOH 
groups (O tagged in deep blue) have (SiOH ) ∼ 8 nm-2 and are all Q2 and H bonded. The calculated 
pKa is 7.6 ±0.3. (b) Hydroxylated (100) -cristobalite surface with one OH group replaced by a H 
to break the chain of hydrogen bonds. The SiOH near this defect (Q2 and isolated) exhibits p Ka = 
8.9 ± 0.3. (c) Reconstructed (100) -cristobalite  surface, (SiOH ) ∼ 4 nm-2, Q3, and isolated; p Ka = 
8.1  ± 0.5 (6 layers of water) and 7.0 ± 0.4 (4 layers). (d ) The structure in panel c comes from 124 
 
removing atoms sho wn here in black  and linking  the resulting undercoordinated Si and O atoms. 
Panels a -d show the side view of  ∼1.5 simulation cells. (e) (H 3SiO) 3 SiOH, which is Q3 and 
isolated, exhibits p Ka = 7.9 ± 0.5. (f) Top half of a reconstructed (0001) quartz  surface model 
containing cyclic silica trimers (Si -O)3, (SiOH ) ∼ 2.3 nm-2, Q3, and H bonded; the SiOH on the 
trimer ring exhibits pKa = 5.1 ± 0.3 while the other has pKa = 3.8 ± 0.4 and 4.8 ± 0.4 dependin g on 
whether a nearby trimer ring breaks  (see text). Si, O, and H atoms are in yellow, red, and white, 
respectively. (b and e) Finite -temperature AIMD snapshots with water molecules omitted for 
clarity; (a, c, and f) Shown at T =  0 K. 
 
 
On the C(100) surf ace, with a silanol density of 8 OH/nm2, the SiOH are all chemically 
equivalent. The zig zag surface H-bond s features between silanols are preserved in the finite -
temperature aqueous phase simulation. The umbrella sampling method was used to compute the 
W(R) associated with SiOH deprotonation using a  four-atom reaction coordinate R (Figure 52a ). 
 
 125 
 
 
Figure 52. Umbrella method: Four -atom reaction coordinate R, illustrated for silicic acid in water 
but is similar for all silanol -containing species. (b -d) Snap shots from AIMD deprotonation 
simulations with outershell H 2O molecules removed for clarity. As deprotonation proceeds, R 
progresses from intact SiO -H (R around  -0.4 Å, panel b), to the SiO -H3O+ contact ion pair (R  
about  -1.0 Å, panel c) , and then via a Gr otthuss proton transf er to a solventseparated SiO -/H3O+ 
pair ( R around  -1.32 Å, panel d). Yellow, red, white, and gree n spheres represent Si, O, H, and the 
“O-” atoms, respectively.  The water O atoms which are second and third nearest neighbors to the 
SiO- oxygen are colo red blue and pink, respectively. Adapted with permission from Ref.584. 
Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.  
 
On this surface, s ilanols exhibit pKa value s of 7.5 and 7.7. The other surfaces, containing 
isolated, H-bond ed, and ge minal silanols all exhibit a pK a > 7.0.  The isolated SiOH group on 
cristobalite ( Figure 52 b) has a pK of 8.9, and is less acidic by 1.2 -1.4 pH units than when the SiOH  126 
 
hydrogen donor is present . In Figure 52c, a reconstructed cristobalite surface exhibits isolated 
silanols (4 OH/nm2), with  pKa =8.1. The authors deduced that in the range 4 < (OH) < 8 OH/nm2, 
the OH density has no effect on pKa. All those silanol models may explain the experimental value 
of 8.5.  To model a high acidity silanol, a reconstructed, quartz (0001) model,  featuring (Si -O)3 
(S3R) , was used. It presents 2.3 SiOH /nm2 with two types of silanol groups which are hydrogen 
bonded to each other; one member of the pair resides on a cyclic trimer, while the other does not 
(Figure 51f ).  These SiOH groups on the strained surface exhibit p Ka ∼5.1 and 3 .8 respectively, 
close to the experimental value of 4.5.  This study highl ights the role of defect ive regions as the 
most promising candidate to explain the elusive bimod al acid -base behavior of silica surfaces . 
The (001) quartz -water interface ha s also been recently investigated by Sulpizi et al582 using 
PBE-D, who confirm that the H -bond network on this surface is partially maintained: two types of 
silanols, “in plane” and “out of plane”, are present on the surface ( Figure 53) . The “in plane” 
silanols are H -bond donor to a silanol (strong H -bond), and the “out of plane” ones are H -bond 
donor to water ( Figure 53 b). The strong in plane H -bond is maintained. Water in the interfacial 
layer is now only of type II, with half being strong H -bond accep tor from silanols and half weaker 
H-bond donor to silanols. In the local structure formed, a reminiscence of the dimer adsorption is 
observed, where, however, the H -bond between water molecules is lost. Water in the subsequent 
layer has a random orientatio n. From the ice bilayer found by Yang et al,504 only the water -silanol  
interaction is retained, w hile all water -water interactions are lost. Thus, strictly speaking, the 
interfacial layer cannot be referred as ice -like, as no water -water favorite lateral interactions are 
present. A noticeable difference between results from classical and ab initio cal culations is that the 
former does not predict the structuring of the first water layer compared to the latter. Another 
AIMD study shows that the water orientation at the surface is lost at the increased temperature of 
1000K.501 
 127 
 
 
 
Figure  53: Quartz slab  quartz -water interface and water orientation at the surface . Reprinted  with 
permission  from Ref.582. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.  
 
The acidity constants of surface silanols and silicic acid are computed using the reversible 
proton insertion/deletion  method.  The most acidic silanol species, out of plane, has a  calculated pKa 
of 5.6, while pKa=8.5 for the in -plane silanol. The authors conclude that there is a bimodal 
distribution of silanols. However, the 1:1 ratio of the considered species does not fit the 
experimental value of 1:4.  
To summarize, the final wor d on the nature of the acidic species on silica has not yet been 
written. Whereas Leung et al. open the route to defects of low silanol density and especially strained 
(S3R) rings on the surface, Sulpizi et al. results suggest that H -bonds are responsible of the increase 
of acidity of otherwise equivalent silanols.  
The “methodological gap” between AIMD and FF was bridged  in the case of the (101) 
quartz surface. AIMD (PW91) was compared  with X-ray reflectivity (XRR) experiments , and   with 
three force field s, LFF,593 ClayFF,622 and CWCA528. Discrepancies between the force fields, but 
also between AIMD and experimental data were evidenced. ClayFF was found to better agree with 
AIMD, however AIMD d id not allow to totally recover the XRR data. This is likely due to the 
overestimation of H -bonds by pure GGA, and by the absence of van der Waals forces in these 
AIMD calculation.  One reason for the discrepancy between FF and ab initio methods is the abse nce 
of dispersion in the latter (usually included in FF) so that it is mandatory to address the above 
problems with a level of theory of DFT -D quality, at the least.    
 
One can remember from this chapter that water and crystalline silicas modify each othe r at 
the interface. On the one hand, strong silanol -silanol H -bonds are not disrupted by water even at the 128 
 
quartz -liquid interface at room temperature. Indeed, a recent PBE AIMD study of water -crystalline 
silica interfaces623 shows that the inte raction between crystalline silica surfaces and water does not 
necessarily cleave the pre -existent H -bonds between the surface silanol groups. O n the contrary, in 
some cases such as Q(100) and C(001) , it is observed that  SiOH ···OHSi H -bonds are even 
streng thened, as the result of a mutual cooperative H -donor/H -acceptor enhancement between 
silanols and water molecule s. In consequence, on those crystalline surfaces, the interaction with 
water is highly dependent on the preexisting H -bond network.  On the othe r hand, the surface tends 
to impose a preferred orientation to the first water layer , thus giving rise to water surface layers 
properties closer  to those  of solid ice than that of bulk liquid. Studies at the silica -liquid interface 
(generally quartz) all conclude that the effect of the sur face is lost beyond three layers .  
 
8.2.7. Water on hydrophobic crystalline silicas  
It is well established that whereas fully hydroxylated surfaces ( surface density of 4 –5 Si–OHnm2 as 
measured by Zhuravlev78) have a hydrophilic character, highly dehydroxylated  surfaces (around 1–
2 Si–OHnm2) manifest hydrophobic character.82  
Du et al.  showed that  the reconstructed dry α-quartz (0001) surface is hydrophobic with 
respect to the interaction with  a water molecule .589 Rignanese et al.500 showed  with the PW91  GGA 
associated to a 50 Ry cutoff that the reconstructed  dry α -quartz (0001) surface is stable and 
hydroxylation  of such a surface by a water molecule is energetically unfavorable.500 
Tosoni et al ,503 with B3LYP, used a completely dehydroxylated crystalline silica surface to 
model adsorption processes  on highly dehydrated silica materials. The structure envisages only 
unstrained siloxane Si -O-Si bridges, a model not easy to devise . To do this, the authors have used a 
siloxane face of a 1:1 layered phyllosilicate as found in kaolinite.  The surface exposes regular 6R 
rings ( Figure 54 ). Its hydrophobic/hydrophilic character has been characterized by s imulating the 
adsorption of water, from low to high water coverage. Three H 2O loading has been simulated as 
adsorbates: (i) a single H 2O molecule (one H 2O/cell); (ii) a hexagonal C-ice layer derived from a 
proton order form of ice XI (two H 2O/ cell); (iii)  a water monolayer (three H 2O/cell). At low 
coverage, t he oxygen atom of the adsorbed water molecule lies on  the silicon atom of the slab, 
whereas the water protons are  directed toward the siloxane oxygen atoms without a clear  indication 
of hydrogen bondin g. Adsorption is athermic. T he interaction energy of H 2O with the siloxane layer 
is indeed negligible at any coverage and for cases (ii) and (iii) the dominant factor is the lateral 
H2O-H2O interaction. When dispersion is included at the B3LYP -D* level, a weak interaction is 
established between the siloxane slab and the adsorbed water layer. Water does indeed prefer to 
move away from  the siloxane surface to maximize the H -bond interactions within the ice -like layer. 
The H -bond features resemble those of a p ure ice -like layer although the mismatch between the 129 
 
siloxane unit cell and that of the free wa ter layer causes a lengthening/ weakening of the H -bonds 
and the interaction energy per H 2O molecule i s well below that in water ice (in absolute value). The 
free energy  of adsorption  at P = 1 atm, for cases ii) and iii) , remains indicative of an exothermic 
process  until the thermal  energy of the molecules is high enough to break the order of  the ice layer , 
at T = 298K, according to the calculations . This is in qua litative agreement with IRAS  and TPD  
measurements concerning water adsorbed on thin silica  layers grown on Mo(112),624 where at 140 
K an ordered ice monolayer film was  detected  which becomes completely desorbed above 160 K.  130 
 
 
Figure  54. Water on hydrophobic surfaces . Reprinted  with permi ssion from Ref.503. Copyright 2010 
American Chemical Society.  
 
8.2.8. A dsorption of water on crystalline defects  
As explained earlier, we will not consider in this chapter crystalline defects that are healed 
in reacting with water, as e.g. the two -membered ring, S2R . Theoretical75,625 studies converge with 131 
 
experimental ones (Sections 3.1.3 and 3.1.7, e.g. Ref.178) in suggesting the disappearance of the S2R 
upon reaction with water  at room temperature (see Section 7.4 for a discussion of this question) . 
However, some  defects of crystalline silicas which  are not healed by water adsorption, are 
mentioned here, as well as the reactivity with water of the SiO•  defect, which has been reported as 
the possible responsible for quartz toxicity.  
Chen and Cheng626 have used  DFT (PW91) method to study dry (1× 1) α-quartz ( 0001) 
surfaces that have Frenkel -like defects such as oxygen vacancies . Single water molecule s, water 
clusters and water films were  adsorbed on four defective surfaces.  
-According to the calculated adsorption and bonding energies, the hydroge n bonds within 
water clusters  or water films are stronger than the defect –water interaction. In cases of water cluster 
adsorption on surfaces, the defect sites do enhance the interaction between water clusters and 
surfaces compared to the perfect surface. In the case of a single molecule adsorption, the molecule–
surface defect interaction  is larger than on the perfect surface . The situation is opposite in water 
dimer–surface adsorption; adsorption energies on defective surfaces are smaller than on the perfe ct 
surface.  
-When water films are deposited on surfaces, the energy contributions from the  hydrogen 
bond network and from the water –silica interaction differ by an order of magnitude. Neither the 
single -point defect of oxygen vacancies nor the oxygen disp lacements alter the basic water 
adsorption geometry on a (1 × 1) α -quartz (0001) surface. The calculations indicate that at low 
temperature and low defect density (oxygen vacancy and oxygen displacement), α -quartz (0001) 
surfaces are basically hydrophobic. Therefore, a surface with a low number of strained Si –O bonds 
and a low density of Frenkel defects is highly stable and not easily hydroxylated. The high stability 
of the water bilayer further reduces the water –defect interaction. Interesting ly the dimer and the 
bilayer share a common feature, namely the fact that defect /surface interaction is weakened because 
of their intrinsic stable hydrogen bond patterns. In a review article, Yates627 made a similar 
conclusion for water adsorption on silica surfaces with low defect density.  
Radicals on crystalline silicas were evidenced through EPR spectroscopy  (see Section 
3.1.7) . Murashov et al495 demonstrated the facility of quartz cleavage into se veral faces exhibiting 
radicals. Musso  et al345 have performed a p eriodic DFT study of the properties of the SiO• radical 
defect on quartz, cristobalite, tridym ite, an d amorphous surface models. The radical defect is 
constructed by removing a hydrogen atom from a silanol of the surface while conserving the other 
features of the crystalline polymorph. Comparison between the hydroxylated and the radical slab 
shows that the radical defect at the surface does not induce significant tension at the crystalline 
structure, the Si -O bond distance associated to the radical defect being the only geometrical 
parameter that varies significantly ( ∼0.04 Å). The spin density analysis shows that, regardless of the 132 
 
surface, the unpaired electron is mainly localized on the radical defect and, thus, does not provide a 
clue to understand the different behavior between crystalli ne and amorphous silica rega rding the 
SiO• + H 2O  SiOH + OH• reaction. The enthalpy of this reaction is linearly dependant on the 
strength of the H -bond formed at the surface after the reaction (Figure 55). Finally, the enthalpy of 
reaction is twice less energetic on amorphous sili ca than on quartz, suggesting an explanation for 
the toxicity of quartz. However, the presence of water molecules smoothes the differences out to 
some extent.  
 
Figure  55. BHandHLYP correlation between ΔE of reaction SiO• + H 2O  SiOH + OH• (kcalmol-
1) and the length (Å) of the H -bond (H · · ·O distance) formed as  product in the case of Q(00 1), 
Q(100), and C(101) surfaces . Reprinted with permission from Ref.345. Copyright 2010 American 
Chemical Society.  
 
8.3. Water on amorphous hydroxylated silicas  
Remember that amorphous silicas are reported to have a hydroxyl group surface density of 
about 4.6 OH/nm2 (Section 3.1.1). In recent years, a great amount of effort has been devoted to 
generate models of amorphous silica that are easy to hand le with periodic  ab initio  methods . 
Chuang and Maciel88 proposed a generalized -cristobalite model of planes alternance where single 
silanols are situated on (111) -type surface segments and geminal silanols are situated on (100) -type 
surface segments.628 This allows to mimic a larg e panel of H -bonding situations, which is not 
possible on homogeneous crystalline surfaces.  However to our knowledge, the reactivity to wards 
water has not been envisaged on this model.  133 
 
In contrast to water/crystalline silica interface, the water/amorphous silica interface is not 
expected to induce an ordering of water in an ice -like structure. Actually, it has been shown that the 
ice-amorphous silica (native oxide film grown on Si) interface already has a “quasiliquid structure” 
at a temperature close to the interfacial melting point.544 In other words, interfacial melting occurs 
at the ice -amorphous SiO 2 contact, just the oppo site of the phenomenon mentioned for crystalline 
silica interfaces. T he thickness of the interfacial layer within which the chemical and physical 
properties  of the solution  are affected by  the amorphous silica  surface was  estimated to be 0.5 
nm.629 
For amorphous silica, the main challenge is –and remains - to describe to what extent and 
how the H -bond breaking may  occur in the preexisting H -bond surface network to form a new 
network with water. Another question concerns the well -known heterogeneity of amorphous silicas, 
exhibiting hydrophilic and hydrophobic zones, and finally, the link between nanoscopic reactivit y 
and large scale measurements such as contact angles.  
 
Table 12. Theoretical works based on classical force fields, devoted to bulk water at amorphous 
silicas: nature of the surface studied and methods.  
 
Silica surface Properties  Method  Ref. 
Hydrophobic  and hydrophilic silica fully hydroxylated  LMcCR force field630 631 
SiO and SiOH units with a 3:1 ratio  Collins & Catlow 
force field632,633 634 
Silanol density 3.33 OH/nm2 and SiO - deprotonation 
sites 
 Stillinger -Weber 
potential530 for Si and 
Vashista et al531 for 
SiO 2 285,307 
Surfaces of different silanol density  BKS (see Table 3)  462,635 
Surface with 1.3 OH/nm2  BMH (see Table 3)  524,636 
Silanol density from 1 to 3.2 OH/nm2 CC force field  528 
Silanol density 3.2 OH/nm2 CC Force field  637 
Surface with 1.8 OH/nm2 BMH (see Table 3)  638 
 
 
8.3.1. Hydroxylated amorphous silicas models obtained by classical MD  
The first works on water adsorption on a morphous silicas were performed by Garofalini et 
al. to study the adsorption mechanisms and the effect of water on the relaxation of surfaces464,639  
(Table 12) . However, no water adsorption on hydroxylated silica was considered. Later on, Lee and 
Rossky631 studied the structural and dynamic properties of water above two hydrophobic (rough and 
flat) and one hydrophilic silica surfaces . Warne et al.634 studied the effects of increas ing the ionic 
strength of water  confined between two amorphous silica surfaces.  Unfortunately , in these works no 
details are given about the nature (terminal or geminal)  of silanols , the OH density, the distribution 134 
 
of silica rings or the silica H -bond  network.  Cruz -Chu et al.528 simulated wetting angles of water 
adsorbed on silicas surfaces with 0, 1 and 3.2 SiOH/nm2. They showed that the presence of silanols 
induces hydrophilicity. However, i t was not possible to i dentify diffe rences in wetting angles (that 
were equal to zero) between the surfaces with silanol densities 1 and 3.2  nm-2. Colombi Ciacchi et 
al.307  proposed two amorphous si lica models, one obtained from bulk silica,  and one ultrathin SiO 2 
layer on metal Si, both having a  SiOH density of 3.33 OH/nm2. The two surfaces, when immersed 
in water, induce a structuring of water in layers of higher and lower densities with respect t o the 
bulk. Water penetration  into the relatively open  structure of the hydroxylated surfaces was also 
observed. The bulk water density  is reached at 4 -5 Å from the surfaces. Heat of  immersion values 
of 166 mJ m2 and 203 mJm2 for the amorphous silica and native oxide, respectively, were 
calculated. The first of the two values may be compared with experimentally measured values of 
157 and 158 mJ m2, for surfaces with estimated densities of terminal SiOH groups of 2.3 and 3.4 
nm−2.604,605 Water in the first layer above amorphous silica form on average  2.54 H-bond s with 
water, 0.14 H-bond s with siloxane O, 0.3 donor and 0.3 acceptor  bonds with silanol groups. On the 
ultrathin film, the water -siloxane H -bond is increased to 0.24. We note, as for crystalline s urfaces, 
the occurrence of donor H bonds from water to siloxan e that were not confirmed with ab initio 
studies on crystalline surfaces. However an ab initio study of an amorphous silica surface/water 
interface is still lacking. More recently, the same group proposed a theoretical study of water 
adsorption on a  period ic model of amorphous silica (see Figure 56), from which a cluster containing 
a negatively charged  SiO- group  is cut .285 Ab initio preliminary calculations sho w that water 
preferentially adso rbs on a SiO- group with the protons pointing towards  the negative charge. Force 
field parameters have been parametrized to fit an onset of ab initio MP2 benchmark. It is found that 
the heat of immersion of the negatively ch arged surface is highly dependent on the surface charges 
and of the chosen water model.             135 
 
(a) (b)
(c)
(d)
 
Figure  56. Model systems used for the calculation of atomic charge differences after the 
deprotonation of a terminal silanol group. (a) The (0001) surface  of -quartz in contact with liquid 
water. (b) A small periodically repeated amorphous SiO 2 slab in contact with liquid water. (c) A 
deprotonated amorphous SiO 2 cluster carved out from the large amorphous SiO 2 slab shown in (d) 
and terminated with  OH group s to saturate the artificial dangling bonds. Reprinted w ith permission 
from Ref.285. Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons.  
 
Hassanali and Singer462,463,635  genera ted an amorphous silica surface  exhibitin g a silanol 
densit y of 6.4 OH/nm2 with 70% of geminal silanols and 30% of vicinal groups, and a surface with 136 
 
4.0 OH/nm2, 40% geminal and 60% vicinal silanols, which also had  strained S2R rings. The 
calculated heat s of immersion are 0.832 and 0.279 J/ m2 respectively, suggesting an increased 
hydrophilicity of the high OH density silica. This was confirmed by the analysis of the surface 
heterogeneity, in which patches of siloxane covered surfaces exhibit a hydrophobic character, 
whereas zones of high silanol d ensities have an increased hydrophilic character, a trend confirmed 
by the radial density  analysis  (Figure 57 ). 
 137 
 
Figure  57.  a) Hydrophobic and hydrophilic zones onamorphous silica, b) Radial density of water 
molecules surrounding silanol oxygens (solid c urve) and surface siloxane (dashed curve). Reprinted 
with permission from Ref.462. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.   
 
Floess and Murad637 studied the competitive adsorption of PDMS and water o n amorphous 
silica. The generated amorphous silica surface features are unfortunately not described. The 
adsorption of water vapor is found stronger than the PDMS one, with penetration into the silica 
network.  Water seems to clusterize on the surface rath er than form a continuous film.  
Leed and Pantano524,636 generated a n amorphous silica surface containing a hydroxyl 
concentration of 1.3 OH/nm2, a rather low OH content. No local information on the OH distribution 
at the surface is provided. The  heat of water adsorption on this surface ranged from -75 to -40 
kJ/mol. 50% of the surface sites exhibit an interactio n with water more negative than -44 kJ/mol, 
the heat of water liquefaction.562  
Chai and Yang638 modelled water /amorphous silica interaction and the wetting angle (Figure 
58). 
 
 
Figure  58: Wetting of amorphous silica by water . Reprinted  with permission  from Ref.638. 
Copyr ight 2009 Elsevier.   
8.3.2. Hydroxylated amorphous silicas models obtained by ab initio  methods  
In the recent years, ab initio amorphous silica models have been proposed. Minibaev et al640 
proposed a silica surface  with a silanol density  of 6.9 OH/nm2. Ab initio  studies of adsor ption of 
simple molecules on this  silica gel surface allowed the most preferential  adsorption positions to be 
found. The energies of adsorption  of water  with the silica gel surface ranged from  -19.3 kJ/mol to -
77.2 kJ/mol, in the most stable configuration, water is twice H -bond acceptor from silanols and 
once H -bond donor .  
Adsorption  energies  of isolated water molecule s on the Tielens’ model  is -46 and -50 kJ 
mol-1 on the  terminal and geminal silanols respectively , showing no significant reactivity 138 
 
differences between terminal and germinal silanols.510  A  more favorable energy of adsorption is 
calculated for water adsorption on silanol nests:  a study of discrete water molecules adsorption on 
amorphous silica was perform ed by Costa et al.641 The amorphous silica surface model is inspired 
on the model of Masini and Bernasconi .507 This surface presents a high silanol density of 7.66 OH 
per nm2, partition ed in 66%  geminal silanols, and 34% terminal -associated ones.  AIMD of water 
molecules evenly spread on the whole silica surface resulted in water clusteri zation and 
concentration on the parts of the surface  richest silanols (Figure 59 ). The mean  energy of adsorption 
of water on this surface  is -61 kJ mol-1, slightly more negative than that found on isolated silanols. 
Poly-H-bonded silanols have been reported to exhibit an increased acidic character by comparison 
with mono - and di -H-bonded silanols .200,642 
 
 
Figure  59. Water cluster adsorbed on a morphous silica . Drawn with data from Ref.641 
 
In conclusion , silica -water interface represents a complex system to be studied because of 
the subtle interplay between complementary/competing forces (hydroxyl -hydroxyl network vs 
water -hydroxyls interactions) on one hand, and intrincate H -bond patterns occurring at t he 
amorphous silica surfaces, on the other hand. One clear point is that Q2 and Q3 develop the same 
attitude to H -bond with adsorbed water molecules and can be considered to exhibit the same 
Brönsted acidity. Experimental data reveal that the silica interf ace has a structuring effect on the 
adsorbed water layer. Ab initio studies show that water adsorption is efficiently described by its 
interactions with the preexisting H -bond pattern: water may either break or cooperatively reinforce 
this pattern. The OH density and nature are two factors affecting the preexisting H -bond pattern . Ab 
initio MD appears to be the most promising tool to reveal silica surface properties related to the 
acid/base character of its surface sites. Furthermore, results from AIMD MD a llow developing and 139 
 
validating new force fields, which in turn permit to study the properties of more complex model 
systems and for a longer time evolution.  
 
9. Interaction with Biomolecules  
 Understanding the interaction between biomolecules and inorganic  materials is of 
extraordinary relevance due to its direct implications in several fields such as biotechnology, 
nanotechnology, biomaterials, biomineralization and drug delivery  as mentioned in the 
Introduction .261 The practically rel evant properties of, for instance,  a protein/surface system , are 
mediated by protein adhesion at the surface, which in turn is dictated by molecular recognition. 
Deep knowledge o f the biomolecule /surface interactions would indeed allow the design  and/or th e 
functionalization of biocompatible materials in a more rational fashion, since they could then be 
prepared with a particular target in mind . Silica s urfaces are particularly suitable for these purposes. 
Furthermore, in a prebiotic chemistry context, it w as suggested long ago and reviewed recently205 
that mineral surfaces could have played a role in the polymerization of biomonomer ic building 
blocks  to form the first biopolymers. Although Si in the Earth’s crust is primarily found in silicates 
that contain cations of crucial relevance in the condensation processe s, studying the 
biomolecule/ silica surface interactions constitutes the  first step in understanding the role of such 
surfaces in concentrating, immobilizing, selecting and organizing the relevant  raw biomolecules in 
the reactions. Additionally, peptide/silica surface interactions may induce conformational changes, 
which may s timulate the peptide to show a  specific bioactivity  lacking in its unfolded state . Such an 
activation of the potentially “hidden” bioactivity  might have triggered the  first biocatalytic reactions 
in a primordial Earth, hence giving rise to  the emergence of  metabolic cycles, a crucial aspect for 
the origin of life.643 
Useful information for the above  mentioned purposes can be provided by answering the 
following questions: i) which regions of the biomolecule  are responsible for the biomolecule /silica 
surface interaction s, and why ? ii) is the biomolecule /surface contact direct or through solvent water 
molecules?   iii) among the different surface  sites present in a given biocompatible material, does the 
biomolecule  show any preferen tial interaction  and why? iv) does the biomolecule  undergo 
significant conformational changes upon adsorption? Most of this information can be obtained by 
carefully analyzing the biomolecule/silica interface region.  
From the modeling point of view, works purpo rting to study the interactions between full 
biomacromolecular systems  and silica surfaces, which  normally include  the presence of water 
solvent, were carried out with classical molecular dynamics. Studying th is kind of systems at an ab 
initio level, despi te the fast progress in computer architecture and  codes development , is not yet 
feasible because of the enormous complexity of the systems, which would render calculations 140 
 
extremely costly. However, useful information about biomolecule/silica surface syste ms at an ab 
initio level can be obtained by using drastically simplified biosystems; e.g., amino acids, small 
peptides, nucleobases, base -pairs, etc. Additionally, this procedure allows focusing the problem in a 
more oriented way, for instance, from a set of amino acids, determining those more prone to interact 
with a particular silica surface feature.  
Among biomolecules, proteins are by far the most studied systems and thus, results 
involving proteinaceous -based systems have significant presence in this s ection. This section is 
organized as follows. First, a review of the results concerning amino acids interaction with silica 
surfaces will be provided, both at the gas phase -silica and solution -silica interfaces, paying 
particular attention to glycine, the simplest amino acid. Second, we will focus on peptides and 
proteins adsorbed on silica, and finally, we will address the interaction of other biomolecules (i.e., 
DNA -derivatives), drugs and natural products with silica surfaces.  
9.1 Interaction with amino acids  
9.1.1 The glycine case  
9.1.1.1 Gas -phase interaction  
 Glycine (Gly, shown in Figure 60), is the simplest amino acid and is ideal to model 
AA/silica systems  because the defining functionalities of an amino acid are not obscured by the 
lateral substitu ent. For years, Gly was the only known natural amino acid to sublimate before 
decomposing so that chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on silica (and on other solid surfaces as 
well) allowed to study experimentally the intrinsic Gly/silica surface features, fre e from the 
influence of water, which resulted in a fertile ground for a fruitful interplay between theory and 
experiments. Currently, the fast thermal heating techniques allow obtaining neutral amino acids in 
the gas phase.644,645 141 
 
glycine
(Gly)O
C H
N
zwitterionic glycine
(Gly-zwitt)OCHN
peptide bond
O
C
H N
diketopiperazine
(DKP)
O
CH
N
H-bonding
SiOCHN
surface mixed anhydride
(SMA)
SiOCHN
 
 
Figure 60 . Chemical systems relevant for glycine adsorption mentioned in this review.  
 
  
 
The works of Groenewegen et al.646 and Basiuk et al.647 are two seminal studies focused on 
the interaction of Gly vapors with silica surfaces outgassed at 650 –700 ºC using IR spectroscopy 
measurements. More recently, Lomenech et al.223 reported the FTIR spectrum of the adsorption of 
Gly by CVD on a silica sample pretreated at 100ºC. Because some of the Gly IR absorption modes 
strongly overlap with vibrational modes of silica or residual water (in particu lar, the (OH) COOH  and 
the (HNH) Gly modes are obscured by the the (OH) of Si -OH and the (HOH) of water, 
respectively), the (C=O) mode is usually used as fingerprint to characterize Gly adsorption onto 
silica surfaces  due to its sharp and intense band.  The experimental (C=O) vibrational mode for Gly 
in the gas -phase was measured by Stepanian et al.648 by entrapping Gly in a cold Ar matrix, 
resul ting in a value of 1784 cm-1. Table 13 collects the (C=O) registered in these works and the 
assignments made by the authors.  
 
 
 142 
 
Table 13.  Reported stretching (C=O) values (in cm-1) and the assignments made by the authors. 
Figure 60 shows the chemical sys tems associated to these assignments.  
 
Authors  (C=O)  Assignment according to the authors  
Groenewegen et al.646 1740  “Surface mixed anhydride ” 
 1670  H-bonding  
Basiuk et al.647 1760  “Surface mixed anhydride ” 
 1720  H-bonding  
 1670  Peptide bond  
Lomenech et al.223 1699  H-bonding  
 
Both Groenewegen et al.646 and Basiu k et al.647 observed one band at 1720 and 1740 cm-1 
region, respectively, which was associated to the formation of the  “s urface mixed anhydride ”, i.e.,  
of grafted glycine Sisurf-O-C(=O) -CH 2NH 2 (SMA, see Figure  60). As men tioned in Section 3, this 
kind of surface feature should form if Gly condensates with a silanol surface group releasing water; 
i.e., Si-OH + HOOC -CH 2NH 2  Sisurf-O-C(=O) -CH 2NH 2 + H 2O. In contrast, Lomenech et al.223 
did not observe any band at this region. The three works assigned (C=O) bands co rresponding to 
Gly interacting with SiOH groups via H -bonding, although discrepancies concerning the position 
were also reported. Finally, a value of 1670 cm-1 was found  only in the Basiuk’s spectra, which was 
interpreted as the C=O stretch corresponding t o a peptide bond (see Figure  60), suggesting that 
silica surfaces catalyzed the peptide bond formation.  
The FTIR spectra recorded by Lomenech et al.,223 both for the naked silica powder and for 
the Gly/silica prepared by CVD, within the 2000 – 1300 cm-1 region are shown in Figure  61. In 
addition t o the above mentioned 1699 cm-1 band, two sharper bands at 1423 and 1371 cm-1, 
probably resulting from the (HCH) and (CCH) modes, respectively, were attributed to Gly 
adsorption, as they were not present in the spectrum of bare silica. The other two band s present in 
the two spectra (1861 and 1630 cm-1) were assigned to the as(SiOSi) and (HOH) frequencies of 
adsorbed water, respectively, although in the latter a contribution from the (HNH) mode was also 
tentatively assigned. No bands associated to SMA w ere observed.  
 143 
 
00.10.20.30.40.50.6
2000 1900 1800 1700 1600 1500 1400 1300% transm .
(cm-1)silica
Gly/silica1861
(SiOSi )
1630
(HOH)
H2O
1699
(CO)1423
(HCH)
1371
(CCH)
 
Figure 61.   FTIR spectra of the naked silica powder (dotted line spectrum) and Gly/silica prepared 
by CVD (solid line spectrum) . Adapted with permission from Ref.223. Copyright 2005 John Wiley 
and Sons.   
 
It was suggested that fully hydroxylated silica surfaces  may act as solid s olvents, since the 
presence of a large amount of Si -OH groups may have the same effect as a large number of water 
molecules. This can be checked by analyzing the presence of adsorbed Gly zwitterion, 
+H3NCH 2COO- (Gly-zwitt, see Figure  60) in the Gly/silica spectrum of Figure  61. Results indicated 
no signs of adsorbed Gly -zwitt . Indeed, neither the bending modes of NH 3+, at approximately 1617 
and 1523 cm-1, nor the COO- stretching modes, which appear at lower values than those in 
C=O(OH), were present in the spectrum. Thus, from the gas -phase, Gly adsorbs in its canonical 
form (Gly -can), indicating that the silanol groups present at the surface are not sufficient to make 
silica behave as a solid solvent and transform Gly -can into Gly -zwitt.  
A final interestin g point to analyze in Lomenech’s spectra ( Figure  61) is whether other 
transformed forms of Gly are present. The (C=O) bands due to a peptide bond and the 
diketopiperazine (DKP, shown in Figure  60) cycle were not present. The formation of DKP, which 
takes place by cyclodimerization of two Gly molecules at 150 –200 ºC with the emission of two H 2O 
molecules, could be ruled out as the ring stretching mode at 1471 cm-1, the most conspicuously sign 
for DKP, was not present. Both absences indicate that no Gly cond ensation proceeds on the surfaces 
in the conditions used.  
Despite the very interesting results provided by the se IR  data, several questions still remain 
open, such as: i) what is the actual picture of Gly adsorbed on a silica surface at a molecular level?  
ii) why are there discrepancies in the (C=O) value for the H -bonding interacting fo rm between the 144 
 
different works?  iii) why is the surface mixed anhydride observed in some works and not in others? 
Answers to these questions have been provided in works ba sed on quantum mechanics.  
In the same work of Lomenech et al.223 B3YLP calculations on the Gly interaction with 
minimal clusters (H 3SiOH, H 2Si(OH) 2 and H 4Si2O(OH) 2 simulating isolated, geminal and vicinal 
sites, respectively) were also reported. Calculations allowed performing a complete search for  all 
possible H -bonded complexes between one single Gly and a variable number of silanol groups, 
representing the complex distribution of OH groups at the surface of amorphous silica. On the other 
hand, Rimola et al.74,309 simulated at the B3LYP level the adsorption of Gly on the (001) surface of 
edingtonite term inated with isolated hydroxyl groups, using both a cluster approach and a full 
periodic treatment. The structures that best match the experimental results as well as the computed 
adsorption energies ( Eads) are shown in Figure 62. Table 14 summarizes the c omparison between 
the computed and the experimental (C=O) values.   
 
Table 14. Comparison between the experimental and computed (C=O) values (in cm-1) reported in 
the literature. The structural interpretation made by the authors is defined in the “Intera ction 
pattern/Model” column and shown in Figure 62.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computational details for: aB3LYP/double - and a scaling factor of 0.957; bB3LYP/6 -31++G(d,p) 
and a scaling factor of 0.961; cB3LYP/6 -31+G(d,p) and a scaling factor of 0.975.  
 Experimental  Computed  Interaction pattern/Model  Authors  
1699  1694a  double H -bonding/periodic  Rimola et al.309 
 1701b  double H -bonding/minimal cluster  Lomenech et 
al.223 
1720  1717a  Single H-bonding/Periodic  Rimola et al.309 
 1724c  Single H-bonding/large cluster  Rimola et al.309 
 1723b  Single H-bonding/minimal cluster  Lomenech et 
al.223 
1760  1767c  Surface mixed anhydride/large cluster  Rimola et al.74 
 1769a Surface mixed anhydride/ periodic  Rimola et al.74 145 
 
Double H-bonding
Ec
ads= -56.9
periodicEads= -68.6
minimal cluster
CONH
Si1.78
1.731.85
1.83
1.971.77 2.18
Single H -bonding
Ec
ads= -39.3
periodicEads= -44.8
large clusterEads= -45.2
minimal cluster
C
ON
H
Si1.841.761.99
1.75
1.811.89
Surface mixed anhydride
Er= +30.5
periodicEr= +25.5
large cluster
ON
H
SiC
 
 
Figure  62. Different Gly/silica surface complexes obtained from ab initio calculations: “periodic” 
means calculations performed at the B3LYP/double - level using a periodic sil ica surface model; 
“minimal cluster” means calculations performed at the B3LYP/6 -31++G(d,p) level using minimal 
cluster models; “large cluster” means calculations performed at the B3LYP/6 -31+G(d,p) level using 
a larger cluster model than the minimal ones. Computed adsorption energies (in kJ mol-1) are also 
reported: Eads and EC
ads refer to adsorption energies without and with the basis set superposition 
error corrected, respectively. Er refers to the reaction energy (in kJ mol-1) for the formation of the  
surface mixed anhydride ( Sisurf-OH + HOOC -CH 2-NH 2  Sisurf-O-C(=O) -CH 2-NH 2 + H 2O). The 
bond distances reported are in Å. Drawn from data of Refs.74,223 
 
The value of 1699 cm-1 represents the maximum bathochromic shift  (-85 cm-1) of the 
(C=O) fingerprint mode and results from the H -bonding with two different terminal silanol groups 
(see “double H -bonding”  interaction pattern in Figure  62). Theoretical results indicate that the 
interaction of Gly with silica surfaces may also take place with only one SiOH group through the 
“single H-bonding” interaction  pattern (see Figure  62). The computed (C=O) values fo r Gly 
adopting this adsorption mode (1717, 1724 and 1723 cm-1, for periodic, minimal and large cluster 146 
 
models, respectively) agree fairly well with the experimental value of 1720 cm-1. Noticeably, the 
“single H -bonding” interaction pattern corresponds to a  cooperative H -bond  similar  to that 
common ly found for carboxylic acid di mers ; i.e., the COOH group is envisaged in two H -bonds 
with one silanol group, one in which the glycine OH group acts as a H -bond donor and another one 
in which the C=O group acts as a H-bond acceptor. Such a cooperative effect is responsible for the 
significant bathochromic shift observed for (C=O) (experimentally, -64 cm-1). Remarkably, the 
computed Gly/silica complexes that exhibit these two H -bond patterns were found to be the mos t 
stable adducts. Differences between the experimental results of Basiuk et al.647 and those of 
Lomenech et al.223 can be related to the different pretreatment of the silica surfaces. The latter 
authors pretreated the silica sample at 100ºC overnight, while the form er ones outgassed the silica 
sample at about 700 ºC. Silanol population is smaller in the silica sample treated at 700 ºC because 
at high temperatures silica surfaces undergo silanol condensations. Thus, isolated silanol groups are 
predominant in Basiuk’s silica and the interaction with Gly takes place via the “single H -bonding” 
interaction pattern. In contrast, Lomenech’s silica, richer in silanol groups (both in amount and 
diversity), is able to adsorb Gly via two contiguous surface silanol groups adoptin g the “double H -
bonding” interaction pattern.  
Basiuk et al.647 also observed a band at 1760 cm-1, which was associated to the (C=O) 
mode of the SMA bond. Calculations addressed to check whether this band could correspond to this 
surface functionality indicated that this is indeed the case. The computed (C=O) values using both 
the “large cluster” and the “periodic” surface models were found at 1767 and 1769 cm-1, 
respectively (see Table  14).309 Nonetheless, theoretical calculations also revealed that SMA 
formation from reacting Gl y with an isolated SiOH has a reaction free energy (T= 298K) of +25.5 
kJ mol-1; that is, the reaction is thermodynamically disfavored. However, as already discussed in a 
previous section, a pretreatment of the silica sample at 700 ºC causes silanol condens ation 
processes, which as we have previously explained may result in the formation of some strained 
surface defects such as (SiO) 2 or S2R, and (SiO) 3 or S3R. Rimola et al.541 have theoretically studied 
the reactivity of S2R defects with Gly to give the SMA. Calculations indicated that this reaction is 
indeed feasible as the computed free energy barrier and reaction free energy were found to be about 
54 and -63 kJ  mol-1, respectively. This is probably due to the opening of the very strained S2R ring. 
Moreover,  these results provide a plausible explanation of why Basiuk et al.647 observed the 
formation of the silica SMA whereas Lomen ech et al.223 did not. That is, in Basiuk’s  surfaces, after 
pretreatment at 700 ºC, some S2R defects were probably present, which reacted with vapors of Gly 
during the CVD experiments to form the SMA bond; in contrast, Lomenech’s silica surface was 
pretreated at 100 ºC so that such strained defects  were probably not produced and consequently 
SMAs were not able to form.  147 
 
Noticeably, calculations agree with the experimental observations about the fact that the 
Gly/silica surface interactions do not induce the preferential adsorption of Gly -zwitt over G ly-can. 
Figure 63a  and Figure 63b  show that attempts to optimize Gly -zwitt with the presence of one SiOH 
group (structures on the left) evolved towards Gly -can (structures of the right).309,556 In fact, 
adsorption of Gly -zwitt is only determined to be favorable at large coverages309 due to stabilizing 
lateral interactions ( Figure  63c), similarly to what occurs in the Gly  molecular crystal.649,650 This 
brings about a rather strong H -bond cooperativity between adsorbed Gly m olecules that helps 
increasing the electrostatic interactions between them up to a limit in which adsorbed zwitterionic 
forms are stable. It is worthy to mention that this structure can only be found with a periodic 
treatment; otherwise the lateral interac tions between adjacent Gly molecules, crucial for the 
stabilization of Gly -zwitt, cannot be accounted for.  
opt
opta)
b)
c)CO
NH
Si
CO
NH
Si
CO
NH
Si
 
Figure  63. (a) and (b): attempts to optimize glycine in its zwiettrionic state when interacting with 
one SiOH group. Results indicated that glycin e evolved towards its canonical state; (c): zwitterionic 
glycine found as a stable form only when considering a high loading adsorption. Drawn from data 
of Refs.309,556 
 
Similarly, from theoretical results in Ref.223 and Ref.556 it is confirmed  that an increment of 
the SiOH groups interacting with Gly induces a significant stabilization of Gly -zwitt over Gly -can 
(see Figure  64).  It is expected that with fo ur SiOH groups Gly -zwitt would become more stable 
than the canonical form. However, a glycine molecule interacting with four SiOH group is not 
physically sound, as it would mean a silica surface with an unreasonable high density of silanols. 
Along this lin e, Han and Sholl651 found that Gly -zwitt adsorbed on a periodic model of a fully 
hydroxylated -quartz (0001) surface, featured to exhibit H -bonded g eminal SiOH groups, was 148 
 
practically isoenergetic with the analogous canonical system, in both cases four SiOH groups were 
involed in the Gly binding.  
 
(SiOH )n Canonical systems Zwitterionic systems
n= 1
n= 2
n= 3-Erel
-
41.8
15.5C
ONH
Si
CONH
Si
CONH
Si
 
Figure  64. Relative energies ( Erel, in kJ mol-1) between canonical glycine and zwitterionic glycine,  
as a function of the number of SiOH groups ( Drawn from data of Ref.223). Computed at B3LYP/6 -
31++G(d,p).  
 
All the structures shown above simulate the interaction of Gly with silica surfaces 
considering isolated, vicinal and interacting silanol groups. However, geminal silanols are also 
present on silica surfaces. Geminal silanol groups, although being present in a lesser degree than the 
others, have been reported to exhibit a slightly more acidic character (see Sections 3.1.2 and 8.2.6) 
and because of that the interaction of Gly with these silanol groups also deserves to be studied. 
Adopting the minimal Si(OH) 4 cluster model, Lomenech et al.223 computed at B3LYP/6 -
31++G(d,p) level the complex shown in Figure 65a , as a first attempt to picture the Gly/SiOH 
geminal interface, in which the COOH establishes a cooperative H -bond with two geminal OH 
groups.  149 
 
CON
H
Sia)
Eads= -68.6
GGGVc)
Eads= -141.8b)
Eads= -74.3CO
N
H
Si
 
Figure  65. (a): Optimized structure and computed adsorption energy ( Eads, in kJ mol-1) at 
B3LYP/6 -31++G for Gly interacting with a minimal cluster (Si(OH) 4) model representing geminal 
silanol groups ( drawn with data from Ref.223). (b): Optimized structure and computed adsorption 
energy at PBE for Gly interacting with the hydroxylated (0001) -quartz surface ( drawn with data 
from Ref.651); (c): The dominant configuration obtained  from several ab initio molecular dynamics 
simulations (PBE method and T= 300K) for Gly interacting with a silica surface model rich in 
geminal silanol groups ( drawn with data from Ref.641). The computed adsorption energy ( Eads, in 
kJ mol-1) was obtained by performing a geometry optimization onto this configuration at the 
B3LYP/6 -311++G(d,p) level. V and G refers to vicinal and geminal silanol groups, respectively.  
  
Han and Sholl651 also calculated at the PBE level the most stable structure of Gly adsorbed 
on the hydroxylated -quartz (0001) surface (see Figure 65b ). For this case, two H -bonds present 
on the pristine surface were destroyed in order to  form the four H -bonds that bind Gly onto the 
surface. In a more recent work, Costa et al.641 computed the interaction of Gly on a highly 
hydroxylated amorphous silica surface (7.66 OH per nm2) particularly dominated by geminal SiOH 
groups (5.1 per nm2, with a ratio of about 66% of the total surface SiOH). Calculations were based 150 
 
on ab initio molecular dynamics simulations carried out at T= 300K using the PBE density 
functional method. The most stable configuration obtained is represented in Figure 65c . As one can 
observe, Gly was found as Gly -zwitt, the carboxylate groups being engaged by the surface through 
two vicinal and one geminal SiOH groups (labeled as V and G, respectively) and the ammonium 
being H -bonded the O atom of a geminal SiOH. The authors in terpreted that the stabilization of the 
Gly-zwitt could be due to two factors: i) the large amount of silanol groups present on the surface, 
which facilitated the formation of several H -bonds with Gly (about 4); ii) the increased acidic 
character of the ge minal SiOH, which enabled to form more favorable electrostatic interactions with 
negative charge densities, as the one present in the carboxylate group. Therefore, according to these 
theoretical results, it seems that highly hydroxylated silica surfaces (7 –8 OH per nm2) may indeed 
act as solid solvents. However, this statement should be taken with caution considering that it is 
generally accepted that the silanol density for fumed silica is approximately 4 –5 per nm2 and the 
geminal silanol density is consid erably lower than the one exhibited by the surface model used by 
Costa et al.641 In fact, no traces of Gly -zwitt were found in the experimental Gly/silica IR spectrum. 
Despite that, these results are of relevance for studies using silicas formed in conditi ons of high 
water activity such as the biogenic ones, in which the density of 6.2 OH nm-2 has been quoted. 
Additionally, precipitated silica, where SiOH densities between 7 –8 per nm2 have been reported, 
might be the most probably relevant materials present  in the prebiotic earth so that these results gain 
significance in a prebiotic context.  
 
9.1.1.2. Interaction in presence of water.  
All the works commented so far dealt with the adsorption of Gly under strict gas phase 
conditions; namely, in absence of wa ter. Nonetheless, water is ubiquitous in biological media so the 
adsorption of glycine in wet conditions is of great relevance. Lambert and coworkers have 
investigated in depth210,224,247,652 Gly adsorption on amorphous silica from aqueous solutions at 
different initial concentrations and pHs, by means of different spectroscopic techniques such as 
XRD, dif fuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS), solid state nuclear 
magnetic resonance (ssNMR) and thermoprogrammed desorption coupled to  mass spectrometry 
(TPD -MS). From these works, three main conclusions can be drawn, which are expose d below:  
i) A molecularly adsorbed Gly species coexists with the - and -glycine crystalline forms.  
Glycine is known to crystallize as three polymorphs:  -, - and -glycine (those 
other forms found only in extreme conditions are not included). In these th ree polymorphs 
Gly is found in its zwitterionic state and the local environments of these zwitterions differ 
only by specific H-bonding arrangement s. The 13C NMR chemical shifts  in the carboxylate 
region (170 –178 ppm) for the -, - and -glycines are well  differentiated:  176.4,  175.4 and 151 
 
174.5, respectively.  Considering that the reproducibility of the chemical shifts is better than 
0.05 ppm, ssNMR is therefore a suitable technique to discriminate between these and other 
Gly forms.  
The obtained 13C cross p olarization magic angle spinning ( CP-MAS ) NMR spectra 
focused on  the carboxylate region for Gly/silica with low and high Gly concentrations (pH 6 
– 7) are shown in Figure 66a.   
() 180 175 170172.8175.4
176.45
0.03M
0.01Ma)
(º 2)
(001)
(-110)(-110)(020)
(101)(040)(-112)(041)
20 25 30 350.50M
0.08Mb)
1606
1617 1632
15021527
1443
1411
13321523
1482
1443 1443
1412 1412
13341508
1600 1800 1400 ()0.50M
0.01Mα-Glyc)
1600 1800 1400 () 
1746
1720
1500
14261525
1412 14121496pH 6
pH 2pH 10.5d)
1600 1800 1400 ()1673
1472
1316
1678
1462
13191525
1410
1632
1482
1443
1412160º
90ºDKPe)
 
Figure  66. (a): 13C CP -MAS NMR (in ppm) spectra in the carboxylate region fo r Gly/silica at low 
(solid line spectrum) and high (dotted line spectrum) Gly concentrations (pH 6 –7). (b): XRD 
diffractograms for Gly/silica at low (solid line spectrum) and high (dotted line spectrum) Gly 
concentrations. (c) FTIR spectra (in cm-1) for Gl y/silica at low (solid line spectrum) and high 
(dotted line spectrum) Gly concentrations (pH 6) and for the -glycine polymorph (broken line 152 
 
spectrum). (d) FTIR spectra for Gly/silica (in cm-1) at different pH values. (e): DRIFTS spectra (in 
cm-1) for Gly/ silica at 90 and 160 ºC (solid and dotted line spectra, respectively) and for DKP/silica 
(broken line spectrum). Adapted with permission from Ref. 210,224,247. Copyright 2004, 2009 
American Chemical Society, copyright 2007, Schweizerbart Science Publishers . 
 
At high Gly concentrations three characteristic signals were  observed, among which 
two were  assigned to the - and -Gly forms (176.45 and 175.4 ppm, respectively). When 
the Gly loading was decrease d, these two signals vanish ed while the one at 173 ppm 
remain ed present with the same intensity , indicatin g that it does not belong to any bulk 
polymorph but to a form  of Gly interacting with silica surface groups, hereafter called 
“molecularly adsorbed Gly”. Additionally, it was noted that the change in the chemical shift 
of this form with respect to the bulk  zwitterionic ones was of the same order as the 
difference in  between the polymorphs, which suggested modifications by H -bonding to the 
surface (formation of covalent bonds would result in at least twice larger shifts). 
Accordingly, the authors suggested  that the “molecularly adsorbed Gly”  was defined by the 
formation of H -bond networks with the silica surfaces in the line of a typical “surface 
adduct”. The registered XRD diffractograms shown in Figure 66b  confirmed the 
precipitation of bulk Gly crystals at high Gly concentrations. Additionally, FTIR spectra 
(Figure 66c ) clearly indicated that at high Gly concentration the observed bands matched 
perfectly well those for pure -Gly (assignments available in Table  15). Therefore, at low 
concentrations Gly wa s specifically adsorbed on silica surface sites, presumably interacting 
through H -bonds yielding a “molecularly adsorbed Gly”  form, whereas at higher 
concentrations the - and -Gly bulk polymorphs were also present.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 153 
 
Table  15. Assignments of the bands observed in the spectra shown in Figure 66c, 66d and 66e.  
 
Assignments for Figure  66c (cm-1)  
Vibrational mode  [Gly] = 0.01M  [Gly] = 0.50M  pure α -glycine  
as(NH 3+) 1632  1617  1606  
s(NH 3+) 1482  1523, 1508  1527,1502  
s(CH 2) 1443  1443  1443  
s(COO-) 1412  1412  1411  
w(CH 2) - 1334  1332  
Assignments for Figure  66d (cm-1)  
species  Vibrational mode  pH 2  pH 6  pH 10.5  
Gly-can (C=O)  1746, 1720  - - 
Gly-zwitt  s(NH 3+) 1500  1525  1496  
 s(COO-) 1426  1412  1412  
Assignments for Figure  66e (cm-1)  
species  Vibrational mode  90 ºC  160 ºC  DKP/silica  
Gly-zwitt  as(NH 3+) 1632   - 
 s(NH 3+) 1482  1525  - 
 s(CH 2) 1443   - 
 s(COO-) 1412  1410  - 
DKP  (C=O)  - 1678  1673  
 DKP ring breathing  - 1462  1472  
 w(CH 2) + (C-C) - 1319  1316  
 
The authors highlighted the formation of the  polymorph in addition to the  one 
(see the intensities of the XRD difractogram of the Figure 66b),  an unexpected fact as the 
latter normally precipitates from saturated solutions. Based on the observations in which 
precipitation of different Gly allomorphs from a concentrated solution can be controlled by 
polarization effects using laser light,653 the authors  proposed  that the electric field gradients 
imposed by the negative charges present on the silica surface are strong enough to cause 
specific orientations of the molecu les, although they also pointed out that other structuring 
effects such as H -bonding with surface groups could be operating as well.  
Based on these results, the authors suggested that the most likely picture of glycine 
adsorption consists in an initial sp ecific adsorption on a limited number of surface sites 154 
 
followed by surface precipitation in the vicinity of the silica surface, or possibly on the 
selectively adsorbed Gly molecules.   
 
ii) At low pH glyc inum cation and zwitterion species coexist, at higher pH  only zwitterions are 
present.   
Figure 66d  shows the recorde d FTIR spectra of the Gly/silica system as a function of 
adsorption pH, while Table  15 summarizes the assignments of the bands. At pH 2 the two 
bands at 1720 and 1746 cm-1 due to (C=O) of protona ted COOH and the band at 1500 cm-1  
due to s(NH 3+) indicated that the glycinium cation was present in the sample. Moreover, 
Gly-zwitt also seemed to be present since the band for the s(COO-) mode appeared at 1426 
cm-1. With the solution pH increase (see the pH 6 spectra) the (C=O) modes totally 
disappeared while the s(COO-) mode considerably increased, thus indicating that only Gly -
zwitt was present.  The s(COO-) and s(NH 3+) modes  changed to 1412 and 1525 cm-1, 
respectively, almost the same as for th e zwitterion in the -Gly polymorph. At pH 10.5 the 
registered spectrum was very similar to the one at pH 6 so that Gly -zwitt was still present, 
and contrarily to what one would expect no evidences of the glycinate anion was observed. 
Interestingly, the ba nd at 1525 cm-1 was shifted to 1496 cm-1, which closely resembled the 
one observed at pH 6 for low coverage samples. Concerning the presence of only 
zwitterions instead of glycinate anions at pH 10.5, the authors suggested that the speciation 
of Gly could be governed by local values of pH close to the surface rather than its bulk 
value. That is, at this pH the silica surface bears a strong negative charge and, accordingly, 
the solution neighboring the surface forms a diffuse layer of opposite charge, which 
automatically produces a local pH lower than the value in the solution bulk. Therefore, the 
speciation at the interface may be different than in the bulk and for this particular case the 
lower local pH might justify the observed higher percentages of zwitt erions.  
Interestingly, the authors also indicated that no covalent bonds between Gly and the 
silica surface occurred, a fact which allowed ruling out any “surface acylation”. In other 
words, the SMA form was not present. This strengthened the thesis that the “molecularly 
adsorbed Gly” was formed by specific H -bonds with the surface, rather than by covalent 
bonds.        
 
iii) Thermal treatments of adsorbed Gly molecules induce the formation of DKP.  
Figure 66e  shows the in -situ DRIFT spectra of the Gly/silica s ystem as a function of 
heating temperature with a sample that mostly contain ed the “molecularly adsorbed Gly” 
form (pH 6 and concentration of 0.08M) . Table  15 collects the assignments of the bands 155 
 
observed. At 90 ºC no changes were observe d in compar ison to FTIR spectra a t room 
temperature (Figure  66c). At 160 ºC , the spectra underwent strong modifications and 
became quite similar to that of DKP/silica system. In particular, the transformation was 
evidenced by the presence of the intense absorption band at 1678 cm-1 due to the (C=O) of 
the adsorbed DKP, by the small sharp band at 1462 cm-1 corresponding to the DKP ring -
breathing  and by an increase in intensity of the w(CH 2) mode due to the contribution of the 
C-C stretching vibrations at approximately the same frequency  (1316 cm-1). The presence of 
small bands at 1410 and 1525 cm-1 (s(COO-) and s(NH 3+), respectively) also evidenced 
small amounts of residual adsorbed Gly -zwitt . Conversely, the bands associated to the linear 
Gly-Gly dimer (for instance, its strongest band at 1598 cm-1) were not observed. 
Additionally, TPD -MS experiments (not shown here) revealed  H2O+ signals (18 amu) 
between 160 – 200 ºC, in agreement with DKP formation, as the reaction  is accompanied by 
the production of two water molecules . Therfore, the authors concluded that  adsorption of 
Gly-zwitt  on silica surfaces activates the formation of amide bonds, contrarily to Gly on 
Pt(111),654 graphite655 and Cu(1 10).219  
 
In addition to this set of works , Ben Shir et al .228 also studied the binding of Gly on silica 
surfaces  using  multinuclear ssNMR -techniques  (Section 3.2.5).  For this case SBA -15, a 
mesoporous silica material with a high surface area (pore diameters of 5–30 nm) , was used as silica 
surface model . The effect of the amount of water present in the system was also considered 
adopting both low and high hydration states.  In low hydration conditions , the presence of a single 
population of surface -bound Gly species  was observed. Despite  the low H atom density (< 4 H nm-
2), it was possible to determine, by means of 15N {1H} separated local field (SLF) NMR 
experiments, that the Gly amine moiety was protonated (i.e., -NH 3+). Cross polarization (CP) 15N 
{29Si} and 29Si {15N} REDOR measurements allowed to establish the geometry, stoichiometry and 
specificity of Gly to the silica surface binding sites. In particular, it was found that the -NH 3+ 
moiety was positioned above a plane formed by 3 or 4 Si  surface atoms , pre dominantly Q3 Si 
species arranged in a triangular or square geometry, with a n internuclear N···Si distance of 4. 1  
0.3 Å. In addition to the high abundance of Q3 silanol sites, Q2 and Q4 Si species were also observed 
on the SBA -15 surface in lesser amount s. Moreover, 15N {13C} REDOR data indicated that the 
COO- had a very restricted motion, which practically indicated no contribution to surface binding. 
For the high hydration state (estimate d surface hydrogen density of 6 –12 H atoms/nm2) the presence  
of tw o different surface -bound Gly populations, plus a third population with “free” (non surface -
bound) Gly  molecules  was determined . One interacting species was identified  to be the same as the 
one present in the low hydration state; the other bound population  was found to have the same 156 
 
binding stoichiometry and geometry, but the COO- group experien ced a larger amplitude motion. 
The “free” population was interpreted as Gly being completel y solvated by water molecules 
because  Gly exhibited  large libration motion s. The physical picture suggested by the authors for the 
three populations detected,  emerged from the accumulated data is shown in Figure  67.  
a)
b)
c)
 
 
Figure  67. Picture of the three populations (bound, a and b, and free, c) for Gly/SBA -15 detected 
by multinuc lear ssNMR experiments .Adapted  with permission  from Ref.228. Copyright 2012 
American Chemical Society ).  
 
H-bond ing network between the ammonium H atoms and the lone pair electrons of the 
oxygens atoms of the SiOH and of H 2O (for bound and non -bound populations) were  postulated to 
be the chemical driving forces that underlie Gly/silica surface specific interactions. Confi rming the 157 
 
results of Lambert and coworkers,210,224,247 surface -induced crystallization of  and  polymorphs 
was also observed.  
Despite these very interesting results, important aspects, however, still remain unclear. An 
important issue is to determine whether the interaction between Gly and the silica su rface takes 
place through an actual direct contact or is mediated by solvent water molecules. Moreover, for the 
former case, it is also of interest to know which are the preferred groups (COO- or NH 3+) 
responsible of the contact , although, as shown above, sophisticated ssNMR techniques can provide 
some clues.228 Additionally, it is relevant to establish the number of OH g roups (both from SiOH 
and water) needed to stabilize the zwitterionic form over the canonical one. Although these points 
were not fully resolved by the previous spectroscopic works, some ab initio studies were devoted to 
provide information on these aspect s.  
Costa et al.556 and Rimola et al.322 simulated th e interaction of Gly in its zwitterionic state 
with silica surfaces terminated by isolated SiOH groups in a microsolvated state, that is, accounting 
for a small number of water molecules. The former authors used the minimal H 3SiOH clusters  in 
the presence of 1 and 2 water molecules and the B3LYP/6 -31++G(d,p) level of theory. The most 
stable complexes found are shown in Figure  68. Results indicated that with one water molecule the 
interaction of Gly with one isolated SiOH group can take plac e directly through the NH 3+ group, the 
COO- interaction being mediated by the water molecule ( Figure 68a),  or adopting the reverse 
situation ( Figure 68b)  as both complexes were found to be energetically almost degenerate. 
Additionally, with two H 2O molecul es and two isolated SiOH groups, the most stable adduct is the 
structure shown in Figure 68c , in which the COO- moiety interacts directly with the silanols 
whereas waters bridge the interaction with NH 3+. Rimola et al.322 used a periodic model of the (001) 
edingtonite silica surface wi th two independent SiOH groups per unit cell to study at the 
B3LYP/triple - level the successive addition of water molecules (from 1 to 5) at the Gly/silica 
interface. The most stable adducts found are shown in Figure  69.  
 158 
 
C O
NH
Sia)
b)
c)
 
Figure  68. Stable structures  found in Ref.556 for the interaction of zwitterionic glycine with minimal 
silanol clusters in the presence of 1 and 2 explicit water molecules. Optimized at the B3LYP/6 -
31++G(d,p) level.  159 
 
CO
NH
Sia)
 b)
2W
c)
2W
 2Wd)
2We)
 
 
Figure  69. The most stable structures found in Ref.322 for the successive addition of water (from 1 
to 5, a–e, respectively) at the Gly -zwitt/silica surface interface. Periodic systems optimized at the 
B3LYP/triple - level.  Adapted with permission from Ref.322. Copyright 2008 American Chemical 
Society.  
 
Interestingly, with one water molecule ( Figure  69a), the direct contact of Gly wi th the silica 
surface occurred through the COO- group, whereas water interacted with NH 3+. With two and three 
water molecules ( Figure 69b and  Figure 69c,  respectively), COO- still was found to be involved in 
the direct contact with SiOH, while it interacte d with two water molecules. However, for 4 and 5 
water molecules ( Figure 69d  and Figure 69e , respectively) such a direct contact disappeared and the 
Gly/silica interaction was mediated by water. This progressive microsolvation procedure indicates 
that the direct contact between Gly and the silica surface becomes lost upon increasing the number 
of water molecules until reaching a situation in which the Gly/silica interface is completely 
dominated by water. It is worth mentioning that this situation was not o bserved by Costa et al.556 
due to the limited number of water molecules considered. In the work of Rimola et al.,322 the 
vibrational frequencies of the structure shown in Figure 69e  were also computed and compared with 
the experimental IR results of Meng et al.210 (data shown in Table  16). In this case, the as(COO-) 
and (NH 3+) modes useful for comparison are hidden by the stretching and bending modes of 
solvent water, which cover th e 3900–3500 cm-1 and 1700 –1600 cm-1 regions. Because of that, the 
(CCH) + s(COO-), (HCH) and as(NH 3+) were used, as they do not interfere with water bands. 160 
 
The comparison between the experimental measurements and the B3LYP data is fairly good, with a 
maximum deviation of 30 cm-1. Indeed, the B3LYP as(NH 3+) and (CCH) + s(COO-) values are in 
very good agreement with the experimental ones, thus supporting the view that NH 3+ and COO- are 
completely solvated by H 2O. 
 
Table  16. Comparison between the exper imental and harmonic B3LYP frequencies (cm-1) for the 
Gly/silica system. The experimental values are at pH 6 (taken from Figure 66c). The computed 
frequencies correspond to the structure shown in Figure 69e.  
 
Vibrational mode  Experiments (pH 6)  B3LYP  
(CCH) + s(COO-) 1412  1405  
(HCH)  1443  1422  
as(NH 3+) 1617  1619  
 
The analysis focused on the Gly -zwitt Gly -can relative stability as a function of the number 
of OH groups (shown in Figure  70) is also of interest. Results indicated that, as expected, the la rger 
the number of OH, the higher the stability of Gly -zwitt. Rameakers et al.656 found that, for the 
Gly/(H 2O)n system, with n = 2 Gly -zwitt was metastable  (i.e., Gly -zwitt did not reverse to Gly -can) 
whereas Gly -can was the dominating form. With n = 4 Gly -zwitt was found to be more stable than 
Gly-can. When silica surface is p resent, results show the same trend, even though in this case the 
OH groups belong to water and silanols. That is, with two OH groups in direct contact with Gly, 
Gly-zwitt becomes stable, although the canonical form is the preferred configuration, whereas when 
Gly is in contact with four OH groups Gly -zwitt becomes the most stable form.     
 161 
 
Canonical systems
number of OH
2
(1H2O + 1SiOH)
2
(2H2O)
4
(3H2O + 1SiOH)
5
(5H2O)
Zwitterionic systems
number of OH
2
(1H2O + 1SiOH)
3
(2H2O + 1SiOH)
4
(3H2O + 1SiOH)
5
(5H2O)Erel
107.1
8.8
-111.3
-192.0structure structure
 
 
Figure  70. Relative electronic energies ( Erel, in kJ mol-1) of the zwitterionic systems with respect 
to the canonical ones as a function of the number of OH groups  interacting with glycine, with 
different H 2O loadings (1, 2, 3 and 5 water molecules). Adapted with permission f rom Ref.322. 
Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.  
 
As mentioned, these theoretical results only addressed the interaction of Gly with isolated 
SiOH groups and not with geminal ones, which due to their more acidic behavior are expected to be 
different. Because of that, Costa et al.641 and Zhao et al.323 studied the adsorption of Gly on silica 
surfaces rich in geminal silanol groups in the presen ce of water, both works using first -principles 
molecular dynamics simulations. In the work of Costa et al.641 the adsorption was simulated 
considering a microsolvated environment constituted by 5 water molecules (enough to ensure the 
stabilization of Gly -zwitt over Gly -can). Several MD runs at the PBE level and T = 300 K with 
evolution times of 1500 fs indicated that in the dominant conformation (shown in Figure 71a)  the 
COO- moiety was in direct contact with the surface through one geminal SiOH group, wher eas 
NH 3+ was interacting with water molecules far from the surface.  162 
 
GVCO
NH
Sia)
CONH
SiGb)
c)
time ( ps)time evolution
distance (Å)
 
Figure  71. Interaction between glycine and a silica surface rich in geminal silanols with the 
presence of water: (a) Dominant configuration obtained by means of ab initio MD simulation s with 
5 explicit water molecules (PBE density functional method, T = 300 K and evolution times of 1500 
fs; drawn with data from Ref.641); (b): Dominant configuration obtained by means of SCC -DFTB 
simulations with 140 explicit water molecules (T = 300 K an d evolution times of 20 ps;). The water 
molecules have been removed for the sake of clarity; (c) time evolution of the distance of the COO- 
and NH 3+ moieties with the surface (red and blue lines, respectively) for the MD run associated to 
the configuration  shown in (b). b) and c) reprinted with permission from Ref.323. Copyright 2011 
American Chemical Society.  
 
Zhao et al.323 also studied Gly adsorption, but unlike this previous work, they included 140 
water molecules in order to simulate the bulk solvent effects and carried out MD simulations based 
on the self -consistent charge density functional tight binding (SCC -DFTB) method (see Section 
5.6.2 for details of the method). After running several MD simul ations at T= 300 K with evolution 
times of 20 ps for different initial guess structures, the results obtained did not differ much from 
those found by Costa et al.641 Indeed, they found that the dominant configuration (shown in Figure 
71b) exhibited the COO- group pointing towards the surface and establishing direct contact with 
geminal SiOH groups, while NH 3+, though they were able to establish direct H -bonds with geminal 
SiOH groups, preferred to interact with bulk water, away from the surface. These trend s can be seen 
in the time evolution of the distance between the functional COO- and NH 3+ groups of Gly -zwitt 
and the surface silanols obtained for one MD run (see Figure 71c ): COO- was close to the surface 
during all the MD simulation while NH 3+ only inter acted with the surface for a short lapse of time, 
being far from the surface the rest of the time. Analysis of the Mulliken charges after the MD 
simulations showed that the interaction involved a considerable charge transfer, as the surface 
carried a negat ive charge (from -0.381 to -1.09 electrons) whereas Gly and water molecules hold a 
positive charge (from +0.0719 to +0.0124 electrons, for Gly).  Moreover, the authors indicated that, 
as the surface exhibited a negative charge, the low affinity of NH 3+ to the surface could not be 163 
 
explained using the conventional acid –base (proton) theory, but considering that the large positive 
net charge on the geminal H must repel any incoming NH 3+, which would explain the great affinity 
of the COO- group for the surface. Remarkably, these two works coincide in estimating the 
adsorption energy of Gly -zwitt on the geminal silanol groups to about -140/-150 kJ mol-1.  
9.1.2 Other Amino Acids  
9.1.2.1. Alanine  
The side chain of alanine (Ala) is the –CH 3 group and therefore, it i s reasonable to consider 
that no significant changes will occur compared  to Gly because the side chain cannot establish H -
bonds with free silanol groups, although dispersive interactions are larger for Ala than for Gly due 
to the presence of the CH 3 group . In spite  of that, there are some theoretical and experimental works 
addressed exclusively to the interaction of Ala with silica surfaces.  
The gas -phase interaction of Ala with a large cluster model simulating the (001) edingtonite 
surface that contains 4 isolated SiOH groups has been reported by Rimola et al.321 Calculations 
were carried out using the ONIOM2 strategy with B3LYP/6 -311++G(d,p)  as high level and MNDO 
as low level. It was found that the interaction through the backbone chain followed the same 
features as for Gly; tha t is, adsorption in the canonical state and engaging at least two H -bonds 
between the SiOH groups and the C=O Ala group. The optimized structure is shown in Figure 72a.   164 
 
a)
CO N
HSi
b)
CON
H Si
c)
d)C
ONH
Si
C
ONH
Si
 
Figure  72. (a) Optimized structure for the Ala/silica system in gas -phase at the 
ONIOM2(B3LYP/6 -311++G(d,p):MNDO) level ( drawn with data from Ref.321); (b) dominant 
configuration for the Ala/silica system in gas phase by means of ab initio MD simulations (PBE 
method, T = 100K); (c) dominant configuration for the Ala/silica system in aqueous solvent (63 
water mol ecules) by means of ab initio MD simulations (PBE method, T = 300K); (d) Eventual 
configuration observed during the same MD simulation that yielded (c). Sections b -d drawn from 
data of Ref.324 
 
Nonella et al.324 also s tudied the Ala/silica interactions but in this case by means of first -principles 
MD simulations at the PBE level considering both vacuum conditions and the presence of explicit 
water molecules. In vacuo adsorption simulations, carried out at T = 100 K and with evolution 
times of 2.5 ps, showed that the dominant configuration is the one given in Figure 72b.  This is 
notably different from the one previously observed ( Figure 72a ) as in this case there is a rather 
strong H -bond between the NH 2 and one SiOH grou ps and the H -bonds between SiOH and COOH 165 
 
adopt a different pattern. Although in both cases the silica surface model is based on edingtonite, 
these differences are probably due to the fact that Nonella’s model is richer in SiOH surface groups 
than the Rimol a’s one (8 vs 4 SiOH groups per unit cell, respectively). This higher SiOH density 
probably favors the formation of the additional interaction with the NH 2 moiety and the different H -
bonding patterns in the COOH group. Furthermore, in Nonella’s model the S iOH are interacting 
whereas in Rimola’s one they are isolated. MD simulations carried out in the presence of 63 explicit 
water molecules at T= 300 K converged into a picture in which Ala is adsorbed as a zwitterion on 
the neutral surface (i.e., with no evi dences of negatively charged SiO- surface groups) through 
indirect H -bonds mediated by water molecules  (see Figure 72c ). Noticeably, NH 3+ eventually 
established direct H -bond interactions with O atoms of silanols (see Figure 72d ). Additionally, the 
results  indicated that the NH 3+ group interacted more strongly with the surface than the COO- one, 
which was reflected by the orientation of Ala (NH 3+ pointing towards the surface).  
 From an experimental point of view, Ben Shir et al.227 have also reported ssNMR results 
focused on the Ala/SBA -15 interface, in a procedure similar to t hat used later for the Gly/SBA -15 
system228 (see above). The results obtained are, as expected, very similar between t he two works. 
That is, the low hydration state was found to be dominated by a surface -bound Ala population, with 
the protonated –NH 3+ moiety close to 3 –4 Q3 silicon  centers with an internuclear Si···N distance of 
4.0–4.2 Å and the COO- moiety not showing c ontributions to surface binding, whereas in the high 
hydration state three populations were found, two of them surface -bound and one “free”. The only 
significant difference found between the two works is that surface -induced crystallization was not 
observe d for the Ala case. Remarkably,  this view of transforming a surface immobilized Ala into a 
“free” Ala molecule solvated by water when the hydration conditions are increased is in full 
agreement with the results of Amitay -Rosen  et al.,225 in whi ch they observed, by means of dynamic 
MAS NMR measurements, that a single water molecules was enough to remove the bound Ala 
molecules from the SBA -15 surface. This  behavior  is moreover  consistent with the calculations of 
Nonella et al.324 (see above ) where it was observed that  the adsorption of Ala on a silica surface is 
not direct through the NH 3+ or COO- groups but bridged by solvent water molecules.  
 
9.1.2.2. Lysine and Glutamic acid  
The side chain of lysine (Lys) and glutamic acid ( Glu) are the –(CH 2)4-NH 2 and –(CH) 2-
COOH groups, respectively, and thus, these amino acids are of interest because they exhibit 
different protonated forms depending on the pH. Figure  73 shows the different states as well as 
respective p Ka values.  166 
 
pKa1= 2.18 pKa2= 8.95 pKaR= 10.53
pKa1= 2.19 pKaR= 3.65 pKa2= 9.60a)
b)Dicationic
(H3Lys2+)Cationic
(H2Lys+)Zwitterionic
(HLys)Anionic
(Lys-)
cationic
(H3Glu+)Zwitterionic
(H2Glu)anionic
(HGlu-)dianionic
(Glu2-)
 
 
Figur e 73.  Different protonated states for lysine (Lys, (a)) and glutamic acid (Glu, (b)), including 
corresponding p Ka values.   
 
The adsorption of Lys on amorphous silica in the 7.1 –9.8 pH range was measured by Kitadai 
et al.217 by means of attenuated total reflectance infrared (ATR -IR) spectroscopy. At pH < 7, the 
absorbance of adsorbed Lys was found to be small be cause non -adsorbed Lys was predominant, and 
therefore at these values the ATR -IR spectra were not recorded. Figure  74 shows the spectra of Lys 
in solution (a) and when adsorbed on silica (b) over the whole range of pH values tested.  167 
 
0.04 Absorbanceas(COO-) 
+ 
as(NH 3+)
1598sc(NH 2)
1559as(NH 3+)
1521s(COO-) 
1412a)
pH 7.1pH 7.5pH 7.9pH 8.6pH 9.0pH 9.8
as(COO-) 
+ 
as(NH 3+)sc(NH 2)as(NH 3+)
s(COO-) 
(H2O)1598 15591521
1412
1635
1800 1600 1400 1200b)
pH 7.1pH 7.5pH 7.9pH 8.6pH 9.0pH 9.8
()
 
Figure  74. ATR -IR spectra (in cm-1) for Lys in solution (a) and when adsorbed on silica surface (b), 
respectively, as a function of pH . Adapted with permission from Ref. 217. Copyright 2009 Elsevier.  
 
Spectra in Figure  74a indicated that, as expected, Lys changes its protonation state from the 
zwitterionic to the cationic state upon pH decrease. This was clearly evidenced by the 
disappearance of the NH 2 scissoring ( sc(NH 2)) band at 1559 cm-1, only present in the zwitterionic 
state, and by the increase in intensity of those bands involving NH 3+, due to the protonation of the 
-amino group when the pH decreased. In contrast, it was  observed that the spectra for the adsorbed 
Lys on silica remained mostly invariable upon pH change ( see Figure 74b).  Quantitative spectral 
analysis based on calibration lines for Lys in solution indicated that, regardless of the pH, 81 5% of 
the adsorbed Lys was present in the cationic state and 19 5% in the zwitterionic state. With these 
results and considering that the point of zero charge of the used silica sample is about 2, the authors 
interpreted that adsorption of Lys was mainly driven by electrosta tic interactions between the 168 
 
negatively charged silica surface and the protonated NH 3+ groups, although hydrophobic 
interactions between Lys and siloxane bridges were not ruled out. Remarkably, this binding 
mechanism based on electrostatic forces agrees wi th the isothermal experiments of O’Connor et 
al.215 on the adsorption of Lys on siliceous MCM -41 and is consistent with the experimental 
findings of Stievano et al.,247 which showed a preferential adsorption of Lys from an equimolar 
mixture of Gly and Lys. Indeed, considering that at pH 7 Gly is in its zwitterionic state, Lys 
predominantly in its cationic state, an d silica bears a significant negative charge, Lys adsorption 
should certainly be more favorable than Gly adsorption.  
As far as Glu is concerned , Bouch oucha et al.211 recorded the IR spectrum for the Glu/silica 
system, results showing that at pH 3 the predominant species was the H 2Glu zwitterionic state, as 
the dominant bands were those involving the backbone NH 3+ and COO- groups and the protonated 
side chain  COOH (see Figure 75a).   
 
1800 1700 1600 1500
()1400 13001407
s(COO-) 1507
s(NH 3+) 1634
as(NH 3+) 
1721
(C=O) a)
b)
 
 
Figure 7 5. (a): IR spectrum (in cm-1) for Glu when adsorbed on silica at pH 3 (adapted with 
permission from Ref.211. Copyright  2011 Ameri can Chemical Society ). (b) Schematic 
representation of the Glu/silica interface where two forms of Glu (the molecularly adsorbed and the 
precipitated ones, as minority and majority species, respectively) were found to coexist.  
 
As expected, at pH 8 –9 the C =O band associated to COOH was absent indicating that the 
predominant species was the HGlu- anion. Similar IR features were obtained for free Glu in solution 169 
 
at these pH values, thereby confirming that the contact with silica does not significantly modify Glu 
speciation. Additionally, quantitative adsorption data from HPLC suggested a weak affinity 
between Glu species and the hydrated silica surfaces, and therefore that the interaction mainly takes 
place via H -bonding rather than electrostatic forces. On th e other hand, the obtained XRD 
diffractograms showed the formation of bulk Glu crystallites at concentrations lower than 
saturation.  This phenomenon was comparable to what geochemists sometimes call “surface 
precipitation” or better “surface -induced preci pitation”, i.e., the precipitation of a mineral 
exclusively on the surface adsorbent, under conditions where the bulk solution is undersaturated. 
Such a growth ha s also been reported for the Gly/TiO 2(110) system657 and this “surface -induced 
precipitation” has  been even used in several procedures of preparation of supported heterogeneous 
catalysts.658  Incidentally , the Glu crystallite formation is different compared to the Gly one. For 
Glu, the shape of the adsorption isotherm suggests that nucleation of a bulk Glu phase does ind eed 
occur at the silica -solution interface  whereas for Gly bulk crystallites can be formed from non -
specifically retained solution during the drying step . However, for Glu, the bulk phase that 
precipitated was the same that would be obtained from a concent rated aqueous solution of Glu, that 
is, the -polymorph. Solid state NMR measurements confirmed the presence of these two Glu 
populations; i.e., the molecularly adsorbed form and the precipitated one, as minority and majority 
species, respectively, (see th e schematic picture of Figure 75b ) and also suggested that at the 
interface the adsorbed species compete with a few water molecules to directly interact with the 
silica surface.    
From a theoretical point of view, Lys and Glu adsorptions considering stric t gas -phase 
conditions were simulated by Rimola et al.321 using a (001) edingtonite -based surface cluster model 
that contains 4 isolated SiOH groups and the ONIOM2(B3LYP/6 -311++G(d,p):MNDO) level of 
theory. As expected, the computed adduct exhibited a rather strong H -bond between t he proton of 
one SiOH and the N atom of the amine side chain (see structure of Figure 76a ). A similar H -
bonding pattern was found by Han et al.659 when studying the adsorption of methylamine 
(considered as a model of the side chain of Lys) on the hydroxylated (0001) surface of -quartz, 
although in this case the H of the NH 2 group also established a H -bond with an O atom of one 
surface SiOH group. Glu holds a COOH group at the end of the side ch ain and thus the most stable 
adduct found for this amino acid exhibits the cooperative H -bonding pattern between the COOH 
and one SiOH groups, (see Figure 76b ). To the best of our knowledge, calculations accounting for 
water solvent effects have only been carried out for the Lys case by Gambino et al.,660 who modeled 
by means of classical MD simulations the adsorption of Lys on a hydroxylated quartz surface with 
the presence of 350 explicit water molecules. At variance with  the ATR -IR results, they found 
HLys as the most stable state, over the cationic one. Despite that, the results obtained are likewise 170 
 
of valuable interest as it was found that Lys interacts adopting an end -on orientation with the 
protonated NH 3+ side chai n group pointing towards the surface (see schematic structure of Figure 
76c). Moreover, it was observed that water provides an indirect cooperative contribution to the 
Lys/quartz interactions, decreasing the solvation shell around the charged NH 3+ and SiO- groups 
and in turn strengthening the Lys/quartz interactions.  
 
C
ON
HSia)
C
ONHSib)
c)CO
N
H
Si
 
 
Figure  76. Interaction of Lys (a) and Glu (b) with a hydroxylated (001) edingtonite surface model 
(drawn from data of Ref.321) computed at the ONIOM2(B3LY/6 -311++G(d,p):MNDO level). (c) 
Schematic representation of the dominant configuration obtained for zwitterionic Lys interacting 
with a hydroxylated -quartz  surface model in aqueous solution using classical MD simulations 
(drawn from data of  Ref.660). Water molecules have been omi tted for the sake of clarity.  
 
9.1.3 General trends found in the amino acid adsorption on silica surfaces  
Static quantum chemical calculations have the advantage that they allow to compute binding 
adsorption energies straightforwardly and efficiently. This  is important because by computing the 171 
 
adsorption energies of a set of AA on silica surfaces one may establish a scale of relative stability of 
the AA/silica adducts and hence obtain trends on the affinity of AA with silica. This was actually 
performed by Rimola et al.,321 who pres ented a comprehensive computational study for the gas -
phase adsorption of 15 AA ( Table  17 shows some selected cases) in their canonical state on a model 
cluster of hydroxylated silica surface based on the (001) edingtonite surface terminated by four 
isolat ed SiOH groups.  
 
Table  17. BSSE -corrected adsorption energies ( EC
ads), free energies ( GC
ads, T = 298 K) and 
including dispersion (D) for several amino acids interacting with hydroxylated silica surface from 
Ref.321. Units in kJ mol-1. 
 
Amino acid  Side chain behavior  EC
ads GC
ads GC
ads + D 
glycine (Gly)  non-polar  -48.5 18.4 -13.0 
alanine (Ala)  non-polar  -46.4 18.8 -7.5 
phenylalanine (Phe)  non-polar  -43.1 29.7 -15.9 
serine (Ser)  polar/neutral  -56.1 25.1 -20.5 
glutamic acid (Glu)  polar/acidic  -76.6 7.5 -36.0 
glutamine (gln)  polar/amide function  -72.8 14.2 -33.5 
lysine (Lys)  polar/basic  -73.6 7.1 -37.2 
arginine (Arg)  polar/basic  -72.4 11.7 -41.0 
 
Geometry optimizations were performed at the ONIOM2(B3LYP/6 -311++G(d,p):MNDO) 
level and adsorption energies were determined after  including Grimme’s correction for 
dispersion.420 It is worth mentioning that in all cases the adsorbed complexes showed the same 
interactions observed for Gly (see Figure  62) plus those derived from the AA side chain with the 
available free SiOH groups. This ensured that differences in the adsorption energies were due to the 
AA side chain interactions with silica. The computed adsorption energies ( Table  17) indicated that 
EC
ads become mo re favorable as the number of polar groups in the AA side chain increases due to 
the formation of stronger H -bonds with the surface. Interestingly, the computed GC
ads were found 
to be all positive due to the unfavorable entropic terms. However, since the dispersive forces play a 
fundamental role on the adsorption energy, when adding the correction for dispersion, final free 
adsorption energies ( GC
ads + D) become all negative. Overall, the authors pointed out that the 
adsorption processes were mainly dicta ted by both H -bonding and dispersion. That is, while the 
former interactions seemed to determine the relative silica affinity for the different AA, the latter 
ones mainly contributed by greatly lowering the adsorption energies. From the GC
ads + D values, 
the authors established the following relative scale for AA affinity towards silica surfaces of 172 
 
moderate hydroxylation degree: polar/basic  > polar acidic  polar/amidic  > polar/neutral  > 
nonpolar.  
Sholl and coworkers651,661 have reported theoretical results addressed to the enantiospecific 
adsorption of AA. All natural -AA with the exception of Gly are intrinsically chiral and only one 
of the two possible enanatiomers is naturally found in proteins. The existence of this biological 
homochirality raises profound questions about the origins of life. Furthermore, in nature, not only 
biomolecules are chiral but also naturally occurring minerals may present chirality. Some auth ors 
have invoked the possibility that naturally occurring chiral surfaces may discriminate one 
enantiomer over the other, which in turn is controlled by the enantiospecific interactions between 
the two partners. Quartz is chiral and because of that, Sholl and coworkers calculated the adsorption 
energies of the two possible enantiomers of several AA on the chiral (0001) and (0 -10) -quartz 
surfaces. The results obtained are summarized in Table  18. The authors highlighted that 
measureable energy differences w ere obtained between the two enantiomers of Ser and Cys, and for 
Ser, Asp and Asn when adsorbed on the (0001) and (0 -10) surfaces, respectively, while for the other 
amino acids negligible energy differences were computed. They also mentioned, however, that  the 
largest enantiospecific energy difference, given by Asp, was the only case comparable to the 
computed enantiospecific energy differences reported on metal chiral surfaces, which are indeed 
able to carry out chiral recognition.662,663  
 
Table  18. Computed electronic adsorption energies ( Eads) and including ZPE -corrections ( Uads) 
for the adsorption of th e R and S enantiomers of alanine (Ala), serine (Ser), cysteine (Cys), aspartic 
acid (Asp) and asparigine (Asn) on the (0001) and (0 -10) -quartz surfaces. In kJ mol-1. Data 
obtained from ref. 651,661 
 
Chiral AA  (0001)651  (0-10)661  
 Eads Uads Eads Uads 
R-Ala -74.3 -68.5 -70.4 -69.5 
S-Ala -73.3 -66.5 -72.4 -72.4 
R-Ser -85.9 -76.2 -73.3 -70.4 
S-Ser -90.7 -83.9 -69.5 -67.5 
R-Cys -83.2/ -83.0 -75.0/ -75.5 -78.1 -75.3 
S-Cys -79.2/ -78.7 -71.6/ -70.9 -78.1 -75.3 
R-Asp   -75.3 -73.3 
S-Asp   -84.9 -81.0 
R-Asn   -69.5 -64.6 
S-Asn   -73.3 -68.5 
 173 
 
To the best of our knowledge, systematic studies focused on the adsorption of AA on silica 
surfaces in solution to obtain an affinity scale have not been reported yet, which is unfortunate since 
exper imental data exist for comparison (Ref.207; see Section 3.2.2). However, Walsh and 
coworkers591,595 have reported the binding of several AA analogues (i.e., small molecules that 
resemble the side chain of AA) on the (001), (100) and (011) hydroxylated α -quartz surfaces under 
aqueous conditions ( Table  19 reports som e selected cases). It is worth noting that, because of the 
aqueous environment, the butyl ammonium and ethanoate molecules (as analogues for Lys and Glu, 
respectively) were considered as charged forms; i.e., carrying NH 3+ and COO- moieties, 
respectively. I n this work, free energies of adsorption were obtained using the potential of mean 
force (PMF) method. This method allows running MD simulations for a fixed distance between the 
center of mass of the adsorbate and the surface. By modifying this distance ov er a certain range one 
can get the PMF free energy profile of adsorption and the binding free energy. For this case, the 
MD simulations were based on classical force fields. Results obtained ( see Table  19) indicated that, 
in general, the PMF free energy of  adsorption did not correlate with the surface silanol density 
(which ranges, from highest to lowest, as (001) > (100) > (011)), suggesting that the surface 
topology, and in particular the interstitial spaces between silanol groups, was important. Indeed, 
visual inspection of the typical configurations of the AA analogues adsorbed on the α -quartz 
surfaces (see Figure  77) showed that molecules tended to be inserted within the interstitial grooves.  
 
Table  19. PMF free adsorption energies (in kJ mol-1) for so me amino acid analogue molecules 
interacting with the (001), (100) and (011) -quartz surfaces from Ref.595 
 
molecule  AA-analogue for  (001)  (100)  (011)  
CH 4 Ala -4.6 -5.0 -6.7 
CH 3OH Ser -4.2 -3.8 -5.9 
CH 3(CH 2)3NH 3+ Lys -2.1 -2.9 -4.2 
C6H6 Phe -7.1 -8.8 -11.7 
CH 3COO - Glu -6.7 -5.4 -12.1 
 174 
 
a) b)
c)
 d)
e)
 
Figure  77. PMF typica l configurations of methane (a), methanol (b), butyl ammonium (c), benzene 
(d) and ethanoate (e) interacting with the (011) -quartz surface in aqueous solution . Water 
molecules have been removed for the sake of clarity.  Adapted with permission from Ref.595. 
Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).  
  
Accordingly, the authors interpreted that hydrophobic interactions between aliphatic chains 
and the surfaces contributed significantly to the surface binding. For those AA analogues that bear 
polar groups, however, it was observed that H -bonding is also relevant for th e binding. The 
obtained PMF adsorption free energies revealed the following trend in the binding: 
nonpolar/aromatic > polar/negatively charged > nonpolar/aliphatic > polar/neutral > polar/positively 
charged. The authors also mentioned the limitations of th e biomolecule models used. That is, for 
most residues, the alkyl parts of their side chains will be restrained to point away from the surface 
(not within or in close proximity the interstitial spaces) by the backbone chains of amino acids and 
peptides, so their contribution to the binding energy is limited. This is, for instance, the case of 
methanol and ethanoate (to model Ser and Glu, respectively), in which the methyl groups were 
found to lie in an interstitial groove, which is not possible if the full a mino acid residue is accounted 
for due to geometry constraints.  
The previous results were obtained considering that the silica surfaces did not bear any 
surface charge; namely, they were neutral. However, silica surfaces may exhibit net electrical 
surface  charges, the sign of which strongly depends on the pH of the solution when silica is 175 
 
immersed. As stated in Section 3.1.2, at solution pH values above/below the PZC the mineral 
respectively displays a negative/positive surface charge. Obviously, the highe r the difference 
between the solution pH and the PZC, the more charges the surface exhibits. The PZC marks a 
changeover in the electrochemical properties of the silica surfaces; however, since it is quite low for 
silica (about 2), pH values below the PZC a re not very relevant. Analogously, as shown for the Lys 
and Glu cases, AA can be found in different charged states depending on the pH of the medium. 
The isoelectric point (pI) of one AA is the solution pH at which the AA carries equal amounts of 
positive and negative charges; that is, it is found as zwitterion. In fact, if there are no ionizable 
groups in the side chains, the pI is simply the mean value of the pKa’s that involve the carboxylic 
acid and the ammonium functions, pKa 1 and pKa 2, respectively. W hen there is an ionizable group in 
the side chain, its pKa value (pKa R) also intervenes. Accordingly, at pH values above/below the pI, 
the AA is found to be anionic/cationic. Due to these pH -dependent electrical properties shown by 
silica surfaces and AA, the charged states of the two partners in the adsorption processes may 
determine the strength of the AA/silica interactions, which in this case will be mainly dictated by 
electrostatic forces. As already mentioned in Section 3.1.2, Churchill et al.105 have studied the 
influence of the PZC of quartz surfaces and the pI of some amino acids in the adsorption processes. 
The PZC of the quartz surfaces was determined, using the atomic force microscope (AFM) 
technique to be 2.8, whereas the amount of the adsorbed AA on quartz  was analyzed with liquid 
chromatography techniques. Table  20 shows the results obtained, jointly with pKa and pI values of 
the AA tested.  
 
Table 20.  Relative adsorption of amino acids analyzed by high -performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC) and reverse -phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) on quartz, and p Ka’s and isoelectric 
points (pI) of the amino acids tested. p Ka1, pKa2 and p KaR refer to p Ka values for backbone COOH, 
NH 3+ and side chain R groups, respectively.  
 
Amino acid  Relative adsorption  pKa values  pI 
 HPLCa RPLCb pKa1  pKa2 pKaR  
Lysine (Lys)  1.00 - 2.18 8.95 10.53  9.74 
Tyrosine (Tyr)  < 0.20  1.00 2.20 9.11 10.07  5.66 
Alanine (Ala)  < 0.05  0.81 2.34 9.69 - 6.01 
Glycine (Gly)  < 0.05  0.51 2.34 9.60 - 5.97 
Glutamic acid (Glu)  < 0.05  0.12 2.19 9.67 4.25 3.22 
Aspartic acid (Asp)  < 0.05  0.12 1.88 9.60 3.65 2.77 
a measurements normalized with respect to Lys. b measurements normalized with respect to Tyr  
 176 
 
AA with pI values that greatly differ from the PZC of quartz adsorbed in greater abundance 
than A A for which pI values and the PZC are similar. That is, Lys was found to be the most 
adsorbed AA (it is indeed the amino acid that exhibits the largest difference between pI and PZC, 
9.74 vs 2.8, respectively), while Asp and Glu are the least adsorbed amin o acids (with pI values 
similar to PZC, 2.80 and 3.04 vs 2.8, respectively). This could be understood considering that at pH 
values above the PZC of quartz but below the pI of the AA means the quartz surfaces and AA have 
opposite charge and thus, electrost atic interaction is attractive and large. For instance, at pH 5, 
quartz has a moderate negative charge density on the surfaces but Lys is mostly found in its cationic 
state, so that attractive electrostatic interactions occur between them, thus favoring ad sorption. In 
contrast, Asp is mostly found as anion (like quartz) so that repulsive electrostatic interactions are 
established, thereby giving rise to poor adsorption of Asp. This can be visualized in Figure  78.  
5 pH
2.8
pzcpositive weakly negative strongly negative
pKa11.88
pKa29.60
H3Asp+Asp2-
pKaR3.65
H2AspHAsp-
pKa12.19
pKa29.67
H3Glu+Glu2-
pKaR4.25
H2GluHGlu-
pKa12.34
pKa29.60
H2Gly+HGluGly-
pKa12.34
pKa29.62
H2Ala+HAlaAla-
pKa12.20
pKa29.11
H3Tyr+H2TyrHTyr-Tyr2-
pKaR10.07
pKa12.18
pKa28.95
H3Lys2+HLysH2Lys+
pKaR10.53
Lys-
 
Figure 78. Theoretical acid -base speciat ion of the -quartz and the AA tested in Ref.105 as a 
function of pH. p Ka1, pKa2 and p KaR refer to p Ka values for backbone COOH, NH 3+ and side chain 
R groups, respectively.  
 
Interestingly, the greater the separation between the PZC and the pI values, the greater the 
charge difference between the mineral surface and the amino acid and thus, the more favorable the 
electrostatic interaction. This pH -dependent adsorption has been also observed by other authors via 
acid-base titration experiments. Bouchoucha et al.211 and Gao et al.253 also observed low amounts of 
Glu adsorption on amorphous  silica and SBA -15, respectively, which was attributed to the 
negligible difference in pH between the pI of Glu and the PZC of these silica materials (around 3). 177 
 
In the same line, both Gao at al.253 and Vlasova et al.214 observed that adsorption of Arg (pI = 
10.76) r eadily occurred on SBA -15 and on surfaces of highly dispersed silica particles, respectively, 
and that the adsorption amounts quickly increased from pH 3 to 9 because, while the amount of 
positively charged Arg was kept almost constant within this range, t he silica surfaces became more 
and more negatively charged.  
All these facts evidence that electrostatic forces play an important role in the adsorption 
processes, especially in the pH regions which correspond to changes in the speciation of the AA and 
silica surfaces. In the work of Gao et al.253 the adsorption of AA with non -polar side chains (Phe, 
leucine (Leu) and Ala) was also studied. For the particular case of Phe, the mean charge per 
molecule was approximately zero in the pH 4 –8 range (namely, it was present as zwitterion) but 
Phe was intensively adsorbed on the surfaces of the SBA -15 and the amount adsorbed was 
insensitive to pH variation since the acido -basic speciation of Phe was hardly affected. Furthermore, 
these authors also found that the adsorption amounts of these three amino acids increased with the 
increase of the size of their side chains (i.e., Phe > Leu > Ala). These facts led them to interprete  
that the adsorption of Phe was mainly driven by hydrophobic interactions between the non -polar 
side chain and the siloxane Si -O-Si surface groups. Along this line, it has been recently 
demonstrated that hydrophobic interactions indeed play an essential ro le which is clearly revealed 
when electrostatic and H -bonding interactions can be considered as constant.426  
In summary, it seems clear that the adsorption mechanism of AA on silica surfaces may be 
driven by three main kinds of contributions: i) electrostatic forces between AA ions and negatively 
charged SiO- surface groups, which become particularly  favorable when the silica surfaces and 
AA exhibit a net charge of opposite sign achieved by modulating the pH; ii) H -bonding interactions 
between AA (either as neutral molecules or ions) and neutral SiOH groups; iii) hydrophobic 
interactions between the AA side chains and the siloxane Si-O-Si groups.  
 
9.1.4 Thermal -induced transformations of adsorbed amino acids on silica surfaces  
Upon adsorption amino acids may react to give DKP (vide supra). Indeed, early experiments 
of Basiuk et al.  (ref. 241) deve loped a synthethic procedure for obtaining DKPs derivatives from 
simple aminoacids by means of their sublimation in the presence of silica gel. This was the starting 
point for further very extensive studies of silica catalyzed thermal transformations of am inoacids. 
Even though DKPs are usually major products, the catalytic activity of silica is so high that DKPs 
can be further singly or even doubly N -acylated to form imidazopyrazine systems .664-667 Formation 
of DKP derivatives via silica -catalyzed dehydrocyclization of linear dipeptides has also been 
reported.668 These examples show that thermal transformations of amino acids in the presence of 
silica is the gateway to a very rich che mistry that has not yet been fully investigated.  178 
 
Experiments in water solution with Gly, Ala, Lys and Glu, carried out by Lambert et al,652 
have shown that u pon t hermal activation at moderate temperatures (150 –160;°C), cl ean 
polymerization events occur , which c an easily be observed by thermogravimetric analysis . Figure  
79 shows the differential thermogravimetric (DTG) analysis for these AA/silica systems.  
DKP/SiO2Glu/SiO2Gly/SiO2Ala/SiO2Lys/SiO2
100 200 300 400 500
temperature (oC)Amide
bond 
formation
 
 
Figu re 79. Differential thermogravimetric analysis of several AA and DKP on amorphous silica 
The temperature region where amide bond formation seems to occur is highlighted in grey.  Adapted 
with permission from Ref.652. Copyright 2009 Elsevier.  
 
At least two clear regions were differentiated: i) one around 150 ºC, which was attributed to 
amide bond formation, and ii) another one around 300 ºC, which corresponded to the  degradation of 
the adsorbed organic matter. Noticeably, the peak at 150 ºC was not present for the DKP/silica 
system as no amide bond formation could occur (there are no free amine or carboxylic groups in 
this molecule). In spite of these general similari ties between AA, the case of Glu has been studied in 
more detail by Bouchoucha et al.211 because, in addition to the peak at 150 –160 ºC, another well 
defined peak at 110 –120 ºC was also detected in some conditions (see Figure 80a).   179 
 
100 200 300 400 500
temperature (oC)
-H2O-2H2O
-H2Ox 2
x 2a)
b)
Glu PyroGluPyroGluDKP
PyroGlu -PyroGlu
 
Figure  80. (a) Thermogram (DTG) of Glu on amorphous si lica. (b) Schematic representation of the 
thermal events suggested in Ref.211 
 
Experimental measurements performed with FTIR, ssNMR and ESI -MS (ElectroSpray 
Ionization -Mass Spectrometry) techniques clearly indicated that this first peak was due to an 
intramolecular lactam ring closure of G lu to yield pyroglutamic acid (PyroGlu, see Figure 80b).  The 
evidence, however, was less clear for the second peak. Thermogravimetric results indicated that this 
second step could also be associated to the loss of one water molecule per Glu. Additionally, in situ 
IR showed that the product formed had some bands attributable to the imide functions. These two 
facts led the authors to deduce that the product formed was the PyroGluDKP ( see Figure 80b),  
which was formed via cyclic condensation of two PyroGlu mol ecules with the subsequent release of 
two water molecules. ESI -MS experiments also showed the presence of a peptide constituted by 
two PyroGlu moieties; i.e., PyroGlu -PyroGlu, which also bears an imide bond (see Figure 80b).  
However, the peptide could itse lf be the result of a very quick hydrolysis of previously extant 
PyroGluDKP  upon exposure to water in ESI conditions. Irrespective of that, these results evidenced 
the capability of silica surfaces to act as activators of condensation events. In water solu tions the 
internal cyclization to give PyroGlu is known to be thermodynamically disfavored. In the absence 
of water the process becomes thermodynamically favorable but may be kinetically slow; in the form 
of bulk crystalline Glu, it does indeed occur but o nly at 197 ºC, whereas when supported on silica 
the condensation was observed to take place at 118 ºC. Therefore, the silica surface exerts a kinetic 
effect on the reaction by working as a catalyst.  
 
 
9.2 Interaction with peptides  180 
 
The works available in l iterature addressed to study the interaction of peptides with silica 
surfaces pursue common objectives (Section 3.2.7). Most of them focus on determining the binding 
forces that dictate the peptide/silica interactions; other works aim at unraveling the ami no acidic 
residues most prone to interact with silica surfaces, and just a few evaluate the behavior of peptides 
upon adsorption. In this review, some details of these works will be provided. It is worth 
underlining that a great number of works concerning the immobilization of proteins in mesoporous 
silicates are also available in literature. These works are of great interest because of their potential 
applications in the areas of biotechnology and biocatalysis. They have been recently reviewed by 
Hudson et  al.669 and therefore will not be addressed in this review.  
As far as the first group of works is concerned, a very recent study of Patwardhan et al.273 
emerges as a landmark on the chemistry of aqueous silica nanoparticle surfaces and the mechanism 
of peptide adsorption. In this  work, three types of amorphous silica nanoparticles with 15, 82 and 
450 nm diameter were synthesized and by means of base titrations and zeta potential measurements 
it was found that the acidity of the silica nanoparticles increased with the particle size . The authors 
stated that such a dependence of the acidity with the nanoparticle size was due to the adoption of a 
modified Stöber synthesis670,671 for the nanoparticle preparation. In this procedure the concentration 
of ammonia was varied to control the particle size, and higher ammonia concentration precipitated 
larger particles in such a way that more silan ol groups became ionized. T he PZC decreased  from 4.2 
to 2.4 as the size of the silica particles increased from 15 to 450 nm and by means of classical MD 
dynamics the authors estimated that between 5 –20% (corresponding to 15 –450 nm size) of silanol 
groups w ere ionized in the form of Si-O- at pH 7. Peptide binding assays with seven different 
dodecapeptides were performed using different synthetic peptides by means of zeta potential 
measurements. It was shown that peptides with higher pI values (i.e. those th at contained Lys and 
Arg residues) were attracted more strongly for those surfaces that exhibited larger surface density of 
negatively charged Si-O- groups, thus indicating electrostatic contribution to binding. This was 
also observed by Chen et al.,233 who showed that two peptides enriched with basic amino acid 
residues  had a great binding affinity to SiO 2 supports, and this is also in line with the trend observed 
by Churchill et al.105 using AA instead of peptides (see Section 9.1.3). Contribution of electrostatic 
forces in the peptide/silica interaction was also demonstrated by the  fact that at low initial 
concentration (less than 0.2 mg/l) cationic peptides (namely, those with higher pI) were 
immediately attracted by silica nanoparticles, presumably via ion pairing, whereas for non -cationic 
peptides (namely, those with lower pI) we ak or no adsorption occurred, since the electrostatic 
interaction was not favorable. However, these non -cationic peptides indeed adsorbed after 
overcoming a certain initial peptide concentration threshold value. Since these peptides contained 
polar amino a cidic residues such as serine, threonine and tyrosine (with R=CH 2OH, CH(CH 3)OH 181 
 
and PhOH, respectively), the authors interpreted that H -bonding directed the interaction of these 
peptides with silica nanoparticles. Additionally, at high concentrations, adsor ption of cationic 
peptides seemed to level off due to saturation of Si-O- sites (Langmuir adsorption, monolayer), 
whereas for non -cationic peptides the adsorption increased even after further elevating the initial 
concentration, in support of the formatio n of H -bonded peptide multilayers. The authors stated that 
these two binding mechanisms were consistent with the different initial concentrations of the two 
peptide groups needed to reach significant adsorption. That is, since H -bonds are weaker than 
elect rostatic interactions, the adsorption of cationic peptides required less peptide concentration 
than for non -cationic peptides.  
In this same work,273 classical MD simulations using polymer consistent force field 
augmented for silica (PCFF -SILICA) at T = 300 K were also carried out. Simulations addressed the 
interaction of a cationic and a non -cationic peptide on neutral and  partially ionized silica surfaces. 
Results showed that the former peptide was found within a distance < 3 Å from the superficial 
SiOH/Si -O- layer during 80% of simulation time while the non -cationic one remained separated 
from the same surface by several water layers. In the bound conformations NH 3+ moieties from N -
terminal and side chains tended to be close to surface Si-O-, thereby confirming the formation of 
ion pairs. Despite that, it was also observed that polar groups established intermittent contac ts with 
SiOH through H -bonds. Figure  81 shows snapshots of the MD that reflect these situations.  182 
 
 
 
Figure  81. Snapshots of the peptides adsorbed on silica surfaces during classical MD simulations 
(PCFF -SILICA force field, T = 300K). Interaction with a n eutral silica surface (top and middle) and 
with a negatively charged silica surface (bottom) due to the presence of SiO- surface groups. The N - 
and C -terminal have been labeled. Adapted with permission from Ref.273. Copyright 2012 American 
Chemical Society.  
 
In view of these results, the authors concluded that the major contributions to binding are 
ion pairing via electrost atic forces and H -bonds, although they were aware that less energetic ion -
dipole, dipole -dipole and van der Waals interactions must be also present, and that the balance of 
these two major contributions depends on the acidity of the silica and on the pI an d conformational 
flexibility of the peptides.  183 
 
Results obtained from classical MD simulations carried out by Nonella et al.,325 in this case 
using the CHARMM -modified force field, are also along this line. In this work the peptide model 
was the Ala -Lys-Lys-Lys-Ala sequence (AKKKA, charge of +3) and the silica surface was based 
on the edingtonite structure with some deprotonated silanol groups (charge of -19), the 
electroneutrality of the sys tem being completed by the inclusion of Cl- or Na+ ions. After several 
MD runs authors observed that the interaction occurred through direct peptide/surface and indirect 
peptide/water/surface H -bonds, which in turn were continuously formed and broken durin g the 
trajectories. Such a peptide/surface interaction variability caused the peptide to exhibit a certain 
mobility, both in terms of diffusion along the surface and of internal conformational changes, a fact 
that led the authors to interpret that the “ads orbate state” showed strong dynamical features and, 
accordingly, an ensemble of different adsorbed structures should exist. Figure  82 shows two MD 
snapshots in which the peptide interacts directly through 5 H -bonds with the surface (a) or 
indirectly bridge d by water solvent (b).  
 
a)
b)CO
N
H
Si
C
ONH
Si
 
 
Figure  82. Snapshots of the peptide/silica system during classical MD simulations in aqueous 
solvent (CHARMM -type force field, T =  300K). (a) direct H -bonds between peptide and silica; (b) 
indirect H -bonds between peptide and silica bridged by water. Only water molecules involved in H -
bonds are shown.  Redraw  with permission from data of Ref.325 Copyright 2010 Elsevier,  
  
Remarkably, it was found that direct H -bonds all adopted the Lys -NH 3+··· -OSi pattern, 
thus including a strong electrostatic component, whereas indirect H -bonds adopted either 184 
 
NH···OH···-OSi or NH···O··· HOSi, where NH can either belong to Lys -NH 3+ group, to the 
terminal NH 3+ group or to the ba ckbone NH moiety  and O or OH belong to a water molecule .  
It seems clear that electrostatic interactions between charged peptides and silica surfaces 
play a significant role in peptide binding. This adsorption driving force has been exploited by 
Jonsson an d coworkers672,673 in order to induce helical peptide structures when adsorbed on silica 
particles, as already men tioned in Section 3.2.6. Indeed, the authors beautifully showed that 
designed peptides, which were unconstructed in solution, adopted a well -defined helix structure 
upon silica adsorption due to the electrostatic interaction between the two partners (see Figure 83a).   
SiO2
SiO2unconstructed
peptidehelix
peptidea)
A
B
CD E
FG
Arg6
Arg13
Arg20
Arg27Arg3
Arg10
Arg17
Arg24Tyr1
Glu8
Glu15
Glu22Gln4
Gln11
Gln18
Gln25Gln5
Gln12
Gln19
Gln26
Ala2
Ala9
Ala16
Ala23Ala7
Ala14
Ala21
Ala28b)
 
 
Figure  83. (a) Schematic representation of the silica surface -induced helix formation. (b) Amino 
acid sequence of a peptide presented in Ref.673 that folds as an -helix in the presence of silica 
surfaces, depicted as a helical wheel, where  each point gives rise to a row of amino acids.  
 
In these works, several peptides were synthesized with the particularity that basic amino 
acidic residues such as Arg were precisely placed at strategic positions in such a way that when 
adopting an -helix structure they were positioned on the same side of the helix ( see Figure 83b ). 
Since at pH 8 –10 the basic residues and the surfaces of the silica nanoparticles exhibited net 
positive and negative charges, respectively, the electrostatic complementarity ind uced the formation 
of helical structures upon adsorption. Additionally, the addition of acidic residues such as Glu, 
which were deprotonated at these pH values, at positions that pointed away the surface when 
adopting helix structure (i.e., facing the solu tion, see Figure 83b) resulted  in a significant increase 
of the helical content of the peptide upon silica adsorption, probably due to both electrostatic 
repulsion with the surface and attraction to water solvent. Interestingly, Bolivar et al.209 have 
demonstrated that proteins that in solution exhibited helix conformations constituted by Arg 185 
 
residues,  which in turn were exposed on one side of the helix, retained the very same conformation 
upon silica surface adsorption. This was due to the large affinity between the Arg -rich helix regions 
and the surface, hence opening up a potential way to immobilize enzymes on silica surfaces, which 
usually tends to denaturation.  
Despite these findings, Manyar et al.674 observed that during the enzyme pepsin 
immobilization in SBA -15 the maximum loading was achieved when both the enzyme and the 
matrix were negatively charged. Because of these surprising results, Giussani et al.675 have recently 
presented a theoretical study to understand this behavior. The work was carried out by means of 
classical MD simulations (CHARMM22 force field) where a complete solvated pepsin with a -6 
charge interacted with a flat silica surface exhibiting negatively charge d SiO- groups in the presence 
of either Na+ and K+ cation to insure electroneutrality. Results indicated that, irrespective of the 
counter ion, solvated pepsin adhered to the surface regions where the SiO- groups were located 
because of the mediation of th e cations and solvent. It was found that the actual pepsin/silica 
interaction depended on the nature of the co -solvating cation. That is, K+ was found to coordinate 
the SiO- oxygen atom dragging the solvated pepsin on top of the negative surface, whereas N a+ 
showed more affinity towards water than SiO-, forcing water molecules that surround pepsin to 
stick via H -bonding to silanolates, thereby approaching pepsin towards the surface.  
Related to the question of which residues are more prone to interact with s ilica surfaces, 
Sarikaya and coworkers271,272,676 have reported results that provide clues to understand the 
connection between the amino acid content, the sequence and the molecular structure of peptides on 
the on e hand, and their interaction and affinity to silica on the other hand. Remarkably, this has 
been achieved by combining bioinformatics, experiments and theoretical simulations. They first 
developed a bioinformatic approach271 that allowed to identify and select available peptides  
according to their inorganic -solid binding properties (Section 3.2.6), so that a classification from 
strong to weak -binding peptides sequences was established. Interestingly, the binding properties of 
these selected peptides towards quartz experimentally measured using surface plasmon resonance 
spectroscopy very well matched those predicted by bioinformatic tools. Among the different 
selected peptides, it was found that the strong binding ones contained hydrophobic regions 
characterized by the presence of proline (Pro) along with other hydrophobic residues such as 
tryptophan (Trp) and leucine (Leu), whereas the weak -binding sequences did not. In order to 
evaluate the role of these residues in the interaction, classical MD simulations (CHARMM force 
field) of  three peptides (two strong -binders and one weak -binder) in interaction with quartz (100) 
surface were carried out.272,676 It was found that the strong -binding peptides exhibited the Pro -rich 
regions in close proximity to silica surface, and visual inspection revealed that these residues were 186 
 
buried at interstitial sites of quartz, whereas polar groups (Ser, Hi s and C -terminus carboxylate) 
were involved in H -bonds with the surface (see Figure 84a and Figure 84b ).  
a)
b)
c)
 
Figure  84. Snapshots of the peptide/silica systems during classical MD simulations in aqueous 
solvent (CHARMM -type force field, T =  300K), of the f or strong -binding peptides (a and b) and the 
weak -binding peptide (c). Water molecules have been omitted for the sake of clarity.  Adapted with 
permission from Ref.272. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.  
 
For the weak -binding peptide, it was observed t hat the interaction occurred through Val (R= 
CH(CH 3)2), Ala and Arg (see Figure 84c ), the former two residues being attracted to the 
hydrophobic quartz interstices while the Arg/quartz contact was attributed to a combination of 
electrostatic and H -bonding.  Therefore, it seems that hydrophobic regions are prone to interact with 
quartz surfaces due to the presence of hydrophobic cavities. This had already been suggested and 
shown using amino acid analogues (see above, Section 9.1.3). The authors also stated t hat the Pro -
rich region play a second role to favor the interaction. That is, analysis of internal H -bonds (namely, 
intrapeptide and peptide -water H -bonds) both in solution alone and in interaction with quartz 
revealed that the two strong -binding peptides do not change the number of internal H -bonds, while 
the weak -binding one loosens a certain number of its internal H -bonds upon adsorption. This 187 
 
suggested that the Pro -rich regions might have hindered the formation of internal H -bonds in the 
sense that thei r internal stability remained constant between the solution and contact with the 
surface, whereas for the other peptide the internal stability decreased when adsorbed due to the loss 
of internal H -bonds, rendering the peptide/silica complex globally less s table.  
According to these results, the propensity of certain residues to interact more or less 
favorably with silica surfaces, which ultimately leads to the specific recognition of a given silica 
surface by a given peptide sequence,  arises from the compl ex interplay of interactions such as 
electrostatic interactions, directional H -bonding, and hydrophobic (dispersive) forces. However, a 
very recent work of Schneider et al.308 highlighted that the peptide -sequence/silica surface 
recognition may also be helped by the structuring of the water solvent when in contact with the 
silica surface features; that is, amino acid side chains are capable to “sense” the mole cular solvent 
structure, and in particular the local solvent density variations, at the solid/liquid interface with 
atomic scale precision, similarly to the lock -and-key recognition mechanism typical in biological 
systems. The authors performed several cla ssical MD simulations (AMBER force field) for the 
adsorption of Arg -Lys-Leu-Pro-Asp-Ala (AKLPDA) onto an oxidized silicon surface that contained 
SiOH and SiO- surface groups. Results indicated that the Arg and Lys residues remained close to 
the surface dur ing most of the simulation time (see Figure 85a ), the computed adsorption free 
energy being -15 and -7 kJ mol-1 for Arg and Lys, respectively.  188 
 
a)
0 5 10
z [Å]0.00.10.01.02.03.0G(z)[eV] (z)[g/cm3] b)
c)
 
Figure  85. (a) Snapshots of the peptide/oxidized silicon surface system during classical MD 
simulations in aq ueous solvent (AMBER force field, T =  300K). Arginine (R) and lysine (K) 
residues have been labeled. (b) Density profile of water oxygen on the oxidized silicon surface. (c) 
Free energy profile of a spherical hydrophobic solute on the oxidized silicon surf ace. Grey regions 
indicate that positions with low water density on the surface match with maxima of G(z). Adapted 
with permission from Ref.308. Copyright 2 012 American Chemical Society.  
 
The authors also analyzed the water structuring during the simulations by examining the 
density profiles of water oxygen atoms along the direction normal to the surfaces, and they 
observed the presence of a first broad water  layer as well as patches of reduced water density (see 
Figure 85b).  The most interesting point was that the aliphatic parts of the side chains spread almost 
flat within regions of low water density while the charged moieties occupied high -density position s 
(namely, the first broad water layer) seeking the proximity of SiOH and SiO- to establish H -bonds. 
This was confirmed by computing the free energy profile of a spherical hydrophobic solute from the 
surface to the bulk water along the normal direction of the surface ( G(z)), in which the maximal 
values of G(z) were correlated with those positions with low water density ( see Figure 85c ). These 
findings pointed out that the local solvent density variations near heterogeneous rough surfaces, as 189 
 
the silica on es, may be sensed by the side chains in a way that bears many features characteristic of 
the specific recognition in biomolecular aggregates. In this particular study, the alternation between 
hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues optimized the matching with  the solvent density oscillations.   
Finally the experimental works carried out by Somorjai and coworkers235,677 and a lready 
mentioned in Section 3.2.6 are also of interest because they show the evolution of peptides once 
they are adsorbed on silica surfaces. In these works the adsorption of peptides with XY composition 
(X hydrophobic and Y cationic) on hydrophilic silica  were studied in situ. QCM measurements 
indicated that all peptides tested adsorbed onto silica. However, the most interesting peptide was the 
14-AA containing Leu (L) and Lys (K) (sequence of Ac -LKKLLKLLKKLLKL -NH 2) since SFG 
results indicated that it was the only peptide that, when adsorbed on silica, showed an NH stretching 
band (3300 cm-1) due to an amide peptide and the absence of CH stretching modes in the spectrum, 
suggesting a different orientational distribution of the peptide at the solid/water int erface compared 
to that in solution. For this peptide the results obtained by AFM are also of interest, since the 
authors monitored the changes of the adsorbed peptide on the silica with time of adsorption. In 
general (see Figure  86, left column), it was o bserved that the peptide underwent a gradual 
morphological transition on silica from small spherical islands ( 200 nm wide) to much larger 
laterally aggregated domains (up to 1.5 m) between t < 5 min to > 30 min. Despite that, the 
authors observed that th e lateral expansion was not accompanied by an incremental growth in 
feature height, since topographic heights of 2.5 and 5.0 nm remained constant (see Figure  86, right 
column). Interestingly, QCM results indicated that adsorption took place in a multistep fashion. 
These data, along with AFM observations, suggested that the process involved an initial rapid 
adsorption on top of several nucleation sites on the surface, followed by subsequent slower 
reorganization, which included island growth, and spreading o ver silica, to form large laterally 
coalesced domains.  
 190 
 
a)
b)
c)
 
Figure  86. AFM topographical features of a peptide based on the Leu and Lys residues in 
interaction with silica imaged at < 5 min (a), 5 –10 min (b) and > 30 min (c). In the right column it is 
observed that the topographic heights do not dramatically change with adsorption time.  Adapted 
with permission from Ref.235. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.  
  
9.3 Interaction with Nucleic acid -related biomolecules   
Understanding the adsorption of nucleic -acid derivatives (i.e., nucleobases, base -pairs, DNA 
and RNA sequences, et c.) to solid surfaces has important applications in DNA microarrays,678-680 
gene therapy,681,682 DNA -based devices ,683,684 high quality DNA purification by chromatographic 
techniques,685,686 and DNA hybridization.687,688 The initial stage of biofilm formation is facilitated 
by the attachment of extracellular DNA on the s ubstrate surface689 so that a thorough understanding 
of DNA adsorption to surfaces is of great relevance to control the formation of bacterial biofilms. 
Additi onally, it has been reported690 that adsorbed extracellular DNA on mineral surfaces may 
retain its ability to transform competent microorganisms (namely, microorganism s adapted for 
easier receiving of heterogeneous DNA) via horizontal gene transfer, thus giving rise to microbial 
diversity. In this context, the interaction with nucleic -acid derivatives becomes of particular 
relevance due to the capability of silica nanop articles, especially those of mesoporous silica, to load 
and delivery genetic material, a fundamental process in gene therapy.691 Indeed, th e prospect of 
gene therapy and genetic engineering as a new medical technique implies transferring custom 
genetic material into cellular environments to correct genetic diseases via loading and transport of 
the genetic material on carrier bodies. The most common and simplest method of gene delivery is 191 
 
the viral vector system,692 in which th e genetic material is carried into nonpathogenic viruses. 
However, the risks involved in the expression of the viral genetic code and its nonspecificity have 
promoted the development of synthetic systems for these purposes, among which mesoporous silica 
nanoparticles are attractive candidates due to their ability to confine genetic material into their 
porous space, their high chemical resistance to microbial attack, low toxicity, thermal stability and 
ease of modifications.  
Organizing this section adopting  the “bottom up” scheme, in terms of size and complexity of 
the systems (similarly to what has been done for amino acids and peptides), has shown that much 
less data are available in the literature compared to AA and peptides. Indeed, to the best of our 
knowledge, only one work dealing with single nucleobase interacting with bare silica surfaces has 
been reported, while works involving functionalized silica surfaces can be found in the literature 
due to the relevance of these modified phases in chromatograp hy. Even if we include modified 
silicas, all the works available are based on experimental measurements, while no computational 
studies have been found.  
In this single work devoted to nucleobase/silica interactions, Plekan et al.258 studied the 
adsorption of adenine on SiO 2 by means of photoemission and soft X -ray photoabsorption.  The 
photoemission spectra was found to be quite similar to that of adenine multilayer but some striking 
differences were observed, which led to propose that adenine chemisorption had occurred.  
As regards the polymeric nucleic acids, clear evidences of the fact that mesoporous silica 
can load DNA sequences into the pores were provided by Solberg et al.693 In this work, experiments 
of X -ray diffraction, nitrogen physisorption, UV -visible spectroscopy and fluorescence confocal 
microscopy performed before and after pore filling were used to demonstrate th at double -stranded 
linear DNA sequences were certainly taken up into the pores of acid -prepared mesoporous silica 
(APMS). Powder XRD patterns (see Figure 87a)  indicated that APMS alone adsorbed certain 
amount of DNA.  192 
 
Intensitya)
2/ degrees1 4 7 10
b)
2 m
 
 
Figure  87. (a) Powder XRD patterns  before (dashed -line) and after (solid line) DNA filling. (b) 
Fluorescence confocal scanning laser microscopy image of APMS after DNA adsorption. Adapted 
with permission from Ref.693. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.  
 
The presence of a single broad diffraction peak of the parent material alone (dashed -line peak) is 
typic al of ordered mesoporous silica due to the amorphous nature of the walls, while the decrease in 
intensity (solid -line peak) was claimed to be indicative of the presence of a guest molecule inside 
the pores.694 Clearer evidences of this is provided by the fluorescence confocal scanning laser 
microscopy images (see Figure 87b),  which also indicated DNA penetration of the bulk of the 
micrometric particles.  
This view that DNA can be loaded within the p ores of mesoporous silica nanoparticles has 
been recently strengthened by Li et al.695,696 In these two works, th e adsorption behavior of a short 
salmon DNA in the presence of either a mesoporous silica nanoparticle or a non -mesoporous silica 193 
 
nanoparticle was compared. DNA adsorption isotherms produced a typical Langmuir shape ( see 
Figure 88 ) suggesting that monolaye r adsorption at the DNA/silica interface occurred, but 
differences on the maximum adsorption capacity between the two materials were detected; i.e., 
121.6 and 48.3 mg DNA/mg nanoparticle for mesoporous and non -porous silica nanoparticles, 
respectively.  
0 100 200 30001020304050
0 100 200 300020406080100120
Equilibrium Concentration (g/mL)Adsorbed DNA ( mg/g)a)
b)
 
Figure  88. Ascending adsorption isotherms measured for salmon DNA with non -porous (a) and 
mesoporous (b) silica nanoparticles.  Reprinted with permission from Ref.696. Copyright 2012 
American Chemical Society.  
 
The most remarkable finding of these works was that two desorption events were observed: 
one at T = 0.5 ºC, in which a very small fraction of adsorbed DNA w as released and a second one at 
T = 37 ºC, in which a large amount of adsorbed DNA was released. Supported by dynamic light 
scattering experiments, the authors interpreted that the first DNA desorption was due to the release 
of DNA sequences adsorbed on th e external surfaces of the mesoporous silica particles, whereas the 
second one corresponded to DNA located within the pores.     
Thus, it seems clear that DNA indeed adsorbs on pure silica surfaces. However, an 
interesting question arises: considering that  at physiological pH, both silica surfaces and DNA 
sequences have a net negative charge because of the presence of SiO- and phosphate groups, 
respectively, what are the driving forces for DNA adsorption? The same question was formulated 
by several authors.690,696-699 Summarizing the results of these different works , one may conclude 
that the energetic contributions to DNA interaction with a silica surface can be categorized into 194 
 
three parts: i) the electrostatic effect (repulsive); ii) the dehydration effect; iii) DNA/silica H -
bonding. As regards point i), it was ob served that an increase of the salt concentration (namely, the 
ionic strength) led to an increase of adsorption, which was more pronounced for divalent than for 
monovalent cations. The authors interpreted that the increase of salt concentration shielded to  a 
greater extent the negative charges on DNA and silica surfaces, thus reducing the electrostatic 
repulsion. Dehydration effects were also considered as a binding mechanism based on the fact that 
an increase in concentration of a chaotropic salt (that is,  a salt that tends to disrupt the structure of 
macromolecules and that can intensively capture free water molecules) also yielded an increase in 
adsorption.696,697 This was explained by considering that the reaction of DNA adsorption actually 
involves the release of water: DNA(hydrated) + silica(hydrated) + conterions   DNA/silica + 
water. The formation of H -bonds between DNA and silica was confirmed by two findings. The first 
one was that a pH decrease resulted in an increase of adsorption, which led the authors to interprete 
that at low pH some of the phosphate groups  became protonated, hence enabling H -bonding . The 
second evidence was that isothermal titration calorimetry for DNA injected into binding solution 
with silica indicated that its adsorption was exothermic.696 The overall picture for the adsorption 
mechanism of DNA -derivatives onto silica must thus consider the presence of cations to shield the 
unfavorable electrostatic interactions between the negative charge s present in silica and DNA, as 
well as the dehydration effects and the formation of intermolecular H -bonds.   
An interesting point concerning DNA/silica interactions is the conformation changes 
undergone by DNA due to adsorption. This was addressed by Sch oles et al.,700 who explored, by 
means of resonance energy transfer -based techniques, the conformation changes occurred within the 
helical structure of a well -defined oligonucleotide upon si lica adsorption from aqueous solution. 
Results obtained via evanescent wave -induced time -resolved Förster resonance energy -transfer 
(EW -TRFRET) measurements, showed a dependence of the nucleotide conformational state on the 
electrolyte concentration. That is, at high electrolyte concentrations, an increase in the flexibility of 
the oligonucleotide was observed, which led to an unwinding of the helix and to a separation of the 
two strands, allowing the oligonucleotide to bind directly to the silica surfaces.  In contrast, at low 
electrolyte concentrations, the rigidity of the oligonucletide prevented an unwinding of the double 
helix upon adsorption, which resulted in only small segments directly contacting with silica. These 
two situations are depicted in Figure 89.  195 
 
nucleotide pair in bulk solution
adsorption in 1M 
additional electrolyteadsorption in 0.01M 
additional electrolytesilica
substrate
 
 
Figure  89. Schematic representation of the conformational changes of oligonucleotides upon silica 
adsorption depending in the electrolyte concentration . Reprinted with permission from R ef.700. 
Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.  
 
9.4 Interaction with drugs and natural products  
A thorough characterization of the interface between silica surfaces and drugs or natural 
products is of prime relevance due to the growing interest i n the field of drug delivery systems. 
Indeed, ordered mesoporous materials such as the ones based on silica (e.g., MCM -41, SBA -15) 
can be loaded with different organic molecules that would be released afterwards in a controlled 
fashion inside a living body . This potential route for drug intake is motivated by the lack of long -
term efficiency for certain therapies when the drug is administrated orally or via injection,  or their 
negative effects when conventionally administered. Because of the  their lack of t oxicity, their 
furtivity (they easily become invisible to the immune system) and porosity, silica -based ordered 
mesoporous materials have shown to be excellent candidates to act as drug delivery systems, since 
they are able to incorporate high dosages of d rugs into the mesopores.17 Moreover, the sil anol-
containing walls can be functionalized allowing a better control over drug release.701 In the last ten 
years, great efforts have been devoted to the confinement and storing of drugs in mesoporous 
silicas, as well as to the kinetics of the drug release. Along this line works  devoted to several 
drug/mesoporous silica systems are available in literature: ibuprofen in MCM -41,17,702 MCM -48703 
and SBA -15,702 gentamicin in SBA -15,704 erythromycin in MCM -41,705 MCM -48703 and SBA -
15,705 alendronate in SBA -15,706 amoxicillin in SBA -15.707 Moreover, Vallet -Regí and coworkers 
have recently authored two excellent reviews focused on this topic.15,708 For conciseness, in this  
section we will focus on studies that aim to provide a detailed picture at a molecular scale (either 
with spectroscopic methods or via theoretical calculations) of the actual drug/silica interface. A 
proper understanding on the drug/silica interactions is  fundamental to understand the 
loading/delivery capability of a given system, since this ultimately depends on the chemical nature 
of the functionalities of the two partners.   196 
 
Within the present context, it is worth mentioning the works of Azaïs et al.709,710 who 
studied, by means of sophisticated ss -NMR techniques, the behavior of ibuprofen (IB)709 and 
benzoic acid (BA)710 when encapsulated within different MCM -41 silica matrices, which dif fered 
by the pore diameters (for IB, 35 and 116 Å, hereafter referred as MCM -4135 and MCM -41116, 
respectively; for BA, 30 and 100 Å, hereafter referred as MCM -4130 and MCM -41100, respectively). 
The 1H MAS NMR spectra at ambient temperature of IB and BA wer e recorded both in their 
crystalline bulk forms and when confined in the MCM -41 matrices (shown in Figure 90a  and Figure 
90b).   
20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10bulk
MCM -4135phenylalkylCOOH
SiOHbulk
MCM -4130COOH
SiOHphenyl
20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10
a) b)
(ppm) (ppm)
IB BA
bulkMCM -41116MCM -4135
c)
1700 1780 1860 1620
(cm-1)-100 -80 -60 -40 -20
T (0C)d)Heat flow
(W g-1)
-0.6-0.4-0.2
 
 
Figure  90. Recorded spectra for confined ibuprofen (IB) and benzoic acid (BA ). (a) and (b): 1H 
MAS NMR spectra of  IB and BA , respectively, in their bulk states and in MCM -41 matrices; (c): 
FTIR spectra of IB in the (C=O) region in its bulk state and in MCM -41 matrices; (d): DSC 
measurements of BA within MCM -41. Adapted with permission from Ref.709,710. Copyright 2006, 
2010 American Chemical Society.  
 197 
 
Contrarily to the bulk crystalline forms, the spectra for the confined molecules were found to be 
extremely sharp, a fact which confirmed the high mobility behavior of IB and BA within the pores,  
in fact the NMR spectra look more like liquid phase than solid -phase. For both molecules the 
signals of the protons corresponding to alkyl an d phenyl groups as well as of SiOH were 
unambiguously assigned (labeled in Figure 90a  and Figure 90b).  The proton signals coming from 
the COOH group of IB and BA were not visible, contrarily to the bulk forms, whereas they 
appeared in the spectra recorded at low temperatures. These findings suggested that at ambient 
temperature the proton of the COOH groups was in fast exchange with other environmental protons, 
namely SiOH and/or H 2O. Additional evidences for the involvement of the COOH group in the 
interac tion with the silica walls were provided by FTIR measurements (only for IB, see Figure 90c),  
which observed an important bathochromic shift of the (C=O) (from 1721 to 1709 cm-1). 
Measurements of apparent transverse relaxation times T 2’(1H) were carried ou t through solid echo 
sequence experiments using monoexponential time decay in order to determine the mobility of IB 
and BA within the pores (the higher the mobility, the longer the T 2’(1H) value). Unusually long 
values were obtained (2.4 -16.6 and 14.7 -20.2 ms for IB and BA, respectively) compared to 
crystalline forms (for bulk BA T 2’(1H)  150 s) although shorter compared to, for instance, BA in 
CDCl 3 (around 600 – 700 ms), suggesting a viscous (i.e. liquid -like) behavior of the confined 
molecules. For bot h IB and BA, 1H MAS NMR experiments indicated that a liquid -solid phase 
transition took place when decreasing the temperature (at -50 and -55 ºC, respectively), which 
intriguingly occurred at significantly lower temperatures than respective bulk melting po ints (76 
and 125 ºC, respectively). In order to get a deeper insight onto this phase transition, differential 
scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements were carried out since it allows elucidating the physical 
state of confined molecules. The occurrence of p hase transitions permits differentiation of glassy 
from crystalline states, while absence is indicative of molecular deposition onto the surfaces. DSC 
measurements (shown in Figure 90d ) for BA in MCM -4130 clearly evidenced a variation of the heat 
flow at -55 ºC, which was not detected on unloaded MCM -4130 and on pure BA. Such depression of 
the phase transition temperatures has been reported in literature to be characteristic of confined 
molecules in porous materials.711-716 Remarkably, IB solidified in a glassy state and in a crystalline 
form when confined  in MCM -4135 and MCM -41116, respectively. Authors attributed these two 
radically different behaviors to steric effects; that is, crystalline ibuprofen is a dimer with a total 
length of  26 Å so that pores of 116 Å diameters were large enough to allow nucl eation of 
crystallites, whereas pores of 35 Å diameters, even if the dimer fitted inside, were exceedingly 
constrained, thus inducing a vitrification process. In contrast, BA solidified in a glassy state when 
confined in both MCM -41 silicas (no entrapped c rystallites of BA were observed), a fact which led 198 
 
the authors to suggest that the minimal critical size needed for crystallization of BA in MCM -41 
might be superior to 100 Å.  
The studies of Mellaerts et al.717,718 are focused on investigating the loading and the 
molecular interactions of the itr aconazole (ITR) drug into SBA -15 using a combination of DSC, 
XPS, DRS UV -vis, FTIR and 1H MAS NMR spectroscopic techniques. DSC measurements allowed 
the authors to elucidate the phase transition of ITR occurring within the SBA -15 pores. Bulk 
crystalline IT R melts at 168 ºC while it undergoes a glass transition at 60 ºC. These phase 
transitions were also observed (see Figure  91a) for ITR within the pores, which revealed the 
formation of an ITR bulk phase.  
ITR
60
T (0C)30 90 120 150 180a)
SBA-15ITR/SBA -15Heat flow (dH/dt)
200 250 300 350 400 450 500
(nm)b)
ITR/SBA -15
glassycrystalline
1700 c)
1680
1800 1750 1700 1650 1600
(cm-1)ITR
ITR/SBA -153750 3630
ITR
ITR/SBA -15d)
4000 3800 3600 3400 3200
(cm-1)3000
16 0 4 8 12 -4 14 10 6 2 -2 -6
(ppm)e)
4.5
1.75
1.05.5 7.25.51.75
2.8
 
 199 
 
Figure 91. Recorded spectra for confined itracon azole (ITR ). (a) DSC measurements of pure SBA -
15 and loaded with ITR; (b) DRS -UV spectra of crystalline and glassy ITR, and in SBA -15; (c) and 
(d): FTIR spectra of free ITR and in SBA -15 in the C=O and OH stretching regions, respectively; 
(e): 1H MAS NMR s pectra of confined ITR in SBA -15 (solid line and dashed -line spectra belong to 
single pulse excitation and spin echo spectra, respectively).  Adapted with permission from 
Ref.717,718. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society and 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.  
 
XPS techniques allowed determining that ITR was deposited as a film or layer -wise along 
the p ore walls. In order to preliminary define the molecular environment of the confined ITR a set 
of DRS UV -vis experiments were performed. Figure 91b  shows the recorded spectra for glassy, 
crystalline and confined ITR. The band at 320 nm (also present in the pure bulk forms) and the 
shoulder between 350 –400 nm revealed an aggregation of ITR molecules. Additionally, the band 
featured at 200 –245 nm, according to the authors, was indicative of the contact of glassy ITR 
particles with the silica carrier.   In orde r to have a deeper insight onto the actual contact between 
ITR and SBA -15, FTIR and 1H MAS NMR measurements were also carried out. Concerning FTIR, 
it was observed that in the carbonyl stretching region ( see Figure 91c ) the band at 1700 cm-1 of the 
isolate d ITR underwent a bathochromic shift to 1680 cm-1 upon adsorption, indicating a H -bonding 
between the C=O and the SiOH groups. Noticeably, similar IR shifts were also observed by Qu et 
al. for Captopril confined in the MCM -41 pores.719 Consistently, the absorption bands of isolated 
SBA -15 at 3750 and 3630 cm-1 due to isolated and H -bonded silanol groups, respectively, became 
red-shifted in the ITR/SBA -15 system (see Figure 91d ). However, according to the authors, such 
shifts were not only caused by the interaction with the C=O group but also by  the interaction with 
the O ether and t he N piperazine atoms, since significant spectral shifts in the CH stretching region 
of the neighboring ether and piperazine groups were also detected. Concerning 1H MAS NMR 
(spectra shown in Figure 91e ), the broad signals at 4.5 and 7.2 ppm were assigned to aliphatic and 
aromatic protons of ITR. The sharp signal at 1.75 ppm was due to protons of isolated SiOH, while 
the signal around 1 ppm to silanolic hydroxyl protons but with different acid strength and/or 
location to the isolated ones. The authors highl ighted the considerable intensity of the 1.75 ppm 
signal, despite the high ITR loading and the ITR/SiOH contact evidenced by FTIR. Due to that, 
authors interpreted that large part of the SiOH groups did not find a binding partner in the ITR 
monolayer due t o the inaccessibility of the bulky adsorbed ITR molecules, probably because of the 
roughness of the SBA -15 walls. The authors assigned the signal at 5.5 ppm to H -bonded silanols 
which were not bonded to H 2O molecules (the SiOH···H 2O bonding gave rise the s ignal at 2.8 
ppm due to the chemical exchange process between the chemically equivalent protons720), in 
particular to the interactions with adsorbed ITR. Since SiOH···H 2O clustering was also observed, 
the picture the authors proposed was ITR in contact with the SBA -15 surfaces with some H 2O 
molecules positioned between the two partners.  200 
 
As far as theoretical works on this subject are concerned, to the best of our knowledge, only 
one theoretical work focused on the interaction of drugs with silica surfaces has been published so 
far. This work721 addresses the adsorption of aspirin (ASP) on a periodic model of the fully 
hydroxylated (001) α -quartz surface, using the PBE density functional method and a linear 
combination of numerical atomic orbitals as implemented in the SIESTA code. The most stable 
adsorbed geometry found by the authors is shown in Figure  92.  
ASP
C
HO
Si
Eads= -107.11.29 1.59
1.48
 
Figure  92. Structure of aspir in (ASP) and the optimized most stable structure of the ASP adsorbed 
on the (001) -quartz surface in gas -phase at the PBE level . The computed adsorption energies 
(Eads, in kJ mol-1) is also reported. Bond distances in Å.  Drawn  from  data of  Ref.721  
 
The interaction between ASP and the surface was found to be dictated by three H -bonds. In 
two of them two surf ace SiOH groups acted as donor H -bonding groups, the C=O groups of ASP 
being the acceptor, while the third H -bond involved the proton of the COOH group and the O atom 
of another SiOH group. As for Gly interacting with the same surface (see Section 9.1.1.1 and Figure 
65b), the H -bonding network exhibited by the pristine α -quartz surface was broken in order to form 
the ASP/silica adduct, suggesting a competition between the SiOH···ASP and SiOH···SiOH H -
bond interactions. The adsorption energy was calculated t o be -107 kJ mol-1, similar to the values 
obtained for some amino acids.  201 
 
Concerning theoretical works on the interaction of natural products with silica surfaces, 
several works devoted to the adsorption of benzenediol compounds are available in the literat ure, in 
particular for catechol (1,2 -benzendiol)722,723 and hydroquinone (1,4 -benzendiol).426 Small amounts 
of catechol occur naturally in fruits, vegetables and in some mushrooms. Moreover, the catechol 
moiety is present in proteins of marine mussels, which have an unusual high content of 3,4 -
dihydroxy -L-phenylalanine (the catechol functionality). These residues have been suggested to be 
the responsible for the strong adhesion of mussels in wet surfaces such  as mineral oxides. 
Hydroquinone may be found as an active toxin in the agaricus  mushrooms family and is one of the 
primary reagents in the defensive glands of bombardier beetles.  
Mian et al.722 have theoretically studied, at the PBE level, the gas -phase adsorption of 
catechol onto periodic models of the (001) α -cristobalite and (111) -cristobalite surfaces, which 
only present geminal and isolated SiOH groups, respectively. The most stable adduct s found are 
shown in Figure  93.  
C
HOH
SiOHa)
b)
C
H
O
H
SiOHEC
ads= -59.2
EC
ads= -48.7O
O
 
 202 
 
Figure  93. Optimized most stable structures of the catechol adsorbed on the (001) -cristobalite (a) 
(111) -cristobalite surfaces in gas -phase at the PBE level . The computed BSSE -corrected 
adsorption energies ( EC
ads, in kJ mol-1) are also reported.  Draw from data of Ref.722 
 
On (001) α -cristobalite, catechol forms four H -bonds with the geminal SiOH groups, the OH 
catechol functions acting both as donor and acc eptor H -bonding groups (see Figure 93a ). Once 
again these H -bonds were formed at the expenses of partial destruction of the H -bonding network of 
the pristine surface. Catechol on (111) -cristobalite was found to form three H -bonds (see Figure 
93b), in whi ch one catechol OH acts as H -bond acceptor solely whereas the ot her one acts both as 
H-bond donor and acceptor. Consistently with the number of H -bonds formed, the BSSE -corrected 
adsorption energies ( EC
ads) for catechol on the (001) α -cristobalite and (11 1) -cristobalite 
surfaces were computed to be -59 and -49 kJ mol-1, respectively. Rimola et al.426 have studied the 
gas-phase adsorption of hydroquinone on periodic surface models based on the sanidine feldspar 
framework with hydrophobic and hydrophilic surface features at the B3LYP -D level. The most 
stable structures found considering low surface loa ding (i.e., with no lateral interactions between 
adsorbed molecules belonging to adjacent unit cells) are shown in Figure  94.  
a)
b)Ec
ads= -42.3
Ec
ads= -84.1C
OHOH
Si2.52 3.91 2.45
C
OHOH
Si1.762.77O
 
Figure  94. Optimized most stable structures of the hydroquinone adsorbed on models of 
hydrophobic (a) and hydrophilic (b) sili ca surfaces based on the sanidine feldspar framework at the 
B3LYP -D level . The computed BSSE -corrected adsorption energies ( EC
ads, in kJ mol-1) are also 
reported. Bond distances in Å. Drawn from data of  Ref.426 
 203 
 
Hydroquinone in interaction with the hydrophobic surface shows weak H -bonds between the 
hydroquinone OH functionalities and the O atoms of si loxane groups (see Figure 94a).  The 
computed EC
ads value at B3LYP -D is -42 kJ mol-1. The role of dispersive forces in the adsorption 
was found to be crucial since EC
ads computed at the pure B3LYP level was -2 kJ mol-1. In the most 
stable adduct found for  hydroquinone interacting with the hydrophilic surface (see Figure 94b),  only 
one of the hydroquinone OH groups was engaged in H -bonds with the surface. Interestingly, the 
SiOH group that interacts with hydroquinone is the one that exhibits the largest aci dity among the 
different SiOH groups available in the unit cell, as indicated by the potential electrostatic maps of 
the naked surface. The EC
ads was computed to be -84 kJ mol-1 at B3LYP -D level , twice more 
negative than for  hydroquinone adsorbed on the h ydrophobic surface . Remarkably, although the 
adduct was significantly H -bonded, dispersion also played a major role since the computed EC
ads 
value at pure B3LYP was only -30 kJ mol-1. 
As noted, these works dealt with the adsorption of benzenediol compound s under strict gas -
phase conditions, so that no effects from the bulk water were accounted for. Aware of this 
limitation, Mian et al.,723 in a subsequent work, studied catechol adsorption onto the (001) α -
cristobalite surface model in the presence of 25 explicit water molecules and ran a set of static 
calculations and ab initio MD simulations at the PBE level. The static calculations were u sed to 
proceed with a progressive microsolvation of the catechol/silica interface (i.e., progressive addition 
of water molecules arising from the wet environment) in a similar fashion to what has been already 
reported in the literature.724 By means of these calculations, the authors determined that the more 
water  molecules at the interface bridging catechol and silica, the more unstable the system was, 
suggesting that catechol and the silica surface preferred to establish direct contact. In order to 
further confirm this finding, ab initio MD simulations were carri ed out, results showing that, 
starting from a configuration in which water molecules were fully occupying the catechol/silica 
interface region, after 10 ps of MD evolution, direct interactions between catechol and the surface 
were already established (see see Figure  95).  204 
 
C
SiO
H
O
10 psHOH
C
SiO
OH
OHH
 
 
Figure 95 . Initial configuration (top) and snapshot taken after 10 ps of evolution (bottom) of an ab 
initio MD simulations (PBE level) for catechol adsorption on the (001) -cristobalite surface with 
25 explicit waters. Drawn from data  of Ref.723 
 
 
10. Summary  and perspectives  
 Hopefully this review has highlighted the complexity and subtleties of silica in its crystalline 
and amorphous forms already as a bare material. The rather subtle nature of the different 
functionalities present at the silica surface is discussed in Section 2 and their characterization by 
experimental techniques reviewed in Section 3. In essence, for silica exposed to atmospheric 
moisture the dominant surface features are silanol (SiOH) groups and siloxane bridges  (Si-O-Si), 
the relative ratio between them being dictated by the thermal history suffered by the silica sample. 
Siloxanes are rather unreactive unless highly strained, but silanols show diverse types of reactivity. 205 
 
They are weakly acidic and can be deprot onated in the presence of a solution. They readily engage 
in H-bonding, either between themselves or with Lewis basic molecules from their environment. 
Further structural distinctions can be made that have consequences on silanols reactivity. First, on 
the basis of bond connectivity, geminal silanols Q2 are different from terminal ones, Q3. Some 
experimental data suggest that the acidity of these two types of silanols may be different but, in 
opposition, quantum mechanical calculations reveal that, when iso lated, Q2 and Q3 sites have almost 
the same acidity. In other words, it is difficult to conceive differences in reactivity with respect to 
the interaction of biolomolecules to Q2 sites compared to Q3 ones and , for instance , there is no 
definite indication that a Q2 rich surface could be connected to toxicity of crystalline silica. Second, 
on the basis of spatial proximity, silanols that are close enough to be associated by H -bonding 
exhibit a different reactivity from isolated ones. The terminal SiOH group belonging to a chain of 
mutually H -bonded SiOH groups is much more acidic than isolated Q3 or Q2 groups. The acidity is 
modulated by the H -bond strength which, in turn, results from the topology and chain length of the 
interacting SiOH . This is perhaps the  real reason why in some cases the presence of Q2 which 
induce a local increase of silanol density, has been put in relation with a specific reactivity.  On 
surfaces derived from crystalline silica polymorphs the H -bond cooperativity extends to infinity, 
whereas for amorphous silica surfaces only short chains are possible due to the uneven distribution 
of the OH groups.  This is, in our opinion, the reason which bring s about the existence of two acidic 
sites on amorphous silica surfaces (pKa=8.5 and 4.5, re spectively) as resulted from experimental 
measurements: the first acidity would be associated to isolated silanol species (Q2 or Q3), the second 
one being due to the terminal silanols of H -bonded chains.  Longer -range distinctions may be 
significant but thi s is still hypothetical. As regards to siloxanes, it is important to know what kind of 
(-Si-O-)n rings (also called SnR) they form. Experimental data are not precise so far, but it is 
estimated that S4R, and smaller rings are unstable. Two -silicon rings, S 2R or (SiO) 2, may be 
present in samples treated at high T as a minor surface feature, as their concentration is typically 
about one order of magnitude smaller than that of isolated SiOH.   
Through these surface functionalities silica interacts with adsorbe d (bio)molecules and 
ultimately, with living organisms. The nature of the sites implies that H -bonds (with the SiOH) and 
dispersive interactions (with Si -O-Si) are the key forces behind localized adsorption of 
(bio)molecules while chemical reactions involv ing these groups are less common. Therefore, 
experimental methods capable to track the changes in the SiOH spectroscopic features which are 
sensitive to H -bonding interactions are particularly useful (infrared, Raman and NMR). 
Unfortunately, the amorphous nature of most silica materials adopted in technological applications 
renders the elucidation of the atomic details difficult because diffraction -based techniques, such as 
LEED and electron diffraction microscopy, are not applicable. Therefore, although am orphous 206 
 
silicas have been studied experimentally for at least 50 years, progress in site identification has been 
excedingly slow and many features of the silica surfaces are still debated. This is also why SiO 2 
surface chemistry is a field where the contri bution of theoretical chemistry methods has always 
been highly valued. Only the advent of powerful computers, together with highly efficient 
programs, allowed to overcome the intrinsic limits of experimental techniques, as the primary 
objective of computer  modeling is to provide atomistic details of the system under investigation.   
Strategies to efficiently model silica surfaces have been covered in Section 4 and the 
computational methods apt to describe with different level of accuracy their physico -chemi cal 
features and the adsorption of (bio)molecules have been briefly reviewed in Section 5. Clearly, 
techniques based on solving the electronic Schrödinger equation (either based on the wave function 
or the electron density) can be adopted if high accuracy and generality are sought, provided that 
density functional methods based on standard exchange -correlation functionals are supplemented 
with dispersion interaction correction. While these methods are, in principle, the best approach one 
can use, the comple xity of the systems of interest (size, amorphous nature, role of water, etc.) and 
the need to account for temperature effect by molecular dynamics simulations, forces adopting more 
approximated methods based on classical force fields in a molecular mechani cs approach.  
Section 6 and 7 provide an overview of the properties of bare silica surfaces determined by 
the above computational methods. In general, we realize that there is no specific force field capable 
to “accurately” mimic all the features of both b ulk and surfaces of silica. The best attempt to date is 
FFSiOH467 which is definitely capable to reproduce structure, dynamic properties and H -bond 
features of silica based materials, not restricted to dense silica ones. Much work needs, however, to 
be done to extend this promising force field toward the interaction with molecules, water being the 
most urgent one.  Force fields were proved essential to allow for  a multiscale approach, using a 
specific method according to a given system size, in order to arrive to a number of definite and 
realistic models of the amorphous silica surface, as described in Section 7. The complexity of the 
possible cases of interest wh en (bio)molecules interact with silica surfaces has been divided in 
logical pieces of increasing complexity, namely the case of H 2O adsorption (Section 8), as water is 
the most ubiquitous molecule in a biological environment, followed by the cases of monom ers 
(mainly amino acids), and then of the corresponding polymers, peptides and nucleic acid related 
biomolecules (Section 9). The adsorption of other molecules, which are not rigorously 
biomolecules, has also been addressed in Section 9, as their behaviors  mimic that of residues to be 
found in real proteins . From the methodological point of view, only methods capable to properly 
handle relatively weak intermolecular interactions should be adopted. As the interaction of 
biomolecules with silica surfaces is d riven by H -bond and dispersion forces, this excludes DFT 
methods based on standard GGA functionals as they completely miss the dispersion component of 207 
 
the interaction. Also, care should be exterted when choosing a specific functional as those based on 
Perdew formulation of the exchange (PBE, PW91) tend to give too long OH bond  length . 
Functionals based on the Becke formulation of the exchange (BLYP, BP86) or even hybrid ones 
(B3LYP) when coupled to empirical corrections to recover dispersion interactions , as suggested 
recently , have been shown to provide a more balanced behaviour. As a perspective, semiempirical 
methods based on the new PM7 method which includes  H -bond and dispersion corrections, appear 
to be very promising. As semiempirical methods favoura bly scales with the system size,  we look 
forward to seeing new applications in the silica/biomolecules context.  The main “take home 
message” from the results of Section 9 is that computer simulation can provide excellent support to 
experimental interpreta tion providing that adsorption is carried out at the gas/solid interface. In the 
particular case of amino acids, this is indeed feasible, as they sublimate without decomposing and 
can be condensed on well -defined silica surfaces – few teams have studied su ch experimental setups 
until now, however. The situation is much more intricate when experiments envisage adsorption 
from water solution. In this case, the adsorption is strongly pH -dependent as both the silica surface 
and the amino acids change their prot onation state accordingly, greatly affecting the sign of the 
electrostatic interaction. More precisely, pH values higher than the point of zero charge of silica 
surfaces will cause deprotonation of SiOH groups with dramatic consequences for the adsorption of 
amino acids. The latter also exhibit different charge speciations (between zwitterionic, anionic, and 
cationic forms) as a function of their pKa values; according to this speciation, they undergo strong 
electrostatic interactions (attraction, or repulsi on, as the case may be) with the silica surface, which 
often dominate the adsorption energetics. Carrying out adsorption from water solutions is 
experimentally less complex than from the gas phase: the opposite is true for the modeling 
approach. There, the  need to account for the presence of significant amounts of water in order to 
bring the system to be stabilized in a different protonation state compared to the canonical forms in 
gas-phase renders the simulation a daunting task in terms of the requested c omputational resources. 
Resorting to micro solvation (few water molecules located at strategic points) is a clever idea but 
the applicability of this approach should not be overstated as many of the sought properties result 
from the presence of a large qua ntity of water (entropic factors, structuring of the second solvation 
shell, etc). In that respect, one of the key issue is to understand whether the (bio)molecule is directly 
attached to the surface functionalities or its interaction is mediated by the pr esence of pre -adsorbed 
water. This is not easily addressed by experiments or by simulations. Experimentally, it is hard to 
detect spectral features which can be unambiguously attributed to a “first layer of adsorbed water” 
and discriminate them from the fe atures for bulk water, although vibrational sum frequency 
spectroscopy725 can indeed help in obtaining such data. For the latter, the relatively long res idence 
time of a protein residue or a water molecule attached to the surface requests rather sophisticated 208 
 
and expensive metadynamics procedure726 to bring th e time scale of molecular dynamics 
simulations down to acceptable values.  
More generally, there are not many techniques that allow characterizing in situ  molecules at 
“buried interfaces”, including the silica/solution interface. An extensive review of the se techniques, 
concerning solid/solution interfaces in general, has recently appeared; a significant number of the 
examples provided concern biomolecules adsorption, but mostly their application is not yet 
routine.727 
Gathering pr ecise experimental data on even a single biomolecule/silica system is a long, 
protracted endeavor. It can be seen from Section 9 that only for the the simplest amino acid has the 
amount of experimental data reached a “critical mass” where systematic compar isons between 
experiment and theory become fruitful, and even in the case of glycine/silica many experimental 
data are still missing. On the other hand, the progress of spectroscopic techniques (especially 
vibrational and NMR) now allows to reach an unprec edented level of detail in the molecular 
characterization of adsorbed biomolecules. If close cooperations of experimentalists and 
theoreticians on well -focused systems can be undertaken, future progress could be fast.  
During the search for papers focusing on the present topic we discovered that nothing has 
been done to model the interaction of DNA bases with silica while few works have appeared 
addressing their interactions with montmorillonites.412,728 The same is also true for studies dealing 
with phospholipids as model of cell membranes in which only one paper has been published.729 
Both fields should be explored in depth, among other reasons because of the importance of DNA in 
developing nano -devices within a bottom -up approach.730 For instance, in a way similar  to 
nanolithography, one could  pattern ordered DNA to the desired positions on  a  substrate  that  
include s  hydrophilicity  and  covalent  attachment  as provided by silica surfaces .731 On the other 
hand, cell membranes are the main “contact surfaces” between a living organism and a biomaterial 
and, as a perspective, we believe that understanding the process of membrane lipids adhesion is key 
to ultimately improve  the design on biocompatible materials.732 Despite the difficulties described 
above we are confident that new technological improvements in the high performance co mputing 
machines as well as on experimental methods will widen our possibility to address problems in the 
“biological surface science”733 context, like understanding how conformational changes are induced 
in pept ides by adsorption at oxides surface, or better drug protection and delivery using mesoporous 
materials, to mention just two of them. Hopefully, these basic research advances will provide the 
grounds and the driving force needed for rapid developments in a  wide range of applications 
including tissue engineering, biosensors, drug delivery or medical diagnosis.  
 
 209 
 
11. Acknowledgments  
Part of the Introduction and Section 2 have been derived from the PhD thesis by Federico Musso, 
“Theoretical Study of the surfac e properties of crystalline and amorphous silica polymorphs”, 2011, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona  and University of Torino . PU is grateful to  the Ministerio de 
Educacíon Cultura y Deporte del Gobierno de Espana for support ing his stage (SAB2011 -0033)  at 
the UAB during the writing of this review and to Progetti di Ricerca di Ateneo -Compagnia di San 
Paolo -2011 -Linea 1A, progetto ORTO11RRT5  for funding . Fruitful discussion and support with 
Dr. M. Corno and M. Delle Piane of the Dipartimento di Chimica, Uni versità di Torino are also 
acknowledged. PU acknowledges the invaluable and continuous scientific support provided by Prof. 
Vera Bolis on silica topic. Many of the results reported in this review would have not been possible 
without allowance of the massiv e parallel version of the CRYSTAL09 code provided by the 
Theoretical Chemistry group at Dipartimento di Chimica, Università di Torino. MS gratefully 
acknowledges support through 2011 ICREA Academia award. Financial support from MICINN and 
the DIUE of the G enneralitat de Catalunya through the CTQ2011 -24847/BQU and 2009SGR638 
projects, respectively, is also acknowledged. AR is indebted to Ministerio de Economía y 
Competitividad for a Juan de la Cierva contract. The authors are also grateful to Prof. Lucio 
Colombi Ciacchi (University of Bremen) for providing the coordinates of the amorphous silica 
surface from which Figure 20 has been made. DC thanks B. Diawara for graciously providing the 
Modelview software which has allowed the construction and analyses of so me data reported here. 
DC and JFL thank Frederik Tielens for discussion on many aspects of amorphous silica models.  
 
 
 
 210 
 
Art Cover   
 
 
 211 
 
References  
 
 (1) Brown, G. E.; Henrich, V. E.; Casey, W. H.; Clark, D. L.; Eggleston, C.; Felmy, A.;  
Goodman, D. W.; Grätzel, M.; Maciel, G.; McCarthy, M. I.; Nealson, K. H.; Sverjensky, D. A.; 
Toney, M. F.; Zachara, J. M. Chem. Rev.  1998 , 99, 77-174. 
 (2) Clayton, D. C. Principles of Stellar Evolution and Nucleosynthesis ; The University 
of Chicago Press : Chicago, 1983.  
 (3) Iler, R. K. The Chemistry of Silica ; 2nd ed.; John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: New York, 
Chichester, Brisbane, Toronto, 1979.  
 (4) The Surface Properties of Silica ; Legrand, A. P., Ed.; John Wiley & Sons: 
Chichester, 1998.  
 (5) Adsorption on Silica Surfaces ; Papirer, E., Ed.; Marcel Dekker Inc.: New York, 
2000; Vol. 90.  
 (6) El Shafei, G. M. S. In Adsorption on Silica Surfaces ; Papirer, E., Ed.; CRC Press, 
Taylor & Francis Group: Santa Barbara, California, 2000; Vol. 90, p 35.  
 (7) Morrow, B. A.; Gay, I. D. In Adsorption on Silica Surfaces ; Papirer, E., Ed.; CRC 
Press, Taylor & Francis Group: Santa Barbara, California, 2000; Vol. 90, p 9.  
 (8) Davydov, V. Y. In Adsorption on Silica Surfaces ; Papirer, E., Ed.; CRC Press, 
Taylor & Francis Group: Santa Barbara, California, 2000; Vol. 90, p 63.  
 (9) Characterization and Chemical Modification of the Silica Surface ; Vansant, E. F.; 
van der Voort, P.; Vrancken, K. C., Eds.; Elsevier Science B.V.: Amsterdam, 1995; Vol. 93.  
 (10) Vallee, A.; Humblot, V.;  Pradier, C. M. Acc. Chem. Res.  2010 , 43, 1297 -1306.  
 (11) Nawrocki, J. J. Chromatogr.  A  1997 , 779, 29-71. 
 (12) Hench, L. L.; Splinter, R. J.; Allen, W. C.; Greenlee, T. K. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 
Symp.  1971 , 2, 117 -141. 
 (13) Hench, L. L. Sol-gel silica.  Properties, processing and technology transfer ; Noyes 
Publications: Westwood, New Jersey 07675, 1998.  
 (14) Colilla, M.; Izquierdo -Barba, I.; Vallet -Regí, M. Expert Opin. Ther. Pat.  2008 , 18, 
639-656. 
 (15) Vallet -Regí, M.; Balas, F.; Arcos, D. Angew. Che m. Int. Ed.  2007 , 46, 7548 -7558.  
 (16) Barbe, C.; Bartlett, J.; Kong, L. G.; Finnie, K.; Lin, H. Q.; Larkin, M.; Calleja, S.; 
Bush, A.; Calleja, G. Adv. Mater.  2004 , 16, 1959 -1966.  
 (17) Vallet -Regí, M.; Rámila, A.; del Real, R. P.; Pérez -Pariente, J. Chem . Mater.  2001 , 
13, 308 -311. 
 (18) Castner, D. G.; Ratner, B. D. Surf. Sci.  2002 , 500, 28-60. 
 (19) Lai, C. Y.; Trewyn, B. G.; Jeftinija, D. M.; Jeftinija, K.; Xu, S.; Jeftinija, S.; Lin, V. 
S.-Y. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2003 , 125, 4451.  
 (20) Slowing, I.; Trewyn , B. G.; Lin, V. S. -Y. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2006 , 128, 14792 -
14793.  
 (21) Fubini, B. In The Surface Properties of Silicas ; Legrand, A. P., Ed.; John Wiley & 
Sons: West Sussex, 1998, p 415 -458. 
 (22) Fubini, B. Ann. Occup. Hyg.  1998 , 42, 521 -530. 
 (23) Fubini,  B.; Otero Areán, C. Chem. Soc. Rev.  1999 , 28, 373 -381. 
 (24) Merget, R.; Bauer, T.; Kupper, H. U.; Philippou, S.; Bauer, H. D.; Breitstadt, R.; 
Bruening, T. Arch. Toxicol.  2002 , 75, 625 -634. 
 (25) Groppo, E.; Lamberti, C.; Bordiga, S. S., G.; Zecchina, A.  Chem. Rev.  2005 , 105, 
115-184. 
 (26) Shahriari, M. R. In Optical Fiber Sensors Technology ; Grattan, K. T. V., Meggitt, B. 
T., Eds.; Kluwer Academic: Dordrecht, 1999; Vol. 4.  
 (27) Cho, E. J.; Bright, F. V. Anal. Chem.  2001 , 73, 3289 -3293.  
 (28) Shughart, E. L.; Ahsan, K.; Detty, M. R.; Bright, F. V. Anal. Chem.  2006 , 78, 3165 -
3170.  212 
 
 (29) Lichtenstein, L.; Buchner, C.; Yang, B.; Shaikhutdinov, S.; Heyde, M.; Sierka, M.; 
Wlodarczyk, R.; Sauer, J.; Freund, H. J. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.  2012 , 51, 404 -407. 
 (30) Berman, H. M.; Westbrook, J.; Feng, Z.; Gilliland, G.; Bhat, T. N.; Weissig, H.; 
Shindyalov, I. N.; Bourne, P. E. Nucleic Acids Res.  2000 , 28, 235 -242. 
 (31) Water in biomaterials surface science ; Morra, M., Ed.; John Wiley & Sons Ltd: 
Baffin Lane, Chiches ter, 2001.  
 (32) Young, G. J. J. Colloid Sci.  1958 , 13, 67-85. 
 (33) Morrow, B. A.; Cody, I. A.; Lee, L. S. M. J. Phys. Chem.  1976 , 80, 2761 -2767.  
 (34) Blum, J.; Avnir, D. In Handbook of Sol -Gel Science and Technology ; Sakka, S., Ed.; 
Springer: New York, 2003; Vol. III.  
 (35) Pagliaro, M. Silica -Based Materials for Advanced Chemical Applications ; RSC 
Publishing: Cambridge, 2009.  
 (36) Corno, M.; Rimola, A.; Bolis, V.; Ugliengo, P. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2010 , 12, 
6309 -6329.  
 (37) Tilocca, A. Proc. - R. So c. Edinburgh, Sect. A: Math. Phys. Sci.  2009 , 465, 1003 -
1027.  
 (38) Knözinger, H. In The Hydrogen Bond. Recent Developments in Theory and 
Experiments ; Schuster, P., Zundel, G., Sandorfy, C., Eds. North -Holland: Amsterdam, 1976; Vol. 3, 
p 1263.  
 (39) Sauer,  J.; Ugliengo, P.; Garrone, E.; Saunders, V. R. Chem. Rev.  1994 , 94, 2095 -
2160.  
 (40) Burneau, A.; Gallas, J. P. In The Surface Properties of Silicas ; Legrand, A. P., Ed.; 
John Wiley & Sons: Chichester, 1998, p 145 -234. 
 (41) Zachariasen, W. H. J. Am. Chem . Soc.  1932 , 54, 3841 -3851.  
 (42) Bruckner, R. Encyclopedia of Applied Physics  1997 , 18, 101 -131. 
 (43) Catlow, C. R. A.; Cormack, A. N. Int. Rev. Phys. Chem.  1987 , 6, 227 -250. 
 (44) Chao, E. C. T.; Shoemaker, E. M.; Madsen, B. M. Science  1960 , 132, 220 -222. 
 (45) Stishov, S. M.; Popova, S. V. Geokhimiya  1961 , 10, 837.  
 (46) Ross, N. L.; Shu, J. -F.; Hazen, R. M. Am. Mineral.  1990 , 75, 739 -747. 
 (47) Nicholas, J. B.; Winans, R. E.; Harrison, R. J.; Iton, L. E.; Curtiss, L. A.; Hopfinger, 
A. J. J. Phys. Chem.  1992 , 96, 7958 -7965.  
 (48) Bär, M. R.; Sauer, J. Chem. Phys. Lett.  1994 , 226, 405 -412. 
 (49) Luke, B. T. J. Phys. Chem.  1993 , 97, 7505 -7510.  
 (50) Tielens, F.; De Proft, F.; Geerlings, P. J. Mol. Struct. THEOCHEM  2001 , 542, 227 -
237. 
 (51) West, R.; Whatle y, L. S.; Lake, K. J. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  1961 , 83, 761 -764. 
 (52) Baerlocher, C.; McCusker, L. B. Database of Zeolite Structures . 
 (53) Diffusion Mechanisms in Crystalline Materials ; Catlow, C. R. A.; Cowern, N. E. B.; 
Farkas, D.; Mishin, Y., Eds.; Material  Research Society, 1999; Vol. 527.  
 (54) Computer Modelling of Microporous Materials ; Catlow, C. R. A.; van Santen, R. A.; 
Smit, B., Eds.; Elsevier Ltd.: London, 2004.  
 (55) Weiss, A.; Weiss, A. Z. Anorg.  Allg. Chem.  1954 , 276, 95-112. 
 (56) Hamann, D. R.  Phys. Rev. B  1997 , 55, 14784 -14793.  
 (57) Sing, K. S. W. Pure Appl. Chem.  1985 , 57, 603 -619. 
 (58) Brunauer, S.; Emmett, P. H.; Teller, E. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  1938 , 60, 309 -319. 
 (59) Avnir, D.; Farin, D. Nature  1984 , 308, 261 -263. 
 (60) Hench, L. L.; Ulric h, D. B. Ultrastructure Processing of Ceramics Glasses and 
Composites ; Wiley: New York, 1984.  
 (61) Depradel, A. C.; Imelik, B. C. R. Hebd. Seances Acad. Sci.  1956 , 242, 122 -124. 
 (62) Kresge, C. T.; Leonowicz, M. E.; Roth, W. J.; Vartuli, J. C.; Beck, J. S. Nature  1992 , 
359, 710.  213 
 
 (63) Beck, J. S.; Vartuli, J. C.; Roth, W. J.; Leonowicz, M. E.; Kresge, C. T.; Schmitt, K. 
D.; Chu, C. T. -W.; Olson, D. H.; Sheppard, E. W.; McCullen, S. B.; Higgins, J. B.; Schlenker, J. L. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc.  1992 , 114, 10834 -10843. 
 (64) Hatton, B.; Landskron, K.; Whitnall, W.; Perovic, D.; Ozin, G. A. Acc. Chem. Res.  
2005 , 38, 305 -312. 
 (65) Ehrlich, H.; Demadis, K. D.; Pokrovsky, O. S.; Koutsoukos, P. G. Chem. Rev.  2010 , 
110, 4656 -4689.  
 (66) Dickerson, M. B.; Sandhage, K. H.;  Naik, R. R. Chem. Rev. 2008 , 108, 4935 -4978.  
 (67) D'Souza, A. S.; Pantano, C. G. J. Am. Ceram. Soc.  1999 , 82, 1289 -1293.  
 (68) Li, I.; Bandara, J.; Shultz, M. J. Langmuir  2004 , 20, 10474 -10480.  
 (69) Zhou, F.; Head, J. D. J. Phys. Chem. B  2000 , 104, 9981 -9986.  
 (70) Mondal, B.; Ghosh, D.; Das, A. K. Chem. Phys. Lett.  2009 , 478, 115 -119. 
 (71) Eyre, R. J.; Goss, J. P.; Macleod, R. M.; Briddon, P. R. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  
2008 , 10, 4495 -4502.  
 (72) Maciel, G. E.; Sindorf, D. W. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  1980 , 102, 7606 -7607.  
 (73) Tarini, M.; Cignoni, P.; Montani, C. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph.  2006 , 12, 
1237 -1244.  
 (74) Rimola, A.; Tosoni, S.; Sodupe, M.; Ugliengo, P. ChemPhysChem  2006 , 7, 157 -163. 
 (75) Rimola, A.; Ugliengo, P. J. Chem. Phys.  2008 , 128, 2047 02. 
 (76) Mathias, J.; Wannemacher, G. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  1988 , 125, 61-68. 
 (77) Zhuravlev, L. T.; Potapov, V. V. Russ. J. Phys. Chem.  2006 , 80, 1119 -1128.  
 (78) Zhuravlev, L. T. Colloids Surf., A  2000 , 173, 1-38. 
 (79) Zhuravlev, L. T. Colloids Su rf., A  1993 , 74, 71-90. 
 (80) Zhuravlev, L. T. Langmuir  1987 , 3, 316 -318. 
 (81) Bolis, V.; Cavenago, A.; Fubini, B. Langmuir  1997 , 13, 895 -902. 
 (82) Bolis, V.; Fubini, B.; Marchese, L.; Martra, G.; Costa, D. J. Chem. Soc. Faraday 
Trans.  1991 , 87, 497 -505. 
 (83) Trebosc, J.; Wiench, J. W.; Huh, S.; Lin, V. S. Y.; Pruski, M. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  
2005 , 127, 3057 -3068.  
 (84) Landmesser, H.; Kosshck, H.; Storek, W.; Fricke, R. Solid State Ionics  1997 , 101-
103, 271 -277. 
 (85) Jal, P. K.; Sudarshan, M.; Saha, A.; Pa tel, S.; Mishra, B. K. Colloids Surf., A  2004 , 
240, 173 -178. 
 (86) Lesnichin, S. B.; Kamdem, N.; Mauder, D.; Denisov, G. S.; Shenderovich, I. G. Rus. 
J. Gen. Chem.  2010 , 80, 2027 -2031.  
 (87) Taylor, D. E.; Runge, K.; Cory, M. G.; Burns, D. S.; Vasey, J. L. ; Hearn, J. D.; 
Henley, M. V. J. Phys. Chem. C  2011 , 115, 24734 -24742.  
 (88) Chuang, I. S.; Maciel, G. E. J. Phys. Chem. B  1997 , 101, 3052 -3064.  
 (89) Bolt, G. H. J. Phys. Chem.  1957 , 61, 1166 -1169.  
 (90) Abendroth, R. P. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  1970 , 34, 591 -598. 
 (91) Duval, Y.; Mielczarski, J. A.; Pokrovsky, O. S.; Mielczarski, E.; Ehrhardt, J. J. J. 
Phys. Chem. B  2002 , 106, 2937 -2945.  
 (92) Sverjensky, D. A.; Sahai, N. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta  1998 , 62, 3703 -3716.  
 (93) Dixit, S.; Van Cappellen, P. Geochem. Cosmochem. Acta  2002 , 66, 2559 -2568.  
 (94) Hiemstra, T.; DeWit, J. C. M.; VanRiemsdijk, W. H. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  1989 , 
133, 91-104. 
 (95) Schwarz, J. A. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  1999 , 218, 1–12. 
 (96) Ong, S. W.; Zhao, X. L.; Eisenthal, K. B . Chem. Phys. Lett.  1992 , 191, 327 -335. 
 (97) Ostroverkhov, V.; Waychunas, G. A.; Shen, Y. R. Phys. Rev. Lett.  2005 , 94, 046102.  
 (98) Schnippering, M.; Neil, S. R. T.; Mackenzie, S. R.; Unwin, P. R. Chem. Soc. Rev.  
2011 , 40, 207 -220. 
 (99) O’Reilly, J. P. ; Butts, C. P.; I’Anson, I. A.; Shaw, A. M. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2005 , 
127, 1632 -1633.  214 
 
 (100)  Fisk, J. D.; Batten, R.; Jones, G.; O'Reilly, J. P.; Shaw, A. M. J. Phys. Chem. B  2005 , 
109, 14475 -14480.  
 (101)  Fan, H. -F.; Li, F.; Zare, R. N.; Lin, K. -C. Anal. Ch em. 2007 , 79, 3654 -3661.  
 (102)  Hiemstra, T.; Venema, P.; VanRiemsdijk, W. H. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  1996 , 184, 
680-692. 
 (103)  Bickmore, B. R.; Tadanier, C. J.; Rosso, K. M.; Monn, W. D.; Eggett, D. L. 
Geochem. Cosmochem. Acta  2004 , 68, 2025 -2042.  
 (104) Machesky, M. L.; Predota, M.; Wesolowski, D. J.; Vlcek, L.; Cummings, P. T.; 
Rosenqvist, J.; Ridley, M. K.; Kubicki, J. D.; Bandura, A. V.; Kumar, N.; Sofo, J. O. Langmuir  
2008 , 24, 12331 -12339.  
 (105)  Churchill, H.; Teng, H.; Hazen, R. M. Amer. Mineral . 2004 , 89, 1048 -1055.  
 (106)  Alexander, G. B.; Iler, R. K. J. Phys. Chem.  1953 , 57, 932 -934. 
 (107)  Sonnefeld, J. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  1996 , 183, 597 -599. 
 (108)  Behrens, S. H.; Grier, D. G. J. Chem. Phys.  2001 , 115, 6716 -6721.  
 (109)  Charlet, L.; Sc hindler, P. W.; Spadini, L.; Furrer, G.; Zysset, M. Aquatic Sci. 1993 , 
55, 291–303. 
 (110)  Sahai, N.; Sverjensky, D. A. Geochem. Cosmochem. Acta  1997 , 61, 2801 -2826.  
 (111)  Foissy, A.; Persello, J. In The surface properties of silicas ; Legrand, A. P., Ed.;  J. 
Wiley & Sons: Chichester, 1998, p 147 -234. 
 (112)  Marmier, N.; Delisée, A.; Fromage, F. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  1999 , 212, 228 -233. 
 (113)  Turov, V. V.; Leboda, R.; Bogillo, V. I.; Skubiszewska -Zieba, J. Langmuir  1997 , 13, 
1237 -1244.  
 (114)  Turov, V.  V.; Mironyuk, I. F. Colloids Surf., A  1998 , 134, 257 -263. 
 (115)  Morrow, B. A.; McFarlan, A. J. Langmuir  1991 , 7, 1695 -1701.  
 (116)  Kamiya, H.; Mitsui, M.; Takano, H.; Miyazawa, S. J. Am. Ceram. Soc.  2000 , 83, 
287-293. 
 (117)  Bolis, V.; Busco, C.; Bordiga , S.; Ugliengo, P.; Lamberti, C.; Zecchina, A. Appl. 
Surf. Sci.  2002 , 196, 56-70. 
 (118)  Hoffmann, P.; Knozinger, E. Surf. Sci.  1987 , 188, 181 -198. 
 (119)  McFarlan, A. J.; Morrow, B. A. J. Phys. Chem.  1991 , 95, 5388 -5390.  
 (120)  Takei, T.; Kato, K.; Meguro , A.; Chikazawa, M. Colloids Surf., A  1999 , 150, 77-84. 
 (121)  Boccuzzi, F.; Coluccla, S.; Ghlottl, G.; Morterra, C.; Zecchina, A. J. Phys. Chem.  
1978 , 22, 1298 -1303.  
 (122)  Queeney, K. T.; Weldon, M. K.; Chang, J. P.; Chabal, Y. J.; Gurevich, A. B.; 
Sapje ta, J.; Opila, R. L. J. Appl. Phys.  2000 , 87, 1322 -1330.  
 (123)  Queeney, K. T.; Herbots, N.; Shaw, J. M.; Atluri, V.; Chabal, Y. J. Appl. Phys. Lett.  
2004 , 84, 493 -495. 
 (124)  Olsen, J. E.; Shimura, F. Appl. Phys. Lett.  1988 , 53, 1934 -1936.  
 (125)  Nagai, N .; Hashimoto, H. Appl. Surf. Sci.  2001 , 172, 307 -311. 
 (126)  Pasternack, R. M.; Rivillon Amy, S.; Chabal, Y. J. Langmuir  2008 , 24, 12963 -12971.  
 (127)  Kim, J.; Seidler, P.; Fill, C.; Wan, L. S.  Surf. Sci.  2008 , 602, 3323 -3330.  
 (128)  Kim, J.; Seidler, P.; Wan, L. S.; Fill, C. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  2009 , 329, 114 -119. 
 (129)  Kim, J.; Cho, J.; Seidler, P. M.; Kurland, N. E.; Yadavalli, V. K. Langmuir  2010 , 26, 
2599 -2608.  
 (130)  Aissaoui, N.; Bergaoui, L.; Landoulsi, J.; Lambert, J. -F.; Boujday, S. Langmui r 
2012 , 28, 656 -665. 
 (131)  Brinker, C. J.; Brow, R. K.; Tallant, D. R. J. Non -Cryst. Sol.  1990 , 120, 26-33. 
 (132)  Maniar, P. D.; Navrotsky, A. J. Non -Cryst. Sol.  1990 , 120, 20-25. 
 (133)  Humbert, B.; Burneau, A.; Gallas, J. P.; Lavalley, J. C. J. Non -Cryst. Sol.  1992 , 143, 
75-83. 
 (134)  Riegel, J. o. N. -C. S.; Hartmann, I.; Kiefer, W.; Gross, J.; Fricke, J. J. Non -Cryst. 
Solids  1997 , 211, 294 -298. 
 (135)  Wallace, S.; West, J. K.; Hench, L. L. J. Non -Cryst. Sol.  1993 , 152, 101 -108. 215 
 
 (136)  Chakoumakos, B. C .; Hill, R. J.; Gibbs, G. V. Am. Miner.  1981 , 66, 1237 -1249.  
 (137)  Morrow, B. A.; Cody, I. A. J. Phys. Chem.  1976 , 80, 1995 -1998.  
 (138)  Michalske, T. A.; Bunker, B. C. J. Appl. Phys.  1984 , 56, 2686 -2693.  
 (139)  Bunker, B. C.; Haaland, D. M.; Ward, K. J.;  Michalske, T. A.; Smith, W. L.; 
Binkley, J. S.; Melius, C. F.; Balfe, C. A. Surf. Sci.  1989 , 210, 406 -428. 
 (140)  Grabbe, A.; Michalske, T. A.; Smith, W. L. J. Phys. Chem.  1995 , 99, 4648 -4654.  
 (141)  Inaki, Y.; Yoshida, H.; Yoshida, T.; Hattori, T. J. Phy s. Chem. B  2002 , 106, 9098 -
9106.  
 (142)  Chiang, C. -M.; Zegarski, B. R.; Dubois, L. H. J. Phys. Chem.  1993 , 97, 6948 -6950.  
 (143)  Zarubin, D. P. J. Non -Cryst. Sol.  2001 , 286, 80-88. 
 (144)  West, J. K.; LaTorre, G.; Hench, L. L. J. Non -Cryst. Sol.  1996 , 195, 45-53. 
 (145)  Engelhardt, G.; Michel, D. High Resolution Solid State NMR of Silicates and 
Zeolites ; Wiley & Sons: New -York, 1987.  
 (146)  Boujday, S. PhD Thesis, UPMC Paris 6, 2002.  
 (147)  Zhao, H.; Chen, Q.; Zhang, S. Microporous Mesoporous Mater.  2012 , 155, 240 -244. 
 (148)  Rossini, A. J.; Zagdoun, A.; Lelli, M.; Gajan, D.; Rascon, F.; Rosay, M.; Maas, W. 
E.; Coperet, C.; Lesage, A.; Emsley, L. Chem. Sci.  2012 , 3, 108 -115. 
 (149)  Spearing, D. R.; Farnan, I.; Stebbins, J. F. Phys. Chem. Miner.  1992 , 19, 307 -321. 
 (150)  van Eck, E. R. H.; Smith, M. E.; Kohn, S. C. Sol. State Nucl. Mag. Res.  1999 , 15, 
181-188. 
 (151)  Hu, J. Z.; Kwak, J. H.; Herrera, J. E.; Wang, Y.; Peden, C. H. F. Solid State Nucl. 
Magn. Reson.  2005 , 27, 200 -205. 
 (152)  d’Espinose de la Caill erie, J. -B.; Aimeur, M. R.; Kortobi, Y. E.; Legrand, A. P. J. 
Colloid Interface Sci.  1997 , 197, 434 -439. 
 (153)  Liu, C. H. C.; Maciel, G. E. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  1996 , 118, 5103 -5119.  
 (154)  Hughes, C. E. Progr. Nucl. Magn. Res. Spectr.  2004 , 45, 301 -313. 
 (155) Baum, J.; Munowitz, M.; Garroway, A. N.; Pines, A. J. Chem. Phys.  1985 , 83, 2015 -
2025.  
 (156)  Hwang, S. -J.; Uner, D. O.; King, T. S.; Pruski, M.; Gerstein, B. C. J. Phys. Chem.  
1996 , 99, 3697 -3703.  
 (157)  Shantz, D. F.; Schmedt auf der Günne, J.; Kolle r, H.; Lobo, R. F. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  
2000 , 122, 6659 -6663.  
 (158)  Fubini, B.; Giamello, E.; Volante, M.; Bolis, V. Toxicol. Ind. Health  1990 , 6, 571 -
598. 
 (159)  Stathis, J. H.; Kastner, M. A. Phys. Rev. B  1984 , 29, 7079 -7081.  
 (160)  Pacchioni, G.; Vitiello , M. J. Non -Cryst. Solids  1999 , 245, 175 -182. 
 (161)  Mashkovtsev, R. I.; Pan, Y. M. Phys. Chem. Miner.  2012 , 39, 79-85. 
 (162)  Buscarino, G.; Vaccaro, G.; Agnello, S.; Gelardi, F. M. J. Non -Cryst. Solids  2009 , 
355, 1092 -1094.  
 (163)  Feng, P. B.; Wang, Y.; Rong, X.; Su, J. H.; Ju, C. Y.; Du, J. F. Phys. Lett. A  2012 , 
376, 2195 -2199.  
 (164)  Romanelli, M.; Di Benedetto, F.; Bartali, L.; Innocenti, M.; Fornaciai, G.; 
Montegrossi, G.; Pardi, L. A.; Zoleo, A.; Capacci, F. Phys. Chem. Miner.  2012 , 39, 479 -490. 
 (165) Fenoglio, I.; Fubini, B.; Ghibaudi, E. M.; Turci, F. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev.  2011 , 63, 
1186–1209.  
 (166)  Zelenak, V.; Zelenakova, A.; Kovac, J. Colloids Surf., A  2010 , 357, 97-104. 
 (167)  Lercher, J. A.; Grundling, C.; EderMirth, G. Catal. Today  1996 , 27, 353 -376. 
 (168)  Marchese, L.; Gianotti, E.; Maschmeyer, T.; Martra, G.; Coluccia, S.; Thomas, J. Il 
Nuovo Cimento D  1997 , 19, 1707 -1718.  
 (169)  Armandi, M.; Bolis, V.; Bonelli, B.; Arean, C. O.; Ugliengo, P.; Garrone, E. J. Phys. 
Chem. C  2011 , 115, 23344 -23353.  
 (170)  Bonelli, B.; Cozzolino, M.; Tesser, R.; Di Serio, M.; Piumetti, M.; Garrone, E.; 
Santacesaria, E. J. Catal.  2007 , 246, 293 -300. 216 
 
 (171)  Parry, E. P. J. Catal.  1963 , 2, 371 -379. 
 (172)  Trombetta, M.; Busca, G.; Rossini, S.; Piccoli, V.; Cornar o, U.; Guercio, A.; Catani, 
R.; Willey, R. J. Catal.  1998 , 179, 581 -596. 
 (173)  Fubini, B.; Bolis, V.; Cavenago, A.; Garrone, E.; Ugliengo, P. Langmuir  1993 , 9, 
2712 -2720.  
 (174)  Borello, E.; Zecchina, A.; Morterra, C. J. Phys. Chem.  1967 , 71, 2938 -2945.  
 (175)  Borello, E.; Zecchina, A.; Morterra, C. J. Phys. Chem.  1967 , 71, 2945 -2951.  
 (176)  Natal -Santiago, M. A.; Dumesic, J. A. J. Catal.  1998 , 175, 252 -268. 
 (177)  Luts, T.; Katz, A. Top. Catal.  2012 , 55, 84-92. 
 (178)  Bunker, B. C.; Haaland, D. M.; Michal ske, T. A.; Smith, W. L. Surf. Sci.  1989 , 222, 
95-118. 
 (179)  Natal -Santiago, M. A.; Hill, J. M.; Dumesic, J. A. J. Mol. Catal. A  1999 , 140, 199 -
214. 
 (180)  Brunel, D.; Cauvel, A.; Di Renzo, F.; Fajula, F.; Fubini, B.; Onida, B.; Garrone, E. 
New J. Chem.  2000, 24, 807 -813. 
 (181)  Srinivasan, S.; Datye, A. K.; Smith, M. H.; Peden, C. H. F. J. Catal.  1994 , 145, 565 -
573. 
 (182)  Sindorf, D. W.; Maciel, G. E. J. Phys. Chem  1982 , 86, 5208 -5219.  
 (183)  Koltsov, S. I.; Malygin, A. A.; Volkova, A. N.; Aleskovskii, V . B. Russ. J. Inorg. 
Chem.  1973 , 47, 988 -991. 
 (184)  Fleischman, S. D.; Scott, S. L. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2011 , 133, 4847 -4855   
 (185)  Dong, Y.; Pappu, S. V.; Xu, Z. Anal. Chem.  1998 , 70, 4730 -4735.  
 (186)  Boujday, S.; Lambert, J. -F.; Che, M. J. Phys. Chem. B 2003 , 107, 651 -654. 
 (187)  Boujday, S.; Lambert, J. -F.; Che, M. ChemPhysChem  2004 , 5, 1003 -1013.  
 (188)  Schroeder, T.; Adelt, M.; Richter, B.; Naschitzki, M.; Bäumer, M.; Freund, H. -J. 
Surf. Rev. Lett. 2000 , 7, 7-14. 
 (189)  Wendt, S.; Frerichs, M.; Wei, T.; Chen, M. S.; Kempter, V.; Goodman, D. W. Surf. 
Sci. 2004 , 565, 107 -120. 
 (190)  Chen, M. S.; Santra, A. K.; Goodman, D. W. Phys. Rev. B  2004 , 69, 155404.  
 (191)  Yu, X.; Yang, B.; Boscoboinik, J. A.; Shaikhutdinov, S.; Freund, H. -J. Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 2012, 100, 151608.  
 (192)  Mirji, S. A.; Halligudi, S. B.; Mathew, N.; Ravi, V.; Jacob, N. E.; Patil, K. R. 
Colloids Surf., A  2006 , 287, 51-58. 
 (193)  Takahashi, T.; Fukatsu, S.; Itoh, K. M.; Uematsu, M.; Fujiwara, A.; Kageshima, H.; 
Takahashi, Y.; Shiraishi, K. J. Appl. Phys.  2003 , 93, 3674 -3676.  
 (194)  Chang, C. -C.; Shu, M. -C. J. Phys. Chem. B  2003 , 107, 7076 -7087.  
 (195)  Wu, W. L.; Wallace, W. E.; Lin, E. K.; Lynn, G. W.; Glinka, C. J.; Ryan, E. T.; Ho, 
H. M. J. Appl. Phys.  2000 , 87, 1193 -1200.  
 (196)  Chiba,  K.; Takenaka, Y. Appl. Surf. Sci.  2008 , 254, 2534 -2539.  
 (197)  Chandrasekhar, V.; Boomishankar, R.; Nagendran, S. Chem. Rev.  2004 , 104, 5847 -
5910.  
 (198)  Feher, F. J.; Newman, D. A.; Walzer, J. F. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  1989 , 111, 1741 -1748.  
 (199)  Abbenhuis, H. C. L.; Burrows, A. D.; Kooijman, H.; Lutz, M.; Palmer, M. T.; 
vanSanten, R. A.; Spek, A. L. Chem. Commun.  1998 , 2627 -2628.  
 (200)  Dijkstra, T. W.; Duchateau, R.; van Santen, R. A.; Meetsma, A.; Yap, G. P. A. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc.  2002 , 124, 9856 -9864.  
 (201) Gun'ko, V. M.; Turov, V. V.; Zarko, V. I.; Voronin, E. F.; Tischenko, V. A.; Dudnik, 
V. V.; Pakhlov, E. M.; Chuiko, A. A. Langmuir  1997 , 13, 1529 -1544.  
 (202)  Totland, C.; Steinkopf, S.; Blokhus, A. M.; Nerdal, W. Langmuir  2011 , 27, 4690 -
4699.  
 (203)  Basiuk, V. A. In Encyclopedia of Surface and Colloid Science ; Marcel Dekker: 2002, 
p 277 -293. 217 
 
 (204)  Parida, S. K.; Dash, S.; Patel, S.; Mishra, B. K. Adv. Coll. Interf. Sci.  2006 , 121, 77-
110. 
 (205)  Lambert, J. -F. Origins Life Evol. Biospheres  2008 , 38, 211 -242. 
 (206)  Popat, A.; Hartono, S. B.; Stahr, F.; Liu, J.; Qiao, S. Z.; Lu, G. Q. Nanoscale  2011 , 3, 
2801 -2818.  
 (207)  Basiuk, V. A. Surfact. Sci. Ser.  1998 , 75, 55-87. 
 (208)  Hartmann, M. Chem. Mater.  2005 , 17, 4577 -4593.  
 (209)  Bolivar, J. M.; Nidetzky,  B. Langmuir  2012 , 26, 10040–10049.  
 (210)  Meng, M.; Stievano, L.; Lambert, J. -F. Langmuir  2004 , 20, 914 -923. 
 (211)  Bouchoucha, M.; Jaber, M.; Onfroy, T.; Lambert, J. -F.; Xue, B. J. Phys. Chem. C  
2011 , 115, 21813–21825.  
 (212)  Janossy, I.; Menyhard, M. Surf. Sci.  1974 , 25, 647 -649. 
 (213)  Clegg, M. L.; Morales de la Garza, L.; Karakatsani, S.; King, D. A.; Driver, S. M. 
Top. Catal.  2012 , 19-20, 1429 -1444.  
 (214)  Vlasova, N. N.; Golovkova, L. P. Colloid J.  2004 , 66, 657 -662. 
 (215)  O’Connor, A. J.; Hokura, A.; Kisler, J. M.; Shimazu, S.; Stevens, G. W.; Komatsu, 
Y. Sep. Purif. Technol.  2006 , 48, 197 -201. 
 (216)  Basiuk, V. A.; Gromovoy, T. Y. Colloids Surf., A  1996 , 118, 127 -140. 
 (217)  Kitadai, N.; Yokoyama, T.; Nakashima, S. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  2009 , 329, 31-37. 
 (218)  Paszti, Z.; Keszthelyi, T.; Hakkel, O.; Guczi, L. J. Phys. Cond. Matt.  2008 , 20, 
224014.  
 (219)  Barlow, S. M.; Kitching, K. J.; Haq, S.; Richardson, N. V. Surf. Sci.  1998 , 401, 322 -
335. 
 (220)  Holinga, G. J.; York, R. L.; Onorato, R. M.;  Thompson, C. M.; Webb, N. E.; Yoon, 
A. P.; Somorjai, G. A. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2011 , 133, 6243 -6253   
 (221)  Macklin, J. W.; White, D. H. Spectrochim. Acta A  1985 , 41A, 851 -859. 
 (222)  Basiuk, V. A.; Gromovoy, T. Y. React. Kinet. Catal. Lett.  1993 , 50, 297 -303. 
 (223)  Lomenech, C.; Bery, G.; Costa, D.; Stievano, L.; Lambert, J. -F. ChemPhysChem  
2005 , 6, 1061 -1070.  
 (224)  Lopes, I.; Piao, L.; Stievano, L.; Lambert, J. -F. J. Phys. Chem. C  2009 , 113, 18163 -
18172.  
 (225)  Amitay -Rosen, T.; Kababya, S.; Vega, S. J. Phys. Chem. B  2009 , 113, 6267 -6282.  
 (226)  Amitay -Rosen, T.; Vega, S. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2010 , 12, 6763 -6773.  
 (227)  Ben Shir, I.; Kababya, S.; Amitay -Rosen, T.; Balazs, Y. S.; Schmidt, A. J. Phys. 
Chem. B  2010 , 114, 5989 -5996.  
 (228)  Ben Shir, I.; K ababya, S.; Schmidt, A. J. Phys. Chem. C  2012 , 116, 9691 -9702.  
 (229)  Stievano, L.; Tielens, F.; Lopes, I.; Folliet, N.; Gervais, C.; Costa, D.; Lambert, J. -F. 
Cryst. Growth Design  2010 , 10, 3657 -3667.  
 (230)  Mirau, P. A.; Naik, R. R.; Gehring, P. J. Am. C hem. Soc.  2011 , 133, 18243 -18248.  
 (231)  Wolny, P. M.; Spatz, J. P.; Richter, R. P. Langmuir  2010 , 26, 1029 -1034.  
 (232)  Satriano, C.; Fragala, M. E.; Forte, G.; Santoro, A. M.; La Mendola, D.; Kasemo, 
B. Soft Matt.  2012 , 8, 53-56. 
 (233)  Chen, H.; Su, X. ; Neoh, K. -G.; Choe, W. -S. Anal. Chem.  2006 , 78, 4872 -4879.  
 (234)  Phillips, D. C.; York, R. L.; Mermut, O.; McCrea, K. R.; Ward, R. S.; Somorjai, G. 
A. J. Phys. Chem. C  2007 , 111, 255 -261. 
 (235)  Mermut, O.; Phillips, D. C.; York, R. L.; McCrea, K. R.; Wa rd, R. S.; Somorjai, G. 
A. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2006 , 128, 3598 -3607.  
 (236)  York, R. L.; Holinga, G. J.; Somorjai, G. A. Langmuir  2009 , 25, 9369 -9374.  
 (237)  Wei, Y.; Latour, R. A. Langmuir  2008 , 24, 6721 -6729.  
 (238)  Thyparambil, A. A.; Wei, Y.; Latour, R. A. Langmuir  2012 , 28, 5687 -5694.  
 (239)  Landoulsi, J.; Dupres, V. ChemPhysChem  2011 , 12, 1310 -1316.  
 (240)  Cha, P.; Krishnan, A.; Fiore, V. F.; Vogler, E. A. Langmuir  2008 , 24, 2553 -2563.  
 (241)  Basiuk, V. A. Russ. J. Theor. Exp. Chem.  1990 , 26, 89-93 (97 -102 original russian).  218 
 
 (242)  Basiuk, V. A.; Gromovoy, T. Y.; Glukhoy, A. M.; Golovaty, V. G. Origins Life Evol. 
Biospheres  1991 , 21, 129 -144. 
 (243)  Basiuk, V. A.; Gromovoy, T. Y.; Chuiko, A. A.; Soloshonok, V. A.; Kukhar, V. P. 
Synthesis  1992 , 5, 449 -451. 
 (244)  Basiuk, V. A.; Gromovoy, T. Y.; Khil'chevskaya, E. G. Origins Life Evol. 
Biospheres  1995 , 25, 375 -393. 
 (245)  Bujdák, J.; Rode, B. M. React. Kinet. Catal. Lett.  1997 , 62, 281 -286. 
 (246)  Bujdák, J.; Rode, B. M. Origins Life Evol. Biospheres  1999 , 29, 451 -461. 
 (247)  Stievano, L.; Yu Piao, L.; Lopes, I.; Meng, M.; Costa, D.; Lambert, J. -F. Eur. J. 
Mineral.  2007 , 19, 321 -331. 
 (248)  Kunota, L. T.; Gambero, A.; Santana Santos, A.; Granjeiro, J. M. J. Colloid Interface 
Sci. 1996 , 185, 453 -457. 
 (249)  Alaeddine, S.; Nygren, H. Colloids Surf., B  1996 , 6, 71-79. 
 (250)  Vlasova, N. N. Colloid J.  2005 , 67, 537 -541. 
 (251)  Palit, D.; Moulik, S. P. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  2001 , 239, 20-26. 
 (252)  Pizzanelli, S.; Kababya, S.; Frydman, V.; Landau, M.; Vega, S.  J. Phys. Chem. B  
2005 , 109, 8029 -8039.  
 (253)  Gao, Q.; Xu, W.; Xu, Y.; Wu, D.; Sun, Y.; Deng, F.; Shen, W. J. Phys. Chem. B  
2008 , 112, 2261 -2267.  
 (254)  Goering, J.; Sah, S.; Burghaus, U.; Street Jr., K. W. Surf. Interf. Anal.  2008 , 40, 
1423–1429.  
 (255)  Casado, C.; Cast n, J.; Gracia, I.; Yus, M.; Mayoral, A. l.; Sebasti n, V.; L pez -
Ram-de-Viu, P.; Uriel, S.; Coronas, J. Langmuir  2012 , 28, 6638 -6644.  
 (256)  Shin, J. H.; Park, S. S.; Selvaraj, M.; Ha, C. -S. J. Porous Mat.  2012 , 19, 29-35. 
 (257)  Kim, J .; Desch, R. J.; Thiel, S. W.; Guliants, V. V.; Pinto, N. G. Micr. Mes. Mat.  
2012 , 149, 60-68. 
 (258)  Plekan, O.; Feyer, V.; Sutara, F.; Skála, T.; Svec, M.; Cháb, V.; Matolín, V.; Prince, 
K. C. Surf. Sci.  2007 , 603, 1973 -1980.  
 (259)  Poeckh, T.; Lopez, S. ; Fuller, A. O.; Solomon, M. J.; Larson, R. G. Anal. Biochem.  
2008 , 373, 253 -262. 
 (260)  Nakanishi, K.; Sakiyama, T.; Imamura, K. J. Biosci. Bioeng.  2001 , 91, 233 -244. 
 (261)  Gray, J. J. Curr. Op. Struct. Biol.  2004 , 14, 110–115. 
 (262)  Lundqvist, M.; Seth son, I.; Jonsson, B. -H. Langmuir  2005 , 21, 5974 -5979.  
 (263)  Greenfield, N. J. Anal. Biochem.  1996 , 235, 1-10. 
 (264)  Giacomelli, C. E.; Bremer, M. G. E. G.; Norde, W. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  1999 , 
220, 13-23. 
 (265)  Xia, N.; May, C. J.; McArthur, S. L.;  Castner, D. G. Langmuir  2002 , 18, 4090 -4097.  
 (266)  Han, S.; Xu, W.; Meiwen, C.; Jiqian, W.; Xia, D.; Xu, H.; Zhao, X.; Lu, J. R. Soft 
Matt.  2012 , 8, 645 -652. 
 (267)  Burkett, S. L.; Read, M. J. Langmuir  2001 , 17, 5059 -5065.  
 (268)  Read, M. J.; Burkett, S.  L. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  2003 , 261, 255 -263. 
 (269)  Sethuraman, A.; Vedantham, G.; Imoto, T.; Przybycien, T.; Belfort, G. Proteins: 
Struct. Funct. Bioinform. 2004 , 56, 669 -678. 
 (270)  Felsovalyi, F.; Mangiagalli, P.; Bureau, C.; Kumar, S. K.; Banta, S . Langmuir  2011 , 
27, 11873 -11882.  
 (271)  Oren, E. E.; Tamerler, C.; Sahin, D.; Hnilova, M.; Seker, U. O. S.; Sarikaya, M.; 
Samudral, R. Bioinform.  2007 , 23, 2816–2822.  
 (272)  Oren, E. E.; Notman, R.; Kim, I. W.; Evans, J. S.; Walsh, T. R.; Samudrala, R.; 
Tamerler, C.; Sarikaya, M. Langmuir  2010 , 26, 11003 -11009.  
 (273)  Patwardhan, S. V.; Emami, F. S.; Berry, R. J.; Jones, S. E.; Naik, R. R.; Deschaume, 
O.; Heinz, H.; Perry, C. C. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2012 , 134, 6244 -6256.  
 (274)  Ikeda, T.; Kuroda, A. Colloids Surf., B  2011 , 85, 359 -363. 219 
 
 (275)  Dovesi, R. In Quantum -Mechanical Ab -initio Calculation of the Properties of 
Crystalline Materials ; Pisani, C., Ed.; Springer: Berlin, 1996; Vol. 67, p 31.  
 (276)  Pisani, C. In Quantum -Mechanical Ab -initio Calculation of t he Properties of 
Crystalline Materials ; Pisani, C., Ed.; Springer: Berlin, 1996; Vol. 67, p 47.  
 (277)  Pisani, C.; Dovesi, R.; Roetti, C. In Lecture notes in Chemistry ; Springer -Verlag: 
Berlin, 1988; Vol. 48, p 193.  
 (278)  Bergerhoff, G.; Hundt, R.; Siever s, R.; Brown, I. D. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci.  1983 , 
23, 66-69. 
 (279)  Giacovazzo, C.; Monaco, H. L.; Artioli, G.; Viterbo, D.; Ferraris, G.; Gilli, G.; 
Zanotti, G.; Catti, M. Fundamentals of Crystallography ; 2nd ed.; Oxford University Press: New 
York, 200 2. 
 (280)  Bakos, T.; Rashkeev, S. N.; Pantelides, S. T. Phys. Rev. Lett.  2002 , 88, 055508.  
 (281)  Malavasi, G.; Menziani, M. C.; Pedone, A.; Segre, U. J. Non -Cryst. Solids  2006 , 
352, 285 -296. 
 (282)  Pedone, A.; Malavasi, G.; Menziani, M. C.; Segre, U.; Cor mack, A. N. Chem. Mater.  
2008 , 20, 4356 -4366.  
 (283)  Pedone, A. J. Phys. Chem. C  2009 , 113, 20773 -20784.  
 (284)  Colombi Ciacchi, L.; Payne, M. C. Phys. Rev. Lett.  2005 , 95, 196101.  
 (285)  Butenuth, A.; Moras, G.; Schneider, J.; Koleini, M.; Koppen, S.; Mei ssner, R.; 
Wright, L. B.; Walsh, T. R.; Colombi Ciacchi, L. Phys. Status Solidi B  2012 , 249, 292 -305. 
 (286)  Sarnthein, J.; Pasquarello, A.; Car, R. Phys. Rev. B  1995 , 52, 12690 -12695.  
 (287)  Sarnthein, J.; Pasquarello, A.; Car, R. Phys. Rev. Lett.  1995 , 74, 4682 -4685.  
 (288)  Haworth, R.; Mountjoy, G.; Corno, M.; Ugliengo, P.; Newport, R. J. Phys. Rev. B  
2010 , 81, 060301.  
 (289)  Corno, M.; Pedone, A.; Dovesi, R.; Ugliengo, P. Chem. Mater.  2008 , 20, 5610 -5621.  
 (290)  Dracinsky, M.; Benda, L.; Bour, P. Chem. Phys. Lett.  2011 , 512, 54-59. 
 (291)  Dovesi, R.; Civalleri, B.; Orlando, R.; Roetti, C.; Saunders, V. R. In Reviews in 
Computational Chemistry, Vol 21 ; Lipkowitz, K. B., Larter, R., Cundari, T. R., Eds.; Wiley -Vch, 
Inc: New York, 2005; Vol. 21, p 1 -125. 
 (292) Tasker, P. W. J. Phys. C Solid State Phys.  1979 , 12, 4977 -4984.  
 (293)  Meyer, B.; Marx, D. Phys. Rev. B  2003 , 67, 0035403.  
 (294)  Murashov, V. J. Mol. Struct.  2003 , 650, 141 -157. 
 (295)  Murashov, V. V. J. Phys. Chem. B  2005 , 109, 4144 -4151.  
 (296)  Radzig, V. A. In Defects in SiO2 and Related Dielectrics: Science and Technology ; 
Pacchioni, G., Skuja, L., Griscom, D. L., Eds. 2000; Vol. 2, p 339 -370. 
 (297)  Radzig, V. A.; Berestetskaya, I. V.; Kostritsa, S. N. Kinet. Catal.  1998 , 39, 863 -867. 
 (298)  Pacc hioni, G.; Ferrari, A. M.; Ierano, G. Faraday Discuss.  1997 , 106, 155 -172. 
 (299)  Pacchioni, G.; Ierano, G. Phys. Rev. Lett.  1997 , 79, 753 -756. 
 (300)  Pacchioni, G.; Ierano, G. Phys. Rev. B  1998 , 57, 818 -832. 
 (301)  Pacchioni, G.; Ierano, G.; Mar quez, A. M. Phys. Rev. Lett.  1998 , 81, 377 -380. 
 (302)  Zwijnenburg, M. A.; Sokol, A. A.; Sousa, C.; Bromley, S. T. J. Chem. Phys.  2009 , 
131, 034705 -034711.  
 (303)  Boero, M.; Pasquarello, A.; Sarnthein, J.; Car, R. Phys. Rev. Lett.  1997 , 78, 887 -890. 
 (304)  Rudra, J. K.; Fowler, W. B. Phys. Rev. B  1987 , 35, 8223 -8230.  
 (305)  Vaccaro, G.; Buscarino, G.; Agnello, S.; Sporea, A.; Oproiu, C.; Sporea, D. G.; 
Gelardi, F. M. J. Phys. Chem. C  2012 , 116, 144 -149. 
 (306)  Musso, F.; Sodupe, M.; Corno, M.; Ugliengo, P. J. Phys. Chem. C  2009 , 113, 17876 -
17884.  
 (307)  Cole, D. J.; Payne, M. C.; Csanyi, G.; Spearing, S. M.; Colombi Ciacchi, L. J. Chem. 
Phys.  2007 , 127, 204704.  
 (308)  Schneider, J.; Colombi Ciacchi, L. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2012 , 134, 2407 -2413.  
 (309)  Rimola, A .; Sodupe, M.; Tosoni, S.; Civalleri, B.; Ugliengo, P. Langmuir  2006 , 22, 
6593 -6604.  220 
 
 (310)  Corno, M.; Busco, C.; Bolis, V.; Tosoni, S.; Ugliengo, P. Langmuir  2009 , 25, 2188 -
2198.  
 (311)  Rimola, A.; Corno, M.; Garza, J.; Ugliengo, P. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. , A 2012 , 370, 
1478 -1498.  
 (312)  Rimola, A.; Corno, M.; Zicovich -Wilson, C. M.; Ugliengo, P. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  
2008 , 130, 16181 -16183.  
 (313)  Rozanska, X.; Delbecq, F.; Sautet, P. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2010 , 12, 14930 -
14940.  
 (314)  Peri, J. B.; Hensley, J. A. L. J. Phys. Chem.  1968 , 72, 2926 -2933.  
 (315)  Vigne -Maeder, F.; Sautet, P. J. Phys. Chem. B  1997 , 101, 8197 -8203.  
 (316)  Civalleri, B.; Casassa, S.; Garrone, E.; Pisani, C.; Ugliengo, P. J. Phys. Chem. B.  
1999 , 103, 2165 -2171.  
 (317)  Tosoni, S.; Civa lleri, B.; Pascale, F.; Ugliengo, P. J. Phys.: Conference Series  2008 , 
117, 012026 -012033.  
 (318)  Civalleri, B.; Ugliengo, P. J. Phys. Chem. B.  2000 , 104, 9491 -9499.  
 (319)  Goumans, T. P. M.; Catlow, C. R. A.; Brown, W. A. J. Chem. Phys.  2008 , 128, 
134709.  
 (320)  Goumans, T. P. M.; Wander, A.; Catlow, C. R. A.; Brown, W. A. Mon. Not. R. 
Astron. Soc.  2007 , 382, 1829 -1832.  
 (321)  Rimola, A.; Sodupe, M.; Ugliengo, P. J. Phys. Chem. C  2009 , 113, 5741 -5750.  
 (322)  Rimola, A.; Civalleri, B.; Ugliengo, P. Langmuir  2008 , 24, 14027 -14034.  
 (323)  Zhao, Y. L.; Koppen, S.; Frauenheim, T. J. Phys. Chem. C  2011 , 115, 9615 -9621.  
 (324)  Nonella, M.; Seeger, S. ChemPhysChem  2008 , 9, 414 -421. 
 (325)  Nonella, M.; Seeger, S. Chem. Phys.  2010 , 378, 73-81. 
 (326)  Orlando, R.; Del le Piane, M.; Bush, I. J.; Ugliengo, P.; Ferrabone, M.; Dovesi, R. J. 
Comput. Chem.  2012 , 33, 2276 -2284.  
 (327)  Pisani, C.; Maschio, L.; Casassa, S.; Halo, M.; Schutz, M.; Usvyat, D. J. Comput. 
Chem.  2008 , 29, 2113 -2124.  
 (328)  Pisani, C.; Schutz, M.; Casa ssa, S.; Usvyat, D.; Maschio, L.; Lorenz, M.; Erba, A. 
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2012 , 14, 7615 -7628.  
 (329)  Paier, J.; Ren, X.; Rinke, P.; Scuseria, G. E.; Gruneis, A.; Kresse, G.; Scheffler, M. 
New J. Phys.  2012 , 14, 043002.  
 (330)  Hafner, J. J. Comput. Ch em. 2008 , 29, 2044 -2078.  
 (331)  Maschio, L.; Civalleri, B.; Ugliengo, P.; Gavezzotti, A. J. Phys. Chem. A  2011 , 115, 
11179 -11186.  
 (332)  Maschio, L. J. Chem. Theory Comput.  2011 , 7, 2818 -2830.  
 (333)  Sherrill, C. D. J. Chem. Phys.  2010 , 132, 110902 -110906.  
 (334)  Tomasi, J.; Persico, M. Chem. Rev.  1994 , 94, 2027 -2094.  
 (335)  Sauer, J. Chem. Rev.  1989 , 89, 199 -255. 
 (336)  Meier, W. M.; Olson, D. H.; Baerlocher, C. Zeolites  1996 , 17, 1-229. 
 (337)  Sauer, J.; Hill, J. R. Chem. Phys. Lett.  1994 , 218, 333 -337. 
 (338)  Civalleri, B.; Garrone, E.; Ugliengo, P. Chem. Phys. Lett.  1998 , 294, 103 -108. 
 (339)  Civalleri, B.; Garrone, E.; Ugliengo, P. Chem. Phys. Lett.  1999 , 299, 443 -450. 
 (340)  Civalleri, B.; Garrone, E.; Ugliengo, P. Langmuir  1999 , 15, 5829 -5835.  
 (341)  Bordiga, S.; Roggero, I.; Ugliengo, P.; Zecchina, A.; Bolis, V.; Artioli, G.; Buzzoni, 
R.; Marra, G.; Rivetti, F.; Spano, G.; Lamberti, C. J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans.  2000 , 3921 -3929.  
 (342)  Bolis, V.; Busco, C.; Ugliengo, P. J. Phys. Chem. B  2006 , 110, 14849 -14859.  
 (343)  Bolis, V.; Busco, C.; Aina, V.; Morterra, C.; Ugliengo, P. J. Phys. Chem. C  2008 , 
112, 16879 -16892.  
 (344)  Koch, W.; Holthausen, M. C. A Chemist's Guide to Density Functional Theory ; 2nd 
ed.; Wiley -VCH Verlag GmbH: Weinheim, 2002.  
 (345)  Musso, F.; Ugliengo, P.; Solans -Monfort, X.; Sodupe, M. J. Phys. Chem. C  2010 , 
114, 16430 -16438.  221 
 
 (346)  Yang, J. J.; Meng, S.; Xu, L. F.; Wang, E. G. Phys. Rev. Lett.  2004 , 92, 146102.  
 (347)  Bakowies, D.; Thiel, W. J. Phys. Chem.  1996 , 100, 10580 -10594.  
 (348)  Zhang, Y.; Lee, T. -S.; Yang, W. J. Chem. Phys.  1999 , 110, 46-54. 
 (349)  Poteau, R.; Alary, F.; Abou El Makarim, H.; Heully, J. L.; Barthelat, J. C.; Daudey, 
J. P. J. Phys. Chem. A  2001 , 105, 206 -214. 
 (350)  Poteau, R.; Ortega, I.; Alary, F.; Solis, A. R.; Barthelat, J. C.; Daudey, J. P. J. Phys. 
Chem. A  2001 , 105, 198 -205. 
 (351)  Taylor, C. E.; Cory, M. G.; Bartlett, R. J.; Thiel, W. Comput. Mater. Sci.  2003 , 27, 
204-211. 
 (352)  Taylor, D. E.; Bunte, S. W.; Runge, K. J. Phys. Chem. A  2006 , 110, 6279 -6284.  
 (353)  Mallik, A.; Taylor, D. E.; Runge, K.; Dufty, J. W. Int. J. Quantum Chem.  2004 , 100, 
1019 -1025.  
 (354)  Maseras, F.; Morokuma, K. J. Comput. Chem.  1995 , 16, 1170 -1179.  
 (355)  Frisch, M. J.; Trucks, G. W.; Schlegel, H. B.; Scuseria, G. E.; Robb, M. S.; 
Cheeseman, J. R.; Zakrzewski, V. G.; Montgomery Jr., J. A.; Stratmann, R. E.; Burant, J. C.; 
Dapprich, S.; Millam, J. M.; Daniels, A. D.; Kudin, K. N.; Strain, M. C.; Farkas, O.; Tomasi, J.; 
Barone, V.; Cossi, M.; Cammi, R.; Mennucci, B.; Pomelli, C .; Adamo, C.; Clifford, S.; Ochterski, 
J.; Petersson, G. A.; Ayala, P. Y.; Cui, Q.; Morokuma, K.; Salvador, P.; Dannenberg, J. J.; Malick, 
D. K.; Rabuck, A. D.; Raghavachari, K.; Foresman, J. B.; Cioslowski, J.; Ortiz, J. V.; Baboul, A. 
G.; Stefanov, B. B. ; Liu, G.; Liashenko, A.; Piskorz, P.; Komaromi, I.; Gomperts, R.; Martin, R. L.; 
Fox, D. J.; Keith, T.; Al -Laham, M. A.; Peng, C. Y.; Nanayakkara, A.; Challacombe, M.; Gill, P. 
M. W.; Johnson, B.; Chen, W.; Wong, M. W.; Andres, J. L.; Gonzalez, C.; Head -Gordon, M.; 
Replogle, E. S.; Pople, J. A.; Gaussian 98, Gaussian, Inc.: Pittsburgh, PA, 1998.  
 (356)  Svensson, M.; Humbel, S.; Froese, R. D. J.; Matsubara, T.; Sieber, S.; Morokuma, K. 
J. Phys. Chem.  1996 , 100, 19357 -19363.  
 (357)  Humbel, S.; Sieber, S.; Mo rokuma, K. J. Chem. Phys.  1996 , 105, 1959 -1967.  
 (358)  Dapprich, S.; Komaromi, I.; Byun, K. S.; Morokuma, K.; Frisch, M. J. J. Mol. Struct. 
THEOCHEM  1999 , 461, 1-21. 
 (359)  Eichler, U.; Kolmel, C. M.; Sauer, J. J. Comput. Chem.  1997 , 18, 463 -477. 
 (360)  Vreven, T.; Morokuma, K. J. Comput. Chem.  2000 , 21, 1419 -1432.  
 (361)  Roggero, I.; Civalleri, B.; Ugliengo, P. Chem. Phys. Lett.  2001 , 341, 625 -632. 
 (362)  Bolis, V.; Barbaglia, A.; Broyer, M.; Busco, C.; Civalleri, B.; Ugliengo, P. Origins 
Life Evol. Biosph ere 2004 , 34, 69-77. 
 (363)  Bordiga, S.; Ugliengo, P.; Damin, A.; Lamberti, C.; Spoto, G.; Zecchina, A.; Spano, 
G.; Buzzoni, R.; Dalloro, L.; Rivetti, F. Top. Catal.  2001 , 15, 43-52. 
 (364)  Sauer, J.; Sierka, M. J. Comput. Chem.  2000 , 21, 1470 -1493.  
 (365)  Brandle, M.; Sauer, J. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  1998 , 120, 1556 -1570.  
 (366)  Nachtigallova, D.; Nachtigall, P.; Sierka, M.; Sauer, J. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  
1999 , 1, 2019 -2026.  
 (367)  Tuma, C.; Sauer, J. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2006 , 8, 3955 -3965.  
 (368)  Sillar , K.; Hofmann, A.; Sauer, J. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2009 , 131, 4143 -4150.  
 (369)  Svelle, S.; Tuma, C.; Rozanska, X.; Kerber, T.; Sauer, J. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2009 , 
131, 816 -825. 
 (370)  Vreven, T.; Byun, K. S.; Komaromi, I.; Dapprich, S.; Montgomery, J. A.; 
Morok uma, K.; Frisch, M. J. J. Chem. Theory Comput.  2006 , 2, 815 -826. 
 (371)  Cramer, C. Essentials of Computational Chemistry: Theories and Models ; 2nd ed.; 
Wiley, 2004.  
 (372)  Jensen, F. Introduction to Computational Chemistry ; 2on ed.; Wiley, 2006.  
 (373)  Szabo, A.; Ostlund, N. S. Modern Quantum Chemistry: Introduction to Advanced 
Electronic Structure Theory Dover, 1996.  
 (374)  Pyykkö, P.; Stanton, J. F. Chem. Rev.  2012 , 112, 1-3. 
 (375)  Crawford, T. D.; King, R. A. Chem. Phys. Lett.  2002 , 366, 611 -622. 
 (376)  Lee, M. S.; Maslen, P. E.; Head -Gordon, M. J. Chem. Phys.  2000 , 112, 3592 -3601.  222 
 
 (377)  Maslen, P. E.; Head -Gordon, M. Chem. Phys. Lett.  1998 , 283, 102 -108. 
 (378)  Saebo, S.; Pulay, P. Chem. Phys. Lett.  1985 , 113, 13-18. 
 (379)  Saebo, S.; Pulay, P. J. Chem . Phys.  1988 , 88, 1884 -1890.  
 (380)  Saebo, S.; Pulay, P. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem.  1993 , 44, 213 -236. 
 (381)  Schutz, M. J. Chem. Phys.  2002 , 116, 8772 -8785.  
 (382)  Scuseria, G. E.; Ayala, P. Y. J. Chem. Phys.  1999 , 111, 8330 -8343.  
 (383)  Werner, H. J.; Manby,  F. R.; Knowles, P. J. J. Chem. Phys.  2003 , 118, 8149 -8160.  
 (384)  Pisani, C.; Busso, M.; Capecchi, G.; Casassa, S.; Dovesi, R.; Maschio, L.; Zicovich -
Wilson, C.; Schutz, M. J. Chem. Phys.  2005 , 122, 094113.  
 (385)  Sousa, S. F.; Fernandes, P. A.; Ramos, M.  J. J. Phys. Chem. A  2007 , 111, 10439 -
10452.  
 (386)  Musso, F. PhD Thesis, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona and Università di Torino, 
2011.  
 (387)  Tucker, M. G.; Keen, D. A.; Dove, M. T. Mineral. Mag.  2001 , 65, 489 -507. 
 (388)  Schmahl, W. W.; Swainson, I. P.; Dove, M. T.; Graeme -Barber, A. Z. Kristallogr.  
1992 , 201, 125 -145. 
 (389)  Kihara, K.; Matsumoto, T.; Imamura, M. Z. Kristallogr.  1986 , 177, 27-38. 
 (390)  Saxena, S. K.; Chatterjee, N.; Fei, Y.; Shen, G. Thermodynamic Data on Oxides and 
Silicates ; Sprin ger-Verlag: Berlin, 1993.  
 (391)  Goumans, T. P. M.; Wander, A.; Brown, W. A.; Catlow, C. R. A. Phys. Chem. 
Chem. Phys.  2007 , 9, 2146 -2152.  
 (392)  Zicovich -Wilson, C. M.; Pascale, F.; Roetti, C.; Saunders, V. R.; Orlando, R.; 
Dovesi, R. J. Comput. Chem.  2004, 25, 1873 -1881.  
 (393)  Sicolo, S.; Palma, G.; Di Valentin, C.; Pacchioni, G. Phys. Rev. B  2007 , 76, 075121.  
 (394)  Giordano, L.; Sushko, P. V.; Pacchioni, G.; Shluger, A. L. Phys. Rev. Lett.  2007 , 99, 
136801.  
 (395)  Giordano, L.; Sushko, P. V.; Pacchioni , G.; Shluger, A. L. Phys. Rev. B  2007 , 75, 
024109.  
 (396)  Raghavachari, K.; Ricci, D.; Pacchioni, G. J. Chem. Phys.  2002 , 116, 825 -831. 
 (397)  Sodupe, M.; Bertran, J.; Rodriguez -Santiago, L.; Baerends, E. J. J. Phys. Chem. A  
1999 , 103, 166 -170. 
 (398)  Braida, B.; Hiberty, P. C.; Savin, A. J. Phys. Chem. A  1998 , 102, 7872 -7877.  
 (399)  Gilli, G.; Gilli, P. J. Mol. Struct.  2000 , 552, 1-15. 
 (400)  Kim, K.; Jordan, K. D. J. Phys. Chem.  1994 , 98, 10089 -10094.  
 (401)  Tuma, C.; Boese, A. D.; Handy, N. C. Phys. Che m. Chem. Phys.  1999 , 1, 3939 -3947.  
 (402)  Novoa, J. J.; Sosa, C. J. Phys. Chem.  1995 , 99, 15837 -15845.  
 (403)  Civalleri, B.; Garrone, E.; Ugliengo, P. J. Mol. Struct. THEOCHEM  1997 , 419, 227 -
238. 
 (404)  Ugliengo, P.; Civalleri, B.; Garrone, E. Nuovo Ciment o D 1997 , 19, 1765 -1771.  
 (405)  Thanthiriwatte, K. S.; Hohenstein, E. G.; Burns, L. A.; Sherrill, C. D. J. Chem. 
Theory Comput.  2011 , 7, 88-96. 
 (406)  Ireta, J.; Neugebauer, J.; Scheffler, M. J. Phys. Chem. A  2004 , 108, 5692 -5698.  
 (407)  Ugliengo, P.; Pasc ale, F.; Merawa, M.; Labeguerie, P.; Tosoni, S.; Dovesi, R. J. 
Phys. Chem. B  2004 , 108, 13632 -13637.  
 (408)  Hobza, P.; Sponer, J.; Reschel, T. J. Comput. Chem.  1995 , 16, 1315 -1325.  
 (409)  Allen, M. J.; Tozer, D. J. J. Chem. Phys.  2002 , 117, 11113 -11120.  
 (410) Kristyan, S.; Pulay, P. Chem. Phys. Lett.  1994 , 229, 175 -180. 
 (411)  Perezjorda, J. M.; Becke, A. D. Chem. Phys. Lett.  1995 , 233, 134 -137. 
 (412)  Mignon, P.; Ugliengo, P.; Sodupe, M. J. Phys. Chem. C  2009 , 113, 13741 -13749.  
 (413)  Mignon, P.; Ugliengo , P.; Sodupe, M.; Hernandez, E. R. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  
2010 , 12, 688 -697. 
 (414)  Lin, I. C.; Seitsonen, A. P.; Coutinho -Neto, M. D.; Tavernelli, I.; Rothlisberger, U. J. 
Phys. Chem. B  2009 , 113, 1127 -1131.  223 
 
 (415)  Grossman, J. C.; Schwegles, E.; Draeger , E. W.; Gygi, F.; Galli, G. J. Chem. Phys.  
2004 , 120, 300 -311. 
 (416)  Sit, P. H. L.; Marzari, N. J. Chem. Phys.  2005 , 122, 204510.  
 (417)  Todorova, T.; Seitsonen, A. P.; Hutter, J.; Kuo, I. F. W.; Mundy, C. J. J. Phys. Chem. 
B 2006 , 110, 3685 -3691.  
 (418)  Elstner, M.; Hobza, P.; Frauenheim, T.; Suhai, S.; Kaxiras, E. J. Chem. Phys.  2001 , 
114, 5149 -5155.  
 (419)  Grimme, S. J. Comput. Chem.  2004 , 25, 1463 -1473.  
 (420)  Grimme, S. J. Comput. Chem.  2006 , 27, 1787 -1799.  
 (421)  Grimme, S.; Antony, J.; Ehrlich, S.;  Krieg, H. J. Chem. Phys.  2010 , 132, 154104.  
 (422)  Civalleri, B.; Zicovich -Wilson, C. M.; Valenzano, L.; Ugliengo, P. CrystEngComm  
2008 , 10, 405 -410. 
 (423)  Jurecka, P.; Cerny, J.; Hobza, P.; Salahub, D. R. J. Comput. Chem.  2007 , 28, 555 -
569. 
 (424)  Kabel ac, M.; Valdes, H.; Sherer, E. C.; Cramer, C. J.; Hobza, P. Phys. Chem. Chem. 
Phys.  2007 , 9, 5000 -5008.  
 (425)  Morgado, C.; Vincent, M. A.; Hillier, I. H.; Shan, X. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2007 , 
9, 448 -451. 
 (426)  Rimola, A.; Civalleri, B.; Ugliengo, P. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2010 , 12, 6357 -
6366.  
 (427)  Tkatchenko, A.; Scheffler, M. Phys. Rev. Lett.  2009 , 102, 073005.  
 (428)  von Lilienfeld, O. A.; Tavernelli, I.; Rothlisberger, U.; Sebastiani, D. Phys. Rev. Lett.  
2004 , 93, 153004.  
 (429)  von Lilienfeld, O.  A.; Tavernelli, I.; Rothlisberger, U.; Sebastiani, D. Phys. Rev. B  
2005 , 71, 195119.  
 (430)  Torres, E.; DiLabio, G. A. J. Phys. Chem. Lett.  2012 , 3, 1738 -1744.  
 (431)  Dion, M.; Rydberg, H.; Schroder, E.; Langreth, D. C.; Lundqvist, B. I. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 2004 , 92, 246401.  
 (432)  Zhao, Y.; Truhlar, D. G. J. Chem. Theory Comput.  2007 , 3, 289 -300. 
 (433)  Zhao, Y.; Truhlar, D. G. Acc. Chem. Res.  2008 , 41, 157 -167. 
 (434)  Boys, S.; Bernardi, F. Mol. Phys.  1970 , 19, 553 -566. 
 (435)  Goltl, F.; Hafner, J. J. Chem.  Phys.  2012 , 136. 
 (436)  Civalleri, B.; Zicovich -Wilson, C. M.; Ugliengo, P.; Saunders, V. R.; Dovesi, R. 
Chem. Phys. Lett.  1998 , 292, 394 -402. 
 (437)  Tosoni, S.; Tuma, C.; Sauer, J.; Civalleri, B.; Ugliengo, P. J. Chem. Phys.  2007 , 127, 
154102.  
 (438)  Paier, J.; Hirschl, R.; Marsman, M.; Kresse, G. J. Chem. Phys.  2005 , 122, 234102.  
 (439)  Leach, A. R. Molecular Modelling. Principles and Applications ; 2 ed.; Pearson 
Education Limited: Dorchester (UK), 2001.  
 (440)  Alder, B. J.; Wainwright, T. E. J. Chem. Ph ys. 1959 , 31, 459 -466. 
 (441)  Rahman, A. Phys. Rev.  1964 , 136, A405 -A411.  
 (442)  Car, R.; Parrinello, M. Phys. Rev. Lett.  1985 , 55, 2471 -2474.  
 (443)  Marx, D.; Hutter, J. Ab initio Molecular Dynamics: Basic Theory and Advanced 
Methods ; Cambridge University  Press: Cambridge, 2009.  
 (444)  Pople, J. A.; Santry, D. P.; Segal, G. A. J. Chem. Phys.  1965 , 43, S129 -S135.  
 (445)  Dewar, M. J. S.; Thiel, W. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  1977 , 99, 4899 -4907.  
 (446)  Stewart, J. P.; MOPAC2012, Ed.; http://OpenMOPAC.net:  Colorado Springs (CO) 
USA, 2012.  
 (447)  Korth, M.; Pitonák, M.; Rezác, J. J. Chem. Theory Comp.  2010 , 6, 344 -352. 
 (448)  Řez č, J.; Hobza, P. J. Chem. Theory Comput.  2011 , 8, 141 -151. 
 (449)  Slater, J. C.; Koster, G. F. Phys. Rev . 1954 , 94, 1498 -1524.  
 (450)  Elstner, M.; Frauenheim, T.; Kaxiras, E.; Seifert, G.; Suhai, S. Phys. Status Solidi B  
2000 , 217, 357 -376. 224 
 
 (451)  Elstner, M.; Frauenheim, T.; Suhai, S. J. Mol. Struct. THEOCHEM  2003 , 632, 29-41. 
 (452)  Elstner, M.; Porezag, D .; Jungnickel, G.; Elsner, J.; Haugk, M.; Frauenheim, T.; 
Suhai, S.; Seifert, G. Phys. Rev. B  1998 , 58, 7260 -7268.  
 (453)  Frauenheim, T.; Seifert, G.; Elsterner, M.; Hajnal, Z.; Jungnickel, G.; Porezag, D.; 
Suhai, S.; Scholz, R. Phys. Status Solidi B  2000 , 217, 41-62. 
 (454)  Thomas, F.; Gotthard, S.; Marcus, E.; Thomas, N.; Christof, K.; Marc, A.; Michael, 
S.; Zoltán, H.; Aldo Di, C.; Sándor, S. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter  2002 , 14, 3015 -3047.  
 (455)  Elstner, M. Theor. Chem. Acc.  2006 , 116, 316 -325. 
 (456)  Allinger, N. L. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  1977 , 99, 8127 -8134.  
 (457)  van Beest, B. W. H.; Kramer, G. J.; van Santen, R. A. Phys. Rev. Lett.  1990 , 64, 
1955 -1958.  
 (458)  Dick, B. G.; Overhauser, A. W. Phys. Rev.  1958 , 112, 90-103. 
 (459)  Jackson, R. A.; Catlow, C. R.  A. Mol. Simul.  1988 , 1, 207 -224. 
 (460)  Gale, J. D. Z. Kristallogr.  2005 , 220, 552 -554. 
 (461)  Schaible, M. Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci.  1999 , 24, 265 -323. 
 (462)  Hassanali, A. A.; Singer, S. J. J. Phys. Chem. B  2007 , 111, 11181 -11193.  
 (463)  Hassan ali, A. A.; Singer, S. J. J. Comput. Aided Mater. Des.  2007 , 14, 53-63. 
 (464)  Garofalini, S. H. J. Non -Cryst. Solids  1990 , 120, 1-12. 
 (465)  Mahadevan, T. S.; Garofalini, S. H. J. Phys. Chem. C  2008 , 112, 1507 -1515.  
 (466)  Du, J.; Cormack, A. N. J. Am. Ce ram. Soc.  2005 , 88, 2532 -2539.  
 (467)  Pedone, A.; Malavasi, G.; Menziani, M. C.; Segre, U.; Musso, F.; Corno, M.; 
Civalleri, B.; Ugliengo, P. Chem. Mater.  2008 , 20, 2522 -2531.  
 (468)  van Duin, A. C. T.; Dasgupta, S.; Lorant, F.; Goddard, W. A. J. Phys. Che m. A 2001 , 
105, 9396 -9409.  
 (469)  Pauling, L. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  1947 , 69, 542 -553. 
 (470)  van Duin, A. C. T.; Strachan, A.; Stewman, S.; Zhang, Q. S.; Xu, X.; Goddard, W. 
A. J. Phys. Chem. A  2003 , 107, 3803 -3811.  
 (471)  Fogarty, J. C.; Aktulga, H. M.; Gram a, A. Y.; van Duin, A. C. T.; Pandit, S. A. J. 
Chem. Phys.  2010 , 132, 174704.  
 (472)  Feuston, B. P.; Garofalini, S. H. J. Chem. Phys.  1988 , 89, 5818 -5824.  
 (473)  Tsuneyuki, S.; Tsukada, M.; Aoki, H.; Matsui, Y. Phys. Rev. Lett.  1988 , 61, 869 -872. 
 (474)  Schröder, K. -P.; Sauer, J.; Leslie, M.; Richard, C.; Catlow, A.; Thomas, J. M. Chem. 
Phys. Lett.  1992 , 188, 320 -325. 
 (475)  Hill, J. R.; Sauer, J. J. Phys. Chem.  1994 , 98, 1238 -1244.  
 (476)  Schroder, K. P.; Sauer, J. J. Phys. Chem.  1996 , 100, 11043 -11049.  
 (477) Sierka, M.; Sauer, J. Faraday Discuss.  1997 , 106, 41-62. 
 (478)  Guillot, B.; Guissani, Y. J. Chem. Phys.  2001 , 114, 6720 -6733.  
 (479)  Skuja, L. N.; Silin, A. R. Phys. Status Solidi A  1979 , 56, K11 -K13.  
 (480)  Griscom, D. L. J. Non -Cryst. Solids  1985 , 73, 51-77. 
 (481)  Skuja, L. J. Non -Cryst. Solids  1994 , 179, 51-69. 
 (482)  Skuja, L.; Suzuki, T.; Tanimura, K. Phys. Rev. B  1995 , 52, 15208 -15216.  
 (483)  Skuja, L.; Tanimura, T.; Itoh, N. J. Appl. Phys.  1996 , 80, 3518 -3525.  
 (484)  Skuja, L.; Naber, A. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Defects 
in Insulating Materials - Icdim 96 ; Matthews, G. E., Williams, R. T., Eds. 1997; Vol. 239 -, p 25 -28. 
 (485)  Vaccaro, L.; Cannas, M.; Radzig, V.; Boscaino, R. Phys. Rev. B  2008 , 78, 075421.  
 (486)  Vaccaro, L.; Cannas, M.; Radzig, V. J. Non -Cryst. Solids  2009 , 355, 1020 -1023.  
 (487)  Zyubin, A. S.; Mebel, A. M.; Lin, S. H.; Glinka, Y. D. J. Chem. Phys.  2002 , 116, 
9889 -9896.  
 (488)  Griscom, D. L. J. Non -Cryst. Solids  1978 , 31, 241 -266. 
 (489)  Stapelbroek , M.; Griscom, D. L.; Friebele, E. J.; Sigel, G. H. J. Non -Cryst. Solids  
1979 , 32, 313 -326. 
 (490)  Griscom, D. L.; Friebele, E. J. Phys. Rev. B  1981 , 24, 4896 -4898.  
 (491)  Griscom, D. L. J. Non -Cryst. Solids  2011 , 357, 1945 -1962.  225 
 
 (492)  Glinka, Y. D.; Lin,  S. H.; Chen, Y. T. Phys. Rev. B  2002 , 66, 035404.  
 (493)  Raghavachari, K.; Pacchioni, G. J. Chem. Phys.  2001 , 114, 4657 -4662.  
 (494)  Murashov, V. V.; Demchuk, E. Surf. Sci.  2005 , 595, 6-19. 
 (495)  Murashov, V. V.; Demchuk, E. J. Phys. Chem. B  2005 , 109, 10835 -10841.  
 (496)  Koudriachova, M. V.; Beckers, J. V. L.; de Leeuw, S. W. Comput. Mater. Sci.  2001 , 
20, 381 -386. 
 (497)  Rignanese, G. M.; De Vita, A.; Charlier, J. C.; Gonze, X.; Car, R. Phys. Rev. B  2000 , 
61, 13250 -13255.  
 (498)  Lopes, P. E. M.; Demchuk,  E.; Mackerell, A. D., Jr. Int. J. Quantum Chem.  2009 , 
109, 50-64. 
 (499)  de Leeuw, N. H.; Higgins, F. M.; Parker, S. C. J. Phys. Chem. B  1999 , 103, 1270 -
1277.  
 (500)  Rignanese, G. M.; Charlier, J. C.; Gonze, X. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2004 , 6, 
1920 -1925.  
 (501)  Adeagbo, W. A.; Doltsinis, N. L.; Klevakina, K.; Renner, J. ChemPhysChem  2008 , 
9, 994 -1002.  
 (502)  Walsh, T. R.; Wilson, M.; Sutton, A. P. J. Chem. Phys.  2000 , 113, 9191 -9201.  
 (503)  Tosoni, S.; Civalleri, B.; Ugliengo, P. J. Phys. Chem. C  2010 , 114, 19984 -19992.  
 (504)  Yang, J. J.; Wang, E. G. Phys. Rev. B  2006 , 73, 035406.  
 (505)  Zyubin, A. S.; Glinka, Y. D.; Mebel, A. M.; Lin, S. H.; Hwang, L. P.; Chen, Y. T. J. 
Chem. Phys.  2002 , 116, 281 -294. 
 (506)  Ceresoli, D.; Bernasconi, M.; Iarlori, S.; Parr inello, M.; Tosatti, E. Phys. Rev. Lett.  
2000 , 84, 3887 -3890.  
 (507)  Masini, P.; Bernasconi, M. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter  2002 , 14, 4133 -4144.  
 (508)  Mishler, C.; Horbach, J.; Kob, W.; Binder, K. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter  2005 , 17, 
4005 -4013.  
 (509)  Uglien go, P.; Sodupe, M.; Musso, F.; Bush, I. J.; Orlando, R.; Dovesi, R. Adv. Mater.  
2008 , 20, 4579 -4583.  
 (510)  Tielens, F.; Gervais, C.; Lambert, J. F.; Mauri, F.; Costa, D. Chem. Mater.  2008 , 20, 
3336 -3344.  
 (511)  Pickard, C. J.; Mauri, F. Phys. Rev. B  2001 , 63, 245101.  
 (512)  Thomas, J. M.; Klinowski, J.; Ramdas, S.; Hunter, B. K.; Tennakoon, D. T. B. Chem. 
Phys. Lett.  1983 , 102, 158 -162. 
 (513)  Engelhardt, G.; Radeglia, R. Chem. Phys. Lett.  1984 , 108, 271 -274. 
 (514)  Pedone, A.; Malavasi, G.; Menziani, M. C .; Cormack, A. N.; Segre, U. J. Phys. 
Chem. B  2006 , 110, 11780 -11795.  
 (515)  Ugliengo, P.; Viterbo, D.; Chiari, G. Z. Kristallogr.  1993 , 207, 9-23. 
 (516)  Dovesi, R.; Saunders, V. R.; Roetti, C.; Orlando, R.; Zicovich -Wilson, C. M.; 
Pascale, F.; Civalleri,  B.; Doll, K.; Harrison, N. M.; Bush, I. J.; D'Arco, P.; Llunell, M.; Università 
di Torino: Torino, 2006.  
 (517)  Delle Piane, M.; Corno, M.; Ugliengo, P. In Satellite Meeting of the World 
Association of Theoretical and Computational Chemists, WATOC 2011: T heoretical Modeling of 
Materials  Barcelona, 13 -15 July 2011.  
 (518)  Feuston, B. P.; Garofalini, S. H. J. Chem. Phys.  1989 , 91, 564 -570. 
 (519)  Berendsen, H. J. C.; Postma, J. P. M.; van Gunsteren, W. F.; Hermans, J. In 
Intermolecular Forces ; Pullmann, B., Ed. 1981, p 331.  
 (520)  Bakaev, V. A.; Steele, W. A. J. Chem. Phys.  1999 , 111, 9803 -9812.  
 (521)  Roder, A.; Kob, W.; Binder, K. J. Chem. Phys.  2001 , 114, 7602 -7614.  
 (522)  Mischler, C.; Kob, W.; Binder, K. Comput. Phys. Commun.  2002 , 147, 222 -225. 
 (523)  Okuno, M.; Kawamura, K. J. Non -Cryst. Solids  1995 , 191, 249 -259. 
 (524)  Leed, E. A.; Pantano, C. G. J. Non -Cryst. Solids  2003 , 325, 48-60. 
 (525)  Mischler, C.; Horbach, J.; Kob, W.; Binder, K. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter  2005 , 17, 
4005 -4013.  226 
 
 (526)  Cerius2 v.4.9 2003 , Accelrys, Inc.  
 (527)  Brooks, B. R.; III, C. L. B.; Jr, A. D. M.; Nilsson, L.; Petrella, R. J.; Roux, B.; Won, 
Y.; Archontis, G.; Bartels, C.; Boresch, S.; Caflisch, A.; Caves, L.; Cui, Q.; Dinner, A. R.; Feig, M.; 
Fischer, S.; Gao, J.; Hodoscek,  M.; Im, W.; Kuczera, K.; Lazaridis, T.; Ma, J.; Ovchinnikov, V.; 
Paci, E.; Pastor, R. W.; Post, C. B.; Pu, J. Z.; Schaefer, M.; Tidor, B.; Venable, R. M.; Woodcock, 
H. L.; Wu, X.; Yang, W.; York, D. M.; Karplus, M. J. Comput. Chem.  2009 , 30, 1545 -1614.  
 (528) Cruz -Chu, E. R.; Aksimentiev, A.; Schulten, K. J. Phys. Chem. B  2006 , 110, 21497 -
21508.  
 (529)  Berendsen, H. J. C.; Grigera, J. R.; Straatsma, T. P. J. Phys. Chem.  1987 , 91, 6269 -
6271.  
 (530)  Stillinger, F. H.; Weber, T. A. Phys. Rev. B  1985 , 31, 5262 -5271.  
 (531)  Vashishta, P.; Kalia, R. K.; Rino, J. P.; Ebbsjö, I. Phys. Rev. B  1990 , 41, 12197 -
12209.  
 (532)  Lerbret, A.; Lelong, G.; Mason, P. E.; Saboungi, M. L.; Brady, J. W. Food 
Biophysics  2011 , 6, 233 -240. 
 (533)  Rustad, J. R.; Hay, B. P. Geochim. C osmochim. Acta  1995 , 59, 1251 -1257.  
 (534)  Bourg, I. C.; Steefel, C. I. J. Phys. Chem. C  2012 , 116, 11556 -11564.  
 (535)  Morrow, B. A.; Cody, I. A. J. Phys. Chem.  1975 , 79, 761 -762. 
 (536)  Morrow, B. A.; Cody, I. A. J. Phys. Chem.  1976 , 80, 1998 -2004.  
 (537) Ferrari, A. M.; Garrone, E.; Spoto, G.; Ugliengo, P.; Zecchina, A. Surf. Sci.  1995 , 
323, 151 -162. 
 (538)  Woodcock, L. V.; Angell, C. A.; Cheeseman, P. J. Chem. Phys.  1976 , 65, 1565 -
1578.  
 (539)  Wilson, M.; Walsh, T. R. J. Chem. Phys.  2000 , 113, 9180 -9190 . 
 (540)  Du, M. -H.; Kolchin, A.; Cheng, H. -P. J. Chem. Phys.  2004 , 120, 1044 -1054.  
 (541)  Rimola, A.; Ugliengo, P. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2009 , 11, 2497 -2506.  
 (542)  Wander, M. C. F.; Clark, A. E. J. Phys. Chem. C  2008 , 112, 19986 -19994.  
 (543)  Ostroverkh ov, V.; Waychunas, G. A.; Shen, Y. R. Chem. Phys. Lett.  2004 , 386, 144 -
148. 
 (544)  Engemann, S.; Reichert, H.; Dosch, H.; Bilgram, J.; Honkimaki, V.; Snigirev, A. 
Phys. Rev. Lett.  2004 , 92, 205701.  
 (545)  Pelmenschikov, A.; Leszczynski, J.; Pettersson, L. G. M. J. Phys. Chem. A  2001 , 
105, 9528 -9532.  
 (546)  Criscenti, L. J.; Kubicki, J. D.; Brantley, S. L. J. Phys. Chem. A  2006 , 110, 198 -206. 
 (547)  Gautier, J. M.; Oelkers, E. H.; Schott, J. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta  2001 , 65, 1059 -
1070.  
 (548)  Nangia, S.; Ga rrison, B. J. J. Phys. Chem. A  2008 , 112, 2027 -2033.  
 (549)  Nangia, S.; Garrison, B. J. Mol. Phys.  2009 , 107, 831 -843. 
 (550)  Gratz, A. J.; Bird, P. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta  1993 , 57, 977 -989. 
 (551)  Castagliola, M.; Tellier, C. R.; Vaterkowski, J. L. J. Mater. Sci.  1986 , 21, 3551 -3560.  
 (552)  Zeitler, T. R.; Cormack, A. N. J. Cryst. Growth  2006 , 294, 96-102. 
 (553)  Sjoberg, S. J. Non -Cryst. Solids  1996 , 196, 51-57. 
 (554)  Yang, J. J.; Wang, E. G. Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci.  2006 , 10, 33-39. 
 (555)  Sauer, J.; Schroder, K. P. Z. Phys. Chem. (Leipzig)  1985 , 266, 379 -387. 
 (556)  Costa, D.; Lomenech, C.; Meng, M.; Stievano, L.; Lambert, J. F. J. Mol. Struct. 
THEOCHEM  2007 , 806, 253 -259. 
 (557)  Chashchikhin, V.; Rykova, E.; Bagaturyants, A. Phys. Chem. Ch em. Phys.  2011 , 13, 
1440 -1447.  
 (558)  Fubini, B.; Bolis, V.; Bailes, M.; Stone, F. S. Solid State Ionics  1989 , 32-3, 258 -272. 
 (559)  Puibasset, J.; Pellenq, R. J. M. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2004 , 6, 1933 -1937.  
 (560)  Fubini, B.; Bolis, V.; Cavenago, A.; Ug liengo, P. J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans.  
1992 , 88, 277 -290. 227 
 
 (561)  Douillard, J. M.; Elwafir, M.; Partyka, S. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  1994 , 164, 238 -
244. 
 (562)  Fubini, B. Thermochim. Acta  1988 , 135, 19-29. 
 (563)  Klier, K.; Shen, J. H.; Zettlemoyer, A. C. J. Phys. Chem.  1973 , 77, 1458 -1465.  
 (564)  Du, Q.; Freysz, E.; Shen, Y. R. Phys. Rev. Lett.  1994 , 72, 238 -241. 
 (565)  Garrone, E.; Kazansky, V. B.; Kustov, L. M.; Sauer, J.; Senchenya, I. N.; Ugliengo, 
P. J. Phys. Chem.  1992 , 96, 1040 -1045.  
 (566)  Ferra ri, A. M.; Ugliengo, P.; Garrone, E. J. Phys. Chem.  1993 , 97, 2671 -2676.  
 (567)  Murashov, V.; Harper, M.; Demchuk, E. J. Occup. Environ. Hyg.  2006 , 3, 718 -723. 
 (568)  Thompson, K. C.; Margey, P. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2003 , 5, 2970 -2975.  
 (569)  Cypryk, M.  J. Organomet. Chem.  1997 , 545, 483 -493. 
 (570)  Pelmenschikov, A. G.; Morosi, G.; Gamba, A. J. Phys. Chem. A  1997 , 101, 1178 -
1187.  
 (571)  Ignatyev, I. S.; Partal, F.; Gonzalez, J. J. L.; Sundius, T. Spectrochim. Acta, Part A  
2004 , 60, 1169 -1178.  
 (572)  Pelmenschikov, A. G.; Morosi, G.; Gamba, A. J. Phys. Chem.  1992 , 96, 7422 -7424.  
 (573)  Yang, J. J.; Meng, S.; Xu, L. F.; Wang, E. G. Phys. Rev. B  2005 , 71, 035413.  
 (574)  Musso, F.; Ugliengo, P.; Sodupe, M. J. Phys. Chem. A  2011 , 115, 11221 -11228.  
 (575)  Band ura, A. V.; Kubicki, J. D.; Sofo, J. O. J. Phys. Chem. C  2011 , 115, 5756 -5766.  
 (576)  Chen, Y. W.; Chu, I. H.; Wang, Y.; Cheng, H. P. Phys. Rev. B  2011 , 84, 155444.  
 (577)  Casarin, M.; Falcomer, D.; Glisenti, A.; Natile, M. M.; Poli, F.; Vittadini, A. Chem . 
Phys. Lett.  2005 , 405, 459 -464. 
 (578)  Takeuchi, M.; Bertinetti, L.; Martra, G.; Coluccia, S.; Anpo, M. Appl. Catal., A  2006 , 
307, 13-20. 
 (579)  Gallas, J. -P.; Goupil, J. -M.; Vimont, A.; Lavalley, J. -C.; Gil, B.; Gilson, J. -P.; 
Miserque, O. Langmuir  2009 , 25, 5825 -5834.  
 (580)  Lutz, W.; Weber, M.; Bertram, R.; Kurzhals, R.; Kryukova, G. Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem.  
2011 , 637, 421 -425. 
 (581)  Behrens, H.; Stuke, A. Glass Sci. Technol.  2003 , 76, 176 -189. 
 (582)  Sulpizi, M.; Gaigeot, M. -P.; Sprik, M. J. Chem. Theor y Comput.  2012 , 8, 1037 -1047.  
 (583)  Fernandez -Cata, G.; Perez -Gramatges, A.; Alvarez, L. J.; Comas -Rojas, H.; 
Zicovich -Wilson, C. M. J. Phys. Chem. C  2009 , 113, 13309 -13316.  
 (584)  Leung, K.; Nielsen, I. M. B.; Criscenti, L. J. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2009 , 131, 18358 -
18365.  
 (585)  Gaigeot, M. -P.; Sprik, M.; Sulpizi, M. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter  2012 , 24, 124106.  
 (586)  Zhao, Y. L. J. Theor. Comput. Chem.  2012 , 11, 155 -162. 
 (587)  Skelton, A. A.; Fenter, P.; Kubicki, J. D.; Wesolowski, D. J.; Cummings, P. T. J. 
Phys. Chem. C  2011 , 115, 2076 -2088.  
 (588)  Skelton, A. A.; Wesolowski, D. J.; Cummings, P. T. Langmuir  2011 , 27, 8700 -8709.  
 (589)  Du, Z. M.; de Leeuw, N. H. Surf. Sci.  2004 , 554, 193 -210. 
 (590)  Du, Z. M.; de Leeuw, N. H. Dalton Trans.  2006 , 2623 -2634.  
 (591) Notman, R.; Walsh, T. R. Langmuir  2009 , 25, 1638 -1644.  
 (592)  Argyris, D.; Cole, D. R.; Striolo, A. J. Phys. Chem. C  2009 , 113, 19591 -19600.  
 (593)  Lopes, P. E. M.; Murashov, V.; Tazi, M.; Demchuk, E.; MacKerell, A. D. J. Phys. 
Chem. B  2006 , 110, 2782 -2792.  
 (594)  Nangia, S.; Washton, N. M.; Mueller, K. T.; Kubicki, J. D.; Garrison, B. J. J. Phys. 
Chem. C  2007 , 111, 5169 -5177.  
 (595)  Wright, L. B.; Walsh, T. R. J. Phys. Chem. C  2012 , 116, 2933 -2945.  
 (596)  Zeitler, T. R.; Greathouse, J. A.; Cygan, R. T . Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2012 , 14, 
1728 -1734.  
 (597)  Xuefen, Z.; Guiwu, L.; Xiaoming, W.; Hong, Y. Appl. Surf. Sci.  2009 , 255, 6493 -
6498.  228 
 
 (598)  Phan, A.; Ho, T. A.; Cole, D. R.; Striolo, A. J. Phys. Chem. C  2012 , 116, 15962 -
15973.  
 (599)  Greathouse, J. A .; O'Brien, R. J.; Bemis, G.; Pabalan, R. T. J. Phys. Chem. B  2002 , 
106, 1646 -1655.  
 (600)  Lu, Z. Y.; Sun, Z. Y.; Li, Z. S.; An, L. J. J. Phys. Chem. B  2005 , 109, 5678 -5683.  
 (601)  Tosoni, S.; Pascale, F.; Ugliengo, P.; Orlando, R.; Saunders, V. R.; Dovesi , R. Mol. 
Phys.  2005 , 103, 2549 -2558.  
 (602)  Schlegel, M. L.; Nagy, K. L.; Fenter, P.; Sturchio, N. C. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta  
2002 , 66, 3037 -3054.  
 (603)  Etzler, F. M.; Fagundus, D. M. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  1987 , 115, 513 -519. 
 (604)  Takei, T.; Chika zawa, M. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  1998 , 208, 570 -574. 
 (605)  Takei, T.; Eriguchi, E.; Fuji, M.; Watanabe, T.; Chikazawa, M. Thermochim. Acta  
1998 , 308, 139 -145. 
 (606)  Fubini, B.; Zanetti, G.; Altilia, S.; Tiozzo, R.; Lison, D.; Saffiotti, U. Chem. Res. 
Toxicol.  1999 , 12, 737 -745. 
 (607)  Heinz, H.; Farmer, B. L.; Pandey, R. B.; Slocik, J. M.; Patnaik, S. S.; Pachter, R.; 
Naik, R. R. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2009 , 131, 9704 -9714.  
 (608)  Perdew, J. P.; Burke, K.; Ernzerhof, M. Phys. Rev. Lett.  1998 , 80, 891 -891. 
 (609) Fuerstenau, D. W.; Pradip Adv. Colloid Interface Sci.  2005 , 114, 9-26. 
 (610)  Ahmed, S. M.; Vancleav.Ab Can. J. Chem. Eng.  1965 , 43, 23-26. 
 (611)  Li, H. C.; Debruyn, P. L. Surf. Sci.  1966 , 5, 203 -220. 
 (612)  Pokrovsky, O. S.; Golubev, S. V.; Mielczar ski, J. A. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  2006 , 
296, 189 -194. 
 (613)  Eisenthal, K. B. Chem. Rev.  2006 , 106, 1462 -1477.  
 (614)  Shen, Y. R.; Ostroverkhov, V. Chem. Rev.  2006 , 106, 1140 -1154.  
 (615)  Allen, L. H.; Matijevi.E; Meties, L. J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem.  1971 , 33, 1293 -1299.  
 (616)  Gurau, M. C.; Kim, G.; Lim, S. M.; Albertorio, F.; Fleisher, H. C.; Cremer, P. S. 
ChemPhysChem  2003 , 4, 1231 -1233.  
 (617)  Bertie, J. E.; Labbe, H. J.; Whally, E. J. Chem. Phys.  1969 , 50, 4501 -4520.  
 (618)  Scherer, J. R.; Snyder, R. G.  J. Chem. Phys.  1977 , 67, 4794 -4811.  
 (619)  Lorenz, C. D.; Travesset, A. Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids,  2007 , 75, 
061202.  
 (620)  Skelton, A. A.; Kubicki, J. D.; Fenter, P.; Van Duin, A. C. T.; Wesolowski, D. J.; 
Cummings, P. T. Geochim. Cosmoc him. Acta  2010 , 74, A969 -A969.  
 (621)  Argyris, D.; Cole, D. R.; Striolo, A. Langmuir  2009 , 25, 8025 -8035.  
 (622)  Cygan, R. T.; Liang, J. J.; Kalinichev, A. G. J. Phys. Chem. B  2004 , 108, 1255 -1266.  
 (623)  Musso, F.; Mignon, P.; Ugliengo, P.; Sodupe, M. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2012 , 14, 
10507 -10514.  
 (624)  Kaya, S.; Weissenrieder, J.; Stacchiola, D.; Shaikhutdinov, S.; Freund, H. J. J. Phys. 
Chem. C  2007 , 111, 759 -764. 
 (625)  Du, M. H.; Kolchin, A.; Cheng, H. P. J. Chem. Phys.  2003 , 119, 6418 -6422.  
 (626)  Chen, Y. W.; Cheng, H. P. J. Chem. Phys.  2011 , 134, 114703.  
 (627)  Yates, J. T. Surf. Sci.  2004 , 565, 103 -106. 
 (628)  Branda, M. M.; Montani, R. A.; Castellani, N. J. Surf. Sci.  2000 , 446, L89 -L94. 
 (629)  Shchukarev, A.; Sjoberg, S. Surf. Sci.  2005 , 584, 106 -112. 
 (630)  Lee, C. Y.; McCammon, J. A.; Rossky, P. J. J. Chem. Phys.  1984 , 80, 4448 -4455.  
 (631)  Lee, S. H.; Rossky, P. J. J. Chem. Phys.  1994 , 100, 3334 -3345.  
 (632)  Collins, D. R.; Catlow, C. R. A. Am. Mineral.  1992 , 77, 1172 -1181.  
 (633)  deLeeuw, N. H .; Watson, G. W.; Parker, S. C. J. Chem. Soc. -Faraday Trans.  1996 , 
92, 2081 -2091.  
 (634)  Warne, M. R.; Allan, N. L.; Cosgrove, T. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2000 , 2, 3663 -
3668.  229 
 
 (635)  Hassanali, A. A.; Zhang, H.; Knight, C.; Shin, Y. K.; Singer, S. J. J. Chem . Theory 
Comput.  2010 , 6, 3456 -3471.  
 (636)  Leed, E. A.; Sofo, J. O.; Pantano, C. G. Phys. Rev. B  2005 , 72, 155427.  
 (637)  Floess, J. K.; Murad, S. Chem. Phys. Lett.  2011 , 516, 216 -219. 
 (638)  Chai, J. C.; Liu, S. Y.; Yang, X. N. Appl. Surf. Sci.  2009 , 255, 9078 -9084.  
 (639)  Feuston, B. P.; Garofalini, S. H. J. Appl. Phys.  1990 , 68, 4830 -4836.  
 (640)  Minibaev, R. F.; Zhuravlev, N. A.; Bagatur'yantz, A. A.; Alfimov, M. V. Russ. Phys. 
J. 2009 , 52, 1164 -1169.  
 (641)  Costa, D.; Tougerti, A.; Tielens, F.; Gervai s, C.; Stievano, L.; Lambert, J. F. Phys. 
Chem. Chem. Phys.  2008 , 10, 6360 -6368.  
 (642)  Duchateau, R.; Dijkstra, T. W.; van Santen, R. A.; Yap, G. P. A. Chem. --Eur. J.  
2004 , 10, 3979 -3990.  
 (643)  Wächtershäuser, G. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  1990 , 87, 200 -204. 
 (644)  Linder, R.; Nispel, M.; Häber, T.; Kleinermanns, K. Chem. Phys. Lett.  2005 , 409, 
260-264. 
 (645)  Linder, R.; Seefeld, K.; Vavra, A.; Kleinermanns, K. Chem. Phys. Lett.  2008 , 453, 1-
6. 
 (646)  Groenewegen, J. A.; Sachtler, W. M. H. J. Catal.  1974, 33, 176 -183. 
 (647)  Basiuk, V. A.; Gromovoy, T. Y.; Golovaty, V. G.; Glukhoy, A. M. Origins Life Evol. 
Biospheres  1990 , 20, 483 -498. 
 (648)  Stepanian, S. G.; Reva, I. D.; Radchenko, E. D.; Rosado, M. T. S.; Duarte, M. L. T. 
S.; Fausto, R.; Adamowicz, L.  J. Phys. Chem. A  1998 , 102, 1041 -1054.  
 (649)  Marsh, R. E. Acta Cryst.  1958 , 11, 654 -663. 
 (650)  Chowdhry, B. Z.; Dines, T. J.; Jabeen, S.; Withnall, R. J. Phys. Chem. A  2008 , 112, 
10333 -10347.  
 (651)  Han, J. W.; Sholl, D. S. Langmuir  2009 , 25, 10737 -1074 5. 
 (652)  Lambert, J. -F.; Stievano, L.; Lopes, I.; Gharsallah, M.; Piao, L. Planet. Space Sci.  
2009 , 57, 460 -467. 
 (653)  Garetz, B. A.; Matic, J.; Myerson, A. S. Phys. Rev. Lett.  2002 , 89, 175501.  
 (654)  Löfgren, P.; Krozer, A.; Lausmaa, J.; Kasemo, B. Surf. Sci.  1997 , 370, 277 -292. 
 (655)  Löfgren, P.; Krozer, A.; Chakarov, D. V.; Kasemo, B. J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A  1998 , 
16, 2961 -2966.  
 (656)  Ramaekers, R.; Pajak, J.; Lambie, B.; Maes, G. J. Chem. Phys.  2004 , 120, 4182 -
4193.  
 (657)  Soria, E.; Román, E.; Wi lliams, E. M.; de Segovia, J. L. Surf. Sci.  1999 , 433–435, 
543-548. 
 (658)  Charlet, L.; Manceau, A. A. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  1992 , 148, 443 -458. 
 (659)  Han, J. W.; James, J. N.; Sholl, D. S. Surf. Sci.  2008 , 602, 2478 -2485.  
 (660)  Gambino, G. L.; Lomba rdo, G. M.; Grassi, A.; Marletta, G. J. Phys. Chem. B  2004 , 
108, 2600 -2607.  
 (661)  Han, J. W.; Sholl, D. S. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.  2010 , 12, 8024 -8032.  
 (662)  Greber, T.; Šljivančanin, Ž.; Schillinger, R.; Wider, J.; Hammer, B. Phys. Rev. Lett.  
2006 , 96, 056103.  
 (663)  Bhatia, B.; Sholl, D. S. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.  2005 , 44, 7761 -7764.  
 (664)  Basiuk, V. A.; Navarro -Gonzalez, R.; Basiuk, E. V. Origins Life  Evol. Biosphere  
1998 , 28, 167 -193. 
 (665)  Basiuk, V. A.; Navarro -Gonzalez, R. J. Chromatogr. A  1997 , 776, 255 -273. 
 (666)  Basiuk, V. A.; Navarro -Gonzales, R.; Basiuk, E. V. Bioorg. Khim  1998 , 24, 842 -847. 
 (667)  Basiuk, V. A. Origins Life Evol. Biosphere  1992 , 22, 333 -348. 
 (668)  Basiuk, V. A.; Gromovoy, T. Y. Collect. Czech. Chem. Commun.  1994 , 59, 461 -466. 
 (669)  Hudson, S.; Cooney, J.; Magner, E. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.  2008 , 47, 8582 -8594.  
 (670)  Stöber, W.; Fink, A.; Bohn, E. J. Colloid Interface Sci.  1968, 26, 62-69. 
 (671)  Roach, P.; Farrar, D.; Perry, C. C. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2006 , 128, 3939 -3945.  230 
 
 (672)  Lundqvist, M.; Nygren, P.; Jonsson, B. -H.; Broo, K. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.  2006 , 45, 
8169 -8173.  
 (673)  Nygren, P.; Lundqvist, M.; Broo, K.; Jonsson, B. -H. Nano Lett.  2008 , 8, 1844 -1852.  
 (674)  Manyar, H. G.; Gianotti, E.; Sakamoto, Y.; Terasaki, O.; Coluccia, S.; Tumbiolo, S. 
J. Phys. Chem. C  2008 , 112, 18110 -18116.  
 (675)  Giussani, L.; Tabacchi, G.; Gianotti, E.; Coluccia, S.; Fois, E. Philos. Trans. R.  Soc., 
A 2012 , 370, 1463 -1477.  
 (676)  Notman, R.; Oren, E. E.; Tamerler, C.; Sarikaya, M.; Samudrala, R.; Walsh, T. R. 
Biomacromolecules  2010 , 11, 3266 -3274.  
 (677)  Phillips, D. C.; York, R. L.; Mermut, O.; McCrea, K. R.; Ward, R. S.; Somorjai, G. 
A. J. Ph ys. Chem. C  2006 , 111, 255 -261. 
 (678)  Fodor, S. P. A.; Rava, R. P.; Huang, X. C.; Pease, A. C.; Holmes, C. P.; Adams, C. 
L. Nature  1993 , 364, 555 -556. 
 (679)  Pease, A. C.; Solas, D.; Sullivan, E. J.; Cronin, M. T.; Holmes, C. P.; Fodor, S. P. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  1994 , 91, 5022 -5026.  
 (680)  Schena, M.; Shalon, D.; Heller, R.; Chai, A.; Brown, P. O.; Davis, R. W. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA  1996 , 93, 10614 -10619.  
 (681)  Cheng, L.; Ziegelhoffer, P. R.; Yang, N. S. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  1993 , 90, 
4455-4459.  
 (682)  Rädler, J. O.; Koltover, I.; Salditt, T.; Safinya, C. R. Science  1997 , 275, 810 -814. 
 (683)  Sen, T.; Sebastianelli, A.; Bruce, I. J. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2006 , 128, 7130 -7131.  
 (684)  Mannelli, I.; Minunni, M.; Tombelli, S.; Wang, R.; Michela S piriti, M.; Mascini, M. 
Bioelectrochemistry  2005 , 66, 129 -138. 
 (685)  Ferreira, G. N. M. Chem. Eng. Technol.  2005 , 28, 1285 -1294.  
 (686)  Stellwagen, N. C.; Stellwagen, E. J. Chromatogr. A  2009 , 1216 , 1917 -1929.  
 (687)  Hook, F.; Ray, A.; Nordén, B.; Kasemo,  B. Langmuir  2001 , 17, 8305 -8312.  
 (688)  Larsson, C.; Rodahl, M.; Höök, F. Anal. Chem.  2003 , 75, 5080 -5087.  
 (689)  Branda, S. S.; Vik, Å.; Friedman, L.; Kolter, R. Trends Microbiol.  2005 , 13, 20-26. 
 (690)  Romanowski, G.; Lorenz, M. G.; Wackernagel, W. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  1991 , 
57, 1057 -1061.  
 (691)  He, X. -x.; Wang, K.; Tan, W.; Liu, B.; Lin, X.; He, C.; Li, D.; Huang, S.; Li, J. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc.  2003 , 125, 7168 -7169.  
 (692)  Verma, I. M.; Somia, N. Nature  1997 , 389, 239 -242. 
 (693)  Solberg, S. M.; La ndry, C. C. J. Phys. Chem. B  2006 , 110, 15261 -15268.  
 (694)  Marler, B.; Oberhagemann, U.; Vortmann, S.; Gies, H. Microporous Mater.  1996 , 6, 
375-383. 
 (695)  Li, X.; Zhang, J.; Gu, H. Langmuir  2011 , 27, 6099 -6106.  
 (696)  Li, X.; Zhang, J.; Gu, H. Langmuir  2012, 28, 2827 -2834.  
 (697)  Melzak, K. A.; Sherwood, C. S.; Turner, R. F. B.; Haynes, C. A. J. Colloid Interface 
Sci. 1996 , 181, 635 -644. 
 (698)  Gani, S. A.; Mukherjee, D. C.; Chattoraj, D. K. Langmuir  1999 , 15, 7130 -7138.  
 (699)  Nguyen, T. H.; Elimelech, M . Biomacromolecules  2006 , 8, 24-32. 
 (700)  Scholes, C. A.; Millar, D. P.; Gee, M. L.; Smith, T. A. J. Phys. Chem. B  2011 , 115, 
6329 -6339.  
 (701)  Muñoz, B.; Rámila, A.; Pérez -Pariente, J.; Díaz, I.; Vallet -Regí, M. Chem. Mater.  
2002 , 15, 500 -503. 
 (702)  Izquierdo -Barba, I.; Sousa, E.; Doadrio, J.; Doadrio, A.; Pariente, J.; Martínez, A.; 
Babonneau, F.; Vallet -Regí, M. J. Sol -Gel Sci. Technol.  2009 , 50, 421 -429. 
 (703)  Izquierdo -Barba, I.; Martinez, Á.; Doadrio, A. L.; Pérez -Pariente, J.; Vallet -Regí, M. 
Eur. J. Pharm. Sci.  2005 , 26, 365 -373. 
 (704)  Doadrio, A. L .; Sousa, E. M. B.; Doadrio, J. C.; P rez Pariente, J.; Izquierdo -Barba, 
I.; Vallet -Reg  , M. J. Controlled Release  2004 , 97, 125 -132. 231 
 
 (705)  Doadrio, J. C.; Sousa, E. M. B.; Izquierdo -Barba, I.; Doadrio, A. L.; Perez -Pariente, 
J.; Vallet -Regi, M. J. Mater . Chem.  2006 , 16, 462 -466. 
 (706)  Balas, F.; Manzano, M.; Horcajada, P.; Vallet -Regí, M. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2006 , 128, 
8116 -8117.  
 (707)  Vallet -Reg  , M.; Doadrio, J. C.; Doadrio, A. L.; Izquierdo-Barba, I.; Pérez -Pariente, 
J. Solid State Ionics  2004 , 172, 435-439. 
 (708)  Vallet -Regí, M. Chemistry – A European Journal  2006 , 12, 5934 -5943.  
 (709)  Azaïs, T.; Tourné -Péteilh, C.; Aussenac, F.; Baccile, N.; Coelho, C.; Devoisselle, J. -
M.; Babonneau, F. Chem. Mater.  2006 , 18, 6382 -6390.  
 (710)  Azaïs, T.; Hartmeyer , G.; Quignard, S.; Laurent, G.; Babonneau, F. J. Phys. Chem. C  
2010 , 114, 8884 -8891.  
 (711)  Alcoutlabi, M.; McKenna, G. B. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter  2005 , 17, R461 -R524.  
 (712)  Morishige, K.; Kawano, K. J. Chem. Phys.  2000 , 112, 11023 -11029.  
 (713)  Morine au, D.; Guegan, R.; Xia, Y.; Alba -Simionesco, C. J. Chem. Phys.  2004 , 121, 
1466 -1473.  
 (714)  Takei, T.; Konishi, T.; Fuji, M.; Watanabe, T.; Chikazawa, M. Thermochim. Acta  
1995 , 267, 159 -167. 
 (715)  Gedat, E.; Schreiber, A.; Albrecht, J.; Emmler, T.; Shend erovich, I.; Findenegg, G. 
H.; Limbach, H. H.; Buntkowsky, G. J. Phys. Chem. B  2002 , 106, 1977 -1984.  
 (716)  Dosseh, G.; Xia, Y.; Alba -Simionesco, C. J. Phys. Chem. B  2003 , 107, 6445 -6453.  
 (717)  Mellaerts, R.; Jammaer, J. A. G.; Van Speybroeck, M.; Chen, H .; Humbeeck, J. V.; 
Augustijns, P.; Van den Mooter, G.; Martens, J. A. Langmuir  2008 , 24, 8651 -8659.  
 (718)  Mellaerts, R.; Roeffaers, M. B. J.; Houthoofd, K.; Van Speybroeck, M.; De Cremer, 
G.; Jammaer, J. A. G.; Van den Mooter, G.; Augustijns, P.; Hofkens , J.; Martens, J. A. Phys. Chem. 
Chem. Phys.  2011 , 13, 2706 -2713.  
 (719)  Qu, F.; Zhu, G.; Huang, S.; Li, S.; Sun, J.; Zhang, D.; Qiu, S. Microporous 
Mesoporous Mater.  2006 , 92, 1-9. 
 (720)  Grünberg, B.; Emmler, T.; Gedat, E.; Shenderovich, I.; Findenegg, G . H.; Limbach, 
H.-H.; Buntkowsky, G. Chemistry – A European Journal  2004 , 10, 5689 -5696.  
 (721)  Abbasi, A.; Nadimi, E.; Plänitz, P.; Radehaus, C. Surf. Sci.  2009 , 603, 2502 -2506.  
 (722)  Mian, S. A.; Saha, L. C.; Jang, J.; Wang, L.; Gao, X.; Nagase, S. J. Phys. Chem. C  
2010 , 114, 20793 -20800.  
 (723)  Mian, S.; Gao, X.; Nagase, S.; Jang, J. Theor. Chem. Acc.  2011 , 130, 333 -339. 
 (724)  Rimola, A.; Corno, M.; Zicovich -Wilson, C. M.; Ugliengo, P. Phys. Chem. Chem. 
Phys.  2009 , 11, 9005 -9007.  
 (725)  Richmond, G. L. Chem. Rev.  2002 , 102, 2693 -2724.  
 (726)  Barducci, A.; Bonomi, M.; Parrinello, M. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. -Comput. Mol. Sci.  
2011 , 1, 826 -843. 
 (727)  Zaera, F. Chem. Rev.  2012 , 112, 2920 -2986.  
 (728)  Mignon, P.; Sodupe, M. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phy s. 2012 , 14, 945 -954. 
 (729)  Murashov, V.; Leszcynski, J. J. Phys. Chem. A  1999 , 103, 1228 -1238.  
 (730)  Biswas, A.; Bayer, I. S.; Biris, A. S.; Wang, T.; Dervishi, E.; Faupel, F. Adv. Colloid 
Interface Sci.  2012 , 170, 2-27. 
 (731)  Kershner, R. J.; Bozano, L. D.; Micheel, C. M.; Hung, A. M.; Fornof, A. R.; Cha, J. 
N.; Rettner, C. T.; Bersani, M.; Frommer, J.; Rothemund, P. W. K.; Wallraff, G. M. Nat. 
Nanotechnol.  2009 , 4, 557 -561. 
 (732)  Kasemo, B. Curr. Opin. Solid State Mat. Sci.  1998 , 3, 451 -459. 
 (733)  Hook, F.; Kasemo, B.; Grunze, M.; Zauscher, S. ACS Nano  2008 , 2, 2428 -2436.  
 
 