170ISSN 0096-3925, Moscow University Biologic al Sciences Bulletin, 2016, Vol. 71, No. 3,  pp. 170–176. © Allert on Press, Inc., 2016 .
Original Russian Text © S.G. Va silieva, E.S. Lobakova, A.A. Lukyanov, A.E. Solo vchenko, 2016, published in Vestnik Moskovskogo Universiteta, Seriya 16: Biologiya, 2016, No. 3,
pp. 65–72.
Immobilized Microalgae in Biotechnology
S. G. Vasilieva, E. S. Lobakova, A. A. Lukyanov, and A. E. Solovchenko
Department of Bioengineering, Faculty of Biolog y, Moscow State University, Moscow, 119234 Russia
e-mail: vankat2009@mail.ru
Received April 5, 2016; in final form, June 6, 2016
Abstract —This paper considers immobilization of oxygenic phototrophic microorganisms, cyanobacteria
and eukaryotic microalgae, in natural and artificial expe rimental systems. This review emphasizes that micro-
bial immobilization, for example, as a part of biofilms, is a strategy widespread in nature ensuring the survival
of cells. Accordingly, artificially immobilized cells of oxygenic phototrophic microorganisms can be consid-ered as a special group of biomimetic (bioinspired) mate rials. Particular attention is paid to the influence of
different immobilization methods on the physiological state of cells of cyanobacteria and microalgae, their
resistance to stresses, and the productivity of immobilized cultures. This review analyzes the advantages anddisadvantages of modern immobilization methods and curr ently used carriers. It also considers the possibility
of using immobilized cultures of oxygenic phototroph ic microorganisms in various areas of biotechnology,
such as the production of biomass and metabolites, biomass harvesting, and purification of water areas andsewage from heavy metals, excess nutrients, and organic pollutants.
Keywords: immobilization, microalgae, cyanobacteria, biotechnology, biofilms, review
DOI: 10.3103/S0096392516030135
INTRODUCTION
In natural conditions, many oxygenic phototrophic
microorganisms, including cyanobacteria and eukary-otic microalgae, exist in the form of communities
(associations) with heterotrophic and other microal-
gae. Morphologically, such associations may be aggre-gates, clusters, flakes, or granules, that is, attached
communities or communities suspended in an aque-
ous medium [1], in which the cells are enclosed in amatrix of extracellular biopolymers. Therefore,
immobilization of microalgal cells can be regarded as
a universal form of their existence, in which microor-ganisms immobilized in a biopolymer matrix function
as a consistently acting multicellular organism [1].
Currently, there is intensive development of bio-
technology based on immobilized microalgal cultures.Cells attached to the surface and (or) various carriers
are widely used to produce biomass and metabolites
and for removal of excess nutrients and heavy metals
from wastewater [3]. Advantages of immobilized cells
compared with cell suspensions include simplificationof biomass harvesting and increased cell resistance to
unfavorable factors (temperature, acidity, and toxic
compounds).
T h i s  r e v i e w  i s  d e s i g n e d  t o  o r g a n i z e  d a t a  o n  t h e
immobilization methods, carriers used, effects of
immobilization on cellular physiology, as well as
advantages and disadvantages of using microalgalimmobilized cultures in various biotechnological pro-
cesses in comparison with free cultures.Natural Biofilms as a Prototype of an Immobilized 
Culture of Microalgae
Formation of stable algobacterial associations in
nature is due to the fact that microalgae are the centers
of formation of sustainable production systems. Their
central role is defined by the presence of highly orga-nized surface structures (mucous capsules, covers, and
colonial mucus), as well as the ability to release various
organic compounds that support the growth and phys-iological activity of components of the emerging com-
munity. In associations, cells of microorganisms inte-
grated into the extracellular matrix have limitedmobility and are concentrated in a limited volume,
that is, are immobilized [4].
Components of the communities with microalgae
have different types of bonds—trophic, spatial, andprotective—and the regulation of their stability is
based on intercellular communication. Examples of
such communities are stromatolites and modern cya-
nobacterial microbial mats, the most ancient (3.5 bil-
lion years) evolutionarily successful form of life [5].Current literature broadly denotes such associations
(communities) of microorganisms by the term bio-
films [6].
Biofilm Formation as the Main Survival Strategy
of Microorganisms under Natural Conditions
Approximately 99% of all prokaryotes exist in the
form of biofilms whose formation is a complex, strictlyECOLOGYMOSCOW UNIVERSITY BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES BULLETIN  Vol. 71  No. 3  2016IMMOBILIZED MICROALGAE IN BIOTECHNOLOGY 171
regulated biological process. Microorganisms inte-
grated into the biofilm are protected against adversephysical, chemical, and biological factors of the envi-
ronment: extreme temperatures, dehydration, ultravi-
olet radiation, nutritional deficiency, and toxic agents,getting the opportunity to exist in relatively constant
conditions [7]. Formation of biofilm communities is
the basic survival strategy of microorganisms under
natural conditions.
Communication between microorganisms in bio-
films is carried out through chemical signals that reg-ulate gene expression in microorganisms forming the
biofilm, allowing the cells to control their own struc-
ture, morphogenesis, and adaptation [8]. The bio-polymer matrix is   composed mainly of polysaccha-
rides and proteins (up to 85% in total), which form
polyanionic hydrogel matrices, as well as minoramounts of nucleic acids and lipids [6].
Biofilms implement the basic principle of the evo-
lutionary development of microorganisms, the princi-
ple of cooperative existence [9], when life products ofone species serve as nutrients for another species, and
microorganisms of the same or different species inter-
act through special signaling systems [10].
An example of natural immobilization is microal-
gal colonization of the surface of transparent gel-like
structures of animals living in the photic zone:
hydroids, mollusks, nematodes, etc. In hospite ,
microalgae provide nutrients to animals, participate in
the synthesis of protective mucus, chemical defensecompounds, mineralization of external coatings, and
protective pigmentation of the animal. In turn, ani-
mals provide a habitat for microalgae, protection fromadverse environmental factors, and, most importantly,
deliver microalgal cells to light [11].
It can be assumed that immobilization of microal-
gae in artificial systems will increase the cell resistanceto stresses and provide advantages compared to the use
of suspension cultures.
Microalgal Immobilization Methods
Immobilization is the process of attachment of the
cells to the carrier or their inclusion into the volume of
the latter [12]. Making the cells part of polymer beads
allows achieving higher specific concentration of theattached cells compared to immobilization on the sur-
face. In addition, the cells enclosed into the volume of
the polymer are protected from contamination by for-eign microorganisms [13].
Terms of immobilization and carriers should
ensure minimum damage to the cells and inhibit diffu-
sion. Most standard methods of immobilization ofmicroorganisms are potentially useful for microalgae
if their cells receive a sufficient amount of light.Immobilization Carriers
Carriers for immobilization of microorganisms are
divided into natural and synthetic. Examples of natu-ral carriers are insoluble materials to which cells
adhere in vivo (wood, wool, or minerals). The advan-
tages of natural carriers include hydrophilicity, bio-compatibility, and ease of recycling, while shortcom-
ings include low stability and high cost. Carriers for
immobilization of microorganisms often consist in
substrates of loofah fruits, sphagnum, peat, glass, plas-
tic, wood, natural polysaccharides (agar-agar, cellu-lose, alginate, carrageenan, chitosan), and synthetic
polymers (polyacrylamide, polyurethane, polyvinyl
chloride, polypropylene, polysulfone, epoxy resin)[14, 15].
The ideal carrier for microalgal cells should not
inhibit their ability to live nor prevent the mass transferand block the light. The carrier should have high
mechanical, chemical, and biological stability and
processability. Furthermore, it should be inexpensive,securely hold the cells, and have a high hydrophilicity
(without which reactions in an aqueous medium are
not possible).
Immobilization Methods
Currently, there are two groups of immobilization
methods: passive and active. Passive immobilization isbased on the natural ability of microorganisms to
attach to solid or gel-like carriers [16]. This is the sim-
plest method of immobilization of microbial cells thatdoes not cause cellular stress and simulates the process
of cell attachment in nature.
In contrast, active methods of immobilization do
not depend on the natural ability of microalgal cells to
attach to any surface and include two main
approaches:
(1) Covalent bonding of the cells with the surface of
the carrier via cross-linking agents, such as glutaralde-hyde.
(2) Inclusion of the microorganism cells into the
mass of the carrier, for example, inclusion into algi-nate beads [16].
Passive immobilisation . Natural microalgal cell
attachment to solid and gel-like surfaces is caused bychemical (covalent) and physical (ionic, electrostatic,
hydrophobic) mechanisms [13]. Immobilization is
implemented through the use of synthetic and naturalmaterials, such as processed loofah fruits [17]: they are
quite porous, biodegradable, nontoxic, and cheap.
Travieso et al. [18] used 1 cm
3 polyurethane foam
cubes as a carrier for Scenedesmus quadricauda  cells in
wastewater treatment. The same authors proposed a
bioreactor design with a rotating drum made of poly-
urethane foam for biocapture of heavy metals fromwastewater. Passive methods of immobilization are
also used with such carriers as glass, plastic, and wood,172
MOSCOW UNIVERSITY BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES  BULLETIN  Vol. 71  No. 3  2016VASILIEVA et al.
especially in environmental, ecotoxicological and bio-
technological research [19, 21].
Active immobilization . In covalent cell binding, both
synthetic and natural materials are used, such as chitinor chitosan. However, this type of active immobiliza-
tion involves the use of toxic bifunctional reagents
(dialdehydes, diisocyanates), so it is more suitable forattachment of dead cells [16].
For immobilization in the carrier volume, natural
polymers, such as agarose and agaropectin, are oftenused. The advantages of agar include nontoxicity, low
melting point, and the ability to form mechanically
strong gels even at low concentrations [22]; thus, the useof cell immobilization in agar became widespread [23].
Microalgal immobilization using calcium alginate
pellets is also one of the most widely used methods at
present [3]. Growth of microalgal cells as part of pel-
lets is not limited by light intensity [23], and they arenot toxic for microalgal cells [24–26], but such carri-
ers are partially destroyed in seawater and sewage
water. Carrageenans are also widely used now despitetheir lesser stability in aqueous media compared to
alginates.
Effect of Immobilization on Microalgal Cells
The ability of microalgal cells to attach to the sur-
face of various carriers is largely determined by theage, the state of culture, and the composition of the
culture medium. This capability is maximal in the cells
in the exponential growth phase, while it is usuallydecreased in the stationary phase [27].
Immobilized microalgal cells showed a marked
increase in the pigment content, as well as changes inthe amount and composition of lipids and fatty acids
compared to free-living cells [14, 28]. Thus, the chlo-
rophyll content in cells of Chlorella vulgaris  immobi-
lized in carrageenan gel is two times higher than in sus-
pension culture [28], and cells of Botryococcus braunii
and B. protuberan  within alginate beads have a high
content of chlorophylls, carotenoids, and lipids com-
pared with free cells [29]. Joint immobilization ofmicroalgae Chlorella  spp. and bacteria Azospirillum
brasilense  also results in the increased content of pig-
ments and lipids in microalgal cells [30].
Immobilization can be a powerful stressor for
microalgal cells, leading to a reduction in the number
of living cells. This reduction may be compensatedlater if the immobilized cells do not lose the ability to
divide [14]. It was found that cells of Skeletonema
costaum  and Heterocapsa  sp. inside alginate beads do
not divide, whereas the growth rate of other microal-
gae is not different from that in the suspension [31].
In some cases, such as in Chlorella minutissima ,
Pavlova lutheri , Haematococcus pluvialis , and
Dunaliella bardawil , fixed in 2% carboxymethylcellu-
lose gel, immobilization stimulates the growth of
microalgal cultures [32]. Opposite effects are possibledue to the toxicity of the polymers and the compounds
used for immobilization of cells [33, 34].
As noted above, immobilized cells become more
resistant to changes in pH, temperature, and ionic
strength of the medium [13]. Thus, immobilization ofcells of Synechococcus  sp. in chitosan increases the
resistance of cells to NaOH [35]. There is also an
increase in cell resistance to various toxic substances.For example, the toxic effect of Ni and Cr ions on the
cells of nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria Aulosira fertilis-
sima  is significantly reduced when they are immobi-
lized in alginate beads [36].
Immobilization also affects the metabolic activity
of cells: Dunaliella salina  cells immobilized in agar
synthesized more glycerol as compared with free cells
[37], and marine diatom Haslea ostrearia  cells immo-
bilized in agarose gel increased production of marenin
used for feeding oysters [38].
There is evidence of significant changes in the
shape and increased sizes of immobilized cells [39],
trichomes, and colonies [2].
The effect of immobilization on the photosynthetic
activity of microalgal cells is ambiguous [39–41] and
depends on changes in effective cell illumination. In
case of insufficient or excessive illumination of immo-bilized cells, the photosynthesis rate drops, but the
carrier may protect cells from photodamage by dissi-
pating excess light. Photosynthesis can also be limited
by the lack of CO
2. In this case, it is efficient to carry
out joint immobilization of microalgal and heterotro-
phic microorganisms that supply microalgae with car-
bon dioxide during respiration [16].
Use of Immobilized Microalgae in Biotechnology
Currently, immobilized microalgal cells are widely
used in biotechnology to produce biomass, valuablemetabolites, and biohydrogen; to clean water areas
and wastewater from heavy metals, biogenic elements,
and organic compounds; and also as biosensors tomeasure the degree of water pollution [2, 4, 31]. One
of the challenges of biotechnology using microalgae is
to search for optimal ways of biomass harvesting. Cur-rently used approaches (filtration, centrifugation,
flocculation) are energy-intensive and time-consum-
ing [42]. The use of immobilized cultures makes it
possible to simplify and reduce the cost of biomass
harvesting. Other areas of application are coveredmore in the following sections.
Production of Biomass and Valuable Metabolites
Immobilized microalgal cells, for example, Por-
phyridium cruentum , are used to obtain sulfated poly-
saccharides [43]. Cells of cyanobacterium Aphano-
capsa  MN-11 immobilized in alginate beads coated
with light-scattering optical fiber excrete substantial
amounts of sulfated polysaccharides [44]. There is aMOSCOW UNIVERSITY BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES BULLETIN  Vol. 71  No. 3  2016IMMOBILIZED MICROALGAE IN BIOTECHNOLOGY 173
description of the preparation of alkaloid codeine
from morphine by cyanobacterium Spirulina platensis
immobilized in alginate [45]. Cells of nitrogen-fixing
cyanobacteria Anabaena azollae  immobilized in poly-
urethane pellets were cultured in a photobioreactor toobtain NH
3. The possibility of using the specified cul-
ture immobilized on various carriers as a bio-fertilizer
in rice fields has been studied [46].
Production of Biohydrogen
There is a growing interest in renewable energy
sources, such as biohydrogen produced by microalgalcells. Some microalgae are capable of releasing hydro-
gen in light under stress conditions (for example, in
the absence of sulfur compounds in the culturemedium). Lack of sulfur compounds blocks synthesis
of proteins of the photosynthetic apparatus, leading to
reduced activity of the second photosystem, hydroge-nase synthesis induction, and hydrogen release [47].
Presently, the Chlamydomonas reindhartii  culture is
the most promising and studied candidate for com-
mercial biohydrogen production [48, 49]. In cyano-
bacteria, most promising is the light-dependenthydrogen production by heterocyst species synthesiz-
ing H
2 as a by-product of their nitrogenase activity. It
is essential that nitrogenase in heterocysts is protected
from the inhibitory effect of oxygen [48]. It is shown[50] that Anabaena  N-7363 cells immobilized in 2%
carrageenan gel produce 2.4 times more hydrogen (up
to 3.24 mmol per hour per 1 g of dry gel) as comparedwith free cells. Immobilization of C. reinhardtii  cells in
alginate beads decelerates hydrogenase inactivation by
oxygen since the alginate layer limits oxygen supplyinto the beads. As a result, the cell produces more
hydrogen as compared with free cells [48]. In C. rein-
hardtii  cells immobilized on glass fibers, the period of
active hydrogen production lengthens, while the rate
of hydrogen production in free and immobilized cells
is the same [49].
Removal of Biogenic Elements from Wastewater
Biological treatment using microalgae seems to be
one of the most promising biotechnologies for purifi-
cation of wastewater (including sewage from farms),
which makes it possible to effectively and economi-cally dispose of wastewater with minimal damage to
the environment [51]. Cultivation of microalgae in
wastewater containing biogenic elements, such asnitrogen and phosphorus, makes it possible to com-
bine purification and biomass production [2]. One of
the most promising ways of recycling of microalgalbiomass enriched with bio-available forms of nitrogen
and phosphorus is the production of fertilizers.
For effective removal of biogenic elements, it is
now proposed to use microalgae enclosed in naturaland synthetic polymer gels [2] or immobilized on the
surface of various polymeric materials [52]. Theincreasing efficiency of removal of biogenic elements
from wastewater using immobilized microalgal cellsmay be due to not only the increase in their photosyn-
thetic activity but also adsorption of biogenic ions. For
example, the matrix of carrageenan adsorbs ammo-nium cations, while chitosan adsorbs anions (phos-
phate, nitrate, and nitrite) [27]. It is shown that C. vul-
garis  cells immobilized in alginate beads are able to use
up to 80% of ammonium and 70% of phosphorus from
wastewater [53]. Immobilized on the polyurethaneand polyvinyl carrier, the culture of microalgae Phor-
midium laminosum  is also successfully used to remove
nitrate from the medium [34]. Cells of cyanobacte-rium Phormidium  sp. immobilized on the surface of
chitosan (adsorbing 60% of orthophosphate from the
cultivation medium within 4–6 h) remove up to 95%of inorganic nitrogen and 87% of phosphates within
24 hours [54].
When using microalgal cells encapsulated in poly-
mer beads, it should be noted that, at low concentra-
tions of biogenic elements, the rate of their supply intothe beads reduces greatly. For example, it was demon-
strated in [55] that C. reindhartii  immobilized in cal-
cium alginate do not accumulate nitrates if their con-
centration in the medium is below 0.14 mmol/L, while
the suspension culture of these microalgae removesnitrates completely.
Despite the limited growth of the culture in the
beads as compared with the suspension, the metabolic
activity of the immobilized cells may be greater,
thereby increasing the completeness and the rate ofwastewater purification. Thus, within 3 days, more
than 95% of ammonium and 99% of phosphate was
used by immobilized C. vulgaris  cells, which is two
times higher than that for free cells [28].
The use of thermophilic cultures can improve the
effectiveness of bioremediation if the temperature of
water under treatment is more than 30 C. Thus, cya-
nobacterium Phormidium laminosum  [56] immobi-
lized on porous cellulosic fibers in tube bioreactors
efficiently removed biogenic elements at the tempera-ture of 43 C.
Biocapture of Heavy Metals
Currently, the problem of environmental pollution
w i t h  h e a v y  m e t a l s  ( H M )  i s  b e c o m i n g  i n c r e a s i n g l y
important. Microalgal cells can accumulate many ele-
ments, including heavy metals, in high concentra-tions, so they are widely used for cleaning wastewater
from heavy metals [57].
The process of adsorption of metal ions on the sur-
face of microalgal cells involves their binding by thecell wall and/or cytoplasmic membrane, as well as
capsule substances and extracellular compounds. The
efficiency of biosorption of metals by microalgal cellsdirectly depends on the total cell surface area, there-
fore immobilization of cultures on the surface of vari-174
MOSCOW UNIVERSITY BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES  BULLETIN  Vol. 71  No. 3  2016VASILIEVA et al.
ous carriers, which makes it possible to concentrate
them in a small volume, in most cases leads to a signif-icant increase of biocapture of heavy metals [58]. Cur-
rently, heavy metals are biocaptured using mainly
microalgal cultures immobilized on natural media(carrageenan, alginates, chitosan, and agarose) and
chemical polymers (polyacrylamide, polypropylene,
polysulfone, and various copolymers). In [59], sea-
weed Sargassum  sp. and Ulva  sp. were used for immo-
bilization of Tetraselmis chuii  and Spirulina maxima
cells.
Dead microalgal cells also very effectively accumu-
late heavy metal ions. In [33], biomass of cyanobacte-
rium Phormidium laminosum  immobilized on polysul-
fone and epoxy resin is used to concentrate ions of Cu,Fe, Ni, and Zn. It is shown that the amount of
adsorbed metal increases with the increasing amount
of biomass and heavy metal concentration in aqueousmedia. It is noted that the efficiency of heavy metal
biocapture is not reduced after ten cycles of adsorp-
tion–desorption. Copper ions are selectively adsorbedby alginates [60]. In [61], polystyrene sulfonate
(NaPSS) was added to alginate gel to improve the
adsorbing capacity with respect to copper, but the
introduction of cyanobacterium Microcystis  sp. cells to
alginates contributed to a significant increase in theamount of adsorbed copper.
A series of papers [17, 62] studied the process of
biocapture of Ni, Cd, Cr, and Pb ions from aqueous
media by cells of C. sorokiniana  immobilized on a loo-
fah carrier. The maximum adsorption capacity withrespect to Cd and Ni is 192 mg and 71 mg per 1 g of
immobilized microalgal biomass, respectively. The
greatest amount of lead is adsorbed at pH 5, and theheavy metal adsorption efficiency is 96% after 5 min.
The authors of [63] describe the use of microalgae
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii  immobilized in alginate
beads for biocapture of Hg, Cd, and Pb from aqueousmedia. At pH 5.0–6.0, biosorption of Hg, Cd, and Pb
was 89.5, 66.5, and 253.3 mg/g of dry weight, respec-
tively. In [64], biocapture of uranium from samples ofsalty and fresh water was carried out using microalgae
Chlorella  spp. immobilized in polyacrylamide gel. It
was shown that microalgal cells can be used in multi-ple cycles of adsorption after desorption of metal ions.
Currently, some species of microalgae are used for
separation and concentration of Pd, Pt, Pb, Cu, Cd,
and Au [31]. The authors of [65] show selective bio-sorption of palladium and platinum from highly acidic
environments (pH < 2) by C. vulgaris  cells immobi-
lized on anion exchange resin Cellex-T.
FINDINGS
Thus, the results of numerous experimental works
summarized in this report make it possible to concludethat immobilized cultures of microalgae can be
applied for commercial cultivation of these organisms.Immobilization simplifies biomass harvesting, con-
tributes to resistance of cultures against stresses, andsimplifies development of hardware for cultivation. All
of this generally leads to higher productivity of cul-
tures, and to the increase in the efficiency of wastewa-ter treatment in the case of environmental biotechnol-
ogy. Right now, for the use of immobilized cultures,
special biofilm photobioreactors (PBI) are developed,
which are oriented for microalgae culturing in order to
obtain biomass and valuable metabolites, as well as forwastewater bioremediation. In conclusion, it should
be emphasized that the successful use of immobilized
microalgae cultures in real technology criticallydepends on the choice of the carrier and the cell
immobilization method.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Russian Science
Foundation (project no. 16-14-00112).
REFERENCES
1. Costerton, J.W., Lewandowski, Z., Caldwell, D.E.,
Korber, D.R., and Lappin-Scott, H.M., Microbial bio-films, Annu. Rev. Microbiol. , 1995, vol. 49, no. 1,
pp. 711–745.
2. Mallick, N., Biotechnological potential of immobilized
algae for wastewater N, P and metal removal: a review,Biometals , 2002, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 377–390.
3. Eroglu, E., Smith, S.M., and Raston, C.L., Applica-
tion of various immobilization techniques for algal bio-processes, in Biomass and Biofuels from Microalgae ,
Moheimani, N.R., McHenry, M.P., de Boer, K.,Bahri, P., Eds., Berlin: Springer, 2015, pp. 19–44.
4. Zvyagintsev, D., Dobrovol’skaya, T., and Lysak, L.,
Plants as development centers of bacterial communi-ties, Zh. Obshch. Biol. , 1993, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 183–
199.
5. Gerasimenko, L. and Zavarzin, G., Relict cyanobacte-
rial communities, in Problemy doantropogennoi evolyut-
sii biosfery (Problems of Pr e-Anthropogenic Evolution of
the Biosphere) , Rozanov, A.Yu., Ed., Moscow: Nauka,
1993, pp. 222–253.
6. Sirotkin, A.S., Shaginurova, G., and Ippolitov, K.,
Agregatsiya mikroorganizmov: flokuly, bioplenki, mikrob-
nye granuly (Aggregation of Microorganisms: Flocculi,Biofilms, Microbial Granules) , Kazan: Izd. Fen, 2007.
7. Romanova, Yu. and Gintsburg, A., Bacterial biofilms
as a natural form of existence of bacteria in the environ-ment and host orgnaism, Zh. Mikrobiol., Epidemiol.
Immunobiol , 2011, vol. 3, pp. 99–109.
8. Zavarzin, G., Evolution of the system of geosphere and
biosphere, Priroda , 2003, vol. 1, pp. 27–35.
9. Branda, S.S., Vik, A., Friedman, L., and Kolter, R.,
Biofilms: the matrix revisited, Trends Microbiol. , 2005,
vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 20–26.
10. Wingender, J., Neu, T., and Flemming, H., Microbial
Extracellular Polymeric Substances: Characterisation,Structure and Function , Berlin: Springer, 1999.MOSCOW UNIVERSITY BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES BULLETIN  Vol. 71  No. 3  2016IMMOBILIZED MICROALGAE IN BIOTECHNOLOGY 175
11. Trench, R., Microalgal-invertebrate symbioses – a
review, Endocytobiosis  Cell Res. , 1993, vol. 9, nos. 2–3,
pp. 135–175.
12. Lopez, A., Lazaro, N., and Marques, A.M., The inter-
phase technique: a simple method of cell immobiliza-tion in gel-beads, J. Microbiol. Methods , 1997, vol. 30,
no. 3, pp. 231–234.
13. Sinitsyn, A., Rainina, E., Lozinskii, V., and Spasov, S.,
Immobilizovannye kletki mikroorganizmov (ImmobilizedMicrobial Cells) , Moscow: Izd. Mosk. Gos. Univ.,
1994.
14. de-Bashan, L.E. and Bashan, Y., Immobilized
microalgae for removing pollutants: review of practicalaspects, Bioresour. Technol. , 2010, vol. 101, no. 6,
pp. 1611–1627.
15. Hameed, M. and Ebrahim, O., Biotechnological
potential uses of immobilized algae, J. Agric. Biol. ,
2007, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 183–192.
16. Moreno-Garrido, I., Microalgae immobilization: cur-
rent techniques and uses, Bioresour. Technol. , 2008,
vol. 99, no. 10, pp. 3949–3964.
17. Akhtar, N., Iqbal, J., and Iqbal, M., Removal and
recovery of nickel (II) from aqueous solution by loofasponge-immobilized biomass of Chlorella sorokiniana :
characterization studies, J. Hazard. Mater. , 2004,
vol. 108, no. 1, pp. 85–94.
18. Travieso, L., Benitez, F., Weiland, P., Sanchez, E.,
Dupeyron, R., and Dominguez, A., Experiments onimmobilization of microalgae for nutrient removal inwastewater treatments, Bioresour. Technol. , 1996,
vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 181–186.
19. Ghosh, M. and Gaur, J., Current velocity and the
establishment of stream algal periphyton communities,Aquat. Bot. , 1998, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 1–10.
20. Nayar, S., Goh, B., Chou, L., and Reddy, S., In situ
microcosms to study the impact of heavy metals resus-pended by dredging on periphyton in a tropical estuary,Aquat. Toxicol. , 2003, vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 293–306.
21. Danilov, R.A. and Ekelund, N., Comparison of useful-
ness of three types of artificial substrata (glass, wooda n d  p l a s t i c )  w h e n  s t u d y i n g  s e t t l e m e n t  p a t t e r n s  o fperiphyton in lakes of different trophic status, J. Micro-
biol. Methods , 2001, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 167–170.
22. Burdin, K. and Bird, K., Heavy metal accumulation by
carrageenan and agar producing algae, Bot. Mar. , 1994,
vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 467–470.
23. Khattar, J., Sarma, T., and Singh, D., Removal of
chromium ions by agar immobilized cells of the cyano-bacterium Anacystis nidulans  in a continuous flow bio-
reactor, Enzyme Microb. Technol. , 1999, vol. 25, no. 7,
pp. 564–568.
24. Schreiter, P., Gillor, O., Post, A., Belkin, S., Schmid,
R., and Bachmann, T., Monitoring of phosphorus bio-availability in water by an immobilized luminescentcyanobacterial reporter strain, Biosens. Bioelectron. ,
2001, vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 811–818.
25. Suzuki, T., Yamaguchi, T., and Ishida, M., Immobili-
zation of Prototheca zopfü  in calcium-alginate beads for
the degradation of hydrocarbons, Process Biochem. ,
1998, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 541–546.
26. Leino, H., Kosourov, S.N., Saari, L., Sivonen, K.,
Tsygankov, A.A., Aro, E.-M., and Allahverdiyeva, Y.,Extended H
2 photoproduction by N2-fixing cyanobac-
teria immobilized in thin alginate films, Int. J. Hydro-
gen Energy , 2012, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 151–161.
27. Mallick, N. and Rai, L., Removal of inorganic ions
from wastewaters by immobilized microalgae, World J.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. , 1994, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 439–
443.
28. Lau, P., Tam, V., and Wong, Y., Effect of carrageenan
immobilization on the physiological activities of Chlo-
rella vulgaris,  Bioresour. Technol. , 1998, vol. 63, no. 2,
pp. 115–121.
29. Singh, Y., Photosynthetic activity, and lipid and hydro-
carbon production by alginate-immobilized cells ofBotryococcus  in relation to growth phase, J. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. , 2003, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 687–691.
30. de-Bashan, L.E., Bashan, Y., Moreno, M., Lebsky, V.K.,
and Bustillos, J.J., Increased pigment and lipid content,lipid variety, and cell and population size of the
microalgae Chlorella  spp. when co-immobilized in algi-
nate beads with the microalgae-growth-promoting bac-terium Azospirillum brasilense, Can. J. Microbiol. ,
2002, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 514–521.
31. Moreno-Garrido, I., Campana, O., Lubián, L., and
Blasco, J., Calcium alginate immobilized marinemicroalgae: experiments on growth and short-termheavy metal accumulation, Mar. Pollut. Bull. , 2005,
vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 823–829.
32. Joo, D., Cho, M., Lee, J., Park, J., Kwak, J., Han, Y.,
and Bucholz, R., New strategy for the cultivation ofmicroalgae using microencapsulation, J. Microencap-
sulation , 2001, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 567–576.
33. Blanco, A., Sanz, B., Llama, M., and Serra, J., Bio-
sorption of heavy metals to immobilised Phormidium
laminosum  biomass, J. Biotechnol. , 1999, vol. 69, no. 2,
pp. 227–240.
34. Garbisu, C., Gil, J., Bazin, M., Hall, D., and Serra, J.,
Removal of nitrate from water by foam-immobilized
Phormidium laminosum  in batch and continuous-flow
bioreactors, J. Appl. Phycol. , 1991, vol. 3, no. 3,
pp. 221–234.
35. Aguilar-May, B., del Pilar Sánchez-Saavedra, M., Liz-
ardi, J., and Voltolina, D., Growth of Synechococcus  sp.
immobilized in chitosan with different times of contactwith NAOH, J. Appl. Phycol. , 2007, vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 181–183.
36. Banerjee, M., Mishra, S., and Chatterjee, J., Scaveng-
ing of nickel and chromium toxicity in Aulosira fertilis-
sima  by immobilization: effect on nitrogen assimilating
enzymes, Electron. J. Biotechnol. , 2004, vol. 7, no. 3,
pp. 13–14.
37. Thakur, A. and Kumar, H., Use of natural polymers as
immobilizing agents and effects on the growth ofDunaliella salina  and its glycerol production, Acta Bio-
technol. , 1999, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 37–44.
38. Lebeau, T., Moan, R., Turpin, V., and Robert, J., Algi-
nate-entrapped Haslea ostrearia  as inoculum for the
greening of oysters, Biotechnol. Tech. , 1998, vol. 12,
no. 11, pp. 847–850.
39. Cassidy, M., Lee, H., and Trevors, J., Environmental
applications of immobilized microbial cells: a review, J.
Ind. Microbiol. , 1996, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 79–101.176
MOSCOW UNIVERSITY BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES  BULLETIN  Vol. 71  No. 3  2016VASILIEVA et al.
40. Jeanfils, J. and Collard, F., Effect of immobilizing
Scenedesmus obliquus  cells in a matrix on oxygen evolu-
tion and fluorescence properties, Eur. J. Appl. Micro-
biol. Biotechnol. , 1983, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 254–257.
41. Robinson, P., Goulding, K., Mak, A., and Trevan, M.,
Factors affecting the growth characteristics of alginate-entrapped Chlorella, Enzyme Microb. Technol. , 1986,
vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 729–733.
42. Takaichi, S., Carotenoids in algae: distributions, bio-
synthese and functions, Mar. Drugs , 2011, vol. 9, no. 6,
pp. 1101–1118.
43. Gudin, C. and Thepenier, C., Bioconversion of solar
energy into organic chemicals by microalgae, Adv. Bio-
technol. Processes , 1986, vol. 6, pp. 73–110.
44. Matsunaga, T., Sudo, H., Takemasa, H., Wachi, Y.,
and Nakamura, N., Sulfated extracellular polysaccha-ride production by the halophilic cyanobacterium Apha-
nocapsa halophytia  immobilized on light-diffusing opti-
cal fibers, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. , 1996, vol. 45,
nos. 1–2, pp. 24–27.
45. Rao, K. and Hall, D., Photosynthetic production of
fuels and chemicals in immobilized systems, Trends
Biotechnol. , 1984, vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 124–129.
46. Kannaiyan, S., Rao, K., and Hall, D., Immobilization
of Anabaena azollae  from Azolla filiculoides  in polyvinyl
foam for ammonia production in a photobioreactor sys-tem, World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. , 1994, vol. 10,
no. 1, pp. 55–58.
47. Melis, A., Zhang, L., Forestier, M., Ghirardi, M., and
Seibert, M., Sustained photobiological hydrogen gasproduction upon reversible inactivation of oxygen evo-lution in the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii,
Plant Physiol. , 2000, vol. 122, no. 1, pp. 127–136.
48. Kosourov, S. and Seibert, M., Hydrogen photoproduc-
tion by nutrient-deprived Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
cells immobilized within thin alginate films under aer-obic and anaerobic conditions, Biotechnol. Bioeng .,
2009, vol. 102, no. 1, pp. 50–58.
49. Laurinavichene, T., Kosourov, S., Ghirardi, M., Seib-
ert, M., and Tsygankov, A., Prolongation of H
2 photo-
production by immobilized, sulfur-limited Chlamydo-
monas reinhardtii  cultures, J. Biotechnol. , 2008, vol. 134,
no. 3, pp. 275–277.
50. Kayano, H., Karube, I., Matsunaga, T., Suzuki, S., and
Nakayama, O., A photochemical fuel cell system usingAnabaena  N-7363, Eur. J. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. ,
1981, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–5.
51. Solovchenko, A., Lukyanov, A., Vasilieva, S.,
Savanina, Y., Solovchenko, O., and Lobakova, E., Pos-sibilities of bioconversion of agricultural waste with theuse of microalgae, Moscow Univ. Biol. Sci. Bull. , 2013,
vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 206–215.
52. Abe, K., Takahashi, E., and Hirano, M., Development
of laboratory-scale photobioreactor for water purifica-tion by use of a biofilter composed of the aerialmicroalga Trentepohlia aurea  (Chlorophyta), J. Appl.
Phycol. , 2008, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 283–288.53. Travieso, L., Benitez, F., and Dupeiron, R., Sewage
treatment using immobilied microalgae, Bioresour.
Technol. , 1992, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 183–187.
54. de la Noüe, J. and Proulx, D., Biological tertiary treat-
ment of urban wastewaters with chitosan-immobilizedPhormidium,  Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. , 1988, vol. 29,
nos. 2–3, pp. 292–297.
55. Garbayo, I., Vigara, A., Conchon, V., and Dos, San-
tosV., and Vilchez, C., Nitrate consumption alterationsinduced by alginate-entrapment of Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii  cells, Process Biochem. , 2000, vol. 36, no. 5,
pp. 459–466.
56. Sawayama, S., Rao, K., and Hall, D., Nitrate and
phosphate ion removal from water by Phormidium lami-
nosum  immobilized on hollow fibres in a photobioreac-
tor, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. , 1998, vol. 49, no. 4,
pp. 463–468.
57. Nascimento, C. and Xing, B., Phytoextraction: a
review on enhanced metal availability and plant accu-mulation, Sci. Agric. , 2006, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 299–311.
58. Malik, A., Metal bioremediation through growing cells,
Environ. Int. , 2004, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 261–278.
59. Da Costa, A.C.A. and De Franca, F.P., Cadmium
uptake by biosorbent seaweeds: adsorption isothermsand some process conditions, Sep. Sci. Technol. , 1996,
vol. 31, no. 17, pp. 2373–2393.
60. Alhakawati, M. and Banks, C., Removal of copper from
aqueous solution by Ascophyllum nodosum  immobilised
in hydrophilic polyurethane foam, J. Environ. Manage. ,
2004, vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 195–204.
61. Jang, L., Nguyen, D., and Geesey, G., Selectivity of
alginate gel for Cu over Zn when acidic conditions pre-vail, Water Resour. , 1999, vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 2817–
2825.
62. Akhtar, N., Iqbal, M., Zafar, S., and Iqbal, J., Biosorp-
tion characteristics of unicellular green alga Chlorella
sorokiniana  immobilized in loofa sponge for removal of
Cr (III), J. Environ. Sci. , 2008, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 231–
239.
63. Bayramoglu, G., Tuzun, I., Celik, G., Yilmaz, M., and
Arica, M., Biosorption of mercury (II), cadmium (II)and lead (II) ions from aqueous system by microalgaeChlamydomonas reinhardtii  immobilized in alginate
beads, I n t .  J .  M i n e r .  P r o c e s s . , 2006, vol. 81, no. 1,
pp. 35–43.
64. Nakajima, A., Horikoshi, T., and Sakaguchi, T.,
Recovery of uranium by immobilized microorganisms,Eur. J. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. , 1982, vol. 16, nos.
2–3, pp. 88–91.
65. Dziwulska, U., Bajguz, A., Godlewska-Zylkiewicz, B.,
The use of algae 
Chlorella vulgaris  immobilized on
cellex-T support for separation/preconcentration oftrace amounts of platinum and palladium beforeGFAAS determination, Anal. Lett. , 2004, vol. 37N,
pp. 2189–2203.
Translated by K. Lazarev