3~1_6 _____________________________________ BOOKREVIBNS--------------------NA_T_u~R_E_v_o_L_.3~3_2_24_M~A_R~C~H~1~98~s 
the reader to trace, for example, the origin 
of what is now known as the Higgs mech­
anism. The author also correctly notes 
that, when it is a matter of many interact­
ing degrees of freedom, we often run into 
totally unexpected effects which are diffi­
cult to predict ahead of their experimental 
discovery, such has certainly been 
the case for superconductivity and super­
fluidity. And how about the newly dis­
covered high-temperature superconduc­
tors? Those who believe that condensed­
matter physics is an arid occupation of 
simply solving many-particle Schrodinger 
equations should take a lesson. 
As some of us know, Leggett has been 
interested in the problem of quantum 
measurement for some time. Indeed, in 
recent years, he has played a major role in 
inspiring condensed-matter experimental­
ists to perform a number of beautiful 
experiments to test quantum mechanics 
on a macroscopic scale. It therefore does 
not come as a surprise to see a large 
amount of space devoted to the subject. In 
fact, the whole book betrays an uneasiness 
about quantum mechanics. However 
unorthodox the point of view of the author 
may be, I am sure that any serious reader 
will find his discussion of Bell's inequality 
delightfully simple and yet forceful. The 
same is true for his account of the 'cat 
paradox'. The question that he wishes us 
to consider is "whether, and if so where 
and how quantum mechanics breaks down 
in the face of increasing complexity ... ". 
However, there are certain aspects of 
the book that I found disturbing. First, 
there is a tendency throughout the text to 
throw out a few questions, for example 
"why should nature seem to be described 
by Lagrangian field theory, and therefore 
~ubmit herself to the stringent constraints 
imposed by it? Is the formalism univers­
ally valid, in fact, even when it gives rise to 
severe paradoxes?... Or are these 
questions themselves 'meaningless'?". 
Although these questions are not in them­
selves 'meaningless', they seem to lose 
their impact if they are not seen in context. 
My second concern is to do with an 
unnecessary defensiveness, which per­
haps stems from a particular type of socio­
logical tension in the physics community 
today. Thus Stephen Hawking may 
proudly announce that the end is perhaps 
in sight for theoretical physics, but we 
know, all too well, what the fate of such 
prophecies is. We do not need to put up a 
straw man to conclude that " .... far from 
the end of the road being in sight, we are 
atill, after three hundred years, only at the 
Ening of a long journey along a path 
twists and turns promise to reveal 
which at present are beyond our 
\lrildest imagination". 0 
Sudip Chakravarty is an Associate Professor in 
the Department of Physics, State University of 
New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, New 
York 11794, USA. Climatological 
quirks 
A. Slingo 
A Climate Modelling Primer. By A. 
Henderson-Sellers and K. McGuffie. 
Wiley: 1987. Pp.217. £28.50, $53.95. 
CuMA TE modelling is very much in the 
news at present. Our understanding of the 
physical mechanisms responsible for such 
important natural variations as the ice 
ages and the El Nino/Southern Oscillation 
has improved through advances in both 
observational techniques and numerical 
modelling. At the same time, models have 
been used to predict the systematic 
changes expected from increasing concen­
trations of greenhouse gases liberated by 
anthropogenic activities, as well as the 
short-term effects of a nuclear war. 
There is clearly a need for an introduc­
tory text which describes climate models 
and their application to a wide range of 
problems. The authors of this book 
have identified a gap in the literature, 
but their account is far too idiosyn­
cratic to serve as a useful introduction and 
in many places it is actually misleading. 
For example, what little information there 
is on the physical basis of climate is scat­
tered through the text, so the reader is in 
no position to understand the material on 
feedback processes and climate change 
which occupies much of the first chapter. 
Static action 
Peter Dunnill 
Immobilized Cells: Principles and Applica­
tions. By J. Tampion and M.D. Tampion. 
Cambridge University Press:1987. Pp.257. 
£30, $59.50. 
lmmobilised Enzymes and Cells. By A. 
Rosevear, J.F. Kennedy and J.M.S. 
Cabral. Adam Hilger, Bristol/Taylor & 
Francis, Philadelphia:J987. Pp.248. 
£37.50, $102. 
IT rs now 80 years since Michaelis of enzyme 
kinetics fame described the adsorption of 
an enzyme to charcoal, and 30 years since 
the systematic study of enzyme immobili­
zation for practical application began in 
earnest. Success with attachment of 
enzymes to supports encouraged studies 
of whole-cell immobilization, though 
immobilized cells had been used for a 
century, largely unconsciously, in fields 
such as sewage treatment and vinegar 
production. 
There are now dozens of methods of 
enzyme and cell immobilization and any 
guidance on appropriate procedures is Three-dimensional models form the basis 
of serious climate research, yet they 
receive less attention than much simpler 
models. As justification, there is the 
extraordinary and incorrect assertion that 
in 1986 there was "a series of occurrences 
of apparently correct results being gener­
ated for the wrong reason". 
Some quirks are simply juvenile, such 
as the attempts at humour in the dedica­
tion and acknowledgements, and the glos­
sary definition of infinite as "quite a lot­
really an awful lot". Others are more seri­
ous. There is a tendency to reproduce 
material from other sources without 
explanation, as in the section on cloud 
prediction in Chapter 6. In this and other 
places, the reader is swamped by unneces­
sary detail, while the underlying physics 
remains unexplained. Such detail does, 
however, lead to a useful bibliography. 
The book is summed up by the 'spag­
hetti diagram', which purports to show the 
many interactions between elements of 
the climate system and which leaves the 
boxes blank for readers to fill in for them­
selves. As an alternative text, I would 
recommend An Introduction to Three­
dimensional Climate Modeling by Wash­
ington and Parkinson, which, although its 
remit is more restrictive, does at least have 
the stamp of authority which comes from 
authors who are acknowledged experts in 
this field. 0 
A. Slingo, Meteorological Office, Bracknell, 
UK, will shortly be moving to the National Cen­
ter for Atmospheric Research, PO Box 3000, 
Boulder, Colorado 80307, USA. 
very welcome. As their titles imply, these 
two books take quite different approaches, 
with one focusing just on immobilized 
cells and the other considering both 
enzymes and cells. For newcomers to 
applied biocatalysis, the latter approach is 
particularly valuable because the first 
decision to be made is whether to use 
whole cells or enzymes. 
That choice might be more straight­
forward if scientists could agree on what 
they mean by the use of the word 'cell'. 
Thus on page 1 Tampion and Tampion 
define an immobilized cell as "a cell or 
remnant thereof that by natural or arti­
ficial means is prevented from moving 
independently". Aside from cell organ­
elles, however, a remnant of a cell effec­
tively functions as an enzyme catalyst 
lacking the organization needed for, say, 
co-factor recycling. Rosevear et al. refer 
to such systems as "dead cells", but the 
European Federation of Biotechnology 
Working Party disapproves of this term. 
Equally it dislikes terms such as "living", 
but welcomes "viable", "non-growing" 
and "respiring" in appropriate circum­
stances. At present we don't understand 
why immobilized cells are often much 
more stable as catalysts than free cells, so 