Journal  of  Hazardous  Materials  243 (2012) 86–  94
Contents  lists  available  at  SciVerse  ScienceDirect
Journal  of  Hazardous  Materials
j  our  na  l  ho  me  p  age:  www.elsevier.com/locate/jhazmat
Impacts  of  operating  parameters  on  oxidation–reduction  potential  and
pretreatment
 efﬁcacy  in  the  pretreatment  of  printing  and  dyeing  wastewater  by
Fenton
 process
Huifang  Wua,∗,  Shihe  Wangb
aCollege  of  Environment,  Jiangsu  Key  Laboratory  of  Industrial  Water-Conservation  &  Emission  Reduction,  Nanjing  University  of  Technology,  Nanjing  210009,  China
bDepartment  of  Municipal  Engineering,  Southeast  University,  Nanjing  210096,  China
h i g h l i g h t s
/trianglerightsldA real  printing  and  dyeing  wastewater  was  pretreated  by  Fenton  process.
/trianglerightsldWe investigated  impacts  of  operating  parameters  on  ORP  and  pretreatment  efﬁcacy.
/trianglerightsldRelationship among  ORP,  operating  parameters  and  treatment  efﬁcacy  was  established.
/trianglerightsldPretreatment efﬁcacy  was  in  proportion  to  the  exponent  of  temperature  reciprocal.
/trianglerightsldWe investigated  kinetics  of  color  and  COD  removal  and  BOD 5/COD  ratio  in  solution.
a  r  t  i  c  l  e  i  n  f  o
Article  history:
Received
 17  July  2012
Received
 in revised form
27
 September  2012
Accepted
 1  October  2012
Available online 22 October 2012
Keywords:PretreatmentOxidation–reduction potential
EfﬁcacyFenton process
Printing
 and  dyeing  wastewatera  b  s  t  r  a  c  t
An  experiment  was  conducted  in  a  batch  reactor  for  a  real  printing  and  dyeing  wastewater  pretreatment
using Fenton process in this study. The results showed that original pH, hydrogen peroxide concen-
tration and  ferrous  sulfate  concentration  affected  ORP  value  and  pretreatment  efﬁcacy  greatly.  Under
experimental conditions,  the  optimal  original  pH  was  6.61,  and  the  optimal  hydrogen  peroxide  and  fer-
rous sulfate  concentrations  were  1.50  and  0.75  g  L−1,  respectively.  The  relationship  among  ORP,  original
pH, hydrogen  peroxide  concentration,  ferrous  sulfate  concentration,  and  color  (COD  or  BOD 5/COD)  was
established, which  would  be  instructive  in  on-line  monitoring  and  control  of  Fenton  process  using  ORP.
In addition, the effects of wastewater temperature and oxidation time on pretreatment efﬁcacy were
also investigated.  With  an  increase  of  temperature,  color  and  COD  removal  efﬁciencies  and  BOD 5/COD
ratio increased, and they were in proportion to the exponent of temperature reciprocal. Similarly, color
and COD  removal  efﬁciencies  increased  with  increasing  oxidation  time,  and  both  color  and  COD  removal
obeyed the ﬁrst-order kinetics. The BOD 5/COD  ratio  could  be  expressed  by  a  second-degree  polynomial
with respect  to  oxidation  time,  and  the  best  biodegradability  of  wastewater  was  present  at  the  oxidation
time of  6.10  h.
© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1.  Introduction
A  large  numbers  of  synthetic  dyes  are  produced  worldwide
every  year  for  printing  and  dyeing  and  a  portion  is  discharged  with
wastewater  [1].  There  are  some  dyestuff,  slurry,  dyeing  aid,  acid  or
alkali,  ﬁber  and  inorganic  compound  in  printing  and  dyeing  waste-
water.  Furthermore,  some  dyestuff  contains  nitryl,  amidocyanogen
and  heavy  metals,  such  as  copper,  chrome,  zinc  and  arsenic  and
so  on.  Besides,  the  components  will  be  changed  because  of  dif-
∗Corresponding  author  at:  College  of  Environment,  Nanjing  University  of  Tech-
nology,
 Zhongshanbei  Road  200,  Nanjing  210009,  China.  Tel.:  +86  25  58771250.
E-mail address:  whfkhl@sina.com (H.  Wu).ferent  dyestuff  category,  dyeing  process,  dye  concentration  and
equipment  scale  [2].  Generally,  the  printing  and  dyeing  waste-
water  is  characterized  by  strong  color,  high  pH,  high  chemical
oxygen  demand  (COD),  and  low  biodegradability  [3].  Thus,  such
wastewater  is  difﬁcult  to  treat,  especially  for  color  removal,  using
conventional  wastewater processes [4], and the quality of efﬂu-
ent  from biological wastewater process has often exceeded the
discharge  criterion.
Recently,  advanced  oxidation  processes  using  ozone  [5],  tita-
nium  dioxide  [6],  ultra  violet  [7],  and  Fenton’s  reagent  [8]  have
received  considerable  attention  as  effective  pretreatment  pro-
cesses  of  less  biodegradable  wastewater  [9].  Among  them,  Fenton’s
reagent  is a mixture of hydrogen peroxide and ferrous ion, which
generates  hydroxyl  radicals  [10–12] .  The  highly  reactive  hydroxyl
0304-3894/$ – see front matter ©  2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2012.10.030H.  Wu,  S.  Wang  /  Journal  of  Hazardous  Materials  243 (2012) 86–  94 87
radicals  (oxidation  potential  2.8  V  [13])  attack  and  destroy  the
organic  pollutants  in  wastewater,  and  accordingly  improve  the
biodegradability  of  refractory  wastewater.  Compared  with  other
advanced  oxidation  processes,  the  Fenton’s  reaction  has  a  shorter
reaction  time  [14]  and  the  faster  degradation  rate.  Esplugas  et  al.
[15]  reported  that  Fenton’s  reagent  showed  the  fastest  degradation
rate,  40  times  higher  than  UV  process  and  photocatalysis  and  ﬁve
times  higher  than  ozonation  for  phenol  degradation.  The  shorter
reaction  time  and  faster  degradation  rate  imply  a  lower  capital
cost  than  other  advanced  oxidation  processes  [15–17] .  In  addition,
the  Fenton’s  reagent  is  relatively  cheap,  easy  to  handle  compared
with  other  advanced  oxidation  processes  [18],  reacts  well  with
organic  compounds  and  does  not  produce  toxic  compounds  dur-
ing  oxidation  [19],  Fenton  process  has  been  widely  applied  to  treat
various  types  of  industrial  wastewater  [14,20–22,17] .  The  investi-
gators  have  found  that  Fenton  oxidation  is  effective  in  decolorizing
and  degrading  organic  compounds  of  the  wastewater  that  contains
various  types  of  dyes  [23–26] .  In  addition,  the  combined  process
of  Fenton  oxidation-biological  process  has  been  used  to  treat  dye
wastewater,  in  which  Fenton  process  ﬁlls  the  role  of  improving
the  biodegradability  of  wastewater  [27,18,28] .  Thus,  the  ﬂuctua-
tion  of  efﬂuent  quality  of  Fenton  oxidation  process  would  cause  on
decrease  of  the  overall  process  performance.  However,  according
to  the  mechanisms  of  Fenton  oxidation,  the  operational  conditions
including  original  pH  level  of  wastewater,  the  dosages  of  hydro-
gen  peroxide  and  ferrous  ion,  temperature  and  oxidation  time  play
important  roles  in  the  removal  of  color  and  COD  from  wastewater
and  improvement  of  the  biodegradability.  In  addition,  the  char-
acteristics  of  printing  and  dyeing  wastewater  vary  widely.  So  in
order  to  attain  better  pretreatment  efﬁcacy  and  economization  of
reagents  including hydrogen peroxide and ferrous sulfate simul-
taneously,  the  best  operational  conditions  should  be  ascertained,
and  accordingly  Fenton  dosages  should  be  adjusted  dynamically
according  to  inﬂuent  qualities,  treatment  targets  and  operational
conditions.  However,  the  related  on-line  monitoring  and  control
techniques  are  rarely  discussed  in  the  literature.
Oxidation–reduction  potential  (ORP)  has  been  used  as  a  tool  for
monitoring,  control  and  optimization  of  biological  treatment  sys-
tems  since 1980s [29–31] , and  has  been  proven  to  be  economical
and an effective technique for process control in many wastewa-
ter  treatment  systems,  such  as  alternating  aerobic-anoxic  system
[32],  sequencing  batch  reactor  [33],  extended  aeration  treatment
system  [34]  and  sulﬁde  oxidizing  bioreactor  [35].  For  Fenton  pro-
cess,  the  hydroxyl  radical  is  the  major  oxidizing  species,  however,
on-line  monitoring  the  hydroxyl  radical  is  difﬁcult.  The  ORP  value
in  the oxidation stage should be high to be a controlling param-
eter  for  the  Fenton  process.  Furthermore,  ORP  has  been  used  as  a
control  parameter  for  textile  wastewater  treatment  in  the  Fenton
process  [19,36] .  In  the  two  literatures,  one  literature  obtained  the
relationship  among  ORP  value,  Fenton’s  reagent  concentration  and
COD,  and  ORP  was  used  to  control  the  COD  removal;  while  another
one  obtained  the  relationship  among  ORP  value,  Fenton’s  reagent
concentration,  pH value and color, and ORP was used to control the
color  removal.  However,  as  a  pretreatment  process,  besides  COD
and  color  removal  efﬁciencies,  the  BOD 5/COD  ratio  is  also  a  key
parameter  to  indicate  the  biodegradability  of  wastewater,  but  at
present  no literature, which published the relationship among ORP
value,  BOD 5/COD  ratio  and  Fenton’s  reagent  concentration,  was
searched.
In this study, the Fenton process was used to pretreat a real
printing and dyeing wastewater, and the impacts of operating
parameters such as original pH of wastewater, hydrogen perox-
ide concentration, ferrous sulfate concentration, temperature, and
oxidation  time  on  the  pretreatment  efﬁcacy  were  investigated.  In
addition, we obtained the relationship among ORP, original pH,
hydrogen  peroxide  concentration,  ferrous  sulfate  concentration,and
 color  or  COD  or  BOD 5/COD  ratio  according  to  the  results.  The
ﬁndings  of  this  study  may  provide  useful  messages  in  the  pretreat-
ment  of  printing  and  dyeing  wastewater  using  Fenton  process,  and
may  be  instructive  in  on-line  monitoring  and  control  of  Fenton
process  using  ORP.
2. Experimental
2.1.  Materials
Raw wastewater  was  a  combination  of  printing  and  dyeing
wastewater  from  certain  printing  and  dyeing  corporation,  Nan-
jing  city,  PR  China.  The  characteristics  of  wastewater  were  as
follows:  color  concentration  of  200  times,  pH  value  of  12.77,  COD
of  1240  mg  L−1,  BOD 5of  397  mg  L−1and  BOD 5/COD  ratio  of  0.320.
All  chemicals  were  reagent-grade  and  were  used  as  received,
and  all  solutions  were  prepared  with  distilled  water.  Ferrous  sulfate
(FeSO 4·7H2O)  and  hydrogen  peroxide  (30%,  w/v)  were  used,  and  pH
of  the  solution  was  adjusted  by  using  the  0.5  M  H2SO4. All chemicals
were  provided  by  Shanghai  Chemicals  Reagent  Ltd.
2.2. Experiments
The  experiments  were  conducted  in  a  300  mL  batch  reactor  ﬁlled
with  100  mL  of  sample,  continuously  mixed  at  200  rpm  with  mag-
netic stirred bar. The whole set-up was placed in a water bath to
control  reaction  temperature.  Oxidation  was  carried  out  with  the
following  steps:  pH  was  adjusted  to  target  value  by  using  the  0.5  M
H2SO4; the temperature was raised to target temperature with the
water  bath;  FeSO 4·7H2O  was  added  in  reactor  and  dissolved;  and
then  the  solution  was  slowly  mixed  with  H2O2.  At  schedule  time,
the  ORP  values  of  the  solution  were  determined,  and  the  samples
were  collected and centrifuged for 10 min at 4000 ×g. The  super-
natant  was recovered and properly diluted for the measures of COD,
BOD 5and  color.
We  calculated  the  removal  efﬁciency  of  color  or  COD  using  the
following  equation:
R =C0−  Ct
C0× 100% (1)
where R  is  the  removal  efﬁciency  of  color  or  COD  by  the  Fenton
process,  in  %;  and  C0and  Ctare  the  original  concentration  and  the
residual  concentration  of  color  or  COD  in  solution,  respectively,  in
times  for  color  and  mg  L−1for  COD.
2.3.  Analyses
According to  the  standard  methods  of  China,  COD  was  deter-
mined  by the dichromate method (GB 11914-89 Water quality-
Determination  of  the  chemical  oxygen  demand-Dichromate
method);  BOD 5was  determined  by  the  dilution  and  seeding
method  (HJ 505-2009 Water quality-Determination of biochemical
oxygen  demand  after  5  days  for  dilution  and  seeding  method);  and
color  concentration  was  determined  by  the  double  dilution  method
(GB  11903-89  Water  quality-Determination  of  colority).  pH  was
measured  by a MODEL PHS-3C pH meter. ORP was measured using
a  MODEL  250A  pocket  ORP  meter.
3. Results  and  discussion
3.1.  Effect  of  original  pH
3.1.1. ORP  variation
Under  the conditions of temperature of 30◦C,  hydrogen  perox-
ide concentration of 0.60 g L−1,  and  ferrous  sulfate  concentration  of
0.50  g  L−1,  ORP  of  solution  at  different  original  pH  levels  are  showedDownload English Version:
https://daneshyari.com/en/article/577588
Download Persian Version:
https://daneshyari.com/article/577588
Daneshyari.com