Design of Anticancer Prodrugs for
Reductive Activation
Yu Chen,1Longqin Hu1,2
1Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers,
The State University of New Jersey, 160 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854
2The Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901
Published online 7 August 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).
DOI 10.1002/med.20137
!
Abstract: Anticancer prodrugs designed to target speciﬁcally tumor cells should increase
therapeutic effectiveness and decrease systemic side effects in the treatment of cancer. Over the last20 years, signiﬁcant advances have been made in the development of anticancer prodrugs through
the incorporation of triggers for reductive activation. Reductively activated prodrugs have been
designed to target hypoxic tumor tissues, which are known to overexpress several endogenousreductive enzymes. In addition, exogenous reductive enzymes can be delivered to tumor cellsthrough fusion with tumor-speciﬁc antibodies or overexpressed in tumor cells through genedelivery approaches. Many anticancer prodrugs have been designed to use both the endogenousand exogenous reductive enzymes for target-speciﬁc activation and these prodrugs often containfunctional groups such as quinones, nitroaromatics, N-oxides, and metal complexes. Although nonew agents have been approved for clinical use, several reductively activated prodrugs are in
various stages of clinical trial. This review mainly focuses on the medicinal chemistry aspects of
various classes of reductively activated prodrugs including design principles, structure-activityrelationships, and mechanisms of activation and release of active drug molecules.
/C2232008 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc. Med Res Rev, 29, No. 1, 29–64, 2009
Key words: bioreductive activation; gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy (GDEPT); hypoxia;
metal complex; nitroaromatic; nitroreduction; N-oxide; prodrug; quinone; target-speciﬁcactivation
1. INTRODUCTION
Cancer is an important health issue that caused 7.6 million deaths in 2007 according to American
Cancer Society. Localized cancer can be removed by surgery, but cancer after metastasis has to betreated systematically by chemotherapy in combination with radiotherapy and surgery. However,most chemotherapeutic agents employed are cytotoxic agents and suffer several limitations including
Correspondence to: Longqin Hu,Ph.D.,Departmentof Pharmaceutical Chemistry,Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy,Rutgers,
TheStateUniversityofNewJersey,160FrelinghuysenRoad,Piscataway,NJ08854.E-mail:longhu@rutgers.edu
Medicinal Research Reviews, Vol. 29, No. 1, 29^64, 2009
/C2232008 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.lack of selectivity toward tumor cells, emergence of drug resistance, and low therapeutic index. The
lack of selectivity is responsible for the dose-limiting side effects and toxicities associated withcytotoxic agents. One approach to improve the therapeutic effectiveness and decrease systemic sideeffects of current anticancer agents is through the design of targeted anticancer prodrugs for tumor
site-speci ﬁc activation.
1These targeted prodrugs will be stable and inactive over a wide range of
physiological conditions and will be activated preferentially by a speci ﬁc enzyme or metabolic
pathway only present or predominantly present in the targeted cancer cells. This type of anticancerprodrugs, by utilizing the special features associated with cancers, can selectively act on thosetumor cells and improve the therapeutic index over traditional chemotherapy. A number of prodrugdesigns have been proposed to meet these requirements and are currently under investigation.
2–4
Enzymes targeted by these prodrugs can be either endogenous enzymes such as DT-diaphorase,
b-glucuronidase, prostate-speci ﬁc antigen (PSA) and cytochrome P450 enzymes, or exogenous
enzymes such as carboxypeptidase and nitroreductase that are delivered to cancer cells viaantibody,
gene and virus directed technologies. A number of reviews appeared over the last few years ontargeted prodrugs
2,5–19covering various aspects of the approach from enzyme biology16and design
strategies3,4,20to clinical studies;18however, this current review will focus on prodrugs activated
by reductive enzymes with special emphasis on the prodrug design principles and the structure-activation relationship (SAR) to help medicinal chemists in their design of targeted anticancerprodrugs for reductive activation. After a brief discussion of the strategies and enzymes employed inreductive activation, prodrugs with varying core structures or key functional groups that can be used
to trigger reductive activation will be discussed in the order of quinones, nitroaromatics, N-oxides,
and metal complexes.
2. STRATEGIES FOR REDUCTIVE ACTIVATION OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS
A. Tumor-Speciﬁc Activation Under Hypoxic Conditions
Hypoxia is a common characteristic of most solid tumors resulting from inef ﬁcient microvascular
systems associated with rapid tumor growth.
21Hypoxic tumor cells confer resistance to radiotherapy
and chemotherapy and present a tremendous challenge to cancer therapy for the following reasons:
(i) hypoxic cells are distant from blood vessels and anticancer drugs usually cannot reach thesehypoxic tumor cells;
22(ii) any treatment that kills better-oxygenated cells will allow hypoxic cells to
be reoxygenated and start to grow, making a signi ﬁcant contribution to repopulation of the tumors;
(iii) tumor cells that survive in the hypoxic environment are more hypoxia-tolerant and mightpromote the growth of more malignant tumor cells;
23,24(iv) tumor cells adapted to hypoxia also
upregulate genes involved in drug resistance including genes encoding p-glycoprotein.25On the other
hand, hypoxia also distinguishes tumor cells, especially those solid tumor cells, from normal cells,
thus presenting new opportunities for selective cancer treatment. Hypoxia-selective prodrugs have
obvious advantages over traditional anticancer cytotoxic agents in that the action of the prodrugs afteractivation is limited to hypoxic tumor regions thus minimizing the systemic side effects. Therationale employed in the design and development of hypoxia-selective agents targeting tumor cellsis that hypoxia-selective prodrugs are able to release the active cytotoxic agents upon reduction underhypoxic conditions. Although reducing enzymes that can activate these hypoxia-selective prodrugsmay also be present in aerobic cells, the reduced prodrug forms can often be rapidly oxidized back tothe parental prodrugs by molecular oxygen. This redox cycling process ensures that the prodrugs
are stable in normal cells and activated only in the hypoxic area of tumor tissues to deliver a
selective treatment. Many enzymes including NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase, DT-diaphorase,xanthine oxidase/xanthine dehydrogenase, and cytochrome b
5reductase are involved in the reductive
activation either alone or in combination with each other.30*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medB. Tumor-Speci ﬁc Activation by Exogenous Reductive Enzymes Delivered to Tumor Cells
In addition to targeting endogenous reductive enzymes present in hypoxic cells, alternative strategies
such as gene directed enzyme prodrug therapy (GDEPT) and virus directed enzyme prodrug therapy(VDEPT) have also been developed to express or deliver exogenous reductive enzymes into targetedtumor cells for prodrug activation. A number of enzyme/prodrug systems for bioreductive activationviaGDEPT/VDEPT were explored and some have been tested in clinical trials recently.
14,18,23,26
Reductive enzymes employed in these strategies include cytochrome P450s, E. coli nitroreductase,
and DT-diaphorase. Cytochrome P450s (CYP450s) represent a large family of heme-containing
enzymes that metabolize both exogenous and endogenous compounds. Although the most common
reaction catalyzed by CYP450s is monooxygenase reaction, CYP450s are also required for theactivation of some bioreductive anticancer prodrugs. Cytochrome P450 reductase (EC 1.6.2.4,CYP450R) is a ﬂavin mononucleotide (FMN) and ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) containing
enzyme and functions as an electron donor for CYP450. This NAPDH-ferrohemoproteinoxidoreductase catalyzes one electron-reduction reducing aldehydes and quinones to alcohols andsemiquinones, respectively. Tirapazamine and AQ4N are two examples of prodrugs activatedby CYPs/CYP450Rs. Nitroreductase, speci ﬁcally nfsB gene product, from E. coli is another
ﬂavoenzyme with a bound FMN cofactor, which catalyzes the reduction of aromatic nitro groups to
hydroxylamino groups. This reduction of nitro to hydroxylamino group represents a very largeelectron density change and can thus be used as an ef ﬁcient ‘‘electronic switch ’’to release or generate
potent cytotoxic agents as exempli ﬁed by the combination of CB1954 with virally delivered E. coli
nitroreductase for the treatment of cancer.
26,27DT-diaphorase (EC 1.6.5.2, NAD(P)H quinone
dehydrogenase, NADPH-quinone oxidoreductase-1, NQO1) is an oxygen-independent ﬂavoenzyme
that catalyzes two-electron reduction using NAD(P)H and has a preference for short-chain acceptorquinones, such as ubiquinone, benzoquinone, juglone, and duroquinone. DT-diaphorase is a ﬂavoprotein
containing FMN as a cofactor and reduces quinones to the corresponding hydroquinones (diols).
3. PRODRUGS DESIGNED FOR BIOREDUCTIVE ACTIVATION
Four major classes of anticancer prodrugs have been investigated speci ﬁcally for reductive activation,
each with a distinct core structure. They are quinones, nitroaromatics, N-oxides, and metal complexes.
A. Quinones
Natural and synthetic compounds containing a quinone core structure are an important class of
biologically active agents from coenzyme Q, vitamin K to anticancer antibiotics doxorubicin. Due tothe strong tendency to form a fully aromatic system, quinones can be easily reduced by variousenzymes to hydroquinones. The bioreduction of quinones can be through a one-electron pathway to
produce semiquinone radicals by reductive enzymes like CYP450 reductase, cytochrome b
5
reductase and ubiquinone oxidoreductase or through a two-electron pathway to hydroquinones by
reductive enzymes like DT-diaphorase. The one-electron reduction is a reversible and oxygen-dependent process which can be inhibited by molecular oxygen under normoxic conditions. Underhypoxic conditions, however, the semiquinone radicals will continue to be reduced to hydroquinones(Scheme 1). The hypoxia selectivity of quinone-containing prodrugs arises from this one-electronreduction pathway. DT-diaphorase is the major enzyme responsible for the two electron reduction ofquinones and it is expressed at high levels in many human solid tumors, such as thyroid, adrenal,
breast, ovarian, colon, and non-small-cell lung cancer. Therefore, DT-diaphorase became an
attractive target for enzyme-directed anticancer prodrugs designed for reductive activation. However,the distribution of DT-diaphorase in normal tissues also presents potential adverse effect related tothis type of prodrugs.
28DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*31
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medQuinone-containing prodrugs of cytotoxic agents are designed to be selectively activated either
by the hypoxic environment of tumor cells or by the two-electron reducing enzyme DT-diaphorase.Prodrugs that are good substrates of DT-diaphorase will be more cytotoxic under normoxicconditions but with lower hypoxia selectivity while prodrugs that are good substrates of a one-electron reductase but poor substrates of DT-diaphorase usually possess good hypoxia selectivity.
It has also been shown that hypoxia selectivity of quinone-containing prodrugs is very sensitive to
structure modi ﬁcation; slight changes on quinone core structure could result in substantial reduction
in hypoxia selectivity.
1. Quinones as Part of Active Drugs
Mitomycin C (MMC, 1) is the earliest clinically used quinone-containing drug recognized as a
bioreductive and hypoxia-selective alkylating agent.
30As the prototype agent in this group, the
mechanism of action of mitomycin C has been extensively investigated and is believed to involvebioreductive activation as shown in Scheme 2. MMC and its analogues produce their cytotoxicitythrough reductive metabolism followed by well-de ﬁned fragmentation to bifunctional alkylating
species that crosslink DNA viaguanine –guanine in the major groove.
31However this ﬁrst hypoxia-
targeting prodrug only shows marginal hypoxia selectivity while its N-methyl analogue por ﬁromycin
(2) shows higher selectivity and has been clinically evaluated as a hypoxia-selective prodrug.32
In addition to reduction by CYP450 reductases, MMC and its analogues are also substrates of
DT-diaphorase33,34which is widely overexpressed in many types of tumor cells. EO9 ( 3) and AZQ ( 4)
are another two principal aziridinylquinones, analogues of MMC developed as hypoxia selectiveagents. They are simpli ﬁed analogues with aziridine attached directly to benzoquinone or indo-
lequinone ring. These two types of quinone compounds were shown to be potent alkylating agentsupon reduction to the corresponding aziridinyl hydroquinone, which effectively increases the pK
aof
the aziridine nitrogen for protonation and activation toward nucleophilic attack at physiological
pH values.35
Scheme 1 .Quinonereductionpathwayby CYP450sandDT-diaphorase.29
32*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medEO9 ( 3), an indolequinone-based bioreductive prodrug, was identi ﬁed as a good substrate of both
human and rodent DT-diaphorases and can be activated to form DNA-damaging species under bothnormoxic and hypoxic conditions.
36–39Under normoxic conditions, its cytotoxicity correlated well
with DT-diaphorase activity, while the cytotoxicity under hypoxic conditions also correlated with but
could not be attributed completely to the low levels of DT-diaphorase activity in tumor cells. Theseresults indicate that EO9 has the potential to kill either the aerobic fraction of DT-diaphorase-richtumors or the hypoxic fraction of DT-diaphorase-de ﬁcient tumors.
40EO9 exhibited excellent activity
in solid tumor animal models and showed no signi ﬁcant bone marrow toxicity in animal toxicology
studies.41EO9 was tested in a phase II clinical study using a marker lesion strategy to evaluate its
activity for the intravesical treatment of bladder cancer. Complete response, de ﬁned as complete
disappearance of the marker lesion, was achieved in 67% and local toxicity was similar to that seen
with other intravesical chemotherapeutic agents. Larger clinical trials will be needed to evaluate the
potential clinical use of this drug.42However, clinical trials of EO9 failed to show signi ﬁcant
therapeutic bene ﬁts in humans. The main reason for this failure is believed to be due to its poor
pharmacokinetic properties such as the very short half-life and poor tissue penetration.43Since the
discovery of EO9, indolequinone-based bioreductive prodrugs have drawn considerable interest. Theindolequinone core has been modi ﬁed in efforts to develop analogues that would retain the hypoxia-
selectivity and low toxicity while exhibit improved pharmacokinetic properties. SAR studies mainlyfocused on the 2, 3, or 5 position on the indolequinone core as shown in Figure 1.
5-position: An aziridinyl group at 5-position is essential for potency and selectivity under both
normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Addition of a methyl group onto the carbon of aziridinyl ringintroduces steric hindrance that would reduce DT-diaphorase-dependent metabolism leading toincreased hypoxia selectivity.
44–46
3-position: Elimination from the indol-3-yl methyl position was found to be important in clearly
differentiating the hypoxic cells from the normoxic DT-diaphorase-rich cells. Several modelcompounds were synthesized and shown to undergo elimination of the leaving groups at 3-yl positionas shown in Scheme 3 under chemical or radiolytic conditions exhibiting signi ﬁcant hypoxia
selectivity in the range of 10 –200.
47However, very few changes at the indol-3-yl methyl position can
be made without adversely affecting substrate speci ﬁcity. Introduction of bulky leaving groups like
carbamoyloxy methyl at the 3-position usually gave poor substrates of DT-diaphorase.44On the other
hand, when a small good leaving group like chlorine was attached at 3-position, inactivation of thereductive enzyme was observed. That is believed to be due to alkylation of the enzyme active site.
45,46
This ﬁnding was utilized later to design mechanism-based inhibitors of DT-diaphorase with a series
of phenolic leaving groups at the 3-position.48Replacement of the hydroxymethyl group with an
Figure 1. SARofindolequinoneanalogues.
Scheme 2 .BioreductiveactivationofmitomycinCandporfiromycinleadingtotheformationofbifunctionalalkylatingagents.DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*33
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medaldehyde completely lost the substrate activity of DT-diaphorase under both normoxic and hypoxic
conditions.49It is, thus, possible to preferentially target the hypoxic fractions of tumors with such
modi ﬁcations at the 3-position that gave poor substrates of DT-diaphorase but with high hypoxia
selectivity. When desired, reintroduction of the hydroxymethyl group at the 3-position would render
it active as a substrate of DT-diaphorase, making it possible to target the normoxic DT-diaphorase-
rich fractions of tumors.
2-position: The effect of substitution at indol-2-yl position on cytotoxicity and selectivity under
hypoxic conditions has been investigated by Stratford and co-workers.47It was demonstrated that the
bulkiness of the alkyl group at 2-position dramatically affected the in vitro cytotoxicity and hypoxia
selectivity upon reductive activation under chemical or radiolytic conditions. Analogues without anysubstitution at C-2 were up to 300 times more cytotoxic but less hypoxia-selective than analogueswith an alkyl substituent at C-2.
47However, substrate speci ﬁcity for DT-diaphorase was not adversely
affected by such modi ﬁcations and was substantially enhanced in some cases. For example,
2-piperidin-1-ylethyl aminocarbonyl, 2-morpholinylethyl aminocarbonyl, or cyclopropyl substitu-tion at C-2 position was well tolerated resulting in good substrate activity for DT-diaphorase thatis comparable to EO9.
452-Phenyl-5-methoxy indolequinone derivatives were shown to be six
times better as substrates of DT-diaphorase.45,50Recently, a series of indolequinones bearing
p-nitrophenoxymethyl group at indol-2-yl position were reported to be poor substrates ofDT-diaphorase.
51
Benzoquinone-based bioreductive prodrugs like AZQ ( 4)52–55and prodrugs based on
benzimidazolequinone, and naphthoquinone56–61were also widely investigated as hypoxia-selective
bioreductive anticancer agents. Such SAR studies are not only essential for optimization ofquinone-based small molecules as active drugs but also facilitate the design and development of newquinone-based molecules to deliver cytotoxic agents to hypoxic tumor tissues or tumor tissuestransfected to express reductive enzymes.
2. Quinone as a Promoiety for the Targeted Delivery of Cytotoxic Agents
Indolequinones ( 5) have been extensively used as promoieties to effectively release the parent drugs
attached at 3-position upon bioreduction or radiolytic reduction.
46,47,62Reductive activation of
indolequinone prodrugs is accompanied by the concomitant formation of the electrophilic iminiumcations, which may also contribute to the cytotoxicity to tumor cells. Other similar promoietiesinclude naphthoquinones ( 6) and benzoquinone ( 7). A recent example of indolequinone prodrugs is
an FUDR prodrug 8ashown in Scheme 4. 8aexhibited only minimal cytotoxicity against EMT6/KU
cells under aerobic conditions, while it showed signi ﬁcantly enhanced cytotoxicity under hypoxic
conditions with an IC
50as low as 150 nM. This is approximately 50-fold lower than the IC 50of 8.1mM
for the parent drug FUDR. This enhanced cytotoxicity was attributed to the strong cytotoxic effect of
the electrophilic iminium cation formed in addition to the release of the parent drug FUDR.63
Camptothecin is a potent inhibitor of DNA topoisomerase leading to irreversible and lethal strandbreaks of DNA during its replication. However, unfavorable physicochemical properties ofcamptothecin such as poor water solubility, lactone ring instability prevented its clinical use in thetreatment of cancer. Various approaches such as camptothecin analogues, camptothecin prodrugs, or
Scheme 3 .Eliminationoftheleavinggroupatthe3-positionofindolequinones.34*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/mednew drug delivery systems have been developed to overcome these unfavorable physicochemical
issues.64–70One of these approaches is to develop water soluble camptothecin prodrugs with
selectivity toward tumor cells by targeting tumor hypoxia. Camptothecin was attached to the3-position of indolequinone as in 8bthrough N, N
0-dimethyl-2-aminoethylcarbamate linker as a new
class of water soluble prodrugs that can be activated quickly by DT-diaphorase. The reduction was
followed by cyclization releasing the parent active drug camptothecin. This camptothecin prodrugshowed at least one order of magnitude lower cytotoxicity and higher hypoxia selectivity than theparent drug camptothecin.
71
Anticancer agent EO9 has also been proposed as a promoiety to attach to an anticancer drug at its
indol-3-yl methyl position as a leaving group to form a dual acting prodrug ( 9).72Upon reduction,
both the anticancer drug itself and the active metabolite of EO9 can be released viaspontaneous
elimination.
In addition to indol-3-yl position, SAR study has demonstrated that modi ﬁcation at 2-position
might be superior to the 3-position in terms of generating better substrates of DT-diaphorase.
Molecular modeling of the enzyme-substrate complex also indicated that the active site of DT-
diaphorase can accommodate a broad range of substituents at 2-position since this position is locatedat the entrance to the binding site.
45,73In light of these ﬁndings, it is believed that a prodrug strategy
utilizing bioreductive delivery of cytotoxic agents from the 2-position of the indolequinone wouldprovide compounds having a high correlation between DT-diaphorase activity and cytotoxicity.Aspirin was chosen as a model drug to be attached to indolequinone at 2- or 3-position to providepotential prodrugs 10and11for bioreductive activation.
74As shown in Scheme 5, it was found that
only 3-substituted regioisomer 11can generate aspirin under radiolytic conditions, suggesting that
modi ﬁcation of C-2 position might not be suitable for drug delivery through bioreductive activation.
Scheme 4 .Releaseoftheactivedrugsfromprodrugsintheformofindolequinone-drugconjugates.DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*35
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medThis conclusion was reexamined by Borch and co-workers when they extended this
indolequinone prodrug strategy to deliver phosphoramide mustards to prepare phosphoramidateprodrugs for activation by DT-diaphorase.
62,75It was found that both 2- and 3-substituted prodrugs
undergo rapid activation viatwo electron reduction. Furthermore, the 3-substituted prodrug 12also
underwent rapid activation following one electron reduction while 2-substituted prodrug 13was
activated very slowly by one electron reduction (Scheme 6). Although both prodrugs were shown to
be nanomolar inhibitors of cell proliferation in vitro , there was no correlation between cytotoxicity
and DT-diaphorase activity for the 3-substituted regioisomer.62Further investigation under similar
conditions found that the 3-substituted regioisomer could also be activated by glutathione rapidlywhile the activation of 2-substituted regioeisomer was considerably slower by glutathione. Theseresults suggested that drug delivery viatwo-electron reduction from the 2-position was a more
selective prodrug strategy.
75
Anticancer drugs can also be released from benzoquinone conjugates. One example of a
benzoquinone prodrug is the conjugate 14of a nitrogen mustard. Under hypoxic conditions, prodrug
14can be activated to produce 4-[bis(2-chloroethyl)amino]benzoic acid as shown in Scheme 7.
Under physiological pH, the anionic nature of the carboxylate increases the electron density ofaromatic ring that favors the formation of the aziridinium species capable of alkylating DNA.
76
The‘‘trimethyl lock ’’type of conformational restriction was also employed to facilitate cycliza-
tion activation of benzoquinone-derived prodrugs.77Upon reduction to hydroquinone, the ring
cyclization process was facilitated by three strategically placed methyl groups —one the quinone ring
ortho to the side chain and two on the side chain bto the carbonyl but ato the quinone ring as shown
Scheme 8; such arrangement has been shown to restrict the rotation of the side chain and bring the
carbonyl group closer to the attacking nucleophilic OH, an effect referred to as the ‘‘trimethyl lock. ’’
Scheme 5 .Drugreleaseofmodelprodrugs 10and11ofaspirinuponradiolyticreduction.
Scheme 6 .Activationofindolequinoneprodrugsofphosphoramidemustard.36*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medTrimethyl lock was ﬁrst applied to prodrug design by Carpino et al.78and then explored by others in
the design of prodrugs (Scheme 8).20,79,80Alkylating agent melphalan was shown to be released via
lactonization following reduction of compound 15. Recently, an antiangiogenic agent SU5416, a
potent inhibitor of the VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase Flk-1/KDR, and its 6-hydroxy derivatives wereused as the parent drugs in this prodrug system and the prodrugs 17and18were shown to release
parent drug molecules under reductive conditions, although hydrolysis of the amide or ester bond
between the parent drug and benzoquinone promoiety could not be ruled out.
81
Another example of a prodrug using the ‘‘trimethyl lock ’’concept is a benzoquinone conjugate
16of 4-aminophenyl nitrogen mustard.82Prodrug 16was shown to be a good substrate of
DT-diaphorase with a Km of 2.70 /C61.14mmol/L, release the 4-aminophenyl nitrogen mustard upon
reduction by DT-diaphorase under cell free conditions, and exhibit selectivity toward both theDT-diaphorase-overexpressing cells under normoxic conditions and T47D cells that overexpresscytochrome P450 enzymes with a hypoxia selectivity of 15.8.
Naphthoquinone and benzoimidazolequinone have been tested as prodrug promoieties to release
phosphoramide mustard.
83The naphthoquinone prodrug 19was a good substrate of DT-diaphorase
and underwent facile activation and rapid expulsion of the cytotoxic phosphorodiamidate as shown inScheme 9; however, its cytotoxicity was not correlated to DT-diaphorase activity suggesting thepresence of other activation mechanism. Michael addition of sulfur nucleophile GSH to 3-position ofnaphthoquinone followed by elimination is believed to be the alternative activation mechanism ofthis prodrug. To solve this problem, benzoimidazolequinone analogue 20was designed and
synthesized. Prodrug 20was stable to the nucleophilic attack; however, the reduced product was also
stable and failed to expel the phosphorodiamidate anion.
83
B. Nitroaromatics
Nitroaromatic compounds can be reduced in cells by a number of ﬂavoprotein enzymes viastepwise
addition of up to six electrons as shown in Scheme 10; however, the major enzymatic metabolite is
Scheme 7 .Reductiveactivationofabenzoquinoneprodrugof4-[bis(2-chloroethyl)amino]benzoicacid.
Scheme 8 .Benzoquinoneprodrugsdesignedusingthe‘‘trimethyllock’’concept.DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*37
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medusually the four-electron product, hydroxylamine. The ﬁrst electron adduct of nitro group is a nitro
radical anion which can be ef ﬁciently oxidized back by O 2to the nitro group, thus limiting prodrug
activation to hypoxic environments. This leads to the hypoxia selectivity of nitroaromaticcompounds.
1. Nitroaromatics as Prodrugs
Hypoxia-targeted prodrugs using nitroaromatics were initially developed from the early nitro-
imidazole-based radiosensitizers such as misonidazole 21and etanidzole 22as mimetics of oxygen.
These radiosensitizers are selectively metabolized under hypoxic conditions but with only weakcytotoxicity in tissue culture and moderate hypoxia selectivity.
8Since it was found that misonidazole
could enhance radiotherapeutic outcome in vivo , nitroimidazole-based derivatives were extensively
exploited to increase its cytotoxicity and hypoxia selectivity. For example, alkylating side chains
were introduced to nitroimidazole analogues. The ﬁrst agent showing a remarkable enhancement in
hypoxia selectivity was RSU1069 ( 23). This 2-nitroimidazole contains an aziridine moiety in the N1
side chain enabling RSU1069 to function as a bifunctional alkylating agent upon reduction.84,85
RB6145 ( 24), the mustard analogue of RSU1069, was shown to be 2.5 times less toxic but only
slightly less active than RSU1069 partially due to the improved pharmacokinetic pro ﬁle with
RB6145.86Both R- and S-enantiomers of RB6145 were potent hypoxia-selective agents;87however,
due to the retinal toxicity related to its R enantiomer (also called CI-1010), RB6145 was not furtherdeveloped.
88Bis bioreductive compounds were also explored as an approach to increase potency
and selectivity of prodrugs.89–91The bis-nitroimidazole 25is one such example; Compound 25joins
a 2-nitroimidazole and 5-nitroimidazole moiety viaa carboxamide linker, was shown to be more
selective than the mononitroimidazoles for hypoxic AA8 Chinese hamster cells.91The bis
bioredutive mechanism could be responsible for the high hypoxia selectivity; but, DNA cross-linkingwas unlikely to be involved as originally conceived.
90,91
Scheme 9 .Reductiveactivationofnaphthoquinoneandbenzoimidazolequinoneprodrugsofphosphoramidemustard 19and20.
Scheme 10 .Reductionofnitroaromaticsandback-oxidationofnitroradicalanionbyoxygen.38*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medDNA intercalating moieties have also been tethered to nitroimidazoles in efforts to increase their
potency.92–98However, NLA-1 ( 26) with a nitroimidazole tethered to an acridine, which is a tight
DNA binding moiety, exhibited slow dissociation kinetics and limited extravascular diffusion tohypoxic regions of tumors and was, thus, ineffective in vivo . Weak DNA intercalating moiety with
DNA af ﬁnity high enough to produce cytotoxicity yet low enough to allow ef ﬁcient diffusion and
penetration were more desirable.
99,100NLCQ-1 ( 27), a quinoline analogue of NLA-1, met these
requirements and showed signi ﬁcant hypoxia selectivity in several rodent and human tumor cell lines.
NLCQ-1 substantially enhanced the antitumor effect of alkylating agents, as well as anti-metabolite5-FU and anti-mitotic paclitaxel without increasing bone marrow or hypoxia-dependent retinaltoxicity.
100
Compared to nitroimidazole derivatives 26and27, 1-nitroacridine (nitracrine, 28) showed more
potency and similar hypoxia selectivity toward AA8 cells in culture.101However, nitroacrine and its
derivatives showed rapid metabolism and tight DNA binding with limited extravascular diffusionthus no activity against hypoxic cells in solid tumor in vivo .
93,102,103Nitroquinoline derivatives like
29were considered better candidates due to their lower DNA binding af ﬁnity than nitroacridine but
with comparable selectivity in AA8 cell cultures. Various substituted nitroquinolines were preparedto improve their extravascular diffusion which was thought to be the key factor limiting the
performance of such prodrugs in vivo . However, none of nitroquinolines synthesized showed activity
toward hypoxic cells in vivo .
104
Nitrobenzene directly attached with alkylating agents formed an important group of
bioreductively activated prodrugs. The nitro group is a strong electron-withdrawing group (Hammetts
pelectronic parameter ¼0.78) and is converted to an electron-donating hydroxylamino group
(sp¼/C0 0.34) upon NTR-reduction.27Enzymatic reduction of an aromatic nitro group to a
hydroxylamine results in a huge difference in electronic effect ( Ds p¼1.12) on the aromatic ring
which can activate the latent alkylating species directly attached on it.
Among this group of prodrugs, 5-aziridinyl-2, 4-dinitrobenzamide (CB1954, 30)105was the
most widely studied for GDEPT with E. coli nitroreductase and for reductive activation under
hypoxic conditions.106CB1954 was initially found to have potent anti-tumor activity against the
Walker rat carcinoma associated with its reduction at 4-position by rat DT-diaphorase; however,DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*39
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medhuman DT-diaphorase is much less ef ﬁcient than the rat enzyme isoform in activating the prodrug.
CB1954 was found later to be a good substrate of E. coli nitroreductase with reduction at either 2- and
4-position and was evaluated as a prodrug with virally delivered E. coli nitroreductase in clinical
trials.107Although reduction of CB1954 with E. coli nitroreductase in cell free systems gives
an equimolar mixture of 2- and 4-hydroxylamine metabolites, 4-hydroxylamine metabolite was
shown to be more cytotoxic than the 2-hydroxylamine metabolite.108A recent study suggests that the
2-amino instead of the 4-hydroxylamino was the major metabolite responsible for the bystandereffect of CB1954 when it was activated by E. coli nitroreductase in tumors.
109SN23862 ( 31), the
mustard analogue of CB1954, was not a substrate of DT-diaphorase; unlike CB1954, SN23862 isactivated by E. coli nitroreductase only at the 2-position providing a single metabolite that has
superior cytotoxicity and diffusion property as compared to CB1954 metabolites. In addition toefﬁciently killing cancer cells through bystander effects, it also showed potential to target tumor cells
with severe hypoxia.
110
To develop hypoxia-selective cytotoxic agents, extensive SAR studies of SN23862 were
conducted by Denny and collaborators mainly focusing on modi ﬁcation of the carboxamide moiety,
the mustard leaving groups, and various regioisomers to improve aqueous solubility and at thesame time retain or enhance its hypoxia selectivity.
111,112The optimization efforts led to the
development of analogue PR-104 ( 32) in clinical trials as a hypoxia-activated prodrug.113PR-104 is a
phosphate ester pre-prodrug114which is released in vivo through the action of phosphatases,
followed by cellular metabolic reduction to its 5-hydroxylamino and 5-amino metabolites where the
mustard moiety is activated (Scheme 11).113DT-diaphorase was initially thought to be the enzyme
responsible for PR-104 reduction.. It was demonstrated recently that NADPH:cytochrome P450oxidoreductase along with other unknown ﬂavoproteins were the enzymes responsible for the
activation of PR-104.
115
To develop prodrugs useful in gene therapy (GDEPT) in combination with E. coli nitroreductase,
SAR studies are still ongoing focusing more on improving the bystander effects through balancingthe lipophilicity for adequate membrane penetration and hydrophilicity for aqueous solubility.Optimal bystander effects in GDEPT will be critical to the success of the cancer therapy.
114,116,117
2. Nitroaromatics as Promoieties in Prodrug Design
Due to their selectivity to tumor hypoxia or reductive enzymes used in GDEPT mentioned above,
nitroaromatics have been used as promoieties to release various anticancer cytotoxic agents upon
bioreduction. Various linking functional groups have been employed to attach the anticancer
cytotoxic agents through amines, hydroxyls, thiols, and carboxylic acids.a. Drug Release Through Radical Cleavage . Nitrobenzyl mustard quaternary ammonium salts were
ﬁrst reported as a new class of hypoxia selective cytotoxic agents exempli ﬁed by 33.
118This design
has obvious advantages such as highly deactivated mustard moiety by positive charge and excellentwater solubility. The prodrugs ( 33) were originally thought to undergo activation through
fragmentation upon one electron reduction followed by release of the cytotoxic nitrogen mustardmechlorethamine and benzyl radical as depicted in Scheme 12. This nitrobenzyl quaternary
ammonium salt was found to exhibit high hypoxia selectivity invitro ; however, only marginal activity
Scheme 11 .HydrolyticandreductiveactivationofPR-104.11540*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medagainst hypoxic cells was observed in vivo . Analogues with various substituents on benzene ring were
investigated to alter the reduction potential of the nitro group. Although the reduction potential wasaltered and the observed hypoxia selectivity varied over a wide range from 1 to 3,000-fold against
hypoxic AA8 cells, there were no correlations found between reduction potential and hypoxia
selectivity.
119Detailed mechanistic studies by steady-state and pulse radiolysis suggested that multi-
electron reduction of 33was required before fragmentation could occur and that the fragmentation
was accompanied by the formation of many aromatic byproducts. On the other hand, nitroimidazoleand nitropyrrole analogues 34and35showed high yield of mechlorethamine formation with clean
fragmentation upon reduction. However, they too failed to produce predictable cytotoxicity in vivo
and were not subjected to further development. These mustard quaternary ammonium salts werefound to be unstable leading to nonspeci ﬁc release of mechlorethamine, which could be the major
reason responsible for the observed variable cytotoxicity.
120
b. Drug Release and Activation Through Elimination . Nitroquinoline 36wasﬁrst developed in 1991
as a targeting moiety for bioreductive activated prodrug to achieve selective cytotoxicity towardshypoxic cells.
121As depicted in Scheme 13, phosphoramide mustard attached to b-position was
released following nitro reduction under hypoxic conditions and the subsequent b-elimination
was facilitated by the nearby basic quinoline nitrogen. Cytotoxicity assays showed the prodrug36was 11-fold more toxic toward HT-29 human colon tumor cells under hypoxic conditions than
under normoxic conditions. DNA interstrand cross-links con ﬁrmed the release of phosphoramide
mustard. Phosphoramide mustard is the active metabolite of cyclophosphamide 37, one of the most
successful anticancer agents developed over the past few decades. Because of its activity against bothcycling and noncycling cells, cyclophosphamide is one of the few anticancer agents effective inthe treatment of slow growing solid tumors. Cyclophosphamide has to be activated by cytochromeP-450 enzyme in the liver. As shown in Scheme 14, hepatic cytochrome P-450 oxidation coverts
Scheme 12 .Proposed mechanism of activation and drug release from nitrobenzyl mustard quaternary ammonium salts upon
bioreduction.
Scheme 13 .Release of phosphoramide mustard from prodrug 36following bioreduction and intramolecular catalytic
b-elimination.DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*41
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medcyclophosphamide to 4-hydroxycyclophosphamide, followed by general base catalyzed b-elimination.
Acrolein is a byproduct that is responsible for hemorrhagic cystitis, a life-threatening sideeffect associated with cyclophosphamide. Thus, targeted delivery of phosphoramide mustardthrough the design of prodrugs could avoid the systemic release of acrolein and the problemsassociated with it.
The interest in developing more selective alkylating anticancer agents led to the development of
a variety of phosphoramidate prodrugs. 4-Nitrobenzyl derivatives in the form of 38are among the
most widely investigated promoiety for delivering cytotoxic agents selectively to hypoxic tumor cellsor in gene therapy in combination with E. coli nitroreductase. Bioreduction of the nitro group
in38gives the corresponding hydroxylamine intermediate, which then undergoes a spontaneous
1,6-elimination to release the cytotoxic drug molecule as shown in Scheme 15. Among them,prodrugs that can generate an alkylating agent upon activation are the most widely exploited.
4-Nitroaryl phosphorodiamidates were ﬁrst explored by Borch ’s group as a potential hypoxia-
selective alkylating agent.
122The analogue without the nitro group was not cytotoxic con ﬁrming that
the presence of the nitro group is essential for activity. Both 39and40showed selective cytotoxicity
to HT-29 cells under hypoxic conditions resulting in a greater number of DNA interstrand cross-links.Compound 39without the methyl at benzylic position showed a selective cytotoxicity ratio of only
2.0 while the corresponding analog 40with a methyl substitution at the benzylic position showed an
improved selectivity ratio of >90. The basis for these differences is not yet clear. However, toxicity to
bone marrow progenitor cells was also observed for almost all 4-nitroaryl phosphorodiamidatestested.
122
Nitrofuryl and nitrothienyl derivatives bearing phosphoramidate ( 41and42) were also studied as
hypoxia-selective alkylating agent. SAR study indicated that electron-withdrawing substituents on
the furan and thiophene ring increased cytotoxicity under aerobic conditions and thereby decreased
hypoxia selectivity while electron-donating substituents markedly decreased both aerobic andhypoxic cytotoxicity but enhanced hypoxia selectivity. These nitroheterocyclic analogues wereremarkably of low toxicity as compared to other alkylating agents, exhibiting only moderate toxicityto bone marrow progenitors at the maximum tolerated dose.
123Highly potent but moderately
selective analogues were selected for preclinical evaluation. Pharmacokinetic studies showed thatboth were rapidly metabolized, but the nitrofuryl compound had a somewhat longer plasma half-life.It was concluded that the nitrofuryl phosphoramidate 41was the most promising as a single agent
Scheme 14 .MechanismofactivationofcyclophosphamidebyliverCYP450.
Scheme 15 .Activationandreleaseofactivedrugfrom4-nitrobenzyldrugconjugatesuponbioreductionfollowedby1,6-elimination.42*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medbecause it was highly potent and moderately selective to hypoxia; it could kill both aerobic and
hypoxic cells, exhibiting excellent antitumor activity and minimal toxicity at therapeuticallyeffective doses in mice. However, enzymes responsible for the activation of this prodrug has notidenti ﬁed yet.
124
Efforts from our group have focused on the design of cyclophosphamide analogues through
the incorporation of a trigger-activation mechanism by E. coli nitroreductase for gene therapy. The
design of our nitroaromatics is based on the activation mechanism of cyclophosphamide shown inScheme 14, in the hope of moving the site of activation from the liver to nitroreductase-expressingtumor cells. As shown in Scheme 14, hepatic cytochrome P-450 oxidation converts cyclophosphamide37to 4-hydroxycyclophosphamide, followed by a general base-catalyzed b-elimination. Our ﬁrst
analogue 43was a nitrobenzene-fused cyclophosphamide (Fig. 2).
125The strong electron-
withdrawing effect reduces the oxidation potential of the phosphorinane ring system toward hepatic
cytochrome P-450 oxidation thus avoiding liver metabolism. The strong electron density change
upon reduction to hydroxylamine by E. coli nitroreductase facilitates the cleavage of benzylic C-O
bond and activation of highly cytotoxic phosphoramide mustard portion as shown in Scheme 16. Thisnitrobenzene fused cyclophosphamide exhibited good substrate activity for E. coli nitroreductase
with a half-life of 13 min and a modest >33-fold enhanced cytotoxicity toward E. coli nitroreductase-
expressing cells. Though not suf ﬁciently potent, 43represented a new structure type for reductive
activation and a new lead for further modi ﬁcation in the development of better analogues with much
improved selective toxicity to be used in gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy.
125
Our interest then turned to related exocyclic cognate, 4-nitrophenyl-substituted cyclo-
phosphamide 44.126Structure-activity relationship studies demonstrated that cytotoxicity and
selectivity were dependent on not only good substrate activity toward E. coli nitroreductase but also
the presence of a benzylic oxygen para to the nitro group. Compared to the nitrobenzene-fused
cyclophosphoramide 43, the 4-nitrophenylcyclophosphoramide ( 44) showed an over 100-fold
increase in cytotoxicity and nearly 1,000-fold increase in selectivity toward E. coli nitroreductase-
expressing cells. The trans -isomer was shown to be a better substrate of E. coli nitroreductase than the
corresponding cisisomer as indicated by its relatively shorter half life in the presence of the enzyme,
suggesting that con ﬁguration might affect the substrate binding to and/or the catalytic activity of
E. coli nitroreductase. Surprisingly, the acyclic analogue 4-nitrobenzyl phosphoramide mustard
45(LH7), which was originally synthesized as a control compound to explore the mechanism of
activation of cyclic phosphoramide analogues, turned out to be the most active compound in all ourassays. Prodrug 45showed 170,000-fold selective cytotoxicity toward E. coli nitroreductase-
expressing V79 cells and an IC
50as low as 0.4 nM. When compared to CB1954, an excellent substrate
ofE. coli nitroreductase currently in phase II clinical trials, 4-nitrobenzyl phosphoramide mustard 45
is 100-fold more active and 27-fold more selective, along with excellent bystander effects with a TE 50
of 3.3% as compared to 4.5% for CB1954.127All nitroaryl phosphoramide mustard analogues
were stable in phosphate buffer at pH 7.4 and 37/C14C. They are all good substrates of E. coli
nitroreductase with half lives between 2.3 and 13 min. They have low cytotoxicity before reductionand are converted to phosphoramide mustard or like reactive species upon reduction. The excellentactivity of compound 45in nitroreductase-expressing cells was unexpected considering the fact
that only a twofold increase in cytotoxicity was observed for 4-nitrobenzyl N,N,N,N-tetrakis
(2-chloroethyl)phosphorodiamidate ( 39) toward cancer cells under hypoxic conditions as reported
Figure 2. Designofcyclicandacyclicnitroarylphosphoramidemustardsforreductiveactivationby E.colinitroreductase.DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*43
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medby Borch ’s group.122This suggests that either these compounds were poor substrates of the human
reductase(s) present or the expression of these reductase(s) was limited under the hypoxic assayconditions used. The low IC
50and the high selectivity of these types of prodrugs in E. coli
nitroreductase-expressing cells suggest their potential of becoming a drug candidate in enzyme-
prodrug therapy.
Nitrothienyl heterocycle has been used to deliver combretastatin A-4 viabioreductive
activation.128SAR studies showed that only the dimethyl-substituted analogue 46bis metabolically
stable for 16 hr in the presence of liver homogenates under aerobic conditions whereas themonomethyl analog or the unsubstituted analog 46awere not stable under the same conditions.
Apparently, the dimethyl substitution successfully inhibited the undesired aerobic metabolism,thus, increasing the selectivity under hypoxic conditions. When this strategy was applied to the4-nitrobenzyl system in delivering 6-mercaptopurine, it was shown that S-(a,a-dimethyl-4-
nitrobenzyl)-6-mercaptopurine ( 47b) effectively released the parent drug 6-mercaptopurine under
hypoxic conditions while the unsubstituted S-(4-nitrobenzyl)-6-mercaptopurine ( 47a) failed to
release the parent drug.
129
Nitroarylmethyl carbamate is one type of prodrugs that have been explored in GDEPT.12
Nitrobenzyl carbamates ( 48) undergoes enzymatic reduction to its hydroxylamine, followed by
1,6-elimination to release the amine-containing parent drug as shown Scheme 17.130
Since the reduction potential of these compounds are probably too low to be activated ef ﬁciently
by human cellular reductases, application of these prodrugs have turned from targeting hypoxia toGDEPT using E. coli nitroreductase. Crystal structure of E. coli nitroreductase revealed that there are
Scheme 16 .Reductiveactivationofcyclicandacyclicnitroarylphosphoramidemustardprodrugs.
Scheme 17 .Reductiveactivationof4-nitrobenzylcarbamatesprodrugs via1,6-elimination.44*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medonly a few speci ﬁc contacts between the enzyme active site and the ligand, which might explain the
broad substrate speci ﬁcity observed for the enzyme. As shown in Figure 3, alkylating agents 49–54,
antibiotics 55and56, and DNA intercalating agents 57and58have been used as the parent drug in the
4-nitrobenzyl carbamate prodrug system.90,131 –137However, ef ﬁcacy studies have yet to identify the
conjugates for further evaluation in GDEPT.
1-Methyl-2-nitroimidazol-5-ylmethyl carbamates in the form of 59were also tested as potential
prodrugs that share a similar fragmentation mechanism (Scheme 18) as the 4-nitrobenzylcarbamates.
81,138,139Minor groove alkylating agent 5-aminobenz[e]indoline, phenyleneamine
mustard and other cytotoxins analogues have been tested for nitroreductase mediated gene
therapy.140Despite exhibiting potent and selective activity in culture in several cases, they failed to
show activity against NTR þcells in tumors. Further optimization of pharmacokinetic parameter will
be required.
Similar to the design of 4-nitrobenzyl phosphoramide mustard 45for reductive activation,
1-methyl-2-nitroimidazol-5-ylmethyl was attached to phosphoramide as in prodrug 60(TH-302).141
Compound 60is achiral and releases the corresponding bromo analog of isophosphoramide mustard
upon reduction. It was shown to be activated under hypoxic conditions with a 400-fold enhancedcytotoxicity toward H460 human non-small cell lung cancer cells in culture under hypoxic versus
Figure 3. Structures of representative anticancerdrugsthathavebeenusedinthe 4-nitrobenzylcarbamateprodrugsystem.The
nitrogenineachdrugusedtoformthecarbamateisshowninred.[Colorfigurecanbeviewedintheonlineissue,whichisavailableat www.interscience.wiley.com.]
Scheme 18 .Reductiveactivationof1-methyl-2-nitroimidazol-5-ylmethylcarbamateprodrugs.DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*45
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medaerobic conditions. In vivo studies using an orthotopic xenograft model of pancreatic cancer
demonstrated that compound 60has antitumor ef ﬁcacy both alone and in combination with
gemcitabine.
c. Drug Release and Activation Through Cyclization . Cyclization is another strategy that utilizes
the change in electron density/nucleophilicity before and after reduction to effectively release andactivate the parent drug. When this approach was applied to nitroaromatics in the design ofbioreductively activated prodrugs, an amide or ester group can be cleaved intramolecularly by theamine formed after reduction of the nitro group to trigger the release of the parent drug.
Compounds 61and 62, as potential bioreductively activated prodrugs, employed the
2-nitrophenylalkanoyl as the promoiety, releasing the parent drug 4-aminoaniline mustard
142and
5-FUDR,143,144respectively, upon reduction of nitro to amino group via‘‘cyclization-extrusion ’’
mechanism, that is, cleavage of amide or ester bond by cyclization as shown in Scheme 19. Thenucleophilicity of amino group on the benzene ring and the geometry of the compound were found tobe important while the leaving groups with varying substitutions were shown to have little effect onthe rate of cyclization.
142Methyl groups on the benzylic carbon restrict the side chain to the
conformation required for rapid cyclization and to sterically hinder hydrolysis by serum esterase for
increased stability. Cyclization of both compounds 61and62occurs rapidly upon reduction of the
nitro to amino group; however, these compounds were not good substrates of nitroreductase probablydue to steric hindrance or low reduction potential that prevented ef ﬁcient enzymatic reduction.
To obtain prodrugs that can be ef ﬁciently reduced by nitroreductase, further optimization of
this promoiety led to the development of 2,6-dinitrophenyl conjugates in the form of 63featuring
higher reduction potential and conformation restriction through intramolecular H-bonding betweenaniline NH group and the adjacent 2-nitro group
145as shown in Scheme 20. 5-Amino-1-
(chloromethyl)benz[e]indoline and 4-aminoaniline mustard alkylating agents were attached to this
system and the resulting conjugates 63aand63bshowed cell killing by radiation-induced reduction.
However, they were not activated ef ﬁciently by cellular nitroreductases.145
C. N-Oxides
Compounds containing N-oxides were described as cytotoxic agents as early as the 1960s146and have
drawn interests as bioreductively activated prodrugs7,8,14,147,148due to their potential to be selectively
Scheme 19 .Bioreduction and subsequent cyclization activation of 2-nitrophenylalkanoyl conjugates of amine or alcohol-
containingdrugs.46*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medreduced under hypoxic conditions or by certain reducing enzymes. Two representative drugs,
tirapazamine (TPZ, 64) and AQ4N ( 68), have advanced into clinical trials and showed promising
results in combination with radiotherapy and other chemotherapies.18Based on structures, N-oxide
containing compounds can be divided into two classes, each with different mechanisms ofactivation.
148
1. Aromatic N-Oxides
Aromatic N-oxides can be reduced by a one-electron process to generate a possible cytotoxic radical
species (nitroxide radical), which undergoes radical-mediated oxidative DNA strand cleavage,primarily at DNA C ’-4 ribose site, without covalent binding to DNA and protein. Their hypoxia
selectivity is believed to be due to the back oxidation of radical species by molecular oxygen during
the initial reversible stage of their metabolism.
148
Tirapazamine (TPZ, 64), one of the benzo-1,2,4-triazine dioxide derivatives, was ﬁrst emerged
as a hypoxia-selective cytotoxic agents in the 1980s.149TPZ can be activated primarily by
cytochrome P450 and cytochrome P450 reductase150as well as by aldehyde oxidase, xanthine
oxidase, and nitric oxide synthase under hypoxic conditions viaone-electron reduction to form
oxidizing radicals that can damage DNA.8TPZ shows a hypoxia selectivity as high as 200 depending
on the cell lines used, drug exposure time, and oxygen tension; however, the short-lived nature of
the oxidizing radicals means limited diffusion to surrounding tumor tissues after activation. One
special property of TPZ is that it does not require low oxygen tension to be activated, unlikenitroaromatics or quinones; TPZ can, thus, kill hypoxic cells over a much wider range of oxygenlevel.
151
Detailed mechanism of TPZ activation has been investigated by several groups focusing on
oxidizing species responsible for DNA cleavage and the partial aerobic cytotoxicity distinct fromother bioreductive prodrugs.
18,152It was initially proposed that neutral TPZ radical can abstract
hydrogen atoms from the DNA backbone, which is known to be required for DNA strand scission. It
was later identi ﬁed that the well-known DNA damaging agent hydroxyl radical was released from
this neutral TPZ radical after one electron reduction and might be the active species for DNAcleavage.
153More recent studies revealed that the benzotriazinyl 1-oxide radicals from dehydration
of the neutral TPZ radical instead of the hydroxyl radical might be responsible for oxidative DNAcleavage as shown in Scheme 21.
154,155The one electron reduction potential of the benzotriazinyl
1-oxide radicals correlated well with cytotoxicity under hypoxic conditions while the one electron
Scheme 20 .Bioreductionandsubsequentcyclizationactivationof2-nitrophenylalkanoylconjugatesofamineoralcohol-containing
drugs.DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*47
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medreduction potential of the TPZ metabolite, benzotrazine 1-oxide, accounted for the aerobic
cytotoxicity. It was suggested that balancing these two reduction potentials during the drug design
process can provide more selective bioreductive prodrugs.156,157
A large number of TPZ analogues with improved solubility, potency and therapeutic indices
have been studied.158–160Basic functional groups at 3-position were found to be preferred for
increasing hypoxia cytotoxicity and solubility/lipophilicity. Electron-withdrawing substituents at the7-position of TPZ increased in vitro potency by modulating the reduction potential of N-oxides.DNA-targeting moieties have also been incorporated to TPZ analogues to increase itscytotoxicity.
161,162However, high hypoxia selectivity and potency in vitro did not translate into in
vivo antitumor activity in most cases. Poor drug penetration and diffusion was likely one of the key
factors affecting the in vivo activity.163Recently, pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic modeling was
used in efforts to facilitate this translation from in vitro cytotoxicity to in vivo activity during lead
optimization.158,164
In addition to benzo-1,2,4-triazine 1,4-dioxide derivatives, other heterocyclic systems bearing
aromatic N-oxide have been synthesized and tested as antitumor agents targeting hypoxic conditions.These include quinoxaline 1,4-dioxide 65,
165–172imidazoquinoxaline N-oxides 66,173imidazopyr-
idopyrazine N-oxides,174–177oxadiazole N-oxides,178–180triazine N-oxides,181–183and phenazine
5,10-dioxides 67.184–186
2. Alkyl Tertiary Amine N-Oxides
Alkyl tertiary amine N-oxides, as exempli ﬁed by AQ4N ( 68), can undergo two electron reduction by
cellular reductive enzymes, primarily CYP3A isozyme of NADPH:cytochrome C P450 reductase,generating the corresponding tertiary amines. AQ4 is structurally similar to mitoxantrone, which is ananthracycline antineoplastic agent used in the treatment of certain types of cancer, includingmetastatic breast cancer, acute myeloid leukemia, and non-Hodgkin ’s lymphoma. Both AQ4 and
mitoxantrone act as DNA intercalating and topisomerase-II inhibitors. The tertiary amine side chains
Scheme 21 .ReductiveactivationofTPZ( 64):detailedmechanismandactivespeciesresponsibleforDNAstrandcleavage.48*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medin these agents are critical for the electrostatic binding to DNA in addition to ensuring good uptake
into cells.187N-oxidation to N-oxides abolished the DNA binding af ﬁnity of the tertiary amines and
dramatically decreased its cytotoxicity; the N-oxides can be ef ﬁciently reduced to the corresponding
amines in hypoxic tumor cells by cytochrome P450 3A enzymes. Thus, the less toxic alkyl tertiaryN-oxides are transformed upon reduction into the more cytotoxic tertiary amines that possesssuperior diffusion properties than the short-lived radical species generated from the aromaticN-oxides. Their hypoxia selectivity results from the inhibition of the irreversible enzyme reductionprocess by oxygen as shown in Scheme 22.
8Besides acting as bioreductive prodrug targeting
hypoxia, AQ4N was also used in gene therapy in combination with cytochrome P450 enzymes like
1A1, 2B6, and 3A4.116,188 –191
Nitracrine ( 28) is one of the antitumor acridine derivatives capable of DNA intercalation. It
showed potent cytotoxicity and moderate selectivity toward hypoxia through reductive activation ofthe nitro group. The nitroacrine 69with the tertiary amine side chain being oxidized to N-oxide was
evaluated in an attempt to develop a bioreductive activated prodrug possessing dual reduction sites.Similar to the development of AQ4N, the N-oxidation dramatically lowered the DNA binding andresulted in excellent hypoxia selectivity greater than 1,000-fold. However, poor in vivo activity was
observed probably due to rapid metabolism and poor diffusion to hypoxic tissues. Approaches to
modulate its reduction potential of the nitro group and the steric environments failed to signi ﬁcantly
improve the in vivo activities.
192
Amona ﬁde and mitona ﬁde are two naphthalimide-type anticancer agents bearing tertiary amino
side chains that inhibit the activity of topoisomerase and act as DNA intercalators. To avoid sideeffects such as CNS toxicity, myelosupression, vomiting, and erytherma side effects related to thesenaphthalimides, they were prepared into their N-oxide prodrugs 70aand70bin a similar manner
as mitoxantrone and nitroacrine. However, only low hypoxia selectivity was observed for these
compounds in in vitro assays.
193
3. N-Oxides of Other Cytotoxic Agents for Bioreductive Activation
Because nitrogen mustards are not selective and are unstable, there was considerable interest in
developing nitrogen mustard N-oxide derivatives as tumor targeting agents. Nitromin ( 71) was ﬁrst
Scheme 22 .ReductiveactivationofthealkyltertiaryamineN-oxides.DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*49
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medtested as bioreductive prodrug of simple nitrogen mustard and it showed moderate hypoxia selectivity
due to bioreductive release of the mustard.194Chlorambucil N-oxide 72provided another example of
this type of prodrug releasing aniline mustard upon reduction195as shown in Scheme 23. However,
N-oxide 72failed to show any hypoxia selectivity.
Alchemix is an anthraquinone DNA intercalating agent bearing a bis(chloroethyl)amine side
chain and was designed to overcome the drug resistance due to the reversible DNA binding related toconventional anthraquinone-based anticancer drug.
196The piperidinyl alkylamino analogue of
alchemix was shown to crosslink DNA in the low nanomolar range197and was converted into its
N-oxide 73resulting in total loss of DNA unwinding, DNA crosslinking, and cytotoxicity.198These
results suggest that the N-oxide 73could potentially be used as a bioreductively activated prodrug
targeting hypoxia as shown in Scheme 24 but its cytotoxicity under hypoxic conditions has yet to be
evaluated.
An analogue of bleomycin has also been modi ﬁed to pyridine N-oxide 74as a bioreductively
activated prodrug as shown in Scheme 25. It was believed that bleomycin forms a chelate with Fe2þ
together with oxygen occupying all six coordination positions and the chelate converts the oxygen to
a reactive species causing cell killing through DNA breakdown. The N-oxide in prodrug 74would
block the chelating site for the bleomycin analog making it incapable of activating O 2into the reactive
species. Such non-toxic N-oxide could potentially be reduced under hypoxic conditions generating
parent active drug. Indeed, N-oxide 74showed similar cytotoxicity against Chinese hamster V79
cells as the reduced bleomycin analog after 2-hr exposure in air following a 2-hr exposure to hypoxicconditions, suggesting that the N-oxide 74was activated under hypoxic conditions.
199However, the
concentrations required to inhibit the V79 cell growth were high in the millimolar range. Furtheroptimization of the parent bleomycin analog would be needed to render the prodrug useful.
D. Metal Complexes as Prodrugs for Bioreductive Activation
Metal complexes, particularly those of cobalt, have been exploited as potential prodrugs to target
tumor hypoxia.
200The rational behind this is that the metal complexes with cytotoxic ligands at
Scheme 24 .Reductiveactivationofthe N-oxideprodrugtogiveanalchemixanalog.
Scheme 23 .ReductiveactivationofnitrominandchlorambucilN-oxide.50*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medhigher oxidation state would either stabilize the active cytotoxic agents or protect them from being
rapidly metabolized and that the complexes upon reduction would become relatively unstable at thelower oxidation state releasing the corresponding cytotoxic ligands. Thus, the design of such prodrugrequires that the metal ion possesses two accessible oxidation states and a large difference in stabilityof the complexes between the two oxidation states for ef ﬁcient release of active cytotoxic agent.
Although there are still some controversy over the mechanism of reductive activation of metal
complexes, the hypoxia selectivity is believed to be derived from the redox cycling in the presence of
oxygen between the oxidation states of metal complex similar to other types of hypoxia-targetedprodrugs discussed above. In the instance of Co(III) complexes, the labile Co(II) complexes formedupon the reduction may be re-oxidized by O
2back to Co(III) complexes, while in the absence of
oxygen the labile Co(II) complexes would rapidly dissociate to release the ligand as the active drug asshown in Scheme 26.
201
However, in cases where such reoxidation was too slow, another mechanism was proposed to
explain hypoxia selectivity related to cobalt complexes.201–203A series of cobalt-mustard
complexes, [Co(Racac) 2(DCE)]þ, was initially synthesized using neutral bidentate mustard ligand
N,N-bis(2-chloroethyl)ethylenediamine (DCE) and the R-substituted acetylacetonato (Racac) anionas the ligands. Their lead compound [Co(Meacac)
2(DCE)]þ(SN24771, 75,R¼CH 3) exhibited a
5- to 30-fold selectivity for hypoxic cells in cell culture assays. The reduction of cobalt (III) to cobalt (II)by biological reductants was found to be inhibited by the presence of oxygen and thus the hypoxiaselectivity of this complex was initially assumed to be the result of reoxidation of cobalt (II) to cobalt (III)prior to the release of cytotoxic mustard ligand. A later study on the kinetics of this reduction by pulseand steady-state radiolytic methods revealed that oxygen reoxidation reaction was too slow relative to
the ligand release to make the redox cycling possible. Another mechanism was suggested based on
the competition between the Co(III) complex and oxygen.
202Although SN 24771 exhibited
signi ﬁcant hypoxia selectivity in culture, no selectivity for hypoxic cells in vivo was observed. A new
series of Co (III) complexes 76were synthesized by replacing the methyl-substituted acetylacetonato
(Meacac) ligand in SN24771 with R-disubstituted thiol-containing ligand dithiocarbamato (R 2dtc-)
in an attempt to modulate the electron transfer properties which may allow reoxidation of Co(II)intermediate fast enough to enable redox cycling. However, this new type of complexes was
Scheme 25 .ReductiveactivationofN-oxideprodrugtogiveametal-bindinganalogofbleomycin.
Scheme 26 .Redoxcyclingofcobaltcomplexesinthepresenceoxygenandreleaseoftheactivedrugunderhypoxicconditions.201DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*51
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medfound to be unstable in cell culture medium and no hypoxia selectivity was observed
in vitro.204–206
Recently, novel Cu(II) complex 77with a mustard derivative of 1,4,7-tetraazacyclododecane
(cyclen) as the ligand exhibited 24-fold higher cytotoxicity under hypoxic conditions in vitro , and its
cytotoxicity under normoxic conditions was approximately 10-fold lower than SN24771. Reversibleredox behavior and stability of the cyclen-Cu(II) complex 77in aqueous solution correlated well with
the hypoxia selectivity, making this complex a promising lead for the development of hypoxia-selective cytotoxic agents.
207
Marimastat is a synthetic broad-spectrum matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor and is able to bind
to the Zinc ion in the active site of matrix metalloproteinases thereby inhibiting the proteinase
function. It has been tested in several cancer models;208however, clinical development of marimastat
has been discontinued due to the lack of therapeutic bene ﬁts in patients. The lack of drug ef ﬁcacy
was partially attributed to the presence of hydroxamic acid functional groups in this compoundwhich has strong inherent af ﬁnity to metal ions, especially Fe (III).
209Co (III) and Fe (III) were used
to form complex with the tetradendate ligands, tris(2-methylpyridyl)-amine (tpa) and N,N-bis(salicylidene)ethane-1,2-diimine (salen), respectively. Complex 78showed lower cytotoxicity
and higher stability than 79against A2780 human ovarian cancer cells and has the potential to deliver
the MMP inhibitor to tumor cells. In vivo assay of Co (III) complex 78showed higher level of growth
inhibition against 4T1.2 murine mammary tumor than the free marimastat and the control groups.
209–211
However, a real time PCR assay showed that complex 78and marimastat potentiated metastasis of the
murine mammary tumor in this in vivo model.209
Quinoxaline N,N-dioxides have been developed as bioreductively activated drugs as discussed
earlier. They were shown to have excellent in vitro activities; however, these quinoxaline N,N-
dioxides have too short a half life and insuf ﬁcient aqueous solubility to be useful.171Complexes with
vanadium (V) were shown to have improved selectivity and cytotoxicity. Although medicinalapplications of vanadium complexes have focused on their invitro andinvivo activity as the treatment
of diabetes, vanadium complexes 80were shown to be 3-fold more potent than the free quinoxaline
dioxide ligands and 10-fold more active than TPZ with a hypoxia selectivity of >15-fold in in vitro
assays. Moreover, Vanadium complexes increased signi ﬁcantly the water solubility of the parent52*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medquinoxaline N,N-dioxides.212Additional research is needed to evaluate the in vivo activity of these
vanadium complexes.
E. Miscellaneous Prodrugs Designed for Reductive Activation
In addition to the four types of bioreductively activated prodrugs discussed above, disul ﬁde and azido
functional groups have also been used in the design of prodrugs to selectively target hypoxic tumortissues. For example, paclitaxel is one of the most widely used anticancer agents and has activities inmany types of cancer. However, its low aqueous solubility, dose-limiting toxicity, and drug resistance
have presented major problems in its clinical application. Various prodrugs of paclitaxel have been
designed to overcome these problems.
213Captopril, an ACE inhibitor reported recently to have
antiangiogenic effects, was attached to paclitaxel at 20-OH through a 2,2-dimethyl-4-mercaptobu-
tyric acid linker to give conjugate 81for reductive activation in hypoxic tumor tissues and for
improving of its solubility. Conjugate 81underwent cyclization with a half-life of 25 min upon
reduction by DTT. It showed superior in vivo anticancer activity as compared to paclitaxel itself.214
In another example, aromatic azido group has been introduced to paclitaxel through a self-
eliminating linker at 20-OH to give conjugate 82. Compound 82was shown to release paclitaxel under
chemical reduction and exhibit a lower cytotoxicity under aerobic conditions.215
Recently a novel prodrug 83as shown in Scheme 27 was designed based on the structure of an
anti-epileptic agent, zonisamide.216Zonisamide has a benzisoxazole that underwent reductive
cleavage of heterocyclic N-O bond followed by hydrolysis to give a ketone metabolite. 1,2-Isoxazolewas reduced by cytochrome P450 and liver cytosolic aldehyde oxidase, preferentially under hypoxicconditions. 1,2-Benzisoxazole phosphorodiamidate 83and analogs with various substitutions on the
Scheme 27 .Reductiveactivationofa1,2-benzisoxazolephsophorodiamidateprodrug.DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*53
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medbenzene ring were synthesized in an attempt to investigate the effect of electron density of aromatic
ring on the drug release property and cytotoxicity. It was found that these prodrugs underwentreductive metabolism and generated alkylating phosphoramide mustard; however, no hypoxiaselectivity was observed in cell culture assays.
216
4. PERSPECTIVES AND CONCLUSIONS
Over the last 20 years, many prodrugs have been developed to deliver anticancer cytotoxic agents to
tumor cells and some have been to shown to be highly selective in their targeting of hypoxic tumorcells both in vitro andin vivo . The extensively investigated prodrugs for reductive activation include
quinones, nitroaromatics, N-oxides, and metal complexes. In addition to the clinically usedmitomycin C, there are several other bioreductively activated prodrugs that are being tested in clinicaltrials. For example, AQ4N ( 68) is currently in phase 2 clinical trials for brain tumor, chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, and non-Hodgkin lymphoma; EO9 ( 3) is in phase 3 clinical trials for bladder
tumor as intravesical instillation; PR-104 ( 32) is in phase II clinical trials for solid tumors;
tirapazamine ( 64) was in phase 3 clinical trials for uterine cervix tumor and recently abandoned;
CB1954 has been tested in human clinical trials for prostate cancer and liver cancer in combinationwith virally delivered E. coli nitroreductase. The diffusion properties of these prodrugs are
considered to be a critical factor for a successful targeted cancer therapy exploring bioreduction.Recent advances in the experimental models on the evaluation of prodrugs during the design processhave also been shown to help with the development of prodrugs having suf ﬁcient potency and
desirable pharmacokinetic properties. In gene therapy, enzymes transfected to target cells are an
important research area in addition to the prodrugs used in combination. New enzymes are stillneeded in GDEPT with improved reduction kinetics, minimal immune response, and higherspeci ﬁcity. Metal complexes are also being investigated as a promising type of reductively activated
prodrugs to target hypoxic tumor tissues. Metal complexes can act as chaperones, which deactivateactive drugs until released upon reduction. Such complexes can be ﬁne tuned to achieve desired
physiological and chemical properties through modi ﬁcation of the ancillary ligands. Along with the
advances in the knowledge of the tumor microenvironment and better understanding the enzyme/
drug interaction, better bioreductively activated prodrugs can be designed to effectively improve the
therapeutic ef ﬁcacy and reduce systemic side effects in the treatment of cancer.
REFERENCES
1. Hu LQ. Prodrugs: Effective solutions for solubility permeability and targeting challenges. I Drugs
2004;7(8):736 –742.
2. Tanabe K, Zhang Z, Ito T, Hatta H, Nishimoto SI. Current molecular design of intelligent drugs and
imaging probes targeting tumor-speci ﬁc microenvironments. Org Biomol Chem 2007;5(23):3745 –3757.
3. Denny WA. The design of selectively-activated prodrugs for cancer chemotherapy. Curr Pharm Des
1996;2(3):281 –294.
4. Papot S, Tranoy I, Tillequin F, Florent JC, Gesson JP. Design of selectively activated anticancer prodrugs:
Elimination and cyclization strategies. Curr Med Chem Anti-Cancer Agents 2002;2(2):155 –185.
5. Sherwood RF. Advanced drug delivery reviews: Enzyme prodrug therapy. Adv Drug Deliv Rev
1996;22(3):269 –288.
6. Sinhababu AK, Thakker DR. Prodrugs of anticancer agents. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 1996;19(2):241 –273.
7. Rauth AM, Melo T, Misra V. Bioreductive therapies: An overview of drugs and their mechanisms of action.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;42(4):755 –762.
8. Denny WA. Prodrug strategies in cancer therapy. Eur J Med Chem 2001;36(7 –8):577 –595.
9. Huang PS, Oliff A. Drug-targeting strategies in cancer therapy. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2001;11(1):104 –
110.54*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med10. Jaffar M, Williams KJ, Stratford IJ. Bioreductive and gene therapy approaches to hypoxic diseases. Adv
Drug Deliv Rev 2001;53(2):217 –228.
11. Xu G, McLeod HL. Strategies for enzyme/prodrug cancer therapy. Clin Cancer Res 2001;7(11):3314 –
3324.
12. Denny WA. Nitroreductase-based GDEPT. Curr Pharm Des 2002;8(15):1349 –1361.
13. Yazawa K, Fisher WE, Brunicardi FC. Current progress in suicide gene therapy for cancer. World J Surg
2002;26(7):783 –789.
14. Denny WA. Tumor-activated prodrugs —A new approach to cancer therapy. Cancer Invest 2004;22(4):
604–619.
15. Mckeown SR, Ward C, Robson T. Gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy: A current assessment. Curr
Opin Mol Ther 2004;6(4):421 –435.
16. Rooseboom M, Commandeur JNM, Vermeulen NPE. Enzyme-catalyzed activation of anticancer
prodrugs. Pharm Rev 2004;56(1):53 –102.
17. Barak Y, Thorne SH, Ackerley DF, Lynch SV, Contag CH, Matin A. New enzyme for reductive cancer
chemotherapy, YieF, and its improvement by directed evolution. Mol Cancer Ther 2006;5(1):97 –103.
18. McKeown SR, Cowent RL, Williams KJ. Bioreductive drugs: From concept to clinic. Clin Oncol
2007;19(6):427 –442.
19. Portsmouth D, Hlavaty J, Renner M. Suicide genes for cancer therapy. Mol Aspect Med 2007;28(1):4 –41.
20. Denny WA, Wilson WR. The design of selectively-activated anti-cancer prodrugs for use in antibody-
directed and gene-directed enzyme-prodrug therapies. J Pharm Pharmacol 1998;50(4):387 –394.
21. Brown JM, Giaccia AJ. The unique physiology of solid tumors: Opportunities (and problems) for cancer
therapy. Cancer Res 1998;58(7):1408 –1416.
22. Tannock IF. Conventional cancer therapy: Promise broken or promise delayed? Lancet 1998;351:9 –16.
23. Brown JM, William WR. Exploiting tumour hypoxia in cancer treatment. Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4(6):437 –
447.
24. Graeber TG, Osmanian C, Jacks T, Housman DE, Koch CJ, Lowe SW, Giaccia AJ. Hypoxia-mediated
selection of cells with diminished apoptotic potential in solid tumours. Nature 1996;379(6560):88 –91.
25. Comerford KM, Wallace TJ, Karhausen J, Louis NA, Montalto MC, Colgan SP. Hypoxia-inducible
factor-1-dependent regulation of the multidrug resistance (MDR1) gene. Cancer Res 2002;62(12):3387 –
3394.
26. Searle PF, Chen MJ, Hu LQ, Race PR, Lovering AL, Grove JI, Guise C, Jaberipour M, James ND, Mautner
V, Young LS, Kerr DJ, Mountain A, White SA, Hyde EI. Nitroreductase: A prodrug-activating enzyme for
cancer gene therapy. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 2004;31(11):811 –816.
27. Denny WA, Wilson WR. Considerations for the design of nitrophenyl mustards as agents with selective
toxicity for hypoxic tumor cells. J Med Chem 1986;29(6):879 –887.
28. Siegel D, Ross D. Immunodetection of NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) in human tissues.
Free Radical Biol Med 2000;29(3 –4):246 –253.
29. Asche C. Antitumour quinones. Mini-Rev Med Chem 2005;5(5):449 –467.
30. Sartorelli AC. Therapeutic attack of hypoxic cells of solid tumors: Presidential address. Cancer Res
1988;48(4):775 –778.
31. Tomasz M, Palom Y. The mitomycin bioreductive antitumor agents: Crosslinking and alkylation of DNA
as the molecular basis of their activity. Pharmacol Ther 1997;76(1 –3):73 –87.
32. Belcourt MF, Hodnick WF, Rockwell S, Sartorelli AC. Exploring the mechanistic aspects of mitomycin
antibiotic bioactivation in Chinese hamster ovary cells overexpressing NADPH: Cytochrome C (P-450)
reductase and DT-diaphorase. Adv Enzyme Regul 1998;38:111 –133.
33. Gutierrez PL. The metabolism of quinone-containing alkylating agents: Free radical production and
measurement. Front Biosci 2000;5:D629 –D638.
34. Beall HD, Winski SL. Mechanisms of action of quinone-containing alkylating agents I: NQO1-directed
drug development. Front Sci Ser 2000;5:D639 –D648.
35. Xing CG, Skibo EB. Sigmatropic reactions of the aziridinyl semiquinone species: Why aziridinyl
benzoquinones are metabolically more stable than aziridinyl indoloquinones. Abs Papers Am Chem Soc
2000;220:U567 –U567.
36. Fitzsimmons SA, Workman P, Grever M, Paull K, Camalier R, Lewis AD. Reductase enzyme expression
across the national cancer institute tumor cell line panel: Correlation with sensitivity to mitomycin C and
E09. J Nat Cancer Inst 1996;88(5):259 –269.
37. Robertson N, Haigh A, Adams GE, Stratford IJ. Factors affecting sensitivity to Eo9 in rodent and human
tumor-cells in-vitro —Dt-diaphorase activity and hypoxia. Eur J Cancer 30(7):1013 –1019.
38. Plumb JA, Gerritsen M, Workman P. Dt-diaphorase protects cells from the hypoxic cytotoxicity of
indoloquinone EO9. Br J Cancer 1994;70(6):1136 –1143.DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*55
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med39. Plumb JA, Gerritsen M, Milroy R, Thomson P, Workman P. Relative importance of Dt-diaphorase and
hypoxia in the bioactivation of Eo9 by human lung-tumor cell-lines. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;
29(2):295 –299.
40. Workman P. Enzyme-directed bioreductive drug development revisited —A commentary on recent
progress and future-prospects with emphasis on quinone anticancer agents and quinone metabolizing
enzymes, particularly Dt-diaphorase. Oncol Res 1994;6(10 –11):461 –475.
41. Igarashi Y, Oki T. Mannose-binding quinone glycoside, MBQ: Potential utility and action mechanism.
Adv Appl Microbiol 2004;54:147 –166.
42. van der Heijden AG, Moonen PMJ, Cornel EB, Vergunst H, de Reijke TM, van Boven E, Barten EJ, Puri R,
van Kalken CK, Witjes JA. Phase II marker lesion study with intravesical instillation of apaziquone for
super ﬁcial bladder cancer: Toxicity and marker response. J Urol 2006;176(4):1349 –1353.
43. Phillips RM, Loadman PM, Cronin BP. Evaluation of a novel in vitro assay for assessing drug penetration
into avascular regions of tumours. Br J Cancer 1998;77(12):2112 –2119.
44. Naylor MA, Jaffar M, Nolan J, Stephens MA, Butler S, Patel KB, Everett SA, Adams GE, Stratford IJ.
2-cyclopropylindoloquinones and their analogues as bioreductively activated antitumor agents: Structure-activity in vitro and ef ﬁcacy in vivo. J Med Chem 1997;40(15):2335 –2346.
45. Phillips RM, Naylor MA, Jaffar M, Doughty SW, Everett SA, Breen AG, Choudry GA, Stratford IJ.
Bioreductive activation of a series of indolequinones by human DT-diaphorase: Structure-activity
relationships. J Med Chem 1999;42(20):4071 –4080.
46. Swann E, Barraja P, Oberlander AM, Gardipee WT, Hudnott AR, Beall HD, Moody CJ. Indolequinone
antitumor agents: Correlation between quinone structure and rate of metabolism by recombinant human
NAD(P)H: Quinone oxidoreductase. Part 2. J Med Chem 2001;44(20):3311 –3319.
47. Naylor MA, Swann E, Everett SA, Jaffar M, Nolan J, Robertson N, Lockyer SD, Patel KB, Dennis MF,
Stratford MRL, Wardman P, Adams GE, Moody CJ, Stratford IJ. Indolequinone antitumor agents:
Reductive activation and elimination from (5-methoxy-1-methyl-4,7-dioxoindol-3-yl)methyl derivatives
and hypoxia-selective cytotoxicity in vitro. J Med Chem 1998;41(15):2720 –2731.
48. Colucci MA, Reigan P, Siegel D, Chilloux A, Ross D, Moody CJ. Synthesis and evaluation of 3-
aryloxymethyl-1,2-dimethylindole-4,7-diones as mechanism-based inhibitors of NAD(P)H: Quinone
oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) activity. J Med Chem 2007;50(23):5780 –5789.
49. Jaffar M, Phillips RM, Williams KJ, Mrema I, Cole C, Wind NS, Ward TH, Stratford IJ, Patterson AV.
3-substituted-5-aziridinyl-1-methylindole-4,7-diones as NQO1-directed antitumour agents: Mechanism
of activation and cytotoxicity in vitro. Biochem Pharmacol 2003;66(7):1199 –1206.
50. Beall HD, Winski S, Swann E, Hudnott AR, Cotterill AS, O ’Sullivan N, Green SJ, Bien R, Siegel D, Ross
D, Moody CJ. Indolequinone antitumor agents: Correlation between quinone structure, rate of metabolismby recombinant human NAD(P)H: Quinone oxidoreductase, and in vitro cytotoxicity. J Med Chem
1998;41(24):4755 –4766.
51. Newsome JJ, Swann E, Hassani M, Bray KC, Slawin AMZ, Beall HD, Moody CJ. Indolequinone
antitumour agents: Correlation between quinone structure and rate of metabolism by recombinant humanNAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase. Org Biomol Chem 2007;5(10):1629 –1640.
52. Gibson NW, Hartley JA, Butler J, Siegel D, Ross D. Relationship between DT-diaphorase-mediated
metabolism of a series of aziridinylbenzoquinones and DNA damage and cytotoxicity. Mol Pharmacol1992;42(3):531 –536.
53. Begleiter A, Leith MK, Patel D, Hasinoff BB. Role of NADPH cytochrome P450 reductase in activation of
RH1. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2007;60(5):713 –723.
54. Hasinoff BB, Wu X, Begleiter A, Guziec LJ, Guziec F Jr, Giorgianni A, Yang S, Jiang Y, Yalowich JC.
Structure-activity study of the interaction of bioreductive benzoquinone alkylating agents with DNA
topoisomerase II. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2006;57(2):221 –233.
55. Fourie J, Guziec F Jr, Guziec L, Monterrosa C, Fiterman DJ, Begleiter A. Structure-activity study with
bioreductive benzoquinone alkylating agents: Effects on DT-diaphorase-mediated DNA crosslink andstrand break formation in relation to mechanisms of cytotoxicity. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2004;
53(3):191 –203.
56. Phillips RM, Jaffar M, Maitland DJ, Loadman PM, Shnyder SD, Steans G, Cooper PA, Race A, Patterson
AV, Stratford IJ. Pharmacological and biological evaluation of a series of substituted 1,4-naphthoquinonebioreductive drugs. Biochem Pharmacol 2004;68(11):2107 –2116.
57. Skibo EB. The discovery of the pyrrolo[1,2-a]benzimidazole antitumor agents —The design of selective
antitumor agents. Curr Med Chem 1996;3(1):47 –78.
58. Skibo EB, Gordon S, Bess L, Boruah R, Heileman MJ. Studies of pyrrolo[1,2-a]benzimidazolequinone
DT-diaphorase substrate activity, topoisomerase II inhibition activity, and DNA reductive alkylation.
J Med Chem 1997;40(9):1327 –1339.56
*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med59. Lynch M, Hehir S, Kavanagh P, Leech D, O ’Shaughnessy J, Carty MP, Aldabbagh F. Synthesis by radical
cyclization and cytotoxicity of highly potent bioreductive alicyclic ring fused [1,2-a]benzimidazolequi-
nones. Chem Eur J 2007;13(11):3218 –3226.
60. Fryatt T, Pettersson HI, Gardipee WT, Bray KC, Green SJ, Slawin AMZ, Beall HD, Moody CJ. Novel
quinolinequinone antitumor agents: Structure-metabolism studies with NAD(P)H: Quinone oxidoreduc-
tase (NQO1). Bioorg Med Chem 2004;12(7):1667 –1687.
61. Fryatt T, Goroski DT, Nilson ZD, Moody CJ, Beall HD. Novel quinolinequinone antitumor agents:
Structure-metabolism studies with NAD(P)H: Quinone oxidoreductase (NQO1). Bioorg Med Chem Lett1999;9(15):2195 –2198.
62. Hernick M, Flader C, Borch RF. Design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of indolequinone
phosphoramidate prodrugs targeted to DT-diaphorase. J Med Chem 2002;45(16):3540 –3548.
63. Tanabe K, Makimura Y, Tachi Y , Imagawa-Sato A, Nishimoto S. Hypoxia-selective activation of
5-ﬂuorodeoxyuridine prodrug possessing indolequinone structure: Radiolytic reduction and cytotoxicity
characteristics. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 2005;15(9):2321 –2324.
64. Thomas CJ, Rahier NJ, Hecht SM. Camptothecin: Current perspectives. Bioorg Med Chem 2004;12(7):
1585 –1604.
65. Shamis M, Lode HN, Shabat D. Bioactivation of self-immolative dendritic prodrugs by catalytic antibody
38C2. J Am Chem Soc 2004;126(6):1726 –1731.
66. Rahier NJ, Eisenhauer BM, Gao R, Jones SH, Hecht SM. Water-soluble camptothecin derivatives that are
intrinsic topoisomerase I poisons. Org Lett 2004;6(3):321 –324.
67. Pessah N, Reznik M, Shamis M, Yantiri F, Xin H, Bowdish K, Shomron N, Ast G, Shabat D. Bioactivation
of carbamate-based 20(S)-camptothecin prodrugs. Bioorg Med Chem 2004;12(8):1859 –1866.
68. Paranjpe PV , Chen Y, Kholodovych V, Welsh W, Stein S, Sinko PJ. Tumor-targeted bioconjugate based
delivery of camptothecin: Design, synthesis and in vitro evaluation. J Controlled Release 2004;100(2):
275–292.
69. Cheng J, Khin KT, Jensen GS, Liu A, Davis ME. Synthesis of linear, beta-cyclodextrin-based polymers and
their camptothecin conjugates. Bioconjugate Chem 2003;14(5):1007 –1017.
70. Singer JW, Bhatt R, Tulinsky J, Buhler KR, Heasley E, Klein P, de Vries P. Water-soluble poly-(L-glutamic
acid)-Gly-camptothecin conjugates enhance camptothecin stability and ef ﬁcacy in vivo. J Controlled
Release 2001;74(1 –3):243 –247.
71. Zhang Z, Tanabe K, Hatta H, Nishimoto S. Bioreduction activated prodrugs of camptothecin: Molecular
design, synthesis, activation mechanism and hypoxia selective cytotoxicity. Org Biomol Chem
2005;3(10):1905 –1910.
72. Jaffar M, Naylor MA, Robertson N, Lockyer SD, Phillips RM, Everett SA, Adams GE, Stratford IJ.
5-substituted analogues of 3-hydroxymethyl-5-aziridinyl-1-methyl-2-[1H-indole-4,7-dione]prop-2-en-1-
ol (E09, NSC 382459) and their regioisomers as hypoxia-selective agents: Structure-cytotoxicity in vitro.
Anti-Cancer Drug Des 1998;13(2):105 –123.
73. Faig M, Bianchet MA, Winski S, Hargreaves R, Moody CJ, Hudnott AR, Ross D, Amzel LM.
Structure-based development of anticancer drugs: Complexes of NAD(P)H: Quinone oxidoreductase
1 with chemotherapeutic quinones. Structure 2001;9(8):659 –667.
74. Jaffar M, Everett SA, Naylor MA, Moore SG, Ulhaq S, Patel KB, Stratford MRL, Nolan J, Wardman P,
Stratford IJ. Prodrugs for targeting hypoxic tissues: Regiospeci ﬁc elimination of aspirin from reduced
indolequinones. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 1999;9(1):113 –118.
75. Hernick M, Borch RF. Studies on the mechanisms of activation of indolequinone phosphoramidate
prodrugs. J Med Chem 2003;46(1):148 –154.
76. de Groot FMH, Damen EWP, Scheeren HW. Anticancer prodrugs for application in monotherapy:
Targeting hypoxia, tumor-associated enzymes, and receptors. Curr Med Chem 2001;8(9):1093 –1122.
77. Wang B, Nicolaou MG, Liu S, Borchardt RT. Structural analysis of a facile lactonization system facilitated
by a ‘‘trimethyl lock ’’. Bioorg Chem 1996;24(1):39 –49.
78. Carpino LA, Triolo SA, Berglund RA. Reductive lactonization of strategically methylated quinone
propionic acid esters and amides. J Org Chem 1989;54(14):3303 –3310.
79. Wang W, Jiang J, Ballard CE, Wang B. Prodrug approaches to the improved delivery of peptide drugs. Curr
Pharm Des 1999;5(4):265 –287.
80. Testa B, Mayer JM. Design of intramolecularly activated prodrugs. Drug Metab Rev 1998;30(4):787 –807.
81. Maskell L, Blanche EA, Colucci MA, Whatmore JL, Moody CJ. Synthesis and evaluation of prodrugs for
anti-angiogenic pyrrolylmethylidenyl oxindoles. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 2007;17(6):1575 –1578.
82. Volpato M, Abou-Zeid N, Tanner RW, Glassbrook LT, Taylor J, Stratford I, Loadman PM, Jaffar M,
Phillips RM. Chemical synthesis and biological evaluation of a NAD(P)H: Quinone oxidoreductase-
1-targeted tripartite quinone drug delivery system. Mol Cancer Ther 2007;6(12):3122 –3130.DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*57
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med83. Flader C, Liu JW, Borch RF. Development of novel quinone phosphorodiamidate prodrugs targeted to DT-
diaphorase. J Med Chem 2000;43(16):3157 –3167.
84. Stratford IJ, O ’Neill P, Sheldon PW, Silver AR, Walling JM, Adams GE. RSU 1069, a nitroimidazole
containing an aziridine group. Bioreduction greatly increases cytotoxicity under hypoxic conditions.Biochem Pharmacol 1986;35:5.
85. Stratford IJ, Adams GE, Godden J, Howells N. Induction of tumour hypoxia post-irradiation: A method
for increasing the sensitizing ef ﬁciency of misonidazole and RSU 1069 in vivo. Int J Radiat Biol
1989;55:12.
86. Binger M, Workman P. Pharmacokinetic contribution to the improved therapeutic selectivity of a novel
bromoethylamino prodrug (RB 6145) of the mixed-function hypoxic cell sensitizer/cytotoxin alpha-
(1-aziridinomethyl)-2-nitro-1H-imidazole-1-ethanol (RSU 1069). Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1991;29(1):37 –47.
87. Naylor MA, Threadgill MD, Showalter HD, Stratford IJ, Stephens MA, Fielden EM, Adams GE. Synthesis
of the enantiomers of the bioreductively-activated cytotoxin RSU-1069 and its prodrug RB6145 and lack
of stereoselectivity in their cytotoxicity and radiosensitization in vitro. Drug Des Discov 1993;10(3):249 –
255.
88. Breider MA, Pilcher GD, Graziano MJ, Gough AW. Retinal degeneration in rats induced by CI-1010, a
2-nitroimidazole radiosensitizer. Toxicol Pathol 1998;26(2):234 –239.
89. Hay MP, Wilson WR, Moselen JW, Palmer BD, Denny WA. Hypoxia-selective antitumor agents. 8.
Bis(nitroimidazolyl)alkanecarboxamides: A new class of hypoxia-selective cytotoxins and hypoxic cell
radiosensitizers. J Med Chem 1994;37(3):381 –391.
90. Hay MP, Wilson WR, Denny WA. A novel enediyne prodrug for antibody-directed enzyme prodrug
therapy (adept) using Escherichia-Coli-B nitroreductase. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 1995;5(23):2829 –2834.
91. Moselen JW, Hay MP, Denny WA, Wilson WR. N-[2-(2-Methyl-5-nitroimidazolyl)ethyl]-4-(2-nitro-
imidazolyl)butanamide (NSC 639862), a bisnitroimidazole with enhanced selectivity as a bioreductive
drug. Cancer Res 1995;55(3):574 –580.
92. Anderson RF, Denny WA, Roberts PB, Wardman P, White J, Wilson WR. Correlation of the
radiosensitization potency afforded by nitroacridine intercalators with their electron scavenging ef ﬁciency
in DNA. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;22(3):537 –540.
93. Wilson WR, Thompson LH, Anderson RF, Denny WA. Hypoxia-selective antitumor agents. 2. Electronic
effects of 4-substituents on the mechanisms of cytotoxicity and metabolic stability of nitracrine
derivatives. J Med Chem 1989;32(1):31 –38.
94. Stallings WC, Glusker JP, Carrell HL, Bogucka-Ledochowska M, Ledochowski A, Stezowski JJ.
Intercalation model for DNA-cross linking in a 1-nitro-9-aminoacridine derivative, an analog of theantitumor agent ‘‘ledakrin ’’(nitracrine). J Biomol Struct Dyn 1984;2(3):511 –524.
95. Buchko Garry W, Weinfeld M, DNA-targeted 2-nitroimidazoles: Studies of the in ﬂuence of the
phenanthridine-linked nitroimidazoles, 2-NLP-3 and 2-NLP-4, on DNA damage induced by ionizingradiation. Radiat Res 2002;158(3):302 –310.
96. Cowan DS, Matejovic JF, McClelland RA, Rauth AM. DNA-targeted 2-nitroimidazoles: In vitro and in
vivo studies. Br J Cancer 1994;70(6):1067 –1074.
97. Denny WA, Roberts PB, Anderson RF, Brown JM, Phil D, Wilson WR. NLA-1: A 2-nitroimidazole
radiosensitizer targeted to DNA by intercalation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1992;22(3):553 –556.
98. Cowan DS, Panicucci R, McClelland RA, Rauth AM. Targeting radiosensitizers to DNA by attachment of
an intercalating group: Nitroimidazole-linked phenanthridines. Radiat Res 1991;127(1):81 –89.
99. Papadopoulou MV, Ji M, Rao MK, Bloomer WD. 4-[3-(2-nitro-1-imidazolyl)propylamino]-7-chloroqui-
noline hydrochloride (NLCQ-1), a novel bioreductive compound as a hypoxia-selective cytotoxin. Oncol
Res 2000;12(4):185 –192.
100. Papadopoulou MV, Bloomer WD. NLCQ-1 (NSC 709257): Exploiting hypoxia with a weak DNA-
intercalating bioreductive drug. Clin Cancer Res 2003;9(15):5714 –5720.
101. Wilson WR, Denny WA, Twigden SJ, Baguley BC, Probert JC. Selective toxicity of nitracrine to hypoxic
mammalian cells. Br J Cancer 1984;49(2):215 –223.
102. Wilson WR, Anderson RF, Denny WA. Hypoxia-selective antitumor agents. 1. Relationships between
structure, redox properties and hypoxia-selective cytotoxicity for 4-substituted derivatives of nitracrine.J Med Chem 1989;32(1):23 –30.
103. Wilson WR, Denny WA, Stewart GM, Fenn A, Probert JC. Reductive metabolism and hypoxia-selective
toxicity of nitracrine. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12(7):1235 –1238.
104. Wilson WR, Siim BG, Denny WA, van Zijl PL, Taylor ML, Chambers DM, Roberts PB. 5-Nitro-4-(N,N-
dimethylaminopropylamino)quinoline (5-nitraquine), a new DNA-af ﬁnic hypoxic cell radiosensitizer and
bioreductive agent: Comparison with nitracrine. Radiat Res 1992;131(3):257 –265.58
*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med105. Cobb LM, Connors TA, Elson LA, Khan AH, Mitchley BCV, Ross WCJ, Whisson ME. A potent and
selective inhibitor of growth of the walker carcinomo 256. Biochem Pharmacol 1969;18:9.
106. Knox RJ, Burke PJ, Chen S, Kerr DJ. CB1954: From the walker tumor to NQO2 and VDEPT. Curr Pharm
Des 2003;9(26):2091 –2104.
107. Knox RJ, Friedlos F, Sherwood RF, Melton RG, Anlezark GM. The bioactivation of 5-(aziridin-1-yl)-2,4-
dinitrobenzamide (CB1954) –II. A comparison of an Escherichia coli nitroreductase and Walker DT
diaphorase. Biochem Pharmacol 1992;44(12):2297 –2301.
108. Knox RJ, Friedlos F, Marchbank T, Roberts JJ. Bioactivation of CB 1954: Reaction of the active 4-
hydroxylami derivative with thioesters to form the ultimate DNA-DNA interstrand crosslinking species.
Biochem Pharmacol 1991;42(9):1691 –1697.
109. Helsby NA, Ferry DM, Patterson AV, Pullen SM, Wilson WR. 2-Amino metabolites are key mediators of
CB 1954 and SN 23862 bystander effects in nitroreductase GDEPT. Br J Cancer 2004;90(5):1084 –1092.
110. Helsby NA, Wheeler SJ, Pruijn FB, Palmer BD, Yang S, Denny WA, Wilson WR. Effect of nitroreduction
on the alkylating reactivity and cytotoxicity of the 2,4-dinitrobenzamide-5-aziridine CB 1954 and the
corresponding nitrogen Mustard SN 23862: Distinct mechanisms of bioreductiv activation. Chem ResToxicol 2003;16(4):469 –478.
111. Palmer BD, Wilson WR, Atwell GJ, Schultz D, Xu XZ, Denny WA. Hypoxia-selective antitumor agents. 9.
Structure-activity relationships for hypoxia-selective cytotoxicity among analogues of 5-[N,N-bis(2-
chloroethyl)amino]-2,4-dinitrobenzamide. J Med Chem 1994;37(14):2175 –2184.
112. Palmer BD, Wilson WR, Anderson RF, Boyd M, Denny WA. Hypoxia-selective antitumor agents. 14.
Synthesis and hypoxic cell cytotoxicity of regioisomers of the hypoxia-selective cytotoxin 5-[N,N-bis(2-
chloroethyl)amino]-2,4-dinitrobenzamide. J Med Chem 1996;39(13):2518 –2528.
113. Patterson AV, Ferry DM, Edmunds SJ, Gu YC, Singleton RS, Patel K, Pullen SM, Hicks KO, Syddall SP,
Atwell GJ, Yang SJ, Denny WA, Wilson WR. Mechanism of action and preclinical antitumor activity of the
novel hypoxia-activated DNA cross-linking agent PR-104. Clin Cancer Res 2007;13(13):3922 –3932.
114. Atwell GJ, Yang SJ, Pruijn FB, Pullen SM, Hogg A, Patterson AV, Wilson WR, Denny WA. Synthesis and
structure-activity relationships for 2,4-dinitrobenzamide-5-mustards as prodrugs for the Escherichia colinfsB nitroreductase in gene therapy. J Med Chem 2007;50(6):1197 –1212.
115. Guise CP, Wang AT, Theil A, Bridewell DJ, Wilson WR, Patterson AV. Identi ﬁcation of human reductases
that activate the dinitrobenzamide mustard prodrug PR-104A: A role for NADPH: Cytochrome P450oxidoreductase under hypoxia. Biochem Pharmacol 2007;74(6):810 –820.
116. Patterson A V, Saunders MP, Greco O. Prodrugs in genetic chemoradiotherapy. Curr Pharm Des 2003;
9(26):2131 –2154.
117. Helsby NA, Atwell GJ, Yang SJ, Palmer BD, Anderson RF, Pullen SM, Ferry DM, Hogg A, Wilson WR,
Denny WA. Aziridinyldinitrobenzamides: Synthesis and structure-activity relationships for activation by
E-coli nitroreductase. J Med Chem 2004;47(12):3295 –3307.
118. Tercel M, Wilson WR, Denny WA. Nitrobenzyl mustard quaternary salts: A new class of hypoxia-selective
cytotoxins showing very high in vitro selectivity. J Med Chem 1993;36(17):2578 –2579.
119. Tercel M, Wilson WR, Anderson RF, Denny WA. Hypoxia-selective antitumor agents 12. Nitrobenzyl
quaternary salts as bioreductive prodrugs of the alkylating agent mechlorethamine. J Med Chem 1996;
39(5):1084 –1094.
120. Tercel M, Lee AE, Hogg A, Anderson RF, Lee HH, Siim BG, Denny WA, Wilson WR. Hypoxia-selective
antitumor agents. 16. Nitroarylmethyl quaternary salts as bioreductive prodrugs of the alkylating agent
mechlorethamine. J Med Chem 2001;44(21):3511 –3522.
121. Firestone A, Mulcahy RT, Borch RF. Nitroheterocycle reduction as a paradigm for intramolecular catalysis
of drug delivery to hypoxic cells. J Med Chem 1991;34(9):2933 –2935.
122. Mulcahy RT, Gipp JJ, Schmidt JP, Joswig C, Borch RF. Nitrobenzyl phosphorodiamidates as potential
hypoxia-selective alkylating-agents. J Med Chem 1994;37(11):1610 –1615.
123. Borch RF, Liu JW, Schmidt JP, Marakovits JT, Joswig C, Gipp JJ, Mulcahy RT. Synthesis and evaluation of
nitroheterocyclic phosphoramidates as hypoxia-selective alkylating agents. J Med Chem 2000;43(11):
2258 –2265.
124. Borch RF, Liu JW, Joswig C, Baggs RB, Dexter DL, Mangold GL. Antitumor activity and toxicity of novel
nitroheterocyclic phosphoramidates. J Med Chem 2001;44(1):74 –77.
125. Hu LQ, Yu CZ, Jiang YY , Han JY, Li ZR, Browne P, Race PR, Knox RJ, Searle PF, Hyde EI. Nitroaryl
phosphoramides as novel prodrugs for E-coli nitroreductase activation in enzyme prodrug therapy. J Med
Chem 2003;46(23):4818 –4821.
126. Li ZR, Han JY, Jiang YY , Browne P, Knox RJ, Hu LQ. Nitrobenzocyclophosphamides as potential
prodrugs for bioreductive activation: Synthesis, stability, enzymatic reduction, and antiproliferative
activity in cell culture. Bioorg Med Chem 2003;11(19):4171 –4178.DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*59
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med127. Jiang YY, Han JY, Yu CZ, Vass SO, Searle PF, Browne P, Knox RJ, Hu LQ. Design, synthesis, and
biological evaluation of cyclic and acyclic nitrobenzylphosphoramide mustards for E-coli nitroreductase
activation. J Med Chem 2006;49(14):4333 –4343.
128. Thomson P, Naylor MA, Everett SA, Stratford MRL, Lewis G, Hill S, Patel KB, Wardman P, Davis PD.
Synthesis and biological properties of bioreductively targeted nitrothienyl prodrugs of combretastatin A-4.
Mol Cancer Ther 2006;5(11):2886 –2894.
129. Thomson P, Naylor MA, Stratford MRL, Lewis G, Hill S, Patel KB, Wardman P, Davis PD. Hypoxia-driven
elimination of thiopurines from their nitrobenzyl prodrugs. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 2007;17(15):4320 –
4322.
130. Carl PL, Charkravarty PK, Katzenellenbogen JA. A Novel connector linkage applicable in prodrug design.
J Med Chem 1981;24(5):2.
131. Mauger AB, Burke PJ, Somani HH, Friedlos F, Knox RJ. Self-immolative prodrugs —Candidates for
antibody-directed enzyme prodrug therapy in conjunction with a nitroreductase enzyme. J Med Chem
1994;37(21):3452 –3458.
132. Hay MP, Wilson WR, Denny WA. Nitrobenzyl carbamate prodrugs of enediynes for nitroreductase gene-
directed enzyme prodrug therapy (GDEPT). Bioorg Med Chem Lett 1999;9(24):3417 –3422.
133. Asche C, Dumy P, Carrez D, Croisy A, Demeunynck M. Nitrobenzylcarbamate prodrugs of cytotoxic
acridines for potential use with nitroreductase gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy. Bioorg Med Chem
Lett 2006;16(7):1990 –1994.
134. Ouberai M, Asche C, Carrez D, Croisy A, Dumy P, Demeunynck M. 3,4-Dihydro-1H-[1,3]oxazino[4,5-
c]acridines as a new family of cytotoxic drugs. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 2006;16(17):4641 –4643.
135. Charmantray F, Demeunynck M, Carrez D, Croisy A, Lansiaux A, Bailly C, Colson P. 4-hydroxymethyl-3-
aminoacridine derivatives as a new family of anticancer agents. J Med Chem 2003;46(6):967 –977.
136. Hay MP, Atwell GJ, Wilson WR, Pullen SM, Denny WA. Structure-activity relationships for 4-nitrobenzyl
carbamates of 5-aminobenz e indoline minor groove alkylating agents as prodrugs for GDEPT in
conjunction with E-coli nitroreductase. J Med Chem 2003;46(12):2456 –2466.
137. Hay MP, Wilson WR, Denny WA. Nitroarylmethylcarbamate prodrugs of doxorubicin for use with
nitroreductase gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy. Bioorg Med Chem 2005;13(12):4043 –4055.
138. Hay MP, Sykes BM, Denny WA, Wilson WR. A 2-nitroimidazole carbamate prodrug of 5-amino-1-
(chloromethyl)-3-[(5,6,7-trimethoxyindol-2-yl)carbonyl]-1,2-dihydro-3H-benz[E]indole (amino-seco-CBI-TMI) for use with ADEPT and GDEPT. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 1999;9(15):2237 –2242.
139. Hay MP, Wilson WR, Denny WA. Design, synthesis and evaluation of imidazolylmethyl carbamate
prodrugs of alkylating agents. Tetrahedron 2000;56(4):645 –657.
140. Hay MP, Anderson RF, Ferry DM, Wilson WR, Denny WA. Synthesis and evaluation of nitroheterocyclic
carbamate prodrugs for use with nitroreductase-mediated gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy. J Med
Chem 2003;46(25):5533 –5545.
141. Duan J-X, Jiao H, Kaizerman J, Stanton T, Evans JW, Lan L, Lorente G, Banica M, Jung D, Wang J, Ma H,
Li X, Yang Z, Hoffman RM, Ammons WS, Hart CP, Matteucci M. Potent and highly selective hypoxia-activated achiral phosphoramidate mustards as anticancer drugs. J Med Chem 2008;51(8):2412 –2420.
142. Atwell GJ, Sykes BM, Oconnor CJ, Denny WA. Relationships between structure and kinetics of
cyclization of 2-aminoaryl amides —Potential prodrugs of cyclization-activated aromatic mustards. J Med
Chem 1994;37(3):371 –380.
143. Liu B, Hu LQ. 5
0-(2-Nitrophenylalkanoyl)-20-deoxy-5- ﬂuorouridines as potential prodrugs of FUDR for
reductive activation. Bioorg Med Chem 2003;11(18):3889 –3899.
144. Hu LQ, Liu B, Hacking DR. 50-[2-(2-nitrophenyl)-2-methylpropionyl]-20-deoxy-5- ﬂuorouridine as a
potential bioreductively activated prodrug of FUDR: Synthesis, stability and reductive activation. Bioorg
Med Chem Lett 2000;10(8):797 –800.
145. Sykes BM, Atwell GJ, Hogg A, Wilson WR, O ’Connor CJ, Denny WA. N-substituted 2-(2,6-
dinitrophenylamino)propanamides: Novel prodrugs that release a primary amine via nitroreduction andintramolecular cyclization. J Med Chem 1999;42(3):346 –355.
146. Sugiura K. Antitumor activity of purine N-oxides and effect of selected compounds on tumors induced by
purine N-oxides. Cancer Chemother Rep 2 1968;1(2):383 –402.
147. Chen X, Jin Y. study of bioreductive drugs. J Radiat Res Radiat Process 2003;21(2):83 –87.
148. Cerecetto H, Gonzalez M. N-oxides as hypoxia selective cytotoxins. Mini-Rev Med Chem 2001;1:219 –
231.
149. Zeman EM, Brown JM, Lemmon MJ, Hirst VK, Lee WW. SR-4233: A new bioreductive agent with high
selective toxicity for hypoxic mammalian cells. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1986;12(7):1239 –1242.
150. Patterson AV, Saunders MP, Chinje EC, Patterson LH, Stratford IJ. Enzymology of tirapazamine
metabolism: A review. Anti-Cancer Drug Des 1998;13(6):541 –573.60
*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med151. Koch CJ. Unusual oxygen concentration dependence of toxicity of SR-4233, a hypoxic cell toxin. Cancer
Res 1993;53(17):3992 –3997.
152. von Pawel J, von Roemeling R, Gatzemeier U, Boyer M, Elisson LO, Clark P, Talbot D, Rey A, Butler TW,
Hirsh V, Olver I, Bergman B, Ayoub J, Richardson G, Dunlop D, Arcenas A, Vescio R, Viallet J, Treat J.Tirapazamine plus cisplatin versus cisplatin in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: A report of the
international CATAPULT I study group. Cisplatin and tirapazamine in subjects with advanced previously
untreated non-small-cell lung tumors. J Clin Oncol 2000;18(6):1351 –1359.
153. Daniels JS, Gates KS. DNA cleavage by the antitumor agent 3-amino-1,2,4-benzotriazine 1,4-dioxide
(SR4233): Evidence for involvement of hydroxyl radical. J Am Chem Soc 1996;118(14):3380 –3385.
154. Shinde SS, Anderson RF, Hay MP, Gamage SA, Denny WA. Oxidation of 2-deoxyribose by benzotriazinyl
radicals of antitumor 3-amino-1,2,4-benzotriazine 1,4-dioxides. J Am Chem Soc 2004;126(25):7865 –
7874.
155. Anderson RF, Shinde SS, Hay MP, Gamage SA, Denny WA. Activation of 3-amino-1,2,4-benzotriazine
1,4-dioxide antitumor agents to oxidizing species following their one-electron reduction. J Am Chem Soc
2003;125(3):748 –756.
156. Anderson RF, Shinde SS, Hay MP, Denny WA. Potentiation of the cytotoxicity of the anticancer agent
tirapazamine by benzotriazine N-oxides: The role of redox equilibria. J Am Chem Soc 2006;128(1):245 –
249.
157. Anderson RF, Shinde SS, Hay MP, Gamage SA, Denny WA. Radical properties governing the hypoxia-
selective cytotoxicity of antitumor 3-amino-1,2,4-benzotriazine 1,4-dioxides. Org Biomol Chem 2005;
3(11):2167 –2174.
158. Hay MP, Pchalek K, Pruijn FB, Hicks KO, Siim BG, Anderson RF, Shinde SS, Phillips V, Denny WA,
Wilson WR. Hypoxia-selective 3-alkyl 1,2,4-benzotriazine 1,4-dioxides: The in ﬂuence of hydrogen bond
donors on extravascular transport and antitumor activity. J Med Chem 2007;50(26):6654 –6664.
159. Hay MP, Gamage SA, Kovacs MS, Pruijn FB, Anderson RF, Patterson AV, Wilson WR, Brown JM, Denny
WA. Structure-activity relationships of 1,2,4-benzotriazine 1,4-dioxides as hypoxia-selective analogues oftirapazamine. J Med Chem 2003;46(1):169 –182.
160. Kelson AB, McNamara JP, Pandey A, Ryan KJ, Dorie MJ, McAfee PA, Menke DR, Brown JM, Tracy M.
1,2,4-benzotriazine 1,4-dioxides. An important class of hypoxic cytotoxins with antitumor activity. Anti-
Cancer Drug Des 1998;13(6):575 –592.
161. Hay MP, Pruijn FB, Gamage SA, Liyanage HDS, Kovacs MS, Patterson AV, Wilson WR, Brown JM,
Denny WA. DNA-targeted 1,2,4-benzotriazine 1,4-dioxides: Potent analogues of the hypoxia-selective
cytotoxin tirapazamine. J Med Chem 2004;47(2):475 –488.
162. Delahoussaye YM, Hay MP, Pruijn FB, Denny WA, Brown JM. Improved potency of the hypoxic cytotoxin
tirapazamine by DNA-targeting. Biochem Pharmacol 2003;65(11):1807 –1815.
163. Hicks KI, Pruijn FB, Secomb TW, Hay MR, Hsu R, Brown JM, Denny WA, Dewhirst MW, Wilson WR.
Use of three-dimensional tissue cultures to model extravascular transport and predict in vivo activity ofhypoxia-targeted anticancer drugs. J Natl Cancer Inst 2006;98(16):1118 –1128.
164. Hay MP, Hicks KO, Pruijn FB, Pchalek K, Siim BG, Wilson WR, Denny WA. Pharmacokinetic/
pharmacodynamic model-guided identi ﬁcation of hypoxia-selective 1,2,4-benzotriazine 1,4-dioxides
with antitumor activity: The role of extravascular transport. J Med Chem 2007;50(25):6392 –6404.
165. Ganley B, Chowdhury G, Bhansali J, Daniels JS, Gates KS. Redox-activated, hypoxia-selective DNA
cleavage by quinoxaline 1,4-di-N-oxide. Bioorg Med Chem 2001;9(9):2395 –2401.
166. Priyadarsini KI, Dennis MF, Naylor MA, Stratford MRL, Wardman P. Free radical intermediates in the
reduction of quinoxaline N-oxide antitumor drugs: Redox and prototropic reactions. J Am Chem Soc1996;118(24):5648 –5654.
167. Solano B, Junnotula V, Marin A, Villar R, Burguete A, Vicente E, Perez-Silanes S, Aldana I, Monge A,
Dutta S, Sarkar U, Gates KS. Synthesis and biological evaluation of new 2-arylcarbonyl-3-triﬂuoromethylquinoxaline 1,4-di-N-oxide derivatives and their reduced analogues. J Med Chem 2007;
50(22):5485 –5492.
168. Amin KM, Ismail MMF, Noaman E, Soliman DH, Ammar YA. New quinoxaline 1,4-di-N-oxides. Part 1:
Hypoxia-selective cytotoxins and anticancer agents derived from quinoxaline 1,4-di-N-oxides. BioorgMed Chem 2006;14(20):6917 –6923.
169. Zarranz B, Jaso A, Aldana I, Monge A. Synthesis and anticancer activity evaluation of new 2-alkylcarbonyl
and 2-benzoyl-3-tri ﬂuoromethyl-quinoxaline 1,4-di-N-oxide derivatives. Bioorg Med Chem 2004;12(13):
3711 –3721.
170. Ortega MA, Morancho MJ, Martinez-Crespo FJ, Sainz Y, Montoya ME, de Cerain AL, Monge A. New
quinoxalinecarbonitrile 1,4-di-N-oxide derivatives as hypoxic-cytotoxic agents. Eur J Med Chem 2000;
35(1):21 –30.DESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*61
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med171. Monge A, Palop JA, Decerain AL, Senador V, Martinezcrespo FJ, Sainz Y, Narro S, Garcia E, Demiguel C,
Gonzalez M, Hamilton E, Barker AJ, Clarke ED, Greenhow DT. Hypoxia-selective agents derived from
quinoxaline 1,4-Di-N-oxides. J Med Chem 1995;38(10):1786 –1792.
172. Monge A, Martinez-Crespo FJ, Lopez de Cerain A, Palop JA, Narro S, Senador V, Marin A, Sainz Y,
Gonzalez M, et al. Hypoxia-selective agents derived from 2-quinoxalinecarbonitrile 1,4-Di-N-oxides. 2.
J Med Chem 1995;38(22):4488 –4494.
173. Naylor MA, Stephens MA, Nolan J, Sutton B, Tocher JH, Fielden EM, Adams GE, Stratford IJ.
Heterocyclic mono-N-oxides with potential applications as bioreductive antitumor drugs. 1.8-Alkylamino-substituted phenylimidazo [1,2-a] quinoxalines. Anti-Cancer Drug Des 1993;8(6):
439–461.
174. Langmuir VK, Laderoute KR, Mendonca HL, Sutherland RM, Hei TK, Liu SX, Hall EJ, Naylor MA,
Adams GE. Fused pyrazine mono-n-oxides as bioreductive drugs. II Cytotoxicity in human cells andoncogenicity in a rodent transformation assay. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1996;34(1):79 –84.
175. Naylor MA, Adams GE, Haigh A, Cole S, Jenner T, Robertson N, Siemann D, Stephens MA, Stratford IJ.
Fused pyrazine mono-N-oxides as bioreductive drugs. III. Characterization of RB 90740 in vitro and invivo. Anticancer Drugs 1995;6(2):259 –269.
176. Barham HM, Stratford IJ. Enzymology of the reduction of the novel fused pyrazine mono-n-oxide
bioreductive drug, RB90740 roles for P450 reductase and cytochrome b5 reductase. Biochem Pharmacol
1996;51(6):829 –837.
177. Naylor MA, Sutton BM, Nolan J, O ’Neill P, Fielden EM, Adams GE, Stratford IJ. Radiolytic and
photochemical reduction of the hypoxic cytotoxin 1,2-dihydro-8-(4-methylpiperazinyl)-4-phenylimidazo
[1,2-a] pyrido [3,2-e] pyrazine 5-oxide (RB90740) and a potential mechanism for hypoxia-selectivetoxicity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1994;29(2):333 –337.
178. Boiani M, Cerecetto H, Gonzalez M, Risso M, Olea-Azar C, Piro OE, Castellano EE, Lopez de Cerain A,
Ezpeleta O, Monge-Vega A. 1,2,5-Oxadiazole N-oxide derivatives as potential anti-cancer agents:
Synthesis and biological evaluation. Part IV . Eur J Med Chem 2001;36(10):771 –782.
179. Monge A, Lopez de Cerain A, Ezpeleta O, Cerecetto H, Dias E, Di Maio R, Gonzalez M, Onetto S, Seoane
G, Suescun L, Mariezcurrena R. Synthesis and biological evaluation of 1,2,5-oxadiazole N-oxide
derivatives as hypoxia-selective cytotoxins. Pharmazie 1998;53(11):758 –764.
180. Monge A, Lopez De Cerain A, Ezpeleta O, Cerecetto H, Dias E, Di Maio R, Gonzalez M, Onetto S, Risso
M, Seoane G, Zinola F, Olea-Azar C. 1,2,5-oxadiazole N-oxide derivatives as hypoxia-selective
cytotoxins. Structure-activity relationships. Pharmazie 1998;53(10):698 –702.
181. Cerecetto H, Gonzalez M, Risso M, Saenz P, Olea-Azar C, Bruno AM, Azqueta A, De Cerain AL, Monge
A. 1,2,4-triazine N-oxide derivatives: Studies as potential hypoxic cytotoxins. Part III. Arch Pharm2004;337(5):271 –280.
182. Cerecetto H, Gonzalez M, Onetto S, Saenz P, Ezpeleta O, De Cerain AL, Monge A. 1,2,4-Triazine N-oxide
derivatives: Studies as potential hypoxic cytotoxins. Part II. Arch Pharm 2004;337(5):247 –258.
183. Cerecetto H, Gonzalez M, Onetto S, Risso M, Saenz P, Seoane G, Bruno AM, Alarcon J, Olea-Azar C, De
Cerain AL, Ezpeleta O, Monge A. 1,2,4-Triazine N-oxide and N,N ’-dioxide derivatives: Studies as
potential hypoxic cytotoxins and DNA binder. Med Chem Res 2001;10(5):328 –337.
184. Cerecetto H, Gonzalez M, Lavaggi ML, Aravena MA, Rigol C, Olea-Azar C, Azqueta A, Lopez de Cerain
A, Monge A, Bruno AM. Phenazine 5,10-dioxide derivatives as hypoxic selective cytotoxins: Part II.Structure-activity relationship studies. Med Chem 2006;2(5):511 –521.
185. Cerecetto H, Gonzalez M, Lavaggi ML, Porcal W. Preparation of phenazine N5,N10-dioxides. Effects of
benzofuroxan substituents in the outcome of their expansion reaction with phenolates. J Braz Chem Soc2005;16(6A):1290 –1296.
186. Cerecetto H, Gonzalez M, Lavaggi ML, Azqueta A, Lopez de Cerain A, Monge A. Phenazine 5,10-dioxide
derivatives as hypoxic selective cytotoxinss. J Med Chem 2005;48(1):21 –23.
187. Smith PJ, Blunt NJ, Desnoyers R, Giles Y, Patterson LH. DNA topoisomerase II-dependent cytotoxicity of
alkylaminoanthraquinones and their N-oxides. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1997;39(5):455 –461.
188. Patterson LH. Bioreductively activated antitumor N-oxides: The case of AQ4N, a unique approach to
hypoxia-activated cancer chemotherapy. Drug Metab Rev 2002;34(3):581 –592.
189. McErlane V, Yakkundi A, McCarthy HO, Hughes CM, Patterson LH, Hirst DG, Robson T, McKeown SR.
A cytochrome P450 2B6 meditated gene therapy strategy to enhance the effects of radiation or
cyclophosphamide when combined with the bioreductive drug AQ4N. J Gene Med 2005;7(7):851 –
859.
190. McCarthy HO, Yakkundi A, McErlane V, Hughes CM, Keilty G, Murray M, Patterson LH, Hirst DG,
McKeown SR, Robson T. Bioreductive GDEPT using cytochrome P450 3A4 in combination with AQ4N.
Cancer Gene Ther 2003;10(1):40 –48.62
*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med191. Yakkundi A, McErlane V, Murray M, McCarthy HO, Ward C, Hughes CM, Patterson LH, Hirst DG,
McKeown SR, Robson T. Tumor-selective drug activation: A GDEPTapproach utilizing cytochrome P450
1A1 and AQ4N. Cancer Gene Ther 2006;13(6):598 –605.
192. Lee HH, Wilson WR, Ferry DM, vanZijl P, Pullen SM, Denny WA. Hypoxia-selective antitumor agents.
13. Effects of acridine substitution on the hypoxia-selective cytotoxicity and metabolic reduction of the
bis-bioreductive agent nitracrine N-oxide. J Med Chem 1996;39(13):2508 –2517.
193. Yin H, Xu YF, Qian XH, Li YL, Liu HW. Novel N-oxide of naphthalimides as prodrug leads against
hypoxic solid tumor: Synthesis and biological evaluation. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 2007;17(8):2166 –2170.
194. White INH, Suzanger M, Mattocks AR, Bailey E, Farmer PB, Connors TA. Reduction of nitromin to
nitrogen mustard: Unscheduled DNA synthesis in aerobic or anaerobic rat hepatocytes, JB1, BL8 and
Walker carcinoma cell lines. Carcinogenesis 1989;10(11):2113 –2118.
195. Tercel M, Wilson WR, Denny WA. Hypoxia-selective antitumor agents. 11. Chlorambucil N-oxide:
A reappraisal of its synthesis, stability, and selective toxicity for hypoxic cells. J Med Chem 1995;
38(7):1247 –1252.
196. Pors K, Paniwnyk Z, Teesdale-Spittle P, Plumb JA, Willmore E, Austin CA, Patterson LH. Alchemix:
A novel alkylating anthraquinone with potent activity against anthracycline- and cisplatin-resistantovarian cancer. Mol Cancer Ther 2003;2(7):607 –610.
197. Pors K, Paniwnyk Z, Ruparelia KC, Teesdale-Spittle PH, Hartley JA, Kelland LR, Patterson LH. Synthesis
and biological evaluation of novel chloroethylaminoanthraquinones with potent cytotoxic activity againstcisplatin-resistant tumor. J Med Chem 2004;47(7):1856 –1859.
198. Pors K, Shnyder SD, Teesdale-Spittle PH, Hartley JA, Zloh M, Searcey M, Patterson LH. Synthesis of
DNA-directed pyrrolidinyl and piperidinyl con ﬁned alkylating chloroalkylaminoanthraquinones:
Potential for development of tumor-selective N-oxides. J Med Chem 2006;49(24):7013 –7023.
199. High ﬁeld JA, Mehta LK, Parrick J, Candeias LP, Wardman P. Preparative, physico-chemical and
cytotoxicity studies of prodrugs activated in hypoxia to give metal-binding analogues of bleomycin.
J Chem Soc Perkin Trans 1 1999(16):2343 –2351.
200. Blower PJ, Dilworth JR, Maurer RI, Mullen GD, Reynolds CA, Zheng YF. Towards new transition metal-
based hypoxic selective agents for therapy and imaging. J Inorg Biochem 2001;85(1):15 –22.
201. Hall MD, Failes TW, Yamamoto N, Hambley TW. Bioreductive activation and drug chaperoning in cobalt
pharmaceuticals. Dalton Trans 2007;(36):3983 –3990.
202. Anderson RF, Denny WA, Ware DC, Wilson WR. Pulse radiolysis studies on the hypoxia-selective toxicity
of a colbalt-mustard complex. Br J Cancer Suppl 1996;27:S48 –S51.
203. Hambley TW. Developing new metal-based therapeutics: Challenges and opportunities. Dalton Trans
2007;(43):4929 –4937.
204. Ware DC, Palmer HR, Pruijn FB, Anderson RE, Brothers PJ, Denny WA, Wilson WR. Bis(dialkyl)di-
thiocarbamato cobalt(III) complexes of bidentate nitrogen mustards: Synthesis, reduction chemistry and
biological evaluation as hypoxia-selective cytotoxins. Anti-Cancer Drug Des 1998;13(2):81 –103.
205. Wilson WR, Moselen JW, Cliffe S, Denny WA, Ware DC. Exploiting tumor hypoxia through bioreductive
release of diffusible cytotoxins: The cobalt(III)-nitrogen mustard complex SN 24771. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1994;29(2):323 –327.
206. Ware DC, Palmer BD, Wilson WR, Denny WA. Hypoxia-selective antitumor agents. 7. Metal complexes
of aliphatic mustards as a new class of hypoxia-selective cytotoxins. Synthesis and evaluation of cobalt(III)complexes of bidentate mustards. J Med Chem 1993;36(13):1839 –1846.
207. Parker LL, Lacy SM, Farrugia LJ, Evans C, Robins DJ, O ’Hare CC, Hartley JA, Jaffar M, Stratford IJ. A
novel design strategy for stable metal complexes of nitrogen mustards as bioreductive prodrugs. J MedChem 2004;47(23):5683 –5689.
208. Bramhall SR, Rosemurgy A, Brown PD, Bowry C, Buckels JAC. Marimastat as ﬁrst-line therapy
for patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer: A randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 2001;19(15): 3447 –
3455.
209. Failes TW, Cullinane C, Diakos CI, Yamamoto N, Lyons JG, Hambley TW. Studies of a cobalt(III)
complex of the MMP inhibitor marimastat: A potential hypoxia-activated prodrug. Chem Eur J 2007;
13(10):2974 –2982.
210. Failes TW, Hambley TW. Towards bioreductively activated prodrugs: Fe(III) complexes of hydroxamic
acids and the MMP inhibitor marimastat. J Inorg Biochem 2007;101(3):396 –403.
211. Failes TW, Diakos CI, Underwood CK, Hambley TW, Cullinane CM, Lyons JG. Can metal complexes
serve as hypoxia activated prodrugs? Investigations of a Co(III) complex of the MMP inhibitor marimastat.J Inorg Biochem 2003;96(1):128 –128.
212. Vieites M, Noblia P, Torre MH, Cerecetto H, Lavaggi ML, Costa-Filho AJ, Azqueta A, de Cerain AL,
Monge A, Parajon-Costa B, Gonzalez M, Gambino D. Selective hypoxia-cytotoxins based on vanadylDESIGN OF ANTICANCER PRODRUGS*63
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/medcomplexes with 3-aminoquinoxaline-2-carbonitrile-N-1,N-4-dioxide derivatives. J Inorg Biochem 2006;
100(8):1358 –1367.
213. Skwarczynski M, Hayashi Y, Kiso Y. Paclitaxel prodrugs: Toward smarter delivery of anticancer agents.
J Med Chem 2006;49(25):7253 –7269.
214. Vrudhula VM, MacMaster JF, Li ZG, Kerr DE, Senter PD. Reductively activated disul ﬁde prodrugs of
paclitaxel. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 2002;12(24):3591 –3594.
215. Damen EWP, Nevalainen TJ, van den Bergh TJM, de Groot FMH, Scheeren HW. Synthesis of novel
paclitaxel prodrugs designed for bioreductive activation in hypoxic tumour tissue. Bioorg Med Chem2002;10(1):71 –77.
216. Jain M, Kwon CH. 1,2-benzisoxazole phosphorodiamidates as novel anticancer prodrugs requiring
bioreductive activation. J Med Chem 2003;46(25):5428 –5436.
Yu Chen obtained his Bachelor of Science degree in chemistry from University of Science and Technology of
China in 2000 and currently is a 4th year Ph.D. student in medicinal chemistry at Rutgers University under the
direction of Professor Longqin Hu. He has been actively involved in design and synthesis of targeted anticancer
prodrugs and inhibitors of protein-protein interactions.
Longqin Hu received his Bachelor of Pharmacy degree from the Second Military Medical University in
Shanghai, China and his Ph.D. in Medicinal Chemistry from the University of Kansas. He did his postdoctoralresearch in Biochemistry as an NIH NRSA postdoctoral fellow at the University of Delaware. He started his
academic career ﬁrst at the University of Oklahoma and moved to Rutgers University in 1999. He is currently an
Associate Professor of Medicinal Chemistry in the Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The StateUniversity of New Jersey. His research interests include peptide chemistry, drug design, targeted drug delivery,
targeted anticancer prodrugs, and small molecule inhibitors of protein–protein interactions and protein kinases.64
*CHEN AND HU
Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med