AN ASSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS 
0.F INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT 
With special Reference to the 
Doon Valley, India 
Phase I 
VOLUME / 
THE ENVIRONMENTAL 
ASSESSMENT 
I nternational Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
A-2361 Laxenburg, Austria 
UN I DO Contract No. 85/82 (US/GL0/85/039) 
Principal Investigators 
R. E. Munn, V. Fedorov 
Collaborators 
H. Dobesch, S. Kaden, M. Lenko, J.C. Nautiyal, 
6. Padmanabhamurty, M. Piringer, J. Richards, A. K. Roy, 
M. D. Shedha, T. Thadhani and R. Tilak THE SI'RUCTURE OF THE REPORI' 
I! VOLUME I 
(The Environmental Assessment) 
tiPhysiography 
Environmentally-Related Issues ' Conceptual Framework 
Recommended Secbral Engineering Approaches I 
Conclusion 
VOLUME I1 
(Computer-oriented activities) 
Software Tmnsferred 
to Indian Core Group i 
Data Bank II VOLUME I11 
Environmental Impact 
Assessment 
Modelling and Statistical 
Analysis 
Recommendations and Suggestions FOREWORD 
The Government of India (Department of Environment) has 
recently become concerned about the environmental problems which 
could be created by planned industrialization in the Doon Valley, 
located about 200 km north of New Delhi. Of special concern is 
environmental degradation due to limestone quarrying and lime- 
stone processing. 
Through the aegis of UNDP and UNIDO, IIASA was awarded a 
7-month contract in September, 1985 to undertake Phase I of an 
assessment of environmental impacts of industrial development in 
the Doon Valley, India. The work envisaged was as follows: 
a) Development of a conceptual framework for an assessment 
of environmental impacts of industrial development in 
the Doon Valley; 
b) Preparation of a baseline report describing present 
environmental conditions and past trends in the Doon 
Valley; 
c) Development of computer software and provision of 
demonstration models for environmental management in 
the Doon Valley and elsewhere; 
d) Provision of advice to the Indian Department of the 
Environment with respect to setting up a supporting 
structure and facilities in India (e.g., national 
scientific team, monitoring systems); 
e) On-the-job training of suitable national counterparts; 
f) Preparation of a comprehensive work programme for the 
second phase of the project. 
The present Phase I Report is in three parts. Volume 1 
covers items (a), (b), (d), (e), and (f); Volume 2 relates to 
item (c); Volume 3 contains several papers contributed by the 
collaborators listed on the cover page. 
The principal investigators acknowledge the help that they 
have received from many persons during this study. (See Appen- 
dices 1 and 2 for lists of persons who provided advice.) 
Professor Fedorov visited India in June and November 1985 while 
Professor Munn was there in January 1986. These visits were 
greatly facilitated by UNIDO officers in Vienna (Mr. J.H. 
Paschke) and New Delhi (Dr. K. Hussain and Mr. B. Singh) and by 
Dr. S. Maudgal and his colleagues in the Indian Department of the 
Environment. During the course of these visits, discussions were 
held with a number of persons in government services and the 
universities, and it became clear that there are some very 
competent ecologists, engineers, and environmental scientists in 
India. One of the main roles to be played by IIASA in the Doon 
Valley study is that of a catalyst. A draft of this report was reviewed at a meeting held 
at IIASA on 3-5 March, 1986. Four members of the Indian Core 
Group for the Doon Valley IIASA/UNIDO Study were able to partici- 
pate. That meeting contributed substantially to the focus of the 
study, and the principal investigators are indebted to the 
participants. However, errors and omissions are the responsi- 
bility of the authors. 
Appendix 1 gives a list of participants at the review 
meeting. 
Finally it should be mentioned that Volume 1 contains not 
only a description of baseline and historical conditions with 
resulting findings and recommendations, but also conceptual 
presentations to serve as a reference for future activities of 
the Indian Doon Valley Core Group. This is also true for several 
types of impacts that are only indirectly related to industrial 
development. SUMMARY OF VOLUME I 
People living in the Doon Valley believe that environmental 
quality has deteriorated during living memory. This perception 
appears to be supported by the available quantitative data for 
the Valley. For example, the forest cover decreased by about 
25% between 1972 and 1982 (Sharma and Sharma, 1983) while 
groundwater levels in the City of Dehra Dun have reportedly 
lowered by about 15 m in the last decade (see contribution by Roy 
in Volume 3). The most visible signs of environmental deterio- 
ration are the scarring of the Himalaya slopes due to limestone 
quarrying, and the billowing white smoke downwind of the lime- 
stone kilns. However, an important reason for the general 
decline in environmental quality is population pressure, particu- 
larly within Dehra Dun City and vicinity. 
In Chapters 5 and 6, the results of a baseline study of 
environmental quality are given. Although the data available to 
the Principal Investigators are rather limited, there are clear 
signs of environmental degradation in the Valley. 
1. A recent drop in the water-table in the vicinity of 
Dehra Dun during the dry seasons. 
2. Visible scarring of valley slopes due to limestone 
quarrying, with resultant soil erosion and decreasing 
forest cover. 
3. Poor air quality, particularly in the Dehra Dun - 
Mussoorie pocket, where limestone kilns are operating. 
4. Deforestation due to increased firewood demand. 
5. Declines in the numbers of valued species of birds, 
animals and fish. 
A major cause for this drop in environmental quality is the 
increasing population of people and livestock in the Valley. For 
example, the growth rate of the Dehra Dun urban agglomeration 
between 1971 and 1981 was 44%, which was higher than the national 
average (DOE, 1984). 
Industry is only one of several causes of environmental 
deterioration in the Doon Valley. It is therefore essential that 
the environmental impacts of industrial development be viewed 
within a comprehensive land-use management framework. One such 
framework reproduced on the following page is based on the idea 
of sustainable redevelopment where sustainable applies to both 
ecological and socio-economic processes. Here it should be 
emphasized that with the technology available today, industry 
need not cause harm to the environment. Furthermore, industry 
brings employment opportunities and income to surrounding areas. 
Redevelopment of the Doon Valley requires a thorough 
understanding of the carrying capacity of the region. As 
suggested in the Figure, however, carrying capacity is not a 
fixed quantity but depends on: 
- vii - CONTROL BOUNDARY I 7 
1 I REHAB1 LITATION - DI RECT (REFORESTATION) OR INDIRECT 
(CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL POLLUTANTS) 
EhV1 
CLEAN 
SOIL 
OF 
I NM I GRATI ON VARIABLE CARRYING CAPACITY 
VARIOUS COMBINATIONS OF LEVELS OF ENVIRONMENTAL 
QUALITY AND INCOME TO SUSTAIN POPULATION 
ABOVE SOME SPECIFIED BASELINE LIFESTYLE 
A tentative conceptual framework for environmental management 
in the Doon Valley. PRIMARY [ NDUSTRI AL 
PURCHASABLE 
COMMODTTIES 
- viii - INCOME 
RONI4ENTAL OPT1 CNS 
PRODUCTION 
BIOMASS FOR FOOD AND ENERGY AVERAGE YEARLY 
OF VALLEY 
REPRESENTING KQIJ I REMENTS 
AIR, PRODUCTIVE 
AND AVAILABILITY 
CLEAN WATER INCOME 
RESIDENTS 
ROSS POLICY-DRIVEN MOVES TO PURSUE 
PARTICULAR DEVELOPMENT SCENARIOS 
PRIMARY PURCHASING PaWER -- the levels of environmental quality deemed to be acceptable 
by society; 
-- the lifestyle expectat.ions (incomes, food, shelter, edu- 
cation, etc.) of society; 
-- the investments that society is prepared to make on environ- 
mental protection and pollution control equipment; 
-- externalities such as new technologies, changes in world 
trade patterns, etc. 
From the point of view of carrying capacity, the most 
limiting factor for further industrial development in the Doon 
Valley is lack of water during the dry season. Although monsoon 
rains are very large, most of the water evaporates or is lost as 
runoff. The highest priority should therefore be given to the 
design of engineering works that will improve the water storage 
capacity of the Valley. These facilities must be based on 
understanding, monitoring and modelling the hydrologic cycle. 
Several practical suggestions for improving the hydrologic 
carrying capacity of the watershed are as follows: 
-- Control of future tubewell development (e.g., staggering of 
wells to tap different aquifers); 
-- Construction of underground water storage systems; 
-- Discouragement of plans to locate water-intensive industries 
in the Valley. 
Other carrying capacity factors that limit development in 
the Valley include: 
-- Migration of people into the Valley; (By improving environ- 
mental and economic conditions, planners may encourage 
immigration, severely taxing the carrying capacity of 
the region.) 
-- The poor assimilative capacity of the Valley atmosphere, 
placing an upper limit on the pollution that can be emitted 
if air quality standards are to be met; 
-- Availability of arable land; 
-- Milk and fuel wood; (These products cannot be imported 
economically into the Valley, and thus there is a limiting 
population that can be sustained unless improved or alterna- 
tive technologies are used.) 
-- Livestock populations; (Stall feeding could increase the 
forestry carrying capacity of the Valley with respect to 
this factor. ) 
-- Economic factors such as transport costs to distant markets 
and within urban areas, energy costs, availability of raw 
materials, waste disposal facilities, etc. 
In all of these cases, carrying capacity/sustainability studies 
need to be undertaken, based on a system approach, in which appropriate simulation models are adapted and calibrated for use 
in the Valley. 
In particular, there is a clear need for the development of 
an air quality management strategy. Industry is presently a 
major offender in the industrial area north of Dehra Dun City. 
However, the relative contribution of industrial sources to the 
general air pollution loading of the Valley is not known. 
With respect to the broad topic of environmental management 
(including the management of impacts not caused by industrial 
development), a number of important suggestions are contained in 
Sections 7 and 8, including: 
-- Afforestat ion 
-- Land reclamation 
-- Stall feeding of cattle 
-- Development of a leather business (to remove some of the 
pressure of overgrazing) 
-- Promotion of various programs that would reduce migration 
into the cities, e.g., development of food processing and 
cottage industries in rural areas. 
Finally in Section 9 a Work Plan for Phase I1 is given. 
This plan is summarized in the following Table which contains 4 
components: 
-- Monitoring and modelling 
-- Software tools 
-- Data bank 
-- Training of Indian counterparts 
Details on responsibilities and reporting dates are given in 
Section 9. Phase I1 is expected to last about 18 months, with 
some provisional quantitative policy instruments becoming 
available at the end of the first 6 months of study. PROPOSED WORK PLAN FOR PHASE I1 
Monitorinq and Modellinq 
AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT 
-- climatological analysis 
-- meteorological monitoring 
-- air quality monitoring 
-- air pollution emission inventory 
-- 1-month field project 
-- infrared temperature measurements 
WATER MANAGEMENT 
-- preliminary survey 
-- water balance model 
-- groundwater model 
-- water management model 
FOREST MANAGEMENT 
-- forest growth models 
-- forest carrying-capacity models 
RELATED STUDIES (not funded by UNIDO) 
-- frameworks for regional management 
-- input-output studies 
-- environmental histories 
-- climate change studies 
-- studies of valued ecosystems Software Tools 
-- air quality models 
-- water models 
-- forest models 
-- data bank supporting system 
I -- statistical programs 
Data Banks Y 
-- geography 
-- climate 
-- hydrology 
-- industry 
I -- agriculture I 
( -- forestry I 
-- demography 
-- environmental quality 
indicators Training of 
Indian 
Counterparts TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
FOREWORD v 
SUMMARY OF VOLUME I vii 
1. INTRODUCTION 1 
2. PHYSIOGRAPHY OF THE DOON VALLEY 3 
3. THE ENVIRONMENTALLY-RELATED ISSUES IN THE DOON VALLEY 9 
4. A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 15 
4.1 The Valued-Ecosystem Approach to Environmental 15 
Impact Assessments 
4.2 Identification of Valued Ecosystem 
Components and Indicators 
4.3 Bounding the Doon Valley Problem 17 
4.4 Developing a Conceptual Framework 
for the Doon Valley Assessment 
4.4.1 The array of possible frameworks 18 
4.4.2 Constraints on system outputs 19 
4.4.3 Narrowing the choice of frameworks 19 
4.5 The Valued-Component Approach: 
Applicability to the Doon Valley 
4.6 An Alternative Framework for Environmental 20 
Management in the Doon Valley 
4.7 An Example: The Forestry Sector 26 
4.8 Planning Ahead in an Uncertain World 29 
5. BASELINE REPORT: HISTORICAL TRENDS 3 1 
5.1 Introduction 3 1 
5.2 Population and Urbanization 3 1 
5.3 Transportation and Access 
5.3 Expansion of Agriculture 
5.5 Changes in Vegetation 
5.6 Forest Reservation and Management 
5.7 Limestone Quarrying 
5.8 Animal Population 5.9 Man-land Ratios -1 3 
6. BASELINE REPORT: CURRENT CONDITIONS AND RECENT TRENDS 35 
6.1 Introduction 45 
6.2 The Atmospheric Sector 35 
6.2.1 Climate data sources 45 
6.2.2 Recent trends in climate over India 45 
6.2.3 Recent trends in the climate 45 
of the Doon Valley 
6.2.4 Evidence for mesometeorological wind 47 
circulations in the Doon Valley 
6.2.5 Temperature inversions in the Doon Valley 47 
6.2.6 Air quality in the Doon Valley 54 
6.2.7 The Hydrologic Cycle 54 
6.3 Water Quality 56 
6.4 The Forestry Sector 
6.4.1 Introduction 
6.4.2 Description of the forests 
6.4.3 Recent forestry practices 
6.4.4 The resulting trends in the 
Doon Valley forests 
6.5 Soil Erosion 
7. SOME RECOMMENDED SECTORAL ENGINEERING APPROACHES 69 
7.1 Introduction 
7.2 Air Pollution 
7.3 The Hydrologic Cycle 72 
7.3.1 The hydrologic paradox 72 
7.3.2 Engineering measures to reduce runoff 73 
7.3.3 The development of an operational 75 
hydrologic model 
7.4 Groundwater Utilization and Storafe 
in Dehra Dun City 
7.5 Land Reclamation 
8. CONCLUSIONS AND GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
9. A WORK PLAN FOR PHASE I1 85 
9.1 Introduction 85 
9.2 Air Quality Management 86 
9.2.1 Climatological analyses 86 
9.2.2 Establishment of continuously recording 86 
meteorological stations 
9.2.3 Infrared temperature measurements 86 
- xiv - 9.2.4 A short-term meteorological field program 87 
9.2.5 Air pollution observations 87 
9.2.6 Emission inventory 87 
9.2.7 Development of mesoscale multiple-source 88 
air pollution models 
9.2.8 Economic studies of the cost-effectiveness 89 
of various pollution control strategies 
9.3 Water Management Studies 89 
9.3.1 Preliminary survey and collection of 89 
additional data 
9.3.2 Water balance model 89 
9.3.3 Groundwater flow model 90 
9.3.4 Water management modeling 90 
9.4 Studies Relating to Regional Management 9 1 
9.5 Forest Manapemen t 92 
9.5.1 Forest growth models 
9.5.2 Forest carrying capacity models 
9.6 Input-Output Studies 93 
9.7 Related Studies (coordinated but not funded 96 
by the Project) 
9.7.1 Input-Output Studies 
9.7.2 Environmental Histories 
9.7.3 Climate Change Studies 
9.7.3.1 Analysis of climatological 98 
time series 
9.7.3.2 Investigation of the local 99 
impacts of global climate change 
over the next fifty years 
9.7.4 Studies of Valued Ecosystem 
Indicators (VICs) 
9.8 Some Recommendations to the Doon Valley 
Doon Valley Core Group 
REFERENCES 103 
APPENDICES 
1. List of participants at the review meeting at 
IIASA, 3-5 March, 1986. 
2. List of persons consulted in India regarding the 111 
Doon Valley Assessment. 3. Progress made within Phase I with respect to 
supporting structures in India, training of Indian 
National Counterparts and initiation of the environ- 
mental data bank for the Doon Valley 
List of relevant local, state and national 
standards, guidelines, and regulations. 1. INTRODUCTION 
The Indian Government has recently become concerned about 
environmental problems in the Doon Valley, located about 200 km 
north of New Delhi. The Doon Valley is a typical case where 
industrial development together with other economic and social 
pressures endanger ecological stability. The following human 
activities were identified in the UNIDO Request for Proposal 
(UNIDO, 1985) : 
-- limestone mining with subsequent processing into lime, 
cement, and calcium carbide; 
-- heavy and metal-mechanical industry; 
-- urbanization and other infrastructure; 
-- deforestation due to wood processing industry, increased 
firewood demand and greater agricultural land use through 
population and 'livestock increase; 
-- water and sewage problems due to the growing urban popu- 
lation and increasing number of tourists and religious 
pilgrims; 
-- increased transport activities (dust and gas exhausts). 
These pressures on the environment arise, of course, because of 
the growing population in the area. 
In the UNIDO Request for Proposal (UNIDO, 1985) it was 
emphasized that the Doon Valley Project would have to deal with 
two main problems: 
(a) measurement, analysis and modelling of different 
ecological parameters and estimation of industrial 
impacts; 
(b) identification of a development strategy constituting 
an acceptable compromise amongst the variety of 
objectives. 
Point (b) is particularly to be noted. The assessment is to 
provide a framework for a development strategy, in which 
individual industrial and other land-use proposals can be 
examined in a cross-sectoral way. Although several land-use 
proposals for the Doon Valley have recently been implemented or 
are currently being discussed, one of the main goals of the Phase 
I assessment is to provide a conceptual model within which a 
basket of proposals and inter-related impacts can be viewed. 
Thus the IIASA/UNIDO study is not a conventional environmental 
impact assessment; rather its goal is to provide a tool for 
environmental management at the regional level. 
As will be elaborated in Sections 4 and 5, the Doon Valley 
is environmentally stressed, resulting already in some ecological 
degradation. The stresses have been inevitable in order that 
short-term development goals could be met. However, economic 
growth can not be sustained if these pressures continue. So it is necessary to focus on long-term development goals for the 
Valley. 
The essence of an appropriate long-term strategy is captured 
in the words sustainable redevelopment. This phrase, which has 
recently been coined by Regier and Baskerville (19861, implies 
that industrial and economic growth and environmental restoration 
are mutually reinforcing goals if sound ecological practices are 
introduced into the planning process. In other words, environ- 
ment ought to be included in the set of factors (employment, 
industrial, production, consumption, etc.) normally used to 
describe the "quality" of development. In the process of 
redeveloping a region, certain readjustments may of course have 
to be made within and amongst sectors but the losers, if any, 
should be compensated. Here it should be emphasized that 
development strategies cannot be formulated in terms of 
environmental/ecological factors alone but must be in the contest 
of prevailing legislative, administrative, technological, social 
and cultural practices and norms (Munn, 1979, 1982). 
As agreed by UNIDO, the activities related to assessment of 
the environmental impacts of industrial development in the Doon 
Valley are being undertaken in two phases: 
a first phase, to define the conceptual framework for a 
regional environmental assessment using modern techniques of 
systems analysis, and to undertake a study of baseline 
conditions in the valley, including the identification of 
data gaps; 
a second phase during which the environmental assessment 
would be quantified. One of the main goals of Phase I1 
would be the transfer of computer software developed at 
IIASA and collaborating institutions, together with the 
capability of adjusting this software, whenever necessary, 
to conditions in other parts of India. 
On-the-job training of Indian scientists would begin in Phase I 
and would be accelerated in Phase 11. 2. PHYSIOGRAPHY OF THE DOON VALLEY 
The Doon Valley lies about 200 km north of New Delhi, in the 
foothills of the Himalayas. Fig. 2-1 provides a general idea 
about the valley, which is oriented in a NW-SE direction, with 
the Lesser Himalayas to the NE and the Shivalik* range of hills 
to the SW. The valley is about 70 km in length; the width of the 
valley floor varies from 10 to 20 km. 
The name Dehra Dun is used in several different ways: 
1. The administrative District of Dehra Dun (308,800 
hectares) which is about 30% larger than the area 
shown in Fig. 2-1, the additional area being the tahsil 
or subdistrict of Chakrata (136,000 hectares), a 
montane tract to the northeast; a map of the Adminis- 
trative District is given in Fig. 2-?. - J 
9 . The area shown in Fig. 2-1, viz., the tahsil of 
Dehra Dun; 
3. The administrative sub-divisions of the tahsil of 
Dehra Dun, viz., Dehra Dun (the valley) and Mussoorie 
(the Himalayan areas); 
3. The City of Dehra Dun; 
5. The watershed of the Dehra Dun valley; this area 
is larger than that of the Tahsil of Dehra Dun but it 
does not correspond with Administrative District of 
Dehra Dun. 
Two major river systems divide the valley into two hydro- 
logic basins - the Ganga to the east, and the Yamuna to the 
west. The demarcation zone between these two river systems 
occurs near the City of Dehra Dun, which is the main population 
centre in the region (metropolitan population of approximately 
350,000 and area of 31 kmz). The next most important centre is 
the hill town of Mussoorie (population of 10,000 in the winter 
but up to 30,OO-0 during the hot season), located north of Dehra 
Dun. 
Cross-sections through the valley are shown in Figures 2-3 
while a satellite photograph is given in Fig. 2-4. The steep 
slopes to the north and northeast of the valley are particularly 
to be noted. 
With respect to the valley floor, the highest elevation 
above sea level (600 m) is in the vicinity of Drhra Dun, the land 
sloping downward from that area both to the southeast and to the 
west. Slopes average about 3?i for the first 2 kilometers in both 
directions, then less than 1% to the Ganga (300 m above sea 
level) and Yamuna (also 300 m above sea level) rivers. 
Although the Shivalik hills are rather uniformly oriented on 
a NW-SE line, there is an important off-shoot - Lachhiwala - to 
*Sometimes spelled Siwalik. Fig. 2-1 Geographical and land-use map of the Doon Valley 
(obtained from the Indian Department of the 
Environment) EEEE 
a 
..a: :.:, ........ ..... ...... ..... ....... 
a :-:.:':: .. .., . - .: ...... ...... 0 .:.:.:. ' ...:... .......... ..... ...... ;{::;,;:. ........ .:*:::: ..... : 
i:.:..:.. .::.:..:. .::..: ....... ...... ...... ....... :: ...... ....... ...... ...... .... ....... ..... ....... ...... . L... ....... ........ ..... ...... ....... .... ..: ..... ..... . .::... - - - -? - - - - - - - - - . "":: .... 
... ..... ... ..... .... ... f - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . :. , . ..... ... 
ti/ !; ..... .... .... .... ... .... .... .... ..... ..... .... 
... ... 
... 
a, EEEE the SSE of Dehra Dun, lying between the Suswa and Song rivers in 
the eastern half of the valley. This forested promontory is 10 
Is2 km long, about 5 km wide and rises 60 to 100 m above the 
valley floor. Lachhiwala blocks, to a certain extent, the 
atmospheric ventilation of the Dehra Dun urban area. 3. THE ENVIRONMENTALLY-RELATED ISSUES IN THE DOON VALLEY 
As a first step in undertaking an assessment of the environ- 
mental impacts of industrial development, it will be helpful to 
summarize the main environmentally-related issues in the Doon 
Valley, including those not associated with industry. These 
issues have attained very high public visibility both locally and 
nationally for several reasons. 
-- The environmental degradation that has occurred within 
living memory is clearly visible. 
-- A public interest group, the Rural Litigation and 
Entitlement Kendra (Chairman, Shri .\. Kaushal), has played 
an active role in promoting environmental causes. Tor 
example, the organization has successfully fought a case in 
the Supreme Court of India, resulting in a reduction in 
limestone quarrying in the Valley. 
-- A Doon Valley Board has recently been established whose 
membership includes several federal Cabinet Ministers, the 
Principal of the Doon Public School, the Chairman of the 
Rural Litigation Kendra, and Dr. S. Maudgal from the 
Department of the Environment (Ramamurthy, 1985). 
-- An environmental group is actively campaigning for better 
environmental management in the valley. The Group is 
currently undertaking a study, "Ecosystems Evaluation and 
Planning in the Himalayan Watershed of Ganga and Yamuna," 
sponsored by the Indian Department of the Environment 
(Moench and Bandyopadhyay, 1985). 
-- Several national research institutes are located in the 
Valley and in the neighbouring towns of Roorkee and 
Hardwar. The relative number of professionally trained 
ecologists and environmental scientists in the area is 
rather high. 
-- The level of education of residents of Dehra Dun is also 
rather high. The city has more than its share of retired 
professionals while several nationally important public 
schools are located there. 
-- The hill town of Yussoorie is a popular vacation site for 
people from New Delhi. Some of the visitors have observed, 
or have been told about, the environmental changes taking 
place in the valley below. 
-- Many religious pilgrims from all parts of India come to the 
Yamuna and Ganga rivers. 
With this degree of local and national awareness, it has 
been relatively easy to identify the main environmental issues. 
Here it should be emphasized that these issues should all be 
included in an initial environmental "scoping", whether an 
issue appears to be real or imaginary, important or unimportant, 
to the assessor (9eanlands and Duinker, 1983), and whether an 
issue is related to industrial development or not. In order to compile the list of issues, the following 
publications and persons were consulted: 
1. The UNIDO Request for Proposal (UNIDO, 1985); 
2. Official publications dealing with the Doon Valley, 
particularly the Uttar Pradesh District Gazetteer 
(Varun, 1979)) the review of mining/quarrying in Dehra 
Dun-Mussoorie region (MSM, 1984) and the Master Plan, 
Regulated Area, Dehradun, 1982-2001 (TCPD, UP, 1982); 
3. A large number of scientific publications; (See 
references at the end of this Volume.) 
4. A large number of persons whose views were solicited 
through interviews; (See Appendix 2 for details.) 
5. Relevant local, state and national standards, 
guidelines and regulations. (See Appendix 3.) This 
kind of information provides an indication of the 
"worth" that society places on the environment. 
6. A number of contributed papers from Indian scientists 
and from the proprietor of a hotel in Mussoorie; (See 
Volume 3 of this report.) 
The resulting list of issues is rather diverse. In this connec- 
tion it was not possible to detect any patterns when comparing 
the responses of different types of respondents (e.g., laymen 
vs. specialists). 
We conclude that all of the important environmentally- 
related issues in the Doon Valley are included in the following 
list, although a consensus on the relative importance of each 
issue would be impossible to achieve. 
a. Meeting the basic needs of the people, especially 
the poor (drinking water, food, clothing, shelter, 
energy, health and education). 
Note: This is a general issue in developing 
countries, and is the case specifically in 
India (Maudgal, 1985). 
b. Limestone quarrying (on the steep slopes of the 
southwest-facing slopes of the Himalayas), causing air 
pollution, soil erosion, and aesthetic damage to the 
landscape. 
Note: (1) A recent decision of the Supreme 
Court of India (March 12, 1985) called for 35 
quarries to be permanently closed, and 16 
others to be temporarily shut down pending 
appeal; a further 6 quarries were allowed to 
continue operating. See Ramamurthy (1985) 
and Shiva and Bandyopadhayay (1985). (2) The Mussoorie hills have important 
phosphate deposits, which may be developed in 
the next decade or so (DOE, 1984). 
c. Air pollution 
Note: (1) The main industrial sources of pollution 
are cement plants, lime kilns and chemical 
plants but there are several small chimneys 
in the rural areas emitting black smoke, 
e.g., from sugar processing plants. 
(2) The Doon Valley has been designated as 
an industrial growth area, and incentives are 
provided to attract new industry. 
(3) There are many non-industrial sources of 
pollution. One respondent was of the opinion 
that the vikram (a locally manufactured type 
of taxi) was a major contributor to pollution 
in crowded city streets. However, domestic 
cooking stoves and outdoor fires also add to 
the problem. 
d. Deforestation (due to commercial logging, cutting 
of trees for personal use as fuel wood, large-scale 
road construction, cultivation on steep slopes, death 
of chir pine stands through persistent resin tapping, 
quarrying, etc. ) . 
Note: (1) There has been a recent decision to 
ban cutting of live trees in the Doon Valley 
for 12 years. 
(2) Monocropping of the forest was once a 
problem but this practice has stopped. 
(3) An extensive program of reforestation 
has begun, very often using volunteers. 
e. Monsoon flooding, soil erosion and landslides (due 
to deforestation, road construction and quarrying). 
These phenomena are believed to have increased in 
recent years; (See Section 5 below) 
Note: (1) A bridge on the Rajpur creek near 
the City of Dehra Dun was 15 m above water 
level in 1919; sediment is now up to top of 
the bridge and the road has had to be 
diverted (Narayana and Babu, 1983). 
(2) Siltation has had a harmful effect on 
irrigation canals. 
(3) An extensive program of mine 
rehabilitation and terracing of slopes is 
under way. (4) The Central Soil and Water Conservation 
Research and Training Institute, Dehra Dun 
has developed innovative ways of reclaiming 
derelict lands (CSWCRTI, 1984) and of 
controlling landslides (Sastry et al., 1981). 
f. Decreasing water tables and smaller dry-season river 
flows (due to deforestation, quarrying, and increasing 
water consumption). 
Note: See the contribution by A.K. Roy in Volume 3 
of this Report for a discussion of changes in 
water table in the vicinity of Dehra Dun 
City. The water supply in Dehra Dun is 
already deficient during the dry season (DOE, 
1984.) A similar situation exists in 
Mussorie during the peak of the tourist 
season. (See contribution by Prem Thadhani 
in Volume 3. ) 
g. Climate change 
Note: Many people are convinced that local climate 
in the Doon Valley has become hotter and 
drier with less monsoon rainfall in recent 
years. The most frequently cited cause is 
deforestation. X possible economic impact of 
this change has been mentioned by two 
respondents; viz., that the productivity and 
quality of tea bushes have drastically fallen 
in recent decades. 
h. The Tehri dam development 
Note: This dam development is in the adjoining 
watershed to the east and thus will not 
affect the hydrologic cycle in the Doon 
Valley. However, displaced persons from some 
of the villages to be submerged have been 
given 2000 acres (800 hectares) of forest 
land in the southeast corner of the Doon 
Valley (Lall, 1986), increasing the popula- 
t ion pressures. 
i. The increase in human population 
Note: There is a general impression that the 
human population is increasing beyond the 
level that can be sustained by the renewable 
resources of the valley. The Tehri Dam 
development adds to these pressure. 
j. The increase in livestock population 
Note: (1) There is general agreement that as 
the cattle population of a region goes up, 
the productivity of the land goes down. 
Overgrazing is difficult to reverse, particu- larly the practice of allowing animals to 
feed in the forests, preventing the develop- 
ment of new seedlings. 
(2) A special problem area is the Shivalik 
hills where an estimated 300 nomad families 
each manages a herd of about 200 buffalo, 
donkeys and horses (a total of about 80,000 
animals). It should be mentioned, however, 
that buffalo do not graze in the forests and 
therefore are preferable to cows. These 
Gijjars sell milk to the town people. 
k. Disruption of elephant migrations 
Note: (1) Elephants have traditionally inhabited 
the Shivaliks and forested areas to the 
southeast of the Valley. About 7 years ago, 
a water channel was built on the east side of 
the Ganga river, disrupting migration 
patterns. About 50-100 elephants remain in 
the Shivaliks and another 150 are on the 
other side of the canal. The elephants 
are showing the characteristic restless 
behaviour that results when migration routes 
are closed, trampling the forest and 
occasionally moving out over adjoining 
agricultural fields. Several persons have 
been killed trying to chase the elephants 
away, and there is growing conflict amongst 
gi j jars and farmers. 
(2) There is a proposal to establish the 
Rajaji National Park, which would encompass 
the migration routes of the elephants. 
1. Spread of the weed lentana 
Note: The weed lentana is increasing every year and 
is now spreading into the forests where it 
inhibits the growth of seedlings. 
m. Disappearance of wildlife 
Note: Within living memory, the wild animal 
populations in the Shivaliks are said to 
have decreased dramatically. See, for 
example, the contribution by R. Tilak in 
Volume 3 of this Report. Even in the 
Himalayas, several species are locally 
endangered, e. g., mountain quail once lived 
just behind Mussoorie and some pheasants have 
changed their habitats. 
n. Disappearance of fish 
Note: Due to river beds drying up in the dry 
season, and due in some cases to overfishing, some species of fish are disappearing. In 
particular, the Yahseer, as dietary source of 
protein, is now very rare (Tilak, 1983). See 
also the contribution by R. Tilak in Volume 3 
of this Report. 
0. Decline in the tourist industry 
Note: There is concern in Yussoorie that the 
tourist industry may some day decline 
due to unfavourable media-reporting of the 
Doon Valley problem and due to local climate 
changes that are believed to be taking 
place. See the contribution by P. Thadhani 
in Volume 3 of the this Report. 
P. Pilgrims to Hardwar 
Note: Practically on the southeastern boundary 
of the Doon Valley, nearby Hardwar is a holy 
city with influxes of pilgrims every March - 
April. Once every 12 years there is a 
massive influx, with 8 million persons 
expected in 1986. Whether there are signifi- 
cant interactions with the Doon Valley 
remains to be investigated. 
Reduction in yields of some cash crops 
Note: Several persons mentioned that the yields of 
several cash crops (e.g., tea, lichi, rice) 
had decreased significantly in recent times. 
Interestingly enough, several environmental questions are 
not perceived to be major issues in the Doon Valley. Here one 
could mention water pollution (except in the immediate vicinity 
of industrial and domestic sources), noise, forest fires, vector- 
borne diseases, and the harmful effects of irrigation, e.g., 
salinization of soils. As for high-impact low-probability risks 
(a major public issue in Western Europe and North America and at 
Bhopal in India), the only example of such a risk mentioned by 
respondents was the possibility of increased earthquake hazard 
due to construction of reservoirs and dams in adjacent areas and 
due to local quarrying which would increase the severity of 
landslides if an earthquake did occur. 4. A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
Once there was a woman who came into possession of a million 
acres of forest land. She knew nothing of managing a forest, so she 
advertised far and wide for a forest manager, offering the successful 
applicant the largest salary ever paid a forest manager. She ranked 
the hundreds of applicants and began the intervieus. 
The first applicant, a successful captain of industry, was 
asked, "If I hire you, what will you do for me? 
The answer came quickly, "I'll maximize your income through 
modem management principles and ruthless .efficiency." 
His snrile faded as the owner said, "Goodbye. " 
The second appzicant, a forester, answered the owner's question 
with, "I'll maximize the production of wood products from your forest 
while protecting the ability of that forest to produce trees." 
Another brief "Goodbye. 
A wizdlife biologist said he would produce a diversity of 
wildlife habitats, protect the threatened species, and provide 
excellent htlnting for the owner. The ansuer? "Goodbye.;; 
Finaliy a wise man with appropriate credentials answered the 
question with, ~~t do you want from your land?" The interviews 
were over. She had her manager. * 
4.1 The Valued-Ecosystem Approach to 
Environmental Impact Assessments 
When environmental impact assessments first became mandatory 
in North America 15 years ago, developers were forced to consider 
environmental factors within the planning process. This was a 
major step forward, although the quality of environmental 
assessments left much to be desired. 
A major advance in improving the usefulness of 
environmental/ecological assessments was made by Beanlands and 
Duinker (1983), whose approach has been adopted by many agencies 
in North America. The essence of the method is as follows: 
1. The first step in an assessment procedure is to 
identify a set of valued ecosystem components. In 
the underlined expression, the word valued refers 
not only to components that have high economic value 
but also to those that are believed by ecologists to 
*Thomas, Jack Ward, "Towards the Managed Forest: Going places 
that we have never been", Forestry Chronicle, vol. 61, no. 2 
April 1985, pp. 168-170. be essential to the well-being of the system being 
examined and by public groups to have intrinsic 
value. 
If a component is highly valued, then it is 
necessary to ask the questions: "Valued by whom, and 
why?" 
Some of the valued ecosystem components, e.g., the 
forests, will be immediately selected by the assessor. 
In other cases, it is helpful to catalogue the 
environmental and natural resource issues that are 
important to representative persons and groups, 
including the public. This is the approach that was 
taken in Section 3 above. 
2. The next step in an assessment is to try to seek a 
consensus on guidelines that will permit determination 
of whether postulated changes in ecosystem components 
will improve or diminish the worth of the ecosystem. 
3. Thirdly, it is necessary to specify assessment 
boundaries in space and time. 
4. Next it is essential to develop an explicit strategy 
for investigating the interactions between possible 
human interventions (both deliberate and inadvertent) 
and each valued ecosystem component, and to demonstrate 
how the strategy will be used. 
5. Fifthly, it is essential that predictions of change (or 
of no change) be stated explicitly, and that the 
underlying assumptions be clearly specified. 
6. Finally, a commitment should be made to monitor 
environmental and ecological changes. The main object 
for monitoring should be to test the predictions in the 
assessment, so that mitigative action could be taken if 
the predictions prove to be incorrect (an adaptive 
strategy) (Holling, 1978; Sonntag, 1984). 
An objection is sometimes raised that the Beanlands-Duinker 
assessment framework is unworkab1.e in regions where there are few 
data and where many of the ecological relations are poorly 
understood. However, the valued-ecosystem approach is in fact 
particularly effective in such areas. Where the money available 
to undertake an assessment is limited and the data gaps are 
large, the Beanlands-Duinker approach forces the assessor to 
focus on a relatively few interconnected parameters. (Many 
environmental assessments in the 1970's in North America were so 
comprehensive that they were of little use to policy makers). 
Another benefit of the Beanlands-Duinker approach is that during 
the course of the assessment, a framework is developed for 
long-term environmental management of the area or resource being 
assessed. 4.2 Identification of Valued Ecosystem Components and Indicators 
There are several lists of factors that need to be drawn up 
before vnlued ecosystem components and indicators can be 
identified: 
-- relevant local, state and national standards, guidelines, 
regulations, etc. These provide a baseline for 
environmental management, indicating in some sense the value 
that society places on the thing or process being regulated 
(see Appendix 4); 
-- ecosystem components that are essential in meeting the basic 
needs of the poor; 
-- issues in environmental and resource management that are 
perceived to be important by one or more groups in the area: 
(See Section 3 above); 
-- ecosystem components and indichtor organisms where the 
impact of human development could be much greater and/or 
could occur more quickly than elsewhere in the ecosystem 
(e,g. destruction of nesting habitats for valued species of 
animals and birds), thus providing early warning of unwanted 
conditions. 
4.3 Bounding the Doon Valley Problem 
Several hundred years ago, the Doon Valley might have 
been considered as an economically closed system. Today, 
however, there are important interactions with the outside world: 
-- industrial and economic interactions (imports and exports; 
raw materials; energy prices; subsidies; etc.). 
-- population interactions (tourists; pilgrims; resettle- 
ment of displaced persons; etc.). 
-- technology interactions (rapid. and sometimes inappro- 
priate transfer of new technologies; etc.). 
-- ecological interactions (not important except for species 
migrations). 
-- physical interactions (not important). 
Bounding the problem in time ------- ----- -------------- 
Reasonable time horizons for bounding of the Doon Valley 
assessment are: 
Time dimension 
Short-term (next 
several years) Issue 
The issues for which immediate 
practical steps could be taken. 
(See Section 7) Medium-term (next 
10 years) Valued ecosystem components/ 
indicators that are greatly at 
risk, with some danger of 
irreversibility in current 
trends. 
Long-term (next 
50 years) Identification of development 
pathways that are sustainable over 
the long term; (An outline, 
admittedly sketchy, of a strategy 
for sustainable redevelopment 
should be prepared.) 
4.4 Developing A Conceptual Framework for 
the Doon Valley Assessment 
4.4.1 The Array of Possible Frameworks 
Several conceptual models are available for use in 
environmental/ecological assessments. Briefly, these are: 
1. The hydrologic cycle. 
2. Biogeochemical cycling. 
3. Input-output models of matter. 
4. Input-output models of energy. 
5. Pathway analysis, e.g., food chains (in the case of 
pollution). 
6. Life cycles of selected species (habitats, nesting 
characteristics, migration patterns, etc.). 
7. Population dynamics within an ecosystem (competition, 
predator-prey relations, etc.). 
8. Interactions between ecosystems. 
9. Sustainability analyses, e.g., of the human population 
that the Doon Valley forests can support (See contri- 
bution by Fedorov and Lenko in Volume 3 of this Report 
for an example). 
10. Stress-response models of indicator species and of 
ecosystems. 
11. Recycling of usable wastes 
12. Supply-demand models or submodels. 
Note that frameworks 2 and 3 could be applied to towns and 
villages as well as to the more conventional types of 
ecosystems. See, for example, Moench and Bandyopadhyay (1985) 
for an analysis of the biomass flow system in the village of 
Munglori, 11 km north of Mussoorie. Two or more of these system models could, of course, be 
applied in an interactive way to the Doon Valley system. 
4.4.2 Constraints on System Outputs 
In devising a systems approach to long-term environmental/ 
ecological management, a number of constraints must be recognized 
with respect to the types of system outputs, if the recommen- 
dations are to be implemented. 
-- There is an over-riding short-term requirement to meet 
the basic needs of the people living in the valley; (This is 
often in conflict with long-term goals). 
-- The cost of implementing particular measures, no matter 
how beneficial they may seem, must not be excessive, 
and the recommended strategy should include, if possible, a 
cost-recovery clause. 
-- Recommended measures must be practicable to implement 
within the social, administration and legislative fabric of 
the Doon Valley. 
4.4.3 Narrowing the choice of frameworks 
The participants of the Task Force Meeting (IIASA, 3-5 March 
1986) considered a range of possible conceptual frameworks for 
the Doon Valley assessment. Two proposals were made, recognizing 
that considerable elaboration would be required in each case. 
The two frameworks are discussed in the following two sub- 
sections. 
4.5 The Valued-Component Approach: Applicability 
to the Doon Valley 
As pointed out by Beanlands (see Volume 3 of this Report), 
the valued-ecosystem-component (VEC) approach to assessment has 
only been tested in cases where there is a firm development 
proposal to be examined, with alternatives. Further, the 
approach has not been applied to situations with such a large 
number of environmental/ecological issues as in the Doon Valley. 
Some Task Force Meeting participants expressed the view that 
a matrix of human actions vs. VECs in the Doon Valley would be 
unmanageable. After trying to construct preliminary lists of 
human actions and VECs, this fear seemed to be justified, as the 
number of columns and rows grew and grew. However, the act of 
preparing a matrix provided insight into the nature of the 
problem, revealing differing perceptions of the participants 
concerning the main issues and VECs in the Doon Valley. 
The general conclusion was that it would be valuable if a 
few people were encouraged to develop an appropriate matrix 
during the next several months. In the meantime, the skeleton framework given in Fig. 4-1 was suggested,* in which the items 
listed within each circle are very tentative, and need to be 
discussed with members of the Core and Support Groups to the Doon 
Valley Study, as well as with representatives of local 
organizations. - 
Although Fig. 4-1 provides a skeleton framework for 
examining the environmental issues of the Doon Valley, the 
diagram is not action-oriented. Fig. 4-2 has therefore been 
added to provide a context. Conceptualizing in terms of a 
triple-layer projection, the upper-layer action model contains 
activities such as: 
-- economic development 
-- environmental/ecological protection 
-- monitoring 
-- modifications in institutional frameworks 
-- modifications in infrastructures 
The intermediate layer is the same as that shown in Fig. 4-1 
while the lowest layer is a geographic projection intended to 
suggest that the Doon Valley is not a single homogeneous medium; 
the actions, activities, VECs, VDCs and VACs are all location 
specific. 
4.6 An Alternative Framework for Environmental Management 
in the Doon Valley 
Fig. 4-3 provides another tentative conceptual framework for 
environmental management in the Doon Valley.** The most 
important rectangle is the one labelled variable carrying 
capacity, the use of the word variable being intentional. 
Carrying capacity is not a fixed quantity but is a function of 
two sets of factors: 
1. social goals (specified lifestyles, incomes, 
environmental quality, etc.). 
2. externalities (new technologies, changes in world trade 
patterns, climate, etc.). 
Fig. 4-3 is not intended to provide the basis for a "big" 
environmental-ecological-economic model of the Doon Valley. It 
is merely a framework that may help the various groups identify 
their particular roles/actions. What the block diagram does 
*The basic ideas contained in Figs. 4-1 and 4-2 were developed at 
the Task Force Meeting by Peter Nijkamp. 
**This block diagram was suggested by G. Beanlands and elaborated 
by participants of the Task Force Meeting in IIASA (3-5 March, 
1986). Fig. 4-1 Proposed skeleton framework for environmental manage- 
ment in the Doon Valley. 
VEC- valued environmental/ecosystem component 
VDC- valued economic development component 
VAC- valued administrative component ACTION 
MODEL 
SATELLITE 
MODEL - 22 - 
GEOGRAPHICAL 
PROJECTION 
Fig. 4-2 A triple-layer projection intended to help elucidate 
the development of appropriate environmental management 
strategies in the Doon Valley. CONTROL BOUNDARY 
REHABILITATION - DIRECT (REFORESTATION) OR INDIRECT 
(CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL POLLUTANTS) 
INMIGRATION EhVI 
CLEAN 
SOIL 
OF 
Fig. 4-3 A tentative conceptual framework for environmental 
management in the Doon Valley. INCOME 
RESIDENTS 
GROSS 
PCWER 1 I I I 
VARIABLE CARRY TNG CAPACITY 
VARIOUS COMBINATIONS OF LEVELS OF ENVIRONMENTAL 
QUALITY AND INCOME TO SUSTAIN POPULATION 
ABOVE SOME SPEC1 FI ED BASELINE LIFESTYLE PRIMARY INDUSTRIAL INCOME 
AVERAGE YEARLY 
OF VALLEY 
REPRESENTING 
PURCHASING RONMENTAL OPT IONS 
PRODUCT1 ON 
BIOMASS FOR FOOD AND ENERGY FUN I REMENTS 
AIR, PRODUCTIVE 
AND AVAILABILITY 
CLEAN WATER POLICY-DRIVEN MOVES TO PURSUE 
PARTICULAR DEVELOPMENT SCENARIOS 
PRIMARY suggest is that emphasis should be given to the task of defining 
the carrying capacity of the Valley for various sets of social 
goals and changing externalities. A 50-year time scale should be 
used, and the objective should be to identify a small set of 
sustainable development/redevelopment pathways. 
Lifestyle is of course a difficult idea to quantify. In 
this connection there is an array of lifestyles and we recognize 
that no segment of the population should be excluded in develop- 
ment plans. Fig. 4-4 shows conceptually the idea but does 
not reflect the enormity of the task of shifting from the solid 
to the dotted curve. 
Lifestyle 
Fig. 4-4 A schematic representation of a development goal. The task of defining the carrying capacities of the Valley 
is itself long-term and could not be completed even in Phase I1 
of the IIASA/UNIDO Project. It will require the involvement of 
Indian scientists from many disciplines. Provisionally, however, 
a few factors can be mentioned that limit the kinds of sustain- 
able redevelopment that could be envisaged for the Valley: 
Migration of people into the Valley, particularly into 
the City of Dehra Dun, due to increasing industrializ- 
ation. A preliminary analysis by Fedorov and Lenko 
(see Volume 3 of this Report) indicates that the rural 
population in the Doon Valley is reaching a saturation 
level but the urban population is still growing. This 
raises a serious social problem for the various levels 
of government in India. If uncontrolled migration is 
permitted on the one hand, ecological and economic 
sustainability will not be possible. If efforts are 
made to limit immigration without appropriate incen- 
tives, on the other hand, the social fabric of the 
country would be strained. 
2. Ground water shortages during the dry season. This 
clearly is a limiting factor for future industrial 
development. 
3. The assimilative capacity of the airshed and of the 
watershed with respect to pollutants emitted by 
automobiles, industries, etc. 
4. Fuel wood. This cannot be imported economically into 
the Valley. 
5. Agricultural products. Current technology and land 
availability can sustain a population of about 
250,000. Additional food must be imported. 
6. Livestock populations. There must clearly be an upper 
limit to the number of domestic animals that the Valley 
can sustain. 
7. Economic variables such as financing, availability of 
raw materials, distance to markets, energy costs, 
relative competitiveness vis-a-vis other sites in India 
and abroad. These factors provide brakes on certain 
kinds of development, but do not close other options. 
These factors limit sustainable redevelopment but to what 
degree? And how can the upper bounds be increased? (In the case 
of groundwater shortages, for example, it has been proposed by 
Roy and by Kaden (see Volume 3 of this Report) that spacing of 
tubewells be staggered and that the possibility of underground 
storage of surplus water be examined.) 
With respect to industrial development, the way to begin is 
to create a plausible set of options, and to test each one in 
terms of ecological sustainability. In the case of air pol- 
lution, for example, this will require a detailed multiple-source 
air pollution model which will permit estimates to be made of the assimilative capacity of the Valley and of the impact of proposed 
new factories on air quality. Similarly, input-output models of 
flows of energy and mass need to be elaborated both for the 
Valley and for the City of Dehra Dun. Based on sectoral models 
of this kind, the ecological sustainability of each of the 
development strategies could then be examined. In the meantime, 
however, preliminary studies of the plausibility of a few options 
ought to be explored. Here the following factors should be taken 
into account: 
1. Local availability of the raw materials required, discour- 
aging industries that are dependent on scarce local 
resources, e.g., water and firewood; 
3 . Feasibility of the option in both an administrative and a 
social-cultural sense. 
4.7 An Example: The Forestry Sector* 
Forests provide a number of useful products and amenities, 
tangible as well as intangible. 
(a) Tangible Forest Products: The tangible products are 
generally exchanged in the market and, therefore, often 
have a monetary value (e.g., wood and grass). The 
principal products are timber and fuelwood. Other 
commercial forest products are livestock fodder (i.e., 
leaves, grasses and shrubs) and medicinal products, 
e.g., katha, sal seeds and grasses. 
(b) Intangible Forest Products: The indirect use of the 
forest resource is made through its capability with 
respect to soil and water conservation, flood control, 
aesthetics, clean atmosphere, wildlife and outdoor 
recreation. The intangible forest products are usually 
externalities whose economic values are difficult to 
quantify (e.g., flood control and scenery). These may, 
however, be crucial for the very survival of a region. 
For instance, the collapse of an ancient civilization 
in what is now Iraq was undoubtedly the result of 
overgrazing and deforestration in the upper drainage 
basins of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers (Rsmade, 
1980, p. 145). 
Forestry can exist as an important economic activity 
for a region only as long as there are adequate forests of 
various age classes and a sufficiently large area of forest 
is harvested and regenerated periodically. At the same time 
it is necessary that interference with the forest ecosystem be 
kept within limits. For instance, deforestation to meet the 
needs for industrial and urban development may accelerate road 
construction, soil erosion and other processes that cause further 
forest degradation; as another example, converting natural mixed 
forests into artificial monospecific forests may appear to be 
financially profitable and administratively convenient in the 
short run, but may impose huge hidden costs (Auclair, 1983, 
"An early draft of this Subsection was prepared by J.C. Nautiyal, 
Faculty of Forestry, University of Toronto. . 71). The basic needs of the local population for fodder and 
uel must be met systematically if haphazard pilferage of these 
roducts and consequent damage to timber production is to be 
avoided. Existing forests create conditions of flora, fauna and 
soil that are conducive to the subsequent regeneration of the 
forest itself and, hence, to the continuation of forest economic 
activities. 
Fig. 1--5, which summarizes these ideas, could provide a 
framework for estimating the long-term human "carrying capacity" 
of the Doon Valley forests. Such a framework will need to 
include assumptions about the nature of the processes involved. 
One such assumption is that the firewood, housing construction, 
agricultural implements, fodder and grazing needs of the entire 
rural population in the valley will be supplied From the Forests 
in the area and that even parts of the fuel and construction 
needs of the urban population will be met. Another assumption is 
that the cattle population in the rural areas is sufficient to 
meet the entire milk requirements for the Valley. Hence the 
fodder and grazing needs of the rural population must take the 
needs of the urban dwellers into account. h third assumption is 
that a much larger proportion of cattle'can be stall-fed than is 
presently the case and that the number of cattle left for grazing 
in the forested areas is limited to the number that does not 
harm the forest. 
The magnitude of carrying capacity is primarily and 
ultimately a function of primary-resource availability within 
the environment as defined by the size of the particular area and 
by the level of technology available at that particular time. 
Certainly, the desired level of economic well-being also Figures 
prominently as a determinant of human carrying capacity since an 
environment can sustain many more people at a low level than at a 
relatively high one. Determining optimum or preferred levels is 
a difficult matter in itself, but the important point here is 
that carrying capacity is quite flexible and subject to change - 
both for and against the benefit of society. 
Three possible methods could be used for determining the 
carrying capacity of the Doon Valley: "trial and error" (or 
simulation), linear programming "optimization" (Shoemaker 
1977 p. 105) and non-linear dynamic methods. In the trial and 
error approach, the predictive equations relating components of 
the system must be solved, analytically or numerically, for each 
new value of the decision variable. For a complex model for 
which many alternatives exist, it is usually too expensive to 
test each admissible policy. One may first choose a few of the 
policies that appear most promising and then test their outcomes 
by simulation. Unfortunately, the best policy can be overlooked 
in this procedure. 
A second method often used (but not necessarily the best 
method! to determine the optimal management of systems is to 
described them by a set of likear equations and to solve then by 
linear programming (Sh~~malcer 1977 p. 106). Linear programming 
is a very powerful optimization tool because it can be used for 
systems with a very large number of variables. Solutions can be 
obtained for different objective functions, and the sensitivity 
of the solution to one or another variable can be investigated. COHMERICAL AND 
PRIVATE DEFORESTATION MINING 
INCREASE IN 
HILL ROADS 
t 
INCREASE IN 
PEAK RUNOFFS 
SOIL EROSION \ 7'7 
FOREST QUANTITY 
AND QUALITY INCREASE IN 
CATTLE POPULATION 
1 IMPACTS 1 
LOSS OF 
EMPLOYMENT IN 
THE RECREATION/ 
TOUR1 SM SECTOR I 
t + t t + + 
Fig. 4-5 A schematic diagram showing the relation between the 
forest sector and other components in the Doon Valley. 
With increasing populations of people and cattle, the 
sustainability of the forest sector needs to be 
carefully assessed. REDUCTION IN 
AVA 1 LABLE 
ENERGY TO 
MEET NEEDS 
OF VILLAGES LOSS OF 
EMPLOYMENT 
IN THE 
FORESTRY 
SECTOR DECREASE IN 
WATER TABLE LOSS OF 
LANDSCAPE 
AESTHETICS LOSS OF 
WllDLI FE + NEbATlVE 
IMPACT ON 
RECREATION 
AN0 TOUR1 SPl t, Its major limitation is that it is only suitable for models with 
linear constraints and criterion functions. 
The third method to be used when the functional relation- 
ships amongst the variables are very non-linear is the dynamic 
model approach. However, the input data requirements then 
increase greatly. Of course a non-linear module can be hooked to 
several linear modules of a large model; see, for example Brouwer 
et al. (1983). 
Development of an appropriate sustainability model will 
need input data not yet available to the Project, including 
yields of various agricultural crops and the annual production of 
fuelwood, fodder, timber, resin, and milk. Much of the effort 
required in developing a model must be devoted to selecting and 
obtaining these data. 
4.8 Planning Ahead in an Uncertain World 
Planners usually assume that their task is to help society 
move towards some desired state. There are several problems with 
this approach: 
-- Current aspirations of society are in fact a collection of 
conflicting sectoral aspirations. 
-- These aspirations change from decade to decade. For 
example, the relative importance of good environmental 
quality has increased tremendously in the last two decades. 
-- Strategies proposed by planners to move society forward 
sometimes lead to unexpected results, because of our 
incomplete knowledge of the environment, and of society's 
response to the changed environment. 
Thompson and Wharburton (1985) have given an example of this 
very last point: 
Appropriate Technology solutions of fuel-efficient stoves 
and solar cookers to combat deforestation are environ- 
mentally appropriate only if the forest is being viewed as a 
renewable resource - a perception to which the providers of 
that technology are deeply attached. But what if those to 
whom they wish to deliver this technology see the forest not 
as a source of fuel but as a source of fresh agricultural 
land? Give them the technology and the last obstacle to the 
full clearance of the forest is removed. As we go from one 
institutionally induced perception to another, so the 
Appropriate Technology becomes supremely inappropriate. 
Should the planner have been suprised? Without answering the 
question, the point to be made is that land-use simulation models 
should be sufficiently flexible to permit examination of alterna- 
tive linkages and inter-relations amongst components and sub- 
elements. The possibility of surprise should never be over- 
looked, and the implications should regularly be explored 
that society and life-supporting ecosystems will behave 
differently than expected. 5. BASELINE REPORT: HISTORICAL TRENDSX 
5.1 Introduction 
Having identified the main environmental issues, it is now 
appropriate to consider the data bases that substantiate or 
dispel1 the concerns raised. In this Section we provide a 
historical perspective to the assessment. In Section 5, we 
shall examine current conditions and very recent trends over the 
last few years. 
The area to be discussed in this Section is the Dehra Dun 
administrative district (See Fig. 2-2), for which long-term 
statistics are available. The period covered is the one hundred 
years between 1880 and 1980, and the indicators included are 
human population, land-use, vegetation cover, animal populations 
and man-land ratios. 
The land-use and other time-series data to be presented rely 
in large measure upon official colonial and Republic of India 
statistics. The Agricultural Statistics of India annual series 
is especially valuable for this purpose. Estimates of vegetation 
cover in particular years depend upon close reading of additional 
narrative descriptions and correlation of these with land-use 
statistics. This systematic approach is described more fully in 
Richards et al. (1985, pp. 702-705). Human population figures 
are taken from the decennial census volumes. Animal population 
numbers are found in official livestock censuses taken at varying 
intervals. Other data on forests and forestry policy come from 
the gazetteers and from official Forestry Department 
publications. 
Dehra Dun District, in common with other Himalayan hill 
districts, underwent great changes in the century under review. 
Human pressures on vegetation, soils, wildlife, and water 
supplies have grown steadily. The period after independence has 
been one of intensified alteration of the landscape and 
increasing consumption of the natural resources of the district. 
Both qualitative and quantitative evidence demonstrate the 
strength and consistency of these longer-term historical trends. 
5.2 Population and Urbanization 
Between 1880 and 1980 the number of inhabitants in the 
district rose from 144,000 to 758,000 persons enumerated in the 
1981 census. As Fig. 5-1 shows, the most dramatic growth in 
population has occurred since 1940. In the four decades since 
that date the district's population shot up by 185% from 230,000 
to its 1981 level. Population density, a sparse 47 persons per 
sq. km a century ago, had reached 246 persons per sq. km in 
1980. While not high by all-India standards, this figure is 
considerable for the resources of a mountain valley. 
The rising size and importance of the Dehra Dun metropolitan 
area has driven much of this population increase. In 1880 the 
*J. Richards, Department of History, Duke University, 
Durham, N.C., U.S.A. town numbered approximately twenty thousand persons. It was a 
military cantonment for several regiments of Gurkha troops and a 
favored settlement and retirement spot for many English colonial 
officials. In 1911 the town's inhabitants had nearly doubled to 
about 38,500. By this time the city had begun its role as a 
scientific and intellectual center for the colonial government. 
The Survey of India, the Forestry Department, and a number of 
other scientific arms of the Indian Government had established 
their headquarters here. By 1981 the total urban populace was 
293,500. Today, in 1986, the total surpasses three hundred 
thousand. 
Concentration of population within the metropolitan area has 
had a wide range of direct and indirect effects on the landscape 
and resources of the Doon valley. Urban demands for meat, milk, 
grains, drugs, fuelwood and charcoal, construction wood, lime, 
bricks, water, and other commodities rose steadily in the 
1880-1940 period. The demand for these resources moved sharply 
upward between 1940 and the present day. The needs of the urban 
market encouraged expansion of arable land and clearing of 
forests and other vegetation in the district. Considerable 
evidence exists that these effects have extended well beyond the 
administrative boundaries of the district. As early as 1980, the 
district itself seems to have been importing foodstuffs to feed 
its population. The hinterland for Dehra Dun city and municipal 
region is far greater in extent than the confines of the Doon 
valley. The economic attraction of city markets pulled com- 
modities and labour from hill areas in an expanding arc fifty or 
even one hundred kilometers or more from the city. 
5.3 Transportation and Access 
In 1829 district colonial administrators began construction 
of the main access road from Roorkee through the Siwaliks to 
Dehra Dun. By 1880 this was largely a "metalled" road, bridged 
and drained, and filled with cart traffic moving commodities in 
both directions. Throughout the century, the work of extending 
the intra-district road network continued. By the 1880s, 
virtually all villages had convenient access to a cartable road. 
Construction of the Hardwar-Dehra railway, opened in 1880, 
afforded speedy and cheap access for both people and goods to the 
valley for the first time. Shortly thereafter, motor traffic on 
the main roads -- soon to be paved -- began in earnest. By the 
late 1920s, regular bus service from the plains had begun. These 
new forms of transportation superimposed upon the existing 
network of internal roads supplied a major impetus to the 
economic development of the district. 
5.4 Expansion of Agriculture 
Over the century between 1880 and 1980 the area of arable 
land has expanded from slightly more than 41,000 hectares to 
around 64,000 hectares in 1980, a 55% increase. As Fig. 5-2 
shows, this has been a relatively slow, steady increase save for 
a sudden expansion between 1950 and 1960. In that decade 13,000 
hectares of new land came under cultivation. Presumably this 
pulse resulted from government encouragement for agriculture under the first Five Year Plan. A surge of new migrants to the 
district included some refugees from Pakistan after partition. 
Crops grown have been primarily wheat -- though diminishing 
in importance -- followed by paddy rice, maize, barley, and 
millet. Sugar cane and small tea plantations are important cash 
crops. Fruits and vegetables for the urban markets round out the 
list. 
Hilly terrain and difficult water supplies slowed conversion 
of land to agriculture. Often the only means of expansion for 
many farmers has been to terrace hillside lands with stone work -- an expensive and laborious process. Dry and porous soil makes 
rain-fed farming precarious and difficult. Expansion of arable 
land has frequently depended upon access to springs, streams or 
river-fed, small-scale, canal irrigation. 
One of the largest canals, the Rajapur, dates from the pre- 
British period. British colonial officials built four of the 
remaining large riverine canals in the nineteenth century before 
1880. Since that date, the government and private persons have 
invested in a number of smaller river and spring-fed canals or 
irrigation channels. The irrigated area has varied widely from 
season to season and year to year depending upon the rainfall and 
snowmelt of that year. In 1885, government-owned canals 
totalling 107 km in length irrigated about 5100 hectares of crop 
land. The total area watered from all sources has been consider- 
ably greater. Irrigated lands in the district have covered about 
one quarter of the total lands under cultivation (24.7% in 1901 
and 27.6% of the cultivated area seventy years later). 
Conversion of forest or scrub lands to agriculture, while 
significant, has not been a major source of environmental change 
in Dehra Dun District over the past century. 
5.5 Changes in Vegetation 
Changes in the vegetation cover of Dehra Dun District has 
been less than that for most other North Indian districts in the 
1880 - 1980 period (See Fig. 5-2). Preliminary estimates show 
that the following vegetation categories* have suffered losses 
(upper set of figures) or gains (lower set of figures): 
Hectares 
Forest Woodlands -27,721 (-16%) 
Major Wetlands - 4,607 (-21%) 
Grass-Shrub - 2,269 (-11%) 
Semi-Desert Scrub - 442 (-11%) 
Total -35,039 
*The number of categories (7) has been slightly expanded from the 
number (5) used in Fig. 5-2. Hectares 
Arable ~22,729 (~55%) 
Human Use + 4,982 (426%) 
(Towns, roads, etc. ) 
Woods/Shrub + 7,382 ( 19%) 
Grass Mosaics 
Total ~35,039 
The net effect of human actions over the past century has been to 
convert 35,039 hectares of the total area of 308,800 ha in the 
district from one vegetation category to another or from wild 
vegetation to a managed landscape. 
Lands under the general classification of forest-woodland 
have shrunk by an estimated 27,700 hectares (-16%) since 1880. 
Conifers (chir, deodar, kail, spruce) show the greatest decline 
(22%). Losses in the broad-leaved temperate forests at 18.5% are 
less in percentage terms, but slightly more in number of 
hectares. 
The estimated decline in swamp-marsh wetlands is 21%. This 
is the result of concerted investment in swamp drainage in the 
eastern part of the valley. Before as well as after 1880, the 
larger landholders, numbering many British settlers, drained 
swamps to reduce the risk of malaria. As the writer of the 1911 
Gazetteer puts it: '*The wide swamps which at one time covered so 
much of the [Eastern Doon] have entirely disappeared. . ." 
Clearly, wetland drainage has been a significant habitat 
alteration in the district. 
Woods-shrub-grass mosaics increased by 19% over this 
period. This shift is probably a consequence of an ongoing 
process of forest and woodland degradation. Vegetation category 
shifts due to land conversion are not very dramatic. But it is 
clear from the available evidence that various forms of cutting, 
grazing and other human pressures on forests have substantially 
reduced the density and luxuriance of vegetation in the 
district. Slow thinning and degradation, rather than conversion 
to arable lands, has characterized change in the vegetation of 
the district. 
Dehra Dun is a major timber collection point and market for 
the buoyant timber and fuel markets of the plain. Since 1880, if 
not before, Dehra Dun has continuously exported cut timber for 
sleepers, building scantlings and rafters. In 1970 the total 
timber exports from all sources were 10,000 metric tons. 
Fuelwood and charcoal have been until recent years another steady 
export from the district to the plains markets. Bamboos, 
thatching materials, and other forest products complete the list 
of materials taken from the district's woodlands. 5.6 Forest Reservation and Management* 
The earliest settlements (more than 500 years ago) in the 
Doon valley were established on the slopes of the outer Himalayas 
and on the plateau in the valley defined by the Tons and Rispana 
rivers. These regions were well endowed with forest wealth which 
the people, largely farmers, used for satisfying their needs of 
fuel, fodder, structural timber and agricultural implements. 
Extensive agriculture was practised to produce food surpluses for 
an ever increasing population, and the forests were cleared for 
agricultural cultivation. Moreover, unrestrained forest cutting 
for profit during the brief Gorkha occupation (1803-14) left the 
forests in the vicinity of habitation in the valley devastated to 
a large extent (Tucker, 1982). 
The entry of the British in 1814 did nothing, in the 
beginning, to improve the state of the forests. On the contrary, 
they introduced some drastic changes in the pattern of forest 
utilization which led to their further deterioration. Firstly, 
virgin sal forests were opened to commercial exploitation, and, 
secondly, the "zamindari" or land-lord system of land revenue was 
introduced which destroyed the community organizations in the 
villages. The forests were seen only as sources of revenue by 
the government and as a means of making quick profits by the 
zamindars, the new owners of the forested lands. 
Large-scale clearfellings were carried out, and by the 
1850's, sal tracts below the hills and in the valley were already 
cleared of marketable trees (Tucker 1982). In an effort to 
establish better control over the forest revenue and to ensure 
timber supplies for the newly introduced railway system, the 
Forest Department was established in 1855. It, however, was just 
a forest revenue collecting agency with a different name, and it 
did little to conserve or manage the forests. 
During the 1870's (UPFD, 1979), it was realized that 
one of the important timber species being harvested, sal, was 
not regenerating naturally. The forestry system being practised 
was devoid of conservancy and consisted of heavy destruction and 
waste of forest resources. In order to introduce planned 
scientific management of forest resources in various parts of the 
then British India, the Indian Forest Act of 1878 was 
promulgated. This law defined several legal categories of 
forests, the most important of which was "reserved forests", 
which would be managed by the Forest Department for timber 
production and silvicultural improvement (Tucker, 1982). 
Large areas of forests in the Doon valley were declared 
as reserved forests. Forestry activities were regulated 
according to prescriptions contained in a long-term plan of 
action, called "working plan", a system that is still practised 
today. 
*First five paragraphs were contributed by J.C. Nautiyal, Faculty 
of Forestry, University of Toronto, Canada. Establishment of the central offices and institutes of the 
Forestry Department in Dehra Dun ensured that a large portion of 
the District's forest and woodlands came under official manage- 
ment. Therefore the forest records are full and relatively 
precise. The area devoted to officially designated reserved and 
protected forests has grown by 96% between circa 1880 and 1970: 
(Hectares) 
Date Dehra Dun Chakrata Total % of Area 
Tahs i 1 Tahs i 1 
(Sources: Varun, 1979; Imp. Gaz. 1909; U.P. Forest Department 
Annual Administration Report, 1950-51, 1960-61.) 
Passage of the 1878 Government of India Forest Act confirmed the 
status of the Dehra Dun government-managed forests. These 
comprised one-fourth of the. lands in the district. By the turn 
of the century, incorporation of the Chakrata forests brought the 
proportion of reserved and protected forests to over one-third of 
the total area. This ratio remained stable until after Indepen- 
dence. The U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act of 1950 
gave the Forestry Department authority over private and village 
forests in the district. By 1971 nearly one-half the lands in 
the district were under professional forestry management and 
protection. 
Placing such a large ratio of district lands under the 
protected forests category added a further impediment to the 
expansion of agriculture in the district. The fields and 
"village forest" lands of many villages in the district abutted 
the boundaries of government-protected forest tracts. Whatever 
market incentives might develop, they therefore could not cut and 
clear new fields beyond a certain well-defined limit. 
Professional forest management may have limited, but it 
certainly did not halt, the deterioration of the forest, wood- 
lands and wetlands of the district. Much unrestrained timber 
cutting had already taken place in Dehra Dun District between 
the assumption of British control and the demarcation of reserved 
forests in the late 1870s. Even after demarcation of the 
forests, acceptable standards for cutting and preservation were 
less stringent than those today. Descriptions of the first 
working plans of the late nineteenth century suggest much heavier 
cutting than might have been desirable for a sustained yield 
policy of the 1980s. 
The British colonial forestry service expected to show a 
substantial profit on the extraction and processing of timber and other forest products from all its holdings. In the first decade 
of the twentieth century, Dehra Dun's average annual timber 
export to the plains was 6440 cubic metres (mostly & for 
sleepers and building timbers). In the same period the Depart- 
ment licensed extraction of 27,552 cubic metres of fuelwood and 
charcoal and permitted cutting of 610,810 bamboos in the 77,000 
hectares of the Doon forestry sector. Total average annual 
profits were 77,800 rupees. 
Timber felled and sold by the department travelled to the 
plains by an intricate series of river passages. Individual logs 
floated down the Tons, Pabar and Jumna rivers to be caught by a 
boom. Thereafter the timbers went by raft down the Jumna river 
and the Western Jumna canal to a railhead near Delhi. Unexported 
timber enjoyed a ready market and rising prices at Dehra Dun 
municipality where a building boom followed the opening of the 
railway in 1900. 
Extraction and sale of timber and other forest products 
through official channels was only one means of degradation. 
Private, individual cutting and gathering put additional pressure 
on private and on supposedly protected forest lands. Throughout 
the colonial period, the rural inhabitants of Dehra Dun district 
retained limited rights of access to government forests adjacent 
to their villages. Large areas of government forest were 
completely closed to grazing and gathering of fuelwood. But in 
certain demarcated areas, people could send in their herds for 
forage; they could take out dry fuel wood for personal and 
household consumption; they could lop trees for fodder and obtain 
torchwood and a limited amount of timber for building; and they 
could collect thatching grass and other forms of "minor forest 
produce" free of charge. 
Before the early 1900s, these freely exercised village 
rights probably put less pressure on the forests than government- 
approved felling. However, growing urban demands for fuelwood 
and other forest products led to rising prices, making it 
profitable for villagers to cut more wood than needed for purely 
subsistence purposes. Despite various official control measures 
(including armed guards, arrests, and fines) larger numbers of 
rural inhabitants and their cattle have made greater demands on 
thinning woodlands and forest cover every decade. The sudden 
take-off of population in the district after 1947 has added a 
further dimension to licit and illicit cutting and gathering in 
the reserved forest lands. It appears that for many peasants, 
subsistence rather than merely supplemental income may be at 
stake in the forests. 
5.7 Limestone Quarrying 
Rising prices for building materials encouraged the Forest 
Department in 1904 to expropriate all private rights to the 
quarrying and processing of limestone. In 1908, 17,055 tons of 
lime left Dehra Dun by the railway. Laborers collected boulders 
bearing lime and placed them in large pits of about 30 cubic 
metres capacity. In these kilns, firewood burned steadil'y under 
about 10,000 kg of stones for a week. The end product was about 7500 kg of lime. The 1908 export of lime required an estimated 
5000 to 6000 cubic metres of firewood for the kilns. 
In 1911, four quarries were operating in the Doon Valley. 
That level of production changed very little until the State of 
Pakistan was created, and India had to develop its own sources of 
high quality limestone and marble. In 1980 there were about 100 
quarry leaseholders in the Doon Valley, extracting 513 x lo3, and 
136 x 103 tonnes of limestone and marble, respectively, in that 
year (Bandyopadhyay and Shiva, 1985). 
5.8 Animal Population 
Livestock are obviously a source of agricultural pro- 
ductivity for the rural inhabitants of the district. Meat, dairy 
products, wool and hides are important sources of farm income. 
Dung for fuel or fertilizer is essential. Draft animals still 
are a major source for traction. At the same time, grazing 
animals make significant demands on vegetation. By and large, 
the district farmers do not cultivate forage crops for their 
livestock. Fallow lands, agricultural stubble, village commons, 
and forest and woodlands are the primary sources for animal 
forage. The Doon valley and hill animals have not been 
impressive for either size or productivity by plains district 
standards. The hill animals especially seem to have been 
uniformly small and scrawny. Cows were poor milk producers. But 
the hill bullocks were probably efficient for drawing ploughs and 
other farm tasks on the slopes of the terraced hillsides. It is 
also likely that they could survive on the scantier diet that 
hill and forest grazing supplied. Since 1947, the government has 
invested some resources in cattle and buffalo breeding. The size 
and the feeding requirements of these larger animals have risen 
accordingly. 
The livestock population of Dehra Dun has grown at a steady 
pace (See Fig. 5-3). Between 1890 and 1966, total animals 
increased 89% from 168,000 to 315,000 head. More recent data for 
1980 are not yet available but it seems unlikely that this trend 
has abated. Although impressive, this enhancement is much less 
than the 426% rise in human population for the century. 
Obviously the high proportion of urban dwellers in the district 
helps to explain the discrepancy. Nevertheless, both urbanites 
and the agricultural population depend upon animal resources. 
Between 1890 and 1966 the ratio of livestock to humans has varied 
from 99 head per one hundred humans in 1890 to a high of 124:100 
in the 1908-1929 years, decreasing to 73:100 in 1966. 
The composition of livestock herds has remained surprisingly 
constant over the seventy-six year period. Bovines (cattle, 
bullocks, and buffalo), sheep and goats constitute 98 to 99% of 
the district herds. Horses, not commonly employed in the region 
before the British annexation, remain unimportant. Bullocks 
continue to form 17 to 18% of the herds. Cattle, however, show a 
recent gain from 57 to 58% in the 1920s and 1930s to 62% of the 
total in 1966. Sheep and goats have lost proportionately. 
The recorded enlargement in Dehra Dun's livestock has 
outpaced the expansion of land under cultivation. Arable land, as mentioned above, grew by only 55% in the 1880 to 1980 period. 
We might therefore expect that somewhat greater pressure for 
scrub, woodland and forest grazing may be exerted now than in 
earlier years. Access to grass/shrub mosaics, wood-scrub and 
fallow lands has declined accordingly. The 1890 figure of 0.39 
hectares per animal has dropped steadily to the 0.22 hectares per 
animal in 1966 (See Fig. 5-3). Cultivated forage crops and stall 
feeding do not seem to be common practices at present. Clearly 
for many farmers in the district, the only recourse has been the 
undergrowth, intermittent grasses and lopped branches of the 
district forests. Forestry department management of reserved 
forests placed a barrier between the peasant farmers of the 
district and their accustomed forage resources in the forests. 
Fodder for most of the year consisted of "grass carried in from 
the more precipitous hillsides by the women" and "leaves and 
straw" (1911 GAZ p. 36). Cattle owners rarely tried to store 
fodder, but "hillsides that were too steep for safe grazing acted 
as a natural reserve" (ibid). For four to five months before the 
summer rainy season, the hill villagers drive their cattle "up to 
the great forests on the higher hills: there they make a more or 
less permanent cattle station, not leaving it until the rains 
have well set in" (ibid). 
In 1877-78 the department asserted that the prescriptive or 
customary rights of forest grazing held by farmers both in the 
Doon valley and in the hills was a privilege and not a right. 
Hereafter these rights were to be extended only to defined forest 
areas adjacent to each village. Grazing and access to the 
forests of the Eastern Siwalik ranges were banned altogether. 
This action seems to have put an end to most of the cattle 
stations for summer grazing in the forests. Continuing restric- 
tions on access to more distant reserved forest blocks have 
forced more intensive, and one suspects, more damaging grazing on 
both private and reserved scrub and woodlands circumscribing each 
village. In its descriptions of individual villages, the 1911 
gazetteer mentions the hardships caused the peasants by strict 
exclusion from many forest tracts. 
Wild animals of all types have diminished in numbers as 
human and domestic animal populations have'swollen. Hunting and 
the deterioration of habitat have combined to reduce the 
predators. Tigers, leopards, and the hyena were already reduced 
in numbers by the early twentieth century. Elephants were 
depleted by capture. The last known khedah was held in 1905. 
Deer herds -- sambhar, chital, and parha -- roamed in smaller 
herds in the early twentieth century because of "continuous 
destruction of game." Quail, duck, partridges, among other game 
birds were still prolific. Fish were still abundant, especially 
the large mahseer which could be readily netted by rural folk. 
By the 1970s these animals were certainly far from 
abundant. A tiger census taken in 1973 found eleven animals 
surviving. Other animals suffered less drastic, but similar 
declines. The wildlife protection legislation of 1972 has 
prohibited taking of any animals in the district. Some resto- 
ration of populations may be expected in the reserved forests. 
But this has also reduced access to supplementary food supplies 
for the rural population. Fishing for mahseer is no longer common with the decline in numbers. Whether steady depletion of 
animal and bird numbers has had a deleterious effect on the 
ecosystems of the district is certainly a point that should be 
examined. 
5.9 Man-land Ratios 
The effects of one hundred years of economic development and 
growth in human numbers can be seen most dramatically in 
Fig. 5-4. The amount of arable land per person in the district -- both urban and rural -- has declined slowly but perceptibly 
over the century. From just under three-tenths of a hectare in 
1880, the figure gradually dropped to just over one tenth of 
a hectare in 1980. This trend towards decreasing values supports 
the notion that the district has increasingly relied upon 
imported foodstuffs. Whether post-1950 investments in improved 
seeds, fertilizer and water have led to better yields thus 
compensating for this declining land ratio is not certain. 
More startling is the trend in per-capita access to natural 
vegetation given by the upper curve in Fig. 5-4. In 1880 each 
person in the district had access to nearly 1.8 hectares of 
natural vegetation, which includes all the major types of 
vegetation cover, from wetlands to grasslands to forest areas. 
By 1980 this area had tumbled precipitously to just under 
four-tenths of a hectare per person. 
The trend suggests that in at least one important sense, the 
population of the district has become impoverished. Rural folk 
can no longer readily and easily gather manifold products of 
grassland, shrub or woodland. Wild fruits, dyes, medicines, 
fuelwood, thatching materials, bamboo, honey, and game are either 
inaccessible or more costly in terms of time and energy for their 
collection. For the urban dweller, the availability of these 
products at low cost is no longer possible. Perhaps even more 
significantly, this unfavorable trend suggests that in each 
decade, the inhabitants of Dehra Dun have imposed greater 
pressure on the vegetation of the district. Degradation and 
depletion of the habitat is the inevitable result. Per capita Land Use, 1880- 1980 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-a-e n - u n U 
- 1 
I I I I I I I 1 1 
0 Arable +Vegetated 
Fig. 5-4 The average area of arable land per person (lower curve); 
the average area of vegetated land per person (upper curve) 6. BASELINE REPORT: CURRENT CONDITIONS AND RECENT TRENDS 
6.1 Introduction 
The following baseline report of current conditions in 
the Doon Valley is preliminary. In some cases, the data banks 
were not made available to the Principal Investigators in time to 
meet the deadline for submission of the Phase I Report. In other 
cases, new measurement programs will have to be established under 
Phase I1 of the Project. 
6.2 The Atmospheric Sector 
6.2.1 Climate data sources 
There are three climate observing stations in the valley: 
(1) Dehra Dun city; (2) the Forest Research Institute just to the 
west of the city, and (3) the Field Station of the Central Soil 
and Water Conservation Research and Training Institute - about 18 
km to the west of the city). There is also an observing station 
in the hill town of Mussoorie overlooking the Valley. In 
addition, data are available from a "control" site, Roorkee, 
which lies to the south of the valley (about 65 km SSW of the 
City of Dehra Dun). Observations are made twice daily [0300 GMT 
(0830 LST) and 1200 GMT (1730 LST)] of the usual weather 
elements, including in particular maximum and minimum tempera- 
tures, precipitation amount, and instantaneous wind direction. 
In addition, pilot balloon observations are made at the Dehra Dun 
City station. The records go back many years, and climatological 
normals for the period 1931 to 1960 are published. 
6.2.2 Recent trends in climate over India 
The most important large-scale feature of the Indian climate 
is the southwest monsoon which in the Doon Valley, occurs 
generally between late 'June and mid-September (the rainy 
season). The remainder of the year is dry except for brief 
intervals of rain when weak disturbances cross the region from 
west to east. 
There are significant year-to-year variations in the 
global atmospheric general circulation, particularly with 
respect to the behaviour of the monsoons. However, there is 
no evidence for any recent trends in India. For example, 
Padmanabhamurty has shown (see Volume 3 of this report) that 
there have been no statistically significant changes in annual 
rainfall in recent years. 
6.2.3 Recent trends in the climate of the Doon Valley 
Padmanabhamurty's study did not include rainfall data from 
the Doon Valley. However, a plot of the annual rainfall at the 
Forest Research Institute (Fig. 6-1) certainly does not support 
the idea of a change in rainfall locally in the Doon Valley. A 
careful statistical investigation of this time series as well as 
of 14 recent years of monthly rainfall amounts and temperatures 
at the Forest Research Institute has been undertaken by Fedorov UI. 
= al a 
Y 1 
UI rl 
alo and Lenko (see Volume 3 of this report). Again there is no 
evidence for any recent change in climate. 
6.2.4 Evidence for mesometeorological wind circulations 
in the Doon Valley 
Except during the summer monsoons, the topography appears to 
be generally favorable in the Doon Valley for the development of 
slope and valley winds, which would have a major effect on air 
quality in the area. Do the data provide any evidence to support 
this view? 
The 30-year climatological summaries available to the 
Investigators include frequency distributions, by month of the 
year, of instantaneous wind directions at 0300 and 1200 GMT for 
Roorkee, Dehra Dun City and Mussoorie. Admittedly an instan- 
taneous reading is not the best measure of wind; however, the 
long-term statistics clearly reveal the presence of a diurnal 
cycle in wind except during the monsoon season. Some illustra- 
tive results are given in Figs. 6-2a, b, c, which show: 
-- At Roorkee, a "control" station out of the Valley, the 
prevailing wind is NW in January and SE in July. The 
frequency of calms is higher in January, particularly at 
0300 GMT. (See Fig. 6-2a.) 
-- At Dehra Dun City in January, there is a significant wind 
reversal in between 0300 GMT (prevailing wind N to NE) and 
1200 GMT (prevailing wind SW to W). This effect is not so 
evident in July. (See Fig. 6-2b.) 
-- At Mussoorie, a wind reversal occurs in January, as at Dehra 
Dun City, but the prevailing direction at 1200 GMT is S 
rather than SW to W (this may be due to very local 
differences in exposures). In July, the prevailing 
direction is S at both hours (in contrast to SE at 
Roorkee). (See Fig. 6-2c.) 
In summary, the wind direction climatology at Roorkee is 
representative of conditions in the plains of Northern India. In 
the Doon Valley, there is good evidence even from this limited 
data set for a mesoscale wind field, as might also be expected. 
This has important implications for pollution control strategies, 
as will be elucidated in Section 7.2. 
6.2.5 Temperature inversions in the Doon Valley 
The vertical temperature structure in the Valley is an 
important consideration with respect to the dispersion of air 
pollutants. In particular, a temperature inversion (an increase 
of potential temperature with height) acts as a lid on upward 
diffusion of pollution. 
There are no direct measurements of vertical temperature 
profiles in the Doon Valley, the nearest upper air station being 
at Delhi. However, a rough indication of local conditions may be 
obtained from a comparison of temperatures at Mussoorie with 
those in the Valley. (The difference in height between Mussoorie al C3 P: - 00 LOL 
am 0 1st 
10% 
1st 
0% 
N NE E SESW WWC 
Fig. 6-2b Percentage frequencies of instantaneous wind directions at 
0300GMT (0830LST) and 1200GMT (1730LST) in January and July 
for Dehra Dun. MUSSOORIE JRN a3 MUSSOORIE JHN 12 
MUSSOC3R IE JI-JL D3 MUSSOORIE .JUL 12 
Fig. 6-2c Percentage frequencies of instantaneous wind directions at 
0300GMT (0830LST) and 1200GMT (1730LST) in January and July 
for Mussoorie. and Dehra Dun City is 1360111, so that 13.60C (lO/lOOm) should be 
added to the Mussoorie temperatures to correct for adiabatic 
expansion and cooling, before comparing them with Dehra Dun city 
values. ) 
The results given in Fig. 6-3 should be considered as 
suggestive only. We have used climatological mean monthly 
temperatures, and there will in fact be a frequency distri- 
bution of temperature differences, some larger and some smaller 
than those shown in Fig. 6-3. In addition, we have assumed that 
the air is not saturated; when cloud and mist are present, the 
moist adiabatic lapse rate (0.60C/100m) should be used. Never- 
theless, Fig. 6-3 does suggest that temperature inversions may 
occur, thus limiting the dilution capacity of the mesometeorolo- 
gical valley system. 
As an anecdotal footnote, one of the principal inves- 
tigators (R.E. Munn) measured the temperature with a small 
digital thermometer exposed outside the left front window of a 
moving automobile at each 100 m of elevation between the city 
limits of Dehra Dun and Mussoorie. Heights were estimated from 
the readings of a small aneroid altimeter. The measurements were 
made between 1000 and 1100 LST on January 10, 1986. Skies were 
clear but there was a pall of smoke in the valley. The usual 
caveats apply to this data set: 
-- Temperatures were no doubt rising with time, particu- 
larly on south-facing slopes. However, the increase 
would certainly not have been more than a couple of degrees 
per hour. 
-- The twisting road was sometimes in sun and sometimes in 
shade, sometimes very near the edge of the slope and 
sometimes set back 20m or so. 
In spite of these factors, the data displayed in Figure 6-4 
suggest that an inversion was probably present in the valley 
on that occasion. Visually, there appeared to be an upper 
lid to the smoke pall at an elevation of about 700 m above 
the valley floor. 
Continuing to observe the situation from a southward facing 
vantage point in Mussourie, wisps of smoke began to move up over 
the town at about 1145 LST, and by noon, the side of the valley 
was shrouded in fog (cloud), so that the trip back to Dehra Dun 
was in partial fog. It was therefore not appropriate to repeat 
the measurements on descent, and to average at each elevation, as 
is usually recommended. 
Summarizing, on this single occasion at least, the valley 
did not have an impermeable lid; there was in fact considerable 
leakage of the pollution pall associated with upward-rising air 
over southward-facing slopes. In this connection, these 
observations suggest that air quality should be measured at the 
southern edge of Mussourie; it is possible that the import of 
pollutants into the hill town from the valley below could be 
significant. 5. 0. 
MONTH 
Fig. 6-3 Differences in monthly mean potential temperatures between Dehra 
Dun City and Mussoorie. Lower curve-differences in daytime 
maxima; upper curve-differences in night-time minima. TEMP DIF [OCI 
Fig. 6-4 Vertical profile of potential temperature between 
Dehra Dun and Mussoorie, 1000-1100 LST, 10 January 
1986, obtained from an automobile moving up the hill. 
See text for caveats about the representativeness of 
this profile. 6.2.6 Air quality in the Doon Valley 
Locations of the largest point sources of air pollution in 
the Doon Valley are shown in Fig. 6-5. These emitters are 
situated between Dehra Dun and Mussoorie. However, there are 
many smaller sources not only in the city but also in the 
surrounding rural areas. An air pollution emission inventory 
will have to be made during Phase 11 of the Project. Presently, 
the only information available is contained in an unpublished 
report dated September 1985. At the time of a site visit by a 
Central Board team on 19-21 August, 1985, 
-- ARC Cement: particulate emissions from the stock exceeded 
the prescribed limit of 100 mg/Nm3 and there were many 
fugitive emissions. 
-- M/s V.P. Carbide: the plant was not yet in production but 
it has an installed annual capacity of 21,000 tonnes of 
calcium carbide. Fabric pollution control filters were 
being installed. 
-- M/s Aditya Chemicals Ltd.: particulate emissions were less 
than 50 mg/Nm3, well below prescribed air pollution control 
limits. The plant is producing about 10,000 tonnes per year 
of precipitated calcium carbonate. 
-- Lime kilns: about 200 kilns are operating on both sides of 
Raipur Road near the Rispata river. 
The only air quality measurements in the Valley were 
obtained close to point sources. For example, Bandyopadhyay et 
al. (1984) mention that measurements taken "near the Rispata 
bridge, and including sensitive areas like a residential 
children's school, revealed that the particulate matter in air 
was 350 micrograms per cubic meter" (8-hour averages). This area 
is close to the limestone kilns, which emit visible white 
dust. At a distance of 150 m from the kilns, concentrations of 
suspended particulate matter averaged over 8 hours are usually 
higher than 1000 micrograms per cubic meter (Shri D.P. Sharma, 
U.P. Pollution Control Board). One of th,e tasks to be undertaken 
during Phase 11 of the Project will be to establish a network of 
air quality monitoring stations at representative locations in 
the Valley. 
One rough indicator of long-term pollution trends is 
visibility, particularly the frequencies of occurrences of haze 
and smoke (Munn, 1973). The measurements made at weather 
observing stations in the Doon Valley and vicinity will be 
examined for trends of this type as soon as the data become 
available to the principal investigators. 
6.2.7 The Hydrologic Cycle 
Rainfall climatologies are available from 3 stations in 
the valley, as well as from Mussoorie. As an additional piece of 
information, Moench and Bandyopadhyay (1985) mention that there 
is a rainshadow in the Aglar valley north of Mussoorie; rainfall 
measured at the village of Munglori in the Aglar valley during Fig. 6-5 Main point sources of air pollution in the Dehra Dun 
City-Mussoorie area. 
1. ARC Cement Plant + Railways 
2. UP Calcium Carbide 1 Main Roads 
3. Adihaya Chemicals 
4. Limestone Kilns June-September 1984 totalled only 25% of that recorded at 
Yussoorie. So it is possible to obtain a rough engineering 
estimate of the water input to the Doon Valley system, including 
the year-to-year variability in rainfall; see Fig. 6-6 for an 
example of the type of climatological output that is available. 
From a knowledge of the temperature and humidity fields, a rather 
crude indirect estimate of evapotranspiration could also be made. 
Some data on water storage and runoff have been collected by 
various national and state agencies. However, the information 
has not yet been obtained by the Principal Investigators in most 
cases. This part of the baseline report must therefore remain 
incomplete, and we are able to cite only the following: 
a) Ground-water table in the vicinity of Dehra Dun 
Roy (see Volume 3 of this Report) has mentioned that 
ground-water levels in Dehra Dun have reportedly lowered by 
about 15 m in the last decade. One of the tasks for Phase 
I1 of the IIASA study will be to undertake a careful 
statistical analysis of ground-water time series. 
b) Peak discharges in 5 small watersheds 
in the Doon Valley 
Babu and Narayana (1984) have studied peak discharges 
in 5 small watersheds in the Doon Valley using data for the 
years 1960-1983, and have developed a stochastic model for 
predicting the peaks. For one particular watershed, the 
actual and predicted peaks are shown in Fig. 6-7. As can be 
seen from the best fitting regression curve, an upward trend 
of 0.052 cubic metres per second per year in peak flow is 
obtained. This agrees with the general perception of Valley 
residents that peak run-off rates have been increasing in 
recent years. 
6.3 Water Quality 
Water quality is not a major public issue in the Doon Valley 
(see Section 3). For ease of reference, however, we cite three 
reports that mention water quality. 
-- Singh (1983) - a Master's thesis at Jawaharlal Nehru 
University on water and sediment quality downstream from the 
Mussoorie phosphate mining area. Some typical results are 
shown in Table 6-1. The effect of the mines on sulphate, 
phosphate and calcium concentrations is detectable. 
-- Katiyar et al. (1984) - A chemical analysis was undertaken 
of water quality near three mines and in the Baldi river. 
The results shown in Table 6-2 are consistent with those in 
Table 6-1. The sulphate and phosphate concentrations are 
elevated in the vicinity of untreated old mines. 
-- FRI (1984) - A preliminary investigation is being 
undertaken of the chemical quality of Bijapur Canal water 
passing through the New Forest at Dehra Dun. At Ut = 3.9 + 0.052t + 2.0 Sin - 2-1 
Year 
Fig. 6-7 Actual and estimated annual peak discharge in one 
particular watershed in the Doon Valley (Babu and 
Narayana, 1984). Tab le 6-1: Some typical results from a study of water quality 
downstream of the Mussoorie phosphate mining area. 
Concentrations in ppm. (Singh, 1983) 
Locat ion PH C1- F- HCO3- S04-- Pod-- Ca+ + 
1400 m upstream 8.1 4 1.3 173 X65 0.48 21.5 
of mine discharge 
100 m downstream 8.1 4 1.1 173 754 0.06 28.5 
of mine discharge 
200 m downstream 8.1 3 1.3 135 577 0.36 150.0 
of mine discharge 
Song Canal, Maldeota 8.0 4 1.4 119 338 0.06 110.0 
17,400 m downstream 
Tap water, Dehra Dun 8.0 5 1.3 155 125 0.06 23.5 
33,400 m downstream 
Table 6-2: Some results from a study of water quality in the 
vicinity of mining areas in the Doon Valley. 
Concentrations in ppm. (Katiyar et al., 1984) 
Location PH HC03 - So4 -- Ca+ + 
Treated old mine 
spoil (Jhandoonala) 3.2 143 108 5 1 
Untreated old mine 
spoil (Dhandaula) 
Untreated fresh 
mine spoil (Rali Rau) 8.0 130 370 182 
Baldi river 8.0 140 172 66 6.4 The Forestry Sector* 
6.4.1 Introduction 
Forests of various types and variable densities cover 
about 1000 km2, or nearly 50% of the area of the Doon valley. 
The forest resources of the valley are administered by the East 
and the West Dehradun Forest Divisions of the Siwalik Forest 
circle. There are no village or community forests in the 
valley. Therefore, leaving aside some negligible private or 
municipal treelands, practically all the forest in the valley is 
managed by the Uttar Pradesh State Forest Department. The forest 
distribution in the valley is shown in Fig. 6-8. 
6.4.2 Description of the Forests 
The Doon valley has been known for its excellent sal 
(Shorea robusta) forests. However, over the last few decades, 
the proportion of well stocked forests has been falling (Sharma & 
Sharma, 1983), and the present state of forests leaves much to be 
desired. 
The forests in the three geographical regions within 
the valley are markedly different. The condition of vegetation 
in these three regions was assessed by using aerial photographs 
for the years 1975-77 (Sharma & Sharma, 1983). The approximate 
proportions of areas under different densities of forest cover 
(above 60%, 20 to 60%, below 20% and non-forest) are shown in 
Fig. 6-9. 
The forest cover on the north-eastern slopes of the Siwalik 
was the best of all where about 56% of the land is covered with 
sal forests of high density (i.e., average crown cover of over 
60%). In all, about two thirds of the region had some kind of 
forest cover. In contrast, the valley proper had less than 50% 
of its area under forest, and only one third of the region was 
under dense sal. Almost 8% of these flat lands had planted 
forests, raised mostly on poor and much degraded areas. The 
forest cover in the third region, the south-western slopes of the 
Himalayas, was found to be in a most pronounced state of degra- 
dation. Though technically 60% of the land had forest cover, 
only about 10% had dense forests. There were no sal forests in 
the region and the dense cover consisted of chir pine (Pinus 
roxburghii) and miscellaneous deciduous species. Almost 12% 
of the area was covered with scrub vegetation. 
According to vegetation types, the forests in the Doon 
valley can be classified as sal (655 square km, or 64% of 
the total forest area), low-level miscellaneous (231 square 
km, or 23%), chir pine (2 square km, or 0.2%) and unworkable 
blanks (137 square km, or 13%). 
On the basis of formal forest classification (Champion 
& Seth, 1968), the valley proper and the north-eastern slopes of 
*J.C. Nautiyal, Faculty of Forestry, University of Toronto, 
Canada. LECE.NR 
CLOSED mEST. . .. .m 
OPENFOREST . t_l 
, .- 
NDN FOREST F! 
RIVER.'.. . : . .= 
Fig. 6-8 Vegetation Map of Doon Valley (Based on Land-Sat 
Imagery of the Year 1982) the Siwaliks largely fall under "northern tropical moist 
deciduous" class of forests with sal as its predominant species. 
As described earlier, forests growing on the slopes of the 
outer Himalayan range, reaching up to the Mussoorie ridge, 
are generally sparse and of poor quality. They are classified as 
"Himalayan subtropical scrub" within "Himalayan sub-tropical 
pine" class of forests. The dominant species among whatever 
overwood is left are chir pine and oak (Quercus incana). Shrubs 
cover large tracts of degraded land. 
Certain small areas of forests in the valley proper, 
principally those on the river banks, fall under "khairsissoo 
primary seral" sub-type within "tropical dry deciduous" class of 
forests. The principal species in these forests, as the name 
implies, are sisham (Dalbergia sissoo) and khair (Acacia 
catechu) . 
Further information on the forests of the Doon Valley 
is given in Saxena (1972). 
6.4.3 Recent Forestry Practices 
Forestry working plans are generally for a period of 10 
years and are reviewed and revised at the end of the period. The 
first working plan for the Dehradun forests was prepared by 
Fernandes in 1888. The plan currently being followed in the 
valley is the one prepared by Singh in 1980. 
The objectives of management as laid out in the recent 
working plans are enumerated below: 
1. To conserve, develop and extend the existing forest and 
vegetal cover for soil and water conservation; 
2. To attain normal forests as far as possible (a normal 
forest permits nearly equal volumes to be harvested 
annually in perpetuity); 
3. To improve the density of existing growing stock 
and increase the proportion of valuable timber species 
by planting; 
4. To obtain sustained yield of commercial timber, 
fire-wood and other forest produce in perpetuity; 
5. To meet the demand of forest produce under rights 
and concessions of the local people; and 
6. To meet the present and future demands of industries 
for commercial timber, pulpwood and other raw material. 
Though the objectives of forest management highlight 
the environmental and silvicultural aspects, in practice 
commercial utilization of the resource guides management 
practices in the valley like elsewhere in the region (Planning 
Commission, 1982 p. 12). 
The forests are grouped into different "working circles" 
(WC) depending upon the species, topography and other local factors. There is generally one set of prescriptions for areas 
within a given working circle. The latest working plan for 
Dehradun divides the forests into "Sal WC" (644 square km, or 63% 
of the total forest area), "Protection WC" (74 square km, or 7%), 
"Plantation WCt' (85 square km, or 8%) and "Grazing WC" (11 square 
km, or 1%). There are two other working circles, namely, 
"Grazing Overlapping WC" (917 square km, or 90%) and "Khair Over- 
lapping WC" (59 square km, or 6X), the jurisdictions of which 
superimpose over other distinct working circles. 
Different management systems are applied to different 
working circles. Sal WC is currently managed under the 
"conversion to uniform" system. When natural regeneration 
did not follow fellings, the classical shelterwood compartment 
system was modified and the present system was evolved. Under 
this, areas are specially categorized according to the stage of 
regeneration. Fellings, in theory, are done only to facilitate 
regeneration. In practice, however, yield is obtained in almost 
all age groups. These forests have been suffering because of the 
lack of research into the problems of natural regeneration of 
sal, the inability of the administration to control grazing, 
lopping and thefts, and the temptation to raise plantations of 
fast growing species (UPFD, 1979). 
The forests within the Protection WC are managed under 
the "protection system", where the objective is to conserve 
soil and water. No commercial exploitation is prescribed 
and the area is supposed to be protected from grazing, lopping 
and fire. In practice, however, the WC has very heavy incidence 
of biotic interference and there are no regeneration operations. 
Even though trees are not sold, they are often felled to meet the 
needs of local rightholders and concessionists. 
"Clearfelling system" is practised in the areas under 
the Plantation WC. Large-scale afforestation through plantations 
was introduced in the early 1930's in the form of "taungya" 
(Stebbing, 1962, p.346). In this agro-forestry practice, 
sparsely vegetated areas and those supporting tree crops of low 
commercial value were clearfelled and planted with fast growing 
economical species. Agricultural crops like mustard and castor 
were grown between tree lines for 2 to 3 years. The choice of 
species has been dependent on the market and industrial demand as 
seen at the time of planting. For instance, earlier it was tun 
and semal for producing plywood and matchwood, but more recently 
there is a greater emphasis on planting pulpwood species such as 
hybrid eucalyptus and poplar. Other fast growing species 
which are favoured for planting are teak, khair, sisham and 
tropical pines. The tract is prepared for planting by removing 
all vestiges of past ground flora, sometimes using tractors and 
bulldozers. 
The forests in the Miscellaneous WC are often worked 
under the "selection system". Trees are felled as and when 
they become mature and silviculturally available. In most 
cases the reason for not opting for a more concentrated system is 
the terrain condition. The areas in the Grazing WC are kept 
exclusively for grazing. Due to constant grazing and heavy 
lopping, much by the herds of nomadic gujjars, no improvement in 
pastures is possible. However, the bulk of the livestock in the 
valley is served through the Grazing Overlapping WC as it covers as much as 90% of the forest land. But here, grazing is somewhat 
regulated and only certain pre-specified forest blocks are opened 
to grazing during a given year. In practice, control of grazing 
is extremely difficult and the forests near villages are greatly 
damaged due to unauthorized grazing. 
6.4.4 The Resulting Trends in the Doon Valley Forests 
In recent years there has been a cumulative reduction 
in forest cover and crown density of natural forests. LANDSAT 
scenes for the years 1972 and 1982 (Sharma & Sharma, 1983) show 
that the forest cover in the valley decreased by 25% over a 
period of just 10 years. The reduction in dense forest (i.e., 
forests with average crown density of over 60%) during this 
period was as high as 33%. (See Fig. 6-10.) 
This drastic change can be partially explained as due 
to lack of natural regeneration and transferring of forest 
land for settling displaced people. However, the main reasons 
are as follows: 
(a) Planning of forestry activities exclusively for 
commercial objectives and ignoring the role of the 
forest in conserving soil and water; 
(b) A population explosion resulting in heavy demands for 
fuel and fodder which are often satisfied through 
unathorized means. The population of the Doon valley 
has almost doubled in the last 25 years (TCPD, 1982). 
This rate of growth is very high and if there is no 
significant attempt to stabilize the population soon, 
the demand for forest products in the valley may soon 
outstrip the maximum sustainable yield of the forests 
as in some other Himalayan areas (Nautiyal & Babor, 
1985) ; 
(c) The local demands for fuel and fodder have not been 
given due importance. This is evident from the fact 
that plantations of only industrial, and not of fuel or 
fodder, species have been raised; 
(d) Adequate investments in undertaking soil and water 
conservation measures in the catchments of streams, 
over the eroded hills and in the areas around limestone 
quarries have not been made. 
These causes of forest depletion can be overcome by linking 
forest planning with other socio-economic activities, and by 
adopting innovative approaches to the management of forests. If 
appropriate actions are taken in time, forestry can go a long way 
to stabilizing the ecosystem of the valley. 
It must be emphasised that due to continuing high population 
density and other socio-economic factors, things can never go 
back to the days when village communities were living in stable 
equilibrium with the surrounding forests. This can be realized 
from the fact that all the village and other civil forests in the 
adjoining districts of Garhwal and Nainital have either dis- 
appeared or have become unproductive (UPFD, 1979). Despite 
defective planning and faulty execution by the Forest Department under severe odds, only the forests controlled by the Department 
have survived. The Forest Department in Dehradun, with a 
radically different approach towards forest management, and with 
cooperation of the local people, may still be able to contribute 
to improvement of the ecosystem of the Doon valley if a rational 
population policy aimed at stabilization of the population at a 
future date and integrated development are planned and executed. 
6.5 Soil Erosion 
The limestone quarries have caused serious soil erosion, 
particularly in the area between Mussoorie and Dehra Dun (see 
Fig. 6-5). At present, the quarries and the areas affected by 
their waste disposal cover about 6.5% of the above-mentioned area 
(DOE, 1984). It is difficult to estimate the accuracy of this 
figure but officially, the leasehold area covers 14 km2, about 
80% of which was formerly forested. 7. SOME RECOMMENDED SECTORAL ENGINEERING APPROACHES 
7.1 Introduction 
The development of a comprehensive environmental management 
strategy will have to take account of a large number of inter- 
active issues and socio-economic conditions. Within the frame- 
work of a systems approach, various kinds of modules will have to 
be joined together with a number of feedback loops. 
This idea was elaborated in Section 4. Here it should be 
emphasized that the inner working parts of individual modules are 
rather complex, and in many cases we have only a qualitative 
notion of their "circuit diagrams." Nevertheless, some of them 
are sufficiently well understood that state-of-the-art environ- 
mental engineering techniques could be applied immediately to 
effect significant sectoral improvements in the state of the 
environment. These cases will be considered in this Section, 
although two points should be made at the outset: 
1. Although the inner structure of a module may be 
understood in principle, the site-specific data sets 
required to operate an appropriate management scheme 
may be incomplete. In such cases, e.g., air pollution, 
recommendations on data needs will be given. 
2. The various modules are inter-connected. For example, 
regional air pollution increases when population 
increases but may decrease if new technology is 
applied. However, once a working model of the air 
pollution box is developed, it will be possible to ask 
a number of "What if?" questions with respect to 
possible changes in the inputs from other modules. 
7.2 Air Pollution 
There are several ways to control air pollution (Munn 
and Rodhe, 1985): 
1. Reduction in emissions through, for example, 
-- gradual replacement of old industrial plants by 
new ones; 
-- gradual replacement of old vehicles by new 
ones ; 
-- installation of stack-cleaning equipment, such as 
filters and precipitators; 
2. Construction of tall chimneys and/or increasing the 
exit velocities and temperatures of chimneys; (These 
were common solution in the 1960s before the effects of 
long-range transport of pollutants were realized.) 
3. Intermittent emission control (reducing emissions 
during atmospheric episode conditions); 4. Optimal location of industrial units (avoiding sites 
where atmospheric dispersion is poor; spacing of point 
sources in such a way that pollution "hot spots" are 
avoided; separating residential/agrrcultural areas from 
industrial establishments through green belts; etc.). 
No single approach is best, and an optimum management strategy 
uses a range of methods for controlling air pollution. In recent 
years, many air pollution control authorities have been renamed 
air management authorities, reflecting a shift in emphasis. 
The information needed to operate a regional air pollution 
control program includes the following: 
1. A set of air quality standards is required for the main 
gaseous and particulate pollutants. 
Note: (a) The standards must be supported by 
scientific research reports (as published by 
the World Health Organization, for example) 
indicating that effects on health or 
vegetation are possible if the standards are 
exceeded. 
(b) Annual, daily and hourly standards are 
required. 
(c) There ought to be a process that will 
permit industry and the public to comment 
formally on new proposals for air quality 
standards. 
2. An emission inventory of both point and diffuse area 
sources is needed, for pollutants for which air quality 
standards have been set. 
Note: (a) The inventories should include 
information on both locations and strengths 
of emissions. Engineering estimates of 
strengths can be obtained from a knowledge of 
the industrial processes involved, using 
so-called "emission factors" (see various 
air pollution handbooks). 
(b) The inventories should include 
information on typical variations that occur 
diurnally, weekly and annually. (As an 
example, domestic cooking sources in the Doon 
Valley are highest from 7 to 9 pm, with a 
secondary peak near sunrise, while brush 
burning is a seasonal phenomenon occurring 
mainly in late summer after harvesting.) 
(c) At present, it is not possible to 
estimate the relative contributions of 
various sectors (industrial, transportation, 
urban, agricultural) to the total pollution 
loading of the valley or even of the City of Dehra Dun. This information is required in 
order to set priorities on control 
strategies. 
(d) The most detailed survey has to be done 
for the area between Dehra Dun City and 
Mussorie (see Fig. 6.5). 
3. For major classes of emitters, information should be 
compiled on the cost. cost-effectiveness and practi- 
cality of introducing pollution controls. 
4. Information on the mesometeoro~o~y of the Valley is 
required. 
Note: (a) Not only the distribution of emitters 
but also the wind field is important in 
determining regional pollution potential. 
(b) A model of the wind field will have to 
be developed based on currently available 
climatological data and some additional field 
measurements, particularly with respect to 
inversion heights and intensities. 
(c) Using the source inventory and the wind 
field model, predictions can be made of 
regional air quality, including both space 
and time variations. 
5. Air quality measurements must be made in the Valley on 
a regular basis. - 
Note: (a) These measurements are required: 
(1) to determine whether air quality 
standards are being met. 
(2) to estimate long-term trends in air 
quality; 
(3) for comparisons of model 
predictions with observed values. 
With the information listed above, it will be possible 
to simulate the effects of various industrial development 
strategies, e.g., comparing alternate sites for new industries, 
transportation corridors, etc. Here it should be mentioned that 
air quality management is a long-term activity requiring 
collaboration rather than confrontation between regulators and 
those being regulated, and supported by scientific data that are 
open to public scrutiny. Air quality in the Doon Valley cannot 
be changed very much in a day or a year, but progress will be 
accomplished by a series of many small and often imperceptible 
steps forward. 
Finally, mention should be made of the various possible 
mathematical models that could be applied to estimate the dispersion from multiple sources in the Doon Valley. The 
models range from a simple input-output model to very complex 
representations of the 3-dimensional terrain and-wind fields. As 
the models become more complex, so do the input data 
requirements, and it is often desirable to begin with a rather 
simple model. Also it should be mentioned that the most appro- 
priate model depends on the use to which it will be put, e.g., 
land-use planning vs. intermittent emission control. 
The contribution by M. Piringer in Volume 3 provides a 
description of various kinds of multiple-source air pollution 
models, and defines the input data needs of each. 
Air pollution abatement in the City of Dehra Dun. 
Without waiting to establish a monitoring network and a 
multiple-source air pollution model, several measures could be 
taken to improve air quality in the City of Dehra Dun: 
(1) compulsory servicing of public and private transport 
units, with respect to air pollution emissions (see 
Section 3). 
(2) paving of the shoulders of downtown streets (see 
contribution by R. Tilak, in Volume 3). 
(3) organization of traffic-free zones in the most crowded 
areas of the city. 
(4) Open green spaces should be increased to 20% of the 
total lawn area, instead of 6.5% as provided by the 
Master Plan (DOE, 1984). 
7.3 The Hydrologic Cycle* 
7.3.1 The hydrologic paradox 
A major issue for the Doon Valley is certainly that of 
water conservation. As pointed out by Singh (1973): 
"Paradoxically, the valley though located in a high rainfall 
area, faces acute shortage of water during the dry seasons.'* 
On average, the water-table is about 6.4 m higher in summer 
than in winter. 
The situation is becoming more serious because the annual 
hydrologic cycle has been changing in recent years (less storage; 
higher runoff during the monsoon; decreasing supply of water 
during the dry seasons). Added to this is the fact that there 
are increasing withdrawals of water by industrial, agricultural 
and domestic users. 
*Use of the word cycle is not strictly correct because the Valley 
is not a closed system - water is imported through atmospheric 
transport and deposition, and is exported by river transport and 
evaporation and atmospheric transport. The increase in summer runoff is a self-perpetuating spiral 
because of the increasing soil erosion that it causes. [Soil is 
lost in the Doon Valley at a rate of about 50-55 tons per hour 
during the monsoon season, according to Saxena and Verma (1981).] 
In these circumstances, a two-pronged water resource 
management strategy should be elaborated: 
(1) engineering measures to reduce summer runoff rates and 
the resulting soil erosion; and 
(2) medium- to long-term development of an operational 
hydrologic model. 
7.3.2 Engineering measures to reduce soil erosion 
The approaches recommended by the Central Soil and Water 
Conservation Research and Training Institute to reduce summer 
runoff rates are very practical, and the program should be 
accelerated, with slightly better coordination among the various 
parties involved. Some of the techniques baing used include: 
-- Prevention of cutting trees and of excessive grazing, 
particularly on slopes; 
-- Afforestation; (There are several excellent programs for 
tree-planting, by volunteers as well as by commercial 
and government agencies.) 
-- Debris stabilization downstream of quarries. This is 
achieved through construction of terraces and gabions and 
the planting of grasses and shrubs. (An example of the 
great effectiveness of such measures is shown in Table 
7-1.) For very steep slopes, special engineering works must 
be constructed to prevent landslides (Sastry et al., 1981); 
-- Significant reduction in the number of new roads being 
constructed on the slopes. Bridle paths rather than gravel 
roads are being recommended to connect remote villages to 
main roads; 
-- Bunding (construction of earthen levees) along the 
boundaries of small watersheds, reducing runoff by up 
to 85% (Sastry and Narayana, 1984); 
-- Banning of farming on steep slopes; [See Table 7-2 for an 
example of the effect of slope steepness on soil loss 
(tonnes/ha) at two locations in India (Singh et al., 1981). 
There is a considerable increase in soil loss with 
increasing slope.] In this connection, the Planning 
Commission in the Seventh Five Year Plan has recommended 
that: "Cultivation of Agricultural crops in areas with above 
15 degree slopes should be stopped, and these areas should 
be planted with five F's (food, fodder fuel, fertilizers and 
fibre) trees" (Bahuguna, 1986). Table 7-1: Volume and weight of debris deposited on the Dehra 
Dun - Sahastradhara road before and after gabions 
were constructed on the slopes above the road 
(Katiyar et al., 1984) 
Quantity of debris on the road 
Before treatment 
( 1983-84) After treatment 
( 1984-85 1 
Volume Weight Volume Weight 
(cu. metres) (metric tons) 
Debris and small 8758 17516 2100" 4200* 
boulders 
Blasting boulders 8757 17514 Nil Nil 
*This debris came through two drainage channels from untreated 
sub-watersheds. 
Table 7-2: The effect of slope on soil loss at two sites in 
India (Singh et al., 1981) 
A. Rehmankhera (near Lucknow) 
(average for years 1961 to 1976) 
Slope 0.5% 1.5% 
Soil loss 4.2 6.7 
(tonnes/ha) 
B. Kharagpur 
(average for years 1964-1968) 
Slope 2% 3.5% 
Soil loss 9.1 12.2 
(tonnes/ha) -- Levelling of existing fields. This measure significantly 
reduces runoff and soil erosion. 
Many of these ideas are included in the Master Plan, 
Regulated Area, Dehra Dun (TCPD, 1982) but the list contained 
therein is worth repeating: 
-- planting of vegetation along river banks to reduce soil 
erosion; 
-- construction of reservoirs in the upper reaches of rivers to 
help store surplus water; 
-- banning the removal of boulders, sand and gravel from 
river beds (such removals accelerate water flows during 
monsoons); 
-- rehabilitation of mining areas to reduce soil erosion; 
-- construction of embankments in areas vulnerable to floods; 
-- banning construction on or near small rivulets; blockages in 
these water courses affect other areas. 
These very practical measures are to be encouraged. 
7.3.3 The development of an operational hydrologic model 
A working model of the hydrologic cycle in the Doon Valley 
would be useful for long-term water resource management. (See 
contribution by S. Kaden in Volume 3 of this Report.) At 
present, it is not clear whether the drop in water table is due 
to an increasing amplitude of the annual runoff cycle, or is due 
to the increasing number of tube wells being sunk in the valley. 
The geomorphology of the region is well known (Nossin, 
1971; Singh, 1973), and quite a bit of information is available 
on groundwater (Singh, 1973; see for example, Fig. 7-1) and on 
rainfall. However, runoff during peak monsoon cloudbursts (when 
a significant fraction of.the annual total occurs) will be 
difficult to measure, as indeed will also be the estimation of 
evapotranspiration from the rugged slopes of the Valley. One of 
the Principal Investigators (R.E. Munn) once carried out a field 
study of evapotranspiration in the Marmot Creek watershed of the 
Canadian Rocky Mountains. The conclusion reached was that 
evapotranspiration estimates in such rugged terrain were too 
uncertain to be useful for water resource management purposes 
(Storr et al., 1970). 
7.4 Groundwater Utilization and Storage in Dehra Dun City 
As mentioned by Roy (see Volume 3 of this Report), "Ground- 
water levels in Dehra Dun City have reportedly lowered by about 
15 m in the last 7 years or so." Roy suggests some engineering 
measures that could be taken to alleviate the problem, noting 
that existing tubewells tap more or less the same aquifers at 
depths of about 120-140 m, and that more and more wells are being 
built in a rather haphazard manner: EXPECTED YIELD PER WELL 
It. PER Mlnute 
of Obrermtlon Well8 
8 rest Wlls 
Fig. 7-1 Expected yield per well (litres per minute) in the Doon Valley, based on a survey 
carried out between 1960 and 1967 by the Exploratory Tubewells Organization, 
Government of India (Singh, 1973) 1. Future tubewell development should be controlled so 
that new wells are properly spaced (with respect to the 
existing network of wells) and properly designed to tap 
deeper aquifers in a staggered manner. 
2. A "nest" of properly spaced tubewells should be 
constructed along the terraces of Tons Nadi in the 
Jhajra sector beyond Premnagar, and the water should be 
piped into Dehra Dun. 
3. In order to implement these suggestions, a detailed 
assessment of groundwater resources and location of 
existing wells will have to be carried out. 
4. Finally, industries that have the potential for causing 
groundwater pollution should not be allowed to locate 
in the valley unless appropriate treatment facilities 
are included in the engineering design plans. Ground- 
water is such an essential regional resource that no 
chances should be taken that it might become depleted 
or polluted. If a water pollution source is removed, a 
river will purify itself very quickly but groundwater 
may remain polluted for many years. 
In Volume 3 of this Report, S. Kaden recommends that 
feasibility studies be carried out with a view to constructing 
unde.rground water storage systems. These do not require high 
capital investment and have negligible evaporation losses 
compared to those from surface water reservoirs. The engineering 
techniques that could be used to store water underground are well 
known (see Asano, 1985). 
7.5 Land Reclamation 
Flash floods are continually changing the water courses in 
the Doon Valley. As river beds dry up and new ones are formed, 
areas of gravel and sand are exposed, with only a thin layer, if 
any, of topsoil. Scientists at the Central Soil and Water 
Conservation Research and Training Institute, Dehra Dun have 
demonstrated the effectiveness of a number of practical measures 
for reclaiming these areas for agricultural purposes (Singh et 
al., 1981; Saxena and Verma, 1981; Sastray and Narayana, 1984): 
-- Improvement in the retention of soil moisture through deep 
pitting and replacement of excavated gravel with good soil, 
although it should be mentioned that this process is rather 
costly; (Fruit trees can then be grown successfully.) 
-- Runoff storage in farm ponds for subsequent irrigation of 
crops; 
-- Optimization of crop-rotation techniques; 
-- Planting of babar grass to stabilize bunds; 
-- Planting of trees (eucalyptus in particular) and babar grass 
on riverbed lands; the resulting green matter produced can help meet the fuel, fodder and fibre requirements of the 
villagers. 
Technology transfer to the farmers in the Doon Valley, through 
demonstration plots, field extension courses, special publi- 
cations, etc. is an important element of the Central Soil and 
Water Conservation Research and Training Institute. 8. CONCLUSIONS AND GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
At the outset it should be emphasized that there should not 
be a distinction between "polluting" and "non-polluting" 
industries, since the difference between these two "categories of 
industry" is just determined by the degree to which society is 
willing to pay for "cleaning-up" these so-called "polluting 
industries" by investing in technical facilities. One would 
extremely limit industrialization if all efforts were to be 
concentrated on "non-polluting" industries, e.g., assembly of 
electronic products. And examples exist where even these 
"non-polluting" electronic industries have polluted the 
environment, e.g., groundwater in the United States (California) 
through the production of integrat.ed circuits and micro-chips. 
In this context, the Phase I study has considered qualitat- 
ively an array of industrial development strategies that might be 
appropriate for the Doon Valley. Three of these strategies are 
worthy of further assessment, using modern methods of computer 
simulation: 
1. Decentralized industrialization (employment and income 
generation in rural areas through sales of processed 
agricultural products) 
2. Centralized (non-polluting) processing of agricultural 
products such as fruits and vegetables, wood and other 
forest products, as well as meat, hides and skins (this 
would generate rural income through increased demand 
for agricultural productss and would provide employment 
plus income in urban areas). 
Development of educational and research facilities in 
the industrial field and therefore in coordination and 
cooperation with (high technology) industry. This 
would generate additional employment oppurtunities in 
urban centers like Dehra Dun. At the same time, such 
activities would provide properly skilled labor and 
supervisors for industry and would broaden the 
industry-related basic research. 
Although the data available to the investigators in Phase I 
have been rather limited, there are clear signs of environmental 
deterioration in the Valley. (Industry may not be the major 
cause of this downward trend in some cases.) So industrial 
development strategies other than the three listed above would be 
more difficult and more costly to implement. 
Evidence of declining environmental quality is to be found 
in: 
1. A recent drop in the water-table in the vicinity of 
Dehra Dun during the dry season. 
2. Visible scarring of the valley slopes due to limestone 
quarrying, with resultant soil erosion and decreasing 
forest cover. 3. Poor air quality, particularly in the Dehra Dun - 
Mussoorie pocket, where limestone kilns are emitting 
large clouds of white particles. 
4. Deforestation due to the wood-processing industry and 
increased firewood demand. 
5. Declines in the numbers of valued species of birds, 
animals and fish. 
A major cause for this decline in environmental quality is 
the increasing population of people and livestock in the Valley. 
For example, growth rate of the Dehra Dun urban agglomeration 
between 1971 and 1981 was 44%, which was higher than the national 
average (DOE, 1984). 
The principal factors that could be identified as causing 
the environmental deterioration are: 
-- limestone quarrying 
-- limestone burning (cottage industry) 
-- limestone processing (chemical industry) 
-- other industrial activities (e.g., sugar refining) 
-- transportat ion 
-- population increases, particularly migration into the Dehra 
Dun agglomeration, leading to: 
a. deforestation 
b. intensified agrculture/animal husbandry 
c. increased domestic consumption of water 
Industrial development of the Doon Valley requires a 
thorough understanding of the carrying capacity of the region. 
As was suggested in Fig. 4-3, however, carrying capacity is 
not a fixed quantity but depends on: 
-- the levels of environmental quality deemed to be acceptable 
by society; 
-- the lifestyle expectations (incomes, food, shelter, edu- 
cation, etc.) of society; 
-- the investments (local, regional, national) that society is 
prepared to make on environmental protection and pollution 
control equipment; 
-- externalities such as new technologies, changes in world 
trade patterns, etc. 
From the point of view of carrying capacity, the most 
limiting factor for further industrial development in the Doon Valley is the current lack of water during the dry season. 
Although monsoon rains are very large, most of the water evap- 
orates or is lost as runoff. The highest priority should 
therefore be given to water management. In particular, there is 
need to design engineering works that will improve the water 
storage capacity of the Valley. These facilities must be based 
on understanding, monitoring and modelling the hydrologic cycle. 
Several practical suggestions for improving the hydrologic 
carrying capacity of the watershed are as follows: 
-- Control of future tubewell development (e.g., staggering of 
wells to tap different aquifers); 
-- Construction of underground water storage systems; 
-- Discouragement of plans to locate water-intensive industries 
in the Valley. 
-- Reduction of monsoon runoff, e.g., through afforestation. 
Other carrying capacity factors that limit development in 
the Valley include: 
-- Human and livestock populations; (By improving environ- 
mental and economic conditions, planners may encourage 
immigration, severely taxing the carrying capacity of 
the region.) 
-- The poor assimilative capacity of the Valley atmosphere, 
during the dry seasons, placing an upper limit on the 
pollution that can be emitted if air quality standards are 
to be met; 
-- Availability of arable lands; 
-- Milk and fuel wood; (These products cannot be imported 
economically into the Valley, and thus there is an upper 
limit to the population that can be sustained unless 
improved or alternative technologies are used.) 
-- Livestock populations; (If stall feeding were introduced, 
the forestry carrying capacity of the Valley would be 
increased with respect to this factor.) 
-- Economic factors such as transport costs to distant markets 
and within urban areas, energy costs, availability of raw 
materials, waste disposal facilities, etc. 
In all of these cases, carrying capacity/sustainability studies 
need to be undertaken, based on a system approach, in which 
appropriate simulation models are adapted and calibrated for use 
in the Valley. 
In particular, there is a clear need for the development of 
an air quality management strategy. Industry is presently a 
major offender in the industrial area north of Dehra Dun City. 
However, the relative contribution of industrial sources to the 
general air pollution loading of the Valley is not known. Some of the concrete steps that need to be taken, are given in the 
Work Plan for Phase 11. 
Turning now to the broader topic of environmental management 
(including the management of impacts not caused by industry), a 
number of important ideas were developed at the Advisory 
Committee meeting March 3-5, 1986. 
First, the conceptual frameworks given in Figs. 4-1, 4-2 and 
1-3 may be helpful. Secondly, the practical measures discussed 
in Section 7 for reducing monsoon runoff and soil erosion should 
be promoted. Many of these ideas have already been implemented 
to a certain extent but consideration might be given to providing 
additional encouragement. Local enthusiasm to help solve the 
environmental problems of the Valley is very high; this pool of 
good will is an important resource for the future. Thirdly 
further attention should be given to long-term programs that 
would reduce migration into the cities. Some possibilities 
include: 
-- Food processing. This is recommended because it makes 
use of locally available fruit and vegetables, and can 
be undertaken in the countryside. 
-- Cottage industries (handicrafts, furniture, etc.). These 
industries have the advantage that they are generally 
non-polluting. 
-- Education and research. 
-- High-technology industry. It should be noted, however, 
that other areas in India may be better situated in this 
regard, and it will be important to try to find a specific 
niche for the Doon Valley. 
Finally, some suggestions made by a forestry subgroup at the 
Advisory Committee Meeting should be mentioned: 
(a) Afforestation of village lands and outer Himalaya lands 
should be accelerated. There is the prospect that 
most of the reserve forest land in the Doon Valley will 
be included in a national park. Thus there may be a 
rapid increase in demand for firewood from other areas, 
amplified by the ever growing population. Fuel wood 
requirements may simply not be sufficient. Targets 
must be set on species, locations and management 
criteria. For this program to work, stall feeding 
of animals needs to be commenced in order to reduce 
grazing losses. In determining location, it will be 
important to select villages where the people are 
likely to be receptive. It will also be helpful to 
check the comparative productivity efficiencies (the 
fodder/milk ratios) of buffalo and cows. (Buffalo do 
not graze and therefore are preferable to cows in terms 
of forest management.) It is understood that some FA0 
demonstration forests exist in India; these may serve 
as examples. (b) Agro-forestry projects incorporating recycling of 
organic fertilizers and provision of fuelwood to 
villages should be enlarged. Tree species to be 
considered include: 
(1) for fodder- Macaranga peltata, Grawia, 
Robinia 
(2) for nitrogen fixation- Acacia, Ailanthus, 
Celtis australis 
(c) Development of a leather business (tanning and pro- 
cessing) would remove some pressure from animal 
grazing, particularly among older animals. Then wattle 
(Acacia) plantations should be encouraged to produce 
tannin (for curing hides) as well as for fuel wood. 
(Rural Technology Institute, Wardha, Maharashtra; 
Central Leather Research Institute, Madras; State 
Industry Development Corporation, Lucknow). The 
leather-processing industry is non-polluting, and the 
tanning industry can be designed to be non-polluting. 
(d) In the implementation of forestry projects, women 
should be trained and involved because they are often 
the active members of society in collecting firewood 
and fodder, and have a vested interest in forest 
management . 
(e) Industrial opportunities exist in the forest sector 
that ought to be exploited: 
-- charcoal production by rural workers for consump- 
tion by urban low-income population 
-- manufacture of energy-efficient stoves, a decen- 
tralized small-scale industry 
-- production of carbonated waste material. 9. A WORE PLAN FOR PHASE I1 
9.1 Introduction 
While Phase I attempted to make a qualitative assessment of 
the environmental situation in the Doon Valley, the second phase 
will provide more quantitative information, particularly with 
respect to the various options available for industrial develop- 
ment. According to UNIDO, the parties involved in the second 
project phase are likely to be: 
as financial sources - UNIDO and possibly the GDR 
government - the Government of India 
as executing agency - UNIDO 
as sub-contractor - IIASA 
as project counterpart- Department of Environment, 
Government of India 
as Indian expertise - Indian Environmental Core Group, 
Jawaharlal Nehru University, 
Central Pollution Control 
Institute, Hardwar, Meteorological 
Department, GDR, etc. 
Phase I1 is likely to last about 18 months; policy rec- 
ommendations that are more quantitative than was possible in 
Phase I can be expected after the first 6 months. 
The proposed work plan for Phase I1 will comprise the 
following elements: 
1. Work to be carried out by IIASA (including collabora- 
tive studies in the GDR on water management) 
a. activities during first 6 months 
b. activities during the remaining Phase I1 period 
2. Work to be carried out by the Indian Government 
a. expected counterpart inputs for la and lb 
b. independent activities for obtaining long-term 
statistical information 
c. activities for building-up a national environ- 
mental core group and monitoring system 
3. Work to be carried out by other bodies, with respect to 
environmental management of the Doon Valley, but not 
related directly to industrial development. 
In this connection, the Indian Core and Support Groups and IIASA 
should play a coordinating role to ensure program integration. It is strongly recommended that serious efforts be made to 
ensure that all of the studies discussed below are carried out. 
9.2 Air Quality Manapement 
Air quality management studies should be given high priority 
in Phase 11. The evidence presented in Section 6.2 supports the 
idea that the assimilative capacity of the valley is often 
greatly reduced. The following studies should therefore be 
undertaken: 
9.2.1 Climatological analyses 
Historical time series of twice-daily observations from the 
five climatological stations in the area and of pilot balloon 
observations from the Dehra Dun City station should be analyzed 
in the usual ways for spatial wind and temperature patterns. 
These patterns are needed in order to develop appropriate air 
pollution models. 
Responsibility: IIASA 
Timing: First 6 months of contract 
9.2.2 Establishment of continuously recording 
meteorological stations 
Three continuously recording meteorological stations should 
be established: 
-- at the Field Station of the Central Soil and Water Conser- 
vation R. and T. Institute; 
-- at a location 200 m above the valley floor (to detect 
temperature inversions); 
-- at Mussoorie. 
Hourly wind and temperature observations should be taken at these 
stations, as well as 24-hour high volume sampler measurements. 
Data from these stations are essential inputs into the air 
pollution models. 
Responsibility: Indian Meteorological Department 
Timing: As soon as possible 
9.2.3 Infrared temperature measurements 
As pointed out by Dobesch (see Volume 3 of this Report), it 
may be possible to use remotely-sensed and other infrared imagery 
to obtain snapshots of the variations in ground temperature 
throughout the Valley. This is not an easy task, of course. It 
will require first, the use of complex algorithms to remove the 
effects of horizontal variations in vegetation biomass, surface 
roughness, etc. and second, ground-truth observations at several 
points in the Valley. The approach is promising, and the desired output is 
certainly important; given the variations in surface temperature 
across a region, it is possible to infer the wind patterns and 
thus the air pollution field. It is recommended that the Indian 
Institute of Remote Sensing be invited to undertake the study. 
In this connection, Dr. Dobesch is of the opinion that in order 
to calibrate the system, more detailed information on land use 
will be required than is currently available at IIASA. 
Responsibility: Indian Institute of Remote Sensing with 
Dr. Dobesch as advisor 
Timing: Over full contract period 
9.2.4 A short-term meteorological field program 
A 4-week field campaign should be undertaken. This should 
be scheduled for the dry season, preferably October or November, 
and should include: 
(a) Measurements of the inversion structure over the centre 
of the valley, obtained with a minisonde or an acoustic 
radar (Kumar et al., 1986). 
(b) Automobile temperature traverses through the valley 
--particularly in the western sector, where the 
promontory Lachhiwala may block the ventilation of the 
valley. 
Responsibility: IIASA plus Indian Department of the 
Environment and Prof. B. Padmanabhamurty, 
JNU 
Timing: First priority in October-November, second priority 
in April-May 
9.2.5 Air pollution observations 
In addition to the high-volume sampler observations 
mentioned in Section 9.2.2 above, a portable monitoring station 
should be used to obtain hourly measurements of the range of 
pollutants for which air quality standards exist. Measurements 
need not be made during the monsoon season. These data are 
needed for comparison with model predictions. 
Responsibility: Indian Department of the Environment and 
Pollution Control Research Institute, 
Hardwar 
Timing: As soon as possible 
9.2.6 Emission inventory 
An emission inventory should be carried out as soon as 
possible. This should include: 
-- locations of all industrial chimneys, and provisional 
estimates of emissions (mass per unit time). -- locations of significant transportation line sources, and 
provisional estimates of emissions as a function of time of 
day and day of the week. 
-- locations of significant domestic area sources, and pro- 
visional estimates of emissions as a function of time of 
day, day of the week and season. 
-- locations of significant rural area sources, e.g., burning 
of agricultural wastes, as a function of season. 
Responsibility: Pollution Control Research Institute, 
Hardwar 
Timing: As soon as possible 
9.2.7. Development of mesoscale multiple-source 
air pollution models 
As suggested as a first step by Piringer (see Volume 3 of 
this Report), a simple air pollution box model should be adapted 
for use in the Doon Valley. This would provide estimates of 
areally averaged concentrations for the main pollutants but would 
not give any information on hot spots. 
The box model could be adapted from one already existing at 
the Central Institute for Meteorology and Geodynamics in Vienna, 
and it could become operational shortly after an emission 
inventory (see Subsection 9.2.6) became available. 
Responsiblity: IIASA/Central Institute for Meteorology 
and Geodynamics 
Timing: First 6 months 
As a second step, a Gaussian multiple-source plume model 
adapted to valley situations should be applied to the Doon 
Valley. This work could be undertaken at the Central Institute 
for Meteorology and Dynamics, including training (1 month) in the 
use of the model by an Indian scientist. 
Responsibility: IIASA/Central Institute for Meteorology 
and Dynamics 
Timing: Second 6 months 
There remain two important tasks that could not be under- 
taken until late 1987 after the data mentioned in Subsection 
8.2.1 to 8.2.6 are collected and analyzed: 
-- Episode modelling 
-- Calibration of the box and multiple-source models on the 
basis of observed values. Responsibility: IIASA/Central Institute for Meteorology 
and Geodynamics 
Timing: Final 6 months of contract 
9.2.8 Economic studies of the cost-effectiveness of various 
pollution control strategies 
The multiple-source air pollution models will give an idea 
of how to maximize air quality for given air pollution 
emissions. However, there is need for an associated economic 
submodel that could be used to determine the costs of the 
resulting control strategies. 
Responsibility: IIASA 
Timing: Final 6 months 
9.3 Water Management Studies 
The contribution of S. Kaden in Volume 3 of this Report 
forms the basis for the following proposals with respect to Phase 
I1 water management studies. During the meeting of the Advisory 
Committee, it became clear that if engineering measures were not 
taken, ground-water would probably be the most serious limiting 
factor for further industrial development in the Doon Valley. 
The following recommendations therefore must be given very high 
priority. It is proposed that most of the work will be done by a 
separate contract between UNIDO and Dr. Kaden in the Institute 
for Water Management (IWM), Berlin, GDR. Some preliminary 
discussions have already taken place. 
9.3.1 Preliminary survey and collection of additional data 
As a first step, all relevant data on geography, hydrology, 
hydrogeology, etc. will have to be collected and analyzed. This 
will require a 2-week visit to the Doon Valley by Dr. Kaden. In 
particular, there is a need for flow rates of the Ganga and 
Yamuna rivers. 
The survey will provide guidance on whether additional 
short-term field observations are necessary during the monsoon 
and/or the dry periods. 
Responsibility: IIASA, IWM 
Timing: First 6 months 
9.3.2 Water balance model 
A general water balance model of the Doon Valley, covering 
all relevant subprocesses of the hydrological cycle should be 
developed for monthly mean values. 
Precipitation patterns are well known. For evapotrans- 
piration, semi-empirical models may be applied based on available 
geographical and climatological information. To describe the 
distribution of total runoff into surface runoff, infiltration, baseflow, etc., simple conceptual models (with lumped parameters) 
can be used. 
Responsibility: IIASA/IWM, GDR 
Timing: First 12 months 
9.3.3 Groundwater flow model 
A groundwater flow model for the Doon gravel should be 
developed. This model should consider distributed parameters, 
the interrelationship between surface water and groundwater, and 
time-dependent recharge. In view of the lack of data, a simple 
finite-difference flow model is recommended. 
Calculations with this model would increase our knowledge of 
water resources processes and could be used for designing 
monitoring and exploration programs. Such programs should be 
started as soon as possible in order to gain a better under- 
standing of the functioning of the system. 
An improved groundwater flow model could help in the design 
of a controlled system of groundwater extractions, including 
design scheduling of artificial groundwater recharge. This model 
could be used operationally for control of groundwater extraction 
rates and the design of new installations. 
Responsibility: IIASA/IWM, GDR 
Timing: First 12 months 
9.3.4 Water management modeling 
Depending on the success of the process modeling mentioned 
above, a more management-oriented planning model should be 
developed in 1987 as a tool to find rational strategies for 
long-term development. The model should be capable of dealing 
with: 
-- controversy among different water users, socioeconomic 
development and environmental quality, 
-- multiple criteria for evaluating strategies in cases where 
some of the criteria can not be evaluated quantitatively, 
-- uncertainties and the stochastic character of system input 
(e.g. precipitation). 
To meet these requirements, a model should be developed that 
combines a multi-criteria analysis for planning periods of more 
than one year with stochastic simulations of system behaviour 
using monthly time steps. The model should be highly interactive 
and user-friendly. Computer color graphics should be used for 
the visual display of results. If these features are not 
included, decision makers will not use the system. Responsibility: IIASA/IWM, GDR 
Timing: Final 6 months 
9.4 Studies Relating to Regional Management 
At the Advisory Committee Meeting on 3-5 March 1986, a 
subgroup elaborated the conceptual regional assessment and 
land-use management frameworks as described in Section 4. These 
ideas need to be refined in several ways: 
-- through presentation of the frameworks to the Indian Core 
and Support Groups and to representatives of research and 
public bodies in the Doon Valley; 
-- through elaboration of a manageable matrix on activities - 
VECs-VDCs-VACs (see Section 4.5); 
-- through practical use by the Core Group and other bodies 
concerned with the promotion of better regional management 
in the Doon Valley. 
If the various issues in the Doon Valley of concern to the local 
residents and to the government of India can be viewed within a 
comprehensive ecological framework, the task of land-use manage- 
ment will be greatly simplified. 
In addition to these general remarks, there is a clear need 
for detailed studies of the ecological sustainability of the Doon 
Valley for various development goals and life styles. This work 
will require inputs from the sectoral studies, e.g., in air 
quality, groundwater and forest management, but these inputs will 
need to be coordinated in order that they can be pieced together 
later. 
Particular attention should be given to studies in which the 
consequences of alternative industrial development pathways are 
compared. These studies will have to include economic analyses 
because in principle, the pollution emissions from any given 
industrial enterprise can be made as small as desired -- but at a 
price which in some cases may be too high. 
Some of the alternative industrial development pathways that 
might be examined include the following: 
1. Major industrial development, using state-of-the-art 
pollution control technologies; 
2. The creation of a technopolis providing incentives to 
non-polluting high technology factories, supported by 
an increasing number of colleges and research 
institutes. 
3. Major wilderness and recreation development, creation 
of a national park and discouragement of new industries 
from locating in the the Valley. These three pathways are of course extreme cases that are 
not likely to be realized. But an analysis of the possible 
outcomes should provide helpful guidance with respect to long- 
range industrial planning for the Valley. Other more detailed 
analyses will also be necessary, e.g., to determine whether a 
very few limestone quarries (5-10) under strict government 
control could be operated in an environmentally acceptable way. 
Responsibility: IIASA 
Timing: 18 months 
9.5 Forest Management 
At the Advisory Committee Meeting on 3-5 March 1986, a 
subgroup made a number of important recommendations with respect 
to the forestry sector. This is a critical sector with respect 
to the carrying capacity of the Valley, particularly if a 
national park is created in the Forest Reserve area of the 
Siwaliks, removing a significant supply of fuelwood. Some of the 
general proposals are given in Section 8. Other recommendations 
falling directly within the framework of Phase I1 of the Doon 
Valley Study are as follows: 
9.5.1 Forest growth models 
There is need for one or more forest growth models, whose 
outputs would be used as inputs into forest carrying capacity 
supply-demand models. Suitable model frameworks already exist 
but they need to be adapted so that their space and time resol- 
utions are appropriate for the supply-demand models. One such 
model that should be applied is described by Kairiukstis in his 
contribution to Volume 3. 
Responsibility: IIASA 
Timing: 12 months 
9.5.2 Forest carrying capacity models 
Because the carrying capacity of the forests is crucial to 
the future of the Doon Valley, the development of appropriate 
forest carrying capacity models should be given high priority. 
Section 4.7 outlined the work that should be undertaken, 
beginning with a linear programming model, to be followed by 
the development of a dynamic non-linear model. Another approach 
that should also be applied is described by Kairiukstis in his 
contribution to Volume 3. 
The task will not be easy. In this connection it should be 
emphasized that the goal is to provide practical assistance in 
managing the forests, and is not to build a bigger and bigger 
model. 
Responsibility: IIASA, with Prof. Nautiyal as advisor 
Timing: 18 months 9.6 Computer-Oriented Activities 
If the quantitative assessments described above are to be 
applied in a policy framework, they must be in user-friendly 
form. IIASA has had long experience with decision-support 
systems, and it is proposed to develop an integrated system of 
software tools to make the scientific basis for development 
planning and impact assessment directly available to planners, 
policy and decision makers. Using concepts of artificial 
intelligence coupled with more traditional methods of applied 
systems analysis (e.g., operations research, mathematical 
statistics) these tools are designed to provide easy and direct 
access to scientific evidence, and allow the efficient use of 
formal methods of analysis and information management by 
technical and non-technical users. 
On the basis of experience gathered during Phase I, and the 
detailed discussions during the Advisory Committee Meeting, 3-5 
March 1986, the following six directions should be emphasized in 
Phase 11: 
Preparation of operational atmospheric, hydrological 
and land-use models for the Doon Valley. These models 
must include the most essential features of industrial 
development impacts, and must be compatible with 
available data. Both simulation and optimization 
models have to be prepared. The latter ones will be 
essential for optimal allocation of industries and for 
analysis of various policies in forestry, land-use and 
water management. More information on models to be 
used in Phase I1 can be found in Volume I11 in papers 
by K. Fedra, S. Kaden, L. Kairiukstis and M. Piringer. 
2. The integrated set of software tools will form the core 
of a computer-based Environmental Assessment of 
Industrial Development for the Doon Valley. It will be 
based on methodologies developed at IIASA and will 
fully exploit modern computer technology. 
The study will concentrate on the integration of 
established techniques of environmental impact assess- 
ment, simulation modeling, data base management, 
operations research methodology, statistical methods of 
data analysis and model calibration, analysis of models 
under uncertainty, optimization techniques and modern 
computer technology including interactive color 
graphics and techniques of Artificial Intelligence. 
The basic idea is to draw together the components 
of a comprehensive assessment, such as the background 
data, descriptive and normative models for the analysis 
of what-if questions and the design of management 
alternatives, and decision-support methods. 
The basic functions of the system include: 
-- providing background information on the status quo 
and likely development options; -- design and analysis of feasible development 
policies (optimization of individual activities, 
designing/optimizing sets of coordinated activi- 
ties) and their environmental implications and 
consequences; 
-- and finally, the comparative evaluation of 
development alternatives and decision support 
(policy analysis). 
To facilitate the access to complex computer 
models for the more casual user, and for more exper- 
imental and explorative use, it appears necessary to 
build much of the accumulated knowledge of the subject 
areas into the user interface for the models. Thus, 
the interface will have to incorporate software that is 
capable of assisting any non-expert user to select, set 
up, run, and interpret specialized software. By 
providing a coherent user interface that makes inter- 
actions between different models, their data bases, and 
auxiliary software for display and analysis transparent 
for the user, a more experimental and educational style 
of computer use can be employed, allowing for easy 
exploration of alternative development policies and 
strategies in actual planning situations or for 
training purposes. 
Conceptually, the main elements of the system are: 
-- an Intelligent User Interface, which provides 
access to the systems' *workings for the user. 
This interface must be attractive, easy to 
understand and use, and to a certain extent 
provide the translation between natural language 
and human style of thinking to the machine level 
and back. This interface must also provide a 
largely menu-driven conversational guide to the 
system's usage (dialog-menu system), and a number 
of display and report generation styles, including 
color graphics and linguistic interpretation of 
numerical data (symbolic/graphical display 
system) ; 
-- the Information System, which includes the 
system's Knowledge and Data Bases as well as the 
Inference and Data Base Management Systems, which 
not only summarize application- and implemen- 
tation-specific information, but also contain the 
most important and useful domain-specific 
knowledge; 
-- the Model System, which consists of a set of 
models (Simulation, Optimization), which describe 
individual processes that are elements of a 
problem situation, perform risk and sensitivity 
analyses on the relationship between control and 
management options and criteria for evaluation, or 
optimize plans and policies in terms of their control variables given informat ion about the 
user's goals and preferences according to some 
specified model of the system's workings and rules 
for evaluation. 
-- the Decision Support System, which assists in the 
interpretation and multi-objective evaluation of 
modeling results, and provides tools for the 
selection of optimal alternatives with inter- 
actively defined preferences and aspirations. 
-- Model Calibration and Testing Module, which 
enables models to be adapted to available data, 
defines the most significant gaps in the data, 
scans the essential endogenous parameters and 
input variables. 
Recognizing the open-ended nature of such a 
project, we propose a well-structured cooperative 
effort that takes advantage of the large volume of 
scientific software already available. A modular 
design philosophy enables us to develop individual 
building blocks, which are valuable products in their 
own right, in the various phases of the project, and 
interface and integrate them in a framework which, 
above all, has to be flexible and easily modifiable 
with growing experience of use. Using an open archi- 
tecture concept, the demonstration prototype can be 
constructed at relatively low cost and with only 
incremental effort. 
The modular system will be structured around a 
major regional development model based on concepts of 
systems dynamics and rule-based simulation. 
This model will be augmented by a decision-support 
module for discrete multi-criteria optimization, i.e., 
the selection of preferred alternatives from a set of 
feasible options, generated through scenario analysis. 
This decision-oriented top-level will be connected 
to selected sectoral simulation and optimization models 
(e.g., individual industries, air quality, water 
resources, and possibly also forestry, agriculture, 
urban development, etc.). These models can either be 
used directly or they can provide input (aggregated 
parameters) to the top level. 
Both levels of models will be supported by data 
bases, which again can be used directly as an 
interactive information system. 
The above system will be complemented by the less 
detailed System of Ecological Forecasting (SEF), the 
first version of which was already tested in Phase I. 
The final version of SEF will be used for training 
activities. It is obvious that the quality of the final 
results will be determined by the quality of the models 
mentioned above and by the reliability of the input 
data. 
Basic software techniques for user interface 
design and systems integration, and an operational 
prototype of such an interactive software system will 
be available for demonstration at the very beginning of 
Phase I1 (See Volume 2). 
The transfer of this software to India will be 
simplified significantly if according to earlier plans, 
the Central Pollution Control Institute in Hardwar were 
to acquire the corresponding equipment (SUN 3/160C). 
3. Statistical methods will be one of the main tools in 
data analysis and model fitting. Therefore, the 
necessary set of programmes has to be prepared and 
transferred to the Indian Core Group. Statistical 
methods will also be used to construct optimal moni- 
toring networks. 
4. As has been emphasized many times, reliable data are 
crucial to the assessment. So data collection and 
improvement of the data bank will continue in Phase 11. 
5. The training component is,of great importance in this 
Project, especially with respect to computer-oriented 
activities. It is planned that Indian collaborators 
will visit IIASA several times in Phase I1 (the total 
length of these visits has to be at least 6 months). 
6. To ensure transfer of the most essential software, it 
is recommended that in the budget for Phase 11, funds 
be included to purchase an IBM PC-AT or equivalent IBM 
compatible computer. 
9.7 Related Studies (coordinated but not funded by the Project) 
9.7.1 Input-Output Studies 
As suggested in the contribution by Parikh in Volume 3 of 
this Report, input-output studies of energy and materials are 
urgently needed in order to estimate the ecological sustain- 
ability of the Doon Valley and of Dehra Dun City. 
Input-output studies of energy 
For different sectors in the Doon Valley having different 
energy consumption patterns, the energy flows need to be worked 
out. Referring to Parikh's contribution in Volume 3, her Fig. 2 
is a schematic representation with respect to the agricultural 
sector. Numerical values need to be estimated, and similar flow 
charts should be developed for the industrial, transportation and 
urban sectors. Various sorts of aggregation could then be 
undertaken as appropriate for particular scenario studies. Responsibility: To be decided 
Timing: Long-term 
Input-output studies of materials 
Following the ideas of Moench and Bandyopadhyay (1985) and 
in parallel with the input-output studies of energy, the material 
flows in the Doon Valley need to be worked out. Special con- 
sideration will have to be given to estimating the conversion 
rates to waste products and their disposal. 
Responsibility: To be decided 
Timing: Long-term 
9.7.2 Environmental Histories 
The results given in Section 4 demonstrate the contribution 
that an historian can make to the preparation of a land-use 
management plan or an environmental impact assessment. It is 
therefore recommended that one or two young Indian historians be 
sponsored at Duke University to work with Professor John Richards 
learning the basics of this new science. The historians would 
then become available to assist the Indian Core Group in the Doon 
Valley and elsewhere. This would strengthen greatly the capa- 
bility of the Core Group to sponsor studies of baseline con- 
ditions in areas of interest. 
Specifically, the research centered at Duke University would 
elaborate the ideas contained in Section 4 along the following 
lines: 
1. Expansion of the data base used in Section 4 to include 
the entire hinterland of Dehra Dun municipality. This 
will require a preliminary study to define the area in 
neighboring districts having intensive economic and 
other relations with the Dehra Dun population. 
Portions of districtssuch as Tehri Garhwal and other 
Kumaon hill districts must certainly be considered. 
Time series similar to those for Dehra Dun district can 
be developed for a larger economic and ecological 
region. If sufficient care is used, these time series 
can be pushed back to as early as 1860 or even 1840. 
2. Systematic and detailed research in the available 
records of the Forestry Department. This will provide 
rich information on the history of the forestry sector 
of Dehra Dun valley, and of the larger economic and 
ecological region. These data should help shape 
projections and estimates of longterm sustainability 
of the forestry sector. For example, it is possible to 
obtain year-by-year figures for fuelwood, timber, minor 
forest products, and other productive uses of the Doon 
forests. It is possible to follow detailed working 
plans on a plot-by-plot basis to determine the degree 
of change in the composition of the forest at twenty to 
thirty year intervals. In essence, this will be a process of retrospective monitoring for the forestry 
sector of the district. 
3. Close scrutiny of irrigation department, municipal, and 
other records to undertake retrospective monitoring of 
water supplies for human use, agriculture and industry. 
4. Further detailed research on changes in the domestic 
and wild animal populations and their relationship to 
environmental degradation. 
5. Detailed retrospective monitoring of limestone pro- 
duction and its demands and pressures upon the natural 
resources of the valley. It should be possible to 
collate annual time series data for raw material inputs 
and for lime outputs. 
6. Detailed retrospective study of transportation, 
migration and circulation patterns for the period under 
review. 
Meshing of documentary evidence and other data with 
land-use information available from satellite imagery 
for the Doon valley and its hinterland. It is 
especially important to obtain a clear and reliable 
land-use profile for the mid-1980s in order to work 
backward in time.. At the same time, such an interface 
will help achieve a corrected, or at least corrob- 
orated, portrait of current land-use. 
Responsibility: Prof. J. Richards supported externally plus 
some local currency 
Timing: 18 months 
9.7.3 Climate Change Studies 
9.7.3.1 Analysis of climatological time series 
Time series of daily climatological observations for 
the three valley stations, as well as for the hill station 
(Mussoorie) and the control station (Roorkee) were not available 
at IIASA in Phase I. It is recommended that very long (30 to 60 
yr! time series for these stations be acquired and analysed for 
evidence of recent changes in local climate. The elements to be 
examined are: 
-- Precipitation 
-- Temperature 
-- Diurnal range in temperature (a decrease in the range would 
indicate an increase in haze and smoke.) 
-- Visibility and frequencies of occurrence of various obstruc- 
tions to visibility. A search should also be made for crop-yield data, which 
might give a good indication of climatic trends. See con- 
tribution by Dobesch in Volume 3 of this Report. 
Responsibility: IIASA 
Timing: 18 months 
9.7.3.2 Investigation of the local impacts of global climate 
change over the next fifty years 
There is general agreement that the earth will warm during 
the next 50 years due to the increasing concentrations of carbon 
dioxide, methane and other "greenhouse" gases. The global 
warming is expected to average about ZC but there will be large 
variations from region to region. In areas such as the Doon 
Valley where there is considerable smoke and haze, long-term 
trends in concentrations 'of suspended particulate matter will 
also have to be considered in the assessment of climate warming. 
Numerical models of the atmospheric general circulation 
are being used in several countries to simulate the effect of a 
doubling of greenhouse gases. The outputs of these models are 
mean values, for each grid square (360 km x 360 km) on the earth, 
of temperature and precipitation, as well as frequency distri- 
butions of daily values. Although the spatial resolution of 
these models is subject to many uncertainties, the models do give 
at least a first estimate of how the climate might change in the 
next 50 years. Planners should not assume that present climate 
will continue. 
For Phase I1 of the Doon Valley assessment, it is proposed 
to acquire a set of climatological frequency distributions for a 
COz-warmed earth, specifically for the grid square containing 
Dehra Dun. These distributions can be obtained from one of the 
large computing centres producing three-dimensional atmospheric 
general circulation simulations. The data would be used to 
investigate the possible impacts on the Doon Valley of global 
climate warming. The output would contain practical advice for 
planners, who should not assume that present climate will 
continue. The study could also lead to some useful sensitivity 
analyses of biosphere sustainability to such changes (see, for 
example, Antonovsky and Korzukkin, 1986). 
Responsibility: IIASA 
Timing: 18 months 
9.7.4 Studies of Valued Ecosystem Indicators (VICs) 
As suggested by several persons, there is need to quantify 
the effects of human disturbances on selected valued ecosystem 
indicators (VEIs) in the Doon Valley. The output would be a 
model that could be calibrated with historical data on population 
densities, habitat availability and related factors and that 
could be used to provide estimates of the impacts of various 
proposed land transformation schemes on the VEIs. One such VEI is the game fish Mahseer, which is disappearing 
from the rivers and streams of the Doon Valley (see contribution 
by Tilak in Volume 3). Other recommended VEIs are the major game 
birds (pheasant, partridge, quail), which are particularly 
sensitive to disturbances in ground cover. A proposal to 
undertake a study of gamebirds has been made by P.J. Garson 
(University of Newcastle upon Tyne) (personal communications). 
This kind of work should be supported. 
Responsibility: Prof. P.J. Garson supported externally 
Timing: Long-term 
9.8 Some Recommendations to the Doon Valley Core Group 
1. It is recommended that Phase I1 of the Doon Valley 
study be undertaken, the work plan being that given 
above. Recognizing that the proposals contained in 
Section 9.7 do not fit into the UNIDO framework, it is 
recommended that the Indian Core Group, UNIDO and IIASA 
support efforts to seek alternate sponsors in such 
cases. 
Early in the course of Phase 11, a 3-day meeting should 
be held in the Doon Valley to present the results of 
the Phase I study, and to seek the collaboration of the 
local people involved. People to be invited to the 
meeting should include members of the Core and Support 
Groups to the Doon Valley Study, as well as represen- 
tatives of local organizations interested in sustain- 
able ecological and economic redevelopment of the 
Valley. 
3. It is recommended that the Pollution Control Research 
Institute in Hardwar be commissioned to undertake: 
(a) air pollution monitoring in the Doon Valley; 
(b) a preliminary inventory of emission sources. 
The Pollution Control Research Institute is already 
receiving technical assistance through UNIDO/UNDP to 
develop a pollution monitoring capability, and the 
Institute has been appointed to the group supporting 
the Indian Core Group of the IIASA study. State-of- 
the-art sampling and analysis equipment is available, 
and the Institute could play an important role in the 
air pollution studies planned for Phase 11. In this 
connection, the sampling strategy (siting of stations, 
sampling periods, etc.) should be designed to meet the 
needs of the air pollution meteorologists and 
modellers. It is therefore recommended that a small 
Air Pollution Working Party be established, consisting 
of: 
Dr. B. Padmanabhamurti from the Core Group 
(Chairman) Dr. B.B. Lal, Pollution Control Research Institute 
Drs. R.E. Munn and V. Fedorov, International 
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Dr. M. Piringer, University of Vienna 
4. The Indian Institute of Remote Sensing in Dehra Dun 
provides a unique facility for monitoring land-use and 
environmental changes in the Doon Valley. That 
Institute should be asked to play a major role in 
documenting present and future trends in the valley. 
5. Data Base Management 
In order to ensure an orderly information base for 
all parties to use, the following elements need to be 
assembled, collated and stored for easy access: 
-- Recent aerial photography and satellite imagery- 
scale 1:50,000 or better. (Indian Institute of 
Remote Sensing). 
-- Integrated land resource survey information on 
geology, topography, soils, vegetation, climate, 
and land use, using existing information and 
survey program where possible. (Central Soil and 
Water Conservation Research and Training 
Institute; National Institute of Hydrology; Wadia 
Institute of Geology; J. Nehru University). 
-- Relevant forestry reports, documents and data 
bases, including forestry growth, age and compo- 
sition data (U.P. Forest Department; Forest 
Research Institute). 
-- Preparation of computer map files of the above, 
permitting various kinds of overlays. One example 
of the striking visual displays that could be 
obtained is given in a Canada Forestry Service 
report, "Using Ecological Resouce Inventory" 
(Holland, 1984). 
6. A representative of the Uttar Pradash Forestry Depart- 
ment should be invited to join the Doon Valley Core 
Group. REFERENCES 
Antonovsky, M.J. and Korzukhin, M.D. (1986) Predictive models of 
forest ecosystem dynamics with applications to background 
monitoring, Collab. Paper, IIASA (in press). 
Asano, T. (ed.) (1985) Artificial Recharge of Groundwater, 
Butterworth Publishers, London, 767 pp. 
Atkinson, E.T. The Himalayan Districts of the North-Western 
Provinces of India, 3 vols. Allahabad: Government Press, 
1882-1886. 
Auclair, D. (1983) "Natural" mixed forests and "artificial' 
monospecific forests. Pages 71-82 in Mooney, H.A. and 
C.M. Godron. (Editors) Disturbance and ecosystems: 
Components of response. Springer-Verlag, New York. 
Babu, R. and Narayan, V.V.D. (1984) Stochastic model for 
prediction of annual peak discharge, in "Soil Conservation 
Annual Report," Central Soil and Water Conservation R. and 
T. Institute, Dehra Dun, pp. 31-32. 
Bahuguna, S. (1986) Himalayan tragedy. The Hindustani Times 
Sunday Magazine, 5 January, 1986. 
Baker, F. Final Report of the Ei~ht Revision of Land Revenue 
Settlement of the Dehra Dun District. Allahabad: Govern- 
ment Press, 1886. 
Bandyopadhyay, J. and Shiva, V. (1985) The conflict over 
limestone quarrying in Doon Valley, Dehradun, India, 
Env. Conservation l2, 131-139. 
Bandyopadhyay, J., Shiva, V. Ganju, M.N.A., Menon, A.G.K. and 
Nadir, K.L. (1984) The Doon Valley ecosystem, a report to 
the Department of Env., Government of India, 79 pp. 
Bandyopadhyay, J., Jayal, N.D., Schoettli, U. and Singh, C. 
(eds.) (1985) India's Environment, Natraj Publishers, Dehra 
Dun, 309 pp. 
Beanlands, G.E. and Duinker, P.N. (1983) An ecological framework 
for environment a1 impact assessment in Canada, FEARO, 
Env. Canada, Ottawa, Canada, 132 pp. 
Brouwer, F., Hettelingh, J-P. and Hordijk, L. (1983) An inte- 
grated regional model for economic-ecological-demographic- 
facility interactions, Papers of the Regional Science 
Association, 22nd European Congress, 52, 87-103. 
Champion, H.G. and Seth, S.K. (1968). A revised survey of the 
forest types of India. Government of India, New Delhi. 
404 pp. Chatterjee, P.C. (1980) Nomadic graziers of Garhwal in Singh, 
T. and J. Kaur. (Editors) Studies in Himalayan ecology and 
development strategy. The English Book Store, New Delhi, 
pp. 123-133. 
CSWCRTI (1984) Soil Conservation Annual Report, 1984, Central 
Soil Conservation R. and T. Instititute, Dehra Dun, India, 
241 pp. 
DOE (1984) Review of the Dehra Dun Master Plan, Government of 
India, Department of Environment, New Delhi, India, 45 pp. 
e FEARO/NAS (1986) Proc. Workshop on Cumulative Impact Assessment, 
Fed. Env. Assess. and Review Office, Env. Canada, Ottawa, 
Canada (in press). 
FRI (1984) Research achievements 1975-1984, Env. Res. Stations, 
Forest Research Inst. and Colleges, Dehra Dun, pp. 7-8 
Gupta, P.N. (1979) Afforestation, integrated watershed manage- 
ment, torrent control and land use development project for 
U.P. Himalayas and Siwaliks. U.P. Forest Department, 
Lucknow. 58 pp. 
Hall, C.A.S. and Day Jr., J.W. (1977) Systems and models: Terms 
and basic principles in Hall, C.A.S. and Day Jr., 
J.W. (Editors) Ecosystem modelling in theory and practice: 
An introduction with case histories. John Wiley and Sons, 
Toronto, pp. 5-36 
Heller, W.P. and Starrett, D.A. (1976) On the nature of 
externalities in Lin, S.A.Y. (Editor) Theory and measurement 
of economic externalities. Academic Press, New York, 
pp. 9-22 
Holland, W.D. (1984) Using Ecological Resource Inventory, 
Env. Canada, Ottawa, Cat. No. F042-68/1984E, 39 pp. 
Holling, C.S. (ed.) (1978) Adaptive Environmental Assessment and 
Management, John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, England. 
India (Republic), Director of Census Operations, Uttar Pradesh. 
Census of India, 1971, Series 21, Uttar Pradesh, Part IX, 
Census Atlas of Uttar Pradesh. Lucknow: Government Press, 
1978. 
India (Republic), Director of Census Operations, Uttar Pradesh. 
Dehra Dun District Census Handbook, 1961. Lucknow: 
Superintendent, Printing and Stationery, U.P., 1964. 
India (Republic), National Atlas Organisation, Resource Atlas 
Series: Atlas of Forest Resources of India, ed. S.P. Das 
Gupta. Calcutta: Government Press, 1976. 
Kalapesi, D.M. (1980) Understanding Himalayan ecology in 
Singh,T. and J. Kaur. (Editors) Studies in Himalayan 
ecology and development strategy. The English Book Store, 
New Delhi, pp. 10-26. Karajagi, B.B. (1985) Environmental appraisal of river valley 
projects in India - some procedural aspects, in "Indo-Soviet 
Workshop on Evaluation and Modelling of Impacts on 
Environment and Water Resources Projects," Central Board of 
Irrigation and Fower, New Delhi. 
Katiyar, V.S., Dadhwal, K.S., Arya, R.K. and Gupta, O.P. (1984) 
Structures for minespoil stabilization, In ICAR Soil 
Conservation Annual Report, Central Soil and Water Conser- 
vation Research and Training Institute, Dehra Dun, 
pp. 32-34. 
Kumar, A.R., Rao, M.P. and Murthy, J.S.R. (1986) The effect of 
sea breezes on atmospheric stability as observed with 
acoustic sounder, Boundary-Layer Meteorology (in press). 
Lal.1, J. (1986) The Tehri Dam project, The Statesman, 5.1.86. 
Maudgal, S. (1985) Environmental aspects of water resources 
development projects, in "Indo-Soviet Workshop on Evaluation 
and Modelling of Impacts on Env. of Water Resources 
Projects," Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi, 
pp. 49-66. 
Maudgal, S. (1986) Environmental impact assessment of water 
resources development projects in India, in Proc. Workshop 
on Assessment of Environmental Impacts: their Integration 
for Planning Water Resources Development Projects and Water 
Quality Modelling, Systems Eng. Unit, Central Water Comm., 
New Delhi, India, pp. 53-74 
Moench, M. and Bandyopadhyay, J. (1985) Local needs and forest 
resource management in the Himalaya, a, "India's 
Environment," Natraj Pub., Dehra Dun, pp. 53-77. 
MSM (1984) Review of mining/quarrying in Dehra Dun-Mussoorie 
region, Ministry of Steel and Mines, Department of Mines, 
Government of India, New Delhi, India, 55 pp. 
Munn, R.E. (1973) Secular increases in summer haziness in the 
Atlantic provinces, Atmosphere ll, 156-161. 
Munn, R.E. (1979) Environmental impact assessment in developing 
countries: principles and procedures, consultancy report to 
UNEP, Institute for Env. Studies, University of Toronto, 
Canada, 117 pp. 
Munn, R.E. (1982) Environmental impact assessment: a useful 
development tool? Mazingira 6, 66-73. 
Munn, R.E. and Rodhe, H. (1985) Air Chemistry and air pollution 
meteorology, Compendium of Meteorology Vol. 2, WMO No. 364, 
Geneva, 209 pp. 
Narayana, D.V.V. and Babu, R. (1983) Estimation of soil erosion 
in India, J. Irrigation and Drainage Eng. 109, 419-434. Nautiyal, J.C. and Babor, P.S. (1985) Forestry in the Himalayas: 
how to avert an environmental disaster, Interdisciplinary 
Science Rev. 10, 27-41. 
Nossin, J. (1971) Outline of the geomorphology of the Doon 
Valley, Northern U.P., India, Z. Geomorpholoay l2, 18-50. 
Planning Commission (1982) Report of the task force for the study 
of eco-development in the Himalayan region. Government of 
India, New Delhi. 152 pp. 
Ramade, F (1981) Ecology of natural resources. John Wiley and 
Sons, Toronto. 237 pp. 
Ramamurthy, M.K. (1985) Environment as a public interest cause: 
the case of Doon Valley, in, "India's Environment," Natraj 
Pub., Dehra Dun, pp. 241-244. 
Regier, H.A. and Baskerville, G.L. (1986) Sustainable redevelop- 
ment of regional ecosystems degraded by exploitive 
development, in, "Sustainable Development of the 
Biosphere," eds. W.C. Clark and R.E. Munn (in press). 
Richards, J.F., Hagen, J.R., and Haynes, E.S. "Changing Land Use 
in Bihar, Punjab, and Haryana, 1850-1970," Modern Asian 
Studies 19 (July 1985): 699-732. 
Richards, J.F., Haynes, E.S., and Hagen, J.R. "Changes in the 
Land and Human Productivity in Northern India, 1870-1970," 
A~ricultural History 60 (October 1985): 523-48. 
Sastry, G. and Narayana, V.V.D. (1984) Watershed responses to 
conservation measures, J. Irrigation and Dr. Eng., -, 110 
14-21. 
Sastry, G., Mathur, H.N. and Tejwani, K.G. (1981) Landslide 
control in northwestern outer Himalayas, Bull. No. R8/D6, 
Central Soil and Water Conservation R. and T. Institute, 
Dehradun, 35 pp. 
Saxena, P.B. (1972) Forests in Doon Valley, unpub. report, DBS 
College, Dehra Dun, 12 pp. 
Saxena, P.B. and Verma, S.C.V. (1981) Resource evaluation and 
economic planning in Dehra Dun Valley, Nat. Geographer l6, 
63-70. 
Sharma, R.P. and Sharma, M.K. (1983) Degradation of forest cover 
of Doon Valley. Forest Survey of India, Dehradun. 8 pp. 
Shiva, V. and Bandyopadhyay, J. (1985) People's environmental 
action for Doon Valley, India, Env. Conservation l2, 
273-274. 
Shiva, V., Bandyopadhyay and Jayal, N.D. (1985) :Ifforestation in 
India: problems and strategies, Ambio 13, 323-333. Shoemaker, C.A. (1977) Mathematical construction of ecological 
models in Hall, C.A.S. and Day Jr., J.W. (Editors) Ecosystem 
modelling in theory and practice: An introduction with case 
histories. John Wiley and Sons, Toronto, pp. 75-114. 
Singh, B.K. (1983) Studies on water and sediment quality from 
Mussoorie phosphate mining area, M.A. thesis, School of 
Env. Sciences, J.N. University, New Delhi. 
Singh, G., Babu, R. and Chandra, S. (1981) Soil loss prediction 
research in India, ICAR Bull. No. T-12/D-9, Central Soil and 
Water Conservation R. and T. Institute, Dehra Dun, 70 pp. 
Singh, G.D.S. (1973) Groundwater resources of Doon Valley, India, 
Proc. Int. Symp. on Development of Groundwater Resources, 
Vol. 5, 97-111. 
Singh, G., Joshi, B.P. and Singh, P.N. (1981) Water management ~ 
for high rainfall and seasonally dry regions, Bull. 
No. R-9/D-7, Central Soil and Water Conservation R. and 
T. Institute, Dehra Dun, 24 pp. 
Sonntag, N.C. (1984) Adaptive environmental assessment and 
management (ARAM) as a scoping tool, in Proc. Workshop, 
"Env. Planning for Large-Scale Development Projects," 
Env. Canada, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 80-92. 
Spence, R. (1985) Lime in Industrial Development: A UNIDO Guide 
to its Uses and Manufacture in Developing Countries, 
Sectoral Studies No. 18, UNIDO, Vienna, 75 pp. 
Stebbing, E.P. (1962) The forests of India (Vol. IV). Oxford 
University Press, London. 485 pp. 
Storr, D., Tomlain, J., Cork, H.F. and Munn, R.E. (1970) An 
energy budget study above the forest canopy at Marmot 
Creek. Alberta, 1967, Water Res. Research 6, 705-716. 
TCPD, UP (1982) Master Plan, Regulated Area, Dehradun, 1982-2001, 
Additional Information, Town and Country Planning Department 
U.P., Dehradun, India, 45 pp. 
Thompson, M. and Wharburton, M. (1985 Knowing where to hit it: a 
conceptual framework for the sustainable development of the 
Himalaya, Mountain Res. and Devel. 5, 203-220. 
Tilak, R. (1983) Research proposal to the Department of Environ- 
ment, from the Northern Regional Station, Zoological Survey 
of India, Dehra Dun, 24 pp. 
Tucker, R.P. (1982) The forests of the western Himalayas: The 
legacy of British colonial administration. Journal of 
Forest History. July 1982: 112-23. 
UNIDO (1985) Terms of Reference for assessment of industrial 
development impact on environment with special reference to 
the Doon Valley, India, Phase I, UNIDO, Vienna, 5pp. UPFD (1979) Watershed development and integrated management plan 
for the Himalayan and Siwalik region of Uttar Pradesh 
(India). Part I. Land Survey Directorate, U.P. Forest 
Department, Dehradun. 78 pp. 
Uttar Pradesh, Agricultural Statistics and Harvest Insurance 
Agriculture Department. Uttar Pradesh ke krishi ankare, 
1892-83 (Hindi: "bgricultural Statistics of Uttar Pradesh, 
1982-83"). [N.p.: Agricultural Statistics and Harvest 
Insurance Agriculture Department], 1984. 
Uttar Pradesh, Forest Department. Annual Administration Report, 
Annual Form, 1950-51 and 1960-61. N.p.: n.d. 
Varun, D.P. (ed.) (1979) Dehra Dun: Uttar Pradesh District 
Gazetteer, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow, India, 
107 pp. 
Walton, H.G. District Gazetteers of the United Provinces of Agra 
and Oudh: Dehra Dun. Allahabad: Government Press, 1911. 
Williams, G.R.C. Historical and Statistical Memoir of Dehra 
Doon. Roorkee: Thomason Civil Engineering College Press, 
1874. APPENDIX 1 
ADVISORY COMMITTEE MEETING 
ON THE IIASA/UNIDO PHASE I OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL 
ASSESSMENT OF THE DOON VALLEY, INDIA 
March 3-5, 1986 
IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria 
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS 
Guest Specialists 
BEANLANDS, Gordon 
Federal Environmental 
Assessment Review 
Office 
1318 Robie Street 
Halifax, Nova Scotia 
B3H 3E2 
CANADA 
Tel.: (902) 4247044 
BHAT, Nalini 
Indian Department of 
the Environment 
Bikaner House 
Shahjahan Road 
New Delhi 110011 
INDIA 
BORNSTEIN, Robert 
Department of 
Meteorology 
San Jose State 
University 
San Jose, California 
U.S.A. 
DOBESCH, Hartwig 
Central Institute for 
Meteorology and 
Geodynamics 
Hohe Warte 38 
1190 Vienna 
AUSTRIA 
Tel.: (0222) 364453/246 
DUFFY, Pat 
FEAR0 
13th Floor 
Fontaine Building 
Environment Canada 
Hull, Quebec, KIA OH3 
CANADA 
Tel.: (819) 997 1000 NAUTIYAL, Jagdish 
Faculty of Forestry 
University of Toronto 
203 College Street 
Toronto, M5S 1Al 
CANADA 
Tel. : (416) 9786196 
NIJKAMP, Peter 
Economics Department 
Free University 
1A-38 Hoofdgebouw 
1007 MC Amsterdam 
Postbus 7161 
THE NETHERLANDS 
Tel.: (020) 5484930 
PADMANABHAMURTY, B. 
Jawaharlal Nehru 
University 
School of Environmental 
Sciences 
New Delhi- 110 067 
INDIA 
PEGOV, Serguei S.A. 
All-Union Research 
Institute for System 
Studies 
Prospect 60 Let 
Octyabria 9 
117312 Moscow 
USSR 
PIRINGER, Martin 
Central Institute for 
Meteorology and 
Geodynami cs 
Hohe Warte 38 
A-1190 Vienna 
AVSTRIA 
Tel. : (0222) 3644530 RAMAKRISHNAN, P.S. 
Jawaharlal Nehru Univ. 
School of Environmental 
Studies 
New Delhi 110 067 
INDIA 
RICHARDS, John 
Department of History 
Duke University 
6727 College Station 
Durham, NC 27708 
U.S.A. 
Tel. : (919) 6843966 SCHWIRZER, Sabine 
Landschaftsplanung 
Umweltbundesamt 
Hauptstrasse 17 
1000 Berlin 62 
F.R.G. 
Tel.: (030) 8903689 
SREENIVASAN, Shri 
Jawaharlad Nehru Univ. 
School of Environmental 
Studies 
New Delhi 110 067 
INDIA 
UNIDO Representative 
PASCHKE , Jurgen H . 
United Nations Industrial 
Development Organization 
Vienna International Centre 
P.O. Box 300, A-1400 
Vienna, AUSTRIA 
Tel.: (0222) 26310 
IIASA Scientists 
FEDOROV, Valerie 
Principal Investigator, Doon Valley Study, Environment 
Program, ext-516 
FEDRA, Kurt 
Advanced Computer Applications, ext-484 
KAIRIUKSTIS, Leonardas 
Deputy Leader, Environment Program, ext-437 
KADEN, Stefan 
Water Project, Environment Program, ext-514 
LENKO, Miloslav 
Doon Valley Study, ext-305 
MUNN, Ted 
Principal Investigator, Doon Valley Study and Leader, 
Environment Program, ext-533 
PARIKH, Jyot i 
Food Agriculture Program, ext-554 
SERAFIN, Rafal 
Biosphere Project, Environment Program, ext-324 
TOTH, Ferenc 
Biosphere Project, Environment Program, ext-505 
INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR 
APPLIED SYSTEMS ANALYSIS 
A-23661, Laxenburg, AUSTRIA 
Tel.: (02236) 71521 
Telex: 079137 iiasa a APPENDIX 2 
LIST OF PERSONS CONSULTED IN INDIA 
REGARDING THE DOON VALLEY ASSESSMENT 
Drs. Munn and/or Fedorov have consulted the following 
persons in India with respect to the Doon Valley assessment. 
The Core Group for the Doon Valley IIASA/UNIDO Study 
Dr. S. Maudgal, Department of the Environment (Coordinator) 
New Delhi 
Prof. P.S. Ramakrishnan, Jawaharlal Nehru University 
New Delhi 
Prof. B. Padmanabhamurti, Jawaharlal Nehru University 
New Delhi 
Shri Sreenivasan, Jawaharlal Nehru University 
New Delhi 
Dr. V.V. Dhruva Narayana, Central Soil and Water 
Conservation Research and Training Institute 
Dehra Dun 
Lt. Col. P. Mishra and Prof. M.D. Shedha 
Indian Institute of Remote Sensing 
Dehra Dun 
Dr. (Mrs.) N. Bhat, Department of the Environment 
New Delhi 
The Support Group for the Doon Valley IIASA/UNIDO Study 
Dr. C.K. Gosh, Indian Meteorological Department 
New Delhi 
Dr. S. Chandra, Director, National Institute of Hydrology 
Roorkee 
Mr. B.B. Lal, Pollution Control Research Institute 
Hardiwar 
-e Shri A. Khurama, District Magistrate 
Dehra Dun 
Shri A. Kaushal, Nehru Yuvak Kendra 
Dehra Dun 
Mr. S.Talmar, Director, Ministry of Industries 
New Delhi 
Dr. R.V. Singh, President, Forest Research Institute 
Dehra Dun 
Others 
,e Dr. A. Agarwal 
Centre for Sciences and Environment 
New Delhi Dr. J. Bandyopadhyay, Doon Valley Ecosystem Study 
Indian Institute of Management 
Bangalore 
Dr. Bhandari, Deputy Director, Central Building 
Research Institute 
Roorkee 
Dr. A.K. Biswas, Consultant to UNEP on water projects 
in India 
Dr. S.N. Chaudhury, Pollution Control Research Institute 
Hardwar 
Dr. S.K. Das, Director, Indian Meteorological Department 
New Delhi 
Dr. R. Dayal, Forest Research Institute 
Dehra Dun 
A.K. Gupta, Pollution Control Research Institute 
Hardwar 
Dr. G. Van Ittersum, FA0 and Wildlife Institute of India 
Dehra Dun 
H.C. Jain, Pollution Control Research Institute 
Hardwar 
A.Khan, IRAM Computer Systems Pvt. Ltd. 
New Delhi 
Dr. T.N. Khoshoo, Tata Energy Research Institute 
New Delhi 
Dr. A. Khosla, Development Alternatives 
New Delhi 
Dr. M.L. Khybri, Central Soil and Water Conservation 
R. and T. Institute 
Dehra Dun 
Dr. G.P. Maithani, Forest Research Institute 
Dehra Dun 
Dr. Mitra, Indian Statistical Institute 
New Delhi 
Prof. C.H. Krishna Murti, Chairman 
Scientific Commission on Bhopal Gas Leakage 
New Delhi 
Dr. Y.D. Pendse, Central Water Commission 
New Delhi 
Prof. A.K. Roy, Indian Institute of Remote Sensing 
Dehra Dun 
Shri Sesham, Secretary, Department of the Environment 
New Delhi 
Dr. J.B.Sale, FA0 and Wildlife Institute of India 
Dehra Dun 
Dr. V. Shiva, Doon Valley Ecosystem Study 
Dr. Sreenivasan, Scientific Commission on Bhopal Leakage 
New Delhi B.K. Subba Rao, Forest Research Institute 
Dehra Dun 
Dr. N. Subramanyam, Central Water Commission 
New Delhi 
R. Swaminathan, Pollution Control Research Institute 
Hardwar 
Prem Thadhani, Proprietor, Hotel Gabriel 
Mussoorie 
Dr. R. Tilak, Deputy Director, Northern Regional Station 
Zoological Survey of India 
Dehra Dun 
N.C. Trehan, Pollution Control Research Unit 
Hardwar 
Prof. C.K. Varshney, Jawaharlal Nehru University 
New Delhi APPENDIX 3 
PROGRESS MADE WITHIN PHASE I 
WITH RESPECT TO SUPPORTING STRUCTURES 
IN INDIA, TRAINING OF INDIAN NATIONAL COUNTERPARTS 
AND INITIATION OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL DATA BANK FOR THE DOON VALLEY 
1. Establishment of Supporting Structure in India 
The Core Group and the Support Group for the Doon 
Valley IIASA/UNIDO Study were established in November, 
1985. 
The Core Group is a multidisciplinary scientific team 
comprising professionals in environmental sciences, socio- 
economics, meteorology, hydrology, forestry management, and 
computing. A list of its members is given in Appendix 2. 
The members of the Group made essential contributions 
to the data collection process and to a better understanding 
of the problems related to assessment of the environmental 
impacts of industrial development in the Doon Valley. They 
also contributed to Volume I11 of this report. 
In Phase 11, the Group will be responsible for forming 
alternative concepts of industrial development in the Doon 
Valley, together with IIASA's team. 
One of the major activities of the Group in Phase I1 
will be to transfer the methodology and software tools 
developed by the Project and to disseminate results in 
India. 
The objectives of the Support Group are to describe 
the major socioeconomical and environmental problems in the 
Doon Valley to the research teams, and to organize public 
and legislative support for the measures to improve environ- 
mental conditions that the Project will recommend. 
The members of the IIASA's team are highly appreciative 
of the effective help of the Support Group members in 
organizing their field trips. The list of members of the 
Group is given in Appendix 2. 
2. Training of the Indian National Counterpart 
The training component of the Project was mainly 
oriented to computer-related activities. 
The two sets of training programmes, "Interactive 
System for Design and Analysis of Simulation Experiments 
(ISSE)" and "System of Ecological Forecasting (SEF)" were 
transferred to the Indian Core Group. SEF is mainly 
for training purposes, but can be used for a preliminary 
assessment of the impacts of industrial and agricultural 
development on the environment. ISSE consists of two 
parts, PLAN and SYS. PLAN is the program for constructing optimal multifactor experiments on computers and SYS 
provides the tools for corresponding statistical analyses. 
Further details are given in Volume 111. The first versions 
of ISSE and SEF were transferred during the field visit of 
Prof. V. Fedorov (November-December, 1985). The final 
versions of these software were handed over to 
Mr. Sreenivasan (Indian Core Group member responsible for 
studies related to the software component of the Project) 
during his visit to IIASA. Both systems were demonstrated 
to a number of Indian representatives, including 
Dr. S. Maudgal (Director of the Department of Environment, 
Government of India), B.B. La1 (Director of the Pollution 
Control Institute, Hardwar), and members of the Indian Core 
Group visiting the Advisory Committee Meeting (March, 1986, 
IIASA); they positively evaluated these systems. 
Mr. S. Sreenivasan spent about three weeks at IIASA 
working with the members of the Project and other IIASA 
scientists. He participated in the preparation of various 
alternative scenarios of industrial development in the Doon 
Valley. Together with the Project's computer assistant, 
M. Lenko, he analyzed the majority of these scenarios on 
IIASA's VAX 11-780. They mainly worked with SEF and ISSE. 
Mr. Sreenivasan also participated in improving the Data Bank 
for the Doon Valley. In other words, participation in the 
computer- oriented activities was the prime component of his 
stay at IIASA. 
During the Advisory Committee Meeting (March, 1986) for 
representatives of the Indian Core Group (see the list of 
names in Appendix 2) two seminars devoted to the software 
activities were organized at IIASA. 
In the first seminar, ISSE and SEF were extensively 
discussed with a subsequent demonstration of their possi- 
bilities. In the second seminar, Dr. K. Fedra (Leader of 
the IIASA's Project on "Advanced Computer Applications") 
gave a lecture devoted to modern computerized approaches in 
decision making and demonstrated a prototype of the 
"Integrated System for Development Planning and Impact 
Assessment", which was proposed for implementing Phase I1 
of the Project (for details, see Volume 111). 
The training activities included the following lectures 
delivered by Prof. R.E. Munn during his field visit to 
India: 
- Environmental Impact Assessment (Central Water Com- 
mission) 
- Assessment of Industrial Development Impact in the Doon 
Valley (JNU) 
In the summer of 1986, the Young Scientist Summer 
Program will take place at IIASA. Details and invitations 
were sent to India (Department of Environment, Government of 
India and the Pollution Control Institute, Hardwar). 3. Initiation of the Environmental Data Bank for the Doon 
Valley 
The technical details of the data bank are given in 
Volume 11, together with some sample printouts. The data 
consist of two main blocks: 
- Statistical data block comprising various aspects of 
the Doon Valley geography, environment, economics, 
land-use, and demography. 
- Block of digitized maps, which will be used in the 
interactive decision-making support system. 
In Phase I1 it is planned to extend sections related 
to the meteorology and hydrology of the Doon Valley (see 
Chapter 8, this volume, and the contributions by Fedra, 
Kaden, and Piringer, Volume 11). 
It must be emphasized that this data bank could be of 
interest to other research groups and subsequent studies 
beyond the Project, providing for them a test ground for new 
approaches in environmental assessment. 
4. Guidelines for Establishing a National Environmental 
Monitoring Network 
Dr. S. Maudgal and his colleagues in the Government of 
India (Department of the Environment, Meteorological 
Department, etc.) are well aware of the need to ensure 
uniformity in the design of environmental monitoring 
networks, particularly with respect to: 
- Siting criteria. 
- Instrumentat ion. 
- Periodic field inspections and calibrations. 
- Quality control. 
- Management of large data banks. 
- User accessibility. 
Guidelines for operating specific types of networks are 
available from WMO, WHO, and other international bodies. 
Where applicable, these guidelines are being followed by the 
appropriate departments, agencies, and institutes in India. 
The only advice that can be offered is therefore the 
following: 
(1) As in many other countries, the responsibility for 
collecting environmental data is shared amongst several 
bodies. As a result, methods of storing and accessing 
information are not uniform, creating problems for the user. It is recommended that possible ways of over- 
coming this situation should be considered. 
(2) UNEP has established a facility in Geneva called 
GRID (Global Resource Information Data Base). Although 
still in an early stage of development, GRID will 
ultimately provide environmental data, ordered by 
geographic location and synthesized to answer specific 
questions posed by environmental managers. As is no 
doubt the case already, the Government of India should 
follow carefully the development of GRID, and should 
seek to ensure compatibility between GRID and its 
national environmental data management systems. APPENDIX 4 
LIST OF RELEVANT LOCAL, STATE AND NATIONAL 
STANDARDS, GUIDELINES AND REGULATIONS 
The information in this Appendix is incomplete. However, it 
does seem to be sufficient to demonstrate that there is adequate 
statutory authority to solve most of the problems existing in the 
Doon Valley on a case-by-case basis. In addition, as is 
mentioned in Section 3, citizen groups have the possibility of 
taking class actions to the courts (Ramamurthy, 1985). 
Rarajagi (1985) has summarized the main environmental 
regulations that apply in India as follows: 
Regulations Objectives 
1. Air (Prevention & 
Control of Pollu- 
tion) Act, 1981 This act provides for prevention, 
control and abatement of air pollu- 
tion through Pollution Control 
Boards. 
2. Forest (Conserva- State Governments have to obtain 
tion) Act, 1980 approval from Government of India 
before converting forest lands to 
non-forest lands. 
3. Water (Prevention Act providing for collection of a 
and Control of tax on water from certain indus- 
Pollution) Act, 1977 tries so as to augment the 
resources of Central and State 
Boards for Prevention and Control 
of Pollution. 
4. Insecticides (Amend- To regulate the import, manu- 
ment) Act, 1977 facture, sale, transport, 
distribution and use of 
insecticides. 
5. Water (Prevention This act envisages establishment of 
and Control of Boards for Prevention and Control 
Pollution) Act, 1974 of Water Pollution so as to 
maintain and restore wholesomeness 
of water. 
6. Wild Life (Protection) This act provides for the pro- 
Act, 1972 tection of wild animals and birds 
and for establishing sanctuaries, 
National Parks, Game Reserves and 
closed areas. * 
'Facilities for big game shooting in the Dehra Dun District 
(except for protected species such as tiger and leopard) are 
provided in the Jhabrawala and Barkot forest bloclis through 
permits obtainable from the Chief Wild Life Warden, Uttar 
Pradash (Varun, 1979). 7. Insecticides Act, 1968 To regulate the use of insecticides 
to prevent risk to human beings or 
animasl. 
8. Indian Forest Act, To protect the forests 
1927 and various State 
Acts 
Specifically relating to Uttar Pradesh State, an Act known as 
"Uttar Pradesh Rural and Hill Areas Tree Protection Act, 1976 
(U.P. Act No. 45, year 1976) controls the felling of trees in all 
rural and hilly areas of Uttar Pradesh, including the Doon 
Valley. 
In the book, "India's Environment" (Bandyopadhyay et al., 
eds., 1985, pp. 247--309), several authors discuss the efficacy 
of environmental regulations in India. The general view in that 
book seems to be that the regulations are sometimes inconsistent 
with one another, and are difficult to implement. These 
criticisms are not unique to India but are voiced by citizen 
groups around the world. However, there is no doubt that 
other countries have much to learn from India. The recent 
Supreme Court decision on Doon Valley quarrying, including 
payment of legal costs of the citizen group involved, is without 
precedent in most industrialized countries. SR-86- 1 
May 1986 
AN ASSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS 
OF INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT 
With Special Reference to the 
Doon Valley, India 
Phase I 
VOLUME I1 
SOFTWARE AND DATA 
I nternational Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
A-2361 Laxenburg, Austria 
UN l DO Contract No. 85/82 (US/G L0/85/039) 
Principal In ves tiga tors 
K Fedorov, R. E. Munn 
Con tribu tors 
P. Khomyakov, V. Kroutko, M. Lenko, S. Leonov, E. Nikitin, S. Pegov THE SIXUCTURE OF THE REPORI' 
(The Environmental Assessment) 
Environmentally-Related Issues 
Conceptual Framework 
Historical Trends 
Current Conditions 
Conclusion 
VOLUME I1 VOLUME I11 ; 
Environmental Impact - 
Assessment 
Modelling and Statistical - 
Analysis 
Recommendations and Suggestions 
made at the Advisory Committee - (Computer-oriented activities) 
Software Transferred 
to Indian Core Group 
Data Bank 
Computerized Maps - The present report (Phase I) contains three parts. 
Volume I covers a conceptual framework for environmental impact assessment 
of the Doon Valley, a description of present environmental conditions and past 
trends in the region, and a comprehensive work program and recommendations for 
Phase I1 of the project. To a great extent, Volume I summarizes the main findings 
of Phase I of the Project, reserving the presentation of details for the two other 
volumes. 
Volume I11 contains a collection of contributed papers which were presented 
at the Advisory Committee Meeting (March 1986, IIASA) and some proposals on 
future activities made by participants of this meeting. Some of the papers are 
rather general but the majority of them are devoted to specific aspects of the 
environmental assessment of the Doon Valley and supplement Volume I. 
The present volume (Volume 11) is devoted to computer-oriented results of 
Phase I, including a data bank. The potential users should be equipped with ele- 
mentary computer knowledge: this volume contains tools (more accurately, the 
instructions on how to use them) but not any final results. CONTENTS 
I S0F"IWARE TRANSFERRED TO THE INDUN CORE-GROUP 
PREFACE 
1 INTERACTIVE SYSTEM FOR DESIGN AND 
ANALYSIS OF SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS 
Introduction 
Structure of the Interactive System 
References 
Instructions for program PLAN 
Instructions for program SYS 
Instructions for subroutine STPRG 
Instructions for subroutine FORECAST 
Instructions for subroutine STRAN 
Example of one session with program SYS 
2 SYSTEM OF ECOLOGICAL FORECASTING 
Introduction 
How SEF is used 
How to generate the System 
References 
Appendix A 
List of regions for geographical input mode 
Appendix B 
Synopsis of the shadow dialogue commands 
Appendix C 
Description of system variables 
Appendix D 
List of variables accessible in direct output mode 
Appendix E 
List of system files 
Appendix F 
Example of one session 
3 EXAMPLES 
11 DATA BANK 
1 TABLES 
2 GRAPHICAL PRESENTATION OF MAPS OF DOON VALLEY 
- vii - I SOFTWARE TRAN-D TO THE INDIAN CORE-GROUP PREFACE 
The main efforts of the project during Phase I1 will be directed towards quan- 
titation of ideas and hypotheses on environmental conditions in Doon Valley. 
A number of models comprising various aspects of environmental dynamics are 
planned to adjust to Doon Valley's specific features. It is evident that models of 
different levels of detailedness will be necessary in order to analyze all possible 
alternatives for development of the region. Some of them can describe or (more 
accurately) simulate general tendencies in the valley, say, its average erosion or 
average soil productivity. Others can give more detailed results, such as dynamics 
of space distribution of pollutants or an admissible water management policy. 
To appropriately handle this variety of models, it will be necessary to have a 
special software. Here we will apply the existing methodology based on statistical 
ideas, usually referred to as "Analysis and Design of Simulation Experiments." 
(See, for example, Fedorov, 1983; Fedorov, Korostelev, Leonov, 1984; Naylor, 
1971 .) 
Part 1 contains a short introduction to the subject and a manual with a simple 
example. 
Part 2 is a short description of the "System of Ecological Forecasting" (SEF). 
This system can be used to analyze changes in environmental characteristics of 
geographically and economically homogeneous areas. In terms of references, SEF 
is planned to be a component of the project's training activities. 
Part 3 contains the most essential information from the Data Bank and a short 
description of computerized versions of Doon Valley maps. 1 INTERACTIW SYSTEM FOR DESIGN AND ANALYSIS 
OF SIhULATION EXPERIMENTS 
User's Guide 
S. Leonov, V; Fedorov 
VNIISI - IIASA 1. Introduction 
Computers make it possible to construct and run complicated mathematical 
models of complex systems (e.g., economic systems, ecological systems) which 
involve hundreds of inputs and equations. The links between the different vari- 
ables (inputs and outputs) and equations in these models are usually very difficult 
to follow, and this is complicated by the fact that the models are continuously being 
updated and improved by the incorporation of new mathematical features. Some- 
times models consist of modules (elements) prepared by different researchers, and 
this is one reason why mathematical models (or, more accurately, their computer- 
ized versions) occasionally become "mysterious" even to their authors. Analytical 
techniques prove to be practically useless in analyzing the properties of these 
models. Since it is not possible to obtain the required results in this way, it is 
natural to try another approach: one possibility is to carry out simulation experi- 
ments with the mathematical models themselves. 
The question of the effectiveness of these experiments and whether the 
chosen model adequately describes the empirical data arises at the very beginning 
of the research. To study this, "models" of the models are often constructed. In 
what follows the terms secondary model and primary model will be used in an 
attempt to avoid confusion. 
The construction of secondary models can also be stimulated by the fact that 
the primary models are frequently too detailed for the specific investigations that 
the researcher wishes to perform. For instance, to describe the behavior of a 
primary model over a relatively small range of input values, it might be sufficient 
to use a polynomial approximation of the model. One attractive feature of this 
approximation is that it then becomes possible to develop fast real-time interac- 
tive software. This type of software can be extremely useful to decision makers 
because it allows them to scan a lot of variants in a relatively short time. 
The types of problems that can be solved are indicated in Figures 1-3. Figure 
1 illustrates the possibility of testing or refining the primary model by applying 
the secondary model to initial data. Figure 2 explains the possibility of combined 
analysis of two systems. Figure 3 illustrates how primary models can be compared 
through approximation by the same secondary model. 
Initial 
data Primary 
model 
I Comparison 
t 
Straiehtf orward ~(z ,d) 
estimation 
Figure 1 Testing a primary model by applying a secondary model to initial data. b Secondary 
model ~(z ,d) - Figure 2 The combined analysis of two systems. ) 
System 0 Primary model 
I 
4 
Comparison Secondary model 
I 
Primary model 
11 
, .. 
Secondary model 
11 
> 
'"1 Primary model 
I + 
Figure 3 Comparison of primary models through approximation by the same 
secondary model. - Secondary model 
r] (2 s*) 
4G2 ... I Primary model 
11 4 Secondary model 
9 (2 I*) 2. Structure of the Interactive System 
The current version of the system contains two main programs: PLAN 
(intended for construction of experimental design) and SYS (intended for data 
analysis). These programs are indpendent of each other and are linked only 
through lnput - output files of data. It is necessary to point out that the treatment 
of any specific primary model requires an exchange module. This module makes it 
possible to repeatedly call the prlmary model varying input data. It must be men- 
tioned also that some potentialities notforeseen in the system may be assigned to 
the exchange module. 
3. Construction of Experimental Design 
While investigating the primary model, it is assumed that input variables x 
(factors or independent variables) are separated into groups according to: first, 
prior information on their nature, and second, the expected degree of their influ- 
ence on dependent variable(s) Y . The factors are usually separated into the fol- 
lowing groups: 
(a) Scenario and exogenuous variables; 
(b) Parameters of the model whose values are obtained on the stage of identifica- 
tion; 
(c) Variables known with "small" random errors; they may often be considered as 
random ones. 
The program PLAN can generate designs of different types for variables from 
different groups: 
- orthogonal design 
(i) two-level design X=IX ] ; Xij =+l, -1; X is Hadamard matrix, N=4k , k is 
+j an integer number (X X=h?IN, IN - Identity matrix ); 
(ii) three-level design X=IXij], Xij=+l,O,-1; X is conference matrix, 
N=4k +2 (xTx=(N-1)lN) 
In this version the following numbers of experiments for orthogonal 
design are possible: 
4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 32, 40, 44, 48, 52, 60, 64, 68; 
6, 14, 18, 26, 30, 38, 42, 54, 62. 
The orthogonal design is recommended for group i if a detailed investi- 
gation for the factors from i is required; - random design with two- and multi-level independent variation of factors (usu- 
ally used for the factors from group b); - random design with simultaneous variation of all factors of the group (may be 
applied for block analysis); - random design with continuous law of distribution: uniform and normal (may be 
applied for those factors which are known up to small random error). 
The criterion for design construction is the correlation coefficient of column 
vectors of X - matrix : the columns must have as small a correlation as possible. 
The design may also be generated (for some groups) in a purely random manner. 
There are two variants of the application of generated design X=Iqj ]: 
(i) X - matrix is written (row by row) into the auxiliary file HELP.DAT for appli- 
cation in the exchange module and further analysis of simulation experiment; (ii) the levels of factors may be set in the real scale: mean values and scale of 
variation are chosen by the user. The design in the real scale is obtained with 
the help of the evident formula: FNij =AidDj * (1 +ALFk *Xij), t =l,N. Here the 
j-th factor belongs to the chosen group k ; ALFk is a scale of variation for 
group k ; Wj is a mean value of the j-th factor. The matrix FN=iFNij 1 is 
stored (row by row) in the file HELP.DAT . 
4. Anslysia of Experiments 
The aim of the simulation analysis is the construction of a secondary model of 
the form: 
where y is a response function (dependent variable); a0,al, ..., ak are parameters 
to be estimated (regression coefficients); fl, ... ,fk are known functions depending 
on x - vector of input variables. 
Since k is usually large, one of the main problems of experimental analysis is 
the screening of significant factors. The following is the statement of the problem: 
input data is set - 
Zl,l z1,2 . . . z 1,m 
Z2,1 z2,2 "' Z~,m . . . . . . . . . . . . 
where N is a number of observations and m is a number of variables. One vari- 
able is taken as a response and is denoted by Y . Then k functions f1,f2, ...,fk, 
depending on the rest of the variables, are chosen. (They may be constructed with 
the help of some transformations - the set of the most usable transformations is 
provided by the program.) That is the final step in the formulation of the problem. 
Screening experiments can now be carried out. 
Here we shall enumerate the possibilities of the program: 
(1) Input variables can be separated into groups with the help of an identification 
vector; variables from only one group are analysed simultaneously, but the 
identification vector may be changed, and the groups easily rearranged. 
(2) It is possible to make transformations of factors, include their interactions, 
and take any variable as a response. 
(3) The program provides the stepwise regression procedure (subroutine STPRG): 
factors may be included into regression or deleted from the equation (Efroym- 
son, 1962). This program for screening significant factors is based on the 
subroutines from SSP - package (1970). Some modifications of these subrou- 
tines have been carried out for the implementation of interactive regime. 
Interpretation of input and output information in this module will cause no dif- 
ficulties for a user familiar with the SSP - package. 
(4) A user may obtain both statistics analogous to SSP - subroutines and some 
additional information, for instance, a correlation matrix of regression coef- 
ficients and a detailed analysis of residuals. 
(5) If a secondary model is used for interpolation or extrapolation (subroutine 
FORECAST), values of input variables (predictors) are chosen by the user and 
the standard errors of the prognoses are calculated. (6) A heuristic method of random permutations (subroutine STRAN) for testing 
significance of entered variables is provided by the program. (See Fedorov 
et al, 1984.) 
Program SYS utilises 3 files: SYSIN.DAT and SYSOUT.DAT for input and out- 
put information respectively, and an auxiliary file SYSST.OUT for intermediate 
information. 
REFERENCES 
Efroymson, M.A. 1962. Multiple Regression Analysis, in Mathematical Methods for 
Digital Computws, A. Ralston, H. Wilf (eds). New York: Wiley. 
Fedorov, V. 1983. Analysis and Design of Simulation Experiments for the Approxi- 
mation of Models. WP - 83 -71 . Laxenburg, Austria: International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis. 
Fedorov, V., A. Korostelev, S. Leonov. 1984. Analysis and Design of Simulation 
Experiments with Linear Approximation Models. WP - 84 - 74 . Laxenburg, 
Austria: International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis. 
Naylor, T.M. 1971. Computer Simulation Experiments with Models of Economic Sys- 
tems. John Wiley and Sons, N.Y., London. 
System/360 Scientific Subroutine Package, Version 3, Programmer's Manual. 1970. 
New York: IBM, Technical Publications Department. - 13 - 
Instructions for program FLAN. 
............................. ---------- 
Information on the terminal, ! ! Comments ! 
variable(s1 for input ! ---------- 
............................. 
1. A NUMBER OF GROUPS AND KG - a number of groups for experimental 
A NLIMBER OF FACTORS ? (KG,/) design, M - total number of factors. 
2. FACTOR IDENTIFICATION ? IN(i) (i=l,M) - an index of a group to 
(IN(i), i:l,l) which factor i belongs. 
3. A NLIMBER OF GROUPS FOR MCOR - a number of groups for which 
CORRELATION ANALYSIS, correlation analysis is executed 
INCLUDING ORT.GROUP ? (MCOR) (including orthogonal group) 
Message 4 appears, if KG ) MCOR . 
4. THEIR INDEXES ? NCOR(1) - indexes of the groups for 
(NCORli), i=l,MCOR) which corr. analysis is executed. 
5. WITH ORTHOGONAL DESIGN: 11~1 - with orthogonal design, 
YES - 1, NO - 0 ? (11) IIzO - without orthogonal design 
Messages 6 - 8 appear if 11~1 . 
6. ORTHOGONAL GROUP ? (NORT) NORT - an index of the group with orthogonal 
design. 
7. A CODE FOR ORTHOGONAL NXz2 - two-level (+I, -1) design is 
DESIGN: 2 - TWO-LEVEL DESIGN constructed, 
(N IS 4-TUPLE), 3 - THREE- NX=3 - three-level (+I, 0, -1) design 
LEVEL DESIGN (N IS 2-TUPLE) is constructed. 
( NX ) 
8. DESIRABLE N ? (N) If NX=2, N has the form: N=4k, k - integer 
(possible N appear on terminal) If NX=3, N has the form: N:4k+2. 
( Caution: N must be greater than 3 and less than 69 !!! ) 
9. GROUP CODES : 1 - IG(i) - a code for experimental design 
SIMULTANEOUS VARIATION, for group i: 
2 - TWO-LEVEL VARIATION, 1 - two-level (+I, -1) simultaneous variation 
3 - MULTILEVEL VARIATION, for all factors belonging to group i; 
4 - UNIFURM DISTRIBUTION, 2 - two-level (+I,-1) independent variation; 
5 - NORMAL DISTRIBLITION 3 - aul tilevel independent variation 
( see (10) 1: 
( IG(i), i=l,K6). 4 - factors from group i have unifora 
distribution ( see (13) 1; 
5 - factors from group i have normal 
distribution ( see (14) ). 
Messages 10-12 appear for each group with IG(i)=3. 
10. GROUP i. A NUMBER OF LEV(i) - a number of levels for group i. 
LEVELS ? (LEv(i)) 
11. LEVELS ? ~(1,i) - values of levels. 
(v(l,i), l:l,LEV(i)) 
12. PROBABILITIES ? P(l,i) - corresponding probabilities. 
(P(I,~), I:~,LEv(~)) 
Message 13 appears for each group with I6(i)=4. 
13. GROUP j , INTERVAL Factors from group j are uniformly 
OF VARIATION - (-A,A). distritruted on (-A, A). 
YOUR *A* ? 
Message 14 appears for each group with IG(i)r5 14. GROUP 1, HEAN = 0, Factors from group 1 are normally distributed, 
STANDARD DEVIATION ? (BNOR(1)) BNOR(1) - standard deviation. 
Hessage 15 appears if 114 ( see (5) ) 
15. HINIHAL AND HAXIHAL NN, NIAX - minimal and maximal numbers 
NUMBERS OF EXPERIHENTS ? of experiments are arbitrary ( no orthogonal 
(NN, NHAX) design 1 
16. DO YOU NEED TO WORK WITH JWRz1 - see (17-18). 
THE VECTOR OF HEANS ? (JWR) JWR=O - see (19). 
Hessages 17-18 appear if JWR=l. In that case the levels 
of factors are chosen by the user and set in the real scale 
(see introduction) 
17. GROUP COEFFICIENTS ? ALF(i) - group coefficients. 
(ALF(i), i:l,K6) 
18. VECTOR OF HEANS ? AHD( j) - vector of means. 
(AHD(j1, .i=l,l) 
i In that case the value FN(i,j) of factor j in i-th experiment equals to: 
FN(i,j) : AHD(~) * (1 + ALF(k)*X(i,j)), 
here X(i, j) - constructed design, k - an index of the group to which 
factor j belongs 1. 
13. TO THE BEGINNING - 1, IBNzl - go to (I), 
TO THE END - 0 ? (IBN) 1BN:O - STOP. 
Instructions for program SYS (Analysis of the simulation experiment) ...................................................................... 
Information on the terminal, ! ! Comments ! 
variablek) for input ! ---------- 
............................. 
1.NUHBER OF OBSERVATIONS ? (N) N - total number of observations 
under analysis 
2.TOTAL NLIHBER OF VARIABLES ? HTOT - total number of variables (factors) 
3. IDENTIFICATION VECTOR ? Variable i belongs to block IDNTF(i) 
(IDNTF(~) ,i:l,lTOT) Caution: format - 1011 ! ! ! 
4. A VARIABLE NUMBER AND SCALE ? Scaling of variable KSCAL is made: 
(KSCAL, SCAL) X(KSCAL)::: X(KSCAL) * SCAL 
TO STOP INPUT - TYPE 0 0 
5. BLOCK FOR ANALYSIS ? (NBL) Variables from block NBL will be analysed 
( Caution: total number of variables in the block, including transformations 
and interactions, must be less than 60 ! ! ! ) 
6. TRANSFORMATION OF INDEPENDENT ITRz1 - see (7), 
VARIABLES: YES - 1, NO - 0 ? ITRzO - goto (8). 
Hessage 7 appears if 1TR:l. 
7. TABLE OF TRANSFORIATIUNS: 
1. 1::: X*X 5. 1::: LN(X) 
2. 1::: Sqrt(X) 6. X::: 1/X 
3. 1::: ABS(X) 7. 1::: Arctg(1) 
4. 1::: Exp(X) 
INPUT: VARIABLE NO., TRANS. NO. A new independent variable X(new) is 
(KT, NLIHTR) created: variable KT is transformed 
(it must belong to block NBL !!!I, transformation NUHTR is carried out, 
IDNTF(new1::: NBL. 
8. DEPENDENT VARIABLE ? (NUIDEP) NUMDEP - dependent. variable (response function) 
9. YITH INTERACTIONS: YES - 1, 1NTER:l - if variables i, j belong 
NO - 0 ? (INTER) to block NBL, a new indpendent variable 
is created: X(new)::: X(i)*X(j) 
10. STEPNISE ANALYSIS: IAN=O - Efroymson procedure is executed 
EFROYMSON PROCEDURE - 0, (see STPRG - instructions); 
WITH PERIUTATIONS - 1, , IAN=l - stepwise regression with permutations 
ANALYSIS AND FORECAST - 2, is executed (see STRAN - instructions), 
END OF TASK - 3, it is reconmended after STPRG ; 
ANOTHER OPTION - 4 IAN=2 - forecasting is executed 
(see FORECAST - inst.ruc tions) , caution: 
(IAN) it must be used just after STPRG !!! 
IANz3 - Stop, 
IAN=4 - go to (111 
11. INNOVATION OF IDENTIFICATION 111~0 - go to (5) (new block may beanalysed) 
VECTOR: NO INNOVATION, Ill11 - go to (12) (identif. vector nay be changed) 
NEW ATTEMPT - 0 111.2 - go to (3) (total innovation of identif. vector) 
PARTIAL INNOVATION - 1 11113 - go to (10) 
TOTAL INNOVATION - 2 
ANOTHER OPTION - 5 
( 111 ) 
Message 12 appears if 111~1. 
12. INPUT: VARIABLE AND NEW Partial innovation of identification vector: 
BLOCK NUMBER ? (TO STOP if 0 ( KK ( !TOT, then IDNTF(KK):NEYBL 
INPUT - TYPE 0 0 ) if KK=O, go to (8) . 
( KK, NENBL) 
Instructions for subroutine STPRG - Efroynson procedure ......................................................... 
! Information on the terainal, ! ! Coaments ! 
! variable(s1 for input ! ---------- 
------------------------------ 
1. OUTPUT OF CORRELATION MATRIX: KOUT=l - correlation matrix is written 
YES - 1, NO - 0 (KOUT) into file SYSOUT.DAT 
2. CODES (:[DX(i), i=l,l) Input of codes for stepwise regression: 
(Caution: format - 10 I1 !!!!I IDX(i)=O - free variable, 
IDX(1):l - variable i is forced into regression equation; 
IDX(i):2 - variable i is deleted from regression. 
IDX(1)=3 - variable H is dependent variable. 
Total number of independent variables in the analysed block 
(transformations and interactions are included) equals to 1-1 . 
3. INFORIATION ON THIS STEP: N0UT:l - information is stored in the 
PRINT - 1, NO - 0 (NOUT) file SYSOUT.DAT 
4. FORMARD PROCEDURE - 0, NSTOP=O - next step of stepwise regression 
STOP - 1, is carried out; 
DELET'LNG PROCEDURE- 2 NSTOP=l - end of stepwise procedure (see (6) 1; 
(NSTOP) NSTOPz2 - deleting procedure is executed (see (5)) 
5. DELETING PROCEDURE Information on deleting procedure appears 
( No input !!! 1 on the terninal (see test example) 
6. TO TYPE TABLE OF RESIDUALS: NR=1 - table of residuals is written on 
YES - 1, NO -0 (NR) the terminal and stored in the 
file SYSOUT.DAT . Instructions for subroutine FORECAST - analysis and forecast ............................................................ 
! Information on the terminal, ! ! Comments ! 
! variable(s1 for input ! ---------- 
.............................. 
1. FORECASTING: YES - 0, NO - 1 IFORE=O - forecast is executed (see (2) 1, 
(IFORE) IFOREzl - end of subroutine. 
Hessage 2 appears for all variables from block NBL (only for 
basic variables - not for transformations and interactions) 
2. INPUT: VALUE OF VARIABLE D(j) - a value of variable j for 
j ? iD(j)) for forecast. 
3. NEW AT'TEHPT - 0, TO STOP - 1 ? IATTsO - forecast is made in the 
( IATT new point ( go to (2) ; 
IATTrl - end of subroutine. 
Instructions for subroutine STRAN - stepwise regression with permutations 
------------------------------ ---------- 
! Information on the terminal, ! ! Comments ! 
! variableis) for input ! ---------- 
1. NUMBER OF PERHUTATIONS AND LHAX - number of permutations 
AND HAX. NUHBER OF STEPS ? on each step, 
(LHAX, NHAX) NHAX - maximal number of steps in 
stepwise regression procedure 
(NHAX must be less or equal to H-1 - 
a number of independent variables) 
2. NUHBER OF INTERVALS AND NDIV - a number of intervals, 
SCALE FOR A HISTOGRAH ? SMS - a scale for a histogram 
(NDIV, SHS) 
Histograms for several statistics are constructed: T - Student's, 
F - Fisher's, SS - proportion of the sum of squares reduced on 
the given step. When LHAX is not too large ( LHAX ( 100 1, it is 
recommended to use NDIV 5 - 10, SHS = 1. 
Caution: the following inequalities must be satisfied - 
LHAX ( 300 , 2 ( NDIV ( 50 . 
j. PROGRAM CODE: 0 - FROM HD=O - stepwise regession is executed 
THE I-st STEP, 1 - NOT from the 1-st step (no forced variables) 
FROH THE I-st STEP ? (HD) HD=1 - some variables are forced into regression 
see (4,5 ). 
Hessages 4,5 appear if HD : 1. 
4. TOTAL NUHBER OF FORCED HX1 - a number of variables forced 
VARIABLES ? ( HXl ) into regression equation. 
5. THEIR INDEXES ? NV(i) - indexes of forced variables. 
( NV(i), i:l,HXl) 
6. TOTAL NUHBER OF DELETED HDEL - total number of deleted 
VAIABLES ? iHDEL) variables. 
Hessage 7 appears if MDEL ) 0 
7. THEIR INDEXES ? HDL(i) - indexes of deleted variables . 8. TO WRITE T - HISTOGRAN : JJT:l - information on T-statistic 
YES - 1, NO - 0 ? (JJT) appears on the terminal and is 
stored in the file SYS0UT.DAT 
Analogous messages appear also for F- and SS- statistics. 
9. TO CONTINUE - 1, TO STOP - 0 JKJ=l - next step of stepwise procedure 
(JKJ) is carried out (go to (8) 1; 
JKJ=O - end of subroutine. Example of one session with program SYS: output file 'SYSOUT.DAT' uith some comments 
SYSTEH FOR SIMULATION ANALYSIS, OCT 24,1985 
NVHBER OF OBSERVATIONS ? 
12 
TOTAL NUMBER OF VARIABLES ? 
31 
IDENTIFICATION VECTOR : 
11111112222222233333 
33344444445 
BLOCK FOR ANALYSIS ? 
CAUTION: TOTAL NUHBER OF VARIABLES IN THE BLOCK 
(INCLUDING TRANSF(!RMATIONS AND INTERACTIONS) 
MUST BE LESS THAN 60 
1 
TABLE OF TRANSFORHATIONS 
1. X:-=X*X 5. X:==LN(X) 
2. X:::SQRT(ABS(X)) 6. X:==l/X 
3. X:==ABS(X) 7. X:==ARCTG(X) 
4. X:==EXP(X) 
INPUT: VARIABLE NO, TRANSFORHATION NO. 
COHHENT: IF YOU WANT TO STOP INPUT , PRESS 0 0 
14 
DEPENDENT VARIABLE ? 
3 1 
WITH INTERACTIONS ? ( YES - 1, NO - 0) 
0 
A NUMBER OF DBSERVATIONS 12 
TABLE OF VARIABLES 
FORHAL VARIABLE 1 REAL VARIABLE 1 
FORHAL VARIABLE 2 REAL VARIABLE 2 
FORHAL VARIABLE 3 REAL VARIABLE 3 
FORHAL VARIABLE 4 REAL VARIABLE 4 
FCIRHAL VARIABLE 5 REAL VARIABLE 5 
FORHAL VARIABLE 6 REAL VARIABLE 6 
FORHAL VARIABLE 7 REAL VARIABLE 7 
FORMAL VARIABLE 8 REAL VARIABLE 32 
********** STEPWISE PROCEDLlRE ********** 
VARIABLE HEAt4 STANDARD 
NO. DEVIATION 
1 0. 1.04447 
2 0. 1.04447 
3 0. 1.04447 
4 0. 1.04447 
5 0. 1.04447 
b 0. 1.04447 
7 0. 1.04447 
8 1.54309 1.22746 
9 2.16667 22.90561 Number of observations is 12. 
Total number of variables is 31. 
Identification vector can separate variables into 
a given nurber of blocks. Analysis can be done 
independently for any of these groups. 
The influence of the first block on response function 
is analyzed on this stage. 
Transformation number 4 (exp(x)) is made with the firs 
variable: x(32):expiX(l)), 32:Mtl H is total nurbe 
of variables. 
Variable 31 is the response function. 
Interactions are not included here. 
Variables uhich are to be analyzed on this stage. 
Transformation of variable X(1) (X(32)) is also 
included in the first block. 
Beginning of screening analysis. 
Heans and standard deviations of variables. 
The response function here is the ninth variable. CORRELATION MATRIX 
ROW 1 
1.00000 0.00000 
EOW 2 
0.00000 1.00000 
ROW 3 
-0.00000 -0.00000 
ROW 4 
0.00000 0.00000 
ROW 5 
-0.00000 -0.00000 
ROW 6 
-0.00000 -0.00000 
ROW 7 
0.00000 0.00000 
ROW 8 
1.00000 -0.00000 
ROW 9 
0.24066 0.37959 
NUHBER OF SELECTION 1 
CODES 
00000000 
*******$$******** STEP 1 ***************** 
VARIABLE ENTERED.. . . . 4 
SUH OF SQUARES REDUCED IN THIS STEP.. .. 1213.370 
PROPORTION REDUCED IN THIS STEP ........ 0.210 
CUNULATIVE SUM OF SQUARES REDUCED.. . . . . 1213.370 
CUHULATIVE PPOPORTION REDUCED.. . . . . . . . . 0.210 OF 
MULTIPLE CORRELATION COEFFICIENT.. . 0.459 
F-VALUE FOR ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE.. . 2.662 
STANDARD ERROR (IF ESTIMATE.. . .. . . . . 21.349 
VARIABLE REG. COEFF. ERROR T-VALLIE 
4 10.05556 6.16304 1.632 
INTERCEPT 2.16667 ......................... 
*$*$************ S'IEP 6 *******$********* 
VARIABLE ENTERED.. . . . 1 
SUH OF SQUARES REDUCED IN THIS STEP.. .. 334.259 
PROPORTION REDUCED IN THIS STEP ........ 0.058 
CUMULATIVE SUH OF SQUARES REDUCED.. . . . . 5556.482 
CUMULATIVE PPOPORTION REDUCED.. . . . . . . . . 0.963 OF 
MULTIPLE CORRELATION COEFFICIENT.. . 0.981 
F-VALUE FOR ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE.. . 21.552 
STANDARD ERROR OF ESTIMATE.. . . . . . . . 6.555 
VARIABLE RE6. COEFF. ERROR T-VALUE 
4 10.05556 1.83232 5.314 
6 9.72222 1.89232 5.138 
5 9.27776 1.89232 4.903 
2 9.16667 1. 89232 4.844 
2 8.33333 1.83232 4.404 
1 5.27778 1.89232 2.783 
INTERCEPT 2.16667 ......................... 
**$** END ***** STEPWISE PROCEDURE ***** END ***** 
BLOCK FOR ANALYSIS 9 
CAUTION: TOTAL NUMBER OF VARIABLES IN THE BLOCK 
(INCLUDING 'TRANSFORHATIONS AND IN'TERACTIONS) 
MUST BE LESS THAN 60 
2 Correlation matrix of input variables and response 
function. The part of this matrix is the identity 
matrix due to orthogonality of the design. 
The last line is the correlation of the response 
with input variables. 
All variables are free (no forced, no deleted). 
Regression analysis after the first step. 
Regression analysis after 6 steps. Six variables 
from the first block are entered. 
5771.334 
Hul tiple correlation coefficient (0.981 ) is large 
enough. Student's T-statistics show possible 
significance of variables 1-6. 
(Caution: distribution of T-value does not 
coincide with classical Student's distribution! 1 
End of the first stage of screening analysis. 
Now the influence of the second block is included. 
DEPENDENT VARIABLE ? 
31 WITH INTERACTIONS ? ( YES - 1, NO - 0) 
1 
A NUMBER OF OBSERVATIONS 12 
TABLE C' VARIABL 
FORHAL VARIABLE 1 
FORMAL VARIABLE 2 
FORMAL VARIABLE 3 
FORHAL VARIABLE 4 
FORHAL VARIABLE 5 
FORMAL VARIABLE 6 
FORHAL VARIABLE 7 
FORHAL VARIABLE 8 
FORMAL VARIABLE 9 
FORHAL VARIABLE 10 
FORMAL VARIABLE 11 
FORNAL VARIABLE 12 
F(IRHAL VARIABLE 13 
FORMAL VARIABLE 14 
FORHAL VARIABLE 15 
FORHAL VARIABLE 16 
FORHAL VARIABLE 17 
FORHAL VARIABLE 18 
FORHAL VARIABLE I9 
FORMAL VARIABLE 20 
FORMAL VARIABLE 21 
FORHAL VARIABLE 22 
FORMAL VARIABLE 23 
FORHAL VARIABLE 24 
FllRHAL VARIABLE 25 
FORMAL VARIABLE 26 
FORHAL VARIABLE 27 
FORMAL VARIABLE 28 
FORMAL VARIABLE 29 
FORHAL VARIABLE 30 
FORMAL VARIABLE 31 
FORHAL VARIABLE 32 
FORHAL VARIABLE 33 
FORHAL VARIABLE 34 
FORHAL VARIABLE 35 
FORHAL VARIABLE 36 .ES 
REAL VARIABLE S 
REAL VARIABLE 9 
REAL VARIABLE 10 
REAL VARIABLE 11 
REAL VARIABLE 12 
REAL VARIABLE 13 
REAL VARIABLE 14 
REAL VARIABLE 15 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
:INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
IN'lERACTION OF VARIABLES 
:IN'IERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
1:NTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
***ttt$$M STEPUISE PROCEDURE $$$$$$$$** 
VARIABLE HEAN STANDARD 
NO. DEVIATION 
1 0.16667 1.02986 
2 0. 1.04447 
3 0.66667 0.77850 
4 0. 1.04447 
5 Q. 1.04447 
6 -0.33333 0.98473 
7 -0.33333 0.98473 
8 0. 1.04447 
9 -0.16667 1.02986 
10 O.lddd7 1.02986 
11 -0.16667 1.02986 
12 -0.16667 1.02986 
13 0.16667 1.02956 
14 0.16667 1.02?86 
15 -0.16667 1.02386 
16 0.33333 0.98473 
17 0. 1.04447 
la 0.33333 0.98473 
I? -0.33333 0.98473 
20 0. 1.04447 
21 0. 1.04447 
22 0. 1.04447 
2 5 0. 1.04447 
24 0. 1 .OM47 
2 5 -0.33333 0.38473 Interactions of variables from the second block are 
included. 
Formal and real indexes of variables here differ 
from each other. 
8 AND 9 
8 AND 10 
6 AND 11 
8 AND 12 
8 AND 13 
8 AND 14 
8 AND 15 
9 AND 10 
9 AND 11 
9 AND 12 
9 AND 13 
9 AND 14 
9 AND 15 
10 AND 11 
10 AND 12 
10 AND 13 
10 AND 14 
10 AND I5 
11 AND 12 
I1 AND 13 
I1 AND 14 
11 AND 15 
12 AND 13 
12 AND 14 
12 AND 15 
13 AND 14 
13 AND 15 
14 AND 15 26 0. 
27 0. 
28 0. 
24 0. 
30 0. 
31 -0.33333 
32 -0.33333 33 0. 
34 
0. 
3 5 -0.33333 
36 0. 
37 2.16667 
NUIBER OF SELECTION 
CODES 
0001100 0000000 
0000000 
000000 Forral variables 4, 5 (real variables 11, 12) are 
forced into regression. 
%%%**%**%%%%%%%%% STEP 2 %%%****%***%%%%%% 
VARIABLE ENTERED.. . . . 5 
SUI OF SQUARES REDUCED IN THIS STEP.. . . 715.593 
PROPORTION REDUCED IN THIS STEP. ....... 0.124 
CUIULATIVE SUI OF SQUARES REDUCED.. . . . . 3766.298 
CUIULATIVE PPOPORTION REDUCED. .. . . . .. . . 0.653 OF 5771.334 'Ihey explain 65.3% of variance. That is why variables 
MULTIPLE CORRELATION COEFFICIENT.. . 0.803 1 - 12 are to be analyzed together. 
F-VALUE FOR ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE.. . 8.453 
STANDARD ERROR OF ESTIIATE.. . . . . . . . 14.926 
VARIABLE RE6. COEFF. ERROR T-VALUE 
4 15.94445 4.30873 3.700 
5 7.72222 4.30873 1.792 
INTERCEPT 2.16667 ......................... ...................................... 
***** END ***** STEPHISE PROCEDURE ***** END ***** 
IDENTIFICATION VECTOR : 
11111111111122222222 New identification vector: variables 1 - 12 are 
22222222223 in the first block. 
BLOCK FOR ANALYSIS ? 
CAUTION: TOTAL NUMBER OF VARIABLES IN THE BLOCK 
(INCLUDING TRANSFORlATIilNS AND :INTERACTIONS) 
IUST BE LESS THAN 60 
1 
DEPENDENT VARIABLE 7 
3 1 
WITH INTERACTIONS 7 ( YES - 1, NO - 0) 
0 
A NUIBER OF OBSERVATIONS 12 
TABLE OF VARIABLES 
FORIAL VARIABLE 1 REAL VARIABLE 
FORMAL VARIABLE 2 REAL VARIABLE 
FORfiAL VARIABLE 3 REAL VARIABLE 
FORIAL VARIABLE 4 REAL VARIABLE 
FORfiAL VARIABLE 5 REAL VARIABLE 
FORIAL VARIABLE 6 REAL VARIABLE 
FORIAL VARIABLE 7 REAL VARIABLE 
FORIAL VARIABLE 8 REAL VARIABLE 
FORfiAL VARIABLE 9 REAL VARIABLE 
FORIAL VARIABLE 10 REAL VARIABLE 
FORIAL VARIABLE 11 REAL VARIABLE 
FORIAL VARIABLE 12 REAL VARIABLE 
tt*%t%%*%l STEPWISE PROCEDLlRE $*4:*l$*#t* 
VARIABLE IEAN STANDARD NO. 
1 0. 
2 0. 
3 0. 
4 0. 
5 0. 
b 0. 
7 0. 
8 0.16667 
? 0. 
10 0.66667 
11 0. 
12 0. 
13 2.16667 
NUHBER OF SELECTION 
CODES 
0000002 
0 0 DEVIATION 
1.04447 
1.04447 
1.04447 
1.04447 
1.04447 
1.04447 
1.04447 
1.02986 1.04447 
0.77850 
1.04447 
1.04447 
22.90561 
I 
2 2 2 
Variables 7 - 10 are deleted from equation. 
**************$** STEP 8 **$************** 
VARIABLE ENTERED.. . . .12 
SUH OF SQUARES REDUCED IN THIS STEP.. .. 56.004 
PROPORTION REDUCED IN THIS STEP ........ 0.010 
CUMULATIVE SUH OF SQUARES REDUCED.. . . . . 5710.720 
CUHULATIVE PPOPORTION REDUCED. . . . . . . . . . 0.989 OF 5771.334 Eight variables explain 98.9 I of variance, but they 
HULTIPLE CORRELATION COEFFICIENT.. . 0.995 essentially differ in significance (see T-values). 
F-VALUE FOR ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE ... 35.330 Therefore it is naturally to suggest that deleting 
STANDARD ERROR OF ESTIMATE.. . . . . . . . 4.495 some of them uill not deteriorate approximation 
VARIABLE RE6. CUEFF. ERROR T-VALUE (secondary) model essentially. 
11 5.0350? 1 .996?5 2.521 
6 8.73100 1.42766 6.116 
4 7.38597 1.63050 4.530 
5 6.60819 1.63050 4.053 
3 8.47953 1.51792 5.586 
2 6.65497 1.45837 4.563 
1 3.59942 1.45837 2.468 
12 2.97368 1.78613 1.665 
INTERCEPT 2.16667 ......................... 
********* DELETING PROCEDURE ********* 
**********$%%**** STEP 7 **********%*$$*** 
VARIABLE ENTERED.. . . . 1 
SUH OF SQLIARES REDUCED IN THIS STEP.. . . 142.091 
PROPORTION REDUCED IN THIS STEP ........ 0.025 
CUIULATIVE SUH OF SQUARES REDUCED.. . . . . 5654.715 
CUIULATIVE PPOPORTION REDUCED.. . .. . . . . . 0.980 OF 5771.334 
MULTIPLE CORRELATION COEFFICIENT.. . 0.930 
F-VALUE FOR ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE.. . 27.708 
STANDARD ERR(IR OF ESTIHATE.. . .. . . . . 5.400 
VARIABLE REG. COEFF. ERROR T-VALLIE 
11 4.29167 2.33806 1.836 
6 9.72222 1.55871 6.237 
4 8.62500 1.74263 4.949 
5 7.84722 1.742h9 4.503 
3 7.73611 1.7426? 4.439 
2 6.90278 1.74269 3.961 
I 3.84722 1.7426? 2.208 
INTERCEPT 2.lh667 ......................... 
*$******* DELETING PROCEDURE ********* 
***%t%t$***t$*t** STEP 6 $t*************** 
VARIABLE ENTERED.. . . . 1 
sun OF SQUARES REDUCED IN THIS STEP.. .. 334.259 
PRUPORTION REDUCED IN THIS STEP. .... . .. 0.058 - 24 - 
CUMULATIVE SUM OF SQUARES REDUCED.. . . . . 5556.483 
CLlMULATIVE PPOPi!RTION REDUCED. .. . . . . . .. 0.563 OF 5771.334 
MULTIPLE CORRELATION COEFFICIENT.. . 0.981 
F-VALUE FOR ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE.. . 21.552 
STANDARD ERROR 6F ESTIMATE.. . . . . . . . 6.555 
VARIABLE RE6. COEFF. ERROR T-VALUE 
4 10.05556 1.89232 5.314 Tuo variables (11, 12) are deleted from regressi~n 
6 9.72222 1.8'3232 5.138 uithout essential increasing of the sum of 
5 9.27778 1.89232 4.903 squares. The most significant variables are 
3 9.16667 1.89232 4.844 variables 1 - 6. 
2 6.33333 1.89232 4.404 
1 5.27778 1.89232 2.789 
INTERCEPT 2.16667 ......................... ...................................... 
***** END ***** STEPWISE PROCEDURE ***** END ***** 
Here is the listing of subroutine FORECAST. 
*** HODEL ANALYSIS AND FORECASTING *** 
REGRESSION EQUATION 
NO. SIGNIFICANT VARIABLES RESPONSE S. D. CORRELATION MATRIX OF RE6 ........................................................................................................ RESSION 
COEFFICIENTS (PERCENTAGE) 
DEP. VAR. X( 31 1: 2.167 
1 VARIABLE 4 + 10.056 * X( 4 ) 1.692 100 0 0 0 0 0 
( 5.314) 
2 VARIABLE 6 
3 VARIABLE 5 + 9.278 * X( 5) 1.892 0 0100 0 0 0 
( 4.903) 
4 VARIABLE 3 + 9.167 * X( 3 1.892 0 0 0100 0 0 
( 4.844) 
5 VARIABLE 2 + 6.333 * X( 2 ) 1.892 0 0 0 0100 0 
( 4.404) 
6 VARIAELE 1 + 5.278 * X( 1 ) 1.892 0 0 0 0 0 100 
( 2.789) 
Such correlation matrix (in I) is due to 
orthogonality of the design. ............................................................................................................................ 
TEST STATISTICS 
CUMULATIVE PROPORTION REDUCED.. . . . . . 0.963 Main statistics 
HULTIPLE CORRELATION COEFFICIENT.. . . 0.981 
STANDARD ERROR ESTIMA'TE (S16HAJ.. . . . 6.555 
F-VALUE FOR ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE.. . . 21.552 ............................................................................................................................ 
*** MODEL ESTIMATION *** ............................................................................................................................ 
NO. DEPENDENT VARIABLE RESPONSE RESIDUALS STANDARD RATIO COMMENTS 
X( 31 ) PREDICTION ABSOLUTE PERCENTAGE DEVIATION RESID.1S.D. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
1 -50.1667 -49.6667 -0.5000 1.0 4.6352 -0.1079 Table of residuals 
2 29.8333 35.6667 -5.8333 1. 4.6352 -1.2585 
3 25.8333 23.3333 2.5000 9.7 4.6352 0.5393 
4 20.1667 18.7778 1. ~8~9 6.9 4.6352 0.2996 
5 12.1667 5.6667 6.5000 53.4 4.6352 1.4023 
6 4.1667 6.6667 -2.5000 60.0 4.6352 -0.5333 
7 -7.8333 -10.1111 2.27'8 25.1 4.6352 0.4514 
8 -25.1667 -20.5556 -4.6111 18.3 4.6352 -0.9948 
5 -0.83;3 -3.0000 2.1667 260.0 4.6352 0.4674 
10 -1.1667 -4.1111 2.9444 252.4 4.632 0.6352 11 -2.8333 5.4444 -6.2738 292.2 4.6352 -1.7858 
12 2 1.8333 17.88U 3.7444 18.1 4.6352 0.S510 ............................................................................................................................ 
* -OUTLIER WITH P-0.05 
** -OUTLIER WITH P=0.01 ............................................................................................................................ 
ATTEMPT 1 ***** FORECASTING ***** 
X( 1) : 0. Forecast is made: X1:0, ... , X12:l 
XC 2) = 0. =:=) y- 11.8899 
X( 3) - 0. 
X( 4) r 0. 
X( 5) 0. 
X( 6) = 1.0000 
X( 7): 1.0000 
X( 8): 1.0000 
X( 9): 1.0000 
X( 10) : 1.0000 
X( 11) = 1.0000 
X(121 = 1.0000 
FORECASTED VALUE OF DEPENDENT VARIABLE IS 11.8889 WITH S.D. 6.823 
% END % FORECASTING ttttt END ***** 
******** STEPWISE REGRESSION WITH PERHUTATIONS ******** Subroutine STRAN (stepwise regression with permutations) 
SSSS~SS~SSSSSSSSSSS***** SSSSSSSSSSSS~SSSSSS****** is executed. Regression model with 13 variables 
ONUMBER OF OBSERVATIONS 12 is analyzed (here variables 1 - 12 are independent, 
NUIBER OF VARIABLES 13 variable 13 is response). 
***$*************$*******$********** 
SCALE FOR A HIST0GRAH:A POINT CORRESPONDS TO 1 VALUE/S/ Scale and number of intervals for a histogram. 
NIJMBER OF INTERVALS FOR A HISTOGRAI 5 
fiAX.Nll1BER OF STEPS 5 
NUIBER OF PERIUTATIONS 30 Number of permutations on each step is 30. ........................ ......................... 
TOTAL NUHBER OF DELETED VARIABLES-? 
2 .................................... 
THEIR INDEXES-? 
12 ........................ ......................... 
***********************$ ......................... 
ENTERED VARIABLES AND THEIR T-STATISTICS,STEP: 1 
11 
3.35 .................................... 
STEP 1 
VARIABLE ENTERED 11 
****~***t***L**************t******** 
BASIC T-STATISTIC 3.35 
T-MEAN AND ST. DEVIATION 0.5?43 2.3032 
MIIN. AND NAX. T-STATISTICS AFTER PER1I.ITATION 
-2.84 4.40 
HISTUGRAI FOR T-STATISTIC 
-2.8446 -1.3349 ........... * 
-1.3749 0.0549 * 
0.0549 1.5046 * 
1.5046 2.9544 ................. .* 
2.9544 4.4042 .* 
Z OF T,FOR WHICH ABS(T) IS LESS THAN ABS(T0) 96.67 
***********$*********I** ......................... Variables 1, 2 are deleted froa regression. 
Variable 11 is entered on the first step, its T-statistic 
is TO- 3.35 
iean and standard deviation of T-statistic after 
permu tation: 0.5'943 and 2.3092. 
Minimal and maximal T-statistics after permutation. 
Histogram for T-statistic: one point corresponds 
to one value in the interval (according to 
assigned scale). 
.................................... 
BASIC F-STATISTIC 11.213 
F-MEAN AND ST. DEVIATION 5.508 3.111 
IIN. AND NAX.F-STATISTICS AFTER PERNUTATION 
2.53 19.357 
HISTUGRAI FOR F-STATISTIC 
2.56'84 5.9501 .................... .* 
5.3501 ?.311? ........ * 
1.J117 12.6353 * 
12.b733 16.0350 * 
16.0250 19.366 .* 
1 DF F,LESS THAN FC 36.67 Analogous histograms are for F- and SS-statistics. ******$I**$$*$$$***$$$$$*$*$$$$II$$I 
BASIC SS-PROPURTIUN REDUCED 0.5286 
SS-MEAN AND ST. DEVIATION 0.3378 0.0?% 
WIN. AND WAX .SS-PROPORTIONS AFTER PERMUTATION 
0.2056 0.6588 
HISTOGRAW FOR SS-STATISTIC 
0.2056 0.2865 .......... .* 
0.2965 0.3873 ............ I 
0.3873 0.4781 ......I 
0.4781 0.5690 1 
0.5690 0.65% .* I OF SS,LESS THAN SSO 96.67 
*******$**************$$ ......................... 
........................ ......................... 
........................ $$**$**$***************** 
ENTERED VARIABLES AND THEIR T-STATISTICS,STEP= 2 
11 6 
4.16 2.54 
**$***$$*************$*$*******$**** 
STEP 2 
VARIABLE ENTERED 6 
.................................... 
BASIC T-STATISTIC 2.54 
T-WEAN AND ST. DEVIATION -0.9889 1.9352 
MTN. AND 1AX.T-STATISTICS AFTER PERWUTATION 
-3.86 3.32 
HISTOGRAM FOR T-STATISTIC 
-3.8553 -2.4197 ...... .* 
-2.4197 -0.5840 ............ .$ 
-0.9540 0.4516 .* 
0.4516 1.8873 ....... * 
1.8873 3.3229 ..$ I OF T,F(IR WHICH ABS(T) IS LESS THAN ABS(T0) 76.67 
S**SSSSS$$*$t$*I*$S$$$$I ......................... Variables that are entered into regression (basic model) 
after 2 steps. Variable 6 is entered into regression 
on the second step. 
Here is the information concerning the statistics 
on the second step. 
..................................... 
BASIC F-STATISTIC 11.871 
F-WEAN AND ST.DEVIATION 5.987 4.041 
WIN. AND WAX .F -STATISTICS AFTER PERMUTATION 
0. 20.811 
HISTOGRAM FOR F-STATISTIC 
0. 4.1622 .* 
4.1622 8.3244 ......... .* 
8.3244 12.4867 ............ .* 
12.4867 16.6489 ...* 
16.6489 20.8111 .. .* I OF F,LESS THAN FO 76.67 
$**$******************$* *****$*******~*****~***** 
*******************%*$**$$$$$~****** 
BASIC SS-PROPORTION REDUCED 0.1965 
SS-HEAN AND ST.DEVIATION 0.1495 0.0647 
MIN. AND HAX.SS-PROPORTIONS AFTER PERMUTATION 
0. 0.2936 
HISTOGRAW FOR SS-STATISTIC 
0. 0.0587 .* 
0.0587 0.1174 .......... * 
0.1174 0.1762 ........... $ 
0.1762 0.2349 .... .* 
0.2349 0.2936 ...* I OF SS,LESS THAN SSO 76.67 
The following example shows the potentialities of the subroutine FORECAST when transformations 
and interactions are included into regression 
equation. 
IDENTlFlCATION VECTOR : 
11111112222222222222 
22222222223 
BLOCK FOR ANALYSIS ? 
CAUTION: TOTAL NUMBER OF VARIABLES IN THE BLOCK 
(INCLUDING TRANSFORMATIONS AND INTERACTIONS) 
MUST BE LESS THAN 60 
1 
TABLE OF TRANSFORMATIONS 
1. x:--x*x 5. x:==LN(x) 
2. X:==SORT(ABS(X)) 6. X:::l/X 
3. X:::ABS(X) 7. X:==ARCTG(X) 
4. X:=:EXP(X) 
INPUT: VARIABLE NO, TRANSFORHATION NO. 
COMMENT: IF YOU WANT TO STOP INPUT , PRESS 0 0 
14 
0 0 
DEPENDENT VARIABLE ? 
31 
WITH INTERACTIONS ? t YES - 1, NO - 0) 
1 
A NUMBER OF OBSERVATIONS 12 
TABLE OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 1 REAL VARIABLE 1 
FORMAL VARIABLE 2 REAL VARIABLE 2 
FORMAL VARIABLE 3 REAL VARIABLE 5 
FORHAL VARIABLE 4 REAL VARIABLE 4 
FORMAL VARIABLE 5 REAL VARIABLE 5 
FORMAL VARIABLE 6 REAL VARIABLE 6 
FORMAL VARIABLE 7 REAL VARIABLE 7 
FORHAL VARIABLE 8 REAL VARIABLE 32 
FORMAL VARIABLE 9 INTERACTIUN OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 10 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 11 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 12 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 13 :INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORHAL VARIABLE 14 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORHAL VARIABLE 15 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 16 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 17 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 18 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 19 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 20 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 21 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 22 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 23 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 24 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 25 TN'IERACTIilN OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 26 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORHAL VARIABLE 27 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORHAL VARIABLE 28 INTERACTION OF VARIABLES 
FORMAL VARIABLE 29 INTERACTIOH OF VARIABLES Formal variable 8 - transformation of the first var 
1 AND 2 Formal variables 9 - 29 are interactions 
1 AND 3 of seven variables belonging to the first 
1 AND 4 block which is analyzed. 
1 AND 5 
1 AND 6 
1 AND 7 
2 AND 3 
2 AND 4 
2 AND 5 
2 AND 6 
2 AND 7 
3 AND 4 
3 AND 5 
3 AND 6 
3 AND 7 
4 AND 5 
4 AND 6 
4 AND 7 
5 AND 6 
5 AND 7 
6 AND 7 
*******S** STEP#ISE PROCEDURE S***S***$S 
VARIABLE MEAN STANDARD 
NO. DEVIATION 
1 0. 1.04447 
2 0. 1.04447 3 0. 
4 0. 
5 0. 
6 0. 
7 0. 
8 1.54308 
9 0. 
10 0. 
11 0. 
12 0. 
13 0. 
14 0. 
15 0. 
16 0. 
17 0. 
18 0. 
19 0. 
2 0 0. 
21 0. 
2 2 0. 
2 3 0. 
24 0. 
25 0. 
26 0. 
27 0. 
28 0. 
2 5 0. 
30 2.16667 
NUMBER OF SELECTION 
CODES 
0000000 
0000000 
0000000 Formal variables 6 - 10 are forced into equation. 
*********tt*****# STEP 7 ***************** 
VARIABLE ENTERED.. . . . 2 
SUM OF SQUARES REDUCED IN THIS STEP.. . . 234.224 
PROPORTION REDLICEI! IN THIS STEP. ... . . .. 0.041 
CLIMULATIVE SLIM OF SQUARES REDUCED.. . . . . 5662.125 
CUMULATIVE PPOPORTION REDUCED. .. ... . . . . 0.581 OF 5771.334 
MULTIPLE CORRELATION COEFFICIENT.. . 0.510 
F-VALUE FOR ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE.. . 29.627 
STANDARD ERROR OF ESTIMATE.. . . . . . . . 5.225 
VARIABLE REG. COEFF. ERROR T-VALLIE 
9 -7.61865 1.70167 -4.477 
8 9.87473 1.64755 5.554 
10 -6.10227 1.73524 -3.505 
20 -17.84344 2.03385 -8.773 
15 -13.34975 1.67873 -7.952 
25 14.48738 2.18110 6.642 
2 5.18056 1.76872 2.529 
INTERCEPT -13.07085 ......................... ...................................... 
***** END ***** STEPNISE PROCEDURE ***** END ***** Seven variables are entered into regression. 
*** MODEL ANALYSIS AND FORECASTING *** 
REGRESSION EQUATION ............................................................................................................................ 
NO. SIGNIFICANT VARIABLES RESPONSE S. D. CORRELATION MATRIX OF REGRESSION COEFFICIENTS (PERCENTAGE) ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Here is the secondary model: 
DEP. VAR. X( 31 ): -13.071 
X3l = -13.071 - 
1 INTER. VAR. 1 AND 2 - 7.619 * X( 1)*X( 2) 1.702 100 -1 -5 23 -12 27 18 
( -4.477) - 7.615 * X1 * X? 4 3 INTER. VAR. I AND 3 - 6.102 * X( 1)*X( 3) 1.739 -5 -20 100 26 7 -;6 27 
( -3.509) - 6.102 * XI * X3 - 
4 INTER. VAR. 3 AND 4 - 17.843 * X( 3)*X( 4) 2.034 23 -49 26 100 -3 -37 31 
( -8.773) - 17.843 * X3 * 14 - 
5 INTER. VAR. ?AND 3 - 13.350* X( ?)*I( 3) 1.679 -12 19 7 -3 100 -26 -9 
( -7.952) - 13.350 * X2 * X3 + 
6 INTER. VAR. 6 AND 7 + 14.487 * X( 6)*X( 7) 2.181 27 42 -36 -37 -26 100 14 
( 6.642) + 14.437 * X6 * X7 + 
7 VARIABLE 2 + 5.181 * xi 2 1.769 18 -8 27 31 -9 14 100 
( 2.929) + 5.181 * X2 
(for exarple, forral variable 9 : XI * X2, 
forral variable 8 : exp (XI) etc.) 
'TEST STATISTICS 
CUHLILATIVE PROPORTION REDUCED.. . . . . . 0.981 
HULTIPLE CORRELATIUN COEFFICIENT.. . . 0.990 
STANDARD ERROR ESTIHATE (SIGHA). . . . . 5.225 
F-VALUE FOR ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE .... 29.627 
*** HODEL ESTIHATION *** 
NO. DEPENDENT VARIABLE RESPONSE RESIDUALS STANDARD RATIO COHHENTS 
xi 31 PREDICTION ABSOLUTE PERCENTAGE DEVIATION RESID./S.D. ............................................................................................................................ 
1 -50.1667 -45.0455 -5.1212 10.2 3.9386 -1.3003 
2 29.8333 34.1414 -4.3081 14.4 3.4333 -1.2332 
3 25.8333 28.4444 -2.6111 10.1 3.9908 -0.6543 
4 20.1667 20.1010 0.0657 0.3 3.3109 0.0198 
5 12.1667 13.9647 -1.7980 14.8 4.8345 -0.5719 
6 4.1667 0.5707 3.5960 86.3 4.2905 0.8381 
7 -7.5'233 -9.3586 1.5253 19.5 3.4933 0.4366 
8 -25.1667 -23.3687 -1.7980 7.1 4.8345 -0.3719 
9 -0.8333 -1.5455 0.7121 85.5 3.?386 0.1808 
10 -1.1667 -4.7626 3.5960 308.2 4.2905 0.8381 
11 -2.8333 -7.2424 4.4091 155.6 3.7778 1.1671 
12 21.8333 ?0.1010 1.7323 7.9 3.3109 0.5232 ............................................................................................................................ 
* -OUTLIER WITH Pz0.05 ** -OUTLIER WITH Pz0.01 ............................................................................................................................ 
ATTEHPT I 
** FORECASTING ***** 
X( 1) : 1.0000 Forecast is made: notice that only the values of the 
%( 2): 1.0000 basic variables are to be chosen (values of 
X( 3) = 0. transforrations and interactions are calculated 
X( 4) : 0. by the program). 
X( 5) - 0. 
X( 6) 1 0. 
X( 7) : 0. 
FORECASTED VALUE OF DEPENDENT VARIABLE IS 11.3333 WITH S.D. 6.127 
$8 END ** FORECASTING ** END $**$* 2 SYSIXM OF ECOLOGICAL FORECASITNG 
(=F3 
User's Manual 
P. Khomyakov, V: Kroutko, I. Kouzminsky, M. Lenko, E. Nikitin, S. Pegov 
The authors are very grateful to V. Fedorov and T. Munn for their 
constructive advice during the preparation of this manual. 1. Introduction 
The System of Ecological Forecasting (SEF), created in the All-Union 
Research Institute for Systems Studies (USSR) is a set of programs in Fortran 77. 
It provides an opportunity to analyze and forecast (up to 200 years) the state of 
the environment on a regional scale. 
A region is defined as a landscape with linear extension >= 50 km, situated in 
one of the geographical belts which has more or less homogeneous ecological 
characteristics, including types of soil, lithology, relief and vegetation. A region 
contains three subregions which are described separately: 
1. non-cultivated lands; 
2. arable lands; 
3. flood-lands. 
The environment is described by an index of soil fertility, plant biomass, sur- 
face and ground runoffs, pollutant levels for different ecosystem components, etc. 
(For a list of parameters see Appendix D.) SEF can be used to analyze climatic 
trends and anthropogenic impacts on nature, such as pollution, fertilization, 
lumbering, etc., which may occur in different development scenarios. (See the list 
of admissible scenarios in Chapter 2.2.4.) 
SEF is based on a set of dynamics models of natural components described in 
[I]. The essential features of SEF are rather simple system adjustments for any 
given region (adjustment time 1-5 min) and integrity in region representation. SEF 
can be easily used both by managers and experts; also, it can be used in learning 
and business games. 2. How SEF is Used 
2.1. General Notes 
SEF does not demand any special background in programming. User-system 
dialogue is realized in the form of answers to the system's requests (e.g., see 
Appendix F), which are of two types: 
1. menu, i.e., list of options; user is supposed to point out any available option 
number; 
2. variable value request consisting of variable verbal description and current 
value in brackets; the user should input new value or press <RETURN> if he 
doesn't want to change anything. 
In case of an inconsistent input, the system ignores it, displaying an error 
message and repeating the request. If an input value is beyond the variable's 
prescribed boundaries, the system enters this value but displays a warning mes- 
sage. 
The system has so-called "shadow" dialogue commands. This enables the user 
to manipulate the system and receive necessary information. A description of 
these commands follows (see also Appendix B): 
<?> - "help": this command provides the user with brief additional informa- 
tion about the variable under consideration; 
<!> - "show system state": the response is a table with current values of the 
major system variables. The variables' units are indicated in brackets. 
If the "protocol" file (see below) is opened at this moment, the system 
state is saved by entering it into this file. 
I SYSTEM STATE 
land type 
proportion (I) 
humidity 
climate index 
pollution index 
surf. erosn. (mm) 
wind erosn. (mm) 
incr.soil.q.indx 
vegetation type 
biomass (t/ha) 
soil prod. (t/ha) 
mort biom.(t/ha) 
soil salinity(%) 
soil index natur agricul 
20 .oooo 
115.06 
0. 
1.00000 
0.2075 
0.1523 
0. 
2 
0. 
0. 
0. 
0.0360 
4 .OOO h ydromph . 
9.9548 
118.59 
2.759 
1.00000 
3.897 
0.0174 
0. 
3 
336.67 
0. 
0.689 
0.1240 
3.046 
climate: temper. = 22.500/0/ 
precipit. = 1705.04/mm/ 
lakes (X) = 0 
tot.dissect.(km/km2) = 5.0273; dissect.by rivers(km/km2) = 3.0164; 
riv. wat.sa1. (g/l) = 0.047; wat.sal.lgr(g/l) = 0.337; wat.sal.2gr(g/l) = 0.153 
For more information on variables, see Appendix C. 
The work continues by answering the question, "Do you want to keep the Sys- 
tem State (y/n)?" If you answered "y", SEF asks one more question: "What is 
the name of this System State?" The system saves this "System State" in the 
file "sys.stM under the name given in your answer. This file contains all System States which you wanted to save during the course of a session. It is 
necessary to remember that at the beginning of the next session the previous 
file "sys.st" is removed. 
<*D> - "reverse" (Control D): this command returns you to the previous 
request. 
<#file> - "open protocol": after this command the system-user dialogue will be 
saved in a user-specified file. If the filename is omitted, the system 
asks for it. 
<#! > - "show protocol": enables the user to look through the protocol. 
<##> - "close protocol": dialogue recording ceases and the file of protocol is 
closed. 
<@file> - "external input": with this command, the specified file becomes the 
system's input. At this moment the interactive regime is canceled until 
the end of the file or until an error condition occurs. In the latter case 
the error message is displayed and the appropriate request is 
repeated. In both cases the input is switched back to the terminal being 
operated by the user. Such a command can also be the last command in 
the file itself. In this case the input will be switched from this file to 
another one. If the file "ans.inpU exists, the system reads the required 
information from this file immediately after initiation. If the user is 
aware of the sequence of the system questions, it is possible on one line 
to obtain a reply to a number of questions, succesive answers being 
separated by a semicolon (;). In this case the system is silent until the 
end of the input line or until an error occurs. 
< $ TABLE -(year 1,value 1, ... ,year i,value i, ...) >: this command enables the vari- 
able to be specified as a piecewise linear interpolation. This command 
is available only during the scenario specification stage. If a current 
year of simulation is beyond the indicated years, the command will not 
affect the appropriate variable. 
2.2. Session Stages 
Every scenario involves seven steps as follows: 
1. system start 
2. specify region 
3. adjustment of the model to regional data 
4. specify scenario 
5. set time interval and simulation run 
6. observe and output results 
7. choose next stage. 
The session always starts with stage 1, although the sequence of other stages 
can be chosen in any convenient order. A few technical remarks should be men- 
tioned: 
- When you specify the value of a certain variable, make certain that it is meas- 
ured in the units indicated in the [prompt]; 
- When a list of options is displayed, the user is expected to input a number; 
- In the case of an erroneous input, the system will repeat its question. An 
example of an interactive session is presented in Appendix F. 2.2.1. How to Start the Session 
In running the model type "sef.e" on your terminal, if you want to use input 
from some file instead of input from the terminal (Qfile option), you must "tell" the 
system the identifiers of your terminal using the command "tty > wfil" (for UNIX 
operating system) before you begin the run.. 
The session opens with the following message: 
I 
I YOU ARE WELCOME TO THE SYSTEM FOR 
I 
I ECOLOGICAL FORECASTING 
I 
I I ....................................................... 
I 
I IN THE COURSE OF INTERACTION WITH SEF 
I 
( 1. Use '?' if you need additional information. 
1 2. Use '!' if you need to see the 'SYSTEM STATE'. 
( 3. Use 'control-D' if you need to return to the previous 
( point of interaction. 
1 4. If the SEF question has a current value of 
I "variable" in the brackets 1. .. j you may use 
1 'RETURN' if you do not need to change a value. 
1 5. See details in SEF User's Manual and SEF Model 
( Description. 
I ....................................................... 
I 
I System loading - PLEASE WAIT - System loading 
I 
All program messages apearing in this manual which are shown on the 
display screen are marked with a ( sign in the first column (except Appendix 
F). 
2.2.2. Specify Region 
The stage opens with a heading 
I 
I SPECIFY REGION 
I 
0 
The user will be requested to specify some characteristics of the region that 
he has chosen. The input values should be long-term averages rather than current 
values. If the user is interested in the behavior of the system under unusual cir- 
cumstances, he should specify all the external disturbances at the stage of 
scenario specification. 
There are several ways in which the user may specify the region. These are 
listed in the first display of this stage: I 
1 MODES OF REGION SPECIFICATION 
I 
I 1 - Detailed 
1 2 - Brief 
1 3 - Geographical 
1 4 - Direct 
1 5 - Previous region 
( 6 - Adjusted previous region 
1 7 - CONTINUE 
I 
Options 1-5 are closed in the sense that after the user has reached the end of 
any path, the system returns to the initial display so that if any alterations are 
necessary the user may go through the procedure again. Options 6,7 lead to the 
next stage of the session, named "Scenario specification. " 
2.2.2.1. Option 1: Detailed Specification 
The user is requested to specify detailed regional characteristics by answer- 
ing the system's prompts. 
The procedure is divided into several substages, ending with a question: 
I 
1 any alterations ? (y/n) - 
I 
If the answer is "y", the user is offered a chance to input corrections within the 
current portion of the list, or he can return to the previous request using < *D >. 
For a better understanding of some characteristics, see Figures 4 and 5. 
The full list of specifications is as follows. The number in brackets is the 
current value of the specified parameter. If the user does not want to change it, 
he can go to the next question by pressing <RETURN>: I 
1 depth of 1-st water table (m) {0.150e+02j - 
I I 
I depth of 2-nd water table (m) 10.410e+02j - 
I 
I depth of 1-st aquifer (m) 10.200e+02] - 
I 
I depth of 2-nd aquifer (m) 10.510e+02j - 
I 
1 depth of 2-nd water-bearing horizon roof (m) 10.410e+02] - 
I 
I filtration from transit rivers (mm) [O.e+00] - 
I 
I total dissection (km/km2) 10.290e+01 j - 
1 dissection by transit rivers (km/km2) {0.290e+00 j - 
I 
1 maximum depth of local valleys (m) 10.500e+02 j - 
I 
I average depth of local valleys (m) 10.800e +01j - 
I 
I share of total area (%), covered with lakes 10.250e+01] - 
I 
1 average surface slope (tangent) 10.300e-03 ] - 
I 
1 average width of valleys (m) 10.160e+02 ] - 
I 
I downward infiltration of ground-water (%) [0.750e+01] - 
I 
1 infiltration of ground-water, 2-nd layer, into rivers (2) {0.469e+01 j - 
I 
I ground-water salinity (gr/l) 10.270e+00 j - 
I 
1 deep ground-water salinity (gr/l) {0.270e+00 j - 
I I maximum of monthly surface flow (share of total flow) 10.550e+00 j - 
I 
( any alterations ? (y/n) - n 
I 
Second substage. The user is expected to specify the biotic parameters by 
three types of lands: I 
I biomass, average (t/ha-yr) 
I 
I 
I 1 - non-cultivated lands 10.400e+03 j - 
i 2 - arable lands {O.e+OOj - 
I 
1 3 - flood-lands 10.300e+03 j - 
I 
1 mortmass, average (t/ha-yr) 
I 
I 
I 1 - non-cultivated lands 10.220e+02 j - 
I 
1 2 - arable lands 10.300e+01 j - 
I 
1 3 - flood-lands f0.220e+02 j - 
I 
( index of soil 
I 
I 
( 1 - non-cultivated lands f0.850e+01 j - 
I 
1 2 - arable lands 10.600e+01 j - 
I 
1 3 - flood-lands f0.500e+01 j - 
I 
The soil index is a measure of soil fertility. The lowest value of the index is 0, 
the highest is 20. The following approximate estimates may prove helpful: podzols 
- 4; grey forest soil - 9; siliceous soils - 9; brown, savanna soil - 12/15; black soil - 
18/19. 
I 
I soil salinity (%) 
I 
I 
I 1 - non-cultivated lands 10.700e-01 j - 
1 2 - arable lands f0.700e-01 j - 
I 
Third substage. It should be noted here that the values of the requested 
parameters should be consistent with the altitude of the area in question. The user 
has to input average annual values accounting for the climatic differences in moun- 
tain areas and plains. 
I 
I Precipitation (mm) f0.510e+03 j - 
I 
( do you want to randomize precipitation ? (y/n) - y 
I H/L - average surface slope 
,..,.a ...... 
I-st water table 
.................... ................... I-st water aquifer ................... ................... ................... 2-nd water table 
2-nd water bearing hor, 
2-nd water aquifer 
.................... 
boulder, gravel, sand 
clay, boulder, gravel 
Figure 4 Water tables. 750. -,- 
I 3 - -- 
I L- -7 +, 
I 
Sam. I 
I 
I 
1 SO. + 
1. 5. 
MONTH 
Figure 5 Maximum of monthly surface flow (share of total flow) for Dehra Dun is 
rainfall in August (max. rainfall) divided by rainfall for the whole year. If the answer is "y", the user has to answer the following questions (to set the 
percentage for randomizing the precipitation). The predefined values for this and 
the next temperature randomizations can be set in the file "wthr.datM. 
I 
I standard deviation (%) jO.e+00 j - 0.5 
I 
1 Temperature (grad) I0.630e+01 j - 
I 
( do you want to randomize temperature? (y/n) - y 
I 
I standard deviation (%) IO.e+OO j - 0.2 
I 
1 Wind velocity (m/s) I0.400e+01j - 
I Difference of temperatures for valleys and uplands 1-0.400e+00 j - 
Fourth substage. The user has to specify the prevailing type of lithology. 
I 
( TYPE OF LITHOLOGY 
I 
I 1 - Sand 
1 2 - Loamy sand 
( 3 - Loam 
( 4 -Clay 
1 5 - Marl 
( 6 - Compact sedimentary rocks 
1 7 - Intrusive and metamorphic rocks 
1 8 - Shingle beds 
1 9 - Karsted rocks 
I 
1 input option number - 
I 
This terminates the detailed input procedure and the system returns to the 
initial list. The user may either pass on to the next stage or change the specifica- 
tions. 
2.2.2.2. Option 2: Brief Specification 
This mode does not require so much input information as the previous one. 
The user should answer only 6 questions (in contrast to 38 in the detailed mode). 
All necessary data will be automatically reconstructed by the system on the basis 
of the verbal description. The first list deals with the type of geographical belt. I 
/ TYPE OF GEOGRAPHICAL BELT 
I 
1 1 - Arctic 
( 2 - Temperate 
1 3 - Temperate belt of central sector 
1 4 - Subtropical 
( 5 - Tropical 
1 6 - Equatorial 
I input option number - 
I 
In India, only options 4 and 5 will apply. The second list deals with the type of 
vegetation. The content of it depends on the response of the user to the previous 
one. If the answer was "4" you can choose one of the following types of vegetation: 
I 
I TYPE OF VEGETATION 
I 
I 
I 19 - Subtropical desert 
I 20 - Subtropical steppe 
I 21 - Subtropical prairie 
1 22 - Subtropical sclerophillous forest 
1 23 - Sclerophillous forest, sparse growth of trees 
1 24 - Subtropical monsoon forest 
I 
I input option number - 
I 
The next list is the "type of relief ". 
I 
I TYPE OF RELIEF 
I 
I 1 - Low land 
1 2 - Plainland 
( 3 - Upland 
( 4 - Low mountains 
1 5 - Plateau 
1 6 - Mountains, of medium altitude 
1 7 - Table-land 
I 
( input option number - 
I 
The next list contains different types of lithology and is equivalent to the 
relevant list of the detailed mode: I 
I TYPE OF LITHOLOGY 
I 
1 1 - Sand 
1 2 - Loamy sand 
( 3 - Loam 
1 4 - Clay 
1 5 - Marl 
1 6 - Compact sedimentary rocks 
1 7 - Intrusive and metamorphic rocks 
1 8 - Shingle beds 
1 9 - Karsted rocks 
I 
( input option number - 
I 
The following list contains various intensities of waterlogging for different 
types of hydrological land structures. A high level of waterlogging is typical for 
aquifer 0.5 - 2 meters deep; medium for 2.5 - 3.5 meters deep; low for 3.5 - 5 
meters deep. The display is: 
I 
I WATERLOGGING DUE TO HIGH AQUIFER 
I 
I 1 - Absent 
1 2 - Intensive 
( 3 - Moderate 
1 4 - Low 
I 
I input option number - 
I 
The last request is: 
I 
I filtration from transit rivers (mm) fO.e+00 j - 
I 
This terminates the brief specification mode. 
2.2.2.3. Option 3: Geographical Specification 
This mode is the simplest way to specify a region. The user is requested to 
answer only two questions: 
I 
I Input region number (from 1 to 163) - 
I 
I filtration from transit rivers (mm) tO.e+OOj - 
I 
To answer the first question, the user should consult the geographic map and 
the list of regions (see Appendix A). Having entered this information the system 
takes detailed regional data from the data bank. We were not in a position to 
determine all parameters, which characterise the region, precisely because of the 
lack of information. So the user is supposed to check regional data and correct 
them if necessary. This can be done in two ways. The first is the "Detailed mode". In this case one must look through the list of input variables, checking the values 
in brackets and correcting them if necessary. This method is very suitable but 
takes a long time. A shorter method is the "Direct mode". 
2.2.2.4. Option 4: Direct Specification 
This mode has been developed for users who are well aware of the system 
itself and the meaning of its main variables. Such a user can set the required vari- 
able value directly if he knows its name: 
I 
I Name of variable - b(1) 
I 
Having entered the name, the system checks it and in the case of correct 
input name, displays a second prompt: 
I 
( Value of variable 10.800e+00 j - 0.9 
I 
The number in the brackets is the current value of the variable. One should 
print a new value or press <RETURN>. Then the first prompt is displayed again: 
I 
I Name of variable - 
I 
The user may either input the new name or press <RETURN> to interrupt the 
mode. 
The description of system variables is given in Appendix C. 
2.2.2.5. Option 5: Previous Region 
In case the user has chosen to work with the previous region, the system 
restores the specification of the region as it was immediately after the last region 
specification procedure. This mode of specification, however, may only be chosen 
when the previous region has been specified by the user. It can be used if the user 
wants to specify a new scenario and begin the simulation from zero time point. 
2.2.2.6. Option 6: Adjusted Region 
In response to option 6 the system takes the information for the previously 
adjusted region and proceeds to the "Specify scenario" stage. 
2.2.2.7. Option 7: Continue 
In this case the system displays: 
I 
I Input share of arable lands (X) - 
I 
The next message to appear on the screen is: I 
1 INPUT COMPLETED, MODEL IS ADJUSTING TO THE REGIONAL DATA 
I 
This indicates that the specification of the region is complete. System control 
is then transmitted to the next stage - model adjustment to regional data, which is 
performed automatically. 
2.2.3. Model Adjustment 
Model adjustment does not require participation of the user. Once the pro- 
cedure is over, the screen displays the following message: 
MODEL ADJUSTMENT COMPLETED 
After that, the system passes the control to the next (fourth) stage. 
2.2.4. Specify Scenario 
This stage starts with a prompt: 
I 
I 
1 SPECIFY SCENARIO 
I 
I 
I HUMAN FACTORS 
I 
I 0 -CONTINUE 
( 1 - RETURN to previous scenario 
1 2 - Sensitivity investigation 
( 3 - Temperature trend 
1 4 - Precipitation trend 
( 5 - Pollution and fertilization rates 
1 6 - Irrigation regime 
1 7 - Drainage intensity 
1 8 - Specific features of agriculture 
( 9 - Fires in non-cultivated lands 
1 10 - Artificial destruction of biomass 
( 11 - Changes in the area of arable lands 
1 12 - New plantation in non-cultivated lands 
1 13 - New shelter belts in arable lands 
1 14 - Changes in the stock of wood due to lumbering 
I 
It is assumed that the policy/scenario options will remain unchanged over the 
next simulation period. It should be mentioned, that the user is able to define any 
of the specified scenario variables as a function of time, using command 36 TABLE. 
Any policy change may be introduced only after this period is over. A user may 
define as many succesive policies of regional development as he wishes, provided 
that he does not exceed the upper limit of total simulation time, which is 199 years. It should be noted that the model does not compute the effects of previous pol- 
icy decisions on successive periods; if the user wishes to trace them, he should 
formulate his policy options respectively. 
The interactive procedure at the stage of scenario specification is very simi- 
lar to that of region specification. The system prompts the user with a list of 15 
options, of which all but zero option are closed. 
It should be noted that option 14 refers only to forest areas. 
2.2.4.1. Option 0: Continue Modelling 
If the user has specified option 0, the system responds with: 
I 
1 Input modelling time (max 199 years) - 
I 
which indicates that the control passes to the next (fifth) stage. The scenario, 
which was selected at stage 4 is stored in a file for possible future uses. 
2.2.4.2. Option 1: Return to Previous Scenario 
This option restores the previous scenario and enables the user to formulate 
new scenarios by altering previous ones. 
2.2.4.3. Option 2: Sensitivity Investigation 
The sensitivity of model outputs to variations of some exogeneous variables 
can be studied under this option. The current version of the system provides an 
opportunity to investigate the influence of the following system variables: 
fl - total drainage rate (mm/year) 
dn - total dissection (km/km2) 
hgw - depth of first ground water table (m) 
rws - surface flow (mm) 
rwg - ground water flow (mm) 
rwdg - deep ground water flow (mm) 
while disturbing one of the lithology coefficients: 
clg(i), clw(i), clr(i), where i=l, ... ,9 
depending on lithology type. Predesignated values of these coefficients are stored 
in the table below: 
The sensitivity investigation proceeds as follows. First, the user must choose a Type of lithology clg clw clr 
1 - Sand 
2 - Loamy sand 
3 - Loam 
4 - Clay 
5 - Marl 
6 - Compact sedimentary rocks 
7 - Intrusive and metamorp rocks 
8 - Shingle beds 
9 - Karsted rocks 69.0 
39.0 
26.0 
12.7 
9.0 
6.7 
6.7 
97.5 
162.5 0.10 
0.80 0.85 
0.92 
0.92 
0.93 
0.93 
0.40 
0.30 1.60 
0.64 
0.80 
0.53 
0.17 
0.11 
0.08 
0.80 
0.32 disturbed coefficient (if he has forgotten their names he may use "?" command as a 
"help1'): 
I 
I input name of coefficient - ? 
I 
( ---> input legal name of lithological coefficient: 
1 input name of coefficient - clg(9) 
I 
The number in brackets must correspond to the lithology type of region in ques- 
tion. Then he enumerates the variables which he is interested in (fl, dn and so on) 
using <RETURN> for input interruption. The last request is: 
I 
I input number of random value - 
I 
The answer is an arbitrary integer number which defines the initial point in pseudo 
random values row. The system uses these random values to disturb the specified 
coefficient. Then the system returns to the main scenario menu and the user 
should input 0 (to continue) and modelling time (for example 100 years): 
I 
1 HUMAN FACTORS 
I 
I 0 -CONTINUE 
I 1 - RETURN Lo previous scenario 
1 2 - Sensitivity investigation 
( 3 - Temperature trend 
1 4 - Precipitation trend 
1 5 - Pollution and fertilization rates 
1 6 - Irrigation regime 
1 7 - Drainage intensity 
1 8 - Specific features of agriculture 
( 9 - Fires in non-cultivated lands 
1 10 - Artificial destruction of biomass 
( 11 - Changes in the area of arable lands 
1 12 - New plantation in non-cultivated lands 
1 13 - New shelter belts in arable lands 
1 14 - Changes in the stock of wood due to lumbering 
I I input option number - 0 
I 
( Input modelling time (max 199 years) - 100 
I 
I SIMULATION RUN 
I 
Having completed the calculations, the system displays values of coefficients 
(original and disturbed): 
I 
1 coeff: old = ... , new - ... , re1 err = ... (%) 
I and relative deviations of variables averaged by decades. The next question is 
I 
( print the result? (y/n) - 
I 
After receiving a replay, the system returns to the main menu of scenario specifi- 
cation stage. 
2.2.4.4. Option 3: Temperature Trend 
The system displays the following prompt: 
I 
1 Temperature trend (grad per year) - 
I 
The user is expected to input average yearly rate of temperature change within a 
region. The temperature trends specified by the user are continued over the 
specified period. 
2.2.4.5. Option 4: Precipitation Trend 
The system displays the following phrase: 
I 
I Precipitation trend (mm per year) - 
I 
The user should input average yearly rate of precipitation change that will con- 
tinue over the specified time period. 
2.2.4.6. Option 5: Pollution and Fertilization Rates 
The system displays the following list: 
I 
( POLLUTION DEPOSITION AND FERTILIZATION RATES 
I 
( pollutants (t/ha-year) 
I 
( 1 - sox 
12 - NOX 
1 3 - CxHy 
14 -Pb 
15 -Hg 
(6 -Cd 
1 7 - Nitrogen fertilizes 
1 8 - Phosphorus fertilizers 
1 9 - Potassic fertilizers 
1 10 - Organic fertilizers 
1 11 - Continue 
I 
( input option number - 
I Options 1 - 10 will return the system to the same list. To return to the list of 
scenario options indicate option 11. If any number from the range 1 - 6 was chosen, 
the user will have to specify the distribution of the relevant pollutant between dif- 
ferent types of environment by answering to prompts: 
I 
1 into the soil of non-cultivated lands - 
I 
1 into the soil of arable lands - 
I 
( air pollution - 
I 
( water pollution - 
I 
All fertilizers are applied: 
I 
I into the soil of non-cultivated lands - 
I 
and 
I 
I into the soil of arable lands - 
I 
while organic fertilizers caused 
I 
I water pollution - 
I 
as well. 
Having specified the distribution of pollutants and fertilizers, the user should 
indicate option 11. The system displays: 
( thermal pollution (grad) - 
I 
Thermal pollution, as it is assumed here, is the yearly averaged increment of the 
yearly averaged temperature due to thermal wastes. 
2.2.4.7. Option 6; Irrigation Regime 
The user is requested to specify the sources and the intensity of watering in 
the region: I 
I AGRICULTURAL WATERING 
I 
( with ground water (mm) - 
I 
1 with deep ground water (mm) - 
I 
I with artesian water (mm) - 
I from rivers and lakes (mm) - 
I from transit rivers and canals (mm) - 
I 
1 the reduction in surface flow due to water retention - 
I 
As for the last question, it should be noted that the user is supposed to input a 
number from 1 to 10 to indicate the degree of surface flow decrease as a result of 
water retention. (l-no decrease, 2 - moderate water retention, ..., 10 - significant 
water retention.) We want to stress that 1 (not 0) means no water retention in the 
region. 
2-2.4.6. Option 7: Drainage Intensity 
The following inquires are displayed: 
I 
1 HYDRAULIC AND DRAINAGE RECLAMATION 
I 
I 
I DRAINAGE 
I 
I 0 - Absent 
1 1 - Intensive 
1 2 - Moderate 
( 3 - Low 
I input option number - 
I 
I Change in the surface of lakes due to engineering reclamation (X) 
I 
2.2.4.9. Option 61 Specific Features of Agriculture 
The equations describing the crop production block of the model were origi- 
nally identified for wheat. So the biomass of arable lands is supposed to be the 
wheat biomass. If the user wants to investigate another crop, he has to specify 
values of the appropriate coefficients. To do this, he should answer the following 
requests: I 
1 SPECIFIC FEATURES OF AGRICULTURE 
I 
1 The part of biomass removed from the fields (% of total) {0.750e+02j - 
I 
( The grain/straw ratio in the removed biomass (%) {0.330e+02 j - 
I 
Having received this information, the system determines a new value for the har- 
vest and asks the user about the actual harvest in the area in question in order to 
correct the coefficients: 
I 
I The predicted harvest is (O.lOOe+Olt/ha); input the actual harvest - 
I 
Then the system adjusts the values of the new coefficients and returns to the main 
menu of the stage. 
2.2.4.10. Option 9: Fires on Lands Not Used for Agricultural Purposes 
The system will request the user to specify the damage done by fires by 
displaying the following prompt: 
I 
I THE INTENSITY OF FIRES IN NON-CULTIVATED LANDS 
I 
I 0 - Absent 
I 1 - Low (ground fire) 
1 2 - Medium 
1 3 - Significant (crown fire) 
I 
I input option number - 
I 
It should be kept in mind that forest fires usually occur, for instance, during every 
twentieth or tenth year in the period of simulation. So the time interval under con- 
sideration has to be divided appropriatly. 
2-2.4.11. Option 10: Artificial Destruction of Biomass 
The requests are: 
I 
1 Destruction of biomass by vehicles (%) - 
I 
2.2.4.12. Option 11: Changes in the Area of Arable Lands 
The user should specify the annual average increase (or decrease) in the 
area of arable lands in percentage of total arable lands area in the previous year: I 
I CHANGE IN THE AREA OF ARABLE LANDS (X of total area per year) 
I 
1 increase - 
I 
I decrease - 
2.2.4.13. Option 12: New Plantations in Non-Cultivated Lands 
The questions are: 
I 
1 New plantations in non-cultivated lands (X of total area) - 
I 
1 The age of the trees (years) - 
I 
2.2.4.14. Option 13: New Shelter Belts in Arable Lands 
The questions are similar to the previous option: 
I 
I New shelter belts in arable lands (X of total area) - 
I 
1 The age of the trees (years) - 
I 
2.2.4 -15. Option 14: Changes in the Stock of Wood Due to Lumbering 
It might be pointed out that this option is valid only in the forest areas. The 
user is to specify the reduction in the amount of wood due to lumbering in percen- 
tage of total biomass: 
I 
I Changes in the stock of wood due to lumbering (X) - 
I 
1 Is it selective cutting of young trees? (y/n) - 
I 
2.2.5. Set Time Interval. Run the Model 
This stage opens with the following request: 
I 
1 Input modelling time (max *** years) - 
I 
where *** means the number of years left before the simulation time expires. The 
total length of simulation period should not exceed 199 years. 
After the system has received an answer, it replays the following message: I 
1 SIMULATION RUN 
I 
When the run is over, the system passes on to the next stage. 
2.2.6. Output Modes 
The following menu is offered here: 
I 
I OUTPUT MODES 
I 
1 1 - Standard output 
1 2 - Direct output 
1 3 - Continue modelling 
I 
1 input option number - 
I 
2.2.6.1. Option 1: Standard Output 
Option 1 is followed by displaying the sets of the major variables, grouped in 
some reasonable way. The first list is as follows: 
I 
1 STANDARDOUTPUT 
I 
( Biocenoses dynamics 
I 
1 1 - soil - vegetation 
( 2 - soil productivity - soil index - humidity 
1 3 - soil - fertilizers 
I 
I Water parameters 
I 
I 4 - total flow 
1 5 - surface dissection 
1 6 - ground-water flow 
1 7 - deep ground-water flow 
I 
I Salinity parameters 
I 
1 8 - soil - ground-water 
1 9 - ground-water - river water 
1 10 - pollution parameters 
I 
I input option number - 10 
I 
If option 10 was chosen, then the second list would be displayed: I 
I TYPE OF ENVIRONMENTAL COMPONENT & POLLUTANT 
I Pollution of : 
1 1 - plants with toxic metals 
( 2 - soil with toxic metals 
1 3 - air 
1 4 - surface waters with metals 
1 5 - surface waters with hydrocarbons, nitrogen, phosphorus & potassium 
1 6 - ground-waters with metals 
1 7 - ground-waters with hydrocarbons, nitrogen, phosphorus & potassium 
1 8 - deep ground-waters with metals 
1 9 - deep ground-waters with hydrocarbons, nitrogen, phosphorus & potassium 
I 
I input option number - 1 
I 
Options 1, 3 of the first list and 1, 2 of the second one require additional informa- 
tion concerning type of land: 
I 
I TYPE OF LAND 
I 
1 1 - non-cultivated 
1 2 - arable 
1 3 - wetlands 
I 
I input option number - 
I 
Having received the required information, the system passes to the next stage and 
displays the list of output forms. 
2.2.6.2. Option 2: Direct Output 
Option 2 implies that the user should specify the names of the output vari- 
ables. The prompt is: 
I 
( input name of * variable - 
I 
The asterisk is substituted by the numbers 1 to 4 because the number of output 
variables cannot exceed 4. To interrupt input, the <RETURN> should be pressed. 
The list of accessible output variables is in Appendix C. 
2.2.6.3. Option 3: Continue Modelling 
This option transfers control to the stage of "session continuation options" 
(2.2.8). 2.2.7. Output Fonns 
The user has to choose the type of representation for the output information: 
( OUTPUT FORMS 
I 
/ 1 - Table on display 
1 2 - Plot on display 
( 3 - Plot on graphics device 
I 
I input option number - 
I 
Option 1 is followed by a table of output variables. The other two options 
require additional information. 
2.2.8. Scaling Modes 
The user must choose from: 
I SCALING MODES 
I 
I I - automatic, single scale for all variables 
1 2 - automatic, separate scale for every variable 
1 3 - manual, single scale for all variables 
1 4 - manual, separate scale for every variable 
I 
I input option number - 
I 
Option 1: The system initiates a procedure for defining the minimum (Y min) 
and the maximum (Y max) values among all the values of the output variables. (This 
may be done only if the output variables are measured in the same units.) These 
values then serve as the upper and lower boundaries of the plotted output along 
the Y axis. 
Option 2: The system automatically defines the minimum (Yimin) and the max- 
imum (Yimax) values for each of the output variables (where i is the index of the 
output variable). The output curves are then scaled separately to fit into the same 
box. 
Option 3: The minimum (Y min) and the maximum (Y max) among all values of 
the output variables are specified by the user in response to the prompts: 
I 
I PARAMETERS FOR MANUAL SCALING 
I 
1 y min - 
I 
1 y max - 
I 
In case some values of an output variable exceed (or are less than) the upper (or 
lower) limit defined by the user, the system cuts off some parts of the curve. 
Option 4: The user is requested to specify the Yimin and Yimax values for 
each of the output variables separately (i is index of the output variable) by 
answering to a sequence of prompts: I 
I min of variable number [i] - 
I 
1 max of variable number [i] - 
Having finished the scaling procedure and receiving a response on request: 
I 
I title for plot - 
I 
the system displays a graphic of the specified parameter. In case of option 2 (see 
2.2.7 - Output forms menu), it would be a user's terminal. When the whole graph is 
displayed on the terminal, the program waits for <RETURN>. Only after doing this 
does the following message occur: 
I 
( print the graph y/n ? 
I 
The user can print this graph on the printer choosing "y". 
2.2.8.1. The Usage of Graphics Devices 
The user can display graphs on the graphics devices by choosing option 3 for 
the "OUTPUT FORMS" menu. 
In order to create smooth graphics, the system uses the "Newplot" utility 
which is available on the IIASA VAX 11/780 computer. The system prepares all 
necessary information, puts it into the files "plot.datH and "plot.cmd" and transfers 
the control to the Newplot program. It should be noted that the graphics device is 
specified in the file "plot.dev" on the first line. It can be a graphical terminal, 
"bbc-plotter", or any dot matrix printer. Here is an example of a "plot.dev" file: 
mann 
C- COMMENTS --- 
First string of this file contains the name of the graphic device, i.e., 
a) '/dev/tty.. ' - for particular graphical display 
b) 'screen' - for graphical display 
c) 'bbc' - for bbc plotter 
C) 'varian' - for varian printer 
e) 'tektronix' - for tektronix terminal 
f) other filename - output will go to the file in the current directory 
and later can be redirected to any other previous 
devices or matrix printer 
In order to change the first string of this file one can change the output dev- 
ice for the Newplot. We used the f) option in this file, e.g., the output goes to the 
file with the name "mann"; after that, it is automatically printed on the central 
Mannesmann Tally dot matrix printer. 
If the user is working from the graphical display, he has to choose option b) 
to obtain the graph on his display. Of course he can redirect this output to another 
hardcopy device using the "devi" command. This is possible because when the 
Newplot finished its last command from the file "plot.cmd", it switched the input from the terminal. The user has to issue some of Newplot command to continue or 
to stop the Newplot program. For a description of Newplot, see [2]. For our pur- 
poses, three commands are enough: 
stop - to terminate Newplot 
devi - to override the device 
plot - to produce a graph. 
After each command the Newplot prompts with ">" and after the last command, the 
user can return to the system by typing: 
> stop 
or if he wants to plot a graph on "bbc-plotter", he should type the following 
sequence of commands: 
> devi bbc 
> plot 
> stop 
Newplot creates graphics on the bbc-plotter and returns the control to the sixth 
stage of the system. 
2.2.9. Choose the Next Stage 
When the user has reached this stage, he is offered the following list of 
options: 
I 
1 SESSION CONTINUATION OPTIONS 
I 
I 0 - Terminate session 
1 1 - Define region 
1 2 - Define scenario 
1 3 - Continue modelling 
1 4 - Output results 
I input option number - 
I 
Option 0 terminates the session; options 1 - 4 transfer control to the correspond- 
ing stages of the system. 3. How to Generate the System 
A list of necessary files is in Appendix E. 
3.1. System Executable Module Generation 
The following files should be compiled and linked together to create the exe- 
cutable file "sef.eH using the following UNIX command: 
It must be mentioned that files "sef.cmnM and "grsys.cmn" are indispensable during 
compilation. It is also necessary to compile some auxiliary programs "trans.fU 
"cre.fH and "vndt.f " for direct access files formation. The program "trans.f" 
translates the dialogue files. Program "cre.f" is used for creation of a hash table 
of system variables which is necessary for direct input-output modes. Program 
"vndt.fM alternates the data file "vn.datU. 
3.2. The Content of Files 
"sef.cmnH - common block, includes all the system variables 
"grsys.cmn" - common block, includes variables for output programs 
("outp.fU and "grafn.f ") 
"namtbl.sefM - direct access file having address table for SEF common variables 
"vnun.dat" - direct access file, having model parameters data 
"grspe.datM - standard output control file 
"save.sef" - output variables list file 
"regn.engM , "scen.engM , "outp.eng" - direct access files, having dialogue 
texts 
"regn.fU - region specification program 
"scen.fU - scenario specification program 
"0utp.f" - output result program 
"sef .f " - main supervisor program 
"syssef.fU - service programs 
"ecmod.fM - ecology dynamic model 
"dia1.f" - dialog realisation program 
"str.fV - string information processing 
"ran.fN - random generator 
"sensef . f " - sensitivity investigation program. 
"wthr.dat" - file for random generator control 
"plot.dev" - file for choosing the output device for print figures. 
3.3. Direct Access Files Creation 
For successful system execution, it is necessary to alternate a number of suc- 
cessive access files into direct access files: 1 initial files: program: direct access files: 1 
To realize the above tasks, one should successively execute appropriate programs 
)Ivndt.el', "cre.eU and "trans.eH answering the required questions from the pro- 
grams. It should be mentioned that all "*.engH files can be created within one run 
of the program "trans.eM. 
To get executable programs "vndt.eU "cre.eU and "trans.eH, the user must use 
the following UNIX commands 
REFERENCES 
Pegov, S., P. Komyakov, V. Kroutko: Modelling system of region environment state 
dynamics 
Schweeger, B.: Newplot version 1.2 Reference manual, IIASA, 1982 LS-8 Appendix A List of regions for geographical input mode 
Region Type of Type of Type of Type of 
number vegetation relief lithology waterlogging 
(NZ) (NR) (NL) (NH) Appendix B Synopsis of the shadow dialogue commands 
? - help 
I - show system state 
-D - reverse 
# file - open protocol (protocol writes into the specified file) 
#! - show protocol 
## - close protocol 
Q file - external input (input stream from the specified file) Appendix C Description of system variables 
The following notation is used: 
1. The units of measurement are indicated in brackets after the full name of the 
variable. 
2. Index 'i' appearing in the name of certain variables should be interpreted as 
follows: 
i=l - lands not used for agricultural purposes; 
i=2 - lands used for agricultural purposes; 
i=3 - wetlands. 
3. Index 'j' indicates different kinds of pollutants and fertilisers: 
j=1 - sulfur concentrations; 
j=2 - nitrogen concentrations; 
j=3 - hydrocarbons; 
j=4 - concentrations of Pb; 
j=5 - concentrations of Hg; 
j=6 - concentrations of Cd; 
j=7 - nitrogen fertilizers; 
j=8 - phosphorus fertilizers; 
j=9 - potassic fertilizers; 
j =10 - organic fertilizers; 
j=11:15 - reserved indexes. Biotic parameters 
B(i) - biomass (tonnes per hectare) 
BM(i) - dead biomass (tonnes per hectare) 
CLV(i)- climateindex 
CPOL(i) - pollution index 
D(i) - proportion of the i-th type of land in the total area (lakes not included) 
(X 1 
DV(i) - proportion of the i-th type of land in the total area (lakes included) (%) 
DWNV(i) - wind erosion rate (mm/year) 
FIS(i) - increment of soil quality index due to fertilisation 
GH(i) - soil productivity (tonnes per hectare) 
HFF(i) - humidity 
HFV(i) - humidity for i-th type of land 
KV - vegetation type: 
KV=1 - grass; 
KV=2 - forest-steppe; 
KV=3 - forest; 
KV=4 - moss-lichen; 
SLTV(i) - soil salinity (X) 
SPWV(i) - rate of surface errosion by type of land (mm/year) 
SV(i) - soil index 
Drainage parameters 
CFWV(1) - proportion of surface drainage in total drainage (%) 
CFWV(2) - proportion of drainage from upper ground layer in total drainage (X) 
CFWV(3) - proportion of drainage from lower ground layer in total drainage (9.) 
DN - total dissection (km/km2) 
DNR - dissection by rivers (km/km2) 
n - total drainage rate (mm/year) 
FL1 - surface drainage rate (mm/year) 
FL2 - rate of drainage from upper ground layer (mm/year) 
FL3 - rate of drainage from lower ground layer (mm/year) 
FL1+FL2 - sum of FL1 and FL2 (mm/year) 
FL12+FL3 -sum of FL1, FL2 and FL3 (mm/year) 
HEX - maximum cut (m) 
HGW - depth of first ground water table (m) 
HGWD - depth of second ground water table (m) 
HP1- depth of first aquifer 
HPW - depth of first aquifer (m) 
HWPD - depth of second aquifer (m) 
RMDV - effective surface drainage (X) SWlV - water salinity, first ground water table (g/l) 
SW2V - water salinity, second ground water table (g/l) 
RCSV - river water salinity (g/l) 
Parameters of pollutants and fertilizers (tomes per hectare) 
PLA(j) - atmospheric pollution 
PLDW(j) - water pollution, second ground water table 
PLGM(j) - ground pollution, between first and second water tables 
PLGW(j) - water pollution, first ground water table 
PLP(j,i) - vegetation pollution 
PLS(j,i) - soil pollution (mobile compositions) 
PLSG (j,i) - soil pollution (connected compositions) 
PLWT(j) - surface water pollution 
Variables defined during region specification stage 
HGW - depth of first water table (m) 
HGWD - depth of second water table (m) 
HWP - depth of first aquifer (m) 
HWPD - depth of second aquifer (m) 
H7 - depth of second water bearing-horizon roof (m) 
HPF - depth of permaffrost (m) 
AWF - filtration from transit rivers (mm) 
DN - total dissection (km/km2) 
DNT - dissection by transit rivers (km/km2) 
HEX - maximum depth of valleys (m) 
HEM - average depth of valleys (m) 
CLAK - share of total area covered with lakes (%) 
DEC - average surface slope (tangen) 
CEH - average width of valleys (m) 
CPDG - downward infiltration of ground-water (I.) 
CLDG - infiltration of ground-water, second layer, into rivers (%) 
SW1- ground-water salinity (gr/l) 
SW2 - deep ground-water salinity (gr/l) 
RMDO - maximum of monthly surface flow as percent of total flow (Z) 
biomass, average (t/ha-yr) 
B(1) - non-cultivated lands 
- arable lands 
B(3) - f lood-lands 
mortmass, average (t/ha-yr) 
BM(1) - non-cultivated lands BM(2) - arable lands 
BM(3) - flood-lands 
index of soil 
s(1) - non-cultivated lands 
s(2) - arable lands 
s(3) - f hod-lands 
soil salinity (X) 
SLS - non-cultivated lands 
SLSA - arable lands 
RI - precipitation (mm) 
TI - temperature (grad) 
V1 - wind velocity (m/s) 
DTB - difference of temperatures between valleys and uplands Appendix D List of variables accessible in direct output mode 
dn dnr fl 
f 13 f 132 f1123 
f112 hgw hgwneg 
hgwd hwp hw~d 
swlv sw2v ~CSV 
rws rwg rwdg 
ti ri tpl 
tt tr caf (1) 
pstr ddna clak 
Pg pgt caw 
f rs Paq daq 
u(l) u(2) ~(3) 
b(l) b(2) b(3) 
cf wv(1) cfwv(2) cfwv(3) 
cpol(1) cpol(2) cpol(3) 
gh(l) k?h(2) gh(3) 
hff (1) hff (2) hff(3) 
sv(l) sv(2) sv(3) 
sltv(1) sltv(2) sltv(3) 
pla(1) pla(2 ~143) 
ph(7,l) pls(8,l) pM9,l) 
pW7,2) pls(8,2) pls(9,2) 
pk(7,3) pW8,3) pls(9,3) 
plp(4.1) plp(5,l) plp(6s1) 
plp(4,2) plp(5,2) plp(6,2) 
plp(4,3) plp(5,3) plp(6.3) 
~~4~1) pls(5,l) pl~(6,l) 
pk(4,2) pls(5,2) ph(6,2) 
pls(4,3) pW5,3) pk(6,3) 
plwt(3) plwt(4) plwt(5) 
plwt(6) plwt(7) plwt(8) 
plwt(9) 
plgw(3) ~lgw(4) ~lgw(5) 
plgw(6) plgw(7) plgw(8) 
plgw(9) 
pldw(3) pldw(4) pldw(5) 
pldw(6) pldw(7) pldw(8) 
pldw(9) 
dpls(1,l) dpls(2,l) dpls(3,l) 
dpls(4,l) dpls(5,l) dpls(6,l) 
dpls(7,l) dpw8,i) dpw9,1) 
dpls(10,l) 
dpls(1,Z) dpls(2,2) dpls(3,Z) 
dpW4,2) dpW5,2) dpW6,2) 
dpW7,2) dpW8,2) dpW9,2) 
dpls(10,2) 
dpla(1) dpla(2) dpla(3) 
dpla(4) dpla(5) dpla(6) 
dpla(7) dpla(8) dpk (9) 
dpla(l0) 
dplw(1) dplw(2) dplw(3) 
dplw(4) dplw(5) dplw(6) 
dplw(7) dplw(8) dplw(9) 
dplw (10) Appendix E List of system files 
1. Necessary for normal system operation: 
sef .e 
sef .cmn grsys.cmn namtblsef 
vnun.dat grspe.dat save.sef 
regn.eng scen.eng outp.eng 
wthr.dat plot.dev 
2. Created by the system during a session: 
inireg.ssf iniscn.ssf wfil 
plot.dat plot.cmd pltt 
newplot.dat newplot.graf newplot.prot 
ad j. buff0 
3. Necessary for system generation: 
sef .cmn grsys.cmn 
sef .f syssef .f 8cmod.f 
regn.f scen.f 0utp.f 
dia1.f str.f ran.f 
sensef .f grafn.f Appendix F: Example of one session 
YOU ARE WELCOME TO THE SYSTEM FOR 
ECOLOGICAL FORECASTING 
IN THE COURSE OF INTERACTION WITH SEF 
1. Use '?' if you need additional information. 
2. Use '!' if you need to see the 'SYSTEM STATE*. 
3. Use 'control-D* if yon need to return to the previous 
point of interaction. 
4. If the SEF question has a current value of the 
variable in brackets I ...I you may use 
'RETUEZN' if you do not need to change a value. 
5. See details in SEF User's Manual and SEF Model 
Deacrip tion. ....................................................... 
System loading - PLEASE WAIT - System loading 
SPECIFY REGION 
MODES OF REGION SPECIFICATION 
1 - Detailed 
2 - Brief 
3 - Geographical 
4 - Direct 
5 - Previous region 
6 - Adjusted previous region 
7 - CONTJNUE 
input option number - ? 
---> 1. Detailed description of the area has to be given by the user 
for precise adjustment. 
2. Eco-physical characteristics are been taken from the 
data bank for approximate 
adjustment of the area. 
3. The same as before, but the user has to point out only 
the number of the region in accordance with Appendix A 
from the SEF user's manual. 
4. In addition to 1, some internal parameters can be 
redefined. 
5. The region characteristics will be the same as before 
the model adjustment from the previous run. 
6. The same as 5. but after adjustment. 7. Adjustment of region to chosen parameters. 
input option number - 2 
TYPE OF GEOGRAPHICAL BELT 
1 - Arctic 
2 - Temperate 
3 - Temperate belt of central sector 
4 - Subtropical 
5 - Tropical 
6 - Equatorial 
input option number - 5 
TYPE OF VEGETATION 
25 - Tropical subdesert 
26 - Tropical desert 
27 - Tropical savanna 
28 - Tropical monsoon forest 
29 - Tropical forest 
input option number - 28 
TYPE OF ReLIEF 
1 - Low land 
2 - Plainland 
3 - Upland 
4 - Lon mountains 
5 - Plateau 
6 - Mountains. of medium altitude 
7 - Table-land 
input option number - 4 
TYPE OF LITHOLOGY 
1 - Sand 
2 - Loamy sand 
3-Loam 
4 - Clay 
5 - Marl 
6 - Compact sedimentary rocks 
7 - Intrusive and metamorphic rocks 
8 - Shingle beds 
9 - Karsted rocks 
input option number - 9 
WATERLOGGING DUE TO HIGH AQUIFER 
1 - Absent 2 - Intensive 
3 - Moderate 
4-Low 
input option number - 3 
filtration from transit rivers (mm) [O.e+OOj - 0. 
MODES OF REGION SPECIFICATION 
1 - Detailed 
2 - Brief 
3 - Geographical 
4 - Direct 
5 - Previous region 
6 - Adjusted previous region 
7 - CONTWE 
input option number - 1 
depth of 1-st water table (m) 10.85?e+Olj - 
depth of 2-nd water table (m) 10.950e+02j - 
depth of 1-st aquifer (m) 10.100e+02j - 
depth of 2-nd aquifer (m) 10.100e+03j - 
depth of 2-nd water-bearing horizon roof (m) 10.900e+02] - 
filtration from transit rivers (mm) 1O.e+00j - 
total diaection (krmfkm2) 10.550e+01 j - 
dissection by transit rivers (krmfkm2) 1O.e+00j - 
maximum depth of local valleys (m) 10.350e+03j - 
average depth of local valleys (m) 10.200e+02 j - 
share of total area (X), covered with lakes 1O.e+00j - 
average surface slope (tangens) 10-140e-02 j - 
average width of valleys (m) 1 0.300e+02 j - 
downward infiltration of ground-water (X) 1 O.e+OOj - 
infiltration of ground-water. 2-nd layer, into rivers (X) 1O.e+00j 
ground-water salinity (grf 1) 10.153e+00 j - 
deep ground-water salinity (grfl) 10.153e+00 j - maximum of monthly surface flow (share of total flow) 10.190e+OOj - 
any alterations ? (y/n) - n 
biomass. average (t./ha-yr) 
1 - non-cultivated lands 10.469e+03j - 
2 - arable lands 1O.e+00j - 
3 - flood-lands 10.363e+03j - 
mortmass. average (t/ha-yr) 
1 - non-cultivated lands 10.400e+OOj - 
2 - arable lands 1O.e+00j - 
3 - flood-lands 10.500e+OOj - 
index of soil 
1 - non-cultivated lands 10.500e+Olj - 
2 - arable lands 10.400e+Olj - 
3 - flood-lands 10.400e+01 j - 
soil salinity (X) 
1 - non-cultivated lands 10.516e-01j - 
2 - arable lands 10.516e-011 - 
Precipitations (k) 10.168e+04] - 
do you want to randomize precipitation ? (y/n) - n 
Temperature (grad) 10.225e+02] - 
do you want to randomize temperature? (y/n) - n 
Wind velocity (m/s) 10.350e+01j - 
Difference of temperature between valleys and uplands [0.100e+00 j - 
TYPE OF LITHOLOGY 
1 - Sand 
2 - Loamy sand 3-Loam 
4 - Clay 
5 - Marl 
6 - Compact sedimentary racks 
7 - Intrusive and metamorphic racks 
8 - Shingle beds 
9 - Karsted rocks 
input option number - 9 
MODES OF REGION SPECIFICATION 
1 - Detailed 
2 - Brief 
3 - Geographical 
4 - Direct 
5 - Previous region 
6 - Adjusted previous region 
7 - CONTrnE 
input option number - 7 
Input share of arable lands (X) - 20 
INPUT COMPISTED. YODEL IS ADJUSTING TO THE REGIONAL DATA 
MODEL ADJUSTMENT COMPLETED 
SPECIFY SCENARIO 
HUMAN FACTORS 
0 - CONTINUE 
1 - RETURN to previous scenario 
2 - Sensitivity investigation 
3 - Temperature trend 
4 - Precipitation trend 
5 - Pollution and fedilization rates 
6 - Lrrigation regime 
7 - Drainage intensity 
8 - Specific features of agriculture 
9 - Fires in non-cultivated lands 
10 - Artificial destruction of biomass 
11 - Changes in the area of arable lands 
12 - New plantation in non-cultivated lands 
13 - New shelter belts in arable lands 
14 - Changes in the stock of wood due to lumbering 
input option number - 14 
Changes in the stock of wood due to lumbering (X) - 5 Is it selective cutting of young trees? (y/n) - n 
HUMAN FACTORS 
0 - CONTINUE 
1 - RETURN to previous scenario 
2 - Sensitivity investigation 
3 - Temperature trend 
4 - Precipitation trend 
5 - Pollution and fertilization rates 
6 - Lrrigation regime 
7 - Drainage intensity 
8 - Specific features of agriculture 
9 - Fires in non-cultivated lands 
10 - Artificial destruction of biomass 
11 - Changes in the area of arable lands 
12 - New plantation in non-cultivated lands 
13 - New shelter belts in arable lands 
14 - Changes in the stock of wood due to lumbering 
input option number - 0 
Input modelling time (max 199 years) - 50 
SIMULATION RUN 
OUTPUT MODES 
1 - Standart output 
2 - Direct output 
3 - Continue modelling 
input option number - 1 
STANDARD OUTPUT 
Biocenosea dynamics . . 
1 - soil - vegetation 
2 - soil productivity - soil index - humidity 
3 - soil - fertilizers 
Water parameters 
4 - total flow 
5 - surface dissection 
6 - ground-water flow 
7 - deep ground-water flow 
Salinity parametem 
8 - soil - ground-waters 
9 - ground-waters - river waters 10 - pollution parametres 
input option number - 1 
TYPE OF LAND 
1 - noncultivated 
2 - arable 
3 - wetlands 
input option number - 1 
OUTPUTFORMS 
1 - Table on display 
2 - Plot on display 
3 - Plot on graphics device 
input option number - 2 
SCALING MODES 
1 - automatic, single scale for all variables 
2 - automatic, separate scale for every variable 
3 - manual, single scale for all variables 
4 - manual, separate scale for every variable 
input option number - 2 
Title for plot - firsttable 
print the result? (y /n) - y 
OUTPUT MODES 
1 - Standart output 
2 - Direct output 
3 - Continue modelling 
input option number - 1 
STANDARD OUTPUT 
Biocenoses dynamics 
1 - soil - vegetation 
2 - soil productivity - soil index - humidity 
3 - soil - fertilizera 
Water parameters 
4 - total flow 
5 - surface dissection 
6 - ground-water flow 
7 - deep ground-water flow Salinity parameters 
8 - soil - ground-water 
9 - ground-water - river water 
10 - pollution parametera 
input option number - 5 
OUTPUTFORMS 
1 - Table on display 
2 - Plot on display 
3 - Plot on graphics device 
input option number - 3 
1 - automatic. single scale for all variables 
2 - automatic. separate scale for every variable 
3 - manual. single scale for all variables 
4 - manual, separate scale for every variable 
input option number - 2 
Title for plot - fifthtable 
OUTPUT MODES 
1 - Standart output 
2 - Direct output 
3 - Continue modelling 
input option number - 3 
SESSION CONTlPrUATION OPTIONS 
0 - Terminate session 1 - Define region 
2 - Define scenario 
3 - Continue modelling 
4 - Output results 
input option number - 0 3 EXAMPLES 
K Fedotov, M. Lenko Example 1. Scenarios Soil Quality 
Traditional Development of the Agricultural Sector 
To illuminate the possibilities of SEF, several scenarios were tested and one 
of them is described briefly in this section. This scenario deals with the area 
between the Lesser Himalayas and Siwalik. The geophysical characteristics avail- 
able in the Project's Data Bank (see Chapter 11) were used to respond to the 
requests of the SEF section "detailed region specification". 
For the first 50 years of the run, it was assumed also that 3% of the forest 
cover of the valley was removed annually. The volume of fertilizers was taken at a 
level three times less than the currently reported one. This 50-year run was done 
to imitate the previous development. From Figure 6 it is clear that after 40 years, 
the soil quality significantly deteriorated and approached some low bound without 
noticable changes during the next 10 years. 
Developments for the next 50 years were imitated under the assumption that 
0.016 t/ha of nitrogen, 0.005 t/ha of phosphate, 0.0015 t/ha of potash, and 0.1 t/ha 
of organic fertilizers were used annually (reported in the Yearbook 1984, Dehra 
Dun). One can observe that even at the same rate of deforestation, the fertiliza- 
tion of agricultural land leads to a significant improvement during the next 50 
years. But it also can be observed (see Figure 7) that the dissection of land con- 
tinuously increased during the considered interval, presumably because of a 
rather high level of deforestation which can be the result not only of timbering, 
but also of industrial activities (road construction, limestone quarrying). MRY 1. 7.66 MIN 1. 1.37 
Figure 6 Soil productivity (I), soil index (2) and soil salinity (3) for amble land - MRX 1. 2A.d 
MIN 1. li.6 
Figure 7 Total dissection (in knr / knr2) Example 2. Design and Analysia of Simulation Experiments 
To clarify the facilities of the software on design and analysis of simulation 
experiments and to assess the sensitivity of SEF to the variation of different input 
parameters, the simulation experiment was carried out with SEF adjusted to the 
Doon Valley conditions. It is worthwhile to emphasize "adjusted" to some region 
because the final results strongly depend upon the regional characteristics. 
For the sake of simplicity, only 31 parameters were chosen for the exercise. 
With the help of the module "PLAN" (see Chapter I), the two-level othogonal plan 
was constructed (it contains 32 "observations"; of course, this plan can be found in 
some catalogues but we want to demonstrate the work of the software). The levels 
of variations for all 31 parameters are in Table 1. Most of them can be changed 
under "Detailed" description of the region. Others can be fixed in the "Scenario" 
regime. As a response "soil productivity" was chosen. 
When all 32 observations were executed, the module "SYS" (see Chapter I) was 
used to get the set of the most significant parameters. This included only five out 
of the 31; see Figure 8. The simplest secondary model 
where za are input parameters, and ri are deviations from the primary model, was 
chosen. The normalized sum of square residuals 
m- where N=m +I, Gm =$om+ 19%,, $m are the stepwise least square estimates, 
a =l 
m =I,. . . ,31, was used as a measure of the accuracy of a secondary model. 
From Figure 8 it is easy to see that 5 primary chosen parameters explain 
-90% of the total fluctuation of SEF prognoses for "soil productivity." The set of 
significant parameters depends upon the chosen response. For example, for "total 
dissection" it was average surface slope, precipitation, biomass and the rate of 
forest cutting. Table 1 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 27 
28 
29 
30 
31 + 
18. 
49. 
50. 
5. 
0.5 
75. 
20. 
3.5 
0.1 
24. 
12. 
7.5 
0.6 
400. 
2. 
300. 
30. 
3. 
30. 
12. 
8. 
7. 
2000. 
25. 
4. 
-0.6 
50. 
0.018 
0.0054 
0.0016 
5. m 
m 
mm 
kn/km2 
kn/km2 
m 
m 
X 
tangat 
m 
X 
X 
share -tot./Low 
t/ha/?f 
t/ha/y 
t/ha/y 
t/ha/ y 
t/ha/y 
t/ha/y 
mm ' C 
m/s 
'C 
X 
kg / ha 
kg / ha 
kg / ha 
X 1st water table (+ 1st aquifer) 
2nd water table (+ 2nd aquifer) 
filtration from transit rivers 
total dissection 
dissection by transit rivers 
max. depth of local valleys 
average depth of local valleys 
area covered by lakes in X 
average surface slope 
average width of valleys 
downward filtration 
filt. of gr.water into rivers 
max. monthly surface flow 
biomass non-cultivated 
biomass arable 
biomass f loodlands 
mortmass non-cultivated 
mortmass arable 
mortmass f lood-lands 
index of soil non-cultivated 
index of soil arable 
index of soil flood-lands 
precipitation 
temperature 
wind velocity 
temp diff .-valleys/highlands 
input share of arable land 
fertilizer N 
fertilizer Ph 
fertilizer K 
forest cut - 
13. 
33. 
0. 
2. 
0.1 
25. 
5. 
1.5 
0.001 
8. 
4. 
2.5 
0.2 
200. 
0. 
100. 
10. 
1. 
10. 
4. 4. 
3. 
1000. 
15. 
2. 
-0.2 
10. 
0.012 
0.0036 
0.0012 
1. 0 
15. 
41. 
25. 
3. 
0.3 
50. 
8. 
2.5 
0.05 
16. 
8. 
5. 
0.4 
300. 
1. 
200. 
20. 
2. 
20. 
8. 
6. 
5. 
1500. 
20. 
3. 
-0.4 
30. 
0.015 
0.0045 
0.0015 3. = (15) biomass (arable lands) 
- (23) precipitation 
Figure 8 Simulation experiment - soil productivity (ratio v: / vt) SIMULATION EXPERIMENT 
(9) average surface slope 
a. am 
a-75 1 
P. --&=I am 
0. 15 
a. (24) temperature 
-L (21) initial index of soil 
I rn a m m 
. 4 1. 3. S. 6. 0. 18. 
STEP 
-e- aa ~a~io I el r/a7,loas II DATA BANK 1 TABLES General data about Doon Valley 
Sources are: Gazetteer about Dehra Dun and other short articles 
Dehra Dun town Dehra Dun Tehsil Dehra Dun District 
regulated area 1961 1971 1961 1971 1981 
Total area: 
nonarable land 
forest land 
cultivable land 
land under habi tuse 
popultion total 
rural population 
density total 
density rural 
livestock 
livst .density 750 km2 2003. 
0.1 z 2. z 
44.6 Z 
55.3 z 
5.8 Z 
249879 362300 
184614 167700 
334 per km2 211 
247 per km2 
185617 
248 per km2 
General data from Yearbook 1984: 
I tem unit Year Value 
Area sq km 1981 3088 
Population 
male 1000 1981 420.465 
female 1000 1981 341 .203 
total 1000 1981 761.668 
rural 1000 1981 389.527 
urban 1000 1981 372.141 
Percent of working class 1981 32.56 
Cultivated area 1000 ha 1982-83 57.340 
Hore than oncw cultiv. area 1000 ha 1982-83 30.594 
Net irrigated area 1000 ha 1982-83 23.542 
Production of food grains metric tonns 1981-82 82343 
Irrigation 
length of cannals km 1983-84 336 
State Tubewells no 1983-84 35 
Total number of cattle no. 1982 359085 
Percentage of cultivated land 1981-82 17.69 
1982-83 17.91 
Percenatge of land cultivatet more 1981-82 50.96 
than once 1982-83 53.35 
Percentage of the irrigated land 1981-82 39.74 
in total cultivated area 1982-23 41.05 
fertilizer used per hectare kg 1981-82 23.31 
kg 1982-83 20.96 
Food production per capita 100 kg 1981-82 1.08 
100 kg 1982-83 1.006 
Per capita production in the District 
(prevailing rates) 
(Rupees) 
1970-71 253 
1975-76 506 
1976-77 606 
1978-79 531 
1980-81 840 
1931-82 791 Times CS 5~nrIse (SF) and sunset (SS) on iST 
(Indian Standard Time) ar 2oon Vaiiey (3C.4 K? ?C, E) Data about Dehra Dun from Gazetter 1579: 
Area (1581) 3088 sq km 
Area for landutilisation 2627.3 sq km 
Total population (1571) 577306 (females 251158) 
Rural population 305529 ( 136840) 
Urban population 271777 ( 114358) 
Dehra Dun tahsil 2363.4 sq km 498178 (fern. 215303) 
Chakrata tahsil 263.9 sq km 79128 ( 318751 
Rainfall: 87 I in June-September 
Frequency of rainfall between 1901-1950: 
Range in ro no of years 
1301-1500 2 
1501-1700 2 
1701-1900 6 
1901-2100 11 
2101-2300 9 
2301-2500 6 
2501-2700 2 
27U1-2900 4 
2501-3100 6 
3101-3300 I 
3301-3500 1 
average 79 rainy days (with rainfall ) 2.5mm) 
heaviest rainfall in 24 hours Rajpur 25. Aug 1954 = 440.4 rm 
Temperature: 
highest month Hay 36.2 oC 
lowest month Jan 6.1 oC 
highest max Dehra Dun 43.9 oC on Jun 4, 1502 
min -1.1 Feb 1, 1905 
Relative humidity more than 70 Z 
Winds: 
postmonsoon and winter mornings N, NE 
in afternoons SW, N# throughout the year 
Forest Areas: (in hectars) 
Year forest depart. private total 
1566-67 150517 16500 167017 
1567-68 152786 16500 169286 
1968-69 153058 16500 169558 
1965-70 153320 16500 169895 
1970-71 150803 16575 167378 
area under forest (1961) 171021 ha (1371) 167378 
uncultivated land 23652 
area under current fallows 3430 
cultivated area 56748 
total area affected by soil erosion 35266 ha in the plains 
14625 ha in hilly tracts (1870) 
cultivated area: 
1901 38589 ha e.g. 12 I to total area 
1921 40141 10 
1341 41947 11 
1561 56748 20 
1567 55557 21 
1971 55647 culturable area (areas under groves, forests, pastures, grazing land, 
fallows) 
1906 224961 ha 
1921 291666 
1941 268329 
1961 190698 
1967 190636 
1971 194224 
unculturable area (water, buildings, roads and railways, habitation sites) CLIHATOLOGICAL TABLE 
station: Dehra Dun City 
Honth pressure Air temperature 
rean extremes 
dry wet daily daily high lowe high date love date 
bulb bulb nax rin ront ront year year 
rb oC oC oC oC oC oC oC OC 
jan I 958.7 8.9 7.1 19.1 6.1 23.1 2.7 26.1 16 -1.1 11 
jan I1 937.2 15.6 11.4 1946 1944 
febI ?36.6 11.5 8.9 21.4 8.2 26.0 3.9 29.4 28 -1.1 1 
feb I1 935.0 18.8 12.7 1956 1905 
mar I 934.9 16.9 12.3 26.4 12.4 31.4 7.4 37.2 28 2.2 6 
mar I1 932.9 23.7 14.9 1832 1945 
apr I 932.5 23.2 15.6 32.1 17.0 37.0 12.0 40.6 27 7.8 4 
apr I1 929.8 29.8 16.9 1832 1944 
ray I 928.7 27.8 18.9 36.2 21.5 40.2 16.7 42.8 28 12.8 6 
ray I1 925.7 33.9 19.9 1944 1947 
junI 925.4 28.5 22.4 35.5 23.6 40.1 19.1 43.9 4 13.9 10 
jun I1 922.1 33.2 22.8 1902 1906 
jul1 925.2 26.0 24.1 30.4 23.1 34.7 20.7 40.6 1 18.3 28 
jul I1 922.5 23.3 25.0 1931 1902 
augI 926.8 25.4 23.8 29.5 22.7 32.4 20.8 37.2 5 19.4 27 
aug I1 924.2 27.1 24.6 1949 1932 
sepI 930.4 24.6 22.1 29.6 21.3 32.1 17.8 34.4 30 14.4 30 
sep 11927.8 27.1 23.4 1938 1940 
oct I 955.7 20.4 16.7 28.2 16.1 30.9 11.8 36.1 2 9.4 31 
oct I1 933.4 25.1 19.9 I901 1938 
novI 938.1 14.2 11.3 24.7 10.5 27.5 7.1 30.1 1 2.8 30 
nov I1 936.2 19.8 15.4 1952 1938 
decI 959.1 9.9 7.9 20.9 7.0 24.3 5.7 27.2 30 0.0 31 
dec I1 937.3 16.3 12.6 1960 1934 
annual 932.7 19.8 15.5 27.8 15.8 40.9 2.1 43.9 -1.1 
rean 930.3 24.9 18.3 
nro 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 80 80 
years 24 24 24 
humidity cloud aroun t rainfall rean 
re1 vapour all low total in total in wind 
humid press clouds clouds wettest driest heaviest speed 
nro ronth ronth fall in date 
ronthly rainy with with 24 and 
total days year year hours year 
Z rb oktas of sky rr rr rr rr kr/h 
jan I 
jan I1 
feb I 
feb I1 
nar I 
nar I1 
apr I 
apr I1 
ray I 
nay I1 
jun I 
jun I1 
jul I 
jul I1 
aug I 
aug I1 
sep I 
sep I1 
oct I 
oct I1 
nov I 
nov I1 
dec I 
dec I1 
annual mean 54 16.6 3.2 2.0 1834 1'?07 
nro 30 30 30 20 30 30 80 6'0 SO 
years 24 24 24 20 
station: Hussoorie 
non th pressure Air temperature 
mean extremes 
dry wet daily daily high lowe high date lowe date 
bulb bulb rax min mont ront year year 
mb oC oC oC oC oC oC oC OC 
janI 798.2 5.7 1.9 10.2 2.5 15.9 -1.4 21.1 14 -5.0 16 
jan I1 797.2 6.2 4.1 1949 1935 
febI 797.2 7.1 3.6 11.9 3.7 16.2 -1.5 23.3 26 -6.7 10 
feb I1 796.5 8.0 5.6 1953 1950 
mar I 797.7 11.4 6.5 16.2 7.2 21.9 2.2 26.1 31 -2.5 23 
mar I1 796.8 12.4 8.4 1945 1960 
apr I 797.6 16.3 10.0 21.1 11.8 25.9 5.5 28.9 22 -0.6 4 
apr I1 796.5 18.1 11.6 1956 1944 
may1 796.1 19.8 13.0 24.8 15.1 29.1 9.1 34.4 24 5.6 6 
may I1 794.9 21.6 13.8 1949 1947 
junI 793.6 19.9 15.8 24.1 16.4 28.5 11.0 31.7 3 5.3 3 
jun I1 792.1 21.4 17.2 1935 1957 
jul1 732.8 18.3 17.4 20.8 15.9 24.3 14.1 29.4 7 12.2 1 
jul I1 791.4 18.6 18.1 1949 1939 
augI 794.0 17.9 17.2 20.2 15.6 23.0 14.0 25.6 23 12.2 15 
aug I1 792.6 18.0 17.8 1957 1937 
sepI 796.5 17.3 16.6 19.9 14.3 25.0 11.2 17.2 11 6.1 30 
sep I1 795.1 17.1 16.6 1946 1940 
oct I 799.8 14.4 10.6 18.7 11.1 22.3 7.4 25.6 18 3.3 29 
oct I1 798.5 14.3 12.0 1951 1945 
novI 800.3 11.3 6.4 15.8 7.4 19.6 4.1 25.0 17 -2.1 29 
nov I1 798.5 10.7 7.8 1953 1954 
decI 799.4 8.0 3.8 12.7 4.3 18.5 0.2 21.7 2 -3.9 31 
dec I1 798.2 7.3 5.3 1953 1954 
annua1796.9 13.9 10.2 18.0 10.4 29.8 -2.7 34.3 -6.7 
mean 795.7 14.5 11.5 
nro 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 
years 26 26 26 
humidity cloud amount rainfall mean 
re1 vapour all low total in total in wind 
humid press clouds clouds wettest driest heaviest speed 
nro month month fall in date 
monthly rainy with with 24 and 
total days year year hours year 
X mb oktas of sky mm mm mm mm km/h 
janI 58 5.0 3.9 1.6 66.4 5.3 200.9 0.0 90.9 6 6.7 
jan I1 72 6.7 4.6 2.6 1935 1943 
febI 56 5.5 3.3 1.2 66.9 4.5 220.5 0.0 82.0 4 7.4 
feb I1 71 7.6 4.2 2.2 1949 1949 
mar1 49 6.3 3.3 1.2 63.5 4.6 182.9 0.0 62.0 24 7.9 
mar I1 59 8.4 3.8 2.1 1944 1944 
aprI 44 7.9 2.2 0.8 29.5 2.5 106.4 0.0 45.2 17 7.9 
apr I1 46 8.6 3.6 1.6 1943 1942 
may1 46 10.3 2.1 1.0 45.1 4.1 143.5 5.8 50.0 13 8.4 
may I1 43 11.9 3.7 2.2 1933 I935 1943 
jun I 68 15.1 3.6 2.0 188.5 8.9 542.5 16.5139.9 23 7.5 
jun I1 66 16.1 4.3 3.1 1936 1931 1936 
j~l I 93 19.1 6.6 4.5 726.5 22.9 1268.0 381.8 196.9 23 5.6 
.iul I1 95 20.6 6.9 4.8 1542 1951 1942 
aug I 94 18.9 6.9 4.2 754.7 23.6 1217.9 338.3 302.3 3 4.7 
aug I1 98 20.2 7.4 4.0 1950 1938 1931 
sepI 86 16.2 4.5 3.1 323.2 15.01048.0 36.1199.6 26 5.4 
sepII 94 18.5 6.1 4.9 1947 1939 1.947 
OC~I 63 10.1 1.6 1.1 64.8 2.3 447.0 0.0198.1 Y 6.1 
oct I1 78 12.8 2.7 2.5 1956 1956 nov I 
nov I1 
dec I 
dec I1 
annual 
mean 
nro 
years 
station: Roorkee 
Month pressure Air temperature 
mean extremes 
dry wet daily daily high lowe high date lone date 
bulb bulb max rin ront ront year year 
rb oC oC oC oC oC oC oC OC 
janI 985.1 9.5 8.0 20.1 6.6 24.2 2.8 28.3 24 -1.1 17 
jan I1 983.0 17.6 12.8 1898 1935 
feb I 962.6 11.9 9.9 22.9 8.7 27.9 4.5 31.7 28 -2.2 2 
feb I1 980.3 21.0 13.1 1956 1905 
mar I 980.0 18.0 13.6 28.7 13.1 34.3 7.9 36.9 31 2.8 6 
mar I1 977.5 26.9 16.7 1945 1945 
aprI 976.6 25.3 17.2 35.2 18.2 40.2 12.5 43.3 19 7.2 4 
apr I1 973.2 33.4 19.4 1897 1905 
nay I 972.1 30.5 20.4 39.4 23.6 43.7 18.7 46.1 29 14.4 5 
nay I1 968.3 37.7 21.8 1884 1907 
junI 968.6 30.9 23.5 38.5 25.9 43.7 21.0 46.7 13 16.1 14 
jun I1 964.7 36.8 24.4 1932 1900 
juli 968.6 28.6 25.5 33.3 25.5 36.9 22.3 45.0 1 21.1 11 
jul I1 965.7 31.5 26.5 1931 1955 
augI 970.4 27.8 25.5 32.3 25.0 36.2 22.6 39.8 14 20.6 5 
aug I1 967.3 30.4 26.6 1960 1914 
sepI 974.2 26.9 24.1 32.4 23.4 35.3 19.6 38.3 10 15.6 29 
sep I1 971.1 30.6 25.3 1699 1944 
oct I 980.4 22.4 19.0 30.9 17.2 34.0 12.1 38.3 7 8.9 31 
oct I1 977.3 28.4 21.2 1819 1953 
novI 983.7 14.8 12.3 26.5 10.1 29.9 6.2 33.9 1 2.8 30 
nov 11981.6 22.9 16.1 1952 1934 
decI 985.4 10.3 8.5 22.0 6.8 25.3 3.3 28.5 5 -0.7 25 
dec I1 983.0 18.6 13.3 1889 1902 
annua1977.3 21.4 17.3 30.2 17.0 44.1 2.2 46.7 -2.2 
mean 974.4 29.0 19.9 
nro 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 80 80 
years 28 28 28 
huridi ty cloud amoun t rainfall mean 
re1 vapour all low total in total in wind 
hurid press clouds clouds wet test driest heaviest speed 
nro ronth ronth fall in date 
ronthly rainy with with 24 and 
total days year year hours year 
Z rb oktas of sky rr rr rr DI kr/h 
janI 84 9.2 3.1 1.3 42.9 3.1 162.8 0. 101.6 26 4.0 
jan I1 54 10.8 3.3 1.5 1911 1883 
febI 78 10.2 2.8 0.9 46.8 2.8 202.7 0. 111.0 1 4.8 
feb I1 43 10.6 3.0 1.2 1954 1930 
mar1 62 11.6 2.6 1.0 28.4 2.0 116.3 0. 109.5 2 5.4 
aar I1 32 10.4 2.9 1.5 1955 1955 
aprI 41 13.1 2.0 0.6 11.3 1.1 67.1 0. 38.3 12 6.1 
apr I1 22 10.7 2.5 1.0 1909 1949 
ray1 37 16.2 1.8 0.5 17.0 1.8 98.0 0. 57.7 30 7.2 
iay I1 20 12.9 2.0 0.8 1913 1910 
jun I 55 23.6 3.3 1.4 90.5 5.0 438.9 0.3 148.8 29 7.3 
jun I1 37 20.3 2.7 1.4 1906 1947 1906 
jul I 80 30.5 5.7 3.5 337.2 12.7 621.8 53.1 228.9 7 5.8 
jul I1 68 30.5 5.2 3.1 1689 1911 1889 
augI 84 31.0 5.5 5.8 329.0 12.9 777.0 47.2192.8 3 4.6 
aug I1 73 29.6 5.0 3.5 1942 1699 1896 
sepI 80 27.3 3.6 2.3 206.4 7.0 745.0 0. 266.7 20 4.2 sep I1 
oct I 
oct I1 
nov I 
nov I1 
dec I 
dec I1 
annual 
rean 
nro 
Years 
station: Simla 
Honth pressure Air temperature 
mean ex treres 
dry wet daily daily high lowe high date lowe date 
bulb bulb  ax rin ront ront year year 
rb oC oC oC oC oC oC oC OC 
janI 781.7 4.9 1.0 8.5 1.9 14.3 -3.3 18.9 14-10.6 11 
jan 11 781.1 5.2 2.4 1949 1945 
feb I 780.8 6.4 2.0 10.3 5.1 16.0 -2.3 20.6 26 -8.5 11 
feb I1 780.4 7.1 3.8 1553 1950 
mar I 781.5 10.3 4.2 14.4 6.8 20.0 0.2 23.9 31 -5.6 25 
mar I1 780.9 11.4 6.4 1945 1933 
apr I 781.8 15.7 7.8 19.2 11.2 24.4 4.1 28.3 29 -1.1 1 
aprII780.6 16.6 9.2 1941 1905 
ray I 780.5 15.5 11.2 23.4 15.0 27.7 8.7 30.0 29 4.4 4 
ray I1 779.4 21.1 12.4 1944 1924 
jun I 773.0 20.6 14.6 24.3 16.2 28.3 10.6 30.6 15 7.6 2 
jun I1 776.8 21.8 15.6 1932 1922 
jul I 776.8 18.1 16.4 21.0 15.6 25.0 12.8 28.9 6 10.0 2 
jul I1 775.7 19.1 18.6 1901 1932 
augI 778.3 17.5 16.2 20.1 15.2 23.4 13.3 27.8 26 10.6 1 
aug I1 777.0 17.9 17.0 1951 1957 
sepI 780.8 16.8 14.1 20.0 13.6 22.7 10.8 25.0 11 5.0 29 
sep I1 778.5 17.2 15.3 1946 1940 
octI 784.3 14.5 8.8 17.9 10.6 21.5 6.7 23.9 1 2.8 29 
oct I1 782.9 14.5 10.2 1938 1304 
novI 763.9 11.0 4.3 15.0 7.3 18.5 3.8 21.1 17 -1.1 19 
nov I1 782.9 10.7 5.8 1952 1911 
dec I 782.9 7.4 2.1 11.3 4.2 17.0 -0.3 20.4 5 -6.1 22 
dec I1 782.1 7.2 3.6 1960 1937 
annua1780.9 13.6 6.6 17.1 10.1 28.6 -4.3 30.6 -10.6 
rean 775.9 14.1 10.0 
nro 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 65 65 
years 28 28 
humidi ty cloud amount rainfall rean 
re1 vapaur all low total in total in wind 
humid press clouds clouds wettest driest heaviest speed 
nro month ranth fall in date 
ranthly rainy with with 24 and 
total days year year hours year 
Z rb oktas of sky rr rr rr mr ka/h 
janI 48 3.5 3.7 1.4 65.2 5.4 255.0 0. 78.7 26 3.9 
jan I1 62 5.3 4.6 2.4 191 1 1688 
febI 45 3.7 3.2 1.1 47.6 4.2 229.6 0. 63.5 2 4.3 
feb I1 59 5.8 4.4 2.0 1901 1908 
mar1 37 4.0 3.3 1.0 53.1 5.4 231.4 0. 63.0 24 4.7 
mar I1 48 8.1 3.9 2.3 1911 1901 
aprI 32 5.4 2.4 0.5 37.6 3.8 197.4 0.5 39.6 26 4.5 
apr I1 37 6.5 3.7 1.9 1917 1696 1890 
ray I 54 7.6 2.0 0.6 53.7 4.8 277.4 2.8 97.8 26 4.4 
ray 11 35 8.2 3.2 1.8 1883 1887 1883 
junI 53 12.1 3.1 1.7 147.5 3.5 471.9 24.4122.2 29 3.7 
jun I1 53 13.3 4.1 2.8 1916 1851 1906 
julI 86 17.2 6.4 4.3 414.5 20.1 757.9133.5167.1 20 2.8 jul I1 
aug I 
aug I1 
sep I 
sep I1 
oct I 
oct I1 
nov I 
nov I1 
dec I 
dec I1 
annual 
mean 
nro 
years Station: Dehra Dun City 
MO~I th NEATHER PHENOMENA NIND 
nro of days with nro of days percentage nro of days of 
prec with wind speed wind from 
)0.3 thun- dust squal 20- 1- 
ra hail der fog storm )62 -61 -19 0 N NE E SE S SW W NW CALM 
jan I 60.2 30.2 0 0 0 0 15 16 15 17 1 1 2 2 5 6 51 
jan I1 0 0 19 12 3 2 13 41920 840 
feb I 5 0.1 2 0.3 0 0.1 0 0 12 16 13 14 1 1 0 3 6 5 57 
feb I1 0 0 23 54 30 3 82330 920 
mar I 6 0.3 5 0 0 0.4 0 0 14 17 9 9 1 2 1 6 12 5 55 
mar I1 0 0 24 74 5 14 624241022 
apr I 3 0.2 4 0 0 0.3 0 0 17 13 5 5 1 2 3 13 21 5 45 
apr I1 0 025 554 0272533 915 
may I 5 0.2 8 0 0.2 0.1 0 0 18 13 5 4 1 5 6 16 14 6 43 
aay I1 0 0 27 4 6 4 1282827 915 
jun I 11 0.5 10 0.2 0.1 0.1 0 0 18 12 5 5 2 11 8 12 10 6 41 
jun I1 0 0 25 5 6 7 1 4 10 21 22 10 19 
julI 26 0 121.1 0 0 0 0 18 13 6 6 31310 6 8 444 
jul I1 0 0 23 89 7 212 81114 829 
aug I 25 0 12 0.8 0 0 0 0 16 15 5 5 2 12 7 7 7 4 51 
aug I1 0 0 22 9 7 7 210 91216 631 
sepI 16 0100.6 0 0 00 15157749566452 
sep I1 0 0 19 11 6 7 15 5 9181138 
octI 40.1 5 0 0 0 0 0 14 171012 12 2 4 9 456 
oct I1 0 0 11 20 4 2 0 12 612 766 
nov I 0.7 0 0.5 0.1 0 0 0 0 12 18 10 9 0 0 0 4 5 5 63 
nov I1 00 6241101145661 
dec I 3 0 0.7 0.1 0 0 0 0 13 18 13 14 1 1 0 2 6 6 57 
dec I1 0 0 922 12 022 710 472 
annual 111 1.6 70 30.3 1.0 0 0 182 183 9 9 1 5 4 7 9 551 
rean 0 0 233 132 5 4 1 4 6 16 19 837 
nro 20 20 20 20 20 20 26 26 26 26 28 28 28 28 28 28 26 28 28 
years 26 26 26 26 28 28 28 28 28 26 26 28 28 
Month CLOUD VISIBILITY 
nro if days wuth cloud nro of days with low nro of days with 
amount (all clouds) cloud amount visibility 
oktas oktas up to 4-10 over 
f 0s 1-4 10-20 20 
0 1-2 3-5 6-7 8 0 1-2 3-5 6-7 8 8 lkr krs kms kms kms 
janI 10 7 4 5 5 19 5 3 2 2 0 00.5 31117 
janII 5 10 5 6 5 13 10 4 2 2 0 00.4 4 12 15 
febI 10 6 4 5 3 20 4 2 11 0 00.4 21214 
febII 6 9 5 5 3 12 10 3 2 1 0 0.10.3 3 12 13 
mar1 11 8 4 4 4 22 5 2 11 0 00.6 31512 
mar11 6 10 6 5 4 14 10 3 2 2 0 00.6 3 16 12 
apr1 14 8 4 3 1 23 4 11 10 01.3 41213 
aprII 6 13 5 4 2 13 12 3 1 1 0 00.5 4 13 12 
ray1 16 6 4 3 2 23 5 2 10 0 0.1 2 814 7 
may11 813 5 4 1 1115 3 11 0 0 2 814 7 
jun1 10 6 4 4 6 15 8 3 2 2 0 0.2 31012 5 
junII 511 7 4 3 814 5 2 10 0 3 813 6 
julI 135814 277690 039118 
julII 1 4 5 10 7 1 11 10 5 4 0 01.6 7 12 11 
aug1 0 4 5 715 18 7 411 0 0 3 911 8 
augII 0 3 6 10 10 1 8 10 6 6 0 01.4 7 13 10 
sepI 5 8 5 5 7 710 5 3 5 0 01.4 61211 
sepII 1 10 7 7 5 1 13 8 4 3 1 01.0 6 12 11 
octI 19 6 2 2 2 21 5 2 2 10 00.4 21118 
octII 11 15 3 1 1 11 15 3 1 1 0 00.5 2 12 17 
nov1 21 5 2 1 1 28 2 0 0 0 0 00.10.9 9 20 
nov I1 15 11 2 2 0 22 7 1 0 0 0 0 0.1 2 12 16 
dec1 13 8 4 4 2 23 5 11 10 00.4 21217 
decII 0 3 16 4 8 8 12 7 0 2 2 00.2 5 13 13 
annual 130 75 47 51 62 204 68 35 24 34 0 0.3 16 59 142 150 
mean 64 112 78 62 49 115 137 60 26 24 3 0.1 12 59 154 143 
nro 28 28 28 28 28 20 20 20 20 20 20 28 28 2S 28 28 years 24 24 24 24 24 20 20 20 20 20 20 24 24 24 24 24 
Station: nussoor ie 
Hon th HEATHER PHENOHENA HIND 
nro of days with nro of days percentage nro of days of 
prec with wind speed wind from 
)0.3 thun- dust squal 20- 1- 
me hail der fog storm )62 -61 -19 0 N NE E SE S SW W NU CALI 
jan I 7 2 1.6 3 0 0.3 0 0 24 7 17 13 11 14 13 5 1 5 21 
jan I1 0 0 24 7 7 7 5152713 3 320 
febI 51.71.61.6 00.3 0 0 20 81916 8 810 4 1 727 
feb I1 0 0 23 5 5 5 4153217 3 316 
mar I 6 1.8 4 0.7 0 0.5 0 1 22 8 21 16 8 9 ? 3 1 6 27 
mar I1 0 0 28 3 8 8 5153217 3 3 9 
apr I 4 1.2 5 0.4 00.5 0 1 21 8 18 14 6 9 11 6 2 529 
apr I1 0 127 2 7 6 3153022 4 58 
ray I 6 0.8 8 0.5 0.2 0.8 0 0 22 9 16 9 3 11 19 8 2 5 27 
may I1 0028 3984132619579 
junI 110.2 9 60.10.3 0 0 21 910 8 3122010 2 629 
jun I1 0 0 25 5 6 5 3122818 6 616 
julI 25 0 9 19 0 0 0 0 19 12 9 7 3 919 8 2 538 
jul I1 0 0 21 10 4 3 2 10 25 16 3 4 33 
aug I 270.1 9 17 0 0 0 0 19 12 8 6 3 11 18 8 2 5 39 
aug I1 0 0 22 9 6 5 2102716 1 330 
sep I 17 0.1 9 13 0 0.3 0 0 19 11 11 7 3 11 16 6 1 6 39 
sep I1 0 0 22 8 7 4 1112917 2 227 
octI 40.1 2 3 0 0 0 0 20 111410 31015 6 1536 
oct I1 0 0 25 6 3 5 1135719 0 222 
nov I 0.8 0.1 0.5 1.0 0 0 0 0 21 9 12 10 4 12 16 6 2 7 31 
nov I1 0 0 25 5 3 2 1153817 2 519 
dec I 3 0.7 1.4 2 0 0.1 0 0 23 8 14 11 6 13 17 6 2 6 25 
dec I1 0 0 24 7 7 4 3142915 2 422 
annual 116 9 60 67 0.3 3 0 2 251 112 14 10 5 11 15 6 2 6 31 
mean 0 1294 70 6 5 3133017 3 419 
nro 20 20 20 20 20 20 26 26 26 26 28 28 28 28 28 28 28 28 28 
years 23 23 23 23 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 
Hon th CLOUD VISIBILITY 
nro of days with cloud nro of days with nro of days with 
amount (all clouds) low cloud amount visibility 
oktas oktas up to 4-10 over 
f 0s 1-4 10-20 20 
0 1-2 3-5 6-7 8 0 1-2 3-5 6-7 8 8 lkm kms krs kms kms 
janI 10 6 3 7 5 22 2 1 2 3 1 1.60.6 2 4 22 
janII 4 7 5 7 8 14 5 3 3 3 3 41.4 5 318 
feb I 10 5 3 6 4 21 2 2 1 2 0 0.5 1.4 3 4 19 
feb I1 4 7 4 7 6 12 7 3 2 3 1 1.8 1.9 6 3 16 
mar I 10 7 4 6 4 23 2 2 1 3 0 0.81.3 4 5 21 
mar11 4 9 5 7 6 138 3 4 3 0 0.8 3 5 418 
aprI 13 8 3 4 2 24 3 1 1 1 0 0.31.6 3 5 20 
aprII 411 6 7 2 814 4 3 10 0.1 2 6 418 
may1 15 7 2 5 2 24 3 12 10 0.7 5 4 615 
may11 412 6 7 2 814 3 4 2 0 0.4 6 6 613 
junI 95367 1542533 66559 
junII27687 685623 58539 
julI 2 12 719 4 3 3 3 612 17 4 21.5 6 
jul I1 1 1 2 6 21 1 2 3 5 6 14 18 4 1.9 1.9 5 
augI 0 2 3 719 2 4 3 4 612 16 4 31.5 7 
aug I1 0 0 2 6 23 1 2 2 4 6 16 21 3 1.5 1.4 5 
sepI 465510 863355 733314 
sepII 13 3 716 13 5 5 610 14 3 3 2 8 
octI 17 7 2 3 2 20 5 2 1 2 1 1.50.6 3 4 21 
octII 712 4 3 5 712 3 3 2 4 4 2 4 318 
novI 18 723 0 28 200 0 0 00 2424 
novII 11 11 3 3 2 19 7 1 1 1 1 1.40.8 5 4 19 
decI 11 9 3 5 3 25 2 11 2 0 0.30.1 3 523 
dec I1 7 10 4 6 4 1-9 5 1 2 3 1 5 0.5 6 4 17 annual 119 70 35 64 77 216 58 21 22 34 34 52 28 37 48 201 
mean 43 YO 50 74 102 103 87 36 42 36 53 73 36 54 39 164 
nro 28 28 28 28 28 20 20 20 20 20 20 28 28 28 28 26 
years 28 28 28 28 28 20 20 20 20 20 20 28 28 28 28 28 
Station: Roorkee 
Honth WEATHER PHENOMENA WIND 
nro of days with nro of days percentage nro of days of 
prec nith wind speed uind from 
)0.3 thun- dust squal 20- 1- 
ma hail der fog storm )62 -61 -19 0 N NE E SE S SW W NW CALM 
jan I 50.3 20.7 0 0 0 0 17 14 1 2 110 1 3 135 46 
jan I1 0 0 20 11 12 0 9 13 24636 
feb I 4 0.3 3 0.3 0.1 0 0 0 17 11 3 5 1 14 0 3 1 34 39 
feb I1 0 0 22 6 12 111 15 35521 
mar I 4 0.2 2 0 0.1 0 0 0 20 11 2 3 1 17 1 3 1 36 36 
rar I1 0 124 6 12 112 1525719 
apr I 1.8 0.2 1.9 0.1 0.1 0 0 0 19 11 2 5 2 24 1 3 1 23 39 
apr I1 0 0 25 5 12013 14 26116 
ray I 3 0.1 5 0 0.9 0 0 1 23 7 2 3 1 44 1 2 0 23 24 
ray I1 0 126 4021181 6 15912 
junI 7 0 5 01.1 0 0124 51315611 11719 
jun I1 0 0 26 4 0 3 127 2 5 14714 
julI 150.5 8 00.2 0 0 122 8 13 160 11 0 627 
jul I1 0 1 22 8 1 3 344 2 4 11626 
augI 170.5 7 0 0 0 0 0 21 10 12 149 2 12 933 
aug I1 0 0 22 9 12 139 3 4 11930 
sep I 9 0.1 3 0 0.1 0 0 0 19 11 2 4 1 43 1 1 1 11 36 
sep I1 0 0 20 10 13 121 14 13434 
octI 2 01.3 0 0 0 00 16 15 14 135 11 0750 
oct I1 0 0 15 16 0 1111 0 113154 
nov I 0.6 0 0.4 0 0.1 0 0 0 11 19 1 2 1 I5 1 2 1 12 65 
nov I1 0 0 12 18 10 0 3 1 I13063 
dec I 2 0 0.4 0.4 0 0 0 0 12 19 2 2 0 11 0 2 1 20 62 
dec I1 0 0 15 16 0 10 7 11 23454 
annual 70 2 391.5 3 0 0 3221 141 2 3 131 1 2 11340 
mean 0 3 249 113 1 2 1 18 1 4 1 41 31 
nro 20 20 20 20 20 20 26 26 26 26 28 28 28 28 28 28 28 28 28 
years 26 26 26 26 28 28 28 28 28 28 28 28 28 
CLOUD VISIBILITY 
nro if days wuth cloud nro of days uith lon nro of days with 
amount (all clouds) cloud amount visibility 
oktas oktas up to 4-10 over 
f 0s 1-4 10-20 20 
0 1-2 3-5 6-7 8 0 1-2 3-5 6-7 8 8 lkr krs kms kms krs 
janI Y 7 6 4 5 21 3 32 11 1.2 5 7 315 
janII78754 1864210 037615 
febI 89533 2033200 046414 
febII 610 6 4 2 16 8 3 10 0 0.1 2 5 616 
mar1 910642 2334100 027616 
mar1188843 1595 I1 0 027715 
aprI 12 9 5 2 2 25 2 2 10 0 01.2 7 715 
aprII 810 7 3 2 18 8 3 10 0 0 2 8 812 
may1 13 9 5 2 2 26 2 2 10 0 0.1 3 811 9 
ray I1 12 10 5 2 2 21 7 3 0 0 0 0.1 4 7 13 6 
junI 7 8 5 5 5 19 3 5 2 10 0.2 4 611 9 
dun11 8 8 7 4 3 17 6 5 11 0 0.3 5 611 8 
julI 23 8 9 9 6 511 6 300.1 4 5 715 
julIIO41395 4914400 024619 
augI 14899 56 98 300.24 5814 
augI1 0 5 12 9 5 2 10 13 5 1 0 01.2 4 6 19 
sepI 6 8 7 5 4 10 8 7 4 1 0 01.3 6 9 14 
sep I1 4 10 10 4 2 5 12 10 2 1 0 00.7 5 8 16 
octI 16 9 3 2 1 23 4 2 2 0 0 00.4 6 619 oct I1 13 13 3 1 1 14 13 3 1 0 0 0 0.3 6 6 18 
novI 18 9 2 10 28 2 0 0 0 0 01.0 6 518 
novII 16 9 4 1 0 25 4 1 0 0 0 00.9 7 6 16 
decI 1110 5 3 2 25 2 3 10 0 0.5 3 7 615 
decII 910 6 4 2 23 4 5 10 0 0 3 7 912 
annual 112 95 65 49 44 231 43 51 30 5 1 2 33 76 83 173 
mean 91 105 88 50 31 178 96 67 19 5 0 0.5 26 73 92 172 
nro 28 28 28 28 28 20 20 20 20 20 20 28 28 26 28 28 
years 28 28 28 28 28 20 20 20 20 20 20 28 28 26 28 28 
Station: Simla 
Hon t h WEATHER PHENOHENA WIND 
nro of days with nro of days percentage nro of days of 
prec with wind speed wind fro# 
)O.3 thun- dust squal 20- 1- 
mm hail der fog storm )62 -61 -15 0 N NE E SE S SW W NW CALI 
janI 90.71.3 3 00.4 0 0 23 8 8 9 32521 4 1 227 
jan I1 0 0 24 7 6 11 5 19 22 12 1 2 22 
feb I 7 1.4 1.8 1.4 0 0.6 0 0 20 8 10 17 3 17 18 3 1 1 30 
feb I1 0 0 23 5 8 9 2122718 2 517 
mar I 5 1.8 5 0.5 0.2 0.4 0 0 23 8 9 16 4 18 19 5 1 2 26 
nar I1 0 0 28 310 6 2122820 5 8 9 
apr I 6 1.6 5 0.2 0.1 0.3 0 0 21 9 ? 16 5 15 16 6 1 2 30 
apr I1 0 0 28 2 9 7 192724 610 7 
ray I 8 1.3 7 0.2 0.4 0.1 0 0 23 8 10 17 7 13 14 7 2 3 27 
say I1 0 029 212 8 2 52025 914 5 
junI 120.7 9 20.10.1 0 0 21 51016 9 813 7 3 523 
jun I1 0 0 27 3 11 8 3 5 18 21 8 14 12 
julI 25 0 5 8 0 0 0020111215381472326 
jul I1 0 0 23 812 8 2 61815 5 826 
aug I 24 0 3 10 0 0 0 0 19 12 10 14 5 7 14 5 1 3 41 
aug I1 0 0 22 91211 3 81311 4 929 
sep I 15 0.2 4 4 0 0 0 0 19 11 14 19 5 7 9 3 0 4 39 
sep I1 0 0 23 7 14 13 4 4 12 14 5 12 22 
oct I 5 1.0 2 0.3 0.1 0 0 0 21 10 11 17 4 10 14 5 1 3 35 
oct I1 0 0 26 5 14 8 2 6 19 19 4 11 17 
nov I 1.1 0.2 0.3 0 0 0.1 0 0 21 9 13 18 4 11 14 4 1 2 33 
nov I1 0 0 23 7 13 15 3 9 17 13 2 5 23 
dec I 5 1.0 0.9 0.8 0 0.1 0 0 22 9 12 14 4 17 17 3 1 2 30 
dec I1 0 0 24 7 10 18 4 16 19 8 1 2 22 
annual 126 10 44 30 0.9 2 0 0 253 112 11 16 5 13 15 5 1 3 31 
mean 0 0 300 65 11 10 3 9 20 17 4 8 18 
nro 20 20 20 20 20 20 26 26 26 26 28 28 28 28 28 28 28 28 28 
years 26 26 26 26 28 28 28 28 28 26 28 28 28 CLirUD VISIBILITY 
nro if days wuth cloud nro of days vith low nro of days with 
amount (all clouds) cloud amount visibility 
oktas oktas up to 4-10 over 
f 09 1-4 10-20 20 
0 1-2 3-5 6-7 8 0 1-2 3-5 6-7 8 8 Ikr krs krs krs krs 
janI 10 5 3 6 7 24 1 1 2 2 1 1.30.1 3 10 17 
ianII 6 5 4 7 9 16 4 3 2 4 2 31.019 6 2 
febI 9 6 2 5 6 23 11 12 0 0.1 0 31014 
febII 4 6 5 7 6 16 5 3 2 2 0 21.0 20 51.0 
mar1 11 6 3 6 5 25 2 1 1 1 1 0.40.4 4 13 13 
mar11 5 8 5 7 6 16 5 4 3 3 0 1.01.0 20 81.0 
apr I 13 6 3 5 3 27 1 0 1 1 0 0.1 0.4 5 11 13 
aprII 4 10 5 7 4 15 8 3 2 2 0 01.0 15 131.0 
ray I 16 6 2 4 3 26 2 0 1 2 0 0.30.7 9 13 8 
ray11 611 5 6 3 14 Y 3 3 2 0 01.018111.0 
junI 11 5 2 5 7 21 2 12 3 1 2 213 94 
junII 3 8 6 8 5 10 7 5 5 2 1 2 217 81.0 
JUII 12 3 817 7 3 2 410 5 10 2 9 6 4 
jul I1 0 2 3 10 16 4 3 4 6 11 3 9 4 11 61.0 
augI 124816 743287 112765 
augII 0 13 Y 18 2 3 5 510 6 13 310 41.0 
sepI 7 6 3 6 8 15 4 2 2 5 2 40.9 610 9 
sepII 2 5 6 710 3 5 7 6 7 2 6 214 71.0 
octI 21 4 2 2 2 26 2 1 1 1 0 0.50.3 3 9 18 
oct I1 11 11 3 3 3 14 10 3 2 2 0 1.0 1.0 18 10 1.0 
novI 20 5 2 2 1 29 1 0 0 0 0 0.1 00.3 822 
novII 14 9 3 3 1 25 4 1 0 0 0 1.01.0 21 7 - 
decI 12 7 3 5 4 27 1 1 1 1 0 0.40.2 2 9 20 
decII 7 84 7 5 22 3 2 2 2 0 1.0 221 6 1 
annual 132 60 32 62 79 257 24 13 18 36 17 30 9 64 116 147 
mean 62 84 52 81 86 157 68 41 38 47 14 39 20 204 91 12 
nro 28 28 28 28 28 20 20 20 20 20 20 28 28 28 28 28 
years 28 28 28 28 28 20 20 20 20 20 20 28 28 28 28 28 Climatological data for the years 1969-1984 
Source: Forest research institute and colleges, New Forest, Dehra Dun 
Paephlet No. 3-18 
Station: New Forest (Dehra Dun) 
Hon Av. temperature Av. R. hum Av. Vap.pr No Rain- Evaporat . Sunsh/ Av. wind 
rax. min. mean 07h 14h 07h 14h rain fall Tot av/day day velocity 
(deg.C) (perc.) (ma of Hgldays (me) (ma) (hours) (kw/h) 
1969 
Jan 19.4 3.5 10.9 96 41 6.2 6.3 7 25.3 43.6 1.5 7.2 1.2 
Feb23.0 5.514.0 91 33 6.6 6.4 3 12.7 64.7 2.3 8.3 1.7 
lar 29.6 10.6 20.0 84 30 9.3 8.8 3 36.7 126.8 4.1 9.4 1.9 
Apr 32.9 14.523.5 70 34 11.012.1 6 17.4 185.9 6.2 7.9 3.2 
Hay 34.1 16.724.8 67 32 13.6 11.7 12 138.5 177.3 6.3 8.9 2.8 
Jun 36.6 21.2 28.1 72 38 18.1 15.6 9 53.0 205.8 6.9 8.5 2.3 
Jul 30.4 22.5 26.0 89 69 23.0 21.6 24 476.8 74.6 3.4 4.8 1.5 
Aug 29.1 21.P 24.7 95 82 20.9 22.6 26 859.4 50.9 2.8 4.8 2.5 
Sep28.520.223.8 94 76 18.720.620 201.5 62.1 2.6 5.9 2.1 
Oct 28.6 13.7 20.7 93 57 12.6 15.1 1 32.4 75.9 2.4 9.4 1.9 
Nov 25.5 8.6 16.5 98 57 9.0 13.1 0 0.0 57.2 2.0 9.1 1.9 
Dec21.8 4.1 12.5 P7 43 6.3 8.1 0 0.0 41.5 1.3 8.3 1.9 
Tot. 111 1853.7 1166.3 
Jan18.8 3.910.7 94 48 6.2 7.0 4 79.6 37.1 1.2 6.5 2.4 
Feb21.2 5.713.2 96 57 7.210.0 2 32.4 52.9 2.0 8.4 2.8 
Har 25.7 6.9 17.2 91 57 9.0 13.8 1 11.6 96.0 3.1 8.9 3.0 
Apr 33.813.523.7 73 20 11.4 7.4 1 9.2 172.6 5.7 9.6 3.3 
lay 36.8 17.5 26.4 64 30 13.2 11.6 6 99.2 214.0 6.9 9.6 3.2 
Jun 31.4 21.6 25.7 87 65 19.6 19.4 12 291.8 90.0 3.6 6.2 1.7 
Jul31.122.526.2 91 70 21.422.315 417.9 76.2 3.3 5.3 1.5 
Aug29.922.625.6 96 79 21.622.222 632.1 45.3 2.7 4.1 1.3 
Sep 30.0 20.8 24.8 94 74 19.3 20.8 14 447.4 58.0 2.8 6.5 1.0 
Oct 28.7 14.8 21.3 32 58 13.7 15.6 3 71.8 67.9 2.4 8.8 1.0 
Nov24.9 6.1 15.0 95 43 7.6 9.5 0 0.0 57.8 1.9 9.0 1.1 
Dec21.7 3.111.9 96 45 6.0 8.2 0 0.0 43.1 1.4 7.8 1.1 
lot. 80 2093.0 1011.4 
Jan19.2 2.810.4 95 48 5.7 7.5 3 45.6 49.1 1.6 7.7 1.5 
Feb 21.6 5.1 13.0 95 54 6.9 9.9 4 56.2 60.4 2.3 8.2 2.3 
Har 27.3 6.2 17.8 87 42 8.3 10.8 1 2.8 113.0 3.6 9.4 2.3 
Apr 31.7 14.8 23.1 77 44 12.6 14.5 5 54.8 156.4 5.2 8.9 2.6 
Hay 32.1 17.1 23.9 78 49 14.9 16.0 7 114.5 160.3 5.3 8.7 3.4 
Jun30.122.325.2 90 77 20.721.619 587.9 53.1 2.8 4.5 1.8 
Jul 29.5 22.4 25.4 93 78 21.1 21.9 20 599.5 60.4 2.9 4.7 1.5 
Aug28.121.724.1 96 81 20.321.3251180.6 26.5 2.2 3.9 1.5 
Sep29.4 18.7 23.5 92 67 17.4 19.3 7 136.5 80.7 3.1 8.2 1.2 
uct 27.8 13.7 28.3 33 56 12.9 14.9 5 82.6 80.0 2.8 8.9 1.1 
Nov 23.8 8.0 15.4 97 49 8.4 10.3 2 37.4 48.4 1.7 8.4 1.2 
Dec 21.2 4.6 12.4 98 45 6.6 8.2 0 0.0 45.5 1.5 8.3 1.2 
Tot. 98 2898.4 933.8 
Jan 20.4 4.0 11.6 97 44 6.5 7.4 3 14.2 42.6 1.4 6.8 1.5 
Feb 19.3 3.9 11.4 95 49 6.3 7.7 5 106.6 55.5 2.2 8.8 2.3 
Har 27.5 5.9 18.5 88 41 9.2 10.8 2 48.9 108.7 3.5 8.2 2.4 
Apr30.212.821.5 82 49 11.415.1 5 50.0 152.2 5.1 9.8 2.9 
Hay37.216.926.5 62 25 12.712.0 0 0.3 239.4 7.7 10.1 2.6 
Jun 36.821.328.1 66 39 16.7 15.1 5 51.1 215.1 7.4 6.9 3.0 
Jul 30.8 22.8 26.3 89 73 21.4 22.3 12 278.2 94.8 3.8 5.6 2.1 
Aug29.721.724.9 94 77 20.422.019 324.9 71.4 3.1 5.4 1.1 0 h M Lnhh Jan 18.0 4.8 10.9 97 57 7.2 8.1 7 90.0 36.9 1.3 6.2 2.6 
Feb22.2 6.814.1 95 44 7.8 8.2 0 6.9 57.3 2.1 7.5 3.0 
Mar 24.6 9.7 17.1 93 47 9.7 10.4 6 74.1 88.9 3.0 7.5 3.7 
Apr 31.5 14.3 23.0 76 33 12.3 11.5 1 6.8 172.3 5.7 9.9 3.9 
May 34.3 17.9 25.5 68 37 15.0 14.2 6 79.3 224.8 7.3 10.0 4.2 
Jun 35.4 20.6 27.0 69 43 17.1 15.8 9 242.3 170.5 6.8 8.6 3.6 
Jul30.023.126.0 93 78 22.022.624 699.2 54.9 3.2 3.7 2.5 
Aug30.622.625.9 92 74 21.422.312 467.7 77.1 3.4 5.5 2.6 
Sep 30.6 20.0 24.6 93 64 18.5 19.6 11 128.8 99.3 3.3 7.3 2.2 
Oct 29.4 12.3 20.5 94 47 12.0 13.4 0 0.0 91.2 2.9 9.8 2.3 
Nov 24.0 8.2 15.7 93 51 9.1 10.2 3 75.5 47.1 1.6 8.0 2.1 
Dec 21.6 3.0 11.8 94 40 5.9 7.1 1 7.6 45.6 1.5 8.7 2.4 
Tot. 80 1879.1 1065.9 42.1 92.7 35.1 
Jan20.1 4.811.9 95 51 6.8 7.1 5 88.7 36.8 1.3 6.3 2.5 
Feb 19.5 5.9 12.5 94 54 7.7 8.3 4 62.5 43.5 1.6 6.4 2.8 
Mar 22.6 8.6 15.6 93 54 9.0 10.6 9 185.9 70.2 2.5 7.4 3.5 
Apr 29.9 12.9 21.3 84 41 12.0 12.2 7 56.5 139.2 4.8 9.3 3.6 
May31.915.723.2 82 41 14.512.8 7 104.2 155.9 5.6 9.1 3.3 
Jun 34.7 20.5 26.6 80 49 18.1 17.5 7 103.9 162.8 5.4 9.1 3.3 
Jul 33.4 22.2 27.1 86 65 19.5 21.1 15 434.1 125.9 4.0 6.1 2.9 
Aug 30.7 22.7 25.9 93 77 20.8 22.4 21 652.9 62.3 3.5 4.7 2.5 
Sep 31.3 18.4 24.3 93 60 17.6 20.2 4 40.5 109.5 3.7 8.8 2.5 
Oct 29.2 12.8 20.5 93 53 12.4 14.9 2 51.7 83.4 2.8 6.4 2.3 
Nov 25.3 8.4 16.4 93 48 9.0 11.1 0 0.1 61.2 2.0 7.8 2.2 
Dec21.8 4.312.4 94 44 6.4 8.0 2 52.2 47.2 1.6 6.7 2.2 
Tot. 83 1833.2 1097.9 38.8 90.1 33.6 
Jan18.6 3.710.6 95 55 6.3 8.2 3 78.5 36.4 1.3 6.8 2.3 
Feb20.9 5.0 12.7 94 46 6.7 8.0 3 25.7 57.8 2.1 7.5 2.8 
Mar25.1 8.316.6 91 45 6.710.1 4 65.3 94.2 3.1 7.4 3.2 
Apr 27.5 11.9 19.7 87 47 11.4 11.8 8 97.7 104.6 4.0 7.5 3.3 
Hay 32.0 16.6 23.6 80 50 15.2 15.2 8 113.4 142.5 5.3 9.3 3.1 
Jun35.018.926.4 72 39 16.214.1 5 91.0 191.1 6.6 9.4 3.4 
Jul 31.6 22.2 26.4 88 68 23.3 21.5 17 323.2 101.7 4.1 6.0 2.5 
Aug 30.4 23.4 26.1 '94 76 21.9 22.5 21 689.5 61.6 2.8 3.2 2.4 
Sep30.722.225.8 93 70 20.221.613 346.1 69.5 3.0 6.8 2.1 
Oct28.6 14.621.0 92 50 12.3 14.2 4 41.8 91.1 3.0 9.3 2.1 
Nov 25.5 10.3 17.4 96 46 8.2 10.8 0 0.0 57.3 2.0 9.1 1.7 
Dec 20.8 3.8 11.7 95 46 6.0 8.0 1 6.2 44.9 1.4 7.4 1.8 
Tot 87 1796.5 1052.7 38.7 89.7 30.7 
Jan 19.2 1.8 10.0 95 41 5.2 6.6 2 9.5 46.3 1.5 7.3 2.2 
Feb 21.0 3.9 12.2 94 40 6.0 7.0 6 123.4 58.2 2.2 7.7 2.9 
Mar 28.3 9.9 19.1 90 36 9.4 10.2 1 3.7 113.1 3.6 8.7 2.8 
Apr 32.7 12.9 22.7 76 22 11.7 9.8 1 7.6 184.5 6.2 8.8 3.6 
May 38.2 18.327.6 60 26 14.3 12.4 0 1.0 259.9 8.4 9.5 3.7 
Jun32.923.227.1 84 62 20.420.313 389.5 109.6 4.8 4.9 2.7 
Jul 29.9 21.9 25.3 93 75 20.9 21.7 26 687.4 69.8 3.7 4.9 2.4 
Aug30.222.625.7 93 77 21.422.118 298.6 69.1 3.0 4.5 1.8 
Sep 29.5 18.6 23.5 94 63 17.1 18.7 11 207.1 88.3 3.3 7.8 1.8 
Oct 29.7 11.7 20.2 94 39 10.8 11.7 0 0.0 101.7 3.3 9.8 1.8 
Nov25.3 6.3 15.3 96 42 7.5 9.7 0 0.0 64.8 2.2 8.8 1.6 
Dec 22.1 3.7 12.4 96 42 6.3 7.7 1 13.1 46.1 1.5 7.0 1.5 
Tot. 79 1740.9 1211.4 43.7 89.7 28.8 Temporal distribution of annual rainfall 
Year precipitation (cs) jan 
feb 
mar 
apr 
may 
jun 
jul 
aug 
sep 
oc t 
nov 
dec Monthly average rainfall (60 years) (am) 
(UNDP) 
58.9 
62.7 
32.0 
16.5 
3b.8 
217.2 
668.0 
731.3 
269.7 
32.0 
6'.9 
25.9 Height 
(10OInj 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
5, 
10 
11 
12 
13 Potential temperature differences between 
Hussoorie and valley floor (in oCj 
Diifference 
(0C) 
0.0 
0.5 
1 .o 
1.9 
1.7 
4.2 
3.8 
7.0 
1.9 
3.2 
4.5 
7.3 
6.2 
7.7 
Potential temperature profile measured outside the left 
front window of a moving automobile, 10.00 - 11.00 LST 
Y January, 1986, between the city limits of Dehra Dun 
and Hussour ie. Expected rainfall (in cm) Dehradun uith different percent chance frequency 
Jan 0.25 1.35 2.41 3.96 5.87 7.47 8.61 10.13 12.04 15.24 22.73 
Feb 0.85 1.35 2.44 3.56 4.32 5.99 7.96 11.51 14.73 18.54 21.29 
lar 0.08 0.64 1.14 1.65 2.82 4.11 4.76 6.27 8.33 10.57 19.66 
Apr 0.03 0.20 0.43 0.79 1.09 1.78 2.08 3.12 4.65 6.00 9.68 
lay 0.56 0.89 1.65 2.29 2.87 3.68 4.72 5.87 6.98 11.66 19.30 
Jun 3.51 8.10 10.49 13.51 17.40 21.22 25.96 35.46 40.94 46.00 61.95 
Jul 38.00 48.08 53.32 64.90 70.15 76.61 83.69 87.93 99.87 108.89 113.69 
Aug 42.80 50.07 57.99 65.53 71.70 77.05 88.21 98.60 104.24 117.48 163.65 
Sep 7.72 13.69 17.22 23.06 27.03 32.84 35.08 40.41 56.24 65.99101.40 
Oct 0. 0. 0.13 0.79 1.50 3.20 4.93 8.36 11.33 17.58 32.54 
Nov 0. 0. 0. 0. 0. 0.10 0.36 1.24 3.10 3.9111.43 
Dec 0. 0. 0.23 0.51 1.04 1.73 2.54 4.14 8.28 9.93 15.01 
Annu 154.94 177.80 190.50 205.74 215.90 226.06 241.30 266.70 284.48 302.26 309.90 
Premo 10.90 15.19 17.40 24.03 26.62 30.23 35.92 40.92 50.55 57.86 71.88 
Honso 107.57 135.69 150.65 159.31 175.90 186.97 200.66 218.72 231.85 249.86 262.31 
Posmo 6.00 7.54 9.75 11.58 13.72 18.11 19.43 23.32 26.75 31.88 40.41 
Preronsoon - Harch, April, Hay, June 
lonsoon - July, August, September, October 
Postmonsoon- November, December, January, February 
Frequency = 100. / Percent chance Population during last 12 decades 
District Dehradun 
(yearbook 1984) 
YEAR total male female rural urban I increase 
during 10 years 
Percentage of different workers in rain working class: 
District Dehradun 
(yearbook 1584) 
Total main workers 247582 100 1 
Farmers 69291 28 I 
Agricultural workers 19682 8 I 
Family industry 3168 11 
Others 155841 63 1 
Population & area in 1971 according blocks: 
population area in sq kr 
block Chakrata 22834 302 
block Kalasi 38660 278 
block Sahaspur 112705 1229 
block Doiwala 112991 1114 
block Vangraa 8335 0 
total rural 305529 2923 
total urban 271777 165 
Doon valley rural 234035 2343 
Doon valley total 505812 2508 
Dehra Dun District 577306 3088 Electricity Consumption in District 
in kWhours Electricity in use 
(yearbook 1984) 
1981-82 1982-83 1983-84 
Domestic light 
& power 46080 58500 138360 
Commercial light 
&power 4087 30258 18176 
Industrial 
capacity 88847 157084 158416 
Public 
lightning 874 798 1133 
Agricultural 
consumption 5372 5113 4846 
Sewer & water 
SUPP~Y 12205 14347 13997 
Total 257475 266600 335928 
Per capita use 338 350 441 
Percentage of Electrified Villages Extraction of Forest Product in Dehradun in Cu.H. 
Source: Dept. of Environment 
Year Commercial Free h Concessional Total 
Wood Firewood Wood Firewood 
26698 9515 6 4376 40595 
20654 29181 13 2532 52380 
19514 56056 52 3414 79036 
13111 62564 150 3166 7899 1 
15456 51326 135 3232 70149 
34772 C3490 111 3155 101528 
37359 62782 0 963 101124 
32788 76067 2 28 108885 
26926 54303 n.a. n.a. 81229 
36873 167493 115 166 224647 
41864 141380 125 693 184062 
45620 176002 175 8 221805 
51855 125025 129 378 177387 
34043 115746 108 142 150039 
31023 91556 35 97 122711 
31342 83434 126 84 114986 
40777 89706 50 530 131063 
34053 6'5089 85 173 119400 
39737 n.a. 108 563 40408 Growth of forest revenue 
year revenue 
Ro. 
1080904 
1235302 
136'9681 
1543996 
3484782 
4392395 
5506375 
3216963 
2678341 
2660067 
4079493 grouth 
2 
12.5 
11.8 
12.5 
25.3 
23.19 
27.4 
36.5 
21.2 
0.3 
12.4 expenditure grouth 
Ro 2 
165140 
188633 14.3 
212526 12.5 
236139 11.1 
378484 60.2 
416397 27.9 
378852 10.0 
387777 2.3 
380752 0.2 
359101 8.2 
385665 7.4 
Remark: values and percentages are not reliable 
Source: Dept. of Environment Runoff versus crop rotation in Dehradun Valley 
particulars Sannhemp- Iwar fodder- Maize 
wheat wheat wheat 
Rainfall imm) 986.8 986.6 986.8 
Runoff (mm) 427.8 267.2 179.8 
Runoff as X 43.3 27.0 18.2 
Rainfall (mm) 1678.3 1678.3 1678.3 
Runoff (ma) 1007.4 386.1 680.0 
Runoff as Z 60.0 23.0 40.0 
Rainfall (me) 1023.0 1023.0 1023.0 
Runoff (mm) 403.8 70.6 110.7 
Runoff as X 40.0 6.9 10.6 
Rainfall (mm) 1018.6 1430.2 833.8 
Runoff (me) 260.0 78.0 36.0 
Runoff as X 27.5 5.5 4.3 Runoff and soil erosion 
(for monsoon period) 
Treatment Rainfall water losses 
(me) as X of rainfall 
( for aonsoon period) 
Foddergrass 1250 27.1 
Barefollon 1250 71.1 
Bare ploughed 1250 59.6 
Natural grass 1250 21.2 
(for winter rains) 
Fodder grass 173 11.4 
Bare fallon 173 58.7 
Bare ploughed 173 45.6 
Natural grass 173 4.1 soil erosion 
tons/hour .-I -L cn x C P 77 0 P 
WLI w w P 0 + 0 mrr -n am mrrmrrrro w-rurcm woo P ws cnTC.(D-.O rwmmmu woo 0 a +OXIOX m-rr-mw caa m SD --vmvvr- w tfi 1 mv s. CL~. - - IV7 I\+ s +1 0 7 (D O-.WO(D P C.Z 7 mmr- P r- oasww- UJ(D + BP, OTOrr1 m0mav -.- m r-~ rromr (D D 7 .O 
SCO w am P CL rc'c 07 
LnJ T-V)WJ 0 0 0 
C o- 01- UO 1C 77 I 
am 0 cnT V) T rm m C. 0 0 
WP, V) -a uu- 
V) -. rc 0 V) V) m 1 7- m 
V) 0 t (DO 0 
0 V) 
0 0 V)-. I 0 rrm 
Q a C VI - w rr 
(D X x CL I c. I Pa. r (D VI 
sm P 7 
cn +a- m 
TV) 
2-(D -L L u c- a a- m VI 
um m 7 
V) rc m w -n 0 
w mrrm err0 
cn 7 r-(D -. 0 +OXIOD 1v (D u v C. s. a.m. - c. -. (D OCLt w w-. a 7 0 -1 r-c 0 (D r P CL T-VI W=%- a0 1C 7 rB 
(D C. VI -n rr 0 1 7- L (DO 0 VI-. 0 rcm 
cn - C h3h3 GJW h3PO UL-lNNGJN P I- PP I-- amw u I-- NmuamO c c I-+ mh3 ova u PP w~I-L-~~P I- Ln PP h3h3 UUO h3 0. 00 WW awu 0 zz mwuow~ - NUPPC0. -0 
C u u P 
Q'. Ln 
.. - -- cc Gmmmwv 0. c mi; 
II h3 0 CC PP 
11 a w W ww w3.a mOP u uu OOPL-lW0. OPWNPllC I0 II ci m P uu cn~n mum u uu umm-mm L~CUOGJBO~ 10 
11 C 0 P 0.0. 0.WN N UU h3PCONLnN COUPUIIG- 40 
11 P 0 W h3h3 uu L-l-0. 0 Ww IVOPONG- mO-OPN110 11 arassland/shrubland -2269 -10.7 
GRASS/SHRUB COMPLEXES -2269 -10.7 
deser & semidesert -442 -10.7 
TOTAL WASTELAND & DESERT -442 -10.7 
SETTLED, 0UII.T-UP, RR & ROADS 4928 426.3 
AREA FROM AGGREGATE SOURCE 0 0.0 
TOTAL POPULATION 614171 426.3 
Table prepared by John F. Richards Fertilizer distribution in Dehradun District 
(yearbook 1984) 
nitrogen phosphat potash all fertilizer 
total per ha total per ha total per ha total per hectar 
tonn kg tonn kg tonn kg tonn kg 
1980-81 1224 13.85 305 3.45 97 1.10 1626 18.4 
1981-82 1425 16.16 421 4.76 138 1.56 1987 23.31 
1982-83 1441 16.31 298 3.37 104 1.18 1843 20.96 
annual applications of chemical fertilizers 
for Dehra Dun District 
(source: Gazetteer) 
Kharif tonn Rabi tonn Annual tonn kg/ha 
1969-70 70-71 1969-70 70-71 1969-70 70-71 1969-70 70-71 
Nitrogenous 331 371 459 540 787 911 14.1 16.4 
Phosphatic 87 70 151 217 238 287 4.3 5.2 
Potasic 36 36 101 118 137 154 2.5 2.8 annual applications of insecticides & pesticides 
for Uttar Pradesh 
orgarlo-chlorine 1238.0 cons tonnlyear 0.204 kg/hec tar applic 
organo-phosphorus 24.0 cons tonnlyear 0.004 kglhectar applic 
others 107.0 cons tonnlyear 0.018 kglhectar applic 
N fertilizer 67088 cons tonnlyear 11.3 kglhectar applic 
P fertilizer 15747 cons tonnlyear 2.7 kglhectar applic 
K fertilizer 7394 cons tonnlyear 1.2 kglhectar applic Data about land use 
(source: Yearbook 1984) 
Net cultivated and irrigated land in hectares 
net cultivated net irrigated 
1970-71 55647 18386 
1973-74 54652 17536 
1978-79 58336 22673 
1981-82 56469 23697 
1982-83 57348 23542 
Area in hectares of hain crops 
(1382-83) 
wheat 28305 
barley 2278 
rice 16090 
maize 12701 
sugarcane 5037 
potato 971 
total main crops 65362 
Use of land in hectars in Dehra Dun District ($1 
total area forest fallow present other 
under cultiv. land land 
1980-81 322786 226086 11938 2848 3250 
1981-82 319151 222514 11879 2823 3035 
1982-83 320189 222391 11821 3061 3241 
Land in District under cultivation of various crops 
(in hectares) 
Rice Wheat Barley Maize 
total irrig total irrig total irrig total irrig 
1980-81 17477 13545 27735 12576 2257 123 12200 706 
1981-82 16185 12655 27902 11700 2330 172 11923 521 
1962-83 16090 12088 28305 11628 2278 99 12701 454 
i*) Headings for these tables were taken from translation from original 
language Livestock population, 1890-1966 
bulls/bullocks 30328 18.2 37366 18.8 43595 17.4 44271 16.8 47271 16.6 47273 16.6 57890 18.4 
other bovines 65524 35.2 84546 42.6 107848 42.6 119938 45.6 116375 40.9 122665 42.8 138065 43.8 
total bovines 55847 57.4 121912 61.4 151847 60.0 164205 62.4 163646 57.5 170388 59.4 195975 62.2 
sheeplgoa ts 68813 41.2 73078 36.8 56832 38.3 94546 35.9 115605 40.6 111915 39.0 115900 36.8 
horses/mules/donkeys 2387 1.4 3463 1.7 4193 1.7 4433 1.7 5135 1.8 4400 1.5 3052 1.0 
camels 0 0.0 3 0.0 179 0.1 96 0.0 116 0.0 175 0.1 1 0.0 
total 167047 100.0 198456 100.0 253051 100.0 263284 100.0 284510 100.0 286876 100.0 314932 100.0 
human pop 168135 177465 204534 211877 225850 265786 425014 
ratio of livestock 
to huaan pop 99: 100 112:lOO 124: 100 124:lOO 124:lOO 108:lOO 73:lOO 
foragelgrazing area 60736 62445 63346 64518 65232 66436 64832 
fallow 4653 4254 3657 6410 3728 3412 4100 
total 65389 66739 67003 70928 68960 65848 68932 
hectares per animal 0.39 0.34 0.26 0.27 0.24 0.24 0.22 
Table prepared by John F. Richards Annual values of water need, precipitation, actual water utilized, 
deficiency and surplus of the stations 
(computed acc. to 1955 scheme of Thornthwaite) 
Station Lat Long Elevation 
(rats) 
Hussoorie 300 27' 780 05' 2042 
Dehradun 300 19' 780 02' 682 
Roorkee 290 51' 770 58' 254 
TABLE la/ 
Station water Precipitation water deficiency surplus 
need utilized 
(cm) (cm) (cm) (cm) (cm) 
Hussoorie 72.3 236.1 70.6 1.5 166.1 
Dehradun 116.4 231.4 107.9 8.5 123.5 
Roorkee 133.4 116.3 160.1 27.3 10.2 
TABLE Ib/ 
Station P.E. S.C Ira Ia/Ih 
(cm) z Z Z 
Hussoorie 72.2 41.9 222.4 0.2 
Dehradun 116.5 44.8 101.7 7.3 
Roorkee 133.7 44.4 -46.0 1.7 
P.E potential Evaporation 
S.C Summer concentration of thermal efficiency 
Im Hoisture index 
Ia/Ih Index of aridity / Index of humidity 
TABLE Ic/ 
Water balance acc to 1955 scheme of Thornthwaite (cn) 
Jan Feb Har Apr Hay Jun Jul Aug Sep uct Nov Dec YEAR 
PE - Potential evapo-transpiration 
P - Precipitation 
AE - Actual evapo-transpiration 
WD - Mater deficit 
US - Water surplus GRAPHICAL PRESENTATION OF MAPS OF DOON VALLEY This system is planned to be used as a core for presentation of dynamic 
changes in the region in graphical form. These can be either forest cover changes 
during the time, or changes in area of arable land, pollution areas, etc. In all of 
these cases, input data must be digitized to get the areas in use. To use this system 
with different display possibilities (e.g., on the SUN computer which has the 
display 1024 x 1024 pixels), one has to recompute all coordinates for the new 
display mode. 
Here we have a hardcopy of some maps. Because of technical problems, we 
cannot produce these maps in color as they are displayed on the AED terminal. 
This is why some maps seem to be overloaded by various lines and characters. 
Technical description: 
Necessary hardware: present version of programs works with AED 512 graph- 
ical terminal. The display has 512 x 512 pixels. 
Necessary software: WAED package with graphical subroutine support. WAED 
is a set of subroutines written in fortran 77 for the VAX 11/780 computer under 
the operating system Unix. 
You can display maps consisting of several layers and their sequence can be 
chosen from the menu. You have the following possibilities: 
- to display the basis map (region boundaries with rivers and legend) - to add river names - to paint urban areas - to add names of urban areas - to paint geographical coordinates and scale of the map 
- to add district names 
- to display main roads and railway - to display isolines - to display wind roses for Dehra Dun City and Mussoorie for 
every month 
You can start with displaying the basis map and later you can add any other 
layer, if the picture is full, you can start again from basis map. 
There is a possibility to zoom any part of the picture (but of course the 
number of pixels remains the same). This can be done using keyboard and special 
stick on the AED graphical terminal. 
The package consists of several subroutines written in 2 files: 'waed-f' and 
'opengr.fl. Except this file 'colcom' is necessary. This file contains 'common 
/color/@ which is used in several subroutines (with a help of 'includeB command). 
The system libraries with graphical subroutines are necessary, too. 
To start the work with this system you have to have the executable file WAED 
ready. This file can be prepared using following command: 
xf77 -g waed.f opengr.0 -lxaed -Ixhash -1xU77 -o WAED 
Then you type WAED and the system starts his work. Follow the 
dialog through your terminal. 
Besides programs you need data files, which contain coordinates of different 
objects (boundaries, rivers, roads, isolines etc). All coordinates (data in the files 
and also values of variables in the subroutines) are in absolute values (pixel coor- 
dinates), e.g. between 1. and 512. From the total available system subroutines for graphical support only these 
were used: 
gropen - init graphics 
wendgr - terminate graphics 
wscald - define scaling 
wclut - define the particular color 
wcolor - change the current color 
wmove - move the cursor 
wmover - move relative 
wdraw - draw the line 
wdrawr - draw relative 
wfrect - draw the rectangle 
txtbox - display the text 
wifill - fill the closed polygon with given color 
wlstyl - set line style 
wflush - paint the picture (empty internal buffers) 
wthick - define thickness of the line 
Necessary data files are: 
basis - with coordinates of boundaries and rivers 
coord - with coordinates of geographical coordinates 
isolines - with coordinates of isolines 
roads - with coordinates of roads and railway 
urban - with coordinates of urban areas 
winds - percentual number of days of prevailing wind for every month 
REFERENCES 
B. Schweeger, Nov 1982, IIASA LS-6, Description of the library of graphics subrou- 
tines 
B. Schweeger, July 1983, IIASA, LS-13, Supplement to the description of the library 
of graphics - subbroutines color graphics extentions DEHRR EUN HUSSBg3iLi 
Fl il G i 
Figure 9 Dehra Dun - isolines and wind roses Figure 10 Dehra Dun - roads, railways, isolines IIASA SR-86- 1 2; MA Y 1986 
AN ASSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS 
OF INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT 
With Special Reference to the 
Doon Valley, India 
Phase I 
VOLUME Ill 
REPORTS BY 
COLLABORATORS 
I nternational Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
A-2361 Laxenburg, Austria 
UN I DO Contract No. 85/82 iUS/G L0/85/039) 
Principal 1 n ves tiga tors 
V. Fedorov, R.E. Munn 
Co lla bo ra tors 
G. E. Beanlands, H. Dobesch, K. Fedra, S, Kaden, 
L. Kairiukstis, M. Lenko, J.C. Nautiyal, 5. Padmanabhamurti, 
J. Parikh, M. Piringer, A. K. Roy, P. Thadhani and R. Tilak THE SRUCTURE OF THE REPORI' 
- iii - ) VOLUME I 
(The Environmental Assessment) 
Physiography 
I Environmentally-Related Issues 
I Conceptual Framework 4 
Recommended Sectoral Engineering Approaches 
Conclusion 
VOLUME I11 
(Contributed papers) F Environmental Impact 
Assessment 
Modelling and Statistical 1 
Analysis 
Recommendations and Suggestions 
made at the Advisory Committee - 
Meeting VOLUME I1 
(Computer-oriented activities) 
Software Transferred 
to Indian Core Group 
Data Bank 
Computerized Maps The present report (Phase I) contains three parts. 
Volume I covers a conceptual framework for environmental impact assessment 
of the Doon Valley, a description of present environmental conditions and past 
trends in the region, and a comprehensive work program and recommendations for 
Phase I1 of the project. To a great extent, Volume I summarizes the main findings 
of Phase I of the Project, reserving the presentation of details for the two other 
volumes. 
Volume I1 is devoted to computer-oriented results of Phase I, including a data 
bank. The potential users should be equipped with elementary computer 
knowledge: this volume contains tools (more accurately, the instructions on how to 
use them) but not any final results. 
The present volume contains a collection of contributed papers which were 
presented at the Advisory Committee Meeting (March 1986, IIASA) and some propo- 
sals on future activities made by participants of this meeting. Some of the papers 
are rather general but the majority of them are devoted to specific aspects of the 
environmental assessment of the Doon Valley and supplement Volume I. CONTENTS 
I ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT 
1 Comments on Doon Valley 
Gordon E. Beanlands 
Federal Environmental Assessment Review Office 
Nova Scotia, Canada 
2 On the Possibilities of Obtaining Background Data 
for the Evaluation of Some Climatological Parameters 
in the Doon Valley 
Hartwig Dobesch 
Central Institute of Meteorology 
Vienna, Austria 
3 On Groundwater Conditions in the Doon Valley, U.P. 
A. K. Roy 
Indian Institute of Remote Sensing 
Dehradun, India 
4 Environmental Impact Assessment with Special 
Reference to Dehra Dun 
Prem Thadhani 
Mussoorie, India 
5 Some Ideas on the Doon Valley Environment 
Rw' nlak 
Zoological Survey of India 
Dehra Dun, India 
I1 MODELLING AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
1 Statistical Analysis of Annual Rainfall Time Series 
V; Fedorov and M. Lenko 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Laxenburg, Austria 
2 Population Trends in the Doon Valley 
V: Fedorov and hi. Lenko 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Laxenburg, Austria 
3 A Preliminary Assessment of Some "Carrying Capacity'' 
Indicators for the Dehra Dun District 
V: Fedorov, M. Lenko and J. Parikh 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Laxenburg, Austria 
4 Integrated Software for Environmental Assessment of 
Industrial Development in the Doon Valley 
Kurt Fedra 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Laxenburg, Austria 
- vii - 5 Possible Water Management Models for the Doon Valley 71 
Stefan Kaden 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Laxenburg, Austria 
6 Deforestation and Climatic Change 
B. Padmanabhamurti 
Jawaharlal Nehru University 
New Delhi, India 
7 A Brief Survey of Air Pollution Models Routinely Employed 
at the Central Institute of Meteorology and Geodynamics 
in Vienna Including Data Requirements and Output Examples 
M. Piringer 
Central Institute of Meteorology and Geodynamics 
Vienna, Austria 
m RECO~ENDATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS WE AT THE 
ADVISORY CO~ITTEE MEETING 
1 Recommendations on Water Management Studies 
for the Doon Valley 
S. Kaden 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Laxenburg, Austria 
2 Some Practical Approaches for Maintaining Forest 
Sustainability in the Doon Valley 
L. Kairiukstis 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Laxenburg, Austria 
3 Elements of a Proposed Methodology for Environmental Impact 
Assessment of the Doon Valley 
J. Nautiyal 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, Canada 
4 Human-Activity Modeling of Doon Valley for Exploring 
Adjustment Strategies 
J. Parikh 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Laxenburg, Austria 
- viii - I ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT COMMENTS ON DOON Vm 
Cordon E. Beanlands 
Federal Environmental Assessment Review Office 
Nova Scotia, Canada 
initial hpnrdona 
One cannot help being struck by the complexity of the problems posed by 
developments in the Doon Valley. Any approach to dealing with the complexity of 
issues involved would not reflect the conventional approach to project- specific 
environmental impact assessment (EIA) as practiced in most developed countries. 
On the contrary, the Doon Valley situation is more representative of the problem 
with cumulative environmental effects - a problem which we are only beginning to 
seriously address in the industrialized world. 
Nevertheless, in my experience the problems of development in the Doon Val- 
ley are not unique. I have seen and heard of numerous other examples in other 
parts of the developing world. What makes these situations very difficult to deal 
with is (1) the direct dependence of the majority of the population on the natural 
resource base, (2) the degree of competition for resources brought on by the den- 
sity of population, and (3) the lack of adequate control systems available to those 
responsible for resource management. Attempts are being made to deal with these 
situations through the application of EIA; however, it is difficult to make the model 
fit. EIA, as originally perceived, was a forward-looking mechanism designed to 
support important development decisions yet to be taken. Here it is being applied 
to unravel an environmental mess that has resulted from a lack of planning over 
the years. 
It is also clear to me that any approach to resolving the problems in the Doon 
Valley must give equal weight to the natural (ecological) system and the social sys- 
tem, i.e., public aspiration, administrative difficulties and jurisdictional conflicts. 
In other words, a focus on an "ecological audit" without similar attention to the 
social dimension of the problem will not resolve the issues involved. 
In short, I see the Doon Valley as a challenge - can we demonstrate that the 
underlying concepts and principles of environmental impact assessment are flexi- 
ble enough to be applied to complex environmental problems currently facing the 
developing world? If we can make it work in the Doon Valley, it could be a model 
for application elsewhere. 
The Objective for Phase I 
As I understand it, Phase I of the project is to produce a detailed proposal 
(action plan) to guide the actual conduct of Phase 11. An important component of 
Phase I will be a conceptual framework or model which will provide the basis for 
synthesizing or integrating the diverse sectoral problems which characterize the 
overall situation. 
Following on the above-noted theme, I think it is important to develop such a 
conceptual framework which will take account of the socio-economic and political 
problems as well as those stressed in the resource sectors - agriculture, forestry, 
mining, etc. The conceptual framework should not be limited to the ecological 
"connectivity" but address the human ecology aspects as well. Approaching the Problem 
If we try to adopt the six "requirements" advocated by Beanlands and Duinker 
(1984), it seems to me that Phase I should deal with the first three, i.e., identifica- 
tion of valued ecosystem components, definition of unacceptable changes to these 
components and the establishment of boundaries in space and time. If we are suc- 
cessful in defining these for the Doon Valley, it should provide the basis for imple- 
menting a study strategy, predicting changes and defining monitoring requirements 
in Phase I1 - the remaining three "requirements." A major extension from the ori- 
ginal "requirements" would be the inclusion of the socio-political and 
institutional/administrative components of the problem. 
To put it in other words, the Phase I report should indicate the natural and 
social amenities that are valued by the residents of the Doon Valley, demonstrate 
that these amenities have "significantly" deteriorated in recent times and rational- 
ize the selection of space and time boundaries to place some limits on the problem 
and subsequent analysis. The Phase I report should end up with a clear indication 
of how this information will be crucial in the design of the detailed assessment in 
Phase 11. 
Getting Started 
Scoping is the term currently used to refine the focus of the problem in 
assessment. In the social sense, this is equivalent to the identification of the 
valued ecosystem components under the first "requirement." As mentioned above, 
if we include the human dimension under our definition of t'ecosystem", the valued 
components in the Doon Valley might (for purposes of discussion) be listed as: 
- agricultural production - reliable source of fuelwood (energy) - reliable source of clean water - clean air - aesthetically pleasing countryside 
However, Beanlands and Duinker also urged that an ecological scoping be 
undertaken. This is in recognition of the need to link the social concerns to some 
measurable natural variable(s) which can be studied in a more quantitative 
manner. In the Doon Valley case the question would be 'What variable would best 
reflect the changes in agricultural production which is of concern to the local 
residents?" Would it be decreased growing rates, changes in soil fertility, loss of 
arable land, etc.? In this manner, ecological scoping would provide a list of 
measurable variables linked to each of the valued ecosystem components identified 
in the social scoping exercise. The results of the ecological scoping would provide 
the basic direction required in subsequent baseline studies. 
While the scoping exercise is underway, Beanlands and Duinker also recom- 
mended that an "ecological reconnaissance" be undertaken. This is a summary of 
the main driving forces at work at the regional level - to quote from the publica- 
tion: 
The objective should be to gain an appreaiation for such 
features as the biological resources important to man, and 
important components of their habitat, the key biological 
processes such as major trophic relationships, and driving 
forces such as climatic conditions and transport mechanisms. 
This information serves as the 'backdrop" to more detailed studies undertaken in 
the assessment itself. The Significance of Change 
Once the ecological scoping has provided the basis upon which changes in 
valued ecosystem components will be measured, there should be some definition of 
an unacceptable change. This, of course, is derived from the model in which a sig- 
nilficant change is used as a reference against which predicted changes can be 
tested. In the case of the Doon Valley, however, I suggest that "significance" be 
more appropriately dealt with in terms of trend analysis or time series studies. 
Obviously the valued ecosystem components have been under pressure for some 
time and it may be sufficient to demonstrate that if current trends continue sooner 
or later the results will be socially, economically and politically significant. This 
is what happened with Atlantic salmon stocks in eastern Canada - a demonstrated 
long-term continuous decline eventually forced politicians to act, even though no 
specific "significant" reduction was ever stated. 
In the Doon Valley case, the data required to show the significant decline in 
agricultural production, the availability of water, air quality, etc., could also from 
the basis for the more detailed baseline studies which would be required in the 
comprehensive EIA as envisaged in Phase 11. 
Bounding the Problem 
Beanlands and Duinker recognize four classes of boundaries - administrative, 
project, ecological and technical. Each of these is considered from the perspec- 
tives of time and space. 
The administrative and "project" boundaries for the ~oon Valley should be 
fairly easy to establish from a geographical point of view. The ecological boun- 
daries may be more difficult due to the potential effects of development in the val- 
ley on downstream resources. The technical boundaries may be the most difficult. 
This simply means that it may not be possible to definitively demonstrate the 
cause-effect linkage between specific human aotivities, like limestone quarrying, 
and changes in valued ecosystem components, like agricultural production or 
water supplies. 
The time element may be the most crucial boundary. By this 1 mean that it has 
taken a number of years for the natural systems to react to various perturbations 
in the valley and it will oertainly take a number of years for positive adjustments 
to be achieved. The operative words here are patience (it will require time to 
demonstrate progress) and commitment (all actors must be prepared to abide by 
the new rules for the long run.) 
Projection for Phase II 
The results from Phase I should provide the information and data to undertake 
a full-scale assessment in Phase 11. Such an effort could focus on: 
- Study strategy: the development of an analytical framework - Predictions: applying the analytical framework to various 
development scenarios and predicting effects on the 
valued ecosystem components - Monitoring: the design of monitoring programs to test the 
effectiveness of proposed mi tigation (planning) measures 
I have not taken my thinking too far in this area so I cannot offer any specific 
suggestions. However, the study strategy is the single most important component. 
Will it be based on a quantitative model; will it be based on consensus-seeking among professionals; will it be based on extrapolation methodologies within sec- 
tors, etc.? 
The study strategy to be adopted as the analytical basis for the assessment 
should be outlined at the end of the Phase I report. 
My experience in a number of developing countries emphasizes the utility of 
the old saying "A picture is worth a thousand words." If I was given the responsi- 
bility of communicating the complexity of the Doon Valley problems to the masses, I 
would be tempted to portray it as shown in the drawing below - The Doon Valley 
Weed. 
The roots of the problem are the Limestone industry, escalating urbanization 
and excessive forest harvesting. These lead to changes in air quality, water qual- 
ity and availability and land use - the stem (or integrator) of the problem. The 
"flower" which grows is made up of negative effects on the valued ecosystem com- 
ponents: declining agricultural production, negative effects on aesthetic 
resources, increased risk to human health, insufficient fuelwood supply and dis- 
rupted water supplies. The entire system (weed) is being fed by overriding com- 
mercial interests, a lack of effective control mechanisms (bureaucratic and legal) 
and a lack of appropriate long-term development policies. Ultimately the "fertil- 
izer" will have to be reduced, but for the immediate future it might be possible to 
control the root structure!! 
The Doon Valley Weed Beanlands, G.E. and P.N. Duinker (1983) An Ecological Framework for Environmen- 
tal Impact Assessment in Canada, FEARO, Env. Canada, Ottawa, Canada, 132 pp. ON THE POSSIBIUTJES OF OBTAINING BACKGROUND DATA 
M)R THE EVALUATION OF SOlE CLIMATOLOGICAL P- 
IN THE DOON VALLE"Y 
Hartwig hbesch 
Central Institute of Meteorology and Geodynarnics 
Vienna, Austria 
1 Introduction 
For many environmental, hydrological, ecological and agronomical problems, 
a knowledge of selected climatological parameters, indicators of the meteorologi- 
cal and topographic conditions of the region under investigation, is of consider- 
able importance. Various models have been developed and applied using simple 
climatological data as well as satellite data to evaluate these parameters. A con- 
siderable improvement for model application can be achieved by applying digital 
height grid techniques in conjunction with objective interpolation methods (Gandin 
1963, 1968, or more recently "Kriging") to "snap" the data to the next grid point. 
Monitoring sites are usually distributed irregularly across a region. 
These "objective interpolation methods" must take into account some funda- 
mental relations for the areal distribution of the basic climatological data as there 
is a height dependence of air temperature; the amount of insolation on mountain 
slopes is dependent on aspect, slope inclination and ground albedo; and the surface 
temperature is dependent on surface properties such as roughness, albedo, and 
vegetation coverage. Thus, there is a clear need for detailed knowledge of the 
physical properties of the surface being studied. There exists a rather sparse 
network of climatological stations in the Dehra Doon Valley. The possibility of 
obtaining additional information must be considered. Several approaches are pos- 
sible, with very different costs and manpower requirements. 
2 Data and Methods 
One approach widely used to get information about the mentioned climatologi- 
cal properties is to establish the heat budget of the ground surface. Because 
ground-based data are the most readily available, a vast variety of models have 
been applied to evaluate the main components of the heat budget equation, viz., 
evapo-transpiration, sensible heat flux, long- and short-wave radiation, and the 
heat flux into the ground. Since precipitation data are available in most cases, the 
water budget may also be established, involving evaporation and precipitation as 
its main components. In this case, the time scale is usually a month, whereas for 
the heat budget, the time scale is daily to monthly (e.g., five to ten-day means for 
agrometeorological applications.) 
The crucial problem is to get the maximum information out of the available 
data and consequently to apply adequate models. Since ground-based data net- 
works give good information only for the immediate surroundings of the measuring 
site, some regionalization procedures should be applied to get at least crude infor- 
mation about other parts of the region under investigation. 
The use of satellite data must be considered in a somewhat different manner. 
For climatological purposes, this information consists mainly of the surface tem- 
perature, since remote sending of vegetation-covered surfaces is limited to two 
wave bands: the thermal infrared and the microwave. Concentrating here only upon the thermal IR in the window of 10.5 to 12.5 m, 
the basic technique is to estimate thermal inertia from the diurnal temperature 
range which is closely related to the volumetric water content of the first few cm 
below the surface. 
The model of Carlson et al. (1981) is widely used to estimate both the thermal 
inertia and soil moisture availability using data from polar-orbiting satellites (e.g. 
TIROS) which view the same area twice a day near the times of maximum and 
minimum temperature. An improvement could be achieved (e.g., Wetzel et al., 1983) 
by using data obtained from geostationary satellites (GOES, INSAT) with more 
sophisticated algorithms to remove the effects of horizontal variations in vegeta- 
tion biomass, surface roughness, wind speed and other atmospheric and surface 
properties. 
The basis for these ideas is as follows: Surface heat flux and surface tem- 
perature are closely related; thus the partitioning of energy into sensible and 
latent heat is directly proportional to the amplitude of the surface temperature 
wave. So the greatest amplitude of temperature occurs immediately at the 
ground-air interface, decreasing rapidly upward in the air and downward in the 
ground. Well away from the surface, the daily amplitude is much smaller and is 
greatly modulated by advection and other meteorological influences. 
The surface temperature response is a very sensitive measure of surface 
character. Along with other parameters such as ground-albedo or emissivity, sur- 
face roughness and assumptions concerning an appropriate boundary-layer model, 
a reasonable estimation of surface temperature with a relative accuracy of + or - 
2 " C can be achieved. 
Up to this point, we have been considering "synoptic satellites" which provide 
data at least twice a day with a resolution of 4-7 km. As for information from the 
LANDSAT-3 thermal IR channel (which has a resolution of about 240 meters and 
repetitive coverage every 18 days), appropriate data processing facilities have to 
be provided (see Appendix: IMAGE PROCESSING) as well as some ground-based 
points for control measurements in order to calibrate the pictures. It is then pos- 
sible to get a snapshot of ground temperatures which may be useful to test the 
model under consideration. 
An analysis of climatological conditions in Doon Valley especially for agricul- 
tural purpases should involve gathering of additional data. By applying a height- 
grid model there is the possibility to infer such information from the physical pro- 
perties of the soil, vegetation coverage, land use, etc. in the region under investi- 
gation. So if Landsat data are processed, valuable information about the above 
mentioned properties can be achieved. 
There are some other simpler possibilities to qualify the characteristic clima- 
tological features through phenological observations (if there exist any) and 
cropyield records as a function of weather conditions, including meteorological 
hazards. 
Inquiries for such data should be initiated. If appropriate information is 
obtained, it might be possible to increase crop yields (as has been done, e.g., by 
JEANNERET (1977) for Switzerland). Since there are numerous models which make 
different demands on the data for the Dehra Dun Project, it should be clarified 
first if there is a necessity to evaluate more complex climatological parameters, 
and if a need is found, which data and which model should be on the short list. SUGGESTIONS FOR DATA PROCESSING 
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP THEMATIC WS 
Input ----- 
Dataprocessinq 
VECTOR TO RASTER VECTOR TO RASTER 
COWERS ION 
--- 
GEOMETRICALLY RECTIFIED MODELS OF CLIMATOLOGY, 
HYDROLOGY and other 
CLASSIFIED IMAGES SPATIAL INTERPOLATION Mode 1s 
DATA SET 
Coordinates of the given map-projection (for example UTM) 
all images on the same scale 
4 7 Bands Landsat-Thematic Mapper (multitemporal) 
Digital Terrain Model -elevation 
-slope 
-aspect + 
digital thematic maps andlor 
classified satellite imagery 
thematic maps derived from the geoscientific models and 
the above mentioned sources 
UTM = Universal-Transversal Mercator 
Appendix IMAGE PROCESSING Carlson, T.N., et.al. (1981) SatelUte Estimation of the Surface Energy Balance, 
Moisture Availability and Thermal Inertia. J. Appl. Meteor. 20, 67-87. 
Gandin, L.S., et.al. (1965) Objective Analysis of Meteorological Fields, Leningrad 
(1963). Israel Program for Scientific Translation. 
Gandin, L.S., et.al. (1970) The Planning of Meteorological Station Networks. WMO 
Publ. No.256, Technical Paper No. 149. Geneva. 
Jeanneret, F., et.al. (1977) Kartierung der Klimaeignung fuer die Landwirtschaft 
in der Schweiz (German/French). Geographica Bernensia G6. 
Wetzel, P.J., et.al. (1983) Determining Soil Moisture from Geosynchronous Satel- 
lite Infrared data: A Feasibility Study. J. Appl. Meteor. 23:375-391. ON GROUNDWATER CONDITIONS IN THE DOON VALLEY. U-P. 
A. K. Roy 
Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (N.R.S.A.) 
This paper highlights the hydrogeological setting of the Dehra Dun Valley, and 
the groundwater conditions therein. Recent trends in groundwater exploration in 
the valley and the effect on groundwater conditions are enumerated. Implications 
of industrialisation, deforestation and possible effects on groundwater quality are 
cited. Suggestions for further groundwater resource assessment and future pat- 
tern of exploitation of groundwater are made. It is imperative that proper moni- 
toring and assessment of the water resources of the Dwn Valley be made for 
optimal water utilisation and conservation, to forestall detrimental environmental 
effects. 
INTRODUCTION 
Water is a natural resource. It is vital for sustenance of life, as well as for 
industrial and agricultural development. With the increase in population and human 
activities in the form of hydrologic works, industrialisation and agriculture, no 
natural resource has perhaps given rise to deeper ooncern about its optimal 
exploitation and conservation than good, clean water. 
Underground water is a unique, renewable natural resource in the sense that 
it is a "reserve bank" of generally pure and abundant water wherever good aquifer 
materials exist; on the other hand, surfaoe water can become polluted more 
directly and can also cause damage by flooding during excess run-off. During the 
process of percolation through porous materials and deposits, rain and surface 
waters are "filtered" while being stored in the pore spaces of underground layers 
of porous deposits such as sands and gravels, known as "aquifers" (water-yielding 
deposits). Deep underground waters are generally free of bacteria and other pol- 
lutants, unless artificially polluted by human activities. 
Dehra Dun city and its surrounding Dwn Valley area is endowed with very 
good, coarse aquifer subsurface materials, known as 'Dwn Gravels" geologically. 
The Dwn gravel beds occur at several different depths below the surface. They 
are separated by reddish clay lenses and beds. These gravel-sand- boulder 
aquifers are annually recharged by rain, but some of the underground waters leak 
out of the two ends of the valley along the Suswa river in the east and the Asan 
river in the west. The lower reaches of the Dwn Valley provide good groundwa- 
ter, and are tapped by many tubewells. Tapping of underground water must be 
optimally done. 
HYDBOHORPHOLOGICAL SET-UP 
The salient hydromorphological zones/units are depicted on the attached map. 
The Dwn Valley is bounded on the south by the Upper Siwalik "Structural 
Hills" comprising '%boulder beds" of Tertiary age. These beds dip northwards and 
have silty-clayey matrix-binding gravel, pebbles and boulders of quartzite, sand- 
stone, etc. The hills are highly dissected, variably forested, and form a surface 
run-off zone. The Upper Siwaliks are underlain by Middle Siwalik sandstone and 
clay beds forming hills at the south towards the plains. To the north of the Doon 
Valley occur the "Structural Hills" in the Middle Siwaliks in an overturned sequence forming the northern limb of the syncline underlying the Doon Valley. 
The northern structural hills also forming a run-off zone, extend from north of 
Dehradun westward to the Katapathar area along the Yamuna River. Along this 
stretch, overturned anticline also occurs in the hilly belt with patchy exposures of 
Upper Siwaliks below the Krol Thrust zone at the base of the Mussoorie 'Denduda- 
tional mountains" comprising pre-Tertiary rocks. Upper Siwalik beds also underlie 
the Doon Valley deposits ("Doon Gravels") and form the Doon Syncline. They are 
exposed in places along stream cuttings in the northern part of the valley. Towards 
the western part of the northern flank of the Doon Valley Subathu (Older Terti- 
ary), beds of reddish-purple shales form structural hills and juxtapose pre- 
Tertiary rocks of Mussoorie mountains above the Krol Thrust (KT), as well as lie 
over the Middle Siwalik beds along the Main Boundary Fault (MBF) extending NW - 
SE South of the Krol Thrust zone between Katapathar and Rajpur. 
Eastward, in the northern flank of the Doon Valley, the Krol Thrust and MBF 
appear to coincide, cutting off the subathu beds. The Krol Thrust is intermittently 
concealed by the Doon Valley deposits, and the Middle Siwalik and related beds are 
not exposed in the eastern part of the valley. The hills and mountains are prom- 
inent run-off zones as mentioned earlier. In the Krol (hlussoorie) mountains, 
springs occur in the limestones. 
A major part of the Doon Valley consists of 'Doon Gravel" deposits and 
related alluvial deposits of Late-Pleistocene to Sub-recent age. The Doon Gravels 
are subdivided into older and younger (Sub-recent) units. These deposits are of 
considerable thickness (approximately 200 m in the deepest part) and contain 
gently inclined unconsolidated layers of silts, gravels, sands, pebbles, boulders, 
etc. with interlayers of reddish clays. They form geomorphic units as Intermon- 
tane piedmont plains with land forms such as alluvial fans (both northern and 
southern aspects) and fan-cut terraces, as well as flood plains (present) along 
major rivers and river terraces, fan-cones (recent), etc. Isolated Denudo-Residual 
Hills of relatively Older Doon Gravels also occur (ODG). These isolated hills are 
also run-off units. 
The alluvial fans of the Doon Valley are subdivided as follows: 
a) The southward sloping (80 - 100 slopes) fans orig- inating from the north- 
ern hills/Mussoorie mountain belt. These are the Principal Doon Fans, 
and can be further subdivided into 2 or 3 sub-units from their apexes 
downward. 
b) The northward sloping (about 100) fans (fanglomerates) originating from 
the southern Siwalik hills. The above two terminate along the Asan river 
in the west and the Suswa - Song river in the east. Dehradun forms a 
local surfacewater divide in the valley for the Asan and Suswa - Song 
drainage systems. 
c) Recent fan-cones of localised extent, occuring at the base of hills (not 
shown on map). These act as local rechargers to groundwater. 
d) Isolated high level fans attesting to tectonic activity occurring on the 
top of structural hills near the Krol Thrust zone (not shown on the map 
since they are of limited Hydromorphological significance). 
The alluvial fans and terraces are major rainfall rechargers to groundwater, 
and the valley deposits harbour potential aquifers at depths specially in the lower 
reaches of the valley between the limits of the aquifer zone shown in the attached 
map. The upper reaches of the valley act as a recharging zone mainly, and the 
groundwater moves down the valley to provide good groundwater potential therein. 
In places the circulating groundwaters of the lower parts of the valley also seep 
out as base-flow along the Asan and Suswa-Song rivers in the lowest parts of the valley. These rivers join the Yamuna and Ganga rivers, respectively. The thick- 
ness of the Doon gravels (fanglo- merates) reduces appreciably towards the bound- 
ing structural hills. Generally, the water table in the valley is affected by these 
semi-confined groundwater conditions. Water-table depths range from about 20 to 
90 m. At the lowest valley point, the water table is shallower. Seasonal water- 
level fluctuations range from 20 to 50 m in different parts of the area. Tubewells 
yield around 60,000 to 150,000 litres per hour or more for nominal drawdown 
around 20 m. Locally, shallower perched water levels also exist, but are not reli- 
able, since they dwindle in the dry season. In the lowest parts of the valley where 
seepages occur, deep drilling could possibly provide weak artesian to semi- 
artesian groundwater conditions. One tubewell at Clement Town is reported to have 
a free flow of about 0.4 m above ground surface. A number of seepages/springs 
also occur in the upreaches of the valley along formational contacts adjacent to 
recent faults, e.g., near to and north of Manduwala, along Darer Nadi. 
A number of tubewells have been constructed in the rapidly growing Dehra 
Dun City Campuses and Colonies in recent years, and more are being constructed 
every year. Most of these tubewells tap aquifers up to a maximum depth of about 
120 - 140 m. Some of the recent tubewells are closely clustered, for example in 
the Kaulagarh estate area and are likely to interfere with each other's function- 
ing. Since most of the tubewells in Dehra Dun tap more or less the same existing 
aquifers up to 140 m depth, they are beginning to strain the water resources in 
these aquifers. This is reflected in a general decline (15 m or so) in water table 
level, in Dehradun, in recent years. If further tubewell construction proceeds 
without proper groundwater resource assessment and optimal utilisation, further 
deterio- ration in groundwater yield will occur, to the detriment of the valley's 
development and ecological balance. 
There is thus a great need for proper monitoring of water resources of the 
Doon Valley. The tubewells should be properly spaced, based on standards that 
ought to be set, and should also tap the available aquifers at different depths in a 
staggered way. Future tubewells should also tap still deeper aquifers, after suit- 
able exploration so that these aquifers are also utilised and pressure on the upper 
aquifers is somewhat decreased. Suitable plans for future drilling sites should be 
prepared. A battery of properly spaced tubewells in the Jhaira sector or the Doon 
Valley is suggested for future development of the water supply to Dehra Dun. This 
recommendation is based on analysis of available data for the valley, and needs to 
be elaborated. 
Another important question is environmental degradation and water pollution. 
Environmental degradation of land is a serious concern, since deforestation tends 
to increase surface run-off of rain waters, as well as erosion and sediment supply. 
In the valley basin of Dehradun, further unplanned land degradation due to 
developmental activities would reduce groundwater recharge possibilities by 
attendant increases of run-off, and siltation which would tend to partially choke 
the recharging pores of the surfacial deposits of the valley. The long-term effects 
have to be studied and weighed, so as to evolve a more rational land-use plan for 
Dehra Dun and environs, keeping a balanced mix between development and environ- 
mental conservation. 
With more industries expected in Dehra Dun and neighbouring places, it has to 
be kept in mind that the valley aquifers are directly recharged by surface water 
after rains. Thus any industry discharging poisonous effluents into the valley 
would pose a serious groundwater pollution problem. Hence, chemically polluting 
industries should not be built in the Dehra Dun valley. Even smoke pollution should 
be controlled to a tolerable level in such a closed valley. The introduction of non- 
polluting industries is the only answer to development of the Doon, although it is recognized that one or two vital major industries may be inevitable. Already a 
Cement and Carbide factory exists just north of Dehradun, near a recreational 
centre, which is a pity. There must be a stop to unplanned development. There is 
also a paramount need for creating public awareness towards environmental pro- 
tection side by side with development. 
CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS 
The Doon Valley is a unique Intermontane valley basin forming piedmont allu- 
vial fan plains, fan-cut terraces and river terraces. It consists of "Dwn Gravel" 
deposits of gently- sloping (southwards and northwards - northern and southern 
aspects) silts, sands, gravels, pebbles, boulders etc. with inter-layers of clays. 
These deposits are quite thick in the lower reaches of the valley and form major 
aquifer systems with high groundwater potential. 
The groundwater conditions have been broadly enumerated in the paper. 
Water level is generally deep, but the aquifers support heavy-duty tubewells. 
Water levels in Dehradun have reportedly lowered by about 15 m in the last 7 
years or so. 
The valley is bounded by hills and mountains to its south and north sides, 
enclosing the valley. Antecedent rivers, namely the Yamuna and Ganga cut across 
the foothills to drain into the gangetic plains further south, beyond the valley. 
The hills are composed of pre-Tertiary and Tertiary rocks consisting of phyllites, 
quartzites, shales, Limestones; and sandstones, clays, boulder beds, respectively. 
The main geomorphic units mapped are: 
Intermontane valley - piedmont plains 
Denudo-Residual Hills in Older Dwn Gravels 
Structural Hills in Tertiaries 
Denudational Mountains in pre-Tertiaries 
The environmental and groundwater aspects have been briefly discussed. 
Suggestions for future development are made. Caution is expressed regarding 
environmental degradation due to future development activities around Dehra Dun. 
A balance should be maintained between development and environmental preserva- 
tion. 
Keeping in view the growth of Dehradun and environs and the increasing 
demands for water supply, it is suggested that a detailed groundwater resources 
assessment and associated monitoring should be carried out, and future tubewells 
should be properly located, spaced and designed so as to tap deeper aquifers in a 
staggered manner. For future water supply to the growing Dehradun city, a "nest" 
of properly spaced tubewells should be constructed along the terraces of Tons 
Nadi in the Jhajra sector, beyond Premnagar, and the water should be piped in. 
This is essential so as not to congest Dehradun city proper with too many 
tubewells, as is the case presently, causing a strain on the aquifers in Dehra Dun. 
Measures to conserve the water resources of Dwn Valley, and their optimal 
utilisation as well as artificial recharge should be considered. ENVIROlmEmTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT WITH 
SPECIAL TO DEHRA DUN 
Rem ThatiiLani 
Mussoorie , India 
1 The Area Under Study 
The Dehra Dun watershed is bounded by the first range of the Lesser Himalays 
to the North East, ther Siwalik hills to the South West, the Yamuna river to the 
North West, and the Ganges river to the South East. 
Mussoorie is the highpoint of this watershed. 
The saucer-shaped Doon Valley covers an area of approximately 20 km by 70 
km and has an annual rainfall in excess of 200 cm. The valley is made up of dolom- 
ite rocks above krol Umestone, with shale and mud below. Above the Umestone is a 
thin layer of black phosphatic rock. 
The population of Dehra Dun and Mussoorie is 762,000. This valley is the gate- 
way to the rural Tehri Garhwal hinterland with a population of 498,000. The two 
towns of Mussoorie and Dehra Dun have many residential schools with a student 
population of over 20,000, and several Government institutes like The Indian Mili- 
tary Academy, The Oil and Natural Gas Commission, The Forest Research Institute, 
The La1 Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration, and the High Altitude 
Defence Services Academy of the Indo-Tibet Border Police. 
2 Historg 
According to legend, Garhwal was formed by the merger of 52 Chieftanships. 
Garh means Fort and Garhwal, the land of Forts. Garhwal had a barter system till 
the 18th Century and in the 19th Century 'Rajah' Wilson, a forest contractor, 
minted his own i.0.u. coins near Harsil. Traditionally, this area has had a money- 
order economy, with women toiUng on the Land, and the men joining the army and 
sending money home to support the family. 
After the Gorkha war of 1814, Pauri or British Garhwal was annexed by the 
British and Tehri Garhwal was awarded to Ajaz Pal of the Chandpur Dynasty, for 
helping the British in driving out the Nepalese. At this time, Mussoorie was also 
annexed as a British territory. In the eighteen-thirties the British began to 
encourage people to settle in the Mussoorie hills, as a kind of sanitorium for Brit- 
ish troops and expatriates keen to get away from the summer heat of the Indian 
plains. 
G.R.C. Williams of the "Imperial Gazetteer" recorded in his memoirs of 1874: 
"The scenery of these mountain dales can hardly be surpassed for picturesque 
beauty. " 
Villagers dependent on forests for fodder and firewood preserved them in 
their own interests. In the early 19th Century, felling of trees by Zamindass (lan- 
downers) had led to a reduction of forest cover. Agriculture supported staples Uke 
the famous Basmati rioe, grown on drained swamp land, wheat, lentils, and oilseeds 
like mustard. Plantations grew some of the finest green tea exported to Afghanis- 
tan and sericulture flourished for a while. The railway came to Dehra Dun in 1900. However, no great harm was done to 
the valley till 1947 when refugee miners settled in Dehra Dun and recognised the 
potential for making quick money from limestone quarrying on a large scale. 
Traditionally, parts of river beds had been leased out by the District Magis- 
trate by the grant of permits for a short period to local residents, who cleared the 
rivers of debris brought down by the monsoons and crushed and fired the boulders 
on site to meet their local needs, such as whitewash for painting their houses. Till 
about 1947, the entire quantity of limestone required by a few industries in India 
was imported from Pakistan. 
In 1975 the forest contractor arrangement was ended by the Government and 
the price of minerals started to go up. 
3 Legal Himtory 
For the first time in 1949 an act named 'The Mines and Minerals (Regulation 
and Development) Act 1949" was pcrssed by the Government and the Mineral Conces- 
sion Rules 1949 were published by Notification No. M-11-155 (24)-2 dated 18 
October 1949. This act did not serve the purpose of development and conservation 
of mineral resources and therefore in 1957, the Government substituted this act by 
Act No. 67 of 1957. The main objective of this act was to provide for the regula- 
tion of mines and the development of minerals under the control of the Union. 
Petroleum products which were earlier included in the act of 2949 were now 
excluded. 
In 1952, the Mines Act 2952 was enacted, superseding the 1923 Act, with the 
purpose of removing a number of defects and deficiencies which hampered effec- 
tive administration. 
The Government of India vide notification No. VSR-1398 dated 11 November 
1960 published the Mineral Conaession Rules 1960 by virtue of the power con- 
ferred on them under section 13 of Act 67 of 1957. These rules apply to all the 
major mlinerals which are specified in Schedule I and I1 of Act No. 67 of 1957. The 
Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act 1957 also empowered the 
State Government under section 15 of the Act to make rules in respect of minor 
minerals. Accordingly the Government of Uttar Pradesh vide notification No. 
1575-M-XVIII-BM-96-58 dated 26 August 1963 made the rules known as "U.P. Minor 
Minerals (Concession) Rules 1963. " 
Under the provisions of Act 67 of 1957, the State Government is empowered to 
sanction a lease of a mineral which is specified in Schedule I1 but it has to take 
prior approval of the Central Government in respect of a mineral which is speci- 
fied in Schedule I. In the district of Dehra Dun all the minerals which are avail- 
able are listed in Schedule I1 except for gypsum. Section 8 of the Act says that the 
maximum period for which a lease can be granted for the minerals available in 
Dehra Dun district is 20 years, and the maximum period for which such leases can 
be renewed is also 20 years. 
Consequently, leases were granted around 196213 for 20 years with a clause 
stating that, should the leasee so wish, his lease would be automatically renewed 
for an additional 20 years. 
In the beginning of 1982 the position of leases was as follows: Serial No. Name of Block Under Under No. of leases 
MCR 1960 MMCR 1963 which were to 
expire in 1982/83 
1 Kiarkuli 5 6 5 
2 Banog-Nun 7 7 2 
3 Bhittarli 9 5 3 
4 Maldeota 2 - - 
5 Song Valley 5 1 - 
6 Sahastradhara 6 2 2 
7 Arnigad 7 1 5 
8 Kairwan 3 1 1 
9 Barkot 3 - 1 
47 23 19 
With the growing demand in many circles for the closure of limestone quarries 
on ecological considerations, the Government of U.P. formed a committee under the 
chairmanship of the special Secretary of Industries to advise it on the sanction 
and renewal of leases. Subsequently, the Industries Department issued a General 
Order No. 6013/18-12/82 dated 17 September 1982 saying that the Kiarkuli and 
Song Valley Blocks were unsuitable for mining. In Sahastradara Block, the Govern- 
ment directed that leases should not be sanctioned or renewed close to sulphur 
streams directly connected with the Sulphur Spring. The Government also directed 
that in other blocks, aotion should be taken on the individual merits of each case. 
In February 1983, the Government of U.P. rejected all renewal applications, mainly 
on the grounds that quarrying had an adverse effect on the environment, eoology, 
and scenic beauty of the Mussoorie hills. In some cases the grounds for rejection 
were stated to be that the leased area formed part of reserved forests or other 
forests which came under the purview of the Forest Conservation Act 1980. This 
act prohibits use of forest land for non-forest purposes, and in all such cases 
where forest land is involved, prior permission of the Government of India is 
required. 
It is unfortunate that the Forest Department has not been more alert in pro- 
testing against the grant of leases on forest land. In any case, the State 
Government's action did not go far enough, as it did not touch those mining leases 
which had not expired in 1982/83. Further, it created a contradiotory legal posi- 
tion which it did not tackle or resolve. The steps Men by the State Government 
were skin deep and merely paid lip service to the cause of preserving the environ- 
ment and its ecology, without any real, in-depth appreciation of the general and 
specific factors involved in this particular Himalayan, micro-watershed. 
Almost all persons whose renewal applications had been rejected by the State 
Government, approached the Honorable High Court under Article 226 of the con- 
stitution of India and some of them filed civil suits for injunction under the specific 
performance Act for renewal of their leases for an additional 20 years. 
The first case, decided by the High Court on 9.3.83, directed the Government 
to dispose of the renewal application after giving reasonable opportunity under 
Article 14 of the constitution, and did not agree with the Government that if a 
renewal application is not disposed of within a stipulated time, the application is 
deemed to have been rejected as is provided under sub-rule 3 of rule 24 of the 
Mineral Concession Rules 1960. Other cases were also decided on similar lines. 
Some lease holders had filed civil suits before the Civil Judge, Dehradun and 
on 28.5.83 they were joined by others whose writ petitions had been disposed of by 
the High Court. On 8.6.83 the Civil Judge, Dehradun granted an ad interim injunction against the State of U.P. until disposal of the suit. However, the High 
Court had already directed the Government to oonsider renewing the applications, 
but before this could be done, the Civil Judge, Dehra Dun, a lower court, by its ad 
interim injunction, in unseemly haste preempted the action of the State Government 
under directions of the High Court. 
In some cases, the State Government prematurely determined the leases on 
the grounds that certain provisions of the Metalliferous Mines Reputation Act 1981 
were not being followed. Three leases moved through the Civil Court and one went 
up to the High Court against these orders. All four leases were granted stay ord- 
ers on the technicality that the Director, Geology and Mining, who had prematurely 
terminated the leases, was not empowered to do so, and that the only authority who 
could enforce the Mines Act, the M.M.R. 1961 was the Director, Mines Safety. 
Subsection 3 of Section 5 of the Mines Act reads as follows: 
The District Magistrate may exercise the powers and perform the duties 
of an inspector (of mines) subject to general or special orders of the 
Central Government. Provided that nothing in this subsection shall be 
deemed to empower the District Magistrate to exercise only of the 
powers conferred by section 22 or section 61. 
Section 22 of the Mine Act 1952 states the powers of the Inspector of Mines 
when the cause of danger is not expressly provided against or when employment of 
persons is dangerous. Section 61 relates to the bye-laws for working of mines. 
Non-compliance of an order issued under section 22 or 61 is punishable on com- 
plaint but section 75 provides that when an offence is committed in the course of 
the technical direction and management of a mine, the District Magistrate shall not 
institute any prosecution against an owner, agent, or manager without the previous 
approval of the Chief Inspector. 
The Mine Rules 1955 were framed under section 58 and the Metalliferous Mines 
Regulation 1961 were framed under section 57 of the Mines Act. These rules do not 
spell out the functions of the District Magistrate with regards to the technical 
aspects of the management of mines. The conclusion derived is that it is only the 
Director of Mines Safety who is empowered to prosecute under these Acts and 
Rules which, in any case, are largely confined to the safe working of mines and the 
safety of mine labour, with little or no emphasis on ecological considerations. 
Where ecological considerations are mentioned in passing, they appear to relate to 
the plains and not to hilly terrain. For instance, restrictions on mining within cer- 
tain distances from tube wells are mentioned, but no thought has been given to con- 
tamination and silting of mountain streams and the damage to terraced fields from 
scree from mines situated above the fields. 
A unit of the Directorate of Mines and safety is at Dehra Dun and the Regional 
Office is at Ghaziabad. The quarry office is directly concerned with the recovery 
of royalty, etc., and the work of on-thespot demarcation is done by the geologist 
directly under the control of the D.G.M. Lucknow and the State Government. 
4 Citizens Initiative 
While this legal wrangle was going on in the context of badly framed, ill 
thought out, and uncoordinated laws, the Save Mwsoorie Society, a citizens group 
of ecologically conscious people, filed a petition in July 1983 before the standing 
committee on Petitions of the Rajya Sabha (the upper Howe of Parliament or the 
Council of States) requesting an end to mining in and around Dehra Dun. In its find- 
ings, this committee of Parliament, while sympathising with the petitioners on the 
grounds of ecological damage to the environment, felt itself to be in a dilemma as wholesale closure of mines would, in its opinion, lead to the loss of jobs and cause 
economic hardship. No action was taken by Government on the report of this Com- 
mittee, which sat on the fence. 
5 The Supreme Court 
The saenario then shifted to the Honorable Supreme Court of India. Justice 
P.N. Bhagwati, now the Chief Justice of India, had introduaed a scheme of Public 
Interest Litigation. Under this scheme, anyone could approach the highest court 
of the land for social justiae and ask for free legal aid. 
Mr. Avdesh Kaushal, head of the Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra, 
Dehra Dun, and also the Youth Coordinator of The Nehru Yuvak Kendra, Dehra 
Dun, submitted public interest litigation before the Honorable Supreme Court. 
Other interventionists included ecologically minded publlc groups such as 'The 
Friends of Doon" and 'The Save Mussoorie Society. " 
This aase was strongly contested by both sides during 1984/85. The Honor- 
able Supreme Court of India permanently closed about 54 open-cast llmestone 
mines which fell within the municipal limits of Mussoorie and Dehra Dun; allowed 7 
mines outside municipal limits to continue to operate, including the U.P. State- 
owned U.P.S.M.D.C. mine at Lambhidhar, Mussoorie; and temporarily closed the bal- 
ance of mines falling in a grey area. About 13 mines of 15 lessees, which had 
divided themselves into two rival groups, the Marwah Group and the Oberoi Group, 
submitted revised mining schemes to the Bandhopadhaya Committee set up by the 
Supreme Court vide order dated 12 March 1985. This committee visited all mines 
on 26.27 December 1985 and the final outcome is awaited. 
6 The Negative hpacb of Ximeatone Quarrying on the Ecology of the 
Doon Environment 
At this point, it will be useful to enumerate, in some detail, the negative 
impacts of limestone quarrying on the ecology and environment of the Doon, and 
hence on its economy and the quality of life. 
Opencast limestone quarrying and associated industrial operations for its pro- 
cessing in the Dehra Dun-Mussoorie region have resulted in the following adverse 
environmental effects: 
(a) Denudation of forested slopes. Of the total mining area of 1043 hectares in 
the Mussoorie hills, 803.6 hectares fall under the aategory of reserved 
forests. Denudation of forested slopes and the valuable soil cover is further 
compounded by the construction of access roads to mine sites and by the vast 
quantities of scree sliding down hillsides. With the erosion of hillsides, the 
monsoons have washed away top soil with the result that there is no leaf 
mould, a valuable organic fertiliser, left for the fields. For instance, in the 
Baldi river catchment area, food grain production fell by 28% in the last 2 
decades, according to a study carried out by Dr. Jayanto Bandhopadhaya for 
the Department of Environment, Government of India. 
(b) 30% of the Umestone mined is dumped into river beds, polluting the water and 
raising river bed levels which have led to the inundation of low-lying farm 
land. For instance, in the 1982 monsoons, the debris inflow into the Tons river 
was measured as five feet in height. 
(c) Without water, there can be no civilization. The water supply to Dehra Dun 
and Mussoorie is dependent on perennial, rainfed streams. The Himalayas 
range effectively blocks these settlements from snow-fed river sources which bas 
(a> skirt the Dwn. Some of the important rainfed streams and canals which feed 
these two townships are: the Rajpur Canal, the Bijapur Canal, the Kalinga 
Canal, the Jakhan Canal, the Aswan, Song and Sukswa rivers, the Arnigad Nala, 
the Bhitarli Nadi and the Kandighat stream. The limestone strata is an aquifir 
which stores rainwater in its cavities and allows it to percolate to feed 
streams and rivulets in the dry season. In the four years from 1979 to 1982, 
the water level in the Rajpur Canal has dropped by 80%, in the Bijapur Canal 
by 40%. and in 18 springs in the Baldi Catchment area by 50%. 
Owing to the loss of forest cover, the ambient temperature of Mussoorie has 
risen from 25.8 " C in 1950 to 32.2 " C in 1980. 
Schock waves from gelignite blasts have further weakened the limestone 
strata near tectonic faults in Mussoorie, causing landslides. In 1985, the only 
Mussoorie-Dehra Dun link road was closed for one week by a major landslide. 
The destruction of scenic beauty is detrimental to tourism, an important 
economic activity of the region. 
Short trucks known as "guttuo", which are paid by the truck load, are a 
traffic hazard on narrow hill roads. 
Limestone dust particles from quarries and factories such as ARC Cement, 
Aditya Chemicals, and the UPSMDC Calcium Carbide plant, hang like a pall 
over the valley. Air-borne pollutants cannot escape from the Doon because of 
the prevailing weak air current patterns and the temperature inversion, 
which traps limestone dust in this enclosed valley. This leads to an ever 
increasing concentration of air pollution which is responsible for respiratory 
diseases. Dust particles in the Rispana area have been measured as 360 
microgrammes per cubic meter as against the safe level of 100. This poses a 
direct danger first of all to over 2,000 children in 3 residential schools in the 
area. White limestone dust has settled on vegetation around factories, spot 
zoned in rural areas. Consequently, milk production has dropped from an 
average of 30 liters per cow to 10 liters and major crops which gave a yield of 
19 quintals per acre 20 years ago, now give a yield of 10 quintals per acre. A 
meeting of 500 villagers in November 1985 near the ARC factory, did not 
demand more jobs for local villagers but asked for compensation to every 
household where traditional means of livelihood had been adversely affected 
by air pollution from this factory. 
Quarrying has also led to a loss of grazing land with the result that in the 
Baldi Catchment, livestock population dropped by 35% as compared to a rise of 
15% in the Kalapathar area unaffected by quarrying activity in the last two 
decades. 
The resultant loss of manure has affected productivity of wheat by 40% and of 
rice by 33% in the Baldi valley over the last two decades. 
The plea of conservationists for a total ban on quarrying in the valley is also 
ed on the facts that: 
The limestone reserves of the valley are 3% only of the total reserves in the 
country; and cater to only 54 out of 315 sugar mills, 2 out of 50 cement plants, 
2 out of 121 paper mills, 1 out of 6 major steel plants, and nil out of 147 minor 
iron and steel factories, which all have alternative sources of supply from 
less ecologically sensitive areas in the plains. 
The 99.8% purity of the Mussoorie limestone, perhaps equalled only by sources 
in Japan, may be necessary for the manufacture of defence grade steel. How- 
ever, the TISCO plant could obtain lower grade limestone from less ecologi- 
cally fragile zones and install a new plant in order to upgrade it. (c) The bogey of 'loss of employment if quarrying is stopped" is false as the 
Labour Department records show that 1366 persons only were employed in 
quarries, as agatnst the Industry's claim of about 20,000 people. The migrant 
Nepali and Bihari labour force has already moved on. 
(d) In fact, traditional skills like farming and dairying have been destroyed. Dis- 
placed farmers have taken to occupations like illicit brewing of liquor and 
timber smuggling, or have migrated to slums in cities as unskilled labour. 
(8) De-silting of Calans casts the Garhwal Jal Sanathan Rs.300,000 to Rs. 500,000 
annually. 
(f) If the whole subject was not under review by several agencies, then the 26 
proposed cement and chemical plants would have needed 32 MW of electricity, 
while Dehra Dun consumes only 40 MW today. 
(g) Similarly, limestone-based industries would have consumed 32 cu metres per 
sec of water, which is almost as much as the rest of the valley. 
(h) 20 more years of mining will lead to a water famine and mineable reserves of 
limestone will be exhausted in 50 years. (Source: U.P. Government special 
committee report dated July 1982 and Information and Broadcasting Ministry 
publication 'qndia 1982 ") . 
7 Sabotage by Vested Intereab 
Meanwhile some other developments have taken place which have a bearing on 
the problem. 
Entire villages, like Jhandukhala have been wiped out by landslides caused by 
blasting associated with mining activity. No compensation was paid to the lone sur- 
vivor. While this was brought to the attention of The Rajya Sabha Committee on 
Petitions during their site visits, their report does not document this fact. 
Most of the temporarily closed mines under review by the High powered Ban- 
dhopadhaza Committee of the Honorable Supreme Court of India are situated on 
hills, the slopes of which are directly connected to streams which supply water to 
Dehra Dun and Mussoorie. These streams are Amigad, Bhitarli and Kandigad. 
Funds sanctioned under The National Rural Employment Programme were 
effectively blocked by the District administration for 6 months, delaying construc- 
tion of an absolutely essential minor irrigation Canal in Kiaskhuli Village, 
estimated to cost 1Rs. 5 lakhs; but in nearby Basa Gad Village, a similar Canal, 
estimated to cost Rs. 9 lakhs, has been partly built at an expenditure of Rs. 4 
lakhs, to feed terraced fields which proved to be non-existent. 
While the U.P. Government's own figures show that Dehra Dun district is the 
second most developed district in U.P. in terms of manufactured goods taken as a 
percentage of agricultural produce, this district was declared a "backward dis- 
trict" and became eligible for Government subsidies for industry. This was 
avowedly done to offer incentives to attract the non-polluting electronics industry. 
In fact, limestone-based industries, in which politicians probably have an interest, 
have developed. 
In this district a Cess Trust Board was constituted in 1976 and some quarry 
owners agreed to pay a Cess of Rs. 0.45 per M. ton which was to be used for works 
of public utility within a radius of 5 km from the mine. There is no provision in law 
to realise this cess and in 1982 about Rs. 1,200,000 was outstanding in the account. 
As mine owners have to deal with the District Administration on many matters, 
perhaps District Magistrates could have used greater powers of persuasion to 
realise outstanding cess money. The Honorable Supreme Court in the order dated 12th March, 1985 directed 
"the workmen who were thrown out of their job, in consequence of this order shall 
as far as practicable and in the shortest possible time, be provided employment in 
the afforestation and soil conservation programme to be taken up in this area." 
The Government released Rs. 2,000,000 on 18 March 1985 for providing employ- 
ment through the National Rural Employment Programme to the dis-employed 
quarry workers. However, the District Magistrate of Dehradun did nothing till 
October 1985 when on the complaint of 'The Friends of Doon", this inaction was 
investigated by The Bandyopadhyay Committee of The Supreme Court. 
The Supreme Court in their orders dated 12 March 1985 and 24 April 1985, 
directed that public spirited individuals be associated with representatives of the 
District Magistrate, Dehradun and a gazetted officer of the Mining Department of 
the Government of U.P. to supervise the removal of minerals already mined but 
lying at the site of closed mines. This was done. Subsequently, however, the Dis- 
trict Magistrate, Dehradun issued mining permits/leases for removal of material 
from river beds adjoining the closed mines. This led to illegal quarrying. The Ban- 
dyopadhyay Committee also investigated this matter on reoeiving a oomplaint from 
'The Friends of Doon". The committee's findings were as follows: 
Fresh mining activities were noticed ... As regards the complaint about 
the dislodging of material from the closed mines and subsequent removal 
from the river-beds, this complaint was found to be absolutely correct.. . 
From the foregoing it would be clear that the collector did not act with 
circumspeotion and care in the issue of an auction/mining permit. Due 
attention and regard was also not paid to the spirit of the directions of 
the Honorable supreme court. I feel it is skating on dangerously thin ice 
by giving a permit which touched the boundaries of closed mines.. . 
I cannot say whether this has been done because of mala fide intention, 
carelessness or foolishness ... Since it may amount to a violation of the 
clear order of the Honorable Supreme Court on the issue, I am bringing 
this matter to the notiae of the Honorable Court. 
The summary record of the fifth meeting of the "Board for Doon Valley 
and the Adjacent Watershed Areas of Ganga and Yamuna" held on 5th 
November 1985, states: 'The U.P. authorities would take appropriate 
legal powers if need be through an ordinanoe for declaring Doon Valley 
as an ecologically fragile zone within one month." 
Since the notified Master Plan deviates from the recommendation of the 
Expert Group, the Board direoted that the Department of Environment 
should study the reports.. .a final view.. .should be communicated.. .for 
recasting the Master Plan. 
Serious concern was expressed that some of the industrial units like ARC 
Cement continued to be a source of serious pollution in the Valley despite 
the fact that everybody from the Prime Minister to the citizens of Dehra- 
dun have called for closure of the units. 
The State Government did not declare the Doon Valley as an ecologically 
fragile zone in one month but its Industries Department pushed through 
trial production of the spot zoned Calcium Carbide plant of the 
U.P.S.M.D.C. which went on stream for the first time after the Doon Val- 
ley Board recorded: "the siting of industries should be done in a compo- 
site manner. " 8 Benefib of Tour- 
As against the negative impact of the limestone industry, well planned tourism 
can make a large positive contribution to this region. 
The tourist industry is a catalyst which revitalises other sectors of the econ- 
omy because of its multiplier effect. 
A survey of the International Union of Official Travel Organisations summar- 
ises tourist expenditure as 42% on board and lodging, 55% on internal travel and 
shopping, and 3% under other miscellaneous heads of expenditure. 
By encouraging direct and indirect employment. particularly in less favoured 
backward districts, it alleviates unemployment. For instance, the staff-broom 
ratio for low priaed hotels alone is 1.5 people per room. 
An ad-hoc committee under the Director General of Tourism had estimated 
that 15% of all expenses incurred by tourists accrued to the Government in the 
form of taxes in 1979. Recent trends indicate this figure may now be as high as 
20%. 
Apart from its direct contribution to the growth of hotels, restaurants 
and other tourist orientated schemes, it has signifiaant linkages with 
many other sectors of the eaonomy such as agriculture, fruit growing, 
poultry, horticulture, handicrafts, etc., with a multiplier effect in these 
sectors. Tourism is also signifiaant in having a direct spin-off of income 
among sections of society which are traditionally considered to be back- 
ward and sometimes rural. (Source: Seventh Five Year Plan of Depart- 
ment of Tourism, Chapter 1, para 2). 
Tourism is also India's second major foreign exchange earning activity today. 
Hotels alone earn about Rs. 1,300 crores worth of foreign exchange through ser- 
vices and not by the sale of any commodity. 
Tourism, by its very nature, needs to protect the environment because direct 
contact with nature and different cultures is a significant aspect of the tourist 
industry. 
It is relevant to note here that as against the current foreign tourist arrivals 
of about 1.25 million per annum in India, the target for 1990 is 2.5 million. 
This region can make a positive contribution. It is estimated that 250,000 
tourists visiting Mussoorie each year, spend Rs. 375 lakhs on board and lodge, Rs. 
375 lakhs on shopping and travelling, and Rs. 75 lakhs under misaellaneous items of 
expenditure. The hotel workers' annual wage bill is estimated at Rs. 48 lakhs. 
A guestimated budgeted expenditure on the development and marketing of 
Park Estate, Lakhamandal, Theytur and Surkunda Devi in and around Mussoorie is 
Rs. 4 crores. Should it increase the tourist inflow by even lO%, this would result in 
an additional annual tourist expenditure/contribution to the local economy of Rs. 
90 lakhs. 
Hotel occupancy in Dehra Dun is largely dependent on the patronage of insti- 
tutes such as the ONGC, and litigents visiting the district courts. 
9 fitfalls of Tourisrn 
Tourism necessitates the development of access roads, hotels, restaurants, 
shopping, recreation and entertainment facilities, and other civic amenities. 
These developments have taken place in a lopsided and haphazard manner in the 
Mussoorie region. Consequently, civic services such as the water supply to the town and communication (telephone) facilities have not kept pace with demand. 
The peak tourist season population in Mussoorie of about 75,000 to 100,000 
people in May and June requires water at the rate of thirty gallons of water per 
person per day. We therefore need to pump thirty lakh gallons per day, or 1.5 
lakh gallons per hour per 20 hour-days. (Annex IV). As against this, our installed 
pumping capacity is 75,900 gallons per hour and, owing to poor maintenance of 
pumping stations, we do not pump more than 54,000 gallons per hour for a maximum 
of 18 hours per day. 
We need to identify new spring water sources from which we can make up the 
present shortfall of 75,000 to 100,000 gallons of water per hour, within a reason- 
able time frame at a reasonable cost. Backup water storage needed for 2 days 
water supply is 60 lakh gallons. Out of Mussoorie's installed reservoir oapacity of 
45 lakh gallons, reservoirs with a total capacity of 23 hkh gallons are out of use 
because of poor maintenance. 
The estimated requirement of 3,000,000 gallons of water per day for Mus- 
soorie town does not take into consideration the needs of surrounding villages. It 
is also ironic that most of the mines temporarily closed by the Honorable supreme 
court, and awaiting a final decision, are situated very close to the existing water 
sources of Dehra Dun and Mussoorie. 
In the 19801s, half a dozen highrise buildings were sanctioned for construc- 
tion, including a 100 bed U.P. Government tourist complex costing Rs. 1 crore, 
when 100 hotels with a lioensed capacity of over 10,000 beds Ellready exist in Mus- 
soorie. This also put a further strain on existing civic amenities. 
10 The Right Empharis for Development of the Economy 
The emphasis should have been on developing recreation facilities, including 
off-season winter sports facilities, such as open-air ice skating rinks; theme 
parks, museums, and the preservation of historic landmarks such as Park Estate, 
the residence of Lt-Col. Sir George Everest, Surveyor General of India in the 
1830's. This did not take place because town planners and the administration 
failed to appreciate that Mussoorie and Dehra Dun are: 
1) Locations for leisure tourism, and 
2) Transit tom, a base, a gateway to the Garhwal Himalayas and the hinter- 
land with special tourist interests of photography, bird-watching, 
angling, trekking, hiking, mountaineering, river-rafting, folk festivals, 
mythology and social customs. 
The Master Plan for this region, now being recast, should include in its zone of 
control the development of specific day-return excursions, trekking, river-rafting 
and folk-festival tour circuits. This valley forms a most convenient and logical 
base for them, irrespective of outdated, artificial municipal and district boun- 
daries. In many cases this will mean going South to North along motor roads which 
follow the Yamuna and Bhagirathi/ Ganga river gorges, in search of day-return 
excursion circuits; and East to West along short cuts which run from one river to 
the other, with settlements along each river having separate and distinct cultures, 
dialects and religions, in search of trekking routes. 
The tourist influx to Mussoorie, and the supporting floating population in 
search of seasonal jobs, outweighs the permanent population of about 25,000 
residents. The infrastructural requirements of the permanent population would be 
largely and automatically taken care of under the umbrella of a tourist plan for 
Mussoorie. Town planning for Mussoorie is in fact, planning for tourism. While tourism is a factor in national and international integration, it is neces- 
sary to keep in mind that it is particularly vulnerable to: 
1) Political unrest and 
2) Labour agitation. 
Therefore, while emphasising the relevance of tourism to the economuy of the 
Dehra Dun-Mussoorie watershed, cognizance should be taken of the essentially 
rural character of this region. Any integrated plan for the economic uplift of this 
area should consider the favourable environmental impact of: 
1) Introducing new handloom technology, and 
2) Building minor irrigation field channels to bring more waste/grazing land 
under the plow. 
The major source of funds for rural works would have to come from the many 
Government Schemes for poverty alleviation, such as The National Rural Employ- 
ment Programme (NREP), Training Rural Youth for Self-Employment (TRYSEM), 
Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programme (RLEGP), and so on. 
11 Integrated Approach for the Economic Uplift of the Valley 
It is necessary to learn a lesson from the attempts by vested industrial and 
political interests to discredit efforts to combat opencase limestone quarries in 
the Doon. In this context, one feels there is a strong case to be made for setting 
up a powerful, independent cell, with a "one-window" approach. in order to formu- 
late, implement, monitor and evaluate the progress of poverty alleviation pro- 
grammes at the grassroot level, by participation of the people through village 
panchayats/committees . 
This body, reporting to the Doon Valley Board, should: 
1. Receive Government funds and direct Government effort for intensive, 
integrated development of this watershed. 
2. Mobilise financial resources. 
3. Supplement Government effort. 
4. Simplify procedural formalities. 
5. Disseminate information. 
6. Offer subsidies to break initial barriers. 
7. Be the eyes and ears of the people at the village level. 
8. Set an example and build confidence among the rural poor: happenings in this 
micro-watershed have a great influence on trends in the Garhwal hinterland. 
This cell should concentrate on: 
1. The development of tourism. 
2. The development of the village economy by: 
a) Switching over from monsoon-based to irrigation-based agriculture, by 
the implementation of minor irrigation programmes (defined by Govern- 
ment as costing less than Rs. 10 lakhs each), which could increase the 
production of vegetables and oilseeds, such as mustard, by bringing 
wasteland into production. 
b) Consolidation of landholdings up to 2 hectares each, or more, as the need 
may be, of small and marginal farmers. c) Rainwater management. 
d) Afforestation and pasture development. 
e) Social forestry, i.e., the setting up of rural fuelwood plantations of indi- 
genous thermally efficient species acceptable to the people. 
f) Manpower development by setting up of multipurpose community centers 
for the purpose of imparting training to workers to enable them to take 
up self sustaining, income-generating activities. One such occupation 
which may have good potential for generating resouroes needed for the 
uplift of the rural poor (defined by the Government as those with incomes 
up to Rs. 6,400 P.A. per family) and the lower middle class, is the intro- 
duction of the hand or electric driver AMPAR CHARKHA SPINNING UNIT. 
g) Organisational support by setting up supply and marketing societies. 
h) Infrastructural support by building village roads and by setting up nur- 
series. 
i) Exploring the use of non-conventional sources of energy, such as wind 
energy. The minimum wind speed required to operate windmills is 7 km 
per hour and they can draw water, for irrigation, up to heights of 55 
feet. The cost of the whole system is betweeen Rs. 11,000 to 20,000. 
While the mean daily surface wind speed for Dehra Dun falls within the 5 
km per hour sector, more information is required to determine for what 
period of time wind speeds exceed the minimum necessary limit of 7 km 
per hour. Wind generators, developed in the Country, are also of 
relevance to the village economy. 
12 Specific Prrrpomah on Tourinm 
A) Park Estate. 
Park Estate was the former residence of Lt. Col. Sir George Everest, Sur- 
veyor General of India, from 1833 to 1843. It is situated on Hathiapaon Hill, 7089 
feet above sea level, on the main ridge about 3 miles west of Mussoorie; and within 
2 miles of the hilghpoint, Begog. Between Hathipaon and Benog is the hill called 
Cloud End. To the south, the park overlooks the Doon Valley and to the north, the 
Nag Tibba Range can be seen; beyond that are the snow covered peaks of the 
Himalayas. 
This estate has been divided and sold to many owners over the years. Origi- 
nally, it covered some 570 acres. It is possible that the chain of ownership in the 
title deeds may not be very clear. However, Government acquisition proceedings 
can determine and overcome this problem. 
The main building, Park House, the observatory, and the servants' quarters 
are partly in ruins. These with a surrounding 40 acres of land belong to Mr. 
Chowdhary Pooran Singh, a criminal lawyer of Dehra Dun. 
The U.P.S.M.D.C. open-cast limestone mine is situated to the Southwest, on the 
next range of hills below Park Estate, known as Lambidhas. Some other oaste lime- 
stone mines, temporarily closed by the Honorable Supreme Court of India, are 
situated nearby. 
This area is accessible by two roads: the Cart Road and the road from the 
convent of Jesus and Mary. The Public Works Department has plans to improve 
these roads. This area, i-e., Hathipaon Cloud End and Benog hills, including parts 
of the Yamuna river, lends itself easily for development for tourism and can be 
declared a national park: It is a satellite region 3 miles to the west of Mussoorie town and readily acces- 
sible by 2 existing roads which need only minor improvement. 
Park House, with its historic background, is of international interest and The 
Survey of India can use it as a museum after restoration. 
The Valley land mountain views are superb. 
This is a traditional trekking area which can be improved at minor cost by: 
sign posts and foot bridges, building simple log cabins/alpine huts for shelter 
at convenient points along the trail, and by developing camp sites where sup- 
plies of kerosene and LPG can be stocked for use by trekkers. 
The Yamuna river can be used for river rafting. 
The meadows around Park House can be used for an annual 10 day summer fes- 
tival of Himalayas Folk Dance and Music. 
Some of the nearby abandoned limestone mines can be damned and flooded for 
use as an open air ice skating rink. 
Park House can be flood-lit for a Son et Lumiere show. 
B) Day-Return Excursions to Surkanda Devi, Lakhamandal and Theytur. 
While accessible year round, these excursions would particularly help pro- 
mote off-season, winter tourism. 
A large variety of birds can be seen in the agricultural fields of Theytur in 
winter, when the birds come down to the Aglad River because of the extreme cold 
in the higher mountains. The naturalist, Dr. Fleming, lists 56 birds belonging to 
the Gangotri and Yamunotri Valleys, many of which can be seen near Theytur. 
Theytur is the road head, 35 km from Mussoorie, and the starting point of the 
Nag Tibba trek. The development needed at Theytur are those of a campsite with 
drinking water and toilet facilities and storage for camping equipment (tents, 
sleeping bags, ground sheets, rucksacks and fuel). Simple provisions are already 
available in the village. 
Lakhamandal is much lower and therefore warmer than Mussoorie in the 
winter. Lakhamandal Temple is 71 km and 3 1/2 hours drive from Mussoorie to 
Kuwa on the Yamundri route. From Kuwa one crosses the Yamuna river by a Forest 
Department trolley to Lakhamandal village on the meadowed banks of the river. 
This is a good place for picniking, camping, swimming, and horse riding. An iron 
suspension bridge is under construction. The temple itself is a 1 1/2 km hike up 
through the village along a 3 foot wide goat track. The temple has been classified 
by the Archeological Survey of India as dating back at least to the 8th Century 
A.D. There is a museum nearby and statues and Shive Lingams in the fields. This is 
the mythological site where the Kamaras tried to burn the Pardavas. Lakhamandal 
can also be an excellent half way halting site for Yatra (Pilgrim) tourism going to 
Yamundri Temple. Improvements needed here are a cable ropeway to the top of the 
hill and a camp site or tourist lodge at the bottom of the hill. 
Surkunda Devi is 45 km and a one hour drive from Mussoorie to Kadukhal on 
the Tehri road, from where there is a 3 km/3000 feet hike up to the hill at 10,000 
feet above sea level. This is the mythological site where the head of Lord Shiva's 
consort fell when it was cut off to stop the tantric dance. The 360 degree view is 
of Mussoorie and Dehradun on the one side, and of snow-capped peaks such as 
Swaragrohini, Banderpaonch, Srikanta, the Gangstri group Jaunli, Chankhamba, 
Nilkanth, Badrinlath, and Nanda Devi, on the other. There is a temple at the top of 
the hill. The Ganga Durshera impromptu folk festival is held here at the end of 
May/early June each year, depending on the Hindu Calendar. Improvements needed here are again development of a suitable tourist lodge or campsite and the instal- 
lation of a 'ski lift' or cable ropeway from Kadhukhal to Surkanda Devi. 
C) Trekking Routes. 
The trekking routes of Harkidun and Dodital are fairly well known and easily 
accessible from Musswrie. Harkidun is a green valley at the base of the Bander- 
pwnch mountain. Dodital is known for its alpine lake with mahseer fish. The pos- 
sibility of improving the tmck from the Yamundri side to Dodital needs to be 
explored, as this will make the Dodital trek, which starts from the village of Agoda 
on the Gangotri route, a circuitous trek. 
If the disused army road from Dhanaulti to Son Danda is repaired, it will open 
up the Nagun trek and a new route to Nag Tibba along the ridge. Son Danda should 
then have a tourist lodge. 
Seventh Five Year Plan 1985-90. 
Five Year Plan (1985-90) for Tourism, Ministry of Tourism and Civil Aviation 
Department of Tourism, Government of India. 
Annual Report 1983-84, Government of India, Department of Rum1 Development 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development. 
National Rural Employment Programme Guidelines. Department of Rural Develop- 
ment. 
Annual report 1984-85, Department of Non-Conventional Energy Sources, Ministry 
of Science and Technology, Government of India. 
'Renewable Energy for You" published by the Information and Publicity Wing, 
Department of Non-Conventinal Energy Sources. SOW, IDEAS ON THE DOON VAJJEY ENVIRONMENT 
Zoological Survey of India 
Dehra Dun, India 
INTRODUCTION 
The Doon Valley is a unique area, measuring 2080.25 sq.km. and lying between 
the Shiwalik ranges on the south and the Himalayas on the north. This is the only 
area along the Himalayas where the Shiwalik range separates from the Himalayas 
creating a wide valley in between. Because of its low altitude and tolerable cli- 
mate, the Doon Valley has long been a favourite area for tourists and for retired 
Government and private persons to settle because of the peaceful and healthy 
environment. However, the high aspirations of those who settled in this area have 
been gradually shattered because the environment has deteriorated year after 
year. This reduction in environmental quality has been witnessed by the present 
generation. The environmentalists have collectively raised a voice against some of 
the causes for this deterioration and have been, to a certain extent, successful in 
making the government realize the gravity of the situation. 
Through personal observations during the course of nearly 12 years, the 
important causes for environmental deterioration of the Doon Valley have been 
identified. These are briefly enumerated in this paper: 
1 Deforestation 
During the course of one decade, between 1972-1982, the forest area 
decreased from 1372.75 sq.km. to only 900.50 sq.km. The closed forest area 
decreased from 1046 sq.km. to 703 sq.km. and the open forest area from 257.50 
sq.km. to 227.75 sq.km. As a result, the non-forest area increased from 806.5 
sq.km. to 1119.75 sq.km. The Doon Valley has long been known for the quality of its 
mixed forest comprising Banj (Quercus incana), Chir (Pinus roxburghii), Saal 
(Shorea robusta) etc. luxuriantly growing on the lower Himalayas and Shiwaliks. 
Due to a lack of proper management policy and with utter disregard for the 
environmental effects of a loss of forest area, the Department of Forests of the 
State Government permitted reckless felling of trees. Afforestation is being 
undertaken but to a far lesser extent than deforestation. Some 25-30 years ago, 
the houses in the Valley had no provision for fans or other cooling devices during 
the summer season because the climate was moderated by the forests around. Wind 
storms and hot winds (Loo) during the summer season were unheard of in the Doon 
Valley. At present, the summer season is as hot in the Valley as in the plains; as a 
result, fans and room coolers have become a necessity. Wind storms of high velo- 
city and hot winds from the plains cross through the Valley uninterrupted; the 
winds enter through the defile created by the Yamuna river near Paonta Sahib. In 
earlier times these winds were held back by the thiok forest cover. 
During the past few years, heavy deforestation of the Saal forest in eastern 
Doon Valley was authorized by the state Government to create residential com- 
plexes and agricultural fields for the Tehri Dam oustees. A huge dam on the 
Bhagirathi river near Tehri town is likely to be completed during the next few 
years and the submerged hill villages around Tehri behind the high dam will have 
to be evacuated. Doon Valley unfortunately has been selected for resettlement. This has reduced the forest area still further. 
Nearly 500,000 people reside in the Dwn Valley. The population explosion 
for which the residents are themselves responsible, is another factor; people need 
increasing amounts of firewood. This also causes pressures on the forests, as well 
as on the trees along roads and in fields. New plantations of trees are far below 
the minimum number desirable and as a result, vast stretches of bare fields without 
trees on their periphery are a common sight. The young trees if planted, remain 
uncared for and are eaten by goats and sheep and uprooted by the cattle. Care of 
plantations is also extremely poor. 
As a result of the reduction of forest cover, the number of small trees and 
bushes has decreased markedly and the carrying capacity of the remaining forest 
has tremendously reduced the population of wild life. The number of artiodactyles 
(deer and antelopes) and carnivores (small and big cats) has decreased greatly. 
Large herds of cheetal, a common sight at one time in the forests of the Valley, are 
no more seen. One hardly ever comes across a group of 2-3 cheetals or other 
antelopes even deep into the forests. 
2Mining 
The Mussoorie and Sahastradhara hills are reknowed for their high quality of 
limestone, so badly needed for many industries in the country such as sugar, chem- 
ical, paper, glass, steel, cement and cosmetic. Other minerals in these hills are 
marble, phosphorite and gypsum. The miners have, however, proceeded in an 
utterly unscientific manner. Mining was, in fact, turned into plundering the 
mineral wealth of the hills. As a result, vast stretches of the wounded hills are 
visible along the Musswrie and Sahastradhara hills. Due to reckless dynamiting of 
the area, these hills are now prone to serious geomorphological changes which 
could be disastrous for the human population in the Valley. In the mined area, the 
vegetation cover is completely removed and, therefore, the water retention power 
of the hills is greatly reduced. Many natural springs in these hills have gradually 
dried out, causing a serious local shortage of water and also in the city of Dehra 
Dun which depends solely on these springs. The aquifers below these hills are no 
longer charged properly and a permanent depletion of water is being felt by one 
and all. Thanks to the efforts of various organisations such as the Doon Science 
Forum (of which the present author is President), the Friends of Dwn, the Vil- 
lagers' movement, etc. who put this case to the highest judiciary level in the coun- 
try, the Supreme Court of India has now restricted mining. But at this stage, reha- 
bilitation remains a big problem needing scientific inputs and Government support. 
Huge quantities of stones, pebbles and rubble are washed down during the monsoon 
season, heavily silting up the beds of almost all streams. As an example, one can 
see a bridge on the way to Mussoorie where the bed of the stream, which was at one 
time nearly 20-25 feet below the bridge, almost touches the ceiling of the bridge. 
The perenial streams of the Valley are gradually drying up and many of them 
run only during the rainy season. Due to this, aquatic fauna such as fish, crusta- 
ceans and amphibians have suffered tremendously. Those streams which still 
retain their perenial character do not have sufficient water to hold big fishes such 
as species of Mah Seer Por putitora (Hamilton) and Tor tor (Hamilton)], Labeos 
[Labeo dero (Hamilton) and Labeo dyocheilus @cClelland)]. This has imposed a 
great setback to the endemic fisheries of the area and has also been a great disap- 
pointment for eager anglers with their best fishing tackle who return home with 
empty fish bags. Serious thought and scientific study on the bioecology of these 
fishes is now needed for their rehabilitation by artificial means. The construction 
of dams along the Yamuna river has already inflicted great damage to the Mahseer by obstructing their upstream- downstream migrations, so necessary for spawning. 
The Mahseer does not breed in confined waters and must swim upstream in rivers 
for this purpose, ascending in altitude by an amount of 2000 ft. 
3 Hnman Settlements and Dvergmzing 
All along the Shiwalik hills, there are hundreds of small villages, the predom- 
inant inhabitants being Gujjars who make a living from tending cattle. Each family 
has on an average 15-20 cattle which freely graze on these hills, preventing the 
natural forest seedlings from growing. In order to provide fresh and tender 
leaves for their cattle, the Gujjars intentionally put fire to the forest so that the 
dry leaves and bushes burn out and in the next rainy season, fresh grass shoots 
emerge. The Gujjars also burn out thorny bushes to make an easy passage through 
the forest for themselves as well as for their cattle. In such forest fires, hundreds 
of eggs of birds, including the Red Jungle Fowl, Khalij etc., are destroyed. The 
newly hatched fledglings and the new-born calves of deer and antelopes are 
roasted alive. As a result, the forest cover is reduced and wildlife is endangered. 
4 Air Pollution 
Air pollution in the Valley is increasing at a tremendous rate for several rea- 
sons: 
(a) Thriving on the limestone, kilns burn limestone with coal and produce dehy- 
drated lime. The chimneys of these kilns emit ash and carbon-based poisonous 
gases continuously. It is, in fact, difficult to breathe in the vicinity of these 
kilns. The ash and dust rain down on the houses nearby. 
(b) Also based on limestone mining, factories crush limestone and marble into 
smaller grains and continuously throw tonnes of limestone dust into the atmo- 
sphere. The visible evidence is to be seen on the leaves of trees and bushes, 
houses etc. which turn almost white, as if they had been whitewashed. Due to 
this dust, the evapotranspiration of leaves is reduced, with other side effects. 
(c) The cement and chemical factories installed in the Valley emit hundreds of 
tonnes of smoke and ash into the atmosphere and a black pall often covers the 
sky. The liquid effluents from the chemical factories near Rajpur and 
Harawala are discharged into the adjoining streams where aquatic life is 
endangered as well the human population which depends upon these streams 
for its water supply. 
(d) The city roads in Dehra Dun are like rural roads, a situation that was toler- 
able when the number of automobiles and people was negligibly low. By rural 
roads, I mean that for a 20-30 ft. road width, only the central 12-15 ft. are 
covered with stones and tar whereas the 4-6 ft. flanges on either side remain 
unpaved. During the rainy season, the unpaved portion becomes muddy and 
slippery while during the dry season, huge amounts of dust fly into the atmo- 
sphere from passing automobiles. Unsanitary conditions prevail in many cases 
and the muddy parts of the flanges harbour millions of germs which fly into 
the atmosphere along with the dust particles. Respiratory diseases, such as 
the common cold and bronchial asthma are on the increase in the city and 
endanger the Lives of many people. This problem could be eliminated by pav- 
ing the roads with stone and tar. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF ANNUAL RAINFALL TIME SERTES 
K Fedorov and M. Lenko 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Laxenburg, Austria 
The time series under analysis is presented in Figures la,b,c (Debra-Dun, 
1865-1984; India, 1875-1984). On the visual level there is no indication of the 
existence of any significant systematic variation in this time series despite common 
opinion that the average rainfall in Doon Valley decreased during the last 10-15 
years. This discrepancy demanded a more thorough analysis. 
Nonpara~etric testa 
Translating the colloquial assumption that "nothing systematic happened dur- 
ing the observed interval" into probabilistic language, one can say that our obser- 
vation yl....,yn is a sample corresponding to random values Yl, .... Y,, which are 
independent and identically distributed with an unknown distribution function. This 
assertion is usually called the "null hypothesis." 
It is difficult to formulate well-structured alternatives in our case. Therefore 
the "run tests" oriented to the omnibus alternatives to randomness will be used. 
(See Hannan, Krishnafah and Sen, 1985, page 107.) 
Let c be the sample median and write +(-) for any yi so that yi2c(<c). 
Then the run statistic R counts the number of runs above and below the median of 
the original sequence. When the null hypothesis is true for large n , R is approxi- 
mately normal with mean equals n /2 and variance equals n/ 4 (in our case 
n=120). The simple calculation gives c315 and Rag. So 
R>n /2-1.966/2=48 and for the significance level 0.95, there is no reason to 
reject the null hypothesis. Nevertheless we are quite close to a violation of ine- 
quality, so another test is necessary for certainty. 
This test is based (Hannan, Krishnaiah and Sen. 1985, p. 109) on the statistic 
r = total number of runs up or down. A sequenae of h consecutive inequalities 
yi +I yi >O is called a "run up" of length h (a "run down" is similarly defined; if 
subsequent observations are equal, only one of them must be considered.) If the 
null hypothesis is true, then r is asymtotically normally distributed with mean 
(2n -I)/ 3 and variance (16n -29)/ 90. In our case r =72 which gives 
r >(2n -I)/ 3 -1.964(16n -29/ 90F70 
Since this situation is similar to the previous one, more detailed analysis can prob- 
ably clarify it. Of course we cannot create new data, but we can use more detailed 
models (or hypotheses) implicitly containing some prior information. In statistical 
analysis these could be regression models. 
To start this kind of analysis one has to formulate a regression model which 
accumulates prior information and assumptions, although some of them are still 
subject to verification. Here the assumptions will be (see also Table 1): 
- There are long term fluctuations in average annual rainfall (e.g., in 
model I from Table 1, the fluction is described by the last term.) - There is a permanent trend in average annual rainfall (parameter g2 
describes this trend.) 
- Deviations of annual rainfall from the average behavior are assumed to 
be random and independent and their variance does not depemd on time. 
The tested hypothesis is now 192<0. It will be clear later that the first assumption 
is not crucial for the testing, but the last one can change the final result signifi- 
cantly. Unfortunately, if we start to verify this assumption, we would be led back 
to a situation similar to the one in the previous section. So one can only "believe" 
in it. 
Table 1 Begression Yodels Fitting 
Type of Model: Nonlinear with additive random noise 
pi =7(ti ,9)+ci ,i =l,n ,ti =real scale -1985 
Assumptions: ei are independent with variance c? (unknown). 
For Doon Valley, yi is the yearly rainfall in cm. 
Y;+ For India, yi =- - , where yil is the average of the country's yearly rainfall, 
m Y 
The results of this analysis are summarized in Table 2 and are even more 
surprising than previous ones from the point of view of "common opinion." The 
regression analysis yields I~~XJ, suggesting (insignificantly statistically, but 
nevertheless ...) that during the last century an average increase (!) in rainfall 
occurred in Doon Valley. The reason for the existing common opinion may be the 
long-term periodicity ('-60 years; see Table 2), which approaches its minimum in 
the late seventies. This periodicity is well-pronounced (see parameters $5); more- 
over, the same periodicity takes place for the whole Indian subcontinent (see the 
same Table). One can also see that there is a short-term periodicity (+ years) 
which is statistically significant for Doon Valley. 
In summarizing all currently available data, one must reject the hypothesis of 
a decrease in average annual rainfall in Doon Valley. The calculations were based 
on the algorithm from Fedorov, Vereskov, 1985. - 39 - 
Table 2 Parameter Estimates and their Estimated Standard Deviations 
Parameter number 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
DDI 205.2 0.109 63.0 3.4 11.4 
St.dev. 8.9 0.131 10.2 10.7 6.29 
India I 4.58 0.131 61.1 -5.07 1.75 
St.dev. 2.64 0.0516 28.7 28.9 1.45 
DDII 205.9 0.099 60.85 4.59 11.78 6.06 -1.33 -14.4 
St.dev. 8.75 0.129 8.95 8.67 6.08 0.7 0.727 7.04 
India11 4.43 0.028 63.37 -7.58 1.95 6.26 4.87 4.83 
St.dev. 2.28 0.043 20.1 19.9 1.47 0.329 2.8 1.64 
Analysis of Monthly Data 
The corresponding monthly data were available to us (see DATA BANK in 
Volume 11) only for the last 14 years (Forestry Research Institute Station), and the 
length of the time series is therefore not sufficient for any serious statistical 
approach. Nevertheless, a comparison of data with long-term extremes seems to 
be useful (see Figure 2a,b,c) where the information for two dry months and one 
rainy month is presented. In order to illuminate the stability of traditional 
weather indicators, the temperature time series in Fig. 3a,b,c are presented for 
the same months. It is worthwhile to note that all extremes occurred earlier than 
expected in the time interval under consideration. Figure la Rainfall in Dehra-Dun ANNUAL RAINFFILL 
-11. D 
- 4-m. 1 E U - 
Z 
=Dm. D 
=am. D 
d I 1. - 0 
1EW.D -- - 
YbEi,. I 1 DID. 1-1 S. 1 mS6. 1m6D - 1 m-4. 
YERR Figure lb Rainfall in Dehra-Dun; percentage of the total average RELATIVE RAINFRLL INDIR 
Dm. D 
-Dm D 
Y 0 
mm. D 
A. 1 
1 "8"- ""'I u 
-am. -- 
-OD. 0 -r I 0. am. ID. ID. me - 101. 
YERR RELATIVE RAINFALL DEHRR DUN 
111.1 
1m. 1 
W L3 
SD. 1 
FL 1 4.1 
-am. 1 
-90.9 1. 41. 10. lP1. 
YERR 
Figure 1c Average annual rainfall for India Figure 2a MONTHLY PRECIPITATION 
Figure Zb MONTHLY PRECIFITRTICIN 
- 
- (1911) 
Figure 2c 71. 
so. -- 
-- 
a. -- 
1-7=. 1175. 1070. 1-01. 1-04. I Figure 3a TEMPERATURE IN MRRCH 
5m- 
re. 
W n= - 
-- 
- - - 28.3.1892 
3 
am. - 
10s. - - - 
6.3.1945 
?.mi,. 1-7a. 197s. a-70. Lw-1. 1-04. 1 
YE-R TEMPERRTURE IN RUGUST 
Figure 3b TEMPERRTURE IN NOVEMBER 
Figure 3c REFERENCES 
Fedorov, V. and A. Vereskov. 1985. Numerical Aspects of Some Nonstandard 
Regression Problems, WP-815-32, Laxenburg, Austria: International Institute 
for Applied Systems Analysis. 
Hannan, E.J., P.R. Krishnaiah, M.M. Rao. 1985. Time Series in the Time Domain, 
North-Holland, p. 490. POPULATION TRENDS IN THE DOON VALTXY 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Laxenburg, Austria 
The main data available on the population of Doon Valley is collected in Table 
1; see also Figure 1 (Varun, 1979; Statistical Report, 1984). One can observe that 
the total population growth has had an exponential character of a sort usually 
observed when a region does not face saturation effects, for example, a significant 
shortage of major supplies. 
Table 1 Main Demographic Characteristics 
1941 
1951 
1961 
1971 
1981 265789 
361689 
429014 
577306 
761668 
PERCENTAGE OF DIFFERENT WORKERS IN MAJOR LABOR CLASSES 
Total major workers 
Farmers 
Agricultural workers 
Family industries 
Other 161671 
210860 
242987 
326108 
420454 231179 
305529 
389527 104115 
150289 
186027 
251798 
341203 
247982 
69291 
19682 
3168 
155841 197835 
271777 
372141 
100% 
28% 
8% 
1% 
63% 
POPULATION IN DEHRADUN TAHSIL 
1961 
1971 362300 
498200 205300 
278900 157000 219300 167700 
232500 194600 
265700 POPULATION DURING LAST 9 DECADES 
Figure 1 Three regression models were fitted to this available data. (See Figures 
2a,b,c,d; the vertical lines indicate estimates of the standard deviation.) All three 
have approximately the same sum of square residuals, so they are statistically 
equally good; see Table 2. It is worthwhile to point out that the logistic model 
(which takes into account saturation effects) does not give any visible indication of 
a slowing down of the total population growth. 
Table 2 Eegresaion Yodels of Population Growth 
yt =q(tt ,Q)+et ,tf =rt -1871' 
where et are random values with constant variance 2, 
rt are current years. 
where N is number of observations, 
m, is number of unknown parameters, 
3 are their estimates. 
The sum of two exponents gives the most interesting and "physically" reason- 
able result. It shows that there are two population groups with different growth 
rates. This can be explained by comparing the size of each group with the latest 
available data on rural and urban population (1961, 1971, 1981). The first group 
can be considered urban, the second, rural. One can see in Figure 2d that the 
urban population increases much faster than the rural one. Presumably this is a 
reflection of the fact that the forest-agricultural carrying capacity of the region 
has almost approached its upper limit; see contribution in this volume "A Prelim- 
inary Assessment of Some 'Carrying Capacity' Indicators for the Dehra-Dun Dis- 
trict" by Fedorov, Lenko and Parikh. Parameter numbers 1 2 3 4 s,l/ s: 
MODEL 
I 
I1 
I11 
IV* 
*Case IV - Model I11 was used with the addition of information 
on the urban and rural population (1961,1971, 1981) param. 
st.dev. 
param. 
st.dev. 
param. 
st.dev. 
param. 
st.dev. 80.7 
11.4 
-3.9 
3 .O 
3.4 
4.3 
3.5 
1.7 0.8162 
1. 
0.766 
0.454 0.20 
0.015 
0.21 
0.07 
0.45 
0.09 
0.43 
0.05 4.0-lo3 
12.7.10~ 
139.7 
8.2 
109.6 
12.4 0.065 
0.039 
0.104 
0.012 In addition to the models presented in Table 2, models with the same response 
functions (average behavior) but with other assumptions on additive random devia- 
tions were fitted: 
c?=d277(z ,+)or =d2772(z ,+). 
These models are popular in population growth studies and some probabilistic 
results confirm that they should be better than the models from Table 2. But in our 
case the final results (prognoses and parameter estimates) practically coincide 
for all modifications. POPULATION GROWTH 
1 mom. T 
I EXP APPROX 
Figure 2a Model I POPULRTION GROWTH 
LOGISTIC MEIGHTED APPRORCH 
Figure Zb Model I1 POPULATION GROWTH 
RURAL AND URBAN GROWTH - SIMPLE 
Figure 2c Model I11 POPULRTION GROWTH 
1swm. - 
- m 1 PPB. -- m m -il 
7 - omm. -- - 
Z D - - 
smm. -- -J 
1 3 a 
ame. -- 
LPI7. LPIYI. 
YEFlR 
RURAL AND URBAN dROWTH - SUBD f V 
Figure 2d Model IV A PREUWMRY ASSESSMENT OF SOBE "CARRYING CAPACITY' INDICATORS 
FOR THE DEHRA-DUN DISTRICT 
V Fedorov, M. Lmko, J. Parikh 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Laxenburg, Austria 
Introduction 
An estimate of the "carrying capacity" of a region is often considered to be a 
necessary element of regional environmental assessments. It is clear that "carry- 
ing capacity" is a concept that can include many descriptive factors. (e.g., Slesser 
and Hounam, 1981). Because of data scarcity concerning the Dehra-Dun district, 
only a very models number of factors can be analyzed at present. In Phase 11, the 
corresponding analysis may be done on a multi- factor base, and must comprise 
local industries and mineral resources. 
At present only rural components will be considered, for the reason given in 
the contribution 'Fopulation Trends in the Doon Valley" by Fedorov and Lenko, 
where a brief statistical analysis of population dynamics was made. From this 
analysis it follows that the rural population has nearly approached its saturation 
level, while the urban is still growing intensively. (see "Population Trends in the 
Doon Valley", this volume, Fig.2d) One can also observe value-stabilization of 
arable lands and crops. (Compare Varun, 1979, and Statistical Reports, 1984 .) 
The basic information necessary and available for analysis is shown in Tables 
1 and 2. All regional information corresponds to the Dehra-Dun district. There- 
fore, strictly speaking, the analysis was completed for this administrative unit. 
Table 1 General Information 
Cultivated area 
Area yielding two annual crops 
Foodgrain production 
Forest area 
Forest products 
Timber 
Fuelwood 
Cattle and buffalo 
Sheep 
Goats - 60 - 
Table 2 Auxiliary Informstion* 
Caloric Values on Fresh-weight Basis 
for Certain Agricultural Materials 
Category KJ per kg -lo3 
Grains 16.2 
Pulses (various beans, etc.) 17.1 
Leafy vegetables 2.8 
Tubers (potato) 4 .O 
Vegetables 2.4 
Green fodder 4 -0 
Tree and shrub leaves 4.2 
Hay 14.6 
Leguminous hay 15.0 
Straw 14 .O 
Concentrates 13.9 
Cakes, meals 18.2 
Manure 7.3 
Fertilizer 30.3 
Fuel 16.8 
Milk 4.2 
KJ per day -lo3 
One man-day 16.7 
One bullock-day 72.7 
Fuelwood consumption 1.5 KJ/day capita 
*Pandey, Singh, 1984 
Fuehod Consumption 
From Tables 1 and 2, it follows that in this district the volume of the extracted 
fuelwood is sufficient to support 130,000 people. The coefficient 0.8 was used for 
transformation of cu.m. of fuelwood to tonnes. A rather high coefficient was taken 
and it corresponds to the best species. Usually the value 0.6 is more realistic. 
Our estimate is based on current fuelwood extraction. If we assume an annual 
increment of forest biomass (in this area it is 160 t/sq.km.) used as fuelwood, then 
the district can support about 440.000 people. Of course this figure is purely 
theoretical and even grazing was not taken into account here. At best, one can 
hope for 50% use of the annual increment and this reduces the upper limit to 
220,000. 
It should be pointed out that demand for fuelwood per - capita is decreasing 
steadily due to the use of more efficient energy sources. For instance, about 60% 
of villages are now electrified (See Volume 11. DATA BANK), but the corresponding 
energy is mainly imported. 
Food Consamption 
From Tables 1,2 and Figure 1, it follows that the current level of foodgrain 
production the district can support is about 190,000 people. If one takes into 
account the production of fruits, vegetables and domestic animal products, this 
figure can increase up to 400,000. So the rural population, which is now about 390,000, can support itself but contributes very few products to towns. 
This fact is reflected explicitly in "Population of India", 1984, which states 
that in 1971-1973, when the total population was 580,000 and rural was 300,000, the 
district produced around 58,000 t of foodgrain (compared with 77,000 t in 1984), 
and about 30,000 t was imported. 
Conclusion 
In summarizing the results one can assert that the Dehra-Dun district has 
approached saturation at least for two essential factors: fuelwood and available 
food consumption. There is evidence that water resources (at least under existing 
water-management policies) have become insufficient in the district. This fact has 
been pointed out by different authors (Singh, 1973; Saxena, Verma, 1981). In addi- 
tion, the increase of arable lands seems to be very problematic because it will 
almost certainly result in deforestation with subsequent deterioration of environ- 
mental conditions. 
Therefore, considering previous tendencies and currently available data, 
extensive development of this area looks inadmissible. Of course, this conclusion 
should be considered very cautiously because it is based on a very preliminary, 
single-factor, type of analysis. 
This preliminary assessment does not include several important factors. 
These relate to: 
- Improvements in a static picture of 1980 - Dynamic variations in future 
- Effects of different policies 
1. Inprovementa in base year 
- Demographic composition of population, i.e., different calorie requirements of 
men, women, and children 
- Livestock composition in terms of cows, bullocks, goats, sheep, pigs and their 
different feed requirements 
- Fuel composition and rural energy survey 
2. Dynamic variations in future 
In addition to these improvements for the base year, carrying capacity in 
future needs to be a dynumic concept. This would mean that in the future, one 
could have many trade-offs between alternatives. Some of them are indicated 
below: 
- What amount of population growth and livestock growth could be sustained in 
the future and with what measures? 
- How do increased industrial activities and imports of oil products affect fuel- 
wood situation and employment questions? 
3. Effecta~ of alternative policies 
In addition, there are policy alternatives: PRODUCTION OF CROPS 
IN 1000 METRIC TONNS 
UHEQT 1 33.6 I 
BRRLEY13.24 
OTHERSrS.21 1 
RICE1 15.31 
MRIZE! 17.41 
Figure 1 - Improved efficiencies of fuel-use 
- High-yielding varieties and additional chemical fertilizers - More investment in the region 
How do such policy measures alter the life in the Doon Valley? These and 
other aspects will be looked into in Phase 2. 
REFERENCES 
Pandey, V., D.S. Singh. 1984. Energy-flow Relationships Between Agro- and 
Forest-Ecosystems in Central Himalaya, in Environmental Conservation, 
Vol.I1(1):45-53. 
Saxena, P., S. Verma. 1981. Resource Evaluation and Economic Planning in Dehra 
Dun Valley, in National Geographic, Vol.XVI:63-70. 
Singh, G.D.S. 1973. Groundwater Resources of Doon Valley, in Proc. of Internat. 
Symp. on Development of Ground Water Resources, Vo1.3:97-111. 
Slesser, M., I. Hounam. 1981. Carrying Capacity, in Third Edition of Energy Stu- 
dies Unit, University of Stratchclyde, Glasgow. 
Varun, D. 1979. Uttar Pradesh District Gazetters - Dehra Dun, Roorkee, V.P. 
India. Inte rated Software for Environmental Assessment o 9 Industrial Development in the Doon Valley 
Kurt Fedra 
Project Leader, 
Advanced Computer Applications (ACQ 
smm 
This proposai describes an integrated set of software tools that could form 
the core of a computer-based Environmental Assessment of Industrial Deveiopment 
for the Doon Valley. 
It is based on the integration of esta'olisnea techniques of environmental 
impact assessment, simulation modeling, data base management, operations 
research methodology, and modern computer technology including interactive 
color graphics and techniques of Artificial Intelligence (AI). 
The basic idea is to draw together, into one integrated software environment, 
the comp~nents of a comprehensive assessment, such as the background data, 
descriptive and normative models for the analysis of what-if questions and the 
design of management alternatives, and decision-support methods. Linking them 
into a coherent, easy-to-use system provides a coordinating framework and project 
structure that interactively and dynamically supplements any static, i.e., printed 
impact assessment or report. 
The basic functions of the system include: 
providing background information on the status quo and likely development 
options; 
design and analysis of feasible development policies (optimization of indivi- 
dual activities, designing/optimizing sets of coordinated activities) and their 
environmental implications and consequences; 
and finally, the comparative evaluation of deveiopment alternatives and 
decision support (policy analysis). 
The system wouid be implemented on a super-microcomputer graphics workstation. 
Numerous component models relevant to the Doon Valley and similar situations of 
industrial aevelopment-environment interactions (e.g., a number of models 
developed at the US/EPA) are available at IIASA or have been developed at IIASA 
(see Appendix). Basic software techniques for user interface design and systems 
integration, and an operational prototype of such an interactive software system, 
developed by ACA, are avaiia'ole for demonstration (see attached bibliography). 
RESEARCH APPROACH AND COATTENTS 
The central method of the proposed approach, which is to be understood as 
compiementary to other methods proposed, is knowledge engineering together 
with and around well established techniques of Applied Systems Analysis, Artificial 
Intelligence, and modern computer technology. Tine project will design and deveiop 
an integraied set of soptware tools, building iargely on existing models and 
computer-assisted procedures. This set of tools is designed for a broad group of 
users with diverse, including non-technicai, bacicgrounds. Its primary purpose is 
to provide easy access and aliow efficient use of methods of analysis and informa- 
tion management which are normally restricted to a small group of technical 
experts. The use of advanced information and data processing technology should aliow a more comprehensive and interdisciplinary approach to development poiicy 
design and anaiysis. 
To facilitate the access to compiex computer models for the more casuai user, 
and for more experimental and explorative use, it also appears necessary to buiia 
much of the accumulated knowieage of the subject areas into the user interface for 
the models. Thus, the interface will have to incorporate software that is capabie 
of assisting any non-expert user to select, set up, run, and interpret specialized 
software. By providing a coherent user interface, that makes interactions between 
different models, their data bases, and auxiliary software for display and analysis 
transparent for the user, a more experimental and educational style of computer 
usage can be supported, allowing for an easy exploration of alternative develop- 
ment policies and strategies in actual planning situations or for training purposes. 
Conceptually, the main elements of the system are: 
an Intelligent User Interface, which provides access to the systems' work- 
ings for the user. This interface must be attractive, easy to understand and 
use, and to a certain extent provide the translation between natural language 
and human style of thinking to the machine level and back. This interface 
must also provide a largely menu-driven conversational guide to the system's 
usage (dialog - menu system), and a number of display and report generation 
styles, including color graphics and linguistic interpretation of numerical 
data (symbolic/graphical display system); 
Information System, which includes the system's Knowiedge and Data Bases 
as well as the Inference and Data Base Management Systems, which not only 
summarize appiication- and implementation-specific information, but also con- 
tain the most important and useful domain-specific knowledge; 
the Model System, which consists of a set of models (Simulation, Optimiza- 
tion), which describe individual processes that are elements of a probiem 
situation, perform risk and sensitivity analyses on the relationship between 
control and management options and criteria for evaluation, or optimize plans 
and policies in terms of their control variabies given information about the 
user's goals and preferences according to some specified model of the 
system's workings and rules for evaluation. 
the Decision Support System, which assists in the interpretation and multi- 
objective evaluation of modeling results, and provides tools for the selection 
of optimal alternatives with interactively defined preferences and aspira- 
tions. 
Recognizing the potentially enormous development effort required and the 
open-ended nature of such a project, we propose a well-structured cooperative 
effort that takes advantage of the large volume of scientific software already 
available. A modular design philosophy enables us to develop individual building 
blocks, wnich are valuable products in their own right, in the various phases of 
the project, and interface and integrate them in a framework which, above all, has 
to be flexible and easily modifiable with growing experience of use. 
Using an open architecture concept with a functional and problem-oriented, 
rather than a structural and methodological design for this framework, the 
demonstration prototype can be constructed at relatively low cost and with only 
incremental effort. 
The decision support system proposed here is based on information manage- 
ment and model-based decision support. It envisions experts as its users, as well 
as decision and policy makers, and in fact, the computer is seen as a mediator and 
transiator between expert and decision maker, between science and policy. The 
computer is thus not only a vehicle for analysis, but even more importantly, a vehicle for communication, learning, and experimentation. 
The three basic, interwoven elements, are 
to supply factual information, based on existing data, statistics, and scien- 
tific evidence, 
to assist in designing alternatives and to assess the likely consequences of 
such new plans or policy options, and 
to assist in a systematic multi-criteria evaluation and comparison of the 
alternatives generated and studied. 
The framework foresees the selection of criteria for assessment by the user, 
and the assessment of scenarios or alternative plans in terms of these criteria. 
An example of these concepts in a practical appiication, namely a structurally 
similar study on industrial risk, carried out by IIASA/ACA under contract to the 
Commission of the European Communities, Joint Research Centre (EURATOK), Ispra 
Establishment, Ispra, Itaiy, is described by Fedra (1985, 1986). The material and 
approach ciescribed in these reports could serve as a starting point for the Doon 
Valiey case study software development and integration. 
Also, a similar case study developing Experts Systems for Integrated 
Development: A case study of Shanxi Province, the People's Republic of China, 
developing and implementing model-based decision support software for industrial 
development under environmental constraints, is in progress in the ACA project. 
A short list of references is given in the attached bibliography. 
Structure and Contents 
The highly modular system will be structured around a major regional 
developme~lt model based on concepts of systems dynamics and rule-based simula- 
tion similar in scope to the models used in AEAM workshops (Adaptive Environmen- 
tal Assessment and Management), but based on substantial background data and 
with a higher degree of resolution in time and space. 
This model will be augmented by a decision-support module for discrete 
optimization, i-e., the selection of preferred alternatives from a set of feasible 
options, generated through scenario analysis. 
This decision-oriented top-level will be connected to selected sectoral simu- 
lation and optimization models (e.g., individual industries, mining, forestry, 
agriculture, urban development, air quality, water resources, etc.). These models 
can either be used directly or they can provide jnput (aggregated parameters) to 
the top level. 
Both levels of models are connected to a set of data bases, which again can 
be used directly as an interactive information system. All elements of the system 
are tightly integrated and driven by an interactive, graphics-oriented intelligent 
user-interface and dispiay system. 
Basic software systems components: 
Data Bases should include, e.g.: 
industrial activities and establishments (including emission data) industrial technologies (including pollution abatement methods) 
water resources and climatic data 
land use and agriculture 
population. 
Access to the Data Bases is either transparent through the component simula- 
tion models or through an interactive query format, i.e., menu-driven and symbol- 
oriented interface to the heterarchical*) information structure, combining static 
as well as dynamic data elements with geographical display and simple statistical 
analysis features (e.g., regression, time-series analysis). 
Tentative topics for component models: 
Selected models (covering the topics addressed e.g., in the Dehradun Master 
Plan) will be integrated into the system in a hierarchical, top-down approach, 
starting from an overall regional development planning level: 
dynamic, qualitative (symbolic) simulation of regional development, based on 
principles of system dynamics and rule-based symbolic simulation, linked, in a 
hierarcnical structure, to the sectoral models below; 
process-oriented detailed simulation models for specific activities (e.g., min- 
ing, forestry) for the estimation of economic descriptors, resource consump- 
tion, and pollutant emission, in scenario analysis or possibly optimization 
mode; 
water resources planning, including water allocation, with specific emphasis 
on the effects of land use changes (deforestation); 
environmental quality (air, water) in relation to industrial activities; 
urban development and demography. 
This list is certainly neither complete nor definite; is should only serve as an out- 
line of the possible scope of such a system. However, it is important to understand 
that due to the modular structure, the individual components can be of various 
degrees of detail; initially, they may be very simple modules, that can be easily 
replaced by more aetaiied ones as the study progresses. The models integrated 
can include any computerized assessment method deemed relevant; integration will 
provide an appropriate user interface and the coupling with other models in the 
system and the data bases. 
Systems integration and user interface: 
Data bases and component models will be supplemented by a decision-support 
ievel, based on multi-objective multi-criteria methods. 
The decision support level is based on: 
at the top levei of aggregation, the use of a development planning module, 
consisting of a dynamic, rule-based simulation/gaming model which summarizes 
and aggregates the results of the sectoral simulation models; 
scenario analysis with the component sectoral models (e.g., water resources, 
mining, forestry, agriculture). Individual models are supplied with rule-based 
problem- and input-generators and directly coupled to the data bases to facil- 
itate interactive use; 
*8 
I The term heterarchy refers to a multi-dimensional hierarchy with arbitrary linkages. and finally background information from the heterarchical information sys- 
tem, providing geographically organized data as well as statistical anaiyses in 
an interactive, display-oriented format. 
The user interface is based on menu-driven, largely symbolic input and a mix- 
ture of symbolic, graphical, and alphanumerical tabular or textual output with the 
emphasis on (geo)grapnical color display. On-line explain functions and input 
error correction and automatic feasibility checking are basic elements of the user 
interface. 
The development of the system will start from a minimal set of functional 
components, so that an early prototype is available for extensive testing; pro- 
gress towards increasing refinement and more components would be dependent on 
the time and resources available. The inclusion of additional elements also 
depends on the availability of the appropriate data bases. 
Selected Bibliography 
Fedra, K. (1986) Advanced Decision-oriented Software for the Management of 
Hazardous Substances: A Prototype Demonstration System. CP-86-10, Interna- 
tional Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, A-2361 Laxenburg, Austria. 98p. 
Fedra, K. (1985) Advanced Decision-oriented Software for the Management of 
Hazardous Substances: Structure and Design. CP-85-18, International Insti- 
tute for Applied Systems Analysis, A-2361 Laxenburg, Austria. 61p. 
Fedra,K. (1985) A Modular Interactive Simulation System for Eutrophication and 
Regional Development. Water Resources Research, 21/2, 143-152. 
Fedra, K. and Loucks, D.P (1985) Interactive Computer Technology for Planning 
and Policy Modeling. Water Resources Research, 21/2, 114-122. 
Fedra, K. (1984) Interactive Water Quality Simulation in a Regional Framework: a 
management oriented approach to lake and watershed modeling. Ecological 
Modelling, 21: 209-232. (reprinted as IIASA RR-84-12) 
Fedra,K. (1983) Environmental Modeling under Uncertainty: Monte Carlo Simula- 
tion. RR-83-20, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, IIASA A- 
2361 Laxenburg, Austria, 78p. 
APPENDm available simulation models. 
The following list compiles selected models that could be relevant for the Doon 
Valley study, that are available and already partly implemented at ACA, and that 
could be integrated into the software system outlined above: ITC3M: a spatially distributed Interactive Regional Development simulator, inciua- 
ing industrial production and waste generation (production based waste coeffi- 
cients, estimating water as well as airborne pollution), wastewater treatment, and 
agricultural production; 
lVIITSm: a river basin simulator developed at MIT and widely applied in developing 
countries, that optimizes water allocations among agricultural, industrial and 
domestic use; includes irrigation and hydropower generation; 
RRIYL. a water budget and rain-runoff simulator, describing effects of land use 
changes (e.g., deforestation, urbanization) on runoff (peak and low-flow) and 
groundwater recharge; 
FEFLOW: a 2D finite elements groundwater quantity and quality simulator; 
HSPF: a comprehensive hydrological simulation package developed at US-EPA; 
QUAL-II. =R, WODA, TOX-SCREEN. EXAMS. TOXIWASP: a set of water quality 
simulators with various degrees of resolution, ranging from DO-BOD to multiple pol- 
lutants and toxics; 
ARM: Agricultural Runoff Management, describing runoff and nonpoint source pol- 
lution (including erosion and pesticides) from agricultural watersheds; 
DISCRETE: a scenario analysis post-processor for discrete multi-criteria optimi- 
zation. 
In addition, various data base management and graphical display programs, as well 
as statistical data analysis programs have been developed and implemented at ACA. POSSIBLE WATER MANAGEXENT MODEIS M)R THE DOON VALLlEY 
Stefan Kaden 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Laxenburg, Austria 
Preliminary Remark 
The following contribution is based on a review of the literature. There has 
been no possibility to visit the Dwn Valley and to talk to Indian specialists on 
water management and hydrogeology in the region. Some of the assumptions con- 
tained in this Appendix may therefore be incorrect and the proposed modeling 
schemes may need to be revised. 
The Water Resources System in the Doon Valley 
The Doon Valley is located between the Lesser Himalayas to the NE and the 
Shivalik range to the SW. The Ganga River to the East and the Jumna River to the 
West divide the valley into two major watersheds. The total length of the valley is 
about 70 km, the width of the floor between 10 and 20 km, the width of the 
watersheds 30 km at maximum. The total area of both watersheds amounts to 
approx. 2000 km2. 
The Dwn Valley is characterized by extremely heavy summer precipitation. 
Along the south-facing slope of the Musswrie hills, the monsoon rainfall averages 
2000 mm per year. About 80% of total annual precipitation is received from June to 
September. At an observation point near Dehra Dun, the following figures have 
been given (Singh, 1973): 
- 24 yr. average 1688.1 mm - maximum 2613.5 mm - minimum 1265.4 mm 
For the Dwn Valley, the yearly average precipitation amounts to about 3.4 billion 
m3. In order to evaluate the available water resources, the real evapotranspira- 
tion would have to be estimated. After Sastry and Narayama (1984), the evapora- 
tion in the Doon Valley amounts to about 1350 mm/year (2.7 billion m3). This is the 
value for evaporation from a free water surface; Singh et al. (1981) give the same 
value therefore. Using this value, the total runoff of the valley (precipitation 
minus evaporation) would be 340 mm or 680 million m3. This is only a very rough 
estimate, because the real evapotranspiration from the valley (mostly agricultural 
area and forestry) differs from that of a free water surface. A rough estimate of 
the real evapotranspiration based on Korsun et al. (1984) is 700 mm. From that, a 
total runoff of about 1000 mm/year (2 billion m3) results. As expected, the runoff 
is characterized by a strong annual cycle as Fig. 1 indicates. 1.0 
110 
840 
110 
I10 
100 
a0 m ; w 
j TO 
a g 00 
80 
4a 
a0 
w 
10 
O 11 IT 19 SI rn 81 ST a* 41 u 41 41 4s a1 I I 8 I s 11 Is 11 tr Is st ,& n 
SIWlRO WtLRS , 1 JUL I AW I SfP. ( OCT. I MOV. I OLC ] JAN FEll I MAR I APR ( MAT I JW. 
STANDARD WEEKWISE CLIMATIC WATER BALANCE AT SELAKUI FARM- DEHRAMIN. 
( 1956 - 1979 1 
Figure 1 Annual water balance of the Doon valley, comparing precipitation and 
evaporation 
'It is clear that intermediate storage of runoff during the dry season is impor- 
tant for the natural ecosystem in the Valley as well as for the socio-economic sys- 
tems. In the valley itself, there are practically no natural or artificial surface 
water storages (neglecting short-term storage effects of rivers, especially during 
floods). The only relevant storages are natural subsurface ones: 
- the limestone deposits of the Lesser Himalayas (Mussoorie 
hill) 
- the river beds - the Doon gravel. 
Karstic aquifer of the limestone deposits 
The fissured limestone deposits contain cavities of several sizes. The con- 
nected cavities form a karstic aquifer which is able to store and to release large 
amounts of water. The aquifer is recharged by the monsoon rainfall. After the 
monsoon, the stored water is discharged through springs at the lower parts of the 
deposits. 
Bandyopadhyay et al., (1984) state that: 'The aquifer function of the fissured 
limestone belt of the Mussoorie hills is the most critical factor of transforming a 
temporally uneven distribution of incident water from rainfall into a perennial and 
temporally uniform distribution of spring and stream discharges. Through its 
dynamic role in the hydrological cycle of the Valley, the limestone deposit acts as 
a mechanism for avoiding the twin hazards of floods and droughts. " 
An open question is whether the karstic aquifer is connected subteraneously 
with the Doon gravel aquifer and contributes to its recharge. See below. Subsurface water courses of river beds 
Only the main rivers, the Jumna and the Ganga, and a few of their tributaries 
have perennial flow. All other rivers in the valley are seasonally dry (Nossin, 
1971). The river beds are formed by erosion processes from boulder and gravel 
sediments, undergoing continuous modification. These sediments have high storage 
capacity and permeability. Obviously a part of the river flow especially in the dry 
season occurs below the surface in the river bed. The river beds are hydrogeo- 
logically connected with the Doon gravel. The runoff (surface and subsurface) in 
the river bed, including flood areas, recharges the Doon gravel. In the lower 
parts of the valley, baseflow occurs from the Doon gravel into the rivers. 
Doon gravel aquifer 
The topsoil of major parts of the floor of the Doon Valley is a silty clay loam 
of low permeability. Below the topsoil, a thick gravel formation of medium permea- 
bility exists - the Doon gravel. Its depth amounts to 200 m at maximum (Roy, this 
volume). The Doon gravel is the main aquifer being used for water supply purposes 
in the valley. It is recharged by infiltration from the surface, above all from allu- 
vial fans and terraces and from the rivers. Because the subsurface catchment 
area is not known, it is not clear whether there are further sources of recharge, 
e.g. from the limestone deposit. 
Another open question is the hydrogeological nature of the deeper geological 
formations. Probably these are also permeable and water bearing. 
In dry periods, the Doon gravel aquifer may recharge rivers, especially in 
lower parts of the valley. More details on the hydrogeological setting can be found 
in Roy (this volume). 
Figure 2 gives an overview of the relevant elements of the water resources 
system in the Doon Valley. 1 PRECIPITATION I I EVAPORATION/ EV. TRANSPI RATION 
INTERCEPTION LL 
FOREST/ I 
SURFACE 
RETENTION RUNOFF 
1 SO1 L MOISTURE 1 INFILTRATION RIVERS M RUNoFF lN I 
KARSTIC LIME- DOONGRAVEL 
STONE DEPOSIT 
Figure 2 Water resources system in the Doon Valley 
Impacts on the Water Resources System 
The major water user in the Doon Valley is the population. The water consump- 
tion in Dehra Dun City amounts to 68 - 128 liter/day (1984) per person. Assuming a 
population in the urban agglomeration of 293,000 (1984), we get an annual water 
consumption of 7.3 - 13.7 million m3. This is only 0.3 - 0.7% of the average yearly 
runoff. 
The water consumption figure above contradicts that in Bandyopadhyay 
(1984), who assumed a daily consumption of 25 liter/day per person. In this case 
the annual water consumption would amount to 2.7 million m3, i.e. only 0.1% of the 
total runoff . 
The 1982 water consumption of various industries in Dehra Dun City was 
estimated to about 407 m3 per day, i.e., only 0.15 million m3 per year. This figure 
is less than 10% of the water consumption of the population. 
Figures on water consumption in agriculture are not known. In total, water 
consumption may be estimated to be in the range of 10 million m3 per year. This 
means that in the annual mean, there should not be any problems for water supply 
and the impact of water consumption on water resources should be negligible. 
The situation looks quite different if one considers the annual cycle of runoff 
(see Figure 1). If the monsoon rainfall cannot be stored sufficiently, in the dry 
period water deficits may occur. According to Roy (this volume), the water table near Dehra Dun City is already lowered by about 7 to 15 m. The significance of this 
information is not clear (Is it a mean value? How far is the observation point from 
the extraction wells etc.?) Nevertheless, the observed depletion indicates that a 
depletion of groundwater resources may have already started in this region (the 
pumpage is larger than the natural recharge). And this may effect other parts of 
the water resources system, e.g. the river flow in lower parts of the valley during 
dry periods. 
In addition to the direct impact on the water resources system described 
above, there are a number of indirect human impacts. These impacts are probably 
more relevant than those listed above. According to the available publications, 
the major impacts are caused by: 
- changes in land-use practice including deforestation, 
resulting in an increased surface runoff and reduced 
groundwater recharge, - limestone mining, changing the recharge condition for the 
karstic aquifer of the limestone deposits, increasing 
surf ace runoff, - flood protection measurements and removal of sediments from 
river beds, increasing the amount of unused discharge during 
monsoons (the reduced size of flooded area reduces ground- 
water recharge!), - siltation caused by increased runoff and erosion due to land 
degradation, resulting in surface clogging of river beds and 
groundwater recharge areas (alluvial fans), consequently 
reducing groundwater recharge. 
In Volume I, Chapters 6 and 7, several practical measures for a rational water 
management strategy are listed. Here we would like to emphasize the possibility of 
artificial groundwater recharge. 
Artificial Groundwater Recharge 
Artificial recharge of groundwater basins is becoming increasingly important 
in groundwater management, particularly in the joint use of surface water and 
groundwater resources (Asano, 1985). Major objectives for artificial recharge 
are : 
- augmentation of the amount of available groundwater for 
water supply, - conservation and disposal of runoff and floodwaters, - improved water quality by removing suspended solids by 
filtration through the ground. 
These objectives are applicable to the Doon Valley. Due to the good permeability 
of the Doon Valley during the monsoon, large volumes of runoff could be stored in 
the aquifer. 
The engineering techniques needed for artificial recharge are well-known, 
e.g.: - direct surface techniques such as flooding, ditch and furrow 
systems, basins, - direct subsurface techniques such as wells, reverse 
drainage, pits and shafts, - combinations of these techniques for subsurface drainage 
(collectors with wells). 
Details can be found for instance in Asano, (1985). (This comprehensive text also 
gives a voluminous list of references.) 
The storage method does not require high capital investment. One important 
benefit is that evaporation losses are negligible in comparison with those from sur- 
face water reservoirs. A properly designed system for artificial recharge in the 
Doon Valley could help meet the water supply needs of the residents as well as 
being environmentally beneficial (e.g. increasing the baseflow in the lower part of 
the valley). 
Taah for Water Management Modeling 
The common tasks of water management for regional systems in many countries 
include the following: 
- to elaborate development policies (long-term) for the water 
resources and management system in the region, - to design water management systems (such as reservoirs, 
groundwater extraction wells etc .), - to derive rational medium- and long-term management 
strategies for existing and/or planned water management 
systems, - to consider the needs of short-term (real-time) operational 
control of such systems. 
In principle these tasks are relevant for the Doon Valley. But, at present a 
comprehensive water management plan does not exist. There are practically no 
runoff controls (reservoirs, weirs, etc.). Groundwater extraction is done by the 
help of tube wells, obviously more or less uncontrolled. So the first two tasks are 
of major interest for the Doon Valley - elaboration of development policies and 
design of water management systems, above all the controlled groundwater extrac- 
tion for water supply. In solving these problems, future aspects of rational 
management strategies and operational control would have to be taken into 
account. 
In the Doon Valley, one has to consider the strong inter-relationships between 
the water resources system, the environmental system in general, and the impacts 
of socio-economic development. The deterioration of the environment affects the 
water resources system and thus also the different water users. At the same time, 
there is a strong reverse impact of the water resources system on the environ- 
ment. 
In principle there is a requirement for the development of a complex model 
including all aspects of environmental and socio-economic development. It is cer- 
tain that such a model would be absolutely unrealistic under the conditions in the 
Doon Valley, above all because of the lack of knowledge on subprocesses and the 
lack of data. Nevertheless, any water management modeling for the Doon Valley 
has to consider these complex interrelationships. The models should be designed 
in such a way that results of modelling other environmental subsystems (6.g. soil 
erosion) can be easily included, and results of the water management model can be 
used for modeling of other subsystems. The accuracy and relevance of water management modeling depends on 
knowledge of the basic processes and on the available relevant data on the system 
and systems impacts. In the Doon Valley, one has to work with both missing 
knowledge and missing data. As a result, another task for modeling arises - pro- 
cess modeling in order to understand the water resources processes (hydrological 
cycle) and as a basis for the design of effective exploration and monitoring pro- 
grams. 
Water Resources Process Modeling 
Water resources modeling for the Doon Valley can only be based on deter- 
ministic model concepts, at least for the near future. Due to the lack of long-term 
observations (frequently a lack of any observations at all) any statistical or 
black-box approach as is common in hydrology would fail. 
The starting point should be a general water balance model of the Doon Val- 
ley, covering all relevant subprocesses depicted in Figure 2. The time step should 
be if possible one month at maximum. 
Precipitation patterns are well-known. For evapotranspiration, semi-empiric 
modelsmay be applied based on available geographical and climatological informa- 
tion. To describe the distribution of total runoff into surface runoff, infiltration, 
baseflow etc., simple conceptual models (with lumped parameters) can be wed, e.g. 
based on the model of a linear reservoir. The principal parts of such a water bal- 
ance model are depicted in Figure 3. 
Within the Regional Water Policies project at IIASA in collaboration with the 
Institute for Water Management, GDR, a methodology for developing simplified 
models for regional studies has been elaborated with special regard to surface 
water - groundwater interactions, (Kaden et al., 1985b). The concepts and models 
could be useful for the Doon Valley too. The choice of approach depends finally on 
the available information. Detailed model concepts have to be selected later. 
Such a conceptual balance model could be used for a first impact assessment 
of environmental deterioration. Furthermore it provides a framework for the 
development of more comprehensive process models. 
The elaboration of more comprehensive models for surface and river runoff 
does not seem to be necessary or realistic. But a comprehensive groundwater flow 
model for the Doon gravel should be developed in a second step. This model should 
consider distributed parameters, the interrelationship between surface water and 
groundwater, and the time-dependent recharge. Becawe of the lack of data, a sim- 
ple finite-difference flow model can be used. 
Calculations with this model would increase our knowledge of the water 
resources processes and could be used for designing monitoring and exploration 
programs. Total basin area 
Figure 3 Structure of a catchment model. from Kaden st. al. (1985b) Water Management Yodeling 
Depending on the success of the process modeling, more management-oriented 
models should then be developed. 
An improved groundwater flow model should be applied for the design of a 
controlled system of groundwater extractions. This model should be used continu- 
ously for controlling the groundwater extraction and the design of new installa- 
tions. As new measurement data are obtained, the model could be further 
improved. This would be the so-called concept of a continuously working model 
(Kaden et al., 1985b). 
Based on the balance model above, a planning model should be developed as a 
tool to find rational strategies of long-term development. Such a model should be 
capable of dealing with the following complexities: 
- controversy among different water users, socio-economic 
development and environment, - multiple criteria of evaluation of strategies (it may not be 
possible to evaluate some of the criteria quantitatively), - uncertainties and stochastic character of systems input 
(e .g . precipitation). 
An appropriate Decision Support Model System for the analysis of regional water 
policies in lignite mining areas has been developed at IIASA. It combines a multi- 
criteria analysis for planning periods greater than one year with a stochastic 
simulation of monthly systems behaviour (Kaden et al., 1985a). The system is 
highly interactive and user friendly. Computer color graphics are used for the 
visual display of results. An example (monochrom) is shown in Figure 4. In princi- 
ple, this concept could be applied to water management in the Dwn Valley as soon 
as submodels of the relevant processes have been developed. Perhaps even other 
environmental subprocesses could be included into this model concept. s I GDR TEST FlREFl I 
7 - 
6 - s 
4 
s 
8 
8 
- Qe- - Qv-= 
1991 - =:;:;;A "" - rg-b,8 D ~g-p - r(-b,i D rg-d - me- -rg-e 
am 1-8 
I 
Figure 4 Example of a computer graphic of a regional water management study REFERENCES 
Asano, T. (Ed.), 1985. Artificial Recharge of Groundwater. Butterworth Publish- 
ers, London etc., p. 767. 
Badyopadhyay, J. et al. 1984. The Doon Valley Ecosystem. Report for Department 
of Environment, Govt. of India. 
Kaden, S., Hummel, J., Luckner, L., Peukert, D., Tiemer, K. 1985a. Water Policies: 
regions with open-pit lignite mining (Introduction to the IIASA study), IIASA, 
WP-85-4, p.67. 
Kaden, S., Lauterback, D., Peukert, D., Schramrn, M., Tiemer, K. 1985b. Develop- 
ment of simplified models of regional groundwater and surface water flow 
processes based on computational experiments with comprehensive models. 
IIASA, CP-85-25, p.92. 
Korsun, W.I. et al. 1974. Atlas World Water Balance (in Russian). Gidrometerois- 
dat, Moscow/Leningrad. 
Nossin, J.J. 1971. Outline of the Geomorphology of the Dwn Valley. Z. Geomorph. 
N.F. Suppl.Bd.12, 18-50. Berlin- Stuttgart. 
Sastry, G. and Narayana, D. 1984. Watershed responses to conservation measures. 
ASCE Journal of Irrigation and Drainage Engineering. Vol. 110, No. 1, March, 
pp. 14-21. 
Singh, G. et al. 1081. Advances in rainfed farming. CSWRTI, Dehra Dun, India. 
nn. 1982. Master Plan Regulated Area, Dehradun, additional information. Town 
and Country Planning Department U .P., Sept. 1982. 
nn. 1984. Review of the Dehradun Master Plan. National EcoDevelopment Board, 
Department of Environment, Govt. of India, Oct. 1984. DElWRESI'ATION AND CIlMATIC CHANGE 
B. Padmanabhamurti 
School of Environmental Sciences 
Jawaharlal Nehru University 
New Delhi, India 
Abstract 
The effect of deforestation on rainfall was examined at 32 stations distributed 
over the breadth and width of India. More than 50 years of rainfall observations 
available from a non-parametric rank test applied to the above series of rainfall 
data showed that except for an isolated case (Shimoga in Karnataka), there was no 
significant decrease in rainfall at any station. Introduction 
Industrial projects and other development activities may cause some adverse 
ecological effects like deforestation. Often the damage caused is irreversible. 
Despite industrial and other development activities in India, possible irreversible 
and adverse effects have not yet caused alarm although relevant studies are very 
limited. 
In particular, the effect of deforestation on rainfall is still controversial. 
There are many examples where rainfall has decreased due to deforestation, and a 
few where no change has been noticed (Johnson et al., 1975). Denudation of vegeta- 
tion causes disastrous floods, soil erosion and loss of fertile soil resulting in waste 
lands. Such examples are in Little Andaman, Middle Island and in Great Nicobar. 
Loss of yield has been noticed due to loss of fertility. A study on the effect of 
forest cover on rainfall distribution at Andaman and Nicobar Islands indicates that 
rainfall increases with increasing forest cover (Biswas, 1980). 
Large trees besides providing shelter and comfort to human beings increase 
the rainfall. It has been concluded in the USSR that precipitation increased by 
10-12% over the forests (Fedorov et al., 1967). The idea that deforestation leads to 
a decline in rainfall is &ased on the fact that the presence of a forest has a 
favourable influence on the water economy of an area. Deforestation increases 
maximum air and soil temperatures and decreases slightly the minimum air and soil 
temperatures. Deforestation also decreases the net incoming radiation and 
increases radiative cooling of the air. Deforestation changes the reflectivity of 
the surface of the earth and increases dust particles in the air due to increased 
wind speed and dry soils. This changes the regional radiation exchange between 
the earth and the atmosphere. The relative humidity also is lowered. Deforesta- 
tion increases surface wind. 
Rajasthan desert is presumed to be man-made - a result of ecological 
mismanagement. Archaeological and pollen studies indicate that the desert was 
indeed relatively fertile several thousand years ago and that it contained a fresh- 
water lake that supported the Indus civilization. Suggestions are that defores- 
tation led to increased tropospheric dust loading which in turn enhanced air sub- 
sidence, thus inhibiting precipitation. It should be mentioned here that destruc- 
tion of forests is almost an irreversible process as reforestation is successful only 
with the greatest of difficulty. 
The luxuriant forest growth and unusual climate of early America invited con- 
jecture on the climatic effects of the forests and the consequences of their remo- 
val (Thompson, 1980). Pioneer settlers in America thought that clearing of the 
forests was producing a warming trend and affecting the climate in other ways. By 
the nineteenth century there was wide, but not entirely unanimous belief that 
deforestation had caused significant climatic changes, especially higher tempera- 
tures and lower precipitation. It was also believed that tree planting might 
increase precipitation in the semi-arid west. Modern scientists now attribute an 
important microscale climatic influence to forests and are considering the macros- 
cale effects, especially as related to atmospheric carbon dioxide and albedo 
changes. 
The effect of forests upon the total amount of rainfall is a question upon which 
writers are not agreed, some denying their influence altogether. In the present 
paper, the author has attempted to study the impact of forest clearing on rainfall 
at several stations spread across India (Fig. 1). Figure 1 
Methodology 
A non-parametric Rank Test has been applied to the series of rainfall data. 
Let xl , x2 . . ... xn be the amounts of rainfall in the successive years of the series. 
Let nl , n2 ..... nN be the frequency occurrence of each amount of rainfall. Then 
Test Score P is defines as P = nl + n2 ...... nN. For example, 
Rainfall (MM) 250 500 180 750 390 
Frequency of 
Occurrence 3 1 2 0 0 
A Test statistic S is defined as S=2P- where N is the number of of 2 
observations. According to the above example 
Standard error of S=sE(S)= N (N +1)(2N +5) 
18 J c Z -Score (Standard Normal Variation ) =- - - - -0.4 5 
Z follows a normal distribution with mean 0 and variance 1. If z > 2.58 the test 
score is significant at the 1% level. If z > 1.96, the test score is significant at the 
5% level. The inference could then be that a significant trend exist. 
Results: 
The trend in rainfall analysis as per the non-parameteric rank test is given in 
Table 1 which shows the stations, the number of years of rainfall data used, the 
Test Statistic (S), Standard Error of S and the z Score. TABLE 1 
Trend in rainfall series by Non-parametric Rank Test 
No. of Test z Score 
S.No. Name of Station Years Statistic 
S SE(S) sn(s) 
Coimbatore (Tamil Nadu) 56 -90 144 
Shimoga (Karnataka) 49 -248 118 
Phalghat (Kerala) 62 -37 167 
Sawai Madhopur (Jajasthan) 70 217 200 
Keshod (Gujarat) 9 -18 19 
Kodaikanal (Tamil Nadu) 53 166 133 
Mahabaleshwar (Maharashtra) 38 -69 82 
Panchmarhi (M.P.) 70 -1 1 200 
Kalimpong (West Bengal) 61 318 163 
Bulsar (Gujarat) 52 64 129 
Ranchi (Bihar) 53 -86 133 
Tora (Maghalaya) 67 -91 188 
Koraput (Orissa) 52 144 129 
Bidar (Karnataka) 60 240 159 
Mukeshwar (U.P.) 49 -116 118 
Kohima (Nagaland) 57 66 148 
Udhampur (J & K) 59 123 156 
Kulu (H.P.) 66 145 183 
Chanderpur (Maharashtra) 70 157 200 
Mandla (M.P.) 20 -54 32 
Jagdalpur (M .P .) 61 -122 163 
Shadrachalam (A.P.) 64 188 175 
Nilgiri (Tamil Nadu) 54 -187 136 
Digboi (Assam) 5 
Bomdila (Arunachal Pradesh) 4 Time series too short 
Pauri Garwal 74 -333 217 
Srinagar (Garhwal) 67 -17 187 
Almora 75 -267 221 
Gauhati 65 12 179 
Shillong 67 125 167 
Cherrapunji 61 68 163 
Gangtok 15 -9 21.6 
*Significant at 5% level (slightly decreasing trend). 
Rainfall data from 32 stations have been tested for trend using a non- 
parametric rank test. Except for Shimoga (Karnataka) none of the series exhibits 
any significant trend in long-term rainfall. Shimoga has a slightly decreasing 
trend which is significant at 5% level but not at 1%. 
The data for Digboi and Bomdila were not sufficient to apply the test. REFERENCES 
Biswas, B.C. 1980. Effect of Forest cover on rainfall distribution at Andaman & 
Car Nicobar Islands. Mausam 31, 1, pp 178-180. 
Fedorov, S.F. and A.S. Burov. 1967 "Influence of Forests on Precipitation" Soviet 
Hydrology. 
Johnson, F.L. et al. 1975 "A comparison of Urban and Forest microclimate in 
midwestern United States" Jour. Agr. Met. 
Thompson, Kenneth. 1980. 'Torests and Climate Change in America: Some early 
views" Climatic change, 3, 1, pp 47-64. A BREF SURVEY OF AIR POLLUTION MODELS ROUTINELY EWLOYED AT THE CENTRAL IlWlTWE OF ~OROLOCX AND GEODYNAhUCS IN VIENNA INCLUDING DATA REQIJIFUBENTS AND OUTPUT EXAMPLES 
Central Institute of Meteorology and Geodynamics 
Vienna, Austria 
1 Introduction 
The general scope of the Doon Valley project from the air pollution modeler's 
point of view includes the selection or development of proper air pollution models, 
the application to the specific sites and the gathering of appropriate data. 
Together with the aid of Indian authorities (Pollution Control Research Institute, 
Indian Meteorological Department), the procedure will therefore probably be as 
follows: 
1 Creation of an emission inventory: 
- classification of industrialized and built-up areas as well as traffic condi- 
tions 
- determination of emissions 
2 analysis of meteorological and air pollution data at hand (including landsat 
data) 
3 choice of the locations of monitoring stations (air pollution, meteorology) with 
special emphasis on temperature inversion characteristics in the valley 
4 data analysis after e.g . two years of monitoring 
5 simulation of different air pollution scenarios 
6 discussion of results; interdisciplinary recommendations for future develop- 
ments 
In the following, a brief survey of air pollution models, which are run on a 
routine basis at the Central Institute of Meteorology and Geodynamics, is given, 
with special emphasis on input requirements and output facilities. 
2 Survey of Air Pollution Models 
The survey starts with very simple models not requiring meteorological input 
and ends with the description of a multiple point- and area-source model. All the 
models are Gaussian. Concerning the India project and the difficulty in obtaining 
data, it seems desirable to use models which need little input. 
2.1 Point Source Models Not Requiring Meteorological Input 
2.1.1 Predicting Maximum Concentrations in Flat Terrain 
The model predicts location and amount of maximum concentrations of a single 
pollutant depending on stability class and wind velocity. The model uses Turner 
stability classes, i.e., classes 1 to 3 are unstable, class 4 is neutral and classes 5 to 7 are stable. 
Input requirements: 
1) stack height (m) 
2) effluent temperature at the stack (" C) 
3) air temperature (O C) 
4) effluent volume (m3/ h) 
5) source strength (mg / s ) 
6) stack diameter (m) 
7) vertical velocity of effluent (m/s) 
8) height of anemometer (m) 
If the temperature of the effluent is greater than 50 " C, inputs 6) and 7) are not 
used. 
The output is given as a table and a plot (Fig. 13). 
A model run is very fast, so e.g. different stack heights can be tested easily. TABE LLE 
EFFEUTIVE SCHnPNSTETNWOEWF HE(*I,*ArI*ALlMVTTfTnN SWAr(lO** 0 *&lV**l) UYO DEQEN ENTFEQNUYG X(Ml VON 
0EP OUELLE IU bRr(AENG1GKEIT Vr)Y DEQ VTNnGEfC~uTWOIG~ETT U(q lfl 1ND OER A'Jf ORE ITUNGf ULASSE 
KLASSF 2 3 LABIL 4 NEIITRAL 5 6 7 STABIL 
FESTE SCWOQ~STEIUHOEHF nc*) - 70 
GESA*TABGA SMENGE 0 (F?FTD IF'S-***31HI * .51LF+)5 OUF 1 LSTAERKE OSrVGltl .236E+Ob 
G6SA~TABGAS~FCFE Of NOp*-***3 I4 l - -339 E+16 OUFLL STAERKE 05 fMG /HI * .B51E+03 
ABGASTEMPE RATUP TGlGPAO CFLI* 140 UMGESIJNGSf EWOFPATUR TL~GRA-I :ELI- 10 
OBERE LTCUTEUETTE O(Ml m AUSTRTTTSGFSCWUlNOI WETT VT (q/S I 
Figure 1 Effective stack height HE(m), maximum concentration SMAX (mg/m3) 
and its distance X(m) from the source depending on wind velocity 
(U (m/s)) and stability class 
pollutant: SO2 
stack height H(m): 70 
effluent volume (m 3/ h): 511000 
. source strength (mg/s): 236000 
effluent temperature at the stack ( O C): 180 
air temperature ( O C ): 10 
height of anemometer (m): 10 Figure 2 Maximum concentration depending on wind velocity 2 lm / s and stabil- 
ity class 2.1.2 Predicting Concentration Fields in Flat Terrain 
Using the same input as above, concentration fields for a given combination of 
wind velocity and stability class for a single stack in flat terrain can be plotted. 
An example is given in Figure 3. 
2.1.3 Predicting Concentrations in Flat Terrain or Along Slopes for Multiple 
Sources 
The computer calculates a concentration field in the z -2-plane under the 
assumption that any grid point is influenced by topography except on the line z =O. 
For low windspeeds, streamlines go over obstacles; for higher windspeeds they go 
around them. The user can choose up to 19 receptor points along the z-axis and 
up to 10 "layers" (recommended vertical distance: 50 m). Data are required in a 
similar manner as in Section 2.1.1 for up to 15 stacks, but additional information is 
required concerning field width (number of steps in the z-and z-directions and 
distance of steps). The program also includes different mixing heights. 
An example of output in the form of a table is given in Figure 4; an interpreta- 
tion of this output is given in Figure 5. 0 w VI x Z 0 0 - - 0 5 
C 
+ I 2U.- wm- Nw. z0m OON YZ H ksg; < 
f 0 U 2 m 3 
Figure 3 Limits of pollutant concentrations depending on stability class and wind 
velocity 300.P VLASSF 
300. I? C FSTUU 
23c..0 rL trfr 
Zq0.t GFSCUV 
2oo.o 'fLAtzq 
zno .n s~crru 
1sc.o rLiSsc 
13L.C 6tCCUV 
1oo.n KLA~ZF 
100.U GESCrY 
50.0 WLAFqF 
9n.o GFZC~Y 
u.0 '(LASS 
b.O CFCrllV 
*AKT*hLlfO~7FVlPhTl~U lN ll~?* > '6/'**3 
:J. 71.17. 61b1 . CI~. wr:,. 17:)~. ;;>in. 16~~. lt.13. I sf.). 2.1 )o. ?t:,n. ?C(n. 7cm. ZPOO. 3000. 
3bo.nn~.nooo .?7n3 .or70 .1)~fi* .')??I .o?Y- ,0177 .vlsl .vlic .ma7 .we3 .w?? .0~53 .oo% .uo:l .oclsb 
~~u.o~,L..(:I,,,; .17)1-. .O~V .a356 .u?m .o17- .I. 131 .ill7 .,)!I*, .r)n75 .on67 .ovn ,9055  OW ... IUU .OLL~ 
?AO.OPF.P~V:IJ ,17611 .'JLG~ .OZ~C, ..)la1 .n13n .C~IL .rr)9~ ,)oq5 .i)n .0~5p .:!fib' ..?OTT .DO-? .~~J~o .(.c~> 
~'~CI.TJO~.OVI,( .?~rq .-ien+ .~cl?q ,.J?z~ .(IZ~S .tr?* .;~Iz~I . I,?> :!r)?' .05l1 .no73 .93b6 .0059 .,JO~Z .~~49 
lnn.nco.~x.!, ,1777 .cwq .@31L .?11a .!r:q: .(I('& .r.1*1 .IQ~* .9!1q5 .IJJ~~ .!JI!~o .3(:3~ -3635 .,,a33 .nu31 
~o.~:(~u.II:I~~o .I,FLL .~.cLz. .ten33 .1n37 .1n9. . nr37 .n17q .co'b .;)n2q .o??L .3r1?9 .0c21 .nor0 ,001~ .'~ois 
0.?00.000*, .O:ISU .03L1 eOC.32 .3010 .>7?5 .'J1?5 a-325 .'!P?C -9023 .n)2l .13?P -0FlF a0017 .JOlb -9Clb 
300.0 ~LAC~F r) : 5 9 9 I 5 .T 3 . . q 5 J 5 5 
~OO.~G~CCYW 0.n 4 5.0 5.3 5.0 . -.- '..*I 4.~ ,..L. . . 5. 5. >.o 5.0 
'25u.f~ rLASSE n q 9 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 
z-o.~c~~e~v 11.c 5.1 5.1 5.; 9.9 5.c 5 5.u 5.1) 5.0 5.0 . 5.0 5.0 5.1) 5.0 
700.0 wlhrcc 1 5 5 9 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 
200.?$ClfW 0.L 4.5 5 5.0 5.0 5.0 3 5.0 3.0 5.0 5.0 5 5.J 3.0 5.3 
1-0.0 *LAC<E (. . 5 5 5 9 5 Y > 9 5 3 'I 
]TO.UG~TC~IY 3.1, 4.1. 1.u 7.0 $.a =.n 5.1 n . I 5.6 . 5.7 5. 3.0 5.0 
139.0 NLASfF C L 4 4 4 L C C 6 6 L 4 L 4 5 5 
10U.OCFSCYu 0.f' 17.. 17.4 It.5 17.. 17.5 12.' 1'.5 17.5 I'm' 12.5 1?.5 17.5 12.5 5.0 5.0 . 5u.r ~LAS~F 3 2 2 z 3 ' 9 9 L 4 4 L 4 s 4 
Tc,.nCcsruv 3.n 1.r~ 1.0 1.n 1z.5 17.5 12.5 iz.4 1z.s IZ.~*~?.V 12.5 12.5 12.5 ~2.5 AZ.Y 
0.0 rl.I?ZF n 7 2 ? 3 3 1 3 4 5 4 L 4 L + 4 
U.~CF$CUU 0.n 1.0 I. 1.0 1.0 1.. 1. I.? I 1.0 1.t 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.0 1.0 
1 0. 0 0.0 7777.0 7777.n 7777.0 7777.r1 7777.1 7777.!, 7777.0 7777.F 
FTA u.0 (1.0 7777.0 7777.0 7777.3. 7-77.r 7~77.1- 7~~7.n 7777.n 7777.n 
*TSCHUNCtMn?ME (Y I t 500 
Figure 4 Maximum concentrations depending on stabilf ty class and wind velocity 
in complex terrain ABB .7: !'~A>cl YALE NCX - IMY,l SSIONSKONZENTRATI ON 
(MG/K~, DONNE LI NI EN) 1 N ABHXNG I GKE IT VON DER 
ENTFERNUNC- VOY EMI TTENTEN (KVJ UND DER HOHE 
DBER GRUND (PI) 
DICK AUSGEZOGENE LINIE: HANGPROFIL 
Ml SCHBETR I EB 
Figure 5 Maximum NO, - concentrations (thin lines, mg / m3), depending on dis- 
tance from the source (km) and height above ground (m); thick line: 
profile of the slope 2.2 Analysis of Meteorological and Air Pollution Data 
Programs for analyzing meteorological and air pollution data (half-hour mean 
values) are available under the assumption that the data are correct and have 
been placed on working file with certain format specifications. 
The program calculates daily, monthly, half-year or yearly means of meteoro- 
logical parameters or air pollution concentrations. Name and unit of the parame- 
ter, desired data period and desired mean values are requested. An example of an 
output is shown in Figure 6. YALBJ AYRESMTTTELUERf-,7 1/80. 3/60: ; 5D( 31 
HDYbTSW'TTE LWERT 4/80: ' 30(30) 
-.J A~~?ESFITTELUERT 1/80-1~,/%0: ;- 39( 2) 
MDN ATSY? TTEL WERT l1q&O.~ 19130) 
M~LBJA~RCS~TTTFL WEPT 4/es-~o/~1: 13{ 7) 
JAVQF5+lXTTELWEpT ll/Rb-lCl/Pi: 201 2) 
MqWAT YYITTE LWf PT 11/91: 27( 79) 
MrlWATSMT TTi Lwf PT 1?/@1 : 52(11) 
Figure 6 Monthly, half-year, and yearly measured mean concentrations of SO2; in 
brackets: number of days of mean 2.2.2 Mean Daily Variation of Elements 
A quick glance at a graph depicting the daily mean pattern of a meteorological 
or air pollution element can often be informative. As an example, Figure 7 shows 
the daily mean pattern of SOz, together with the standard deviation. Given the 
working file, only a small amount of information is required, mainly the parameter 
to be printed and the time period to be selected. 
2.2.3 Matrix Representation 
Matrix representation offers the possibility of comparing two meteorological 
elements (or pollutants, or pollutant versus time, etc.) using the system of fre- 
quency distributions. The idea is to construct intervals for each element and to 
count frequencies (absolute or relative) for all intervals of the matrix (see Fig- 
ures 8.9). Figure 8 gives the frequencies of air temperature at two different loca- 
tions at the same time; Figure 9 shows a time-dependent frequency distribution. 
The matrix framework is still more flexible: it allows for almost all combinations of 
elements, for cumulative frequencies, and for different kinds of relative frequency 
distributions. 
Input requirements are again very simple: elements and times have to be 
chosen, and the lettering of the matrix can be chosen by the user. 
In summary, data analysis is possible in an efficient manner with a great 
amount of detail. Thus, it allows meteorologists to draw preliminary conclusions on 
the meteorological situation or concentration pattern in the region of interest. UHRZE I T 
ABB flITTLERER TACESCANG DER S02-UONZENTRATION IN L-3 nGln3 
IN TRAISMAUER 
Figure 7 Daily mean pattern of SOz in mg / m3 Figure 8 Air temperature measured at the same time at two different locations 
over a winter period Figure 9 Time-dependent frequency distribution of wind velocity 2.3 Multiple Point Source Models Requiring Meteorological Observations 
Subdivided by wind direction and wind velocity categories, a frequency distri- 
bution of each stability class (obtained from a combination of temperature gra- 
dient and wind velocity or radiation balance and wind velocity) with respect to the 
season of the year is used as input to the following two models. 
2.3-1 Seasonal Mean Concentration Fields 
The model calculates a field of half-year (winter or summer) or yearly mean 
concentrations of up to 15 stacks with the aid of the above mentioned statistics of 
stability classes. There are several options: inclusion of topography, of intermit- 
tently emitting stacks, of chemical reactions and of deposition. An example of a 
graphical output is given in Figure 10. 
2.3.2 Determination of the Number of Casea Above or Below Prescribed 
Concentration Levels 
The user is allowed to choose two concentration levels of interest, and the 
computer program calculates at each gridpoint the relative frequencies of concen- 
trations below the lower level, between the lower and the upper level. and above 
the upper level. The relative frequencies are again calculated on the basis of sea- 
sonal means with the aid of the statistics of stability classes. Again, emission data 
from up to 15 stacks can be used; the same information as in Section 2.1.1 is 
required. An example of an output in tabular form is given in Figure 11. Scale: 1:50,000 
Period: Average concentrations of emissions 
for the winter half-year (Oct-March) 
Units: mg/m3 
Maximum concentration: 0,00144 mg/m3 (indicated X on nap) 
Intervals of isolines: 0,0001 mg/m3 
Computation: Central Meteorological Office, Vienna 
Graphics : Austrian Institute for Regional Planning, March 1983 
Figure 10 Calculated mean concentrations (SO2, winter) for a single power plant 7.b~ 1 17L 203 571 e5e 93? On? cb,? o;? '7 769 332 '34 FL7 077 3.0 F:? 
? 2C7 3i2 77P 33s ?%-_ !7 . _ 1L . 54 - ---- ~ L. 1: 3 ~ A, 5.3. +.,.. :4 ; 339 35? ,PC id3 I44 51 2r 7 11' 79? iaL 139 7 5C ? ?5 
4.00 1 155 71 163 222 00 5i 4: t57 ,Or; 75J 504 6 fs* 5. *- (-1 
2 CC7 25q._. lt2 . 20- ie__ 53. . 11 14 3 ?7 il; ?fJ " - . -- 4.-_2c-_ ?L: _?ti 
3 4 btD 5 758 7bb c?? 3?o C i?i ?Or i.9 2L7 EOZ 5Eu AL~ 
- - - . -. - . . - -- - - - . . -. ~ . -. - - - . - - - - 
;.SO 1 949 949 54F 940 Db7 967 c4e 65~ s8i '~6?-pr? '757 4a.r 695 7ij 764 
2 13 ? 19 12 I? 12 P 171 !& 2 j3 204 11' 2% .5 
. 54 48 32 2U a*-_/? '5 5hu >92 $?2-..34L-_!_OI ?\O .!7& 
1.00 1 949 940 933 970 070 957 S?F 05i 015 SIC 97i P4? 14 757 552 590 
? 15 22 10 11 . ? .. 5 ?9 5.?--1b?-..2e4L~~~ 
3 42 34 26 20 20 72 51 ?I 74 4 133 115 53F 33 130 i7i 
- ... ~~ - -- -- -. - 
~,FLTT~EYT: I)V~ S~LF~D Cii~l~~ivijn>-6l~by~/<); :.Jc.:.< YYI*). 9331.7 nCfiT=R!?i8J:O . iOC ' 
::ST' yrpov:~~~wrqFr: ul"l ; 53 
;ES~*TLSGIZ'EYGE.-~_. Q~M*+?Iu~ . .1=q:rrr7 **~CLL~TL raw: I * .10?4+?? -. 
:95A!TFnDFCATLlC T<~GRAI CFL I. &. c E,, ~~wCtolll:~,:T:~oFDdTUa TI ICDb*> 'El 1. 10 
1aFRF LICHTErEITF r) I* ) ,.?: pv!r~~;~-~.c:-:u~~~v~?c~' ii urfut51 = 3.36 
,~ELL~TAEQ~~F rJFS POT MbCOSrUA?ST?:FC! niDf.*GtCI . 3. ~l~~r\'~:~l~u;~or~; f't-ll . 3 G:UTC-ITT:IUTOR . ~.~~~j . . - . - . .-a .- . - . - . - - 
Figure 11 Calculation of the number of cases below 0.1 mg SOZ/ m3, between 0.1 
and 0.2 mg SO2/ m3 and above 0.2 mg SOZ/m3 2.4 Line-Source Hodel 
The Central Institute of Meteorology and Geodynamics runs an EPA-version of 
a line-source model called HIWAY, where the space-dependent diffusion parameters 
oy and a,, which determine the angle of spread of the pollutant, are replaced by 
time-dependent ones. The model calculates concentrations at chosen downwind 
receptor locations of a highway of variable size. The user can choose between an 
at-grade highway or a cut section. The following input is required: 
1) dimension of the highway (length, number of lanes, width of each lane) 
2) meteorological input (wind direction, wind velocity, stability class) 
3) line-source strength of each lane, depending on traffic volume and mean emis- 
sion rate of vehicles. 
The output is given in tables, as shown, for example in Figure 12. WINDnTREVTnR TS 315. ~F'GQFF,: 
UJWQ SOFFD TS 1.6 *FTE?S/~F~ 
7 1 TTV I A CC 'T C A "- .. A. 
YEf.GMT nc L T HTf7 NC L? T 5 5'0 OG. (\,.MtTEPS 
Figure 12 Highway line source concentrations (CO, ppm) SATSON (S(OHhER)r W(INTER))r w 
9 9 -1. L v CS W&t+,--*t 5- - -- R-IC 4T UhCG t-f &----WF~+!%--~ 
UMGE BUN GST E up. LO C 
R EZ EPT OR 
fHh--X--ICQ* 1 3500 
2 6600 3 8400 
-T 
5 i5sT 6 3200 7 6400 7 7300 
10 7700 11 RZOO w* 
Figure 13 Urban model SO2 concentrations (mg / m3); area sources; point 
sources; concentration at receptor location 2.5 Gaussian Multiple Point and Area Source Yodel (Urban Yodel) 
The area of interest (in general a big town and its immediate surroundings) is 
divided into equal area sources of about 1 km2 size. For each of these squares, 
mean emission rates are required (e.g., from an emission inventory), where up to 9 
different emission heights can be assigned for each area source. Furthermore, 
emission rates of big point sources of almost any amount at known locations can be 
accepted by the model. The model then calculates concentrations for chosen 
receptor locations (max.99) and chosen weather conditions (any number); point 
source and area source concentrations are printed separately, and also the sum of 
concentrations at each recepter location is given (Figure 13). 
Input requirements are as follows: 
1) Input file for grid and weather specifications 
- number of area sources in the z- and y -directions; grid distances (m) 
- number of chosen emission heights; value (in m) for each height 
- mean plume rise for area sources for each stability class 
- number of wind velocity classes; calculated value for each class (m/s) 
- mixing height (m) for each wind velocity class 
- coordinate pairs for max.99 receptor locations (m) 
- meteorological conditions (any number) 
wind velocity class 
wind direction 
air temperature 
stability class 
2) File containing emission heights and area-source emission rates 
3) File containing the point-source emission rates 
The input is the same as in Section 2.1.1, but the locations of the point sources 
are also required. m RECOMMENDATIONS AND SUGGE~ONS MADE AT THE 
ADVISORY COliMTJXE MEETING RECOMMENDATIONS ON WATER MANAGEMENT STUDIES 
FOR THE DOON VALLEY 
S. Kaden 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Laxenburg, Austria 
Objectives and Work Plan 
The water resources system is an important component of the environment and 
the socio-economic development in the Dwn Valley. The valley though located in a 
high rainfall area, faces acute shortage of water during the dry season. The situa- 
tion is becoming more serious in recent years because of increased surface runoff 
during the monsoon and reduced storage of water to the dry seasons. The availa- 
bility of water may become one of the most restricting factors of industrial 
development, agriculture, and human welfare. 
In order to study the role of the water resources in the environmental system, 
the endangering to be depleted and polluted by industrial and other human activi- 
ties, and their availability for industrial, agricultural and municipal water supply, 
the following tasks should be realized: 
1. Baais analysis and data collection for water resources problems. 
As a first step, an analysis of the water resources problems has to be under- 
taken. All relevant and available data on geography, hydrology, and hydrogeology 
have to be collected. During a field trip to the Dwn Valley, the problems related 
to both water quantity and water quality have to be studied. Based on that, neces- 
sary monitoring activities have to be designed. 
2. Water balance - conceptual hydrological model. 
A general water balance model of the Doon Valley, covering all relevant sub- 
processes of the hydrological cycle has to be developed for monthly time steps at 
maximum. 
Precipitation patterns are well know. For evapo-transpiration, semi- 
empirical models may be applied based on available geographical and climatologi- 
cal information. To describe the distribution of total runoff into surface runoff, 
infiltration, baseflow, etc., simple conceptual models (with lumped parameters) has 
to be used. 
The conceptual hydrological model is a basis for the assessment of industrial 
and other human ilrnpacts on the water resources system, direct impacts as well as 
indirect impacts due to environmental deterioration. 
3. Groundwater flow model 
A groundwater flow model for the Doon gravel has to be developed. This model 
should consider distriburted parameters. the interrelationship between surface 
water and groundwater, and Lime-dependent recharge. In view of the lack of data, 
a simple finite-difference flow model is recommended. Calculations with this model increases our knowledge of water resources 
processes and is a basis for the design of monitoring and exploration programs. 
Such programs should be started as soon as possible in order to gain a better 
understanding of the functioning of the system. Based on that an improved ground- 
water flow model has to be implemented to help in the design of a controlled system 
of groundwater extractions, including scheduling and design of artificial ground- 
water recharge. This model has to be used further operationally for control of 
groundwater extraction rates and the design of new installations. 
4. Water management modeling 
Depending on the success of the process modeling mentioned above based on 
th conceptual hydrological model a management model has to be developed as a tool 
to find rational strategies for long-term development with special regard to indus- 
trial, agricultural, and human requirements. This model has to be capable of deal- 
ing with the following complexities: 
- controversy among different water user, socio-economic development and 
environment, 
- multiple criteria of evaluation of strategies, some of the criteria may not be 
evaluated quantitatively, 
- uncertainties and stochastic character of systems input (e.g., precipitation). 
The final product should be a Decision Support Model System designed hilghly 
interactively and user-friendly including the use of computer color graphics. 
Organizational Aspects 
We propose to subcontract for the water management studies, the Institute for 
Water Management (IFW), GDR, 1190 Berlin, Schnellerstr. 140. 
The IFW is experienced in developing water management models as the colla- 
boration with IIASA during the last years demonstrates, i.e., developing a Decision 
Support Model System for the analysis of regional water policies in lignite mining 
areas. For the above defined tasks the basic methodologies and models are avail- 
able. They have to be adapted to the Doon Valley conditions and implemented. 
In order to realize this subcontract, adequate funds have to be allocated. The 
following possibilities may be considered: 
- direct payment in US dollars from UNIDO; 
- use of national currency of the GDR assigned to UNIDO. S0166E; PRACTICAL APPROACHES FOR MAINTAINING 
FOREST SUSTAINABILTTY IN THE DOON VALLFY 
Acad. L. Kairiukstis 
IWA 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The basic aim of forest management is to keep forest carrying capacity 
at a high level. The idea of maintaining forest productivity distinguishes 
forestry as a profession from forest devastation. Sustained productivity 
may be envisaged in two senses: as a continuity of forest growth and a 
continuity in harvest yield. Sustained yield management means, as a rule, 
both of these. 
The introduction of the sustained yield management principle into 
practical forestry is necessary in order to ensure that the needs for timber 
and environmental protection are met steadily. Under the conditions of 
intensive, multi-objective forest use (of wood and its protective functions) 
in the Doon Valley Phase 11, the following approaches and means to solve the 
problems are suggested.* 
1. To calculate the long-term harvest capacity of the existing forest. 
This can be done using the forst reproduction model. Such a model is 
considered to be an effective tool with which to optimize the aLLowabLe 
cut and to normalize the age structure of a forest, ensuring the 
rational use of mature stands' resources. 
2. To adopt an optimal forest thinning system in the Doon Valley forest 
with conditional high density. This can enable one to maintain forest 
sustainability and to cover wood demand for fuel. 
3. To implement the management system, particularly for reserve forests 
of high density that enable one to form, in the forest, stands of 
maximum productivity. To establish local standards of stands of 
maximum productivity, the module of the most productive forest stands 
should be used. 
4. Finally, the forest sector should be integrated into the Doon Valley's 
regional economy. To achieve this, the dynamic optimum correlation 
among the regional economy branches (land users) and correlations 
between the main territories (agricultural, forest, urban-industrial, 
recreational, con-servational, etc.) must be established. The 
optimization and specialization of forest growth must be based on a 
purposeful function of each large landscape unit. 
=For application of methods and software discussed in this paper, detailed information can 
be obtained from the Lithuanian Research Institute of Forestry, Cirionys, Kaunas, 
Lithuanian SSR (Prof. A. Juodvalkis, Dr. S. Miearas, Dr. R. Deltuves or Dr. J. Crigaliunes). A description of the practical tools and measures for implementation 
above in forestry practice in the Doon Valley follows below. 
2. CALCULATIONS OF THE LONGTERM HARVEST CAPACKTY OF THE 
FOEEST 
The history of European forest resources depletion during the last 
centuries has shown that forest depletion is simultaneously a precondition 
and a consequence of the sustainability and continuity of the use of forest 
resources. Lessons learned in Europe (for example, introducing strong 
regulating forces and laws, programs of afforestation, the monitoring of 
forest resources dynamics, can be used in the case of the Doon Valley. Most 
important among theses is the final yield regulation. 
In the author's opinion, an area method named "OPTINA*" can be used 
for the final yield regulation in the Doon Valley (Deltuvas, 1982; Kairiukstis 
et al, 1985). This method is based on the rotation and age class contribution 
into management classes. 
When constructing the model, the following was presumed: 
a) applicability to any management unit (forest enterprise, rural 
community, region, country, etc.); 
b) examination of the complete age structure of a mangement class; 
c) improvement (normalization) of the age class structure; and 
d) monotonous (if necessary) transition of the allowable cut to an uniform 
annual cut from rotationaged timber. 
The volume yield can be determined by multiplying the estimated cut 
area by the average volume of mature stands in a given management class 
for one ha. The yield for the forest enterprise (rural community) would 
equal the sum of yields estimated for all management classes. 
2.1 Module of Forest Reproduction 
The module is made to obtain the data of the forest state, forest 
utilization volume and economic indexes of forestry at different variants of 
the forest reproduction: 
Preconditions of the model formation: 
a) the state of the forest is described by the tables of age-classes 
differentiated on the basis of the main purposeful destination of 
the forest; 
b) the dynamics of the forests are determined by the movements of 
the age-classes; and 
c) the OPTINA model is used to determine the amount of main forest 
cutting. 
.OPTINA: "OPTimalus NAudojimas" (in Lithuanian) which means optimal amount of forest 
cutting. The module imitates the following means of forest reproduction: 
the increase or decrease of the areas covered with forests; 
change in the structure of the forest; and 
increase or decrease in forest productivity. 
The following input data are needed: 
a. The area distribution into age classes according to prevailing 
tree species: 
Age Class 
Tree 
Species I I1 I11 . . . ... n-1 n Total 
ha ha ha 
Sal - - 
m m mS 
Pine, etc. 
b. Rotation age for every tree specie. 
c. Number of age classes in the rotation age for every tree specie. 
d. Average volume for 1 ha of mature stands in a given management 
class. 
The dynamics of the forests are conditioned by the stands growth, 
silvicultural activities and random factors (natural calamities, fire, etc.). 
Every ten years each element of the area matrix is moved to the next age- 
class. 
The model of forest dynamics and forest use (forest reproduction) 
imitates 12 variants: 
1) the basic variant when other factors influencing forest dynamics 
are not considered in transferring age-classes; 
2) the increase in forest areas; 
3) the decrease in forest areas; an ideal state of forests (the purposeful species composition, a 
normal age-class structure, purposeful timber resources); 
the fertilization of forests; 
forest land reclamation; 
forest growth from elite seeds; 
forest growth from fast growing species and hybrids; 
the impact of hunting fauna on the forests; 
unclear cutting; 
the formation of standard stands; and 
the variant in which climatic fluctuations are taken into 
consideration. 
Table 1. Forest age classes (area, ha). 
I Trce Age clean, 10 ycnre 
spccic ; ! ! I ! I ! ! ! I! ! ! !I !I1 !I11 1 IV ! V iVI !VII ! VIlI!I% /X ! XI ;XI1 ! XII1!Totnl 
Pine 25028 80092 755L5 61029 50440 5UOBrl 45953 33887 I6303 10620 5111 4752 4907 479073 
Spruce 9698 13527 I1167 20390 33042 40087 26659 I7R44 9681 5697 137H 786 236 192000 
Onk 230 1450 I466 I209 658 633 501 456 473 644 304 BGB I129 10109 
Ash 2109 2593 2035 2599 I092 1076 1235 705 470 270 179 212 67 17042 
Pirch 13310 37133 56861 5640% 40952 30480 13898 3323 414 76 3 32 252975 
Block al- 5415 6597 9257 14939 12039 0281 5276 2437 772 217 29 34 
der I0 64403 
11s p 2950 6330 12172 13244 13309 I1531 4723 757 156 I8 3 3 - 65196 
Khiteal- 3506 1212010082 6004 1383 41 20 - - - - - - 33242 
d er 
Total 61434 I59B58 179425 175987 162515 151013 98269 59409 28269 I7542 7287 6687 6429 1134920 
Based on the results of the forest dynamics analysis variant, the 
influence of the whole complex of forests is estimated. 
When estimating the allowable cut for a management class which is 
characterized by the dominant tree specie, its rotation and areas of age 
classes in ten-year intervals, we seek a normal age-class distribution to 
ensure a sustained yield. The area yield for a ten-year period can be 
calculated by the following formula: 
Lk = min f~tj . 
+=l+Tk-l In order to secure the increasing allowable cut from one ten-year 
period to the next, the following limitations are favored: 
then: 
a) if Lk S Nk, then area yield is Lk ; 
b) if Lk > Nk , then area yield is Nk ; 
2. If Nk < fb , then area yield is Nk . 
3. If fe amk , @=O,l, then area yieldisLk, 
ff; =fkk -Lk * 
Indices: 
Lk - calculated minimal area yield; 
Fk - total area of k management class per ha; 
T - rotation deceniums; 
f: - area of i age class per ha; 
fl - area of the stands at felling age, ha; 
Nk - normal allowable cut for k management class, ha. 
The volume yield can be determined by multiplying the estimated area 
by the average volume of actual stands at the felling age in a given 
management class for one hectar. The yield for the whole region would 
equal the sum of yields estimated for all management classes. 
The results of the calculations, based on the average 1 ha volumes of 
the mature stands should they stay at today's level are presented in Table 
2). In Figure 1, the calculations of final forest cutting up till the year 2050 
are suggested in the case that stands are formed according to standard of 
the most productive stands as described above. 
Besides, the scenario is distinguished considering the influence of 
eco-climatic backgrounds fluctuations. Possible changes of eco-climatic 
conditions in the Doon Valley have been discussed in the Final Report of the 
Doon Valley Study - Phase I. Such changes are favorable to a different 
degree for production processes of the forest. In predicting forest 
dynamics these changes can be evaluated and considered by a dendro- 
climatic-chronological method. Taking into consideration the climatic 
fluctuations (y (t)), the timber resources are determined according to the 
formula: where: 
M - average resources for many years; 
Ky (t) - percent of changes in resources depending upon 
climatic fluctuations; 
K - coefficient of proportionality; 
where: 
y (t) - dendroclimatic index (relative deviation of forest 
productivity from perennial) per year t; 
j - number of a climatic cycle; 
n - number of cycles; 
Aj - fluctuation amplitude of j cycle; 
pj - fluctuation phase of j cycle; 
Tj - j cycle duration. 
The computer determines the values of final felling for each variant of 
forest resources reproduction for 10 to 15 years ahead and for the longer 
term. 
2.2 An Example of Calculations of Forest Resource Capacity in the 
Lithuanian SSR 
The Lithuanian SSR is one of the Republics of the USSR situated on a 
area of 6.5 million ha with an average population density of 52 inhabitants 
per km2. The high level of landscape cultivation, intensively developed and 
highly-productive silviculture which meets the requirements for wood by 
approximately 75% are characteristic for the Republic. Of the total area, 
woods cover 27,6Z; the average forest district covers 3000 ha, and forest 
management covers 30000 ha. There is a well-organized nature protection 
system, intensively developed tourism and recreational facilities, game 
management and sport hunting. 
The characteristics of a Lithuanian forest according to age classes is 
given in Table 1. Such a table can be described as a three-dimensional 
matrix c (i, j ,k), where i is the index of a tree specie, j is that of an age- 
class, k is that of the specialized use of the forest sector. Any element c 
(i , j ,k) of the matrix will show the forst area of i tree specie, j age class, 
and k specialised use of the forest sector. The analogous matrix describes 
the standing volume. 
Using the model described above (see Section 2.1), the amount of 
available wood for cutting was calculated for the long-term future. The 
results of the calculations, based on the average 1 ha volumes of the mature 
stands, should they remain at the present level, are given in Table 2. In 
Figure 1, the calculations of final forest cutting up till the year 2050 are 
suggested in the case that stands are formed according to the standards of the most productive stands (as described in Section 3 of this article). 
Table 2. Long range volume yield for the Lithuanian SSR (100 rn3). 
Tree Years 
Species 
1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 
Pine 
Spruce 
Oak 
Ash 
Birch 
Black alder 
ASP 
White alder 
Total 14115 17618 20781 24206 26559 27419 274436 
3. CALCULATIONS OF THE OPTIMAL INTERMEDIATE FOREST USE 
Taking into consideration that the forest in the Doon Valley is fulfilling 
multiobjective purposes, intermediate cuttings may play a important role in 
both maintaining the forest system's sustainability and covering wood 
demand for fuel. 
The model of optimal thinning can be used to plan intermediate use of a 
forest on a sustainable basis. A simplified scheme of the model is presented 
in Figure 2. 
Using input data such as tree species, stand composition, average tree 
height of each specie, stand volume, stand basal area, and volume of 
standard (normal) stands, one can calculate the possible cutting volume and 
stand indices after thinning. The standards established using approaches 
and models described in the following Sections can be taken as criteria for 
normal stands. 
4. THE MODULE OF THE MOST PRODUCTnrE FOREST STANDS 
The optimal parameters of the stands have been defined and 
theoretical foundations of the model have been worked out in the Lithuanian 
Forestry Research Institute (Kairiukstis, 1973; Kairiukstis et al., 1980). 
The preconditions of modeling the most productive stands are as follows: mln. 
Years 
Figure 1: The main use of the forest. The forest volumes of the greatest 
productivity are taken as: 1 - Pinus silvestris; 2 - Picea 
abies; 3 - Betula verrucosa; 4 - Bpulus tremula; 5 - Alnus 
glutinosa; 6 - Alnus incana; 7 - Fkazinus ezcelsior; 8 - 
Quercus robor. SCHEME OF THE OPTIMAL THINNING 
Plot information 1. Code of the basal tree species; 
2. Forest stand composition: 
k 
klKlk2K 2...; = 10: 
3. Middle heights of each species: 
4. Stand volume (m3/ha); 
5. Volume of the normal stands 
(m3/ha); 
6. Relatlve basal area, i.8.. 
G shnd/G normal stand: 
7. Do significant 11.111, ... 
Layer exist? : 
1 - yes: 
2 - no; 
8. Do perspeotive young trees 
of basal species exist In 
overlapping of the stand? : 
1 - yes; 
2 - no: 
SYMBOLS 
K - code of the tree species; Lo the bad or dominatlng tree spacies 
composition of a stand 
it makes 502 or more) 
Do panpactive young A 
11, XI. ... layers? 
Comparison of crttlcal mlattve basal arsas (S') in group 
heights with mlatlve bamal arsa of the stand (S) 
Height group 
I crttioal re~atlve bad area (s') I 
I Cornpartson of critical relative basal areas (S') in group 
heights with relative basal area of the stand (S) 
I 
- 
stand vo~ume after cutting - 
Id, = y,, . S' - I 1 
Cutting volume i M=M.-MN I Height grorrp 
k - coefficient of the participating tree 
species in the stand composition: 
H - middle height of tree species 
M, - normal forest stand volume of the 
dominating tree species (m3/ha); 
M, - shnd volume (m3/ha); 
MN - shnd volume afbr cutting (m3/ha); 
M - cutting volume (m3/ha); 
S - relatlve basal area: 
5' - crttlcal basal area. I 
Crttioal relattve basal area (S') 
SM.6 I SM.6 I SM~T 2 
Figure 2: Scheme of the module for calculation of the optimal amount of thinning. 3 I5I 6 
I Output 7 
Nr. of 
an 
area Nr. of 
a 
stand Shnd 
area 
(ha) Shnd 
compo- 
sition Helght 
(m) Stand 
volume 
(m3) Cutting 
voluma 
(m3) Zof 
cuttlng Stands are formed on the basis of mapping forest soils (Vaicys, 1975) 
from species which under given soil and ecological conditions can yield 
maximum production of industrial wood during the shortest period of 
time. 
The optimal growth of a maximally productive stand is based on 
maximum stand productivity of a definite species on certain soils and is 
feasible under the following conditions: 
a) maximum energy quantity absorbed by the stand (reduced albedo) 
and great effectiveness of its utilization by trees and stories after 
selective thinning (Kairiukstis, 1967); 
b) during the growing process, mutual approach of trees (elementary 
systems) which form a stand (micro- and meso-ecosystems) is 
regulated in such a way that negative consequences of mutual tree 
depression during the ecosystem creation should be minimal 
c) forest cover is formed from maximally productive trees of class A, 
uniformly distributed over an area; the distance between trees is 
optimal (Kairiukstis, 1973); and 
d) crown density and homeostatic stand sustainability is maximal. 
According to the above conditions, the optimal requirements for 
lighting of trees of different species and development classes, the stories 
structure at which the albedo index is at its smallest point, is determined. 
Within the specific class of trees, those with the most economical use of 
solar energy for the formation of stem timber increment, have been found 
and density regulation means have been carried out (Patent Certificate Nr. 
409677). The latter enable mutual tree depression in forest ecosystem 
formation to be avoided. 
The main index in the model of maximally productive forests is the 
optimal quantity of trees, providing the maximum current increment of wood 
in an area unit of any stand age. It is calculated according to the formula: 
where: 
Q = maximally possible canopy area amounting to 7-9th m/ha; 
depending upon the species, age and soil-climatic conditions; 
S = mean area of a horizontal crown of a well-developed tree, m; 
P = the optimal overlapping of crown amounting to 5-20% of the total 
crown area depending upon the species and age. 
Figure 3 presents a block diagram of the algorithm. The values of the 
parameters are: 
A = age, year; 
S = section area in ha; 2 QpLot = area of the layer projection in the section, in m /ha; 
Q = area of the layer projection in m2; area of crown projection of an individual tree without 2 overlapping, in m ; 
crown projection area of an individual tree in m2; 
2 crown area of the optimal projection in m ; 
2 mean area of a crown projection in m ; 
number of trees in the area unit; 
increment of stand basal area of a separate tree in m2; 
increment of a stand basal area, in m2/ha; 
diameter of a tree in cm; 
optimal diameter of a tree in cm; 
radial increment during a one year period in cm; 
percent of the overlapping crown; 
index of a forest type; 
index of a tree species; 
height of a tree in m; 
optimal height of a tree in m; 
optimal sum of stand basal area in m2/ha; 
optimal number of trees in ha; 
optimal volume of a stand, in m3/ha; 
optimal form index; and 
equation parameters. 
The algorithm of the model consists in the determination of the 
maximum density of the layer, the calculation of the area of the horizontal 
projection of the optimal crown, the determination of the optimal 
overlapping percent of the optimal crown, the calculation of the number of 
trees at a certain age. For the determination of the maximum density of the 
layer (Block 2), one should use experiment plots in the possibly dense 
stands in all the range indicated in the constraints and to draw the plan of 
tree locations and crown projections. The whole area of the crown 
projection (qp) and area q, except overlapping, are presented separately 
for each tree. These measurements are necessary for the determination of 
the area of inevitable glades in the stand and calculations of the optimal 
crown overlapping. If the stand contains "windows" (or squares) the area 
which is greater than that of an average tree crown, a certain quantity of 
trees is artificially included in them and their crown are included into the 
initial information. The maximum density of the layer in 1 ha area is found 
by the computer. This is the sum of the crown projection areas without 
overlapping. 
In order to determine the optimal crown parameters, the correlation 
between Zg and gp at a particular age is being sought. The crown 
productive maximum wood increment in the area unit is considered optimal. 
Having the optimal crown parameters at a certain age interval, we find its 
relation with age in all the age ranges (Blocks 4, 5 and 10). 
When the maximum layer density and the optimal crown area are know, 
the optimal number of trees in the area unit can be found. For this purpose, 
however, the optimal distance between the trees must be found. In the 
model, this distance is established in terms of the optimal crown parameters 
and the percent of optimal crown overlap. The calculation of optimal 
percentage of crown overlap is described in blocks 11-14. As a result of Figure 3: A block scheme of automatic systems for model construction of maxl- 
mally productive stands. 2. The oorrelatlon between the 
maxlm m storey olomre and age 1. Input * 5 
Q,, = Cq; Q = Qpln/S; Q = * 
I 3. Subpmrams lor caloulallng 
eguatlon parameters - 
4. The oorrelauon between relatlve arorn produotlvlty 
and orown projeotlon area 
5. Wtlml orown at a e1-n 
4 
10. The proJwtlon area 01 an optlml orown for the whole 
agerange 
e,,=ao+al~ +ae** +aS*' 
+ 
11 
Iqp-q,1S1/4 q.: q.=Cqp/N 
I + 
12. Calmlatlon 01 Zc=I(P) oorrelatlon at a glven &and age 
zC=(~.zJP))/ [q;(i-~/ loo)]: ~~=a~+a~~+a~~~ 18. OpLlmum basal area 
at a glven age t * ~~=tJ.m0l.ndLN/4 18. Output 
13. Optlrnum per oent 01 orown overlapplng In a slsnd 
(Z,)'=PA =-a1/ 2az 
tt 17. Optlmurn stand volume at a 
14. Optlmtwn per oent 01 orown overlapping In the whole glven age 
we-range M~*~'hopt,~'F~ : 
~=ao.explal.Al * +a 
15. Optlrnal tree number The ooelflolents a. and a5 T .)=Q(v.TA)/ [q:;iT..).(l -~(V.TA)/ l~)] 0pi.60 are presented separately. 1 6. = f(qp) oDmelatlon 
establishment and dopt 
aaloulatlon lor an 
Indlvldaal stand 
d = a6+a1q +~zQ;: 
8. Caloulatlon 01 h=f(d) 
and hopt oomelatlons 
lor an lndlvldval stand 
h =ao +aid +a2d2: 
hept=h(d)/d=dopt 11. The wrrelatlon between the lnorrnnent 01 the msa-ewllonal area and 
per oent 01 orown overlapplng for trees of a separate plot 
P=lOO(qp-q)/qp: ~~==ao+alp+aeP*: 
. the mleoted tree0 must meet the oondltlon: ) + 7. CaloulatIon 01 
dopt = f(A) come- 
latlon lor the whole 
age-range 
dopt=ab+~1~+a2~2 
8. Caloulatlon 01 
hopt = I(*) oorre- 
latlon lor the whole 
agerange 
hoPt =aO +O~A +a2P the calculations, the optimal number of trees, the optimal stand base area 
and volume affecting the maximum wood increment are obtained for the 
given type of forests and tree species. 
Finally, based on the above-mentioned, the standards of the most 
productive stands for pure stands and main groups of species' composition 
and site conditions have been elaborated. These standards expressed 
optimal indices of stands in different periods of their growth. The 
standards reflect optimum stand density and structure at any age. 
In the process of standard forest formation in practice, the assessed 
indices of the specific stand at a certain height must be compared with the 
corresponding indices of standard stands calculated by the model for the 
Doon Valley forest, as has already been done for Lithuania (see Table 3). In 
the planning of intermediate cuttings, the volume or stand basal area in the 
forest is compared with the corresponding indices presented in the 
program. The main goal of the thinning system is to achieve highly 
productive stands at the time of final cutting. Table 4 presents an example 
of the average volume and stand basal area of the most productive stands at 
the time of final cutting in the Lithuanian case. 
5. INTEGRATION OF THE FOREST SECTOR INTO A REGIONAL 
(NATIONAL) ECONOMY 
Optimizing forest growth, for different purposes on specific 
geographical landscapes, the elucidation of the role and place of forests in 
the regional (national) economy as well as in the whole land use system, and 
determining the predominant function of the forest on a specific territory 
have appeared during the last decades to be important problems in regional 
(national) development and physical planning. 
To solve such problems, four separate regions are presently feasible 
only for a whole complex of scientific and projecting organizations engaged 
in geographical, ecological, forestry, economic demographic, social, 
genetic and other investigations as well as planning on the given territory. 
For example, in the Soviet Union and other countries where land is state- 
owned, the allocation of functional landscapes among the main branches of 
the national economy (agriculture, forestry, urban development, etc.) as 
well as the integration of the forest sector into the national economy, are 
mainly solved with the aid of regional physical planning. Moreover, when 
optimizing land use in integrated economic development of separate regions, 
rather intricate problems arise in achieving an adequate improvement of 
living conditions of the local human population and development of separate 
industrial branches. 
To reach a more or less optimal decision in regional development, a set 
of models should be used. The cycle being modeled is the following: the 
economics change the environment (air pollution, decrease in woodiness, 
soil erosion, etc.); due to environmental changes an impact is noted on the 
factors of production and on those of the non-productive sphere, including 
man. The consequences of this change by the feedback influence the 
economy and social development of society. The modeling goal is that 
planners may have opportunities to evaluate the state of branches of the Table 3. Program of the most productive spruce stand formation under 
the condition that opening the crown cover and clearing occur 
every five years, while thinning and intermediate cutting occur 
every ten years. 
Assessment indices of trees left 
after thinning in different forest types 
mean 
Height M~rtillosum, aegopodiosum IClfyrttllosum-ozalidosum 
of well- mizto herbosum 
developed 
trees, m N G V N G V 
ind/ha m2/ha m3/ha ind/ha m2/ha m3/ha Table 4. Average volume and stand basal area of maximum productive 
stands at the time of final cutting. 
Tree 
species N M C G H V 
Pine 540 472 39,3 30.5 26,7 0,874 
Fir 504 655 49.3 35.3 28,7 1,300 
Oak 274 405 32.2 38,7 27,9 1,478 
Ash 393 296 25,6 28,8 26.7 0,753 
Beech 599 283 26,4 23,7 25.3 0,472 
Alder 639 319 31,9 25.2 20.8 0,499 
ASP 934 304 28,5 19,7 23,l 0,326 
economy (including the forest sector), of the environment and of people at 
different regional development strategies. This approach can also be used 
in the case of the Doon Valley. 
5.1 An Interbranch Level 
The system of models used for inter-branch analysis embraces the 
bmnches of the regional (national) economy and territorial levels. The 
basic tool used to undertake numerical calculations to forecast economic 
development of the region (republic) on the national economy level is the 
model of analysis and prediction of a reproduction process of gross national 
product. The model was constructed at the Institute of Economics of the 
Lithuanian SSR Academy of Sciences (Rutkauskas, 1980). In the model, the 
multi-branch economic system is described by equilibrium equations. For 
the gross output prediction of branches, the productive functions are 
applied. The rate of growth of net output was chosen as a criterion of the 
optimum. 
The branches of the forest sector are united into a complex which 
includes the timber industry, wood processing and cellulose-paper industry. 
For a disaggregation of the forest branches in the model and in order to 
single out the branch of logging and timber sorting, the following data is 
used: 
- the coefficients of direct expenditures; - productive function of the gross output; 
- branch structure of capital investments; 
- lack of capital investments; 
- the main production funds at the end of the pre-plan period. The coefficients of direct expenditures are determined according to 
the data of inter-branch production balance and output distribution. 
The model of reproduction of the gross national product can work with 
productive functions of the gross output of Cobb-Douglas type and with 
linear functions. These two functions of the gross output for the 
enterprises of the Ministry of Agriculture and Timber Industry of the 
Lithuanian SSR are presented below. 
Cobb-LbugLas function: 
y = 2.4765~ 0.3516 0.35169.~~~~ 
The Linear function: 
where: 
y - annual gross output, in thousand roubles; 
L - personnel engaged in industry and production; 
F - the main production funds, in thousand roubles. 
The coefficients of the formulae were determined by processing 
dynamic rows of the comesponding indices. The branch structure of the 
capital investments showing the part of production of individual branches is 
the following: industry - 0.52; construction - 0.42; other branches - 0.06. 
A lack of capital investments indicates delay in putting the main production 
funds into operation. Currently, we have only data on the remainder of the 
uncompleted construction at the end of every year. In case the remainder 
is invested the following year, the capital investments in construction of a 
two-year lag will be: the first year: 0.79; the second year: 0.21. These 
data enable the branch of logging and timber sorting to be singled out in the 
model and the main indices of their development to be predicted. However, 
in the inter-branch model of gross national product reproduction, 
ecological factors are not considered. Therefore, additional indices are 
introduced into it. They characterize reproduction, the use of natural 
resources and constraints imposed by scarce resources. The principal task 
of the models of national economy (inter-branch) is to establish the basic 
proportion of economic development and to preserve stable ecological 
systems for a long time. The data obtained is concretized and disaggregated 
in the model of individual branches and regions. 
5.2 Branch Level 
At the branch level, the development of individual branches and of 
their whole complex is being modeled. The production volumes, ascertained 
in the model of the national economy must be in agreement with the 
possibility of a branch and the environment. These tasks are being solved 
here. The problems being tackled by a system of models of the forest sector are the following: determination of demand for forest resources, 
singling out of specialized sectors of wood growth, prediction and 
optimization of reproduction of forest resources, establishment of the 
development of logging and timber sorting as well as forecasting and 
optimizing of wood processing. 
Demand for products of branches of wood processing as a whole is 
ascertained in a balance inter-branch model. It is further detailed in the 
block of demand determination for production of wood processing and the 
demand for timber resources is calculated through the model of the 
development of wood processing. The requirements for non-wood forest 
resources (berries, hunting fauna, etc.) and for those resources which form 
the environment are established as a function of the dynamics of population 
number and other indices predicted in the models of the regional (national) 
economy. 
In a study undertaken at IIASA, it was suggested that the determination 
of demand for wood (E) as a function (g) of the gross national product (G), 
population number (P), prices of wood products (P*) and from prices of 
their alternatives (P,). An analogical principle is used to predict the 
requirements for forest resources in LSFM. Having applied this principle 
to ascertain the requirements in the recreation sector, the following 
multifactor equation was obtained (Riepsas, 1981): 
where: 
y - recreation, million visitors days/year; 
zl - dunstion of holidays, in days; 
z2 - number of private cars; 
zg - number of population, in thousands; 
z4 - percent of townsmen. 
The equation approximates well enough the changes in the number of 
people who vacationed in forests in the past and gives a real forecast for 
the future. 
In the whole system of models of the forest sector one part of the data 
on demand is obtained from the models of a regional (national) economy; the 
other part comes from 'The Forest Fund" data bank. 
5.3 Grdh of Speicalized Forest Stands 
The distribution of forests into specialized subsectors is an essential 
condition for the modeling of forest resources reproduction. A specialized 
subsector comprises a complex of stands, territorially isolated and united 
by the major objective of wood growing and similar management. In the 
Lithuanian SSR, there are five main functions of landscapes: agricultural, 
timber-industrial, recreational, urbanized, conservational. In each of 
these there will be similar management peculiarities within the whole functional zone. Depending upon the zone to which forests belong, they 
form the corresponding subsector of wood growth. The essential group of 
factors subjected to analysis in modeling singling out of specialized sectors 
is as follows: the initial structure of land use, demand for production of 
land using branches, restrictions imposed on the use of natural resources 
for environmental protection, suitability of territories for different 
functions, expenditures and losses of transforming one territorial function 
into another. The major problems of establishing territorial functions are 
tackled in the models at the inter-branch and regional levels. Making use of 
the comparative evaluation of forests with different functions, one can 
determine the optimal purposeful distribution of forests. 
We have singled out the following forest subsectors in the republic: 
exploitative (52,7%), agricultural-protective (18,4%), recreational (11,2%), 
conservational (10,6%) and sport (recreational) hunting (7.0%) forest 
subsectors. In optimizing large regions on the basis of the dominating 
function of a territory with different kinds of land uses (agricultural lands, 
forests, water areas, etc.), specialized subsectors may include different 
forest categories although there is only one leading function. 
For the forests of the Lithuanian SSR for example, the standards for 
wood growth for each separate forest subsector is being worked out. 
5.3.1 Standards fbr Industrial-Ezploitative Forests (including 
plantations) of Maximum Productivity 
Standards of the most productive forests have been calculated using 
the module of the most productive forest stands. In the subsector of 
industrial-exploitative forests, all silvicultural operations contributing to 
more simple, inexpensive and rapid wood growth for consumption are being 
implemented. In purely industrial-exploitative forests, clear cutting 
prevails. In mixed forests, shelterwood is applied. In these forests, the elk 
and deer population is decreased to that level which causes least damage to 
the forests, while the number of boars is close to the ecological density 
limit. 
Experience has revealed that due to the growth of industrial- 
exploitative forests according to the program mentioned above, the 
industrial wood increment is increased by 20-25X, its utilization from an 
area unit is significantly augmented and its cutting cycle is noted to be much 
shorter. 
5.3.2 Standards for Agricultural Protective Fbrests 
Standards for agro-protective forests are being established in 
conformity with the forest which maximally prevents erosive processes and 
creates better micro-climatic conditions for the adjoining agricultural 
fields. The forest management goal in these stands is the preservation and 
increase in their protective peculiarities. Dense, many-storied, with 
undergrowth and natural regeneration standard forests serve this purpose. 
Under the conditions of Lithuania, such stands exert a favorable 
influence on the microclimate of fields at a distance of 500-600 meters from 
the forest. Thus, precipitation is distributed more equally, surface run-off decreases up to 65%, deflation reduces greatly, crops lie flat to a lesser 
extent, and the yield increases by 10%. Such forests are of paramount 
importance in hilly regions where woodland is scarce. 
A selected cutting system prevails in the management of agricultural 
protective forests. Shelterwood cutting is an exception. Intensive 
intermediate cutting is directed towards the reduction of spruce (in view of 
its low resistance to wind and poor protective qualities) in stand 
composition, in the restoration of deciduous species and pine as well as 
towards a continuous maintenance of protective features of these forests. 
While in agro-protective forests the quantity of deer is greater, the boar 
population density is regulated on the basis of damage which it inflicts on 
agriculture. 
5.3.3 Standards fir Recreational Forests 
The standards of recreational forests were set up in conformity with 
the highest sanitary, hygienic and aesthetic levels. The forests were 
formed with changing stand density and species community areas, clearings 
and meadows with water basins. Approximately 70% of the whole 
recreational territory is to be forested. Scotch pine (Pinus SiLvestris L.), 
European white birch (BetuLa verrucosa Ehr.), oak (Quercus robur L.), 
maple (Acer platanoides L.), with underwood of common juniper (Juniperus 
communts), and ash-tree (Frazinus ezceLsior L.) predominate in the 
composition of pure or mixed stands. 
A systematic selection of individual trees depending upon their state, 
cutting favoring the formation of the best landscape view and forest 
stability as well as intensive sanitary fellings are applied in the management 
of recreational forests. Forest road construction, parking areas, foot- 
paths, etc., are of great significance. The great density of hunting fauna, 
intensive sport hunting and its management are typical of recrational 
forests. 
5.3.4 Standards for Conservattond Forest 
The standards established meet the goals of the most valuable stands 
from a scientific and nature protection point of view. Such forests are 
composed of game preserves, reservations and national parks. They 
preserve the genofund of the main species, primeval environment, the 
vanishing vegetation, animals and their cenoses. Management activities in 
these forests are entirely forbidden or strictly limited. Statutes and 
protection measures for each object are worked out by scientific 
organizations and approved by state departments. In conservational 
forests a great number of fauna is kept; this may reach an optimum 
ecological level. 
5.3.5 Standards for Sport Hilnting (Recreattond) Forests 
The standards for sport hunting (recreational) forests exclusively 
answer the goals set for intensive hunting management. Silvicultural 
operations applied in these forests contribute to the increase of forage and 
protective measures for hunting game. Depending upon fauna type, these forests are reconstructed for roe deer, red deer and elk rearing. Only one 
of these animal species is considered prevailing, while the rest are minor. 
Hare and wild boar distribution occurs in all forests. 
While specializing the forest hunting areas, significant attention is 
focused on the percentage of the territory which is covered by wood, the 
average size of forest areas, the predominant soil types, stand composition, 
and the recurrence of forested and non-wooded areas. The ecological 
density limit of all the main game species is determined by direct 
dependency on fertility of the prevailing soil types, deciduous species in 
stand composition, percentage of territory covered by wood and the scale 
of forest areas. 
Cutting is directed towards the increase in Lighting under cover and 
reproduction and development of forage plants as well as towards the 
securing of hiding places for game. The creation of plantations containing 
oak (Quercus robur L.), horsechestnut (Aesculus h.d/pocastanum L.), wild 
apple (Malus silvestris L. Mill.), pear (mrus malus L.), mountain ash 
(Sorbus hybrida L.) and goat-willow (Salk caprea L.) is therefore of great 
importance. 
EEFERENCES 
Deltuvas, R. (1982) Timber Production Planning in the Lithuanian SSR. 
Helsinki, Finland. 
Kairiukstis, L.A. (1967) Rational Utilization of Solar Energy as a Factor 
of Productivity Increment in Deciduous Spruce Stands. Volume of 
Fotosintex and Productivity of Forests. Publi. Sci., Moscow; 
pp:151-166 (in Russian). 
Kairiukstis, L.A. (1973) Formation and Ciltting of Mixed Spruce Stands. 
Mintis Publishing House, Vilnius, Lithuanian SSR, USSR (in Lithuanian). 
Kairiukstis, L.A. et al. (1980) mtimal Composition of Wood Species 
According to TopoLogy Peculiarities, Journal of Forestry, 12:14-19, 
Vilnius, Lithuanian SSR, USSR (in Lithuanian). 
Kairiukstis, L.A., Mizaras, S, Deltuvas, R. and Grigaliunas, J. (1985) 
Modeling the Forest Sector of the Lithuanian SSR. Paper presented 
at the Network Meeting 1985 of the IIASA Forest Sector Project in 
Albena, Bulgaria (June 3-7, 1985). Laxenburg, Austria: International 
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis. 
Rutkauskas, A-V.M. (1980) A Subsystem of Mode& for Systems AnaLysis 
and Prediction of Reproductive Process of Gross National Product of 
the Republic. Volume of Regional Modeling of Reproduction Processes. 
Vilnius, Lithuanian SSR, USSR (in Russian). 
Vaicys, M.V. (1975) Genesis and Properties of Forest Soils in the 
Southern Baltic Area. Mintis Publishing House. Vilnius, Lithuanian 
SSR, USSR (in Lithuanian). EU3MF.NTS OF A PROPOSED IiETHODOLOGY MIR 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF THE DOON VMlEY 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, Canada 
It has been established that in the Dwn valley, various economic activities 
are interlinked through ecological processes. Therefore, the traditional sectoral 
approach here to analyze the contribution of each economic activity to economic 
growth and development of a society will be incomplete and, hence, inaccurate 
(Bandopadhyay et al. 1984). Utilization of one natural resource in the generation 
of one economic activity may adversely affect certain othel activities and thus 
impose hidden costs. The one resource approach under-estimates the actual costs 
while inflating the benefits from the individual economic acitvity. Thus, in order to 
take rational policy decisions on such issues as regional economic development, a 
systems approach is the most scientific method to adopt. 
The ecosystem under consideration involves complex interlinkages among 
natural and socio-economic phenomena. Therefore, we need a management model to 
help us make decisions about managing the Dwn valley ecosystem. The overall 
model may contain several sub-models which may be of analytical or simulation type 
or a combination of both (Hall & Day 1977, p.7). The two methods used for solving 
management models are 'trial and error' (or simulation) and 'optimizationB methods 
(Shoemaker 1977, p.105). In the trial and error approach, the predictive equa- 
tions relating components of the system must be solved, analytically or numeri- 
cally, for each new value of the decision variable. For a complex model for which 
many alternatives exist, it is usually too expensive to test each admissible policy. 
One may first choose a few of the policies that appear most promising and then go 
ahead and test their outcomes by simulation. Unfortunately, the best policy can be 
overlooked in this procedure. 
The alternative approach using optimization technique calculates directly the 
policy which maximizes an objective function. Numerical methods have been 
developed to calculate optimal policies. The best method to use depends upon 
characteristics of the problem being studied, that is, whether the problem is 
linear, nonlinear, continuous, stochastic or constrained. One of the methods most 
used to determine the optimal management of systems described by a set of linear 
equations is linear programming (Shoemaker 1977, p. 106). 
Linear programming (or LP) is a very powerful optimization tool because it 
can be used for systems with a very large number of variables. Solutions can be 
obtained for different objective functions and sensitivity of the solution to one or 
the other variable can be investigated. Its major limitation is that it is only suit- 
able for models with constraints and criterion functions that are linear. Another 
disadvantage of LP is that it is not applicable if the relationships among variables 
are stochastic. 
It may be mentioned that even if some of the conditions presumed in applying 
LP are not satisfied by a particular problem, we can still attempt to use it as a 
first approximation. If some components of the problem exhibit random behaviour, 
we may substitute averages for these components. Nonlinear behaviour among 
components can be approximated with suitable linear relationship. The Dwn valley system includes several relationships which involve estimat- 
ing economic externalities in quantitative terms. These are difficult to measure 
even roughly as these are characterised by market failure and, hence, absence of 
relevant economic information (Heller & Starrett 1976, p.10). There are several 
ecological relationships such as between forest cover and flood control or reduc- 
tion in atmospheric pollution which are equally difficult to quantify. Estimation of 
the coefficients representing these relationships within a reasonable range of 
error will be the most formidable task in developing the management model for the 
Doon valley ecosystem. Using complicated techniques such as dynamic program- 
ming or input-output procedure for solving a model with very rough equations is 
not likely to provide better solutions. Therefore, developing a robust model 
should be the priority and using a simpler method of solving it might be a suitable 
approach to begin with. 
The relationships among variables in the ecosystem have to be determined and 
expressed in the form of linear mathematical equations. For instance, linear equa- 
tions could be developed for the possible impacts of forests on various activities 
as pointed.out in Table 1 of the previous section. Similar interlinkages will exist 
for other resources vis-a-vis economic activities in the Doon valley. These will 
have to be specified and quantified appropriately. In addition, we shall have to 
identify our objective function (i.e., the function being maximized or minimized) 
and a set of constraints to which it is subject. 
The constraints will be of physical, economic or political nature. Some will be 
of the form such as: (i) the sum of the land area under different land-use should 
not exceed the total area of the Doon valley; (ii) the area under forest should 
exceed certain minimum such as prescribed by the National Forest Policy; or (iii) 
the amount of forest within a certain distance from villages be no less than that 
required to meet their fuelwood, grazing and timber needs, etc. In general, the 
constraints will be such as to ensure that the ecological status of the valley does 
not become unacceptable. 
The objective function can be of various forms, depending on the choice of the 
policy makers. Some of the possible objective functions can be: (i) maximize the 
total human population of the Doon valley so as to define the carrying capacity of 
the region beyond which the ecology of the valley will deteriorate for the given 
level of technology; (ii) the total income of the valley residents be maximized; (iii) 
introduce income distribution aspect by treating rural and urban categories of 
population separately and maximize a weighted average of income earned by the 
two kinds of population; or (iv) the net value of the produce of the valley be max- 
imized. 
Different scenarios can be used to simulate the impact of different objective 
functions and parameters. The final policy decision can be taken on the basis of 
the results provided by the model above, subject to various assumptions and 
approximations made in the process of its formulation. 
REFEEENCES 
Bandopadhyay, J., V. Shiva, M.N. Ashis Ganju, A.G.K. Menon and K.L. Nadir. 1984. 
The Doon valley ecosystem: A report on the natural resource utilization in 
Doon valley. Department of Environment, Government of India, New Delhi. 77 
PP Hall, C.A.S. and J.W. Day Jr. 1977. Systems and models: Terms and basic princi- 
ples. Pages 5-36 in Hall, C.A.S. and J.W. Day Jr. (Editors) Ecosystem modeling 
in theory and practice: An introduction with case histories. John Wiley and 
Sons, Toronto. 
Heller, W.P. and D.A. Starrett. 1976. On the nature of externalities. Pages 9-22 
in Lin, S.A.Y. (Editor) Theory and measurement of economic externalities. 
Academic Press, New York. 
Shoemaker, C.A. 1977. Mathematical construction of ecological models. Pages 
75-114 in Hall, C.A.S. and J.W. Day Jr. (Editors) Ecosystem modeling in theory 
and practice: An introduction with case histories. John Wiley and Sons, 
Toronto. HUMAN-ACTIVITY MODELING OF DOON V- MIR EXPLORING ADJUSTMENT SI'RATEGIES 
J. Parikh 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Laxenburg, Austria 
In a systems modeling approach, the Doon Valley needs to be characterized in 
such a way that all the dynamic variables are captured. Static parameters such as 
area and location provide a frame of reference. Dynamic variables, e.g., popula- 
tion growth, could be policy-dependent or policy-independent. The interdepen- 
dence of the dynamic variables needs to be examined first. 
Figure 1 illustrates major activites in the Doon Valley. Every activity has its 
resource requirements and environmental implications. There are policies that 
need to be considered, some of which are aimed directly at resource utilization, 
some at the activities themselves (e.g., industrial policies) and some at the 
environmental effects (e.g . , pollution monitoring). 
Instead of discussing all the activities and resources, the example of energy 
will be described in detail. It should be mentioned that a similar approach has 
been tried for Bangladesh successfully and therefore, a skeleton framework 
exists, although it needs to be modified a great deal for the Doon Valley. Figure 2 
illustrates the components involved. 
Deforestation is a symptom caused by many activities, only one of which is 
fuelwood gathering. To that extent, alternative energy supply becomes relevant. 
In particular, the fuelwood problem which is related to the energy question, needs 
to be examined in this light. In rural areas, biomass is used for food, feed, fuel 
and fertilisers. Thus, the biom ass and energy flows are essential for characteri- 
zation of Doon Valley. Energy balances for the Doon Valley need to be worked out 
to show the structure of energy consumption for different purposes and different 
energy supplies. The flow of energy is given in Figure 2, but numerical values need 
to be obtained for each box. 
The rural population of India gets 90% of its energy from biomass-based 
sources, i.e., fuelwood, agricultural waste and animal dung. Biomass resources are 
under severe stress because of the conflicting demands for food, fuel, fodder and 
fertilizers. 
Different income groups have different energy consumption patterns. Energy 
flows for the Doon Valley need to be identified for yet another reason. This is for 
estimating air pollutant emissions. A schematic Figure 3 illustrates various end 
uses and typical energy sources that could be used for those end uses. Actual 
values for this will need to be worked out. In this connection, it is important to 
separate the requirements of the local population from those of the tourists. 
Linear programming approach will be developed which is based on resource 
requirements for different socio-economic activities and consequent environmental 
impacts. For example, the resources required for each activity listed in Figure 1 
require certain land, energy, labor, capital, etc. Each of them also has pollution 
impacts which could be quantified to some extent. The objective function of maxim- 
ization of income-generation with a number of resources and other constraints, 
including minimization of pollution, could characterise development objectives of 
Doon Valley. Since all the uses of biomass are included, carrying capacity of Doon 
Valley will be one of the natural outcomes of this model, not in a static, but in a 
dynamic sense where adjustment mechanisms could be explored. Forests Forestry Deforestation 
Land Agriculture Water pol 1 ution 
Minerals Quarrying Air pol 1 ution 
Water Transport Soi 1 degradation 
Energy Tourism Damage to landscape 
Labor Household 
Capital Other 
Afforestation 
Iniproved stoves 
Industrial development pol icies 
Pol lution monitoring policies 
Land use policies 
Investment pol icies 
Figure 1 Activity-oriented systems modeling for Doon Valley Energy Inputs 
Production 
System 
Agriculture 
Outputs 
Sectors of 
the Economy 
Source: J. Parikh, 1981 Diesel, electricity, petro-chemicals 4- 
Power r, 
Feed 
I. A 
L i 
I v - Dung 
~dod and dood Straws 
Non-Food and 
by -products 
Rural industries 
Savings of 
Figure 2 Biomass and energy flows in rural economy investment 
and imports for 
commercial 
energy I L Animal Agricul. Oil 
Fuelwood Dung Waste Products Electricity 
Households 
Cooking 
Lighting 
Heating 
Hot water 
Industries 
Quarrying 
Lime kilns 
Other 
Transport 
Trucks Cars 
Auto rickshaw/ 
scooter 
Agriculture 
Machinery 
Irrigation pumps 
Note: The needs of tourists and local population could be separated if the data is 
available. 
Figure 3 Energy flows in Doon Valley REFERENCES 
Parikh, J. and G. Kroemer. 1985. Modeling Energy and Agriculture Interactions: 
An Application to Bangladesh. Laxenburg: IIASA RR-85-7. 
Parikh, J. 1977. Environmental Problems of India and their Trends in Future. 
Environmental Conservation 4:189. 
Parikh, J. 1981. Modeling Energy Demand for Policy Analysis. Government of 
India, Planning Commission. New Delhi. Also Laxenburg: IIASA PP-81-8. 
Parikh, J. 1980. Energy Systems and Development: Constraints, Demand and Sup- 
ply of Energy for Developing Countries. Delhi: Oxford University Press. 