Influence of Basic Residue Content on Fragment
Ion Peak Intensities in Low-EnergyCollision-Induced Dissociation Spectra of Peptides
David L. Tabb,²Yingying Huang,³Vicki H. Wysocki,³and John R. Yates, III*,§
SR11 Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road,
La Jolla, California 92037
The primary utility of trypsin digestion in proteomics is
that it cleaves proteins at predictable locations, but it isalso notable for yielding peptides that terminate in basicarginine and lysine residues. Tryptic peptides fragmentin ion trap tandem mass spectrometry to produce promi-nent C-terminal y series ions. Alternative proteolyticdigests may produce peptides that do not follow theserules. In this study, we examine 2568 peptides generatedthrough proteinase K digestion, a technique that producesa greater diversity of basic residue content in peptides.We show that the position of basic residues withinpeptides influences the peak intensities of b and y seriesions; a basic residue near the N-terminus of a peptide canlead to prominent b series peaks rather than the intensey series peaks associated with tryptic peptides. The effectsof presence and position for arginine, lysine, and histidineare explored separately and in combination. Arg showsthe most dominant effects followed by His and then byLys. Fragment ions containing basic residues producemore intense peaks than those without basic residues.Doubly charged precursor ions have generally been mod-eled as producing only singly charged fragment ions, butfragment ions that contain two basic residues may acceptboth protons during fragmentation. By characterizing theinfluence of basic residues on gas-phase fragmentationof peptides, this research makes possible more accuratefragmentation models for peptide identification algo-rithms.
Trypsin digestion is a standard step in many proteomic ex-
periments. Proteins digested by this enzyme are predominantlycleaved C-terminal to arginine and lysine residues, yieldingpredictable collections of peptides.
1Tryptic peptides are particu-
larly favored for tandem mass spectrometry because they yieldspectra with prominent y series ions. Database search algorithmssuch as SEQUEST
2have been tuned to work best with tryptic
peptides. Alternative digestion techniques can be useful to analyzeproteins that do not have many suitable cleavage sites for trypsin(such as membrane proteins) or to increase the diversity ofpeptides covering a protein region of interest. The cleavagespecificities of other digestion enzymes may yield peptides thatfragment differently than those produced by trypsin.
One technique showing promise for proteomics is proteinase
K digestion.
3Proteinase K©s specificity is more variable than
trypsin, favoring amino acids with aromatic side chains as cleavagesites but targeting other residues as well.
4The digestion time
required is less than that of trypsin. Because of proteinase K©sbroader specificity, the diversity of peptides yielded by thesedigests is higher than in tryptic digests.
The most common type of fragmentation used for proteomics
is low-energy collision-induced dissociation (CID). In this tech-nique, peptide ions of a particular mass-to-charge ratio are isolatedand collided with noble gas atoms. Collisions add energy to thepeptide ions and they fragment. The cleavage of peptide bondsin this process is generally mediated by the mobility of a protonadded during the ionization of the peptides, as explained by themobile proton model.
5Once a peptide bond has cleaved, the
resulting fragments may briefly form a proton-bound dimer,competing to retain the charge.
6Amino acids with high proton
affinities thus play a significant role in fragmentation.
Arginine's side chain is the most basic of all amino acids. Its
three basic nitrogens are more prone to sequestering or solvatingprotons than the side chains of other amino acids. Histidine andlysine are the other two most basic amino acids, but studies havevaried in their conclusions as to which is more basic than theother in the gas phase.
7Most peptides contain one other basic
site: the N-terminal amine. Trypsin-produced peptides usuallycontain a C-terminal base (arginine or lysine), an N-terminal
* Corresponding author: The Scripps Research Institute; (phone) 858 784-
8876; (fax) 858 784-8883; (e-mail) jyates@scripps.edu.
²Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195. Current address: Life Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,Oak Ridge, TN 37831-6164.
³Department of Chemistry, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721-0041.
§Diversa, 4955 Directors Place, San Diego, CA 92121.
(1) http://www.abrf.org/ResearchGroups/MassSpectrometry/EPosters/
ms97quiz/SequencingTutorial.html.(2) Eng, J. K.; McCormack, A. L.; Yates, J. R., III. J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom.
1994 ,5, 976 -989.
(3) Wu, C. C.; MacCoss, M. J.; Howell, K. E.; Yates, J. R. 3rd. Nat. Biotechnol.
2003 ,21, 532 -8.
(4) Kolattukudy, P. E.; Sirakova, T. D. In Handbook of Proteolytic Enzymes ; Barret,
A. J., Rawlings, N. D., Woessner, Eds.; Academic Press: San Diego, 1998;pp 322 -325.
(5) Dongre, A. R.; Jones, J. L.; Somogyi, A.; Wysocki, V. H. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
1996 ,118, 8, 8365 -8374.
(6) Paizs, B.; Suhai, S. Rapid Commum. Mass Spectrom. 2002 ,16, 1699 -1702.
(7) Afonso, C.; Modeste, F.; Breton, P.; Fournier, F.; Tabet, J.-C. Eur. J. Mass
Spectrom. 2000 ,6, 443 -449.Anal. Chem. 2004,76,1243 -1248
10.1021/ac0351163 CCC: $27.50 © 2004 American Chemical Society Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 76, No. 5, March 1, 2004 1243
Published on Web 01/22/2004amine, and possibly internal histidine residues (or skipped
arginine and lysine residues when digestion is incomplete). Whentrypsin is not used, greater variability in basic residue content ispossible.
Peptide identification algorithms based on SEQUEST rely on
fragmentation models to identify the peptide corresponding to aparticular spectrum. These models generate theoretical spectrafor candidate sequences. The observed spectrum is compared totheoretical spectra to determine the best match. If a fragmentationmodel is accurate, theoretical spectra look more like theirexperimental counterparts;
8an inaccurate fragmentation model
yields theoretical spectra that are less useful for discriminatingbetween true and false matches. Because trypsin is the mostcommonly used digestion enzyme, fragmentation models generallycreate theoretical spectra by rules for tryptic peptides.
2For
example, doubly charged precursor ions are sometimes modeledas producing only singly charged fragment ions. When thesealgorithms are used on nontryptic peptides, their ability todiscriminate between true and false identifications is reduced bytheir reliance on tryptic assumptions.
9
Generalizations regarding the effects of basic residues on
fragmentation have largely been formed from limited sets ofdefined peptides
5,10or from databases of tryptic peptides;11,12a
systematic study of a large database of peptides with nontrypticbasic residue positions has not been conducted. In this report,we statistically characterize the influence of basic residue positionand identity on fragment ion intensities in tandem mass spectra.Protein lysates from a variety of organisms were digested byproteinase K digestion. The best identifications from these digestswere grouped by their basic residue content, and the relationshipbetween basic residue position and fragmentation was character-ized. Arginine, histidine, and lysine show effects of differentmagnitude and reproducibility. We show that the fragment ionscontaining basic residues generally produce more intense peaksthan fragment ions lacking basic residues. We also note that peaksfor doubly charged ions are most intense for fragments containingtwo basic residues. By statistically analyzing these phenomena,we hope to create a foundation upon which improved fragmenta-tion models can be based.
EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
To improve the statistical power of this analysis, we sought to
gather as diverse a collection of peptides as possible. At the sametime, we endeavored to limit the size of the spectral collection tokeep a high ratio of correct identifications to total spectra included.We achieved this by pooling peptides from a diverse collection ofsamples, all digested with proteinase K and analyzed by two-dimensional liquid chromatography/ion trap tandem mass spec-trometry.
Sample Selection. Chlamydia trachomatis reticulate body
whole cell lysates
13were digested by proteinase K and analyzedin five separate 12-cycle MudPITs14on a Thermo Finnigan LCQ
Deca (San Jose, CA). The results of these five separations werecompared by the Contrast algorithm under low cutoffs (describedbelow), revealing that one run identified a larger number ofproteins than the others. For this MudPIT, 782 of 33 546 spectrapassed the high cutoffs (described below) and were incorporatedinto the spectral collection for this study (see Table 1 for asummary of the samples included in the study).
The malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae midgut proteome was
digested by proteinase K and analyzed by a single 12-cycleMudPIT.
15Multiple runs were not conducted, but this analysis
produced a rich enough collection of peptide identifications forinclusion. Of the 35 516 spectra, 531 yielded identifications thatexceeded the high cutoffs.
The brains of male Sprague -Dawley rats were dissected, and
the hippocampal proteins were digested by proteinase K.
3Five
separate 12-cycle MudPITs on an Thermo Finnigan LCQ Decawere used to identify the peptides in this sample. The best analysisproduced 86 846 spectra, yielding 1488 identifications above thehigh cutoffs.
Informatics. The spectra produced by each of these experi-
ments were processed through a pipeline of algorithms. Thepossible charge states of multiply charged peptides were correctedby the 2to3 algorithm.
16Spectra were matched to peptide
sequences by the normalized SEQUEST algorithm,17a variant of
the software that produces XCorr scores that do not showsequence-length dependence. In evaluating spectra for inclusion,two different sets of criteria were used in the DTASelect andContrast algorithms.
18The ªlowº set used the settings -1 0.3 -2
0.3-3 0.3 -Smn 5. This setting imposes a moderate cutoff
normalized XCorr of 0.3 for peptide inclusion, limiting the listedpeptides to sequences containing at least five residues andaccepting the default of two peptides per protein for listed proteins.The ªhighº set, -Smn 5 -a false -o-c2-C2-2 0.35 -p1 ,
used the same sequence length cutoff of five residues, but these
(8) Huang, Y.; Triscari, J. M.; Wysocki, V. H. Proc. 50th Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom.
Orlando, FL, 2002; TPE-135.
(9) Tabb, D. L.; Saraf, A.; Yates, J. R., III. Anal. Chem. 2003 ,75, 6415 -6421.
(10) van Dongen, W. D.; Ruijters, H. F. M.; Luinge, H.-J.; Heerma, W.;
Haverkamp, J. J. Mass Spectrom. 1996 ,31, 1156 -1162.
(11) Tabb, D. L.; Smith, L. L.; Breci, L. A.; Wysocki, V. H.; Lin, D.; Yates, J. R.,
III.Anal. Chem. 2003 ,75, 1155 -1163.
(12) Kapp, E. A.; Schu Ètz, F.; Reid, G. E.; Eddes, J. S.; Moritz, R. L.; O'Hair, R. A.
J.; Speed, T. P.; Simpson, R. J. Anal. Chem. 2003 ,75, 6251 -6264.(13) Caldwell, H. D.; Kromhout, J.; Schachter, J. Infect. Immun. 1981 ,31, 1161 -
1176.
(14) Washburn, M. P.; Wolters, D.; Yates, J. R., III. Nat. Biotechnol. 2001 ,19,
242-247.
(15) Sinden, R. E.; Butcher, G. A.; Beetsma, A. L. Methods Mol. Med. 2002 ,72,
25-40.
(16) Sadygov, R. G.; Eng, J.; Durr, E.; Saraf, A.; McDonald, H.; MacCoss, M. J.;
Yates, J. R., III. J. Proteome Res. 2002 ,1, 211 -215.
(17) MacCoss, M. J.; Wu, C. C.; Yates, J. R., III. Anal. Chem. 2002 ,74, 5593 -9.
(18) Tabb, D. L.; McDonald, W. H.; Yates, J. R., III. J. Proteome Res. 2002 ,1,
21-26.Table 1. Three Proteinase K Digests Compareda
sample chlamydia mosquito rat
total spectra 33546 35516 86846
protein IDs, low cutoff 323 132 890peptide IDs, low cutoff 1282 1109 2827peptide IDs, high cutoff 782 531 1488
aThree sets of spectra were combined to generate the subsets of
spectra for examining basic residue content. All three samples weredigested with proteinase K and subjected to 12-cycle MudPIT analysis.The rat hippocampus separation yielded the largest number of spectraand identifications. Taken together, 2788 peptides passed the highcutoffs (this is less than the sum of the three because some peptides,such as those for keratin, were observed in multiple samples).
1244
Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 76, No. 5, March 1, 2004critieria include only peptides from doubly charged precursor
spectra scoring at least 0.35 in normalized XCorr, listing peptideseven if they were the only peptide sequences present from theirproteins. The low criteria were employed solely for sampleassessment while the high criteria were used to select sets ofidentifications for statistical analysis.
The spectra passing the high criteria were separated into
subsets based on their basic residue content. Peptides thatcontained no basic residues comprised the first group. The nextthree subsets contained spectra for peptides with a single basicresidue; those containining arginine were separated from thosecontaining histidine and from those containing lysine. Six subsetsof spectra for peptides containing two basic residues were formed.The first three subsets included identifications that contained twodifferent basic residues, and the other three were identificationscontaining two of the same basic residues. The spectra in eachsubset were analyzed by a modification of the DaughterDBalgorithm.
11The measures reported for each subset were pro-
cessed by scripts created in the Rstatistical environment.19
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We assembled a set of 155 908 tandem mass spectral identi-
fications from proteomic experiments employing proteinase K (seeTable 1). The tandem mass spectra were matched to sequencesusing the normalized SEQUEST algorithm, which works bestwhen a large percentage of b and y ions can be found in thespectrum. DTASelect isolated sets of identifications from thiscollection that totalled 2568 peptides. When multiple spectra fora particular sequence were observed, the highest scoring singlespectrum was selected for analysis. Each identification wasrequired to be from a doubly charged precursor and to have anormalized XCorr of 0.35 or higher. This aggressive filtering wasrequired to ensure an acceptable proportion of the identificationswere correct.
Most proteomic data sets contain a large number of spectra
that cannot be identified successfully.
20Proteinase K digests are
even more problematic, in part because nonspecific digestionsyield a greater diversity of peptides, leading to lower concentra-
tions of particular peptide ions for isolation and fragmentation bythe mass analyzer. In addition, database identification algorithmsmay discriminate true and false matches less successfully for non-tryptic peptides. Although the criteria used in selecting peptidesfor this analysis retained fewer than 2% of the raw identifications,more lenient criteria would dilute the results with increasednumbers of false matches. The included identifications receivedXCorr scores that indicate large numbers of fragment ions werematched successfully between theoretical and observed spectra,suggesting that these spectra resulted from mobile proton frag-mentation processes rather than charge-remote mechanisms.
Basic Residue Position and Series Intensity. We began
our investigation by comparing the intensities of b and y ions withrespect to the position of the basic residue. Tryptic peptidesgenerally have basic residues at the C-termini, and they are knownto display prominent y ions. Because we used proteinase K, thebasic residues among our peptides were positioned more ran-domly within the sequences. Sequences with N-terminal basicresidues were defined to have basic residue positions of 0.0, whilethose with C-terminal basic residues were assigned positions of1.0. Basic residues that fell in the middle of the sequences hadintermediate positions. The percentage of the spectral intensityfor each spectrum corresponding to +1 charged b series fragment
ions was stored in the variable b, while the percentage corre-
sponding to y ions was stored in variable y. The y series
enhancement score was calculated to be
By this expression, a spectrum containing y ions and no b ions
would score 1.0, while a spectrum consisting of b ions andexcluding y ions would score -1.0. Spectra with equally intense
b and y ions would score 0.0. Figure 1 shows the plots of yenhancement versus basic residue position for peptides containingsingle basic residues.
Linear regressions and correlations characterized the relation-
ship between basic residue position and ion series intensity (seeTable 2). In this analysis, the slope of the modeled line can beinterpreted as the magnitude of the relationship between basic
(19) Hornik, K. The R FAQ. http://www.ci.tuwien.ac.at/ hornik/R/ISBN:
3-901167 -51-X.
(20) Simpson, R. J.; Connolly, L. M.; Eddes, J. S.; Pereira, J. J.; Moritz, R. L.;
Reid, G. E. Electrophoresis 2000 ,21, 1707 -1732.
Figure 1. The three basic residues each showing a relationship between residue position and the enhancement of one fragment ion series
over the other. When basic residues are at the N-terminus (left edges of graphs), the b series is most intense. When the basic residues are atthe C-terminus (right edges of graphs), the y series is most intense. Arginine is the most clear-cut in its effect. See Table 2 for statisticscharacterizing these figures.
(y-b)/(y+b)
Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 76, No. 5, March 1, 2004 1245position and ion series intensity, while the correlation value
describes the reproducibility with which these effects appear.Peptides containing arginine showed both the strongest correla-tion ( R)0.754) and highest slope ( m)0.846) between the
position of the residue and the intensities of the b and y series.Histidine trailed behind arginine with a weaker correlation ( R)
0.704) and slope ( m)0.775). Lysine's position showed a much
milder influence on series intensity, with a lower correlation ( R
)0.541) and slope ( m)0.490). Although lysine and histidine
may be quite similar in proton affinity,
7histidine appears to play
a more significant role in augmenting fragment ion series.
Subsets of these spectra were examined to determine typical
ion series augmentation for the extreme cases when basic residuescould be found at one of the termini of the peptides (see Table 2,columns six and seven). When the basic residues were at theN-termini of the peptides, the b ion series was more intense thanthe y ion series, as indicated by the negative y series enhancementscore. When the basic residues were at the C-termini of thepeptides (as in most tryptic peptides), the y series dominated,regardless of the identity of the basic residue. These amino acidsappear to play important roles in determining which ion seriesdominates tandem mass spectra.
Competitive Enhancement. As a further test of the influence
of basic residues in fragmentation, we examined sets of peptidesthat contained two different basic residues (see Table 3). Threecombinations of basic residues were examined: His with Lys, Hiswith Arg, and Lys with Arg. Each set of spectra was analyzedtwice, tracking each of the two basic residues present. Again,linear regressions were produced to relate the sequence positionof the tracked residue to the intensity of the fragment ionsproduced. This analysis attempted to determine how pairs of basicresidues found in a single peptide competed in intensifyingfragment ion series.
In both sets of spectra for peptides containing arginine
residues, the position of this residue dominated the other indetermining which ion series was more intense. In fact, arginine'ssequence position correlated with series intensity even more whenother basic residues were present than it did when arginine wasthe only basic residue in the peptide (compare Table 3 to Table2). The slopes of the linear regressions were also higher,indicating that series intensities reflected the location of argininemore prominently when additional basic residues were present.
The remaining set compared the influences on fragmentation
of histidine and lysine when these two basic residues were foundin the same peptide. As suggested by the results for peptides
containing single basic residues, histidine's influence provedstronger than lysine's; the correlation and slope of its linearregression were both higher. The values reveal, though, that lysinecan compete more effectively with histidine than either can witharginine; the slope and correlation calculated for histidine inpeptides containing both histidine and lysine are both much lowerthan those in peptides containing only histidine.
Fragment Ion Augmentation by Basic Content. An amino
acid residue near the N-terminus will be found in a higherproportion of b ions than of y ions, while residues near theC-terminus are found in more y than b ions (see Figure 2). Wehypothesized that the intensity enhancement of one ion seriesover another was the result of the augmentation of fragment ionscontaining the basic residues rather than an increase in intensitiesof the entire series of ions. We analyzed several sets of spectra inan effort to evaluate this claim: peptides containing no basicresidues, peptides containing single basic residues, peptidescontaining two different basic residues, and peptides containingtwo of the same basic residues. Of the 2788 identifications passingthe high criteria, 2568 were accounted for by these classifications.For each set, we separated the fragment ions by charge state andbasic content; singly charged fragment ions were treated sepa-rately from doubly charged ones, and within these classifications,fragment ions containing zero basic residues were separated fromTable 2. Basic Residue Positions Corresponding to
Relative Ion Series Intensitya
(y-b)/(y+b)
contain exclude count correlation slope N-term C-term
R H, K 731 0.754 0.846 -0.347 0.381
H K, R 285 0.704 0.775 -0.156 0.393
K H, R 579 0.541 0.490 -0.264 0.354
aThe first three columns denote which basic residue was contained
in the sequences and how many spectra were found matching thispattern. The ªcorrelationº and ªslopeº columns were calculated fromlinear regressions of the data found in Figure 1. The next two columnsshow the mean y series enhancement values calculated for peptideswith basic residues at the N-terminus or at the C-terminus.Table 3. Competition of Basic Residues When Two Are
Presenta
tracking contain exclude count correlation slope
R H, R K 180 0.826 0.920
H H, R K 180 -0.098 -0.105
R K, R H 275 0.873 1.171K K, R H 275 -0.171 -0.252
H H, K R 98 0.462 0.456K H, K R 98 0.256 0.266
aEach set was analyzed twice, once for each base. The ªtrackingº
column indicates which of the two basic residues© positions was usedfor the linear regression in each row. When arginine was present, itseffect was far more pronounced than the other basic residue (asevidenced by arginine's higher slopes and correlations in the first andsecond sets). Histidine and lysine positions are positively correlatedwith series intensity when they are the only basic residues in thepeptide (see Table 2), but the presence of arginine changes thiscorrespondence to a negative correlation. When histidine and lysineare the only basic residues in a peptide, histidine produces the higherslope and correlation.
Figure 2. Each residue contained in half of fragment ions. When
thebasicresidueisattheN-terminusasinthefirstsequenceshown,onlythebionscontainthebase.Likewise,whenthebasicresidueisat the C-terminus as in the third sequence, it will be found only in yions. If a basic residue is in the middle of the sequence, a mix of band y ions will incorporate the base. Either the b or y ion formed ataparticularpeptidebondcontainsanyparticularresidue,soaspecificamino acid from a peptide is found in half of the possible fragmentions from these two series.
1246
Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 76, No. 5, March 1, 2004those containing one basic residue and from those containing two
basic residues. Fragment ions from the b and y series were treatedinterchangeably for the analysis. The average intensity for frag-ment ions in each class was expressed as a percentage of spectralintensity (see Table 4).
Table 4 reveals several important trends. For sequences
containing any basic residues, the singly charged fragment ionscontaining the basic residues produced more intense peaks thanthose that lacked them. In sequences that contained only a singlearginine, histidine, or lysine, doubly charged fragment ions thatincorporated the basic residue produced more intense peaks aswell. When peptides contained two basic residues, the peaks forsingly charged fragment ions containing both of these residueswere not appreciably more intense than fragment ions containingonly one of them. Fragment ions that contained two basic residuesshowed substantially more intense doubly charged fragment ionpeaks than those containing zero or one basic residue. Interest-ingly, fragment ions containing two arginine residues producedmore intense doubly charged fragment ion peaks than singlycharged ones, suggesting that when both arginines are locatedto one side of the cleaved peptide bond, both protons typicallyassociate with the fragment containing the arginines.
Doubly charged precursor ions are often modeled to produce
pairs of singly charged fragment ions when they fragment. Untilrecently, the SEQUEST algorithm generated only singly chargedfragment ions in theoretical spectra for doubly charged precursors.Table 4 suggests that doubly charged fragment ions may beprominent in spectra for doubly charged precursor ions containingmultiple basic residues. Although these results profile identifica-tions from proteinase K digestions, peptides from trypsin diges-tions may also contain multiple basic residues; internal histidineresidues may be found in many peptides, and incomplete cleavagecan result in internal lysines and arginines as well. Doubly chargedfragment ions may be significant in spectra from doubly chargedprecursors.
Chemical Explanation. Basic residues can affect fragmenta-
tion in a variety of ways. Their presence in a peptide raises theminimum energy requirement for fragmentation.
5Their side
chains may be the sites in a peptide to which protons show thegreatest affinity,
7in some cases resulting in proton sequestration
and enabling charge-remote fragmentation mechanisms.21-23Basic
side chains may also form salt bridges24or charge solvation
structures25within the peptide, facilitating the transfer of protons
to other portions of the peptide. The protonated side chains ofhistidine and arginine may also cleave adjacent amide bonds to
form b ions of non-oxazolone structure.
26,27As a result, the
locations and types of basic residues are pertinent to thefragmentation of peptides.
When a peptide fragments during collision-induced disso-
ciation, proton affinities of the peptide's side chains determinethe most stable locations for the proton or protons.
27,28When a
peptide bond cleaves, the resulting fragments form a proton-bound dimer,
6and the fragment containing the most basic site
is most likely to retain the charge. If only one proton is car-ried by the peptide, this process will determine which ion isobserved, the b or the y, while the other fragment remains neu-tral. Thus, the presence and position of basic residues canalter the relative intensities of the b and y ion series. Proton af-finity enables Arg to show the most pronounced effect in pep-
(21) Tsaprailis, G.; Nair, H.; Somogyi, A.; Wysocki, V. H.; Zhong, W. Q.; Futrell,
J. H.; Summerfield, S. G.; Gaskel, S. J. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1999 ,121, 5142 -
5154.
(22) Gu, C. G.; Tsaprailis, G.; Breci, L.; Wysocki, V. H. Anal. Chem. 2000 ,72,
5804 -5813.
(23) Huang, Y. Y.; Wysocki, V. H.; Tabb, D. L.; Yates, J. R. III. Int. J. Mass
Spectrom. 2002 ,219, 233 -244.
(24) Vachet, R. W.; Asam, M. R.; Glish, G. L. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1996 ,118,
6252 -6256.
(25) Wyttenbach, T.; Paizs, B.; Barran, P.; Breci, L.; Liu, D.; Suhai, S.; Wysocki,
V. H.; Bowers, M. T. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2003 ,125, 13768 -13775.
(26) Farrugia, J. M.; O'Hair, R. A. J.; Reid, G. E. Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 2001 ,
210/211 ,7 1-87.
(27) Wysocki, V. H.; Tsaprailis, G.; Smith, L. L.; Breci, L. A. J. Mass Spectrom.
2000 ,35, 1399 -1406.
(28) Polce, M. J.; Ren, D.; Wesdemiotis, C. J. Mass Spectrom. 2000 ,35, 1391 -
1398.Table 4. Singly and Doubly Charged Fragment Ion Peak Intensities for Each Set of Spectraa
fragment sequencessingly charged fragments
av intens (%) when containingdoubly charged fragments
av intens (%) when containing
contain exclude count 0 bases 1 base 2 bases 0 bases 1 base 2 bases
HKR 196 0.80 0.27
1R HK 731 0.63 1.09 0.10 0.571H KR 285 0.57 0.99 0.11 0.461K HR 579 0.68 0.98 0.10 0.401H, 1R K 180 0.41 0.79 0.80 0.06 0.11 1.071K, 1R H 275 0.43 0.81 0.90 0.10 0.13 0.821H, 1K R 98 0.46 0.87 0.76 0.04 0.12 0.872R HK 57 0.34 0.95 0.21 0.06 0.15 0.912H KR 35 0.38 0.68 0.80 0.10 0.08 0.732K HR 132 0.56 0.79 0.79 0.07 0.11 0.65
aThe spectra were divided into those containing no basic residues, those with a single basic residue, and those with two basic residues. No
distinction was made between b and y fragment ions. The average fragment ion intensity in each of these categories was calculated and expressedas a percentage of the spectrum's intensity. For reference, a typical y ion in a tryptic spectrum accounts for 1% of spectral intensity while a typical
b ion accounts for approximately half that. DaughterDB does not filter out low-intensity peaks or account for the isotopic variants of fragment ions,and so the reported peak intensities may seem lower than expected. The top row of data show the result for peptides with no basic residues. Thespectra from Table 2 are shown in the next section, and spectra from Table 3 are shown next. Finally, spectra for peptides containing two of aparticular basic residue are listed. Singly charged fragment ions containing at least one basic residue are more intense than those without anybasic residues. Doubly charged fragment ions can be as intense as singly charged fragment ions when two basic residues are contained in thefragment ion sequence.
Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 76, No. 5, March 1, 2004 1247tides where two different basic residues are present (see
Table 3).
In the case of multiply charged precursor ions, the protons
may repel each other, dispersing them to both fragments. Thiseffect favors the coproduction of complementary ions for eachcleavage when both fragments are of sufficient mass and basicityto accommodate protons. In some cases, Coulombic repulsion mayinfluence the effective basicity of a fragment. The cleavage of thedoubly charged peptide AEGLIRR at its fifth peptide bond, forexample, is more likely to produce a b5/y2 pair of singly chargedfragment ions than a doubly charged y2 ion, despite the fact thatthe y2 contains both basic residues in this peptide. Because thearginine residues are adjacent, simultaneous protonation of bothis less likely. In peptides where a pair of arginines is separatedby other residues, simultaneous protonation becomes morefavorable. Though Table 4 indicates that fragments containing twoarginines tend to attract both protons more often than not, theproximity of these residues must be taken into account to predicta specific peptide's fragmentation accurately.
The fragmentation influences of the basic residues are a result
of several properties. The existence of resonance structures forprotonated arginine and histidine allows these residues to dis-tribute the proton's charge for greater stability. Protonatedarginine can be shown in four different resonance structures, whilethree different structures can be constructed for protonatedhistidine. Protonated lysine, on the other hand, does not havethese resonance structures. All three basic amino acids activelyform hydrogen bonds, causing the peptides containing them toadopt secondary structure. Basic side chains may intramolecularlytransfer protons to less basic groups, potentially inducing charge-directed fragmentation at the transfer site. Multiple properties ofthese residues combine to yield their influences on fragmentation.
CONCLUSIONS
The ion trap fragmentation spectra of tryptic peptides contain
prominent y series ions because they contain C-terminal basicresidues. When basic residues are dispersed throughout thepeptide sequence, the fragment ions containing basic residues aregenerally more intense than the ions lacking them. As a result,peptides with N-terminal basic residues will show intense b ionsrather than the intense y ions typical for tryptic peptides. If apeptide contains two different basic residues, one basic residuegenerally dominates in determining the intensities of fragmentions. Arginine is the most dominant basic residue in this respect,followed by histidine and then lysine. Fragment ions that containtwo basic residues may adopt a double charge even when theprecursor ion is doubly charged.
These results should be considered in the context of the
process that produced them; for example, ion trap collision-induced dissociation excites peptides in a different way than doestriple-quadrupole CID. Since fragment ions may be excited alongwith precursor ions in multiple collision triple-quadrupole CID,one might expect some differences between the spectra producedby these two instruments. The time scale over which fragmentions form and are scanned in an ion trap may also play a role indetermining which ions are observed. The role of basic residuesas characterized by this article, then, should be taken to represent
ion trap fragmentation and may vary in other instruments.
Peptide identification algorithms such as SEQUEST typically
generate both b and y fragment ions for each peptide bond. Themodeled intensities for these fragment ions are constant for eachseries; y ions are modeled at a characteristic intensity, and b ionsare given a separate, uniform intensity. While this is generallyadequate for identifying peptides from tryptic digestions, peptideswith more varied basic residue positions may not be identified assuccessfully with this model. By generating more accuratetheoretical spectra for sequences, SEQUEST could identify non-tryptic peptides more accurately,
8separating correct sequences
from incorrect sequences by larger margins.
One simple way to improve the SEQUEST fragmentation
model would be to use a set of intensities for fragment ions, withthe appropriate intensity for each fragment chosen from this setbased on the basic residue content of the fragment ion. Forexample, the model could use a low intensity for singly chargedfragments lacking any basic residues and a higher intensity forsingly charged fragments that contain one basic residue. Fragmentions that contain multiple basic residues could be modeled in theirdoubly charged forms as well. In this way, more accuratetheoretical spectra for both tryptic and nontryptic peptides couldbe generated.
A more powerful way to improve these spectrum models would
simulate peptide fragmentation. Initially, the software wouldidentify which peptide bonds would be most likely to cleave basedon sequence context.
11,12Given breakage at a particular peptide
bond, the model would assess the probabilities of each protondeparting with the N-terminal fragment (to produce b and asso-ciated fragment ions) or with the C-terminal fragment (to producey ions). To simulate fragmentation in this way would take moreprocessing power than existing fragmentation models, but it hasincreased potential to create accurate theoretical spectra and toyield new information about the processes at work in peptidefragmentation.
While proton affinities of the basic amino acids cannot be
abstracted directly from the results of this research, it is clearthat proton affinity plays a role in determining the intensities offragment ions. This analysis of database-identified peptides affirmsarginine's unique basicity and adds to the discussion of the relativebasicities of histidine and lysine. The union of theoretical andempirical studies will help to clarify the role of basicity in peptidefragmentation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Christine C. Wu for providing spectra from C.
trachomatis . Thanks go to Christine C. Wu and Michael J.
MacCoss for generating the rat hippocampal lysate spectra.Laurence Florens graciously provided spectra from the mosquitomidgut. D.L.T. was supported by NIH Grant R33 CA81665. Y.H.was supported by NIH GM R0151387 to V.H.W. and by the 2003Pfizer Graduate Research Fellowship in Analytical Chemistry.Funding was also provided by NIH Grants RR11823-08 andR01MH067880.
AC0351163
1248Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 76, No. 5, March 1, 2004