doi: 10.1111/j.1472-8206.2004.00301.x
REVIEW
ARTICLEHerb–drug interactions: an overview of the
clinical evidence
Angelo A. Izzo
Department of Experimental Pharmacology, University of Naples Federico II, via D. Montesano 49, 80131 Naples, Italy
INTRODUCTION
During the last decade, an explosion in the consumption
of herbal remedies has been witnessed in North America
and Europe, particularly in Germany, which leads theworld in the sales of such remedies, and France [1].
Surveys show, for instance, that two-thirds of women
use herbs for perimenopausal symptoms, 45% of parentsgive their children herbal treatments and 45% of
pregnant women try herbal remedies [2]. The vast
majority of these products are unlicensed and are notrequired to demonstrate efﬁcacy, safety, or quality [3].
Although herbs are often promoted as natural and
therefore harmless, they are not free from adverse effects.A recent observational study indicates that herbal
supplements are associated with adverse events that
include all levels of severity, organ systems, and agegroups [4].
A relevant safety concern associated to the use of
herbal medicines is the risk of interaction withprescription medications [5–11]. This issue is especially
important with respect to drugs with narrow thera-
peutic indexes, such as warfarin or digoxin [11].
Recent examinations have indicated that as many as16% of prescription drug users consume herbal sup-
plements [12]. Moreover, fewer than 40% of patients
disclose their herbal supplement usage to health careproviders and many physicians are unaware of the
potential for herb–drug interactions [13]. This lack of
information, combined with the fact that herbal
medicines are usually mixtures of more than 100
active ingredients, obviously increases the likelihood ofinteractions.
The aim of this article is to highlight the clinical
interactions between herbal remedies and prescribeddrugs. Theoretical herb drug interactions, which are
based on in vitro experiments, animal studies, specula-
tive and/or empirical evidence can be found elsewhere[14]. Table I reports the herbal remedies involved in
clinical herb–drug interactions.Keywords
complementary medicine,
cytochrome P450,
herb–drug interaction,
herbal medicine,P-glycoprotein,
phytotherapy,
St John’s wort,warfarin
Received 3 June 2004;
revised 26 August 2004;
accepted 21 September 2004
Correspondence and reprints:
aaizzo@unina.itABSTRACT
Herbal medicines are mixtures of more than one active ingredient. The multitude
of pharmacologically active compounds obviously increases the likelihood ofinteractions taking place. Hence, the likelihood of herb–drug interactions is
theoretically higher than drug–drug interactions, if only because synthetic drugs
usually contain single chemical entities. Case reports and clinical studies havehighlighted the existence of a number of clinically important interactions, although
cause-and-effect relationships have not always been established. Herbs and drugs
may interact either pharmacokinetically or pharmacodynamically. Throughinduction of cytochrome P450 enzymes and/or P-glycoprotein, some herbal products
(e.g. St John’s wort) have been shown to lower the plasma concentration (and/or the
pharmacological effect) of a number of conventional drugs, including cyclosporine,indinavir, irinotecan, nevirapine, oral contraceptives and digoxin. The majority of
such interactions involves medicines that require regular monitoring of blood levels.
To date there is less evidence relating to the pharmacodynamic interaction. However,for many of the interactions discussed here, the understanding of the mechanisms
involved is incomplete. Taking herbal agents may represent a potential risk to
patients under conventional pharmacotherapy.
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–16 1Table I Herbal medicines involved in drug interactions. Data extracted from Capasso et al. [1] and Hennessy et al. [34].
Herbal medicine: common name/Latin name/source Main constituent(s) Main pharmacological action(s) Condition(s) frequently treated
Betel nut/ Areca catechu /seeds Arecoline Direct-acting cholinergic agonist None (used as a relaxing/refreshing drug)
Boldo/ Peumus boldus /leaves Boldine Choleretic/cholagogue, diuretic Indigestion, constipation, hepatic ailments
Chinese wolfberry/ Lycium barbarum /fruits Polysaccharides, glycoproteins, vitamin C Immunostimulant, hypoglycaemic Loss of energy. Diabetes, liver and kidney disorders
Cranberry/ Vaccinium macrocarpon /fruits Fructose, anthocyanins, ﬂavonoids Antibacterial Urinary tract infections
CurbicinaFatty acids, phytosterols, polysaccharides Antiandrogenic, anti-inﬂammatory Benign prostatic hyperplasia
Danshen/ Salvia milthiorriza /roots Tanshinones, phenolic compounds Vasorelaxant, anti-ischaemic, antiplatelet, radical
scavengerAngina, myocardial infarction, ischaemic diseases
Dong quai/ Angelica sinsensis /roots Phytoestrogens, ﬂavonoids, coumarins Estrogenic effects, anti-inﬂammatory, vasorelaxant Gynaecological disorders, circulation condi tions
Devils claw// Harpagophytum procumbens /tubers Harpagoside Anti-inﬂammatory, anti-arrhythmic, positive inotropic Musculoskeletal and arthritic pain
Echinacea/ Echinacea species/roots and aerial parts Polysaccharides, phenols, alkamides Immunostimulant Infection of the upper respiratory tract
Evening primrose/ Oenothera biennis /seeds Essential fatty acids Anti-inﬂammatory Dermatological conditions, rheumatoid arthritis
Fenugreek/ Trigonella foenum-graecum /seeds Alkaloids, ﬂavonoids, saponins Antilipidaemic, hypoglycaemic, cholagogue Diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia,
Ginger/ Zingiber ofﬁcinale /rhizome Pungent principles (gingerols, zingerone) Antiemetic, antiplatelet, anti-inﬂammatory antiulcer Prevention of nausea, dyspepsia
Ginseng/ Panax ginseng /roots Triterpene saponins (ginsenosides) Immunomodulatory, anti-inﬂammatory, antitumor,
hypoglycaemicLoss of energy and memory, stress states,
male sexual dysfunction
Garlic / Allium sativum /bulb Alliins Antihypertensive, antidiabetic, antiplatelet,
antilipidaemicHypercholesterolemia, prevention of arteriosclerosis
Ginkgo/ Ginkgo biloba /leaves Ginkgolides, ﬂavonoids Increase of microcirculatory blood ﬂow,
antiplatelet, free radical scavengingCirculatory disorders
Green tea/ Camellia sinensis /leaves Polyphenols, caffeine Antioxidant, antilipidaemic, antitumoral, CNS stimulant Prevention of cancer, cardiovascular diseases
Guar gum/ Cyamopsis tetragonolobus /seeds Galactomannan, lipids, saponins Antihyperglycaemic, antilipidaemic Diabetes, obesity, hypercholesterolemia
Kava/ Piper methysticum /rhizome Kavapyrones Anxiolytic, anaesthetics, muscle relaxant Anxiety, insomnia
Khat/ Catha edulis /leaves Catinone Central stimulant and indirectly sympathomimetic Loss of energy (khat-chewing is also as a social event)
Liquorice/ Glycyrrhiza glabra roots Glycyrrhizinic acid Expectorant, anti-inﬂammatory,
antiulcer, aldosterone-like effectsGastric ulcer, catarrhs, inﬂammation
Papaya/ Carica papaya /fruits Papain (enzyme) Proteolytic, lipolytic activity Indigestion, obesity
PC-SPESbPolysaccharides, phytosterols,
fatty acids, ﬂavonoidsImmunostimulant, cytotoxic Prostate cancer
Psyllium/ Plantago spp./seeds Mucilages Modiﬁes gut viscosity Constipation, overweight
Red yeast ricecMonacolins Hypocholesterolaemic Hypercholesterolaemia
Siberian ginseng/ Eleutherococcus
senticosus /rootsEleutherosides Immunomodulatory, anti-inﬂammatory, antitumor, Loss of energy and memory, stress states, male sexual
dysfunction
Soya/ Glycine max /beans Phytoestrogens Hepatoprotective, anti-osteoporosis Treatment of menopausal symptoms, prevention of
heart diseases and cancer
St John’s wort/ Hypericum perforatum /aerial parts Hypericin, hyperforin, ﬂavonoids Antidepressant, antiretroviral Mild to moderate depression
aCurbicin contains Serenoa repens (saw palmetto) fruits, Cucurbita pepo (pumpkin) seeds and vitamin E.
bPC-PCS is a mixture of eight herbal drugs, namely Dendrathema morofolium (chrysanthemum), Isatis indigotica (dyer’s woad), Glycyrrhiza glabra (liquorice), Ganoderma lucidum (reishi), Panax pseudoginseng
(san-qui ginseng), Rabdosia rubescens (rubescens), Serenoa repens (saw palmetto), Scutellaria bacicalensis (Baikal skullcap).
cRed yeast rice is produced by fermentation of cooked rice using the fungus Monascus purpureus .2 A. A. Izzo
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–16MECHANISMS OF HERB–DRUG
INTERACTIONS
Herbal medicines follow modern pharmacological prin-
ciples. Hence, herb–drug interactions are based on thesame pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic mecha-
nisms as drug–drug interactions [15]. Pharmacokinetic
interactions have been more extensively studied and invitro and in vivo studies indicated that the altered drug
concentrations by co-administered herbs may be attrib-
utable to the induction (or inhibition) of hepatic andintestinal drug-metabolizing enzymes [particularly cyto-
chrome P450 (CYP)], and/or drug transporters such as
P-glycoprotein [16,17].
The CYP is the most important phase I drug-metabo-
lizing enzyme system, responsible for the metabolism of a
variety of drugs. Many herbs (e.g. St John’s wort,echinacea, kava and garlic) and natural compounds
isolated from herbs (e.g. ﬂavonoids, coumarins, fur-
anocoumarins, anthraquinones, caffeine and terpenes)have been identiﬁed as substrates, inhibitors and/or
inducers of various CYP enzymes [18]. Speciﬁcally,
clinical studies have shown that long-term (2 weeks)St John’s wort administration signiﬁcantly induced
intestinal and hepatic CYP3A4 and possibly other CYP
enzymes involved in drugs metabolism [19–26]. More-over, a clinical study performed on 12 healthy subjects
showed that echinacea modulated the catalytic activity
of CYP3A at hepatic and intestinal sites (induction ofhepatic CYP3A4 and inhibition of intestinal CYP3A4)
[27]. By contrast, a number of herbal medicines,
including green tea [28], ginkgo [29], garlic [30] sawpalmetto [31] and Siberian ginseng [32] did not affect
CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 activities in normal volunteers.
P-glycoprotein in the intestine, liver and kidney may
play an important role in the absorption, distribution, or
excretion of drugs. P-glycoprotein appears to limit the
cellular transport from intestinal lumen into epithelialcells and also enhances the excretion of drugs out of
hepatocytes and renal tubules into the adjacent luminal
space [33]. Like CYP, P-glycoprotein is vulnerable to
inhibition, activation, or induction by herbs and herbal
constituents. Curcumin, ginsenosides, piperine, sylima-rin and catechins may affect P-glycoprotein-mediated
drug transport [17]. St John’s wort induces the intestinal
expression of P-glycoprotein [34–36] both in isolatedcells [35] and in healthy volunteers [34,36]. Hyperforin,
a major ingredient of St John’s wort, binds to orphan
pregnane X receptor [37,38] resulting in a series ofintracellular events leading to the expression of CYP3A4and P-glycoprotein [16]. A few pharmacodynamic inter-
actions have also been described. Pharmacodynamicinteractions may be additive (or synergetic), whereby the
herbal medicine potentiates the action of synthetic drugs
(e.g. interaction between the anticoagulant warfarinwith antiplatelet herbs), or antagonistic, whereby the
herbal medicine reduces the efﬁcacy of synthetic drugs
(e.g. kava possesses dopaminergic antagonistic propertiesand hence might reduce the pharmacological activity of
the anti-parkinson drug levodopa) [15].
LIMITATIONS
Much of the available information about the interaction
between herbal products and prescribed drugs is gleaned
from case reports, although clinical studies are now also
beginning to appear in the literature. The published casereports are often incomplete as they do not allow us to
conclude that a causal relationship exists. Even docu-
mented case reports have to be interpreted with greatcaution, as causality is not usually established beyond
reasonable doubt. According to the scoring system
described by Fugh-Berman and Ernst [7], 68.5% ofthe cases reported were classiﬁed as ‘unevaluable’ (i.e.
reports contained inadequate information to assess the
likelihood of an interaction), 18.5% were classiﬁed as‘possible’ (i.e. reports provided some evidence for an
interaction, but there may be other causes of the event)
and 13% as ‘well documented’ (reports appeared toprovide reliable evidence for an interaction).
INTERACTIONS WITH
CARDIOVASCULAR
PHARMACOTHERAPY
Interaction between herbal remedy and conventional
cardiovascular drugs is a potentially important safety
issue, particularly for patients taking anticoagulants.The majority of reports concern drugs with a narrow
therapeutic index such as warfarin and digoxin. These
interactions have been systematically reviewed [10] and
summarized here in Table II .
Interactions with anticoagulant drugs
Warfarin owes its action to its ability to antagonize the
cofactor function of vitamin K. Theoretically, increasedanticoagulant effects could be expected when warfarin
is combined with coumarin-containing herbs (e.g.
boldo, fenugreek, don quai) or with antiplatelet herbs(e.g. danshen, garlic, ginkgo) [10]. Naturally occurringHerb–drug interactions 3
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–16Table II Clinical interactions between herbal medicines and conventional cardiovascular drugs.
Drug Herb Result of interaction Possible mechanism Clinical comment Source of evidence Reference
Digoxin Gum guar,
St John’s wort,wheat branDecreased plasma
digoxin concentrationMultiple mechanisms:
(i) gum guar delays gastric emptying and
hence may reduce digoxin absorption
(ii) St John’s wort induces
P-glycoprotein which is involved in digoxinabsorption/excretion
(iii) Fibres in bran may trap digoxin in the gutDigoxin has a narrow
therapeutic indexClinical studies 66–69
Aspirin Ginkgo Spontaneous hyphema Additive effect on platelet aggregation
(ginkgolides have antiplatelet activity)Hyphema is a clinical
rare problemA case report 143
Lovastatin Pectin or oat bran Decreased absorption
of lovastatinPectins or bran ﬁbres may bind or trap
lovastatin in the gutThe therapeutic manifestation
of this interaction remains
to be determinedA clinical study 75
Simvastatin St John’s wort Decreased plasma
digoxin concentrationSimvastatin is a substrate of P-glycoprotein
and is metabolized by CYP enzymes.
Both CYP enzymes and P-glycoprotein areinduced by St John’s wortThe therapeutic manifestation
of this interaction remains to
be determinedA clinical study 74
Phenprocoumon Ginger (i) Over-anticoagulation (i) Additive effect on coagulation (ginger
inhibits platelet aggregation)The patient developed an
elevated INR and epistaxisA case report 65
St John’s wort (ii) decreased
anticoagulant effect(ii) Phenprocoumon is metabolised by
cytochrome enzymes which are induced
by St John’s wortPhenprocoumon has a narrow
therapeutic indexA clinical study 64,67
Verapamil St John’s wort Decreased bioavailability
of verapamilInduction of intestinal CYP3A4 by
St John’s wortThe clinical signiﬁcance
remains to be determinedA clinical study 26
Warfarin (i) Boldo/fenugreek,
curbicin, cranberrydanshen, devils claw,
dong quai, garlic,
ginkgo, ginseng,Chinese wolfberry,mango, papaya,
quilinggao,
PC-SPES(i) Over-anticoagulation (i) In general, additive effects on coagulation
mechanisms. Such herbs may haveanticoagulant (boldo, fenugreek, don quai,
PC-SPES) or antiplatelet (i.e. danshen, garlic,
ginseng, ginkgo) properties. Othermechanisms include: cranberry ﬂavonoidsmay inhibit CYP enzymes responsible of
warfarin metabolism; curbicin contain high
amount of vitamin E which can antagonizevitamin K. Mechanism not known for devils
claw, quilinggao and Chinese wolfberry(i) Risk of bleeding. Given
the narrow therapeuticindex of warfarin,
vigilance is needed.
Caution for ginkgo (a casereported intracerebralhaemorrhage) and cranberry
(fatal haemorrhage)(i) Single case reports
for boldo/fenugreek,devil’s claw, ginkgo,
ginseng, Chinese
wolfberry, papaya,PC-SPES. Multiple casefor cranberry curbicin,
danshen, dong quai, garlic40–53,61
(ii) Ginseng
a,
green tea, soya,
St John’s wort(ii) Decreased
anticoagulant effect(ii) Green tea contain vitamin K and thus may
antagonize the effect of warfarin; warfarin is
metabolized by CYP enzymes which are
induced by St John’s wort. Mechanism notknown for ginseng and soya(ii) Potential thrombotic
complications(ii) Single case reports for
green tea, ginseng and soya.
Multiple cases for St John’s
wort. A clinical study forginseng and St John’s wort54–58,60,62,634 A. A. Izzo
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–16coumarins are only weak anticoagulant, but if the plant
material is not stored properly dicoumarol may beformed by microbial transformation, and this compound
is much more potent [1,39]. Conversely, vitamin K
containing herbs (e.g. green tea) can antagonized theanticoagulant effect of warfarin. Case reports indicate
over-anticoagulation [generally revealed by increased
international normalized ratio (INR) values] when war-farin is combined to boldo/fenugreek [40], curbicin
(a preparation containing saw palmetto, pumpkin and
vitamin E, see Table I ) [41], danshen [42–44], devil’s
claw [45], dong quai [46,47], garlic [48], ginkgo [49],
Chinese wolfberry (Go-Qi-Zi) [50], papaya [45], mango
[51], PC-SPES (a mixture of eight herbs) [52], quilinggao(a Chinese herbal combination) [53] and decreased
anticoagulant effect when the drug is co-administered
with cranberry [54,55], green tea [56], soya [57] andSt John’s wort [58]. Analysis of case reports revealed
reliable evidence for an interaction only for the boldo/
fenugreek, danshen, cranberry, dong quai and ginkgointeractions; some evidence for an interaction (but there
may be other causes of the event) was provided for
curbicin, quilinggao, mango, Chinese wolfberry, greentea, PC-SPES and soya, while warfarin interactions
caused by devil’s claw, papaya and garlic were published
in reports containing inadequate information to assessthe likelihood of an interaction [7]. PC-SPES has been
found to contain adulterated indomethacin, warfarin
and diethylstilbestrol [59]. In 2003, it has been suspen-ded from sale from the FDA [9].
A case of fatal interaction has been also reported [54].
Six weeks after starting cranberry juice a 70-year-oldman under warfarin was admitted to hospital with an
INR >50. Before, his control of INR had been stable. He
died of a gastrointestinal and pericardial haemorrhage.Moreover, the Committee on Safety of Medicines (UK)
reported seven other reports about a possible interaction
between warfarin and cranberry juice leading to changesin INR or bleeding [55]. Cranberry juice contains
antioxidants, including ﬂavonoids, which are know to
inhibit CYP enzymes responsible of warfarin metabolism
[16,18].
The reported ginseng–warfarin interaction is some-
what puzzling as case reports have shown that the herb
may either decrease [60] or increase [61] the antico-
agulant effect of warfarin. Two recent randomizedclinical trials have investigated the effect of ginseng on
the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of war-
farin in healthy subjects [62,63]. Jiang et al. showed a7-day treatment with ginseng ( Panax ginseng ) did notaffect the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics
(platelet aggregation and INR) of the anticoagulant inhealthy subjects [62]; by contrast, Yuan et al. reported
that the administration of American ginseng for 2 weeks
reduced warfarin’s anticoagulant activity (decreased INRand warfarin AUC) [63]. The use of different species
(Panax ginseng vs.Panax quinquefolius ) and a different
time of administration (1 week vs. 2 weeks) may explainsuch apparent discrepancy.
Phenprocoumon is an anticoagulant chemically rela-
ted to warfarin. A clinical study [64] highlighted thepossible reduced efﬁcacy of this anticoagulant if co-
administered with St John’s wort. Another clinical trial
showed that coadministration of St John’s wort increasedthe apparent clearance of warfarin, leading to a reduc-
tion in the pharmacodynamic effect of the anticoagulant
[62]. Consistently, seven cases of INR associated withconcomitant use of warfarin and St John’s wort were
reported by the Swedish Medical Product Agency [58].
Lastly, a 76-year-old woman on long-term phenprocou-mon therapy developed an elevated INR and epistaxis
after taking the herb ginger. The INR returned to the
normal range after ginger was stopped and vitamin K1given [65]. An objective causality assessment revealed
that the adverse drug event as a result of the phenpro-
coumon and ginger interaction was probable.
Interactions with cardiac inotropic drugs
There is clinical evidence that blood levels of digoxin canbe reduced by the concurrent administration of some
herbal products, although to date, no therapeutic
interactions between herbs and digoxin have beenreported. St John’s wort was shown to reduce digoxin
through level after 10 days of co-medication in a single-
blind, placebo-controlled study [66]. It was suggestedthat the underlying mechanism involves induction (by
St John’s wort) of the P-glycoprotein drug transporter,
facilitating the efﬂux of the drug from the enterocytes tothe intestinal lumen [18]. The interaction between
St John’s wort and digoxin seems to be correlated with
the dose, particularly of the active ingredient hyperforin
[67]. Other clinical trials showed that serum digoxin
concentration may be reduced by concomitant admin-istration of gum guar (which may reduce digoxin
absorption by delaying gastric emptying) [68] or whet
bran (digoxin may be trapped by ﬁbres contained inwheat bran) [69]. However these interactions have likely
no clinical relevant inﬂuence on therapeutic digoxin
[10]. By contrast, two herbal medicines, namely haw-thorn and ginkgo, did not change the pharmacokineticsHerb–drug interactions 5
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–16of orally administered digoxin in healthy volunteers
[70,71].
Increased levels of digoxin have been associated with
ingestion of Siberian gingeng [72]. The patient was
asymptomatic for digoxin toxicity despite a level of5.2 ng/mL. Siberian ginseng contains glycosides with
structural similarities to digoxin which interfere with
digoxin assay [73].
Interactions with antihyperlipidaemic drugs
Simvastatin, pravastatin and lovastatin are inhibitors ofhydroxymethylglutaryl (HMG)-CoA reductase, the rate
limiting step in cholesterol synthesis. Two clinical studies
reported in a single publication showed that St John’swort decreased plasma concentrations of simvastatin but
not of pravastatin [74]. The difference probably lies in
the different metabolic proﬁles of the two drugs.Simvastatin, in contrast to pravastatin, is metabolized
through a CYP-dependent pathway, and it is also a
substrate of P-glycoprotein. The therapeutic manifesta-tion of this interaction remains to be determined.
A decrease of absorption of lovastatin [associated to
increased low-density lipoprotein (LDL) levels] wasobserved in patients who took this drug concomitantly
with pectin or oat bran [75]. Lovastatin pharmaco-
kinetics and LDL returned normal after bran discontinu-ation. The interaction is likely due to the ability of
pectins or bran ﬁbres to bind or trap concurrently
administered lovastatin.
Interactions with antihypertensive drugs
Few (and poorly documented) cases of herb–drug inter-actions with antihypertensive drugs have been reported.
Surprisingly, an elderly patient was found to have an
increase in blood pressure after taking ginkgo (a periph-eral vasodilator) while receiving a thiazide diuretic (not
speciﬁed in the original paper) [45]. There is no rational
pharmacological mechanism to explain this unusualinteraction. In addition, hypokalemia, associated to
ﬂaccid quadriplegia, has been reported after the ingestion
of small amounts of liquorice (which possess mineral-
corticoid effects) in combination with antihypertensive
treatment (not speciﬁed in the original paper) [76].
Verapamil reduces arterial pressure by inhibiting
calcium ion inﬂux into the vascular smooth muscle
cells, which results in a decrease in smooth muscle toneand vascular resistance. Tannergreen et al. [26] reported
that repeated administration of St John’s wort decreased
verapamil bioavailability in healthy volunteers. Thiseffect is likely caused by induction of ﬁrst-pass CYP3A4metabolism in the gut, because the jejunal permeability
and the terminal half-life of verapamil were unchanged.In addition, verapamil is also a substrate of P-glyco-
protein [77], which can be induced by St John’s wort
[16,37,38].
INTERACTIONS WITH DRUGS
AFFECTING THE CENTRAL NERVOUSSYSTEM
The interactions between herbal remedies and conven-
tional drugs affecting the central nervous system are
summarized in Table III . Patients mixing synthetic and
herbal anxiolytic or antidepressant drugs are at thehighest risk.
Interactions with antidepressant drugs
The herb St John’s wort is effective in the treatment of
mild to moderate depression [24]. Both St John’s wort
and synthetic antidepressants have a high probability ofconcomitant use. St John’s wort and serotonin re-uptake
inhibitors (i.e. sertraline, paroxetine, nefazodone and
venlafaxine) may result in symptoms characteristic ofcentral serotonin excess (e.g. mental status changes,
tremor, autonomic instability, gastrointestinal upset,
headache, myalgias and motor restlessness) as highligh-ted by case series and case reports [78–80]. These effects
could be the result of an additive effect on 5-hydroxy-
tryptamine (5-HT) because hyperforin in St John’s wortinhibit the re-uptake of several brain neurotransmitters
including 5-HT [24]. Concomitant use of St John’s wort
and sertraline has been reported to cause a manicepisode in a 28-year-old man [81]. According to the
report reliability scale for drug interaction [7], the case
was classiﬁed as possible, although it was complicated byconcomitant testosterone replacement therapy following
bilateral orchidectomy. Finally, a clinical study showed
that co-medication with St John’s wort decreased plasmaand urine concentration of amitriptyline in 12 patients
[82]. In addition to being a P-glycoprotein substrate, the
demethylation and subsequent hydroxylation of ami-
triptyline is catalysed by CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 which
may be induced by St John’s wort.
Other herbs which may interact with conventional
antidepressants include ginkgo and ginseng. A 80-year-
old woman with Alzheimer’s disease fell into a comaafter taking a low dose of the atypical antidepressant
trazodone with ginkgo [83]. The case was classiﬁed as
‘possible’ [7]. Another report described a patient whoexperienced insomnia, headache, tremulousness and6 A. A. Izzo
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–16Table III Clinical interactions between herbal medicines and conventional drugs affecting the central nervous system.
Drug Herb Result of interaction Possible mechanism Clinical comment Source of evidence Reference
Alprazolam St John’s wort Decreased plasma levels
of alprazolamAlprazolam is a speciﬁc probe for CYP 3A4,
which is induced by St John’s wortThe therapeutic manifestation of
such interaction was not determinedClinical studies 23,25
Kava Semicomatose state Additive effect on GABA receptors.
Moreover, kava inhibits CYP3A4 in humansThe patient was lethargic and
disoriented for several hoursA case report 93
Amitriptyline St John’s wort Decreased plasma levels
of amitriptylineAmitriptyline is a substrate of both CYP2C19
and P-glycoprotein which are induced by
St John’s wortThe clinical signiﬁcance of such
interaction was not determinedA clinical study 82
BuspironeaSt John’s wort Hypomania Synergistic effect on 5-HT receptors This is the ﬁrst case of hypomania
following brain injury involving
herb–drug interactionA case report 95
Caffeine Echinacea Reduction of caffeine
oral clearanceCaffeine is a substrate of CYP1A2 which
is inhibited by echinaceaThis interaction is not clinically relevant A clinical study 27
Fluphenazine Evening primrose oil Seizures Gamalenic acid from evening primrose oil
lowers the seizure thresholdPhenothiazines are known to be
epileptogenic themselvesTwo cases in a
clinical study90
Levodopa Kava Reduced efﬁcacy of levodopa Kava possesses dopaminergic antagonistic
propertiesIncrease in the duration and number
of ‘off’ periods have been reportedA case report 97
Lithium (i) Psyllium, hispagula (i) Decreased plasma lithium
concentration(i) Hydrophilic psyllium may prevent lithium
from ionizingThe therapeutic index of lithium
salts are extremely lowA case report 86
(ii) Herbal diureticsb(ii) Decreased plasma lithium
concentration(ii) Unknown A case report 87
Midazolam Echinacea Increased (oral midazolam)
or decreased (systemic
midazolam) clearanceMidazolam is a substrate of CYP3A4.
Echinacea inhibits intestinal CYP3A4,
while it induces hepatic CYP3AThe therapeutic manifestation of such
interaction was not determinedA clinical study 27
St John’s wort Decreased plasma levels
of midazolamInduction of CYP3A4 by St John’s wort The therapeutic manifestation of such
interaction was not determinedClinical studies 20,22,36
Phenelzine Ginseng Sleeplessness, tremor
and headachesUnknown The psychoactive effects were considered
to be relevantTwo cases 84
Phenytoin Shankhapushpi Loss of seizure control Not know The interaction is potentially relevant Two cases 91
Procyclidine Betel nut Rigidity, bradykinesia,
jaw tremorsAntagonistic effect of arecoline from
betel nut to the anticholinergic agentprocyclidineBetel nut may reduce drug compliance
in schizophrenic patientsA case report 88
SRI
cSt John’s wort Serotonergic syndrome Synergistic effect on 5-HT uptake The syndrome could be fatal,
particularly in elderlyCase series and
case reports78–80
Trazodone Ginkgo Coma Not known The interaction is potentially relevant A case report 83
aA case of possible serotonergic syndrome has been also reported [96].
bThe herbal formulation contained juniper, buchu, horsetail, corn silk, bearberry, parsley, bromelain and paprika.
cSerotonin-reuptake inhibitors (i.e. sertraline paroxitine, nefazodone and venlafaxine). A case of mania in a patient taking St John’s wort and sert raline has been also reported [81].Herb–drug interactions 7
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–16mania after co-administration of ginseng with phenel-
zine [84]; here, causality is likely because inadvertentre-challenge resulted in similar symptoms [85]. The
mechanisms of such interactions are not known.
Interactions with neuroleptic drugs
Lithium salts are used prophylactically in treating
manic-depressive patients and in the treatment of manicepisodes. Patients taking isphagula or psyllium were
found to have lower blood levels of lithium, possibly
because the plant product may trap lithium in the gut[86]. In addition, a 26-year-old woman stable on lithium
for 5 months, experienced dizziness, grogginess and
diarrhoea after taking a combination of herbal diuretics(juniper, buchu, horsetail, corn silk, bearberry, parsley,
bromelain and paprika) [87]. The adverse events were
associated to increased plasma lithium levels. As therewere several herbal diuretics in the preparation used
and the mechanism of action of each is elusive, it is
impossible to determine which herb caused the lithiumtoxicity.
Extrapyramidal symptoms occurring in a schizophre-
nic patient who was maintained on depot neurolepticmedication following a period of heavy betel nut are
described in a well-documented case report [88]. The
underlying mechanism of this interaction is based on thepharmacological antagonism of the anticholinergic
agent procyclidine (which is given to treat acute
neurological adverse effects resulting from the use ofneuroleptic drugs) by arecoline (an acetylcholine recep-
tor agonist), the active ingredient of the betel nut [89].
Seizures were reported in two patients taking the
phenothiazine ﬂuphenazine with evening primrose oil
and in one patient taking placebo with evening primrose
oil in a study of 23 patient with schizophrenia [90].Evening primrose oil contains c-linolenic acid, which
lowers the seizure threshold [34]. However, it should be
noted that phenothiazines are known to be epileptogenicthemselves.
Interactions with antiepileptic drugs
During the course of routine plasma drug level monit-
oring an unexpected loss of seizure control and reductionin plasma phenytoin levels was noticed in two patients
who were also taking the Ayurvedic multi-herb syrup
Shankhapushpi [91]. Subsequent animal experimentsconﬁrmed that the herbal remedy decreased the anti-
epileptic activity of phenytoin without lowering its
plasma level [91]. The mechanism of this interaction isnot known. In addition, a clinical study showed that a14-day treatment with St John’s wort did not alter
carbamazepine pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers[92].
Interactions with anxiolytic drugs
The benzodiazepines alprazolam and midazolam are used
experimentally as probe for CYP3A4 activity because
they are entirely metabolized by intestinal and hepaticCYP 3A4. Consistently, clinical studies have shown that
St John’s wort decreased alprazolam and midazolam
plasma levels in healthy volunteers [20,22,23,25,36].St John’s wort decreased plasma levels of midazolam the
effect being considerably less after intravenous adminis-
tration than after oral administration. These ﬁndingsindicate that enzymatic induction occurs both in the
intestine and in the liver [36]. Moreover, a clinical study
performed on 12 healthy subjects showed that echinaceaincreased the oral availability of midazolam (CYP3A
probe), which is consistent with inhibition of intestinal
CYP3A by the herb. By contrast the AUC of systemicallygiven midazolam was reduced possibly due to induction
of hepatic CYP3A [27]. The increase of oral availability
of midazolam by echinacea mainly based on the inclu-sion of the reduced AUC of midazolam after intravenous
dosing in the calculation of oral availability [27]. In
addition, clinical studies showed the pharmacokinetics ofalprazolam were not affected by a number of herbal
medicines, including green tea, saw palmetto, garlic,
ginkgo and Siberian ginseng [28–32].
A poorly documented [7] case report described a
semicomatose state in a patient taking kava and alpra-
zolam [93]. Kava inhibits human CYP activities [94] andthus it might increase alprazolam plasma concentra-
tions. Moreover, a pharmacodynamic mechanism can-
not be excluded as both kava and benzodiazepinesinterfere with GABA receptors [5].
Another anxiolytic drug which can interact with
herbal medicines is buspirone, a 5-HT1A receptoragonist. Dannawi et al. reported a case of a possible
serotonin syndrome after combination of buspirone and
St John’s wort [95]. An additive effect on 5-HT receptors
(St John’s wort inhibit 5-HT re-uptake) [8,24] may
explain such interaction. Moreover a female patientexperienced hypomania after adding St John’s wort and
ginkgo to her regimen of buspirone [96].
Interactions with anti-parkinson drugs
Levodopa is a metabolic precursor of dopamine. An
increase in the duration and number of ‘off’ periods in apatient with Parkinson’s disease treated with levodopa8 A. A. Izzo
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–16has been reported [97]. The assessors of this report
suggest that causality is likely [7]. Kava possess dop-amine receptor antagonistic properties [97,98] which
could explain the reduced efﬁcacy of levodopa.
INTERACTIONS WITH ORAL
CONTRACEPTIVES
Drugs that induce CYP3A enzymes, such as rifampicin,
have been associated with reduced efﬁcacy of oral
contraceptives and breakthrough bleeding [99]. Thisinteraction is thought to reﬂect the signiﬁcant contri-
bution of CYP3A enzymes to the oxidative metabolism
of 17 a-ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone [100].
Recently, there have been case reports of breakthrough
bleeding in women who were stabilized by use of ethinyl
estradiol/desogestrel containing oral contraceptives afterco-administration of St John’s wort [58,101]. This
adverse event was conﬁrmed by two clinical trials
performed in healthy female volunteers, who showed ahigher incidence of intracyclic bleeding episodes after
co-administration of St John’s wort and an oral contra-
ceptive (ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone) [22,102].Most importantly, some reports of women becoming
pregnant whilst using oral contraceptives and St John’s
wort have been reported by UK (seven cases), German(four cases) and Swedish (two cases) authorities [103].
These cases were followed by a further detailed report of
unwanted pregnancy in a depressed 36-year-old woman[104]. Clinical studies designed to elucidate the mech-
anism of these interactions have shown that St John’s
wort (consistent with increased CYP3A4 activity), maydecrease plasma levels of norethindrone and 3-ketodes-
ogestrel, as well as the half-life of elimination of ethynyl
estradiol [22,102]. Although the number of bleedingepisodes increased during co-medication with St John’s
wort, it is worth noting that the anti-ovulatory effect was
not impaired by co-medication with the herb [102].
INTERACTIONS WITH
IMMUNOSUPPRESSANTS
The interaction between cyclosporine and St John’s wort
is one of the most serious, and potentially fatal, inter-
action between a herbal remedy and a conventional
drug. It is also one of the most well documented, withmultiple case reports and case series reported [105–114].
The common clinical features of these cases are that
heart, renal or liver transplant patients stabilized oncyclosporine showed decreased plasma levels (associated,in some cases, with acute rejection episodes) after taking
St John’s wort at therapeutic dosage. The clinical pictureimproved in all cases following discontinuation of the
herbal remedy. Cyclosporine is a substrate of P-glyco-
protein and metabolized by CYP3A4. St John’s wort maythus decrease intestinal absorption and increase the
metabolism of cyclosporine.
A case of rhabdomyolysis in a stable renal-transplant
recipient, attributed to red yeast rice has been described
[115]. The condition resolved when consumption of the
herbal product ceased. The authors postulated that theinteraction of cyclosporine and the herbal product
through the CYP system resulted in the adverse effect.
Red yeast rice contains monacolins, including monacolinK, which is identical to lovastatin.
Another herb that may interact with cyclosporine is
red avens ( Geum chiloense ) [116]. Cyclosporine plasma
levels in a 54-year-old renal transplant patient abruptly
increased (469–600 mg/dL) after taking red avens.
Blood levels returned to 55 mg/dL on cessation of thisherb.
Finally, two clinical trials [117,118] showed that
co-administration of St John’s wort dramaticallydecreased the AUC of tacrolimus. Tacrolimus undergoes
extensive hepatic metabolism mainly by CYP3A4 and is
also a substrate for P-glycoprotein. Tacrolimus under-goes extensive hepatic metabolism mainly by CYP 3A4
and is also a substrate for P-glycoprotein.
INTERACTIONS WITH ORAL
HYPOGLYCAEMIC DRUGS
Dietary gums (e.g. gum guar) are advocated to reduce
postprandial hyperglycaemia [1]. Because of their effect
on prolonging gastric retention and because drugs willdiffuse more slowly out of viscous matrices than from
solutions, gums may affect the absorption of concom-
itantly administered drugs, including hypoglycaemicdrugs [119]. Clinical studies have shown that gum
guar reduced the absorption of metformin [120] and
glibenclamide (gliburide) [121] but not glipizide [122]
to a clinical signiﬁcant degree. By contrast, another
trial showed that gum guar enhanced the insulinogenicand blood glucose lowering effect of glibenclamide
[123].
A fall in glucose levels has been reported in a 40-year-
old diabetic woman taking chlorpropamide and a carry
containing garlic and karela [124]. This event is likely
because of an additive effect on glucose level, as bothgarlic and karela possess hypoglycaemic effects [1].Herb–drug interactions 9
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–16INTERACTIONS WITH
CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC DRUGS
By using a urinary excretion method, the bioavailabil-
ities of ampicillin and amoxicillin were determined ineight healthy volunteers [125] after khat chewing.
Drugs were given at various time before khat chewing
session. The extent and rate of ampicillin bioavailabilitywere reduced signiﬁcantly by khat chewing except when
administered 2 h after the khat chewing session. The
mechanisms of this interaction are unknown. It has beenproposed that ampicillin combines with khat tannins to
form an insoluble and poorly absorbed complex [89].
Another double blind trial, performed on 10 healthy
volunteers, showed that the peak penicillin concentra-
tion and the AUC were reduced by co-administration of
gum guar [126]. This interaction is not clinicallyrelevant, especially in view of the fact that oral penicillin
V should always be taken on an empty stomach.
The effect of the Chinese medicines Shosaiko-to (TJp),
Rikkunshi-to (TJ-43) and Sairei-to (TJ-114) on the
bioavailability of the urinary tract antiseptic oﬂoxacin
has been evaluated in seven healthy volunteers [127]. Itwas found that these Chinese medicines had no signiﬁ-
cant effect on the rate and extent of bioavailability of
oﬂoxacin.
Clinical studies have shown that St John’s wort
reduced plasma concentration of the antiretroviral drugs
indinavir (a protease inhibitor) [128] and the oralclearance of the non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitor nevirapine (a non-nucleoside reverse transcrip-
tase inhibitor) [129]. These results have importantclinical implications for HIV-infected patients as low
plasma concentrations of antiretroviral drugs are a cause
of drug resistance and treatment failure. It is importantto point out that other antiretroviral drugs are also
metabolized by the CYP3A4 isoform and thus may be
adversely inﬂuenced by concomitant intake of St John’swort [130]. By contrast, clinical studies have shown that
some herbs, including goldenseal ( Hydrastis canadensis )
[131] and milk thistle [132] do not affect the pharmaco-
kinetics of indinavir in healthy volunteers; in addition,
acute dosing of garlic over 4 days did not signiﬁcantlyalter the single-dose pharmacokinetics of the protease
inhibitor ritonavir [133].
A signiﬁcant decline in the plasma concentrations of
the protease inhibitor saquinavir was observed in 10
healthy volunteers after repeated administration of garlic
[134]. On the basis of AUC, C
max and C8values, the
authors suggest that garlic affected the bioavailability ofsaquinavir rather than its systemic clearance. The effect
may be caused, at least in part, by induction of CYP450in the gut mucosa by garlic. Indeed, administration of
garlic for 5 days led to a signiﬁcant increase in CYP450
activity in rats [135], although this ﬁnding has not beenconﬁrmed in humans [30].
Irinotecan, employed mainly for the treatment of
cancer of the colon or rectum, is a pro-drug of SN-38 anda known substrate for CYP3A4. A randomized, non-
blinded cross-over study showed that St John’s wort
decreased plasma levels of the active metabolite of SN-38by 42% in ﬁve cancer patients. Consequently, the degree
of myelosuppression was substantially worse in the
absence of St John’s wort [136].
INTERACTIONS WITH ANTIASTHMATIC/
ANTIALLERGIC/ANTI-INFLAMMATORY
DRUGS
There is some indirect evidence in the literature that
liquorice may interact with prednisolone. Chen et al.
[137] showed that oral glycyrrhizin (a major constituent
of liquorice) increased the plasma prednisolone concen-trations in six healthy men. Glycyrrhizin, which is a
strong inhibitor of 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydro-
genase (the enzyme which catalyses the conversion ofcortisol to the inactive steroid cortisone), inﬂuences
prednisolone pharmacokinetics by inhibiting its meta-
bolism. Moreover, three major traditional Chinesemedicines (Sho-saiko-To, Saiboku-To, and Sairei-To)
containing glycyrrhizin affected prednisolone pharmaco-
kinetics in healthy volunteers [138]. As these herbalmixtures had different effects on prednisolone concen-
trations, it is unlikely that glycyrrhizin alone may
explain these differences on prednisolone kinetics.
One case of a reduction in plasma theophylline concen-
trations associated with St John’s wort treatment has been
reported [139]. This resulted in an increased dosage oftheophylline to achieve therapeutic concentration. The
same study also reported in vitro evidence that compo-
nents of St John’s wort induced hepatic enzymes. This
report provided some evidence for an interaction, but there
may be other causes involved [7]. However, a recentrandomized clinical trial showed that a 15-day treatment
with St John’s wort did not alter the pharmacokinetics of
theophylline in 20 healthy volunteers [140].
An open-label study showed that single administration
of St John’s wort increased, while a 14-day treatment
decreased, plasma levels of fexofenadine, a non-sedatingH1-receptor antihistaminic drug [141]. As fexofenadine10 A. A. Izzo
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–16is a selective probe drug to determine P-glycoprotein
activity, the authors hypothesized that acute St John’swort inhibited, where as long-term treatment induced
intestinal P-glycoprotein.
Ginkgo constituents (ginkgolides and others) have
antiplatelet activity and are platelet activating factor
(PAF) receptor antagonists [142]. Case reports demon-
strate that patients taking a number of non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs, including aspirin [143], ibuprofen
[144] and the cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitor rofecoxib
[145] experienced severe bleeding after self-prescribingginkgo at recommended doses. Adverse events were
particularly severe for aspirin (spontaneous hyphema)
[143] and for ibuprofen (comatose state with an intra-cerebral mass bleeding of which the patient died) [144].
In addition, aspirin plasma concentrations may be
increased by concomitant use of tamarind [146], a foodalso used as a herbal medicine.
A clinical trial suggests that garlic changes some
pharmacokinetic variables of paracetamol (acetamino-phen) after 1–3 months of treatment [147]. Speciﬁcally,
it was found that commercial aged garlic extract
(approximately equivalent to six to seven cloves ofgarlic) had no effect on oxidative metabolism, but caused
a slight increase in sulphate conjugation of the drug. The
precise mechanisms and the clinical signiﬁcance of thisinteraction are presently not known.
Lastly, it has been shown that the half-life of phen-
azone (antipyrine) was not affected by ginkgo treatment,whereas it was signiﬁcantly decreased after phenytoin
treatment in healthy volunteers [148].
MISCELLANEOUS INTERACTIONS
A brief episode of acute delirium, possibly induced by
exposure to St John’s wort, valerian and the antidiar-
rhoeal opiate loperamide has been reported [149]. The
case provided some evidence for interaction, but theremay be other causes of the event [7]. The mechanisms of
this interaction are not known.
A randomized, cross over study, performed on 12
adult men showed that St John’s wort induced both
CYP3A4-catalysed sulphoxidation and CYP2C19-dependent hydroxylation of omeprazole and enormously
decreased its plasma concentration [150]. The author
believe that an adjustment of the dose should be madeto safeguard successful omeprazole therapy when
co-administration with St John’s wort.
A reduction of methadone plasma levels has been
reported in four addict patients after St John’s wortintake [151]. Two patients reported symptoms that
suggested a withdrawal syndrome. The authors suggestthat such interaction, if not correctly identiﬁed and
handled, might cause unnecessary discomfort to the
patient, lead to resumption of illicit drug use, or be a riskfactor for discontinuation of the methadone or anti-
depressant treatment.
CONCLUSIONS
There is evidence that taking herbal preparations can
result in pharmacokinetic or pharmacodymnamic inter-
actions that represent a potential risk to patients taking
conventional medicines. The pharmacokinetic interac-tions that have been identiﬁed so far all point towards
the fact that herbs induce CYP enzymes and P-glyco-
protein. The majority of interactions identiﬁed to dateinvolve medicines that require regular monitoring of
blood levels (e.g. warfarin, cyclosporine). Given that the
number of medicines that currently require monitoringis low, compared with the number of medicines that are
metabolized by CYP enzymes, it is highly likely that
further interactions will be identiﬁed.
Although some herb–drug interactions may be clinic-
ally insigniﬁcant (e.g. interaction between gum guar and
penicillin V), others may have serious consequences (e.g.interaction between St John’s wort and cyclosporine).
Potentially, this concerns a very long list of medicinal
herbs [14]. The subject clearly requires more research,which, in turn, begs the question who should fund such
research? A recent survey indicates that neither the
pharmaceutical nor the herbal industry is inclined totake on this responsibility [152]. Knowing that millions
of patients take herbal and conventional medicines
concomitantly, often without the knowledge of theirphysicians, and considering our present lack of under-
standing of herb–drug interactions, more research into
this area seems a matter of urgency.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author is grateful to SESIRCA (Regione Campania)
and Coﬁnanziamento Murst for their support of thepresent work.
NOTE ADDED IN PROOF
Dresser and colleagues (2002) have shown that pepper-
mint oil increased the area under the curve values and thepeak plasma concentration of felodipine in humans [153].Herb–drug interactions 11
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–16REFERENCES
1 Capasso F., Gaginella T.S., Grandolini G., Izzo A.A. Phyto-
therapy. A quick reference to herbal medicine, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2003.
2 Ernst E. Are herbal medicines effective? Int. J. Clin. Pharmacol.
Ther. (2004) 42157–159.
3 De Smet P.A. Herbal remedies. N. Engl. J. Med. (2002) 347
2046–2056.
4 Palmer M.E., Haller C., McKinney P.E. et al. Adverse events
associated with dietary supplements: an observational study.
Lancet (2003) 361 101–106.
5 Izzo A.A., Ernst E. Interactions between herbal medicines and
prescribed drugs: a systematic review. Drugs (2001) 612163–
2175.
6 Brazier N.C., Levine M.A. Drug-herb interaction among
commonly used conventional medicines: a compendium for
health care professionals. Am. J. Ther. (2003) 10163–169.
7 Fugh-Berman A., Ernst E. Herb-drug interactions: review and
assessment of report reliability. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. (2001)
52587–595.
8 Markowitz J.S., DeVane C.L. The emerging recognition of
herb-drug interactions with a focus on St. John’s wort
(Hypericum perforatum ). Psychopharmacol. Bull. (2001) 35
53–64.
9 Williamson E.M. Drug interactions between herbal and
prescription medicines. Drug Saf. (2003) 261075–1092.
10 Izzo A.A., Di Carlo G., Borrelli F., Ernst E. Cardiovascular
pharmacotherapy and herbal medicines: the risk of druginteraction. Int. J. Cardiol, in press.
11 Izzo A.A. Drug interactions with St. John’s wort ( Hypericum
perforatum ): a review of the clinical evidence. Int. J. Clin.
Pharmacol. Ther. (2004) 42139–148.
12 Kaufman D.W., Kelly J.P., Rosenberg L., Anderson T.E.,
Mitchell A.A. Recent patterns of medication use in theambulatory adult population of the United States: the Slone
survey. JAMA (2002) 287 337–344.
13 Klepser T.B., Doucette W.R., Horton M.R. et al. Assessment of
patients’ perceptions and beliefs regarding herbal therapies.Pharmacotherapy (2000) 2083–87.
14 Ernst E. Possible interactions between synthetic and herbal
medicinal products. Part 1: a systematic review of the indirectevidence. Perfusion (2000) 132200–2211.
15 Izzo A.A., Borrelli F., Capasso R. Herbal medicine: the dangers of
drug interaction. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. (2002) 23358–359.
16 Zhou S., Gao Y., Jiang W., Huang M., Xu A., Paxton J.W.
Interactions of herbs with cytochrome P450. Drug Metab.
Rev. (2003) 3535–98.
17 Zhou S., Lim L.Y., Chowbay B. Herbal modulation of
P-glycoprotein. Drug Metab. Rev. (2004) 3657–104.
18 Ioannides C. Pharmacokinetic interactions between herbal
remedies and medicinal drugs. Xenobiotica (2002) 32451–
478.
19 Roby C.A., Anderson G.D., Kantor E., Dryer D.A., Burstein
A.H. St John’s wort: effect on CYP3A4 activity. Clin.Pharmacol. Ther. (2000) 67451–457.20 Wang Z., Gorski J.C., Hamman M.A., Huang S.M., Lesko L.J.,
Hall S.D. The effects of St John’s wort ( Hypericum perforatum )
on human cytochrome P450 activity. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther.(2001) 70317–326.
21 Bauer S., Stormer E., Johne A. et al. Alterations in cyclosporin
A pharmacokinetics and metabolism during treatment withSt John’s wort in renal transplant patients. Br. J. Clin.
Pharmacol. (2003) 55203–211.
22 Hall S.D., Wang Z., Huang S.M. et al. The interaction between
St John’s wort and an oral contraceptive. Clin. Pharmacol.
Ther. (2003) 74525–535.
23 Markowitz J.S., Donovan J.L., DeVane C.L. et al. Effect of
St John’s wort on drug metabolism by induction of cyto-chrome P450 3A4 enzyme. JAMA (2003) 290 1500–1504.
24 Di Carlo G., Borrelli F., Ernst E., Izzo A.A. St John’s wort:
Prozac from the plant kingdom. Trends Pharmacol. Sci.(2001) 22292–297.
25 Markowitz J.S., Donovan J.L., DeVane C.L. et al. Effect of St.
John’s wort on drug metabolism by induction of cytochromep450 3A4 enzyme. Obstet. Gynecol. Surv. (2004) 59358–
359.
26 Tannergren C., Engman H., Knutson L., Hedeland M.,
Bondesson U., Lennernas H. St John’s wort decreases the
bioavailability of R- and S-verapamil through induction of the
ﬁrst-pass metabolism. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. (2004) 75298–
309.
27 Gorski J.C., Huang S.M., Pinto A. et al. The effect of echinacea
(Echinacea purpurea root) on cytochrome P450 activity in vivo.
Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. (2004) 7589–100.
28 Donovan J.L., Devane C.L., Chavin K.D. et al. Green tea
(Camellia sinensis ) extract does not alter cytochrome P-450
3A4 or 2D6 activity in healthy volunteers. Drug Metab.Dispos. (2004) 32906–908.
29 Markowitz J.S., Donovan J.L., Lindsay DeVane C., Sipkes L.,
Chavin K.D. Multiple-dose administration of Ginkgo biloba did
not affect cytochrome P-450 2D6 or 3A4 activity in normalvolunteers. J. Clin. Psychopharmacol. (2003) 23576–581.
30 Markowitz J.S., Devane C.L., Chavin K.D., Taylor R.M., Ruan
Y., Donovan J.L. Effects of garlic ( Allium sativum L.) supple-
mentation on cytochrome P450 2D6 and 3A4 activity in
healthy volunteers. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. (2003) 74170–
177.
31 Markowitz J.S., Donovan J.L., Devane C.L. et al. Multiple doses
of saw palmetto ( Serenoa repens ) did not alter cytochrome
P450 2D6 and 3A4 activity in normal volunteers. Clin.Pharmacol. Ther. (2003) 74536–542.
32 Donovan J.L., DeVane C.L., Chavin K.D., Taylor R.M.,
Markowitz J.S. Siberian ginseng ( Eleutheroccus senticosus )
effects on CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 activity in normal volunteers.Drug Metab. Dispos. (2003) 31519–522.
33 Lin J.H., Yamazaki M. Role of P-glycoprotein in pharmaco-
kinetics: clinical implications. Clin. Pharmacokinet. (2003) 42
59–98.
34 Hennessy M., Kelleher D., Spiers J.P. et al. St John’s wort
increases expression of P-glycoprotein: implications for druginteractions. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. (2002) 5375–82.12 A. A. Izzo
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–1635 Perloff M.D., von Moltke L.L., Stormer E., Shader R.I.,
Greenblatt D.J. Saint John’s wort: an in vitro analysis ofP-glycoprotein induction due to extended exposure. Br. J.Pharmacol. (2001) 134 1601–1608.
36 Dresser G.K., Schwarz U.I, Wilkinson G.R., Kim R.B. Coordi-
nate induction of both cytochrome P4503A and MDR1 bySt John’s wort in healthy subjects. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther.
(2003) 7341–50.
37 Wentworth J.M., Agostini M., Love J., Schwabe J.W.,
Chatterjee V.K.. St John’s wort, a herbal antidepressant,
activates the steroid X receptor. J. Endocrinol. (2000) 166
R11–R16.
38 Moore L.B., Goodwin B., Jones S.A. et al. St. John’s wort
induces hepatic drug metabolism through activation of the
pregnane X receptor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. (2000) 97
7500–7502.
39 Barnes J., Anderson L.A., Phillipson J.D. Herbal medicines.
A guide for healthcare professionals, Pharmaceutical Press,
London, UK.
40 Lambert J.P., Cormier A. Potential interaction between
warfarin and boldo-fenugreek. Pharmacotherapy (2001) 21
509–512.
41 Yue Q.Y., Jansson K. Herbal drug and anticoagulant effect
with and without warfarin: possibly related to the vitamin E
component. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. (2001) 49838.
42 Izzat M.B., Yim A.P., El-Zufari M.H.. A taste of Chinese
medicine. Ann. Thorac. Surg. (1998) 66941–942.
43 Tam L.S., Chan T.Y., Leung W.K., Critchley J.A. Warfarin
interactions with Chinese traditional medicines: danshen andmethyl salicylate medicated oil. Aust. N. Z. J. Med. (1995) 25
238.
44 Yu C.M., Chan J.C., Sanderson J.E. Chinese herbs and warfarin
potentiation by danshen. J. Intern. Med. (1997) 241 337–339.
45 Shaw D., Leon C., Kolev S., Murray V. Traditional remedies
and food supplements. A 5-year toxicological study (1991–1995). Drug Saf. (1997) 17342–356.
46 Page R.L., Lawrence J.D. Potentiation of warfarin by dong
quai. Pharmacotherapy (1999) 19870–876.
47 Ellis G.R., Stephens M.R. Untitled (photograph and brief case
report). BMJ (1999) 319 650.
48 Sunter W.H. Warfarin and garlic. Pharm. J. (1991) 246 772.
49 Matthews M.K. Association of Ginkgo biloba with intracerebral
haemorrhage. Neurology (1998) 51933.
50 Lam A.Y., Elmer G.W., Mohutsky M.A. Possible interaction
between warfarin and Lycium barbarum L. Ann. Pharmac-
other. (2001) 351199–1201.
51 Monterrey-Rodriguez J., Interaction between warfarin and
mango fruit. Ann. Pharmacother. (2002) 36940–941.
52 Davis N.B., Nahlik L., Vogelzang N.J. Does PC-SPEs interact
with warfarin? J. Urol. (2002) 167 1793.
53 Wong A.L., Chan T.Y. Interaction between warfarin and the
herbal product quilinggao. Ann. Pharmacother. (2003) 37
836–838.
54 Suvarna R., Pirmohamed M., Henderson L. Possible interac-
tion between warfarin and cranberry juice. BMJ (2003) 327
1454.55 Grant P. Warfarin and cranberry juice: an interaction.
J. Heart. Valve Dis. (2004) 1325–26.
56 Taylor J.R., Wilt V.M.. Probable antagonism of warfarin by
green tea. Ann. Pharmacother. (1999) 33426–428.
57 Cambria-Kiely J.A. Effect of soy milk on warfarin efﬁcacy. Ann.
Pharmacother. (2002) 361893–1896.
58 Yue, Q.-Y., Bergquist C., Gerde ´n B. Safety of St John’s wort.
Lancet (2000) 355 576–577.
59 Sovak M., Seligson A.L., Konas M. et al. Herbal composition
PC-SPES for management of prostate cancer: identiﬁcation
of active principles. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. (2002) 94 1275–
1281.
60 Janetzky K., Morreale A.P. Probable interaction between
warfarin and ginseng. Am. J. Health Syst. Pharm. (1997) 54
692–693.
61 Rosado M.F. Thrombosis of a prosthetic aortic valve disclosing
a hazardous interaction between warfarin and a commercial
ginseng product. Cardiology (2003) 99111.
62 Jiang X., Williams K.M., Liauw W.S. et al. Effect of St John’s
wort and ginseng on the pharmacokinetics and pharmaco-
dynamics of warfarin in healthy subjects. Br. J. Clin.
Pharmacol. (2004) 57592–599.
63 Yuan C.S., Wei G., Dey L. et al. Brief communication:
American ginseng reduces warfarin’s effect in healthy
patients: a randomized, controlled Trial. Ann. Intern. Med.(2004) 141 23–27.
64 Maurer A., Johne A., Bauer S. et al. Interaction of St John’s
wort extract with phenprocoumon. Eur. J. Clin. Pharmacol.
(1999) 55A22.
65 Kruth P., Brosi E., Fux R., Morike K., Gleiter C.H. Ginger-
associated overanticoagulation by phenprocoumon. Ann.
Pharmacother. (2004) 38257–260.
66 Johne A., Brockmoller J., Bauer S., Maurer A., Langheinrich
M., Roots I. Pharmacokinetic interaction of digoxin with an
herbal extract from St John’s wort ( Hypericum perforatum ).
Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. (1999) 66338–345.
67 Mueller S.C., Uehleke B., Woehling H. et al. Effect of St John’s
wort dose and preparations on the pharmacokinetics of
digoxin. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. (2004) 75546–557.
68 Huupponen R., Seppala P., Iisalo E. Effect of guar gum, a ﬁbre
preparation, on digoxin absorption in man. Eur. J. Clin.
Pharmacol. (1984) 26279–281.
69 Nordstrom M., Melander A., Robertsson E., Steen B. Inﬂuence
of wheat bran and of a bulk-forming ispaghula cathartic on
the bioavailability of digoxin in geriatric in-patients. DrugNutr. Interact. (1987) 567–69.
70 Mauro V.F., Mauro L.S., Kleshinski J.F., Khuder S.A., Wang
Y., Erhardt P.W. Impact of ginkgo biloba on the pharmaco-kinetics of digoxin. Am. J. Ther. (2003) 10247–251.
71 Tankanow R., Tamer H.R., Streetman D.S. et al. Interaction
study between digoxin and a preparation of hawthorn
(Crataegus oxyacantha ). J. Clin. Pharmacol. (2003) 43637–
642.
72 McRae S. Elevated serum digoxin levels in a patient taking
digoxin and Siberian ginseng. Can. Med. Assoc. J. (1996) 155
293–295.Herb–drug interactions 13
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–1673 Dasgupta A., Wu S., Actor J., Olsen M., Wells A., Datta P.
Effect of Asian and Siberian ginseng on serum digoxinmeasurement by ﬁve digoxin immunoassays. Signiﬁcantvariation in digoxin-like immunoreactivity among commercial
ginsengs. Am. J. Clin. Pathol. (2003) 119 298–303.
74 Sugimoto K., Ohmori M., Tsuruoka S. et al. Different effects of
St John’s wort on the pharmacokinetics of simvastatin and
pravastatin. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. (2001) 70518–524.
75 Richter W.O., Jacob B.G., Schwandt P. Interaction between
ﬁbre and lovastatin. Lancet (1999) 338 706.
76 Cumming A.M., Boddy K., Brown J.J. et al. Severe hypo-
kalaemia with paralysis induced by small doses of liquorice.Postgrad. Med. J. (1980) 56526–529.
77 Wandel C., Kim R.B., Kajiji S., Guengerich P., Wilkinson G.R.,
Wood A.J. P-glycoprotein and cytochrome P-450 3A inhibi-
tion: dissociation of inhibitory potencies. Cancer Res. (1999)593944–3948.
78 Lantz M.S., Buchalter E., Giambanco V. St. John’s wort and
antidepressant drug interactions in the elderly. J. Geriatr.Psychiatry Neurol. (1999) 127–10.
79 Gordon J.B. SSRIs and St. John’s wort: possible toxicity? Am.
Fam. Physician (1998) 57950.
80 Prost N., Tichadou L., Rodor F., Nguyen N., David J.M., Jean-
Pastor M.J. St. Johns wort-venlafaxine interaction. Presse Med.
(2000) 291285–1286.
81 Barbenel D.M., Yusuﬁ B., O’Shea D., Bench C.J. Mania in a
patient receiving testosterone replacement postorchidectomy
taking St John’s wort and sertraline. J. Psychopharmacol.
(2000) 1484–86.
82 Johne A., Schmider J., Brockmoller J. et al. Decreased plasma
levels of amitriptyline and its metabolites on comedication
with an extract from St. John’s wort ( Hypericum perforatum ).
J. Clin. Psychopharmacol. (2002) 2246–54.
83 Galluzzi S., Zanetti O., Binetti G., Trabucchi M., Frisoni G.B.
Coma in a patient with Alzheimer’s disease taking low dosetrazodone and gingko biloba. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry(2000) 68679–680.
84 Shader R.I., Greenblatt D.J. Phenelzine and the dream
machine – ramblings and reﬂections. J. Clin. Psychopharma-col. (1985) 565.
85 Jones B.D., Runikis A.M. Interaction of ginseng with phenel-
zine. J. Clin. Psychopharmacol. (1987) 7201–202.
86 Perlman B.B. Interaction between lithium salts and ispaghula
husk. Lancet (1990) 335 416.
87 Pyevich D., Bogenschutz M.P. Herbal diuretics and lithium
toxicity. Am. J. Psychiatry (2001) 158 1329.
88 Deahl M. Betel nut-induced extrapyramidal syndrome:
an unusual drug interaction. Mov. Disord. (1989) 4330–332.
89 Ernst E. Interactions between synthetic and herbal medicinal
products. Part 2: a systematic review of the direct evidence.
Perfusion (2000) 1360–70.
90 Holman C.P., Bell A.F.J. A trial of evening primrose oil in the
treatment of chronic schizophrenia. J. Orthomol. Psychiatry
(1983) 12302–304.
91 Dandekar U.P., Chandra R.S., Dalvi S.S. et al. Analysis of a
clinically important interaction between phenytoin andShankhapushpi, an Ayurvedic preparation. J. Ethnopharma-
col. (1992) 35285–288.
92 Burstein A.H., Horton R.L., Dunn T., Alfaro R.M., Piscitelli
S.C., Theodore W. Lack of effect of St John’s wort on
carbamazepine pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers. Clin.
Pharmacol. Ther. (2000) 68605–612.
93 Almeida J.C., Grimsley E.W. Coma from the health food store:
interaction between kava and alprazolam. Ann. Intern. Med.
(1996) 125 940–941.
94 Mathews J.M., Etheridge A.S., Black S.R. Inhibition of human
cytochrome P450 activities by kava extract and kavalactones.
Drug Metab. Dispos. (2002) 301153–1157.
95 Dannawi M. Possible serotonin syndrome after combination of
buspirone and St John’s wort. J. Psychopharmacol. (2002) 16
401.
96 Spinella M., Eaton L.A. Hypomania induced by herbal and
pharmaceutical psychotropic medicines following mild
traumatic brain injury. Brain Inj. (2002) 16359–367.
97 Schelosky L., Raffauf C., Jendroska K., Poewe W. Kava and
dopamine antagonism. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry
(1995) 58639–640.
98 Dinh L.D., Simmen U., Bueter K.B., Bueter B., Lundstrom K.,
Schaffner W. Interaction of various Piper methysticum culti-
vars with CNS receptors in vitro. Planta Med. (2001) 67306–
311.
99 Skolnick J.L., Stoler B.S., Katz D.B., Anderson W.H. Rifam-
pin, oral contraceptives, and pregnancy. JAMA (1976) 236
1382.
100 Guengerich F.P. Oxidation of 17 alpha-ethynylestradiol by
human liver cytochrome P-450. Mol. Pharmacol. (1988) 33
500–508.
101 Ernst E. Second thoughts about safety of St John’s wort. Lancet
(1999) 354 2014–2016.
102 Pfrunder A., Schiesser M., Gerber S., Haschke M., Bitzer J.,
Drewe J. Interaction of St John’s wort with low-dose oralcontraceptive therapy: a randomized controlled trial. Br. J.Clin. Pharmacol. (2003) 56683–690.
103 Murphy P.A. St. John’s wort and oral contraceptives:
reasons for concern? J. Midwifery Womens Health (2002)47 447–450.
104 Schwarz U.I., Buschel B., Kirch W. Unwanted pregnancy
on self-medication with St John’s wort despite hormonalcontraception. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. (2003) 55112–113.
105 Ahmed S.M., Banner N.R., Dubrey S.W. Low cyclosporin-A
level due to Saint-John’s-wort in heart transplant patients.J. Heart Lung Transplant. (2001) 20795.
106 Alscher D.M., Klotz U. Drug interaction of herbal tea
containing St. John’s wort with cyclosporine. Transpl. Int.(2003) 16543–544.
107 Barone G.W., Gurley B.J., Ketel B.L., Lightfoot M.L.,
Abul-Ezz S.R. Drug interaction between St. John’s wort
and cyclosporine. Ann. Pharmacother. (2000) 34
1013–1016.
108 Breidenbach T., Hoffmann M.W., Becker T., Schlitt H.,
Klempnauer J. Drug interaction of St John’s wort withcyclosporin. Lancet (2000) 355 1912.14 A. A. Izzo
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–16109 Breidenbach T, Kliem V, Burg M, Radermacher J, Hoffmann
MW, Klempnauer J. Profound drop of cyclosporin A wholeblood trough levels caused by St. John’s wort ( Hypericum
perforatum ). Transplantation (2000) 692229–2230.
110 Karliova M., Treichel U., Malago M., Frilling A., Gerken G.,
Broelsch C.E. Interaction of Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s
wort) with cyclosporin A metabolism in a patient after liver
transplantation. J. Hepatol. (2000) 33853–855.
111 Mai I., Kruger H., Budde K. et al. Hazardous pharmacokinetic
interaction of Saint John’s wort ( Hypericum perforatum ) with
the immunosuppressant cyclosporin. Int. J. Clin. Pharmacol.
Ther. (2000) 38500–502.
112 Mandelbaum A., Pertzborn F., Martin-Facklam M., Wiesel M.
Unexplained decrease of cyclosporin trough levels in a
compliant renal transplant patient. Nephrol. Dial. Transplant.
(2000) 151473–1474.
113 Moschella C., Jaber B.L. Interaction between cyclosporine and
Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort) after organ transplan-
tation. Am. J. Kidney Dis. (2001) 381105–1107.
114 Ruschitzka F., Meier P.J., Turina M., Luscher T.F., Noll G.
Acute heart transplant rejection due to Saint John’s wort.
Lancet (2000) 355 548–549.
115 Prasad G.V., Wong T., Meliton G., Bhaloo S. Rhabdomyolysis
due to red yeast rice ( Monascus purpureus ) in a renal transplant
recipient. Transplantation (2002) 741200–1201.
116 Duclos J., Goecke H. Hierba del clavo ( Geum chiloense )
modifying cyclosporine levels: potential risk for transplanted
people. Rev. Med. Chil. (2001) 129 789–790.
117 Mai I., Stormer E., Bauer S., Kruger H., Budde K., Roots I.
Impact of St John’s wort treatment on the pharmacokinetics of
tacrolimus and mycophenolic acid in renal transplant
patients. Nephrol. Dial. Transplant. (2003) 18819–822.
118 Hebert M.F., Park J.M., Chen Y.L., Akhtar S., Larson A.M.
Effects of St. John’s wort ( Hypericum perforatum ) on tacrolimus
pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers. J. Clin. Pharmacol.(2004) 4489–94.
119 De Smet P.A.G.M. Health risks of herbal remedies. Drug Saf
(1995) 1381–93.
120 Gin H., Orgerie M.B., Aubertin J. The inﬂuence of Guar
gum on absorption of metformin from the gut in healthy
volunteers. Horm. Metab. Res. (1989) 2181–83.
121 Neugebauer G., Akpan W., Abshagen U. Interaction of guar
with glibenclamide and bezaﬁbrate. Beitr. Infusionther. Klin.
Ernahr. (1983) 1240–47.
122 Huupponen R., Karhuvaara S., Seppala P. Effect of guar gum
on glipizide absorption in man. Eur. J. Clin. Pharmacol. (1985)
28717–719.
123 Huupponen R. The effect of guar gum on the acute metabolic
response to glyburide. Res. Commun. Chem. Pathol. Phar-macol. (1986) 54137–140.
124 Aslam M., Stockley I.H. Interaction between curry ingredi-
ent (karela) and drug (chlorpropamide). Lancet (1979) 1
607.
125 Attef O.A., Ali A.A., Ali H.M. Effect of khat chewing on the
bioavailability of ampicillin and amoxycillin. J. Antimicrob.Chemother. (1997) 39523–525.126 Huupponen R, Seppala P, Iisalo E. Effect of guar gum, a ﬁbre
preparation, on digoxin and penicillin absorption in man. Eur.J. Clin. Pharmacol. (1984) 26279–281.
127 Hasegawa T., Yamaki K., Nadai M. et al. Lack of effect of
Chinese medicines on bioavailability of oﬂoxacin in healthy
volunteers. Int. J. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. (1994) 3257–61.
128 Piscitelli S.C., Burstein A.H., Chaitt D., Alfaro R.M., Falloon J.
Indinavir concentrations and St John’s wort. Lancet (2000)
355 547–548.
129 de Maat M.M., Hoetelmans R.M., Math R.A. et al. Drug
interaction between St John’s wort and nevirapine. AIDS
(2001) 15420–421.
130 Henderson L., Yue Q.Y., Bergquist C., Gerden B., Arlett P.
St John’s wort ( Hypericum perforatum ): drug interactions
and clinical outcomes. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. (2002) 54
349–356.
131 Sandhu R.S., Prescilla R.P., Simonelli T.M., Edwards D.J.
Inﬂuence of goldenseal root on the pharmacokinetics of
indinavir. J. Clin. Pharmacol. (2003) 431283–1288.
132 Piscitelli S.C., Formentini E., Burstein A.H., Alfaro R.,
Jagannatha S., Falloon J. Effect of milk thistle on the
pharmacokinetics of indinavir in healthy volunteers. Phar-macotherapy (2002) 22551–556.
133 Gallicano K., Foster B., Choudhri S. Effect of short-term
administration of garlic supplements on single-dose ritonavirpharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers. Br. J. Clin. Pharma-col. (2003) 55199–202.
134 Piscitelli S.C. Burstein A.H., Welden N., Gallicano K.D.,
Falloon J. The effect of garlic supplements on the pharmaco-kinetics of saquinavir. Clin. Infect. Dis. (2002) 34234–238.
135 Dalvi R.R. Alterations in hepatic phase I and phase II
biotransformation enzymes by garlic oil in rats. Toxicol. Lett.(1992) 60299–305.
136 Mathijssen R.H., Verweij J., de Bruijn P., Loos W.J., Sparre-
boom A. Effects of St. John’s wort on irinotecan metabolism.J. Natl. Cancer Inst. (2002) 941247–1249.
137 Chen M.F., Shimada F., Kato H., Yano S., Kanaoka M. Effect of
oral administration of glycyrrhizin on the pharmacokinetics of
prednisolone. Endocrinol. Jpn. (1991) 38167–174.
138 Homma M., Oka K., Ikeshima K. et al. Different effects of
traditional Chinese medicines containing similar herbal
constituents on prednisolone pharmacokinetics. J. Pharm.Pharmacol. (1995) 47687–692.
139 Nebel A., Schneider B.J., Baker R.K., Kroll D.J. Potential
metabolic interaction between St. John’s wort and theophyl-line. Ann. Pharmacother. (1999) 33502.
140 Morimoto T., Kotegawa T., Tsutsumi K., Ohtani Y., Imai H.,
Nakano S. Effect of St. John’s wort on the pharmacokinetics oftheophylline in healthy volunteers. J. Clin. Pharmacol. (2004)4495–101.
141 Wang Z., Hamman M.A., Huang S.M., Lesko L.J., Hall S.D.
Effect of St John’s wort on the pharmacokinetics of fexofen-adine. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. (2002) 71414–420.
142 Braquet P., Hosford D. Ethnopharmacology and the develop-
ment of natural PAF antagonists as therapeutic agents.J. Ethnopharmacol. (1991) 32135–139.
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–16Herb–drug interactions 15143 Matthews M.K., Jr. Association of Ginkgo biloba with
intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology (1998) 50 1933–
1934.
144 Meisel C., Johne A., Roots I. Fatal intracerebral mass bleeding
associated with Ginkgo biloba and ibuprofen. Atherosclerosis
(2003) 167 367.
145 Hoffman T. Ginkgo, vioxx and excessive bleeding – possible
drug-herb interactions: case report. Hawaii Med. J. (2001) 60
290.
146 Mustapha A., Yakasai I.A., Aguye I.A. Effect of Tamarindus
indica L. on the bioavailability of aspirin in healthy human
volunteers. Eur. J. Drug Metab. Pharmacokinet. (1996) 21
223–226.
147 Gwilt P.R., Lear C.L., Tempero M.A. et al. The effect of garlic
extract on human metabolism of acetaminophen. Cancer
Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. (1994) 3155–160.
148 Duche J.C., Barre J., Guinot P., Duchier J., Cournot A.,
Tillement J.P. Effect of Ginkgo biloba extract on microsomalenzyme induction. Int. J. Clin. Pharmacol. Res. (1989) 9
165–168.
149 Khawaja I.S., Marotta R.F., Lippmann S. Herbal medicines
as a factor in delirium. Psychiatr. Serv. (1999) 50969–970.
150 Wang L.S., Zhou G., Zhu B. et al. St John’s wort induces both
cytochrome P450 3A4-catalyzed sulfoxidation and 2C19-dependent hydroxylation of omeprazole. Clin. Pharmacol.
Ther. (2004) 75191–197.
151 Eich-Hochli D., Oppliger R., Golay K.P., Baumann P., Eap C.B.
Methadone maintenance treatment and St. John’s wort –
a case report. Pharmacopsychiatry (2003) 3635–37.
152 Thompson Coon J., Pittler M., Ernst E. Herb-drug interactions:
survey of leading pharmaceutical/herbal companies. Arch.Intern. Med. (2003) 163 1371.
153 Dresser G.K., Wacher V., Wong S., Wong H.T., Bailey D.G.
Evaluation of peppermint oil and ascorbyl palmite as inhibitorsof cytochrome P4503A4 activity in vitro and in vivo. Clin.
Pharmacol. Ther. (2002) 72247–255.
/C2112004 Blackwell Publishing Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology 19(2004) 1–1616 A. A. Izzo