JOURNAL OF MEDICAL TOXICOLOGY IVOLUME 3, NUMBER 4 IDECEMBER 2007 187INTRODUCTION
Baclofen is a gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) agonist fre-
quently used as an intrathecal infusion to treat muscle spasticity.
Baclofen withdrawal is life-threatening and can include seizures,
autonomic instability, hyperthermia, rigidity, encephalopathy,and multi-system organ failure. Acute cardiomyopathy frombaclofen withdrawal has not been adequately described in the 
literature [1]. We are presenting a case of intrathecal baclofen
withdrawal complicated by myocardial stunning and requiringintra-aortic balloon pump therapy. The case resulted in complete
recovery.
CASE REPORT
A 45-year-old C6 quadriplegic man had received intrathecal
baclofen for several years and developed a perceived side-effect, 
and he was slowly weaned from the intrathecal baclofen over
four months. The patient had a history of chronic back pain and secretion of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH). Inaddition to the intrathecal baclofen, he was prescribed zon-
isamide, gabapentin, olanzapine, and tegaserod. The patient had
been chronically taking these medications without dose adjust-ment during the baclofen wean. The family was unaware of any
history of illicit drug or ethanol abuse.
Within 12 hours of complete cessation of the intrathecal
baclofen, he suffered pruritis, spasticity, fever, and fatigue. Family
found him in his apartment, and he was presented 40 hours after
baclofen discontinuation in a coma and respiratory failure.
Presenting vital signs included tachycardia (160 beats per min),hyperpyrexia (106.4°F), and labile blood pressure (ranging from
130/50 to 88/36 mmHg). He also had diaphoresis, mottled skin,
and diffuse muscle rigidity. He was intubated for airway protec-tion and a post-intubation chest x-ray demonstrated a right lower
lobe inﬁltrate in which gatiﬂoxicin was initiated. Remaining lab-
oratory studies were unrevealing: electrolytes, BUN, creatinine,complete blood count, prothrombin time, liver function tests andthyroid function tests. Only benzodiazepines were identiﬁed in a
urine drug screen which was suspected to be the result of iatro-
genic administration during oral intubation.Reversible Cardiomyopathy Complicating Intrathecal
Baclofen Withdrawal: A Case Report
Anthony F. Pizon, MDa, Frank LoVecchio, DO, MPHb
aUniversity of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Division of Medical Toxicology, Pittsburgh, PA
bBanner Good Samaritan Medical Center, Department of Medical Toxicology, Phoenix, AZ
ABSTRACT
This case report is about reversible cardiomyopathy associated with intrathecal baclofen withdrawal. Previous literature has re ported
that enteral baclofen does not adequately control intrathecal baclofen withdrawal. In our case, coronary atherosclerosis did no t play
a role in the development of the cardiomyopathy. However, reinstitution of intrathecal baclofen promptly resulted in improvemen t.
One could hypothesize that myocardial stunning from sympathetic hyperactivity led to a similar cardiomyopathy reported with cat -
echolamine excess or acute sympathomimetic poisoning.
Keywords: baclofen withdrawal, cardiomyopathy, intrathecal
Notes: There was no outside funding of any kind used for this study. Poster Presentation at the 2005 North American Congress of
Clinical Toxicology Annual Meeting, Orlando, FL.
Corresponding Author: Anthony F. Pizon, MD, Division of Medical Toxicology, UPMC Presbyterian, 200 Lothrop Street, Suite DL-45, Pittsburgh,
PA 15213. Email: pizonaf@upmc.eduToxicology Observations188 JOURNAL OF MEDICAL TOXICOLOGY IVOLUME 3, NUMBER 4 IDECEMBER 2007Over the next 20 hours, intravenous lorazepam (38 mg total
dose), nasogastric baclofen (120 mg total dose), and a continuous
infusion of propofol (as high as 55 mcg/kg/min) were given tocontrol signs while arrangements were made to reinstituteintrathecal baclofen. Due to a prolonged interhospital transporttime, intrathecal baclofen re-instatement was greatly delayed.Approximately 60 hours after stopping the intrathecal adminis-tration, but before the baclofen pump was reinstituted, he becameconsistently hypotensive (82/30 mmHg); an ECG showed ST seg-ment elevations in the anterior-lateral leads, and a troponin-I waselevated at 20.3 ng/ml. An emergency cardiac angiogram showednormal coronary arteries and global hypokinesis with an ejectionfraction of 10% and a cardiac index of 1.6 L/min/M
2. In addition
to intravenous norepinephrine and dopamine, an intra-aortic bal-loon pump was initiated. Seventy-two hours after his baclofenpump was discontinued, 25 mcg of intrathecal baclofen was
administered over four hours and an infusion of 22 mcg/24 hours
was continued. Over several days his rigidity and hyperthermiaresolved, and his mental status normalized. We discontinued theintra-aortic balloon pump on hospital day 3 and vasopressors were
stopped on hospital day 5. After 11 days of reinstituting intrathe-
cal baclofen, an echocardiogram demonstrated an ejection frac-tion of 50-55% and was without valve dysfunction.
Though he was maintained on antibiotics at different times
during his hospital stay, there was no growth in initial culturestaken from his sputum, blood, and urine.
DISCUSSION
The temporal relationship with intrathecal baclofen discontinu-
ation and the onset of the patient’s symptoms makes baclofen
withdrawal the most likely cause of his syndrome. Additionally,collaborating laboratory ﬁndings makes other diagnoses, such as
sepsis, thyrotoxicosis, and sympathomimetic abuse, less likely.
We excluded other diagnosis such as neuroleptic malignant and serotonin syndromes, on the basis of another more likely etiology—baclofen withdrawal. The focal pulmonary infiltrate
was more likely the result of rather than the cause of the patient’s
presenting signs. Right lower lobe inﬁltrates are often the resultof aspiration pneumonitis in unconscious patients or, less likely,
the result of local pulmonary edema from poor cardiac function.
Reversible myocardial stunning from sympathetic hyperactiv-
ity has been well-described from sudden emotional stress, acutesympathomimetic poisoning, pheochromocytoma, high-dose 
epinephrine, and others [2–7]. Moreover, hyperadrenergic stateswith elevated plasma catecholamine levels after withdrawal fromthe GABA-agonist, ethanol, have been described as well [8].
Institution of benzodiazepines during the withdrawal syndrome
subsequently revealed decreased plasma catecholamine levels anda resolution of symptoms. Baclofen would conceivably cause a
similar rise in catecholamines during withdrawal due to a similar
mechanism found in ethanol. The main difference betweenethanol and baclofen, however, is baclofen primarily effects
GABA-B receptors while ethanol affects GABA-A. Clinically, thebaclofen withdrawal syndrome is consistent with a hyperadrener-
gic state like ethanol withdrawal.
In our case, coronary atherosclerosis did not play a role in the
development of the cardiomyopathy. However, reinstitution ofintrathecal baclofen promptly resulted in improvement. Theadministration of oral baclofen replacement and intravenousbenzodiazepines may be inadequate treatment due to the muchlowered intrathecal levels obtained [9]. Supportive care allowedfor a reasonable time of recovery, and treatment of the with-drawal symptoms with re-initiation of intrathecal baclofen couldtheoretically ameliorate the effects of the hyperadrenergic statecentrally.
The pathophysiology for this excess catecholamine-induced
cardiomyopathy is still unclear [2,8]. The cardiotoxicity is sus-pected from a possible combination of cellular hypoxia, freeradial production, and increased intracellular calcium. The cel-
lular hypoxia may result from epicardial coronary artery vaso-
constriction, microvascular occlusion, or possibly both [10,11].In addition, free radicals formed from monoamine oxidase
metabolism of epinephrine have been linked to cardiotoxicity,
but follow up studies reported epinephrine levels required toproduce signiﬁcant free radial stress are not physiologic [12,13].
Lastly, excessive catecholamine stimulation of /H9252-receptors leads
to intracellular calcium-overload and ATP depletion from calcium-
dependent phosphatases, but it is unclear if the increased cal-cium is a result or cause of lost myocyte viability [14]. Several
other theories have been proposed, but they are not supported
in the literature.
One could hypothesize that myocardial stunning from sym-
pathetic hyperactivity led to the reversible cardiomyopathy seenin this case. Further research is required to clearly work-out thepathophysiology of baclofen withdrawal and catecholamine-
induced cardiomyopathy.
The authors have no potential ﬁnancial conﬂicts of interest to report.
REFERENCES
1. Mohammed I, Hussain A. Intrathecal baclofen withdrawal
syndrome—a life-threatening complication of baclofen pump: A
case report. BMC Clin Pharmacol. 2004 ;4:6.
2. Wittstein IS, Thiemann DR, Lima JAC, Baughman KL,
Schulman SP, Gerstenblith G, Wu KC, Rade JJ, Bivalacqua TJ,Champion HC. Neurohumoral features of myocardial stunningdue to sudden emotional stress. N Eng J Med. 2005 ;352:539–548.
3. Hong R, Matsuyama E, Nur K. Cardiomyopathy associated
with the smoking of crystal methamphetamine. JAMA.
1991 ;265:1152–1154.
4. Jacobs LJ. Reversible dilated cardiomyopathy induced by
methamphetamine. Clin Cardiol. 1989 ;12:725–727.
5. Schifferdecker B, Kodali D, Hausner E, Aragam J.
Adrenergic shock – An overlooked clinical entity? Cardiol Rev.
2005 ;13: 69–73.6. Stewart MJ, Fraser DM, Boon N. Dilated cardiomyopathy
associated with chronic overuse of an adrenaline inhaler. Br
Heart J 1992 ;68:221–222.
7. Haft JI. Cardiovascular injury induced by sympathetic cat-
echolamines. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 1975 ;17:73–86.
8. Carlsson C, Haggendal J. Arterial noradrenaline levels
after ethanol withdrawal. Lancet. 1967 ;290:889.
9. Greenberg MI, Hendrickson RG. Baclofen withdrawal 
following removal of an intrathecal baclofen pump despite 
oral baclofen replacement. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2003 ;
41:83–85.
10. Lacy CR, Contrada RJ, Robbins ML, Tannenbaum AK,
Moreyra AE, Chelton S, Kostis JB. Coronary vasoconstrictioninduced by mental stress (simulated public speaking). Am J
Cardiol. 1995 ;75:503–505.
11. Handforth CP. Isoproterenol-induced myocardial infarc-
tion in animals. Arch Pathol. 1962 ;73:161–165.
12. Singal PK, Yates JC, Beamish RE, Dhalla NS. Inﬂuence of
reducing agents on adrenochrome-induced changes in the
heart. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 1981 ;105:664–669.
13. Wheatley AM, Thandroyen FT, Opie LH. Catecholamine-
induced myocardial cell damage: Catecholamines oradrenochrome. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 1985 ;17:349–359.
14. Fleckenstein A, Frey M, Fleckenstein-Grun G.
Consequences of uncontrolled calcium entry and its prevention
with calcium antagonists. Eur Heart J. 1983 ;4 suppl H:43–50.
JOURNAL OF MEDICAL TOXICOLOGY IVOLUME 3, NUMBER 4 IDECEMBER 2007 189