 121   
 
 
Chapter 6 
 
 
Conclusions and Perspectives 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  122  6.1 Conclusions of this study 
The most serious environmental problems of the 21st  century have the potential to 
alter the course of life on this planet. Global war ming, toxic waste, water and air 
pollution, acid rain, and shrinking energy supplies  are frightening challenges that may 
threaten our future if we do not face up to them. T hus, the 21st century is dubbed “the 
century of the environment”. In the present day, th e biotechnology leads up to clue these 
environmental problems.  In particular, many biotechnologies have been intro duced to 
solve many water pollutions, e.g. wastewater treatm ent process. At a wastewater 
treatment process, the wastewater containing nitrog en-compounds is generally treated 
by a combination of the two biological processes of  nitrification and denitrification. In 
recent years, microbial ecology involved in wastewa ter treatment has been investigated 
for an enhancement of process performance. For the microorganisms involving nitrogen 
removal from wastewater, nitrifying bacteria have b een studied more than denitrifying 
bacterial because nitrification is the rate-limitin g step and the detection of nitrifying 
bacteria is easier because of a restricted phylogen etic distribution of the capacity for 
nitrification. However, denitrification performance  is fluctuated by environmental 
change and the operation of denitrification process  (e.g. addition of carbon substrates) 
strongly impacts the system performance and microbi al community structure. Therefore, 
it needs to accumulate the information about denitr ifying microbial ecology in 
wastewater treatment systems. 
One of the important operations at wastewater treat ment systems is adjustment of 
the ratio of carbon to nitrogen (C/N) by adding an external carbon sources. This 
operation affects the running costs and system perf ormance. Thus, the objectives of this 
study are investigation of denitrifying microbial c ommunity in wastewater treatment 
systems for revealing the relationship between carbon substrate and denit rifying 
population. 
  123  In chapter 1, the meaning and objectives of this st udy were indicated. And also, the 
features of some molecular biological techniques, c urrent situation of microbial 
community analysis using these methods and detectio n of denitrifying bacteria in the 
previous studies were described. 
 
In chapter 2, stable-isotope probing (SIP) analysis  is applied for identifying the 
acetate- or methanol-assimilating bacteria under ni trate-reducing conditions in activated 
sludge. It is found that the diversity level for me thanol-assimilating bacteria is 
considerably lower than that for acetate–assimilati ng bacteria. Furthermore, SIP analysis 
identifies the Comamonadaceae  and Rhodocyclaceae  of Betaproteobacteria  and the 
Rhodobacteraceae of Alphaproteobacteria  as acetate-assimilating bacteria. Also, SIP 
analysis identifies the Methylophilaceae  of Betaproteobacteria  and the 
Hyphomicrobiaceae  of Alphproteobacteria  as methanol-assimilating bacteria.  
 
In chapter 3, we further characterize nitrite reduc tase genes ( nirS  and nirK ) as 
functional marker genes for denitrifier communities  in acetate- or methanol-assimilating 
populations. In nir  clone libraries, some nir  sequences were related to the nirS  or nirK  
sequence of some known pure cultures, such as Alcaligenes , Hyphomicrobium , and 
Thauera . However, most of the nirS  or nirK  sequences derived from acetate- or 
methanol-assimilating populations were clustered in  some unidentified groups. 
Phylogenetic analysis of nitrite reductase genes ( nirS  and nirK ) suggests that the 
denitrifying bacterial population strongly depends on the type of organic carbon source 
as well as the results of 16S rRNA analysis. Furthe rmore, it is found that the diversity of 
the nirK  gene is almost equal to that of the nirS  gene in acetate- or 
methanol-assimilating denitrifying bacteria in the activated sludge of a municipal 
sewage treatment system.  
  124  In chapter 4, DNA-SIP analysis determines the activ e bacterial population involved 
in the methane-dependent denitrification (MDD) unde r oxygen-limited conditions and 
further the fate of carbon derived from methane thr ough an indirect labeling effect via 
intermediates of the active methanotrophic bacteria . Firstly, it is found that the 
supplementation of nitrate have a significant impac t on the activity of methane 
consumption and the active methanotrophic populatio n. Our 16S rRNA gene and pmoA  
gene analysis results show that type I and type X m ethanotrophic bacteria tend to 
dominate under nutrient rich conditions while type II tend to appear under 
nitrogen-limiting conditions. In addition, this stu dy suggests that the 
Hyphomicrobiaceae  play an important role as a major nitrate-reducer with 
methane-derived organic intermediates (e.g. methano l, formate) produced by 
methanotrophic bacteria as electron donors in MDD e cosystem. Finally, SIP also detects 
the transfer of 13 C from the primary consumer (methanotrophic bacteri a) to 
non-methanotrophic bacterial population (heterotrop hic bacteria, methylotrophic 
bacteria and micropredators) coexisting in the sewa ge sludge. 
 
In chapter 5, acetate and methanol is compared for their performance as carbon 
source for denitrification and microbial community structure under various saline 
conditions. As a result, acetate-fed process attain ed stable and high nitrate removal at 
0-10% NaCl, while methanol were proven beneficial e lectron donors at 0-3% NaCl. 
Changes of bacterial community structure with the i ncrease of salinity are monitored by 
molecular biological analysis (i.e. cloning, T-RFLP  analysis). In acetate-fed reactor, a 
specialized microbial population (i.e. the genera Halomonas  and Marinobacter ) adapts 
to a high saline environment. In methanol-fed react or, the genera Azoarcus  and 
Methylophaga  increase when salinity concentration was at 1% to 3% NaCl. However, 
the denitrifying activity of methanol-fed sludge wa s drastically decreased at 4% NaCl. 
This result suggests that methanol-utilizing popula tions in sewage sludge are unable to  125  adapt to a high saline environments (> 4% NaCl). Th erefore, it was shown that the 
selection of organic carbon source as an electron d onor for denitrification is a matter of 
great important factor to trigger high nitrate remo val performance in high saline 
environments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  126  6.2 Perspectives 
In this study, denitrifying microbial community str ucture was characterized based 
on 13 C-based stable-isotope probing ( 13 C-SIP) techniques. SIP linked the phylogenetic 
identification of microorganisms with their functio n about carbon cycles (e.g. 
assimilation, dissmilation) in the complex communit y structure. However, there are 
following limitations for the comprehensive underst anding of the truly important 
denitrifying bacteria in complex microbial communit ies although the 13 C-SIP 
application provides insights into the denitrifying  bacteria that consume specific 
13 C-labeled substrates (e.g., methanol). One is that denitrifying bacteria in natural 
environment utilize a wide variety of environmental  organic substrates. The other is the 
restriction of the 13 C-substrates available on the market. To overcome t he demerit of 
13 C-SIP for characterizing denitrifying populations i n ecosystems, currently, we try to 
characterize it by using the SIP application with 15 N-substrates (i.e. nitrate, nitrite). 
Additionally, specific probes are designed based on  phylogenetic information 
obtained by SIP analysis, and the subsequent microa utoradiography-fluorescence in situ  
hybridization (MAR-FISH) analysis can directly link  the phylogeny of uncultured 
microorganisms with those functions in complex ecos ystems (Lee et al., 1999; Ginige et 
al., 2004). Furthermore, monitor of radioisotope subs trate in bacterial cells by beta 
microimaging instead of MAR can be characterized it  above the single-cell level 
(Gieseke et al., 2005). However, MAR-FISH limits its use to eleme nts that have a 
radioisotope with a suitable half-life and excludes  the study of other elements (e.g. 
nitrogen). 
    Recently, other powerful isotopic techniques ha ve been developed: isotope-array 
(Adamczyk et al., 2003); nano-scale secondary ion mass spectrometr y (nanoSIMS) 
(Lechene et al., 2006); Raman microscopy (Huang et al., 2007). We anticipate that these 
isotopic techniques will open clearly the mechanism  of microbial process in natural 
environments.  127  References  
Gieseke, A., Nielsen, J.L., Amann, R., Nielsen, P.H ., and de Beer, D. (2005) In situ 
substrate conversion and assimilation by nitrifying  bacteria in a model biofilm. 
Environ . Microbiol . 7:1392-1404 
Ginige, M.P., Hugenholtz,  P., Daims, H., Wagner,  M., Keller, J., and Blackall, L.L. 
(2004) Use of Stable-Isotope Probing, Full-Cycle rR NA Analysis, and 
Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization-Microautoradiogr aphy to Study a 
Methanol-Fed Denitrifying Microbial Community. Appl . Environ. Microbiol. 70: 
588-596 
Huang, W.E., Stoecker, K., Griffiths, R., Newbold, L., Daims, H., Whiteley, A.S., and 
Wagner, M. (2007) Raman-FISH: combining stable-isot ope Raman spectroscopy 
and fluorescence in situ  hybridization for the single cell analysis of iden tity and 
function. Environ. Microbiol. 9:1878-1889 
Lee, N., Nielsen, P.H., Andreasen, K.H., and Jurets chko, S., Nielsen, J.L., and Schleifer, 
K.H. (1999) Combination of fluorescent in situ hybr idization and 
microautoradiography – a new tool for structure-fun ction analyses in microbial 
ecology. Appl. Environ. Micobiol. 65:1289-1297 
 