ASTUDY OF“ASCORBIC ACID OXIDASE” IN
RELATION TOCOPPER
ByELMER STOTZ, CARTER J.HARRER, anv C.G.KING
(From theDepartment ofChemistry, University ofPittsburgh, Pittsburgh)
REPRINTED FROM
THE JOURNAL OFBIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
Vou. 119, No. 2,Juny, 1937 Reprinted from THE JOURNAL OFBIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
Vol. 119, No. 2,July, 1937
ASTUDY OF“ASCORBIC ACID OXIDASE” IN
RELATION TOCOPPER*
ByELMER STOTZ, CARTER J.HARRER, ann C.G.KING
(From theDepartment ofChemistry, University ofPittsburgh, Pittsburgh)
(Received for publication, March 31, 1937)
Thetissue functions ofvitamin Cfrom achemical point ofview
are still essentially unknown, although many empirical physio-
logical and histological relationships have been clearly established
(1,2). Itssensitivity toaerobic oxidation when copper ispresent
asacatalyst (3,4)isperhaps itsmost striking characteristic in
vitro.
Subsequent tothe description ofa“‘hexoxidase’” incabbage
leaves bySzent-Gyérgyi (5), several investigators have reported
the existence ofan‘‘ascorbic acid oxidase’’ inother plants and
fruits. Such an‘‘enzyme’”’ was reported tobepresent inapple
juice byZilva (6), inthepods ofthe drumstick-tree bySrinivasan
(7),and incauliflower juice byHopkins andMorgan (8). Kertesz,
Dearborn, and Mack (9)have studied the destruction byheat of
anoxidizing agent inanumber ofvegetable extracts. Tauber,
Kleiner, and Mishkind (10) have reported the concentration ofa
similar factor from Hubbard squash. Although the latter workers
suggested that their “enzyme” was ofadifferent character than
the original ‘‘hexoxidase”’ ofSzent-Gyérgyi, the evidence was not
conclusive, asshown bythe statement ofHopkins and Morgan
(8)that there were ‘‘insufficient grounds’’ fordistinguishing these
enzymes.
Barron, Barron, and Klemperer (11) have questioned the
enzymic nature ofthe catalyst. The more consistent inhibition
produced bycyanide compared to8-hydroxyquinoline onaseries
*This investigation wasmade possible bya research grant from theBuhl
Foundation.
Contribution No. 339from theDepartment ofChemistry, University of
Pittsburgh.
511 512 ‘““Ascorbic Acid Oxidase’’ and Copper
ofvegetable and fruit juices ledthem tosuggest that, “Itis...
quite probable that hemochromogens are the main catalysts for
the oxidation ofascorbic acid inthese biological fluids possessing
no inhibitory mechanisms.” McFarlane (12) reported that
sodium diethyldithiocarbamate served asacopper inhibitor
against the aerobic oxidation ofvitamin Cinaqueous solution.
Anobservation inthis laboratory that diethyldithiocarbamate
completely inhibited the aerobic oxidation ofascorbic acid in
cucumber juice, which isvery active catalytically, led toastudy
based onthe hypothesis that copper was chiefly responsible for
the catalytic effect of“oxidase” preparations.!. The problem was
approached from two points ofview: (a)the effect ofaseries of
copper inhibitors upon typical ‘‘enzymes,”’ and (b)acomparison of
the reported ‘‘enzymes”’ with copper plus proteins.
EXPERIMENTAL
The rate ofoxidation ofascorbic acid was measured manomet-
rically inair-filled Warburg vessels. The ‘“‘enzymes’’ and copper
were invariably placed inthemain vessel and ascorbic acid solution
inthe side arm, with atotal volume of3.3ml.including 0.3ml. of
20per cent KOHin thealkali cup. Unless otherwise indicated,
0.01mm ofascorbic acid was used, equivalent theoretically to112
c.mm. ofoxygen under standard conditions. Toavoid contami-
nation bycopper, Kahlbaum’s phosphates were employed, and
triple distilled water from all-glass Pyrex stills was used formaking
upsolutions and rinsing apparatus. The crystalline ascorbic acid
was oxidized very slowly inthis kind ofwater (approximately 5
c.mm. ofO2per hour). Experiments were performed at37°. The
rate ofreaction was expressed asc.mm. of Op:per hour, extra-
polated when necessary from the linear rate obtained forthe major
part ofthe reaction.
The rate ofcatalysis established bycopper-abumin orcopper-
gelatin mixtures was approximately proportional tothe concen-
tration ofcopper and inversely proportional tothe concentration
ofprotein (cf. Fig. 1).
The experimental protein solutions contained sufficient copper
1The authors wish tothank Dr.M.O.Schultze forthecopper analyses
reported in this paper, and Professor E.B.Hart forthesamples ofcopper
amide biuret and copper hematoporphyrin.
' Stotz, Harrer, and King 513
togive anoxidation rate comparable tothat ofthe “enzymes.”’
Asshown in Table I,the concentration ofcopper intheenzyme
preparation was about the same asthat inthe copper-gelatin
solutions. Inthealbumin solutions thecopper concentration was
higher. The method ofFischer and Leopoldi (13) was used in
making copper analyses.
Although there was sufficient copper insome ofthe buffers to
cause aslow oxidation ofascorbic acid, this effect was negligible
inthe presence ofprotein. Nodifference inthe rate ofoxidation
Nsag
3<
8xNe
$gx
  
mi.1%Albumin
Fic. 1.Effect ofovalbumin oncopper catalysis ofthe oxidation of
ascorbic acid. Ascorbic acid, 0.01 mm,pH=5.8,m/15 PO, buffer, T=37°.
bythe ‘‘enzymes”’ orcopper-albumin could bedetected when small
orlarge quantities ofbuffer were used.
Preparation ofEnzymes—Although only a few experiments dealt
with cabbage and cucumber press-juice, “purified squash oxidase”’
and cauliflower press-juice were studied inmore detail.
Thefinal dried acetone precipitate ofsquash ‘‘oxidase,’’ prepared
asdescribed byTauber, Kleiner, and Mishkind (10), was only
slightly soluble inwater. Although the soluble portion was
active, boiling for5minutes didnot destroy the activity. Further-
more, the greater part ofthe activity was associated with material
that was coarsely suspended asaltered protein. For this reason 514 “Ascorbic Acid Oxidase’? and Copper
itwas preferred tosuspend the final acetone precipitate inwater,
aerate until free ofacetone, and utilize this preparation assquash
“oxidase.”’ Bydetermining the units ofactivity inthe alcohol
extract and the final product itwas found that the preparations
were ofequal strength tothose ofthe original investigators.
Effect ofInhibitors—Seven inhibitors that have been used for
qualitative and quantitative tests forcopper were examined for
their inhibitory power onthe press-juice ofcabbage and cauli-
flower, the squash “‘oxidase’’ described above, copper, copper-
albumin, copper-gelatin, and nicotine-hemochromogen. The in-
hibitors were neutralized ifnecessary and diluted tothe desired
concentrations with M/15 Sgrensen buffer (pH 6.0). Table I
records the rates ofoxygen consumption produced bythe un-
poisoned catalysts, while the rates inthe presence ofpoisons are
more conveniently recorded as percent inhibitions.
The inhibitors, all ofwhich poisoned the catalytic action of
copper, copper-albumin, and copper-gelatin, had asimilar effect
upon the catalytic activity ofcauliflower juice and purified squash
“‘oxidase.”’ Itmay be noted that the relative effect oncabbage
juice was considerably less than onsquash ‘‘oxidase,’’ and some-
what less oncauliflower juice (particularly 8-hydroxyquinoline).
This finding isprobably due ingreater degree tothehigher protein
content ofthe preparations than tothe presence ofnon-copper
catalysts. That protein isable tolower the effective concentra-
tion ofinhibitor was demonstrated inanexperiment with high and
low concentrations ofalbumin. With 1ml. ofcopper +1ml. of
1per cent albumin asthe catalyst, diethyldithiocarbamate and
8-hydroxyquinoline produced inhibitions of92and 94per cent
respectively, butwith 1ml. ofcopper +1ml. of6percent albumin
ascatalyst, there was only 40and 45per cent inhibition. The
latter protein concentration corresponded approximately tothe
per cent of solids present inthe cauliflower press-juice, whereas
squash “oxidase”? contained considerably less solids. Therefore
the amount ofinhibitor used was increased tothe quantities
reported inTable I,although innearly allcases much less in-
hibitor produced comparable effects. The effect ofthese higher
concentrations ofinhibitors could hardly bedue toanon-specific
blocking ofanenzyme surface, since (a)the seven compounds
selected had copper-combining capacity astheir only common Stotz, Harrer, and King 515
characteristic, and (6)much higher concentrations ofnon-specific
inhibitors such asurethane and sodium fluoride had little orno
effect.
TABLE [|
Effect ofCopper Inhibitors
Ascorbic acid, 0.01 mm; 7=37°;pH=6.0+ 0.1.  
Catalysts 
Nicotine-| Gayji-
hemo-Cu- Cu- flowerCu, : . chromo-Inhibitor 3X10-5 “parse ee. onz eon]
oe mmCu|
mmCu— 5X10-5
: mMCuhemin  
Rate ofO2consumption, c.mm. Ozper hr. 
420 |260 |240 320 |220 |290  
Per cent inhibition 
Diethyldithiocarba-
mate; 33.< 105"
96 98 76
8-Hydroxyquinoline,
99 92 96 42
Pyridine, 1
KCNS, 1mm.....| 92 90 98 84
Sodium cyanide,
98 95 97 48 88
Potassium ferrocya-
nide, 0.025 mm....| 938 87 90 0 58 32
Potassium ethyl xan-
thate, 0.06 mm....| 95 78 88 0 83 97 68
Sodium sulfide, 0.025       98 86 85 8 91 96 35  
*The quantities ofcopper, ascorbic acid, and inhibitors recorded in this
table represent the total amounts inthe 3cc.volume ofreactants. The
total amount ofalbumin and gelatin in3cc.was 10mg.
}37per cent increase inO2consumption rate.
The results with inhibitors are somewhat different from the
results reported byBarron etal.(11) inwhich cabbage and squash
juice were not inhibited by8-hydroxyquinoline, although mark-
edly affected bycyanide. The apparent discrepancy may bedue 516 “Ascorbic Acid Oxidase” and Copper
todifferent inhibitor toprotein ratios inthe preparations used.
Cyanide isanactive inhibitor against both copper and hemo-
chromogen. ‘The results recorded inTable Ishow that nicotine-
hemochromogen was not affected bythe series ofinhibitors used.
The high concentration ofpyridine inpyridine-KCNS apparently
produced amore effective concentration ofpyridine hemo-
chromogen.
Effect ofHeat—Although the catalytic power ofcopper salts is
not inhibited by boiling, the “enzymes” are heat-sensitive.
Copper-albumin showed an84per cent decrease initscatalytic
power after 5minutes heating at100°, parallel with a75to85per
cent destruction ofthe cauliflower, squash, and cucumber ‘en-
zymes.’ That this phenomenon iscoincident with coagulation
ofprotein issuggested by(a)the heat stability ofthe non-coagu-
lable copper-gelatin, (b)the stability ofcucumber “enzyme”’ at
55°(nocoagulation) and itsdestruction at100° (coagulation), and
(c)the fact that 88per cent ofthe original copper was found by
analysis inthe heat-precipitated cauliflower protein, and 48per
cent inthe case ofsquash. Since this precipitated copper is
practically inactive, theheat coagulation ofprotein must involve a
binding ofthe copper inanon-catalytic form. Itisalso of
interest that albumin, when heat-coagulated inthé absence of
copper, has a greater inhibitory effect oncopper catalysis than the
original protein. We have not studied the possible relationship
oftheabove phenomena to sulfhydryl groups.
Optimum pH—In their original paper Barron, DeMeio, and
Klemperer (4)showed that the catalytic power ofinorganic copper
wasgreatly dependent upon thepH,but that inthenon-autoxidiz-
able range ofascorbic acid (below pH 7.6) there was nodistinct
optimum. The use ofcitrate-phosphate buffer inthe presence of
copper did not alter theabove relationship.
This relation isgreatly changed, however, inthe presence of
albumin orgelatin, inwhich case adistinct optimum pHrange was
found, comparable tothat ofthe “enzymes.” Fig. 2illustrates
the similarity between the postulated enzymes and the copper-
protein complexes.
,Kinetics—Szent-Gyoérgyi (5)found, with cabbage ‘‘oxidase,”’
anincrease of velocity with increasing substrate concentration, and
postulated acomplex reaction involving anintermediate sub- Stotz, Harrer, and King 517
stance X. Since Tauber etal. (10) found, with their squash
“oxidase,” that noincrease invelocity occurred with increasing
substrate concentration, they concluded that their “enzyme” was
ofdifferent character than that ofSzent-Gyérgyi. Since both
findings are inharmony with the Michaelis-Menten theory, their
difference may depend only onthe substrate to“enzyme” ratio.
400-w3 B=3>
55
%
g
Ss
  &
Fie. 2.Optimum pH ofpreparations. Ascorbic acid, 0.01 mM, 7’=37°,
PO,-citrate buffer. CuinCu-albumin, 3X10-4mm (total); inCu-gelatin,
6X10> mm. Albumin andgelatin, 10mg. total. Curve 1,copper-albu-
min; Curve 2,squash “‘oxidase;’’ Curve 3,copper-gelatin; Curve 4,cauli-
flower juice; Curve 5,cabbage juice.
The results given inFig. 3show that itispossible toduplicate
Szent-Gyérgyi’s results with squash “oxidase.” The effect of
changing the substrate tocopper-albumin ratio isalso shown in
Fig. 3. Itwill benoted that both types ofcurve may beobtained
inaccordance with the variation inthis ratio.
THE JOURNAL OFBIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY, VOL, 119, No. 2 518 “Ascorbic Acid Oxidase’ and Copper
Ithas been noted before that the rate ofoxidation ofascorbic
acid follows alinear course until the vitamin has almost com-
pletely disappeared. Hopkins and Morgan (8)have suggested
that, ‘it isperhaps necessary toassume that it[the enzyme] acti-
vates both the reduced and oxidized molecules ofascorbic acid.”
The same phenomenon isnoted, however, inthe presence of
copper-protein. Such velocity relations arecomplex inthe higher
pH ranges (6.0 to7.6) because the irreversible oxidation becomes
50083So&S_~
S9=
®&
gD
g
:
PS ea eared_ t =  5Ds. Be
Substrate Concentration
(on. theoretical oxygen yptake)
Fig. 3.Velocity-substrate relation. pH=6.0,Piel... COpper=
albumin, ©squash “‘oxidase.’’? Albumin, 10mg. total. Curve 1,4X10™4
mm ofCutotal; Curve 2,1X10-4mm ofCutotal; Curve 3, 1X10->mn of
Cutotal.
increasingly prominent. Infact, atpH 7.4theoxygen consump-
tion ofacopper-catalyzed vitamin solution was nearly twice that
indicated bysimultaneous indophenol titration ofthe same solu-
tion. This continued and irreversible oxidation superimposed
onthe reversible oxidation (equivalent to—2H) makes the veloc-
ityOfthe latter difficult tomeasure and interpret.
Inactivation byAcid—Tauber, Kleiner, and Mishkind (10)
found that purified squash ‘‘oxidase’’ was inactivated atpH 2.0.
Squash ‘‘oxidase,”’ cauliflower juice, and copper-albumin were Stotz, Harrer, and King 519
adjusted topH 2.0and allowed tostand for2hours. They were
then tested for their catalytic activity atpH 6.0and compared
with the untreated preparations atthe same dilution. The
inactivations amounted to75, 68,and 64per cent for squash,
cauliflower, and copper-albumin respectively. Cauliflower juice
was partially inactivated atpH 3.0. Acid inactivation ofthe
preparations appears comparable toheat coagulation, aprocess in
which copper isbound inanon-catalytic form bythe denatured
proteins.
Tryptic Digestion—Tauber et al.(10) also observed aprogressive
decrease inthe activity oftheir preparation due tothe action of
trypsin.
Triplicate 90hour digestions at37°were carried outonsquash
“oxidase,” cauliflower juice, and copper-albumin with 0.5per cent
trypsin (Fairchild Brothers and Foster) atpH 6.8 to7.2. Sam-
ples ofthe tryptic digests were tested fortheir catalytic power at
four different time intervals. The results were not soconsistent as
those indicated bytheabove workers. The maximum inhibitions
obtained were 40per cent inthe case ofsquash, 18per cent with
cauliflower, and practically none with copper-albumin. Ifcopper
were liberated from the protein bydigestion ofthe latter, one
might expect either nodecrease in catalytic activity oranincrease.Asignificant result was obtained, however, upon testing the effect
ofsmall amounts ofthe tryptic digests onthe catalytic power of
copper. The results recorded inTable IIindicate that the
products ofproteolysis ofthe squash and cauliflower proteins
inhibit copper catalysis toagreater extent than the original
material. Digested albumin showed little change in itsinhibitory
effect oncopper.
Although copper-albumin showed nodecrease inactivity upon
digestion, neither did itsproducts ofproteolysis inhibit added
copper more than the original material. The latter observation
has also been made with albumin containing nocopper during
digestion.
Combined Forms ofCopper—Evidently the linkage between
copper and protein isone inwhich copper is free toundergo alter-
nate oxidation and reduction and tocombine with copper inhibi-
tors. Inthis connection the findings ofEttisch, Sachsse, and
Beck (14) and ofBorsook and Thimann (15) are ofinterest in 520 ‘Ascorbic Acid Oxidase” and Copper
demonstrating the formation ofun-ionized complexes with pro-
teins and amino acids. The following points inourwork are of
interest inrelation tothe catalytic action ofcombined copper:
(a) Cauliflower press-juice assumed abrown color when diethyl-
dithiocarbamate was added, indicating theformation ofacomplex
similar tothat formed with inorganic copper salts. The juice
lost practically none ofitsactivity, however, when dialyzed foras
long as24hours atpH 4.0 to7.5. (6)Albumin and gelatin in
equal weights possessed considerably different inhibitory powers
onthe copper catalysis ofascorbic acid oxidation. The lesser
inhibitory power ofgelatin isofinterest inconnection with its
low sulfur content and non-coagulability. (c)Copper amide
biuret (16, 17), acombined form ofcopper, was found tocatalyze
Tas_e II
Inhibition ofCopper Catalysis byOriginal and Digested Preparations
Ascorbic acid, 0.01 mM;7'=37°;pH=6.1.  
Rate ofOzconsumption, ¢.mm. Oz per hr. 
Digested materialGiinal Dievated
Original Digested +Cu(1 xX | +Cu(1 x
10-4mM) 10-4 mmo)   
Squash oxidase”: 7.02. .50.1. 5E 142 63
Cauliflower juice 102 66
Copper-albumin88 80  
the oxidation ofascorbic acid atthe same rate asanequimolar
amount ofinorganic copper inthepH rangeof 4.0to7.5. Itwas
inhibited quantitatively bydiethyldithiocarbamate (2moles of
inhibitor permole ofCu), with the formation ofatypical brown
copper complex. (d)Copper hematoporphyrin (16), unlike
hemin, was able tofunction asacatalyst for the oxidation of
ascorbic acid. The catalytic action ofthis ‘‘bound’’ copper was
also completely inhibited by diethyldithiocarbamate. (e)The
usual activity ofglutathione inblocking the catalytic activity of
copper isdecreased rapidly asthe concentration ofprotein in-
creases.
DISCUSSION
Itappears from ourinvestigations that copper may becombined
with proteins insuch amanner that itretains itscatalytic réle in Stotz, Harrer, and King 521
the oxidation ofascorbic acid. Itisnotassumed that the copper-
albumin mixture that wehave studied isthe exact counterpart of
the copper-protein present invegetable preparations, but rather,
that the properties ofsuch mixtures and complexes provide an
experimental basis for understanding the catalytic behavior of
minute quantities ofcopper innatural products.
Although more copper was required toproduce agiven catalytic
effect inthe presence ofovalbumin than was found inthe vege-
table press-juices, copper +gelatin and copper +edestin proved
tobenearly like thevegetable juices inthis respect. Furthermore,
alarge fraction ofthe copper inthe copper-albumin mixture was
dialyzable, whereas that inthe “enzymes”? was not. On the
other hand, the proteins present inthe “enzyme’’ preparations
possessed anefficiency comparable with albumin inthemanner in
which they protected ascorbic acid from oxidation byadded
copper.
The concept ofaspecific “oxidase’’ forthe oxidation ofascorbic
acid hasbeen
afactor inthe belief that this vitamin isanimportant
catalyst inbiological oxidation. The view that copper may serve
asthis “enzyme”’ does not, per se,argue fororagainst such aréle
forthe vitamin.
The evidence given concerning thecopper nature ofthe catalyst
invegetable juices hasanimmediate significance in relation tothe
preservation ofthe vitamin infoods and invitamin analysis, but
further study will benecessary tofind whether thereis arelation-
ship between thevitamin and copper in living tissues.
SUMMARY
1.The catalytic activity ofsquash and cauliflower juices onthe
oxidation ofascorbic acid, previously ascribed toaspecific ‘‘oxi-
dase,” isattributed tothe copper present incombination with
protein material.
2.Seven copper inhibitors produced nearly complete poisoning
ofthe “enzymes,” aswell asofinorganic copper and copper-
protein mixtures. These inhibitors: did not affect the catalytic
function ofnicotine-hemochromogen inamanner which would
suggest that this type ofsubstance isresponsible forthe oxidation
ofascorbic acid bycauliflower juice or“purified squash oxidase.”’
3.The catalytic properties ofcopper arechanged greatly bythe 522 ‘Ascorbic Acid Oxidase” and Copper
presence ofproteins. Amixture ofcopper and albumin assumes
the characteristic properties ofthe “enzymes.’”’ Itdisplays an
optimum pHsimilar tothat ofthe “enzymes,” isinactivated by
heat and acid, and shows similar velocity relations tothequantity
ofsubstrate.
4.The type ofunion which may exist between copper and pro-
tein hasbeen discussed andthe catalytic ability of“bound” copper
illustrated bycopper amide biuret and copper hematophorphyrin.
5.Although the above conclusions apply only tocauliflower
juice, “purified squash oxidase,’’ cucumber juice, and cabbage
juice, itissuggested that the other “ascorbic acid oxidases”
described inthe literature are probably not essentially different
from these. Astudy ofseveral other vegetable and fruit juices
isinprogress inthis laboratory.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
.Sherman, H. C.,Chemistry offood and nutrition, NewYork, 5th edition
(1937).
.King, C.G.,Physiol. Rev., 16,238 (1936).
.Hess, A.F.,and Unger, L.J.,Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. and Med., 19,119
(1921).
.Barron, E.S.G.,DeMeio, R.H.,and Klemperer, F.,J.Biol. Chem.,
112, 625 (1935-36).
.Szent-Gyorgyi, A.,J.Biol. Chem., 90,385 (1981).
.Zilva, 8.8.,Biochem. J.,28,663 (1934).
.Srinivasan, M., Biochem. J.,30,2077 (1936).
.Hopkins, F.G.,and Morgan, E.J., Biochem. J.,30,1446 (1936).
.Kertesz, Z.I.,Dearborn, R.B.,and Mack, G.L.,J.Biol. Chem., 116,
717 (1936).
_Tauber, H., Kleiner, I.S.,and Mishkind, D., J.Biol. Chem., 110, 211
(1935).
.Barron, E.8.G.,Barron, A.G.,and Klemperer, F., J.Biol. Chem.,
116, 563(1936).
.McFarlane; W.D.,Biochem. J.,30,1472 (1936).
.Fischer, H.,and Leopoldi, G.,Angew. Chem., 47,90(1984).
.Ettisch, G., Sachsse, H.,and Beck, W., Biochem. Z.,230, 68(19381).
_Borsook, H.,and Thimann, K.V., J.Biol. Chem., 98,671 (1932).
_Schultze, M.O.,Elvehjem, C.A.,and Hart, E.B.,J.Biol. Chem., 106,
735 (1934). :
.Rising, M.M.,and Yang, P. S.,J.Biol. Chem., 99,755 (1932-33). WAVERLY PRESS, INC.
BALTIMORE, MD. 