www.wjpls.org   
1 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Journal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
 
 
 
EXPRESSION AND  PRODUCTION OF ENZYME LACCASE FOR POTENTIAL 
INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS  
 
 
Syed Sajid Jan, Sikander Ali*, Muhammad Waqas  and Noaman Yaseen  
 
Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, GC University  Lahore , Pakistan . 
 
 
 
 
 
Article Received on 04/06 /2017                          Article Revised on 19/06/2017                         Article Accepted on 04/07/2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Laccase was discovered for the first time in the latex of 
Japanese or Ch inese lacquer trees by Yoshida in 188 3. 
These enzymes appear to be involved in wound curing of 
herbivore as part of defense mechanism against 
pathogens , in iron me tabolism, and in lignification .[1] 
Laccase was discovered in 19th century.[2] Almost all  
fungi have the potential to produce lacca se, and have 
also been  recorded in numerous bacteria and plants .[3] 
Laccase s (oxidoreductases : 1,4-benzenediol EC 1.10.3.2) 
is a member of a wide group of enzymes named as 
polyphenol oxidases that contain copper atoms in center 
of their catalytic site , and  therefore it is also known as  
multicopper oxidases. Typically, it contains copper 
atoms of three different variety, of which one give a 
distinctive blue color, and those that do not have blue 
copper atom are termed as white or yellow laccases. 
Laccases as  a whole are globular mo nomeric proteins of 
about 60 –90 kDa contain  15– 30% carbohydrate with 
isoelectri c point (pI) 4.0.  
 
There is a great diversity of Genes for laccase that are 
found in bacteria, fungi, plants and, insects and various 
other laccase isoe nzymes have been documented in 
numerous species. They have been recorded in numerous 
vegetables and fruits such turnip, potatoes, cabbages, 
pears, apples and in various other plants . Existence of laccases is widespread  in deuteromycetes, 
basidiomycetes, an d ascomycetes,  predominantly 
plentiful in fungi that can metabolize  lignin .[4] Few 
compounds that shows “laccase like properties” such as 
phenoloxidases have been isolated from cuticles of 
various insects that  possibly have role i n the process of 
sclerotiz ation .[5] The genes for laccase production have 
also been documented in both gram -positive and gram -
negative bacteria, as well as bacterial species that are 
extremophiles. Researchers have reported the presence of 
laccase genes in some s pecies of a ctinomyc etes.[6] In 
fungi, laccases perform important role in carrying out 
various physiological and biological functions including 
lignin degradation, stress defense , fungal plant -pathogen 
interactions, plant host interaction, and morphogenesis .[3] 
Most of the la ccases are excreted outside the cells, and 
around 10 to 25% are glycosylated, while in some cases 
glycosylation may reach up to  30%. In bacteria laccases 
play role in sporulation, homeostasis, or pigmentation of 
spores that provide resistance  to harsh cond itions such as 
hydrogen peroxide or UV radiation .[7] 
 
Laccase  oxidize s a broad range of substrates including 
hydroxyindols,  aromatic diamines, methoxy -substituted 
phenols, polyphenols, and various  other compound by a 
radical catalyzed reaction and use  oxyg en as an electron 
acceptor. Additionally,  numerous other organic 
compounds that comprise amino, hydroxil, or acid Research Article  ISSN 2454 -2229  
 wjpls, 2017 , Vol. 3, Issue 6, 01-09 
 
World Journal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
WJPLS  
 
www.wjpls.org  SJIF Impact Factor: 4.223  
*Corresponding Author: Sikander Ali  
Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, GC University Lahore, Pakistan.  
ABSTRACT  
 
Laccases are polyphenol oxidases containing copper atoms, catalysing the oxidation of a broad spectr um of 
complex polyphenols and aromatic diamines compounds. They are increasingly being used in biotechnological and 
industrial application.  In food industries laccases have been progressively more used to improve and modify the 
appearance, colour, and tex ture of various beverages and food products. Laccases have many other application in 
paper and textile industries and is being used frequently in bleaching and dye synthesis.  To overcome its current 
need, higher amount of laccase availability and an adequ ate production systems must be developed. This review 
article presents new advancement about the mechanism of action of laccase catalyzing the oxidation reaction , its 
overexpression in various heterologous hosts such as bacteria, fungi, and yeast, various factors affecting its 
production, different type of fermentation processes for its overproduction, and its purification on large scale. 
Some of the important industrial and biotechnological application have also been discussed.  
 
KEYWORDS: Laccase, Expressi on, Fermentation, Purification, Application.  
 www.wjpls.org   
2 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Journal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
groups can act as a substrates for laccase .[8] Each 
molecule of laccase possess four copper ions in three 
sites according to their spectroscop ic properties that pairs 
the four oxidations of electron of phenolic compound to 
reductive cleavage  of four electron of the dioxygen bond 
and reduce oxygen to water .[3] When laccase oxidize a 
substrate, the substrate loses an electron and generally 
produce  a free radical that may experience  additional 
non-enzymatic reactions or oxidation together with  
polymerization , disproportionation , and hydration .[9] 
Typically laccases are polymeric and generally contains 
metal content  of one type -1 copper, one type -2 and two 
type-3 copper ions subunit/center, where as the type -2 
and type -3 are jointly arranged creating  a trinuclear 
cluster (TNC). The blue color is due to the type 1 site 
copper, whose strong i nteraction to cysteine create a  
solid SCys → Cu  (II) transfer transition charge at about 
600 nm, giving the characteristic blue color to laccase. A  
typical  electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrum  
is exhibited by type 2 , evidently  different  from that of  the 
type 1 EPR, while  type 3 coppers are EPR-silent ions and 
anti-ferromagnetically coupled . Several 3 -dimensional  
structures of laccases have been resolved. All laccases 
have similar molecular structure  arranged  in three 
consecutively  cupredoxin -like domains .[3] The type 1 site  
is positioned  in domain 3, whereas  the cluster TNC is 
entrenched  amid  domains 1 and 3 , through  both domains 
delivers  residues for  organization  of coppers.  Due to the 
advanced  redox capacity of laccases from fungal  origin 
(more than 800mV),  as compared to bact erial or plants 
laccases , they are concerned in quite a lot of 
biotechnological applications particularly in the 
catabolism of lignin. Laccases, owns an outstanding 
potential for the processing of food in diet industry. 
Laccases has a vital  role in  various  industries such as 
paper and pulp industries, food industries, cosmetics, 
textile industries , soil bioremediation, treatment  of 
endocrine disruptors , and biodegradation of phenol ic 
pollutant from environment. Laccases can also be used 
for degradation of  insecticide or pesticide , pulp 
deligniﬁcation, waste detoxiﬁcation, organic synthesis 
food technological uses, textile dye transformation, and 
analytical and biosensor applications .[9] Resear chers have 
also applied laccase  successfully to Nano -biotechnology  
owing to its competence  to carryout oxidation and  the 
allocation  of electron without need of additional  
cofactor s. 
 
The core objective of this review paper is to evaluate  and 
abridge the data present in up -to-dated literature about 
laccases, its overexpre ssion, fermentation, mechanism of 
action and its  uses in different industries. Laccase has 
numerous  uses such as stabilization of different types of 
beverages,  bioremediation, baking, and various other 
industries . This review would contribute in overall 
features  of laccase in an attempt to produce  an up-to-date 
information  that could help the practices of laccase in 
various industries.  
 
 Sources of Laccases  
Usually laccase occurs in fungi and high er plants but it 
has also been isolated from bacteria includi ng 
Marinomonas mediterranea, S.  lavendulae, and S. 
cyaneus . However, laccase is documented more in fungi 
than the higher plants. Several species of Trichod erma 
has th e potential to produce laccase that  comprises 
Trichoderma longibrachiatum, T. harzianum, and T. 
atroviride .[10] Some species of b asidiomycetes that 
includes Lenzites, B etulina, Theiophora terrestris, 
Phanerochaete ch rysosporium , and white -rot fungus  for 
example Trametes versicolour, Pleurotusostreatus , and 
Phlebia radiate  produce laccase. Lacca se from 
Pycnoporus sanguineus  act as phenol oxidase whereas 
Pycnoporus cinnabarinus  produces  laccase as 
ligninolytic enzyme .[11] Some species of a scomycetes 
such as Monocillium indicum, Podospora anserine, 
Melanocarpus albomyces, Ophiostoma novo -ulmi, 
Neur ospora crassa, Magnaporthe grisea, Monocillium 
indicum , Gaeumannomyces graminis ,  and Mauginella , 
produce laccase .[12] Laccase production has also been 
described for soil ascomycete species from the genera 
penicillium, c urvularia , and a spergillus , an d in f ew 
freshwater ascomycetes .[13] However, there are more than 
a few groups of fungi that seemingly do not synthesize 
laccase. Production of laccase has not been docu mented 
in lower fungi, such as c hytridiomycetes and 
zygomycetes .[14] In fungi it take part in  plant 
pathogenesis, pigment production, sporulation, fruiting 
body formation, and deligniﬁcation while in plants, 
laccase has role in ligniﬁcations .[15] 
 
Mechanism of Laccase Action  
The enzyme laccase catalyzes oxidation by reducing  one 
oxygen molecule to water coupled by loss of electron 
“oxidation”  of a wide -ranging  variety of complex  
compounds such as  aromatic  amines, methoxy -
substituted monophenols, and polyphenols .[16] As a result 
of this oxidation, an oxygen -centered free radical  is 
produced that  can be changed to quinone. Laccases have  
four atoms of copper named  as Type-1 Copper (where 
the reducing substrate binds) and T ype-2/Type-3 copper 
trinuclear clusters (TNC).  Oxidation by laccase is 
accomplished in three steps: (1) The reduction of type  1 
Cu b y oxidation of substrate; (2) The transfer of electron 
from type -1 Copper to type -2 Copper and then to type 3 
Copper  TNC ; (3) The reduction of  molecular  oxygen to 
water at TNC .[17] The enzymatic activity of laccase has 
showed that Type 2 Cu and Type 3 Cu i n TNC has 
catalytic activity. The  molecule of  oxygen  typically 
binds to TNC for irregular activation, and then reduced 
to water .[9] Laccase functions like a  battery,  taking 
electrons from each oxidation reaction and loads it to an 
oxygen  molecule. Therefor e, it need four substrates to be 
oxidize d in order to completely reduce  molecular oxygen 
to water.  Free radicals are produced whe n laccase 
oxidizes a substrate.  The lignin catabolism is con tinued 
by radicals of phenoxy, which then breaks the bonds 
between α-carbon and β -carbon or just oxidize α -carbon . 
Due to oxidation, a free radical is produced , which is www.wjpls.org   
3 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Journal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
then transformed  into quinone by another  enzyme -
catalyzed reactio n. The free radicals and the quinone can 
undertake polymerization .[18] 
 
Moreover, l accas e can also catalysis the oxidation of 
nonphenolic substrate in the presence of certain 
mediators. These mediators are low molecular weight 
organic compounds,  which are  oxidized through  laccase 
forming a  cation radical that is highly active and capable 
of oxidizing a nonphenolic compound .  Some common 
mediators for laccase are 2,2 -azino  bis-3-ethyl 
thiazoline -6-sulfonat (ABTS) , 1-hydroxy benzo triazole 
(HOBT) and N -hydro xy phthalimide (NHPI) .[19] 
 
Recombinant Expression of Laccase  
The production of laccases from its native source is too 
less, most of microorganisms are incompatible with the 
normal conditions and processes of industrial 
fermentation, and its yield from natural host cannot meet 
the growing market demand. Through recombinant DNA 
technology, prot eins are expressed in easily handling and 
cultivable hosts that  allow it’s over expression and 
higher productivity in relatively shorter time, as well a s 
reducing the production costs .[20] The productivity and purification of enzyme is increased by manipul ating its 
genes with a solid promoter and strong signaling 
sequences, correctly designed to transfer the enzyme 
outside the cell, hence make downstream processing 
simpler. Moreover, the specificity, activity and  stability 
of enzyme can be enhanced by prote in engineering, 
therefore modified enzymes can be crea ted according to 
the users need .[21] 
 
Now a day’s researchers have a growing interest in the 
field of recombinant expression of laccase, where its 
genes are expressed in Heterologous hosts such as in 
filamentous fungi, yeasts, bacteria, and plants, as well as 
some homologous expression.[22] Bacteria such as 
Escherichia coli has been used for expression, to solve 
the problem in which the laccase cannot be easily 
produced and obtained from its natural hot.  The 
recombinan t expression and production of Streptomyces 
coelicolor  laccase (SLAC) in Streptomyces lividans  has 
produced substantial a great amou nt of lacc ase with high 
purity .[23] Fungal laccase from a ligninolytic fungus such 
as Cyathus Bulleri  has als o been expressed in E. coli .[24]  
The Table 1  shows  a list of recombinant laccases 
produced in bacterial hots.  
 
Table 1:  Laccase expressed in bacteria from different microbial sources.  
 
Source  Laccase  Bacteria  
Cyathus bulleri  Cbu-laccase   Streptomyces ipomea  SilA  Bacillus licheniformis  CotA   Streptomyces coelicolor  SLAC  Streptomyces  
Bacillus halodurans  Lbh1   Thermus thermophilus HB27  Tth-laccase   Streptomyces coelicolor  SLAC   Streptomyces lavendulae REN -7 STSL  Escherichia coli  
Aquifex aeolicus  McoA  Streptomyces griseus  EpoA   Marinomonas mediterranea  PpoA   Bacillus subtilis  CotA   
 
Yeast such as Pichia pastoris  and Saccharomyces 
Cerevisiae  have often been used as an excellent species 
for production of recombinant laccase. Plant laccases has 
also been produ ced in these two yeast species.[25] 
However P. pastoris  is better  in term of production than 
S. cerevisiae .[26] Expression in yeast has several 
advantages over bacteria , it provide ease of gene 
manipulation and has the ability to carry out po st-
translational modification, such as glycosylation, 
disulfide bridge formation, and proteolytic processing. 
The use  of yeast for laccase production is economical, 
require less time and effort, and generally give high 
yields.  Moreover non -conventional yea sts Yarrowia 
lipolytica, Kluyveromyces lactis and Pichia methanolica  
have been used and has similar yield as those obtained 
from other yeasts .[27] Filamentous fungi can be used as 
host for the recombinant expression of laccases, and the 
choice of fungi is usually based on its ability to produce 
large amou nts of proteins into the media.[28] Saprotrophic   
fungi and b asidiomycetes are the utmost  common species 
that are capable of yielding  considerable quantity  of 
laccase in variable amount. However only a sma ll figure 
of fungal host has been studied so for. Examples of fungi 
that has been used as hosts for production of laccase are 
the asexually reproducing Trichoderma reesei, 
Aspergillus sojae, Aspergillus nidulans, Aspergillus 
oryzae  and Aspergillus niger.  Additionally the yield of 
laccase in much higher in filamentous fungi than those 
obtained from yeast, mostly in the range of 100 mg-l. 
Researchers have  also used plants as a hot for 
recombinant expression of plant and fungal laccases. 
Potato laccase (PPO) h as been overexpressed in tomatoes 
to provide a greater and improved resista nce against 
pathogenic bacteria . Insect Sf9 cells has also been used 
for expression of laccase from tobacco hornworm, 
Manduca sexta , through a baculovirus  expression 
system .[29] 
 www.wjpls.org   
4 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Journal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
Production of Laccase  
Laccases are produced by fermentation process usually 
using filamentous fungi that  are extracellularly secreted 
into media.  They are usually  synthesized  through  the 
host secondary metabolism.[30] Different factors can 
influence the prod uction of laccase such as concentration 
of microelements, carbon limitation, nature  of cultivation 
(either solid state or  submerged) , and source  of 
nitrogen.[31] 
 
Effect  of nitrogen  and c arbon  
Fungi for laccase production are  cultured  in a specific  
medi a that is composed of 1% w/v sources of carbon and 
nitrogen and  0.1%  w/v yeast  extract. Fructose, mannose, 
lactose g lucose,  and maltose  are the  generally  used as 
carbon sources while urea, peptone, NaNO 3, and 
(NH 4)2SO 4 are common source of nitrogen. Research ers 
have investigated that in several fungal species, high 
concentration of glucose and sucrose have inhibitory 
action on the production of laccase.[32] Polymeric 
substrates such as cellulose can be used as a carbon 
source instead of glucose or sucrose, an d hence the 
inhibition of la ccase production do not occur .[32] The 
activation of laccase production is generally achieved by 
depleting  the concentration of nitrogen.  However some 
studies suggest that concentration of nitrogen has no 
effect on the activity of enzyme. It has been documented 
that high laccase activity can be induced by low nitrogen 
to carbon ratio. Nevertheless some  investigators have 
reported that high nitrogen to carbon ratio can 
significantly increa se the production of laccase .[33] 
 
Applica tion of i nducers  
Laccase production can be significantly  increased  by 
providing  different  inducer  to the media.  Use of 
xenobiotics such as veratryl alcohol, lignin  and 2,5 
xylidine induce and enhance the activity of laccase .[34] 
Furthermore, laccase activ ity can be enhance up to nine 
folds through  supplementation of 2,5 xylidine to growth 
media after 24 hours of cultivation. The aromatic 
compound, veratryl alcohol addition to culture media can 
considerably inc rease the production of laccase .[35] 
Moreover Lee et al.  (1999 ) has documented that alcohol 
induced laccase  activity more and is much effective than 
xylidine . In another study, it has been reported that  
laccase activity  can be considerably encouraged by 
cellobiose in certain Trametes species. Additiona lly, less 
concentration of copper (Cu+2) in media can encourage 
high level of laccase synthesis , 50 times more than a 
basal medium.[36] 
 
Inﬂuence of t emperature  
The temperature  has limited effect on the production of 
laccase. The Optimum temperature vary from strain to 
strain.  It is reported that in the dark, the best temperature 
is 25oC while in the light it is about 30oC.[37] Thus the 
optimum temperature for production of laccase varies  
among 25oC to 30oC. Farnet et al.  (2000)  investigate  that 
activity of laccase was greatly increased by  pre-
incubati ng the enzymes at 40oC. Furthermore , laccase  produced by  P. ostreatus  is nearly  completely  active  in a 
wide range of temperature between 40oC to 60oC, with 
best activity at 50oC.[38] Moreover Nyanhongo  et al. 
(2002)  documented that the production of laccase by T. 
modesta  is almost very stable at 40oC and completely 
active at 50oC, however the half-life reduced to two 
hours at higher  temperature then 60oC. 
 
Inﬂuence of pH  
Many reports showed initial pH value is usually 
established  between pH 4.5 to pH 6.0 before the 
inoculation, however the value of pH is usually not fixed 
during culti vation and fermentation process.[33] It has 
been documented that  an initial pH of 7.0 was the finest  
for maximum  production of laccase. Additionally t he pH 
has a  partial influence on the production of laccase.  Its 
value varies from substrate to substrate because diff erent 
substrate has different reaction for laccase. The effect of 
pH on laccase activity was  reported by Cord et al.  (2007)  
using syringaldazine as a substrate, and determined that 
the enzyme activity ranges from 3.0 to 8.0. The L1 
isoenzyme of laccase has  an optimum pH 4.0 while L2 
has an optimum pH 5.0. On the other hand Han et al.  
(2005) has isolated laccase from Trametes versicolour,  
and found that the boosted  laccase activity  could  occurs 
at a wide range, however concluded the optimum pH of 
3.0 at 50oC. Filamentous fungi can produce laccase in 
excess when grown at pH 5.0, though most researchers 
have reported th at optimum pH should be at 4.5 to  6.0 
for laccase production . 
 
Inﬂuence of a gitator  
Laccase production can be affected by agitation. Hess  et 
al. (2002) studied the production  of laccase by fungus 
Trametes multicolour  and reported that fungal mycelia 
are damaged  by agitation,  when it is cultivated in a 
stirred tank and  the yield  of laccase was noticeably  
reduced . More over the laccase production by fungus 
Bjerkandera adusta  has dramatically decre ased when 
grown on stirred tank . However some researcher reports 
that using the fungus T. versicolour , agitation has no 
effect on the production of laccase .[44] 
 
Cultivation Type  
Laccases are produced on industrial scale by Solid State 
and Submerged modes of fermentation. Numerous 
cultivation techniques are applied to produce laccase on 
a large -scale, using filamentous fungi. Chief features of 
solid state and submerged fermentation has been 
discussed in forthcoming section.  
 
Submerged Fermentation  
Submerged fermentation encompasses  the 
encouragement of fungi  in aerobic  condition in a liquid 
medium having suitable amount of nutrien ts. Viscosity 
of broth is a most common issue in submerged 
fermentation. Additionally, the growth of fungal 
mycelium can hinder impeller action that slowdown of 
mass transfer and oxygen absorbance. This problem has 
been resolved by a pulsed system designed  by Hess et al.  www.wjpls.org   
5 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Journal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
(2002) that uses white rot fungus Trametes versicolor , 
and decolori zes the synthetic dye, letting the bioreactor 
to work in higher efficiency for an extended period of 
time in a continuous mode .[45] Furthermore, another 
technique “Cell Imoo biliztion” is implemented to 
increase oxygen absorbance, reduce the viscosi ty and 
ease the mass transfer. Luke and Burton . (2001) 
documented that continuous production of laccase can be 
produced without enzyme deactivation for up to  four 
months by immobili zing the fungus Neurospora crassa  
on membrane supports . Sedarati et al. (2003)  examined 
that, in stainless steel and ﬁxed bed bioreactors, there 
was higher laccase activity  by using a diverse  synthetic 
carriers for immobilizing the fungus Trametes hirsute . 
Other factors such as fed -batch culture can also 
significantly increase the production of laccase. Using 
the fungus T. pubescens , researchers have investigated 
that fed batch method can enhance the production 
laccase as well as enzyme activity up to  two f olds.[47] 
 
Solid  State  Fermentation  
Solid state fermentation (SSF) is the type of  fermentation 
process  that contain very less amount of liquid, and 
composed  of natural organic substrate or synthetic inert 
substrates as a solid support that provide the cond ition 
for filamentous fungi under which it naturally grows .[48] 
Different kind of lignocellulosic residues has been 
studied as a solid substrates for numerous enzymes 
including laccases.  These natural residues have 
cellulose/hemicellulose and lignin that a re rich in sugar 
enhancing fungal mycelial growth as well as acts as an 
inducer for different enzymes production. Nevertheless 
on of the major limitation of SSF is absence of any 
conventional  bioreactor designs. A lot of literature have 
discussed  several b ioreactor designs  for SSF, however 
they having many major drawbacks of mass and heat 
transfer. However different configuration of bioreactor 
for laccase production  has been studied. For instant, 
Couto et al.  (2003) has investigated try, immersion and 
expen ded bed configurations of bioreactor having barley 
bran (non -inert) and nylon (inert) support for the 
production of laccase from fungus T. versicolor . They 
concluded that tray configuration has the finest result for 
laccase produc tion. Moreover, Rosales et al., (2007) has 
also documented similar result of tray configuration of 
solid media for laccase production from T. hirsute  raised 
on orange peels.  
 
Using rice bran as substrate, the production of laccase is 
usually higher in both submerged and soli -state 
fermentation. The laccase production is induced by the 
presence of phenolic compounds such as vanillic acid 
and ferulic acid in the rice bran . Various other organic 
agricultural wastes has been used as substrate for laccase 
production such as wheat bran, m olasses waste water, 
cotton stalk, barley bran , grape stalks, and grape 
seeds .[51] 
 
 
 Purification of Laccase  
Fractional precipitation  by ammonium sulphate has been 
frequently  used for laccase  purification . This is 
accompanied with other purification techn iques such 
desalt/buﬀer exchange of protein, gel ﬁltration 
chromatography, and anion exchange chromatography. 
However single step technique for purification of laccase 
from Neurospora crassa has been successfully applied,  
using c elite chromatography  and up to  54 fold laccase 
purification with enzyme activity of 333 U mg-1 was 
obtained .[52] Laccase from  the strains  LLP13 purified 
using column chromatograpy followed by gel filtration 
for polishing .[53] Laccase produced by T. versicolour  is 
purified with specific activity of 91,4 43 U mg-l using 
frictional precipitation by ethanol, followed by Sephadex 
G-100, DEAE - Sepharose, and Phenyl Sepharose 
chromatography . [43] Furthermore, laccase from Tinea 
Versicolor  was also purified by Ion exchange 
chromatography for initial capturing an d intermediate 
purification and then followed by Gel filtration 
chromatography for polishing purpose and an enzyme 
activity of 101 UmL-l and purification of 34.8 fold was 
obtained .[54] Moreover, the lacca se from fungus Sterum 
ostrea  was also purified upto 70 fold, by ammonium 
sulphate precipitation and final polishing by Seph adex 
G-100 colum chromatography. In the same way, laccase 
has also been purified from the fruiting bodies  by 
frictional precipitation with ammonium sulphate salt , up 
to 40 to 70 percent  saturation that  was then  followed b y 
DEAE cellulose chromatography .[55] 
 
Applications of Laccase 
Laccase is a vital enzyme that can oxidize  both toxic and 
nontoxic substrates.  Its mains application are in the field 
of chemical industry, pharmaceutical in dustry, wood 
processing industry, food processing industry, textile 
industry and in numerous other areas.  In this review, 
some of the important application are described.  
 
Food industry  
Laccases are being used for improving or modifying the 
colour, appeara nce and texture of various drinks  and 
food products.  The a reas of food industry  where laccas e 
are used for food processing includes wine stabilization, 
juice processing and in baking.  Its main application  
includes the removal of unwanted phenolic  compounds  
that can create haze, browning and turbidity in clear 
wine, bear, and fruit juices.  Additionally, l accases have 
the ability to cross -link biopolymers and are being used 
in baking industry. Laccases from whit -rot fungus 
Trametes hirsuta  decreased the dough  extensibility and 
enhanced the resistance of dough in both fluten and flour 
dough .[56] Researchers have also documented numerous 
application of laccase in various processes  of food 
industry for example, in  baking, sugar beet pectin 
gelation, beverage proc essing, bioremediation, ascorbic 
acid d etermination and as a biosensor .[57] However , there 
is need of more research on lowering the cost by 
improving laccase production techniques  for industrial 
application.  www.wjpls.org   
6 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Journal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
Paper and p ulp industry  
Degradation and separati on of lignin in wood pulp is 
essential for industrial production of paper but they are 
usually based on of polluting and conventional 
procedures that uses chemical oxidants that are oxygen 
based, and chlorine for bleaching and delignification. 
However, han dling of wood pulp with ligninolytic 
enzyme such as laccase would deliver a cleaner and 
milder approach to delignification that will be mor e 
environmental friendly.[58] Laccase are used in specific  
alteration of wood fibers by producing radicals that are  
reactive in lignin. For instance, laccases can also be 
applied to produce complex materials that are 
lignocellulose based such as fiberboards.  Laccases can 
activat e lignin that are fiber bound during  industrial 
production of composites, hence, can be used in boards 
with better  mechanical and  physical  features  without any 
harmful adhesives.[59]  
 
Textile industry   
Dyes used in textile industry are resistant to fading and 
decolourization on exposure to different chemicals, 
water, and light  due to their synthet ic origin. Numerous 
dyes are made of carcinogenic chemicals such as 
aromatic compounds and benz idine.[60] The dye 
wastewater  from textile industries  is difficult to treat and 
is usually  not economical . Therefore, the ability of 
laccase to degrade various d yes of complex chemical 
structure including synthetic dyes has got more coverage . 
Laccase -based  products have been established and are 
used in numerous industries for degrading different type 
of dyes.  In addition to its ability to decolourise textile 
effluent and to bleach, they are also  used in synthesise  of 
various dyes.[61] 
 
Nano biotechnology   
Laccases are  used in biosensor detection as they are 
capable of catalysing reactions that involves the transfer 
of electron  without  the need of  supplementary  cofactors. 
They are being practised for the detect ion of  numerous 
phenolic compound. Furthermore, biosensor for the 
detection of codeine and morphine, plant flavonoids, 
electro -immunoassay and catechola mines have also been 
developed .[62] Laccases can also have  applications in 
immunochemical reporting such as Nucleic acid -
detection, Histochemical, Cytochemical and Western 
blotting by covalently bonded to a bio -binding molecule.  
Nanotechnology has developed more effective and well 
organized biosensors that have highly  controlled specific 
adsorption and deposition of biomolecules on various 
type of surfaces attaining micro and nanometre order.  
 
Other applications of laccase  
Soil bioremediation   
Xenobiotics and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are  
the main contamin ations in the soil, that have numerous  
adverse effect on environment and therefore, their 
degradation is of very important.  These complex 
compounds can be degraded by using  the catalytic 
activity of  laccases . Hence, laccase causes the detoxification of mun ition residues by facilitate the 
conversion and joining of reduced 2,4,6 -trinitrotoluene 
(TNT) metabolites to organic soil  matrix.[63] 
 
Synthetic chemistry  
Sooner or later laccase might  also b ecome  of a great  
consideration  in the field of synthetic chemist ry, where  it 
can be used for synthesis of complex polymers, oxidative 
depro tection and as a medical agents .[64] Lately , Mustafa 
et al.  (2005) manufactured a  phenolic colourants with the 
help of an industrial laccase Suberase® (Novo Nordisk 
A/S, Denmark).  
 
Cosmetics  
Laccases substitutes hydrogen peroxide as oxidising 
agent in dye formulation. Therefore,  it has numerous 
uses in cosmetics industries. Laccases can be used for 
hair dying that are less harsh, have reduced nuisance and 
can be handled easily as com pared to  current non -laccase 
based dyes .[66] Furthermore, some dermatological and 
cosmetic preparation have used laccase in various 
products for lightening of skin.[67] 
 
CONCLUSION  
 
Laccases are synthesized  by a broad spectrum  of 
bacteria, fungi and plants .  It has the capability of 
oxidizing both phenolic and nonphenolic lignin -related 
complex compounds that makes it of a great interest in 
biotechnological and industrial applications. To meet the 
industrial demand, laccases are overexpressed in 
different h eterologous host to improve their catalytic 
activity as well as  its yield. Optimization of fermentation 
media and application of suitable inducers can 
significantly increase its production and expending less 
resource to make it economical. Both solid state  and 
submerged fermentation techniques have been used for 
its optimal yield. Laccases can act on highly recalcitrant 
environmental pollutants, capable of detoxifying and 
decolorizing the industrial e ﬄuents, can be used 
eﬀectively in bioremediation, xenobiotic degradation, 
textile industries, and in paper and pulp industries, along 
with its use in Nano -biotechnology and as a biosensors.  
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. Hoopes JT, Dean JF. Ferroxidase activity in a 
laccase -like multicopper oxidase from Liriodendron 
tulipifera . Plant Physiology an d Biochemistry, 2004; 
42(1): 27-33. 
2. Laborde  J. Sur la casse des vins.  CR Hebd Seances 
Acad Sci , 1896; 123: 1074 -5. 
3. Giardina, P, Faraco V, Pezzella C, Piscitelli A, 
Vanhulle S, Sann ia G. Laccases: a never -ending 
story.  Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences , 2010; 
67(3): 369-385. 
4. Leontievsky A, Myasoedova N, Pozdnyakova N, 
Golovleva L. Yellow'laccase of Panus tigrinus  
oxidizes non ‐phenolic substrates without 
electron‐transfer mediators.  FEBS letters, 
1997;  413(3): 446-448. www.wjpls.org   
7 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Journal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
5. Dittmer NT, Suderman RJ, Jiang H, Zhu YC, 
Gorman MJ, Kramer KJ, Kanost MR. 
Characterization of cDNAs encoding putative 
laccase -like multicopper oxidases and 
developmental expression in the tobacco hornworm, 
Manduca sexta , and the malaria mosquito, 
Anopheles gambiae.  Insect Biochemistry and 
Molecular B iology , 2004; 34(1): 29-41. 
6. Molina -Guijarro JM, Pérez Torres J, Muñoz -Dorado 
J, Guillén Carretero F, Moya Lobo R, H ernández 
Cutuli. M, Arias Fernández ME. Detoxification of 
azo dyes by a novel pH -versatile, salt -resistant 
laccase from Streptomyces ipomoea , 2009.  
7. Martins LO, Soares CM, Pereira MM, Teixeira M, 
Costa T, Jones GH, Henriques AO. Molecular and 
Biochemical Ch aracterization of a Highly Stable 
Bacterial Laccase That Occurs as a Structural 
Component of the  Bacillus subtilis  Endospore 
Coat.  Journal of Biological Chemistry , 2002; 
277(21): 18849 -18859.  
8. Baldrian P. Fungal laccases –occurrence and 
properties.  FEMS micr obiology reviews , 2006; 
30(2): 215-242. 
9. Cruz JFO. Banana skin: a novel material for a low -
cost production of laccase.  arXiv preprint arXiv, 
2008 ; 0801.3337 . 
10. Velázquez -Cedeño MA, Farnet AM, Ferré E, Savoie 
JM, Variations of lignocellulosic activities in dua l 
cultures of Pleurotus ostreatus  and Trichoderma 
longibrachiatum  on unsterilized wheat 
straw.  Mycologia , 2004; 96(4): 712-719. 
11. Viswanath B, Chandra MS, Pallavi H, Reddy BR. 
Screening and assessment of laccase producing 
fungi isolated from different enviro nmental 
samples.  African Journal of Biotechnology , 2008; 
7(8). 
12. Palonen H, Saloheimo M, Viikari L, Kruus K. 
Purification, characterization and sequence analysis 
of a laccase from the ascomycete Mauginiella 
sp. Enzyme and Microbial Technology , 2003; 33(6): 
854-862. 
13. Junghanns C, Moeder M, Krauss G, Martin C, 
Schlosser D. Degradation of the xenoestrogen 
nonylphenol by aquatic fungi and their 
laccases.  Microbiology , 2005; 151(1): 45-57. 
14. Morozova, OV, Shumakovich GP, Gorbacheva MA, 
Shleev SV, Yaropolov AI. “Blue”  
laccases.  Biochemistry (Moscow) , 2007; 72(10): 
1136 -1150.  
15. Yaver DS, Berka RM, Brown SH, Xu F. The 
presymposium on recent advances in lignin 
biodegradation and biosynthesis.  Vikki Biocentre, 
University of Helsinki, Finland , 2001; 40. 
16. Bourbonnais R, Paice M G. Oxidation of non -
phenolic substrates: an expanded role for laccase in 
lignin biodegradation,  1990; FEBS letters , 267(1): 
99-102. 
17. Gianfreda L, Xu F, Bollag JM. Laccases: a useful 
group of oxidoreductive enzymes.  Bioremediation 
Journal , 1999; 3(1): 1-26. 18. Thurston CF. The structure and function of fungal 
laccases.  Microbiology , 1994; 140(1): 19-26. 
19. Gochev VK, Krastanov AI, Fungal 
laccases.  Bulgarian Journal of Agricultural 
Science , 2007; 13: 75-83. 
20. Ferrer -Miralles N, Domingo -Espín J, Corchero JL, 
Vázquez E,  Villaverde A. Microbial factories for 
recombinant pharmaceuticals.  Microbial cell 
factories , 2009; 8(1): 17. 
21. Demain AL, Vaishnav P. Production of recombinant 
proteins by microbes and higher 
organisms.  Biotechnology advances , 2009; 27(3): 
297-306. 
22. Waterman  SR, Hacham M, Panepinto J, Hu G, Shin 
S, Williamson PR. Cell wall targeting of laccase of 
Cryptococcus neoformans  during infection of 
mice.  Infection and immunity , 2007; 75(2): 714-722. 
23. Dubé E, Shareck F, Hurtubise Y, Daneault C, 
Beauregard M. Homologous cloning, expression, 
and characterisation of a laccase from Streptomyces 
coelicolor  and enzymatic decolourisation of an 
indigo dye.  Applied Microbiology and 
Biotechnology , 2008; 79(4): 597-603. 
24. Garg N, Baranwal R, Chhabra M, Mishra S, 
Chaudhuri TK, Bisaria  VS. Laccase of Cyathus 
bulleri : structural, catalytic characterization and 
expression in Escherichia coli.  Biochimica et 
Biophysica Acta (BBA) -Proteins and 
Proteomics , 2008; 1784 (2): 259-268. 
25. Wang GD, Li QJ, Luo B, Chen XY. Ex planta 
phytoremediation of t richlorophenol and phenolic 
allelochemicals via an engineered secretory 
laccase.  Nature Biotechnology , 2004; 22(7):       
893-897 
26. Colao MC, Lupino S, Garzillo AM, Buonocore V, 
Ruzzi M. Heterologous expression of lcc1 gene from 
Trametes trogii  in Pichia pastoris  and 
characterization of the recombinant 
enzyme.  Microbial Cell Factories , 2006; 5(1): 31. 
27. Piscitelli A, Giardina P, Mazzoni C, Sannia G. 
Recombinant expression of Pleurotus ostreatus  
laccases in Kluyveromyces lactis  and 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Applied Mi crobiology 
and Biotechnology , 2005; 69(4): 428-439. 
28. Nevalainen KH, Te'o VS, Bergquist PL. 
Heterologous protein expression in filamentous 
fungi.  Trends in B iotechnology , 2005; 23(9):      
468-474. 
29. Dittmer NT, Gorman MJ, Kanost MR. 
Characterization of endogenous and recombinant 
forms of laccase -2, a multicopper oxidase from the 
tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta.  Insect 
Biochemistry and Molecular B iology , 2009; 39(9): 
596-606. 
30. Vasconcelos AFD, Barbosa AM, Dekker RF, 
Scarminio IS, Rezende MI. Optimization of laccase 
production by Botryosphaeria sp.  in the presence of 
veratryl alcohol by the response -surface 
method.  Process Biochemistry , 2000; 35(10):   
1131 -1138.  www.wjpls.org   
8 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Journal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
31. Keyser P, Kirk TK, Zeikus JG. Ligninolytic enzyme 
system of Phanaerochaete chrysosporium : 
synthesized in the absence of lignin in response to 
nitrogen starvation.  Journal of bacteriology , 1978; 
135(3): 790-797. 
32. Lee KH, Wi SG, Singh AP, Kim YS. 
Micromorphological characteristics of decayed 
wood and laccase produced by the brown -rot fungus 
Coniophora puteana . Journ al of Wood 
Science , 2004; 50(3): 281-284. 
33. Monteiro MC, De Carvalho MEA. Pulp bleaching 
using laccase from Trametes versicolor under high 
temperature and alkaline conditions. 
In Biotechnology for Fuels and Chemicals          
(983-993). Humana Press, 1998.  
34. Lee IY, Ju ng KH, Lee CH, Park YH. Enhanced 
production of laccase in Trametes vesicolor by the 
addition of ethanol.  Biotechnology Letters , 1999; 
21(11): 965-968. 
35. Barbosa AM, Dekker RFH, St Hardy GE. Veratryl 
alcohol as an inducer of laccase by an ascomycete, 
Botryosp haeria sp ., when screened on the polymeric 
dye Poly R ‐478. Letters in Applied 
Microbiology , 1996; 23(2): 93-96. 
36. Assavanig A, Amornikitticharoen B, Ekpaisal N, 
Meevootisom V, Flegel TW. Isolation, 
characterization and function of laccase from 
Trichoderma.  Applied Microbiology and 
Biotechnology , 1992; 38(2): 198-202. 
37. Thurston CF. The structure and function of fungal 
laccases.  Microbiology , 1994; 140(1): 19-26. 
38. Farnet, AM, Criquet S, Tagger S, Gil G, Petit JL, 
Purification, partial characterization, and reacti vity 
with aromatic compounds of two laccases from 
Marasmius quercophilus  strain 17.  Canadian 
Journal of Microbiology , 2000; 46(3): 189-194. 
39. Nyanhongo GS, Gomes J, Gübitz G, Zvauya R, 
Read JS, Steiner W. Production of laccase by a 
newly isolated strain of Trametes 
modesta . Bioresource Technology , 2002; 84(3): 259-
263. 
40. Cord L, Minussi RC, Freire RS, Durán N. Fungal 
laccase: copper induction, semi -purification, 
immobilization, phenolic effluent treatment and 
electrochemical measurement.  African Journal of 
Biotechnology , 2007; 6(10).  
41. Han M, Choi H, Song H. Purification and 
characterization of laccase from the white rot fungus 
Trametes versicolor . JOURNAL OF 
MICROBIOLOGY -SEOUL -, 2005; 43(6): 555. 
42. Valeriano VS, Silva AMF, Santiago MF, Bara MT, 
Garcia TA. Productio n of laccase by Pynoporus 
sanguineus  using 2, 5 -Xylidine and 
ethanol.  Brazilian Journal of Microbiology , 2009; 
40(4): 790-794. 
43. Hess J, Leitner C, Galhaup C, Kulbe KD, 
Hinterstoisser B, Steinwender M, Haltrich D. 
Enhanced formation of extracellular laccase activity 
by the white -rot fungus Trametes multicolor . In Biotechnology for Fuels and Chemicals          
(229-241). Humana Press,  2002.  
44. Tavares AP, Coelho MA, Agapito MS, Coutinho JA, 
Xavier AM. Optimization and modeling of laccase 
production by Trametes versicolor  in a bioreactor 
using statistical experimental design.  Applied 
Biochemistry and Biotechnology , 2006; 134(3):  
233-248. 
45. Blánquez P, Caminal G, Sarra M. Vicent T. The 
effect of HRT on the decolourisation of the Grey 
Lanaset G textile dye by Trametes 
versicolo r. Chemical Engineering J ournal , 2007; 
126(2): 163-169. 
46. Hess J, Leitner C, Galhaup C, Kulbe KD, 
Hinterstoisser B, Steinwender M, Haltrich D. 
Enhanced formation of extracellular laccase activity 
by the white -rot fungus Trametes multicolor . 
In Biotechnology for Fuels and Chemicals          
(229-241). Humana Press,  2002.  
47. Galhaup C, Wagner H, Hinterstoisser B, Haltrich D. 
Increased production of laccase by the wood -
degrading basidiomycete Trametes 
pubescens . Enzyme and Microbial 
Technology , 2002; 30(4): 529-536. 
48. Pandey A, Selvakumar P, Soccol CR, Nigam P. 
Solid state fermentation for the production of 
industrial enzymes.  Current science , 1999; 77(1): 
149-162. 
49. Couto SR, Moldes D, Liébanas A, Sanromán A. 
Investigation of several bioreactor configurations for 
laccase produc tion by Trametes versicolor  operating 
in solid -state conditions.  Biochemical Engineering 
Journal , 2003; 15(1): 21-26. 
50. Rosales E, Couto SR, Sanromán MA. Increased 
laccase production by Trametes hirsuta grown on 
ground orange peelings.  Enzyme and Microbial 
Technology , 2007; 40(5): 1286 -1290.  
51. Marques De Souza CG, Zilly A, Peralta RM. 
Production of laccase as the sole phenoloxidase by a 
Brazilian strain of Pleurotus pulmonarius  in solid 
state fermentation.  Journal of Basic 
Microbiology , 2002; 42(2): 83-90. 
52. Grotewold E, Taccioli GE, Aisemberg GO, 
Judewicz ND. A single -step purification of an 
extracellular fungal laccase.  World Journal of 
Microbiology and Biotechnology , 1988; 4(3):     
357-363.  
53. Kiiskinen LL, Rättö M, Kruus K. Screening for 
novel laccase ‐producing mic robes.  Journal of 
Applied M icrobiology , 2004; 97(3): 640-646. 
54. Cordi L, Minussi RC, Freire RS, Durán N. Fungal 
laccase: copper induction, semi -purification, 
immobilization, phenolic effluent treatment and 
electrochemical measurement.  African Journal of 
Biotechnology , 2007; 6(10).  
55. Khammuang S, Sarnthima R. Lacease Activity from 
Fresh Fruiting Bodies oÌGanoder/па sp. MK05: 
Purification and Rcmazol Brilliant Blue R 
Decolorization.  J. Biol. Sci , 2009; 9(1): 83-87. www.wjpls.org   
9 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Journal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
56. Selinheimo E, Kruus K, Buchert J, Hopia A, Autio 
K. Effects of laccase, xylanase and their 
combination on the rheological properties of wheat 
doughs.  Journal of Cereal Science , 2006; 43(2): 
152-159. 
57. Minussi, RC, Pastore GM, Durán N. Potential 
applications of laccase in the food industry.  Trends 
in Food Science & Technology , 2002; 13(6):       
205-216. 
58. Kuhad RC, Singh A, Eriksson KEL. 
Microorganisms and enzymes involved in the 
degradation of plant fiber cell walls. 
In Biotechnology in the Pulp and Paper 
Industry  (45-125). Springer Berlin Heidelberg , 1997.  
59. Hüttermann A, Mai C, Kharazip our A. Modification 
of lignin for the production of new compounded 
materials.  Applied Microbiology and 
Biotechnology , 2001; 55(4): 387-394. 
60. Baughman GL, Perenich TA.  Fate of dyes in aquatic 
systems: I. Solubility and partitioning of some 
hydrophobic dyes a nd related 
compounds.  Environmental Toxicology and 
Chemistry , 1988; 7(3): 183-199. 
61. Setti L, Giuliani S, Spinozzi G, Pifferi PG. Laccase 
catalyzed -oxidative coupling of 3 -methyl 2 -
benzothiazolinone hydrazone and 
methoxyphenols.  Enzyme and Microbial 
Technolo gy, 1999; 25(3): 285-289. 
62. Ferry Y, Leech D. Amperometric detection of 
catecholamine neurotransmitters using 
electrocatalytic substrate recycling at a laccase 
electrode.  Electroanalysis , 2005; 17(2): 113-119. 
63. Duran N, Esposito E. Potential applications of 
oxidative enzymes and phenoloxidase -like 
compounds in wastewater and soil treatment: a 
review.  Applied Catalysis B: E nvironmental , 2000; 
28(2): 83-99. 
64. Nicotra S, Cramarossa MR, Mucci A, Pagnoni UM, 
Riva S, Forti L. Biotransformation of resveratrol: 
synthesi s of trans -dehydrodimers catalyzed by 
laccases from Myceliophtora thermophyla  and from 
Trametes pubescens.  Tetrahedron , 2004; 60(3): 595-
600. 
65. Mustafa R, Muniglia L, Rovel B, Girardin M. 
Phenolic colorants obtained by enzymatic synthesis 
using a fungal lacc ase in a hydro -organic biphasic 
system.  Food Research I nternational , 2005; 38(8): 
995-1000.  
66. Lang G, Cotteret J, Hair dye composition containing 
a laccase.  L'Oreal, Fr.). Int Pat Appl WO9936036,  
1999.  
67. Golz -Berner K, Walzel B, Zastrow L, Doucet O. 
Cosmetic a nd dermatological preparation containing 
copper -binding proteins for skin lightening.  Int Pat 
Appl WO2004017931 , 2004; 4(04).  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  