Ut iii|fSl§ ij^iif i jfcr-
ate OT itnowieage in„, _^jt:, • . ;mi«•»•••••••,.;• • • • ,mi§
LANDITREATMENT
OF WASTEWATER
U. Hitfi» &*•!!* wi'. ïl:, ,v'-. i'; ^ül.'••*«!'ifii-ÜÜSl
il (
'"'l l'fiiJiï"Ut
^
:;;:V ' . •Ji-J?!i:liï : «i:.'. :•• •' :" -Mi .••{•<i, ;:JV!>
n0é
^fi^mvm:State of Knowledge in
LAND TREATMENT
OF WASTEWATER
Volume 1
International Symposium
20-25 August 1978 • Hanover, New Hampshire
H.L. McKim
Symposium Coördinator
: ''
Hosted By
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
American Society of Agronomy
Soil Science Society of America
Crop Science Society of America
Science and Education Administratïon, Federal Research
American Society of Agricultural Engineers
U.S. Army Medical Bioengineering Research and Development Laboratory
U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS
COLD REGIONS RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING LABORATORY
Hanover, New Hampshire
AUGUST 1978PREFACE
Many countries have been applying wastewater to the soil for centuries.
In almost all instances the nutrients in the effluent from agricultural and
domestic sources have "been used for their fertilizer value. This alone can
make the concept of land treatment of wastewater a cost-effective alterna-
tive tö other forms of treatment of these waste products. Agricultural crops
produced at land treatment sites are of high quality and can be used as an
animal food source. When wastewater is applied to various forest species,
yields may increase by a factor of two. This increase in yield may provide
an alternative energy source to replace diminishing oil, gas and coal supplies.
In the United States several land treatment systems have been in opera-
tion since the turn of the century. In the past ten years, however, Federal
legislation has not only given municipalities added incentive to utilize land
treatment but it has also mandated that land treatment be one of the treat-
ment alternatives that is considered prior to applying for federal construc-
tion grants. If land treatment is the selected method its percolating water
must meet prescribed water quality standards and it must "be the most cost-
effective method for treating the wastewater.
The objectives of this Symposium are to summarize the state of know-
ledge of the practical aspects of the treatment of wastewater by land appli-
cation and to identify the suitable approaches for the design of such land
treatment systems. The topics to be included are: site selection considera-
tions, case studies of national and international concern, health effects
of land treatment systems, pretreatment considerations, uses of wastewaters
in agricultural and forest systems, monitoring, modeling and design criteria.
The Symposium Proceedings are published in two volumes. Volume I
contains the invited papers presented and discussed at the conference.
Volume 2 contains shorter papers about on-going research that were
selected from the responses received following a call for abstracts.
The program committee wishes tu uuknüwlt-J-ftc i»ir. ^ofaj. Ji-jja.ii, Uhiei,
Urban Studies and Management Section, Engineering Division, OCE for his
support of the Symposium. Special thanks is offered to Mr. Ben Yamashita
and Ms. Mary Ann Austin of the Public Affairs Office, Mr. Stephen L. Bowen
and Mrs. Donna R. Murphy of the Publications Section and Mrs. Donna Gerow
of the Word Processing Center for their assistance in preparation and lay-
out of the proceedings. In addition, the Symposium coördinator is particu-
larly indebted to the program committee for their assistance in coordination
and review of the proceedings, to Mrs. Sandra Messersmith who helped in the
overall planning of the Symposium, to Ms. Nancy Dumont who arranged for the
Russian translations, and to CRREL management for their support and coopera-
tion in hosting the Symposium.
HARLAN.L. MCKIM
Symposium Coördinator
iiINTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM PROGRAM COMMITTEE
Several agencles, architectural engineering firms
and universities participated in the organization
of the symposium. The individuals representing
these groups on the program committee include:
Mr. Anthony Adamczyk
Bureau of Industrial Programs
N.Y. State Department of
Environmental Conservation
50 Wolf Road, Al"bany, NY 12233
Dr. Dale Carlson
Office of the Dean
College of Engineering, FH-10
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 9Ö195
Mr. Ronald W. Crites
Metcalf and Eddy, Inc.
1029 Corporation Way
Palo Alto, CA 9^303
Dr. Curtis Harlin
US EPA - R. S. Kerr Environ-
mental Research Laboratory
P.O. Box 1198, Ada, 0K 7^820
Dr. Frank J. Humenik
Department of Biological and
Agricultural Engineering
P.O. Box 5906
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27650
Dr. Iskandar K. Iskandar
U.S. Army Cold Regions Research
and Engineering Laboratory
Hanover, NH 03755
•Dr. Walter K. Johnson
Director of Quality Control
Metropolitan Waste Control Commission
350 Metro Square, 7th Robert St.
St. Paul, m 55101
Dr, James C. Lance
U.S. Department of Agriculture -
Science and Education Admin-
istration, Federal Research
Building 005, Room Ul6
BARC, West Beltsville, MD 20705Dr. William E. Larson
U.S. Department of Agriculture -
Science and Education Admin-
istration, Federal Research
201 Soil Science Building
University of Minnesota
1529 Gortner Avenue, St. Paul, MN 55108
Dr. Raymond C. Loehr, Director
Environmental Studies Program
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 11+050
Dr. Harlan McKim
U.S. Army Cold Regions Research
and Engineering La~boratory
Hanover, NH 03755
Dr. Al~bert L. Page, Professor
Department of Soil and Environ-
mental Science
University of California
Riverside, CA 92502
Dr. Bernard P. Sagik, Dean
College of Sciences and Mathematics
University of Texas at San Antonia
1+2U2 Piedras Drive East
San Antonio, TX 78281+
Dr. Steve Schaub
U.S. Army Medical Bioengineering
Research and Development La"boratory
Building U59
Fort Detrick, MD 21701
Dr. William Sopper
Land and Water Research Building
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
Mr. Noel Urban
Directorate of Civil Works
Office, Chief of Engineers
Washington, DC 203lH
111CONTENTS
Page
OVERVIEW
Land Treatment: Achieving water quality through effective recycling
of wastewater, John T. Rhett, Office of Water Program Operations,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
LEGISLATION
Mr. Noel Urban, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Chairman
Federal guidelines for use of land treatment of wastewater in the
United States, A. Hais 1
State guidelines for the use of land treatment of wastewater,
T. L. Hullar 7
Treatment of wastewater in Britain, implications for agricultural land,
G. W. Cooke 17
COMPARISON OF HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS FOR LAND TREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
Dr. Ebba Lund, University of Copenhagen, and Dr. Stephen Schaub, U.S.
Army Medical and Bio-Engineering Research Development La"boratory,
Chairmen
Overview — Health considerations associated with land treatment of
wastewater systems compared with other human activities, E.H.
Lennette and D.P. Spath 27
Infectious disease potential of land application of wastewater, B.P,
Sagik, B.E. Moors and CA. Sorber ' 35
Toxic chemicals associated with land tr^atment of wastewater, A.C. Chang
and A.L. Page ^7
Use of wastewater on land - food chain concerns, G.L. Braude, R.B. Read,
Jr., and C.F. Jelinek 59
PUBLIC, INSTITUTIONAL AND TECHNICAL ACCEPTABILITY
Dr. Willaim Walker, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Chairman
Overview of public, institutional and technical acceptaMlity of land
treatment of wastewater, B.C. Nagelvoort 67
Experiences with broad-"based land treatment planning in Prince George's
County, Maryland, D.A. Griffes and CE. Pound 79
An integrated resources management approach to land treatment design,
W.G. Rust 89
SITE EVALUATION AND SELECTIOH
Dr. Jesse Lunin, USDA - Science and Edueation Administration, Federal
Research, Chairman
Economie evaluation and management of land treatment systems, L.A,
Christensen 97
The use of remote sensing techniques and other information sources in
regional site selection of potential land treatment areas, C.J.
Merry 107
IVPage
LAND TREATMENT MATHEMATICAL MODELING
Dr. Donald Nielsen, University of California, and Dr. Dennis Keeney,
University of Wisconsin, Chairmen
Review of physical/chemical/biological models for prediction of
percolate water quality, S.C. Gupta, M.J. Shaffer, and W.E. Larson 121
An evaluation of one- and two-dimensional soil moisture flow models,
R.R. van der Ploeg 133
Evaluation of the moving boundary theory in Darcy's flow through porous
media, ï. Nakano 1^3
Evaluation of phosphorus models for prediction of percolate water
quality in land treatment, C.G. Enfield 153
Evaluation of N models for prediction of NO3-N in percolate water in
land treatment, I.K. Iskandar and H.M. Selim 163
Nitrogen behavior in land treatment of wastewater: A simplified model,
H.M. Selim and I.K. Iskandar 171
Evaluation of plant uptake models for prediction of water quality of
land treatment sites, P.C. Miller and L. Stuavt l8l
EVALUATION OF EXISTING SYSTEMS
Dr. Thomas Hinesly, University of Illinois, and Mr. H. Robert Kohl,
Walt Disney World, Chairmen
Overview of existing land treatment systems, I.K. Iskandar 193
Renovation of wastewater by land treatment at Melbourne Board of Works
Farm Werribee, "Victoria, Australia, J.B. MaPherson 201
The Flushing Meadows Project, H. Bouwer and R.C. Riae 213
Land treatment of wastewater in Braunschweig and in Wolfsburg, Germany,
C. Tiet jen, A. Bramm, N. El-Bassam, and H.0. Fleer 221
Water pollution control through land disposal of secondary-treated
wastewater effluents, M. Sanai and J. Shayegan 231
Dr. Curtis Harlin, Environmental Protection Agency, and Mr. James
McPherson, Metropolitan Board of Works, Melbourne, Australia, Chairmen
Groundwater recharge with reclaimed waters from the Pomona, San José
Creek, and Whittier Narrows plants, F.D. Dryden and C. Chen .... 2^1
The sewage farms of Paris, R.B. Dean 253
Land treatment systems in Poland, J. Cebula and J. Kutera 257
Land treatment of municipal wastewater on steep forest slopes in the
humid southeastern United States, W.L. Nutter, R.C. Sohultz, and
G.H. Bristev 265
Irrigation with untreated sewage water and its effect on the content of
heavy metals in soils and crops, E.B. Sahalsoha, I.F. Vergara, and
T.G. Sahirado 275
PREATMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR LAND APPLICATION OF WASTEWATER
Dr. Dale Carlson, University of Washington, Chairman
Preapplication strategies for wastewater irrigation systems, R.C. Loehr 283
Pretreatment requirements before land application of municipal
wastewater, J.C. Lanoe and C.P. Gerba 293
Preapplication treatment for overland flow, R. Thomas 305
AGRICULTURE AND FOREST USE
Dr. William Sopper, Pennsylvania State University and Dr. William Nutter,
University of Georgia, Chairmen
Agricultural practices associated with land treatment of domestio
wastewater, D.R. Linden, W.E. Larson, and R.E. Larson 313
Renovation of wastewater and response of forest ecosystems: The Pack
Forest study, D.W, Cole and P. Sahiess 323
Utilisation of domestic wastewater in forest ecosystems, The Pennsylvania
State University Living Filter Project, W.E. Sopper and S.N. Kerr . 333
Influence of irrigation with clarified cattle farm outflow on lucerne
crops, A.N. Karaahevtsev, V.N. Samykin} V. Ie. Ma&urovPage
The use of wastewater for irrigation in the Ukranian SSE, Miniatry of
Water Eusbandry, USSR 3U5
MONITORING REQUIREMENTS FOR LAND TREATMENT SYSTEMS
Dr. Walter Johnson, Minnesota Metropolitan Waste Control Coramission
and Dr. Frank J. Humenik, North Carolina State University, Chairmen
An overview of monitoring land treatment systems, R. Bastion 3U7
Design of water quality monitoring systems for land treatment of
wastewater, W.J. Bauev 355
Design of soil-plant monitoring procedures for land treatment systems,
D.R. Keeney and L.M. Walsh 365
Monitoring of microbiological aerosols at wastewater sprinkler
irrigation sites, S.A. Sehaub, J.P. Glennon and H.T. Bausum .... 377
DESIGN CRITERIA
Dr. Raymond Loehr, Cornell University and Mr. Dave Lambert, Corps of
Engineers, Chairmen
Determination of application rates and schedules in land treatment
systems, R.W. Crites 389
Uptake of nutrients by plants irrigated with municipal wastewater
effluent, CE. Clapp, A.J. Vatazzo, W.E. Lavson, G.C. Mavten-i and
D.R. Linden 395
Storage capacity and loading rates for nitrogen and phosphorus, P.F.
Pvatt, F.E. Broadbent, and J.C. Ryden ...... U05
Muskegon County, Michigan's own land wastewater treatment system,
J. Walker Ui7
Land Treatment of Wastewater in Israël, Hillel I. Shuval U29
VIOVERVIEW
Land Treatment: Achieving Water
Quality through Effective
Recycling of Wastewater
John T. Rhett, Office of
Water Program Operations, EPA
The United States Environmental
Protection Agency (US EPA) manages an
active program to use land treatment as
an effective technology to recycle
nutrients while improving water quality.
This program for recycling wastewater
nutrients is a rapidly growing program
with great promise for the future.
A rebirth of research interest some
20 years ago has had results of much
greater impact than envisioned at the
time. The results of this modest
research effort were given strong support
by the environmental movement. The
impact of the environmental movement
led to sweeping changes in Federal
législation that have brought land
treatment to the forefront as an energy
conserving technology which recycles
nutrients while abating water pollution.
The confidence with which people view
land treatment is advancing rapidly
through many avenues for information
exchange. The US EPA program for using
land treatment is reflected in this
rapid gain in confidence. Land treat-
ment may become a Standard for recycling
technology in the near future.
National management of the US EPA
program for improving wastewater treat-
ment is the major function of my office.
Recycling and reclamation of wastewater
by land treatment is a vital part of
that program and my interest in this
symposium is as intense as that of
Mr. Thomas C. Jorling, EPA's Assistant
Administrator for the Office of Water
and Hazardous Materials. It is a
coincidence that Mr. Jorling is deliver-
ing a talk on nutriënt recycling by
land treatment at a meeting underway in
the USSR at this very time.
I know that Administrator Costle
and Mr. Jorling will be extremelyinterested in the results of this
conference because both are deeply com-
mitted to recycling and reclamation of
nutrients by land treatment.
INTRODUCTION
In keeping with the symposium title
"State of Knowledge in Land Treatment of
Wastewater," I shall direct my remarks
to how EPA, in operating an environmental
construction program, views the state-of-
the-art for land treatment. It has been
my experience that the researcher, the
regulator, and the user may diverge
considerably in their assessment of the
same data base. I think my point of
view wil! stimulate some thought pro-
voking questions in your minds today and
I hope, generate some answers during the
later presentations.
Given what we perceive as the "state
of knowledge" of land treatment, I will
be reviewing the symposium to answer the
question, "Land treatment technology --
how can we improve its use?" Our inter-
pretation leads us to conclude that the
data base is strong. The recent his-
torical record of land treatment is
characterized by success stories. While
we can always improve our knowledge and
there is always one more question, we
can bui ld land treatment systems with
confidence by using the knowledge that is
available today.
It is this philosophical position
that spearheads the US EPA thrust to
encourage use of land treatment as a
wastewater management alternative that
improves water quality, is cost
vilcompetitive, saves energy, and recycles
nutrients.
BACKGROUND
The re-establishment of interest in
land treatment as a wastewater management
alternative came early in the environ-
mental movement. Modest research pro-
grams in both the Federal and private
sectors and at several universities
date back 15 to 20 years. These research
programs served as the catalyst for the
intense research over the last 5 to 10
years. They also served as the basis
for the strong emphasis piaced on land
treatment as a recycling option in the
Federal legislation on water pollution
control. In 1976, John Freshmanf1)
speaking for the Staff Director of the
U.S. Senate Committee hand!ing water
pollution legislation stated, "...maybe
people should be having conferences
entitled 'Receiving Water as a Waste
Treatment Alternative' or 'Aerate,
Chlorinate, and Dump as a Waste Treat-
ment Alternative' with land treatment --
since it makes the most sense -- as the
Standard." Mr. Freshman's tone in this
statement is consistent with the tone
of U.S. Federal legislation passed in
1972 and strengthened in 1977.
Although there are some differences
in the use and definition of terms, there
are three generally accepted methods of
land treatment. The slow rate process
(also cal led erop irrigation) couples
wastewater management with recycling of
nutrients in erop production. Rapid
infiltration (also known as infiltra-
tion/percolation) emphasizes water
reclamation rather than direct nutriënt
recycling. The product water from rapid
infiltration may be reused for erop
production, returned to surface waters,
or allowed to recharge groundwaters.
Over!and flow also emphasizes water
reclamation. Unlike rapid infiltration,
however, the product water from overland
flow is almost always discharged directly
to surface waters. The terminology out-
lined has developed in the United States
over the last decade. It has become
the standard for the US EPA program on
land treatment.
THE US EPA PROGRAM
The US EPA program on land treatment
includes research groups at Ada, Oklahoma,
and Cincinnati, Ohio, as wel! as theConstruction Grants Program which is
active across the Nation. Others will
give presentations on the accomplishments
of the research groups so I wil! concen-
trate on the use of overall research
results in support of the Construction
Grants Program.
THE CONSTRUCTION PROGRAM
Land treatment became a major
consideration in program implementation
as a result of Federal legislation passed
in 1972. This legislation identified
land treatment as a recycling alternative
which should be given serious considera-
tion in the national program to end
pollution of streams and lakes. This
legislation made it mandatory to consider
land treatment for all projects starting
on Ouly 1, 1974. This legislative
mandate had been anticipated for several
years and an intensive program to assess
the state of knowledge for design and
operation of systems was nearing com-
pletion. Several reports on the state-
of-the-art for research had been
completed(2)(3)(4) and my staff had
conducted a survey of operating systems
in the United States(5) as wel! as
gathering case history information from
around the world. The results of these
efforts led to the conclusion that there
were dependable design options available
for implementing land treatment as a
recycling alternative as proposed in the
Federal legislation. Program guidance
was issued in July of 1974 and the US EPA
embarked on an active program to use
proven land treatment technologies to
recycle wastewaters as a part of the
national pollution abatement program.
Additional technical reports were then
prepared through my office to deal with
costs(6)(7) and to provide a basis for
evaluating and analyzing preliminary
system designs(8).
It was also recognized that research
would continue to substantially improve
our design knowledge and that we would
need periodic updating of the program
guidance. Numerous research efforts
initiated early in the 1970's were
scheduled for completion with expected
publication of results by 1975. These
included efforts of the US Corps of
Engineers (US COE) - led by the CRREL
staff, efforts of the US Department of
Agriculture (USDA), and many other sources
as wel! as our own US EPA research efforts
led by the Ada, Oklahoma, research team.
In order to consolidate the researchfindings and issue them as quickiy as
possible, the US EPA took the lead for
preparation of a design manual on land
treatment.
An interagency workgroup co-chaired
by the US EPA and US COE took on this
task of preparing a design manual to be
available in the fall of 1977. The
workgroup did accomplish its assigned
task and the design manual was issued in
October 1977 as a joint effort of the
US EPA, the US COE, and the USDA. The
first printing of the manual(9) issued
jointly by the three Agencies is
entitled "Process Design Manual for Land
Treatment of Municipal Wastewater." It
is available from the US EPA Environ-
mental Research Information Center at
Cincinnati, Ohio. This manual is now
established as the basic resource for
those who conceive, plan, and design land
treatment systems in the United States.
It will serve as the US EPA standard for
implementing land treatment as an alter-
native in the national program to abate
water pollution while recycling nutrients
and conserving energy. There will be a
conti nu ing effort to improve and update
this manual as research opens new
horizons and resolves issues which
remain controversial. As the manager of
an operating program, I extend, for
myself and EPA, sincere appreciation to
the research community for a job well
done.
In response to the availability of
detailed design information, the emphasis
by President Carter on cost-effective,
water conserving wastewater treatment
facilities and the encouragement of
Congress to consider wastewater reclama-
tion and recycling by land treatment
processes, on October 3, 1977 EPA
Administrator Douglas Costle issued an
Agency policy statement on land treat-
ment of municipal wastewater(10). This
policy has served to reinforce the
attention giyen to wastewater treatment
processes which renovate and reuse
wastewater as wel! as recycle its
organic matter and nutrients in a
beneficial manner. The policy requires
an applicant for Federal construction
grant funds to provide "complete justi-
fication for the rejection of land
treatment" if a method that encourages
water conservation, wastewater reclama-
tion and reuse is not selected after
examining the alternative wastewater
treatment technologies available to that
applicant.
A look at the statistics concerning
the implementation of land applicationprojects through the Construction
Grants Program indicates that we have
made reasonable progress, but that
clearly more can be accomplished in
this area. Our information shows that
to date at least 350 projects involving
various forms of land application have
been funded through the grants program.
This represents approximately 15% of the
total number of our projects which
progressed to the point that a treat-
ment alternative has been selected. In
terms of dollars, however, this repre-
sents less than 5% of the funds obligated
through the program. The comparatively
small dollar amount is, in part, due to
the fact that many of these projects
have not reached the actual construction
stage (i.e., the point where the greatest
expenditure of funds occurs) and that
most of the projects are relatively
small in terms of wastewater volume
treated. In any event, we most certainly
expect to do better in the future.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION
PROGRAM
New Federal legislation passed in
December 1977 gives even greater impetus
to land treatment as a recycling and
reclamation alternative in the United
States. In the words of the Congres-
sional Conference Committee report
which provides the legislative history
in support of the Clean Water Act of
1977, EPA "has been provided all of
the legislative tools to require the
utilization of such innovative and
alternative wastewater treatment
processes and techniques" This legis-
lation identifies land treatment as one
of the best and most reliable technolo-
gies included in a group of technologies
designated as innovative or alternative.
These innovative/alternative technologies
which emphasize recycling and energy
conservation are to be given preference
over conventional technologies in the
US EPA program to abate water pollution.
There are greater than twelve new
provisions of the Clean Water Act which
provide incentives and requirements for
the use of innovative and alternative
technologies in the Construction Grants
Program including the following:
- Innovative/alternative (I/A) projects
may receive an additional 10% in
Federal funds (i.e., the Federal
share may be increased from the
conventional 75% to 85% of the
ixeligible project costs).
- The States are required to spend 2%
of their allotment of construction
grant funds on increasing the
Federal share to 85% for I/A
projects in fiscal years 1979 and
1980. In 1981, this "set-aside"
increases to 3%.
- The Federal government may parti-
cipate with full grant funding in
I/A projects which are up to 15%
more costly than the most cost-
effective conventional alternative.
- I/A projects may receive 100%
Federal grants for modification or
replacement if they fail to meet
their design criteria at a reason-
able cost.
- I/A projects may receive 100%
Federal grants (research and
development grants as opposed to
construction grants) for technical
evaluations, training of personnel
and information dissemination.
- The land used for storing waste-
water prior to application to the
land is eligible for grant funds.
The land to which the wastewater
was applied for actual treatment
in a land treatment system was
already an eligible cost.
We are presently in the process of
promulgating construction grant regula-
tions to implement these and other
sections of the new law. The final
regulations will be published in Septem-
ber of this year.
Obviously, the future holds even
more promise for expanding use of land
treatment processes in the United States.
There is a strengthening sense among my
staff that we are on the threshold of
a revolution in the concept of wastewater
treatment in the United States. There
is growing optimism that alternatives
which emphasize recycling will indeed
become the standard in the near future.
Such optimism for effective re-
cycling of wastewaters is not new. It
has budded repeatedly over the centuries
and several times in the last century.
The recent history, the 19th and 20th
centuries, of land treatment furnishes
some timeless quotes to this effect:
"The right way to dispose of town sewage
is to apply it continuously on land and
it is only by such application that the
pollution of rivers can be avoided" --
Report of Royal Commission, England 1857;
"...The most efficiënt purification of
sewage can be attained by its application
on land." Also "...on properiy managedsewage farms the utilization of sewage is
not prejudicial to health." -- George
Rafter, U.S. Geological Report No. 1,
1897, and No. 3 1899.
Although the Muskegon, Michigan,
system will be covered in detail as a
design example, I want to cite it as one
example of what the future may hold for
nutriënt recycling. This system,
designed to serve a population equivalent
to 430,000 people, recycles water and
fertilizer nutrients to grow corn.
Operating at a population load of 300,000
people in 1976 the 2,200 ha farm produced
144,000 hl (400,000 bu) of corn.
Revenues from the sale of the erop offset
much of the costs to operate all components
of the wastewater management system.
About 90 metric tons of phosphorus, 230
metric tons of nitrogen, and 250 metric
tons of potassium were recycled by erop
uptake as the wastewater was reclaimed.
While there have been obvious
project benefits from the recovery and
recycling of nutrients through erop
production and revenues gained through
the sale of these crops to help offset
the system's overall operating costs,
there are certainly important water
quality benefits provided by this waste-
water treatment system. Improvements
have already been observed in the water
quality of the lakes that had been
receiving the wastewater discharges now
passing through the land treatment system.
And this mam'age of water quality
improvement and wastewater treatment with
nutriënt recovery and recycling has been
achieved without adverse effects on the
groundwater underlying the project site or
surface waters into which the renovated
water is discharged.
THE FUTURE OF LAND TREATMENT
The future rol e of land treatment in
our Nation's water pollution control
efforts looks brighter than ever, but
continues to face many of the major
impediments we have faced from the
beginning. Overly restrictive state
regulations, resistance by the consultants
and engineers trained or experienced only
in traditional sanitary engineering
techniques, public acceptance issues
and public health concerns remain to be
more of a problem in the implementation
of new projects than our ability to
properly design and operate cost-effective
and environmentally sound land treatment
systems. We need continuing help from
the research community in addressingthese impediments in their future
research efforts to compliment the efforts
being made through the Construction Grants
Program. Continued interagency coordi-
nation and cooperation with the
university research community, as well 8.
as revitalized international exchanges,
should play a major role in the success
of our future efforts to advance land
treatment practices.
9.CONCLUSION
I applaud the Corps for holding
this conference and look forward to
reviewing its results. You in this
room here have been tremendous experi- lo.
mentally, but we are now ready for
implementation. We need your help now.
Our future success in advancing land
treatment may well be measured by how
fast we can get adequate information to
the users.Application and Advanced Wastewater
Treatment, November 1975. US
Environmental Protection Agency,
EPA 430/9-75-016, 25p.
Evaluation of Land Application
Systems; Evaluation Checklist and
Supporting Commentary, March 1975.
US Environmental Protection Agency,
EPA 430/9-75-001, 182p.
Process Design Manual for Land
Treatment of Municipal Wastewater,
October 1977. US Environmental
Protection Agency, No. EPA 625/1-
77-008, 574p.
EPA Policy on Land Treatment of
Municipal Wastewater. October 3,
1977, memorandum from Administrator
Costle.
REFERENCES
1. Freshman, J.D. "A Perspective on
Land as a Waste Management Alter-
native," in Land as a Waste Manage-
ment Alternative (R.C. Loehr, Ed.)
Ann Arbor Science, Ann Arbor, MI.
pp. 3-8, 1977.
2. Pound, CE. and R.W. Crites.
Wastewater Treatment and Reuse by
Land Application - Volume II,
August 1973. EPA 660/2-73-006b,
pp. 249.
3. Wastewater Management by Disposal
on the Land, May 1972. US Army
Corps of Engineers Special Report
No. 171, 1972, 183p.
4. Factors Involved in Land Application
of Agricultural and Municipal
Wastes, July 1974. US Department
of Agriculture, Agricultural
Research Service.
5. Survey of Facilities Using Land
Application of Wastewater, July 1973.
US Environmental Protection Agency
No. EPA 430/9-73-006, 377p.
6. Costs of Wastewater Treatment by
Land Application, June 1975. US
Environmental Protection Agency,
EPA 430/9-75-003, 156p.
7. Cost-Effective Comparison of Land
xiLEGISLATION
FEDERAL GUIDELINES FOR USE OF
LAND TREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
IN THE UNITED STATES
Alan B. Hais, Municipal
Construction Div., EPA
This paper describes a number of
major elements of the Environmental Pro-
tection Agency's land treatment program
which collectively provide the basic
framework for the Federal guidelines in
this area. Discussed in the paper are
the criteria for best practicable waste
treatment technology, the EPA Adminis-
trator 's October 3, 1977, policy state-
ment on land treatment, a draft
construction grants program requirements
memorandum on evaluation of land treat~
ment systems and the "Process Design
Manual for Land Treatment of Municipal
Wastewater."
INTRODUCTION
In preparing to write this paper,
it was necessary to reflect upon the
title - "Federal Guidelines for Use of
Land Treatment of Wastewater in the
United States" - as the initial step in
deciding on the approach to take with
the paper, One would think that deter-
mining the approach for such a paper
would be easy for someone who represents
a Federal regulatory agency like the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
It would seem that all one has to do to
write a paper on Federal guidelines in
a certain area is pull together and ei te
the numerous Federal regulations on the
subject.
This, of course, is not the case,
particularly where EPA is concerned and
particularly where land treatment is the
subject. In addition to its regulatory
responsibilities, EPA also operates in
a great number of other areas, including
a multi-bi11 ion dollar grant program for
the construction of municipal wastewater
treatment facilities and, as evidencedby a number of the other papers being
presented at this conference, and
extensive research and development
programs covering a wide variety of
subjects.
Likewise, the Clean Water Act, which
is the major piece of Federal legislation
covering wastewater practices in this
country, does not specifica!ly require
EPA to develop regulations for the
control of land treatment systems. It
does, however, specifically require the
Agency to encourage practices, such as
land treatment, which provide for re-
claiming of water and/or reclamation
of potential sewage pollutants through
the production of agriculture, silvicul-
ture or aquaculture. In fact, if one
were to limit the coverage of this paper
to Federal guidelines for land treatment
of wastewater in the narrowest regula-
tory sense, the paper could be ended at
this point.
The fact is that there is not a
Standard set of Federal rules which have
been developed for the express purpose
of regulating land treatment systems.
This is not to say that EPA is not
interested in seeing that land treatment
systems are designed and operated so
that they wil! also be compatible with
the environmental protection goals of
the Agency. EPA is of course vitally
concerned with the implementation and
management of land treatment systems in
this country so that they will be built
and operated in a manner which ensures
protection of the environment. This
objective must obviously be in harmony
with the Agency's desire to achieve the
reclamation, recycling and economiebenefits which result from the use of
land treatment systems.
Because of the nature of the EPA
land treatment program, the "encourage-
ment" activities cannot be easily sepa-
rated from the "regulatory" activities.
For this reason, the discussion of these
activities in the remainder of this paper
is interspersed. In keeping with the
title of the paper, however, major
emphasis is given to those pieces of
the Federal program which are aimed at
ensuring the proper management of land
treatment systems from an environmental
impacts point of view.
ELEMENTS OF THE EPA PROGRAM
Most of the identifiable pieces
which collectively can be considered as
the "Federal guidelines for the use of
land treatment of wastewater" are linked
in some way to the EPA Construction Grants
Program. Section 201 of the Clean Water
Act, which authorizes EPA to make grants
to municipalities for the construction of
wastewater treatment facilities, also
requires that grant applicants evaluate
"alternative waste management tech-
niques...[which] provide for the appli-
cation of best practicable waste treat-
ment technology " Section 201 further
specifies that best practicable waste
treatment technology (BPWTT) includes
"reclaiming and recycling of water and
confined disposal of pollutants so they
will not migrate to cause water or other
environmental pollution " "Alternative
Waste Management Techniques for Best
Practicable Waste Treatment" was pub-
lished by EPA pursuant to Section 304 of
the Clean Water Act. Contained in this
document are criteria for systems in
three categories: treatment and dis-
charge to navigable waters; land appli-
cation and utilization practices; and
wastewater reuse.
There are a number of other items
related to the Agency's implementation of
the Construction Grants Program which
are important elements of the "Federal
guidelines" for land treatment. These
include: an extensive series of technical
guidance documents most notable of which
is the recently issued "Process Design
Manual for Land Treatment of Municipal
Wastewater"; an October 3, 1977
Administrator's policy statement on
land treatment, and, a construction
grants Program Requirements Memorandum
(in draft form at the time of this
writing) which provides guidance toimplement the Policy Statement.
It is true that construction grant
requirements are directly applicable only
to the planning, design and construction
of facilities which receive grant funding,
Furthermore, the coverage of the rules
and regulations under which the Construc-
tion Grants Program operates does not
extend to the long-term operation of
completed facilities, whether these
facilities were assisted with grant funds
or not. However, because of the magnitude
of the Construction Grants Program (i.e.,
eventual expenditures likely to exceed
$50 billion and greater than 12,000
projects), its impact on municipal waste-
water treatment practices in this country
obviously is considerable. Consequently,
even though the Construction Grants Pro-
gram elements listed above are not
regulatory in the formal sense of the
word, their impact is often comparable to
that of regulations. Where state regu-
lations or guidelines do not exist to
control a particular practice, applicable
construction grant guidelines have in some
instances been adapted to fill this void.
In other cases, existing state guidelines
have been revised as necessary and
appropriate in recognition of Federal
requirements.
With respect to state land treatment
guidelines, most states have some form of
requirements available, although a signi-
ficant number of states do not have any
controls in place. Even in some states
where land treatment guidelines had
already been developed, revisions are
being considered to provide more con-
sistency with the Federal requirements
issued through the Construction Grants
Program. In all fairness, a number of
states have also taken the position that
their requirements for land treatment are
justifiably different to account for
local variations in the factors which
affect land treatment systems.
The remainder of this paper discusses
the major features of the above mentioned
program elements which collectively
comprise the Federal guidelines for land
treatment.
BEST PRACTICABLE WASTE TREATMENT
TECHNOLOGY
The Best Practicable Waste Treatment
Technology (BPWTT) criteria published by
EPA in October 1975 contain requirements
for land treatment systems which for all
intents and purposes have the impact of
Federal land treatment regulations.Municipal wastewater treatment plants
are required by law to provide for the
application of BPWTT by July 1, 1983.
The principal objective of the
BPWTT criteria for land application and
land utilization systems is to protect
groundwater for drinking water purposes.
The criteria describe three cases as
follows:
CASE I: The groundwater can
potentiaiiy be used for drinking water
supply. In this case the groundwater
resulting from the land application of
wastewater, including the affected
native groundwater, must meet the maxi-
mum contaminant levels for inorganic and
organic chemicals specified in the
National Interim Primary Drinking Water
Regulations.
CASE II: The groundwater is
presently being used for drinking water
supply. In this case, the groundwater
must meet the maximum microbiological
contaminant levels specified in the
National Interim Primary Drinking Water
Regulations as wel! as the levels for
chemicals specified in Case I.
CASE III: The groundwater has
uses other than drinking water supply.
In this case groundwater criteria are to
be developed by the EPA Regional Adminis-
trator based on the present or potential
use of the groundwater.
The National Interim Primary
Drinking Water Standards for inorganic
and organic chemical and microbiological
contaminants presently include limits on
arsenic, barium, cadmium, chrornium, lead,
mercury, nitrate, selenium, silver,
fluoride, endrin, lindane, methoxychlor,
toxaphene, chlorophenoxys (2,4-D and
2,4,5-TP Silvex) and coliform bacteria.
Where a land treatment system results in
a surface discharge (i.e,, either effluent
collected through underdrains or runoff
from an overland flow system), the waste-
water must meet the BPWTT standards for
treatment and discharge. The minimum
level of treatment required for municipal
systems which treat and discharge to
surface is secondary treatment as defined
by EPA in terms of five-day BOD, sus-
pended solids and pH. It is important to
note that in any case, the point at which
the wastewater is measured for compliance
with the Federal BPWTT criteria is when
it leaves the land treatment system
(i.e., becomes part of the permanent
groundwater or is surface discharged)
and not at the point of application to
the land.EPA POLICY STATEMENT ON LAND TREATMENT
OF MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER
On October 3, 1977, the Administrator
of the Environmental Protection Agency
issued a policy statement on land
treatment of municipal wastewater. The
policy statement highiighted the Agency's
intent to "press vigorously for publicly
owned treatment works to utilize land
treatment processes to reclaim and recycle
municipal wastewater." It also required
that construction grant applicants who do
not select methods that encourage water
conservation, wastewater reclamation
and reuse must provide a complete justi-
fication for the rejection of land
treatment.
With respect to "guidelines" for land
treatment systems, the October 3, 1977,
statement emphasized the importance of
ensuring that Federal, state and local
requirements and regulations are imposed
at proper points in the treatment system.
To this end, the statement indicated that
"Whenever states insist upon placing
unnecessarily stringent preapplication
treatment requirements upon land
treatment, such as requiring EPA
secondary effluent quality in all cases
prior to application on the land, the
unnecessary wastewater treatment
facilities will not be funded by EPA."
This is not to say that secondary treat-
ment or an even higher level of treatment
may not be necessary for some land appli-
cation projects. The intent is to cause
arbitrary preapplication treatment
requirements, such as a minimum of
secondary treatment or better in all
cases, to be revised to reflect a level
of preapplication treatment appropriate
for the given situation. Just as
secondary treatment may be appropriate
in some instances, the equivalent of
primary treatment or even raw wastewater
may be sufficient in others. More dis-
cussion of preapplication treatment
requirements is presented in the next
section of this paper.
PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS MEMORANDUM FOR
EVALUATION OF LAND TREATMENT ALTERNATIVES
In April 1978, the Agency issued a
draft Program Requirements Memorandum
(PRM) titled "Revision of Agency Guidance
for Evaluation of Land Treatment Alter-
natives." PRM's are issued by the Agency
to set forth policy for implementation of
the Construction Grants Program. This
narticular PRM was developed to provideguidance in support of the October 1978
policy statement issued by the Adminis-
trator of EPA. It is expected that the
PRM will be issued in final form by the
time this conference is held in late
August, 1978. For this reason, the
following discussion should be read
remembering that revisions prior to
issuance are possible.
Again, while a guidance document
such as this PRM is specifically
developed for implementation of the
EPA Construction Grants Program, it
does constitute Agency policy. In this
way it can be interpreted as having the
effect of Federal guidelines, particu-
larly because PRM's and other similar
issuances are widely circulated for
review and comment prior to publication
in final form.
The PRM establishes the "Process
Design Manual for Land Treatment of
Municipal Wastewater" as the principal
reference of technical information upon
which review of construction grant
projects involving land treatment wil! be
based. The Design Manual is discussed
briefly in the next section of this
paper. The PRM also cites three planning
and design factors which have historica!ly
limited the use of land treatment in this
country. These factors are: (1) overly
conservative and, consequently, costly
design of slow rate (irrigation) systems;
(2) failure to consider rapid infiltra-
tion as a proven and implementable land
treatment alternative; and (3) require-
ments of a substantially higher and more
costly level of preapplication treatment
than is needed to protect health and
ensure design performance.
The PRM also provides more specific
guidance on four items related to the
design of land treatment systems, plus
cost. These four design-related factors
are site selection, loading rates and
land area, preapplication treatment, and
environmental effects. Much of the
information pertinent to these factors is
included in the PRM by reference to other
documents such as the Design Manual and
the BPWTT publication.
An important point to re-emphasize
is EPA's approach to the issuance of
design criteria such as these. The
Agency recognizes that no single value
or even one set of values can be realis-
tically applied to all locations con-
sidering the variability across the
country in climate, geology, treatment
needs and other factors affecting the
design of land treatment systems. For
this reason the EPA guidelines arevaried to suit a number of possible
situations and include ranges of values
wherever possible. For example, the range
of application rates indicated in the PRM
varies from 0.6-6 M/yr for slow rate
systems to 6-170 M/yr rapid infiltration
systems.
This concept of flexibility is
particularly important with respect to
EPA's position on preapplication treat-
ment requirements. The EPA statements
on preapplication treatment have
apparently been misconstrued by some
who have interpreted them as indicating
that the Agency will not support any
project which requires secondary treat-
ment prior to application to the land.
This is not the case. What the Agency is
saying is that the level of preapplica-
tion treatment must be suited to the
particular situation. As previously
noted, in some cases primary treated or
even raw sewage may be acceptable for
application to the land, while in other
instances treatment beyond that provided
by secondary may be necessary. Clearly
an arbitrary requirement that all waste-
water has to receive secondary treatment
prior to land application is not con-
sistent with the Agency's approach. The
guidance on preapplication treatment
included in the PRM ranges from simple
screening or comminution for overland
flow in isolated areas with no public
access to extensive BOD and suspended
solids control with disinfection for slow
rate systems in public access areas such
as parks and golf courses.
PROCESS DESIGN MANUAL FOR LAND TREAT-
MENT OF MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER
The Design Manual is a comprehensive,
state-of-the-art document prepared through
the cooperative efforts of the Environ-
mental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and the U.S. Depart-
ment of Agriculture. While the manual
was developed for a number of purposes
and a variety of audiences, one of its
principal uses is as design guidance for
Federally funded construction grant
projects. In this way it serves as the
technical basis for the entire framework
of Federal guidelines for land treatment.
The manual presents a rational
procedure for the planning and design of
three types of land treatment systems.
Chapters 1 and 2 introducé and define the
land treatment systems referred to as
slow rate, rapid infiltration, and over-
land flow. Chapters 3 through 5 cover the
kprocedures for preliminary design, site
evaluation, and detailed design.
Chapter 6 is devoted to design of small
systems where it may be advantageous to
forego some of the detailed site evalua-
tion required for design of large systems.
Chapter 7 is a compilation of case
histories, and Chapter 8 is a design
example utilizing the procedures set
forth in the manual. The appendices
furnish indepth analyses of selected
factors of special interest.
The manual is assembled in loose
leaf form for the purpose of easy
revision as new information becomes
available. The state-of-the-art for
some aspects of these land treatment
technologies is changing rapidly. It is
anticipated that the first update of the
manual will occur in the fall of 1979.
SUMMARY
The intent of this paper was to
present an overview of the Federal
guidelines applicable to the land treat-
ment of municipal wastewater. Because
it would not be possible to describe in
detail the individual features of such
guidelines in a paper of this nature,
the approach taken was to outline the
major elements which provide the frame-
work for the Federal criteria applied to
land treatment systems. More specific
information is contained in the documents
and publications highlighted in the
paper. Copies of "Alternative Waste
Management Techniques for Best Practic-
able Waste Treatment" (EPA 430/9-75-013),
the Administrator's Policy Statement of
October 3, 1977, and the Program Require-
ments Memorandum on Evaluation of land
treatment alternatives (when available)
can be obtained by writing to Chief,
Municipal Technology Branch (WH-547), EPA,
Washington, D.C. 20460. The "Process
Design Manual for Land Treatment of
Municipal Wastewater" (EPA 625/1-77-008)
can be obtained from the Environmental
Research Information Center, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45268.LEGISLATION
STATE GUIDELINES FOR THE USE OF LAND
TREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
Theodore L. Hullar, Ph.D.
Deputy Commissioner for
Programs and Research
New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation
Albany, New York 12233
Abstract
The history of land treatment in
New York State and development of early
State regulations is discussed.
Present State regulations and
guidelines are presented with discus-
sions as to their use in the implemen-
tation of land treatment systems. The
regulations discussed include ground and
surface water standards pertaining to
land treatment or disposal and project
review requirements including design
guidelines. The use of New York State's
permit system as a monitoring and
management control system is also pre-
sented, including recommended operating
requirements.
A need for multi-program involve-
raent is demonstrated if land treatment
opportunities are to be fully realized.
The interrelationship of various State
and non-State programs and institutions
impacting on land treatment are devel-
oped. A multi-disciplined strategy is
necessary for effective development of
land treatment opportunities.
Both obstacles and opportunities
in land treatment are discussed with em-
phasis on activities that are either
needed to fully develop land treatment
alternatives or that may present
obstacles to such development.50,000 square miles. lts population is
concentrated in 10 standard metropolitan
statistical areas which roughly form a
band starting with Long Island and New
York City up the Hudson River Valley to
Albany, west through the Mohawk River
Valley through Utica and on to Syracuse
and then along the shores of Lake
Ontario and Erie including the cities of
Rochester, Niagara Falls and Buffalo.
New York is also geographically
diverse, consisting of the Adirondack
and Catskill Mountain terrains, the 155
mile Hudson tidal estuary, the central
rolling farmlands and Finger Lake areas,
the Great Lakes shore area, the
Appalachian Plateau and the unique sandy
Long Island area. Though the State is
generally considered highly industrial-
ized, more than 75% of its lands are
agricultural and forest and bush wood-
lands.(l) This population and geo-
graphic dlstribution thus provides the
opportunity for realizing varied effec-
tive land treatment opportunities.
The greatest potential for land
treatment would be expected in the fruit
and vegetable farming areas along the
Great Lakes and in the Finger Lakes
region and possibly in the lumber
industry areas adjoining the Adirondack
and Catskill Mountains and in the
Southern Tier.
Introduction
New York is a large diverse State
with a population in excess of 18 mil-
lion people and a land area of almostHistory of Land Treatment in New York
State
The first municipal plant in New
York State to use land treatment forwastewater effluent was the Village of
Lake George in 1936. There are now
approximately 25 municipalities dis-
charging about 9 MGD to the ground-
waters of New York State. These
systems all use a rapid infiltration
mode of discharge either through tile
fields, leaching pits, or non-
underdrained sand filters.^ ^ Our
Department has extensively studied the
Lake George Village system in relation
to the trophic state of Lake George and
the phosphorus removal capabilities of
various soils. This system protects the
lake from excessive phosphorus inputs by
providing an effective land treatment
system for the removal of nutrients from
a secondary effluent.") Our research
unit has also used this system as a
historie base in its extensive studies
on the phosphorus removal capabilities
of various New York State soils. This
research is directed towards providing
a rationa.1 design based on soil classi-
flcations for the removal of phosphorus
in septic tank-tile field systems.™'
Spray irrigation as a viable means
of industrial wastewater treatment
evolved 1n New York State primarily be~
cause of favorable circumstances in the
food processing industry, Their pro-
cessing schedules occur primarily during
late summer and early fall, which is the
most favorahle season for spray irriga-
tion and the least favorable for surface
discharges. Additionally, many of these
food processors are located in the
farming area of central New York State
away from main watercourses and usually
on the headwaters of minor tributaries
which periodically become intermittent
or completely dry in flow. These
natural conditions demand high levels
of treatment for short periods of time
in order to protect the surface water
quality. Spray irrigation, therefore,
becomes very cost effective under these
circumstances. '•'' Over the last 10 to
20 years, 15 spray irrigation systems
have been developed in New York State,
applying a total of 4.7 MGD to 549
acres of land.
Early State Regulations and Guidelines
New York State groundwater classes
and standards which were promulgated in
May of 1967 essentially included a para-
metric list of drinking water standards
which were applicable at the point of
contact of the wastewater and ground
surface. This effluent Standard ap-proach severly limited the development
of cost effective spray irrigation sys-
tems, particularly systems containing
non critical (non-toxic) organic
material as found in some municipal and
all food processing wastewaters.
Guidelines for the design review
of spray irrigation systems have evolved
in New York State over the last five (5)
years along with the development of land
disposal systems by the fruit and vege-
table industry. These guidelines were
initially conservative especially in the
areas of unknown erop and soil renovative
capability. They also were in part
designed to prevent mis-management of
spray systems which in the past have
caused public nuisance complaints due to
odors, runoff, ponding, etc. It should
be noted that our guidelines are just
that, "guidelines", and as such are sub-
ject to modification for any well
developed specific project design.
Present Regulations and Guidelines
Several different types of regu-
lations and guidelines guide our current
activities in the implementation of land
for waste treatment:
Environmental Standards
Groundwater Standards
Surface Water Standards
Project Review
Environmental Compatibility
(NEPA/SEQR)
Wastewater Facilities Report
Design Guidelines
Management Control
SPDES Permit
Operational Guidelines
Monitoring
Groundwater Standards:
In July of 1977, the State of New
York completed public hearings on pro-
posed revisions to its groundwater
classifications and standards which are
formally designated as Part 703 of Title
6 of the Official Compilation of Codes,
Rules and Regulations of the State of
New York. These revisions (6NYCRR
703.10(a)(3)) contain provisions for
allowing the "potential renovative
capabilities of a water management sys-
tem employing land application technology
and land utilization practices, provided
for each specific proposal it has been
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Department that:There shall be no actual or poten-
tial public health hazard; and
Appllcable Water Quality Standards
shall be met In the saturated
zone; and
Applicable Water Quality Standards
shall not be contravened in any
adjacent waters of the State."
Our ground and surface water
quality standards are found in Part 700
of 6 NYCRR and are promulgated pursuant
to authority under Article 17 of the En-
vironmental Conservation Law of the State
of New York. The best usage class of
generally all of New York's groundwaters
are as a source of potable water supply.
As such, quality standards are consistent
with raw water quality standards promul-
gated in Sub-part 5-1 of 10 NYCRR by the
New York State Department of Health, and
applicable standards promulgated under
the Safe Drinking Water Act (PL 93-523)
in addition to quality standards promul-
gated by our Department in Part 703.
Surface water quality standards are
promulgated according to best usage
classificatlons with standards consistent
with the propagation and protection of
fish.
Project Review:
The New York State Environmental
Quality Review Act (SEQR) and the
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)
require respectlvely an environmental
impact statement and an environmental
assessment summary as part of the con-
struction grant process. The combined
State and Federal environmental assess-
ment identifies any major environmental
constraints such as aesthetics, site
locations, land usage, etc. The State
(SEQR) procedure parallels the construc-
tion grant process and In addition to
identifying major environmental consid-
eration is used as a coordinating
mechanism for all environmental permits.
The Environmental Conservation Law
(Article 17) of the State of New York re-
qulres that plans for disposal systems be
submitted for approval. The engineering
review by the Department of Environmental
Conservation Is dlrected towards insuring
construction and operation of wastewater
facilities which can reasonably be
expected to protect and maintain compli-
ance with applicable State surface water
and groundwater classifIcatlons and stan-
dards of quality and purity, applicable
provisions of Article 17, applicable pro-
visions of the Clean Water Act,prevention of public health hazards and
minimization of nuisance problems.
The review Is conducted in two (2)
phases. The first phase involves the
submission of an "Engineering Report" or
"Wastewater Facilities Report" for the
wastewater treatment facility followed
by the second phase submission of "Plans
and Specifications".
The Engineering Report must be a
final and comprehensive description of
the wastewater problems and the proposed
solution, including applicable design
criteria. The submission should include
the manufacturing process descriptions
and operations as they relate to waste-
water generation or In the case of a
municipal system, must be a properly
developed facilities plan. A discussion
of treatment objectives should be
included. Facilities design, in thls
document, means adequate process sizing
of wastewater treatment units and/or
equlpment to achieve acceptable effluent
levels. The report should consist of
narrative descriptions, engineering cal-
culations, design criteria and process
and equipment sizes.
The report review is conducted to
evaluate whether: The design is
directed at the required objectives; a
proper basis for design has been estab-
lished; acceptable engineering design
principles have been utilized and the
design has a reasonable expectation of
meeting lts objective. The scope of the
engineering report should be sufficient
to fuif111 these review objectives.
The "Engineering Report" review of
land application techniques by the De-
partment of Environmental Conservation
is gulded In part by the guidelines in
Figure 1. Again, it should be emphaslzed
that these are review guidelines and
subject to revision and modificatlons
depending on specific site conditions
and "State of the art" literature.
The plans and sepcifications in-
clude drawings and narrative descrip-
tions of treatment systems as prepared
for construction and descriptions of
equlpment as prepared for purchase.
The review is conducted to determine
whether the treatment facilities can be
constructed, installed and operated in a
manner consistent with the design and
objectives presented in the approved
engineering report.
Because land application by nature
must be site specific and because a wide
range of design possibilities is avail-
able, it is not well suited to
standardized design guidelines. The fewNew York State Department of Environmental Conservation's
Guidelines £or the Design of Spray Irrlgation Systems
Application Rates
1. Hydraulic - maximum application - 3 in/wk
2. Organic - maximum 500 lb BOD/ac/day (recent data indicates this
value may be excessively conservative)
3. Inorganic - maximum salinity 1,000 mg/l
Groundwater
Class GA groundwater standards apply in saturated zone pursuant to
Sec. 703.10 (a)(3) of 6NYCRR.
Spray Scheduling
1. Duration ~ 8 hours or less
2. Spray use/rest ratio - 1:4 or greater (maintain aerobic soil tonditions)
3. Daylight spray only
4. Operation only from May 1 to November 30
5. No spraying during rainfall
Spray Field Layout
1. No overlapping wetted area
2. At least 200 feet separation to surface waters, dweiling and public
roadways
3. Provide runoff collection and recirculation
Crop Cover Maintenance
1. Recommended crop - reed canarygrass
2. Crop harvesting - cut before going to seed, at least twice per season
3. Subsoiling - recommended seasonally
Pretreatment
1. Grit, stone and debris protection
2. Equalization and pH control if required
3. Storage - 2 weeks plus any flow generated in prohibited time period
4. Secondary treatment and disinfection for sanitary wastes - (Subject
to reconsideration under Sec. 703.10 (a)(3) "Exceptions")
Monitoring
1. Flow measurement and water characteristics
2. Rainfall, runoff and groundwater elevation and quality
Figure 1
10existing guidelines are generally
limlted in scope, dealing mainly with
spray irrigation. In lieu of guide-
lines, the design must rely on a com-
prehensive understanding of the prin-
ciples involved, site evaluation by
specialists and ingenuity. A multl-
disclplinary approach to designing land
application systems is necessary. This
most desirably includes englneers,
hydrologists, geologists, soil
scientists and agronomists.
Management Control:
After conducting its engineering
review of a proposed land application
system, the Department of Environmental
Conservation, drafts a proposed
effluent discharge permit consistent
with the Clean Water Act and the State
Environmental Conservation Law. New
York State has been delegated the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimlnation
System (NPDES) program. The State pro-
gram in addition to including surface
water discharges as required under the
NPDES program also includes groundwater
discharges such as land treatment
systems.
The permit contains, for the pro-
posal, management requirements that are
designed to protect groundwater quality
and prevent public nuisance conditions
through maintenance of a healthy erop
cover, adequate soil percolation
capacity and aerobic erop and soil
conditions. The permit requires opera-
tion of such systems in accordance with
the parameters developed in its site
specific design and accepted through
DEC review procedures. The following
items provide the main elements of a
SPDES permit for a land treatment sys-
tem employing spray irrigation:
General Management Provisions
Site Specific Design Parameters
a. Maximum instantaneous ap-
plication rate (in./hr.)
b. Overall application rate
(in./wk.) (includes rest
period)
Monitoring Provisions
a. Flow measurement and
wastewater characteristics
b. Application rates, rainfall
and runoff
c. Groundwater elevation and
quality
Pollution Abatement Time Schedules
(for)
a, Operations and managementmanual
b. Other problems that may
occur
The following recommended perrait
conditions are designed to promote good
management practices for spray irriga-
tion sites:
Spray irrigation should be prac-
ticed only during the period
May 1 to November 30.
Spray irrigation should be prac-
tlced only during daylight
hours.
Spray irrigation should not be
practiced during periods of
measurable natural precipita-
tion.
No area of the spray irrigation
fields should be irrigated on
two consecutive days,
Surface runoff or irrigated waste-
water from the spray field shall
not be permitted, nor shall
surface runoff be permitted to
enter the spray fields.
A viable cover erop shall be main-
tained on all spray irrigation
fields.
Spray irrigation fields should be
designed and operated to pre-
vent surface accumulation of
wastewaters.
The spray irrigation system shall
at all times be operated in a
manner acceptable to the
Department.
These management provisions rep-
resent gnod technical practice. The)'-
have also evolved in part because of
past abuses and problems and, if adhered
to "in good faith", should assure public
acceptance of spray irrigation systems
as goorl neighbors. Again, it must be
emphasized that, because of the public
participation procedures of otir water
pollution control laws, we can expect
objections from potential adjacent
property owners of spray systems because
of bad experiences from other systems.
It is our opinion that proper
management control is so important for
the continued viability and public
acceptance of land treatment that we
have followed up and required all of New
York State's existipg spray irrigation
systems to develop and provide us with
an operations and management manual for
each system. This manual is intended to
provide a definition of the proper
operating conditions for each system,
11particularly for existing operations
that have evolved over the years rather
than being properly designed initially.
The need for this follow-up Is generally
associated with the systems that have
been built prior to the adoption of the
SPDES permit system. The SPDES permit
is uscd as the legal machanism to re-
quire submission of these raanuals in
accordance with a time schedule.
Our SPDES pertnits require monitor-
Ing of the applied wastewater and
groundwater quality. Groundwater
monitoring is by sampling wells so as to
determine water flow and characteristics
into and out of land disposal sites.
The purpose of this groundwater moni-
toring is to provide assurance for the
continued protection and maintenance of
groundwater quality classifications and
standards. Sampling frequency is
generally related to the rate of
groundwater movement and usually is
monthly or quarterly. We generally
require a minimum of three (3) off-
field wells placed so as to insure
interception of groundwater flow into
and out of a land treattnent site. The
sampling wells are required to be con-
structed so as to obtain a represen-
tative sample. Casings must be sealed
and capped to prevent the entrance of
surface rain and irrigated waters.
The critical sampling point is the top
surface of the groundwater, therefore,
screens or slits in the casing are
needed to insure proper sample
collection.
Failure to tnaintain permit condi-
tions or groundwater quality subjects
the owner of the land applications
system to the enforcement provisions of
Article 17 of the Environmental Conser-
vation Law of New York State. These
provisions are similar to the NPDES/
SPDES point discharge enforcement
programs. If violations or problems
occur initial contact is made in a
cooperative manner and then, if
necessary, follow-up through our hearing
procedures.
Multi-Program Involvement
Recent Federal leglslation on the
Clean Water Act and the Resource Con-
servation and Recovery Act both
encourage the use of land for disposal
and/or treatment. At this time, our
Department intends to fully develop
effective land treatment opportunities
in New York State. Fortunately, wehave within a single State Department,
the Department of Environmental Con-
servation, the key divisions necessary
for such an implementation. These pro-
gram divisions are air resources, fish
and wildlife, land resources and forest
management, pure waters, and solid waste
management.
The Division of Pure Waters,
because of having responsibility for
implementation of much of the Clean
Water Act, is greatly involved with this
implementation. lts activities in
developing effective land treatment
systems include:
1. Identification and implemen-
tation of municipal land
treatment systems through
(201 Grants) wastewater
treatment facilities grants.
2. Contact with consulting
engineers (conferences and
guidance).
3. Implementation of toxic
strategy and pretreatment
programs which impact on
acceptable wastewater
characteristics.
4. Water research (phosphorus
removal studies).
5. Development of ground and
surface water quality
standards.
6. Development of project design
and review guidelines.
The Division of Land Resources and
Forest Management has the following
responsibilities in the implementation
of land treatment systems:
1. Through water quality manage-
ment plans (208 studies), the
Identification of potential
land treatment and/or disposal
sites for wastewaters and
residual wastes.
2. The Identification and use of
State forest lands for land
treatment and reuse.
The Division of Solid Waste
Management impacts in the following
program activities:
1. The implementation of the RCRA
through development of secure
landfills as co-disposal sites
(refuse and municipal sludge).
The Division of Fish and Wildlife:
121. Development of freshwater wet-
land inventory and program
(include wastewater disposal
VS beneficial use of Freshwater
Wetlands).
2. Development of ecological stan-
dards for the protection of
fish and wildlife.
In addition, our Department is
utilizing its manpower training and
management, environmental education and
regional operations resources to fully
implement land treatment opportunities
in New York State.
The following schematic in Figure
2 shows the multi-program involvement
necessary for the development of a land
treatment system. It illustrates how by
having a relatively clear organization
structure the many disciplines involved
can be directed towards achieving this
goal.
Use of Non-New York State Expertise
Our Department is only one of the
many institutions that must be involved
in order to develop land treatment
opportunities.
Information for the education and
use of professionals, public officials
and communities is necessary for the
proper development of land as a waste
management alternative. Cornell
University prepared a comprehensive
modular course on land application of
wastewater, including topics such as
legal aspects, site evaluation, nitrogen
removal and others. Assistance of this
kind is necessary and should be suppor-
ted. The engineering community in
particular must have clear, concise
technical principles for the design of
these multi-disciplined systems.
Federal agency assistance is also
used and is necessary. The EPA in the
promulgation of laws, rules and regula-
tions and in providing incentives plays
an important role in the development of
land treatment opportunities. This is
particularly true regarding the addi-
tional grants available under Innovative
and Alternative Technologies. The EPA
policy statement making ineligible for
construction grants unnecessary pre-
treatment facilities is important for
the development of cost effective land
treatment systems.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
in cooperation with the EPA and Depart-
ment of Agriculture, have provlded avery timely Process Design Manual for
Land Treatment of Municipal Wastewaters.
A multi-media education program is
also necessary to reach the community,
public officials and the engineering and
scientific community. This can be
accomplished through the education
community, various professional con-
ferences, public and trade journals and
public relations news releases. We have
held In our Department with the assis-
tance of Cornell University and the
Corps of Engineers an executive con-
ference for the purposes of implementing
land treatment opportunities in New York
State.
Obstacles to Land Treatment
Land as a waste management alter-
native provides many opportunities, but
it also has limitatlons and problems.
Toxic Substance Control:
The use of land for treatment or
disposal must be undertaken carefully to
prevent future environmental problems
resulting from contaminants in surface
and groundwaters and possibly in the
food web. In order to prevent this,
industrial pretreatment programs must be
implemented through the Clean Water Act.
The Toxic Substance Control Act must be
effective. Secure and safe disposal
sites must be developed under the Re-
source Conservation and Control Act.
Our many environmental programs must be
coordinated so as to track and control
hazardous substances to a final, safe
disposal sink. Toxic substance control
through the land is an entire area of
concern in itself particularly regarding
contaminated sludges or dredglng as in
the case of PCB laden spoils from the
Hudson River.(6)
Education:
The use of land as a treatment or
disposal medium historically has not
been emphasized In our universities. It
Is by nature a multi-disciplined
approach and this fact in itself has
been an obstacle because consulting
engineers have not been trained in this
manner nor are there conveniently avail-
able proper design principles. The
disciplines involved in addition to
engineering principles include the
sciences and public health. Consulting
engineers faced for the first time with
13Multi-lnstitutional Involvement for Land
Treatment Implementation
PROJECT INITIATION
• Clean Water Act
208 Studies
201 project (Step 1)
• Education - public
officials, consulting
engineers.Municipality
SITE IDENTIFICATION AND
DESIGN
• Clean Water Act
208 Plan (area wide)
State Forest Lands
Farm Lands
Wetlands
• Design Guidelines
Universities (education)
Gov. Agencies (regulations)
Consulting Engrs. (design)tkIndustry
Pretreatment
Sludge
Disposal
Land Disposal/Treatment
(spray irrigation)CropsToxic Substance
Control Act
Clean Water Act
Toxic Substance Control
Strategy
SAFE FINAL DISPOSAL
OF RESIDUALS
• Clean Water Act
(and reuse)
• Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act
(secure landfill)
• Clean Air Act
(incineration)
PROTECTION OF PUBLIC &
ECONOMIC RETURN
• State Ag. & Mkt.
• Food and Drug Admin.
Croundwater - PROTECTION OF CROUND WATER
• Safe Drinking Water Act
(standards)
• State Ground Water Quality
Standards
Figure 2having to consider land management
alternatives are bombarded wlth a
seemingly exhaustive and sometlmes con-
tradicatory array of literature. Our
Department has, for the last four years,
maintalned an annual land disposal
literature update and in doing so con-
siders for review an average of 150
separate publications per year. Pro-
fessional manpower training programs for
the design engineers are needed in a
relatively short period of time.
Management:
At this time, much of our agency's
contact with the public regarding
existing systems has been due to nui-
sance conditions such as overt runoff,
ponding and odors. The public partici-
pation procedures of our laws are such
that should we be faced with a land
management proposal we can expect
objections from potential neighbors or
communities due to bad experiences from
other systems. In many cases, it is
these issues which determine the fate of
proposed systems and not the protection
of our water resources. It is for
these reasons that many of our design
guideline items and permit conditions
are directed towards encouraging proper
system management.
Site Identification:
Many of the nations water pollu-
tion control programs because of early
State programs (e.g. New York State's
Pure Waters Program begun in 1965),
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
of 1972 and the 1977 Clean Water Act
are in a mature accelerated phase and
keyed into priority lists. Many large
projects are currently under construc-
tion. For these reasons, it is
important that all available resources
be mobilized and directed towards the
timely identification of any remaining
potential land management opportunities.
Agricultural and forest lands contiguous
to future wastewater treatment projects
must be identified and factored into the
Step I phase of the 201 construction
grant. Timing is critical and inter and
intra agency cooperation is necessary to
develop what remaining land management
opportunities exist.
Opportunities in Land Treatment
The use of land as a wastemanagement alternative besides providlng
an economie and desirable wastewater
treatment alternative provides some
unique opportunities.
Wetlands at first glance may seem
to be areas in disarray because of a
mixture of plants and animals and in
the past have been filled, dredged and
drained for urban and agricultural
development. In reality, they are
valuable resources providing fish and
wildlife habitat, open space, flood
control and maintenance of water
quality. The use of land as a waste-
water treatment alternative provides us
a unique opportunity to help preserve,
protect and even create wetlands. The
wastewaters which so overburdened our
streams during the drought in the early
60's also, in some instances provided
the moisture for the maintenance of
many wetlands. The Brookhaven National
Laboratory developed and has been
operating Marsh/Meadow/Pond systems
which in effect are created wetlands.
These are closed natural systems using
a combination of land application tech-
nlques showing excellent energy and
cost savings.
Some of our older,higher organi-
cally loaded spray irrigation systems
have accumulated approximately 125
tons per acre of organics in the first
foot of soil.(7) Opportunities exist
in these systems for the improvement or
creation of farmlands or wetlands by
the use of land treatment techniques.
It appears that for these acclimated
systems, loadings can exceed 15,000
lbs./acre/day of organics with no
apparent adverse effects on groundwater
quality. These application rates are
significant when compared to a gener-
ally accepted design limit of 600 lbs./
acre/day for wastewater treatment
lagoons.
The use of land treatment alter-
natives with imaginative leadership can
be used as a mechanism for the preser-
vation of open space in or adjacent to
urban areas. Land treatment alter-
natives that are not cost effective
because' of the high value of land
should be given reconsideration with
other multiple objectives and purposes.
Though New York State's water
pollution cnntrol program is mature and
does not provide significant oppor-
tunities for large municipal spray
irrigation systems because of systems
either already built or under construc-
tion, other types of opportunities
still exist. Seasonal wastewater spray
15Irrigatlon provides a cost effective
means of providing low flow protection
and nutriënt removal through land
treatment, particularly in our small
rural communities.
Effective implementation of our
toxic control strategy and pretreatment
programs wlll provide opportunities for
the safe and cost effective land dis-
posal of portions of the 4,900 metric
tons per day of municipal wastewater
treatment sludge expected to be
generated in New York State by the year
2000. At this time, we are planning
seven (7) potential co-disposal projects
with a total capacity of 6,700 metric
tons per day of refuse and sludge.^"-'
These projects appear to be the only
reasonable cost effective alternative to
the greater New York City metropolltan
refuse and sludge disposal problems.
Composting as wéll as energy recovery
is being considered for these projects.
Our Department has made a strong
commitment to fully develop effective
land treatment systems in New York
State, We have put together a multi-
disciplined strategy for its implemen-
tation and believe that only with an
approach of this kind can we fully
realize the opportunities that may
exist.
Acknowledgment
The author wishes to thank. staff
members of the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation for their
assistance in the preparation of this
report and for their steady development
of land treatment systems.
The assistance of Anthony Adamczyk
of the Department's Division of Pure
Waters is gratefully acknowledged.Lake's Trophic State", New York
State Department of Environmental
Conservation, Technical Paper
No. 36 (August 1974).
4. Toffletnire, T.J. , et.al. ,
"Phosphate Removal by Sands and
Soils", New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation,
Technical Paper 31, Albany, New
York (December 1973).
5. Adamczyk, A.F., "Land Disposal of
Food Processing Wastewaters in
New York State", Eighth Annual
Waste Management Conference,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New
York (April 1976).
6. New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation,
"Hudson River PCB Study Descrip-
tion and Detailed Work Plan",
Albany, New York (July 1977).
7. Jewell, W.J., et.al., "Limitations
of Land Treatment of Wastes in the
Vegetable Processing Industries",
Cornell University, Department of
Agricultural Engineering, Ithaca,
New York (February 1978).
8. New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation,
"New York State Comprehensive
Resource Recovery and Solid
Waste Management Plan", Albany,
New York (January 1978).
References
1. New York State Division of the
Budget, New York State Statistical
Yearbook - 1977, Albany, New York.
2. Bogedain, F.O., et.al., "Land
Disposal of Wastewater in New
York State", New York State
Department of Environmental
Conservation, Albany, New York
(March 1974).
3. Hetling, L.J., "Observation on the
Rate of Phosphorus Input into Lake
George and its Relationship to the
16LEGISLATION
TREATMENT OF WASTEWATER IN BRITAIN,
IMPLICATIONS FOR AGRICULTURAL LAND
G.W.Cooke, C.B.E.,Ph.D..F.R.S.
Chief Scientific Officer,
Agricultural Research Counci1,
160, Great Portland St., London WIN 6DT
Land treatment was the general
method of purifying urban sewage in
Britain from about 1870. Because large
areas of land were needed, costs were
high, and offensive odours were produced,
artificial methods of treatment began to
be used around 1900. Many sewage farms
continued for long but all had been
abandoned by 1970. Modern artificial
treatment gives a clear effluent dis-
charged to rivers, and sewage sludge,
which is rich in the plant nutrients N
and P. The obstacle to using all sludge
produced on farmland as manure is its
content of heavy metals (zinc, copper,
nickel and chromium) which are toxic to
crops. Guidelines for using sewage
sludge safely have been developed; they
are based on metal contents of sludge
and soil, on the erop, and on the ef-
ficiënt use of the N in sludge.
Intensive animal farmïng systems
produce large amounts of semi-liquid
slurries which, in UK, contain more N, P
and K, and more BOD, than wastes from
the human population. The only econ-
omical way of purifying these wastes,
and making use of the plant nutrients
they contain, is by land treatment,
preferably on grass. Pollution of
drainage water, and surface runoff, must
be avoided. These requirements are met,
and N, P and K are used efficiently, by
using computer models to fit appli-
cations of wastes to the hydraulic ca-
pacity of soil, to the cycle of growth
and use of the erop and to the land
available.LAND TREATMENT OF MUNICIPAL WASTES
Historical
Until 18^7 there were legal pro-
hibitions on the discharge from house-
drains, water-closets or cesspools into
British rivers. Such sewers as existed
were only for removing surface water.
The resulting pollution of subsoils,
low areas of land, and wel Is, was ac-
centuated by the increasing provision of
piped water supplies and water closets.
Conditions in large towns became so bad
that discharge to rivers by sewers was
legalised in 1847. This practice,
largely adopted by the l860s, however,
gave no more than a breathing space and
a Committee (i) reported in 1869 that it
had led to "a greatly augmented pol-
lution of rivers, which is now acknowl-
edged to be an evi1 of national import-
ance".
River Pollution was investigated
by Royal Commissions from 1857- They
quickly recommended that the right way
to dispose of town sewage was to apply
it to land but the practice was adopted
in relatively few places. The British
Association (1) reported in 1869 on 96
towns which had a system of water-borne
sewage, only 15 used land treatment of
their effluent and the Association rec-
ommended its adoption everywhere to
benefit amenity, the health of the
people and agriculture. Investïgations
made on land treatment reported in-
cluded experiments with animals to
measure the feeding value of crops
grown and their safety, the guality of
vegetables, and the health of people
17living on sewage farms.
The Public Health Act of 1875 for-
bade discharge from foul sewers into
rivers (but it was many years before
such discharges ceased completely).
Sewage farms were established to serve
all in land towns and many had lives of
over 50 years. Writing in 1925 Kershaw
(2) devoted considerable space in his
book to land treatment, described as po-
tentially the best way of producing
high-class effluent. However, the pro-
cess needed considerable areas of land
and could not be hurried, particuiarly
if irrigated crops were grown. The
problems of finding sufficient land near
large cities, were serious from the
beginning. They were accentuated where
less suitabie soils had to be used,
capable of deal ing only with the efflu-
ent from 250-500 people on 1 hectare
used for irrigation. Early difficulties
were dealt with by partial treatment of
sewage to settle solids by precipi-
tation processes. Already in the last
century development was begun of com-
pletely artificial processes which pro-
duced two products - sewage sludge and a
clear effluent, and which used very
little land. These processes began to
be accepted in England in about 1896
and the Sewage Disposal Commission ap-
pointed in 1898 had the task of putting
them on a scientific basis.
The recent period
Although Garner (3) writing in
1938 did not mention land treatment as
an important process in Britain, some
sewage farms remained in use after 1945-
In 1970 Jeger (4) stated that all large-
scale land treatment had been abandoned
in Britain because of 1) large areas of
land involved, 2) high cost, 3) smeils
and 4) the need to rest land between
sewage applications if underground
water supplies were not to be polluted.
All sewage treatment (for four-fifths of
the populat ion) was by modern works,
half using biological filters and half
activated sludge processes, both orig-
inally developed in Britain. In 1970
23 mi 11 ion m3 of water was used per day
per person), about a third was
used for domestic purposes. The total
flow of sewage was 14.1 mi 11 ion m3. As
one third of British water supply is
from rivers, treated sewage effluent is
an important component. The minimum
quality for treated effluent is 30 mg/l
of suspended solids and 20 mg/l of BOD,
assuming eight times dilution with riverwater, effluent discharged to rivers
giving less dilution must be of a higher
Standard.
Half of the present sewage flow is
from industry. The liquids range from
wastes from food, drink, paper, leather
and wool industries, which are easy to
treat, to those from metal, engineering
and chemical industries, which are
difficult to treat as they upset bio-
logical processes. Synthetic detergents
have increased the load of phosphorus
and boron in sewage.
Sewage sludge on agricultural land
The only use of land in sewage
treatment in Britain is now for dis-
posal of sewage sludge. About 1 mi 11 ion
tonnes of dry solids are produced annu-
ally containing 2.k% N, 1.3% P2O5, 0.3%
K20. The total plant nutrients -
26,500 t of N, 14,000 t of P205 and
3,300 t of Kz0 - are only about 2%% of
the N, 3% of the P and \% of the K used
as fertilizer in UK. Although it is
sensible to make use of these plant
nutrients on farm land, only about half
is used in this way; the remainder is
dumped on land-fill sites, or at sea; a
little is burned. Composting with town
refuse has not led to products accept-
able for use as manure. The main ob-
stacie to using all sludge on farmland
is that much of it is rich in heavy
metals, toxic to crops and/or to man.
Some sludges contain toxic chemicals or
pathogens.
The agricultural value of the N, P
and K in British sewage sludges, which
has been partially dried, was investi-
gated by Bunting (5). The organic
matter was unimportant. The N and P
were roughly as available as N and P in
farmyard manure (FYM), the smail amount
of K was useless; on an equal weight
basis FYM was superior to sewage sludge,
largely because the former supplied much
K, Some analyses are in Table 1,
Problems with heavy metals in
sewage sludges were discussed by Webber
(6). Poor growth was caused by toxic
amounts of heavy metals, notably zinc,
copper and nickel, occasionally chro-
mium. He described the concept of
maximum permissible applications based
on "zinc equivalents" (on the basis
that Cu is twice as toxic,and Ni eight
times as toxic as Zn). He further
assumed that the total loading should
not exceed 250 mg of Zn-equivalent per
kg of soi1 over a 30-year period. This
is equivalent to 560 kg Zn equivalent/
18Table 1. Analyses of Sewage Sludge and FYM (Bunting (5))
Percentages on fresh materials
Raw sewage sludge
Digested sludge
Dried sludge
Farmyard manureDry
matter
4o52
80
26Organic
matter
20
23
32
16Ash
20
29
48
100
1
2
0N
• 9
.4.0
.6P2O5
0.5
1 .1
2.1
0.4KzU
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.5
Table 2. Metals in Sewage Sludges and Soils
(after Berrow and Webber (7))
All data are for total concentrations in mg/kg
Ag
B
Cd
Cr
Cu
Mn
Ni
Pb
Sn
ZnRange
5-150
15-1000
<6O-15OO
40-8800
200-8000
150-2500
20-5300
120-3000
40-700
700-1*9000Sewage sludges
Mean
32
70
<200
980
970
500
510
820
160
4100Medi an
20
50
-
250
800
400
80
700
120
3000SOM S
typical
level
<1
10
0.
100
20
800
50
30
380
Table 3. Guidelines for the Application of Liquid
Digested Sewage Sludges. (DoE (8))
Normal range of concentrat ton--' Limit of
recommended
Soils Liquid sludges addition
in sludge
mg/kg* mg/kg- kg/haPeriod
of
addi tion
years
Zinc
Copper
Nickel
Chromium
Cadmi urn
Lead
Mercury
Molybdenum
Arsenic
Selen ium
Boron
Available ni trogen
* in dry sol10-300
2-100
5-500
5-500
0.1-1.0
2-200
0.01-0.3
2
0.1-40
0.2-0.5
2-100
-
ids1500-3000
600-800
50-80
100-400
7-50
200-700
3-55
7.5
550
20000-50000560
280
70
1000
51000
2
510
57(grass)
5(arable)
525(grass)
100(cereal)30
30
30
30
30+
30+
30+
30+
30+
30+
1
1
1
1
hectare or 19 kg/ha each year. In
addition allowance must be made for zinc
equivalents already present in the soil
which could be extracted by conventional
extractants. Table 2 from Berrow and
Webber (7) gives concentrations of some
metals in sewage sludges.
Guidelines for the use of sewagesludge on land were developed by a
Working Party of the Department of the
Environment (8). They concluded that the
availabi1ities of N and P in dewatered or
dried sludges were, respectively, one-
third and one-half of the availability of
these nutrients in inorganic Fertilizers.
They followed Coker (9) in saylng that
19851 of the N in liquid digested sludge
was available. The guidelines for di-
gested sludges are shown in Table 3-
Their use should avoid the risk of
damage to crops, animais or people, but
they do require analyses of both sludges
and soils to be available and this in-
formation is, at present, rare. No out-
breaks of disease in man or animals have
been traced to the use of sewage sludge.
These guidelines represent the best
advice at present available but they may
need change as new information is ac-
quired. Large dressings of liquid
sludges applied in winter may poiiute
drainage with nitrate. Most heavy
metals are less available in neutral
than in acid soils and liming diminishes
their toxicity; molybdenum and selenium
are exceptions. Applications for
nitrogen and boron are made on an annual
basis, because they are soluble. The
other elements are retained in soi1 and
the amount applied in any one year
should not exceed one-fifth of the total
recommended for 30 years.
Application of liquid digested sewage
siudge
Most sewage sludge applied to land
has been partially dried. However Drew
(10) proposed the direet use of liquid
digested sludge on land to avoid drying
and to save N; he stated that much in-
organic N was lost by drainage and
volati1isation during the drying
process. Coker(9) reported tests on
liquid digested sludges, applied by
tanker, and supplying up to 132 kg N/ha
in 70,000 litres/ha of liquid. The N in
the liquid sludges was much more avail-
able than N in partially dried sludge;
it was equivalent to 8*t% as much N in
inorganic fertilizer for grass and was
nearly as effective as fertilizer-N for
barley. A dressing of 56,000 1/ha of
liquid sludge supplied 't.8 kg/ha of
zinc; this did not damage the grass
erop. Coker (9) recommended that, to
minimi se damage from heavy metals,
sludge should be spread thinly over a
large area of farmland, and that dress-
ings should not be applied frequently.
DoE (8) report that application of
liquid digested sludges to land has
increased recently. Dry solids in the
sludges do not exceed 6%. The sludges
are applied direct by tanker, by rain
gun or irrigation pipes. However DoE
state that the cost of the tanker fleet
can approach that of mechanical de-
watering and disposal of drier sludge.LAND TREATMENT OF ANIMAL WASTES
Historical
The traditional way of disposing of
animal excreta is to mix them with straw
and other organic bedding materials.
The resulting mixture was then stacked
to ferment and make farmyard manure, a
relative dry material that could be
spread on the land, supplying plant
nutrients and organic matter to benefit
soils and crops. In many European
countries liquid manures were collected
and used as important sources of plant
nutrients. The "Gulle" system was
common where a mixture of faeces, urine
and litter was matured together and
diluted with water. The resulting
liquid was used for crops and grass.
The traditional Swiss system was
described by Gisiger (11). On all grass
farms where the herbage was used on the
farm for grazing or si lage, over So% of
the N and P and 90% of the K. in forage
were returned to the land in liquid
manures. Intensive farming (about 2£
cows/ha) was done to produce mi Ik and
meat with little need for fertilizer
since plant nutrients were recirculated.
On average a cow produced each day ^3
litres of "Gulle" liquid manure con-
taining 0.5% N, 0.09% P and 0.7% K.
Two dressings a year were given to
grass (after diluting with water) and
they supplied about 130 kg N, 20 kg P
and 200 kg K/ha.
In Britain the "Gulle" system was
never used. In the Nineteenth Century
some farmers collected urine and drain-
age in underground tanks and this
liquid was appiïed to land in spring.
With cheap fertilizer readily available
in this century these installations
were abandoned. Farmyard manure con-
tinued to be made and used but waste
liquids often drained to watercourses
and polluted them.
The recent period
Since 1950 the numbers of cattle
in Britain have increased by k0%, pigs
by 300? and poultry by 70%. Workers on
farms have diminished by two-thirds but
are paid much more so labour costs are
much greater. Straw for animal bedding
is scarce and expensive in grassland
districts. Flocks and herds have
become much larger. All these changes
have resulted in intensive methods of
livestock handling. Cattle are con-
fined for half the year, pigs and
20poultry are permanently housed. Farm-
yard manure invoives large costs in
making and handling and is now much less
common on British farms. Faeces and
urine, plus some wash waters, from in-
tensive animal systems are handled as
liquid or semi liquid slurries. Recent
leglislation made discharge of farm
wastes into water-courses illegal, and
the costs of disposal to public sewers
tahere available) became prohibitive.
Farmers were therefore compelled to plan
to dispose of slurries on land. I n-
itially these wastes were regarded as a
serious disposal problem, mainly because
fertilizers were cheap, prices having
risen little since 1955. Between 1972
and 1975 fertilizer prices trebled,
largely as a result of the energy crisis,
and farmers realised the value of the
slurries as sources of plant nutrients.
This had led to a re-appraisal in which
the emphasis is on use, not disposal.
O'Callaghan et al (12) emphasise
the problems created by increase in the
number of specialist farmers with large
numbers of tivestock in small feeding
areas, often using feeding stuffs
bought into the farm, and sometimes with
limited areas of land for disposal.
Methods have been developed for partial
or complete treatment of slurries by
mechanical separation and fermentation
to produce soltd wastes that may be
spread on land without offence from
odour, plus liquid effluent suitable for
discharge to a river; some processes
produce methane for fuel. This paper is,
however, solely concerned with land
treatment of wastes.
The problem
Maximum efficiency in conversion of
animal feed to product has required
standardised feeding and management of
intensively kept stock. There are
therefore no large variations in thenature of the slurries produced;
Tab Ie k gives typical data (from
O'Callaghan et al (12)). The BOD of
wastes varies from 15000 mg/l for cattle
waste with 11% dry matter to 42000 mg/l
for hen waste with 231 dry matter. The
total animal wastes to be disposed of
annually in UK are 57 x 109 litres con-
taining 372000 t of N, 75000 t of P and
241000 t of K. Domestic sewage has BOD
of 400 mg/l, with an annual load of
20 kg/person. The much higher BOD of
animal wastes means that the problem of
treating this waste is equivalent to
that from a human population of 5**
mi 11 ion - close to the population of UK.
Clearly it is impossible to dupiicate
existing sewage facilities to treat
animal wastes - the income from each
animal is much too smail to provide a
margin for capital or running costs of
sewage works [ There is no alternative
to land treatment.
The val ue of these wastes must be
realised; in terms of fertilizers (at
1978 prices for UK) they are worth
$i82m for N, $92m for P and $68m for K,
a total of about $3zt0m. The N in wastes
is more than a third of that used in
fertilizers, the P about half and the K
about three-quarters of fertilizer K.
Estïmates of nutrients in human and
animal sewage are compared in Table 5.
Constrai nts
Water pollution must be avoided.
No effluent discharged to rivers may
exceed 20 mg/l of BOD and 30 mg of sus-
pended solids. Even where BOD is oxi-
dized and suspended matter is removed in
passage through soi1, unless the N
applled matches uptake by crops, drain-
age will contain excess nitrate that
causes entrophication in water courses
(leading to excessive biological growth)
and gives undesirably high nitrate in
drinking water. Drainage water passing
Table k. Amounts of Livestock Wastes produced annually
and their Contents of BOD and N, P and K
Animal
Fattening pig
Laying hens
Young cattle-
Cow-No.
1
100
1
1Annual
P roduct ion
kg
1660
4550
6660
11700BOD
kg
36
190
100
176N
kg
10.5
68
34
60Total
P
kg
2.7
25
4
7.3K
kg
3.2
18.7
31
55
housed for 5 months of the year
21Table 5. Nutrients in Human and Livestock Sewage,
(estimates from several sources)
Total
content
151
64
59Human sewage
Effluent
(to rivers)Sludge
(to land)
Thousands of tonnes
100 26
50 14
50 3Livestock sewage
Total quantity
(to land)
372
75
241
to rivers or to deep aquifers must not
contain more than 22.6 mg/l of NO3-N,
WHO's maximum 'acceptabIe' level.
Surfaces runoff must also be
avoided si nee this conveys BOD plus N
and P to streams with consequent damage
to amenity and water quality. Excessive
dressings may run off sloping land;
heavy ra in may cause runoff if it
follows slurry application.
To satisfy these conditions manures
treated as liquids must not be applied
in UK in winter to soil that is f rozen,
or is at field capacity. Therefore
storage must be arranged for slurry
produced in winter. Dressings must also
match the capacity of crops to use
nutrients.
Odour is a problem in areas where
people unconnected with farming live
near to land on which wastes are used.
0'Callaghan et al (12) consider that
current research on treating slurry by
mechanical and biological methods is
most useful in lessening odour. Treated
effluent may be spread on land without
offence and separated solids may be
transported for use on other farms or
gardens.
Many of the problems of land treat-
ment of domestic sewage that led to its
being abandoned in UK in favour of
artificial treatment have reappeared in
exaggerated forms in the work done
during the last 15 years (16). Although
the volume of sewage wastes from ani-
mais are only a tenth of those from the
human population the total BOD is as
great. We have, overall, adequate land
to accept the wastes. Problems are
greatest where large animal enterprises
are sited with limited land of heavy
texture near urban districts in wet
areas; they are least in rural areas and
on permeable soils in drier climates.
Requirements for satisfactory treatment
i) The capacity of the soil to
absorb the liquid must not be exceeded.The water applied must do no more than
balance the moisture deficit on the day
of application. Hydraulie loadings vary
with soil type and rainfali; moisture
deficits vary in summer from 180 mm in
eastern England (dry area) to only
10 mm in western Wales (wet area).
Spreading is not permissibie in wet
weather (when it may be impossible ïf
tankers are used).
2) Odour problems may have to be
avoided by pre-treatment or by injecting
s1urries into soi1.
3) The plant nutrients applied
should match the needs of the erop to be
grown. Needs vary from 300 kg N,
30 kg P, 300 kg K/hectare for grass to
150 kg N, 20 kg P, 150 kg K/hectare for
wheat; sugar beet and potatoes have
intermediate needs. Intensively used
grassland may receive up to 500 kg N/ha
in a year. However the large amounts of
K which accompany so much N are taken up
"in luxury" by grass so depressing Mg
intake and leading to a risk of hypo-
magnesaemia in grazing cattle. If
grass contains more than 2% K in dry
matter, a supplement of magnesium oxide
must be fed.
Some losses of N by denitri fication
and volati1isation of ammonia may be
expected, but this cause of inefficiency
deperrds on local conditions of weather,
soil and waste and cannot be forecast
accurately.
k) Toxic effects must be avoided.
Heavy dressings of slurry can damage all
crops and grass may be checked in growth
or killed. Copper is often added to pig
diets to stimulate growth; the copper-
rich slurries may damage sensitive crops,
they may also injure sneep where these
graze subsequentiy and ingest contami-
nated surface soil (sheep are particu-
larly liable to copper poisoning).
Paiatabi1i ty of herbage is also dimin-
ished by recent dressings of wastes.
5) The erop should be suitable for
farming where animal wastes are regu-
larly applied. Human food crops should
22be monitored to avoid contamination by
pathogens. Grass is the most suitable
erop to receive slurries. !t grows for
all of the season when temperature is
high enough, it takes up more N, P and K
than other common British crops. Grass-
land carries wheeled traffic best for
spreading. Several dressings may be
appiied in a year, this is not possible
for arable crops.
Grazing is not the best way of
using grassland that receives much
slurry at regular intervals. Most of
the N and nearly all P and K in grass
eaten is returned in excreta of grazing
stock - making further P and K from
slurry unnecessary. The treated grass
is best used for cutting and feeding
fresh, or for si lage, or hay. Unless
there is a gap of 6 weeks between
spreading and grazing, health of stock
may suffer, and grass will be unpalat-
able.
The large amounts of N, and its
organic origin (leading to slow release),
make slurry unsuitable for growing high
quality wheat and barley as crops are
liable to lodge. Slurry is, however,
suitable for producing maize for si lage.
Management systems
The requirements for good manage-
ment of wastes are: 1) that plant nutri-
ents are fully used by crops to be
grown; 2) water pollution is avoided.
The first requirement is settled by
knowledge of the needs of the erop and
the use to be made of it, soil compo-
sition and concentrations of nutrients
in the wastes to be applied. The
second requirement is settled by com-
paring evapotranspirat ion and rainfall
to calculate soil moisture deficit; this
is cal led "permissible hydraulic loading
rate". A model for long-term management
of animal wastes was developed by
O'Callaghan et al (12), Dodd et al (13)
and Woods and O'Callaghan (1*0; the
practical use of the computer program
for this model was described recently by
Parkes and O'Callaghan (15), see Appen-
dix.
Much recent British work to develop
management systems for wastes has been
summarised by ARC (16) who report tests
of systems where large amounts of animal
wastes were spread. There was some
leakage to the drains after an appli-
cation of slurry, particularly when rain
followed; this usually lasted about 12
hours and measurements on drainage
water had returned to normal backgroundafter 36 hours. Less than 2% of very
large dressings applied (310 t/ha)
appeared in drainage, but grass was
scorched, and some was killed where
solids were deposited. Within a month
the grass grew again and colonised the
bare patches.
Bacteriological hazards
ARC (16) reports that as a result
of appiying much pig slurry during the
summer months to grassland on sandy clay
loam, organic pollution of drainage
water in winter was not significant but
105 E. ooli/Wtre were detected. In
other experiments slurry from pigs fed
on whey was spread at a rate equivalent
to 292 mm slurry/year; large concen-
trations of organic and microbial pol-
lutants were found in drainage for a
few days after application. To minimise,
and better to prevent, such pollution of
drainage the hydraulic capacity of the
soil must not be exceeded - as it was in
these last experiments. Nevertheless
drainage water from slurry-treated areas
must be regarded as a potential source
of human and animal pathogens.
Conclus ions
If farmland is used as a dump for
animal wastes at rates which exceed the
moisture deficit at the time, and the
capacity of the erop to use N, (and P
and K) drainage water is liable to be
poliuted and plant nutrients will be
wasted. The overall management of
hydrological regions should inciude the
production and use of animal wastes.
Nutriënt balances for regions should be
calculated; a surplus of nutrients in an
area should be solved by diverting
wastes to other areas with a deficit, as
Dodd et al (13) suggest. Plans for new
farming enterprises, or changes to
existing farms, should include arrange-
ments for disposal of wastes. Intensive
animal farming should not be started in
areas which do not have access to
sufficient land for spreading wastes.
23REFERENCES
10.
12.British Association Committee on
the treatment and utilisation of
sewage. (?87O-1877) First to
Eïghth Reports. London.
Kershaw, G.B. (1925) Sewage puri-
fication and disposal. Cambridge:
University Press.
Garner, J.H. (1938) Sewage treat-
ment in England. In: Modern Sewage
Disposal. Ed. L. Pearse. New York:
Federation of Sewage Works Associ-
ations. pp. 302-314.
Jeger, L. (1970) Taken for
granted. Report of the Working
Party on Sewage Disposal. London:
HMSO.
Bunting, A.H. (1963) Experiments
on organic manures,19^2-9. Journal
of Agricultural Science, Cambridge,
60, 121-140.
Webber, J. (1972) Effects of
toxic metals in sewage on crops.
Water Pollution Control, 1972,
pp. 404-413.
Berrow, M.L. and Webber, J. (1972)
Tracé eJements fn sewage sludges.
Journal of the Science of Food and
Agriculture, £3, 93-100.
Department of the Environment (DoE).
(1977) Report of the Working Party
on the disposal of Sewage Sludge to
Land. Published: National Water
Counci1.
Coker, E.G. (1966) The value of
liquid digested sewage sludge.
Journal of Agricultural Science,
Cambridge. 6j, 91-107.
Drew, E.A. (1962) Institution of
Public Health Engineers Journal,
|2, 216.
Gisiger, L. (1950) Organic
manuring of grassland. Journal of
the British Grassland Society, j>,
63-79-
0'Callaghan, J.R., Dodd, V.A. and
Pollock, K.A. (1973) The long
term management of animal manures.
Journal of Agricultural Engineering
Research, 18, 1-12.13. Dodd, V.A., Lyons, D.F. and
0'Callaghan, J.R. (197*0 Regional
management of animal manures - a
model for collection, storage
location and dïstribution.
Journal of Agricultural Engineer-
ing Research, V$_, 233-244.
14. Woods, J.L. and 0'Callaghan, J.R.
(1974) Mathematical model 1 ing of
animal waste treatment. Journal of
Agricultural Engineering Research,
JJ9, 245-258.
15. Parkes, M.E. and 0'Callaghan, J.R.
(1977) Calculations for efficiënt
use of nutrients in livestock
slurries on grassland. ADAS
Quarterly Review, Tj_, 155-167.
16. Agricultural Research Counci1 (ARC).
(1976) Studies on farm livestock
wastes. London: Agricultural
Research Counci1.
17. 0'Cailaghan, J.R., Pollock, K.A.
and Dodd, V.A. (1971). Land
spreading of manure frorn animal
production units. Journal of
Agricultura! Engineering Research,
16, 280-300.
2kAppendix
LAND SPREADING MODEL
The land spread ing model developed
by O'Callaghan, Pollock and Dodd (17)
was quoted by ARC (16) from which the
figure below is taken. The flow dia-
gram indicates the relevant steps in
calculating the amount of liquid manurethe farm are established. Starting with
the land at field capacity in spring
these data are compared with historical
weekly rainfall to show either growing
soil moisture deficit, or runoff if the
soil becomes saturated. If the balance
indicates a moisture deficit, spreading
should only proceed if the negative
balance is greater than a certain
amount, application with a smaller
Raad national and county data
daad farm data
Make hsight corraction
Scale SOOmm distribution
Mova to next y«r 4™
Move to next plot
Move to next wnk
Calculate AE hom PE
Balenca of rain and AE
Incraa» runoff
Simplified flow diagram for land spreading model.
that may be applied. National and local
evapotranspiration data are published as
averages for the summer months, as are
average rainfall data. A matrix is
available to relate potential evapo-
transpi ration (PT) to actual evapotran-
spi ration (AE); these estimates are
corrected for the height of the farm
above sea level. Total acreage of farm,
numbers of stock, number and si ze of
fields and cropping pattern are used in
go/no go matrices to determine where
spreading is permissible.
Weekly evapotranspirat ion data fordeficit would be unsafe. O'Callaghan
et al (17) assume the safe figure for
deficit as 15 mm (0.6 in). With
smaller values, no spreading is done; if
the deficit exceeds 15 mm, 2.5 mm
(0.1 in) of slurry is spread (equivalent
to 25 t/ha) to reduce the deficit to
12.5 mm (0.5 in). These calculations
are made for each field in turn until
the whole farm has been covered.COMPARISON OF HEALTH
CONSIDERATIONS FOR LAND
TREATMENT OF WAST E WAT ER
OVERVIEW —- HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS
ASSOCIATED WITH LAND TREATMENT OF WASTE-
WATER SYSTEMS COMPARED WITH OTHER HÜMAN
ACTIVITIES
Edwin H. Lennette and David V. Spath,
Viral and Rickettsial Disease Laboratory
and Sanitary Engineering Section,
California Department of Health,
2151 Berkeley Way, Berkeley, CA 94704
ABSTRACT
Conceivable and potential health
hazards arising from presence of toxic
or carcinogenic chemlcals and pathogenic
microbial agents in wastewaters in
connection with land dlsposal of such
wastewaters are presented in broad
terms; certain relationships of these
hazards to those posed by occupational
or environmental exposure to sltnilar
pollutants are discussed. The question
is raised as to how great a hazard is
really posed by the low concentratlons
of chemical contaminants or low numbers
of tnlcroblal pathogenic organistns with
which man coraes in contact during the
course of his normal household or
recreational activities as corapared to
his occupational or environmental ex-
posure to these satne agents. It is
questioned whether an aim of modern
technology should be to achieve a truly
zero-level or no threshold level of
chemical or biological pollutants and
whether cost-beneflt ratios would not
preclude or make infeasible the complete
removal or destruction of such pol-
lutants in wastewater, especially when
such an ideal exceeds the purity of the
natural environment to whlch man is well
conditloned in the evolution of modern
civilization.
TEXT
This session of the Symposium is
concerned with consideration and assess-
raent of potential public health problems
that may arise from land treatment of
wastewater systerns as compared tosimilar potential hazards associated
with other human activities. Such
assessment must of necessity include the
disease potential of microbiological as
well as chemical components actually or
potentially present in wastewaters.
Inasmuch as subsequent papers will con-
sider the biological and chemical as-
pects of the problem in some detail, we
wish to direct our presentation towards
a general overview of the field and to
put into a broad, and perhaps somewhat
different, philosophical perspectlve
some of the speculations, hypotheses
and conclusions of which you have un-
doubtedly heard much in other forums.
Man's pollution of his environment
goes far back in time, and early on, in
clan or tribal societies, it ostensibly
presented no great problem. Tribes
could simply move to new locations and
leave their wastes to natural recycling
processes. It was not until man aban-
doned his nomadic hunter-gatherer exis-
tence and adopted a communal life that
accumulatlon and disposal of human
excreta (and other man-generated wastes)
created an increasing problem. For
centuries and until comparatively recent
times, household wastes and excreta were
simply dumped Into open dralns which ran
down streets and eventually collectively
terminated in running streams or open
bodies of water. Sewerage systeras, in
the modern sense, were a development of
the late eighteenth century and did not
antedate by very much the Industrial
Revolution whlch added its own increment
to the pollution problem via the chemi-
cal components of industrial wastes.
Over the succeeding years, thetremendous technological advances which
created for Western man the hlghest
standards of living ever experienced,
also added appreciably to pollution of
his environment. Harmison (1) points
out that as of today (1978), "an
estimated 2 million recognized chemical
compounds with more than 30,000 chemical
substances are in commerce, and approxi-
mately 1,000 new ones are introduced
each yearV. Such statistics buttress
statements that we live in a sea of
chemicals, and give rise, rightfully,
to concern about the presence of toxic
chemicals in our air, water and food.
The development of indoor sanitary
facilities together with municipal
sewerage systems served effectively to
clean up the immediate household and
comraunal environment but unfortunately
gave rise to a parallel pollution of
surface waters which were the most
convenient sites for sewage disposal.
The consequences were what hindsight
would now lead us to expect, namely, a
marked increase in waterborne infectious
disease. This situation was subsequent-
ly to a large degree brought under
effective control through the develop-
ment and application of water purifi-
cation methods. However, the environ-
mental concerns stemming from a
burgeoning population and increasing
urbanization have brought a growing
recognition that, even with conventional
treatment, the discharge of human wastes
into surface waters may be generating a
new phase of unacceptable risks which
necessitates consideration of alterna-
tive disposal methods. Land application
is one of these.
It has been pointed out (2) that
with the increase in the population over
the coming years in the United States
the increase in the demand for water by
cities, industries and agriculture will
not merely parallel, but will increase
disproportionately to, the population
increase. Bylinsky (2) has estimated
that as of 1970 such water uses were
approximately 1325 billion liters per
day (BLD) (350 billion gallons per day
(BGD))and that by 1980 that figure
would reach 2370 BLD (600 BGD) and by
the year 2000 would be in the vicinity
of 3785 BLD (1000 BGD). As the latter
figure conservatively exceeds the avail-
able supply of fresh water, estimated
at 2460 BLD (650 BGD), it appears evi-
dent that the disparity between avail-
ability and demand will be resolved
only through stringent conservation
practices includlng the reuse ofwastewaters.
Many regions of the world, al-
though amply possessed of water re-
sources, are actually short of fresh
water; thls results not from pro-
fligate use of water for the usual
domestic, agricultural and industrlal
purposes but from the discharge, in
large amounts, of polluted water into
streams and lakes, thus rendering
these recipiënt waters unuseable (3).
Shuval (4), among others, points to
the neêd to reuse wastewater as part of
any conservation aim. The importance
of water conservation and wastewater
reuse is well illustrated by a recent
news item (U.S. News and World Report,
May 9, 1978) that in the arid West and
Southwest of the United States there is
intense competition among states,
cities and agricultural interests for
a dlminishing water supply. The huge
new water usage attending development
of shale-oil production and coal-slurry
pipelines can result only in a severe
exacerbation of the prevaiüng water
shortage probletns. The use of waste-
waters to supplement and/or replace use
of fresh water for irrigation and for
such industrial purposes is a logical
step in water conservation, with the
proviso, of course, that such useage
does not present unacceptable risks to
the public health.
Land application of wastewater for
disposal and for agricultural purposes
is no new development; it dates back
to the late nineteenth century (4,5),
occurring as a spinoff from the expand-
ing development of sewage collection
systems. By the early part of this
century, this agricultural practice was
adopted by numerous farms in both
Europe and the United States (5), and
especially in the arid Western and
Southwestern U.S. (e.g., Wyoming,
Colorado, California, Utah and Montana);
aside from providing agricultural
nutrients, the practice served for land
disposal of domestic sewage. In
California the use of raw sewage for
irrigation of food crops has been pro-
hibited slnce 1918. Regulations per-
mitting irrigation of food crops eaten
raw were first developed in 1933. In
1968, and again in 1975, these criteria
were revised and comprehensive regula-
tions were enacted allowing the use of
reclaimed wastewaters under conditions
which would not prove inimical to the
public health. Over the succeeding
years, the California Department of
Health has looked upon treated domestic
28wastewater as a valuable resource and
has encouraged lts use, not only for
erop irrigation but also for landscape
irrigation (e.g., greenbelts, golf
courses, parks, etc), recreational
impoundments and, in some cases, ground-
water recharge. According to Crook (5)
some 246.6 x 106m3 (200,000 acre-feet)
of wastewater are reclaltned annually
through planned operations, an amount
which represents about 77» of the waste-
water produced. In addition more than
616.5 x 10^3 (500,000 acre-feet) are
recovered incidentally through return to
streams and groundwater basins, thus
contrlbuting to the pool available for
relise. The amount of wastewater avail-
able for reclamation is estimated at
2,096.1 x 106m3 (1.7 million acre-feet)
annually, equal to 5% of the current
total water demand of the State.
This is a not ineonaiderable re-
source, and water reclamation is In-
creasingly looked upon as an important
technic to meet future water needs. It
thus becomes necessary to ascertain the
presence, nature and magnitude of any
potential hazards to the public health
and to control any threatened hazards
through administrative and technologi-
cal means. The potentially hazardous
contaminants found in wastewater providef
in effect, a mirror of the diverse
health risks or problems which already
exlst in the community which gave rise
to the wastewater. The extent and
degree of potential hazards posed by
chemical or biological contaminants in
wastewater should be assessed against
a relevant yardstick, such as exposures
to similar substances or agents en-
countered during the course of other
domestic or occupational activity as
well as other environmental exposures.
With respect to toxic chemicals,
their presence in wastewater is essenti-
ally a direct reflectlon of man's
activlties which generate industrial"
production wastes, refinery wastes,
disperse agrlcultural fertilizers and
pesticides into the environment, etc.
Each of these activities carries its
own array of occupational hazards or
environmental exposures which are, or
need to be, a priraary focus of health
protectlon.
In addition to the potential
hazards posed in land application of
wastewater by the presence or accumu-
lation of contaminants on the soil
surface, there is the associated problem
posed by their dispersion or dissemi-
nation downward through the soil bypercolatlon, or laterally as other
physical conditlons determine. There
are, thus, potential difficulties or
hazards on several counts, including
contamination of drinking water
supplies.
For our purposes, chemical con-
taminants which may be present In
wastewaters and which, following land
application of such waters may con-
ceivably appear eventually in ground-
waters, are considered In two broad
categories, viz., inorganic solutes and
organic solutes.
Let us first consider the inorgan-
ic solutes. In its Summary Report on
Drinking Water and Health (6) the
Committee on Safe Drinking Water of the
National Research Council, U.S.
National Academy of Sciences, presents
an extensive review and evaluatlon of
potential health hazards referrable to
the occurrence of 16 metals In drinking
water. For 6 of these, a group cora-
prising barium, cadmium, chromium, lead,
mercury and silver, maximum allowable
concentrations have been set in the
Interim Priraary Drinking Water Regula-
tions.
Eight metals (chromium, cobalt,
copper, magnesium, maganese,
molybdenum, tin and zinc) are essential
coraponents of the hutnan diet in tracé
amounts. On the other hand, any of
these tracé metals can be toxic for
man if intake is excessive. As
toxicity is manifested only with the
intake of concentrations greater than
those allowable or acceptable in
drinking water, adverse health effects
are generally associated with occu-
pational exposures. Thus, in the case
of nickel, epidemiological observations
suggests that occupational exposure
via the respiratory tract increases the
risk of pulmonary and of naso-pharyn-
geal cancer. Long continued inhalatory
exposure to beryllium-containing dusts
may cause pulmonary sarcoidosis (there
is no evidence that it produces
pulmonary cancer). Similar comments
can be made with respect to the toxici-
ty of certaln of the other tracé metals
reviewed in the NRC Report (6) when
dietary intake is excessive (e.g.,
cadmium and Itai-Itai disease in Japan)
or when there is prolonged occupational
exposure to large concentrations. Man
is not alone in introducing inorganic
solutes into the environment; nature
also plays a contributory role.
Arrhenius (7) mentions an area in the
USSR in which enzootic lung and stomach
29disease occurs in sheep ingesting river
water containlng unusually high natural-
ly-occurring concentratlons (0.2-2.0
tng/L) of boron; he also cites the
natural occurrence of toxic concentra-
tions of mercury, generally looked upon
as a man-made contaminant, in an
Indonesian river. These are perhaps
extreme examples, but if recycling of
water serves to superimpose additional
amounts of tracé elements on the
concentrations derived from natural
sources, the risk of adverse public
health effects is sharpely escalated
unless these contaminants are removed or,
preferably, contained at the source.
When we come to the organic solutes,
additional considerations enter into
evaluation of toxicity and assessment
of health effects. Practically, there
are two approaches to assessment of the
potential acute or chronic ill effects
engendered by exposure to chemical
contaminants in water, viz., (a) the
epidemiologie and, (b) quantitation of
toxicity in laboratory animals. In the
case of non-carclnogenic substances,
"toxic threshold" is defined as the
largest dose which can be tolerated
without production of ill effects.
Lead poisoning provides an example of a
disease where the individual can sup-
port a subthreshold or "non-zero" body
burden without illness; it is only when
the threshold level is exceeded that
disease supervenes. In the case of
carcinogenic substances, on the other
hand, estimation of risk of exposure Is
based on the assumption that there is
no threshold, i.e., the dose response
relationship follows a straight line.
Thus, under thls assumption, if a given
dose of an agent produces cancer in 1
out of 100 laboratory animals, or
persons, reducing the dose 1,000-fold
would stlll produce cancer in 1 of
100,000 subjects. Hence, this theory,
holding that nothing more than a
"zero-level" of a chemical contaminant
is permissible In potable waters, calls
for extremely rigorous safeguards to
assure that land application of was te-
water does not permit the slightest
contamination of groundwater supplies.
Slnce some organic compounds which
may find their way into groundwaters
and drinking water supplies (e.g., the
pesticide Kepone) might, in sufflcient
doses, result in chronic disease,
experimental determination of threshold
levels would seem relevant if attempts
are to be made to hold the environ-
taental concentrations below toxiclevels. However, attention appears
to focus primarily on those substances
which have occupationally been impli-
cated in cancer or suspected of being
carcinogens. The corollary question
then becomes whether these same sub-
stances in the low concentrations en-
countered In drinking waters can also
lead to cancer in man. Extrapolation
to man of findings and data from
laboratory studies of carcinogenicity
requires cautlon and an understanding
of the limitations of the experimental
approach. At this point a quotation
from the National Research Council
Report ((6) page 46) seems pertinent,
to wit, "Because the bioassays that
have been used to establish carcino-
genicity of certain organic chemicals
are conducted at doses which are
hundreds to thousands of times greater
than the levels at which these chemicals
occur in water, the risks at these low
levels must be obtained by extra-
polation from higher doses. There is no
hard evldence that low-level oral
exposure to any of these chemicals
produces cancer. An argument has been
made that dose levels used to establish
carcinogenicity (in anima1 experiments -
Au.) are so high that they overwhelm
norraal detoxification or repair
tnechanisms or both, and produce cancer
by some mechanism that does not oper-
ate under low dose conditions", Extra-
polation may be misleading if no account
is taken of anitnal species differences
with respect to carcinogen activation,
metabollc pathway, etc. Just how this
problem should be dealt with is left
to other speakers who will be dis-
cussing in greater depth later in this
session the health effects of chemical
pollutants arising from land appli-
cation of wastewaters.
Similarly, slnce microbial patho-
gens wlll also be discussed at some
length, our comments on the whole will
be broad and general and concerned with
the tenet that wastewater will contain
significant nurabers of infectious agents
such as typhoid and shigella bacteria,
wild poliomyelitis virus, hepatitis
virus, etc, in direct relatlohship to
the prevalence in the cotnmunity of
individuals infected with these agents.
Historlcally, attention to water
as a source of human disease focused on
the microbial pathogens, generally
classifiable as either bacterial or
vlral.
Developing sanitary engineering
practices, and especially the intro-
30duction of chlorinatlon in the early
part of this century, served to brlng
waterborne bacterial dlseases essential-
ly under full control. This does not
mean that these diseases have been
eradicated. The causal pathogens may
still be encountered in sewage, their
presence reflecting at any given time
the microbial flora of the conmunity.
This becomes a central factor in the
reclamation and use of reclaimed waste-
waters, and obviously some degree of
antimicrobial treatment is required
before the effluents can be safely
utilized. Logically, therefore, the
quality standards that were developed
for drinfcing water are now being applied
to reclaimed wastewater.
The degree of treatment required
increases directly in relation to the
extent and nature of human exposure.
This is illustrated in Figure 1 (kindly
provided by Dr, James Crook, California
Department of Health) which also sum-
marizes the requirements established by
California under the Wastewater Recla-
mation and Reuse Law of 1967 regulating
the application of reclaimed wastewaters
for specific purposes; thus, at the
bottom of the treatment scale areprimary effluents which may be employed
without further treatment for the
surface irrigation of orchards and
vineyards and for non-food crops such
as fodder, fiber and seed. The central
portion of the figure shows the appli-
cations that require wastewater to be
oxidized and dlsinfected by chlori-
nation to the extent that the median
MPN limit of total coliform organisms
does not exceed 2.2 per 100 ml or 23
per 100 ml depending upon the use pur-
pose, as shown. The requirement that
reclaimed water for landscape irriga-
tion must not exceed a median MPN
limit of 23 total coliform organisms
per 100 ml is directed to large land-
scape areas, e.g., golf courses, free-
way median strips, where application
can be controlled and public exposure
is low. Similar expanses of landscape
which lie both withln an urban area and
are intensively utilized by the public,
e.g., parks and athletic fields, may
pose a greater hazard to the user and
hence more stringent standards are re-
quired. Thus, wastewater treated as
shown in the lower section of Figure 1
results in a water of high quality by
bacteriologie standards and which
PHIUtRY
EFFLUENT
Surfnet Irrignllon
of O'cho'dl
& Viri«yord*fodd«r, F,bit,
B Safld Crops
0XIDI2ËD .
DISINFECTED WASTEWATER
(iï.2 coli/lOOml)
I
i— i iSurfac* Rflstrictfd Pflltur* for Londïcop* Londlcope
Irriootlon Rtcreotional Mithino. Animoll Irrigotion IrnpOkjndment
ot Food Crops Impoundlïnnl
D, COAGULATED,
CLARIFIED, FILTEHEO,
OISINFECTfO WA5TEWATER
(£2.2 coli/IOOml)
(mo>.-z3 coM/IOOml)
I
Sprd) Irrljoilon
of Fuod Croptr4onr«Btrict*d
Recr«ationol
Impouridmtnt
FIG. I - Wastswater Ridomotlon Quolity R»quir«mentt
Reprinted with permission of the American Society of
Civil Engineers, Journal of the Environmental Engineering
DIvislon, Proceeding Paper 13928, Volume 104 EE4, August
1978.
31should be safe for irrlgation of food
crops and for unrestricted recreatlonal
use.
These standards r'equire that the
treatment process be consistently and
reliably carried out, an objective not
always achleved (8, 9) for various
reasons. Absent or inadequate dis-
infection of wastewater can thus lead
to a potential or actual health hazard.
Microbial agents surviving the chlori-
nation process would ostenslbly give
rise to potential health problems. We
say ostensibly because in California,
where over 85% (more than 209.6 x
106m3 per year (170,000 acre-feet per
year)) of the wastewater applied to
land is used for non-food erop irri-
gation, no adverse health effects have
been shown to occur (10), However,
more precise information is needed with
respect to possible infection hazards
posed by exposure to aerosols generated
by spray of treated wastewaters, and of
possible contamination of groundwater
supplies. The risk of infection
through exposure to aerosols generated
during spray irrigation with inade-
quately treated wastewater is well
illustrated by the recent work of
Shuval and his associates (11), who
observed that the incidence of ln-
fectious hepatitis and of shigellosis,
salmonellosis and typhoid fever were
from two to four times higher in the
communities using treated non-disln-
fected wastewater for spray Irrigation
as compared with those communlties
which did not practice any type of
wastewater irrigation.
Two recent reviews (12, 13) on the
health significance of microorganisms
in aerosols from wastewater treatment
processes and spray irrigation point
out that the available evidence neither
supports nor denies the existence of
potential infection hazards (cf. 12)
and that additional epidemiologie
studies to resolve this polnt are
desirable.
With respect to land application,
bacterial pathogens (and perhaps viral
pathogens) may survive in soll for a
matter of several months (IA) and
conceivably could accumulate at the
soil surface through repeated appli-
cation of wastewaters over long periods
of time. Normally, removal of both
bacterial and viral agents occurs at,
or wlthin a few feet below, the soll
surface (13, 14), but the nature and
composition of the soil and geological
formation may determine possibleentrance into groundwaters. Removal of
viruses is largely by adsorption to
soil particles and is affected by soil
concentration, pH, flow rates, etc,
and the interplay of such factors may
result in the elution of fully infect-
ive virus from the adsorbent and thus
allow further carriage or dispersal of
the vlrions. Along these Unes, the
field studies of Gilbert et al (15)
showed that viruses were removed by
soil filtration and did not move into
groundwater. On the other hand,
Wellings et al (16) found that viruses
present in treated effluent discharged
onto soil raoved both vertically and
laterally and appeared in nearby wells.
(This interesting and important study
also pointed to the fallibility of the
coliform bacterial count as a measure
of viral inactivation.)
This brings us to a final consid-
eration, namely, if viruses do reach
groundwater and, via this route,
eventually occur in minlscule numbers in
finlshed drinking water, what is their
significance for human health? Since
our experience and expertise fall
primarily within microbiology rather
than chemistry or toxicology, we shall
use a microbial agent to exemplify the
problem of assessing health effects,
although the issues and philosophy are
equally relevant to chemical contami-
nants.
The role of epidemiology has been,
and still is, to sharpen our under-
standing of mechanisms of disease trans-
mlssion so that intelligent distinctions
can be made between agents which readily
utilize the waterborne route of infection
to maintain or to amplify thelr occur-
rence in the community, and those agents
whose presence in water is of little
or no epidemiologie significance in
terms of disease transmisslon.
Thus, when poliomyelitis virus was
flrst recognized in sewage in the early
1940's and about the same time was
recovered froro flies which had fed on
infected feces, it was presumed that
poliomyelitis was yet another enteric
disease transmitted from feces via files
and polluted water. However, despite
intensive study and epidemiologie in-
vestigatlon over the succeeding two
decades, a period during which epidemics
of the disease were occurring almost
annually in the United States and
Western Europe, virtually no clearcut
events implicating water as a vehicle of
transmission were documented (17). The
viral sources for disease transmission
32and, Incidentally, of virtually all the
poliovlrus ir sewage, were the 100 or
more persons who underwent unrecognized
Infections £or every person with
recognized clinical dlsease; thus, In a
year in which there were 20,000 recog-
nized cases of poliomyelitis, there
were concurrently some 2 million or
more persons freely mingling in the
general population, excreting virus and
thereby directly exposing their assocl-
ates and other contacts.
Studies on the natural history o£
poliomyelitis have shown that the role
of virus in polluted water, together
with other environmental sources of
fecal virus exposure in communities or
regions with poor sanitation, was to
bring about a protective Immunologie
conditioning of the population at an
early age, so that clinical poliomyeli-
tis was a rare occurrence. Thus, we
have the irony that epidemie paralytic
poliomyelitis did not appear in Western
Europe and the United States until our
improved levels of sanitation restricted
poliovirus as a natural component of the
microbiological flora to which infants
are regularly exposed within the first
few raonths of life. To control the
disease in the United States, we now
simulate the natural conditions of 100
years ago by feeding infants oral
poliovirus, in the form of attenuated
virus strains, during the first few
months of life. Other examples of how
immunizing doses of microbial agents
protect man against overt disease are
suggested by Melnick (18), who found
many years ago that sewage workers "had
the lowest amount of absenteeisra among
all the occupational groups studied.
It appeared that sewage workers were
regularly immunized by their exposure
to small amounts of infected material"
(see also (19, 20)). This parallels
what is done in the laboratory, viz.,
animaIs are actively immunized against
overt or lethal infection through the
administration of small ainounts of the
agent. This leads ua, as it did Mel-
nick, to "wonder whether very tiny
amounts of virus in water would be a
public health hazard" (18) or simply
another facet of man's innocuous, if
not beneficial, microbiological environ-
ment.
What is the relevance of these
comments to the present day health con-
cerns in the use of wastewater? It is
our philosophy that in struggling with
the complexities of establishing goals
or standards for treatment of recycledwastewater in order to provide reason-
able assurance against health risks,
we should be wary of insisting that
nothing less is acceptable than the
ultimate degrees of purity which
modern technology can achieve. This
technology is immensely costly and
should be reserved for those situations
in which there is a genuine and demon-
strable need. Because modern technology
permits measurement of such minute
traces (e.g., one part in a trillion)
of many chemlcals and the detection of
a single infective poliovirus particle
in 378.5 liters or 100 gallons of water
(1 to 3.3 trillion on a volume basis
(21))* it does not necessarily follow
that public health wlll be better pro-
tected or the public interest better
served by embracing such sweeping goals
as the complete removal of all viruses
of human origln from any waters that man
may contact or equivalent ideals such
as "zero-levels" and "no-threshold
levels" of toxic or carcinogenic sub-
stances. We have In these two situ-
ations what McLean (22) has so aptly
stated, namely, "A conflict of decision
between risks that are inmeasurably
small, but which cannot be proved
absent, and a certainty of costs" and
further "some groups. .„. .seetn to
believe that every chemical banned re-
presents a victory, and that the
efficiency of a regulatory agency is
judged by how many compounds it bans".
The same raight be said of viruses.
*This is "equivalent to detecting a
submerged ping-pong ball in 20 billion
gallons (or 75.6 billion liters -- Au.)
of water" (21).
REFERENCES
1. Harmison, L.T. Toxic substances and
health. Pub. Health Rep., 1978,
23: 3-10.
2. Byllnsky, G. The limited war on
water pollution. Chapter 1 _in
The environment. A national miss ion
for the Seventies. Editors of
Fortune Magazine, Perennial
Library, Harper and Row. New York,
1970.
3. Lvovitch, M.I. World water re-
sources, present and future.
Atnbio, 1977, 6: 13-21.
334. Shuval, H.I. Direct and indirect
wastewater reuse for municipal
purposes. Amblo, 1977, j>: 63-65.
5. Crook, J. Health aspects of water
re-use in California. Preprint
3015, Fall Meeting Am. Soc. Civil
Engineers, San Francisco, CA,
Oct. 17-21, 1977.
6. Sumraary report: Drinking water and
health. Coraraittee on Safe Drink-
ing Water, National Research
Council, National Academy of
Sciences. Washington, D.C., 1977.
7. Arrhenius, E. Health effects of
multipurpose use of water. Ambio,
1977, ,6: 59-62.
8. Deaner, D.G. Public health and
water reclamation. Bureau of
Sanitary Engineering, California
Department of Public Health,
Berkeley, 1970.
9. Crook, J. Reliabllity of waste-
water reclamation facilities.
Water Sanitation Section, Calif-
ornia Department of Health,
Berkeley, 1976.
10. Jopllng, W. Health aspects of
fodder erop irrigation. Presented
at Sonoma County Conference II,
Santa Rosa, CA, Nov. 1973, (Bureau
of Sanitary Engineering, Calif-
ornia Department of Health,
Berkeley).
11. Katzenelson, E,, Buium, I., and
Shuval, H.I. Risk of communicable
disease infection associated wlth
wastewater irrigation in agri-
cultural settlements. Science,
1976, 194: 944-946.
12. Hickey, J.L.S., and Reist, P.C.
Health significance of airborne
microorganistns from wastewater
treatment processes. Part II.
Health significance and alterna-
tlves for actlon. J. Water
Pollution Control Fed., 1975, 47:
2758-2773.
13. Sorber, CA., and Guter, K.J.
Health and hygiëne aspects of
spray Irrigation. Am. J. Pub»
Health, 1975, jS51 47-52.14. Gerba, C.P., Wallis, C, and
Melnick, J.L. Fate of waste-
water bacteria and viruses In
soil. J. Irrlg. and Drainage
Div., Am. Soc. Civll Engineers,
1975, 101, No. IR3, Proc. Paper
11572, Sept., pp. 157-174.
15. Gllbert, R.C., Rise, R.C.,
Boumer, H., Gerba, C.P., Wallis,
C, and Melnick, J.L. Wastewater
renovation and reuse: virus
removal by soil filtration.
Science, 1976, .192: 1004-1005.
16. Wellings, F.M., Lewis, A.L.,
Mountain, C.W. and Pierce, L.V.
Demonstration of virus in ground-
water after effluent discharge
onto soil. Appl. Microbiol.,
1975, 29: 751-757.
17. Mosley, J.W. Transmisslon of
viral diseases by drinking water
In Transmission of viruses by the
water route. G. Berg, editor.
Interscience Publishers, New York,
1965.
18. Melnick, J.L. Discussion _in
Transmission of viruses by the
water route. Page 39. G. Berg,
editor. Interscience Publishers,
New York, 1965.
19. Rylander, R., Andersson, K.,
Belin, L., Berglund, G.,
Bergstrom, R., Hanson, L-A.,
Lundholm, M., and Nattsby, I.
Sewage workers syndrome. Letters
to the Editor, Lancet, 1976, 2:
478-479.
20. Clark, C.S., Bjornson, A.B.,
Schiff, G.M., Phair, J.P.,
Van Meer, G.L., and Gartside, P.S.
Sewage workers syndrome. Letters
to the Editor, Lancet, 1977, JL:
1009.
21. Clarke, N.A., Hill, W.Fo, Jr., and
Jakubowski, W. Detection of virus-
es in water: tentative Standard
method. A.W.W.A., Tech. Conf.
Proc, Dallas, Texas, Dec. 2-3,
1974, XIV-1 to XIV-6.
22. McLean, A.E.M. Pestlcides.
Letter to the Editor, New Scien-
tist, 1978, 28: 40.COMPARISON OF HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS
FOR LAND TREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
INFECTIOUS DISEASE POTENTIAL OF LAND APPLICATION OF WASTEWATER
B. P. Sagik The University of Texas at San Antonio
B. E. Moore The University of Texas at San Antonio
C. A. Sorber The University of Texas at San Antonio
The question of health effects of
land application of wastewater is examin-
ed in terms of (1) measurable risk and
(2) the acceptability of such risk. A
brief and selective review of the litera-
ture is combined with experience from
the authors' laboratory to present what
can be described as a personal position
paper on this topic.
INTRODUCTION
When one is asked to speak or write
of the health effects of such practices
as land disposal of domestic wastewaters
and sludges, the question implicitly (and
often explicitly) is directed to the risk
or safety of the practice. Lowrance (23)
has written
"that two very different acti-
vities are required for determin-
ing how safe things are: measur-
ing risk, an objective but proba-
blistic pursuit, and judging the
acceptability of that risk (judg-
ing safety), a matter of personal
and social value judgment."
This statement stresses the relativistic
and judgmental nature of the task. We
have focused first on the objective por-
tion of determining the safety of land
disposal and thus sought some measure of
what biological agents may be distributed
by land disposal, what the probable sur-
vival times of these agents are and what
is their probable ultimate fate, i.e.
decay, immobilization, ingestion.
PATHOGENS OF CONCERN
In a recent review of the health
hazards associated with wastewater efflu-
ents and sludges, Akin et al. (l.a.)listed the organisms of major concern
which may be present in raw sewage from
U.S. communities (see Table 1).
Healy and Visvesvara (Ld.) concurr-
ed in the conclusion of Akin et al. that
the major parasitic cause of water-
associated cases of diarrhea in the U.S.
at this time is the protozoan Giardia
lamblia. From their 1977 paper is taken
a listing (Table 2) of published cases of
Giardia infection in which water was im-
plicated. In the 1969 Aspen outbreak,
organisms were not isolated from the town
water supply, but Giardia cysts were re-
covered at two points where the sewage
entered the treatment plant (water-sewer
contamination had been found). In the
1977 Rome, NY outbreak of Giardia infec-
tion, organisms were isolated from the
water supply, microscopic identification
made and clinical illness produced experi-
mentally in beagle puppies. Healy and
Visvesvara suggested that the water used
for drinking and bathing in many parts of
the U.S. is a potential source of Giardia.
Further, other Giardia species causing
illness to man may be harbored by domes-
tic and wild animals (beavers have been
implicated). Wol fe (31), reviewing the
epidemiology of Giardia, stated that he
has recognized infections contracted in
97 different countries. Although tap
water was implicated as the main source
of infection in Leningrad, infection may
also be initiated by the hand-food-mouth
route (with the food hand!er an asymptoma-
tic cyst passer) in the Soyiet Union and
other areas of increased risk, including
Southeast and South Asia, West and Cen-
tral Africa, Mexico, Korea, and western
South America.
Healy and Visvesvara noted that free-
1iving amoebae such as Naegleria fowleri
and members of the genus Aaanthamoeba
35TABLE 1.
Major Organisms of Health Concern That May be Present in
Sewage front U.S. Conmunities
ORGANISMS
I. PROTOZOA and HELMINTHS
Balcmiidiwn aoli
Entamoeba hieiolytioa
Giardia lanibliaNematodes
Aecaris lumbricoidsa
Aneylostoma duodenale
Neeatov cmeriaanus
Anaylostom bvasilienae
AncyloBtorru aaninum
Entevobi.ua veimiaulaPie
Strongyloidea eteraovalia
Toxoaafa aati
ToxoaaPa aania
Triahuris tpiohiitra
Cestodes
Tasnia saginata
Taenia eolium
Hymenolepis nana
Eehinoooaaua gvamuloaua
Echinocoaoue multiloaularie
II. BACTERIA
Salmonellae
(Approx. 1700 types)
Shigeiiae (4 spp.)
Esaheriohia aoli(enteropathogenic types)
III. ENTERIC VIRUSES
Enteroviruses
(67 types)
Rotavirus
Parvovirus-like Agents
(at least 2 types)
Hepatitis A virus
Adenoviruses
(31 types)DI5EASE
Ba1antidias1s
Amebiasis
G1ard1as1s
Ascar1as1s
Ancylostom1as1s
Necator1as1s
Cutaneous Larva Migrans
Cutaneous Larva Migrans
Enterobiasis
Strongyloidiasis
Visceral Larva Migrans
Visceral Larva Migrans
Trichuriasis
Taen1as1s
Taeniasis
Taeniasis
Uniloculai-
Echinococcosis
Alveolar Hydatid
Disease
Typhoid Fever
Salmonellosis
Shigeilosis
(bacillary dysentary)
Gastroenteritis
Gastroenteritis, heart
anomaiies, meningitis,
others
Gastroenteritis
Gastroenteritis
Infectious Hepatitis
Respiratory disease,
conjunctivities, otherRESERVOIR(S)
Man, Swine
Man
Man, Domestic and
wild animals?
Man, Swine?
Man
Man
Cat
Oog
Man
Man, Dog
Camivores
Carnivores
Man
Man
Man
Man, Rat
Dog
Dog, Carnivore
Man, domestic and
Wild Animals and
Birds
Man
Man, domestic animals
Man, possibly lower
animals
Man, domestic animals
Man
Man, other primates
Man
TABLE 2,
Implicated Waterborne Giardiasis
Place
Portland, Oregon, 1969
Aspen, Coiorado, 1969
Rome, New York, 1977
Camus, Washington, 1977
Berlin, New Hampshire, 1977
Estes Park, Coiorado, 1977
Resort Lodge, Colorado, 1976
Unita Mts., Utah, 1976Source
Water *
City Water*
City Water*
City Water*
City Water
Mountain StreamCases
500
298
350
128
205
9
13
34Potential Source
50,000
7,000
50,000
6,000
15,000
42
40
7
G^. lambl ia cysts recovered from water.
36also cause disease, although relatively
infrequently. They cited extensive evi-
dence that pathogenic Naegleria can be
isolated from al most every type of water
system (Table 3). Aaanthamoeba species
have been isolated from sewage dumpsites
from ocean sediment as well as in brack-
ish waters. The authors stated that these
protozoa often are present in source wa-
ters and after treatment as wel! as in
wastewaters and sewage sludges. They
considered them to be of increasing impor-
tance in any health effects assessment.
TABLE 3.
Isolation of Pathogenic Naegleria Sp.
Number
Strains
Isolated
1
1
1
1
5
2
1
24
1
2
22
1
4Source
Lake water
Tap water
Domestic water
supply
Swimming pool
Sewage
Tap water & fire
hydrant
Sewage
Thermal Canal
Warm physio-
therapy pool
5 Thermal lakes
and rivers
Thermal water-
factory
Sewage
14 Fresh water
lakes,
1 Thermal lakeCountry
Virginia
South
Australia
South
Australia
Bel giurn
India
South
Australia
U.S.S.R.
Belgi urn
England
Florida
Belgiurn
South Korea
Florida
Although the prevalence of infection
with parasitic helminths has decreased
with modern sanitary practices, about
30,000 positive stool specimens were re-
ported by state health laboratories in
the U.S. in 1976 (the last year for which
published CDC data were available at the
time of writing). Akin et al. estimated
that over a mi 11 ion persons harbor asca-
rids. In communities with immigrants
from more tropical countries, whipworm
(Trichuris trichiura) eggs may be concen-
trated in municipal sludges (17).
Hookworms, too, may present a prob-
lem in warm humid areas where the worm
larvae can embryonate in the soil before
penetrating the skin. This is an obvious
hazard in climates where going barefoot
is a common practice. Helminths of pets,
whether roundworms or hookworms, also
have the potential of causing a usuallymild disease in humans where they have an
incomplete developmental cycle.
In addition to those organisms list-
ed in their table, Akin et al. noted that
other bacteria such as clostridiwn, Myoo-
baoteriwn and ïersinia species may be pre-
sent in sewage but are probably not at a
concentration sufficient to cause disease
via sewage exposure. Guentzel (l.c.) has
reported the concentration of Clostridium
perfringens and of Mycobaoterium species
in a non-chlorinated secondary effluent
to be about 105/liter and 106/liter, re-
spectively; no Yevsinia species were iso-
lated in his study. Parenthetically, it
should be noted that Yersiniosis has been
recognized much less frequently in the
U.S. than in Northern Europe, Japan and
Canada, although Y. enteroeolitica has
been implicated in school, hospital and
familial outbreaks (6).
Of the more than 100 types of enter-
ie viruses which may be isolated or ob-
served in raw sewage, vaccine poliovirus
strains are the most frequently recover-
ed in demographically normal communities.
Dominant types do change, reflecting the
strains endemic in a community at any
time.
An interesting picture of the range
of virus species which may be present in
unchlorinated secondary effluent may be
obtained from a paper presented by Met-
calf et al. (l.g.) on their studies of
virus transport in a mariculture system.
In addition to all three poliovirus types,
13 other potentially pathogenic entero-
virus types were isolated and identified.
In addition, a larger number of unidenti-
fied virus isolants were recovered. Met-
calf et al. state that
"the non poliovirus isolants were
considered indicative of enteric
virus pathogens excreted by in-
fected humans, whether clinically
ill or not, and representative of
the opportunities presented for
introduction. . .of more serious
virus pathogens like infectious
hepatitis virus."
Berg (l.b.), in his 1978 paper re-
minded us that the source of all these
viruses is sewage. The use of poliovirus
vaccination with its resultant heavy seed-
ing of sewage, he believes, serves to
mask the fluctuations in the levels of
potentially pathogenic virus strains.
Adenoviruses, for example, are primarily
cold weather infectors, but are rarely
sought specifically. In addition, hepa-
titis A virus and the rotaviruses impli-
cated in human gastroenteritis are not
readily detected in water.
37Akin et al. cited Craum and McCabe's
review (7) in support of their belief that
direct sewage contamination through plumb-
ing cross-connections or obvious failures
in water treatment of sewage contaminated
with source waters have been found to be
at fault in most water-borne outbreaks in
the United States.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT EFFICACY
Biological agents can be removed by
available technology as Sproul (l.i.) has
written. However, treatment is generally
limited to conventional secondary treat-
ment because of the costs involved in go-
ing beyond secondary treatment. In his
paper, Sproul has given data on the effi-
cacy of pathogen removal by conventional
treatment (see Tables 4, 5). Chlorina-
tion can reduce the pathogen levels still
further. However, many of the data cited
for the efficacy of anaerobic digestion
and of chlorination were carried out by
adding free rather than solid- or particle-
associated organisms to the water or
sludge. Under these conditions, the or-
ganisms are readily accessible to the in-
activating agents and processes. In real
wastewater and sludge the free condition
probably does not prevail and protection
by particulate-association or solids-
occlusion undoubtedly affects the rate
and degree of inactivation.
Sanders and her co-workers (27) uti-
lized solids-incorporated poliovirus in
their laboratory study of the digestors
and found that incorporation into solids
afforded some protection to poliovirus I
(see Figure 1). Even with soiids incor-
poration, 99% loss of viral recoverabil-
ity was obtained in five days. Neverthe-
less, Lund (24) has isolated poliovirus
III from a municipal digestor operated at
50 C and Palfi (26) isolated up to 17 in-
fectious indigenous viruses from 500 ml
of sludge leaving a digestor with greater
than 60 days retention time at 34 C.
Moore and her co-workers (l.h.), in a
field study of sludge handling, found a
two logio reduction in indigenous viruses
isolated from a two-stage digestor-
thickener with a 100-day retention time
(see Table 6). The authors commented
that this study emphasizes the limitations
of laboratory model ing. Actual digestor
operation is subject to overloading and
shortcircuiting and total elimination of
viruses is not achievable by this process.
Low levels of enteroviruses probably will
be introduced into soil systems by land
application of municipal sludges.i—i—i—r » i
O Cantnl
D t-tfay MMta
A lo-doy Dttmtlwi
J i
Time (days)
1. Poiloviru* Recovery from An»«robU Otgesters
(37 CJ
TABLE 6.
Enterovirus Reductlons by the
Anaerobic Sludge Digested Process,
East Pearl Treatment Plant,
Boulder, Colorado
Indigenous Enterovirus Reduction (%)
Sampleöigester
(40 D-
71
87TMckener
(60 D) Total
"55"
99
997
Z8
12
Hel* cell MonoUyers, direct plating of
sludge eluates.
Foster and Engelbrecht (13) have
estimated the level of pathogens applied
to the soil in chlorinated, secondarily
treated effluent assuming average effi-
cacy of removal or disinfection by the
treatment processes. These data are
given in Table 7.
Moore and her co-workers (25) had
shown earlier that viruses are sequester-
ed in the secondary sludge in biological
secondary treatment, confirming Lund's
(24) observation on the virus-binding
capacity of sludge. Recent data on the
solids-association of viruses, reported
by Moore and co-workers in 1978 are given
below (Table 8). Unpublished data from
Duboise, using genetically identifiable
bacteria, suggested that they, too, are
concentrated in the biomass. Hays (18)
reported that ova and cysts are parti-
tioned in similar fashion. If this is
so, it can be seen that the potential for
seeding the environment by land disposal
of sludges is significantly greater even
than that calculated for wastewaters.
38Pathogen
Salmonella
ttycobacterium
E. histolytica
Helminth ova
VirusRMBVtl
Aqtnt
Pa ruft**
Beef tape*om eg«s
E. Mstolytica cysts
Bacteria
Tubercle bacil11
Coiifom
Viruses
Polio 1
Polio 1, 2. 3
Parasites
Beaf tapwong eggj
E. h1xtolyt1ca cysts
Bacteria
Tubercle bad 111
S. typtil
Col 1 font
Ps. aeruginosa
Cl. ptrfringens
Virusas
Comekie A9
Echovirus 12
Polio 1
mxett (natural)
Parasites
BMf tapeworm eggs
E. histolytica cysts
Bactaria
E. typhosa
Cholera
Tuberei» badlH
Californ
Fecal streptococci
Viruses
Coxsackie A9
Polio 1
Mixed (nativa)
Pol1o 1, 2, 3TAH.E 4.
of Orgniiwi by CanvmtiOMi TrMtMnt
Rawval (X)
PIAIN SEDIMEKTATION
se0 to 1ncompl«ta rwnval
50
27-96
0
Inc to 69X rwoval
0-12
TRICXUNG FILTERATION
30
InCdMpltta
90-99.9
45
72
98
+74 (Incraast)
n
94
83
85
Inc. to 69
ACTIVATED SLUOGE
0
Inco^ltte
86-99
96-100
90+
97
96
96-99
79-94
53-71
76-90Systm
Sench
Plant
Plant
Benen
B«nch
Plant
Plant
Banch
Plant
Benen
Plant
Plant
Plant
Plant
Plant
Banen
Sench
Bench
Plant
Bench
Plant
Bench
Banch
Bench
Bench
Bench
Bench
Bench
Plant
Plant
TABLE 5.
Inactivation by Anaerobic Sludge Digestion
Aqent
Parasites
Beef tapeworm eggs
Bacteria
Tubercle bacil 11
Salmonella
Viruses
Polio 1
Polio Z
Polio 1, Z
Coxsackie A9
Echovirus 11
Echovirus 11
MixedInact1vat1on
50+
70-85
Z5
93
98
99,999+
98
54
98
(15t of sample
were positive)Temp. Time(Oays) System
85°C
Not G1ven
Not Giver,
Z8°C
28°C
28°C
35°C
35°C
35°C
33°C180
35
60-90
1
1
5
1
1
2
40Bench
Plant & Bench
PUnt
Bench
Bench
Bench
Bench
Bench
Bench
Plant
TABLE 7.
Estimated Wastewater Pathogens Applied to So1l
Number of Organisms per milHon gallons
Raw Wastewater Primary Effluent Secondarv EffluentOrganisms AppUed
D1s1nfect1on per acre per day
Z x 10
Z x 101
1.5 x 10710
,8
2.5 x 10'
4 x 10,8
101.
z.1
1
3
5
ZX
X
X
X
X1010
108
107
107
1010(50%)c
(50*)
(50Ï)
(50Ï)
(50%)1
15
.5
.Z
5
ZX
X
X
X
X108
107
107
106
109(95%)
(85%)
(10%)
(80«)
(90%)5 x 103
1.5 x 104
1.2 x 104
5 x 103
2 x 1063.9 x 10J
l.Z x 10Z
9.3 x 101
3.9 x 101
1.6 x 104
a Conditions suffident to yield a 99.9% kill.
b Applied at a rate of Z Inches per week.
c Estimated pathogen percentage removal efficiency of the treatment.
39TABLE 8.
Enterovirus Distribution in Activated Sludge Aeration Basins
Viruses Detected (pfu/1)'
Treatment
Plant Location
Austin, Texas
Chicago, Illinois
Butte, Montana
Portland, OreqonMLSS
(mg/1)
1800
2100
1700
1560
2780Liquid
90
40
70
40
2
5
57
34Solids+
950
600
450
202
190
279
720
500Solids
Associated
(*)
93
95
91
83
99
98
93
94TT
Assayed as plaque-forming units (pfu) on Hela cells.
Total pfu eluted from the collected solids of 1 liter mixed liquor sample.
SURVIVAL OF PATHOGENS IN SOIL
Land disposal makes it imperative
that we be able to estimate the survival
of microbiota in soil. Hays (18) has re-
viewed the survival of protozoa and hel -
minths in treatment plants and in soil.
Biological secondary treatment plus dis-
infection was reported to be ineffective
in destroying parasites. Heavier eggs
appear in the sludge as do most cysts.
Only heat is effective in inactivating
parasites. However, fully embryonated
Asoaris eggs may be relativeiy resistant
even to heating for 30 minutes at 60 C.
The survival of parasite ova and
cysts in soil is influenced by some of
the same factors which affect bacterial
and viral survival. Of all the parasites
mentioned, Asaaris ova are the most re-
fractory to treatment and adverse condi-
tions.
In a recent review, Gerba et al.
(14) listed the factors affecting the
survival of enteric bacteria in soil as
moisture content, moisture holding capa-
city, temperature, pH, sunlight, organic
matter, and antagonism from soil micro-
flora. These parameters should be remem-
bered when comparing microbial survival
data among various studies. Early stud-
ies by Beard (4,5) demonstrated that
Salmonella typhosa could be recovered
from loam and peat soils for periods up
to 85 days, while survival of this organ-
ism in drying sand was only 4-7 days,
Additionally, S. typhosa may survive as
long as two years at freezing tempera-
tures. Myaobaateria, because of their
high content of waxy substances, can sur-
vive even dry conditions for long periods
of time. Greenberg and Kupka (16) in a
review of available literature citedseveral times ranging from 150 days to
15 months for Myaobaateria in soil.
In two interesting papers, Bagley
and Seidler (3) and Knittel et al. (21)
have examined a large number of Klebsiel-
la pnewnoniae isolates of various origins
for their ability to grow at elevated
temperatures. They found that this char-
acteristic was stable after prolonged
growth. Further, their studies show co-
lonization of the botanical environment
by Klebsiella isolates of pathogenic
origin. The authors suggest that aquatic
environments polluted with botanical mat-
erial may serve as potential reserviors
for perpetuating the growth and spread
of opportunistic Klebsiella pathogens
that may ultimately colonize animals,
humans and aquatic organisms.
Survival of viruses in soils are in-
fluenced by many of the same parameters
described above, although at this time
little direct evidence supports viral in-
acti vation by antagonistic microorganisms.
The effect of temperature and moisture
on the survival of poliovirus I (Chat) is
shown in Table 9. As expected, lower
temperatures favor longer survival times.
Observation of a one logio loss of viral
titer required approximately 3 months at
4 C, 1 month at 20 C, and less than one
week at 30 C. Likewise, an optimal soil
moisture content favors poliovirus survi-
val in soil, while dessication results in
a more rapid loss of virus recoverabil-
ity. Bagdasaryan (2), working with a
wide variety of human enteroviruses in-
cluding polioviruses, Coxsackieviruses,
and echoviruses, reported survival times
ranging from 110 days to 170 days at a
soil pH of 7.5 and a soil temperature of
3-10 C. Moore and her co-workers (l.h.)
have presented field data showingrecovery of indigenous enteric viruses
from fieids injected six months earlier
with anaerobically digested sludge and
then allowed to winter over.of the core effluents. Changes in the
ionic nature of percolate waters would be
expected to have the same effect in
field situations.
TABLE 9.
Effect of Temperature and Moisture on the Survival of Poliovirus I
Days
1
3
8
10
14
21
28
42
49
80
100
134% VirusVarious
4 C
74
68
48
68
47
45
33
22
13
12
8
5Recovered at^Temperatures
20 C
99
139
44
40
53
24
12
9
5
0.7
0.4
0.230 C
33
17
2
1
0.5
0.1
0.01
0.006
NDND
ND
ND% Virus Recovered atVarious Moisture Contents
25%
69
42
22
17
13
10
5
2
1
0.2
0.07
0.00415%
99
138
44
40
53
24
12
9
5
0.7
0.4
[ 0.2Drying
74
35
0.3
0.08
0.02
ND0.003
ND
0.002
NDND
ND(13.1)
(10.9)
( 6.2)
( 5.5)
( 4.6)
( 4.6)
( 0.6)
15% soil moisture content.
MOVEMENT OF PATHOGENS IN SOIL
Removal of bacteria from liquid per-
col ating through a soil is due to both
mechanica! removal, i.e. straining or
sieving at the soil surface, and adsorp-
tion to soil particuiates. Studies in
Rumania (recently reviewed by Gerba et
al-, 1975) using coliform bacteria label-
ed with radioactive phosphorus demonstrat-
ed that 92-97% of the bacteria were re-
tained in the first centimeter of soil,
while 3-5% were detected at depths be-
tween 1-5 cm. The direct relationship of
coliform removal from percolating water
to increasing cation concentration and de-
creasing pH are consistent with classical
adsorption theory.
Bacterial movement through soils has
been demonstrated at several field sites.
Reporting from the available literature
reports, Gerba et al. (14) noted coli-
form movements in a van'ety of soils for
distances ranging from 3 feet to 1500
feet. Release and movement of micro-
organisms would be expected as physical
assorption of particulates is a reversi-
ble phenomenon and, in part, ion-depend-
ent. Duboise (1977, personal communica-
tion) has monitored the movement of a
genetically-distinguishable coliform
organism through soil cores during cyclic
applications of secondary effluent foliow-
ed by dïstilled water. The release and
subsequent movement of this organism was
consistent with decreasing conductivityIn like manner, the phenomenon of
adsorption as a mechanism for the reten-
tion of viruses in soil systems was de-
monstrated by Drewry and Eliassen (10).
The results they obtained using bacterio-
phage systems showed that virus adsorp-
tion followed typical Freundlich iso-
therms. In general, virus adsorption by
soils increased with ion exchange capa-
city, clay content, organic carbon, and
glycerol-retention capacity.
The movement of poliovirus I (Chat)
through 20 cm length, non-sterile cores
taken from a sandy forest soil was moni-
tored using simulated cycles of effluent
application and rainfail (12). Results,
iiiustrated in Figure 2, show a burst of
released virus detected in the core eff-
luent as the specific conductance of the
percolating water began to decrease.
This pattern of movement inversely rela-
ted to specific conductance, was repeat-
ed through three cycles with 22.4% of the
total virus applied being recovered in
the core effluents. Additionaiiy, these
authors found the capacity of surviving
virions to migrate through the soil col-
umns during an 84 day period (during
which time the natura! soil moisture was
maintained) was unchanged. Similar move-
ment of poliovirus in 250 cm columns
packed with calcareous sand were reported
by Lance et al. (22). While most of the
virus inoculum applied to the column sur-
face was adsorbed in the top 5 cm of
soü, subsequent application of deionized
water resulted in virus desorption and
movement to a depth of 160 cm. In this
klstudy, drying for 1 day between viral
application and flooding with deionized
water reportedly prevented desorption (or
enhanced viral inactivation).two indicators of sewage poliution vary
independently. Berg also argues from the
widely-discussed Katzenelson, Buium, Shu-
val paper (20) on the risk of communicable
Figure 2.
Cyclic Elution of Poliovirus from Soil Cores
• ) HTDI |al |
II» CVCLE 2nd CYCLËEFFLIHNTIM)
tri CYCtE
Both laboratory and field studies
have yieided data consistent with pro-
longed survival and recovery of viruses,
bacteria and helminth ova in soils where
climatic conditions are appropriate to
such survival. The subsequent movement
of the applied pathogens through soil is
a complex function of soil structure,
its physicochemical characteristi.es and
regional precipitation pattern.
Berg (l.b.) has stated that depend-
ence upon the transitionalfecal coliform
levels as safety indicators in not ade-
quate for judging virus levels. From his
paper, Table 10 has been constructed. It
can be seen that the levels of thesedisease infection associated with waste-
water irrigation that
"[W]hat may be most signifi-
cant is that in none of the
affected kibbutzim had there
been an awareness of higher
incidence of illnesses there-
in, some of them quite severe,
than in the kibbutzim that
did not practice spray irriga-
tion with wastewater."
He concludes that it is not acceptable
to demand epidemiological proof of such
transmission when we know that viruses
are present at water intakes and that
plants break down periodically.
TABLE 10.
Recovery of Viruses and Fecal CoHfonns From Rivers «t or Near Mater Intakes
Test No.
Viruses
(PFU/380 liters)
Fecal Coiiforms
(CFU/100 mlMissouri
1
38
137R1ver
2
6
03
5
--Mfssissippi
4 5
6
4002
250R1ver
6
2
--7
6
1408
14
13009
11
1310
4
17Z11
28
330New York 81ght
12 13
5
17236
490014
2
415
2
4916
32
130017
1
8This conclusion contrasts somewhat
in tone with those of LleweHyn (l.e.)
who said that
"the state of scientific and
of public health knowledge does
not permit a statement of no
risk to human health from . . .
land application. . . . There
is still little evidenoe (our
evidence) of a major health
hazard from land application
. . . [t]he lack of data re-
garding disease associated with
wastewater treatment and land
application may reflect either
the absence of a problem, the
lack of intensive mom'toring
or the inadequacy of [the]
present epidemiological methods
to detect these problems. . .
all three may be true."
Melnick (l.f.)> too, questions whe-
ther against the background of the nat-
ural transmission of enteric viruses it
is feasible to obtain data on the risk of
additional exposure by contaminated water.
In this he paraphrases Westwood and Sat-
tar (30) who wrote
". . .extreme dilution of virus
in the environment will reduce
the probability of infection of
individuals in an exposed popu-
lation, but will not eliminate
it. Si nee many viruses are
stable for prolonged periods of
time under external conditions,
the effect of viral pollution
of water must be a low-grade
seeding of the population with
the production of endemic foei
of infection in the community.
"It is suggested that the
real question to be answered at
this time is whether the impor-
tance of this seeding relative
to other modes of teansmission
in the community is sufficient
to warrant major action. . ."
though he lacks their faith in the effi-
cacy of standard epidemiological investi-
gative techniques. Melnick argues that
statistics on waterborne disease outbreaks
are woefully inadequate. Further, he
writes, our knowledge of waterborne viral
disease has not been advanced much by con-
ventional epidemiological studies. This
(citing Goldfield, 1976) is because a sub-
stantial portion of the exposed population
would likely possess prior immunity and
simply suffer, at most, silent transient
reinfection. The larger portion of those
not previously infected would not develop
illness as the inapparent infectiondisease ratios in the enterovirus infec-
tion are quite high (even in hepatitis A;
Dienstag et al., 1978). And of the small
number developing illness, so varied a
clinical picture would be present as to
be unrecognizable as related to a single
etiologic agent.
In another form these arguments
appeared again when Hetrick (19) wrote
concerning the burgeoning problem of hum-
an viruses in estuarine waters. He cit-
ed the large number of infectious condi-
tions which can be produced by viruses
and stated that
". . .Although it is generally
acknowledged that bathing in
polluted seawater poses a threat
of disease, there are no reports
tracing an outbreak of a viral
disease to such a water. How-
ever, this lack of evidence is
probably a false security, as
many infections of individuals
could be occurring and not be
reported or, if reported, are
not associated with exposure to
polluted water. Indeed, the
following facts indicate that
the presence of very low levels
of enteric and hepatitis viruses
in surface waters are of public
health importance. First, the
minimum infective dose of entero-
viruses for human beings is very
low; e.g. only 1 to 2 plaque-
forming units of poliomyelitis
is needed to infect a human
being, which is in marked con-
trast to waterborne bacterial
diseases, such as typhoid fever
or cholera where large numbers
of organisms need to be ingested
before infection results. Se-
cond, the great majority of
enterovirus infections (>90%)
are sub-clinical in nature, but
individuals with such infections
can transmit the virus to their
contacts. . . . Third, enteric
viruses produce a range of clini-
cal diseases with widely varying
incubation periods, which fur-
ther complicates epidemiological
identification of a waterborne
source of viral infection."
The data presented above and the re-
ferences cited all make clear the measur-
able survival of significant numbers of
helminthic and protozoal parasites, bac-
teria and viruses through all the conven-
tional secondary wastewater treatment
processes, including chlorine disinfec-
tion. However, such treated effluentshave been discharged to surface waters
and both the effluents and sludges used
in intensive agricultural practice for
many years.
Schaerff (28) has reported on neariy
80 years of such experience in Braunsch-
weig in Central Germany. Three thousand
hectares now are irrigated by the Brauns-
schweig Sewage Utilization Association.
Irrigation is combined with percolation
basins to handle the volume, The sludge
is stabilized by six months digestion in
ponds and is plowed under by association
farmers. Cereals, potatoes, sugar beets
and asparagus are the principal crops.
The eoonomiaally successful cultivation
of sugar beets, barley and wheat on the
area's light sandy soil is possible be-
cause of the use of wastewater irrigation.
Schaerff wrote that the long digestion
period in the ponds effectively destroys
known pathogens which settled with the
solids. No evidence of ill health has
been seen in persons working with the
wastewater irrigation system. No contam-
ination of groundwater has been evidenced
by the wells in the irrigation and perco-
lation basins area. Finally, the water
quality of the Oker River which drains
the Braunschweig area has shown improve-
ment downstream of Braunschweig.
In Munich, Süe and his co-workers at
the Bavarian Agricultural and Botanical
Institute have studied the effects on
agricultural yields of sludge utilization,
an area practice of long-standing. At
present, they are irradiating the sludge
from a plant serving about one-fourth of
the city's population. They report that
300 kilorads from a Co°0 source improves
dewaterability and reduces the extremely
high level of Salmonella found in the
region's domestic sludges. Again, no ad-
verse health effects of the selective
agricultural use of properly treated
sludge is seen (29).
Currently, in California, there are
over 200 planned reclamation projects us-
ing reclaimed water for erop and land-
scape irrigation, ornamental and recrea-
tional impoundments, groundwater recharge,
industrial purposes, and fire protection.
Planned reclamation returns about 7% of
the wastewater produced (8). About 90%
of the wastewater reclaimed is used for
erop irrigation, much of it for fodder,
fiber and seed crops. The criteria
applied to water for such uses are less
stringent than those required for water
to be used for food erop irrigation. The
most restrictive standards are applied
for use in irrigation of urban parks,
playgrounds and athletic fiel ds.SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This paper has shown that current
treatment chain design appropriately
utilized is probably adequate to remove
much of the potential public health ha-
zard due to biological cause from waste-
water effluents. Available data suggest
that rather than inactivation, what
occurs during treatment is sequestering
of the microbiota into the secondary
biomass. The problem then becomes one
of sludge handling.
Anaerobic digestion is reasonably
effective in inactivating most pathogens,
the precise degree of efficacy reported
from the laboratory depends upon the in-
dicator organism used and the conditions
of the experiment. In actual practice,
short-circuiting and mechanical defects
in mixing make such anaerobic digesters
less efficiënt in the field than they are
in the laboratory.
The restraint on land disposal which
is operative despite all that which has
been cited is the implicit desire for
absolute safety, for risk-free land
application. To return to Lowrence (23)
briefly:
"A thing is safe if its
risks are judged to be aaaep-
tab Ie,
"By its preciseness and
connotative power this defini-
tion contrasts sharply with
simplistic dictionary defini-
tions that have 'safe' meaning
something like 'free from risk.'
Nothing can be absolutely free
of risk. One can't think of
anything that isn't, under some
circumstances, able to cause
harm. There are degrees of
risk, and consequently there
are degrees of safety.
"Notice that this defini-
tion emphasizes the relativity
and judgmental nature of the
concept of safety. It also
implies that two very different
activities are required for
determining how safe things
are: measuring risk, an objec-
tive but probabilistic pursuit;
and judging the aooeptability
of that risk (judging safety),
a matter of personal and social
value judgment."
We must recognize then, that in lab-
oratory and field studies we have been
measuring risk. Using appropriate treat-
ment methodology brings us to the area
of uncertainty shown.in Figure 3 for lowexposure effects. Judging the acceptabi-
lity of that risk (judging safety) is a
matter for social value judgment, an
issue quite appropriate to the political
arena. It is also an issue which will be
decided differently in different coun-
tries, depending on direct economie bene-
fits, on the level of technological deve-
lopment and—this is of enormous impor-
tance—on the present level of pathogens
extant in the local environment and indi-
genous to that country's population.
Figure 3.
Generalized exposure-effect curve
showing uncertainly at high and
low exposure: diameter of ei rel es
indicates degree of certainty
abocit data points.
ui
Exposure
REFERENCES
1. Proceedings of Conference on Risk
Assessment and Land Effects of
Land Application of Muniaipal Waste-
watev and Sludges. B.P. Sagik and
CA. Sorber, Editors. Center for
Applied Research and Technology,
The University of Texas at San Anton-
io, San Antonio, Texas 78285. 1978.
a. Akin, E.W., H.P. Pahren, W. Jaku-
bowski, and J.B. Lucas. Health
Hazards Associated with Wastewater
Effluents and Sludges: Microbio-
logical Considerations. pp.9-25.
b. Berg, G. Viruses in the Environ-
ment: Assessment of Risk. pp.216-
225.
c. Guentzel, M.N. Potential Impact on
Water Resources of Bacterial Patho-
gens in Wastewater Applied to Land.
pp.180-194.
d. Healy, G. and G.S. Visvesvara.
Obligate Parasites and other Oppor-
tunistic Organisms in the Water
Resource, pp.196-202.
e. Llewellyn, C.H. Health Effects and
Pathogenic Aerosols--An Epidemiolo-
gical Viewpoint. pp.272-278.
f. Melnick, J.L. Are Conventional
Methods of Epidemiology Appropriatefor Risk Assessment of Virus Con-
tamination of Water? pp.61-70.
g. Metcalf, T.G., R. Comeau, R. Moon-
ey and J. Ryther. Opportunities
for Virus Transport within Aquatic
and Terrestrial Environments,
pp.77-101.
h. Moore, B.E., B.P. Sagik and CA.
Sorber. Land Application of
Sludges: Minimi zing the Impact of
Viruses on Water Resources, pp.
154-167.
i. Sproul, 0. The Efficiency of
Wastewater Unit Processes in Risk
Reduction. pp.282-196.
2. Bagdasaryan, G.A. Survival of Vir-
uses of the Enterovirus Group (Polio-
myelitis, ECHO, Coxsackie) in Soil
and on Vegetables. J. of Hyg, Epi-
demiol., Microbiol. and Immunol.
8:497 (1964).
3. Bagley, S.T. and R.J. Seidler. Sig-
nificance of Fecal Coliform-Positive
Klebsiella. Applied and Environ.
Microbiol. 33:1141 (1977).
4. Beard, P.J. The Survival of Typhoid
in Nature. JAWWA 30:124 (1938).
5. Longevity of Eberthella
typhosus in Various Soils. Am.J.
Pub.Health 30:1077 (1940).
6. Black, R.E., R.J. Jackson, T. Tsai,
M. Medvesky, M. Shayegani, J.C. Fee-
ley, K.I.E. MacLeod, and A.M. Wake-
lee. Epidemie Yersinia enteroaoli-
tica Infection Dur to Contaminated
Chocolate Milk. N.E.J. of Med. 298;
76 (1978).
7. Craun, G.F. and L.J. McCabe. Review
of the Causes of Waterborne Disease
Outbreaks. JAWWA 65_:74 (1973).
8. Crook, J. Health Aspects of Water
Reuse in California. Preprint 3015
ASCE Fall Convention, San Francisco,
CA. October, 1977.
9. Dienstag, J.L., W. Szmuness, CE.
Stevens and R.H. Purcel 1. Hepatitis
A Virus Infection: New Insights
from Serioepidemiologic Studies. J.
Inf.Diseases 137^328 (1978).
10. Drewy, W.A. and R. Eliassen. Virus
Movement in Groundwater. JWPCF 40_:
R257 (1968).
11. Duboise, S.M., B.E. Moore, B.P. Sa-
gik and CA. Sorber. The Effects of
Temperature and Specific Conductance
on Poliovirus Survival and Transport
in Soil. Abstract, Nat'1 Conf. on
Environmental Research, Development
and Design, Univ. of Washington,
Seattle, 1976a.
12. , B.E. Moore and B.P.
Sagik. Poliovirus Survival andMovement in a Sandy Forest Soii.
Appl.Environ.Microbiol. 31:536
(1976b). ~"
13. Foster, D.H. and R.S. Engelbrecht.
Microbial Hazards in Disposing of
Wastewater on Soil, in Recycling
Treated Mum'ei pal Wastewater and
Sludge through Forest and Cropland,
W.E. Sopper and L.T. Kardos (Ed.), 26.
Pennsylvania State Univ. Press,
Univ. Park, PA (1973).
14. Gerba, C.P., C. Wallis and J.L. Mel-
nick. Fate of Wastewater Bacteria
and Viruses in Soil. J. of Irriga- 27.
tion and Drainage Division, ASCE
101:1R3 (1975).
15. GöTdfield, M. Epidemiological Indi-
cators for Transmission of Viruses
in Water, in Viruses in Water, Berg,
G., H.L. Bodily, E.H. Lennette, J.L.
Melnick and T.G. Metcalf (Ed.). Am. 28.
Pub.Health Assoc. (1976).
16. Greenberg, A.E. and E. Kupka. Tu-
berculosis Transmission by Waste- 29.
waters--A Review. Sewage and Indus-
trial Wastes 29_:524 (1957).
17. Hargus, E.P. Intestinal Parasites
in Childhood Populations of Latin
Origin. Clinical Pediatrics 15:927
(1976).
18. Hays, B.D. Potential for Parasitic
Disease Transmission with Land Appli-
cation of Sewage Plant Effluents and
Sludges. Water Res. n_:583 (1977).
19. Hetrick, F.M. Survival of Human 30.
Pathogenic Viruses in Estuarine and
Marine Waters. ASM News 44:300
(1978). ~~
20. Katzenelson, E., I. Buium and H.I.
Shuval. Risk of Communicable Dis-
ease Infection Associated with Waste- 31.
water Irrigation in Agricultural
Settlements. Science 195:944 (1976).
21. Knittel, M.D., R.J. Seidler, E. Eby
and L.M. Cabe. Colonization of the
Botanical Environments by Klehsiella
Isolates of Pathogenic Origin. Appl.
Environ.Microbiol. 34:557 (1977).
22. Lance, J.C., C.P. Gerba and J.L.
Melnick. Virus Movement in Soil
Columns Flooded with Secondary Sew-
age Effluent. Appl.Environ.Micro-
biol. 32L520 (1976).
23. Lowrance, W.W. Of Acceptable Risk.
Science and the Determination of
Safety. William Kaufman, Inc., Los
Al tos, CA (1976).
24. Lund, E. Observations on the Virus
Binding Capacity of Sludge. Proc.
of the 5th Int11 Water Pollution
Research Conference, San Francisco,
CA. 1-24/1-1-24/5 (1970.
25. B.E. Moore, L. Funderburg, B.P.Sagik, and J.F. Mali na, Jr. Appli-
cation of Viral Concentration Tech-
niques to Field Samples. In Virus
Survival in Water and Wastewater
Systems, Proc. Center for Research
and Water Resources, Symposium No.7,
B.P. Sagik and J.F. Malina, Jr.
(Ed.) (1974).
Pal fi j A. Survival of Enteroviruses
During Anaerobic Sludge Digestion.
Proc. of the 6th Int'1 Water Pollu-
tion Research Conference, Jerusaiem,
p.90 (1972).
Sanders, D.A., B.E. Moore, B.P.
Sagik, J.F. Maline, Jr., and CA.
Sorber. The Fate of Solids-Incorpo-
rated Poliovirus During Continuous
High-Rate Anaerobic Digestion. 50th
Annual Conf. of WPCF, Philadelphia,
PA (1977).
Schaerff, E. Braunschweig: A Coop-
erative Success. Water Spectrum 9_:
12 (1977).
SÜB, A., A. Rosopilo, H. Borchert,
T. Beek, J. Bauchhenss, and G. Schur-
mann. Experience with a Pilot Plant
for the Irradiation of Sewage Sludge
Results on the Effects of Different
Treated Sewage Sludge to Plants and
Soil. Proc. Symposium on the Use of
High-Level Radiation in Waste Treat-
ment, Int'1 Atomic Energy Agency,
Munich, 1975; also, personal comm-
unication.
Westwood, J.C.N, and S.A. Sattar.
The Minimal Infective Dose, in Virus-
es in Water. Berg, G., H.L. Bodily,
E.H. Lennette, J.L. Melnick, T.G.
Metcalf (Ed.). Am.Pub.Health Assoc-
iation (1976).
Wolfe, M.S. Current Concepts in
Parasitology. Giardiasis. N.E.J.
Med. 298:319 (1978).
1+6COMPARISON OF HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS
FOR LAND TREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
TOXIC CHEMICALS ASSOCIATED WITH LAND TREATMENT OF WASTEWATER-
A. C. Chang and A. L. Page_'1/
ABSTRACT
Land application of domestic
wastewater has been practiced around
the world since the advent of the
wastewater treatment technology. In
recent years, because of the need
to conserve water and restrictions
imposed on the waste disposal in sur-
face waters, the interest of land
oriented wastewater treatment systems
has again attracted widespread atten-
tion in the U.S. The more recently
conceived concepts of land treatment
are not intended to replace the con-
ventional wastewater purification pro-
cesses, but to further the treatment
of wastewater by removing additional
impurities in a natural or artificially
constructed soil mantle. Through the
tertiary treatment, the discharged
wastewater could be effectively util-
ized for recharging natural water
systems (surface or underground) or
irrigation, two widely accepted uses
of reclaimed water. Numerous investi-
gations have been conducted to deter-
mine the fate of disease causing
— Presented at International
Symposium on Land Treatment of Waste-
water. August 20-25, 1978, Hanover,
N.H. Contribution of the Department
of Soil and Environmental Sciences,
University of California, Riverside,
CA 292521.
— Associate Professor of Agricul-
tural Engineering and Professor of
Soil Science, respectively.microorganisms, nitrogen, and phos-
phorus in the wastewater during the
course of a land treatment. As to
the existence of potentially toxic
chemicals in the wastewater and their
possible pathways in soils, little is
known at the present time. Depending
on the nature of the land treatment
system, hazardous substances in waste-
water may pose a present or poten-
tially future long-term danger to
human health or other living organisms
because they are toxic, non-degradable,
or persistent in the natural environ-
ment. Some substances may also be
biologically magnified or otherwise
cause elemental cumulative effects.
This presentation systematically
reviews the fate of potentially
hazardous substances during soil
treatment of wastewater effluents.
The physical, chemical and micro-
biological mechanisms of wastewater
treatment systems are capable of
removing the majority of the toxic
agents. In the treated wastewater
effluents, the concentration of
hazardous substances are usually
low. Based upon existing data and
water quality criteria, the hazardous
nature of wastewater effluents is
characterized and evaluated. Physical
and chemical mechanisms of removing
hazardous chemicals from wastewater
during land treatment are reviewed.
It appears that tracé metal elements
may accumulate to become a potential
hazard during land treatment,especially for wastewater originating
from industrial waste discharge. The
concentrations of organic substances
in wastewater are very low making the
task of identifying their origin
difficult. Further studies are nec-
essary to determine the role of stable
organic substances in land treatment
systems.
INTRODUCTION
Land application of domestic
wastewater has been practiced around
the world since the advent of waste-
water treatment technology. Most
of these practices were abandoned
for rapid urbanization, advancement
in wastewater treatraent technology
and increasing concerns over the
potential public health hazards.
In recent years, the interests of
land oriented wastewater treatment
concepts again attracted widespread
attention in the U.S. Part of the
reason, at least, lies on the nation's
commitment in achieving the ultimate
goal of water pollution control through
physically, chemically and biologically
balanced natural water systems.
The single goal ecological oriented
approach to clean water resulted
in a management strategy that would
ban all waterborne waste disposal
practices wherever possible through
the use of closed-cycled water reuse
technology and land disposal systems.
The more recently conceived concepts
of wastewater land treatraent are not
intended to circumvent the conventional
wastewater purification processes, but
to further the degree of wastewater
treatment by removing additional
impurities in a natural o,r artificially
constructed soil mantle. f2'3'4)
Numerous investigations have been
conducted to determine the fate of
disease causing microorganisms, nitro-
gen and phosphorus compounds, and
biodegradable organic matter in the(1)
wastewater during the course of a
land treatment. ("»6»7) As to the
existence of potentially hazardous
chemicals in the wastewater and their
possible pathway in land treatment,
hazardous substances may pose a present
or potentially future long-term danger
to human health and other living
organisms because they are toxic, and
possibly non-degradable or persistant
in the natural environment. Somesubstances may also be biologically
magnified or otherwise present ele-
mental cumulative effects. Under-
standing wastewater borne toxic
substances1 behavior in soils is
essential to the effectiveness of
wastewater land treatment.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER AND ITS TREATMENT
Any beneficial use of water
always results in quality degradations.
If the increments of contaminants
in the water interfere with the sub-
sequent use of this water or degrade
the quality of the receiving water
body, the wastewater requires treat-
ment. Wastewater purification pro-
cesses are essential in preventing
the continuing degradation of water
quality in a multiple-purpose,
multiple-use water resource manage-
ment system. Wastewaters of urban
environment contain five general
categories of impurities that seriously
affect its quality. They are:
(1) biochemical-chemical oxygen
demanding organic material,
(2) disease causing microorganisms,
(3) essential plant nutrients,
(4) toxic Chemical substances, and
(5) dissolved minerals.
A conventional wastewater treatment
system consists of the physical
separation of suspended solids at the
primary treatment stage, followed by
bio-adsorption and flocculation of
dissolved biodegradable organic sub-
stances and a final disinfection pro-
cess before discharge. This type of
treatment process is effective in
reraoving the turbidity causing sus-
pended solids, oxygen demanding
organic substances and bacteria of
fecal origin from the wastewater
(Table 1). The removal of nitrogenous
and phosphorus compounds in a typical
wastewater treatment plant, by and
large, is accidental and not by
design. As to the increment of
chemical constituents that contribute
to the total dissolved minerals of the
water no significant change of its
concentration in the effluent water is
expected, Since the water quality
changes during a treatment were not
evaluated by specific compounds,
little information could be extra-
polated to its effectiveness of
removing potentially hazardous
compounds. The efficiënt removalof suspended solids and BOD (bio-
chemical oxygen demand) in a treatment
in no way indicates the corresponding
reduction of toxic chemicals.
Organic Chemicals of Wastewater
The presence of organic matter
in raw and treated wastewater is
highly variable and dependent upon the
source of wastewater and the degree of
treatment. The organic matter content
of wastewaters is expressed in terms
of measured parameters such as BOD
(biochemical oxygen demand), COD
(chemical oxygen demand) or TOC
(total organic carbon). These para-
meters bear little indication to
the chemical nature and toxicity
of wastewater organics. Attempts
to characterize the organic matter
in wastewaters in the past have not
met with complete success. (°»*»10)
Compounds to be identified are numerous
and complete isolation and identifica-
tion of each compound has not yet
been achieved. In the raw wastewater
entering a treatment plant, organic
compounds consisted primarily of
carbohydrates, fatty acids and esters,
proteins and amino acids and anionic
surface-active agents (detergents).
After the secondary treatment, organic
matter content of wastewater is
greatly reduced. The more refractory
and high molecular weight organics
such as fulvic acid, humic acid,
and hymathomelanic acid become the
major organic constituents of treated
wastewater. Many of these substances
are naturally occuring and there is
no indication that they would be toxic
to the subsequent users of the water.
Much of these high molecular weight
organic substances generally constit-
uted the "color" and "taste" associated
with the treated water. The nature
of the unaccounted fraction (usually
20-50% of the total organic matter)
remains to be characterized.
With the assistance of more
sophisticated analytical instruments
and advanced techniques, efforts
have been made to identify stable
organic compounds that entered the
wastewater collection system and
survived the treatment processes.
Because of their extremely low con-
centrations in water (generally less
than 100/ig/l), the procedures of
isolation and identification are
tedious and time consuming and thelist of identified compounds is
long. (Il»12) Chlorination of treated
wastewater effluents brought about
many chlorinated organic compounds
(chloro-benzoic acids, chlorophenol,
etc.) that are more persistent in
natural systems. (13) Although many
of these organic compounds are
naturally occuring and they present
more of a problem in terms of taste,
odor, and color rather than toxi-
city. (1^>15) There are also compounds
considered potentially hazardous,
because they are persistent, in the
environment. More importantly, their
chemical and biochemical reactions in
soils are not known. The low con-
centration in water would undoubtedly
affect the chemical reaction kinetics.
Besides treated wastewater
effluents, organic compounds are also
found in natural waters and public
drinking waters. Very little is
known concerning the public health
impact of tracé amounts of biolog-
ically resistant and potentially
hazardous organic chemicals in
drinking water. There is little
evidence to link the presence of
these substances in water to any human
disease. The hazard of exposing human
subjects to long-term low level con-
tact and the probability of biological
accumulation in other organisms should
not be overlooked.(16) For this
reason, the concentration of organics
in the wastewater should be reduced
to as low as possible in any waste-
water treatment. The national Academy
of Science, Safe Drinking Water
Committee has identified more than
100 organic compounds whose presence
in water are considered undesirable
because they have been found in
detectable concentration in water,
and there are data to suggest toxicity
to man and test animals.(l')
Inorganic Chemicals of Wastewater
Unlike the vaguely-defined and
still little understood toxic tracé
organic constituents in wastewaters,
the toxicological significance and
hazardous nature of inorganic con-
stituents of, wastewater are well
documented, ^ ' Generally, hazardous
inorganic chemical constituents of
wastewater are the tracé elements.
Geochemically, tracé elements are a
group of otherwise unrelated chemical
elements that are present in naturalsystem in extremely low concentrations.
Some of these elements are essential
for the growth of living organisms.
When present in high enough concentra-
tions, essential tracé elements may
become toxic. The list of potentially
hazardous tracé elements is long and
probably increasing. Boron, cadmium,
chromiutn, copper, nickel, mercury,
arsenic, molybdenum, vanadium, cobalt,
silver, lead, fluorine, aluminum, iron,
manganese, titanium and zinc all have
to be considered potentially dangerous
to humans or to plants at elevated
concentrations.
Many of these elements are widely
used in industrial processing and in
manufacturing of consumer goods. For
this reason, small amounts of tracé
elements are always present in waste-
water. Excessively high concentrations
of any tracé element in wastewater
always indicates industrial waste
discharge into the collection system.
During a wastewater treatment, tracé
elements could be removed from waste-
water, but the removal efficiencies
are not always consistent (Table 2).
If the concentration in the wastewater
is high or the removal in a wastewater
treatment plant is inadequate, addi-
tional removal becoraes necessary,
Table 3 summarizes the concentra-
tion range of selected tracé elements
in the treated wastewater effluents. (
These concentrations are also compared
with the established water quality
criteria for public water supply
and for erop irrigation use. Properly
treated, most wastewater could meet
the recommended tracé element limita-
tions for both uses. Among elements
likely to exceed the upper limits,
lead and cadmium are closely related
to industrial wastes. The main source
of boron is the widespread use of
boron containing household detergents.
Except for boron, the use of waste-
water on fine textured soils with
neutral or alkaline pH minimizes toxic
effects of tracé elements to plants.
REMOVAL OF TOXIC CHEMICALS BY LAND
TREATMENT
A conventional wastewater treat-
ment system is designed to remove
gross contaminants of wastewater
(i.e., suspended solids, biochemical
oxygen demanding organic material,
bacteria of fecal origin, etc). Tosafeguard the biological treatment
processes, toxic chemicals in high
concentrations are also prevented
from entering the treatment system.
Certain degrees of toxic chemical
removal during wastewater treatment
is also expected. However, the removal
of any toxic chemical substances is
not integrated into the operation of
a domestic wastewater treatment pro-
cess. For this reason, the removal
efficiency of these substances in
wastewater treatment is not consistent.
Like the first and second stage waste-
water treatment, the performance
evaluation of land treatment of waste-
water has also been focused on the
effectiveness of soil in removing
gross contaminants of water. With the
large number of potentially hazardous
chemical substances that may be
present in the treated wastewater,
their impact on a land treatment
system is difficult to assess.
Mechanisms in soils that may
interact to affect the fate of toxic
chemicals in the water to be treated
are summarized in Table 4. The effec-
tiveness of each outlined pathway in
removing toxic substances from passage
water would depend on the properties
of the soil and the hydraulic charac-
teristics of the land treatment system.
Based on methods of water application,
land treatment of wastewater may be
categorized into three basic systems:
(1) Irrigation,
(2) infiltration-percolation, and
(3) overland flow.
Irrigation is the most commonly used
land treatment system, involving
the application of treated wastewater
on land for further treatment and
for meeting the water demand of growing
plants. The applied water undergoes
treatment by means of physical, chem-
ical and biological pathways in soils.
It not only avoids the direct surface
discharge of wastewater, but also
provides for water conservation.
In infiltration-percolation system,
wastewaters are applied at a relative
high rate in confined basins. Because
of the expected high hydraulic
loading in these systems, coarser
textured soils are always used. Under
such operating conditions, removal
of contaminants from water is predom-
inantly physical straining and
filtration. The biological barrier
formed near the soil surface may also
be effective in chemical adsorption
50and biological decomposition. The
overland flow system resembles a
biological treatment process in which
the treated wastewater is applied on
the top end of a sloped field and
allowed to flow overland through a
vegetated surface to a collection
ditch at the lower end. As the water
flows, physical, chemical and bio-
logical reactions take place at the
water-soil interface. At the present,
existing information does not permit
any thorough review on the fate of
toxic chemicals under each of the
land treatment options. A general
overview, however, is presented in
the following sections.
Fate of organic chemicals in soils
There is ample evidence to
indicate that a relatively large
number of soluble organic substances
may survive the conventional waste-
water treatment process and are
present in the treated effluent at
concentrations in the ^g/1 range.
These compounds involve both toxic
and non-toxic organic substances,
Because of their extremely low con-
centration, the source of these sub-
stances are difficult to tracé and
they are less susceptible to microbial
decomposition. They enter into waters
through natural processes, through
waste disposals or result from micro-
bial synthesis or degradation.
In wastewater effluents, most
of the stable organic substances
appear to be present in polymeric
fortns and to some extent resemble
the soil humus material. If we view
soil mantle as a chromatographic
column in which adsorption and desorp-
tion are rather active, the tracé
amount of stable organic substances
in the percolating water may be
adsorbed onto the soil surface.
The molecular weights as well as
the chemical structure would determine
eventually the extent of adsorption
under a specific hydraulic loading.
The adsorption phenomena of soils
could bring the organic substance
concentration at the soil surface
to a higher concentration and there-
fore make them more susceptible to
microbial decomposition. Simple
organic compounds such as aliphatic
and phenolic acids, amino acids, and
sugars are readily decomposible by
soil microorganisms. Substances withbranched chains and higher molecular
weight are more resistant to biode-
gradation and require longer periods
of time to decompose in soils. Their
immobilization by soil adsorption in
the biologically active zone is
essential to their inactivation.
Pesticide residues constituted a
significant fraction of the presently
identified potentially toxic organic
substances of the water and waste-
water. The behavior and decomposition
pathway of raany pesticides in soils
have been studied for many years.(20)
In terms of adsorption and mobility
of these organic substances, both
soil and pesticide characteristics
influence the outcome. The affinity
of pesticides for soil minerals and
organic matter generally decrease in
the series of organic matter > vertni-
culite > montmorillonite > illite >
chlorite > kaolinite. Adsorption of
organic pesticides by soil also charac-
teristically increases as the con-
centration of functional groups such
as primary, secondary and tertiary
amines, amides, carboxyl, and phenolic
increase. The presence of organic
substances usually increase the
adsorption affinity. The pesticides
can also be effectively bonded with
iron and aluminum oxides at proper
soil pH ranges. Both laboratory and
field experiments indicate that most
pesticide residues remain in surface
soils with only a few migrating to
depths of 30-60 cm in soil.(2l>
Because of the rather strong adsorp-
tion by soil particles, there is
little evidence that pesticide
chemicals would move with percolating
water to any significant depth during
land treatment. Observations made at
a few long term ground water recharge
operation sites also seemed to support
this reasoning; pesticide residues
found in the recharged water were
well within the concentration normally
found in natural waters. (22) Organic
substances other than pesticide resi-
dues in the wastewater also appear to
be adsorbed onto the soil. *• '
Although the ability of soil to absorb
these compounds is less than that of
activated carbon, soils serve as an
effective filter to remove them from
leaching water. The immobilized
organic substance in soils are sub-
sequently subject to chemical or
photochemical decomposition, volatil-
ization and microbial decomposition.
51Fate of tracé elements in soils
Studies of tracé elements in
treated wastewater effluents indicate
that they are present in the waste-
water effluent principally as finely
divided suspended solids. (24) These
fine suspended solids do not settle
out easily in the secondary settling
process. Through the physical strain-
ing at the surface and filtration
through the porous soil media, land
treatment should effectively remove
this fraction of the tracé metal ele-
ments frora the applied water. The
removal of soluble tracé metal
elements of the water, however, would
depend largely upon the type and the
extent of chemical reaction that may
take place in the soil. The amount
and the type of clay minerals and soil
organic matter are important factors
in determining the nature of the
chemical reactions. Water percolating
through low organic matter, coarse
textured soils may exhibit little
change in tracé element concentration
of the applied water. On the other
hand, soils with a high percentage of
clay and organic matter facilitate
quite effective reraoval of tracé
elements frora the water.
In general, elements which occur
in solution as anions or neutral
molecules may pass through soils more
readily than elements that are pre-
sent as cations. Elements such as
As, Se, F, B and Mo in soils often
occur as anions or neutral molecules.
Metallic elements (Cd, Cu, Cr, Pb, Hg,
Ag and Zn), on the other hand, are
most commonly found in water and in
soils as cations. All tracé elements
concerned may also react to form
organo-metallic complexes in water
and in soil. The chemistry or organo-
metallic complex in the heterogeneous
natural system is extremely compli-
cated. Currently information is
insufficient to assess the impact of
organo-metallic complexes in land
treatment system. Besides the
apparent soil mineral and ion species
effect, there are also many other
factors that would influence the
chemical reactions of the soil. Each
of these elements should be treated
individually. The probable chemical
reaction of a few elements in soils
are briefly outlined below:
As. In solution As is commonlypresent in the trivalent state (HAsO
and AsOg") or in pentavalent state
(H-jAsO^, HjAsO^", HAsO4= and AsO^).
In the pH range of most soils and
waters, arsenic in solution is most
likely to be present as a mono-valent
or divalent anion. Although the
chemical reactions of As in soils are
not completely understood, it is
thought to react with iron, aluminum
and/or calcium to form rather insol-
uble compounds. It appears that in
acid soils, the solubility is con-
trolled by the solubility of iron and
aluminum arsenites and arsenates.
In neutral and calcareous soils, the
solubility of calcium arsenate is
thought to control concentrations of
dissolved arsenic. The solubility of
As in soils usually increases as the
pH of the soil increases.
Se. The chemistry of Se resem-
bles that of the sulfur, Inorganic
selenium occurs in solution as either
SeO/~ or SeO^~. In acid soils, these
anions most likely react with iron
and aluminum oxides to form the rather
insoluble selenites (SeOo~). Selenium
also becomes more soluble in neutral
and calcareous soils.
Cd and Zn. Chemical reactions
of Cd and Zn are commonly similar in
natural systems. They occur in solu-
tion as divalent cations and sometimes
as ion pairs. The ion pairs may be
cationic, anionic or neutral and have
^a-b a general formula of [M^b] ^a-yb wnere
M represents the divalent metal ion,
X represents the anion, y its valence,
and a and b the numbers of cations and
anions in the complex, respectively.
Ion pairs of Zn and Cd may include
anions such as OH", Cl", CO ~, and
SO,**. Although ion pairs are known
to occur under some conditions, their
signification to a land treatment are
difficult to evaluate. More commonly,
Zn and Cd in water are sufficiently
attenuated in soils by precipitation,
coprecipitation, and adsorption in-
volving clay minerals, organic matter
amorphous oxides. As long as soil pH
is greater than 4.5, Zn of water is
not likely to exceed recommended
limits of water quality criteria.
Cu. Like Cd and Zn, copper can
exist as ion pairs or free divalent
cations in solutions. Under reducing
conditions, divalent cupric ion isreduced to the monovalent cuprious
ion. In slightly acid, neutral, or
calcareous soils, the solubility of
inorganic Cu seldom exceeds 1 mg/l due
to the formation of quite insoluble
organic and inorganic complexes. In
most soils, the solubility of Cu is
less than that predicted from solu-
bility products of carbonates, indi-
cating other mechanisms (adsorption or
other insoluble compounds) may be
controlling the solubility of Cu in
soils.
Cr. Chromium may occur in solu-
tion ~as Cr++, CT+++, CrOj-", CrO4=
and Cr„0 ~. The Cr"1"1" ion is unstable
and in natural systems rapidly oxi-
dized into Cr . Hexavalent chromium
ion in soil is more mobile and toxic
to plants than trivalent chromium.
Recent studies have demonstrated the
rapid oxidation of hexavalent chromium
to trivalent chromium in the presence
of organic matter. '25,26) jn turn,
the trivalent chromium would form
insoluble oxides, leaving little
chromium available for plants or
leaching.
Pb. Lead may occur in solution
as divalent or tetravalent cations.
The solubility of Pb in natural system
is extremely low due to the formation
of sparsely soluble or insoluble PbSO,,
PbCO3, Pb(OH)^ and lead phosphate.
Lead present in wastewater is probably
largely in the form of fine suspended
solids and should be effectively
removed from wastewater in any form
of land treatment.
Hg. The concentration of Hg in
soil solution is principally deter-
mined by the ionic adsorption on soil
minerals, and organic matter. In
soils, inorganic and organic compounds
may be reduced to elemental Hg and
subject to volatilization,
From the brief review of the
chemistry of selected toxic tracé
elements in soils, it is obvious that
most soils possess the capacity to
immobilize tracé elements through
Chemical adsorption, complexation
and precipitation reactions. Since
wastewater effluent to be applied on
land is usually low in tracé elements,
for most beneficial use of the water
the added removal by soils would
further safeguard the use of these
waters. Except for boron,laboratory(27)and field experi-
both indicate effective
tracé metal removal by soils or soil-
plant systems. Since the tracé
elements in wastewater effluents are
chemically immobilized in the soil,
it is essential that the chemical
properties of soils that facilitate
the immobilization of tracé elements
be maintained. A change of the
chemical properties of soil could
release large amounts of potentially
hazardous tracé metal elements.
CONCLUSIONS
Land treatment of wastewater has
been extensively studied in recent
years. To wastewater treatment
authorities, land treatment offers
an alternative to the direct surface
discharge of treated wastewater.
It may also facilitate conservation
of water resources. Among all con-
stituents of concern in a land treat-
ment system, toxic chemicals (i.e.,
stable organic substances and tracé
metal elements) are the least under-
stood. Little attention has been
focused on the impact of these
potentially hazardous substances
on a disposal system or on reuse
of the water, Existing information
tends to indicate that toxic chemicals
in the treated wastewater are in
low enough concentrations not to
interfere with land treatment oper-
ation. The concentration of several
known toxic substances in treated
wastewater were also within the
limit recommended for most beneficial
use of water. On the other hand,
soils also seem to possess the ability
to attenuate the input of toxic
chemicals through various mechanisms.
With existing data it is difficult to
project the long term effectiveness
and the consistency of soil mant Ie
to immobilize and detoxify hazardous
substances in wastewater. Therefore,
for long term, full scale land treat-
ment operations, it is essential that
the fate of toxic chemicals during
the land treatment not be overlooked.
53Table 1. Typical treatment of municipal wastewater*
ParameterConcentration
Influent Secondary Removal
Wastewater Effluent Efficiency
Biocheinical Oxygen Demand
Chemical Oxygen Demand
Suspended Solids
Nitrogen
Phosphorus200
400
200
20
1020
80
20
18
990
80
90
10
10
*Environmental Pollution Control Alternatives: Municipal Waste-
water, U. S. EPA Technology Transfer, EPA-625/5-76-012.
Table 2. Tracé Metal Removal in Wastewater Treatment*
Element Removal by Secondary Treatment
Cd
Cr
Cu
Hg
Ni
Pb
Zn20-45
40-80
0-70
20-75
15-40
50-90
35-80
*Environmental Pollution Control Alternatives;
Municipal Wastewater, U. S. EPA Technology Transfer,
EPA 625/5-76-012.
5»*Table 3. Concentration of Tracé Elements
in Treated Wastewater vs. Water Quality Criteria
Element
As
B
Cd
Cr
Cu
Hg
Mo
Ni
Pb
Se
ZnWastewater
Range
<0.005-0.023
0.3 -2.5
<0.005-0.22
<0.001-0.1
0.006-0.053
<0.0002-0.001
0.001-0.018
0.003-0.60
0.003-0.35
0.004-0.35Effluent
Median
<0.005
0.7
<0.005
0.001
0.018
0.0002
0.007
0.004
0.008
0.04Water
Public
Water
Supply
mg/l
0.1
0.01
0.05
1.0
0.002
0.05
0.05Quality Criteria
Irrigation
Continuous
Use
0.1
0.75
0.01
0.1
0.2
0.01
0.20
5.0
0.02
2.0Short
term
Use
2.0
2.0
0.05
1.0
5.0
0.15
2.0
10.0
0.02
10.0
Table 4. Soil Reactions in Reraoving Toxic Chemicals
Mode of
ReactionReaction
PathwayAc t ive
Component
in SoilAffected
Constituents
ChemicalCation
exchange
Surface
adsorption
Precipitation
ComplexationClay minerals,
organic matterToxic metal elements
Clay minerals Organic substances,
toxic metals
Oxides of Fe, Al,
carbonates
hydroxidesToxic metals
Organic matter Toxic metals
PhysicalSurface
straining
Absorption
Sedimentation
VolatilizationSurface soil
Soil particlesSuspended solids
Suspended solids
Soil pore space Suspended solids
Soil surface,
pore spaceVolatile organic and
inorganic constit-
uents, microbial
products
Decomposition
Microbial Methylation
BiomagnificationSoil
microorganism
Soil
microorganism
Soil
microorganismOrganic compounds
Selected tracé
metal elements
Selected tracé
metal elements
pesticides residues
55REFERENCES
1. Westman, W. E., 1972. Some basic
issues in water pollution control
legislation, Amer. Scientist 60(6):
767.
2. Kardos, W. T. 1967. Wastewater
renovation by the land — a living
filter. In Agriculture and the Quality
of Pur Environment. N, C. Brady (ed.)
American Association for the Advance-
ment of Science Publication No. 85.
3. Bouwer, H., J. C, Lance and M. S.
Riggs. 1974. High rate land treat-
ment. II. Water Quality and economie
aspects of the Flushing Meadows Pro-
ject. Jour. Water Poll. Contr. Fed.
46:844.
4. Erickson, A. E., J, M. Tiedje,
B. G. Ellis, C. M. Hansen. 1972.
Initial observations of several
medium-sized barriered land-scaped
water renovation systems for animal
wastes. Proc. 1972 Cornell Agri-
cultural Waste Management Conference.
5. Romero, J, C. 1970. The move-
ment of bacteria and virus through
porous media, Gróund Water 8:37.
6. Lance, J. C., and F. D. Whisler.
1972. Nitrogen balance in soil
column intermittently flooded with
sewage water. Jour. Environ.
Quality. 1:180.
7. Tofflemire, T. J,, and M. Chen.
1977. Phosphate removal by sand
and soils. J[n_ Land as a waste
mangement alternative. Proc. of
the 1976 Cornell Agricultural Waste
Management Conference. R. C. Roehr
(ed.). Ann Arbor Science, p. 151.
8. Bunch, R. L., E. F. Barth and
M. B. Ettinger. 1961. Organics in
Secondary Effluents, Jour. Water
Poll. Contr. Fed. 33(2):122.
9. Rebhun, M., and J. Manka. 1971.
Classification of organics in sec-
ondary effluents. Environ. Sci. and
Tech. 5(7):606.
10. Painter, H, A., M. Viney and A.
Bywaters. 1961. Composition of
sewage and sewage effluents. Jour.
Inst. of Sewage Purification, 4:302.11. Katz, S., W. W. Pitt, Jr., C. D.
Scott, and A. A. Rosen. 1972. The
determination of stable organic com-
pounds in wastewater effluents at
microgram per liter levels by auto-
ntatic high-resolution ion exheange
chromatography, Water Research 6:1029.
12. Manka, J., M. Rebhun, A. Mandel-
baum, and A. Bortingers. 1974.
Characterization of organics in sec-
ondary effluents. Environ. Sci. and
Tech. 8:12.
13. Morris, J. C. 1975. Formation
of Halogenated organics by chlor-
ination of water supply - A Review.
Environmental Protection Technology
Series, EPA-600/1-75-002. U. S.
Environmental Protection Agency, 54
pp.
14. Lin, S. D. 1976. Sources of
tastes, and odor in Water - Part I.
Water and Sewage Works 123(6):101.
15. Lin, S. D. 1976. Sources of
tastes, and odor in Water - Part II.
Water and Seage Works 123(7):64.
16. Ottoboni, A., and A. E. Green-
berg. 1970. Toxicological aspect
of wastewater reclamation - A Pre-
liminary Report. Jour. Water Poll.
Contr. Fed. 42:493.
17. National Academy of Science,
Safe Drinking Water Committee. 1977.
Drinking water and health, National
Academy of Science, Washington, D. C.
939 pp.
18. Chang, A. C, and A. L, Page.
1977. Tracé elements in wastewater,
California Agriculture 31(5):32-33.
19. Hajek, B. F. 1969. Chemical
interactions of wastewater in a soil
environment. Jour. Water Poll. Contr.
Fed. 41(10):1775.
20. Helhig, C. S., D. C. Kearney,
and M. Alexander. 1971. Behavior of
Pesticides in Soils. Advances in
Agronomy 23:147.
21. Bailey, G. W. and J. W. White.
1970. Factors influencing the
adsorption desorption of pesticides
in soils. Residue Review 32:29.
22. Bookman-Edmonston EngineeringInc. 1974. Annual Report on results
of water quality monitoring water year
1972-1973. Report to the Central and
West Basin Replenishment District,
Downey, California.
23. McGhee, T. J., and R. A. Miller.
1976. Soil adsorption of humic color.
Jour. Water Poll. Contr. Fed. 48(8):
1970.
24. Chen, Y., C. W. Young, T. K. Jan,
and Rohatgi. 1974. Tracé metals in
wastewater effluents. Jour. Water
Poll. Contr. Fed. 46(12):2663.
25. Barlett, R. J., and J. M. Kimble.
1976. Behavior of chromium in soils:
I. Trivalent forms. Jour. Environ.
Qual. 5(4):379.
26. Barlett, R. J., and J. M. Kimble.
1976. Behavior of chromium in soils:
II. Hexavalent forms. Jour. Environ.
Qual. 5(4):383.
27. Wentink, G. R., and J. E. Etzel.
1972. Removal of metal ions by soil.
Jour. Water Poll. Contr. Fed. 44(8):
1561.
28. Ellis, B. S. 1973. The soil as
a chemical filter. In Recycling
heated municipal wastewater and
sludges through forest and cropland.
W. E. Sopper and L. T. Kardov (eds.).
University of Pennsylvania Press, p.
46.COMPARISON OF HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS
FOR LAND TREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
USE OF WASTEWATER ON LAND -
FOOD CHAIN CONCERNS
George L. Braude, Ralston B. Read,
Jr., and Charles F. Jelinek
Bureau of Foods, Food and Drug
Administration, Washington, D.C.
ABSTRACT
Disposal of wastewater and efflu-
ents on land provides many potential
benefits, but carries with it the risk
of contaminating human and animal food.
Among the chemical contaminants
present in wastewater, heavy metals,
including cadmium and lead, and persis-
tent organic compounds are of most
concern. Because of dilution and dis-
tribution to larger land areas, waste-
water must be considered less hazardous
than sludge when used at typical
application rates, but there are ex-
ceptions. Microbiological concerns
apply to both wastewater and sludge and
the degree of concern depends upon the
pretreatment, use practices, and the
type of erop receiving the wastewater
and/or sludge.
For these reasons, we recommend
that consideration be given to the
possible adverse effects of the
application of wastewater to food crops
before this practice is instigated.
INTRODUCTION
Many variables determine the bene-
fits and risks of the practice of
applying wastewater to land. The origin
of the wastewater is of primary impor-
tance. Municipal wastewater ordinarily
contains liquid domestic sewage, but may
also frequently contain varying amounts
of industrial effluents and street run-
of f. Domestic sewage is a known source
of pathogens for humans. Industrial
wastes contain a variety of metals,particularly cadmium, lead, and mercury,
and refractory organic compounds includ-
ing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
Street runoff is a source of lead from
automotive exhausts and also of some
other metals such as zinc and cadmium.
Before its application to land,
wastewater may or may not have under-
gone treatment, which may range from
only minimal sedimentation or primary
treatment, to the more customary
biological processes such as the act-
ivated sludge, trickling filter, or
aerated lagoon systems that are used in
the United States. In general, the more
advanced the treatment, the greater the
reduction in the levels of many of these
chemical and microbiological contam-
inants in the effluents which are to be
applied to land and/or crops. Many of
the contaminants, will, however, remain
In sewage sludges which, when applied
to land, may present a more severe
problem than the use of wastewater.
Sewage and effluents usually con-
tain substantial concentrations of
soluble nitrogen compounds and phos-
phates. To prevent ground and surface
water contamination, use of vegetation
on the land is desirable or necessary.
In many instances, grasses are used
which sometimes provide food for
grazing animals. A more economically
attractive solution is the planting of
food crops to make use of the fertilizer,
water, and organic humus contents;
however, planting crops, in turn, causes
concern because of the problems of
chemical and microbiological contam-
ination of the food supply.
59NATURE OF CONTAMINANTS
Metals
The diet in the United States and
other industrial countries is high in
some toxic metals. The elements of
primary concern are cadmium and lead.
Table I gives the maximum tolerable
daily intakes for these metals proposed
by the World Health Organization (WHO)
(1), compared with the daily intake of
a teen-age male, as estimated by the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (2).
These estimates are based on the results
obtained in FDA surveys of the lead and
cadmium content of about 50 food cora-
modities and on data obtained in FDA's
Total Diet, or "Market Basket" study (3).
Depending on the study used and its
interpretation, estimates of cadmium
intakes range from 30 to 70 ug/day, and
are thus at or near the tolerable daily
intake proposed by WHO. For this
reason, FDA has stated that new prac-
tices which would significantly increase
the cadmium levels in foods should not
be instituted. In the case of lead,
we are especially concerned about in-
fants, since they eat more food per
pound of body weight and absorb a
higher proportion of the lead they
ingest than do adults.
Numerous studies have been con-
ducted in recent years on both effl-
uents and sludges containing metals
(4,5,6,7,8,9,10). In most instances,
the use of sewage sludges is of more
concern than the use of wastewater
unless the wastewater is heavily con-
taminated and application rates are
high. Figure 1 demonstrates this fact
graphically for cadmium. Treated
wastewaters usually contain cadmium at
less than 20 or at the most 30 parts
per billion (ppb) (8), while sludges
contain this element in the parts per
million (ppm) range, often exceeding
50-100 ppm or more. Although much more
wastewater than sludge is applied to a
given land area, this difference is not
large enough to make up for the higher
concentrations of cadmium in sludges as
compared with those in wastewater. The
end result is that cadmium and other
metals are usually applied at higher
rates to a given land area when sludge
is used rather than wastewater.
Limits allowed for cadmium in
drinking water are 10 ppb, based on the
drinking water regulations of theEnvironmental Protection Agency (EPA).
In 1972, the National Academy of
Sciences proposed an irrigation water
Standard of only 5 ppb of cadmium be-
cause of the accumulation potential of
this element. As shown in Fig. 1, use
of wastewater with these concentrations
on land would not result in cadmium
additions of over 0.5 kg/ha/year at
realistic application rates of up to
400 cm/year (about 3 inches per week).
This rate of 0.5 kg of cadmium applied
annually would be the maximum permitted
after 1986 in the regulations on the
use of wastes on land proposed by EPA
(11) and supported by FDA. However,
higher cadmium levels in wastewaters of
industrial origin would, in the long
run, present a much greater health
problem. Sewage sludges, even those
having moderate cadmium levels, would
have to be used at low application
rates on land to avoid erop contami-
nation problems. FDA recommends that
sludge containing more than 25 ppm
should not be used on land on which
certain food crops are grown and that
maximum annual and cumulative limits
be established. The same applies to
highly contaminated wastewater, taking
the difference in application rates
into account.
On secondary treatment, a varying
proportion of the amounts of cadmium
present in raw wastewater is removed
with the sewage sludge; the balance
remains in the effluent. The ratios
are dependent on the level of cadmium
initially present and many other fact-
ors: generally, the higher the initial
level, the greater the percentage that
will remain in sludge (12). Most of
the cadmium from low-cadmium waste-
water will pass into the effluent in
soluble form.
Organic Contaminants
The presence of organic contam-
inants is a matter of considerable
concern, partly because of the lack of
sufficient research and study and part-
ly because many of these contaminants
are toxic and potentially carcinogenic,
teratogenic, or mutagenic to humans.
Wastewater contains a wide variety
of organic substances. Some of the
natural compounds may or may not be of
concern, but the "man-made" variety is
of particular interest. This category
includes many of the thousands of
Industrial chemicals; some examples
are insecticides, herbicides, and the
6oTABLE I
Tolerances and Dietary Intakes of Cadmium and Lead
WHO/FAO (1972), Provlsional Tolerances
(Adult), Converted to ug/Person/Day
Dietary Intake, U.S. Teen-Age Male,
ug/Person/DayCADMIUM
57-71
30-70LEAD
429
254
T34.0 .
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.5
5
50Cd in
Sludge (ppm) or
Wastewater (ppb)
100
30
30040 metric tons/ha - sludge
400 cm/ha - wastewater
Fig. 1 - Annual Additions of Cadmium to Land (calculated)
61persistent compounds such as PCBs and
chlorinated hydrocarbons. Based on the
Information being developed under the
Toxic Substances Control Act, more than
30,000 different commercial chemical
products, mostly organic, are being
manufactured in the United States. It
appears probable that many, if not most,
of these chemicals can be found in
wastewaters together with all their
by-products, metabolites, oxidation
products, etc. (13).
Sewage treatment is often combined
with chlorination of the effluent prior
to land application. This procedure
is obviously desirable microbiologically,
since the treatment may reduce the
number of pathogenic microorganisms
present. However, chlorination also
results in the formation of a wide range
of chlorine- and other halogen-contain-
ing derivatives which can then be found
in the wastewater and often in drinking
water (14).
Chlorination of natural organic as
well as industrial substances has been
well documented. An example is the
surprising finding that chlorination
of humic substances in water ylelds
chloroform and other lower halocarbons.
In additlon to those chemical substances
that have been discovered in wastewater
in recent investigations, large numbers
of more hydrophilic compounds are
believed to be present. These latter
compounds are very difficult to detect
with current analytical methods.
Because wastewater thus can contain
a wide range of known and suspected
organic contaminants, risks involved
must be carefully considered before its
application to land.
Microbiological Contaminants
A review of the potential micro-
biological problems associated with
the application of sewage containing
domestic wastewater to land has been
prepared by Larkin et al., and appears
in Volume 2 of the Proceedings of this
Symposium. Essentially, an assessment
of the hazards involves consideration
of the kinds of microbial and parasitic
pathogens in domestic wastewater, the
probability of their survival during any
treatment the wastewater might receive,
the manner and schedule of application of
wastewater to the erop, the processing
the erop receives before consumption,
and, finally, the infectious dose of the
pathogen in question.when these potential problems
are considered, it is apparent that
there is a good probability of human
pathogens reaching the erop through
application of domestic wastewater, and
the persistence of some of these path-
ogens is such that they could remain
viable until the food is either process-
ed or consumed. Because of this
possibility, we believe that wastewater
containing domestic sewage should not be
applied to crops that are normally
eaten raw. Furthermore, because of the
persistence of some parasites, land
that has received wastewater containing
domestic sewage should not be used to
grow crops normally eaten raw for 3
years after the last application of
wastewater. In addition, unless it is
free of pathogenic microorganisms,
domestic wastewater should not be used
on crops that enter the home or res-
taurant in the raw state (even when the
food is to be cooked before consumption)
because of the potential for cross-
contamination.
MECHANISMS OF POTENTIAL FOOD
CONTAMINATION
Given the presence at significant
levels of some or all of the contam-
inants discussed above, what are the
ways in which they may enter the human
and animal food chain?
Wastewater application methods are
important. Various types of overhead
sprays are usually employed where crops
are planted, but other techniques In-
clude ridge and furrow irrigation and
overland flow. Some of these latter
methods may not be especially adapted
to the planting of crops, at least
in some parts of the country.
Physical Contamination
Chaney and Lloyd (15) have shown
that sewage sludges are effectively
retained when applied to vegetation by
spraying, and that they are not well
removed by rain. Because of the more
dilute nature (and lower vlscosity) of
wastewater and effluents, lower con-
tamination levels on vegetation would
be expected. Kowever, evaporation
and repeated application may provide
sufficient buildup of contaminants
to be a cause for concern. Contaminants
physically retained on crops may be
ingested by animals, or possibly
62directly by humans, if improper prac-
tices are followed (16).
Uptake from Soil
Much research has been conducted
on the uptake of metals such as cadmium,
lead, zlnc, nickel, and copper from
soils. In recent years, such research
has accelerated because of concerns
about the use of sewage sludges on
land (10). As dlscussed above, waste-
waters would provide lower concentra-
tions of such metals. However, some
metals may also be more readily avail-
able from wastewaters, since they are
mostly present in dissolved form. For
this reason, additional studies with
realistic and exaggerated concentrations
should probably be conducted to deter-
mine metal uptakes.
The uptake of organic compounds
such as pesticides and PCBs from soils
into plants has also been studied, but
on a more limited scale. Some pesti-
cides are taken up, but others are not
or are taken up only at low levels
(17, 18). The pesticides heptachlor,
dieldrin, and chlordane are taken up by
soybean plants from soil, translocated
to the seed, and stored in the oil, but
at low levels (19). PCBs, on the other
hand, are not carried from soil to the
top of plants if direct vapor trans-
mission is prevented by a barrier over
the soil (20). Uptake of PCBs by root
crops, however, has been demonstrated
under field conditions (21).
In addition to the uptake of
organics and metals, two research groups
and possibly a third have shown that
virus uptake through the root system
of plants is possible, This would rer-
sult in internal contamination of the
plant with viruses (22).
Foliar Uptake
The subject of foliar uptake and
translocation of sewage-borne contam-
inants by plants and food crops is an
area of considerable interest, but few
if any direct research studies have been
conducted, The development and evalua-
tion of commercial herbicides, however,
has prompted extensive studies on the
relationship between chemical structure,
physical properties, and the behavior
of these chemicals in and on plants.
Although no simple relationship was
found between the variables involved, it
is apparent that many chemicals areeffectively taken up from leaves, and
that others are also taken up via roots
or shoots. Some compounds may be re-
tained in the area to which they are
applied or may be readily translocated
to other parts of the plant. An example
is the application of diquat, a bipy-
ridylium, to beet leaves: 33% of the
amount applied is retained within 30
seconds and can not be washed off (23).
Some herbicides, such as 2,4-D, are
notorious for their ability to migrate
to most parts of a plant when applied
to either the foliage or soil.
As in many processes of this type,
the concentration of the particular
contaminant in the liquids or wastes
applied is of importance in foliar
uptake and very low concentrations do
not appear to be a major cause for
concern. A possible exception here
would be extraction or transport
phenomena by which such substances
would be selectively removed and retain-
ed by the cuticle on erop and plant
leaves.
In sewage treatment processes,
many organic substances are partly
metabolized, modified, and broken down.
These alteration products are usually
more water-soluble than the original
chemical. Normally, such substances
may be of less concern environmentally
than the more fat-soluble materials
because of decreased biomagnification
potential through the food chaln.
However, when such metabolites or de-
gradation products are applied to
plants, absorption, retention, and/or
distribution to edible portions may re-
sult.
Direct Uptake by Food Animals
Cattle and other animals ingest
soil as well as plants while grazing.
Chemical contaminants, especially
metals and PCBs, may build up in select-
ed tissues of such animals when sewage
sludge is used on land and pastures (24).
Although wastewaters may present a less-
er problem, those from highly contam-
inated sources may result in the build-
up of contaminants in the surface layer
of the soil similar to that observed
with sludges.
There have been sporadic reports
of anima1 disease from grazing on land
treated with wastewater or sludge. As
an example, a recent case in Pittsylvania
County in Virginia involved human
infestation with tapeworms from cattle
63that had pastured on land treated with
digested sludge (25).
Aerosol Drifting
Spray application of wastes often
results in the drifting of aerosolized
materials for relatively long distances.
Drifting may result in the contamination
of crops on neighboring fields, which
may not have been selected for the
application of that particular waste
(of concern would be, for instance,
crops to be eaten raw such as lettuce
and strawberries). Primary hazards
here would be microbiological, though
chemical contamination by foliar uptake,
retention, or other mechanisme should be
considered.
CONCLUSION
Use of wastewater on land may or
may not be a safe procedure. Much
depends on the origin of the wastewater,
the treatment process used, the crops
planted, and above all on the quality
of the planning and care. All these
factors will determine whether such
practices are the desirable recycling of
a resource or a public health liability.
REFERENCES
(1) Sixteenth Report of Joint FAO/WHO
Expert Committee on Food Additives,
Geneva, 1972.
(2) Compliance Program Evaluation, FY
1974 Heavy Metals in Foods Survey,
7320 13C Bureau of Foods, Food and
Drug Adminlstration, June 19, 1975.
(3) FY 74 Total Diet Studies, No. 7320.
08 Bureau of Foods, Food and Drug
Administration, January 21, 1977.
(4) Braude, G. L., In Conference on
Muskegen County, Environmental
Protection Agency, Report No.
905/9-76-006, Dec. 1976, pp. 146-148.
(5) Iskandar, I. K.: Urban Waste as a
Source of Heavy Metals in Land
Treatment. Proceedings, International
Conferences on Heavy Metals in the
Environment, Oct. 1975, Toronto,
Canada, pp. 27-31.
(6) Iskandar, I. K., Murrmann, R. P.,
and Legett, D. C: Evaluation of
Existing Systems for Land Treatment
of Wastewaters at Manteca, Cal. and
Quincy, Wash. CRREL Report 77-24,
Sept. 1977, Cold Regions Research and
Engineering Laboratory, Hanover N. H.(7) Palazzo, A. J.: The Effects of
Wastewater Application on the
Growth and Chemical Composition of
Forages. CRREL Report 76-39, Oct.
1976, Cold Regions Research and
Engineering Laboratory, Hanover N. H.
(8) Thomas, R. E., and Law, J.:
Properties of Wastewaters, in
Soils for Management of Organic
Wastes and Wastewaters. American
Society of Agronomy, 1977, Madison,
Wis.
(9) Sidle, R. C, Hook, J. E., and
Kardos, L. T.: Heavy Metals Appli-
cation and Plant Uptake in a Land
Disposal System for Waste Water.
J. Environ. Qual. !5 (1), 97-102,
(1976).
(10) Application of Sewage Sludge to
Cropland: Appraisal of Potential
Hazards of the Heavy Metals to Plants
and Animals. Report No. 64. Council
for Agricultural Science and Tech-
nology, Ames, Iowa, 1976.
(11) Solid Waste Disposal Facilities -
Proposed Classification Criteria,
Environmental Protection Agency.
Federal Register, Feb. 6, 1978,
Part II, pp. 4942-4955.
(12) Brown, H. G., Hensley, C. P.,
McKinney, G. L., and Robinson, J. L.:
Efficiency of Heavy Metals Removal
in Municipal Sewage Treatment Plants.
Environ. Lett. _5, 103-114 (1973).
(13) Monitoring to Detect Previously
Unrecognized Pollutants in Surface
Waters. Environmental Protection
Agency, Report No. EPA 560/7-77-001,
1977.
(14) Jolley, R. L.: Chlorine-Containing
Organic Constituents in Sewage
Effluents. J. Water Pollut. Control
Fed. 47_, (3), 601-618 (1975).
(15) Chaney, R. L., and Lloyd, C. A.:
Adherence of Spray-Applied Liquid
Digested Sewage Sludge to Tall Fescue.
J. Environ. Qual. (in press).
(16) Jelinek, C. F., and Braude, G. L.:
Management of Sludge Use on Land.
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of
the International Association of Milk,
Food and Environmental Sanitarians,
Inc., August 14-18, 1977 (in press).
(17) Nash, R. G.: Pesticides in Soil
and Water, Soil Science Society of
America, Inc., Madison, Wis., 1974,
pp. 257-313.
(18) Nash, R. G., and Harris, W. G.:
Chlorinated Hydrocarbon Insecticide
Residues in Crops and Soil. J. Env-
iron Qual., 2 (2), 269-273 (1973).
6U(19) Moore, S., Petty, H. B., and Bruce,
W. W.: Insecticide Residues in Soy-
beans in Illinois, 1965-1974. 28th
Illinois Custom Spray Operators'
Training School, Summary of Present-
ations, 1976, pp. 226-230.
(20) Fries, F. G., and Marrow, G. S.:
Uptake of Chlorobiphenyls by the
Soybean Plants. Presented at the
175th National Meeting, American
Chemical Society, Anaheim, Cal.
March 13, 1978.
(21) Iwata, Y., and Gunther, F. A.:
Translocation of the Polychlorinated
Biphenyl Aroclor 1254 from Soil into
Carrots under Field Conditions.
Arch. of Environ. Contam. and Tox. 4_,
44-59. (1976).
(22) Mazur, B., and Paciokrewicz, W.:
The Spread of Enterovlruses in Man's
Environment. I. The Presence of
Poliomyelitis Virus in Various Parts
of Vegetable Plants. Medical
Microbiological Experiments (Trans.),
23-83 (1973).
(23) Brian, R. C: The Uptake and
Adsorption of Diquat and Paraquat by
Tomato, Sugar-beet and Cocksfoot.
Ann. Appl. Biol. 59^ 91-99, (1967).
(24) Kienholz, E., Baxter, J., Ward, G.,
and Johnson, D.: Health Considera-r
tions Relating to Ingestion of Sludge
by Farm Animals. Proceedings, Third
National Conference on Sludge Manage-"
ment, Disposal and Utilization, Dec.
14-16, 1976, pp. 128-134.
(25) Dawson, J. W.: Personal
Communication.PUBLIC, INSTITUTIONAL AND
TECHNICAL ACCEPTABILITY
OVERVIEW OF PUBLIC, INSTITUTIONAL AND TECHNICAL
ACCEPTABILITY OF LAND TREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
Bernard C. Nagelvoort
Professional Staff (Minority)
Merchant Marine and Fisherïes Committee
United States House of Representatives
Wash i ngton, D.C. 20515
ABSTRACT
Land treatment of sewage has
been called a "Paper Tiger" in
the words of a sanitary engineer.
It might more appropriate 1y be
called a "Caged Tiger" about to
break out of its cage in view of
the substantial support for the
concept reflected in legislation
from the Congress, pronouncements
of policy positions from top
adm Inistrative levels of the U.S.
Environmenta1 Protection Agency
and actions of citizens groups.
A substantial history of oppos-
ition from the sanitary engineer-
ing profession whose training
predisposes engineers towards
conventional treatment processes
is the major problem the concept
faces. That attitude tends to
prevail in many of the Regional
Offices of EPA and State environ-
mental agencies. But changing
National goals and needs have
focused attention on recycling
concepts in recent years. The
ability of recycling systems to
provide clean water at 1ow cost
in a sound manner whi1 e accomp-
lishing other desirable object-
ives should mean that land treat-
ment of sewage will gain wide
acceptance in the next few years.In t rod uct ion
Chairman Walker, ladies and
gentlemen, I am pleased to have
the opportunity to participate in
this International Symposium on
Land Treatment of Wastewater. I
have spoken on the subject of
land treatment in several parts
of the Country over the past few
years, but never in a more
attractive setting. A friend in
Washington who attended Dartmouth
said I would 1ike the territory
and I do. It has only the draw-
back of needing to be leveled
somewhat to accomodate center
pivot irrigation rigs. Well,
sometimes trade-offs are necess-
ary.
l'm not really that much of an
advocate of land treatment. I
don1t think it is a panacea. I
doubt if Barrow, Alaska, and a
few mountainside communities in
Switzerland can use this approach.
Of course, I 'm not s ure they
cou1 dn(t.
There is an interesting psych-
ology about land treatment. It
needs to be checked out with
Freud's disciples some day, but
there is just one city in this
Country that I visit quite often
where I don't feel guilty about
using the restroom facilities.
That is Muskegon, Michigan. Any
place else I wonder who is down
stream. At Muskegon I wonder how
many bushels of corn I've just
produced.
67In the Metropolitan Washington
area we worry about who is up-
stream. And we've been forced to
worry even harder about upstream
the past few years because some
local and state officials have
wanted to build a 228,000-cu
m/day (60 mgd) AWT facility above
our drinking water intakes on the
Potomac and prove that past
worries about drinking treated
effluent have been unfounded.
But you know many top level EPA
officials live in the Washington
area. And maybe they don ' t
believe all those glowing reports
that come from Technology
Transfer about AWT. So at least
for the time being that AWT
system is dead; killed by Russell
Train and buried under Doug
Costle, so to speak. More about
that later .
I 'm not supposed to talk
about AWT. My talk title is
"Overview of Pubi ie, Insti tution-
al and Technical Acceptabi1ity of
Land Treatment of Wastewater."
That covers a good bit of terri-
tory. Land treatment itself
covers so little territory that
the Water Pollution Control Fed-
eration Journal in January called
land treatment a "Paper Tiger."
I would prefer to call it a
"Caged Tiger" and the reasons
will become apparent as I proceed.
Problems with sanitary engineers
Let me talk about institu-
tional acceptabi1ity of land
treatment first, and begin with
the sanitary engineering profes-
sion. Part of what I am going to
give you will be persona] impres-
sions as I have worked with the
subject for the past eight and a
half years, since first becoming
exposed to the subject in the
fa1 1 of 1969 at Muskegon.
Most of the sanitary engi-
neers that I have dealt with in
that period, with certain
notable exceptions, suffer from
what I have chosen to call acute
myopia. They were brought up on
slide rules, calculators, plumb-
ing systems and reinforced
concrete. They were taught how
to arrange pipes and design
activated sludge and trickling
filter sewage treatment plants.They were taught that rivers have
assimilative capacity and are
meant to be used as part of
the sewage treatment process. ^ •
I believe it is reasonable to
say that sanitary engineers are
strongly influenced by public
health officials many of whom are
aiso sanitary engineers. The
activated sludge and trickling
filter systems they design were
first developed to solve health
and esthetic problems.^- They
reduce BOD, thus reducing oders,
and make it cheaper to chlorinate
effectively, to reduce pathogen
levels. They reduce nitrogen
1 e v e 1 s 3 • inadvertently, but just
to make certain too many problems
are not solved they produce sub-
stantial biomass in the form of
sludge to give operators another
source of headaches.
Sanitary engineers in EPA,
state agencies and the consulting
engineering profession 1ike these
systems that provide what is
called conventional secondary
treatment. They believe they are
the "Best Practicable Treatment
Technology" to meet the "Best
Practicable Treatment" goal of
Public Law 92-500 for July 1, 1977-
They don't produce clean water,
but they are easy to build. They
don ' t produce clean water, but
they are not too expensive. They
don ' t produce clean water, but
the engineers have the plans
ready after they design the first
one so it is just a little bigger
here or a little smaller there on
the blueprints, an adjustment here
and a minor change there for each
additional facility. They break
down and are subject to erratic
performance, but engineers know
how to design them.^- They don't
produce clean water, but it is
easy to locate them down hill
where they collect sewage cheaply
and can discharge to a river,
usually in an industrial area or
a 1ow income area which has grown
accustomed to dirty water over
the years. Most sanitary engi-
neers seem to believe such systems
are just fine. And they certainly
don't want to be bothered much
with land treatment even though
requïred by NEPA and PL 92-500 to
consider viable alternatives to
conventional systems.
686.Sanitary engineers have long
been reluctant to embrace land
treatment as a viable alternatiye.
to conventional processes.
Occasionally the attitude of
the profession shows up in print.
I n November of 1 972 in a letter'-
to the Mayor of Miami, the
Fiorida Department of Poilution
Control said among other things
about land treatment, "EPA has
not yet approved it as a means of
disposal of sewage effluent.
Also, we of the Sta te Pol 1 utïon
Board, will not approve any plan
that uses recycling . Therefore,
without approval and without
funds recycling is not a workable
way of disposing of sewage
effluent." And 'later in the
letter, "The idea of land dis-
posal in South Florida is patent-
1y red i cu1ous."
EPA found its own interesting
excuses which are described in a
letter to Congressman Guy Vander
Jagt in 1974 after the Congress-
man had chailenged the agency on
issues related to South Florida.
EPA's letter said, "Large scale
utilization of conventional (sic)
land disposal systems in South-
east Florida were (sic) held not
to be practical, due to the large
area of land required (approx-
imately 8,100 hectares [20,000
acres] per 38O,OOO-cu m/day [100
mgd] for erop irrigation), the
infiltration of saline waters
into the wastewater collection
system, and the secondary ecolog-
ical stresses caused by storage
of excess water during wet
seasons and the disposal of
excess reciaimed irrïgation
waters."
My impression at the time was
that the State Agency was just-
ifying its failure to give
serious conside ration to land
treatment, and the Atlanta
Regional Office of EPA was just-
ifying its ignorance of the
subject of land treatment. It
was fascinating that Tallahassee,
Florida, was successfully irri-
gating erop land with treated
effluent at the time and had been
doing so since 19&6.'1 Also
fascinating at the time was an
article in the Christian Science
Monitor describing the oxidation
of organic soils in South Floridaand an observation that "Using
massive amounts of treated sewage
and garbage from the nearby
Florida Gold Coast, the soil
could be rebu i11."°•
There are signs that the
Atlanta Regional Office of EPA
is changing its attitude in that
it has approved for construction
a 7'6,000-cu m/day (20 mgd) forest
irrigation system for Clayton
County, Georgia. The system will
re-charge a drinking water supply
aqu i fer.
In Muskegon County, Michigan,
(When I worked 'for Congressman
Vander Jagt who represents the
County) we ran into many obstacles
Including one represented by a
statement early in the step 1
process attributed to two members
of the Michigan Water Resources
Commission that the Commission
should, "Give them enough ropè
to hang themselves, but not
enough to hang us, too,"°* ref-
erring to approval of thè con-
struction plans for the Muskegon
County land treatment system. To
paraphrase Winston Churchill,
some rope some hanging!
Another interesting obser-
vation about Muskegon was made
in the Water Poilution Control
Federati-on Journal article of
July, 1973» referred to earlier,
when the author said, "Profession-
al engineers and agronomists
warned that the land disposal
plan was extremely costly, might
cause irreparable ecological
damage, could cause hygenic
hazards, and in all likelihood,
would never create the agricult-
ural economy its promoters
claimed it would. But the color-
less facts, statistics, and cost
estimates were no match for
flamboyant academie theories,
claims, and predietions."'^• One
of those "colorless" cost
estimates was prepared by consult-
ing engineers for the City of
Muskegon as a competitive alter-
native to the County system.
They said the 160,000-cu m/day
{hl mgd) County system would cost
$72 mi 11 ion when in fact it cost
$k$ million. Michigan State
University's Agriculture Depart-
ment predicted erop income at
$10 per acre.''' And, of course,
69the system has produced about
140,800 hl (400,000 bushels) of
corn on 2,000 ha (5,000 acres)
each of the past two years with
net income of more than $500,000
each of those years from corn
sales reducing operating costs of
the system by roughly one-third.
Those operatïng costs are far
lower than the costs for other
systems which do not provide the
high quality water Muskegon pro-
duces. '
Consulting engineers for the
city of Owosso in Michigan de-
signed a physica 1-chemica 1 system
for the city that will cost 30%
more than the cost of land treat-
ment. The consultant's estimates
indicated land treatment to be
substantia11y more costly, but an
EPA review found the estimates
toolow for the physïca 1-chemica 1
system and too high for land
treatment. "' Unfortunate1y, EPA
beiieves the construction grant
process has proceeded too far to
require the city to abide by EPA
cost-effectiveness requirements,
or so they teil me.
Local officials along
Gulf Coast of Mississippi
currently opposing a plan
sewage treatment proposedthe
are
for
by a
team of state, federal and
private "experts" which would
discharge effluent into brackish
coastal bays thus threatening
marine life. The Governor of
Mississippi's coördinator for
water quality planning is quoted
as saying "Land disposal would
require a 200 ha (500 acre)
lagoon of pure sewage large enough
to sail a yacht on" and "another
lagoon would be required for
resettling, and 2,000 ha (5,000
acres) would be necessary to pump
water onto, surrounded by a
4,000 ha (10,000 acre) bufferii I **.i
zone. 'Incredible.
Michigan changes
I believe State Government
in Michigan has substantia 1 1 y
improved its posture in the past
several years with respect to
land treatment. There is not
much evidence to suggest that
the sanitary engineering profes-
sion in the state has changed,
but Dr. Howard Tanner, new as theDirector of the Michigan Depart-
ment of Natural Resources in 1975,
is a forceful advocate of resource
recycling. In a speech to the
Michigan Water Pollution Control
Association in 1976, Dr. Tanner
said, "I am convinced we must take
a f und'amen tal 1 y different direct-
ion -- in our water pollution
control efforts --. We must
commit ourselves to and follow the
principle that wastes of all kinds
must be recovered and reused --
recycled -- if we are going to
survive and thrive over the long
haul." Tanner also said, "The
real problem lies in fitting thïs
concept into our economie, socia)
and cuitural patterns. Solving
that problem will be an extremely
difficult job, calling on all the
ingenuity we can bring to bear.
It is a job of information and
education, of innovation and
demonstration. It will take many
years to accomplish, the going
wil! be s1ow and difficult, and
there will be many obstacles and
setbacks. But it's a job we must
do regard 1 e.ss.. " In h i s conc 1 ud i ng
remarks he said the most important
responsibi1ity of State Government
in water pollution control was to
provide "leadership in development
of the new recycling technojogy
I have been talking about. "'5.
Congress continues to lead
Perhaps most exciting in
recent months has been the atti-
tude of the Congress in its mid-
course correction of PI_92~500 in
which the encouragement of
resource recycling has been
greatly strengthened. The action,
in which the House-Senate Confer-
ence on amendments to the Act
adopted virtually intact a bili
introduced by Congressman Don
Clausen of California, is virtual-
1 y unprecedented.
Clausen's bili added a sub-
stantial carrot to accompany EPA
requirements for the' consideration
of land treatment by providing 85%
Federal funding for construction
of land treatment systems versus
75% for conventional processes, by
providing a 15% cost-effectiveness
preference for land treatment and
by making land used for storage
of wastewater an eligibie cost.
T0Fortunately, at least at
higher levels of EPA, there is
aiso a firm recognition of the
need for at least some limitation
on the luxury, or call it extrav-
agance or wastefu11ness, in
certain kinds of convenience.
Bottle deposit legislation to
encourage recycling is not making
progress in the Congress because
of powerful entrenched interests
although it has gained acceptanee
in some states in recent years
and months. On the other hand,
the recycling of nutrients in
sewage has been strongly encour-
aged by both the Congress and the
Administrators of EPA in Washing-
ton .
In 1972 Public Law 92-500 was
enacted and contained the first
language providing strong encour-
agement for the recycling of
nutrients in wastewater, in the
amendments offered by Congressman
Vander Jagt. But the EPA Region-
al Administrators, the states and
consulting engineers essentially
ignored that language. In
response to admonishments from
Vander Jagt, John Quarles, then
Deputy Administrator of EPA, on
November 1, 197^, issued a
memorandum to the Regional Admin-
istrators calling on them to
"do a better job in assuring that
land treatment is given full and
adequate consideration as a
possible method for municipal
sewage disposal in projects
funded with Federal grants."
Also during those several
years following enactment of
PL92-500, Belford Seabrook, in
EPA's Office of Water Program
Operations, was able to stir EPA
to fund a number of land treat-
ment oriented studies which have
helped to provide essential tech-
nical background information for
the imp1ementation of the law.
In 1977. with the appointment
of Douglas Costle as Administra-
tor of EPA and Torn Jorling as
Assistant Administrateur for Water
and Hazardous Materials, a
stronger policy in support of
land treatment evolved at EPA.
In testimony before the Senate
Subcommittee on Environmenta1
Pollution on June 30, 1977,
Jorling said, "Regarding the
future of the program EPA seestwo primary themes in pursuing its
mission of water pollution con-
trol: (1) to control toxic po 11 -
utants and (2) to encourage the
conservation, reuse and recycling
of both water resources and the
valuable eiements contained in the
various streams currently being
discharged to the nation's water."
On October 3, 1977, Mr. Costle
issued a memorandum to Assistant
and Regional Administrators in
which he saïd, "Therefore, the
Agency will press vigorously for
publicly owned treatment works
to utilize land treatment process-
es to reclaim and recycle munici-
pal was tewater." He also said, " I f
a method that encourages water
conservation, waste water reclam-
ation and reuse is not recommend-
ed, the applicant should be re-
quired to provide complete justif-
ication for the rejection of land
t rea tmen t."
So it is very apparent that
the highest levels of EPA support
recycling systems.
EPA has a Regional Office problem
However, it is also apparent
that s1ow progress is being made
at the Region level of EPA in some
i ns tances.
Region V of EPA, for example,
published a position paper last
year urging a ban on phosphates
in detergents in all of the states
in the Great Lakes Basin to help
correct eutrophication probiems in
the Great Lakes.'°- Particularly
revealing is the 2nd paragraph of
the I n t roduct i on to this paper on
page 1 where EPA Region V says,
"This position is a departure from
the EPA policy on phosphorus
control from 1971 to present. The
policy was to rely on chemical
treatment to reduce phosphorus
levels in. municipal sewage and
industrial wastes discharged into
waterways. Because this policy
has failed to achieve the water
quality goal of sufficiently
decreasing and stabilizing rates
of eutrophication in both inland
lakes and the Great Lakes, not
only in Region V of EPA, but State
governments and other regional
and international agencies have
recently been reconsidering the
need and means of reducing phos-
Tlphorus loadings. No other single
factor is so important for the
future water quality of the Great
Lakes Reg ion."
On page three this paper
discusses the International Joint
Commïssion (IJC) conside rations
on phosphorus which state that a
1 mg/l effluent limit, the
present Standard, is so high that
eutrophication will not be stabil-
ized. The IJC suggests that the
level may need to be lowered to
0.1 mg/l for all municipal plants,
but as an immediate meas ure urges
a 0.5% limit for phosphorus by
weïght for detergents used in the
Gteat Lakes Basin.
It is not mildly ironie that
the IJC reports discussed by EPA
in this phosphate ban paper
indicate phosphate concentrations
in the effluents from municipal
sewage treatment plants discharg-
ing directiy or indirectly to the
Great Lakes exceed 0.1 mg/l
phosphorus in every instance;
that is, every ïnstance but one:
Muskegon, County. The best level
achieved in 1976 in discharges
by Michigan municipa 1 ities dïrect-
ly or indirectly to Lake Michigan,
into which the Muskegon system
discharges indirectly, is 0.5
mg/l. The best level except for
Muskegon, that is. Muskegon was
.07 mg/l or seven times better
than the next best system. And
the unweighted average phosphorus
discharge for 26 Systems discharg-
ïng to the Lake Michigan water-
shed in Michigan was 1.8 mg/l in
1976 or 26 t i mes the Muskegon
rate. Fifteen of the 26 systems
discharged at levels above the
1 mg/l standard and none but
Muskegon, of course, met the 0.1
mg/l recommendation of the IJC.'7.
Was this astounding accomp1ishment
acknowledged by the EPA Region V
Phosphorus Committee? In the
Committee's report there is no
discussion, of any kind, of
Muskegon success. Incredible.
I am reminded of discussions
in 1969 and 1970, among those of
us who became strong advocates of
land treatment at Muskegon, that
the 80% phosphorus removal
requirement of the Lake Michigan
Enforcement Conference would have
to be made more and more strin-
gent if the quality of the Lakewere to be protected. Obviously
a percentage removal requirement
would be helpful only if total
flows did not increase and the
resulting removal in total pounds
of phosphorus were sufficient to
protect water quality. I beiieve
I can state without serious chal-
lenge that the 80% removal stan-
dard reflected the capabilities of
the state of the art for coriven-
tional sewage treatment processes,
taking costs into conside ration,
rather than the requirements for
clean water. Thus municipalities
have been encouraged for many
years to build conventional
systems while there has been sub-
stantial knowledge that they would
have to add increments of phos-
phorus removal eventually, an
expensive deception and one which
ha-s 'been very detrimental to land
t reatment.
I am reminded that the Exec-
utive Director of the Michigan
Water Resources Commission at that
time argued that the Commission
could not afford to fund Muskegon,
which would solve the problems of
the year 2000, when the Commission
had to meet the needs of 1975-
Unfortuna te 1y, according to the
IJC the problems of the year 2000
had arrived in 1977 leaving every
community but those in Muskegon
County with the need to upgrade
its conventional process to remove
expensive increments of phosphor-
us .
But Region V of EPA has not
yet recognized the implications
in this situation. And the logic
of ïts failure must once again be
placed on sanitary engineer
myop i a.
This EPA Region has been
willing to fund a special study
on the potential uses in outstate
Michigan of sewage sludge produced
in the southeast part of the
State. "• Detroit now produces
about 3,800-cu m/day (1 miliion
gallons) of sludge, incinerates
1,520-cu m/day (^00,000 gallons)
and discharges the remainder to
the Detroit River. The study,
completed this spring, indicates
it would be less costly to recycle
the sludge on forest land than it
would cost to "waste" it all by
incineration which has been the
city's plan. It is interesting tosee the support for recycling of
sludge which is occuring out of
necessity: incineration would
violate air quality standards in
southeast Michigan. It wï11
also be interesting to review
Detroit's progress in meeting
phosphorus removal standards.
The cost curve problem
There is an additional factor
that bears discussion at this
point which is related to engineer
myopia. It is an attitude given
substance several years ago by
the Director of Research at
Minnesota Mining and Manufactur-
ing Company, Dr. Joseph Ling.
It relates to the slope of
curves showing costs for removing
additional increments of poll-
utants when 100% removal is
approached. This gentleman
whose premi se was the subject of
a Wall Street Journal editorial
in 1972 argued that it was
relatively cheap to remove
80-90% of the phosphorus in
sewage, but when one tried to
remove higher percentages the
costs increased at geometrie
rates. He argued very persua-
sively that it would take huge
amounts of energy and chemicals
to remove those high percentage
increments, and that the poll-
ution caused by the generation
of that energyand the production
of those chemicals would exceed
the pollution reduct.ion result-
ing from their use in sewage
treatment. You have all seen
thosé cost curves. I must con-
fess I don't 1 I ke them. They
give too many people the impres-
sion that we can't afford clean
water. And you know, they are
right if we are chained to con-
ventional sewage treatment pro-
cesses or rely on artifically
produced energy and chemicals
to do the job rather than soils
and sunlight that do the work
cheap1y!
Disposal ph Mosophy ' pl'ays role
It is my belief that this
myopia has also evolved in part
from the "disposal" philosophy
which has prevailed in sewage
treatment circles for the betterpart of this century. Conventïon-
al systems are designed to
destroy oders and pathogens and
dispose of what Is left. The
add-ons for nutriënt removal
follow this same "disposal"
philosophy. Engineers are all
too willing to design the add-on
plumbing systems and they carry
over the philosophy to physical-
chemïcal AWT a 1 ternatives. This
is probably part of a larger
societal problem and perhaps it
is unfair to imply that the blame
for its implications lies with
sanitary engineers. Of course,
engineering schools apparently
have taught littie about natural
processes for cleansing waste-
water and there seems to be little
association between agriculture
and engineering education rela-
tive to the recovery of nutrients
i n wastewater.
Muskegon provides new standards
Most of the sanitary engineers
and our friend from 3M seem to
have no idea that we can get from
where we are to where we want to
be by an.a1ternative approach.
They insist on continuing to beat
the old horse harder to make him
go faster rather than switching
to another form of transportation.
At some point the horse collapses.
It is at this point in the anal-
ogy where the public begins to
believe it can't afford clean
water because the engineers can
prove it costs too much. Clean
water from conventional process-
es often does cost too much. But
clean water from land treatment,
in my experience, does not. Even
though it ïs a very old process,
far anteceding conventional treat-
ment, it is a breakthrough, in
effect, in its modern application.
Rèuse is often 1ess expensive
than "disposa1."
Look at Muskegon efficiency:
97% removal of phosphorus in 1976
and 1977. Other reductions are
33% BOD, 95% COD, 97% suspended
solïds, total nitrogen reduced to
2.5 mg/1, heavy metais, 1ow to
begin with, 88% and fecal coli-
form at least 99.3%. '9- What is
more, Muskegon soils are mostly
sand and consequentiy are not as
efficiënt as heavier soils in
73removing pollutants.
These numbers are particu-
lariy impressive when one con-
slders operating costs are far
less than the costs for any
alternatïves which approach the
quality of water Muskegon pro-
duces. And construction costs
were not high either at about
$1 per gallon of treatment
capacity, equivalent to the
rule of thumb costs for con-
ventional secondary treatment
at the t ime.20-
I won't spend any additional
time discussing Muskegon because
you will hear more about it
from another speaker.
What the system Miustrates
is a unique leapfrog in tech-
nology whereby modern equipment
dovetails with natural processes
to produce synergistic effects:
clean water and 140,800 hl
(400,000 bushels) of corn.
Land treatment isn't complex
I am going to discuss one
more aspect of the sanitary eng-
ineering syndrome.. At the Water
Pollution Control Federatton
Seminar on the 1977 Clean Water
Act in March I found myself in a
rather heated argument with a
consulting engineer from Pitts-
burg who thought the 1977 amend-
ents had been produced by
individuals who knew nothing
about sewage treatment. Having
had something to -do wïth the
legislation I feit a certaïn
need to respond. His principle
content ion was that ?t is diffi-
cuit enough to train people to
operate conventional systems,
let alone expect to find people
to manage Muskegon type facili-
ties. I didn't try to offend
him by asking what troubles he
would anticipate in the operation
of physica 1 -chemica 1 and other
AWT facilities, none of which
have worked right in this country
as far as I know, that is if they
could be built to work as design-
ed, or if the community could
afford to operate them.^'-
The point, though, is that
land treatment can consist of
simpie aeration, simple storage,
and simple irrigation combined
with simple farming. We alreadytrain thousands of farmers every
year on our farms and in our
agriculture schools, irrïgation
is a weil developed activity and
the sewage pre-treatment needs
to by accomplished anyway. But
let me add one other element here
that I believe is very important.
Land treatment, in contrast to
conventional systems, is a
pos i t i ve process. It produces
something at the same time it
cleans water. It is not a nega-
tïve, "disposal" process. It
makes use of pollutants. It
converts them to beneficial use.
It returns nutrïents to the use
cycle. It doesn't produce a
slimy, gray-green river at its
outfali, but ta11, green stalks
of corn or broad fields of hay
or luxurient forests. In further
contrast to conventional process-
es, it can be said that the
cleaner it returns water to lakes
and streams the less it costs.
In other words, there is room
for real credit to those who
operate land treatment systems
efficiently. The attitude at
Muskegon is justïfiably one of
positive, substantial, measurable
accomp1ishment. Perhaps it would
not be so diff Ie uit to get good
people to run conventional sewage
treatment plants if they could be
made to produce clean water.
I find myself automatica 11y
giving a sales talk for land
treatment, and to an audience that
already understands the subject.
But maybe this just represents a
tendency to respond to a strong
fee) ing that those of us who do
understand the concept must go out
and sell it to the public, to
governmental ins11 tutions, to
educators and to the engineering
profess i on.
Citizens' efforts very important
That leads me to a few ob-
servations about the general
public. Where there has been a
strong generation of public inter-
est in land treatment it has come
initially for the most part from
a very few people, outside the
normal wastewater management
infrastructure, who have taken the
time to develope an understanding
of the concept. Perhaps that is
7»*true of any new concept, or in
this case in the new application
of an old concept. Of course,
there aren't too many people who
spend any time at all talking
about sewage although I beiieve
the number is growing as more
become aware of the implications
of sewer lines on all of the
issues relating to growth and
deveiopment.
There seem to be a nuifibér of
motivations for those who do,
however. But essentially citi-
zens who become advocates appear
to accept the phi1osophica 1
premises on which land treatment
is based, that is: the environ-
ment is a single unit in which
air, land and water interact;
the earth is a closed system and
planning for those activities
with a potential to degrade the
environment must similarly
strive to achieve closed systems;
and pollutants are potential
resources out of place.22-
These premises may not be
vocalized as'such by individuals
who support the concept. But
in the long run they seem to
play a quite decisive role in
citizen support for the concept.
Of course, if the premises are
sound one would expect that to
be thè case.
For the time being, untll
the sanitary engineering pro-
fession makes a greater accomo-
dation to the concept, citizen
advocates will probably continue
to find themselves in a position
which requiresconfrontation with
public officials and direct
challenges in hearings to gain
proper cons i dera t '\ on of the
concept. I am aware of a nurnber
of efforts of this kind over the
past six years since the enact-
ment of PL92-5OO, a few of which
have been successful, but unfor-
tunately many have failed essen-
tially because state agencies
and EPA Regional offices have
rubber stamped the findings of
engineering consultants. As I
pointed out earlier in the case
of Owosso, Michigan, even after
EPA, Washington, conducted a
review, the agency chose not to
require that itsfindings be
imp1emented.However, there is one example
of a substantial degree of citizen
success of which I am aware that
I will brief1y describe and that
has occured in Montgomery County,
Maryland. As long ago as 1971
citizens began to object to the
planned construction of an AWT
system which would have discharged
to the Potomac River. They argued
that the system threatened the
area's drinking water supplies,
was too expensive and that the
capacity of 228,000-cu m/day
(60 mgd) was not all needed. They
also argued that the consultant's
land treatment study was inadequate.
Several years of struggle and a
gradual change in EPA Region Mi's
attitude finally resulted in 1976
in the decision by Russell Train,
which I mentioned earlier, not to
fund the AWT facMity.23-At the
same time Train called for addi-
tïonal study of land treatment in
Montgomery County. County offi-
cials then proceeded to have such
a study performed which was com-
pleted in June of last year and
indicated land treatment to be
feasibie in the County and that
it would cost substantially less
than the AWT alternative. State
and local officials took EPA to
court to force approval of the
AWT system funding, but lost that
decision in April of this year.
While land treatment systems
have functioned satisfactori1y in
several parts of the County and
other small systems operating
without problems exist in other
parts of Maryland, the State has
preciuded substantial use of the
process with requi rements for pre-
treatment of sewage to drinking
water qüality before irrigation on
cropland. The added cost of such
pre-treatment, of course, is a
major deterrant to ïts use and
seems highly unjustified judging
from the experience of other
states. It is noteworthy that in
order to protect shellfish waters
Maryland requi res the use of land
treatment systems for discharges
immediately upstream. It doesn ' t
apply that stringent Standard for
discharges above drinking water
intakes, however. Incredible.
It remains to be seen whether
land treatment will be implementedin Montgomery County, but the
effeetiveness of citizen action
is weii demonstrated.
Conc1us i ons
It is very apparent to me, and
I am certain to you, that land
treatment systems for sewage are
not about to take over the
Nation and the worid in the
near future. No one is prepared
to make the committment to clean
water and the conservation of
resources that would be required
to establish land treatment as
a panacea, at least in the
foreseeable future. But we are
making substantial progress.
Ten years ago no one in this
Country but Penn State and the
southwest gave the subject
serious thought. Now we have
strong support for the concept
in the Congress, at the highest
levels of EPA, in the Corps of
Engineers, from environmenta1
organizations led by Clean Water
Action, a Washington, D.C. based
grass roots, citizens action
group and from many other
citizens1 groups. With Muskegon
to grow from we are beginning to
see a number of additional large
systems being given serious
consideration. The sanitary
engineering professi on has
frequently been able to keep the
"tiger" in the cage, but because
the concept is grounded in sound
princiiple, no pun intended, I am
optimistic that we will see
substantial growth in utili-
zation of the concept in the
next few years. It deserves to
grow as the Nation recognizes
the need to avoid waste and
encourage reuse of its resources
and finds that in the process it
can have clean water that it
can af ford.
Footnotes
1. Duane R. Egeland, "Land disposai 1: A giant step backward,"
Journal of the Water Poiiution Contro1 Federation, July 1973,
page. 1kGj,
2. Ibid., p. 1468.
3- Mogens Henze Christensen and Paul Harremoes, "Biological
Denitrification in Water Treatment," Rep. 2-72, Department of
Sanitary Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 1972.
k. John R. Sheaffer, "Pollution Control: Wastewater Irrigation,"
The De Paul Law Review, Vol. XXI, 1972, p. 993-5. Letter from James F. Redford, Jr., to Mayor John ürr, Jr.,
November 22, 1972.
6. Letter from Russell Train to Congressman Guy Vander Jagt,
Maren 29, 197^.
7. United States Environmenta1 Protection Agency, Survey of
Facilities Using Land Application of Wastewater" EPA-^3O/9"73-OO6,
July, 1973, P. 211 .
8. News item in the Christian Science Monitor, March, 1973.
9- Lansing, Michigan, Booth News Bureau Report, March 19, 1970.
10. Egeland, o_p_. c i t. , p. 1471.
11. Engineering Feasibility Demonstration Study for Muskegon County,
Michigan, 1970.
12. United States Environmenta1 Protection Agency, Region V,
Wastewater: Is Muskegon County's Sol ution Your Solution?,
Septembe r 1976, pp. 11, 38, and kk, a1so s upp1emen ta1 repo r t
for 1976.
Personal conversations with Dr. Y.A. Demirjian, manager of the
Muskegon system, February, 1978.
News item in the Washington Post, October 12, 1977.
13. John Walker, "Review of Wastewater Treatment Facility Planning
for Mid-Shiawassee County, Michigan (Owosso)," Municipal
Technology Branch, U.S. EPA, unpublished, August, 1977.
1't. Editorial in the South Mississippi Sun, March 16, 1978.
News item in the Daily Hera1d [Bi 1 o x i , Mississippi], April 7,
1978.
15. Howard A. Tanner, keynote address to Michigan Water Pollution
Control Association, Boyne Mountain, Michigan, June 1 't, 1976.
16. United States Environmenta1 Protection Agency, Region V,
Detergent Phosphate Ban, EPA-9O5/2-77-OO3, June, 1977-
17- Great Lakes Water Quality 1976 (Appendix C, Remedial Programs),
18. Board of Comm i ss ï oners , Lake County Michigan, Planning Comm i s s '\ on ,
Lake County Michigan, Lake County Michigan Resource Recovery
Project, March, 1978.
19. United States Environmenta1 Protection Agency, Region V,
Wastewater: Is Muskeqon County's Solution Your Solution?,
September 1976, p~. ^t~.
20. Ibid., p. 11, kk.
21. Walker, o_p_. c i t. , p. 6.
22. Sheaffer, £p_. c i t. , p. 996.
23. Russell E. Train, Administra tor's Decision on the Proposed
Dickerson Wastewater Treatment Plant Grant Application, U.S.
EPA, August 20, 1976.
TTPUBLIC, INSTITUTIONAL AND
TECHNICAL ACCEPTABILITY
EXPERIENCES WITH BROAD-BASED LAND TREATMENT
PLANNING IN PRINCE GEORGE'S COUNTY, MARYLAND
Douglas A. Griffes, Project Engineer, Metcalf & Eddy, Inc., Palo Alto, Calif.
Charles E. Pound, Vice President, Metcalf & Eddy, Inc., Palo Alto, Calif.
ABSTRACT
Broad-based planning for land
treatment is a no-constraints approach.
It allows for all constraints, including
the legal, regulatory, institutional,
social, and planning considerations to
be held open in order that a fira range
of alternatives may be developed. Also
included in this approach is an
intensive public involvement program.
The planning effort for Prince
George's County, Maryland, serves to
illustrate the various facets of this
approach. The result was a wide variety
of land treatment options developed for
consideration in that county for
wastewater management, both present and
future.
INTRODUCTION
Land treatment systems are
generally more integral to community
development than are conventional
wastewater treatment systems. At the
same time, these system exhibit the
potential for a wider range of social
benefits, depending on how the project
is conceived and designed.
Consequently, a broad, more
comprehensive approach to wastewater
planning is desirable—one which
involves a great number of different
disciplines and considers a wide range
of different concerns and ideas.
The preliminary feasibility study
of land treatment in Prince George's
County, Maryland, is an example of how
such an approach can be used. This
study, which was conducted independentlyof the federally-funded Section 201
facilities planning program, addressed
the fuil range of land treatment
possibilities available to the county,
including:
• Systems that will meet wastewater
treatment requirements while
concurrently optimizing other
objectives such as maximum
agricultural production and careful
land use planning
• Wastewater treatment alternatives
of both regional and local
significance
• Alternatives that are consistent
with ongoing facilities planning
efforts and those that are
primarily long-term options (20+
years) outside of current
facilities planning projects
In examining the experiences with
land treatment planning in Prince
George's County, it is necessary to
consider both the existing situation
within the county and the expected
conditions that would result from
implementation of study recommendations.
Of particular interest, also, is the
institutional program established by the
county for interacting with the public
and review and implementation of various
portions of the study.
79EXISTING SITUATION
Prince George's County is a rapidly
growing residential and eraployment
center within the metropolitan area of
Washington, D.C. (see Figure 1). From
1960 to 1974, its population nearly
doubled to 684,000. This high level of
growth taxed the capacity of all county
services, including wastewater
transmission and treatment facilities.
The identification of public health
hazards from continuing raw sewage
overflows caused a large area of the
county to be placed under a sewer
moratorium by the Maryland Secretary of
Health and Mental Hygiëne. The
moratorium severely limited new sewer
hookups in major drainage basins within
the county. (The construction of new
transmission lines, expanded and up-
graded treatment plants, as well as the
correction of infiltration/inflow
problems allowed the lifting of this
moratorium in the Spring of 1978.) At
the same time, increasing levels of
treatment were being required by state
and federal regulatory agencies to
improve water quality conditions in the
Potomac estuary. These treatment
requirements included a high degree of
nutriënt removal, BOD reduction, and
suspended solids reduction. Several
major treatment plant projects have been
planned to help alleviate these
problems. For the most part, these
projects are expansions and upgradings
of the existing conventional wastewater
treatment facilities (shown in Figure
2). However, the consequent rise in
sewer service rates caused the county
officials to become concerned and was
one of the factors which led to this
study of alternative treatment systems.
The county's rapid growth also
impacted the local agricultural
community, which is undergoing extensive
social and economie change. Total
farmland in production, as defined in
the Census of Agriculture, has been
reduced from 113,965 acres in 1964 to
70,272 acres in 1974 (a 38% decrease).
Moreover, the number of working farms
declined by 42% over the same period.
Much of the remaining "farmland" is
being held for speculative purposes.
The Maryland-National Capitol Park
and Planning Commission's 1964 General
Plan cal led for urban development to be
concentrated along three basic corridors
in Prince George's County, radiating
outward from Washinton, D.C. Between
the development corridors were to be"green wedges" of open space, agriculture
and low density development. However,
wedge implementation has not been very
successful and there has been a
substantial intrusion by urban uses into
these areas. It was believed that land
treatment systems in the county could
help to preserve some remaining open
space in the wedges and retain growth in
the corridors. Such systems, at the
same time, would provide a very high
quality of wastewater treatment for the
corridor development areas. These
systems would also combine the resources
of land, water, and nutriënt value to
provide a counter-incentive to preserve
agricultural uses in the county. It
should be noted that this concept is
consistent with the objectives of the
water quality planning process defined
in the Clean Water Act of 1972 and in PL
95-217, amendments to the act.
APPROACH
In developing land treatment
alternatives for Prince George's County,
a no-constraints planning process was
used. County goals and objectives were
identified, and the ability of land
treatment to help meet these objectives
was assessed. Other benefits evaluated
included the cost effectiveness of
wastewater treatment, the production of
cash crops through nutriënt recycling,
the preservation of agriculture land and
open space areas, and the implementation
of other land use planning objectives
included in the general plan.
Development of alternatives focused on
those options that would be compatible
with existing land ownership and current
agricultural activities.
As can be seen in Figure 3, the
process of identifying land treatment
sites and alternatives was an iterative
one. Land treatment opportunities were
first conceived in general terms and
then refined in several cycles on the
basis of technical evaluations and
assessments of planning implications.
One of the most significant
features of the approach utilized is the
conceptualization of land treatment
opportunities solely on the basis of
soil types, topography, and land use,
while at the same time remaining
independent of wastewater treatment
needs. This enabled land treatment to
be considered in a much more innovative
manner. The experience of the authors
was that where identification of
treatment needs is established as a
starting point, issues such as extent of
80VIRGINIA
PRINCE
WILLIAM
COUNTY
Figure 1. Location of Prince George's County, Maryland
81SIP
HORSEPEN SIP
om E SIP
EIISTIK8 PUUR STITIOH
UISUKt tOUt Dtlll
Figure 2. Major Wastewater Systems in Prince George's County, Maryland
82IDEMTIFT
counrr GOALS
AND MiECTIIES
IIEITIFÏ
POTtMIAl
UNO IIEITKEIIT
AIUS AKD SITES
EVAUIAIE
SITE
CHAIACTEIISTICS
\
ASSE1S
LAND IIEATHEKT
gpponTuain»DETEHMINE
fASTEIATEI
IUAIKIIT
HEEOt
VDEVELOr
LAIU TtEATKIIT
ALIEMITIVtSEIALIUTE
LAND tÜEATMEHT
UTEIMTKEt
Figure 3. Planning Sequence Used in the
Development of Major Land Treatment Alternatives
service area, rates of flow, and size
and location of potential sites may
become prematurally fixed and therefore
lesa flexible in later analysis of
strategies.
An integral part of the planning
process was a comprehensive interaction
program with public officials and
citizens' groups, as well as industry
and the agricultural community. The
reasons for this program included:
• Initiation of a continuing dialogue
between various facets of the
community
• Initiation of the education process
necessary to explain implementation
of land treatment alternatives
• Solicitation of the views and
concerns of the community in the
development of alternatives to
encourage public review and
acceptance of any proposal that
might result
Openness and flexibility of
planning was emphasized throughout this
program. From a technical standpoint,
this approach cal led for fuil
consideration of all applicable
technologies. Each of the three methods
of land treatment (shown in Figure 4),
slow rate process (irrigation) , rapid
infiltration, and overland flow, as well
as various combinations of processes,
were examined. Conventional wastewater
treatment unit processes were also
examined, as were combinations of
conventional and land treatment systems.(») IRRIGITION
(b) RAPID INFILTRATION
I I 1 I I I i
(c) OVERLAND FLOW
Figure 4. Methods of Land Treatment
83LAND TREATMENT OPPORTUNITIES
Considering the diversity of
terrain, land uses, and wastewater
aources in Prince George's County, it
became apparent that the many different
opportutiities for land treatment had to
be reduced to a manageable set of
options. After analysis, the three most
promising options included: (1) major
land treatment alternatives, (2) a
wastewater reuse possibility involving
silviculture, and (3) local land
treatment alternatives.
Major Land Treatment Alternatives
Major land treatment alternatives
would provide significant wastewater
treatment capacity for the county
(greater than 43.8 L/s), when used in
conjunction with major wastewater
treatment plants in the area.
The 12 sites shown in Figure 5 were
identified as potentially suitable for
these alternatives. They have the
potential for utilizing the fuil range
of land treatment methods including
irrigation, overland flow, and rapid
infiltration. The preliminary
assessment of treatment capacity
associated with each of these proposed
sites demonstrated the availability of
sufficient capacity to meet all of the
county1s needs for the next 20 years.
The sites were identified on the basis
of county plans for development over the
next 10 years, existing land ownership
(parcelage), and physical
characteristics as determined from
topography and SCS soil survey maps.
The options for utilization of
these sites were divided into five
alternatives (summarized in Table 1), on
the basis of the source of wastewater
and the location of sites involved. In
addition to providing high level
wastewater treatment, the groups
included opportunities for the following:
1. Provision of additional
treatment capacity and
improved operationai
performance associated with
existing facilities.
2. Productive secondary use of
gravel extraction areas
3. Establishment of intraurban
open space6.
7.
8.Provision of process and
cooling water from storage
lagoon or recovered water for
planned industrial uses
Establishment of a compatible
land use with an adjacent
sensitive environmental area
Preservation of open space in
the Central County wedge area
Preservation of prime
agricultural land
Protection and enhancement of
rural residential areas
All five groups of major
alternatives contain viable
opportunities for land treatment that
warrant further study. A definitive
conclusion, i.e., recommendation of
specific alternatives, was not
considered possible or desirable at this
level of planning. Instead, the options
were compared in general terms on the
basis of the following:
• Wastewater treatment effectiveness
• Costs associated with alternatives
• Impacts
Many of the major alternatives
appear promising from the standpoint of
wastewater treatment effectiveness ,
particularly as levels of treatment
requirements become more stringent. All
major discharges in the county will soon
be subject to nutriënt limitations of
some sort. Phosphorus limitations are
imminent and could be met easily with
the slow rate process or rapid
infiltration. There is also a
possibility that a limit could also be
placed on total nitrogen concentrations,
in which case either slow rate systems
or overland flow in combination with
rapid infiltration would be applicable.
A preliminary investigation of the
costs of the major alternative groups
showed that land treatment, in most
cases, could be cost effective when
compared with similar levels of advanced
wastewater treatment. Estimates were
based on one or two typical designs for
each group, and were intended to
demonstrate the magnitude of costs that
could be expected.
8Ho
Figure 5. Potential Sites for Major Land Treatment
Alternatives in Prince George's County
85Tab Ie 1* Major Land Treatment Alternative Groups in Prince George's County
Alternative
group Deseription
1
2
3
4
5Treatment of flows frcu
either upper Anacostia Basin
and/or Parkway STP at
Anacostia sites (A-l, A-2)
Treatment of Upper Western
Branch or Bowie flows at
Basin sites (w-1, w-2, W-3,
W-4, B-l, B-2)
Advanced waste treatment
of secondary effluent from
Western Branch STP at Sites
W-5, P-l, W-3, or B-2
Treatment of flows from
Upper Anacostia Basin via
pumpover to Upper Western
Branch (Sites W-1, W-2, W-3,
B-l, B-2)
Treatment of flows from
Mattawoman Basin and/or
Piscataway STP at
Hattawoman sites
(M-l, M-2)treatment
Aerated lagoons
at site, or
Parkway STP
Aerated lagoons
at site, or
Bowie STP
Western Branch
STP
Aerated lagoons
in Upper
Western Branch
Aerated lagoons
at site or
Piscataway STPLand treatment
process
Rapid infiltrstion,
overland flow,
Irrigation, or
combinations
Primarily
irrigation
Rapid infiltration,
irrigation
Primarily
irrigation
Primarily
overland
flowTbeoretical
maximum
capacity,
0.88-2.2
1.9
1.3-2.1
1.7
J..7-2.5Combined site
araas, hab
2,138
5,941
6,111
6,881
2,337Disposition of
effluent
Primarily to surface
streams of Anacostia
Basin. Some aquifer
recharge.
Primarily to surface
streams of Western
Branch and Patuxent
basins. Some aquifer
recharge.
Primarily to surface
streams of Western
Branch and Patuxent
basins.
Primarily to surface
streams of western
Branch and Patuxent
basins. Soue
aquifer recharge.
To silvicultural/
agricultural reuse
project or PiBcataway
outfall.
a. Assumes fuil utilization of each site within alternative groups.
b. Probably required land afea includes application area plus 25% allowance for buffer zones and other areas but does not
include an allowance for preapplication treatment and storage.
Impacts of the alternatives
considered were divided into economie,
social, environmental, public health,
and land use planning. Evaluation of
the impacts of land treatment
alternatives led to a mixture or a
combination of positive and negative
effects.
Wastewater Reuse Opportunity
An opportunity for a large-scale
wastewater reuse project was identified
as an adjunct to the overland flow
alternative in the southern part of the
county (Alternative Group No. 5). Such
a system would consist essentially of
distribution networks for utilization of
the treated wastewater in silviculture
and agricultural activities in that part
of the county. Not only would the
implementation of this option provide an
additional level of treatment, but it
would also provide added benefits in the
form of reduction of costs associated
with utilization of artificial
fertilizers and provision of water for
erop management in this area. Further,
or finally, it would provide a viable
alternative to further expansion and
upgrading of an existing wastewater
treatment plant.The major emphasis of this prospect
would be on silviculture. Intensive
management and irrigation of forest
resources would substantially accelerate
tree growth, broaden the existing
agricultural base, and improve economie
conditions for the residents of the area
and of the county in general. The
market potential for forest products in
this area was investigated and was found
to be very favorable. Irrigation of
woodlands would be an efficiënt use of
forest resources that are currently
underutilized within the county.
Another essential feature of the
project would be benefits accruing to
local residents. In order to avoid
relocation of residents by condemnation
or other fee acquisition procedures,
methods which would maintain control
without relocation were considered. One
possibility examined was the purchase of
timber rights rather than the fee
interest in the land itself. Such a
system could be operated by a forest
management company or a consortium of
land owners under contractual
arrangements with the wastewater
authority. By the sale of the timber
rights, rather than the land itself, the
local residents would profit from use
and enrichment of parts of their land
which, at this time, offer no financial
86return. This incentive, combined with
the fact that residents would not lose
title to the land, should make the
concept more readily acceptable. The
extent of irrigation of agricultural
land will be dependent on the needs and
desires of the local farmers, as well as
local climatic conditions. The system
would be designed so that the wastewater
would be accessible to farmers who wish
to benefit from it.
Overland flow was considered to be
the most favorable method of
preapplication treatment for several
reasons:
• Most trees do not require additions
of substantial nitrogen because
they recycle a major portion of
the ir nitrogen back to the soil via
leaf litter. The overland flow
technique, by reducing total
nitrogen concentrations in the
applied wastewater, would protect
the groundwater from nitrate
contamination.
• It is impractical and undesirable
to limit public contact in an
irrigation area of this size (4050
ha or more). Disinfection prior to
spraying must be adequate to allow
for public use of this area. This
technique would sufficiently reduce
BOD and suspended solids to levels
necessary for effective
disinfection without excessive
utilization of chemicals.
Local Land Treatment Opportunities
The possibility of small land
treatment systems (generally with
capacities much less than 43.8 L/s) was
considered separately from the
standpoint of local opportunities.
These systems would not be considered as
significant alternatives in relation to
the major treatment plants in the
county. Instead, they could serve local
communities on an annual or seasonal
basis and relate specifically to that
community1 s needs and goals. The
possibilities for local treatment
systems exist wherever there is
available land near a present or
potential source of wastewater flow.
Opportunities for these systems are
generally more apparent in isolated
areas than on a large-scale basis.
Consequently, this analysis did not
focus on the suitability of small
systems for the county as a whole,rather it concentrated on several
specific and more apparent alternatives.
With regard to planning
considerations, small land treatment
systems can be utilized to accomplish
two major objectives:
• Provide needed sewage treatment
capacity to remote communities
• Obtain secondary benefits
associated with reutilization of
water and nutrients in the treated
wastewater
The first objective relates mainly
to the outlying areas in the county
where connections with major sewer
systems are either uneconomical or
undesirable. In such a situation, a
local land treatment system can provide
capacity for planned small-scale rural
development. It could also be used to
provide relief to small communities
experiencing septic tank failures.
Aside from treating wastewater,
small systems can be used to achieve
nureerous secondary benefits. An
intraurban open space can be preserved
within a developing community, providing
such things as a small, local farming
operation, an outdoor recreation area,
or wooded parkland.
IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
The county staff responsible for
the study recognized from the outset of
the project that there could be many
serious obstacles to implementing a land
treatment alternative, no matter how
technically sound any of the
alternatives might be. Consequently,
considerable time and effort was devoted
by county staff, elected officials, and
citizens' groups to address potential
obstacles that might prevent
implementation of any of the recommended
alternatives.
As mentioned earlier, the approach
taken during the course of the study was
one based on an open planning process.
Preliminary contact was made with many
segments of the community that could
eventually be involved or affected in
some way if a land treatment system were
implemented. This contact with both
public and private interest groups was
broadened extensively during an open-
ended planning period following
publication of the report. The report
was used as a basis for discussion so
that land-based treatment schemes
8Tcould acquire a high potential for
implementation.
The program for public
participation in the second phase of the
project (after publication of the
report) was initiated with a formal
presentation by the county government,
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission,
and the consultants. Representatives of
nearly every interest group in the
county that might possibly be affected
by land treatment were invited.
Detailed presentations and meetings were
also scheduled for any group that
desired them. Groups that became
involved included local civic
associations and local agricultural
organizations, including the
Agricultural Extension Service of the
University of Maryland and the Soil
Conservation Service,
The overall reaction of these
groups to the approach was quite good.
Most parties were able to agree with the
utilization of land treatment systems.
However, there were concerns over
certain aspects of such systems. These
included concerns related to public
health impacts and the aesthetics of
such systems. Information was presented
to address these concerns and most of
the fears of risks of land treatment
were reduced. However, it was quite
obvious from the results of the dialogue
with the public that an extensive public
information program would be required
prior to implementation of any
alternative involving land treatment.
Another concern not adequately addressed
in the planning process was the
acquisition of private lands by the
public agencies (particularly
agricultural land). On the basis of
several meeting held with local
agricultural groups, the importance of
considering alternative methods of land
control such as leasing and/or
contractural arrangements with farmer-
operators was quite apparent. This
aspect of the development of land
treatment options clearly requires
extensive elaboration so that land
owners and residents in the vicinity of
the proposed project sites would fully
understand the benefits from
implementation of a land treatment
option.CONCLUSION
The prospects for implementing an
effective land treatment system(s) in
Prince George's County appear reasonably
good. A range of technically feasible
alternatives has been identified, and a
framework has been established for
future planning, acceptable to those
concerned with the study area. This
contrasts with several previous
facilities planning efforts in the
county in which land treatment was found
not to be feasible. For the most part,
these studies were from a more limiting
point of view in which the positive
aspects of land treatment could not be
realized. Experience, in this case,
indicates that by using a more
comprehensive approach to planning it is
possible to deal with the multifaceted
nature of land treatment in ways which
would not otherwise be apparent.PUBLIC, INSTITUTIONAL AND
TECHNICAL ACCEPTABILITY
AN INTEGRATED RESOURCES
MANAGEMENT APPROACH TO
LAND TREATMENT DESIGN
William Rust -
Sheaffer & Roland, Inc.
ABSTRACT
A comprehensive resources man-
agement plan was formulated for a
development in western metropoli-
tan Chicago. The plan links land
treatment with other resource man-
agement elements to achieve a
highly integrated economie deve-
lopment plan. The plan is accept-
able from both technical and poli-
tical perspectives. This develop-
ment demonstrates the opportunity
to implement land treatment with-
in a high density urban region.
The management of wastewater with-
in an urban region provides an op-
portunity to achieve concurrently,
water supply, flood control, re-
creation, open space, and energy
management benefits.
INTRODUCTION
A comprehensive resources man-
agement plan was formulated for a
development that links land treat-
ment with water supply, flood con-
trol, recreation, open space, and
energy management. The plan in-
tegrates the proposed development
with the physical environment of
the site.
The discussion of the plan is
presented in three parts. First,
the physical environment is as-
sessed. Second, resource manage-
ment opportunities are identified.
Finally, the elements of the com-
prehensive resources managementplan are sketched out.
The final part of the paper
presents the conclusions which can
be drawn from the planning effort.
THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
The development comprises 112
hectares (277 acres) located in a
high density urban region in wes-
tern metropolitan Chicago, 6.4
kilometers (4 miles) west of O'
Hare International Airport. Resi-
dential development surrounds
three sides of the site. On the
western side is a large indus-
trial complex.
The land and water resources
of the development provide the
setting for the development. The
natural resource features of the
site can be discussed from the
following perspectives: geology,
topography, soils, climate,
groundwater, and surface water.
Each of these is discussed brief-
ly in this section of the paper.
Geology
The surface geology of north-
eastern Illinois is attributed to
glacial action. The advance and
recession of huge ice masses a-
cross the region formed the topo-
graphy and laid down formations
which store and transmit ground-
water.
There are three significant geo-
logical features of the site. The
first is the glacial till that ex-
tends approximately 21 meters (70
feet) below the subsoil. This
material is unconsolidated clay
and silt with sand and gravel len-
ses only a few centimeters thick.
The second is the Silurian dolo-
mite bedrock 24 meters (80 feet)
below the land surface. The bed-
rock is fissured and fractured,
especially the top layers. The
third is the Maquoketa shale be-
low the bedrock. These shales are
impervious and tend to restrict
the downward movement of the
groundwater that has percolated
through the glacial till.
Topography
The land surface of the siteslopes gently toward swales and
depressions near the middle. This
topography was shaped by the gla-
cial activity that occured on the
site. Elevations range from 209
meters (685 feet) to 218 meters
(715 feet) above sea level with
maximum relief on the site being
9 meters (30 feet). Slopes are
generally less than 3 percent.
These slopes increase to 7 percent
near the depressions and swales.
Soils
The soils on the site generally
have silt and clay loam textures.
Traces of oxidized iron are com-
mon in soil profiles. The soils
can be divided into two groups
according to the organic matter
content and structure. The first
group includes soils on the slopes.
The second group includes those in
swales and depressions.
The soils on the slopes have
surface layers 8 to 46 centimeters
thick. They tend to have medium
and coarse subangular blocky struc-
tures and contain variable amounts
of organic matter ranging from
6.2 to 8.9 percent. Surface layer
permeabilities are moderate. Cat-
ion exchange capacities range be-
tween 12.6 and 25.9 meq/100 grams
of soil. Subsoils contain more
clay and have slowly moderate to
moderate permeabilities. The
swales and depressions contain de-
posits of organic material that ex-
tend to depths of 2.0 to 3.3 meters
(8 to 13 feet). As a result, the
organic matter and cation exchange
capacities of these soils are
slightly higher than the soils on
the slopes. Organic matter com-
prises 10 percent of the soils in
the swales and depressions, cation
exchange capacities range between
25.8 and 28.9 meq/100 grams of
soil.
Climate
The climatic regime of north-
eastern Illinois is classified as
"humid Continental type" with cha-
racteristically hot summers, cold
winters, and rain distributed
throughout the year. Precipita-
tion is slightly more than 84 cen-
timeters (33 inches). Slightlyhigher amounts of precipitation
occur between April and September
due to thunderstorms.
Groundwater
Underlying most of north-
eastern Illinois are shallow and
deep aquifers. The shallow aqui-
fers include sand and gravel aqui-
fers and the Silurian dolomite
aquifer. The only shallow aquifer
underlying the site is the Silu-
rian dolomite. The Cambrian-
Ordovician aquifer is a deep aqui-
fer that is confined by overlying
Maquoketa shales and underlying
Eau Claire shales. Both of these
aquifers are used as public water
supplies.
Surface Hydrology
The development is located in
the Salt Creek drainage basin.
Two intermittent watercourses en-
ter the site which drain 267 hec-
tares (660 acres). Formerly a
third watercourse flowed into the
site, but construction of a large
highway storm sewer diverted this
surface water resource from the
site.
The floodplain of record on the
site was delineated by the U.S.
Geological Survey in a hydrologi-
cal atlas (HA-143). Also the spe-
cial flood hazard area or the 100-
year floodplain was delineated on
maps prepared by the Federal In-
surance Administration. Both of
these maps indicate that 18 hec-
tares (45 acres) of the site is
subject to innundation either from
the flood of record or the 100-
year flood.
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES
Developing a large urban com-
plex presents several resource
management problems. The develop-
ment needed to attain water sup-
plies, an increase in flooding
problems had to be prevented, good
surface water quality was neces-
sary, open space recreation and
the benefits of energy conserva-
tion were also desired. The fol-
lowing presents these resource
management opportunties.
90Water Supplies
The development needed a potable
water supply and water for land-
scape irrigation and fire protec-
tion. Potable water will be con~3
sumed at the initial rate of 955m /
day (0.25 mgd). In this area of
northeastern Illinois, these needs
are secured from groundwater sup-
plies.
The available groundwater in the
area of the development is declin-
ing because groundwater is being
extracted from storage areas faster
than it is being replaced. The
practical sustained yield of the
shallow aquifer in this region was
estimated by the Illinois Water
Survey to be 16,700m3/day (4.4 mgd),
The actual pumpage in 1974 was
17,000m3/day (4.5 mgd). The sit-
uation is much more critical in the
deep aquifer, where the practical
sustained yield is estimated to
be 5,300m3/day (1.4 mgd) and the
actual pumpage was 17,800m3/day
(4.7 mgd).1 There are regional
plans that have considered import-
ing Lake Michigan water 40 kilo-
meters (25 miles) to this area be-
cause of the great concern over
declining groundwater supplies.
Flooding Problems
Increased runoff and floodplain
encroachment has caused severe
flood problems in the Salt Creek
drainage basin. To prevent an in-
crease in these flooding problems,
the development is required by lo-
cal ordinance to store runoff
from the 100-year storm. The deve-
lopment will have to provide 11.1
hectare-meters (90 acre-feet) of
stormwater storage capacity to pre-
vent increased flooding problems
downstream.
Water Quality
The development will have to
treat their wastewater including
non-point sources of wastewater.
Both must be economically treated
to prevent degradation of surface
water areas.
Most developers in this area
discharge wastewater to municipal
sewage treatment plants, but flows
from the development cannot betreated by existing municipal
wastewater treatment facilities
because they are already at capa-
city. Furthermore, the develop-
ment needs a water supply for
landscape irrigation and fire pro-
tection. The initial point source
wastewater flow from the develop-
ment is estimated to be 955m3/day
(0.25 mgd).
Open Space Recreation
One of the site development ob-
jectives is to provide open space
recreation opportunities. Urban
sprawl has rapidly reduced the
available open space and wildlife
habitat in the area. From 1970
to 1976, 30 percent of the re-
maining open space in Addison Town-
ship, DuPage County, Illinois was
developed leaving only 567 hect-
ares (6 percent of the Township)
undeveloped.
Energy Conservation
The importation of energy to
the development must be minimal.
The operation costs must reflect
wise use of energy and energy con-
servation.
THE COMPREHENSIVE RESOURCES
MANAGEMENT PLAN
The resources of the develop-
ment are integrated with a compre-
hensive resources management plan.
The plan features multiple use of
land and water resources to pro-
vide an economie self-sustained
urban module. Figure 1 shows a
cross-section of the development.
The water supply, stormwater, was-
tewater and energy management ele-
ments are presented in the follow-
ing.
Water Supply Management
The potable water supply of the
development will come from the
shallow dolomite aquifer. However,
once used, the wastewater will not
be discharged to a river. It will
be treated and used as a water sup-
ply for landscape irrigation. Af-
ter the water has filtered through
the soil, underdrains will collect
91ZUHOff PIUTEHEP SY <S£A£s AWP
AMD
CT5T2l0UTe THÈM THEU
ANP AEM/ÉL FILTEATIPN
and convey it to five interconnec-
ted lakes where it will be avail-
able for fire protection, enhance-
ment of site aesthetics, and re-
creation. During this time, areas
of the site will be recharging the
underlying shallow dolomite aquifer.
This will occur continuously
through 11 hectares (27 acres) of
lake bottoms and intermittently
through the 34 irrigated hectares
(85 acres).
Water conservation and future
site activity may reduce the de-
mand for water at the development.
Studies have demonstrated that to-
tal water consumption can be re-
duced up to 2 7 percent with simple
inexpensive water conserving fix-
tures.^ Implementation of water
conservation could reduce the ul-
timate water demand from l,553m3/
day (0.41 mgd) to l,023m3/day
(0.30 mgd). This would signifi-
cantly reduce the size of waste-
water management facilities needed
for wastewater treatment.
Stormwater Management
Stormwater runoff is managed at
the development by removing non-
point source pollutants before it
is conveyed to the lakes for stor-
age. Land treatment will be used
to filter runoff from imperviousareas before it is collected in
grass swales. First, the runoff
will pass through a layer of soil
and grass, then through gravel
and again through grass. The par-
king lot cross-section in Figure
1 shows the placement of materials
used for designing these treatment
facilities. Porous concrete struc-
tures—grass pavers or monoslabs—
will be installed along parking
lot fringe areas. Water can slow-
ly flow through these structures
and grass can be grown on the soil
placed between them. Underlying
these structures is a layer of
gravel that extends under a storm-
water storage berm. Runoff will
flow through the porous structures
and through the gravel layer to
an overland flow grass filtration
area. The stormwater is then col-
lected at the bottom of the grass
filtration area by grass swales
and underdrains before it is con-
veyed to the lakes. To prevent
topping of the storage berm during
major storms, relief standpipes
will be placed at intervals along
the pavement edge. The cost of
these stormwater management faci-
lities including the grass swale
will be approximately $55.75 per
linear meter ($17.00/linear foot).
This cost is comparable to conven-
tional storm sewers which do not
92provide treatment of non-point
source pollutants.
Wastewater Management
The wastewater management sys-
tem for the development will be
a self-contained facility serving
only the buildings on site. This
system links wastewater management
with water supply and flood con-
trol facilities. Open space re-
creation and energy conservation
are also linked to the wastewater
management system. Land treat-
ment will keep water cycling
through the development adding
aesthetic, recreation and energy
management benefits to the site.
The system will have an initial
design capacity of 955m3/day
(0.25 mgd). The following pre-
sents the components of the sys-
tem and then the design and cost
details.
System Components
The wastewater management sys-
tem consists of collection, pre-
treatment, storage, and irrigation
components. Figure 2 shows a flow
diagram of the system. Pretreat-
ment consists of aeration in a
3 celled lagoon and filtration
by intermittent sand filters.
Pretreatment and storage will be
combined for the initial design
flow. The aerated lagoon will
provide 133,600m3 (35.28 mg) of
storage capacity, enough to store
winter flows. Before the waste-
water is applied to the land as
a landscape irrigant, it will be
chlorinated. After irrigation,
the renovated wastewater is col-
lected by underdrains and stored
in the lakes for reuse. The irri-
gated areas will provide open
space and recreation opportunities.
Trailways will meander through
irrigated areas providing access
to surface water and landscaped
areas.
This wastewater management sys-
tem requires only an Illinois En-
vironmental Protection Agency
"construct, own and operate" per-
mit to produce a 10 mg/l biochemi-
cal oxygen demand (BOD), 12 mg/l
suspended solids (SS) effluent.
A National Pollution DischargeElimination System (NPDES) permit
is not required, because the sys-
tem is considered a zero discharge
operation. Therefore, the system
will be exempt from changes in
water quality and effluent stan-
dards.
Design and Cost Details
Wastewater from the development
will be generated from office,
hotel, and commercial activities.
The influent flow rates and load-
ings based on the initial develop-
ment phase of the development are
presented in Table 1.
Estimated wastewater flows from
the fully developed site could in-
clude an additional 610m3/day
(0.161 mgd) based on another
209,000m2 (2,250,000 sq. ft.) of
office space. It this would oc-
cur, the fuil project average
daily design flow would be
I,565m3/day (0.413 mgd).
A summary of the preliminary
design and costs for treatment of
the initial flow is shown in
Table 2. The capital cost of the
system is estimated to be $650,000.
The annual operation and main-
tenance costs will be approximate-
ly $28,000. These costs do not
include pumping, irrigation, and
underdrains for landscaping, which
can be eliminated because land-
scape irrigation facilities would
be installed without a wastewater
management system.
The entire pretreatment process
of the initial design will re-
quire 2.8 hectares (7 acres) of
land. Another 1.6 hectares (4
acres) will be required for stor-
age of flows from the second phase
of development.
The wastewater will be pre-
treated with aerated lagoons. The
pretreatment design will consist
of three treatment cells that will
reduce BOD inflows by 75 percent.
Provisions will be made so that
each cell can be by-passed for
maintenance purposes.
Intermittent sand beds will fil-
ter the lagoon effluent before
chlorination and landscape irri-
gation. The beds will be flooded
with 7.6 to 10.2 centimeters (3
to 4 inches) of effluent and al-
lowed to drain before the next
93Figure 2
FLOW DIAGRAM OF THE WASTEWATBR MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
STATION
V
'P£-CVUDfi|KïATIOK4
TUMPwKiOPTIOMAL. •BV-TA'6-i
UAjjOOM CJELU
HO.±
L-KUt>6i!APÉMD.3
\
V
TABLE 1
V/«.'}Ti:v;.\TKR FLOW RATES AND SYSTEM L0ADI1I&
I'-aiametpr office
Floor spaoe (m2) 209,100
Occupanta 9,000
Mean weekday flow (mJ/day) 852
Hoan wefikday loadin^ (kg/day)
BOD 176
33 204
Ifflj-M 25
Total mean dally,
design flow (m /day)
Total mean daily.
design loadirig (lcg/day)
BOD
SSSite Activity
hotel
27,900
750
284
53
68
9retail/eommercial
15,000
61
12
15
2Total
250,000
1,650
1,197
246
287
56
955
196
228
29TABLE 2
SUMMARY OF DESIGN AND COSTS FOR WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT SÏSTEM
COMPONENTS PRËLIMINARY DESIGN CAPITAL O «. M
Raw Wastewater Pumping
2.5 MGD InstaXled Capacity
In-ground, factory built
station
Aerated Lagoons - Construction
82,000 ydJ excavation x
S1.60/yd3
Cell No. 1$ 130,000 S 2,500
Peak flow capacity,
1.90 MGD
BOD loading - 431 lbs/day =
205 mg/l ,
Volume required = 8 58,000 ft
Additional winter storage re-
quired = 2,650,000 ft3
Average detention time (summer
operation) = 27 days
Liquid depth (summer opera-
tion) = 15 feet
Liquid depth - maximum - 35 feet
BOD effluent = 107 lbs/day =
Cell No. 2 BOD. loading
135mg/l107 lbs/day
g/
Volume required = 356,670 ft
Additional winter storage re-
quired = 1,392,000 ft3
Average detention time (dummer
operation) = 11 days
Liquid depth (summer operation)
=15 feet
Liquid depth - maximum =35 feet
BOD. effluent = 27 lbs/day
= 13 mg/l
Cell No. 3
Lagoon Appurtenances and
Piplng
Aeration - Tubes, Lines
Blowers
Effluent Pumping to
Sand Beds
Reoirculation Pumping
Sand Beds: Construction
2740 yd3 Sand g $4/yd3
1370 yd3 Gravel g $4/yd3
Distribution and underdrains
for Bed
Chlorine Peed, Contact Tanks,
Stripping TanksBOD- loading - 27 lbs/day =
13 mg/l
Volume required = 0.2 5 x
x 356,670 ft3 = 89,170 ft3
Additional winter storage re-
quired - 668,900 ft3
Average detention time (summer
operation) = 3 days
Liquid depth (summer opera-
tion) = 15 feet
Liguid depth (maximum) = 35 feet $ 131,200
? 30,000
750 CFM oapacity $ 65,000
0.55 MGD installed $ 47,000
capacity
0.23 MGD installed capacity $ 39,000
Average flow rate = 0.44 MGD $ 16,500
Average hydraulic design loading
rate = 10 gallons/ft2/day ,
Total surface area = 44,000 ft
- 1.01 acres
Number of beds = 7
Underdrainage system at 10-foot
intervals discharges to chlorina-
tion facilities
Peak flow capacity = 0.44 MGD $ 32,000
Maximum dosage rate = 5 mg/l $ 30,000
Contact time =15 minutes
Dechlorination time » 60 minutes$ 17,00
$ 1,300
$ 1,500
$ 2,800
$ 2,400
Pumping, Irrigation and
Underdrains for LandscapingIrrigation areas available - $ 215,000 5 12,800
85 acres
Average flow rate = 0.44 .MGD
Irrigation period » 7 months
Hydraulic loading rate -
1.33 Inches/week
Type of irrigation equipment:
Permanent set sprinkler systems
Sub Total $ 735,700 $ 40,800
Engineering and contingencies
- 25 percent 5 184,000
Total excluding Landscaping
Comp. $ 920.000
TOTAL $ 650,000 * 28,000
95flooding. Flows from the sand fil-
ters will be pumped to landscape
irrigation facilities. An under-
drainage system will assure drain-
age of irrigated areas. The col-
lected water will be conveyed to
the lakes to augment lake inflows.
Energy Management
Energy will be used efficient-
ly at the development. The lakes
will be used to manage building
energy budgets on the site. The
lakes will be used for evaporative
cooling during the summer when
heat is removed from the buildings.
The lakes are also being considered
as a heat source to augment energy
supply of solar heated buildings.
Use of wastewater for land-
scape irrigation rather than
groundwater will also conserve
energy. If the water used for
irrigation were pumped from ground-
water supplies underlying the site
262,500 KW hours of energy would
be required annually, valued at
$13,000. Implementation of water
conservation will also reduce the
energy required for pumping and
wastewater treatment.REFERENCES
Illinois State Water Survey,
Water Resources Availability,
Quality, and Cost in North-
eastern Illinois. State of
Illinois Department of Regis-
tration and Education, Urbana,
Illinois (1976).
North Marin Water District,
North Marin's Little Compen-
dium of Water Saving Ideas,
North Marin County Water Dis-
trict, Novato, California
(1977).
CONCLUSIONS
This study demonstrates the op-
portunity to implement a land
treatment system within an urban
region. When properly planned,
a range of benefits can be
achieved. These include treated
wastewater; including non-point
sources, augmented water supplies,
aquifer recharge, open space and
recreation opportunities, preser-
vation of wildlife habitat, flood
control and energy conservation.
96SITE EVALUATION AND
SELECTION
ECONOMIC EVALUATION AND MANAGEMENT
OF LAND TREATMENT SYSTEMS
Lee A. Christensen
Natural Resources Economics Division
Economics, Statistics, and Cooperatives
Service, U.S. Department of Agrlculture
ABSTRACT
Legislative and administrative man-
dates are focusing increased attention
on land application of effluents in the
United States. This presents an oppor-
tunity to shift emphasis from waste
treatment and disposal to resource
recovery and reuse.
The economie analysis of land
treatment systems needs to address
issues of both efficiency and equity.
Efficiency is addressed through cost-
effectiveness analysis. Equity is
addressed through institutional analy-
sis, where the influence of society's
rules determine who pays and who bene-
fits as a result of public policy
choices.
Analytical frameworks are discussed
for accounting for cost variations in
important components of land treatment
systems. A framework of options for
acquisition and management of land is
provided, and the implications are dis-
cussed.
Experiences from operational land
treatment systems indicate that local
factors as well as general frameworks
influence the acquisition and manage-
ment options selected.
INTRODUCTION
Water quality goals in the United
States are articulated in state and fed-
eral laws. Most ambitious in terms of
goals and potential expense are the 1972
Amendments to the Federal Water Pollu-
tion Control Act (PL 92-500) and theClean Water Act of 1977 (PL 95-217).
These laws contain significant provi-
sions dealing with the control and
treatment of wastewater from municipal
and industrial sources. In particular
they provide emphasis for the evaluation
and use, when found cost-effective, of
land application of municipal effluent.
Added emphasis has been given land
treatment by EPA policy statements and
by provisions in PL 95-217 providing
special subsidies for innovative tech-
nologies applied to wastewater treat-
ment problems (EPA, 1977; Federal Reg-
ister, 1978). For example, innovative
technology can be considered cost effec-
tive if it costs no more than 115 per-
cent of the least costly alternative.
Interest in land treatment of
effluents provides a unique opportunity
to emphasize resource recovery and reuse
in wastewater management rather than
treatment and disposal. Numerous oppor-
tunities exist to reclalm water and
nutrients for erop production and to
recharge groundwater supplies. Under
this philosophy, wastewater can be a
valuable resource to be managed, rather
than a nuisance for disposal.
Land treatment however, is no
panacea. There are many instances where
conditions are not condusive to the con-
struction of land treatment systems.
Careful case by case evaluation is
required to identify those situations
where land treatment is most viable.
Such analysis requires a truly multi-
disciplinary approach. Technological,
economie, social, and legal factors
must be evaluated within a site specific
context.
91This paper focuses on economie and
institutional issues encountered in the
analysis of land application systemsi.'
in the United States. Some factors
encountered in an economie analysis of
land treatment systems are addressed.
It then identifies important institu-
tional considerations for land acquisi-
tion and management, and concludes wlth
examples from operating systems in the
United States and around the world.
ECONOMIC EVALUAT10N
Care is needed when referring to an
"economie" evaluation of a land treat-
ment system. In the broadest sense,
such an evaluation should quantify all
costs and benefits associated with a
system, both monetary and nonmonetary.
Such a benefit-cost analysis is a formal
procedure for evaluatlng alternative
policies. Difficulties often arise in
assigning dollar values to all costs and
benefits. Benefits are often excluded
from the evaluation, making the economie
evaluation more correctly a cost evalu-
ation.
When a policy objective is assumed,
as in the case of wastewater treatment,
one economie question is that of deter-
mining cost-effective methods for meet-
ing the stated policy goal. Such cost-
effective analysis identifies and quan-
tifies the costs of alternatives to meet
a given policy objective. Then the
least costly method can be selected.
Emphasis is primarily on monetary costs,
with the benefits presumably reflected
in the predetermined policy goal. In
addition, only accounting costs are gen-
erally considered. The opportunity
costs, the value of goods and services
and opportunities foregone by the use of
resources in a particular manner, are
generally omitted from a cost-effectlve-
ness analysis.
Cost-effective analysis applied to
wastewater treatment probleras thus seeks
to identify the least costly way of
meeting goals specified through stan-
dards for such pollutants as biological
oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen
demand (COD), total suspended solids
(TSS), nitrogen (N) and phosphorous (P).
The costs of land treatment systems are
1/ Discussions are limited to irri-
gation applications, but the results and
ideas have applicability to overland
flow and infiltration basins.developed and compared with the costs
of alternative treatment systems.
Cost Considerations
Cost-effective analysis of waste-
water treatment alternatives needs a
consistent data base including both the
costs of component Items and the result-
ant level of effluent treatment. It is
important that cost comparisons between
treatment technologies be based upon
consistent underlying assumptions and
data sets. An analytic framework is
needed to explicitly account for all the
factors influencing costs and identify
the sensltivity of total costs to
changes in the costs of the various
components. Cost variables to be ana-
lyzed include land acquisition costs,
land preparation costs, surface runoff
control costs, subsurface drainage,
irrigation system costs and relocation
costs. Other variables to be evaluated
include capital subsidies, erop selec-
tion, effluent recovery costs, design
flows, transmission distance, reserve
land requirements, discount rate and
period, and input costs.
Some Results
Several simulatlon models and
methodologies have been developed for
evaluating land treatment systems (Corps
of Engineers, 1976; Young, 1976; Pounds,
Crites and Griffes, 1975). Cost effec-
tiveness analysis data in this paper are
based upon USDA research, particularly
(Young, 1976).
Costs for land treatment of waste-
water can be estimated using the Cost
of Land Application Wastewater (CLAW)
model discussed in Volume 2 of the
Conference proceedings (Young, 1978b).
This model consists of five basic steps:
preapplication treatment, transmission,
effluent storage, application system
and recovery of renovated water.
Land treatment systems are most
cost-effective for volumes up to ten
MGD. At that level, most economies of
size have been achieved (Young, 1976).
Cost comparisons between two land treat-
ment systems (solid-set irrigation and
center pivot irrigation) and three
advanced waste treatment systems are
shown in table 1, along with some indi-
cators of relative effluent quality.
Based on the assumptions and representa-
tive systems evaluated, land treatment
was found to be cost-effective for
achieving tertiary wastewater treatmentTable 1. Comparison of average total wastewater treatment costs for varlous
facility types and sizes and effluent quality comparisons
1/
Treatment techniqueFacility size (MGD)~
0.5 1.0 10.0 100.0
Cents per 1,000 gallons
Secondary Treatment
Trickling filter
Activated sludge
Tertiary Treatment
AWT1: Activated sludge followed by
nitrification-denitrification
AWT2: Activated sludge followed by
lime addition, filtration,
and sludge recalcination
AWT3: AWT2 plus ion exchange
Aerated lagoon followed by solid-
set irrigation
Aerated lagoon followed by center
pivot irrigation65.7 48.3
70.0 42.415.8 13.6
19.1 13.6
105.5 77.5
165.0 129.430.0
51.621.1
31.7
184.8 144.5 62.1 35.8
91.3 69.5 43.8 37.8
85.1 63.1 36.4 29.7
2/Effluent quality parameters—'
Secondary Treatment
Trickling filter
Activated sludge
Tertiary Treatment
AWT1: Activated sludge followed by
nitrification-denitrification
AWT2: Activated sludge followed by
lime addition, filtration,
and sludge recalcination
AWT3: AWT2 plus ion exchange
Aerated lagoon followed by solid-
set irrigation
Aerated lagoon followed by center
pivot irrigationBOD
40
20
15
5
5
1SS
50
25
16
5
5
1Total N
30
30
3
30
3
3P
8
8
8
0.5
0.5
0.1
0.1
1/ After (Young, 1978).
II Pounds, Crites, and Smith, 1975.
99goals, especially for smaller communi-
ties (Young, 1978). However, it is
important to remember that nutriënt
removal with land application depends
a great deal upon the application rate,
the erop grown, and specific site
characteristics. The cost advantage of
land treatment over advanced wastewater
treatment (AWT) options reflected in
table 1 is primarily due to the use of
relatively inexpensive aerated lagoons
for pretreatment prior to land applica-
tion. However, for smaller communities
it can also be cost-effective with other
pretreatment techniques, such as acti-
vated sludge. Adjustments in costs for
other pretreatment techniques can be
made by adding the cost of a secondary
treatment process such as a trickling
filter and deducting the costs of aera-
ted lagoons. Thus a community with an
existing secondary treatment facility
would not need to construct aerated
lagoons for pretreatment.
Direct cost comparisons between a
land treatment system in one location
and a conventional AWT system in another
location can be misleading. Local con-
ditions influence cost, particularly
for land treatment systems where stan-
dardization of cost items is less com-
mon than for AWT systems. In addltion,
effluent quality requirements lend vari-
abllity to the analysis. Effluent qual-
ity from land application wlll vary
depending upon local soil characteris-
tics and the particular erop selected
for irrigation. Communities may spec-
ify a level of treatment that can be
obtained only with an advanced waste
treatment system. For example, the
treatment level specified by Lake Tahoe,
California precludes land treatment
systems.
Cost-effective analysis should
consider combinations of systems in
addition to single systems. For some
communities, a system with a land treat-
ment component for part of the effluent
and an AWT component for the remainder
may be most cost-effective and handle
flow and seasonal variations more effi-
ciently than a single system design.
INSTITUTIONAL ANALYSIS
An economie analysis of land treat-
ment systems needs to investigate issues
of equity as well as economie efficiency.
Cost-effective analysis focuses on effi-
ciënt use of resources. Equity issues
should also be evaluated, particularlyhow the rules governing the distribution
of costs and benefits influence the out-
come of public policy decisions.
One of the factors influencing the
cost-effectiveness of land treatment
systems is land cost. The monetary cost
of purchasing land can be large, but
even more important, the social costs
and resulting opposition from land owners
can prevent development of land treat-
ment systems. Land acquisition and man-
agement needs to be handled carefully,
balancing the respectlve views and goals
of both the community and the land owner.
One of the key factors distin-
guishing land treatment systems from
other wastewater treatment systems is
the requirement for land. While all
systems require land for plant location,
it is an integral part of the treatment
process for land treatment systems.
Also, type, location, and quantity of
land is much more important for land
treatment systems.
For the community, land Is needed
as an input for the primary goal of
wastewater treatment. Land needed for
treatraent systems is also an important
resource required by farmers for making
a living. Thus a community needlng land
for treating municipal effluent needs
to consider the farmer's perspective.
Equity considerations require that land-
owners should not be penalized if society
considers using their land for meeting
its wastewater management goals.
Institutional analysis focuses on
how land will be acquired and managed
and the impact of methods selected on
issues of equity, system management,
treatment reliability, Implementation,
and acceptabillty. Institutions define
the working rules of society and set
the rules which govern the operation of
physical and economie systems. Institu-
tions are "collective action in control,
llberation, and expansion of individual
action" (Commons, 1934), and as "sets
of ordered relationships among people
which define thelr rights, exposure to
rights of others, privileges and respon-
sibilities" (Schmld, 1972). Institu-
tions specify what is acceptable Indi-
vidual and group behavior, reflect
political power, and imply a capacity
for one segment of society to impose
its will upon another. For this paper,
institutions are the organizations,
authorities and relationships by which
land application systems are implemented.
Property rights are an important
economie institution influencing land
treatment systems as they establish the
100rules for land sales, lease, and use and
govern contracts and conditions for the
acquisition and use of land. They
reflect people's perspectlves and values
and a distribution of political and
economie power to influence and control
individual behavior and group action.
Acqulsition and Management Optlons
Property rights govern the transfer
and use of land needed for several pur-
poses including treatment lagoons, pre-
treatment facilities, conveyance puraping
stations, and application sites. Options
for acquiring land provide control over
the resource itself. Management options
obtain certain behavioral actions from
both farmer and community in the use of
land (table 2). A number of management
options can be exercised in conjunction
with acquisition options, particularly
with fee simple acquisition (purchase)
and contracts. Decision makers need to
evaluate these options in light of site
requirements, and impacts on costs,
control, and public opinion.
Fee Simple Acquisition. Through
fee simple acquisition, a community and
farmer exchange the total "bundie of
rights" ascribed to property, with the
exception of those rights reserved by
the State, such as taxation, eminent
domain, and police powers. A community
can obtain fee simple title through a
normal market exchange between buyer and
seller. If legal authority exists, a
community may exercise the right of emi-
nent domain and obtain the rights from
a reluctant seller in exchange for just
compensation.Options for the management of land
acquired in fee simple include purchase
and manage, purchase and leaseback, and
purchase and resale on condition. The
wastewater authority makes the manage-
rial and operational decisions with the
purchase and manage option. With the
purchase and leaseback option, most
managerial and operational responsibili-
ties are transferred to the lessee. The
purchase and resale on condition option
enablës the authority to buy the
required land and then resell it with
conditions attached compatible with land
treatment requirements.
Real Property Interest Other Than
Fee. Easements are the primary example
of ownership of only a part of the total
"bundie of rights" vested in land, or
real property interest other than fee.
Easements have been used for a number
of public purposes. They may be
acquired in a number of ways, through
donation, purchase, or condemnation.
Through the use of easements, a
community can acquire limited rights to
land, such as for passage for irriga-
tion pipes, ditches, or other equipment.
Easements can be used to obtain buffer
strips around irrigation sites. The
easement conditions can impose some
constraints on a farmer's managerial
decisions, but he retains primary farm
management discretion. They can be
used to compensate farmers, particularly
if erop yields decline as a result of
land treatment. A major problem with
easements is that they often provide
much less control at about the sarae
cost as fee simple purchase.
Table 2. Alternatives for Acquisition and Management of Land for Waste
Management Systems
Acquisition
OptionsManagement
Options
I. Fee Simple
II. Less than fee simple
III. Contractual agreements
—no real property1. Purchase and manage
2. Purchase and leaseback to present
owner
3. Purchase and lease to third party
4. Purchase and resale
1. Easements
1. Waste management cooperative
2. Leases
3. Contracts
101Contractual Agreements
Land owners can provide a community
access to land without the transfer of
ownershlp rights, through the use of
individual contracts or through group
contracts such as a wastewater coopera-
tive.— ' Contracts specify an agreement
of actions to be taken or refrained from
in exchange for a consideration. Most
contracts for land application in the
United States have been between a farmer
and community wastewater authority,
specifying agreements for applying
effluent to private farms or to land
owned by the city.
An alternative to two-party con-
tracts is a cooperative venture where
a number of farmers enter into a con-
tract with a city to provide land for
wastewater treatment. Such a coopera-
tive approach has not been used in the
United States, but was evaluated as a
possibility for a large scale land
treatment system (Christensen, 1975b).
The cooperative approach to the
utilization of land waste treatment has
been used successfully in Braunschweig,
Germany (Tietjen, 1973; Schaerff, 1977).
The Sewage Utilization Association of
Braunschweig was organized in 1974 to
expand the activities of a sewage farm
operating in the area since the 1890's.
The association is made up of the city
of Braunschweig, population 325,000,
476 farmers, and 26 nearby communlties.
Approximately eight million gallons per
day of raw sewage is applied to 10,400
acres of land. The total irrigation
area consists of land in 12 communities
which is divided into four districts of
comparable size which are further
divided into three rural districts and
three government districts. Policy
decisions are made by a cotnmittee of 20
farmers and four city representatives.
The cost of the system is divided—
farmers pay 25 percent and the city
75 percent. Many communities bordering
the irrigation area have joined the
association, paying annual charge for
sewer and pumping station networks.
Implications for Farmers and Communities
Each acquisition and management
option impacts differently on the
2/ A wastewater cooperative is a
collective management venture that is
an alternative to a two-party contrac-
tual agreement, such as between indi-
vidual farmers and a wastewater authority.respective goals of the farmer and
comraunity and needs to be considered in
the evaluation of land treatment systems.
Farmer's goals include income generation,
wealth accumulation, firm growth, free-
dom of decision-making and the sense of
belonging to a community (Christensen,
1975a). A community1s goals include
meeting water quality standards in an
economical manner. Both parties are
motivated by a combination of economie
and other goals. Water and nutrients
in effluent may be used to increase
agricultural production, which in turn
can increase farm incorae and reduce
community treatment costs.
Some specific implications of
acquisition and management alternatives
for farmers and communities are:
Farmers.
1. The impact of land treatment
on farmer's goals is the greatest when
fee simple title is acquired by the
wastewater authority. Easement acqui-
sition and contractual arrangements
have less impact as the farmer's
activities are influenced only by the
terms of the easement or contract.
2. With fee simple transfer of
title, the impact on the farmer is
influenced by the management option
selected by the community. If the
farmer can reraain on the land under a
tenancy or employment arrangement, the
impact would be far less severe than if
the farming operations were turned over
to a third party and existing farmers
relocated. A lease arrangement would
afford a former owner the greatest stake
in the operation, particularly if he
shares in successes as well as in fail-
ures.
3. Contractual arrangements
between the farmer and the community
should be reviewed on a regular basis.
The initial agreement should indicate
agreement over the distribution of
benefits and costs, but changes in the
underlying factors would require a
regular review of contractual terms.
Communities.
1. Fee simple acquisition gives a
community complete ownership of the
land, but at a high cost, particularly
for large systems.
2. Fee simple acquisition enables
a community to unilaterally pursue its
primary objective of wastewater treat-
ment and renovation, With other than
102fee simple acquisition, the treatment
goals of the community and the income
goals of the farmers will require more
land to simultaneously treat wastewater
and maintain agricultural production.
3. Fee simple acquisition provides
a community flexibility to use the lands
for a variety of public purposes such as
parks and open space.
4. Real property interest other
than fee may be obtained through the use
of easements. Title to the treatment
site would be retained by the current
owner and the community acquires only
those property rights necessary to carry
out the particular management practices
and controls required by the land treat-
ment system. Easements do not remove
land from the local property tax base.
5. The potential problems associ-
ated with a community buying large
tracts of land suggest that public owner-
ship of treatment sites is more viable
for smaller communities than for a large
metropolitan area. Even when land re-
mains in private ownership, the acreage
required for large wastewater volumes
suggests that the land treatment is most
applicable for smaller communities or
for treatments of only part of the total
wastewater volume from a large metro-
politan area.
Operational Experiences
A review of selected operating land
treatment systems found fee simple
acquisition and contracts the usual ways
communities acquire land (table 3). No
cases were found of easement use.
Leases are the most frequently used
management option. Leases exist to
manage farming on city owned land, as in
the case of Lubbock, Texas, and Mesa,
Arizona, as well as to govern the sale
of water for application to privately
owned land, as in the cases of Tooele,
Utah, and Dickinson, North Dakota.
No situatlon clearly emerges where
one acquisition or management option is
more likely to be used than another.
Fee simple acquisition might be expected
to be used more frequently by smaller
communities due to smaller land needs
and fewer problems associated with
community opposition. Conversely, one
might expect contracts and leases would
be more likely to be used by larger
communities. However for the communities
shown in table 3, the larger sites are
owned by the city, except for Braun-
schweig. While one of the smaller sites
is owned by the city (Mesa), most smallsites are owned by farmers who contract
with the city for water.
The fact that no clear pattern
emerges highlights the uniqueness of
each individual land application system
and the difficulty of generalizing from
one location to another. While concepts
and guidelines provide some general
assistance, the particular mix of tech-
nical, economie, legal, regulatory,
social, and political factors operating
at each site have the most influence on
management and acquisition option selec-
tion. For example, the Muskegon, Michi-
gan land treatment systems developed out
of the combination of special water
quality needs, a certain mind-set of
county officials towards establishing
the system and handling public opposi-
tion, large areas of sparsely settled,
relatively non-productive land, and
research grants. The extent to which
such combinatiions of factors would
result in other large scale, publicly
owned land treatment systems in the
United States is an unanswered question.
CONCLUSIONS
Land application of municipal
effluent is receiving considerable atten-
tion in the United States due to legis-
lative mandates and an increasing recog-
nition that the concept of resource
reuse and recovery has advantages over
that of waste treatment and disposal.
Evaluation of land treatment
systems needs to consider issues of both
economie efficiency and equity. Cost-
effective analysis seeks to insure
efficiënt resource use in wastewater
treatment. Cost-effectiveness analysis
needs an analytical framework to
identify the sensitivity of total costs
to changes in costs of the key compo-
nents. These include the costs of land,
irrigation systeras, transmission, labor,
Utilities, maintenance, and the availa-
bility of subsidies. Land application
is a very cost-effective means of pro-
viding treatment, especially for
facility sizes up to 10 million gallons
per day. When comparing land treatment
systems with alternatives, it is impor-
tant that cost comparisons be consistent
with the level of treatment provided.
Institutional analysis provides
insight to the equity issues surrounding
land application systems. The rules for
distributing the costs and benefits of
a system determine the equity of public
policy choices. This is partlcularly
103Table 3. Applications of options for land acquisition and management
LocationType of Site Size Acquisition Management
Waste (acres) Op t ion Option
Muskegon County, Michigan
Braunschweig, Germany
Bakersfield, California
Lubbock, TexasWastewater 10,600
and sludge
Wastewater 10,400
and sludge
Wastewater 2,400
Wastewater 4,000
and sludgeFee simple
title
Contract
Fee simple
Fee simple
and contract
San Angelo, Texas
Chicago, IllinoisWastewater
Sludge750
15,000Fee siraple
Fee simple
Dickinson, North Dakota
Tooele, Utah
Roswell, New Mexico
Mesa, Arizona
Camarillo, CaliforniaWastewater 250
Wastewater 550
Wastewater 200
Wastewater 160
Wastewater 475Contract
Contract
Contract
Fee simple
ContractManaged by county
Wastewater coop-
erative
Leaseback to
farmer; cash rent
Leaseback of city
owned land to
single farmer who
uses water on city
owned land, his own
land, and sells
water to other
farmers and an
electric utility.
Managed by munici-
pal employees
Managed by Metro-
politan Sanitary
District and con-
tracts let for
farm operations.
Cash lease for
water sale to
farmer
Cash lease for
water sale to
farmer
Cash lease for
water sale to
farmer
Leaseback for
cash rent
Landowner provides
land in exchange
for water and
leases land to a
third party
important when deciding how land should
be acquired and managed for land appli-
cation systems.
Alternatives exist for land acqui-
sition and management, each with differ-
ent implications for the community and
farmer. These need to be considered in
planning future land treatment systems.
A review of land treatment systems
currently operating in the United States
found considerable variation in both theacquisition and management options used.
No unique sets of conditions were found
where certain options are used exclu-
sively or more likely to be experienced
than another. Site specific technical
data, economie issues, polltical and
social environment, and the legal and
regulatory environment combine to
influence the selection of a particular
acquisition and operating option.
10ULiterature Cited
1. Christensen, Lee A. 1975a. A Framework for Evaluating Institutlonal and
Socio-Economic Issues of Land Treatment of Waste Water. Journal of
Environmental Quality, Vol. 4, No. 2.
2. Christensen, Lee A. 1975b. "Land Treatment of Municipal Wastewater: A
Cooperative Approach to Management," Journal of the Northeastern Agricultural
Economlcs Council, Vol. IV, No. 2, October
3. Commons, J. R. 1934. Institutional Economics: lts Place in Political
Economy, The MacMillan Company.
4. Environmental Protection Agency. 1977. Memo to Assistant and Regional
Administrators, EPA Policy on Land Treatment of Municipal Wastewater, October.
5. Federal Register. Tuesday April 25, 1978. Part III EPA Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, Construction Grants, Vol. 43, No. 80, pages 17690-17720.
6. Pounds, Charles E., Ronald W. Crites, and Douglas A. Griffes. 1975. Cost of
Wastewater Treatment by Land Application. Environmental Protection Agency,
Technical Report 430/9-75-003.
7. Schaerff, Erick. 1977. "Braunschweig: A Cooperative Success," Water
Spectrum, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fall.
8. Schmid, A. Allen. 1972. Analytical Institutional Economics: Challenging
Problems in the Economie Resources For a New Environment. American Journal
of Agricultural Economics, November.
9. Tietjen, C. 1973. Sewage Disposal by Sprinkler Irrigation on 10,000 Acres
of Farmland. In Soil, Science Contributes to a Quality Environment. Crops
and Soils Sci. Dep., Michigan State University, East Lansing, Mich.,
May 16-17.
10. U.S. Department of Army. 1976. Computer Assisted Procedure for the Design
and Evaluation of Wastewater Treatment Systems (CAPDET) Users Guide (Draft),
Corps of Engineers, Office of the Chief of Engineers.
11. Young, C. Edwin. 1976. The Cost of Land Application of Wastewater: A
Simulation Analysis. Tech. Bulletin No. 1555. Economie Research Service,
USDA, Washington, D.C. 20250.
12. Young, C. Edwin. 1978a. A Cost Analysis of Land Application of Wastewater.
Forthcoming Technical Bulletin, Economics, Statistics, and Cooperatives
Service, USDA, Washington, D.C.
13. Young, C. Edwin. 1978b. The CLAW Model for Estimating the Costs of Land
Application of Wastewater. Vol. 2, Proceedings of International Symposium
on Land Application of Wastewater. Hanover, New Hampshire, U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, August.
105SITE EVALUATION AND SELECTION
THE USE OF KEMOTE SENSING TECHNIQUES AND OTHER INFORMATION SOUECES IK
REGIONAL SITE SELECTION OF POTENTIAL LAND TREATMENT AREAS
Carolyn J. Merry Geologist, U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engi-
neering Laboratory, Hanover, New Hampshire, USA
ABSTRACT
Landsat, Skylab S190A Multispectral
Photographic Camera, and Skylab S19OB
Earth Terrain Camera satellite data
products vere used to préparé land use
maps for regional site selection of po-
tential land treatment areas. The
satellite data products were photograph-
ically enlarged to scales of 1:500,000
and 1:250,000 to facilitate the land use
mapping. Interpretation of tonal and
textural characteristics on the photo-
graphy corresponded to vegetation,
urban and agricultural land use cate-
gories. Color and color infrared trans-
parencies augmented the land use mapping,
which was accomplished on black and white
photographic prints.
The Landsat and Skylab S190A photo-
graphic data products were useful for
rapid regional land use surveys at the
level I classification as described in
the U.S. Geological Survey national
land use and land cover classification
system. The Landsat land use map took
two hours to préparé and the Skylab
S190A map required four hours. A
Landsat image covers an area of 3^,225
km2 (13,225 mi2) with a ground resolu-
tion of 70 m (230 ft), whereas a Skylab
S190A photograph covers 26,569 ton2
(10,201 mi2) with a resolution of 25 m
(82 ft). The S190A land use map was
more detailed than the Landsat raap due
primarily to the increased resolution
and scale.
The resolution of the Skylab S190B
photography was sufficient to préparé a
detailed land use map at the level I and
II classifications. Although the mapping
time increased to eight hours, the S190Bmap was considerably more detailed. An
S190B photograph covers an area of
11,881 km2 (k,62h mi2) with a resolution
of 12.5 m (1+1 ft).
The resolution (5 m [16 ft]) and
scale (1:120,000 or 1:130,000) of NASA
high-altitude aircraft photography
provided for detailed level I, II and
III land use mapping. The NASA high-
altitude aircraft photography with an
areal coverage of 729 or 900 km2 (289
or 32li mi2) can be effectively used in
mapping land use for potential land
treatment sites within a certain radius
of existing wastewater treatment plants.
Land use data obtained from the
satellite and aircraft data products can
be combined with readily available
information on regional and site-specific
characteristics of soils, geology and
topography to evaluate land treatment
potential. Potential land treatment
sites can be identified for future
consideratïon in detailed site-specific
design studies.
INTRODUCTION
Regional site characterization of
an area is required to provide the basic
information necessary to make a prelim-
inary assessment of land treatment
potential Li], The important physical
regional features addressed in this paper
include land use, soils, geology and
topography.
Corps of Engineers attendees at
land treatment training courses pre-
sented during the past three years have
indicated a critical need for techniques,
procedures and methodologies for assess-
ing regional site characteristics in the
107evaluation of land treatment potential.
Since the launch of the Landsat-1 satel-
lite and the Skylab satellite mission,
satellite data products have been readily
available for public use. In addition,
NASA high-altitude aircraft photography
is available for many areas of the
United States.
In many instances the resolution of
these satellite and aircraft data prod-
ucts is adequate for identification of
land use and various parameters related
to hydrology, geology and soils. A
methodology using state-of-the-art
photointerpretation techniques is dis-
cussed for mapping regional land use in-
formation to be used in the evaluation
of land treatment potential.
The objective of this paper is to
demonstrate the use of satellite and
aircraft data products in the mapping of
regional land use. In addition, avail-
able sources for hydrologie, geologie,
soils and topographic information are
discussed for use in evaluating sites
for land treatment potential. The
Metropolitan Region of Nashville, Ten-
nes see, Urban Study Area was selected as
the case example for demonstrating the
use of satellite data products in re-
gional site selection (Fig. l). The
Phase One report entitled "Feasibility
of Land Application of Wastewater in the
Metropolitan Region of Nashville, Ten-
nessee, Urban Study Area" has recently
been published [2J. In addition, the
Sacramento, California, area was select-
ed to demonstrate the use of NASA high-
altitude aircraft photography for mapping
detailed land use. These study areas
provided an opportunity to demonstrate
remote sensing techniques in current
urban study programs.
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SATELLITE AND
AIRCRAFT DATA PRODUCTS
Landsat
The Landsat-1 satellite (formerly
called ERTS-1), launched on 23 July
1972, provides repetitive coverage of
the earth every 18 days by raeans of the
multispectral scanner (MSS) system. The
satellite operates in a circular, sun-
syncïironous, near-polar orbit at an
altitude of approximately 920 km (572
mi) [3]. It circles the earth every 103
minutes, completing approximately 14
orbits each day [3].A black and white photographic data
product can be processed from the MSS and
covers an area of approximately 3*+5225
km2 (13,225 xdz) in the following spec-
tral regions: band h (0.5-0.6 vm),
band 5 (0.6-0.7 ym), band 6 (0.7-0.8 ym)
and band 7 (0.8-1.1 ym). The multi-
spectral data can also be obtained in
digital form on computer-compatible
tapes (CCTs) [3].
Landsat-2, launched on 22 January
1975 5 provides the same lo-day repeti-
tive coverage. Landsat-2 was launched
so that its orbit followed the track of
Landsat-1 at a delay of nine days. In
February 1977 the sequence changed to a
6-12 day coverage so that Landsat-1
followed Landsat-2 by 6 days and Landsat-
2 followed Landsat-1 by 12 days. The
Landsat-1 satellite operations termin-
ated on l6 January 1978. Landsat-3 was
launched on 5 March 1978. Repetitive
coverage on a 9-day basis now oecurs
between the Landsat-2 and Landsat-3
satellites.
Skylab
The Skylab satellite program con-
sisted of three separate missions—
Skylab-2 (25 May-22 June 1973), Skylab-3
(28 July-25 September 1973) and Skylab-U
(16 November 1973-8 February 197^). The
satellite was launched with a 50-degree
inclination to the equator so that the
theoretical coverage was limited to an
area 50 degrees north and south of the
equator [k\. The Skylab satellite com-
pleted an orbit in 93 minutes and thus
the ground track was repeated every five
days 1.1+]. The coverage along the ground
track was not entirely complete due to
weather conditions and the astronauts'
schedules. The satellite, at a nominal
altitude of U35 km (270 mi), provided
visible and near-infrared photographic
coverage using the S190A Multispectral
Photographic Camera and the S190B Earth
Terrain Camera [U],
The S190A camera provided a ground
coverage of 26,569 km2 (10,201 mi5)
for six wavelength bands taken simultan-
eously: 0.5-0.6 ym and 0.6-0.7 ym
(Film type SO-022, Panatomic-X B&W),
0.7-0.8 ym and 0.8-0.9 ym (Film type EK
2U2U, B&W infrared), O.U-O.T ym (hi-
resolution color) and 0.50-0.88 \im
(color infrared) [k]. The S190B camera
provided a ground coverage of 11,881 km2
(h,62k mi2) for a selected wavelength
band from the following spectral re-
gions: O.U-0.7 ym (Film type SO-Oi+2,
hi-resolution color), 0.5-0.7 ym (Film
10887*
36'
-N-
20 «tm
lOmilis36°
87'
Figure 1. Loeation map of the Metropolitan Region of Nashville,
Tennessee, Urban Study Area.
type EK 3klk, hi-definition B&w) and
0.50-0.88 ym (Film type EK 3^3, infra-
red color or S0-131, hi-resolution film
infrared color) [k].
NASA Aircraft
NASA high-altitude aircraft photo-
graphy is currently available for many
areas of the United States. There are
two NASA aircraft and camera systems
which are normally used: an RB-57 air-
craft using RC-8 cameras and a U-2 air-
craft with an RC-10 camera. Both camera
systems provide color infrared photo-
graphy (Film type 2^1+3, 0.51-0.90 urn) or
color film (Film type 2kk^ or S0-39T,
O.H-0.7 ym) in a 9-inch format. The U-2
photography is acquired at an altitude
of 19,800 m (65,000 ft). The scale of
the photography is 1:130,000. The RB-57
photography is acquired at an altitude
of 18,300 m (60,000 ft), resulting in a
scale of 1:120,000. Ground coverage for
the U-2 and RB-57 photography is 900 km2
(.32U mi2) and 729 km2 (289 mi2), re-
spectively.Resolution and Scale
The general film characteristics of
the Landsat, Skyla"b and NASA high-
altitude aircraft photography are sum-
marized in Table 1 [5]. Table 2 shows
the minimum size of detectatle objects
(ground resolution) which was determined
"by inspecting the NASA data products and
comparing the object to ground measure-
ments L5Ï. The smallest features that
can "be recognized on the Landsat imagery
are linear features such as roads,
bridges, etc. about 70 m (230 ft) in
width that contrast sharply with the
surrounding terrain [6], The minimum
size of circular or oblate objects
detectable on the Skylab S190A photog-
raphy is about U,900 m2 (l.2 acres),
whereas on the Landsat imagery the
minimum size is about 2it,300 m2 (6
acres) 15].
109Table 1. Film characteristics of the NASA data products Lmodified from 5]-
Data product
Landsat Multispectral
Scanner (0.6-0.7 ym
S190A Multispectral
Photographic Camera
10.6-0.7 yin)
S190B Earth Terrain
Camera (CIR 31+1+3)
RB-57 RC-8 Camera
(CIR 21+1+3)
U-2 RC-10 Camera
(CIRTransparency
dimension
(cm) (in.)
18.6
5.7
11.1+
22.9
22.97-3
2.25
U.5
9-0
9.0Scale
1:1,000,000
1:2,850,000
1:950,000
1:120,000
1:130,000Estimated
ground
coverage
(km) (mi)
185 115
163 101
109 60
27 17
30 18Area
(km2) (mi2)
3U
26
11,225
,569
,881
729
90013,225
10,201
l+,62l+
289
321+
Table 2. Ground resolution of the NASA data products [5].
Data product
Landsat
S190A
S190B
RB-57
APPR0ACH
Acquisition and
ProductsLinear features, width
(m) (ft)Circular features, area
(m2) (acre)
70
25
12.5
5
Selection of Data230
82
1+1
162l+,300
l+,900
3,200
ÖQO6.0
1.2
0.8
0.1
A listing of all available Landsat
imagery can be requested from the NASA
Browse Facility*. In addition, a com-
puter search of all available Landsat,
Skylab S190A and S190B photography,
NASA high-altitude aircraft photography
and low-altitude aerial mapping photog-
raphy can be requested from the EROS
Data Center**. Black and white or color
paper prints or film transparencies of
these data products can be purchased
either from the EROS Data Center or the
Aerial Photography Field Office***.
The final selection of satellite
and aircraft photographs should be based
on the cloud cover, date of acquisition
and the type of information required.
*Address: NASA Goddard Space Flight
Center, Greenbelt Rd., Greenbelt, MD
20771
**Address: U.S. Geological Survey,
Sioux Falls, SD 57198
***Address: U.S. Dept. of Agriculture,
Agricultural Stabilization and Conserva-
tion Service, 2222 West 2300 South, P.O.
Box 30010, Salt Lake City, UT «1+125The percentage of cloud cover should be
at a minimum so that mapping can be
easily accomplished. The optimum season
for photographic coverage is dependent
on the type of map information required.
The photography should be fairly recent
as current information is necessary.
Land Use Mapping
The land use classification scheme
recommended for the land use mapping has
been modified from the U.S. Geological
Survey Land Use Classification System
[7]. This scheme uses the best criteria
of existing land use classification
systems to the extent that they are
amenable for use with remote sensing
data products. The open-ended concept
presented by Anderson can be used by
regional, state and local agencies to
develop detailed land use classification
systems for compatibility vith the
national system. Table 3 shows the land
use classification scheme used during
the land use mapping.
Land use maps vere prepared from
black and -white contact prints of a
Landsat MSS band 5 and 7 image at a
scale of 1:500,000 and of an S190A color
infrared (0.50-0.88 urn) photograph and
S190B color (O.U-0.7 um) photograph at a
110Table 3- Land use classification sys-
tem [modified from T]-
Level I Level II
U. Urban and 1. Residential
built-up 2. Commercial and
land services
3. Industrial
h. Extractive
5- Transportation,
communication and
utilities
6. Institutional
7- Strip and clus-
tered settlement
8. Mixed
9. Open and other
A. Agricultural 1. Cropland and
land pasture
2. Orchards
F. Forest land
W. Water
N. Nonforested
wetlands
B. Barren land1. Mixed
1. Streams and water-
ways
2. Lakes
3- Reservoirs
1. Vegetated
2. Bare
scale of 1:250,000. These -wavelength
bands were selected because the land use
•was prominently displayed for the de-
fined spectral regions. Black and white
photographs were contrast-enhanced
photographically to portray the maximum
number of grey tones. During the
mapping, reference was made to the
original color and color infrared trans-
parencies.
The MSS band 5 Landsat photomosaic
and land use map of the Nashville, Ten-
nessee, area are shown in Figure 2. The
Landsat imagery can be enlarged to
scales of 1:500,000 and 1:250,000 to map
land use on a regional basis. The level
I land use units, such as forest, agri-
cultural, and urban and built-up land,
can be easily differentiated on the MSS
band 5 image. However, the water cate-
gory was mapped using MSS band 7 because
water appears black and contrasts
sharply with the surrounding terrain in
the near infrared band.
The tones, textures and patterns
evident on the black and white imagery
were the interpretation factors used in
the land use mapping. The black tones
on MSS band 7 indicate water. The
Cumberland River and J. Percy Priest
Reservoir are the two main water bodiesand smaller tributary streams and lakes
can also be seen.
The dark grey tones on the MSS band
5 image are the forest areas. The agri-
cultural land use unit shows a character-
istic rectangular pattern indicating
cropland, pasture and row crops and
exhibits grey and white tones. Smaller
parcels of forest land in the agricul-
tural areas are characterized by pre-
dominantly light grey tones.
The urban and "built-up land use
unit is composed of predominantly white
tones on the photography. Interstate
highways serving the Nashville area can
be easily delineated on the MSS band 5
image.
A potential advantage in using
Landsat imagery is its repetitive cov-
erage on a seasonal and annual basis.
This can enable more efficiënt updating
of land use data and identification of
areas where changes in land use are
occurring [8], Evaluation of maps
prepared from Landsat data in other
studies indicates that all level I land
use categories can be correctly identi-
fied to an accuracy exceeding 90% [<3]-
The Skylab S190A photomosaic and
land use map of the Nashville, Tennes-
see, area are shown in Figure 3. The
same photointerpretation techniques of
mapping tones and textures on the Land-
sat imagery were applied to the S190A
photograph. Reference was often made to
the color infrared transparency product
for ease in discriminating land use. In
general, more detail was observed on the
S190A photography at the mapping scale
of 1:250,000.
Level II land use units could be
identified on the S190A photograph,
particularly in the urban areas. Air-
ports, secondary roads, commercial com-
plexes and housing density were more
easily discerned than on the Landsat
image.
The Skylab S190B photomosaic and
land use map of the Nashville, Tennes-
see, area are shown in Figure h.
Again, photointerpretation techniques
used in the Landsat and S190A land use
mapping were employed. The greatest
detail of all the satellite data prod-
ucts was observed on the S190B photog-
raphy at the mapping scale of 1:250,000.
The level I and II units observed on the
S190B photography were more detailed
than on the S190A photograph.
NASA high-altitude aircraft photog-
raphy was not available for the Nash-
ville, Tennessee, area. Therefore, the
Sacramento, California, area, where a
111U Urbon
A Agriculture
F Forest
Pigure 2. Landsat-2 photomosaic (MSS band 5) and land use map of the Nashville,
Tennessee, area (NASA scène IDs 2U>+3-15^2 and 2586-153UU; acquired
9 April and 30 August 1916, respectively).
similar wastewater management study had
been conducted, was selected to illus-
trate the use of NASA high-altitude
alrcraft photography in the mapping of
potential land treatment sites. U-2
color infrared photography (scale
1:130,000) acquired in July 1972 utiliz-
ing an RC-10 camera was used as a data
base to define potential land treatment
sites (Fig. 5) [10]. Potential land
treatment sites were evaluated within a
1.6-km (l-mi) radius of existing waste-
water treatment plants.
It can "be seen from Figure 5 that
very detailed land use mapping can be
accomplished using high-altitude air-
craft photography. Fallow and vegetated
agricultural land can be easily mapped
using the original color infrared photo-
graphic product as the fallow lands
appear blue and the vegetated areas
appear bright red. Very detailed map-
ping of the urban and built-up land use
units can be made and the rural areahousing pattems can be delineated.
Land treatment area requirements for an
8,63^ m3/yr (7 acre-ft/yr) application
rate were determined based on general
soil associations and associated soil
permeability rates [10]. Preliminary
consideration of the land use mapped
from high-altitude aircraft photography
and soils information indicated that
potential land areas were available for
13 out of 18 wastewater treatment plants
[10]. Therefore, it was determined that
land treatment could be used to upgrade
these existing wastewater treatment
plants in the Sacramento area as an
alternative to conventional treatment
[10].
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The time involved in mapping the
ten-county area of 12,200 km* (i+,700
mi2) surrounding Nashville for the
112communicat ion «Jn<(
utllitiesu»
A, Agriculture-cfoptefJd and posture
W, Water~str««ft*t «nd woterways
W, Water-resvrvotrë
Figure 3. Skylato S190A photomosaic and land use map of the Nashville, Tennessee,
area [NASA Scène IDs 51-062 and 51-063 (acquired 30 November 1973);
09-151 and 09-152 (acquired 9 June 1973)].
Landsat image was approximately two
hours. The Landsat map was the least
detailed of the maps prepared, but can
"be used effectively for mapping regional
land use at a resolution of 70 m (230
ft). The Landsat imagery provides for
a large areal coverage of 3^,225 km2
(13,225 mi2) on a repetitive basis.
The Landsat map can toe used to
identify where land treatment potentïal
would be low, moderate or high. The
urban and built-up land, nonforested
wetlands and barren land use units can
be considered as low potential areas for
land treatment. The forest land would
be considered as moderate potential for
land treatment. The agricultural land
can be considered as the highest poten-
tial for land treatment.
The S190A map took four hours to
complete and the land use map was sig-nificantly better than the Landsat map.
An area of 26,569 km2 (10,201 mi2) can be
readily screened for potential land
treatment sites. In addition, more
detailed delineation of moderate or high
potential areas can be accomplished
using the S190A photography.
The S190B map took approximately
eight hours and was the most detailed of
all the satellite land use maps. Al-
though the S190B map took the longest
time to préparé, it provided the most
information on land use. More detailed
maps of selected moderate and high
potential land treatment areas, pre-
viously defined toy the Landsat and S190A
land use maps, can be accomplished using
the S190B photography. A Skylab S190B
photograph covers an area of ll,88l km2
(U,62U mi^) and has a resolution of
12.5 m (Hl ft).
113K-J
^
A.
F,
W,Urban-tronsponoHonf
comrmiracatton.utiüties
Urbafi-tnsHtutional •
Urban* mixed
Agriculture-cropland ond pasfurö
Forest-m»x«d
Water-streoms and watorways
Water-reservoirs
Figure h. Skylab S190B photomosaic and land use map of the Nashville, Tennessee,
[NASA Scène IDs 90-031* and 90-036 (acquired 30 November 1073)area
81-198, 81-199 and 81-200 (acquired 9 June 1973).
Available NASA high-altitude air-
craft photography can be used for de~
tailed level I, II and III* land use
classification purposes. In addition,
medium- and low-altitude photography
can be obtained from the EROS Data
Center, USDA-ASCS, U.S. Forest Service,
Bureau of Land Management anti local Soil
Conservation Service offices for mapping
land use in a site-specific analysis of
land treatment.
The land use maps prepared from
satellite and aircraft data products can
*Level III land use units are more de-
tailed delineations of level II land
use categories.be used in conjunction with other Infor-
mation to evaluate land treatment poten-
tial. Some of the necessary data in-
clude information on soils, geology and
topography.
Other Available Information for Site
Evaluation of Land Treatment
Soils. A soil association map can
provide sufficient information on phys-
ical and hydraulic soil characteristics
in the evaluation of soils for potential
land treatment. A soil association
comprises one or more major soil series
and at least one minor soil series [il].
When evaluating soil association
maps, the physical and hydraulic charac-
teristics of a soil vhich should "be con-
sidered in a regional analysis are:
llUFigure 5. NASA U-2 high-altitude aircraft photography of the Sacramento, Cali-
fornia, area (Scène ID Uag 101+5 153.22 1973; acquired 2T July 1972).
Each circle represents a 1.6-ton (l-mi) radius surrounding existing
wasteva-ter treatment plants.
depth of soil to bedrock, soil perme-
ability and slope. Soil series infor-
mation within the soil association can
be used in a rating process for determ-
ining the o-verall land treatment poten-
tial of the soil association [2].
For site-specific analyses detailed
soil surveys have "been published for
many counties of the United States and
can "be obtained from the U.S. Department
of Agriculture-Soil Conservation Service
[12]. In addition, detailed soil sur-
veys are available for many portions of
foreign countries. Soil surveys containdetailed and general soils maps, general
Information about the agriculture and
climate of the area, descriptions of
each soil, percent slopes occurring
within a soil unit, discussion on soil
formation and classification, and lat>-
oratory data on physical and chemical
characteristics of soils. Soil surveys
published since 1957 are printed on a
photomosaic "base at scales of 1:2^,000,
1:20,000 or l:15,8Uo and provide soil
interpretation keys which are usefu.1 for
engineering purposes [12].
115During the last several years
computer processing of Landsat digital
data has been used in the preparation of
regional soils maps [13, ik]. These
soils maps could be combined with ancil-
lary digitized information on topog-
raphy, geology, vegetation, land use and
physiographic information for one, two
or more passes to provide comprehensive
information on environmental conditions
[8].
Another publication available from
the U.S. Department of Agriculture con-
tains a map of major land resource areas
[15]• The dominant physical character-
istics of each land resource region and
area are described briefly in terms of
land use, elevation, topography, climate,
water and soils [15]. This map would
provide valuable information on the
regional geographic and physical setting
of an area.
Geology. The geology of an area is
another important factor for regional
evaluation of potential land treatment
sites. Various geologie maps are avail-
able to obtain regional information on
geology.
A Geologie Map of the United States
(scale 1:2,500,000) is available with
explanatory texts to describe the Pre-
cambrian, Paleozoic and Mesozoic rocks
[16, 17, 18]. A Glacial Map of the
United States East of the Rocky Moun-
tains (scale 1:1,750,000) can be used
for interpreting glacial deposits [19].
A Tectonics Map of North America (scale
1:5,000,000) and the Tectonic Map of the
United States (scale 1:2,500,000) can "be
used in geologie interpretation of
lineaments and faults [20, 2l].
Geologie maps can be obtained for
each state from the U.S. Geological
Survey* or the respective State Geologi-
cal Survey. A geologie map index avail-
able for each state indicates the areas
for which geologie maps have "been pub-
lished. A bedrock and/or surficial
geology map at a scale of 1:500,000 is
available for many states for use in
evaluating regional geology.
The U.S. Geological Survey has pub-
lished a list of geologie and water-
supply reports and maps for each state
which are related to the geology, min-
eral and water resources of an individ-
ual state. This publication contains a
*Address: Branch of Distribution, 1200
So. East St., Arlington, VA 22202list of available bedrock and/or sur-
ficial geologie quadrangle maps (scale
l:2U,000).
During the last few years Landsat,
Skylab and aircraft photography have
been used in a number of studies for
geomorphic interpretation of the land-
scape [22, 23, 2k, 25, 26, 27], Satel-
lite and aircraft photographs can be
used as a source of geologie information
for engineering purposes. This geologie
information would include: Identifica-
tion and location of soil materials,
both granular and clay and clayey silt
soils; analysis of structural geology;
and location of sample areas for de-
tailed investigation of soil and rock
materials [2J], Interpretations of
surficial materials and bedroclc can be
made based on diagnostic photographic
characteristics such as drainage charac-
teristics, surface expression of the
soil materials or soil patterns, identi-
fication of landforms, erosional charac-
teristics, photographic tones and colors,
and the distribution and type of vegeta-
tion [27]. Satellite and aircraft
photographs also provide significant
information on the location of faults
and lineaments as some of these struc-
tural trends are recognized from subtle
expressions on photographs, but are
identified only with difficulty on the
ground [27].
Topography. Por regional analysis
combined slope categories can be used to
indicate generalized topographic charac-
teristics of an area. Various regional
topographic maps (1:1,000,000, 1:500,000
and 1:250,000) and other special maps
and sheets can be obtained for each
state from the U.S. Geological Survey.
Also, 7 l/2-minute (scale 1:2^4,000), 15-
minute (scale 1:62,500) and 30-minute
(1:125,000) quadrangle map series are
available for each state. The contour
intervals of these maps vary according
to the map scale and the terrain relief.
A state index of topographic maps indi-
cates the extent of map coverage and the
availability of these maps.
In addition, limited coverage of
orthophotoquad maps of the United States
are available from the U.S. Geological
Survey. An orthophotograph is a map
showing a photograph overprinted onto a
Standard topographic quadrangle map.
These maps can be quite useful if photo-
graphic coverage is limited for an area.
116SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Landsat and Skylab photographic
data products were used in a demonstra-
tion of regional site selection tech-
niques for mapping land use in the
Nashville, Tennessee, area. Land use
maps were prepared using black and white
photographic prints at a scale of
1:500,000 for the Landsat imagery and
1:250,000 for the Skylab S190A and S19-0B
photography.
The resolution, large areal coverage
and repetitive coverage of the Landsat
imagery can provide regional level I land
use surveys with minimal mapping time.
It required two hours to map over 12,200
km2 (U,TOO km2) in the Nashville, Ten-
nessee, area. Areas with a resolution
of 70 m (230 ft) could be rapidly scanned
within the 3^,225 ^ (13,225 mi2) areal
coverage of a Landsat image. Large
areas, such as the urban and built-up
land, could be eliminated and considered
as low potential areas for land treat-
ment. The Landsat land use map can also
be used to identify land areas, such as
agricultural and forest land, where land
treatment potential would be moderate or
high.
The Skylab S19-0A multispectral
photography can provide detailed level I
and II land use maps. The mapping time
for the S190A land use map of the Nash-
ville, Tennessee, area was four hours;
but the S190A map provided for more de-
tailed delineation of the level I land
use categories. Areas could be rapidly
evaluated within the 26,569 km2 (10,201
mi2) areal coverage at a resolution of
25 m (82 ft) of an S190A photograph.
The Skylab S190B photography pro-
vided for more detailed level I and II
land use mapping. The mapping time of
the S190B land use map increased to
eight hours, but the map was more de-
tailed than the Landsat and S190A maps.
The Skylab S190B photography can be used
for more detailed delineation of moder-
ate and high potential land treatment
areas previously defined using the
Landsat and S190A photography. The
S190B land use map can be used to eval-
uate land areas to an accuracy of 12.5 m
(Ui ft) within a ll,88l ton2 (U,62H mi2)
areal coverage of an S190B photograph.
More detailed Information can be
observed from the NASA high-altitude
aircraft photography. The large scale
photography (scale 1:120,000 and
1:130,000) can be used for detailed land
use mapping within an area of 729 or 900km2 (289 or 32U mi2) at a resolution of
approximately 5 m (16 ft). Potential
land treatment sites, which can be
previously identified on an area-wide
basis using the satellite photography,
can be mapped in more detail using the
NASA high-altitude aircraft photography.
The potential sites can then be evalu-
ated in conjunction with other informa-
tion sources for the slow infiltration,
rapid infiltration and overland flow
modes of land treatment.
The land use information mapped
from satellite and aircraft photographic
products can be combined with readily
available information on regional and
site-specific soils, geology and topog-
raphy. Using geomorphic interpretation
of the photographs and map overlays of
soils, geology and topography, potential
land treatment sites can be identified
for future consideration in site-specif-
ic design studies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The study was funded by the Direct-
orate of Civil Works, Office, Chief of
Engineers. Appreciation is extended to
the Urban Studies Branch, Nashville Dis-
trict, Corps of Engineers, as the study
area selected for application of the
regional site selection techniques was
part of the wastewater management compon-
ent of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers1
Metropolitan Region of Nashville, Ten-
nessee, Urban Study Area.
REFERENCES
[l] U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and U.S.
Department of Agriculture (1977) Process
Design Manual for Land Treatment of Mu-
nicipal Wastewater, EPA 625/1-77-OO8
(COE EM 1110-1-501).
[2] Metcalf and Eddy, Inc. (1978) Feasi-
bility of Land Treatment of Wastewater
in the Metropolitan Segion of Nashville,
Tennessee Urban Study Area, Final Report
prepared for the Nashville District,
Corps of Engineers, under Contract No.
DACW62-77-C-0123, 3*a p.
[3] NASA (1976) Landsat Data Users Hand-
book, Document No. 76SDSU258, NASA
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt,
Maryland.
117[1+] NASA (197*0 Skylab Earth Resources
Data Catalog, JSC 09016, NASA Lyndon B.
Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas,
U.S. Government Printing Office: Wash-
inton, D.C-, 359 p.
[5] McKim, H.L., L.W. Gatto, C.J. Merry,
D.M. Anderson and T.L. Marlar (1975)
Land Use/Vegetation Mapping in Reservoir
Management—Merrimack River Basin, CRREL
Special Report 233, 21 p.
[6] McKim, H.L., T.L. Marlar and D.M.
Anderson (1972) The Use of ERTS-1 Imagery
in the National Program for the Inspec-
tion of Dams, CRREL Special Report 183,
20 p.
[j] Anderson, J.R., E.E. Hardy, J-T.
Roach and R.E. Witmer (1976) A Land Use
and Land Cover Classification System for
Use with Remote Sensor Data, U.S. Geo-
logical Survey Professional Paper 96I+,
U.S. Government Printing Office: Wash-
ington, D.C., 28 p.
[8] Williams, R.S. and W.D. Carter
[editors] (1976) ERTS-1, A New Window on
our Planet, U.S. Geological Survey Pro-
fessional Paper 929» U.S. Government
Printing Office: Washington, D.C., 362
P-
[9] Short, N.M., P.D. Lowman, Jr., S.C.
Freden and W.A. Finch, Jr. (1976) Mis-
sion to Earth: Landsat Views the World,
NASA SP 360, U.S. Government Printing
Office: Washington, D.C. , 1+59 p.
[10] U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (1975)
A Study of the Feasibility of Land
Treatment for Wastewater Management in
the Sacramento Area, Phase II Report for
the National Science Foundation, 232 p.
[il] U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service (1975) Soil
Taxonomy, A Basic System of Soil Classi-
fication for Making and Interpreting
Soil Surveys, Agricultural Handbook No.
1+36, U.S. Government Printing Office:
Washington, D.C., 751* p.
[12] U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service (1978) List of
Published Soil Surveys, ik p.
[13] Weismuller, R.A., I.D. Persinger
and O.L. Montgomery (1977) Soil Inven-
tory from Digital Analysis of Satellite
Scanner and Topographic Data, Journal of
the Soil Science Society of America,
Vol. 1*1, pp. 1166-1070.[ik] Kirscher, F.R., H.R. Sinclair and
R.A. Weismuller (1977) Quantification of
Soil Mapping "by Digital Analysis of
Landsat Data, in Proceedings of the
Eleventh International Symposium on
Remote Sensing of Environment, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, 25-29 April, pp. 1567-
1573.
[15] Austin, M.E. (1972) Land Resource
Regions and Major Land Resource Areas of
the United States, Agricultural Handbook
296, U.S. Department of Agriculture-Soil
Conservation Service, U.S. Government
Printing Office: Washington, D.C., 82
P-
[16] King, P.B. and H.M. Beikman (197I+)
Explanatory Text to Accompany the Geo-
logie Map of the United States, U.S.
Geological Survey Professional Paper
901, U.S. Government Printing Office:
Washington, D.C., 1+0 p.
[17] King, P.B. (1976) Precambrian
Geology of the United States; An Explan-
atory Text to Accompany the Geologie Map
of the United States, U.S. Geological
Survey Professional Paper 902, U.S.
Government Printing Office: Washington,
D.C., 85 p.
[18] King, P.B. and H.M. Beikman (1976)
The Paleozoic and Mesozoic Rocks; A Dis-
cus si on to Accompany the Geologie Map of
the United States, U.S. Geological
Survey Professional Paper 903, U.S.
Government Printing Office: Washington,
D.C., 76 p.
[19] Geological Society of America
(1959) Glacial Map of the United States,
Scale 1:1,750,000, Geological Society of
America: Nev York, New York.
[20] King, P.B. (1969) The Tectonics of
North America—A Discussion to Accompany
the Tectonic Map of North America, Scale
1:5,000,000, U.S. Geological Survey Pro-
fessional Paper 628, U.S. Government
Printing Office: Washington, D.C., 95 p.
[2l] U.S. Geological Survey and American
Association of Petroleum Geologists
(1962) Tectonic Map of the United States,
Scale 1:2,500,000.
[22] Drake, B. and R.K. Vincent (1976)
Geologie Interpretation of Landsat-1
Imagery of the Greater Part of the
Michigan Basin, in Proceedings of the
Tenth International Symposium on Remote
Sensing of Environment, Ann Arbor, Michi-
gan, 6-10 October, pp. 933-91+8.
118[23] Goébel, J.E. (1977) Quatemary Geo-
logie Map of Minnesota, in Proceedings
of the Eleventh International Symposium
on Remote Bensing of Environment, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, 25-29 April, pp. 791-79**.
[2U] Sinnock, S., W.N. Melhorn and O.L.
Montgomery (197*0 Machine-Aided Analysis
of Land Use-Landform Relations from
ERTS-1 MSS Imagery, Sand Hills Region,
Nebraska, in Remote Sensing of Earth
Resources, Vol. III, The University of
Tennessee: Tullahoma, Tennessee, pp.
503-526.
[25] Frater, J.B. and W.N. Melhorn (1975)
Geomorphic Interpretation of Skylab
Photography Collected Over the Nevada
Portion of the Great Basin, in Remote
Sensing of Earth Resources, Vol. IV, The
University of Tennessee: Tullahoma,
Tennessee, pp. 21-U2.
[26] McKim, H.L. and C.J. Merry (1975)
Use of Remote Sensing to Quantify Con-
struction Material and to Define Geolog-
ie Lineations, Dickey-Lincoln School
Lakes Project, Maine, Final Report
submitted to the New England Division,
Corps of Engineers, Foundations and
Materials Branch, CRREL Special Report
2*+2, Pt. 1 and 2, 26 p.
[27] Ray, R.G. (1960) Aerial Photographs
in Geologie Interpretation and Mapping,
U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper
373, U.S. Government Printing Office:
Washington, D. C, 230 p.
119LAND TREATMENT
MATHEMATICA!. MODELING
REVIEW OF PHYSICAL/CHEMICAL/BIOLOGICAL MODELS
FOR PREDICTION OF PKRCOLATE WATER QUALITY
S. C. Gupta, USDA-SEA-FR, University o£ Minnesota, St. Paul, MN
M. J, Shaffer, USDI-Bureau of Reclamation-Engr. & Res. Ctr., Denver, CO
W. E. Larson, USDA-SEA-FR, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN
Physical/chemical/biological models
for quality and quantity of drainage
water, and thus input for optiraal design
and management of land treatment systems
are reviewed.
Differences and similarities among
various models are pointed out in terms
of: (a) type of flow, (b) initial and
boundary conditions, (c) presence of
plant roots, (d) type of salt flow mech-
anisms, (e) initial condition of salt
flow models, and (f) various interactions
with soil particles or with other salts
in solution. The models can be clasai-
fied into: (a) analytical solutions,
(b) numerlcal solutions, or (c) a combi-
nation of analytical and numerical solu-
tions.
An illustration of predicted water
quality using the Bureau of Reclamation's
combination type model versus measured
values from an experiment at Apple Valley,
Minnesota, is included. The computed
versus measured quantity and quality of
drain water on a seasonal basis appears
good.
INTRODUCTION
Land application of wastewater
provides a means of returning good qual-
ity water to its natural cycle while also
benefitting agriculture. However, proper
application of wastewater coupled with
wise soil-crop management decision is
essential. Over or under application of
wastewater can dramatically affect the
nutriënt balance in soil, nutriënt avail-
ability to plants, and thus the quality
of wastewater as it passes through anirrigation cycle. The principal factors
for consideration in salt balance in
soils are evaporation, transpiration,
ion exchange, leaching, and precipita-
tion of salts. These processes, in turn,
are influenced by the quality and quan-
tity of applied water, physical and
chemical characteristics of the soil,
types of crops, method of water applica-
tion, type of drainage, climatic condi-
tions, and biochemical reactions. Most
of the models that describe the simul-
taneous flow of salt and water are based
on the principles describing the above
processes. These models offer the pos-
sibility of quickly assessing the long-
term effects of wastewater application
schemes on salt balance in soil and the
quality of percolate water.
The objective of the paper is to
review the physical/chemical/biological
models that can provide the best avail-
able automated procedure for predicting
the quality of percolate water and thus
input for optimal design and management
of land treatment systems. Because of
the space limitation, the review in this
paper is not comprehensive and only
important features of each model are
presented. Although duplication is
unavoidable, this review article will
supplement some of the earlier reviews,
e.g., Gardner (1965), Frissel and
Poelstra (1967), Biggar and Nielsen
(1967), and Boast (1973).
Table 1 summarizes some of the salt
and water flow models discussed in the
literature. Differences and similari-
ties among various models are pointed
out in terms of: (a) type of flow,
(b) initial and boundary conditions,
121Table 1. Review of available salt and water flow Bodels.
roAuthors/Tear
1. Wilson (1940)
2. DeVault (1943)
3. Glueckauf (1949)
4. Lapidus 6 Aaundson (1952)
5. Ribble & Davis (1955)
6. Molen (1956)
7. Bower et al. (1957)
8. Gardner & Brooka (1957)
9. Nielsen & Biggar (1962)
10. Biggar & Nielsen (1963)
11. Elrick et al. (1966)
12. Cho (1971)
13. Hisra et al. (1974)
14. Skopp & Warrick (1974)
15. Cassel et al. (1975)
16. van Genuchten & Wierenga (1976)
17. Brealer (1967)
18. Brealer & Hanks (1969)
19. Lai & Jurinak (1971)
20. Warrick et al. (1971)
21. Dutt et al. (1972)
22. Gupta (1972)
23. Bresier (1973)
24. Kirda et al. (1973)
25. Shaffer et al. (1977)Water flow model
Typeof
flowSteady
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Transient
X
X
X
X
X
X
XInitial
•o01
4J
Cd
3
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X1
3
3
1
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Xsonditions
[Uniform initlal
water content
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Variable initial |
water content
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
1 Infiltration
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
XBoundary
conditlons
1•H4J
9ja•HUil
X
X
X
X
X
X
1 Evaporation [
X
X
X
X
Xrto•rl4J«t14
•H
0,
\
H
X
X
X
1 Water table
X
X
X
X
XSalt flow model
Type of1 Convective flow |
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
XElOW
IMolecular
diffuslonu
pIsu o,•o oo
E'SInitial
conditlomUniform initial
salt concentration
Varlabla initial
salt concentrationSink or
source Non-interactlng
solutes
AHALTTICAI. SOLUTIONS
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
NUHE
X
X
X
X
XX
X
ÏICAL
XX
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
SOLU
XnoNsX
X
X
X
X
XX
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Interacting
solutes
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
XExchange
reactions Exchange reactlon
considered
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Xf
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Xi
X
X
X
X
X
X
X1
X
X
X
XPrecipitation &
Solublllzation
•*
X
X
XX
X
Xu
•a
o.
a•3
•o
u
j*Is
X
X
Xtt
u
J09 O
Si•H U
X
X
X
X
XVali-
datioiiLaboratory 1
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
iField 1
X
X
X
X
X
X(c) presence of plant roots, (d) type of
salt flow mechanisms, (e) initial condi-
tion of salt flow models, and (f) various
interactions with soil particles or with
other salts in solution. These models
can be classified into: (a) analytical
solutions (1 through 16), and (b) numer-
ical solutions (17 through 24), or (c)
a combination of both (25),
Salt and water flow models have also
been classified as rate or plate models.
However, this classification only applies
to the source or sink term in the model.
In a rate model, kinetics is the control-
ling mechanism in the calculation of the
source or sink term, whereas in plate
models, steady-state equilibrium is
assumed between the adsorbed solution
and solid phase in each segment. Either
of these approaches could be used in
models based on analytical or numerical
solutions,
Models Based on Analytical Solutions
In these models, an entire soil
column is considered as a unit of calcu-
lation and thus initial water and salt
contents are assumed to be constant
throughout the column. These models only
predict the quality of percolate water
and provide very little Information on
salt and water content distributlon in
the soil column. Using miscible displace-
ment experiments, these models have been
tested in the laboratory on homogeneous
soil columns under steady-state infiltra-
tion conditions. Predictions from these
models have been reasonably good. How-
ever, water flow in the field is far from
steady state, and is often simultaneously
moving downward (infiltration) and upward
(evaporation). The system is further
complicated by removal of water by roots
from deeper layers. Thus the applicabil-
ity to field situations is limited because
of simplified assumptions. However,
experiments where the miscible displace-
ment technique has been used for valida-
tion of these models has proved useful
in furthering knowledge about the basic
mechanism of simultaneous flow of salt
and water in soil.
Models Based on Numerical Solutions
In these models the soil column is
divided into a number of segments, each
of which is considered uniform with re-
spect to chemical and physical properties.
Steady state equilibrium between adsorbed
solution and solid phases is then assumedwithin each segment. With the availabil-
ity of digital computers, application of
numerical methods to problems of salt
and water flow in soils with complex
initial and boundary conditions has been
made easier.
Models of Gupta (1972) and Dutt et
al. (1972) are examples of use of numer-
ical solutions. They are essentially a
combination of the water flow model by
Hanks and Bower (1962), the convective
salt flow model by Bresier (1967), and
the model on the interaction of salt
with soil or other salts by Dutt (1962).
Some of the models (Gupta, 1972,
and Nimah and Hanks, 1973) assume that
the quality of percolate water in drains
is similar to that of the layer in the
soil immediately above the water table.
This is erroneous in artificially
drained soils because of differences in
leaching patterns between the drains.
Even in homogeneous soils, if drainage
is achieved by means of tile drains or
ditches, leaching patterns will not be
uniform. Several times as much water
will pass through the soil located
adjacent to the tile line as will
through that midway between lines. The
Bureau of Reclamation's Irrigation
Return Flow Model (Shaffer et al., 1977)
is a further modification of the model
of Dutt et al. (1972) to take into
account the presence of drains and is a
comblnation-type model. Water flow
models above drains are based on numeri-
cal Solutions, whereas drainage discharge
is calculated from the analytical solu-
tion of the water flow equation. Combi-
nations of both dynamic and steady-state
equilibrium are used in the calculation
of source and sink terms. Other modifi-
cations included in the Bureau's model
account for chemical changes and trans-
formation of nitrogen compounds in the
saturated zone adjacent to drains and
also during mixing of discharge water in
the drains from different stream lines.
THEORETICAL BASIS
In general, models developed for
simultaneous flow of water and salt are
based on the laws of conservation of
mass. They state that the amount of
material applied to the soil layer minus
that amount leached and the amount
absorbed by plants is equal to the net
increment (positive or negatlve) of the
material in the soil layer. These
principles have been supplemented with
123statlstical or emperical relationships
when required.
The Bureau's model for predicting
the quality of irrigations return flow
seems to be the most complete model avail-
able to date, which can be extended to
the problems of land treatment of waste-
water. Certain assumptions which are
simplified for a given system may need
further improvement. In the next section
we wlll discuss the important processes
considered in the construction of the
Bureau's model. Differences and similar-
ities with other models are also dis-
cussed. The Bureau's model is essentially
made up of two submodels: (a) the water
flow model and (b) the salt and nutriënt
flow model. Other models in Table 1 are
also based on the following basic rela-
tionships or some variation of these
relationships.
Water Flow Model
The water flow submodel is based on
the numerical approximation of the basic
water flow equatlon
3t3V
3Z[1]
Where V is the volumetric flux of
water as given by Darcy's Law
V = - K(6) f [2]
Symbols in these equations and those
to follow are defined at the end of the
paper.
A review of the Solutions of equa-
tion [1] has been given by Freeze (1969).
To account for water loss by evapo-
transpiration and thus root extraction,
adjustment in the water content as pre-
dicted from equation [1] is made by sub-
tracting a fraction of the consumptive
use that is being lost from a particular
layer. This fraction is proportional to
the root distrlbution with depth. Root
distribution was assumed being constant
throughout the season in the Bureau's
model. Although this is a simplified
approach to account for roots, sophisti-
cated models given by Nimah and Hanks
(1973) were included by Gupta (1972) and
can be incorporated in the Bureau's
model. Most of the models based on the
analytical solution of equation [1] have
assumed a steady-state conditlon and thus
bypassed the need for a water flow model.
A computed (equation [1]) quantity
of water raoved into the water table from
the unsaturated profile above the drainsis then used to calculate the position
of the water table from equation [3]
[3]
Daily increment of flow into the water
table could result in instantaneous rise
(if water moves from the unsaturated to
saturated zone) or instantaneous decline
(if water moves from the saturated to
unsaturated zone by capillary flow) in
the water table. Basically, the water
table shape is chosen as a fourth-degree
parabola:
x,o(L3X-3L2X2+4LX3-2XA) [4]
Drain discharges from both sides of the
parallel circular drains are calculated
from Darcy's Law (equation [2]) in con-
junction with equation [3]. Two situa-
tions are considered in the Bureau's
model:
(a) Drains above the barrier
27TK(d' Y )m,o
(b) Drains on the barrier
3.64 K(0 )Y2
„ s m,t[5]
[6]
Salt and Nutriënt Flow Model
The salt flow rate at any plane in
the direction of flow may be given by:
3(6C)
3t[7]
where the first term on the right repre-
sents the contribution from diffusion
and dispersion to the flow of solute and
the second term respresents the contri-
bution from convective flow. The source
or sink term, SS, is due to solubility
of minerals and exchange of ions in
solution with solid phase.
The diffusion coëfficiënt which
appears in equation [7] is not the
diffusion coëfficiënt which applies in
the absence of water movement (Gardner,
1965). It is rather an apparent diffu-
12Hsion coëfficiënt which is the sum of
molecular diffusion and the hydrodynamic
dispersion. Hydrodynamic dispersion
results from the variation of pore water
velocity between (a) the edge and the
center of pores and (b) the large and
small pores or the dead end pores, This
dispersion can enhance the diffusion
process and, at sufficiently high veloc-
ity, may completely obscure it (Gardner,
1965). Even though some of the models
discussèd in Table 1 have not explicitly
stated the difference between molecular
diffusion and hydrodynamic dispersion,
the values used in most of these models
were the apparent diffusion coëfficiënt,
which is a suramation of both molecular
diffusion and hydrodynamic dispersion.
The Bureau's model assumes the contribu-
tions of the diffusion and dispersion
process to be negligible compared to
convective flow of salts. However, plate
models like the bureau's model tend to
introducé an error or so-called numerical
dispersion in the calculations of con-
vective flow. Experience has shown that
proper selection of the number of plates
can be used to introducé the correct
amount of dispersion in the calculations.
Numerical approximation for the con-
vective flow of salt in equation [7] is
used to predict the concentration of
salts at various soll depths. These con-
centrations are then modified for thesink or source term in equation [7],
Various chemical and biological processes
that affect the sink or source terms are:
(a) nitrogen transformations, including
the hydrolysis of urea, mineralization-
immobilization of organic-N and ammonium-
N, nitrification of ammonium, and immobi-
lization of nitrate, (b) salt reactions,
and (c) erop uptake of nitrogen.
The nitrogen rate equation used in
the Bureau's model was derived from using
multiple regression analysis, reaction
rate theory, and statistical thermodynam-
ics. Variables include ammonium, nitrate,
organic-N, and ion concentrations; tem-
perature; carbon nitrogen ratio; ionic
strength and soil moisture content. Some
models in Table 1 have assumed constant
temperature, uniform soil and steady-
state conditlons, and thus eliminated
the need for a functional relationship
between rate constant and soil proper-
ties.
Chemical reactions included in the
salt (inorganic) chemistry portion are
the solubilization or precipitation of
gypsum and calcium carbonate, undissoci-
ated ion pair reaction for calcium and
magnesium sulfate, calcium-magnesium
exchange, calcium-sodium exchange,
sodium-ammonium exchange, and pCO2-Ca++
-HC03~interactions. The equations used
to describe exchange reactions are:
Figure 1. Cumulative seasonal wastewater appüed plus
rain for the low rate and high rate experi-
ment and consumptive use of water of an
experiment at Apple Valley, Minnesota.
125"CaKCa
Ca"Mg[8]
[9]
Na
Exchange coefficients were assumed
to be constant with solution concentra-
tion in the Bureau's model. This may
not be true in all soils. Thus modelsbased on variable exchange coefficients
(Lai and Jurinak, 1971) should be used
for those soils.
Constituents presently considered
in the Bureau's model are nitrate,
ammonium, calcium, magnesium, sodium,
bicarbonate, chloride, carbonate, and
sulfate.
Applicability of the Bureau's model
to problems of wastewater renovation by
agricultural land was checked on experi-
mental data from Apple Valley, Minnesota
(Clapp et al., 1977). Input data for
the model are given in Table 2.
Table 2. Input data from Apple Valley, Minnesota, experiment used in the Bureau of
Reclamation's Irrigation Return Flow Model.
1.059 x 109 e24"06 cm/day
08Hydraulic properties of soil above drain
K(0)
D(9) = 2.058 x 10
\\>e = 10,0 cm
=60.0 cm/daySoil and wastewater analysis
12*53 cm2/day
K(6s)
0.55 cm /cm
Bulk Density = 1.2 g/cm
Hydraulic properties of soil belów drain
K(es) 6420 cm/day
3 30.36 cm /cm
3 30.40 cm /cm
Bulk Density =1.7 g/cm"Parameters
NH4-N
NO3-N
Ca
Na
Mg
Cl
HCO3
CO3
SO4
Organic-N (ug/g)
C:N
Extract ratio of
water to soilSoil
Saturation
Extract
mg/l
0.00
3.08
72.55
209.07
15.44
199.64
0.00
124.5
253.12
2.0
10:1
0.25
CaC03
CEC (0-60 cm)
(60-150 cm)Wastewater
mg/l
15.12
2.38
67.53
294.50
24.32
414.88
0.00
36.00
12.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
22.0 meq/100 g
1.0 meq/100 g
Drainage design
Drain spacing = 1350 cm
Depth to drains = 150 cm
Depth to barrier = 1650 cm
Gravel envelope size = 12.6 cm
Wastewater application
Irrigation schedules and amount -
Figure 1
Effective precipitation dates and
amount - Figure 1Crop Information
Growing season
CropApril 22-Oct. 10, 1976
reed canarygrass (Phalaris
arundiancea L.)
Root distribution
Depth Roots
(cm) (Fraction)
0-30 0.50
30 - 60 0.25
60 - 90 0.25
90 - 150 0.0
Consumptive use - Figure 1
Soil temperature - Figure 2
N-uptake by plants - Figure 4
126Figure 2. Weekly temperature of the soil profile for an experiment at
Apple Valley, Minnesota.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 3 gives the cumulative leach-
ate entering the water table. About 49
and 67% of the wastewater plus precipita-
tion is lost in drainage under low and
high amounts of wastewater application,
respectively. When estimated by months,
the maximum amount of drainage was in
the month of July (Table 3) followed by
August and June under both high and low
treatments. On most months the amount
of drainage from the high treatment was
about doublé the drainage from the low
treatment. In both cases the change in
soll water storage was about 8 cm over
the season.
Predicted concentration of various
salt species in the drainage water was
practically the same for both treatments
(Table 3). As expected, these predlctionsindicated a trend toward steady state
chemical equilibrium. Concentrations
of salt species (Cl , Na ) , which were
higher in the wastewater compared to the
initial soil solution, gradually
increased in their concentration in the
drainage water, thus indicating an
accumulation of these salts in the soil
profile. In the later part of the sea-
son Cl and Na concentrations in the
drainage were close to the concentration
of the wastewater applied (Tables 1 and
3)._ On the other hand, salt species
(CO3, SO4) which had low concentration
in the wastewater and high in the soil
profile showed some losses from the soil
profile._ Concentration of these salts
(CO3, SO^) in the drainage decreased
with time and were very close to the
concentration in the soil profile at the
end of the season. In the absence of
Figure 3. Predicted cumulative leachate using the
Bureau of Reclamation's model for the
low rate and high rate treatments at
Apple Valley, Minnesota.
12TTable 3. Predicted mcmthly and predicted seasonal average water quality using the
Bureau of Reclamation's Irrigatlon Return Flow Model and measured seasonal
average water quality for Apple Valley, Minnesota, experiment.
Months
May
June
July
August
September
Average Predicted
Measured
April
May
June
July
Augus t
September
October
Average Predicted
MeasuredDrainage
(cm)
3.4
15.9
30.2
24.8
2.9
0.6
12.1
36.3
64.5
50.5
8.8
1.5N03-N
3.5
3.1
2.5
2.2
2.0
2.6
0.3
3.6
3.1
2.6
2.0
1.9
1.7
1.3
2.2
1.0*VN
0.00
0.03
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.05
0.00
0.02
0.05
0.08
0.10
0.13
0.12
0.08Ca^
88
98
113
118
129
111
87
90
104
111
112
121
120
109Na+Mg-
mg/l -
LOV
244
262
286
295
309
283
25518
21
24
25
28
24
HIGH
243
248
274
290
293
308
308
286
28918
19
22
24
24
26
26
23Cl
238
272
334
350
394
325
425
236
243
321
366
368
420
419
351
506C03
148
147
134
135
121
137
147
149
122
106
107
86
84
111296
288
249
250
210
256
293
298
223
179
181
125
121
194Total
1036
1089
1142
1176
1194
1139
1104
1027
1050
1069
1078
1085
1088
1079
1077
1222
j^gure 4. Predicted nitrogen balance using the Bureau
of Reclamation's model for the high rate
treatment at Apple Valley, Minnesota.
128any source,continued application of
wastewater would deplete the soil profile
of these salts.
Predicted concentrations of some
salt species were also compared with
measured values (Table 3). These values
corresponded to the concentration in the
soil water at the interface of coarse
sand overlaid with silt loam soil. Soil
water was extracted by suction cup samp-
lers. Since permeability of coarse sand
is considerably higher than that of silt
loam, quality of drainage water was
assumed to be same as that of soil water
at the interface of these layers. In
general, average predicted concentration
of NO3-N, Na+, Cl", and total salts in
drainage water were in close agreement
with measured concentrations of soil
water. Concentrations of other salt
species were not measured. Predicted
total salt concentrations were high in
low treatment and low in high treatment
which is reverse of the measured values.
Though the concentrations of various
salt species in the drainage water were
similar under low and high treatment yet
the total amount of salts leached was
higher under high treatment than low
treatment. This was due to the higher
amount of leachate under high treatment.
Figure 4 gives the predicted nitro-
gen balance for the high application
treatment at various times during the
growing season. The negative leaching
on day 112 is due to the upward movement
of water and thus nitrogen from the water
table into the initial dry profile (6^ =
0.40). Between 134 and 155 days, plant
uptake of nitrogen is greater than the
amount added with the wastewater. Differ-
ences between these amounts was contrib-
uted by mineralization of soil organic
nitrogen. Over the season the nitrogen
balance showed minor contributions to
leaching and plant uptake from organic
nitrogen. The nitrogen rate reactionsin the model were not developed for land
application of wastewater and may need
modification for this purpose.
CONCLUSIONS
The irrigation return flow model of
the Bureau of Reclamation satisfactorily
predicted over a season, the quantities
and qualities of drainage water result-
ing from a wastewater experiment at
Apple Valley, Minnesota. Further vali-
dations are needed for monthly and more
frequent predictions. The model needs
testing on other soils. The model may
need modifications to better handle land
application of wastewater situations.
Modifications to account for variable
root-depth distribution with time and
improved estimates of nitrogen transfor-
tnation coefficients and their relation-
ships with other soil properties may be
helpful. This may be achieved from the
large volume of literature published
after the inception of this model.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Contribution from the Soil and
Water Management Research Unit, North
Central Region, Federal Research,
Science and Education Administration,
U.S. Department of Agriculture, St. Paul,
MN, and the U.S. Department of the
Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, Engi-
neering and Research Center, Denver, CO,
in cooperation with the Minnesota Agri-
cultural Experiment Station, Paper No.
10357, Scientific Journal Series.
Appreciation is expressed for financial
support of this research in part by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. We also
acknowledge the supply of field facili-
ties by the Metropolitan Waste Control
Commission, St. Paul, MN.
129SYMBOLS
C * concentration of salt species
CEC = cation exchange capacity
D = diffusion or dispersion coëfficiënt
D = average saturated aquifer thickness
ECa' ^Me' ENa = concentrati°n °f exchangeable calcium, magnesium, and sodium ions
on the soil exchangeable complex
H = hydraulic head
K(9 ) = saturated hydraulic conductivity
KCa-Mg' KCa-Na = exchan8e constants
L = horizontal drain spacing
5 = specific yleld or storage coëfficiënt
SS = source or sink term
Y • volumetrlc flux of water
X = horizontal axis
Y = initial water table height above the drains at position mm,o
Y = water table height above the drains at position m and time t
Y = initial water table height above the drains at position x
Xj O
Y = water table height above the drains at position x and time tx, t
Z = depth
a , a^ , SL = activities of calcium, magnesium, and sodium ions in the soil
° solutlon
d' = effective depth
m = horizontal midpoint between drains (i.e., m = L/2)
q = drain discharge rate per unit length
t = time
6 = water content
0 = saturated water contents
\p = air entry potential
130REFERENCES
1. Biggar, J. W., and D. R. Nielsen.
1963. Miscible displacement: V.
Exchange Processes. Soil Sci. Soc.
Am. Proc. 27:623-627.
2. Biggar, J. W. , and D. R. Nielsen.
1967. Miscible displacement and
leaching phenomenon. J!n_ Ed Hagen
et al. (ed.) Irrigation of agricul-
tural land. Agronomy 11:254-274.
Am. Soc. of Agron., Madison, Wis.
3. Boast, C. W. 1973. Modelling the
movement of chemicals in soil by
water. Soil Sci. 115:224-230.
4. Bower, C. A., W. R. Gardner, and
J. 0. Goertzen. 1957. Dynamics of
cation exchange in soil columns.
Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 21:20-40.
5. Bresier, E. 1967. A model for
tracing salt distribution in the
soil profile and estimating the
efficiënt combination of water qual-
ity and quantity under varying field
conditions. Soil Sci. 114:227-232.
6. Bresier, E. 1973. Simultaneous
transport of solutes and water under
transient unsaturated flow conditions.
Water Resour. Res. 9:975-986.
7. Bresier, E., and R. J. Hanks. 1969.
Numerical method for estimating
simultaneous flow of water and salt
in unsaturated soils. Soil Sci. Soc.
Am. Proc. 33:827-832.
8. Cassel, D. M., M. Th. van Genuchten,
and P. J. Wierenga. 1975. Predict-
ing anion movement in disturbed and
undisturbed soils. Soil Sci. Soc.
Am. Proc. 39:1015-1019.
9. Cho, C. M. 1971. Convective
transport of ammonium with nitrifi-
cation in soil. Can. J, Soil Sci.
51:339-350.
10. Clapp, C. E., D. R. Linden, W. E.
Larson, G. C. Marten, and J. R.
Nylund, 1977. Nitrogen removal
from municipal wastewater effluent
by a erop irrigation system. In
Land as a Waste Management Alterna-
tive, R. C. Loehr (ed.) Proceedings
of the 1976 Cornell Agricultural
Waste Management Conference. Ann
Arbor Science Publishers Inc., MI.
p. 139-150.11. DeVault, D. 1943. The theory of
chromatography. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
65:532-540.
12. Dutt, G. R. 1962. Prediction of
the concentration of solutes in soil
solutions for soil systems contain-
ing gypsum and exchangeable Ca and
Mg. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 26:
341-343.
13. Dütt, G. R., M. J. Shaffer, and
W. J. Moore. 1972. Computer simu-
lation model of dynamic bio-physico
chemical processes in soils. Univ.
Arizona Agric. Exp. Stn. Techn.
Buil. 196.
14. Elrick, D. F., E. T. Erh, and H. K.
Krupp. 1966. Application of
miscible displacement technique to
soils. Water Resour. Res. 2:717-727.
15. Freeze, R. A, 1969. The mechanism
of national ground water recharge
and discharge. I. One dimensional
vertical, unsteady, unsaturated flow
above a recharging or discharging
ground water flow system. Water
Resour. Res, 5:153-171.
16. Frissel, M. J., and P. Poelstra.
1967. Chromatographic transport
through soils. I. Theoretical
evaluation. Plant Soil 26:285-302.
17. Gardner, W. R. 1965. Movement of
nitrogen in soil. In W. V.
Bartholomew and F. E. Clark (ed.)
Soil nitrogen. Agronomy 10:550-572.
Am. Soc. of Agron., Madison, Wis.
18. Gardner, W. R., and R. H. Brooks.
1957. A descriptive theory of
leaching. Soil Sci. 83:295-304.
19. Glueckauf, E. 1949. Theory of
chromatography. Part VI. Precision
measurements of adsorption and
exchange isotherms from column
elution data. J. Chem. Soc.
3280-3285.
20. Gupta, S. C. 1972. Model for
predictlng simultaneous distribution
of salt and water in soils. Unpub-
lished Ph.D. dissertation, Utah
State Univ., Logan, Utah. 100 pp.
21. Hanks, R. J., and S. A Bower. 1962.
Numerical solution of the moisture
flow equation for infiltration into
layered soils. Soil Sci. Soc. Am.
131Proc. 26:530-534.
22. Klrda, C., D. R. NIelsen, and J. W.
Biggar. 1973. Simultaneous trans-
port of chloride and water during
infiltration. Soil Sci. Soc. Am.
Proc. 37:339-345.
23. Lai, Sung-Ho, and J. J. Jurinak.
1971. Numerical approximation of
cation exchange in miscible displace-
ment through soil column. Soil Sci.
Soc. Am. Proc. 35:894-899.
24. Lapidus, L., and N. R. Amundson.
1952. Mathematics of adsorption in
beds. VI. The effect of logitudinal
diffusion in ion exchange and chroma-
tographic columns. J. Phys. Chem.
56:984-988.
25. Misra, C. D., D. R. Nielsen, and
J. W. Biggar. 1974a. Nitrogen
transformation in soil during leach-
ing: I. Theoretical consideration.
Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 38:289-293.return flow. V. Detailed return
flow salinity and nutriënt simula-
tion model. EPA-600/2-77-179E, EPA,
Ada, 0K. 400 pp.
33. Skopp, J., and A. W. Warrick. 1974.
A two-phase model for the miscible
displacement of reactive solutes in
soils. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc.
38:545-550.
34. van Genuchten, M. Th., and P. J.
Wierenga. 1976. Mass transfer
studies in sorbing porous media.
I. Analytical solutions. Soil Sci.
Soc. Am. J. 40:473-480.
35. Warrick, A. W., J. W. Biggar, and
D. R. Nielsen. 1971. Simultaneous
solute and water transfer for an
unsaturated soil. Water Resour.
Res. 7:1216-1225.
36. Wilson, J. N. 1940. A theory of
chromatography. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
62:1583-1591.
26. Misra, C. D., D. R. Nielsen, and
J. W. Biggar. 1974b. Nitrogen
transformation in soil during leach-
ing: II. Steady state nitrification
and nitrate reduction. Soil Sci.
Soc. Am. Proc. 38:294-299.
27. Misra, C. D., D. R. Nielsen, and
J. W. Biggar. 1974c. Nitrogen
transformation in soil during leach-
ing: III. Nitrate reduction in
soil columns. Soil Sci. Soc. Am.
Proc. 38:300-304.
28. Molen, W. H. van der. 1956.
Desalinization of saline soils as a
column process. Soil Sci. 8:19-27.
29. Nielsen, D. R., and J. W. Biggar.
1962. Miscible displacement. III.
Theoretical considerations. Soil
Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 26:216-221.
30. Nimah, M. N., and R. J. Hanks. 1973.
Model for estimating soil water,
plant, and atmospheric interrelations:
I. Description and sensitivity.
Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 37:522-527.
31. Ribble, J. M., and L. E. Davis.
1955. Ion exchange in soil columns,
Soil Sci. 79:41-47.
32. Shaffer, M. J., R. W. Ribbens, and
C. W. Huntley. 1977. Prediction
of mineral quality of irrigation
132LAND TREATMENT MATHEMATICAL MODELING
AN EVALUATION OF ONE- AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL SOIL MOISTURE
FLOW MODELS
R.R. van der Ploeg
Institute of Soil Science and Forest Nutrition,
Georg-August University, Goettingen, West Germany
ABSTRACT
Since the turn of the cen-
tury attempts have been made to
describe moisture flow in porous
materials (as soils) by means of
physically derived relations.
During the first half of the
century research was focused on
water-saturated soils. Many soils
however are for most of the time
water-unsaturated. Since about
1950 the unsaturated zone has
also received due attention and
basic flow equations for un-
saturated porous materials have
been derived. One equation that
has been widely used is the so-
called soil moisture flow
equation. This equation is a
diffusion type of equation that
does not arise in other fields
of science or engineering.
Because of its uniqueness, and
even more because of its com-
plexity, much effort was
necessary to make the equation
suited for numerical computations.
Although many physical and mathe-
matical aspects as related to
the soil moisture flow equation
still are unsolved, the equation
is increasingly used in field
studies that deal with moisture
and solute movement, with deep
seepage and evaporation, and
with stora'ge and plant availabi-
lity of soil water. In the
present paper four such studies
are discussed. It is shown that
soil moisture flow models canprovide data about movement and
storage of soil water that may
be accurate enough for many
practical purposes.
THE UNSATURATED SOIL MOISTURE
FLOW EQUATION
With use of a three-dimen-
sional cartesian coordinate
system the unsaturated soil
moisture flow equation can be
expressed as:
y)
(1)
In eq. 1 k denotes the hydraulic
conductivity of the soil, h
stands for the hydraulic head,
0 for the volumetric moisture
content of the soil, x, y and z
are space coordinates and t
represents time. A derivation of
eq. 1 can be found in Kirkham
and Powers (1972, p. 239). The
hydraulic conductivity k, in
eq. 1 is not a constant, but a
function of the water content
0. Only for saturated soils can
k be considered as a constant.
Since it' is usually also assumed
that the water content in
saturated soils is constant,
eq. 1 for saturated soils can be
written as:
2-!-d2h/<Jz2=O (2)
Eq. 2 has been extensively used
in the soil literature,especially
133in drainage studies. In the
present paper however no saturated
flow problems will be dealt with.
For one- and two-dimensional
flow problems in saturated soils
the reader is referred to Kirk-
ham and Powers (1972).
For a flat unsaturated soil
eq. 1 usually is written as
d(kèh/<!>z)/Oz = èe/bt, (3)
in which expression z denotes the
soil depth, perpendicular to the
soil surface. If water uptake by
the root system of a plant canopy
must be taken into account, eqs.
1 and 3 can be expanded. This can
be done by adding a sink term,
Q to the left hand side of eqs. 1
and 3. Eq. 3 then can be written
as:
èikbh/èz)/èz-Q •= óe/èt (4)
Solutions to equations like 3 and
4 allow the calculation of the
moisture content e at any depth
and at any time in the soil
profile. Such solutions also
enable the calculation of changes
in storage and seepage rates,
quantities that are experimentally
not easily determined. However
it is not a simple matter to do
computational work with eqs. 3
and 4.
NUMERICAL METHODS AND APPLICA-
BILITY OF THE SOIL MOISTURE FLOW
EQUATION
A variety of methods has
been developed to solve the un-
saturated soil moisture flow
equation, especially for one-
dimensional flow. None of the
methods so far developed is com-
pletely satisfying, and new
techniques are continuously
being propose. Analytical
solutions, as discusses by Philip
(1969), have only minor relevance
to field problems, since they
require too many simplifying
assumptions. Numerical solutions
have a much larger range of
applicability, but require large
digital computers and extensive
amounts of computer time. A
review of some of the commonly
used numerical techniques to
solve eq. 3 is given by Haverkamp
et al. (1977). Hornung (1977) has
recently developed a new methodthat appears promissing. Semi-
numerical methods, that do not
use as much computer time as
truly numerical solutions can be
found in Wind and Van Doorne
(1975) and Hayhoe (1978).
Most of the numerical methods
that have been used to solve eq. 1
are finite difference methods. A
recent development is the use of
finite element methods. Neuman et
al. (1975) and Feddes et al.
(1975) have used this technique
to handle two-dimensional flow
problems. Other examples of
finite element solutions to un-
saturated flow problems can be
found in Gray et al. (1977). A
main advantage of finite element
methods over finite difference
methods is the ease with which
irregularly shaped flow regions
(two- and three-dimensional flow)
can be handled. A discussion of
numerical methods in general
(finite differences and elements)
may be found in Remson et al.
(1971) .
In order to see how well an
equation like eq. 3 describes un-
saturated moisture flow in
porous materials, experimental
data and computational results
obtained with eq. 3, can be com-
pared. To solve eq. 3 it is
necessary that a boundary
condition at the soil surface is
specified. Under controlled
laboratory conditions this
usually is no problem. To test
the applicability of eq. 3, many
researches have, for a variety
of soils, performed such labora-
tory experiments, i.e. Youngs
(1957), Haverkamp et al. (1977),
Zaradny (1978). Either a constant
hydraulic head or a known flux
of water is maintained at the
soil surface during the course
of the experiment. Fig. 1 is
taken from the work of Haverkamp
et al. (1977) and shows cal-
culated and measured moisture
profiles at different times (in
hours) in a 80 cm long sand column.
Youngs (1957) and Zaradny (1978)
show similar results. Also two-
dimensional unsaturated flow
under controlled laboratory con-
ditions have been analysed, for
example by Brandt et al. (1971)
and Bresier et al. (1971) and
these authors also report close
13Uagreement between calculated and
measured moisture profiles.
20
CL
LU
Q
60
80INITIAL
MOISTURE
PROFILE
— Experiment
o-o Calculated
O 0.) 0.2 0.3
Vol. Moisture Content Icm3/cm3)
Fig. 1. Calculated and measured
moisture profiles in a
sand column (after Haver-
kamp et al., 1977)
Eq. 3 has also been experi-
mentally tested in the field.
Nielsen et al. (1961), and Black
et al. (1969) for example, have
conducted field experiments on
infiltration and evaporation,
respectively, that also indicate
the validity of eq. 3. In both
works a time-independent
boundary condition (constant hy-
draulic head) at the soil
surface was assumed. It must be
admitted however that in all the
works mentioned a complete agree-
ment between calculated and
measured soil moisture data was
never observed.
A few works have been cited,
and many others exist in the soil
literature, that indicate the
usefulness of eq. 3 to describe
moisture flow in unsaturated
soils. Yet eq. 3 has been used
only sporadically in hydrologie
studies. The main reason herefore
is the difficulty in specifyingthe boundary condition at the
soil surface under field con-
ditions.
THE BOUNDARY CONDITION AT THE
SOIL SURFACE
A necessity for any solution
of the unsaturated soil moisture
flow equation is that the boun-
dary condition at the soil
surface can be specified. Under
field conditions this is usually
extremely difficult. Neither the
hydraulic head, nor the soil
moisture content at the soil
surface, nor the upward flux
through the soil surface are
directly measurable. Moreover
these quantities change rapidly
with time. To overcome the ex-
perimental difficulties, it has
been tried to relate the upward
flux through the soil surface to
atmospheric quantities that are
more easily measured than soil
properties near the soil surface.
Frequently used in this
context is the concept of
potential evaporation, an upper
limit of evaporation in case the
soil surface is thoroughly wet.
Well-known expressionsfor the
potential evaporation are given
by Penman (1948) and by Van Bavel
(1966). The equation by Van Bavel
(1966), which is a modified Pen-
man equation, reads:
E =P(A/j')Rn+B(es-e)
(5)
+ 1
in which expression Ep stands for
the potential evaporation rate,
Rn for the net radiant energy
available for evaporation, B
represents a ventilation vector
depending on the wind velocity
and the erop height, es-e is the
vapor pressure deficit of the air
and A/jf a coëfficiënt depending
on the air temperature. In the
work of Van Bavel (1966) lysi-
meter data are shown that support
the validity of eg. 5. Another
appealing aspect of eq. 5 is that
is does not contain empirical
quantities. However, the ex-
pression only yields an upper
limit for the evaporation rate;
about the actual evaporation rate
E, that occurs when the soil is
135drying, eq. 5 does not provide
information.
Various expressions have
been propose for the actual eva-
poration rate when the water
supply of the soil is limited.
Usually such expressions have
an empirical nature and are
suited for regional use only. In
the United States the Blaney-
Criddle relationship, see Eagleson
(1970) is widely used, whereas in
Germany the Haude equation (Haude,
1955) frequently is applied to
estimate the actual evaporation
rate. Others have tried to relate
the Penman equation or eq. 5
with some property of the soil
surface to estimate reduced
evaporation rates. Such attempts
can be found for example in
Staple (1974), in Jackson et al.
(1976) or in Beese et al. (1977).
In the just cited works
only evaporation from a bare soil
is considered. Fig. 2 is taken
from Beese et al.(1977), and
10 60 100 1000
SOIL SUCTION (cm ot water)
Fig. 2. Relation between actual/
potential evaporation and
soil suction head at the
soil surface (Beese et
al., 1977)
shows a relation between the ratio
of actual and potential eva-
poration and the suction head
(the main component of the hy-
draulic head) at the soil surface.
The relation was determined with
a weighing soil monolith, and
will be referred to later on in
this paper.
In a similar way as the
potential evaporation from a bare
soil is reduced, attempts have
been made to reduce the transpi-
ration rate from a cropped soilas the soil water becomes de-
pleted. Nimah and Hanks (1973a,b)
Saxton et al. (1974), Neuman et
al. (1975), Peddes et al. (1975)
and Van der Ploeg et al. (1978)
discuss possibilities to achieve
such a reduction. The reduction
is accomplished by relating the
potential evaporation with the
root distribution of the erop and
the moisture status of the soil in
the root zone. A most simple way
to account for the dryness of the
soil in the root zone has been
proposed by Feddes et al. (1976).
In slightly modified form this
relation is shown in fig. 3. The
0.5
10 lOO 1000 10000
SOIL SUCTION (cm of H30)
Fig. 3. Relation between actual/
potential transpiration
and soil suction in the
root zone (Feddes et al.,
1976, modified)
ratio of actual and potential
evapotranspiration as function of
the suction head in the root zone
is shown. It is remarked that all
the reduction procedures are
rather speculative, and additional
research is needed for a better
insight in this phenomenon. In
the next section results of model
calculations will be presented
that were obtained with use of
reduction procedures as just
described.
SOME ONE- AND TWO-DIMENSIONAL
MODEL RESULTS
Fig, 4 shows results published
by Van der Ploeg and Benecke
136SOILSUCTION
o FIELD QBSEHVATIQN AT 15 cm DEPTH
- •• 45 cm
* a
Fig. 4. Calculated and measured
suction values in a field
soil in a period without
evapotranspiration (Van
der Ploeg and Benecke,
1974a)
(1974a). Shown are calculated and
measured suction heads in a
layered forest soil over a one-
month period. The flat soil is
located in a plateau-like
mountanous area. During the
period under consideration eva-
potranspiration was neglected. A
numerical solution to eq. 3 was
obtained with a method as described
by Van der Ploeg (1974). By assuir-
ing zero evapotranspiration the
boundary condition at the soil
surface could be stated in terms
of the occurring precipitation
only. The occurrence and intensity
of precipitation are shown as an
insert in fig. 4. Fig. 4 shows a good
agreernent between calculated and
measured suction values in three
different depths.
Fig. 5 shows similar results.
Now however evaporation from
the soil surface is taken into
account. Fig. 5 is taken from the
work of Beese et al. (1977), who
used the relation shown in fig. 2
to estimate the actual daily eva-
poration rate from a bare loess
soil. Prom the good agreement
between measured and calculated
suction heads, Beese et al.(1977)
infer that the evaporation and
the deep seepage as calculated by
their model, also must be close
to the actually occurring amounts,
that cannot be measured directly.
Results from another one-
dimensional model are given in
fig. 6. Shown are measured andFig. 5. Calculated and measured
suction values in a bare
field soil (Beese et al.,
(1977)
137calculated soil moisture data of
a sugar beet erop, between May 4
and Oct. 13, 1975. The curves in
fig. 6 denote the calculated data.
1000
I 900
| 800
'S 700
I 600
o 500
5 400
« 300
5 200
100
Fig.MAY JUNE
MAY4-OCT.13 1975
* 15 cm d*pth
O IO5tm
alBQem
•.•• :JULV
ƒ
/
rt
i
-ft-'AUG '
/
f
I11
^ .
yTSEPI 'OCT
/
180 210 240 270
TIME Idays)300
6. Calculated and measured
suction values in soil
under a sugar beet erop
(Van der Ploeg et al.,
1978)
The figure is taken from Van der
Ploeg et al. (1978). Especially
early in the season, evaporation
as well as transpiration must be
considered. Instead of eq. 3 now
eq. 4 is used to describe the
moisture flow in the soil. The
potential evapotranspiration for
fig. 6 was calculated with eq. 5.
A distinction between potential
evaporation (from the soilsurface)
and potential transpiration (from
the erop) was accomplished by use
of data published by Ritchie
(1972) for row crops. In Van der
Ploeg et al. (1978) computer
results and field measurement for
the same soil pertaining to the
period Dec. 1, 1974 - May 4, 197 5
are also shown. During that
period the soil was bare. Table 1
is also taken from the work of
Van der Ploeg et al. (1978). The
data shown in Table 1 reflect the
entire period of study, Dec. 1,
1974 - Oct. 13, 1975. Monthly
values in mm for the precipitation
P, the interception I, the eva-
poration E, the transpiration
T, the seepage S at a depth of
170 cm, and the change of storage
in the profile, R are shown. Only
the precipitation P was measured,
the other components were cal-
culated. The data of Table 1
compare well with results that
were experimentally derived, see
Van der Ploeg et al. (1978).December
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October(l2days)
TotalP
91
34
6
54
45
64
62
71
24
52
16
5191
0
2
6
5
11
4
28E
19
16
8
23
37
46
20
9
2
0
0
180T
7
35
81
103
44
25
295S
4
43
8
5
30
22
6
1
0
0
0
119R
68
-25
-10
26
-22
-11
- 1
-26
-86
-3
-13
-103
Table 1. Monthly values in mm of
the components of the
water balance equation
of an agricultural field
(Van der Ploeg et al.,
1978)
All the models considered so
far were dealing with one-dimen-
sional moisture flow. Van der
Ploeg and Liebscher (1978) also
used the unsaturated soil moisture
flow equation in a watershed
study, where two-dimensional un-
saturated flow had to be con-
sidered. For calculation purposes
the elongated watershed, overlying
impervious bedrock material, was
subdivided into two representative
slopes. The slopes were of unequal
steepness. The 76-ha large water-
shed was completely covered with
a spruce stand. No deep seepage
was allowed; only lateral sub-
surface flow was considered. The
subsurface lateral flow is
collected in a small creek, which
drains the watershed. The
discharge of the creek was recor-
ded at a weir. Schematically the
watershed flow configuration is
shown in fig. 7, which is derived
138WEIR
Fig. 7. Schematic representation
of an elongated watershed
(after Eagleson, 1970)
from Eagleson (1970). Also descri-
bed in Eagleson (1970, chapter 15)
is a model that describes water
flow in small streams. This model
was, slightly modified, used in
the present study. The lateral
subsurface flow in the soil was
calculated with a two-dimensional
space equivalent of eq. 4. The
potential evapotranspiration was
reduced to actual evapotranspi-
ration with use of fig. 3. Details
of the numerical procedure are
given by Van der Ploeg and Benecke
(1974b).
For periods without a snow
cover (which is roughly speaking
between April and November every
year) model calculations were
carried out to calculate the
stream flow in the creek. Also the
actual transpiration for each of
the two slopes was calculated.
For three consecutive years
simulations were performed. In
fig. 8 results for 1974 are shown.
During the period April 1 - Octo-
ber 21 of fig, 8 the cumulative
amount of rain per m2 was 569 mm.
An equivalent amount of 143 mm
discharge was recorded at the
weir during the same period,
whereas the model yielded 154 mm.
CONCLUSIONS
Some general features of one-NOV I DEC | JAN I FEBlMRCHl APR I MAY | JN | JL I AUG I SEP loCT
1974
STREAM DISCHARBE IN 1974 (l/km!'s«c)
MEASURED
CALCULATED
Fig. 8. Measured and calculated
stream discharge data
from a small watershed
(Van der Ploeg and
Liebscher, 1978)
and two-dimensional soil moisture
flow models have been discussed.
It has been pointed out that the
soil moisture flow equation
appears to describe moisture flow
in many soils rather accurately.
Use of the equation in field
studies is limited because of the
difficulty to specify the boun-
dary condition at the soil sur-
face. Four model studies were
presented in which the soil
moisture flow equation con-
stituted a central part. In each
of the four examples it was
indicated how the boundary con-
dition at the soil surface was
handled. The shown results
suggest the usefulness of such
models in studies in which data
about amounts of seepage water
and about flow velocities through
soil are needed. Such data can
subsequently be utilized in
studies about the movement of
agricultural or industrial
Chemicals through soil. The four
sample models that were presented
may be considered as a stimulus
to utilize soil hydrologie models
in handling environmental prob-
lems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Financial support from the
German Research Foundation (DFG)
is thankfully acknowledged.
139LITERATURE
Beese, F. and R.R. van der Ploeg.
1976. Influence of hysteresis
on moisture flow in an un-
disturbed soil monolith. Soil
Sci. Soc. Amer. J. 40:
480-484
Beese, F., R.R. van der Ploeg and
W. Richter. 1977. Test of a
soil water model under field
conditions. Soil Sci. Soc. Amer.
J. 41: 979-984
Black, T.A., W.R. Gardner and
G.W. Thurtell. 1969. The
prediction of evaporation,
drainage and soil water storage
for a bare soil. Soil Sci.
Soc. Amer. Proc. 33: 655-660
Brandt, A., E. Bresier, N. Diner,
I. Ben-Asher, J. Heller and
D. Goldberg. 1971. Infiltration
from a trickle source: I.
Mathematical models. Soil Sci.
Soc. Amer. Proc. 35: 675-682
Bresier, E., J. Heller, N. Diner,
I. Ben-Asher, A. Brandt and
D. Goldberg. 1971. Infiltration
from a trickle source: II.
Experimental data and theoreti-
cal predictions. Soil Sci. Soc.
Amer. Proc. 35: 683-689
Eagleson, P.E. 197O. Dynamic Hy-
drology. McGraw-Hill, New York
Feddes, R.A., S.P. Neuman and E.
Bresier. 1975. Finite element
analysis of two-dimensional
flow in soils considering water
uptake by roots. II. Field
applications. Soil Sci. Soc.
Amer. Proc. 39: 231-237
Feddes, R.A., P. Kowalik, K.
Kolinska-Malinka and H. Zarad-
ny. 1976. Simulation of field
water uptake by plants using
a new root extraction function.
J. Hydrol. 31: 13-26
Gray, W.G., G.F. Pinder and CA.
Brebbia. 1977. Finite Elements
in Water Resources. Pentech
Press. London
Haude, W. 1955. Zur Bestimmung der
Verdunstung auf moeglichst
einfache V7eise. Mitteilung.
Dt. Wetterdienst 11(2): 1-24
Haverkamp, R., M. Vauclin, J.
Tourna, P.J. Wierenga and G.
Vachaud. 19 77. A comparison of
numerical simulation models for
one-dimensional infiltration.
Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. J. 41: 285-
294.Hayhoe, H.N. 1978. Numerical
study of quasi-analytic and
finite difference solutions
of the soil-water transfer
equation. Soil Sci. 125: 68-74
Hornung, Ulrich. 1977. A numeri-
cal method for the simulation
of unsteady groundwater flow
in both saturated and un-
saturated soils. Soil Sci.
124: 140-144
Jackson, R.D., S.B. Idso and
R.J. Reginato. 1976. Calcu-
lation of evaporation rates
during the transition from
energy-limiting to soil-
limiting phases using albedo
data. Water Resour. Res. 12:
23-26
Kirkham, Don and W. L. Powers.
1972. Advanced Soil Physics.
Wiley-Interscience. New York.
Neuman, S.P., R.A. Feddes and
E. Bresier. 1975. Finite
element analysis of two-
dimensional flow in soil con-
sidering water uptake by roots.
I. Theory. Soil Sci. Soc. Amer.
Proc. 39: 224-230
Nielsen, D.R., Don Kirkham and
W.R. van Wyk. 1961. Diffusion
equation calculation of field
soil water infiltration
profiles. Soil Sci. Soc. Mer,
Proc. 25: 165-168
Nimah, M.N. and R.J. Hanks. 1973a.
Model for estimating soil
water, plant and atmospheric
interrelations. I. Description
and sensitivity. Soil Sci. Soc.
Amer. Proc. 37: 522-527
Nimah, M.N. and R.J. Hanks. 1973b.
Model for estimating soil water,
plant and atmospheric inter-
relations: II. Field test of
model. Soil Sci. Soc. Amer.
Proc. 37: 528-532
Philip, J.R. 1969. Theory of in-
filtration. Iri Advances in
Hydroscience 5: 215-296
Penman, H.L. 19 48. Natural eva-
poration from open water, bare
soil and grass. Proc. Roy. Soc.
A 193: 120-145
Remson, I., G.M. Homberger and
F.J. Molz. 1971. Numerical
Methods in Subsurface Hydrology.
Wiley-Interscience. New York
Ritchie, J. 1972. Model for
predicting evaporation from a
row erop with incomplete cover.
Water Resour. Res. 8:
1204-1213Saxton, K.W., H.P. Johnson and
R.H. Shaw. 1974. ModelÜng
evapotranspiration and soil
moisture. Trans. ASAE 17: 673-
677
Staple, W.J. 1974. Modified Pen-
man equation to provide the
upper boundary condition in
computing evaporation from soil.
Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. Proc. 38:
837-839
Van Bavel, C.H.M. 1966. Potential
evaporation: the combi nation
concept and its experimental
verification. Water Resourc.
Res. 2: 455-467
Van der Ploeg, R.R. 1974. Simu-
lation of moisture transfer in
soils: one-dimensional in-
filtration. Soil Sci. 118:
349-357
Van der Ploeg, R.R. and P. Be-
necke. 1974a. Simulation of
one-dimensional moisture trans-
fer in unsaturated, layered,
field soils. _in Data analysis
and data synthesis of forest
ecosystems. B. Ulrich, R. Mayer
and H. Heller, eds. Goettinger
Bodenkundliche Berichte 30:
150-169
Van der Ploeg, R.R. and P.
Benecke. 1974b. Unsteady, un-
saturated n-dimensional
moisture flow in soil: a com-
puter simulation program. Soil
Sci. Soc. Amer. Proc. 38: 881-
885
Van der Ploeg, R.R., F. Beese, 0.
Strebel and M. Renger. 1978.
The water balance of a sugar
beet erop: a model and some
experimental evidence. Z.
Pflanzenern. Bodenk, (in press)
Van der Ploeg, R.R. and H.J.
Liebscher. 1978. A soil water
model for the water budget of
a small catchment. (manuscript
in preparation)
Wind, G.P. and W. van Doorne.
1975. Numerical model for the
simulation of unsaturated
vertical flow of moisture in
soils. J. Hydrol. 24: 1-20
Youngs, E.G. 1957. Moisture pro-
files during vertical infil-
tration. Soil Sci. 84: 283-
290
Zaradny, H. 1978. Boundary con-
ditions in modeling water flow
in unsaturated soils. Soil Sci.
125: 75-82LAND TREATMENT MATHEMATICAL MODELING
EVALUATION OF THE MOVING BOUNDARY THEORY IN DARCY'G FLOW THROUGH POROUS MEDIA
Yoshisuke Nakano
U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory, Hanover, New
Hampshire, USA
ABSTRACT
Traditionally in hydrology and soil
physics neither the -water table nor the
wetting front in Darcy's flow were
believed to be singular surfaces. Re-
cently a new and conflicting theory has
teen advanced using tvo different
approaches. It has been shown, based
upon continuüm physics, that across "both
the water table and. the wetting front
local acceleration generally suffers a
non-zero jump, and these two boundaries
can be interpreted as acceleration waves.
This interpretation was found consistent
with reported regularity results obtained
from a purely mathematical viewpoint.
INTRODUCTION
At any given time a porous medium
may be uniquely divided into several
parts according to three kinds of flow
conditions that are mutually exclusive
with respect to the specific incompres-
sible fluid under consideration. If all
the voids in a part of the medium are
completely filled with this fluid we
refer to it as saturated; if not we
refer to it as unsaturated. There is
another situation where the content of
fluid in a part of the medium is not
high enough to induce flow; we refer to
this as stagnant.
Among the three kinds of interfaces
between the three kinds of parts two
kinds of interfaces are of practical
importance. In hydrology an interface
between a saturated and an unsaturated
part is called a water table, and an
interface between an unsaturated and
a stagnant part is called a wetting front,For the case in which the fluid
under consideration is compressible, the
distinction between a saturated and an
unsaturated part is unnecessary. Only
one kind of interface is of practical
importance, that is an interface between
a stagnant part and one in which flow
takes place. For the sake of convenience,
we also refer to such an interface as
a wetting front.
Traditionally in hydrology and soil
physics neither the water table nor the
wetting front appearing in porous media
described by Darcy's law were believed
to be singular surfaces [17,19]. How-
ever, in recent years a conflicting
theory, that these surfaces were
essentially singular, was advanced using
two different approaches. One of them
was "based upon the theory of singular
surfaces in continuüm physics [11,12,13].
It was proven that both the water table
and wetting front can be interpreted as
singular surfaces of order 2, i.e. pro-
pagating acceleration waves.
Another approach was based upon
pure mathematical theory in functional
analysis. A special class of wetting
front problems attracted mathematicians
[9,lU] and its theory is now fairly well
advanced [1,2, 5,6]. For this class of
problems it was established that
singularities occur in their solution.
It has been recognized for some
time that similarity solutions may be
limiting solutions, as time approaches
infinity, of more general solutions of
parabolic equations. The first proof
of this observation was given in theory
of boundary layers by Serrin [2l].
Recently similar results were proved fora special class of vetting front problems
[15J. Traditionally In hydrology and
soil physics the similarity solution was
assumed to 'be the general solution of
the wetting front problem [l6]. This
assumption is contradictory to mathema-
tical theory [k].
In this paper we examine a new
theory for "both the water table and the
wetting front. In the following section
we present the theory of acceleration
waves applied to Darcy's flow. The
theory of singular surfaces and acceler-
ation waves originated in the work of
Christoffel [3] and Hugoniot [8] and was
extended in a treatise by Truesdell and
Toupin [22]. In recent years the
acceleration wave has been studied in
raany branches of continuüm physics [10].xk(X, t)a a' U.k)
The vorticity vector W is defined as
a
W = curl xa a(2.5)
The spatial equation of continuity
for the a"^ constituent is given as
+ div. (gx) = 0 (2.6)
Suppose there exists an acceleration
wave o(t) of the a constituent.
Then let the surface a(t) be repre-
sented as
ACCELERATION WAVES
We consider a porous medium that
consists of rigid solids and pores. We
assume that the pores are uniformly
distributed throughout the medium. Let
the pores contain a mixture of two bodies
B, where a = 1, 2, and B and B represent
an incompressible fluid1and a2compres-
sible fluid, respectively. Let d repre-
sent the mass density of the atnaconstit-
uent per unit volume of the mixture and
g represent the mass of the a constit-
uent per unit volume of the mixture.
Then 6 =+fi/d will be the volume fraction
of the a constituent.
Let X be the place occupied by a
partiële of B in some reference config-
uration. The motion of B is the mapping
of B onto a time-sequenee of configura-
tion in space.f (X, t) = 0
X = Xa(2.1)
Let a backward prime denote the
time derivative when X is held constant,
i.e., the time derivatUve that is
material with respect to, B. The velocity
X and the acceleration X are defined asa a
X = T~X (X, t)a 3t a a'
l (a'a a(2.2)
(2.3)
Ir-
The deformation gradiënt x of the
ath constituent is defined by a'(2.7)
An alternative representation of a(t) is
(2.8) F (X, t) = 0
SL
By the use of standard notation [22] the
general jump conditions for acceleration
waves of the fluid phase across a(t) are
given as
[xk J = - u skN
N o
= U2
N(2.9)
(2.10)
where
[A] = A+ -A"
IL, = speed of propagation
N = unit normal to the surface
defined by (2.8)
If we choose the material coor-
dinates as being equal to the spatial
coordinates at the instant the wave
passes, then (2.9) and (2.10) become
[22]
[xk ] = U sk n
[xk] = U2 sk
a(2.11)
(2.12)
lhkwhere Case h
U = u - xn na
U = speed of the surface defined
*>y (2.7)
n = unit normal to the surface
defined by (2.7)
x = x • nna a
From (2.11) and (2.12) we obtain
[div x] = - U s • n
a(2.1*0
[w] = [curl x] = - U s x n (2.15)
a a °
Interpretation of these identities yields
Hadamard's theorem: longitudinal accel-
eration wave carries a jump in expansion
but vorticity is unchanged, while a
transverse acceleration wave carries a
jump in vorticity but does not affect
expansion [22].
We further examine a longitudinal
acceleration wave, It is necessary to
examine the jump condition for x , be-
cause if x suffers a non-zero an jump
across an a(t), (2.13) no longer
represents an acceleration wave. The
balance of fluid mass across a(t) yields
[P (x - u )] = 0
a a
or
[p xn
a aun [p]
a(2.17)
(2.17) includes the following five cases:
Case 1 The fluid is incompressible
and [e] = 0
a
Case 2 The fluid^s incompressible
and u = x = x~
n 11The f luid is compressible,
[d] 7* 0, and [d x ] = 0
a nna a
Case 5 The fluid is compressible,
[d] # 0, and [d x ] f 0
a n
a a
For the incompressi"ble f luid, if the
condition of either Case 1 or Case 2 is
not met, then the velocity suffers a
non-zero jump and a(t) "becomes a shock
wave, which contradicts the assumption
that the fluid is incompressible.
It is easy to see that in Cases 1,
2 and 3 [x ] = 0; therefore a(t) is an
acceleration wave. In Case h u =0 and
the wave is stationary. Case 5 merits
further gxamination. In this case the
jump of x may te written as
a
fxn]=^[d]
a aa<-„ - j,>(2.18)
(2.18) implies that if u = x , then^
[i ] = 0; however, if u ? x &-nthen [x ] /
n n n' n
a a a
0 and a(t) possibly becomes a shock wave
rather than an acceleration wave. We
examine the latter case. The jump condi-
tion of momentum across a(t) is given as
[dxn (X -u )]=0
a a a(2.19)
From (2.l6) and (2.19) we obtain
a
(2.20)a a
Since u 4 x in this case, from
(2.20) we obSainan
a a a(2.21)
The density of the fluid generally
suffers a non-zero jump across a(t) and
the jump condition is given as
(2.22)
a a a^ n
a a
In the following sections we apply
the theory of acceleration waves to
three specific cases which are important
for practical applications,
Case 3 The fluid is compressible
and (d] = 0
aWATER TABLE OF AH INCOMPRESSIBLE FLUID
We conslder a porous medium that
contains an incompressible fluid B and
air B. By the use of a Cartesian^-coor-
dinafe frame (x , i = 1, 2, 3).that is
attached to the1solid phase with the
x -axls being coincident with the direc-
tion of gravity, Darcy's lav for satu-
rated flow is given [19] as
X = - (K/9 ) grad (h - x,), h > O, (3.1)
1 S 1 l3 1 ~
where K = saturated hydraulic con-
ductivity that is constant
8 =9(h;h>0)= constant
3 1 1 1
h = (p - p )/dg = pressure head
11 ° 1
p = pressure of fluid
1
p = atmospheric pressure
g = gravitational acceleration
From (2.6) and (3.1) the spatial
differential form of fluid mass balance
in saturated flow is given as
div X = 0
1(3.2)
Darcy's law for unsaturated flow is
given [19] as
X = - (k(h)/9(h)) grad (h - x ), h <_ 0,
1 111 1 1J 1
(3.3)
where k(h) = unsaturated hydraulic
1 conductivity and k(0) =
K
The function k(h) is usually deter-
mined empirically. We assume that k(h)
is a smooth function for h < 0. 1
From (2.6) and (3-3)J.the spatial
differential form of fluid mass balance
in unsaturated flow is given as
9 = - div (x 8)
1 11(3.U)
We assume that 9 is a function of
the pressure head h in unsaturated flow
16 = h (h)
1 1(3.5)
-1and the unique inverse h is assumed to
exist.
We assume that the porous medium
consists of a saturated part V~, in
which (3.l) holds true, and an unsatu-
rated part V , in which (3-3) and (3-5)
hold true.
In the past, several works were
reported on the nature of flow described
"by (3.1) [20], and it is well established
that (3.l) accurately describes saturated
flow of a Newtonian fluid in a rigid
porous medium, if the inertial terms are
negligibly small, because (3.1) completely
neglects the inertial terms. Neglecting
the inertial terms is well justified be-
cause they are indeed small [7, 18].
However, it is important to note that
the acceleration is finite regardless of
how small it might be. This small but
finite acceleration is supposed to be
the limit of the acceleration as a(t) is
approached upon paths interior to V .
Since in V~ the acceleration is absent
while in V the acceleration is present,
the discontinuity of the local accelera-
tion across a(t) is generally inevitable.
Therefore, the water table of an incom-
pressible fluid belongs to either Case 1
or Case 2 in the previous section and
constitutes a longitudinal acceleration
wave.
Next we examine whether or not o(t)
constitutes a transverse acceleration
wave. We compute the jump of the
vorticity vector W across a(t).
From (3.1) we obtain
W = 0
1in V (3.6)
and from (3-3) we obtain
W =
1ï2'
?1in (3.7)
where 6 = (6/k) — (k/6) and the assump-1 dV 12 2tion that 3 h/(3x.3x.) = 3 h/(3x,3x.) wasI ij | J 1
used in the derivation of (3-7)- (3-6),
(3.7) and (2.15) yield
Ik6[w] =
1
Ou s x
o
(3.8)
where B is the limiting value of B if
it exists when a(t) is approached upon
paths inteyior to V . (3.8) implies
that, if £5 /O, the vorticity vector
can be discontinuous across o(t) and a
transver_se acceleration wave propagates.
Since B depends solely upon the material
property of the medium, it is not certain
that the "boundary a(t) can "be interpreted
as a propagating transverse acceleration
wave.
WETTING FRONT OF AU INCOMPRESSIBLE FLUID
We again consider a porous medium
that contains an incompressible fluid B
and air B. We assume that the porous '
medium consists of an unsaturated part
V , in which (3.3) and (3-5) hold true,
and a stagnant part V , in which the
following conditions hold true:
= 9 (constant!o
h
1h (constant)o(U.l)
(U.2)velocity suffers a non-zero Jump across
o, a "becomes a shock wave. Since in
this case the fluid is incompressible
and does not admit a shock wave, the
local acceleration must suffer a non-zero
jump across a, and o becomes an accelera-
tion wave. (2.13) is reduced to
- - u (div x) +
n(k.5)
and either one of the following two
conditions, which correspond to Case 1
and Case 2 in the general theory, must
be satisfied:
e = ex = o
in
ux = O
ln(U.6)
CU.T)
The wetting front of an incompres-
sible fluid can be generally interpreted
as an acceleration wave. On the front
the volume fraction and the velocity of
the fluid are continuous, however the
local acceleration of the fluid is dis-
continuous.
We must now examine whether or not
the above conclusion is consistent with
the regularity results derived from
purely mathematical analysis. Gilding
[6] and Gilding and Peletier [5] studied
the Cauchy problem for a special case of
the present situation, in which (3.3)
takes the form
x = 0
1(U.3) x = -D
1 1O e/3x_) + K en (U.8)
ii3 ° 1
In the physical problem, it is
clear_that the interface cr(t) Toetween V
and V should move with a finite speed.
When a(t) is approached upon paths
interior to V , the limiting material
time derivative of the velocity is
given as
(Dx /Dt)+ = Ox /3t) + + x+ (grad (x )) +
n n n nAfter suitahle rescaling of the
independent variable the equation of
continuity (2.6) is written as
(36/3t) =
where 939n/3x
= 6 ^D U/m
= e Kl/n(U.9)
+ 1
If the local acceleration (3x /3t)
and the velocity x+ vanish simultaneously, a^4 C+.8) reduces to
then the particles stop moving and there-
fore a(t) stops moving. Since "both local
acceleration and velocity vanish in V~,
a singularity of either the local
acceleration or the velocity must appear
so that the interface o moves with a
finite speed. On the other hand, if thex = -36m-1„n-1
m-1^10)
We consider the Cauchy problem for
(1+.9). Let S denote the strip (-», ») x
(0, T] in the x, t-plane, for some fixednumber T>0, and let L denote the non-
linear operator
Then we consider the problem
L6 = 0 in S„
e(x, o] = e1(x) (U.12)
in which 9. is a given non-negative,
bounded and continuous function in
(-<*>, »).
It was shown by Gilding and Peletier
[5] that problem (k.ll) and (U.12) need
not have a classical solution, and be-
cause of this the notion of a weak
solution was there introduced. They
show that if 9.m is uniformly Lipschitz
continuous and^ > 1 and n >^ T; (m+l),
then
(a) Problem (U.ll), (1+.12) has a
unique weak solution.
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)6 satisfies a Hölder condition
in ST.
9 has a continuous derivative
with respect to x in S .
9 has a bounded generalized
derivative with respect to
x in any strip of the form
(-», «0 x [T, T], te(0, T).
in S,exists and is continuous
if m < 2.T
6 is infinitely continuously
differentiable and a classical
solution of (IK11) in a neigh-
borhood of any point in S
where it is positive.
The above regularity results may be
interpreted as follows. In order to
avoid unnecessary complication, we con-
sider a situation in which only one
interface a(t) exists. We refer to the
part where 9 > 0 as V" and to the part
where S = 0 as V . We exclude the case
where 2 > m > 1 because it is not physi-
cally relevant. From (b) and (c) we get
ande+ = o
(6 x) + = 0(fc.13)
(U.lU)
where the + sign denotes the limiting
value when o is approached upon pathsinterior to V". (U.13) andvjU.ll0 do
not^ijiecessarily implv_ that x exists.
If x exists, then x =0. Since x ^ 0
implies that the fluid is compressible,
we_ consider here only the case where
x = 0 and postpone our discussion on a
compressible fluid to thenext section.
(d) and (f) imply that 9m and 9 exist
and are continuous everywhere except on
a. The reason why these two derivatives
are generally singular on o merits
furiher discussion. The singularity of
9 is directly related to the singu-
larity of x. According to the present
theory for an incompressible fluid x
should be continuous so is 9m~ . However,
since problem (U.ll), (U.12)xdoes not
include the condition that the fluid is
incompressible, it is expected that
6m is generally singular on o.
Suppose that a is an acceleration
wave, then 9 can be shown to be gener-
ally singula? on o as follows. If 0 is
an acceleration wave, £hen from (U.5) a
limiting value (div x) exists and is
not zero. From (U.10) we get
,n-l
div x = -m
m-1391
- [m
-m6m-2 326
x e V
From (U.15) if m > 3, and if both
9 and 9 are continuous on a, then
tne limiting value (div x) becomes zero.
Therefore either 9 or 9 must be dis-
continuous on a. feis sh^ows that even
if a is an acceleration wave, it is
possible that 9 is discontinuous on a.
Next we examine the condition for 6 to
be discontinuous on o.
The time derivative of 9 with
respect to the surface that is moving
with a speed u is given as
D9_
Dt39
3tu'n 3x
39n
3x39
CU.16)
D9_
DtFrom (lt.10) and (h.16) we get
„m-1m(m-2) 3 61'
3x
1U8If the limiting values of^all terms of
(U.17) exist, accounting x =0, and
(6m-1xf= 0, we getand
'Dt'= u_ (U.18)
Since always 6 = 0, so the left
hand side of (U.18) should be zero..
Therefore we conclude that if (9m~ 6 )
= 0, then 9 is continuous. If not,3™
6 is discontinuous on o.
Un£ortunately the existence of
(div x) does not directly follow the
regularity results by Gilding and
Peletier [5]. So far, the present theory
does not contradict the regularity re-
sults. Therefore, the regularity results
neither negate nor confirm the existence
of an acceleration wave.
WETTING FRONT OF A COMPRESSIBLE FLUID
We consider a porous medium that
contains only one compressible fluid B.
We assume that the porous medium 2
consists of a part V , in which the
pressure h of the fluid is greater than
a non-negative nuraber h and a stagnant
part V~, in which the following conditions
hold true:
h = h
X = 0
2(5-1)
[5.2)d+ x + = u [d]
o ^n n _(5.7)
(5.7) includes the following three
cases
Case 1 d+ / 0 and [d] = 0
2 2
Case 2 d+ / 0 and [d] f 0
2 2
Case 3 d = 0 and [d] = 0
2 2
In Case 1, x is continuous across
2n
0, so a is an acceleration wave. In
Case 2, x is discontinuous across o, so
a is a snoek wave. In Case 3, it is not
certain whether or not x is continuous
2n
on o. So O can be either an acceleration
wave or a shock wave. The physical
description of Case 3 is that a compres-
sible fluid is flowing into a vacuüm
through the porous medium. Since
Aronson [l, 2] studied the Cauchy
problem for a special case of this
situation, we examine whether or not the
above conclusion is consistent with his
results.
In his problem, (5.3) takes the form
x =-m
m-1m > 2 (5-8)
where x = x_
We refer to an interface between V
and V as o and assume that the velocity
is given as= d
2
X = - k(.h) grad (h - x ), h > h (5.3)
2 2 2 2^ 2 c
= 0 0 < h < h-2- c(5-
From (2.6) and (5.3), the spatial
eguation of continuity for the fluid in
V is given as
3d/3t = div (d x)
2 2 2(5-5)
The jump conditions of local accel-
eration and velocity are given as
af *3t gu (div x)+
n o(5.6)and (5-5) reduces to
3t(5.9)
The Cauchy problem is the same as
problem (U.ll) and (U.12) except that
the operator L is defined as
LO = (9ra)x,x -t(5.10)
Aronson showed that the regularity
results (a) ^ (f) hold true. Moreover
he proved that (g) if 9i is continuoi:
If the derivative of 9 m~ with respect
to x is absolutely continuous and
1U9eSS inf _JL_ Q m~1 t,.\ ^ .. frr -i-, \ 2.
3x3."1"" (x) > - a (5.11)
for some constant a ^ 0, then
2
ess inf — 8m~1(x, t) >_ -6 (5.12)
3x
for some constant S >_ 0 and
x+ (x, t) = x (a (t), t) (5-13)
exists for all t > 0 and
x (u - x ) = 0 (5.1U:
Again it is easy to find that the
regularity results from (a) to (f) are
not inconsistent with the present theory.
Since the regularity result (g) adds more
insight to the problem, we examine it.
(5•1^ ) includes two mutually
exclusive situations. If x =0, then
(5.lM is satisfied. This impl|es that
er is a shock wave, Also u = x satisfies
(5-lM- And this implies that o is a
shock wave. Since the problem has a
unique solution, it may be interpreted
that this unique solution can be either
an acceleration wave or a shock wave,
depending on other unknown conditions.
This conclusion is indeed consistent
with the present theory.
CONCLUSION
A new theory that "both the water
table and the wetting front in Darcy's
flow are generally singular surfaces of
order 2 is found theoretically sound and
consistent with the reported regularity
results obtained from a purely mathemati-
cal viewpoint. Darcy's law is considered
an accurate but approximate description
of real porous flow; however, the
problems involved in either a water
table or a wetting front require an
extra boundary condition imposed on
these surfaces due to a singularity that
is inherent in the porous media described
"by Darcy' s law.
REFERENCES
1. Aronson, D.G. Regularity properties
of flows through porous media. STAM
J. Appl. Math. 17 (1969), pp. U6I-U67.10.
11.Aronson, D.G. Regularity pro-
perties of flows through porous
media: the interface. Arch.
Rational Mech. Anal. 37 (1970),
pp. 1-10.
Christoffel, E.B. Untersuchungen
Ü"ber die mit dern Fortbestehen
linearer partieller Differentialglei*.
chungen vertraglich Unstetigkeiten,
Ann. Math 8 (l8T7), PP- 81-113.
Duyn, C.J. van and L.A. Peletier,
Asymptotic behaviour of solutions
of a nonlinear diffusion equation.
Arch. Rational Mech. Anal. 6h (1977),
pp. 363-377.
Gilding, B.H. and L.A. Peletier,
The Cauchy problem for an equation
in the theory of infiltration. Arch.
Rational Mech. Anal. 6l (1976),
pp. 127-lUO.
Gilding B.H. Properties of solu-
tions of an equation in the theory
of infiltration. Arch. Rational
Mech. Anal. 65 (1977), pp. 203-225.
Groenevelt, P.H. and G.H. Bolt,
Non-equilibrium thermodynamics of
the soil-water system, J. Hydro-
logy 7 (1969), PP- 358-388.
Hugoniot, H. Sur la propagation du
mouvement dans un fluide
indéfini (Première Partie and
Deuxiëme Partie), C.R. Acad. Sci.,
Paris 101 (1885), pp. 1118-1120
and 1229-1232.
Kalashnikov, A.S. The occurrence
of singularities in solutions of
the non-steady seepage equation.
Zn. Vychisl. Mat. i Mat. Fiz. 7
(1967), PP- UUO-UHU. (Translated
as: USSR Computational Math. and
Math. Pbys. 7 (1967), PP. 269-275.)
McCarthy, M.F. Singular surfaces
and waves, In Continuüm Physics,
edited by A.C Eringen. Vol. 2
(1975), Part 3, pp. 1*50-513,
Academie Press, New York, N.Y.
Nakano, Y. Theory and numerical
analysis of moving "boundary pro-
blems in the hydrodynamics of
porous media. Water Resources
Research 1^ (1978), pp. 125-131*.
15012.
13.
15.
16.
17.Nakano, Y. The mathematical descrip- 18.
tion of a moving boundary problem in
an elliptic-parabolic system of
partial differential equation in the
hydrodynamics of porous media, Trans.
23rd Conf. of Army Mathematicians, 19.
ARO Report 78-1 (1978), pp. 11-20.
Nakano, Y. Theory of acceleration
waves applied to singular boundary
problems in Darcy's flow through
porous media, manuscript submitted
for possible publication in BIAM
J. Appl. Math. (1978). 20.
Oleinik, O.A., A.S. Kalashinikov,
and Chzhou Yui-Lin, The Cauchy pro-
blem and boundary problems for
equations of the type of non-station-
ary infiltration. Izv. Akad. Nauk.
SSR Ser. Mat. 22 (1958), pp. 667-70U
Peletier, L.A. Asymptotic 'behaviour
of solutions of the porous media
equation. SIAM J. Appl. Math. 21
(1971), PP. 5^2-551.
Poulovassilis, A. Flow character-
istics during infiltration into a
horizontal sand column. Water
Resources Research 13 (1977), PP-
369-.- 21.
22.
Raats, P.A.C. Jump conditions in
the hydrodynamics of porous media,
Fundamentals of Transport Phenomena
in Porous Media, Vol. 1 (1972),
University of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada, pp. 155-173.Raats, P.A.C. The role of inertia
in the hydrodynamics of porous
media, Arch. Rational Mech. Anal.
kk (1972), pp. 267-280.
Raats, P.A.C and V.R. Gardner,
Movement of water in the unsaturated
zone near a water table, In
Drainage for Agriciilture, edited
by J.V. Schllfgaade. Am. Soc.
Agronomy Inc., Madison, Wisconsin
(197*0, PP- 311-^05.
Scheidegger, A.E. Hydrodynamics in
porous media, Handbuch der Physik,
VIII/2, Springer-Verlag, Berlin
(1963), PP. 625-653.
Serrin, J. Asymptotic behaviour of
velocity profiles in the Prandtl
boundary layer theory. Proc. Roy.
Soc. A299 (1967), PP- ^91-507.
Truesdell, C, and R.A. Toupin, The
classical field theories, Handbuch
der Physik III/l, (1963), pp.
226-793, particularly p. 523,
Section 190. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin.
151LAND TREATMEIMT MATHEMATICA!. MODELING
EVALUATION OF PHOSPHORUS MODELS FOR
PREDICTION OF PERCOLATE WATER
QUALITY IN LAND TREATMENT
CarlG. Enfield
U. S. Environmental Protection Agency
Robert S . Kerr Environmental Research
Laboratory
Ada, Oklahoma 74820
ABSTRACT
A review of existing literature yields
several models proposed to assist a designer
in estimating the concentration of phosphorus
in the percolate water under land application
wastewater treatment systems • The models
range in approach from empirical equilibrium
reactions to multistepped, hysteretic, kinetic
models. The models are classified in three
broad groups— empirical models which are
not based on any known theory; two phase
kinetic models which assume a solution
phase and some adsorbed phase; and multi-
phase models which include solution, ad-
sorbed and precipitated phases.
Representative models from each of the
classes are presented. It is concluded none
of the models have been adequately evaluated
under field conditions. The ability to pre-
dict phosphorus concentrations in percolate
waters from land application systems, there-
fore, has not been demonstrated. Based on
the models presented, an interim design ap-
proach is suggested. The design approach
estimates maximum application rates to
achieve a discharge requirement. A method
to estimate the capacity of a soil to react
with phosphorus is referenced.
INTRODUCTION
The application of wastewaters to soil-
water plant systems results in the accumu-
lation of phosphorus in soils. As residence
time increases, the amount of water soluble
phosphorus decreases. This observation
has led some individuals (e.g. Soil Conser-
vation Service , 1975) to the conclusion that
the potential for phosphate pollution after
land treatment is small. As a general rule,
soils do have a large capacity to react withsoluble phosphorus. Thus, land application
does present an economical and effective
means of treating wastewaters for soluble
phosphates.
The objectives of this presentation are:
1) Present an equilibrium chemical thermo-
dynamic model as a rationale to determine the
potential for phosphate reaction in soil.
2) Review other current modeling approach-
es to phosphate transport through soils.
Brief comments discussing advantages and
disadvantages of the approaches are included.
3) Propose a preliminary approach to design-
ing land application wastewater treatment
systems to meet a percolate water quality
Standard.
EQUILIBRIUM THERMODYNAMICA MODEL
IN SOILS
The number of phosphate species which
might be found under wastewater application
are large and highly pH dependent. Thermo-
dynamics governing the transformation
between the different forms is extremely
complex (Larson, 1967). A careful study of
chemical thermodynamics indicates trends
for potential reactions.
Given sufficient time for the reaction to
proceed, concentrations estimated from a
chemical thermodynamic model should be
quite accurate. The equilibrium state is
dependent on the activity of several ions
in the soil solution including phosphorus,
iron, aluminum, calcium, sulfur, fluoride,
and hydrogen. The activity of thermo-
dynamic concentration is the important
parameter to consider, since the activity
is a measure of the effective concentration
of reactants in a chemical reaction.
153To understand the interrelationship
between solution concentration reported in
the literature and thermodynamic concentra-
tions (activity), six thermodynamic concepts
are presented.
Law of Mass Action
This law states if the reaction of b moles
of B with c moles of C has equilibrated with
d moles of D and e moles of E
bB + cC «* dD + eE [1]
thenwhere R is the gas constant, and
T is the absolute temperature.
Ionic Strength
Ionic strength, I, is defined as
I = 1/2 2 mi 2. [5]
where m. is the molality, and Z. is the charge
tli 1
of the i— ion in the solution, The ionic
strength of soil solutions can be estimated
from the electrical conductivity of a satu-
ration extract by the equation
- K f2] 1= 0.013 EC [6]
where K is the thermodynamic equilibrium
constant and a represents activity.
Standard State Activity
A standard state is defined for each sub-
stance in terms of reference conditions,
usually 25°C and one atmosphere pressure.
Under the reference conditions, the sub-
stance is assigned an activity of unity.
Free Energy of Reaction
The standard free energy change for a
reaction is the sum of free energies of for-
mation of the products in their standard
state, minus the free energies of formation
of the reactants in their standard state.
O o
AGr = IA f (products)
- ÏAQf (reactants) [3]
Chemical reactions will take place to achieve
the lowest energy state. Thus, when AG0
is negative, the products of the reaction
are more stable than the reactants.
Relation Between Reaction Free Energy and
Equilibrium Constant
The free energy of change (AGp in a
reaction is related to the thermodynamic
equilibrium constant (K) by the equation
AG = -RTlnKr[4]where the ionic strength (I) is in moles/
liter, and the electrical conductivity (EC)
is in millimoles/cm2 at 25°C.
Activity Coëfficiënt
Ions in electrolytic solutions exert long-
range forces on one another with a resulting
lowering of the ionic activity. In dilute so-
lutions , the activity coëfficiënt is given by
the modified Debye-Hückel expression
where
I
Z,
ai
P =
m. =1
A =-log Y< = PI [7]
1 -
activity coëfficiënt of the i—
ion
ionic strength of the solution
valence of the i— ion
effective diameter in angstroms
of the i— ion in solution (3.5
for OH" , F" ; 4.2 for H^POÏ ,
HPCS *, PO; s, SOl 2 ; 5 for
S"2; 6 for Ca+2, Fet2; "and 9
for Al*3)
0.257 (Moreno et al, 1960)
molar concentration of the i —
ion
temperature dependent coëffici-
ënt 0.508 @ 25°C (Garrels and
Christ, 1965)B = temperature dependent coëffici-
ënt 0.328 @ 25°C (Garrels and
Christ, 1965)
Application of Chemical Thermodynamics to
Phosphate Transport Through Soils
With the above introduction to chemical
thermodynamic concepts, the reader should
be able to apply literature data to the evalua-
tion of treatment cites for land application.
Sadiq and Lindsay (1978) have reviewed the
literature and compiled a list of free energies
of formation for numerous compounds occur-
ring in soils. Table 1 is a partial listing, from
Sadiq and Lindsay (1978) , of compounds re-
lated to phosphate chemistry. As can be
seen, there are numerous compounds which
might be considered even in this partial list-
ing . For simplification, only one aluminum
TABU! 1
Gibbs Free Energy of Formulation for Selected Compounds
Related to Phosphates in Soil Solutions
(after Sadiq and Lindsay, 1978)TABLE 1 (continued)
SPECIES
Fe"
Fe*J
FcCl * '
FeCl,°
FeClj
FeCl°,
FeOH+
Fe(OH)'*
Fe(OH)j
Pe(OH)i
FeCOH>jCC)
Fc(OH), (amorp)
Fe (OH) ,, (soil)
FePO, s (c)A Gf (K cal/mole)
SPECIES
Al*'
Al (OH J'
AKOH)i*
AKOH)!0
Al(OH), (aroorp)
o-Al(OH)iCbayerite)
Y-AKOH), (gibbsite)
A1PO4 (berlinite)
A1PO4 • 2HtO (variseite)
A1(SO)4
A1,(SO4),
A1,(SO4)S (C)
Al,(SO4)j • 6HaO (O
Ca"
CaHCOj
CaCOj (aragonite)
CaCOi (calcite)
CaCOj • 6H1O (ikaite)
CaPOi"
CaHPO,
CaH,PO4
CaHPO4 (monetite)
CaHPO1-2H30 (brushite)
Ca(H,PO4),- HiO (O
o-Ca,(PO,), (C)
p-Ca,(PO4)i (whitelockite)
CasHj(PO4), • 5H2O
(oclacalcium phosphate)
CaioFj (PO4), Cfluoripatite)
C»io(OH)j (PO4), (hydroxyapatite)A Gf (K cal/mole)
-117,33
-167.17
-218.02
-266.94
-312.25
-274.21
-275.78
-276.43
-388.50
-505.97
-299.64
-•475.82
-765.94
-758.08
-1121.93
-132.52
-274.33
-269.87
-270.18
-607.52
-386.51
-398.29
-406.28
-403.96
-516.89
-734.48
-922.70
-927.37
-2942.62
-3094.73
-3030.24FeH.Po/'
FeSO4°
FeO (C)
a-Pe,O, (hematite)
FeiO< (inagnetite)
0-FeOOH (goethite)
FePO4 • 2H,O (strenglte)
Fe, (PO4),> 8HjO (vivianlte)
0-FeS (C)
FeS, (markasite)
FeS| (pyrlte)
HPO,
H,PO4'
H,POJ
OH'
H,0-21.8
-4.02
-37.41
-84.44
-69.67
-99.19
-69.29
-57.72
-148.22
-113.29
-117,58
-169.25
-170.41
-283.19
-288.74
-280.93
-297.33
-283.28
-202.75
-187.63
-60.1
-177. 85
-243.47
-117.42
-398.58
-1058.36
-23.40
-37.83
-38.78
-245.18
-262.03
-271.85
-274.78
-37.594
-56.687
phosphate (Variscite) , one iron phosphate
(strengite), and three calcium phosphates
(dicalcium phosphate dihydrate, octacal-
cium phosphate, and hydroxyapatite) will
be discussed in relation to the equilibrium
chemical thermodynamic model.
Consider first the dissolution of Variscite.
A1PO4 • 2H,0
Al' * + H2PO; + 2OH" [8]
To predict the phosphate activity from the
above reaction, knowledge of the aluminum
activity and hydroxyl activity are required.
A common approach is to assume the aluminum
in the reaction is made available from the
solubilization of a naturally occurring min-
eral such as Gibbsite. The solubility of
these minerals are also pH dependent, and
little data is readily available on the amounts
155of such minerals in given soil samples.
Thus, predicting equilibrium conditions
based on the presence of one of these miner-
als may lead to significant errors. In cases
where the activity of aluminum in the waste-
water stream and the activity of aluminum
in the soil solution are approximately the
same, this aluminum activity should be used,
For the purpose of discussion, assume Gibb-
site controls the solubility of aluminum then
Al P04 • 2H2O +H20
Al (OH) 3 + H+ +H2PCT4 [9]
From Eq. 9 and Table 1 AG° is positive;
therefore, the reaction should proceed
toward the Al PO4 • 2H2O (Variscite) . From
Eq. 4 we determine log K = -10.54 or
10-10.84
[A1PO« • 2H2O] [H,O]
[10]
at atmospheric pressure and 25°C. Assuming
standard state conditions for [Al (OH)3],
[Al PO4 • 2H2O], and [H2O], Eq. 10 reduces
to
10- 10 -84
[11]
To obtain the total phosphate activity, both
H2PÖ4 and HPO4 2 species must be considered
in normal pH ranges found in soils (Enfield
et al, 1977).
H» PO4* ml
H +HPO4
= 9.82[12]
[13]
Again from Eq. 4 when the temperature is
25°C log K = -7.20 or
[HjPO4"]
[HPO4"
The total phosphate activity [P ] is thenFrom Eq. 15, the molar phosphate activity,
for a Gibbsite-Varisite system, can be cal-
culated as a function of pH. Before this
activity can be correlated to the measured
concentration in the soil solution, the ionic
strength, Eq. 5 or 6, and the activity co-
ëfficiënt, Eq. 7, must be calculated. Table
2 gives a sample analysis for a non-saline
soil extract used in the example develop-
ment.
TABLE 2
Major Cations and Anions in Sample Problem
ION
CaM
Mg*'
N.+
K+
er
so4*'
HCOJConcentration
(mg/D
88
2
46
31
50
77
177Molar
0.0022
0.0001
0.0020
0.0008
0.0014
0.0008
0.0029
The ionic strength (I) of the solution in
Table 2 is then 0.00895, and the activity co-
ëfficiënt for phosphorus is 1.24. Using this
activity coëfficiënt and Eq. 15, a solubility
diagram in terms of solution concentration
and pH can be developed as shown in Fig. 1.
DCPD
[PT] = [HPO4" ] + or
10- 17-74
[15]PH
Fig. 1. Equilibrium solubility of selected
phosphate compounds vs pH. Fe-P is the
disassociation of strengite in the presence
of Fe (OH) s (soil) . Al-P is the disassociation
of variscite in the presence of Al (OH) 3
(amorp) . DCPD is the disassociation of
brushite (dicalcium phosphate dyhydrate),
OCP is the disassociation of octacalcium phos-
phate, and HA is the disassociation of hydroxya-
patite in the sample wastewater Table 2.
156In a similar manner, iron and calcium
phosphate equilibrium solubility diagrams
can be developed as shown in Fig. 1.
The equilibrium chemical thermodynaniic
model gives no Information on how fast a re-
action will take place. Capacities can be es-
timated for given initial conditions. For
example, at a pH of 8.0 where calcium phos-
phate will control the equilibrium phosphorus
in solution. The capacity of a soil to react
with phosphorus can be estimated from the
total calcium in a soil which has not received
wastewater s. One problem with this approach
is: How much calcium will be in the soil pro-
file after 20 years of wastewater application,
and how is this calcium fractionated? Under
acidic conditions , a considerable knowledge
of the mineralogy is required before accurate
estimates can be made. Thus , it will be ex-
tremely easy to incorrectly estimate a system's
capacity using this approach.
REVIEW OF EXISTING FLOW MODELS
Chemical thermodynamics gives infor-
mation on the potential for a reaction to take
place but does not give any Information on
how fast one can anticipate being able to
apply wastes to the land without having
detrimental problems. Most modeling ap-
proaches attempt to answer the rate question
while predicting capacities of a given soil
to react with phosphorus. Several approach-
es have been proposed beginning about
1970 (e.g. Kuo andLotse, 1972; Shaw et al,
1975; Harter andFoster, 1976; Enfield and
Bledsoe, 1975; Novak et al, 1977; Enfield et
al, 1977; and Mansell et al, 1977). The
models can be classified in three broad
groups—those which are strictly empirical;
those based on a sorption theory; and those
based on more than one mechanism. Se-
lected models from each class are present-
ed. Some advantages and disadvantages of
the models are discussed.
Empirical Models
Harter and Foster (1976iused a sorp-
tion isotherm which was a n— order poly-
nomial of the form
S = A + BX + CX2 +—NXn-1[16]
where S = amount of phosphorus sorbed
X = amount of phosphorus added
A-N are constants.
This equation was developed by repeated
applications of phosphorus to a soil sample
under laboratory conditions until no fur-
ther sorption was observed. From this sorp-
tion isotherm, Harter and Foster predictedbreakthrough curves dependent only on the
rate phosphorus is applied to the system.
This approach is quite similar to that pro-
posed by Taylor and Kunishi (1974) , since
neither addresses the rate of reaction, and
both are primarily concerned with the capa-
city of a soil to react with phosphorus.
Advantages of either approach are their
ease of application. Useful conservative
results can be obtained from either approach,
provided soil from the proposed treatment
site and wastewater are used in the
laboratory studies.
Limitations to equilibrium sorption
isotherms include: 1) During the past
few years there has been a reducing trend
in the phosphate concentration in waste-
water streams. Since Harter and Foster's
procedure was developed for a single con-
centration , there does not appear to be
an adequate way of accounting for changes
in applied concentration.
2) The amount of time allowed for the re-
action to take place will give different results.
This observation has been made by numerous
researchers (Coleman et al, 1960). It
is, therefore, possible to obtain an infinite
number of curves of isotherms for each soil
dependent on the time allowed for equilibra-
tion. Figure 2 shows a similar type of data
for phosphorus sorption by soils taking into
consideration contact time. From this data,
the importance of contact time can be seen.
Enfield (1974) presented an empirical
model which includes reaction rate in its
formation. The equation is exponential in
form and has characteristics similar to a
time dependent Freundlich isotherm, Eq. 20.
Enfield proposed describing the reaction rate
as
as
3TaCbSd[17]
where
9
3t = rate of sorption
C = phosphorus solution concentra-
tion
S = concentration of phosphorus in
the solid phase
a, b, and d are constants.
The equation has been shown to describe
time dependent sorption isotherms (Enfield
et al, 1976) and do a fair job of predicting
phosphate transport through soils (Enfield,
1976). This approach does not, however,
take into consideration:
1) Differences in composition of
applied wastes.
2) Desorption is not permitted.
3) Soils would have infinite capacity
at infinite times.
15720 40 60 80 100
TIME (days)120 140 160
Fig. 2. Change in solution concentration vs time for several applications
of Phosphorus.
Sorption Theory Kinetics Models
Sorption theory kinetic models are one
step more advanced than equilibrium sorp-
tion models or empirical kinetic models.
These models assume equilibrium can be
described by some adsorption theory such as:
1) linear sorption
S = KC
where K is a constant[18]They further assume the force driving the
reaction is the difference between "equili-
brium" and the systems current status.
Different researchers have used different
methods to describe the kinetics. The ma-
jority are first order kinetic models (e.g.
Novak et al., 1975); others are diffusion
limited models (e.g. Enfield et al, 1976).
Novak et al (1975) proposed the equation
dt = KoA(C-C ) [21]
2) Langmuir adsorption
S =S BC
ra
1 +BC[19]
where
S is the maximum concentration
wliich can be sorbed by the solid phase
B is a constant related to the bonding
energy
3) Freundlich sorption
S = mCn [20]
where
m and n are constants.where
C* = equilibrium concentration for
langmuir adsorption
liquid interface area
mass transfer coëfficiënt
Enfield and Bledsoe (1975) used a similar
approach with equilibrium described by a
Freundlich equation
at = Cs*-[22]
where p = soil dependent variable which
includes both liquid and solid interface
area and mass transfer coëfficiënt of Novak
et al, (1977).
S* = equilibrium sorption described
by Freundlich equation.
A linear approach
158as
at = a (KC-S)[23]
where a is a constant was presented by
Enfield and Shew (1975) .
An advantage to the linear model is the
existence of analytical Solutions for simu-
lation (Oddson et al, 1970) . There is consi-
derable doubt, however, that linear sorption
can adequately describe the equilibrium
status for phosphorus . A deficiency com-
mon to each of the sorption theory kinetic
model is the ability to accurately describe
the equilibrium condition. The reaction of
phosphorus with soils is much more com-
plex than sorption alone.
Multiple Mechanistic Models
Models with multiple mechanisms essen-
tially assume more than two phases for the
phosphorus. Mansell et al (1977) assumed
four phases to be present— a) solution,
b) adsorbed, c) immobilized (chemisorbed),
and d) precipitated.
The equations describing the rates of
transfer between the phases were given as
follows:
d(QA)
at
+ p (KjB + K«D) [24]
a(pB)
Kx 0AN
- [K, +K3] pB +K4pC
3(pC)
= K3pB-K4pC
a(pD)
at = Ks (©A) - K6pD[25]
[26]
[27]
where
e
p
t
A
B
CD = amount of phosphorus precipi-
tated
N = constant representing order of
adsorption process
Ki = rate coëfficiënt for adsorption
Kj = rate coëfficiënt for desorption
Kj := rate coëfficiënt for immobili-
zation
K4 = rate coëfficiënt for mobilization
Ks = rate coëfficiënt for precipitation
Kj = rate coëfficiënt for dissolution
As written, the model could also be con-
sidered a three phase system where sorption
(adsorption and chemisorption) is a two step
process. The model is linear first order
except for adsorption which could be consi-
dered possibly being non-linear when N is
not 1. If the equations are all linear, the
numerical solution, when combined with
a flow model, can be solved analytically
rather than some approximating technique.
This greatly reduces simulation time. The
model has several degrees of freedom.
Thus, using curve fitting techniques, it
should be possible to very accurately repro-
duce experimental breakthrough curves.
The question becomes : Are the same co-
efficients adequate for different flow bound-
daries? In other words, are the coefficients
directly related to physical or chemical pro-
perties of the soil? It will take considerable
effort to evaluate the validity of the model.
Another multistepped model which con-
ceptually is quite similar to the multistepped
model of Mansell et al (1977) was presented
by Enfield et al (1977) . Enfield et al assumed
adsorption was instantaneous and described
by a Langmuir equation (Eq. 19) rather
than a Freundlich function (Eq. 20) as assum-
ed by Mansell et al. Enfield et al further
assumed that precipitation and dissolution
were reversible. The precipitation process
was assumed first order but limited by
chemical thermodynamic equilibrium. They
further limited the maximum precipitation or
dissolution to the chemical limits of the con-
trolling soil system . Their model follows
the equation
S bC(t)
ST(t) = bC(t)n
£ S
3=1 '[28]
volumetric soil water content
soil bulk density
time
concentration of phosphorus in
solution
amount of phosphorus adsorbed
amount of phosphorus immob-
lizedwhere
ST(t)
mtheoretical phosphorus
sorption at some time t
Langmuir sorption maxi-
mum
159j (C(t) - dt
n
2 S
where
CE. =
mxj
b
C(t)mxj
for S .<S .xj mxj
for S . > S .xj - mxj
for S ,KOxj —
a rate constant for the j —
species under consideration
thermodynamic chemical equili-
brium concentration of the
j— species
the maximum amount of phos-
phorus which can be formed
by a particular ionic species
Langmuir constant re-
lated to the bonding
energy
solution concentration
at some time tperimental data to obtain a series of regres-
sion coefficients. Some models were "fitted"
from batch sorption studies while other
studies were based on column data. There
are some studies such as Enfield and Shew
(1975) and Enfield (1976) which used the
regression coefficients derived from batch
sorption studies to predict the results of
column studies. These studies were perform-
ed under laboratory conditions with con-
trolled flow and solution compositions.
Published data attempting to evaluate under
field conditions the above mentioned models
are lacking. Fig. 3 reproduces some of the
findings of Enfield (1976) and Enfield and
Shew (1975) where attempts were made to
evaluate models. Four different modeling
approaches were evaluated—1) after the
empirical model, 2) an instantaneous form
of langmuir adsorption, 3) a simplified
approximation of langmuir adsorption with
first order kinetics similar to Eq. 21,
4) a linear form of adsorption with first
order kinetics (Eq. 23) . None of the models
- 8r
o
oo
zo
I-
rs_i
o
Again the model can have several degrees of
freedom. The number of degrees of freedom
will depend on the number of ionic species
considered by the model. Enfield et al consi-
dered three species of which two influenced
the system under acidic conditions, while one
was the predominate factor under basic con-
ditions .
They also showed a reasonable corre-
lation between pH and the rate coëfficiënt parti-
cularly under basic conditions. If the rate
coefficients are not dependent on soil chara-
cteristics and dependent only on the pH and
the species being formed, the number of de-
pendent variables will be reduced.
MODEL EVALUATION AND APPLICATION
TO LAND TREATMENT DESIGN
Most of the models have not been ade-
quately evaluated. Generally the data pre-
sented in the literature was developed by
"curve fitting". In other words, a precon-
ceived model was regressed to a set of ex-0 5
ELAPSED10
TIME15 20
(days)
Fig. 3-1. Comparison between predicted
phosphorus breakthrough curve and
measured breakthrough curve using Eq. 17,
~ 8
•= 6
oo
zo
.UTI
o4
2
n
°c/.
"/ *
) 5
ELAPSED••
10 15
TIMEi
20
{days)
Fig . 3-2 . Comparison between predicted
phosphorus breakthrough curve and
measured breakthrough curve based on
Eq. 19.
160= 8
o»
ü
zo
ow
0' 5 10 15 20
ELAPSED TIME (days)
Fig. 3-3. Comparison between predicted
phosphorus breakthrough curve and
measured breakthrough curve based on
Eq. 19 and Eq. 22.
-» IAo•s,
O
z 0.8o
K 0.6
uio
<
lüuating systems for specific sites. Pratt's
proposed design model (1977, sec. B.4.4)
uses long sorption times to estimate sorption
capacity and recommends this approach for
slow rate systems. The method is quite
similar to the models of Harter and Foster
(1976) or Taylor and Kunishi (1974), except
long equilibrium times are permitted for the
reaction to proceed. This may be as good as
any other method at the present time to esti-
mate capacities. For high rate systems,
Pratt suggests employing Eq. 17. Since
design models for the prediction of phosphates
in percolates have not been field tested, a
more logical recommendation might to be use
Eq. 28 to estimate maximum application rates.
Crude conservative estimates of maximum ap-
plication rates can be obtained without time
dependent sorption isotherms.
For example, assume a designer is re-
quired to estimate the maximum application
rate for a high rate system. The designer
determines 10 mg/l phosphorus wastewater
with pH7.5 ionic strength of 0.009 is to be ap-
plied to a soil with pH 7.5 and bulk density
1.5 g/cc. The discharge requirement one
meter below the surface is 1. 5 mg/l of phos-
phorus . No plants are to be grown. on the
system, and it is to operate without seasonal
constraints.
ELAPSED TIME (days)
p 3-4. Coroparison between predicted
phosphorus breakthrough curve and
measured breakthrough curve based on
Eq. 18 and Eq. 21.
evaluated are totally satisfactory. The
closest fit was from the empirical model
(Eq. 17) . But with limitations previously
mentioned, it should not be considered
satisfactory for design purposes.
The conclusion that must be made is —
no currently available model has been ade-
quately demonstrated to satisfactorily
predict phosphorus concentrations in per-
colate waters resulting from land treatment.
This conclusion corresponds to a recent
review by Pratt (1977) . This conclusion does
not mean all of the models are inadequate;
only a demonstration of the adequacy or in-
adequacy has not been provided.
TENTATIVE DESIGN APPROACH
With the uncertainty of current predic-
tion models, the designer has difficulty eval-Fig . 4. First order rate constant in Eq. 18
as a function of pH developed from Enfield
et al, 1977.
4, the estimated rate coef-
'7 h" 1 for above conditionsFrom Fig
ficient 10"
is obtained. Under the worst possible con-
ditions, or a driving force of 1.5 mg/l, the
maximum application rate would be 3 x 10" 8
micrograms phosphorus per gram of soil per
hour. This is equivalent to applying 1.3 cm
of wastewater per day. Under optimum con-
ditions, or a driving force of 10 mg/l, the
allowable application rate would increase to
161approximately 8 cm per day.
This procedure is crude but will give
an appropriate range for design purposes
without the complexities of computer
analysis. Much additional work is required
to validate all of the mentioned models and
determine their applicability and accuracy
before they can be recommended for use in
estimating percolate water quality from
land application.
REFERENCES
Coleman, N. T., James Thorup, and
W. A. Jackson, 1960. Phosphate-
Sorption Reactions that Involve Exchange-
able Al. Soil Sci. 90:1-7.
Enfield, Carl G. 1974. Rate of Phos-
phorus Sorption by Five Oklahoma Soils.
Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. Proc. 38:404-407.
Enfield, Carl G. and Bert E. Bledsoe.
1975. Fate of Wastewater Phosphorus in
Soil. J Irrigation and Drainage Div.,
ASCE. 101:145-155.
Enfield, Carl G. and D. C. Shew. 1975.
Comparison of Two Predictive Nonequili-
brium One-Dimensional Models for Phos-
phorus Sorption and Movement Through
Homogeneous Soils. J Environ. Qual.
4: 198-202.
Enfield, Carl G. 1976. Phosphate Trans-
port Through Soils. Iii Disposal of Resi-
dues on Land. Rockville, Md., Informa-
tion Transfer, Inc., pp. 138-145.
Enfield, Carl G., Curtis C. Harlin, Jr.,
and Bert E. Bledsoe. 1976. Comparison
of Five Kinetic Models for Orthophosphate
Reaction in Mineral Soils. Soil Sci. Soc.
Amer J 40:243-249.
Enfield, Carl G. , T. L. Kuo, Y. V.
Subbaro, and Roscoe Ellis, Jr. Kinetic
Model for Phosphate Reactions with Miner-
al Soils. Presented at Joint Annual Meet-
ings, ASA, CSA, SSA, Los Angeles, Ca.,
Nov. 1977.
Garrels, Robert M. and Charles L. Christ.
1965. Solutions, Minerals, and Equilibria.
N. Y., Harper & Row, 450pp.
Griffin, R. A. and J. J. Jurniak. 1973.
Estimation of Activity Coefficients from
Electrical Conductivity of Natural Aqueous
Systems and Soil Extracts. Soil Sci. 116:
26-30.Harter, Robert D. and Bennett B.
Foster. 1976. Computer Simulation
of Phosphorus Movement Through Soils.
Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. J 40:239-242.
Kuo, S. and E. G. Lotse. 1972. Kinetics
of Phosphate Adsorption by Calcium Car-
bonate and Ca-Kaolinite. Soil Sci. Soc.
Amer. Proc. 36:725-729.
Mansell, R. S., H. M. Selim, and J.G.A.
Fiskell. 1977. Simulated Transformations
and Transport of Phosphorus in Soil.
Soil Sci. 124: 102-109.
Moreno, E. C, W. E. Brown, and G.
Osborn. 1960. Solubility of Dicalcium
Phosphate Dihydrate in Aqueous Solutions.
Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. Proc. 24:94-98.
Munns, D.N. and R. L. Fox. 1976. The
Slow Reaction Which Continues After Phos-
phate Adsorption: Kinetics and Equili-
brium in Some Tropical Soils. Soil Sci.
Soc. Amer. J 40:46-51.
Novak, L. T., D. C. Adriano, G. A.
Coulman, and D.B. Shah. 1975. Phos-
phorus Movement in Soils: Theoretical
Aspects. J Environ. Qual. 4:93-99.
Oddson, J. K., L. Letey, and L. V.
Weeks. 1970. Predicted Distribution of
Organic Chemicals in Solution and Adsorb-
ed as a Function of Position and Time for
Various Chemicals and Soil Properties.
Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. Proc. 34:412-417.
Pratt, Parker. 1977. Appendix B-Phos-
phorus. In_ Process Design Manual for
Land Treatment of Municipal Wastewater.
EPA, U. S. Army Corps of Engineers,
USDA, EPA/1-77-008, Oct. 1977, pp. B-l-
B-34.
Sadiq, Muhammad and W. L. Lindsay.
Selection of Standard Free Energies of For-
mation Useful in Soil Science. Ft. Collins,
Co., Colorado State Univ., Dept. of Agro-
nomy (In Press) .
Shaw, Dhananjai, B. 1975. A Mathemati-
cal Model for Phosphorus Movement in
Soils. J. Environ. Qual. 4:87-92.
Soil Conservation Service, U. S. Dept. of
Agriculture. 1975. Agricultural Waste
Management Field Manual Wash. D.C.
Taylor, A. W. and H. M. Kunishi. 1974.
Soil Adsorption of Phosphorus from Waste
Water, In_ Factors Involved in Land
Application of Agricultural and Municipal
Wastes, Beltsville, Md., USDA, ARS,
Soil, Water, and Air Sciences.
162LAND TREATMENT MATHEMATICA!. MODELING
EVALUATION OF N MODELS FOR PREDICTION OF NO -N IN PERCOLATE
WATER IN LAND TREATMENT
I.K. Iskandar
H.M. SelimU.S. Army Cold Regiems Research and Engineering Laboratory,
Hanover, New Hampshire
Agronomy Department, Louisiana Agricultural Experiment
Station, Louisiana State University
ABSTRACT
Nitrogen simulation modela develop-
ed to describe one or more processes in
agricultural soils can te adopted for
land treatment. The most important
processes in the simulation of N trans-
formations for prediction of N in per-
colate water in land treatment are:
nitrification, denitrification, plant
uptake and exchange of NH^ with the soil.
The W model must be incorporated into a
moisture flow model. It was concluded
that the Michaelis-Menten type model is
the most appropriate, although the first
order kinetic may "be used to describe
the nitrification process. Modeling
the denitrification process in slow
infiltration must include biodegradable
carbon and dissolved oxygen as limiting
factors. Although several large models
are available to simulate and predict
N in leachate in land treatment, a need
for a simplified model that can be test-
ed in the field is apparent.
INTRODUCTION
In land treatment, nitrogen is al-
most always the factor limiting the
rate of application. Excessive nitrate
concentrations in groundwater are a
great health concern. This is due to
its association with infant methomo-
globinemia (blue baby syndrome) and
eutrophication of natural waters.
Consideration of land treatment as an
alternative to advanced waste treatment
has been hampered by the lack of hard
scientific data on the fate of N thatwould allow efficiënt design of systems
without incurring health risks on one
hand but avoiding overdesign (cost
ineffectiveness) on the other.
Land treatment of wastewater is not
a new concept. Systems were built in
1559 in Lover Silesia and Germany
(iskandar, 1978). Present interest,
however, is in the design of cost-
effective and reasonably safe systems.
Thus a quantitative description is
needed of the chemical, physical, and
biological interactions that occur
between the vastewater constituents and
the soil system to make possible accur-
ate recommendations on how and when
wastewater can be applied and predictions
of the quality of the leachate.
Allison (1966) published a review
entitled, "The fate of nitrogen applied
to soil." While it may be claimed that
little that is new has been reported in
this field since then, there have been
two major trends:
(1) In the past, we vere primarily
concerned with the problem of getting
more fertilizer into a erop. At the
present time, and particularly in land
treatment, the primary focus is on the
fate of applied N not taken up.
(2) Ways of using research data
are changing. With recent advances in
the use of computers and development of
techniques'for modeling ecological
systems, we are becoming better equipped
to describe (or even predict) quantita-
tively the behavior of nitrogen in soil
systems).
The fact that in land treatment
systems nitrogen is applied in small
amounts repeatedly (most often weekly),
163in contrast to normal agricultural
fertilizing practice, should make signi-
ficant differences in the nitrogen
transformation processes. Also, the
soils under land treatment are most
often kept wet (above field capacity),
and the water flow pattern as well as N
transformation processes will vary
significantly from those of an agricul-
tural regime.
The objective of this paper is to
review the literature in regard to
modeling the nitrogen transformation in
soil-plant-water systeras, with particu-
lar emphasis on possible application to
land treatment systems. Eecause of
limited space, only those models devel-
oped for prediction of percolate quality
will "be discussed.
TYPES OF MODELS
There are three types of mathemati-
cal models. The first are mechanistic
type models which were developed to
understand the response of a biological
system in terms of the mechanisms
present. They are constructed by looking
at the system, dividing it into compon-
ents, and acquiring an understanding of
the behavior of the whole system in
terms of the individual system components
and their interaction one with another.
The steps that are most often taken are
assumptions, mathematical formulation,
solution of equations, and finally
validation. The last step is carried
out to test the accuracy and validity ofthe assumptions. The second type of
model is empirical. These models let us
understand the response of a system
without going through the structure,
making assumptions, and understanding
the mathematical consequences of those
assumptions. Briefly looking at the
experimental data, possibly doing some
analysis of the data and trying to make
an "intelligent" guess at a (simple)
form of equation or set of equations.
The third type of model is a mixture of
the first two and is the type now "being
used most of the time.
SUBMODELS FOR N PREDICTION IN PERCOLATE
WATER
To predict nitrogen concentration
in percolate water from land treatment,
at least three major steps need to "be
considered:
(1) Chemical and/or biological
transformation of nitrogen species
in soils.
(2) Transport of water and soluble
N species of soil water.
(3) Plant uptake of water and N
species.
Figure 1 illustrates the major
processes that may occur in land treat-
ment of wastewater. The form of N
applied to the land depends largely on
the pretreatment steps. However, in
most cases most of the N applied (about
85%) is in the ammonium form (iskandar
Clay
minerals
Inorganic-N J '—" ""
Soil bioma»
Effluent
wastewaterVegetation
Nitrification
NH4
Immobilization
Organic-N
MineralizationNO2Nitrogen gawt
NO3*| Atmospheric
Denitrification
Runoff
Ground water
INPUT STORAGE REACTIONS LOSSES
Figure 1. Nitrogen transformations in land treatment.
16Uet al., 1976), while organic N and NO--N
constitute <15/?. Once NO3 is formed, it
moves down as fast as or even faster
than the water. Therefore, the first
process to be considered in the model
must be nitrification. Nitrification is
the process whereby ammonium ions are
changed to nitrate by biochemical action.
Simulation of this process is important
for predicting the amount of NO3 perco-
lating to the groundwater and as a book-
keeping record of plant uptake of N from
the NH^ and NO3 sources.
Modeling the Nitrification Process
Since the extensive review of the
literature on the nitrification and
nitrifying "bacteria "by Painter (1970), a
large amount of quantitative and semi-
quantitative information on this process
has become available (Jenkins, 1977;
Focht and Chang, 1975; Sharma and
Ahlert, 1977; Duffy et al., 1975; Mehran.
and Tanji, 197^; Endelman et al., 1973;
Dutt et al., 1972; Hagin and Amberger,
197^; Beek and Frissel, 1973; Ardakani
et al., 19TU; Starr et al, 19lk; Cameron
and Kowalenko, 1976; McLaren, 1970).
There have been contradictory descrip-
tions of the simulation process of
nitrification. Cameron and Kowalenko
(1976), Duffy et al. (1975), Mehran and
Tanji (197*0, Misra et al. (197M and
Starr et al. (197*+) considered the
process as first order kinetic while it
has "been considered zero order kinetic
by Beek and Frissel (1973) and Sabey et
al. (1969). Other descriptions such as
sigmoid (Hagin et al., 1976; Lees and
Quastel, 19^6), logarithmic (Quastel and
Scholefield, 1951", Stojanovic and
Alexander, 1958) and Michaelis-Menten
(Ardakani et al., 1973, 197^; Laudelout
et al., 1977; McLaren, 1970; Nishio and
Furusaka, 1971) have also been reported.
Recently, Leggett and Iskandar (1978)
reviewed the literature on the simula-
tion of the nitrification process in
soils amended vith ammonium and con-
cluded that the Michaelis-Menten type is
the most reasonable approach. They also
developed and validated an improved
model for simulating the nitrification
process in soils under land treatment
conditions. Although several investiga-
tors have previously used Michaelis-
Menten1 s equations to fit their data,
very little work has been done on the
effect of environmental factors such as
pH, temperature and oxygen concentration
on the rate of nitrification. Leggett
and Iskandar included in their model theeffect of temperature and pH, but due to
the complexity involved, feit that
oxygen could not be included at this
time. However, they concluded that
oxygen would not be as critical in land
treatment because of the small periodic
nature of the nitrogen increment. In
other words, the kinetics may truly be
nitrogen-limited as is required for the
single substrate Michaelis-Menten model
to be valid.
Modeling the Denitrification Process
Nitrate reduction by bacteria was
documented as early as 1886 (Gayon and
Dupetit, 1886). Since then many pub-
lications have become available; however,
there is very little quantitative
description of this process which may be
due at least partially to the lack of
complete understanding of the effects of
the environmental factors and to the
difficulty in identifying the respon-
sible species. Nommik (1956) and
Bremner and Shaw (1958) studied the
factors affecting denitrification in
soils and more recently Focht and Chang
(1975) reviewed the process as it is
related to wastewater effluent. They
found that pH, temperature, water con-
tent , oxidation status, and organic
carbon are the most important factors.
The rate of denitrification was very
slow at a pH below k.Q and increased
very rapidly at pH 8.0-8.6. Denitrifi-
cation is a relatively temperature-
tolerant process, with an optimum
temperature close to 60°C (Nommik,
1956). It is very slow between 5 and
10°C and stops completely at temperature
<5°C. The data of Hommik show a linear
response to temperature ranging from 10
to 60°C,
The degree of water saturation of
soil has a significant influence on the
rate of denitrification. Bremner and
Shaw (1958) concluded that if all other
variables are favorable for denitrifica-
tion, little loss of H occurs if the
moisture content is less than 60% of the
water holding capacity of the soil. It
seems that the effect of moisture
content on denitrification is indirect—
it affects the oxygen content and the Eh
(oxidation reduction potential) of the
soil. Focht and Chang (1975) concluded
that the critical factor governing
denitrification in sewage water is the
dissolved oxygen concentration, not the
composition of the atmosphere. The
critical oxygen concentration proposed
by Wuhrmann (I96U) was 0.1 mg Og/l. At
165any higher rate, denitrification could
"be described as of zero order due to the
small Michaelis constant (Km = 10"" m)
for respiration rates of microorganisms
(Painter, 19T0). In this case the
reduction of organic substrate is the
limiting step. Focht and Chang (1975)
related the aeration status of the
wastewater to the Eh. Patrick (l96l)
reported that denitrification in soils
occurs at a potential of 300-350 mV or
less. The aeration status is important
not only in influencing the rate of
denitrification but also in determining
whether any intermediate products might
accumulate.
Temperature is undoubtedly the most
important and most difficult environ-
mental parameter to control in soils and
causes the greatest problems, particular-
ly during the winter months. The optimum
temperature for denitrification is
higher than that for nitrification,
ranging from 65 to 75°C, and denitrifica-
tion ceases at 85°C (Nommik, 1956).
Dawson and Murphy (1972) shoved that
denitrification conformed to Arvenius
kinetics from 3 to 28°C, although most
other studies showed that the rate is
affected proportionally more below the
10-15°C range (Nommik, 1956; Bremner and
Shaw, 1958). Changes in temperature may
also influence the composition of the
products formed during denitrification.
At lover temperature N0 is detected in
greater quantities in soils (Nommik,
1956). Several investigators (Nommik,
1956; Bailey and Beauchamp, 1973) have
observed no reduction of NOo after 22
days at 5°C; however, they did detect NO
as the only gas formed at 5°C Novak
(197^) considered the effects of tempera-
ture upon the Michaelis constant K^
and the maximum rate constant Vmax and
modified the standard Michaelis-Menten
equation to consider exponential coëf-
and Vmax.ficiënt s for both ^
The kinetics for denitrification
are far more complex than for nitrifica-
tion and have not been well developed.
Because reduction of NO3 is coupled with
the oxidation of a carbon substrate, a
kinetic model must involve at least a
dual substrate enzyme(s) complex. Such
equations have "been developed (Bray and
White, 1966) for idealized systems, but
denitrification is far more complex.
The nitrogenous intermediates presumably
have different saturation constants and
may be competitively inhibited at speci-
fic redox potentials, and the association
complex of reductant and oxidant may
involve one or several enzymes (Bremnerand Shaw, 1958). Unfortunately, most of
the studies have not even considered
whether Michaelis-Menten kinetics are
applicable and have taken a grosser,
simplistic outlook by attempting to
describe denitrification as a zero or
first order reaction. Investigation
with soil showed that the rate of
denitrification was independent of
nitrate concentration (Wiljer and
Delwiche, 195^; Nommik, 1956; Bremner
and Shaw, 1958; Cooper and Smith, 1963),
but this is apparently due to the use of
a high N0„ solution concentration
(usually 100 mg N/l or greater), which
appears to be much lower when considered
on a dry weight basis. Thus, apparent
first order kinetics were reported by
Stanford et al. (1975) in soil where
solute concentrations were less than 32
ppm NO3-N. Bowman and Focht (197U)
showed that the apparent zero order and
first order are the extreme ends of the
standard Michaelis-Menten curve in
describing denitrification provided the
concentration of reductant or oxidant,
held constant while the other was varied,
was not limiting.
The discrepancies between reported
zero-order (Wuhrmann, 19Ö3; Dawson and
Murphy, 1973) and first-order (Johnson,
1968; Balakrishnan and Eckenfelder,
1969; Mulbarger, 1971) kinetics observed
in wastewater treatment were explained
by Focht and Chang (1975) based on
whether the system is carbon or N-
limiting. Secondary treated sewage and
soil systems are usually carbon limiting,
so that addition of more NO3 should not
increase the rate of denitrification.
The rate of denitrification gener-
ally proceeds maximally at a C/N ratio
of 2 to 3 (Dawson and Murphy, 1973;
Wuhrmann and Mechsner, 1973) in sewage
plants. This same ratio has also been
found to apply to soils, which have much
higher C/N ratios than sewage when
exogenous carbon is added (Bremner and
Shaw, 1958; Bowman and Focht, 197^).
This would suggest that, like sewage,
the bulk of the carbon is used for re-
spiratory rather than assimilatory
purposes. Increasing the C/N ratio by
additions of methanol or other exogenous
substrates "beyond that needed for deni-
trification does not significantly
reduce the effluent NO3-N concentrations
and increases the effluent BOD as
Wuhrmann and Mechsner (1973) have shown.
Other Processes
Mineralization of organic-N, im-
166mobilization of inorganic-N, and plant
uptake of H are the remaining three
processes considered in N modeling.
Mineralization of organic-H is a long-
term process which has "been simulated
and studied for many years (Beek and
Frissel, 1973; ïïagin et al., 1976; Hagin
and Amberger,197*O. Studies on immo-
"bilization and mineralization will be
discussed in the next section. However,
for prediction of NO3-N in percolate
water from land treatment, it. is possi-
ble to assume that the net change in
soil N due to those two processes is
equal over a short period of time (2-**
months).
Plant uptake of Jf is very important
in land treatment, particularly the slow
infiltration and overland flow types.
On a yearly basis Iskandar et al. (1976)
found that it constitutes up to 10% of
the N removal mechanisms in a slow
infiltration field experiment. Miller
and Stuart (1978), however, reviewed the
literature on plant uptake models for
predicting water quality in land treat-
ment (this volume). Therefore, it is
probably more constructive to discuss
complete N simulation models.
SIMULATION MODELS FOR N TRANSFORMATION
AND TRANSPORT
So f ar, most H models have "been
developed to simulate one or two pro-
cesses to provide an understanding of
the "basic mechanisms involved. Recently,
efforts have "been made to integrate the
major N processes into a complete soil
system "by making use of data accumulated
on the individual basic mechanisms
incorporated into a moisture simulation
model (Frere et al., 1970; Dutt et al.,
1972; Beek and Frissel, 1973; Mehran and
Tanji, 197h; Hagin and Amberger, 197U;
Hagin et al., 1976; Cameron and Kowalen-
ko, I976; Reuss and Innis, 1977).
Mass balance modeling approaches
have been proposed by Morel (1969) and
Reuss and Innis (1977). The main fea-
ture in the model by Reuss and Innis
(1977) is the introduction of a simple
producer/ decomposer submodel. In this
submodel, relative rates appropriate to
the system being simulated are set
externally. The model includes the
state variables HH, , N0-, live roots,
dead roots, soil organic N, live tops
and litter. Temperature and soil water,
driving variables, were supplied from
external sources. The model has beentested in the field and has a potential
for wider utilization in large-scale
sy sterns.
Greenwood et al. (197*0 developed a
dynamic erop response model with func-
tions to describe leaching, nitrate
uptake by plant roots, and growth.
These models, however, have to be
incorporated into larger simulation
models which include water submodels in
order to predict the quality of the
percolate. Campbell et al. (1975)
obtained reasonably good results by
using regression analysis to relate
change in N0 -N concentration to soil
temperature and moisture under both
laboratory and field conditions. Multi-
ple regression analysis was used by Dutt
et al. (1972) to develop an empirical
model for W transformation and transport
in soils. The model was tested recently
by Gupta and Schaeffer (personal com-
munications), using data from an ex-
isting land treatment site in Minnesota.
The predicted N data did not match the
experimental data, which could be due to
the assumptions used in the model (Dutt
et al., 1972). The models by Beek and
Frissel (1973), Hagin et al. (1976) and
Hagin and Amberger (197*0 were focused
on simulation of organic matter decom-
position and oxidation of mineralized
NHu to N03. Hagin et al. (1976) assumed
first order kinetics for the nitrifica-
tion and denitrification rates. The
rate constants were taken from the
literature and were adjusted according
to environmental factors such as pH,
moisture, oxygen and water content. No
validation of the model was given.
In summary, these large models are
useful in aiding our understanding of
the complete N cycle but they are very
complicated due to the complex nature of
the soil processes. The models must "be
simplified in order to be useful tools
in managing or controlling nitrogen
behavior in soils under land treatment.
In addition, they should be modified to
land treatment conditions, as they were
developed for agricultural land where
nitrogen is being applied in large
quantities (fertilizer applications) but
less frequently. In general, the models
available lack the evaluation (valida-
tion) and field testing of model para-
meters .
167REFERENCES
Allison, I.B., 1966. The fate of nitro-
gen applied to soil. Advance Ag.,
18:219.
Ardakani, M.S., J.T. Rehbock, and A.D.
McLaren, 1973. Oxidation of nitrite
to nitrate in a soil column. Soil
Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 37:53-56.
Ardakani, M.S., R.K. Schulz, and A.D.
McLaren, 197*+. A kinetic study of
ammonium and nitrite oxidation in a
soil field plot. Soil Sci. Soe.
Am. Proc. 38:273-277.
Bailey, L.D. and E.G. Beauchamp, 1973-
Effects of temperature on NOg
and NO2 reduction, nitrogenous gas
production, and redox potential in
a saturated soil. Can. J. Soil
Sci. 53:213-218.
Balakrishnan, S. and W.W, Eckenfelder,
1969. "Denitrification in the
modified activated sludge process."
Water Res. 3:177-188.
Beek, J. and M.J. Frissel, 1973- Simu-
lation of nitrogen toehavior in
soils. Centre for Agricultural
Publishing and Documentation.
Wageningen, the Netherlands.
Bowman, R.A. and D.D. Focht, 197U.
"Influence of glucose and nitrate
concentrations upon denitrification
rates in sandy soils." Soil Biol.
and Biochem. 6:297-301.
Bray, H.G. and K. White, 1966. "Kinetics
and Thermodynamics in Biochemistry."
2nd ed., Academie Press, N.Y.
Bremner, J.M. and K. Shaw, 1958. Denit-
rification in soil. II: Factors
affecting denitrification. J. Ag.
Sci. 51:1+0-52.
Cameron, D.R., and C.G. Kowalenko, 1976.
Modeling nitrogen processes in
soil: Mathematical development and
relationships. Can. J. Soil Sci.
76:71-78.
Campbell, C.A., V.0. Biederbeck and W.C.
Hinmen, 1975. Relationships
between nitrate in summer-fallow-
ed surface soil and some environ-
mental variables. Can. J. Soil
Sci. 55:213-223.
Cooper, G.S. and R.L. Smith, 1963.
"Sequence of products formed during
denitrification in some diverse
western soils." Soil Sci. Soc.
Am. Proc. 27:659-662.
Dawson, R.W. and K.L. Murphy, 1973.
"The temperature dependency of
biological denitrification." Water
Res. 6:71-83.Duffy, J., C. Chung, C. Boast, and M.
Franklin, 1975. A simulation model
of biophysiochemical transformations
of nitrogen in tile drained corn
belt soil. J. Environ. Qual.
l+: 1+77-1+86.
Dutt, G.R., M.J. Shaffer, and W.J.
Moore, 1972. Computer simulation
model of dynamic biophysiochemical
processes in soils. Arizona
Agric. Exp. Stn. Buil. 196.
Endelman, F.J., M.L. Northrup, R.R.
Hughes, D.R. Keeney and J.R. Boyle,
1973- Mathematical modeling of
nitrogen transformations. AICHE
Symposium Series, 70:83-90.
Focht, D.D. and A.C. Chang, 1975-
Nitrification and denitrification
processes related to waste water
treatment. Adv. Appl. Microbiol.
19:153-186.
Frere, M.H., M.E. Jensen and ..T.N. Carter,
1970. Modeling water and nitrogen
behavior in the soil-plant system.
In Proceedings of the 1970 Summer
Simulation Conf. , Vol. 2:71+6-71+9.
Simulation Councils, Inc., LaJolla,
California.
Gayon, E. and G. Dupetit, 1886. Re-
search on the reduction of nitrate
(in French). Soc. Sci. Phys. Nat.
Bordeaux, Ser. 3:201-307.
Greenwood, D.J., J.T. Wood, and T.J.
Cleaver, 197*+. A dynamic model for
the effects of soil and weather
conditions on nitrogen response.
J. Agric. Sci. 82:1+55-1+67.
Hagin, J. and A. Amberger, 1971+. A
contribution of fertilizer and
manures to the N and P load of
waters. A computer simulation.
Final Rep. submitted to the
Deutsche Forschungs Gemeinschatt,
Jan., 123 pp.
Hagin, J., A. Amberger, G. Kruh and E.
Segall, 1976. Outlines of a
computer simulation model on re-
sidual and added nitrogen changes
and transport in soils. 2.
Pflanzenern. Bodenk. Heft u:
1+1+3-1+55.
Iskandar, I.K., R.S. Sletten, D.C.
Leggett and T.F. Jenkins, 1976.
Wastewater renovation by a pro-
totype slow infiltration land
treatment system. CRREL Report
76-19, USACRREL, Hanover, NH.
Iskandar, I.K., 1978. Overview of
existing.land treatment systems.
Proceedings of International Sym-
posium on Land Treatment of Waste-
water, 20-25 August 1978, Hanover,
N.H.
168Jenkins, S.H., 19TT. Proceedings of a
specialized conference on nitrogen
as a water pollutant. Iri Prog.
Wat. Technol. (S.H. Jenkins, ed.),
in press, Pergamon Press, N.Y.
Johnson, W.K., 1968. In_ Advances in
Water Quality Improvement, E.F.
Gloyna and W,W. Eckenfelder (eds.),
pp. 178-189, Univ. of Texas Press,
Austin, Texas.
Laudelout, H., L. Germain, P.F. Chabalier
and C.H. Chiang, 1977. Computer
simulation of loss of fertilizer
nitrogen through chemieal decom-
position of nitrite. J. Soil Sci.
28:329-339.
Lees, H. and J.H. Quastel, 19^6. Bio-
cheraistry of nitrification in soil.
Biochem. J. ï+0:803-815.
Leggett, D.C. and I.K. Iskandar, 1978.
Impi'oved enzyme kin et ie model for
nitrification in soils amended with
ammonium. CRREL Report (in prepara-
tion).
McLaren, A.D., 1970. Temporal and
vectoral reactions of nitrogen in
soil. A review. Can. J. Soil Sci.
50:97-109-
Mehran, J. and K.K. Tanji, 197^. Com-
puter modeling of nitrogen trans-
formations in soils. Jour. En-
viron. Qual. 3:391-395-
Milier, P.C. and L. Stuart, 1978.
Evaluation of plant uptake models
for prediction of water quality of
land treatment sites. Proceedings
of International Symposium on
Land Treatment of Wastewater, 20-25
August 1978, Hanover, N.H.
Misra, C., D.R. Nielsen, and J.W. Biggar,
191h. Nitrogen transformation in
soil during leaching: II. Steady
state nitrification and nitrate
reduction. Soil Sci. Soc. Am.
Proc. 38:29l+-299.
Morel, R., 1969. Essai de dëterminations
quantitatives relatives a 1'êvolu-
tion de 1'azote dans un sol cultivê
en équilibre azote. Ann. Agron.
(Paris) 20:161-181.
Mulbarger, M.C., 1971. Nitrification
and denitrification in activated
sludge systerns. J. Water Pollut.
Contr. Fed. U3:2O59-207O.
Nishio, M. and C. Furusaka, 1971.
Kinetic study of soil percolated
with nitrite. Soil Sci. and Plant
Nutr. 17:61-67.
Hommik, H., 1956. ïnvestigations on
denitrification in soil. Act.
Agric. Scand. 6:195-228.Novak, J.T., 191h. Temperature-substrate
interactions in biological treat-
ment. J. Water Pollut. Contr. Fed.
U6:198U-199U.
Painter, H.A., 1970. A review of litera-
ture on inorganic nitrogen meta-
"bolism in microorganisms. Water
Res. U:393-U5O.
Fatrick, W.H., 1961. "Nitrate reduction
rates in a submerged soil as
affected by redox potential."
Proc. Int. Congr. Soil Sci. 7th,
1960, pp. U9U-5OO.
Quastel, J.H. and P.G. Scholefield,
1951. Biochemistry of nitrifica-
tion in soil. Bacteriological Rev.
15:1-53.
Reuss, J.0. and G.S. Innis, 1977. A
grassland nitrogen flow simulation
model. Ecology 58:379-388.
Sabey, B.R., L.R. Frederick, and W.V.
Bartholomew, 1969. The formation
of nitrate from ammonium nitrogen
in soils. IV: Use of the delay
and maximum rate phases for making
quantitative predictions. Soil
Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 33:276-278.
Sharma, B. and R.C. Ahlert, 1977.
Nitrification and nitrogen removal.
Water Res. 11:897-925.
Stanford, G., R.A. Vander Pol. and S.
Dzienzia, 1975- Denitrification
rates in relation to total and
extractable soil carbon. Soil
Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 39:28U-289.
Starr, J.L., F.E. Broadbent and D.R.
Nielsen, 197^. Nitrogen trans-
formations during continuous
leaching. Soil Sci. Soc. Am.
Proc. 38:283-289.
Stojanovic, B.J. and M. Alexander, 1958.
Effect of inorganic nitrogen on
nitrification. Soil Sci. 86:208-
215.
Wiljer, J. and C.C. Delwiche, 195k.
Investigations on denitrifying
process in soil. Plant Soil
5:155-169.
Wuhrmann, K., 1963. Effects of oxygen
tension on biochemical reactions in
sewage purification plants. In_
Advan. Biol. Waste Treat. Conf. (M.
Alexander, ed.), 1960, Paper No. 3-
Wuhrmann, K., I96U. Microbial aspects
of water pollution control.
Advan. Appl. Microbiol. 6:119-151.
Wuhrmann, K. and K. Mechsner, 1973.
Discussion by K. Wuhrmann on paper
by Dawson and Murphy (p. 682, Fig.
1).
169LAND TREATMENT MATHEMATICA!. MODELING
NITROGEN BEHAVIOR IN LAMD TREATMENT OF WASTE WATER:
A SIMPLIFIED MODEL
H.M. Selim, Agronomy Department, Louisiana Agricultural
Experiment Station, Louisiana State University
I.K. Iskandar, Earth Sciences Branch, U.S. Arwy Cold
Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory, Hanover, NH
A simplified mathematical model was
developed to describe transformations
and transport of nitrogen under transient
soil water flow conditions. Kinetic
reactions were assumed to govern the
nitrification and denitrification pro-
cesses. A macroscopic approach was used
to incorporate plant uptake of water as
well as NO3-N and NH^-N from the soil
solution. The sensitivity of the model
to changes in rate of N transformation,
N uptake by plants, and schedule and
amounts of N application were also
investigated. The model can "be used as
a tooi to predict the fate of nitrogen
in land treatment systems. The model is
flexible and can "be adapted to incor-
porate various nitrogen transformation
mechanisms as well as layerings in the
soil profile.
INTRODUCTION
Nitrogen models such as those
described by Beek and Frissell (1973),
Hagin and Amberger (197^) and Selim et
al. (1976b), among others, provide a
mechanistic description of the fate of
nitrogen in the soil system. However,
several disadvantages are inherent in
the use of such models. These models
require an extensive number of para-
meters. In addition, independent measure-
ments of many of these parameters are
difficult to achieve. Another disad-
vantage is that these models, because of
their complexity, are difficult to
validate. They also require an ex-
tensive amount of computer (CPU) time if
predictions for one year or even a few
months are desired.In this paper, a simplified nitro-
gen model is presented (Fig. l) for the
purpose of describing the transport and
transformations of soil nitrogen during
saturated-unsaturated water flow con-
ditions. The main feature of the
proposed model is that it requires a
minimum number of independently measured
soil parameters. Furthermore, the model
is simple to use and easy to adapt to
incorporate soil and plant parameters.
MODEL DEVELOPMENT
Two major approximations were made
in the development of the simplified
nitrogen model. First, the nitrifica-
tion process was considered as a single
step, i.e. NHl^ ->• NOo, rather than a two-
step process (Ml± •+ NO2 •+ NO3). Such
an assumption is considered adequate,
since HO2, in most soils with a neutral
pH, is rapidly oxidized to NO3: The
second major simplification is that the
organic-N phase was not incorporated in
the model. Thus, in the simplified
model it is assumed that the organic-N
content is small and/or the rates of
nitrogen mineralization as well as
immobilization are extremely slow or
equal to each other. Such an assumption
is not valid if considerable mineraliza-
tion and/or immobilization of nitrogen
is encountered in the soil. However, if
the average amount of mineralization
approximately equals the araount of N
immobilized, over an extended period (a
few months or a year), the simplified
model can provide an adequate descrip-
tion of the fate of nitrogen in the
soil.
171NH4-N
ExchangeableNH4-N
Solution
N-Plant
UptakeN
Denitrified
NO
SolK2
ution
Figure 1. Schematic of nitrogen transformations in_ the
simplified nitrogen model where Ki and K2 are
rate coefficients for nitrification and denit-
rification, respectively, and KD the Freundlich
distribution coëfficiënt for exchangea"ble NH,-N.
The nitrogen transformation pro-
cesses considered in the simplified
model were: nitrification of NHi| to
NO3, denitrification of NO^, and ion
exchange of NH^. The ion-exchange
process was considered instantaneous,
whereas the nitrification and denitri-
fication processes were of the first-
order kinetic type (Mehran and Tanji,
197^; Hagin and Amberger, I97U). In
future, a Michaelis-Menten kinetic type
may he incorporated (Leggett and Iskandar,
1978).
The transport of NH^-N and NO3-K
in the soil solution occurs as a result
of molecular diffusion, mechanical
dispersion, and convection or mass flow.
Molecular diffusion results from the
random thermal movement of molecules,
whereas mechanical dispersion results
from the velocity distri"bution of water
in the soil pore space. A single dis-
persion coëfficiënt (ü) is commonly used
which combines mechanical dispersion and
diffusion. Thus, the convective-disper-
sive equation for Nïï^-N and NO3-N
transport may be expressed as (Selim et
al., 1976a)3(6C)/3t = (3/3z) (6D
- 3(vC)/3z -6 knC -p3S/3t -q.m
(1)
3(9Y)/3t = (3/3z)(9D 3Y/3z)-
3(vY)/3z - eitjC - 6k2Y-qN0 (2)
where
6
C
Y =
D =
V =
t =soil water content (cm /cm )
concentration of NH^ in soil
solution (/^)
concentration of N0-, in soil
solution (yg/cm^)
solute dispersion coëfficiënt
(cm2/hr)
soil water flux (cm/hr)
time (hr)
z = distance in soil, positive
downward (cm)
S = amount of Nlfy in exchangeable
phase per gram soil (yg/g)
p = soil bulk density (g/cnP)
k and kg = kinetic rate coeffi-
cienxs for nitrification and
denitrification (hr"-1-), re-
spectively
172%o= rate of plant uptake
of NB^-ÏÏ and NOo-N per unit
soil volume (yg/cnP hr), re-
spectively.
The first two terms on the right
side of equations (l) and (2) account
for solute transport, and are usually
referred to as the dispersion and mass
flow terms, respectively. The third and
fourth terms of- equation (l) account for
nitrification and ion exchange of NH.-N,
respectively. Similarly, the third and
fourth terms of equation (2) represent
the nitrification and denitrification
processes, respectively. The ion ex-
change process governing ÏÏH^-N adsorp-
tion-desorption was assumed to be of the
linear Freundlich type, i.e.
S =:, or 3S/3t= (3)
where Kp, which is comraonly referred to
as the distribution coëfficiënt (cm3/g),
represents the ratio of the amount of
ÏÏH^ adsorbed to concentration in the
soil solution.
The terms q^-^ and q^o^ in equations
(l) and (2) account for the rate of
uptake of NH^-N and NO3-N respectively.
Several models have been proposed to
describe the flux of nitrogen to plant
roots. These models utilize two dis-
tinct approaches: a microscopic ap-
proach, where the nitrogen flux to a
single root is considered (Nye and
Marriot, 1969; Claassen and Barber,
1976), and a macroscopic approach, where
the entire root system as a whole is
considered (Dutt et al., 1972; Davidson
et al., 1977). In the simplified model
proposed here the macroscopic approach
for nitrogen uptake is used. Here the
Michaelis-Menten approach vas used to
determine the total H uptake as a func-
tion of NH^-N and NO-j-N concentrations,
1
Km +
Imax
(c
maxC
+ Y)
Y
(C + Y)(5)
where QJJJJ and QJJQ represent the rate
of NH^-N and NQ3-N3uptake for the
entire rooting system per unit area of
the soil surface (yg/hr cm2), Imax the
rate of uptake at infinite concentration
(yg/hr cm?), and Km the Michaelis con-
stant (yg/cm^), From equations (k) and(5) the rate of NH^-N and NO3-N uptake
per unit volume of soil was calculated
as a function of the root density
distribution R(z) in the soil profile.
Therefore, qNH and qN0 of equations
(l) and (2) may be exprê'ssed as
/f0
= V R(z)/ f3 0R(z) dz
where L is the depth of the root zone
(cm) in the soil and R(z) is the effec-
tive root density distribution, which may
be regarded as a measure of the root
density (volume or length of roots per
unit volume of soil) as a function of
soil depth. Such a relationship is an
approximate one since root density does
not reflect accurately the nitrogen
adsorption capacity of individual roots.
For our purposes, R(z) will be con-
sidered proportional to the root density.
From equations (l) and (2) the
transport of NHl^-N and NO3-M is depen-
dent on the water content 9 and water
flux v, both of which are variables
under transient water flow conditions.
The water flow equation for unsaturated
soils is
Cap(h) 3h/3t = (3/3z) (K(h)
3h/3z)-3K(h)/3z - A(z,6) (8)
where
h = soil water pressure head (cm)
K(h) = soil hydraulic conductivity
(cm/hr)
" ) Cap(h) = soil-water capacity (cm" )
A(z,6) = rate of water extraction
In equation (8) the soil-water
capacity, Cap(h), is a measure of the
change of soil-water content with suc-
tion (Cap(h) = 38/Sh). This was deter-
mined using soil-water characteristic
relationships (6 versus h). Equation
(8) was chosen over the water diffusivity
form (Selim et al., 1976b) "because it
allows for saturated-unsaturated flow as
well as soil stratification. The root
extraction or sink term A(z,G) represents
the volume of water uptake per unit
volume of soil per unit time (cm^/hr
cmy). In this study, the macroscopic
approach for the extraction term is used
(Molz and Remson, 1970), where
173A(z,9) = T H(z) K(h)/ (9)
ƒ R(z) K(h) dz
O
where T is the evapotranspiration„rate
per unit area of soil surface (cm /cm
hr).
The initial and boundary conditions
used in conjunction with the water and
nitrogen transport equations (l), (.2)
and (8) were
h = hQ(z) 0<z<£, t=0 (10)
h = 0 z=£, t>0 (10a)
v=-K(h) 3h/3z+K(h) z=0, t<T (11)
C = Y = 0 0<z<SL, t=0 (12)
v C =-8D SC/9z+vC z»0, t<T (13)s
0=-6D 3Y/3z+vY
3C/3z=O,z~ö, t<T
z=Z, t>0 (15)
Equations (10) - (15) describe water and
solute transport through a soil profile
initially (t = 0) devoid of nitrogen and
having a non-uniform suction head ho(z)
with a water table at depth l from the
soil surface. It is further assumed
that an ammonium solution having a
concentration C was applied at the soil
surface for a time T. A water flux
boundary condition at the soil surface
was used (equation (il)), where the
water flux v was a funetion of time, in
order to simulate water infiltration as
well as redistribution in the soil
profile. Equations (l), (2), and (8)
are nonlinear partial differential
equations and cannot be solved analy-
tically. Therefore, equations (l), (2)
and (8) subject to boundary conditions
(10) through (15) were solved using
numerical analysis techniques. The
method of solution was the explicit-
implicit finite difference approximation
which was successfully used by Selim et
al. (1976a) for transient water flow
conditions. Finite difference approxi-
mations provide distributions of the
various nitrogen species as well as
water content or suction at incremental
distances Az in the soil and at discrete
time steps At. A computer program which
was written in FORTRAN language was
developed to solve the water and nitrogentransport and transformation equations
simultaneously. The program is valid
for (l) nonuniform initial water and
nitrogen content distributions, (2)
uniform and layered soil profiles, (3)
variable water flux (infiltration or
evaporation) or water head at the soil
surface, (k) variable kinetic rate
coefficients, and (5) variable water.
The computer program is flexible and can
be adapted to incorporate other nitrogen
transformation processes and uptake
patterns which influence water and
nitrogen transport in the soil.
INPUT SOIL AMD PLANT PARAMETERS
Simultaneous transport, transforma-
tion, ion-exchange, and uptake of
nitrogen in wastewater land treatment
systems were simulated using the simpli-
fied nitrogen model presented here. For
the purpose of model simulation, applied
wastewater was assumed to contain 25 ppm
of NHlj-N. The wastewater applied per
application was 5.0 cm and the schedule
of application was either weekly or
twice weekly (see Iskandar et al.,
1976). Thus 5 or 10 cm of wastewater
was applied every week. NH. -N and N0--N
distributions in the soil profile, in
percolate water, and the amounts taken
up by plants were obtained for a simu-
lated period up to 100 days. The soil
chosen for this study was a loam soil
having ö(h) and K(h) relationships
similar to those proposed by Gardner
(1958):
e(h) = e / [1 + (-h/a)*]
S
K(h) = K exp (ah)s
where 8S and Kg are the soil water
content and hydraulic conductivity at
saturation, respectively. The values
chosen for 6S, Ks and the arbitrary
constants a, b and a were O.k, 0.5, 300,
1.0 and 0.03, respectively. The soil
profile was assumed uniform with a bulk
density p = 1.6 g/cm3 where a water
table was located at 150 cm below the
soil surface. Initially (t = 0), the
soil was assumed to "be in equilibrium
with zero flux condition (i.e. h = 0 at
z = 150 cm and h = 150 cm at z = 0).
Furthermore, the soil was initially
devoid of nitrogen. The dispersion
coëfficiënt D was 2.5 cm/hr and the
Michaelis-Menten constant K^ = 10
yg/hr cm^. The value of Imax used
ranged from 0.5 to 2.0 yg/cnr hr. The
rooting depth was 60 cm and the root
Vjhdensity distribution R(z) used was that
given by Danielson (l<?67) where kO, 30,
20 and 10$ of the total uptake is sup-
plied, respectively, from each quarter
(15 cm) of the root zone. A daily
average evapotranspiration demand of 0.3
cm/day was assumed. The distribution
coëfficiënt KD was 0.25 cm^/g. Finally,
the kinetic rate coëfficiënts for nitri-
fication and denitrification, k]_ and
kg, were used as a function of soil
water suction (h) or water content (ö)
at any depth in the soil_profile such
that ki = k-Fx and k2 = k2F2- The
functional relationships, F and F„,
were similar to those used by Hag_in and
Amberger (197*0. The values of ^ and
k2 used in this study ranged from 0.01
to 0.1 hr"1.
MODEL SENSITÏVITY
Model sensitivity to changes in
nitrogen transformation rate coefficients,
rate of nitrogen uptake, and amounts and
scheduling of wastewater application
were examined. The purpose of this
sensitivity analysis is to illustrate
the dependence of percolate water quality
as well as the concentration distribu-
tions of NH^-N and NO3-ÏÏ in the soil
profile with time on the soil and plant
parameters used in the model. Further-
more, a wide range of soil and plant
parameters is needed "because of their
dependence on the soil type as well as
environmental factors (pH, temperature,
organic matter content, etc.) and plant
species.
Figure 2 shows NH^-N and NO -N
distri~butions in the soil profile at
s_elected times. In this..case, k, and
k were 0^1 and 0.01 hr and I was
1.0 yg/cm hr. Following the appïica-
tion of 5 cm of the wastewater, which
contained 25 ppm NH,-N, we see that NH,-N
concentration continued to decrease with
time from 0.5 day to 2 days. In addi-
tion, NH,-N did not penetrate "bevond 30
cm in the soil profile. After 7 days,
i.e. prior to the second wastewater
application, only negligible NHv-N was
found in the soil profile. It should be
emphasized that for the second applica-
tion (times 7.5, 8 and 9 days) the NH.-N
distribution with time was similar to
that following the first application.
Similar NH.-N patterns following each
application were due to the disappearance
of all NH,-N applied within each applica-
tion schedule (7 days).The total disappearance of NHi -N
was primarily due to its conversion to
NO -N through nitrification and to a
lesser extent to uptake by plants. The
N0„-N contente shown in Figure 2 result
totally from the nitrification of NHr-N,
since the soil was initially (t = 0)
assumed devoid of NO -N. Due to the
continued conversion of NHj-N to W0-.-N,
the concentration of NO -N continued to
increase in the profile with time, as
illustrated by the curves for 1, 2 and 3
days after wastewater application.
After 7 days, however, the NO -N dis-
tribution indicated additional transport
at lower depths in the soil profile as
well as a decrease in concentration in
the top portion (20 cm) of the profile.
This NO -N decrease was due to uptake "by
plants, denitrification, and transport
in the soil profile.
The N0--N distributions of Figure 2
show that unlike NHi -N there was a
substantial amount of N0„-N in the soil
profile prior to the second application
of wastewater (7 days). As a result of
the second application, NO -N concen-
tration with depth continued to increase
with time. More important, NO -N con-
tinued to penetrate to lower dëpths in
the soil profile. This transport of
NO -N in the soil is illustrated in
Figure 3 for a time period up to ik
weeks (98 days), during which time the
weekly application of 5 cm wastewater
was maintained. Due to this weekly
application of wastewater, the N0_-N
concentration continued to increase in
the soil profile. However, such an
increase became extremely small after 10
weeks of wastewater application. These
results would suggest that the N0,-N
distribution is at quasi-steady-sïate
conditions. More significant is the
quality of the percolate water seeping
to the groundwater table at 150 cm.
After Ik weeks, the N0 -N concentration
at the water table was extremely low,
less than 1 ppm. Such a low N0--N
concentration at the groundwater table
was a result of N0 -E uptake as well as
denitrification. These two mechanisms
of nitrogen removal from the soil
solution accounted for the majority of
the weekly applied nitrogen after 10-lU
weeks of application.
Figure k shows the influence of a
ten-fold decrease in the rate coëf-
ficiënt for nitrification k1? from 0.1
to 0.01 hr , on .the transport and
transformation of NH^-N and NO3-ÏÏ in
the soil profile. Due to the decrease
175in the rate of nitrification, substan-
tial amounts of NH,-N remained in the
soil profile. Moreover, the NH,-N
concentration continued to increase with
time throughout the soil profile. As a
result, ÏÏH,-N reached the groundwater
table depth (150 cm) with a concentra-
tion of 0.5 ppm af ter ik -weeks. In
contrast, the NO -N distri"butions vith
time were substafltially lower than those
where k.. was 0.1 (Fig. 3). Such low
concentration levels of NQ.-ÏÏ were a
direct result of reduced rate of nitri-
fication.
The influence of a tenfold increase
in the denitrification rate coëfficiënt
k , from 0.01 to 0.1 hr , on N0 -N
distribution is shown in Figure 5. The
N0 -N distribution'shows a substantial
decrease in the concentration levels
through the soil profile. Furthermore,
NO -N did not penetrate substantially
bejrond 100 cm depth. NH,-ïï concentra-
tion distributions (not shown) were
similar to those shown in Figure 2.
Plant uptake patterns of N0„-ïï and
NH.-N for the various cases consfdered
are shown in Figure 6. With one excep-
tion, the NO -N uptake was always higher
than the NH.-N uptake. Higher N0 -N is
a direct result of a high concentration
of NO -N in the soil solution in com-
parisön with NH,-N. Only when the rate
of nitrification was small (k.. = 0.01
hr ) did the NH,-N uptake with time
exceed that of NO -ïï. The low rate of
nitrification resulted in lower N0,-N
amounts available for plant uptake in
comparison with ÏÏH.-N.
The results shown in Figures 2-6
indicate that the maximum rate of plant
uptake I was taken as 1.0 yg/cm hr.
Figures lfaand 8 show the influence of
doubling the value of I on NO -ïï
distribution and the cumuïative ïï uptake
with time. A comparison of Figures %
and 3 shows a substantial reduction in
ïï0,-N concentration at all depths when
I was 2.0 yg/cm hr. Figure 8 also
sBows that for higher I the total N
uptake was consistentlymHigher at all
times. After 35 days, 38 kg N/ha was
taken up for an I value of 1, whereas
56 kg N/ha was taJstn up when the value
of I was doubled.
mÈo far, we have considered the
transformations and transport of NH.-N
and N0--ÏÏ when wastewater (5 cm) was
applied weekly. In addition_j_ the trans-
formation rate coëfficiënts k- and kg
were considered uniform (constant)
throughout the soil profile. Figures 9
and 10 show NO3-N distribution and plantuptake of N, respectively, where two
applications per week were considered
rather than a weekly application. Here
5 cm of wastewater was applied every J^. 5
days^ In addition, the coefficients k,
and kp were considered as an exponential
decay_function with soil depth_ where
*1 = kl max 6XP (-°'Olz) and k2 * K2 max
exp (-O.lOz). The values of k x and
k were 0.1 and 0.01 hr^ anct r_epre-
sen^feie maximum values of k^. and k„
which are encountered at the soil
surface. „Furthermore, I was taken as
0.5 Mg/cm hr. ExponentTaï decay func-
tions for the rate coefficients K and
K„ were used in order to illustrate the
decrease of these parameters with soil
depth (Ardakani et al., 197M. As a
result of doubling the weekly rate of
wastewater application, the concen-
tration of N0_-ÏÏ in the soil profile
continued to Increase drastically with
time. Moreover, significantly high N0_-
ÏÏ concentrations reached the groundwater
table only after k weeks of application.
It is suggested that the low rate of
denitrification, especially at soil
depths below 20 cm, also contributed to
the high effluent ÏÏ0 -N concentrations.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
A simplified mathematical model was
developed to describe transformations
and transport of nitrogen under tran-
sient soil water flow conditions.
Kinetic reactions were assumed to govern
the nitrification and denitrification
processes. A macroscopic approach was
used to incorporate plant uptake of
water as well as NO -ïï and NH.-ïï from
the soil solution. The sensitivity of
the model to changes in rate of N trans-
formation, ïï uptake by plants, and
schedule and amounts of N application
were also investigated. The model can
be used as a tooi to predict the fate of
nitrogen in land treatment systems,
estimation of N application load, plant
uptake of N, and as a research or manage-
ment model for N behavior in land treat-
ment. The model is flexible and can be
adapted to incorporate various nitrogen
transformation mechanisms as well as
layerings in the soil profile.
176N03-N CONCENTRATION, ,t*g-NA:m3
5 10 15
^— io "
—— 11 "14 "20
-
NH4-N CONCËNTRATION,/tg-N/cm3
S 10 15 20_ O 5 10 15 20
/r^1
T/ K, "0.1
f K2 =0,0
' Imgx=2,07.5doys
8 "
9
hr"1
hr"1
^q/hr/crn2
Figure 2. Simulated concentration
distributions of NOo-N and NH^-N in a
loam soil profile with a water table at
150 cm. Soil and plant parameters were
K± = 0.1 hr"1, K2 = 0.01 hr , and 1,,^
= 1.0 ug/hr cm^.NOj-N CONCENTRATION. ^
O 5 10 15 £0
14025
Figure 3. Simulated concentration
distributions of NO3-N in the soil
profile where weekly applications of 5
cm of ÏÏHj^-ïï solution were maintained.
NOS-N CONCENTRATION.^q-N/cm3
0 Z 46 8 10NH4-N CONCENTRATION,^g-N/cm3
0 2_ .4 6 8 10
K, -0.01 hr'1
R2 -0.01 hr"1
Imtu»UD g/hr/cm -
Figure k. Simulated concentration
distributions of NO3-N and NH^-N^n the,
jjoil profile for the case where Kj_ and
K2 were 0.01 and 0.01 hr"1, respectively.N03-N CONCËNTRATlON,/ig-N/cm3
123456789 10
80-
100 -R, =0.1 hr"'
R2 =0.1 hr"1
Imox= 1.0
Figure 5« Simulated con-
centration distributions
of NO -N in the soil pro-
file for_ the case where
K and K£ were 0.1 hr" ,
respectively.
177z
Ld
-
z 60
s"40
5 20MUI
O o~- Imax '1.0/ig/hi/cm8
K|=o.ihr'
Kj-O.OIhr"'
K( =0.1 hr~'
Kj^O.I hr-l
K. =0.01 hr"1•
A
Ra = o.oihr' ~ j-*'
i i i i iy
i i i
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
TIM E, days
Figure 6. Cumulative NO3-N and Ïïïï^-N
uptake with time for three cases where
Imax was 1.0 yg/hr^ cm^.40
Figure 8. Total H uptake with time
where Imax2.0 ug/hr
20
40
140NO,-N CONCENTRATION, /(.g-N/cm3
5 4 5_ 6 7
K, =0.1 hr"1
K2 =0.01 hr"1
Imax = 2.0 ,/ig/hr/cm'
Figure 7. Concentration distri"butions
of NO3-N iii the soil profile where K =
0.1 hr K2 = 0.01 hr-1 and I™,^ =2.0
yg/hr cm^.Figure 9. Concentration distributions
of NO3-N in the soil profile where two
applications of HH^-N solution per week
were maintained.
ZO 30 40 50 60
TIME, doy»70
Figure 10. Cumulative NH^-N and NO3-N
uptake with time where two applications
of NH^-N per week were maintained.
178REFERENCES
Ardakani, M.S., R.K. Schulz, and A.D.
McLaren, 197*+. A kinetic study of
ammonium and nitrite oxidation in a
soil field plot. Soil Sci. Soc.
Am. Proc. 38:273-277.
Beek, J. and M.J. Frissel, 1973- Simu-
lation of nitrogen behavior in
soils. Centre for Agricultural
Publishing and Documentation.
Wageningen, the Netherlands.
Claassen, H. and S.A. Barber, 1976.
Sixnulation model for nutriënt
uptake from soil "by a growing plant
root system. Agron. J. 68:961-966.
Danielson, R.E., 1967- Root system in
relation to irrigation. In R.H.
Hagan et al. (ed.), Irrigation of
agricultural lands, pp. 390-U13.
American Society of Agronomy,
Madison, Wisconsin.
Davidson, J.M., P.S.C. Rao, and H.M.
Selim, 1977- Simulation of nitro-
gen movement, transformations and
plant uptake in the root zone.
Proc. National Conference on
Irrigation Return Flow Quality
Management, Ft. Collins, 9-l8.
Dutt, G.R., M.J. Shaffer, and W.J.
Moore, 1972. Computer simulation
model of dynamic biophysiochemical
processes in soils. Arizona
Agric. Exp. Stn. Buil. 196.
Gardner, W.R., 1958. Some steady-state
solutions of the unsaturated
moisture flow equation with applica-
tion to evaporation from a water
tat)le. Soil Sci. 85:228-232.
Hagin, J. and A. Amberger, 197^• A
contribution of fertilizer and
manures to the N and P load of
waters. A computer simulation.
Final Rep. submitted to the Deutsche
Forschungs Gemeinschatt, Jan., 123
pp.
Iskandar, J.K., R.S. Sletten, D.C.
Leggett and T.F. Jenkins, 1976.
Wastewater renovation by a proto-
type slow infiltration land treat-
ment system, CRREL Report 76-19,
USACRREL, Hanover, NH.
Leggett, D.C. and I.K. Iskandar, 1978.
Improved enzyme kinetic model for
nitrification in soils amended with
ammonium. CRREL Report (in pre-
paration).
Mehran, J. and K.K. Tanji, 197^. Com-
puter modeling of nitrogen trans-
formations in soils. Jour. Environ.
Qual. 3:391-395.Molz, F.J. and I. Remson, 1970. Ex-
traction term models of soil
moisture use "by transpiring plants.
Water Resour. Res. 6:13^6-1356.
P.H. and F.H.C. Marriot',, 1969. A
theoretical study of the distri-
bution of substances around roots
resulting from simultaneous dif-
fusion and mass flow. Plant SoilNye,
Selim, H.M., J.M. Davidson, P.S.C. Rao,
and D.A. Graetz, 1976t>. Nitrogen
transformations and transport
during transient unsaturated water
flów in soils. Agron. Abstracts,
Am. Soc. Agron., p. 123.
Selim, H.M., R.S. Mansell, and A.
Elzeftway, 1976a. Distribution of
2,it-D and water in soil during
infiltration and redistribution.
Soil Sci. 121:176-183.
179LAND TREATMENT MATHEMATICAL MODELING
Evaluation of Plant Uptake Models for
Prediction of Water Quality of Land
Treatment Sites
Philip C. Miller
Systems Ecoiogy Research Group
San Diego State University
San Diego CA 92182
Lee Stuart
Systems Ecology Research Group
San Diego State University
San Diego CA 92182
ABSTRACT
Models are developed to meet
various objectives; therefore the first
problem of model ing is to define objec-
tives clearly. Models have been
developed to simulate diffusion and
mass flow of nutrients to plant roots,
the uptake of nutrients by roots or
micorrhizae, root growth» translocation
of nutrients from roots to above ground
plant parts, plant growth and incorpora-
tion of nutrients into plant tissue, and
harvesting strategies. These models can
be adapted for land based waste water
treatment problems. After model ing
objectives have been established, the
rqquired precision must be balanced
against cost, time, and personnel
constraints.
INTRODUCTION
Models are developed to meet
various objectives. Possible objectives
are: to expedite discussion among
researchers and to guide research, to
keep track of carbon, water, or nutri-
ents in an ecosystem, to predict events
based on past behavior, to design new
equipment, or to test management
alternatives. The first problem of
model ing 1s to define the objectives
clearly. The situation being considered
here involves models for bookkeeping of
water and nutrients. The question is
stil 19 on what system are we keeping
books? We propose that two themes
involving water and nitrogen are
implicit in discussion of land treat-
ment sites: (1) keeping books on the
amount of water and nitrogen in the soil
or soil water and (2) keeping track of
the amount of water and nitrogen in the
plant-soil system. For the first ob-
jective plant uptake can be considered
merely as a sink, removing nutrients at
some rate. For the second objective,
the bookkeeping is more complex and
involves first the transfer of nitrogen
from the soil to the aboveground plantparts and second the rmoval of nitrogen
from the system at the most rapid rate
possible by harvesting the plant tops,
the whoie system operating in some root-
benefit balance.
Management of nutriënt levels can
be considered in several stages: the
first is the supply and deliyery of the
nutriënt to the plant which involves
mass flow, diffusion, and root growth;
the second stage is the uptake of the
nutriënt by the root or mycorrhizae;
the third is the translocation of the
nutriënt from roots to above ground
parts; and the fourth is the incorpora-
tion of the nutriënt into plant tissue.
The last stage involves harvesting
strategies to maximize nutriënt removal
for the duration of the land treatment
system. Models exist for all stages.
The time scales of these models range
from minutes to years. Some are simple
enough to allow analytical solutions,
others are complex and require numeri-
cal solutions. As the system becomes
more complex, numerical solutions are
more commonly used.
Models of Diffusion and Mass Flow
to Plant Roots
Models organized around solutions
of diffusion and mass flow differential
equations have been reviewed by Oisen
and Kemper (1968). The equation solved
by the models, in radial coordinates,
is generally of the form:
(1)
where: B - slope of the adsorption
isotherm (yg cm"3 soil/ng cm"3 soil
solution), e = volumetric water content
of the soil (cm3 cm~3 soil),C s concen-
tration of the nutriënt in solution
(lig cm~3 soil solution), t = time (sec),
r = radial distance (cm), Dp= porous
diffusion coëfficiënt (cm2 sec~1), v =
average macroscopic vel oeity of spil
water at the root surface (cm *ec-l),
and a = radius of the root (cm).
The first term in the parenthesis
of the right hand side of eq. 1 repre-
sents the contribution of diffusion to
nutriënt supply, the second represents
supply by mass flow of water. The
equation 1s solved subject to the
boundary conditions that at time t = 0,
C = Co where Co is a constant at all
distances from the root. For all t>0,
there is no flux of nutriënt across the
outer boundary described at the edge of
181the effective nutriënt absorption zone
of the root. The inner boundary condi-
tion 1s usually described by one of the
following conditions: 1) Nutriënt flux
across the root surface is proportional
to nutriënt concentration at the sur-
face: F - aC where a is termed the
absorption capacity of the root
(Passioura, 1963; Nye, 1966; Marriott
and Nye, 1968; Nye and Tinker, 1969;
Bar-Yosef et alk , 1972; and NaNagera
(rt al_., 197F). 2) Concentration of the
nutriënt at thé root surface is 0, jLe_.
the root is a perfect sink, (Zartman et
al., 1976) or constant. 3) The rate of
nutriënt uptake is constant: F = k
(Olsen and Kemper, 1968). 4) The con-
centration at the root surface decreases
exponentially w1th time (Lewis and Quirk,
1967). Comparative results based on
different boundary conditions and
assumptions are given expUcitly in
Olsen and Kemper (1968) and Zartman ejt
al_., (1976). Solutions for the analo-
gous heat flow equations are given in
Carslaw and Jaeger (1959).
The following assumptions are im-
pücit in the diffusion-mass flow models
for which analytical Solutions have been
derived. Many of the assumptions can be
relaxed considerably when numerical
methods are used. 1) Plant roots are
long cylinders with measurable radius.
2) Roots are uniform along their entire
length for nutriënt uptake; o is not
affected by the age of the root or the
presence of other 1ons. 3) Roots are
far enough apart that there is no over-
lap of absorption zones. 4) The soil
is an homogeneous isotopic medium with
uniform initial nutriënt content,
water content, and with soil water velo-
city siow enough that hydrodynamic dis-
persion does not occur. 5) Dp and B are
constant for the time and conditions
being modeled. 6) The concentration at
the root surface can be approximated by
concentration 1n the bulk solution when
the flux equations are derived from
formal solutions. 7) Reaction with the
solid phase if it occurs, is instantan-
eous, reversible and linear.
Zartman et^ al_., (1976) have demon-
strated that models for nitrate uptake
based on boundary condition 1 underes-
timate nutriënt accumuiation, and those
based on boundary condition 2 with the
root as a perfect sink overestimate
accumuiation. A constant uptake rate
may be applicable for young active roots
in the initial stage of uptake, but it
is likely that for longer termabsorption the appropriate boundary
condition is that of a constant concen-
tration at the root surface.
In models developed by Anderssen
et al., (1969), Passioura (1963), and
Gardner (1968), growth of roots into
new areas of soil has been included as
a third mechanism for supplying nutri-
ents. Essentially the method involves
portraying the root as a moving line
sink, or a group of roots as a moving
front sink. Anderssen ejt aj_. solve for
surfaces of equal concentration around
an extending root; Gardner offers Solu-
tions in one, two, and three dimensions
for equations of a moving sink; and
Gardner and Passioura give solutions
similar to those by Carslaw and Jaeger
(1959) for the same boundary conditions.
The choice of equation and neces-
sary boundary conditions again depends
on the objective of the model 1 ing
effort. Is the interesting question
what happens around an indiyidual root,
or does the real issue 1 ie in what
happens over the entire profile--what
drains out the bottom, what is moved to
plant tops, and what is left in the
soil? If the objective is to define
regions of nutriënt depletion around a
root, the theoretical diffusion and
mass flow equations are suitable. How-
eyer, when approached from a wider
viewpoint, i_.e_. the whole plant system,
it is obvious that supply and delivery
are only the first steps in nutriënt
acquisition and such models must be
coupled with models dealing directly
with plant properties in relation to
nutrients.
In addition it is necessary to
assess the appropriateness of the
mathematica! formulation to the site at
hand. Are diffusion and mass flow of
equal importance, or is one clearly
more important and the other able to
be ignored? PhilUps et a]_. (1976),
show that when the ratTö" v/a is < 0.2
the importance of diffusion with
respect to mass flow is large, but at
ratios v/a > 1.0 mass flow is the domi-
nant process. At low evapotranspira-
tion the problem clearly becomes one of
diffusion. A second question is the
relationship of mass flow to transpira-
tion. Soil water vel oeity and trans-
piration rate are often coupled in the
equation Ts = 27rave. The equation
essentially states that the only
driving force for soil water movement
is transpiration. In a nearly saturated
soil such as the tussock or wet meadow
182tundra, or in systems where irrigation
is practiced, a significant amount of
nutrients may be carried in vertical or
horizontal movement of water through the
profiIe.
A third question to consider is the
trade-off between an elegant mathemati-
cai treatment and the acceptance of
theoretically questionable conditions
such as linear absorption, constant root
uptake properties and instantaneous,
reversible reaction with the solid phase.
A greater fiexibility in approach may be
achieved with systems models which do
not rely on formal solution but which
allow control of transfers by rates
which may change continuously as a
result of the interaction of plant or
soil characteristics.
Models of Root Uptake
Studies on nutriënt uptake by
excised roots in solution have demon-
strated that nutriënt uptake as a func-
tion of external concentration often
follows a Michaelis-Menton relationship
(Epstein and Hagan, 1952; Carter and
Lathwell, 1967). Uptake is then
expressed as a function of solution
concentration, maximum vel oeity of up-
take and a half reaction constant.
(2)
The equation can be adjusted for compe-
tition with other ions as shown in
Epstein and Hagan (1952) and Frere and
Ashley (1964). In addition it is possi-
ble to extend the Michaelis-Menton
equation to include more carrier systems
simply by determining the appropriate
constants and summing the uptake by each
carrier.
Michaelis-Menton uptake equations
are used in ecosystem level models
(Reuss and Innis, 1977; Col e et al.,
1977) in which delivery by the soil sys-
tem is handled in a separate set of
equations. Both the above models incor-
porate two carrier systems. To prevent
excess nutriënt buildup in roots during
the simulation reverse flow equations
are utilized at high root nutriënt con-
centrations. Coefficients are applied
to reduce the effective concentration of
the soil solution as a result of reac-
tion of the nutriënt with the solid
phase.
The chief limitation of using
Michaelis-Menton equations in fieldconditions lies in extrapolation of
results from solution experiments.
Frere and Ashley (1964) did demonstrate
however that uptake of cations is
largely from the solution phase and
that the solid phase ions may be envi-
sioned as a nutriënt reservoir.
Michaelis-Menton kinetics may be
incorporated as the inner boundary
conditionfor the mass flow and diffu-
sion models. At low nutriënt concen-
tration the single carrier equation
reduces to boundary condition 1 of the
preceeding section, allowing an
analytical solution. It is more Hkely
however that nutriënt uptake is not
governed by a single carrier system,
and in a waste water treatment area it
is questionable whether the reduced
form of the kinetic equation is appro-
priate due to the frequent charging of
the soil profile with nutrients.
Models of Root Growth
Models related to net assimilation
rate (Williams, 1946) have been devel-
oped by Loneragan (1968), Elgawhary e_t
a]_. (1972), Mengel and Barber (1974),
and Jungk and Barber (1974). The models
assume that root length (or weight) and
uptake are linearly related over time.
The nutriënt flux for the entire plant
is calculated for a particular nutriënt
by:
1 dMWrdt(3)
where: Im is the nutriënt flux, Wr is
the weight of roots, and dM/dt is the
change in nutriënt content of M in the
plant with time. The mean uptake rate
may be calculated by:
lnW2-lnW1 M2 - M1
t2-*lW„ - W1(4)
where subscripts refer to harvest, and
M is the amount of a particular nutri-
ënt in the plant.
Mengel and Barber (1974) and Jungk
and Barber (1974) use the equation with
root length substituted for root weight.
Equation (4) is most suitable for
roots in the stage of exponential growth.
As roots die back, mean root length
between successive harvests is used
instead of the actual length at harvest.
Growth models demonstrate the changing
nature of uptake characteristics as
roots age and are most suitable for
183annual crops where there are no substanr
tl al nutriënt reserves other than in the
seed. If significant reserves exist, as
in perennial species, the relationship
between uptake and flux 1s more complex.
The major limitation of models
based on net assimilation rate is that
uptake is not directly coupled to soil
processes. The growth models place the
emphasis on the plant part of the plant-
soil system. Waste treatment models
focussed on growth models would visual*
ize the plant as a gross sink for nutri-
ents. Microprocesses of supply or
kinetic uptake would only be expressed
by a different Ievel of approach.
Models of Translocation
The mechanisms of translocation
have been studied for a long time but
are still not understood. Models of
translocation of carbon and nutrients in
relation to plant growth and development
have been either detailed and mechanis-
tic (Horowitz, 1958; Dainty, 1965) or
descriptive (Warren Wilson, 1964, 1966;
Blackman, 1968; Kvet et al., 1971).
Thornley (1972a, b), MilTêr et al.
(1977c), and Stoner et ah (1977c) con-
sidered translocation to be driven by a
concentration gradiënt impeded by resis-
tances. Brouwer and de W1t (1969), de
Wit et ah (1970), and Fick et al.
(1975*)" bypass the problem by poöTing all
reserves into one plant pool which is
drawn upon for growth by each plant part.
All formulations ignore the possibility
of sugars being transported against a
concentration gradiënt which has been
observed.
Models of Water Utilization
The factors which define the inter-
action of the vegetation and the above-
ground environment, especially involving
water and CO2 gas transfer, are most
clearly understood. These include
radiation, turbulent transfer, plant
water relations, and canopy photosynthe-
sis. Radiation models which have a
broad base of usage in temperate zone
crops have been developed from concepts
of light penetration in continuous
vegetation canopies (Monsi and Saeki,
1953; Davidson and Philip, 1958; de Wit,
1965; Duncan e_t ah, 1967; Anderson and
Denmead, 1969; YThT e_t ah, 1969; Acock
et ai-, 1970; Idso and de Wit, 1970).
the model of Mi 11 er et al. (1976) and
Mi 11 er and Stoner (1978~F~calcu1ates
infrared radiation within the canopy, a
component not found in other modelswhich is significant in affecting leaf
and ground surface temperatures and
evaporation rates, and includes the
effects of sterns on the radiation dis-
tribution within the canopy, a factor
which has rarely been considered but
is important in woody vegetation. This
model was developed in the red mangrove
vegetation of south Florida (Müler,
1975), and applied to the canopies of
the arctic and alpine tundra (Tieszen
et ah, 1975; Miller et al., 1976) and
to the canopy of the chaparral
(Lawrence, 1975; Miller and Mooney,
1974). A model of radiation in non-
homogeneous canopies and individual
shrubs was developed for the chaparral
(Roberts and Miller, 1975).
Models of the turbulent transfer of
heat, water vapor and CO2 in the canopy
have been proposed by Denmead (1964),
Waggoner and Reifsnyder (1968),
Waggoner et ah (1969), Murphy and
Knoerr (1970, 1972), and Stewart and
Lemon (1972) and tested with data from
red cl over, mi 11 et, pine, and corn
canopies with reasonable success. In
Mi lier et ah (1976) and Miller and
Stoner 7J978) profil es of air tempera-
ture and humidity between the top of the
canopy and a reference height above the
soil surface are calculated with
algorithms proposed by Waggoner and
Reifsnyder (1968) and Waggoner et ah
(1969). The canopy microclimate predic-
tions have been tested on a preliminary
basis on chaparral, mangroves and arctic
tundra with fair success (Miller et al.,
1974; Miller, 1975; Miller e_t al.,
1976; Tieszen e£ al., 1976).
In Miller et al. (1976) and Miller
and Stoner (197~~]YTeaf and stem temper-
atures are calculated from the energy
budget equation for individual leaves
(Gates, 1962, 1965). The model estimates
the physical processes of sol ar and in-
frared radiation absorption, infrared
loss from the leaves, convectional ex-
change, and transpirational exchange.
Leaf temperatures have been tested
against measured temperatures in man-
groves (Miller, 1972) and chaparral
(Lawrence, 1975). Energy exchange pro-
cesses and temperatures of plant parts
are calculated for sunlit and shaded
parts at different levels in the canopy.
Models of plant water relations
have been proposed by Honert (1948) and
Rawlins (1963), and described in non-
mathematical terms by Oarvis and Jarvis
(1963). As concepts have become refined,
the formulation has become more complex
18U(Cowan, 1965; Philip, 1966). These
models, drawn as electrical analogues,
attempt to explain the regulation of
water movement from the soll through the
plant and into the atmosphere by plant
and environmental variation. These
models have been tested only partially
because of the difficulty in measuring
simultaneously all of the necessary
parameters. The model of plant water
relations of Miller et al. (1976), and
Mi 11 er and Stoner (19787"allows for non-
equal rates of water uptake and loss and
was first developed for the mangroves
(Miller, 1975) and evaluated and used in
the alpine tundra (Ehleringer and Miller,
1975a, b), the arctic tundra (Stoner and
Miller, 1975) and the chaparral (Fig. 1)
(MUler and Mooney, 1974; Miller and
Poole, in litt.).
CALII- CHILE
lü
FAI
Figure 1. Transpiration, soil evapora-
tion, and evapotranspiration calcuiated
for pure stands of four species in
California and Chile, with increasing
foliage area indices.
Models of canopy photosynthesis are
usually based on the photosynthetic
relations of a single leaf within the
canopy. Monsi and Saeki (1953) and
Davidson and Philip (1958) used a simpli-
fied model to calculate stand photosyn-
thesis. de Wit (1965) used a more
realistic model to calculate the annual
course of potential production for
different regions. Monteith (1965),Anderson (1966), Duncan et_ a]_. (1967)
and Lemon (1967) proposed a series of
refinements to the basic concepts.
Miller and co-workers developed a canopy
photosynthesis model for the mangroves
(Miller, 1972) and used it to indicate
the daily and seasonal progression of
production and water use efficiency in
chaparral, mangroves, and tundra
(Miller and Mooney, 1974; Miller, 1975;
Miller et al_., 1976; Mi 11 er and Stoner,
1978).
Energy exchange processes at the
soü surface have been modeled by
Goudriaan and Waggoner (1972) and
Denmead (1973), using simplifying
assumptions about the moisture status
of the soil. A more complex version of
the energy budget.model has been used
for work in chaparral, mangroves and
arctic tundra (Miller et al_., 1974; Ng
and Miller, 1975, 197777 Soil tempera-
tures may be simulated from a known
surface temperature (Goudriaan and
Waggoner, 1972; de Wit and Goudriaan,
1974), or directly from air temperatures
(Hasfurther and Burman, 1974).
The movement of water in the soil
was calculated by Hanks and Bowers
(1962), Liakapoulos (1965), Amerman
(1971), and de Wit and Goudriaan (1974).
A soil water model based on the same
principles was tested and developed in
chaparral to estimate evaporation, deep
percolation and transpiration losses
(Ng, 1974).
Models of Plant Growth and
Nutriënt Incorporation
Models providing an integrative
framework of plant growth processes are
stil 1 rudimentary (Loomis, 1970), even
for plants with agricultural importance.
Monsi and Murata (1970) showed by
simple calculations how the allocation
of carbon to productive tissues, rather
than to absorptive tissues, can affect
production. Brouwer and de Wit (1969)
proposed a model of plant growth in
which allocation to shoots or roots was
controlled by the availability of
carbohydrate reserves and water, de
Wit et al, (1970) elaborated upon this
modeTT "The model was developed for
agricultural crops and compared against
data on corn in particular. Thornley
(1972a, b) proposed general models
descn'bing the growth of shoots and
roots by logistic equations. Bodkin
(1975) developed a model of the growth
of several forest trees, describing the
process of succession in a northeastern
185hardwood forest using as simple formu-
lation as possibie to describe the
responses to light and water. Fick
et. aj.. (1975) desoribe a model for the
growth and carbohydrate allocation in
sugar beets. Penning de Vries et. al.
(1976) present a model of nitrogen
dynamics and growth of loblolly p1ne
over a multi-year time interval. Van
Keulen (1975) describes a model of the
growth of annual grasses 1n an arid
region, which was extended to include
nitrogen (van Keulen e£al-« 1975).
Harpaz (1975) included the nitrogen
dynamics for an arid region in a model
similar to van Keulen's. However, these
models include only a superficial treat-
ment of nitrogen dynamics in the plant.
Three models of growth and alloca-
tion, with different levels of sophis-
tication, were developed for the
single-shooted graminoid, during the
U.S. IBP Tundra Bi ome Research (Mi 11 er,
1972; Mi 11 er et aK» T978C; Stoner et
at.., 1978c; Lawrence et ai-, 1978). The
models are driven by tHe seasonal pat-
terns of growth in various structures.
Growth is affected by temperature and
plant sugar, nitrogen, phosphorous, and
calcium status. Carbon and inorganic
nutrients associated with the growth
of new tissue are calculated from the
composition of young mature tissue.
Growth respiration is calculated from
the respiratory costs of creating differ-
ent biochemical constituents (Penning
de Vries, 1972, 1973, 1974; Penning de
Vries et al., 1974). A similar model
has been developed for an evergreen
shrub (Ledum paiustre), a deciduous
shrub (Salix pulchra), and a tussock
graminoid (Eriophorum vaginatum) (Stoner
et al-, 1977F)7
Miller e_t al- (1978) describe a
model of plant and soil processes in
mediterranean scrub ecosystems. The
processes include thé movements of and con-
trol 1 ing influences on carbon, water,
and nitrogen. The model has been para-
meterized for four shrub species and
two grass species. The species are
grouped singly or together in various
combinations to simulate the seasonal
progression of water loss from the soil
surface and plant tissue; carbon uptake;
growth of leaves, sterns, and roots;
death of leaves, sterns, and roots; nitro-
gen uptake, mineralization, and decom-
position (Fig. 2). The model will also
estimate the annual totals of various
quantities of interest to the investi-
gator and search for combinations ofFigure 2. Seasonal progressions of the
resources available to the vegetation,
precipitation, sol ar irradiance, and
nitrogen released by mineralization;
capture of the resource by the vege-
tation; transpiration; net photosynthe-
sis, and nitrogen uptake; other related
processes; and resource use efficiencies;
transpiration over precipitation, net
photosynthesis over solar irradiance,
and nitrogen uptake over nitrogen
release.
species and plant growth forma which use
light energy, water, and nitrogen maxi-
mally (Fig. 3) (Miller et al., 1978).
The plant process models have been
parameterized and combined with soil
thaw and decomposition models to simu-
late the saturated and nearly saturated
conditions of the arctic tundra (Miller
et al., unpubl.).
Models of Harvesting Strategies
Davidson and Phillip (1958)
exploited their model to define harvest-
ing strategies to maximize production.
The tradeoffs are between how much and
how often a erop is removed by harvest-
ing, maintaining enough leaf area for
rapid regrowth, and allowing too much
leaf area for high production rates.
186-l>M„Kt tVnf
Figure 3. Resource use and resource use
efficiencies for two species replacement
series using Adenostoma fascicuiatum
(A.f.) and Ceanothus greggii (C.g.).
The abscissa gives the foliar area index
(FAI) for species mixes used in the
simulation.
SUMMARY
Models of land based waste water
treatment can be constructed for any one
aspect of the problem, from micropro-
cesses in the soil to a harvesting
scheme to maxi mi ze nitrogen harvest.
Models constructed to predict long range
trends may not be suitable for small
time spans. Conversely, models suitable
for smal! time spans may not be applie-
able to long range use. A model can be
built to monitor nitrate per se in the
system, or the model can be expanded to
include phosphorous or heavy metals.
A model can be designed to describe soil
processes in detail with the plant as a
black box sink, or the biochemistry of
nutriënt uptake and allocation can be
model led with the soil a black box
source. A model can incorporate details
of both the plant and the soil systems
in an integrated, interrelated manner.
In short, models exist or can be
developed for most applications. The
major problem in model development is
establishing the objectives and neces-
sary precision, balanced by cost, time
and personnel constraints. Once the
objectives and required precision are
defined, the adequacy of the data base
and research plan can be evaluated.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Support was provided to the Systems
Ecology Research Group at San Diego
State University to develop plant-soil-water models by the National Science
Foundation on grant DEB77-13944. The
National Science Foundation also
supported model development as part of
the RATE program grants 0PP75-1295209-
306 and NSF DPP76-80646. The Department
of Energy has supported our model ing
effort on grant EE77-5-03-1525.
187Acock, B., J. H. M. Thornley, and J.
Warren Wilson. 1970. Spatial
variation of light in the canopy,
p. 91-102. 1Ü Prediction and
measurement of photosynthetic
productivity. Center for Agricul-
tural Publishing and Documentation,
Wageningen.
Amerman, C. R. 1971. Numerical solu-
tion of the flow èquation, p. 241-
254. In_D. Hillel. Soil and water.
Academie Press, New York.
Anderson, M. C. and 0. T. Denmead. 1969.
Shortwave radiation on inclined
surfaces in model plant conmunities.
Agron. J. 61:867-872.
Anderson, M. C. 1966. Stand structure
and light penetration. II. A
theoretical analysis. J. Appl.
Ecol. 3:41-54.
Anderssen, R. S., R. P. Hale, and J. R.
M- Radok. 1969. The simulation
with mathematical models of ion
uptake by growing roots- Plant
Soil 30:271-289.
Bar-Yosef, B., U. Kafkafi, and E.
Bresier. 1972. Uptake of phos-
phorus by plants growing under
field conditions. I. Theoretical
model and experimental determina-
tion of its parameters. SSSAP 36:
782-788.
Blackman, G. E. 1968. The application
of the concepts of growth analysis
to the assessment of productivity
jh^ F. E. Eckardt, ed. Functioning
of terrestriaJ-ecosystems at the
primary production level. Paris:
UNESCO.
Brouwer, R. and C. T. deWit. 1969. A
simulation model of plant growth
with special attention to root
growth and its consequences. J_n_
W. J. Whittington, ed. Root growth.
London:Academic Press.
Carslaw, H. S. and J. C. Jaeger. 1959.
Conduction of heat in solids, 2nd
ed. Cl arendon Press, Oxford.
Carter, 0. G. and 0. J. Lethwell. 1967.
Effects of temperature on ortho-
phosphate absorption by excised
corn roots. PI. Phys. 42:1407-1412.Cole, C. V., G. S. Innis, and J. W. B.
Stewart. 1977. Simulation of
phosphorus cycling in semiarid
grasslands. Ecology 58:1-15.
Cowan, I. R. 1965. Transport of water
in the soil-plant-atmosphere
system. J. Appl. Ecol. 2:221-239.
Oainty, J. 1965. Osmotic flow in the
state and moyement of water in
living organisms. New York:
Academie Press.
Davidson, J. L. and J. R. Phillip.
1958. Light and pasture growth,
p. 181-187. XD-Climatology and
microclimatology. Paris: UNESCO.
Denmead, 0. T. 1964. Evaporation
sources and apparent diffusivities
in a forest canopy. J. Appl.
Meterol. 3:383-389.
Denraead, 0. T. 1973. Relative signi-
ficance of soil and plant evapora-
tion in estimating evapotranspir-
ation, p. 505-511. Xü. R- °-
Slatyer, ed. Plant response to
climatic factors, Proceedings of
the Uppsala Symposium. Paris:
UNESCO.
Duncan, W. C., R. S. Loomis, W. A.
Williams, and R. Hanau. 1967. A
model for simulating photosynthe-
sis 1n plant communities.
Hilgardia 38:181-205.
Ehleringer, J. R. and P. C. Miller.
1975a. A simulation model of plant
water relations and production in
the alpine tundra, Colorado.
Oecologia 19:177-193.
Ehleringer, J. R. and P. C. Miller.
1975b. Water relations of
selected plant species in the
alpine tundra, Colorado. Ecology
56:370-380.
Elgawhary, S. M., G. L. Malzer and S.
A. Barber. 1972. Calcium and
strontium transport to plant
roots. SSSAP 36:794-799.
Epstein, E. and C. E. Hagan. 1952. A
kinetic study of the absorption of
al kali cations by barley roots.
PI. Physiol. 27:457-474.
188Fick, G. W., R. S. Loomis, and W. A.
Williams. 1975. Sugar beet, p.
259-297. In.L. T. Evens, ed. Crop
Physiology. Cambridge University
Press.
Frere, M. H. and J. H. Axley. 1964.
Cation uptake by excised barley"
roots from solutions and suspen-
sions. Soil Sci. 97:209-213.
Gardner, W. R. 1968. Nutriënt trans-
port to plant roots. Trans. 9th
Int. Congr. Soil Sci. 1968, Vol.
1, p 135-142.
Gates, D. M. 1962. Energy exchange in
the biosphere. Harper and Row,
New York.
Gates, D. M. 1965. Energy, plants and
ecology. Ecology 46:1-13.
Goudriaan, J. and P. E. Waggoner. 1972.
Simulating both aerial microclimate
and soil temperature from observa-
tions above the foliar canopy.
Neth. J. Agric. Sci. 20:104-124.
Hanks, R. J. and S. B. Bowers. 1962.
Numerical solution of the moisture
flow equation into layered soils.
Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 26:530-
534.
Harpaz, Y. 1975. Simulation of the
nitrogen balance in semi-arid
regions. Ph.D. Thesis, Hebrew
University, Jerusalem.
Hasfurther, V. R. and R. D. Burman.
1974. Soil temperature model ing
using air temperature as a driving
mechanism. Trans. ASAE (Am. Soc.
Agric. Eng.) 17:78-81.
Honert, T. H. van den. 1948. Water
transport in plants as a catenary
process. Disc. Faraday Soc. 3:146-
153.
Horowitz, L. 1958. Some simplified
mathematical treatments of trans-
location in plants. Plant Phys.
33:81-93.
Idso, S. B. and C. T. de Wit. 1970.
Light relations in plant canopies.
Apple. Opt. 9:177-184.Jarvis, P. G. and M. S. Jarvis. 1963.
The water relations of tree
seedlings. IV. Some aspects of the
tissue water relations and drought
resistance. Physiol. Plant. 16:
501-516.
Jungk, A. and S. A. Barber. 1974.
Phosphate uptake rate of corn
roots as related to the proportion
of the roots exposed to phosphate.
Agron. J. 66:554-557.
Keulen, H. van. 1975. Simulation of
water use and herbage growth in
arid regions, p. 176. Center for
Agric. Pub. and Docum., Wageningen,
The Netherlands.
Keulen, H. van, N. G. Seligman and J.
Goudriaan. 1975. Availability of
anions in the growth medium of
roots of an actively growing plant.
Netherlands J. of Agric. Sci. 23:
131-138.
Kvet, J., J. P. Ondok, J. Necas and P.
G. Jarvis. 1971. Methods of
growth analysis. lr±Z. Sestak, J.
Catsky and P. G. Jarvis, ed. Plant
photosynthetic production. The
Hague: Dr. W. Junk.
Lawrence, B. A., M. C. Lewis and P. C.
Miller. 1978. A simulation model
of population processes of arctic
tundra graminoids. 1^ L. L.
Tieszen, ed. Vegetation and pro-
duction ecology of an Alaskan
Arctic Tundra. Springer-Verlag.
Lawrence, W. T. 1975. A radiation
model for chaparral canopies.
M.S. Thesis, San Diego State Univ.
Lemon, E. R. 1967. The impact of the
atmospheric environment of the
integument of plants. Int. J-
Biometeor. 3:57-69.
Lewis, P. G. and J. P. Quirk. 1967.
P diffusion in soil and uptake by
plants. IV. Computed uptake by
model roots as a result of diffu-
sion flow. Plant Soil 26:445-453.
Liakopqulos, A. C. 1965. Theoretical
solution of the unsteady unsatu-
rated flow problems in soils.
Int. Assoc. Sci. Hydrol. Buil. 10:
58-69.
189Loneragan, J. F. 1968. Nutriënt con-
centration, nutriënt flux and plant
growth. Trans. 9th Int. Congr.
Soil Sci. 2:173-182.
Loomis, R. S. 1970. Summary dynamics
and development of photosynthetic
systems. IQ Prediction and mea-
surement of photosynthetic produc-
tivity. Wageningen: Center for
Agricultural Pub. and Docum.
Marriott, F. H. C. and P. H. Nye. 1968.
The importance of mass flow in
uptake of ions by roots from soil.
Trans. 9th Int. Congr. Soil Sci.
1:127-135.
Mengel, D. B. and S. A. Barber. 1974.
Rate of nutriënt uptake per unit of
corn root under field conditions.
Agron. J. 66:399-402.
MTller, P. C. 1972. A model of vege-
tation structures and depth of thaw
for the tundra, p. 13-15. In. 1972
Tundra Biome Symposium, University
of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
Miller, P. C. 1972. Bioclimate, leaf
temperature, and primary production
in red mangrove canopies in south
Fiorida. Ecology 53:22-45.
Miller, P.C. 1975. A comparison of
short-term effects of thermal addi-
tion on photosynthesis and plant-
water stress in three ecosystems,
p. 623-636. In Environmental
effects of coöTing systems at
nuclear power plants. Int- Atomic
Energy Agency, Vienna, Austria.
[Proc. of a Symp. on the Physical
and Bioi. Effect on the Env. of
Cooling Systems and Thermal Dis-
charges at Nuclear Power Stations,
Oslo, 26-30 August 1974.]
Miller, P. C. 1975. Simulation of
water relations and net photosyn-
thesis in mangroves in south
Florida. JJI G. E. Walsh, S. C.
Snedaker and H. 6. Teas, eds. Proc.
First Int. Symp. on Bioi. and
Mgmt. of Mangroves, Honolulu,
Hawaii.Miller, P. C. and H. A. Mooney. 1974.
The origin and structure of Ameri-
can arid-zone ecosystems. The
producers: Interactions between
environment, form, and function,
p. 201-209. In. Proc. First Int.
Congr. of Ecology, The Hague,
Netherlands.
Miller, P. C, J. R. Ehleringer, B.
Hynum, and W. A. Stoner. 1974.
Digital simulation of potential
reforestation problems in the
Rung Sat Delta, Viet Nam, p. 100-
164. In. H. T. Odum, M. Sell, M.
Brown, J. Zucchetto, C. Swallows,
J. Browder, T. Ahlstrom, and L.
Peterson, eds. The effects of herbi-
cides in south Vietnam. Part B:
Working papers. Models of herbi-
cide, mangroves, and war in Viet-
nam. Natl. Acad. Sci-Natl. Res.
Council, Washington, D. C.
Miller, P. C, VI. A. Stoner, J. Hom,
and D. K. Poole. 1976. Potential
influence of thermal effluents on
the production and water use effi-
ciency of mangrove species in
south Florida, p 39-45. .In. G. W.
Esch and R. W. McFariane, eds.
Thermal ecology II. Proceedings
of the Thermal Ecology Conf.
Energy Res. and Development Agency.
Miller, P. C, W. A. Stoner, and L. L.
Tieszen. 1976. A model of stand
photosynthesis for the wet meadow
tundra at Barrow, Alaska.
Ecology 57:411-430.
Miller, P. C, W. A. Stoner, L. L.
Tieszen, M. L. Allessio, B. H.
McCown, F. S. Chapin, III, and
G. R. Shaver. 1978. A model of
carbohydrate, nitrogen, phosphorus
aliocation and growth in tundra
production. Xn.L. L. Tieszen, ed.
Vegetation and production ecology
of an Alaskan Arctic Tundra.
Springer-Verlag.
Miller, P. C., W. A. Stoner, and S. P.
Richards. 1978. MEDECS, a
simulation of Mediterranean ecosys-
tems. Simulation (in press).
190Monsi, M. and T. Saeki. 1953. Uber den
Lichtfaktor in den Pflanzengesell-
schaften und seine Bedeutung fur
die Stoffproduktion. Jap. J. Bot.
14:22-52. (English trans. W.
Woodard and P. C. Mi 11 er, mimeo.)
Monsi, M. and Y. Murata. 1970. Devel-
opment of photosynthetic systems
as influenced by distribution of
matter, p. 115-129. In. Prediction
and Measurement of Photosynthetic
Productivity. Wageningen: Center
for Agricultural Pub. and Doeum.
Monteith, J. L. 1965. Light distribu-
tion and photosynthesis in field
crops. Ann. Bot. N. S. 29:17-37.
Murphy, C. E. and K. R, Knoerr. 1970.
Model ing the energy balance
processes of natural ecosystems.
U.S. IBP (Int. Biol. Program) Anal.
Ecosyst. Program Eastern Deciduous
Forest Bi ome Subproject Res. Rep.
Final 1969-1970, Oak Ridge Nat.
Lab. 168 pp.
Murphy, C. E. and K. R. Knoerr. 1972.
Model ing the energy balance
processes of natural ecosystems.
U.S. IBP Anal. Ecosyst. Program
Eastern Deciduous Forest Bi ome
Subproject Res. Rep. EDFB-IBP 72-10
Oak Ridge Nat. Lab. 141 pp.
NaNagora, T., R. E. Phillips and J. E.
Legett. 1976. Diffusion and «iass
flow of nitrate nitrogen into corn
roots grown under field conditions.
Agron J. 68:67-72.
Ng. E. 1974. Soil moisture relations
in chaparral. M.S. Thesis, San
Diego State Univ., San Diego, CA.
114 pp.
Ng, E. and P. C. Miller. 1975. A model
of the effect of tundra vegetation
on soil temperatures, p. 222-226.
IjX G. Weller and S. A. Bowling,
eds. Climate of the arctic. 24th
Alaska Science Conf., Fairbanks,
Alaska, August 15-17, 1973.
Geophysical Inst. Univ. of Alaska,
Fairbanks, Alaska.
Ng, E. and P. C. Miller. 1977. Valida-
tion of a model of the effect of
tundra vegetation on soil tempera-
tures. Arct. Alp. Res. 9:89-104.Nye, P. H. 1966. The effect of the
nutriënt intensity and buffering
power of a soil, and the absorbing
power, si ze and root hairs of a
root, on nutriënt absorption by
diffusion. Plant and Soil 15:81-
105.
Nye, P. H. and P. B. Tinker. 1969. The
concept of a root demand coëffi-
ciënt. J. Appl. Ecol. 293-300.
Olsen, S. R. and W. D. Kemper. 1968.
Movement of nutrients to plant
roots. Advances in Agron. 20:91-
149.
Passiouro, J. B. 1963. A mathematical
model for the uptake of ions from
the soil solution. Plant Soil 18:
235-238.
Penning de Vries, F. W. T. 1972. A
model for simulating transpiration
of leaves with special attention
to stomatal functioning. J. Appl.
Ecol. 9:57-77.
Penning de Vries, F. W. T. 1973.
Substrate utilization and respira-
tion in relation to growth and
maintenance in higher plants.
Ph.D. Dissertation. Agricultural
Univ., Wageningen.
Penning de Vries, F. VI. T. 1974. Sub-
strate utilization and respiration
in relation to growth and main-
tenance in higher plants. Neth.
J. Agric. Sci. 22:40-44.
Penning de Vries, F. VI. T., C. E.
Murphy, Jr., C. G. Wells, and J. R.
Jorgensen. 1974. Simulation of
nitrogen distribution in time and
space in even-agral loblolly pine
plantations and its effect on
productivity. IPB Contribution
#156. Proceedings of the Symp.
on Mineral Cycling in Southern
Ecosystems. Augusta, Georgia
May 1-3, 1974.
Penning de Vries, F. VI. T., C. E.
Murphy, Jr., C. G. Wells, and J. R.
Jorgensen. 1976. Simulation of
nitrogen distribution in time and
space in even-agral loblolly pine
plantations and its effect on pro-
ductivity. IBP Contribution #156.
Paper presented at Symp. on Mineral
Cycling in Southern Ecosystems,
Augusta, Ga. 1-3 May 1974.
191Philip, J. R. 1966. Plant water rela-
tions: some physical aspects.
Ann. Rev. Plant Physiol. 17:245-268.
Phillips, R. E., T. NaNagara, R. E.
Zartman, and J. E. Leggett. 1976.
Diffusion and mass flow of nitrate-
nitrogen to plant roots. Agron J.
68:63-66.
Rawlins, S. L. 1963. Resistance to
water flow in the transpiration
stream, p. 69-84. JTL I. Zelitch,
ed. Stomata and water relations
in plants. Conn. Agric. Exp. Sta.
Buil. 664.
Reuss, J. 0. and G. S. Innis. 1977.
A grassland nitrogen flow simula-
tion model. Ecology 58:379-388.
Roberts, S. W. and P. C. Miller. 1977.
Interception of solar radiation as
affected by canopy organization in
two Mediterranean shrubs.
Oecologia Plantarum (in press).
Stewart, D. W. and E. R. Lemon. 1972.
The energy budget at the earth's
surface: A simulation of net
photosynthesis of field corn. ECOM
Atmospheric Sciences Lab. Fort
Huachuca, Ariz. Int. Rep. 69-3.
Stoner, W. A. and P. C. Miller. 1975.
Plant water relations in the wet
coastal tundra at Barrow, Alaska.
Arct. Alp. Res. 7:109-124.
Stoner, W. A., P. C. Miller and L. L.
Tieszen. 1978. A model of plant
growth and phosphorus allocation
for Dupontia fischeri in coastal,
wet, meadow tundra. lri L. L.
Tieszen, ed. Vegetation and pro-
duction ecology of an Alaskan
Arctic Tundra. Springer-Verlag.
Stoner, W. A., P. C Miller, S. P.
Richards, and S. A. Barkley. 1977.
Internal nutriënt recycling as
related to plant life form--a
simulation approach. In^ Proc.
Environmental Chemistry and Cycling
Processes Symposium, 28-30 April
1976, Athens, Georgia.
Thornley, J. H. M. 1972a. A balanced
quantitative model for root:
snoot ratios in vegetative plants.
Ann. Bot., 36:431-441.Thornley, J. H. M. 1972b. A model to
describe the partitioning of
photosynthate during vegetative
plant growth. Ann. Bot. 36:419-
430.
Waggoner, P. E., G. M. Furnival, and
W. E. Reifsnyder. 1969. Simula-
tion of microclimate in a forest
canopy. For. Sci. 15:37-45.
Waggoner, P. E. and W. E. Reifsynder.
1968. Simulation of temperature,
humidity, and evaporation profiles
in a leaf canopy. J. Apply.
Meteorol. 7:400-409.
Warren Wilson, J. 1964. Annual growth
of Salix arctica in the high-
arctic. Ann. Bot. N. S. 28:71-76.
Warren Wilson, J. 1966. An analysis
of plant growth and its control
in arctic environments. Ann.
Bot. N. S. 24:372-381.
Williams, R. F. 1946. The physiology
of plant growth with special
reference to the concept of net
assimilation rate. Ann. Bot. N.
S. 10:41-72.
Wit, C. T. de. 1965. Photosynthesis
of leaf canopies. Agric. Res.
Rep. 663, Inst. for Biol. Chem.
Res. Field Crops Herb., (Wagenin-
gen). 57 pp.
Wit, C. T. de and Goudriaan, J. 1974.
Simulation of ecological processes.
Centre for Agricultural Pub. and
Docum., Wageningen. 159 pp.
(Simulation Monographs series).
Wit, C. T. de, R. Brouwer and F. W. T.
Penning de Vries. 1970. The
simulation of photosynthetic
systems. jj^ Prediction and
Measurement of Photosynthetic
Productivity. Wageningen: Center
for Agricultural Pub. and Docum.
Yim, Y., H. Ogawa and T. Kira. 1969.
Light interception by sterns in
plant communities. Jap. J. Ecol.
19:233-238.
Zartman, R. E., R. E. Phillips, and J.
E. Leggett. 1976. Comparison of
simulated and measured nitrogen
accumuiation in burley tobacco.
Agron. J. 68:406-410.
192EVALUATION OF EXISTING
SYSTEMS
OVERVIEW OF EXISTING LAND TREATMENT SYSTEMS
I.K. Iskandar Research Chemist, Earth Sciences Branch,
U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering
Laboratory, Hanover, New Hampshire 03755
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews existing systems
of land application of wastewater. Par-
ticular emphasis is placed upon the
historical philosophy of the utilization
of the natural soil-plant system for
purifying wastewater, reasons for the
success or failure of the older systems,
and experience gained from their design,
construction and operation.
The first documented systems were
built in 1559 in lower Silesia, Poland,
and in Buzlau, Germany. The practice of
applying wastes to land then spread
throughout Europe. Sarly systems vere
constructed to improve stream water
quality and to fertilize the soil. The
first system in the U.S. was huilt in
Augusta, Maine, in 18T2.
The number of sewage farms began to
decline at the start of the 20th century,-
mainly hecause of urbanization and the
increase in the cost of transporting
wastewater. The decline was not due to
any documented case of health problems
associated with the utilization of waste-
water in agriculture.
Today, the purposes of land applica-
tion of wastewater are to treat the
wastewater, to utilize its nutrients in
agriculture, to provide for its reuse as
a water resource for arid and semi-arid
regions, to help solve the energy short-
age, and to eliminate the pollution of
natural waters.
Existing systems can te utilized as
demonstration sites, for public accept-
ance purposes, for gaining experience in
design criteria, management, and opera-
tion practices, and for assessment ofthe long-term effects on the soil-plant
systems.
IHTRODUCTION
Population growth and urbanization
in recent years have resulted in in-
creased production of municipal and
industrial wastes which must undergo
treatment and disposal. Also, demands
for drinking and irrigation water have
increased in arid and semi-arid regions.
At the same time, more stringent water
quality legislation has been enacted to
prevent eutrophication of lakes and
streams, and to protect human health
from an increasing number of potentially
toxic Chemicals being released into the
environment. Concurrently, the reali-
zation that our present supply of pot-
able water and energy resources is not
infinite has led to a reevaluation of
wastewater treatment practices. Empha-
sis has been placed on reclaiming this
water resource, while utilizing a much
more cost effective method.
Land treatment systems, given the
proper design and management, can achieve
a level of treatment equal to or even
higher than an advanced waste treatment
plant, at a-lower energy and cost level.
Although there are many benefits to the
reutilization of wastewater, describing
them is not the main objective of this
paper. lts purpose is to summarize the
historical philosophy of the utilization
of the natural soil-plant system for
purifying wastewater. Reasons for the
success or failure of these old systems
are documented, and experience gained
193from the design, construction, and opera-
tion of new land treatment systems is
discussed.
HISTORICAL OVERVIEW
The application of wastewater to
land is not a new concept; it has been
reported as far back as ancient Athens
(Markland et al., 197*0. The first
documented case- occurred in 1559 when
Boleslawiec,' in lover Silesia (Wierz-
bicki, 19U9), "became the first Ëuropean
city to forbid the direct discharge of
sewage into nearby waterways. During
the sarae year, a sewage farm was estab-
lished in Bunzlau, Germany (Pound and
Crites, 1975)- The practice of applying
wastes to the land spread slowly through-
out Europe. Not only was it found to be
the simplest method for the treatment
and disposal of wastewater, but it also
proved to increase the fertility of the
land when used for erop irrigation.
This, in turn, increased both erop
yields and the value of the land. For a
detailed historical survey of land
application of sewage effluent, the
reader should consult Iskandar and
Keefauver (1978), Jewell and Seabrook
(1978), Sullivan et al. (1973), and the
Center for the Study of Federalism
(1972). The report by Jewell and Sea-
brook was not available for evaluation
at the time this paper was submitted
for publication. However, the senior
author (Dr. W. Jewell) gave the refer-
ence for citation and indicated its
availability in the near future as an
EPA publication (personal communica-
tions).
The growth of industry in England
during the early l8th century, and the
subsequent pollution of waterways,
forced the English to consider the
necessity of wastewater treatment.
Early land application systems were
established in order to reach two goals:
first, to improve stream water quality,
and second, to fertilize the soil (Ewert
et al., 1973). The first facility was a
slow infiltration system built outside
London in 1829 (Hyde, 1929). In 1ÖU3,
sewage farms were established in Edin-
burgh, Ashburton and Devon.
Treatment of sewage in the expand-
ing Ëuropean cities became an increasing
health problem. The outbreak of such
infectious diseases as typhus provided
the impetus for the establishment of
a treatment system in Berlin (Weiland,1955). Studies conducted in the early
1870's demonstrated the effectiveness of
land treatment in the removal of patho-
gens. Tests conducted by the Veterinary
College of Berlin showed that no ill
effects resulted from feeding sewage-
irrigated fodder to cattle. The system,
which initially consisted of 2,000
hectares, began operating in 1878. At
first, because no pretreatment was given
to the wastewater, the suspended solids
in the wastewater affected the erops.
Settling basins were installed to
alleviate this problem. Since its
initiation, the Berlin sewage farm has
played a major role in the development
of land application techniques.
Following the English design, a
sewage farm was established in the
1890's at Braunschweig, Germany (Tietjen,
1977). This early system encompassed
350 hectares. Raw sewage from the city
was piped to the farm and applied by
flooding. Over several decades,
Braunschweig expanded to the point where
the farm could no longer handle all of
the city's wastewater. Recognizing the
high degree of purification that could
be obtained from the sewage farm, the
citizens enlarged it to twice its origi-
nal size, and it began to serve two
additional nearby cities, WolfenbUttel
and Salzgitter.
Another major land treatment system
was begun in the 1890's. Located out-
side Melbourne, Australia, the Werribee
Sewage Farm was destined to become one
of the oldest and largest operating land
treatment systems (Seabrook, 1975). The
idea arose from a recommendation made by
an English engineer, James Mansergh. In
fact, out of eight proposals for waste-
water treatment and disposal, five
involved land treatment. The original
farm consisted of 3,580 hectares.
Operations began in I897, when the first
raw sewage flooded the fields by the
overland flow mode. Today, approxi-
mately 2,000 hectares consist of a fine
sandy loam with an infiltration rate of
25 mm/day. The remaining land has a
much lower permeability (2.5 mm/day) and
a gentle slope.
Sewage farms became common in the
second half of the 19th century. In
1872, the first one in the United States
was established at Augusta, Maine (Pound
and Crites, 1975), and by the end of the
century, there were systems in 20 states.
Land application of sewage effluent
has been practiced in many other coun-
tries as well. It has been reported inIndia (Arceivala, 1977), Israël (Shelef,
1977), Japan (Kubo and Sugiki, 1977),
South Africa (Hart and Van Vuuren,
1977), China (Tsu-Yuan, 1965)» Canada
(EPS, 1976), Mexico (Aguirre and Eloy
Urroz, 1977), New Zealand (McDowali,
1958) and the Netherlands (Beek and De
Haan, 1973). For a complete listing the
reader should consult Iskandar and
Keefauver (1978).
At the start of the 20th century,
increasing urbanization began to cause a
decline in sewage farms in both Europe
and America. With the growth of cities,
land not only became more expensive, but
there was less suitable land available.
This made it necessary to move further
from the cities, which, in turn, in-
creased transportation costs. As popu-
lations increased, old fields became
overburdened by the increasing amounts
of waste. This resulted In poor treat-
ment of the sewage, as well as poor erop
yields. The combination of these fac-
tors led to a decline in the number of
sewage farms. By 1900, the method was
considered outdated, and nutrients from
wastewater were found to be more costly
than commercial fertilizer (Center for
the Study of Federalism, 1972).
Although some sewage farms contin-
ued to operate successfully, a shift was
made toward physical-chemical and bio-
logical treatment. This shift was
clearly demonstrated by the geographical
distribution of land treatment systems
in the United States. By 1935, there
were well over 100 systems in the U.S.
(Markland et al., 197*0 • The vast
majority of these systems were located
in the western portion of the country.
Denser populations, higher land values,
and little need for erop irrigation
provided small incentive for the contin-
uation of such systems in the east.
Water supplies in the west, however,
were limited, and the demand for irri-
gation was high. Here wastewater repre-
sented an additional supply of water.
There were over 100 communities in the
west which utilized wastewater for
irrigation, 67 of which had municipally
owned sewage farms (Hutchins, 1939). By
1971, the total number of land applica-
tion systems in the United States ex-
ceeded 500 (Center for the Study of
Federalism, 1972). Again, most of them
were in the western and southern regions
of the U.S.
There was concern over the possi-
bility of disease arising from the irri-
gation of crops with raw sewage. Thisled states to require pretreatment, even
though it was recognized that many
streams which were utilized for irriga-
tion purposes were also the dumping
sites for untreated wastes. The direct
discharge of raw sewage into streams and
lak.es was not uncommon (Lawton, I96O).
In regions where stream flow was natur-
ally intermittent, raw sewage composed a
major portion of the stream flow during
certain times of the year, For example,
in 193U at Ogden, Utah, Hutchins (1939)
found that:
The Odgen sewage, which was
discharged untreated into the Ogden
River, ..., represented more than
one-half of the water being pumped
by two irrigation companies...
Even taking into account the poten-
tial health risk and the negative public
attitude, it was feit that the rising
demand for irrigation water would and
could be alleviated by increased use of
treated wastewater. In general, there
is a good similarity between the reasons
that forced the British Royal Commission
on Sewage Disposal to press for the uni-
versal revival of land application of
sewage in 1865 and today's pressure
from U.S. regulatory agencies for land
treatment as a viable alternative to
advanced waste treatment. Nevertheless,
it is improbable that land treatment will
attain universal application in the
United States due to the high variability
in climate, soil type, hydrology, topo-
graphy, and state regulations.
EXISTING SYSTEMS AND HEALTH ASPECTS OF
LAND APPLICATION OF WASTEWATER
One of the major issues raised in
the consideration of land treatment is
the health risk involved. Concern over
the danger of disease at sewage farms
and the possible contamination of
irrigated crops has existed from the
start. This public fear, however, has
had little evidence to support it. When
a major typhoid epidemie struck Berlin
in 1889, not one case was reported on
the sewage farm (Mitchell, 193l).
Boleslawiec, site of the first land
treatment system, was considered one of
the healthiest European cities in the
19th century (Wierzbicki, 191*9). Kute-
pov (1968) stated:
195... no direct evidence that the
irrigation of fields with sewage
inereases the danger of epidemics
... that where this was thought to
be the case, careful investigation
invariably dispelled the suspicion.
The use of wastewater for the irri-
gation of crops and the possibility of
contamination has aroused great public
concern. This concern.'led to restric-
tions concerning the types of crops
used for wastewater irrigation.
California was one of the first
states to adopt legislation concerning
the use of sewage for irrigation (Wol-
man, 1977). This bill, vhich was
passed in 1918, prohibited the applica-
tion of untreated wastes to garden pro-
duce which was consumed raw, but per-
mitted the irrigation of vegetables
which were normally cooked, as long as
the irrigation ceased thirty days prior
to harvest (Ongerth and Jopling, 1977)•
Since then, new regulations have been
passed, the most recent ones in 1975-
This legislation, which is very compre-
hensive, not only covers the conditions
under which wastewater reclamation is
permitted with regard to pretreatment,
application mode, erop, and bacteriolog-
ical standards, but also regulates the
design and operational procedures of
such systems.
Germany also has regulations con-
cerning the use of domestic sewage for
irrigation and a restriction prohibiting
its use for the irrigation of vegetables
(Muller, 1977). The regulations,
especially with regard to pretreatment,
are much less specific than the Cali-
fornia legislation. For example, in
Germany the bnly pretreatment required
is settling and some degree of biologi-
cal treatment is termed "desirable."
The only restriction placed on waste-
water utilized for spray irrigation is
that it is to be chlorinated. The
California regulations, on the other
hand, specifically state pretreatment
steps for both flood and spray irriga-
tion for varying erop types.
Kornder (1976) asks:
Is our concern justified? I
think the first assumption has to
be that there really are health
concerns associated with spray
irrigation of sewage. The degree
of risk is, of course, most diffi-
cult to quantify. However, the
risk the public seems prepared toaccept is quite small, in spite of
the fact that many do not use seat
belts, many smoke and drink to ex-
cess, and most are obese. Those
personal choices of health abuse
somehow seem to be viewed with much
less alarm than the infinitely
smaller risk associated with spray
irrigation of sewage.
It seems rather ironie that so much
conce-rn is focused on spray irrigation
while at the same time relatively little
is said about the indiscriminate use of
surface' waters which are often polluted.
Many land treatment systems utilize
wastewater whieh has undergone seeondary
treatment.
There are several ways in which
land treatment systems may spread di-
sease. They can be a direct source, as
in the cases of erop contamination,
bodily contact, or airborne dispersal of
pathogens, or they can be an indirect
source, as in the case of underground
water contamination. Although the
possibility of any of these occurrences
is very real, with proper design and
management such risks may be rendered
minimal. In evaluating the degree of
risk associated with land treatment,
consideration must be given to the
health risk involved with alternative
treatments.
The transmittance of pathogenic
organisms to humans by means of sewage-
irrigated crops has been documented
(Kornder, 1976). This danger, however,
can apply equally as well to conven-
tionally treated wastes. This is
especially true in arid regions where
sewage plant effluent composes a major
portion of stream flow which is often
used for irrigation.
The biological purification ob-
tained from conventional treatment is
not complete. There is evidence that
greater bacterial and viral removal
results from land treatment (Kutepov,
1968; Ewert et al., 1973; Tietjen, 1977;
Center for the Study of Federalism,
1972; Bouwer, 1976). Concerning the
subsurface drainage of the land treat-
ment system at Braunschweig, Germany,
the local public medical board has
stated (cited by Ewert et al., 1973):
The discharge of the Okertrench
at Neubruck... is in its quality
very definitely better than dis-
charge of unobjectionably operating
mechanical-biological treatment
plants.
196Although conventional treatment
does remove most pathogenic organisms,
it does not remove viruses. Soil, on the
other hand, has "been found to remove
viruses (under proper management) as well
as bacteria (Tietjen, 1977; Bouwer, 1976;
Center for the Study of Federalism,
1972). Viral particles are removed by
adsorption onto negatively charged clay
particles or organic matter, or by
f ixation "by surface active materials,
such as iron and aluminum oxides. There
are many factors, such as pH, cation
concentration, and the soil cation
exchange capacity, which greatly affect
virus removal (Bouwer, 1976).
The Santee, California, system was
the site of a three year study of virus
removal. Pive monitored viruses, Reo-
virus, Adenovirus, Polio, Echo, and
Coxsackie, were found to "be present in
both primary and secondary treated
waste, "but absent after land treatment.
To determine the efficiency of removal,
an experiment was performed where con-
centrations of Type 3 Polio virus were
applied directly to the soil. Complete
virus removal was achieved in the first
60 meters (Center for the Study of
Federalism, 1972).
Bodily contact with wastewater
poses hazards which can be easily avoid-
ed. When wastewater is applied to
recreational areas such as parks and
golf courses, pretreatment, which in-
cludes disinfection, renders the waste-
water just as safe as the streams and
lakes into which sewage effluent is
discharged. Fishing and other recre-
ational use is made of many such streams.
Land treatment also provides additional
purification of the water. Por example,
effluent from the Santee system is used
to create a series of lakes, the last of"
which was found safe enough for public
swimming, and was so used for several
years (Ongerth and Jopling, 1977).
Spray irrigation of wastewater does
pose a risk "because both bacteria and
viruses can travel in the air (Bouwer,
1976). To decrease the possibility of
spreading disease by spray drift or
droplet infection, buffer zones can be
established or rows of hedges or trees
erected around the fields. Other options
include flooding the wastewater onto the
fields, or disinfecting the wastewater
before spraying.
At locations where there is a po-
tential contamination of groundwater
from a land treatment system, there are
two possible options. In the case wherethe contamination is the result of just
one or two substances, it is possible to
pretreat the waste specifically for the
removal of those substances.
In summary, the potential health
hazards from land treatment are no
greater and probably less than those
from conventional treatment. Land
treatment, under proper management, is
more effective, reliable and predictive
in the removal of toxic tracé metals and
organics, viruses, and pathogens than
conventional sewage treatment. The
degree of acceptable risk has to be
defined and compared with the risk
associated with other alternatives of
wastewater treatment and disposal.
PRESENT INTEREST IN LAND TREATMENT
Recent interest in land treatment
of wastewater has been a result of the
increased pollution of natural water as
a consequence of the discharge of un-
treated or partially treated wastewater
into open water. Eutrophication and a
high level of toxic chemicals in the
food chain were the immediate signs of
water quality deterioration. As a
result, governments have set standards
for the discharged effluents which can
not easily be met on a cost-effective
basis by mechanical treatment methods.
In the meantime, they passed laws and
guidelines encouraging local governments
and companies to consider treating
wastewater by application on land. The
most important ones are PL 92-500 and
PL 95-217.
Recently the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) emphasized two
basic criteria: namely, the cost effec-
tiveness and the best practicable treat-
ment (BPT). These require any grant
applicant to evaluate three alternatives
for each project: l) treatment and
discharge, 2) land treatment, and 3)
reuse, such as for industrial waters,
the basic requirement being secondary
treatment. For land treatment, the
primary goal is treating the wastewater
while simultaneously protecting the
groundwater. In this regard, three
separate criteria have been established,
based on the ultimate use of the reno-
vated water. If the groundwater is to
be used for drinking, the aquifer must
continue to meet the chemical, biologi-
cal, and pesticide criteria established
in the drinking water standards. If the
groundwater has a potential to be used
197as a source of potable water, even
though it may not be used for that
purpose at the present time, the same
chemical and pesticide standards must be
met, though the biological standards do
not apply. If the renovated water would
clearly never be used as potable water,
then regional EPA and state regulations
would apply.
Although land treatment, like all
known waste treatment systems, has
potential health hazards associated with
it, these risks can be kept to a mini-
mum. Considering that land treatment
has been found to remove nitrogen,
heavy raetals, phosphorus, bacteria, and
viruses better than conventional treat-
ment (Bouwer, 1976; Ewert et al., 1973;
Tietjen, 1977> Kutepov, 1968; and Center
for the Study of Federalism, 1972), it
is rather odd that the former instills
so much more public fear than the latter.
LEARNING FROM THE PAST
There are many things that we can
learn from past experience in land dis-
posal of wastewater. Information on pur-
pose, feasibility, design, performance,
management, monitoring, and public
acceptance may all be extrapolated by
proper evaluation of existing systems.
Several review articles (Shuval, 1977)
have recently been published on the
reuse of wastewater. The feasibility of
land treatment should be evaluated on a
cost effective basis.
Experience gained in design, per-
formance, management and monitoring of
land treatment systems may be utilized
during the planning and design stages
of new systems. Because of the large
number of systems available, a computer
file of both foreign and domestic land
application systems has been established
(iskandar, unpublished) at the U.S. Army
Cold Regions Research and Engineering
Laboratory in Hanover, N.H.
Information on 11 design parameters
as well as available papers is included.
Parameters include system name, loca-
tion, system type, flow rate, waste
type, purpose of the system, and year of
initiation. When Information on a eer-
tain type of system is desired, the
program can retrieve all stored informa-
tion which fits the given parameters as
well as a listing of all related papers.
It is hoped that by the use of such
information, past experience can be
used and successful techniques employed
so that further improvements in the landtreatment of wastewater may be achieved.
Long-term heavy metals and phos-
phorus accumulation in land treatment
may be estimated by examination of soils
and vegetation obtained from old dis-
posal systems and compared with the
levels in adjacent similar soils which
have never received wastewater. This
technique has been utilized successfully
by Iskandar et al. (1977), Baillod et
al. (1977) and Uiga et al. (1977), and
may also be utilized in working demon-
stration projects. An operating example
is the best response to objections
raised by the public concerning odor,
unsightliness, depreciation of land
value, or treatment efficiency. In
California, the state containing the
largest number of land application
systems (Bouwer, 1976), a public survey
was made of the attitudes toward differ-
ent uses of reclaimed water. It was
found that opposition was greatest for
uses involving the greatest amount of
human contact and that the reason for
this opposition was mainly psychological
repugnance (Ongerth and Jopling, 1977).
In summary, there is much to gain
from visiting and evaluating existing
land treatment systems for wastewater.
Not only can past performance character-
istics be determined, but also informa-
tion about the design parameters, cost
estimates, health aspects, and public
acceptance may be gained for present and
future construction purposes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This vork was supported by the OCE
Directorate of Civil Works Land Treat-
ment Program under work unit 31280,
"Evaluation of Existing Facilities for
Wastewater Land Treatment." The assis-
tance of E. Keefauver and C. Chen in
surveying the literature and S. Reed,
Major J. Bouzoun and T. Jenkins for
reviewing a draft of this manuscript is
appreciated.
LITERATURE CITED
Aguirre, M.J. and J. Eloy Urroz, 1977.
Water Reclamation and Wastewater
Reuse for Irrigation of Agricul-
tural Lands in Mexico. In:
Wastewater Renovation and Reuse, F.
D'Itri (ed.), Marcel Dekker, Inc.,
p. 1-33.
198Arceivala, S.J., 1977. Water reuse in
India. In: Water Renovation and
Reuse, H.I. Shuval (ed.), Academie
Press, p. 277-310.
Baillod, C.R., R.G. Waters, I.K.
Iskandar and A. Uiga, 1977. Pre-
liminary Evaluation of 88 Years
Rapid Infiltration of Raw Municipal
Sewage at Calumet, Michigan. In:
Land as a Waste Management Alter-
native, R. Loeher (ed.), Ann Arbor
Sci., Mich., p. U89-5IO.
Beek, J. and F.A.M. De Haan, 1973.
Phosphate Removal by Soil in Rela-
tion to Waste Disposal. Proc.
Intern. Conf. on Land for Waste
Management, Oct. 1973, Ottawa,
Canada.
Bouwer, H., 1976. Use of the Earth's
Crust for Treatment or Storage of
Sewage Effluent and other Waste
Fluids. Critical Reviews in En-
vironmental Control 6(2): 111-130.
Center for the Study of Federalism,
1972. Greenland — Clean Streams:
The Beneficial Use of Waste Water
Through Land Treatment. Philadel-
phia, Pa.: Center for the Study of
Federalism, Temple University.
Ewert, H., C. Tietjen and A. Bramn,
1973. Braunschweig Sewage Utiliza-
tion Association Municipal Sewage
Disposal by Sprinkler Irrigation on
10,000 acres. Proc. Intern. Conf.
on Land for Waste Management, Oct.
1973, Ottawa, Canada, p. 187-193.
EPS (Environmental Protection Service),
1976. Spray Irrigation of Treated
Municipal Wastewater. Canada.
Hart, 0.0. and L.R.J. Van Vuuren, 1977.
Water Reuse in South Africa. In:
Water Renovation and Reuse, H.I.
Shuval (ed.), Academie Press,
P- 355-395-
Hutchins, W.A., 1939. Sewage Irrigation
as Practieed in the Western States.
U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Technical Bulletin No. 675, March
1939.
Hyde.G.H., 1929. Sewage Disposal
Practice in Europe. Western Con-
struction News, July 10, 1929.Iskandar, I.K. and E. Keefauver, 1978.
Historical Survey of Land Applica-
tion of Sewage Effluent. CRREL
Special Report (in prep.), U.S.
Army Cold Regions Research and
Engineering Laboratory, Hanover, N.H.
Iskandar, I.K., R.P. Murrmann and D.C.
Leggett, 1977. Evaluation of Exist-
ing Systems for Land Treatment of
Wastewater at Manteca, California,
and Quincy, Washington. CRREL
Report 77-2U, 38 p.
Jewell, W. and B. Seabrook, 1978.
Historical Review of Land Applica-
tion as an Alternative Treatment
Process for Wastewater. EPA
U3OI9-77-OO8 (in press).
Kornder, L.S. , 1976. Health Effects
of Spray Irrigation of Sewage
Effluent. In: Spray Irrigation of
Treated Municipal Wastewater. EPS,
Canada, 3-PR-76-1.
Kubo, T. and A. Sugiki, 1977- Water
Reuse in Japan. In: Water Renova-
tion and Reuse, H.I. Shuval (ed.),
Academie Press, p. 333-353.
Kutepov, L.Y., 1968. Purification
of Sewage by Soil. Soviet Social
Science, 11: 1523-1530, Nov.
Lawton, G.W., 1960. Trans. Seminar on
Algae and Metropolitan Wastes,
Cincinnati, Ohio, April 27-29,
1960.
Markland, R.E., L.D. Smith and J.D.
Becker, 197^. A Benefit-Cost Analy-
sis of Alternative Land Disposal
Waste Water Methods in an Urban
Environment. University of Mis-
souri, St. Louis, Missouri.
McDowali, F.H., I958. Disposal by
Spray Irrigation on Pasture Land.
Dairy Eng., 75:251-251+.
Mitchell, G.A., 1931. Observations on
Sewage Farming in Europe. Eng.
News - Record 106: 66-69.
MUller, W.J., 1977. Water Reuse in the
Federal Repüblic of Germany. In:
Water Renovation and Reuse, H.I.
Shuval (ed.), Academie Press, p.
258-27^.
199Ongerth, H.J. and W.F. Jopling, 1977.
Water Reuse in California. In:
Water Renovation and Reuse, H.I.
Shuval (ed.), p. 219-250.
Pound, CE. and R.W. Crites, 1975.
Treatment of Municipal Wastewater
by Land Application. Wastewater
Disposal, p. 1+5-56.
Seabrook, P.E., 1975- Land Application
of Wastevater in Australia, The
Werribee Farm System, Melbourne,
Victoria. EPA PB-257 k^k, May.
Shelef, G., 1977. Water Reuse in
Israël. In: Water Renovation and
Reuse, H.I. Shuval (ed,), Academie
Press, p. 311-332.
Shuval, H.I., 1977 (ed.). Water Renova-
tion and Reuse. Academie Press,
N.Y.
Sullivan, R,H., M.M. Cohn and S.S.
Baxter, 1973- Survey of Facilities
Using Land Application of Waste-
water. EPA U30/9-73-006.
Tietjen, C., 1977. The Agricultural
Reuse of Municipal Wastewater in
Braunschweig, Germany. In: Waste-
water Renovation and Reuse, F.M.
D'Itri (ed.), p. 69-87-
Tsu-Yuan, K., 1965. Utilization of City
Sewage in China. Valtenhygien,
21:8U-87 (English summary).
Uiga, A., I.K. Iskandar and H.L. McKim,
1977. Water Reuse at Livermore,
California. In: Land as a Waste
Management Alternative, R. Loeher
(ed.), Ann Arbor Sci., Michigan, p.
511-531.
Weiland, K., 1955- Development and
Present Condition of Sewage Treat-
ment and Utilization in Berlin.
CRREL Draft Translation 655, Oct.
1977.
Wierzbicki, J., I9U9. Sewage Farming at
Ostrow Wielkopolski. CRREL Draft
Translation 6^3, Sept. 1977.
Wolman, A., 1977. Public Health Aspects
of Land Utilization of Wastewater
Effluents and Sludges. Journal
WPCF, Nov. 1977, P- 2211-2218.
200EVALUATION OF EXISTING SYSTEMS
RENOVATION OF WASTE WATER BY LAND
TREATMENT AT MELBOURNE BOARD OF WORKS
FARM WERRIBEE, VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA.
James B. McPherson, M.Agr.Sc. MAIAS.
Farm Manager
Wastewater from the City of Melbourne
has been renovated by land treatment
method at the Board of Works Farm,
Werribee since 1896. On arrival the raw
sewage is distributed through a network of
concrete lined channels. Of this sewage,
30% of flow and 75% of the organic loading
(B.O.D.5) is contributed by tradewaste
discharges, the balance comes from
domestic sources. Average flow is 440 Ml/
day, B.O.D.5 540 mg/l and S.S. 588 mg/l.
Three methods of purification are used
depending on the season and the rate of
flow - Land Filtration, Grass Filtration
and Lagooning.
The soils and climate conditions at
Werribee favour land treatment methods for
wastewater renovation. The performance of
both land systems shows removal rates of
95% B.O.D.5 and S.S., whilst Total Nitrogen
and Total Phosphorus removal under grass
filtration, the winter system, is much less
effective than land filtration.
During the year approximately 23% of
flow is land filtered, 34% grass filtered
with 43% going to lagooning. The hydraulic
loadings imposed are 1.10 Ml/ha/day for
land filtration and 0.18 Ml/ha/day for
grass filtration.
Analysis of herbage shows considerable
increases in N.P.K., with very little
increase in Ca and Mg levels. Heavy metals
are within the acceptable range for most
common grasses and legumes. Analysis of
kidney and liver tissues have shown
concentrations of Zn, Cd etc. to be within
the expected range for maramalian tissue.
The Farm carries 22,000 head of beef
cattle and 30,000 sheep. Revenue from the
sale of livestock offsets some of the net
cost of sewage purification.Investigations are now in progress to
assess the future potential for the re-use
of this reclaimed wastewater.
INT30DUCTI0N
Over the past 80 years, sewage from
the City of Melbourne (population 2,689,000)
has been purified by land treatment at the
Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works
Werribee Farm located 35 kilometres south
west of the city and occupying an area of
10,850 hectares. This area is bounded to
the south by a frontage of 21 kilometres to
Port Phillip Bay, and to the north by a
major highway. The Werribee River adjoins
the Eastern Boundary for 10 kilometres,
whilst to the west the boundary abuts
general farmland and a major airfield.
The waste water arrivés at the Farm
as raw sewage and is distributed by a net-
work of channels. Of the flow 30% is trade
waste, the balance coming from domestic
sources. Figure 1 shows typical dry
weather flows. The average flow is now
approximately 440 Ml/day, five day B.O.D.
540 mg/l and suspended solids 588 mg/l.
201*- 600-
i 500 -LU
O£
400-
300
200TYPICAL DRY WEATHER
FLOW
10 NOON 2 4 6 8 10 MID/N
TIMES AT FARM CONTROL GATES
Variatlon Of Flow Rate Figure 1,
PURIFICATIQN PROCESSES
Three main methods of purificatlon
are used depending on the season and the
rate of flow: (Figure 2).
Land Filtratlon
Land filtration, for the perlods of
high evaporation during late spring,
suramer and autumn (mid September - April),
which is the normal irrigation season in
Victoria.
Grass Filtration
Grass filtration, also known asoverland flow, for periods of low
evaporation (May - August), when
irrigation is not practical.
Lagooning
Lagooning (anaerobic and aerobic) for
peak daily and wet weather flows.
In general, the tnore permeable soils
adjacent to the Werribee River are used
for land filtration, the heavier clays and
loams on the western side of the Farm for
grass filtration and the lower foreshore
areas for lagoons.
•£ 600-o•o
en
o
LU500"
300-
200
100 H
o•' "
J ' F MA ' M 'j 'A'S'O'N'D
Average Daily Flow
202Figure 2.PRIMARY SEDIMENTATIQN AND SLUPGE PROCESSING
All of the sewage applled to the grass
filtration areas, and part of the flowa to
the land filtration and lagoon areas, is
first passed to sedimentation tanks to
remove settleable solid matter.
Sedimentation is performed in shallow
concrete llned basins having a total area
of 3.3 ha. The solids deposited, usually
referred to as sludge, are transferred
periodically to sludge digestion lagoons.
The sludge is retained here for an
extended period, during which it ferments
to a "digested", or stabilized condition.
The sludge lagoons average about 4 m
in depth and have an overall area of
approximately 13 ha each.
Digested sludge is discharged by
gravity flow from these lagoons to drying
areas. It remains drying over a period of
at least 2 years after which it is cleared
by earth moving equipment, and used as
earth fill around the property.
LAND FILTRATION
Purification by land filtration
involves irrigation of permanent pasture
bays, with mainly raw sewage, during the
periods of high evaporation between October
and April.
Each bay is given approximately 1 to 2
days irrigation, followed by 5 to 8 days
drying and 10 to 14 days livestock grazing,
making a total operating cycle of 18 to 21
days.
Depending on the terrain, the bays are
prepared, either as flat plots surrounded
by banks, or as graded areas 180 m long by
10 m wide, which receive sewage at their
higher end. The first system described is
referred to as square check irrigation,
whilst the latter is the well known border
check irrigation system.
In both cases, banks prevent overflow
of the applied sewage directly into the
collecting drainage system, except where
series treatment in adjacent bays is
adopted.
The irrigation of each bay is adjusted
according to the prevailing circumstances,
the average application being some 100 mm.
The irrigant is purified by filtration
through the soil, most of the nutriënt and
heavy metal compounds being removed in the
process.*
Some 50 to 60 percent of the applied
irrigant percolates in this manner and is
collected in a system of open drains 1.2
to 1.8 m deep, which are constructedthroughout the area at 180 m intervals.
The remainder is lost in evaporation,
transpiration or seepage Into the lower
subsoil.
Wastewater irrigation promotes a high
rate of pasture growth and this plant
material must be regularly removed to
maintain areas in proper condition, both
from the point of view of continuing
growth and irrigation. Removal is carried
out by grazing animals.
GRASS FILTRATION
These areas are used during the
months from May to September, when
evaporation is low and land filtration is
impracticable.
Use of this process began in about
1930, to provide purification of winter
flows which had previously been held in
shallow lagoons along the foreshore to
Port Phillip Bay.
In the grass filtration process,
sedimented sewage is continuously passed
over graded areas planted with Italian rye
grass. As the sewage seeps through the
vegetation, the suspended matter is
filtered out and the organic matter is
removed by a biologically-active film
built up on the vegetation. The purified
effluent is then discharged to the
drainage system.
The areas are prepared in a similar
manner to those for the graded land
filtration. The grass filtration areas
then dry out, the grass goes to seed and
cattle are then admitted to feed on the
dry vegetation. The grass seed remaining
on the ground is germinated by rain or
irrigation in the next autumn to provide
for the following operational season.
LAGOON TREATMENT
Lagoons, although not a form of land
treatment, were introduced in 1937, to
provide purification throughout the year
for daily peak flows and wet weather flows
which exceed the capacity of the land or
the grass filtration processes.
In the lagoon process, the sewage is
passed through a series of 8 to 12 lagoons,
each having an area of between 4 to 8 ha.
The average depth of the lagoons is just
over a metre. The first lagoon in each
series being deeper than the remainder to
accommodate sludge accumulation.
Sewage Is purified by the natural
processes of sedimentation, aeration and
203by bacterial and algal activity in the
lagoons. Because of the high organic
loading which is imposed, the first few
lagoons of each series are anaerobic. The
organic loading progressively decreases as
the sewage passes through the succeeding
lagoons, which remain aerobic. Development
of algal growth in the lagoons assists the
purification process by the photo-synthetic
production of oxygen.
PROPUCTION FROM WERRIBEE FARM
Irrigated pastures are grazed by up to
22,000 head of cattle throughout the year
and during spring and summer 20,000 to
50,000 sheep are fattened.
Annually, 7,000 cattle are sold and
replaced by natural increase with calves
bom during the year.
Sheep are purchased during spring and
summer and sold in autumn.
Livestock thrive on the Farm and
require only the same care and attention as
livestock elsewhere. Sales of Farm cattle
are subject to the provisions of the State
Health Act 1958 and the Abattoirs and Meat
Inspection Act 1973, which requires all
cattle on leaving the Farm, to be
immediately slaughtered at a registered
abattoir controlled by the Victorian
Department of Agriculture, whose staff
ensure all carcasses are subjected to rigid
inspection.
These restrictions are imposed under
the Victorian Health Act Regulations to
detect whether cattle which have grazed on
land irrigated with sewage have developed
the disease commonly known as "beef
measles". This i^ caused by the ingestion
of grass containing eggs of the tape worm
Taenia saginata which may develop into
cysts (Cysticercus bovis) in the body of
the anlmal. Viable cysts in the beef are
destroyed by cooking or freezing.
Under such rigid meat inspection,
condemnations of carcasses of Farm animals
from all causes run at about 0.02% -
approximately the same as for animals over
the rest of the State.
Sheep are not subject to restrictions
concerning disposal as in the case of
cattle.HEALTH AND AMENITY
During the whole of its existence,
the Farm has had a resident population
varying from 500 at times to 40 at
present. The work force has exceeded 500
on occasions and is now 325. The health
of these people has been as good as that
of the community generally and no
epidemics of disease have occurred.
No special precautions have been
taken'other than normal hygiëne practices,
and at one time, it was the custom for
residents to water their gardens with raw
wastewater.
There have been complaints of odours,
but it is only infrequently that these
extend beyond the Farm boundaries, and it
is feit that the degree of offence or
inconvenience has been minimal.
The area of Port Phillip Bay adjacent
to the Farm is a popular fishing ground,
and many small boats operate there,
obtaining good catches.
ECONOMICS OF FARM OPERATION
The costs incurred in operating and
maintaining the Farm can be divided into
the following categories:
- sewage purification working
expenses;
- general working expenses;
- management expenses;
- livestock management costs;
- interest charges; and
- head office administrative charges.
These costs are partly offset by
marketing the Farm's livestock.
The annual gross return from the sale
of livestock is in the order of $1.3
million.
After crediting revenue, the net cost
of Sewage Purification is some $4.8
million. This represents treatment costs
of about 2.9 cents per 1,000 1.
Fig. 3 is a diagrammatic
representation of the Farm's budgeted
income and expenditure for the year
1977/78. Income from livestock fluctuates
seasonally depending on weather and market
conditions but always exceeds that
expended on livestock management.EXPENDITURE INCOME
INTEREST ON CAPITAL
$ 1.100,000
SEWAGE PURIFICATION
WORKING ËXPËNSES
LIVESTOCK
MANAGEMENT COSTS
$ 946,300
GENERAL WORKING
EXPENSES
f 690,800
MANAGEMENT EXPENSES
$ 535,100
HEAO OFFICE AOMIN
EXPENSES $ 210,000INCOME
$ t,310,700
NET COST OF
SEWAGE PURIFICATION
$ 4,810,200
COST/MI OF
SEWAGE TREATED
(AVERAGE FLOW OF
450 Ml/day )
$ 29-00
Farm Estimated Expenditure And Income For 1977/78 Figure 3.
CLIMATE
The average annual rainfall (83 year
av.) is 488 mm, whilst evaporation (4 year
av.) is 1,447 mm. The rainfall is
distributed evenly throughout the year
with just a slight winter evidence.
Temperatures are never low enough to
completely stop plant growth, although
crops such as lucerne (alfalfa) make very
little winter growth. Frosts may occur
from April to October, but owing to the
proximity to Port Phillip Bay, they are not
severe.
SOILS
Two main soil types are encountered, a
delta spil - red brown loam (15 - 30 cm)
overlying a medium clay. This soil has amoderate permeability and a pH 6.9. The
second soil is of basaltic origin,
consisting of a red brown light clay (0 -
10 cm) or variable coloured hard setting
loams (0 - 15 cm) over medium to heavy
clay. This soil has low permeability and
a pH 6.9.
RESULTS OF TREATMENT PERFORMANCE
Samples of effluent from all drains
discharging frora the various treatment
processes are taken twice weekly, and
submitted for laboratory examination.
Results of the various land treatment
processes for 1977 are summarised in the
following Tablé 1.
205Waste Water Renovation
PARAMETER1 ^^1 A ^^ 11 ^— I ^— • *
5 DAY BOD
UNFILTERED
SUSPËNDED SOLIDS
VOLATILE
SUSPENDEO SOLIDS
TOTAL
DISSOLVEO SOLIDS
TOTAL
ORGANIC CARBON
COLOUR
Pt/Co UNITS
pH UNITS
DISSOLVED OXYOEN
NITRITE AS N
NITRATE AS N
AMMONIA AS N
ORGANIC NITROGEN
TOTAL NITROGEN
ORTHOPHOSPHATE
AS P
TOTAL PHOSPHORUS
ANIONIC
SURFACTANTS
COPPER
CHROMIUM
CADMIUM
IRON
LEAD
MËRCURY
NICKEL
ZINCINFLOW
RAW
SEWAGE
mg/i
540
5S8
476
1100
336
270
6-9
-
006
0 12
26 1
25 0
51 3
5 1
7 8
3 5
0 32
0 29
0010
3 8
0 28
0 0030
0 11
0 79LAND FILTRATION
OUTFLOW
EFFLUENT
mc,/|
S
15
10
2200
22
50
7-2
•6 0
0 24
2 02
16
2 7
6 6
0 9
11
0
002
003
0002
-
001
00004
0 04
0 04PERCENT
REMOVAL
V.
95
95
95
—
95
-
—
-
-
-
-
85
-
65
100
95
90
80
„
95
85
65
95SEDJMENTATION
'OUTFLOW
EFFLUENT
mg/|
396
172-
140
-
241
270
69
-
006
0 04
27 2
16-5
43 8
69
7-3
3 2
0-18
0 20
0 007
24
0 19
-
0 0»
0 51PERCENT
REMOVAL
•/.
25
70
70
-
35
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
15
-
S
10
45
30
10
40
25
-
10
35GRASS FILTRATION
PLUS
SEDIMENTATION
OUTFLOW
EFFLUENT
mg/i
21
28
13
1075
37
300
7-7
•2 9
007
0 34
259
4 8
31 1
65
6 5
0 7
003
006
0002
19
0 02
00005
006
008PERCENT
REMOVAL
V.
95
95
95
90
_
-
-
-
-
-
-
40
-
15
80
90
80
80
50
95
85
45
90
Table 1.
Note: Removal rate is on a concentration basis. Percent removal is to the nearest 5%.
206DOMESTIC & 1NDUSTRIAL
SEWAGE FROM
MELBOURNE
BROOKLYN
LIVESTOCK PUMPING STATION
MAIN OUTFALL SEWER.
TO FARMPUMPING RATE Ml/day
Daily Average Ml
Daily Variation 200 to 600
Wat Woathijr UpJoiOOO
OTHER SOURCES
Avarogn 30 Ml/day
SUMMER
PASTURES
• -•-.
•INTERMITTENTI221 Ml/dayWINTER
300 Ml/dav GRAS5 FILTRATION
141 Ml/day
ANAEROBlC
UNIT
FACULTATIVE
AND
AEROBIC
PORTPHILLIP
Sewage Purlficatlon 1977BAY
Figure 4,
HYDRAULIC LOADING
Figure 4 sets forth the sewage distrib-
ution over the past 12 months period.
To effect these performance figures,
the inflow of raw sewage was 441,000 ^
(i.e. 441 Ml or 116 MG(U.S.)/day).
The land flltratlon process is used to
purify up to an average of 214 Ml/day of
raw sewage over an approximate peak
operational season which is equivalent to a
hydraulic loading rate of 1.10 Ml/day/ha
(Table 2) as only 5% of the total area
available is under irrigation at any one
time.The flow to the grass filtration area
is continuous and relatively constant with
only small diurnal fluctuations. The
water losses by infiltration to ground
water and evapotranspiration are relatively
insignificant and largely balanced by
precipitation. The process is used to
treat an average flow of up to 271 Ml/day
of settled sewage at a hydraulic loading
rate of 0.18 Ml/day/ha.
Sewage Treatment Facilities
AREA 10V
ha.
ac.
PERCENT FLOW TREATED
PEAK OPERATING
. AVERAGE DAILY FLOW
10* ma
Ml.
M.G.(IMP)
M.6. (USJ
PEAK OPERATING
HYnRAlll IC LOAOINR
Ml/day/ha.
M.G.(IMP)/day/ac.
M.G.(U.S.I/day/ac.LAND
FILTRATION
42 81
fc 281
10S78
23
2U
2U
47
56
1-10
0 097
0117GRASS
FILTRATION
U'63
U63
3615
34
271
271
59
72
0 16
0 016
0 019LAGOONS
14 99
1499
3704
43
191
191
42
50
OU
0 013
0*016SEDIMENTATION
AREAS
060
60
U8
Table 2.
207NUTRIËNT REMOVAL
Nitrogen
Nitrogen is removed from the sewage by
land processes in the following ways:
- by incorporation into the pasture;
- by volatilization of ammonia from
the irrigant, from the soil and
from the faecal matter of the
grazing animals;
- by diffusion through the soil to the
atmosphere of molecular nitrogen
resulting from denitrification of
nitrate; and
- by incorporation into microbial
biomass in the soil.
In the land filtration process, with
the present method of irrigation and at the
current hydraulic loading rate, the first
two removal mechanisms are most important.
Ammonia can be temporarily bound in the
soil under the anaerobic conditions
occurring immediately after each raw sewage
irrigation and can be converted to nitrate
during the drying period when aerobic
conditions develop. Nitrate ions cannot be
bound in the soil matrix and will either be
utilized by the vegetation or leached out
to the underground water table which Is
intercepted by the effluent drains.
Presently the nitrogen removal rate, for
the six month operational season is some
85%.
In the grass filtration process the
main mechanism for the removal of nitrogen
is by incorporation into the pasture.
Presently the nitrogen removal rate, for
the six month operational season, is some
40%.
In both these processes real nitrogen
removal with the pasture is achieved by
grazing with cattle and sheep, even though
some recycling of nutrients occurs via
animal faecal matter.
Phosphorus
Phosphorus is removed from sewage by
the land processes in the following ways:
- by incorporation in the pasture; and
- by chemical precipitation and
adsorption to the soil matrix.
In the land filtration process the
latter mechanism is the principal means of
phosphorus removal. Phosphorus precipitated
in the soil is far in excess of the normal
requirements for pasture. Total phosphorus
removal averages some 85% for these areas
at the present rates of loading.
In the grass filtration process the
former mechanism is the primary means of
phosphorus removal. As there is littleleachate flow through the soil matrix to
the underground water table, a significant
removal mechanism for phosphorus is not
available. Total phosphorus removal
averages some 15%.
Nutriënt Accumulation in the Soil
There has been significant
accumulation of nitrogen, phosphorus and
carbon in the soil in the land filtration
areas,.as a result of long-term
irrigation with unsedimented sewage.
Detailed Information is provided In the
report prepared for the U.S. Department of
the Army, Corps of Engineers on "Selected
Chemical Characterlstics of Solls, Forages
and Drainage Water from the Sewage Farm
Serving Melbourne, Australia". It can be
seen from Table 3, P. 17 of this report
that the accumulation of nitrogen is
confined to the top layers of soil up to
23 cm below the surface whereas the
building up of phosphorus has extended to
depths of 46 cm or more.
It is considered that the soil in the
land filtration areas will not become
"clogged" with phosphorus for many years
and that it will still provide a
significant phosphorus removal medium for
at least the next 50 years.
In the grass filtration areas
nutrients are only accumulated in a
relatively thin surface layer of some
75 mm.
TRACÉ METALS
Removal
Agents for tracé metal reraoval
throughout the Farm treatment processes
include sedimentation and adsorption to
organic matter (sludge) and soil clay
particles (with subsequent uptake by
vegetation and grazing animals);
precipitation as sulphides; together with
bioflocculation and accumulation in
treatment biota (slimes algae and
zoöplankton).
In general high levels of removal
are obtained by the three processes
(83% ± 12%).
Relationship Bëtween Soil, Plant and Animal
Current investigation of land
filtration areas indicates a general
linear relationship between accumulation
in the soil (some 60% in the top 10 cm)
and total volume of sewage applied over
the years. Retention in the soil is
208therefore non uniform even over quite
small areas, due to variation in terrain,
grade, soil type and application
techniques.
Vegetation likewise (within particular
soil types) correlates with input loads and
bears a general direct relationship in
trade metal levels to the soil on which it
grows.
Current investigation into the liver
and kidney levels of Farm cattle grazed
generally on sewage irrigated pastures
indicate no increase with age. The levels,
whilst generally higher than those of Farm
cattle grazed solely on non irrigated
pastures, were marginally lower than a
random sample (26) from non Farm cattle.
The picture Is further clouded by
metal interaction, where such significant
metal level increases as for example zinc,
cadmium and particularly copper in herbage
consumed, are not reflected in the grazing
animal tissue.
CURRENT INVESTIGATIONS FOR FUTURE
DEVELOPMENT
A number of investigations are
currently underway to determine the
practicability and economics of using
treated effluent for irrigation of high
value agricultural crops.
The areas of immediate interest are:
Forestry
Varied species of trees have been
planted to evaluate those best suited for:
- Commercial production of structural
timber, wood chip, pulp and
matchwood.
- Ornamental varieties for esthetlc
purposes, shade and shelter.
- Attention is being given to those
most suited for the establishment
of dense growth wood lots.
Agrlculture
A contlnuing program is underway to
assess the potential of various grain and
forage crops.
- Winter and spring sown cereal crops.
- Oilseed crops.
- Summer grain and forage crops.
- Vegetable rotations. and production.
- Varied pasture mixtures for protéin
extraction.As would be expected in the forestry
section, several eucalypt species have
made dynamic growth, whilst the growlng of
summer grain crops requires close
attention to variety and erop type. Sun-
flowers have given excellent yields, as
has winter sown barley for grain
production. With most summer grown crops,
seed maturity and harvestlng have
presented many difficulties.
Vegetable production appears to
provide a high degree of success, but
studies are continuing to observe growth
rates, product quality, health status and
heavy metal accumulation.
Animal Health Investigations
The problem of "beef measles" in
cattle has been investigated with the
production of a vaccine and the
application of chemotherapy.
Vaccination of calves against Taenia
saginata infection using antigens
collected during in vitro cultivation of
larval cestodes has created world interest.
This work commenced in 1974 and has given
complete protection to calves subjected to
artificial challenge of tapeworm eggs.
This vaccine is now undergoing field test
evaluation.
Another important activity under
investigation is the use of Taenia
hydatigina derived vaccine rather than
Taenia saginata. Earlier experiments
showed a significant degree of cross
protection with this parasite and work is
in progress to record whether the degree
of cross protection given is sufficient
to hold field acquired infections to a low
level.
209Facts About The Board Of Works Farm Werribee
(As at 30th June, 1977)
Number of Employees .. .. ..
Road Constructed ,.
Fencing Erected .. ..
Channels Constructed ..
Drains Constructed .. .. .. •-
Annual Rainfall at Farm Office
Sewage Purified and Disposed of during Year
Ended 30/6/77
Median Daily Flow
Average Daily Flow
Area used for Purification of Sewage -
Land Filtration
Grass Filtration
Lagoon Treatment
Sedimentation Areas ..10,849 hectares (26,809 acres)
325
231 km
Approx. 2,024 km
853 km
666 km
488 mm
163,026 Ml
438 Ml
441 Ml
4,281 hectares
1,463 hectares
1,499 hectares
60 hectares
LIVESTOCK
Cattle on Farm as at 30/6/77
Cattle Bred on Farm during Year
Cattle sold during Year
Sheep on Farm as at 30/6/77
Sheep sold during Year
Number of Sheep Shorn15,651
6,665
6,951
6,208
19,591
4,333
210LAND FILTRAT10N
GRASS F1LTRATION
LAGOONS
BOARD OF WORKS FARM
WERRI6EE
p H I L L 1
PORT B A YReferences
Johnson, R. D., Jones R. L., Hinesly, T. D.,
David, D. J. -
Selected chemical characteristics of
soils, forages, and drainage water
from the sewage farm serving Melbourne,
Australia.
Prepared for U.S. Department of the
Army, Corps of Engineers., January 1974.
Kirby, C. F. -
Wastewater Treattnent and Disposal by
Irrlgation.
Presented I.A.W.P.R. Post Conference
Continuing Educatlon Course on Low Cost
Wastewater Treatment and Disposal
Methods at Oniversity of Melbourne,
October 1976.
Kirby, C. F. and Searle, S. S. -
'Waste into Wealth' -
U.S. Department of Army, Water
Spectrum - Fall 1972.
McPherson, J. B. -
Land Treatment Operations at the Melbourne
and Metropolitan Board of Works Farm,
Werribee.
Proceedings 8th International Conference
of the International Association on Water
Pollution Research, Sydney, Australia,
October 1976.
Rickard, M. D. and Adolph, A. 1977 -
The prevalence of cysticerci of Taenia
saginata in cattle reared on sewage
irrigated pasture. Med. J. Aust. 1:
525-527.
Rickard, M. D. -
Vaccination of calves against Taenia saginata
infection using antigens collected during In
vitro cultivation of larval cestodes.
Ath International Congress of Parasitology,
Warszawa, Poland, 1978.
Scott, T. M. -
Land Treatment Processes.
Presented at a Course in Public Health
Engineering at University of Melbourne,
Australia, September 1977.
212EVALUATION OF EXISTIIMG SYSTEMS
THE FLUSHING MEADÖWS PROJECT
Herman Bouwer
Robert C. RiceU.S. Water Conservatlon Laboratory, SEA-FR, ÜSDA
4331 East Broadway, Phoenix, AZ 85040
U.S. Water Conservation Laboratory, SEA-FR, USDA
4331 East Broadway, Phoenix, AZ 85040
After 10 years of operation of the
Flushing Meadows Project west of Phoe-
nix, Arizona, in which 760 m of second-
ary effluent infiltrated into the soil,
there has been no reduction in renova-
tion efficiency and hydraullc capacity
of the system. Cycles of 2-3 weeks
flooding and 10-20 days drying produced
maximum hydraulic loading rates of about
90 to 120 m per year, but relatively low
nitrogen removal (< 30%). Nine-day-
flooding and 12-day-drying periods, on
the other hand, yielded loading rates of
60 to 75 m/year, but about 60% of the
nitrogen in the effluent was removed in
the soil by denitrification. Under
these loading conditions, the renovated
water in 1977 contained 8.6 mg/l N03-N,
1.7 mg/l NH4-N, and 0.55 mg/l organic
N. Phosphate removal was 50 to 80% in
the first 10 m of downward movement be-
low the basins, but increased to more
than 90% after 60 m lateral movement of
the renovated water through the aquifer,
where phosphate apparently continued to
precipitate. The renovated water also
contained about 1 mg/l fluoride (2 mg/l
in the effluent) and 0.5 mg/l boron
(boron is not removed by the soil).
Metal concentrations in the effluent
were already below maximum limits for
irrigation. Viruses could not be de-
tected in renovated water sampled at 6
to 9 m depth below the basins. Fecal
coliforms were absent after the reno-
vated water had moved laterally through
the aquifer for about 60 m. Total
organic carbon of the renovated water
averaged about 4 mg/l. Possible tox-
icity of tracé organics is the major
concern in potable reuse of renovatedwastewater. Operational systems should
be designed and managed so that only a
portion of the aquifer is used as a
natural, advanced treatment system,
protecting the rest of the aquifer and
high quality indigenous groundwater
against encroachment by renovated
wastewater.
PURPOSE AND DESCRIPTION OF SYSTEM
The Flushing Meadows Project was
installed in the Salt River bed west of
Phoenix, Arizona, in 1967 to study the
feasibility of renovating conventional
secondary sewage effluent by ground-
water recharge with rapid-infiltration
basins. Renovation of the effluent is
desirable because it enables use of the
water for unrestricted irrigation, rec-
reation, and other purposes with a rel-
atively high economie or social return.
The sewage flow from Phoenix and sur-
rounding cities presently is about 0.45
X 10* ms/day (120 mgd) and increases by
about 0.02 X 108 m3/day (5 to 6 mgd)
each year due to the increasing popu-
lation. Since the Salt River Valley
is a water-short area where groundwater
is being depleted, reuse of the efflu-
ent would reduce groundwater overdraft
and slow down water table declines,
whlch have been as much as 3 m (10 ft)
per year in some areas.
The Flushing Meadows Project is
located on the north side of the Salt
River bed about 2.5 km (1 1/2 miles)
downstream from the 91st Avenue Sewage
Treatment Plant in Phoenix. This is an
activated sludge plant which presently
213DRAINAGE LINI
CONSTANT-HEAD
STRUCTURE
SUPPLY LINE-
FLUME
«RAVEL OAM-UNLINEO
4 POND
EAST WELL
100 200
«WELL300 <••<• 7
Figure 1. Schematic of Flushing Meadows Project.
discharges about 0.28 X 10s m3/day (75
mgd) into the normally dry Salt River
bed. The Salt River floodplain is about
0.8 km (1/2 mile) wide and consists
mostly of sand and gravel. While coarse
gravel and boulders are exposed in the
main channels of the floodplain, the
soil profile of the rest of the river-
bed typically consists of about 1 m of
fine, loamy sand underlain by coarse
sand and gravel layers to great depth
(Bouwer, 1970). This is a desirable
profile for rapid-infiltration systems
because the top layer is sufficiently
fine to filter out suspended material,
to provide an adequate surface area for
bacterial growth, and to have enough
cation exchange capacity (clay content
about 3%) for adsorbing ammonium from
the infiltrating sewage effluent. On
the other hand, the top soil at the
Flushing Meadows Project still is suf-
ficiently perméable (hydraulic conduc-
tivity about 1 m/day) to yield high in-
filtration rates (0.3-1 m/day). The
underlying sands and gravels have such a
high hydraulic conductivity (85 m/day in
horizontal direction; Bouwer, 1970) that
the renovated water is readily trans-
mitted laterally through the aquifer
without build-up of high groundwater
mounds beneath the infiltration basins.The height of the groundwater mound be-
low the Flushing Meadows Project nor-
mally does not exceed 1 m above the
static water table.
The Flushing Meadows Project con-
sists of six parallel basins, 6.1 by
213 m each, and 6.1 m apart (Figure 1).
Secondary effluent is pumped from the
discharge channel into the basins. The
inflow rate into each basin is con-
trolled with an alfalfa valve and meas-
ured with a critical-depth flume
(Replogle, 1975 and 1977). The water
depth in the basins is controlled with
an overflow structure at the outflow
end of the basins, where the rate of
outflow is measured with the same type
flumes as at the inflow end. Water
depths in the basins normally are held
at 18 or 33 cm. The first 15 m of each
basin was excavated deeper and separated
from the rest of the basin by a 0.5-m
high gravel dam to serve as a presedi-
mentation reservoir for removal of large
suspended solids. Observation wells
consisting of 15-cm cased holes open at
the bottom were installed on a line
across the project half-way down the
basins. The wells are located between
pairs of adjacent basins and at various
distances from the basins outside the
project area (Figure 1). The EastCenter Well (ECW) is 9.1m deep, the
West Center Well (WCW) 30.5 m, and
the other wells 6.1 m. The water table
normally is at a depth of about 3 m,
but declined to 4.5 m and even deeper in
dry years when groundwater pumping in
the valley intensified.
HYDRAULIC LOADING AND NITROGEN REMOVAL
The primary objective of the
Flushing Meadows studies in the first
six years was to obtain maximum hy-
draulic loading. This was achieved with
flooding periods of 2 to 3 weeks alter-
nated with drying periods of 10 to 20
days, depending on rate of drying as
affected by weather conditions. Regular
drying periods are necessary to restore
infiltration rates and to bring oxygen
into the soil. At a water depth of
33 cm in the basins, these flooding and
drying cycles produced hydraulic load-
ing rates of 90 to 120 m per year.
Growing grass in the basins or covering
the bottom with a 15-cm layer of fine
gravel offered no particular advantages.
It was concluded that bare soil with
volunteer vegetation was the most de-
sirable bottom condition from a stand-
point of economics of basin management
and hydraulic loading. At a loading
rate of 100 m per year, 12.8 ha of
basins are needed to infiltrate the
sewage effluent from 100,000 people
(assuming a sewage production of 350
liters per person per day).
The main effect of maximizing hy-
draulic loading on the quality improve-
ment of the effluent water as it moved
through the soil below the basins was a
relatively low rate (< 30%) of nitrogen
removal, and possibly a slight reduc-
tion in PO^-removal. Since PO*,-
precipitation continued in the aquifer,
however, the ultimate POi,-concentrations
in the renovated water about 100 m
away from the infiltration basins were
not significantly affected by hydraulic
loading rate. Removal of other sub-
stances such as suspended solids, bio-
degradable organics (as expressed by
the BOD), and fecal coliform bacteria
was equally effective at high as at re-
duced loading rates.
Total-nitrogen concentrations in
the secondary sewage effluent normally
ranged between 20 to 40 mg/1,. Most of
this nitrogen was in the ammonium form.
The major process whereby nitrogen can
be removed from the effluent water as
it seeps through the soil In rapid-infiltration systems is biological de-
nitrification. Most of this denitrifi-
cation occurs in the top 40 cm of the
soil and during the beginning of a
drying period (Gilbert, et al., 1974),
as ammonium that was adsorbed in the
soil during the previous flooding
period is nitrified in the aerobic por-
tion of the top soil. The resulting
nitrate is then denitrified in micro-
anaerobic zones in the otherwise aer-
ated top soil. Not all nitrate is de-
nitrified this way and when flooding is
resumed, the remaining nitrate is
leached out. This produces a nitrate
peak In the renovated water from a
certain well when effluent water that
has infiltrated at the beginning of a
flooding period reaches that well.
For the East Center Well, these peaks
occurred about 5 days after the start
of a new flooding period (September-
December period of Figure 2). This is
the time it takes for the water to
travel from the bottom of the basin to
the intake of the well. As the reno-
vated water continues to move through
the aquifer, the nitrate peaks from
successive flooding periods become
flatter and eventually disappear.
If flooding periods are relatively
short (for example, less than 2 or 3
days), the upper soil remains suffi-
ciently aerobic for complete conversion
of ammonium and organic nitrogen in the
effluent to nitrate in the renovated
water. When this occurs, nitrogen re-
moval is Insignificant (July-August,
Figure 2). If, on the other hand,
flooding periods are relatively long
(more than 2 weeks for example), more
ammonium is adsorbed in the soil during
flooding than can be nitrified during
drying. This reduces the ammonium ad-
sorption during subsequent flooding
periods and eventually leads to a grad-
ual increase in the ammonium content of
the renovated water. After 4 years of
essentially maximum hydraulic loading,
for example, NH<.-N concentrations in the
renovated water had increased from low
initial values of about 2 mg/1 in 1968
(Figure 2) to almost 20 mg/1 in 1971
(Figure 3).
At the maximum hydraulic loading
rates, N-removal initially was about 30%
but decreased as NtU-N concentrations in
the renovated water gradually increased.
Since laboratory studies had indicated
that the percent N-removal could be in-
creased by reducing the hydraulic load-
ing rate (Lance et al., 1976), studies
were initiated at the Flushing Meadows
21540
oclu
1-
3•s.(9
zLU(9
OJE
1-30
20
10" INUNDATION
f l96tT]
-
c^^ft-o-o^
JULY 'PERIODS-'
AU G'. '\
u\ft1
1
\—0—
—•—
r
SEPT.1 1 • 1 • 1
TOTAL N OF EFFLUENT
NH4-N OF RENOVATED
NO,-N OF RENOVATED
n11
Ho-cyit» b-0-0 o-cb-
1 ' OCT. NOV.-
WATER
WATER
-0—cfT•t1
K(f\ OOÔ
'DEC'.
Figure 2. Nitrogen in sewage effluent and renovated water from
East Center Well, 1968.
I i i lii I i i I i i I i i I
120
no
100
90
SO
Q. 70
60
Ul
%
DC
30
20
10
0'INUNDATION PERIODS
EC W
—a— TOTAL N OF EFFLUENT
No3- N ECW
NH4-N ECW
1971
^^^o-ïoLj_ j^-o-o
1 I • I ' I'M I ' ' I ' I ' ' I ' I • ' I ' I * ' I ' I ' ' I ' I ' ' I ' I ' ' I ' I 1 ' I ' I • ' I ' I ' I ' I
JAN. FEB. MAR. APRIL MAY JUNE JULY AU6. SEPT. OCT. NOV. DEC.
Figure 3. Nitrogen in sewage effluent and renovated water from
East Center Well, 1971.
216Project in 1973 to see If a reduced
water depth (18 cm) and shorter flood-
ing periods (9 days flooding and 12
days drying) would increase the removal
of nitrogen from the effluent water.
These changes reduced the hydraulic
loading rate to about 60 m per year,
but increased nitrogen removal to about
60%. The shorter flooding periods and
lower infiltration rates apparently
produced a better balance between
ammonium adsorption during flooding and
nitrification of adsorbed ammonium
during drying, because the NHi,-N content
of the renovated water began to show a
gradual decline and reached an essen-
tially steady level of about 1.7 mg/1
in 1977. The average N03-N concentra-
tion of the renovated water in 1977 was
8.6 mg/1, while the organlc-N content
averaged 0.55 mg/1. The percentage
nitrogen removal was calculated from
infiltration rates and nitrogen con-
centrations in effluent and renovated
water during flooding only, assuming
piston flow from the infiltration
basins to the well intake and static
conditions during drying. The hydrau-
lic loading rate in 1977 averaged 75
m/year for all six basins. This is not
much lower than the maximum rates of
90 to 120 m obtained in the first 5
years of the project when hydraulic
capacity was maximized. Nevertheless,
nitrogen removal in 1977 had more than
doubled, from 30% to 63%.
PHOSPHORUS
Most of the phosphorus in the sec-
ondary effluent at the Flushing Meadows
Project is in the orthophosphate form,
which precipitates as complex calcium
phosphates (apatite, for example) in the
soil and aquifer. PO^-P concentrations
in the effluent were 15 mg/1 and more in
1969 (Bouwer et al., 1974), but averaged
about 8 mg/1 in 1977. This decrease is
probably due to increased use of low-
phosphate detergents. While POft-P re-
moval in the first 9 m of downward move-
ment (3 ra above the water table and 6 m
in the aquifer) below the Flushing
Meadows Project generally ranged between
50 and 80%, the removal after additional
movement of 30 m laterally through the
aquifer exceeded 90%. After 10 years of
operation of the project, in which a
total of 760 m of effluent infiltrated
into the soil (average for all six
basins), there is no evidence of a de-
crease in the phosphate removal from theeffluent water. Since phosphate may be
the only substance to accumulate in sig-
nificant amounts in the soil and aquifer
materials, it may eventually restrict
the hydraulic conductivity of the soil
materials and hence the hydraulic capac-
ity of the system. Preliminary calcula-
tions Indicated, however, that this may
not occur until after about 100 or 200
years of operation of the project.
FLUORIDE
The removal of fluoride from the
effluent tended to parallel the removal
of phosphate, indicating precipitation
of calcium fluoride and fluorapatite.
Fluoride levels in the effluent were
around 4 mg/1 in the beginning of the
project (Bouwer et al., 1974) but grad-
ually decreased to an average of 2.1
mg/1 in 1977. F-concentrations in the
renovated water in 1977 averaged 1.7
mg/1 for the wells between basins, and
1.1 mg/1 for Well 1 which is 30 m from
basin 1 (Figure 1).
BORON AND METALS
Boron is not removed from the
effluent water as it passes through the
clay-poor sands and gravels of the Salt
River bed. Boron concentrations in the
effluent were around 0.7 to 0.8 mg/1 in
1970-1972 (Bouwer et al., 1974). For-
tunately, these values have dropped in
recent years to around 0.5 mg/1, which
is below the maximum limit for irriga-
tion of citrus and other boron-
sensitive crops (National Academy of
Sciences and National Academy of
Engineering, 1973). Of the heavy
metals, the concentrations of zinc and
copper were reduced as the effluent per-
colated through the soil. However,
heavy metals are not a problem because
the concentrations in the Phoenix sec-
ondary effluent are already below the
maximum limits for irrigation water
(Bouwer et al., 1974; National Academy
of Sciences and National Academy of
Engineering,. 1973) .
BACTERIA AND VIRUSES
Fecal coliform concentrations in
the secondary effluent, which is not
chlorinated, were on the order of 10s
to 10* per 100 ml. Sometimes, fecal
coliforms could be detected in renovated
217water sampled beneath the basins, espe-
cially after the start of a new flooding
period when newly infiltrated effluent
water had just reached the Intake of one
of the observation wells between the
basins (Bouwer et al., 1974). Peaks of
several hundred fecal coliforms per 100
ml have been observed at these times.
As flooding continued, however, the
fecal coliform concentrations in the
renovated water sampled beneath the
basins decreased to zero. This was
probably due to increased clogging of
the bottom and to increased activity and
antagonistic effects of other micro-
organisms in the soil. Further removal
of fecal coliforms took place with
additional lateral movement of the reno-
vated water in the aquifer. Thus, fecal
coliform bacteria have never been de-
tected in observation wells 60 m away
from the basins. Viruses were present
in the secondary sewage effluent at an
average concentration of 21 PFU's per
liter, but they could not be detected
in the renovated water from the various
observation wells. These results were
obtained in a 1974 study in which
viruses from large volumes of water
samples were concentrated and assayed
at 2-month intervals for the entire
year (Gilbert et al., 1976).
ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Biodegradable organic compounds in
the effluent water were essentially com-
pletely removed by soil bacteria. How-
ever, although the BOD of the renovated
water was about zero (compared to about
20 mg/1 of the secondary effluent), the
total organic carbon (TOC) concentration
of the renovated water averaged about 4
mg/1, indicating presence of refractory
or trace organics. These organics now
are the main concern for possible po-
table use of renovated water, since
their identity is not completely known
and carcinogenicity or other toxicity
has been implied (Shuval, 1977). Sev-
eral studies are under way at various
laboratories and universities to iden-
tify these trace organics and to evalu-
ate their toxicity. Activated carbon
adsorption before and/or after rapid
infiltration and ozonation may be effec-
tive in removing the trace organics.Flushing Meadows Project, there is no
indication of a loss in hydraulic capac-
ity or in renovation efficiency of the
system. The 12-day drying periods are
sufficient to restore infiltration
rates, which generally decrease during
flooding. If the suspended solids con-
tent of the secondary effluent is fairly
low (less than 30 mg/1, for example),
the basins can be operated for years
without cleaning them to remove accumu-
lated solids.
For deep, unconfined aquifers such
as the one below the Flushing Meadows
Project, the height of the pseudo-
equilibrium groundwater mound during in-
filtration should vary linearly with
infiltration rate. Thus, the height of
the mound per unit infiltration rate
should be constant, unless there is a
change in the hydraulic conductivity of
the aquifer. Since this ratio at the
Flushing Meadows Project has remained
essentially constant at about 0.8 days
(0.8-m rise of water table per 1 m/day
infiltration rate), clogging of aquifer
materials and resulting reduction in
hydraulic conductivity apparently has
not occurred.
Future plans for the Flushing
Meadows Project include studies on trace
organics, enhancement of denitrifica-
tion, fate of viruses in soil, phosphate
accumulation in soil, and efficiency of
renovation.
INSTITUTIONAL, AGRONOMIC, AND AESTHETIC
REQUIREMENTS
The use of sewage effluent for crop
irrigation is governed by state rules,
which are based on public health con-
cerns and not on agronomic suitability
of the water. The strictest standards
are for unrestricted irrigation, which
includes sprinkler irrigation of lettuce
and other crops consumed raw by humans.
Arizona standards for unrestricted
irrigation1 require an effluent that has
had primary and secondary treatment fol-
lowed by additional treatment to produce
a BOD and suspended solids content both
of less than 10 mg/1, and a fecal coli-
form concentration of less than 200/100
ml. Such an effluent is then also suit-
able for use in recreational lakes with
LONG-TERM PERFORMANCE
After 10 years of operation of the1Arizona Department of Health Services
Rules and Regulations, Chapter 20,
Title 9, Article 4.
218PLAN
ouT RIVER B L SAL/
«
f /INFILTRATION AREAS-^—^
WELL!1 ,
VA////
VAA,
CROSS SECTION A-A
Figure A. Schematic of system of infiltration strips and wells for
collecting renovated water.
primary-contact activity. California
regulations* are much stricter and re-
quire for unrestricted irrigation an
adequately disinfected effluent (7-day
median coliform count not in excess of
2.2/100 ml and a 30-day maximum not ex-
ceeding 23/100 ml), that is well oxi-
dized (organic matter stabilized),
coagulated (colloidal and finely divided
suspended material removed), clarified
(clarification of oxidized, coagulated
effluent by further settling), and
filtered (clarified wastewater which
has passed through soils or filter
media).
In addition to the public health
aspects, there are also agronomic and
aesthetic aspects to consider when
using sewage effluent for irrigation.
For example, the nitrogen content of the
effluent should be reduced, preferably
to the range of 0-5 mg/1 where it will
cause "no problems," but certainly to
the low part of the 5-30 mg/1 range
where it may cause "increasing problems"
California Administrative Code, Chapter
4, Title 22, Division 4, Environmental
Health.(Ayers, 1977). Of course, if irriga-
tion with sewage effluent is restricted
to grasses or other forage crops, rela-
tively high nitrogen concentrations can
be tolerated and may actually be bene-
ficial. Problems due to excessive
nitrogen application to other crops may
range from delay in crop maturity and
harvest (cotton) to a lower sugar con-
tent (sugarbeets, sugar cane) and im-
paired quality of fruit and vegetable
crops (Baier and Fryer, 1973). Public
acceptance of the use of wastewater for
irrigation or other purposes in popu-
lated areas probably is easier for reno-
vated water from rapid-infiltration
projects than for other upgraded second-
ary effluents, This is because the
former is clear, odor free, and comes
from wells, which at least mentally re-
moves the connotation of purified
sewage.
SYSTEM LAYOUT AND AQUIFER PROTECTION
When renovation of sewage effluent
by rapid infiltration and groundwater
recharge is practiced on an operational
scale, it may be necessary to design and
manage the Infiltration and collection
219systems so that all water that infil-
trates as sewage effluent will be re-
moved from the aquifer as renovated
water. This can be accomplished by sys-
tems as in Figure 4, where infiltration
and pumping rates are controlled so that
the water table beneath the outer edges
of the infiltration areas is not
affected by the infiltration and the
pumping, and, hence, remains at the
same level as the water table in the
aquifer adjacent to the infiltration
system. In that case, no renovated
water moves outside the system of in-
filtration basins and wells, and no
native groundwater is drawn into the
renovation system and pumped from the
wells. Systems as in Figure 4 would
avoid legal problems regarding with-
drawal of native groundwater or loss of
control over the renovated water after
it has moved into the aquifer adjacent
to the infiltration projects and beneath
lands of other owners. Avoiding move-
ment of renovated water into the aqui-
fer adjacent to the rapid infiltration
system also protects indigenous ground-
water resources against encroachment of
renovated sewage effluent, whose trace
organics and other constituents would
otherwise be a threat to high quality
potable groundwater resources.
REFERENCES
Ayers, R. S. 1977. Quality of water
for irrigation. Jour. Irrig. and
Drain. Div., Amer. Soc. Civil
Engin. 103(IR2);135-154.
Baier, D. C. and W. B. Fryer. 1973.
Undesirable plant responses with
sewage irrigation. Jour. Irrig.
and Drain. Div. Amer. Soc. Civil
Engin. 99(IR2):133-142.
Bouwer, Herman. 1970. Ground water
recharge design for renovating
waste water. Jour. Sanitary Engin.
Div., Amer. Soc. Civil Engin.
96(SAl):59-74.
Bouwer, Herman, J. C. Lance, and
M. S. Riggs. 1974. High-rate land
treatment. II. Water quality and
economics of the Flushing Meadows
Project. Jour. Water Pollution
Control Fed. 46(5) :844-859.
Gilbert, R. G., C. P. Gerba, R. C. Rice,
H. Bouwer, et al. 1976. Virus
and bacteria removal from waste-
water by land treatment. Appl. and
Environ. Microbiol. 32(3):333-338.Gilbert, R. G., J. B. Robinson, and
J. B. Miller. 1974. The micro-
biology and nitrogen transforma-
tions of a soil recharge basin
used for wastewater renovation.
Proc., Intl. Conf. on Land for
Waste Management, 1-3 October 1973,
Ottawa, Ont., Canada, pp 87-96.
Lance, J. C, F. D. Whisler, and
R. C. Rice. 1976. Maximizing
denitrification during soil filtra-
tion of sewage water. Jour.
Environ. Quality 5(1) ; 102-107.
National Academy of Sciences and
National Academy of Engineering.
1973. Water Quality Criteria 1972.
Report prepared by Committee of
Water Quality Criteria at request
of U.S. Environ. Prot. Agency,
Washington, D.C. 594 pp.
Replogle, John A. 1975. Critical-flow
flumes with complex cross-section.
In Irrigation and Drainage in an
Age of Competition for Resources.
Irrig. and Drain. Div., Amer. Soc.
Civil Engin, pp 366-388.
Replogle, John A. 1977. Compensating
for construction errors in
critical-flow flumes and broad-
crested weirs. In "Flow Measure-
ment in Open Channels and Closed
Conduits," Natl. Bureau Standards,
Special Pub. #484, Vol. I.,
pp 201-218.
Shuval, H. I. (Ed). 1977. Water
Renovation and Reuse. Academic
Press, New York. 463 pp.
220EVALUATION OF EXISTING SYSTEMS
LAND TREATMENT OF WASTEWATER IN
BRAUNSCHWEIG AND IN WOLFSBURG, GERMANY
C. Tietjen, A. Bramm, N. El-Bassam, H.O. Fleer
Federal Research Station for Agriculture Braunschweig-VOlkenrode, and
Board of Water Resources Braunschweig (Bundesforschungsanstalt fur Land-
wirtschaft Braunschweig-VBlkenrode, D-33 Braunschweig; Wasserwirtschaftsamt
D-33 Braunschweig)
INTRODUCTION
Land treatment of municipal waste-
water has heen a common practice at
Braunschweig for many decades. In
195^j & group of some hundreds of farm-
ers and city representatives assisted by
the State, formed the Braunschweig
Sewage Utilization Association (SUA) in
order to solve the twin problems of
final wastewater disposal and fertiliz-
ing agricultural land by extended sprink-
ler irrigation upon 3,000 ha of cropland.
There was already considerable
local experience in wastewater utiliza-
tion for crop production available.
Before the turn of the century, a com-
bined sewer system 100 km long was built
in Braunschweig. It ends in a confusing
system of dams and ditches on a sewage
farm of 350 ha. Braunschweig was one
of those German towns which followed
earlier English examples and the recom-
mendation of Justus Liebig to reclaim
the plant nutrients in wastewater in-
stead of letting them run into the
rivers to the ocean.
In l895, the sewage farm at Braun-
schweig made available 350 ha for a
population of 115,000, a ratio of about
330 inhabitants per ha of farmland.
Already 30 years afterwards, it was
recognized that this ratio could not
be kept in the proper balance. The
population and the quantity of sewage
grew continuously, but the sewage farm
did not. Much of the collected water
did not reach the fields, it was dis-
charged into the river, A project wasconsidered to enlarge the sewage farm
many times, to collect and treat the
wastewater from a large area, including
many communities and three towns, all
together about twice the population of
Braunschweig. This project was not
implemented because of World War II.
Afterwards, the new beginning was charac-
terized by a lack of food and fertilizer,
a great surplus of sewage, and 50 years
of experience in the utilization of
sewage as fertilizer.
The great demand for food; the
technical progress in equipment develop-
ment for sprinkler irrigation; and, very
important, the encouraging results of
bacteriological investigations by Popp
et al. (1955, 1956) in sprinkler irri-
gation of wastewater on farm land near
the city of Wolfsburg were all favorable
arguments for the proposal to establish
the Sewage Utilization Association of
Braunschweig in 195^-. The union com-
bined the City of Braunschweig and about
350 farmers. They made available a
total area of U,200 ha including 3,000
ha of sprinkler irrigated cropland
north of Braunschweig and north of the
sewage farm, a sandy land strip between
the rivers Erse and Oker, about 15 km
long and 3 km wide (Figure l). The
ratio of population equivalent (p.e.,
including industry) to irrigation area,
both 350 ha sewage farm with surface
flooding and 3,000 ha of the association,
shifted to 350,000 p.e. and 3,350 ha or
IOU p.e. per ha, in 1977 (Table l).
221Figure 1. Sewage Utilization Association, Braunschweig
THE SEWAGE UTILIZATION ASSOCIATION OF
WOLFSBURG
Wolfsburg was a village "before the
Volkswagen factory was established there.
In 1939, the City of Wolfsburg, some
smaller communities and about 100
farmers founded the Sewage Utilization
Association to serve 15,000 inhabitants.
Today a sewage flow of 19,000 m3 per day
is generated by a population of about
125,000. The facilities are being ex-
tended to treat the wastewater from
170,000 inhabitants (Figure 2).
The farmers make available a total
area of 2,100 ha including 1,200 ha of
sprinkler irrigated cropland and 310 ha
of woodland. The percentage of areaunder cultivation for different crops is
shifting in favor of spring grain and
sugar beet (Table 2). These crops make
a better use of the wastewater and have
a higher market value.
The wastewater is collected at the
pumping station of Wolfsburg, After
primary treatment including three hours
of sedimentation it is pumped to the
irrigation area where every year 250 to
350 mm are spread on the fields by
sprinkler irrigation in five to seven
applications of 50 mm per day. The
available woodland is considered as
reserve area to spread a surplus of
wastewater by surface flooding or
sprinklers (Sommer, 1976).
222Table 2
Wolfsburg SUA, irrigated crops, percentage of area
1965 1976
Spring grain
Winter grain
Potato
Sugar beet
Grassland16
27
22
13
2252
31
7
29
1
Table 1
Wastewater at Braunschweig in 1977 and prognosis for 2000
1977 2000
Quantity per year
Population equivalent
Treatment per day
Summer
Sewage farm
Sewage association
Winter
Sewage farm
Sewage association18 million m°
350,000
13,000 m5
40,000 m5
20,000 m5
29,000 m^25 million m
480,000
25,000 m5
47,000 m5
30,000 m5
56,000 m5
Because nuisance odors are not com-
pletely excluded, experimental instal-
lations have "been established for treat-
ment with oxygen in the pressure line
and for intensive aeration in storage
"basins.
Wolfsburg and Braunschweig have
the same climate and the same farming
conditions; the distance between the
two cities is only 25 km. Knowledge
and experience of sewage utilization for
crop production in a well organized
irrigation operation could "be trans-
ferred without difficulty from one site
to the other. The favorable results of
hygienic investigations and official
supervision were an important "basis
for the foundation of the Braunschweig
association (Bringmann and Kuehn, 1957;
Popp, 1957).THE SEWAGE UTILIZATION ASSOCIATION OF
BRAUNSCHWEIG
The Organization
The Association today is made up
of the City of Braunschweig, 26 nearby
communities and 310 farmers. The Assoc-
iation is headed by a committee of three
farmers and two representatives of the
city. The landowners, communities and
city administration are represented in a
commission of 2U members. The water
resources board and the chamber of
agriculture are the controlling and
advisory bodies. State control is
exercized by the president of the admin-
istration district.
The manager of the Association is
an agronomist. At his disposal are
223*. •••:'-?:^vl?'ïi-;^K«^.s;^-.ïfi
BÈfc^fe^îîiâlî*;;*-^ *v;i?o^f "•' •--•"5'ÎT:»Spray irrigation area
Sewage main pipeline with
pumping stations
Sewage pipes
Associated communities
Wood
Figure 2. Sewage Utilization Association, Wolfslaurg
221+an office, a workshop, five irrigation
specialists with assistants, and four
pump operators. They have the task
of providing for a controlled use of
the wastewater. This involves operating
the four pumping stations, shifting the
sprinkler equipment, maintaining and
renovating Association installations
including 90 ha of shelter hedges, a
drainage system with subsurface pipes
and open ditches, and also carefully
advising agricultural members.
Annual fees from the members cover
operating costs. According to the "bud-
get plan for 1978, the city is required
to pay 2 million DM and farmers owe
M30,000 DM. The present economic situ-
ation of Agriculture permits no consid-
erable increase in farmers' contribu-
tions in the foreseeable future. In
accordance with the Association's
charter, the share of the city is limited
by the costs which Braunschweig would
otherwise have to bear if operating its
own sewage treatment plant. (Schaerff,
1977)
The System
Braunschweig's wastewater is col-
lected in a pumping station downtown.
Here it is pumped through a concrete
pipe gravity line to the transfer
station. The line is 6 km long and has
a capacity of 2,700 m3 an hour.
The Association takes the flow from
the transfer station through its own
gravity line to the four pumping stations.
This conduit of 15.** km consists of
concrete pipe at the "beginning and
asbestos cement pipe for the remainder.
The pumping stations have the task of
generating the required pressure to the
sprinklers. Each station has four spray
pumps with capacities of ltOO m3 an hour;
they pump the water from the storage and
settling basins with a total capacity of
15,500 m3 into the underground pressure
line. Holding time for settling the
suspended solids varies from one-half
to several hours, depending on flow
rates from the generating sources. The
sludge produced daily at the settling
basins is pumped into earthen sludge
basins of 5.6 ha with a depth of 1 m.
After several months of digestion and
dewatering, the sludge is carried off
and spread on cropland.
The water is distributed through
an underground network of asbestos
cement pipe more than 100 km in length.
Underground hydrants at intervals of90 m are used to transfer the water from
this underground network into movable
pipelines. In 1972, the Association
began to phase out the original portable
hand-moved irrigation pipes and to in-
troduce spraying machines with flexible
polyethylene plastic pipes about 300 m
in length stored on a drum. The machines
are pulled into place by a tow truck. A
spray head attached to the end of the
plastic pipe sprinkles that water over
an area of 50 to 60 m in diameter with a
pressure of 6.5 bars at the 22-mm
nozzle. The plastic pipe is retracted
by a turbine driven by the water of the
pressure pipe line.
One hundred of these irrigation
machines are necessary to irrigate the
3,000 ha. Instead of the 20 spray
attendants employed in the original
system, only 7 are now required.
During dry summer seasons, the
daily flow of wastewater is not suffic-
ient to match the water requirements of
all crops. Wells have been installed
at the pumping stations for this purpose
to make water available from underground.
Excess wastewater on Sundays,
holidays or during freezing periods,
about 65 days a year, is collected in
percolation basins which cover l4.5 ha,
or it is sprinkled on arable land with
dormant crops.
For the most efficient use of labor
and equipment, land consolidation is
helpful and necessary in order to adjust
highways and roads, the size and shape
of the fields, the subsurface pressure
line with hydrants and junctions, sub-
surface pipe and ditch drainage, shelter
hedges and woodlands, and even land use
and the cropping system. Fifty km of
roads have been constructed; hedges
established to protect access roads,
paths and settlements from both spray
and wind erosion cover 90 ha in strips
of 10 m depth; the drainage system of
open ditches which is necessary to
collect the seepage of percolated and
natural groundwater and to carry it to
the rivers has a length of 22 km. Much
has been done already, but up to now
only part of the large project has been
finished and efforts continue to improve
the process, the operation, the results
in pollution abatement and in crop pro-
duction.
Nuisance odors are not a widespread
problem at the installations of the
Braunschweig Sewage Utilization Associa-
tion. The final solution to this sea-
sonal and limited difficulty will con-
225sist of aerating the water before
sprinkling. After extensive experi-
mental work, R. Kayser, Technical
University Braunschweig, submitted the
proposal of a sewage pretreatment plant
(Figure 3). The wastewater will flow
through a screening chamber, 20 mm
aperture, into an aerated grit chamber,
lj-25 m3, and will be treated by lk dual
mammoth rotors, each with a 75 kW motor,
in two activated sludge tanks, total
capacity 17,000 in3; secondary settling
follows in two basins which hold 10,200
m3. The problem of sludge disposal will
be eluded by re-injecting the sludge
into the irrigation pipe line for land
treatment and utilization as fertilizer.
The installations for the Sewage Pre-
treatment Plant are now under construc-
tion; the outline is projected for a
daily wastewater flow of 72,000 m3 with
25 t BOD, equivalent to 550,000 inhabi-
tants. The operation will be started in
1979-
The Site: Soil and Climate
The soil and climate are favorable
for a supplementary water supply.
Except for a more clayey strip on "both
sides of the River Oker, the whole area
is characterized by an extremely uniformlayer, 20 to ^0 m thick, of fine to
coarse to gravelly sand without stones.
This sand is of very low fertility with
less than one percent of organic matter
in the humus layer. The groundwater
level is between 1.75 and 3.50 m. Damage
by wind erosion occurs every spring and
fall. There are almost no elevations
in the level surface, but the altitude
decreases from south to north by 9 m.
This smooth grade of about 0.05 percent
facilitates the transport of the sewage
in a gravity line and also controls the
groundwater flow.
The average mean value of the temp-
erature is 8.5°C. In the growing season
from April to September, it is 13.9°.
The corresponding values for precipita-
tion are 655 ram a year and 393 mm
during the growing season.
The balance of precipitation and
evaporation is a positive value of 125 mm
per year with a negative value of kk mm
in the growth period. This explains
the success of the supplementary water
supply if it is applied to meet the
needs of the growing crop. This also
explains the farmers' active interest
in this water source; they have exper-
ienced years with a still greater short-
age of rainfall, and they know its
catastrophic effect on plant growth and
yields.
to SUAraw sewage
0 *-Iexcess sludge
jj operation oontrol f\ pumping station and bar screens
aerated grit chamber
activated sludge tanks
final clarifier
Figure 3. Sewage Pretreatment Plant, Braunschweig
226According to the climatic water
"balance sheet and the available "300
sprinkling days over the entire year,
a total of 300 mm of water was estimated
to "be the optimal supplement needed.
Agriculture
The wastewater is spread on the
fields "by sprinkler irrigation in six
applications of 50 mm, three in summer
and three in winter. That is the
average; more exact amounts applied to
various crops are as follows :
potatoes
Winter grain,
spring "barley
Oats
Spring wheat,
sugar beet2 applications of
30 mm
3 applications of
50 mm
k applications of
50 mm
5 applications of
50 mm
Very soon after the beginning of the
wastewater utilization at Braunschweig,
an experimental field was established
with all crops grown in the area of the
Association. According to these experi-
mental data, sugar beets and potatoes
show a remarkable increase in yield
from wastewater application particularly
in dry years when the natural water
supply is insufficient. For small
grains, however, the wastewater is bene-
ficial every year. This indicates that
not only the water but also the nutrient
constituents are useful if applied with
rather small amounts of water and leach-
ing is restricted. With the annual
irrigation rate of 300 mm, the quantity
of nutrients applied per ha is : 150 kg
nitrogen, ho kg phosphorus, 100 kg
potassium, and small amounts of micro-
nutrients as well as heavy metals
(Table 3).
Winter and summer cereals, pota-
toes, sugar beets and asparagus are the
principal crops. It is noteworthy that
the cultivation of sugar beets, wheat
and barley is made possible with an
economical success on the area's sandy
soils because of the wastewater irriga-
tion. The farmer not only achieves
greater harvests with the help of spray
irrigation; above all, harvests can now
be reliably planned year after year.
According to experience and experi-
mental data, spring grain makes the best
use of the wastewater. This influences
the ratio of crops grown in the area.The portion of spring grain increased
considerably whereas winter grain de-
creased (Table h). The cultivation of
sugar beets and potatoes is extremely
important for a controlled irrigation
operation, for they are irrigated at
different times from those of cereals.
The tendency to grow more cereals and
few potatoes because cereals are selling
for, just as much and cost less to pro-
duce is not unlimitedly desirable be-
cause it results in peak periods of
demand for irrigation.
To counter this trend, a dehydra-
tion plant was built to dry potatoes and
produce potato pulp for animal feeding.
The facility is also used for drying
grain, grass, draff, sugar beet chips.
Quantities treated up to 1977 were:
potatoes 118,000 t, draff 6U,5OO t,
grass 6,000 t, sugar beet chips U,000 t,
grain 2,800 t.
Except for asparagus which is
sprayed only during the non-harvest
months of June to December, vegetables
and low growing fruit are not irrigated.
All crops are processed before human
or animal consumption so there is no
danger that any pathogenic organism
remaining in the sprayed wastewater and
soil can be transferred. Cattle cannot
graze on irrigated pastures until three
weeks after spraying.
Minimum distances are maintained
between irrigated and inhabited areas
and public roads. In addition, in the
vicinity of these areas irrigation
machines with less aerosol forming are
used and spraying is stopped during
periods of high winds. Two independent
irrigation inspectors are continuously
controlling this regulation.
Studies on heavy metals in the
wastewater, soil, soil-water and ground-
water have revealed that the concentra-
tions are far below the standards
established by the Federal Government
(Bramm, 1976; Bramm et al., 1977;
Sommer, 1976). Toxic accumulations
in the soil matrix are not to be expected
provided that the rate of irrigation and
the concentration in the wastewater are
not increased. This also prevents the
pollution of the groundwater as can be
concluded from investigations of the
heavy loaded soil in the area of the
old sewage farm and also from migration
experiments with radioactive elements
in undisturbed soil columns (El-Bassara,
1977; El-Bassam et al., 1977).
227Table 3
Braunschweig SUA, water quality data 1973/74
NO,-N
P
K
Na
Cl
so4
Fe
Zn
Cu
Mn
Go
Cd
Pb
BOD
E C
mmho/cm
pHSewage
n = 16
mg/1
49
0.2
13
52
77
128
134
2.0
0.9
0.15
0.3
0.2
0.02
0.04
192
1.11
7.1Oker
River
n - 12
mg/1
7.0
8.4
0.9
11
69
153
202
1.2
0.6
0.03
0.4
0.12
0.01
0.02
8
0.98
7.2Erse
River
n = 12
mg/1
14.2
7.0
0.7
55
98
454
286
0.8
0.5
0.04
0.9
0.27
0.02
0.03
17
1.91
7.1Groundwater
Inside Outside
of the irrigation area
n « 242 n = 58
mg/1 mg/1
2.8
30
0.5
33
57
133
203
12
0.4
0.06
1.7
0.14
0.01
0.07
1.6
1.04
6.72.9
8.7
0.4
85
50
158
237
8.3
0.7
0.05
2.1
0.19
0.02
0.04
1.7
1.35
7.0
Sewage: Pumping station no. 2
Oker and Erse Rivers: Samples taken before the rivers reach
the area
Groundwater: 21 observation wells in district no. 1; 5 wells
beyond the rivers; groundwater table 0.5 - 3.5 m
n = number of samples
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Final and complete sewage disposal
is a difficult task for sanitary engi-
neers who must protect the environment.
The Braunschweig Sewage Utilization
Association has shown that its land
treatment system is very effective in
eliminating pollutants from water courses
that flow through large and densely
inhabited areas. The Oker River's water
downstream of the city and contributing
communities is cleaner than the water on
the upriver side.
High efficiency is also obtained in
land conservation and erosion abatement.Spring sandstorms which regularly appear
and used to blow away the topsoil with
the first sowing alarm farmers no longer.
Crop production on the sandy soil with
its very low natural fertility level has
improved definitely; farmers of the
Sewage Utilization Association can
compete in farming success with their
colleagues who cultivate better soils.
To return waste into the natural
cycle of transformations by land treat-
ment does result in final waste disposal.
However, land disposal and land treat-
ment must be considered as separate
alternatives. The goal of maximum dis-
posal may be mutually exclusive with
228Table k
Braunschveig SUA, crops growing
Percentage of area under
cultivation, district 1
Crop 1957 I960 1965 19T0 1975
Winter
grain
Spring
grain
Potato
Sugar beet
Asparagus
Grassland36
10
2k
12
8
1023
19
19
19
10
1020
28
lit
19
18
1120
31
10
18
13)
1026
29
6
21
9
9
the goal of maximum utilization. To
produce crops, land treatment of waste
must accommodate the natural conditions
of the site and the properties of the
waste. In fitting cities as well as
agricultural areas into the "biosphere,
designs are needed to make these cycles
beneficial. Along with proper engi-
neering design and management, site
selection must be recognized as an
important ingredient for lasting success
(Hartman, 1974). Biologically based
recycling systems should be designed
so as to optimize the production of
economically and socially useful
products. Standards for waste utiliza-
tion in crop production should provide
reasonably high levels of public health
protection as well as high levels of
crop growth-promoting and soil-improving
constituents in the waste. Maximum crop
growth is a biological proof of an eco-
logically balanced recycling system.
Remarkable efficiency is obtain-
able by land treatment of wastewater in
a cooperative program of sanitary engi-
neering, water resources policy and
agriculture if the soil and climatic
conditions are favorable and the farmers'
economic situation can be improved. This
has been demonstrated by the Braunschweig
and the Wolfsburg SUAs since 1957 and
1939, respectively.Bramm, A. and Tietjen, C. 1977. Unter-
suchTingen liber Spurennahrstoffee
und Schadstoffe im Beregnungsgebiet
des Abvasserverbandes Braunschweig.
Landbauforseh. Vtflkenrode 27,
2, 111-115.
Bringmann, G. and Kuehn, R. 195?. Das
Verhalten von Colibakterien des
Abwassers auf Blattern und Brei
von Gemtisepflanzen. Gesundheit-
singenieur 78, 138-145.
El-Bassam, N. 1977. Anreicherung und
Verlagerung von Cadmium in BSden
durch Zufuhr kommunaler Siedlung-
saf&lle. Landwirtsch. Forsch. 30,
3, 215-220.
El-Bassam, N., Keppel, H. and Tietjen, C.
1977. Einflug von Abwasser,
KlSrschlamm und Mtlllkompost auf die
Belastung der KulturbBden mit Arsen
und Selen. Landbauforsch. VOlken-
rode 27, 2, 105-110.
Hartman, W.J. 1975. An evaluation of
land treatment of municipal waste-
water and physical siting of facil-
ity installations. Office Chief
Engineers Cpubl.), Washington, D.C.
Popp, L., Bahr, H. and Gornandt, H.J.
1955. Bakteriologische Studien in
einem Abwasserverregnungsgebiet.
Wasser und Nahrung 2, 41-48.
Popp, L. 1957. Zur Hygiene der Land-
wirtschaftlichen Abwasserverwertung.
Wasser und Boden 9, UU9-.I4.5I4-.
Schaerff, E. 1977. Braunschweig: A
Cooperative Success. Water Spec-
trum 9, 4, 13-19.
Sommer, U. 1976. Untersuchungen zur
Ausbringung von Abwasser in Wald-
bestfinden. Dissertation GSttingen
University.
LITERATURE CITED
Bramm, A. 1976. Einfltisse der Abwasser-
landbehandlung auf oberflSchennahes
Grundwasser - Untersuchungen im
Abwasserverband Braunschweig.
Dissertation Kiel University.
229EVALUATION OF EXISTING SYSTEMS
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL THROUGH LAND DISPOSAL
OF SECONDARY-TREATED WASTEWATER EFFLUENTS
M. Sanal & J. Shayegan Arya Mehr University of Technology
Tehran, Iran
ABSTRACT
To prevent the pollution caused lay
direct discharge of sewage effluents in-
to surface waters, a wastewater treat-
ment scheme is proposed where the efflu-
ent is applied to agricultural lands in
place of ordinary irrigation water.
The environmental effects caused "by this
scheme are evaluated "by systematic
measurements of soil, wastewater, and
agricultural products. The results
indicate that there are no irreparable
short-term or long-term hazards asso-
ciated with the scheme. Measurements
regarding budgets of the main nutrients
i.e., nitrogen, phosphorus, and po-
tassium, are reported and indicate neg-
ligible probability of underground water
pollution, even if the technique is
utilized for an extended period. More-
over, an increase of nearly 25% in
growth rate and final yield density is
achieved when wastewater-irrigated
plots are compared to their corre-
sponding reference ones where fresh
water, with or without commercial fer-
tilizers, is used for irrigation. Based
on experimental results obtained to
date, it is proposed that the wastewater
treatment renovation scheme results in
little or no environmental pollution
hazards, recharges the much needed
groundwater supply under certain condi-
tions, and produces valuable food in the
process. As such, this scheme is
extremely useful for semi-arid countries
such as Iran, where agricultural activ-
ities are generally limited by available
water resources.INTRODUCTION
During recent time the world has
become increasingly aware of irreparable
damages that uncontrolled disposal of
treated or untreated wastewater efflu-
ents may inflict upon the receiving
water bodies. To help alleviate this
problem, field experiments have "been
conducted where secondary-treated sewage
collected from the City of Isfahan has
been sprayed onto various crops, in-
cluding alfalfa, corn, and potatoes.
The scheme is based on the "living
filter" concept (l-3), where the soil
and plants treat the nutrient-laden
wastewater.
The number of independent variables
present in the ecosystem under consid-
eration are so numerous that meaningful
results may be obtained only if com-
parisons are made between wastewater-
irrigated plots and some suitable ref-
erence plots. Therefore, for each
wastewater-irrigated plot, two reference
plots with the same crop are irrigated
with an equal amount of fresh water for
the purpose of comparison. One of the
reference plots receives no commercial
fertilizer at all, while the other
receives a typical amount of a suitable
mixture of chemical fertilizer. The
fertilizer applications of nitrogen,
phosphorus, and potassium are adjusted
so that they are similar to those re-
ceived by the main plots as a result
of irrigation with wastewater. In this
way, comparative analyses may be made
on the basis of the results obtained
from the wastewater-irrigated and ref-
erence plots.
231EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Nutrient Balances
Systematic measurements of param-
eters believed to be most significant
in the system were made during the cul-
tivation period. These measurements
included chemical analyses of soil,
plant tissues and organs, fertilizers,
and atmospheric precipitation as well
as routine tests that were conducted
on the water and wastewater utilized for
irrigation. The main emphasis of chem-
ical analysis has been on determination
of the three main nutritive elements
present in various forms while physical
tests were aimed at evaluation of param-
eters representing integrated effects,
such as the product yield.
Product .Yield
Annual yields for the three plant
varieties tested during recent years are
shown in Table (l). It is noted that
the yields obtained in the case of
wastewater-irrigated plots are invar-
iably higher than those irrigated with
fresh water, even when equivalent amounts
of fertilizer were applied. This prob-
ably reflects the advantage of gradual
and uniform nutrient application during
the irrigation period as compared to the
commonly practiced method where all the
fertilizers are applied either at once
or in a few applications during the
cultivation period.
Chemical Analyses
Standard methods were used to
sample and analyze the amount of nitro-
gen, phosphorus, and potassium in soil,
plant tissues, irrigating waters, and
the various fertilizers used. Table (2)
shows a summary of results of some of
the important tests that are used in
calculation of nutrient balances.
The analyses reported for waste-
water indicate a substantial amount of
nutrients which may be readily absorbed
by growing vegetation. On the average,
application of 1 cm of wastewater is
calculated to provide commercial fer-
tilizer constituents equivalent to
1.8 kg of nitrogen (N), 2.1 kg of phos-
phate (P2O5), and 2.2 kg of potash (K2o),
for each hectare of land irrigated with
wastewater. This would be nearly equal
to applying 6.5 kg of a 7-8-10 commer-
cial fertilizer per hectare. (The appli-
cation rate in the experiments reported
averaged about 5 cm/week during the
growing season.)In principle, a balance may be
obtained for each nutrient once it is
introduced into the system through
application of wastewater, commercial
fertilizers, and atmospheric precipita-
tion and is transported out of the sys-
tem as a result of product harvest,
cut weeds or sublimation, or is dissolved
and carried away in the percolate. The
task here has been made simpler by
several experimental observations made
in regards to water percolation following
each irrigation (U). Humidity measure-
ments indicate that the soil humidity
below 125 cm depth does not change as
a result of irrigation. This implies
that the nutrient movements are re-
stricted to the top 125 cm of soil, and
layers below are scarcely affected by
the leachate under the present operating
conditions. Therefore, by comparing the
nutrient content of the top soil layers
before planting and after harvest, one
may obtain the amount accumulated in
soil during the cultivation period.
Figures la to lc illustrate graph-
ically the balances obtained for nitro-
gen, phosphorus and potassium in the
system. Calculations are based strictly
on experimental observations which in-
clude both physical and chemical measure-
ments. The method for determining the
balance is straightforward: the amount
of each nutrient included in wastewater,
fertilizers, atmospheric precipitation,
and that absorbed from air (only in the
case of leguminous family plants) are
regarded as an "income" to the system
(left columns in each graph of Fig. l)
while those included in the harvested
biomass and sublimation (only in the
case of nitrogen) are considered to be
an "outcome" to the system.
The effect on soil (i.e. the net
deficit or accumulation) is assumed to
be proportional to the area between the
nutrient-abundancy distribution curves
obtained as a function of soil depth at
the beginning and end of the cultiva-
tion period. The curves are based on
chemical analyses of composite soil
samples extracted from layers 25 cm
apart down to a maximum depth of IT5 cm.
If positive, the area values calculated
represent a net accumulation in soil,
to be regarded as an "outcome" from the
system and, if negative, they represent
à net deficit of the corresponding
nutrients in soil, which is regarded as
an "income" to the system.
232Table (1) Annual yields in tons/hectare of alfalfa, corn, and potato in various plots during 1976 and 1977.
1976
SECONDARY FRESHWATER FRESHWATER
TREATED WITH WITHOUT
WASTEWATER FERTILIZER FERT!LIZER1977
SECONDARY FRESHWATER FRESHWATER
TREATED WITH WITHOUT
WASTEWATER FERTILIZER FERTILIZER
rooou>ALFALFA FIELD
POTATO FIELD
Product
Leaves
Weeds
CORN FIELD
Grains
Leaves
Hub
Branches
Weeds128.6 109-7
8.6
46.4
4.87-2
38.2
4.2105.5
5-1
36.5
4.0105-0 80.5 76.0
12
29
59.8
.0
.012
28
29.4
• 5
.08.
27.
29.1
0
0
6.2
3.8
1.2
9-5
36.84.4
3.4
0.8
9-3
26.14.1
3-1
0.7
8.5
25.8Table (2) A summary of chemical analyses of various parameters. The mean values signify averages obtained
from wastewater-irr-igated and reference plots.
NITROGEN
MIN MAX MEANPHOSPHOROUS
KIN MAX MEANPOTASSIUM
MIN MAX MEAN
WASTEWATER (ppm) 16.8 24.2 21.0
FRESHWATER (ppm)
ALFALFA (gr/300gr)
CORN (gr/IOOgr)
Grains
Leaves
Hub
Branches
Weeds
POTATO (gr/IOOgr)
Product1.8
2.14
2.0
1.43
0.60
0.7
2.4
1.82.8
2.45
2.3
1.61
0.76
0.94
2.6
2.22.5
2.30
2.1
1.52
0.71
0.82
2.5
2.0
1.7 2.4 2.1
1.21 1.23 1.26.2 7-2 7.0
0.2 0.35 0.3
0.26 0.28 0.27
0.20 0.24 0.22
0.25 0.29 0.27
0.13 0.18 0.16
0.23 0.26 0.24
0.36 0.37 0.35
0.12 0.15 0.13
0.22 0.31 0.26
0.19 0.21 0.2015.0 22,0 18.5
2.8 3.6 3
2.1 2.4 2.3
0.54
1.03
0.68
0.82
3.10
3.5
4.4
5.00.68
1.23
0.86
0.94
3.24
4.7
5.4
5-20.61
1.10
0.78
0.88
3.14
3.19
3-6
5.1"INCOME"
^FERTILIZER
1 APPLICATION
IRRIGATION
[^ATMOSPHERIC
ITATIONNET DEFICIT
IN SOIL
BSORPT1ON
IFROM AIR"OUTCOME"
lDESIRED
IMATION
«T ACCUMULATION
IN SOIL
ALFALFA
wo.
526
52 IS
1ay,
cIOC
2
2S9
0i i ii i J
fflIII
1UB8-6
23
CORN
POTATO
WASTE WATER FRESHWATER
WITH FERTILIZERFRESH WATER
WITHOUT FERTILIZER
Fig. 1a. Balance of nitrogen.
235"INCOME"
FERTILIZER
APPLICATION"OUTCOME"
(U11UJ IRRIGATION
^ATMOSPHERIC
tiijPRECIPITATION|NET DEFICIT
1INSO1L
^ABSORPTION
JFROM AIRuuiiDESIRED (TTTT
IŒIPRODUCT |ïà
(rmiUNDESIRED rn-r-
LLLUlpRODUCT IliltSUBLIMATION
ALFALFANET ACCUMULATION
IN SOIL
irtrt , ___ 1 ? VWV
8)
6931QUI
I11797
6-4
0
100RTTTTTTTI13 100
T
Jffli1273
)-63CORN
POTATO
p,9.92 WWxjJO.66
j]| *|*l
9
7.83
m
ri0Ml III
- . =
r ——
^ -'^
—'•=:^^
^^
D 0• 11;
Hi-
It!1
T i
IIIà£2
0
142 KO
ttjru
f
M.
288
là2.4
H7
WASTE WATER FRESHWATER
WITH FERTILIZERFRESHWATER
WITHOUT FERTILIZER
Fig. 1b. Balance of phosphorous.
236"INCOME"
K22APPUCATION I
DU IRRIGATION [
[777! ATMOSPHERIC
LKJpRECIPITATION3NET DEFICIT
llN SOIL
3 ABSORPTION
3 FROM AIROUTCOME'
mmDESIRED nrrnSUBLIMATION
UiilPRODUCT liiiJ
ITTTfJtŒSlRED fTTTlNET ACCUMULATION
LtttJPRODUCT UiillN SOIL
ALFALFA
!tt
111
M
CORN
POTATO
" "W9
muXXI <U"t m
94
0limn
_-~
jp=j685
647
0 0/6?
IllllIlllm
12»9
3
\AttSTE WATER FRESH WATER
WITH FERTILIZERFRESHWATER
WITHOUT FERTILIZER
Fig. 1c. Balance of potassium.
23ÏAs noted from Fig. 1, all the
reference plots receiving no commercial
fertilizers, as well as many of the
other plots, indicate a negative accumu-
lation or a deficit. In such cases,
the amount of nutrients added as a
result of irrigation or fertilizer
application has not "been sufficient to
meet the amount required "by the growing
plant. Therefore, to meet their growth
requirements, the plants have had to
draw upon the nutritive elements resid-
ing in soil "reservoir", thus causing
a net deficit at harvest time.
The numbers appearing at the right
of each of the indicator columns in
Fig. 1 represent the actual values cal-
culated on the basis of experimental
measurements. Their corresponding norm-
alized values, or percentages, are shown
at the left; theoretically, the totals
marked at the top of every "income" and
"outcome" column in each case must be
the same. However, due to many unavoid-
able experimental approximations, some
of the totals obtained are not exactly
equal. The discrepancies involved are
noted to be mostly below 20$, indicating
a reasonable accuracy in the current
calculations.
Despite the approximations men-
tioned above, the material flow analyses
Just described illustrate the possibil-
ity of a build-up in nutrients when con-
tinuous irrigation with wastewater takes
place. However, by exercising careful
management with regards to frequency and
amount of wastewater applied and, also,
by making a proper choice of vegetation,
such shortcomings may be resolved such
that a hazard-free system with long
term treatment capability evolves for a
given set of conditions.
Removal Efficiency
Regarding the whole scheme as a
system for removing the eutrophicant
agents contained in the wastewater,
a removal efficiency may be determined
and compared to that reported by a
similar project at Pennsylvania State
University (6-7). On the basis of
chemical analyses made after each har-
vest, the product yields from the waste-
water-irrigated plots may be expressed
in terms of nutrient values removed by
each product. Table (3) shows the
removal efficiencies, defined as the
ratio of the amount of nutrients re-
moved out of the system by harvest to
the total amount entering by the irri-
gating wastewater.In the case of alfalfa, a 200 kg/
hectare nitrogen utilization from air is
assumed. The values obtained reflect
the high sewage renovation capability
of the present scheme. Removal effic-
iencies of above 100$ obtained in some
cases indicate that some nutrients
initially present in the soil were also
absorbed by the plants in addition to
those introduced through wastewater
application. It therefore appears that
a greater rate of sewage application is
possible without additional difficulties.
CONCLUSION
Results from research experiments
on wastewater treatment through agricul-
tural land irrigation illustrate that
the proposed scheme can function as a
pollution-free long-term sewage treat-
ment/renovation technique, provided that
correct management is exercised during
the operation. While producing valuable
food, the biosystem of soil and plant
performs as a "living filter" and is
capable of renovating the wastewater
for groundwater recharge.
Although no risk of underground
water pollution exists under the present
operating conditions, the possibility
of long-term soil pollution as a result
of contamination with excessive amounts
of nutrients may occur. This problem
may be resolved by either using the
plots alternately, or, for continuous
operation, it may be controlled by match-
ing the amount of wastewater applied to
the type of vegetation cultivated such
that the majority of the nutrients con-
tained in the sewage are removed out of
the system in the harvested biomass.
On the whole, the proposed scheme
may be recommended as an effective
method for wastewater re-use and disposal
and appears to be specially suitable for
semi-arid countries such as Iran.
238Table (3) Removal efficiency of potential pollutants by various products.
NITROGEN PHOSPHORUS POTASSIUM
65.5$ 195$
30.3#ALFALFA
CORN
POTATOPresent Experiments
Penn. State Project
Present Experiments
Penn. State Project
Present Experiments
Penn. State Project
REFERENCES-
13O5S
120$138%
123$ 97$
180$
6. R.R Farizek, et al., "Wastevater
Renovation and Conservation",
1. L.T. Kardos, "Wastewater Renovation Penn Stats Studies Report No. 23,
toy the Land - A Living Filter", Pennsylvania State University,
Agriculture and the Quality of our University Park, Pennsylvania,
Environment, N.C. Brady (ed), (196"7) 72.
A.A.A.S. Put. Ho. 85, PP. 2U1-250
(1967).
2. L.T. Kardos and W.E. Sopper, "Reno-
vation of Municipal Wastevater
through Land Disposal t>y Spray
Irrigation", Recycling Treated
Municipal Wastewater and Sludge
through Forest and Cropland, W.E.
Sopper and L.T. Kardos (eds), The
Pennsylvania State University Press,
pp. 1U8-I63 (1973).
3. H.T. Odum et al., "Recycling Treated
Sewage through Cypress Wetlands in
Florida", Report from Center for'
Wetlands, University of Florida,
Gainsville, Florida, (1976).
k. M. Sanai and J. Shayegan, "Waste-
water Re-Use in Agriculture",
Proceedings of the Third Iranian
Congress of Chemical Engineering,
Pahlavi University, Siraz, Iran,
6-10 November 1977-
5. W.E. Sopper, "Perennial Crop Selec-
tion and Management for Municipal
Wastewater Irrigation Systems",
Proceedings of the Conference on
Recycling Municipal Sludges and
Effluents on Land, July 9-13, 1973,
National Association of State
Universities and Land-Grant Col-
leges, Washington, D.C., p. 2UU.
239EVALUATION OF EXISTING SYSTEMS
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE WITH RECLAIMED WATERS FROM THE
POMONA, SAN JOSE CREEK, AND WHITTIER NARROWS PLANTS
Franklin D. Dryden, Sanitation Districts of Los Angeles County
Ching-lin Chen, Sanitation Districts of Los Angeles County
ABSTRACT
The high demand for water in semi-
arid and densely populated Southern
California has seriously overdrawn
groundwater resources. An active
groundwater recharge program to replen-
ish the groundwater system has been con-
ducted by the Los Angeles County Flood
Control District in the Montebello
Forebay area of Los Angeles County.
Prior to 1962 the water used for re-
charge had been exclusively storm water
run-off and Colorado River water. Since
that time, three wastewater reclamation
facilities operated by the Sanitation
Districts of Los Angeles County have
provided reclaimed water for the ground-
water recharge effort. The objective
of this paper is to present a technical
review of the various aspects of the
Montebello Forebay groundwater re-
charge program, as well as a brief dis-
cussion of an ongoing health effects
study which will determine whether this
groundwater recharge program has caused
any significant health risk within the
population in the vicinity of the re-
charge operation.
INTRODUCTION
The historic overdraft of ground-
water basins in Southern California has
encouraged groundwater basin recharge
in the South Coastal Hydrologie Region,
as indicated in Figure 1, to maintain
the groundwater table and to prevent
the intrusion of seawater into the
freshwater aquifers along the coast.For many years, the Los Angeles County
Flood Control District (LACFCD) has
been recharging the groundwater basins
along the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel
Rivers with storm water run-off and sur-
plus Colorado River water. Since the
early 1950's the Sanitation Districts of
Los Angeles County (LACSD) have proposed
the use of water reclaimed from sewage
as a supplemental source of recharge
water. The diminishing availability of
Colorado River water and the continu-
ously increasing overdraft of the basins
combined to obtain general public sup-
port for the effort.
Beginning in 1962, reclaimed water
from the Whittier Narrows Water
Reclamation Plant (WNWRP) became avail-
able for spreading. The water was pur-
chased by the Central and West Basin
Water Replenishment District for the
same price paid for Colorado River
water under the terms of a contract
which provided for the construction of
the Whittier Narrows Plant. Based on
the success of the Whittier Narrows
Plant, the Sanitation Districts of
Los Angeles County developed a master
plan for construction of more water
reclamation plants to meet the need for
expanded water reuse. At this time,
the Sanitation Districts operate three
Water Reclamation Plants (Pomona,
San Jose Creek, Whittier Narrows)
which produce water for spreading in
percolation basins operated by the
Los Angeles County Flood Control
District. The treated wastewater is
disinfected by chlorination before dis-
charge to flood control channels which
convey the water to the spreadinggrounds. The present practice of re-
charge includes dilution of the re-
claimed water with imported supplies on
a 2:1 ratio prior to percolation. The
dilution criterion is intended to pro-
duce groundwater with less than 10 mg/1
nitrate nitrogen. The locations of the
spreading grounds, the water reclamation
plants and the flood control channels
are indicated in Figure 2. The total
quantity of reclaimed water recharged
since 1962 is approximately 370 million
cubic meters (300,000 acre-feet).
Groundwater recharge with reclaimed
water via percolation is considered a
cost-effective and esthetically attrac-
tive means of water reuse, because the
unsaturated soil provides tertiary
treatment for the reclaimed water and
protection against the transmission of
disease. Additionally, the underground
aquifer provides both a storage and dis-
tribution system for the water and a
method of losing the identity of the re-
claimed water by blending with natural
waters.
The Montebello groundwater re-
charge operation constitutes one of the
oldest reuse projects in the nation.
However, expansion of the recharge ac-
tivity has been opposed by the
California State Health Department.
This is primarily due to the concern
over the hypothesized relationship be-
tween low concentrations of stable or-
ganics reaching groundwater supplies
and their effects upon human health.
In an attempt to alleviate such concern,
the Sanitation Districts have initiated
a two year study on the health effects
of groundwater recharge as part of the
Orange and Los Angeles Counties Water
Reuse Stmdy.
SANITATION DISTRICTS WATER RECLAMATION
PLANTS
The construction of the Whittier
Narrows WRP was completed in July, 1962,
and by August 20, 1962 the first re-
claimed water was discharged into the
Rio Hondo behind the Whittier Narrows
Dam for delivery to the Rio Hondo
spreading grounds. The plant was de-
signed as a 38,000 cu m/day (10 MGD)
activated-sludge treatment plant but
has been operated successfully at a
rate of 57,000 cu m/day (15 MGD). A
dual media filtration system that will
enhance disinfection will be in opera-
tion by the fall of 1978. The average
water quality of the plant effluent isshown in Table 1.
The San Jose Creek WRP was con-
structed in 1971 and the first re-
claimed water available for ground-
water recharge was released to the San
Gabriel River spreading grounds in 1972.
Only portions of the 95,000 cu m/day
(25 MGD) output by the San Jose Creek
activated-sludge treatment plant were
used for groundwater recharge in the
past because of limits set by historical
spreading proportions and also at times
when total dissolved solids (TDS) levels
exceeded 700 mg/1. At present, the
plant contributes approximately 57,000
cu m/day (15 MGD) to the groundwater re-
charge effort. The average water quali-
ty of the plant effluent is shown in
Table 1. Installation of an inert dual
media filtration system at the San Jose
Creek WRP is presently nearing com-
pletion and is expected to be on-line
by the fall of 1978.
Approximately 15 percent of the
38,000 cu m/day (10 MGD) reclaimed
water from the Pomona WRP is presently
reused in the Pomona area. The re-
maining flow is discharged to the lined
section of San Jose Creek in Pomona and
conveyed to unlined portions of San
Jose Creek and the San Gabriel River
where it infiltrates near the Whittier
Narrows Dam. The average quality of
the effluent is shown in Table 1. Since
January, 1977 the Pomona WRP has em-
ployed an activated granular carbon ad-
sorption-filtration system to further
improve its activated-sludge secondary
effluent before discharge into San Jose
Creek. A substantial portion of this
carbon treated effluent is intended for
reuse by various local industries.
There are no sludge-processing
facilities at the three water reclama-
tion plants described above. All
sludges from the plants are returned to
trunk sewers, and conveyed to the
Sanitation Districts' Joint Water
Pollution Control Plant (JWPCP) in
Carson, California, where they are re-
moved, anaerobically digested, de-
watered, and composted. As Indicated
by the typical domestic sewage treat-
ment plant effluent qualities in Table
1, each of the three inland treatment
plants receives negligible quantities
of industrial wastewater. Thus, metal
concentrations in the final effluents
are very low and are not included in
Table 1.
2U2UNITED
STATES OF
CALIFORNIAIN. AMERICA
LOS ANGELE
AOUADUCT
/ 1916
SOUTH COASTAL
HYDROLOGIC AREA
STATE OF CALIFORNIA
100 ZOO
MILES
SANITATION DISTRICTS OF
LOS ANGELES COUNTY
(I MILE = 1.6 KM.)
LOS ANGELES COUNTY
FIGURE I, LOCATION MAPTable 1. Summary of Secondary Effluent Quality (1976 Annual Average
Constituents
Suspended Solids, mg/1
Total COD, mg/1
Dissolved COD, mg/1
Total Nitrogen, mg/1 N
Total Phosphate, mg/1 PO4.
TDS, mg/1
Total Alkalinity, mg/1 CaC03
Total Hardness, mg/1 CaC03Whittier
Narrows
7
37
28
19.1
18.9
511
219
179San Jose
Creek
5
31
25
14.0
18.8
676
208
231Pomona
6
43
35
18.5
22.8
559
215
212
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE OPERATIONS
Spreading Grounds
The Rio Hondo - San Gabriel R,iver
system drains the entire San Gabriel
Valley through a 3.2 kilometer (2 mile)
break in the topography called the
Whittier Narrows. The Whittier Narrows
separates the La Merced Hills from the
Puente Hills. To the west, the
La Merced Hills rise to over 182 meters
(600 feet) above sea level, while on the
east, the Puente Hills rise more sharply
to about 424 meters (1400 feet) above
sea level. The ground surface elevation
at the Whittier Narrows is about 60
meters (200 feet) above sea level.
A broad floodplain has been formed
to the south where the Rio Hondo and
San Gabriel Rivers emerge from the
whittier Narrows. This is known as the
Montebello Forebay. It forms the con-
nection between the groundwater in the
San Gabriel Valley and the two large
groundwater basins to the south; namely,
the Central Basin and the West Coast
Basin. Located in the Montebello
Forebay are the Rio Hondo and San
Gabriel Spreading Grounds which are
operated by the Los Angeles County
Flood Control District.
The Rio Hondo and San Gabriel
River Spreading Grounds, indicated in
Figure 2, have total available percola-
tion areas of 182 hectares (455 acres)
and 40.4 hectares (101 acres), respec-
tively. Approximately 53.2 hectares
(133 acres) are also available for
spreading in the unlined portion of the
San Gabriel River. The spreading
grounds are subdivided into numerous in-
dividual basins ranging in size from
1.6 to 8 hectares (4 to 20 acres).According to California Department
of Water Resources Bulletin No. 104,.0)
there is continuity between the ground
surface and the uppermost aquifers
along the Rio Hondo and the San Gabriel
River and between these two streams
from the Whittier Narrows downstream to
the vicinity of the Santa Ana Freeway.
In general, there is a significant de-
gree of hydraulic continuity over much
of the Montebello Forebay area between
the uppermost Gaspur Aquifer and the
successive underlying Exposition-
Artesia Aquifer, Gardena-Gage Aquifer,
Hollydale Aquifer, Jefferson Aquifer,
and Lynwood Aquifer. However, the
areas of hydraulic continuity between
the foregoing aquifers and the deeper
Silverado and Sunnyside Aquifers is, to
a large degree, limited to relatively
small areas near the Whittier Narrows
(and areas above the Whittier Narrows).
Inflows to the Montebello Forebay
Until reclaimed waters were avail-
able, groundwater recharge by spreading
or natural infiltration, utilized
Colorado River water, subsurface inflow,
rising water, storm inflow, and local
precipitation. In 1974, additional im-
ported water from the California
Aqueduct became available for ground-
water recharge. Table 2 shows the
total inflows of the various sources of
recharge waters for each water year
from 1960-61 to 1976-77. During this
entire period, reclaimed water has
represented 13.5 percent of the total
inflows to the Montebello Forebay while
imported and local waters have repre-
sented approximately 41.1 and 45.4 per-
cent, respectively.TO POMONA
WATER RENOVATION
PLANT
WATER RECLAMATION
PLANT
RIO HONDO
SPREADING (X)
GROUNDS I6O2T
SCALE OF FEET
4000 0 4000 8000
LEGEND
(X) INTENSIVELY MONITORED WELLS
mt LINED CHANNEL
UNLINED CHANNEL
FIGURE 2. LOCATIONS OF SPREADING GROUNDS, CHANNELS AND TREATMENT PLANTS
2U5Operational Procedures
Many of the operational procedures
used in groundwater recharge are based
on experience with artificial filters,
i.e., slow sand filters for water treat-
ment and intermittent sand filters for
sewage treatment. Normally, artificial
filters have some type of effluent col-
lection system, whereas a surface spread-
ing operation normally permits the per-
colated water to reach the main body of
groundwater.
The Rio Hondo and San Gabriel
River spreading basins are filled
cyclicly to maintain aerobic conditions
in the upper soil strata and to control
vector insects. Groups of basins are
rotated through a 21 day cycle consist-
ing of filling to a depth of 1.2 meters
(4 feet) for 7 days, draining for 7
days, and drying for 7 days. On this
rotating basis the capacity of the
basins for recharge is approximately
757,000 cu m/day (200 MGD). On a short
term basis with all basins in operation
simultaneously the capacity for ground-
water recharge is approximately
2,221,000 cu m/day (600 MGD). This
latter mode of operation is used in
storm periods to maximize conservation
of storm water.
GROUNDWATER MONITORING PROGRAM
There are approximately 200 wells
in the Central and West Coast Basins
owned and operated by numerous water
companies and monitored by both the
California State Department of Water
Resources and the Los Angeles County
Flood Control District under their
Basinwide Monitoring Program. Some of
the wells produced water quality data as
early as 1931; however, the majority of
the wells were not monitored for water
quality until the 1950's. Most of the
wells are sampled annually and analyzed
for calcium, magnesium, sodium, po-
tassium, bicarbonate, carbonate, sul-
fate, chloride, nitrate, TDS, iron,
manganese, and trace metals.
Beginning in 1972, sixteen wells
within the Montebello Forebay area were
specifically selected for an intensive
water quality monitoring program. The
general locations of these intensively
monitored wells are indicated in Figure
2. Samples from these wells are col-
lected by the Los Angeles County Flood
Control District and analyzed by
Sanitation Districts' Laboratoryand other commercial laboratories at
Central and West Basin Water
Replenishment District's cost- In-
tensively monitored wells are sampled
quarterly for major minerals, nitro-
genous compounds, COD, BOD, TDS, elec-
trical conductivity, pH, and odor, and
annually for complete trace metals and
chlorinated hydrocarbons analyses.
Data from the above monitoring pro-
grams have been used actively to evalu-
ate the impact of groundwater recharge
on the well water qualities. These
data, as well as the new data to be col-
lected by the Health Effects Study,
will aid in the determination of possi-
ble expansion or curtailment of ground-
water recharge programs.
CHANGES IN RECLAIMED WATER QUALITY
DURING PERCOLATION
The water quality changes that
occur in reclaimed water as it perco-
lates through soil have been studied by
several investigators at the Whittier
Narrows Test Basin. The test basin was
constructed by the Los Angeles County
Flood Control District in the reservoir
area north of the Whittier Narrows Dam.
Prior to the installation of the test
basin, the land was used for farming.
Consequently, there was an abundance of
organic material in the uppermost por-
tion of soil. The soil profile at the
Whittier Narrows site presented in Table
3 shows the soil to be non-homogenous
with thin, discontinuous layers of silt
and micaceous material. At the time of
construction, the water table was
approximately 2.7 meters (9 feet) below
the ground surface.
During the various studies, undi-
luted reclaimed water from the Whittier
Narrows WRP was spread at rates varied
to maximize the hydraulic loading while
maintaining aerobic conditions in the
soil. Grab samples were collected from
sampling pans buried at depths of 0.6,
1.2, 1.8, and 2.4 meters (2, 4, 6, and
8 feet, respectively) below the ground
surface. A brief discussion of each in-
dividual series of experiments follows.
McKee-McMichaels Study(2)
During the McKee-McMichaels study,
the spreading schedule initially con-
sisted of continuous flooding which was
subsequently changed to flooding on
Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays. The
2h6Table 2. Annual Inflows to the Montebello Forebay
(Thousands of Acre-Feet)
Water
Year
1960-61
1961-62
1962-63
1963-64
1964-65
1965-66
1966-67
1967-68
1968-69
1969-70
1970-71
1971-72
1972-73
1973-74
1974-75
1975-76
1976-77Reclaimed Water
Whittier
Narrows
Plant
1
12
13
15
15
16
18
14
17
19
18
14
13
15
12
10San
Jose
Plant
8
8
7
9
13Pomona
Plant
6
6
9
8
8
8
6
5
5
1Imported
Colorado
River
Water
121
180
68
86
136
102
67
79
17
61
63
30
80
80
11
1
12Water
Calif.
Aqua-
duct
56
34
14Subsur-
face
Inflow
26
23
21
21
19
17
17
21
24
24
23
24
26
27
26
28
32Local
Rising
Water
6
11
7
3
2
6
14
17
26
23
14
6
8
7
4
1
0Water
Storm
Inflow
5
34
9
11
15
41
47
16
88
21
22
18
30
26
18
18
19Local
Precipi-
tation
11
23
12
11
13
20
22
12
26
11
12
11
22
14
13
5
11
NOTE: 1000 acre-feet = 1.23 million cubic meters.
final schedule consisted of flooding
from Monday through Friday.
The results of the study indicated
that the sum of organic and ammonia ni-
trogen was diminished by more than 54
percent during percolation through the
upper 60 centimeters (2 feet) of soil.
Past this depth, the change of the or-
ganic and ammonia nitrogen concentration
was minimized. Continuous increase of
nitrate nitrogen was observed through
the 2.4 meter (8 feet) sampling depth.
The nitrate nitrogen concentration at
the 2.4 meter sampling point was about
five times higher than the surface con-
centration. This increase was slightly
less for samples collected during
periods of continuous flooding. Total
nitrogen decreased slightly (about 10
percent) over the first 1.8 meters (6
feet) of percolation, but increased
(about 18 percent) between the 1.8 and
2.4 meter (6 and 8 feet) depths.
Approximately 53 percent of the
applied COD was removed by the first
1.2 meters (4 feet) of soil. From 1.2
to 1.8 meters (4 to 6 feet), COD concen-trations were observed to increase to
approximately 8 percent over the surface
concentration. Below this level, the
COD concentrations decreased to slightly
below the surface concentration. The In-
crease in COD observed in some of the
1.8 meter (6 foot) percolates probably
resulted from contamination in the 1.8
meter (6 foot) pan.
The study results indicated an in-
creasing trend for both TDS and hardness
with depth. TDS increased by 18 percent
while hardness increased by 53 percent.
Both increases were attributed to disso-
lution of minerals by weak nitrous acid
formed during the intermediate steps of
ammonia to nitrate conversion in the
soil.
Contrary to the findings of pre-
vious investigators that vertical travel
through soil removed coliform organisms,
this study demonstrated that well-
ripened filtration beds generate coli-
forms as well as myriads of other bac-
teria. Further tests revealed that
coliforms in the percolates were of a
non-fecal origin, i.e., they were normal
2H7Table 3. Geologic Soil Profile at the Whittier Narrows
Test Basin(2)
Depth Below
Surface
(cm)General Description
0-
60-
120-
180-
240-
300-Dark brown very fine to medium,
silty sand and soil
Light brown to tan fine to medium
sand with lenses of gray fine sand.
Moist, oxidized, orange fine sand
streaks are common in tan portion.
Wood fragments up to 7.6 cm long
in dark brown to black medium to
fine sand. Sand is highly micaceous.
Tan fine to medium soft, micaceous
sand, with gray fine sand lenses.
Tan portions commonly show orange
streaks of oxidized fine sand.
Dark brown to black micaceous
fine sandy silt stringer.
Gray medium to coarse sand and
"pea gravel" with occasional
gravels to 1 cm.
soil bacteria that thrived in the en-
vironment created by the application of
reclaimed water.
Virological analyses performed on
the reclaimed water indicated that on
the average, enteric virus concentra-
tions were very low (less than 100 PFU
per liter). Samples taken during and
shortly after the Sabin Oral Sunday in-
noculations of February, 1963 showed
about 250 PFU of enteric viruses per
liter in the Whittier Narrows effluent
but no measurable concentration in the
percolate from the 60-cm (2-foot) sam-
pling pan. A subsequent addition of
Sabin Type - III vaccine to the effluent
applied to the testing basin failed to
produce measurable concentrations of
viruses in the percolates.
1970 LACFCD
The Los Angeles County Flood
Control District initiated a study in
June, 1970 to evaluate the effects of
long-term spreading and to further in-
vestigate changes in reclaimed water
quality during percolation. During thestudy, the test basin was flooded for
seven consecutive days and then allowed
to dry at least 14 consecutive days.
During this investigation, measurements
of COD, coliforms and viruses were not
made.
The results indicated that the
ammonia concentration at the 1.2 meter
(4-foot) level was essentially zero,
while the nitrate concentration had in-
creased by a factor of eight from the
surface concentration. One unexplained
phenomenon occurred at the 1.8 meter
(6-foot) level where percolate samples
showed a sharp increase in ammonia and
a decrease in nitrate. Following 2.4
meters (8 feet) of percolation, the
ammonia concentration was essentially
zero and the nitrate concentration re-
turned to its initial concentration.
As in the McKee-McMichaels study,
TDS and hardness both increased with
depth. In this study, TDS increased by
approximately 11 percent and hardness
by 31 percent following 2.4 meters (8
feet) of percolation.
2U8LACFCD - LACSD Study<3)
The Los Angeles County Flood
Control District and the Los Angeles
County Sanitation Districts began a
joint investigation in March, 1973 of
the effects of spreading nitrified
effluent- Spreading and sampling
methods were similar to those used in
the 1970 LACFCD study. The main thrust
of this study was to evaluate the inter-
relationship of nitrification and TDS
increase. Each agency collected data
for a period of approximately one year.
LACSD data indicated 51 percent of
applied COD was removed during 2.4
meters (8 feet) of percolation. This
removal closely approximates the removal
found by the LACFCD of 57 percent. In
both cases, the greatest change occurred
within the first 1.2 meters (4 feet) of
percolation. No further nitrification
was observed to occur as a result of
percolation since nitrate and ammonia
concentrations remained constant with
depth.
The LACSD data revealed that the
TDS increased about 19 percent over sur-
face concentrations. This increase was
approximately 30 percent for LACFCD data.
These results combined with data from
the two previous studies which used non-
nitrified effluent demonstrate that some
differences did exist for nitrified and
non-nitrified percolated effluents in
terms of TDS increase; however, these
differences were not too significant-
Hardness also increased with depth. The
average increase, according to LACSD
data, was 52 percent which is about the
increase found by the LACFCD of 63 per-
cent.
Summary of Test Basin Studies
Combining the data from all
Whittier Narrows Test Basin studies, the
following conclusions can be made re-
garding the changes in reclaimed water
quality which occurred during 2.4 meters
(8 feet) of percolation:
1. Approximately 50 percent COD
removal was achieved. This
average did not include data
from the McKee-McMichaels
Study because that data did
not fit the pattern of more
recent studies.
2. TDS and hardness were in-
creased approximately 20 and
50 percent, respectively.3. Nitrate and ammonia nitrogen
behavior varied from study
to study and also varied
between effluent type.
However, both nitrification
and denitrification seemed
to occur during percolation.
4. On the basis of one study,
both viruses and fecal
coliforms were shown to be
effectively removed.
Although the studies have contri-
buted to the understanding of changes in>.
reclaimed water quality during percola-
tion, the fate of many constituents,
such as heavy metals and trace organics,
is still unknown. The capacity of the
spreading grounds to continue to remove
biological and chemical contaminants
should also be investigated. Addition-
al test basin work has been planned as
part of the Health Effects Study to ad-
dress some of these questions.
EFFECTS OF RECLAIMED WATER ON
GROUNDWATER QUALITY
The water quality data from moni-
toring wells indicate that the various
well waters are generally of good quali-
ty. Outside of the fairly high miner-
alization of some of the well water
supplies, no significant water quality
problems have been revealed by the
groundwater monitoring program.
Well No. 2947U is located slightly
upstream from the Montebello Forebay
spreading grounds, as indicated in
Figure 2, and contains 300 mg/1 or less
TDS which is a measure of the total
mineralization of the water. Well No.
1590M which is located within the Rio
Hondo spreading ground is shown to con-
tain higher TDS in the range of 340 to
400 mg/1. The difference in TDS concen-
trations of the above two wells can be
attributed to the groundwater recharge
operation. Although the reclaimed
water may contribute some TDS to the
groundwater as revealed by the results
of the Whittier Narrows teat basin
studies, yet the TDS increases in the
wells influenced by the spreading
operations are predominantly due to the
spreading of Colorado River water which
contains an average TDS of 750 mg/1 and
has comprised over 40 percent of the
total amount of water spread. A similar
increase pattern is also observed in the
results of well water hardness analyses.
The hardness increases in the wells are
2U9also primarily due to the spreading of
the Colorado River water which has an
average hardness of 330 mg/1 as CaCC>3.
The average nitrate and COD concen-
trations of the sixteen intensively
monitored wells are shown in Table 4
under a special grouping. The grouping
of the wells is based on the distance
from spreading grounds and the depth to
the first well perforation. This cate-
gorization is crude because complexity
of the aquifers has not been considered.
Nevertheless, the table seems to indi-
cate a trend between nitrate concentra-
tion in the well and the distance of
the well from the spreading grounds. In
spite of this concentration and distance
relationship, the slight increase in ni-
trate concentration can probably be
attributed to sources other than re-
claimed water, such as fertilizer from
previous farming operation in the
Montebello Forebay.
The average nitrate concentration
in the affected wells is still well
within the 10 mg/1 nitrate nitrogen
limit. Any concern for nitrate in-
creases can be minimized by maintaining
a proper ratio between the reclaimed
water and the imported surface water in
the spreading operation. The same prac-
tice can be applied to control the in-
crease of TDS and hardness by using more
California Aqueduct water, which has
average TDS and hardness concentrations
of 190 mg/1 and 90 mg/1 (as CaC03), re-
spectively, instead of Colorado River
water in the blending operation for
groundwater recharge.
As indicated in Table 4, the COD
concentrations in the wells seem to be
independent of the distances between
the wells and the spreading grounds.
The average COD concentrations in the
wells are further shown to be generally
lower than those of local surface water
supplies. Therefore, no.serious impact
of reclaimed water on the groundwater
quality can be recognized. However, the
effects of reclaimed water on ground-
water quality cannot be fully evaluated
without more complete data on the fate
of trace metals, trace organics, and
microorganisms. Therefore, an accurate
evaluation cannot be made until the com-
pletion of the Health Effects Study.
HEALTH EFFECTS STUDY
A study has been initiated by the
Sanitation Districts to determine the
health effects of the groundwater re-charge program in the Montebello
Forebay. The study is carefully de-
vised to produce the needed data to
allow regulatory agencies to make de-
cisions on whether to continue and
possibly expand the Montebello Forebay
recharge effort, and, in addition to
provide information upon which other re-
charge programs could be established.
Although closely interrelated, the study
has been divided into the following four
tasks1:
Assessment of Reclaimed Water Movement
This task is to quantify as accur-
ately as possible the percentage of the
well water that consists of water that
was once reclaimed water. This informa-
tion is needed to determine the exposure
of population in the vicinity of the re-
charge operation to water of reclaimed
water origin. The most promising
approach to this problem involves the
use of a previously developed water
movement model for the Montebello
Forebay based on sulfate ion concentra-
tions in Colorado River water acting as
a tracer.
Additionally, a new test basin
study will be conducted under this task
to determine the changes in reclaimed
water quality during percolation. Fac-
tors such as soil properties, depth to
groundwater, and spreading schedule,
which are believed to influence the
quality changes, will be thoroughly in-
vestigated.
Characterization of Water Quality
This task will produce detailed
water quality data for well waters, re-
claimed waters, imported waters, and
other sources of waters involved in the
recharge effort. Water quality analyses
will include existing analytical param-
eters under the intensive monitoring
program; however, more emphasis will be
placed on the characterization of trace
organics, trace metals, and viruses.
Initially, a list of specifically se-
lected organic compounds of suspected
health significance will be used as a
set of target compounds. Samples will
be analyzed using gas chromatograph/
mass spectrometry (GC/MS). All GC/MS
computer output will be recorded on
magnetic tape so that additional com-
pounds not on the list can be identi-
fied without the burden of additional
sampling.
250Table 4. Summary of NO3 and COD in Intensively Monitored Wells
Group*No. of
WellsDistance from
Spreading
Grounds
(kilometer)Depth to First
Perforation
(meter)Avg. COD
Cmg/1)Avg. NOT
(mg/1 N)
I
II
III7
5
40-1.3
1.3-6.1
1.6-3.212- 90
90-150
44-1593.1
3.5
3.13.2
1.7
0.2
* Group I = Wells close to the spreading grounds and with shallow perforations.
Group II = Wells moderately close to the spreading grounds with deeper
perforations.
Group III = Wells upstream from spreading grounds.
Toxicologie Experiments
The Ames test and a mammalian cell
transformation test will be used to
isolate the discrete organic fractions
of water concentrates which exhibit
possible health effects, i.e., mutagen-
Ic and presumptive carcinogenic activi-
ty. Specific compounds or fractions
with positive test results will be fur-
ther identified by GC/MS/COMP methods.
Epidemiological Study
The objective of this task is to
determine whether the groundwàter re-
charge program in the Montebello
Forebay causes any increase in health
risk compared to other areas where
potable well water has not been in-
fluenced by planned water reuse. The
success of this task is heavily de-
pendent on the fulfillment of the goals
of the above three tasks.REFERENCES
1. "Planned Utilization of the
Ground Water Basins of the
Coastal Plain of Los Angeles
County," California Department
of Water Resources Bulletin
No. 104, Appendix A, "Ground
Water Geology," June, 1961.
2. McMichaels, F. C. and McKee, J. E.,
"Research on Wastewater at
Whittier Narrows - Final Report,"
W. M. Keck Laboratory of
Environmental Engineering,
California Institute of
Technology, 1965.
3. "Health Effects of Groundwater
Recharge - Phase I Report,"
Draft, Orange and Los Angeles
Counties Water Reuse Study,
Los Angeles County Sanitation
Districts, 1977.
251EVALUATION OF EXISTING SYSTEMS
THE SEWAGE FARMS OF PARIS
Robert B Dean LunDean Environ-
mental Co
Abstract
The sewage treatment farms of Paris,
France, have been in operation since 1880,
Some early fields close to the City were
abandoned in 1955 and that land is now
used by industry. The present farms some
30 km NW of Paris were started in I895
and now occupy essentially the same
areas they did in 1920. Sewage in excess
of the capacity of the fields is treated
by activated sludge. The farms now treat
only 15$ of the total flow and 30$ of the
solids. They will be retained as a safe-
ty feature for so long as the land is
not expropriated by local communities.
Raw sewage, screened and degritted, is
applied at rates up to k meters per year.
The major crop is maise used as dry
cattle feed. Grass, trees and vegetables
are also grown, but with one minor
exception, no vegetables
that may be eaten raw. The Ministry of
Health inspects vegetables sold in the
Paris markets and has found no evidence
of infectious disease germs in produce
from the sewage farms. Irrigation of
vegetables is stopped if the World
Health Organization announces a cholera
alert for Europe and vegetables are
then quarantined for 10 days after the
last irrigation. There is no evidence
of damage to the soil by heavy metals.
The authorities do not consider metal
uptake in foods to be a problem and
analyses of foods for heavy metal con-
tent have not been made. Underdrain
effluent is usually better than the
standards for secondary treatment but
contains nitrates in excess of WHO
standards for drinking water, at
least in the warm months.The utilization and treatment of
sewage on land by the City of Paris,
France, started in I88O following years
of discussion by, among others, Victor
Hugo who as early as 1862 in "Les
Misérables" looked upon night soil and
sewage as "flowering fields .. green
grass .. game and cattle". Land in the
first meander of the Seine river north
of the City in the region of Grenne-
villiers was used for sewage purifica-
tion until the mid 50's. This may be
the area referred to by Rhode as show-
ing signs of exhaustion (1962). He at-
tributed the exhaustion to excess zinc
in the soil and found zinc values rang-
ing from 500 to 2200 ppm for unhealthy
soils and 305 to U55 ppm for healthy
soils. The lowest pH was 6.7. There
have been several unsuccessful at-
tempts since then to find the exhaust-
ed soils of the Paris sewage farms
(Bauer 1973). The present management
of the system has no knowledge of any
problems with fertility. In any case
the old sewage farm at Grennevilliers
was closed in 1955 and converted to
industrial use. The soil analyzed by
Rhode is probably covered by the
General Motors now.
The first sewage farm at Grenne-
villiers was already too small by 1895
and additional land was purchased in
meanders further down stream from the
city. By 1920 large trunk sewers had
been built to Achères, and sewage was
irrigated on the land from permanent
concrete head boxes spaced 20 to 60
meters (yards) apart along 30 cm
(l foot) mains. Figure 1. Sewage was
and still is distributed in conven-
tional irrigation furrows. Much of
the land drains naturally through
porous subsoil to the river. There
are some tile drains and open drain-
253Région de
Carrières. Triel
Figure 1 Map of the Sewage Farms of Paris and Trunk sewers.
age ditches 2 to 3 meters (7-10 feet)
deep to convey surplus water to the
river. A small recreational lake is
also filled "by seepage from the sew-
age fields.
Almost all of the land in the
Archere district that was included
in the sewage farms in 1920 is still
receiving sewage but some of the
land has "been taken over for sewage
treatment plants to handle the in-
creased volume due to the population
growth since 1929. At the present
time the sewage farms take 70 to 80
million cubic meters per year
(about 20 billion US gallons per
year) out of a total annual flow
of 520 million cubic meters (150
billion gallons) or less than 15$
of the flow. The rest of the sewage
is treated by primary sedimenta-
tion followed by activated sludge.
Waste activated sludge and all
other excess liquids are returnedto the primary tanks. The com-
bined sludge is digested in two-
stage high-rate digesters oper-
ated at 35 C (95 P). About 15$ of
the digested sludge is pumped
back into the sewer main serving
the irrigated farms more than
doubling the solids content of
the raw sewage going on the land.
Sewage going to the farms receiv-
es only degritting before being
pumped from the main collection
station in Clichy on the edge of
Paris proper. The management of
the farms considers that primary
sedimentation or any other form
of sewage treatment would be a
waste of good organic matter
that might otherwise benefit the
soil.
Typical compositions of
sewage as it was applied to the
land in 1977 is shown in Table 1.
Table 1.
Solids Organic Total N Total P
Normal Sewage 13,000 mg/l 60% of Solids 300 mg/1 100 mg/l
Heavy Sewage Ii2,000 kO l68OIt is obvious that this
fortified sewage could equally
well "be described as a dilute
sludge. The metal content of
digested sludges taken from dry-
ing "beds in the same year was "below
the median concentration of US
sludges reported "by Salotto et al
(197M for all elements with the
exception of zinc and cadmium.
The soil of the farm is a
mixture of sand, clay and grav-
el that was laid down "by the
river as it meandered "back and
forth across the valley. The
underlying rock is limestone
and the soil is full of flints
and is naturally well limed-
Sewage is applied at rates which
"by regulation must not exceed a
total of h meters per year (3
inches per week). The highest
average rate was 3.6 meters in
the drought of 1976. Some fields
appear to have received more
than their share of sewage. Tur-
bidity in the effluent in one
drainage ditch was attributed
to heavy loading of a few fields
to get rid of some sludge. There
are two types of farms in the
sewage disposal system. About
half of the area is leased to
independent farmers who operate
their land subject to regula-
tions by the City,and the De-
partment of Health. The average
farm covers 150-200 hectare
[375-500 acres) and must have
one sixth of the area in pas-
ture land that can take sewage
at any time of the year. Other-
wise the leased farms take sew-
age only when they want it,
usually during the dry summer
months. The city operated
farms take sewage all year
and are happy to have the
warm sewage when frost or snow
covers the rest of the land.
The city is taking over the
leases of the tenant farmers
as their contracts expire so
that it can use the land more
efficiently for sewage treat-
ment. About UOO of the 1300
hectares operated by the city
is used to grow poplar and
other trees for the city
parks. Otherwise the princi-
pal crop is maise or indian
corn which is used as grainfor cattle. Hay is not cut
from the meadows and only
one farm is raising beef
cattle. The only vegetables
permitted are those that
will be cooked such as beans,
onions and celery root (ce-
leriac). Celery root how-
ever is also eaten raw in
France, usually grated as a
garnish on salads and meats.
One farm at Achëres ships
truckloads of hand peeled
celery roots to the Paris
Markets. Spraying of sewage
is not permitted in France
and no sewage may be applied
to the leaves of growing crops.
Vegetables from Archères
are carefully checked for Salmo-
nella by the Hygiene Laboratory
of the City of Paris. None have
been found and no disease has
been traced to the sewage farms.
However recommendations from the
Health Dept have stopped the rais-
ing of dairy cattle on the sewage
farms. In the event that a cholera
outbreak is officially announced
by the World Health Organization
all vegetables would be quaran-
tined for 10 days after the last
application of raw sewage. Cholera
vibrio have not been identified on
vegetables from farms during a chol-
era outbreak. Ascaris (round worm)
eggs have sometimes been found but
it is not known whether they came
from humans or dogs. Odors are
noticed from time to time but they
are not significant outside the
boundry of the farms.
All sludge separated from
sewage is digested. Some is dried
on open air beds and shipped to
vineyards. Some is given heat
treatment similar to Porteous treat-
ment . The heat treated sludge is
filter pressed to 50% solids and
shipped 50 km (30 miles) to a farm-
ers association that is buying the
sludge on a 5 year contract. Some
vacuum filtered sludge is dumped
in a landfill. The rest is added
to the raw sewage going to the
land.
Although France has regula-
tions regarding the quality of
sludge used in agriculture no ci-
ty seems able to meet them and
they all get specific variance.
The maximum solids loading is
255currently set at 25 tons/ha over
a 5 year period. Sludge in the
sewage shown in table 1 would be
at least 130 tons per ha for
each meter of sewage applied.
The Ministry of Culture and the
Environment have recently start-
ed a research program on "Soil
and Solid Refuse". The first
symposium, which was held in
March 1977 at Orleans, dealt
with the early stages of
research into the properties of
sludges and their behavior on
the land (Colin 1978). The early
studies failed to find Salmonel-
la on sludges used at Archères
although this negative finding
does not mean that the bacteria
were absent. It is known that
it is very difficult to culture
Salmonella in the presence of
activated sludge.
The entire operation at
Archëres follows the general
requirements given by Abel
Wolman at the 50th Annual WPCF
Conference last year with some
minor exceptions. It is care-
fully managed on an appropriate
site, potential hygienic risks
are detected and controlled
and the process is cost effec-
tive. There is a prohibition
against crops eaten raw, but
there is one notable exception
in the case of celery root.
Monitoring of ground water has
shown only nitrates in excess
of drinking water standards
and all ground water flows to
a large polluted river. The
operation does not however
stop during rain or freezing
weather and there is no provi-
sion for storage. Furthermore
solids are not removed from
the raw sewage so that in ef-
fect raw sludge is being ap-
plied to the land along with
additional digested sludge.
Metal hazards to human health
are indirectly controlled by
the prohibition on leaf vege-
tables which might be eaten
raw. The major crop consists
of grains which take up much
less metal than leaf vegetables.
The grain is furthermore fed
primarily to short lived meat
animals where the risk from
cadmium accumulation in thekidney is minimal. There is
little doubt that sewage treat-
ment on the land is success-
ful in Paris. One million
people more or less (15% of
6.h million) have been using
the land for fifty years and,
as has been said before, "50
million Frenchmen can't be
wSong",
Acknowledgement s
The author wishes to thank City
Engineers G. Foy in Paris and Alain
Lefaux at Achères, Dr. Louis Coin of
the Supreme Health Council of France
and J. Bechaux of Degremont for their
cooperation which made this paper pos-
sible. The author is President of
LunDean Environmental Co., Cincinnati
and Copenhagen.
References
1. Bauer, W. (1973) comments in "Re-
cycling Municipal Sludges and Ef-
fluents on the Land", page 60,
Champaign Illinois 1973.
2. Colin, F., Philip, P. and Pommel, B.
1978. "Utilization of Sewage Sludge
on Land in France". Paper Number 17
in the Conference "Utilization of
SeWage Sludge on Land", Oxford,
Water Research Centre, Medmenham,
England 1978.
3. Hugo, V. (1862). "Les Misérables"
quoted by Fair, G.M. and Geyer,
J.C. "Water Supply and Waste Dis-
posal" p. 21 John Wiley & Sons,
New York 1965.
k. Rhode, G. (1962) Jour, and Proc.
Inst. of Sewage Purification §_
581-5.
5. Salotto, B.V., Grossman, E.,
anlFarrell, J.B. in "Pretreat-
ment and Ultimate Disposal of
Wastewater Solids." Ratgers
Univ. New Brunswick N.J. 19fU
EPA 902/9-7^-002. NTIS PB
239 868.
6. Wolman, A. 1977. "Public Health
Aspects of Land Utilization of
Wastewater Effluents and
Sludges." Jour. W.P.C.F. ^9_
2211-18.
256EVALUATION OF EXISTING SYSTEMS
LAND TREATMENT SYSTEM IN POLAND
Dr. J. Cebula
Prof. J. KuteraInstitute of Meteorology and Water Management, Wroclaw
Institute of Melioration and Grasslands, Wroclaw
ABSTRACT
Agricultural utilization of sewage
has a long tradition in many European
countries, extending over several dozens
of years. Also in Poland there are
several effectively operating systems
using municipal sewage in agriculture.
It is required that the already operating
sewage land treatment plants and those
which are now under construction provide
full biological treatment of sewage
through its most economical utilization
in production of crops. It is also
required that sewage is utilized under
proper sanitary and hygienic conditions
and with protection of environment.
This article presents results of
observations and experiments concerning
the operation of Wroclaw Sewage Farm,
which was operated continuously for 90
years. The positive effects of land
treatment of sewage, observed at this
farm, are characteristic for many such
systems operating in Poland.
INTRODUCTION
The present situation in agricul-
ture, which suffers from a deficit of
fertilizers and the increased activity
for conservation of aquatic environment'
are bringing about a world-wide interest
in agricultural use of sewage, particu-
larly of municipal sewage, because of
its large fertilizing potential (U).
The fertilizing value of sewage is
beyond question. Apart from its irri-
gating value, sewage contains dissolvedorganic compounds, suspensions and
biogenic substances of particular value
in agriculture. The fertilizing value
of sewage is not limited to those nu-
trient macrocomponents. Sewage, in
addition to organic matter and macro-
components, contains also a full blend
of microelements as well as several
microorganisms and enzymes.
The second essential argument,
fully justifying the purposefulness of
sewage use for cropland irrigation, is
provided by the volume of sewage. For
example, in Poland during dry years
sewage represents over one half of all
surface water flow all over the country.
During such dry seasons sewage consti-
tutes the most reliable source of irriga-
tion water, particularly because there
is also a scarcity of vater reservoirs.
Sewage is available the year round,
regardless of hydrological conditions
and weather (3,1*).
Irrigation of croplands with sewage
is economically important because unlike
irrigation with pure water, it decreases
the demand for mineral fertilizers such
as NPK.
The above considerations indicate
that one of the main purposes of instal-
lation of irrigated fields is maximum
utilization of sewage in production of
crops. Many data, collected by experi-
ments conducted over many years, dem-
onstrate that sewage is utilized most
economically by grasslands and fodder
root crops. For example, the long-term
experimental cycles at the Institute of
Melioration and Grasslands demonstrated
the indisputable advantages of fodder
257plants. Sewage utilization by cereal
plants is much less efficient.
The yields, usefulness and quality
of crops grown on irrigated fields de-
pend on local soil and water conditions,
technology and technique of irrigation,
methods of agricultural utilization as
well as on the type and quality of
sewage. All these factors are closely
interconnected.
In addition to positive effects,
the land systems of sewage treatment or
utilization have also some negative
aspects. Municipal sewage contains
large quantities of chemical substances
and various microorganisms, even patho-
genic ones, being potentially hazardous
to the health of animals and, indir-
ectly, also to human health. Both these
groups of components may produce a
durable or temporary contamination of
plants, ground waters or even air when
sewage is incorrectly managed.
As a result of the awareness of
these hazards, there were organized, in
several scientific institutions in
Wroclaw "broad, multi-sided studies.
Because of the nature of the problem the
studies were collective and involved
such areas as medicine, veterinary medi-
cine, hygiene, sanitary engineering,
water management and agriculture. The
results of these demonstrated that it is
possible to use sewage effectively in
plant production and, at the same time,
to achieve safe and effective treatment
of sewage by its purification in irri-
gated soils (k). Attention was brought
to the fact that there exists an effec-
tive possibility of elimination of bio-
genic sewage components through their
assimilation by irrigated plants.
This article presents some results
of observations and experiments carried
out at Wroclaw Sewage Farm. This farm
is among the largest in Poland, where
the requirements of agriculture were
successfully combined with correct
technology of municipal sewage treat-
ment.
GENERAL CHARACTERISTIC OP WROCLAW IRRI-
GATION FARM
Wroclaw in its central part has a
combined sewage system while in other
parts there is a separate system.
Municipal sewage is treated mainly at
the irrigation farm which accepts about
93$ (about 1T0,000m3/day in 1975) oftotal sewage. Irrigated fields were de-
signed and built about 1890. The fields
were extended as the city grew larger
and now their area is about 1500 ha
(.Fig. 1). Extension of fields was
accompanied by their modernization, con-
cerning preliminary treatment. There
also was built a new system of pipelines
bringing sewage to the farm. In 1973
there was put into operation the experi-
mental farm in Szewce, serving to dimin-
ish the load of irrigated fields (Fig. l),
The irrigated soils consist of light
and compact medium.
Subsoil consists of small-grain
sands, sands with gravel or gravel with
pebbles. Impenetrable layer is at the
depth of 10 - 20 meters. Filtration
coefficient of aquiferous layer is
h x 10~V/s, as determined by experi-
mental pumping. On this area there are
irrigated mainly the grasslands (l08l
ha), 1+5 ha of filtration fields serve
the purpose of around the year treat-
ment of sewage. The fields are divided
into plots irrigated using the basin
slope systems. The area of individual
plots is 0.35-^.0 ha. Other technical
data are shown in Table 1.
Sewage to be used for irrigation is
treated mechanically in 12 two-chamber
settling tanks (capacity of each cham-
ber - 10,000 - 18,000 m3). The tanks
are situated at irrigation farm, along
the main pipeline bringing sewage.
Average period of chamber filling with
sludge is k to 5 years. Sludge drying,
performed during summer, takes h-5
months. During such long time there
occurs almost complete mineralization of
preliminary sludge. Dewatered and dried
sludge is removed from chambers and sold.
Empty chambers are prepared for the next
cycle.
PHYSICO-CHEMICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF
MUNICIPAL SEWAGE
Crude municipal sewage applied to
irrigated fields is characterized by
increased contents of most contaminants
(Table 2). This sewage is more concen-
trated than typical municipal sewage.
In principle, its composition is charac-
teristic for sewage from large urban
areas. Statistical analysis of the con-
tent of some sewage components indicates
large variability of organic contamin-
ants, represented mainly by chemical
oxygen demand and dry residue.
258vnS SZEWCE^G i
Pumping station
Equalization tank
^Osobowiçs^z
irrigation fields
sewage
from Whxtaw
Total Area= 10^8 ha
Total Row=ca170300myd
LEGEND
==== - delivery pipe
—:— — sewage ditch
drainage ditch
border of Samp ftrm (±D-drying of green fodder
A,B,C... points of drainage and ground waters samplingGH- settling tanks
embankment
Figure 1 Wroclaw sewage farmTable 1
Principal technical and economical data of Szewce and Osobowice farms
Farm
No.
1.
2.
3.
k.
5.
6.Specification
Irrigation system
Area in hectares
Average load*
Annual operation costs
Unit costs of treatment
(zl/m3) of sewage
Employment (persons/lOOha)
- irrigation
- conservationOsobowice
basin slope and basin
101+8
57.20
U300
0.08
1.0
1.1Szewce
semi-permanent sprink-
ling installation
1+1+5
990
6000
0.61
2.2
1.3
*including filtration and dumping fields
In the analysis of sewage attention
was also paid to the presence of trace
elements. However, their contents
(Table 2) are not excessively high,
except for zinc. The concentration of
this element is above values permissible
for sewage used in agriculture. Crude
sewage from Wroclaw does not represent
yet a serious source of heavy metals but,
at the same time, it is not possible to
dump this sewage to receiving waters
without treatment.
Analysis of the effluent from
settling tanks, i.e. of sewage directly
applied to fields, indicates a degree
of treatment which is higher than in
classical mechanical treatment (Table 2).
EFFECTS OF SEWAGE TREATMENT
The effects of sewage treatment on
irrigation fields were assessed by
analysis of drainage waters coming
from underground systems and by analysis
of ground waters present under the
drainage system. Essential analytical
results are shown in Table 3. These
results demonstrate that the levels
of many contaminants are very effective-
ly reduced.
Observation of ground water compo-
sition, conducted for two years at the
irrigated fields by means of an array
of piezometers and drilled wells,
served to evaluate the effect of irri-gation with sewage on ground waters,
conclusions are as follows :The
1.Ground waters in areas irrigated
with municipal sewage can be con-
sidered as an important source of
water for many uses.
2. Ground waters, being contin-
uously re-supplied by irrigation,
can be more reliable as water source
for many users than surface waters.
3. At suitable geological condi-
tions (large thickness of aquiferous
layer), the ground waters at irri-
gated fields can be regarded as an
underground reservoir serving to
assure a constant supply of water
during different periods. Such
conditions prevail at the Osobowice
farm, presented in this article.
k. Chemical and bacteriological
analysis of ground waters from
piezometers situated on irrigated
fields demonstrated quite good
sanitary indices, often better
than those for water from farm
wells, situated beyond the limits
of irrigated fields.
5. Still better, from the sanitary
point of view, are waters taken
from deeper layers by means of deep
wells. Test pumping demonstrated
260Table 2. Contamination indices of municipal sewage used for irrigation
No
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8,
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.Index
pH
Acidity
Alkalinity
BOD
Permanganate value
Chemical oxygen
demand
Chlorides
Conductivity
Total solids
Total dissolved
solids
Total suspensions
Sulphates
Total nitrogen
Organic nitrogen
Total phosphorus
Sodium
Potassium
Calcium
Arsenic
Mercury
Boron
Silver
Copper
Nickel
Zinc
Lead
Cadmium
ManganeseUnits
pH
mva1/1
mval/1
mg Og/1
mg Og/l
rag Og/1
mg Cl/1
us
rag/1
mg/1
mg/1
mg S04/l
mg Nog/1
mg Norg/1
mg P/l
mg Na/1
mg K/l
mg Ca/1
mg As/1
mg Hg/1
mg B/l
mg Ag/1
mg Cu/1
mg Ni/1
mg Zn/1
mg Pb/1
mg Cd/1
mg Ma/1Crude sewage
6,5 - 7,7
0T0 - 1,0
3,4 - 10
160 - 320
180 - 240
967 - 1237
142 - 200
1560 - 2000
1061 - 1721
489 - 870
372 - 851
147 - 192
45,3- 50,9
15,8 - 19,1
8,1 - 193
83 - 115
25 - 43,5
35 - 185
0,001 - 0,076
0,$. - 2,0
0,13 - 0,24
0,001 - 0,005
0,11 - 0,57
0,06 - 0,15
1,0? - 2,80
0,02 - 0,1
0,012 - 0,100
0,10 - 0,35Mechanically
treated sewage
7,3 - 7»5
0,4 - 0,6
3,3 - 3,4
110 - 116
57 - 74
191 « 294
156 - 168
1650 - 1890
914 - 1001
726 - 785
186 - 228
172 - 215
41,9 - 45,3
13,9 - 14,0
12 - 15,1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
—
-
-
261Table 3. Physico-chemical composition of drainage ana ground
waters from irrigated fields.
Ho
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.Index
PH
Conductivity
Chemical oxy-
gen demand
BOD-
COD,.
Ammonia
Organic nitrogen
Total nitrogen
Sulphates
Sodium
Potassium
Calcium
Arsenic
Mercury
Boron
Silver
Copper
Nickel
Zinc
Lead
Cadmium
ManganeseUnits
PH
us
mgOg/l
mgOg/l
mgO^/l
mgNH^/1
HgNorg/1
mgNog/1
mgSO^/1
mgNa/1
mg K/l
mgCa/1
mgAé/1
mgHg/1
mgB/1
mgAg/1
mgCu/1
mgWi/1
mgZn/1
mgPb/1
mgCa/1
mgMn/1Drainage
water . „
A,B
6,9 -7,1
765 - 915
13.8 - 16.0
12,4 - 14.8
16,5 - 4-0.6
6.5 - 8.2
1.8 - 2.6
9.1 - 10.0
160 - 254
131
32 - 36
210 - 235
0,04
0.2 - 0.2
0.240
0.002 -0.003
0.040 -0.060
0.075 -0.120
0.68 - 1.46
0.034 -0.052
0.002-0.011
0.090-0.64Ground
water
from
field E
7,0
900
2,4
2.2
40.6
2.8
28.0
30.8
342
144
18.0
225
0,05
0.7
0.185
0.006
0.210
0.060
1.27
0.024
0.005
0.086Ground
water
from
field F
7,2
1215
4.3
1.0
10.2
2.8
2.8
5.6
272
90
38
130
0,009
0.8
0.11
0.002
0.03
0.095
1.18
0.043
O.OOJ
0.430Drainage
ditches
6,0 - 7,2
1025 - 1380
3.9 - 16.0
1.6 - 17.6
9.9 - 6O.9
2.8 - 9.1
1.4 - 7.0
7.8 - 10.5
125 - 238
68 - 138
7.0 - 265
200 - 285
0,019- 0,032
0.2 -, 0.9
0.137 vO.183
0,003 -0.004
0,020 -0.110
0.061 -0,120
0,20 - 2.83
0.023 -0,043
0.003 -0.012
0.170 -0,750
that water quality from such wells
is within standards for drinking
water.
Analysis of soils from irrigated
fields gave results shown in Fig. 2.
The overall picture resulting from these
analyses is not too negative. Higher
concentrations of trace elements are ofcourse found in upper soil layer, in
comparison with deeper layers, thus
demonstrating the sorptive action of
soil, but concentration values are al-
most the same as those given in the re-
port by Page (2) for soils which are not
irrigated with sewage.
262Trace elements
AgCuCoNi Mn Zn PbCdAsCr fe
55 3057 1425 125
56 26531475 114
53 24 571437*08
4417451169 37
3724451049 38
3812 26 496 3291 1 12 45 1,5
S3 1 17 44 *£
76 1 17 41 1,6
371 9 3213
231 15 15 1$
19 1 B 12 X2
0 39720432 12 13 0*0 9 03
0 29 7 20 467 9 13 0 12 6 0,4-
•0 36 8 22 475 10 12 0 19 6 04.Trace elements
AgCuCoNi Mn Zn PbCdAsCrfe
2 €4 22 73 1867 17 104 7 17 5816
2 71 21 65 1576 11 95324 7213 '
2 71 21 631724 41 92 2 20 7715"
056 113373160-124 3006
0 106 10 22 392 26 22 1 24 18 04
1 534 9 29 484 27 56 1 27 13 05
0 39 7 27 418 20 10 0 35 19Q5
0 51 8 29 531 16 12 0 3014 05
0 28 13 42 894 22 15 1 24 37Q9
* ground water levelTrace elements
Ag Cu Co Ni Mn Zn Pi Cd As Cr Fe
0 43 12 42 1297 6E 74 1 15 50 14
1 51 13 521403 70 83 1 45 5015
0 48 13 541518 72 73 * 20 4615
03510421*76 23 19 1 26-1C
13994095717 905 25 -07
0 27 7 40*0*6 17 7 05 8 -08
0 34 8 44 1273 21 9 05 6 -08
026846 1156 259 05 5-08
' ground water level
0 23*0 34 937 14 11 1 17 21 06
0 702060 50 30 4010- -120 ! combined sample from holes no 1.2.3'Trace elements . ug
As Hg Zn Cd * Cu Ni pb
36:289 03 43 12 10 7
2 33 3422 563 20371 33
32 02 "5 2 K" 208 70 58
39 025S 2 1250 165 72 57
14 .:2 9* 2 175 39 70 45
12 06 *52 2 440 45 66 73
•" Q3 ^ 2 331 78 72 43Co Ag
5 -
5 3
3ia2 5C2 275 3475345 3
1i Q25106 2 275 37 55 51 2 2
2 44* 133 35 41 42 3 2
25 83 2 Sffi. 171 76 42 2 2
2 32 35 * *00 30 4611 3 2
ground water level
roTrace elements s >jg/g
As hg Zn Cd- Mn Cu Ni Pb Ce Ag
35 G.7'86 : 33 17 13 7 5 -
C 03115 * 500C* 3446 4 2
3 0391 1 9S3K248 5:? 1
32 02594 1 1015 96 72 47 3 i
132 02 93176952334732
6 03111 1 1297 79 6537 4 2
5 02597 2 1000 86 67r. 5 2
17 02 89 2 '156 46 6u 44 6 2
02291 767915527 3 2
03130 2 1015 £•: 09 44 4 4
03 18 1 347*31 38 26 4 2
0,4 90 2 100094 33 48 3 2
ground water Sevelplants
33
- r'*fr - 15 C25 22 1 TOO 65 4516 5 2
-£f';- « 03 17 • 1000 60 40* 5 2 j$$r 12 02*37 2 1078 77 67 65 -rrace elements ; jug/g ^
As Me Zn Cd Mn Co N; Pb Co Ag no7
230286 03i3 12 1C74- slants 5
— 40 5i3 5 !— — ' "Trace elements
IS -33 m 1
80 03 W *%
17 04 27 1 1034170 4617 3 ..
T2 02 73 1 863»4i.2962
1" S, 123 * 3C5 3b 40 29 - 3
29 0.T 05 765 37 35 12 3 2 -p •-; • 3 02 19
3 0236 i 576 50 33 23-2
ground water levelTrace elements îAigy*3
ZnCdMnCuNiPbCoAc
25 235 2 -434 57 60 43
'2 257 2 396 56 37100
25 257 2 612 78 43 97
06527*2 585^2 73135
0.2 45363 428105385
05 140 * 633 3T247 100
02 29 * 711 40 42 18
02 S 1 503 39 42 «
13 78 ' 1156 60 41 21
, 27 02 26 1 906 50 45 14 - 2
LEGEND;ground water level1 503 4836 19 -24 510 147 52 JÛC - 7
2 415 82 37 22 - 3
921 4C 49 20 - 32 Q4 37 1 539 34 32*6 -*
• 4 0544* 5853840*2-2
•40 03 1051 758 50 51 30-2
ground water level
3-clay
J-heavy
clay
Figure 2a-ckiyey
sondv sandi f- médium sane
Occurrence of selected trace
elements in the soil.AGRICULTURAL EFFECTS OF SEWAGE UTILIZA-
TION
Dense drainage, large soil perme-
ability and temperature of sewage have
the effect that vegetation on grass and
pasture land starts sooner than on non-
irrigated fields or fields irrigated
with pure water. Cattle can start
grazing towards the end of April and
continue to the end of November. Har-
vesting of grasses begins in the first
ten days of May (in exceptional years
even 20-30 April) and ends 20-30 Novem-
ber. Due to large irrigating doses and
frequent harvesting only few species of
grasses grow on these fields, mainly
spear-grass, orchard grass, canary grass
and meadow grass. Spontaneous mono-
cultures of these grasses were formed
on some areas. There are encountered
also small numbers of tussock-grass,
fescue and herbs, improving the taste
of grasses. In 1973-1975 the average
yield of green grass was HOO q/ha and
even 700 q/ha from some plots. Grasses
are harvested with 9 efficient self-
propelled mowing machines using one-
phase or two-phase harvesting. Grasses
are transported to thermal drying plants.
Three such plants (SB 1500 type, Dutch
license) are working for the sewage
farm and are situated in Osobowice and
Szewce. Combined output of these drying
plants approaches U500 kg/hour of hay
meal. One-phase harvest of grasses
ensures continuous harvesting also in
rainy weather while, during good weather,
the two-phase system permits partial
drying on field. This saves energy
but "brings about losses of protein.
Thermal drying plants are a necessity
in agricultural utilization of sewage
because traditional drying is not applic-
able due to high protein content in
grasses and necessity of harvesting
regardless of weather.
Average hay meal contains : protein
20$, fiber 22%, silica 3%, moisture 10$,
as calculated for dry weight. These
values correspond to the Extra type of
hay meal, the majority of which is ex-
ported. Some laboratory analyses indi-
cate exceptionally high protein content,
approaching 28$. The quality of hay meal
is determined mainly by protein and fiber
content, depending on the time of harvest,
and by the content of silica, resulting
from contamination with sand. Silica
content decreased when mowing machines
were equipped with hydraulic adjusting
of the height of mowing.CONCLUSIONS
1. Agricultural utilization repre-
sents one of the most effective methods
of sewage treatment.
2. Properly designed and operated
systems of agricultural sewage utiliza-
tion do not pose any hazards to natural
environment.
3. Agricultural systems of sewage
treatment have a very advantageous
effect on hydrogeological conditions on
irrigated fields.
h. Using of sewage for irrigation
provides an opportunity of increasing
the yields of cultivated plants, partic-
ularly of fodder plants which, after
suitable treatment, are valuable as
high-protein feed.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Bodko et al.: Qualitative and
quantitative changes of ground
waters in areas irrigated with
sewage. Unpublished study, Agri-
cultural Academy in Wroclaw, 1975.
2. Cebula J.: Utilization of sewage
sludges from combined treatment
plant jointly with solid wastes.
Final report EPA-PR-5-532-8.
Wroclaw, 1977.
3- Cebula J.: Review and assessment
of literature concerning agricul-
tural utilization of sewage. Report
No. 1. EPA-JB-5-532-2lj.
h. Kutera J.: Utilization of sewage
in agriculture. PWRIL, Warszawa,
1978.
26HEVALUATION OF EXISTING SYSTEMS
LAND TREATMENT OF MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER ON STEEP FOREST SLOPES
IN THE HUMID SOUTHEASTERN UNITED STATES
Wade L. Nutter
Richard C. Schultz
Graham H. BristerSchool of Forest Resources, University
of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
There is little information availa-
ble for many climatic and physiographic
regions to aid in the design and inter-
pretation of land treatment systems. One
such region is the upland, humid region
of the southeastern United States. The
region is characterized by moderate to
high rainfall, deeply weathered soils,
moderate to steep slopes and forest vege-
tation. A research program was initiated
in 1973 to develop the design information
base for land treatment systems. The re-
gion prototype research project was
established on a 30 percent forest slope
receiving a weekly municipal wastewater
loading of 76 mm, for a combined annual
loading of wastewater and precipitation
of 5600 mm. Renovation of the applied
wastewater constituents has been high.
Site hydrology plays an important role in
the nitrogen renovation through enhanced
denitrification. Soil and vegetation re-
sponses to the applied wastewater indi-
cate a general increase in soil and vege-
tation nutrient storage and forest tree
growth. The results of the prototype
study were applied in the design of a
municipal wastewater land treatment sys-
tem with a daily flow of 7.4 x 104 m3.
The final design requires a weekly waste-
water loading of 63 mm on 957 ha of a
1475 ha contiguous forested site. The
domestic water supply intake for the
municipality is 11 km downstream from
the land treatment site and the return
flow will augment the water supply.INTRODUCTION
The land treatment of municipal
wastewaters has been practiced world-
wide for many years, yet little informa-
tion is available for many specific
climatic and physiographic regions to aid
in the design and operation of land
treatment systems. Specific knowledge
of the hydrologie and chemical inter-
actions between soil, geology and vege-
tation is necessary to properly design
land treatment systems and predict with
some degree of certainty the long term
impacts of the system operation. One
such region where this type of response
information is needed is the upland
southeastern United States.
The upland portions of the south-
eastern United States include the Pied-
mont Plateau and the southern Appala-
chian Mountain physiographic provinces.
The climate of the region Is classified
as humid, temperate with mean annual
precipitation ranging from 1200 mm to
over 2000 mm and mean annual temperature
ranging from 12 C to 17 C, Soils are
generally developed from residual parent
material and have deep, well-developed
profiles. The soils are acid with low to
moderate cation exchange capacities and
have textures ranging from sandy loam to
clay. The major rock formations from
which the residuum and soils developed
are granite, hornblende, and biotite
gneiss, schist and quartzite. The re-
siduum, or saprolite, often ranges in
depth from 1 m to 20 m depending on the
rock formation. Slopes range from gen-
tle to steep and the drainage pattern is
usually deeply incised and dendritic.
265Forests occupy 70 percent of the region,
however, the slopes greater than 12 per-
cent are nearly 100 percent forested.
Principal forest species are oak
(Quercus spp.), hickory (Carya spp.),
loblolly pine (Pinus taeda L.) and
shortleaf pine (Pinus echinata, Mill.).
Although agricultural sites within
the region are suitable for land treat-
ment, forest sites have gained favor for
several reasons. They are: forest land
is generally readily available at a more
favorable cost, forest land is more
easily managed than agricultural land
under the constraints of high precipita-
tion and wastewater loading and forests
are removed from the human food chain.
If forests are to be used extensively
for land treatment in the region, the
moderate.to steep slopes will have to be
utilized as part of the land treatment
system. Sepp (1973) reports general
success in the use of forested mountain
slopes for land treatment in California.
The infiltration capacities of the forest
floor and underlying mineral soil are
generally high and the applied waste-
water moves through the soil as rapid
subsurface flow down the slopes receiv-
ing a high degree of renovation.
Nutter (1973 and 1975) and Hewlett (1961)
have shown that soil water movement is
laterally down the slope which improves
opportunities for renovation of the
wastewater by increasing the pathlength
of flow through the more reactive soil
and root zones. Nitrogen renovation by
denitrification, in particular, could
possibly be enhanced by the periodic
anerobic conditions developed at the
base of the slopes.
Reported in this paper are the re-
sults of a four year continuing study on
the renovation of wastewater applied to
steep forest slopes and the extrapola-
tion of the results to the design of a
0.9 m3/s (7.8 x 104 m3/day) land treat-
ment system on 1475 ha of forest land
near a large metropolitan area.
THE RESEARCH STUDY
In 1973 a land treatment facility
utilizing steep forested slopes was de-
signed for the Unicoi State Park and
Conference Center in the Blue Ridge
mountains near Helen, Georgia. The park
operates throughout the year and pro-
duces a wastewater similar to that ex-
pected from a small, non-industrial
community. The 1.5 ha site selected for
application of wastewater is located inan area typical of much of the land be-
low the 800 in elevation in the Blue Ridge
mountains and ranges in elevation from
490 m to 520 m with slopes of 15 to 30
percent and lengths of 90 m to 110 m.
The predominant soil is a Hayesville
sandy loam, a member of the clayey,
oxidic, mesic family of Typic Hapludults.
The texture grades from a sandy loam at
the surface to clay in the B2 horizon
(25-70 cm), to clay loam in the B3 hori-
zon (70-120 cm) and loam in the C horizon
(120-155 cm). The saprolite extends in
many places to a depth of 8 m or more.
The soil pH averages 5.4 and cation ex-
change capacities range from 5 to 14
meq/100 g (Gibbs and Perkins, 1966).
Vegetation on the site consists of a
mixed hardwood-pine forest with predomi-
nant overstory species of oak (Quercus
spp.), white pine (Pinus strobus L.), and
Virginia pine (Pinus virginiana Mill.).
The lower slopes contain a dense under-
story of mountain laurel (Kalmia
latifolia L.) while the upper slopes con-
tain a mixed herbaceous-woody plant
understory with blueberry (Vaccinium
spp.) and huckleberry (Gaylussacia spp.)
the predominant species. The stand is
uneven-aged with an average age of
approximately 45 years.
The climate is characterized by
warm summers, cool winters, and the high
rainfall, averaging 1800 mm per year, is
somewhat uniformly distributed through-
out the year with a maximum in spring
and a minimum in early fall. Only a few
days of above 32 C or below 0 C tempera-
tures are recorded each year and the
mean annual temperature is 15 C.
Wastewater is applied to a depth of
76 mm one day each week at a rate of 8
mm per hour. The irrigation system con-
sists of above-ground portable aluminum
pipe with impact-type sprinklers on 1.5
m risers at 12 by 18 m spacing. The
operating pressure is 3.2 kg/cm2.
Wastewater Treatment
The wastewater, averaging 1.03 x
10~3 m^/s, is collected and delivered
to a 0.4 ha oxidation lagoon of which
0.1 ha receives mechanical aeration.
The wastewater is chlorinated as it is
pumped from the lagoon. The range and
mean quality of the wastewater applied
to the land treatment site during the 42
month period January 1974 through June
1977 is presented in Table 1. Also
shown In Table 1 is the amount of each
constituent applied annually in kg/ha.
266Table 1. Quality of the Wastewater Applied to the Land Treatment Site
during the Period January 1974 through June 1977.
Constituent
Total Kjeldahl N
Ammonia - N
Nitrate - N
Total phosphorus
Calcium
Magnesium
Sodium
Potassium
Chloride
Total organic carbon
as carbon
Biological oxygen
demand - 5 day
pHMinimum
4.8
2.3
0.02
1.6
0.11
0.44
22.0
0.49
16.5
42
22
5.0Concentration
Maximum
mg/1
37.1
14.6
5.8
22 .-1
30.8
3.9
52.1
33.7
54.1
405
78
6.6Mean
18.0
7.1
0.49
12.1
9.5
1.4
34.8
10.5
29.0
220
60
5.7Amount .
Applied^'
kg/ha/yr
684
270
19
460
361
53
1323
399
1103
8366
2282
—Fifty irrigation periods per year with 76 mm wastewater per period.
Quality of the Renovated Wastewater
The portion of the study area se-
lected for monitoring is uniform and
wastewater is irrigated on an area be-
ginning at the ridge and extending 67 m
down a 30 percent slope. The base of
the slope is approximately 95 m from the
ridge. Soil water percolate is sampled
on the irrigated site and an adjacent
non-irrigated site and at the base of
the irrigated slope where the lateral
subsurface drainage collects. Vacuum
porous cup samplers are installed at four
depths and four locations in both the
irrigated and non-irrigated areas and at
three depths and three locations along
the base of the irrigated slope. A
nearby first-order stream is also moni-
tored to provide regional background
water quality. The mean quality of the
soil percolate at each sample depth and
the nearby stream for the period January
1974 through June 1977 is presented in
Table 2.
In general, the results presented in
Table 2 indicate that with the exception
of Na, Cl and NO3-N, the concentrations
within the soil percolate at the base of
the slope are little different from the
concentrations found in the soil perco-
late in the non-irrigated area or the
regional natural water quality as evi-
denced by the stream. The reduction or
renovation of phosphorus in the water
collected from the surface 275 cm of the
Irrigated site averages 97 percent.Comparison with the non-irrigated site
indicates little difference in concen-
tration, although the total amount
leached from the irrigated area would be
greater due to greater volumes of water
moving through the soil. The renovation
of calcium, potassium and magnesium
within the irrigated area is also high
and renovation is improved as the waste-
water percolates to the base of the
slope. Although chloride is subject to
some anlonic adsorption, the low re-
duction in concentration as the waste-
water moves from the irrigated area to
the base of the slope does serve to
illustrate that the applied wastewater is
moving laterally down the slope. So-
dium, on the other hand, is subject to
cationic adsorption but being weakly
bonded is replaced by other more
strongly adsorbed cations allowing a
high proportion of the sodium to be
flushed to the base of the slope.
As evidenced by the results pre-
sented in Table 2 there is little change
in the soil percolate quality with depth
in the irrigated area and at the base of
the slope or in the non-irrigated area.
Nitrate-nitrogen is a critical ele-
ment in the design and evaluation of
land treatment systems because it is not
only a preferred plant nutrient but is
highly mobile in the soil percolate and
concentrations greater than 10 mg/1 in
drinking water can be hazardous to human
health. The nitrogen cycle for a land
treatment site is complex and the degree
267Table 2. Mean Quality of the Soil Percolate for the Period January 1974
Through June 1977 for the Irrigated, Non-Irrigated and Base of
Slope Areas and a Nearby Stream.
Site and Depth
Irrigated
30
60
120
275
Base of Slope
60
120
200
Non-Irrigated
30
60
120
275
StreamP
0.45
0.27
0.26
0.49
0.25
0.20
0.24
0.22
0.22
0.27
0.23
0.29Ca
0.47
0.37
0.20
0.63
0.12
0.10
0.12
0.40
0.22
0.19
0.10
0.64Mg
0.65
0.76
0.47
0.69
0.57
0.47
0.48
0.50
0.65
0.34
0,32
0.22K
2.7
1.9
1.5
2.0
0.98
0.78
1.1
0.56
0.47
0.45
0.49
0.58Na
26.1
25.3
23.2
26.1
15.6
15.5
17.5
0.81
0.63
0.65
0.65
1.8Cl
25.1
24.4
23.7
26.2
16.5
19.0
19.3
1.9
1.5
1.6
1.4
1.1TKN
1.5
2.0
1.6
1.5
1.3
0.67
0.97
0.07
—
0.17
—
3.1NH4-N
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.07N03-N
7.7
8.1
7.2
8.7
3.2
3.5
4.5
0.006
0.008
0.005
0.008
0.03
of renovation is a function of the form
of nitrogen in the wastewater, net plant
storage, soil temperature, pH, moisture
regime and other factors (Broadbent, et
al,, 1977 and Iskander, et al., 1976).
The organic and ammonia forms of nitrogen
are readily retained in the soil through-
out the year and transformation to the
easily leached nitrate form occurs pri-
marily during the summer months. Net
tree storage of nitrogen is low due to
the annual recycling of leaves. There-
fore, the primary manner in which nitro-
gen is lost or renovated in a forest
land treatment system must be nitrate in
the percolate or nitrogen gas diffusion
to the atmosphere following denitrifica-
tion.
Since the NO3-N concentration in the
wastewater is low (Table 1) nitrifica-
tion must take place before there can be
a substantial loss of nitrogen. As
shown in Table 2, a substantial portion
of the nitrogen leached from the site is
in the NO3-N form. There is a better
than 50 percent reduction in NO3-N con-
centration as water moves from the irri-
gated area through the area at the base
of the slope. These results and several
other observations help to clarify the
interactions and relationships between
nitrification and denitrification.
In July 1974 the oxidation lagoon
aerators were turned off resulting in an
increase in the total nitrogen loading
to a rate equivalent to over 900kg/ha/yr. The NO3-N concentration in
the irrigated area soil percolate in-
creased markedly to greater than 20 mg/1
and the concentration at the base of the
slope reached a peak of 10 mg/1, the
drinking water standard limit. When
lagoon aeration was resumed one year
later the nitrogen loading decreased and
there was an almost immediate drop in
nitrate levels in the soil percolate.
The levels in the soil percolate con-
tinued to decline as the levels of or-
ganic and ammonia nitrogen stored on the
site during the increased loading also
declined. Thus, the denitrification
capacity of the site under the given
moisture regime and availability of car-
bon was exceeded by an overload of ni-
trogen.
The temperature dependence of ni-
trification and denitrification is also
apparent from observations of NO3-N in
the soil percolate. As soil temperatures
increase in the spring NO3-N concentra-
tions also increase. Ammonification of
the organic matter applied to the site
during the winter increases at the same
time and the released ammonia plus that
applied in the wastewater and stored
during the winter is readily available
for nitrification. Within several weeks
a decrease in NO3-N concentrations is
noted which is likely due to active up-
take of nitrate and ammonia by plants,
and increased rates of denitrification.
A nitrogen budget based on an
268Table 3. Occurrence of Nitrifying and Denitrifying
Bacteria and the Evolution of Nitrogen Gas
(after Rowe, et al., 1976)
Bacteria
Site Nitrifiers DenitrifiersN2 Gas
Evolution
Irrigated
Base of Slope
Non-Irrigated280000
3100
4100Number/g dry soil
5600CT
5O3OOL
2400ym/m /day
12. 7a
7.2a
0.7
Mean significantly different from non-irrigated site
mean at a, 95 percent; b, 90 percent; and c, 50 percent.
assumed hydrologie budget for the irri-
gated and base of the slope areas indi-
cates that the difference between nitro-
gen input and output as measured in the
wastewater and soil percolate is approxi-
mately 470 kg/ha/yr. To determine if
denitrification may account for part of
the unaccounted nitrogen a study was
carried out from May through November
1975 to measure relative rates of N2 gas
evolution from the soil and the popula-
tions of nitrifying and denitrifying
bacteria (Rowe, et al., 1976). Numbers
of nitrifying bacteria on the irrigated
area (Table 3) are significantly higher
than in the non-irrigated or the base of
slope area. In contrast, the number of
denitrifiers on the irrigated and the
base of slope areas are significantly
higher than on the non-irrigated area.
More important than the presence of the
denitrifying bacteria is the significant
increase in N2 gas evolved from the
irrigated and the base of slope area as
compared to the non-irrigated area.
Recent studies by Hook and Kardos
(1978) and Barr, et al. (1978) point out
the importance of maintaining periodi-
cally saturated soil conditions as well
as maintaining a readily available
source of carbon if denitrification
rates are to be enhanced. Barr, et al.
(1978) report that carbon from plant
residues is not adequate, except for
short periods of time during the year,
to maintain rates of denitrification
above natural levels. They suggest that
available carbon in the wastewater it-
self be increased through a decreased
level of treatment.
As shown in Table 1, the total
organic carbon in the wastewater Is high
and could be expected to supplement the
plant residue carbon sources. Appar-
ently the degree of saturation andsource of carbon are sufficient at the
base of the slope to maintain denitrifi-
cation at a rate perhaps as high as 60
percent of that on the Irrigated site.
Groundwater levels at the base of the
irrigated slope range from 30 cm to
greater than 200 cm below the surface.
Saturation at the base of the slope in
the 60 to 120 cm depth occurs frequently
within 12 to 48 hours following irriga-
tion, lasting from 24 to 72 hours de-
pending on the season of the year and
precipitation. Although we cannot esti-
mate at this time how much of the un-
accounted nitrogen in the budget can be
attributed to denitrification, it Is
apparent that it is a major source of
nitrogen loss from the system.
Soil Nutrient Responses
Chemical changes in the land treat-
ment site soils have been monitored at
the end of each growing season for the
past four years. Four depths between
the surface and 120 cm are sampled at
six locations each year in both the
irrigated and non-irrigated areas. Ex-
tractable cations Mg, Na, Ca, and K are
determined following extraction with
0.025N H2SO4 and 0.05N HC1, while the
total P and total Kjeldahl nitrogen is
determined following digestion with a
solution of H2SO4 and H2SeO3. In
general, the irrigated area showed high-
er mean concentrations of P, K, Ca and
Na over the four year period at each
sampled depth while Mg concentrations in
the irrigated soil were higher In the
top 60 cm of soil but lower in the 60 to
120 cm depth. The total Kjeldahl nitro-
gen in the irrigated soil was only
slightly greater than in the non-
irrigated soil at all depths except the
15 to 30 cm depth where It was slightly
269240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
-20Ca
TKN
IYear
First
jSJ Second
p") Fourth
Na
Mg
Figure 1. Soil Nutrient Concentration Differences Between Irrigated and Non-
Irrigated Soils During the Four Years of Irrigation (Depths Pooled).
less.
The trends suggested by these four
year mean data can be seen more clearly
by comparing the concentration differ-
ences between the irrigated and non-
irrigated soils for each year as pre-
sented in Figure 1. Differences between
the P, K, Ca and Mg concentrations of the
irrigated and non-irrigated soils have
increased steadily over the four years of
treatment. The differences have been
greatest for Ca which is generally con-
sidered to be held more tightly by the
soil colloid than Mg, K or Na. The
greatest differences in calcium concen-
tration have occurred at the shallow
depths with differences decreasing with
increasing depth. Less K has been
adsorbed by the soil as evidenced by the
smaller differences between the irri-
gated and non-Irrigated soils and the
greater proportion of K leached from the
site (Table 2). The differences in K
concentration between the irrigated andnon-irrigated soils were greatest at the
shallow depths during the first two
years of irrigation. However, by the
fourth year there were no obvious
differences between the depths of the
irrigated soils. Only small quantities
of Mg have been added in the wastewater.
However, differences in Mg concentration
between the irrigated and non-irrigated
soils have also been increasing steadily
since irrigation began. The greatest
differences in the irrigated soils have
taken place in the upper 30 cm of the
profile. Sodium concentrations have
been consistently higher in the irri-
gated soil since it is the least tightly
held of the cations and therefore the
most mobile. This is strongly suggested
by the fact that differences in depth in
the irrigated soil over the treatment
period have remained almost constant
since the first year of irrigation.
Phosphorus has responded as ex-
pected since the soils have a high
270phosphorus fixation capacity. The added
phosphorus is quickly immobilized and
the greatest concentration is found in
the surface layers of the soil. The
differences in P concentration between
the irrigated and non-irrigated soils
have been increasing at nearly a linear
rate since irrigation began.
Total nitrogen in the soils has
shown an interesting response. Over the
four year irrigation period the differ-
ences in concentration between the irri-
gated and non-irrigated soils have gone
from a gain to an increasing loss. This
would suggest that the irrigated soil is
losing nitrogen in spite of large addi-
tions from the wastewater. The losses
are occurring in the upper 15 cm of soil
while gains are occurring below 15 cm.
This would suggest that the added or-
ganic matter and the decomposing organic
matter of the forest floor are moving
into lower depths of the soil profile.
The depth of the forest floor on the
irrigated area appears to be decreasing,
although the total forest floor biomass
has remained unchanged, while the
structure of the forest floor is chang-
ing from a mor to a mull. The changes
observed seem reasonable to expect in
light of the higher calcium contents
(increased pH) and the added moisture.
In general, the responses in soil chem-
istry that have been observed at Unicoi
are similar to those found by
Richenderfer, et al. (1975) for northern
forested soils.
Vegetation Responses
To identify the response of the
vegetation to wastewater irrigation both
growth and nutrient data were collected
from the site during the first three
years. Comparisons between the irri-
gated and non-irrigated vegetation have
indicated that both growth and nutrient
contents have been altered as a result of
irrigation.
Both diameter at breast height and
height of the dominant trees have been
significantly increased as a result of
irrigation. Understory species have not
shown any significant stimulation from
the irrigation. The overstory on the
site is quite dense allowing little light
penetration to support a vigorous under-
story. A significant decrease in both
the laurel understory and the lower
ground vegetation has occurred as a re-
sult of irrigation. The laurel, which
was the densest understory shrub species
on the lower slopes, has disappearedfrom the irrigated area. High moisture
and ice damage from year round irriga-
tion may be the reason for its demise.
Likewise, the blueberry (Vaccinium spp.)
and the huckleberry (Gaylussacia spp.)
which were the most prevalent shrub spe-
cies on the upper slopes have also been
greatly reduced in numbers since irriga-
tion began and red maple (Acer rubrum
L.) and poleweed (Phytolacca americana
L.) appear to be taking their place.
Both of these latter species are usually
found on moist sites. The high moisture
conditions on the irrigated area have
made the dominant, shallow-rooted, white
pine more susceptible to windthrow.
High winds have blown over several of
these trees on the irrigated area but
none on the non-irrigated area.
The total nutrient content of the
trees on the irrigated area showed sig-
nificant increases over similar trees on
the non-irrigated area (Table 4). Total
Kjeldahl nitrogen, P, K and Mg showed
increases in a majority of the tissues of
the trees. However, the significant
differences were usually a result of
large differences in only one or two of
the seven major species sampled. No one
species had consistently high concentra-
tions in all tissues. Although differ-
ences between the irrigated and non-
irrigated trees exist, the large inherent
variability and the small number of
trees available for sampling ruled out
any clear identification of species dif-
ferences. Similar problems occurred in
sampling the nutrient concentrations of
the lower vegetation.
The understory, or lower vegeta-
tion, and forest floor nutrient con-
tents were also determined and the re-
sults are presented in Table 5. Al-
though there were increases in concentra-
tions of TKN, P, K and Mg in the irri-
gated lower vegetation, none of the dif-
ferences are significant.
The nutrient data for the plants is
somewhat inconclusive in this experiment.
Although steep slopes require a forest
cover to be considered for irrigation,
the plant community does not seem to play
a major role in the renovation process
by taking up and storing large quanti-
ties of the nutrients. Natural stands
of second growth mixed pine-hardwood
forests are not highly efficient renova-
tors of applied wastewater effluents.
No doubt some improvement in the vegeta-
tion's role can be expected through
species selection and intensive forest
management.
271Table 4. Mean Nutrient Concentrations for all Trees Measured During the Study
Period.
Constituent
and Area
TKN
Irrigated
Non-Irrigated
P
Irrigated
Non-Irrigated
K
Irrigated
Non-Irrigated
Ca
Irrigated
Non-Irrigated
Mg
Irrigated
Non-IrrigatedBark
1.04a
0.73
354a
215
2156a
1180
9075a
6399
435a
231Branches
.80
0.84
668a
419
2098a
1562
4519
4530
596a
488Tree Component
Twigs
1st yr
1.7ia
1.24
1309a
904
5439
4961
5831
5678
1029a
6892nd yr
1.24
1.05
918a
600
3555a
2657
4620
5028
547a
485Deciduous
leaves
2.05a
1.59
1951a
1063
5331
5155
8580b
10390
2777
2904Conifer
1st yr
1.64a
1.13
1427a
1040
5921a
4560
1945
1707
1267
1011leaves
2nd yr
1.64
1.56
1158a
816
4786
4366
3090
3284
829
821
Concentrations in irrigated trees are significantly different from means In the
non-irrigated trees at a, 99% and b, 95%.
APPLICATION TO SYSTEM DESIGN
The prototype land treatment system
at Unicoi has served in several ways to
improve regional land treatment design
concepts. Regulatory agency officials
and designers have been able to observe
a system within the region in operation
over an extended period of time. The
study results have been directly applied
in establishing regulatory agency guide-
lines. The regional prototype system
has been of greatest benefit in providing
the basis for design of systems within
the region.
Although several large land treat-
ment systems in excess of 500 ha are
currently in operation, few have been
designed under the constraints of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972 (P.L. 92-500) requir-
ing wastewater treatment facility plan-
ning in which the most cost-effective
plan must be implemented. One such
study in accordance with the Act was a
planning study undertaken for an area In
Clayton County, part of the metropolitan
Atlanta, Georgia area, located in the
Piedmont Plateau province. A number of
treatment systems, including land treat-
ment and advanced wastewater treatment,were evaluated for the project's 7.4 x
104 m3/day flow.
As part of the land treatment
feasibility portion of the study, 4800
ha were evaluated using criteria for
soils, geology, topography, climate,
hydrology, vegetation and other factors
established at the prototype study.
Land costs near the large metropolitan
area were high and system design was
further constrained to use of the small-
est land area possible. A contiguous
1475 ha site containing better than 80
percent forest cover with the optimum
combination of factors that would enable
high wastewater loading and an accepta-
ble degree of renovation was selected.
Although the average annual rainfall
in the area is 1320 mm, domestic water
supply is in short supply due to large
populations located in headwater basins.
Clayton County's domestic water supply
intake is located 11 km downstream from
the selected land treatment area and the
irrigation return water would augment
the water supply through recycling. The
recycling posed additional constraints
to the land treatment system design,
particularly with regard to levels of
nitrate-nitrogen leached to groundwater
and streams.
272Table 5. Mean Nutrient Concentrations for Lower Vegetation
and Forest Floor.
Constituent
and Area
TKN
Irrigated
Non-Irrigated
P
Irrigated
Non-Irrigated
K
Irrigated
Non-Irrigated
Ca
Irrigated
Non-Irrigated
Mg
Irrigated
Non-IrrigatedLower
Vegetation
1.59
1.16
3026
1051
9679
4946
5353
6245
16A7
1181Component
Forest Floor
L & F
_
1.56
1.18
1172a
572
15503
1012
12307a
4887
1045a
476Forest Floor
Humus
0.76
0.71
782a
520
2264
2056
5207
1267
605a
299
Concentrations in irrigated samples are significantly
different from means in the non-irrigated plants at a,
99 percent.
Removing bottomlands along streams
and land required for buffer from con-
sideration, over 50 percent of the site
has slopes greater than 12 percent.
This topographic feature plus the good
hydrologie condition of the soil made
possible by the presence of forest cover
indicate that a high hydraulic loading
is possible. The principal forest vege-
tation to be managed on the site will be
loblolly pine, although many of the
steeper slopes will remain in natural
mixed hardwood-pine stands.
Because the net storage of nitrogen
in trees has been shown to be low, deni-
trification must be enhanced to assure
adequate nitrate renovation and protec-
tion of the drinking water supply, A
wastewater loading of 63 mm/week to be
applied in a 12 hour period was estab-
lished as optimum for conditions of the
site and the enhancement of denitrifica-
tion. The steep slopes will direct sub-
surface flow to create anerobic condi-
tions. Further opportunities for deni-
trification will occur in the bottomland
areas of the site where the water table
will fluctuate over a 0.5 m to 1.5 m
range. Nitrate-nitrogen concentrations
in the applied wastewater will bemaintained at low levels such that win-
ter season flush-through of applied
nitrates will not occur. The total
nitrogen concentration in the applied
wastewater is 18 mg/1. The anticipated
level of nitrate-nitrogen in the streams
during operation of the system will not
exceed 5 mg/1. The total wetted area
needed for the design wastewater loading
is 960 ha.
The system is currently under con-
struction and will be in operation in
1980. An intensive forest management
program is currently underway to assure
maintenance of the sites' hydrologie
condition and to achieve the most vigor-
ous growth conditions possible.
CONCLUSIONS
The prototype land treatment re-
search study in the upland southeastern
United States has demonstrated that with
proper design and operation steep forest
slopes provide more than adequate treat-
ment of applied wastewater. Nitrogen,
although recycled rapidly through the
forest with little net storage gains, is
adequately renovated through denltrifi-
273fication. The combination of a .reasona-
bly high periodic wastewater loading and
lateral subsurface flow create moisture
conditions on the irrigated area and at
the base of the slope that enhance high
rates of denitrification. Although
forest growth is enhanced to some degree,
the uptake and net storage of nutrients
within an early-mature forest stand is
low and plays little role in the direct
renovation of the wastewater.
The regional prototype land treat-
ment system has demonstrated the value of
such systems in providing base data and
experience for use in aiding design of
systems within the physiographic region.
This value was realized in the design of
a large forest land treatment system
where recycling of the land treated
wastewater as drinking water will be
achieved.
LITERATURE CITED
Earr, S. S., R. H. Miller and T. J.
Logan. 1978. Some factors affect-
ing denitrification in soils irri-
gated with wastewater. Jour. Water
Poll. Control Fed., 50:709-717.
Broadbent, F. E., D. Pal and K. Aref.
1977. Nitrification and denitrifi-
cation in soils receiving municipal
wastewater. In Wastewater Renova-
tion and Reuse, Marcel Dekker, Inc.,
N. Y., pp. 312-347.
Gibbs, J. A. and H. F. Perkins. 1966.
Properties and genesis of the
Hayesville and Cecil series of
Georgia. Soil Sci. Soc. of Amer.
Proc, 30:256-260.
Hewlett, J. D. 1961. Soil moisture as
a source of base flow from steep
mountain watersheds. USDA Forest
Service SE Forest Expt. Sta. Paper
132, 11 pp.
Hook, J. E. and L. T. Kardos. 1978.
Nitrate leaching during long-term
spray irrigation for treatment of
secondary sewage effluent on wood-
land sites.
Iskander, I. K., R. S. Sletten, D. C.
Leggett and T. F. Jenkins. 1976.
Wastewater renovation by a proto-
type slow infiltration land treat-
ment system, USA CRREL Report 76-19,
44 pp.
Nutter, W. L. 1973. The role of soil
water in the hydrologie behavior of
upland basins. In Field Soil Water
Regime, Soil Sci. Soc, of Amer.
Madison, Wis., pp 181-193.Nutter, W. L. 1975. Moisture and energy
conditions in a draining soil mass.
Environmental Resources Center, Ga.
Inst. of Tech., Report ERC 0875,
77 pp.
Richenderfer, J. L., W. E. Sopper and
L. T. Kardos. 1975. Spray-
irrigation of treated municipal
properties of forest soils. USDA
Forest Service Central Technical
Report NE-17, 24 pp.
Rowe, R., R. L. Todd and W. L. Nutter.
1976. Gaseous nitrogen evolved
from the soil and forest floor of
an area amended with secondary
sewage effluent. Agronomy Abstracts,
American Society of Agronomy,
P 139.
Sepp, E. 1973. Disposal of domestic
wastewater by hillside sprays.
Jour. Envir. Eng. Div., Amer. Soc.
of Civil Eng., Vol. 99, No. EE2,
Proc. Paper 9673, pp 109-121.EVALUATION OF EXISTING SYSTEMS
IRRIGATION WITH UNTREATED SEWAGE WATER AND ITS EFFECT
ON THE CONTENT OF HEAVY METALS IN SOILS AND CROPS
E.B.Schalscha
I.F.Vergara
T.G.SchiradoFacultad Ciencias Quimicas Universidad de Chile
Facultad Ciencias Quimicas Universidad de Chile
Facultad Ciencias Quimicas Universidad de Chile
ABSTRACT
Treatment of municipal and indus-
trial sewage waters is practically non
existent in Chile. Untreated sewage
waters from the Zanjon de la Aguada ca-
nal (ZA) which collects 2/3 of the do-
mestic and industrial sewage of the city
of Santiago with 3.5 million inhabitants,
are used to irrigate approximately 4,500
ha of vegetable producing farmlands. The
effects on soils and crops of more than
40 years irrigation with these waters
were investigated. Special attention
was paid to the content of the heavy
metals, Cd,Cr,Cu,Ni, and Zn in the wa-
ters, soil profile, and crops. The
quantities of Cu in the water-soil-plant
system were relatively high but no phy-
totoxic effects were observable. Cadmium
levels in vegetable leaves were below
3 ppm. Leaf Cr,Ni, and Zn values were
in the normal range. Cd,Ni and Zn were
evenly distributed in the soil profile
and averaged 1.5, 18, and 160 ppm re-
spectively down to the water table at
the 2 m depth. Copper increased with
depth of the soil and reached over 1,000
ppm. Chromium accumulated in the top
soil where 50 ppm were found, and de-
creased with depth to 15 ppm. Fertility
of the soil investigated is high and no
salt accumulation has occured. Commer-
cial fertilizers are not used and N, P
and other nutrients are supplied exclu-
sively by ZA waters. Two crops of let-
tuce and celery and 4 cuts of swiss
chard are harvested each year.INTRODUCTION
Municipal and industrial waste
waters are frequently used to irrigate
agricultural land. In many countries
these waste waters are treated to elimi-
nate suspended solids, microbial patho-
gens, and some soluble mainly toxic com-
ponents before they are returned to
natural drainage channels or are used
for other purposes. In other countries,
such as Chile, few or no treatment fa-
cilities exist and raw sewage waters are
allowed to flow into streams and rivers
or are used directly to irrigate signif-
icant agricultural areas. The conse-
quences of these practices with respect
to soil and water properties and plant
nutrition have not received much aten-
tion, except for epidemiological aspects
related to the presence of microbial
pathogens in crops and waters consumed
by the population.
Since water requirements for domes-
tic and agricultural uses are increas-
ing, waste waters constitute an addi-
tional source to satisfy increasing
needs (Day, 1974). The effect of treat-
ed or reclaimed waters and of the
sludges removed from them on soils is
presently receiving wide attention
(Elliot and Stevenson, 1977; Lund et al.,
1976; Pratt et al., 1978). Special at-
tention has been focused on the accumu-
lation of heavy metals in soils irrigat-
ed with treated waste waters or sewage
sludges, nitrate movement in treated
soils, and possible contamination of
ground and or well waters (King and
Morris, 1974; Ludwick et.al., 1976;
Pratt et al., 1972). Few studies have •
275been published on the effect of the use
of untreated domestic and industrial
sewage waters on soils and on crops ir-
rigated with them.
In Chile, treatment of municipal
waste waters is practically non exist-
ent. However, some efforts have been
made in a number of small towns to in-
troduce some form of processing domestic
waste waters, by use of sedimentation
ponds. One experimental program has
been underway in the town of Melipi 11 a
(around 60,000 inhabitants) since 1972.
Progress made during the last five years
has been such that the Ministry of
Public Works is now recommending this
method for small towns all over the
country. For larger cities, however,
this approach is not practical and re-
sources for more sophisticated treat-
ments are not available. Therefore in
big cities like Santiago with 3.5 mil-
lion inhabitants, the disposal of sewage
waters will remain a problem for many
years. At present the raw domestic and
industrial sewage is collected by a
canal known as Zanjon de la Aguada (ZA)
and these waters are used to irrigate
vegetable producing agricultural areas.
Excess sewage waters are emptied into
the Mapocho river, a tributary of the
Maipo river, which eventually flows into
the Pacific Ocean.
The purpose of this presentation is
to briefly summarize some of the results
of a study made to determine the influ-
ence of the continuous use of untreated
sewage waste waters on highly productive
agricultural lands, with special empha-
sis on heavy metal accumulation in soils.
GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AREA STUDIED
Geographically Chile is located
between paralells 18° and 56° L.S. and
71° to 74° longitude west. It is 4,200
km long and on the average, 120 km wide.
All major climatic zones except tropi-
cal, are present in this country. The
northern part down to 1 attitude 33° S is
completely arid except for a few oasis
and transversal valleys. Further south
and down to 36° L.S. lies a semi-arid
region, followed from there to the south
by a semi-humid to humid region where
rainfall increases from 1,000 to 2,500
mm per year and no dry seasons exists.
The city of Santiago lies in a cen-
tral valley at approximately 70°30' lon-
gitude west and 33° lattitude south, in
a semi-arid zone were the mean annual
rainfall is around 400 mm with a dryseason of around 8 months. The rainy
season comprises late May to early
September and each rainfall does not ex-
ceed 10 to 15 mm. Air temperatures dur-
ing the dry season reaches highs of 33°C
during daytime, dropping to around 10°C
at night. Relative humidity during this
season rarely exceeds 40%.
During the dry season an area of
around 4,500 ha is irrigated exclusively
with untreated domestic and industrial
sewage waters. On this intensily farmed
agricultural land a 15 ha plot was se-
lected for the present study. The area
is located on the western and lower,
side of the city of Santiago, next to
the town of Maipu and is delineated on
the north and south by two main highways
and on the west by the Mapocho river and
the Lo Aguirre mountains. Irrigation
water is drawn exclusively from the ZA
canal which collects more than 2/3 of
the domestic sewage of Santiago and the
industrial wastes from medium to small
sized industrial operations such as:
foundries and tanneries, and metal pro-
cessing, copper manufacturing, electro-
battery, etc., plants. The average flow
of the ZA canal at the point where sec-
ondary outlets start, varies between 8
and 20 nr per second during daytime,
with two peaks, one at midmorning and
one in the late afternoon. Only a small
part of the total water flow is diverted
for irrigation, while the major portion
empties into the Mapocho river
(Figure 1).
The depth of the water table in the
irrigated area varies between 1 m and 15
m with an east-west flow. Below the wa-
ter table lies a compact (up to 80 m
deep) non-permeable volcanic deposit
which confines an acquifer which, be-
cause of the impermeable nature of the
layer should not be influenced by irri-
gation of the overlying land (Trepiana,
1976). Drinking water for a population
of a few thousand people comes mostly
from wells which are subject to pollu-
tion from surface run-off and leaching
both from the cultivated soils and from
the ZA canals. Figure 1 shows the ap-
proximate shape of the water table.
The soils in the area are Vertisols
and the soil of the 15 ha plot chosen
for this study is a Typic Chromudert.
The plot is representative of the whole
area. Mainly vegetable crops are grown
on this farmland, specially lettuce,
celery, swiss chard, cucumbers, squash,
and onions. Wheat is also grown to a
limited extent and a few deciduous fruit
orchards exist. The soils are highly
276Linos of equal depth
of water table
N
1 : 250000
Figure 1. Map of experimental area and depth of water table
productive and from the plot under study
three lettuce or two celery crops are
harvested each year. Swiss chard yields
four cuts per year. Irrigation averages
around 2.4 m per hectare per year and is
accomplished by the furrow system. No
data on evapotranspiration are available.
Vegetable crops from the area sup-
ply a major part of the needs of the
population of Santiago. Therefore con-
tamination with microbial pathogens and
other types of toxic substances that may
be taken up by plants irrigated with ZA
waters pose a potential pollution prob-
lem. This is compounded by the habit of
farmers of washing their vegetables to
keep them fresh looking before marketing
using unfortunately ZA water. In spite
of intensive efforts by health authori-
ties to change at least the water used
for washing to deep-well water made
available at convenient points, the old
habit persists. Since March of this
year (1978), however, farmers are no
longer allowed to grow lettuce in the
area because of the epidemiological
problems involved.MATERIALS AND METHODS
Water analysis:
Composite samples collected in
plastic containers between 10 AM and 4
PM were filtered and the filtrates and
residues analyzed. COD, pH and EC were
determined according to standard proce-
dures (Jackson, 1958). Total N was de-
termined by a modified Kjeldahl method
and NO3-N by the phenol-disulfonic acid
colorimetric method. Heavy metals in
the filtrate were determined by Atomic
Absorption Spectrophotometry (AA) after
extraction by the APDC-MIBC method de-
scribed by Brooks et al., (1967) and
Koirtyohann and Wen (1973). Heavy met-
als in the suspended solids were deter-
mined by AA after digestinq with H2O2
and HNO3.
Soil analysis:
Soil samples were collected at 0.4
m intervals down to the water table,
using a screw-type Auger. Field-water
content was estimated by weighing fresh-
277TABLE 1. Some characteristics of sewage, river and well waters studied
Source
ZA canal
Mapocho
Well
Well (control)pH
7.8
8.4
7.6
8.0EC
mmhos/cm
1.71
0.96
1.35
1.50COD
375
96
54
95NITROGEN
NO^-N Total N
0.2
0.6
13.7
0.9- mg/1 —
38.0
3.6
15.1
1.3SOLIDS
Suspended Soluble
310
137
13
3940
680
910
950
ly collected samples before and after a
24 hr air-drying period (Pratt et al.,
1972). The pH of a saturation paste was
determined with a glass electrode, total
N by a modified Kjeldahl method, and or-
ganic C by the Walkley-Black method. Ni-
trates were extracted with a CuS04-
Ag2S04 solution (Jackson, 1958) and de-
termined colorimetrically by the phenol -
disulfonic acid method. Heavy metals
were determined by AA after extraction
under reflux for 12 hours at 80 C with
4 N. HNO3.
Vegetable analysis:
Aerial parts of lettuce, celery,
and swiss chard were sampled just before
harvest and washed, dried at 65 C and
weighted. The dry samples were ashed,
dissolved in HC1, and heavy metals de-
termined by AA.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Some properties of the irrigation
and well-waters are given in Table 1.
The electrical conductivity of the ZA
and shallow well waters is moderately
high, with 1.7 and 1.35 mmhos/cm re-
spectively. The pH is slightly alkaline
varying between 7.8 and 8.0. Suspended
solids in the ZA waters are about 300
mg/1 and total N content around 38 mg/1,mostly in the ammonia form.
The soils irrigated with ZA waters
are medium to light textured (Table 2),
with a pH that increases from 6.9 at the
surface to 7.5 at the 150-190 cm depth.
Field water content is about 20%
throughout the soil profile which indi-
cates thorough and uniform irrigation
practices, 0rganic-C decreases from
2.15% in the surface soil to around
0.05% in the deepest part of the soil
profile studied. The C/N ratios are
about 13 in the surface soils and de-
crease to about 5 at the lower depths.
Electrical conductivity of the satura-
tion extract averages about 1.0 mmhos/cm
which denotes moderate amounts .of solu-
ble salts and indicates that the soil
is well leached.
An average of 8 ppm NO3-N on a dry
soil basis is found throughout the soil
profile. Inasmuch as the NO3-N of the
ZA waters is very low (Table 1) a con-
siderable portion of the soil nitrate
probably originates through nitrifica-
tion of the ammonium-N in the waters.
Additional NO3-N could originate through
mineralization and nitrification of or-
ganic nitrogenous compounds in the wa-
ters and in the surface soil. Sizable •
amounts of NO3-N are therefore available
for leaching into ground waters
(Schalscha et al./ 1978). That this oc-
cur is confirmed by the presence of
NO3-N in shallow wells (Table 1) where
TABLE 2. Some properties of soils studied (average of 4 samples)
Depth
cm
0-30
30 - 70
70 -110
110 -150
150 -190pH
6.9
7.2
7.3
7.2
7.5Field "
moisture
i
21.2
18.8
18.5
18.2
19.3Organic
C
%
2.13
0.62
0.25
0.14
0.05Tota
N
%NO3-N
ppm
0.16 7.1
0.06 8.8
0.02 6.2
0.02 8.4
0.0L 7.4EC
mmhos/cm
0.99
1.02
0.95
0.89
1.08Texture*
SCL
SCL
SL
SL
SL
* SCL: sandy clay loam; SL: sandy loam
278TABLE 3. Heavy metals in ZA irrigation waters
Season of
sampling
Spring
Summer
Fall
Winterss1
17
19
20
21Cd 0
2.5
0.9
1.8
0.7Cr
ss
1115
2080
1020
350f
11
15
8
3ss
ug/1
460
530
390
148Cu
f
7
23
20
11Ni
ss
83
130
99
72f
97
12
54
30Zn
ss
270
720
250
140f
26
42
63
49
~ss = in suspended solids
2f = in filtrate or soluble form
nearly 14 ppm have been detected which
is near the limits set by the USPHS for
human consumption.
Heavy Metals: The concentration
of the heavy metals, Cd, Cr, Cu, Ni and
Zn in the ZA waters are given in Table
3. They are found predominantly in the
suspended solids except for Ni where up
to 50% is present in the filtrate or
soluble form.
While investigating the source of
abnormal concentrations of heavy metals
in ZA waters, it was found that a few
industries store their waste waters con-
taining heavy metals in special tanks
thereby complying with existing regula-
tions. However, when the tanks are fil-
led they discharge the contents into the
ZA canal selecting a time period when no
inspection takes place.
The levels of Cd in the ZA waters
are in the medium to high range (around
20 ug/1) but up to date no toxic effects
on plant growth have been detected.
Copper concentrations range from 159 to
555 ug/1 and should not pose any special
problem. The same is true for Ni and Zn
with concentrations fluctuating respec-
tively, between 102 to 180 ug/1 and 189
to 762 ug/1, Zn being surprisingly low.
Chromium concentrations vary between 353
and 2095 ug/1 and these high amounts can
only be explained by the above citedemptying of storage tanks from tanneries
into the ZA canal. Incidentally only Cr
is subject to special regulations as to
the amount dischargeable.
Considering the heavy metal con-
tent of the ZA canal waters and their
use in irrigation of vegetable producing
farmlands, a potential hazard exist.
However, yields of vegetable crops ir-
rigated exclusively with these water are
high, and no toxicity symptoms have been
detected. If criteria for irrigation
water quality of the U.S. Federal Water
Pollution Control Administration (FWPCA)
of 1968 are used, only Cd would be above
tolerable levels (5 ug/1) and in some
instances Cu (200 ug/1).
The concentrations of heavy met-
als in the soils irrigated exclusively
with ZA waters are shown in Table 4. It
is interesting to observe that the a-
mounts of Cd, Cr, Ni, and Zn in the pro-
file below the root zone are more or
less evenly distributed down to 190 cm,
which is just above the water table.
Only Cr accumulates in the top layer,
and Cu surprisingly increases with
depth. On the other hand Cd concentra-
tions in the soil range from 0.7 to 2.8
ug/g and therefore exceed in some in-
stances the FWPCA limits. The same is
true for Cu where amounts up to 1,700
ug/g of soil are found. In the root
zone Cu concentrations fluctuate between
TABLE 4. 4 N^ HNO3 soluble Cd, Cr, Cu, Ni and Zn in soils collected from raw
sewage water irrigated farmland, (averages of 3 samplings of four
replicates.
Depth
cm
0 - 30
30 - 70
70 -110
110 -150
150 -190Cd
1.7
1.3
1.51.0
1.2Cr
51
35
16
15
16Cu*
u9/9
706(273)
767(221)
1041(218)
1060(105)
1061(104)Ni
15
16
1821
20Zn
161
156
155
201
180
Data in parenthesis for Cu from a control soil not irrigated with ZA waters
279580 and 850 ug/g, much higher than the
critical level for plant growth describ-
ed by Bingham et al., (1975). The ab-
normally high concentrations of Cu were
first thought to be of geological ori-
gin. However, analysis performed on ad-
jacent soils of the same type but not
irrigated with ZA waters, showed a con-
centration range of 104 to 273 ug/g of
soil. Therefore the source of copper
could be attributed to the ZA irrigation
waters. The Cu values appear somewhat
inconsistent considering the amounts
of the other metals found in these
soils, but except for the facts mention-
ed there seems to be no other source of
Cu. The nearby Lo Aguirre mountains
contain exploitable copper ores, but
they are separated from the area under
study by the Mapocho river into which
the ZA canal and its natural runoff emp-
ties.
Heavy metal contents of vegetable
crops grown in this area are shown in
Table 5. The data show leaf Cd levels
of 0.1 to 2.8 ppm and Cu concentrations
of 15.6 to 23.0 ppm which are relatively
high (Page, 1974, Dowdy and Larson,1975).
However no limitation of plant growth
nor visible toxic symptoms were obser-
ed. The Cd content of swiss chard which
is considered a Cd accumulator varied
from 1.1 to 1.8 ppm which is lower than
the values for lettuce, namely 1.6 to
2.8 ppm. Celery contained only 0.1 to
0.4 ppm Cd, which is very low. Copper
concentrations in leaves of the threecrops were practically the same, around
20 ppm. Chromium levels were about 1.5
to 6.0, 0.3 to 2.5, and 0.1 to 0.3 ppm
respectively for swiss chard, lettuce,
and celery.
Some typical yields of vegetable
crops are also presented in Table 5.
Compared to yields in general throughout
Chile and other countries these are high
notwithstanding the fact that three
crops of lettuce, two of celery, or 4
cuts of swiss chard are harvested each
year. In addition no commercial ferti-
lizers and no pesticides are applied to
this area.
The observations and results sum-
marized indicate that the fertility of
the soils under investigation have been
maintained by the N and other elements
present in the sewage water used for ir-
rigation, and even after 40 years or
more toxic amounts of salts and heavy
metals ions have not accumulated in the
soil profile. It appears that salts have
moved through the soil profile with the
waters. It is also possible that some
of the heavy metals have complexed with
small molecular weight soluble organic
compounds originating from the sewage
waters and have moved down or through
the soil in the complexed form. How-
ever, concentrations of Cu and Cd in the
soil may be reaching critical levels, so
it is important that industrial wastes
containing these elements not be dis-
charged into the sewage canal.
TABLE 5. Heavy metals in leaves of vegetables irrigated exclusively with
ZA waters (dry matter basis).
Crops CdCrCu Ni Zn Yield
ug/g Tons/ha/ys
1st cut - Winter 1.1
Swiss Chard (Beta cicla, L)
3rd cut - Summer 1.86.0 18.1 2.8 95.4
1.5 18.7 1.3 70.25.0
Lettuce
Celery
dulce)
Celery,Winter
(Lactuca Sativa)
Summer
Winter
(Apium graveolens
Summer
Winter
stalks
Summer1.6
2.8
0.1
0.4
0.5
0.22.5
0.3
0.1
0.3
0.7
0.423.0
22.8
15.6
20.2
9.1
9.52.1
2.0
3.1
2.1
2.3
1.578.1
99.7
99.0
95.9
45.3
50.36.7
13.7
280ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Financial support of the University
of Chile, grant 4001 is gratefully ac-
knowledged. The present work was also
supported by a bi-national NSF - CONICYT
program.
The authors wish to thank Dr. J.P.
Martin for his editorial help.
REFERENCES
Bingham, F.T., G.A. Mitchell, R.J.
Mahler, and A.L. Page. 1975. Yield and
heavy metal content of food crops grown
on soils ammended with sewage sludge.
Int. Conf. on Sensing and Assesment Vol.
2(30-6) 1-4, Las Vegas, Nev. USA.
Brooks, R.R., B.J. Presley and I.R.
Kaplan. 1967. APDC-MIBK extraction
system for the determination of trace
elements in saline waters by atomic ab-
sorption spectrophotometry. Talanta,
14:809-816.
Day, A.D., A. Rahman, F.R.H.
Katterman, and V. Jensen. 1974. Effects
of treated municipal waste waters adn
commercial fertilizers on growth, fiber,
acid soluble nucleotides, protein, and
amino-acid content of wheat hay.
J. Environ. Qual. 3:17-19.
Dowdy, R.H. and W.E. Larson. 1975.
The availability of sludge-borne metals
to various vegetable crops. J. Environ
Qual. 4:278-282.
Elliot, L.F. and F.J. Stevenson,
1977. Soils for management of organic
wastes and waste waters. Publ, by A.S.A.
CSSA, and SSSA, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
Jackson, M.L. 1958. Soil Chemical
Analysis. Prentice Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, N.J., USA.Koirtyohann, S.R. and J.W.Wen, 1973
Critical study of the APCD-MIBK extrac-
tion system for atomic absorption. Anal.
Chem. 45:1986-1989.
King, L.D. and H.O. Morris, 1974.
Nitrogen movement resulting from surface
application of liquid sewage sludge. J.
Environ. Qual. 3:238-243.
Lund, L.J., A.L. Page, and CO.
Nielsen, 1976. Movement of heavy met-
als below sewage disposal ponds. J.
Environ. Qual. 5:330-334.
Ludwick, A.E., J.0. Reuss, and E.J.
Langin, 1976. Soil nitrates following
four years continous corn and as survey-
ed in irrigated farm fields of central
and eastern Colorado. J. Environ. Qual.
5:82-86.
Page, A.L., 1974. Fate and effects
of trace elements in sewage sludge when
applied to agricultural lands. EPA-670/2,
74-005. Environmental Protection Tech-
nology Series.
Pratt, P.F., W.W. Jones, and V.E.
Hunsaker, 1972. Nitrate in deep soil
profiles in relation to fertilizer rates
and leaching volume. J. Environ. Qual.
1:97-102.
Pratt, P.F., L.S. Lund, and J.M.
Rible. 1978. An approach to measuring
leaching of Nitrate from freely drained
irrigated fields. JJTI Nitrogen in the
Environmment-Nitrogen Behaviour in Field
Soils. (D.R. Nielsen and J.G. MacDonald,
Eds.) Vol. 1:223-256.
Schalscha, E.B., I. Vergara, T.
Schirado and M. Morales, 1978. Nitrate
movement in a Chilean agricultural area
irrigated with untreated sewage water.
J. Environ. Qual. (in press).
Trepiana, X. 1976. Antécédentes
hidrologicos Rinconada de Maipu. Report
IREN-CORFO Santiago, Chile.
281PRETREATMENT REQUIRE-
MENTS FOR LAND APPLICATION
OF WASTEWATER
PREAPPLICATION STRATEGIES FOR WASTEWATER IRRIGATION SYSTEMS
Dr. Raymond C. Loehr, Director, Environmental Studies Program
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853
ABSTRACT
The preapplication approaches that
should be used with wastewater irrigation
systems are those that reduce risks to
the public, the environment and the equip-
ment, and permit the pollutant removal
mechanisms in the soil to renovate the
wastewater. The use of the limiting
parameter concept in design, specific
application and site management, and the
following preapplication approaches
should result in reliable irrigation
systems that have extremely low health
and environmental risks. The preappli-
cation approaches for wastewater irri-
gation systems are: storage, odor con-
trol, removal of large solids, and
possible pretreatment to reduce abnormal
levels of nitrogen, metals, pH and SAR.
INTRODUCTION
Land treatment of wastewaters can
be a cost effective treatment process for
many communities and industries. Al-
though land treatment can be considered
for untreated wastewaters, it generally
is utilized as an alternative to secon-
dary or tertiary treatment processes.
There are three basic land treatment
processes: a) slow rate, b) rapid infil-
tration, and c) overland flow. This
paper discusses the preapplication
strategies for the slow rate process.
This is a process in which vegetation is
a critical component for managing water
and nutrients, and the water application
rate is low, up to about 4 inches (10 cm)
of wastewater per week. The wastewateris applied by sprinkler or surface
methods. Slow rate systems also are
referred to as irrigation systems; how-
ever, the emphasis is on wastewater
treatment rather than on crop irrigation.
Many advantages can be associated
with land treatment such as: a) recla-
mation and recycling of the nutrients
and water, b) reducing the discharge of
pollutants to surface waters, and c)
favorable energy requirements and eco-
nomics. While land treatment is not a
panacea to be used in every situation,
it can be a viable treatment alternative
that should be adequately considered
when the most appropriate treatment
process is determined.
The potential of land treatment has
been recognized in federal water pollu-
tion control legislation. Evaluation of
land treatment in waste treatment facili-
ties planning has been mandatory since
July 1974. A detailed assessment of one
or more land treatment systems is
required as part of the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) construction
grants program. EPA also has indicated
that any preapplication requirements
shall not be unnecessarily stringent.
Thus it is appropriate to consider the
types of preapplication methods that
are commensurate with the proper design
and management of a slow rate system.
This paper considers only pre-
application strategies for the treatment
of wastewaters by the slow rate process.
It does not address the requirements
that may be necessary for subsequent use
of the renovated wastewaters such as for
a public water supply.
283RISK
There have been philosophical dif-
ferences regarding the levels of pretreat-
ment that are needed before wastewaters
are applied to land. One view is that
the equivalent of secondary treatment,
including possibly chlorination, is
necessary before the treated wastewaters
are applied to the land. This view
infers that land application of waste-
water is a disposal mechanism that does
not include wastewater treatment capa-
bilities. Another view is that only a
minimum amount of preapplication is
necessary, i.e., that which minimizes
nuisance conditions, increases system
reliability and reduces the risk to the
public.
The second view recognizes that the
soil has a capability to assimilate waste
and renovate wastewater. The first view
indicates a preference to have the con-
trol of wastewater treatment in the hands
of man rather than depend upon the capa-
city of the soil. Both views represent
conscientious attempts to minimize the
risks to the public and the environment.
Human activity will always and un-
avoidably involve risks and there can be
no hope of reducing all risks to zero.
These statements are valid for all
aspects of waste management including
land treatment. Because safety is a
judgemental decision, a technology such
as slow rate land treatment will be
judged safe if its risks are judged to
be acceptable by the public. Whether
something is "safe" can not be measured,
because the physical and biological
sciences can assess only the probabili-
ties and consequences of events, not
their value to people.
The many concerns about acceptable
risk can be summarized by four basic
considerations (1):
1) definition of conditions of
exposure, i.e., who or what will be
exposed? to what? in what way? for
how long?
2) identification of adverse effects,
i.e., what is the threat or adverse
effect to the individuals or objects
that are exposed?
3) relationship of exposure with
effect, i.e., how much adverse effect
results from how much exposure?
4) estimation of the overall risks
The need for preapplication treat-
ment is related to reducing the risks to
equipment, to the public, and to the
environment. Judgements concerning therisks associated with using or not using
certain preapplication methods must be
included in assessing the preapplica-
tion methods that should be used with
slow rate systems.
GENERAL GUIDANCE
In identifying preapplication
methods that may be needed, there are
several criteria that are basic:
• there shall be no public health
hazard
• applicable groundwater quality
standards shall not be contra-
vened
• applicable water quality standards
shall not be contravened in any
adjacent surface waters
In addition, there will be different
preapplication needs depending upon the
degree of public access to the land
treatment site, whether the crops are
for human consumption, and if so, whether
they are to be eaten raw. The need for
preapplication methods also is related
to the ability of the soil to remove con-
taminants and renovate the wastewater.
This ability, in turn, is a function of
the pollutant removal mechanisms in the
soil.
POLLUTANT REMOVAL MECHANISMS IN THE SOIL
General
Any wastewater treatment system,
including a land treatment system, is
designed to convert raw sewage into an
acceptable effluent and to dispose of
the solids removed in the system. The
basic approach is to determine the char-
acteristics of the untreated waste and
to utilize the capabilities of various
treatment processes to achieve the
desired effluent quality. With conven-
tional wastewater treatment systems, few
constraints are placed upon the input to
intermediate processes except where such
constraints are necessary to protect
these processes from overloading or from
breakdown of mechanical components. The
same approach should be taken with
design of land treatment systems.
With wastewater irrigation, the soil
is the important treatment process and
its capability to remove pollutants
should be utilized. There should be
neither over design of the slow rate
system nor overloading of the soil.The design relationships for irriga-
tion of wastewaters are governed by the
soil and subsurface conditions, the
climate, the availability of land, the
desired quality of the renovated waste-
water, the crops to be grown on the land,
and the expected management of the system.
Included in the design will be the con-
trolling limiting parameter and the pre-
application possibilities that permit the
site to be managed satisfactorily.
The effectiveness of a wastewater
irrigation system is related to the char-
acteristics of the soil and the resultant
pollutant removal mechanisms. When waste-
water is applied to the soil, some con-
stituents may pass through the soil to
the groundwater,' others are utilized by
growing plants, some are metabolized by
the soil microorganisms, and others are
retained within the soil. The design of
a wastewater irrigation system, and there-
fore the need for preapplication methods
must relate the quantity of pollutant in
the wastewater to the pollutant removal
mechanisms in the soil. These can be
categorized as physical, such as filtra-
tion and dilution; chemical, such as
adsorption and precipitation; and bio-
logical, such as microbial transformations
and plant uptake. The need for preappli-
cation can be determined by evaluating
the possibility of overloading the
removal mechanisms.
Physical
As wastewater moves through the soil
pores, suspended solids are removed by
filtration. The depth at which removal
occurs varies with the size of the parti-
cles, soil texture, and rate of water
movement. The larger the hydraulic appli-
cation rate and the coarser the soil, the
greater the distance the particles will
move. However, at the wastewater appli-
cation rates used with the slow rate pro-
cess, large suspended solids are removed
in the surface soil and smaller particu-
lates, even as small as bacteria con-
tained in the wastewater, are removed in
the upper few feet of all but the very
coarse soils.
Constituents in the applied waste-
water can be diluted by rain and snow
melt. Chemical and biological transfor-
mations and removals in the soil also can
reduce concentrations of specific con-
stituents. Where evaporation losses are
high, such as in arid climates, increases
in the concentration of conservative
constituents, such as salts, can occur.
Excessive suspended solids can clogthe soil pores as well as clog distribu-
tion systems. Clogging of the soil will
reduce the soil infiltration rate.
Natural decomposition of the organic
solids during nonapplication or "resting"
periods will allow the infiltration rate
to recover.
Application of two inches of primary
municipal effluent to the soil will
result in the application of about 45
pounds of suspended solids per acre
(40 kg/ha) per application. With waste-
water irrigation systems, the wastewater
is applied intermittently, i.e., once or
twice a week. Thus a two to four inch
application rate will add about 45 to 90
pounds SS/acre (40 to 80 kg/ha). This
is less than 0.1 ounce/ft2 (28 g/m2),
an amount well within the absorption and
assimilation capacity of the soil.
The design hydraulic application
rate for a wastewater irrigation system
will be less than the infiltration rate
of the soil. At this application rate,
soil clogging due to suspended solids
will not be a significant problem. Thus
preapplication methods for suspended
solids should be limited to methods such
as screening or primary sedimentation
that will avoid clogging of the irriga-
tion distribution equipment or avoid
excessive wear of pumps and piping.
Chemical
Chemical reactions in the soil
affect the mobility of dissolved ions
or compounds with the result that some
constituents are retained within the
soil profile for extended periods of
time while the movement of others may
only be temporarily restricted. Liquid
residence times for normal wastewater
irrigation rates are on the order of
weeks, with organic residence times on
the order of years.
Adsorption and chemical precipita-
tion are the most important chemical
reactions governing the movement of con-
stituents in the irrigated wastewater
with cation exchange being the most
important adsorption phenomenon. The
cation exchange capacity (CEC) of soils
can range from 2 to 60 meq/100 grams of
soil (2) with most soils having a CEC
value between 10 and 30. The differences
occur because soils vary widely in their
humus and clay content, the components
that have the highest CEC.
Typical soils have considerable
capacity to adsorb many of the cations in
wastewater, including many of the metals
which may adversely affect the health of
285humans and animals eating the crops grown
on the irrigated fields.
Cation exchange of ammonium nitrogen
is a possible control mechanism for nitro-
gen. However, the ammonium ion is bio-
logically oxidized to nitrate in aerobic
soils. Nitrate is an anion and will move
with the soil water.
Phosphate is the only anion appre-
ciably retained in soil. The primary
mechanism is the formation of insoluble
or slowly soluble precipitates.
In arid regions, wastewater irriga-
tion rates may not be enough to avoid the
accumulation of sodium ions in the soil.
Such accumulations can lead to a degra-
dation of soil structure and a reduction
in infiltration and percolation rates.
When industrial wastes are included
in the wastewater to be irrigated, adjust-
ment of the pH and the sodium adsorption
ratio (SAR) may be needed. The waste-
water to be applied should have a pH
within the range of 6.0 to 9.5 to avoid
adverse effects to site vegetation.
Wastewaters with high sodium adsorption
ratios must be accompanied by special
soil management procedures to compensate
for the effect of the sodium. The SAR of
wastewaters used for irrigation should be
no more than 8 to 10.
One example may illustrate the type
of preapplication methods that may be
necessary with specific wastes. Before
the irrigation of cannery wastes, pre-
treatment was necessary to remove the
coarse organic solids and to adjust the
pH and SAR (3). Coarse screens were used
to remove the large solids, and the SAR
and pH were adjusted with gypsum. No
further preapplication was used even
though the organic content of the applied
wastewater was very high.
With normal wastewater irrigation
rates and suitable management, the chem-
ical mechanisms in the soil control
wastewater constituents of concern such
as phosphorus and certain potentially
toxic elements and chemicals. The pre-
application methods that may be related
to the chemical reactions in the soil
could include:
a) pretreatment controls, such as
industrial source control or chemical
precipitation, if the amount of poten-
tially toxic elements and chemicals in
the wastewater are likely to exceed the
chemical removal mechanisms in the soil.
b) adjustment of wastewater pH and
SAR to acceptable levels.Biological
The biological transformations that
occur in the soil include organic matter
decomposition and nutrient assimilation
by plants. These transformations occur
in the biologically active upper few feet
of the soil, i.e., the rooting zone.
The numbers of bacteria are large ranging
from one to three billion per gram of
soil. One thousand pounds of live bac-
terial mass per acre two feet of soil is
probably a modest estimate (2). The
great diversity of native organisms
enhances the capability of a soil to
degrade the variety of natural and man-
made organic compounds in the applied
wastewater.
The presence or absence of oxygen
in the soil has a significant effect on
the rate and end-products of degradation.
The oxygen status of the soil is a func-
tion of soil porosity. Soil properties
that favor rapid infiltration and trans-
mission of the applied wastewater also
favor oxygen movement. Low and inter-
mittent wastewater application rates
used with irrigation systems favor aero-
bic conditions, rapid organic matter
decomposition, and oxidized end-products.
As a result of organic matter decom-
position, elements such as nitrogen,
phosphorus, and sulfur are converted
from organic to inorganic forms. Many
of these mineralized constituents can be
assimilated by plants. Crops are an
integral part of the slow rate process.
Organic matter is added continu-
ously to soils as plant residue and is
continuously oxidized by the soil
organisms. In general, soils have a
high capacity for organic carbon oxida-
tion. Data reported for an irrigation
system treating vegetable processing
wastes indicate that organic oxidation
rates could exceed 5000 pounds per acre
per day (4110 kg/ha/day) (4). In con-
trast, a two-inch application of munici-
pal primary effluent would add about 90
pounds of BOD per acre (80 kg/ha) per
application which would amount to the
addition of 90 to 180 pounds BOD/acre/
week (80 to 160 kg/ha/week) assuming a
once or twice per week application.
Based upon this comparison, it is un-
likely that the organic oxidation capa-
city of the soil will be exceeded in a
slow rate process, and therefore no pre-
application requirements will be needed
for this parameter.
The biological processes in the
soil form nitrate from ammonia and organic
nitrogen under aerobic conditions. Nitro-
286gen oxides and nitrogen gas result from
nitrate reduction when aerobic conditions
are followed by anaerobic conditions. It
is possible to consider both gaseous
nitrogen losses (volatilization and deni-
trification) and nitrogen removal by plant
uptake as control mechanisms for the
nitrogen in the applied wastewater.
Crop selection and management are
important components of a wastewater
irrigation system. Plant uptake of nitro-
gen is in the range of 100 to 400 pounds
per acre per growing season, depending
upon specific crop and management
techniques.
The nitrogen application rate should
be determined from a nitrogen balance on
the system (5), The important processes
involved in nitrogen removal from waste-
water applied to the land are ammonia
volatilization, crop uptake and removal,
soil adsorption of ammonium, incorpora-
tion into the soil organic fraction, and
denitrification. With the slow rate
process, nitrogen management is princi-
pally due to crop uptake with some deni-
trification. The proper application rate
will be that which, when crop uptake and
denitrification are considered, maintains
the nitrogen concentration in the perco-
lating water below allowable limits,
generally less than 10 mg/1 nitrate
nitrogen.
Denitrification losses can range up
to S0% depending upon how the irrigation
site is managed. A conservative estimate
would be to assume denitrification and
volatilization losses to be 20 to 25% of
the applied nitrogen. Consideration of
plant uptake and these losses as the
nitrogen control mechanisms will reduce
the risk of excessive nitrogen in the
percolate.
Preapplication approaches related to
biological mechanisms could include
nitrogen removal prior to irrigation
where the nitrogen application rate is
the limiting factor and the required land
area is excessive. Such removal could
include nitrification followed by denitri-
fication in preliminary wastewater
storage ponds.
LIMITING DESIGN PARAMETER
There are many factors that deter-
mine the land area that will be required
for a wastewater irrigation system.
These factors are related to the charac-
teristics of the soil, climate, waste-
water, and crop and should be evaluated
using site specific information.The application rate of the follow-
ing parameters will significantly affect
the required land area: a) water, b)
organics, c) nutrients, d) potentially
toxic elements, and e) salts. When
evaluating the required land area, the
land area for each potentially limiting
parameter should be determined. That
parameter which requires the largest land
area to avoid environmental problems
becomes the limiting parameter. This
"limiting parameter principle" states
that the design land area shall be no
less than that allowed by the limiting
environmental parameter.
Figure 1 illustrates the concept of
the limiting design parameter. In the
example, nitrogen is the controlling
design parameter as is the case in most
land treatment systems treating municipal
wastewaters.
PARAMETER REQUIRED LAND AREA
TOXIC
ELEMENTS
Figure 1. Relationships Between Waste
Constituents and Potentially
Limiting Design Parameters
for Land Application Systems.
When the land area determined for
the limiting parameter is used for the
design of the irrigation system, there
is an added degree of safety in terms of
the application rates of the other con-
stituents of potential concern. The
application rate of another constituent
will be considerably less than the rate
that would occur if the constituent would
be the limiting parameter. In addition,
because of the conservative approach
using plant uptake and gaseous nitrogen
losses to determine the nitrogen loading
rate and hence the maximum land area,
there is even less risk associated with
the application of the other constituents
in wastewater.
267The basic concept inherent in the
limiting parameter approach is to use the
site specific characteristics of the soil
and the wastewater to meet the desired
"effluent," i.e., groundwater quality,
and calculate the loadings accordingly.
The concept is to use soil loading cri-
teria and not specific preapplication
treatment criteria for the design of a
land treatment system.
HEALTH
Protection of the public from patho-
gens is a frequently cited reason for pre-
application requirements. Because human
pathogens must be assumed to be in muni-
cipal wastewaters, concern must be given
to the potential health hazard associated
with wastewater irrigation systems.
Irrigation systems have the potential to
transmit pathogens with the percolate to
the groundwater, with surface runoff,
with aerosols which may be generated, and
with the crops grown on the irrigation
site.
Numerous critical reviews have
assessed the health risks associated with
the land application of wastewaters and
sludges (5-9). Pathogenic bacteria and
viruses in applied wastewater and sludge
are the organisms of greatest concern.
Bacteria are the most fragile of the
pathogens and are greatly reduced in
wastewater storage systems and by sun-
light, drying, or competition in the soil.
Contamination of plant surfaces can occur
by direct contact and by rain splashing,
but survival is only on the order of a
week or two (6). Bacteria can live
longer if protected from sunlight and
drying.
Viruses may persist in soils and on
vegetation for several weeks or months.
If exposed to sunlight and drying,
viruses eventually will be inactivated.
Although the reviews agree that the
epidemiological evidence is not abundant,
they also indicate that little health
risk is associated with well-managed land
application systems for sludges and
wastewater. The key is a "well-managed
system" since reported disease outbreaks
have been associated with the use of
night soil and raw sludges, when crops
grown on soils that have received raw
sewage were eaten raw, or when grazing
cattle have been contaminated by raw
sewage. Percolation of wastewater at a
moderate rate through medium to fine
texture soils removes bacteria and
viruses in a short distance due tophysical entrapment, adsorption, and
die-off.
Disinfection of wastewater by chlor-
ination prior to irrigation has been
suggested but does not appear necessary
if sound application and management pro-
cedures are followed. Reliance on pre-
application disinfection rather than
proper application rates and site
management procedures can provide a
false sense of security. Management
procedures to minimize health risks are
noted in Table 1.
Table 1. Wastewater Application and
Site Management Procedures
to Minimize Health Risks
— restrict public access
to the site
— wastewater application rates
that are consistent with limiting
parameter relationships
— prevent runoff from the
site
— crop production restricted to
those not eaten raw
— establishment of buffer zones
— low trajectory, low pressure
spray distribution systems to
minimize aerosol drift
— surface distribution irrigation
systems to avoid aerosol drift
— use of vegetation that does not
have a high accumulation of toxic
elements and chemicals
As Wolman (9) notes, the applica-
tion of wastewater to land is a prac-
ticable method of wastewater disposal
provided that "it is carefully, effi-
ciently, and continuously managed."
Under such conditions, the public health
problems associated with wastewater
irrigation should be minimal. The con-
tribution of health risks to the general
public should be extremely small,
especially if the public has limited
contact with the irrigation site. To
protect the public from waterborne
diseases, it is more appropriate to
collect and disinfect the renovated
groundwater prior to public use rather
than chlorinate the wastewater applied
to the land.
Based upon the lack of specific
evidence that there is a serious health
288risk associated with well-managed waste-
water irrigation systems, and the fact
that there are a number of management
approaches to minimize potential health
risks, it is not possible to justify
the ubiquitous use of chlorination as a
preapplication requirement.
SYSTEM RELIABILITY AND MANAGEMENT
The above sections discuss preappli-
cation strategies based upon pollutant
removal mechanisms in the soil and reduc-
tion of health hazards. There are
preapplication methods that are necessary
or desirable for consistent system
reliability or sound system management.
These include: storage, odor control,
and prevention of distribution system
clogging.
Disposal of wastewater on land in
cold climates may not be practiced con-
tinuously because of cold weather
operating problems and because crop
uptake for nitrogen control is minimal
in the winter. Storage of the waste-
water during such periods is desirable.
In addition, storage will be necessary
when natural precipitation prevents
application of the wastewater. Storage
lagoons or ponds can provide intermediate
treatment of the wastewater through
biological action, solids deposition
and pathogen reduction. Thus wastewater
storage has benefits beyond holding of
the wastewater during periods when the
land can not be irrigated. The quality
of the storage lagoon effluent may
approximate that of secondary treatment
effluent.
Since wastewater can become odorous
when stored, the storage lagoons must be
designed to maintain aerobic conditions.
Such ponds and lagoons also serve to
equalize wastewater flows and loads and
provide flexibility to the operation of
the irrigation system.
With a slow rate system, the grit,
organic solids, and fats and grease in
the wastewater may adversely affect dis-
tribution system components and perfor-
mance. This material can be removed in
storage ponds or by separation units
such as screens prior to application to
the land.
Thus there are a number of physical
and mechanical preapplication methods
that can be utilized to enhance the
reliability and management of slow rate
wastewater treatment systems.SUMMARY
The purpose of a land treatment
system is to use the soil mantle as a
reactor capable of treating contaminants
and renovating wastewater. Wastewater
irrigation is a treatment process in
which the soil is the basic unit process
with the physical, chemical, and bio-
logical mechanisms, including the vege-
tation, as the important components in
the process. With wastewater irrigation,
the applied wastewater does not have to
have a quality equivalent to that which
would be permitted for stream discharge.
There are numerous examples of slow rate
systems treating primary treated munici-
pal sewage and producing percolate
water that is virtually free of organics,
pathogens, and toxic elements and chem-
icals. The soil has a capacity to
treat contaminants in wastewater and
the capacity should be utilized.
The sound design of a well-managed
wastewater irrigation system will be
based on the limiting parameter principle,
i.e., that parameter which will require
the largest land area to be utilized.
Each site will have a specific limiting
parameter that will be based upon the
waste characteristics, soil character-
istics, topography, climate, crops to be
grown, and the management to be utilized.
Generally the soil is capable of reno-
vating any wastewater containing any
type of pollutant. In extreme cases and
with no pretreatment, certain pollutants,
such as toxic elements and chemicals
may have to be applied at such a low
application rate that land treatment
would not be a cost-effective method.
However, with the constituents in
typical municipal wastewater, slow rate
systems can be cost-effective, and the
limiting parameter approach reduces the
risk of adverse effects due to contami-
nants in the wastewater.
An important part of the planning
and design of a slow rate system is
knowledge of the constituents in the
wastewater to be applied. If the char-
acteristics of the wastewater are not
known in adequate detail, a wastewater
analysis program should be initiated.
When a wastewater has character-
istics that may be detrimental to the
equipment, the public health, the soil,
or the crops--such as excessive grit or
organic solids, a high SAR or pH, poten-
tially high concentrations of toxic com-
pounds, or high numbers of human or
animal pathogens--the adverse effect of
wastewater irrigation should be evaluated
289carefully prior to full scale design and
operation. Preapplication methods that
will reduce the parameters of concern
should be used.
Preapplication methods can enhance
the capability of a wastewater irrigation
system to function reliably and continu-
ously and minimize health or environmen-
tal risks that are associated with the
system. Based upon consideration of the
removal mechanisms that occur in the soil
and the management approaches that can be
utilized, certain preapplication strate-
gies for wastewater irrigation systems
can be identified and are noted in Table
2. Two types of preapplication require-
ments exist: a) those needed to assure
that the soil can function as a treatment
process, and b) those needed for other
purposes such as odor control and storage.
Table 2. Preapplication Strategies for
Wastewater Irrigation Systems
Strategies to sustain the capability
of the soil as a treatment process
— pretreatment to reduce excessive
amounts of nitrogen and poten-
tially toxic elements and chemi-
cals and to adjust abnormal pH
and SAR values in the wastewater
to be applied
Strategies to avoid nuisances and
maintain system reliability
— wastewater storage
— odor control
— removal of large solids to avoid
distribution system wear and
clogging
The fact that the potential health
effect of wastewater irrigation has not
been completely resolved is cause for
using conservative management and design
procedures but should not preclude the
use of wastewater irrigation systems
where they are cost effective. It also
should not result in the use of unneces-
sarily stringent preapplication
requirements.
Satisfactory wastewater irrigation
systems do not just happen. They are
carefully designed and receive sound and
continuous management. The use of the
limiting parameter concept in design, the
use of management procedures such as
those noted in Table 1, and the incorpora-
tion of the preapplication strategiesnoted in Table 2 should result in waste-
water irrigation systems that can be
cost effective, reduce risks to the
public, the environment, and the equip-
ment, and can meet accepted surface and
groundwater quality.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The assistance of the many indi-
viduals who reviewed this paper, particu-
larly Dr. William J. Jewell who contrib-
uted to many of the concepts that are
described, is gratefully acknowledged.
REFERENCES
1. Lowrance, W.W. Of Acceptable Risk -
Science and Determination of_
Safety, Wm. Kaufmann Inc., Los Altos,
California, 1976.
2. Buckman, H.O. and Brady, N.C. The
Nature and Properties of_ Soi,l_,
Macmillan Co., Eighth Edition, 1974.
3. Crites, R.W., Lynard, W.G., and
Hatch, H.L, "Land Treatment of
Cannery Wastes," Presented at the
SOth Annual Conference, Water Pollu-
tion Control Federation, October,
1977.
4. Jewell, W.J., Kodukula, P.S. and
Wujcik, W.J., "Limitations of Land
Treatment of Wastes in the Vegetable
Processing Industries," Final Report,
Dept. of Agr. Engr., Cornell Univ.,
Ithaca, N.Y., February 1978.
5. Environmental Protection Agency,
Process Design Manual for Land
Treatment of Mu Municipal Wastewater,
EPA 625/1-77-008, Washington, D.C.,
October 1977.
Pahren, H.R., Lucas, J.B., Ryan,
J.A., and Dotson, G.K. "An Apprai-
sal of the Relative Health Risks
Associated with the Land Applica-
tion of Municipal Sludge" Pre-
sented at the 50th Annual Conference,
Water Pollution Control Federation,
October 1977.
Burge, W.D. and Marsh, P.B. "Infec-
tious Disease Hazards of Land-
spreading Sewage Wastes"
Qual_. 7_, 1-9, 1978.J. Environ.
Elliott, L.F. and Ellis, J.R. "Bac-
290terial and Viral Pathogens.Asso-
ciated with Land Application of
Organic Wastes" J^ Environ. Qual.
b, 245-251, 1977.
Wolman, A. "Public Health Aspects
of Land Utilization of Wastewater
Effluents and Sludges" J_;_ Water
Poll. Control Fed. 50, 2211-2218,
1977.
291PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR
LAND APPLICATION OF WASTEWATER
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS BEFORE LAND APPLICATION OF MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER
J. C. Lance, USDA-SEA-FR, National Program Staff, Beltsville, Maryland
C. P Gerba, Department of Virology and Epidemiology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas
Abstract
The equivalent of primary treat-
ment usually will be needed as minimum
pretreatment to remove suspended solids
and heavy metals before land applica-
tion of wastewater. Pathogen popula-
tions are not greatly reduced by pri-
mary treatment but removal of suspended
solids could reduce pathogen survival
time on crops and soils. Suspended
solids removal also removes most of the
heavy metals. Secondary treatment mini-
mizes odors by stabilizing the waste-
water, and removes some pathogens but
leaves relatively high pathogen popula-
tions in the effluent. Disinfection of
secondary effluent removes most of the
bacterial pathogens, helminths, and
protozoa. However, removal of most of
the turbidity by advanced treatment is
required before disinfection will re-
duce the virus populations to low
levels. Conventional treatment methods
leave most of the nutrients in waste-
water while lagoons can be managed for
extensive nutrient removal. Tertiary
treatments remove nutrients but will be
too expensive for pretreatment for most
land application systems. In many
cases, treatment beyond the primary
level will not be required before land
application, but the exact decree of
pretreatment needed is highly site
specific and depends upon the waste-
water, soil characteristics, climate,
degree of human exposure, and intended
use or disposition of the renovated
water.Introduction
Land application of municipal
wastewater offers a unique opportunity
to simultaneously recycle valuable
resources and reduce the pollution of
our water resources. However, since
wastewaters contain pathogens, nutrients,
and heavy metals which can be health
hazards or pollutants, land treatment
systems must be carefully designed and
managed to provide safe effective treat-
ment. Municipal wastewater is usually
treated somewhat before land application.
Thus land application is practiced as
part of a total system that may include
other treatment methods before or after
land application or both. Usually, most
of the other treatment precedes land
application.
Pretreatment may be needed to mini-
mize health hazards by removing patho-
gens, to promote infiltration by re-
moval of suspended solids, to prevent
overloading the system by removing
nutrients or to make the system more
aesthetic by reducing and stabilizing
organic loads. The degree of pretreat-
ment needed is determined by the capaci-
ty of the land treatment system to
remove the various components mentioned
above. Therefore, the pretreatment
needed is site specific. In this dis-
cussion, we will focus on principles
that can be used to assess the degree of
pretreatment needed for various waste-
waters and soils.
293Pathogen Removal
The large variety of pathogens pre-
sent in domestic wastewater includes
pathogenic bacteria, viruses, protozoa,
and parasitic worms. These pathogens
may reach humans by vegetables contami-
nated by wastewater used for irrigation,
by farm workers working In contaminated
crops•or soils, by farm workers or resi-
dents In the area exposed to aerosols
containing pathogens or by pathogens
moving through the soil into groundwater
supplies. Some of these hazards can be
alleviated by pretreatment, but manage-
ment practices and exclusion of certain
uses are often more practical than pre-
treatment-
Foster and Engelbrecht (15) assessed
the pathogen removal efficiency of con-
ventional sewage treatment systems (Tab-
le 1). In general, primary treatment
reduces the populations of helminth ova
but has little impact on numbers of bac-
teria or amoebic cysts. Virus removal
is probably significant because most
viruses are associated with suspended
particles, although some laboratory
studies have failed to demonstrate sig-
nificant virus removal. Thus, primary
treatment removes only those pathogens
heavy enough to settle out of the water
or associated with suspended solids.
However, primary treatment may have a
significant impact on pathogen survival
on crops and soils due to removal of
suspended solids which protect pathogens
from adverse conditions.
Activated sludge treatment results
in about a 99% removal of bacteria and
viruses but little additional removal of
amoebic cysts or helminth ova. Removal
by trickling filters can be more effic-
ient with up to 99.9% removal of bacter-
ial pathogens and amoebic cysts and up
to about 75% removal of helminth ova and
viruses.
The infective dose (the number of
organisms necessary to cause disease inhealthy humans or animals) should be
considered when evaluating the treatment
Infective doses for most bacter-
ial and protozoan pathogens are rela-
tively high. For example, ingestion of
108 enteropathogenic Escherichia coli
or Vibrio cholerae, IP1* to 109 Salmon-
ella, and 10 to 10^ Shigella organisms
are necessary to cause infection in man
(21). The infective dose of a proto-
zoan, like Entamoeba histolytica, is
believed to be as high as 20 cysts (15).
The infective dose for viruses ranges
from 1 to 10° or more (33, 48). Thus
because of the low infective dose,
viruses must be kept at relatively low
concentrations in reclaimed water or
groundwater.
Foster and Engelbrecht (15) also
estimated the number of pathogens re-
maining per liter of wastewater after
conventional treatment (Table 2). Usu-
ally the infective dose is equal to the
pathogen population of at least a few
liters of secondary effluent and very
large volumes of disinfected secondary
effluents. Since virus is a notable
exception we will discuss the removal
of those pathogens in more detail.
Virus Removal by Different Sewage Treat-
ments - Infectious viruses are always
present in raw domestic wastewater and
appear at some level in the discharges
of conventional sewage treatment plants.
The concentration of viruses in raw
wastewater depends on many factors like
the time of year, hygienic conditions in
the community, per capital consumption
of water, etc. The concentration of
enteric viruses has been reported as
high as 500,000 PFU per liter (9) in
wastewater in some parts of the world.
In the United States, the expected aver-
age concentration of enteric viruses has
been calculated to be about 7,000 PFU
per liter in raw sewage (44). Consid-
ering the apparent low Infectious dose
Table 1. Removal of Pathogens from Sewage Water by Conventional Treatment
Systemsa
Pathogen
Salmonella
Mycobacterium
Amoebic cysts
Helminth ova
VirusPrimary
15
48 to 57
No removal in 3 hr.
72 to 98
3 to extensive
removalActivated Sludge Trickling filter
96 to 99
slight to 87
No apparent removal
No apparent removal
76 to 9984 to 99.9
66 to 99
11 to 99.9
62 to 76
0 to 84
aAdapted from Foster and Engelbrecht (15).Table 2. Estimated Concentrations of Wastewater Pathogensa
Pathogen
Salmonella
E. histolytica
Helminth ova
Mycobacterium
Human enteriovirus
(poliovirus,etc.)Untreated
Wastewater
5.2 x
4.0 x
6.6 x
3.8 x
1.0 x103
10°101
101
10"Number of
Primary
Effluent
2.6 x 103
3.5 x 10°
6.6 x 10°
5.2 x 101
5.2 x 1030rganisms/L
Secondary
Effluent
1.3 x 102
3.2 x 10°
1.3 x 10-1
4.0 x 10°
5.2 x 102Effluent
Disinfected^
1.3 x 10-1
3.2 x 10-3
1.3 x lO-"
4.0 x lO-3
5.2 x 101
aAdapted from Foster and Engelbrecht
^Conditions sufficient to yield a 99.
of enteric viruses (17), removal pro-
cesses must be capable of achieving
large reductions of virus before direct
reuse.
Viruses are removed from water and
wastewater physically and by inactivat-
ing or destroying the virus. Process-
es that remove viruses include sediment-
ation, adsorption, filtration, coagula-
tion and precipitation. Viruses are
inactivated by high pH, chemical oxida-
tion by disinfectants like halogens,
ozone, and photo-oxidation by certain
dyes and ultraviolet light (45, 49).
Processes that inactivate viruses are
preferable to those that simply remove
them since removal presents a problem
of the disposal of potentially infect-
ious materials.
There are several shortcomings to
the evaluation of wastewater treatment
plant methods. For example, the number
of viruses entering a sewage treatment
plant during a 24-hr period varies
greatly, making temporal coordination of
samples for treatment effectiveness dif-
ficult. Seeding experiments have been
used to overcome this problem, but they
too may yield misleading data because
many viruses naturally present in sewage
may be deeply embedded in or absorbed
to suspended solids (3,4,30).
Primary treatment - Primary treatment
of wastes, usually Involving only settl-
ing and retention before discharge,
seems to remove few viruses from sewage
(10). Unfortunately, obtaining a true
indication of the number of viruses
removed by this process is difficult
since there is no accurate method to
assess the number of viruses embedded
in and adsorbed on fecal material and
other solids. Like most field studies,
experiments with seeded poliovirus type
1 indicated little removal during pri-(15)
9% kill.
mary settling (3). Also, settling in
Imhoff tanks reportedly did not result in
significant virus removal(3). Berg (3),
however, believes that since many of the
viruses present in raw sewage are probab-
ly solid-associated, long settling times
of 12 to 24 hr should result in a con-
siderable amount of virus removal. In
any event, it is certain that large num-
bers of virus remain suspended in sewage
after primary sedimentation.
Secondary treatment - The three most
widely used biological processes for
secondary sewage treatment are trickling
filtration, activated sludge and oxida-
tion ponds. Again, virus removal during
these processes seems to depend largely
on virus adsorption to solids (1,3,41),
although biological antagonism may also
be a factor (3,41). Trickling filter
removal varied from 16 to 100% (3).
Sherman, et al. (39) recently reported
average virus removal of 9.0 and 18.9%
through the trickling filter beds at two
different plants. Berg (3) stated that
viruses passing through trickling filters
simply do not make good contact with ad-
sorptive surfaces. However, rotary-tube
trickling filters seem to be more effi-
cient. Clark and Chang (11) reported
59 to 95% removal for three different
enteroviruses in a bench-scale, rotary-
tube trickling filter. Removal depended
on the type of virus and the filtration
rate. At medium filtration rates, virus
removal approached that of the activated
sludge process; high-rate filtration
significantly reduced virus removal.
Enterovirus removals of 90% or
greater have been observed during acti-
vated sludge treatment of sewage (1,3,
15,17). Results of several studies in-
dicated that the efficiency of a treat-
ment plant is closely related to the con-
centration of the mixed liquor-solids
295and its capacity to remove them,(1,44).
Clarke et al. (10) showed that Coxsack-
ievirus A9 was removed much more effect-
ively than poliovirus, although removal
of both viruses was always greater than
80%. This indicates that each entero-
virus will probably have different re-
movel rate characteristics in the acti-
vated sludge process (44), More recent-
ly, Farrah et al. (14) found that rota-
viruses, the major agent of gastrointes-
tinal illness in children, adsorbed
poorly to activated sludge floes as
compared with poliovirus type 1. On this
basis, they speculated that wastewater
treatment processes that are highly
effective in the removal of enteroviruses
may not be as effective in removing other
viral groups, such as rotaviruses. Most
field studies appear to confirm that a
properly operated activated sludge treat-
ment plant removes as high as 90% of the
viruses, but little or no virus removal
is not unusual in plants that are not
operating efficiently (3).
Removal of viruses by waste stabili-
zation ponds is erratic, and few studies
have been reported. Shuval (40) report-
ed virus removals ranging from 0 to 96%
in ponds with a 20-day retention time.
Malherbe and Strickland-Cholmley (31)
found highly variable virus removals in
a pond with a 19-day retention period,
but they noted short-circuiting which
may account for much of the great varia-
bility generally experienced with remov-
al of viruses by stabilization ponds (3).
The time of year may influence the
efficiency of virus removal from oxida-
tion ponds. " Nupen et al. (32) reported
greater removals in the summer, when
algal growth was abundant, than in the
winter. Removals as high as 99.9% were
achieved but viruses were still routine-
ly detected in the pond effluent.
Tertiary treatment - The tertiary treat-
ment of wastewater usually involves some
type of physical-chemical processing,
like coagulation with alum, lime, iron
salts, or polyelectrolyte and/or passage
through activated carbon or resins to
remove residual organics. Coagulation
seems to be a highly effective method
for the removal of enteroviruses from
wastewater. In laboratory studies, re-
movals to 98% removals of poliovirus
type 1 were obtained by precipitation of
the phosphate in domestic wastewater,
using either alum or calcium hydroxide
(8). In pilot plant studies at an
advanced wastewater treatment plant, 63%of seeded poliovirus type 1 was removed
during alum treatment and greater than
99.7% during lime treatment of activated
sludge effluent (49). Sattar et al. (35)
found in laboratory studies that 99.99%
or more of added poliovirus could be re-
moved from raw sewage by lime treatment
at pH 11.5 for 1 hour. In experiments
using seeded virus, Nupen et al. (32)
reported 3.7 to 4.5 log reductions during
lime treatment with a retention time of
60 minutes. Virus removal was directly
related to retention time and pH. Most
enteric viruses are inactivated at high
pH. However, these same investigators
were always able to recover naturally
occurring viruses in 1-1 samples, even
after exposure of the wastewater to pH
11.5 for 180 minutes. Thus, while seeded
laboratory-grown virus studies indicate
large reductions during lime treatment,
naturally occurring viruses may be more
resistant to high pH and not as effic-
iently removed.
Compared with metal salts, commerci-
ally available polyelectrolytes have only
minor significance In virus removal from
wastewater, but they do increase the
effective range of virus removal by alum
and iron salts. Shelton and Drewry (28)
found only a 70% reduction of seeded f2
bacteriophage from wastewater by poly-
electrolytes, but greater than 90% re-
moval with metal salts.
Carbon adsorption of residual organ-
ics Is often practiced in advanced waste-
water treatment facilities, but while
viruses are adsorbed to activated carbon,
its adsorption capacity for viruses is
limited (3,16), and breakthrough occurs
after the passage of a few bed volumes
(16).
The complete physical-chemical
treatment of wastewater has received
increasing interest as an alternative
to the conventional biological treatment
of wastewater. Sobsey et al. (42) stud-
ied the removal of poliovirus type 1
from a packaged physical-chemical treat-
ment plant consisting of chlorination,
activated carbon adsorption, alum floccu-
lation, and vacuum filtration using dia-
tomaceous earth as a filter aid. This
system was capable of removing an average
of 99.95% of the influent virus from raw
sewage. The degree of virus removal in
such systems generally seems to be super-
ior to that of conventional primary and
secondary wastewater treatment.
Disinfection - No sewage treatment pro-
cess is principally designed to affect
296pathogen removal, except by disinfection.
The sole purpose of disinfection is to
reduce the level of any remaining patho-
gens to negligible levels from the pub-
lic health standpoint. While most dis-
infectants are highly effective in remov-
ing bacteria from wastewater, far greater
difficulty is encountered in the inacti-
vation of viruses. The most commonly
used disinfectant for wastewater is
chlorine, although the use of other halo-
gens, ozone, UV light, and photodynamic
oxidation is currently being investigated
(18,45).
Chlorine is an effective, rapid
virucide in clean water devoid of ammon-
ia and organic compounds and at neutral
pH levels, where it exists as highly
virucidal hypochlorous acid (4). How-
ever, in sewage effluents chlorine' com-
bines rapidly with ammonia to form chlor-
amines and other forms of combined chlor-
ine that have very small capacities for
virus inactivation. In general, enteric
viruses seem more resistant than bacter-
ia to chlorine, although the sensitivity
varies considerably by species, type,
and even strain (45). One recent con-
cern has been the demonstration that ex-
posure of poliovirus type 1 to repeated
sublethal doses of chlorine resulted in
the surviving viruses becoming progress-
ively more resistant to chlorine inacti-
vation (2). Liu and McGowan (29), in
laboratory studies using 25 different
human enteric viruses, found that the
time required for 99.99% inactivation
varied from 2.7 to 120 minutes when
viruses were exposed to 0.5 mg/1 free
chlorine in river water. Application
of 8 mg/1 chlorine to secondarily treat-
ed sewage resulted in no decrease of
virus after 1 hour (3). With high doses
(40 mg/1 for 10 minutes), 99.9% of the
viruses in secondary sewage were des-
troyed (3). A combined residual of 400
mg/1 resulted in the inactivation of
99.99% poliovirus type 1 in 30 min in
primary effluent, but such high levels
of chlorine are costly and may produce
potentially carcinogenic substances.
Kott (24) found that after a 2-hr appli-
cation of 8 mg/1 chlorine, the level of
naturally occurring enteroviruses in
oxidation pond effluent decreased 46%.
Clearly, it is difficult to sub-
stantially reduce virus numbers in pri-
mary and secondary sewage by chlorine
application, but in advanced wastewater
treatment systems involving physical-
chemical treatment, where the amount of
organic matter, ammonia, and turbidityare greatly reduced, large reductions
of virus are possible (12). For exam-
ple, Nupen (32) reported reductions of
7 logs of virus after breakpoint chlor-
ination of tertiary treated effluents.
Other methods are currently being
investigated for disinfection of waste-
water, such as chlorine dioxide, bromine
chloride, UV light, ionizing, irradia-
tion, ozone, etc., but these methods
have been studied only in the laboratory
or on a pilot scale (45). Ozone has
received the most attention since it has
been us,ed to treat water supplies in
Europe and Canada for over 60 years (45),
but it is only now being studied for
wastewater treatment. Recent pilot
studies indicate that it is often diffi-
cult to disinfect secondary effluents
with ozone and to consistently meet
nominal bacteriological standards and
that tertiary treatment may be required.
Our review indicated that some
level of viruses will be present in the
effluent from commonly used wastewater
plants. Sproul (44) and Gerba et al.
(17) previously estimated the percent-
age removal of viruses by various waste-
water treatment systems. This infor-
mation has been used to calculate the
viruses remaining after various treat-
ment sequences (Table 3). It should be
emphasized that this information is
largely based on work done with entero-
viruses, and other viral groups may be
removed more or less efficiently by
these treatment processes. Based on
the estimates of Clarke et al. (10)
that raw sewage contains on the average
7,000 plaque-forming units (PFU) per 1,
Sproul (44) estimated that 350 viruses/
liter would remain after activated
sludge treatment, including chlorina-
tion and physical-chemical treatment
involving phosphate precipitation and
6 PFU/liter remained after activated
carbon adsorption and chlorination
about. In other parts of the world,
virus concentrations would be much
higher. Calculations using the data of
Buras (9) show that as many as 25,000
PFU of virus per 1 may be present after
secondary treatment and chlorination
(Table 3).
Removal of Suspended Solids During Pre-
treatment
The suspended solids content of
wastewater is important in land treat-
ment because of their effect on the
soil infiltration rate. This is
297Table 3. Estimated Enterovirus Reduction by Various Sewage Treatment Methods
TreatmentPercent
virus
removal
expectedViruses remaining in
effluent
Clarke
et al.(10)aBuras
(9)b
1. Primary treatment
Sedimentation
Chlorination
2. Secondary treatment
Stabilization ponds
Trickling filters
Chlorination (after trickling
filters)
Activated sludge
Chlorination (after activated
sludge)
3. Tertiary treatment (after
sedimentation)
Excess lime precipitation 90-99-99
Alum precipitation (after lime) 90
Chlorination (after lime and alum) 99-99.99
Activated carbon adsorption 0-50PFU/1
0
50
90
50
50
90
507,000
3,500
700
3,500
1,750
700
350500,000
250,000
50,000
250,000
125,000
50,000
25,000
700-0.7 50,000-50
7-0.07 5,000-5
O.O7-0.OOO0O7 50-0.0005
aBased on an estimate of 7000 PFU/liter
bBased on a finding of 500,000 PFU/liter in wastewater in Israel.
particularly important in managing high
rate infiltration systems because main-
taining high infiltration rates over a
long period of time is essential for an
effective treatment system. Infiltra-
tion rates of 40 to 60 cm/day have been
maintained during the 10 years the
Flushing Meadows project was operated
(1967-1976) (6,28). The soil at the
site In a dry river bed contains about
89% sand, 8% silt, and 3% clay. The
optimum flooding cycle was 2 weeks
flooding, alternated with 1 to 2 weeks
drying (1 week drying in summer, 2 weeks
drying in winter). Infiltration rates
declined linearly during flooding and
were restored in sigmoid fashion during
dry periods. Experiments with soil
columns placed In a greenhouse showed
that high infiltration rates could be
maintained if the secondary effluent
contained less than 10 mg/1 suspended
solids (34).
Experiments with soil columns
placed in an insulated 'shelter with the
top of the columns extending through
the roof showed that high infiltration
rates could also be maintained using
primary sewage effluent (27). Afterthe columns had been flooded on a sched-
ule of 9 days flooding alternated with
5 days drying for Bh months, the average
infiltration rate had decreased by only
about 3%. The average infiltration rate
for the 8% months of flooding with pri-
mary sewage effluent was 17.5 cm/day as
compared with an average rate of 21.1
cm/day for the same columns for 10 months
of intermittent flooding with secondary
sewage effluent during the previous year.
The suspended solids content of the pri-
mary effluent ranged from 51 to 181 mg/1.
Evidently the suspended solids of pri-
mary sewage effluent reduced infiltration
rates much less than the suspended solids
of secondary sewage effluent. The reason
for this may be that suspended solids of
primary sewage effluent were degraded
much more rapidly after they had accumu-
lated on the soil surface than those of
secondary sewage effluent.
The effect of flooding with a third
kind of wastewater was studied in a field
system with 16-ha recharge basins flooded
with secondary sewage effluent from a
32-ha detention pond (27), The several
days' detention time in the pond allowed
a dense algal population to develop.
298Infiltration rates ranged from 20 to 30
cm/day even though the soil was very
similar to the area with 40 to 60 cm/day
infiltration rates of secondary effluent
in previous experiments. Preliminary
studies indicated that the algal content
of the water from the detention pond was
probably the most important factor in
reducing the infiltration rate and that
much higher infiltration rates could be
obtained with secondary effluent that
had bypassed the 32-ha detention pond-
This indicates that the algae of oxida-
tion pond effluents may present a prob-
lem in maintaining high infiltration
rates in a rapid infiltration system.
Thus, pretreatment to maintain in-
filtration rates is important mainly for
rapid infiltration systems. Further-
more the available data indicate that
only limited pretreatment (primary) is
needed to insure high infiltration rates
in coarse sandy soils. However, data
are not available on the effect of dif-
ferent types and concentrations of sus-
pended solids on infiltration rates of
soils that may be marginal in providing
high infiltration rates for rapid infil-
tration systems. The algal content of
water from oxidation ponds or lagoons
may be a serious problem in maintaining
high infiltration rates. However, this
effect is highly site specific and
infiltration rates for waters from la-
goons in different regions cannot be
predicted without additional data.
Nutrient Removal
Conventional treatment systems are
relatively ineffective in removing nitro-
gen and phosphorus from wastewater.
Primary treatment usually results
in only slight removal while secondary
treatment results in 10 to 20% removal.
Therefore, conventional treatment has
little effect on the nutrient load ap-
plied to land treatment systems. Vari-
ous tertiary treatment systems can be
used to remove most of the nutrients at
considerable expense. Lagoon or oxida-
tion ponds vary in their effectiveness
depending upon the detention time and
management system. For example, the
storage lagoons of the Muskegon project
reduced the total nitrogen (N) content
from 8.2 to 5.6 mg/1 and total phosphor-
us (P) from 2.4 to 1.4 mg/1 (46). The
Deer Creek Lake lagoons reduced the
total N from 50.6 to 5.4 mg/1 and P
from 6 to 0.4 mg/1 (25). Some of the
reduction was due to dilution. There-
fore, lagoons can significantly reducenutrient loads when used as pretreatment
before land application. If storage is
required, nutrient removal will depend
largely upon the detention time in the
lagoon.
Heavy Metal Removal
Removal of heavy metals may be nec-
essary to avoid injury to plants and to
prevent harmful accumulations of metals
in food chain crops and soils or movement
to groundwater. Most heavy metals are
removed by conventional treatment (Table
4) and even primary treatment is effect-
ive in producing wastewater adequate for
land treatment (46). This is due to the
association of most of the metals with
the suspended solids. However, this
would not be true for some effluents
with large amounts of industrial wastes
containing high metal concentrations.
Degree of Pretreatment Needed for
Different Land Treatment Systems
Since the maximum loading rates,
pathogen hazards, etc. are highly site
specific, we cannot formulate definite
rules for the degree of pretreatment
needed. The following principles and
alternatives should be considered in
designing the various types of land
treatment systems. Table 5 shows the
problems associated with the different
types of land treatment systems. A high
degree of pathogen removal is required
before wastewater can be used to irrigate
edible crops. Since even disinfection
does not produce a pathogen free effluent,
excluding crops consumed raw from waste-
water irrigation is more practical and
less hazardous than extensive pretreat-
ment. Irrigation of crops which are
processed before sale should not be
hazardous if at least primary treatment
precedes land application. Irrigation
with wastewater should not contaminate
groundwater except when very coarse soils
are used.
Only limited information is avail-
able on aerosols from irrigation systems.
Sepp (36) detected coliform bacteria as
far as 3 m downwind from spray limits in
a sparsely vegetated area when ponded and
chlorinated activated sludge effluent was
applied by spray irrigation. Katzenelson
and Teltch (22) isolated coliforms with
an Anderson sampler 350 m from sprinklers
applying raw sewage water. A Salmonella
bacterium was isolated 60 m from the
sprinklers.
Sorber (43) concluded that aero-
299Table 4. Concentration of Metals in Various United States Wastewatersa
Element
Cadmium
Chromium
Copper
Iron
Lead
Manganese
Mercury
Nickel
ZincUntreated
Wastewater
mg/1
0.004-0.14
0.02-0.700
0.02-3.36
0.9-3.54
0.05-1.27
0.11-0.14
0.002-0.044
0.002-0.105
0.030-8.31Primary
Effluents
mg/1
0.004-0.028
<0.001-0.30
0.024-0.13
0.41-0.83
0.016-0.11
0.032-0.16
0.009-0.035
0.063-0.20
0.015-0.75Secondary
Effluents
mg/1
0.0002-<0.02
<0.010-0.17
0.05-0.22
0.04-3.89
0.0005.-<0.20
0.021-0.38
0.0005-0.0015
<0.10-0.149
0.047-0.35EPA Recommended
Drinking
Water Standards
mg/1
0.01
0.05
1.0
0.3
0.05
0.05
0.002
No standard
5.0
aAdapted from Process Design Manual for Land Treatment of Municipal Wastewater (46)
solization of wastewater seems to range
from 0.2 to 0.4%, depending on spray
equipment and the prevailing meteorolog-
ical conditions. Sunlight, temperature,
and relative humidity affect virus sur-
vival in aerosols. Atmospheric stabili-
ty is the most important meteorological
variable affecting virus survival. Under
the least desirable meteorological con-
ditions, less than 200 m would be re-
quired to provide a reduction of three
orders of magnitude in aerosolized virus
concentrations (43). This would suggest
that very low levels of enteroviruses
would be present at 200 m when secondary
sewage effluent was sprayed, but consid-
erably more might be present at this dis-
tance if raw sewage was sprayed.
Katzenelson, et al. (23) reported
that the incidence of enteric disease in
agricultural communal villages in Israel
near areas which were spray-irrigated
with wastewater was higher than in simi-
lar villages not near spray-Irrigated
fields. However, the wastewater was con-centrated sewage that was sprayed on
fields after only a few days detention
time in lagoons. Also, it was not deter-
mined whether the enteric diseases were
transmitted by aerosols or by other means.
Thus, the limited data available
indicate that aerosols from raw sewage
used for sprinkler irrigation probably
would be hazardous, while spray irriga-
tion with secondary sewage effluent might
present some hazard. The possible aero-
sol hazard from spray irrigation with
secondary sewage effluent could be elim-
inated in several ways. Disinfection of
secondary sewage effluent by chlorination
should reduce to negligible levels the
spread of pathogens by aerosols. However,
it may be more practical to eliminate
aerosols by applying the sewage by sur-
face irrigation rather than by sprinkling.
Buffer zones can also be used to reduce
aerosol hazards. Disinfection is usually
advisable when wastewater is used to ir-
rigate golf courses or parks.
Contamination of crops is not a
Table 5. Potential Problems
Types of
Land Treatment Soil
Systems Clogging
Overland
flow
Irrigation
(slow rate) +
Rapid
infiltration ++Associated with Different Land
Problems Associated with Land
Food
Contamination
-
+
-Ground-
water
Pollution
_
+Treatment Systems
Treatment
Surface
Water
Pollution Aerosols
++ +
+ ++
- -
Little or no potential problem
Moderate potential
Considerable potential
300problem with high-rate systems because
crops are not usually grown on these
lands. Movement of pathogens to the
groundwater is the primary concern for
high-rate systems. The available data
indicate that both bacteria and viruses
can move in large numbers through coarse
sand and gravels to the groundwater.
The efficiency of virus removal by
rapid soil infiltration has received
only a limited amount of field study.
Field studies at the Flushing Meadows
rapid infiltration wastewater land treat-
ment site near Phoenix, Arizona, indicat-
ed that at least 99.99% of the naturally
occurring viruses in secondarily treated
sewage could be removed by passage
through 9 m of fine sandy loam soil(20).
These results were confirmed by labora-
tory studies with the same soil (26).
However, sporadic isolation of enteric
viruses in groundwater below coarse san-
dy soils at some land treatment sites
(37,47) indicated that efficiency of
virus removal may be site dependent.
There are indications that the nature of
the soil, as well as environmental con-
ditions (i.e., rainfall), can greatly
affect the efficiency of virus removal
by soil filtration (26). Management
practices to reduce virus movement
through soils probably can be developed
but little research has been done on
these practices. With soils with a
loamy sand or finer texture, only a few
fecal bacteria move through 2 m or more
soil to the groundwater (7). The limi-
ted data available indicated that virus-
es would not move through these soils
(13,28,50). The fecal bacteria seem to
be eliminated by about 100 m of lateral
movement in groundwater. Therefore,
pretreatment could reduce the numbers of
pathogens moving through rapid infiltra-
tion systems with very coarse soils.
However, pretreatment would not be a
factor if sufficient underground deten-
tion time could be provided before move-
ment of the reclaimed water to wells or
streams. Recently, Gerba and Lance
(19) showed that equal amounts of seeded
virus were removed from primary and sec-
ondary effluents by soil columns. Since
these are general statements, each high-
rate system must be considered separate-
ly. More research is needed to deter-
mine exactly which soils permit passage
of some bacteria and viruses and which
soils effectively remove these pathogens.
One way to prevent the spread of patho-
gens in the groundwater is to intercept
the renovated water and reuse it for
irrigation, industrial, or recreationalpurposes. Water treated by most high-
rate land filtration systems would meet
pathogen standards for unrestricted irri-
gation and would require minimal treat-
ment for industrial use or recreational
lakes.
Pretreatment by conventional treat-
ment plants has relatively little impact
on nutrient removal by land treatment
systems. Some nitrogen is removed by
secondary treatment, but the carbon to
nitrogen ratio of primary effluent is
more favorable for denitrification in
land application systems. However, stor-
age lagoons can have considerable impact
on the nutrient removed from wastewater.
Lagoons can be managed by varying deten-
tion times, etc., to provide any addit-
ional nutrient removal needed above that
provided by land treatment. The combi-
nation of lagoons and land treatment
needed depends upon economics and local
conditions. When extensive storage is
required due to climate, it may be desir-
able to design and manage the storage
lagoon to provide extensive nutrient
removal.
If a land application system does
not provide adequate phosphorus removal,
pretreatment with materials like lime and
alum can be used to precipitate phos-
phates (5).
In summary, the equivalent of pri-
mary treatment usually is needed to pro-
vide some stabilization and removal of
suspended solids and heavy metals. In
some cases, secondary treatment is need-
ed to provide further stabilization and
to minimize odors. Secondary treatment
is designed primarily to remove BOD and
accomplishes this goal. However, BOD
loads are not a serious problem in land
treatment systems because soils can
handle high BOD loading rates. Second-
ary treatment also provides some patho-
gen removal but leaves relatively high
pathogen populations in the effluent.
Lagoons can be used to provide varying
degrees of treatment and nutrient and
pathogen removal could be an added bene-
fit to storage systems. Due to its high
cost, rarely would tertiary treatment be
used before land treatment. In fact,
land treatment often is used In lieu of
in plant tertiary treatment. Most land
application systems can be operated with-
out using disinfection as pretreatment
but sometimes a high degree of human con-
tact with treated crops, soils, or aero-
sols may necessitate disinfecting waste-
water before land application. The
exact degree of pretreatment required
depends upon the wastewater characteris-
301tics, soils, climate, degree of human
exposure around the site and the intend-
ed use or disposition of the renovated
water and should be determined separate-
ly for each system.
References
1. Balluz, S.A., H.H. Jones & M. Butler.
1977. The persistence of poliovirus
in activated sludge treatment. J. Hyg.
Cambridge, 78:165-173.
2. Bates, R.C., P.T.B. Shaffer & S.M.
Sutherland. 1977. Development of poli-
ovirus having increased resistance to
chlorine Inactivation. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 34:849-853.
3. Berg, G. 1973. Removal of viruses
from sewage, effluents and waters. 1,
A review. Bull. World Hlth. Org.
49:451-460.
4. Berg, G. 1973. Removal of viruses
from sewage, effluents and waters.
2. Present and future trends. Bull.
World Hlth. Org. 49:461-469.
5. Bledsoe, B.E., R.E. Thomas & K.F.
Jackson. 1977. Effects of pretreat-
ing domestic wastewater or hydraulic
loading of overland flow. Agron.
Abstr. pp. 21-22.
6. Bouwer, H., J.C. Lance and M.S. Riggs
1974. High-rate land treatment. II.
Water quality and economic aspects
of the Flushing Meadows project. J.
Water Pollu. Control Fed. 46:844-859.
7. Bouwer, H., & R. L. Chaney. 1974.
Land treatment of wastewater. In:
N.C. Brady, Ed., Advances in Agronomy
V. 26. Academic Press, New York, pp.
133-176.
8. Brunner, D.R. & O.J.Sproul. 1970.
Virus inactivation during phosphate
precipitation. J. San. Eng. Div.,
Amer. Soc. Civil Engr. 96:365-379.
9. Buras, N. 1974. Recovery of viruses
from wastewater and effluent by the
direct inoculation method. Water
Res. 8:19-22.
10. Clark, N.A., R.E. Stevenson, S.L.
Chang & P.W. Kabler. 1961. Removal
of enteric viruses from sewage by
activated sludge treatment. Amer. J.
Publ. Health 51:1118-1129.
11. Clarke, N.A., & S.L. Chang. 1975.
Removal of enterviruses from sewage
by benchscale rotary-tube trickling
filters. Appl. Microbiol. 30:223-228.
12. Culp, R.L. 1974. Breakpoint chlorin-
ation for virus inactivation. In:
J.F. Malina & B.P. Sagik, Eds.,
Virus Survival in Water and Waste-
water Systems. Center for Research in
Water Resources, Austin, pp.158-165.13. Damgaarde-Larsen, S., K.O. Jensen &
B, Nissen. 1977. Survival and move-
ment of enterovirus in connection
with land disposal of sludges. Water
Res. 11:503-508.
14. Farrah, S.R., S.M. Goyal, C.P. Gerba,
R.H. Conklin, & E.M. Smith. 1978.
Comparison between adsorption of
poliovirus and rotavirus by aluminum
hydroxide and activated sludge floes.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 35:360-363.
15. Foster, D.H., & R.S. Engelbrecht.
1973. Microbial hazards of disposing
of wastewater on soil. In: W.E. Soppe
& L.T. Kardos, Eds., Recycling Treat-
ed Municipal Wastewater and Sludge
Through Forest and Cropland. Penn.
State Univ. Press, University Park,
PA. pp. 247-270.
16. Gerba, C.P., M.D. Sobsey, C. Wallis,
& J.L. Melnick. 1975. Adsorption of
poliovirus onto activated carbon in
wastewater. Environ. Sci. Technol. 9:
727-731.
17. Gerba, C.P., C. Wallis, and J.L.
Melnick. 1975. Viruses in water: the
problem, some solutions. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 9:1122-1125.
18. Gerba, C.P., C. Wallis, & J.L.
Melnick. 1977. Disinfection of waste-
water by photodynamic oxidation. J.
Water Pollu. Control Fed. 49:575-
583.
19. Gerba, C.P., and J.C. Lance. 1978.
Virus removal from primary and secon-
dary sewage effluent by soil filtra-
tion. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
(in press).
20. Gilbert, R.G., C.P. Gerba, R.C. Rice,
H. Bouwer, C. Wallis, & J.L. Melnick.
1976. Virus and bacteria removal from
wastewater by land treatment. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 32:333-338.
21. Hoadley, A.W., & S.M. Goyal. 1976.
Public health implications of the
application of wastewater to land.
In: R.G. Sanks and T. Asano, Eds.,
Land Treatment and Disposal of Muni-
cipal and Industrial Wastewater. Ann
Arbor Science, Ann Arbor, MI. pp.
102-132.
22. Katzenelson, E., & B. Teltch. 1976.
Dispersion of enteric bacteria by
spray irrigation. J. Water Pollu.
Control Fed. 48:710-716.
23. Katzenelson, E., I. Borum, and H.I.
Shuval. 1976. The risk of communica-
ble disease infection associated with
wastewater irrigation in agricultural
settlements. Science 194:944-946.
24. Kott, Y. 1973. Hazards associated
with the use of chlorinated oxida-
tion pond effluents for irrigation.
302Water Res. 7:853-862.
25. Lambert, D.J., and H.W. McKlm. 1977.
Deer Creek Lake - Inland wastewater
treatment system. In: R.C. Loehr, Ed.
Food, Fertilizers and Agricultural
Residues. Ann Arbor Science Publ.,
Inc., Ann Arbor, MI. pp. 79-94.
26. Lance, J.C., C.P. Gerba, and J.L.
Melnick. 1976. Virus movement in
soil columns flooded with secondary
sewage effluent. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 32:520-526.
27. Lance, J.C., R.C. Rice, and H.
Bouwer. 1978. Nitrogen and pathogen
removed by rapid and slow infiltra-
tion systems for land treatment.
Progress in Water Technology (in
press).
28. Lance, J.C. 1978. Fate of bacteria
and viruses in sewage applied to
soil. Trans. Amer. Soc. Agr. Engr.
(in press).
29. Liu, O.C., and F. McGowan. 1973.
Effect of chlorination of human
enteric viruses in partially treated
water from the Potomac estuary.
Study report prepared for U.S. Army
Engin. Div., North Atlantic, North-
eastern Water Supply Laboratory,
Narrangansett, RI.
30. Malina, J.F., K.R. Ranganathan, B.E.D.
Moore, and B.P. Sagik. 1974. Polio-
virus inactivation by activated
sludge. In.- J.F. Malina and B.P.
Sagik, Eds., Virus Survival in Water
and Wastewater Systems. Center for
Research in Water Resources, Austin,
TX. pp. 95-106.
31. Malherbe, H.H., and M. Strickland-
Cholmley. 1967. Survival of viruses
in the presence of algae. In: G.
Berg, Ed., Transmission of Viruses
by the Water Route. John Wiley, New
York, pp. 449-458.
32. Nupen, E.M., B.W. Bateman, and N.C.
McKenny. 1974. The reduction of
virus by the various unit processes
used in the reclamation of sewage
to potable waters. In: J.F. Malina
and B.P. Sagik, Eds., Virus Survival
in Water and Wastewater Systems.
Center for Research in Water Resour-
ces, Austin, TX, pp. 107-114.
33. Platkin, S.A., and M. Katz. 1965.
Minimal infective doses of viruses
for man by the oral route, in: G.
Berg, Ed., Transmission of Viruses
by the Water Route Interscience,
New York. pp. 151-166.
34. Rice, R.C. 1974. Soil clogging dur-
ing infiltration of secondary effl-
uent. J. Water Pollu. Control Fed.
46:708-716.35. Sattar, S.A., S. Ramia, and J.C.N.
Westwood. 1976. Calcium hydroxide
(lime) and the elimination of human
pathogenic viruses from sewage:
Studies with experimentally contami-
nated (poliovirus type 1, Sabin) and
pilot plant samples. Canad. J. Publ.
Health 67:221-225.
36. Sepp, E. 1971. The use of sewage for
irrigation. A literature review.
California State Dept. Publ. Health,
Bur. of Sanitary Engin., Sacramento.
37. Schaub, S.A., and C.A. Sorber. 1977.
Virus and bacteria removal from waste-
water by rapid infiltration through
soil. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 33:
609-619.
38. Shelton, S.P., and W.A. Drewry. 1973.
Tests of coagulants for the reduction
of viruses, turbidity, and chemical
oxygen demand. J. Amer. Water Works
Assoc. 65:627-635.
39. Sherman, V.R., K. Kawata, V.P.
Oliveri, and J.D, Naparstek. 1975.
Virus removals in trickling filter
plants. Water Sew. Works 122:R36-
R44.
40. Shuval, H.I. 1978. Detection and
control of enteroviruses in the
water environment. In: H.I. Shuval,
Ed., Developments in Water Quality
Research. Ann Arbor Sci. Publ., Inc.,
Ann Arbor, MI. pp. 47-71.
41. Sobsey, M.D., & R.C. Cooper. 1973.
Enteric virus survival in algal-
bacterial wastewater treatment
systems. Water Res. 7:669:685.
42. Sobsey, M.D., C. Wallis, M.F. Hobbs,
A.C. Green, & J.L. Melnick. 1973.
Virus removal and inactivation by
physical-chemical wastetreatment.
J. Environ. Engin. Div., Amer. Soc.
Civil Engin. 99:245-252.
43. Sorber, C.A. 1976. Viruses in aero-
solized wastewater. In: L.R. Baldwin,
J.M. Davidson, and J.F. Gerba, Eds.,
Virus Aspects of Applying Municipal
Wastes to Land. Center for Environ.
Programs, Insti. of Food & Agric.
Sci., U. of Florida, Gainesville,FL.
pp. 83-87.
44. Sproul, O.J. 1976. Removal of viruses
by treatment processes. In: G. Berg,
H.L. Bodily, E.H. Lennette, J.L.
Melnick, & T.G. Metcalf, Eds., Virus
in Water. Amer. Publ. Health Assoc,
Washington, DC. pp. 167-179.
45. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
1976. Disinfection of wastewater.
Task Force Report. EPA-430/9-75-012.
Washington, DC.
46. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, & U.S.
303Department of Agriculture. 1977.
Process design manual for land treat-
ment of municipal wastewater. EPA
625/1-77-008 (COE EM 100-1-501).
47. Wellings, F.M., A.L. Lewis, C.W.
Mountain, & L.V. Pierce. 1975. Demon-
stration of virus in groundwater
after effluent discharge onto soil.
Appl. Microbiol. 29:751-757.
48. Westwood, J.C.N., & S.A. Sarter. 1976,
The minimal infective dose. In: G.
Berg, Ed., Viruses in Water. Amer.
Publ. Health Assoc, Washington, DC,
pp. 61-69.
49. Wolf, H.W., R.S. Safferman, A.R.
Mixson, & C.E. Stringer. 1974. Virus
inactivation during tertiary treat-
ment. In: J.F. Malina & B.P. Sagik,
Eds., Virus Survival in Water and
Wastewater Systems. Center for
Research in Water Resources, Austin,
TX, pp. 145-157.
50. Young, R.H.F., & N.C. Burbank, Jr.
1973. Virus removal in Hawaiian soils.
J. Amer. Water Works Assoc. 65:598-
604.PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR
LAND APPLICATION OF WASTEWATER
PREAPPLICATION TREATMENT FOR
OVERLAND FLOW
Richard E. Thomas, Municipal
Construction Division, EPA
Overland flow, while well accepted
for treating several industrial waste-
waters, is a developing technology for
treatment of domestic wastewater. The
research team at the EPA laboratory in
Ada, Oklahoma, has been conducting
studies on overland flow treatment of
domestic wastewaters since 1971. These
studies included a series of field-plot
studies to compare the effects of pre-
application treatment on the quality of
product water produced by overland flow
treatment.
The results reported compare the
treatment achieved for 3 levels of pre-
application treatment and 2 loading
rates for each level of preapplication.
Overland flow treatment of raw domestic
wastewater at a loading of 5.2 M/yr is
an effective advanced treatment process.
Overland flow at 10.4 M/yr preceded by
primary treatment gives comparable re-
sults for removal of total suspended
solids (TSS) and total organic carbon
(TOC) but less effective removal of
total nitrogen and total phosphorus.
Overland flow at 20.8 M/yr preceded by
secondary treatment achieves better re-
moval of TSS and TOC but substantially
less effective removal of total nitrogen
and total phosphorus.
INTRODUCTION
Treatment of wastewater by allowing
it to flow as a thin sheet over gently
sloping ground is commonly referred to
as "spray runoff," "grass filtration" or
"overland flow." Overland flow has been
adopted by the United States Environ-
mental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) and
will be used in this discussion of pre-
application treatment as a design factor.Overland flow is not a new technology
for disposal of wastewater. It has been
in use for many decades for disposal of
industrial wastewaters and municipal
wastewater on a limited basis. Con-
versely, the concept of overland flow
as a treatment process is relatively
new. Research to understand the removal
mechanisms and consequently the control
of these mechanisms by design and
operation is a rapidly advancing science.
Increased scientific interest in the
use of the overland flow concept by
food processors in the United States
appears to originate from experiences
with a sprinkler disposal system re-
ported by Luleyt1) in 1963. Sub-
sequently, the concept has been further
developed and installed as the treatment
process at other food processing plants
(2)(3). Direct involvement at several
of these successful industrial locations
and knowledge of results at scattered
municipal systems around the world
stimulated EPA researchers in Ada,
Oklahoma, to initiate a program on
overland flow treatment of raw sewage in
1970. The program has covered many
aspects of overland flow technology in
its eight year history.
The Ada research team became partic-
ularly interested in preapplication
treatment of municipal wastewaters while
conducting a study at a food processing
plant. Law, Thomas, and MeyersO) re-
ported that this system was producing
an effluent with a biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD) of 9 mg/1 while being
loaded with a raw wastewater having a
BOD of 5 mg/l. This direct experience,
coupled with other reported results on
305treatment of high BOD wastewaters, led
the research team to conclude that over-
land flow treatment of raw domestic
wastewater had higher potential as a
low cost treatment alternative.
The purpose of this paper is to
highlight the principal results of seven
years of research by the U.S. EPA team
at Ada. The paper summarizes study of
overland flow as a complete treatment
process and as a polishing process fol-
lowing conventional primary or secondary
treatment. Emphasis is placed on a
comparison of effluent quality obtained
with or without the preapplication treat-
ment. The principal comparison is for
no preapplication treatment (raw sewage),
conventional primary preapplication
treatment, and conventional secondary
preapplication treatment.
EXPERIMENTAL SITE CONDITIONS AND
OPERATIONS
The study site at Ada, Oklahoma, is
suitable for year round operation with
minimal considerations due to severe
weather conditions. Much of the annual
precipitation of about 100cm occurs
during high intensity storms of short
duration. There is an average of 26
days per year with more than 1.25cm of
precipitation. The long summers are
warm with a high percentage of clear days.
Average minimum temperatures are above
freezing for all months except January
when the average minimum temperature
dips to -1.0°C. The seven year study
period was characterized by typical
variations in weather conditions.
All experiments were conducted on
plots measuring 11 meters by 36 meters
with slopes of 2 - 4%. Raw domestic
wastewater was obtained directly from
the city sewer main and the primary
and secondary effluents were obtained
from the city treatment plant. Secondary
treatment was provided at the city plant
by a trickling filter. Figure 1 shows
a schematic of the handling system for
the raw wastewater. The system for
handling primary effluent and secondary
effluent was similar except that the
settling tank was replaced with a flow
equalization tank and the mutrator was
eliminated from the system. Flow
measuring and sampling was provided for
each of the seven plots that were used
to compare many different design and
operating variables. Wastewater was
applied to the plots through the rotating
distributor shown in Figure 2. Thesedistributors applied the wastewater over
a circle 10 meters in diameter at the
upper edge of the plot. This circular
area of 78.5m2 was about 20% of the
total plot area of 396m2. The 11 x 26
meter area downslope from the actual
application area received the wastewater
by sheet flow from the upslope area.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This 12 month study was devised to
evaluate the effect of increasing the
level of preapplication treatment on
the quality of effluent after overland
flow and on the amount of wastewater
that could be applied to the overland
plots. The operating conditions for
this study included 3 levels of pre-
application treatment and two amounts of
wastewater loading to the overland flow
plots. The schedule of applying the
wastewater was the same for all plots.
Each plot was dosed for 5 consecutive
days and then rested for 2 days in
winter while being dosed for 6 consecu-
tive days and then rested for 1 day in
summer. The average annual loadings
for the 3 levels of preapplication treat-
ment were as follows: raw domestic
wastewater 5.2 and 10.4 M per year,
primary 7.8 and 10.4 M per year, and
secondary 13.0 and 20.8 M per year.
Daily and weekly loadings were seasonally
adjusted by as much as 15% more in
summer and 15% less in winter for some
of the test periods.
The chemical composition of the raw
domestic wastewater, the primary
effluent, and the secondary effluent
is summarized in Table 1 for selected
parameters. The data show the raw
domestic wastewater to be a medium
strength source for the United States.
The concentration of suspended solids
and organic carbon in the primary and
secondary effluents were comparatively
low in comparison to typical values.
This would indicate that the treatment
plant was operating very efficiently
during this period of study.
Chemical composition of the renovated
wastewater collected after overland flow
treatment is summarized in Table 2.
All of the data presented show overland
flow to be an effective process for
removal of suspended solids, organic
carbon, and total nitrogen. Removal of
phosphorus is substantially less and is
more dependent on the level of pre-
application treatment and the amount of
wastewater loading. There was not a
306consistent improvement in the removal
for all parameters as the level of pre-
application treatment was increased to
secondary. Neither was the best removal
achieved for all four parameters with
the lower amount of annual loading.
The concentration of suspended
solids after overland flow treatment did
decrease with an increasing level of
preapplication treatment even though the
wastewater loading for the highest
amount of secondary effluent loading
was four times the amount for the lowest
loading of raw wastewater. When applying
raw domestic wastewater, doubling the
wastewater loading resulted in a doubling
of the suspended solids in the system
discharge. A 33% increase in the primary
effluent loading and a 60% increase in
the secondary effluent loading did not
change the suspended solids concentration
after overland flow treatment. These
results indicate that removal of
suspended solids from primary effluent
or secondary effluent by overland flow
is comparable for substantially different
wastewater loadings whereas removal of
suspended solids from raw wastewater was
sensitive to the amount of wastewater
loading.
The concentration of total organic
carbon after overland flow treatment also
decreased as the level of preapplication
treatment increased to secondary. In
contrast to the results for suspended
solids removal there was no appreciable
differences between the low and high
loadings regardless of the level of pre-
application treatment. These results
indicate that none of the loading rates
selected for study exceeded the capacity
of the system to stabilize the organic
carbon. Since the capacity of the
system to stabilize organic carbon was
not exceeded at the high wastewater
loadings, it is logical to assume that
solids removal through the primary and
secondary treatment processes reduces
the amount of slowly oxidizable organic
carbon in the wastewater. Proof of this
assumption would require fractionation
and identification of the organic carbon
in the applied wastewaters and the over-
land flow product water.
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) was
measured during the early phases of these
overland flow studies to establish a
ratio of BOD to TOC. Once a firm ratio
was established the time consuming BOD
test was dropped from the analytical
program because BOD could be accurately
estimated from TOC data. A total of 40
sets of data were used to establish theratio of BOD to TOC for the renovated
wastewater following overland flow
treatment. On the basis of these data
sets BOD equals 0.54 times the TOC with
a very narrow range of 0.47 to 0.62
times the TOC. This ratio, 0.54 times
TOC, was used to calculate the BOD
values in Table 2 which show that BOD
values" were generally less than 10 mg/1.
The concentration of total nitrogen
after overland flow treatment varied
with both the amount of wastewater
applied and the level of preapplication
treatment. Increasing the level of
preapplication treatment resulted in
an increase in the concentration of
total nitrogen after overland flow
treatment. Similarly, increasing the
loading resulted in an increase in the
concentration of total nitrogen for all
three levels of preapplication treatment.
These results show that nitrogen removal
by the overland flow process is very
dependent on the source of the wastewater
and the amount of wastewater loading.
Previous results reported by Thomas,
Jackson, and Penrod (5) attribute
nitrogen removal to microbial denitri-
fication. The results of this study
are consistent with the hypothesis that
the nitrogen is being removed by micro-
bial denitrification. The higher
oxygen demand in the raw wastewater
makes it easier to deplete available
oxygen and sustain a low oxygen
environment which promotes denitrifi-
cation following nitrification in
aerobic areas. Increasing the loading
of this wastewater too much depletes
oxygen to the point where nitrification
is blocked and high concentrations of
reduced nitrogen forms (ammonia and
organic) remain after overland flow
treatment. The secondary level of
preapplication treatment reduces the
oxygen demand in the wastewater to
where denitrification is limited by
higher oxygen concentrations. In this
case higher concentrations of oxidized
nitrogen forms (nitrate) remain after
overland flow treatment. The appli-
cation of 34.5 mg/1 of reduced nitrogen
forms in the raw wastewater results in
5.5 mg/1 after overland flow treatment
and removal of 85% of the applied
nitrogen. Doubling the loading of the
raw wastewater to 10.4 M/yr started to
block nitrification or to exceed the
ni tri fi cati on/deni tri fi cati on capabi1i ty
and the removal of nitrogen dropped off
to 73% and 9.2 mg/1 remained after over-
land flow treatment. The application of
15.3 mg/1 of partially oxidized nitrogen
307in secondary effluent results in up to
9.8 mg/1 of oxidized nitrogen (nitrate)
after overland flow treatment and
removal of 36% of the applied nitrogen.
The concentration of total phospho-
rus after overland flow treatment
increased as the amount of wastewater
applied was increased regardless of the
level of preapplication treatment.
There was also a general decrease of
phosphorus removal by overland flow
treatment with greater preapplication
treatment even though more phosphorus
was removed by each level of preapplica-
tion treatment. The best phosphorus
removal, 52%, was for the lowest loading
of raw domestic wastewater while the
poorest removal, 11%, was for the highest
loading of secondary effluent. Many
researchers (2)(4)( ) have reported that
phosphorus removal is comparatively
low for overland flow while Thomas,
Bledsoe, and Jackson (7) have reported
on enhancement of phosphorus removal
by chemical addition. Phosphorus removal
by soil and plants is obviously a
function of the quantity applied, the
available reaction surface, and the time
of exposure to the reaction surface.
Overland flow, unlike other land treat-
ment systems, provides a short contact
time over a limited reaction surface.
Because of these operating conditions
phosphorus removal will be comparatively
low unless the rate of the precipitation
reaction or the reaction surface is
augmented in some manner.
SUMMARY
These data, extracted from parts of
seven years of study, show that overland
flow can provide excellent treatment of
raw domestic wastewater without primary
or secondary preapplication treatment.
The product water obtained by direct
application of raw domestic wastewater
is representative of advanced treatment
and equal to or better than the renovated
water obtained by providing either
primary or secondary preapplication
treatment. The cost of overland flow
as a process unit with a loading of 5.2
M/yr is approximately equal to the cost
of conventional primary treatment. It
is obvious that providing primary or
secondary preapplication treatment
increases the total cost regardless of
the fact that the loading can be
increased substantially by providing more
preapplication treatment.Overland flow for treatment of
domestic wastewater is a developing tech-
nology for which practical considerations
of location and site conditions have a
strong influence in the decision process.
Seasonal preapplication treatment will
always be needed where climatic conditions
prevent year round operation. Since the
concept is new and comparatively un-
proven, gaining acceptance by state
agencies, the consulting profession, and
the public will be difficult. It is
natural for most people in all walks of
life to accept standard practice rather
than to be a pioneer for something dif-
ferent. Research and pilot system
results are establishing overland flow
as a low cost and energy saving alter-
native for wastewater management. The
transition from technical proof of the
process to general acceptance will be
frought with controversy until there are
several operating systems that demonstrate
and verify the findings of the research
studies.
REFERENCES
1. Luley, H. G. Spray Irrigation of
Vegetable and Fruit Processing
Wastes. Journal WPCF. 35:1252-1261,
October 1963.
2. Bendixen, T, W., R. D. Hill,
F. T. Dubyne, and G. G. Robeck.
Cannery Waste Treatment by Spray
Irrigation-Runoff. Journal WPCF.
41:385-391, March 1969.
3. Glide, Louis, C. An Overland Flow
Spray Irrigation System for Treat-
ment of Cannery Wastes. Journal
WPCF. 43:2011-2025, October 1971.
4. Law, J. P., R. E. Thomas, and
L. H. Myers. Cannery Wastewater
Treatment by High-Rate Spray on
Grassland. Journal WPCF. 42:1621-
1631, September 1970.
5. Thomas, R. E., K. Jackson, and
L. Penrod. Feasibility of Over-
land Flow for Treatment of Raw
Domestic Wastewater. Robert S. Kerr
Environmental Research Laboratory.
EPA Series No. 660/2-74-087,
July 1974. 31p.
6. Kirby, C. F. Sewage Treatment
Farms—Post Graduate Course in
Public Health Engineering, Session
No. 12. Department of Civil
308Engineering, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia. 1971. 14p.
7. Thomas, R. E., B. Bledsoe, and
K. Jackson. Overland Flow Treat-
ment of Raw Wastewater with En-
hanced Phosphorus Removal. U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
EPA-6O0/2-76-131, June 1976. 36p.
Table I.
Parameter
number of samples
TSS
TOC
total N
total PComposition of Wastewaters for the
Preapplication Treatment Study
Raw Domestic
Wastewater
30
170
90
34.5
8.1Primary
Effluent
34
52
31
19.0
7.3Secondary
Effluent
32
12
16
15.3
6.6
Table II.
Parameter
TSS
TOC
BODE1)
total N
total PChemical Quality after Overland Flow
Treatment - Mean Concentration, mg/1
Wastewater source and annual loading, M/yr
Raw Domestic
Wastewater
5.2 10.4
8
17
9
5.5
4.216
19
10
9.2
4.7Primary
Effluent
7.8 10.4
14
8
6.7
4.714
8
6.7
5.2Secondary
Effluent
13.0 20.8
11
6
7.6
5.010
5
9.8
5.9
calculated as 0.54 times TOC based on 40 sets of BOD/TOC data
309MUTRATOR
RAW SEWAGE^
LINEWET
WELL
PUMPSETTLING TANKFIELD PUMP
I-1
oL1 AUTOMATIC
TIMING CONTROLPLOT-I
PLOT-2
PLOT-3
TO WASTE WATER
DISTRIBUTOR
FIGURE I - SCHEMATIC OF WASTEWATER HANDLING SYSTEM0.6 m 3.0 m
Counter
Weight
Fon Nozzle
P16URE 2 - DETAIL OF WASTEWATER DISTRIBUTORAGRICULTURE AND FOREST USE
AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES ASSOCIATED WITH
LAND TREATMENT OF DOMESTIC WASTEWATER
D. R. Linden, USDA-SEA-FR, University of Minnesota
W. E. Larson, USDA-SEA-FR, University of Minnesota
R, E. Larson, USDA-SEA-FR, University of Minnesota
Important factors in the success of
land application of wastewater systems
are the field design and agronomic man-
agement during operation. Crop selection
should be based on their adaptability to
the region, marketability, tolerance to
wet soil conditions and soluble salts,
disease resistance, and their nitrogen
uptake rates. Two or more crops allow
more freedom in timing of operations and
flexibility in scheduling irrigations
and may offer agronomic advantages.
Crops that remove large amounts of
nitrogen are desirable to maximize re-
moval of nitrogen from the wastewater.
We present an equation that relates con-
centration of nitrogen in percolate
water to concentration of nitrogen in
the wastewater, amount of wastewater
applied, nitrogen uptake by the crop,
rainfall, and evapotranspiration.
On many soils underground drainage
will be required because of high natural
or perched watertable conditions. Deeper
and more closely spaced drains than the
normal design will be needed to achieve
the required unsaturated soil depth.
Irrigation designs for application
of wastewater range from a continuous
mist to surface flooding. Factors, like
land topography, prevailing winds, soil-
type, operator-skill requirements, and
available labor must be considered. In
many wastewater application systems, the
soil will seal at the surface and materi-
ally reduce infiltration. Tillage,
residue, and cover-crop management sys-
tems are suggested to minimize sealing
during production of row crops.
Irrigation design and schedules
must consider the hydraulic propertiesof the soil, rainfall, and evapotranspi-
ration and irrigation must be scheduled
to allow drying time before crop planting
and harvesting. Drying times will depend
upon soil and climatic characteristics.
Planting of row crops In tilled
strips of sod crops has the advantages of
a longer season for nutrient uptake by
plants and less surface-soil sealing. In
many climates, two or more crops may be
planted in 1 year, which also will
enhance nutrient removal.
INTRODUCTION
The success or failure of a land
application of wastewater system will
greatly depend upon soil and crop manage-
ment. This is true, if an adequate
design and site have been selected.
Field management can be prescribed
in broad outlines, although daily altera-
tions will often be necessary because of
variations in weather and crop systems.
Soil microorganisms, agronomic crops, and
plant diseases are biological systems
that are highly influenced by weather
conditions and also are responsive to
management by man.
The object of this report is to out-
line field management practices and how
they are used to maximize the nutrient
renovation of wastewater when it is
recycled through a soil-crop-system.
CROP SELECTION
Selecting the proper crops for a
wastewater irrigation system is a key
313factor in the success of land treatment.
Land treatment Is a biological renovation
system, and when we select crops that
will perform the needed function, e.g.,
transfer nitrogen from wastewater to
harvestable portions of the plant, under
the conditions created by land applica-
tion we must consider both the nature of
the plant and the environment in which it
Is grown. Crop selection should be based
largely on local climate and market con-
ditions , the need for a variety of crops,
their tolerance to total salts or
specific Ion components of the was te water,
their disease resistance, and their
nitrogen-uptake rates into plant tissue.
Crops well adapted to local condi-
tions (irrigated in dry areas) should be
used for Initial screening for waste-
water- irrigation systems. Crops adapted
to local conditions of temperature,
humidity, day length, radiation, and
season length are integrated Into a range
of crops that are known to produce
economic yields in the region. This list
of adapted crops can be narrowed to
those with an existing or potential
market in the area.
Crop selection should not be
narrowed to a single crop because a
variety of crops will enhance market
stability, provide some variation in
timing and types of cultural operations,
e.g., planting, tillage, and harvesting;
benefit soil physical and chemical con-
ditions; and provide a variety of timing
and amounts of wastewater irrigation.
Variety in irrigation timing is a
benefit to wastewater-Irrigation systems.
For example, a system with both forages
and corn can be used so that the corn is
irrigated while the soil in the forage
systems is drying for harvesting.
Forages can be irrigated early and latein the season before the corn is
planted and after it is mature, as well
as during the corn growing season.
Crop selection will also be governed
by the crop's tolerance to total salts
and specific ion components of the
wastewater. Typical municipal secondary
effluent is classified high saline and
low to medium sodium and, thus, is not a
sodium problem on most soils but might
require plants with good salt-tolerance.
Reduced crop production by salts from
irrigation water is usually due to an
increased osmotic potential of the water
which reduces the availability of water
to plants. Additional detrimental
effects of salts in irrigation water are
due to specific ion-toxicities. The
USDA Salinity Handbook (8) is an excel-
lent source book for selecting crops
with high degrees of tolerance for total
salt and specific ion problems.
Crops selected for wastewater
application must be highly resistant to
disease, since frequent wastewater
applications produce conditions favor-
able to disease organisms.
A major factor to be considered in
selecting a crop is its ability to re-
move nutrients from the wastewater. In
most land-treatment Systems nitrogen
will be the main nutrient of concern,
since most other constituents are
filtered or sorbed within the soil or
are not major environmental concerns.
A crop's ability to remove nitrogen
from wastewater will depend on many
environmental factors as well as on the
crop's physiological requirements.
Table 1 gives a range of nitrogen-
uptake values that might be expected for
various agronomic crops. These (Table 1)
values were compiled from considerable
data in the literature for above-average
Table
Crop1.Maximum
the U.Syield
.A.andnitrogen uptake of
North
Yield Uptakevarious species for
Central
Yield Uptakethreeregions of
South
Yield Uptake
-mt/ha-
Alfalfai/
Coastal bermuda grass!/
Kentucky bluegrass 2/
Brome gras s ,2/
Reed canarygrass.2/
Tall fescue.2/
Quackgrass^/
Corn (fodder) 3/
JL/ Assumes 3.0% N
2/ Assumes 2.5% N
3/ Assumes 1.2% N10
9
10
10
10
10
15.300 18.540
225
250
250
250
250
18012
18
18
18
--.300
.450
.450
.450
--24
24.600
.600
31kyields under excellent climate and soil
(including fertility) growing conditions.
Nitrogen uptake by a crop in a waste-
water land treatment system is somewhat a
function of the amount of nitrogen
loading (3). Nitrogen uptake in Minnesota
by reed canarygrass ranged from 230 to
400 kg N/ha for applications ranging
from 230 to 800 kg N/ha/yr. Corn had a
much narrower range of nitrogen uptake
with little increase due to increased
nitrogen loading. Assuming that denltri-
ficatlon, mineralization, change of
storage within the soil, ammonia
volatilization and other nitrogen
reactions have no net effect on nitrogen
uptake and leaching, an expression may
be written as:
(En - U) X 10
E + R - ET(1)
Where C • average concentration of
nitrogen in percolate water (mg/liter);
En - nitrogen applied in wastewater
(kg N/ha); U « nitrogen uptake by crop
(kg N/ha); E * wastewater applied (cm);
R - rainfall (cm); ET a evapotransplra-
tlon (cm). Two examples for reed
canarygrass with effluent at 20 mg/liter
and R- ET; (1) E - 200, En - 400, U -
325, and C - 3.8; (2) E- 300, En - 600,
U - 400, and C » 6.7. In these examples
a 50% increase in effluent application
produced a 75% (3.8 vs. 6.7) increase In
percolate nitrogen concentration. If
crop uptake had remained constant at
325 kg N/ha, the percolate nitrogen con-
centration would have Increased 140% to
9.2 mg/liter.
DRAINAGE
Soil drainage to intercept and re-
move excess water will probably be
required for most land-treatment sys-
tems. Under many agricultural conditions,
permanent or perched watertables will
occur when heavy wastewater loads are
applied, and underdrainage is necessary.
Interception of percolated water
may be desirable to meet regulatory re-
quirements or to maintain normal stream-
flow. Once intercepted, it can be
further treated, or returned to surface
waters. Interceptor drains can be
subsurface perforated plastic tile, open
ditches, or interceptor wells. Back-
ground information for design of such
systems can be obtained from Drainage of
Agricultural Lands (6),
It may be necessary to remove waterfrom the biologically active zone of the
soil under the land-treatment fields to
achieve good crop growth and wastewater
renovation. High watertables under
wastewater irrigation fields will lead
to poorly aerated soils with root growth
and biological activity restricted.
Under most agricultural production sys-
tems , the watertable should be main-
tained between the 0.6 and 1.5-m depth.
Drainage design requirements to achieve
the unsaturated soil depth are illus-
trated in Figure 1. The equation
relating soil characteristic K (hydrau-
lic conductivity) and the loading rate
I (infiltration rate) to the dimensions
of the system (shown in Figure 1) is:
He2 - Hd2 + IW(W + 2L/K) (2)
This equation is a steady-state equation
since with a given set of dimensions a
continuous inflow of I would produce
watermounding, characterized by He. The
equation can be applied to Intermittent
application by using an equivalent
steady-state inflow rate and determining
i.8r
1.6
à1-4
1.2
1.0
.4 .6 .8
HYDRAULIC LOADING I/KI.O
Fig.Relative tile drain spacing
(2W) and depth (D) as a func-
tion of relative hydraulic
loading (I) in order to main-
tain a satisfactory aerated
soil depth (Da). Curves based
upon height of mounding equa-
tion (Eqn.2) with L - 0, Da -
1.52m; Di-15.2m; K-.10m/day.
315the spacing and depth of drain-placement
requirements. As hydraulic loading rate
increases, drain spacing (2W when L - 0)
must decrease and/or the depth of drain
placement must increase. Figure 1 shows
relative drain depth or drain spacing
required to maintain an aerated zone of
constant depth as the average infiltration
rate (hydraulic loading rate) increases
from 0.2 to 1.0K. Drain depth cannot be
increased beyond about 2 to 3 m since
trenching equipment has limited depth
capacity. Qualified drain installers of
an area can give recommendations on
drainage requirement based on consider-
able practical experience.
IRRIGATION
Method of Irrigation
Wastewater-dlstrlbution systems and
application methods are of major concern
In designing and managing land-treatment
systems. Application methods range
between a continuous mist to surface
flooding and are alternatives that must
be considered. Factors like land topog-
raphy, prevailing winds, soil type,
operator skill requirements, and
available labor must be considered.
Engineering aspects of design have been
adequately discussed elsewhere and will
not be «examined here (5,9).
Method of application influences
some soil-management considerations. In
a ridge-furrow irrigation system the soil
must be shaped and occasionally reshaped
into ridges for water conveyance. Weed
control may be particularly difficult in
a rldge-furrow system.
Ridge-furrow or other surface-
flooding systems require considerable
operator skill to obtain uniform appli-
cations. It is important to Initially
have a large stream flow until runoff
starts and then cut back stream size to
avoid excessive runoff and minimize
leaching at the upper end of the field.
Surface-application systems will also
require a tailwater recycling system to
retain wastewater within the system
until It percolates through a soil pro-
file.
Sprinkler-type application requires
a minimum of operator skill since the
system can be controlled mechanically.
The operator, however, must observe the
system periodically to detect malfunc-
tions. A major problem with sprinkler-
type irrigation is the action of falling
water drops destroying inherent soilstructure and forming a dense relatively
Impermeable crust or seal at the soil
surface. The formation of a seal
depends on the momentum of the water
drops, I.e., both drop size and their
height of fall. The sealing action can
be minimized by mist-type applications
with very small water droplets. However,
small water droplets are extremely sus-
ceptible to wind drift which can lead to
nonuniform application and to considera-
ble movement of airborn material.
The intensity of seal formation
depends on the structural stability of
the soil. Most agricultural soils will
seal when exposed to rainfall or sprink-
ler irrigation and, under high applica-
tion of wastewater, will develop reduced
intake capacity as the season progresses.
Soils with low organic matter contents
and high silt content are particularly
susceptible. Design considerations for
application rates should be based on
sealed conditions and site management
should be geared to minimize seal
formation. Techniques like plant-
residue mulches, cover crops, are use-
ful to minimize seal formation.
Irrigation scheduling and loading
Most slow rate systems irrigated
with typical secondary effluent will
accept more water than nitrogen
renovation requirements will allow.
Factors to consider in nitrogen loading
can be illustrated by use of a nitrogen
balance equation:
Rn + F + En + M
Dn + V + N + IU + (3)
where Rn * rainfall nitrogen; F -
fertilizer nitrogen; En » effluent
nitrogen; M - nitrogen mineralized from
soil organic matter; S - nitrogen re-
turned in crop residue; U - crop uptake;
Dn * nitrogen drainage below root zone;
V - ammonia volatilization; N •
denitrification; I * nitrogen immobili-
zation (all units in kg/ha/time). The
major components influencing nitrogen
loading are the amount and quality of
the effluent applied, crop uptake, and
drainage losses. The other components
of nitrogen balance will be small and
may be self-compensating in a typical
slow rate system. Therefore, a simpli-
fied nitrogen-balance equation may be
written as:
En - U + Dn + XEn (4)
316where X is fraction of applied
nitrogen removed from wastewater by the
net effects of all other components of
nitrogen balance, and En, Dn, and U were
previously defined.
A water-balance equation may also
be written (assuming no surface runoff)
as:
E + R - Dw + ET (5)
where E - effluent loading; R •
rainfall; Dw - drainage water; ET »
evapotranspiration (all units in cm).
Combining equations 4 and 5 and substi-
tuting the relationships:
En - .1 ECi
Dn « .1 DwCo
gives an equation for effluent loading as:
10U + Co(R - ET) , .
(Ci - Co)(l - X) WTable 2. Climatic data used to estab-
lish biweekly effluent loading
rates at SW Agr. Exp. Station,
Lamberton, Minn., 1961-1976.
where Ci
nitrogen; Co «• input concentration of
percolate water nitrogen
100 200 300
Crop uptake U (kg/ha)
Fig. 2. Annual effluent loading rate (E)
as a function of crop uptake of
nitrogen (U) for various values
of nitrogen lost (expressed as
a fraction of the nitrogen
applied.) by other means (X).
Curves based on effluent loading
equation (Eqn. 6) with Ci - 20.
Co » 10 (units in mg/liter) and
R - ET.Biweekly
period
beginning
4/1
4/15
4/29
5/13
5/27
6/10
6/24
7/8
7/22
8/5
8/19
9/2
9/16
9/30
10/14
Season
TotalET1/
4.0
5.1
6.2
7.0
7.7
8.3
8.6
8.1
7.4
6.7
6.1
5.4
4.7
3.9
3.1
92.2Effluent
Rain
2.1
3.1
3.7
3.9
4.0
4.3
4.7
4.9
4.3
2.9
2.6
3.6
4.0
3.6
2.5
54.2Loading^/
10.1
12.7
15.4
17.9
19.7
21.3
21.9
20.1
18.6
18.0
16.1
13.2
10.4
8.4
7.2
231.0
1/ ET * evapotranspiration *• 0.8X
(pan evaporation)
2/ Effluent loading assumptions and
calculations: Crop uptake - 170
kg/ha; Effluent-N concentration -
20 mg/1; Drainage-N concentration =•
10 mg/1; Fraction nitrogen loss
other than crop uptake « 0.1;
Seasonal effluent loading » 231 cm
(Eqn. 6) ; biweekly loading •
((231 + 54)/92)ET-Rain, (Bqn. 7).
concentration (units in mg/liter).
Equation 6is a simplified design equation
in terms of input nitrogen concentra-
tions, the normal climatic balance
between rain and evapotranspiration, the
net losses of nitrogen by other mecha-
nism, crop uptake of nitrogen, and the
desired (or regulated) nitrogen concen-
tration of drainage water.
Figure 2 presents some simplified
solutions to the loading-rate equation
(Eqn. 6) indicating that effluent load-
ing may be increased by increasing crop
uptake, U, or the fraction lost by
other mechanisms, X. Optimizing condi-
tions for maximum nitrogen removal
through crop selection and management
will maximize nitrogen renovation of
wastewater more than optimizing nitrogen
losses by other means.
The distribution of the annual
loading rate into daily, weekly, or
317monthly applications can be determined
by considering water balances for shorter
time periods. Variation in evapotranspl-
ration, ET, can be used to distribute
the annual loading between biweekly
periods since plant growth (and, sub-
sequently, nitrogen uptake) increases
and drainage volume decreases as ET
increases. Table 2 shows a typical
variation in ET demand during the grow-
ing season and a typical rainfall
distribution for Minnesota. Weekly
effluent loading can be obtained from
such a relationship (Table 2) by using
the simple ratio:
\ ET Reason \ ET / period(7)
where: E, R, and ET were previously
defined as irrigation, rainfall and
evapotranspiration amounts (units in cm)
respectively.
Table 2 shows some sample calcula-
tions of biweekly effluent loading based
on the normal climatic data. Such a
distribution of effluent-irrigation
amounts will create a distribution of
drainage matched to ET demands and maxi-
mize nitrogen renovation by taking
advantage of higher soil temperatures
and biological activity.
After establishment of weekly,
biweekly, or monthly application amounts,
it will also be necessary to distribute
this water into smaller time intervals
of hours or days. Two somewhat opposed
principals should govern this distribu-
tion. First, maximum residence time
within the soil is obtained by applying
very low rates continuously. Secondly,
short application times allow drying
periods for disease and insect control
and biological activity. Continuous
applications require considerably more
management skill and labor than inter-
mittent (daily, every other day, every
third day) applications and may also
lead to continuously waterlogged soils
with restricted oxygen supply. Contin-
uous applications must be at a rate
below the unsaturated hydraulic
conductivity at 10% residual air satura-
tion (RAS) to meet aeration and oxygen
requirements of roots. Figure 3 illus-
trates some typical data of continuous
application rates vs. RAS. The data
from which Figure 3 was developed was
obtained from a controlled experiment in
which soil-water contents and hydraulic
gradients were measured periodically
during and following an effluent irriga-
tion. The application rate for this10 «AIR CONTENT (% BY VOLUME)
14 12 10
103
WATER CONTENT (% BY VOLUME)
Fig. 3. Hydraulic conductivity or
continuous application rate as
a function of water and air
contents of a Typic Hapludoll.
silt loam soil must be below 0.065 cn/hr
to maintain a 10% RAS. Such a restric-
tion on application rate limits weekly
loading to about 10.9 cm of wastewater.
Intermittent applications could be at
higher rates because during drying the
matrix potential in the soil increases
and, thus, water enters the soil at
rates exceeding the saturated hydraulic
conductivity. Intermittent irrigations
at higher intensities produce wetter
soils during the irrigations but drier
soils between irrigations.
Experimental data with reed canary-
grass indicated that irrigation
scheduling with an ammonia form nitro-
gen wastewater from daily to weekly
applications (with equivalent weekly
loading) had little effect on the
nitrogen renovation capacity of the
soil-crop system.
The final design irrigation
schedule is then:
1. Intermittent irrigations with
1 or more days between irriga-
tions.
2. Application intensity limited
to the soil's capacity to in'
take water over extended
periods of time.
3. Weekly, biweekly, or monthly
loading rates based on ET
demands and the annual loading.
3184. Annual loading rates determined
by nitrogen and water balance
considerations.
Irrigation scheduling must maintain
some degree of flexibility so that the
schedule can be interrupted for signifi-
cant rainfall events and cultural
operations. A rule-of-thumb practice
might be to increase each irrigation
amount by 10% so that about 10% of the
irrigations could be omitted from the
schedule due to rainfall or cultural
operations.
Undue compaction of the soil by
tillage or harvesting equipment must be
avoided as it will reduce water intake
and crop growth. The wetter the soil
the greater the degree of compaction from
a given load. One to several days of
drying after irrigations may be neces-
sary, depending on the soil type, drain-
age, and ET demand, for the soil to sup-
port farm equipment. Longer drying
periods would be required in the spring
and fall, and for larger equipment.
Figure 4 presents a typical irriga-
tion frequency diagram obtained from a
study in Minnesota. When conditions
were favorable (high ET and no rainfall),
dally irrigations were applied. Early
and late in the season and during harvest
periods, several days elapsed between
irrigations.CROP AND SHE MANAGEMENT
Close-seeded forages
Perennial forages are high in
protein, they generally require minimal
management skills and they provide con-
tinuous vegetative cover for the soil
surface which enhances the infiltration
capacity of the soil. Selected forages
are well adapted to wet soil conditions
and continuous application of small
amounts of nitrogen. To optimize pro-
duction and, thereby, remove the most
nitrogen from the soil-crop system, a
good stand of the selected forage must
be established and the crop must be
harvested at appropriate times.
Establishing perennial forage will
involve: (1) weed control (including
grass); (2) preparation of a good seed-
bed; (3) selection and planting good
quality seed at a recommended rate; and
(4) limited irrigation until the plants
are established.
Timely harvest, use of insecticides
as needed, control of soil pH, and appli-
cation of required fertilizer will
assure maintenance of the stand for
optimum production.
w
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1-
SEWAGE EFFLUENT APPLICATIONS
FORAGE, 1974
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
|^-—'
I/y
i-
/
|-
j_ j i-
-
-
-
-
-325
300
275
250
225
200
175
150
125
100
75
50
25o
oION/ ÎIGAT JLATIVE IRF
=3
O
o
30 31 30 31
Fig. 4.31 30 31
MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER
Daily and accumulative effluent irrigation amounts during an application
season.
319Row-crop management
Several important soil properties
are the result of the interactions of
the kind of crop cover, plant roots,
plant residue, tillage, irrigation, and
climatic conditions. Bulk density,
porosity, water conduction and holding
capacity, and heat exchange and storage
properties, and soil strength--all are
properties affected by the interaction
of external forces and the crop on the
basic soil matrix. The processes of
root growth and decay, freezing and
thawing, rainfall and irrigation wetting
and water-drop impact, interception of
water by a crop canopy, and the presence
or absence of plant residue material at
the soil surface or within the soil are
particularly important to the formation
and maintenance of soil structural
features and soil physical properties.
Table 3 gives some typical data obtained
from soil sampling following irrigations
on density, water, and air contents
after 24 hr of drainage and infiltration
characteristics of a soil with a peren-
nial forage crop as compared with annual
row-cropped corn.
Reduced infiltration capacity,
resulting from the formation of a sur-
face seal and a denser soil-surface
layer, will probably be the major
management problem under row-cropping
systems. Low infiltration rates will
limit effluent loading rates, enhance
the chances for undesirable runoff
losses, and also limit soil aeration by
restricting air flow and oxygen diffu-
sion through the soil surface layer.
Thus, it is desirable to maintain the
soil at high-infiltatlon-capacity condi-
tion, which is naturally obtained under
a perennial sod crop. The presence of
plant residue, tillage, and crop cover
will be discussed as techniques for
maintaining a high-infiltration-capacitysoil.
Tillage loosens soil material,
creates large pores and a roughened soil
surface, and enhances infiltration
capacity (2). Infiltration enhancement
from tillage Is usually temporary since
the soil tends to recompact, become
smoother, and decrease in inflltation
capacity when exposed to natural or
Irrigation wetting. Generally, one to
several centimeters of rainfall or
irrigation are sufficient to reduce the
infiltration capacity on freshly tilled
surfaces to less than the pretillage
condition. If the freshly tilled soil
is protected by crop residue, it will
take 2 to 10 times more rainfall or
Irrigation to reduce the infiltration
capacity to pretillage conditions.
Crop residue mulches will enhance
and help maintain high infiltration
capacity conditions (4), Surface resi-
due mulches protect the soil from direct
water drop impact. The protective
effect of crop residue mulches diminish
with time because they are subject to
microbial decomposition and will usually
be undetectable by the end of a growing
season. Under effluent Irrigation sys-
tems, the microbial decomposition of
plant residue is more rapid than under
ordinary irrigation systems. Plant
residue will be most effective pro-
tecting a high-infiltratlon-capacity
condition from water-drop impact, but
may also help develop Increased infil-
tration capacity by promoting earthworm
activity. Residue on the surface in
the spring and fall may significantly
enhance earthworm activity and thereby
increase infiltration capacity, but may
not be important during a single grow-
ing season. Alternative or additional
infiltration enhancement procedures may
be necessary in order to eliminate low
infiltration problems during part of
the year.
Table 3. Soil physical properties under corn and perennial forage crops.
Crop
Corn
ForageBulk
Density
g/cm3
1.40
1.17Porosity
47.1
55.9Field
(24
Volumetric
Water
Content
X
36.4
43.2Capacity
hour)
Air
Filled
Porosity
10.7
12.7Final
Infiltration
Rate
(60 min)
cm/hr
0.8
3.3
3201.0I CAPACITY -TRATWNINFIl RELATIVE
n-
I
I
i
—-
APRIL '„ sniHC TILLAGE FALL TILLAGE _.
Hn COM SEEDING I BtE SEEDIM
\
\
\ \-« WITH «ElinilES "~ -- ^,1
1
1
i
1
1
1
1
1
i
i
\
—--'
MAY ' JUNE ' JULY ' AUGUST SEPTEMBER1
Fig. 5.Relative infiltration capacity
(relative to a freshly tilled
condition) as a function of time
for various management schemes.
Perennial sod crops enhance infil-
tration conditions and they have been
grown between corn rows to enhance and
maintain high-infiltration-capacity con-
ditions (1). A live grass interrow
crop, like rye or reed canarygrass, has
been very effective in maintaining high-
infiltration-capacity conditions through-
out the application season in our
experiment. The grass interrow crop
provides year-long coverage and contiiual
root growth and decay processes as well
as some residue material to promote soil
biological activity. The interrow grass
is competitive with corn and some set-
back (limit growth of grass) procedures
may be necessary. Herbicides, partial
tillage, and grass cutting are all
possible means of setting back the growth
of grass, while not entirely killing the
established grass crop.
Figure 5 presents a summary of
probable infiltration capacity conditions
for various residue and tillage manage-
ment systerns throughout the season based
upon extensive infiltration data in the
literature and observations on our own
experiments.
SUMMARY
Agronomic management information is
necessary to design a land-treatment
system, and sound agronomic decisions
are also essential to successfully
operate the system. Crop selection
based on climatic conditions, salttolerance, disease resistance, and
nitrogen uptake of the crops are
Important. Irrigation systems based on
annual nitrogen loading, seasonal varia-
tion in evapotranspiration demands, soil
conditions, operator skill, and drying
periods are essential. Proper drainage
to intercept water and maintain an un-
saturated biologically-active soil zone
will be necessary. Timely cultural
operations and harvests will also be
necessary. Special attention should be
given to maintaining the soil in a high-
infiltration-capacity condition by using
crop residue, tillage, winter-cover
crops, and dual-cropping systems. Daily
modifications to a well-designed system
based on observation will be a critical
factor in the successful operation of a
land-treatment system.
CROP IDENTIFICATION
Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.)
Coastal bermuda grass (Cynodon
dactylon L.)
Corn (Zea mays L.)
Kentucky bluegrass (Poa pratensis
L.)
Quackgrass (Agropyron repens L.)
(Phalaris Reed canarygrass
arundiancea L.)
Rye (Secale céréale L.)
Smooth bromegrass (Bromus inermie
Leyss)
Tall fescue (Festuca arundiancea
Schreb.)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Contribution from Federal Research,
Science and Education Administration,
U.S. Department of Agriculture, and the
Minnesota Agricultural Experiment
Station, St. Paul, Minnesota SS108.
Paper No. 10355, Sci. Journal Series.
Prepared for publication in the
Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Land Treatment of Was tew a ter,
August 20-25, 1978, Hanover, N. H.
Soil Scientist, USDA-SEA-FR, and
Research Fellow, University of Minnesota;
Soil Scientist, USDA-SEA-FR, and
Professor, University of Minnesota; and
Agricultural Engineer, USDA-SEA-FR, and
Professor, University of Minnesota,
St. Paul, Minnesota 55108.
321Appreciation Is expressed for
financial support of this research In
parts by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers. We also acknowledge the
supply of field facilities by the
Metropolitan Waste Control Commission,
St. Paul, Minnesota.
REFERENCES
1. Bennett, 0. L., E. L. Mathlas, and
Charles B. Sperow. 1976. Double
cropping for hay and no-tillage corn
production as affected by sod
species with rates of atrazine and
nitrogen. Agron. J. 68:250-254.
2. Burwell, R. E., and W. E. Larson.
1969. Infiltration as influenced by
tillage-induced random roughness and
pore space. Soil Sci. Soc. Am.
Proc. 33(3):449-452.
3. Clapp, C. E., A. J. Palazzo, W. E.
Larson, G. C. Marten, D. R. Linden.
1978. Uptake of nutrients by plants
with municipal wastewater effluent.
In Int'l, Sym. Land Treatment
Wastewater Proc, Hanover, N. H.,
August 20-25, 1978.
4. Duley, F. L., and L. L. Kelly. 1941.
Surface condition of soil and time
of application as related to intake
of water. USDA Cir. No. 608.
5. Hagen, R. M., H. R. Haise, and T. W.
Edminster, (ed.) 1967. Irrigations
of agricultural land. Agronomy 11:
1-1180. Am. Soc. of Agron.,
Madison, Wisconsin.
6. Luthin, J. N. 1957 (ed.) Drainage
of agricultural lands. Agronomy 7:
1-611, Am. Soc. of Agron., Madison,
Wisconsin.
7. Mays, D, A. (ed.) 1974. Forage
fertilization. Am. Soc. of Agron.,
Madison, Wisconsin.
8. U.S. Department of Agriculture.
1954. Diagnosis and improvement of
saline and alkali soils. Agr.
Handbook No. 60.
9. U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency. 1977. Process design
manual for land treatment of
municipal wastewater. EPA G25/
1-77-008.
322AGRICULTURE AND FOREST USE
RENOVATION OF WASTEWATER AND RE-
SPONSE OF FOREST ECOSYSTEMS: THE
PACK FOREST STUDY.
Dale W. Cole, Professor, College of
Forest Resources, Uni-
versity of Washington
Peter Schiess, Assistant Professor,
College of Forest Re-
sources, University of
Washington.
ABSTRACT
Wastewaters from a secondary treat-
ment facility have been irrigated on
both seedlings and an established 45-
year-old Douglas-fir forest year round
at the rate of 5 cm/wk. Both barren and
a grass plot have also been irrigated
with wastewater during this period to
provide comparison with another vege-
tative type and a non-vegetative controL
Ion fluxes within the soil and
nutrient utilization by the vegetative
cover were monitored monthly during
this study period. Our data allow cal-
culation of the efficiencies of these
forest systems in renovating applied
wastewaters.
Results from the first three years
of our study demonstrate that waste-
waters can be added at 5 cm/wk to these
forest systems and the drainage waters
from them will be well within the 10 ppm
nitrate standards set by EPA for drink-
ing water. In addition the Douglas-
fir and poplar seedlings show a marked
increase in production and nitrogen
uptake after wastewater irrigations.
For example, during the third growing
season total production on the Douglas-
fir seedling plot is 6-fold greater
than the control and the poplar plot is
13-fold greater. This Increase in
growth yields a nitrogen renovation rate
in excess of 80% on the seedling plots
and 90% on the established forest.
Phosphate renovation is complete (99.9%)on all wastewater plots.
INTRODUCTION
Application of wastewater from
municipal sewage treatment facilities on
forest sites is not a new approach. It
holds certain advantages over other land
disposal alternatives. Forest lands are
abundant, comprising about a third of
the land area of the United States, and
generally are less costly than other
land types suitable for effluent dis-
posal. Forests are farther removed
from man's food chain than are agricul-
tural areas; consequently, the public
health aspects and social acceptability
of effluent application to such land may
be more easily managed. Many forests,
especially in the Pacific Northwest, are
nitrogen deficient and adding nitrogen
results in rapid nitrogen uptake and in-
creased tree growth (Gessel e_t aj^.,
1969). Another potential benefit has
direct implications for drinking water
standards since the nitrification pro-
cess seems to be inhibited in some
forest soils (Overrein, 1971; Cole, et_
al., 1975).
In the United States perhaps the
best known of such studies are those of
Kardos and Sopper (1973) in Pennsylvania
and Urle (1973) in Michigan. These
studies have now been complemented in
the Douglas-fir region of the Pacific
Northwest of the United States. This
program of wastewater application by
spray irrigation was started in June
1973 about 120 km south of Seattle,
Washington at Pack Forest, an experi-
323mental forest of the College of Forest
Resources, University of Washington. In
this paper the results from the Pack
Forest wastewater renovation project are
synthesized and compared to those from
other forest sites where t"he slow in-
filtration of wastewater has been
studied. The results are discussed in
three parts: the effect of wastewater
application on the chemistry of the soil
solution and drainage waters; growth
response of the forest to these appli-
cation rates; the efficiency of waste-
water renovation under forest conditions.
PACK FOREST - THE STUDY SITE
Pack Forest is south of Seattle
within the Puget Sound lowlands. As
such it has a temperate, mild climate.
Mean annual precipitation is about 100
cm, most of which is in the form of rain.
A summer drought of two to three months
is common. The annual temperature is
about 10°C with the winter temperature
remaining relatively mild (January mean
temperature is 3°C).
The wastewater study site Is on a
glacial outwash terrace, deposited dur-
ing the most recent period of glaciation
about 10,000 years ago. The soil is an
Everett series, a Dystric Xerochrept
composed of over 90% gravel (<2 mm).
Five plot types were established
in the study area: (1) an area kept
free of all vegetation, (2) an area
planted with Douglas-fir seedlings
(Pseudotsuga menziesii), (3) an area
planted with Lombardy poplar rooted
cuttings (Populus nigra), (4) an area
planted with grass, primarily reed can-
ary (Phalaris arundinacea), and (5) an
existing 45-year-old Douglas-fir forest.
Naturally occurring grasses invaded the
two seedling plots and remain the
dominant form of vegetation on the
Douglas-fir plot after three years of
irrigation.
Within each vegetation plot, one
subplot receives municipal wastewater
and one receives water from the nearby
Nisqually river. The river water sub-
plot provides the control in the experi-
mental design.
The wastewater is supplied by the
Renton, Washington, Sewage Treatment
Plant operated by the Municipality of
Metropolitan Seattle (METRO). This
30 MGD treatment plant provides second-
ary treatment by an activated sludge
process. Seventy-five percent of the
inflow is estimated to be of domesticorigin.
Wastewater is applied once a week
in one eight-hour period. About 5 cm
is sprayed on all experimental plots,
using irrigation sprinklers for two
minutes of each 30-minute period. Ex-
cept for a few times when the pumping
equipment malfunctioned or the sprin-
kling system froze, the barren, grass,
poplar, and Douglas-fir seedling plots
have been irrigated on this weekly
schedule since October 1974. The 45-
year-old Douglas-fir plot first re-
ceived wastewater in December 1975.
Soil solutions moving through the
soil profile are continuously sampled
by tension lysimeters (Cole, 1968).
Water flow through the profile and
evapotranspiration are estimated from
the outflow of containment lysimeters
adjacent to the experimental plots
(Fritschen £t aL., 1973). The contain-
ment lysimeters, 2 m deep x 7.5 m
diameter, have vegetative covers equiv-
alent to those on the experimental
plots and received simultaneous waste-
water irrigation. The outflows from
these lysimeters provide accurate
estimates of the volume of soil solu-
tion flowing through the profile and
of evapotranspiration from the four
vegetative types. These data provide a
second estimate for quantifying nu-
trient flux through the soil profile
to the groundwater.
Further details on the field in-
stallation, methods used for the anal-
ysis of the soil solutions, and soil
and vegetative materials are reported
elsewhere (Breuer e£ a^L., in press).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Effect of Wastewater on the Chemistry
of the Soil Solution and Drainage
Waters.
Since the overriding reason for
wastewater application to forest eco-
systems is for disposal, it is critical
that these systems be effective in such
a role. Such systems should, as a min-
imum, be able to alter the chemical
composition of wastewater to meet safe
drinking water standards. Nitrogen and
phosphorus are the two elements of
greatest concern in this regard, ni-
trogen because of its toxlcity in the
nitrate form and phosphorus because of
its activity in aquatic productivity.
Removing these nutrients from waste-
waters occurs in two ways: physical-chemical removal by adsorption,.fixation,
and ionic exchange, and biological re-
moval through the plant uptake process
and by denitrification.
Forest ecosystems seem to remove
phosphate from wastewater rapidly and
completely. The deepest that wastewater
phosphate has leached on any of the
wastewater Irrigated plots during the
first two years of irrigation, including
the barren control plot, has been about
10 cm (Table 1). Less than 0.1% of the
applied phosphate leached passed the
10 cm depth. Clearly this removal is
physical-chemical and not biological,
because removal is equally complete on
the plot kept free of vegetative cover
(barren plot). In addition, the ad-
sorption isotherms demonstrate that this
soil Is capable of removing such levels
of added phosphorus (Johnson and Cole,
1977).
Table 1. Phosphorus leaching over a 2-
year period associated with
wastewater (WW) and river
water (RW) irrigations
(kg/ha).
180 cm
WW
RW
WW
RW
WW
RW
WW
RWInput
195
2
188
2Depth
10cm 60cm
Barren
1 <1
3 <1
Grass
12 <1
3 <1
Poplar seedlings
186
26 <1
1 <1
Douglas-fir seedlings
174
22 1
1 <1
Sopper (1975) found similar results
in the Penn State Project. After a
decade of wastewater application at a 2
to 5 cm per week rate he reported re-
moval of from 96 to 99% of the added
phosphorus within the top 120 cm of soil.
Urie (1973) also found the added phos-
phorus associated with wastewater irri-
gation in a Jack Pine (Plnus banksiana)
forest remained largely within the top
60 cm of soil and did not reach the
ground water table.
When losses of nitrogen through
leaching occurred the form was almostexclusively as the nitrate ion (Table 2).
This was very evident for the barren
plot. In 1977 a total of 177 kg/ha of
nitrogen leached past the 180 cm soil
depth; 96% was in the nitrate form with
less than 1% as ammonium. To a lesser
extent the same relationship held true
for the Douglas-fir seedling and grass
sites. When the annual leaching of
nitrate was observed to be at a minimum
level, as in the case of the poplar
seedling plot (4 kg/ha, 0.3 mg/L) the
Douglas-fir forest plot (10 kg/ha,
0.7 mg/L) the leaching of nitrogen was
correspondingly decreased (Table 2).
Thus the leaching of nitrogen is directly
linked by the nitrification process.
Table 2. Leaching losses at the 180 cm
soil depth associated with
wastewater irrigation during
1977.
NO, Total N
mg/L kg/ha mg/L kg/ha
Barren
9.8 165 10.2 171
Grass
5.6 95 6.1 103
Poplar seedling
0.3 4 0.7 10
Douglas-fir seedling
6.6 92 7.0 97
Douglas-fir forest
0.7 10 0.9 14
The monthly trends associated with
nitrate leaching losses for each of the
vegetative types are shown in Figure 1.
These data show that the forest areas
become more efficient in renovation of
wastewater as the seedlings mature and
occupy more of the site. This was
particularly true in the case of the
poplar plot where during the initial
year of irrigation 47% of the applied
nitrogen leached past the 180 cm soil
depth resulting in a peak of 38 rag/L
of nitrates in these drainage waters.
In the second and third years only 5%
of the applied nitrogen reached the
180 cm depth with the average concentra-
tion dropping to less than 0.2 mg/L.
Applying wastewater to the 45-year-
old forest also yield excellent nitrogen
renovation for the two-year period that
325this phase of the study has been con-
ducted. The maximum nitrate concentra-
tions observed in the 180 cm drainage
waters for this plot has been 5 mg/L.
Typically the concentrations have re-
mained below 1 mg/L (Figure 1) and have
averaged 0.7 mg/L during this two-year
period.
9 \Z
1974
Figure 1. Nitrate-nitrogen concentration
in soil solution collected at
180 cm under five different
vegetation covers undergoing
wastewater irrigation.
The leaching of anions, including
nitrate and phosphate, through the soil
profiles of these various vegetative
types is illustrated in Figure 2 and
tabulated in Table 3. The removal of
phosphate in the surface 10 cm and the
mobility of nitrate, chloride and sul-
phate through the soil profile is evi-
dent. There Is a sharp decrease in the
bicarbonate ion concentration with soil
depth caused by a corresponding de-
crease In the soil solution pH. It can
be seen from Figure 2 that the leaching
of cations (Ca++, Mg"1"4", K+, Na+) is
regulated on a stoichioraetric basis with
the leaching of the anions. Thus any
process that Increases the anion concen-
tration of the soil solution, such as
nitrification, also increases the po-
tential for losses of an equivalent
amount of cations.DOUGLAS-FIR
SEEDLING
180
SOIL SOLUTION CONCENTRATION (meq/l)
Figure 2. Anion and cation fluxes
(meq/L) within the soil
profile associated with
wastewater irrigation at
Pack Forest.
These relatively low rates of ni-
trate leaching following wastewater ir-
rigation on forest sites are not always
found. Sopper (1975) and Urie (1973)
both reported a significant quantity
(in excess of 10 ppm) of nitrate at
times in leachates or groundwaters af-
ter extended periods of wastewater ir-
rigation. This was especially evident
at the 5'cm/wk application rate. This
can be partially accounted for by the
fact that the forest cover did not
utilize nearly so much of the applied
nitrogen in either of these two studies
326Table 3. Ion fluxes (eq/ha) in waste-
water (WW) irrigation and soil
solution passing 10 cm, 60 cm,
and 180 cm (October, 1975
through August, 1976).
SO2-Cl"NO,
WW 4,435
10 cm 16
60 cm 3
180 cm 3
WW 4,253
10 cm 89
60 cm 3
180 cm 4No Vegetation
13,085 15,086 593
9,632 15,477 17,706
11,998 16,759 14,755
8,833 12,825 15,553
Poplar Seedling
12,307 14,414 530
8,385 18,611 4,157
10,033 16,870 2,093
10,862 20,685 773
WW 3,315
10 cm 22
60 cm 27
180 cm 2
WW 4,280
10 cm 334
60 cm 2
180 cm 2Douglas-fir Seedling
9,641 11,195 441
6,006 8,783 2,639
7,141 9,013 2,382
7,948 10,848 2,212
Grass
12,504 14,578 556
7,979 14,030 9,284
8,925 16,637 9,384
8,884 14,100 5,660
as we have observed at Pack Forest.
This was particularly true when waste-
water was applied to the coniferous
stands of these study areas. It is also
possible that the nitrification process
is inhibited in forest soils we have
studied (Cole et^ &L. , 1975, Hellman,
1974) in that Breuer, et_ al_. (in press)
found less activity of these nitrifying
bacteria associated with the lower solu-
tion nitrate levels.
Growth Response Resulting from Waste-
water Applications
Wastewater renovation by forest
systems partly depends on uptake and
storage of the wastewater nutrients by
the forest cover. Initially some re-
moval, perhaps for the first several
years, could be accomplished by soil
microorganisms due to the high carbon
to nitrogen ratios in these forest
soils. Ultimately, however, the re-
moval must be either by uptake by the
forest cover or by denitrification.
Plant uptake could be an effective
mechanism for decreasing nitrogen leach-
ing losses through these soils if the'uptake rates are high enough. For trees
to be effective agents in this removal
process, the annual uptake of nutrients
must be substantially increased over the
10 to 30 kg/ha reported for Douglas-fir
on these sites (Heilman and Gessel,
1963, Cole et. al., 1967).
In order to achieve a nutrient up-
take rate more in line with the rates
of application, it is necessary to
realize a marked increase in produc-
tivity on the wastewater-treated sites.
The extent of the growth response after
three growing seasons is shown in
Table 4. Poplar cuttings showed the
greatest response to wastewater (18-
fold) followed by grass (10-fold) and
Douglas-fir seedlings (3-fold). By
including the subordinate vegetation,
primarily grass, into the production
calculations a more uniform response
picture emerges between these three
plots. This gives the poplar plot a
total production of 13 times the waste-
water control, grass 10 times the con-
trol, and the Douglas-fir seedling
six times the control. The difference
in grass production on the poplar and
Douglas-fir seedling plots is due pri-
marily to shading by the seedlings al-
though competition for nutrients may be
a factor in the poplar plot. After
three years of growth the poplar cuttings
are more than 7 meters tall while the
Douglas-fir seedlings are about 3 meters
tall.
Table 4. Aboveground biomass production
by vegetation irrigated with
wastewater (WW) and river
water (RW) (kg/ha).
1976
Age 2 Yr
WW RW1977
Age 3 Yr
WW RW
Poplar
seedling 8540 1020 28170 1220
grass 8000 1600 5970 120
total 16540 2620 34140 2340
Douglas-fir
seedling 2860 930
grass 8500 1600
total 11360 2530
grassGrass
8500 30004910 1620
8440 760
13350 2380
9130 910
327This increase in biomass production
is reflected in a substantially greater
nutrient uptake in the wastewater-treated
sites (Table 5). Nitrogen uptake was
increased 10-fold on the poplar plot,
5-fold on the Douglas-fir seedling plot,
and 12-fold on the grass plot. A maxi-
mum nitrogen uptake of 303 kg/ha was
observed in 1977 on the poplar plot.
This is nearly three times larger than
the maximum nitrogen uptake value re-
ported in the literature for forest
species and accounted for 62% of the ap-
plied nitrogen. Sixty-seven percent of
the applied nitrogen was accounted for
by uptake in the Douglas-fir seedling
plot while only 37% of the applied ni-
trogen could be accounted for on the
grass plot during the same period.
Table 5. Nitrogen and phosphorus uptake
by three-year-old vegetation
irrigated with wastewater (WW)
and river water (RW)(kg/ha).
Plot
Component
Seedling
Grass
Total
Seedling
Grass
TotalNitrogen
WW RW
Poplar
213
90
30315
16
31Phosphorus
WW RW
Seedlingi
42
21
632
2
4
Douglas-fir Seedlings
43
181
22416
30
467
31
382
3
5
Grass 179 15 36
Biomass production and nutrient up
take information will not be available
from the 45-year-old Douglas-fir plot
until the end of the 1978 growing sea-
son. However, preliminary observations
of these older trees indicate that they
are also experiencing a substantial in-
crease in growth and nutrient uptake.
Sopper (1975) also noted a signif-
icant tree growth response in his Penn
State Project. The greatest increases
he observed were with hardwood species
rather than conifers: red pine (Pinus
resinosa) and white spruce (Picea
glauca). However, the response he re-
ported was not as great as we noted at
Pack Forest; thus Sopper found sub-
stantially less nitrogen and phosphorus
uptake. For example, the poplar standat Pack Forest removed 212 kg/ha of ni-
trogen during its third year of growth
while an established hardwood forest in
the Penn State study removed only 94
kg/ha.
Efficiency of Wastewater Renovation
under Forest Conditions
The capacity of a forest ecosystem
to utilize and store nutrients associ-
ated with wastewater irrigations has
been clearly demonstrated at Pack
Forest. Viewed in terms of wastewater
renovation efficiencies, we can also
see that these forested systems are
functioning effectively. The wastewater
renovation capacity of the four vege-
tative types and barren control at Pack
Forest during the past three years is
shown in Table 6. These data clearly
show that all of the vegetative covers
provide substantially greater renova-
tion of wastewater than the barren
control. For this three-year period,
an average of 84% of the nitrogen was
removed by the vegetated plots through
both soil retention and plant uptake.
Without any vegetative cover the removal
percentage was substantially less, an
average of 56% over the three-year
period. By examining the yearly trends
in these data (Table 6) we see that an
established forest cover increases this
renovation capacity. For example,
wastewater applications to the 45-year-
old forest resulted in a nearly com-
plete removal of nitrogen (94%). Ap-
plications on the poplar plot show a
similar removal efficiency after the
poplar became established in 1976 and
fully occupied the site. Because of
initial slower growth, Douglas-fir
seedlings have not yet fully occupied
the plot after three years of growth.
Consequently this site still has a
major component of grass, 64% of the
1977 production. Since the Douglas-fir
are now about 3 meters tall on the
wastewater-treated site, we would ex-
pect that this area will be essentially
dominated by trees at the end of the
1978 growing season. This should in
turn cause an increase in the renova-
tion capacity, bringing this plot more
in line with the poplar and 45-year-old
forested sites.
Monthly patterns of renovation by
each vegetative type and the barren con-
trol over this three-year period are
illustrated in Figure 3. A pattern of
seasonal!ty emerges from this analysis.
328Table 6. Addition (kg/ha) and renovation
(%) of nitrogen associated with
wastewater irrigation at Pack
Forest.
1975 1976 1977 Total
kg/ha %• kg/ha % kg/ha % kg/ha %
404 69 438 34 489 65 1331 56
Grass
404 93 433 77 480 79 1317 83
Poplar Seedling
404 53 429 95 406 98 1239 82
Douglas-fir Seedlings
404 85 320 83 333 71 1057 80
Douglas-fir Forest
_-.* —* 400 88 429 97 829 92
wastewater application did not begin
until December 1975.
Z. 40-
1975 1976
IRRIGATION
SOIL SOLUTION AT ISOcm
Figure 3. Nitrogen addition by waste-
water irrigation and loss
through deep leaching (180
cm) for the five vegetative
types at Pack Forest.The greatest loss of nitrogen occurs
from the barren site from May to October
when the soil temperatures are highest.
This loss coincides with the period of
greatest nitrification (Figure 2). In
contrast nitrogen renovation on the vege-
tated plots was lowest during the winter
and early spring periods. This was not
unexpected because nitrogen uptake by
these systems is probably maximum dur-
ing summer and fall. Where very high
rates of nitrogen uptake were found,
such as in the case of the poplar and
forest plots, all indications of sea-
sonality in renovation were lost.
The removal of nitrogen from the
wastewater irrigation in the 45-year-
old forest could be related to the mi-
croorganisms. The high carbon content
and wide C/N ratio associated with the
forest floor and surface A horizon of
this established forest theoretically
provide a storage potential of over
500 kg/ha of nitrogen. Although this is
not a large storage reservoir compared
to the annual additions by wastewater,
it is sufficient to provide a storage
buffer during the initial year before
rapid growth response.
The renovation efficiency for ni-
trogen by the tree species tested in the
Penn State Project (Sopper, 1975) is not
as encouraging. This could be partly
due to the testing of some slower grow-
ing species such as red pine and also
to the harsh winter climate of that
site. Sopper (p. 233) concluded that
"trees are not as efficient renovating
agents as agronomic crops." Our results
at Pack Forest suggest that this con-
clusion may be invalid for species and
sites having greater growth potential.
CONCLUSION
The study at Pack Forest and those
in Pennsylvania and Minnesota demonstrate
that forest ecosystems can play a major
role in renovating municipal wastewater.
There are several advantages in using
forests for this purpose. The results
from the Pack Forest project clearly
show that forest ecosystems can be as
effective in renovation as agricultural
crops. Renovation rates comparable to
agricultural crops have been achieved.
It was also found that wastewater could
be applied to the forest sites at 5 cm/
wk on a year-round basis and still main-
tain EPA drinking water standards for
solutions passing 180 cm depth.
329The key to accomplishing this reno-
vation of wastewater seems to be a high
nitrogen recovery rate and growth re-
sponse of the vegetative cover. The
mild winter climate at the Pack Forest
site undoubtedly was an important factor
in allowing these year-round irrigations.
Using a perennial plant, such as a tree,
is also critical in this regard.
Poplar appears to be an ideal re-
cipient of wastewater because of its
rapid early growth and high uptake rates
of nutrient elements. Douglas-fir seed-
lings take longer to occupy a site ini-
tially, but such a rapid growing coni-
ferous species might ultimately be a
better choice because of its capacity to
transpire water and take up nutrients in
the winter months, as well as its higher
final market value.
The outstanding response of trees
to these wastewater applications leads
us to speculate on the feasibility of
combining wastewater management with
forest management. Such a prospect is
further enhanced by the current interest
in utilizing forests as energy planta-
tions to help meet the world energy
needs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research reported here was sup-
ported by the Corps of Engineers, U.S.
Army, Cold Regions Research and Engin-
eering Laboratory, Hanover, N.H. through
contract nos. DACW73-73-C-006 and DACA
89-77-c-OOOA, and by the Municipality of
Metropolitan Seattle (METRO) through
contract no. CR2385.
REFERENCES
Breuer, D.W., D.W. Cole and P. Schiess.
(In press.) Nitrogen transformation
and leaching associated with waste-
water irrigation in Douglas-fir,
poplar, grass and unvegetated systems.
IN: W.E. Sopper (éd.), Municipal
Wastewater and Sludge Recycling on
Forest Land and Disturbed Land. The
Pennsylvania State University Press,
University Park.
Cole, D.W. 1968. A system for measur-
ing conductivity, acidity and rate of
water flow in a forest soil. Water
Resources Research 4:1127-1136.
Cole, D.W., W.J.B. Crane and C.C. Grier.
1975. The effect of forest manage-
ment practices on water chemistry in
a second-growth Douglas-fir eco-
system, p. 195-208. IN: B. Bernierand C. H. Winget (eds.), Forest Soils
and Land Management. Les Presses de
L'Université Laval, Quebec.
Cole, D.W., S.P. Gessel and S.F. Dice.
1967. Distribution and cycling of
nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium and
calcium in a second-growth Douglas-
fir ecosystem, p. 197-223. IN:
Symp. Primary Productivity and Min-
eral Cycling in Natural Ecosystems.
Am. Assoc. Adv. Sci. Conf., North
Carolina State University, Raleigh,
August 1968.
Fritschen, L.J., L. Cox and R. Kinerson.
1973. A 28-meter Douglas-fir tree in
a weighing lysimeter. Forest Science
19:256-261.
Gessel, S.P., T.N. Stoate and K.J. Turn-
bull. 1969. The growth and behavior
of Douglas-fir with nitrogenous
fertilizer in western Washington.
Contrib. No. 7, Institute of Forest
Products, University of Washington,
Seattle. 119 p.
Heilman, P.E. 1974. Effect of urea
fertilization on nitrification in
forest soils of the Pacific North-
west. Soil Science Society of Am-
erica Proceedings 38:664-667.
Heilman, P.E. and S.P. Gessel. 1963.
Nitrogen requirement and the biolog-
ical cycling of nitrogen in Douglas-
fir stands in relationship to the
effects of nitrogen fertilization.
Plant and Soil 18:386-402.
Johnson, D.W. and D.W. Cole. 1977.
Anion mobility in soils: Relevance
to nutrient transport for terrestrial
to aquatic ecosystems. EPA-600/3-
77-068.
Kardos, L.T. and W.E. Sopper. 1973.
Renovation of municipal wastewater
through land disposal by spray irri-
gation, p. 148-163. IN: W.E. Sopper
and L.T. Kardos (eds.), Recycling
Treated Municipal Wastewater and
Sludge through Forest and Cropland,
The Pennsylvania State University
Press, University Park, PA.
Overrein, L.N. 1971. Isotope studies
on nitrogen in forest soil. I.
Relative losses of nitrogen through
leaching during a period of forty
months. Norwegian Forest Research
Meddr. Norsk Skogfars Ves 29(114):
261-280.
Sopper, W.E. 1975. Wastewater recycling
on forest lands, p. 227-243. IN:
B. Bernier and C.H. Winget (eds.).
Forest Soils and Forest Land Manage-
ment. Les Presses de L'Université
Laval, Quebec,
330Urie, D.H. 1973. Phosphorus and nitrate
levels in groundwater as related to
irrigation of Jack Pine with sewage
effluent, p. 176-183. IN: W.E.
Sopper and L. T. Kardos (eds.), Re-
cycling Treated Municipal Wastewater
and Sludge through Forest and Cropland
The Pennsylvania State University
Press, University Park, PA.
331AGRICULTURE AND FOREST USE
UTILIZATION OF DOMESTIC WASTEWATER IN FOREST ECOSYSTEMS
THE PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY LIVING FILTER PROJECT
William E. Sopper and Sonja N. Kerr
Institute for Research on Land and Water Resources
The Pennsylvania State University-
University Park, PA 16802
ABSTRACT
Long-term nitrate-N renovation
efficiency of several forest ecosystems
on the Penn State Renovation and Conser-
vation Project were evaluated. During
the past 15 years (1963-1977) secondary
treated municipal sewage effluent was
spray irrigated in mixed hardwood forests,
a red pine (Pinus resinosa), and a white
spruce (Picea glauca) plantation estab-
lished on an abandoned old field. Efflu-
ent was applied at rates ranging from
2.5 to 7.5 cm per week over various
lengths of time from the growing season
to the entire year. Soil water samples
were collected weekly at the 120 cm
depth with suction lysimeters and ana-
lyzed for selected nitrogen forms.
Results indicated that satisfactory
wastewater renovation was achieved when
mixed hardwood forests and red pine
plantations were irrigated with sewage
effluent at 2.5 cm per week during the
growing season. An old field-white
spruce ecosystem irrigated at 5.0 cm per
week during the growing season also pro-
vided satisfactory renovation. A red
pine plantation, spray irrigated with
effluent at 5.0 cm per week during the
growing season did not provide adequate
wastewater renovation. However, when
the red pine plantation was replaced by
a first-stage succession of herbaceous
vegetation and pioneer shrub and tree
species, renovation efficiency was re-
stored. Year-around irrigation of a
mixed hardwood forest ecosystem on a
sandy loam soil at an application rate
of 5.0 cm per week did not provide
adequate wastewater renovation. Increas-ing the sewage effluent application rates
by 50 percent after 9 years of operation
resulted in the collapse of all forest
ecosystem renovation systems. Recovery
of these systems was extremely slow re-
quiring 1 to 3 years. Recovery was most
rapid when wastewater applications were
terminated completely rather than con-
tinued at a lower application rate .
INTRODUCTION
The fate of nitrogen in one of the
most important aspects which must be
considered in regard to land application
of municipal wastewater. This is partic-
ularly true for "Living Filter" systems
where the primary goal is renovation of
wastewater for direct recharge of the
groundwater reservoir. Renovation, In
terms of nitrogen, means that the con-
centration of nitrate-N in soil water
leaving the root zone should not exceed
10 mg/1 (U.S. Public Health limit for
potable water).
Under the "Living Filter" concept,
the renovation of wastewater is achieved
through the removal and degradation of
organic and inorganic constituents by
microorganisms, chemical precipitation,
ion exchange, biological transformation,
and biological absorption through the
root systems of the vegetative cover.
Most ecosystems have an initial high
capacity to accept and renovate waste-
water satisfactorily. However, the con-
tinual application of large volumes of
water with high amounts of nutrients will
ultimately affect ecosystem stability and
all renovation processes. Most of these
333changes occur slowly and may not become
obvious for a decade. Some of the more
important changes that may influence
wastewater renovation efficiency in for-
est ecosystems are vegetation species
composition and density, foliage chemical
composition, leaf litter and forest floor
decomposition rates, humus mineralization
rates, physical and chemical properties
of the soil, microbial and earthworm
populations, and microclimate.
Wastewater renovation has been
intensively investigated in several
forest ecosystems as a part of the Penn
State Wastewater Renovation and Conser-
vation Project. Earlier results have
been reported by Pennsypacker et al
(1967), Kardos and Sopper (1973), Hook
and Kardos (1977, 1978), Parizek et al
(1967), and Sopper and Kerr (1978). The
purpose of this report is to summarize
the results of these earlier studies and
to discuss the long-term effects of
spray irrigation of sewage effluent on
the renovation efficiency of several
forest ecosystems.
During the past 15 years (1967-1977)
secondary treated municipal sewage efflu-
ent from the University wastewater treat-
ment plant has been spray irrigated in
several forest ecosystems. The eco-
systems included two mixed hardwood
forests, a red pine (Pinus resinosa)
plantation, and a sparse white spruce
(Picea glauca) plantation established
on an abandoned old field. Detailed
descriptions of these areas have been
previously reported by Parizek et al
(1967). The two soils present are
ultlsols. The Hublersburg soil (Typic
Hapludalf) has a silt loam topsoil with
a sllty clay or clay subsoil. It has
moderate to moderately rapid permeability
and is well drained. The Morrison soil
(Ultic Hapludalf) is a sandy loam with
a sandy clay loam subsoil and has a
moderately rapid to rapid permeability
and is well drained.
Application rates ranged from 2.5
to 7.5 cm per week over various lengths
of time ranging from the growing season
(April to November) to the entire year.
The normal weekly application rates were
2,5 and 5.0 cm per week (0.63 cm per
hour), throughout the study period
except for 1972 and 1973. During these
two years the application rates were
increased by 50 percent to evaluate the
effects of chronic applications of
wastewater on ecosystem collapse andrecovery. During the period 1963 to
1977, the total amount of sewage effluent
applied was 1064 cm on the areas irri-
gated at 2.5 cm per week and 2090 cm on
the areas irrigated at 5.0 cm per week
during the growing season on the Hublers-
burg soil. The hardwood forest on the
Morrison soil which was irrigated at
5.0 cm per week the entire year received
a total of 2362 cm during the period
1965 to 1977.
The mean concentration of nitrogen
forms in the sewage effluent is given in
Table 1.
Table 1. Mean Concentration of Nitrogen
Forms in the Sewage Effluent
NH4-N
Org-N
Total-Nmg
9
8
4N/l
.4
.5
.6
22.5
There has been a change in the con-
centrations of nitrogen forms over the
15 year period and this change must be
considered in relation to the renovation
process. In 1970, the sewage treatment
plant modified its operation to lower
nitrogenous-biological oxygen demand of
the effluent since only 20 percent was
being applied on land and 80 percent was
being discharged into a local stream.
As a result there was a shift in the
predominant nitrogen form from ammonium
to nitrate. Such a shift could influence
the amount of nitrate leaching, particu-
larly during the winter. During winter
irrigation ammonium added should be held
on exchange sites of soil colloids and
with low nitrification, should accumu-
late in the soil. Nitrate would con-
tinually leach during the winter.
During the summer months, the exchange
phenomena should hold ammonium near the
soil surface as water percolates down-
ward during irrigation, carrying much
of the nitrate with it. It is possible
that the ammonium held in the surface
soil layer might be converted to nitrate
and then would be subject to leaching
with irrigation the following week.
However, in any event, this nitrogen
would remain in the topsoil for a longer
period of time which would prolong its
33^availability for plant uptake, microbial
assimilation, or denitrification before
the next irrigation. While mean annual
total N concentration was almost constant,
there was a distinct seasonal cycle in
mean monthly total N concentrations
(Hook and Kardos, 1978), Mean monthly
total N concentrations ranged from a low
of 18 mg/1 in August to a high of 35 mg/1
in March. The increases during the
winter months were primarily due to
ammonium increases and were probably in
response to changes in the student popu-
lation served by the sewage treatment
plant.
METHOD OF STUDY
Samples of the sewage effluent were
collected in each forest ecosystem
during each irrigation period using rain
gauges or plastic containers placed 1 m
above the ground. Suction lysimeters
were installed in all areas at the 120
cm soil depth to obtain samples of
percolating soil water. Soil water
samples were collected, whenever possible,
after each weekly application of waste-
water. Nitrate-N was determined by the
brucine method (APHA, 1965a) from 1963
to 1969 and by the ion-selective elec-
trode method (Milham et al, 1970) from
1970 to 1976. Ammonium was measured by
direct Nesslerization method (APHA,
1965b) from 1963 to 1972 and by ammonia
gas electrode (Orion, 1971) from 1973 to
1976, Organic N was determined by a
semimicro^kjeldahl digestion followed by
direct Nesslerization (Kelley et al,
1946) or by ammonia gas electrode.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Nitrogen
The efficiency of the forest eco-
systems to renovate the wastewater and
to reduce nitrogen concentrations in
soil water has been variable. Mean
annual concentrations of nitrate-N in
soil water at the 120 cm soil depth for
all forest ecosystems during the period
1965 to 1977 are given in Table 2, Data
for 1963 and 1964 are not presented
since soil water samples were only
collected at the 30 and 60 cm depths,
However, nitrate-N concentrations in
soil water at these shallower depths
were all equal to or less than the
values reported for 1965 at the 120 an
depth.Forest Ecosystems on Hublersburg Soil
Mixed Hardwood Forest. Sewage
effluent was irrigated in this ecosystem
during each growing season at the appli-
cation rate of 2.5 cm per week through-
out the study period (1963-77) except
for 1972 and 1973 when the application
rate was increased to 3.8 cm per week.
Results presented in Table 2 indicate
that this forest ecosystem was able to
satisfactorily renovate the wastewater.
The mean annual concentrations of
nitrate-N in the soil water were con-
sistently below the U.S. Public Health
Service (USPH) limit for potable water
(10 mg/1) during the first nine years
of operation (1963-1971). However,
there appears to be a decreasing trend
in renovation efficiency starting in
1968 after the first six years of opera-
tion. This may be related to other eco-
system changes reported by Richenderfer
and Sopper (1978) and Dindal et al (1978)
Richenderfer and Sopper found that
sewage effluent irrigation caused a
significant increase in forest floor
decomposition rates, and, thus, higher
humus mineralization rates. Dindal
reported significant increases in micro-
bial and earthworm populations. All of
these changes would tend to favor higher
leaching of nitrate-N. The data in
Table 2 also indicates that forest eco-
systems may be quite sensitive to waste-
water application rates and may have a
low threshold of collapse in terms of
renovation. Ecosystem collapse being
defined as that point in time when the
ecosystem is no longer able to remove
nitrogen and the concentration of
nitrate-N in soil water at the 120 cm
depth exceeds 10 mg/1. In 1972, when
the application rate was increased from
2.5 to 3.8 cm per week, the forest eco-
system renovation system collapsed and
the soil water mean annual nitrate-N
concentration Increased significantly
to 23.9 mg/1. However, it should also
be noted that some of this increase in
nitrate-N leaching was due to tropical
storm "Agnes." During the period June
21-25, 1972 there was a total of 24.05
cm of rain. This large amount of rain-
fall also significantly increased the
mean annual concentration of nitrate-N
in the soil water of the control forest
(0.1 to 4.7 mg/1). The increased appli-
cation rate was applied again in 1973
and the results obtained are more
indicative of what might happen under
normal climatic conditions. Wastewater
renovation was still unsatisfactory,
335Table 2. Mean Annual Concentration of Nitrate-Nitrogen in Soil Water at the 120 cm Depth in the Forest Ecosystems.
Year
1965
1966
1967
u) 1968
^ 1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977Red Pine I
Hublersburg Soil
cm per week
0 2.5
mg/1
0.9
0.1
0.9
0.9
0.2
<1
2.6
6.0
0.5
0.7
1.3
0.7
0.7mg/1
2.2
2.1
1.7
2.7
4.2
5.3
8.3
21.8*
13.7*
16.1
11.9
9.8
5.0Red Pine II
Hublersburg Soil
cm per week
0 5
mg/1
0.9
0.1
1.8
1.6
0.5
<1
2.6
6.0
0.5
0.7
1.3
0.7
0.7mg/1
3.9
9.3
13.8
20.0
24,2
8.1
2.1
14.5+
8.7+
7.8
5.1
4.3
3.7Hardwood
Hublersburg Soil
cm per week
0 2.5
mg/1
—
0.1
0.3
0.1
0.1
<1
0.5
4.7
3.0
1.5
1.7
1.2
1.4mg/1
0.0
0.2
1.4
8.0
7.2
5.0
5.8
23.9*
14.7*
14.5
11.6
12.5
9.4Old Field
Hublersburg Soil
cm per week
0 5
mg/1
0.3
0.1
0.3
0.2
0.2
<1
0.5
3.2
0.5
0.5
0.8
0.8
0.9mg/1
8.0
5.0
6.1
3.7
2.3
3.5
3.8
11.8+
13.5+
10.9
12.9
8.4
6.9Hardwood
Morrison Soil
cm per week
0 5
mg/1
—
0.1
1.4
0.1
0.3
1.0
0.8
4.7
1.3
0.5
0.8
0.6
1.1mg/1
—
10.6
19.2
25.9
23.7
42.8
17.6
22.9
17.3
14.3
9.0
4.8
5.1
*Application rate increased to 3.8 cm per week,
fApplication rate increased to 7.5 cm per week.however, the mean annual nitrate-N con-
centration in soil water was only 14.7
mg/1. During the period 1974 to 1977
the application rate was reduced to 2.5
cm per week. It is quite obvious that
ecosystem recovery after chronic appli-
cations of wastewater is extremely slow.
Mean annual nitrate-N concentration
remained above 10 mg/1 until 1977 when
it decreased to 9.4 mg/1.
Red Pine I. Sewage effluent was
irrigated in this ecosystem during each
growing season at the application rate
of 2.5 cm per week throughout the study
period except for 1972 and 1973 when
the application rate was increased by
50 percent. Results presented in Table
2 indicate that this forest ecosystem
was able to satisfactorily renovate the
wastewater. The mean annual concentra-
tions of nitrate-N in the soil water
were consistently below 10 mg/1 during
the entire period 1963 to 1971. Similar
to the mixed hardwood forest there
appears to be a decreasing trend in
renovation efficiency starting in 1969.
As in the mixed hardwood forest, the
explanation for this decreasing renova-
tion efficiency may be the ecosystem
changes previously discussed. Increas-
ing the application rate in 1972 result-
ed in a similar collapse of the eco-
system renovation processes and the mean
annual nitrate-N concentration in the
soil water significantly increased to
21.8 mg/1. During the period 1974 to
1977 the application rate was reduced to
2.5 cm per week. Ecosystem recovery was
extremely slow with nitrate-N concentra-
tions remaining above 10 mg/1 until 1976
when it decreased to 9.8 mg/1.
Red Pine II. Sewage effluent was
irrigated in this ecosystem during each
growing season at the application rate
of 5.0 cm per week throughout the study
period except for 1972 and 1973 when the
application rate was increased by 50
percent. Renovation results are given
in Table 2. Results indicate that this
forest ecosystem was only able to satis-
factorily renovate wastewater during the
first four years of operation (1963 to
1966)• Mean annual concentration of
nitrate-N in soil water gradually
increased from 3.9 to a peak of 24.2
mg/1 in 1969. In November of 1968, a
snow storm accompanied by high winds
resulted in a complete blowdown of the
plantation. In 1969 the area was clear-
cut and all trees were removed. Sewage
effluent irrigation was continued andimmediately a dense cover of herbaceous
and shrub vegetation developed. With
the development and-growth of this
perennial herbaceous vegetative cover,
the mean annual concentration of nitrate-
N in the soil water decreased from 24.2
mg/1 in 1969 to 8.3 mg/1 in 1970 and to
2.9 mg/1 in 1971. Increasing the appli-
cation rate from 5.0 to 7.5 cm per week
in 1972 increased the nitrate-N concen-
tration in the soil water to 14.5 mg/1.
Even though this concentration exceeds
10 mg/1, it is obvious that the new
developing ecosystem composed of invad-
ing pioneer species of herbaceous and
tree vegetation was very efficient in
renovating wastewater. In 1972, tropical
storm "Agnes" increased the mean annual
concentration of nitrate-N in the soil
water on the control area from 2.6 to
6.0 mg/1. On the irrigated area, in
1973, with the increased application
rate under normal climatic conditions,
the nitrate-N concentration in soil
water was only 8.7 mg/1. It is obvious
that the pioneer vegetation ecosystem
was able to recovery quickly from the
chronic applications of wastewater and
that the renovation efficiency of the
new ecosystem is much greater than the
original red pine ecosystem. Even though
the red pine ecosystem was very ineffi-
cient in renovating the wastewater
during the period 1963 to 1969, reaching
a peak concentration of 24.2 mg/1 of
nitrate-N in soil water, the new develop-
ing pioneer vegetation ecosystem was
extremely efficient as indicated by the
fact that mean annual nitrate-N concen-
tration in the soil water was only 3.7
mg/1 in 1977. This is quite signifi-
cant when one considers that almost 21
meters of sewage effluent had been
applied on this area as of 1977. The
results obtained from this area dramat-
ically illustrate the interrelationship
between the application rate, the type
of vegetation, and the system of manage-
ment.
Old Field-White Spruce. Sewage
effluent was irrigated in this ecosystem
during each growing season at the appli-
cation rate of 5.0 cm per week through-
out the study period except for 1972 and
1973 when the application rate was
increased by 50 percent. Nitrogen was
added at an average rate of 310 kg N/ha
per year. In 1972 and 1973, 430 kg N/
ha per year was added.
Renovation results are given in
Table 2. This ecosystem has been some-
33Twhat exceptional in terms of nitrogen
renovation in comparison to the other
forest ecosystems. It received the high-
est application rate on the Hublersburg
soil and yet has consistently maintained
nitrate-N concentrations in soil water
below 10 mg/1 throughout the period 1963
to 1971. Increasing the application rate
in 1972 resulted in a slight increase in
concentrations of nitrate-N in the soil
water. However, the ecosystem quickly
recovered. Average leaching losses of N
at the 5.0 cm per week irrigation rate
was 109 kg N/ha per year or 35 percent.
At the increased irrigation rate (7.5 cm
per week) the leaching loss of N was 323
kg/ha/yr or 75 percent. In 1963 at the
start of the project the area was pri-
marily an open field with a few scatter-
ed white spruce saplings (1 to 2 meters
in height). Although the trees are now
more than 9 m in height, the spruce
stand is still sparse with fairly large
open areas occupied by perennial herba-
ceous vegetation and shrubs. It appears
that the annual and perennial vegetation
that occupy these open areas during the
growing season (irrigation period) pro-
vide temporary storage for nitrogen and
hence reduce the nitrate-N leaching
losses. In the fall, vegetation growth
ceases and nitrate-N is again available
for leaching. However, since irrigation
has ceased by this time, the concentra-
tion of nitrate-N in soil water remains
at an acceptable level. The desynchroni-
zation effect of nitrate-N application,
vegetation utilization, soil water leach-
ing is one of the primary factors con-
tributing to the renovation efficiency
of this ecosystem.
Forest Ecosystem on Morrison Soil
Mixed Hardwood Forest. Sewage
effluent was irrigated in this ecosystem
during the entire year at the rate of
5.0 cm per week (0.42 cm per hour)
throughout the period 1965 to 1974.
Renovation results are given in Table 2.
Results indicate that irrigation through-
out the entire year of forest ecosystems
on sandy soils with sewage effluent is
not feasible. Mean annual concentration
of nitrate-N in soil water continually
increased reaching a peak within five
years (1970) of 42.8 mg/1. During the
study period unknown amounts of liquid
digested sludge were periodically in-
jected into the sewage effluent and
spray irrigated on the area. These
sludge applications probably account for
the unexplained fluctuations in the meanannual nitrate-N concentrations In the
soil water during the period 1968 to
1971. The increase in nitrate-N con-
centration in soil water in 1972 was
partially the result of tropical storm
"Agnes." At the end of the growing
season in 1974 It was decided to cease
sewage effluent irrigation in this
forest ecosystem and to evaluate the
rate of ecosystem recovery In terms of
nitrate-N renovation efficiency. Within
one year the mean annual concentration
of nitrate-N in soil water decreased
from 14.3 mg/1 to 9.0 mg/1. In 1976 and
1977 sewage effluent was again applied
during the growing season at the rate of
5.0 cm per week. Results indicate that
the forest ecosystem is again providing
satisfactory renovation of the waste-
water. Nitrate-N concentrations of
percolating water at the 120 cm soil
depth were below 10 mg/1 (4.8 mg/1 in
1976 and 5.1 mg/1 in 1977).
CONCLUSIONS
Several forest ecosystems were
irrigated with treated municipal waste-
water over a 15-year period. Wastewater
application rates ranged from 2.0 to 7.5
cm per week and were applied over various
lengths of time ranging from the growing
season to the entire year. Soil water
samples were collected at the 120 cm
soil depth for chemical analyses.
Results of these analyses were used to
determine the long-term renovation
efficiency of each forest ecosystem.
The results reported Indicate the
following conclusions:
1. The mixed hardwood and red pine
forest ecosystems on the
Hublersburg soil that were
irrigated during the growing
season at 2.5 cm per week for
nine years (1963-1971) provided
satisfactory renovation of the
wastewater. The mean annual
concentration of nitrate-N In
soil water at the 120 cm soil
depth never exceeded the U.S.
Public Health limit of 10 mg/1
for potable water.
2. The old field-spruce ecosystem
on the Hublersburg soil that
was irrigated during the grow-
ing season at 5.0 cm per week
for nine years (1963-1971) pro-
vided satisfactory renovation
of the wastewater. The average
annual concentration of nitrate-
338N In soil water at the 120 cm
soil depth never exceeded 10
mg/1.
3. The red pine forest ecosystem
on the Hublersburg soil that
was irrigated during the grow-
ing season at 5.0 cm per week
for nine years (1963 to 1971)
did not adequately renovate the
wastewater. Average annual con-
centrations of nitrate-N exceed-
ed 10 mg/1 by 1967 and reached
a maximum of 24.2 mg/1 in 1969.
4. Conversion of the red pine
forest, following blowdown in
1968, to a first-stage succes-
sion of herbaceous vegetation
and pioneer shrub and tree
species resulted in restoration
of renovation efficiency. With-
in one year the average annual
concentration of nitrate-N in
soil water decreased from 24.2
to 8.3 mg/1 and to 2.1 mg/1 by
the second year.
5. Year-around irrigation of the
mixed hardwood forest ecosystem
on the Morrison soil at 5.0 cm
per week did not provide ade-
quate renovation of the waste-
water. Within one year the
average annual concentration of
nitrate-N in the soil water
exceeded 10 mg/1 and peaked at
42.8 mg/1 within 5 years. These
results indicate that it is not
feasible to irrigate mixed
hardwood forests with municipal
wastewater at an application
rate of 5.0 cm per week on a
continuous year-around basis.
6. Results indicated that a 50
percent increase in the weekly
application rate (from 2.5 to
3.8 and 5.0 to 7.5 cm per week)
resulted in a collapse of the
forest ecosystem renovation
system in all areas on the
Hublersburg soil.rate.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The research reported here is part
of the program of the Waste Water Reno-
vation and Conservation Project of the
Institute for Research on Land and
Water Resources and Hatch Project No.
2214 of the Agricultural Experiment
Station, The Pennsylvania State Uni-
versity, University Park, Pennsylvania.
This research was supported in part
by funds' provided by the Northeast
Forest Experiment Station of the USDA
Forest Service, through the Pinchot
Institute Consortium for Environmental
Forestry Research.
LITERATURE CITED
American Public Health Association.
1965a. Brucine method. Standard
methods for the examination of
water and wastewater. 12th ed.
APHA, N.Y. pp. 198-200.
American Public Health Association.
1965b. Direct Nesslerization
method. Standard methods for the
examination of water and waste-
water. 12th ed. APHA, N.Y. pp.
193-194.
Dindal, D. L., L. T. Newell, J. P.
Moreau. 1978. Municipal waste-
water irrigation: Effects on
community ecology of soil inverte-
brates. In Utilizing Municipal
Sewage Effluent and Sludge on
Forest and Disturbed Land. W. E.
Sopper (ed.). The Pennsylvania
State University Press, University
Park, Pa. (In press).
Hook, J. E. and L. T. Kardos. 1978.
Nitrate leaching during long-term
spray irrigation of treatment of
secondary sewage effluent on wood-
land sites. J. Environ. Qual.
7(1): 30-34.
7. Recovery of the ecosystem reno- Hook, J. E. and L. T. Kardos. 1977.
vation systems following
chronic applications of waste-
water is extremely slow, requir-
ing one to three years.
Recovery is the most rapid if
wastewater applications are
terminated rather than con-
tinued at a lower application
339Nitrate relationships in the Penn
State "Living Filter" system. In
Land as a Waste Management Alterna-
tive R. Loehr (ed.). Ann Arbor
Science, Ann Arbor, Mich. pp. 181-
198.Kardos, L. T. and W. E. Sopper. 1973. Pa. (In Press)
Renovation of municipal wastewater
through land disposal by spray
irrigation. In Recycling Treated
Municipal Wastewater and Sludge
Through Forest and Cropland. W. E.
Sopper and L. T. Kardos (Eds.).
The Pennsylvania State University
Press, University Park, Pa. pp.
148-163.
Kelley, 0. J., A. S. Hunter and A. J.
Sturges. 1946, Determination of
nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium,
calcium, and magnesium in plant
tissue. Ind. Eng. Chem. Anal. Ed.
18: 319-322.
Milham, P. J., A. S. Awad, R. E. Paull,
and J. H. Bull. 1970. Analysis of
plants, soils, and waters for
nitrate by using an ion-selective
electrode. Analyst 95: 751-753.
Orion Research, Inc. 1971. Instruction
manual. Ammonia electrode. Orion
Research, Inc., Cambridge, Mass.
24 pp.
Parizek, R. R., L. T. Kardos, W. E.
Sopper, E. A. Myers, D. E. Davis,
M. A. Farrell, and J. B. Nesbitt.
1967. Waste Water Renovation and
Conservation. Penn State Studies
No. 23. University Park, Pa.
71 pp.
Pennypacker, S. P., W. E. Sopper, and
L. T. Kardos. 1967. Renovation
of wastewater effluent by irriga-
tion of forest land. J. Water
Pollution Control Fed. 39(2): 285-
296.
RIchenderfer, J. L., and W. E. Sopper.
1978. Effect of spray irrigation
on treated municipal sewage efflu-
ent on the accumulation and de-
composion of the forest floor. In
Utilizing Municipal Sewage Effluent
and Sludge on Forest and Disturbed
Land. W. E. Sopper (éd.). The
Pennsylvania State University Press,
University Park, Pa. (In Press).
Sopper, W. E. and S. N. Kerr. 1978.
Renovation of municipal wastewater
on eastern forest ecosystems. In
Utilization of Municipal Sewage
Effluent and Sludge on Forest and
Disturbed Land. W. E. Sopper
(éd.). The Pennsylvania State
University Press, University Park,AGRICULTURE AND FOREST USE
INFLUENCE OF IRRIGATION WITH CLARIFIED CATTLE FARM OUTFLOW ON LUCERNE CROPS
VLIYANIYE OROSHENIYA OSVETLENNYMI STOKAMI FERM KRUPNOGO
ROGATOGO SKOTA NA UROZHAY LYUTSERNY
A.N. Karachevtsev, V.N. Samykin, V, Ye. Mazurov, VNIISSV Belgorod Base
Kupavna, Ministry of Amelioration and Water Utilization, All Union Scientific
Research Institute for Utilization of Waste Water in Agriculture, 1975-
Translated by Office of the Assistant Chief of Staff for
Intelligence for the Office, Chief of Engineers, 1978.
The conversion of animal husbandry
to an industrial base in Belgorodskaya
Oblast was undertaken in I96U. In 197^
there were 20 hog breeding complexes,
9 young cattle offspring growing and
feeding complexes, and 20 dairy farms.
The construction of about ^0 dairy com-
plexes is nearing completion. The
successful operation of animal husbandry
complexes largely depends on the utili-
zation of liquid manure, i.e., improperly
stored and utilized, clarified outflow
could become a source of pollution of
surface and ground water.
One of the efficient methods for the
utilization of animal husbandry outflow
is its use for irrigating farm crops,
perennial grasses in particular. In
Belgorodskaya Oblast lucerne is the
main crop used in fodder crop rotation,
accounting for about 60% of the area.
Compared with other leguminous grasses,
lucerne contains more digestible protein
in its green mass and in a well-prepared
protein-vitamin grass meal, hay, and hay-
lage. It is rich in macro- and micro-
elements and in many other vitamins
needed by the animals.
With suitable agrotechnology lucerne
yields high crops. A total of 700 to
1000 quintals of green mass or 150 to
200 quintals of hay may be obtained per
hectare of irrigated land with h to 7 or
more mowings. Lucerne growing has a
positive agrotechnical importance. With
high yields it has a favorable impact on
soil properties. In order to obtain
high and stable lucerne yields it would
be expedient, along with the vegetation
irrigation, to have autumn or early
spring water supply irrigation ondroughty areas. Such irrigation con-
tributes to the lucerne's fast growth
and development.
Until recently studies were concen-
trated essentially on the doses, types,
and times of application of chemical
fertilizers and manure in lucerne crops
while the question of irrigating the
lucerne with clarified outflow was
totally ignored. The purpose of this
study was to determine the optimal norm
of application of clarified outflow
in lucerne growing. The experiment
was organized in 1972 at the kolkhoz
imeni Sverdlov, Belgorodskaya Oblast.
The lucerne (Pavlovskaya-7 strain)
was planted in the autumn of 1972 with
a SZTTX-H6 grain seed drill; the seeding
rate was lh kg per hectare planted at
a 2-cm depth. Following the planting
the soil was rolled. In the period of
the germination of the seed and the
appearance of the sprouts the crop was
cultivated with a light harrow to break
up the soil crust.
The content of the nutritive sub-
stances in the clarified cattle outflow
used for irrigation, with a 99-5$
moisture, was as follows: general
nitrogen, 0.03$; phosphorus, 0.015$; and
potassium, 0.05$. Table 1 shows the
rate and times of lucerne irrigation
with waste water by experiment year.
According to Table 2 superphosphate
in variants Nos 5 and 6 was applied at
the beginning of the vegetation period.
The irrigation of the experiment sector
was conducted with an ANZh-2 machine
using flexible capron hose. The experi-
ment was repeated three times. Plots
were chosen at random, covering areas ofTable 1. Basic Lucerne Irrigation System Indicators.
Year of
study
1973
19lhIV
1+00
1+00Irrigation
V
1+00
1+00VI
800
800norm,
VII
350
350m3/ha
VIII
350
350IX
500
500Irriga-
tion period,
days
123
123Sprinkling
norm, m /ha
2800
2800
Table 2. Influence of Clarified Cattle Outflow on Lucerne Crop (green mass)
N
1
2
3
1+
5
6
7
8
9Variant
Control (no irri-
gation
Clarified outflow
2800 nrVha
Clarified outflow
2000 m3/ha
Ibid, 1500 m3/ha
Ibid, li+00 m3/ha +
water, lUOO m3/ha +
l80 kg P_0
Clarified outflow,
11+00 m3/ha +
water ll+OO m3/ha
Clarified outflow,
700 m3/ha + water
2100 m3/ha+9O kg
P2°5Clarified outflow
600 m-Vha
Clarified outflow
300 m3/ha + water
2500 m3/haContent in outflow
and chemical
tilizers, kg
N
-
81+0
600
1+50
1+20
1+20
210
180
90
HCP 0.05, quintals/
haP2O?
-
1+20
300
225
390
210
195
90
1+5fer-
K20
-
ii+oo
1000
750
700
700
350
300
150Yield,
quintals/ha
1973
389
7l+0
650
61+9
625
610
612
1+90
535
23.01971+
1+09
702
61+6
602
617
603
600
529
559
30.Average
yield,
quintals/ha
399
721
61+8
626
621
606
606
509
5l+7
0Additional
yield from
fertilizing I
and irrigation
quintals/he
-
322
21+9
227
222
207
207
110
1U81 %
100
l80
162
156
158
151
151
131.
121+
120 square meters with a control area of
50 square meters. The full experiment
system is shown in Table 2.
In the course of the experiment
weather conditions varied greatly: in
1973 rain precipitation in the vegeta-
tion period was about 280 mm, compared
with 321+ mm in 197U. Precipitation was
uneven. The June-July 197^ precipitation
accounted for 62$ of the annual amount.
Within that period the average daily
above-freezing temperatures ranged be-
tween 21+.5 and 26°C. The plots were
mowed 3 times annually.Observations indicated that the
lucerne particularly needs moisture and
uses more of it in its growth period (in
spring and after mowing) and in the
course of its intensified growth, usu-
ally taking place before and during the
bud formation period. During the
vegetation period the greatest need for
water was observed in the first half of
the summer. Toward the autumn moisture
outlays declined as a result of the
lower evaporation from the soil surface
and the lucerne plants. The initial
irrigations took place at the end of
3l+2April and ended with the irrigation
season in September; subsequent ones
were applied k-5 days after mowing. Ir-
rigation rates ranged from 350 to 500
cubic meters per hectare.
Water supply irrigation at the rate
of 500 cubic meters per hectare was ap-
plied every year to accumulate moisture
at the beginning of the vegetation (in
September). Along with improvements in
the water regime of the, soil the lucerne
was supplied with easily accessible
nutritive substances from irrigation
outflow. Thus, in the second variant
the amount of nutritive substances ap-
plied (N, P2O5, and K20) reached, re-
spectively, 81+0, U20 and ihQO kg per
hectare.
The study of the lucerne green mass
crop by year indicated that with alldoses reliable additions compared with
the control variant (Table 2) were
achieved. The green mass yield treated
with clarified outflow in the experimen-
tal variant for the second year averaged
between 399 and Î21 quintals per hectare.
The highest yield was obtained in the
variant with a maximal waste water ap-
plication rate (2800 cubic meters per
hectare), reaching ?21 quintals. Di-
luting this amount with an equal amount
of water lowered the yield to 606
quintals per hectare, while an 800%
dilution lowered it to 5I+T quintals per
hectare. This way the use of animal
husbandry outflow in lucerne growing
enables us to use huge volumes of liquid
manure and obtain high guaranteed fodder
yields regardless of weather conditions,
and protect the surrounding territory
and nearby water bodies from pollution.
31*3AGRICULTURE AND FOREST USE
THE USE OF WASTEWATER FOR IRRIGATION IN THE UKRANIAN SSR (ABSTRACT)
Ministry of Water Husbandry, USSR
UCRCPP
A large part of the Ukranian
territory is located in the zone of
insufficient precipitation. Therefore,
in order to ensure a guaranteed produc-
tion of grain, artificial irrigation is
performed. One use of the irrigation
process is wastewater from cities and
animal farms.
In 1977 wastewater was used for
irrigation on more than 70,000 ha. City
wastewater mixed with industrial waste-
water was subjected to full biological
purification before application to the
land. Using this technique the waste-
water does not have a large fertilizing
value, and is used primarily during the
harvest period for irrigation of agri-
cultural crops, and during the fall-
winter periods water runoff is allowed
to enter surface water. Due to the
large temperature fluctuations in the
Ukranian climate and the absence of
irrigatable lands in the proximity of
the cities, the wastewater runoff must
be collected.
The collected residential effluents
are used to irrigate 61,000 ha. The
largest irrigation system is theBORTNICHSKAIA system with more than
23,000 ha. The wastewater is applied by
a sprinkler irrigation system. The irri-
gation rates range from 2,000 to
4,000 m-fyha. The type of agricultural
crops are limited by sanitary rules.
The crops grown are mainly used for feed
purposes. Grass harvest range from
80-100 centners/ha of dry mass, tuberous
crops from 500-600 centners/ha.
Animal waste runoff is used to ir-
rigate close to 9,000 ha. Manure removal
Is conducted by hydraulic rinsing. The
solid fraction is separated from the
liquid and is then removed by mobile
transportation. The liquid fraction is
stored in holding ponds and Is diluted
with fresh water 15-20 times before
being applied to the field by a hydraulic
method.
The largest irrigation system is
located in the KALITIANSKAIA with an
area of 1,800 ha. The rate of irriga-
tion depends upon the climatic zone and
ranges from 1,000 to 4,000 nrVha. In
connection with the increased deficit
of pure water, irrigation with waste-
water should obtain high development.
3U5MONITORING REQUIREMENTS
FOR LAND TREATMENT
SYSTEMS
AN OVERVIEW OF MONITORING
LAND TREATMENT SYSTEMS
Robert K. Bastian, Municipal
Construction Division, EPA
Monitoring of a well designed and
operated land treatment system should be
undertaken in a manner designed to serve
as an early warning system and to help
optimize the operation of the system's
individual components, as well as pro-
viding performance monitoring data to
fulfill regulatory requirements. Such
considerations generally prove to be of
much more value to the system's operators
and managers, as well as to regulatory
officials, than undertaking the more
detailed monitoring associated with
research and demonstration projects.
The results of this type of monitoring
can help avoid the onset of major opera-
tional problems and may lead to signi-
ficant O&M savings at the same time.
INTRODUCTION
When we speak of land treatment
systems, apparently certain individuals
envision situations where wastewater is
"indiscriminately dumped on the land,"
and they respond accordingly by enumera-
ting an almost endless list of antici-
pated problems, including potential
hazards to human health and the environ-
ment. Such "opponents" to land treatment
systems often include landowners of or
neighbors near the selected site and
possibly more importantly, a variety of
individuals trained in and experienced
with conventional treatment and discharge
technologies - including many of our
local, state and Federal regulatory
officials. Even after undertaking care-
fully planned and executed steps to
explain the more or less natural physi-
cal, chemical and biological processes
involved with land treatment systems
and the detailed project design and
operating/management plans incorporatingthe latest information available, many
of these technically minded opponents
to land treatment projects are not
reassured that well designed and managed
land treatment systems can reliably
"treat" wastewater without creating
"more of a nuisance than they're worth."
In fact, one of the major problems with
expanding the use of land treatment
systems has been the institutional
acceptance of such systems for water
pollution control (Freshman, 1976).
One mechanism that has been widely
used to gain the acceptance of specific
land treatment projects is the incorpo-
ration of a detailed monitoring system
design to address the potential problems
that could potentially occur if condi-
tions allowed and if built-in design
safeguards failed. These very detailed
research oriented monitoring systems
generally give considerable attention to
the internal workings of the land treat-
ment system, while conventional treat-
ment and discharge systems generally are
only required to monitor influent and
effluent quality to gain acceptance.
They frequently incorporate the latest
highly sophisticated sampling and
analytical techniques that require the
assistance of university research
scientists to be properly implemented.
Detailed data and information are
generated by such monitoring programs,
which are aimed at gaining initial
acceptance of the project rather than
optimizing the system's overall per-
formance. However, in many cases, the
monitoring becomes more of a research
effort than one of performance moni-
toring and little of the data generated
3U7serves any purpose other than confirming
what has been demonstrated many times
before by carefully operated and managed
land treatment systems.
It is time that the monitoring
programs for land treatment systems be
designed and implemented in a manner that
serves the useful functions of providing
an early warning of individual process
failures and helping to optimize the
overall performance of the entire system
and not treat each new land treatment
system as a research project. Land treat-
ment technologies are established waste-
water treatment alternatives and should
be so treated. While project specific
in nature, the monitoring programs for
new land treatment systems should reflect
this attitude.
MONITORING RATIONALES
The monitoring of land treatment
systems as with the monitoring of con-
ventional treatment and discharge
systems may be undertaken for numerous
reasons. In general, however, monitoring
programs are normally implemented for one
or more of the following objectives: (1)
to meet regulatory requirements; (2) to
generate detailed R&D information; (3)
to serve as an early warning system and
provide data to help optimize the
system's operation. The level of detail
required and the cost of monitoring
undertaken in response to these objec-
tives can differ greatly.
Regulatory Requirements
Some type of regulatory monitoring
requirements are placed on nearly all
land treatment systems, but they may
differ considerably from project to
project, being somewhat dependent upon
the level of preapplication treatment.
EPA1s technical design basis for land
treatment alternatives is provided in
the "EPA Design Manual on Land Treatment"
(EPA 625/1-77-008), which includes
guidance on the level of preapplication
treatment prior to storage or actual
application to the land, and the criteria
for protection of groundwater set forth
in 40 FR 6190, February 11, 1976.
In general, the level of preappli-
cation treatment required by EPA is not
one of a uniform level for all land
treatment systems (EPA, 1977), but is
described as "an internal process
decision made by the designer to ensure
optimum performance of the land treat-ment processes." It ranges from screen-
ing or comminution for isolated overland
flow systems with no public access to
biological treatment by lagoons or
inplant processes with additional BOD
or SS control as needed for aesthetics
plus disinfection for sprinkler appli-
cation in public access areas such as
parks and golf courses.
The role of adequate industrial pre-
treatment to protect.the natural bio-
logical processes involved with land
treatment systems is also stressed. As
with projects applying sewage sludge to
the land (EPA 430/9-77-004), it only
makes sense to test wastewaters being
applied to the land to determine their
levels of both undesirable (pathogens,
toxic organics and certain heavy metals)
and desirable (nutrients, micronutrients,
and biodegradable organics) pollutants
in addition to the traditional pollutants
(BOD, SS, pH, and coliforms) to protect
the system from toxic upsets or other
problems, to allow accurate accounting
of nutrients applied, and to assure
that discharge permit requirements are
met.
State regulatory agencies, however,
have frequently issued regulations more
restrictive than those promulgated by
Federal agencies. Data compiled by the
National Commission on Water Quality and
by several more recent studies (e.g.,
Corps of Engineers, 1975; Morris &
Jewell, 1976) indicate that while pre-
application treatment requirements for
wastewaters prior to land application
vary widely throughout the United
States (depending on the site, ultimate
fate of the applied waters, crops grown
and other conditions -- anything from
very limited to "tertiary" treatment of
effluents may be required), a majority
of states have required secondary treat-
ment or secondary treatment plus disin-
fection prior to land application
of ("disposal" in most cases) sewage
effluents. Generally, the states have
simply applied these "land disposal"
requirements to land treatment systems
which are designed to "treat" waste-
waters and not merely to dispose of
them on land rather than into surface
waters. In some cases, state guidelines
have been so restrictive that they
clearly discourage if not prohibit land
treatment as a practicable treatment
technology mainly due to their require-
ments for very extensive and expensive
preapplication treatment.
The differences in state preappli-
cation treatment requirements in certaincases have also been seen in their
monitoring requirements. Several states
have quite flexible project monitoring
requirements based upon site specific
factors including application rates,
water quality, crops to be grown, ground-
water hydraulics and quality, soil
characteristics, etc. Other states have
employed uniform monitoring requirements
for all land application projects or
for various categories; these have
generally been based upon water quality
relative to any crops grown. Many of
the latter situations were based upon
the attitude that the wastewater was
being applied or disposed of onto the
land as an irrigation water rather than
being "treated" by a well designed and
operated land treatment system.
In general, the state monitoring
requirements have ranged from analyses
of BOD, SS, etc., in the irrigated
water and in any effluent discharged to
surface waters, as with conventional
treatment and discharge systems, to
specific numbers and locations of ground-
water sampling wells, baseline data
collected before operation of the
facility, and routine analyses of
effluents and underlying groundwater for
such parameters as: conductivity,
chlorine residual, TDS, nitrate-,
nitrite-, and ammonia-nitrogen, phospho-
rus fecal coliform bacteria, and
méthylène blue active substance. In
addition specific analyses of soils,
crops grown, and even aerosols have
been required. Under certain circum-
stances heavy metals, toxic organics,
specific pathogen and virus analyses
have been required to gain project
approval. The reporting requirements
for such analyses as described above
have varied from one time analyses to
routine daily/weekly/monthly/annual
or periodic data submittals.
Since the issuance of the EPA
policy on land treatment of municipal
wastewater and the Land Treatment Design
Manual in October 1977, there has been
an apparent change in the acceptance of
land treatment technologies by certain
state agencies. We eventually expect
this to also be reflected in the level
of preapplication treatment and moni-
toring required by the states, including
those states that have strongly dis-
couraged or prohibited land treatment
systems from being utilized. We hope
that such changes will come about from
an increased understanding and
acceptance of land treatment as an
available alternative treatment technol-ogy and not simply due to a tighter
control of the Federal construction
grants funding available for municipal
wastewater treatment facilities.
Detailed Research Information
In many cases where extensive moni-
toring requirements have been placed
upon land treatment systems, these
requirements have been adopted from
research and demonstration projects
that have attempted to answer detailed
questipns about the physical, chemical
and/or biological mechanisms at work in
land treatment projects. This may be
due in part to the joint funding of
research efforts as a part of full
scaèe demonstrations of land treatment
(e.g., Muskegon, MI, and Phoenix, AZ).
Experimental efforts have been underway
for some time to address such detailed
questions as the longevity of pathogens
and viruses in effluents sprayed on the
soil and crops, the impact of infiltrated
and percolated effluents upon ground-
water quality, the effect of a system's
age on hydraulic efficiency and reno-
vation efficiency, the effect of natural
soil chelation processes on metal avail-
ability, movement and availability of
organic and inorganic P and N, the
impact of application rates upon nitri-
fication/denitrification processes, etc.
The types of detailed monitoring re-
quired to provide the data necessary to
address such research areas are generally
far more detailed than what should be
expected from non-research oriented
but well designed and operated land
treatment systems.
The Musekgon Land Treatment Project
(slow rate system using center pivot
irrigation) is an example of a jointly
funded research and demonstration
project. The operation of the Muskegon
system has included an extensive series
of research programs (involving over
$2.5 million to date) to determine the
efficiency of the system, to ensure
that the quality of the underdrain water
meets discharge standards, to investi-
gate the detailed physical, chemical
and biological mechanisms at work
renovating the wastewater, to study
impacts on groundwaters underlying the
system, and to follow the response of
surface waters into which the renovated
water recovered from beneath the system
is discharged (Bastian, 1973). The
research monitoring program at Muskegon
was designed to evaluate the influent,
biological preapplication treatment,storage, irrigated water, lagoon seepage,
groundwater quality and movement, surface
water, soil and crop characteristics in
detail. Samples were taken for chemical
and biological analyses once or twice
daily at each step of the treatment
process. On a weekly basis, a total of
2,883 samples were analyzed for at least
one of 25 wastewater constituents. In
addition, groundwater was sampled monthly
to twice yearly from over 300 wells (at
both onsite and offsite locations) for
analysis (Demirjian, et. al., 1978;
Walker, 1976; Culp and Hinricks, 1976;
EPA 625/1-77-008).
This major research funded monitor-
ing program required the services of
nine full-time laboratory personnel at
the facility plus several outside
research groups. The results to date
have shown that no significant negative
effects on the groundwater under the
project site have occurred. At the
same time, improvements are becoming
evident in the area lakes that had
received primary and secondary effluent
discharges before the land treatment
project was implemented. Finally, no
significant negative soil impacts have
occurred and no limitations to the sale
of the corn crop have occurred as a
result of detailed crop quality moni-
toring. This is not meant to imply that
the project has not had problems, but
only that the project has performed well
within its design expectations.
The Phoenix "Flushing Meadows"
rapid infiltration research and demon-
stration project was constructed and has
been operated in a highly successful
manner for about ten years as an experi-
mental pilot project to demonstrate
the feasibility of renovating secondary
effluent for unrestricted irrigation and
recreational uses. A scaled-up project
was constructed in 1974 based upon the
engineering criteria developed at
Flushing Meadows. In addition to ground-
water level and quality, once fully
operational this project will also follow
the direction of groundwater movement by
monitoring TDS concentrations in
observation wells outside the infiltra-
tion basins. Continuous 24-hour samples
will be taken of effluent entering the
infiltration basins. Additional research
at the Flushing Meadows and scaled-up
facilities has emphasized how air pres-
sure build-up in the soil beneath the
large infiltration basins affects infil-
tration rates, effects of high algae
loadings on surface clogging, and the
fate of viruses and nitrogen in thewastewater as they enter the soil. In
all, over 30 parameters have been
closely monitored at the Phoenix
research and demonstration facilities.
The renovated water from the projects
has been certified by the Arizona
Health Department for unrestricted
irrigation and recreational uses.
The detailed research oriented moni-
toring being undertaken at joint
research and demonstration projects
such as the Muskegon and Phoenix projects
should not be required at all land
treatment systems for a number of
reasons including cost, accuracy and
value of detailed data to the systems
operation, and the lack of agreement
within the scientific community as to
the interpretation of the research
monitoring data.
Interpretations of experimental
results from such detailed studies
should, however, help provide the basis
for determining new system design
factors, including built-in safeguards
to avoid both short-term and long-term
operating problems. Summaries of
research findings are published quite
frequently in conference proceedings
(such as this one), technical journals
and reports (Appendix A). This detailed
information should serve as the basis
for updating design manuals, guidance
and regulations to allow appropriate
system design rather than intensive
system monitoring to address the most
recent findings of detailed research
and demonstration studies.
Early Warning & System Optimization
In general, the monitoring of well
designed and managed land treatment
systems can be undertaken in a manner
quite similar to the monitoring of
conventional treatment systems, with
early warning of individual process
failures and optimization of system
performance in mind. This type of
system emphasizes the monitoring
necessary to protect the system's vital
functions against unforeseen or unpre-
ventable failures as well as fine-
tuning of individual processes. It isH
a basic necessity for a well managed
land treatment system's successful
operation. The equipment that is
utilized in preapplication treatment,
pumping stations, transmission systems,
and irrigation systems are especially
vulnerable to mechanical failure and
vandalism in spite of routine mainte-
nance programs. In addition, monitoring
350for uncontrollable slugs of toxics that
could enter a land treatment system can
prove to be invaluable by allowing the
operation of the system to adjust and
thereby prevent major process failures
that might lead to poor water renovation
or long-term harmful effects to soils or
crops.
By monitoring for highly mobile ions
such as chlorides and nitrates, the
actual movement of the wastewater can
be detected. If these indicators are
detected at elevated levels in areas of
groundwater where levels above background
are not expected, further detailed
monitoring to determine the actual source
of the indicators should be initiated
and, where necessary, changes in the
system design and/or operation can be
undertaken to mitigate or prevent future
problems.attributable to the system.
Fairly inexpensive though efficient moni-:
toring of indicators has proven to be an
effective early warning system to handle
potential groundwater impacts problems.
In addition, monitoring of the
water quality parameters identified in
the system's operating permit at the
beginning or end of each major step of
the land treatment system (e.g.,
influent, preapplication treatment,
storage, point of application to the
land, and point of recovery, discharge
or entry into groundwater) may allow for
modifications, perhaps only seasonal,
to the system's operation that can lead
to sizable O&M savings. For example,
storage lagoons can also act as
effective stabilization and treatment
mechanisms that could allow for at
least seasonal cutbacks in preapplica-
tion treatment by mechanical aerators,
etc., and save both significant energy
and maintenance expense. Higher-than-
design loadings may be possible during
high flow periods as long as final
effluent quality meets permit require-
ments, thereby preventing bypass
problems and expenses. Chlorine
residuals for disinfection purposes may
be avoidable where natural die-off is
demonstrated to meet acceptable levels.
Monitoring of crop condition and tissue
analyses during the growing season will
allow adjustments to be made in fertil-
ization or pest control programs that
prevent possible crop failures and re-
sulting losses in levels of wastewater
treatment or revenues from crop sales.
This type of monitoring involves
the observation of significant changes
that result within the land treatment
system as well as at the point of
351discharge. Such monitoring data can
serve to confirm predictions and to
determine where corrective action may be
necessary to protect the environment,
maintain the renovative capacity, or
improve the operation efficiency of the
land treatment system.
MONITORING PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT
The development of a practical moni-
toring program for a specific land
treatment system should initially focus
upon the objectives you wish to achieve
from monitoring the system. Once these
objectives are established, be they
regulatory, research, operations or
otherwise oriented, you can proceed to
develop a monitoring plan to meet your
needs and the project's specific site
conditions.
Since land treatment systems are very
site specific in nature and design (e.g.,
high rate ys_ low rate; public access vs_
no public access; varying in climatic,
soils, geology, hydrology, crop, in-
fluent and required effluent quality
characteristics), this variability will
also be evident in a particular land
treatment system's monitoring needs
and program design. There are very few,
if any, general rules to go by that
would dictate a particular number of
groundwater monitoring wells, soil
samples or even sampling frequency for
all land treatment systems due to this
project specific nature.
Because land treatment systems
involve wastewater interactions directly
with soil and often vegetation, and
indirectly with groundwaters and surface
waters, monitoring of the system's
environmental impacts is often con-
centrated on these interactions.
Additional monitoring may also involve
the project's effects upon marketed
crops, wildlife, odor and aerosol
production. Also, due to these environ-
mental interactions, as well as opera-
tional and regulatory considerations,
it is very important to monitor the
water quality characteristics of the
system's wastewater influent and
ultimate discharge to surface or ground-
water.
In most situations regulations will
require at a minimum that land treat-
ment projects monitor the water quality
of the influent and renovated water
for traditional pollutants. In addition,
most systems will be required to monitor
the quality of the applied wastewaterand the groundwater underlying the
project site. Many systems will also be
required to analyze soils and vegetation
on a periodic basis. Systems with
complex industrial inputs in their waste-
water should also place a major emphasis
on monitoring these industrial waste
sources and their pretreatment activities.
In general, it is necessary to
monitor new projects more intensively
during their initial period of operation
to be assured that the system's processes
are effectively operating and the design
criteria are met. With experience and
a data base demonstrating successful
performance, even the regulatory
officials will become more comfortable
with these relatively "natural" systems;
their sampling frequency and analyses
requirements may even be relaxed.
Eventually the monitoring program for a
new land treatment project may even be
allowed to function as a tool for the
system's operators and managers rather
than a regulatory crutch.
EQUIPMENT AND DETAILED PROGRAM DESIGN
Once the decisions have been made
concerning what is to be monitored to
meet the objectives of a planned
monitoring program, a logical question
that comes to mind is "What procedures
should be used?" The Land Treatment
Design Manual (EPA 625/1-77-008)
addresses many helpful procedures in
the detailed appendices. While detailed
"standard methods" exist for sampling
and analyzing many water, soil and
biological constituents, a very useful
publication titled "Sampling and
Analysis of Soils, Plants, Wastewaters
and Sludge; Suggested Standardization
and Methodology" (Ellis, et. al., 1975)
is available that addresses sampling
and analyses procedures as they apply
to land application systems. The use
of standard samples, sampling, sample
handling and preservation and analytical
procedures are all covered in a readily
understandable format. References
providing sources of additional informa-
tion are also provided. Other sources
of detailed information include profes-
sional societies publication (such as
those of the Soil Science Society of
America, the American Society of
Agronomy, the American Society of Agri-
cultural Engineers, the Society of
Analytical Chemists, and others).
Considerable information on
adopting standardized methods to handlespecific project requirements is avail-
able in the literature. True insights
into the problems encountered when
carrying out monitoring programs,
however, can best be obtained from
operating project personnel responsible
for their system's monitoring program.
Further information on techniques for
monitoring different types of land
treatment systems will be presented in
the papers to follow in this session.
CONCLUSIONS
Monitoring of land treatment systems
may be undertaken for a variety of
reasons. These may include the
collection of data for submittal in
reports required by regulatory agencies
and for investigations of detailed
process mechanisms as a part of research
efforts. Monitoring can also serve as
an early warning of process or
mechanical failures and to provide
information that allows operators and
managers to make operating adjustments
in an effort to optimize their system's
performance.
In the past land treatment systems
have often been required to develop and
implement very detailed monitoring
programs based upon the type of moni-
toring performed at research and
demonstration projects to obtain project
approval by regulatory officials. A
clear distinction, however, should be
made between the monitoring needs of
individual operating land treatment
systems and the detailed monitoring of
research and demonstration projects.
Monitoring of operating systems should
be limited when possible to that required
to comply with realistic regulatory
requirements and to serve the system's
operators and managers as a tool for
early warning of unforeseeable process
failures and for system optimization
purposes.
Land treatment technologies have
been repeatedly demonstrated to provide
reliable engineering processes for
n wastewater management. The monitoring
of these systems should, therefore, be
undertaken with the same attitude in
mind as the monitoring of other accepted
wastewater treatment systems. Detailed
research oriented monitoring should be
limited to research and demonstration
efforts or special situations where it
is of real value while practical
monitoriing programs designed specifi-
cally for local site conditions and with
352specific objectives in mind should be
the normal course for well designed and
operated land treatment systems.
REFERENCES
Freshman, J.D. (1976) A Perspective on
Land as a Waste Management Alternative.
In Land As A Waste Management Alter-
native (R. Loehr, Ed.). Proceedings of
the 1976 Cornell Agricultural Waste
Management Conference. Ann Arbor Science.
EPA, 1977. EPA Policy on Land Treatment
of Municipal Wastewater. October 3,
1977 memorandum from Administrator Costle.
Municipal Sludge Management: Environ-
mental Factors (October 1977). EPA 430/
9-77-004.
Process Design Manual for Land Treatment
of Municipal Wastewater (October 1977).
EPA 625/1-77-008.
40 FR 6190 (February 1976) published as
a supplement to Alternative Waste
Management Techniques for Best Practi-r
cable Vaste Treatment. EPA/9-75-Û13
(October 1975).
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (November
1975). A Study of the Feasibility of
Land Treatment for Wastewater Management
in the Sacramento Area. PHASE II Report
to the National Science Foundation.
Morris, CE. and W.J. Jewell (1976)
Regulations and Guidelines for Land
Application of Wastes -- A 50-State
Overview. In Land as a Waste Management
Alternative (R. Loehr, Ed.).
Proceedings of the 1976 Cornell Agri-
cultural Waste Management Conference,
Ann Arbor Press.
Demirjian, Y.A., D.R. Kendrick, M.L.
Smith and T.R. Westman (1978) Muskegon
County Wastewater Management System -
Progress Report 1963 through 1975.
FINAL DRAFT Report to EPA.
Walker, J.M. (September 1976) Wastewater:
Is Muskegon County's Solution Your
Solution? EPA Region V, Office of
Research and Development- EPA 905/2-76-
604.
Culp, G.L. and D.I!. Hinricks (June 1976)
A Review of the Operation and Mainte-
nance of the Muskegon County Wastewater
Management System. Muskegon CountyBoard of Works. Muskegon, MI
Bastian, R.K. (1973) Project Status and
Research at Muskegon, MI. In Pro-
ceedings of the Symposium on Land Treat-
ment of Seoondary Effluent. November
8-9, 1973. Boulder, CO
Bouwer, H., R.C. Rice and E.G. Escarcega
(May 1974) High-rate Land Treatment I:
Infiltration and Hydraulic Aspects of the
Flushing Meadows Project. Jour. WPCF
46:834-843.
Bouwer, H., J.C. Lance and M.S. Riggs
(May 1974) High-rate Land Treatment II:
Water Quality and Economic Aspects of the
Flushing Meadows Project. Jour. WPCF
46:844-859.
Rice, R. and R.G. Gilbert (1976) High-
rate Land Treatment -- Monitoring
Techniques and Methods. Presented at
the 1976 Annual ASAE Meeting, June 27-30,
1976 in Lincoln, NB.
Ellis, R., J.J. Hanway, G. Holmgren, D.
Keeney and O.W. Bidwell (1975) Sampling
and Analysis of Soils, Plants, Wastewaters
and Sludges; Suggested Standardization
and Methodology. Research Publication
170 (North Central Regional Publication
280), Agricultural Experiment Station,
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS.
APPENDIX A
Examples of Sources Providing
Detailed Research Data Summaries
Mather, J.R. (Ed.) (1969) An Evaluation
of Cannery Waste Disposal by Overland
Flow spray irrigation. In Publications
in Climatology;, Volume XXIJ Number 2.
C.W. Thornthwaite Associates» Laboratory
of Climatology, Centerton, NJ.
Sopper, W.E. and L.T. Kardos (1973)
Recycling Treated Municipal Wastewater
and Sludge through Forest and Cropland.
The Pennsylvania State University Press
(also EPA 660/2-74-003; March 1974).
Prooeedings of Conference on Land
Disposal of Municipal Effluents and
Sludges (March 1973) held at Rutgers
University. EPA 902/9-73-001
Proceedings of the Joint Conference on
Recycling Municipal Sludges and Effluents
on Land (July 1973) held in Champaign, IL.
EPA, USDA and the National Assoc. of
State Universities and Land Grant Colleges.
353Proceedings of the International
Conference on Land for Waste Management
(October 1973) held in Ottawa, Canada.
Canadian Dept. of the Environment
and the National Research Council of
Canada.
Proceedings - Wastewater Use in the
Production of Food and Fiber (June 1974)
held in Oklahoma City. EPA 660/2-74-041.
Land Application of Sewage Effluents and
Sludges: Selected Abstracts (June 1974)
EPA 660/2-74-002
Proceedings - Land Application of
Wastewater (May 1975) held in Newark, DE
EPA 903/9-73-017
Young, D.E. (November 1975) Current
Research on Land Application of Waste-
water and Sludge. ERS/USDA and the
Institute for Research on Land and Water
Resources, Penn State Univ., University
Park, PA.
Lvovich, A.I. (December 1975) Natural
Methods for Purifying Wastewaters and
Utilizing them in Agriculture. Biblio-
graphy, Parts 1 and 2. Report No.
CRREL-TL-505. Cold Regions Research and
Engineering Lab, Hanover, NH.
Tofflemire, T.J. (February 1976) Land
Disposal of Wastewater - Literature
Review for 1975. New York State Dept.
of Environmental Conservation, Albany,
NY.
Baldwin, L.B., J.M. Davidson and
J.F. Gerber (June 1976) Proceedings
- Virus Aspects of Applying Municipal
Waste to Land. Center for Environmental
Programs, Institute of Food and Agri-
cultural Sciences, University of Florida
- Gainesville.
Lance, J.C. (1977) A Pollution Research
Bibliography 1970-1976. USDA/ARS,
Beltsville, MDMONITORING REQUIREMENTS FOR
LAND TREATMENT SYSTEMS
DESIGN OF WATER QUALITY
MONITORING SYSTEMS FOR LAND
TREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
W.J. Bauer Consulting Engr.
Chicago, IL
ABSTRACT
This paper introduces the subject
of monitoring of water quality resulting
from land treatment of wastewater.
Omitted are those aspects which are
common to both land treatment and
other forms of treatment, such as
aerosols, odors and discharges to
surface waters. The paper concen-
trates upon soils, plants, soil water
and ground water. Typical models for
movement of ground water are presented.
Comparison of the steadiness of the
land treatment system with the steadi-
ness of the conventional system is
made. Field methods for measuring
soils permeability and transmissivity
are discussed, as are the conventional
model of agricultural soil systems and
conventional sampling and chemical
analyses of soils. Samplings and
analyses of plant and water systems
are also discussed. Finally, a bibli-
ography for further study is presented.
INTRODUCTION
General Approach
This paper is not concerned with
those aspects of monitoring which
would be common to both conventional
and land treatment of wastewater. For
example, the monitoring of aerosols is
not discussed. One would use thesame techniques for the monitoring of
aerosols from a land treatment system
as for a conventional treatment system.
Aerosols produced by trickling filters
or aeration tanks travel in the same
way through the air as aerosols from
a spray irrigation system, and are
affected in the same way by atmos-
pheric conditions. The same condition
would apply to the monitoring of odors
or the monitoring of discharges to
surface waters, something which is
often the final step in a land treat-
ment system.
Ground and Soil Water Impacts
Impacts of land treatment of waste
wastewater upon ground and soil water
can be and are monitored by a variety
of methods. Methods of sampling and
analysis are examined here. Methods
to control the direction of movement
of ground water are also discussed,
such controls being an effective way
to provide assurance that the ground
water under neighboring properties
will not be affected.
Soil Impacts
Over a long period of time, the
soil of a land treatment system will
be impacted by the process. Most
commonly, these impacts are bene-
ficial, such as the increased humus
355content of the upper soil horizon.
There are concerns, such as possible
accumulation of heavy metals in the
soils, which are sometimes expressed
as potential hazards. This subject will
also be discussed.
Plant Impacts
Related to the possible accumula-
tion of heavy metals in soils receiving
applications of wastewater is the con-
cern about possible adverse effects
upon plants grown on these soils. The
viewpoint that such concerns are only
hypothetical and without any basis in
objective observations is presented.
SOIL AND GROUND WATER MODELS
Soil Water Mechanics
Definition. The term "soil water"
is used for the water present in the
nonsaturated layer of soil above the
elevation in the soil which is satu-
rated with water, the water in the
saturated zone being called "ground
water". In the nonsaturated zone, the
soil water is present in the form of
films of water which cling to indivi-
dual soil particles. The void space
between soil particles not filled with
water is then available for atmospher-
ic gases, including oxygen. This
oxygen is essential for certain natural
soil bacteria which function to solu-
bilize plant nutrients which are
present in the soil.
Surface Tension. The property
of water which dominates the mech-
anics of water movement in the zone
of soil water is the property of sur-
face tension. This is the same pro -
perty that dominates the phenomenon
of capillarity, as in the action of a
wick in drawing fluid up against
gravity. Surface tension is so domi-
nant with finely grained soils that
the effect of gravity in the zone of
soil water can be largely ignored. On
the other hand, as soils with progres-
sively coarser structures are examined,
one observes a systematic increase inthe relative importance of the gravi-
tational forces with respect to the
forces of surface tension.
The effect of surface tension is
responsible for the fact that not all of
the water in a typical soil can be
drained out of it by gravitational
forces. The finer the soil texture,
the larger the fraction of the soil water
which cannot be so drained. Other
forces, such as those developed by
osmosis or by evaporation must be
relied upon to remove water from such
soils.
Infiltration. When sufficient water
is available on the surface, infiltra-
tion into the soil occurs. The rate of
infiltration is also a function of soil
texture. Fine-grained soils have
small rates of infiltration, and coarse
ones have large rates. When the rate
of infiltration is in excess of the quan-
tity required to maintain the minimum
of soil moisture, then a general down-
ward movement of the water in the
soil occurs, extending from the sur-
face to the ground water. This is the
mechanism whereby the ground water is
most commonly "recharged".
Further Study. Those interested
in the mechanics of water movement
in the zone of soil water should do
further reading in the field. Book (1)
in the Bibliography at the end of this
paper is suggested as a starting point-.
Much work has been done in studying
soil water mechanics, particularly in
the field of agricultural engineering.
Ground Water Mechanics
Definition. Ground water exists
in the saturated portions of earth
which lie beneath the zones of soil
water as discussed above. In this
zone, all of the interstices between
the particles of soil are filled with
water, generally with very little dis-
solved gas in it, though often with
considerable quantities of dissolved
solids.
Gravitational and Viscous Forces.
356The dominant properties of water which
govern the movement of it in the
ground water phase are those of fluid
weight and fluid viscosity. The gra-
vitational effect which results in fluid
weight provides the motivating force
which produces fluid motion. The
viscosity of the fluid is the property
which produces forces which resist
motion. The balance of these forces
is achieved when the motion of the
fluid has reached an equilibrium,
steady state.
Viscosity of water is a function of
the temperature, and to a minor extent
a function of the materials which may
be admixed with the water. In the
practical case, there are no admixtures
in the ground water which significantly
affect the viscosity, and the tempera-
ture of the water is nearly a constant,
so the ordinary assumption is made
that the viscosity is a constant. This
is the reason why one fails to see a
viscosity term in the mathematical
models most often used to describe the
movement of ground water.
Gradients. In accordance with
the second law of thermodynamics,
ground water moves in the direction
of the hydraulic gradient, this being
the direction of maximum negative
gradient of the piezometric potential.
At the surface of the zone of saturation
the interface between the zone of soil
water and the zone of ground water,
commonly called the "water table" -
the pressure is considered to be
atmospheric or zero. At this location,
the piezometric potential is equal to
the elevation. Rather commonly, one
measures the locations of the "ground
water table" and from this deduces
what the pattern of piezometric po-
tential must be. Less commonly, one
also measures the piezometric poten-
tial at other locations below the
"ground water table", and uses these
measurements also in constructing a
map of piezometric potential. The
common way of showing such measure-
ments is in terms of maps with con-
tours of equal piezometric potential.
The maximum piezometric gradients arethen found to be perpendicular to the
contours of equal piezometric potential.
Flow Nets. The network which can
be made up of lines of equal piezo-
metric potential and the lines of maxi-
mum piezometric potential gradient
perpendicular to those lines is called
a flow net. Often the flow net is
constructed graphically, using the
principles that the "squares" of the
net should be as nearly square as
possible, and that all intersections
should be at right angles. As the net
becomes more and more finely sub-
divided, these requirements should be
increasingly more accurately met.
The flow net is a useful tool to
calculate the rate of flow of water
through saturated permeable materials.
The area diagrammed is bounded by the
"ground water table" at the top and by
an aqaiclude at the base. This aqui-
clude is a relatively impervious layer
of earth which is continuous and
functions to prevent the flow of water
through it. A partially permeable
aquiclude is sometimes called an
"aquitard", a layer with less permea-
bility which retards the flow through it.
More accurately, the aquitard simply
requires a steeper piezometric gradient
to achieve a given rate of flow. If
the gradient is not possible, then the
flow rate through the aquitard is cor-
respondingly small.
Ground Water Models. The actual
mass of soil which is saturated with
water is by its nature ordinarily very
complex. The characteristics are
distributed in a nonuniform manner
throughout the mass, except in un-
usual cases. Such a situation is
typical of any problem in hydraulics
of natural earth formations, whether
the problem be one of surface or of
ground water hydrology. In such
instances, one employs the technique
of substituting for the real condition
a "model" which is less complex and
more amenable to mathematical des-
cription. As the complexity of the
model approaches the complexity of
the real situation, the correspondence
357of model behavior with actual behavior
comes closer to unity. However, it is
often found that a relatively simple
model of a naturally complex system
will give such a high degree of cor-
respondence as to be very useful in
analysis. This fact results from the
dominance of certain aspects of the
natural situation, so that by taking
these dominant aspects into account
in the model and ignoring the others
one can achieve a model which closely
approximates in its behavior under a
given set of inputs the actual behavior
of the natural system under the same
set of inputs.
The validity of the model is
demonstrated by a process called
'calibration", in which the same in-
puts are used in both model and pro-
totype (the latter being the name
given to the real situation in nature)
and the "calibration" is considered
completed when the outputs of model
and prototype agree within acceptable
limits.
Specialists who work with models
of ground water systems, like specia-
lists in any field of work, acquire a
skill in assessing very rapidly what
are the dominant aspects in any given
situation. They also acquire a skill
in making a selection of the appro-
priate model, such that they are very
often correct in the very first model
which they propose to use. The
techniques used by these specialists
involve both physical and mathemat-
ical models, the latter often being of
the digital type for use with an
electronic computer. Examples of
physical models are actual models
using water and earth materials in a
laboratory and the use of electrical
analogy models in which voltage cor-
responds to piezometric potential, and
current flow to flow of water. The
explanation of how models are con-
structed and operated is a subject
far beyond the scope of this paper.
Suffice it to say that such techniques
and specialization exist, and it would
behoove anyone who contemplates
setting up a monitoring system to
secure the services of a skilledhydrologist who can produce a model
of any desired degree of sophistication.
Controlling Ground Water Move-
ment. In some instances, it is desir-
able or necessary to control the direc-
tion of movement of the ground water.
Control methods can best be devised
after the model of the particular ground
water situation has been developed.
The principle of control is always the
same: produce gradients of piezometric
potential of the desired direction and
magnitude. Gradients are produced by
adding or withdrawing water from a
system. Additions can be by surface
application, or by injection wells.
Withdrawals can be by evapotranspira-
tion, or by drainage. The latter can
be accomplished by either horizontal or
vertical drains, the latter commonly
called wells. The Muskegon County
Wastewater Management System No. 1
used both wells and horizontal drain-
age pipes and ditches for control of
the piezometric gradients, and hence
the control of the ground water move-
ment. The acjiifer was a dune sand
20 feet to 160 feet in thickness under-
lain by a clay aquiclude.
Controls of ground water move-
ment are ordinarily designed to permit
variation of inputs in response to
observed outputs. If the movement is
either too fast or too slow, one can
change the inputs to achieve the velo-
city desired. Likewise, if the direc-
tion is not exactly what one desires,
one relocates the inputs to alter the
direction in the desired manner.
Chemical Reactions
Aerobic Conditions. The condi-
tions in the zone of soil water are
generally aerobic. The chemical reac-
tions which occur in this zone are not
the same as those which occur in the
anaerobic conditions which generally
exist in the ground water below. Thus,
nitrogen in the soil water is generally
in the nitrate form, such ammonia as
may be present being converted to
this nitrate form by the action of
aerobic bacteria which are present in
358the zone of soil water. If the nitrate
is not taken up by plants and moves
on down into the ground water, there
is the possibility of a different action
taking place as is discussed below.
The soil chemistry in the aerobic
zone has been the subject of much s
study and research.
Anaerobic Conditions. In the
ground water there is usually a defi -
ciency of oxygen, and anaerobic con-
ditions prevail. Here a different set
of chemical reactions take place. For
example, if nitrate nitrogen enters
the ground water and sufficient carbon
source is also present, denitrifying
bacteria which operate under anaerobic
conditions can separate the nitrogen
from the oxygen in the nitrate, releas-
ing nitrogen gas which eventually
escapes to the atmosphere.
Not as much is known about
chemical reactions in the anaerobic
ground water zone, as none of the
agricultural processes take place in
this zone. Only recently is know-
ledge of this zone being expanded,
with the research at the Muskegon
County project being one source of
information. Here, the soils under the
storage lagoons and under the dikes
surrounding these lagoons permit steady
percolation of water leaking out of
the lagoons and into the interception
ditch which is provided for that pur-
pose. During the first 5 years of
operation of these lagoons, this soil
mass - which is roughly 60 feet in
average thickness, 500 feet in width,
and 40,000 feet long - has been fil-
tering an average of 16 million gallons
of water per day. The filtered product
meets the highest standards for any
effluent to be discharged into Michigan
streams, and is so discharged without
further treatment. For example, the
toal phosphorus is consistently
changed from about 2 mg/l in the
storage lagoons to about 0.1 mg/l in
the water in the ditch. Furthermore,
much of the total P in the ditch water
comes from the biological community
which lives in the ditch. There is
reason to believe that the total Pcontent of the percolating water before
it enters the ditch is about 0.2 mg/l.
This is an example of the type of
chemical change which is taking place
in the anaerobic conditions which
exist in the saturated sands through
which this leakage is taking place.
Long before the mechanics of the
soil chemistry is understood, it is
possible that sufficient information
would be obtained from the actual
operation of the Muskegon system to
permit other systems to be designed
to take advantage of what appears to
be a very reliable yet inexpensive
method for removing phosphorus from
the percolating water (probably the
precipitation by iron in the soil).
COMPARISON WITH CONVENTIONAL
MONITORING
Steadiness
It is instructive to compare the
steadiness of the monitoring of land
treatment systems with the steadiness
of monitoring of the alternative con-
ventional systems. Conventional
systems do not have the very large
storage facilities that commonly com-
prise a part of a land treatment
system. Hence, they are subject to
relatively rapid changes in conditions
as the qiality of the incoming sewage
may change abruptly. If one is then
to monitor properly a conventional
treatment system, the number of
samplings must be very large. The
quality of the incoming sewage may
change from hour to hour. Such fre-
quent sampling is usually considered
too expensive and compromises are
made which result in missing the
sampling of sudden changes in qjality
resulting from an industrial spill, for
example. The result appear as ano-
molies in the final data, where one
could find more nitrogen in the
effluent than in the influent, for
example.
The inherent unsteadiness of a
conventional treatment system com-
bined with the high cost of sampling
to measure the actual variation in
359quality with Urne result in monitoring
systems which are not as comprehen-
sive as one would desire.
By contrast, the land treatment
system with sufficient storage is a
very steady system. The variation in
results from hour to hour, day to day,
or even week to week is relatively
small. Although the quality of the
imput may vary just as widely as it
would in a conventional system, the
fact that these variations must blend
with a much large mass of water which
has accumulated over a long period of
time necessarily results in very small
variation in the quality of the water in
the storage lagoon, for example.
TMs steadiness in land treatment
systems makes possible a careful
monitoring with many fewer samples to
be analyzed than would be required to
obtain the same degree of knowledge
about a conventional system.
Reliability
The land treatment system is
inherently a very reliable system. It
is difficult to discharge untreated
water from the system; in comparison,
the conventional treatment system does
not require much in the way of an
upset or a temporary overload to
result in a discharge of polluted water
directly into a waterway.
Again, the reason for the differ-
ence lies in the use of large volumes
of storage in the land treatment
system. If sudden changes in quantity
of quality of sewage occur, they are
absorbed with little or no difficulty
by the large masses of water already
in the system.
The writer has often proposed that
a comparison be made of the relative
reliabilities of treatment systems,
with the Muskegon County System, for
example, being compared with any
other system in the State of Michigan,
particularly with conventional systems
such as exist at Detroit, Grand Rapids,
Lansing and elsewhere. It is believed
that such comparisons would reveal a
very much higher degree of reliability
in the land treatment systems.Now this reliability is very impor-
tant to the achieving of the clean
streams for which the entire water
pollution control program is striving.
If a stream receives shock loads of
occassionally untreated sewage, such
shock loads would certainly nullify
the effects of good treatment perform-
ance between shock loads. The pos-
sibility of shock loads would make the
stream unreliable as a source of water
for reuse and as a stream which could
be stocked with fish for sport fishing.
(Because it is difficult if not
impossible for conventional systems to
achieve reliability, this problem is
largely ignored by the environmental
engineering community. It is one of
those vexing problems - like the
handling of polluted storm water run-
off - which is being "postponed" until
some future date. One would do well
to ponder if there is any conceivable
answer to either of these problems
save in the use of massive amounts
of storage.)
Again, because land treatment
systems are inherently reliable, it is
possible to achieve sufficient moni-
toring of results with very many fewer
samplings than would be true for a
conventional system. This fact is not
recognized by most authorities in the
field, however, possibly because past
experience with conventional plants
has shown them to have insufficient
sampling and analysis to fully monitor
what has happened.
PERMEABILITY AND TRANSMISSIVITY
MEASUREMENTS
Mechanical Properties of Aquifers
Systematic mechanical analysis
of soils and aquifers begins with
assembling of previously available
information about the region. Aerial
photographical maps, logs of borings
of exploratory drillings and of wells,
and geological reports are all sources
of such information. On the basis of
éuch information, one constructs a
preliminary model of the land and
soil mass to be involved in a land
360treatment system and develops a pro-
gram of further exploration. This can
take the form of drilling and sampling
of the soils in the conventional man-
ner, supplemented in some instances
by seismic explorations to map inter-
faces between formations of substan -
tially different densities.
Laboratory tests of samples would
include size distribution analyses,
with particular emphasis upon the dis-
tribution of the finer particles. It is
usually true that the finest 5% to
10% of the soils particles determine
the permeability of the mass. The
number of such samples would depend
upon the amount of variation of soil
types in the region involved.
Hydraulic Properties of Aquifers
The best way to measure the
hydraulic properties of an aquifer is
through the making of actual field
tests. This can best be done by
means of well pumping tests. In each
test, a pumping well is located in a
strategic location and a number of
observation wells are constructed
around it. The water level in each
well before pumping is measured.
Then the pumping well is operated
for a long period of time - for
several days up to 2 weeks - at a
steady rate without interruption. The
rate of pumping should be the maxi-
mum that can be sustained. The
rate of pumping is measured and
recorded at regular intervals. At the
same time, regular and systematic
measurements are made of the water
levels in the observation wells. The
initial measurements are made rela-
tively soon after the well pumping
begins. Successively longer intervals
elapse between times of water level
measurement as the test goes on.
The resulting data permit one to
calculate both the storage coefficient
and the transmissivity of the forma-
tion in the vicinity of the well. By
making a number of such tests, one
can determine the variation of transmis-
sivity of the quifer with location
throughout the region of the proposedland treatment system. The cost of
one well pumping test is likely to be
in the range of $15,000 to $50,000,
depending upon the depth and capa-
city of the aqiifer. If four such tests
would be used on a large treatment
site as for Muskegon, the cost would
be as much as $200,000. Spread over
a large site of 10,000 acres, this
would amount to $20 per acre, which
is not a large fraction of the total
project cost. Yet these tests provide
essential information by which the
design of the ground water monitoring
system is controlled.
SOIL SYSTEM ANALYSIS
Agricultural Soil Horizons
Bibliographies (1) and (2) provide
rudimentary information about the
standard way of classifying the soil
horizons from the point of view of
agriculture. This system should be
recognized by the persons making
analyses of soil systems to be used
for land treatment, as both the agro-
nomical and soil chemistry considera-
tions will be much aided by the agri-
cultural perspective of a soil system.
Suffice it to say here that the
agriculturalist classifies the soil into
the A, B, and C horizons, with the
progression being downward from the
surface of the ground. Within the A
horizon, one finds at the top the plow
layer, underlain by successively less
and less fertile layers in the typical
situation. Much of the important
action in a land treatment system
takes place in the plow layer, so most
of the attention in monitoring is paid
to this layer.
Sampling and Analyses
Typical sampling is done by hand
using special stainless steel push-
probes which are used to take samples
typicall 1/2" in diameter and seven
inches long. Ordinarily a number of
these samples is taken to comprise a
composite sample of the soil in a
given general location, spread out
36lover about one acre. A number of
such composite samples - about one
per 4 acres - would be used to
characterize a 40-acre field.
The samples are classified visual-
ly by the person taking the sample,
and sealed in tight plastic containers
to preserve the moisture content. They
would be carefully tagged and labeled
and an accurate record would be kept.
Soil Chemistry
Reference (2) in two volumes is a
source of information which concen-
trates on the organic aspects of soil
chemistry. This field of work is so
different from the chemistry that is
ordinarily applied to environmental
engineering work as to call for entirely
different procedures and training.
Much waste has occurred and much
misinformation has been generated by
laboratories inexperienced in soil
chemistry which have attempted to
perform assignments in this field.
Responsible professional engineers
have a duty to insure that any
analytical laboratory which they use
for the analysis of soil samples is
fully qualified in that field.
Likewise, the interpretation of
the laboratory results must be per -
formed by persons experienced in soil
chemistry. Such persons can quickly
spot laboratory problems and errors
and if brought into the picture at an
early date can greatly multiply the
value of the laboratory work which is
done.
Typical Results
Samples of soil involved in land
treatment system are often analyzed
for changes in organic content,
changes in nutrient content and for
accumulations of metals such as zinc
lead and cadmium. Such changes
occur most prominently in sludge
apllications to land, where the amount
of solids applied to the soil is
perhaps 10 to 100 times as much as
would be applied in a year's appli-
cation of wastewater. Results fromtesting soils to which large amounts
of sludge have been applied have
shown no problems with the crops
subsequently grown on these soils,
the many papers which have raised
the spectre of such problems notwith-
standing. The serious investigator
will do well to probe deeply the claims
of the persons who warn of problems
of heavy metal accumulations or uptake
by plants and he will find that such
problems are entirely conjectural. In
no actual field study has such a
problem been observed. This warning
is necessary in view of the popular
misconception that problems of heavy
metal accumulations actually do exist
in real situations.
Because the testing and analyses
of soils subjected to heavy dosages
of sewage sludge have shown these
soils to have benefited from such
applications and not been degraded,
one is inclined to discount even
further the possibility that soils would
be adversely affected by the applica-
tion of the very much more dilute
sewage effluent to them. For this
reason, it is prudent to do the soils
sampling and analytical work very
carefully and very well, even for a
few samples, rather than to attempt to
do a large number in a careless and
perhaps misleading manner. To dis-
cover an adverse impact on soils
resulting from the application of
sewage to them would be startling,
in view of the total lack of such
évidence at present.
PLANT SYSTEMS ANALYSES
General Observations
Sampling of plants to determine
deficiencies in nutrients and micro
nutrients is a well practiced art
among sophisticated agronomists.
Refined laboratory techniques have
been developed to aid in this work,
and the securing of such a qualified
laboratory will greatly facilitate the
obtaining of valid results.
This is again a field of consider-
able specialization and one is advised
362to secure the services of qualified
specialists with considerable
experience.
Typical Results
Again one would be surprised to
find that the irrigation of crops with
sewage effluent would in any way
create an adverse impact on such
crops, unless the amount of water
applied is excessive, such as to
drown the essential soil bacteria.
Such an adverse impact could of
course be produced by plain water,
so that the use of effluent would be
of no consecjience. Aside from such
foolish approaches, there would
probably be no way that one could
produce an adverse impact, assuming
the sewage to have been given bio-
logical treatment prior to irrigation.
(This biological treatment gives assur-
ance of the absence of biological
poisons in the sewage.)
For this reason, one would ordi-
narily conduct a rather economical
program of monitoring of plants pro-
duced by irrigation with wastewater.
There is no known way in which
adverse impacts could be produced,
saved by deliberate sabotage or out-
right foolishness.
WATER SYSTEMS ANALYSIS
Soil Water
Soil water is sampled by means
of iysimeters which intercept soil
water as it percolates downward
toward the ground water table. These
are ordinarily installed in pits in the
ground and utilize horizontal or
slightly tipped trays to intercept the
flow and to deliver it to sampling
containers. Samples are removed at
intervals and taken to laboratories
for analysis.
Tests of soil water are made
solely for research purposes. One
seeks to determine the rate at which
changes in the chemistry of the per-
colating water is taking place as a
function of the thickness of the soilthrough which it has passed. By
taking samples first at one and then
at another depth, one can answer
questions.
From the point of view of an
operating land treatment system, it is
important to know the quality of the
final product and this if found in the
ground water under the irrigation site.
Ground Water
Samples of ground water may be
withdrawn with the aid of wells or by
removing water from the horizontal
drains of the regular drainage system.
In the Muskegon County project, both
techniques are used.
Samples of ground water are
generally found to be devoid of sus-
pended solids and bacteria. Such
pollutants as may be present are all
in dissolved form. With ordinary
loading rates on good agricultural
soils, testing for virus usually shows
it to be absent in the ground water,
even though it may be present in the
applied water. Only in instances in
which the soil is relatively coarse -
such as gravel or course sand - would
one expect a few virus to reach the
ground water. Such soils may not be
suitable for the land treatment of
wastewater.
When the ground water is allowed
to empty into open ditches as it is
in the Muskegon County project, it
picks up from the biological commu-
nity of such ditches a new complement
of suspended solids and bacteria.
Thus, the final effluent as discharged
to surface streams does not have the
same high quality that one would find
in the ground water itself. For
example, the ground water at Muske-
gon County may be compared with the
ditch water as follows:
Parameter
Suspended
solids
Total P
BacteriaGround
Water
0
0.02
0Ditch
Water
4
0.10
100 MPN
363These results are merely illustra-
tive of the type of results to be
expected. The major differences are
in those materials which the soil is
effective in removing. Soluble
materials such as nitrates and
chlorides remain unaffected.
Frecjjency of Sampling
Because of the relative steadiness
of a land treatment system, there will
be very little variation in quality of
the ground water from month to month.
Thus the frequency of sampling can be
low. Just how low one could deter-
mine from actual experience with a
given site. One should be prepared to
find that perhaps 4 samples per year
at a given location would suffice.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(1) "Soil and Water Physical Principles
and Processes", Daniel Hillel,
Academic Press, New York and
London, 1971.
(2) "Organic Chemicals in the Soil
Environment", Volumes 1 and 2,
edited by Cleve A. I. Goring and
John W. Hamaker, Marcel Dekker,
Inc., New York, 1972.
36hMONITORING REQUIREMENTS FOR
LAND TREATMENT SYSTEMS
DESIGN OF SOIL-PLANT MONITORING
PROCEDURES FOR LAND TREATMENT
SYSTEMS
D. R. Keeney, Department of Soil
Science, University of Wisconsin
L. M. Walsh, Department of Soil
Science, University of Wisconsin
The philosophy of a monitoring pro-
gram of soil and plants in a land
treatment system is discussed, and
recommendations of suggested analyses
and frequency of sampling are given.
Since a monitoring program is site
specific, no firm recommendations are
possible. Interpretation of the data
is difficult due to sample variability
and regional climate and soil differ-
ences. For constituents which are
tightly sorbed on soil particles, long-
term trends in.soil profile distribu-
tion and plant uptake will be needed to
establish potential impact. Yearly
sampling of the surface soil is recom-
mended mainly to evaluate soil fertility
and yearly harvested plant material to
evaluate crop quality and N and P
removal efficiencies. We feel the dif-
ficulties in properly monitoring the
NO3-N concentration of the percolate
below the root zone, which often is
essentially at the ground water surface,
are such that it is not justified in a
soil monitoring program. Rather NO3-N
must be included in a ground water or
underdrain monitoring program.
INTRODUCTION
A monitoring program for a land
treatment system should be designed to
provide continuing evaluation of system
effectiveness and provide early warning
of soil, water or plant growth prob-
lems not anticipated in the system
design. The amount of monitoring
required should be the minimum neces-
sary to attain these objectives sincemonitoring is expensive. In this
regard, it is important to differen-
tiate between a monitoring program
designed strictly for continued evalua-
tion of system performance and one in
which research and development is also
a component of the project. The latter
would require more extensive data col-
lection than we recommend here.
Monitoring programs must of neces-
sity be site-specific. Among the
factors to be considered are:
(a) wastewater characteristics and
variability of these characteristics;
(b) application method [slow rate (SR),
rapid infiltration (RI) or overland
flow (OF)]; (c) crops grown and ulti-
mate use of the crops; (d) ground water
or surface water regime and potential
for contamination of the receiving
waters; (e) climate; (f) size of the
system; and (g) availability of trans-
ferable performance data.
In this paper, we have limited our
discussion to nutrients, metals and
persistent organics in the soil-water
system. Ground water and pathogen
monitoring is discussed elsewhere in
the symposium. Further, we make no
attempt to review in detail the numer-
ous biochemical, chemical and physical
transformations of the constituents
considered here. These are discussed
elsewhere in this symposium and in
several other reviews and symposia
proceedings.
365CRITICAL CONSTITUENTS
Nitrogen
Most SR and OF systems are design-
ed to take advantage of the nutrients
of the wastewater to partially or total-
ly supply nutrients needed for food or
fiber crops. This enables an economic
return from the system to offset some
of the costs and permits removal of
these nutrients in the crop. In con-
trast, agronomic crops are seldom a
component of RI systems.
Because of the requirement that
the percolate below the root zone of
land treatment systems contain less than
10 mg/1 of NO3-N (13), N removal is of
critical importance in most land treat-
ment systems. Luxury consumption of N,
leading to excessively high NO3-N in
forage or silage crops and potential
animal health problems, must also be
considered (31,42). Crop species
selection, particularly for SR systems,
usually is made based on their rela-
tively high N requirement. The most
commonly used crops are corn, corn
interseeded with an annual grass such
as rye, or forages (11,13,20,28,34).
Forest ecosystems also have been uti-
lized, but often are considered less
desirable due to their lower capacity
to assimilate N (17,19). Even though
the total wastewater N applied over a
growing season may meet or exceed
annual crop requirements, in some cases
a N deficiency may occur. This is
because the wastewater may have too low
a concentration of available N to
supply the crop needs during the
period of rapid growth and N uptake.
Supplementary fertilizer N may be
required as was demonstrated in the SR
Muskegon project (14).
Denitrification may also be an
important mechanism of N removal in
land treatment systems (16). Lance et
al. (26) have demonstrated the poten-
tial for managed denitrification to re-
move up to 70% of the effluent N in RI
systems. Ni trification-denitri fi cation
at the plant-soil interface is appar-
ently responsible for much of the N
removal in well-managed OF systems (13).
The potential for denitrification in SR
systems is considered much less than in
RI or OF systems since aerobic condi-
tions must be maintained for optimum
plant growth, and relatively coarse-
textured soils are used to obtain
satisfactory infiltration rates. The
current design manual (13) uses 20%denitrification of effluent in the cal-
culation of N loading rates with SR
systems. This is an empirical value
based on N balances obtained with ferti-
lizer N studies, and true denitrifica-
tion in SR systems could be signifi-
cantly greater or less than 20%. In
fact, the seasonal distribution and
total amount of denitrification in SR
systems is extremely difficult to pre-
dict, and virtually impossible to
monitor.
Phosphorus
The amount of P added in land
treatment systems will usually exceed
crop needs. Thus, soil attenuation
becomes the important P removal mechan-
ism for SR and RI systems over the site
lifetime, and monitoring programs are
needed only to evaluate the depth of P
leaching, especially on coarse-textured
soils where P retention would be rela-
tively low. Phosphorus toxicity to
crops is extremely unlikely, but imbal-
ances, particularly of micronutrients
could possibly be induced by accumula-
tion of excess available P (9,33).
Overland flow systems normally are less
efficient in removing P from wastewater;
removals of 35 to 60% are commonly
reported (13).
Potassium, Calcium and Magnesium
These nutrients dominate the
cation exchange sites of most soils
(except sodic soils). While of no con-
cern from a pollution standpoint, they
can be of importance in system perfor-
mance if they are not present in suffi-
cient amounts for normal plant growth.
While municipal wastewaters likely con-
tain sufficient Ca and Mg that these
elements will always be present in
sufficient amounts, K deficiency in
heavily cropped municipal wastewater
treatment sites is possible (36).
Agronomic crops commonly remove about
the same amount of K as they do N.
Fortunately, most wastewaters also have
about a 1:1 N:K ratio, but much more
N can potentially be lost by leaching
or denitrification. Therefore, K
deficiency in most systems is unlikely,
but soil available K should be routine-
ly monitored (33).
366Sodium, Chloride, Sulfur and Excess
Salts
Sodium is of main concern with re-
gard to its effects on soil permeability;
excess Na on the exchange sites will
cause loss of soil structure (floccula-
tion), with drastic negative effects on
the ability of the soil to accept and
transmit water while excess salts de-
crease crop growth (13,40). Experience
in irrigated regions of the arid west
has shown that use of irrigation waters
high in Na relative to other cations
(principally Ca and Mg) can cause
sodicity problems (15,25,40); problems
with excess Na or salts are much less
likely in humid regions. Sodicity is
evaluated by measuring exchangeable Na
relative to Ca and Mg. Chloride, an
essential plant nutrient, can be pre-
sent in sufficient amounts to reduce
crop growth (phytotoxicity). These
situations can be avoided by proper site
management and monitoring.
Most wastewaters contain consider-
able SO4-S. Sulfur deficiency in crops
is relatively rare; except for air
pollution, toxicity due to excess SO*
has not been documented.
Micronutrients
Several elements, B, Mo, Mn, Fe,
Cu and Zn, are essential to plants in
small amounts, yet toxic in excess
amounts. Deficiencies and toxicities
are a rare occurrence in normal agri-
cultural systems (9). Municipal waste-
waters usually contain an ample amount
of these elements to prevent deficien-
cies; toxicities due to municipal waste-
water application are rare. Toxicity
due to B is a distinct possibility if
sensitive crops and a high-B wastewater
is used (9,32). Copper and Zn toxi-
cities could possibly develop after con-
siderable time due to the tendency for
these elements to be retained in the
surface soil (9,35). Boron, on the
other hand, readily leaches from most
soils. Molybdenum could accumulate in
plants in sufficient concentrations to
be hazardous to grazing animals (35).
Other Elements
Other potentially hazardous
elements present in trace concentrations
in most municipal wastewaters include
As, Hg, Se, Pb, Cr and Cd (29). With
the exception of Cd, availability of
these elements once they have reactedwith soil constituents is low, and they
are generally not considered a problem
in land treatment systems (2). Cadmium,
on the other hand, is of concern due to
its potential for accumulation in the
food chain (13). Hence crop, and per-
haps soil, monitoring should be prac-
ticed to assure that Cd is not a prob-
lem. The extensive literature accumu-
lating on Cd uptake by crops grown on
sewage-sludge treated land indicates
that yearly applications of 1 to 2 kg
Cd/ha with a site lifetime maximum of
10 to 20 kg/ha can readily be tolerated
(23,24). System monitoring for Cd
should be required only if applications
reach or exceed these limits.
Organics
Most wastewaters contain appre-
ciable biodegradable organic matter.
However, due to the ability of soils to
rapidly degrade these materials, they
are of little or no concern from a
monitoring standpoint. While little
information is available, wastewaters
undoubtedly contain variable concentra-
tions of persistent man-made organic
chemicals. Their analysis is difficult
and expensive. Further, they often are
tightly bound in the soil, and thus
their bioavailability would therefore
be low. Wastewater monitoring will pro-
vide the first indication of the possi-
bility of including persistent organics
in a soil-plant monitoring program. In
most cases, analysis likely will be
confined to plant tissue since this will
provide an indication of potential food
chain magnification.
MONITORING PROGRAM
Philosophy of Soil and Plant Testing of
Land Treatment Systems
Evaluating the effects of waste-
water application on soils and plants
is a necessary component of the total
program. However, both soil and plant
analysis have limitations with respect
to proper interpretation. While much
research is in progress to resolve
these limitations, uncertainties will
always exist.
Soils are characteristically non-
uniform in chemical and physical pro-
perties. Vertical differentiation as a
result of geologic incidents, soil for-
mation, and of man's activities in the
recent past, is readily recognized.
367Often the lower horizons of a soil pro-
file differ markedly from the upper one-
half to one meter which is of importance
to plant growth. Soils also vary wide-
ly in the horizontal plane, and this
variability adds considerable uncertain-
ty in soil testing procedures. The
amount of time a soil has been exposed
for weathering as well as differences in
climate result in wide regional differ-
ences in soil characteristics such as
the type and amount of clay, the pH,
carbonate content, organic matter and
buffering capacity of the soils. With-
in regions, nearly as wide variations
can often be found depending on parent
material, topography and drainage.
Even within a given soil type in a field,
microheterogeneities exist.
Since soil chemical properties
markedly affect the reactions of criti-
cal nutrients in soils, it is not sur-
prising that universal soil tests to
evaluate bioavail ability of these
nutrients are not available, for
example, several soil extractants to
estimate available soil P are in use in
soil testing laboratories in the U.S.
(41). Soil tests for micronutn'ents
and toxic metals are even less well
researched. In fact, Melsted (29) con-
siders the possibility of developing
standard soil tests for these metals
rather remote.
Nitrogen offers even more diffi-
culties with respect to soil monitoring.
Despite several decades of research
effort, no valid, widely applicable
test for estimating the amount of soil
organic nitrogen which would become
available over a growing season is
available. Monitoring of inorganic N
(especially NO3-N) in the profile of
soils receiving wastewater also pre-
sents formidable problems due to soil
heterogeneity and the rapid rate of
movement of NO3-N under high water
application rates. Intensive soil pro-
file sampling is out of the question
due to the expense involved while por-
ous cup samplers(also known as suction
lysimeters) generally give widely
variable results which are difficult
to interpret.
Plant analysis presently offers
the most logical approach to monitor-
ing the performance of land treatment
systems with respect to many elements.
Since the plant integrates the various
soil and climatic factors involved in
nutrient and heavy metal availability,
analysis of the tissue for the concen-
tration of these constituents willprovide an indication of their avail-
ability. Further, methods for total
elemental analysis of plant tissue are
widely available and uniformly appli-
cable. The average range in nutrient
composition for numerous agronomic
crops grown under a wide range of soils
and climates, is available. However,
these data usually are gathered under
conditions ranging from deficient to
sufficient in nutrients. What is much
less well characterized is the upper
tolerance levels, particularly of the
nonessential elements (29). Progress
is being made in defining these limits,
particularly with respect to sludge
application on land.
Soil Sampling Procedures
We propose that the soil sampling
programs be developed for two separate
objectives. One program should involve
regular sampling at frequent intervals
(at least yearly) of the surface soil
horizon to the depth of tillage or the
root zone. Additionally, sampling of
the profile to a considerable depth
should be conducted perhaps every
third to fifth year to assess movement
of P and metals.
It has long been accepted in soil
testing that sampling variation is much
greater than analytical variation and
that the validity of a soil test is
dependent upon the quality of the sample
taken (37). A soil sampling program
should provide not only an indication
of the characteristic being monitored,
but also a measure of its variability.
The first step is to define the
sample unit. This must be done with
respect to the soil type (the lowest
unit in the natural system of soil
classification) rather than a geo-
graphical area. For example, a 53 ha
sprinkler irrigation system might be a
geographical unit but two or even
several soil types, with different
chemical and physical properties,
could be present in this area. Sub-
units of 2 to 8 ha often are arbitrarily
suggested but the size of the subunit
obviously varies with the degree of
uniformity of the area (37).
Soil sampling generally involves
mixing several borings to make up a
composite sample, and obtaining one to
four such samples per unit. We recom-
mend that a minimum of two samples per
unit be taken to obtain an indication
of variability. There is no univer-
sally accepted number of borings
368needed for a sample since this also is a
function of field variability. We recom-
mend between six and twelve borings per
sample. The samples should be thor-
oughly mixed, preferably in a laboratory,
before subsampling. Sample handling
and storage can markedly affect results
of some tests, most notably those for
inorganic N and exchangeable K. The
most widely accepted approach is to air-
dry the sample (for example, spread the
sample thinly on a plastic sheet) as
soon as possible after collection. High
temperature (>40°C) drying should be
avoided. The sample then can be
ground to pass a 2-mm screen, remixed,
and stored in an air-tight container.
Great care throughout the sampling and
sample preparation procedure must be
taken to avoid contamination by heavy
metals. Subsamples are then taken, as
needed from the bulk sample. For
analysis methods that use a small amount
of material (e.g. the semi-micro
Kjeldahl method), a relatively large
subsample should be finely ground (<80
to <100 mesh) and again subsampled to
obtain material for the analysis (8).
Tissue Sampling Procedures
There are generally two distinct
objectives to tissue sampling programs:
(a) Sample a representative portion of
the entire harvested portion to deter-
mine either quality of the crop or
total nutrient removal, or (b) sample
a specific plant part (usually a
recently-matured leaf) at a given
growth stage to evaluate potential de-
ficiencies or toxicities. The latter
approach has been discussed by several
authors (1,6,21,23,30).
The primary advantages of leaf
sampling is that the sampling is rela-
tively easy, it can often be done in
time to correct the suspected defi-
ciency, and considerable literature is
now available to facilitate interpre-
tation of the results, at least for
most nutrient elements (1,30). However,
there are several disadvantages. For
one, elements are never distributed
uniformly throughout the plant. For
example, many crops have lower heavy
metal concentrations in the grain than
in the vegetative tissue. For another,
nutrient composition changes, often
markedly, during the growing season
(30). Thus results of leaf tissue
tests must be correlated with other-
indices such as crop yield or quality.In many cases, data to construct this
type of relationship are not available
(1).
While much more data on the rela-
tionship between diagnostic leaf tests
and land treatment system performance
is needed, we recommend that such tests
be included as part of a routine
sampling program, with sampling being
conducted relatively infrequently (once
every three to five years) and limited
to the heavy metals. However, if poor
plant growth is noted, specialists
should be consulted. Plant tissue tests
likely will provide valuable clues of
system problems.
We also recommend that the plant
monitoring program include determina-
tion of the yield and N and P concen-
tration of the harvested crop. Heavy
metals could also be analyzed on this
material once every three to five
years. If a forage or pasture crop is
utilized in the land treatment system,
we also recommend that the NO3-N con-
centration be determined to evaluate
potential NO3 toxicity problems. Deter-
mination of other quality character-
istics specific to a particular crop
may be desirable (e.g., total digest-
ible nutrients, protein, oil, stora-
bility).
In all cases, we recommend that a
control site for each crop be maintain-
ed. This would be a site where normal
management of the crop is practiced,
and no wastewater is applied. Results
of tissue tests from the control area
will be valuable in interpreting the
impacts of land treatment.
Once collected, plant tissue
samples should be dried (65°C) as quick-
ly as possible, ground and stored for
analysis. Several wet digestion and
dry ashing procedures are available
for preparation of the sample for
analysis (22).
Baseline and Infrequent Monitoring of
Soils
Evaluation of system performance
requires consideration of changes in
various measurements over time. Unfor-
tunately, preapplication data for the
soils and vegetation are usually not
obtained. While baseline vegetation
data are useful only where the exist-
ing vegetation is used (e.g., irriga-
tion of forests) the soils data are
necessary. This is because the pre-
viously mentioned soil variability may
369result in samples from untreated areas
being significantly different than
those from the areas to be treated.
Further, soil samples obtained before
land treatment is initiated should be
stored indefinitely. If methods change,
or if analysis for a previously unsus-
pected contaminant should be desired,
the initial soil samples then can be
reanalyzed.
The baseline data recommended are
given in Table 1. These measurements
are largely those required in site
characterization for system design.
Additionally, we recommend a compre-
hensive profile analysis for metals
and P so that the rate of leaching of
these constituents can be determined
from subsequent analyses.
The references listed in Table 1
are intended only to direct the reader
to the appropriate literature.
Further information on appropriate
methods can be obtained from USDA, EPA,
or University personnel.
Table 1. Recommended soil analyses to be taken before system
initiation and once every three to five years.
Analysis
Total N (Kjeldahl)
Organic C
Carbonate C
Cation exchange
capacity
pH in H20 and 0.01 M
CaCl2
Lime requirement
"Available" phosphorus
"Total" Cu,Zn,Ni and
Cd by hot HNO3-H0SO4
or HCla J ù
"Available" Cu.Zn,
Ni and CdProfile depths(cm)
0
to
to
As
As
0to 5; 5 to 10; 10
15; 15 to 30; 30
60
for total N
for total N
to 30; 30 to 60
As for total N
plus 60 to 90; 90
to 120; 120 to 150
0
As
As
Asto 15
for pH
for pH
for pHReference
8
4
5
10
27
27
As recommended
12
As recommended
Total analysis by more complete digestion procedures could
also be used. The hot-acid method is recommended as it
normally extracts >90% of the soil metals and is much easier
to do.
3TOYearly Soil Monitoring Data
Yearly monitoring, preferably in
the autumn of the year, should be con-
ducted with the primary objective of
evaluating the suitability of the land
treatment system for sustaining optimum
plant growth and to check for possible
deleterious effects due to salinity
and sodicity. In essence, this is a
soil fertility testing program, and
appropriate USDA and University Exten-
sion personnel should be consulted for
advice on analyses to be conducted and
their interpretation. Table 2 lists
indices which may be included. The
sampling should encompass the major
portion of the root zone (e.g., 0 to 15
cm).
Table 2. Recommended year"\y soil
analyses.
Analysis Reference Comments
Soil pH in
H20 or 0.01
M. CaCl227
Exchange-
able Ca,Mg,
K and Na18,38,39
"Available" P 33
Soluble salts 7If acid (<6.0
in H20) a lime
requirement
test (27) should
be conducted
and corrective
lime additions
made.
Exchangeable
Ca, Mg and K
should be ade-
quate; Na not
more than 10%
of the cation
exchange capa-
city.
As recommended.
If >4 mmho/cm
in saturation
extract, cor-
rective mea-
sures should be
initiated.tempting to present generalized normal
composition and toxic level values for
plants, the many variables that go
into plant tissue composition of ele-
ments dictate that specific advice be
sought should problems be suspected.
For hazardous elements, particularly
Cd, specific food levels have not yet
been established. A suggested guide
for assessment of potential metal
toxicity problems is given in Table 4.
The values are modified from those
given by Melsted (29) and it must be
emphasized that they remain largely
judgement values.
It is imperative that "control"
values obtained from the same crop,
sampled at the same time on similar
soils that have never received waste-
water, be available. These control
data will greatly aid in interpreta-
tion of the plant tissue monitoring
results.
ASSESSMENT OF MONITORING PROGRAM
We have presented a wide array
of potential soil and plant analyses.
As was emphasized initially, the fre-
quency and number of analyses required
will be site-specific. It is impossible
to attempt to establish firm recom-
mendations. As we also have indicated,
mere collection of data is not a moni-
toring program. Data interpretation
and evaluation must be an on-going
activity.
A major omission in our recommen-
dation is the monitoring of NO3-N in
the soil. We feel this presents more
difficulties than the effort warrants.
Rather, we recommend that this be
included as part of the ground water
or underdrain monitoring program.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Contribution from the College of
Agricultural and Life Sciences,
University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI, 53706, USA.
Plant Monitoring
Suggested plant tissue tests are
listed in Table 3. The character of
the wastewater may dictate that addi-
tional analyses be conducted, as indi-
cated in the table. Unfortunately, it
is easier to obtain than to interpret
many of these data. While it is
371Table 3. Suggested analyses for plant tissue.
Plant part
Harvested
portions
Grasses,
forage or
silage
Harvested
portions or
leaf tissue
Harvested
portions or
leaf tissueAnalyses
Total N.P
NO3-N
Cu,Zn,Ni,Cd
Other poten-
tially hazard-
ous substances
in waste.
Se,Hg,As,B,Cl,
Pb,Cr, persis-
tent organicsFrequency
Yearly
As used
Once in
each 3 to
5 yearsComments
To establish removal
efficiencies. Other
quality tests may be
desired.
Minimize potential
NO3-N poisoning of
livestock. Problems
possible if >1,000 mg
NO3-N per kg of dry
material (42).
Establishes trends in
metal uptake.
Frequency will depend
upon potential hazard.
Yearly analyses may be
required until trends
in uptake are estab-
lished.
Table 4. Average composition range of selected elements in
leaf tissue of common agronomic crops and
suggested tolerance level to be used for monitor-
ing purposes.
Element
Arsenic
Boron
Cadmium
Chromium
Cobalt
Copper
Lead
Manganese
Molybdenum
Nickel
Selenium
ZincAverage
composition
rangea
mg/Kg ary
0.1 to 4
30 to 75
0.05 to 0.5
0.1 to 1.0
0.01 to 0.5
5 to 20
0.1 to 5
15 to 150
0.2 to 1.0
0.1 to 1.0
0.05 to 2.0
15 to 200Suggested
tolerance
levela
>5
75
2
2
5
50
10
500
3
50
3
400
aTaken from 2,3,21,23,24,29. Values are for recently
matured leaf tissue.
372REFERENCES
1. Aldrich, S. R. 1973. Plant analy-
sis: problems and opportunities,
p. 213-222. In L. M. Walsh and
J. D. Beaton Jed.) Soil testing
and plant analysis. Soil Sci.
Soc. Am. Inc., Madison, WI.
2. All away, W. H. 1968. Agronomic
controls over environmental
cycling of trace elements. Adv.
Agron. 20: 235-274.
3. Allaway, W. H. 1977. Food chain
aspects of the use of organic
residues, p. 283-300. JJI
L. F. Elliot and F. J. Stevenson
(ed.) Soils for management of
organic wastes and waste waters.
Am. Soc. Agron., Madison, WI.
4. Allison, L. E. 1965. Organic
carbon. ln_ C. A. Black et al.
(ed.) Methods of soil analysis,
Part 2. Agronomy 9: 1367-1378.
5. Allison, L. E., W. B. Bollen and
C. D. Moodie. 1965. Total
carbon, ln_ C. A. Black et al.
(ed.) Methods of soil analysis,
Part 2. Agronomy 9: 1346-1366.
6. Baker, D. E., M. C. Amacher and
W. T. Doty. 1977. Monitoring
sewage sludges, soils and crops
for zinc and cadmium, p. 261-281.
In. R. C. Loehr (ed.) Land as a
waste management alternative.
Ann Arbor Science, Ann Arbor, MI.
7. Bower, C. A. and L. V. Wilcox.
1965. Soluble salts, la C. A.
Black et al. (ed.) Methods of soil
analysis, Part 2. Agronomy 9:
933-951.
8. Bremner, J. M. 1965. Total nitro-
gen. |a C. A. Black et al. (ed.)
Methods of soil analysis, Part 2.
Agronomy 9: 1149-1178.
9. Chaney, R. L. and P. M. Giordano.
1977. Microelements as related
to plant deficiencies and toxi-
cities. p. 235-282. In. L. F.
Elliot and F. J. Stevenson (ed.)
Soils for management of organic
wastes and waste waters. Soil
Sci. Soc. Am. Inc., Madison, WI.
10. Chapman, H. D. 1965. Cation-
exchange capacity. J_a C. A.
Black et al. (ed.) Methods of
soil analysis, Part 2. Agronomy
9: 891-901.
11. Clapp, C. E., D. R. Linden, W. E.
Larson, G. C. Marten and J. R.
Nylund. 1977. Nitrogen removal
from municipal wastewater efflu-
ent by a crop irrigation system.p. 139-150. In. R. C. Loehr (ed.)
Land as a waste management alter-
native. Ann Arbor Science, Ann
Arbor, MI.
12. Ellis, R., J. J. Hanway, G.
Holmgren and D. R. Keeney. 1975.
Sampling and analysis of soils,
plants, waste waters and sludge:
Suggested standardization and
methodology. Res. Pub. 170,
Agr. Exp. Stn., Kansas State
Univ., Manhattan. 20 p.
13. Environmental Protection Agency.
.1977. Process design manual for
land treatment of municipal
wastewater. EPA 625/1-77-008.
14. Erickson, A. E. 1976. Proposed
cropping wastewater nitrogen
stripping studies, p. 87-90. In.
J. M. Walker (ed.) Proc. Conf.
on Muskegon County, Michigan
Wastewater System. EPA-905/9-76-
006.
15. Fuller, W. H. and T. C. Tucker.
1977. Land utilization and dis-
posal of organic wastes in arid
regions, p. 473-492. Jji L. F.
Elliot and F. J. Stevenson (ed.)
Soils for management of organic
wastes and waste waters. Soil
Sci. Soc. Am. Inc., Madison, WI.
16. Gilmour, C. M., F. E. Broadbent
and S. M. Beck. 1977. Recycling
of carbon and nitrogen through
land disposal of various wastes,
p. 173-196. la L. F. Elliot and
F. J. Stevenson (ed.) Soils for
management of organic wastes and
waste waters. Soil Sci. Soc. Am.
Inc., Madison, WI.
17. Harris, W. F., G. S. Henderson and
D. E. Todd. 1977. Disposal of
industrial nitrate effluents by
means of forest spray irrigation,
p. 166-173. Jn_ Disposal of resi-
dues on land. Information Trans-
fer Inc., Rockville, MD.
18. Heald, W. R. 1965. Calcium and
magnesium. ln_ C. A. Black et al.
(ed.) Methods of soil analysis,
Part 2. Agronomy 9: 999-1010.
19. Hook, J. E. and L. T. Kardos. 1977.
Nitrate relationships in the Penn
State "living filter" system,
p. 181-198. In. R. C. Loehr (ed.)
Land as a waste management
alternative. Ann Arbor Science,
Ann Arbor, MI.
37320. Johannsen, C. E. 1977. Site
selection and land-use considera-
tions, p. 30-41. _In_ L. W.
Jacobs (ed.) Utilizing municipal
sewage wastewaters and sludges on
land for agricultural production.
North Central Regional Extension
Pub. 52, Dept. of Crop and Soil
Sci., East Lansing, MI.
21. Jones, J. B. 1972. Plant tissue
analysis for micronutrients.
p. 319-346. hi J. J. Mortvedt
et al. (ed.) Micronutrients in
agriculture. Soil Sci. Soc. Am,
Inc., Madison, WI.
22. Jones, J. B. and W. J. A. Steyn.
1973. Sampling, handling and
analyzing plant tissue samples,
p. 249-270. In L. M. Walsh and
J. D. Beaton Tëd.) Soil testing
and plant analysis. Soil Sci.
Soc. Am. Inc., Madison, WI.
23. Keeney, D. R., K. W. Lee and L. M.
Walsh. 1975. Guidelines for the
application of wastewater sludge
to agricultural lands in
Wisconsin. Tech. Bull. 88, Wis.
Dept. Natural Resources, Madison,
WI.
24. Keeney, D. R. and L. M. Walsh.
1975. Heavy metal availability
in sewage sludge amended soils,
p. 379-402. Jn. T. Hutchinson
and A. L. Page (ed.) Proc. Int.
Conf. on Heavy Metals in the
Environment, Univ. Toronto.
25. Keeney, D. R. and R. E. Wildung.
1976. Chemical properties of
soils, p. 75-97. In. L. F.
Elliot and F. J. Stevenson (ed.)
Soils for the management of
organic wastes and wastewaters.
Am. Soc. Agron., Madison, WI.
26. Lance, J. C., F. D. Whisler and
R. C. Rice. 1976. Maximizing
denitrification during soil fil-
tration of sewage water. J.
Environ. Qual. 5: 102-107.
27. McLean, E. 0. 1973. Testing soils
for pH and lime requirement,
p. 77-98. ln_ L. M. Walsh and
J. D. Beaton (ed.) Soil testing
and plant analysis. Soil Sci.
Soc. Am. Inc., Madison, WI.
28. Malhotra, S. K. and E. A. Myers.
1975. Design,operation, and mon-
itoring of municipal irrigation
systems. J. Water Poll. Contr.
Fed. 47: 2627-2639.29. Melsted, S. W. 1973. Soil-plant
relationships (some practical
considerations in waste manage-
ment), p. 121-128. In_ Recycling
municipal sludges and effluents
on land. Natl. Assn. State Univ.
and Land-Grant Colleges,
Washington, D.C.
30. Munson, R. D. and W. L. Nelson.
1973. Principles and practices
in plant analysis, p. 213-222.
In L. M. Walsh and J. D. Beaton
led.) Soil testing and plant
analysis. Soil Sci. Soc. Am.
Inc., Madison, WI.
31. National Research Council, 1972.
Accumulation of nitrate. Natl.
Acad. Sci., Washington, D. C.
106 p.
32. Neary, D. G., G. Schneider and
D. P. White. 1975. Boron toxi-
city in red pine following muni-
cipal waste water irrigation.
Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Proc. 39:
981-982.
33. Olsen, S. R. and S. A. Barber,
1977. Effect of waste applica-
tion on soil phosphorus and
potassium, p. 197-218. JJI
L. F. Elliot and F. J. Stevenson
(ed.) Soils for management of
organic wastes and wastewaters.
Am. Soc. Agron,, Madison, WI.
34. Overman, A. R. and A. Nguy. 1975.
Growth response and nutrient up-
take by forage crops under
effluent irrigation. Commun.
Soil Sci. Plant Anal. 6: 81-93.
35. Page, A. L. 1974. Fate and
effects of trace elements in
sewage sludge when applied to
agricultural lands. U.S. EPA
Rept. EPA-670/2-274-005. 108 p.
36. Palazzo, A. J. 1975. Land appli-
cation of wastewater: forage
growth and utilization of
applied N, P and K. p. 171-180.
lH R. C. Loehr (ed.) Land as a
waste management alternative.
Ann Arbor Science, Ann Arbor, MI.
37. Peck, T. R. and S. W. Melsted.
1973. The principles of soil
testing, p. 13-22. ln_ I. M.
Walsh and J. D. Beaton (ed.)
Soil testing and plant analysis.
Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Inc., Madison,
WI.
38. Pratt, P. F. 1965. Potassium. Jj^
C. A. Black et al. (ed.) Methods
of soil analysis, Part 2.
Agronomy 9: 1022-1030.39. Pratt, P. F. 1965. Sodium. In.
C. A. Black et al. (éd.) Methods
of soil analysis, Part 2.
Agronomy 9: 1031-1034.
40. Stewart, B. A. and B. D. Meek.
1977. Soluble salt considerations
with waste application, p. 219-
234. j£ L. F. Elliot and F. J.
Stevenson (ed.) Soils for manage-
ment of organic wastes and waste-
waters. Am. Soc. Agron., Madison,
WI.
41. Thomas, G. W. and D. E. Peaslee.
1973. Testing soils for phos-
phorus, p. 115-132. In L. M.
Walsh and J. D. BeatonTed. )
Soil testing and plant analysis.
Soil Sci. Soc. Am. Inc., Madison,
WI.
42. Wright, M. J. and K. L. Davison.
1964. Nitrate accumulation in
crops and nitrate poisoning in
animals. Adv. Agron. 16: 201-
256.
375MONITORING REQUIREMENTS FOR
LAND TREATMENT SYSTEMS
MONITORING OF MICROBIOLOGICAL AEROSOLS
AT WASTEWATER SPRINKLER IRRIGATION SITES
Dr. Stephen A. Schaub, USAMBRDL, Ft. Detrick, Frederick, MD
CPT John P.. Glennon, USAMBRDL, Ft. DetHck, Frederick, MD
Dr. Howard T. Bausum, USAMBRDL, Ft. Detrick, Frederick, MD
ABSTRACT
The application of wastewater to land
by spray Irrigation may generate aerosols
containing pathogenic microorganisms
which can migrate beyond the wetted zone.
Aerosol monitoring may have usefulness
in assessing the potential human exposure
and the infectious disease risk relative
to other sources of exposure. Micro-
biological aerosol sampling can be per-
formed with a wide variety of samplers
including inertial impactors and imping-
ers, electrostatic précipitators and
scrubbers. Simultaneous, continuous
meteorological Information 1s required
to insure valid sampling and is also re-
quired for predictive mathematical aero-
sol modeling. A successful monitoring
program should include a quality assur-
ance program for sampling and microbiolo-
gical assays. The objectives and proto-
cols should be well planned and strictly
adhered to. Field logistics problems
such as sampler sterility, maintenance
and repair, sample shipment and process-
ing, and acquisition of flexible, depend-
able field personnel must receive careful
attention. To provide statistically val-
id aerosol data for interpretation and
modeling requirements appropriate types
of samplers in adequate numbers must be
used. Several predictive models are
available to provide estimates of down-
wind aerosol migration. The models in-
corporate physical decay and dispersion.
Some attempt to predict biological die-
off and the proportion of water aerosoli-
zed.
INTRODUCTION
The use of land application as ameans of wastewater treatment 1s accom-
panied by a concern for potential Infec-
tious disease hazards to workers and
surrounding populations. The human
health hazard from aerosolization of
treated wastewater 1s not well defined
(1, 2). Spray aerosols near land appli-
cation sites abound with a wide range of
microorganisms, including enteric viruses,
bacteria, fungi and protozoa. Downwind
migration and dispersion of microbio-
logical aerosols, as well as the asso-
ciated dieoff (biological decay) and fall-
out (physical decay) have been investi-
gated at several locations (3-8). How-
ever, information gaps remain. Exposure
levels constituting an unacceptable In-
creased probability of human infection
have not yet been defined. In addition,
the human dose response via aerosol dis-
persion has not been adequately deter-
mined. Unless future research Indicates
the absence of any health hazard, some
form of aerosol monitoring or other risk
assessment may be required.
The objective of this presentation is
to provide researchers, site management
and operations personnel, and health en-
forcement agencies some indications of
(a) methods of aerosol monitoring at
spray irrigation sites (b) technical and
logistical approaches and problems, (c)
sampling and assay techniques, (d) data
evaluation methods and (e) mathematical
modeling approaches and model validation.
Aerosol Formation During Spray Irrigation
Common types of spray equipment used
in wastewater application Include Impact
and fan sprinklers, rain guns and fixed-
aperature rocker-arm sprayers. All of
377these produce aerosols that travel beyond
the wetted zone of application (9). The
smaller droplets produced 1n spray acti-
vities are quickly reduced 1n size by
evaporation, yielding still smaller drop-
let nuclei which may remain aerosolized
for prolonged periods. Most droplet
nuclei produced by spray Irrigation with
wastewater are greater than 0.5 ym in
diameter. The term aerosol Is generally
applied to airborne particles up to 50
ym in diameter.
Microbial aerosol concentrations dur-
ing spraying are dependent on a number
of factors. One 1s the concentration of
microorganisms in the wastewater itself.
Another is the aerosolization efficiency
of the spray process, I.e., the propor-
tion of water sprayed that enters the
aerosol state. This, 1n turn, 1s in-
fluenced by a number of Interrelated
features ( 9 ) including nozzle size and
pressure, angle of spray trajectory,
angle of spray entry to the wind and
other mechanical features such as the
use of impact devices to propel the
sprinklers.
Factors Influencing Microbiological
Viability and Migration Downwind
Once aerosolized, microorganisms
contained in droplets or droplet nuclei
are subjected to a number of stresses
which influence their survival. As the
aerosol 1s formed, there is an Immediate
aerosol shock which may, within seconds,
reduce the level of viable microorganisms
by over an order of magnitude (7, 10).
However, after the Initial shock, the
continued aerosol dieoff is relatively
slow and is highly dependent on tempera-
ture and relative humidity. Important
factors in microbial aerosol inactivation
are desiccation, osmotic changes and
ultraviolet or Ionizing radiation. On
the other hand, partial desiccation may
concentrate materials within the droplet
that protect the microorganisms. More-
over, for larger particle sizes there 1s
an Increased proportion of particles
bearing more than one viable organism.
This leads to greater apparent resist-
ance, since the particle is rendered
non-viable only upon 1nact1vat1on of
every contained organism.
Microorganisms in aerosol particles
are also influenced by meteorological
and geographical factors. The rate of
physical aerosol decay (deposition to
the ground) is influenced by wind veloc-
ity (higher winds keep particles aloft
to greater distances),atmospheric stability (turbulent air
hastens dispersion of aerosol plumes),
and local topography.
Human Health Implications
Pathogen-containing aerosol particles
of any size are considered potential
health hazards after they have settled
or impacted upon surfaces such as tools,
equipment or clothing, which may be
handled by humans with subsequent inges-
tion. This overview 1s most concerned
with the inhalation of 0.5 ym - 5 ym
aerosol particles, which are most likely
to be desposited on the bronchial or
alveolar passages of the respiratory
tract (11).
The evaluation of infectious disease
hazards in wastewater aerosols must em-
phasize the concentration of pathogens
to which a person is exposed over a
limited period of time. Thus the concen-
tration of pathogenic aerosols at any
downwind location is the primary criter-
ion to be used in health risk assessment.
Aerosol Samplers for Microorganisms
A variety of aerosol samplers design-
ed for or adaptable to environmental
sampling of microorganisms is currently
available. Generally these samplers can
be put into 3 groups: inertial Impingers/
impactors, electrostatic predpitators
and scrubbers. Table 2 describes some
representative samplers and tneir
capabilities.
Sampler Efficiency and Calibration
It is essential to know the collec-
tion efficiency of the sampling equipment
used especially for aerosol particles 1n
the size range of greatest human health
concern. Also the collection efficiency
of each sampler type should, when
possible, be measured 1n laboratory
quality assurance tests for each aerosol
parameter to be studied in the field.
A majority of droplet nuclei encoun-
tered downwind of spray irrigation opera-
tions fall between 0.5 ym and 5 ym
diameter, the range of maximal pulmonary
deposition. In this size range, there
are several widely used types of samplers
that exhibit good microbiological collec-
tion efficiency as shown in Table 2.
Collection efficiency decreases sharply at
the lower end of the particle size range
Measurements of identical aerosols
using the AGI-30 or Andersen sampler are
often used as a standard against which to
378Table 1. Characteristics of Representative Samplers
Sampler Type
Impactors
Impingers
Electrostatic
Précipitators
ScrubbersRepresentatives
Multislit Impactors
Andersen multistage
AGI, Greenburg-Smith
LEAP & Litton model M
Venturi scrubbersSampling
Capacities
(1/min.)
12-2000
28
12-24
1200 &
10,000
25 or
850Features
good
easy to use
particle size
discrimination
Inexpensive,
std. sampler
to rate others
high volume &
recovery
high volumebad
low effic. for
small particles
sampler
overcrowding
low effic. for
small particles,
low volume
expensive,
complex
not commercially
available
measure other samplers or collection
techniques. Factors adversely affecting
sampling efficiency fall into two major
categories; mechanical losses and losses
in viability.
Mechanical collection efficiency can
be assessed by using an aerosol of known
strength consisting of an aerosol-stable
organism such as Bacillus subtil is niger
spores and comparing actual to predicted
recovery. A second approach to estima-
tion of mechanical efficiency relies on
measurement of the slippage of aerosol
particles through the sampler. A second
sampler of the same kind is used in tan-
dem with the first for this determina-
tion; aerosol recovery in the second sam-
pler indicates slippage. For the Ander-
sen sampler; 1f recovery on the last
stage 1s close to zero, very limited
slippage is indicated for any aerosol
particles above 0.5 urn.
Important factors that reduce mech-
anical collection efficiency in the
field are: line voltage drops affecting
airflow in samplers, partially clogged
air intakes or critical orifices, Im-
proper volume of fluid in impingers or
of collection agar 1n Impactor samplers
and incomplete wetting of précipitator
sampler collection discs. Reduced
electrostatic potential in electrostatic
precipitator samplers may also cause a
decline In aerosol sampling efficiency.
Using the LEAP sampler, we observed the
following collection efficiencies for
fluorescein-methylene blue aerosols with
median particle diameter 2.0 urn (assumeefficiency at 13 kilovolts <M) - 100*):
9 ktf - 75%, 7 kV « 50%.
Use of disposable plastic petri
dishes in Andersen samplers was reported
by Andersen (1958) (14) to result in
lowered sampling efficiency in relation
to glass, but Dimmick (Dimmick and Akers
1969) (16) found no significant differ-
ence. In laboratory studies, using
bacterial aerosols in the 2 to 5 uni
particle size range, we have not detect-
ed reduced efficiency of the Andersen
plastic dish system using the AGI-30 as
a standard.
Viability losses may result from
prolonged sampler operation. In an im-
pactor sampler such as the Andersen,
this 1s dependent on microbial species
and humidity, but 30 to 40 minutes is
probably a maximal sampling time in the
absence of an evaporation retardant. In
laboratory studies we observed a 30 per-
cent loss 1n Impacted Klebsiella and
E. coli 1n 40 minutes In the Andersen
TampTiF at 50-75% relative humidity. On
the other hand, in the LEAP sampler, re-
circulation of aerosolized £_. coli and
S_. marcescens for 40 minutes aO'0-40
percent relative humidity and 12 kilo-
volts potential, did not cause measure-
able viability losses.
The collection efficiency was not
affected by microbial aerosol concentra-
tion in tests performed in our laboratory.
General discussions of aerosol sampl-
ing and aerosol behavior have been provided
by Fuchs (1964) (16). Dimmick and Akers
(1969) (15) and Friedlander (1977) (17).
379Table 2. Aerosol Collection Efficiencies of Selected Sampler
Types 1n the Particle Diameter Range 1 to 5 urn
A1r Sampler Collection efficiency % Data Source
Small-Volume Samplers
AGI-30
Multistage
liquid Impinger
Midget Impinger
Andersen viable
Large-Volume Samplers
Multislit liquid
impinger
LEAP electrostatic
précipitator
Litton Model M
electrostatic
précipitator90
80
up
15
90
7590to
to
83
to
to
to
to
to99
90
99
60
95
95
99Tyler and Snipe (1959) (12)
Dimmick and Akers (1969)(15)
Tyler and Snipe (1959)
Various sources
Decker et al_. (1969) (13)
Manufacturer's literature
(Environmental Research Corp)
Decker et al. (1969}
Manufacturers literature
Basic Tasks for Field Sampling
To properly assess microbiological
aerosols several analytical operations
should be performed. The wastewater, at
the spray nozzle or lagoon, should be
sampled and analyzed for microorganisms of
concern during every aerosol test. If
the water comes directly from a waste-
water treatment plant without storage,
the samples should be taken frequently
enough to detect diurnal microbial fluc-
tuations. Also, chemical tests should
be performed on the wastewater to include
such parameters as BOD, TOC, total and
volatile solids (dissolved and suspended),
pH, ammonia and Kjeldahl nitrogen and,
1f disinfected, the active residual dis-
infectant. The aerosolIzation effi-
ciency of the specific spray machinery
at normal operating Une pressure should
be determined by performing dye studies
(dyes experience only physical and not
biological decay) with aerosol measure-
ment at close downwind points. The
microbial aerosol monitoring program
should be designed to obtain statisti-
cally valid sampling for an assessment
of aerosol concentrations, particle sizes,
dieoff and downwind dispersion. It is
also Important that meteorological data
be gathered to determine the effective
sampling periods; this is also a neces-
sary input for aerosol dispersion equa-
tions and for mathematical modeling.
Together, these test parameters can be
used to reveal the extent of downwind
microbial aerosol travel under a range of
conditions.
380Use of Air Samplers in the Field
All-glass Impingers such as the AGI-
30 or the Greenburg-Smith are useful for
sampling both tracer dyes and micro-
organisms. Andersen six-stage Impactors
are commonly used because they differen-
tiate the aerosol into Its various parti-
cle size ranges. These or other small
sampling equipment are best adapted to
close-in sampling. For high volume air
sampling, which Is necessary for low
concentration aerosols or distant down-
wind sampling, electrostatic precipita-
tors (LEAP or Litton Model M) are the
most efficient. Many samplers exhibit
shortcomings in field operation because:
some must be carefully leveled, none can
sample air isokinetically at various
wind velocities, orifices often can't be
maintained into the wind, liquid impinger
surface film or sample volume is diffi-
cult to maintain; dehydration of semi-
solid medium or over-sampling (crowding
of sampled organisms) must be checked
and can limit sampling time. Further-
more, the more complex samplers are prone
to mechanical or electronic breakdown and
also may present problems in the mainten-
ance of sample sterility.
In general, It is necessary to use
several sampler types In unison. In this
way the need for several sampling capa-
bilities, I.e., high sensitivity, particle
size discrimination and precision of
estimate, can be met, and the aerosol
plume can be reasonably described.
Also multiple samplers help provide
a statistically valid determination ofdieoff, particle size distribution and
concentration of organisms at any speci-
fic downwind point. It is of importance
to set the samplers at a uniform eleva-
tion of approximately 1.5 to 2 meters to
represent the height of aerosol inhala-
tion by humans.
There are two principal approaches
to aerosol sampling for determination
of the concentration and nature of down-
wind microbial aerosols. The first
approach 1s to set a number of samplers
close together and close to the spray
source, possibly 30-50 meters beyond the
wetted zone. In this manner it is pos-
sible to obtain a statistically valid
set of aerosol values for regions near
the source. However, estimates of maxi-
mum downwind migration (I.e., distance
required to resume ambient background
aerosol levels) must then be obtained
by extrapolation and must rely heavily
on meteorological data and dispersion
equations.
The second approach 1s to measure
the aerosols at some distant point of
interest, such as property lines, buffer
zone boundaries or housing areas to
determine if background levels are being
exceeded. To perform such sampling,
large volume samplers and/or long sampling
times must be utilized, and generally a
relatively large number of samplers would
be required to provide statistical valid-
ity. To its credit, this sampling pro-
cedure provides the most accurate esti-
mate of the extent of downwind survival.
Sampling at distant locations requires
extreme care to i sure that the micro-
organisms recovered are from the spray
source and not from residential, commer-
cial, animal or other background sources.
Background sampling (during periods be-
tween spray Irrigation) should be per-
formed to determine the nature and extent
of these aerosol sources.
The positioning of samplers may be
tailored to site-specific objectives.
Often, especially 1n research studies,
it is desirrd to have both close-in and
distant aerosol measurements. One common
approach 1s to determine beforehand the
mean wind direction and then to set up
samplers directly (or in an array) in
line downwind. This method 1s quite
successful when the wind direction is
stable. However a shift in wind direc-
tion of even 20° to 30° before or during
sampling may require termination of a
run or realignment of samplers. Another
method is to orient a sampler line cross-
wind or parallel to a line of sprinklers.
A greater range of wind direction canthen be accepted.
The choice of the sampling procedure
to be used is finally dependent on the
size and type of aerosol source (point,
line or field source), number and type
of samplers available (both small and
high volume), and available personnel and
facilities. One or two persons obviously
could not perform a field test where a
large number of samplers, some of which
require almost constant attention, are
used and where complex assay procedures
required for bacterial and viral pathogens
are desired.
Meteorological Data Requirements
On-site meteorological information is
essential for determining appropriate
conditions for initiation or continuance
of sampling and for providing input to
predictive dispersion equations. Contin-
uous recording of wind direction and wind
speed is necessary. Data on the solar
Intensity, angle of the sun and cloud
cover may provide useful data related to
both atmospheric stability and biological
decay rates.
Logistical Problems
Because of the nature of field sampl-
ing, the logistics are formidable. Numer-
ous equipment items, and in many cases a
field laboratory facility, are required.
Samplers, air pumps and most meteorologi-
cal equipment require AC current. This
necessitates a main electrical connection
from a nearby source or field generators,
hundreds of feet of electrical line, and
circuit breakers. Another logistical
problem is that of supplying adequate
parts and repair capability for field
equipment. This problem is typically
acute with high volume air samplers, which,
because of their many electronic and
mechanical components are often out of
service. Additional problems in the field
are: maintaining sample sterility before
and after sampling; providing communica-
tion in the field and from field to lab-
oratory; providing transportation of
sampling equipment to and from field
stations and rapid return of samples to
the laboratory
Field experience demonstrates that
careful planning and appropriate alterna-
tive sampler deployment patterns are a
necessity. It is also important to have
a staff that is flexible to changes in
working hours and that will persevere in
accomplishing the sampling task.
381Sampling of Aerosols and Wastewater
Methods used in field sample collec-
tion and laboratory analysis of samples
have been discussed (6, 18).
For determination of microbial aero-
sols, both semi-solid medium (Andersen
sampler, slit sampler) and broth or tis-
sue culture fluid (LEAP, Litton samplers)
are used. The semi-solid medium used may
be a general purpose one, such as tryp-
tose glucose-extract or standard plate
count agars, which measure the overall
aerobic bacterial population. Alterna-
tively, differential or selective media
may be employed for estimation of speci-
fic microbial groups, e.g., Endo agar for
coliform bacteria. A procedure has been
used in our laboratory to sample airborne
coliphage directly, using Andersen sam-
plers. The plates are overlaid with soft
agar seeded with host £. cqli. Overlay
may be performed either before or after
sampling, but Incubation at the appro-
priate temperature must be initiated
Immediately after sampling.
Aerosols of fluorescent tracer dyes
are sampled by liquid impingement in dis-
tilled water containing antifoam (AGI) or
a wetting agent (LEAP, Litton Model M).
Liquid collection media used for either
microorganisms or dye should be sampled
prior to exposure, as a control on sam-
pler contamination.
Prior to sampler operation a number
of procedures should be performed.
Andersen sampler sieves should be washed,
checked for any occluded apertures and
disinfected by ethanol or isopropyl alco-
hol wiping between runs to eliminate
sample contamination. The assembled
sampler with critical orifice (orifice
used to standardize sample volume) should
be frequently checked for air leaks by
stoppering and applying a vacuum. Agar
volume per plate should be sufficient to
allow 2.5 mm clearance between agar and
sieve (14). Contact between the agar
surface and the sieves should be avoided.
AGI sampler orifices should be checked
and should be held in an upright position
by cylindrical cups or holders affixed
to the sampler stands.
Studies in this laboratory have used
continuously recirculating medium in the
LEAP and Litton model M samplers in the
field to concentrate the microorganisms
sampled. Evaporative losses were restor-
ed by addition of sterile distilled water
during sampling, as needed. These sam-
plers should be leveled with care to
facilitate even distribution of sampling
fluid and complete wetting of the collec-tion (impingement) disc. Sterilization
of large volume samplers is also extreme-
ly important between runs, since contam-
inant organisms may multiply on interior
sampler surfaces. We have used 0.1%
H0C1, pH 6.5, to disinfect inlet and
collection tubing. This is followed by
sterile sodium thiosulfate solution and
sterile water. The collection disc is
cleaned with detergent solution and
disinfected with 70% alcohol. Disinfec-
tion may also be achieved by running steam
through the system.
Samples of the wastewater being spray-
ed should be obtained from spray heads or
the irrigation system reservoir simultan-
eously with air sampling. For indigenous
organisms, two or three grab samples taken
from a well-mixed reservoir during runs
will suffice, and these may be composited.
If tracer seeded material (dyes or micro-
organisms) is used, a larger number of
samples, distributed 1n time over the
entire sampling period should be taken.
These should not be pooled, as a check
on fluctuation in tracer level at the
spray head.
Analysis of Samples
All liquid samples containing micro-
organisms should be placed in ice prompt-
ly to await removal from field to labor-
atory. Otherwise, dieoff of some organ-
isms, especially injured ones, may occur
due to cumulative stresses, while others,
in rich medium, may undergo multiplica-
tion. Analysis of samples should take
place on the same day even if samples
must be shipped to a distant laboratory.
Liquid samples are analyzed for stand-
ard plate count, indicator organisms or
other bacteria or viruses according to
any appropriate procedure. Standard
Methods (19) should be followed when
possible. Sensitivity may be maximized
by concentration procedures, e.g., mem-
brane filtration.
Exposed agar medium (Andersen sam-
pler, slit sampler) is simply removed
from the samplers for Incubation. Each
Andersen sampler plate count is subjected
to a positive-hole statistical correc-
tion (14). From each Andersen sample,
consisting of six plates, a median par-
ticle diameter for colony forming parti-
cles 1s calculated (14, 15).
In studies using fluorescent dye,
fluorimetric determinations are made on
all liquid samples including zero time
samples from AGI's, electrostatic pre-
cipitator or other sampling equipment.
Wastewater grab samples are also measured.
382Since the degree of fluorescence 1s pH-
dependent, care must be taken to avoid
any significant difference 1n pH between
wastewater and aerosol samples at the
time of fluorimetric reading.
Field Data
Two field studies were performed at
Ft. Huaçhuca, AZ, (4-6) 1n which the
aerosol output of a single impact sprink-
ler, applying chlorinated or nonchlorinat-
ed secondary effluent, was measured. In
Table 3 are presented mean observations
for the aerobic bacterial aerosol (stand-
ard plate count) obtained by Andersen
samplers. Nighttime runs have been
averaged separately, and certain meteor-
ological data are included. Individual
standard plate count observations 42-49 m
downwind from the sprayer ranged up to
lOVm3, with mean values as shown.
Bacterial levels at the greatest distances
sampled, 120-152 m, were about one order
of magnitude lower. Under nighttime
conditions, characterized by lower wind
speeds and Increased atmospheric stabi-
lity, aerosol levels were somewhat great-
er than under daytime conditions. Chlor-
ination, ca 6 mg/1 total residual, re-
duced bacterial levels in the wastewater
by more than 3 orders of magnitude, and
the bacterial concentration in aerosols
to near-background values.
Field aerosol observations at Deer
Creek Lake, Ohio, are discussed else-
where in these proceedings (18). At this
Site total source strength in colony form-
Ing units (CFU) per second averaged 2- to3-fold less than at Ft. Huachuca, while
aerosol strengths measured downwind at
21-50 m averaged 5 x 102/m3, within the
range of corresponding values 1n Table 3.
In 14 experimental runs, the net aerosol
strength at 200 m averaged 8 percent of
that at 30 m.
At the Arizona site, total presumptive
coliform levels (using the membrane fil-
ter method with m-Endo broth) comprised
0.5 percent of standard plate count In
the Ft. Huachuca wastewater and averaged
2.0 percent of standard plate count 1n
the aerosols. Low source strength
coupled with sensitivity to chlorination,
seriously limits the utility of the
coliform group as an indicator of the
presence of microbial aerosols at land
treatment sites. Approximately half of
the presumptive coliforms were classified
as Klebsiella, and LEAP sampler estimates
of the viable Klebsiella aerosol 46 m
downwind ranged from 1/m-J to 23/m3.
Bacteriophage (coliphage) f2 was used
as a tracer (ca 10= PFU/ml final concen-
tration) in a number of runs at Ft.
Huachuca. The f2 aerosol was collected
by both LEAP and Andersen sampler with
post-exposure overlay using seeded soft
agar. Prior laboratory experiments had
shown an efficiency for this method of
collection equal to ca 23Ï, using the
AGI-30 as a standard. Field observations
were multiplied by a factor to compensate
for this. As a tracer 1n studying waste-
water aerosols, f2 was shown to have
several advantages; (1) It 1s much more
resistant to chlorination than standard
plate count or coliforms (2) like coliform
Table 3. Bacterial Aerosol Strength, Colony Forming
Particles (CFP)/m3, Observed Under Various Conditions, Without
Effluent Chlorination,at Ft. Huachuca, AZ (mean values)
Daytime No. Rel. Wind
or of Hum. Speed Temp. Source Strength*
Year Night Runs % (mps) (°F) CFU/ml CFU/secAerosol Levels (Geom. means)
Nearest Point Farthest Point
Distance CFP/m3 Distance CFP/m3
(m) (m)
1974 Day 9 55 5.1 64
Night 4 63 3.2 52
1975 Day 9 20 3.8 74
Night 3 10 2.6 723.3x105 2.1x10?, 49 4.3x102
3.7x10$ 2.4xlO9 45 5,6x102
2.1X105. 1.6X109 46 1.4xlO3
3.9X105 2.7x10^ 46 6.3xlO3139 8.6X101
122 1.7xlO2
120 1.3x10?,
152 4.1xlO2
*Total applied water
383bacteria the corresponding ambient aero-
sol Is essentially zero, and this absence
of background facilitates detection of
the aerosol at lower concentration than
the general bacterial aerosol and (3) It
Is more aerosol-stable than conforms at
Intermediate, though not at low (Table 4),
relative humidity levels.
Fluorescent dye (sodium fluorescein)
was used as a tracer, at 1 to 10 mg/1
final concentration, in several runs at
each field site studied. Model predic-
tions of the resulting aerosoH, which
are free of a biological dieoff factor,
were made using plume dispersion equa-
tions. Since the model assumes that 100
percent of the applied water is aeroso-
lized, the ratio observed to predicted
aerosol strength estimates the aerosol 1-
zation efficiency. These estimates have
ranged from 0.2 to 0.85 percent of the
total wastewater sprayed.
Similar dispersion model estimates
have been made for microbial aerosols.
Such estimates assume zero dieoff. Be-
cause dieoff actually occurred, the
resulting ratio: obstrved/predicted
aerosol strength 1s lower than for
fluorescein. From this difference 1n
aerosolization efficiency, percent
viability loss on aerosolization for each
organism was calculated according to the
formula: fractional viability loss =
•j efficiency, microbe
"efficiency, dye
Combining data from the two sites, aero-
sol Ization efficiencies and percent via-
bility loss are given in Table 4 (20).
Table 4. Mean Aerosol Efficiencies
and Viability Losses for Ft. Huachuca
and Deer Creek Lake Trials
AerosolAerosolization ViabilityEfficiency Loss
(Geom. mean) (percent)
Fluorescein 8.48xlO"3
Standard
Plate
Count
Presumptive
Conforms
Coliphage
f22.10xl0"3
2.35x10-3
4.83x10-475
72
94A very substantial fraction of bacte-
ria- and coliphage-bearing particles, 50
percent for the Ft. Huachuca observations
and 75 percent for those at Deer Creek
Lake, fell within the size range 1 to 5
w.
STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Biological aerosol studies are sub-
ject to high levels of innate statistical
variability. In the field, many sources
of'Variation exist due to the lack of
control over relevant source and environ-
mental conditions. Numerous technical,
logistical and economic factors affect
the variability and statistical signifi-
cance of the data. The degree to which
these factors will introduce constraints
will vary and be dependent on the objec-
tives of the program (Table 5).
Table 5. Factors Influencing Statistical
Variability During Aerosol
Monitoring Programs
1. Wastewater concentration and varia-
bility (daily, seasonal, etc.) of
specific microorganisms to be moni-
tored .
2. Sample handling and microbiological
assay procedures.
3. Efficiency, flow rate and calibra-
tion of aerosol samplers.
4. Type of irrigation machinery.
5. Local meteorological and topographi-
cal characteristics.
6. Duration of monitoring program and
frequency of sampling.
7. Magnitude of quality assurance
effort.
The Initial step 1n designing a
monitoring program should be definition
of the desired level of statistical re-
liability required. These requirements
should be consistent with the overall
objectives of the monitoring program.
Obviously, the more stringent the statis-
tical requirements, the greater will be
the cost and time investment.
Expertise in statistical experimental
design will be needed to estimate the
level of effort necessary to meet the
desired objectives. Estimates of the
expected variability of the data due to
the factors listed 1n Table 5 will aid
1n determining such requirements as
number of simultaneous samples (samples
per trial), number of sampling trials,sampling volumes, etc. Unfortunately,
due to variability In site characteris-
tics, only limited data are available to
facilitate such estimates. The most com-
prehensive sources of such, developed
during studies at Pieasanton, CA and
other sites are described by Johnson, et
al., (7) Camann, etal_., (21) and
lîâusum, elt al., (SJ. A pilot monitoring
program may~b~e required to obtain better
estimates of the expected statistical
variability and the necessary level of
effort.
It must then be determined if the
objectives can be achieved with the
resources allocated. If not, attempts
should be made to obtain additional
resources or to relax objectives.which
is favored over attempting an ambitious
effort with limited resources,as the
later may fail to provide any useful In-
formation.
We wish to emphasize the overwhelm-
ing impact statistical reliability re-
quirements have in generating constraints
on an aerosol monitoring program. Each
additional increment in sensitivity or
statistical reliability desired in state-
of-the-art aerosol monitoring methods 1s
associated with a disproportionate in-
crease in cost and time investment. A
single example, that of the Deep Creek
Lake study, will suffice to demonstrate
this trend.
The principal objective of this study
was to characterize the aerosol source
strength from this field source aeroso-
lization system,in which wastewater from
a recreational area received prolonged
holding in lagoons and chlorination.
Due to limitations in resources, it was
decided that the program would emphasize
evaluation of one microbiological para-
meter, the standard plate count. Sen-
sitivity was constrained by the non-
availability of a sufficient number of
high-volume samplers. Thus, Andersen
samplers were used predominantly. Since
the objective was to characterize aero-
sol source strength, the majority of the
samplers were positioned close to the
spray field. The Fort Huachuca study
had indicated that statistical reliabi-
lity for such a study could be improved
by placing aerosol samplers side-by-side
at each sampling distance rather than
along a line running downwind from the
source. This permits a determination of
variability arising from sampling, hand-
ling and analytical processes (Table 5).
Characterization of aerosols close to
the source dictated a close-In sampler
row. However, the prior studies hadalso shown that, if samplers were placed
too close to the source, increased varia-
bility would result due to discrete con-
butions of individual sprinkler heads.
Thus, two rows, each with four Andersen
samplers on 3 m centers were placed at
approximately 25 and 45 meters downwind
from the spray field. From twenty aero-
sol sampling trials, the average aerosol
concentration levels at the 25 and 45
meter distances were 469 and 413 viable
bacteria/m3, respectively. The standard
deviation within rows associated with
these measurements was ascribed to differ-
ences in the measurements made by adja-
cent samplers. It was calculated that
to obtain 90% or 95% confidence that
average aerosol concentration measure-
ments, collected within the aerosol
plume, at each distance were within 10
percent of the true value, 19, or 30
Andersen samplers would have to be
positioned s1de-by-s1de. It is Interest-
ing to note that only 7 or 9 samplers
are required for + 20 percent departure
from true value. Unfortunately, Informa-
tion was not available prior to this
study to predict this degree of variabi-
lity. Indeed, prior laboratory deter-
minations had indicated far less sampler
variability. While the data remain use-
ful, they have less statistical reliabi-
lity for comparison purpose than had
been hoped.
The following sampling strategies,
which apply to most sites, may reduce
statistical variability or Insure that
it remains relatively constant.
1. Collect a large number of aero-
sol samples at a limited number of down-
wind distances. Model determinations
based on accurate aerosol concentration
measurements at a limited number of
sampling distances (minimum of two) have
appeared more reliable than outputs
based on highly variable concentration
measurements from numerous downwind dis-
tances .
2. Within the monitoring program's
resources, use the most sensitive sampl-
ing equipment available. The sensitivity
of the sampling instruments must exceed
the required overall sensitivity for the
monitoring program.
3. Have a well defined and strictly
managed protocol. All sampling, sample
handling and microbiological assay pro-
cedures must be standardized to prevent
additional sources of statistical varia-
bility 1n the data. Changing procedures
during the course of the program should
be undertaken only after assessing the
impact these modifications will have on
385the accuracy and precision of the entireprogram.
4. A continuing quality assurance
program for aerosol sampling and micro-
bial assay should be included in the
monitoring plan. An investment of 10-20
percent of the budgetary and personnel
commitment may be required to insure the
reliability of the data being collected.
5. Statistical expertise must be
available throughout the program, pro-
viding statistical input during the
design phase and periodic evaluations
of the sampling data and the results from
the quality assurance program.
Mathematical Modeling
Several modeling approaches have
been undertaken to describe the genera-
tion of viable aerosols by wastewater
sprinkler irrigation systems and to pre-
dict downwind aerosol concentration. The
intent is to develop a model that is
uniformly predictive for those factors
influencing aerosol generation, disper-
sion and dieoff that are not site-depen-
dent. Such a model would ideally require
only the input of; (a) the wastewater
microorganism concentrations, (b) the
sprinkler Irrigation machinery aerosoli-
zation efficiency and (c) local meteoro-
logical and topographical information.
The ultimate goal would be to eliminate
the necessity for long term aerosol mon-
itoring programs at all wastewater land
treatment sites.
Mathematical modeling has also been
a necessity when the goal of the aerosol
monitoring program has been to measure
or predict aerosol concentrations at
relatively distant, i.e. greater than
200 meter, downwind locations. Micro-
meteorological conditions often render
aerosol plume travel complex. Therefore,
atmospheric dispersion models are also
employed to assist in the placement of
downwind aerosol samplers. More impor-
tantly, limited sensitivity of samplers
often prevents the collection of measure-
able concentrations attributable to the
sprinkler irrigation system. Thus,
modeling often becomes the only practical
means of viable aerosol estimation at
distant locations.
Modeling efforts to date have used
atmospheric diffusion models from air
pollution monitoring programs (22-24).
These models are often satisfactory in
predicting aerosol behavior and plume
distribution in relation to meteorolo-
gical conditions. The existing models
however, fail to account for losses inaerosol strength due to biological die-
off. Since the microbiological aerosols
must be viable to initiate infection and,
thus to be of human health concern, a
useful model must accommodate the factors
that affect microorganism survival.
Camann, et al_., describe a recent
effort to develop such a model (21). The
simplified form of this model estimate
of the aerosol concentration (P) at a
particular downwind location is:
where :
D = physical diffision model estimate,
of downwind aerosol concentration;
assumes all wastewater sprayed
becomes aerosolized and no bio-
logical dieoff.
E = Aerosolization efficiency factor.
That fraction of the sprayed
wastewater that leaves the site
(beyond 50 m.) as aerosol.
I = Microbiological impact factor.
Cumulative number representing
several Interactive factors that
influence microorganism survival
and aerosol concentration during
the Initial seconds (0-50 m down-
wind) of aerosolization (I>0).
X = Microorganism dieoff rate at
distances greater than 50 m from
source.
a - aço = Aerosol age from 50 m down-
wind to the location where con-
centration estimate (P) 1s made.
The model's development still requires
verification at operational sites, but
it has been relatively successful in
describing physical diffusion (D), aero-
sol ization efficiency (E) and the micro-
organism dieoff rate (X). A major limi-
tation in verifying these model com-
ponents has been associated with inade-
quacies in the state-of-the-art for
obtaining reliable microorganism concen-
trations 1n effluent and aerosol samples.
Refinements in the model are proba-
bly necessary to separate the individual
components presently Included 1n the
microbiological impact factor (I). This
factor was Initially postulated to ac-
count for the expected rapid microorgan-
ism dieoff rate (>X) during the initial
seconds (between 0-50 meters) of aeroso-
lization. Thus, fractional values be-
tween 0 and 1 were expected. Quite
often, however, values of I greater than
1 were calculated, indicating an increas-
ed number of viable particles over what
386was expected. The most logical explana-
tion of this phenomenon offered to date
Is that the initial assay for microor-
ganisms in the wastewater was an under-
estimate of the true number of viable
microorganisms present. This could re-
sult from either inadequacies in assay
procedures or from the tendency of
microorganisms to occur in wastewater
as aggregates. The forces active at
the sprinkler head and during aerosoli-
zation could break apart these clumps
and cause a net increase in the number
of viable particles assayed. Median
values of I above 1 would result for
those groups of microorganisms generally
considered resistant to the lethal ef-
fects of aerosol1zation (fecal strepto-
cocci , Clostridium perfringens, myco-
bacteria and Pseùdbmonas). Conversely,
the less hardy groups of microorganisms
(total coliform, fecal coliform, coli-
phage and standard bacterial plate count)
all had I values less than 1; indicating
a greater influence of biological dieoff
in the overall calculation of the micro-
biological impact factor. A second
limitation Is the inadequacy of coliform
bacteria, standard bacterial plate count
or coliphage to serve as representative
indicators of the pathogen content of
wastewater aerosols. Camann, et al.,
(21), have shown all of these organisms
to be relatively fragile in the aerosol
state relative to a number of wastewater-
borne pathogenic bacteria. Thus, use of
these organisms as indicators will con-
sistently under-estimate the pathogen
content of the atmosphere 1n the vicinity
of a sprinkler irrigation system.
CONCLUSION:
The forgoing has reviewed some of
the requirements and limitations asso-
ciated with microorganism aerosol moni-
toring programs at wastewater sprinkler
irrigation systems. The incentive to
conduct such studies has been a concern
that the distribution of pathogenic
microorganisms in the atmosphere may
be associated with an increased probabi-
lity of human infection. Of concern is
the health status of employees at the
wastewater land treatment site and their
families and of Individuals who work
or reside in the vicinity of the site.
Unfortunately, correlations have yet to
be developed to define aerosolized patho-
gen concentrations that significantly in-
crease the probability of infection com-
pared to other environmental sources ofthe same disease organisms. Therefore,
the Individual considering the establish-
ment of a microbiological aerosol moni-
toring program is forewarned that a yard-
stick does not yet exist to permit con-
clusions regarding the actual human health
hazard that is associated with a measured
aerosol concentration.
DISCLAIMER
The findings in this report are not
to be construed as an official Department
of the Army position unless so designated
by other authorized documents.
LITERATURE CITED
1. Sorber, C.A., S.A. Schaub and H.T.
Bausum, "An Assessment of a Potential
Virus Hazard Associated with Spray
Irrigation of Domestic Wastewaters"
in Malina, J.F., Jr. and B.P. Sagik
(eds.) Virus Survival in Water and
Wastewater Systems, Center for Re-
search in Water Resources, Austin, TX
(1974).
2. Stanford, G.B. and R. Tuburan,
"Morbidity Risk Factors from Spray
Irrigation with Treated Wastewaters"
in Wastewater Use in the Production
of Food and Fiber Proceedings, EPA
660/2-74-04, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Washington, DC
(1974).
3. California Water Pollution Control
Board, 3rd Report, "Study of Waste-
water Reclamation and Utilization"
(1957).
4. Bausum, H.T., S.A. Schaub, M.J. Small,
J.A. Highfill and C.A. Sorber, "Bac-
terial Aerosols Resulting from Spray
Irrigation with Wastewater," TR 7602,
U.S. Army Medical Bioengineering
Research and Development Laboratory,
Fort Detrick, Frederick, MD (1976)
AD A028359.
5. Sorber, C.A., H.T. Bausum, S.A.
Schaub and M.J. Small, "A Study of
Bacterial Aerosols at a Wastewater
Irrigation Site," J. Water Poll.
Control Fed., 48(10T:236T3T379~Tl976)
6. Bausum, H .T., S.A. Schaub and C.A.
Sorber, "Viral and Bacterial Aero-
sols at a Wastewater Spray Irrigation
Site," TR 7804, U.S. Anrçy Medical
Bioengineering Research and Develop-
ment Laboratory, Fort Detrick,
Frederick, MD (1978).
7. Johnson, D.E., D.E. Camann, C.A.
Sorber, B.P. Sagik, and J.P. Glennon,
38721"Aerosol Monitoring for Microbial
Organisms Near a Spray Irrigation 18.
Site," Proceedings of Conference on
Risk Assessment and Health Effects
of Land Application of Municipal
TjJastewater and Sludges, Center for
Applied Research ana Technology, The
University of Texas, San Antonio, TX,
pp 231-239 (1978).
8. Bausum, H.T., B.E. Brockett, P.W. 19.
Schumacher, R. Bates, S.A. Schaub
and H.L. McKim, "Microbiological
Aerosols from a Field Source during
Sprinkler Irrigation with Wastewater, 20*
Deer Creek Lake, Ohio, July-August
1976" Joint Technical Report, U.S.
Army Cold Regions Research and
Engineering Laboratory, Hanover, NH
and U.S. Army Medical B1oeng1neer1ng
Research and Development Laboratory,
Fort Detrick, MD (Forthcoming).
9, Hennessy, J., G. Raynor and M. Small,
"Aerosols and Land Deposition from
Wastewater Spray Irrigation," Final
Comprehensive Report by Brookhaven
National Laboratory to U.S. Army
Medical Research and Development
Command, Washington, DC (1975).
10. Ferry, R.M., W.F. Brown and E.B.
Damon, "Studies on the Loss of Via-
bility of Stored Bacterial Aerosols,
II. Death Rates of Several Non-patho-
genic Organisms 1n Relation to Bio-
logical and Structural Characteris-
tics, J.. Hygiene 56:125-150 (1958).
11. Brown, J., K. Cook, F. Ney and T.
Hatch, "Influence of Particle Size
upon the Retention of Particulate
Matter In the Human Lung," Amer. J_.
Public Health, 40:450-458 (TfSTT).
12. Tyler, M.E. and E.L. Snipe, "Bacter-
ial Aerosol Samplers. I. Development
and Evaluation of the All-glass Im-
pinger," Appl. Microbiol. 7:337-348.
13. Decker, HTMTT D.E. Frisque, B.M.
Roberts, and L.H. Graf, "Large-volume
Air Samplers for Collecting and Con-
centrating Microorganisms," Technical
Memorandum No. 172, U.S. Army, Fort
Detrick, MD (1969).
14. Andersen, A.A., "New Sampler for the
Collection, Sizing and Enumeration
of Viable Airborne Particles," J.
Bacteriol., 76(5):471-484. (1958")
15. Dimmick, R.L. and A.B. Akers, (eds.),
An Introduction to Experimental
Ttërobiology, John Wiley, New York,
NY (1969).
16. Fuchs, N.A. "The Mechanics of Aero-
sols," Oxford, Pergamon Press and New
York, MacMillan (1964).
17. Friedlander, S.K., "Smoke Dust and
Haze: Fundamentals of Aerosol Behav-22.
23.
24.1or," New York, Wiley, 1977.
Bausum, H.T., B.E. Brockett, P.W.
Schumacher, S.A. Schaub, H.L. McK1m
and R. Bates, "Microbiological
Aerosols from a Field Source During
Sprinkler Irrigation with Waste-
water," Proc. Intl. Symp. on Land
Treatment of Wastewater, Hanover,
NH, 1978, V517TT
Standard Methods for the Examination
o^ Water and Wastewater 14th Ed.,
American Public Health Association,
Washington, DC (1975).
Dumbauld, R.K., "Calculated Aerosoli-
zation Efficiencies for the Deer
Creek Lake and the 1974 and 1975
Ft. Huachuca Wastewater Spray Trials,"
Final Report #TR-78-l24-01 by the
H.E. Cramer Co., Salt Lake City, UT
to US Army Medical Research and
Development Command, Washington, DC,
(1978).
Camann, D.E., C.A. Sorber, B.P.
Sagik, J.P. Glennon, and D.E.
Johnson, "A Model for Predicting
Pathogen Concentrations in Waste-
water Aerosols", in Proceedings of
the Conference on Risk Assessment
and Health Effects of Land Applica-
tion of Municipal Wastewater andSludges, Center for Applied Research
and Technology, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio,
TX, pp 240-271, (1978).
Turner, D.B., Workbook of Atmos-
pheric Dispersion Estimates, Publi-
cation No. AP-26, USEPA, Research
Triangle Park, NC (1970).
Pasquill, F., "The Estimation of
the Dispersion of Windborne Mater-
ial." Meteoroi. Mag., 90:1063
(1961).
Bjorkland, J.R. and R.K. Dumbauld,
"User's Instructions for the Volume
Source Diffusion Models Computer
Program," H.E. Cramer Co. Technical
Report TR 75-303-03 to US Army,
Dugway Proving Ground, UT (1975).
388DESIGN CRITERIA
DETERMINATION OF APPLICATION RATES AND SCHEDULES
IN LAND TREATMENT SYSTEMS
Ronald W. Crites, Metcalf & Eddy, Inc., Palo Alto, California
ABSTRACT
Three methods can be used to
determine application rates in land
treatment systems: field measurements;
comparison with rates from similar
existing projects; and field
measurements combined with previous
experience and judgment. In view of the
present state of the art in land
treatment technology, the third method
is recommended.
In irrigation systems, application
rates are determined using the water
balance, the nitrogen balance, and
measured or estimated percolation rates.
In rapid infiltration systems, field
measurements are necessary, coupled with
a detailed knowledge of the subsurface
hydrology and comparisons with existing
systems. In overland flow systems,
application rates depend mostly on
wastewater treatment needs and are
currently determined by comparison with
existing treatment systems.
INTRODUCTION
The determination of application
rates in land treatment systems is one
of the most crucial and complex problems
in planning and design. In planning
studies, the relationship between soil
permeability and the application rate
(for infiltration systems) presented in
the EPA Process Design Manual can be
used [1]. In design, the recommended
practice is to make field measurements
(especially for rapid infiltration) and
to temper the results with experience
from similar projects. Considerationsof wastewater quality and treatment
levels required also influence the
selection of application rates. In this
paper, application rates, application
schedules, and comparisons with existing
systems are discussed for irrigation,
rapid infiltration, and overland flow
systems.
IRRIGATION
Application Rate
Typical application rates for
irrigation or slow rate systems range
from about 1.5 to 10 cm/wk. The choice
depends on the climate, soil
permeability, crop type and management
practices, and required quality of the
treated water. The climate and soil
permeability are evaluated using the
water balance; the required quality of
the treated water is usually evaluated
using the nitrogen balance. When crop
production is the overriding concern,
the irrigation requirements of the crop
may limit the application rate.
Hydraulic Loading Rate. In the
water balance, the inputs are wastewater
application and precipitation and the
outputs are evapotranspiration and
percolation. The precipitation and
evapotranspiration values should be
determined for a design year in which
wetter-than-normal conditions occur.
The percolation rate can be either
estimated from the soil permeability or
measured in the field. On the basis of
experience with wastewater, the long-
term percolation rate can safely range
389from 4 to 10% of the permeability of
the most limiting layer in the soil
profile. Recommended field measurement
techniques are basin flooding or the
sprinkler infiltrometer [1).
Nitrogen Loading Rate. Because of
the ability of nitrate nitrogen to move
with the percolating water, nitrogen is
often the limiting water quality
parameter in infiltration systems. In
slow rate systems, the input nitrogen is
balanced against crop uptake,
denitrification, and the nitrogen that
percolates through the root zone. The
climate can also influence the nitrogen
balance. For example, in a humid
climate, the water from precipitation
(in excess of evapotranspiration) can
dilute the percolating nitrogen
concentration, as shown in the following
comparison (Table 1) for a percolate
containing a maximum of 10 mg/L
nitrogen. Thus, in a humid climate, 36%
more nitrogen can be applied than in the
arid climate.
Table 1. Comparison of Nitrogen
Loadings in Humid and Arid Climates [1]
Parameter
Applied nitrogen, mg/L
Precipitation minus
evapotranspiration, m/yr
Crop uptake, kg/ha
Denitrification, « of
applied nitrogen
Hydraulic loading, m/yr
Waatewater nitrogen
loading, kg/haHumid
climate
25
O.S
336
20
4.0
980Arid
climate
25
-0.5
336
20
2.9
720
Application Schedule
The application schedule for
irrigation depends on the soil
permeability, type of crop, application
technique, and the climate. Operator
convenience should also be considered.
For permeable soils, the schedule should
be to irrigate once a week or more
frequently. For heavier soils using
surface irrigation, the schedule may be
to irrigate 1 day and rest for 4 to 6
weeks.
At Penn State, the schedule for the
solid-set sprinkler system was to
irrigate for 8 hours and rest for 6 days
[2]. When 24 h/d operation is used, it
may be more convenient to eitherautomate the system or operate for 12
hours per setting. Each application
schedule requires dividing the total
field area into plots or settings for
rotation.
The scheduling of application does
not seem to materially affect the
percolate quality of slow rate systems.
At Hanover, New Hampshire, for example,
the scheduling was varied from 8 hours
once a week, to 24 hours once a week, to
8 hours three times a week without
noticeable differences in percolate
quality [3].
Comparison With Existing Systems
Wallace compared the infiltration
rates with the actual application rates
at three slow rate systems, and none of
the systems was hydraulically limited
[1]. For example, on the basis of soil
permeability, the system at Muskegon,
Michigan, could have been designed
hydraulically for moderately high rate
infiltration. In many slow rate
systems, the application rate depends
more on crop, groundwater, and nitrogen
considerations than on hydraulic
loadings.
RAPID INFILTRATION
Application Rate
In rapid infiltration, evaporation
and vegetation are relatively
unimportant but the soil permeability is
critical. It is therefore important to
concentrate the planning and design on
determining the optimal infiltration
rate to ensure that the system will work
hydraulically while providing the
necessary wastewater treatment.
Hydraulic Loading Rate. Although
the soil permeability can be related to
the infiltration rate, as previously
described, it is recommended that the
soil profile be evaluated and that field
measurements of infiltration rates be
conducted. The preferred method of
determining the infiltration rate
depends on the nature of the soil
profile. If the profile is generally
homogeneous, a surface flooding basin 2
m or more in diameter can be used. The
basin is filled with clean water until
the soil is saturated, and then the rate
of infiltration is measured. Clean
water is generally used unless the
actual wastewater is available.
390When the hydraulically limiting
layers are deep within the soil profile,
the various methods proposed by Bouwer
can be used [4]. The gradient intake or
double tube methods can be used to
measure the permeability at the bottom
of an auger hole.
Treatment Performance. In rapid
infiltration systems, the required
treatment performance is of primary
importance in determining the
application rate. Lance has shown that
decreasing the application rate from the
hydraulic limit can result in increased
removals of constituents, especially
nitrogen [5]. Because the chief
mechanism of nitrogen removal in rapid
infiltration systems is denitrification,
the requirements of biological
denitrification must be met:
(1) adequate detention time,
(2) anaerobic conditions (or at least
anaerobic micro-sites), and (3) adequate
carbon to drive the reaction. The
reduction in application rate increases
detention time and increases the
potential for denitrification.
At Hollister, California, it was
observed that high BOD to nitrogen
ratios (5.5 to 1) in the applied
wastewater and a moderate infiltration
rate (about 15 m/yr) produced a nitrogen
removal 93% [6]. If nitrogen removal is
the limiting criterion in treatment
performance, the loading rate, ratio of
BOD to nitrogen in the wastewater, and
the application schedule deserve special
attention.
Application Schedule
Treatment efficiency in rapid
infiltration systems responds to
variations in application cycle. Short,
frequent application schedules such as
0.5 to 3 days on and 1 to 5 days off,
maximize nitrification but minimize
nitrogen removal. As the drying time
during the cycle increases, the
potential for nitrogen removal
increases. For example, the application
schedule at Hollister, California, is 1
to 2 days on and 14 to 21 days off [6].
At Phoenix, Arizona, maximum nitrogen
removal occurred when 10 days on was
followed by 10 to 20 days off.
Comparison With Existing Systems
Because so few rapid infiltration
systems have been designed for
wastewater treatment and only a few ofthe others have been monitored, it is
necessary to compare any proposed design
with a few existing systems. The
existing systems include those at
Hollister, California [6]; Phoenix,
Arizona [7]; Lake George, New York [8];
and Boulder, Colorado (pilot study).
At Hollister, California, the long-
term application rate after 30 years
averaged 4.2 cm/d [6], Tests were made
of the infiltration rates with both
clear water and primary effluent using
cylinder infiltrometers. With clear
water, the infiltration rate averaged 85
cm/d while with primary effluent the
rate was 98 cm/d (no statistical
significance to the difference in
rates). The long-term operating rate is
therefore about 4 to 5% of the measured
infiltration rate. Other ratios of long-
term operating rates to measured
infiltration rates are presented in
Table 2.
Table 2. Ratios of Operating Rates
of Application to Measured
Infiltration Rates for Rapid
Infiltration Systems [1]
Soil
texture class
Sand
Gravelly sand
Loamy Band
sand gravelType of wastewater
Oily cooling water
Secondary kraft mill
Secondary kraft mill
Secondary municipalRatio, % operating
rate to
infiltration rate
19.0-31.0
0.5-1.0
2.0-12.7
4.6-6.2
OVERLAND FLOW
Application Rate
Overland flow is a form of a fixed-
film biological reactor. The
application rate should therefore be
predictable on the basis of the kinetics
of treatment and the required treatment
levels. For example, high-quality
effluent has been produced in research
projects using these application rates:
raw wastewater, 10 cm/wk; primary
effluent, 15 to 20 cm/wk; and secondary
effluent, 25 to 40 cm/wk [9]. With all
three application rates, the runoff
contained less than 10 mg/L BOD on the
average. Slopes were 2 to 4% and 36 m
long.
Smith is studying the kinetics of
overland flow treatment in an attempt to
predict the necessary detention time and
application rate that will provide a
391specified level of treatment [10]. This
type of research and full documentation
of existing research and demonstration
findings are needed for a more complete
understanding of the overland flow
process.
For the present state of the art,
application rates are determined from
comparisons with existing systems and
research projects. For raw wastewater,
7.5 to 10 cm/wk should be considered.
For primary effluent, 10 to 20 cm/wk
could be used, depending on the level of
overall treatment required. For
secondary effluent, either from ponds or
conventional secondary facilities, the
need is either for polishing (further
reductions for BOD and suspended solids)
or for nutrient removal. For polishing,
20 to 40 cm/wk could be considered. For
nutrient removal, only 10 to 20 cm/wk
may be possible because adequate
detention time is necessary for
denitrification.
Application Schedule
Experience with existing systems
has led to application schedules of 6 to
8 hours on and 16 to 18 hours off over 5
to 6 d/wk. At Melbourne, Australia,
however, the application has been
continuous rather than intermittent.
The optimum cycle will depend on the
climate and the BOD loading. Other
considerations include the harvesting of
the grass and the potential for
propagation of insects.
Comparison With Existing Systems
Hydraulic loading rates for
overland flow have been increased, in
research projects, as more experience is
gained with the process. For example,
Thomas began treating raw, comminuted
wastewater in 1971 at rates of 7.4, .8.6,
and 9.8 cm/wk. Hydraulic loading rates
for the more recent research projects
are summarized in Table 3.
Full-scale industrial systems at
Paris, Texas, and at Davis and
Sebastopol, California, have been of
value in determining successful
application rates and cycles at new
facilities. Research and demonstration
at Ada, Oklahoma, has been most
instrumental in determining loading
rates for various types of municipal
wastewater [11]. Research and
demonstration projects at Utica,
Mississippi [12], and Hanover, New
Hampshire [13], have added climatic,wastewater, and management variations to
the body of knowledge on overland flow
technology.
Table 3. Selected Hydraulic Loading
Rates for Overland Flow
Research Projects [1, 12, 13]
Ada,
Oklahoma
Ada,
Oklahoma
Pauls Valley,
Oklahoma
Utica,
Mississippi
Hanover,
New HampshireType of
effluent
applied
Raw
comminuted
Trickling
filter
Oxidation
pond
Oxidation
pond
Primary and
secondaryHydraulic
loading
rates,
cm/wk
10-20
25-40
25
6-12
SDegree
of
slope,
%
2-4
2-4
2-3
2-8
5Slope
length,
m
36
36
45
45
21
CONCLUSIONS
It should be possible to determine
application rates for land treatment
systems on a case-by-case basis using
data on soil infiltration rates,
climate, wastewater characteristics, and
required treatment performance.
Unfortunately, neither the relationship
between the infiltration rate and
loading rate nor the relationship
between the loading rate and treatment
performance have been developed to the
point where they can be used in design
without requiring comparisons with other
land treatment systems. Research and
development in this area is promising;
but more data relating design loadings
to field conditions and treatment
performance are needed.
REFERENCES
1. Process Design Manual for Land
Treatment of Municipal Wastewater.
Environmental Protection Agency.
EPA 625/1-77-008. October 1977.
2. Kardos, L.T. £_£ £JL_. Renovation of
Secondary Effluent for Reuse as a
Water Resource. Environmental
Protection Agency, Office of
Research and Development. EPA-
660/2-74-016. February 1974.
3923. Iskandar, I.K. e_t _al. Wastewater
Renovation by a Prototype Slow
Infiltration Land Treatment System.
Corps of Engineers, U.S. Army Cold
Regions Research and Engineering
Laboratory. CRREL Report 76-19.
Hanover, N.H. June 1976.
4. Bouwer, H. and R.C. Rice. Modified
Tube-Diameters for the Double Tube
Apparatus. Soil Sci. Soc. Amer.
Proc. 31:437-439. 1967.
5. Lance, J.C. and C.P. Gerba.
Nitrogen, Phosphate and Virus
Removal from Sewage Water During
Land Filtration. In: Progress in
Water Technology. Vol. 9, Pergamon
Press. Great Britain. 1977.
6. Pound, CE., R.W. Crites, and J.V.
Olson. Long Term Effects of Land
Application of Domestic Wastewater,
Hollister, California, Rapid
Infiltration Site. Environmental
Protection Agency. EPA-600/2-78-
084. February 1978.
7. Bouwer, H. ^t £^. Renovating
Secondary Sewage by Ground Water
Recharge with Infiltration Basins.
Environmental Protection Agency,
Office of Research and Monitoring.
Project No. 16060 DRV. March 1972.
8. Aulenbach, D.B., T.P. Glavin, and
J.A. Romero Rojas. Protracted
Recharge of Treated Sewage into
Sand, Part I - Quality Changes in
Vertical Transport Through the
Sand. Groundwater. 12(3): 161-169,
May-June 1974.
9. Bledsoe, B.E. and R.E. Thomas.
Effects of Pretreating Domestic
Wastewater on Hydraulic Loading of
Overland Flow. Presented at the
69th Annual Meeting of the American
Society of Agronomy. Los Angeles,
Calif. November 14, 1977.
10. Smith, R.G. Personal
Communication. May 1978.
11. Thomas, R.E., B. Bledsoe, and K.
Jackson. Overland Flow Treatment
of Raw Wastewater with Enhanced
Phosphorus Removal. EPA-600/2-76-
131. Environmental Protection
Agency, Office of Research and
Development. June 1976.12. Lee, C.R., et_ £l. Highlights of
Research on Overland Flow for
Advanced Treatment of Wastewater.
U.S. Army Engineer Waterways
Experiment Station. Miscellaneous
Paper Y-76-6. November 1976.
13. Jenkins, T.F. e_t _al_. Performance
of Overland Flow Land Treatment in
Cold Climates. Vol. 2.
International Symposium, Land
Treatment of Wastewater, Hanover,
N.H. August 20-25, 1978.
393DESIGN CRITERIA
UPTAKE OF NUTRIENTS BY PLANTS IRRIGATED
WITH MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER EFFLUENT
C. E. Clapp, USDA-SEA-FR, University of Minnesota
A. J. Palazzo, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, CRREL
W. E. Larson, USDA-SEA-FR, University of Minnesota
G. C. Marten, USDA-SEA-FR, University of Minnesota
D. R. Linden, USDA-SEA-FR, University of Minnesota
We present comparisons of plant
nutrient uptake by corn and forage
grasses when these crops were irrigated
with secondary municipal wastewater
effluent or treated with inorganic fer-
tilizer. Characteristic analyses of
effluent from various locations are
given for the macro plant nutrients as
well as for quality indicators, The
importance of the presence of varying
amounts of N, P, and K in effluent stud-
ies is discussed. Micro elements in
effluent are considered for their use to
meet nutrient requirements of these crops
as well as for their potential for envi-
ronmental contamination. Total dry
matter produced when combined with the
content of an element in the harvested
part of the crop directly reflects the
quantity of an. element removed. We
graphically present total seasonal N
uptake by corn irrigated with effluent
in Minnesota, including comparisons with
data from Pennsylvania and Florida exper-
iments. Similar N uptake curves are
plotted for reed canarygrass and other
selected forage grasses grown at four
locations. Nitrogen uptake with time
within seasons by reed canarygrass during
the normal first cutting period is graph-
ically illustrated. Grass from control
and high effluent treatments accumulated
N linearly over the entire period, but N
uptake was curvilinear when we used a
low effluent rate. Tables of data in-
cluding crop yields, amount applied, and
uptake for P, K, Ca, Mg, and Na are pre-
sented and discussed.INTRODUCTION
The renovation of treated municipal
wastewater (secondary effluent) by irri-
gation of plants growing in soil has
been adequately demonstrated. The goal
Is for optimum agricultural benefits as
well as providing most efficient renova-
tion of effluent without adverse environ-
mental effects. The major advantage of
applying effluent to growing crops is
the possibility of recycling part of the
plant nutrients. Secondary effluent con-
tains, on the average, about 20 rag/1
nitrogen, 10 mg/1 phosphorus, and 15 mg/1
potassium (Pound and Crites, 1973). To
equal or surpass normal plant require-
ments , an application of 250 ha-cm/yr of
effluent would provide 500 kg N/ha, 250
kg P/ha, and 375 kg K/ha.
A conference proceedings edited by
Sopper and Kardos (1973a) covers land
application of wastewater to agronomic
and forest crops through 1972. They
emphasize the research at Pennsylvania
State University which involved studies
of plant nutrient uptake and balances,
In addition to soil responses and water
quality changes. Bouwer and Chaney
(1974) reviewed treatment of wastewater
on land including fate of wastewater
constituents in soil, crop response and
system designs. The Cornell Agricultur-
al Waste Management Conference Proceed-
ings of 1976 and 1977 (Loehr, 1977a and
1977b) present several papers concerned
with plant uptake of nutrients contained
in wastewater effluent.
395Our objective in this paper is to
provide a comparison of total uptake of
nutrients by corn and perennial forages
irrigated with secondary municipal waste-
water effluent.
EFFLUENT COMPOSITION
Secondary municipal wastewater efflu-
ent characteristics (Table 1) used in
experiments compared herein show a simi-
larity in most constituents. Where vari-
ations exist for a given location from
the 'typical' values of Pound and Crites
(1973), some' unusual situation of treat-
ment plant modification is usually givenas explanation. Only the macro nutrients,
N, F, K, Ca, and Mg are discussed in
detail in this paper. Sulphur data is
usually not reported in the literature
probably because of analytical difficulty.
Sodium and calculated sodium absorption
ratio (SÂR) values are shown since some
effluents have high Na contents which may
lead to problems in soil structure and
permeability or in competition with K for
exchange and uptake. Electrical conduc-
tivity (EC) and pH values when available
are also compared as indicators of efflu-
ent quality. The micro nutrients includ-
ing Fe, B, Mn, Mo, Cl, Zn, and Cu are
present in effluent at very low concen-
trations and usually do not show signifi-
Table 1. Characteristic analyses of secondary municipal wastewater effluent
from various locations.
Constituent
Nitrogen, total
NH4-N
N03-N
Phosphorus, total
PO4-P
Potassium
Calcium
Magnesium
Sodium
SAR
EC
PHMinn*
20.8
16.5
1.5
8.4
7.6
12
71
24
274
7.0
1940
8.2Penn
23.7
12.9
5.0
6.0
16
25
13
28
1.1
7.8Source
NH*
25.2
18.0
5,2
6.3
5.8
11
13
3
45
3.0
400
7.2Mass§
17.9
7.5
9.2
8.5
7.7
9
8
4
38
2.8Alberta
13.3
1.4
3.9
138^
147
3.1
*Apple Valley, MN; USDA-SEA-FR, and University of Minnesota, St. Paul, 1974-77.
(Larson, 1974-77),
tState College, PA: Pennsylvania State University, 1967-71. (Sopper and Kardos,
1973b; Hook and Kardos, 1977).
•CRREL, Hanover, NH; U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 1974-76. (Palazzo and McKitn,
1978).
gOtis Air Force Base, MA: Woods Hole Océanographie Institution, 1975-76.
(Deese et al., 1977).
ifTaber, Alberta, Canada; Agriculture Canada, Lethbridge, 1972-75. (Bole and
Bell, 1978). Ca concentration - Ca + Mg.
396cant increases in plant uptake when com-
pared with fertilized control treatments.
Nitrogen
Emphasis in effluent studies is
placed on N because its transformations
in the soil-plant system encompass the
whole N cycle. The main consideration
from the standpoint of N content of
effluent is the relationship between crop
uptake and quantity applied. Forma of N
are important, with the effluents com-
pared here (Table 1) giving ratios of
NH4~N:NO3-N:organic N ranging from 79:7:
14 (Minnesota) to 42:51:7 (Massachusetts).
A high NH4-N to NO3-N ratio appears to be
desirable from both the soil storage and
water quality aspects. The NHA-N form
will allow exchangeable NH4 to be stored
on clay and organic matter sites as well
as requiring microbial transformation to
NO3-N for either N uptake or leaching
into ground water. The Pennsylvania
project experienced problems with yield
reductions for corn and high NO3-N leach-
ing when effluent-N changed to higher
NO3-N levels in 1971. A few attempts
have been made to account for N in the
f«iositl-*sit«T^erop system by measuring
characteristic N components in a field
experiment (Sopper and Kardos, 1973;
Clapp et al., 1977; Deese et al., 1977).
Excessive N may have adverse effects
such as reducing yield and quality of
fruit crops, delaying maturity of cotton,
lowering sugar content of sugar beets
and starch content of potatoes, and
causing lodging of grain crops (Bouwer
and Chaney, 1974). However, feed quali-
ty of forage grasses and corn fodder was
not reduced when these crops were grown
on land irrigated with effluent supply-
ing large amounts of N (Sopper and
Kardos, 1973; Marten et al., 1978).
Phosphorus
In nutritional importance to crops,
P ranks second only to N. Some soils
require additions of P fertilizer to
sustain plant growth. Effluents, when
applied in sufficient amounts to satisfy
N needs for plants, will often provide P
in excess of crop uptake (Table 1).
Most soils have the capability of sorting
large quantities of P and thus prevent
serious losses of this key. eutrophication
nutrient into surface waters. The long-
term effects of P application are usually
associated with determining when the soil
sorption capacity will be exceeded, and
thus shorten the life of a land treatmentsite.
Potassium
Potassium is present in significant
concentrations in effluents (Table 1).
Effluent application experiments have not
been designed to study K interactions and
uptake because it is not a serious water
contaminant. Usually fertilizer K is
applied in ample amounts, in addition to
K in effluent, so as not to limit plant
growth.
Calcium, Magnesium, Sodium
The nutrients Ca and Mg usually
vary in concentration in effluents with
respect to water source. Waters from
high-lime soil areas contain higher con-
centrations of Ca and Mg (Minnesota and
Alberta, Table 1), whereas, those from
acid soil areas usually contain lesser
amounts (New Hampshire and Massachusetts).
Levels of Ca and Mg also may be affected
by food processing or sludge treatments.
Sodium, while not a nutrient, is con-
tained in effluent in varying amounts,
but appears to be highest where NaCl is
used in water softeners to reduce water
hardness due to Ca and Mg (Minnesota) or
where soils are normally high in Na
(western U.S.).
Micro Nutrients
Micro elements in effluent as nutri-
ents and as potential environmental con-
taminants were studied by Sopper and
Kardos (1973b) — Mn, Fe, Cu, Zn, B, and
Cl; Sidle et al. (1976) — Zn and Cu;
Deese et al, (1977) — Mn, Fe, Zn, and Cu;
Bole and Bell (1978) — Mn, Fe, Zn, and
Cu; and Dowdy et al. (1978) — Mn, Fe,
Zn, Cu, and B. The major concern has
been to determine whether plant uptake
of the metals would occur at phytotoxic
levels or at levels harmful to the food
chain. Sidle et al. (1976) concluded
that uptake of heavy metals by reed
canarygrass and corn silage from effluent
application is not a hazard to the food
chain except for Cu on reed canarygrass.
These crops, however, received sewage
sludge as well as effluent which
increased the metals content considerably
over effluent alone. The results of
Dowdy et al. (1978) indicated that in
spite of high effluent loading rates,
trace metals content of corn and grasses,
in general, did not change appreciably
from fertilized control treatments.
However, Cu concentrations in corn and
397grasses decreased almost to plant defi-
ciency levels. Effluent additions also
caused reduced Fe and Mn concentrations,
but increased B levels. From limited
studies of uptake of micro nutrients from
effluent, one may conclude that removal
of these elements is less than 10% of the
annual application. These quantities
should not pose a hazard to crop growth
or to the food chain.
CROP YIELDS
When municipal effluents are applied
to agricultural land, the primary objec-
tive becomes their use as a source of
plant nutrients for maximum crop produc-
tion. Similarly, the most effective
method of removing elements is to harvest
the plants that have taken up the ele-
ments, and remove them from the area.
Crop yields as an indicator of effective-
ness of an effluent irrigation system are
influenced by many additional factors
other than those directly related to the
effluent, e.g., climate, soil physical
and chemical properties, drainage, crop
species, crop and soil management, and
irrigation rates and schedule. Total
dry matter produced (crop yield) when
combined with the content of an element
in the harvested part of the crop direct-
ly reflects the quantity of an element
removed by a crop irrigation system.
PLANT COMPOSITION AND UPTAKE
For the macro nutrients, N, P, and
K, elemental concentrations in harvested
crop tissues have wide ranges. Means,
minimum, and maximum levels for corn
fodder (mature whole plants) are 1.4% N,
0.8 to 2.4; 0.3% P, 0.2 to 0.5; and
0.9% K, 0.8 to 1.1 (Miller, 1958).
Perennial cool season grasses fall with-
in the ranges of 0.5 to 4.5% N, 0.1 to
0.9% P, and 0.5 to 4.1% K. Other ele-
mental concentrations for macro and
micro nutrients for selected crops are
cited by Miller (1958), Rickard (1972),
and Kardos et al. (1977), Many of the
mean nutrient values included in Miller'b
report are too low for adequately ferti-
lized crops. It is misleading to use
these data In calculating potential
nutrient uptake based on average crop
yields and effluent composition. Our
Minnesota effluent experiments indicate
more realistic concentration values of
N, P, and K, respectively, for corn
fodder of 1.2% N, 0.3% P, and 1.0% K; forreed canarygrass of 3.0% N, 0.4% P, and
2.7% K (Larson, 1974-77).
Total quantities of N removed by
crop uptake under fertilizer systems may
range from as little as 60 kg N/ha/yr
for small grains to as much as 400
kg/ha/yr for reed canarygrass. The same
respective crops will remove from 9 to
62 kg P/ha/yr and from 16 to 380 kg
K/ha/yr (Fried and iKoeahaarte» 1967).
For other macro nutrients, Ca uptake can
range from 10 kg/ha/yr for grasses to
170 kg/ha/yr for legumes and Mg uptake
can vary from 8 kg/ha/yr for small grains
to 25 kg/ha/yr for corn. Kardos et al.
(1977) suggested that Na uptake is rela-
tively low (< 5 kg/ha/yr) for forage
crops fertilized with inorganic elements
or with effluents containing low Na con-
centrations. However, Larson (1974-77)
reported much higher Na uptake values
(35 kg/ha/yr for corn and 60 kg/ha/yr
for tall fescue) by plants irrigated
with effluents having high Na concentra-
tions. The micro nutrients Mn, Fe, Cu,
Zn, and B are usually in microgram per
gram quantities, giving crop uptake
values of from 40 mg Cu/ha/yr to 400 g
Mn/ha/yr (Allaway, 1968).
Nitrogen
Figure 1 describes total N uptake
by corn irrigated with effluent for a 4-
year period in Minnesota. Two effluent
rates (^ 5 and 10 cm/wk) with varying N
concentrations produced N applications
ranging from 150 to 630 kg/ha. Uptake
of N varied from 110 to 145 kg/ha at the
lower N applied levels (67% uptake) then
appeared to reach a constant value of
180 kg/ha (30% uptake) as applications
increased. Control blocks fertilized
with NH4NO3 showed a mean of 300 kg N/ha
applied with 175 kg N/ha uptake (58%)
for 3 of the 4 years. In 1975, a combin-
ation of favorable conditions produced
high yields and N concentrations to give
an uptake of 75%. Calculated points from
the Pennsylvania (Sopper and Kardos,
1973b; Hook and Kardos, 1977) and Florida
(Overman and Nguy, 1975) studies are
plotted for comparison. The Pennsylvania
data were quite variable over the 1968-73
period, and included N applied and N up-
take ranging from 259 and 46 kg/ha in
1968 to 176 and 249 kg/ha in 1969, re-
spectively. By 1973, 233 kg N/ha applied
gave only 67 kg N/ha uptake, as corn
fodder yields decreased to 8.7 mt/ha.
The authors suggested several possible
reasons for these decreases, including
weed competition, applied N not meeting
398peak demands, and N mineralization rates
too slow to supply adequate N. We sug*
gest the additional factor of effluent N"
changing from predominantly'NH^-N to
NO3-N in 1972, resulting in leaching of
NO3-N below the plant root zone. The
Florida data were taken from a study
designed to relate N uptake to N applied
at several stages of corn growth. The
means for two application rates, 5 and
20 cm/wk, were calculated from the
authors' N uptake curves.
350
200
150
100
50
0*
-
o S
/°CORN
• MINN.. CONTROL
O MINN., IBM 77
^ PENN, 1968-73
• FLA.. 1072
1 1 1 1f
O
\
100 200 300 «0 500
NITROGEN APPLIED (kg/ha)600
Figure 1. Total seasonal nitrogen up-
take by corn irrigated with secondary
municipal wastewater effluent.
Figure 2 compares total N uptake by
reed canarygrass at four locations as a
function of N applied. The Minnesota
data cover a range in N applied from 235
to 800 kg N/ha and N uptake from 235 kg
N/ha (100% uptake) to 420 kg N/ha (52%
uptake). Control blocks fertilized with
NH4NO3 have a mean of 308 kg N/ha applied
with 296 kg N/ha uptake for the 4-year
period (96%). The Pennsylvania values
(Hook and Kardos, 1977) are grouped about
a 4-year mean of 630 kg N/ha applied and
390 kg N/ha uptake (62%). The 4-year
data from Alberta (Bole and Bell, 1978)
are derived mainly from lower N applica-
tions when the N content in the effluent
decreased by 50% between the first and
second years. Applied and uptake N
ranged from 52 and 59 kg/ha (113% uptake)
to 410 and 237 kg/ha (58% uptake). The
Massachusetts (Deese et al,, 1977) data
were derived from a figure of accumula-
tive N applied plotted against accumula-
tive N uptake. For three application
rates during 1976, values for N appliedand N uptake ranged from 300 and 190
kg/ha to 150 and 85 kg/ha with a constant
uptake of 46%. Insufficient data were
provided for further comparisons.
o500
400
300
200
100
0-
-
-
D
-7DD J
/n
M LJ
••
I• REED CANARYORASS
•
o
•
•
1MINN.. CONTROL
MINN., 1974-77
PENN., 1967-70
ALBERTA. 1972-75
MASS., 1978
1 1
200 400 600
NITROGEN APPLIED (kg/ha)800
Figure 2. Total seasonal nitrogen up-
take by reed canarygrass irrigated
with secondary municipal wastewater
effluent.
Figure 3 represents N uptake with
time for reed canarygrass irrigated with
effluent at 6 and 11 cm/wk during 1976
compared with fertilized controls.
Samples were taken from the first cutting
of each of the 4-time, 3-tlme, and 2-time
cutting schedules (Larson, 1974-77).
Sharply increasing yields combined with
decreasing N contents give N uptake
curves which are still increasing for
the control and high effluent treatments,
but leveling off for the low treatment.
These data may provide valuable input
information for testing computer models
of effluent water quality.
Total N uptake by selected forage
grasses other than reed canarygrass at
three locations is compared with N
applied (Figure 4). The uptake curve is
similar to the one for reed canarygrass
(Figure 2). The forage mixture in the
New Hampshire study (Palazzo and McKim,
1978) received up to 1120 kg N/ha with
an uptake of 450 kg/ha (40%).
399200
100
50REED CANARYGRASS
MINN. -1976
20
-MAY-30
-K-10
CUHING DATE-JUNE •20 30
-H
Figure 3, Nitrogen uptake with time in
the fir*t crop of reed canarygrass
irrigated with secondary municipal
wastewater effluent.ë500
400
300
S 200
100B
FORAHE HRAMH
A ««PI -TIMOTHY
• Mim - IRBHEIRA»
O HHM.-TlkLLFEUUE
A HH.-MIXTURE
• ALSERTA - UROMEORASS
400 «00 800
NITROGEN APPLIED (kg/ha)1000 1200
Figure 4. Total seasonal nitrogen
uptake by selected forage grasses
irrigated with secondary municipal
wastewater effluent.
Phosphorus
Yields and P uptake for several
crops at various locations as a function
of effluent application rate are compared
in Table 2. Data were obtained from the
same experiments as for the N comparisons
presented in Figures 1 to 4. Results for
fertilized control treatments are report-
ed whenever available (0.0 cm/wk). For
most crops and locations, yields
increased with increasing effluent appli-
cation rates. Yields from controls were
higher than or equal to those from the
high rates of effluent. Uptake of P
remained quite constant within species,
however percentage uptake always
decreased with increasing amounts of P.
Potassium
Uptake of K for several crops at
various locations (Table 3) ranged from
108 kg/ha (68% uptake) on reed canary-
grass at Massachusetts to 345 kg/ha
(133% uptake) on the mixed forages at
New Hampshire. Where lower amounts of K
were applied (Pennsylvania and New Hamp-
shire) , K uptake exceeded 100%.
Calcium, Magnesium, Sodium
Uptake data summarized for Ca anjâ.
Mg (Table 4) show values within the
ranges reported by Fried and Broeshart
(1967). These elements are difficult to
study, in an effluent irrigation experi-
ment because liming and fertilizer treat-
ments often confound separation of thenutrient source. Uptake of Na has been
included because of the high concentra-
tions in the effluents applied at Minne-
sota. The Na uptake by corn, reed
canarygrass, and tall fescue (34, 38,
and 58 kg/ha, respectively) are the high-
est values reported for municipal waste-
water effluent experiments.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Contribution from the Soil and Water
Management and Plant Science Research
Units, North Central Region, Science and
Education Administration-Federal Research,
U.S. Department of Agriculture, St. Paul,
MN, and the U.S. Army Cold Regions Re-
search and Engineering Laboratory,
Hanover, NH, in cooperation with the
Departments of Soil Science and Agronomy
and Plant Genetics, University of Minne-
sota, St. Paul. Minnesota Agricultural
Experiment Station Paper No. 10,376,
Scientific Journal Series. Appreciation
is expressed for financial support of
this research in part by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers. We also acknowlegë
the supply of field facilities by the
Metropolitan Waste Control Commission,
St. Paul, MN.
UooTable 2. Crop dry matter yields and uptake of phosphorus for several crops at
various locations as a function of application rate of secondary
municipal wastewater effluent.
Crop Location Years Rate Yield Applied Uptake Uptake
cm/wk mt/ha/yr •—4cg/ha/yi
Corn
Reed Canarygrass
Smooth Bromegrass
Timothy
Tall Fescue
**
Mixed ForagesPenn
Penn
Penn
Penn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Penn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Alberta
Alberta
Mass
Alberta
Alberta
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
NH
NH1970
1969-70
1968-71
1972-73
1974-77
1974-77
1974-77
1967-70
1974-77
1974-77
1974-77
1972-75
1972-75
1976
1972-75
1972-75
1974-75
1974-75
1974-75
1974-75
1974-75
1974-75
1974-76
1974-76
1974-76
1974-75
1974-75
*Zea mays L. (Varieties: Penn - 'Pa.0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
0,0
5.1
9.4
5.0
0.0
7.0
12.6
3.0
6.0
5.0
3,0
6,0
0,0
6.5
11.4
0.0
6.5
11.4
0.0
6.3
11,3
5,0
15.0
890-S'10.7
13.4
9.3
7.7
16,0
12.7
13.4
12.4
11.1
9.7
12.2
5.8
9,4
6.0
6.0
10,0
9.6
7.4
7,9
8.8
7.6
8.6
11.6
10.9
12.0
10.2
13.3
and 'Pa.22
46
64
76
104
190
162
76
138
248
27
54
150
27
54
152
158
in
152
158
277
101
151
268
94
262
602-A1; Minn24
34
29
34
39
35
37
56
38
42
54
26
36
24
23
35
44
34
43
34
32
40
40
43
49
32
44154
63
53
51
34
19
35
50
31
22
96
67
16
85
65
29
22
16
22
20
14
40
28
18
34
17
- 'Minhybrid
4201', 'Pioneer 3780', 'Northrup King PX-488* and 'PX-476'),
fPhalaris arundinacea L. (Varieties: Penn - not given; Minn ^ 'Rise', and
"NCR-Clf; Mass - not given).
tBromus inermis Leyss. (Varities: Alberta - not given; Minn - 'Fox').
SPhleum pratense L. (Variety: Minn - 'Climax').
If Festuca arundinacea Schreb, (Variety: Minn - 'Kentucky 31').
**Phalaris arundinacea L,, Phleum pratense L. var. 'Climax*, BrOmus inermis
Leyss. var 'Lincoln'.
U01Table 3, Crop dry matter yields and uptake of potassium for several crops at
various locations as a function of application rate of secondary
municipal wastewater effluent.
Crop*
Corn
Reed Canarygrass
Smooth Bromegrass
Timothy
Tall Fescue
Mixed ForagesLocation
Penn
Penn
Penn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Penn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Mass
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
NH
NHYears
1970
1969-70
1969-70
1974-77
1974-77
1974-77
1967-70
1974-77
1974-77
1974-77
1976
1974-75
1974-75
1974-75
1974-75
1974-75
1974-75
1974-76
1974-76
1974-76
1974-75
1974-75Rate
cm/wk
0.0
2.5
5.0
0.0
5.1
9.4
5.0
0.0
7.0
12.6
5,0
0.0
6.5
11.4
0,0
6.5
11.4
0.0
6.3
11.3
5.0
15.0Yield
mt/ha/yr
10.7
13.4
14.2
16,0
12.7
13.4
12.4
11.1
9.7
12,2
6,0
9.6
7.4
7.9
8.8
7.6
8.6
11.6
10.9
12.0
10.2
13.3Applied Uptake
kg/ha/yr-—
57
111
462
459
532
304
462
516
628
159
421
412
443
421
412
443
505
485
557
127
260110
144
122
162
119
131
292
306
260
335
108
284
214
230
257
225
250
318
269
306
236
345Uptake
%
251
110
35
26
25
96
66
50
53
68
67
52
52
61
55
56
63
55
55
186
133
*See footnotes to Table 2.Table 4. Crop dry matter yields and uptake of calcium, magnesium, and sodium
for several crops at various locations as a function of application
rate of secondary municipal wastewater effluent.
Crop
Corn
Reed Canarygrass
Smooth Bromegrass
Timothy
Tall FescueLocation
Penn
Penn
Penn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Penn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Mass
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
Minn
MinnYears
1970
1969-70
1969-70
1974-76
1974-76
1974-76
1967-70
1974-77
1974-77
1974-77
1976
1974-75
1974-75
1974-75
1974-75
1974-75
1974-75
1974-76
1974-76
1974-76Rate
cm/wk
0.0
2.5
5.0
0,0
5,0
9,0
5.0
0.0
7.0
12.6
5.0
0,0
6.5
11,4
0.0
6.5
11,4
0.0
6,3
11.3Yield
mt/ha/yr
10.7
13.4
14.2
16,0
13.1
14,0
12.4
11.1
9.7
12.2
6.0
9,6
7.4
7.9
8,8
7.6
8.6
11.6
10.9
12.0CaUptake
MENa
kg/ha/yr-,
47
34
24
37
25
26
55
38
37
51
10
34
32
35
35
32
41
51
43
5017
26
23
37
28
24
40
40
32
38
14
26
18
22
24
18
22
48
32
340,1
2
2
9
25
34
4
6
24
38
2
5
18
20
5
16
24
15
37
58
*See footnotes to Table 2.
REFERENCES
1. Allaway, W. H. 1968, Agronomic con-
trols over environmental cycling
of trace elements. Adv. Agron.
20:235-274.
2. Bole, J. R. and R. G. Bell, 1978.
Land application of municipal
sewage waste water: yield and chem-
ical composition of forage crops.
J. Environ. Qual. 7:222-226,
3. Bouwer, H. and R. L. Chaney. 1974.
Land treatment of wastewater.
Adv. Agron. 26:133-176.
4. Clapp, C. E., D. R. Linden, W. E.
Larson, G. C. Marten, and J, R.
Nylund. 1977. Nitrogen removal
from municipal wastewater effluent
by a crop irrigation system.p. 139-150. ^ii Land as a waste
management alternative, R. C.
Loehr (éd.). Ann Arbor Science
Publishers, Inc., Ann Arbor, MI.
5. Deese, P. L., R, F. Vaccaro, B. H.
Ketchum, P.C. Bowker, and M. R.
Dennett. 1977. Ionic distribution
in a spray irrigation system,
p. 39-66. _Iii Food, fertilizer,
and agricultural residues, R. C.
Loehr (éd.). Ann Arbor Science
Publishers, Inc., Ann Arbor, MI.
6. Dowdy, R. H., G. C. Marten, C. E.
Clapp, and W. E. Larson, 1978.
Heavy metal content and mineral
nutrition of corn and perennial
grasses irrigated with municipal
wastewater. _Ln Intern. Sym. Land
Treatment Wastewater Proc., Hanover,
NH, 20-25 Aug. 1978.
U037. Fried, M. and H. Broeshart. 1967.
The soil-plant system in relation
to inorganic nutrition. Academic
Press, New York. 358p,
8. Hook, J. E. and L. T. Kardos. 1977.
Nitrate relationships in the Penn
State "living filter" system,
p. 181-198. fri Land as a waste
management alternative, R. C.
Loehr (éd.). Ann Arbor Science
Publishers, Inc., Ann Arbor, MI.
9. Kardos, L. T., C. E, Scarsbrook and
V. V. Volk. 1977. Recycling
elements in wastes through soil-
plant systems, p. 300-324. l£
Soils for management of organic
wastes and waste waters, L. F.
Elliott and F. J. Stevenson (eds.).
ASA/CSSA/SSSA, Madison, WI.
10. Larson, W. E. 1974-77. Unpublished
data. USDA-SEA-FR, St. Paul
Annual Reports.
11. Loehr, R. C. (éd.). 1977a. Land
as a waste management alternative,
Proc. 1976 Cornell Ag, Waste Mgmt.
Conf. Ann Arbor Science Publishers
Inc., Ann Arbor, MI. 811p.
12. Loehr, R. C. (éd.), 1977b. Food,
fertilizer, and agricultural res-*
idues, Proc. 1977 Cornell Ag.
Waste Mgmt. Conf. Ann Arbor
Science Publishers, Inc., Ann Arbor,
MI.
13. Marten, G. C., R. H. Do#j0y, W. E.
Larson,and C. E. Clapp. 1978.
Feed quality of forages irrigated
with municipal sewage effluent.
In Intern. Sym. Land Treatment
Wastewater Proc, Hanover, NH,
20-25 Aug. 1978.
14. Miller, D. F. (éd.). 1958. Compos-
ition of cereal grains and forages.
Nat. Acad. Sci. - Nat. Res. Council,
Publ. 585. 663p.
15. Overman, A. R. and A. Nguy. 1975,
Growth response and nutrient uptake
by forage crops under effluent
irrigation. Commun. Soil Science
and Plant Analysis 6:81-93.16. Palazzo, A, J, and H, L, McKim.
1978. The growth and nutrient
uptake of forage grasses when re-
ceiving various application rates
of wastewater. In_ Intern. Sym.
Land Treatment Wastewater Proc.,
Hanover, NH, 20-25 Aug. 1978.
17. Found, C, E, and %, W, Crites.
1973. Characteristics of municipal
effluents. p, 49-61, In_ Proc.
Joint Conf, Recycling Municipal
Sludges and Effluents on Land,
July 9-13, Champaign, IL.
18. Rickard, W. 1972. Botanical com-
ponents involved in land disposal
of wastewater effluent, p. 94-116.
In Wastewater management by dis-
posal on the land, S. C. Reed
(co-ordj. U. S. Army Cold Regions
Res. Eng. Lab. Spec, Rep. 171,
Hanover, NH.
19. Sidle, R. C, J. E. Hook and L. T,
Kardos. 1976. Heavy metals app-
lication and plant uptake in a
land disposal system for wastes-
water. J. Environ. Qual. 5:97T-1O1.
20. Sopper, W. E. and L. T. Kardos (eds.)
1973a. Recycling treated municipal
wastewater and sludge through
forest and cropland. The Pennsyl-
vania State University Press,
University Park, PA. 479p.
21. Sopper, W. E. and L. T. Kardos,
1973b, Vegetation responses to
irrigation with treated municipal
wastewater. p. 271-294, _In^
Recycling treated municipal wastes
water and sludge through forest and
cropland. W. E. Sopper and L. T.
Kardos (eds.). The Pennsylvania
State University Press, University
Park, PA.
UoUDESIGN CRITERIA
STORAGE CAPACITY AND LOADING RATES
FOR NITROGEN AND PHOSPHORUS
P. F. Pratt, University of California, Riverside
F. E. Broadbent, University of California, Davis
J. C. Ryden, University of California, Riverside
ABSTRACT
Removal of N and P in harvested
crops and capacities for storage of
these elements in the soil are discussed
as important factors in determining
loading rates for wastewater on lands.
Stqrage mechanisms for N are irrevers-
ible trapment of NH, in clays, accumula-
tion of NH, as an adsorbed but exchange-
able ion and accumulation in the organic
form. Loading rates for N should be
adjusted to storage capacities, removal
in harvested crops, and the amount of N
lost by volatilization as NH and as NjO
and N from denitrification. Storage of
P is By reaction with inorganic con-
stituents in the soil. Sorption of P on
surfaces is used as the dominant soil
reaction and sorption concepts are used
to develop an empirical model for pre-
dicting the capacity of soils to store
the P added in excess of removal in
crops for a low rate system.
INTRODUCTION
Of the 16 elements recognized as
essential for the growth of.plants,
nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) are the
two that are most frequently deficient
in soils and are the dominant elements
in inorganic commercial fertilizers.
These two elements are also of signifi-
cance in water quality problems. Both
are essential for biological productiv-
ity in waters and are thus involved in
problems of unwanted or excess biologi-
cal growths.
When wastewaters are used forirrigation the N and P they contain can
meet the needs of crops or greatly ex-
ceed these needs depending on concentra-
tions of N and P, amounts of wastewater
used, crop needs, the nature of the soil
and the management system. When crop
needs and the capacity of the soil
system to store these elements in un-
available forms are exceeded, their
escape into surface and groundwaters
create undesirable environmental
effects. Thus, removal of N and P in
harvested crops and/or their inactiva-
tion in or losses from the soil should
be considered in establishing loading
rates.
Nitrogen and P behaviors in soils
are so distinctly different that each
must be treated separately. Detailed
discussions of soil reactions and re-
moval in harvested plants of each
element relative to the use of waste-
waters on lands were presented in
recent reviews by Broadbent (1977) and
Pratt (1977).
NITROGEN
Storage
In a steady-state situation over a
period of years or decades where addi-
tions to and removals of N from the soil
system are equal, the storage capacity
of the soil is not important even
though residence time in the soil may be
quite long. In actual wastewater appli-
cation practice, particularly during the
first few years of use of the wastewater
with slow rate systems, storage can be
U05important because steady-state or equi-
librium conditions are not quickly-
attained. The main storage mechanisms
are fixation of NH, by clay minerals and
by organic matter, retention of NH as
an exchangeable cation and incorporation
into soil organic matter through plant
and microbial utilization.
Ammonium fixation. Soil clays,
particularly those of the verraicylitic
group have a capacity to trap NH, within
the crystal lattice. The NH, ions fixed
by this mechanism do not exchange
readily with other cations and are not
accessible to nitrifying bacteria
(Nommik, 1965). And the quantities of N
thus fixed will remain fixed indefi-
nitely. The NH added in most waste-
waters, will keep the fixation capacity
by this mechanism saturated.
Quantities of NH, fixed by three
different soils that received five con-
secutive applications of a solution con-
taining NH.-N at 100 mg/1, without in-
tervening drying periods are shown in
Figure 1. The Aiken soil containing
mainly kaolinite clay fixed no NH,. The
Columbia fine sandy loam fixed about 22
mg/kg (308 kg/ha-m of soil). This soil
and the Sacramento clay contain vermicu-
lites and montmorillonites capable of
NH fixation.
NUMBER OF APPLICATIONS
Fig. 1. Clay-fixed NH4 in three soils
resulting from five applica-
tions of a solution containing
NH.-N at 100 mg/1, without in-
tervening drying (from F» E.
Broadbent, Unpublished Data,
University of California,
Davis).
Another mechanism of N storage in-
volves the reaction of NH, with soilorganic matter to form stable organic
matter complexes. But, because the
amounts fixed depend strongly on pH and
on the organic matter present (Burge and
Broadbent, 1961), this mechanism is not
likely to be important in soils of low,
organic matter contents and at the NH,
and organic matter concentrations found
in most wastewaters and at the pH of
these waters.
Exchangeable ammonium. Like other
cations in wastewaters, NH, can be ad-
sorbed by the negatively charged clay
and organic colloids in soils. Lance
(1975) calculated the NH, adsorption
from the NH, adsorption ratio (AAR) and
the cation-exchange capacity (CEC) of
the soil. The AAR is the ratio of NH,
concentration to the_square r<j>«t of the
concentration of Ca plus Mg when
concentrations are in mmoles/1. In slow
rate systems the NH, adsorption capacity
is usually sufficient to retain the
applied NH, in the surface of the soil.
Continuous flooding in rapid infiltra-
tion systems will in time saturate the
adsorption capacity and the NH, will
move downward with the percolating water.
Storage in the exchangeable form is
temporary in any case because the NH, is
nitrified as soon as oxygen (0) becomes
available. But, exchangeable NH, plays
an important role in the nitrification-
denitrification sequence in high rate
systems by holding N in the soil until
the environment becomes oxic during dry-
ing.
Incorporation into organic matter.
The amount of organic N stored in the
organic matter tends to reach some equi-
librium amount under a given set of con-
ditions. This equilibrium level is
attained when the rate of production of
organic N equals the rate of destruction
(mineralization). To store more organic
N the rate of production must increase
relative to the rate of mineralization.
If the rate of production is increased
the amount of organic N stored will in-
crease rapidly for a few years and then
asymtotically approach a new equilibrium
as the rate of mineralization Increases
to balance the new rate of production.
Net Immobilization of N by soil
microorganisms requires the presence of
decomposable organic matter having a N
content less than about 1.25%. Except
for cannery and certain industrial
wastewaters this condition is not met
for land treatment systems. Crop
residues on land receiving wastewaters
1+06may result in a new microbial immobili-
zation of a small amount of N, though
probably not more than 45 to 65 kg/ha-
yr.
The storage of N through plant up-
take of NH, or N0_ and subsequent con-
version of roots and other plant resi-
dues into soil humus can be large when
the original soils have low organic
matter contents. This storage is illus-
trated in Figure 2, using data from a
cropped area near Bakersfield, Califor-
nia, where wastewater had been used for
36 years. Total N down to a depth of
1.5 m increased by 8,290 kg/ha when com-
pared with an adjacent untreated area.
This represents an average storage of
230 kg/ha-yr, although most of this
storage would have occured during the
first 10 to 15 years with only small
annual amounts stored during the re-
maining time. Lesser quantities of N
would be stored in soils of high organic
matter contents and in some cases the
application of wastewater can change the
environmental conditions to favor net
mineralization of organic N (Sopper and
Kardos, 1973). Thus, the storage of N
by incorporation into organic matter is
highly dependent on the wastewater and
the environmental conditions in the soil-
water system.
OH 6AH IC H.t
o o tn o.O» a il o.i»
Fig. 2. Effect of 36 years of waste-
water application on organic N
in a soil at Bakersfield, Cali-
fornia (F. E. Broadbent, Un-
published Data, University of
California, Davis).
Loading Rates
The effectiveness of land treatmentin removing N as the wastewater moves
through the soil-plant system is deter-
mined by the annual loading rate minus
the sum of annual 1) storage in soil,
2) removal in harvested crops, and 3)
volatilization as NH and as the gaseous
products, NjO and N», of denitrification.
The objective is to minimize the differ-
ence between input and storage_plus out-
puts other than leaching of NO~.
"Storage in the soil. An estimate
of the quantity of N that can be stored
by NH, fixation by clays can be obtained
from laboratory studies using appropri-
ate soil samples from the land area to
be used. The number of samples and the
depth of sampling will depend on the
local conditions relative to soil varia-
bility and the length of the pathway for
water moving through the soil and on
financial resources.
Laboratory analyses can also be
used to determine the capacity for tem-
porary NH, storage in the CEC of the
soil. The appropriate data are CEC in
meq/100 g of soil, the MR of the waste-
water and"the bulk density of the soil
of the field. Of course the relation-
ship between AAR and the percent satu-
ration of the CEC must be known. In-
corporation into organic matter must be
estimated from experience and from
knowledge of local conditions.
In slow rate systems storage can
be important particularly in the first
few years of a project. But, with time
the storage capacity will be saturated.
In rapid infiltration systems the tem-
porary storage as adsorbed NH, is per-
haps the only storage mechanism of
importance.
After a few years of a given pro-
ject, storage in the soil can probably
be ignored and the steady-state model,
in which annual inputs are equal to
removal in crops, plus volatilization
losses plus leaching losses, can be
used.
Removal in harvested crops. Re-
moval in harvested crops varies from a
few kg/ha-yr for some fruit crops to
hundreds of kg/ha-yr for some forage
crops. Tucker and Hauck (1978) reported
annual removals as low as 9 kg/ha for
olives and as high as 361 kg/ha for corn
silage and 438 kg/ha for hay (non-
legumes). Pratt et al (1976) reported a
maximum removal of 468 kg/ha-yr from
double cropping with sudangrass and
barley. Nitrogen removals by bermuda-
grass as calculated from data of Fisher
1+07and Caldwell (1958) by Tucker and Hauck
(1978) are presented in Figure 3. The
maximum removal in kg/ha was at an input
of about 1500 kg/ha, but the maximum
percent removal was at an input of about
200 kg/ha. However, Fried et al (1976)
reported that with corn the maximum
yield was obtained at 224 kg N/ha and
the maximum removal and maximum percent
removal were at inputs of 336 and 224
kg/ha, respectively.
800
N, kg/ho yr
"i
i*
1000
N ADDED, kg /ho2000
Fig. 3. Relationship of N removed in
bermudagrass hay and the N
added (Data of Fisher and Cald-
well (1958) as presented by
Tucker and Hauck (1978)).
Obviously, management decisions
relative to removal in harvested crops
must consider not only the capability of
a crop to remove N but its suitability
for the climate, the soil system being
designed, and the potential financial
returns. In slow rate systems the crop
can be an important sink for N, but in
rapid infiltration systems these re-
movals can be so small compared to total
inputs that crop removals can be
ignored.
Volatilization. The conditions
that favor volatilization of NH. and
denitrification are sufficiently well
known that projects can be planned to
provide these conditions. The volatili-
zation of NH is favored by a high pH,
soils of low buffering capacity, warm
temperatures and high concentrations of
NH,-N at the surface of the soil. These
effects are illustrated in Figure 4.
The main effects are soil pH, the tex-
ture of the soil and the depth of place-
ment of the (NH,) SO, in the soil. An-
other factor is tne water content, with
wet soils favoring volatilization. Be-
sides the selection of sandy soils,
management can add agricultural lime-stone to make the soil calcareous to
give a pH of 7.5 or higher.
80
70 -
•S 60
Q.
a.o
o 50 h
8 40O
i 30h
O
S
5 20
10 -
Soil pH 5 6 7 8 9
Soil Temperature I2C 22C 32C
Rate 110 220 330 440 550
(kg Nitrogen/ha)
Placement (cm) 0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.01 1
Ammonium
Placement
. /Sulfate
Soil /
(5cm placement) ,
^ ~~_Z^r^^~] Temperature
/ / '
\/
^ i \ i i
Soil Type Clay Silty Clay Loam Sand
Fig. 4. Approximate relationships of
NH loss to soil pH, soil tem-
perature, NH, application rate,
depth of placement, and soil
type for ammonium sulfate. The
relationships are for NH. loss
from a clay soil (excluding
soil type curve), surface
applications (excluding place-
ment curve, 550 kg N/ha NH, +
application rate (excluding NH,
rate curve), 30C (excluding
temperature curve), and pH 7.6
(excluding pH curve). Taken
from Rolston, 1978).
Denitrification is favored by
anoxic conditions, a supply of readily
available organic material, a pH be-
tween 6 and 8 and relatively high tem-
peratures. Development of anoxic con-
ditions are favored by saturation of the
soil with water so that 0_ diffusion
through the soil is restricted, by
rapid consumption of 0_ by soil micro-
organisms and plant roots. Anoxic con-
ditions develop not only in saturated
soils but also in micropores of unsatu-
rated but wet soils in which 0. con-
U08sumption is more rapid than CL supply.
Growth of plants and application of or-
ganic materials such as manures, crop
residues and other wastes favor denitri-
fication by providing energy materials
for microorganisms which in turn in-
creases 0 consumption. The nature of
the soil Has a large effect on denitri-
fication with soils of low water trans-
missivity favoring development of anoxic
conditions thus favoring denitrification.
Management can select soils, manage
water and add organic materials to favor
denitrification. Wetting and drying
cycles have been developed to alter-
nately provide nitrification-denitrifi-
cation cycles to maximize N losses as
N_0 and N_. Examples of the manipula-
tion of conditions for the removal of N
from wastewaters using denitrification
as the main process are the Flushing
Meadows project at Phoenix, Arizona
(Lance and Whisler, 1972; Bouwer et al,
1975; and Lance, 1975),, the Santee
project in California (Merrell et al,
1965), the Detroit Lakes project in
Minnesota (Larson, 1960) and the Fort
Devens project in Massachusetts
(Satterwhite and Stewart, 1974).
PHOSPHORUS
Storage
The P that enters a soil is either
removed physically, stored in the soil
as part of the solid phase or is leached
on through the soil in soluble forms in
the drainage water. It can be physical-
ly removed In harvested crops or lost in
wind or water erosion. However, we will
assume that lands used for receiving
wastewaters will be well protected from
erosion, leaving removal in harvested
crops as the only physical removal
process.
Concentrations of P in wastewaters
usually range from 1.0 to 40 mg/1, but
most concentrations are less than 20
mg/1. Thomas (1973) used 10 mg/1 as a
typical concentration. In contrast, the
concentration of dissolved P in the soil
solution is usually between 3.0 and 0.03
mg/1 with typical concentrations of a
few tenths mg/1. These differences in
concentrations are reflective of the re-
actions which remove P from wastewaters
when they are added to soils. The ex-
tent of P removal from solution depends
on the intensity of these reactions, the
capacity of the soil to maintain them
and the time allowed for them to pro-ceed.
The dominant reactions of P in
soils Involve inorganic orthophosphate
ions. As organic forms of P in waste-
waters are generally readily converted
to inorganic forms, organic forms of P
are expected to be relatively unimpor-
tant in P storage in the soils used for
wastewater treatment, and will not be
discussed.
The removal of P from solution can
be described loosely as retention, a
term that implies no distinct reaction
mechanisms. The term sorption is used
to describe the retention of P at sur-
faces as contracted with precipitation
with inorganic species directly from
solution. Explanations of the nature of
P retention have oscillated from those
implying the dominance of sorption re-
actions to those relying heavily on
solubility and precipitation principles.
An overview of the literature suggests
that P retention involves mainly sorp-
tion at surfaces and that sorption pro-
vides the more meaningful approach to
predicting the capacity of soils to
store P. Direct precipitation of phos-
phates in soils appears to be fairly
well limited to high P concentrations in
the vicinity of fertilizer bands. Rela-
tive to the retention of P from waste-
waters, precipitation of Ca phosphates
can be expected in soils and/or waste-
waters high in Ca and secondary precipi-
tation of other phosphates might occur
at solution P concentrations in the
higher range of concentrations found in
wastewaters. Under most circumstances,
however, conditions favoring sorption
reactions are expected for wastewater
treatment systems.
Sorption surfaces. Many studies
have pointed to the importance of
secondary Fe and Al oxides and hydrous
oxides, particularly those of amorphous
character (Syers et al, 1971; Williams
et al, 1958; Saunders, 1965). Data
tabulated by Syers and Williams (1976)
show that crystalline Fe and Al oxides
sorb five to ten times more P than
crystalline aluminosilicate clays or
calcium carbonates and that amorphous
oxide gels sorb five to 100 times more
than their crystalline counterparts and
approaching 1000 times more than
crystalline aluminosilicates and calcium
carbonates. Even at alkaline pH values
characteristic of calcareous soils, the
presence of amorphous hydrous oxides,
particularly if present as coatings,
may reduce to relatively minor import-ance the sorptlon of P by calcium car-
bonate as demonstrated by Shukla' et al
(1971) and Holford and Mattingly (1975).
Sorption equations. The sorptlon
equation most frequently used for P in
soils is that of Langmuir. A plot of
sorption data using one of the linear
forms of this equation permits the
determination of a sorption maximum and
a sorption energy. Although Langmuir
(1918) originally developed this equa-
tion to describe the sorption of gases
by solids, its extension to sorption
from aqueous solutions has been justi-
fied in a theoretical discussion by
Giles (1970).
Recent work by Ryden and Syers
(1975a, 1977ab) and Ryden et al (1977
abc) and McLaughlin et al (1977) has
shown that three Langmuir equations de-
scribed P sorption up to a concentra-
tion of 20 mg/l. Each equation account-
ed for at least 80% of the sorption
occurririg over its operational solution
concentration range. Chemisorption of P
at hydrous oxide surfaces was indicated
for solution P concentrations below
about 0.2 mg/l. In contrast, above this
concentration an increasing proportion
of the sorbed P was described by the
third equation, the parameters of which
in conjunction with additional data, in-
dicated a more-physical sorption reac-
tion which was reversible when the P
concentration in solution was decreased.
Conformity of P retention data to
the Langmuir equation does not consti-
tute irrefutible proof that a sorption
reaction is involved (Brunauer et al,
1966; Veith and Sposito, 1977). How-
ever, additional data relating to
charge, pH and ionic strength relation-
ships and the ease of desorption and
Isotopic exchange support the concept
that mainly sorption reactions are in-
volved in P retention by soils in the
solution P concentration range found In
most wastewaters.
One of the consequences of the
sorption process in which the quantity
of P retained is a function of the solu-
tion P concentration, is that as the
wastewater is added to the soil the P
moves down in a diffuse boundary as
shown in Figure 5. In contrast, if a
compound of definite solubility were be-
ing formed a very much more abrupt
boundary is expected. It should be
noted that a diffuse boundary between
enriched and unenriched soil horizons is
generally observed in field studies
(Pratt et al, 1956; Kardos and Hook,1976) indicating the importance of
sorption as a removal mechanism. The
bottom of the diffuse boundary rep-
resents near zero saturation of the
sorption capacity and the'top of the
diffuse layer represents near saturation
at the top, with an infinite number of
saturations in between.
PHOSPHORUS IN SOLUTION, mg/i
rt MJICHE]BETft!»r JfPLltl
\ twtmiitu»
\"
DIFFUSE BOUNOtnr BETWEEN
EMICHED l«D_«O»EKRICHtD SDK
Fig. 5. Relationship between P concen-
tration and depth for abrupt
and diffuse boundaries between
nonenriched and enriched soil.
Reactions rates. The reaction of P
with soils is characterized by an ini-
tially fast reaction, followed by a slow
reaction, which continues for months or
years. If short periods of time are
used for observations, an apparent equi-
librium is attained in a few days, but,
if longer periods are used, the soil
appears to approach an equilibrium in 1
to 4 years depending mainly on the tem-
perature.
This slow reaction might be ex-
plained as the result of decreased solu-
bility of precipitated P compounds as
they crystallize and stabilize. One
possible explanation for alkaline con-
ditions could be the conversion of Ca
phosphates to less soluble compounds,
i.e., the conversion of dicalcium to
octacalcium to hydroxyapatate phos-
phates. The formation of discrete com-
pounds from saturated surfaces could
expose more reactive surfaces to con-
tinue the sorption process.
However, changes in the properties
of sorbed P, such as decreases In the
1*10ease of desorption and isotopic ex-
change, are associated with this slow
reaction. Ryden et al (1977b) and
McLaughlin et al (1976) have shown that
a shift from more-physicàlly bound to
chemisorbed forms and the regeneration
of sorptive capacity are characteristic
of the slow reaction. It was also
demonstrated that the shift to chemi-
sorbed forms was accompanied by a de-
crease in 0.1M NaOH-extractable P. The
latter finding .strongly suggested the
absorption of initially adsorbed P.
This concept, which involves the entry
of surface sorbed P into the "structur-
ally-porous" amorphous hydrous oxides
(an absorption process) allows not only
for the slow increase in sorption sites,
but also for the decrease in the ease of
isotopic exchange and desorption.
Barrow and Shaw (1974 and refer-
ences contained therein) proposed a
"three-compartment" (A-B-C) model based
on the kinetics of P sorption. Compart-
ment A represented the soil solution,
compartment B a weakly sorbed form and C
a strongly sorbed form. With increasing
time, P was transferred from compartment
B to C. The properties of compartments
B and C enable them to be identified,
respectively, with the more-physically
sorbed P and chemisorbed P defined by
Ryden et al (1977a).
For a wide range of south Austra-
lian soils the transfer of P from com-
partment B to C was described by equa-
tion (1)
(1 - a) = (kt + 1)-b(1)
where a is the fraction of sorbed P in
compartment C, (1 - a) is the fraction
of the sorbed P remaining in compartment
B, t is the time of contact, b is a con-
stant and k is a temperature coefficient
as defined in equation (2)
-E/RTAexp (2)
where A is a constant, R is the gas con-
stant, T is the absolute temperature and
E is the activation energy.
Barrow and Shaw (1974), who used
the term "relative effectiveness" to de-
scribe 1 - a, found that it was propor-
tional to the added P which remained
effective for plant growth and which re-
mained desorbable or isotopically ex-
changeable. Data obtained by Ryden et
al (1978) indicated that 1 - a was also
related to the shift of P to chemisorbed
forms, and by inference the regeneration
of sorption sites.Equation (1) describing the rela-
tionship between "relative effective-
ness" and time, indicates that as the
period of contact between soil and
added P increased the rate of transfer
from compartment B to C decreased. An
increase in temperature, however, con-
siderably increases the rate of trans-
fer. In contrast, the effect of water
content was negligible except at low
water contents «10%). The fact that
equation (1) was applicable to such a
wide range of soils, Indicated that the
model provides a generalized description
of the kinetics of P sorption. This in-
dependence of soil type, which was also
observed in a study reported by Ryden et
al (1978), Is the most important feature
of the model and suggests a basis for a
widely applicable model for P sorption
kinetics in wastewater treatment
systems.
Loading rates
Loading rates depend on the rate of
removal of P in harvested crops and the
capacity of the soil to store P. The
application of P in amounts greater than
the sum of crop removal plus the capac-
ity of a given depth of soil to retain P
will result in P moving below that
specified depth.
Removal in harvested crops.
Amounts of P removed vary from about 10
kg/ha-yr for such crops as sugar beets
and peanuts to about 70 to 80 kg/ha-yr
or more for high yielding forage crops.
Typical data are summarized in Table 1.
These quantities of P are important in
slow rate systems where annual rates of
P application are the same order of
magnitude as used in agronomic practice.
For a solution concentration of 10 mg
P/l, wastewater at a rate of 1 m-ha/ha-
yr equals a P rate of 100 kg/ha-yr.
Thus wastewater at rates of 1 to 2 m
would give P rates somewhat comparable
to agronomic practice. At these rates
removal of 60 to 70 kg P/ha-yr would be
significant whereas at 20 to 30 m-ha/ha-
yr a P removal at these rates would be
relatively insignificant.
Removal of P In harvested crops can
be predicted or estimated from yields
and P concentrations In the materials
harvested- These types of data are
easily available for most crops grown in
a local area.
Storage in the soil. A satisfac-
tory predictive model for P storage
Ullshould consider mainly the capacities
and kinetics of the P sorption process
in soils and sediments from the land
surface to the point of discharge into
surface or groundwaters. Because this
pathway is not well known a given depth
into the soil profile and underlying
strata is considered.and temporal variability in the hy-
draulic conductivity are known to occur
and these variabilities bring up the
questions of how many and what kinds of
samples or measurements are needed.
After the data are obtained, problems
arise in averaging and interpreting such
large variations. Also, there have been
Table 1. Removal of P annually by the usually
selected crops.
Crop
Corn (1)
Cotton (1)
Lint and seed
Wheat (1)
Rice (1)
Soybeans (1)
Grapes (1)
Tomatoes (1)
Cabbage (1)
Oranges (1)
Small grain-corn-
hay rotation (2)
Reed canary grass (2)
Corn silage (2)
Poplar trees (3)
Barley-sudangrass
rotation for forages (4)
Johnson grass (1)
Guinea grass (1)
Tall fescue (1)Yield
metric tons/ha
12
1.7
5.0
3.2
4.0
11
36
32
25
-
-
-
-
-
11
11
3.2harvest portion of
Phosphorus
kg/ha
35
19
22
22
25
11
34
18
11
33
45
31-41
26-70
85-91
95
51
33
(1) Agricultural Waste Management Field Manual (1975); (2) Kardos
and Hook (1976); (3) Kutera (1975); (4) Unpublished data of Pratt
and Davis, University of California, and USDA-ARS, Riverside.
All models are based on a materials
balance. That is, the P that goes into
a given soil volume is either retained
in the solid phase, removed by plants or
moved through the soil volume in per-
colating water. This means that all
models have a water flow and a P re-
action component and of course if the
system has a crop, plant removal is a
third component for both water and P.
Models can consist of simple bookkeeping
or of mathematical equations of various
degrees of sophistication.
A number of researchers, using
various approaches have reported limited
successes in modeling the reactions of P
with soils (Enfield et al, 1976; Enfield
and Shew, 1975; Novak et al, 1975;
Harter and Foster, 1976).
Limitation of models. There are a
number of problems that need to be
solved before any predictive models can
be used with confidence. Large spatialno studies of the numbers of samples
needed to characterize the F reaction
characteristics of a field soil to a
given depth.
The concentrations of Fe, Al, Ca
and perhaps other constituents in the
wastewater may influence P reactions.
Waters that acidify or alkalinize the
soil can also have large effects.
Perhaps the most serious limita-
tion is that to date the reaction of P
with the soil cannot be predicted from
simple soil properties that can be
mapped in the field or measured quickly
in the laboratory (Enfield et al, 1976;
Pratt et al, 1969).
Proposed model. In this simple
model the P added minus that removed in
harvested crops is assumed to react
progressively with successive depth in-
crements in the soil profile. The
first depth becomes "saturated" before
the P moves to the next. The boundary
1+12between the P-enriched and the non-
enriched soil is assumed to be abrupt as
in the theoretical model of Novak et al
(1975). The term "saturated" is defined
as the condition in which the soil is
sufficiently enriched that the P move-
ment with percolating water is signifi-
cantly above background for the original
soil material. This model also assumes
water movement to be so unimportant com-
pared to P reactions that it can be dis-
regarded. Consequently, there will be
sufficient time for the slow P reactions
to have an impact. The P sorption capa-
cities for the depth increments will in-
clude the slow reactions.
This model expressed mathematically
is
Sp
lp - Hp(3)
where T is time in years for the P front
to reach a given depth, Sp is the sorp-
tion capacity of the volume of soil
above that depth expressed in kg/ha, Ip
is the P input in kg/ha-yr and Hp is
that removed in harvested crops in kg/
ha-yr. The values for Ip and Hp can be
determined with reasonable accuracy by
well established techniques. The
measurement of Sp is less well esta-
blished. However, recent work (Barrow
and Shaw, 1975; Holford and Mattingly,
1975; Ryden and Syers, 1977b; Ryden et
al, 1977a), has suggested a relatively
simple approach to determining Sp.
The term Sp in equation (3) is not
the overall sorption maximum of the soil,
but the sorption capacity at the average
solution P concentration found in the
wastewater to be applied. This sorption
capacity is difficult to obtain directly
but can be indirectly estimated. The
overall sorption maximum of a soil can
be obtained from the sorption isotherms
suggested by Ryden and Syers (1977b) and
from this value an estimate of Sp for
any P solution concentration can be ob-
tained.
By plotting the fractional satura-
tion of the equilibrium P sorption maxi-
mum against solution P concentration, as
is done in Figure 6 for four contrasting
soils (Ryden et al, 1976) a generalized
sorption curve is obtained. From this
generalized curve the sorption at any
solution P concentration can be calcu-
lated by multiplying the corresponding
fractional sorption times the P sorption
maximum which is the only parameter that
varies among soils.
The overall equilibrium P sorption
maximum can be determined based on themethod of Ryden and Syers (1975b). In
this method a quantity of soil is shaken
with a solution containing P at a rela-
tively wide solution to soil ratio
which is valid for equilibrium studies
(Hope and Syers, 1976). The solution P
concentration is determined at several
times (t) greater than 70 hours and
graphed against 1/t. The resulting
linear relationship is extrapolated to
1/t = 0, i.e. infinite time. The solu-
tion P concentration obtained at 1/t =
0 is used as an estimate of the equilib-
rium solution concentration for the
amount of P added. From these two
values the amount of P sorbed at 1/t = 0
can be calculated. This quantity of
sorbed P must be adjusted by adding to
it the amount of sorbed P initially
present in the soil, I.e., the amount of
P extracted by a 0.1M. NaOH solution
(Ryden et al, 1977b). The equilibrium
sorption maximum (b) can then be cal-
culated from
9
in which X is the experimentally deter-
mined sorbed P (adjusted for the sorbed
P initially present) for the single P
application used and 9 is the fractional
sorption saturation obtained from
Figure 6 for the experimentally deter-
mined solution P concentration for 1/t
= 0. From the calculated b value the
amount of P sorbed at any equilibrium
solution concentration can be estimated
by using the appropriate 9 value ob-
tained from Figure 6.
0.8
0.4 •
2.0 40 6.0 8.0
SOLUTION P CONCENTRATION (mg I"1)10.0
Fig. 6, Generalized equilibrium iso-
therm for P sorption by four
1U3contrasting soils. 6 = X/b,
where X is the amount of P
sorbed at any given solution P
concentration and b is the
equilibrium sorption maximum.
•= Okaihau soil: V = Egmont
soil: • = Waikakahi soil:
A = Porirua soil. Data from
Ryden et al (1977a).
The utility of the generalized P
sorption isotherm (Figure 6) is illustra-
ted by the interpretation of data pre-
sented in Table 2 for a Ramona soil, a
soil not used in the original develop-
ment of the generalized isotherm. The
sorption maximum (b) calculated from
equation (4) using 0 values from the
generalized sorption isotherm in Figure
6 was independent of the amount of P
added. The fact that b was a constant
suggests that P sorption by the Ramona
soil was described by the same isotherm
as the four soils used in developing the
generalized isotherm.tion.
The uncertainties of this P
balance-reaction model are the assumed
abrupt boundary between enriched and
non-enriched soil layers and the
assumption that water movement is slow
enough to allow complete sorption equi-
librium. Furthermore, all of the gen-
eral limitations of modeling also apply
to this model.
There is ample evidence from soils
that have received large amounts of P as
fertilizers or wastes that soluble P
decreases gradually as a function of
depth with a diffuse front (Pratt et al,
1956; Spencer, 1957; Taylor and Kunishi,
1974; Kardos and Hook, 1976). Water
movement in waste treatment systems will
vary depending on water application
rate, infiltration and transmissivity of
the soil and evapotranspiration. Never-
theless, the model presented here might
be useful in providing estimates of the
storage of P in soils of wastewater
treatment systems.
Table 2. Equilibrium P sorption data for Ramona soil and related
data calculated from the generalized P sorption isotherm
in Figure 6.
Padded Equilibrium
P ConcentrationEquilibrium
P Sorption (x)Calculated
sorption .
maximum (b)
jug/g mg/1 -ug/g /ig/g
5
10
20
40
80
120
500
Average0.033
0.080
0.157
0.285
0.655
1.33
8.0032.0
35.0
41.2
54.7
76.3
82.5
1290.18
0.21
0.26
0.32
0.44
0.49
0.75178
167
159
171
173
168
172
170
+ Included 29 jug P/g native sorbed P.
# Obtained from the generalized isotherm (Figure 6).
& Calculated from equation (4).
If the Ramona soil were used to re-
ceive a wastewater having 5 mg P/l, a 9
value of 0.68 will apply (Figure 6).
From this value and the average sorption
maximum (Table 2), the equilibrium sorp-
tion level at this solution P concentra-
tion can be calculated as 116jug/g/0.68:
170/ig/g) . However, the amount of na-
tive sorbed P must be subtracted to give
an effective sorption of 87 jug/g. The
data in Table 2 show that the sorption
of P at only one addition of P plus one
determination of the initially sorbed P
would have been sufficient to calculate
a net P sorption (Sp in equation (3))
for any given wastewater P concentra-LITERATURE CITED
1. Agricultural Waste Management Field
Manual. 1975. U.S. Dept. Agriculture,
Soil Conservation Service.
2. Barrow, N. J. and T. C. Shaw. 1974.
Factors affecting the longterm effect-
iveness of phosphate and molybdate fer-
tilizers. Comm. Soil Sci. Plant Anal.
5:355-364.
3. Bouwer, H., J. C. Lance, and M. S.
Riggs. 1974. High rate land treatment.
II. Water quality and economic aspects
of the Flushing Meadows project. Jour.
WPCF. 46:844-859.
4. Broadbent, F. E. 1977. Nitrogen.Appendix A In: Process Design Manual
for Land Treatment of Municipal Waste-
water. USEPA, U.S. Army Corps of Engi-
neers, USDA. EPA 625/1-77-008 (COE
EM1110-1-501).
5. Brunauer, S., E. E. Copeland, and D.
L. Kantro. 1966. The Langmuir and BET
theories. _In: Jhe gas-solid interface,
Vol. 1, E. A. Flood (éd.). p. 77-85.
Marcel Dekker, New York,
6. Burge, W. D. and F. E. Broadbent.
1961. Fixation of ammonia by organic
soils. Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. Proc. 25:
199-204.
7. Enfield, C. G. and D. C. Shew. 1975.
Comparison of two predictive non-equi-
librium models for phosphorus sorption
and movement through homogeneous soils.
J. Environ. Quality A:198-202.
8. Enfield, C. G., C. C. Harlin, Jr.,
and B, E. Bledsoe. 1976. Comparison of
five kinetic models for orthophosphate
reactions in mineral soils. Soil Sci.
Soc. Amer. J. 40:243-249.
9. Fisher, F. L. and A. G. Caldwell.
1958. Coastal bermudagrass as an irri-
gated hay crop. Progress Report 2035,
Texas Agri. Exp. Station.
10. Giles, C. H. 1970. Interpretation
and use of sorption isotherms. In:
Sorption and Transport Processes in
Soils. Soc. Chem. Ind. (London) Mono-
graph 37:14-32.
11. Harter, R. D. and B. B. Foster.
1976. Computer simulation of phosphorus
movement through soils. Soil Sci. Soc.
Amer. J. 40:239-242.
12. Holford, I. C. R. and G. E. G.
Mattingly. 1975. The high- and low-
energy phosphate adsorbing surfaces in
calcareous soils. J. Soil Sci. 26:407-
417.
13. Hope, G. D. and J. K. Syers. 1976.
Effects of solution: soil ratio on
phosphate sorption by soils. J. Soil
Sci. 27:301-306.
14. Kardos, L. T. and J. E. Hook. 1976.
Phosphorus balance in sewage effluent
treated soils. J. Environ. Quality 5:
87-90.
15. Kutera, J. 1975. Treatment and
disposal of wastewaters of settlements
in rural, agricultural and non-urban
areas. Progress in Water Tech. 7:877-
884.
16. Lance, J. C. and F. D. Whisler.
1972. Nitrogen balance in soil columns
intermittently flooded with secondary
sewage effluent. J. of Environ. Quality
1:180-186.
17. Lance, J. C. 1975. Fate of nitro-
gen in sewage sludge applied to soil.
Journal of the Irrigation and DrainageDivision, Proc. of ASCE 101:131-144.
18. Langmuir, I. 1918. The adsorption
of gases on plane surfaces of glass,
mica and platinum. J. Amer. Chem. Soc.
40:1361-1403.
19. Larson, W. C, 1960. Spray irri-
gation for the removal of nutrients in
sewage treatment plant effluent as
practiced at Detroit Lake, Minnesota.
In: Algae and Metropolitan Wastes.
Transactions Seminar, U.S. Dept. HEW.
pp. 125-129.
20. McLaughlin, J. R., J. C. Ryden, and
J. K. Syers. 1977. Development and
evaluation of a kinetic model to de-
scribe phosphate sorption by hydrous
ferric oxide gel. Geoderma 17: (In
Press).
21. Merrell, J. C. Jr., A. Katko, and
H. E. Pintler. 1965. The Santee recre-
ation project, Santee, California.
Public Health Service. Publication
Number 99-WP-27.
22. Nommik, H. 1965. Ammonium fixa-
tion and other reactions involving a
nonenzymatic immobilization of mineral
nitrogen in soil. In: Soil Nitrogen.
American Society of Agronomy, Madison,
Wisconsin, pp. 198-258.
23. Novak, L. T., D. C. Adriano, G. A.
Coulman, and D. B. Shah. 1975. Phos-
phorus movement In soils: Theoretical
aspects. J. Environ. Quality 4:93-99.
24. Pratt, P. F., F. F. Peterson, and
C. S. Holzhey. 1969. Qualitative min-
eralogy and chemical properties of a
few soils from Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Turrialba 19:491-496.
25. Pratt, P. F., W. W. Jones, and H.
D. Chapman. 1956. Changes in phos-
phorus in an irrigated soil during 28
years of differential fertilization.
Soil Sci. 82:295-306.
26. Pratt, P. F., S. Davis, and R. G.
Sharpless. 1976. A four-year field
trial with animal manures. I. Nitrogen
balances and yields. Hllgardia 44:99-
112.
27. Pratt, P. F. 1977. Phosphorus.
Appendix B rn: Process Design Manual
for Land Treatment of Municipal Waste-
water. USEPA, U.S. Army Corps of Engi-
neers, USDA. EPA 625/1-77-008 (COE
EM1110-1-501).
28. Rolston, D. E. 1978. Volatile
losses of nitrogen from soil. Iii:
Management of Nitrogen in Irrigated
Agriculture, P. F. Pratt (éd.), Univer-
sity of California, Riverside, pp. 169-
193.
29. Ryden, J. C. and J. K. Syers.
1975a. Charge relationships of phos-
phate sorption. Nature 255:51-53.
U1530. Ryden, J. C. and J. K. Syers.
1975b. Rationalization of ionic
strength and cation effects on phosphate
sorption by soils. J. Soil Sci. 26:395-
406.
31. Ryden, J. C. and J. K. Syers.
1977a. Desorption and isotopic exchange
relationships of phosphate sorbed by
soils and hydrous ferric oxide gel. J.
Soil Sci. 28:596-609.
32. Ryden, J. C. and J. K. Syers.
1977b. Origin of the labile phosphate
pool in soils. Soil Sci. 123:353-361.
33. Ryden, J. C, J. K. Syers, and P.
E. H. Gregg. 1978. A new understanding
of the nature and persistence of labile
phosphate in soils: Implications to
soil testing. Reviews in Rural Science,
No. 3, University of New England Press
(In Press).
34. Ryden, J. C, J. R. McLaughlin, and
J. K. Syers. 1977a. Mechanisms of
phosphate sorption by soils and hydrous
ferric oxide gel. J. Soil Sci. 28:72-
92.
35. Ryden, J. C, J. R. McLaughlin, and
J. K. Syers. 1977b. Time-dependent
sorption of phosphate by soils and hy-
drous ferric oxides. J. Soil Sci. 28:
585-595.
36. Ryden, J. C, J. K. Syers, and J.
R. McLaughlin. 1977c. Effects of
ionic strength on chemisorption and
potential-determining sorption of phos-
phate by soils. J. Soil Sci. 28:62-71.
37. Satterwhite, M. B. and G. L.
Stewart. 1974. Treatment of primary
sewage effluent by rapid infiltration in
a New England environment. Agronomy
Abstracts, p. 38.
38. Saunders, W. M. H. 1975. Phos-
phate retention by New Zealand soils and
its relationship to free sesquioxides,
organic matter and other soil proper-
ties. New Zeal. J. Agric. Res. 8:30-57.
39. Schneider, I. F. and A. E. Erickson.
1972. Soil limitations for disposal of
municipal wastewaters. Mich. Agri.
Exp. Sta. Res. Rpt. 195.
40. Shukla, S. S., J. K. Syers, J. D.
H. Williams, D. E. Armstrong, and R. F.
Harris. 1971. Sorption of inorganic
phosphate by lake sediments. Soil Sci.
Soc. Amer. Froc. 35:244-249.
41. Sopper, W. E. and L. T. Kardos.
1973. Vegetation responses to irriga-
tion with treated municipal wastewater.
In: Recycling Treated Municipal Waste-
water and Sludge Through Forest and
Cropland. Penn. State Univ. Press.
University Park, PA. pp. 271-294.
42. Spencer, W. F. 1957. Distribution
and availability of phosphate added to
kl6Lakeland fine sand. Soil Sci. Soc.
Amer. Proc. 21:141-144.
43. Syers, J. K. and J. D. H. Williams.
1976. Phosphorus and arsenic in soils.
In: Soil Chemistry, J. M. Bremner and
G. Chesters (eds.). Marcel Dekker (In
Press).
44. Syers, J. K., T. D. Evans, J. D. H.
Williams, and J. T. Murdock. 1971.
Phosphate sorption parameters of repre-
sentative soils from Rio Grande do Sul,
Brazil. Soil Sci. 112:267-275.
45. Taylor, A. W. and H. M. Kunishi.
1974. Soil adsorption of phosphates
from wastewater. _Iii: Factors Involved
in Land Application of Agricultural and
Municipal Wastes. ARS-USDA National
Program Staff, Soil, Water and Air
Sciences, Beltsville, Maryland 20705.
p. 66-96.
46. Thomas, R. E. 1973. Fate of ma-
terials applied. In: Proc. Conf. Land
Disposal Municipal Effluents Sludges.
EPA-902/9-73-001. pp. 181-200.
47. Tucker, T. C. and R. D. Hauck.
1978. Removal of nitrogen by various
irrigated crops. In: Management of
Nitrogen in Irrigated Agriculture, P. F.
Pratt (éd.), University of California,
Riverside, pp. 135-167.
48. Veith, J. A. and G. Sposito. 1977.
On the use of the Langmuir equation in
the interpretation of adsorption phenom-
ena. Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. J. 41:697-
702.
49. Williams, E. G., N. M. Scott, and
M. J. McDonald. 1958. Soil properties
and phosphate sorption. J. Sci. Food
Agr. 9:551-559.DESIGN CRITERIA
MUSKEGON COUNTY, MICHIGAN'S
OWN LAND WASTEWATER
TREATMENT SYSTEM
J. M. Walker, Physical Scientist,
Office of Water Programs Operations,
USEPA, Washington, D. C. 20460
Y. A. Demirjian, Manager-Director,
Muskegon County Wastewater Management
System, Muskegon, Michigan 49940
The Muskegon County Wastewater
Management System is a lagoon-impound-
ment, spray irrigation treatment
facility which services 13 municipal-
ities and five major industries. The
system consists of a 4,455 hectare
site (11,000 acre) site which contains
three aeration ponds, two storage
lagoons of 344 hectares (850 acres)
each and a total storage capacity of
19.3 million cubic meters (5.1 billion
gallons), and 2,200 hectares (5,500
acres) of land Irrigated by center-
pivot irrigation rigs. The system is
provided with a network of subsurface
drains, open interception ditches and
shallow wells to make possible the
monitoring and control of the quality
of water throughout the treatment
process.
With an average daily flow of 102
thousand cubic meters (27 million
gallons) from its first fully opera-
tional year in 1975 to the present,
the system provided discharge water
of a quality consistently above state
NPDES specifications. Studies on
water quality and soil-crop-nutrient
balance revealed that by balancing
the nutrients in wastewater with crop
needs, more effective overall nutrient
removal was achieved, simultaneously
enhancing crop production and waste-
water renovation. Revenues from crop
sales are returned to the system to
ameliorate treatment costs which
amounted to between 6 and 7 cents per
cubic meter (23-25 cents per 1000gallons) from inception of full opera-
tion in 1975 through 1977.
Aspects of the system discussed
Include a description of components,
their effectiveness in renovating
wastewater, the impact on ground and
surface water and costs.
DESIGN FACTORS
Geographic Location
Muskegon County is located on the
eastern shore of Lake Michigan about
185 km (115 mi) north of its southern
tip. The county is traversed by many
streams which flow predominately west-
ward and converge eventually into or)e
of three inland lakes: Bear Lake,
Mona Lake, and the largest, Muskegon
Lake. The Wastewater Management Site
is 24 km (15 miles) east of the
Lake Michigan coastline and is
drained by two stream systems, the
Black Creek to the south and the
Mosquito Creek to the north. Treated
wastewater which is channeled into
these creeks flows to Mona and
Muskegon Lakes and finally to Lake
Michigan.
Climate
The climate of the area is
tempered by the position of the
county relative to Lake Michigan.
Precipitation, including snow,
averages 76.2 cm/yr (30 in/yr) and is
kllconsidered moderate; of the 218
cm/yr (86 in/yr) of snow, most falls
during December and January. The
mean average annual temperature is
8.40 C (47.2° F) with the average
maximum in July at 26.80 C (80.3° F)
and the average minimum in January at
-8.00 C (17.6° F). The average
frost-free period ranges from 160 to
170 days.
Soils
Many of the soils in the area are
relatively infertile, unproductive,
sandy, highly permeable and droughty.
Population
The population in 1970 was
approximately 140,000 and the 1990
projected population is 180,000 with
an,estimated service area of 65,000
hectares (150,000 acres).
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
The Muskegon County Wastewater
Management System is comprised of two
separate lagoon-impoundment spray
irrigation systems of similar design.
One system is large (159 TCMD [42 MGD]
wastewater treatment design capacity)
and one is small (5.3 TCMD [1.4 MGD]).
The small separate system was built
as an economical alternative to a long
expensive sewer connection. This
report discusses only the large system.
The system consists of collection,
transmission, aeration, storage,
irrigation, soil, crop, and drainage
components (Figure 1). The system
treated 27 MGD of wastewater in 1975,
60% of which was industrial flow,
leaving a reserve capacity of 15 MGD
for serving additional residential
and industrial development. (Acreage
requirements of various portions of
the system are shown in Table 1).
Wastewater Collection and Transmission
Wastewater is collected via
connector sewers and ten lift stations
which deliver wastewater to a central
pumping station. The wastewater is
pumped from the central lift station
18 km (11 miles) through a 1.7 meter
(66 inch) diameter pipe line to the
land treatment site. The listing of
those municipalities and industries
connected to the collection systemwith their respective discharge
volumes for 1975 is in Table 2.
The main pumping station consumed
7.8 million KWH of electricity in 1975
and the feeder stations consumed a
total of 2.8 Million KWH the same year.
Energy consumed in following years
was similar.
Aeration and Storage
After reaching the treatment site,
wastewater can be aerated in each of
three 8-acre 42-million-gallon capacity
aeration cells. There are six 50-
horsepower mixers and twelve 60-horse-
power aerators in each cell. Research
and operating experience justified
reducing the amount of aeration needed
and cut electrical energy used
drastically. The aeration mode most
often used at this time is treatment
with 8 aerators in cell 1 followed by
treatment with 4 aerators in cell 2.
With the current 27 MGD flow, the
average retention time is about 1.5
days In each cell. After aeration in
winter, the water flows into the
storage lagoons. During the summer,
the aerated water may either be sent
into storage or retained briefly in
an 8-acre solids settling cell before
application on land through the
Irrigation system.
There are two storage lagoons,
each 850 acres in size, with a combined
storage capacity of 5 billion gallons.
These large lagoons serve several
functions: they provide a large
reservoir of water for the Irrigation
season; they constitute a holding area
in which suspended solids in wastewater'
may settle out; and, depending upon
the duration of retention of the water,
they facilitate the breakdown of BOD,
toxic materials and pathogenic micro-
organisms.
Surrounding the storage lagoons
are interception ditches which are
designed to catch leachate from the
lagoons as well as to create a small
hydrologie gradient in the groundwaters
toward the lagoons. This leachate—or
seepage water—is monitored for water
quality on a daily basis, and as it
meets the standards of the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources, it is
pumped directly into the nearby
receiving streams. Otherwise, it is
pumped back into the lagoons.
Biological treatment, like the
collection and transmission pumping,is a major consumer of electrical
energy. The breakdown by year of power
consumption by the biological treatment
cells is in Table 3, and it shows that
though the system was operating only
wight months in 1973, the KWH require-
ments were about 40 percent higher than
for the full year of 1975.
This reduction in electrical energy
for biological treatment was achieved
without appreciable sacrifice in
efficiency of BOD removal. In fact,
removal of BOD per KWH of electricity
increased as shown in Figure 2. The
additional BOD loading into the storage
lagoons has caused no problems.
Final Disinfection
Before water is irrigated onto the
land, it enters a discharge cell/Prior
to entering irrigation ditches that
supply the water to pumping stations,
the water is chlorinated as necessary
to meet health standards.
Irrigation and Farming
The pretreated wastewater is
distributed to center pivot irrigation
rigs via buried asbestos cement pipes.
The operating présure is from 30 to 70
psi depending upon location in the
system. The rigs were especially
designed for spraying wastewater with
downward pointing low pressure nozzles
(Figure 3). There are 54 center pivot
irrigation rigs (Figure 4) located in
circular fields of 35 to 140 acres.
The soils are mostly sandy.
During the 1975 season, 4,500 of
the 5,400 irrigated acres were planted
with corn and irrigated with up to 4
inches per week of wastewater. The
other 900 acres were fallow or in rye
grass. Total wastewater applied to
the 5,400 acres varied from none to
over 100 inches per field during 1975.
Irrigation was performed from mid-April
to mid-November with time out for
cultivating, planting, and harvesting
the corn crop. Irrigation pumping
required about 5.2 million KWH of
electricity in 1977.
Thus far corn has been the main
crop. Corn planted in 1975 yielded an
average 60 bushels per acre (31 to 90
bushels per acre, Table 4), which was
nearly equal to the 65 bushel per acre
average corn grain yield in Muskegon
County on operating farmland. The
average corn grain yield on 4,700 acres
in 1974 (the initial year of operation)was 28 bushels/acre. The corn has
been marketed through normal channels.
The 1974 and 1975 average grain
yields of 28 and 60 bushels per acre
are indeed remarkable considering the
following: (1) the Muskegon system was
new and untried; (2) the primary
purpose of the system is wastewater
renovation; (3) incomplete Installation
of irrigation equipment and many
operation difficulties with the new
irrigation system have caused interrup-
tions particularly in 1974; and
(4) most soils at the site are very
poor, will not yield more than a few
bushels per acre of corn grain without
irrigation and nutrients, and normally
only support scrub oak and other forest
species.
During the 1976 and 77 seasons
all fields were planted to corn and
irrigated with wastewater. The yields
averaged about 80 bushels/acre each
year indicating a leveling off in corn
production balanced against the primary
goal of wastewater renovation. Some
additional increase in average corn
yield is expected as additional
drainage problems in some of the fields
are overcome and additional improve-
ments are made in liquid nitrogen
fertilization and weed control prac-
tices.
Drainage
Before construction, the ground-
water table was very close to the soil
surface in many of the fields. Tile
drainage or drainage wells were
installed and the water table lowered.
The drainage network now collects the
sprayed renovated wastewater after it
has percolated through the crop soil
filter and discharges it into the
receiving stream. The drainage net-
work (105 km long), along with inter-
ception ditches around the storage
lagoon, is designed to protect the
quality of the groundwater. Another
interesting aspect of the design of the
site drainage system was the bypassing
of all drainage from lands upstream,
and construction of berms to prevent
storm water run-off from the site.
Quantities of water drained to the
receiving streams are shown in Table 5.
Operations, Management, and Reserach
and Development
The entire system is being oper-
ated by 40 full-time persons and an
1*19additional part-time labor force of up
to 10 workers. Some of their job
activity is associated with the
Muskegon EPA Research and Development
Grant. It is essential for large oper-
ations of this nature to have laboratory
and development study capabilities.
The success of this operation has
depended and will continue to depend
heavily on expert management which in
turn is based on sound business, farm-
ing, engineering, and scientific skills.
Managment has benefited from the
creation of a Farm Advisory Board made
up of Agricultural Experts from Michigan
State University and from a Research
Advisory Board made up of experts within
EPA. As a direct result of good manage-
ment, directly assisted by research and
development efforts, progressive im-
provements have been achieved and
operational problems (inherent not only
in any system, but also in a large
previously untried system of this
nature) have been overcome at very
modest cost.
Examples of these coopertive
management-research efforts are:
(1) Studies and steps undertaken to
eliminate problems with underground
electrical cable and irrigation mains
to irrigation rigs: (2) Economic step-
wise modifications of the system to
reduce problems with irrigation rig
nozzle plugging and to overcome
occasional odor problems from
industrially discharged flows at the
site; (3) Studies and steps undertaken
to improve drainage in a number of
inadequately drained fields; (4) Signi-
ficant reduction in energy consumption
based on studies of aeration cell
operation; and (5) Studies to optimize
population density of corn, nitrogen
fertigation and weed control. Other
examples of improvements, resulting from
good management, are: Reduction in
the full-time labor force from over 60
to 40; acquistion and updating of equip-
ment for more efficient farming and
self-maintenance of nearly every phase
of the system; and hedging to insure
and improve cash revenues from the corn
crop.
Treatment Performance
Wastewater is being renovated to
the degree shown in Table 6. Examina-
tion of this information shows that the
goal of providing clean, high quality
renovated water is being met by the
Muskegon County Wastewater System.The Irrigation-soil-cropping phase
of the wastewater treatment system is
providing not only what is often called
tertiary or advanced wastewater treat-
ment (AWT), but also utilized nutrients
in the wastewater for growing a corn
crop. Over $100,000 worth of nitrogen,
phosphorus, and potassium from the
wastewater was utilized in 1975 to im-
prove the soil and grow food.
Calculations and experience has
shown that if, for example, 3 inches of
wastewater were applied each week over
a 6-month season, an adequate amount
of phosphorus and potassium is available
for the corn crop (Table 7). However,
the level of nitrogen would not be
adequate because of the low nitrogen
level present in the wastewater and
because soils do not retain much
nitrogen. In addition the nitrogen is
utilized by corn primarily only during
2 months of the 6-month irrigation
period. The nitrogen fertilizer,
therefore, was injected (fertlgated)
into the wastewater daily during the
active part of the corn growing season
to increase corn growth and yield and
to stimulate increased removal of
phosphorus, potassium, and other waste-
water nutrients. From 0-89 pounds per
acre of nitrogen fertilizer was added to
the different irrigated fields, dépende
ing upon the amount of wastewater
applied and corn crop's needs (Table 8).
All Circles
The phosphorus (P) concentration in
the land sprayed wastewater has been
just over 1 ppm. At the indicated
level of wastewater application the P
applied is about equal to crop needs
and therefore will not accumulate in
the soil. If the total P level is 3
ppm, a majority of soil at the waste-
water site should be able to remove the
excess P and prevent leaching with the
renovated wastewater for at least 50
years. This assumes that wastewater
is sprayed uniformly on the soil under
the conditions shown.
The quantities of potassium (K),
sodium (Na), and calcium (Ca), in
excess of crop needs are not causing
problems on the sandy soils at Muskegon.
Soil monitoring studies by Michigan
State University indicate that these
wastewater elements are reaching an
equilibrium with the soil sorptive
surface and will be passing through
into the renovated wastewater with
little change in concentration but at
1+20acceptable levels. Studies on other
inorganic and organic constituents in
the wastewater do not indicate any
anticipated problems under the current
mode of operation and with the waste-
water as it now exists,
IMPACT ON GROUND AND SURFACE WATER
Monitoring
There is an extensive monitoring
system. Monitoring results are used
to determine the efficiency of treat-
ment and to assure that the opera-
tion avoids the degradation of ground
and surface water. Samples are taken
for chemical and biological analyses
once or twice daily at each step of the
treatment process. Groundwater is
sampled monthly to twice yearly from
the over 300 wells for analysis.
Finally, the surface water quality is
examined in lakes and streams at some
distance from the treatment site, but
still under the influence of the
wastewater treatment system.
Groundwater
There were 233 monitoring wells
around the storage lagoons. Water
quality results were summarized by
averaging as given in Table 9. Pre-
operation nitrate nitrogen averaged
0.18 mg/1 and doubled to 0.39 mg/1
after start-up; in the same time frame,
chloride went from 4.8 to 13 mg/1, and
conductivity was slightly raised from
2.0 to 2.7 umhos/cm [xlOO]. Phosphate
was stable. With the exception of
chloride, the order of magnitude of
these changes was not considered
significant. A convincing argument
may be made that the large change in
chloride concentration is due to
factors other than the wastewater
treatment operations, namely past oil
drilling operations.
There were also 56 site peri-
meter wells. The averaged data for
preoperation and the 1974-75 post
operation periods show essentially
no change, and therefore are not given.
Surface Water
The quality of water in the
receiving streams has remained about
the same since diversion of wastewater
to the treatment site in 1973, even
though there has been a slight degra-
dation of stream water quality belowthe treated effluent discharge points.
The water quality in the lakes,
however, has improved (Figure 5). The
level of improvement is expected to
increase further as more industries and
communities within Muskegon County join
the Wastewater Treatment System. The
level of improvement is not adequate to
eliminate eutrophication.
DEVELOPMENT COSTS AND CONSTRUCTION
Judged by any standard, the time
frame in which all major construction
components of the project were completed
is remarkable: a period of 20 months.
Start up was May 8, 1973. Total
development costs are given in Table 10.
Excluding land acquisition the
construction of the collection and
transmission network comprised 35 per-
cent of the construction costs. In-
stallation of the force mains and the
pumping stations was done between
October, 1971, and June, 1973. With
extremely minor exceptions, the
collection system was on line to
receive wastewater in late April, 1973.
Cost associated with excavations
amounted to about 35 percent of the
total. In the formation and installation
of the aeration and storage lagoons,
the amount of soil removed was 2.29
MCM (3 millioncubic yards), over an
area of 8,645 ha (3,500 a). The digging
of the drainage ditches involved over
16 km (10 mi) of excavations. All
excavation work was completed within a
period of 8 to 12 months ; aeration
lagoons were ready by January, 1973,
storage lagoons by June 1973, and
drainage ditches by February, 1973.
The distribution segment, includ-
ing irrigation pressure pipelines,
electrical lines and irrigation rigs,
represented 11 percent of the total
consturction costs. Sequencing required
that the pipelines and underground
cables be installed after the comple-
tion of the underground drainage
system, so full-scale construction of
these elements did not begin until
September, 1973, and most of the work
was not completed until late winter.
The pipeline-electrical work lasted
from September, 1973, until April, 1974.
Installation of the irrigation rigs
spanned the eleven month period of
August, 1973, to June, 1974, and was
likewise sequenced after the under-
drainage system.
Underdrainage costs amounted to
9 percent of the total construction
U21eosts. The installation of 109 km
(68 mi) of plastic drain laterals was
accomplished in five months (June-
October, 1973) by the use of laser
devices mounted on excavating equip-
ment; this new technique lowered man-
power requirements, minimized
excavation excesses and dramatically
lowered costs. To assay the importance
of the laser technique in lowering
construction costs, refer to the
original bids: of the $50 million
total original bid, the cost of
installation of underdrainage by
conventional means was $12.5 million.
Actual cost was $758,000.
Muskegon County paid $16 million
of the development costs, the State
of Michigan $8.4 million, and U.S. EPA
$20.1 million. The county issued $16
million worth of bonds to cover its
needed capital outlay. The 1975 bond
repayment was $1.2 million ($0.3
million capital and $0.9 million
interest). Final repayment is due in
1997. Land acquisition costs were not
eligible for federal funding at the
time the grant was awarded, however,
relocation allowances were. Approxi-
mately 190 families and 4 businesses
were relocated.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS
The 1975 total cost for treatment,
including collection, transmission,
aeration, land treatment, depreciation,
amortization, and debt retirement, was
24C/1000 gallons of wastewater (Table
11). This cost is charged to users
via a 17Ç/1000 gallon operational and
a 4.5Ç/1000 gallon debt retirement fee
(22C/1000 gallon user charge) and
acreage charges.
The costs for operation and
maintenance compare very favorably
with those for operating systems
elsewhere within the United States
which have comparable or lesser levels
of treatment (Table 12).
OUTLOOK AND LIFE EXPECTANCY
Any wastewater treatment system
has limitations and the Muskegon
County Wastewater System is no
exception. Operated, however, in it's
present mode (with adequately pre-
fereated wastewater of similar
composition and irrigated with similar
quantities and rates) most of the
cropped soils at Muskegon are expected
to adequately remove wastewatercontaminants like phosphorus for at
least 50 years. If after 50 years, the
land were saturated with phosphorus and
would no longer be able to provide
adequate phosphorus removal, many other
uses for the land will be possible.
Additional research and development
activity should more clearly be able to
predict the life expectancy of all parts
of the system for handling and treating
all wastewater consituents, not only
under the current mode of operation but
also under different modes of operation
using wastewater of different charac-
teristics.
REFERENCE MATERIAL
Data in this report has been drawn
from the following reports which have
been published or are expected in print
in 1978.
Demirjian, Y. A., D. R. Kendrick,
M. L. Smith and T. R. Westman.
Muskegon County Wastewater Management
System. Progress Report, 1963 through
1975. To be published as an EPA
Research Report in 1978.
Ellis, B. G., A. E. Erickson, A. R.
Wolcott, B. D. Knezek, J. M. Tiedje
and J. Butcher. Applicability of
Land Treatment of Wastewater in the
Great Lakes Basin, Volume II:
Effectiveness of Sandy Soils at
Muskegon County, Michigan, for
Renovating Wastewater. To be
published as U. S. EPA Region V
Report in 1978.
Fleck W. B. and M. G. McDonald. Three
Dimensional Finite - Difference Model
of Groundwater System Underlying the
Muskegon County Wastewater Disposal
System, Michigan, J. Res. U.S.
Geological Survey 6:307-318, 1978.
Freedman, P. L., R.P. Canale and M. T.
Auer. Applicability of Land Treatment
of Wastewater in the Great Lakes Area
Basin, Volume III: Wastewater
Diversion Treatment Impact on Muskegon
& Michigan Lakes. To be published
as a U. S. EPA Region V Report in
1978.
Walker, J. M. Wastewater: Is Muskegon
County's Solution Your Solution? EPA
905/2-76-004. September 1976.
1+22TABLES AND FIGURES Table 4. INCREASED AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY BY
RENOVATION/REUSE OF WASTEWATER IN MUSKEGON
Corn Yield and Income
Table 1. ACREAGE ALLOCATIONS AT UMS
Purpose
Irrigated with vastwiatsr
Wastevater storage lagoons
Solid waste landfill s municipal
& industrial development
Ditches 4 toads
Dry land fanned borders
Aeration, settling, outlet lagoons,
chlorlnatlon k other buildings
TotalAllocation
Acres
5350
1700
1500
1000
1000
300Hectare*
2167
689
608
405
405
122Percent of
total
49
16
14
9
9
3
10850 4395 100
UserTable 2. USER WASTEWATER QUANTITIES
Daily Volume Annual Volume
Start-up Date TCMD TCM
City of Muskegon
City of Norton Shores
City of Roosevelt Park
City of Muskagon
Heights
City of North Muskegon
S.D. Warren Company
(pulp mill)
Story Chemical Corp.
Total5/10/73
5/10/73
5/10/73
5/30/73
6/9/73
6/4/73
4/18/7427.7
2.60
2.60
4.50
1.10
55.310,086
967
967
1,658
415
20,172
1,244
35,509Wastewater Site
County Average
Gross Crop Revenue974
28
55
351975
bu/acre
60
65
millions of
0.71976
81
45-50
dollars
1.0 (est.)
Tabla S. DRAINAGE STSTBK DISCHARGE VOLUMES, 1973-1975
Year, TCM
Receiving vatar* & drainage source 1973 1974 1975
Hoaqulto Craak
Drain til**» 16,5*0
Walla11 o
Lagoon Interception Ditch 7,£31
Total 24,21123,027 25,207
0 (sat.) 0
12,079 9.797
35,106 35,193
Black Craak
Drain til**
Valla (circles 36,37,3», t 40)
Lagoon Interception Ditch5,186 7,378 6,447
0 (*st.)378 378
5,697 5,364 6,560
Total 10,883 13,120 13,385
•Outfall discharge minus veils and Ensley Fuap Station
bSo Discharge due to aechanlcal-elactrical probleu
Table t. TRSAMHJT FERFOBUHCI, 1975
1973-1975
Cell number/Apparatus 1973, HMHe 1974, KWH
Cell number 1
Aerators8
Mixers11
Cell number 2
Aerators
Mixers
Cell number 3
Aerators
Mixers
Total3,152,736
1,328,400
3,046,464
1,328,400
1,700,352
649,4403,885,521
2,001,648
3,853,868
1,963,874
443,004
527,723
a44.7 KV
b3?.2 KW
cCella in operation eight months2,959,471
899,157
1,863,983
708,248
731,899
218,606
11,205,792 12,675,638 7,381,364ParaMter InfluentAftar
AerationAfter
StorageDlsctiaria
After
Crop-Soil
Filt.E Limit
Table 3. ELECTRIC POWER CONSUMPTION IN BIOLOGICAL TREATMENT CELLS ^
1975, KMH205
545
Ui
Total P 2.4
Mania-! 6.1
«ltrata-l Trace
zinc** 0.37•j/llt.r81
375
144
0.1
0.41118
20
1.4
2.4
1.1
0.111
28
7
0,05
1.4
1.9
0.0710 4
0.5 0.5
0.6 0.5
5
Fecal >10*/100 pi >10*/100 ml 103/100 ml <102/100 ml 200/100 pi 0/100 pi
Collfora
__—J Creek
Represent at ITB of timvrj petal contents
1*23Tabla 9. COMPARISONS OF SELECTED WATER PARAMETERS ON ALL LAGOON
SEEPAGE «ELLS BEFOBE AMD AFTER WASTEUATER OPERATIONS
Element
N
P
J.
Na
CaTable 7.
Sprayed
Waetawater
Cone.
ppm
4-7
1-3
6-11
140
60WASTEMATER NUTRIENTS
Nutirent* 1B
75-inch (seaion)
Effluent Sprayed
lbs/acre
68-119
17-51
102-187
2400
1000ADDED TO SOILS
Nutlnnt* for
100 bu/acre
Corn Grain
lba/acre
15
20Faranter
HO3-N, IBg/l
Chloride, mg/1
P04-P, «g/1
Conductivity,
unho»/cm[xl00)
Table 10.TUT
1972-1973
1974-1975
1972-1973
1974-1975
1972-1973
1974-1975
1972-1973
1974-1975Averag*
0.18
0.39
4.80
13i0
0.03
0.02
2.00
2.70
DEVELOPMENT COSTS
WASTEWATER SYSTEMStandard
Deviation
0.91
1.39
16.8
38.9
0.05
0.06
1.00
2.00
FOR MUSKEGON
T.bi. 8. «nuEsniTATira ntux OF CORS GUIX m 197}
rt unicAtm FIELD AT man»»
circular
ruld
Hi^xr
S
a
17
37
32
IB
Î5
36Soil
Typ.
ibiblcos S.nd
fciblcon Sand
Au Gr*B Sand
Au Gr« Sand
Granby Loamy
Sand
Kaaco^MHi
Sand
Botcoaaon
Sand
Ro«cOil*0n
saodIU[inui
Appllri
inch..
106
93
39
It
14
57
69
ItSupplantai
uuotu
ranlliiar
lba/acra
«3
44
70
10
27
65
«0
0Draina**
Statu»
txuUanc
Huilant
Good
Poor
fosr
soot
Poor
FourTlald
bu/acre
«3
53
71
36
61
90
69
31Component
Collection
Transmission
Pre-Application Treatment-"
Aeration
Storage (5 billion gallon»)
Land & Relocation
Purchase
Relocation
Clearing
Distribution-Irrigation
Recovery-Drainage
Interest & Engineering
Other
TOTAL MUSKEGON SITE
TOTAL WHITEHALL SITE
TOTAL CAPITAL COSTS
NON-CAPITALIZED COSTS
TOTAL SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT COSTSMillions of dollars
5.2
6.8
3.1
5.2
5.4
1.2
1.9
4.1
3.7
3.8
2.3
42.7
0.8
13.5
1.0
$44.5
ALL emeus
k2kTable 11. NET OPERATING COSTS FOR MUSKEGON
WASTEWATER SYSTEM, 1975
Gross Operating
By Component
Collection 6 Transmission
Aeration & Storage
Irrigation & Drainage
Farming
Laboratory 6 Monitoring
Otb«r$ 431,000
191,000
475,000
474,000
236,000
77,000Tabl« 12. WASTEWATER OPERATION ADD
MAINTENANCE COSTS, 1977
Total nuskegon
Total Whitehall
TOTAL GROSS OPERATING
Band Repayment $1,
Revenues51,
!_
$1,886,000
62,000
946,000
200,00
acres x bu x S/bu
Crop: Corn 4500 x 60 x $2.58
Wheat 270 x 10 x $3.10
Laboratory services
TOTAL REVENUE
Operating
Bond Repayment
TOTAL GROSS
Revenues, Corn
TOTAL NETSunrnary
Costs, millions of$689
8
8
$714
dollars
$ 1.9
1.2
$ 3.1
$ 0.7
$ 2.4,000
,000
,000
,000Wastewater
Treatment 0 & M Costs
Plut* S/1000 G
Laurel, MD 0.65-0.80
UiltM
EutTahoe, CA 2.70
Lansing, MI 0.40-0.45
Muskegon Co., MI 0.25
( )
P
S
CP
SF
N
SI* Capacity available but not
- Primary
- Secondary
- Chemical precipitation of
- Sand Filter
- Nitrogen treatment
- Spray IrrigationWater
Treated
MGD
5(7.5)
3.5(7.5)
12(19)
27(43)Level of
Treatment
P. + S + CP
P + S + CP > », etc
P + S + CP + SF
Aeration + SI
yet utilized
phosphate
NET COST TO TREAT WASTEWATER IN 1975
(27 MGD FLOW)
$0.24/1000 GALLONS
1*25FIGURE 1 Aeral view of the Muskegon County Land
Wastewater Treatment System. Shown are
some of the circular irrigated fields,
the storage lagoons and aeration cells,
FIGURE 3. renter-pivot Irrigation rig with
downward pointing nozzles spraying
corn at Muskegon
(Photo by the Muskegon Chronicle)
Kl'.H CONSUMPTION
4H
FIGURE 2. Five-day biochemical oxygen demand removal
and KWH consumption in the biological
treatment cells. 1974 & 1975.Irrigation Pressure Pipe Distribution -
X,Y,Z Aeration • biological treatment cells
S Settling cell
D Discharge cell
C Chlorination
IS Irrigation pumping stations
1-55O Center pivot irrigated fields
Solid waste landfill.
FIGURE 4, Muskegon Wastewater
Treatment Site,
h2642^PiHIÎ,
T0T4L OlSSOLVtO PHOSPHOHUS
MUSKEGOIM LAKE
1972
CHLO«W"VLI. » ifT^T ™«- """^"^
MONIA UAKE300
ISO
0DISSOLVED IHODWIIC «TMXEH
FIGURE 5. Annual average surface water concentrations of selectedwater quality variables 1n the MuskfiqOn Lakes.
1+27DESIGN CRITERIA
LAND TREATMENT OF
WASTEWATER IN ISRAEL
Hi 11 el I. Shuval - Professor of
Environmental Health, Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical
School, Jerusalem, Israel
Abstract - Israel suffers from a se-
vere shortage of water resources with
over 95% of the total available water
supplies being currently utilized. The
utilization of wastewater has been in-
cluded as a major national water re-
source in Israel's water planning for
over 20 years and by 1978 about 20% of
the available wastewater in the country
was being utilized. Major regional
projects are underway to quadruple the
amount of reuse during the next ten
years.
The health aspects of the land
application of wastewater have been
studied extensively in Israel. The 1970
cholera outbreak in Jerusalem demonstra-
ted the risk associated with uncon-
trolled irrigation of salad crops with
wastewater. Studies on the dispersion
of aerosolized microorganisms from
wastewater sprinkler irrigation have
detected coliforms at 450 m. Salmonella
sp_ at 60 m and enteroviruses at 100 m
Hown-wind of fields sprinkler irrigated
with partially treated non-disinfected
wastewater. A retrospective epidemio-
logical study in 77 Kibbutzim (co-
operative agricultural settlements)
practicing sprinkler irrigation with
partially treated, undisinfected
wastewater indicated that there appears
to be a significant increase in enteric
disease rates (salmonella, typhoid,
Schigella and Infectious Hepatitis) in
Kibbutzim practicing wastewater sprink-
ler irrigation, as compared to settle-
ments not utilizing wastewater in any
form. Sewage treatment leading to
effectiye pathogen reduction in the
effluent is recommended prior to landapplication in the vicinity of resi-
dential areas.
Studies on the use of the drip
irrigation method with wastewater
effluent indicate that there may be
certain hygienic advantages using this
agronomic technique developed in Israel.
Israel with its high level of re-
search capacity can provide an excel-
lent full scale laboratory for the study
of many of the technological.agronomic
and health aspects of the land applica-
tion of wastewater since some 250 land
application projects are in operation.
Other major projects utilizing a wide
variety of techniques are under develop-
ment.
WATER RESOURCES REQUIREMENTS
Israel is a quasi-arid country
having an annual average rainfall of
550 mm/year (22 in/year) in the central
coastal plain which drops to 25 mm/yr
(1 in/yr) at the soutern tip of the
country on the shores of the Red Sea.
The rainfall is seasonal with 90% dis-
tributed during the months of November
to April. With a population of some
three and one half million persons in
1978, Israel's population has more than
quadrupled since the country achieved
independence in 1948, while the area
under irrigation increased more than
5 fold during the same period.
Large scale water supply develop-
ment projects have tapped most of the
country's surface and underground water
resources and it has been estimated that
in 1978 current water supplies for
i+29agricultural, industrial, and municipal
purposes are utilizing some 95% of the
country's economically feasible water-
sources. While present water supplies
for all purposes have reached about
1600 million cubic meters per year (MCM)
(4xlOD MG/yr)it is estimated that by the
year 1990 the country's population will
reach some % million persons and that
there will be a deficit in water supply
of some 200-400 MCM/year (5-10 10 MG/yr).
While sea water desalination may
eventually have to be developed to supply
additional required water for industrial
and municipal use, the maximum reuse of
wastewater has become a matter of
national water resources planning policy
for well over 20 years. Present esti-
mates indicate that the cost of desali-
nization of seawater will most likely
preclude its use for agricultural
purposes except in the case of a few
select high priced crops grown under
special conditions for export. Thus the
severe future water resources constraints
facing the country have made wastewater
reuse a priority program in Israel.
DEVELOPMENT OF LAND APPLICATION PROGRAMS
In the early 1950's projects to
study the agronomic and health aspects
of wastewater reuse in agriculture were
initiated (Shuval, 1951; Bergner-Rabi-
novitz, 1956) which led to the develop-
ment of wastewater irrigation regula-
tions by the Ministry of Health. These
regulations were aimed at limiting land
application of wastewater to crops not
eaten raw or to agricultural practices
avoiding direct contact between edible
crops or fruit and wastewater such as
by ridge and furrow irrigation. However,
the irrigation of crops such as potatoes
normally used for human consumption
after cooking but grown in direct con-
tact with sewage was allowed. The early
policy developed by the Ministries of
Health and Agriculture favored minimum
treatment of wastewater in anaerobic
and aerobic-facultative oxidation ponds
with a total detention period of about
10 days with serious restrictions as
mentioned above on the types of crops
irrigated. Raw wastewater is generally
introduced into two parallel anerobic
ponds with a depth of about 2.5 m and a
detention time of about one day, with
a load of 1500-2000' kg B.O.D/hectare/day.
The primary ponds can be cleaned of
accumulated sludge alternatively. The
secondary aerobic ponds which followgenerally have a depth of 1.2-1.5 m and
a detention time of 7-10 days with a
loading of about 150 kg B.O.D./hectare/
day. (NoV and Felnnesser. 1977). Expe-
rience in Israel h&s indicated that such
secondary ponds generally remain aerobic
during most of thé winter period. How-
ever, on occasion serious odor problems
have been associated with ponds in Is-
rael, generally due to overloading during
winter months.
The possibility of much higher levels
of wastewater treatment Including dis-
infection so as to allow for unrestricted
crop irrigation was ruled out on eco-
nomic and policy grounds during the
earlier phases of the wastewater reuse
program in Israel but is now under con-
sideration. (Shuval, 1977). As land
values have increased in the vicinity of
urban areas aerated ponds have been
introduced to allow for a reduction in
the pond area required.
In a survey of wastewater utiliza-
tion for agricultural purposes carried
out in 1975 (Feinmesser and Wikinski,
1975) it was reported that in the urban
sector encompassing some 2.75 million
persons 87% were connected to central
sewerage systems. Some 30 MCM/year of
the sewage was utilized for agriculture
representing 15% of the total urban
sewage. In the rural sector surveyed,
representing a population of 110,000,
7.5 MCM/year was utilized, which is
33% of the total rural sewage available.
On a countrywide basis some 17% of the
total sewage flow was utilized, 16.5%
directed to the land for agricultural
purposes and 0.5% for industrial use.
The total land area under wastewater
irrigation in 1975 reached 5,200 hect-
ares (13000 acres), while 4.2 MCM/year
where utilized in fish ponds. At that
time there were 49 urban and 153 rural
waste water reuse projects in operation
with additional major projects in the
planning stage. Some 60% of the urban
wastewater was used to irrigate field
crops, mainly cotton and sugar beets.
About 14% was used to irrigate pasture
and forage crops with 21% going to
citrus and other fruit trees. Of the
remaining 5%, 3% went to fish ponds and
2% to various other crops. By 1978
some 20% of the available wastewater
flow from sewered areas was being uti-
lized.
LARGE SCALE REUSE PROJECTS
The first major regional wastewaterproject includes the city of Tel Aviv*
Israel's largest metropolitan center,and
six neighboring municipalities which have
joined together to form the Dan Region
Sewerage Association. Two additional
towns will also join the group.
The region's main mode of waste-
water disposal has been through outfall
sewers to the sea leading to serious
pollution of nearby Tel Aviv bathing
beaches.
The Dan Region Wastewater Reclama-
tion Project was initiated in the early
I9601s by Tahal-Water Planning for Israel
with the aim of solving the problem of
beach pollution and of recycling the
large volumes of wastewater to the
national water system (Amramy, 1965)
(5). In 1978 the total population in-
cluded in the region was about 1,000,000
persons. The estimated population for
1985 is 1,300,000 reaching about 1,700,-
000 in the year 2000. Total mean water
consumption of the region in 1978 was
.3MCM/day (75 MGD). Estimated water
consumption for 1985 is .41 MCM/day
(103 MGD) reaching .55 MCM/day (137 MGD)
by the year 2000 (Amir and Ideliovitch,
1974).
Both due to the recent drastic in-
increases in the costs of energy which
has made seawater desalination an im-
practical alternative water source at
this time, and the urgent need to reduce
the pollution of the Tel Aviv beaches,
the Dan Region Project has been given the
highest priority in the national water
resources development program. The pro-
ject is now in an advanced stage of de-
sign and construction.
The Dan Region Project includes the
construction of major intercepting
sewers to convey the wastewater from all
the towns in the region to the treatment
site in the sand dune area along the
coast south of Tel Aviv. There the
wastewater will be processed by biolo-
gical and chemical treatment processes
prior to reuse. One reuse plan calls
for pumping the effluent to recharge
basins located on the sand dunes. The
water will be pumped from the aquifer
by a series of recovery wells located
several hundred meters away from the re-
charge basis. The recovery wells have
been designed to provide for a residence
time of some 400 days in the aquifer and
for a degree of dilution, with the
ground water. The reclaimed water ex-
tracted from the aquifer will then re-
ceive final polishing treatment and
further dilution. The reclaimed water
will be conveyed mainly to the Negevarea south of the Dan Region for agri-
cultural use. An alternative reuse plan
calls for direct land application of the
treated effluent in the southern Negev
area, thus avoiding ground water re-
charge. Surface storage of the effluent
will be required and may involve a num-
ber of sanitary problems not yet fully
solved.
First Stage
The first stage now in operation
has a design capacity of .041 MCM/day
(10.3MGD) and serves the southern sub-
urbs of Tel Aviv as well as three
neighboring towns. The treatment as now
developed includes: biological purifi-
cation in recirculated facultative
oxidation ponds having an area of 120
hectares; chemical treatment by excess
lime precipitation; ammonia stripping in
open ponds; effluent stabilization in
ponds and lime sludge disposal. The
biological treatment ponds have been
operated since 1970 while the chemical
treatment and recharge of effluent was
initiated in the early part of 1975.
A series of observation wells have been
placed at varying distances between the
ponds, recharge basins, and recovery
wells so that the effects of percolation
from the ponds and recharge basins on
the quality of the water in the aquifer
can be determined at various stages
prior to the arrival of the recharged
water at the recovery wells.
Second Stage
The second stage will have a capa-
city of .27 MCM/day (68.5 MGD) and will
serve the whole area of the Dan Region.
This stage is now in an advanced stage
of planning. The treatment includes:
advanced biological purification by a
modified low-rate activated sludge pro-
cess which will provide for nitrifica-
tion and denitrification, (the treatment
in oxidation ponds will be abandoned in
the second stage due to the large land
area required); in-plant chemical pre-
cipitation; post aeration and disin-
fection of the effluent. Excess sludge
disposal by means of a long sea outfall
which will assure suitable dilution,
dispersion and bacterial decay before
reaching the shore lines is being con-
sidered as one possible solution.
Existing ponds from the first stage will
be integrated into the operation of the
second stage treatment plant in order to
reduce peak loads reaching the mainplant, thus allowing for savings in
capital and operating costs (Idelovitch,
1977).
The additional area of irrigated land
provided for by this project is about
10,000 hectares (25,000 acres)
The Kishon Reuse Project
A large scale regional reuse pro-
ject for the wastewater of the city of
Haifa and its neighbors, with a popula-
tion of some 500,000, 1s in the advanced
planning stages. The chlorinated
effluent from the region's activated
sludge plant will be conveyed to a large
storage reservoir which also collects
certain amounts of flood water. The
diluted effluent will be withdrawn from
the Kishon Reuse Project storage reser-
voir for agricultural use by agricultural
settlements in the Oezriel Valley, en-
abling the irrigation of some 5000 hect-
ares (12,500 acres). It is anticipated
that the large scale Dan and Kishon
regional projects, in addition to
numerous other small projects «nl lead
to a major increase in reuse of
the country's water resources, with some
75% of the country's total available
wastewater being utilized. Many of
the newer reuse projects will involve
the construction of reservoirs to store
sewage over the winter for use during
the 5-6 months irrigation season. The
environmental implications and ecological
problems involved need to be studied In-
tensively so as to establish design
criteria for such long term sewage
reservoirs.
HEALTH PROBLEMS IN LAND APPLICATION
The fact that improper land applica-
tion of wastewater can lead to serious
health problems was dramatically de-
monstrated during the course of a cholera
outbreak in Jerusalem in 1970 (Cohen
et al,1971). It quickly became apparent
that the outbreak was not associated
with contaminated drinking water despite
the fact that the 250 cases detected
appeared in various regions of the city
with no clear picture of transmission
by direct personal contact. Our in-
vestigations clearly showed that after
the first few clinical cases of cholera
were reported, it was possible to de-
tect Cholera, vibrio (El Tor) in the
municipal sewage which flowed untreated
in a dry river bed past a number of
villages practicing illegal irrigationof vegetables including salad crops.
Soil samples from sewage irrigated plots
and harvested vegetables were found
positive for Cholera vibrio as well. It
was concluded that the first few indivi-
dual cholera cases in Jerusalem were
introduced by tourists from neighboring
Middle Eastern countries where a cholera
epidemic had been progressing for a
number of weeks. However, once the
city's sewage became heavily contaminated
with Cholera vibrio excreted by carriers
or clinical cases, the main mode of dis-
semination of the disease to the public
at large was through the sewage irrigated
salad crops which were sold throughout
the city on the same morning as harvested.
This outbreak, although associated with
illegal sewage irrigation practices led
to a tightening up of the sewage irriga-
tion standards and to further intensive
studies of the health problems associat-
ed with the land application of waste-
water (Shuval, 1977).
Dissemination of Microorganisms by
Sprinkler Irrigation
Most irrigation in Israel is by
sprinkler irrigation systems. The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem studies
have shown that enteric bacteria an4
viruses can be detected in the air at
considerable-distances downwind of
wastewater sprinkler irrigation fields
(Katznelson et al, 1977). Conforms
have been detected at 450 m., Salmonella
sp. at 60 m., while echo, coxsackie, and
polio virus have been detected up to
100 m.down wind. In most cases, the
effluent for irrigation was partially
treated in oxidation ponds with 3-5
days detention time having coliform
counts of about 10/100 ml.
Further studies have been made in
an attempt to determine the role of
various meteriological factors in the
survival of aerosolized enteric micro-
organisms. Preliminary findings indi-
cate that relative humidity is posi-
tively correlated with bacterial sur-
vival, while ultraviolet radiation is
negatively correlated. When nighttime
samples of airborne bacteria were com-
pared with daytime samples under equi-
valent wind speeds, relative humidity
and distances, ten times more bacteria
could be detected at night. It is
important to note that in Israel most
irrigation (including with wastewater)
is carried out at night to reduce
evaporative losses and due to more favor-
able wind conditions.
1+32A significant portion of the land
application of wastewater for agri-
cultural purposes is carried out by co-
operative agricultural settlements
(kibbutzim) where the irrigated fields
are mainly 300-1000 m. from residential
areas.
To evaluate the possible epidemio-
logical significance of wastewater irri-
gation, a retrospective study was
carried out in kibbutzim practicing
various forms of irrigation (Katznelson
et al, 1976).
The incidence of enteric communic-
able diseases in 77 kibbutzim practicing
wastewater spray irrigation with
partially treated non-dis1nfected oxida-
tion pond effluent was compared with that
in 130 kibbutzim practicing no form of
wastewater use. The incidence of
shigellosis, salmonellosis, typhoid
fever, and infectious hepatitis was two
to four times higher in communities
practicing wastewater irrigation. No
significant differences were found for
the incidence of streptococcal infections,
tuberculosis, and laboratory-confirmed
cases of influenza. Nor were differences
found for enteric disease rates during
the winter irrigation season (see Fig.1)This study does not provide defi-
nitive proof that the primary mode of
the pathogen transmission was airborne
aerosolized pathogens resulting from
sprinkler irrigation with wastewater.
Other routes of infection, such as
direct contact between irrigation workers
and other residents in the communities
is equally possible. However, these
studies do indicate that a potential
health risk does exist when only
partially purified non-disinfected
wastewater is used for land application
in the close proximity of residential
areas. It was concluded that waste-
water treatment processes leading to a
significant reduction of enteric bacteria
and viruses prior to sprinkler irriga-
tion with wastewater in the vicinity of
residential areas is a minimum precau-
tion required to provide reasonable
protection of the public health.
Since the most widely practiced
form of wastewater treatment prior to
land application is oxidation ponds, a
study was carried out to determine the
efficiency of actual operating ponds in
the removal of coliforms and entero-
viruses. Our studies indicated that
while a 90-99% reduction in coliforms
Man Mijonil inckMnct p« 100,000
! 1 I I I | I I f I
Shritllostt
Silmontllotit
InfKtioul A
htpititit
Typhoid
ftvtr
Ififlutn»
* Mflutmi
5 laboratory
; COflftrmtd
E
E Strtptococcd A
| mftction 8
Tubtrculotit
Shijtllout
Inftctiout A
hipititit
Fig. 1. Mean seasonal incidence of communicable diseases in kibbutzim with and without waste-
water spray imgaiion.
U33can be expected from a typical oxidation
pond system having a 5-7 day detention
period. The removal of enteroviruses
as detected on B.G.M. tissue culture
cell lines varies from 30-602!. It is
the author's opinion that much higher
levels of bacterial and virus reduction
are desirable prior to land application,
particularly 1f sprinkler irrigation is
practiced in the vicinity of residential
areas or public parks and roads.
Effective disinfection of a bio-
logically treated effluent would pro-
vide the higher degree of safety that
appears warranted in light of research
findings to date.
Drip Irrigation with Wastewater
One possible method to reduce the.
risk of aerosol formation during waste-
water application to the land involves
the use of the drip irrigation tech-
nique developed in Israel. This method
distributes the water continuously
directly to the root zone of the irri-
gated plant through a small plastic pipe
with tiny outlets for each plant.
There are numerous agronomic ad-
vantages to the method, particularly for
arid areas, but certain hygienic ad-
vantages may also be obtained when used
for wastewater irrigation.In our studies (Sadovsky et al,1976)
we have been able to demonstrate that
drip irrigation with wastewater does not
prevent the contamination of vegetables
which grow on the ground, such as
cucumbers, and which are in direct con-
tact with the wastewater wetted soil.
A technique using plastic sheets to
cover the drip irrigation lines and the
wetted soil area has developed in Israel
as a kind of membrane "mulch" to reduce
evaporation and cut down on the growth
of weeds. Our studies indicate that
with the use of such plastic sheets even
crops growing on the soil do not in
practice become contaminated by sewage.
In Fig. 2 it can be seen that while
the poliovirus inoculated into the
effluent survived more than a week in
the soil and on cucumbers in direct con-
tact with drip irrigated soil, cucumbers
drip irrigated on plots covered by
plastic sheets were free of poliovirus.
The use of drip irrigation techniques for
land application of wastewater may hold
promise in overcoming some of the health
problems associated with land application
of wastewater and is worthy of further
study.
F1g<2. Virus contamination level on soil and on cucumbers
Irrigated with effluent seeded with Poliovirus.
Comparison between plot covered with plastic sheets
and uncovered plot.
(Date of experiment 4.11.74)
EFFLUENT (PFU/OOml)
CUCUMBERS FROM UNCOVERED
SX<PFU/O0Q>
SCHUPFU/lOOo dry wt)
CUCUMBERS FROM COVERED
SOIL (PFU/OO g)
23456760 12 34567
DAYS 0AY8
TIME AFTER INOCULUMTransport of Viruses to Crops Through
The Roots
An investigation of the possibility
that viruses from wastewater could be
transported through the root system to
the leaves was carried out (Mi 11s,1977).
Subsoil was inoculated with polio-
virus and the leaves of plants grown
in the soil were tested for the virus.
No viruses were detected in leaves of
plants with undisturbed roots, however
when the roots were damanged or cut, it
was possible to detect viruses in the
leaves within a few hours. Whether
this mode of virus transport through
damaged roots is a real public health
risk in cases of drip irrigation with
waste water is not clear at this early
stage of the investigation.
CONCLUSION
Israel is at this time one of the
leading practitioners of land applica-
tion of waste water due to its severe
shortage of water resources and national
reuse policy. Some 250 land application
projects are in operation with 20% of
the country's available wastewater
currently being recycled to the land.
With the completion of major regional
reuse projects now in the construction
phase, it is anticipated that about
75% of the country's wastewater will be
utilized by 1990.
Due to Israel's high level of
engineering, agricultural and environ-
mental health research institutions
in both the governmental and academic
sectors, the country can serve as an
excellent full scale laboratory to
study many of the yet unresolved
questions associated with the land
application of wastewater.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS:
Much of the information presented
in this paper is based on unpublished
reports of the Office of The Water
Commissioner, Israel Ministry of Agri-
culture and Tahal-Water Planning for
Israel, Ltd. The research findings are
drawn from studies supported in part by
grants from The Office of the Water
Commissioner; The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, and the Rockefeller
Foundation.REFERENCES
Amir Y. and Idelovitch E. (1974)
Reuse of municipal wastewater - Dan
Region Project. Proc. U.N. Symp. on
Efficiency in the Use and Reuse of Water.
Herzelia.
Amramy A., (1965) Wastewater treat-
ment for groundwater recharge. Advances
in Water Pollution Research Vol. 2 pp.
147-168. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Bergner-Rabinowitz S. (1956) The
Survival of Coliforms, Streptococcus
foecalis and Salmonella tennessee in the
soil and c1imate of Israel. Applied
Microb. 4:101-106.
Cohen, J.» Schwartz, T., Klazmer,
R., Pridan D., Ghalaymi, and Davies,A.M.
(1971) Epidemiological aspects of
cholera El Tor outbreak in a non-endemic
area. Lancet 11:86-89
Feinmesser A, and Wikinski M.,
(1975) Survey of sewage treatment and
utilization for agricultural purposes
in Israel - 1975. Office of the Water
Commissioner - Tel Aviv. 11 pgs.
Idelovitch E. (1977) Wastewater
reuse by biological-chemical treatment
and ground water recharge. Tahal, Water
Planning for Israel Ltd. Tel Aviv
Katznelson E., Buiutn I. and Shuval
H.I. (1976) Risk of communicable disease
infection associated with wastewater
irrigation in agricultural settlements.
Science: 194:944-946.
Katznelson E., Tetch B. and Shuval
H.I. (1977) Spray irrigation with waste-
water: The problem of aerosolization and
dispersion of enteric microorganisms.
Prog. Wat. Tech. 9:1-11.
Mills D. (1977) Survival of viruses
in soil and transport through the roots
to the leaves. M.Sc. Thesis - School of
Applied Science and Technology - Hebrew
Univ. of Jerusalem (in Hebrew).
Noy J., and Feinmesser A. (1977)
The use of wastewater for agricultural
irrigation, pps.73-92 in Water Renovation
and Reuse, ed. H.I. Shuval. Academic
Press, New York.
Sadovski, A.Y., Fattal B., Katznel-
son E, Goldberg D., and Shuval H.I.(1976)
A study of the distribution of enteric
viruses and bacteria during simulated
epidemics in soil and crops irrigated
with wastewater by the drip irrigation
method. Proc. 7th Scientific Conf.
Israel Ecological Society Tel Aviv,
pps. 221-235.Shuval H.I. (1951) Public Health
aspects of sewage irrigation. Jour.
Israel Assoc. of Architects and Engi-
neers. Sept: p.36 (Hebrew)
Shuval H.I. (1977) Health conside-
rations in water renovation and reuse
pps. 33-72 in Water Renovation and Reuse
ed. H.I. Shuval, Academic Press, New
York.
S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1 978—700-1 11 / I 23