CAN J ANESTH 54: 12    www.cja-jca.or g    December, 2007  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IMAGES  IN ANESTHESIA  1019
CAN J ANESTH 54: 12    www.cja-jca.or g    December, 2007Left ventricular outflow obstruction in a patient 
with undiagnosed hypertrophic obstructive  
cardiomyopathy
CAN J ANESTH 2007 / 54: 12 / pp 1019 −1020
FIGURE 1  A mid-esophageal five-chamber view showing systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve with left ventricle out -
flow tract obstruction. LVOT = left ventricle outflow tract; LV = left ventricle; LA = left atrium.
FIGURE 2  Colour flow Doppler of the left ventricle outflow tract (LVOT) at the mid-esophageal level with a five-chamber 
view. Note the posteriorly-directed mitral regurgitation (MR) and the turbulent flow at the LVOT.1020  CANADIAN  JOURNAL  OF ANESTHESIA
CAN J ANESTH 54: 12    www.cja-jca.or g    December, 2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 46-yr-old male patient with obstructive 
sleep apnea presented for an elective sep -
toplasty. He had a longstanding history of 
hypertension and occasional episodes of 
shortness of breath during moderate exercise. There 
was no previous hospital admission related to cardiac 
or respiratory illness. He had no history of previous 
surgery and no known drug allergies. Physical exami -
nation revealed an overweight patient with a body 
mass index of 43 kg·m-2. Heart sounds were muffled 
and the remainder of the physical examination was 
unremarkable. His medications included atenolol 50 
mg PO bid  and multi-vitamins. 
Following induction of anesthesia, the patient’s 
blood pressure decreased to 65/30 mmHg. 
Incremental doses of ephedrine did not prevent a 
further decrease in blood pressure. Epinephrine 50 µg 
iv resulted in tachycardia (heart rate 102 beats·min–1)  
without any improvement in blood pressure. A trans -
esophageal echocardiography assessment was imme -
diately undertaken. A mid-esophageal five-chamber 
view revealed systolic anterior motion of the anterior 
leaflet of the mitral valve (Figure 1). This resulted in 
left ventricular outflow obstruction (Figure 2). The 
patient was treated with intravenous fluids, esmolol 
and phenylephrine, which resulted in hemodynamic 
improvement. Surgery was postponed and the patient 
was referred to cardiology for further evaluation.Ashraf Fayad MD FASE FCARCSI
The Ottawa Hospital, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, 
Canada
E-mail: afayad@ottawahospital.on.ca 
Accepted for publication September 26, 2007.
Reference
 1 Anonymous. Practice guidelines for perioperative 
transesophageal echocardiography. A report by the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists and the Society 
of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists Task Force  on 
Transesophageal Echocardiography. Anesthesiology 
1996: 84: 986–1006.
FIGURE 3  Left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) of the 
normal heart. LA = left atrium, LV = left ventricle, PV = 
pulmonary vein, LVOT = left ventricular out flow tract, 1 
= anterior leaflet of the mitral valve, 2 = posterior leaflet of 
the mitral valve; Ao = aorta.
FIGURE 4  Left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruc -
tion caused by the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve (1). 
The patient had intraventricular septal hypertrophy and 
mitral regurgitation (MR) directed posteriorly. LA = left 
atrium, LV = left ventricle, PV = pulmonary vein, LVOT 
= left ventricular out flow tract, 1 = anterior leaflet of the 
mitral valve, 2 = posterior leaflet of the mitral valve; MR = 
mitral regurgitation.