 
Electrochemical Treatment of organic and oily wastewaters  
 
 
A Dissertation Submitted to 
 
 Thapar University, Patiala  
 
in partial fulfillment of the Requirements 
 for the Award of Degree of 
 
Master of Technology 
(Environmental Science and Technology)  
 
 
 
 
Under the Guidance of 
Dr. A.S. Reddy 
(Assistant Professor, DBTES) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       
                                            
By 
Sumedha Tripathi 
Roll No. 60701009 
 
 
Department of Biotechnology and Environmental Sciences 
THAPAR UNIVERSITY, 
PATIALA- 147004  June, 2009 
 
Candidate’s Declaration  
I, hereby declare that the thesis report entitled  “Electrochemical treatment of organic and 
oily wastewaters ” in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the award of the degree of 
Masters of Technology, Department of Biotechnology and Environmental Sciences, Thapar 
University, Patiala, is an authentic record of my own work during the period of eleven 
months from August 2008 to June 2009, under the supervision of Dr. A.S. Reddy, Assistant 
Professor, Department of Biotechnology and Environmental Sciences, Thapar University. 
The report has not been submitted for the award of any other degree or certificate in this or  
any other university.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Place: Patiala                  
Date (Sumedha Tripathi) 
 
   
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
 
I would like to express my deep and sincere gratitude to my supervisor Dr. A.S. Reddy , 
Assistant professor. His wide knowledge and logical way of thinking have been of great 
value for me. His understanding and personal guidance have provided a good basis for the 
present thesis. Especially the strict and extensive comments and many discussions and the 
interactions with Dr. Reddy had a direct impact on the final form and quality of this thesis 
report. 
I am also sincerely thankful to Mr Vishal Duggal  for providing me the power system 
without which the work would have been crippled.  
I further extend my gratitude the Mr M.S. Bhatti,  Lecturer, JNDU for helping me with the 
analysis parts of the results. 
I also thank to all the faculty and staff members of DBTES and Science and Technology 
Thapar University, Patiala and Satluj Monitoring Project members for their co-operation and 
support throughout the course work.  
I owe my sincere thanks to my mother and sister with whose support I was able to finish this 
work successfully.  
Finally, and most importantly, I would like to thank the almighty God, for it is under his 
grace that we live, learn and flourish. 
 
           
           
 
          
 
 
 
                                                                                                         ( Sumedha Tripathi) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contents 
 
 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
                 1.1 Objectives of work 
                 1.2 Scope of work 
                 1.3 Significance of work 
                 1.4 Limitations of work 
                 1.5 Overview of contents of thesis 
 
Chapter 2: Literature review 
                 2.1 General literature     
                 2.2 Literature on treatment of different waste waters with organics 
1. Coffee curing waste waster 
2. Landfill leachate 
3. Phenolic waste waters 
4. Yellow waste waters 
5. Slaughter house waste waters 
6. Treated effluent 
7. Dairy waste water 
8. Pharmaceutical waste water 
9. Paper and pulp industry waste water 
10. Distillery waste water 
11. Latex treatment waste water 
12. Food processing waste water 
13. Waste water with recalcitrant organic compounds 
14. Municipal waste water 
15. Algae rich waste water 
               2.3 Oily waste waters 
1. General literature 
2. Olive mill waste water 
 
Chapter 3: Methodology                             3.1 Wastewaters studied 
                            3.2 Experimental set up  
                            3.3 Approach followed 
                            3.4 Analytical techniques 
 
Chapter 4: Results and discussion 
             4.1 Treatment of acrylic fibre application oil wastewater 
 4.2 Treatment of first extraction stage bleach effluent 
 4.2.1 Using iron electrodes 
 4.2.2 Using aluminum electrodes 
 4.2.3 Using stainless steel electrodes- Modeling for colour removal  
 
Chapter 5: Conclusion 
                  References 
Annexure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 List of Figures and Graphs 
 
 
Figure 3.1 Experimental set up for electrochemical treatment process. 
Graph 4.1 pH versus COD removal (%) for Acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater.  
Graph 4.2 Chlorides versus COD removal (%) for Acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater. 
Graph 4.3 Voltage versus COD removal (%) for Acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater. 
Graph 4.4 Time versus COD removal (%) for Acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater. 
Graph 4.5 pH versus Colour removal (%) for first extraction stage bleach effluent. 
Graph 4.6 Voltage versus Colour removal (%) for first extraction stage bleach effluent.  
Graph 4.7 Time versus Colour removal (%) for first extraction stage bleach effluent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 List of Tables 
 
 
Table 3.1 Characterization of Acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater from textile industry 
Table 3.2 Characterization of first extraction stage bleach effluent  
Table 4.1 Process variables and their ranges for Acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater 
Table 4.2 Experimental range and level of independent process variables for acrylic fibre 
applicator oil wastewater 
Table 4.3 Experimental design as per CCD for acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater 
Table 4.4   Selection of model for acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater 
Table 4.5 Actual and predictive responses of COD removal efficiency of Acrylic fibre       
applicator oil wastewater 
Table 4.6 Process variables and their ranges for Bleach effluent 
Table 4.7 Experimental range and level of independent process variables for Bleach effluent 
Table 4.8 Experimental design as per CCD for Bleach effluent 
Table 4.9 Selection of model for first extraction stage bleach effluent 
Table 4.10 Actual and predictive responses of Colour removal efficiency of First Extraction 
Stage Bleach Effluent using SS-SS pair of electrodes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract 
The study aims to investigate the treatability of acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater from 
textile processing industry and first extraction stage bleach plant effluent from a pulp and 
paper industry by electrochemical treatment process. The set of experiments to be performed 
were found using Response Surface Methodology (RSM) of design expert software. The 
experimental results were analysed by the design expert software and the electrochemical 
treatment process was modelled. 
For the acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater, stainless steel electrodes were used and the  
treatment process was optimized for the fixed factors pH, voltage, time and chloride content, 
and treatment efficiency in terms of COD removal was recorded as response. Statistical 
modelling and the response maximization gave 5.1 pH, 14.26 V voltage, 9.25 minutes 
treatment time and 1067mg/l of chloride as optimal parameter values for the maximum COD 
removal of 77.7%.  
For the treatment of bleach plant effluent, aluminium, iron and stainless steel electrodes were 
used. May be due the inability to properly monitor the response, statistical model 
development and process optimization could be done only for the SS-SS pair of electrodes. 
Optimum conditions for the maximum colour removal with SS-SS pair of electrodes were 
found to be 6.25 pH, 8.99 V voltage, and 15.69 minutes treatment time. The maximum colour 
removal efficiency achieved was 96.6%.  
Thus above results show that electrochemical treatment can be successfully used for th e 
treatment of acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater and also for that of the first extraction 
stage bleach plant effluent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chapter 1 
Introduction 
One of the major problems faced by human race today is to provide clean water to the vast 
majority of population all around the world. With fresh water sources as rivers, canals and 
estuaries etc limited and those available being polluted by indiscriminate discharge of 
industrial pollutants and other processes, making fresh water much cherished commodit y 
now a days. The widening gap between demand and supply of water comes in the way of 
sustainable development. Thus in the wake of 21st century ,emphasis is being laid on 
reduction, recycle and reuse of natural resources such as fresh water. Further there are severa l 
difficult waste waters which cannot meet the present standards by conventional waste water 
treatment techniques. Thus for recycling and reusing the waste water that leads to reduction 
of fresh water consumption and for treating difficult waste waters, there is an urgent need to 
develop innovative, more effective  and inexpensive technique of waste water treatment.  
Electrochemical treatment is one such technique which can either be used as main treatment 
scheme or as a hybrid technique. It can also be used as a pretreatment scheme for difficult 
waste waters for which feasible technologies are not available.  Treatment of these 
wastewaters may require segregation of the culprit wastewater streams at source and 
pretreatment prior to addition to other wastewaters for treatment and disposal. Here, objective 
of the pre-treatment is to make the wastewater compatible for mixing with other wastewaters 
and to improve the treatability of the overall wastewater of the industrial unit. This pre-
treatment approach, for the segregated wastewater streams, makes the otherwise costly 
wastewater treatment technologies feasible. Low volumes and high strength of the segregated 
wastewater streams are responsible for this. 
Electrochemical treatment can be used as an treatment technique for the treatment of waste 
water with lignin and tannic acid (Chiang et al. 1997), resorcinol and cresols (Rajkumar et al. 
2001; Rajkumar and Palanivelu 2003), tannins (Buso et al. 2000), textile dye (Allen et al. 
1995;Vijayaraghavan et al. 2001; Szpyrkowicz et al. 2000), landfill leachate (Chiang et al. 
1995), polyaromatic organic compounds (Panizza et al. 2000), tannery (Szpyrkowicz et al. 
1995), and pharmaceutical (George et al. 1995) wastewaters etc. Although the technique is 
not new and can be traced back of being used for the first time in 1889 in UK, still it has 
never been used as the main stream treatment technology. This can be attributed to its high 
operational cost.  So in the present report, on the basis of experimental results for acrylic waste water and 
bleach effluent obtained on a lab scale, attempts are being made to find out the most suitable 
type of electrode and optimum conditions ( such as pH, Voltage, Time) to get the requisite 
treatment of waste water in a cost effective manner. 
1.1: Objective of work 
 Objective of this study is to optimise the treatment conditions on laboratory scale, whose 
results can be used to scale up to a pilot scale treatment unit for acrylic fibre applicator oil  
wastewater and first extraction stage bleach effluent. 
1.2: Scope of work 
1. Literature has been obtained from Mr. M.S. Bhatti,  lecturer of Guru Nanak Dev 
University, Amritsar. Some of the literature was also searched from 
www.sciencedirect.com, www.IEEE.com and www.googlesearch.com. 
2. To work on electro-chemical treatment original industrial wastewater was used which was 
provided by Dr A.S. Reddy, Associate Professor of Thapar university- 
 Acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater from textile industry.  
 First extraction stage bleach plant effluent from a pulp and paper industry. 
3.  It also includes the lab scale electrochemical treatment unit fabrication and standardization 
of the treatment process which can be used for different waste waters to get the lab scale 
results. 
4. Main emphasis was on electro-chemical treatment of wastewater and to obtain the results 
under different experimental conditions.  
1.3: Significance of work 
1.  Work was done on two types of wastewaters, so this report is of immense use for us to 
know about the treatability studies of these wastewaters and if any person wants to do 
further work then this report will be of immense use as starting material. 2. Most of the abstracts related to electrochemical treatment system, available online were 
gone through. Relevant research papers related to electrochemical treatment of organic 
and oily water were also thoroughly scanned to get the insight of the status co in the field. 
3. The results obtained were used for modelling by response surface methodology (RSM).In 
this relevant software and the experimental results obtained, were used to chalk out 
optimised set of conditions for the treatment of waste water. 
1.4: Limitations  
Following were the limitations faced while working to reach the objectives of present thesis 
work. 
1. The treatment scheme followed here is batch type, which is not usually the treatment mode 
followed in industries. Hence reliability of these results for scaling up to pilot scale plant 
is slightly reduced. 
2. Further a dead space of 2 cm length is present below the reactor where the electrodes are 
not present. So there is no treatment going on in that area of the reactor which 
considerably reduces the efficiency of treatment. 
3. Also the free board provided over the reactor was found to be quite less as compared to the 
volume of waste water treated, so the flocs and the scum rising above the reactor have to 
be periodically collected for preventing their overflow and getting the correct insight of 
the sludge volume produced. 
4.  The magnetic stirrer bead which was used to create mixing and turbulence within the 
reactor was useful only with aluminium and stainless steel electrodes and it was 
magnetically stuck to the iron electrodes when used with them, hence causing no mixing.  
This effects the uniformity of the experimental sets results when experimental results of 
different electrodes are compared. 
1.5: Overview of Contents of Thesis Report 
This thesis report includes abstract, five chapters and references whose contents can be 
briefly described as follows: Chapter-1 It gives the brief background information and overview of the contents of thesis 
report along with the objectives, scope, significance and limitations of the work done. 
Chapter-2 It is literature review of electrochemical treatment of organic and oily waste 
waters. This chapter compiles the different types of organic matter and oil rich wastewater s 
treated using different types of electrodes under different treatment conditions. Further the 
efficiency for the treatment of different wastewaters and cost effectiveness of this technology 
in comparison to other technology was also considered. 
Chapter-3 is Methodology. This chapter gives the information about the source and 
characteristics of waste water; experimental set up used; procedure followed for the 
treatability studies and the analytical techniques used for analysing the raw and the treate d 
effluent. 
Chapter-4  is Results and Discussion. This chapter includes the experimental results along 
with their interpretation and further use in modelling. The details of modelling and optimised 
results are also quoted here. 
Chapter-5 is Conclusion. Here summary of the report is presented and it also highlights the 
need of technology for treatment of different wastewaters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chapter -2     
Literature Review 
This thesis work is based on organic matter and oil rich waste waters hence the literature 
review was totally focussed on these waste waters. 
Electrochemical treatment has been found to be an efficient technique for difficult and 
recalcitrant waste waters as soluble oils, liquid from food, cellulosic waste water, textile 
effluent etc for which conventional treatment techniques are either not meeting the discharge 
standards or are not feasible. However all the organic matter and the oil rich waste waters 
have different components so according to Calvo et al (2003), the treatment efficiency of 
electrochemical process may change dramatically from one waste water to another for 
instance the COD removal from landfill leachate is 73% [Peterson et al(2007)], phenolic 
waste water is 99% [Ma H et al(2008)], slaughter house waste water is 82% [Asselin et al( 
2008)], poultary waste water is 93% [Kobya M. et al (2006)], dairy waste water is 98% 
[Sengil A. et al (2006)], paper and pulp industry waste water is 80%[ Mahesh S. Et al(2006)], 
distillay waste water is 89.62%[Piyareetham P. et al (2006)] etc. 
Thus efficiency, applicability and even feasibility of electrochemical treatment for orga nic 
matter and oil rich waste water depends upon the different constituent present in that waste 
water to be treated as given below. 
 
3.1. Organic waste waters  
3.1.1. General literature 
Barrera-Díaz et al . (2009) in A Comparison of Iron and Aluminium Electrodes in Hydrogen 
Peroxide-Assisted Electrocoagulation of Organic Pollutants studied the  removal of organic 
pollutants from a highly complex industrial wastewater by aluminium and iron 
electrocoagulation assisted with hydrogen peroxide. Under optimal treatment the process 
reduced chemical oxygen demand (COD) by 92%, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD 5) by 
89%, color by 92%, turbidity by 95%, and total coliforms by 99%. Initial and final pollutant 
levels in the wastewater were monitored using UV-Vis spectrometry and cyclic voltammetry.  
Shibin et al. (2007) in Removal of organic pollutants from 2,2',5,5'-tetrachlorobenzidine 
(TCB) industrial wastewater by micro-electrochemical oxidation and air-stripping found that 
combined micro-electrochemical oxidation or iron-chipping filtration (ICF) and air-stripping reactor (ASR) is a feasible method for treatment of the wastewater from the two-staged 
neutralization in 2,2',5,5'-tetrachlorobenzidine (TCB) manufacturing processes, a refractory 
dye intermediate effluents. On conditions of HRT 1h, pH 3.0 in ICF and HRT 38 h, gas-
liquid ratio 15, pH 6.0-8.65, temperature 26 degrees C in ASR, the overall COD, color, TCB 
and ammonical-N removal were 96.8%, 91%, 87.61% and 62%, respectively, during the 
treatment of TCB wastewater from the two-staged neutralization dissolved by methanol. The 
averaged 18.3%, 81.7% of the total degraded COD, 35.2%, 64.8% of TCB were carried out in 
ICF and ASR, respectively. Ammonical-N removal was finished mainly in ASR. The 
experimental results indicated that the combined micro-electrochemical oxidation and air-
stripping process performed good treatment of COD, color, TCB and ammonical-N removal 
in TCB wastewater from the two-staged neutralization dissolved by ethanol or acetone came 
up the discharge standard in China.  
Panizza et al. (2001) in Removal of organic pollutants from industrial wastewater by 
electrogenerated Fenton's reagent studied the treatment of an industrial wastewater mainly 
containing naphthalene and anthraquinone-sulphonic acids, by electrogenerated Fenton's 
reagent. The influence of cathode potential, Fe2+ concentration and electrode surface pre-
treatment on chemical oxygen demand (COD) removal and colour fading were studied. 
Results indicated that the higher COD removal was obtained in the presence of 3 mM of 
ferrous ions working at a constant potential of 1 V. Moreover, it was shown that both 
chemical and electrochemical pre-treatments of the cathode surface resulted in a dec rease of 
COD depletion. 
Zhou et al. (2005) in Long life modified lead dioxide anode for organic wastewater treatment: 
electrochemical characteristics and degradation mechanism, found that the lack of ideal 
anodes with both good activity and stability is one of the critical problems in electrochemical 
oxidation for organic wastewater treatment. The electrochemical properties, the activity and 
stability for anodic oxidation of various phenolic compounds, and the degradation mechanism 
on a novel beta-PbO2 electrode modified with fluorine resin were investigated and found that 
the anode life after modification was greatly improved to be more than 10 yr in common 
electrochemical current conditions. Such an anode was effective for partial degradation of 
phenolic compounds, but selective because reactive activities were varied with different 
substituents. The active species generated during anodic oxidation were mainly hydroxyl 
radical and little ozone. The reactions between hydroxyl radical and phenolic compounds were proved to be electrophilic reactions, based on which a general electrochemical 
degradation mechanism for aromatic compounds was proposed.  
Martínez-Huitle et al. (2006) in Electrochemical oxidation of organic pollutants for the 
wastewater treatment: direct and indirect processes, summarized the results of an extensive 
selection of papers dealing with electrochemical oxidation of organic waste waters. Both the 
direct and indirect approaches are considered and the role of electrode materials is discussed 
together with that of other experimental parameters. Apart from discussing the possibility of 
removing selected contaminants from water using different anodes, efficiency rates for 
pollutant removal was also calculated.  
Bonfatti et al. (2000) in Anodic mineralization of organic substrates in chloride-containing 
aqueous media  investigated the electrochemical incineration of glucose in alkaline media, in 
the presence of NaCl. The dependence of chemical oxygen demand (COD) and total organic  
carbon content, on electrolysis duration, t was considered. The influence of current density, 
sodium chloride concentration, temperature, sodium hydroxide concentration on the rate of 
COD abatement was also considered. The rate of the incineration was found to increase with 
increasing the current density and pH and decreasing the solution temperature. With 
increasing the chloride concentration up to a given critical value, the mineralization rate 
increases while further increase causes a decrease. The critical value of the mediator 
concentration has been found to be lower at higher pH. On the basis of this preliminary 
screening, an attempt of optimization of the mediated electrochemical incineration as a 
function of current density and chloride concentration has been carried out, basing the 
analysis on the Simplex algorithm.  
 Jiang et al. (2008) in  Simultaneous Hydrogen Production and Electrochemical Oxidation of 
Organics Using Boron-Doped Diamond Electrodes studied the advantages of using a boron-
doped diamond (BDD) electrode for hydrogen production and wastewater treatment in a 
single electrochemical cell. Results indicated that the BDD electrode allowed new 
possibilities for both anodic and cathodic reactions to simultaneously take place. The BDD 
electrode exhibited high anodic potential, generating high oxidation state radicals that 
facilitated oxidation of toxic waste organic compounds such as 4-nitrophenols. In contrast, 
because of widening of potential windows, the rate of hydrogen evolution at the cathode was 
significantly increased. Time-on-stream concentrations of reaction intermediates were 
monitored to elucidate mechanism involved in 4-nitrophenol oxidation. Overall, the BDD electrode exhibits unique properties including chemical inertness, anticorrosion, and extended 
service life which are important in wastewater treatment. Economic advantages were 
attributed to the low cost and long duration BDD electrode and the valuable hydrogen 
byproduct produced. When combined with solar energy and fuel cells, electrochemical 
wastewater processing can become energy efficient and cost-effective. 
3.1.2. Literature on different waste waters with organic compounds  
1. Coffee curing waste water 
Bejankiwar et al. (2003) in Colour and organic removal of biologically treated coffee curing 
wastewater by electrochemical oxidation method investigated the treatment of biologically 
treated wastewater of coffee-curing industry by the electrochemical oxidation using steel 
anode. Bench scale testing was done for several operating parameters like time, pH and 
current density to ascertain their effects on the treatment efficiency. Steel anode was found to 
be effective for the COD and colour removal with anode efficiency of 0.118 kg COD/ h x A x 
m-2 and energy consumption 20.61 kWh / kg of COD at pH 9. The decrease in pH from 9 to 3 
found to increase the anode efficiency from 0.118 kgCOD / h x A x m-2 to 0.144 kWh / kg of 
COD while decrease the energy consumption from 20.61 kWh / kg of COD to 12.86 kWh / 
kg of COD. The pH of 5 was considered an ideal from the present treatment process as it 
avoids the addition of chemicals for neutralization of treated effluents and also economical 
with respect to energy consumption.  
2. Landfill leachate treatment  
Thaveemaitree et al. (2003) in Application of electrochemical process for landfill leachate 
treatment with emphasis on heavy metal and organic removal conducted laboratory 
electrochemical experiments using both synthetic wastewater and landfill leachate samples. 
From the synthetic wastewater experiments, the lead removal efficiencies were found to be 
more than 99% which was observed to be dependent on: the electrical current, ratio between 
reacting surface area and volume of reactor and operation time, and follows a first-order 
reaction. Similar results on lead removal were obtained when the landfill leachate samples 
were treated in the electrochemical reactor where the percent removal of soluble BOD and 
soluble COD concentrations from the landfill leachate during the electrochemical treatment 
were 30-60%, while the color removal was 70%.  Wang et al. (2001) in Electrochemical Oxidation of Leachate Pretreated in an Upflow 
Anaerobic Sludge Blanket Reactor studied to develop a two-stage process for the treatment of 
Hong Kong leachate. The leachate, containing 4750 mg l-1 of chemical oxygen demand 
(COD) and 1310 mg l-1 of ammoniacal nitrogen (NH 3-N), was first treated in a UASB 
(upflow anaerobic sludge blanket) reactor at 37°C. The process removed on average 66.1% of 
COD with 6.1 days of hydraulic retention time (HRT), corresponding to an organic loading 
rate of 0.78 g-COD (l·day)-1. The UASB effluent, which had an average pH of 8.9, COD of 
1610 mg l-1 and NH 3-N of 1480 mg l-1, was then further treated by electrochemical oxidation 
in a batch reactor with recirculation. With the addition of 2000 mg l-1 of chloride (in the form 
of sodium chloride) and at a current density of 32.3 mA cm-2, 87% of COD and 100% of 
NH3-N were removed from the UASB effluent in six hours. The energy consumption was 
<55 kWh kg-COD-1. The final effluent contained no residual NH 3-N and only 209 mg l-1 of 
COD. 
Peterson et al. (2007) in Electrodegradation of landfill leachate in a flow electrochemical 
reactor studied the treatment of landfill leachate by electrochemical treatment process . 
Leachate from a municipal landfill site was treated by electrochemical oxidation in a pilot 
scale flow reactor, using oxide-coated titanium anode. The experiments were conducted 
under a constant flow rate of 2000 l h−1 and the effect of current density on chemical oxygen 
demand, total organic carbon, color and ammonium removal was investigated. At a current 
density of 116.0 mA cm−2 and 180 min of processing, the removal rates achieved were 73% 
for COD, 57% for TOC, 86% for color and 49% for ammonium. Thus the process proved 
effective in degrading leachate, despite this effluent’s usual refractoriness to treatment.  
Feki et al. (2009) in Electrochemical oxidation post-treatment of landfill leachates treated 
with membrane bioreactor investigated the integration of membrane bioreactor (MBR) with 
electrochemical process as treatment of stabilized landfill leachates, collected from Djebel 
Chekir (Tunisia). Results showed that at optimum conditions for the membrane and with 
organic loading rates of 1.9 and 2.7g COD L(-1)d(-1), MBR treated effluent is still coloured  
and contains high COD and ammonia concentrations. In order to reduce these high pollutant 
concentrations, electrochemical oxidation process using Ti/Pt, graphite and lead oxide 
electrodes, was tested as effluent post-treatment where Ti/Pt electrodes showed the best 
performance. COD, ammonia and colours removals were affected by the current density (J ) 
and treatment time (t). At optimal operational conditions (t=1h, J=4Adm(-2)), the final COD and total kjeldahl nitrogen concentrations (TKN) were 1000 and 86mgL(-1), respectively. 
The final treated wastewater COD, TKN, colours, pH meet the discharge standards in the 
sewer. Thus the combination of MBR treatment process with electrochemical oxidation can 
be a technical suitable solution for stabilized landfill leachates treatment with an efficient 
reduction of different parameters, essentially COD (85%), TKN (94%), and colour(436) 
(99%). 
3. Phenolic waste waters  
Ma et al. (2008) in Electrochemical catalytic treatment of phenol wastewater found that the 
slurry bed catalytic treatment of contaminated water appears to be a promising alternative for  
the oxidation of aqueous organic pollutants. In this paper, the electrochemical oxidation of 
phenol in synthetic wastewater catalyzed by ferric sulfate and potassium permanganate 
adsorbed onto active bentonite in slurry bed electrolytic reactor with graphite electrode has 
been investigated. In order to determine the optimum operating condition, the orthogonal 
experiments were devised and the results revealed that the system of ferric sulfate, potassium 
permanganate and active bentonite showed a high catalytic efficiency on the process of 
electrochemical oxidation phenol in initial pH 5. When the initial concentration of phenol 
was 0.52g/L (the initial COD 1214mg/L), up to 99% chemical oxygen demand (COD) 
removal was obtained in 40min. According to the experimental results, a possible mechanism 
of catalytic degradation of phenol was proposed.  
Korbahti et al. (2003) in Continuous electrochemical treatment of phenolic wastewater in a 
tubular reactor investigated the innovate process of electrochemical treatment of phenolic 
wastewater in a continuous tubular reactor, constructed from a stainless steel tube with a 
cylindrical carbon anode at the centre. The effects of residence time on phenol removal was 
studied at 25 degrees C, 120 g/ l electrolyte concentration for 450 and 3100 mg / l phenol 
feed concentrations with 61.4 and 54.7 mA cm(-2) current densities, respectively. The change 
in phenol concentration and pH of the reaction medium was monitored in every run and 
GC/MS analyses were performed to determine the fate of intermediate products formed 
during the electrochemical reaction in a specified batch run. For 10 and 20 min of residen ce 
time phenol removal was 56% and 78%, respectively, with 450 mg/ l phenol feed 
concentration and above 40 min of residence time all phenol was consumed within the 
column. For 1, 1.5, 2 and 3h of residence time, phenol removal achieved was 42%, 71%, 81% 
and 98%, respectively; at 3100 mg/l phenol feed concentration. It is noteworthy that more than 95% of the initial phenol was converted into a non-passivating polymer without 
hazardous end products in a comparatively fast and energy-efficient process, proving 
electrochemical treatment a safe treatment. 
Lou et al. (2008) in Study on Treatment of the Simulation Wasterwater of Phenol with 
Electrochemical Process found that electrochemical treatment of organic pollutants in 
wastewater has the advantages of high efficiency, simple operation, compatibility with the 
environment etc. The experiment takes the carbon stick of discard and old No. 1 dry batteries 
as electrodes, uses the beaker as electrolytic cell and at room temperature by changing the 
concentration of supporting electrolyte by using Na 2SO4,  load voltage, pH value', the initial 
phenol concentration different experimental results are obtained. Electrochemically treated 
simulation wasterwater of phenol was analysed using the High Performance Liquid 
Chromatography (HPLC) and the results show that: the concentration of supporting 
electrolyte Na 2SO4 at 20.0 g/L, the load voltage at 5.5 V, pH value at 8.0 etc is the best 
process condition for treatment of the simulation wasterwater of phenol.  
4. Yellow waste waters 
Lazarova et al. (2008) in Treatment of yellow water by membrane separations and advanced 
oxidation methods compared the performance memberane separation and advanced oxidation 
on purification of yellow wastewaters separated and collected in solarCity, Linz, Austria. 
Three membrane methods (micro-, ultra-, and nano-filtration), and two advanced oxidations 
(gamma radiation and electrochemical oxidation) were applied. Best results concerning the 
removal of pharmaceuticals and hormones from urine by membrane separation were achieved 
using the membrane NF-200 (FilmTec). Pharmaceuticals and hormones were removed 
completely from urine. NF-separation also has some disadvantages: losses of urea, and 
lowering the conductivity in the product (permeate). The results showed that electrochemical 
oxidation is more suitable than gamma radiation. Gamma-radiation with intensities higher 
than 10 kGy has to be applied for efficiently destroying of ibuprofen, and especially 
diclofenac. A high quantity of intermediate "problem" substances with oestrone structure was 
formed during the gamma oxidation of hormone containing urine samples. However the 
electrochemical oxidation can be successfully applied for elimination of pharmaceuticals 
such as diclofenac, and hormones(oestrone, beta-oestradiol) from yellow wastewater without 
loss of urea.  5. Slaughter house waste water  
Asselin et al. (2008) in Effectiveness of electrocoagulation process in removing organic 
compounds from slaughterhouse wastewater using monopolar and bipolar electrolytic cells 
used electrochemical techniques at the laboratory pilot scale for organic compounds removal 
from poultry slaughterhouse (PS) effluent  in order to produce an effluent suitable for stream 
discharge. Slaughterhouse wastewaters contain varied and high amounts of organic matter 
(e.g., proteins, blood, fat). Results showed that the best performance was obtained using mild 
steel BP electrode system operated at a current intensity of 0.3A, through 60 or 90 min of 
treatment. Under these conditions, removals of 86+/-1% and 99+/-1% were measured for 
BOD and oil and grease, respectively, whereas soluble COD and total COD were removed by 
50+/-4% and 82+/-2%, respectively. EC is also efficient for decolorization (red-color) and 
clarification of the PS effluent. Removals of 89+/-4% and 90+/-4% have been measured for 
total suspended solids and turbidity, respectively. Electrochemical coagulation operated 
under the optimal conditions involves a total cost of 0.71 USD $ per cubic meter of treated 
PS effluent.  
Tezcan et al. (2005) in Hybrid processes for the treatment of cattle-slaughterhouse 
wastewater using aluminium and iron electrodes found that Electrocoagulation (EC) of cattle-
slaughterhouse wastewater, which is characterized by (i) high turbidity (up to 340 
Nephelometric turbidity units), (ii) increased chemical oxygen demand (COD) concentration 
(4200 mg L−1), and (iii) a dark color, served the purpose of lowering the turbidity and COD 
concentration to levels below the permitted direct-discharge limits. Iron and aluminium were 
used as electrode materials. Experiments were conducted to evaluate the effects of current 
density, initial pH, and supporting electrolyte (Na 2SO4) dosage on the performance of the 
system. COD removal increased with increase in current density. The original pH of 
wastewater (7.8) was found to be preferable for both the electrode materials. Higher 
concentrations of Na 2SO4 caused an increase in COD removal efficiency, and energy 
consumption was considerably reduced with increasing conductivity. Hybrid processes were 
applied in this work to achieve higher COD removal efficiencies. In the case of aluminum 
electrode, polyaluminum chloride (PAC) was used as the coagulant aid for the aforesaid 
purpose. COD removal of 94.4% was obtained by adding 0.75 g L−1 PAC. This removal 
efficiency corresponded to effluent COD concentration of 237 mg L−1, which meets the legal 
requirement for discharge from slaughterhouses in Turkey. In the case of iron electrode, EC was conducted concurrent with the Fenton process. As a result, 81.1% COD removal was 
achieved by adding 9% H 2O2. Consequently, hybrid processes are inferred to be superior to 
EC alone for the removal of both COD and turbidity from cattle-slaughterhouse wastewater. 
Kobya et al. (2006) in Treatment of poultry slaughterhouse wastewaters by 
electrocoagulation investigated batchwise treatment of poultry slaughterhouse wastewater 
(PSW) by electrocoagulation (EC). Effects of the process variables such as medium pH, 
electrode material, current density, and operating time are investigated on chemical oxygen 
demand (COD) and oil –grease removal efficiencies, electrical energy consumption, and 
sacrificial electrode consumption. The highest COD removal efficiency is reached with 
aluminium as 93%, and maximum oil –grease removal is obtained with iron electrodes as 
98%. Combined use of both electrode materials in the EC unit may yield high process 
performances with respect to both COD and oil –grease removals. Further work needs to be 
carried out at pilot scale to assess the technical end economic feasibility of the process. 
6.  Treated effluent (post treatment)  
Buzzini et al. (2006) in Preliminary evaluation of the electrochemical and chemical 
coagulation processes in the post-treatment of effluent from an upflow anaerobic sludge 
blanket (UASB) reactor comparatively studied chemical and electrochemical coagulation 
processes, both followed by flocculation and sedimentation of an effluent from an upflow 
anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactor for treating simulated wastewater from an 
unbleached Kraft pulp mill. The electrochemical treatment removed up to 67% (with 
aluminum electrodes) and 82% (with stainless-steel electrodes) of the remaining chemical 
oxygen demand (COD) and 84% (stainless steel) and 98% (aluminum) of the color in the 
wastewater. These efficiencies were achieved with an energy consumption ranging from 14 
to 20 Wh/l. The coagulation-flocculation treatment with ferric chloride and aluminum sulfate 
removed up to 87% and 90% of COD and 94% and 98% of color, respectively. The addition 
of a high molecular weight cationic polymer enhanced both COD and color removal 
efficiencies. Hence both the post-treatment processes proved to be technically feasible. 
Lei et al. (2007) in Electrochemical treatment of anaerobic digestion effluent using a Ti/Pt-
IrO2 electrode evaluated the electrochemical treatment of the anaerobic digestion effluents 
using a Ti/Pt-IrO(2) electrode and found it feasible. The effects of electric current, NaCl 
dosage, and initial pH on ammonia, nitrate, total organic carbon (TOC), inorganic carbon (IC), final pH, and turbidity variations were studied in a series of batch experiments. It was 
found that the electric current and NaCl dosage had a considerably larger effect on the 
oxidization of ammonia; this was less for the effect of the initial pH. In addition, 
electroflotation was the main mechanism for turbidity, TOC, and IC removals. Further, the IC 
removal was mainly affected by the pH of wastewater.  
6. Dairy waste water  
Guven et al. (2008) in Electrochemical treatment of deproteinated whey wastewater and 
optimization of treatment conditions with response surface methodology studied 
electrochemical treatment of deproteinated whey wastewater produced during cheese 
manufacture. Through the preliminary batch runs, appropriate electrode material was 
determined as iron due to high removal efficiency of chemical oxygen demand (COD), and 
turbidity. The electrochemical treatment conditions were optimized through response surface 
methodology (RSM), where applied voltage was kept in the range, electrolyte concentration 
was minimized, waste concentration and COD removal percent were maximized at 25 
degrees C. Optimum conditions at 25 degrees C were estimated through RSM as 11.29 V 
applied voltage, 100% waste concentration (containing 40 g/L lactose) and 19.87 g/L 
electrolyte concentration to achieve 29.27% COD removal. However, highest COD removal 
through the set of runs was found as 53.32% within 8h proving the applicability of EC 
treatment for whey waste water. 
 Şengil et al . (2006) in Treatment of dairy wastewaters by electrocoagulation using mild steel 
electrodes investigated the removal of COD and oil –grease from dairy wastewater was 
experimentally using direct current (DC) electrocoagulation (EC). In the EC of dairy 
wastewater, the effects of initial pH, electrolysis time, initial concentration of COD, 
conductivity and current density were examined. In batch experimental sets with iron as the 
sacrificial electrode material, optimum operating range for each variable was found. The 
overall COD and oil –grease removal efficiencies reached 98 and 99%, respectively. The 
optimum current density, pH and electrolysis time for 18,300 mg COD/L and 4570 mg oil–
grease/L were 0.6 mA/cm2, 7 and 1 min respectively. Mean energy consumption was 
0.003 kWh/kg of COD. 
Ihara et al. (2006) in Electrochemical oxidation of the effluent from anaerobic digestion of 
dairy manure studied the electrochemical oxidation of the digested effluent from anaerobic digestion of dairy manure. The digested effluent sample containing suspended solids was 
pretreated by filtration. The influence of direct anodic oxidation and indirect oxidation was 
evaluated through the use of dimensionally stable anode (DSA) and Ti/PbO 2 as anode. The 
decreasing rate of chemical oxygen demand (COD) was higher at lead dioxide coated 
titanium (Ti/PbO 2) electrode than at DSA, however the DSA was preferred anode for the 
decrease of ammonium nitrogen (NH 4-N) due to the control of ammonium nitrate (NO 3-N) 
accumulation. The results showed that the filtration of suspended solids as a pretreatment and 
addition of NaCl could improve the whole removing efficiency of NH 4-N in the digested 
effluent on electrochemical oxidation. 
8. Pharmaceutical waste water  
Abhijit et al. (2005) in Electrochemical oxidation of pharmaceutical effluent using cast iron 
electrode investigated electrochemical oxidation of low (BOD/COD) ratio pharmaceutical 
wastewater. The batch experimental results were assessed in terms of COD and BOD 
concentration while the recalcitrance was monitored in terms of change in the (BOD/COD) 
ratio during the process. The effects of operating parameters like pH, electrolysis duration 
and current density were studied on the treatment efficiency and their operating ranges were 
experimentally determined. The efficiency and energy consumption of anode were estimated. 
Cast iron electrode was found to be effective in removing 72% COD after 2hours of 
electrolysis. In particular, it was found that the (BOD/COD) ratio had improved from 0.18 to 
0.3 after 120 min. of electrolysis indicating improvement of biodegradability of wastewater, 
proving that the pharmaceutical waste water can be effectively treated by EC treatment. 
9. Paper and pulp industry waste water 
Perng et al. (2007) in Treatment of a Specialty Paper Mill Wastewater Using a Pilot-sc ale 
Pulsed Electrocoagulation Unit used a pilot-scale pulsed electrocoagulation (EC) system 
capable of treating 0.5~1 m3/ h, with a hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 2.17~6.5 min, and 
consisting of a homogenizer tank, a pulsed EC reactor, an aerator, a flocculation tank, and a 
sedimentation tank to treat specialty paper mill wastewater from central Taiwan was used. 
The mill has a daily production of 5 t/ d, and discharges 1300 m3/ d of wastewater. The 
controlled parameters of the pulsed EC unit included the use of either iron or aluminum 
electrodes, current density, and HRT (flow rate). The wastewater quality variables examined 
before and after the treatment include electrical conductivity, suspended solids (SS), chemical oxygen demand (COD), and true color. The results indicated that electrical conductivity 
decreased with increasing current density and HRT; under all current densities, SS removal 
appeared to have no correlation with the flow rate, and a minimum of 85% SS removal was 
observed. Removal of COD was dependent on the electrode materials. Aluminum electrodes 
in contrast to iron achieved at least a 40 % COD removal at lower current densities. With both 
electrodes, the higher the current density and the longer the HRT, the greater the true color 
removal rates became. Under the best operational conditions (a current density of 106.7 A m-
2, and an HRT of 3.25 min) using aluminum electrodes achieved removals of 25.4, 97.14, 
76.47 and 70.09 % of electrical conductivity, SS, COD, and true color, respectively. Under 
any current density, however, SS removal showed no correlation with the effluent HRT, and 
always achieved a removal of ≥ 85 %. The current dissolved air flotation unit costs NT$2.68 
(US$0.0812) per ton of wastewater to operate, while the pulsed EC unit costs NT$2.42 
(US$0.0733) per ton of wastewater. A proposed 5-stage mechanism of the EC system is also 
discussed. 
Mahesh et al.  (2006) in Electrochemical Degradation of Pulp and Paper Mill Wastewater. 
Part 1. COD and Color Removal investigated the electrochemical degradation of agri-based 
paper mill wastewater (black liquor) in a 2 dm3 electrolytic batch reactor using iron plate 
electrodes. Of the four-, six-, and eight-plate configurations, a current density of 55.56 A/m2 
at neutral pH with a six-plate arrangement was found to be optimal, achieving a maximum 
chemical oxygen demand (COD ) and color removal of 80% and 90% (175 platinum−cobalt 
units (PCU)), respectively. The chemical dissolution of iron was strongly influenced by pH 0. 
Electrochemical treatment at higher pH 0 (pH0 ≥ 9) increases the dissolution of iron electrodes 
by an order of magnitude. At the optimal current density, the iron electrode consumed is 
31.27 g/m2·h, achieving maximum COD removal. An increase in salinity reduces the 
treatment time significantly, and the sludge settling characteristics also improve. The addition 
of polyacrylamide (10 mg/dm3) to the electrochemical reactor enhances the COD removal 
rate with a very short treatment time with excellent sludge settleability. Specific energy  
consumption (SEC) reduces from 6.64 to 5.73 kWh/kg of COD removed with the addition of 
NaCl (625 mg/dm3). The posttreatment of electrochemically treated wastewater by chemical 
coagulation using alum (360 mg/dm3) along with 20 mg/dm3 polyacrylamide (PAA) further 
reduced COD values to <180 mg/dm3 and a near 100% (<5 PCU) color removal. An overall 
COD removal of 91% and color removal of near 100% could be achieved by electrochemical 
treatment followed by coagulation/flocculation.  Ugurlu et al. (2008) in The removal of lignin and phenol from paper mill effluents by 
electrocoagulation investigated the treatment of paper mill effluents using electrocoagulation. 
Removal of lignin, phenol, chemical oxygen demand (COD) and biological oxygen demand 
(BOD) from paper mill effluents was investigated at various current intensities by using 
different electrodes (Al and Fe) and at various electrolysis times (1.0, 2.5, 5.0 and 7.5 min). It 
was observed that the experiments carried out at 12 V, an electrolysis time of 2 min and a 
current intensity of 77.13 mA were sufficient for the removal of these pollutants with each 
electrode. The removal capacities of the process using an Al electrode were 80% of lignin, 
98% of phenol, 70% of BOD, and 75% of COD after 7.5 min. Using an Fe electrode the 
removal capacities were 92%, 93%, 80% and 55%, respectively. In addition, it was found that 
removal of lignin, phenol, BOD and COD increased with increasing current intensity. In the 
experiments carried out at different current intensities, higher removal can be explained 
through a decrease in intra-resistance of solution and consequently an increase at the transfer 
speed of organic species to electrodes. It was also found that Al electrode performs higher 
efficiency than Fe electrode except for COD removal. However, the time required for 
removal of BOD was more than that of COD. The results suggest that electrocoagulation 
could be considered as an effective alternative to paper mill effluents treatment. 
Zaied et al. (2008) in Electrocoagulation treatment of black liquor from paper industry found 
that the procedure of electrocoagulation is an effective, fast and economic technique for 
treatment of black liquor resulting from paper industry. The effect of electrolysis time, 
current density, type of electrode material and initial pH were studied in an attempt to achieve 
a higher removal capacity. Under the optimal experimental conditions (initial pH 7, 
t = 50 min and J = 14 mA cm−2), the treatment of black liquor by electrocoagulation has led 
to a removal capacity of 98% of COD, 92% of polyphenols and 99% of color intensity with a 
good repeatability (R.S.D. < 3%) making it possible to highlight the industrial interest of this 
electrochemical process.  
Wang et al. (2007) in Electrochemical treatment of paper mill wastewater using three-
dimensional electrodes with Ti/Co/SnO 2-Sb2O5 anode  studied the properties of the interlayer 
and outer layer of Ti/Co/SnO 2-Sb2O5 electrode, along with the examination of 
electrochemical behavior. As a result of unsatisfactory treatment using Ti/Co/SnO 2-Sb2O5 
electrode, electrochemical disposal of paper mill wastewater employing three-dimensional 
electrodes, combining active carbon granules serving as packed bed particle electrodes, with Ti/Co/SnO 2-Sb2O5 anode, was performed. The outcome demonstrates that efficient 
degradation was achieved. The residual dimensionless chemical oxygen demand (COD) 
concentration reached 0.137, and color removal 75% applying 167 mA cm−2 current density 
at pH 11 and 15 g l−1 NaCl. The instant current efficiency, energy cost, electrochemical 
oxidation index (EOI) and kinetic constant of the reaction were calculated. At the same time, 
the influence of pH and current density on COD abatement and decolorization was also 
investigated, respectively. 
Patel et al. (2008) in Electrochemical treatment of pentachlorophenol in water and pulp 
bleaching effluent studied the removal of Adsorbable organic halides (AOX) compounds 
produced during bleaching of pulp which are recalcitrant and known to have eco-toxic effect. 
The removal of pentachlorophenol (PCP) as a model AOX compound in water as well as in 
pulp bleaching effluent of a bamboo based mill by electrochemical treatment in batch mode 
was studied. It was found that 10 mg L−1 of PCP in water was removed almost completely in 
<10 min at a current density of 6 mA cm−2 in the presence of 1000 mg L−1 NaCl serving as an 
electrolyte and source of chloride ions. The initial rate of PCP removal was found to decrease 
at alkaline pH (9.3) as compared to that at acidic pH (5.5). PCP removal in neutralized raw 
pulp bleach effluent (containing 1830 mg L−1 of chloride) was very slow and incomplete 
even after 2 h of electrochemical treatment at a current density of 15 mA cm−2. Various 
pretreatments of raw bleach effluent such as, alkaline sulfide using sodium sulfide, alkaline 
reduction using ferrous sulfate and coagulation using potash alum were evaluated. 
Electrochemical treatment of potash alum pretreated effluent (spiked with PCP) could 
achieve >90% removal of initial colour, COD and PCP in <1 h. Thus the treatment scheme 
presented may be a promising technology for removal of AOX, COD and colour from pulp 
bleaching effluent. 
Mansour et al. (2007)  did work on treatment of wastewater of paper industry containing high 
amount of suspended solids, COD and BOD. The experiment was done in both batch and 
continuous modes by using electrodes and a flotation unit. The electrodes were made up of 
titanium coated with ruthenium oxide as anode and stainless steel as cathode. The voltage 
was varied between 7 to 9 volts and the current density was varied and not fixed. The batch 
mode aims to optimize coagulant concentration, pH and current density at fixed electrolysis 
time (20 minutes). Continuous mode aims to optimize the residence time. The results 
demonstrated that the removal efficiency of suspended solids in both the cases was more than 
95%. 
10. Distillary effluent    
Piya-areetham et al. (2006) in Application of electrooxidation process for treating 
concentrated wastewater from distillery industry with a voluminous electrode conducted 
experiments in a laboratory scale to reduce color and chemical oxygen demand (COD) in 
distillery wastewater by using electrooxidation processes. A cylindrical electrochemical 
reactor constructed in an axial configuration with 0.2m diameter and 0.35 m height was 
employed in this study. Two materials including graphite particles and titanium sponge were 
used as the voluminous anodes. A cathode made from Ti/RuO(2) was placed 0.04-0.05 m 
above the upper level of anode particles. Effect of parameters including initial pH of 
wastewater (1-5), time of dilution, current intensity (1-10A), type of additive (peroxide and 
NaCl), and additive concentration were investigated. The results indicated that the anode 
made from titanium sponge showed a higher potential to treat wastewater than another one. 
The treatment in acidic condition (pH=1) provided the maximum oxidation of organic 
pollutants in wastewater. The presence of additives can promote the reduction of COD and 
color in wastewater approximately 89.62% and 92.24%, respectively. The maximum current 
efficiency was reached at the first 30 min and decreased slightly as electrolysis time 
proceeded due to the formation of passivation on the electrode surface. The energy 
consumption was obtained in the range of 2.82-4.83 kWh/kgCOD or 24.08-28.07 kWh/m(3) 
wastewater depending upon the concentration of additive. The kinetics of COD reduction was 
the pseudo first-order reaction with a fast rate constant of 6.78 min-1. 
11. Latyx treatment waste water 
Vijayaraghavan et al. (2008) in Electrolytic treatment of latex wastewater treatment was 
developed based on in-situ hypochlorous acid generation. The hypochlorous acid was 
generated in an undivided electrolytic cell consisting of two sets of graphite as anode and 
stainless sheets as cathode. The generated hypochlorous acid served as an oxidizing agent to 
destroy the organic present in the latex wastewater. For an influent COD concentration of 
3,820 mg/L at an initial pH 4.5; current density of 74.5 mA/cm2; sodium chloride content 3% 
and electrolysis period of 90 min, resulted in the following residual concentration pH 7.3; 
COD 78 mg/L; BOD 5 55 mg/L; TOC 45 mg/L; residual total chlorine 136 mg/L; turbidity 17 NTU and temperature 54°C, respectively. In the case of 2% sodium chloride content for the 
above, said operating condition resulted in a residual concentration of pH 7; COD 162 mg/L; 
BOD5 105 mg/L; TOC 90 mg/L; residual total chlorine 122 mg/L; turbidity 26 NTU and 
temperature 60°C respectively. The energy requirements were found to be 35 and 50 Wh/L 
while treating 24 L of latex wastewater at 3 and 2% sodium chloride concentration at a 
current density 74.5 mA/cm2. The observed energy difference was due to the improved 
conductivity at high sodium chloride content. 
12. Food processing waste water 
Roa-Morales et al. (2007) in Aluminum electrocoagulation with peroxide applied to 
wastewater from pasta and cookie processing studied the removal of organic pollutants from 
pasta and cookie processing industrial wastewater by aluminum electrocoagulation and 
combined electrocoagulation/H 2O2 processes using a pilot batch reactor. Under optimal 
conditions of pH 4 and 18.2 mA/m2 current density, the electrochemical method yields very 
effective removal of organic pollution. Treatment reduced chemical oxygen demand (COD) 
by 90%, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD 5) by 96%, total solids by 95% and fecal 
coliforms by 99.9%. The effect of reducing the pH of the aqueous solution with sulfuric acid 
on the chemical species formed and its effect on the sludge phase formation was determined.  
The wastewater quality was monitored using UV –vis spectrometry and cyclic voltammetry in 
order to characterize raw and treated wastewater.  
13. Waste water with recalcitrant organic compounds  
Rajkumar et al. (2004) in  Combined electrochemical degradation and activated carbon 
adsorption treatments for wastewater containing mixed phenolic compounds studied the 
electrochemical degradation of mixed phenolic compounds present in coal conversion 
wastewater was investigated in the presence of chloride as supporting electrolyte. Initially, 
the degradation experiments were conducted separately with 300 mg/L of individual phenolic 
compound in the presence of 2500 mg/L chloride using Ti/TiO2 –RuO2 – IrO2 anode at 5.4 
A/dm2 current density. Comparison of the experimental results of the chemical oxygen 
demand (COD) removal versus charge indicated that the order of decreasing COD removal 
for various phenolic compounds as catechol > resorcinol > m-cresol > o-cresol > phenol > 
p-cresol. Degradation of the mixture of phenolic compounds and high pressure liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) determinations at various stages of electrolysis showed that phenolic compounds were initially converted into benzoquinone and then to lower molecular 
weight aliphatic compounds. The COD and the total organic carbon (TOC) removal were 83 
and 58.9% after passing 32 Ah/L with energy consumption of 191.6 kWh/kg of COD 
removal. Experiments were also conducted to remove adsorbable organic halogens (AOX) 
content in the treated solution using granular activated carbon. The optimum conditions for 
the removal of AOX was at pH 3.0, 5 mL/min flow rate and 31.2 cm bed height. Based on the 
investigation, a general scheme of treatment of mixed phenolic compounds by combined 
electrochemical and activated carbon adsorption treatment is proposed. 
 Yoon et al. (2007) in  Electrochemical Degradation of Benzoquinone in a Flow through Cell 
with Carbon Fibers studied the anodic degradation of benzoquinone(BQ), a model compound 
for wastewater treatment was carried out using a home-made flow-through electrochemical 
cell with carbon fibers. The experimental variables affecting the degradation of BQ, such as 
the applying current, pH, reaction time, and flow rate of the BQ solution were examined to 
optimise the process and degradation products of the oxidation reaction were identified by 
High Performance Liquid Chromatography and Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic 
Emission Spectrometer. While optimum pH was 6.56 optimum time was 12 hours 
respectively.Low molecular weight aliphatic acids, and CO2 were the major products in this 
experiment. The removal efficiency of BQ from the solution increased with the applying 
current and time. 99.23% of BQ was degraded to aliphatic acids and CO2 when the applying 
current is 175 mA in 12 hr electrolysis. 
Samet et al. (2006) in Electrochemical degradation of 4-chloroguaiacol for wastewater 
treatment using PbO 2 anodes studied the electrochemical oxidation of 4-chloroguaiacol (4-
CG) at Nb/PbO 2 anodes under different experimental conditions such as initial concentration 
of substrate, electrolysis time, temperature and pH. We measured the concentrations of 4-
chlorocatechol (4-CC), 2-methoxyhydroquinone (2-MHQ), maleic acid (MA) and carbon 
dioxide as the main products. Black solid particles consisting mainly of polymers were 
formed during electrolysis. A mechanism of electrochemical oxidation of 4-CG was 
investigated. The oxidation of 4-CG can generally be described by simple pseudo first-order 
kinetics. The degradation of 4-CG was favoured at high temperature and lower initial 
concentration of 4-CG and low solution pH. However, the increase of temperature has not a 
significant effect on the mineralization of carboxylic acids. Moreover, these products 
required long electrolysi s. 14. Municipal wastewater  
 Zheng et al. (2006) in PAH removal from spiked municipal wastewater sewage sludge using 
biological, chemical and electrochemical treatments  found that the PAH molecules are 
strongly adsorbed on the particulate matters of soils, sludges or sediments because of their 
strong hydrophobicity which makes them less bioavailability, thus limiting their 
bioremediation. Different sludge treatment processes were tested to evaluate their 
performances for PAH removal from sludge doped with 11 PAHs (5.5 mg each PAH kg−1 of 
dry matter (DM)): two biological processes (mesophilic aerobic digestion (MAD) and 
simultaneous sewage sludge digestion and metal leaching (METIX-BS)) were tested to 
evaluate PAH biodegradation in sewage sludge. In parallel, two chemical processes (quite 
similar Fenton processes: chemical metal leaching (METIX-AC) and chemical stabilization 
(STABIOX)) and one electrochemical process (electrochemical stabilization (ELECSTAB)) 
were tested to measure PAH removal by these oxidative processes. Moreover, PAH 
solubilisation from sludge by addition of a nonionic surfactant Tween 80 (Tw80) was also 
tested. The best yields of PAH removal were obtained by MAD and METIX-BS with more 
than 95% 3-ring PAH removal after a 21-day treatment period. Tw80 addition during MAD 
treatment increased 4-ring PAHs removal rate. In addition, more than 45% of 3-ring PAHs 
were removed from sludge by METIX-AC and during ELECSTAB process were quiet good 
with approximately 62% of 3-ring PAHs removal. However, little weaker removal of 3-ring 
PAHs (<35%) by STABIOX. None of the tested processes were efficient for the elimination 
of high molecular weight ( 5-ring) PAHs from sludge.  
 15. Algae rich waste water  
Azarian et al. (2007) in Algae Removal by Electro-coagulation Process, Application for 
Treatment of the Effluent from an Industrial Wastewater Treatment Plant found that although 
stabilization ponds and lagoons are suitable treatment processes due to simplicity of operation 
and low per capital costs, the effluents of these systems have too high of a total suspended 
solids concentration to be discharged into receiving waters. This problem is mainly caused by 
algae.  For the continuous flow electro-coagulation reactor used in these experiments three 
aluminum anodes were utilized. This type of metal was selected because it could introduce 
the flocculation agent into the effluent, thereby algae could be removed by both mechanisms 
of electro-flotation and electro-flocculation. The results of treatment were remarkably good 
and the efficiencies of total suspended solids (TSS) and chlorophyll a removal reached to as 
high as 99.5% and about 100% by applying a power input of about 550 W. In fact, this level 
of power input was needed for complete removal of algae in a low retention time of 15 
minutes. Meanwhile, by applying less power input of about 100Wdm-3, the required time for 
a relatively same treatment was reached to 30 minutes. 
3.2 Oily waste waters 
3.2.1 General oil rich waste water  
Yang et al. (2009) in Electrochemical coagulation for oily water demulsification studied the 
electrochemical treatment of oil rich waste water. Motor oil and industrial surfactants were 
used to prepare synthetic oily water. When stabilized with surfactant, the turbidity shows a 
positive correlation with the oil content in the emulsion with a correlation coefficient of 
1.78 FAU/(mg/L). The oil –water emulsion was tested with gravity separation, centrifugation, 
flotation, and electrochemical coagulation for the effectiveness of each process on 
demulsification. Electrochemical coagulation was then selected for further study. A dc 
voltage was applied to the electrodes, dissolving ferrous ions (Fe(II)) at the anode and 
forming hydrogen (H 2) gas and hydroxyl (OH−) ions at the surface of the cathode. A few 
100 mg/L of sodium chloride (NaCl) were added to the solution to provide ionic conductivity 
and to prevent passivation of the iron electrode. The ferrous ions were oxidized into ferric 
ions (Fe(III)), destabilizing the emulsion. The coalesced oil droplets were adsorbed into the 
highly dispersed and reactive ferric hydroxide (Fe(OH) 3) coagulant. The oil-rich sludge that 
was generated in the operation was then floated to the surface forming a blanket that was 
removed by skimming. This complicated mechanism was completed in 4 min. When the 
reactor was operated for this amount of time, a measure of 165.8 mg/L of ferric ions was 
generated. The treatment reduced the turbidity of the emulsion from 1800 to 60 FAU. Beyond 
the 4-min treatment period, the addition of more iron to the system resulted in turbidity 
change at a much slower rate. When the operation occurred continuously with a current of 
2 A and a throughput of 320 mL/min, the turbidity of the electrically treated effluent was less 
than 14 FAU, the detection limit of the Hach DR/4000 Spectrophotometer. 
Gonclaves et al. (2008) in Electrooxidation as the anaerobic pre-treatment of fats: Oleate 
conversion using RuO 2 and IrO 2 based anodes studied electrochemical treatment of oleate 
using RuO 2 and IrO 2 type dimensionally stable anodes in alkaline medium was performed to 
develop a feasible anaerobic pre-treatment of fatty effluents. The results showed that the pre-treated solutions over RuO 2 were faster degraded by anaerobic consortium than the raw 
oleate solutions or the electrolysed solutions using IrO 2. In batch experiments carried out with 
pre-treated solutions over RuO 2 (100 –500 mg/L), no lag phases were observed before the 
methane production onset. On the other hand, raw oleate and pre-treated oleate over IrO 2 had 
originated lag phases of 0 –140 and 0 –210 h, respectively. This study demonstrated that it is 
advantageous to apply the electrochemical treatment carried out on the RuO 2 type DSA in 
order to achieve a faster biodegradation of lipid-containing effluent and consequently to 
obtain a faster methane production. 
Ma et al. (2006) in Electrochemical pilot-scale plant for oil field produced wastewater by 
M/C/Fe electrodes for injection found that oil field produced water, by separated  from crude 
oil  can be treated by an electrochemical process in laboratory pilot-scale plant, using double 
anodes with active metal (M) and graphite (C) and iron as cathode and a noble metal content 
catalyst with big surface. Due to the strong oxidizing potential of the chemicals produced 
(Cl(2), O(2), OCl(-), HO and so on), when the wastewater pass through the laboratory pilot-
scale plant the organic pollutants including bacteria were oxidized and coagulated by 
produced M(n+) ion. It can be concluded that the catalytic electrochemical treatment of oil 
field produced wastewater is effective. Both chemical oxygen demand (COD) and 
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) were reduced by over 90% in 6 min, suspense solids 
(SS) by 99%, Ca(2+) content by 22%, corrosion rate by 98% and bacteria (sulphate reducing 
bacteria (SRB), saprophytic bacteria (TGB) and iron bacteria) by 99% in 3 min under 
15V/120A. These results indicate that this catalytic electrochemical method could be used for 
effective oil field wastewater treatment for injection purpose.  
Xinhua et al. (2004) in Treatment of refectory oily wastewater by electro-coagulation process 
studied the use of electro-coagulation to treat refectory wastewater with high oil and grease 
contents. Different operational conditions were examined, including pH, current density, 
reaction time, conductivity, electrode distance and inlet concentration. The optimum current 
density was 10 –14 A m−2 within 30 min depending on the wastewater properties tested. 
Conductivity had little effect on the treatment efficiency. Although the addition of extra salts 
(e.g., sodium chloride) to the wastewater did not help increase the pollutant removal 
efficiency, it could save the power consumption significantly. The COD Cr and oil removal 
efficiency descended with increasing electrode distance. The optimal electrode distance was 
determined to be 10 mm for this equipment in consideration of the treatment cost and efficiency together. The pH effect on the performance of the electro-coagulation process was 
not very significant in the range of 3 –10. The removal efficiency of oil and COD Cr under 
normal condition exceeded 95% and 75%, respectively. 
Tezcan et al. (2006) in Electrocoagulation of vegetable oil refinery wastewater using 
aluminium electrodes  found that electrocoagulation with aluminum electrodes can be used to 
treat the vegetable oil refinery wastewater (VORW) in a batch reactor. The effects of 
operating parameters such as pH, current density, PAC (poly aluminum chloride) dosage and 
Na2SO4 dosage on the removal of organics and COD removal efficiency have been 
investigated. It has been shown that the removal efficiency of COD increased with the 
increasing applied current density and increasing PAC and Na 2SO4 dosage and the most 
effective removal capacity was achieved at the pH 7. The results indicate that 
electrocoagulation is very efficient and able to achieve 98.9% COD removal in 90 min at 
35 mA cm−2 with a specific electrical energy consumption of 42 kWh (kg COD removed)−1. The 
effluent was very clear and its quality exceeded the direct discharge standard.  
Santos et al. (2005) in the application of electrochemical technology to the remediation of 
oily wastewater studied the successful application of electrochemical technology, employing 
a dimensionally stable anode, for the remediation of wastewater from the oil extraction 
industry has been demonstrated. Electrolysis of the oily wastewater lead to a time-dependent 
reduction in chemical oxygen demand (COD) in the sample that could be attributed to: (i) the 
direct oxidation of oil components at the electrode, by the metal oxide itself or by OH 
radicals available at the electrode surface, (ii) the indirect oxidation of oil components by 
intermediate oxidising agents formed in parallel reactions (ex. ClO(-)), and (iii) the 
aggregation of suspended oil droplets by electroflotation. The largest reduction (57%) in 
COD was obtained following electrolysis of an oily sample for 70 h at 50 degrees C with a 
current density of 100 mA cm(-2). The stability of DSA electrodes for use in oily wastewater 
remediation has been assessed. 
3.2.2 Olive mill waste water 
Chen et al. (2000) in Separation of pollutants from restaurant wastewater by 
electrocoagulation investigated the characteristics of restaurant wastewater and found high oil 
and grease contents. Different electrode materials and operational conditions were examined. 
Aluminum was preferred to iron. Charge loading was found to be the only variable that 
affected the treatment efficiency significantly. The optimum charge loading and current density were 1.67 –9.95 F/m3 wastewater and 30 –80 A/m2 depending on the wastewater 
tested. The removal efficiency of oil and grease exceeded 94% for all wastewaters tested. The 
experimental results also show that the electrocoagulation can neutralize wastewater pH. 
Several mechanisms associated with pH variation are proposed. 
Chatzisymeon et al. (2007) in Electrochemical oxidation of model compounds and olive mill 
wastewater over DSA electrodes: 1. The case of Ti/IrO 2 anode, conducted experiments at 
1300 mg/L initial COD, 0 –1.23 V vs SHE and 1.4 –1.54 V vs SHE potential windows, 
50 mA/cm2 current density, 0 –25 mM NaCl, 60 –80 °C temperature and acidic conditions. 
The reactivity of model compounds decreases in the order phenol ≈ p-coumaric 
acid > cinnamic acid > caffeic acid. Partial and total oxidation reactions occur with the 
overall rate following zero-order kinetics with respect to COD and increasing with 
temperature. Oxidation of OMW at 43 Ah/L, 80 °C and in the presence of 5 mM NaCl leads 
to complete color and phenols removal, elimination of ecotoxicity but moderate (30%) COD 
reduction. Similar performance can be achieved at 6 Ah/L in the presence of 15 mM NaCl. In  
the absence of salt, the respective color and phenols removal (at 6 Ah/L) is less than 10%. 
Excessive salinity (25 mM), although does not change color, phenols and COD removal, has 
an adverse effect on ecotoxicity. 
Khoufi et al. (2007) in Detoxification of olive mill wastewater by electrocoagulation and 
sedimentation processes, examined the effect of a physico-electrochemical method to 
detoxify olive mill wastewater prior an anaerobic biotreatment process. 
Olive mill wastewater (OMW) is characterised by its high suspended solids content (SS), 
high turbidity (NTU), chemical oxygen demand (COD) concentration up to 100 gl(-1) and 
toxic phenolic compounds concentration up to 10 gl(-1). The proposed pre-treatment process 
consisted in a preliminary electrocoagulation step in which most phenolic compounds were 
polymerised, followed by a sedimentation step. The BOD(5)/COD ratio of the 
electrocoagulated OMW increased from 0.33, initial value, to 0.58. Furthermore, the 
sedimentation step yielded the removal of 76.2%, 75% and 71% of phenolic compounds, 
turbidity and suspended solid, respectively, after 3 days of plain settling. The combination of 
electrocoagulation and sedimentation allowed a COD reduction and decoloration of about 
43% and 90%, respectively. This pre-treatment decreases the inhibition of Vibrio fisheri 
luminescence by 66.4%. Continuous anaerobic biomethanization experiments conducted in 
parallel with raw OMW and electrocoagulated OMW before and after sedimentation at a 
loading rate of 6g COD l(-1)day(-1), proved that the final pre-treated OMW was bioconverted into methane at high yield while raw OMW was very toxic to anaerobic 
microorganisms.   
Kotta et al. (2007) in  The effect of solids on the electrochemical treatment of olive mill 
effluents studied the treatment of effluent using Ti-Pt anodes which had an average total 
chemical oxygen demand (COD) value of 234 g L−1, soluble COD of 61 g L−1, soluble 
phenolic content 3.4 g L−1, total solids of 80 g L−1 and pH = 5.1. Experiments were conducted 
in a 10 L vessel with the effluent recirculating at 1 L s−1. The applied current was varied 
between 5 and 20 A, the salinity between 1 and 4% NaCl, and experiments were performed 
with the effluent diluted with water to achieve the desired initial concentration. Emphasis was 
given to the effect of the presence of solids as well as of varying operating conditions on 
process performance as assessed in terms of COD, color and phenols removal. In general, 
degradation of phenols occurred relatively fast with conversion increasing with increasing 
applied current and decreasing initial organic loading and this was accompanied by low COD 
removal levels and moderate decolorization. The presence of solids had practically no effect 
on phenols removal, which, in most cases, was complete in less than about 180 min of 
reaction. However, oxidation in the presence of solids resulted in a substantial solid fraction 
being dissolved and this consequently increased sample color and the soluble COD content. 
The solid content typically found in olive mill effluents may partially impede its treatment by 
electrochemical oxidation, thus requiring more severe operating conditions and greater 
energy consumption.  
Gotsi et al. (2005) in Electrochemical oxidation of olive oil mill wastewaters  conducted 
batch experiments in a flow-through electrolytic cell with internal recycle at voltage of 5, 7 
and 9 V, NaCl concentrations of 1%, 2% and 4%, recirculation rates of 0.4 and 0.62 L/s and 
initial chemical oxygen demand (COD) concentrations of 1475, 3060, 5180 and 6545 mg/L. 
A titanium –tantalum –platinum –iridium anode was used and it was found that conversion of 
total phenols and COD as well as the extent of decolorization generally increased with 
increasing voltage, salinity and recirculation rate and decreasing initial concentration. In  most 
cases, nearly complete degradation of phenols and decolorization were achieved at short 
treatment times up to 60 min; this was accompanied by a relatively low COD removal that 
never exceeded 40% even after prolonged (up to 240 min) times. The acute toxicity to marine 
bacteria Vibrio fischeri decreased slightly during the early stages of the reaction and this was 
attributed to the removal of phenols. However, as the reaction proceeded toxicity increased due to the formation of organochlorinated by-products as confirmed by GC/MS analysis. The 
toxicity to Daphnia magna increased sharply at short treatment times and remained quite high 
even after prolonged oxidation. 
Inan et al. (2004) in Olive oil mill wastewater treatment by means of electro-coagulation 
studied the removal of chemical oxygen demand (COD), color and suspended solid (SS) from 
olive oil mill wastewater (OMWW). Aluminum and iron were used in the reactor 
simultaneously as materials for electrodes. The reactor voltage was 12 V, current density 
(CD) was changing between 10 and 40 mA cm−2, pH was taken equal to 4, 6, 7, and 9 units, 
and duration varied in the limits of 2 –30 min. Under the 30-min retention time, 52% COD 
was removed by the aluminum anode and 42% was removed by the iron anode. CD 
efficiency versus the percent of COD removal was examined at the 10-min retention time for 
pH 6.2±0.2. It appeared that with the CD increase, the percent of COD removal was 
increasing as well. The color removal yield was examined as the result of using different 
retention times, current densities, and iron and aluminum as materials for anodes. CD values 
in the range of 10 –40 mA cm−2 were tested at the 10-min retention time each one; color 
removal was 90 –97% by this. In this study the EC process was examined with the aim of 
determining the highest rate of SS removal from the OMWW as well. 
Bellakhal et al. (2006) in Olive Oil Mill Wastewater Treatment by the Electro-Fenton Process 
the use of a combination of the Fentons reagent with electrochemistry (the electro-Fenton 
process). The electro-Fenton process is shown to fully destroy (mineralize) olive oil mill 
wastes in water without previous extraction and without addition of chemical reagents. This 
wastewater contains many organic compounds like polyphenols, which are very difficult to 
treat by classical techniques. An advanced electrochemical oxidation process, the electro-
Fenton process, has been used as a way of removing chemical oxygen demand and colour 
intensity from olive oil mill wastewater. Vanillic acid, which has been selected as a model 
compound, and olive oil mill wastewater have been completely mineralized by the electro-
Fenton process with a carbon felt cathode, using Fe(2+) ions as the catalyst 
Longhi et al. (2004) in Electrochemical treatment of olive oil mill waste water studied the 
possibility of oxidizing at a PbO2 anode the phenols and polyphenols, present in the olive oil 
mill wastewater, as a pretreatment for the submission of such wastewater to the traditional 
biological treatments. The results obtained operating at current densities ranging 500 to 2000 
A/m2 show that it is possible to reduce the concentration of the phenolic components, which interfere with the biological treatments, down to low values without decreasing too much the 
total organic content of the wastewater. 
Panizza et al. (2006) in Olive mill wastewater treatment by anodic oxidation with parallel 
plate electrodes studied the applicability of electrochemical oxidation of a real olive- mill 
wastewater by performing galvanostatic electrolysis using parallel plate electrodes. Olive mill 
wastewater is characterized by very high chemical oxygen demand (COD) values and 
contains high concentrations of polyphenols that inhibit the activity of micro-organisms 
during biological oxidations. A mixed titanium and ruthenium oxide (Ti/TiRuO 2) was used as 
anode and stainless steel as cathode. The effect of chloride concentration and applied current 
on the removal of COD, aromatic content and colour was investigated. The experimental 
results showed that an effective electrochemical oxidation was achieved in which the 
wastewater was decolourised and the COD and aromatic content completely eliminated. In 
particular, the mineralisation took place by indirect oxidation, mediated by active chlorine, 
and the COD removal rate was enhanced by the addition of 5 g L−1 of NaCl to the wastewater 
and by increasing the applied current 
Canizares et al. (2007) in  Advanced oxidation processes for the treatment of olive-oil mills 
wastewater studied the treatment of an actual industrial waste with three advanced oxidation 
processes (AOP): conductive-diamond electrooxidation (CDEO), ozonation and Fenton 
oxidation. The wastewater comes from olive-oil mills (OMW) and contains a COD of nearly 
3000 mg dm−3. CDEO allowed achieving the complete mineralization of the waste with hig h 
current efficiencies. Likewise, both ozonation and Fenton oxidation were able to treat the 
wastes, but they obtained very different results in terms of efficiency and mineralization. The 
accumulation of oxidation-refractory compounds as final products excludes the use of 
ozonation and Fenton oxidation as a sole treatment technology. This confirms that besides the 
hydroxyl-radical mediated oxidation, CDEO combines other important oxidation processes 
such as the direct electro-oxidation on the diamond surface and the oxidation mediated by 
other electrochemically formed compounds generated on this electrode. 
Tezcan et al. (2007) in Complete treatment of olive mill wastewaters by electrooxidation 
examined  the efficiency of treatment scheme through the dependence of chemical oxygen 
demand (COD), oil-grease, phenol and turbidity on electrolysis duration. The influence of 
current density (25, 45, 65, 75, 85, 105, 135 mA cm−2), sodium chloride concentration (1, 2, 
3, 5 M), recirculation rate of OMW (1.1, 4.6, 7.9 cm3 s−1) and temperature (7, 20, 40 °C) on the rate of pollutants abatement and the response of the system and specific energy 
consumption were evaluated. Based on the results obtained from laboratory experiments, the 
removal rates of organics increased with the increase of applied current density, sodium 
chloride concentration, recirculation rate and temperature. The results also indicated that 
specific energy consumption (SEC) ranged between 5.35 and 27.02 kWh (kg COD)−1 
decreased with increasing NaCl concentration, recirculation rate and temperature whereas it 
increased with increasing current density. The initial COD concentration of 41,000 mg L−1 
was reduced to 167 mg L−1 (corresponding to 99.6% removal) which complies with legal 
requirements while almost complete conversion of phenol, 99.85% turbidity removal, 99.54% 
oil-grease removal were achieved with the running cost of 0.88€  (kg COD)−1 after 7 h 
electrolysis at the conditions of 135 mA cm−2, 2 M NaCl, 7.9 cm3 s−1, 40 °C. 
Khoufi et al. (2007) in Pilot-plant results of the electro-Fenton treatment of olive mill 
wastewaters followed by anaerobic digestion investigated an integrated technology for the 
treatment of the recalcitrant contaminants of olive mill wastewaters (OMW), allowing water 
recovery and reuse for agricultural purposes. The method involves an electrochemical pre-
treatment step of the wastewater using the electro-Fenton reaction followed by an anaerobic 
bio-treatment. The electro-Fenton pre-treatment process removed 66% of the total 
polyphenolic compounds and subsequently decreased the OMW toxicity from 100 to 66.9% 
which resulted in improving the performance of the anaerobic digestion. A continuous lab-
scale methanogenic reactor was operated at a loading rate of 10 g COD/L day without any 
apparent toxicity. Furthermore, in the combined process, a high overall reduction in COD, 
suspended solids, polyphenols and lipids content was achieved by the two successive stages. 
Moreover, this combined process which was experimented at a real scale (25 m3 digester), 
demonstrated its technical feasibility and opens promising perspectives for industrial 
application in the Mediterranean countries due to its easy conception and its high energy 
(methane) production. 
Khoufi et al. (2007) in Pilot scale hybrid process for olive mill wastewater treatment and 
reuse developed a novel technique at  pilot scale for the treatment of olive mill wastewater 
(OMW), which combines electro-Fenton, anaerobic digestion and ultrafiltration. Application 
of electro-Fenton procedure in semi-continuous mode permitted high removal efficiencies of 
chemical oxygen demand (COD) (50%) and monophenolic compounds (95%). This pre-
treatment was found to enhance the anaerobic activity of an up-flow anaerobic filter (300 l) significantly. In the bioreactor, COD removal efficiency of 75% was reached at a hydraulic 
retention time of 4.5 d and an organic loading rate of 10 g COD l−1 d−1. The use of 
ultrafiltration technology as a post-treatment completely detoxified the anaerobic effluent and 
removed its high molecular mass polyphenols. An economic calculation of this treatment 
process revealed that a surplus of energy of 73.5 kWh could be recovered after the treatme nt 
of 1 m3. 
Deligiorgis et al. (2007) in Electrochemical oxidation of table olive processing wastewater 
over boron-doped diamond electrodes: treatment optimization by factorial design accessed 
the effect of operating conditions, such as initial organic loading (from 1340 to 5370 mg/L 
chemical oxygen demand (COD)), reaction time (from 30 to 120 min), current intensity (from 
5 to 14 A), initial pH (from 3 to 7) and the use of 500 mg/L H2O2 as an additional oxidant, 
on treatment efficiency  for implementing a factorial experimental design. Of the five 
parameters tested, the first three had a considerable effect on COD and total phenols removal, 
while the other two were statistically insignificant. In most cases, high levels of phenols 
degradation and decolorization were achieved followed by moderate mineralization. The 
analysis was repeated at more intense conditions, i.e., initial COD up to 10,000 mg/L, 
reaction times up to 240 min and current up to 30 A; at this level, the effect of treatment time 
and applied current was far more important than the starting COD concentration. Treatment 
for 14 h at optimal conditions (30 A and an initial loading of about 10,000 mg/L) led to 73% 
COD removal with a zero-order kinetic constant of 8.5mg/(L min) and an energy 
consumption efficiency of 16.3 g COD/(m3 A). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3. Methodology 
3.1 Wastewaters Studied 
Two wastewaters namely, acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater form textile processing 
industry and first extraction stage bleach plant effluent from integrated pulp and paper 
industry were studied. 
The acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater is generated when synthetic oil in aqueous 
medium is applied on acrylic fibre. Prior to drying, the applied excess oil is removed by 
hydrosqueezing the acrylic fibre as acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater. This wastewater 
has about 0.3% of oil and separation of this oil or treatment of the wastewater by 
conventional treatment technologies have been found difficult. Please see table-3.1 for the 
characteristics of the acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater used in the present study.  
 
S.No Parameter Untreated value 
1 pH 5.92 
2 Conductivity 1131 µS/cm 
3 Turbidity 432 NTU 
4 Chloride 209.81 mg/l 
5 Oil and grease 331.2 mg/l 
6 COD 14304 mg/l 
7 BOD 3940 mg/l 
 
Table-3.1: Characteristics of the Acrylic Fibre Applicator Oil Wastewater  
Kraft pulp after brown stock washing is subjected to the first stage of bleaching usually by 
chlorine or chlorine and chlorine dioxide. First extraction stage bleach effluent is generated 
from the alkali extraction and washing of this bleached pulp. This wastewater is coloured, has 
chlorinated organic compounds and has high COD. Please see table-3.2 for the characteristics 
of the first extraction stage bleach plant effluent used in the present study.  
 
S.No Parameter Untreated value 
1 pH 5.57 
2 Conductivity 6620 µS/cm 
3 Turbidity 75.8 NTU 
4 TS(Total solids) 7.5 g/l 5 TSS(Total suspended solids) 1.03 g/l 
6 TDS(Total dissolved solids)  6.47 g/l 
7 COD  5040 mg/l 
8 Chloride 2516.95 mg/l 
9 Apparent colour 4290 PCU 
10 True Colour 3840 PCU 
 
Table-3.2: Characteristics of the first extraction stage bleach plant effluent  
Then the pulp is subjected to extraction washing in alkali The wastewater thus generated has 
approximately 0.3% oil which is difficult to treat by conventional treatment technology. 
Bleach effluent retrieved was the First extraction stage effluent from the large and an 
integrated paper and pulp mill. Pulp after brown stock washing is subjected to bleaching by 
Cl2/ Cl2, ClO2 and the bleached pulp is further subjected extraction in alkaline solution. The 
wastewater generated here has colour and chlorinated organic compounds as main culprits 
making conventional treatment techniques not useful for the treatment of bleach effluen t. 
3.2 Experimental setup  
The experimental electrochemical treatment system, used for the batch treatment of the 
wastewater, included a reactor and a DC power supply system. Please see figure-1 for details. 
Reactors (fabricated by using 6 mm acrylic sheet) of 5 cm length, 3.5 cm width and 32 cm 
height were used in the electrochemical treatment studies. Working volume of these reactors 
is 400 ml. Two electrodes (anode and cathode), each of 5 cm width, 20 cm length and 2 mm 
thickness, are housed inside the reactor as shown in Figure-3.1. Three different types of 
electrodes, namely, Al-Al, Fe-Fe and SS- SS, were alternatively used in the present stud y. 
With the help of grooves in the reactor wall, spacing between the electrodes was maintained 
at 10 mm. For mixing the reactor contents a 1.5 cm long stirring bead was used and the 
reactor was placed over a magnetic stirrer. The DC power supply system (Model L-3210 of 
Aplab, India) used was capable of supplying DC power in the range of 0-32 volts and 0-10 
amperes. It can supply DC power at the desired constant voltage (in the range of 0 to 32 V) or 
constant amperage (in the range of 0 to 10 Amp.). The system has provisions for the 
regulated and metered (voltage and amperage) supply of DC power. The ripple and noise of 
the instrument was less than 0.04%.  
After each run, the electrodes were washed with acetone (to remove the surface grease) and 
dipped for five minutes in a freshly prepared solution of 100 mL of 35% HCl and 200 mL of 2.8% aqueous solution of hexamethelenetetramine (Do and Chen, 1994) for the removal of 
impurities from the electrode surface.  
3.3 Approach followed 
Electrochemical treatment of acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater was studied using 
stainless steel electrodes and focused on the optimization of the parameters, pH, chloride, 
voltage and treatment time. COD removal was used as a measure for the treatment. Treatment 
of the first extraction stage bleach plant effluent was studied using three different types o f 
electrodes, namely, Al-Al, Fe-Fe, and SS-SS. The parameters optimized in the case of first 
extraction stage bleach plant effluent included pH, voltage and treatment time. Colour 
removal was used as a measure for the treatment. 
Design-Expert 7.1.5 (Stat-Ease Inc., Minneapolis, MN USA) was used for the design of 
experiments. Using the selected parameters and their operating ranges as inputs, the set of 
experiments to be carried out were obtained from running the Rotatable Central Composite 
Design (CCD) under the Response Surface Methodology of the Design-Expert software. 
Using the laboratory scale batch electrochemical treatment system the set of experiments 
obtained from the design of experiments were carried out at the specified parameter values 
and responses were recorded.  
In case of acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater, chloride content and pH of the wastewater  
was adjusted to desired level by adding sodium chloride and using either sulphuric acid or 
sodium hydroxide solutions. Then wastewater was taken into the reactor, SS-SS electrodes 
were set in place, Voltage was fixed at the desired level and DC current was passed for 
specified period. Amperage (for facilitating estimation of power consumption), initial and 
final temperature and pH of the wastewater were monitored. After the treatment, the treated 
wastewater was allowed to settle for 2 hours, and the supernatant was sampled and analysed 
for COD.  
In case of the first extraction stage bleach plant effluent, pH of wastewater was adjusted to 
desired level by using sulphuric acid or sodium hydroxide solutions. The set of 
electrochemical treatment experiments were carried out at the specified parameter conditions. 
The set of experiments were run three times, the first set with Al-Al electrodes, the second set 
with Fe-Fe electrodes, and the third set with SS-SS electrodes. Amperage (for facilitating estimation of power consumption), and initial and final temperature and pH of the wastewater 
were monitored. After the treatment, the treated wastewater was allowed to settle for 2 hours, 
and the supernatant was sampled and analysed for colour, COD and turbidity. 
Using the responses together with the parameter values as inputs, through running design 
expert software, statistical models, describing and simulating the electrochemical treatment 
process, were developed. In case of the acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater, COD re moval 
efficiency and energy consumption (responses) were modelled against the parameters, pH, 
Chloride level, Voltage and treatment duration. And, in case of the first extraction stage 
bleach plant effluent colour removal and energy consumption (responses) were modelled 
against the parameters, pH, Voltage and treatment duration, for each of the three sets of 
electrodes used separately.  
The model development process involved two steps: selection of model and development of 
the selected model. The model selection process involved calculation of the effects of all the 
model terms and comparison of F-values, Lack of fit , and coefficient of regression (R2) 
values. In the model development process, first a model inclusive of all the possible terms 
was developed and then it was reduced through eliminating all the non-significant terms. An 
ANOVA (Analysis of variance) table, developed with the help of the software, was used for 
identifying the significant model terms (at 95% significance level) and reducing the model. 
Goodness  of fit of the developed model  was evaluated through estimating R2 and CV values.  
The software gave the developed model both as a standardized equation (in terms of 
standardized coded values for the parameters) and as an unstandardized equation (in terms of 
actual values for the parameters). This model included all the significant parameter terms and 
the parameter interaction terms. And it can be used for predicting responses, and also for 
simulating and optimizing the treatment process.   
With the help of the design expert software, using the developed model, parameter 
optimization (finding values for different influencing parameters at which the response is 
either maximum or minimum as desired) was carried out.  
3.4 Analytical techniques  
pH and conductivity (in mho/cm) were measured with electronic pH meter (CP-901) by 
CENTURY instruments after calibrating the pH meter with buffer solutions of pH 4.0, 7.0 and 9.2. (Method number 4500-B of Standard Method, 1989) and digital conductivity meter 
(601-E) made by Deluxe instruments which is calibrated with standard KCl solution of 0.1N 
strength (Method number 2510-B of standard methods, 1989). Chemical oxygen demand 
(COD) was determined by closed reflux (titrimetric) method (Method number 5220-C of 
standard methods, 1989). Turbidity of sample was measured by using Nephalometer which 
uses optical properties of light as basis (Method number 2130- B of standard method, 1989) 
and chloride was estimated by argentometric method (Method number 4500-B of standard 
method, 1989). Oil and grease was determined by Partition-Gravimetric method (Method 
number 5520-B of standard methods, 1989) while the colour of effluent samples was 
determined spectrophotometrically according to Canadian Paper and Pulp Association 
(CPPA) Standard Method (1974). Sulphate estimation was done by gravimetric method 
(Method Number 4500- sulphate D of standard methods, 1989) and Biological Oxygen 
Demand (BOD) was estimated by standard dilution technique (Method number 5210-B of 
standard methods, 1989). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
         
            Figure 3.1 - Schematic diagram of the experimental set up  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 
Results and discussion 
Both the wastewaters namely, a crylic fibre applicator oil wastewater from textile industry and 
first extraction stage bleach effluent from paper and pulp industry are investigated in the 
following study. Response Surface Methodology was used for the experimental design and 
Design Expert software was used for the data analysis and model building. Acrylic fibre 
applicator oil wastewater from the textile industry was used and the experiments were 
conducted using stainless steel pair of electrodes as per the experimental design and COD 
removal was obtained as response. Further first extraction stage bleach effluent from paper 
and pulp industry was treated using three pairs of electrodes (Al-Al, Fe-Fe, SS-SS electrodes) 
and colour removal was obtained as response. 
4.1 Treatment of acrylic fibre application oil wastewater 
For the treatment of acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater based on the extensive literature  
review done 4 process variables were selected and their range was specified as given in the 
Table 4.1 
Parameters Ranges 
pH 4 to 9 
Chloride (mg/l) 0 to 1200 
Voltage (V) 5 to 15 
Time (min) 5 to 20 
 
Table 4.1 Process variables and their ranges for acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater 
The experimental variables in terms of actual and coded values are given in Table 4.2 and the 
set experiments performed is given in the Table 4.3. These set of 21 experiments were 
obtained by using rotatable central composite design method of Response surface 
methodology using Design Expert Software. The responses (COD removal efficiency) or the 
experimental results obtained for the set of experiments conducted are shown in Annexure 1. 
The response data was fitted using design expert software and the best response fitting was 
obtained through the linear model indicating it to be the most appropriate model for the data. 
Please see the Table 4.4 for details. The linear model is significant at 99.99% significance 
level (F value = 22.7, df = 4) and the Lack of Fit was not significant at p- value = 0.4472 (F 
value = 1.26, df = 12) as depicted in Table 4.4. Table 4.5 compares the actual and the 
predicted values showing the model to be a fitting properly. Finally based upon the press 
values the linear model gives the minimum value. For the linear model all the model terms are significant at the p- value < 0.05. Model gave a CV of 18.47% and R2 of 0.8502 
(acceptable above 0.80%). Also the model has low noise as compared to the signal which is 
evident from the precision value of 16.52 (acceptable > 4). On running the data on the 
software the linear model equation given in equation 4.1 was developed. This model equation 
has the parameters in terms of unitless regression coefficients and cannot be directly used for 
predictions or optimization. 
COD removal  = + 49.13- 7.48* pH+ 11.57* Chloride + 17.25* Voltage +7.76* Time   (4.1) 
where pH, chloride,voltage and time are in coded units.      
For the convenience of use this linear model equation is converted into equation in terms of 
actual units as shown in equation 4.2.   
 COD removal = + 5.10834 - 3.74150 * pH + 0.025867 * Chlorides + 3.44973 * Voltage 
+1.55133 * Time                                                                                                                   (4.2)   
where pH, chloride,voltage and time are in actual units.         
Further the model is validated by comparing the actual and predicted COD removal 
efficiency values then the model is used for finding out the optimum treatment conditions. 
The numerical optimization of the model predicted COD removal efficiency of 77.7% at 5.1 
pH, 1067 mg/l chloride concentration, 14.26 volts and 9.15 minutes treatment time.           
The model indicates that voltage has the highest contribution in the COD removal( Graph-
4.3) followed by chloride concentration(Graph - 4.2). COD removal efficiency increases with 
the increase in voltage and chloride concentration where as treatment time has slight effect on 
it(Graph – 4.4). pH has negetive effect on the COD removal efficiency infering that low pH 
(acidic pH condition) favours better COD removal  (Graph- 4.1).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                        Coded values 
    Independent variables -1.68 -1 0 1 1.68 
         Actual values         
pH 
  3.64 5 7 9 10.36 
Chloride(mg/l) 
 0 305.1 752.6 1200  1505.1 
Voltage(volt) 
 1.59 5 10 15 18.41 
Treatment time (min) 1.59 5 10 15 18.41 
        Table 4.2 Experimental range and level of independent process variables for acrylic fibre 
applicator oil wastewater     
Experimental 
run Coded values (Actual values) 
  pH Chloride Voltage Time 
Star points (α = ± 1)        
1 +1(9) +1(1200) +1(15) -1(5) 
2 +1(9) +1(1200) -1(5) -1(5) 
3 +1(9) -1(305.1) +1(15) +1(15) 
4 -1(5) +1(1200) -1(5) +1(15) 
5 +1(9) -1(305.1) -1(5) +1(15) 
6 -1(5) -1(305.1) +1(15) -1(5) 
7 -1(5) +1(1200) +1(15) +1(15) 
8 -1(5) -1(305.1) -1(5) -1(5) 
Axial points (α = ± 1.68)  
   9 -1.68(3.64) 0(752.6) 0(10) 0(10) 
10 1.68(10.36) 0(752.6) 0(10) 0(10) 
11 0(7) -1.68(0) 0(10) 0(10) 
12 0(7) 1.68(1505.1) 0(10) 0(10) 
13 0(7) 0(752.6) -1.68(1.59) 0(10) 
14 0(7) 0(752.6) 1.68(18.41) 0(10) 
15 0(7) 0(752.6) 0(10) -1.68(1.59) 
16 0(7) 0(752.6) 0(10) +1.68(18.41) 
Center points (α = 0)  
   17 0(7) 0(752.6) 0(10) 0(10) 
18 0(7) 0(752.6) 0(10) 0(10) 
19 0(7) 0(752.6) 0(10) 0(10) 
20 0(7) 0(752.6) 0(10) 0(10) 
21 0(7) 0(752.6) 0(10) 0(10) 
 
Table 4.3 Experimental design as per CCD for acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater 
 
 
Source Sum of square df mean sq F value P-value prob> F   
Mean vs Total 46840.6 1 46840.6 
   Linear vs Mean  7478.99  4 1869.75  25.74  < .0001  Suggested  2FI vs Linear 725.37 6 120.89 2.99 0.0683 
 Quadratic vs 
2FI 189.09 4 47.27 1.35 0.368 
 Cubic vs Quad. 53.8 2 26.9 0.67 0.5763 Aliased 
Residual 121.15 3 40.38 
   Total 55409 20 2770.45       
  
        Table 4.4   Selection of model for acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater 
 
            Response 1 
Exp. 
     COD removal 
no. Initial pH Chloride(mg/l) Voltage (V) Time(T) 
 Efficiency (%) 
      Actual Predicted 
1 9 1200  15 5 
 61.16 61.98 
2 9 1200  5 5 
 23.97 27.48 
3 9 305.1 15 15 
 49.2 54.34 
4 5 1200  5 15 
 64.14 57.96 
5 9 305.1 5 15 
 9.03 19.85 
6 5 305.1 15 5 
 64.54 53.8 
7 5 1200  15 15 
 76.76 92.46 
8 5 305.1 5 5 
 16.67 19.3 
9 3.64 752.6 10 10 
 61.82 60.98 
10 10.36 752.6 10 10 
 47.88 35.81 
11 7 0 10 10 
 32.27 28.93 
12 7 1505.1 10 10 
 74.77 67.86 
13 7 752.6 1.59 10 
 15.01 19.39 
14 7 752.6 18.41 10 
 73.11 77.4 
15 7 752.6 10 1.59 
 27.03 35.35 
16 7 752.6 10 18.41 
 70.52 61.44 
17 7 752.6 10 10 
 45.62 48.39 
18 7 752.6 10 10 
 62.16 60.3 
19 7 752.6 10 10 
 57.57 48.39 
20 7 752.6 10 10 
 52.86 48.39 
21 7 752.6 10 10 
 43.96 48.39 
 
Table 4.5 Actual and predictive responses of COD removal efficiency of Acrylic fibre 
applicator oil wastewater 
  
Graph 4.1 pH versus COD removal (%) for acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater 
 
 
Graph 4.2 Chlorides versus COD removal (%) for acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater 
 Design-Expert® Software
COD removal (%)
X1 = A: pH
Actual Factors
B: Chlorides = 752.55
C: Voltage = 10.00
D: Time = 10.00
5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0926436077
A: pHCOD removal (%)One Factor
Design-Expert® Software
COD removal (%)
X1 = B: Chlorides
Actual Factors
A: pH = 7.0
C: Voltage = 10.00
D: Time = 10.00
305.10 528.83 752.55 976.27 1200.00926436077
B: ChloridesCOD removal (%)One Factor 
Graph 4.3 Voltage versus COD removal (%) for acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater 
 
Graph 4.4 Time versus COD removal (%) for acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater 
 
 
 
 Design-Expert® Software
COD removal (%)
X1 = C: Voltage
Actual Factors
A: pH = 7.0
B: Chlorides = 752.55
D: Time = 10.00
5.00 7.50 10.00 12.50 15.00926436077
C: VoltageCOD removal (%)One Factor
Design-Expert® Software
COD removal (%)
X1 = D: Time
Actual Factors
A: pH = 7.0
B: Chlorides = 752.55
C: Voltage = 10.00
5.00 7.50 10.00 12.50 15.00926436077
D: TimeCOD removal (%)One Factor4.2 Treatment of First extraction stage Bleach effluent 
For the bleach effluent also on the basis of extensive literature review and preliminary 
laboratory scale testing 3 process variables namely- pH, voltage and time were selected and 
their range was specified as given in Table 4.6. 
 
                               
                    Table 4.6 Process variables and their ranges for Bleach effluent 
 In the present study, for the treatment of bleach effluent three different pairs of electrodes 
(Fe- Fe, Al- Al and SS- SS) were used. Further on the basis of set of 15 experiments obtaine d 
by using rotatable central composite design method of Response surface methodology using 
Design Expert Software the responses were obtained as COD, colour and turbidity removal 
efficiencies. The responses (COD, colour and turbidity removal efficiency) or the 
experimental results obtained for the set of experiments conducted are shown in Annexe 2, 3 
and 4 for Fe- Fe, Al –Al and SS-SS pair of electrodes respectively. However the modelling 
done here is basically focussed on colour removal efficiency as response. 
4.2.1 Using Fe-Fe pair of electrodes 
 The experimental results for first extraction stage bleach effluent using Fe- Fe pair of 
electrodes gave the responses in the form of CO D, colour and turbidity removal. However for 
model to give reliable results R2 value should be greater than 0.8 which was not the case here, 
hence modelling was not done for these results. 
4.2.2 Using Al-Al pair of electrodes  
For modelling to be done using Al-Al pair of electrodes again R2 value came out to be lesser 
than 0.8 showing less reliability of the model. Further greater is the predicted R2 value better 
is the prediction, and in the case  of Al- Al pair of electrodes predicted R2 value was highly 
diminished, showing that the model has low predictability.  Thus modelling was not done for 
this case as well. Parameters Ranges 
pH 2to 10 
Voltage (V) 0 to 10 
Time (min) 0 to 20 4.2.3 Using SS-SS pair of electrodes  
For successful modelling to be done using SS-SS pair of electrodes, experimental range an d 
level of independent process variables for Bleach effluent were specified as depicted in Table 
4.7. The set experiments performed is given in the Table 4.8. The response data was fitted 
using design expert software and the best response fitting was obtained through the linear 
model indicating it to be the most appropriate model for the data. Table 4.9 gives the details 
of model selection showing linear model to be the most suitable model. For proving the 
selected model correct, the actual and predicted Colour removal efficiencies were compared 
as given in Table 4.10. Further the results for the set of experiments conducted are quoted in 
annexe 4.  
On running the data on the software the linear model equation given in equation 4.3 was 
developed. As this model equation has the parameters in terms of unitless regression 
coefficients and cannot be directly used for predictions or optimization, hence equation 4.4 
was developed which is in terms of actual units. 
Colour removal (%) = + 48.59 + 38.33  *pH + 31.16* Voltage+ 28.97*Time                (4.3) 
where pH, voltage and time are in coded units. 
Colour removal (%) = -166.53949 + 13.93709* pH +10.38814* Voltage + 5.26690 * Time 
                                                                                                                                             (4.4) 
where pH, chloride,voltage and time are in actual units.                                                                                                                      
As indicated by equation 4.3, pH has the greatest influence on colour removal efficiency 
(Graph- 4.5) followed by voltage (Graph- 4.6). Further time has the least influence on colour 
removal efficiency (Graph -4.7) with no interaction being seen between the different factors. 
On the basis of above modelling results the optimised colour removal conditions were sorted 
out. Thus at 6.25 pH and 8.99 volts on giving 15.69 minutes of treatment time an optimum 
colour removal efficiency of 96.6% was achieved. 
 
 
 
 
 
         Coded levels     
Independent variables - 1.68 - 1 0 + 1 +1.68 
        Actual values     
pH 
 2.36 3.5 6.25 9 10.14 
Voltage (volt) 2.76 4 7 10 11.24 
Treatment time (min) 2.72 5 10.5 16 18.28 
 
Table 4.7 Experimental range and level of independent process variables for first extraction 
stage Bleach effluent 
 
  
Experimental 
run Coded values (Actual values) 
  pH Voltage Time 
Star points (α = ± 1)      
1 +1(9) +1(10) -1(5) 
2 +1(9) -1(4) +1(16) 
3 -1(3.5) +1(10) +1(16) 
4 -1(3.5) -1(4) -1(5) 
Axial points (α = ± 1.68)  
 5 -1.68(2.36) 0(7) 0(10.5) 
6 +1.68(10.14) 0(7) 0(10.5) 
7 0(6.25) -1.68(2.76) 0(10.5) 
8 0(6.25) +1.68(11.24) 0(10.5) 
9 0(6.25) 0(7) -1.68(2.72) 
10 0(6.25) 0(7) +1.68(18.28) 
Center points (α = 0)  
 11 0(6.25) 0(7) 0(10.5) 
12 0(6.25) 0(7) 0(10.5) 
13 0(6.25) 0(7) 0(10.5) 
14 0(6.25) 0(7) 0(10.5) 
15 0(6.25) 0(7) 0(10.5) 
 
 
Table 4.8 Experimental design as per CCD for first extraction stage Bleach effluent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 Sum of 
 Mean F p-value 
 Source Squares df Square Value Prob > F 
 Mean vs Total 35410.17 1 35410.17 
   Linear vs Mean 26234.59 3 8744.863 49.44888 < 0.0001 Suggested 
2FI vs Linear 1047.302 3 349.1006 3.109992 0.0886 
 Quadratic vs 2FI 584.5393 3 194.8464 3.107888 0.1269 
 Cubic vs 
Quadratic 1.567574 1 1.567574 0.020103 0.8941 Aliased 
Residual 311.9032 4 77.9758 
   Total 63590.06 15 4239.338 
   
        
Table 4.9 Selection of model for first extraction stage bleach effluent 
 
    Response 1 
Exp. 
   COD removal 
no. Initial pH Voltage (V) Time (T) Efficiency (%) 
    Actual Value Predicted Value 
1 9 10 5 90.39 86.49 
2 9 4 16 89.06 82.1 
3 3.5 10 16 
  4 3.5 4 5 -55.73 -52.49 
5 2.36 7 10.5 10.42 5.32 
6 10.14 7 10.5 92.97 97.84 
7 6.25 2.76 10.5 -8.85 -0.43 
8 6.25 11.24 10.5 95.05 103.6 
9 6.25 7 2.72 -2.6 2.67 
10 6.25 7 18.28 90.76 100.49 
11 6.25 7 10.5 60.42 51.58 
12 6.25 7 10.5 56.77 51.58 
13 6.25 7 10.5 41.67 51.58 
14 6.25 7 10.5 58.07 51.58 
15 6.25 7 10.5 65.1 51.58 
 
Table 4.10 Actual and predictive responses of Colour removal efficiency of First Extraction 
Stage Bleach Effluent using SS-SS pair of electrodes Graph 4.5 pH versus Colour removal (%) for first extraction stage bleach plant effluent 
 
Graph 4.6 Voltage versus Colour removal (%) for first extraction stage bleach plant effluent
  Design-Expert® Software
Colour removal (%)
X1 = A: pH
Actual Factors
B: Voltage = 7.00
C: Time = 10.50
3.50 4.88 6.25 7.63 9.00-60.0-20.020.060.0100.0
pHC o lo u r  r e m o v a l ( % )One Factor
Design-Expert® Software
Colour removal (%)
X1 = B: Voltage
Actual Factors
A: pH = 6.25
C: Time = 10.50
4.00 5.50 7.00 8.50 10.00-60.0-20.020.060.0100.0
VoltC o lo u r  r e m o v a l ( % )One Factor 
Graph 4.7 Time versus Colour removal (%) for first extraction stage bleach plant effluent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Design-Expert® Software
Colour removal (%)
X1 = C: Time
Actual Factors
A: pH = 6.25
B: Voltage = 7.00
5.00 7.75 10.50 13.25 16.00-60.0-20.020.060.0100.0
Time (min)C o lo u r  r e m o v a l ( % )One Factor 
  Conclusion 
Electrochemical treatment process was used to treat Acrylic fibre applicator oil wastewater 
from textile industry and 1st extraction stage bleach plant effluent from paper and pulp 
industry. For the acrylic fibre oil application waste water 4 factors namely pH, chloride, 
voltage and time were fixed and the treatment efficiency was accessed on the basis of COD 
removal efficiency. Based on the literature review stainless steel electrodes were used for 
treatment. For the interpretation of the results obtained on the laboratory scale analysis linear 
model was selected which gave the optimum results for COD removal at pH- 7.08, 1105.87 
mg/l, 14.31 V and 13.61 minutes giving 77.72% COD removal.  
In the case of Bleach effluent from paper and pulp industry three different electrodes namely 
aluminium, iron and stainless steel were used. Here three factors -pH, voltage and time were 
fixed in each experiment and the results were accessed on the basis of COD, colour and 
turbidity removal efficiencies. During modelling Fe-Fe and Al-Al pair of electrodes gave a 
low R2 value (R2 value< 0.8), hence model development was omitted for these. However 
results of treatment using SS-SS pair of electrodes gave satisfactory R2 value and predicted 
R2 showing that the model has high predictability. Hence on modelling linear model was 
selected which gave 96.6% as optimum colour removal efficiency at 6.25 pH and 8.99 volts 
on giving 15.69 minutes of treatment time. 
Further as an additional advantage of the process it was found that the treatment leads to the 
neutralization of pH- slightly on the higher side, which cuts down the additional 
neutralization expenses. However, it should be noted that no feasibility analysis of the results 
obtained were done so the process can only be followed if it’s cost effective as compared to 
the conventional treatment schemes. 
Thus both Acrylic oil application waste water from textile industry and 1st extraction stage 
bleach effluent from paper and pulp industry gave encouraging results with electrochemical 
treatment process, so after pilot scale testing the process can be used on the industrial scale. 
  
  
References 
 
1. Abhijit, D . Lokesh K. S . Bejankiwar R. S . and Gowda T. P ., Electrochemical oxidation of 
pharmaceutical effluent using cast iron electrode, J Environ Sci Eng.  2005 (47) 21-4. 
2. APHA, AWWA and WPCF, 1995. Standard methods for the Examination of water and 
wastewater. 19th edition, jointly edited by Eaton, A.D., Clesceri, L.S.and Greenberg, A.E. 
3. Asselin, M . Drogui P . Benmoussa H .and Blais J. F ., Effectiveness of electrocoagulation 
process in removing organic compounds from slaughterhouse wastewater using monopolar 
and bipolar electrolytic cells, Chemosphere.  2008 (11) 1727-33. 
4. Azarian, G. H. Mesdaghinia A. R. Vaezi F. Nabizadeh R. and Nematollahi D., Algae 
Removal by Electro-coagulation Process Application for Treatment of the Effluent from 
an Industrial Wastewater Treatment Plant, Iranian J Publ Health. 2007 (36) 57-64.  
5. Barrera-Diaz, C. Bilyeu B.  Roa-Morales G. and Balderas-Hernández P., A Comparison of 
Iron and Aluminium Electrodes in Hydrogen Peroxide-Assisted Electrocoagulation of 
Organic Pollutants, Journal of Hazardous Materials . 2009  (163) 995-1000. 
6. Bejankiwar, R. S .  Lokesh K. S . and Gowda T. P ., Colour and organic removal of 
biologically treated coffee curing wastewater by electrochemical oxidation method, J. 
Envir sci. (China). 2003 (3) 323-7. 
7. Bellakhal, N. Oturan, M. A. Oturan, N. and Dachraoui, M., Olive Oil Mill Wastewater 
Treatment by the Electro-Fenton Process, Environmental Chemistry. 2006 (3) 345-349. 
8. Bonfatti, F., Anodic mineralization of organic substrates in chloride-containing aqueous 
media, Electrochimica Acta. 2000 (46) 305-314. 
9. Buzzini, A. P.  Motheo A. J.  and Pires E. C. , Assessment of electrochemical and chemical 
coagulation as post-treatment for the effluents of a UASB reactor treating cellulose pulp 
mill wastewater. Chemical Engineering & Technology . 2005 (28) 95 – 105. 
10. Buzzini, A. P . Patrizzi L. J . Motheo A. J . Pires E. C ., Preliminary evaluation of the 
electrochemical and chemical coagulation processes in the post-treatment of effluent from 
an upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactor, J Environ Manage.  2007 (4) 847-57.  11. Canizares, P.  Lobato, J.  Paz R. Rodrigo M. A. and Saez C., Advanced oxidation 
processes for the treatment of olive-oil mills wastewater, Chemosphere . 2007 (67) 832-
838. 
12. Chatzisymeon, E. Dimou A. Mantzavinos D. and Katsaounis A., Electrochemical 
oxidation of model compounds and olive mill wastewater over DSA electrodes: 1. The 
case of Ti/IrO 2 anode, Chemosphere . 2007 (66) 2035-2043. 
13. Chen, X. Chen G. and Yue P. L., Separation of pollutants from restaurant wastewater by 
electrocoagulation, Separation and Purification Technology . 2000 (19) 65-76. 
14. Deligiorgis, A . Xekoukoulotakis N. P . Diamadopoulos E . and Mantzavinos D ., 
Electrochemical oxidation of table olive processing wastewater over boron-doped 
diamond electrodes: treatment optimization by factorial design, Water Res.  2008 (42) 
1229-37. 
15. Feki, F. Aloui F. Feki M. and Sayadi S.Gonçalves, M. Alves M. M. Correia J. P. and 
Marques I. P., Electrooxidation as the anaerobic pre-treatment of fats: Oleate conversion 
using RuO 2 and IrO 2 based anodes, Bioresource Technology . 2008 (99) 8207-8211.  
16. Gotsi, M. Kalogerakis N. Psillakis E. Samaras P. and Mantzavinos D.,  Electrochemical 
oxidation of olive oil mill wastewaters. Water Research  2005 (39) 4177-4187.  
17. Guven, G . Perendeci A . Tanyolaç A ., Electrochemical treatment of deproteinated whey 
wastewater and optimization of treatment conditions with response surface methodology. J 
Hazard Mater.  2008 (1) 69-78. 
18. Ihara, I. Umetsu K. Kanamura K. and Watanabe T., Electrochemical oxidation of the 
effluent from anaerobic digestion of dairy manure, Bioresource Technology . 2006 (97) 
1360-1364. 
19. Inan, H.  Dimoglo A. Simsek H. and Karpuzcu M., Olive oil mill wastewater treatment by 
means of electro-coagulation, Separation and Purification Technology . 2004 (36) 23-31.  
20. Jiang, J. Chang M. and Pan P., Simultaneous Hydrogen Production and Electrochemical 
Oxidation of Organics Using Boron-Doped Diamond Electrodes, Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2008 (42) 3059 –3063. 
21. Khoufi, S. Aloui F. and Sayadi S.,  Pilot scale hybrid process for olive mill wastewater 
treatment and reuse,  Water Res.  2008 (4-5) 1229-37.  22. Khoufi, S . Feki F. Aloui F. Sayadi S., Pilot-plant results of the electro-Fenton treatment 
of olive mill wastewaters followed by anaerobic digestion, Water Science Technol.  2007 
(12) 259-65. 
23. Khoufi, S . Feki F. and Sayadi S ., Detoxification of olive mill wastewater by 
electrocoagulation and sedimentation processes, J Hazard Mater.  2007 (142) 58-67.  
24. Kotta, E. Kalogerakis N. and Mantzavino D., The effect of solids on the electrochemical 
treatment of olive mill effluents, Journal of Chemical Technology & Biotechnology . 2007 
(82) 504-511. 
25. Kobya, M. Senturk E. and Bayramoglu M., Treatment of poultry slaughterhouse 
wastewaters by electrocoagulation, Journal of Hazardous Materials . 2006 (133) 172-176.   
26. Korbahti, B. K . and Tanyolaç A . Continuous electrochemical treatment of phenolic 
wastewater in a tubular reactor. Water Res.  2003 (7) 1505-14. 
27. Lazarova, Z . and Spendlingwimmer R ., Treatment of yellow water by membrane 
separations and advanced oxidation methods. Water Sci Technol.  2008 (2) 419-26. 
28. Lei, X. and Maekawa T ., Electrochemical treatment of anaerobic digestion effluent using 
a Ti/Pt-IrO2 electrode, Bioresour Technol.  2007 (18) 3521-5. 
29. Longhi, P. Vodopivec B. and Fiori G., Electrochemical treatment of olive oil mill waste 
water, Separation and Purification Technology . 2004 (36) 33-39. 
30. Lou, H. Wang J.  Zhang P.  Zhong Y.  Sha J. and Yang J., Study on Treatment of the 
Simulation Wastewater of Phenol with Electrochemical Process  Environmental Science 
and Management, Environ. Sci. Manage. 2008 (33) 72-76.  
31. Ma, H. Wang B., Electrochemical pilot-scale plant for oil field produced wastewater by 
M/C/Fe electrodes for injection, J Hazard Mater.  2006 (2-3) 237-43. 
32. Ma, H. Zhang X. Ma Q. and Wang B., Electrochemical catalytic treatment of phenol 
wastewater,  J. Hazard Mater.  2008 xxx. 
33. Mahesh, S.  Prasad B. Mall I. D.  and Mishra I. M., Electrochemical Degradation of Pulp 
and Paper Mill Wastewater. Part 1. COD and Color Removal, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2006 
(8) 2830 –2839 
34. Mansour, B. L. Kesentini I. and Elleuch B., Treatment of waste water of paper industry 
by coagulation - electro flotation, Desalinization.2007 (208) 34-41. 35. Martinez-Huitle, C. A . and Ferro S., Electrochemical oxidation of organic pollutants for 
the wastewater treatment: direct and indirect processes, Chem Soc Rev.  2006 (35) 1324-
40.  
36. Panizza M . and Cerisola G . Removal of organic pollutants from industrial wastewater by 
electrogenerated Fenton's reagent, Water Res.  2001 (16) 3987-92. 
37. Panizza M. and Cerisola G., Olive mill wastewater treatment by anodic oxidation with 
parallel plate electrodes, Water Research . 2006 (40) 1179-1184.  
38. Patel U. D. and Suresh S., Electrochemical treatment of pentachlorophenol in water and 
pulp bleaching effluent, Separation and Purification Technology . 2008 (61) 115-122. 
39. Perng, Y. S. Wang E. C. Yu S. T. Hsieh Y. C. Chen P. R. and Chi H. Y., Treatment of a 
Specialty Paper Mill Wastewater Using a Pilot-scale Pulsed Electrocoagulation Unit, 
Taiwan J For Sci. 2007 (3) 355-66. 
40. Peterson B. M. and Bertazzoli R., Electrodegradation of landfill leachate in a flow 
electrochemical reactor, Separation and Purification Technology  2007 (54) 388-395.  
41. Piya-areetham, P . Shenchunthichai K . Hunsom M ., Application of electrooxidation 
process for treating concentrated wastewater from distillery industry with a voluminous 
electrode, Water Res.  2006 (15) 2857-64. 
42. Rajkumar, D. Palanivelu, K. and Balasubramanian N., Combined electrochemical 
degradation and activated carbon adsorption treatments for wastewater containing mixed 
phenolic compounds, Published on the NRC Research. 2004. 
43. Roa-Morales, G. Campos-Medina E. Aguilera-Cotero J. Bilyeu B. and Barrera-Díaz C., 
Aluminum electrocoagulation with peroxide applied to wastewater from pasta and cookie 
processing, Separation and Purification Technology . 2007 (57) 124-129.  
44. Samet, Y. Elaoud S. C. Ammar S. and Abdelhedi R., Electrochemical degradation of 4-
chloroguaiacol for wastewater treatment using PbO 2 anodes, Journal of Hazardous 
Materials . 2006 (138) 614-619.  
45. Sengil, A. and Ozacar M., Treatment of dairy wastewaters by electrocoagulation using 
mild steel electrodes, Journal of Hazardous Materials . 2006 (137) 1197-1205.  46. Shibin X. Shuichun X . And Changqing Z ., Removal of organic pollutants from 2,2',5,5'-
tetrachlorobenzidine (TCB) industrial wastewater by micro-electrochemical oxidation and 
air-stripping, J Hazard Mater.  2007 (144) 159-63. 
47. Tezcan, U. A. Koparal S. and Ogutveren U. B.,   Hybrid processes for the treatment of 
cattle-slaughterhouse wastewater using aluminum and iron electrodes. Journal of 
Hazardous Materials  (Article in Press). 
48. Tezcan, U. Altay U. Koparal A. S. and Ogutveren U. B., Complete treatment of olive mill 
wastewaters by electrooxidation, Journal of Hazardous Materials . 2007 (142) 58-67. 
49. Tezcan, U. U. Koparal A. S. and Ogutveren U. B., Electrocoagulation of vegetable oil 
refinery wastewater using aluminum electrodes, Chemosphere.  2006 (3) 393-9. 
50. Thaveemaitree, Y .  Polprasert C . and Seung-Hwan L ., Application of electrochemical 
process for landfill leachate treatment with emphasis on heavy metal and organic removal, 
Environ Technol.  2003 (9) 1135-45.   
51. Ugurlu, M.  Gurses A. Dogar C. and Yalcın  M., The removal of lignin and phenol from 
paper mill effluents by electrocoagulation, Journal of Environmental Management . 2008 
(87) 420-428. 
52. Vijayaraghavan, K. Ahmad D. Yuzri A. and Yazid A., Electrolytic treatment of latex 
wastewater, Desalination . 2008 (219) 214-221. 
53. Wang, B. Kong W. and Ma H., Electrochemical treatment of paper mill wastewater using 
three-dimensional electrodes with Ti/Co/SnO 2-Sb2O5 anode, Journal of Hazardous 
Materials . 2007 (146) 295-301.  
54. Wang, P. Lau I.W.C. and Fang H.H.P.  Electrochemical Oxidation of Leachate Pretreated 
in an Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket Reactor, Environmental Technology .2001 (9) 
373-381. 
55. Xu, X. And Zhu X., Treatment of refectory oily wastewater by electro-coagulation 
process, Chemosphere . 2004 (56) 889-894. 
56. Yang C., Electrochemical coagulation for oily water demulsification, Chemical 
Engineering and Processing: Process Intensification . 2009 (48) 643-650.  
57. Yoon, J. H. Yang J. E. Shim Y. B. And Won M. S., Electrochemical Degradation of 
Benzoquinone, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc. 2007 (28) 403 – 403. 58. Zaied M. and Bellakhal N., Electrocoagulation treatment of black liquor from paper 
industry, Chemical Engineering Journal . 2008 (139) 445-452. 
59. Zhou, M. Dai Q. Lei L. Chunan MA . and Wang D., Long life modified lead dioxide 
anode for organic wastewater treatment: electrochemical characteristics and degradation 
mechanism, Environ Sci Technol.  2005  (39) 363-70. 
 
  
  
 