 
 
Ship -based Marine Plastic Litter  
Bibliography  
 
Trevor Riley, Head of Public Services, NOAA Central Library  
Katie Rowley, Librarian, NOAA Central Library  
Erin Cheever, Librarian, NOAA Central Library  
Jamie Roberts, Librarian, NOAA Central Library  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NCRL subject guide 201 9-03 
https://doi.org/10.25923/qw9w -bw71  
 
April 2019  
 
U.S. Department of Commerce  
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration  
Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research  
NOAA Central Library – Silver Spring, Maryland   
2 
 Table of Contents  
 
Background & Scope  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 3 
Sources Reviewed  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 3 
Section I: Analysis and Estimates  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  4 
Sectio n II: Impact of Ghost Fishing Gear  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 20 
Section III: Port Waste Reception  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  31 
Section IV: Ship -based Plastic Waste Reduction Strategies  ................................ ................................ .... 37 
 
  3 
 Background & Scope  
Under the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL), the discharge 
of plastics into the sea is prohibited  (Annex -V 1988) . Pursuant to  this regulation, governments are also 
required to ensure adequate port reception facilities to receive ship waste. Furthermore, the London 
Convention of 1972 and Protocol of 2006  limit material that can be dumped at sea. Recognizing the 
need to do more in  the area of ship -based marine plastic litter, the International Maritime 
Organization’s Marine Protection Committee (MEPC) adopted an action plan to enhance existing 
regulations in support of reducing marine plastic litter from ships in October of 2018. T his bibliography 
was developed in support of the NOAAs work on this action plan. While there is an abundance of 
literature on plastics in the marine environment, this bibliography is focused on ship -based litter. Due to 
the nature of the issue and the evol ution in regulations, technology, and management, there was no 
limitations set on publication date.  
 
Section I – Analysis and Estimates  
This section is focused on material which provides analysis and estimates of ship -based marine plastic 
litter. It includes articles on debris analysis from beach litter, ships’ litter management behavior, 
identifying ship -based litter, and reports which pr ovide analysis of other contributors such as hull 
scrapings and container loss.  
 
Section II – Impact of Ghost Fishing Gear  
On the topic of  ship-based plastic litter, literature on issues surrounding abandoned, lost, or discarded 
fishing gear represents a large percent of the research. This section is focused on the literature that 
describes the effect of lost gear including ghost fishing, catch rate estimates, environmental and 
socioeconomic impacts.  
 
Section III – Port Waste Reception  
This section is focu sed on literature related to port waste management systems and the reception 
facilities that are required under MARPOL. Literature in this area is a mix of guidelines, analysis of 
trends, practices, and impact reports.  
 
Section IV – Ship -based Plastic Wast e Reduction Strategies  
This section is focused on literature in which the author(s) have worked to develop a strategy to reduce 
ship-based plastic litter. These strategies range from legal  strategies  to incentives, planning, 
technologies, and general appr oaches.  
 
Sources Reviewed  
The following databases were used to identify sources: Clarivate Analytics’ Web of Science: Science 
Citation Index Expanded and Social Science Index; ProQuest’s Science and Technology; JSTOR; EBSCO’s 
Academic Search Complete, EconLit, and Environment Complete; NOAA’s Institutional Repository; ASFA; 
and BioOne. A review of UNEP, NOAA, IMO, and other relevant organizations both governmental and 
NGO was also conducted identify relevant literature. Only English language materials w ere included.  4 
 Section I: Analysis and Estimates  
 
Al-Shwafi, N. A. A., & Ahmed, A. M. (2011). Litter on the Beaches of the Red Sea of Yemen. Russian 
Journal of General Chemistry, 81 (13), 2717 -2723 https://doi.org/10.1134/S1070363211130135 . 
Distribution of litter: ropes, netting, lamb bulbs, foot wear, plastic bags, bottles, aluminum cans, 
cardboard, wood loges, rubber, polystyrene blocks and plastic sheets accumulating on Red Sea beaches 
of Yemen were examined. The results of the study reflected these wastes to be varied from a region to 
region but they were similar in almost all -coastal ar eas. Most of the litter were plastics including food 
bags, oil and water bottles, bait bags, and also vehicles tires. Most of pollution occurred from the sea, 
due to the heavy traffic and to the fishing vessels, which fish in the area.  
 
Barnett, F. G. J. ( 1997). Shipping and Marine Debris in the Wider Caribbean: Answering a Difficult 
Challenge. In J. M. Coe & D. B. Rogers (Eds.), Marine Debris: Sources, Impacts, and Solutions  (pp. 
219-227). New York, NY: Springer New York https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-4613 -8486 -1_18 . 
Marine debris, a global pollution problem, is especially serious for the Wider Caribbean, a region of 
more than three dozen diverse states and territories renowned for its fragile, nat ural beauty. In this 
developing region, already beset with a dense resident population (Table 14.1), beauty makes tourism 
the number -one source of foreign exchange. Fueled by the burgeoning coastal populations and 
exacerbated by booming tourism, the marine  debris problem is magnified in the Wider Caribbean, with 
more and more people generating more and more garbage, much of it finding its way to the sea.  
 
Blidberg, E., Bekken, A. L., Bäckström, A., Haaksi, H., Hansen, L. -M., Skogen, M. H., . . . Ångström, J. 
(2015). Marine Littering and Sources in Nordic Waters.  TemaNord produced for: Nordic Council 
of Ministers. Copenhagen.  https://doi.org/10.6027/TN2015 -524 
Marine litter is a global environmental problem that endangers wildlife and has great socio -economic 
and aesthetic impacts. To identify sources of marine litter is an important key in order to propose cost-
effective measures. Pick analyses of beach litter have therefore been conducted in order to categorise 
litter items from a product perspective. The results confirm that plastic are the most common litter 
material found on beaches in the Nordic countri es. Short life items and packaging are dominating, which 
is strongly linked to individual consumers. It is further concluded that the plastics and packaging industry 
has an important role to play to decrease the amount of marine litter.  
 
Butt, N. (2007). T he Impact of Cruise Ship Generated Waste on Home Ports and Ports of Call: A Study of 
Southampton. Marine Policy, 31 (5), 591 -598 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2007.03.002 . 
Cruise ships represen t less than 1% of the global merchant fleet yet it has been estimated that they are 
responsible for 25% of all waste generated by merchant vessels. This volume of waste produces 
pressures on the environment, particularly with respect to ship -generated wast e disposal at home ports 
and ports of call. Southampton, home port for both Cunard and P&O, and a port of call for Royal 
Caribbean Cruises, is the focus of this study. This paper investigates current waste management and 
disposal options for cruise ship ge nerated waste and the associated impacts of this waste for ports. It is 
concluded that all cruise vessels should vigorously pursue a waste reduction strategy and for ports to 5 
 provide adequate recycling, reduction and re -use facilities for cruise ship gener ated waste, optimising 
use of local facilities whenever possible.  
 
Cantin, J., Eyraud, J., & Fenton, C. (1990). Quantitative Estimates of Garbage Generated and Disposal in 
the U.S. Maritime Sectors before and after MARPOL  Annex V.  NOAA -TM-NMFS -SWFSC -154.  
Retrieved from https://swfsc.noaa.gov/publications/TM/SWFSC/NOAA -TM-NMFS -SWFSC -
154_P119.PDF  
Annex V of MARPOL 73/78 is regarded as an important instrument for redu cing the amounts of plastics 
and other debris discarded into the ocean. Estimates of the aggregate quantities of garbage discarded 
are outdated, however, and represent only order of magnitude efforts. In this paper, the authors 
present updated estimates of  the amounts of plastics and other debris generated in the U.S. maritime 
sectors.  The analysis covers both public and private sectors, including merchant marine vessels active in 
U.S. trade; commercial fishing vessels; recreational boats; research and ind ustrial vessels; U.S. Navy, 
Coast Guard, and Army ships; and vessels and structures associated with offshore oil and gas operations. 
Current disposal practices as well as disposal practices under Annex V are analyzed and used to develop 
estimates of how th e disposition of garbage generated at sea, i.e., the amounts dumped overboard, 
brought back to shore for disposal, and incinerated, will change under the new regulations.  
 
Čulin, J., & Bielić, T. (2016). Plastic Pollution from Ships. Pomorski zbornik, 51  Retrieved from 
https://hrcak.srce.hr/index.php?show=toc&id_broj=12426  
The environmental impact of shipping on marine environment includes discharge of garbage. Plastic 
litter is of parti cular concern due to abundance, resistance to degradation and detrimental effect on 
marine biota. According to recently published studies, a further research is required to assess human 
health risk. Monitoring data indicate that despite banning plastic dis posal at sea, shipping is still a source 
of plastic pollution. Some of the measures to combat the problem are discussed.  
 
Driedger, A. G. J., Durr, H. H., Mitchell, K., & Van Cappellen, P. (2015). Plastic Debris in the Laurentian 
Great Lakes: A Review. Journal of Great Lakes Research, 41 (1), 9 -19 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jglr.2014.12.020  
Pollution by plastic debris is an increasing environmental concern in the Laurentian Great Lakes where it 
affect s open -water, shoreline, and benthic environments. Open -water surveys reveal that in certain 
areas of the Great Lakes, surface water densities of plastics are as high as those reported for areas of 
litter accumulation within oceanic gyres. Data from volunt eer beach cleanups show that typically more 
than 80% of anthropogenic litter along the shorelines of the Great Lakes is comprised of plastics. The 
distribution of plastics in bottom sediments of the Great Lakes is essentially unknown. Sources of plastic 
debris to the Great Lakes include microplastic beads from consumer products, pellets from the plastic 
manufacturing industry, and waste from beach -goers, shipping, and fishing activities. Many plastics 
degrade slowly in the environment and may have long -term  adverse ecological and economic impacts, 
including the dispersal of persistent organic pollutants. Plans to combat and curtail plastic debris 
pollution in the Great Lakes will come at a significant economic cost, likely in excess of $400 million 
annually.  Here, we review the current state of knowledge on plastic pollution in the Great Lakes, identify 
knowledge gaps, and suggest future research directions.  
 6 
 Earl, R. C., Williams, A. T., & Tudor, D. T. (2000). Pilot Project to Establish Methodologies and Gui delines 
to Identrify Marine Litter from Shipping.  Coastal Management for Sustainability, produced for: 
The Maritime and Coastguard Agency . Retrieved from 
www.globalgarbage.org/MALITA_6_ML_from_Shipping_2000_by_UKMCA.pdf  
The overall aims of the Maritime and Coastguard Agency (MCA) are to developm promote and enforce 
high standards of maritim e safety and pollution prevention; to minimise the loss of life among seafarers 
and coastal users, and to minimise pollution from ships to sea and coastline. One of its supporting 
objectives is "to develop, monitor, review and enforce pollution prevention policies and standards". The 
aim of this project was to produce a pragmatic robust methodology to assest the prevention of litter 
pollution from shipping.  
 
Edyvane, K. S., Dalgetty, A., Hone, P. W., Higham, J. S., & Wace, N. M. (2004). Long -Term Marine Lit ter 
Monitoring in the Remote Great Australian Bight, South Australia. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 
48(11-12), 1060 -1075 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2003.12.012  
The Anxious Bay beach litter clearance is the longest running annual survey of ocean -based litter in 
Australia. It's remoteness from centres of human population and location (with respect to prevailing 
winds and currents) make it an ideal place for monitor ing ocean or ship -based litter in Australia's 
southern oceans and particularly, the Great Australian Bight. Over the 1991 -1999 period, a large but 
gradual decline in the amount of beach washed litter was recorded (with minor peaks recorded during 
the 1992 and 1994 surveys). Beach washed litter decreased by approximately 86%, from 344 kg 
recorded in 1991 (13.2 kg/km) to 49 kg in 1999 (i.e. 1.9 kg/km), reaching a maximum of 390 kg in 1992 
(or 15 kg/km of beach). However, a sharp increase in litter was recorde d in 2000 (i.e. 252 kg or 9.7 
kg/km). This increase in litter yield in 2000 is probably due to stronger than average onshore surface 
flow (or Ekman Transport) in the western Eyre Peninsula and Bight region. Prior to the survey in 2000, 
the results appeared  to indicate that ocean litter on Anxious Bay beach was beginning to level out at 
around 50 -70 kg/year (i.e. 2 -3 kg/km). As the beach surveys involve the assumption that the beach is 
completely cleared of litter, this may represent a baseline level for oce an-based litter in the region. The 
yields and type of litter collected from the annual survey indicates that the majority of litter washed 
ashore originates from commercial fishing activities within the Great Australian Bight. Most of the 
fishing -related l itter was directly sourced to the Southern Rock Lobster Fishery (i.e. bait buckets, 
baskets, pots), the Great Australian Bight Trawl Fishery (i.e. codends, trawl nets) and the Southern Shark 
Fishery (i.e. monofilament gillnets and longlines). Between 1994 and 1999, large reductions were 
observed in the amount of bait straps (77% reduction), lobster bait baskets/buckets (86% reduction), 
nets/ropes (62% reduction) and floats/buoys (83% reduction). Significantly, fishing -related litter in the 
Bight has reduced  at a slower rate than domestic litter. While the level of glass and soft plastics on the 
beach have both reduced by almost 93% (i.e. 103 -7 kg and 119 -8 kg, respectively), the level of hard 
plastics, has diminished at a slower rate, with reductions of only  75% (i.e. 122 -30 kg). Some fisheries (i.e. 
rock lobster, Southern Shark Fishery) have shown marked reductions in fishing -related litter. This is 
probably due, to some extent, to significant reductions in fishing effort in the region, although this 
require s further investigation. The information from the Anxious Bay beach litter survey is crucial in 
monitoring trends in ocean litter in Australia's southern oceans and compliance with international litter 
regulations. While fishing -related litter remains the major source of ship -based or ocean litter in 
Australia's southern oceans, the continued reduction in ship -based litter since 1991 supports increasing 
compliance to MARPOL (Annex V) by commercial fisheries and shipping in the Great Australian Bight. 
While Australia participates in marine debris monitoring programs in the Antarctic (under CCAMLR), 
there is currently no national program or management framework to assess, manage and monitor 7 
 ocean -based litter along Australia's coasts, and monitor compliance wi th MARPOL. Apart from the 
commitments under CCAMLR for Antarctic (and sub -Antarctic) marine environments, there are no other 
regional programs, guidelines or monitoring protocols or to assess and manage ocean litter in the 
Southern Ocean.  
 
Fleet, D. M., Da u, K., Gutow, L., Schulz, M., Unger, B., & Franeker, J. A. v. (2017). Marine Litter.  Common 
Wadden Sea Secretariat,  Retrieved from https://qsr.waddensea -
worldheritage.org/report s/marine -litter  
The results from the various investigations and monitoring programmes presented in this report 
demonstrate the continuous and widespread occurrence of litter in the Wadden Sea and adjacent 
offshore waters. Marine litter of different sizes a nd from diverse sources occurs on dunes and beaches, 
in and on inter - to subtidal sediments and in marine organisms, including protected seabirds and 
mammals. The OSPAR Beach Litter Monitoring and Monitoring on Litter in Fulmars’ Stomachs provide an 
evalua tion of the temporal development of litter abundance in the southern North Sea. Both 
programmes clearly show that litter densities have not declined since the last Wadden Sea QSR in 2009, 
indicating that large amounts of litter are still entering the marin e environment either directly within the 
Wadden Sea or from adjacent waters. The amount of litter entering the marine environment is 
continuously increasing  
 
Franeker, J. A. v., Meijboom, A., Jong, M. d., & Verdaat, H. (2009). Fulmar Litter Ecoqo Monitorin g in the 
Netherlands 1979 2007 in Relation to EU  Directive 2000/59/Ec on Port Reception Facilities.  
IMARES Report number C032/09.  Retrieved from http://edepot.wur.nl/143301  
Operational and cargo related wastes from ships are an important source of litter in the marine 
environment in the southern North Sea and cause serious economical and ecological damage. 
Inadequacies in the ship to shore waste delivery procedures are considered a major factor in illegal 
discha rges. The European Union therefore addressed the problem with the Directive on Port Reception 
Facilities (Directive 2000/59/EC). Obligatory waste delivery to shore and indirect financing of the costs 
are key elements of the Directive to stimulate and enfor ce proper disposal of shipwaste in harbours. 
Monitoring the effect of the EU Directive is required.  
 
Golik, A. (1997). Debris in the Mediterranean Sea: Types, Quantities, and Behavior. In J. M. Coe & D. B. 
Rogers (Eds.), Marine Debris: Sources, Impacts, an d Solutions  (pp. 7 -14). New York, NY: Springer 
New York https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-4613 -8486 -1_2 
The Mediterranean Sea, which occupies some 2.5 million km2, is an enclosed sea with only one ope ning 
for water exchange, the 14 -km-wide Strait of Gibraltar. In the strait, surface water flows into the 
Mediterranean Sea and deeper water flows out. The water exchange rate of the Mediterranean is 
estimated to be 80 years. The sea is bordered by 18 count ries, where more than 135 million people 
inhabit its coastal regions (Blue Plan 1987). The northwestern shores of the sea are heavily populated 
and highly urbanized, although its southern coast is sparsely populated. Major shipping lanes are found 
in the M editerranean, with oil as probably the most important cargo. These physical and demographic 
conditions of the Mediterranean Sea make it a trap for marine - and land -derived litter.  
 8 
 Hammer, J., Kraak, M. H. S., & Parsons, J. R. (2012). Plastics in the Marin e Environment: The Dark Side of 
a Modern Gift. In D. M. Whitacre (Ed.), Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology  
(pp. 1 -44). New York, NY: Springer New York https://doi.org/10.1007/97 8-1-4614 -3414 -6_1 
Plastics are one of the most widely used materials in the world; they are broadly integrated into today’s 
lifestyle and make a major contribution to almost all product areas. The typical characteristics that 
render them so useful relate p rimarily to the fact that they are both flexible and durable. These 
characteristics are very useful when plastics are used in everyday life. But when plastics are discarded 
into the environment they can persist for very long periods of time. Because of the ir nearly 
indestructible morphology and the toxins they contain, plastics can seriously affect ecosystems (UNEP 
2005).  
 
Hansen, L. -M., Skogen, M. H., Frandsen, B. L., Thernström, T., & Ångström, J. (2015). Marine Littering 
and Sources in Nordic Waters.  Tem aNord produced for: Nordic Council of Ministers 
https://doi.org/ 10.6027/TN2015 -524 
Marine litter is a global environmental problem that endangers wildlife and has great socio -economic 
and aesthetic impacts. To identify sources of marine litter is an important key in order to propose cost -
effective measures. Pick analyses of beach litter have therefore been conducted in order to categorise 
litter items from a product persp ective. The results confirm that plastic are the most common litter 
material found on beaches in the Nordic countries. Short life items and packaging are dominating, which 
is strongly linked to individual consumers. It is further concluded that the plastic s and packaging industry 
has an important role to play to decrease the amount of marine litter.  
 
Hardesty, B. D., Lawson, T., van der Velde, T., Lansdell, M., & Wilcox, C. (2017). Estimating Quantities 
and Sources of Marine Debris at a Continental Scale. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 
15(1), 18 -25 https://doi.org/ 10.1002/fee.1447  
Marine debris is recognized as an important global issue that can negatively affect wildlife, habitats, 
environm ental processes, ecosystem services, and human activities including tourism, fishing, and 
navigation. To improve understanding of the sources and impacts of marine debris, we carried out a 
national litter survey at 175 sites around Australia using a strati fied random sampling approach. Litter 
from land - and sea -based sources is ubiquitous, and sampling effects related to coastline shape, 
substrate characteristics, gradient, and backshore type were highly significant. Source effects related to 
land -based sou rces (eg population density and distance to road) were also highly significant. Of the total 
debris sampled, approximately 75% was plastic; 2% was related to recreational fishing. Litter density 
significantly increased with proximity to urban areas, sugges ting a domestic origin; statistical patterns 
suggest that illegal rubbish disposal is a major driver. By quantifying debris at a large scales and 
distinguishing potential litter sources, we can better develop scale -appropriate solutions to reduce 
debris in puts to the environment.  
 
Horsman, P. V. (1982). The Amount of Garbage Pollution from Merchant Ships. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 
13(5), 167 -169 https://doi.org/10.1016/0025 -326x(82)90088 -1 
The co ntent of ships' waste was analysed on two merchant vessels. The results show a large amount of 
unnecessary garbage pollution by ships. The disposal at sea of plastic materials, and of all garbage 
except food waste in certain special areas, is against the I nter -Governmental Marine Consultative 9 
 Organization (IMCO) 1973 regulations. Ships are ignoring these regulations. The garbage can be a hazard 
to man and wildlife, apart from being aesthetically displeasing. It is recommended that more 
responsibility be put  with the shipping companies, owners and suppliers to stop this pollution.  
 
International Maritime Organization. (2016). Review of the Current State of Knowledge Regarding 
Marine Litter in Wastes Dumped at Sea under the London Convention and Protocol.  Office for 
the London Convention/Protocol and Ocean Affairs. Retrieved from 
http://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Environment/LCLP/newandemergingissues/Pages/default .as
px 
As one of the partners in the UNEP -led Global Partnership for Marine Litter (GPML), IMO is co -leading 
efforts on sea -based sources of marine litter together with FAO. Within the framework of this 
partnership, the Secretariat was able to allocate GPML  funding to commission a study on marine litter in 
relation to the various waste streams under the London Convention and Protocol. In January 2015, a 
consultant was contracted to carry out this study. A draft report, prepared by the consultant was 
reviewed  by the Scientific Groups in May 2015. The main objective of the study is to provide an 
overview of the current state of knowledge regarding litter/plastics in wastes dumped at sea and their 
possible implication in relation to the London Convention and Pro tocol (LC/LP). It should be noted that 
the purpose of the report is to serve as a starting point for discussions on the nature and extent of litter 
(in particular plastics) in the waste streams under the LC/LP. It does not claim to be a complete review of 
these aspects, but will hopefully stimulate further discussions, both in relation to the LC/LP and within 
the wider global community.  
 
International Maritime Organization. (2019). Hull Scrapings and Marine Coatings as a Source of 
Microplastics.   Retrieved from 
http://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Environment/LCLP/newandemergingissues/Pages/default.as
px 
Through a recent report, the International Union for the Cons ervation of Nature (IUCN) identified hull 
scrapings, marine coatings and anti -fouling systems as potential sources of microplastics to the oceans. 
The impacts of marine plastics and microplastics upon species and communities are increasingly 
recognised wit h concomitant regulation and public attention. Accordingly, through its mandate on the 
protection of the marine environment from shipping operations, the International Maritime 
Organization (IMO) conducted a literature review to assess current knowledge an d data regarding 
marine coatings as microplastics sources. This study identified important data gaps and made 
suggestions for subsequent research into whether ship coatings are an important source of 
microplastics to the ocean. If so, the overall relative contribution to ocean microplastics from ship 
coatings, as well as the individual contributions from the normal use, maintenance and cleaning of 
coatings, need to be determined as the first step in further research efforts with a view towards 
informed mana gement.  
 
Jones, M. M. (1995). Fishing Debris in the Australian Marine Environment. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 
30(1), 25 -33 https://doi.org/10.1016/0025 -326X(94)001 08-L 
The loss and disposal of fishing gear has been recognized internationally as a major environmental issue 
for several decades. This paper reviews the available data on fishing debris in the Australian marine 
environment. In some regions debris from dee p-water trawl, longline and rock lobster fisheries has 10 
 harmed marine wildlife and littered beaches. The highest documented incidence of wildlife 
entanglement by fishing debris is for the Australian fur seal in Bass Strait and off southern Tasmania, 
where o ver the period 1989 –1993 approximately 1.5 -2% of seals were found with neck collars. Data 
collected by Australian observers on board foreign vessels fishing within the Australian Fishing Zone, 
indicate that in 1992 and 1993 at least one -third of these vess els did not comply with the MARPOL 
regulations on the disposal of plastics. Approaches used to reduce debris have included education 
programmes, development of plastic -free gear, and clean -up programmes.  
 
Lebreton, L., Slat, B., Ferrari, F., Sainte -Rose, B., Aitken, J., Marthouse, R., . . . Reisser, J. (2018). Evidence 
That the Great Pacific Garbage Patch Is Rapidly Accumulating Plastic. Scientific Reports, 8 (1), 
4666 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -018-22939 -w 
Ocean plastic can persist in sea surface waters, eventually accumulating in remote areas of the world’s 
oceans. Here we characterise and quantify a major ocean plastic accumulation zone formed in 
subtropical waters between California and Hawaii: The Great Pacific Garbage Patch (GPGP). Our model, 
calibrated with data from multi -vessel and aircraft surveys, predicted at least 79 (45 –129) thousand 
tonnes of ocean plastic are floating inside an area  of 1.6 million km2; a figure four to sixteen times 
higher than previously reported. We explain this difference through the use of more robust methods to 
quantify larger debris. Over three -quarters of the GPGP mass was carried by debris larger than 5 cm an d 
at least 46% was comprised of fishing nets. Microplastics accounted for 8% of the total mass but 94% of 
the estimated 1.8 (1.1 –3.6) trillion pieces floating in the area. Plastic collected during our study has 
specific characteristics such as small surfac e-to-volume ratio, indicating that only certain types of debris 
have the capacity to persist and accumulate at the surface of the GPGP. Finally, our results suggest that 
ocean plastic pollution within the GPGP is increasing exponentially and at a faster ra te than in 
surrounding waters.  
 
Maes, T., Barry, J., Leslie, H. A., Vethaak, A. D., Nicolaus, E. E. M., Law, R. J., . . . Thain, J. E. (2018). Below 
the Surface: Twenty -Five Years of Seafloor Litter Monitoring in Coastal Seas of North West 
Europe (1992 –2017). Science of the Total Environment, 630 , 790 -798 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.02.245  
Marine litter presents a global problem, with increasing quan tities documented in recent decades. The 
distribution and abundance of marine litter on the seafloor off the United Kingdom's (UK) coasts were 
quantified during 39 independent scientific surveys conducted between 1992 and 2017. Widespread 
distribution of l itter items, especially plastics, were found on the seabed of the North Sea, English 
Channel, Celtic Sea and Irish Sea. High variation in abundance of litter items, ranging from 0 to 1835 
pieces km−2 of seafloor, was observed. Plastic tems such as bags, bo ttles and fishing related debris were 
commonly observed across all areas. Over the entire 25 -year period (1992 –2017), 63% of the 2461 
trawls contained at least one plastic litter item. There was no significant temporal trend in the 
percentage of trawls con taining any or total plastic litter items across the long -term datasets. 
Statistically significant trends, however, were observed in specific plastic litter categories only. These 
trends were all positive except for a negative trend in plastic bags in the Greater North Sea - suggesting 
that behavioural and legislative changes could reduce the problem of marine litter within decades.  
 11 
 Marine Environmental Emergency Preparedness and Response Regional Activity Centre. (2009). 
Regional Report on Sea -Based Marin e Litter in the Nowpap Region.   Retrieved from 
https://wedocs.unep.org/handle/20.500.11822/26200  
Marine litter is now recognized as one of the major problems of marine pollution that destroy s the 
ecological, economical and cultural values of the marine environment. Marine litter can be found in the 
water column and on the seafloor as well as on beaches in the Northwest Pacific region. It degrades very 
slowly and causes injury or death of huma n and other living things as well as accident or damage of the 
vessels. MERRAC, one of four Regional Activity Centres of NOWPAP, has been designated to implement 
activities related to sea -based marine litter. The 9th MERRAC Focal Points Meeting decided to develop 
the National Reports on sea -based marine litter in NOWPAP region for understanding general situation 
(5-7 June 2006). Based upon the National Reports, MERRAC has developed a regional report titled 
“Regional Report on Sea -based Marine Litter in the NOWPAP Region,” as background information for 
further works on sea -based marine litter issue. This report aims to provide such general information on 
sea-based marine litter in the NOWPAP region.  
 
Marine Environmental Emergency Preparedness and Response Re gional Activity Centre. (2017). 
Understanding of Floating Marine Litter Distribution in the Nowpap Region.   Retrieved from 
https:/ /wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/26239/understand_floating_ML.pdf?
sequence=1&isAllowed=y  
This publication aims to gather information on the distribution of the floating marine litter in the 
NOWPAP region. The main objective is to understand t he current status of floating marine litter in order 
to identify prospects for effective management and find solution to floating marine litter problems, by 
analyzing the marine litter distribution by amounts, types and sources (origins) and also by mappin g 
hotspots in the NOWPAP region.  
 
Mobilik, J. M., Ling, T. Y., Husain, M. L., & Hassan, R. (2016). Type and Quantity of Shipborne Garbage at 
Selected Tropical Beaches. The Scientific World Journal, 2016 , 1-11 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/5126951  
Marine debris is widely distributed at the coastal area of the global oceans; however, shipborne garbage 
source studies are still lacking to document the pollution in Malaysia Territorial Water. Thus, this study 
has adopted a standard method of beach marine debris survey at five beaches and inspected 115 
vessels to assess the type and amount of debris from shipping source stranded on the beach. This study 
found that vessel visiting Malaysian ports observed the MARP OL 73/78 Annex V requirements; however, 
identified objects from shipping activity (1.3%; 2 items/km) found on the beaches indicate that there are 
vessels disposing of garbage illegally at sea. Therefore, there is a need to promote the use of 
biodegradable material and introduce environmental education to increase awareness on the vessel.  
 
National Ocean Service Office of National Marine Sanctuaries. (2014). The Containerized Shipping 
Industry and the Phenomenon of Containers Lost at Sea.   Retrieved from 
https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/17410  
During a transit from San Francisco Bay to the Port of Los Angeles on February 26, 2004, the M/V Med 
Taipei encountered a storm and lost 15  forty -foot shipping containers in the Monterey Bay National 
Marine Sanctuary (MBNMS), and another nine south of the Sanctuary. One of these containers was 12 
 discovered by the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (MBARI) on June 9, 2004 on Smooth Ridge 
at a depth of 1,281 meters, 17.5 nm NW of Point Pinos. This was not an isolated incident. Containerized 
maritime trade grew eight -fold from 1985 to 2007, and worldwide there are now approximately 5 to 6 
million containers in transit at any given moment. Tho usands of shipping containers are lost at sea every 
year, often due to the nexus of rough seas, inadequate or faulty securing mechanisms, and failure to 
weigh all containers at the time of loading. On March 8 -10, 2011, we conducted a research expedition to  
the container on Smooth Ridge using MBARI’s R/V Western Flyer. The cruise aimed to assess the 
container’s current condition, describe habitat and ecosystem impacts, and to bring public attention to 
this deep -sea phenomenon that has been increasing with ec onomic globalization. Given the potentially 
severe ecological, economic, and navigational safety consequences associated with container loss, the 
issue has led to a range of responses from industry and the consideration of additional preventative 
measures at the international level.  
 
National Research Council. (1995). Clean Ships, Clean Ports, Clean Oceans: Controlling Garbage and 
Plastic Wastes at Sea . Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
https://doi.org/10.17226/4769   
Marine debris is a serious environmental problem. To do its part, the United States has agreed to abide 
by the international treaty for garbage control at sea, known as MARPOL 73/78 Annex V.Clean Ships, 
Clean Ports, Clean Oce ans explores the challenge of translating Annex V into workable laws and 
regulations for all kinds of ships and boats, from cruise ships to fishing crafts and recreational boats. The 
volume examines how existing resources can be leveraged into a comprehens ive strategy for 
compliance, including integrated waste management systems and effective enforcement.Clean Ships, 
Clean Ports, Clean Oceans describes both progress toward and obstacles to Annex V compliance. The 
book coversHow shipborne garbage orignates a nd what happens to garbage discharged into the 
seas.Effects of discharge on human health, wildlife safety, and aesthetics.Differences in perspective 
among military, industrial, and recreational seafarers and shoreside facilities.Clean Ships, Clean Ports, 
Clean Oceans will be important to marine policymakers, port administrators, ship operations officers, 
maritime engineers, and marine ecologists.  
 
National Research Council. (1996). Shipboard Pollution Control: U.S. Navy Compliance with MARPOL  
Annex V . Washi ngton, DC: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/9190  
The Committee on Shipboard Pollution Control was formed under the auspices of the Naval Studies 
Board, based on discussions between U.S. Na vy and National Research Council representatives. The 
issues involved in shipboard pollution control are a complex mixture of Navy management, 
congressional mandate, international agreements, environmental community concerns, and technology. 
The committee as a whole was chosen for its expertise in technology. The first term of reference for the 
study poses the following question: “What is the technical feasibility of eliminating, by 2000 for surface 
ships and 2008 for submarines, nonfood solid waste dischar ge from Navy ships operating in Special 
Areas?”  The Special Areas referred to are defined in the international agreement on Marine Pollution, 
MARPOL, with specific reference to Annex V, which covers nonfood marine pollution solid waste. Naval 
ships are ex empt from MARPOL, but the U.S. Congress required compliance by the U.S. Navy in the 
Marine Plastic Pollution Research and Control Act of 1987 as modified by the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1994. Various deadlines and extensions have been applied, with the 
latest deadlines those given in the above question. Special Areas already designated include the Baltic 13 
 Sea, the North Sea, and the Antarctic Ocean. Special Areas expected to be designated in the future 
include the Mediterranean Sea,  the Persian Gulf, the Gulf of Mexico, and the Caribbean Sea.  
 
Pruter, A. T. (1987). Sources, Quantities and Distribution of Persistent Plastics in the Marine -
Environment. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 18 (6b), 305 -310 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0025 -
326x(87)80016 -4 
Persistent plastics are widely distributed at the surface and coastal margins of the global oceans, but 
many uncertainties remain about their specific sources, quantities and distribution. Awareness of the 
problem of plastic pollution has grown only recently. Thus, systematic observations have not been 
either extensive enough or long enough to document the situation adequately. Major sources of these 
materials are from land, vessels and beac hgoers. This paper reviews recent literature on the sources, 
amounts and distribution of various types of plastics in the marine environment.  
 
SCS Engineers. (1989). An Investigation of Using Burn Barrel Technology to Dispose of Shipboard -
Generated ( MARPOL  V) Wastes.  Produced for: National Marine Fisheries Service Marine 
Entanglement Research Program Retrieved from 
https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/5870  
With the advent of MARPOL Annex V, most ships must find an alternate to ocean dumping of their 
wastes. Marine incinerators, compactors, and grinders (comminutors) may not be economically viable 
for a particular vessel, or there may be inadequate space for their installation. One me thod of dealing 
with ships' wastes that has been used and may receive greater attention in the future is the "burn 
barrel". An example of a burn barrel is a 55 -gallon drum with holes cut in the side to allow combustion 
air to enter, similar to those in wid espread use in the 1950s to burn residential garbage. The National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) has sponsored this study to evaluate the safety and 
feasibility of the burn barrel method of at -sea disposal. It was the intent of this study t o provide vessel 
operators with clear information on the operation, safety and effectiveness of this disposal method.  
 
Smith, S. D. A., Banister, K., Fraser, N., & Edgar, R. J. (2018). Tracing the Source of Marine Debris on the 
Beaches of Northern New Sout h Wales, Australia: The Bottles on Beaches Program. Marine 
Pollution Bulletin, 126 , 304 -307 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.11.022  
Identifying the source of marine plastic pollution a ccumulating on ocean beaches is often difficult as 
unidentifiable fragments of plastic usually predominate. In this study, we surveyed plastic bottles as a 
relatively identifiable subset of plastics on 30km of beach along a 200 -km section of the north coas t of 
New South Wales, Australia. Source and product type (contents) were determined using barcodes, 
inscriptions/embossing, or bottle shape and characteristics. Country of origin and product type could be 
determined for two -thirds of the 694 bottles found.  Just over half (51%) of these were of domestic 
origin with the remainder dominated by bottles from China (24%) and south -east Asian countries (21%). 
As most of the foreign bottles lacked marine growth, and are unavailable for purchase in the region, 
passi ng ships are hypothesised as the primary source.  
 
Storrier, K. L., McGlashan, D. J., Bonellie, S., & Velander, K. (2007). Beach Litter Deposition at a Selection 
of Beaches in the Firth of Forth, Scotland. Journal of Coastal Research, 23 (4), 813 -822 
https://doi.org/10.2112/04 -0251.1  14 
 Beach litter deposition at a selection of beaches in the Firth of Forth, Scotland, was studied between July 
2001 and December 2003. The amount and types of beach litter is relativ ely consistent among beaches 
and over time, with an increased abundance of certain litter types at irregular intervals. Plastic is the 
most common litter type recorded. The amount of litter items per square metre is affected by Local 
Authority beach cleani ng, community beach cleanings, and the presence of sewerage structures and 
takeaway facilities. Litter from fishing and shipping was relatively low compared with litter from 
recreation and sewage -related debris. It is likely that climatic conditions and ti dal patterns are the 
greatest influence on the abundance of beach litter. Management actions are required to effect a 
reduction in beach litter. A combination of education, provision of adequate waste reception facilities, 
and enforcement of legislation is  needed to tackle beach litter.  
 
Strand, J., Tairova, Z., Danielsen, J., Hansen, J. W., Magnusson, K., Naustvoll, L. -J., & Sørensen, T. K. 
(2015). Marine Litter in Nordic Waters.  TemaNord produced for: Nordic Council of  Ministers 
https://doi.org/10.6027/TN2015521  
This report is one of the outcomes of a Nordic project called “Marine litter in the Nordic waters” funded 
by The Marine Group (HAV) under The Nordic Council of Ministers in 2013 –2014. The main aim o f the 
project was to establish a Nordic forum for collaboration and exchange of knowledge on status for 
methodologies and available data for marine litter between Nordic experts, environmental managers 
and stakeholders, due to the common environmental conc erns in our shared seas. This report compiles 
information that can be used as a contribution to facilitate the framing of this environmental problem in 
a Nordic perspective. This report includes also input from two workshops on I) Common knowledge 
status o n marine litter in the Nordic countries, and indicators relevant for EU Marine Strategy 
Framework Directive (November 14, 2013 in Gothenburg, Sweden) and II) Status for monitoring and 
Future actions (November 6 –7, 2014 in Oslo, Norway).  
 
Tekman, M. B., Kru mpen, T., & Bergmann, M. (2017). Marine Litter on Deep Arctic Seafloor Continues to 
Increase and Spreads to the North at the Hausgarten Observatory. Deep Sea Research Part I: 
Oceanographic Research Papers, 120 , 88-99 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dsr.2016.12.011  
The increased global production of plastics has been mirrored by greater accumulations of plastic litter 
in marine environments worldwide. Global plastic litter es timates based on field observations account 
only for 1% of the total volumes of plastic assumed to enter the marine ecosystem from land, raising 
again the question ‘Where is all the plastic? ’. Scant information exists on temporal trends on litter 
transpor t and litter accumulation on the deep seafloor. Here, we present the results of photographic 
time -series surveys indicating a strong increase in marine litter over the period of 2002 –2014 at two 
stations of the HAUSGARTEN observatory in the Arctic (2500m d epth). Plastic accounted for the highest 
proportion (47%) of litter recorded at HAUSGARTEN for the whole study period. When the most 
southern station was considered separately, the proportion of plastic items was even higher (65%). 
Increasing quantities of  small plastics raise concerns about fragmentation and future microplastic 
contamination. Analysis of litter types and sizes indicate temporal and spatial differences in the 
transport pathways to the deep sea for different categories of litter. Litter dens ities were positively 
correlated with the counts of ship entering harbour at Longyearbyen, the number of active fishing 
vessels and extent of summer sea ice. Sea ice may act as a transport vehicle for entrained litter, being 
released during periods of melt ing. The receding sea ice coverage associated with global change has 
opened hitherto largely inaccessible environments to humans and the impacts of tourism, industrial 
activities including shipping and fisheries, all of which are potential sources of marin e litter.  15 
  
Topçu, E. N., Tonay, A. M., Dede, A., Öztürk, A. A., & Öztürk, B. (2013). Origin and Abundance of Marine 
Litter Along Sandy Beaches of the Turkish Western Black Sea Coast. Marine Environmental 
Research, 85 , 21-28 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marenvres.2012.12.006  
Beach debris abundance was estimated from surveys on 10 beaches of the Turkish Western Black Sea 
Coast. Debris was  collected from 20  m long transects during four different seasons; sorted and 
categorized by type, usage and origin. Litter density varied from 0.085 to 5.058  items  m−2. Debris was 
mainly composed of unidentifiable small size (2 –7 cm) plastic pieces and be verage -related litter such as 
bottles and bottle caps. About half of the labeled litter was of foreign origin, including 25 different 
countries, 23% of which are in the Black Sea region. The south -western Black Sea Coast seems to receive 
foreign litter fro m two main sources: land -based debris from the neighboring countries and seaborne 
debris due to international shipping. Standardized methodology and indicators need to be designated all 
over the Black Sea basin in order to quantify and qualify coastal litt er pollution, monitor compliance with 
MARPOL and develop regionally effective mitigation measures.  
 
Topping, P., Morantz, D., & Lang, G. (1997). Waste Disposal Practices of Fishing Vessels: Canada’s East 
Coast, 1990 –1991. In J. M. Coe & D. B. Rogers (Eds.) , Marine Debris: Sources, Impacts, and 
Solutions  (pp. 253 -262). New York, NY https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-4613 -8486 -1_22  
There is a growing awareness that persistent plastic debris in the marine  environment threatens marine 
life and reduces economic potential. Data from beach surveys and high seas observations collected over 
the years demonstrate a long -term problem and identify a common source of debris: offshore fishing 
fleets (Buxton 1990; Luc as 1992). An extensive fleet of both foreign and domestic vessels operates in the 
Atlantic Ocean within the 200 -mile economic zone off Canada’s east coast. Before this project, formal 
data concerning waste disposal practices of fishing vessels or of other vessels at sea were scarce.  
 
Tutor, D., & Williams, A. (2004). Development of a ‘Matrix Scoring Technique’ to Determine Litter 
Sources at a Bristol Channel Beach. Journal of Coastal Conservation, 10 (1-2), 119 -127 Retrieved 
from https://link.springer.com/article/10.1652/1400 -0350(2004)010[0119:DOAMST]2.0.CO;2  
Litter at beaches can come from more than one source and determining the proportions to assign 
pollu tion to different sources is very complex. There is no widely accepted methodology at present that 
links litter items to their source. The aim of this study was to create a method of assigning a source to 
litter found on beaches of the Bristol Channel but which could equally be used on any beach. Various 
methods that attempt to establish the source of beach litter were evaluated; their strengths, 
weaknesses, applicability and reliability for use on Bristol Channel, UK beaches were considered. 
Elements of ex isting methods coupled with new ideas were utilized in the production of a ‘refined’ 
methodology: consequently a new method of assigning a source to beach litter was developed. The 
developed ‘Matrix Scoring Technique’ was applied to data collected at Mineh ead beach on the Bristol 
Channel, UK. Several numerical and nomenclature variations were used to produce a system that 
reflected the various sources and eliminated as much bias as possible. This cross -tabulated matrix 
scoring system can produce an insight into the contribution of different source groups to litter found on 
beaches. This novel approach requires further testing with emphasis on a control data set.  
 16 
 United Nations Environment Programme. (2005). Marine Litter: An Analytitcal Overview.   Retrieved  from 
http://wedocs.unep.org/handle/20.500.11822/8348  
It is estimated that about 6.4 million tons of marine litter are disposed in the oceans and seas each year. 
According to other estimates and calculations, some 8 million items of marine litter are dumped in 
oceans and seas every day, approximately 5 million of which (solid waste) are thrown overboard or lost 
from ships. Furthermore, it has been estimated that over 13,000 pieces of plastic l itter are floating on 
every square kilometre of ocean today. Considering the magnitude and the severity of the marine litter 
problem, UNEP’s Regional Seas Programme, in cooperation with the GPA, initiated a “Feasibility Study 
on Sustainable Management of M arine Litter” to assess the global threat posed by marine litter 
worldwide and to examine the efficacy of current instruments, programmes and initiatives. This study, 
summarized in the analytical review before you, proposes a series of global and regional activities aimed 
at controlling, reducing and abating the problem.  
 
United Nations Environment Programme. (2009). Marine Litter: A Global Challenge.  Nairobi.  Retrieved 
from http://wedocs.unep .org/handle/20.500.11822/7787  
Marine litter is a global concern affecting all the oceans of the world. It poses environmental, economic, 
health and aesthetic problems that are rooted in poor solid waste management practices, lack of 
infrastructure, indiscr iminate human activities and behaviours and an inadequate understanding on the 
part of the public of the potential consequences of their actions. The UNEP Global Initiative on Marine 
Litter has provided an effective framework for conducting regional activi ties addressing marine litter 
around the world, including those of the 12 participating Regional Seas programmes. The objective of 
this document is (1) to present and analyse available information on marine litter discussed in 
documents produced by the 12 regional programmes with the help of regional consultants and technical 
experts and (2) to propose recommendations for addressing the problems associated with marine litter 
worldwide.  
 
United States Environmental Protection Agency. (2008). Cruise Ship Disc harge Assessment Report.  
Oceans and Coastal Protection Division Office of Wetlands, Oceans, and Watersheds EPA842 -R-
07-005. Washington, DC.  Retrieved from 
https://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/Z yPURL.cgi?Dockey=P1002SVS.TXT  
This Cruise Ship Discharge Assessment Report (Assessment Report) concludes EPA’s response to the 
petition from Bluewater Network. This Assessment Report examines five primary cruise ship waste 
streams -- sewage, graywater, oil y bilge water, solid waste, and hazardous waste. For each waste 
stream, the Assessment Report discusses (1) what the waste stream is and how much is generated; (2) 
what laws apply to the waste stream; (3) how the waste stream is managed; (4) potential envi ronmental 
impacts of the waste stream; (5) on -going actions by the federal government to address the waste 
stream; and (6) a wide range of options and alternatives to address the waste stream from cruise ships 
in the future. Though this report includes dis cussion of some proprietary treatment technologies for the 
abatement of pollution from cruise ships, that discussion in no way constitutes an endorsement by EPA 
of any non -federal entity, its products, or its services.  
 
Urban -Malinga, B., Wodzinowski, T., Witalis, B., Zalewski, M., Radtke, K., & Grygiel, W. (2018). Marine 
Litter on the Seafloor of the Southern Baltic. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 127 , 612 -617 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2 017.12.052  17 
 Marine litter occurrence and composition were investigated during routine bottom trawl fish surveys 
type BITS performed in the Polish Maritime Areas (the southern Baltic Sea). Sampling covered a distance 
of 325km and an area of 16km(2) at a dept h range of 19 -110m. Litter densities varying between 0 
items/ha (34% of tows) and 2.23items/ha with a mean of 0.20items/ha (SD=0.30) are at the bottom 
range of densities reported from other shelf habitats worldwide at similar water depths. The majority of 
the items (40%) were found at a depth range of 51 -60m. Overall, plastic was the most common litter 
type (67% of all items) found in all tows with litter. The results of this study indicate that despite the 
Baltic being a semi -enclosed basin, with a densely  populated coastline and extensive shipping, marine 
litter pollution of the southern Baltic seafloor is low compared to other coastal areas.  
 
Vauk, G. J. M., & Schrey, E. (1987). Litter Pollution from Ships in the German Bight. Marine Pollution 
Bulletin, 1 8(6, Supplement B), 316 -319 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0025 -326X(87)80018 -8 
A 60 m length of beach at Helgoland was sampled approximately every third day for a year  to determine 
the composition of litter deposited there. A total of 8473 items with a total weight of 1320 kg were 
identified as shipping wastes in the 106 samples. Plastics of all types composed 75% of the items, 
whereas wood represented 65% of the total weight. Ships' waste from along the main shipping routes in 
the southern German Bight may be a dominant source of the litter. The objects found were originally 
manufactured in 26 different nations. The study provides an estimation of the dimensions of litt er 
pollution in the area of the inner German Bight.  
 
Veiga, J. M., Fleet, D., Kinsey, S., Nilsson, P., Vlachogianni, T., Werner, S., . . . Cronin, R. (2016). 
Identifying Sources of Marine Litter.  Joint Research Centre, European Commission’s Science and 
Knowledge Service, JRC 104038 EUR 28309.  https://doi.org/10.2788/956934  
A wide variety of methods have been used over the years to determine the sources of marine litter, 
from simple counts of items believed to originate from a given source to more complex statistical 
methods. This report provides a brief overview of the main methods used and outlines one of the most 
promising approaches for determining sources – a Matrix Score Technique based on likelihoods, whi ch 
considers the possibility that specific items originate from more than one source. Furthermore, it 
presents a series of other parameters that can be used to analyse data -sets, with regard to the use, 
origin and risk of items recorded in the marine or co astal environments. These can further support 
decision -making when considering preventive measures. Finally, recommendations to help the process 
of identification of sources are given, from the early stage of data collection and site characterization to 
bringing in the knowledge of local stakeholders to better determine where litter is coming from and 
what needs to be done to prevent it.  
 
Wade, B. A. (1997). The Challenges of Ship -Generated Garbage in the Caribbean. In J. M. Coe & D. B. 
Rogers (Eds.), Marin e Debris: Sources, Impacts, and Solutions  (pp. 229 -237). New York, NY 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-4613 -8486 -1_19  
The ratification of Annex V of the MARPOL Convention marks an important step forward in the 
protection of the oceans. However, many countries have failed to fully understand its significance, and 
the leaders of Caribbean States do not seem to have paid sufficient attention to this development. One 
reason may be that in the area of marine pollution, ship -generated garbage is considered less significant 
than oil spills or spills of hazardous substances. At the local level, ship -generated garbage has not 18 
 evoked society -wide responses. Nonetheless, if left unaddressed ship -generated gar bage could have 
damaging environmental and public health consequences.  
 
Waller, C. L., Griffiths, H. J., Waluda, C. M., Thorpe, S. E., Loaiza, I., Moreno, B., . . . Hughes, K. A. (2017). 
Microplastics in the Antarctic Marine System: An Emerging Area of Res earch. Science of the 
Total Environment, 598 , 220 -227 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.03.283  
It was thought that the Southern Ocean was relatively free of microplastic contamination; however, 
recent studies and citizen science projects in the Southern Ocean have reported microplastics in deep -
sea sediments and surface waters. Here we reviewed available information on microplastics (including 
macroplastics as a source of microplastics) in the Southern Ocean. We estimated primary microplastic 
concentrations from personal care products and laundry, and identified potential sources and routes of 
transmission into the region. Estimates showed the levels of microplastic pollution released int o the 
region from ships and scientific research stations were likely to be negligible at the scale of the Southern 
Ocean, but may be significant on a local scale. This was demonstrated by the detection of the first 
microplastics in shallow benthic sediment s close to a number of research stations on King George Island. 
Furthermore, our predictions of primary microplastic concentrations from local sources were five orders 
of magnitude lower than levels reported in published sampling surveys (assuming an even dispersal at 
the ocean surface). Sea surface transfer from lower latitudes may contribute, at an as yet unknown 
level, to Southern Ocean plastic concentrations. Acknowledging the lack of data describing microplastic 
origins, concentrations, distribution an d impacts in the Southern Ocean, we highlight the urgent need 
for research, and call for routine, standardised monitoring in the Antarctic marine system.  
 
Watters, D. L., Yoklavich, M. M., Love, M. S., & Schroeder, D. M. (2010). Assessing Marine Debris in Deep 
Seafloor Habitats Off California. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 60 (1), 131 -138 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2009.08.019  
Marine debris is a global concern that pollutes the world's oce ans, including deep benthic habitats 
where little is known about the extent of the problem. We provide the first quantitative assessment of 
debris on the seafloor (20 -365 m depth) in submarine canyons and the continental shelf off California, 
using the Del ta submersible. Fishing activities were the most common contributors of debris. Highest 
densities occurred close to ports off central California and increased significantly over the 15 -year study 
period. Recreational monofilament fishing line dominated thi s debris. Debris was less dense and more 
diverse off southern than central California. Plastic was the most abundant material and will likely 
persist for centuries. Disturbance to habitat and organisms was low, and debris was used as habitat by 
some fishes  and macroinvertebrates. Future trends in human activities on land and at sea will determine 
the type and magnitude of debris that accumulates in deep water.  
 
Whiting, S. D. (1998). Types and Sources of Marine Debris in Fog Bay, Northern Australia. Marine 
Pollution Bulletin, 36 (11), 904 -910 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0025 -326x(98)00066 -6 
Marine debris items were collected and categorized during surveys of beaches in Fog Bay, northern 
Australia in 1 996 and 1997, Synthetic items (45%) were the most numerous followed by metal (35%) and 
glass (16%). Drink containers contributed 53% of the total items, while fishing gear and foreign material 
contributed only 4% and 3%, respectively, Scores were given to each possible source of marine debris 
according to their likelihood of contributing to each group of debris items. Using this method, 
commercial fishing, merchant shipping and recreational boaters were likely to contribute to over 85% of 19 
 all debris items. Composition of debris items varied between beach orientation within the same year 
and within beach orientation between years, which suggests that a number of beaches and locations 
should be sampled to obtain an unbiased estimate of marine debris for annual  comparisons. (C) 1998 
Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.  
 
Williams, A. T., Tudor, D. T., & Randerson, P. (2003). Beach Litter Sourcing in the Bristol Channel and 
Wales, U K. Water Air and Soil Pollution, 143 (1-4), 387 -408 
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022808908500  
Principal component analysis (PCA) and cluster analysis were carried out on beach litter found primarily 
along the Bristol Channel, U. K., together with beaches located around the Princi pality of Wales. Both 
techniques indicated three beach survey sites as outliers, with distinctive beach litter profiles. PCA 
distinguished between riverine, sewage related, fishing and shipping sourced items, but did not produce 
a coherent grouping for bea ch user litter. This was attributed to a difference in modes of transport. 
Beaches from mid and north Wales, which had small litter amounts, were not differentiated from the 
central grouping. The western edge of the Channel was more heavily influenced by s hipping and fishing 
inputs than was the eastern portion. Cluster analysis showed a discrete group of beaches located mainly 
on the southern side of the Bristol Channel.  
 
World Shipping Council. (2017). Containers Lost at Sea 2017 Update.   Retrieved from 
http://www.worldshipping.org/industry -issues/safety/Containers_Lost_at_Sea_ -
_2017_Update_FINAL_July_10.pdf  
In 2016, the international l iner shipping industry transported approximately 130 million containers 
packed with cargo, with an estimated value of more than $4 trillion. Proper packing, stowage and 
securing of containers and reporting of correct weight is very important to the safety of a container ship, 
its crew and its cargo, to shore -based workers and equipment, and to the environment. However, even 
with proper packing of the cargo into the container, correct container weight declaration, and proper 
stowage and securing aboard ship,  a number of factors ranging from severe weather and rough seas to 
more catastrophic and rare events like ship groundings, structural failures, and collisions can result in 
containers being lost at sea. In the past, obtaining an accurate assessment of how many containers 
actually are lost at sea was a highly speculative process. For many years, there were widely circulated, 
but unsupported and grossly inaccurate claims that the industry might lose as many as 10,000 
containers a year at sea. Ocean carriers o perating the containerships, which the World Shipping Council 
(WSC) represents, remain the best sources for accurate information on this subject. Therefore, in an 
effort to provide greater clarity and a more accurate assessment of the number of containers lost at sea 
on an annual basis, WSC undertook the first survey of its member companies in 2011, with updates in 
2014 and 2017, and has published the results to make the information readily available to all interested 
parties.  
 
Zuin, S., Radonjic, G., Logoz ar, K., Belac, E., & Marzi, B. (2010). Life Cycle Assessment of Ship -Generated 
Waste Management of Luka Koper (Vol 29, Pg 3036, 2009). Waste Management, 30 (5), 3036 -
3046 https://doi.org/10.1016/j .wasman.2010.01.013  
Sea ports and the related maritime activities (e.g. shipping, shipbuilding, etc.) are one of the main driver 
of Europe's growth, jobs, competitiveness and prosperity. The continuously growth of shipping sectors 
has however introduced so me environmental concerns, particularly with respect to ship -generated 20 
 waste management. The port of Koper, one of the major ports on the northern Adriatic Coast, is the 
focus of this study. In this paper, a life cycle assessment was performed to identify and quantify the 
environmental impacts caused by the ship -generated waste management of port of Koper. Carcinogens 
substance (e.g. dioxins) and inorganic emissions, especially heavy metals, resulted to be the most critical 
environmental issues, while the f ossil fuels consumption is reduced by recovery of ship -generated oils. 
Moreover, the final treatment of ship waste was found to be critical phase of the management, and the 
landfill have a significant contribute to the overall environmental load. These res ults can be useful in the 
identification of the best practices and in the implementation of waste management plans in ports.  
 
 Section II: Impact of Ghost Fishing Gear  
 
Al-Masroori, H., Al -Oufi, H., McIlwain, J. L., & McLean, E. (2004). Catches of Lost Fish T raps (Ghost 
Fishing) from Fishing Grounds near Muscat, Sultanate of Oman. Fisheries Research, 69 (3), 407 -
414 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2004.05.014  
A field study was under taken to quantify the catch rate of simulated lost fish traps at five traditional 
fishing grounds near Muscat and Mutrah, Sultanate of Oman. Twenty -five traps were set at depths 
between 16 and 36m during the period late November 2000 to mid -July 2001. Ghos t fishing mortality 
was estimated at 1.34kg/trap per day, decreasing over time. An exponential model, to estimate trap 
ghost fishing mortality, predicted a mortality rate of 67.27 and 78.36kg/trap during 3 and 6 months 
respectively, with trapped fish havin g a value of 55.565RO/trap ( ∼US$145) and 64.725RO/trap 
(∼US$168) respectively.111 Rial Omani (RO) equals 2.604 US$. To reduce the negative impacts of ghost 
trap fishing here and elsewhere, it is recommended that future traps be better marked, equipped with  
timed -release or degradable sections or panels, and that openings be included in the traps to release 
undersized animals.  
 
Anderson, J. A., & Alford, A. B. (2014). Ghost Fishing Activity in Derelict Blue Crab Traps in Louisiana. 
Marine Pollution Bulletin,  79(1), 261 -267 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2013.12.002  
Derelict crab traps impact the coastal ecosystem through continued catch of target species and species 
of conservation, economic, or recreational importance. During volunteer -supported crab trap cleanups 
in 2012 and 2013, we quantified ghost fishing activity in derelict crab traps in coastal Louisiana through a 
citizen scientist program. Volunteers removed 360 7 derelict traps during these events, and over 65% of 
traps analyzed by citizen scientists were actively ghost fishing. Additionally, volunteers identified 19 
species enmeshed in derelict traps, including a combination of fresh and saltwater species. We al so 
detected a significant difference in the number of blue crab in actively ghost fishing derelict traps across 
removal locations with estimated catches varying between 2.4 and 3.5 crabs/trap. Our instantaneous 
estimates of ghost fishing activity are great er than those previously thought in Louisiana, further 
justifying current derelict crab trap prevention and removal extension and outreach programs in 
Louisiana and throughout the Gulf of Mexico.  
 
Arthur, C., Sutton -Grier, A. E., Murphy, P., & Bamford, H. (2014). Out of Sight but Not out of Mind: 
Harmful Effects of Derelict Traps in Selected U.S. Coastal Waters. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 
86(1), 19 -28 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.m arpolbul.2014.06.050  21 
 There is a paucity of data in the published literature on the ecological and economic impacts of derelict 
fishing traps (DFTs) in coastal ecosystems. We synthesized results from seven NOAA -funded trap 
fisheries studies around the Unite d States and determined that DFT -caused losses to habitat and 
harvestable annual catch are pervasive, persistent, and largely preventable. Based on this synthesis, we 
identified key gaps to fill in order to better manage and prevent DFTs. We conclude with suggestions for 
developing a U.S. DFT management strategy including: (1) targeting studies to estimate mortality of 
fishery stocks, (2) assessing the economic impacts of DFTs on fisheries, (3) collaborating with the fishing 
industry to develop solutions to  ghost fishing, and (4) examining the regional context and challenges 
resulting in DFTs to find effective policy solutions to manage, reduce, and prevent gear loss.  
 
Baeta, F., Costa, M. J., & Cabral, H. (2009). Trammel Nets’ Ghost Fishing Off the Portugue se Central 
Coast. Fisheries Research, 98 (1), 33 -39 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2009.03.009  
The loss of fishing gear has negative consequences to marine communities if the gear preserves its 
catching abilities for a significant period, a phenomenon called “ghost fishing”. The present study 
assessed the impact of lost trammel nets in both sandy and rocky bottoms in the central area of the 
Portuguese coast. Ten trammel nets, e ach 50m long and corresponding to the most common type used 
by the local commercial fleet, were allowed to fish continually for 285 days. During this time, changes in 
the structure and catching ability of each net were monitored by scuba divers in regular time intervals 
(1, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 60, 80, 120, 250 and 285 days). Three control nets were also set in each bottom 
type the day before each monitoring dive. Irrespective of bottom type, nets’ fishing area decreased to 
about 40% during the first 30 d ays, and then gradually (rocky bottoms) or sharply (sandy bottoms). It 
was estimated that during the experiment 541 and 257 individuals were caught per 100m of net in rocky 
and sandy bottoms, respectively. Catching efficiency decreased in a negative expone ntial manner in 
parallel with the nets deterioration. The nets’ effective fishing lifetime, when catching efficiency became 
lower than 1%, was 10 –11 months in the rocky bottom and 8 months in the sandy bottom.  
 
Ballesteros, L. V., Matthews, J. L., & Hoekse ma, B. W. (2018). Pollution and Coral Damage Caused by 
Derelict Fishing Gear on Coral Reefs around Koh Tao, Gulf of Thailand. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 
135, 1107 -1116 https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.marpolbul.2018.08.033  
Most lost fishing gear is made of non -biodegradable plastics that may sink to the sea floor or drift 
around in currents. It may remain unnoticed until it shows up on coral reefs, beaches and in other 
coastal habitats. Stony corals h ave fragile skeletons and soft tissues that can easily become damaged 
when they get in contact with lost fishing gear. During a dive survey around Koh Tao, a small island in 
the Gulf of Thailand, the impact of lost fishing gear (nets, ropes, cages, lines) was studied on corals 
representing six different growth forms: branching, encrusting, foliaceous, free -living, laminar, and 
massive. Most gear ( > 95%) contained plastic. Besides absence of damage (ND), three categories of 
coral damage were assessed: fresh  tissue loss (FTL), tissue loss with algal growth (TLAG), and 
fragmentation (FR). The position of the corals in relation to the fishing gear was recorded as either 
growing underneath (Un) or on top (On), whereas corals adjacent to the gear (Ad) were used a s 
controls. Nets formed the dominant type of lost gear, followed by ropes, lines and cages, respectively. 
Branching corals were most commonly found in contact with the gear and also around it. Tubastraea 
micranthus was the most commonly encountered coral s pecies, either Un, On, or Ad. Corals underneath 
gear showed most damage, which predominantly consisted of tissue loss. Fragmentation was less 
common than expected, which may be related to the low fragility of T. micranthus as dominant 
branching species. Ev en if nets serve as substrate for corals, it is recommended to remove them from 22 
 reefs, where they form a major component of the plastic pollution and cause damage to corals and 
other reef organisms.  
 
Brown, J., & Macfadyen, G. (2007). Ghost Fishing in Euro pean Waters: Impacts and Management 
Responses. Marine Policy, 31 (4), 488 -504 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2006.10.007  
In this paper we review levels of net loss, what happens to the gear once  it has been lost, and the 
resulting levels of 'ghost catches' made in passive net fisheries in the EU. We also consider ghost catches 
resulting from lost gear in other types of fisheries, and the extent to which the value of ghost catches 
has been quantif ied. We consider why fishing gear is lost, and profile common management responses. 
We present a cost benefit model to assess the relative cost effectiveness of different management 
measures, and suggest that gear retrieval programmes may provide less valu e for money than other 
management responses. (c) 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
 
Brown, J. G., Macfadyen, G., Huntington, T., Magnus, J., & Tumilty, J. (2005). Ghost Fishing by Lost 
Fishing Gear.  Institute fo r European Environmental Policy , Poseid on Aquatic Resource 
Management DG FISH/2004/20.  Retrieved from 
https://ieep.eu/uploads/articles/attachments/4a24b509 -013d -44ca -b26e -
47c8f52e29c4/ghostfishing.pdf?v=63664509699  
‘Ghost fishing’ is the term given to the continued fishing by fishing gear that has been lost or 
abandoned. It is largely confined to ‘passive gears’ such as gillnets, trammel nets, wreck nets, and traps. 
It is a phenomenon that has attracted attention over the past two decades given the sometimes graphic 
images of fish and other marine life entangled in lost nets, illustrating the potentially wasteful and 
destructive impacts of lost fishing gear. However, t he real extent of the problem is not well known at the 
present time. This report is the output of a six -month research project funded by the Environment Unit 
of DG Fisheries and Maritime Affairs of the European Commission. Evidence suggests that ghost fish ing 
from ‘active’ fishing gears such as trawl nets and from ‘static’ pot fishing is not significant in European 
Union (EU) waters, and the focus of this project is therefore on ghost fishing in static set -net fisheries.  
 
Chiappone, M., Dienes, H., Swanson,  D. W., & Miller, S. L. (2005). Impacts of Lost Fishing Gear on Coral 
Reef Sessile Invertebrates in the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary. Biological 
Conservation, 121 (2), 221 -230 https://do i.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2004.04.023  
The Florida Keys coral reef ecosystem supports multimillion -dollar commercial and recreational 
fisheries. The ecological effects caused by fishing gear that is lost when cut or broken after snagging on 
the bottom is a gro wing concern to managers and scientists. Few data exist, however, to assess the 
impacts of lost fishing gear to benthic organisms and habitat structure. In this study, 63 offshore coral 
reef and hard -bottom sites were surveyed during 2001 to quantify the i mpacts of lost fishing gear to 
coral reef sessile invertebrates. Lost hook -and-line fishing gear accounted for 87% of all debris (N = 298 
incidences) encountered and was responsible for 84% of the 321 documented impacts to sponges and 
benthic cnidarians, p redominantly consisting of tissue abrasion causing partial individual or colony 
mortality. Branching gorgonians (Octocorallia) were the most frequently affected (56%), followed by 
milleporid hydrocorals (19%) and sponges (13%). Factors affecting the impact s of lost fishing gear 
include sessile invertebrate density, the density of lost fishing gear, and gear length. While lost hook -
and-line fishing gear is ubiquitous in the Florida Keys, less than 0.2% of the available milleporid 
hydrocorals, stony corals, a nd gorgonians in the habitats studied are adversely affected in terms of 
colony abrasions and partial mortality.  23 
  
Cho, D. -O. (2011). Removing Derelict Fishing Gear from the Deep Seabed of the East Sea. Marine Policy, 
35(5), 610 -614 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2011.01.022  
The East Sea, with an average depth of 1700m, has long been subject to heavy fishing pressure, resulting 
in derelict fishing gear. Most derelict fishing gear s, such as fishing nets, fishing ropes, and crab pots, sink 
to the seabed and do not degrade. This gear results in “ghost fishing,” which has adverse impacts on 
deep benthic habitats. Recently, the Korean government has started to remove derelict fishing g ears 
from the deep seabed of the East Sea by bottom trawling with heavy hooks (50 –80kg) and ropes. A total 
of 207.8 and 252.2tons of marine debris in 2009 and 2010, respectively, were removed from the seabed, 
most of which were derelict fishing gears. Cont rary to monitoring surveys and clean -up in shallow 
waters, removal of marine debris from remote deep habitats is much more difficult and dangerous for 
removal crews.  
 
Erzini, K., Monteiro, C., & Ribeiro, J. (1998). An Experimental Study of Gill Net and Tra mmel Net Ghost 
Fishing Off the Algarve (Southern Portugal). Marine Ecology Progress Series, 6 (45), 1049 -1050 
Retrieved from https://www.jstor.org/stable/24858816  
Four 100 m lengths of both monofilament gill nets and trammel nets were deployed at depths between 
15 and 18 m off the coast of the Algarve (south of Portugal) between April 1995 and June 1996. The nets 
were set on a natural rocky bottom with one end cut loose to simulate lost nets. Changes in n et 
structure (net height, effective fishing area, movement, colonisation, wear and tear) and their catches 
(species, sizes, numbers, and biomass) were monitored by divers. Similar patterns were observed in all 
the nets, with a sharp decrease in net height and effective fishmg area, and an increase in visibility 
within the first few weeks. Net movement was negligible except in the case of interference from other 
fishing gears. Catch rates were initially comparable to normally fished gd.l nets and trammel net s in this 
area, but decreased steadily over time. No sea birds, reptiles or mammals were caught in any of the 8 
nets. Catches were dominated by fish (89% by number, at least 27 species), in particular by sea breams 
(Sparidae) and wrasscs (Labridae). Under the conditions experienced throughout the study the fishlng 
hfetime of a 'lost' net is between 15 and 20 wk. Based on an exponential model, we estimated that 100 
m lengths of gill net and trammel net will catch 314 and 221 fish respectively over a 17 wk pe riod. 
However, we consider this to be an underestimate due to high rates of predation and scavenging by 
octopuses, cuttlefish, moray eels, conger eels, and other fish such as the wrasse Coris julis. When the 
nets were surveyed in the following spring. 8 to  11 mo after being deployed, they were found to be 
completely destroyed or heavily colonised by algae and had become incorporated into the reef.  
 
Gilardi, K. V. K., Carlson -Bremer, D., June, J. A., Antonelis, K., Broadhurst, G., & Cowan, T. (2010). Marine 
Species Mortality in Derelict Fishing Nets in Puget Sound, W A and the Cost/Benefits of Derelict 
Net Removal. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 60 (3), 376 -382 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j .marpolbul.2009.10.016  
Derelict fishing gear persists for decades and impacts marine species and underwater habitats. Agencies 
and organizations are removing significant amounts of derelict gear from marine waters in the United 
States. Using data collected  from repeated survey dives on derelict gillnets in Puget Sound, Washington, 
we estimated the daily catch rate of a given derelict gillnet, and developed a model to predict expected 
total mortality caused by a given net based on entanglement data collected  upon its removal. We also 
generated a cost:benefit ratio for derelict gear removal utilizing known true costs compared to known 
market values of the resources benefiting from derelict gear removal. For one study net, we calculated 24 
 4368 crab entangled duri ng the impact lifetime of the net, at a loss of $19,656 of Dungeness crab to the 
commercial fishery, compared to $1358 in costs to remove a given gillnet, yielding a cost:benefit ratio of 
1:14.5.  
 
Gilman, E. (2015). Status of International Monitoring and M anagement of Abandoned, Lost and 
Discarded Fishing Gear and Ghost Fishing. Marine Policy, 60 , 225 -239 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2015.06.016  
Abandoned, lost and discarded fishing gear (ALDFG) can pose substantial ecological and socioeconomic 
problems. Over the past decade there has been increasing international recognition of the need for 
multilateral efforts to address transboundary problems resulting from AL DFG, including ghost fishing. To 
benchmark the status of international monitoring and mitigation of ALDFG and ghost fishing, an 
assessment was made of data collection protocols and management measures to prevent and 
remediate ALDFG and ghost fishing by 19 global and regional bodies and arrangements with the 
competence to establish binding controls for marine capture fisheries. Four organizations were explicitly 
mandated by their convention or agreement text to monitor and control ALDFG and ghost fishing. 
Modifying mandates of the other organizations might augment members' political will to monitor, 
prevent and remediate ALDFG and ghost fishing. Ten organizations collected logbook or observer data 
on ALDFG. Harmonizing data collection protocols where they are  in place, and filling gaps where they 
are lacking, would improve regional monitoring of ALDFG. Twelve organizations have adopted binding 
measures that contribute to avoiding or remediating ALDFG. The organizations, however, make use of a 
small subset of a vailable tools: Only half of 18 categories of methods identified as having the potential 
to prevent and remediate ALDFG and ghost fishing were used by the organizations. Organizations 
lacking relevant binding measures could begin to fill this gap and organ izations can tap a broader suite 
of complimentary management methods.  
 
Gilman, E., Chopin, F., Suuronen, P., & Kuemlangan, B. (2009). Abandoned, Lost or Otherwise Discarded 
Gillnets and Trammel Nets.  Food and Agriculture Organizat ion of the United Nations (FAO)     
FAO technical paper no. 600. Rome.  Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/3/a -i5051e.pdf  
The ecological and socio -economic problems caused by abandoned, lost and discarded fi shing gear 
(ALDFG) are increasingly of concern. Used primarily by coastal, artisanal, small -scale fisheries worldwide, 
marine gillnets and trammel nets, which have relatively high ghost fishing potential, account for about 
one-fifth of global marine fisher ies landings. FAO and the Global Programme of Action for the Protection 
of the Marine Environment from Land -based Activities, hosted by the United Nations Environment 
Programme, as Secretariat for the Global Partnership on Marine Litter, commissioned this study to 
identify best practices to estimate ghost fishing mortality rates and levels, priority research needs, and 
the status of international monitoring and management of ALDFG and ghost fishing by marine gillnet 
and trammel net fisheries. Accurate estim ates of total ghost fishing mortality levels can be made given 
quality data on the density of ALDFG retaining fishing efficiency, duration of ghost fishing efficiency, and 
total ghost fishing mortality level of a unit of effort of ALDFG over the full perio d that the derelict gear 
retains fishing efficiency. Recommendations to improve estimates of regional and global rates and levels 
of ghost fishing from ALDFG from marine gillnet and trammel net fisheries were made. An assessment 
was made and opportunities were identified to improve intergovernmental organizations’ data 
collection protocols and management measures to prevent and remediate ALDFG and ghost fishing by 
marine gillnets and trammel nets.  
 25 
 Gilman, E., Chopin, F., Suuronen, P., & Kuemlangan, B. (201 6). Methods to Estimate Ghost Fishing 
Mortality, and the Status of Regional Monitoring and Management.  Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations, FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Technical Paper No. 600. 
Rome.  Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/3/a -i5051e.pdf  
The ecological and socio -economic problems caused by abandoned, lost and discarded fishing gear 
(ALDFG) are increasingly of concern. Used primarily by coastal, artisanal, small -scale fisherie s worldwide, 
marine gillnets and trammel nets, which have relatively high ghost fishing potential, account for about 
one-fifth of global marine fisheries landings. FAO and the Global Programme of Action for the Protection 
of the Marine Environment from Lan d-based Activities, hosted by the United Nations Environment 
Programme, as Secretariat for the Global Partnership on Marine Litter, commissioned this study to 
identify best practices to estimate ghost fishing mortality rates and levels, priority research n eeds, and 
the status of international monitoring and management of ALDFG and ghost fishing by marine gillnet 
and trammel net fisheries. Accurate estimates of total ghost fishing mortality levels can be made given 
quality data on the density of ALDFG retain ing fishing efficiency, duration of ghost fishing efficiency, and 
total ghost fishing mortality level of a unit of effort of ALDFG over the full period that the derelict gear 
retains fishing efficiency. Recommendations to improve estimates of regional and global rates and levels 
of ghost fishing from ALDFG from marine gillnet and trammel net fisheries were made. An assessment 
was made and opportunities were identified to improve intergovernmental organizations’ data 
collection protocols and management measu res to prevent and remediate ALDFG and ghost fishing by 
marine gillnets and trammel nets.  
 
Good, T. P., June, J. A., Etnier, M. A., & Broadhurst, G. (2010). Derelict Fishing Nets in Puget Sound and 
the Northwest Straits: Patterns and Threats to Marine Faun a. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 60 (1), 
39-50 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2009.09.005  
Derelict fishing gear remains in the marine environment for years, entangling, and ki lling marine 
organisms worldwide. Since 2002, hundreds of derelict nets containing over 32,000 marine animals have 
been recovered from Washington’s inland waters. Analysis of 870 gillnets found many were derelict for 
years; most were recovered from norther n Puget Sound and high -relief rocky habitats and were 
relatively small, of recent construction, in good condition, stretched open, and in relatively shallow 
water. Marine organisms documented in recovered gillnets included 31,278 invertebrates (76 species) , 
1036 fishes (22 species), 514 birds (16 species), and 23 mammals (4 species); 56% of invertebrates, 93% 
of fish, and 100% of birds and mammals were dead when recovered. For all taxa, mortality was generally 
associated with gillnet effectiveness (total ar ea, age and condition, and suspension in the water). 
Mortality from derelict fishing gear is underestimated at recovery and may be important for species of 
economic and conservation concern.  
 
Hong, S., Lee, J., & Lim, S. (2017). Navigational Threats by Der elict Fishing Gear to Navy Ships in the 
Korean Seas. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 119 (2), 100 -105 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.04.006  
This study assessed the impact o f derelict fishing gear (DFG) on navigation. The Republic of Korea's navy 
(ROKN) recorded every case of approximately 170 naval ships associated with propeller entanglement 
by DFG from January 2010 to December 2015. The frequency of cases was 2.3 per ship and 397.7 (±37.5) 
per year. The amount of DFG disentangled was 0.025tons per ship and 10.0 (±1.7) tons per year. The 
frequency temporally decreased whereas the amount increased over these six years. To disentangle 
propellers, 3.1 divers were needed on aver age per case. Propeller entanglement occurred in all local 
seas and some of these areas showed increases over time. Our study highlights that the impact of DFG 26 
 on navigational threats has been persistent and ubiquitous and can potentially be reduced by 
preventing DFG in fishing areas, with a focus on improved management by fishermen and government 
and with more efficient retrieval of DFG.  
 
Humborstad, O. -B., Løkkeborg, S., Hareide, N. -R., & Furevik, D. M. (2003). Catches of Greenland Halibut 
(Reinhardtius H ippoglossoides) in Deepwater Ghost -Fishing Gillnets on the Norwegian 
Continental Slope. Fisheries Research, 64 (2), 163 -170 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165 -
7836(03)00215 -7 
Fishing g ear may continue to fish after it has been lost. Large catches have been observed during cruises 
to retrieve lost gillnets in Norwegian waters, especially in the fishery for Greenland halibut (Reinhardtius 
hippoglossoides). The Norwegian Greenland halibut is overexploited, and there is serious concern about 
the effect of lost nets on this stock. Catches in deliberately lost gillnets were studied in the fishery for 
Greenland halibut off the coast of mid -Norway in July 2000 and June 2001. Gillnet fleets were deployed 
at depths of between 537 and 851m, and the soak time ranged from 1 to 68 days. Most of the catch 
consisted of the target species, and the proportions of different species did not change with soak time. 
All individuals caught were categorized in te rms of seven condition states. A gradual shift from fresh to 
decomposed individuals over time was evident. The catching efficiency of gillnets decreased with soak 
time, presumably due to the weight of the catch causing the headline height to decrease, and after 45 
days was only about 20 –30% of that of nets used in the commercial fishery. Catch rates were estimated 
after stabilization at 67 –100 and 28 –43kg per day per gillnet fleet in 2000 and 2001, respectively. The 
results indicated that gillnets lost in t his area continue to fish for long periods of time. Annual losses of 
nets need to be quantified in order to estimate the effects of ghost fishing on stock levels, a figure that 
is currently lacking.  
 
Johnson, S. W. (1989). Deposition, Fate, and Characteris tics of Derelict Trawl Web on an Alaskan Beach. 
Marine Pollution Bulletin, 20 (4), 164 -168 https://doi.org/10.1016/0025 -326X(89)90486 -4 
Derelict trawl web washed ashore on an 8 km beach near Yakutat, Alaska was counted, weighed, 
measured for mesh size, and tagged periodically from September 1985 to September 1987 to determine 
deposition rate, fate, and net characteristics. Approximately nine fragments of trawl web were 
deposited per  km of beach per year. Significantly more fragments were washed ashore during the fall 
and winter than during the spring and summer. A total of 165 fragments of trawl web were tagged of 
which 72 (44%) were recovered during the last survey in September 1987 ; most (73%) fragments 
recovered remained near their original tagging location. Fragments not recovered probably were either 
washed inland or buried by sand during storms. The average weight of a fragment of trawl web was 4.0 
kg and one -third of the fragme nts sampled had mesh sizes (≥ 15 cm) with the potential, while adrift at 
sea, to entangle northern fur seals.  
 
Kaiser, M. J., Bullimore, B., Newman, P., Lock, K., & Gilbert, S. (1996). Catches in 'Ghost Fishing'' Set Nets. 
Marine Ecology Progress Series, 145 (1-3), 11 -16 https://doi.org/10.3354/meps145011  
Both trammel and gill. nets are used to catch marine fishes and crustaceans around the British Isles. 
Their use is controversial in areas  where there is a risk of incidental catches of seabirds or marine 
mammals. An additional concern is the fate and fishing capabilities of nets when they are lost either as a 
result of bad weather or when they are damaged by mobile fishing gear. Few, if any , studies have 
ascertained for how long or effectively these lost nets continue to fish, more commonly termed 'ghost 
fishing'. Two types of fixed gear, a gill and trammel net, were set by a commercial fisherman ca 1000 m 27 
 offshore from a rocky coastal area in southwest Wales, UK. One end of each net was cut free to simulate 
net loss. The nets were then allowed to fish continually for 9 mo, during which time they were surveyed 
by divers recording catches by direct observation, still photography and video came ra survey. Several 
hours after both nets had been set, a large number of dogfishes were caught, causing the nets to 
collapse. Within 1 d, 2 commercial crustacean species, spider crabs Maja squinado and brown crabs 
Cancer pagurus, were attracted to the dead  and decomposing fishes. Many of these animals also 
became trapped in the netting and were fed upon by their conspecifics and other scavengers. Some of 
these crustaceans also became entangled and died, producing a sequence of captures throughout the 
observ ation period. Catch rate began to decline within a few days of the initial deployment, probably 
related to a decline in the effective fishing area. The results indicate that lost nets could continue to 
catch commercial crustacean species for at least 9 mo after initial loss.  
 
Macfadyen, G., Huntington, T., & Cappell, R. (2009). Abandoned, Lost or Otherwise Discarded Fishing 
Gear.  United Nat ions Environment Programme FAO Technical Paper No. 523 UNEP Regional 
Seas Reports and Studies N o. 185. Rome.  Retrie ved from 
http://www.fao.org/docrep/011/i0620e/i0620e00.htm  
This report reviews the magnitude and composition of ALDFG, and while noting that information is not 
comprehensive and does not all ow for any global estimates, suggests that gillnets and fishing traps/pots 
may be the most common type of ALDFG, although netting fragments may also be common in some 
locations. The impacts of ALDFG are also considered and include: continued catching of ta rget and non -
target species (such as turtles, seabirds and marine mammals); alterations to the benthic environment; 
navigational hazards; beach debris/litter; introduction of synthetic material into the marine food web; 
introduction of alien species transp orted by ALDFG; and a variety of costs related to clean -up operations 
and impacts on business activities. In general, gillnets and pots/traps are most likely to “ghost fish” while 
other gear, such as trawls and longlines, are more likely to cause entanglem ent of marine organisms, 
including protected species, and habitat damage.  
 
Morishige, C., & McElwee, K. (2012). At -Sea Detection of Derelict Fishing Gear in the North Pacific: An 
Overview. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 65 (1), 1 -6 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2011.05.017  
There are numerous known impacts of derelict fishing gear (DFG) to marine ecosystems and safe 
navigation around the world. To miti gate these impacts, the preemptive detection and removal of DFG 
at sea are being pursued. This special issue focuses on the North Pacific Ocean because of historic and 
ongoing research on DFG in the area, particularly as it relates to the Hawaiian Archipel ago. In order to 
develop an effective detection strategy, information and expertise from three disciplines must be 
integrated: marine debris, oceanography, and remote sensing technology. Building upon results and 
discussions during a workshop held in Decem ber 2008, this special issue provides both results of original 
research and review papers, pursuing each discipline as it relates to DFG and outlining a multi -faceted 
strategy to effectively detect DFG at sea. This strategy serves as a roadmap, taking us c loser to realizing 
the goal of detecting and removing DFG at sea.  
 
Nash, A. D. (1992). Impacts of Marine Debris on Subsistence Fishermen an Exploratory Study. Marine 
Pollution Bulletin, 24 (3), 150 -156 https://doi.org/10.1016/0025 -326X(92)90243 -Y 
As a first step, the study investigates two beaches close to Jayapura, Irian Jaya province, Indonesia, for types 
and amounts of waste. The source of litter is a municipal dumpsite on the coastline in a nearby bay. In that 
bay lives a small community of traditional fishermen. These fisherfolk mainly use gill nets, hook and line, or 28 
 gather shellfish and molluscs by hand. The respondents described impacts such as propeller entanglements, 
foulings of gill nets and hooks, damage to the fishing gear, and injuries. These problems were viewed by 
some as serious enough to cause modifications to their fishing behaviour (sometimes against their best 
economic interest) such as avoidance of some fishing  areas, and use of different types of gear. Plastic bags 
are the most common type of debris reported by the fishermen. More than half of gill net fishing expeditions 
had debris fouling the nets.  
 
Pawson, M. G. (2003). The Catching Capacity of Lost Static F ishing Gears: Introduction. Fisheries Research, 
64(2), 101 -105 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165 -7836(03)00208 -X 
Concern over the ability of synthetic nets and traps to continue fish ing after they are lost, and the resulting 
additional mortality of target and non -target species, lead to an international project to quantify the catching 
capacity of such gears in commercial fishing situations. This special section of Fisheries Research presents 
eight case study investigations, ranging from gill nets set for hake in coastal waters off Portugal, to traps set 
for red king crabs in deep water off Norway.  
 
Phillips, C. (2017). Ghostly Encounters: Dealing with Ghost Gear in the Gulf of Carpent aria. Geoforum, 78 , 33-
42 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2016.11.010  
Ghost gear -abandoned, lost, or otherwise discarded fishing gear -has been recognised as a global 
environmental challenge since the mid -1980s, and yet little social science attention has fallen on the 
phenomenon. This paper explores how the burden of global fisheries, materialised through its gear, is 
experienced and managed. How is ghost gear encountered? How is it understoo d? What influence does it 
have, and what responses does it provoke? To consider these questions, the paper begins with detailing of an 
encounter with ghost gear and Aboriginal rangers on the eastern coast of the Gulf of Carpentaria, northern 
Australia. Und erstanding encounters as tangles of interlaced threads, rather than isolated intimacies, the 
paper also follows ghost gear beyond the expetience of beach clean -up. How ghost gear journeys to this 
beach, and the mobilities and meetings that occur during its  travels is explored, as well as the policy 
responses to ghost gear that figure it primarily as marine debris to be managed through territorial control as 
isolated 'waste'. These more -than -human stories offer insights into the distributed agencies, complex  
relations, and differential responsibilities involved in the phenomenon of ghost gear, and efforts to deal with 
it as part of land -sea assemblies.  
 
Richardson, K., Gunn, R., Wilcox, C., & Hardesty, B. D. (2018). Understanding Causes of Gear Loss Provides a 
Sound Basis for Fisheries Management. Marine Policy, 96 , 278 -284 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2018.02.021  
Derelict fishing nets comprise a significant amount of the marine d ebris in the world's oceans and on its 
shorelines. These ‘ghost nets’ result in economic losses for the fishing industry, pose hazards to navigation at 
sea, and can entangle marine and terrestrial wildlife. Ghost nets are an acute problem along Australia's  
northern coastline, with most nets originating from Southeast Asian fishing vessels outside Australia's 
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). To understand the causes of gear loss and identify tractable solutions to this 
transboundary problem, Australian and Ind onesian fishers (N = 54) were asked why, when and in what 
circumstances and conditions they are likely to lose gear. Fishers identified snagging of nets (78%) and gear 
conflicts (19%) as the main causes of gear loss. These interviews informed the developme nt of a fault tree, as 
a tool to identify the chain of events that result in gear loss or abandonment. The fault tree analysis provides 
recommendations for interventions and improvements in regional fisheries management to reduce fishing 
gear loss ultimate ly resulting from overcrowding, overcapacity and illegal, unreported and unregulated 
Fishing (IUU).  
 29 
 Richardson, K., Haynes, D., Talouli, A., & Donoghue, M. (2017). Marine Pollution Originating from Purse Seine 
and Longline Fishing Vessel Operations in the  Western and Central Pacific Ocean, 2003 -2015. Ambio, 
46(2), 190 -200 https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280 -016-0811 -8 
Fisheries observer data recorded between 2003 and 2015 on -board purse seine and longlin e vessels 
operating in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean reported more than 10 000 pollution incidents within the 
exclusive economic zones (EEZs) of 25 Pacific countries and territories, and in international waters. A majority 
of the reported purse sei ne pollution incidents related to dumping of plastics waste. Other common pollution 
incidents related to oil spillages and to abandoned, lost or dumped fishing gear. Data analysis highlighted the 
need for increased monitoring, reporting, and enforcement of  pollution violations by all types of fishing 
vessels operating in the Pacific region; a regional outreach and compliance assistance programme on marine 
pollution prevention and improvements in Pacific port waste reception facilities.  
 
Saldanha, H. J., San cho, G., Santos, M. N., Puente, E., Gaspar, M. B., Bilbao, A., . . . Arregi, L. (2003). The Use of 
Biofouling for Ageing Lost Nets: A Case Study. Fisheries Research, 64 (2-3), 141 -150 
https://doi .org/10.1016/S0165 -7836(03)00213 -3 
The use of biofouling for estimating the age of lost nets was investigated by means of net loss simulations 
and sequential retrieval, conducted in the Bay of Biscay (northern Spain) and off the Algarve (southern 
Portugal) . Two trials were conducted in each location at different seasons. At both study sites, heavier 
colonisation was observed on the upper parts of the retrieved nets than in the bottom sections, irrespective 
of season. The biomass of fouling organisms was sub ject to geographical and seasonal variation, being 
considerably higher in the Algarve and throughout the spring/summer trials. Three bivalve species were 
selected as key species for net ageing: Anomia sp., Hiatella artica and Pteria hirundo. Bivalve abunda nce 
increased over time, until the 7th month of the trials in the Bay of Biscay and the 3rd month off the Algarve, 
and decreased thereafter. Analyses of the specimens' size evolution over time indicated that the shell length 
of Anomia sp. could be used for  ageing abandoned nets in the Bay of Biscay and that of P. hirundo off the 
Algarve. However, the use of these particular organisms for estimating soaking times of fishing gear is limited 
to a specific set of environmental conditions.  
 
Sancho, G., Puente, E ., Bilbao, A., Gomez, E., & Arregi, L. (2003). Catch Rates of Monkfish (Lophius Spp.) by 
Lost Tangle Nets in the Cantabrian Sea (Northern Spain). Fisheries Research, 64 (2), 129 -139 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165 -7836(03)00212 -1 
Commercial tangle nets used for capturing monkfish were employed in an experiment designed to study the 
fishing pattern by tangle nets that are lost at sea, a phenomenon commonly known as ‘ghost’ fishing. To  
simulate lost nets, 27 fleets of tangle nets were deployed on soft bottoms in the Cantabrian Sea shelf at 
depths between 117 and 135m. Nets were recovered at intervals of 1 –12 months and their catches recorded 
(composition, abundance, size, biomass, prese rvation state) in two trials, measuring seasonal changes in 
catch rates. A fleet of tangle nets was operated following commercial procedures next to the abandoned 
nets, providing simultaneous estimates of commercial catch rates. Monkfish (Lophius budegassa  and Lophius 
piscatorius) dominated the fish catches in abandoned tangle nets (81%). In summer –fall conditions, 
abandoned nets showed after 135 days catch rates similar to those simultaneously recorded for commercial 
nets (respectively, 0.18 and 0.22 speci mens per 100m of netting), but ceased to capture monkfish after 224 
days. In spring –summer conditions, monkfish catches were negligible in abandoned experimental nets and 
lower in the commercial nets than in the previous trial. The pattern of extended catc h rates observed in 
tangle nets abandoned in deep water differed from studies using abandoned gill and trammel nets in shallow 
waters, which typically cease to capture fish much sooner. Total monkfish catches by abandoned tangle nets 
were estimated through  a cumulative catch model to be 17.7kg (4.7 specimens) per 100m of netting. 
Multiplying this value by the estimated number of tangle nets lost annually by the Cantabrian Sea fishing 30 
 fleet, it was estimated that 18.1t of monkfish are captured annually by ab andoned nets. This represents 
1.46% of the commercial landings of these species in the Cantabrian Sea.  
 
Scheld, A. M., Bilkovic, D. M., & Havens, K. J. (2016). The Dilemma of Derelict Gear. Scientific Reports, 6 , 1-7 
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep19671  
Every year, millions of pots and traps are lost in crustacean fisheries around the world. Derelict fishing gear 
has been found to produce several harmful environmental and ecological effects, however socioeconomic 
consequences have been investigated less frequently. We analyze the economic effects of a substantial 
derelict pot removal program in the largest estuary of the United States, the Chesapeake Bay. By combining 
spatially resolved data on dereli ct pot removals with commercial blue crab (Callinectes sapidus) harvests and 
effort, we show that removing 34,408 derelict pots led to significant gains in gear efficiency and an additional 
13,504 MT in harvest valued at US $21.3 million --a 27% increase ab ove that which would have occurred 
without removals. Model results are extended to a global analysis where it is seen that US $831 million in 
landings could be recovered annually by removing less than 10% of the derelict pots and traps from major 
crustacea n fisheries. An unfortunate common pool externality, the degradation of marine environments is 
detrimental not only to marine organisms and biota, but also to those individuals and communities whose 
livelihoods and culture depend on profitable and sustaina ble marine resource use.  
 
Stelfox, M., Hudgins, J., & Sweet, M. (2016). A Review of Ghost Gear Entanglement Amongst Marine 
Mammals, Reptiles and Elasmobranchs. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 111 (1), 6 -17 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.06.034  
This review focuses on the effect that ghost gear entanglement has on marine megafauna, namely mammals, 
reptiles and elasmobranchs. A total of 76 publications and other sources of grey  literature were assessed, and 
these highlighted that over 5400 individuals from 40 different species were recorded as entangled in, or 
associated with, ghost gear. Interestingly, there appeared to be a deficit of research in the Indian, Southern, 
and Arct ic Oceans; and so, we recommend that future studies focus efforts on these areas. Furthermore, 
studies assessing the effects of ghost gear on elasmobranchs, manatees, and dugongs should also be 
prioritised, as these groups were underrepresented in the curr ent literature. The development of regional 
databases, capable of recording entanglement incidences following a minimum global set of criteria, would 
be a logical next step in order to analyse the effect that ghost gear has on megafauna populations worldwi de. 
 
Taylor, J. R., DeVogelaere, A. P., Burton, E. J., Frey, O., Lundsten, L., Kuhnz, L. A., . . . Barry, J. P. (2014). Deep -
Sea Faunal Communities Associated with a Lost Intermodal Shipping Container in the Monterey Bay 
National Marine Sanctuary, C A. Mari ne Pollution Bulletin, 83 (1), 92 -106 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2014.04.014  
Carrying assorted cargo and covered with paints of varying toxicity, lost intermodal containers may take 
centuries to degrade on the deep seafloor. In June 2004, scientists from Monterey Bay Aquarium Research 
Institute (MBARI) discovered a recently lost container during a Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) dive on a 
sediment -covered seabed at 1281 m depth in Monte rey Bay National Marine Sanctuary (MBNMS). The site 
was revisited by ROV in March 2011. Analyses of sediment samples and high -definition video indicate that 
faunal assemblages on the container's exterior and the seabed within 10 m of the container differed  
significantly from those up to 500 m. The container surface provides hard substratum for colonization by taxa 
typically found in rocky habitats. However, some key taxa that dominate rocky areas were absent or rare on 
the container, perhaps related to its potential toxicity or limited time for colonization and growth. Ecological 
effects appear to be restricted to the container surface and the benthos within approximately 10 m.  
 31 
 Unger, A., & Harrison, N. (2016). Fisheries as a Source of Marine Debris on Beac hes in the United Kingdom. 
Marine Pollution Bulletin, 107 (1), 52 -58 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.04.024  
Marine debris from ships has persisted and remains a concern despite interna tional agreements such as 
MARPOL We report on an analysis of beach litter based on a data set established by the Marine Conservation 
Society (MSC) Beachwatch weekends. Debris collected around the UK was divided into three main types of 
debris: (1) plastic,  (2) fishing, and (3) fishing related plastic and rubber. Correspondence analysis (CA) was 
used to examine patterns in the occurrence of debris types on a total of 1023 beaches and debris attributable 
to fishing was identified on clusters of beaches mainly  located on the coasts of Scotland and along the English 
Channel. General Linear model (GLM) identified fishing as the highest explanatory factor when testing for 
relationships between litter and proximity to fishing ports and grounds. The results add to t he growing body 
of evidence that the fishing industry is largely responsible for marine debris. Crown Copyright (C) 2016 
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
 
Section III: Port Waste Reception  
 
Ball, I. (1999). Port Waste Reception Facilities in UK  Ports Iwan Ball. Marine Policy, 23 (4), 307 -327 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0308 -597X(98)00057 -8 
The ability to comply fully with the discharge requirement s set out in the MARPOL 73/78 Convention 
depends upon the availability of adequate facilities on land for the reception of shipgenerated waste. 
This paper considers ways of ensuring adequate provision of reception facilities, and discusses the 
approach tak en by the UK to reduce the amount of pollution entering the marine environment from the 
deliberate discharge of waste from ships. Arguably, the most significant of the measures adopted by the 
UK is the requirement for all ports and harbours to prepare port  waste management plans. Disincentives 
to the use of port waste reception facilities are examined, together with the benefits and shortcomings 
of various financing arrangements, and compulsory discharge of waste in ports. The paper concludes 
that the statu tory approach to improving the provision and use of waste facilities should be supported 
by an appropriate awareness campaign to educate shipowners about the need to discharge waste 
legally to port reception facilities.  
 
Carpenter, A., & Macgill, S. M. (20 05). The EU Directive on Port Reception Facilities for Ship -Generated 
Waste and Cargo Residues: The Results of a Second Survey on the Provision and Uptake of 
Facilities in North Sea Ports. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 50 (12), 1541 -1547 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2005.06.021  
The aim of this paper is to evaluate the results of a survey of the availability and uptake of port 
reception facilities within the North Sea area. The evaluation is based primarily on original survey data 
from the autumn of 2002 which followed on from a similar survey conducted in the summer of 2000. 
The EU Directive on port reception facilities for ship -generated waste etc. (Directive 2000/59/EC) was 
due to enter int o force in December 2002, and required all EU ports to provide reception facilities to 
meet the needs of the vessels normally calling in at them. This paper examines the readiness of North 
Sea ports to meet that requirement and also considers the actual up take levels of facilities, where ports 
were able to provide such information.  
 
Commission of the European Communities. (2015). Inception Impact Assessment: R EFIT Revision of E U 
Directive 2000/59/EC  on Port Reception Facilities for Ship -Generated Waste and Cargo Residues.   
Retrieved from http://ec.europa.eu/smart -32 
 regulation/roadmaps/docs/2017_move_001_refit_direct ive2000 -
59_port_reception_facilities_for_waste_en.pdf  
Discharges from shipping are estimated to account for about 20% of global discharges at sea. The 
protection of the marine environment can be greatly enhanced by reducing these discharges of ship 
generat ed waste and cargo residues into the sea. Achieving zero -waste in maritime transport is one of 
the Commission's policy goals, as set out in the Commission Communication on strategic goals and 
recommended actions for the EU's maritime transport policy until  2018 (COM(2009) 8)1. Directive 
2000/59/EC on port reception facilities for ship -generated waste and cargo residues ("the PRF 
Directive") aims "to reduce the discharges of ship generated waste and cargo residues into the sea, 
especially illegal discharges from ships using ports in the EU, by improving the availability and use of 
facilities in ports for receiving the waste from ships – "port reception facilities" (Article 1 – Purpose). The 
Directive is based on the requirements contained in the International  Convention for the Prevention of 
Pollution from Ships (the MARPOL Convention). MARPOL requires the Contracting Parties2 to provide 
for port reception facilities for waste from ships that is not allowed to be discharged into the sea. Those 
facilities must be adequate to meet the needs of ships using the port, without causing undue delay.  
 
Hollin, D., & Shaw, D. F. (1997). Comparison of MARPOL  Annex V Port Reception Facilities for Garbage in 
the U.S. Gulf of Mexico and the United Kingdom. In J. M. Coe & D. B . Rogers (Eds.), Marine 
Debris: Sources, Impacts, and Solutions  (pp. 245 -251). New York, NY: Springer New York 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-4613 -8486 -1_21  
Annex V of the International Convention  for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, as modified by the 
protocol of 1978 (MARPOL 73/78), entered into force on December 31, 1988, changing the way ships’ 
wastes are managed. Ports, terminals, and marinas are required to provide adequate waste recep tion 
facilities for ships to offload waste generated onboard. Under Annex V, ship -generated garbage includes 
“all kinds of victual, domestic and operational waste excluding fresh fish and parts thereof, generated 
during the normal operation of the ship.”  
 
Kuznetsov, A., Dinwoodie, J., Gibbs, D., Sansom, M., & Knowles, H. (2015). Towards a Sustainability 
Management System for Smaller Ports. Marine Policy, 54 , 59-68 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2014.12.016  
Larger ports routinely deploy environmental management tools but systematic sustainability 
management in smaller ports is rare. Accordingly, this paper assesses the sustainability needs of smaller 
ports in Cornw all and Devon, a case -study, and proposes a systematic method for identifying and 
managing them. The development and deployment of a Port Sustainability Management System for 
smaller ports in an environmentally sensitive but economically peripheral UK area  is discussed. In -depth 
collaboration with Harbour Masters to identify sustainability management practice revealed few 
applications of the theoretical elements of triple bottom line accounting. Rather, semi -structured 
interviews unearthed the essential ele ments of port management and facilitated mapping of the forces 
which underpin port sustainability practices. A constructivist grounded theory approach identified 
emerging concepts, common patterns and sustainability themes, which were synthesised into a 
Sustainability Management System based on 11 indicators of knowledge criteria and a self -scoring 
mechanism. Adopters reported a more proactive stance towards sustainability and safeguarding of local 
communities, improved understanding, and more effective dis course with stakeholders. Benefits 
spanned port improvements; awareness of progress, performance, strengths and weaknesses; 
enhanced communication and reporting; and improved thought processes. Almost all reacted positively 
and identified multiple benefits , equating to two new jobs in each port.  33 
  
Mohee, R., Surroop, D., Mudhoo, A., & Rughooputh, B. K. (2012). Inventory of Waste Streams in an 
Industrial Port and Planning for a Port Waste Management System as Per ISO14001. Ocean & 
Coastal Management, 61 , 10-19 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2012.02.003  
The Port Louis Harbour is the sole port in Mauritius and handles 99% of cargo entering the island. The 
port ar ea is subject to a wide range of port installations handling, processing and storing a wide range of 
cargo ranging from petroleum products, coal, cement, edible oil, heavy oil, molasses, wheat, bitumen to 
fertiliser manufacturing. This study integrated pro cedures of ISO14001 and was carried out in the 
context of the UNEP GEF WIO –Lab Solid Wastes Demo Project during the period April 2009 to May 2010. 
An inventory of the wastes generation and flow from ships and within the industrial port area was 
conducted, and on basis of the results obtained, an environmental pollution prevention and protection 
program was developed to eventually assist in the setting up of a Port Waste Management System 
(PWMS) at the Port Louis Harbour. The PWMS identified the significant environmental aspects and 
impacts, structure of the organisation, distribution of responsibilities, needs for training, objectives and 
targets as well as the operational control measures. At the end of the study, suggestions on how to 
improve the port’s en vironmental performance with regards to waste management were 
recommended.  
 
National Marine Fisheries Service Northwest and Alaska Fisheries Center. (1988). A Report to the Alaska 
Department of Environmental Conservation on the Effects of MARPOL , Annex V, on the Ports of 
Kodiak and Unalaska.  NWAFC Processed Report  88-26.  Retrieved from 
https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/5836  
The practical effects of Annex Von U.S. sea ports and c oastal communities are unknown. However, since 
Annex V places severe restrictions on the ability of sea going vessels to dump refuse in the ocean, it is 
assumed significant quantities of additional refuse from sea -going vessels will be returned to shore fo r 
disposal. This additional refuse poses potential problems for municipal waste management systems, 
particularly in remote Alaskan seaports. In order. to gage the impact of Annex von municipal waste 
management systems, the Alaska Department of Environmenta l Conservation, in concert with the 
National Marine Fisheries Service, contracted with Pacific Associates, a Juneau based consulting firm, to 
evaluate the waste management systems in Kodiak and Unalaska relative to their ability to handle the 
increased ref use expected to result from the implementation of Annex V. Specifically, Pacific Associates 
was asked to: (1) Review current laws and regulations to identify any potential interactions or conflicts 
with Annex V. (2) Characterize the vessel traffic in Kodia k and Unalaska by type, volume, seasonal 
patterns, duration of in -port stay, destination while in -port, crew size, etc. (3) Estimate the range of 
types and volumes of refuse that might be generated by each type of vessel category. (4)Discuss the 
impact of the delivery of the additional refuseinto Kodiak and Unalaska, and recommend possible 
solutions for those areas where present capaCity may be inadequate.  
 
Neffa Gobbi, C., Lourenco Sanches, V. M., Acordi Vasques Pacheco, E. B., de Oliveira Cavalcanti 
Guima raes, M. J., & Vasconcelos de Freitas, M. A. (2017). Management of Plastic Wastes at 
Brazilian Ports and Diagnosis of Their Generation. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 124 (1), 67 -73 
https://doi.org /10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.07.004  
This study evaluated the management of plastic wastes at 20 Brazilian maritime ports, from three 
sources: vessels, leased and non -leased areas. The data were obtained from documents on port wastes 
organized in a relational database with defined protocols (closed form). Analysis of the spreadsheets 34 
 prepared and field visits revealed that the main bottleneck in managing plastic wastes at ports is their 
segregation. In general, more material is segregated and sent for recycling  from leased areas than non -
leased ones (administered by the government). This relatively better performance in managing the 
wastes generated in leased areas is probably due to the need for private operators to comply with the 
international standards such as the Code of Environmental Practice to satisfy the international market.  
 
Ninaber, E. (1997). MARPOL  Annex V, Commercial Ships, and Port Reception Facilities: Making It Work. 
In J. M. Coe & D. B. Rogers (Eds.), Marine Debris: Sources, Impacts, and Soluti ons (pp. 239 -243). 
New York, NY: Springer New York https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-4613 -8486 -1_20  
Annex V of MARPOL (73/78) is the key international authority for controlling ship sources of marine  
debris. States representing nearly 70% of the world’s registered shipping tonnage have ratified Annex V 
and presumably are striving toward its full implementation. Annex V requires states “to ensure the 
provision of facilities at ports and terminals for t he reception of garbage, without causing undue delay to 
ships, and according to the needs of the ships using them.” Interestingly, while Annex Y prohibits the 
discharge of plastics, ships are generally allowed to discharge all their other garbage at sea, a t specified 
minimum distances from shore. In Annex V Special Areas, the discharge norm is far more strict: only 
food wastes may be discharged outside 12 nautical miles from shore; all other disposal into the sea is 
prohibited. However, the International Ma ritime Organization (IMO) Guidelines for the Implementation 
of Annex V (1988) recommend that, regardless of location, ships should endeavor to use port reception 
facilities as the primary means for disposal of their wastes. In the context of commercial shi pping, this 
paper briefly examines some institutional factors relevant to the ability of ships and ports to meet these 
challenges. In particular, we consider whether it is possible to use port reception facilities as the primary 
means to dispose of ships’ wastes.  
 
Øhlenschlæger, J. P., & Gordiani, G. (2012). The Final Report of the Study on the Delivery of Ship -
Generated Waste and Cargo Residues to Port Reception Facilities in E U Ports.  Ramboll produced 
for: European Maritime Safety Agency , EMSA/OP/06/2011.   Retrieved from 
http://emsa.europa.eu/ implementation -tasks/environment/147 -port -reception -facilities/1607 -
study -on-the-delivery -of-ship-generated -waste -and-cargo -residues -to-port -reception -facilities -
in-eu-ports.html  
This study, carried out by consultants following a public tender, is based on  the information received 
from 40 EU ports. The aim of the study was threefold: to update the data on the delivered ship -
generated waste and cargo residue volumes to port reception facilities; to describe the systems in place; 
to analyse the impact of thes e systems on the delivery of ship -generated waste and cargo residues.  
 
Oosterhuis, F. (2006). Free Plastic Waste Disposal in the Ports of Rotterdam and Amsterdam.  Institute for 
European Environmental Policy, Institute for Environmental Studies  Retrieved f rom 
https://ieep.eu/uploads/articles/attachments/552a9429 -b172 -44da -b311 -
121a8d4623f0/NL%20Port%20Plasti c%20Waste%20final.pdf?v=63680923242  
Since 1 January 2016, sea -going vessels visiting the ports of Rotterdam and Amsterdam can dispose of 
their plastic waste without paying a fee. This price incentive is only effective for amounts of garbage that 
exceed 6 m 3 , since for smaller amounts the disposal fee is already included in the port dues and is 
unrelated to the amount of garbage. The effectiveness of this instrument is not yet known, but it fits 
well in the framework of the multi -stakeholder 'Green Deal' on  ship waste. This Green Deal aims at 
closing the maritime waste cycle by means of waste prevention and delivering waste in harbours, and at 35 
 contributing to the closing of the plastic cycle by collecting plastic waste separately and making it 
suitable for r ecycling. The instrument is accepted by all stakeholders and is considered to be suitable for 
application in other sea ports. Harmonisation of the waste disposal rate structure provisions in the port 
reception facilities Directive (2000/59/EC) could be hel pful to enhance the effectiveness of the 
instrument.  
 
Pallis, A. A., Papachristou, A. A., & Platias, C. (2017). Environmental Policies and Practices in Cruise Ports: 
Waste Reception Facilities in the Med. SPOUDAI Journal of Economics and Business, 67 (1), 5 4-70 
Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/10419/169194  
With cruise activities continuing to grow, the cruise world and related decision makers take initiatives 
aiming to handle the produced externalities. Among the key environmental issues is the handling of the 
various wastes produced on cruise ships. In recent times, cruise lines and ports have put efforts into 
reducing, selecting and managing generated wastes implementing the requirements of the internat ional 
regulatory framework (MARPOL 73/78), as well as those imposed by the European legislation. This study 
focuses on the state port reception facilities (PRF) in the case of the second biggest cruise region of the 
world, the Mediterranean and its adjoini ng seas. In particular, it sheds light on the extent that the 
current practices of cruise ports have achieved a satisfactory level of compliance to the emerging 
environmental related international regulatory framework. The paper does so via a survey that m aps the 
existing conditions and port based practices followed by 40 port entities that manage 52 cruise ports in 
the region. The findings record the available facilities, technologies and services suggesting a 
widespread effective correspondence to require d adjustment. It also details a variation as regards the 
charging practices, that might affect the level playing field. The analysis generates knowledge on the 
emphasis given by cruise ports in addressing environment challenges. Given that the European Dir ective 
governing PRF is currently (2016) under review, the study provides practical recommendations to 
decision makers and practitioners on what can be done so as to further secure a sustainable cruise 
future.  
 
Recht, F. (1988). Dealing with Annex V : Refe rence Guide for Ports.  National Marine Fisheries Service 
Marine Entanglement Research Program, NMFS F/NWR -23.  Retrieved from 
https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/5856  
This referen ce guide has been assBnbled based on experiences gained in Newport, Orego~during a 15 
month pilot project. The project improved refuse reception facilities at the Port of Newport and 
encouraged the return of refuse to port through an educational campaign. The Port of Newport serves a 
large and diversified commercial fishing fleet, numerous recreational vessels, and operates a small non -
containerized international shipping terminal. The purpose of this project was to assist other ports in 
meeting Annex V req uirements efficiently while promoting a positive image of the Port and its clients. 
While there are larger and smaller ports it is felt that many of the lessons learned in Newport are 
generally applicable to the various types of port operations. This guide  provides ideas as well as 
resources. It begins with a summary of the information contained in this report. A short introduction to 
the marine debris problem, and a description of the Port of Newport and the pilot project are included 
in the part called "B ackground". Each section of the "Guidelines" is designed to stand alone, so 
redundancies may exist in the points made. Section 1 contains recommendations for the port or 
terminal manager and an outline for a marine debris progrrun. Subsequent sections cont ain information 
pertaining to forming and using an advisory group, defining refuse system needs and options, 
anticipating and recovering costs, refuse system operation and evaluation, and education and 
promotion. The appendices provide resources and supple mental informatton. Appendix 1 contains 36 
 information about the changes made in the Port of Newport refuse reception system. Appendix 2 
contains lists of available resources. Appendix 3 provides information on the recycling of plastics and 
references to othe r waste management information. The other appendices contain sample surveys, 
notices, press releases, activity ideas, and other items which can be used or adapted.  
 
Sarinas, B., Docto, D., Dumaicos, M., & Flores, J. (2012). Solid Waste Management: Compliance, 
Practices, Destination and Impact among Merchant Vessels Docking in Iloilo Ports, Philippines. 
Journal of Maritime Research, 9 (2), 73 -76 Retrieved from 
https://www.jmr.unican.es/index.php/jmr/article/view/184  
There are no or few existing studies exist on the solid waste management of ships in Fort San Pedro port 
(FSPP) and Dumangas port (DP),  Iloilo, Philippines. Thus, this descriptive -survey determines the 
compliance and practices on ship’s solid waste management, its impact to crew members on board the 
vessel and the fate of these solid wastes during docking. Nine ships served as samples, si x of which are 
Ro-Ro from DP and three passenger -cargo vessels from FSPP. There were 141 crews were interviewd 
which comprise of six masters (four masters from DP and two from FSPP), three chief officers (two from 
DP and one from FSPP), 50 crew from Ro -Ro vessels at DP and 82 crew from passenger vessels in FSPP 
were interviewed on the impacts of solid waste management. The results showed a 100% compliance to 
solid waste management among vessels in both ports while in wastes practices’ on board, specific 
garbage bins where used by these vessels. Consequently, these vessels upon reaching the receiving port, 
relinquish their solid wastes to the “Golden Dragon” that collects solid wastes. The present study 
showed that vessels in both ports observe the Annex V of  the MARPOL 73/78 and reveals an eco -friendly 
shipping.  
 
Svaetichin, I., & Inkinen, T. (2017). Port Waste Management in the Baltic Sea Area: A Four Port Study on 
the Legal Requirements, Processes and Collaboration. Sustainability, 9 (5), 17 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su9050699  
The cruise ship industry has become a well -implemented industry in the Baltic Sea area, and each year, 
the number of cruise ship passengers rises steadily. Efficient waste management in cr uising ports 
around the Baltic Sea is a crucial element in minimizing environmental impacts. This research involves 
the four selected ports of Copenhagen, Helsinki, Stockholm and Tallinn. The study applies statistics and 
interview data to the analysis of w aste management systems for cruise ship -generated waste. The 
interview data involves 12 executives and professionals responsible for environmental issues and 
decision making in their respective ports. The interviews highlighted the need for standardized 
environmental legislation and related procedures, which would result in coherent measurement 
systems. These systems would enable transparent environmental monitoring, thus maintaining the 
ports' competitiveness. A common environmental legislation would suppo rt the emerging waste 
management system for the whole Baltic Sea area. The study suggests that ports should focus on 
handling specific types of wastes and collaborate as a spatial network. Specialization to allow the 
discharge of certain fractions of waste  is essential. The paper concludes by addressing demands for 
future research, particularly vessel -and customer behavior -focused studies.  
 
Wallace, B., & Coe, J. M. (1998). Guidelines for the Provision of Garbage Reception Facilities at Ports 
under MARPOL  Annex V.  NOAA Technical Report NMFS 136.  Retrieved from 
https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/3049  37 
 This report offers guidelines for the provision of adequate port reception facilit ies for vessel -generated 
garbage under the requirements ofAnnex V ofthe International Convention for the Prevention of 
Pollution From Ships, 1973 (MARPOL 73/78), Regulations for the Prevention of Pollution by Garbage 
from Ships. MARPOL Annex V prohibits at -sea disposal of plastic materials from vessels, and specifies 
the distance from shore at which other materials may be dumped. Annex V also requires the provision 
ofport reception facilities for garbage, but it does not specify these facilities or how they  are to be 
provided. Since the at -sea dumping restrictions apply to all vessels, the reception facility requirement 
applies to all ports, terminals, and marinas that serve vessels. These guidelines were prepared to assist 
port owners and operators in meeti ng their obligation to provide adequate reception facilities for 
garbage. The report synthesizes available information and draws upon experience from the first years 
ofimplementation ofMARPOL Annex V.  
 
 
Section IV: Ship -based Plastic Waste Reduction Strategies  
 
A.T. Kearney Inc. (1989). Dealing with G arbage under MARPOL  Annex V : Examples of Compliance 
Approaches Used by the Shipping Industry.  National Marine Fisheries Service Marine 
Entanglement Research Program  Retrieved from 
https:/ /repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/9169  
To identify the range of approaches and techniques used by the commercial shipping and cruise 
industries using U.S. waters and at U.S. ports to comply with MARPOL Annex V, telephone interviews 
with shipping compa ny and port operations personnel were conducted. The interviews were conducted 
between May and November 1989. The purpose of the interviews was to find out how a cross section of 
companies with different types of vessels were complying with MARPOL Annex V.  The results of the 
interviews are, therefore, not a comprehensive survey of the shipping industry'S response to MARPOL 
Annex V. The approach to MARPOL Annex V compliance used by the companies and at the ports was not 
known before the telephone contact was  made. This report summarizes the interviews conducted. It 
describes the approach and techniques used to comply with MARPOL Annex V by six companies with 
ocean going commercial vessels, two cruise lines operating out of U.S. ports, seven ports, and one bar ge 
company operating on the inland waterways. In addition, activities by the U.S. Navy to manage plastic 
and other solid waste are summarized. Military vessels are not included in MARPOL Annex V, but under 
U.S. law, military and other public vessels have u ntil December 31, 1993 to comply with the new at sea 
garbage disposal limitations. The results of a survey of vessel operators on their knowledge of MARPOL 
Annex V and their method of compliance by the U.S. Coast Guard in Honolulu, Hawaii are also 
presente d. The report is organized around four headings: ocean going commercial vessels, cruise lines, 
ports, and other. This report was prepared as part of a shipping industry marine debris education 
program sponsored by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin istration's (NOAA) Marine 
Entanglement Research Program.  
 
A.T. Kearney Inc. (1989). Model Plastics Refuse Control and Minimization Plan for Ships.  produced for: 
National Marine Fisheries Service Marine Entanglement Research Program . Seattle, WA.  
Retrieved  from https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/8997  
On  December 31, 1988, with the entry into force of MARPOL Annex V. tbe way the shipping industry 
handles garbage changed. Over the side is no longer tbe unquestioned practice for garbage disposal 38 
 MARPOL Annex V probibits disposal of plastics in the ocean and specifies the distance from shore that 
all other garbage may be dumped. It does not, however. specify how compliance is to be ac hieved. The 
appropriate approach to compliance varies and depends on a number of factors including route, type 
and size of vessel, on board garbage handling and processing equipment, storage space, and crew size. 
Plastics control and minimization are integ ral pans of MARPOL Annex V compliance. This document 
presents a model plastics control and minimization plan. It was developed based on guidance 
documents on MARPOL Annex V implementation, shipboard waste management plans, and actual 
practices and techniqu es used by shipping companies to comply with MARPOL Annex V. The plan is 
divided into three parts (1) Techniques to Control and Minimize Plastics on Vessels. This section presents 
examples of some of the techniques used by shipping companies to comply with  MARPOL Annex V. (2) 
Model Plastics Refuse Control and Minimization Plans (or Ships. This section presents examples of plans 
to reduce and control plastic garbage on vessels. These model plans are also examples of different 
approaches to MARPOL Annex V com pliance. (3) Marine Debris Education Program (or the Shipping 
Industry. This section organizes existing marine debris education techniques and malerials into a Cfe'N 
awareness training program on MARPOL Annex V and marine debris. This Model Plastics Refuse  Control 
and Minimization Plan for Ships was prepared by the Kearney Centaur Division of AT. Kearney. Inc. for 
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration under Contract Number 52ABNF800132. The plan 
outlines techniques being used by the shipping i ndustry to comply with MARPOL Annex V requiremenu 
that prohibit at sea disposal of plastics and place restrictions on at sea disposal of other types of 
garbage. It includes examples of different formats for a plastics ooolrol and minimization plan. It also  
includes techniques (or use in crew education and training about MARPOL Annex V and the 
consequences of marine debris. This document is pan of a marine debris education program for the 
Shipping industry.  
 
Bean, M. J. (1987). Legal Strategies for Reducing Persistent Plastics in the Marine -Environment. Marine 
Pollution Bulletin, 18 (6b), 357 -360 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0025 -326x(87)80026 -7 
A variety of legal strategies could be employed to address  aspects of the problem of persistent plastics 
in the marine environment. These include strategies based on international agreements, federal 
legislation, and state law. At the international level, plastic pollution from vessels is addressed by the 
Interna tional Convention Relating to Pollution from Ships (MARPOL), though its operative provisions are 
not yet in force. Vessel -source pollution can also be addressed, with varying degrees of effectiveness, 
through pollution laws, fishery and wildlife conservati on laws, and fishing gear compensation 
programmes. These authorities provide a diverse set of opportunities for addressing the entanglement 
problem, though realizing such opportunities is likely to require an expanded perception on the part of 
their admini strators of the types of hazards addressed by the pollution laws. Various state measures 
focus primarily on reducing or preventing the problem of generation of plastic pollution from land -based 
sources. These include several laws that impose degradability standards for certain plastic products or 
attempt to encourage recycling of plastic waste. The experiences of various states that have enacted 
such laws are described and recommendations are made with respect to needed measures for more 
effective implement ation of such laws.  
 
Chen, C. -L. (2015). Regulation and Management of Marine Litter. In M. Bergmann, L. Gutow, & M. Klages 
(Eds.), Marine Anthropogenic Litter  (pp. 395 -428): SpringerOpen https:// doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-
319-16510 -3_15  
To minimize the negative impacts of marine litter, a plethora of instruments has been developed at 
international, regional and national levels to prevent, reduce and manage marine litter. They represent 39 
 a wide range of international, regional and national efforts devoted to combat marine litter. The goal of 
this article is to provide an overview of these instruments, to identify the potential gaps in the existing 
management body and suggest solutions. As it is impossible  and impractical to cover the gamut of all 
relevant instruments in detail within the scope of this chapter, I will first consider the general 
mechanisms of the instruments and refer to specific ones as illustration when appropriate. This 
approach has the a dvantage of providing a general, snapshot picture of the management framework of 
marine litter, while also laying out the specifics of certain instruments, including the management 
measures contained therein. It should also be noted that marine litter is a n issue of, or related to, 
broader topics, such as marine environmental protection, changes in biodiversity, rafting of invasive 
species, water quality and hazardous waste, waste and sewage water management as well as eco design 
and producer responsibility . The instruments addressing these broader issues would also be applicable 
to marine litter, although not specifically mentioned. However, as such instruments are large in scope 
and may not encompass the specifics of marine litter management, I will focus on those that specifically 
address marine litter.  
 
Chen, C. L., & Liu, T. K. (2013). Fill the Gap: Developing Management Strategies to Control Garbage 
Pollution from Fishing Vessels. Marine Policy, 40 , 34-40 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2013.01.002  
It is widely documented that marine debris is detrimental to the marine ecological environment. While 
there are various sources of marine debris, that g enerated by ships constitutes a significant proportion. 
Annex V of MARPOL 73/78 is to regulate the discharge of garbage from ships; in particular, it prohibits 
all kinds of plastics from being discharged into ocean. However, most fishing vessels are virtua lly exempt 
from such regulations due to their low gross tonnage, below 400 t. Given the great number of fishing 
vessels operating around the world, it can be argued that fishing vessels are a common source of marine 
debris. This paper aims to propose measu res that will fill the gap in international regulations in 
addressing the problem of vessel -source garbage pollution. An understanding of what constitutes the 
underlying causes leading to fishers' decision on debris disposal is needed when designing effect ive 
measures to reduce garbage pollution from ships. Thus, this paper seeks to identify factors that have the 
potential to influence fishers' disposal behavior and investigate the association between factors and 
fishers' intention of bringing garbage back to port. Major factors of a well -developed recycling practice, 
adequate collection facilities placed at port, fishers' positive views towards marine environments and 
provision of rewards are identified, which have significant implications for management st rategies. 
Finally, the papers offers suggestions regarding future efforts focusing on debris reduction strategies to 
further address the problem of garbage pollution from fishing vessels. (C) 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights 
reserved.  
 
Cho, D. O. (2009). The Incentive Program for Fishermen to Collect Marine Debris in Korea. Marine 
Pollution Bulletin, 58 (3), 415 -417 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2008.10.004  
A significant amount of sea -based m arine debris is generated and deposited in Korean coastal waters. 
The Korean government has removed 66,000 tons of deposited marine debris since 1999. However, to 
fully address the problem, the generation of marine debris needs to be prevented. As an alter native, 
Korean government has initiated an incentive program for fishermen, who collect fishing gear or other 
marine debris while fishing. Although a considerable amount of marine debris is collected and removed 
from major fishing grounds, the program may not incentivize long -term sustainable behavior, resulting 
in further discarding of marine debris when the program is completed. (C) 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights 
reserved.  40 
  
Ellis, J., & Podlich, M. (1997). Recreational Boaters and Marine Debris: How We Can  Effectively Reduce 
Littering. In J. M. Coe & D. B. Rogers (Eds.), Marine Debris: Sources, Impacts, and Solutions  (pp. 
271-276). New York, NY: Springer New York https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-4613 -8486 -1_24  
Historically, there has been considerable emphasis on identifying the sources of marine debris to narrow 
the focus of remediation. This has been a valuable exercise, principally because it has shown that every 
group using the water contributes t o the trash problem. Recreational boaters, however, have earned 
the dubious distinction of being a major source of marine debris. There is no question that boaters have 
ample opportunity to contribute, because collectively they spend more time on the water  than any 
other potential source group. However, the estimates of debris attributable to recreational boaters are 
based on assumptions about generation and dumping rates that have not been confirmed.  
 
Hagen, P. E. (1990). The International Community Confro nts Plastics Pollution from Ships: Marpol Annex 
V and the Problem That Won't Go Away. American University International Law Review  
Retrieved from https://digitalcommons.wcl.american .edu/auilr/vol5/iss2/9/  
Part I of this Comment provides an overview of the primary sources and quantities of marine plastics 
pollution. The environmental and economic impacts of plastics in marine waters are also examined. Part 
II examines the regulation o f plastic pollution from ships and analyzes the inadequacy of previous 
international and United States law governing vessel source plastics pollution. This section also surveys 
the role of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and the evolution of the 1973 MARPOL 
Convention and Protocol of 1978. Part III discusses the enforcement regime of Annex V as well as United 
States implementing legislation and interim regulations. Part IV analyzes the limits of Annex V and 
United States implementing legislati on in regulating plastic pollution from ships. This part also examines 
the problems likely to occur through increased and largely unregulated on -board incineration. The 
Comment .concludes with recommendations for strengthening both domestic and internation al 
prohibitions on the disposal of ship generated plastic and ash at sea.  
 
Hartmann, N. B., Huffer, T., Thompson, R. C., Hassellov, M., Verschoor, A., Daugaard, A. E., . . . Wagner, 
M. (2019). Are We Speaking the Same Language? Recommendations for a Defini tion and 
Categorization Framework for Plastic Debris. Environmental Science & Technology, 53 (3), 1039 -
1047 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b05297  
The accumulation of plastic litter in natural environ ments is a global issue. Concerns over potential 
negative impacts on the economy, wildlife, and human health provide strong incentives for improving 
the sustainable use of plastics. Despite the many voices raised on the issue, we lack a consensus on how 
to define and categorize plastic debris. This is evident for microplastics, where inconsistent size classes 
are used and where the materials to be included are under debate. While this is inherent in an emerging 
research field, an ambiguous terminology resul ts in confusion and miscommunication that may 
compromise progress in research and mitigation measures. Therefore, we need to be explicit on what 
exactly we consider plastic debris. Thus, we critically discuss the advantages and disadvantages of a 
unified t erminology, propose a definition and categorization framework, and highlight areas of 
uncertainty. Going beyond size classes, our framework includes physicochemical properties (polymer 
composition, solid state, solubility) as defining criteria and size, sh ape, color, and origin as classifiers for 
categorization. Acknowledging the rapid evolution of our knowledge on plastic pollution, our framework 
will promote consensus building within the scientific and regulatory community based on a solid 
scientific foun dation.  41 
  
He, P., & Suuronen, P. (2018). Technologies for the Marking of Fishing Gear to Identify Gear Components 
Entangled on Marine Animals and to Reduce Abandoned, Lost or Otherwise Discarded Fishing 
Gear. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 129 (1), 253 -261 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2018.02.033  
Fishing gears are marked to establish and inform origin, ownership and position. More recently, fishing 
gears are marked to aid in ca pacity control, reduce marine litter due to abandoned, lost or otherwise 
discarded fishing gear (ALDFG) and assist in its recovery, and to combat illegal, unreported and 
unregulated (IUU) fishing. Traditionally, physical marking, inscription, writing, colo r, shape, and tags 
have been used for ownership and capacity purposes. Buoys, lights, flags, and radar reflectors are used 
for marking of position. More recently, electronic devices have been installed on marker buoys to 
enable easier relocation of the gea r by owner vessels. This paper reviews gear marking technologies 
with focus on coded wire tags, radio frequency identification tags, Automatic Identification Systems, 
advanced electronic buoys for pelagic longlines and fish aggregating devices, and re -location technology 
if the gear becomes lost.  
 
International Maritime Organization. (2018). (Revised) Consolidated Guidance for Port Reception 
Providers and Users.  IMO MEPC.1/Circ.834/Rev.1.  Retrieved from 
http://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Environment/PortReceptionFacilities/Documents/MEPC.1 -
Circ.834 -Rev.1.pdf  
In view of the need to tackle the long -standing problem of the inadequacy of port recepti on facilities, 
the Marine Environment Protection Committee (the Committee), having received valuable input from 
the Industry Port Reception Facilities Forum, adopted, at its fifty -fifth session (October 2006), the Action 
Plan on Tackling the Inadequacy of Port Reception Facilities and instructed the Sub -Committee on Flag 
State Implementation (FSI) to progress the Plan's work items. The Guide to good practice for port 
reception facility providers and users was developed as one of the work items of the Action  Plan as a 
practical users' guide for ships' crew who seek to deliver MARPOL wastes/residues ashore and for port 
reception facility providers who seek to provide timely and efficient port reception services to ships.  
 
Kim, S., Kim, P., Lim, J., An, H., & S uuronen, P. (2016). Use of Biodegradable Driftnets to Prevent Ghost 
Fishing: Physical Properties and Fishing Performance for Yellow Croaker. Animal Conservation, 
19(4), 309 -319 https:/ /doi.org/ 10.1111/acv.12256  
Abstract When synthetic non -biodegradable fishing nets are lost, abandoned or discarded at sea, they 
may continue to catch fish and other animals for a long period of time. This phenomenon is known as 
‘ghost fishing’. Biodegradable fishing nets, on the other hand, are intended to degrade or decompose 
after a certain period of time under water and thereby lose their ghost fishing capacity more quickly 
than conventional gear. A biodegradable net material, a blend of 82% p olybutylene succinate (PBS) and 
18% polybutylene adipate -co-terephthalate (PBAT), was developed. We examined the physical 
properties and degradability of the biodegradable monofilament, and compared the fishing 
performance of driftnets made of conventional  nylon and of the biodegradable material. When dry, 
conventional nylon monofilament exhibited a greater breaking strength and elongation than 
biodegradable monofilament of the same diameter. When wet, the biodegradable monofilament 
exhibited a stiffness of  c. 1.5 -fold than nylon monofilament. This suggests that a net made of the less 
flexible biodegradable monofilament would have lower fishing efficiency than conventional nets. The 
fishing performance comparisons between the biodegradable and conventional n ylon nets, however, 42 
 revealed similar catch rates for yellow croaker Larimichthys polyactis. Biodegradable monofilament 
started to degrade after 24  months in seawater by marine organisms. We conclude that biodegradable 
netting may become a feasible alternat ive to conventional nylon netting and can contribute to reducing 
the duration of ghost fishing. Nonetheless, there remain many uncertainties, challenges and knowledge 
gaps that have to be solved before we are able to draw firm conclusions about the overall  benefits of 
these materials in driftnet fisheries.  
 
Koss, L. J. (1997). Dealing with Ship -Generated Plastics Waste on U.S. Navy Surface Ships. In J. M. Coe & 
D. B. Rogers (Eds.), Marine Debris: Sources, Impacts, and Solutions  (pp. 263 -270). New York, NY: 
Springer New York https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-4613 -8486 -1_23  
In the 1980s, the U.S. Navy began a long -term program to develop shipboard equipment to manage 
solid w aste. The primary objectives were to improve the efficiency of shipboard waste handling, to 
reduce the security risks associated with a ship’s “trash signature,” and to comply with the potential 
ocean discharge restrictions on trash and garbage, even thoug h the pending international agreements 
exempted military vessels. Plastics were considered a normal component of the solid waste stream. In 
1987 when the U.S. Congress made the international ban on plastics discharge at sea applicable to Navy 
ships, the U. S. Navy was caught somewhat by surprise. International maritime regulations have always 
recognized the unique operating constraints of warships and have allowed navies to comply to the 
extent practicable. Nevertheless, the Navy responded to the challenge a nd undertook an aggressive 
program to achieve compliance. This paper summarizes the Navy’s response to the unexpected plastics 
discharge limitations, the regulatory background, the Navy’s program strategy, and the status of the 
Navy’s efforts. The formal r equirements and policies, adopted by the Navy for shipboard solid waste 
handling and. disposal, are detailed in OPNAVINST 5090. IB of 1 November 1994.  
 
Lentz, S. A. (1987). Plastics in the Marine -Environment - Legal Approaches for International Action. 
Mar ine Pollution Bulletin, 18 (6b), 361 -365 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0025 -326x(87)80027 -9 
Serious problems caused by the presence of plastics and other synthetic materials in the marine 
environment are well demonstrated. Legal regimes exist to address those problems internationally and 
regionally through the Law of the Sea Convention, the London Dumping Convention, an international 
agreement on vessel -source pollution, and regional conventions. This paper describes and compares 
those legal regimes. All provide appropriate forums for implementing specific mitigation measures and 
all should be fully utilized to regulate plastic pollution of the ocean.  
 
McElwee, K., Donohue, M. J., Courtney, C. A., Moris hige, C., & Rivera -Vicente, A. (2012). A Strategy for 
Detecting Derelict Fishing Gear at Sea. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 65 (1), 7 -15 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2011.09 .006  
Derelict fishing gear (DFG) is a highly persistent form of marine pollution known to cause environmental 
and economic damage. At -sea detection of DFG would support pelagic removal of this gear to prevent 
and minimize impacts on marine environments and  species. In 2008, experts in marine debris, 
oceanography, remote sensing, and marine policy outlined a strategy to develop the capability to detect 
and ultimately remove DFG from the open ocean. The strategy includes three interrelated components: 
underst anding the characteristics of the targeted DFG, indirectly detecting DFG by modeling likely 
locations, and directly detecting pelagic DFG using remote sensing. Together, these components aim to 
refine the search area, increase the likelihood of detection, and decrease mitigation response time, 
thereby providing guidance for removal operations. Here, we present this at -sea detection strategy, 43 
 relate it to relevant extant research and technology, and identify gaps that currently prevent successful 
at-sea dete ction and removal of DFG.  
 
Øhlenschlæger, J. P., Newman, S., & Farmer, A. (2013). Reducing Ship Generated Marine Litter – 
Recommendations to Improv e the EU  Port Reception Facilities Directive.  Institiute for European 
Environmental Policy, London, UK.  Retr ieved from https://ieep.eu/publications/reducing -ship-
generated -marine -litter  
An important contributing EU law to address one source of marine litter, waste from shipping, i s the 
Port Reception Facility Directive. The study provides an analysis of this Directive, discusses the situation 
in Member State ports regarding ship waste handling, and provides examples of ports with efficient 
systems and ‘best practices’. The study ma kes recommendations for improvement of the 
implementation of the Directive. The study has been based on literature review, phone interviews and 
meetings.  
 
Palabıyık, H. (2003). Waste Management Planning for Ship Generated Waste. Journal of Naval Sciences 
Engineering, 1 (2) Retrieved from https://dergipark.org.tr/jnse/issue/9983/123402  
The most considerable purpose of waste management plans and reception facilities is to reduce and 
eliminate dump ing wastes illegally to the sea environment. Many examples have already demonstrated 
that unsatisfactory waste handling and/or even illegal dumping take place in many ports around the 
world due to inefficient waste management operations, lack of control, r ecovery systems and inefficient 
information flow [1]. Especially the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships 
(MARPOL 73/78) and European Council Directive on port reception facilities for ship generated waste 
and cargo residues,  which requests ports to prepare and implement port waste management plans, 
provide on international framework on management of ship and port wastes.  
 
Seas at Risk. (2011). Ship Waste Dumping and the Clean Ship Concept: How an Improved EU PRF 
Directive Can  Play a Key Role in Cleaning up the Seas.   Retrieved from https://seas -at-
risk.org/images/pdf/Seas_At_Risk_Position_Paper160911.pdf  
This paper intends to give further  insight into the problem of ship -waste dumping and recommends 
some crucial reforms needed for the Port Reception Facilities Directive (to be acknowledged as the PRF 
Directive from here in) that can reduce the potential for illegal dumping of waste at sea and in turn 
facilitate a move towards making the Clean Ship concept a reality. The paper is broken down into 4 
chapters: 1) Ship waste dumping, the problem; 2) The Clean Ship concept in relation to ship waste; 3) 
Problems associated with ship generated was te in Europe; 4) Detailed recommendations on the review 
of the PRF Directive (and other associated instruments)  
 
Senarak, C. (2016). The Use of Seasons in Preventing Marine Pollution from Cargo Ships in Laemchabang 
Port, Thailand. Environment and Natural R esources Journal, 14 (1) 
https://doi.org/10.14456/ennrj.2016.2  
The success of marine pollution prevention relies on several managerial tools and knowledge from the 
interdisciplinary sciences. As the critical source of pollution, seaports need a variety of policies and 
practices for enhancing their environmental performance. This paper contributes to the existing 
literature and the implementation by analyzing the season of operational waste from mariti me 
transportation. The seasonal regression analysis (SRA) was performed by using the data from Port 44 
 Authority of Thailand. The adjusted model provides a greater statistics for identifying the seasons than 
that of the original model which was impaired by th e obsolete information. To ensure the correctness of 
the finding, the result of SRA was compared with the seasonal index, goodness -of-fit measure and 
model error obtained from times series analysis. The conclusion was mutually agreed by two 
approaches indi cating the reliability of the research finding. As the vacillation of operational waste 
depends on time, port authority should pay a close attention during the high season. Thanks to the 
enormous amount of operational waste, the monitoring of ship and mari ne environment should be 
strictly implemented. However, the pollution -related concern can be alleviated during the interval of the 
low season due to the scarce demand for discharging operational waste at the port.  
 
Spirkovski, Z., Ilik -Boeva, D., Ritterbus ch, D., Peveling, R., & Pietrock, M. (2019). Ghost Net Removal in 
Ancient Lake Ohrid: A Pilot Study. Fisheries Research, 211 , 46-50 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2018.10.023  
A pilot study on  the occurrence of abandoned, lost or otherwise discarded fishing gear (ALDFG) was 
conducted in the Macedonian part of Lake Ohrid. Focussing on abandoned gill nets, different methods 
for detection and removal of these so -called ghost nets were tested and e ffects on biota assessed. As 
shown with the help of echo sounding, diving and creeping (i.e. towing of armed anchors and grapnels, 
respectively, over the ground), ghost nets were found to be widely present in this freshwater habitat. 
Altogether more than 1 2,000 m of nets were retrieved from water column and lake bottom. Free -
floating nets were effectively detected using echo sounding, whereas masses of nets accumulated at 
underwater obstacles were easier to detect by diving. Creeping led to removal of less numerous but 
actively fishing ghost nets. Ghost nets contained fish at different stages of decomposition (in addition to 
birds and crustaceans) indicating that abandoned gear continues fishing over extended periods. 
Together, the results show that ghost ne ts are not only a marine problem but can significantly pollute 
freshwater lakes, too.  
 
Wallace, B. (1997). A Strategy to Reduce, Control, and Minimize Vessel -Source Marine Debris. In J. M. 
Coe & D. B. Rogers (Eds.), Marine Debris: Sources, Impacts, and Solutions  (pp. 277 -286). New 
York, NY: Springer New York https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-4613 -8486 -1_25  
The principal focus of this paper is on commercial and publicly owned vessels, including comm ercial 
shipping, commercial fishing vessels, passenger cruise lines, mili -tary fleets, research vessels, passenger 
ferries, tugboats and barges, offshore oil and gas platforms, and offshore service industry vessels. There 
are few common elements among thes e categories of vessels. Some vessels are privately owned, others 
are public vessels. Some primarily use private ports and terminals, while others tend to use public ports 
and terminals. Some vessels move worldwide, while others have more regional or local  movements. 
Some vessels carry a crew, while others carry crew and passengers. The crew on some vessels totals 
fewer than 5 persons, while on others the crew totals 500 persons or more. Nonetheless, every vessel 
generates wastes.  
 
 