 
 
  
 
 Screening Assessment  
 
Sulfamic acid, cyclohexyl -, monosodium salt 
(sodium cyclamate)  
and 
Cyclohexanamine   
(cyclohexylamine ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chemical Abstracts Service Registry Numbers  
139-05-9 
108-91-8 
 
 
 
Environment and Climate Change Canada  
Health Canada  
 
 
April  2022  
 
 
 Cat. No.: En84 -289/2022E -PDF 
ISBN 978 -0-660-42342 -5 
  
Information contained in this publication or product may be reproduced, in part or in whole, and by any 
means, for personal or public non -commercial purposes, without charge or further permission, unless 
otherwise specified.  
  
You are asked to:  
  
 Exercise due diligence in ensuring the accuracy of the materials re produced;  
 Indicate both the complete title of the materials reproduced, as well as the author organization; 
and  
 Indicate that the reproduction is a copy of an official work that is published by the Government of 
Canada and that the reproduction has not b een produced in affiliation with or with the 
endorsement of the Government of Canada.  
  
Commercial reproduction and distribution is prohibited except with written permission from the author. 
For more information, please contact Environment and Climate Cha nge Canada’s Inquiry Centre at 1 -
800-668-6767 (in Canada only) or 819 -997-2800 or email to  enviroinfo@ec.gc.ca . 
  
© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, represented by the Minister of the Environment and 
Clim ate Change, 2022.  
  
Aussi disponible en français    
i Synopsis  
Pursuant to section 74  of the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 (CEPA), the 
Minister of the Environment and the Minister of Health have conducted a screening 
assessment of two substanc es: sulfamic acid, cyclohexyl -, monosodium salt (sodium 
cyclamate) and cyclohexanamine  (cyclohexylamine) . These substances  were identified 
as priorities for assessment as they met categorization criteria under subsection 73(1) 
of CEPA. The Chemical Abstrac ts Service Registry Numbers (CAS RN1), their Domestic 
Substances List  (DSL) names , and their common names and abbreviation s are listed in 
the table below.   
Substances in th is assessment   
CAS RN  DSL name  Common name 
(abbreviation)  
139-05-9  Sulfamic acid, cyclohexyl -, 
monosodium salt  Sodium cyclamate  
108-91-8 Cyclohexanamine  Cyclohexylamine 
(CHA)  
Sodium cyclamate and cyclohexylamine do not naturally occur in the environment. 
According  to information submitted in response  to a CEPA section 71 s urvey, no 
manufacturing quantity was reported for sodium cyclamate  or for  cyclohexylamine  above 
the reporting threshold of 100 kg  in Canada in 2011. The import quantities were 
reported in a range of  100 000 kg to 1 000 000 kg for sodium cyclamate and a total of 
871 5 18 kg for cyclohexylamine .  
In Canada, sodium cyclamate is primarily used as a table -top sweetener, and as a non -
medicinal ingredient  for the purpose of sweetening  in drugs , including natural health 
products.  It is not a permitted food additive  in Canada , nor has it been identified as 
being used  as a component in the manufacture of  food packaging materials . 
Cyclohexylamine  is primarily used as a corrosion inhibitor  in water treatment , but it is 
also a boiler -cleaning agent , and may be used in cosmetics , as a formulant in 
pesticides, as a component in the manufacture of food packaging materials, incidental 
additive s used in food processing establishments , and in other products available to 
consumers.  
The ecological risks of sodium cyclamate and cyclohexylami ne were characterized 
using the ecological risk classification of organic substances (ERC), which is a risk -
based approach that employs multiple metrics for both hazard and exposure, with 
weighted consideration of multiple lines of evidence for determining  risk classification. 
                                            
1 The Chemical Abstracts Service Registry Number (CAS RN) is the property of the American Chemical Society, and 
any use or redistribution, except as required in supporting regulatory requirements and/or for reports to the 
Government of Canada  when the information and the reports are required by law or administrative policy, is not 
permitted without the prior written permission of the American Chemical Society.   
ii Hazard profiles are based principally on metrics regarding mode of toxic action, 
chemical reactivity, food web -derived internal toxicity thresholds, bioavailability, and 
chemical and biological activity. Metrics considered in the expo sure profiles include 
potential emission rate, overall persistence, and long -range transport potential. A risk 
matrix is used to assign a low, moderate or high level of potential concern for 
substances on the basis of their hazard and exposure profiles. Ba sed on the outcome of 
the ERC analysis, sodium cyclamate and cyclohexylamine are considered unlikely to be 
caus ing ecological harm.  
Considering all available lines of evidence presented in this screening assessment, 
there is low risk of harm to the environ ment from  sodium cyclamate and 
cyclohexylamine . It is concluded  that sodium cyclamate and cyclohexylamine  do not 
meet the criteria under paragraphs 64( a) or ( b) of CEPA as they are  not entering the 
environment in a quantity or concentration or under condit ions that have or may have an 
immediate or long -term harmful effect on the environment or its biological diversity or 
that constitute or may constitute a danger to the environment on which life depends . 
Exposure of the general population  of Canada  to sodiu m cyclamate can result from its 
use as a table -top sweetener and from drinking water . Exposure can also result f rom 
the use as a non -medicinal ingredient  for the purpose of sweetening  in drugs , including 
natural health products . 
Exposure of the general pop ulation to cyclohexylamine  can result from  drinking water 
and food . While there is no potential for direct food contact associated with its uses as a 
component in the manufacture of  food packaging  materials , there is pot ential for dietary 
exposure from the use of the substance as a boiler water additive  in food processing 
establishments . The general population may also be exposed to cyclohexylamine  from 
use of cosmetics such as aerosol hairsprays  and from the use of firespace gel fuel 
canister s. 
Laboratory studies with sodium cyclamate were limited in quality, but indicate d potential 
effects on the testes after a lifetime of high daily oral doses . Given the limited quality of 
the studies, data from sodium cyclamate’s metabolite, cyclohexylamine , or its analo gue, 
cyclohexylamine hydrochloride, were used to inform selected critical health effects of 
sodium cyclamate.   
For sodium cyclamate and cyclohexylamine , comparisons of levels of oral, dermal and 
inhalation exposure s to the general population and levels at which critical health effects 
were observed , results in  margins of exposure considered adequate to address 
uncertainties in the health effects and exposure databases.  
Considering all  the information presented  in this screening assessment, it is conclude d 
that sodium cyclamate and cyclohexylamine do not meet the criteria under paragraph 
64(c) of CEPA as they are not entering the environment in a quantity or concentration or 
under conditions that constitute or may constitute a danger in Canada to human life or 
health.    
iii Therefore, i t is concluded  that sodium cyclamate and cyclohexylamine do not meet  any 
of the criteria set out in section 64 of CEPA.  
 
   
iv Table of Contents  
 
Synopsis  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  i 
 Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  1 
 Identity of substances  ................................ ................................ ..............................  2 
 Selection of analogues  ................................ ................................ ........................  3 
 Physical and chemical properties  ................................ ................................ ...........  4 
 Sources and uses  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 4 
 Potential to cause ecological harm  ................................ ................................ .........  7 
 Characterization of ecological risk  ................................ ................................ ....... 7 
 Potential to cause harm to human health  ................................ ...............................  8 
 Exposure assessment  ................................ ................................ .........................  8 
 Health effects assessment  ................................ ................................ ................  14 
 Characterization of risk to human health  ................................ ...........................  23 
 Uncertainties in evaluation of risk to human health  ................................ ...........  29 
 Conclusion  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  29 
References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  31 
Appendices  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  38 
Appendix A. Summary of health effects and read -across approach for sodium 
cyclamate and CHA  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 38 
Appendix B. Estimates of daily human exposure to sodium cyclamate and CHA in 
drinking water  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  42 
Appendix C. Additional details pertaining to the esti mation of daily human exposure 
to cyclamic acid from the consumption of table -top sweeteners containing sodium 
cyclamate  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  43 
Appendix D. Parameters used to estimate human exposure to sodium cyclam ate and 
CHA from use of products available to consumers  ................................ ...................  45 
Appendix E. Sodium cyclamate acceptable daily intake (ADI)  ................................ .. 49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
v List of Tables   
Table 2 -1. Substance identities of sodium cyclamate and CHA  ................................ ...... 3 
Table 3 -1. Experimental physical and chemical property values (at standard 
temperature) for sodium cyclamate and CHA  ................................ ................  4 
Table 4 -1. Summary of information on Canadian manufacturing and imports of sodium 
cyclamate and CHA submitted in response to a CEPA section 71 survey  .... 5 
Table 4 -2. Summary of major non -confidential uses of sodium cyclamate and CHA in 
Canada submitted in response to a  CEPA section 71 survey (based on 
reported consumer and commercial codes)  ................................ ..................  5 
Table 4 -3. Additional uses in Canada for sodium cyclamate and CHA  ...........................  5 
Table 6 -1. Estimated ‘eaters only’ usual dietary exposure to cyclamic acid (mg/kg 
bw/day) from the con sumption of table -top sweeteners containing sodium 
cyclamate (assuming 32% sodium cyclamate)  ................................ ............  11 
Table 6 -2. Summary of estimates of daily and intermittent exposure to sodium 
cyclamate from the use o f natural health products and drugs  .....................  12 
Table 6 -3. Summary of estimates of exposures to CHA from the use of products 
available to consumers  ................................ ................................ ................  13 
Table 6 -4. Relevant exposure and hazard values for sodium cyclamate as well as 
margins of exposure for determination of risk  ................................ ..............  24 
Table 6 -5. Relevant exposure and hazard values for CHA as well as  margins of 
exposure, for determination of risk  ................................ ..............................  27 
Table 6 -6. Sources of uncertainty in the risk characterization  ................................ ....... 29 
 
 Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
1 
 Introduction  
Pursuant to section 74 of the Cana dian Environmental Protection Act, 1999  (CEPA) 
(Canada 1999), the Minister of the Environment and the Minister of Health have 
conducted a screening assessment of sulfamic acid, cyclohexyl -, monosodium salt 
(sodium cyclamate) and cyclohexanamine (cyclohexyl amine or CHA) to determine 
whether these substance s present or may present a risk to the environment or to 
human health. Cyclohexanamine  was moved from the Aliphatic Amines Group to the 
assessment of sulfamic acid, cyclohexyl -, monosodium salt,  since CHA  is a metabolite 
of sodium cyclamate in mammals and CHA data were used to assess the risk to human 
health of both substances . These substances  were identified as priorities for 
assessment as they met categorization criteria under subsection 73(1) of CEPA (ECCC, 
HC [modified 2017]).   
The ecological risks of sodium cyclamate and CHA  were characterized using the 
ecological risk classification of organic substances (ERC) approach (ECCC 2016 a). The 
ERC describes the hazard of a substance using key metrics includin g mode of toxic 
action, chemical reactivity, food web -derived internal toxicity thresholds, bioavailability, 
and chemical and biological activity and considers the possible exposure of organisms 
in the aquatic and terrestrial environments on the basis of such factors as potential 
emission rates, overall persistence and long -range transport potential in air. The various 
lines of evidence are combined to identify substances as warranting further evaluation 
of their potential to cause harm to the environment o r as having a low likelihood of 
causing harm to the environment.  
Sodium cyclamate in association with cyclamate and its salts have been reviewed by, 
the Joint (Food and Agriculture Organization/World Health Organization [FAO/WHO ]) 
Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA). Cyclamate and its salts were also 
assessed by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). The documents  
from both of these organizations  also reviewed CHA as it is a significant metabolite of 
cyclamates and its salts. These a ssessments undergo rigorous review. Health Canada 
and Environment and Climate Change Canada consider these assessments to be 
reliable. Sodium cyclamate was also assessed by the European Scientific Committee 
on Food  (SCF) . 
This screening assessment includes  consideration of information on chemical 
properties, environmental fate, hazards, uses and exposure s, including additional 
information submitted by stakeholders. Relevant data for sodium cyclamate and CHA  
were identified up to October 2018 . Empirical data  from key studies as well as results 
from models were used to reach conclusions. When available and relevant, information 
presented in assessments from other jurisdictions was considered.  
This screening assessment was prepared by staff in the CEPA Risk Ass essment 
Program  at Health Canada and Environment and Climate Change Canada and 
incorporates input from other programs within these departments.  The ecological and 
human health portions of this assessment have undergone external review and/or Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
2 consultation. Comments on the technical portions relevant to human health were 
received from Dr. Lynne Haber, Dr. Jennifer Seed, and Dr. Pamela Williams through the 
University of Cincinnati Risk Science Center . The ecological portion of this assessment 
is based on the E RC document (published July 30, 2016), which was subject to an 
external review as well as a 60 -day public comment period.  Additionally, the draft of this 
screening assessment (published December 1 4, 2019) was subject to a 60 -day public 
comment period. While external comments were taken into consideration, the final 
content and outcome of the screening assessment remain the responsibility of Health 
Canada and Environment and Climate Change Canada.  
This screening assessment focus es on information critical to determining whether 
substances meet the criteria as set out in section 64 of CEPA by examining scientific 
information and incorporating a weight of evidence approach and precaution2. This 
screening assessment presents the critical information and considera tions on which the 
conclusions are based .  
 
 Identity of substances  
 
The CAS RN3, Domestic Substance List  (DSL) names, common names and 
abbreviations for sodium cyclamate and CHA  are presented in Table 2-1.  
 
                                            
2A determination of whether one or more of the criteria of section 64 of CEPA are me t is based upon an assessment 
of potential risks to the environment and/or to human health associated with exposures in the general environment. 
For humans, this includes, but is not limited to, exposures from ambient and indoor air, drinking water, foodst uffs, and 
products available to consumers. A conclusion under CEPA is not relevant to, nor does it preclude, an assessment 
against the hazard criteria specified in the Hazardous Products Regulations  which are part of the regulatory 
framework for the Workpl ace Hazardous Materials Information System for products intended for workplace use. 
Similarly, a conclusion based on the criteria contained in section 64 of CEPA does not preclude actions being taken 
under other sections of CEPA or other Acts.  
3 The Chemic al Abstracts Service Registry Number (CAS RN) is the property of the American Chemical Society, and 
any use or redistribution, except as required in supporting regulatory requirements and/or for reports to the 
Government of Canada when the information and t he reports are required by law or administrative policy, is not 
permitted without the prior written permission of the American Chemical Society.  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
3 Table 2-1. Substance identities of sodium cyclamate and CHA  
CAS RN  DSL name  
(common name ; 
abbreviation ) Chemical structure 
and molecular 
formula  Molecular 
weight 
(g/mol)  
139-05-9 Sulfamic acid, cyclohexyl -, 
monosod ium salt  
(sodium cyclamate ) 
C6H12NNaO 3S  201.2 
108-91-8  Cyclohexanam ine  
(cyclohexylamine ; CHA ) 
 
C6H13N 99.2 
 
Cyclamate can refer to cyclamic acid (CAS RN 100 -88-9), sodium cyclamate (CAS RN 
139-05-9), or calcium cyclamate (CAS RN 139 -06-0) (Lawrence 2003) . In this 
assessment , cyclamate refers to  the cyclamate moiety of sodium cyclamate or the  
cyclamate anion that forms when  sodium cyclamate dissociates  (the dissociation will 
mainly result in the cyclamate anion and the sodium cation) .  
 
 
  Selection of analogues  
A read -across approach using data from analogue s was used to  inform the human 
health assessment.  
Analogue s selected w ere structurally and/or functionally similar to substances in this  
assessment (similar physical -chemical properties, toxicokinetics), and were associated 
with relevant empirical data that could be u sed to read -across to substances in this 
assessment .  
Specifically, cyclohexylamine hydrochloride ( CHA HCl; CAS RN 4998 -76-9) was used to 
inform the assessment of health effects of CHA (details are provided in Appendix A ). 
Health effects information on CHA  and CHA HCl  was also used to inform the 
characterization  of critical health effects of sodium cyclamate . 
 
Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
4 
 Physical and chemical properties  
A summary of physical and chemical property data for sodium cyclamate  and CHA  are 
presented in Table 3-1. Additional physical and chemical properties are reported in 
ECCC (2016b).  
Table 3-1. Experimental physical and chemical property values (at standard 
temperature) for sodium cycl amate and CHA  
Property  Sodium cyclamate  CHA  
Physical state  White crystalsa Liquide 
Melting point (°C)  300b -17.7f 
Vapour pressure 
(Pa) 7.08 × 10−5 
[modelled]c 1430g 
Henry’s law 
constant  
(atm·m3/mol)  1.70 × 10−8 
[modelled]c 4.16 x 10-6 g 
Water solubili ty 
(mg/L)  1.0 × 106 
[modelled]c  1.0 × 106 g 
(miscible)  
Log K ow 
(dimensionless)  -1.61 
[modelled]c 3.7e,h 
pKa  
(dimensionless)  1.71 
[modelled]d 10.68e 
Log K oc 
(dimensionless)  1.079  
[modelled]d 1.606  
[modelled]i 
Abbreviations: K ow, octanol –water partitio n coefficient; pK a, acid dissociation constant ; Koc, organic carbon –water  
partition coefficient . 
a PubChem (2004 - ) 
b US EPA [updated 2018]  
c EPI Suite (c2000 -2012 ) 
d HSDB (2012 ) 
e ECHA (c2007 -2017 ) 
f  Carswell and Morrill (1937 ) 
g HSDB (2005 ) 
h At tempera ture of 25°C and pH of 6.8  
i ChemSpider (2015 ): Log K oc is predicted by EPISuite   
 
 
 Sources  and uses 
Sodium cyclamate and CHA  do not occur naturally in the environment.  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
5 Sodium cyclamate and CHA  have been included in a survey issued pursuant to section 
71 of CEPA  (Canada 2012). Table 4-1 presents a summary of information reported on 
the total manufacture and total import quantities for sodium cyclamate and CHA . 
Table 4-1. Summary of information on Canadian manufacturing and imports of 
sodium cyclamate and CHA  submitted in response  to a CEPA section 71 survey   
Substance  Total manufacturea  Total importsa (kg) Reporting 
year 
Sodium cyclamate  NR 100 000 to 
1 000 000 2011  
CHA NR 871 518 2011  
Abbreviations: NR, Not Reported above the reporting threshold of 100 kg.  
a Values reflect quantities reported in response to a CEPA section 71 survey (Canada 2012). See survey for specific 
inclusions and exclusions (schedules 2 and 3).  
Table 4 -2 presents a summary of the major uses of sodium cyclamate and CHA  
according to information submitted in response  to a CEPA section 71 survey 
(Environment Canada 2013).  
Table 4-2. Summary of major non -confidential uses of sodium cyclamate and CHA  
in Canada submitted  in response to a CEPA section 71 survey (based on reported 
consumer and commercial codes)  
Major usesa Sodium cyclamate  CHA  
Food and beverages  Y N 
Water treatment  N Y 
Personal care produc ts N Y 
Abbreviations: Y, use was reported for this substance; N, use was not reported for this substance.  
a Non-confidential uses reported in response to a CEPA  section 71 survey  (Canada 2012). See survey for specific 
inclusions and exclusions (schedules 2 and 3).  
Table 4-3. Additional uses in Canada for sodium cyclamate and CHA   
Use Sodium cyclamate  CHA  
Food -related uses other 
than food additivea Y N 
Incidental additivea, b N Y 
Food packaging materialsa N Y 
Medicinal or non -
medicinal ingredients in 
disinfectant, human or 
veterinary drug productsc Y N 
Medicinal or non -
medicinal ingredients in 
licensed natural health 
productsd Y N 
Notified to be present in 
cosmetics under the 
Cosmetic Regulationse N Y Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
6 Use Sodium cyclamate  CHA  
Active ingredient or 
formulant in registered 
pest control productsf N Y 
Abbreviations: Y , use was reported for this substance; N , use was not reported for this substance.   
a Sodium cyclamate, personal communication, e-mails  from Food Directorate (FD), Health  Canada (HC), to Existing 
Substances Risk Assessment Bureau (ESRAB), Health Canada (HC), dated Sept. 11 and Oct . 23, 2018; 
unreferenced;  Health Canada  established an acceptable daily intake (ADI) of 11 mg/kg bw/day, expressed as 
cyclamic acid (personal com munication, e-mails  from FD, HC to ESRAB, HC, dated Oct. 24, 2018; unreferenced). 
CHA , personal communication, e -mail from FD, HC to ESRAB, HC dated January 10, 2017; unreferenced.    
b  While not defined under the Food and Drugs Act  (FDA), incidental addit ives may be regarded, for administrative 
purposes, as those substances which are used in food processing plants and which may potentially become 
adventitious residues in foods (e.g. cleaners, sanitizers). 
c   Sodium cyclamate is  used as  a non-medicinal ing redient  for the purpose of sweetening  in drugs , personal 
communication, e -mails from Therapeutic Products Directorate (TPD),  HC to ESRAB, HC, dates ranging from  May 
3 to Sept. 17, 2018; unreferenced.  
d Sodium cyclamate is a non -medicinal ingredient in nat ural health products , personal communication, e-mails from 
Natural and Non -Prescription Health Products Directorate (NNHPD), HC to ESRAB, HC, dates ranging from May 3 
to Sept . 18, 2018; unreferenced.  
e CHA , personal communication, e-mails from Consumer  and Hazardous  Product s Safety Directorate (C HPSD), HC, 
to ESRAB, HC, dated Dec . 14, 2016 and Dec . 14, 2017; unreferenced  
f  Sodium cyclamate, personal communication, e-mail from Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA), HC to 
ESRAB, HC, dated April 5, 2018; unreferenced. CHA  is a formulant, personal communication, e-mail from PMRA, 
HC to ESRAB, HC, dated Dec . 21, 2016; unreferenced.  
 
In Canada, sodium cyclamate is primarily used as a table -top sweetener ( Canada 
1978b , Canada 2012 ). Under Part E of the Food an d Drug Regulations , cyclohexyl 
sulfamic acid (cyclamic acid) or any of its salts (e.g., sodium cyclamate) may be sold as 
a sweetener for personal use provided it is labelled to state that it should be used only 
on the advice of a physician and provided its  energy value is labelled  (personal 
communication, e-mail from FD, HC, to ESRAB, HC, dated Nov . 9, 2018; 
unreferenced) . Sodium cyclamate is used as a non -medicinal ingredient for the purpose 
of sweetening in drugs , including natural health products ( person al communication, e-
mails from NNHPD and TPD, HC to ESRAB, HC, dates ranging from May 3 to Sept . 18, 
2018; adi). 
In Canada, CHA  is used as a corrosion inhibitor in water treatment,  a boiler -cleaning 
agent, a processing aid, and in cosmetics  (Environment Ca nada 2013).  More 
specifically, CHA is in aerosol hairsprays  (personal communication, e-mails from CPSD, 
HC, to ESRAB, HC, dated Dec 14, 2016 and Dec 14, 2017; unreferenced)  and 
firespace gel fuel canisters (e.g., for a fireplace, fire bowl, or lantern)  (MSDS 2018) . 
CHA may be used in food packaging materials  as a component in the external layer of 
pipes intended for the transfer of beverages, and in  the non -food contact layer of  
polyethylene -coated paper/paperboard used to package beverages  in Canada. CHA is 
an incidental additive which may be used in food processing establishments where  it 
may be  used as a boiler water additive, and can be present in the resulting steam that 
may be in contact with food ( personal communication, e-mail from FD, HC to ESRAB, 
HC, dated Jan 10, 2017; unreferenced). CHA  is a pesticide formulant  (personal 
communication, e-mail from PMRA, HC to ESRAB, HC, dated Dec 21, 2016; 
unreferenced).  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
7  
 Potential to cause ecological harm 
 Characterization of ecological risk 
The ecological risks o f sodium cyclamate and CHA  were  characterized using the 
ecological risk classification of organic substances (ERC) approach (ECCC 2016a). The 
ERC is a risk -based approach that considers multiple metrics for both hazard and 
exposure, with weighted considera tion of multiple lines of evidence for determining risk 
classification. The various lines of evidence are combined to discriminate between 
substances of lower or higher potency and lower or higher potential for exposure in 
various media. This approach redu ces the overall uncertainty with risk characterization 
compared to an approach that relies on a single metric in a single medium (e.g., median 
lethal concentrations ) for characterization. The following summarizes the approach, 
which is described in detail in ECCC (2016a).   
Data on physical -chemical properties, fate (chemical half -lives in various media and 
biota, partition coefficients, and fish bioconcentration), acute fish ecotoxicity, and 
chemical import or manufacture volume in Canada were collected fro m the scientific 
literature, available empirical databases (e.g., OECD QSAR Toolbox  2014), and from 
responses to surveys conducted under section 71 of CEPA, or they were generated 
using selected (quantitative ) structure -activity relationship ( [Q]SAR) or ma ss-balance 
fate and bioaccumulation models. These data were used as inputs to other mass -
balance models or to complete the substance hazard and exposure profiles.  
Hazard profiles were based principally on metrics regarding mode of toxic action, 
chemical re activity, food web -derived internal toxicity thresholds, bioavailability, and 
chemical and biological activity. Exposure profiles were also based on multiple metrics, 
including potential emission rate, overall persistence, and long -range transport potentia l. 
Hazard and exposure profiles were compared to decision criteria in order to classify the 
hazard and exposure potentials for each organic substance as low, moderate, or high. 
Additional rules were applied (e.g., classification consistency, margin of expo sure) to 
refine the preliminary classifications of hazard or exposure.  
A risk matrix was used to assign a low, moderate or high classification of potential risk 
for each substance on the basis of its hazard and exposure classifications. ERC 
classifications  of potential risk were verified using a two -step approach. The first step 
adjusted the risk classification outcomes from moderate or high to low for substances 
that had a low estimated rate of emission to water after wastewater treatment, 
representing a l ow potential for exposure. The second step reviewed low risk potential 
classification outcomes using relatively conservative, local -scale (i.e., in the area 
immediately surrounding a point  source of discharge) risk scenarios, designed to be 
protective of t he environment, to determine whether the classification of potential risk 
should be increased.  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
8 ERC uses a weighted approach to minimize the potential for both over - and under - 
classification of hazard  and exposure , and of subsequent risk. The balanced 
approaches for dealing with uncertainties are described in greater detail in ECCC 
(2016a ). The following describes two of the more substantial areas of uncertainty. Error 
with empirical or model led acute toxicity values could result in changes in classificatio n 
of hazard, particularly metrics relying on tissue residue values (i.e., mode of toxic 
action), many of which are predicted values from (Q)SAR models  (OECD QSAR 
Toolbox 201 4). However, the impact of this error is mitigated by the fact that 
overestimation of median lethality will result in a conservative (protective) tissue residue 
value used for critical body residue analysis. Error with underestimation of acute toxicity 
will be mitigated through the use of other hazard metrics such as structural profiling  of 
mode of action, reactivity and/or estrogen binding affinity. Changes or errors in chemical 
quantity could result in differences in classification of exposure as the exposure and risk 
classifications are highly sensitive to emission rate and use quantit y. The ERC 
classifications thus reflect exposure and risk in Canada based on what is estimated to 
be the current use quantity, and may not reflect future trends.  
Critical data and considerations used to develop the substance -specific profiles for 
sodium cy clamate and CHA , and the hazard, exposure and risk classification results are 
presented in ECCC (2016b).  
On the basis of low hazard and low exposure classifications according to information 
considered under ERC, sodium cyclamate and CHA were classified as having a low 
potential for ecological risk. It is unlikely that these substances are resulting in concerns 
for the environment in Canada.  
  Potential to cause harm to human health  
 Exposure assessment  
6.1.1  Environmental media and food  
Environmental media,  sodium cyclamate  
Sodium cyclamate is expected to dissociate and be present as the cyclamate anion and 
sodium cation in the environment, as indicated by its pK a value . With its  low vapour 
pressure, volatilization of the cyclamate anion from water and soil surface s is not 
expected. Also, cyclamate anion  is not expected to adsorb more strongly to soils than its 
neutral counterparts, and it is not expected to adsorb to suspended solids and sediment 
in water based on the estimated K oc (HSDB 2012).  
No measured concent rations of sodium cyclamate in air, soil, or dust were identified in 
Canada. Concentrations were modelled  in environmental media  using ChemCAN 
(2003 ) based on  commercial quantities of sodium cyclamate submitted in Canada in 
response to a CEPA section 71 su rvey (Environment Canada 201 3). Total daily intakes Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
9 of sodium cyclamate via ambient air, indoor air, soil and dust were estimated to result in 
negligible exposure.  
Sodium cyclamate has been detected in the form of cyclamate anion in drinking water 
and sur face water in Canada. The concentrations of cyclamate anion in water are 
estimat es of sodium cyclamate levels  that have dissociated in water , but these 
concentrations may also include contributions of cyclamate anions from other cyclamate 
salts, such as calcium cyclamate.  
In 2011, cyclamate  was measured at concentrations ranging from 0.09 to 4.1 µg/L with 
a median value of 0.17 µg/L in groundwater samples (8% detection frequency) collected 
from 59 domestic wells located in southern portion of the Nottawasa ga River watershed 
in Ontario (Spoelstra et al. 2017). Spoelstra et al. (2013) also measured cyclamate at a 
mean concentration of 0.2 µg/L and a maximum concentration of 0.88 µg/L  in 57 
surface water samples from the Grand River watershed  in Ontario during  the 2007 to 
2009  period . The maximum concentration of cyclamate reported in Canada from 
Spoelstra et al. (2017) (4.1 µg/L) was selected for characterizing exposure to sodium 
cyclamate via drinking water. The highest d aily intake of sodium cyclamate from 
drinking water is estimated to be 5.4 x 10-4 mg/kg bw/day in formula -fed infants aged 0 
to 5 months  (Appendix B) .  
Sodium cyclamate (based on cyclamate anion levels) has been measured in ambient 
air, soil, dust  and surface water in other countries  (Gan et a l. 2014 ; Berset et al. 2012 ; 
Scheurer et al. 2009 ; Arbel áez et al. 2015 ; Lange et al. 2012 ; Sang et al. 2014 ; Tran et 
al. 2014 ; Watanabe et al. 2016 ; Gan et al. 2013 ; Edwards et al. 2017 ; Yang et al. 2018).  
These measurements are not expected to be reflect ive of Canadian environment al 
concentrations  due to differences in manufacturing activities and environmental 
conditions.  
Environmental media,  CHA  
CHA is expected to be present in protonated form as a cation in the environment, as 
indicated by its pK a value. As such , adsorption to soils and suspended soils in water is 
likely (PhysProp c2013). CHA  is associated with a high vapo ur pressure and  will exist 
as a vapour in the atmosphere if released to air (PhysProp c2013). CHA is expected to 
exist in the cation ic form in surface water s, and v olatilization from water surfaces is not 
expected as the cationic form of CHA  is not expected to be volatile . However, CHA  may 
volatilize from dry soil surfaces  based upon its vapour pressure  (HSDB 2005 ). 
No measured concent rations of CHA in air, soil, or dust were identified in Canada. 
Concentrations were modelled in these environmental matrices using ChemCAN ( 2003 ) 
and based on commercial quantities of CHA reported in Canada in response to a CEPA  
section 71 survey  (Environm ent Canada 2013). Estimated t otal daily intakes of CHA via 
ambient air, indoor air, soil and dust , resulted in negligible exposure.  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
10 No Canadian data on concentrations of CHA in  drinking water or surface water were  
identified. Estimated concentrations in s urface water were derived with the New 
Substances Assessment and Control Bureau (NS ACB) Environmental Assessment Unit 
(EAU) Drinking Water Workbook using the industrial release scenario (Health Canada, 
in-house model unpublished; see Table B-1, Appendix B  for detail s). The resulting 50th 
percentile predicted environmental concentration  was 13 µg/L, which result ed in a 
conservative  daily intake of 1.7 x 10-3 mg/kg bw /day for formula -fed infants aged 0 to 5 
months .  
 
Food, s odium cyclamate  
Food consumption da ta from the Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS) 
(Statistics Canada 2015) , a national 24 -hour dietary recall survey , were used to assess 
exposure of the general population to sodium cyclamate . Over 20 000  respondents 
were surveyed on the first 24 -hour recall, and a pproximately one third of respondents 
were surveyed on a second, non -consecutive day in order to provide a means to 
measure day -to-day variability in consumption, which is required to calculate usual 
intakes.   
Respondents included children, peo ple with and without diabetes, as well as pregnant 
and breastfeeding women. Approximately 2% of the surveyed adults reported 
consumption of table -top sweeteners containing sodium cyclamate , with the median age 
of 62 years. No one below age 19 , or who was p regnant (n=114) reported consumption 
of sodium cyclamate. Only 1 of the 187 breastfeeding women surveyed reported 
consuming cyclamate -containing table -top sweeteners. Therefore, ‘ eaters  only’ daily 
dietary exposures were estimated for adults age 19 and ove r, who reported consuming 
sodium cyclamate -based table -top sweeteners on at least one day of the CCHS survey . 
The assessment assume d a sodium cyclamate content of 32%  in table -top sweetener , 
based on the most  commonly used brand of cyclamate sweetener, out  of three brands 
containing from 30% to 34% sodium cyclamate  (personal communication, e-mail from 
FD HC to ESRAB HC, dated November 9, 2018) . As Health Canada’s acceptable daily 
intake  (ADI) associated with this compound is defined on a cyclamic acid basis , the 
quantity of sodium cyclamate was in turn converted to a quantity of cyclamic acid using 
the relative molecular weights of sodium cyclamate and cyclamic acid.  
Dietary exposure to cyclamic acid  was estimated for 'eaters only' , by multiplying the 
sodium  cyclamate concentration (32%) by the quantity of those sweeteners consumed 
by individual survey respondents  (personal communication, e-mail from FD, HC, to 
ESRAB, HC, dated November 2, 2018; unreferenced ) and then applying the molecular 
weight ratio to co nvert this to cyclamic acid . This yielded a full distribution of cyclam ic 
acid exposure estimates for each of the included subpopulations . An adjustment to yield 
'usual intakes' was then applied in order to generate exposure estimates that are more Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
11 reflect ive of the typical, long -term dietary exposure to cyclamic acid. Details on the 
parameters used and adjustment approach are found in Appendix C. 
Mean and 90th percentile estimates of eaters -only, usual dietary exposure to sodium 
cyclamate (as cyclamic acid ) are presented in Table 6-1. The usual exposure was 
estimated both for the general population (including those with diabetes), and for 
individuals with diabetes as a subpopulation hypothesized to consume higher quan tities 
of table -top sweeteners. In general, women consumed approximately 19 % to 22% more 
cyclamate than men on a body weight basis.  
Table 6-1. Estimated ‘eaters only’ usual dietary exposure to cyclamic acid (mg/kg 
bw/day) from the consumption of table -top sweeteners containing sodium 
cyclamate (assuming 32% sodium cyclamate)  
Population  Male m ean 
dietary 
exposure 
(mg/kg 
bw/day)  Female m ean 
dietary 
exposure 
(mg/kg 
bw/day)  Male 90th 
percentile  
dietary 
exposure 
(mg/kg 
bw/day)  Female 90th 
percentile  
dietary 
exposure 
(mg/kg 
bw/day)  
General 
Population 
(adults, 19+ 
years)  6.53 8.00 12.63  14.98  
Population with 
Diabetes 
(adults, 19+ 
years)  6.28 7.67 12.15  14.57  
For the general population  19 years of age and above , 2.14% of respondents reported 
consumption of cyclamate on either day of recall; among the subpopulation of 
respondents with diabetes, 9.68% reported consumption of cyclamate. However, usual 
exposure estimates for individuals with diabetes were quantitatively similar to or slightly 
lower than those of the general population, suggesting that while more people with 
diabetes may consume cyclamate, the amount they consume per day is not any higher.  
Food, CHA  
In Canada, CHA  may be present in certain  food packaging materials as a result of its 
use as a component in external layer of pipes  (at a maximum level of 25 ppm)  intended 
for the transfer of beverages  and in the non -food contact layer of paper/paperboard 
intended for use in contact with beverages . There is no po tential for direct food contact 
associated with these uses since CHA  may be  present in the external layer of pipes, 
and in the paper/paperboard, a polyethylene coating act s as a barrier from direct food 
contact (Personal communication, e-mail from FD, HC, to ESRAB, HC, dated January 
10, 2017; unreferenced).  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
12 CHA may also be present as an incidental additive used in food processing 
establishments in Canada where it is used as a boiler water additive (BWA).  The 
maximum concentration of CHA  allowed in boiler w ater system s is 10 ppm in the steam . 
Steam treated with CHA is not considered to be acceptable for use in the processing of 
milk and milk products.  Health Canada had  no objection to the use of blends of 
restricted chemicals including CHA  as a BWA , provided  that the total amine 
concentration of steam does not  exceed 25 ppm  (Health Canada 2010) . This use 
results in direct food contact with a conservative estimate of a probable daily intake of  
5.7 µg/kg bw/day for adults (Personal communication, e-mail from FD , HC to ESRAB, 
HC, dated Jan 10, 2017; unreferenced).  
6.1.2  Products available to consumers  
Sodium cyclamate  
Potential exposure to sodium cyclamate from  its use as non -medicinal ingredient for the 
purpose of sweetening in drugs , including natural health product s was estimated based 
on conservative assumptions. Details are presented in Appendix D. Estimates for 
scenarios that result in the highest level of potential oral, dermal, or inhalation exposure 
(referred to as sentinel scenarios) for relevant age groups are presented in  Table 6-2.  
Table 6-2. Summary of estimates of daily and intermittent exposure to sodium 
cyclamate from the use of  drugs including  natural health product s 
Duration 
and route of 
exposure  Product scenario  Age 
group  Maximum 
quantity per 
dosage unit or 
concentration  Exposure 
estimate  
(mg/kg 
bw/day)  
Daily oral  Non-medicinal 
ingredie nt or the 
purpose of 
sweeteninga Adults 
(19+ 
years)  70 mg/dose 
(1.4%)  2.84 
 
Daily oral  Non-medicinal 
ingredie nt or the 
purpose of 
sweeteninga Toddlers 
(1 year)  1.5%  1.36 
 
Daily buccal  Mouthwashb Teens (14 -
18 years)  0.5%  0.69 
 
Daily 
inhalation  Respirator solution 
to treat 
bronchospasmb, c, d Children 
(5-8 years)  3 mg/dose  0.034  
Intermittent  
oral Chest congestion 
relief syrupb Children 
(12-13 
years)  1.5%  14.3  
Intermittent 
buccal  Buccal  anesthetic 
solutionb Toddlers 
(2-3 years)  2% 7.2  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
13 Duration 
and route of 
exposure  Product scenario  Age 
group  Maximum 
quantity per 
dosage unit or 
concentration  Exposure 
estimate  
(mg/kg 
bw/day)  
Intermittent 
dermal  Topical anesthetic 
solution for skin 
pain reliefb Children 
(3-8 years)  2% 0.38 
a Personal communication, e-mails from NNHPD, HC to ESRAB, HC, date s ranging from May 3  to Sept. 18, 2018; 
unreferenced.   
b Personal communication, e-mails from TPD, HC to ESRAB, HC, date s ranging from  May 3  to Sept. 17, 2018; 
unreferenced.  
c Inhala tion exposure estimates shown here are the internal dose on day of exposure (mg/kg bw/day) estimated using 
ConsExpo Web (2018) and parameters outlined in Appendix D. Internal dose was selected to compare with oral 
hazard endpoints.  
d A respirator solution  for the treatment of severe bronchospasm associated with exacerbations of chronic bronchitis 
and bronchial asthma. A prepared solution is administered using a respirator or nebulizer.   
 
CHA  
CHA is found in aerosol hairspray products in Canada up to concen trations of 0.3% 
(personal communication, e-mails from CPSD, HC, to ESRAB, HC, dated December 8  
and 14 , 2016; unreferenced ). It is also found in firespace gel fuel canister s at a 
maximum concentration of 0.3%  (MSDS 2018) . Inhalation and dermal exposure 
estimates for aerosol hairspray products and inhalation exposure estimates for 
firespace gel fuel canister s were derived using ConsExpo Web ( 2018 ). Estimates for 
scenarios that result in the highest level of potential exposure (referred to as sentinel 
scenari os) for relevant age groups are presented in  Table 6-3. Details are presented in 
Appendix D. 
Table 6-3. Summary of estimates of exposures to CHA  from the use of produc ts 
available to consumers  
Product 
scenario  (age 
group)  Maximum  
concentratio
n Inhalation 
exposure b Dermal 
exposure c Exposure 
estimate  d 
Daily use of 
aerosol 
hairspray 
(adults, 19+ 
years )a  0.3%  0.00075  
mg/kg bw/day  0.013  mg/kg 
bw/day  0.014 mg/kg 
bw/day  
 
Per event use 
of aerosol 
hairspray  
(children, 4-8 
years )a 0.3%  0.001 2 mg/kg 
bw 0.026 mg/kg 
bw 0.027 mg/kg 
bw 
 
Per event use 
of firespace gel 
fuel canister s 0.3%  3 mg/kg bw  N/A N/A Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
14 Product 
scenario  (age 
group)  Maximum  
concentratio
n Inhalation 
exposure b Dermal 
exposure c Exposure 
estimate  d 
(toddlers, 1 
year)e,f 
Abbreviation: N /A, Not Applicable 
a Personal commu nication, e-mail from CPSD, HC, to ESRAB, HC, dated December 14, 2016; unreferenced .  
b Inhalation exposure estimates shown here are the internal dose on day of exposure (mg/kg bw/day) estimated using 
ConsExpo Web (2018) and parameters outlined in Appendix  D. Internal dose was selected to compare with oral 
hazard endpoints.  
c Dermal exposure was calculated as a dose (mg/kg bw/day) using parameters outlined in Appendix D. 
d Combined dose (mg/kg bw/day) from dermal and inhalation exposure .  
e MSDS (2018) . 
f When this product is used indoors (e.g., by an adult), toddlers can be exposed to CHA released in the indoor air . 
 
Although dermal and inhalation exposure are both expected from use of hair spray, the 
high vapour pressure of CHA may result in a short reten tion time on the skin, therefore 
consideration of both inhalation and dermal routes of exposure is considered to be a 
conservative approach . 
 
 
 Health effects assessment  
Sodium cyclamate in association with cyclamate and its salts was reviewed by the 
Europe an Scientific Committee on Food (SCF 2000) , the JECFA  (1970, 1982) , and the 
US FDA (1980 ). Cyclamates and its salts, including sodium cyclamate, are not 
classifiable as to their carcinogenicity in humans (Group 3; inadequate evidence in 
humans and inadequa te evidence in animals)  (IARC 1999).  Information from these 
reviews and additional literature were taken into consideration in this assessment.  
As a metabolite of cyclamate and its  salts, CHA  was also reviewed in these documents . 
CHA  was also evaluated by the European Union (ECHA 2017)  and the US EPA (1988 ). 
The European Commission classifies CHA  as a reproductive toxicant (Repr 2)  (EU 
2008 ). 
Studies with sodium cyclamate were limited . Data from CHA , the primary metabolite in 
humans who can convert sodium c yclamate to CHA (Bopp et al. 1986),  and 
cyclohexylamine  hydrochloride (CHA HCl) were  used to inform the assessment of  
health effects of sodium cyclamate and CHA .  
Toxicokinetics of sodium cyclamate  
The toxicokinetics of sodium cyclamate was reviewed by Bop p et al. (1986 ). When 
sodium cyclamate was orally administrated to humans, peak plasma levels occurred 
between 6 and 8 hours. The half -life was determined to be 8 hours; this correlated with 
the half -lives of 6.6 and 8.8 hours determined in rats and dogs, respectively. In humans 
37% of the quantity of cyclamates ingested is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, 
leaving 63% unabsorbed, based on unpublished information submitted to HC (personal Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
15 communication, e -mail from FD, HC to ESRAB, HC, dated Nov. 20 , 2018; 
unreferenced). Absorption of cyclamate from the gastrointestinal tract of rats and dogs 
is similar (33 to 40%), and higher in monkeys  (62 to 66 %) (Parekh et al. 1970; Bopp et 
al. 1986).   
Rats and dogs orally dosed with sodium cyclamate showed that cyclamate distributes to 
most tissues in the body with highest levels in the kidneys and lowest in the brain. 
Cyclamate may also cross the placenta and enter the fetuses of rats, monkeys and 
humans. It has also been found in the milk of rats, dogs and pigs  (Bopp et al. 1986).  
Oral or subcutaneous dosing of sodium cyclamate results in cyclamate in the 
gastrointestinal environment of pigs (Collings 1989), suggesting that sodium cyclamate 
dissociates into cyclamate in the gastrointestinal tract of mammals. Cyclamate in the 
gastrointestinal tract can then be microbially biotransformed in mammals by a bacterial 
enzyme, sulfamatase, through hydrolysis of cyclamate into CHA (Bopp et al. 1986) . In 
several published studies,  most humans  were unable  to convert cyclama te to CHA, with 
approximately 10% to 30% of over 1000 human subjects  able to generally convert  0.1 to 
8% cyclamate to CHA , with a minority converting up to 60% of ingested cyclamate  
(IARC 1980) . Similarly, in the few monkeys tested for CHA levels in a limi ted dietary 
monkey study , most  monkeys did n ot convert cyclamate to CHA  after 12 years of 
repeated dietary dosing , with a minority converting up to  1% sodium cyclamate to CHA 
(Thorgeirsson et al. 1994) . In contrast,  most rats (up to 92%) in multiple oral (dietary, 
gavage, drinking water)  studies , converte d up to 35% cyclamate to CHA , similar to  30% 
in humans  (Wallace et al. 1970; Renwick and Williams 1972 a; Bickel et al. 1974; Bopp 
et al. 1986) . CHA is the major metabolite in humans who can convert cyclamat e to CHA 
(Bopp et al. 1986).  
Individually, human non -converters generally remained non -converters (Renwick et al . 
2004) , but conversion rates could increase with repeated cyclamate intake or decrease 
with cessation of intake (Buss et al. 1992; Renwick et a l. 2004).  Overall, JECFA (1982) 
estimated 30% CHA can be formed by microbial biotransformation of cyclamate in the 
gastrointestinal tract of all mammalian species studied  including humans ( IARC 1999; 
SCF 1985 cited in SCF 2000).  Although there is variabili ty in conversion rates between 
and within converters of cyclamate to CHA, estimating complete conversion of all 
ingested cyclamate to CHA is a conservative assumption. If it is assumed that in 
humans 63% of sodium cyclamate is not absorbed in the gastroint estinal system, then 
63% dissociated cyclamate is available for 30% conversion to  CHA (SCF 1985 cited in 
SCF 2000; Baines and DiNovi 2010), then up to 19% of the ingested dose of sodium 
cyclamate may convert to CHA.   
In experimental animals orally dosed wi th sodium cyclamate, c yclamate absorbed from 
the gastrointestinal tract is primarily excreted in the urine , and  less than 1% of the dose 
is secreted in the bile of rats and dogs (Bopp et al. 1986). Twenty -four men ingesting 
70.5 to 226 mg/kg bw/day of sodi um cyclamate ( capsules administered with meals 3 
times/day ) for 30.4 weeks had a  wide interindiv idual variation of CHA urinary excretion, 
with a mean of 17.2% (0.25% to 75.4%) ; when one subject receiving 141 mg/kg bw/day Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
16 was analyzed  over the course of the  study , there was also a va riation of 0.21 to 19% 
urinary excretion of CHA  with no consistent relation between excretion of CHA and 
cyclamate  (Wills et al. 1981) . This may indicate  that conversion  of sodium cyclamate to 
CHA varies amongst and within  humans , and supports the estimate of 19% as the 
portion of the ingested dose of sodium cyclamate that may be convert ed to CHA in 
humans.  
Toxicokinetics of CHA  
When CHA is orally administrated to humans , rats and dogs , peak blood or plasma 
levels occurred between  1 and 2 hours and the half -life ranged from 3 to 5 hours (ECHA 
2017). After a single oral radiolabelled dose of CHA, most of the parental compound 
was excreted uncha nged in the urine of animals ( 90% or more) and humans (86% to 
95%)  (Bopp et al. 1986, Renw ick and Williams 1972b; Eichelbaum et al. 1974; ECHA 
2017).  
Orally administered CHA i n the rat  showed  the highest concentrations of CHA  in the 
lungs, spleen, liver, adrenal glands, heart, gastrointestinal tract and kidneys 
(unpublished report cited in both Bopp et al. 1986  and ECHA 2017 ).  
In the rat kidney, CHA is metabolized mainly by hydroxylation of the cyclohexane ring, 
and in the human kidney, it is metabolized by deamination. In both cases, CHA forms 
minor metabolites including cyclohexanone, cycloh exanol, trans -cyclohexane -1,2-diol 
and N-hydrocyclohexylamine (Gaunt et al. 1974; Golberg et al. 1969; IARC 1999).  CHA 
was demonstrated to diffuse across the placental membrane in pregnant monkeys and 
human women given an intravenous dose of CHA (ECHA 2017 ; Pitkin et al. 1969; Pitkin 
et al. 1970). Consequently, the developing fetus may be exposed to maternal CHA in 
pregnant women who can convert cyclamate to CHA .  
 
CHA is excreted mostly unchanged in the urine (IARC 1999). CHA  metabolites are also 
excreted in the urine ( Golberg et al. 1969; IARC 1999 ; Renwick and Williams 1972b; 
Gaunt et al. 1974 ). 
Health effect studies using s odium cyclamate  
In a two -year chronic toxicity/carcinogenicity study, a lthough there were increased 
papillary carcinomas in the bladd er in rats fed 2500 mg/kg bw/day  10:1 sodium 
cyclamate and sodium saccharin mixture (Oser et al. 1975) , the role of sodium 
cyclamate was confounded by the mixture and this tumour type  was not considered 
toxicologically relevant to humans (US NTP 2016).   
In a lifetime study, m onkeys (cynomolgus, rhesus and African green) were fed sodium 
cyclamate in a vitamin mixture applied in sandwiches at 0, 100 or 500 mg/kg bw/day 
(11/5, 5/5, 8/3 males/females, respectively) five times per week from a few days after 
birth and continuing for up to 24 years. There were no treatment -related effects 
observed in females at any dose. Most  treated monkeys died during the last 10 years of Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
17 the study due to circumstances not related to tr eatment . After 2 3 years  (two years after 
the average lifespan of 21.3 years in control monkeys) , testicular effects were observed 
in 2/5 males at 500 mg/kg bw/day (focal germ cell aplasia or Sertoli -cell only tubules in 
both monkeys mixed with areas showing normal spermatogenesis, and chronic 
inflam mation of the testis in one of the two) . At 12 years of age , when monkeys are 
considered to be  of reproductive age , measures of testicular size and morphology, 
semen analysis and serum testosterone and gonadotropin levels showed no differences 
between trea ted and control monkeys (as reported in Thorgeirsson et al. 1994). Further, 
testicular biopsies from treated monkeys showed no histological differences from control 
monkeys at 12 years of age  (Takayama et al. 2000) . Unfortunately, a full detailed 
analysis of testicular effects was  only conducted at the end of life. The study authors did 
not consider the testicular effects to be due to cyclamate per se, but did not exclude a 
role for CHA based on the correlation of higher CHA levels  in the plasma, testes and  
urine of  a monkey with  testicular effects  (CHA levels were not measured in the other 
monkey  with the same effect ). Complete necropsies and histopathological analysis of 
major organs and tissues were conducted and there was no evidence of carcinogenicity 
in either sex. (Takayama et al. 2000).  While this study highlighted testicular effects to be 
of interest for sodium cyclamate, it was not selected as a critical study due to 
confounding factors including a limited number of animals  and limited analysis of 
testicular effects at 12  years , and a varicella infection during 1 year of the study (as per 
Thorgeirsson et al. 1994), which resulted in 2 mortalities.   
Results from in vitro  genotoxicity studies conducted with sodium cyclamate were mixed. 
There was  negati ve mutagenicity in a host -mediated assay using Salmonella  (S.) 
typhimurium  (mice injected intraperitoneally with S. typhimurium  were exposed to 
sodium cyclamate by subcutaneous injection) , positive clastogenicity in Chinese 
hamster lung cell and human skin  fibroblast chromosome aberration studies and 
equivocal clastogenicity in human lymphocytes, positive DNA damage/repair in a cell 
transformation assay using rat bladder cells (IARC 1999), but negative DNA 
damage/repair in rat hepatocytes (Jeffrey and Willi am 2000 cited in HSDB 2012).  A 
Comet assay conducted on human colon cancer cell lines and human embryonic kidney 
cells showed minimal, if any, DNA damage (van Eyk 2015).  
However, all in vivo  genotoxicity  studies using sodium cyclamate showed negative 
resul ts. In vivo  mutation studies were negative in Chinese hamsters  and mice (IARC 
1999 ). HSDB (2012) also reported negative chromosome aberration in an in vivo  study 
using Chinese hamsters. In humans dosed orally with 70 mg/kg bw/day of sodium 
cyclamate  for 4 days , the peripheral blood lymphocytes were negative for chromosomal 
aberration (IARC 1999).  
In a limited multi -generation reproductive toxicity study, rats (12 females and 6 
males/group) received 0 or 3% sodium cyclamate in the diet, equal to 0 or 1500 m g/kg 
bw/day and F2 adults were mated twice; dams delivered offspring after the first mating 
but were sacrificed before parturition after the second mating  (Ferrando and Huchet 
1968).  Fertility was not affected in this study  for two generations. After the f irst F2 
mating, there was a decrease d number of F2 surviving pups  at postnatal day (PND)  10 Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
18 and weaning (2 versus 14 in the control group). This may be due to the excessive  dose 
level administered to the animals . No developmental effects were noted after t he 
second mating. However,  treated F2 males had decreased body weight and testicular 
degeneration (4/6 males) . The two surviving F3 male s (1500 mg/kg bw/day) show ed 
testicular atrophy (age at sacrifice not reported). There were two other dose groups, in 
which sodium cyclamate was administered  via drinking water at 0.8% and 1.6% , but 
effects in these groups were not used due to inconsistencies in the dosing protocol 
(unclear as to whether treated and untreated drinking water were administered  
separately or c oncurrently ) (JECFA 197 0; Bopp et al. 1986; HSDB 2012) . A no 
observed adverse effect level ( NOAEL ) could not be determined in this study.  
Developmental toxicity studies in which rabbits and rats were administered sodium 
cyclamate orally at doses up to 250 mg/kg bw/day did not show any evidence of 
embryotoxic or teratogenic effects (Bein et al. 1967, Fritz and Hess 1968 ; US Food and 
Drug Research Laboratories 1969 cited in JECFA 1970). Other acute gavage 
developmental studies in mice and rats were not use d due to excessive dose levels 
(equivale nt to 2150 mg/kg bw and above)  (Tanaka 1964a,b cited in JECFA 1970 ; Bopp 
et al. 1986 ).  
In a human volunteer study conducted over 30.4 weeks (7 months), men (8/group aged 
25 to 39) ingested capsules containing sodium cy clamate at 0 (sucrose vehicle), 5, 10 
or 16 g/day (equ ivalent  to 0, 7 1, 141, or 226 mg/kg bw/day , based on Health Canada 
[1994 ]). The initial high dose was lowered to an unspecified level below  141 mg/kg 
bw/day  due to decreased dosing  over the period of the study  as a result of persistent 
diarrhea . Soft stools (persistent diarrhea) appeared within the first two weeks in 2/8 men 
dosed with 141 mg/kg bw/day and 7/8 men dosed with 226 mg/kg bw/day , which  
persisted throughout the study . Hematology and clinical chemistry parameters , as well 
as sperm parameters (concentration and motility measured in semen every 2 weeks)  
were not affected in this study (Wills et al. 1981).  
In another human volunteer study limited by self -identified (unmeasured) food intake , it 
was suggested that sperm parameters and fertility were not correlated with cyclamate 
ingestion based on CHA urinary excretion ( Serra -Majem et al. 2003) .  
No studies examining effects via  the dermal or inhalation routes of exposure  were 
identified . 
 
Overall, w hile testicular effects were identified  after repeated daily d oses beyond the 
average lifespan in a limited 24-year monkey study at 500 mg/kg bw/day  and in a 
limited reproductive study in the  second generation at 1500 mg/kg bw/day , the latter  
suggests that  fertility would not be affected  for two generations . Further, based on a 
human volunteer study wherein there was persistent diarrhea b eginning at 141 mg/kg 
bw/day within the first two weeks of daily consumption  during a 7 -month study , it is 
considered unl ikely that humans would continuously consume higher daily amount s of 
sodium cyclamate  for a relatively longer duration to effect these potential changes . The Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
19 limited oral studies with sodium cyclamate suggest that it is not expected to be of 
genotoxic or c arcinogenic concern.  
 
Health effect studies using CHA  
In a specialized 13-week dietary study that specifically examined testicular effects , 
Sprague -Dawley rats (100 males/group) were administered 0, 68.5, 137, 274  or 411 
mg/kg bw/day  CHA  HCl in the diet , equivalent  to 0, 50, 100, 200 or 300 mg/kg bw/day 
CHA  (Brune et al. 1978 [unpublished report], as cited in Bopp et al. 1986). Two control 
groups were included: ad libitum and pair -fed. The pair -fed control groups were added 
to help separate testicular effec ts from body weight effects. At the end of the study, the 
body weights of the male rats in all CHA -treated groups were significantly decreased in 
comparison to the ad libitum  control animals. There was decreased body weight gain in 
the 200 and 300 mg/kg bw /day groups during the first 14 days of the study, but only in 
the 300 mg/kg group over the entire study, when compared with their respective pair -fed 
groups.  The investigators performed detailed analysis of testicular scores for all animals 
in the study. Histopathological findings were observed in the testes (degenerative 
changes in the tubules, giant cell formation,  and testicular atrophy  in some animals ), of 
which the tubular changes were statistically significant at 200 and 300 mg/kg bw/day 
compared to both the free -fed and pair -fed control groups , on the basis of their testicular 
scores . Testicular weights were also significantly lower in the 200 and 300 mg/kg 
bw/day groups when compared to the free -fed control group. However, a significant 
effect was o nly seen at the highest dose when compared to the pair -fed control group. 
The study authors identified a NOAEL of 100 mg/kg bw/day on the basis of the 
testicular effects observed at higher doses. Health Canada supports the selection of  the 
NOAEL based on examination of the original unpublished report. No other measures of 
toxicity were examined in the study.  
In another 13 -week dietary study that sp ecifically conducted a detailed examination of  
testicular effects, CHA HCl was fed in the diet of male Wistar rats (15 treated plus 10 
controls) at doses of 0 or 400 mg CHA/kg bw/day for 1, 3, 7, 9 or 13 weeks ; there were 
no pair -fed controls in this study  (Creasy et al. 1990). Food consumption and body 
weights were decreased throughout the study. Following histol ogical analysis , no 
testicular effects were observed after week 1, but during the rest of the study, the 
authors reported that gradual and persistent damage to testicular tissue occurred at 400 
mg/kg bw/day. Male animals (4/15) had vacuolation of Sertoli c ell cytoplasm along with 
localized loss of spermatocytes and spermatogonia in the testes at 3 weeks, all males 
showed Sertoli cell vacuolation and germ cell populations showed mild to moderate 
degeneration and depletion in some tubules at 7 weeks, and germ  cell depletion was 
observed in 75% of testicular tubules with disruption of the germinal epithelium at 9 
weeks. By 13 weeks, 10/15 males showed generalized germ cell degeneration and 
depletion, some tubules were shrunken with Sertoli cells remaining in th e lining and 
some spermatids were multinucleated and showed degenerated round morphology. The 
authors also established primary cell cultures from the testicular tissue isolated from 28 -
day old Wistar rats and exposed the cells in vitro  to 0, 0.1, 1, 3 or 1 0 mM CHA HCl for 
24, 48 or 72 hours. Analysis of the cells using microscopy showed Sertoli and germ cell Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
20 vacuolation became more extensive with time at doses of 3 mM or greater. Taken 
together, the authors concluded that the spermatogonial effects were sec ondary to 
CHA -mediated Sertoli cell damage (Creasy et al. 1990).  
Another  assessment of testicular tissue was performed by Roberts et al. (1989) for MF1 
mice and Wistar and dark agouti ( DA) rats administered CHA  HCl in the diet at doses 
equivalent to 0 or 400 mg  CHA /kg bw /day for 3, 7 or 13 weeks. CHA treatment did not 
affect food consumption , body weight , testicular weight, tissue morphology or sperm 
morphology in mice. In rats, significantly decreased food consumption and body weight 
gain were observed, te sticular weights were decreased and slight germ cell 
degeneration and depletion w ere observed beginning at 3 weeks, but progressing to 
75% to 100% of seminiferous tubules affected at 13 weeks, with DA rats (15/15 males) 
showing more extensive effects (larger proportion of tubules affected) than Wistar rats 
(6/15 males). Unlabelled CHA measured in the plasma and testes were lower in mice 
than rats over the 13 weeks (0.5 versus 6 or 3.5 µg/ml in plasma, 6 versus 40  or 30 
µg/g in testes , in mice versus Wistar or DA rats, respectively ). Creasy et al. (1990), 
discussed above, examined the same Wistar rats from this study but also included 
assessments at 1 and 9 weeks and conducted detailed histopathology of the testes.  
In a 13-week dietary study, rats (15/sex/gr oup) were fed a diet containing 0, 600, 2000 
or 6000 ppm CHA HCl for 13 weeks, equ ivalent to 0, 41, 143 or 468 mg/kg bw/day, 
respectively (0, 30, 105 or 342 mg/kg bw/day CHA  respectively) (Gaunt et al. 1974). At 
doses equal to or greater than 143 mg  CHA HC l/kg bw/day, body weight gain was 
significantly reduced ( 9% to 20% and 26 % to 34% decreases at the mid and high doses  
compared to controls), which was accompanied by significantly reduced food  and water 
cons umption. This effect was due in part to the ad libitum  feeding, since the extent of 
decreased body weight gain at the high dose was less (14 % to 26% decrease 
compared to controls) in a satellite group of pair fed animals (5/sex/ control and high 
dose only). The only histological finding that could be rel ated to treatment was reduced 
spermatogenesis and tubular atrophy at 143 and 468 mg/kg bw/day  (in 4/11 and 18/20 
males, respectively) , which was accompanied with significantly decreased relative 
testes weights  (0 and 17%  decreases, respectively) . In the pa ir-fed group, relative 
testes weights were significantly decreased by 49% at 468 mg/kg bw/day, but 
histopathological analyses were not conducted on pair -fed animals. The authors and 
ECHA (2017) identified a NOAEL of 41 mg CHA HCl/kg bw/day  (30 mg  CHA /kg bw /day) 
on the basis of the testes effects observed at higher dose levels . 
In a two -year dietary study  investigating chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity , rats 
(48/sex/group) were fed diets containing 0, 600, 2000 or 6000 ppm CHA  HCl, equivalent 
to 0, 24, 82  or 300 mg/kg bw/day in males and 0, 35, 120 or 400 mg/kg bw/day in 
females (0, 18, 60 or 219 mg/kg/day in males and 0, 26, 88 or 322 mg/kg/day in females 
of CHA)  (Gaunt et al. 1976) . At all dose levels, there were statistically significant dose -
related re ductions in body weight , which were related to  significantly reduced food and 
water intakes throughout the study. In females, r elative brain and ovary weights were  
significant ly increased at all doses , and relative thyroid weights were also increased at 
all doses  (significant at the mid and high doses ). In males, relative brain weights were Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
21 non-significantly increased  at the mid and high dose, whereas serum albumin levels 
were significantly dose -dependently increased, serum urea levels were significantly 
decreased and total leucocytes were significantly dose -dependently decreased at all 
doses . At the highest dose, female animals exhibited slight anemia and reduced 
production of normally concentrated urine while males showed significant ly increased 
testicular  changes (atrophy, tubules with few spermatids, ca lcium deposits in tubules) . 
“Tubules with few spermatids ” was also significantly increased at the mid dose. In 
addition, an increased incidence of histopathological changes in the lungs (alveoli with 
foamy macrophages) was also observed in both sexes at the highest dose.  ECHA 
(2017) established a lowest observed adverse effect level ( LOAEL ) of 18 mg/kg bw/day 
based on decreased body weight and increased relative ovary, thyroid and brain 
weights  in females . However, the reduction in body weight and associated changes in 
organ weights was attributed to the decreased food  consumption . For this assessment , 
the NOAEL from this study is identified to be  60 mg/kg bw/day based on  significant ly 
increased testicular ch anges (atrophy, tubules with few spermatids, calcium deposits in 
tubules) at 219 mg  CHA /kg bw/day .  
In an 80 week dietary study, mice ( 48 males, 50 females /dose) were fed CHA HCl at 
doses of 0, 300, 1000 or 3000 ppm, equivalent to 0, 40, 140 or 400 mg/kg b w/day (0, 
29, 102, or 293 mg/kg bw/day of CHA, respectively) . No effects on food/water intake, 
hematology, mortality, histopathological changes in the testes were identified (Hardy et 
al. 1976). At doses equal to or greater than 140 mg/kg bw there was a si gnificant 
decrease in body weight gain of male animals.  Histopathological changes that were 
statistically significant and potentially treatment -related were increased incidences of 
liver cell vacu olation/polyploidy and pulmonary leucocyte infiltration/depo sits in female 
animals receiving 400 mg/kg bw/day . The authors determined a NOAEL of 140 mg/kg 
bw/day (102  mg/kg bw/day of CHA) based on  liver effects in females at the highest 
dose . ECHA (2017) reported the same NOAEL , but determined that there was 
insuff icient information in the registration dossier to conclude on a NOAEL.  
On the basis of available information, ECHA (2017) determined that CHA is unlikely to 
be genotoxic . In vitro , CHA did not increase the frequency of chromosomal aberrations 
in Chinese Ha mster ovary cells or in rat bone marrow cells (Brusick et al. 1989; Dick et 
al. 1974; ECHA 2017) or increase DNA damage/repair/synthesis in rat hepatocytes 
(Brusick et al. 1989). Although there were some equivocal results in vivo  in 
chromosomal aberration  assays ( in the ova, spermatogonia or bone marrow cells when 
administered orally or as an intraperitoneal injection to Chinese hamster, rats and mice ), 
most reports were negative for CHA at doses from 50 to 68 mg/kg bw (ECHA  2017 ; 
JECFA  1982) .  
In a 2-year multi -generation reproductive toxicity study , CHA HCl was administered at 
the equivalent doses of 0, 15, 50, 100, or 150 mg CHA/kg bw/ day in the diet to rats 
(30/sex/group) (Oser et al. 1976) . The parental animals (F0) were mated six times to 
generate six litters (L1 -L6), with a one -week rest period between matings. After a 13 -
week post -weaning period, 15 pairs of rats from the first litters (L1) of each generation 
(F1-F4) were mated twice to produce the next generation. Fifteen  pairs of rats from the Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
22 secon d litters (L2) were also mated and half of the offspring were examined for birth 
defects while the other half were kept until weaning.  In the parent al generation at the 
end of 2 years,  there was decreased body weight at 50 mg/kg bw/day and above in 
females  (13% to 25%), and at 100 mg/kg bw/day and above in males  (19% to 23%) . 
However, the authors attributed these differences to variations in food consumption  
because  food efficiency  was not affected during the first 12 weeks of growth  when all 5 
parental gen erations were analyzed (statistical analyses were not reported for the 
remainder of the study) . No further information on body weight was  provided for the F1 
to F4  parental generations  after 12 weeks . No significant histopathological changes 
were observed.  At 150 mg/kg bw/day, there were testicular effects (F0 males, abnormal 
germinal epithelium and atrophy), decreased fertility (F0 dams, 4th and 5th matings), 
reduced litter size (average of 5 successive litters from F0 dams) and weanling BW at 
PND28 (avera ge of first litters from 5 successive generations), and increased 
resorptions (F4). There were no malformations.  ECHA (2017) established  a NOAEL of 
15 mg/kg bw/day for systemic toxicity based on dec reased body weight in females at 
the LOAEL of 50 mg/kg bw/ day. In this study, the significance of the decreased body 
weights are confounded by the lack of controlled food consumption. ECHA (2017) also 
established a NOAEL of 100 mg/kg bw/day for reproductive toxicity based on “growth 
retardation due to the lower f ood consumption”, slight reduction of litter size and 
weaning weight,  and significant higher incidence of testicular atrophy in adult males  at 
the LOAEL of 150 mg/kg bw/day .  
Many of the studies discussed above showed effects on testes such as decreased 
testes weight, testicular atrophy, degeneration of tubuli , and reduced spermatogenesis, 
although some of them did not follow standard test guidelines. The data, however, show 
a concern for fertility, which is covered by the EU classification as Repr. Cat. 2.  (ECHA 
2017).  
In a developmental toxicity study, CHA HCl was administered to groups of 25 rats or 
mice by gavage at 0, 14, 42, 140 mg/kg bw/day (equivalent approximately to 0, 10, 30 
or 100 mg/kg bw/day CHA) from days 6 through 15 of gestation (Lorke and M achemer 
1983). No effects were reported in mice . In rats at 100 mg CHA/kg bw/day , there was 
reduced  placental weight (16%) and fetal weight (16%) in the presence of maternal 
decreased body weight gain  (30% during treatment, 8% during the entire pregnancy 
period) . There were no effects on implantations, resorption rate, or other fetal 
parameters (sex ratio, variations and malformations) . ECHA (2017) identified  a NOAEL 
of 30 mg/kg bw/day for both maternal and developmental toxicity.  
No studies were identifie d using the dermal routes of exposure.  For the  inhalation route, 
a short -term study was identified which reported a lack of neurobehavioural effects in 
men and women after three to four hour exposures to various concentrations of CHA 
(up to 10 ppm or 41 mg /m3) (Juran et al . 2012) , but this was not used for risk 
characterization since n o other measures of toxicity were examined. Although r epeat ed-
dose inhalation studies in experimental animals were available  (e.g., Watrous and 
Schulz 1950 ; Lomonova 1965) , they were associated with methodological limitations or 
contained insufficient details on study design.  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
23  
 
 Characterization of risk to human health  
The sodium cyclamate database is limited and although  testicular effects were observed  
in the 24 -year monkey s tudy using sodium cyclamate, it was not considered as a critical 
study for various reasons , including a limited number of test animals (3 to 8 
animals/sex/dose group). Since CHA is a metabolite of sodium cyclamate in humans, 
with potential testicular effec ts occurring after shorter durations and lower doses than 
those observed for sodium cyclamate, and there is evidence to show that it may be 
better absorbed and more widely distributed throughout the blood and tissues of the 
human body than cyclamate, studi es using CHA or its analogue, CHA HCl, were 
selected  for use in the risk assessment of sodium cyclamate.   
For daily exposures, t he 13 -week oral feeding study in rats conducted by Brune et al. 
(1978) with CHA  was selected as the critical toxicity study due to the large sample size 
(100 males/group), control for food consumption by including pair -fed control and 
treatment groups at all 4 treatment dose levels, and detailed analyse s of testicular 
scores for all animals in the study. A NOAEL of 100 mg/kg bw/day  was identified on the 
basis of the testicular effects observed at 200 mg/kg bw/day and above, based on 
Health Canada’s assessment of the original unpublished report.  
The 13 -week dietary study in rats conducted by Gaunt et al. (1974) with CHA  suggests 
a lower NOAEL and LOAEL (30 and 105 mg/kg bw/day, respectively) for testicular 
effects, but it used fewer animals/dose (15/sex/group), the analysis of testicular effects 
was not as detailed as that of Brune et al. (1978), and the pair -feeding portion of this 
study analyzed a much higher dose (342 mg/kg bw/day of CHA v ersus  controls) 
compared to the pair -feeding components of the Brune et al. (1978) study. The 2 -year 
dietary study in rats conducted by Gaunt et al. (1976) was not selected  as a critical 
study also because food consumption was not controlled , and the dose spacing in this 
study resulted in a higher LOAEL (219 mg/kg bw/day) and lower NOAEL (60 mg/kg 
bw/day) for similar testicular changes than those in the Brune et al. (1978) study.  
The NOAEL of 400 m g/kg bw/day identified after the first week of testing in the 13 -week 
dietary study in rats conducted by Creasy et al. (1990) was considered to be 
appropriate as the critical endpoint for characterization  of risk from intermittent 
exposure. In this  study there were adequate numbers of animals/group per time point  
(15 males/group plus 10 controls) and there was histopathological analysis of the most 
sensitive organ (testes) at 5 different periods (1, 3, 7, 9 or 13 weeks) during the study, 
of which the 1 week  exposure period was considered most applicable for intermittent 
exposure estimates  (the dose of 400 mg/kg bw/day was determined to be the LOAEL 
after 3 to 13 week s of testing ). 
Although the developmental toxicity study in rats gavaged with CHA HCl (Lorke and 
Machemer 1983; ECHA 2017) demonstrated decreased maternal body weight, Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
24 placental weight, and fetal weight at 100 mg CHA/kg bw/day, all other developmental 
parameters were not affected. This study was not selected for evaluation of intermittent 
exposure s because it is unclear that decreased weights  would be expected after a 
single or few exposure s. 
The critical health effect endpoints identified in the studies conducted with CHA were 
conver ted to an equivalent dose of cyclamic acid  (this is because sodiu m cyclamate 
dissociates to cyclamic acid in the gastro -intestinal tract ). The conversion formula 
accounted for relative molecular weight s, and taking into account the 63% of cyclamate 
available to be converted to CHA in humans and the assumed conversion ra te of 
cyclamate to CHA in the gut of humans (30%). This is aligned with the approach of 
JECFA (1982) and Health Canada in their calculation of the ADI of 11 mg/kg bw/day, 
expressed as cyclamic acid.  
Table 6-4 provi des all relevant exposure and hazard values for sodium cyclamate, as 
well as resultant margins of exposure  (MOEs) , for determination of risk.  
Table 6-4. Relevant exposure and hazard values for sodium cyclamat e as well as 
MOEs  for determination of risk  
Exposure 
Scenario 
(age group  
with highest 
estimate ) Systemic 
Exposurea Critical effect 
level  Critical health 
effect endpoint  MOE  
Daily oral 
intake from 
drinking water  
(infants aged 
0 to 5 months)   0.00054 mg/kg 
bw/day  NOAEL adj.b = 
1058 mg/kg 
bw/day of 
cyclamic acid in 
13-week rat 
study.  NOAEL of 100 
mg/kg bw/day 
was selected 
based on the 
testicular effects 
observed at 200 
and 300 mg 
CHA/kg bw/day.  1 960 000 
Daily oral 
intake from 
table -top 
sweetener , 
eaters onl y  
(adult  males , 
19+ years ) 6.53 mg/kg 
bw/day 
(mean ); 12.63  
mg/kg bw/day  
(90th 
percentile ) 
 NOAEL adj.b = 
1058 mg/kg 
bw/day of 
cyclamic acid in 
13-week rat 
study.  NOAEL of 100 
mg/kg bw/day 
was selected 
based on the 
testicular effects 
observed at 200 
and 30 0 mg 
CHA/kg bw/day.  162 
(mean) ; 84 
(90th 
percentile)  
 
Daily oral 
exposure from 
use as non -
medicinal 
ingredient for 
the purpose of 2.84 mg/kg 
bw/day  NOAEL adj.b = 
1058 mg/kg 
bw/day of 
cyclamic acid in 
13-week rat 
study.  NOAEL  of 100 
mg/kg bw/day 
was selected 
based on the 
testicular effects 
observed at 200 373 Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
25 sweetening 
(adults, 19+ 
years)  and 300 mg 
CHA/kg bw/day.  
Daily oral 
exposure from 
use as non -
medicinal 
ingredient for 
the purpose of 
sweetening 
(toddlers, 1 
year)  1.36 mg/kg 
bw/day  NOAEL adj.b = 
1058 mg/kg 
bw/day of 
cyclamic acid in 
13-week rat 
study.  
 NOAEL of 100 
mg/kg bw/day 
was selected 
based on the 
testicular effects 
observed at 200 
and 300 mg 
CHA/kg bw/day.  778 
Daily buccal 
exposure to 
mouthwash  
(teens, 14 -18 
years) 0.69 mg/kg 
bw/day  
 NOAEL adj.b = 
1058 mg/kg 
bw/day of 
cyclamic acid in 
13-week rat 
study.  NOAEL of 100 
mg/kg bw/day 
was selected 
based on the 
testicular effects 
observed at 200 
and 300 mg 
CHA/kg bw/day.  1 530 
Daily 
inhalation 
exposure to 
respirator 
solution to 
treat 
bronchospas
m 
(children, 5 -8 
years) 0.034 mg/kg 
bw/day  NOAEL adj.b = 
1058 mg/kg 
bw/day of 
cyclamic acid in 
13-week rat 
study.  NOAEL of 100 
mg/kg bw/day 
was selected 
based on the 
testicular effects 
observed at 200 
and 300 mg 
CHA/kg bw/day.  31 100 
Intermittent  
oral exposure 
from chest 
congestion 
relief syrup 
(children,12 -
13 years) 14.3 mg/kg 
bw/day NOAEL adj.c = 
4230 mg/kg 
bw/day of 
cyclamic acid , 
no effects 
observed after 
1 week in a rat 
study.  NOAEL of 400 
mg/kg bw/day of 
CHA was 
selected based 
on lack of 
testicular effects 
in males at 1 
week.  296 
Intermittent 
buccal 
exposure to 
buccal  
anesthetic 
solution 
(toddlers, 2 -3 
years) 7.2 mg/kg 
bw/day  NOAEL adj.c = 
4230 mg/kg 
bw/day of 
cyclamic acid, 
no effects 
observed after 
1 week in a rat 
study.  NOAEL of 400 
mg/kg bw/day of 
CHA w as 
selected based 
on lack of 
testicular effects 
in males at 1 
week.  588 Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
26 Abbreviation: MOE, Margin of Exposure ; NOAEL, no observed adverse effect level . 
a Exposure estimates are c alculated on a sodium cyclamate basis (only the daily oral intake from food is calculated as 
cyclamic acid). However, comparison of sodium cyclamate exposure estimates to the adjusted NOAELs does not 
significantly affect the MOE calculations because the mo lecular weight of cyclamic acid (179.2 g/mol) is close to 
that of sodium cyclamate (201.2 g/mol).  
b Adjusted NOAEL of 1058 mg/kg bw/day was calculated from NOAEL of 100 mg/kg bw/day based on the following 
formula: 100 mg/kg bw per day X  2 [rounded integer from 179.2 (the MW of cyclamic acid ÷ 99.2 ( MW of CHA)] ÷ 
[0.63 (as in 63% of cyclamate is available to be converted to CHA) ÷ 0.3 (the rate of conversion of cyclamate to 
CHA)] = 1058 mg/kg bw/day.   
c Adjusted NOAEL of 4230 mg/kg bw/day was calculated from NOAEL of 400 mg/kg bw/day based on the following 
formula: 400 mg/kg bw per day X 2 [rounded integer from 179.2 (the MW of cyclamic acid ÷ 99.2 ( MW of CHA)] ÷ 
[0.63 (as in 63% of cyclamate is available to be converted to CHA) ÷ 0.3 (the rate of conversion o f cyclamate to 
CHA)] = 4230  mg/kg bw/day .  
d Assumes 100% d ermal absorption . 
The MOEs for sodium cyclamate from table -top sweetener are considered adequate to 
address uncertainties in the health effects and exposure databases.  The mean 
exposure level for t he adult male population (6.53 mg/kg bw/day) is below the ADI and 
results in a MOE of 162. Although the MOE is 84 for the 90th percentile of adult male 
consumers of sodium cyclamate, this is considered adequate for multiple reasons. 
Considerations include i) table-top sweeteners containing sodium cyclamate  must be 
labelled to state that they should be used only on the  advice of a physician;  ii) there was 
no evidence of effects on sperm parameters (including motility) in various studies with 
sodium cyclamate  or CHA ; iii) no reproductive or developmental toxicity was observed 
in animals orally dosed with up to 250 mg/kg bw/day of sodium cyclamate; i v) repeated 
daily ingestion of sodium cyclamate in human males greater or equal to 140 mg/kg 
bw/day may result in  persistent diarrhea within two weeks, which would be expected to 
deter males from high and/or prolonged consumption ; and v) available market share 
data suggest that sodium cyclamate -containing sweeteners' share of the table -top 
sweetener market has declin ed significantly over the past decade (see Appendix C). As 
such,  the MOEs for sodium cyclamate are considered adequate to address 
uncertainties in the health effects and exposure databases.  
The maxi mum intakes for oral  exposure to mouthwash, as well as fro m its use as non -
medicinal ingredient for the purpose of sweetening in natural health products, ranging 
from 0.69 to 2.84 mg/kg bw/day , while the maximum intake for inhalation exposure via a 
respirator solution to treat  bronchospasm  was 0.0342 mg/kg bw/day . These values are  
lower than the ADI of 11 mg/kg bw/day , expressed as cyclamic acid,  calculated for 
sodium cyclamate by Health Canada and JECFA (1982) (and lower than 7 mg/kg 
bw/day calculated by the SCF 2000)  (see Appendix E) . The ADI is based on a 100 -fold Intermittent 
dermal 
exposure from 
topical 
anesthetic 
solution for 
skin pain relief 
(children, 3 -8 
years) 0.38 mg/kg 
bw/dayd NOAEL adj.c = 
4230 mg/kg 
bw/day of 
cyclamic acid, 
no effect s 
observed after 
1 week in a rat 
study.  NOAEL of 400 
mg/kg bw/day of 
CHA was 
selected based 
on lack of 
testicular effects 
in males at 1 
week.  11 100 Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
27 uncertainty factor applied to the adjusted NOAEL of 1058 mg/kg bw/day used in the 
table above. Thus, both on the basis of comparison  to the ADI and of comparison to  
critical effect levels from a 13-week rat  study  (using CHA with conversion to an 
equiva lent dose of sodium cyclamate) , the resulting margins are considered adequate 
to address uncertainties in the health effects and exposure databases.   
For intermittent  oral exposure to c hest congestion  relief syrup  and intermittent  oral or 
dermal exposure t o a topical anesthetic , comparis on of  the NOAEL  from a  one-week  rat 
study (using CHA  with conversion t o sodium cyclamate ) to the conserv ative estimate s 
of exposure from  these product s containing sodium cyclamate  show MOE ranges of 
296 to 11  000. The result ing margins are considered to be adequate to address 
uncertainties in the health effects and exposure databases.  
Although the MOEs for sodium cyclamate from table -top sweetener are considered 
adequate to address uncertainties in the health effects and expo sure databases , many 
of the studies were conducted before standard guidelines were established and some of 
them lacked several parameters that affected their study quality. A discussion for 
selection of critical studies for CHA follows.  
Table 6-5 provides all relevant exposure and hazard values for CHA , as well as 
resultant MOEs , for determination of risk.   
Table 6-5. Relevant exposure and hazard values for CHA as well  as MOEs  for 
determination of risk  
Exposure 
Scenario (age 
group  with 
highest 
estimate ) Systemic 
Exposure  Critical effect 
level  Critical health 
effect endpoint  MOE  
Daily oral 
intake from 
food and 
beverages  
based on 
potential use 
from incidental 
additives 
(adults, 19+  
years ) 0.0057 mg/kg 
bw/day  
 NOAEL = 100 
mg/kg bw/day 
of CHA in 13 -
week rat study.  NOAEL of 100 
mg/kg bw/day 
was selected 
based on the 
testicular effects 
observed at 200 
and 300 mg 
CHA/kg bw/day.  17 500 
Daily oral 
intake from 
drinking water 
(infants aged 0 
to 5 months)  0.0017 mg/kg 
bw/day  NOAEL = 100 
mg/kg bw/day 
of CHA in 13 -
week rat study.  NOAEL of 100 
mg/kg bw/day 
was selected 
based on the 
testicular effects 
observed at 200 58 800 Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
28 Abbreviation: MOE, Margin of Exposure ; NOAEL, no observed adverse effect level.  
a When this product is used indoors (e.g., by an adult), toddlers can be exposed to CHA released in the indoor air.  
 
As shown in Table 6-5, for both daily and per event  inhalation and dermal exposure to 
aerosol hairsprays  and firespace gel fuel canister , the resulting margins are considered 
to be adequate to address uncertainties in the health effects and exposure databases.  
The resulting margins from daily oral exposure from food and beverages, and drinking 
water are also considered to be adequate to address uncertainties in the health effects 
and exposure databases . 
While exposure of the general population to CHA  is not of co ncern at current levels, this 
substance is  considered to have a health effect of concern on  the basis of  its potential 
hazard, due to its classification  as Globally Harmonized System Repr 2 (Suspected 
human reproductive toxicant) (ECHA 2017). Sodium cyclam ate is considered to have 
the same potential concerns, based on the use of CHA as an analogue. Therefore, 
there may be a concern for human health if exposures to sodium cyclamate or CHA 
were to increase.   
 and 300 mg 
CHA/kg bw/day.  
Daily inhalation 
and dermal 
exposur e to 
aerosol 
hairsprays 
(adults, 19+ 
years)  0.014 mg/kg 
bw/day  NOAEL = 100 
mg/kg bw/day 
of CHA in 13 -
week rat study.  NOAEL of 100 
mg/kg bw/day 
was selected 
based on the 
testicular effects 
observed at 200 
and 300 mg 
CHA/kg bw/day.  7 140 
Per event 
inhalati on and 
dermal 
exposure to 
aerosol 
hairsprays 
(children, 4 -8 
years) 0.027 mg/kg 
bw NOAEL = 400 
mg/kg bw/day 
of CHA in first 
week of 1 to 13 -
week rat study.  NOAEL of 400 
mg/kg bw/day 
was selected 
based on lack of 
testicular effects 
in males at 1 
week.  15 000  
Per event 
inhalation 
exposure to 
firespace gel 
fuel canister 
(toddlers, 1 
year)a 3 mg/kg bw  NOAEL = 400 
mg/kg bw/day 
of CHA in first 
week of 1 to 13 -
week rat study.  NOAEL of 400 
mg/kg bw/day 
was selected 
based on lack of 
testicular effects 
in males at 1 
week.  133 Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
29 
 Uncertainties in evaluation of risk to human health 
The key sources of uncertainty are presented in the table below.  
Table 6-6. Sources of uncertainty in the risk characterization  
Key source of Uncertainty  Impact  
No Canadian data for sodium cyclamate or CH A levels in  drinking water , 
air, soil or dust.  +/- 
Consumer loyalty to particular brands or types of artificial sweeteners in 
Canada is unknowna. +/- 
Aggregate exposures of products containing sodium cyclamate were not 
estimated because these products (i ncluding food products) are not 
expected to account for a significant market share in Canada . +/- 
Since few consumers reported consuming sodium cyclamate, use of  
‘eaters only’ has a significant influence on dietary  estimates  of sodium 
cyclamate . + 
High a mounts of sodium cyclamate consumed by certain respondents 
have a significant influence on the 90th percentile exposure estimates.  + 
There is variability in the percentage absorption a nd the conversion rate 
of cyclamate to CHA . +/- 
No dermal absorption d ata for sodium cyclamate or CHA . + 
No repeated dose dermal or inhalation toxicity study for sodium cyclamate 
or CHA . +/- 
No good quality carcinogenicity, reproductive or developmental oral 
studies with sodium cyclamate . +/- 
+ = uncertainty with potentia l to cause over -estimation of risk; - = uncertainty with potential to cause under -estimation 
of exposure risk; +/- = unknown potential to cause over or under estimation of risk.  
a While brand loyalty could not be assessed in the CCHS survey because brands were not reported, only 8% of 
respondents reported consuming two different table -top sweeteners (e.g. sucralose and cyclamate) and less than 
1% of respondents reported consuming more than two table -top sweeteners.  
 
 Conclusion  
Considering all available line s of evidence presented in this screening assessment, 
there is low risk of harm to the environment from  sodium cyclamate and CHA . It is 
conclude d that sodium cyclamate and CHA do not meet the criteria under paragraphs 
64(a) or ( b) of CEPA as they are  not e ntering the environment in a quantity or 
concentration or under conditions that have or may have an immediate or long -term 
harmful effect on the environment or its biological diversity or that constitute or may 
constitute a danger to the environment on whi ch life depends .  
Considering all  the information presented in this screening assessment, it is conclude d 
that sodium cyclamate and CHA do not meet the criteria under paragraph 64( c) of 
CEPA as they are not entering the environment in a quantity or concent ration or under 
conditions that constitute or may constitute a danger in Canada to human life or health.  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
30 Therefore, it is conclude d that sodium cyclamate and CHA do not meet any of the 
criteria set out in section 64 of CEPA.  
  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
31 References  
Arbeláez P, Borrul l F, Pocurull E, Marcé RM. 2015. Determination of high -intensity sweeteners in river 
water and wastewater by solid -phase extraction and liquid chromatography -tandem mass spectrometry. J 
Chromatogr A. 1393:106 -14. 
Baines J, DiNovi M. 2010. Cyclamic acid and  its salts: Dietary exposure assessment. Pp. 29 -56 in JECFA 
(2010).  
Berset JD, Ochsenbein N. 2012. Stability considerations of aspartame in the direct analysis of artificial 
sweeteners in water samples using high -performance liquid chromatography -tandem ma ss spectrometry 
(HPLC -MS/MS). Chemosphere. 88(5):563 -9. 
Bickel MH, Burkard B, Meier -Strasser E, Van Den Broek -Boot M. 1974. Entero -bacterial formation of 
cyclohexylamine in rats ingesting cyclamate. Xenobiotica 4(7):425 -439. 
Bopp BA, Sonders RC, Kesterson JW. 1986. Toxicological aspects of cyclamate and cyclohexylamine. 
Cril Rev Toxicol . 16(3):213 -306. 
Brusick D, Cifone M, Young R, Benson S. 1989. Assessment of the genotoxicity of calcium cyclamate 
and cyclohexylamine. Environ Mol Mutagen . 14(3):188 -199. 
Buss NE, Renwick AG, Donaldson KM, George CF. 1992. The metabolism of cyclamate to 
cyclohexylamine and its cardiovascular consequences in human volunteers. Toxico l Appl Pharmacol . 
115(2):199 -210. 
Calorie Control Council. 2013. International regulatory status: Worldwide status of cyclamate  [docx] . 
Atlanta (GA): Calorie Control Council.  
 
Canada. 1970a. Food and Drugs Act: Food and Drug Regulations, amended. P.C. 1970 -865, 1970 May 
12, SOR/70 -203. Canada Gazette, Part II, vol . 104, no. 10. p . 555. 
 
Canada. 1970b. Food and Drugs Act: Food and Drug Regulations, amended. P.C. 1970 -1314, 1970 July 
22, SOR/70 -332. Canada Gazette, Part II, vol. 104, no. 15. pp. 837 -838. 
Canada. 1978a. Food and Drug Regulations, Part E, Cyclamate and Saccharin Sweeteners . Canada 
Gazette Part II, vol. 112, no. 1 0, p. 2208.  
Canada. 1978b. Food and Drug Regulations , C.R.C., c.870.   
Canada. 1999. Canadian Environm ental Protection Act, 1999 . S.C. 1999, c.33 . Canada Gazette Part III, 
vol. 22, no. 3.  
Canada. 2012. Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 : Notice with respect to certa in substances 
on the Domestic Substances List [PDF] . Dept. of the Environment, Government of Canada. Canada 
Gazette, Part I, vol. 146, no. 48, Supplement.  
Canadian Chemical Producers Association. 2003. Reducing emissions 2003 emissions inventory and five 
year projections. Report No.: 12.  
Carswell TS, Morrill HL. 1937. Cyclohexylamine and dicyclohexylamine. Ind Eng Chem. 29(11 ):1247 -
1251.  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
32 ChemCAN. 2003. Level III fugacity model of  24 regions of Canada. Version 6.00.  Peterborough (ON): 
Trent University, Canadian Centre for Environmental Modelling and Chemistry.  
ChemSpider [database]. 2015. London (UK): Royal Society of Chemistry.  
 
Codex Alimentarius. 2018. General Standard for Food Additives  Online . CODEX STAN 192 -1995.  Last 
Revision 2018.  
Collings AJ. 1989. Metabolism of cyclamate and its conversion to cyclohexylamine. Diabetes Care . 
12(1):50 -55. 
[ConsExpo We b] Consumer Exposure Web Model. 2018. Bilthoven (NL): Rijksinstituut voor 
Volksgezondheid en Milieu [National Institute for Public Health and the Environment].  
Creasy DM, Ford GR, Gray TJ. 1990. The morphogenesis of cyclohexylamine -induced testicular atro phy 
in the rat: in vivo  and in vitro  studies.  Exp Mol Patho . 52(2):155 -169. 
Dick CE, Schniepp ML, Sonders RC, Wiegand RG. 1974. Cyclamate and cyclohexylamine: lack of effect 
on the chromosomes of man and rats in vivo . Mutat Res. 26(3):199 -203. 
[ECCC] Envir onment and Climate Change Canada. 2016a. Science approach document: ecological risk 
classification of organic substances . Ottawa (ON) : Government of Canada.  
[ECCC] Environment an d Climate Change Canada. 2016b. Supporting documentation: d ata used to 
create substance -specific hazard and exposure profiles and assign risk classifications in the Ecological 
Risk Classification of organic substances. Gatineau (QC): ECCC. Information in s upport of the science 
approach document: ecological risk classification of organic substances.  Available from: 
eccc.substances.eccc@canada.ca . 
[ECCC, HC] Environment and Climate Change Canada, Health Ca nada. [modified 2017 Mar 12]. 
Categorization  of chemical substances . Ottawa (ON): Government of Canada.  
[ECHA] European Chemicals Agency. c2007 -2017. Registered substances database; search results for 
CAS RN 108 -91-8 [database] . Helsinki (FI): ECHA. [updated 2018 Aug 15; ac cessed 2018 Oct 4].  
[ECHA] European Chemicals Agency. 2017. ECHA CORAP Substance evaluation conclusion and 
evaluation report for cyclohexylamine.  Substance Evaluat ion Conclusion document prepared by the 
Belgian Federal Public Service Health, Food Chain Safety and Environment Risk Management Service. 
56 pp.  
Edwards QA, Kulikov SM, Garner -O'Neale LD, Metcalfe CD, Sultana T. 2017. Contaminants of emerging 
concern in su rface waters in Barbados, West Indies. Environ Monit Assess. 189(12):636.  
Eichelbaum M, Hengstmann JH, Rest HD, Brecht T, Dengler HJ.  1974. Pharmacokinetics, cardiovascular 
and metabolic actions of cyclohexylamine in man. Arch Toxicol. 31:243 -263. 
Environm ent Canada. 2013. DSL Inventory Update data collected under the  Canadian Environmental 
Protection Act, 1999 , section  71: Notice with respect to certain substances on the Domestic Substances 
List. Data prepared by: Environment Canada, Health Canada; Existin g Substances Program.  
[EPI Suite] Estimation Program Interface SuiteTM [estimation model]. c2000 -2012. Estimation Program 
Interface for Microsoft Windows Ver. 4 .11. Washington (DC): US Environmental Protection Agency, Office 
of Pollution Prevention and Toxics; Syracuse (NY): Syracuse Research Corporation.  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
33 [EU] European Union. 2008. Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures, 
amending and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amend ing Regulation (EC) No 
1907/2006.  Off J Eur . Union L 353:1 –1355.  
Ferrando MR, Huchet B. 1968. [ Study of possible activity of sodium cyclamate on the rat in the course of 
three generations]. Bulletin de L’Académie Nationale de Médicine 153:36 -41. [in Fren ch] 
Ficheux AS, Chevillotte G, Wesolek N, Morisset T, Dornic N, Bernard A, Bertho A, Romanet A, Leroy L, 
Mercat AC, et al. 2016. Consumption of cosmetic products by the French population. Second part: 
Amount data. Food Chem Toxicol. 90:130 -141. 
Gan Z, Sun H, Feng B, Wang R, Zhang Y. 2013. Occurrence of seven artificial sweeteners in the aquatic 
environment and precipitation of Tianjin, China. Water Res. 47(14):4928 -37.  
Gan Z, Sun H, Yao Y, Zhao Y, Li Y, Zhang Y, Hu H, Wang R. 2014. Distribution of artifici al sweeteners in 
dust and soil in China and their seasonal variations in the environment of Tianjin. Sci Total Environ. 488 -
489:168 -75.  
Gaunt IF, Sharratt M, Grasso P, Landsdown AB, Gangolli SD. 1974. Short -term toxicity of 
cyclohexylamine hydrochloride i n the rat. Food Cosmet  Toxicol . 12(5-6):609 -624. 
Gaunt IF, Hardy P, Gangolli SD, Butterworth KR. 1976. Long -term toxicity of cyclohexylamine 
hydrochloride in the rat. Food Cosmet Toxicolo . 14(4):255 -67. 
Golberg L, Parekh C, Patti A, Soike K. 1969. Cyclamat e degradation in mammals and in vitro . Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 14:654.  
Gomez -Berrada MP, Ficheux AS, Rakotomalala S, Roudot AC, Ferret PJ. 2017. Probabilistic exposure 
assessment of sun care products. Food Chem Toxicol. 108:314 -325.  
Hardy J, Gaunt IF, Hoo son J, Hendy RJ, Butterworth KR. 1976. Long -term toxicity of cyclohexylamine 
hydrochloride in mice. Food Cosmet Toxicol . 14(4):269 -276. 
Health Canada. 1994. Human health risk assessment for priority substances.  Ottawa (ON): Health 
Canada.  
Health Canada. 2010. Guidelines for Incidental Additive Submissions – Guideline No.4. Bureau of 
Chemical Safety, Food Directorate. Ottawa (ON): Health Cana da. 
Health Canada. 2015. Food consumption table derived from Statistics Canada, Canadian Community 
Health Survey, Cycle 2.2, Nutrition (2004), Share file. Ottawa.  
Health Canada. 2017. Water consumption table derived from Statistics Canada, Canadian Communi ty 
Health Survey, Cycle 2.2, Nutrition (2004). Share file. Ottawa.  
Health Canada. 2018a. Backgrounder document on default values for breast milk and formula intakes. 
Unpublished report. Ottawa (ON): Government of Canada.  
Health Canada. 2018b. Backgrounder document on updated default body surface areas for use in 
ESRAB assessments. Unpublished report. Ottawa (ON): Government of Canada.  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
34 Health Council of the Netherlands. 2001. Committee on Updating of Occupational Exposure Limits. 
Cyclohexylamine; Health -base d Reassessment of Administrative Occupational Exposure Limits. The 
Hague  (NL): Health Council of the Netherlands. 35 pp. No. 2000/15OSH/021.  
[HSDB] Hazardous Substances Data Bank [database]. 2005. Cyclohexylamine, CAS RN: 108 -91-9. 
Bethesda (MD):  US Nation al Library of Medicine. [revised 2005 Aug 23; accessed 2018 Oct 4]. Search 
“cyclohexylamine” in https://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/newtoxnet/hsdb.htm . 
[HSDB] Hazardous Substances Data  Bank [database] . 2012. Cyclamate, CAS RN: 100 -88-9 (Includes 
data on Sodium cyclamate, CASRN 139 -05-9). [revised 2012 Jan 6; accessed 2018 April 25  and Sept. 
18]. Search “cyclamate” in https://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/n ewtoxnet/hsdb.htm . 
[IARC] International Agency for Research on Cancer. 1980. Cyclamates (cyclamic acid, sodium 
cyclamate, calcium cyclamate, cyclohexylamine and dicyclohexylamine), pp. 55 -110 in IARC Monographs 
on the evaluation of carcinogenic risk of chemicals to humans, Vo lume 22: Some Non -nutritive 
sweetening agents . Lyon (FR): IARC Working Group on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals 
to Humans.  
[IARC] Intern ational Agency for Research on Cancer. 1999. Cyclamates. Pp. 195 -222 in IARC 
Monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans, Volume 73: Some chemicals that cau se 
tumours of the kidney or urinary bladder in rodents and some other substances.  Lyon (FR): IARC Working 
Group on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans.  
[JECFA] Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives. 1970. Toxicological evaluation of some 
extraction solvents and certain other substances.  Geneva (CH): World Health Organization. FAO Nutrition 
Meetings Report Series No. 48A;  WHO/FOOD ADD/70.39 11 pp.   
[JECFA] Joint  FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives. 1982. Evaluation of certain food additives 
and contaminants. Geneva (CH): World Health Organization. Report No. TRS 683 -JECFA 26/27. 52 pp.  
[JECFA] Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives. 2010. Safety evaluation of certain food 
additives. Prepared by the 71st meeting of the JECFA. WHO Food Additives Series 62. Geneva (CH): 
World Health Organization . 284 pp.  
Juran SA, van Thriel C, Kleinbeck S, Schaper M, Falkenstein M, Iregren A, Johanson G. 2012. 
Neuro behavioral performance in human volunteers during inhalation exposure to the unpleasant local 
irritant cyclohexylamine. Neurotoxicology . 33(5):1180 -1187.  
Lange FT, Scheurer M, Brauch HJ. 2012. Artificial sweeteners -a recently recognized class of emerging 
environmental contaminants: a review. Anal Bioanal Chem. 403(9):2503 -18. 
Lawrence JF. 2003. Cyclamates. In: Caballero B, Finglas P, Toldra F, editors. Encyclopedia of Food 
Sciences and Nutrition , 2nd ed. Cambridge (MA): Academic Press. 1712 -1714  pp. 
Lomono va GV. 1965. Toxicity of cyclohexylamine and dicyclohexylamine. Fed Proc  24: T96 -8 (translation 
from Gig Trud Prof Zabol 1963; 7(11):51 -6). [cited in Health Council of the Netherlands 2001].  
Lorke D, Machemer L. 1983. The effect of cyclohexylamine on the e mbryo following oral administration to 
rats and mice. Tox Letters 17:137 -143. 
[MSDS] Material Safety Data Sheet. 2018. SunJel Fume -free Firespace gel fuel canister, pure gel . Salt 
Lake City (UT) : Thatcher Company, Inc. [accessed 2018 Nov 18].  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
35 National Rese arch Council. 2007. Cyclohexylamine.  In: Acute exposure guideline levels for selected 
airborne chemicals, Volume 5 . Washington (DC): National Academies Press. 92 -144 pp. 
[Nielsen] AC Nielsen  Company of Canada . 2005 -2017.  Item ranking reports  of 2005, 2010, 2014, 2015, 
and 2017.  
OECD QSAR Toolbox. [Read -across tool] . 2014. Ver sion 3.3 . Paris (FR): Organisation for Economic Co -
operation and Development,  Laboratory of Mathematical Chemistry . 
Orlando RA, Lao YJ. 1993. An assessment of exposure to cyclohexylamine arising from steam 
humidification of indoor air. J Enviro n Health. 56(5 ):6-9.  
Oser BL, Cars on S, Cox GE, Vogin EE, Sternberg SS. 1975. Chronic toxicity study of cyclamate: 
saccharin (10:1) in rats. Toxicology . 4(3):315 -30. 
Oser BL, Carson S, Cox GE, Vogin EE, Sternberg SS. 1976. Long -term and multigeneration toxicity 
studies with cyclohexylamine  hydrochloride. Toxicology . 6(1):47 –65. 
Parekh C, Goldberg EK, Goldberg L. 1970. Fate of Sodium Cyclamate -14C in the Rhesus Monkey (M. 
mulatta). Abstract no. 26 in Abstracts of papers for the ninth annual meeting of The Society of Toxicology, 
Atlanta, Geor gia; March 15 -19, 1970. Toxicol App Pharmacol. 10:282.  
[PhysProp] Interactive PhysProp Database [database]. c2013. Syracuse (NY): SRC, Inc. [accessed 2018 
Oct 4]. One of several databases at http://www.srcinc.com/what -we-do/environmental/scientific -
databases.html . 
Pitkin RM, Reynolds WA, Filer LJ. 1969. Cyclamate and cyclohexylamine: transfer across the 
hemochorial placenta. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 132(3):993 -995. 
Pitkin  RM, Reynolds WA, Filer LJ. 1970. Placental transmission and fetal distribution of cyclamate in early 
human pregnancy. Am Journal Obstet Gynecol.  108(7):1043 -1050.  
PubChem [database] . 2004 -. Bethesda (MD): US National Library of Medicine, National Center for 
Biotechnology Information. [accessed 2018 Sep 4].  
Renwick AG, Thompson JP, O'Shaughnessy M, Walter EJ. 2004. The metabolism of cyclamate to 
cyclohexylamine in humans during long -term administration. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol . 196(3):367 -80. 
Renwick AG, Williams RT. 1972 a. The fate of cyclamate in man and other species. Biochem J. 129:869 -
879. 
Renwick AG, Williams RT. 1972b. The metabolites of cyclohexylamine in man and certain animals. 
Biochem J. 129:857 -867. 
[RIVM] Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieu [National Institute for Public Health and the 
Environment]. 2006. Cosmeti cs fact sheet: to assess the risks for the consumer: updated version for 
ConsExpo 4.  Bilthoven (NL): RIVM. Report No.: 320104001/2006.  [accessed 2018 Oct 4].  
Roberts A, Renwick AG, Ford G, Creasy DM, Gaunt I. 1989. The metabolism and testicular toxicity o f 
cyclohexylamine in rats and mice during chronic dietary administration. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol . 
98(2):216 -29. Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
36 Sang Z, Jiang Y, Tsoi YK, Leung KS. 2014. Evaluating the environmental impact of artificial sweeteners: 
a study of their distributions, photodeg radation and toxicities. Water Res. 52:260 -74. 
[SCCS] Scientific Committee on Consumer Safety. 2015. The SCCS’s notes of guidance for the testing of 
cosmeti c ingredients and their safety evaluation, 9th revision. Revised version of 25 April 2016.  Report No. 
SCCS/1564/15. 151 pp.  
[SCF] Scientific Committee on Food. 2000. Revised opinion on cyclamic acid and its sodium and calcium 
salts. Report No. SCF/CS/EDUL/192 final. 13 March 2000 . European Commission Health & Consumer 
and Hazardous Protection Directorate -General. 8 pp.  
Scheurer M, Brauch HJ, Lange FT. 2009. Anal ysis and occurrence of seven artificial sweeteners in 
German waste water and surface water and in soil aquifer treatment (SAT). Anal Bioanal Chem. 
394(6):1585 -94. 
Serra -Majem L, Bassas L, García -Glosas R, Ribas L, Inglés C, Casals I, Saavedra P, Renwick AG . 2003. 
Cyclamate intake and cyclohexylamine excretion are not related to male fertility in humans. Food Additi  
Contam . 20(12):1097 -1104. 
Spoelstra J, Schiff SL, Brown SJ. 2013. Artificial sweeteners in a large Canadian river reflect human 
consumption in t he watershed. PLoS One. 8(12):e82706.  
Spoelstra J, Senger ND, Schiff SL. 2017. Artificial Sweeteners Reveal Septic System Effluent in Rural 
Groundwater. J Environ Qual. 46(6):1434 -1443.  
Statistics Canada 2015. Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS) 2015 S hare File. Ottawa, ON. 
Canada. Estimates generated using SAS 9.3 [GRID] through SAS EG 5.1.  
Takayama S, Renwick AG, Johansson SL, Thorgeirsson UP, Tsutsumi M, Dalgard DW, Sieber SM. 2000. 
Long -term toxicity and carcinogenicity study of cyclamate in nonhuma n primates. Toxicol Sci. 53:33 -39. 
Thorgeirsson UP, Dalgard DW, Reeves J, Adamson RH. 1994. Tumor incidence in a chemical 
carcinogenesis study of nonhuman primates. Reg Tox Pharm. 19:130 -151. 
Tran NH, Hu J, Li J, Ong SL. 2014. Suitability of artificial swe eteners as indicators of raw wastewater 
contamination in surface water and groundwater. Water Res. 48:443 -56. 
[USA] United States of America. 1970. Federal Register, 35, 13644, August 27, 1970.  
[US EPA] US Environmental Protection Agency. 1988. Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS) 
Cyclohexylamine; CASRN 108 -91-8 [PDF]. Washington (DC): Office of Research and Development.   
[US EPA] US Environmental Protectio n Agency. Chemistry Dashboard [database ]. Sodium cyclamate.  
[updated 2018 Sept 13; accessed Sept 18, 2018].  
[US FDA] US Food and Drug Administ ration. 1980. Cyclamate, Commissioner's Decision.  Federal 
Register, Volume 45, No. 181, FR 61474, September 16, 1980.  
[US NTP] United Sta tes National Toxicology Program. 2016. Report on Carcinogens, 14th ed. Research 
Triangle Park (NC): US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service.   Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
37 van Eyk AD. 2015. The effect of five artificial sweeteners on Caco -2, HT -29 and HEK -293 cells. Drug  
Chem  Toxicol . 38(3):318 -327. 
Wallace WC, Lethco EJ, Brouwer EA. 1970. The metabolism of cyclamates in rats. J Pharmacol Exp 
Ther. 175(2):325 -330. 
Watanabe Y, Bach LT, Van Dinh P, Prudente M, Aguja S, Phay N, Nakata H. 2016. Ubiquitous detectio n 
of artificial sweeteners and iodinated X -ray contrast media in aquatic environmental and wastewater 
treatment plant samples from Vietnam, the Philippines, and Myanmar. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol. 
70(4):671 -81. 
Watrous RM, Schulz HN. 1950. Cyclohexylamin e, p-chloronitrobenzene, 2 -aminopyridine: toxic effects in 
industrial use. Ind Med Surg. 19:317 -320. [cited in National Research Council 2007].  
Wills JH, Serrone DM, Coulston F. 1981. A 7 -month study of ingestion of sodium cyclamate by human 
volunteers. R eg Tox Pharm . 1:163 -176. 
Yang YY, Zhao JL, Liu YS, Liu WR, Zhang QQ, Yao L, Hu LX, Zhang JN, Jiang YX, Ying GG. 2018. 
Pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) and artificial sweeteners (ASs) in surface and 
ground waters and their application as i ndication of wastewater contamination. Sci Total Environ. 616 -
617:816 -823. 
 
  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
38 Appendices  
Appendix A. Summary of health effects  and read -across approach for 
sodium cyclamate and CHA  
Table A -1. Hazard information for sodium cyclamate and CHA  
Chemical 
name  Cyclohexylamine 
hydrochloride  (CHA 
HCl) Cyclohexylamine 
(CHA)  Sodium cyclamate  
Role Analogue  Analogue and  Target 
substance  Target substance  
CAS#  4998 -76-9 108-91-8 139-05-9 
Chemical 
structure  
   
Molecular 
weight 
(g/mol)  135.6  99.2 201.2  
Vapour 
pressure (Pa 
at 25°C)  No data  1430  1.70 x 10-8 
[modelled]  
Water 
solubility 
(mg/L)  8.3 x 105  
(17℃) “miscible”  1.0 x 106 
[modelled]  
Log K ow 
(dimensionles
s) No data  3.7 -1.61 
[modelled]  
Toxico -
kinetics and 
metabolism  No data   CHA better absorbed 
from gastrointestinal 
tract and more widely 
distributed throughout 
tissues of body than 
cyclamate (Bopp et  
al. 1986; HSDB 
2012).  
 
CHA metabolized in 
kidney to form minor 
metabolites: 
Cyclohexanone, Sodium cyclamate 
salts dissociates to 
cyclamate in rats;  
some of it is absorbed  
from the  
gastrointestinal tract 
of all mammals 
(Collings 1989).  
 
Cyclamate can then 
be transformed to 
CHA by microbes in 
GI tract of all 
Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
39 Chemical 
name  Cyclohexylamine 
hydrochloride  (CHA 
HCl) Cyclohexylamine 
(CHA)  Sodium cyclamate  
Role Analogue  Analogue and  Target 
substance  Target substance  
CAS#  4998 -76-9 108-91-8 139-05-9 
cyclohexanol, trans -
cyclohexane -1,2-diol 
and N -hydrocyclo -
hexylamine , including 
minor metabolites, 
excreted in urine 
(Gaunt et al. 1974; 
Golberg et al. 1969; 
IARC 1 999). 
 
Urine excretion in 
men ingesting sodium 
cyclamate for 7 
months was 88% 
cyclamate and 17% 
CHA (relative mean 
percentages) (Wills et 
al. 1981).  mammals (IARC 
1999).  
 
Cyclamate and 
expired air and < 3% 
recovered CHA, 
including minor 
metabolites, excreted 
in urine (Gaunt et al. 
1974; Golberg  et al. 
1969; IARC 1999).  
Urine excretion in 
men ingesting sodium 
cyclamate for 7 
months was 88% 
cyclamate and 17% 
CHA (relative mean 
percentages) (Wills et 
al. 1981).  
Repeat dose 
toxicity (oral)  NOAEL = 13 7 mg/kg 
bw/day; 13 -wk rat 
study in rats based on  
the testicular ef fects 
observed at 274 and 
411 mg/kg bw/day 
(Brune  et al.  1978 
[unpub lished report], 
as cited in ECHA 
2017; Bopp et al. 
1986).  
NOAEL = 546.8 
mg/kg bw/day (HTD) 
based on lack of 
testicular effects in 
males at 1 week in 1 Read -across from 
CHA HCl  Read -across from 
CHA  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
40 Chemical 
name  Cyclohexylamine 
hydrochloride  (CHA 
HCl) Cyclohexylamine 
(CHA)  Sodium cyclamate  
Role Analogue  Analogue and  Target 
substance  Target substance  
CAS#  4998 -76-9 108-91-8 139-05-9 
to 13 -wk rat study 
(Creasy et al. 1990).  
Long -term 
toxicity (oral)  NOAEL = 82  mg/kg 
bw/day based on 
testicular changes 
(atrophy, tubules with 
few spermatids, 
calcium deposits in 
tubules) at 300 mg/kg 
bw/day in 2-yr rat 
study (G aunt et al. 
1976 cited in Bopp et 
al. 1986).  Read -across from 
CHA HCl: (Gaunt et 
al. 1976 cited in Bopp 
et al. 1986).  NOAEL = 100 mg/kg 
bw/day; 24-yr monkey 
study, based on 
testicular effects 
observed at 500 
mg/kg bw/day after 23 
years (Takayama et 
al. 200 0). 
NOAEL = 1120 mg/kg 
bw/day; 2 -yr rat, 
based on bladder 
carcinomas at 2500 
mg/kg bw/day. 
Bladder carcinomas 
may have been 
related to saccharin 
treatment (US NTP 
2016).a 
Reproductive 
Toxicity (oral)  NOAEL = 100 mg/kg 
bw/day based on 
“growth retardation 
due to the lower food 
consumption”, slight 
reduction of litter size 
and weaning weight, 
and significant higher 
incidence of testicular 
atrophy in adult males 
at the LOAEL of 150 
mg/kg bw/day ; 2-yr 
multi -generation study 
in rats  (Oser et al. 
1976 ; ECHA 2017 ). Read -across from 
CHA HCl  LOAEL = 1500 mg/kg 
bw/day (HTD) ; 3-
generation rat study, 
based on testicular 
degeneration in F2  
and F3  adult males  
and effects in F3 
offspring (decreased 
pup survival from birth 
to weaning) (Ferrando 
and Huchet 1968).  
Develop -
mental 
Toxicity (oral)  NOAEL =  42 mg/kg 
bw/day; rat 
developmental study, 
based on reduced Read -across from 
CHA HCl  NOAEL = 250 mg/kg 
bw/day in rat and 
rabbit developmental 
toxicity studies (HTD) Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
41 Chemical 
name  Cyclohexylamine 
hydrochloride  (CHA 
HCl) Cyclohexylamine 
(CHA)  Sodium cyclamate  
Role Analogue  Analogue and  Target 
substance  Target substance  
CAS#  4998 -76-9 108-91-8 139-05-9 
placental and fetal 
weights in the 
presence of 
decreased maternal 
body weight gain at 
140 mg/kg bw/day 
(Lorke and Machemer 
1983 cited in ECHA 
2017).  (Bein et al. 1967, 
Fritz. and Hess 1968 
and US Food and 
Drug Research 
Laboratories cited in 
JECFA 1970).  
Genetic 
toxicity  NR Negative in vitro  and 
in vivo  (chromosomal 
aberration and 
dominant lethal 
studies were mostly 
negative at oral or 
intraperitoneal doses 
of 50 to 150 mg/kg bw 
in rats, mice and 
Chinese hamsters 
[JECFA 1982; Bopp 
et al. 1986; ECHA 
2017]).   Equivocal in vitro ; 
Negative in vivo  
Carcino -
genicity (oral)  NR No evidence of 
cancer effects based 
on available data.  Not classifiable (IARC 
Group 3) (IARC 
1999).  
Abbreviation: NR , Read -across not required for risk characterization; NOAEL, no observed adverse effect level; HTD, 
highest tested dose; LTD , lowest tes ted dose; OTD , only tested dose; h , hours, wk , week.  
a Rats fed a 10:1 mixture of sodium cyclamate:sodium saccharin in the diet.   Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
42 Appendix B. Estimates of daily human exposure to sodium cyclamate 
and CHA in drinking water   
Table B -1 summarizes the estimate s of daily intake of sodium cyclamate and CHA from 
drinking water, as well as the parameters used in the estimation. Exposure from other 
environmental media such as air, dust or soil  are expected to be negligible.  
Table B -1. Upper -bounding  estimates of da ily intake (μg/kg -bw per day) of sodium 
cyclamate and CHA  
Substanc
e Route of 
exposure  0 to 5 
monthsa 
(formula 
fed)b 6 to 11 
month
sc 1 yrd 2 to 3 
yre 4 to 8 
yrf 9 to 13 
yrg 14 to 
18 yrh Greater 
than or 
equal to 
19 
yearsi 
Sodium 
cyclamate  Drinking 
Waterj 0.54 0.34 0.13 0.12 0.09 0.07 0.07 0.08 
CHA  Drinking 
Waterk 1.70 1.09 0.43 0.37 0.30 0.23 0.23 0.27 
a  Assumed to weigh 6.3 kg (Health Canada 2015)  
b Exclusively for formula -fed infants, assumed to drink 0.826 L of water per day (Health Canada 2018a), 
wher e water is used to reconstitute formula. See footnote on drinking water for details.  
c Assumed to weigh 9.1 kg (Health Canada 2015) and to drink 0 L of water per day (Health Canada 
2017). For formula -fed infants, assumed to drink 0.764 L of water per day ( Health Canada 2018a), 
where water is used to reconstitute formula. See footnote on drinking water for details.  
d  Assumed to weigh 11.0 kg (Health Canada 2015) and to drink 0.36 L of water per day (Health Canada 
2017) 
e Assumed to weigh 15 kg (Health Canad a 2015) and to drink 0.43 L of water per day (Health Canada 
2017).  
f Assumed to weigh 23 kg (Health Canada 2015) and to drink 0.53 L of water per day (Health Canada 
2017).  
g Assumed to weigh 42 kg (Health Canada 2015) and to drink 0.74 L of water per day ( Health Canada 
2017).  
h Assumed to weigh 62 kg (Health Canada 2015) and to drink 1.09 L of water per day (Health Canada 
2017).  
i Assumed to weigh 74 kg (Health Canada 2015) and to drink 1.53 L of water per day (Health Canada 
2017).  
j Drinking water intake w as estimated using the maximum concentration of sodium cyclamate (4.1 µg/L) 
measured in groundwater from domestic wells in southern portion of Nottawasaga River watershed in 
Ontario, Canada (Spoelstra et al. 2017). Sodium cyclamate was measured at the mini mum 
concentration of 0.09 µg/L and median concentration of 0.17 µg/L (estimated from figures) with a 
detection frequency of 8% from 59 samples.   
k No monitoring data of drinking water in Canada were identified. The predicted environmental 
concentration (PE C) of 13 µg/L was calculated using in -house environmental modelling tool based on 
the total reported import quantity of CHA (Environment Canada 2013) and assuming wastewater  
treatment system  removal of 83.13% from ECCC ERC report and daily release to waste water of 4% 
(3% as residue containers, 1% as transfer line/process vessel residues). This PEC was selected for 
deriving daily intake estimate from drinking water (Health Canada, NSACB, Environmental Assessment 
Unit Workbook, In house model unpublished).  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
43 Appendix C. Additional details pertaining to the estimation of  daily 
human exposure to cyclamic acid from the consumption of table -top 
sweeteners containing sodium cyclamate  
Food consumption data from the Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS) 
(Statistics C anada 2015) were employed in the exposure assessment. This survey 
distinguishes between five different table -top sweeteners: aspartame, sucralose, 
saccharin, steviol glycosides and cyclamate. Consumption estimates were generated 
based on "Sweetener, cyclam ate" specifically (food code 403802). As described in 
Section 6.1.1, the quantity of sodium cyclamate -containing table -top sweetener 
consumed was converted to a quantity of sodium cyclamate consumed based on its 
presence therein at 32% by mass, and in turn  converted to a quantity of cyclamic acid 
using the relative molecular weights of sodium cyclamate and cyclamic acid (Equation 
1). 
Cyclamic acid = sweetener (g) × 32% × 1000 mg/g × (179.234/201.216) ÷ body weight (kg)  
Equation 1: Calculation of exposure to cyclamic acid (mg/kg bw per day) based on 
consumption of sodium cyclamate -based table -top sweetener (g/day)  
None of the approximately six thousand respondents below age 19 reported 
consumption of sodium cyclamate, thus exposure estimates were only calculated for 
adults age 19 and over, among whom approximately 2% reported consumption of table -
top sweeteners containing sodium cyclamate. As inclusion of the non -consumers, 
representing more than 98% of adult respondents, would great ly dilute exposure 
estimates, they were not considered in the exposure assessment.  
Single -day consumption estimates from a 24 -hour dietary recall survey provide insight 
about exposure on the specific survey day and are often considered appropriate for use  
in drawing conclusions about the health significance of this exposure. However, some 
assessments require that an adjustment procedure be carried out in order to generate 
estimates more reflective of typical, long -term dietary exposure. Approximately one t hird 
of respondents in the CCHS survey were surveyed on a second, non -consecutive day in 
order to provide a means to measure day -to-day variability in consumption, which is 
required to calculate usual intakes.  
 
There are two sources of variation in the sur vey data: 'within -person' variation, the 
difference in what a given person eats on one day versus another day, and 'between -
person' variation, the difference in what one person eats versus what another person 
eats. The latter is desirable to retain; for in stance, it is needed to examine the exposure 
of high consumers, that is, the 90th percentile of exposure in the present assessment. In 
order to estimate usual intakes over a longer period of time, it is necessary to remove 
the within -person variation while  preserving the between -person variation.   
Usual intakes for cyclamic acid were generated using the US National Cancer Institute 
(NCI) adjustment method implemented through the SAS programming language Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
44 (Statistical Analysis System, Version 9.3 accessed thr ough SAS Enterprise Guide 5.1, 
SAS Institute). This statistical method for determining usual intakes can be used for 
both ubiquitously and episodically consumed foods.  
Mean and 90th percentile eaters -only, estimates of usual dietary exposure to sodium 
cyclamate (as cyclamic acid) were generated both for the "general population" 
(including those with diabetes), and for individuals with diabetes as a subpopulation 
hypothesized to consume higher quantities of table -top sweeteners. These estimates 
are presented  in Table C-1 along with consumption rates of sodium cyclamate -based 
table -top sweeteners.  Available market share data suggest that sodium cyclamate -
containing sweeteners' share of the table -top sweetener market has declined 
significantly over the past dec ade (Nielsen 2005 –2017).  
 
Table C-1. Consumption of sodium cyclamate -based table -top sweeteners 
(containing an assumed 32% sodium cyclamate)a and estimated ‘eaters only’ 
usual dietary exposure to cyclamic acid based on this consumption  
Estimates  Age 
Group  Mean  Mean  90th 
Percentile  90th 
Percentile  
  
Male  Female  Male  Female  
Sweetener b 
consumption (g/day)  19+ years 
(general)  2.14 2.10 4.07 3.81 
Sweetener b 
consumption (g/day)  19+ years 
(diabetes)  2.06 2.06 3.88 3.81 
Sweetener 
consumption(packets/
day)c 19+ years 
(general)  2–3  2–3 5 4–5 
Sweetener 
consumption(packets/
day)c 19+ years 
(diabetes)  2–3 2–3 4–5 4–5 
Exposure to cyclamic 
acid (mg/kg bw per 
day)d 19+ years 
(general)  6.53 8.00 12.63  14.98  
Exposure to cyclamic 
acid (mg/kg bw per 
day)d 19+ years 
(diabetes)  6.28 7.67 12.15  14.57  
a The assumed cyclamate content of 32% is based on the average of three brands of cyclamate 
sweeteners containing 30 -34% cyclamate.  
b 'Sweetener' here refers to the total mass of the sweetener product, including the assumed 32% sodium 
cyclamate as well as the mass of carrier that comprises the remainder.  
c Number of sweetener packets that consumption represents is included for ease of conceptualization of 
the quantity. Packets are assumed to weigh 0.8 grams each, which was fo und to be typical among the 
available products.  
d Body weights are self -reported values from the survey respondents, thus varied depending on 
individuals.   Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
45 Appendix D. Parameters used to estimate human exposure  to sodium 
cyclamate and CHA from use of produ cts available to consumers  
Exposure from the use of products available to consumers was estimated using the in-
house algorithms (for oral, buccal, and dermal routes) or ConsExpo Web (2018)  (for 
inhalation route) . Exposure estimates were calculated based on  default body weights of 
74 kg, 62 kg, 42 kg, 23 kg, 15 kg, 11 kg, 9.1 kg, and 6.3 kg for adults (19 years and 
older), teens (14 to 18 years old), children (9 to 13 years), younger children (4 to 8 
years old), toddlers aged 2 to 3 years, toddlers aged 1 ye ar, infants aged 6 to 11 
months, and infants aged 0 to 5 months, respectively (Health Canada 2015 ). Dermal 
absorption of 100% was assumed in the absence of dermal absorption data. The 
parameters used in the estimation of exposure from the use of natural he alth products 
and drugs are described in Table D-1. 
Table D-1. Parameters used in estimating e xposure to sodium cyclamate from use 
of drugs including natural health products  
Product  
scenario  Model parameters and assumptionsa 
Non-medicinal 
ingredient for 
the purpose of 
sweetening  Quantity per dosage unit : 70 mgb 
Dosage unit t: 5 mL (1 tsp)b 
Frequency of use: 3 times dailyb 
Age group: adult s (19+ yrs)b  
 
Non-medicinal 
ingredient for 
the purpose of 
sweetening  Concentration: 1.5%b 
Dose amount: 1  mLb  
Frequen cy of use: 1 time dailyb 
Age group: 1 to 18 yrsb  
 
Mouthwash  Concentration: 0.5%c 
 
Ingested amount of product per application:  
1700 mg /use for adults and teens, and 1000 mg /use for children 
(9-13 yrs ) (based on mean product amount from Ficheux et al. 
[2016] and ingestion factor of 10% from SCCS [2015 ]) 
 
Frequency of use: 5 times daily for adults, teens, and children 
(based on professional judgement and product description)c 
 
Age group: 9 to 19+ yrsc 
 
Chest 
congestion 
relief syrup  Concentration: 1.5%c 
Dose  amount: 10  mL (product labels)  
Frequency of use: 4 times daily (for up to 7 days based on similar 
product labels).   
Age group: 12 to 19+ yrs (product labels)  
 Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
46 Product  
scenario  Model parameters and assumptionsa 
Buccal  
anesthetic 
solution  Mouthwash exposure scenario (buccal) was assumed , except 
where other wise indicated,  based on the product description and 
general use  information . 
 
Concentration: 2%c 
 
Frequency of use: 8 times/day for adultsc and 6 times/day for 
teens, children, and toddlers (2 -18 yrs) (based on similar product)  
 
Dose amount:   
Adults and t eens: 15  mL (4.5 mg/kg bw or maximum of 300 mg per 
single dose)c 
Children (4 -13 yrs) and toddlers (2 -3 yrs): 1mL per 5 kg bw (4 
mg/kg bw; based on similar product)  
 
Ingestion rate (IR):  
Adults, teens, and children: 10% of dose amount  (assuming 
mouthwash buccal exposure scenario; SCCS [2015 ]) 
Toddlers (2 -3 yrs): 30% of dose amount (assuming application with 
a cotton tip based on similar product; IR estimated from % of 
cosmetic product transferred onto the skin from wipes; Ficheux et 
al. [2016 ])  
 
Age group : 2 to 19+ yrs (similar product labels)  
 
Topical 
anesthetic 
solution for 
skin pain relief  After -sun milk dermal exposure scenario was assumed based on 
product description and general uses (temporary relief of pain 
associated with minor burns, sunburns, mi nor cuts, scrapes, insect 
bites or minor skin irritations c). 
Concentration: 2%c 
 
Surface area: half the surface of forearms assuming sunburns on 
small area (adjusted from Health Canada [2018 b]; based on 
product label ‘do not use in large quantities’ ) 
Adults (19+ yrs): 637.5 cm2 
Teens (14 -18 yrs): 622.5 cm2 
Children (9 -13 yrs): 475 cm2 
Younger children (3 -8 yrs): 312.5 cm2 
 
Amount of product used per day per cm2 (Gomez -Berrada et al. 
2017)  
Adults and teens: 0.64 mg/day/cm2 
Children (10 -14 yrs): 1.05 mg/day/ cm2 Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
47 Product  
scenario  Model parameters and assumptionsa 
Younger children (3 -9 yrs): 1.41 mg/day/cm2 
 
Respirator 
solution to 
treat 
bronchospasm  
 Ingredient quantity per dose : 3 mg/dosec 
 
Exposure model , Exposure to vapour - Instantaneous release
 (RIVM 2006)  
Frequency  of use: 4 times dailyc  
Age group: 5 to 19+ yrsc  
Exposure duration : 10 minute  for each treatmentc  
 
Room volume : 1 m³ (formulation is administered via a respirator or 
nebulizer)  
Ventilation rate :  2  per hour  
Inhalation rate : 15.1 m³/day  for adults, 15.9 m³/day for teens, 13.9 
m³/day for childr en (9 -13 yrs), and 11.1 m³/day for children ( 4-8 
yrs).  
Absorption fraction : 100%  
 Abbreviation: yrs , years  
 a Unless specified, a retention factor of 1 was used.  
b Personal communication, e-mails from NNHPD, HC to ESRAB, HC, dated May 3, May 14, July 27,  Aug 8, and Sept 
18, 2018; unreferenced.   
c Personal communication, e-mails from TPD, HC to ESRAB, HC, dated May 3, July 27, Aug 8, and Sept 17, 2018; 
unreferenced.  
  
The parameters used in the estimate  of inhalation and dermal exposure f rom use of 
produc ts available to consumers  are described in Table D-2. Exposures were estimated 
using ConsExpo Web ( 2018 ) or other algorithms (see below for more details).  
Table D-2. Parameters and assumptions used in estimating inhalation and dermal 
exposure to CHA from use of products available to consumers  
Product  Assumptionsa 
Hair styling 
product – 
aerosol 
hairspray  Concentration of CHA : 0.3%c 
Molecular weight: 99.2 g/mol  
Vapour pressure: 1.3 x 103 Pa 
 
Frequency of use:  
1.49 per day (19+ yrs) (Loretz et al . 2008),  
0.63 per day (14 -18 yrs) and  
0.64 per day (9 -13 yrs and 4 -8 yrs) (Wu et al . 2010)  
 
Inhalation:  
Exposure to vapour, instantaneous release (RIVM 2006)  
Exposure duration: 5 minutes  
Product amount: 2.6 g (19+ yrs) (Loretz et al . 2006); 2.3 g (4-8, 9-
13, and  14-18 yrs) (Ficheux et al. 2016)  Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
48 Abbreviation: yrs , years  
a Unless otherwise stated, the retention factor is assumed to be 1 . 
b Total surface area of half head . 
c Personal communication, e-mail from CPSD, HC, to ESRAB, HC, dated December 14, 2016; unreferenced .  
d MSDS (2018) . 
  Room volume: 10 m3  
Ventilation rate: 2 per hour  
Mass transfer coefficient: 10 m/hr  
Limit concentration to saturated air concentration: yes  
Application temperature:  20°C  
Absorption model:  Fixed fraction   
Absorption fracti on: 100%  
 
Dermal:  
Direct Contact – Instant application  
Exposed areab: 585  cm² (19+ yrs), 370 cm² (14 -18 yrs), 350 cm² 
(9-13 yrs), and 305 cm² (4 -8 yrs) (Health Canada 2018 b) 
Product amount: 2.6 g (19+ yrs) (Loretz et al . 2006); 2.3 g (4-8, 9-
13, and 14 -18 yrs) (Ficheux et al. 2016)  
Retention Factor: 0.085  
 
Firespace gel 
fuel canister   Concentration of CHA: 0.3%d 
 
Defaults from essential oil – air freshener scenario were used, 
otherwise specified (RIVM 2006)  
 
Frequency of use : 168 per year  
 
Inhalation:   
Exposure to vapour, instantaneous release  (Tier 1 approach ) 
Exposure duration: 4 hours ( default for essential oil: air freshener 
scenario from RIVM 2006 ) 
Product amount: 1107  g (three canister s of gel fuel )d 
Room volume: 58  m3 (living room)  
Ventilation rat e: 0.5 per hour  
Inhalation rate: 15.1 m³/day for adults, 15.9 m³/day for teens, 13.9 
m³/day for children (9 -13 yrs), 11.1 m³/day for children (4 -8 yrs), 
9.2 m³/day (2 -3 yrs), and 3.7 m³/day (0 -5 months).  
Emission duration: 3 hours  
 
Limit concentration to saturated air concentration: yes  
Application temperature:  20°C 
Absorption model : Fixed fraction   
Absorption fraction : 100% 
 Screening Assessment - Sodium Cyclamate  and Cyclohexylamine   
49 Appendix E. Sodium cyclamate acceptable daily intake ( ADI)  
Canada enacted regulations on cyclamate sweeteners (Canada 1978a), including 
sodium cyclamate, based on an internal review of cyclamic acid and its salts (see 
Canada 1978b for updated regulations on cyclamate sweeteners). H ealth Canada  
established an acceptable daily intake (ADI) of 11 mg/kg bw/day, expressed as 
cyclamic acid (persona l communication, e-mail from FD, HC to ESRAB, HC, dated Oct. 
24, 2018; unreferenced).  
The ADI for sodium cyclamate was based on the 13 -week study in which rats were 
administered  CHA  and using the NOAEL for testicular effects  (Brune et al. 1978) . The 
conver sion to a cyclamic acid basis (due to the fact that sodium cyclamate dissociates 
to the cyclamic acid anion and the sodium cation in the gastrointestinal tract) was 
calculated based on the relative molecular weights (MW) of cyclamic acid  and CHA,  and 
other  factors . JECFA (1982) calculated an ADI = 11 mg//kg bw/day based on [100 
mg/kg bw/day X 2 ( equal to the molecular weight [MW] of cyclamic acid  ÷ MW of CHA)  
= 2 when rounded up to the integer value ] ÷ [0.63 (as in 63% of cyclamate is available 
to be conver ted to CHA) ÷ 0.3 (the rate of conversion of cyclamate to CHA)] = 1058 
mg/kg bw/day and applying an uncertainty factor (UF) of a 100.  From their interpretation 
of data, JECFA assumed that  18.9% of cyclamate is converted to CHA by gut bacteria.  
This is cons ervative as most studies have shown a conversion rate of < 10% in animal 
and human models. Note that Health Canada calculated the same ADI value based on 
data available in 1976 ( personal communication, e-mails from FD, HC to ESRAB, HC, 
dated Oct. 18 and 24 , 2018; unreferenced) . 
SCF (2000) calculated an ADI = 7 mg/kg bw/day based on the following formula: 
(NOAEL X MW) ÷ (UF X conversion rate) = (100 mg/kg bw/day X 2) ÷ (32 X 0.85) = 
7.35 mg/kg bw/day. SCF (2000) increased the 18.9% assumed conversion rate us ed by 
JECFA (1982) and replaced it with an overall value of 85% absorption and conversion 
rate. By accounting for inter -individual variability with a high conversion/absorption rate, 
the SCF (2000) then applied a smaller uncertainty factor, reducing it fro m 100 to 32.  
 