Created February 2016MICROPLASTICS
Overview of research projects in the NY/NJ Region
Plastics are synthetic, persistent materials derived from petroleum (crude oil). In recent decades, single-use
disposable plastic items have become pervasive, and epitomize a society of convenience that unfortunately
has significant ecological costs, especially in aquatic environments. Although difficult to
quantify, vast amounts of plastic enters the ocean each year from land-based sources and at-sea sources that is
increasing the almost immeasurable volume already circulating around the globe.  Plastics in the marine
environment have significant environmental and economic consequences, including harm to marine life
(entanglement and ingestion), tourism (beach closures due to littered beaches), and navigation hazards (snared
propellers, clogged intakes), as well as other negative impacts. 
Plastics do not biodegrade; they do not break down into organic constituents that are then re-absorbed
naturally into the environment. Existing pieces break down into ever smaller pieces via photodegradation and
mechanical abrasion. As such, once plastic is introduced into the environment, it will persist for hundreds of
years. The smaller plastics are referred to as microplastics.
Microplastics, plastic pieces < 5 mm in size, are increasingly common in the marine environment. There are
two sources of microplastics: 1) manufactured products (primary) and 2) fragments (secondary), the
breakdown of larger pieces. Examples of manufactured products include microbeads, industrial raw pellets
(‘nurdles’), and synthetic filaments from clothing. Microbeads are found in cosmetics and toothpaste, but
recent legislation, specifically the Microbead-Free Waters Act of 2015, requires the phase out and prohibition
by 2018. [1] The tiny plastic microbeads in personal care products and clothing fragments are often too small
for wastewater treatment plant filtration systems to intercept, ending up in waterways and ultimately the
ocean. Researchers have documented the accumulation of microplastics in the marine environment for over
four decades. [2; 3] 
Microplastic particles may have particularly serious health implications for marine life. In the process of
degradation, plastic debris releases toxic chemicals used in their production, such as bisphenol A (BPA) and
styrene trimer (a liquid hydrocarbon), which have been linked to endocrine disruption. Plastics in the ocean
have also been known to attract persistent, bio-accumulating and toxic substances (PBTs), which include
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), dioxins, and petroleum based chemicals. [4] These substances may act as
endocrine disruptors, mutagens or carcinogens, causing a range of chronic health impacts. Scientists have
documented adsorption of PBTs by plastics of all types and sizes in seawater. Marine life may mistakenly
ingest these toxic-tainted plastics. [5-10] Once inside an animal’s body, plastic pieces may release adsorbed
chemicals into the organism, where they can cause serious health impacts or bio-accumulate in tissues to be
potentially passed up the food chain. [11-13] More research is needed on the presence, abundance, and effects
of microplastics in the marine environment.
EPA Region II - Trash Free Waters Program
The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) developed the Trash Free Waters (TFW) Program in 2014 as a
means to identify a focused set of actions that support trash prevention and reduction initiatives by many
public and private stakeholders. Stakeholders decided to focus TFW initiatives to combat the plastic plague.
The group is tackling the issue in the following categories: boxes, microplastics, cigarette butts, bottles, and
bags. Along with other projects, the microplastics working group is highlighting research being done in Region
2 with a goal of data standardization.
For more information about getting involved in the TFW program, contact Josh Kogan, TFW Program
Coordinator, at Kogan.Joshua@epa.gov. To get involved in the microplastics working group specifically,
contact Catie Tobin at education@CleanOceanAction.org.Overview of the issue:
[1] Fendall, L.S., & Sewell, M.A. (2009). Contributing to marine pollution by washing your face: microplastics in facial cleansers. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 58, 1225-1228.
[2] Thompson, R.C., Olsen, Y., Mitchell, R.P., Davis, A., Rowland, S.J., John, A.W.G., McGonigle, D., & Russell, A.E. (2004). Lost at sea: where is all the plastic? Science, 304, 838.
[3] Thompson, R., Moore, C., Andrady, A., Gregory, M., Takada, H., & Weisberg, S. (2005). New directions in plastic debris. Science, 310, 1117.
[4] Mato, Y., Isobe, T., Takada, H., Kanehiro, H., Ohtake, C., & Kaminuma, T. (2001). Plastic resin pellets as a transport medium for toxic chemicals in the marine environment. Environmental
Science and Technology, 35, 318-324.
[5] Thompson, R.C., Olsen, Y., Mitchell, R.P., Davis, A., Rowland, S.J., John, A.W.G., McGonigle, D., & Russell, A.E. (2004). Lost at sea: where is all the plastic? Science, 304, 838.
[6] Browne, M.A., Dissanayake, A., Galloway, T.S., Lowe, D.M., Thompson, R.C. (2008). Ingested microscopic plastic translocates to the circulatory system of the mussel, Mytilus edulis (L.).
Environmental Science and Technology, 42, 5026-5031.
[7] Ward, J.E., & Kach, D.J. (2009). Marine aggregates facilitate ingestion of nanoparticles by suspension-feeding bivalves. Marine Environmental Research, 68, 137-142.
[8] Von Moos, N., Burkhardt-Holm, P., & Köhler, A. (2012). Uptake and effects of microplastics on cells and tissue of the blue mussel Mytilus edulis L. after an experimental exposure.
Environmental Science and Technology, 46, 11327-11335.
[9] Davison, P., & Asch, R.G. (2011). Plastic ingestion by mesopelagic fishes in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 432, 173-180.
[10] Wright, S.L., Thompson, R.C., & Galloway, T.S. (2013). The physical impacts of microplastics on marine organisms: a review. Environmental Pollution, 178, 483- 492.
[11] Teuten, E.L., Saquing, J.M., Knappe, D.R.U., Barlaz, M.A., Jonsson, S., Björn, A., Rowland, S.J., Thompson, R.C., Galloway, T.S., Yamashita, R., Ochi, D., Watanuki, Y., Moore, C., Viet, P.H.,
Tana, T.S., Prudente, M., Boonyatumanond, R., Zakaria, M.P., Akkhavong, K., Ogata, Y., Hirai, H., Iwasa, S., Mizukawa, K., Hagino, Y., Imamura, A., Saha, M., & Takada, H. (2009). Transport
and release of chemicals from plastics to the environment and to wildlife. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 364, 2027-2045.
[12] Engler, R.E. (2012). The complex interaction between marine debris and toxic chemicals in the ocean. Environmental Science and Technology, 46, 12302-12315.________________________________________________________________Clearwater, Inc.
Established 1966
Who:
How:What:Clearwater is an organization dedicating to protecting the Hudson River and its tributaries. Clearwater works to
provide innovative environmental education programs, advocacy, and celebrations designed to expand
people’s experience, awareness and stewardship of this magnificent natural resource. This project was carried
out in partnership between Hudson River Sloop Clearwater Inc. and a high school science researcher, Alina
Campbell. In 2014, Alina approached Clearwater with an interest in microplastic particulate and discussed
pursuing research involving sampling the Hudson River for microplastics with Dave Conover, the Education
Director for Clearwater. Conover referred her to Dr. Mason, a Professor of Chemistry at SUNY Fredonia. Alina
then travelled to Fredonia, NY to learn processing techniques for surface water samples. As a senior, Alina
continues this research and is planning to study Environmental Science in college. With the help of Dr. Mason
and Dave Conover, Alina was able to be one of the first to document the abundance of microplastic particulate
within the lower Hudson River. In documenting the plastic particles, she also categorized each particle in order
to give insight about source and distribution of a plastic type.  
The goals of this study were two-fold: 1) estimate the abundance of microplastic particulate (MP) within the
lower Hudson River, and 2) categorize the plastic particles by size and type to identify prominent sources of
pollution
Ten samples were collected at various locations
along the lower Hudson River with Clearwater’s
Sloop, using a 333 µm mesh net known as a manta
trawl net. The sample sites spanned between
Kingston, NY and New York, NY. This research
followed methodology derived from the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
In addition this process has also been used in a
study by Free et al. in 2014, and is used by Alina’s
mentor, Dr. Sherri Mason
The plastic particulates was counted using a
dissecting microscope. As this occurred, Alina also
separated the particulates into three size classes
(0.355-0.999mm, 1.000-4.749mm and >4.75mm),
and characterized it into five categories (fragment,
pellet, film, fiber and foam).
(ABOVE) A) Sampling sites along the lower Hudson River B) the manta
trawl net device deployed over the Clearwater Sloop, towed along the
surface of the water C) Alina Campbell with Dave Conover, rinsing the
plastic particulate through a sieve into a container
(BELOW left-to-right)  An image of the five types of microplastic
particles: 1)  fragment- hard jagged piece of plastic, 2) pellet- round hard
particles of plastic, 3) film- clear/white flimsy planes of plastic, 4) fiber-
clear/colored lines of plastic, and 5)  foam- sponge-like pieces of plastic Where:
Results:
Why:When:
This study focused on estimating the abundance
of MPs in the lower Hudson River, a nutrient
rich environment that serves as a nursery for
many aquatic organisms. Clearwater and Alina
carried out this research with sample sites
spanning from Kingston, NY to New York, NY.Samples were collected between August
2014 to August 2015
This study documents MPs to be in an abundance of approximately 3 million particles per square kilometer.
99% of samples were smaller than 1mm in size. Fibers were the largest contributors of MP pollution in the
lower Hudson River. The pellets added to personal care products, known as microbeads, were found in high
abundance in a study conducted by Eriksen et al. in 2013. However this study found that microbeads
comprised only ≈2% of the samples. The data shows that the Hudson River is more polluted, with this study
detecting more particulate compared with a study by Free et al. 2014. Research is necessary to gain an
understanding of MP abundance within the Hudson River as a whole. Also, future research should involve
sampling in other aquatic environments as MP pollution of other habitats remain undocumented. Alina plans
to continue this research, and is currently investigating a possible relationship between the wastewater
treatment plant proximity and the abundance detected.
(LEFT) A view of microbead
pellets (sourcing from personal
care items) from a dissecting
microscope.
Past research such as Thompson et al. in 2009 and Rochman et al. in 2013 has already established that
microplastic particles have been ingested by aquatic organisms. Lusher et al. in 2013 reported MPs to be
ingested by fish, mussels, and crab, while supporting the bio-magnification between these organisms. Chua et al.
2014 found that MP contain toxic contaminants that disrupt the function of organisms that ingest it. Also, a
study by Claessens et al. in 2011 found that MP pollution has been significantly increasing each year.
Through the Microbead-Free Waters Act, which was passed in December 2015, microbeads are banned from
being used in personal care items. However this federal ban does not go into effect until 2018. They are used not
only in personal care products such as facial scrub and toothpaste, but also from synthetic fibers in clothing such
as pantyhose or fleece-wear. Despite the recent pass of a federal ban against microbeads, there are still
additional sources of MPs that need to be addressed. For example, in this study the results show that the
synthetic fibers made up most of the samples which suggest that synthetic fibers should not be used, and instead
replaced by natural fibers such as cotton and wool.
This research serves as the first documentation of MP pollution in the lower Hudson River. Our study supports
the limit in use of synthetic materials (i.e. nylon, polyester). It is important to Alina to inform the public of this
issue through community outreach. She was fortunate enough to be able to speak about her research to the
public during Clearwater’s Festival last June.
For more information about this project, feel free to contact Alina Campbell at a.j.campbell@aol.com, David Conover at
dave@clearwater.org, or Dr. Sherri Mason at mason@fredonia.edu.
(LEFT/RIGHT) Alina Campbell at
the Clearwater Festival in June. She
was there with Dave Conover and
other members of Clearwater,
where she spoke to others about
her microplastic research.Clean Ocean Action
Established 1984
Who:
What:
Where:Clean Ocean Action (COA) is a nonprofit, ocean advocacy organization comprised of a coalition of 117 groups
with a shared mission to improve and protect marine waters of the New Jersey/New York coast. For over 30
years, COA has used a combination of science, education, and citizen action to drive public policy toward
a clean ocean. Catie Tobin of Clean Ocean Action and Beth Sharack of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) - James J. Howard Marine Laboratory are serving as Principal Investigators for this
study. NOAA has generously provided laboratory space, equipment and materials, and technical expertise.
COA’s microplastics research agenda uniquely applies a citizen science approach to microplastics research in
New Jersey.  Currently, COA is engaging with high school students from the Marine Academy of Science and
Technology (MAST) in Monmouth County and college students from the Raritan Valley Community College,
as well as citizen volunteers.  The students involved are gaining valuable hands-on experience in study design,
field sample collection, laboratory processing, and data interpretation as they work to improve the collective
understanding of this pressing and ever-growing problem.
The goal of the research agenda is to establish protocols and document the presence, abundance and impacts
of microplastics in New Jersey and promote citizen action in the following phases of investigation:
1) microplastics (less than 5mm) on New Jersey shorelines and in the water, 2) microplastics (less than 5mm),
visible to the naked eye on New Jersey shorelines and in waterways , 3) microplastics in the intestinal tract of
common ecologically and commercially important marine fishes while working with recreational and
commercial fishermen, and 4) adsorption qualities of plastic utilizing spectroscopy techniques (i.e. FT-IR).  
Currently underway is Phase I, which began in 2014 and was the first comprehensive microplastics
assessment in New Jersey. 
 
Phase I is divided by geographic boundaries- coastal
water along the Jersey shore and tidal portions of
the Delaware River. For coastal locations, COA
worked with MAST. Thirty-two sampling locations
were selected in New Jersey from the list of over 70
sites included in COA’s twice-annual Beach
Sweeps a successful and long-running
cleanup program. The sites span Monmouth,
Ocean, Atlantic, and Cape May Counties and vary in
several physical and use characteristics.
For the Delaware River, COA worked with the
Raritan Valley Community College to sample sites
along the tidal portion of the main stem of the
Delaware River from Crosswick's Creek (Mercer
County) to the Commodore Barry Bridge
(Gloucester County). 
(TOP LEFT) Sampling
location in Brigantine, NJ
 (BOTTOM LEFT) Sampling
locations along the Delaware
River 
(TOP RIGHT) Sampling
locations along the coast of NJWhen:
How:
Results:
Why:For Phase I, field sampling in the coastal water and beach
sand along the Jersey shore occurred from July to
October 2014. Data analysis has been ongoing since July
2014 and will wrap up in 2016. 
Field sampling within the tidal portions of the Delaware
River occurred during the summer of 2015. Analysis has
been ongoing since that time and will conclude in 2016. 
For Phase I, 96 sand and 96 water samples were
collected along the NJ coastal water shoreline and 17
sand and 17 water samples were collected along the
Delaware River. Sand samples were collected using a 
  50 cm x 50 cm quadrat with contents being placed into
a 1 liter mason jar. Water samples were collected using
'whole water sampling' methodology with contents
being collected in a 1-liter mason jar. Both sets of
samples are being processed in a laboratory donated by
NOAA. Processing methodology was adapted from
Adventurers and Scientists for Conservation in Maine
and Ghent University in Belgium. Contents were filtered
onto 0.7 micrometer filters, then 0.45 micrometer filters
and viewed under the microscope. 
(TOP LEFT) Sand sampling
methodology                 
 (TOP RIGHT) Student
volunteer collecting a water
sample
(LEFT) Laboratory sand
processing methodology 
Researchers have estimated that globally, plastic comprises 60-80% of marine anthropogenic (man-
made) debris. [1] This fact is further confirmed by COA’s twice-annual Beach Sweeps, which has engaged
thousands of volunteers in cleaning up beaches across New Jersey and recording information on the types of
trash found, including plastic. Between 2009 and 2013, an average of 80.8% of the marine debris items collected
during COA’s Beach Sweeps were plastic, much of it in small, unidentifiable pieces. Given the high proportion
of collected plastic beach debris, the propensity for plastic to continuously break down into smaller pieces and
the increasing evidence of harmful impacts to marine life, COA was inspired to document the presence of
microplastics in the New Jersey coastal environment. This research is especially relevant given that microplastic
pollution is caused either directly or indirectly by human activity and New Jersey is downstream of the most
densely populated area of the United States.  Once microplastics presence has been accomplished, COA intends
to continue its research into the impacts of microplastics to marine life and importantly, to reduce the sources
of these coastal pollutants.
____________________________________________________________
[1]  Derraik, J.G.B. (2002). The pollution of the marine environment by plastic debris: a review. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 44, 842–852.For more information, contact Catie Tobin, education@cleanoceanaction.org.  or 732-872-0111.              
COA is completing the analysis of samples. Results of
water samples will be released in June 2016 and beach
sand samples in September 2016.
(LEFT) A blue plastic fiber, found in the sample collected
near Asbury Park Convention Hall (RIGHT) A clear plastic fragment
found in the sample collected near Sea Bright Boro Hall.
NY/NJ Baykeeper
Established 1989
Who: 
What:
How:NY/NJ Baykeeper is the citizen guardian of the NY-NJ Harbor Estuary. Since 1989, we’ve worked to protect,
preserve, and restore the environment of the most urban estuary on Earth – benefiting its natural and human
communities. Through our Estuary-wide programs we seek to end pollution, improve public access, conserve
and restore public lands, restore aquatic habitats, encourage appropriate and discourage inappropriate
development, carry out public education, and work with federal and NY/NJ state regulators and citizen
groups as partners in planning for a sustainable future for the NY-NJ Harbor Estuary.
NY/NJ Baykeeper’s plastic collection research study provides a first look at the quantity, type, and distribution
of plastic pollution within NY-NJ Harbor Estuary waters. Project partners include Hudson River Sloop
Clearwater Inc., Rutgers University, Five Gyres Institute, SUNY Fredonia, and Monmouth University’s Urban
Coast Institute.
The goals of the study are to:
● Measure the concentration of plastics and
microplastics in NY-NJ Harbor Estuary
waters
● Document the sizes and types of plastics
found 
● Identify local sources of plastic pollution
● Inform NJ and NY lawmakers to influence
policy 
● Educate members of the public and
encourage behavioral changes
 (ABOVE) Manta trawl net used for sampling
Eighteen samples were collected in various locations in the NY-NJ Harbor Estuary using a 333-micron manta
trawl net designed to collect floatable debris off the water’s surface. The net and methodology used is the
same protocol used by the Five Gyres Institute and for the work completed by Dr. Sherri Mason in the Great
Lakes region. Analysis protocol is derived from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA). Plastics present in samples were separated into three size classes (0.355-0.999 mm, 1.00-4.749mm,
and >4.75mm), categorized by type (fragment, foam, line, pellet, and film), and finally, counted using a
dissecting microscope.
(LEFT TO RIGHT) Contents of a trawl, contents being sieved, a preserved sample before lab
processing, and microplastics after lab processing prior to categorizing and counting.Where:
When: 
Results:
Why:The NY-NJ Harbor Estuary, one of the most
urban estuaries on Earth encompasses the
Ports of NY and NJ, as far north as the
Tappan Zee Bridge and as far south as
Sandy Hook Bay. Sites sampled were
selected based on the proximity to
combined sewer outfall pipes and included
the Lower Harbor near Perth Amboy, NJ,
the Passaic River, the Morris Canal, the East
River, Newtown Creek, the Upper New York
Bay, the Arthur Kill, the Lower Newark Bay,
and the Upper Newark Bay.
Sampling was conducted from March to
August 2015. Sample analysis was completed
in December 2015.
According to NY/NJ Baykeeper’s estimates, at
least 165 million plastic particles are floating
within NY-NJ Harbor waters at any given time.
The average abundance of plastic particles is
256,322 per square kilometer Approximately
85% of particles counted were microplastics
(smaller than 5mm) and the average plastic
quantity per square kilometer sampled in New
York waters was approximately twice the
average of New Jersey waters. While these
results suggest significant trends, the small
sample size of eighteen 30-minute trawls is
limiting. More sampling must occur to provide
definitive results
Our world’s oceans are expected to contain 1 metric ton of plastic for every 3 metric tons of fish by 2025, and
by 2050, more plastics than fish by weight. [1] No one wants to live in a world where this prediction becomes
true. Together, we can all make changes to refuse and reduce plastic consumption. Going forward, NY/NJ
Baykeeper will collaborate with study partners to continue collecting water column samples, analyze, and
compare results. We will analyze what the potential impacts are of microplastics entering the human food web,
what the effects of these materials are on the estuary's wildlife, and the interaction between plastic and
persistent contaminants of concern in the NY-NJ Harbor Estuary.(ABOVE) Starting points of sites sampled (BELOW) A blue
plastic microbead pictured on the right along with spherical
piece of foam, both measuring less than 5mm.
For more information , contact Sandra Meola at sandra@nynjbaykeeper.org or 732-888-9870 x7.
____________________________________________________________
[1] Ellen MacArthur Foundation. 2016. The New Plastics Economy: Rethinking the future of plastics. World Economic Forum.Hudson River Park
Established 1998
Who:
Hudson River Park is a 550-acre park and estuarine sanctuary from Chambers Street to W. 59th Street in
Manhattan. It includes four miles of waterside esplanade, 16 reconstructed public piers to date, four dedicated
boat houses for sailing, rowing, and paddling, and numerous other places to play, learn, and relax. The Park’s
400 acres of sanctuary waters and the ecological abundance they support have informed virtually every
aspect of Park planning and operation. Every day, staff, volunteers, and Park partners work to make the
experience of water as direct as possible for millions of visitors each year. We in the Environment and
Education Department work to communicate the River’s vital ecological role to everyone from
schoolchildren to the general public, serving more than 27,000 people in 2016.
What:
When:Where:The primary goals of this study were to obtain
baseline microplastic concentration data for the
Lower Hudson Estuary within Hudson River
Park and to determine how these concentrations
fluctuated based on proximity to shore and
sewer outfalls.
The study was performed entirely within the
boundaries of Hudson River Park’s sanctuary
waters with one midtown site at 34th Street and
one downtown site at Vestry Street.
Sampling was performed monthly from July
to October of  2016.
(ABOVE) Samples transferred
to mason jars for processing
(LEFT) Neuston net, mid-
deployment
(RIGHT) Park staff and
Brooklyn College students
measuring site conditions(ABOVE) Satellite images of trawling sites at both Channel and Near Shore
locations within Hudson River Park’s downtown and midtown waters. How:
Two samples from each trawling site (Channel and Near
Shore) were taken monthly during the Summer of 2016.
Samples were collected using a 0.3mm (300 µm) mesh,
surface trawling neuston net. In an attempt to standardize
regional methods and data for the New York City area, this
study followed the same methodologies as NY/NJ
Baykeeper’s, which are derived from 5 Gyres, Dr. Sherri
Mason’s research, and National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration’s  “Laboratory Methods for the Microplastics
in the Marine Environment.” Trawl time was reduced to 15
minutes  to account for the relatively high flow rate of the
Lower Hudson. Processed samples were counted and
categorized under a dissecting microscope into one of three
sizes (0.3-1mm, 1-5mm, and >5mm) and one of five types
(Fragment, Pellet, Foam, Line, and Film).
Results:
Why:The average microplastic concentration within Hudson River Park was found to be 188,657 pieces/km2.
Notably, a significant difference in microplastic concentrations was found between Channel and Near
Shore sites, but not between midtown and downtown waters. The higher microplastic concentration at
Channel sites may be the result of reduced flushing between piers and near the shoreline. Unexpectedly,
no correlation was found between microplastics concentrations and rainfall. This may suggest that the
majority of microplastics collected do not enter the River from Combined Sewer Outfall points along the
side of Manhattan. The vast majority (70%) of the plastics identified were fragments and nurdles, nearly all
of which were under 5mm. These data, while limited to sixteen samples, seem consistent with that of other
local monitoring initiatives. 
As the impacts of microplastic pollution in the
world’s water systems intensifies, we must work
toward solutions through scientific research and
policy. This study marks the start of  Hudson
River Park’s microplastic monitoring initiative
within its estuarine sanctuary. It is within the
Park’s mission to ensure that our waters are
protected and restored. We hope that this study
contributes to the growing body of regional
microplastic data that will inform future inquiry
and policy. It is imperative to humankind that
our waters are taken care of. 
(ABOVE) Lead authors (left to right) Siddhartha Hayes, Carrie
Roble, and Nadia Noori with fresh samples(ABOVE) Processed and dried sample at 10x
magnification under dissecting microscope
For more information, contact Carrie Roble at croble@hrpt.ny.gov or (917) 661-8771