 1 ICES Journal of Marine Science  
September 2013 , Volume 70, Issue 6, Pages 1055 -1064  
http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1093/icesjms/fst122  
© 2013 International Council for the Exploration of the Sea. Published by 
Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.  
 
 Archimer  
http://archimer.ifremer.fr  
 
 
 
This is a pre-copy-editing, author-produced PDF of an article accepted for publication in ICES Journal of Marine 
Science following peer review. The definitive publisher-authenticated version is available online at:  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fst122  
 
 
 
Marine litter within the European Marine Strategy Framework Directive 
 
F. Galgani1,*, G. Hanke2, S. Werner3 and L. De Vrees4 
 
 
 
1 IFREMER, LER/PAC, Bastia, France 
2 Water Resources Unit, Institute for Environment and Sustainability, European Commission Joint Research 
Center (JRC), Ispra, Italy 
3 Federal Environment Agency (UBA), Dept protection of the marine environment, Dessau-Roßlau, Germany 
4 European Commission, DG ENVIRONMENT, Brussels, Belgium 
 
 
*: Corresponding author : Françoise Galgani, tel: +33 638425290 ; email address : Francois.galgani@ifremer.fr   
  
 
 
 
 
Abstract:  
 
There have been numerous anthropogenic-driven changes to our planet in the last half-century. One 
of the most evident changes is the ubiquity and abundance of litter in the marine environment. The EU 
Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD, 2008/56/EC) establishes a framework within which EU 
Member States shall take action to achieve or maintain good environmental status (GES) of their 
marine waters by 2020. GES is based on 11 qualitative descriptors as listed in Annex I of the MSFD. 
Descriptor 10 (D 10) concerns marine litter. As a follow-up to the related Commission Decision on 
criteria and methodological standards (2010/477/EU) in which 56 indicators for the achievement of 
GES are proposed, the EC Directorate-General for the Environment, on the request of the European 
Marine Directors, established a Technical Subgroup on Marine Litter (TSG ML) under the Working 
Group on GES. The role of TSG ML is to support Member States through providing scientific and 
technical background for the implementation of MSFD requirements with regard to D 10. Started in 
2011, TSG ML provides technical recommendations for the implementation of the MSFD requirements 
for marine litter. It summarizes the available information on monitoring approaches and considers how 
GES and environmental targets could be defined with the aim of preventing further inputs of litter to, 
and reducing its total amount in, the marine environment. It also identifies research needs, priorities 
and strategies in support of the implementation of D 10. The work of TSG ML also focuses on the 
specification of monitoring methods through the development of monitoring protocols for litter in the 
different marine compartments, and for microplastics and litter in biota. Further consideration is being 
given to monitoring strategies in general and associated costs. Other priorities include the 
identification of sources of marine litter and a better understanding of the harm caused by marine litter. 
 
 
Keyword s: Descriptor 10 ; Harm ; Litter ; marine debris ; marine litter ; Marine Strategy Framework 
Directive ; Monitoring ; MSFD ; Research ; Sources ; targets  
 
INTRODUCTION  
It is widely recognised that marine resources often undergo excessive pressures and 
demands and that action must be taken in order to minimise the associated negative impact 
on the marine environment (Barnes & Metcalf, 2010).  
In this aim, the European Commission has developed 
the Marine Strategy Framework 
Directive (MSFD) for the protection and sustainable use of 
marine ecosystems. The MSFD 
builds on sector-based approaches such as the Common Fisheries Policy, Natura 2000 and 
the Nitrates Directive. It is the environmental pillar of the Integrated Maritime Policy for the 
European Union, which aims to achieve the sustainable development of maritime sectors (Markus et al., 2011).  
The MSFD establishes a framework within which Member States are required to take action 
to achieve or maintain Good Environmental Status (GES) for the marine environment 
by 
2020. It explicitly refers to the management of human activities, recognising that 'environmental status' also includes the impact of anthropic activities.  
The EU Member States are required to take six steps between mid-2012 and 2016 to 
develop a marine strategy for their waters: (i ) initial assessment of current 
environmental 
status (Article 8, 2012) (ii) definition of good environmental status (Article 9, 2012), (iii) drawing up of a comprehensive set of environmental targets and associated indicators (Article 10(1), 2012), (iv) drawing up and implementation of a monitoring programme for ongoing assessments, together with regular target updates (Article 11(1), 2014), (v) development of a measurement programme designed to achieve or maintain good 
environmental status (Article 13(1) to (3), 2015) and (vi) implementation of the measurement 
programme (Article 13(10), 2016).  
After the initial assessment, the EU Member States will draw up a series of characteristics 
defining the 
GES of their relevant waters, taking in account the indicative 'pressures' and 
'impacts' listed in Annex III of the Directive. These characteristics are to be determined on the basis of the 11 qualitative descriptors listed in Annex I and in reference to Commission Decision 2010/477/EU relating to 'Criteria and methodological standards on good environmental status of marine waters', which proposes 56 indicators for the 11 descriptors.  
This approach aims to establish consistent criteria and methodologies across the European 
Union (EU), 
along with a meaningful harmonization of GES achievements across various 
regions.  The MSFD recognises that the conceptualisation of GES is not a one-off matter, but will 
continue to evolve and adapt due to dynamic factors such as ecosystem changes, new scientific knowledge and the development of new technological capabilities (Juda, 2010). 
Periodic assessments of the status of the marine environment, together with monitoring 
efforts and the formulation of environmental tar gets, are perceived as part of the continuous 
management process. Provisions have theref ore been made for the modification of adopted 
marine strategies and measures.  
 
Human pressures on the oceans have increased substantially in recent decades. The expansion of coastal and marine activities has  adversely impacted the marine environment 
and affected ecosystem goods and services. In addition,  coastal and marine human activities 
generate considerable quantities of waste that potentially contaminate the marine environment.  
Much of this litter will persist in the sea for years, decades or even centuries. On average, three-quarters of 
all marine litter consists of plastics known to be particularly persistent. The 
occurrence of litter has been demonstrated worldwide: in oceanic gyres, on coastlines, in 
sediments and in the deep sea. Litter is accumulating in both densely-populated areas and 
remote regions such as the Antarctic (Barnes et al., 2009).  
Of the 11 descriptors listed in Annex I of the MSFD for determining GES, descriptor 10 has 
been defined as 'Marine litter does not cause harm to the coastal and marine environment'.  
Commission Decision 2010/477/EU identifies the following criteria and four associated 
indicators for Descriptor 10: 
Criteria 10.1. Characteristics of litter in the marine and coastal environment  — Trends in amount of litter washed ashore and/or deposited on coastlines, including 
analysis of its composition, spatial distribution and, where possible, source (10.1.1)  
— Trends in amount of litter in water column (including floating on the surface) and deposited 
on sea floor, including analysis of its composition, spatial distribution and, 
where possible, 
source (10.1.2)  
— Trends in amount, distribution and where possible, composition of micro-particles (in 
particular microplastics) (10.1.3)  
Criteria 10.2. Impacts of litter on marine life  — Trends in amount and composition of litter ingested by marine animals (e.g. stomach 
analysis) (10.2.1).  In 2010, as a follow-up to Commission Decision 2010/477/EU, the European Marine 
Directors requested the Directorate-General for the Environment (DG ENV) of the European Commission to establish a technical subgroup under the Working Group on GES (WG GES) 
for the implementation of MSFD Descriptor 10.  
Based on the definition of UNEP (United Nations Environmental Programme) (Cheshire et 
al., 2009), 
the group defined marine litter as any persistent, manufactured or processed solid 
material discarded, disposed of, or abandoned in the marine and coastal environment. Litter consists of items that have been made or used by people and deliberately discarded or 
unintentionally lost in the sea or on beaches, including materials transported from land into 
the marine environment by rivers, r un-offs, sewage systems or winds.  
The initial mandate for the Technical Subgroup on Marine Litter (TSG ML) was drafted by DG ENV, discussed by WG GES and approved by the EU Marine Directors in 2011. IFREMER 
(France), UBA (Germany) and the Joint Research Centre 
(JRC) chair the work of this group. 
The group's mandate contained the following work items: (i) identify and review existing data and ongoing data collection on marine litter; (ii) describe data needs and methods for the future assessment of marine litter; (iii) consider standards for monitoring marine litter; (iv) develop proposals for the development of impact indicators for each of the regions; (v) 
address how to develop objectives (characteristics of GES), environmental targets and 
associated indicators in relation to marine litter; (vi) discuss the effectiveness of measures to reduce marine litter, and; (vii) recommend proposals for further research priorities.  
The work undertaken by the group resulted in a report published in the JRC scientific and 
technical report 
series in 2011, entitled 'Marine Litter – Technical Recommendations for the 
Implementation of MSFD Requirements'. This r eport identifies and presents 15 options (a so-
called toolbox) for monitoring litter in the various marine compartments, together with the 
biological impact of ingested litter or micro-litter. It also considers sources, GES, objectives, environmental targets and research needs, as well as a roadmap for further tasks in 2012 
and 2013. This roadmap, along with a detailed work programme, was adopted by the EU 
Marine Directors to further support monitoring programmes conducted under the MSFD, including the development of monitoring protocols and additional recommendations on (i) general monitoring strategies and associated costs, (ii) sources and (iii) understanding harm. 
(See
 http://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/  111111111/22826 ). 
Despite today's litter-fighting efforts (Port reception facilities, Fishing for litter; International 
Coastal Cleanups, No-special-fee; Adopt-a-Beach; Blue Flag, etc.), current knowledge of the quantities of litter in European Seas, the degradation and fate of litter in the marine environment and its potentially harmful biologica l, physical and chemical impacts on marine life and habitats, remains inadequate. The methods used to monitor marine litter, together 
with our understanding of the sociological factors that underpin behavioural changes in relation to littering, are also insufficient. The evaluation and regulation of marine litter 
sources alone will not therefore suffice to achieve Good Environmental Status.
  
   MARINE LITTER
 
What started as an aesthetic problem is now raising concern as to the various potentially-
harmful implications of marine litter in the marine environment.  
The majority of reported litter-related incidents affecting individual marine organisms involve 
plastic items. In terms of plastic litter or use, ropes and netting accounted 
for 57% of 
encounters in 2012, followed by fragments (11%), packaging (10%), other fishing-related litter (8%) and microplastics (6%) (CBD 2012). Encounters with marine litter were reported 
for 663 species (CBD 2012). Over half of the reported species (about 370) were associated 
with entanglement in and ingestion of marine debris, representing an increase of more than 40% since the last review in 1997, when 247 species were reported as being affected by the above two impact categories (Laist, 1997).  
The entanglement of species in marine litter, which is often a result of normal behavioural 
patterns, has 
frequently been described as a serious mortality factor, leading to potential 
losses in biodiversity. The most problematic marine litter includes derelict or discarded 
fishing gear (nets, traps and pots), which may continue to 'fish' for years; this phenomenon has been termed 'ghost fishing'. It is estimated that 10% percent of all litter entering the 
oceans every year consists of so-called ghos t nets (Macfadyen et al., 2009). However, many 
losses presumably remain unreported (UNEP, 2009). Entanglement in marine debris has 
been reported for pinniped species, cetaceans, all seven species of marine turtles and over 56 species of marine and coastal birds (Katsanevakis et al., 2007). The decline of deep-water sharks in the North Atlantic has been linked to ghost fishing in the region (Large et al., 
2009). 
At least 43 % of existing cetacean species, all species of marine turtles, approximately 44% 
of the 
world's seabird species and many fish species reportedly ingest marine litter, either 
because debris is misidentified as natural prey, or during the course of feeding and normal 
behaviour (Gregory, 2009, Katsanevakis 2008, CBD 2012). More recently, major commercial 
invertebrates were found to have ingested plastics (Murray & Cowie, 2011). In some species, a considerable proportion of the population is affected by interactions with litter that affect their body condition and ability to forage and reproduce, which may ultimately lead to mortality (Van Franeker et al., 2011). An emerging area of concern is the accumulation of microplastic fragments in the water 
column and sediments (Thompson et al., 2004,). Pieces of common polymers (including polyester, nylon, polyethylene and polypropylene) of less than 20µm have been recorded 
worldwide (Barnes et al., 2009). Plastics are biologically inert. They degrade to tiny particles, 
which probably stay in the marine environment for long periods. Because of their size, they are available to a wide range of organisms, including bottom feeders, filter feeders and scavengers (Thompson et al., 2004). When ingested, plastics release chemicals (nonylphenols, polybrominated diphenyl ethers, phtalates and bisphenol A), together with 
sorbed hydrophobic pollutants such as PCBs and DDT that may be transferred to organisms, 
hence raising concern as to their subsequent adverse effects (Mato et al., 2001, Teuten et al., 2009). The ingestion of microplastic material could be a route for chemicals to pass from plastics to the food chain. More research is needed to establish the full environmental 
relevance and potential impact of these microparticles, in particular on distribution, transport, 
degradation/weathering processes and
 sorption/release mechanisms. 
Ecologically-speaking, the 'level of litter that causes harm to the environment' depends on the type and quantity of litter measured and the affected environmental 
and ecosystem 
components. Conversely, the impact of microplastic particles resulting, for example, from the 
degradation of fishing nets, will persist for decades or centuries in the sea, possibly affecting a range of species through the mechanical and chemical consequences of ingestion. 
Other known impacts of marine litter include the alteration, damage and degradation of 
benthic habitats such as coral reefs (Katsanevakis et al., 2007) and soft 
sediment abrasion 
caused by derelict fishing gear, or smothering by macro and microplastics in sandy sediment 
in intertidal zones (Katsanevakis et al., 2007, Richards, 2011). Litter can disrupt assemblages of organisms living on or in sediment (Chiappone et al., 2002). Microplastics and litter fragments on beaches reportedly alter the porosity and heat transfer capacity of sediment (Carson et al. 2011). Furthermore, marine litter items can facilitate the invasion of 
alien species, such as algae associated with red tides (Barnes, 2002; Barnes and Milner, 
2005).  
From a socioeconomic perspective, the harm caused by marine litter includes the cost of 
deterioration of 
ecosystem goods and services. Social harm includes the reduced 
recreational, aesthetic and educational value of areas such as beaches, together with human health hazards and risks such as floating objects, which may encounter boats.  
The economic harm caused by marine litter includes significant direct costs and loss of 
income affecting a range of maritime sectors (including aquaculture, agriculture, 
fisheries, 
shipping and leisure boating), power plants and industry, local authorities and tourism. Economic 'harm' may run into millions of euro per annum, even on a sub-regional scale 
(Mouat et al., 2010).  
Marine litter is also a serious aesthetic problem for tourists and local beach-goers. In 
addition, sanitary, sewage-related and medical waste can cause injury and/or constitute a 
health 
hazard (Ivar do Sul and Costa, 2007). The environmental issues raised by marine 
debris can have an even wider social impact if the livelihood and health of local coastal communities are affected (Tinch et al. 2012). This aspect, i.e. what constitutes 'harm' in a socioeconomic sense, remains to be defined in relation to MSFD descriptor 10
.  
There is no solid, common understanding of what exactly constitutes 'harm' caused by marine litter, or how it can be assessed with respect to the implementation of the MSFD. Future studies will need to assess the available evidence base and attempt to develop a consensus on how to approach this issue. Research efforts aimed at developing a robust 
approach to harm assessment will have to be identified and facilitated where possible and 
the results taken into consideration by the TSG ML. Currently, a number of potential environmental issues caused by marine litter are not sufficiently taken into account. This may be due to inadequate monitoring or uncertainty as to how to approach the issue best, e.g. how to assess levels of entanglement in, or ingestion of litter by other target species such as 
fish.  
It is paramount to identify potential gaps in our understanding and develop proposals for pilot 
monitoring schemes designed to address them in a coordinated 
manner before we consider 
whether robust monitoring tools and protocols can be realistically and cost-effectively 
implemented.  
Litter can originate from numerous sources, which all need to be targeted by measures to 
reduce litter-induced pollution. Identifying the source of litter items is often a complex task, 
as 
marine litter enters the ocean from land, sea and widespread sources and can travel long 
distances before being deposited on shores or settling on the bottom of the ocean, sea or 
bay.  
Litter from land-based activities, resulting from poor waste management, enters the marine 
environment via 
drainage or sewage systems, rivers, winds, road run-offs and storm water 
outflows. Land-based sources include tourism and recreational uses of the coast, the general public, fly tipping, local businesses, industry, harbours and unprotected waste disposal sites. Sea-based sources of marine litter include merchant shipping, ferries and cruise liners, commercial and recreational fishing vessels, military fleets and research vessels, pleasure craft, offshore installations such as oil and gas rigs, drilling rigs and aquaculture sites. 
Factors such as ocean currents, winds, tides and the proximity to urban centres, industrial and recreational areas, shipping lanes and fishing grounds also influence the types, nature 
and amount of litter found in the open sea or collected along beaches, waterways or underwater.  
Marine litter sources can be characterised in several ways. A common method is to classify 
sources as either land-based or sea-based, depending on how the litter enters the marine 
environment. These broad categories can be further broken down into 
sources such as 
recreational litter, shipping litter and fishing litter. Some items can confidently be associated with their sources, such as various fishing items, sewage-related debris (SRD) and certain 
tourism-related litter. These so-called 'use categories' provide valuable information for setting 
targets and reduction measures, as they can easily be linked to measurements. The 
production or geographical source of litter can also be identified but, given the increasing globalisation of markets, this information is of less use for implementing effective measures 
and targets than use categories. Information on litter sources can be obtained by monitoring 
beaches, the sea surface or sea floor. A common approach to categorising litter in the different marine compartments is required. 
PNUE/PAM/MEDPOL (2009) reported that most marine litter in the Mediterranean Sea 
comes from land rather than sea-based sources (e.g. ships). Litter mainly enters the sea 
from the coastline as a result of recreational 
activities. It comprises mainly plastics, 
aluminium and glass. Recordings of floating litter have confirmed the overwhelming presence of plastics in the Mediterranean Sea, accounting for about 83% of observed marine litter items. In some touristic areas, over 75% of annual waste production is generated in the 
summer season.  
The situation is different in the North Sea. The wide diversity of items found along the North 
Sea coasts and the composition of litter recorded during the OSPAR 
Beach Litter monitoring 
programme indicate that maritime activities in the form of shipping, fishing and offshore installations are the predominant litter sources in the North-East Atlantic, together with 
coastal recreational and touristic activities (Fleet et. al., 2009; OSPAR, 2009; ARCADIS 
2013(a)). A considerable proportion of litter enters the North Sea through transport by wind, currents and rivers and via the English Channel. Plastics account for around 75% of litter items found in the North-East Atlantic (JRC 2011).  
The EC has commissioned pilot projects in the four regional seas (OSPAR, HELCOM, 
MEDPOL and 
Black Sea regions) in the aim of pinpointing missing information on the plastic 
cycle. The results will provide input for a further analysis of litter sources and fate by the TSG ML (see final reports by ARCADIS, BIPRO and RPA at http://ec.europa.eu/environment/marine/ good-environmental-status/descriptor-
10/index_en.htm ). 
Upcoming work will lead to a more precise understanding of waste pathways according to 
litter type. Source and quantity mapping remains a necessary step for planning effective 
countermeasures. Reducing 
litter inputs at source (domestic, industrial, tourism, rivers, 
shipping, fishing and aquaculture activities) as part of national marine strategies should contribute to reaching marine litter GES at a regional level. Although not all litter pathways to the sea have been identified to date, it seems likely that some litter sources will lie outside 
national jurisdiction; as a result, national measures will not suffice to achieve national GES.  
 
MONITORING  
Regular litter surveys, together with results analysis in relation to local weather conditions 
and coastal geomorphology, are necessary to obtain information on the 
geographical origins 
of coastal waste and form a basis for implementing actions to reduce litter pollution. Existing 
monitoring methods that are different but compatible need to be adapted and harmonised to take regional differences into account, e.g. coastline type or prevailing currents in offshore areas.  
Methodologies for source assessment are mostly based on the identification and reporting of 
collected/observed marine 
litter. As a result of differences in monitoring approaches, the 
ability to identify litter types (categories) vari es across the environmental compartments. For 
reporting purposes, the TSG ML recommends using categories that are compatible with 
various types of survey (beaches, sea surface and sea floor), in order to produce comparable 
results. Marine litter reporting for the purpose of source attribution still needs further development, as the efficiency of measures targeting specific litter sources depends on the identification of litter types / categories in the various environmental compartments. 
The 2011 TSG ML report and other forums in the context of MSFD implementation provide 
guidelines for existing approaches, summarised in table 1 (after Galgani 
et al., 2010; Galgani 
et al, 2011):  
  
 Insert table 1 
  
Litter will persist in the sea for years, decades and even centuries. Therefore, source 
assessment alone will not suffice and long-term monitoring in the marine environment will be 
necessary in order to understand trends. Monitoring scheme planning should also give proper consideration to spatial and temporal scales. Although beach litter surveys, sea floor 
monitoring on continental shelves and socioeconomic studies can readily be applied on a European scale, priority should be given to monitoring marine areas most affected by litter.  
Methodological protocols in Europe are currently available for the assessment of certain 
types and 
occurrences of litter on coastlines (OSPAR, 2009). These standards should be 
adjusted to MSFD needs and harmonised for extension to other regions. Pilot projects have also indicated that litter on the sea floor could be measured in conjunction with routine biological trawling surveys (e.g. International Bottom Trawl Surveys in OSPAR area, 
Mediterranean International Trawl surveys, in the MEDPOL area), including source 
evaluation. Larger pieces of floating litter can be quantified by aerial observation and image recognition systems, whereas floating micro-litter can be monitored using tow nets or filtered water samples.  
In the framework of the OSPAR Convention, the amounts of plastics found in Fulmar 
stomachs are used to assess temporal trends, local differences and compliance with set targets for acceptable pressures in the North Sea (van Franeker, 2011). This monitoring 
effort could be extended to other marine regions using region-specific 
indicator species, such 
as turtles in the Mediterranean Sea.  
The future work of the TSG ML to support marine litter monitoring will need to focus on (i) 
developing common monitoring protocols, including advice on strategies that can be adopted 
to ensure the comparability of monitoring programs;  (ii) facilitating the 
implementation of fit-
for-purpose monitoring programmes, providing advice on potential common monitoring tools, 
identifying opportunities to improve comparability, ensuring continuous quality assurance and data control, etc. (iii) evaluating new moni toring tools and promising tools currently under 
development and providing advice on their su itability for meeting EU Member State 
monitoring and assessment needs; (iv) estimating the cost of implementing monitoring tools so that EU Member States can make informed choices and; (v) developing standardised litter 
categories in close conjunction with the Regional Seas Conventions, in order to harmonise 
currently-reported marine litter categories and im prove comparability across Member States. 
The evaluation of waste fluxes across the vari ous marine compartments is a necessary step 
and goal 
for understanding transport and flux mechanisms and potential impacts. Figure 1 
shows a diagram of litter fate, summarising the relationship between various habitats and biological entities, together with main interactions. Fluxes will still need to be assessed in terms of litter quantities and type/composition for each type of debris.  
  Insert Figure 1 Finally, understanding transport mechanisms will help explain the transformation of marine 
litter and provide a better description of its spatial distribution. The accumulation of litter on the sea bed, its degradation rate at sea, the associated chemical sorption/desorption kinetics 
and rate of ingestion by various marine organisms are all poorly-understood mechanisms. 
These knowledge gaps are a stumbling block for the identification of targeted and effective measures to reduce litter pollution. 
The abundance of litter at sea can be estimated either by the direct observation of large 
items of debris (e.g. submersible remote obser
vation vehicles (ROVs) for monitoring litter on 
the sea bed, or ship-based and aerial observations for debris floating on the sea surface), or by means of large-scale imagery (Hanke & Piha,  2011) and net trawls (for smaller items). 
Net-based surveys are the most widespread and efficient method found to date (Goldberg 1994; Galgani and Andral, 1998).  
General protocols for investigating debris on the sea bed are similar to the methodologies 
used for monitoring benthic species. Greater emphasis should be 
placed on the number and 
type/category (e.g. bags, bottles and pieces of plastics) of litter items, rather than their weight.  
Trend interpretation is problematic, as the fate of plastics at depth is not well-researched and 
the accumulation of plastics on the sea bed began long before specific 
scientific 
investigations were launched in the 1990s.  
Among the areas investigated to date along the European coasts (Galgani et al., 2000), 
Mediterranean sites 
tend to show the greatest densities of litter accumulation. Debris - mainly 
plastics - that reaches the sea bed may have been transported a considerable distance from source, only sinking to the ground when weighed down by fouling. The result is an accumulation of plastic debris in bays and canyons, rather than in the open sea (Galgani et al., 1996; Katsanevakis et al., 2007). However, due to large-scale residual ocean circulation patterns, some accumulation zones in the Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea have very 
high debris densities, despite being located far from the coast (Galgani and Lecornu 2004).  
We know little about the accumulation trends of debris at sea, but available data indicates 
considerable variability. Abundances decreased slightly in the Gulf of Lions (France) 
over a 
15-year period (1994-2009). However, in some areas around Greece, the abundance of 
debris at depth increased over a period of 8 years (Koutsodendris et al., 2008). Debris is 
progressively broken down in the marine environment (Thompson et al., 2004) into micro-particles (< 5mm, Arthur et al., 2009). There is considerable concern about the accumulation of microscopic pieces of plastic ('microplastic'), in view of their prevalence at sea and slow chemical and biological degradation. This category includes spillages of pre-production plastics (resin pellets) (Ryan et al., 2009), granules, e.g. from cosmetic products and fibres 
from washing machines. These granules and fibres may be discharged from sewage treatment plants (Liebezeit & Dubaish 2012). The prevalence of small fragments and 
granules (<5mm in diameter) varies considerably according to area, although current quantities appear to be relatively low in most locations. Nonetheless, plastic micro-particles have been reported in quantities exceeding 100,000 items/km2 (Thompson et al. 2009) in the 
North Sea. Similar quantities of debris have been reported in the north-western area of the Mediterranean Sea (Collignon et al, 2012) with 115,000 items/km2 measured, giving a total 
extrapolated amount of 250 billion items throughout the Mediterranean basin.  
The OSPAR Ecological Quality Objective (EcoQO) for litter in fulmar stomachs has provided 
various valuable information on temporal and spatial variations 
in marine litter abundance, 
trend variations in terms of industrial and user plastics and marine litter sources (Van 
Franeker et al., 2010). The EcoQO is currently applied in the North Sea, but can be adapted 
to most areas of the North-East Atlantic. Pilot studies for litter bio-monitoring should also cover other species, in particular marine turtles, which are regularly stranded in the Mediterranean region and often found to contain fatal quantities of ingested litter. Monitoring does exist in some Mediterranean countries and could provide a basis for evaluating litter 
ingestion, once monitoring methodologies have been harmonised. In the future, fish, 
zooplankton species, shellfish and seals may be considered as generally-applicable target species for most European seas, or as target species for one or more of the (sub-) regions listed in the MSFD. 
  
 DETERMINATION OF GOOD ENVIRONMENTAL STATUS  
One of the key EU Member State challenges in implementing the MSFD is determining 'good 
environmental status'. Although this term is def ined in the Directive (Art. 3(5) MSFD), GES 
takes on a variety of meanings in EU marine regions or sub-regions and is therefore open to 
interpretation (Barnes & Metcalf, 2010). The MSFD requires 
a holistic assessment of the 
impacts of anthropogenic pressures on marine ecosystem components. Regarding marine litter, more than one indicator will be required to assess GES in relation to the various marine compartments and various aspects of litter pollution. Metrics are not currently available for 
assessing the majority of biological impacts that litter may have. In their absence, thresholds 
could be replaced by trends in pressure-related indicators, such as the amount of litter on the sea floor or on beaches, in order to provide proxies for evaluating progress towards GES.  
As we saw earlier, the 'harm' caused by marine litter can be divided into three general 
categories: social harm, i.e. impaired aesthetics and public health; economic harm, 
such as costs in terms of tourism, damage to vessels (nets and ropes in propellers), fishing gear and 
facility cleaning costs and; ecological harm, e.g. mortality of, or sublethal effects on animals through entanglement by ghost nets, derelict traps, pots or other fishing gear, or harm 
resulting from the ingestion of litter, including the uptake of micro-particles (mainly 
microplastics). 
Insert figure 2 
On the basis of the MSFD definition of GES for Descriptor 10 given above, GES could be 
considered as 
being achieved once litter and its degradation products present in, or entering 
EU marine waters (i) do not cause harm to marine life and habitats; (ii) (ii) do not cause direct or indirect risks to human health and (iii) do not have negative socioeconomic impacts.  
  
At a national level, EU Member States may take additional priorities into account for 
evaluating GES. Alongside Descriptor 9 on the contamination of seafood, Descriptor 10 
particularly focuses on human health (such as the risk of beach-goers and 
swimmers getting 
cut on sharp litter items and divers getting entangled in litter items), together with socioeconomic interests (such as the cost of cleaning beaches and fishing nets, or the risk of entanglement of ship propellers). The use of trend indicators as listed in the Commission 
Decision (10.1.1; 10.1.2; 10.1.3), aimed at observing and assessing trends in litter 
occurrence in the various marine compartments, will help predict both health-related and socioeconomic consequences.  
Current assessments are not generally capable of providing information on the extent of 
harm at a population, community or ecosystem le vel and it is actually unlikely that we can 
develop 
an assessment procedure capable of showing effects at a population or ecosystem 
level. It is therefore essential to consider harm in relation to individual organisms. Assessing 
the numbers of affected individuals is likely to offer the most feasible and representative conclusions on biological impact. Following the example of the OSPAR EcoQ for plastic litter 
items in fulmar stomachs in the North Sea region, additional indicator species must be found 
for other EU marine regions (such as sea turtles for the Mediterranean Sea) and additional indicators on the ecological impacts of litter (e.g. on entanglements) may be required in reference to Commission Decision 2010/477/EU. Although litter potentially assists the 
transport and introduction of non-indigenous species, this impact has not been put forward 
for assessment using a specific indicator under Commission Decision 2010/477/EU.  
  
DEFINING TARGETS Achieving GES can be considered as a continuous reduction of inputs to reduce total 
amounts of marine litter by 2020 and reach levels that do not harm the coastal and marine environments.  
Although initiatives to remove litter present in the marine environment will assist in reaching 
this goal, various major points need to be considered as follows: 
- One of the stumbling blocks to target-setting in certain marine regions is the lack of 
available data for developing a baseline: rather than 'zero tolerance', the EU directive refers to an acceptable amount of litter that does not affect Good Environmental 
Status. In order to achieve this, classification must be performed according to the 
potentially harmful effects of various litter types (e.g. plastics, glass, metal, etc.) on various species and habitats, together with their use (e.g. nylon nets, plastics from households and industry and sanitary items). So-called 'use categories' provide the 
most useful information for setting targets and defining reduction measures. 
- All marine litter assessments should take into account short-term variations caused 
by meteorological and/or hydrodynamic events and seasonal fluctuations, which 
influence our ability to detect underlying trends. 
Given the variability of litter data, 
which is greatly influenced by season, weather conditions and water currents, a 5-year running mean is considered as appropriate for providing a baseline in terms of 
average pollution. However, a reduction in litter inputs may not lead to a measurable reduction in total litter in the marine environment in the short term. This is due to the persistence of certain materials, together with the time scales and long degradation 
time of many litter categories (plastics, metal, glass and rubber). Observation 
timescales should therefore be adapted to ensure pluriannual monitoring frequencies.  
- Finally, data aggregation for assessments at a sub-regional or even regional scale will 
differ according 
to the considered paramet ers. For example, beached litter surveys 
can be applied on the European spatial scale, whereas deep sea floor monitoring, 
which is limited to a few areas, is more relevant on smaller scales and over longer 
periods. 
Even though it is reasonable to say that plastics, which are a major part of the marine litter problem, are completely unnatural, it would be unreasonable to argue that the ultimate goal 
of the MSFD should be zero plastic in the marine environment. 
Targets for the various 
marine compartments need to be set by EU Member States on the basis of their initial national assessments according to Article 8 MSFD and depending on the initial level of pollution in the considered area. An appropriate target for clean areas would be the maintenance of this status, along with the eventual achievement of clean area status in 
assessed areas with unacceptable litter levels.  
The amount of litter present in the various marine compartments depends, among other 
factors, on regional topography, including sea bed topography and prevailing currents, winds 
and 
tidal cycles. Better knowledge of the amount and dynamics of litter in the marine 
environment will help determine whether targets need to be defined at a regional level, in addition to the targets set by individual EU member states. 
Regarding litter on beaches, which is already well-monitored in some regions, it is suggested 
that the reduction goal recommended by the TSG ML be adopted 
as a first step. This goal 
aims to achieve a general, measurable and statistically-significant reduction in beach litter by 
2020. Despite uncertainties relating to natural fluctuations in the quantities of litter washed ashore (annual variability, effects of storms, etc.), local applicability, technical feasibility 
(confidence, monitoring implications, spatial scale, etc.), trends and inflicted harm, trend-
based targets may remain appropriate until a provenly viable alternative is produced. Discussions are currently revolving around the quantification of the following potential targets: (i) [XX%] overall reduction in the number of visible (> 2.5 cm) [new] litter items on coastlines by 2020 and, more specifically, (ii) [XX%] reduction in the number of 
plastic/fishing/sanitary litter items on coastlines by 2020.  
Although yet to be harmonised, various protocols currently enable the assessment of litter 
floating on 
surface waters. However, specific areas will need to be selected for monitoring. 
Litter on the sea bed has been monitored at a few sites in the EU, but data is sparse and 
assessment is difficult. As a result, a trend target is now being considered, in which data 
would be derived from existing monitoring programmes, or programmes scheduled for extension, in order to improve temporal and spatial scales. The opportunistic sampling of litter on the sea bed would be conducted in conjunction with ongoing fish stock assessment and contaminant surveys (IBTS/ MEDITS programmes). Those monitoring programmes 
would support the application of the following potential targets for marine litter: (i) Overall 
reduction [XX %] in litter density in nationally-defined areas affected by litter floating on the sea surface (ii) Overall reduction [XX %] by 2020 in litter density on the sea bed as measured by trawl surveys, through diving in selected shallow waters and litter harvested through 
fishing operations.  
Microplastics are not currently measured on a regular basis and no baseline is available, 
meaning we do not currently have enough information on most waters 
to set quantitative or 
qualitative targets. Adequate monitoring should therefore be performed and a baseline established before any targets are set.  Micro-particles on the sea surface and in the water column can be assessed by sampling 
with a manta trawl or filtration system. This dat a could be used to formulate a potential target 
for significantly reducing micro-particles by 2020. The occurrence of micro-particles in 
sediments should also be considered.  
Recent studies on industrial plastics found in beached fulmars in the North Sea (Van 
Franeker et al., 2011) showed that reductions in the abundance of specific marine litter items, of around 50% per decade, are a feasible 
target if adequate measures are taken. In 
order to prevent items ending up as marine litter, it is important to tackle the problem at 
source. Operational targets relating to specific sources can be used to help draw up targeted 
measures aimed at reducing the amount of litter entering or present in the sea. However, although these targets can be used to assess the effectiveness of measures, they cannot act as substitutes for environmental targets. 
OSPAR has defined its target for litter-induced ecological pressures in the North Sea as 
follows: less 
than 10% of Northern Fulmars should have over 0.1g plastic in their stomachs 
(undated target for the Greater North Sea). The OSPAR EcoQO cannot be directly transposed on other marine areas uninhabited by fulmars; in order to monitor the ingestion of litter in other EU marine regions, appropriate indicator species still need to be established 
(e.g. sea turtles in the Mediterranean Sea). Similarly to target setting for beach litter it may, 
for the time being, be more suitable to describe GES in relation to litter ingestion in terms of trend, e.g. x % annual reduction in the quantity of ingested litter. It is then important to establish a reference value, with which the reduction should rapidly be compared.  
  
FURTHER SUPPORT TO MEMBER STATES   
The MSFD definition of Good Environmental Status, the objectives for achieving or 
maintaining GES by 2020 and the related monitoring needs require a thorough understanding of the mechanisms and processes associated with litter at sea. In turn, 
this 
requires considerable research efforts in the aim, for example, of clarifying fundamental research gaps relating to litter quantities and associated harm in the context of GES, defining priorities, improving the scientific and technical basis of monitoring, harmonising and coordinating common and comparable monitoring approaches and, finally, supporting the 
development of guidelines for assessing GES.  
An initial joint evaluation on the status of regional/sub-regional research by the EU Member 
States is 
currently under way in the aim of providing a scientific and technical basis for 
monitoring marine litter and defining knowledge gaps and priority research areas. Harmonisation, which is necessary to define common and comparable monitoring approaches and put forward recommendations and guidelines for assessing GES on a 
regional, national and European scale, will need to be coordinated by a group of experts from the EU Member States. Research will need to  include improved knowledge on the impact of 
litter on marine life, litter degradation processes at sea, the study of litter-related micro-particles, the study of litter-associated chemicals, factors influencing the distribution and densities of litter at sea (human factors, hydrodynamics, geomorphology etc.), the comparability of monitoring methods and the determination of thresholds for GES. The assessment and monitoring of socioeconomic harm will also need to be addressed and 
research will be required to implement novel  methods, automated monitoring devices and, 
finally, monitoring rationalisation.  
MSFD implementation is a long-term and cy clic process, aimed at achieving good 
environmental 
status by 2020. Research must be undertaken rapidly, in particular to support 
the start of monitoring by 2014. A number of short-term priorities were identified by the GES 
TG group in 2010 (Galgani et al., 2010), including: 
(1) Evaluate the behaviour (floatability, density, effects of wind, biofouling, degradation rates) 
and factors affecting the fate of litter (weather, sea state, temperature driven variations, slopes, canyons, bays, etc.) and affecting the transport of litter.  
(2) Use comprehensive models to define source and destination regions of litter (especially 
accumulation areas, permanent gyres, deep sea zones), estimate 
residence times, consider 
the average drift times and Tran boundary transport from and to MSFD region/sub regions.  
(3) Evaluate the rates of degradation of the different types of litter, quantify the degradation 
products (to nanoparticles) and evaluate the envir onmental impact of litter-related chemicals 
(Phthalates, bisphenol A, flames retardants, etc.) on marine organisms.  
(4) Identify sources for direct inputs of micro-particles of litter.  (5) Establish the environmental impacts of micro-litter, in particular in relation to the potential 
physical and chemical impacts on wildlife, resources and the food chain.  
(6) Evaluate biological impacts (on metabo lism, physiology, survival, reproductive 
performance and ultimately on populations or communities).  
(7) Evaluate the risk of the introduction of invasive non-indigenous species.  (8) Study dose/ response relationships in relation to the 
types and quantities of marine litter 
in order to enable science-based definitions of threshold levels for GES.  (9) Evaluate direct costs of marine litter to the maritime industry, fishing industry, local 
authorities and governments and in terms of impact on ecosystem goods and services.  (10) Develop automated monitoring systems (ship-based cameras, micro-litter quantification 
etc.) and impact indicators (aesthetic impact, effects on human health and harm to environment).  
(11) Optimise monitoring (standards/baselines; data management/quality insurance; extend 
monitoring protocols to all MSFD (sub-) regions)  
  
CONCLUSIONS   
The EU Marine Strategy Framework Directive (M SFD) provides a framework for EU Member 
States to achieve or maintain Good Environmental Status for their marine waters by 2020. 
Annex 
I of the Directive lists marine litter as one of the qualitative descriptors for achieving 
GES and is therefore a key instrument for addressing this type of marine environment 
contamination, which must be tackled urgently. Plastics are a major part of the marine litter 
problem. As plastic is completely unnatural in the marine environment, the ultimate goal should be to produce plastics with no effects on it.  
Policy makers, managers and scientists involved in implementing the MSFD on marine litter 
are faced with complex and diverse issues, including questions relating to the harmonisation 
of monitoring 
tools and strategies, the definition of 'harm' to the marine environment, the 
assessment of land and sea-based sources from which marine litter enters the sea and the 
development of a common understanding of the application of appropriate operational/environmental targets.  
The TSG ML has been assigned to work on these various questions and draw up monitoring 
protocols, along 
with additional technical and procedural recommendations, in the aim of 
assisting EU Member States in taking the steps required to implement the MSFD. This supporting role will help combat marine litter, while providing a strong scientific and technical foundation for the implementation of Descriptor 10 of the MSFD.  
  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS:  
This article is based on the activities of the MSFD task group TG 10 (2010) and the GES-
Technical Subgroup 
on Marine Litter (2011-2012). All members of these groups are sincerely 
acknowledged for their contribution. EC DG ENV and the EC Joint Research Centre, UBA 
Germany and IFREMER France are also acknowledged for supporting the process. We also thank Andrea Weiss from UBA and Laura Valentine for reviewing the manuscript. 
  
REFERENCES:  Arthur, C., Baker, J., Bamford, H. (eds.) 2009. Proceedings of the International Research 
Workshop on the Occurrence, Effects and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris. Sep 9-11, 
2008. NOAA Technical Memorandum NOS-OR&R-30. NOAA, Silver Spring 530pp. 
Barnes, D. K. A. 2002. Invasions by marine life on plastic debris. Nature 416, 808–809. 
(doi:10.1038/416808a) 
Barnes, D.K.A., Milner, P. 2005. Drifting plastic and its consequences for sessile organism 
dispersal in the Atlantic Ocean. Marine Biology, 146, 815–825. 
Barnes, D.K.A., Galgani, F., Thompson, R. C. & Barlaz, M. 2009. Accumulation and 
fragm entation of plastic debris in global environm
ents. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B, 1985-1998. 
Barnes, R. & Metcalf, D. 2010. 'Current Legal Developments – The European Union: The 
Marine Strategy Fram ework Directive'. Int. J.of Mar.Coast.Law, Vol. 25, 81-91  
CBD. 
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Scientific and Technical 
Advisory Panel 
GEF (2012). Impacts of Marine Debris on Biodiversity: Current Status and 
Potential Solutions, Montreal, Technical Series No. 67, 61 pages . 
 Cheshire, A.C., Adler, E., Barbière, J., Cohen, Y., Evans, S., Jarayabhand, S., Jeftic, L., 
Jung, R.T., Kinsey, S., Kusui, E.T., Lavine, I., Manyara, P., Oosterbaan, L., Pereira, 
M.A., 
Sheavly, S., Tkalin, A., Varadarajan, S., Wenneker, B., Westphalen, G. 2009. UNEP/IOC 
Guidelines on Survey and Monitoring of Marine Litter. UNEP Regional Seas Reports and 
Studies, No. 186; IOC Technical Series No. 83: xii + 120 pp. 
Fleet, D., van Franeker, J., Dagevos, J.and Hougee, M. 2009. Marine Litter. Thematic Report 
No. 3.8. 
In: Marencic, H. and Vlas, J. de (Eds), 2009. Quality Status Report 2009. 
WaddenSea Ecosystem No. 25. Common Wadden Sea Secretariat, Trilateral Monitoring 
and Assessment Group, Wilhelmshaven, Germany. 
Collignon A., JH Hecq, F Galgani, P Voisin, Goffard, A. 2012. Neustonic microlastics and 
zooplankton in the western Mediterranean sea. Mar. poll. Bull., 64, 861-864.  
Galgani, F., Andral, B. 1998. Methods for evaluating debris on the deep sea floor. 
OCEANS'98/IEEE/OEC Conference, Nice 28/09-01/10/98 3, 1512–1521. 
Galgani, F., Lecornu, F. 2004. Debris on the sea floor at'Hausgarten': in the expedition 
ARKTIS XIX/3 of the research vessel POLARSTERN in 2003. Berichte Polar 
Meeresforsch. 488, 260–262. 
Galgani, F., Souplet, A., Cadiou, Y. 1996. Accumulation of debris on the deep sea floor of 
the French Mediterranean coast. Mar. Ecol. Progr. 
Ser. 142, 225–234. 
(doi:10.3354/meps142225) 
Galgani F., Leaute J. P., Moguedet P., Souplet A., Verin Y., Carpentier A., Goraguer H., 
Latrouite D., 
Andral B., Cadiou Y., Mahe J. C., Poulard J. C., Nerisson P. 2000. Litter on the Sea Floor Along European Coasts. Marine Pollution Bulletin 40(6):516-
527.(doi:10.1016/S0025-326X(99)00234-9) 
Galgani, F., Fleet, D., Van Franeker, J., Katsavenakis, S., Maes, T., Mouat, J., Oosterbaan, 
L., Poitou, I., Hanke, G., Thom
pson, R., Amato, E., Birkun, A. & Janssen, C., 2010. 
Marine Strategy Framework Directive Task Group 10 Report Marine litter, JRC Scientific and technical report, ICES/JRC/IFREMER Joint Report (no 31210 – 2009/2010), Editor: N. Zampoukas, 57 pp. 
Galgani F., Hanke G, Werner S., Piha H., 2011 MSFD GES Technical Subgroup on Marine 
Litter. Technical 
Recommendations for the Implementation of MSFD Requirements. JRC 
scientific and technical report, EUR 25009 EN – 2011, 93 pages. 
Goldberg, E. 1994. Diamonds and plastics are forever? Editorial. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 28, 466. 
(doi:10.1016/0025- 326X(94)90511-8) 
Gregory, M. R.2009. Environmental implications of plastic debris in marine settings – 
entanglem ent, ingestion, sm
othering, hangers-on, hitch-hiking, and alien invasions. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 364, 2013-2026 (doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0265) 
Hanke, G. and Piha, H. 2011. Large scale monitoring of surface floating marine litter by high 
resolution im agery, Presentation and extended abstract, 5th International 
Marine Debris 
Conference. 20.-25. March 2011, Hawaii, Honolulu. 
HELCOM/UNEP. 2007. Assessment of the Marine Litter problem in the Baltic region and 
priorities for response. HELCOM(http://www.helcom .fi/). 
Hess, N., Ribic, C., Vining, Y. 1999. Benthic m
arine debris, with an emphasis on fishery-
related items, surrounding Kodiak Island, Alaska, 1994–1996. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 38, 885–890. (doi:10.1016/S0025-326X(99)00087-9)Katsanevakis S, 2008. Marine 
debris, a 
growing problem: Sources, distribution, composition, and impacts. In: Hofer TN (ed) Marine Pollution: New Research. Nova Science Publishers, New York. pp. 53–100. 
Ivar do Sul, J.A., Costa, M.F. 2007. Marine debris review for Latin America and the Wider 
Caribbean Region: From  the 1970s until now, and where do we go from 
 here? Marine 
Pollution Bulletin, 54, 1087–1104. 
Katsanevakis, S., Verriopoulos, G., Nikolaidou, A.,Thessalou-Legaki, M. 2007. Effect of 
marine 
pollution with litter on the benthic megafauna of coastal soft bottoms. Marine 
Pollution Bulletin, 54, 771–778. 
Juda, L. 2010 The European Union and the Marine Strategy Framework Directive: 
Continuing the Developm ent of European Ocean Use Managem
ent, Ocean Development 
&International Law, 41:1, 34-54. 
Koutsodendris, A., Papatheodorou, A., Kougiourouki, O., Georgiadis, M. 2008. Benthic 
marine litter in four Gulfs in 
Greece, Eastern Mediterranean; abundance, composition and source identification. Est. Coast. Shelf Sci. 77, 501–512. 
(doi:10.1016/j.ecss.2007.10.011) 
Large, P. A., Graham, N. G., Hareide, N-R., Misund, R., Rihan, D. J., Mulligan, M. C., 
Randall, P. J., 
 Peach, D. J., McMullen, P. H., and Harlay, X. 2009. Lost and abandoned nets in deep-water gillnet fisheries in the Northeast Atlantic: retrieval exercises and outcom es. – 
ICES Journal of 
Marine Science, 66: 323–333. 
Law, K. L., S. Moret-Ferguson, N. A. Maximenko, G. Proskurowski, E. E. Peacock, J. Hafner 
and C.M. Reddy (2010). Plastic accum ulation in the North Atlantic Subtropical 
Gyre. 
Science, 329, 1185–1188. 
 Laist, D. (1997). Impacts of marine debris: Entanglement of marine life in marine debris 
including a com prehensive list of species with entanglem
ent and ingestion records. In J. 
Coe and D. Rogers (Eds.). Marine debris: Sources, impact and solutions, 99-141. 
Springer Verlag. New York. 
Liebezeit, G., Dubaish, F. 2012.Microplastics in Beaches of the East Frisian Islands 
Spiekeroog and Kachelotplate. Bull Environ Contam
 Toxicol. DOI 10.1007/s00128-012-
0642-7.  
Macfadyen, G., T. Huntington and Cappell, R, 2009. Abandoned, lost or otherwise discarded 
fishing gear, 
UNEP Regional Seas Reports and Studies 185 and FAO Fisheries and 
Aquaculture Technical Paper 523, UNEP/FAO, 115 pp.  
Markus, T., S. Schlake & Maier, N. (2011) Legal Implementation of Integrated Ocean 
Policies: The EU's Marine Strategy Fram ework Directive'. 
Int. J.of Mar.Coast.Law, Vol. 
26, 59-90.Mato, Y., Isobe, T., Takada, H., Kanehiro, H., Ohtake, C., Kaminuma, T. 2001. Plastic resin pellets as a transport medium for toxic chemicals in the marine environment. Environ. Sci. Technol. 35, 318–324. (doi:10.1021/es0010498) 
Mouat, J., R. Llozano, Bateson, H. (2010) Economic Impacts of marine litter. Kimo report 
(http://www.kimo.org
), Kimo ed., 100 pages. 
Murray, F., Cowie, P. 2011. Plastic contamination in the decapod crustacean Nephrops 
norvegicus (Linnaeus, 1758), Marine Pollution Bulletin, in press.  
 OSPAR 2009. Marine litter in the North-East Atlantic Region: Assessment and priorities for 
response. London, United Kingdom , 127 pp. 
PNUE/PAM/MEDPOL 2009. Results of the assessm
ent of the status of marine litter in the 
mediterranean. Meeting of MED POL Focal Points n°334, 91p.  
Ryan, P.G., Moore, C.J., Van Franeker, J.A., Moloney, C.L. 
2009. Monitoring the 
abundance of plastic debris in the m arine environm
ent. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B. 364. (doi: 
10.1098/rstb.2008.0207) 
Teuten, E. L., Saquing, J. M., Knappe, D. R. U., Barlaz, M. A., Jonsson, S., Björn, A., Rowland, S. J., Thompson, R. C., Galloway, T. S., Yamashita, R., Ochi, D., Watanuki, Y., 
Moore, C., Viet, P., Tana, T. S., Prudente, M., Boonyatumanond, R., Zakaria, M. P., Akkhavong, K., Ogata, Y., Hirai, H., Iwasa, S., Mizukawa, K., Hagino, Y., Imamura, A., 
Saha, M., Takada, S. 2009. Transport and release of chemicals from plastics to the 
environment and to wildlife. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 364, 2027-2045. 
Thompson, R. C., Olsen, Y., Mitchell, R. P., Davis, A., Rowland, S. J., John, A. W. G., 
McGonigle, D. 
& Russell, A. E. 2004. Lost at sea: where is all the plastic? Science 304, 
838. (doi:10.1126/science.1094559) 
Thompson, R. C., Moore, C., vom Saal, F. S., Swan, S. H. 2009. Plastics, the environment 
and hum
an health: current consensus and future trends. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 
364.(doi:10.1098/rstb.2009.0053) 
Tinch, R., Brouwer, R., Görlitz, S. Interwies, E., Mathieu, L., Raatikainen, N., Soutukorva, A. 
and D. 
 Tinch (2012). Recreational benefits of reductions of litter in the marine environment - Final 
report. 
UNEP, 2009: Marine Litter: A Global Challenge. Nairobi: UNEP, 232 pp. 
Van Franeker, J.A., et al. 2011, Monitoring plastic ingestion by the northern fulmar 
Fulm arus glacialis in the North Sea, 
Environmental Pollution (2011), 
doi:10.1016/j.envpol.2011.06.008  
  
  
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
     
 
 
 
Figure 1: A schematic cycle of litter a Sea 
  
 
Figure 2: Major impacts of marine litter and related MSFD indicators. Minor impacts such as entanglement in 
pelagic species, transport of alien sp ecies to beaches etc. could be im
portant in specific cases or areas.   