February 2015
Prepared by the Product Stewardship Institute, Inc. (PSI) with funding from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Region 92
 iii 
Marine Debris & Plastic Source  
Reduction Toolkit  
for Colleges & Universities 
Prepared by the  
Product Stewardship Institute, Inc.  with funding from the  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Region 9 
Grant Number 00T98301WS 
February 2015 iv Acknowledgements
 
PSI prepared this toolkit for the EPA Region 9 Marine Debris Team as part of our project 
requirements under Grant 00T98301WS. We would like to thank the many individuals from the University of California campuses at Santa Barbara, San Diego, and San Francisco, as well as the University of California Office of the President, who contributed their time, effort, and expertise to this project. We would also like to thank the following organizations for their contributions: Plastic Pollution Coalition, California Product Stewardship Council, Clean Water Fund California, and As You Sow. Finally, we would like to thank the County of Santa Barbara Public Works Department, San Diego Environmental Services Department, and San Francisco Department of the Environment for their input on source reduction policies. v  
 
 
 
 
 Table of Contents
 
Introduction ............................................................................................................. 1
 
........................................................... 41
 
Step One: Determine Your Campus’s Plastic Footprint   .......................................... 5 
Section I: Background Information  ................................................................................................ 6 
Basics About Your Campus
 
Summary of Existing Efforts on Campus
Initial Review of Sources of Plastic  ................................................................................................................. 6 
Recycling and Composting Opportunities  ......................................................................................... 6 
 ............................................................................................ 8 
 ......................................................................................................9 
Section II: Which Disposable Plastics Are Used On Campus?  . ....................................................... 10 
Visual Inventory: Disposable Plastic Found on Campus  
Surveying Stormwater Catch Basins  .
................................................................................................. 10 
.................................................................. 12 
Section III: Which Disposable Plastics Do We Buy, Use, and Throw Away on Campus?  .
Procurement Inventory: Sources of Disposable Food Service Plastic  .
Section IV: What Does This Information Mean for Our Campus?  ................
12 
............................................ 12 
................................................. 14 
Step Two: Create a Source Reduction Plan  . .......................................................... 15 
Guidelines to creating a source reduction plan  
Source reduction plans in action: Case Studies  ............................................................................ 16 
.............................................................................21 
Case Study 1: University of California Santa Barbara (UCCase Study 2: University of California San Francisco (UCSF) 
Case Study 3: University of California San Diego (UCSD)SB)  
 
 ................................................................. 23 
...........................................................33 
Source Reduction Resources ........................................................................................................ 49
 
Best Management Prac tices  
Campus W
ater Bottle Filling Stations
Reusable To-Go Contai
Reusable To-Go Cutlery    
ners
V
endors of Compostable and Recyclable Food Service Ware and Bags  .............................................................................................................. 49
 
.............................................................................................. 49

 
................................................................................................................ 51
 
...................................................................................................................... 51
 
........................................ 51

 
Step Three: Change Campus Procurement Practices  ........................................... 55
 
Guide to Integrating Plastic Source Reduction Into Procurement Systems   ................................ 56
 
Procurement Resources  ............................................................................................................... 
61
 
Sample Bid SpecificationSample Leasing Agreem s  .................................................................................................................. 61 
 
e
nts  .............................................................................................................
65
 
Step Four: Establish Source Reduction Policies  . ...................................................67
 
Policies Influencing Consumer Behavior  
Voluntary PoliciesMandatory Policies   .
Procurement Policies  
Voluntary PoliciesMandatory Polici   .
e.......................................................................................68
 
............................................................................................................................. 68
 
............................................................................................................................ 68
 
...................................................................................................................69
 
............................................................................................................................. 69
 
s............................................................................................................................ 69
 vi Real-Life Policy Examples ..............................................................................................................
................................................................................................................. 71
 
Model Policy Language  73
 
1. 	Model Ordinance Banning Sale of Drinking Water in Single-Serve PET Bottles  .
2. 	Model Ordinance Banning Expanded Polystyrene (EPS) Foam-based Disposable  
     Food Service Ware by Food Vendors ..
3. 	Model Ordinance Banning Single-use Carry-out Bags .
4. 	Model Ordinance for Regulating Take-out Food Packaging  .
5. 	Model Ordinance Requiring Re-Usabl
Serving Food And Beverages For On-Site Dining  ....... 
........................................................................
..............................................
....................................
e Food Service Ware For Restaurants  
......................................................................... 74
 
.................. 75
 
.................. 77
 
................. 80
 
.................. 82
 Did you know? 
According to the Ocean Conservancy, six of the top 10 contributors to marine debris are single-use, or disposable, 
plastic products. They include food and beverage container caps and lids, beverage bottles, plastic bags, food wrappers, flatware (i.e., cups, plates, and cutlery), and drinking straws. Known as “food service ware,” such single-use plastic utensils and containers pose a threat to marine environments because they do not fully break down or decompose. When littered, or caught by the wind, these items get washed into stormwater drains that empty into streams, rivers, bays, and other waterways. 
Believe It When You “Sea” It 
Over the years, plastic food service ware products have contributed to the formation of what is known as the Great Pacific Garbage Patch—an enormous swath of floating plastic debris and plastic particles in the Pacific Ocean. Also known as the Pacific Trash Vortex, this “island” of plastic is caused by large currents that meet and form a whirlpool-like system, known as gyres. The Great Pacific Garbage Patch is formed by one of five large gyres and poses a major environmental health problem that continues to grow. In fact, since the discovery of the Great Pacific Garbage Patch, similar trash vortices have been found in four other ocean gyres, including the North Atlantic Gyre and the Indian Ocean Gyre. Plastics have also been carried by similar currents into the Great Lakes. 
Marine debris can impact 
aquatic species and habitats in a number of ways. As debris accumulates, light levels may be reduced in underlying waters, thereby depleting oxygen levels. These changes can undermine the ability of both open water and benthic (ocean bottom) habitats to support life.
1 Animals may 
also mistake these floating pieces of plastic for food, which, when ingested, cause severe bodily damage and lead to eventual starvation. According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, more than one-third of sea bird species ingest plastic. Also, while plastics do not degrade, they do break down into smaller pieces. These pieces then act like sponges, absorbing chemical contaminants in the water around them, such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), chlorinated pesticides like dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) and other toxins. When animals ingest these plastic pieces, mistaking them for food, these toxic compounds then enter their bodies and, in turn, make their way up the food chain— all the way to humans. 
The problem is far more profound than just a few 
patches of unsightly litter on local shorelines. Marine debris affects our ocean and its food chains, which sustain human life. 
1 USEPA, 2011. Marine Debris in the North Pacific: A Summary of Existing Information and Identification of 
Data Gaps, http://www.epa.gov/region9/marine-debris/pdf/MarineDebris-NPacFinalAprvd.pdf 
11   
  
  
  What This Toolkit Is About 
Many plastic food service ware items originate on 
college and university campuses—in cafeterias, snack rooms, cafés, and eateries with take-out dining options. That’s why we created this Campus Plastic Source Reduction Toolkit. The toolkit was piloted at three University of California (UC) campuses—Santa Barbara (UCSB), San Diego (UCSD), and San Francisco (UCSF)— but we designed each of these steps to be replicable and easily implemented by other colleges and universities around the country. By following the steps in the toolkit, you can help your college or university reduce plastic waste through source reduction—the process of minimizing the amount of plastic used. Together, we can cut down on plastic waste and reduce the amount of marine debris polluting the planet’s oceans and waterways. 
This toolkit is made up of four distinct steps. It is 
important that you follow these steps in the order that they are presented here, as each step lays the foundation for the next. 
STEP 1:  Determine Your Campus’s Plastic Footprint – 
Using the Plastic Footprinting Tool, identify the types and sources of disposable plastic currently procured by and used on your college or university campus. 
STEP 2:  Create a Source Reduction Plan – 
Develop and carry out a campus-wide plan to reduce or eliminate the use of disposable plastic items and promote the use of reusable alternatives. 
STEP 3:  Change Your Campus’s Procurement Practices – 
Identify alternative, less environmentally impactful products and help your campus ensure environmentally preferable procurement. 
STEP 4:  Establish Source Reduction Policies – 
Implement campus-wide (and even municipal) policies that encourage source reduction. 
22
 33 
Before You Get Started . . .
 
There are a few basic considerations that will help you embark on your plastic source reduction journey: 
1. If your campus has student-led environmental groups, tap into them. Student bodies can wield the power
that’s needed to effect campus-wide change. Identify and assemble student leaders who can carry out the
necessary activities on campus.
2.	Appoint a faculty advisor to oversee the student group’s activities and offer practical guidance. A facultyadvisor also helps to legitimize the students’ work.
3.	Assemble a team of key campus staff—for example, food service professionals, maintenance staff,procurement managers, and executive leaders (e.g., the Office of the President)—who can facilitate cross-campus communication and ensure that their respective departments’ source reduction responsibilities arecarried out.
With your foundational elements—a student group, a faculty advisor, and an inter-departmental team of campus staff—now in place, you can advance to the first step of the toolkit, Determine Your Campus’s Plastic Footprint . 
Good luck! 44
 
Determine Your 
Campus’s Plastic Footprint 
Use the Plastic Footprinting Tool to identify 
the types and sources of disposable plastic currently procured by and used on your campus 
The Plastic Footprinting Tool is intended to help you 
jumpstart your plastic source reduction initiative by clearly defining the “problem” so that you can then develop and execute an action plan to solve it. Collecting data will allow you to analyze the current amount of single-use plastic food service ware used on campus. 
At its most basic level, the Footprinting Tool is a 
survey, or a series of questions, to help you collect data from various campus sources (namely, purchasing departments and facilities staff). It includes background information on your campus’s plastic source reduction efforts and waste management infrastructure, and inventories the disposable plastics purchased and used on campus. This is where the cross-departmental team of campus staff will come in handy, as team members should be able to facilitate data gathering within each of their respective departments. The Footprinting Tool also includes on-the-ground visual inspections and observations around campus. 
Completing the Footprinting Tool will provide you with 
the information needed to identify opportunities to reduce disposable plastics as you advance to Step Two, Create a Source Reduction Plan. To begin, fill out each of the informational fields in the pages that follow. If you wish to use a different document to collect and house the information—for example, a spreadsheet—you may do so, but be sure to provide the data in the format(s) specified below to ensure consistency and comparability. 
5 5 Section I: Background Information 
Basics About Your Campus 
1. Name of school:
2. Type of school (i.e., public/private, 4-yr/2-yr, undergrad only/graduate students etc.):
3. Number of enrolled students (undergraduate and graduate):4.Number of faculty and university staff:
	
Recycling & Composting Opportunities 
1. Does your campus have a recycling program? If so, are materials collected together (i.e., single
stream), or are there separate bins to collect different materials (e.g., different bins for plastic, glass, paper, and metal)? 
2. Does your campus have a composting program? If so, can the program accept compostable food
service ware, such as cups, plates, and cutlery? Are there any limitations on the types of compostable food 
service ware your composting program will accept (e.g., certified biodegradable by Biodegradable Products Institute (BPI), only noncoated paper, etc.)? 
3. What materials can be recycled on campus? Fill out Table 1, below.
6666  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 1: Materials Recycled on Campus 
MATERIAL TYPE RECYCLED ON CAMPUS? LOCATION OF RECYCLING BINS 
(if known) 
#1 PET 
(polyethylene terephthalate)* 
water/soda bottles, clamshells, cups, food jars, etc. 
#2 HDPE 
(high density polyethylene)* 
Milk jugs, detergent bottles, etc. 
#3 PVC 
(polyvinyl chloride) containers, clamshells, etc. 
#4 LDPE 
(low density polyethylene) shopping bags, container lids, shrink wrap, etc. 
#5 PP 
(polypropylene) yogurt containers, takeout containers, bottle caps, etc. 
#6 PS 
(polystyrene) rigid food service containers & cups, clamshells (except foam), etc. 
#6 EPS foam 
(expanded polystyrene or Styrofoam
Tm ) 
# 7 “Other” 
Glass bottles* Office paper* Cardboard* Aluminum cans* Steel cans* Other – please specify: 
*These materials are the most widely recycled, but check signage on campus recycling bins to fill out list of accepted items.
	
777 7 Summary of Existing Efforts on Campus 
1.	Does your university have a sustainability, waste diversion, and/or zero waste plan? If so, either attach the
plan or provide a URL below, and describe any past, current, or future actions that have resulted or will resultin the reduction of disposable plastic items used, or that increase recycling efforts for disposable plastics. T o
whom have these results been reported?
2. What barriers have you encountered or do you anticipate encountering when implementing sustainabilityinitiatives? Please describe.
3. Which student groups work to reduce disposable plastics on campus? Which student groups are involved inbroader, but relevant, sustainability initiatives? Which university staff or faculty are involved in sustainabilityefforts and might provide input on a plastic source reduction plan for your campus?
4.	Has your campus conducted events in the past that aim to reduce the use of disposable plastic, or tootherwise increase awareness of the link between disposable plastics as sources of marine debris? If so,please describe the event(s) and indicate whether the goals were achieved (e.g., obtaining signatures,distributing reusable water bottles or bags, etc.).
5.	Does your campus have any upcoming events planned that aim to reduce the use of disposable plastic, orto otherwise increase awareness of the link between disposable plastics and marine debris? If so, pleasedescribe the event(s) and the goals.
6.	Please share if there are other policies, protocols, or other aspects of your university structure that arerelevant to this plastics source reduction project. These may include municipal or local ordinances impactingyour campus.
7.	Is your campus required to develop a stormwater management plan? If yes, please describe bestmanagement practices to contain trash from the student union or other food service settings. (Thefacilities department and/or the environmental health and safety department should be able to helpyou answer this question.)
8.Does your campus keep track of the amount and type of plastic debris that gets caught in stormdrains? If yes, please review the reports and record the amount and type of plastic litter debris here.
888 8                                        
                                                                                 
 Initial Review of Sources of Plastic 
To assist your review, we recommend identifying each of these sources on a campus map. 
1.	Not including  eat-in dining halls, what options do students and others on campus have for purchasing
beverages, snacks, or meals to go? Include all eateries owned and managed by the university, as well as the
eateries owned by private vendors leasing space on campus. Use Table 2, below, to record your answers.
Table 2: On Campus Eateries Offering Takeout/To-Go Options
	
TYPE NUMBER NAME 
Cafés/Takeout dining facilities 
(managed by university) 
Other fast food restaurants 
(run by private companies) 
Coffee shops 
(managed by university) 
Other, e.g., library, food cart 
(managed by university) 
2. Are there vending machines on campus? Circle the description that best represents your campus.
Beverages only Snacks only Both Other: 
3. Estimate how many vending machines exist on campus. Highlight the one that best represents your campus.
1-5 	 6-10 11-15 15+ 
4. Are there cafés, fast food restaurants, or other take-out eateries off campus (but within walking distance)that students frequent? If so, please list the 5 closest and/or most visited options below:
5.	How many drinking fountains or hydration stations—retrofitted drinking fountains that provide easy accessfor filling water bottles—that can accommodate a refillable bottle are on your campus? (If possible, pleasemark their locations on a campus map.)
999 9  Section II: Which disposable plastics are used on campus? 
Visual Inventory: Disposable Plastic Found on Campus 
In this next step, you will collect information by walking around your campus and making observations, particularly 
in and around the food service locations that offer takeout/to-go options. This exercise will help you identify and visualize which disposable plastics items are most frequently used, verify the location of recycling bins that you identified in Table 1, and help you make the connection about where they come from.
	
Based on your visual inventory, fill out the table below to indicate which disposable plastic items appear most 
around campus. If you can, determine what the source(s) of the items may be. For example, do the items (e.g., plastic straw or cutlery) originate from a café or library on campus, or do consumers bring them onto campus from an off-campus location (e.g., cups from a nearby fast food restaurant)? 
Take pictures of commonly found plastic items that have been disposed of, or that are littered around campus, and 
note where you found them. 
RECOMMENDED ACTIVITY (Optional): Consider noting your findings on a map of the campus, indicating the 
location of dining facilities, recycling bins, and stormdrains. This can assist you in identifying source reduction opportunities. 
101010 10  Table 5: Visual Inventory of Plastics Disposed of on Campus 
DISPOSABLE PLASTIC 
FOOD SERVICE ITEM FOUND ON 
CAMPUS? POTENTIAL ON-CAMPUS 
SOURCE(S) POTENTIAL OFF-CAMPUS 
SOURCE(S) WHERE WAS 
PICTURE TAKEN? 
Bottles + Cups 
Plastic water bottles 
Other plastic bottles 
(e.g., juice, soda) 
EPS (expanded 
polystyrene foam) cups 
Other plastic cups (e.g., 
SOLO cups) 
Plastic lids + bottle caps 
Take-Out/To-Go Containers + Utensils 
EPS (expanded
polystyrene foam) plates 
EPS (expanded
polystyrene foam) “clam shells” 
Other rigid plastic “clam 
shells” 
Other plastic food 
containers 
Plastic cutlery (spoons, 
forks, knives, etc.) 
Straws 
Miscellaneous 
Plastic grocery/retail
bags 
Plastic wrappers 
Plastic sandwich/
snack bags 
Other plastic wrap 
Plastic stirrers Other plastic items
(explain) 
Compostable or Other
Biodegradable plastics 
Cups 
Plates + takeout 
containers 
Utensils 
111111 11 Surveying Stormwater Catch Basins 
Observing which items get trapped in stormwater catch basins after a rain storm on campus, and whether these 
items originate from campus eateries, is also important for determining the types of litter that become marine debris. If you find that disposable plastic food service ware is indeed a major source of accumulated trash in stormwater catch basins, you will want to target these items in Step Two when you develop your campus’ Source Reduction Plan. If these items are not a major source of debris found in catch basins following storms, this should also be noted. 
1.	How many stormwater catch basins are there near the student union or other campus eateries? Please notethem on your campus map and describe the type of litter found in or near these basins. (You may want totake pictures to document your findings.)
Section III: Which disposable plastics do we buy, use, and throw away on campus? 
Procurement Inventory: Sources of Disposable Food Service Plastic 
There are many sources of disposable plastic waste, both on-campus and off-campus. This procurement inventory is designed to focus on university-managed eateries, in part because students and staff can have the most direct impact in these locations. However, private vendors operating fast food restaurants on campus can also contribute to disposable plastic waste. Therefore, any purchasing or procurement data that can be obtained from private vendors leasing space on campus is valuable for establishing a baseline of on-campus disposable plastic sources. 
To obtain measurable data on the sources of disposable plastic items procured by the university, you must work 
directly with the university staff responsible for purchasing on behalf of the campus-managed eateries that offer take-out/to-go options. 
Although disposable plastics purchased for campus-managed eateries are of particular interest to this project, 
disposable items used for events, meetings, and other activities on campus are also important. Ideally, these data should also be captured in the inventory as separate categories. Depending on how procurement responsibilities are divided, you may need to reach out to staff in the food service, operations/logistics, conference planning, and/or sustainability departments. 
Once you have identified the appropriate contact(s), set up a meeting to discuss this initiative and collect data 
on disposable plastic food service items purchased by the university. T o do so, fill out the table below. The 
quantitative data you collect and note here will enable you to complete the plastic footprint of your campus, and will complement the qualitative observations you make in other sections of this tool. Since one of the purposes of this Plastic Footprinting Tool is to enable college and university campuses across the U.S. to compare their results and collectively reduce their environmental impacts, it is important to record the data consistently using the units specified in the chart. 
121212 12  DISPOSABLE 
PLASTIC FOOD 
SERVICE ITEMS PURCHASED 
BY THE 
UNIVERSITY 
(YES/NO)? IF PURCHASED BY 
THE UNIVERSITY, 
BY WHICH 
DEPARTMENT? # OF ITEMS 
PURCHASED 
PER YEAR TOTAL 
COSTS PER 
YEAR DESCRIPTION OR 
PRODUCT AND VENUE 
IN WHICH USED/SOLD 
Bottles + Cups 
Plastic water 
bottles 
Other plastic
bottles (e.g., juice, soda) 
Expanded 
polystyrene foam cups 
Other rigid plastic
cups (e.g., SOLO cups) 
Plastic cup lids 
Take-Out/To-Go Containers + Utensils 
Expanded 
polystyrene foamplates 
Other rigid plastic 
“clam shells” 
Other plastic
take-out container bottoms 
Other plastic take-
out container lids 
Plastic cutlery
(spoons, forks, knives, etc.) 
Straws 
Miscellaneous 
Plastic grocery/ 
retail bags 
Plastic film wrap 
(e.g., Saran Wrap™) 
Plastic sandwich/
snack bags 
Other plastic wrap 
Plastic stirrers Other plastic items
(explain) 
131313 13 Section IV: What does this information mean for our 
campus? 
Once the sections above have been completed, answer the following questions: 
1. Based on the visual inventory and your observations of disposable plastics found on campus, which three to
five items are most commonly found?
2. Based on data obtained from the procurement inventory, what are the top three to five disposable food
service plastic items that are purchased (based on number of items)?
3.Based on your visual inventory and procurement inventory, which three to five items are most widely used
and may be of primary concern on your campus?
4. List potential on-campus sources of these items.
5.Based on what you know now, what are the top three to five disposable plastic items you want to focus on in
the next 12 months? Please explain.
Congratulations! 
You’ve just completed Step One of the Campus Plastic Source Reduction Toolkit! You’ve identified and quantified the 
most common sources of disposable plastics on your campus, and are now ready to move on to Step Two, Create a Plastic Source Reduction Plan,  which will help you identify opportunities for reducing and eliminating certain plastic 
food service ware items on campus. It will also set the stage for inspiring behavior change among students so that they consistently choose reusable or less impactful alternatives. 
Turn the page to advance to Step Two. 
141414 14 15
Using data from the Plastic Footprinting 
Tool, custom-build a plan to minimize the use of disposable plastic on your campus. 
Now that you’ve completed Step One, Determine 
Your Campus’s Plastic Footprint, you should have enough data to be able to create a customized action plan for reducing plastic on your college or university campus at the source. That’s what Step Two is all about. Within these pages, you’ll find opportunities for reducing your campus’s use of disposable plastic food service ware items while increasing its use of durable, reusable products or less impactful alternatives. These opportunities might include: 
•  Eliminating the use of unnecessary plasticpackaging and single-use plastic items;
•  Switching from single-use products to reusableitems; and
•  Substituting single-use products with otherproducts that are less likely to end up inwaterways.
Turn the page to get started! STEP 
Create a Source 
Reduction Plan TWO 
15  
 
 
  Where do I begin? 
To help get you started thinking about a Source 
Reduction Plan for your campus, we have developed a series of guidelines to keep in mind. These guidelines should help you stay focused and on track to deliver real and lasting results: 
• 	 Reducing the use of plastic is the goal of this
Source Reduction Plan . While many types of
materials contribute to the waste stream, this planfocuses exclusively on reducing plastic, since, as wementioned, plastic makes up more than half of allmarine debris.
• 	 Make recommendations consistent with the solidwaste management hierarchy . Source reduction
and reuse of materials are the preferred approachesfor curbing all waste, including marine debris. In thecontext of plastics source reduction, actions at thetop of the hierarchy include reducing the use of,or banning, items such as plastic straws and plasticbags, and using reusable food service ware.
• Recommend products consistent with localsolid waste management infrastructure.  When
source reduction actions cannot be immediatelyimplemented, substitution with compostable orrecyclable materials is the next best option—butonly if the appropriate infrastructure to recoverthose materials exists. Therefore, the food serviceware options available depend on the end-of-lifemanagement systems (recycling or composting) inplace. Check with your solid waste vendors beforemaking any changes—for example, some recyclerswill accept plastic clamshells for recycling; otherswill not accept any food service packaging with food residue. Hence, the “recyclable” pizza box may end up with other trash if there’s cheese on it, while the plastic salad clamshell might be recyclable. Similarly, some compostable plastics may not be compatible with your local composting system even though the product is labeled compostable and/or biodegradable. Importantly, compostable plastics are not recyclable and will, in fact, contaminate the stream rendering recyclable plastics unusable. So, you should choose an approach – either targeting recyclable or compostable food service ware – after careful consideration and discussion with those who manage your recycling and composting programs. If the infrastructure does not exist to recycle or compost these alternative food service ware products, reuse is the best option to avoid these materials winding up in the marine environment where they will contribute to marine debris. 
Recommend products that have proven successful.  
Early program successes can pave the way for
implementing additional product changes, whilefailures, which may arise from using unprovenproduct prototypes, may make campus decision-makers more wary of making future changes. Toensure a relatively seamless transition to new foodservice ware products, we suggest that your campusconsider alternative products that have been testedin a food service environment and in the targetedend-of-life management system (i.e., recycling orcomposting). If you choose to test out prototypes,proceed with caution and make sure the campuscommunity understands it is a trial.
Prioritize local solutions, when possible. Where
available and feasible, you should recommend local
alternatives to the most common disposable plasticitems. W
e recognize that developing alternatives
to disposable plastics is an emerging industry andthat locally sourced materials may become morecommon in the future. Nonetheless, keeping alow carbon footprint for all recommendations is apriority, where possible.
Price-competitive solutions are a priority .
Identifying scalable alternatives that are cost-
competitive is important for obtaining support fromthe campus administration and other stakeholders.
Use targeted initiatives to rapidly decrease plastic
disposal. Developing procurement policies andcriteria may seem daunting, and the process maytake a while—especially if your campus has long-•	 
•	 
•
	 
•	 
16 
 
  term, multi-year procurement contracts that must 
expire before changes can be made. To jumpstart the attainment of your plastic source reduction goals, try launching one or more targeted initiatives, such as: 
p Promoting the use of refillable bottles and launching “bring your own cup” campaigns to reduce single-use bottled water, coffee cups and other single-use containers on campus. A well-developed system of strategically placed hydration stations or retrofitted drinking fountains that provide easy access for filling water bottles (e.g., in high traffic pedestrian areas and residence halls), and signs indicating hydration station locations, also supports refillable bottle initiatives. Further information about hydration stations can be found in the Resources section on page 49. 
p Developing a program that limits or eliminates the purchase of disposables for campus meetings and special events. UCSD’s Reusable Dishware Program
2 provides reusable dishware 
for student organization events free-of-charge. This and similar programs can be expanded to reduce the waste footprint of other campus events. 
p Implement a returnable container system. Many campuses offer a reusable clamshell container system that can be used for take-out dining. Diners initially receive a free or low-cost container for take-out use; however, once used, customers return the container to a central area (e.g., dining hall or food court) to be washed. In turn, they receive a token to use the next time they get a take-out meal. The Resources section on page 49 provides additional information about implementing these systems. 
Review the Best Management Practices in the Resources section, too, for additional source reduction ideas. 
2 http://studentsustainability.ucsd.edu/resources/reusable­
dishware-program/ 
1717 
Okay, I understand the guidelines. Now what? 
We suggest using the data and information gathered 
from Step 1 to create your Source Reduction Plan as follows: 
1. 	What were the top three to five sources of disposable plastic on campus that you identified in Step One, Determine Your Plastic Footprint?  
Whether they include eating utensils, single-use water bottles, packaging, or some other type of plastic, these three to five campus-specific “priority products” will be the focus of your Source Reduction Plan. Consider a balance between strategies related to procurement and targeted initiatives and campaigns to rapidly decrease use of disposable plastics. 
2. 	 What are your campus’ existing waste management infrastructure and waste reduction initiatives? How can your source reduction plan complement initiatives already underway? Many colleges and universities, as well as the cities and towns in which they’re located, have already undertaken environmental initiatives that deal with plastic product procurement and use. It is important to understand what these initiatives are to ensure that your source reduction recommendations are complementary and not duplicative. You will also need to understand what kind of waste management infrastructure your campus operates within so that your source reduction recommendations are relevant. For example, if your campus uses composting facilities, you might recommend replacing disposable plastics with commercially compostable food service ware. (Note that Step Four of this Toolkit, Implement Source Reduction Policies, helps you 
1818
  
  refine existing policies, or create new ones, to 
support your source reduction efforts.) 
3. 	 What clear actions can you take to cease the use of certain disposable plastic products on campus? For each priority product you identified from the Plastic Footprinting Tool, can your campus eliminate its use or switch to products that can be reused, recycled, or composted? You’ll want to prioritize these alternative product 
options based on their feasibility, availability, and cost. To maximize the likelihood of success, your campus should pilot one or more options before doing a full-scale roll out. 
4.	 What are your source reduction goals and how will you measure progress? Establish results-
oriented goals, such as reducing plastic straw purchases by 50 percent, and be sure you have the necessary baseline data (number of plastic straws currently being purchased, for example) to measure your progress. 5. 	How will you educate campus staff, faculty, students and visitors about your source reduction activities? There are many ways to educate your campus’ stakeholders about green purchasing. Many campuses begin by educating their procurement and sustainability staff when building their source reduction team. The Association for the Advancement of Sustainability in Higher Education (AASHE) coordinates campus sustainability resources across North America, providing case studies, policies, and blogs. AASHE’s website has links to webinars and presentations that staff may find useful for developing a common understanding and language about green procurement. 
Campuses can also include information during 
freshman orientation, provide interactive campus maps directing visitors to public water fountains or hydration stations, and offer peer-to-peer education. 
Peer-to-peer education effectively promotes 
sustainability initiatives at UCSB and UCSD. Plastic Solutions, a student-led group at UCSB, has sponsored a number of events that heighten awareness of plastic source reduction including “Day Without a Bottle” in 2013, which rewarded students who pledged to refuse single-use bottles with free reusable bottles. Meanwhile, six MBA students at UCSD launched “ Kill the 
Cup,” a social outreach campaign to influence student behavior and increase the use of reusable coffee mugs at campus eateries. The 8-week campaign, which ran from April 1 to May 26, 2013, resulted in nearly a 70 percent increase in the number of cups of coffee bought with reusable containers. This program has now become a nationwide initiative.
3 
3 http://www.killthecup.com/our-story.html 19 2020
 UCSB 
•  Comprised of five schools 
that offer undergraduate and graduate degrees. 
•  Approximately 31,783 faculty, staff, and students make up thtotal population including: 
- 18,989 undergraduate 
students 
- 2,938 graduate students 
- 1,054 faculty - 8,802 staff 
•  Single-stream recycling 
(accepting all plastic resins #1 - #7, except polystyrene foam) collected throughout campus. 
•  Composting bins are located throughout campus, primarily in the dining halls and the University Center (UCen). 
•  Diverted 70 percent of its municipal solid waste in 2012. UCSF 
•  Comprised of four professional schools (no undergraduate programs) 
•  Approximately 27,324 faculty, staff, and students make up the total population including:
- 3,137 students enrolled in 
degree programs 
-1,670 residents (physicians, dentists and pharmacists in training) 
- 2,483 faculty 
- 20,034 staff 
•  Single stream recycling 
(plastics #1 through #7 – except #4 (LDPE) collected throughout campus. 
•  Compost bins are located within central areas of office suite and all café/dining areas 
•  Diverted 60 percent of its municipal solid waste in 2012. UCSD 
  Comprised of six undergraduate 
colleges, five academic divisions, and five graduate and professional schools. 
  Approximately 56,423 students, 
staff, and other employees makeup the campus community 
- 22,676 undergraduate 
students 
- 5,618 graduate students 
- 765 residents - 2,483 faculty - 24,881 staff 
  Single-stream recycling 
(accepting all plastic resins #1 -#7) collected throughout most of campus, although some areas have separate collection bins for different materials (e.g., mixed paper, plastic, glass). 
  Diverted 66 percent of its 
municipal solid waste in 2012. e 
 •
 •
•
•Source Reduction Plans in Action: Case Studies 
To help you understand how to assimilate the data worked with each campus to develop plans for 
you’ve collected from the Plastic Footprinting Tool implementing these initiatives. 
and from the various steps described above, and to Because each campus has its own population size and 
demonstrate how these data help formulate a Plastic unique circumstances (summarized below), each plan 
Source Reduction Plan, the following case studies is also unique.  However, because the University of 
offer three examples of campus-wide plans. Using our California Office of the President (UCOP) set goals for 
Plastic Footprinting Tool, the University of California each of the 10 UC campuses to divert 75 percent of 
(UC) campuses at Santa Barbara (UCSB), San Francisco their waste by June 30, 2012, with the ultimate goal of 
(UCSF), and San Diego (UCSD) identified their own becoming zero waste by 2020, each campus has been 
priority items and then used the data to develop and striving to reduce and/or divert its waste from landfills. 
execute their own customized Plastic Source Reduction We are providing their one-of-a-kind Plastic Source 
Plans. Each campus was additionally allocated $3,200 Reduction Plans here as case studies, so you can learn 
from this USEPA-funded project to implement targeted from them and replicate them, as appropriate, on your 
initiatives that reduce single-use water bottles. PSI own campus. 
21 21
 2222
 23
Source Reduction Plan Case Study #1 
University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) 
Situated on the Pacific Coast, the University of California 
Santa Barbara (UCSB) campus spreads over 1,000 acres. UCSB is located a few miles west of the City of Santa Barbara and south of the Santa Ynez Mountains. Isla Vista is a densely populated community (less than two square miles) adjacent to UCSB, where students living off campus make up the majority of residents. In addition to its wide-ranging undergraduate degree programs, UCSB also has two graduate schools—the Bren School of Environmental Science and Management, and the Gevirtz Graduate School of Education. The University Center (UCen) is home to a range of programs and services on campus, including the independent food retail establishments leasing space on campus, referred to in this plan as private vendors. 
23 Dining at UCSB 
UCSB students and other campus users have to access to a wide range of dining options throughout the campus, 
but many are concentrated in the UCen. The university manages several eateries, convenience stores, and coffee carts that offer to-go options. In addition, 10 private food vendors, including retail chains, lease space on campus. 
The following list includes all dining options available to students and staff on the UCSB campus that offer food and 
beverages to-go. 
OWNED AND OPERATED BY UCSB PRIVATE VENDORS LEASING SPACE ON CAMPUS 
Eateries with to-go options 
• Coral Tree Café 
• Courtyard Café 
• Nicolettis (at the Ucen) 
• Romaine’s (at the Ucen) 
• Route 217 (at the Ucen) 
Convenience stores • The Arbor 
• The Corner Store 
• The Store at Buchanan 
Coffee/snack carts 
• Buchanan (coffee cart) 
• Nicoletti’s coffee carts (2) 
Campus Priority Products • Die Bretzel (pretzel cart) 
• Domino’s Pizza (at the Ucen) 
• Jamba Juice (at the Ucen) 
• Panda Express (at the Ucen) 
• Subway (The Arbor) 
• Wahoo’s Fish Taco 
• Woodstock’s (at The Arbor) 
• Yoshinoya (at The Courtyard Café) 
• The Faculty Club 
Using the Plastic Footprinting Tool, PSI worked with Plastic Solutions at UC Santa Barbara, a student-driven 
organization aiming to reduce plastic pollution and raise awareness on campus, to identify the quantity and types of disposable plastic packaging purchased for campus-managed UCen eateries, coffee shops, and all campus catering services from September 2012 to June 2013. From this initial baseline information, we identified the five most prevalent disposable plastic food service items purchased.
 
UNIVERSITY CENTER EATERIES:  Data collected include campus-managed eateries, coffee shops, and campus catering 
services for the 10 month “school year” (September 2012 to June 2013). 
TYPE of PLASTIC WARE QUANTITY (pieces/school year) 
Plastic lids 425,000 
Plastic cutlery 272,000 
Plastic straws 174,300 
Plastic water bottles 112,003
Plastic bags 36,550 
*Since these data were collected, the UCen has changed its procurement practices by providing compostable cutlery, containers, cups, and lids at its campus-managed eateries. Therefore, strategies presented in this plan include opportunities for increasing reusables as well as encouraging private vendors to implement procurement changes. 
24 Waste Management Infrastructure 
UCSB has a single-stream recycling program that accepts 
a wide range of materials, including all #1 through #7 plastic resins (excluding expanded polystyrene foam, or Styrofoam™). Over 100 outdoor four-bin receptacles (known as “Big Berthas” (see image below) for collecting recyclables, office pack (or mixed paper), compost, and trash are located on campus. UCSB has also purchased 43 Big Belly brand solar compactors— receptacles that electronically compact waste, recycling,  
and compostables directly inside the bin and notify facilities management staff when they need to be emptied. UCSB contracts with MarBorg Industries, a waste management company, to handle all of its waste and recycling. Partnering with MarBorg and Engel & Gray, a commercial composting facility in Santa Maria, California, UCSB initiated a program to collect pre- and post-consumer food scraps, as well as post-consumer compostable food service ware. All of the UCen eateries,  
as well as a number of the private vendors leasing space on campus, collect food scraps in their kitchens. In addition, UCSB has strategically placed compost bins near eateries around campus. Each month, about 40 tons of material are diverted for composting at UCSB. Since Engel & Gray operates on a 90-day composting cycle, the commercial composting facility is able to accept and fully break down compostable food service ware. 
25
 UCSB students are actively involved in managing 
recycling and compost activities on campus. Associated Students (AS) Recycling, a sub-group of the student government organization on campus, employs students to collect recycling and compost for the outdoor bins. These “route riders” use bicycles equipped with carts to visit the four-bin systems every day, and they visit the Big Belly solar compactors when needed. AS Recycling also leads a number of on-campus compost initiatives, including the “Grounds to Grounds” coffee composting and vermicompost (worm composting) program. 
Waste Reduction and Management Initiatives 
PROMOTING  REUSABLE  TO-GO  CONTAINERS  
In 2011, UCSB purchased clamshell containers produced by G.E.T. enterprises and began piloting an “eco-
clamshell” container initiative at the Coral Tree and Courtyard Café, two UCen eateries on campus. Clamshell containers consist of two halves joined by a hinge that enable the containers to be opened and closed. Students can purchase a reusable clamshell container for $5 and then return it to Coral Tree or Courtyard Café, where they will be given a clean container to use on their next visit. However, despite signage at the participating eateries, students use the service relatively infrequently (it is more common among UCSB staff). This is perhaps because the containers do not seal tightly enough to prevent spillage. UCSB is considering whether to extend the pilot to two additional UCen eateries. In addition to promoting reusable to-go containers, the UCen offers discounts on coffee to students who bring their own mugs. 
26
 PROMOTING REUSABLE  WATER BOTTLES 
As of December 2014, UCSB has 36 hydration stations positioned throughout campus. The stations, which are free to anyone on campus who wishes to use them, offer two options – one handle dispenses filtered water and another handle dispenses reverse-osmosis water, which can filter out smaller particles. 
Plastic Solutions at UCSB is currently promoting the 
use of UCSB Hydration Stations as an alternative to purchasing single-use plastic water bottles through various education and outreach initiatives. In addition to the recent installation of more stations, Plastic Solutions is leading an ongoing educational campaign about the health and environmental impacts of single-use plastic water bottles. 
For example, the group hosted a “Day Without a Bottle” 
event on April 1, 2013, which provided free reusable bottles to students who pledged to refuse single-use bottles. And, as part of the 2014 Earth Week activities, 
the group constructed a visual display of single-use plastic water bottles on campus, and hosted a screening 
of the documentary, “ Plastic Paradise,”4 which describes 
the role of plastics in creating the Great Pacific Garbage 
Patch. 
Plastic Solutions at UCSB continues to work on several 
initiatives related to plastic single-use water bottles, including: 
1. 	 Organizing a reusable water bottle giveaway for incoming freshman as part of a campaign highlighting the benefits of “going reusable” anusing the hydration stations. This project aims tcreate a campus culture that views sustainable actions as “cool” and the use of reusables as thsocial norm. 
2. 	 Obtaining approval from appropriate campus entities to create signage that better advertisesand promotes the hydration stations. 
3. 	 Collecting data on the number of water bottles purchased at campus-managed locations (UCenand tallying the amount of water bottles “savedfrom using hydration stations. 
4. Increasing membership in the organization to 
help expand the reach of these initiatives. 
4 http://plasticparadisemovie.com DISPOSABLE  PLASTIC  REDUCTION  AND  LEASING  
LANGUAGE  FOR  PRIVATE  VENDOR  TENANTS 
Beginning in 2013, the UCen made a significant shift in its procurement practices to replace conventional disposable plastic food service ware with compostable alternatives for all of its eateries on campus. UCSB had previously worked to establish the food scraps and composting program with Engel & Gray and MarBorg Industries. Once it was determined that Engel & Gray’s composting facility was capable of processing compostable food service ware, UCen made the switch to compostable cups, lids, cutlery, containers and other food service ware at all nine UCen eateries. The switch to compostables enabled UCSB to easily educate diners with a simple message – all food scraps and food service ware go to the collection bin labeled “compost.” 
Additionally, the UCen recently established a progressive 
policy requiring all private food vendors leasing space from the UCen to provide compostable food service ware. The UCen added the following sustainability language to all leasing contracts, effective as of 2013: 
“As the campus is aggressively involved in issues of 
sustainability, the selected vendor will be required to use the provided bins for pre-consumer kitchen waste and 
27 d 
o 
e 
 
) 
” bility Goals provide compostable bags for this purpose. In addition, 
all customer disposable wares must be compostable. BPI [Biodegradable Products Institute] certification will be required for all compostable products selected by the Vendor.” (UCen lease agreement language for private food vendors.) 
Yoshinoya, a retail food chain that finalized a new 
contract with the UCen in the summer of 2013, became the first private vendor that had to comply under the new policy. As of fall 2013, some of its to-go food service ware items were compliant (e.g., clamshell container), but Yoshinoya was still using non-compostable plastic bags, bowls, fountain drink cups, and lids. University staff members have since met with Yoshinoya to ensure that the company’s future purchasing complies with the new requirements. In addition, UCen is reminding existing private vendor tenants that they must comply with the new policy if they wish to renew their contracts. 
DISPOSABLE  PLASTIC  REDUCTION   
AND  THE  GREEN  BILL 
AS Recycling, developed and approved what’s known as the “Green Bill”—a guiding document on sustainable practices regarding purchasing, waste reduction, energy use, and transportation. Student organizations can go through a Green Bill Certification process to demonstrate that their practices comply with the Green Bill. The purpose of the certification program is to raise awareness and encourage sustainable initiatives within the AS community. The following guidelines are relevantto purchasing and using food service ware for university-funded events and AS activities: 
• 	 No student funds can be used to purchase polystyrene foam service ware products. 
• 	 Single-use plastic water bottles cannot be purchased for use in meetings, offices, and small events. 
-	 Plastic water bottles can only be purchased for events occurring outdoors that expect more than two hundred (200) people. 
• 	 Use of water coolers and cups should be used when possible, and are preferred. 
• 	 Purchase of reusable goods (e.g., such as bottles, plates, cups, and utensils) should be encouraged and promoted 
• 	 50 percent of utensils used within AS meetings and events must be compostable 
 
28
 Campus Sustainability Goals a
The first UCSB Campus Sustainability Plan (CSP) was approved by the Campus Planning Committee in April 2008. The UCSB CSP was updated in May 2013 and includes action items in 11 functional areas of the campus, including food, procurement, and waste. Goals relevant to plastic source reduction include switching from traditional food service ware to compostable food service ware and expanding the campus food waste compost program in collaboration with MarBorg Industries, UCSB’s contracted waste management company. 
Existing Municipal Ordinances and Programs 
SANTA  BARBARA  COUNTY  GREEN  BUSINESS  
PROGRAM  CERTIFICATION 
At UCSB, all the UCen managed eateries, convenience stores, and coffee shops are certified through the Santa Barbara County Green Business Program .
5 Besides 
meeting mandatory compliance with public health and environmental regulations, restaurants must implement a minimum number of improvements across a menu of options in five categories, including solid waste reduction and recycling, environmentally preferable purchasing, energy conservation, water conservation, and pollution prevention. As part of its overall waste reduction and sustainability efforts, all of the UCen eateries are Green Business certified by Santa Barbara County. UCSB’s Courtyard Café & Coral Tree Café, for example, implemented a 10-cent discount to customers who bring their own re-usable mugs, cups, and/or to-go containers as a component of its certification program. UCen staff are also approaching the private food vendors on campus to encourage their tenants to also become Green Business certified. 
Plastic Bag Ban 
The City of Santa Barbara passed a plastic bag ban in 
October 2013. The ordinance prohibits stores from providing single-use plastic carryout bags to customers at the point of sale and requires customers to pay 10-cents for each paper bag that the stores provide. The stores may retain the 10-cent charge on paper bags to help them offset costs of complying with the ordinance. UCSB is not located in the City of Santa Barbara and, therefore, is not technically covered by the ordinance. However, student and other community stakeholders are currently building support for the plastic bag ban to be implemented on campus. While a statewide ban on plastic bags was enacted in 2014, a legal challenge has halted implementation. UCSB can, however, proceed to ban bags in its own right. 
5   http://www.greenbizsbc.org/ PLASTIC  SOURCE  REDUCTION  
  
OPTIONS  FOR  UCSB
 
Plastic lids, cutlery, straws, water bottles, and bags 
are the disposable plastic items that UCSB purchases 
in the largest quantities each year (based on UCen 
procurement data from September 2012 through May 
2013, reported above and collected using the Plastic 
Footprinting Tool). UCSB concurrently launched an 
initiative to replace these items with compostables, 
as they can be collected in the campus composting 
program, and composting is higher on the solid waste 
management hierarchy than disposal. 
Therefore, the options discussed below focus on 
plastic source reduction that is achievable through the increased use of reusable items (most preferred), along with the use of recyclable and compostable items, where reuse is not possible (less preferred). The options also emphasize encouraging existing private vendors to voluntarily reduce disposable plastic service ware use. (UCSB will require existing vendors to use only compostable items as a condition of renewing their lease, but the private vendors are not required to implement the change prior to the expiration of their current lease.) 
LIDS 
UCSB-operated eateries replaced single-use plastic cups and lids with compostable cups and lids. However, single use cups and lids can be replaced with reusables. Options include: 
OPTION 1:  Provide reusable dishware for dine-in 
customers, including lidless cups . This option would 
not only reduce plastic lids, but would also reduce other plastic food service ware used on campus. This option would work well with UCSB’s existing “ask first” policy—asking customers whether their purchases are “for here” or “to go.” 
OPTION 2:  Encourage eat-in rather than take-out.  
UCSB could increase seating areas, where feasible, to encourage customers to eat-in. This would complement Strategy 1. 
OPTION 3:  Encourage use of reusable mugs/ 
cups. UCSB currently offers discounts to students using reusable drink containers for coffee. Similar discounts could be offered for other types of drinks (e.g., fountain drinks) that are typically served with disposable lids. 
OPTION 4:  Encourage private vendors to purchase 
compostable alternatives before they are required to do so. New private vendors are required to purchase and use compostable items. However, current leasers are not required to switch to compostables 
29 
hoto credit: Aberration Art. p 
 
 until their lease expires. This strategy would 
encourage vendors to make the substitution earlier, which would result in less disposable plastic use, as well as a reduced risk of contamination when plastics are erroneously disposed of with compostables. 
OPTION 5:  Provide plastic lids upon request only. 
This will help prevent situations where customers 
receive plastic lids that they may not need, want, or even use. 
UCSB rejected Option 1 due to a lack of space and capacity for on-site dishwashing. Therefore, Option 2 (encourage dine-in) is unlikely to provide any benefit as reusables would not be available to dine-in patrons. The campus opted to pursue Options 3 and 4 for reducing the number of disposable lids used on campus through a mixed approach, encouraging reusables and compostables, as these strategies leverage current campus initiatives. UCSB may consider Option 5 in a future school year. 
CUTLERY 
UCSB has replaced its disposable plastic cutlery with compostable alternatives. While compostables are preferable to disposables, reducing single-use cutlery is the preferable option. Options for reducing plastic cutlery include: 
OPTION 1:  Encourage reusable cutlery. UCSB could 
implement a reusable cutlery program for take-out dining. The University of Vermont has promoted the use of “sporks,” a single utensil that combines the functionality of a spoon, knife, and fork, by offering a discount to customers who use them.
6 Other 
reusable cutlery sets come equipped with an easy­to-carry case that clips on to backpacks or other carriers. 
OPTION 2:  Provide compostable cutlery upon 
request only . UCSB could make compostable cutlery 
available only upon request and work with private vendors to do the same. 
UCSB will consider these options in a future school year. 
STRAWS 
UCSB uses over 174,000 plastic straws each school year. Options for reducing their use include: 
6 http://www.uvm.edu/ecoreps/projects-and-activities/ 
past-projects/eco-ware-sporks, accessed January 28, 2015.
OPTION 1:  Ban plastic straws on campus. This option 
would immediately reduce the amount of disposable plastic used on campus. 
OPTION 2:  Reusable straws.  Reusable straws, made 
from metal, bamboo, or glass, are an option to disposables. 
OPTION 3:  Use compostable straws.  Straws made 
from paper or compostable plastics are another option for UCSB. 
UCSB will consider options for eliminating or reducing the use of straws in a future school year. 
WATER BOTTLES 
OPTION 1: Increase outreach and promotion of UCSB hydration stations.  UCSB has slashed the number of 
single-use water bottles purchased on campus by 54 percent, eliminating an estimated 60,000 bottles, by promoting reusable bottles and installing hydration stations. Continuing education and awareness campaigns about the campus’s hydration stations are important, particularly as new students arrive on campus. UCSB has installed 36 stations already; campus leaders should promote the positive impacts 
30  
 
 
   of these stations to further increase their use. Plastic 
Solutions will be installing eye-catching promotional signage around campus, including stickers on the hydration stations themselves, using U.S. EPA grant funds that PSI allocated to them for this project. 
OPTION 2: Reduce single-use plastic water bottles in 
UCSB athletics.  Reusable water bottles are currently 
prohibited in UCSB’s stadium. A policy change could be implemented to allow guests to enter the stadium with empty reusable water bottles to be filled at on-site hydration stations. 
OPTION 3
: Provide no-cost or low cost refillable 
bottles.  Providing free or low-cost water bottles 
encourages the use of hydration stations. These reusable, refillable bottles can be given away as part of a hydration station promotional campaign. Or, they can be included as part of a welcome package for new students, faculty, and staff, along with information about the location of hydration stations and UCSB’s efforts to reduce plastic waste on campus in general. 
UCSB is implementing Option1 and will consider Option 2 in a future school year. Currently, funding is not available for Option 3. 
BAGS 
Plastic bags are a significant source of marine debris. Options for reducing their use include: 
OPTION 1:  Ban single-use plastic bags on campus. 
UCSB has been holding meetings for campus and other community stakeholders to discuss whether the City of Santa Barbara’s plastic bag ban will be implemented on campus. Regardless of the outcome of these meetings, UCSB could adopt a plastic bag ban on campus that meets or exceeds the scope outlined in the City of Santa Barbara’s ordinance. 
OPTION 2:  Encourage use of reusable bags. Campus-
managed eateries and private vendors could sell reusable bags at point of sale. As part of an introductory campaign to promote their use, UCSB could offer reusable bags at highly discounted rates, or even for free, for a limited time. 
During Earth Week events in 2014, Plastic Solutions 
spoke with students about the benefits of using reusable bags and the importance of refusing single-use plastic bags. Plastic Solutions also handed out reusable bags (repurposed from giveaways from previous events and other surplus bags) to students who were interested in learning more . 
OPTION 3: Offer single-use bags by request only. 
UCSB could work with vendors to implement a “by request only” policy, offering disposable bags to customers only when they request one. This policy could be reinforced with an education and awareness campaign promoting reusable bags. 
UCSB implemented Strategies 2 and 3 while awaiting the outcome of discussions of the bag ban, as described in Strategy 1. 
TO-GO CONTAINERS 
UCSB is currently piloting a reusable plastic food container (“eco-clamshell”) initiative at two campus-managed eateries. Challenges with this program— including the container’s inability to contain liquids, inadequate program promotion, and a lack of convenient options for returning the “used” containers—have resulted in underuse. 
Pilot alternative reusable to-go containers. Reusable 
to-go container systems have been implemented successfully at other campuses (See the Resources section on page 49 for further information.) UCSB could benchmark their current pilot to these systems to identify opportuncontainers and impltake-back options. ities for purchasing leak-proof 
ementing convenient container 
SOURCE  REDUCTION  PLAN  RESULTS 
p 54% Decline in Water Bottle Sales: 
Each school year, Plastic Solutions at UCSB 
selects one source of single-use disposable plastics, and develops a targeted campaign to reduce or eliminate the specific plastic. During the 2013 – 2014 school year, plastic water bottles were the focus of Plastic Solutions efforts, which led to a 54 percent decline in water bottle sales and eliminated an estimated 60,124 bottles. 
p 97% Reduction in Plastic Bags:  
As of spring 2014, UCSB eateries reduced their annual plastic bag use from 36,550 to 1,000 bags, eliminating 35,500 plastic bags by providing single-use plastic bags upon request only. 
31
 3232
 3333 
Source Reduction Plan Case Study #2 
University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) 
Located in the heart of San Francisco, UCSF consists of 
two main campuses—Parnassus, or “West Zone” (which includes the Medical Center) and Mission Bay, “or East Zone”—and is spread out over 24 sites. UCSF is the only campus in the UC system that is focused exclusively on health sciences; it therefore has a unique mix of students, staff, and visitors to campus. UCSF also does not have any undergraduate students. 
Dining at UCSF 
There are two major dining options at the UCSF campus: (1) the Medical Center, where all food service (e.g., the Moffit Cafe) is campus-managed and where there are no independent vendors; and (2) the University, which features only independent food retail establishments, or private vendors. 
Medical Center staff manages all in-patient food service, 
catered events, and two express cafés offering items to-go. It is important to note that the Medical Center is a separate institution that has its own contracts and reporting procedures and is therefore not incorporated into the UCSF Campus Recycling Program. As a result, staff at the Medical Center, and not the UCSF Recycling Program Coordinators, handle their own procurement processes. 
Although there is no staff position focused solely on 
waste reduction, recycling, and compost efforts, the  Medical Center’s Hospitality Services Department regularly communicates with the two Recycling Coordinators 
managing the Campus Recycling Program. 
The following eateries at UCSF are operated by private vendors leasing space on campus: 
MISSION BAY CAMPUS:  EAST ZONE PARNASSUS CAMPUS: WEST ZONE 
• Café 24 
• Caffe Terzetto 
• Carmelina’s Café 
• Peasant Pies 
• The Pub 
• Publico 
• Subway 
• Food trucks (various) 
• The View Cafe and Catering (Laurel Heights) • Café Bellini (Millberry Union) 
• Caffe Terzetto Express (coffee cart) 
• Café Society Espresso (coffee truck) 
• Carmelina’s Taqueria (Millberry Union) 
• Jamba Juice (Millberry Union) 
• Palio Café (Millberry Union) 
• Panda Express (Millberry Union) 
• Subway (Millberry Union) 
NOTE : There are also two Starbucks locations that are not part of the UCSF campus, but are located just outside the 
campus and are frequented by students, staff, and faculty. UCSF’s source reduction strategies, further described below, focus on cutlery, plastic lids, bottles, straws, and plastic 
bags. 
Campus Priority Products 
Using the Plastic Footprinting Tool, UCSF Recycling Coordinators identified the quantity and types of disposable plastic packaging purchased for the Moffitt Café at the Medical Center, as well as for six private fast food vendors that lease space on campus. The data, collected during summer 2013, are as follows: 
MOFFITT CAFÉ 
TYPE of PLASTIC WARE QUANTITY (pieces/school year) 
Plastic cutlery 2,377,600 
Plastic lids 1,831,740 
Compostable Cups  1,148,600 
Plastic juice & soda bottles 996,986 
Plastic straws 530,000 
Plastic water bottles  121,216 
NOTE: Data collected include campus-managed cafeteria, in-patient food service, and events/ meetings catered by the 
Café. 
PRIVATE VENDORS 
TYPE of PLASTIC WARE QUANTITY (pieces/school year) 
Plastic grocery bags 441,050 
Plastic lids 430,000 
Plastic cutlery 375,000 
Plastic juice & soda bottles 56,556 
Plastic water bottles  32,198 
NOTE: Data collected from six of the private vendors and carts on campus. V endor names withheld to maintain 
confidentiality. 
34  
WASTE  MANAGEMENT  
INFRASTRUCTURE  
UCSF contracts with Recology, a materials management 
company that the City of San Francisco also uses, to provide recycling, composting, and waste management services. The single-stream recycling program accepts a wide range of materials, including plastic resins #1 through #7, although expanded polystyrene (known more commonly by the brand name Styrofoam) and plastic grocery bags are not accepted. Recology also accepts a range of materials for its composting facility in Vacaville, California. 
UCSF runs a unified recycling, composting, and discard 
campaign to educate the campus community on how to properly sort materials, all while using signage that is consistent with the City of San Francisco’s. The campus also developed a 10-minute educational video,
7 which is 
featured on its Living Green website, and is used in staff 
trainings. 
Now that UCSF is equipped with composting bins and 
universal signage throughout campus, the Recycling Coordinators and Medical Center staff are working together to purchase compostable food service ware for the Medical Center. 
Waste Reduction and Management Initiatives 
PROMOTING REUSABLE  WATER BOTTLES 
UCSF has access to high quality tap water that comes from the Hetch Hetchy Reservoir. Through a grant from the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission, UCSF has installed two hydration stations—one on the Parnassus campus (in the Millberry Union) and one on the Mission Bay campus. In addition, a few department offices have purchased Quench, a water filtration unit that sits on a 
countertop and connects to a sink. Other offices have water cooler units that use large, refillable plastic water jugs. 
All of these options reduce the need to purchase single-
use water bottles and encourage staff to use reusable, refillable ones; however, water purification systems have less of an environmental impact than refillable water coolers because they do not require the regular transportation of heavy, plastic water jugs. Additionally, while UCSF’s Living Green  website calls attention to 
the hydration stations, there remains a significant opportunity to increase awareness about them among faculty, students, and staff. 
7 http://sustainability.ucsf.edu/1.172 35     
      
      
 
    Campus Sustainability Goals 
SUSTAINABILITY STEERING COMMITTEE (SSC) 
UCSF’s SSC supports initiatives of ten workgroups 
comprised of student, staff, and faculty representatives that focus on a range of approaches to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and improve overall campus sustainability. UCSF’s 2011-2012 annual report
8 highlights 
the workgroups’ goals, achievements, and challenges. Three workgroups have missions that overlap and/ or align with the goal of this Source Reduction Plan to reduce the use of disposable plastics in food service settings: 
Procurement Workgroup:  Focused on incorporating 
best purchasing practices that are economically viable and environmentally preferable. With a grant from the U.S. EPA, UCSF is working with UC Berkeley to develop a software tool to flag third-party certified green products in “BearBuy”— an online purchasing system developed by UC Berkeley— to encourage procurement of environmentally preferable office supplies. 
Sustainable Food Workgroup:  Focused on the 
UCOP sustainable food policy that campus and 
Medical Center food service operations shall strive to earn third-party “green business” certifications for sustainable dining operations. UCSF is working to incorporate UCOP guidelines for sustainable food service practices into all new leases and lease renewals with private vendors. 
Zero Waste Workgroup:  Focused on incorporating 
best practices in recycling, composting, and re-use 
at UCSF facilities. With the exception of two sites, all campus buildings have compost bins within central areas of office suites and all café/dining areas have composting services on site. 
Existing Municipal Ordinances and Programs 
SAN FRANCISCO FOOD SERVICE WASTE REDUCTION ORDINANCE 
The City and County of San Francisco passed the Food Service Waste Reduction Ordinance in 2006 to reduce marine debris and other environmental impacts, as well as to minimize the potential health impacts of polystyrene, which contains carcinogenic chemicals that can leach into food or drinks. The Ordinance: 
• prohibits the use of polystyrene (Styrofoam™) “to-go” containers by all establishments serving food in San Francisco; and 
• requires food vendors and restaurants to use 
8 Annual Sustainability Report FY11-12 http://sustainability. 
ucsf.edu/what_ucsf_is_doing_2/annual_report_fy11_12 only compostable or recyclable to-go food service ware. 
All private food vendors leasing space on the UCSF campus must comply. 
The San Francisco Department of the Environment 
(SF Environment) clearly defines the specifications for compostable food service ware: 
“Compostable plastic products must be clearly labeled ‘Compostable’ (sticker or printing) in a green color or within a green band in order to distinguish the product from conventional plastic. Cutlery must be embossed with the word ‘Compostable’ on each piece. Compostable plastics must meet ASTM D6400 standards for compostable plastics. The Biodegradable Products Institute maintains a list of certified compostable products that meet the ASTM standard: BPIworld.org.” —SF Environment 
SAN FRANCISCO MANDATORY RECYCLING AND COMPOSTING ORDINANCE 
In 2009, San Francisco passed a first-in-the-nation Mandatory Recycling and Composting Ordinance requiring all residents and businesses to participate in the City’s recycling, composting, and disposal program. Under the ordinance, residents are issued three color-coded containers, and residential and commercial property managers are required to provide these containers to their tenants, along with program information. SF Environment also trains vendors on how to properly segregate materials at the “back of the kitchen” through its vendor café program. . UCSF uses the three container system throughout campus and also takes advantage of the vendor café training program. Consistency with San Francisco’s program ensures a seamless transition for handling solid waste materials on or off campus. 
SAN FRANCISCO CHECKOUT BAG ORDINANCE 
The City and County of San Francisco banned single-use plastic checkout bags at grocery stores and pharmacies in 2007. The Ordinance was expanded in 2012 to cover all retail locations beginning October 1, 2012, and all food establishments beginning October 1, 2013. Stores must replace single-use plastic checkout bags with: 
• 	“Compliant” checkout bags, which include certified compostable plastic bags; 
• 	 Paper bags that have at least 40 percent post-consumer recycled content; or 
• 	 Reusable checkout bags that consumers can purchase at the point-of-sale. 
Stores must charge their customers a minimum of 10 cents for each compliant checkout bag that the store 
36     
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 supplies, and this charge must be displayed separately 
on the customer receipt. (The 10-cent fee does not apply to on-site purchases of reusable bags.) The plastic bag ban applies to all private food vendors and the Medical Center, including the Moffit Café at UCSF. 
PLASTIC SOURCE REDUCTION OPTIONS FOR UCSF 
Plastic cutlery, lids, juice and soda bottles, straws, and bags are the disposable plastic items purchased in the largest quantities each year. UCSF’s Moffitt Café has launched an initiative to replace these items with compostables, as the infrastructure for composting exists, and composting is higher on the waste hierarchy than disposal. In addition, compostables enable UCSF to streamline its messaging – leftover food and food service ware are both placed in the composting bin. Options discussed below focus on plastic source reduction that is achievable through the increased use of reusable items (most preferred), along with the use of recyclable and compostable items, where reuse is not possible (less preferred). 
CUTLERY 
Of all disposable plastic food service ware items, plastic cutlery is purchased in the greatest quantities at the Moffitt Café, and it is the third most commonly purchased disposable plastic item for private vendors at UCSF. The following options would help reduce UCSF’s plastic cutlery use: 
OPTION 1:  Encourage reusable cutlery. The Moffitt 
Café could eliminate virtually all of its disposable cutlery by switching to reusable cutlery and, for take­out dining, offer an incentive to customers using reusable utensils. 
OPTION 2:  Use compostable cutlery. 
Moffit Café is pursuing compostable cutlery, since a composting infrastructure already exists on campus, and since the café is already purchasing compostable plates. Strategy 2 also requires minimal education, as all compostable cutlery and plates get collected in the same container along with leftover food. Once UCSF’s existing cutlery supplier contract ends in 2015 or 2016, the Medical Center also plans to switch to using compostable cutlery. 
Option 1 is currently not viable as the cafeteria does 
not have sufficient space for on-site dishwashing. If the university has plans to renovate the cafeteria in the future, these plans should include the addition of on-site commercial dishwashers. 
UCSF’s recycling coordinators are trying to facilitate 
a change to compostable cutlery with the private on-campus vendors. The coordinators have collected samples of disposable plastics currently used by the vendors, identified similar items purchased by multiple vendors (such as plastic cups), and using the purchasing power amassed by more than 12 vendors, trying to negotiate more favorable pricing on behalf of the vendors. 
LIDS 
Plastic lids are the second most widely purchased disposable plastic food service ware item for both Moffitt Café and private vendors. The following options would help reduce plastic lid use: 
OPTION 1:  Expand use of reusable mugs/cups. 
Through UCSF’s “Bring Your Own Cup” (or B.Y.O.C.) campaign, participating retail vendors that lease space on campus offer discounts on coffee to customers using reusable containers or mugs. Customers can purchase any larger drink size, up to 16 ounces, for the same price as a small-sized drink. This program could be expanded to all vendors and to other types of drinks (e.g., fountain drinks). 
Private Retail Vendors Offering Coffee Discounts to 
Customers Through UCSF’s “Bring Your Own Cup 
(B.Y.O.C)” Campaign: 
Café 24 Lunch Stop 
Café Bellini Moffit Long Hospital Eateries 
Caffe Terzetto Palio Café 
Caffe Terzetto Express Peasant Pies 
Carmelina’s Café The Pub 
The Daily Grind The View Jamba Juice 920 Express 
OPTION 2:  Provide plastic lids upon request only . This 
option reduces plastic waste since customers would 
receive a lid only if they asked for it. 
OPTION 3:  Purchase compostable alternatives . 
Compostable lids are an alternative to disposable lids and, if used with compostable cups, can easily be collected with other compostable food service ware collected on campus. 
The Medical Center has decided to pursue Strategy 3 to coincide with its switch to compostable cups. 
STRAWS 
Moffitt Café uses over 500,000 plastic straws each year. Options for reducing their use include: 
OPTION 1:  Ban plastic straws on campus. This option 
would immediately reduce the amount of disposable plastic used on campus. 
OPTION 2:  Reusable straws.  Reusable straws, made 
from metal, bamboo, or glass, are an option to disposables. 
37   
 
 
 
   
OPTION 3 : Use compostable straws. Paper or 
compostable plastic straws are another option 
compatible with UCSF’s recovery infrastructure. 
Unfortunately, banning straws altogether is difficult to accomplish in a medical environment, where they are often used to prevent the spread of germs. Therefore, we recommend that the Medical campus switch to compostable straws as soon as existing food service ware vendor contracts expire. 
BAGS 
As of 2013, plastic grocery bags were the single most-purchased plastic food service ware product among private vendors at UCSF. However, as mentioned earlier, the City and County of San Francisco expanded an ordinance banning single-use plastic checkout bags in 2012 that impacts UCSF’s campus vendors. For example, the on-campus Subway restaurant is no longer using plastic sandwich bags; instead, it has purchased paper bags (branded with Subway’s logo) and provides them only upon request. See the Resources section on page 49 for a list of vendors providing recyclable or compostable bags. 
Given that vendors are already in compliance with the 
City and County ordinance, this Source Reduction Plan does not provide additional source reduction strategies for bags. 
38 PLASTIC BOTTLES 
More than 1 million single-use plastic bottles containing juice, soda, or water are purchased by Moffitt Café and another 88,000 are purchased from private vendors. UCSF recently initiated a healthy eating campaign that encourages the campus community to drink water rather than sugary beverages. This campaign provides an opportunity to simultaneously educate the UCSF campus about the benefits of using refillable water bottles. The following strategies would help reduce UCSF’s disposable plastic bottle use: 
OPTION 1: Promote use of existing hydration 
stations . As of January 2014, two hydration stations 
are installed on UCSF’s campus; however, only one of these is in a high-traffic location. Outreach and signage would provide greater visibility and promote tap water as an alternative to bottled water. For example, Portland State University’s Campus Sustainability Office provides maps identifying locations of hydration stations (see below), and UC Santa Barbara has an interactive online map
9 
identifying hydration station locations. 
OPTION 2: Install additional hydration stations . 
Installing additional hydration stations in key locations (i.e., in buildings where the vending machines are located) will increase convenience for 
9 http://map.geog.ucsb.edu and use by students, faculty, and staff. Alternatively, 
existing water fountains can be retrofitted with water spouts to accommodate reusable water containers. 
OPTION 3:  Provide no-cost or low cost refillable 
bottles . Providing free or low-cost water bottles 
encourages the use of hydration stations. These reusable, refillable bottles can be given away as part of a hydration station promotional campaign. Or, they can be included as part of a welcome package for new students, faculty, and staff, along with information about the location of hydration stations and UCSF’s efforts to reduce plastic waste on campus in general. Providing refillable water containers for purchase at Moffitt Café and at private vendor locations at UCSF would help, as well—as would implementing and/or supporting initiatives to restrict or ban the use of disposable water bottles  
on campus. 
UCSF is implementing options 1 and 2. PSI project funding from U.S. EPA enabled UCSF to add goose-neck water spouts to existing fountains to accommodate refillable bottles. Due to the early success and attention of the first few water filling stations, UCSF’s Chancellor agreed to invest $17,500 in additional water spouts throughout campus over the next year. UCSF should draw attention to the new spouts with signage and, once the additional spouts have been installed, develop campus maps denoting their locations. 
SOURCE  REDUCTION  PLAN  RESULTS: 
UCSF implemented the following source reduction and 
substitution strategies over the course of this project: 
p In Summer 2014,  UCSF retrofitted four 
existing water fountains installed in high-traffic 
locations on the Parnassus campus and installed five water fountains on the Mission Bay campus. Project funding from U.S. EPA enabled UCSF to add goose-neck water spouts to existing fountains to accommodate refillable bottles (see picture). The early success of these water filling stations enabled UCSF to obtain $17,500 from the UCSF chancellor to install additional water spouts throughout campus over the next year. It is too early to measure the impact of the water fountains, but by Summer 2015, UCSF should take stock of the number of disposable plastic bottles purchased on campus to determine the fountains’ influence on disposable bottle use. 
p The Moffitt Café will be substituting 
disposables with compostable cutlery by July 1, 2016, replacing 2,377,600 pieces of disposable plastics with compostable plastic each year. 
p As a purchaser of large quantities of food 
service ware, the Medical Center has amassed enough purchasing power to negotiate more favorable pricing for compostable products. Unfortunately, UCSF’s smaller on-campus private vendors do not have this negotiating power. For this reason, UCSF’s Recycling Coordinators are working with compostable food service ware supplier World Centric to identify products that all vendors can use. By combining their purchases, private vendors may be able to negotiate a lower price for compostable products in the same way that the Medical Center does. 
39 3940 40
 41
Located a few miles north of the City of San Diego in La 
Jolla, California, the University of California San Diego (UCSD) spreads over 1,200 acres of coastal woodlands. The campus is within walking distance of the Pacific Ocean. Each of the six undergraduate colleges has its own buildings grouped together and provides on-campus housing. The University Centers, made up of the Price Center (PC) and the old student center, are the main student hubs and are centrally located in the heart of the campus. The PC is home to a range of amenities, including fast food restaurants and other eateries, the campus bookstore, a movie theater, and office space for student organizations and faculty. 
Dining at UCSD 
The Department of Housing, Dining, and Hospitality (HDH) provides a wide range of dining options for students spread throughout campus. There are eat-in restaurants (e.g., The Bistro, Café Ventanas) that also offer food to-go, smaller cafés and coffee shops, as well as six Place and Markets (P&Ms), which are convenience stores with a deli, fresh produce, and a coffee bar. Every HDH dining facility, with the exception of Foodworx and Goody’s, uses durable food service ware, as the kitchens have on-site dishwashing. 
In addition to the eateries managed by HDH, 26 
independent food retail establishments, referred to Source Reduction Plan Case Study #3 
University of California at San Diego (UCSD) 
41 OWNED & OPERATED BY UCSD PRIVATE VENDORS LEASING SPACE ON CAMPUS 
Restaurants/dining facilities with to-go options 
• Café Ventanas 
• Canyon Vista • Club Med • The Faculty Club
10 
• Foodworx • OceanView Terrace • Pines • Roots • The Bistro (at the Strand) • The Food Co-op (student run co-operative) • General Store (student run convenience store) 
Place and Markets (P&M) 
• Earl’s P&M • Goody’s
11 P&M 
• John’s P&M • Roger’s P&M • Sixth P&M • The Village P&M 
Coffee shops and cafés 
• Fairbanks coffee (5 locations on campus) 
• Muir Woods • Perks  • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • 
 • Art of Espresso Café Bella Vista Social Club and Caffé Bombay Coast (Price Center) Burger King (Price Center) Come On In! Café Croutons (Price Center) Cups Outdoor Café Espresso Roma Café (Price Center) Hi Thai (Student Center) Home Plate Incredi-Bowls (food truck) Jamba Juice (Price Center) 
Panda Express (Price Center) Peet’s Coffee & Tea 
Porters Pub Round Table Pizza (Price Center) Rubio’s (Price Center) Santorini Greek Island Grill (Price Center) Shogun (Price Center) 
Subway (Price Center) Sunshine Market (Price Center) Tapioca Express (Price Center) Yogurt World (Price Center) Zanzibar Café (Price Center) 
Café Olé (coffee cart) 
TYPE of PLASTIC FOOD SERVICE WARE QUANTITY (pieces/school year) 
Plastic cups   19,141,915 pieces 
Plastic lids (including lids for containers)  16,218,722 pieces 
Plastic cutlery 5,880,100 pieces 
Plastic clamshells and other plastic food containers 4,288,605 pieces 
Plastic straws 921,327 pieces in this plan as private vendors, lease space on campus. Many of these private vendors are retail chains that are 
located in the food court in Price Center. 
The following list includes all dining options available to students and staff on the UCSD campus: 
Campus Priority Products 
Using the Plastic Footprinting Tool, PSI worked with UCSD student interns and sustainability staff to obtain 
procurement data on disposable plastic food service ware. The following data, collected in December 2013, represent two sources of annual purchasing: eateries run by UCSD’s Housing, Dining and Hospitality department (restaurants, residential dining facilities, P&Ms, and catering operations) and a sampling of private fast food vendors (four establishments) that lease space on campus. From this information, we identified the most prevalent disposable plastic items purchased. 
HOUSING, DINING, AND HOSPITALITY 
Note: Data collected include campus-managed restaurants, residential dining facilities, P&M, and catering operations.  
10 The Faculty Club does offer food in to-go containers but provides very little single-use plastics. The vast majority of customers 
dine-in.
 11 Goody’s can be considered as two locations, an eatery upstairs and a P&M downstairs.
42      
 
  PRIVATE VENDORS
 
YPE of PLASTIC FOOD SERVICE WARE T QUANTITY (pieces/school year) 
Plastic lids (including lids for containers) 156,016,400 
Plastic cups 120,012,000 
Plastic stirrers 105,004,000 
Plastic straws 100,774,400 
Plastic cutlery 29,902,500 
Plastic bags 1,896,500 
Compostable or biodegradable utensils 1,325,097 
Note: Data collected include sample of 4 out of 26 private vendors and carts on campus.
	
WASTE MANAGEMENT INFRASTRUCTURE  
UCSD has a single-stream recycling program that accept
a wide range of materials, including all #1 through #7 plastic resins (excluding plastic films such as plastic bags, food wrappers, etc. and expanded polystyrene foam). There are still some locations on campus that have separate collection bins for different materials (e.g., mixed paper, plastic, and glass). In 2012, UCSD installed 50 Big Belly solar-powered compacting trash and recycling receptacles in high-traffic areas around campus, replacing the existing containers. These receptacles electronically compact waste inside the bin and also notify facilities management staff when they need to be emptied. This has resulted in the following benefits: a 90 percent reduction in weekly collections and trash liner use; a 56 percent reduction in greenhousgas emissions associated with collection; and the elimination of animal intrusions. 
Since 2011, UCSD has also participated in the commercial 
food scraps composting program, run by the City of San Diego’s Environmental Services Department (ESD). UCSemployees separate pre-consumer food scraps in each of the 10 kitchens/prep stations and in the six P&Ms on campus. The food scraps, along with lawn trimmings, arsent to Miramar Greenery, where compost certified by the U.S. Composting Council is produced. UCSD piloted biodegradable cups made from corn; however, the cups were not compatible with Miramar Greenery’s 10-week composting process, as they did not degrade within this time frame. ESD tested compostable cutlery made from PLA plastic and wood; these materials did not degrade within this time frame, either. Based on these results, ESD decided not to accept any type of compostable product at the Miramar Greenery with its routine collection. UCSD subsequently decided to purchase only #1 and #5 recyclable plastic food service ware to avoid contamination and create a consistent message to students to place the disposable plastic items in the recycling. s 
e 
D 
e 
Waste Reduction and Management Initiatives 
REDUCING SINGLE-USE PLASTIC WATER BOTTLES 
In 2013, UCSD’s Department of Housing, Dining, and Hospitality (HDH) decided to eliminate water bottles from all of the on-campus dining facilities in an effort to decrease the amount of water bottles the department purchases. The P&Ms, as well as the privately owned vendors on campus, are the only options that patrons have for purchasing bottled water. As an alternative, each of the dining halls has a hydration station conveniently located both inside and outside the building. 
To promote the use of the 50 hydration stations located 
across the campus, HDH has been providing on-campus residents with free reusable water bottles with some of the locations printed on the bottle. In total, HDH distributes 11,000 reusable water bottles to campus 
43
          
   VENDOR AT UCSD OFFER DISCOUNT FOR DISCOUNTS FOR REFILLS FOR STORE-
“BRING YOUR OWN” BOUGHT CUPS 
Bombay Coast No Yes – 2 free refills 
Burger King No Yes – free refill 
D’Lush Yes, for coffee – charge as a 12 oz. Yes, for coffee – $1 refill 
Hi-Thai No 
Panda Express No 
Rubio’s No 
Subway Yes – charge as a small Yes - $.50 refill 
Yes – free refill 
Yes – free refill 
Yes – free refill 
 
 
  
 residents each year. The other UCSD hydration station 
locations can be found online.12  
PROMOTING  REUSABLE  CUPS  
HDH provides a 20-cent discount on coffee and all fountain drinks to students at campus-managed eateries if they bring their own reusable cup or mug. Currently, HDH is promoting this initiative aggressively all over campus by placing advertisements at the register in all P&Ms. In addition, in 2013, six MBA students at UCSD launched “Kill the Cup,” a social outreach campaign to influence student behavior and increase the use of reusable coffee mugs at HDH eateries. The 8-week campaign, which ran from April 1 to May 26, 2013, was a success, resulting in nearly a 70 percent increase in the number of cups of coffee bought with reusable containers. In fact, it prevented an estimated 1,300 disposable cups from entering landfills while reaching more than 8,500 campus community members through social media. The following vendors participate in the program: 
16,000,000,000 
cups used in America every year 
For more info, visit KillTheCup.com 
or hdh.ucsd.edu/sustainability 
HDH Dining Services has teamed up with Kill The Cup 
Bring your own cup & enter for a 
chance to win an iPad or Triton Cash! 
Buy coffee with 
your own mug Step 1 
Take a picture of 
your coffee reﬁll Step 2 
Upload pic at 
KillTheCup.com Step 3 
Only .99¢  for drip coffee reﬁlls! 
TOBY’S  SPOT  REUSABLE  DISHWARE  PROGRAM  
REUSABLE  CONTAINER  PILOT 
Toby’s Spot was a program at UCSD that allowed students to take food to-go using durable plates, bowls, glasses, and silverware from each of the six dining halls. When they were done eating, students would return the reusable dishware to one of the Toby’s Spot drop-off sites, located throughout the different housing areas on campus. Each drop-off site consisted of a roll-around cart containing bins in which to place soiled dishware for washing and reuse. This program eliminated the need to use disposable plastic food service ware and provided a convenient option for students on the go. However, the program ended because of various operational challenges, including the frequent loss or misplacement of the reusable dishware, maintenance costs, and animal intrusions in the uncovered carts. 
UCSD  POLICY  ON  DISPOSABLE  POLYSTYRENE 
As UCSD moves toward its zero waste goal for 2020, 
12 http://hdh.ucsd.edu/sustainability/hydration.asp44 the campus is requiring all vendors within the University Centers (Price Center and the Student Center) to eliminate polystyrene foam and other disposable polystyrene plastic products. UCSD’s policy, which was first implemented in 1989, only allows the use of these products if no other alternative is available. Currently, none of the private vendors located in Price Center or the Student Center carries any disposable polystyrene products. 
Campus Sustainability Goals  
UCSD  CLIMATE  ACTION  PLAN 
UCSD developed a Climate Action Plan in 2008 to outline steps to meet the UC zero waste goal by 2020. The following actions, identified in 2008, relate to reducing the plastic footprint at UCSD, either directly or indirectly: 
• 	 Improve the single-stream recycling program by updating and homogenizing containers and signage     
   
    
  • 	Improve waste reduction efforts 
-Education efforts may also focus on 
reducing waste through encouraging the use of durable, re-usable products whenever possible 
• 	 Develop a campus-wide composting program 
• 	 Supply new water fountains and water distribution stations to reduce the need for bottled water 
• 	 Evaluate tools for improved data collection and record keeping and implement the new record keeping program 
• 	Increase education of all staff, students, and faculty regarding the recycling program 
EDUCATIONAL CAMPAIGN – GREEN GUIDE 
The Green Guide
13 is a small booklet that is given to 
on-campus residents when they move in. The booklet educates readers about daily activities that promote sustainability, what HDH is doing to become more sustainable, and what sustainability initiatives exist on campus currently. It covers various topics, including consumption, energy, food, recycling, compost, donating, e-waste, and transportation. 
Existing Municipal Ordinances and Programs 
PROPOSED PLASTIC BAG BAN 
The City of San Diego previously introduced legislation that would ban plastic bags and require most stores to assess a 10-cent surcharge for customers who ask for a paper bag. The plastic bag ban proposal passed the City Council’s Rules and Economic Development Committee in October 2013 and was awaiting an economic impact report. This study was deferred when California’s governor passed a state-wide ban of single-use carryout bags in September 2014. However, implementation of this ban is uncertain as an alliance of plastics manufacturers is trying to overturn the ban. 
PLASTIC SOURCE REDUCTION OPTIONS FOR UCSD 
Options discussed below focus on plastic source reduction that is achievable through the increased use of reusable items (most preferred), along with the use of recyclable items, where reuse is not possible (less preferred). UCSD’s options for compostable food service ware are limited by Miramar Greenery’s inability to accept these items. Therefore, UCSD has pursued recyclables, which enables the campus to use a simple message – if it’s plastic, recycle it. 
13 http://hdh.ucsd.edu/sustainability/docs/GreenGuide.pdf CUPS 
Plastic cups were purchased by HDH more than any other product, and were a “Top 5” most-purchased item among private vendors who provided procurement data. 
Encourage use of reusable mugs/cups by offering discounts . HDH provides a 20-cent discount on 
coffee and all fountain drinks to students at campus-managed eateries if they bring their own reusable cup or mug. Currently, HDH is trying to promote this initiative aggressively all over campus by placing advertisements at the register in all P&Ms. While a few of the private retail vendors on campus also offer drink discounts for reusable mugs/cups, this information is not as well advertised. UCSD could encourage vendors to more prominently feature their discounts, and HDH could partner with the vendors to launch a campus-wide reusable discount program. As the success of the “Kill the Cup” student-led initiative demonstrates, education and outreach is critical, and social media can be an effective tool for reaching students to encourage behavior change. 
UCSD is implementing this strategy. 
LIDS 
Plastic lids were the second most-purchased disposable plastic item in HDH, and a “Top 5” most-purchased item among private vendors who provided procurement data. Options for reducing beverage lids include: 
OPTION 1:  Encourage use of reusable mugs/cups by 
offering discounts . As noted above, HDH provides a 
20-cent discount on coffee and all fountain drinks to students at campus-managed eateries if they bring their own reusable cup or mug. Only a few private vendors extend a similar discount. UCSD could encourage vendors to more prominently feature their discounts, and HDH could partner with the vendors to launch a campus-wide reusable discount program. In eight weeks, the student-led “Kill the Cup” initiative reduced coffee cup use by 70 percent. A financial incentive combined with a social media campaign can be an effective tool for reaching students to encourage behavior change. 
OPTION 2:  Provide plastic lids upon request only . This 
will help prevent situations where customers receive plastic lids that they may not need, want, or even use. 
UCSD decided to implement Option 1, as it complements the strategy the campus is using to reduce the use of cups. 
45     
 
  CUTLERY 
UCSD uses recyclable plastic cutlery. While recyclables 
are preferable to disposables, reducing single-use cutlery is the preferable option. Options for reducing plastic cutlery include: 
OPTION 1:  Implement a reusables program. UCSD 
could offer an incentive to customers using reusable utensils. 
Option 2:  Provide recyclable plastic cutlery upon 
request only. HDH dining facilities provide durable 
food service ware for students eating on-site, but students may also purchase items to-go. UCSD could make recyclable plastic cutlery available only upon request and work with private vendors to do the same. 
UCSD decided to implement Option 2, as this option is the best fit with the campus’ ongoing initiative to encourage the use of recyclable plastic. 
CLAMSHELLS AND OTHER FOOD CONTAINERS 
Recyclable plastic clamshells and other food containers were the second most-popular type of items purchased by HDH. Options for reducing these containers include: 
OPTION 1:  Encourage eat-in rather than take-out. 
HDH dining facilities provide durable food service ware for customers eating on-site. Therefore, by providing a comfortable environment, and/or by increasing the size of seating areas, UCSD could encourage more customers to dine in. In addition, UCSD should continue to implement an “ask first” policy—asking customers whether their purchases are “For here?” or “To go?”—as this prompts customers to consider whether they really need to take their purchases off-site. 
OPTION 2:  Purchase reusable to-go containers. 
UCSD could consider re-implementing an improved Toby Spots program, or purchasing reusable “eco-clamshell” and/or other to-go containers. Reusable to-go containers, such as the one pictured here, have proven to be a viable option at a number of 
46
46 photo credit: WebstaurantStore.com universities across the country. They work best in conjunction with container return sites located at dining facilities or at kiosks that track user activity via tokens or university identification cards. Significant education and outreach is also essential to program success. (Further information about these containers can be found in the Resources section on page 49.) 
The campus decided to implement Strategies 1 and 2. Beginning Fall 2014, the Oceanview Terrace eatery will be pilot testing the Ozzi container system,
14 which links 
reusable containers with a reverse-vending machine. When a customer is finished with their meal, they place their emptied container in the machine’s slot and receive a token. Containers are collected from the machines and washed. The token is redeemable for another container the next time the customer wishes to purchase a to-go meal. UC Merced was one of the first campuses to test this system and received California Higher Education Sustainability Committee award for “Best Innovative Waste Reduction Program.” Since the original pilot, UC Merced has expanded the program to four campus locations. 
A campus-wide reusable container system is likely to 
yield the largest plastic source reduction impact at UCSD. HDH currently uses over 4 million single-use clamshells a year, plus single-use plastic lids for other take-out containers. Further reductions are achievable by combining reusable cutlery with the reusable container. 
STRAWS 
Plastic straws were the fifth most prevalent type of disposable plastic purchased by HDH, and one of the “Top 5” items among private vendors who provided procurement data. Options for reducing their use include: 
OPTION 1:  Ban plastic straws on campus.  This option 
would immediately reduce the amount of disposable plastic used on campus. 
OPTION 2:  Reusable straws.  Reusable straws, made 
from metal, bamboo, or glass, are an option to disposables. 
OPTION 3:  Provide straws upon request only. Getting 
HDH and private vendor customers to stop and think about whether they need a straw could result in a simple, but long-term, behavior change that will reduce plastic straw waste. 
UCSD may pursue strategies 1 and 2 in the future, but for now, the campus has deemed straws less of a priority than other products, and is therefore not addressing them at this time. 
14 See http://www.agreenozzi.com/ for further information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
PLASTIC BAGS 
Plastic bags are a significant source of single-use plastic 
in marine debris. Although it is uncertain whether the state-wide ban will be overturned, UCSD could implement the following options: 
OPTION 1:  Ban single-use bags on campus.  UCSD 
previously banned polystyrene foam packaging for food service ware. This provides precedence for implementing an on-campus ban of single-use bags. 
OPTION 2:  Encourage use of reusable bags. UCSD 
sells reusable bags at its Place & Markets and the campus bookstore and does not provide plastic bags to customers at the campus-managed eateries. However, most, if not all, of the private retail vendors are still giving plastics bags away to customers with their purchases. UCSD could work with private vendors to require or otherwise encourage them to stop providing plastic checkout bags to their customers. This initiative could begin as a pilot that encourages private vendors to take proactive steps to reduce waste and comply with a potential future city­wide or even state-wide plastic bag ban. 
OPTION 3: Offer single-use bags by request only. 
UCSD could work with vendors to implement a “by request only” policy, offering disposable bags to customers only when they request one. This policy could be reinforced with an education and awareness campaign promoting reusable bags. 
UCSD is working with vendors to eliminate plastic bags. 
47 47
SOURCE  REDUCTION  PLAN  RESULTS: 
UCSD implemented the following source reduction 
strategies over the course of this project: 
p UCSD negotiated  with on-campus Subway 
restaurants to eliminate plastic sandwich bags and plastic straw sleeves by summer 2014, thereby eliminating over 1 million sandwich sleeve bags each year and saving the franchisee approximately $14,000 per year. 
p As of June 2014,  two additional hydration 
stations have been installed in the Scripps Institution of Oceanography building. Each hydration station will eliminate approximately 60,000 disposable water bottles per year. 
p A group of students  is submitting 
a proposal to UCSD’s “Green Grants” to implement an “eco-clamshell” or reusable container initiative on campus. 
47 -. 
' 4848 48
 
--"--"'-..:.:.:~~' ;.;:;.;::;..h~~ .'~   
 Source Reduction Resources 
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 
The following list of plastic source reduction options 
represent practical, effective means of further reducing plastic use on campuses: 
For dine-in eateries: 
p Use reusable cups, plates, glassware, and cutlery 
p Offer straws only on request, and only use paper 
straws
 
p Do not use single-serving packaging (for 
example, serve milk or cream for coffee in a pitcher rather than in single-use servings) 
p Offer beverage stirrers only on request, and only use wood stirrers 
p Use compostable or recyclable, and preferable non-plastic packaging for sending leftovers home 
For take-out eateries: 
p Participate in a reusable container system (as described in the next few pages) 
p Offer discounts to customers bringing their own cups and cutlery
 
p Do not use single-serving packaging (for 
example, serve milk or cream for coffee in a pitcher rather than single-use servings) 
p Offer straws only on request, and only use paper straws 
p Offer beverage stirrers only on request, and only use wood stirrers 
p Ensure that any disposable packaging used is compatible with the local waste infrastructure p Eliminate expanded polystyrene (Styrofoam™) products 
p Offer non-bottled tap water 
p Eliminate plastic bags 
Campus Water Bottle Filling Stations 
HYDRATION STATIONS 
“Hydration stations” are a modified water fountain installation that provides users a means of easily refilling a water bottle from tap water sources. Hydration stations can provide unfiltered or filtered water, and it can also be chilled. Some stations come with a feature that shows how many disposable water bottles have been eliminated from the waste stream by using the station. Hydration stations can either be bought new or retrofitted onto an existing water fountain. Brands offering either option include Oasis and Elkay. 
Hydration stations, including those made by these two 
manufacturers, typically offer optional filtration features to improve the quality and taste of water served. Filtering the water increases station maintenance costs as the filters are expensive and must be replaced regularly depending on use. For example, heavily used stations such as those at exercise facilities need to have filters changed once a month, on average, whereas less frequently used stations need filters changed quarterly. 
Elkay filters cost $72 each and can filter 3,000 gallons 
before replacement is necessary. The process of changing the filters is fairly easy and takes about 30 minutes per station. In total, filter replacement can cost up to $1,200 per year for a highly utilized station; for a less utilized station, replacement costs are around $400 per year. 
49 49
  
 Advantages 
• 	 Eye-catching and popular 
• 	Elkay hydration stations have “Bottle 
Replacement” counter feature
	
• 	 Filtered models are available 
• 	High refill rates (Elkay fills at 1.5 gallons per minute) 
Disadvantages 
• 	 Costly ($1,200+) 
• 	Some retrofits possible only with a certain type of installed water fountain 
Recommendations 
• 	Don’t use the filters unless there is a complaint about the taste of the tap water. 
GOOSENECK FIXTURES 
Gooseneck fixtures are an elongated spout that is affixed to water fountains to provide water bottle filling capability. Users typically press a small lever located at the base of the spout to activate water flow. The length of the neck enables tall containers such as water bottles to be filled while being help upright. Gooseneck fixtures are featured on some water fountain models or can be added to a preexisting water fountain. Costs vary depending on installer, but costs range $400 to $500 for the fixture and labor for installation. 
Advantages 
• 	 Lower cost compared to hydration stations ($400-500) 
• 	 Can be added to any existing water fountain 
Disadvantages 
• 	 Less distinct visually 
• 	 No additional features compared to drinking fountain 
• 	Low refill rate (average of .4 gallons per minute) 
Recommendations15 
• 	 An easy-to-read map can help show where water can be obtained on the campus (on school website and physical map of campus) 
• 	 Water fountains and hydration stations should be cleaned and sanitized regularly as users are reticent to use stations that appear dirty. 
• 	 Promote hydration stations to ensure their widespread use: 
15 See http://www.aashe.org/events/webinars/2013-empower ­
ing-procurement for example. 
50  
  -	 Highlight hydration stations in school 
newspaper, university websites, email alerts. 
-	 Promote reusable water bottles through student games/lotteries/giveaways. 
-	Distribute brochures, flyers, and fact sheets. 
-	 Encourage use at new student orientation events. 
-	Organize “tap water challenges” where students taste-test tap and bottled water to reduce stigma regarding tap water palatability. 
• 	 Provide a means for students to obtain reusable bottles at low cost or for free. 
-	 Organize reusable water bottle give-aways on campus. 
-	Offer high quality reusable water bottles for sale at campus bookstore, other retailers. 
• 	Display colorful signage above a refilling station to promote use and awareness; signage should feature interesting facts about water bottle waste and related topics to raise awareness. 
• 	Install signage on or next to filling stations to demonstrate use. 
• 	 If there are complaints about the taste of the tap water, consider adding a filter to the water fountain. 
Reusable To-Go Containers 
Many campuses offer a reusable clamshell container for take-out dining. These one-piece containers are made up of two halves joined by a hinge that allows the container to open and close. Containers may be distributed to the campus community for free or at low-cost. Diners initially receive their meal in the reusable container at a campus eatery. After finishing their meal, customers return the clamshell to a central area (such as a dining hall or food court). In exchange for returning the container, the customer receives a token or other form of credit (credit may be stored on a swipe card). The reusable containers are then collected, cleaned, and sanitized, and made available for future use at participating eateries. The token is redeemed the next time the customer purchases a take-out meal, and most programs also offer a discount for using the reusable containers. 
Reusable to-go container systems have been 
implemented successfully at several campuses, such as University of California at Merced
16 and University of 
16 http://dining.ucmerced.edu/ozzi-initiative-new/how-use-ozzi Vermont17. Some campuses include reusable cutlery as a 
component of their reusable container program as well. How to Start a Reusable Takeout Container Program at Your College
18 is a valuable resource for campuses rolling 
out reusable systems. Eckerd College has a similar handbook
19 based on that campus’s experience. Both 
resources suggest that you start off small – develop a pilot program at one campus-managed eatery. Make sure you thoroughly plan your pilot before launching – early problems can affect the long-term success of your pilot. 
Reusable To-Go Cutlery 
University of Vermont piloted a reusable spork (a one-piece combination of spoon, knife and fork) in fall 2010. Due to gaining popularity, UVM Dining agreed to expand their availability on campus. Students can purchase a spork for $1, and receive a $0.05 discount on take-out meals when using their spork. Other reusable to-go cutlery options are available, and include a carrying case to readily keep on hand. 
Vendors of Compostable and Recyclable Food Service Ware and Bags 
The San Francisco Department of the Environment has assembled a list of vendors that provide compostable and/or recyclable food service ware and bags that meet the city and county’s Food Service Waste Reduction Ordinance. 
17 https://uvmdining.sodexomyway.com/planet/composting. 
html 
18 http://www.shareable.net/blog/how-to-start-a-reusable­
takeout-container-program-at-your-college 19 http://www.eckerd.edu/green/files/EckerdEcoClamshell ­
Handbook.pdf 
51 Vendors of Compostable or Recyclable Food Service Ware and :Bags 
.... nt,...,, :: ()< 1l r (Pl 
Recyclab le: Aluminum (A) and Recyclable Plastic (AP) 
1 Ve odor 
Alllan.ce PlloN 
(31219G4&42A Web&lte 
1-.., •""'' .. ,_... I 
I I " II 0 
Cll 
p i 0 
Cll 
F.RP OCI 
~~ .. _ 
SI -
0 0 
P.CP. 
RP t a 
RP ;ij l .. ~ 
::c 8 
A,F,P •;E 
"° .. 
~ " " 0 ·::c 
P,RP j .. "° .. , 
l~ .. &-8 
0. E: .. Bi 
p .. ., 
Oi 
ii: 
F. P, 
RP ; 
ii! 
(i5 
RP 0. " (.l !! 
~. • 'O 
~1 
I!! ... 
P,RP 
2 American Paper snd Plastic Inc • ('0201 444 0000 !!fl!rlf IRR'E!' t!H!! i p P. :RP C:P, RP CP P,RP p P.RP RP 
3 Anchor Packaging (31411227800 ·-- RP RP 
4 Arrow Tableware (~18718226 l!!l!!! l!'!ll!!l~zl! .... Ii ~ f F F F F 
5 Beeause we care (852~)111 !175 m ,~91 MUSICla'stm.IY I CP 
6 
7 
8 BioSman • 
Bio-DC• 
Bio Bag (ee81 3102000 
('ecll 704 3273 
(72117a918'6 n1t.Dlaam11tt1»t:b.um am 
'fm• S;llfltSiSi ,_ 
1-., .. ,_.._ ·-·--....... -I 
I p F,P CP OP, F p CP 
CP 
CP F F 
CP 
9 B1<><1egr11d11ble Foods.eMOe " (541) S9:l21<11 muil:tdls.Dc ' I CP,F CP F p F 
10 Biode{lradable S10t"e I f CP CP CP,F P,RP CP F 
11 Bircflware (aa8124& 6080 WJ!l!t:1&:!l"b!ttt11 '521!1 w 
12 Bran eh ('151 S28 1012 !!lm tu:ir-ttmmJ-..&Rm I PF CP. PF CP CP.P PF PF 
13 BiRlle· (SOOl 227 $S73 e1111tt!1l11~ p CP.F CP P.RP CP F,P 
14 Bncige-Oa te Albance (92151'17 0838 mm.lld!l.ttamum I 
! F F F F 
15 Cash and Cany • l!ml£1!!lll11:!!~u1a .... 1c1 l!!l!!I I 
I F.P P,RP RP F P,Rs> F.P RP F 
1& 
17 Cos too 
D1s~able Food SCl'ViCC 
Products• (SOOJ 77• 21118 
(1118167411112 ----~ 
!!!!!!,ll:!H1J:Q ·s:A!.!t F,P 
f CP,P. 
RP 
F CP 
RP 
F P,RP CP CP p 
F RP 
F 
18 Earth Cyele (&041M00929 1~ ._ .... ___ ...,..._,. F F F 
19 EarthSmalt LlC • (3101834 7336 !!!!J! ,11!11!1!!!1!11l~&:mD I I' F F F 
20 Elllem111 Plates cM7J an 6648 m atmi!alllltl '51CD I F F F 
21 EcNowTecb' (S.C, I lU 3308 ~ 11S!!$Z!!dl~ ~ F,P F,RP p F 
22 Eco-Ged<o PrO<lud.5 (1'1012205393 k~~- F w F 
23 Eco Gteenwates ($101&569"40 !l!f:!t1Kitllf'HtlWM'9.JCOfft f CP CP f p CP F F 
24 Ecoware Inc. !6041880 11<18 !!:!a! Em!«lii!md~St; ~mt! ! w 
25 Evel'ythillQ Etco-&ote (4151337891 • -· I 
I f ·CP F p CP F 
26 Excellenl Pacbg"'Q and Supply • (!l(IOl3i727$7 .:az azlf:m1Q121a lW1 SiliUD p 
! CP,F CP w OP,F F,P CP F p CP,F 
27 Genpak • {S18J 19811511 ~Ats!~~~ F F F F 
28 Go Earth. (l10)'3110?97 DIMllt:tl!l tlSillllrllriifllII I f F F F F 
29 Go Mega Green.com • (415) 93:165641 :!!l!• 1a~*'l•~n&~"' F CP p CP F F 
Good Ftao Bioteci'lnology 30 (!U)=311'1 1 C-0nYlral i0n _...,~l~!:!!!l~~~S2!!l CP.RP CP,RP 
31 Goodwil faJr irading Co. t•1Sll03 UZl I RP RP RP P,RP 
Green Day E.co-fnelldly Material 32 (8& 5GIZ) 5HI 3383 Co.Ud 
33 Green Duc:J( (804) 2~0 8757 I 
ll::l!Blilllm211Si:Diii:fZm 
I 
l!l!l!!·lll~""''- '~ l<l!m I F.P CP CP 
CP. w F P, RJ> Cl" F .. 
"Note an.at lh~e vendors may cell)' noo-com.Pliant s:irooud.5 In &dcJklon 10 those 11:.tecl above. 
Please re-.Aew Lile Accepted Reeyel3ble or CornpostatJle Food Service Ware list al www Sffnvlronmenl.orgffoodServl<:e . 
["") ., SF Environment 
Our-. Ovr<ily. °"' ,,_.,. 
~-""'c:.. .. c.. ....... ,_ 
Updeted &1612-012 
1 
52
 Vendors of Compostable or Recyclable Food Servjce Ware and Bags 
Cc: -if.I 1 ,' 1 r s JI ~hsljl" I l Mlllde I Flhe1 (Fl Jn<I P rfPl 
Recyclabre"' Aluminum (A) and Recyclabfe Plastic (RP) 
PhoM .. .. 
I! Q. 
34 Green Home • p F CP C? 
w CP.P F,W F 
35 Green Is Green. tnc. Wttw'!l.QCDtmlyunn 1pc,s.gm I CP.F CP CP CP,F F CP F F 
36 Green Paper Products : WWW RfS'"P'QICWosfu c1\cpm F.P CP F P.RP CP F F 
37 Green Wave F F F 
38 Greeno Pro<luds : Wftw'.Ars1popmstug1 com p F P,RP F 
39 IFN Green • ($iOHIOO 28t1 ' WfUt.Maqrttt\COm F CP CP W,F p F F 
40 lnooware (8001237 8270 Y'CNft lf!QRO"D'•ns spsn 
I CP,RP p 
"1 1ns1awares p p P.RP RP RP p p p RP P,RP,A 
'2 Lets Go Green • xmw Qqoqrtco Ric 
I F,P CP CP,F P,RP CP,P F F 
43 Lilin Eoo F CP CP F CP F F 
>04 Majestic Sales • F,RP CP P,RP F,P CP F,P RP 
45 Maple Trade corporati<ln RP RP RP p 
c& Nature Friendly Products • 'www.flrAAo.et11'11 CP.F CP CP p CP F F 
47 Notur·Tec I JYWW.Oll\ld).1$1 [Q(!\ CP 
'48 Nexus Group· {$101 ~71000 P F.RP CP,F, 
RP A..F,P,CP, 
RP F.RP P.CP F P. R? CP. P. R? 
F 
50 P !< R Poper SUPC>ly , wttw,pCHP' r.com p F. P. 
RP CP,P RP F,RP p p F,P, 
RP RP A 
51 Pactiv· RP RP p F A,F,P.RP 
52 Ptwne Link Solutions F F,P F 
53 Rainbow Gt0oe~ CP p 
54 Red t=>od, Inc· CMOl 396 7560 P,RP 
55 Rest.autanl Depot • WN"'·EI Maymttftp<tl .com p p p RP PF P,RP CP,P p F 
56 Re51ocklt ceoo1680 oase p p P.RP RP p p P.RP 
51 S.F. Supply Master. P P,RP CP,P, 
RP RP #..,CP P, 
RP p P.CP P,RP p P,RP,A 
58 Sabelt {800) 122 3711 RP,CP RP.F 
cBOO• 894 0~11 p RP p 
60 Slalltmarket F CP CP CP P.CP F CP p 
61 Sys.co FOO<l Services • (~101220000 : www lx•sorr;t CO!" p F.P. 
RP Ci>. P, 
RP RP P,RP P,RP P.CP F. P, 
RP RP,P F,P.RP 
62 Tahoe Gtten 'IN(W.\llloHfHn 1DC.C.OfTI F.P CP.f CP f F.P CP F F 
l>-3 The Websiauram $lore CP CP, i>. RP p A.F.RP 
64 us FOO<lservicc F. P. 
RP CP.P RP F.P RP P,CP F, P, 
RP RP FP 
65 Vegware p F CP CP F CP.P P.cP F 
66 Veti'erra Lid. F F F 
67 WoddCenine Siore F CP CP CP,F F CP F,P F 
"Note 11\at these vendor.; may carry non-ooms:il iant prO<luct5 In adelltlon lo th~ listed above. 
Please re>Aew the Accepted Recvciable or Compostable Food Service Ware liM 31 www SFEn\ltronrnent.org/FoOUServi~ . SF Environment 
0.. -°"' <q. °"' .......... • _,, .... c... ... c..-,.;-.,_ 
Updated &!6!2-012 
2 
53
 54 54
 STEP THREE 
Change Campus 
Procurement  
Practices 
Guide your campus’s procurement leaders 
toward the purchase of more sustainable food service ware options. 
Now that you’ve completed Step One, the Plastic 
Footprinting Tool, and Step Two, the Source Reduction Plan, you are ready for Step Three, Change Campus Procurement Practices. This step will help to ensure that your campus implements environmentally preferable procurement policies and procedures (culminating in Step Four, Implement Source Reduction Policies) .  
Although the focus here is food service ware, you may also find the information in this step useful for other environmentally preferable purchasing initiatives. A suite of supplemental resources, including sample bid specifications and on-campus lease agreements that incorporate procurement stipulations, can be found in the Resources section (page 49) at the end of this step. 
There are seven action items necessary to change your 
campus’s procurement practices: 
55 55  
 
  1. Convene Your Plastic Source Reduction Team 
To change the type of food service ware products that your campus 
purchases, you need the input and expertise of a cross-section of campudining, waste management, and procurement services staff, as well as students. While you may have already received assistance from these stakeholders when completing the Plastic Footprinting Tool and Source Reduction Plan, you may need to recruit additional members. To recruit additional members, make sure you do the following: 
• 	 Include at least one person from every department that makes and is impacted by food service ware purchasing decisions. Chances are good that some of these departments have little to no experience with campus sustainability initiatives; however, their participation is still important. For example, you may need to call upon campus real estate staff to incorporate plastic sourcreduction in campus leases. By having a representative from each  
of these campus departments on your team, you can facilitate communication and expedite results. 
• Recruit people with sufficient authority and autonomy to make department-wide decisions so the team can take immediate action without being slowed down by lengthy approval processes. 
• 	Seek support from your university’s president’s office to strengthen your team’s efforts. 
• 	 Solicit input from a student-led campus sustainability group, if one exists on your campus. Students are key drivers in advancing sustainability and can provide on-the-ground input and feedback. (See Campus Highlight 1.) s 
e CAMPUS  
HIGHLIGHT #1  
Forming a Plastic Source Reduction Team 
UCSD has solicited the assistance of staff from Housing, Dining, and Hospitality; Procurement and Contracts; and Student Affairs to evaluate plastic source reduction options for food service ware. 
2. Establish and Implement Sustainable Food Service Ware Plans 
CAMPUS HIGHLIGHT #2 
Establishing a Sustainable  Food Service Ware Plan 
UCSB, UCSD, and UCSF all based their plastic source reduction plans on the UC system-wide zero waste goal and environmentally preferable purchasing policy, as outlined in the UC Sustainability Practices Policy. For example, UCSD required all food vendors in their student centers to eliminate polystyrene foam and other disposable polystyrene plastic products because these materials, which are not readily recyclable, do not meet zero waste goals. Universities and colleges often develop environmentally preferable purchasing plans for everything from green energy and office supplies to food service ware products. These plans can serve as your team’s university-supported rationale for implementing plastic source reduction. Your team should identify and review all current plans and, where lacking, work to either strengthen them or implement new ones. (See Campus Highlight 2 for examples.) 
56  
3. Establish Desired Environmental Criteria for Purchases 
Environmental criteria ensure that your campus’s environmental priorities are reflected in the 
university’s purchasing choices, and inform the specifications for on-campus or off-campus dining facilities. Specifications are tools that enable purchasing staff to identify characteristics of a product or a service, incorporate environmental criteria, and to convey this information to suppliers. Specifications may describe the physical, functional, or performance characteristics of the product, as well as requirements for inspection or testing,  
such as meeting biodegradability standards. One example of a product specification might be “8-ounce paperhot cup, without handle.” 
The following criteria may be used as 
baseline for food service ware: 
• 	 Includes recycled content 
• 	 Recyclable or compostable 
• 	 Reusable 
• 	 Conserves energy 
• 	 Durable and long-lasting 
• 	 Reduces greenhouse gas emissions 
• 	 Conserves water 
• 	 Chlorine-free manufacturing 
Note: Contact recycling and composting experts on your campus and in your local community regarding the specific infrastructure available in your area. Even though food service ware may be marked “recyclable” or “compostable,” your recycling or composting vendors may be unable to accept the item f or recycling or 
composting.  CAMPUS HIGHLIGHT   #3  
Developing Environmental Purchasing Criteria 
a When creating their environmental purchasing criteria,UCSD Procurement Services and UCSD’s Housing, Dining,and Hospitality Services (HDH) collaborated to reviewthe available recyclable and compostable food serviceware options. Based on their findings, the team decided to prioritize the procurement of plastics numbers 1 (PET, or polyethylene terephthalate) and 5 (PP, or polypropylene) because they were the most desirable to recyclers. 
4. Develop Green Product Specifications and Leasing Standards for 
Food Service Vendors 
One easy way to achieve your campus’s plastic source reduction goals is to include third-party green certification standards in your product specifications. For example, by adding “compostable to ASTM D 6868”
20  to the 8-ounce paper hot cup specification, a campus can ensure the procurement of a 
compostable 8-ounce paper hot cup. (See the Procurement Resources section on page 61 for example specifications.) You can also encourage the purchase of reusables by including durability criteria in specifications. 
20 ASTM D 6868 (Standard Specification for Labeling of End Items that Incorporate Plastics and Polymers as Coatings or Additives 
with Paper and Other Substrates Designed to be Aerobically Composted in Municipal or Industrial F acilities) standard specifies that a 
product labeled as “compostable” meets three criteria: 1) it must break down to carbon dioxide, water , inorganic compounds, and 
biomass (i.e., compost), 2) decompose so no plastic fragments are visually distinguishable, and 3) leave no toxic residue that would 
impede its use as compost.. Source: http://www.astm.org/Standards/D6868.htm, accessed Aug 25, 2014. 
57 Forest Certifies that products come from 
Stewardship responsibly managed forests. A good 
Council certification to look for when selecting 
paper products. 
Biodegradable Certifies that products are compostable 
Products by meeting ASTM D6400 and/or ASTM 
Institute D6868 standards. A good certification for compostable food service ware. 
Green Seal 
Develops product-specific multi-criteria certifications, such as recycled content, compostability, and fiber bleaching methods for food service ware. May be used to select sustainable food packaging materials. 
U.S. 
Environmental 
Protection 
Agency’s 
Comprehensive 
Procurement 
Guidelines 
Provides recycled-content guidelines for a variety of paper products CAMPUS HIGHLIGHT   #4
  
Integrating Sustainability Standards with Private Vendors 
Certification systems relevant to food service ware include:
	UCSF includes a “Sustainability Clause” in its food vendor contracts and leases. To support the recycling and composting programs on campus, vendors must agree to provide a mechanism for recycling and composting relevant materials and decreasing the use of disposable food service ware. UCSF’s Recycling Coordinators are seeking to add zero waste procurement language into the contracts to further improve food service sustainability. 
Many campuses also lease space to private food vendors. If this is the case for your campus, you can include green procurement language in leasing agreements to ensure that vendors purchase food service ware that is aligned with your environmental policies and waste management infrastructure. For examples of green leasing agreement language, see the Procurement Resources section on page 61. 
5. Integrate Plastic Source Reduction into Electronic Purchasing Systems 
To ensure that source reduction policies lead to changes in what your campus purchases, criteria need to be integrated into campus procurement processes and online requisition systems. UCSF, UCSD, and UCSB all use SciQuest, a cloud-based procurement system. Each of the campuses has tailored the software to its particular needs. (See Campus Highlight 5.) CAMPUS HIGHLIGHT   #5  
Implementing Sustainable Sourcing 
Beginning in fall 2013, UCSB premiered its new Gateway Procurement System. Gateway consolidated UCSB’s previously fragmented procurement and requisition system into a centralized portal that, today, is used for the majority of campus purchases. Any UCSB member with a campus login, including administration, faculty, and students, can access and use Gateway. As the centralized procurement portal for almost the entire UCSB campus, Gateway has enormous potential to influence purchasing behavior. As of March 2014, over 4,500 suppliers were listed in UCSB Gateway. Procurement staff intend to review these suppliers in the future and eliminate those that do not meet UC system and/or UCSB campus procurement policies, including environmentally preferable purchasing. 
58 UCSF and UCSB combined their purchasing activities by using BearBuy, a SciQuest-based software platform that 
enables collaborative procurement. The platform flags products with positive environmental attributes to facilitate compliance with environmentally preferable purchasing policies. (See image below.) Prior to centralizing in 2011, both UCSF and UCSB had distinct procurement departments. Now, Central Procurement works with product standards groups and provides samples of more environmentally friendly products. It also negotiates and or bids for competitive pricing that meets end-user needs on both campuses. 
6. 	Take Advantage of Partnership Opportunities with Other Campuses and Governmental Agencies 
Many resources are available to campuses that are developing plastic source reduction policies. Regular communication between your sustainability program leaders and others programs across the state and country creates opportunities for collaboration and may dramatically speed up the success of your initiatives. For example, the Association for the Advancement of Sustainability in Higher Education (AASHE) coordinates campus sustainability resources across North America, providing case studies, policies, and blogs (including the California 
Student Sustainability Coalition blog). AASHE also offers a sustainability reporting tool, Sustainability Tracking, Assessment & Rating System™ (STARS), which provides a framework for colleges and universities to measure their sustainability performance and gain recognition for their successes. Look on AASHE’s website or your state 
59
[Caption: Screenshot of BearBuy procurement software] 59 government’s web site, as many states offer tips and tools for identifying and buying green products. If 
your school is a member of AASHE, we suggest sharing your successes by submitting your case study for inclusion in AASHE’s Campus Sustainability Case Study Database! This database is also an excellent source for additional ideas for greening your campus. 
At the state level, organizations like the California Resource Recovery Association and the California 
Collegiate Recycling Council provide resources for initiating and implementing campus source reduction 
and recycling programs. The annual California HigherEducation Sustainability Conference (CHESC),organized by California’s independent/private colleges,community colleges,state universities, and the University of California, offers research and case studies across a broad range oftopics, including programdevelopment and operations,curriculum development, andcommunity partnerships. 
CAMPUS HIGHLIGHT   #6  
Sharing Information 
While assisting UCSF and UCSD in implementing source reduction opportunities, PSI regularly shared information with campus teams. After a Subway franchisee on the UCSF campus agreed to 	discontinue the use of plastic bags for take-out orders, the Product 	Stewardship Institute provided a sample letter to persuade UCSD’s franchise to take the same step. UCSD staff were able to efficiently and successfully convince their campus Subway franchise to discontinue the use of plastic bags and plastic straw wrappers. 
7. Review Procurement Options Regularly 
The long-term success of any green procurement project depends highly on your ability to address new situations, expand initiatives for greater impact, and ensure that procurement plans are carried out. It is therefore important to revisit these options on a regular basis, whether through an informal review process or through regularly scheduled structured reviews. 
The procurement of more sustainable, environmentally 
preferable products allows your campus to reduce its 
environmental impact in a major way. With the aid of this 
Procurement Guide, you can create a plastic source reduction team, establish procurement criteria, and ensure the purchase of more sustainable products. The success stories of UCSB, UCSD, and UCSF serve as replicable models of how to put this Guide into practice. And the Procurement Resources section on the following pages arm you with practical, in-depth know-how about specific procurement strategies. 
You’re almost on to the fourth and final step: Implement 
Source Reduction Policies! CAMPUS HIGHLIGHT   #7  
Reviewing Procurement Options 
In April 2011, UCSF released anupdated Sustainability ActionPlan (SAP), developed through amulti-stakeholder review meeting covering issues ranging from zero waste to cultural shifts toward sustainability. The group has since published annual reports indicating goals for the next fiscal year. By holding regular review meetings, UCSF has developed a number of workgroups that continue to affect procurement plan development and implementation. 
60 Procurement Resources 
SAMPLE BID SPECIFICATIONS 
61 7360-0008R3 
dep1eling emissions, use unbleached or process ch!orine-f'ree manufactu ring processes , and 
are are leacli-free and mercury-free. 
Polylactic acid (PLA> 
A clear bioplastic made trom corn, resembles common pelroohem ical-based plastics such as 
polyelhylene and polypropylene. 
Renewable 
Derived from ren~b te agricultural and forestry resources. 
Recyclable Material 
Recyolable material is defined as a product lhat can be used as an ingreclLent in an.other 
manufactured process to create ano1her product. 
4.0 REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 The products S:ha11 oomp.1y with all applicable Federal & State mandatory requirements 
and regulations re,aling to lhe preparation, packaging, labering, storage, distribution , and 
sales of the products within the commercia l marketplace. 
4.2 The products thal make contact wi1ih food and/or beverage shall be prepared in 
accordance with the 21 CFR §110, Current Good Manufacturing PracUoe in 
Manufacturing , Packing, or Holding Human Food and shall comply with the regulations 
contained within the 2.1 CFR Parts 170 thru 189, where applicable. 
4.3 The plastic food and beverage container products shall comply with the CA Publtc 
Resources Code Division 30, Chapter 5. 423.59.6.(a} A person shall not sell a plastic 
food or beverage oont.ainer in this slate that is !abefed with the term ·composlab le." 
"biodegradab le: "degradab le." or any form of those terms, or in anyway imp.ly that lhe 
container will break down in a landfill, composting, marine, or other natural terrestrial 
environment, unless. at the time oHhe safe. the plastic food or beverage oonlainer 
meets ~he AS™ standard specificat ion for ll'le term used on the 'abel. •ASTM slandard 
specificatio n· means ASTM 06400-04 -Standard Specification for Compostable 
:Plastics. 
5.0 PRODUCT REQUIREMENTSlDESCRJP'TIONS 
5.1 Group A (Cups, lids, Slee<ves & Containers) 
5.1.1 Cold Cups & Cold Containers 
5.1.1.1 The cold oups and cold containers shall be compostab le and 
biodegradable. 
5.1. 1. 1.1 Plastic materials shall meet lhe requirements of ASTM D640Q.. 
04 Standard Specification for Composta ble Plastics. (Use of 
Active Organic EMyme (AOE) for bkldegradabi lity is not 
aoceptallle .) 
5.1.1.1.2 Plastic coating1 shall meet the requirements of ASTM 06868-
03 Standard Specifica:tion for Biodegradable :Plastics Used as 
C.oating.s on Paper and Other Compostab fe Substrates . 
Galinato, c Pag.e 2 of 4 e>eoomber 1, 2008 
Dlsp. Food Supplies 
62
 7360-0008R3 
5.1.2 Sleeves 
5. 1.2. 1 The sleeves &hall be compo·stable and bioc!eg.radable and made from 
bio-based materiaf(.s.). 
5.1.2.2 The sleeves S:ha11 be manufactured process chlorine free (na.tural or 
1unbleadhed color is aooeptable}. 
5.1.2.3 The sleeves shall contain a minimum of 30% post-consumer recycled 
content materiaf(s). 
5.1.3 Hot Cups & Hot/Cold Containers 
5.1.3. 1 The hot cups and hotlcol:d containers shall meet at least one of the 
following: 
5.1.3.1.1 The hot cups and hot/cold containers shall be C()mpostable 
and biodegradable. 
• Plastic malerials shall meet lhe requiremen ts of ASTM 
106400·04 Standard Spedfi.calfon for Com,postable 
Plastics. (Use or Active Organic Encyme (AOE) for 
biodegradability is not aooeptabfe.) 
• Plastic coated paper (Qr other compostabte sut>stra.te) shall 
meet the requirements of ASTM 06868-03 Standard 
Specification for Siode{lradab le Plastics Used as Coa~ ings 
on Paper and Other C-Omposlab te Subsh'ates . 
5.1.3.1.2 The hot cups and hot/cold containers shall be manufactured 
from a blo-based material wilh a plastic coating. 
5.1.3.1.3 The hot cups and hot/cold containers shall be manufacture<! 
from recyclable polymeri:c material(s) with a minimum of 30% 
post-consumer recycled content. 
5.1 .4 Lids (Hot & Cold) 
5.1.4.1 The tids (hot & cold) shall meet at least one of the following : 
5. 1.4.1.1 The lids shall be oompostab fe and biodegradab le. 
• Plastic materials shall meet lhe requirements of ASTiM 
100400-04 Standard Specificalio n for Compo.stable 
Plastics. (Use of Active Organic :Enzyme (AQE) for 
biodegrada bility is not aoef3ptabte.) 
• Plastic coatoo paper or other substrates shall meet the 
requirements of ASTM 100868-03 Standard Specilicalion 
for Btodegrada!Yle Plastics Used as Coaling.son Paper and 
Other Compostable Substrates. · 
5.1.4.1.2 The lids shall be manufactured with 10% minimum post 
consumer recycled content or rrom a recyclable polymeric 
material(s). 
Galinato, c Pag.e 3 of 4 e>eoomber 1, 2008 
Dlsp. Food Supplies 
63
 7360-0008R3 
5.2 Group B (Napkins) 
5.2.1 Each m~pkin product. shall meet two or more of the following: 
5.2.1.1 The napkin produ:ots shall be biO-:based, composta.b le and 
biodegradable . 
5.2.1. 2 The napkin products .shall :be manufactured from a minimum 40% post­
consumer r~yded content material(s). 
5.2.1.3 The napfdn products shall be manufaelured process chlorine free. 
"Natural" unbleached color is acceptatile. 
5.2.1.4 The napkin products shall meet at least one of the following certification : 
• Certified to "Environmental Choice· -CCD 084 for Table n._pkins 
• Certified to "Green Seal™" -:Environmental Standard for Paper 
Towels and Paper Napkins GS 9 
• Marked wilh lhe "Ch!orine Fr~ Products Associatio n" (CFPA) 
Totally Chlorine Free (TCF} or Processed Ghforlne Free (PCF) 
Certification Mark 
6.0 PACKAG ING & PACKING 
All pa.ck.aging materials shall be made from 10% post consumer recycled content or recycilabre 
materials. All paper based paokagin.g shall contain a minimum 30 percent by flber weight post­
consumer li'ber. No foil or mylar packaging. Excessive inner pa.citing ma.teriaJs are not 
acceptable . 
Galinato, c Pag.e 4 of 4 e>eoomber 1, 2008 
015.p. Food Supplies 
64
       SAMPLE LEASING AGREEMENTS
 
UCSF 
UCSF includes a “Sustainability Clause” in its food vendor contracts and leases; this clause contains the 2013 UC 
Sustainable Practices Policy . To support the recycling and composting programs on campus, the following language is 
included in the agreement signed by each vendor: 
Recycling/Composting 
Licensee must comply with all University’s campus recycling and composting policies, which may include the 
following: recycling of cans/bottles at campus events; providing a location and manner for recycling cardboard, cans, and bottles; educating staff, etc., regarding proper recycling and locations of drop off points for self-collected bottles and cans; decrease the use of throw away trays, silverware, food and beverage containers; providing a location and manner for the composting of food, paper, paper plates, napkins, milk/juice cartons, paper cups, tea bags and coffee grounds and proper collection and disposal of grease and cooking oils. 
UCSF is equipped with composting bins and universal signage throughout campus, and the Recycling Coordinators and Medical Center staff are working to purchase compostable food service ware for the campus-owned Medical Center. UCSF’s Recycling Coordinators would like to include zero waste procurement language in vendor contracts, mandating private food service vendors to use compostables, to take advantage of this composting infrastructure. 
UCSB 
UCSB’s University Center (UCen)-owned eateries follow UC-wide and UCSB procurement policies; however, private UCen leasers only have to adhere to the UCen leasing agreement. UCen has modified leasing agreements to restrict leasers to using compostable products for single use materials that they give to customers: 
“As the campus is aggressively involved in issues of sustainability, the selected vendor will be required to use the provided bins for pre-consumer kitchen waste and provide compostable bags for this purpose. In addition, all customer disposable wares must be compostable. BPI certification will be required for all compostable products selected by the Vendor.” 
UCSB staff have been encouraging leasers who are on active contracts to switch to using compostable takeout containers by notifying them that they will have to when their contract is up and by identifying other campus leasers who have made the switch. To date, Panda Express and Wahoo’s have committed to making the switch to 100% compostable. Yoshinoya is using up the last of their non-compostable stock and the next shipment will be compostable. All nine UCen Dining Units will then be using 100% compostable takeout containers. To address food service needs at special events that require catering, UCSB provides a list of approved catering companies . 
UCSD 
UCSD’s University Center, which is where most of the private food vendors on campus are located, has become proactive in requiring all incoming food vendors to avoid the use of expanded polystyrene foam and incorporate UCSD’s Sustainable Food Policy into their practices; current food vendors will be required to do the same at the time of contract renewal. Excerpts of the specific language are exhibited below: 
11.6 General use of disposable polystyrene foam and other disposable polystyrene plastic products shall be 
confined to situations when no reasonable replacement product is available. All appropriate replacement items are to be recyclable or biodegradable in nature. Tenant will use recyclable or biodegradable products whenever possible. 
They provide this language to all vendors in an attachment to the operating agreement. Also, in future lease agreements, language is being incorporated to require vendors to use biodegradable packaging and adhere to the UCSD Fair Trade Policy. 
65 6666
 67
Set protocols and enact regulations that 
help ensure reduced waste on your campus and in your local city, town, or village. 
Congratulations on making it to the fourth and final step 
of the Plastic Source Reduction Toolkit! You are well on your way to minimizing not only your campus’s overall environmental footprint, but also the amount of plastic marine debris that pollutes our planet’s oceans and waterways. 
In this section of the toolkit, you’ll find a menu of 
customizable waste reduction policies, strategies, and sample ordinances for your campus and the municipality in which your campus is located. This tool is especially useful because it can help align campus and municipal sustainability objectives. As microcosms of their larger communities, colleges and universities often have unique opportunities to pilot policies that are later adopted by surrounding municipalities. The policies presented in this toolkit are based on a range of policies previously implemented in other municipalities or on other college campuses. 
For food service ware, in particular, campuses and 
municipalities can choose from a wide range of policy types—from those that influence consumer behavior (such as discounts for bringing your own cup) to those that directly alter purchasing practices (such as polystyrene foam bans). Policies may be voluntary or mandated by legislation or contract. 
The policy options presented may be replicated and 
adapted for your unique college and municipality. They are followed by some real-world examples, as well as model language you can tailor for your use. 
67 STEP FOUR
Establish Source Reduction Policies 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Policies Influencing Consumer Behavior 
Voluntary Policies 
• Dine-in/take-out policy 
How many times have you purchased a food or beverage at a restaurant or café with the intent to eat or 
drink it there, only to receive your order in a disposable container with single-use utensils that you end up having to discard? By requiring that restaurant staff ask customers whether they plan to dine in or take their order to go, campuses and municipalities can ensure that those who dine in only get served with reusable food service ware. This will significantly reduce the use of disposable plastics, such as cutlery and plates, as well as secondary packaging, like plastic bags, containers, and lids. 
• Provide plastic straws and/or other disposable items only upon request 
Encouraging eateries to provide disposable items only by customer request could curtail the improper disposal of these items. Signage to support this “Ask First” policy helps customers understand the policy and prompts them to question whether they really need such items. 
• Incentives 
To promote the use of reusable food service ware, restaurants could offer discounts to customers who come with their own mug, cup, plate, or cutlery. (See the Mandatory Policies section for more on implementing a “disincentive” policy for single-use service ware: in other words, charging customers extra for these items.) 
• Offer a reusable clamshell package for take-out meals 
Restaurants and on-campus eateries can coordinate to offer reusable clamshell containers—one-piece containers made up of two halves joined by a hinge that allow the container to open and close. Once customers have finished using the clamshells, they return them to a central area (e.g., dining hall or food court) for washing. To implement this on a campus level, work with dining services to use the dining infrastructure already in place to collect, clean, and distribute containers. To implement this on a municipal level, assess which eateries may be interested in participating. Then, coordinate with them to find an appropriate container dispersal and collection site. See the Source Reduction Resources section of this Toolkit on page 49 for further information about these containers. 
Mandatory Policies 
• Disincentives 
Eateries could be required to charge for dispensing disposable service ware items to customers. By showing a visible charge for each disposable service ware item, customers may be less inclined to request these items 
and may bring their own reusable items to avoid the charge. This policy is an option for reducing disposable straws, cups, lids, utensils, carryout bags, etc. Compared to incentive policies, disincentive policies send a stronger message to customers about the externalized environmental costs of their purchases. When implemented, they should be campus-wide or municipality-wide to ensure fairness and prevent patrons from preferentially choosing certain eateries over others. Disincentive policies should be considered whenever possible. 
68  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Procurement Policies
 
Voluntary Policies 
•	 Reduce single-serve packaging 
Eateries could be encouraged to replace single-serve pouches of condiments (e.g., mustard, ketchup, 
and mayonnaise) with refillable dispensers, and swap out individual portion-sized creamers with refillable thermoses and sugar packets with dispensers. Other options include selecting cutlery that is packaged in bulk rather than individually wrapped or replace fork, knives, and spoons with a single utensil, the Spork.21 
•	 Offer reusable food service ware for dine-in customers 
Eateries could be encouraged to use reusable food service ware for their dine-in customers. 
•	 Choose recyclable or compostable food service ware 
By leveraging existing recycling and compost systems of your municipality or campus, you could make recyclable or compostable food service ware accessible to eateries and their customers. You could also collaborate with dining institutions to develop procurement programs that specify products containing only a certain percentage of post-consumer recycled content. 
Mandatory Policies 
•	 Ban problematic food service products 
Bans may address a specific type of material or an entire product category. For example: 
• 	Expanded polystyrene foam (EPS): EPS foam, more commonly known by its trademarked name, 
StyrofoamTM, has been the ubiquitous material of choice for hot drink cups and other take-out containers 
for decades. However, options for recycling polystyrene foam are limited and, because of its light weight, it can be easily swept away by the wind, eventually making its way into storm drains that lead to rivers, lakes, and oceans. Over time, polystyrene breaks down into small pieces that are easily ingested by marine life and, thus, introduced into the food chain. There are also concerns about the potential human health impacts of styrene, the chemical building block for polystyrene. Due to these issues, as well as the fact that alternatives with fewer environmental impacts are readily available (e.g., paper cups, reusable mugs), nearly 100 municipalities in the U.S.—including San Francisco—have banned the use of disposable polystyrene food service ware for both dine-in and take-out food. 
• 	Ban use of non-recyclable or non-compostable service ware 
Develop municipal ordinances or campus policies that require dining institutions to offer only recyclable or compostable food service ware. Seattle introduced such a ban in 2009, beginning with a ban on polystyrene foam the first year and expanding it to all disposable food packaging and service ware by the second year. Minneapolis passed a similar ordinance in May 2014, effective as of April 22, 2015 (Earth Day). 
Of course, you’ll need to make sure that the restaurant and municipal/campus infrastructure supports the 
proper management of recyclable and compostable products. First, the restaurant must provide separate receptacles for customers to segregate their waste. Second, the waste hauler must have the ability to 
21 http://www.industrialrev.com/spork-original.html 69  
 
 
 
 
 keep waste streams segregated for composting or recycling. And third, municipal recycling and compost 
collection systems must allow customers to properly dispose of these items at home, in parks, on streets, or in other locations where customers may take their food. Otherwise, compostable and recyclable packaging will likely end in the landfill or even be littered, allowing it make its way to the ocean, where it becomes marine debris. 
•	 Ban plastic bags 
More than 150 municipalities across the U.S—and, as of September 2014, the entire state of California— have banned single-use disposable plastic bags. Plastic bags are not compatible with most curbside recycling programs and easily blow into trees and waterways. In 2007, San Francisco became the first city to enact an ordinance that banned the distribution of single-use plastic bags at grocery stores. Since then, many other cities and municipalities across the country have followed suit with similar bans. Additionally, some municipalities and campuses have coordinated related disincentive policies that charge customers for single-use paper or compostable plastic bags, thereby encouraging the use of reusable bags. 
•	 Ban use of disposable food service ware for dine-in customers 
This ban would require that eateries have dishwashing capacity for reusable food service ware. An ancillary benefit of this policy option is the reduced potential for cross-contamination of waste streams, which can hinder efforts to compost or recycle. For example, 
compostable food service 
ware that is unintentionally 
mixed with recyclable (yet 
non-compostable) food 
service ware will contaminate 
the recyclable materials, and 
be lost to the composting 
program. You may want to 
consider grandfathering in 
older establishments, and/or 
implementing the policy only 
in those eateries that meet a 
certain building capacity (e.g., 
minimum number of square 
feet).
 
•	 Ban use of all or specific 
types of disposable items for on-campus or municipal events 
Many campuses ban the use 
of disposable water bottles 
or polystyrene foam plates 
and cups. For example, UCSB, 
UCSF, and UCSD have all 
banned polystyrene foam 
plates and cups. These bans 
can be a practical first-step for a campus or municipality to 
change procurement practices 
and to ensure that purchased 
food service products are 
compatible with the local solid 
waste management program 
and goals.
 
70  
 
   
   Real-Life Policy Examples 
The following policies are active right now in states across the U.S. Y ou may find that you can use them to model 
your own: 
Plastic Bag Reduction Ordinance (CA, 2007)22 
More than 150 cities and municipalities have passed ordinances banning single-use plastic carry-out bags. These 
ordinances are typically marked by a progressive roll-out, first requiring larger grocery stores to eliminate plastic bags, followed by pharmacies and smaller food markets. Many ordinances also require that stores charge customers for alternative bags, unless the customers bring their own bags, and that store-supplied bags meet specific recycled content standards. For example, the City and County of San Francisco Plastic Bag Reduction Ordinance prohibits food establishments and retail stores from using single-use plastic bags at check-out. Customers must either bring their own bag or pay 10 cents to receive a compostable plastic bag or a paper bag with at least 40 percent post-consumer recycled content. 
Polystyrene Foam Ban (CA, 2006)23 
The City and County of San Francisco Food Service Waste Reduction Ordinance, passed in November 2006, prohibits food vendors and restaurants from using disposable food service ware made from polystyrene foam. Only recyclable or compostable to-go containers can be used. 
Recyclable and Compostable Food Packaging Ordinance (MN, 2014)24  
Effective April 22, 2015, Minneapolis’s Environmentally Acceptable Packaging ordinance requires that the city’s food establishments use recyclable, reusable, or compostable food packaging for all food that is to be “immediately consumed” (immediate consumption is not defined). 
PET Water Bottle Ban (MA, 2013)25 
The Sale Of Drinking Water In Single-Serve PET Bottles Bylaw, implemented by the Town of Concord, MA, prohibits the sale of single-serve PET water bottles of 1 liter or less. 
22 http://www.amlegal.com/nxt/gateway.dll/California/environment/chapter17plasticbagreductionordinance?f=templates$f ­
n=default.htm$3.0$vid=amlegal:sanfrancisco_ca 
23 http://www.sfenvironment.org/sites/default/files/editor-uploads/zero_waste/pdf/sfe_zw_food_service_waste_reduction_or ­
dinance.pdf 
24 http://www.minneapolismn.gov/www/groups/public/@clerk/documents/webcontent/wcms1p-124792.pdf 
25 http://www.concordnet.org/Pages/ConcordMA_Bylaws/Water%20Bottle%20Bylaw.pdf 
71
 72 72
 Model Policy Language
 
The following pages provide model language that you 
can use to jumpstart the development of your own plastic source reduction policies. Examples include model ordinances for: 
1.	Banning Sale of Drinking Water in Single-ServePET Bottles;
2.	Banning Expanded Polystyrene (EPS) Foam-based Disposable Food Service Ware by FoodVendors;
3. Banning Single-use Plastic Carry-out Bags;
4. Regulating Take-out Food Packaging; and
5.	Requiring Re-Usable Food Service Ware ForRestaurants Serving Food And Beverages ForOn-Site Dining.
73 73 
         
   1. Model Ordinance Banning Sale of Drinking Water in Single-Serve PET Bottles26 
AN ORDINANCE of the [insert name of jurisdiction] 
AMENDING [IF ORDINANCE IS AMENDING PRIOR LEGISLATION, INSERT REFERENCE] 
Sale of Drinking Water in Single-Serve PET Bottles 
It shall be unlawful to sell non-sparkling, unflavored drinking water in single-serving polyethylene terephthalate 
(PET) bottles of one liter (34 ounces) or less in [relevant jurisdiction] on or after [effective date]. 
Exemption for Emergencies 
Sales occurring subsequent to a declaration of an emergency adversely affecting the availability and/or quality of drinking water to [relevant jurisdiction] residents by [relevant city, county, state or federal authority] shall be exempt from this ordinance until seven days after such declaration has ended. 
Enforcement Process 
Enforcement of this ordinance shall be the responsibility of the [relevant official, e.g. Town Manager or Director of relevant department] or his/her designee. The [relevant official] shall determine the inspection process to be followed. Any establishment conducting sales in violation of this ordinance shall be subject to a non-criminal disposition fine as specified in [relevant section]. Any such fines will be paid to [relevant city]. 
Suspension of the Ordinance 
If the [relevant official] determines that the cost of implementing and enforcing this ordinance has become unreasonable, then the [relevant official] shall so advise the [relevant legislative body] and the [relevant legislative body] shall conduct a public hearing to inform citizens of such costs. Subsequent to the public hearing, the [relevant legislative body] may continue this ordinance in force, or may suspend it permanently or for such length of time as it may determine. 
Fine Schedule 
FINE SCHEDULE FINE ALLOWED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY 
1st Offense Warning [relevant agency] 
2nd Offense $25.00 
3rd and subsequent offense $50.00 
26 Based on ordinance in Concord, MA. See http://www.concordnet.org/Pages/ConcordMA_Bylaws/Water%20Bottle%20Bylaw. 
pdf. 
74          
 
 2. Model Ordinance Banning Expanded Polystyrene (EPS) Foam-based
Disposable Food Service Ware by Food Vendors27
AN ORDINANCE of the [insert name of jurisdiction] 
AMENDING [IF ORDINANCE IS AMENDING PRIOR LEGISLATION, INSERT REFERENCE] 
Legislative Purpose 
The [insert relevant legislative body] finds and determines that: 
a)	Polystyrene is a petroleum-based, lightweight plastic material commonly used as food service ware by retailfood vendors operating in [county or city]. Expanded Polystyrene Foam (EPS), often referred to by thetrademark Styrofoam, has become a problematic environmental pollutant given its non-biodegradable, andnearly non-reusable, nature.
b)	EPS-based, single-use food service ware constitutes a substantial portion of the litter within [county or city].
c)	Effective ways to reduce the negative environmental impacts of disposable food service ware includereusing or recycling food service ware and using compostable materials made from renewable resourcessuch as paper, cardboard, corn starch, and/or sugarcane.
The [insert relevant legislative body] does therefore find and declare that it should restrict the use by food vendors of EPS-based disposable food service ware. 
Definitions 
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
a) “Disposable food service ware” means single-use disposable products used in the restaurant and food
service industry for serving or transporting prepared, ready-to-consume food or beverages. This includes butis not limited to plates, cups, bowls, trays and hinged or lidded containers also known as clamshells.
b) “Food vendor” means any vendor, business, organization, entity, group or individual, including a licensed
retail food establishment that provides prepared food at retail level.
c)	“Expanded polystyrene” (EPS) means and includes expanded polystyrene, which is a thermoplasticpetrochemical material utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by any number of techniques including,but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding, formmolding, and extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene). The term “polystyrene” also includespolystyrene that has been expanded or blown using a gaseous blowing agent into a solid foam (expandedpolystyrene (EPS)), and clear or solid polystyrene known as oriented polystyrene.
d) “Prepackaged food” means any properly labeled processed food, packaged to prevent any direct human
contact with the food product upon distribution from the manufacturer, and prepared at an approvedsource.
e)	“Prepared food” means food or beverages, which are serviced, packaged, cooked, chopped, sliced, mixed,brewed, frozen, squeezed or otherwise prepared. Prepared food does not include eggs, fish, meat, poultry,and foods containing these raw animal foods requiring cooking by the consumer as recommended by theFood and Drug Administration.
Prohibited Use of EPS-based Disposable Food Service Ware 
No food vendor shall use EPS disposable food service ware when providing prepared food. 
Exemptions 
a)	Prepackaged food is exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
b)	Polystyrene coolers and ice chests intended for reuse are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
27 Based on ordinances in Seattle, WA and San Mateo County, CA. See http://clerk.seattle.gov/~scripts/nph-brs.ex -
e?s3=&s4=122751&s5=&s1=&s2=&S6=&Sect4=AND&l=0&Sect2=THESON&Sect3=PLURON&Sect5=CBORY&Sect6=HI ­
TOFF&d=ORDF&p=1&u=%2F~public%2Fcbor1.htm&r=1&f=G  and http://www.cawrecycles.org/files/SMCounty_EPSord.pdf . 75 Request for an exemption 
Any food vendor may seek an exemption from the requirements of this chapter upon demonstrating that strict 
application of the requirements would cause undue hardship. 
a) An “undue hardship” shall be found in:
i)Situations unique to the food vendor where a suitable alternative does not exist for a specific application;and/or 
ii)Situations where no reasonably feasible available alternative exists to a specific and necessary container
prohibited by this chapter 
b) The exemption process shall be as follows:
i) The food vendor seeking an exemption shall submit a written exemption request to [relevant department]
ii) A written exemption request shall include all information and documentation necessary for the Director of
[relevant department] to make a finding of undue hardship 
iii) The Director of [relevant department] may require the applicant to provide additional information in order
to make a determination regarding the exemption application 
iv)Exemption decisions are effective immediately and are final and not subject to appealv) The Director of [relevant department] or his/her designee may grant an exemption for a period of up to one
year upon a finding that the food vendor seeking exemption has demonstrated that strict application of the specific requirement would cause undue hardship. 
c)	If a food vendor granted an exemption wishes to have the exemption extended, it must re-apply for theexemption prior to the expiration of the one year exemption period and demonstrate continued unduehardship. Extensions may be granted for intervals not to exceed one year.
Administrative Fine 
a)	A fine may be imposed upon findings made by the Director of [relevant division], or his or her designee, thatany food vendor has used EPS food service ware in violation of this Chapter.
b) Amount of fine:
	
i)a fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation;
	
ii)a fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation;
	iii)a fine not exceeding $500.00 for the third and subsequent violations;
	iv) each day that a food vendor uses EPS food service ware when providing prepared food shall constitute a
separate violation 
c) Notice of the fine shall be served on the food vendor. The notice shall contain an advisement of the right
to request a hearing before the Director of [relevant department] or his or her designee contesting theimposition of the fine. The grounds for the contest shall be either that (1) the food vendor did not usepolystyrene-based disposable food service ware when providing prepared food or (2) the food vendorwould have been granted an exemption under [relevant section] if the food vendor had applied for suchexemption. Said hearing must be requested within ten days of the date appearing on the notice of thefine. The decision by the Director of [relevant department] shall be based upon a finding that one or moreof the above listed grounds for a contest have been met and shall be a final administrative order, with noadministrative right of appeal.
Operative Date 
All of the requirements set forth in this Ordinance shall become operative on [effective date] 
76          
 3. Model Ordinance for Banning Single-use Carry-out Bags28 
AN ORDINANCE of the [insert name of jurisdiction] 
AMENDING [IF ORDINANCE IS AMENDING PRIOR LEGISLATION, INSERT REFERENCE] 
Legislative Purpose 
The [insert relevant legislative body] finds and determines that: 
a) 	 The use of single-use carry-out bags by consumers at retail establishments is detrimental to the environment, 
public health, and welfare. 
b) 	 The manufacture and distribution of single-use carry-out bags requires utilization of natural resources and 
results in the generation of greenhouse gas emissions. 
c) 	 Single-use carry-out bags contribute to environmental problems, including litter in storm drains, rivers and streams, and the ocean. 
d) 	 Single-use carry-out bags impose unseen costs on consumers, local governments, the state, and taxpayers, and constitute a public nuisance. 
The [insert relevant legislative body] does therefore find and declare that it should restrict the use of single-use carry-out bags. 
Definitions 
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
a)  “ASTM Standard” means the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)’s Standard Specification 
for Compostable Plastics D6400, as that standard may be amended from time to time. 
b) 	“Compostable Plastic Bag” means a plastic carry-out bag that conforms to at least the minimum standards of [insert relevant stats] labeling law, and meets current ASTM D6400 Standard Specifications for compostability, is labeled as meeting the ASTM Standard by a recognized third-party independent verification entity, such as the Biodegradable Product Institute, and is labeled “Compostable” on both sides of the bag either in green color lettering that is at least one inch in height, or as otherwise specified, or within a green color band that is at least one inch in height in order to be readily and easily identifiable. 
c) 	“Single-use carry out bag” means a bag other than a reusable bag provided at the check stand, cash 
register, point of sale or other point of departure, including departments within a store, for the purpose of transporting food or merchandise out of the establishment. “Single-use carry out bag” does not include bags without handles provided to the customer: (1) to transport prepared food, produce, bulk food, or meat from a department within the store to the point of sale; (2) to hold prescription medication dispensed from a pharmacy; or (3) to segregate food or merchandise that could damage or contaminate other food or merchandise when placed together in a reusable bag. 
d) 	“Department” means [relevant city department]. 
e) 	“Director” means the Director of [relevant city department]. 
f) 	“Food Establishment” means [food service establishment, as defined in relevant law] 
g) 	“Person” means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, partnership, or association. 
h) 	“Recyclable” means material that can be sorted, cleansed, and reconstituted using [city]’s available recycling collection programs for the purpose of using the altered form in the manufacture of a new product. Recycling does not include burning, incinerating, converting, or otherwise thermally destroying solid waste. 
i) 	“Recyclable Paper Bag” means a paper Checkout Bag that meets all of the following requirements: 
i) Is 100% recyclable, using the standards for [city]’s available curbside recycling collection program; 
28 Based on ordinances in San Francisco, CA and San Mateo County, CA. See http://www.amlegal.com/nxt/gateway.dll/Califor­
nia/environment/chapter17plasticbagreductionordinance?f=templates$fn=default.htm$3.0$vid=amlegal:sanfrancisco_ca  and 
http://www.cityofsanmateo.org/DocumentCenter/Home/View/37289 . 77 ii) Contains only post-consumer recycled fiber, and fiber from sources accredited by the Forest Stewardship 
Council or other independent certification organization, as approved by the Director. 
iii) 	 Contains a minimum of 40% post-consumer recycled content, and the Department may modify the 
requirements for recycled content by regulation adopted after a public hearing and at least 60 days’ notice, based upon environmental benefit, cost, and market availability; and 
iv) Displays the word “Recyclable” in a highly visible manner on the outside of the bag, and is labeled with 
the name of the manufacturer, the location (country) where manufactured, and the percentage of post-consumer recycled content in an easy-to-read size font. 
j) “Reusable Bag” means a carry-out bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for 
multiple reuse and meets all of the following requirements: 
i) 	 Has a minimum lifetime capability of 125 or more uses carrying 22 or more pounds over a distance of at least 175 feet; 
ii) Is capable of being washed so as to be cleaned and disinfected at least 100 times; 
iii) If made of plastic, is at least 2.25 mils thick; iv) Meets any standards for minimum recycled content established by regulation adopted by the 
Department after a public hearing and at least 60 days’ notice, based upon environmental benefit and 
market availability. 
v) 	 Garment bags that meet the above criteria shall be considered reusable even if they do not have handles. 
k) 	“Store” means a retail establishment or Food Establishment located within the geographical limits of [city]. A “retail establishment” includes any public commercial establishment engaged in the sale of personal consumer or household items to the customers who will use or consume such items. 
Mandatory Use of Recyclable, Reusable, and Compostable Carry-Out Bags 
a) 	 All Stores shall provide only the following as carry-out bags to consumers: Recyclable Paper Bags, and/or Compostable Plastic Bags, and/or Reusable Bags. 
b) 	 Violation of the requirements set forth in subsection (a) shall subject a Store to penalties set forth in 
[relevant section]
 
c) 	 Nothing in this section shall be read to preclude Stores from making reusable bags available for sale to customers. 
Carry-out Bag Charge 
a) 	 On or before [one year from implementation date], a Store may only make Recyclable Paper Bags, and/or Compostable Plastic Bags, and/or Reusable Bags available to customers if the retailer charges a minimum of ten cents. 
b) 	 On or before [two years from implementation date], a Store may only make Recyclable Paper Bags, and/or Compostable Plastic Bags, and/or Reusable Bags available to customers if the retailer charges a minimum of twenty-five cents. 
c) 	 Notwithstanding this section, no Store may make available for sale a Recyclable Paper Bag; a Compostable Plastic Bag; or a Reusable Bag unless the amount of the sale of such bag is separately itemized on the sale receipt. 
d) 	 Report 
i) 	 After [date], the Controller shall perform an assessment and review of the economic impacts on businesses, both large and small, of the Carry-out Bag Charge. Based on such assessment and review, the Controller shall submit an analysis to the [relevant legislative body]. The analysis shall be based on criteria deemed relevant by the Controller, but should include a survey of whether and how the Carry­out Bag Charge specifically has impacted businesses’ profits and losses. 
78 e) 	 Exemption 
i) 	 [Exemption from Carry-out Bag Charge for customers receiving supplemental food assistance, WIC and 
other public assistance programs, as applicable in relevant state/jurisdiction] 
ii) 	 A Store shall not charge the Carry-out Bag Charge required under subsection (a) for a Reusable Bag which meets the requirements of this Chapter and which is distributed to a customer without charge during a limited duration promotional event, not to exceed 12 days per year. 
f) 	 Waiver. Any owner or operator of a Store may petition the Director of the [relevant department] for a full or partial waiver of the requirements of this Section, for a period of up to one year, if the owner or operator can: 
i) Demonstrate that application of this Section would create undue hardship or practical difficulty for the 
Store not generally applicable to other stores in similar circumstances, or 
ii) 	 Establish that the business as a whole cannot, under the terms of this Section, generate a return that is commensurate with returns on investments in other enterprises having corresponding risks and is sufficient to attract capital. 
g) 	 Violations. Violations of this Section may be punished under the provisions of [relevant Section] 
Outreach and Implementation 
The Department’s responsibilities for implementing this Chapter include conducting outreach to stores, providing multi-lingual information to educate store employees and customers, and making available lists of vendors who sell Recyclable Paper, Compostable Plastic, or Reusable Bags. 
The Director, after a public hearing, may adopt and may amend guidelines, rules, regulations and forms to 
implement this Chapter. 
Enforcement and Penalties 
Any person who violates this Ordinance shall be guilty of an infraction. If charged as an infraction, upon conviction thereof, said person shall be punished by: 
1) a fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation,
	
2) a fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within the same year, and
	3) a fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within the same year.
	
Operative Date 
All of the requirements set forth in this Ordinance shall become operative on [effective date] OPTION: Operative 
dates for different types of Store may be staggered so that the program is phased-in over the first year of operation. 
79          
 4. Model Ordinance for Regulating Take-out Food Packaging29 
AN ORDINANCE of the [insert name of jurisdiction] 
AMENDING [IF ORDINANCE IS AMENDING PRIOR LEGISLATION, INSERT REFERENCE] 
Legislative Purpose 
The [name of governing body] finds that discarded packaging from foods and beverages prepared for immediate 
consumption constitutes a significant and growing portion of the waste in [name of jurisdiction]’s waste stream. Regulation of food and beverage packaging, therefore, is a necessary part of any effort to encourage a recyclable and compostable waste stream, thereby reducing the disposal of solid waste and the economic and environmental costs of waste management for the citizens of [jurisdiction] and others working or doing business in [name of jurisdiction]. 
The [name of governing body] further finds that plastic packaging is rapidly replacing other packaging material, 
and that some plastic packaging used for foods and beverages is nonreusable, nonreturnable, nonrecyclable, and noncompostable. 
The [name of governing body] also finds that the two (2) main processes used to dispose of discarded nonreusable, 
nonreturnable, and nonrecyclable and noncompostable plastic food and beverage packaging, are land filling and incineration, both of which should be minimized for environmental reasons. 
The [name of governing body] therefore finds that the minimization of nonreusable, nonreturnable, nonrecyclable, 
and noncompostable food and beverage packaging originating at retail food establishments and at events providing food and/or beverages within the [name of jurisdiction] is necessary and desirable in order to minimize the [city’s, county’s, town’s] waste stream, so as to reduce the volume of landfilled waste, to minimize toxic by-products of incineration, and to make our communities more environmentally sound places to live. 
Definitions 
As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings as defined in this section: 
a) 	 Packaging  shall mean and include food or beverage cans, bottles or containers used to package food and 
beverage products for distribution including glasses, cups, plates, serving trays, and to-go containers, but shall specifically exclude foods pre-packaged by the manufacturer, plastic knives, forks and spoons sold or intended for use as utensils and plastic films less than ten (10) mils in thickness. 
b) 	Environmentally acceptable packaging  shall mean and include any of the following: 
1) 	 Reusable and returnable packaging : Food or beverage containers or packages, such as, but not limited to, 
water bottles, growlers, milk containers and bulk product packaging that are capable of being refilled at a retail location or returned to the distributor for reuse at least once as a container for the same food or beverage; 
2) 	 Recyclable packaging : Packaging that is separable from solid waste by the generator or during collection 
for the purpose of recycling including glass bottles, aluminum cans and plastic food and beverage packaging that have robust recycling markets. For the purposes of this chapter, environmentally preferable plastic packaging includes the following plastic types: 
i) 	 Polyethylene Terephthalate (#1 PET or PETE); 
ii) 	 High Density Polyethylene (#2 HDPE); and 
iii) 	 Polypropylene (#5 PP). 
3) Compostable packaging : Packaging that is separable from solid waste by the generator or during 
collection for the purpose of composting. Compostable packaging must be made of paper, certified 
compostable plastics that meet ASTM D6400 or ASTM D6868 for compostability or other cellulose-based 
29 Based on proposed or passed ordinances in Minneapolis, MN, Seattle, WA, and San Francisco, CA. See http://www.min ­
neapolismn.gov/www/groups/public/@clerk/documents/webcontent/wcms1p-124792.pdf , http://clerk.seattle.gov/~scripts/ 
nph-brs.exe?s3=&s4=122751&s5=&s1=&s2=&S6=&Sect4=AND&l=0&Sect2=THESON&Sect3=PLURON&Sect5=CBORY&Sect6=HI ­
TOFF&d=ORDF&p=1&u=%2F~public%2Fcbor1.htm&r=1&f=G , and http://www.sfenvironment.org/sites/default/files/editor-uploads/ 
zero_waste/pdf/sfe_zw_food_service_waste_reduction_ordinance.pdf. 
80 packaging capable of being decomposed through composting or anaerobic digestion. 
c) Food establishment , as used in this chapter, means a food service business, including restaurant, store, shop, 
and sales outlet, as defined in section [insert reference to pertinent code] of the [insert name of jurisdiction] 
Code of Ordinances. 
Prohibitions and Duties 
a) 	 No person owning, operating or conducting a food establishment or any person or organization providing free food or beverage products within the [insert name of jurisdiction] pursuant to a permit or license, or in a manner which would require a permit or license, shall do or allow to be done any of the following within the [city, county, town]: Sell or convey at retail or possess with the intent to sell or convey at retail any food or beverage intended for immediate consumption contained, at any time at or before the time or point of sale, in packaging which is not environmentally acceptable packaging. The presence on the premises of the food establishment of packaging which is not environmentally acceptable packaging shall constitute a rebuttable presumption of intent to sell or convey at retail, or to provide to retail customers packaging which is not environmentally acceptable packaging; provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply to manufacturers, brokers or warehouse operators, who conduct or transact no retail food or beverage business. 
b) 	 Packaging used to contain food or beverages intended for immediate consumption consumed at the point of sale shall be considered environmentally acceptable packaging only when the food establishment provides consumers with an opportunity to recycle and/or appropriately manage compostable plastics and utilizes a qualified recycling and/or organics management system. 
1) A qualified recycling system shall have the following elements: 
i) A clear and verifiable process for separating recyclable packaging from discarded solid waste; and ii) 	 Collection and delivery of recyclable packaging to a recycling facility for processing in the same or 
similar manner as recyclable packaging collected in a municipally approved recycling program. 
2) 	A qualified organics management system shall have the following elements: 
i) A clear and verifiable process for separating organic materials from discarded solid waste; and ii) 	 Collection and delivery of organic materials to a food to people, food to animals, organics 
composting or anaerobic digestion facility in the same or similar manner as organic materials collected in a municipally approved organics management program 
Enforcement 
The [insert relevant city government department and division] shall have the duty and the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The license official shall also have authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Rules and Regulations 
The [insert relevant division] may, upon notice and hearing, promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter and protect the health of the public, including the development of exemptions for packaging for which there is no commercially available alternative. In promulgating such rules, the director of [insert relevant division] shall consider the legislative purpose provided in section [XX] of this chapter, and shall consult with the operators of affected food service establishments. 
Report to [Relevant Legislative Body] 
No later than [two years after effective date of legislation], the Director of [insert relevant department], in consultation with [city administrator or relevant official] and with input from members of the public, shall submit to the [relevant legislative body] a report recommending changes, if any, to this Chapter, including whether the ban imposed by this Chapter should be extended to other products, as supported by the report. If the Director recommends banning additional products, the report must include an estimate of the costs and benefits of compliance with a ban on additional products, including the increased costs to the City as well as to the City’s food service industry. 
81          
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  5. 	Model Ordinance Requiring Re-Usable Food Service Ware For Restaurants 
Serving Food And Beverages For On-Site Dining30 
AN ORDINANCE of the [insert name of jurisdiction] 
AMENDING [IF ORDINANCE IS AMENDING PRIOR LEGISLATION, INSERT REFERENCE] 
WHEREAS, according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the quantity of solid waste 
generated per capita in the U. S. increased from 2.68 pounds per day in 1960 to 4.38 pounds per day in 2012;31 
and 
WHEREAS, according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, packaging comprised 30% by 
weight of municipal solid waste in 2012 the United States;32 and 
WHEREAS, numerous studies demonstrate that reusable food service ware offers important 
environmental advantages over single use disposable products and that those benefits multiply with each use
33. 
WHEREAS, it has been demonstrated that switching to reusables saves food service businesses 
significant costs, even with dishwashing, energy and labor costs factored in.34 
NOW THEREFORE, the XXXX ordains as follows: 
Title XXX of [insert local code] is hereby amended by adding Chapter X, Section X, to read as follows: 
Section 1. Declaration of Findings Section 2. Title. This Chapter may be cited as the “Transition to Re-usable Food Service Ware at Dine-in Restaurants” 
provision 
Section 3. DEFINITIONS 
u “Restaurant” for the purposes of this ordinance, means a retail use eating place which serves prepared, 
ready to eat, cooked foods and/or drinks to customers for on-site immediate consumption on or off the premises and which has seating. It may be a limited restaurant, such as coffee store, juice bar, or bakery, or a full service restaurant. For the purposes of this ordinance, this includes fast food outlets, grocery stores with food service areas, bar/taverns with food preparation and service, and restaurants. It is not required to operate within an enclosed building so long as it is also a mobile food facility with outdoor seating/and or dining area. 
u “Dine-in” means food or beverages are served for consumption on the premises of a food service 
establishment 
u“To go” means food or beverages which are served for consumption outside the premises of a food service es 
tablishment u “Re-usable food service ware” shall mean plates, bowls, cups, glasses, and utensils that are designed to be 
used more than once and are generally considered to be non-disposable. 
30 This ordinance was drafted by California Clean Water Fund, with input from the Product Stewardship and the California 
Product Stewardship Council. 31 http://www.epa.gov/waste/nonhaz/municipal 
32 http://www.epa.gov/waste/nonhaz/municipal/pubs/2012_msw_dat_tbls.pdf  (See Table 9) 
33 See: Alliance for Environmental Innovation, Report of the Starbucks Coffee Company/Alliance for Environmental Innovation Joint Task Force, April 2000. This study found that for every 1 million beverages served in glass, instead of PET plastic cups, there would be a 98% reduction in energy use; both ceramic and glass cups reduced water pollution by 99 percent and ceramic reusables reduce water usage by 64 percent, ceramic re-usable reduced the amount of air particulates by 86% and greenhouse gases by 29 percent. VOCs could be reduced by 99.7 percent; ceramic reusables reduced solid waste by 86 percent; and glass resuables cut solid waste by 88 percent by weight. http://business.edf.org/files/2014/03/starbucks-report-april2000.pdf . See also, 
Environmental Evaluation of Single-Use and Reusable Cups. Nuria Garrido and M. Dolors Alvarez del Castillo Technical University of Catalonia. June 2007. The study concluded that the minimum number of uses of the reusable cup necessary for it to have a smaller environmental impact than the single-use cup is 10. As the number of uses of the reusable cup increases, the contribu­tion to all the environmental impact categories decreases. http://www.springerlink.com/content/x4658g3436577005/fulltext. 
pdf. 34 See Alliance for Environmental Innovation study (note iii) that found that when fully implemented, a re-usable cup and glass service program could save Starbucks more than $1 million per year in packaging costs (based on Starbucks size at the of 1999). 
82 u “Disposable food service ware fee ” shall mean an annual fee levied by the Department of Environmental 
Health that is deposited into a “re-usable food service ware transition account” 
u “Re-usable food service ware transition account “collects fees levied on the use of disposable food service 
ware for dine-in at a restaurant. Funds from the account are specifically designated to provide direct funding to restaurants for the transition from disposable to re-usable. Funds shall be available to cover costs associated with plumbing, electrical, and other construction necessary to install dishwashing capacity, as well as the costs associated with purchase of re-usable food service ware. 
Effective January 1, 20XX: 
A. 	 Restaurants shall be prohibited from selling or providing food and beverages for dine-in consumption using single use disposable plates, bowls, cups, containers, or utensils, except as provided by section C. Customers must be asked whether they want the food or beverage they have ordered to be eaten on the premises (i.e. “dine in”) or “to go.” If the purchased food or beverage is intended for dine-in, the food service establishment must serve the food and or beverage on re-usable food service ware. 
B. 	 The restaurant shall certify to the City/County [insert name of solid waste/recycling program] that it provides re-usable food service ware to serve dine-in meals. 
C. 	Restaurants that do not have on-site or off-site dishwashing capacity to sanitize re-usable food service ware in compliance with the California Health Code section may claim an exemption from (A) but will be required to pay a disposable food service ware fee of XXX$ on an annual basis to the City/County [insert name of solid waste/recycling program]. 
D. 	 Funds collected by the [insert City/County solid waste/recycling program] shall be deposited into the Reusable Food Service Ware Transition Account. The [insert City/County solid waste/recycling program] shall make these funds available to restaurants to cover the costs of installation of dishwashing equipment, re­usable food service ware, or the costs associated with the first year of participation in an off-site dishwashing service. The [insert City/County solid waste/recycling program] shall determine how to distribute funds through this program, but the express purpose of the distribution of funds shall be to assist restaurants in transitioning from using disposable food service ware for dine-in food service to using re-usable food service ware. 
83 