Marine litter: Progress in developing an integrated policy approach
in Scotland
Emily Hastingsa,n, Tavis Pottsb
aThe James Hutton Institute, Craigiebuckler, Aberdeen AB15 8QH, UK
bScottish Association for Marine Science, Oban, UK
article info
Article history:
Received 20 December 2012Received in revised form23 January 2013Accepted 29 January 2013
Available online 1 March 2013
Keywords:
Marine litter
Marine policyPolicy integrationScotlandabstract
Marine litter is a problem that undermines the Scottish Government’s vision for ‘clean, healthy, safe,
productive, biologically diverse marine and coastal environments, managed to meet the long term
needs of nature and people’. The impacts of marine litter extend to environmental, social and economicspheres but currently the understanding of effects is limited. It is clear however, that marine litter can
impact on a range of resources and ultimately threaten policy goals such as the Marine Strategy
Framework Directive (MSFD) and its focus on delivering a clean and healthy marine environment. TheScottish Government has initiated a process to advance a marine litter strategy as part of its response to
the MSFD. This paper draws upon the literature and practice of environmental policy integration to
identify opportunities and obstacles in the emerging policy response in Scotland. Ultimately, anymarine litter strategy for Scotland should be innovative and forward looking, coordinating amongst thevariety of sectors, users and instruments available —‘joining the dots’ to tackle the considerable
challenges in educating the public and contributing to a zero waste Scotland.
&2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The disposal of waste at sea and its accumulation on the coast
is not a new occurrence. However, the on-going shift towards the
use of more durable materials with increased residence time, and
an increasing interest in the protection of the seas, is pushing
marine litter up the political and public agenda. Combined with
high proﬁle reports such as incidences of oceanic garbage patches
[1], there is an augmented international drive to address the
problem of marine litter.
Marine litter can be deﬁned as manufactured or processed
solid material disposed of, or abandoned, either directly or
indirectly, in the marine and coastal environment. The majority
consists of plastics, and is highly persistent, often remaining in
the environment for centuries [2]. Marine litter originates from
both land- and sea-based activities. Land based sources include
rivers [3,4], sewerage overﬂows [5], ﬂy-tipping, wind-blown
waste, industry [6], poor municipal waste management, as well
as litter left by beachgoers [5]. Marine sources include both
commercial and recreational ﬁsheries [7]and shipping [3,8,9].
At the global scale, it has been estimated that the greatest
proportion of marine litter is from land-based sources, with
similar proportions at the UK level. In the UK, the MarineConservation Society [10] highlighted from their annual beach
clean surveys that 47% was from land based sources, 17% from
ﬁshing and shipping and a further 37% is non-sourced (where due
to the type or condition of the item, no clear source can be
identiﬁed). The latest survey in Scotland revealed 37.5% of
collected marine litter had originated from public sources, 29.6%
non-sourced, 20.5% sewage related waste, 8.9% from the ﬁshing
industry, 1.7% from shipping, 1.6% ﬂy-tipped and 0.2% medical
waste [10].
The studies show the predominant identiﬁable source of
marine litter is considered as ‘public’. ‘Public’ is a diffuse sourceof marine litter, encompassing many sub-source types such as
beach users and riverine and urban runoff. Litter in this category
can include food and drink packaging and smoking related waste.
Fisheries and sewage related waste are also noted for their high
proportions within the surveys. Marine litter associated with
ﬁsheries and aquaculture includes nets, ropes, buoys and cages.
These are often lost or released into the marine environment due
to the snagging of gear on topographical features [6]. The
discharge of untreated sewage due to ineffective waste treatment
facilities and the use of combined sewer overﬂows can result in
an inﬂux of related waste (cotton bud sticks, nappies, sanitary
products) into coastal waters [6]. Lesser quantities of litter are
recorded from offshore activities and shipping, including acciden-
tal loss due to adverse weather; the contents of approximately
10,000 cargo containers are lost worldwide each year in this
way [6]. The ability however, to identify a particular source orContents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/marpolMarine Policy
0308-597X/$ - see front matter &2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2013.01.024
nCorresponding author. Tel.: þ44 1224 395150.
E-mail address: emily.hastings@hutton.ac.uk (E. Hastings).Marine Policy 42 (2013) 49–55industry from an individual litter item is difﬁcult, depending on
the state of the litter item (weathering) or the possibility of
multiple sources.
There is a plethora of international, European and regional law
pertaining to the wider principles of sustainability and water
quality. Examples of these include the London Dumping Conven-
tion 1972; Bathing Water Directive 1976; the International
Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL)
73/78 Annex V 1988/1991; the Convention for the Protection of
the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic (OSPAR Con-
vention) 1992; and Port Reception Facilities Directive 2000.
Increasingly however, regulatory requirements on meeting envir-
onmental quality are accounting speciﬁcally for marine litter. The
most recent of these is the EU Marine Strategy Framework
Directive (MSFD), an integrated policy for the protection of the
marine environment [11]. The directive aims to address multiple
threats such as climate change, biodiversity loss, introduction of
alien species and pollution from land and ocean sources.
Like all ‘wicked problems’, marine litter is not an easy one to
solve. It can be considered a classical trans-boundary governance
problem as it crosses scales, sectors and social divisions [12].I ti s
a problem characterised by myriad drivers, from individual
responsibility to industry actions, from land and at sea. Litter
comes from a number of different sources and poses problems
across the economy, environment and society. There is no quick
ﬁx or easy solution, and this dynamic is one that has previously
undermined a successful policy response in the UK.
The Scottish Government has recently initiated a process to
advance a marine litter strategy as part of its response to the
MSFD. The wide spread and multi-actor nature of the marine
litter problem highlights that any policy response should incor-
porate environmental policy integration principles at its core to
address the multiple drivers. While the Scottish strategy is in itsinfancy, progress has been made in determining the extent of the
problem and how a marine litter strategy could coordinate, and
integrate, across a range of international, UK, and Scottish policy
contexts. This paper ﬁrstly summarises the key impacts upon the
environment, society and economy and highlights the extent of
the problem in Scotland. Secondly, the paper draws upon the
literature of environmental policy integration to identify oppor-
tunities and obstacles in the emerging policy response focused at
delivery in the Scottish context. It speciﬁcally aims to illuminate
the challenges inherent in delivering an integrated approach to
reducing marine litter that affects many sectors across national
jurisdictions, using data from a stakeholder workshop.
2. Impacts and extent of marine litter
The value of the maritime economy to Scotland is signiﬁcant.
In 2008 the core marine sectors contributed nearly £3.6 billion
(Gross Value Added), and a further £13.3 billion for oil and gas
extraction [13]. Nevertheless, policy governing the marine envir-
onment and its protection falls under the remit of many bodies,
and frequently no clear mechanisms exist for problems crossing
multiple jurisdictions such as marine litter. Recognising the
negative impacts of this situation and of marine litter is a ﬁrst
step in developing effective policy measures.
The problems and threats arising both directly and indirectly
from marine litter are extensive, and well documented [2,14–17],
including environmental, social and economic impacts. These
impacts are diverse, usually interconnected and thus harder to
mitigate as separate entities. Detrimental effects on marine life
typically include entanglement [9,18] and ingestion [19] reducing
quality of life, decreasing reproductive capability and ultimately
leading to death. Less emotive impacts include the potential formarine litter to act as a vector for non-native species [20,21],
damage to benthic habitats via smothering and anoxic conditions
[2,22], as well as wider ecosystem deterioration. The pressures of
marine litter add to other anthropological stressors in the marine
environment, such as over-ﬁshing, coastal development, ocean
acidiﬁcation and pollution events [2]. This amalgamation may
combine to cause extensive ecosystem deterioration, and reduce
the ecosystem’s capacity to withstand large perturbations in the
environment, such as the impacts of climate change.
Furthermore, marine litter can have wide spread social
impacts such as direct, short-term human health issues (e.g.
injuries, entanglement and navigational hazards) and indirect,
long-term impacts on quality of life (e.g. diminishing recreational
opportunities, loss of aesthetic value and loss of non-use value)
[22]. Despite the extensive impacts, the overall understanding of
these are limited, particularly the indirect and socio-economic
effects. There are incomplete data on the overall inﬂuence of
marine litter on society. It is clear, however, that there is an
abundance of economic impacts upon the raft of industries reliant
on our coastal and marine environment [6]. Of these, those with
direct economic impacts are the most obvious, from the expense
to local authorities responsible for clean-up activities, and the
impacts on tourism, to the loss of vessel activity as a result of
propeller or ﬁshing net fouling.
Figures from the literature provide a picture of the consider-
able economic impacts of marine litter. In a study focused on
Scotland by Mouat et al. [6], ﬁsheries were found to have
sustained economic impacts of £10 million/annum. Impacts on
aquaculture from litter were valued at more than £130,000/
annum. Data for other sectors such as oil and gas, agriculture,
recreational angling, sailing and tourism are not readily available,
making the full economic cost of the impacts complex. While
economic costing of ecosystem services is considered a relativelynew science, it is clear that litter can impact and deteriorate a
range of natural functions that provide on-going social and
economic beneﬁts. A study found that 85% of tourists and
residents would not visit a beach with more than two litter items
per metre and 97% would not go to a beach with 10 or more large
items of litter per metre [23]. This could have signiﬁcant impacts
on the geography of tourism, and on areas where tourism forms
the mainstay of the local economy.
It is apparent therefore, at the level of the individual, that the
costs associated with marine litter are often borne by parties
different from those causing the problem. There is insufﬁcient
liability to those responsible, and a lack of incentives to reduce
littering practice. Expressed differently —the polluter, whether it
is sectors or individuals, does not pay. This is compounded by a
lack of enforcement mechanisms and actions. Adding to this
complexity is the fact that marine litter comes from a diverse
array of sources —from land and sea, from individuals, commu-
nities, and industries across a variety of spatial scales. The
resolution of these problems requires considerable policy innova-
tion and the use of a portfolio of traditional command and control
instruments, market based instruments, education and awareness
raising initiatives. Indeed, marine litter can be construed as a
‘wicked problem’ where no clear solution can be found to a
problem that crosses scales and interests. Addressing it therefore
requires investment in long term social change and policy
innovation across jurisdictions.
Monitoring is often seen as integral to solving the marine litter
issue; without it there would be little indication of which policy
interventions are having an impact. Baseline data for Scotland are
limited mostly to coastal surveys of beached marine litter. Marine
Conservation Society (MCS) data show in 2011, a total of 21,888
items of litter were collected on selected Scottish beaches and
offer insights to the originating source [10].E. Hastings, T. Potts / Marine Policy 42 (2013) 49–55 50Download	English	Version:
https://daneshyari.com/en/article/7491578
Download	Persian	Version:
https://daneshyari.com/article/7491578
Daneshyari.com