Proceedings of the International Research Workshop on the 
Occurrence, Effects, and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris
NOAA Marine Debris Program
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
U.S. Department of Commerce
Technical Memorandum NOS-OR&R-30
January 2009   Mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute 
endorsement or recommendation for their use by the United States government.  
 
 
 
            
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH 
WORKSHOP ON THE OCCURRENCE, EFFECTS, AND 
FATE OF MICROPLASTIC MARINE DEBRIS
September 9-11, 2008University of Washington Tacoma, Tacoma, WA, USA
Courtney Arthur , Joel Baker , and Holly Bamford  (eds.)
  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
  Office of Response & Restoration  NOAA Marine Debris Division  Silver Spring, MD 20910, USA
  The Center for Urban Waters
  University of Washington Tacoma  Tacoma, WA 98402, USA
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
Technical Memorandum NOS-OR&R-30January 2009
 
The suggested citation for this document is as follows: 
Arthur, C., J. Baker and H. Bamford (eds). 2009. Proceedings of the International Research  
      Workshop  on the Occurrence, Effects and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris. Sept 9-11,  
       2008.  NOAA Technical Memorandum NOS-OR&R-30.
For copies of this document, please contact:
NOAA Marine Debris DivisionN/ORR, SSMC-41305 East-West HighwaySilver Spring, MD 20910
www.MarineDebris.noaa.gov2 1 1
1
2TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
 
PREFACE ............................................................................................................................  4 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS ......................................................................................................  5 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...................................................................................................  7 
 
PRESENTATIONS .............................................................................................................  18 
     Opening Remarks ......................................................................................................... 19 
Keynote Address – How concerned should we be about microplastics?   
Dr. R.C. Thompson ...............................................................................................  22 
 
Session I: Occurrence of small p lastic debris in the marine environment ..................  77 
Fate of plastics debris in the marine environment  
Dr. Anthony Andrady ..................................................................................  78 
Microplastics as accumulators and sources of persistent organic pollutants in marine food webs: how significant?   
Dr. Alan Mearns ......................................................................................... 107 
The oceanography, biology, and fisheries of the North Pacific  
Dr. Michael Seki ........................................................................................  162 
Small plastic debris and plankton: perspectives from NOAA plankton sampling programs in Northeast Pacific ecosystems  
Dr. Miriam Doyle ....................................................................................... 186 
 Session II: Impact of small plastic debris on the marine environment .....................  226 
Foolish fulmars and their contribution to ecological quality  
Dr. Jan A. van Franeker .............................................................................  227 
Incidence of marine debris ingestion in seabirds from Midway Atoll and Heard 
Island  
Dr. Heidi J. Auman ....................................................................................  254 
Ingestion of microplastics by marine invertebrates  
Dr. Richard Thompson ............................................................................... 295 
Translating scientific findings into action: California’s response to plastics in the environment  
Dr. Stephen Weisberg ................................................................................  326 
 Session III: Impacts of small plastic debris exposure to persistent organic pollutants................................................................................................................................... 351 
E
ffect of sorbent particulate amendments on PCB bioavailability in sediments  
Dr. Upal Ghosh ..........................................................................................  352 
International Pellet Watch: Global distribution of persistent organic pollutants 
(POPs) in marine plastics and their potential threat to marine organisms  
Dr. Hideshige Takada ................................................................................  371 
Microplastic -pollutant interactions and their implications in contaminant transport 
to organisms  
Dr. Emma Teuten .......................................................................................  429  
 
Session IV: Effect of oceanic small plastic debris on biogeochemical cycling of POPs................................................................................................................................... 458 
Role of microplastics on transport and fate of POPs  
Dr. Rainer Lohmann ..................................................................................  459 
Wrap -up: Consequenc es and challenges of microplastics in the world’s oceans  
Dr. Joel Baker ............................................................................................  510 
 
APPENDICES ..................................................................................................................  518 
A.W orkshop Agenda ................................................................................................. 519 
B. Charge to Breakout Groups .................................................................................. 521 
C. Workshop Participants  ......................................................................................... 522 
D. G roup Photograph ................................................................................................  528 
 PREFACE  
 
Welcome to the proceedings of the first International Research Workshop on the 
Occurrence, Effects and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris  held September 9 -11, 2008 
on the University of Washington Tacoma campus in Tacoma, Washington, USA.  These proceedings  include an overall summary of the workshop sessions, the participant points 
of agreement, and suggested research initiatives to move the science of understanding the impacts of microplastics on the marine environment forward. This invitation only workshop was a joint effort between the University of Washington Tacoma and the 
NOAA Marine Debris Program.   
 The purpose of the workshop was to bring together environmental research  scientists 
from around the world to discuss the  impacts of microplastic interactions and ingestion to 
marine species , the connection with contaminant uptake by organisms, and to outline the 
potential next steps in microplastic research. The workshop format combined presen tations, breakout groups, and participant discussions during two days of  meetings . 
Thirty two individuals participated in the workshop, repr esenting academic, industrial, 
private, policy and governmental sectors.  Fourteen oral presentations included research 
on such broad -ranging topics as the oceanography of the Nort h Pacific, the ingestion of 
microplastics by marine invertebrates, and persistent organic pollutants in marine plastic debris.  All fourteen presentations are included here, with abstracts and slides as deemed appropriate by the presenters.   
 Sessions wer e organized to focus on four main research topics : (1) the occurrence of 
small plastic debris in the marine environment, (2) the impacts of small plastic debris on 
the marine environment, (3) the impacts of small plastic debris exposure to persistent 
organic pollutants, and (4) the effect of oceanic microplastics on biogeochemical cycling 
of persistent organic pollutants.  A review  paper , currently in preparation for 
consideration of publication, was distributed to participants before the workshop to 
captur e the overarching themes of these four sessions, and to ensure all participants were 
equally familiar with each session topic .  One final session included three breakout 
groups: sources and sinks of plastics in the marine environment, effects of microplast ic 
debris on marine organisms, and the role of microplastics in POP cycling and exposure.  The workshop closed with presentations from each breakout group that summarized discussions on the state of the science, key research gaps and potential research initiatives .  Following the two day workshop was a half day meeting of the Steering 
Committee consisting of the participant breakout leads, session rapporteurs , and the 
workshop organizers to help consolidate the information and draft the final workshop proceedings.     Appendices include the workshop agenda, the guiding document for breakout groups, a list of workshop participants and contact information, and a photograph of participants.  These proceedings are meant to be a synopsis of the workshop and its f indings.  
Presenters have sole responsibility for the views and data in their presentations.   The content of presentations and summaries from breakout sessions does not necessarily reflect the views of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration nor th ose of 
the Un iversity of Washington Tacoma.  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
 
Summary of the International Research Workshop on the Occurrence, Effects, and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris  
 
 Courtney Arthur
1, Joel Baker2*, Holly Bamford1, Nir Barnea3, Rainer Lohmann4, Kris 
McElwee5, Carey Morishige5, Richard Thompson
 6 
1NOAA Mar ine Debris Division , Silver Spring, MD, USA.  2The Center for Urban Waters, U niversity 
of Washington Tacoma, Tacoma, WA, USA.  3NOAA Marine Debris Division , Seattle, WA, 
USA.  4University of Rhode Island, Graduate School in Oceanography, Narragansett, RI, 
USA.  5NOAA Marine Debris Division , Honolulu, HI, USA.  6University of Plymouth, Plymouth, 
Devon, UK.   
*
 To whom correspondence should be addressed.  
 
 Executive Summary  
Are microplastics a problem in the marine environment?  This wa s the key question 
investigated  at the microplastic marine debris research workshop.  Participants examined 
information on a variety of topics that addressed sources, transport, and possible impacts 
of microplastic  marine  debris.  When planning this workshop, it was  sought to br ing 
together leading scientists investigating microplastics as well as those with expertise in related fields.  Very little research directly focusing on sources and levels of microplastics in the marine environment has been published, and even less publis hed 
research addresses the impacts of microplastics on marine ecosystem s.  Th is workshop 
opened the dialog among scientists in this field and took a comprehensive look at each component of the issue: sources and occurrences of microplastics, impacts of microplastics on the marine environment, and chemistry of microplastics including their 
ability to sorb and leach contaminants in the marine environment.      
I.  Workshop Summary 
  
 
Session I .  Occurrence of small plastic debris in the marine environment  
Session I presentations covered a broad overview of microplastics in the environment; the 
fate of plastic debris in the environment ; potential approaches to identifying impacts on 
marine food webs;  the oceanography of the North Pacific Ocean;  the interaction of 
oceanography, biology and fisheries ; and how these factors may affect movement of 
microplastics.  Additionally, the results of plankton survey cruises in the eastern  North 
Pacific that incidentally  captured microplastics ( e.g., California Cooperative Oc eanic 
Fisheries Investigations) were discussed (Doyle  2009) .  These presentations gave an 
extensive  overview of the problem of documenting occurrences , especially in the open 
ocean.  No research has examined microplastics in deep ocean sediments, and most has 
only – quite literally – scooped the surface of the ocean looking for plastics.  Though many  plastics are buoyant, many other factors play a role in the “life cycle” of a piece of 
plastic in the ocean.  Sinking may occur due to biofouling, and plastics  may eventually 
settle into sediments.  The fouled microplastics may be eaten, the biofilm consumed, and 
the remaining undigested plastic packaged into fecal matter.  Oceanographic factors are very important controls of the movement and weathering of plast ic particles, as is the 
chemical composition and durability of the plastics (Andrady et al.  1998; Pichel et al.  
2007).  It is likely that nearly all of the plastic that has ever entered the environment still occurs as polymers and very little or any plastic fully degrades in the marine environment (Andrady  2009).  Estimates of amount of macro - and microplastic in the oceans, both in 
absolute quantities and relative to plankton, are highly uncertain due to the lack of consistent, verified sampling and analyt ical methods (Carpenter et al.  1972; Colton et al.  
1974; Day and Shaw 1987; Moore et al.  2001; Thompson et al.  2004). A risk assessment 
framework was applied to the microplastics issue in an effort to enhance discussion on the best practices to further the  science of microplastics (Mearns 2009).  This first session 
framed the complex issues surrounding the occurrence and sources of microplastics for the workshop participants, and set the stage for discussion to identify information gaps and needed studies.    
 
Session II . Impacts of small plastic debris on the marine environment  
Session II highlighted the paucity of data linking microplastic debris to demonstrated 
impacts on the marine environment.  Quite a bit of research has focused on larger plastic items  that are ingested by seabirds during oceanic foraging trips, but the se pieces are 
greater than 10 cm along the longest dimension and too large to be considered 
“microplastics” ( e.g., Auman et al.  1997; Baltz and Morejohn 1976; Fry et al.  1987; 
Kenyon and Kridler 1969;  Pettit et al.  1981; Ryan 1988;  van Franeker et al.  2004, 2005).  
Research on northern fulmars, albatross, and other seabirds was presented at the workshop. S ome connections were drawn between ingestion of microplastics and seabird 
death, but overall the impact on entire seabird populations is either unknown or not 
considered to be large enough to warrant further investigation at this time (Auman 2009; Mallory et al.  2006; van Franeker 2009).  One presentation given in this session 
discussed the  results of a laboratory study that surveyed the ability of several marine 
invertebrates to ingest microplastics . The lugworms, amphipods, barnacles, and mussels 
all were capable of ingesting and passing microplastics through their digestive systems, even though each has a different mode of feeding and particle selection (Browne et al.  
2008; Thompson et al.  2004). Another presentation in this session stressed a 
comprehensive and scientific approach to the microplastics issue in order to give policymakers th e best information possible on the current status of microplastics 
(Weisman 2009) .  Data that conclusively demonstrate negative impacts of microplastics 
on the marine environment are not available.  This is probably the largest and most critical gap to fill.  Research into collection methods, species impacts, and removal 
methods should focus on potential microplastics hotspots.      Session III . Impacts of small plastic debris exposure to persistent organic pollutants  
(POPs)  
Session III provided an overview  of the interaction of microplastics with persistent 
organic pollutants (POPs) .  A synopsis of organic pollutant behavior in the environment 
was presented, including the process of adding highly sorptive particles to contaminated 
sediments as a remediation  technique (Ghosh 2009).  Two  presentations detailed the 
occurrence and pote ntial implications of POP s sorbed to plastics (Takada  2009; Teuten 
2009).  In  some areas, the pollutants sorbed to plastics mirror the concentrations of these 
pollutants found in m ussels from the same areas (Takada 2009).  In a laboratory 
environment, phenanthrene was sorbed from dosed sediments to microplastics and in a separate experiment, ingestion of microplastics was documented in three species of sediment -dwelling invertebrate s (Teuten et al.  2007; Thompson et al.  2004).  To date, 
only a few types of plastic polymers and a few types of organic pollutants have been examined (Endo et al.  2005; Karapanagioti and Klontza 2008; Mato et al.  2001; Rios et 
al. 2007; Teuten et al.  2007).  The specificity of pollutant and plastic interactions warrant 
further research into the ability of plastics to not only sorb contaminants from the environment, but also leach contaminants to the marine environment and to organisms upon ingestion.   
 
Session IV . Effects of marine microplastic debris on the biogeochemical cycling of 
persiste nt organic pollutants  
Session IV reviewed the global cycling of persistent organic pollutants in marine 
environments, focusing on the implications of microplastics sorbing POPs and leaching 
contaminants to the marine environment.  Based on available information, it seems unlikely that the amount of microplastics  in the marine environment  is currently large 
enough to be an important geochemical reservoir for POPs, as rese arch was presented 
that pointed to a much stronger binding of organic pollutants to the more abundant black carbon than to plastic polymers (Lohmann  2009).  However , depending on the amount of 
microplastics and their life cycle in the oceans, it is possibl e that these sorptive properties 
could influence parts of POPs ’ biogeochemical cycles.  Attention must also be paid to the 
scale of the system; small scale marine environments may differ from the global perspective.  Determining the mobility of sorbed poll utants and of labile plastic 
components is key to addressing the risk that microplastics pose to food webs and biogeochemical cycles  on both regional and global scales. 
  
II.  Findings  
 After the workshop sessions, a Steering Committee, which consisted of the leaders of the 
breakout groups, members of the NOAA Marine Debris Program, and the meeting coordinators, met to review  the information exchanged and discussed at the workshop 
and to write the Executive Summary.  The workshop participants agreed  that 
microplastics may pose problems in the marine environment based on the following:  (1) the documented occurrence of microplastics in the marine environment, (2) the long 
residence times of these particles (and, therefore, the ir likely buildup in the future), and 
(3) their demonstrated ingestion by marine organisms.   Microplastics are present in the marine environment, originate from a variety of sources, and are persistent in the marine environment (Andrady et al . 1998).  Impacts  of microplastics to organisms and the 
environment are largely unknown.  The ability for plastics to transport contaminants has been documented, but the specifics of sorption and leaching are not fully understood (Endo et al.  2005; Karapanagioti and Klontza 2008; Mato et al.  2001; Rios et al.  2007; 
Teuten et al.  2007).   It is difficult to determine how large an impact microplastics might 
have as sources or sinks of these pollutants to the oceans.   Altogether, the science suggests that microplastics deserve further scrutiny in the laboratory and in the field.  Collaborations should be utilized, and research is needed to (1) determine a “ life cycle ” 
of microplastics for different marine environments, and (2) assess the ecosystem -level 
impacts of microplastics on the marine environment.  Only then will it be possible for the best science to inform management decisions for the remediation and prevention of microplastic pollution in the marine environment.   
 
Key Issue #1.  Sources of microplastics to the marine environment  
Points of agreement 
 
Definition of microplastics.
  The Workshop participants defined microplastics as 
plastic particles smaller than 5 mm.   
While  there is no requirement for a “lower bound”  in size, as a practical matter 
defining microplastics as those that range between 5mm and 333μm recognizes the common use of 333μm mesh neuston nets commonly used in the field to 
capture plankton and floating debris.  Smaller (1.6μm ) particles have been 
detected, but no standard procedure for sampling these in seawater has been developed (Ng and Obbard 2006). The  maximum size was chosen to focus the 
microplastics discussion on possible ecological effects other than physical blockage of gastrointestinal tracts.  Though “micro” infers the need for  
microscopy to view these plastic pieces , due to the early state of research the 
Steering Committee chose not to exclude visible components of the small plastic spectrum and thus set the upper limit at 5mm.   Perhaps when the science 
advances, “small plastics” that can be seen without the aid of micr oscopy will be 
assigned to a separate category and only microscopic polymer fragments will be included as “microplastics .” 
 
Sources of microplastics.   An important outcome of the workshop is that there are 
two main types of sources of microplastics.  Borrowing terminology from atmospheric sciences, “primary ” microplastic sources are those in which 
microplastics are intentionally produced either for direct use or as precursors to other products.  Examples include pre -production plastic pellets, industrial 
abrasives, exfoliants , plastics used in rotomilling,  and other consumer product uses.  “Secondary” microplastics are formed in the environment from breakdown 
of larger plastic material, especially marine debris. The rate of production of 
secondary microplastics likely depends on characteristics of the plastic, the extent of weathering, and on the energetics of the local environment.  
Key information gaps  
The relative importance of primary and secondary sources of microplastics to the marine environment is unknown. It is important to begin addressing this gap in order to mitigate and eventually prevent the input of microplastics into the marine environment, keeping in mind that control strategies will differ by source (e.g., disintegrating plastic debris vs. s pillage of pre -production plastic pellets).  
Obviously, the absolute and relative magnitudes of these source types will vary considerably in space and time.  
 The physical and chemical composition of primary microplastics and their production volumes has not been cataloged in a way that allows their potential importance to be estimated.   Weathering characteristics of primary microplastics, especially release of component chemicals, are largely unstudied.  
 Predicting the rate of secondary microplastic production is very difficult, as no systematic study of the disintegration processes of microplastics under realistic conditions has been conducted.  At present there are no methods to characterize microplastic particles by source location, although initial efforts to characterize particles by polymer type using 
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT -IR) are promising (Thompson et al.  
2004).  
Next s teps 
 
Complete an inventory of primary microplastic production and use.  This inventory should catalog production by region ( e.g., North America), by 
composition, and by use ( e.g., abrasives, consumer products, rotomilling). 
 Complete an inventory of secondary plastic production and release to the marine environment.   
 
Key Issue #2.  Measuring micropla stics in the marine environment  
Points of agreement  
 
At present, progress is limited by the lack of consistent methods to collect, isolate, identify , and quantify microplastic particles in marine samples (water, sediments, and organisms).  Methods to consistently anal yze and report data are also 
required. 
 Initial measurements of microplastics levels in the marine environment are too sparse to make general statement s about spatial distributions or temporal trends. 
 
Key information gaps  
Methods to isolate microplastics  from surface waters (net tows, filters), 
sediments, and organisms are desperately needed before further progress can be made in this field.  Current methods are tedious and labor -intensive and may be 
biased towards microplastics that are clearly different  from the surrounding 
natural particles (Thompson et al.  2004).  These  methods likely underestimate 
levels of smaller and neutrally colored microplastics.  
 There has not been any attempt to compare or intercalibrate methods used by the very few research gr oups around the world measuring microplastics in the  marine  
environment.  
Next steps  
 
Further evaluate, standardize, and compare s ampling and analytical methods 
among independent laboratories.  Conduct a n initial investigation in which 
surface waters, sedi ments, and native deposit - and filter -feeding organisms are 
collected from two or more likely “microplastic hot spots ” and exchanged 
between laboratories .  Such a study would lead to improved and standardized 
methods, which could then be expanded to a larger interlaboratory comparison exercise.  
 Where possible, add microplastic measurements to existing and ongoing plankton 
surveys, especially in coastal areas.  
  
 
Key Issue #3.  Routes of exposure and potential vulnerabilities  
Points of agreement  
 
Studies by  R. C. Thompson, University of Plymouth, and colleagues demonstrate 
that microplastic particles are ingested by deposit -feeding benthos and by filter -
feeding mussels, and that microplastics can be assimilated within the mussel (Browne et al.  2008; Thompson et al.  2004). 
 Marine organisms that ingest particles of the size range of microplastics are the most vulnerable to potential impacts and should be the focus of initial studies.  
Key information gaps  
To date, only one study has examined the possible inte ractions between marine 
zooplankton and microplastics  (Andrady 2009) . In a laboratory study presented at 
the workshop, Andrady and colleagues showed ingestion of 20μ m polyethylene 
fragments by the krill species Euphasia pacifica.  To date, no studies have examined microplastic interactions between larval fish or  
pelagic tunicates,  many of which  inhabit the sea -surface microlayer, and 
microplastics.  These interactions may be especially important to those species that utilize coastal habitats for spawning.  
 
Next steps  
 
Based on known behaviors, identify marine species or life stages that would likely be most vulnerable to microplastic exposure. 
 
Since there are a very large number of possible combinations of particle -feeding 
species and microplastic types, focus initial exposure studies on field studies in 
locations that are  likely “microplastic hotspots”  and are habitat for vulnerable 
species and sensitive life stages.   Document whether microplastics are ingested by 
these species under field conditions.   
 
Key Issue #4.  Effects of microplastics on marine organisms  
Points of agreement  
 
Possible effects include three broad modes of action:  (1) physical blockage or damag e of feeding appendages or digestive tract, (2) leaching of plastic 
component chemicals into organisms after digestion, and (3) ingestion and accumulation of sorbed chemicals by the organism.  All of these effects require that the microplastic particles be  ingested. 
 Microplastics as defined here (<5mm) are not likely to cause  widespread  
ingestion -related effects on large organisms ( e.g., birds, marine mammals), 
certainly relative to the well -documented impacts of larger marine plastics.  
 
Key information gaps  
Dose -response relationships between specific types of microplastics and 
vulnerable marine species or life stages do not yet exist.  Protocols for conducting realistic exposure experiments of microplastics in 
laboratory toxicity studies are needed. 
 Next steps   
Scale direct  toxicity studies to levels of microplastic particles observed in 
hotspots, using likely vulnerable organisms as described above. 
 
 
 Key Issue  #5.  Roles of microplastics on the cycling of persistent organic pollutants 
(POPs)  
Points of agreement  
 
At current levels in the open ocean, microplastic s are unlikely to be an important 
global geochemical reservoir for historically released POPs such as PCB, dioxins, 
and DDT.   It is not clear if microplastics play a larger role as chemical reser voirs 
on smaller scales.   
 
POPs have a high affinity for plastic in seawater.  This is the basis for several POP sampling techniques, including passive sampling.  While this high affinity results in elevated POP concentrations on microplastic particles, these POPs may not be readily bioavailable. 
 Key information gaps  
Very little is known about the chemical composition and rates of leaching of integral plastic components  in seawater.  It is not possible, therefore, to judge 
whether emission of primary mic roplastics is a significant source of, for example, 
plasticizers or flame retardants to the world’s oceans.  
 While microplastics accumulate POPs and some organisms ingest microplastics, the net effect of this on transfer of POPs into marine organisms is unclear.  On one hand POP ingestion is increased, but it is not clear under what physiological conditions plastic -associated POPs would be assimilated by marine organisms  
upon ingestion of plastics. 
 Next s teps 
 
Based on the inventory of primary microplastic  production (see Key Issue #1, 
next steps ), conduct studies of  integral plastic  component leaching in seawater to 
enable estimates of component loadings to the marine environment.  Systematically study the  role of microplastic ingestion in POP  exposure (in both 
the water column and sediment) with a strategically selected series of 
microplastics (varying in magnitude of affinity for POPs), set of POPs (with varying aqueous solubilities), and organisms (filter feeding and deposit feeding).  Interpret results from these studies using existing pharmacokinetic models that 
account for ingestion rates and assimilation efficiencies.  
  
  
Andrady, A. (2009).  “Fate of Plastics Debris in the Marine Environment.”  Presentation 
(and personal c ommunication  to J. Baker) IN: Arthur, C., J. Baker, and H. 
Bamford (eds).  2009.  Proceedings of the International Research Workshop on 
the Occurrence, Effects, and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris. Sept 9 -11, 2008.  
NOAA Technical Memorandum NOS -OR&R -30. References  
Andrady, A. L., S. H. Hamid, X. Hu and A. Torikai (1998). "Effects of increased solar 
ultraviolet radiation on materials." Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology 
B: Biology
Auman, H. (2009).  “Incidence of marine debris ingestion in seabirds from Midway Atoll 
and Heard Island.”  IN: Arthur, C., J. Baker, and H. Bamford (eds).  2009.  Proceedings of the International Research Workshop on the Occurrence, Effects, and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris. Sept 9 -11, 2008.  NOAA Technical 
Memorandum NOS- OR& R-30.  46(1 -3): 96 -103. 
Auman, H. J., J. P. Ludwid, J. P. Giesy and T. Colborn (1997). Plastic ingestion by 
Laysan Albatross chicks on Sand Island, Midway Atoll, in 1994 and 1995. 
Albatross Biology and Conservation
Baltz, D. M. and G. V. Morejohn (1976). "Evidence from seabirds of plastic particle 
pollution off central California." . G. R. a. d. Gales, Surrey Beatty & 
Sons, Chipping Norton. 
Western Birds
Browne, M. A., A. Dissanayake, T. S. Galloway, D. M. Lowe and R. C. Thompson 
(2008).  "Ingested Microscopic Pla stic Translocates to the Circulatory System of 
the Mussel, Mytilus edulis (L)."  7: 111-112. 
Environmental Science and Technology
Carpenter, E. J., S. J. Anderson, G. R. Harvey, H. P. Miklas and B. B. Peck (1972). 
"Polystyrene Spherules in Coastal Wa ters."  42(13): 
5026-5031. 
Science
Colton, J. B., Jr., F. D. Knapp and B. R. Burns (1974). "Plastic Particles in Surface 
Waters of the Northwestern Atlantic."  178(4062): 749-750. 
Science
Day, R. H. and D. G. Shaw (1987). "Patterns in the Abundance of Pelag ic Plastic and Tar 
in the North Pacific Ocean, 1976-1985."   185(4150): 491-497. 
Marine Pollution Bulletin
Doyle, M. (2009).  “Small Plastic Debris and Plankton: Perspectives from NOAA 
Plankton Sampling Programs in Northeast Pacific Ecosystems.”  IN: Arthur, C ., J. 
Baker, and H. Bamford (eds).  2009.  Proceedings of the International Research Workshop on the Occurrence, Effects, and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris. Sept 9 -11, 2008.  NOAA Technical Memorandum NOS- OR&R -30.  18(6B): 311-
316. 
Endo, S., R. Takizawa, K. Okuda, H. Takada, K. Chiba, H. Kanehiro, H. Ogi, R. 
Yamashita and T. Date (2005). "Concentration of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in beached resin pellets: Variability among individual particles and regional differences." 
Marine Pollution Bulletin
Fry, D. M., S. I. Fefer and L. Sileo (1987). "Ingestion of plastic debris by Laysan 
Albatrosses and Wedge -tailed Shearwaters in the Hawaiian Islands."  50(10): 1103-1114. 
Marine 
Pollution Bulletin  18(6, Supplement 2): 339-343. Ghosh, U. (2009).  “Effect of sorbent particul ate amendments on PCB bioavailability in 
sediments.”  IN: Arthur, C., J. Baker, and H. Bamford (eds).  2009.  Proceedings 
of the International Research Workshop on the Occurrence, Effects, and Fate of 
Microplastic Marine Debris. Sept 9 -11, 2008.  NOAA Technical Memorandum 
NOS -OR&R -30. 
Karapanagioti, H. K. and I. Klontza (2008). "Testing phenanthrene distribution properties 
of virgin plastic pellets and plastic eroded pellets found on Lesvos island beaches (Greece)." 
Marine Environmental Research
Kenyon, K. W. and E. Kridler (1969). "Laysan Albatrosses Swallow Indigestible 
Matter."  65(4): 283-290. 
The Auk
Lohmann, R. (2009).  “Role of microplastics on transport and fate of POPs.”   IN: Arthur, 
C., J. Baker, and H. Bamford (eds).  2009.  Proceedings of the International Research Workshop on the Occurrence, Effects, and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris. Sept 9-11, 2008.  NOAA Technical Memorandum NOS- OR&R -30.  86(2): 339 -343. 
Mallory, M. L., G. J. Roberston and A. Moenting (2006). "Marine plastic debris in 
northern fulmars from Davis Strait, Nunavut, Canada." 
Marine Pollution Bulletin
Mato, Y., T. Isobe, H. Takada, H. Kanehiro, C. Ohtake and T. Kaminuma (2001). 
"Plastic Resin Pellets as a Transport Medium for Toxic Chemicals in the Marine Environment."  
52(7): 813-815. 
Environmental Science and Technology
Mearns, A. (2009 ).  “Microplastics as accumulators and sources of persistent organcic 
pollutants in marine food webs: how significant?”  IN: Arthur, C., J. Baker, and H. Bamford (eds).  2009.  Proceedings of the International Research Workshop on the Occurrence, Effects, and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris. Sept 9 -11, 2008.  
NOAA Technical Memorandum NOS -OR&R -30.  35(2): 318-324. 
Moore, C. J., S. L. Moore, M. K. Leecaster and S. B. Weisberg (2001). "A Comparison 
of Plastic and Plankton in the North Pacific Central Gyre." 
Marine Pollution 
Bulletin
Ng, K. L. and J. P. Obbard (2006). "Prevalence of microplastics in Singapore's coastal 
marine environment."  42(12): 1297-1300. 
Marine Pollution Bulletin
Pettit, T. N., G. S. Grant and G. C. Whittow (1981). "Ingestion of Plastics by Laysan 
Albatross."  52(7): 761-767. 
The Auk
Pichel, W. G., J. H. Churnside, T. S. Veenstra, D. G. Foley, K. S. Friedman, R. E. 
Brainard, J. B. Nicoll, Q. Zheng and P. Clemente- Colon (2007). "Marine debris 
collects within the North Pacific Subtropical Convergence Zone."  98(4): 839-841. 
Marine 
Pollution Bulletin
Rios, L. M., C. Moore and P. R. Jones (2007). "Persistent organic pollutants carried by 
synthetic polymers in the ocean environment."  54(8): 1207-1211. 
Marine Pollution Bulletin
Ryan, P. G. (1988). "Intraspecific Variation in Plastic Ingestion by Seabirds and the Flux 
of Plastic Through Seabird Populations."  54(8): 
1230-1237. 
The Condor
Takada, H. (2009).  “International Pellet Watch: Global distribution of persistent organic 
pollutants (POPs) in marine plastics and their potential threat to marine organisms.”  IN: Arthur, C., J. Baker, and H. Bamford (eds).  2009.  Proceedings of the International Research Workshop on the Occ urrence, Effects, and Fate of  90(2): 446-452. Microplastic Marine Debris. Sept 9 -11, 2008.  NOAA Technical Memorandum 
NOS -OR&R -30. 
Teuten, E. (2009).  “Microplastic -pollutant interactions and their implications in 
contaminant transport to organisms.”  IN: Arthur, C., J. Baker, and H. Bamford 
(eds).  2009.  Proceedings of the International Research Workshop on the Occurrence, Effects, and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris. Sept 9 -11, 2008.  
NOAA Technical Memorandum NOS -OR&R -30. 
Teuten, E. L., S. J. Rowland, T. S. Galloway and R. C. Thompson (2007). "Potential for 
Plastics to Transport Hydrophobic Contaminants." 
Environmental Science & 
Technology
Thompson, R. C., Y. Olsen, R. P. Mitchell, A. Davis, S. J. Rowland, A. W. G. John, D. 
McGonigle and A. E. Russ ell (2004). "Lost at Sea: Where Is All the 
Plastic?"  41(22): 7759-7764. 
Science
Van Franeker, J.A. (2009).  “Foolish Fulmars and their contribution to ecological 
quality.”  IN: Arthur, C., J. Baker, and H. Bamford (eds).  2009.  Proceedings of the Internatio nal Research Workshop on the Occurrence, Effects, and Fate of 
Microplastic Marine Debris. Sept 9 -11, 2008.  NOAA Technical Memorandum 
NOS -OR&R -30.  304(5672): 838-. 
Van Franeker, J. A., A. Meijboom and M. L. de Jong (2004). Marine litter monitoring by 
Northern Fulmars in the Netherlands 1982- 2003. W. Alterra. Den Burg (Texel), 
The Netherlands, ALTERRA : 48. 
Van Franeker, J. A., M. Heubeck, K. Fairclough, D. M. Turner, E. W. M. Stienen, N. 
Guse, J. Pedersen, K. O. Olsen, P. J. Andersson and B. Olsen (2005). 'Save the North Sea' Fulmar Study 2002-2004: a regional pilot project for the Fulmar-Litter -EcoQO in the OSPAR area. Den Berg (Texel), T he Netherlands, 
ALTERRA.  
Weisman, S. and D. Gregorio (2009).  “Translating scientific findings into action: 
California’s response to plastics in the environment.”  IN: Arthur, C., J. Baker, and H. Bamford (eds).  2009.  Proceedings of the International Res earch 
Workshop on the Occurrence, Effects, and Fate of Microplastic Marine Debris. Sept 9 -11, 2008.  NOAA Technical Memorandum NOS- OR&R -30.  
                      
ABSTRACTS AND PRESENTATIONS  
  Keynote Address - How concerned should we be about microplastics? 
Dr. RC Thompson, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK 
Abstract:  Microplastics are small fragments of plastic debris. This material has been reported on shorelines and 
in the water column on a global scale and there are concerns it may present hazards to wildlife and to human 
health.  
Methods to separate and quantify microplastics from environmental samples are time consuming and 
represent an incomplete estimate of contamination; however these semi -quantitative approaches have 
successfully identified microplastic as small as 20µm in diameter, have shown that the abundance of this debris 
has increased over recent decades and that microplastics are widely distributed in the environment. The sources 
of microplastic debris are most probably fragmentation of larger items of marine litter and the direct release of 
small pieces of plastic from various cleaning applications.  
Plastic products bring many societal benefits and as a consequence, annual global production has 
increased from 5 million tonnes in the 1950s to over 230 million tonnes today. However, because of their 
disposable nature substantial quantities of plastic items have been discarded to the environment and so the abundance of microplastic is likely to increase over the next few decades.  
Laboratory experiments have shown that microplastics are ingested by filter feeders, deposit feeders 
and detritivores and there is concern that ingestion of this material could present a physical hazard to wildlife, for 
example by compromising the ability to feed. In addition, there is evidence, that small fragments of plastic could 
facilitate the transfer of toxic substances to wildlife. Two routes have been suggested: (1) the release of 
chemicals incorporated during manufacture as plasticisers, flame retardants and antimicrobials, and (2) the 
release of persistent organic pollutants  (POPs) that have arisen in the environment from other sources and have 
sorbed to plastic debris in seawater.  
Reaching robust, environmentally relevant conclusions about the abundance and the potential impacts 
of microplastic debris is not a trivial task and this workshop offers a major step toward identifying a suitable 
research agenda. There is also an important need for parallel research and policy focusing on solutions to 
established problems associated with the production, usage and disposal of plastic s. 
 
 
 
 Richard C. Thompson, PhD,  is a Marine Ecologist specialising in the ecology of shallow water marine habitats.  
He studied Marine Biology at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne from 1988 to 1991 followed by a PhD on 
the ecology of intertidal biofilms at the University of Liverpool from 1992 to 1996.  He subsequently worked as 
postdoctoral research fellow at the University of Southampton and since 2001 he has been a lecturer, and is now a Reader, in Marine Ecology at the University of Plymouth.  He currently leads the BSc Marine Biology 
degree programme at Plymouth and lecture in marine ecology and experimental biology.  His research has 
focused on a wide range of ‘natural’ ecological interactions and on anthropogenic disturbance.  He supervises a research group of 2 post docs and 8 PhD students.  Work by his group has examined: biodiversity and 
ecosystem function using rockpools as natural mesocosms, trade- offs between food availability and refuge 
quality, trophic linkages between intertidal and subtidal habitats, the ecology of coastal defenses and marine 
renewable energy developments.  Much of his work over the last decade has focused on marine debris.  In 2004 
his group published a paper in Science describing the distribution and temporal trends in the abundance of 
microscopic fragments of plastic in the NE Atlantic.  They have subsequently been working to establish the 
environmental consequences of this type of debris.  He is currently acting as invited editor of a Theme Issue of 
13 papers, for Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, focusing entirely on Plastics the Environment and Human Health. 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
S
ESSION I: OCCURRENCE OF SMALL P LASTIC DEBRIS IN 
THE MARINE ENVIRONME NT 
  
Fate of Plastics Debris in the Marine Environment  
 Dr. Anthony L. Andrady, Research Triangle Institute, Durham, NC, USA  
 
Abstract:  Certain classes of plastics, those used in the fabrication of fishing gear and those used in packaging 
applications are present in quantity in the marine environment. Most of these are non- biodegradable formulations of 
nylons and polyolefins that are used in netting and ropes. Expanded polystyrene from packaging and floats as well as 
polyolefins from consumer packaging materials are also commonly present.  
The usual factors that facilitate the deterioration of these materials on exposure to land environments, mainly 
solar UV -B radiation and high temperatures have a limited impact floating plastics debris. This results in markedly  
retarded degradation of plastics in the oceans. Mineralization of these and their return to the carbon cycle must therefore be a very slow process. The plastic microparticles well known to be present in the oceans, likely originate 
from both the slow deterioration of the floating or submerged plastics, as well as the fragmentation of plastics degraded 
to embrittlement in the beach environment. Analysis of the collected particles cannot determine their origin but can only 
identify the chemical class of the plastic. Also, a significant fraction of the plastic fragments on beach and in water 
consists of virgin prils that mainly enter the environment during transport. These not being compounded will degrade at a relatively faster rate both on land and at sea.  
This discussion will summarize the chemical aspects degradation of the relevant classes of plastics, review 
the criteria for degradation in these systems and discuss the chemistries for enhancement of plastics degradation. 
Special emphasis will be on the origins and the fate of polymer microparticles.  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
Tony Andrady, PhD , is a Senor Research Scientist at the Research Triangle Institute in North Carolina.  He is a 
Material Scientist with a research interest in issues relating to plastics debris in the Marine Environment.  
 Microplastics as Accumulators and Sources of Persistent Organic Pollutants in Marine Food Webs: 
How Significant?  
 Dr. Alan J. Mearns, NOAA Office of Response & Restoration, Seattle, WA  
 
Abstract:  It has been nearly 40 years since Carpenter and Smith (1972)  first reported the occurrence of plastic 
spherules in the Atlantic, including confirming the ability of Long Island Sound spherules to accumulate PCBs (Carpenter et al, 1972).  Only recently have scientists again started exploring the role of microplastics as accumulators 
and vectors of Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs). Microplastics accumulate POPs to part per million concentrations.  
However, there remain differences of opinion about the significance of microplastics as vectors of POP accumulation in marine wildlife. When birds or juvenile fish ingest microplasics, which is worse to the health of organisms and 
populations: the undigestible plastic or the POP’s?  Clearly, reducing microplastic inputs will reduce marine life injuries, 
regardless of the mode of injury.  It remains unclear to what extent microplastics represent a source for food chain POP accumulation compared to other sources, such as marine organisms normal food.  A risk assessment approach 
would help sort out the questions and their significance.   
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
Alan J. Mearns, PhD , is an Ecologist and Senior Staff Scientist with the NOAA Office of Response and Restoration in 
Seattle, Washington.   He holds a PhD in Fisheries from the University of Washington and Master's and Bac helor's 
degrees in Biology and Zoology from California State University in Long Beach.   During the 1970's Alan was Leader of 
the Biology Division at the Southern California Coastal Water Research Project (SCCWRP) and in the 1980's Ecologist 
for the MESA Pu get Sound Project and Leader of the National Status and Trends Historical Trend Assessment 
Program which evaluated longterm contaminant trends along the entire US coastline.   Since 1989 he has been a 
member of the NOAA ERD (HazMat) Team supporting NOAA's Scientific Support Coordinators (SSC's) during oil spills 
and emergency response, including conducting longterm monitoring of recovery from the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill. He is also leader of the Water Environment Research Journal's Annual review of the Effects of Pollutants on Marine Life, 
which includes marine debris. He has been a science adviser to various national and regional committees involving 
bioremediation, wastewater discharges, cruise ship pollution, sediment bioassay methods, the San Francisco Est uary 
Institute (SFEI), the Coastal Response Research Center (CRRC) and is a member of the Science and Technical 
Committee of the Oil Spill Recovery Institute (OSRI) and EPA's Environmental Technology Verification (ETV) Program. 
During the past decade Alan has been using 3D trajectory models to support and facilitate consensus evaluation of the 
effects and benefits of alternative spill response options around the US and in Mexico and the Caribbean.  
 The oceanography, biology, and fisheries of the North Pacific  
Dr. Michael P. Seki, NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service, Honolulu, HI  
Abstract:  An overview of the oceanography and living resources of the North Pacific Ocean is presented.  In particular, physical 
processes such as large scale ocean circulation patterns and semi -permanent frontal systems that play key roles in facilitating 
the accumulation of marine debris are highlighted.  Seasonal and meso- scale variability of ocean processes give rise to localized 
“hot spots” of convergence and enhanced biological aggregations. And an examination of the basin- wide Transition Zone 
Chlorophyll Front depicts a region where surface feeding animals are particularly vulnerable to marine debris accumulation.  
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
Michael P. Seki, PhD , is the Deputy Director of the Pacific Islands Fisheries Science Center located in Honolulu, Hawaii. He is a 
career government employee having been with NOAA Fisheries since 1980. As a research scientist over the past 27 years, he 
has conducted studies on marine resources in the Pacific region including seabirds, sea turtles, tropical snappers, oceanic s quid, 
tunas, and billfishes, and has authored or co- authored over 40 scientific papers on topics such as open ocean food webs 
(ecosystems) and the influence of the physical oceanographic environment on the distribution and abundance patterns of living 
marine marine resources.  
Born and raised in Hawaii, Dr. Seki received his B.S. in biology from the University of Oregon, his M.S. in oceanography from the 
University of Hawaii, and his Ph.D. in marine environment and resources from Hokkaido University (Graduate School of 
Fisheries Science); with a dissertation topic focused on how living marine resources in the North Pacific respond to abrupt 
changes in oceanographic conditions.  Small Plastic Debris and Plankton: Perspectives from NOAA Plankton Sampling Programs in Northeast Pacific 
Ecosystems 
 
Dr. Miriam Doyle, Joint Institute for the Study of the Atmosphere and Ocean, Univer sity of 
Washington, Seattle, WA  
 
 
Abstract:   The purpose of this study was to examine the incidence of small particles of plastic in plankton samples 
collected in Northeast Pacific ecosystems, and to contribute to the development of a standardized protocol for future research into the occurrence and effect of small plastic debris in marine pelagic ecosystems.  Zooplankton samples 
were collected in conjunction with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) ongoing ecosystem 
surveys in the Northeast Pacific, during four research cruises off California in spring, summer and fall of 2006, and in January of 2007, and two research cruises in the Southeast Bering Sea in the spring and fall of 2006.  Neuston 
samples were collected during all cruises, and sub- surface samples during the four cruises off  California.  A total of 
593 plankton samples from these research cruises were processed for debris particles. Results from this study indicate 
that tiny amounts of small plastic debris are present primarily in surface waters of the California Current and Southeast 
Bering Sea coastal ecosystems.  The mean standardized quantity of plastic debris, expressed as mass (mg) and 
numbers of particles per meter cubed, was very low overall for both sampling areas and all cruises (<1 mg/ m
3, and 
<0.2 particles/m3
 , respectively) but spatial and temporal variability was apparent within the range of values recorded. 
The plastic particles were assigned to three plastic product types: product fragments, fishing net and line fibers, and industrial pellets; and five size categories: <1 mm, 1- 2.5 mm, 2.5 -5 mm, 5 -10 mm, and >10 mm.  Product fragments 
accounted for the majority of the particles, and most were less than 2.5 mm in size.  Although the quantity of plastic particles was extremely low, their ubiquity in the plankton samples and predominance of particles <2.5 mm, implies persistence in these pelagic ecosystems as a result of continuous breakdown from larger plastic debris fragments, and 
widespread distribution by ocean currents.  The estimated biomass of zooplankton was many orders of magnitude 
higher than the mass of plastic particles, both for average cruise values and among individual samples, implying 
minimal interaction between small plastic debris and zooplankton organisms in these regions.   
This project was supported by a grant from the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation in partnership with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Marine Debris Program, and the American Chemistry Council.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Miriam Doyle, PhD, has worked for 17 years  at the Alaska Fisheries Science Center in Seattle, USA, on a variety of 
research projects in the field of early life history ecology of Northeast Pacific fishes, prior to which she studied the 
ecology of early life stages of fish species in the plankton of the Northeast Atlantic.  Through the JISAO Institute at the 
University of Washington, she works with NOAA scientists at the Alaska Fisheries Science Center and the Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory to understand the influence of climate and ocean processes on fluctuations in Alaska 
fish populations.    
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
S
ESSION II: IMPACT OF SMALL PLAST IC DEBRIS ON THE 
MARINE ENVIRONMENT  FOOLISH FULMARS AND THEIR CONTRIBUTION TO ECOLOGICAL QUALITY  
 
Dr. Jan A. van Franeker, Wageningen IMARES , Den Berg (Texel), THE NETHERLANDS  
 
& the Save the North Sea Fulmar Study Group  
 
Abstract:  Indiscriminate foraging enables the Northern Fulmar (Fulmaru s glacialis)  to successfully exploit variable food 
resources in changing marine environments. But flexibility can be taken too far. Like most tubenosed seabirds, Fulmars 
ingest a wide variety of man-made litter. Ingested plastics resist digestion and mechanical breakdown in the stomach 
and accumulate over time. Unlike gulls, Fulmars normally do not regurgitate indigested stomach contents and need to 
‘process’ them slowly in the digestive system. Ingested materials sometimes cause direct mortality but more 
importantly, indirect sublethal effects will occur in almost all individuals in many populations. However, the accumulated 
plastics also represent a convenient monitoring instrument for the litter situation in the offshore environment. Stomach 
contents integrate probably up to several weeks of ‘sampling’ of the marine litter situation in their foraging area.  
 
In 2002 the North Sea Ministerial Conference decided to tackle marine problems through the concept of ‘Ecological 
Quality Objectives (EcoQO’s)’.  An EcoQO provides a monitoring system as well as a target for ‘acceptable ecological 
quality’.  For the marine litter issue, an EcoQO based on the amount of plastic in stomachs of beached Fulmars was 
selected. The preliminary political target for acceptable ecological quality was worded as “less than 10% of Fulmars having more than 0.1 gram of plastic in the stomach”.  Implementation of this ‘Fulmar -Litter -EcoQO’ started in 2002 in 
the EU project ‘Save the North Sea’. Data show that 40% to 60% of Fulmars in the North Sea currently exc eed the 
critical value of 0.1 gram of plastic in the stomach. In addition of being a valuable policy instrument, the image of ‘birds 
with plastic in their stomach’ attracts much public attention and stimulates awareness and changed behaviour among 
stakeholders. Fulmars are foolish foragers, but by being ‘quantifiable fools’, they can contribute to improved ecological quality for the benefit of all.  
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Jan van Franeker, PhD , is a senior scientist at the Ecology department on Texel of the Netherlands Institute for 
Marine Resources and Ecosystem Studies (IMARES). Van Franeker is a marine biologist and has his main expertise in 
seabirds and other marine top predators, with a focus on their functioning in polar marine ecosystems, especially the 
Southern Ocean. SInce 1986 is project leader for the Antarctic Research conducted by IMARES. Throughout his 
career, pollution issues in relation to marine wildlife have been a recurrent phenomenon.  In recent years he has 
guided important projects on monitoring the ingestion rates of litter by seabirds. Formerly a government research 
instutute for the Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality, IMARES is now a privatised marine research organisation working under the umbrella of Wageningen University and Research (WUR).   
 Incidence of Marine Debris Ingestion in Seabirds from Midway Atoll and Heard Island 
Dr. Heidi J. Auman, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, AUSTRALIA  
Abstract:  The presence of ingested anthropogenic marine debris in seabirds is of growing concern, especially in areas of 
the earth remote from point sources.  Laysan albatross chicks from Midway Atoll, North Pacific Ocean, were assessed for 
impacts of marine debris ingestion.  Masses and incidence of debris in chicks were compared between birds found dead of 
natural causes and those injured by vehicles.  Laysan albatross chicks dead from natural causes had significantly greater 
masses of plastic debris in their proventriculi and gizzards and had significantly lighter body masses and lower fat indices than injured but otherwise healthy chicks.  In a separate study of seabirds from Heard Island in the Southern Indian Ocean, small amounts of ingested marine debris were found in two Antarctic prions and evidence of indirectly ingested debris were found from the casts of sub -Antarctic skuas.  Ingested marine debris probably does not cause significant direct mortality in 
these seabirds, but is likely to cause physiological stress as a result of satiation and mechanical blockages.  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
Heidi J. Auman, P hD, earned a B.S. in Biology from Alma College, a M.Sc. in Fisheries and Wildlife from Michigan State 
University, and a Ph.D. in Zoology from the University of Tasmania. She has spent the last 20 years focusing on human 
impacts in seabirds, specifically in the topics of toxicology, disturbance, plastic debris ingestion, urbanisation and diet. Her 
research is global in scope with a preference for isolated islands, including those in the North American Great Lakes, subtropical Midway Atoll, subantarctic Heard Island and Tasmania. A popular science communicator, she has demonstrated 
that our ecological footprint has reached the furthest corners of the Earth, often with disturbing consequences.  
 Ingestion of microplastics by marine invertebrates  
Dr. RC Thompson, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK 
Abstract:  Microplastics are small fragments of plastic debris. This type of material has been reported on a 
global scale and is present in the water column, on shorelines and in subtidal sediments. Large items of plastic 
debris are known to have potentially harmful  effects on over 260 marine species, principally via ingestion and 
entanglement. Because of their size microplastics have the potential to be ingested by a much wider range of 
organisms including relatively small invertebrates.  
In laboratory experiments the filter feeder, Semibalanus balanoides; the infaunal deposit feeder, Arenicola marina and the detritivore, Orchestia gammarellus  all ingested microplastic fragments (20 - 2000μm diameter) 
over a period of several days. Subsequent experiments with the common mussel (Mytilus edulis ) showed that 
plastic microspheres (3.0 and 9.6 µm) were ingested and within 3 days had translocated from the gut to the 
haemolymph (circulatory system). These particles were still present in the haemolymph 48 days after transfer t o 
clean conditions, but no adverse biological effects were detected. It is apparent therefore that invertebrates with 
a range feeding strategies can ingest microplastics and that this debris may be retained in theirbodies.  
Ingestion of microplastic could impair feeding in a similar way to that already described for larger items of debris. There is also concern that ingestion of small items of plastic debris could facilitate the transport of toxic 
chemicals to marine organisms. Our recent experiments support  this possibility, but more work will be required 
to reach firm conclusions. As a precursor we need to establish whether there are particular ‘sinks’ for the accumulation of microplastic debris and to establish the extent to which organisms are ingesting m icroplastics in 
these habitats. Some creatures, such as sea birds, are known to actively select plastic fragments mistaking them 
for food items at the sea surface. As a consequence of habitat and/or behaviour some organisms may therefore 
be exposed to greater quantities of microplastics than others. Hence, data on natural levels of exposure are crucial to inform the choice of appropriate test organisms.  
 
  
 
  
Richard C. Thompson, PhD,  is a Marine Ecologist specialising in the ecology of shallow water marine habitats.  
He studied Marine Biology at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne from 1988 to 1991 followed by a PhD on 
the ecology of intertidal biofilms at the University of Liverpool from 1992 to 1996.  He subsequently worked as 
postdoctoral research fellow at the University of Southampton and since 2001 he has been a lecturer, and is 
now a Reader, in Marine Ecology at the University of Plymouth.  He currently leads the BSc Marine Biology degree programme at Plymouth and lecture in marine ecology and experimental biology.  His research has 
focused on a wide range of ‘natural’ ecological interactions and on anthropogenic disturbance.  He supervises a 
research group of 2 post docs and 8 PhD students.  Work by his group has examined: biodiversity and ecosystem function using rockpools as natural mesocosms, trade- offs between food availability and refuge 
quality, trophic linkages between intertidal and subtidal habitats, the ecology of coastal defenses and marine renewable energy developments.  Much of his work over the last decade has focused on marine debris.  In 2004 
his group published a paper in Science describing the distribution and temporal trends in the abundance of 
microscopic fragments of plastic in the NE Atlantic.  They have subsequently been working to establish the 
environmental consequences of this type of debris.  He is currently acting as invited editor of a Theme Issue of 13 papers, for Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, focusing entirely on Plastics the Environment 
and Human Healt h. 
 Translating scientific findings into action: California’s response to plastics in the 
environment  
 Dr. Ste phen B. Weisberg, Southern California Coastal Water Research Project, Costa Mesa, CA, 
USA 
 
Dominic Gregorio, California State Water Resources Control Board, CA, USA  
 
Abstract:  Numerous studies have documented the increasing presence of debris in the marine environment, from 
derelict floating fishing gear to litter on beaches.  In response, California’s Ocean Protection Council passed a 
landmark resolution in 2007 to reduce marine debris, followed by a draft implementation plan in 2008.  The 
implementation plan, as well as actions being undertaken or considered by local jurisdictions, fall into five general 
strategies: 1) Regulatory controls on the discharge of plastic debris; 2) Public education and behavior modification; 3) Change the packaging strategy; 4) Remove debris from the environment; and 5) Monitor to assess program 
effectiveness.  These strategies reflect effective translation of science into management, but most of the actions focus 
on reducing the amount of large debris.  In part this is because the management actions for large debris are easier to 
implement, but it also reflects our lesser scientific knowledge about the sources and effects of  microdebris.  Here we 
discuss the interface between scientific findings and management action, highlighting the scientific needs for 
microdebris in that context.  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
Stephen Weisberg, PhD , is Executive Director  of the Southern California Coastal Water Research Project (SCCWRP) 
where he specializes in the design and implementation of environmental monitoring programs.  He Chairs the Southern 
California Bight Regional Monitoring Steering Committee and is on the Governing Boards of the California Ocean 
Science Trust and the Southern California Coastal Ocean Observing System.  He serves on advisory committees for numerous programs, including the California Ocean Protection Council, California’s Clean Beach Task Force the 
University of Southern California Sea Grant Program,  the Alliance for Coastal Technology  and the Hollings Laboratory 
Oceans and Human Health Program.  Dr. Weisberg received his undergraduate degree from the University of Michigan 
and his Ph.D. from the University of Delaware.  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
S
ESSION III:  IMPACTS OF SMALL PLASTIC DEBRIS 
EXPOSURE TO PERSISTE NT ORGANIC POLLUTANT S Effect of sorbent particles on the bioaccumulation of persistent organic pollutants in sediments  
 
Dr. Upal Ghosh, University of Maryland Baltimore County , Baltimore, MD, USA  
 
Abstract:  Our recent work provides new understanding of contaminant binding through direct microscale 
determination of contaminant association with sediment particle types.   We investigated the roles of different types of 
natural and anthropogenic organic particulates in impacted sediments (coal, soot, charcoal, wood, coal tar pitch, and humic materials) and explored how predominant association of contaminants with certain types of organic matter may 
affect overall bioavailability.   In our work with sediment from several urban locations across the country, we find that 
the majority of hydrophobic contaminants such as PAHs and PCBs are strongly bound to carbonaceous particles.   We 
also find that PAHs bound to carbonaceous particles are resistant to desorption, microbial biodegradation, and bioaccumulation by organisms.   Our current work extends this understanding by demonstrating how the addition of 
low-cost sorbents such as activated carbon, may sequester persistent organic contaminants, and reduce contaminant 
availability, exposure, and accumulation in sediment -dwelling organisms.   We propose that addition of activated carbon 
to PCB contaminated sediment may be an effective in- situ stabilization method to reduce contaminant availability to 
biota and surrounding water.   We are now testing this approach in two pilot -scale technology demonstrations, one in a 
tidal mudflat, and the other in a river environment.   This talk will focus on the role of strong sorbent particles on 
contaminant bioavailability in sediments and also explore the impact of plastic debris on contaminant bioavailability to 
marine organisms.  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Upal Ghosh, PhD , is an associate professor at the department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of 
Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC). His research explores fundamental process mechanisms that control  organic 
contaminant fate in soils, sediments, and aquatic environments. His research uses multidisciplinary tools to investigate exposure and bioavailability of organic contaminants to organisms. The new understanding is used to develop novel 
remediation technologies, site-specific risk assessment, and remediation goals.   Dr. Ghosh is currently involved in 
pilot-scale technology demonstrations of in- situ remediation of PCB -impacted sediments. The technology is based on 
contaminant binding and bioavailability reduction through the amendment of activated carbon tosediments.  
 
Dr. Ghosh has a M.S. and Ph.D. in Civil and Environmental Engineering from the University at Buffalo, and a B.Tech. 
in Chemical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay. Before joining UMBC, Dr. Ghosh worked at Carnegie Mellon University as a post doctoral fellow and at Stanford University as a research associate and lecturer.  
 International Pellet Watch: Global distribution of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in marine plastics and their potentia l threat 
to marine organisms  
 
Hideshige TAKADA, Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology,  Tokyo, JAPAN  
 
Abstract: Beached resin pellet samples collected at 30 locations from 17 countries were analyzed for PCBs, DDTs, HCHs, PAHs, and 
hopanes.  PCB concentrations in the polyethylene pellets were highest on US coasts (100 - 500 ng/g), followed by  western European 
countries (e.g., U.K. and Netherlands) and Japan (50 - 100 ng/g), whereas lower in tropical Asia, southern Africa and Australia (5 – 50 
ng/g).  The spatial pattern was well correlated with that of the monitoring results of mussel watch, indicating that concentrations of hydrophobic contaminants in the plastic pellets reflect the pollution status of the coastal environments.  DDTs showed high c oncentrations 
on the west coast of USA (~300 ng/g) and Vietnam (~200 ng/g).  In Vietnam, DDT was predominant over its metabolites (DDE and DDD), 
suggesting current usage of the pesticide.  High concentrations of HCHs were detected in the pellets from southern Africa (~30 ng/g), 
whereas HCHs showed trace concentrations in the other areas in the world (~  1 ng/g or lower).  This suggests current usage of the 
pesticide in southern Africa.  Hopanes, biomarker of petroleum pollution, were detected in all the pellet samples collected across the 
world at µg/g level, indicating ubiquitous petroleum pollution.  PAHs were significantly detected at several locations and they were rich in 
alkyl homologs, indicating the dominance of petrogenic origin over pyrogenic one.  We also analyzed plastic fragments (i.e. s craps of 
consumer products) from the central gyre of the Pacific and a Japanese coast for the organic micropollutants.  In addition to the 
hydrophobic organic pollutants such as PCBs and PAHs, additive- derived chemicals such as bishphenol A and nonylphenols were 
detected in the plastic fragments.  Higher concentrations (20 – 40 ng/g) of brominated flame retardants, PBDEs, were detected in the 
plastic fragments from the central gyre than the Japanese coast.  They were rich in BDE183 which is the major component of Oc ta BDEs, 
indicating contribution of the additives.  To examine potential transfer of the plastic -associated contaminants to sea birds which ingest the 
marine plastics, a feeding experiment was conducted and contaminated plastic resin pellets were fed to Streaked Shearwater chicks.  Analysis of PCBs in preen gland oil excreted from the sea bird suggested that transfer of lower -chlorinated congeners from the plastics to 
the sea bird.  
  
 
Hideshige TAKADA, PhD, is an organic geochemist studing the behaviors of organic micropollutants in aquatic environments .  He was 
born in Tokyo, Japan, in 1959.   He obtained a PhD from Tokyo Metropolitan University in 1989, and then studied at Woods Hole 
Oceanographic Institution with Dr. John Farrington from 1990- 1991.   He is a professor in the Laboratory of Organic Geoc hemistry (LOG) 
in Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology. His lab discovered a range of organic micropollutants in marine plastics in 2001.   
Since then they have been conducting several researches on organic micropollutants in environmental plastics including "International 
Pellet Watch.” Microplastic -pollutant interactions and their implications in contaminant transport to 
organisms  
 
Dr. Emma Teuten, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 
 
Abstract:  Uptake of hydrophobic organic contaminants (HOCs) onto plastic debris followed by transport  of the 
sorbed contaminants to organisms has been discussed in the literature since the 1970s.  While it has been unequivocally demonstrated that contaminants concentrate on plastics in the environment, little evidence exists 
supporting their subsequent transfer to animals.  This is probably due partly to the complexity of designing 
experiments to effectively investigate such transfer.  
 
On-going work at the University of Plymouth has attempted to address this issue.  Transfer of plastic -bound 
contaminants to a typical benthic organism (lugworm; Arenicola marina) was modelled using equilibrium 
partitioning.  The model results suggested that addition of plastic to the sediment would decrease the contaminant 
tissue concentration in lugworms.  This is due to the high affinity of plastics for HOCs allowing them to act as 
“scavengers”, thus removing contaminants from the environment and reducing the exposure of benthic organisms.  However, this mechanism can only apply for plastics that are relatively “clean” and uncontaminated.  Since 
plastics readily sorb HOCs from the environment, they are unlikely to remain clean for long.  Plastics are known to accumulate on the strandline, and float in the sea- surface microlayer, where contaminant concentrations are often 
higher than in the bulk water. Fouling of the plastics can cause them to sink, carrying their contaminant load into the sediment, where it may ultimately increase the contaminant body burden of sediment dwelling organisms.  Preliminary in vivo  trials have demonstrated transfer of a selection of HOCs from plastics to lugworms.  
 Uptake of contaminants by organisms occurs by inhalation, dermal sorption and ingestion, dependant upon the 
organism and the physicochemical properties of the contaminant.  For many organisms ingestion is the most likely 
exposure route for plastic -mediated uptake of contaminants.  More than 180 species have been documented to 
ingest plastic debris, and a positive correlation between the mass of ingested plastic and the PCB concentration in 
birds has been observed. Since plastics are known to accumulate PCBs in the environment, this correlation 
supports plastic -mediated transfer of contaminants to higher organisms.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Emma Teuten, PhD , completed her PhD in organic chemistry at the University of Missouri in 2002 and then 
received a Dreyfus Postdoctoral Fellowship to conduct environmental chemistry at Woods Hole Oceanographic 
Institution.  Her work there focused on the origin of halogenated organic contaminants in marine mammals .  
Following that she returned to the UK and did another postdoc at the University of Plymouth, where she investigated transport of contaminants to benthic organisms by microscopic fragments.  She is currently working 
as a Research Fellow in Environmental Engineering at the University of Edinburgh, where she is looking into the 
potential for plastics to be used as sorbents in the removal of contaminants from the environment.  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
S
ESSION IV: EFFECT OF OCEANIC SMALL PLASTIC 
DEBRIS ON BIOGEOCHEM ICAL CYCLING OF POP s Role of microplastics on transport and fate of POPs  
 
Dr. Rainer Lohmann, University of Rhode Island, Providence, RI, USA  
 
Abstract:  Results from recent ocean cruises covering the Arctic (2004), Atlantic (2006) and Pacific (2007) Ocean are 
presented for different POPs. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) were simultaneously measured in air and surface seawater between 49° N and 25° S in the open Atlantic Ocean. Broad latitudinal trends were observed with the lowest PAH and PCB air concentration in the South Atlantic and the highest 
off the west coast of Africa. The unexpectedly high concentrations off NW Africa were discussed assessing the 
possible contribution of the emerging oil industry along the African shore, the role of biomass burning and natural sources of PAHs. Correlations of PAHs’ partial pressures versus inverse temperature were not significant, in contrast 
to results for PCBs from the same transect. This could have been due to the importance of ongoing primary sources for 
PAHs combined with shorter atmospheric life- times. Ratios for anthracene and phenanthrene were <0.3 in the remote 
tropical Atlantic, suggesting net volatilization. PCB concentrations were highest in Europe and the lowest in the Arctic. Fractionation was observed for PCBs in seawater with the relative abundance of PCB 28 and 52 increasing and that of 
the heavier congeners decreasing with latitude. Comparison with other data from cruises in the Atlantic and Arctic 
Ocean since 1990 indicate little change in PCB air concentrations. On average, deposition dominates over 
volatilization for PCBs in the Arctic region with a strong increase in the middle of the transect near the marginal ice zone (78- 79 °N), possibly caused by ice melting. During a 2006/2007 cruise on the Pacific, gas -phase PCBs were 
highest in the Northern Hemisphere (NH), and decreased towards the equator. In the remote South Pacific, concentrations declined to <10 pg/m
3
  for individual PCBs. In the surface water, concentrations of PCBs decreased 
from >2 pg/L per congener in the NH to ~1 pg/L in the S -Pacific. Dissolved PCBs in the S -Pacific gyre were higher than 
those reported from the S -Atlantic, possibly due to the extremely low biological productivity and removal fluxes from the 
S-Pacific gyre’s surface waters.  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 Rainer Lohmann, PhD,  received his PhD in Environmental Chemistry from Lancaster University, England (UK) in 
2000.  He then joined the Massachusetts Institute of Technology as a postdoctoral fellow, and moved to the Research Center for Ocean Margins (Bremen, Germany) as a fellow for most of 2004.  Since November 2004 he has been 
Assistant Professor in Oceanography at the University of Rhode Island’s Graduate School of Oceanography.  His 
current research interests are: the black carbon cycle and its effects on the (bio)availability of organic pollutants, the global fate of POPs and the use of passive samplers to  measure the activities of organic compounds in air, water and 
sediment.  
 Consequences and challenges of microplastics in the world’s oceans  
 
Dr. Joel Baker , University of Washington Tacoma, Tacoma, WA, USA  
 
Abstract:  Producing industrial intermediates and consumer products that are persistent in the environment inevitably leads  to 
their global distribution throughout the world’s oceans.  The re is abundant evidence and numerous examples of this, including the well -told story of the ‘global distillation’ of semivolatile organic chemicals ( e.g., the ‘dirty dozen’ POPs).  Materials  susceptible 
to global transport are those that resist degradation 
and
  are poorly removed from mobile reservoirs ( i.e., the atmosphere and 
surface ocean water).  Due to their chemical stability and near neutral buoyancy, it appears that microplastics meet these criteria, as supported by the increasing number reports documenting microplastics in remote marine environments.  It is also now clear that microplastics may enter marine food webs, primarily through inadvertent ingestion, that components of the plastic may leach 
into seawater, and that other chemical contaminants can adsorb to microplastics.  While parts of the story are emerging, the 
overall impact and consequences of marine microplastics has not yet been articulated.  Significant scientific uncertainty remains, 
especially surrounding the potential biological impacts and the role of microplastics in controlling chemical contaminant exposure 
and cycling.  For example, one might argue that microplastics scavenge pollutants from seawater into highly concentrated, easily ingested packages, resulting in enhanced exposure to marine organisms.  Conversely, this ‘packaging’ can be viewed as a 
competitive ‘protection’, where the microplastic -bound pollutants are sequestered in a non- bioavailable form.  Assessing the risk 
of marine microplastics depends on resolving these uncertainties.  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
Joel Baker, PhD holds the Port of Tacoma Chair in Environmental Science at the University of Washington Tacoma.  He earned a B.S. degree in Environmental Chemistry  from the State University of New York in Syracuse, and M.S. (1985) and Ph.D. (1988) 
degrees in Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of Minnesota.  Between 1988 and 2007, he was a member of the faculty of the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science’s Chesapeake Biological Laboratory.  Dr. Baker’s lab 
studies the transport of organic contaminants in the atmosphere and in surface waters, specifically atmospheric transport and 
deposition of organic chemicals, aerosol particle chemistry, the dynamics of contaminant transport in estuaries, and the exposure and transfer of bioaccumulative chemicals in aquatic food webs.  He has co- authored over eighty papers on contaminant cycling 
in the Great Lakes, the Chesapeake Bay and coastal waters, and edited Atmospheric Deposition of Contaminants to the Great Lakes and Coastal Waters  (SETAC Press, 1997).  He was the lead author on a scientific review of PCBs in the Hudson River, a 
contributing author to the Pew Oceans Commission report Marin e Pollution in the United States , and a member of the national 
Research Council’s Committee on Oil in the Sea, chaired the New York/New Jersey Harbor Contaminant Assessment and Reduction Program’s Model Evaluation Group, advised the European Commission on water quality modeling, and served on the 
Board of Directors of the Society of Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry.  Dr. Baker is the Science Director of the Center  for 
Urban Waters in Tacoma, WA and recently elected as chair of the Puget Sound Partnership Science Panel.  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
A
PPENDICES  APPENDIX A: WORKSHOP AGENDA                   
 
 
Tuesday, 9 September 2008  
CARWEIN AUDITORIUM, KEYSTONE BUILDING, UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON TACOMA  
 
08:30  Coffee and Registration  
 
09:00  Opening remarks  – Dr. Pat Spakes , Chancellor, University of Washington Tacoma, Dr. Joel Baker , University of Washington 
Tacoma, Doug Helton , National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Marine Debris Program  
 09:15  Keynote Address  – How concerned should we be about microplastics?  
Dr. RC Thompson , University of Plymouth, Plymouth, UK  
 
10:15  Break  
 SESSION I: O ccurrence of small plastic  debri s in the marine environment  
10:30  Fate of Plastics Debris in the Marine Environment  
 Dr. Anthony Andrady , Research Triangle Ins titute, Durham, NC, USA 
 11:15   Microplastics as accumulators and sources of persistent organic pollutants  in marine food webs: how significant?   
Dr. Alan Mearns , NOAA  Office of Response & Restoration , Seattle, WA 
 
12:00  Lunch 
 
13:00    The oceanography, biology, and fisheries of the North Pacific  
Dr. Mike Seki, NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service, Honolulu,  HI, USA  
 
13:45    Small Plastic Debris and Plankton: Perspectives from NOAA Plankton Sampling Programs in Northeast Pacific Ecosystems  
 Dr. Miriam Doyle , Joint Institute for the Study of the Atmosphere and Ocean, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA  
 
SESSION II: Impact of small plastic  debri s on the marine environment  
14:30  Foolish Fulmars and their contribution to ecological quality  
Dr. Jan A. van Franeker , Wageningen IMARE S, Den Berg (Texel), THE NETHERLANDS  
 15:15  Break  
 15:30  Incidence of marine debris ingestion in seabirds from Midway Atoll and Heard Island  
Dr. Heidi J. Auman , University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, AUSTRALIA 
 
16:15  Ingestion of microplastics by marine invertebrates  Dr. Richard Thompson , University of P lymouth, Plymouth, UK  
 
17:00  Translating scientific findings into action: California’s response to plastics in the environment  Dr. Stephen Weisberg , Southern California  Coastal Water Research Project, Costa Mesa, CA, USA  
 17:45  Adjourn – Dr. Joel Baker  
18:30  R eception and Dinner  
 The Tacoma Club, Wells Fargo Plaza, 1201 Pacific Avenue, 16
th floor  
 
  
 
 
 
                         
Wednesday, 10 September 2008  
CARWEIN AUDITORIUM, KEYSTONE BUILDING, UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON TACOMA  
 
08:00  Opening remarks  – Dr. Joel Baker  
 
Session II I: Impacts of small plastic  debris  exposure to persistent organic pollutants  
08:15  Effect of sorbent particulate amendments on PCB bioavailability in sediments  
Dr. Upal Ghosh, Universit y of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD, USA  
 
09:00  International Pellet Watch: Global distribution of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in marine plastics and their potential threat to marine organisms  
Dr. Hideshige Takada , Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Tokyo, JAPAN  
 
9:45 Microplastic- pollutant interactions and their implications in contaminant transport to organisms  
Dr. Emma Teuten , University of Edinburgh , Edinburgh, UK  
 Session IV : Effect of oceanic small plastic  debris on biogeochemical cycling of POPs  
10:30  Role of microplastics on transport and fate of POPs  
Dr. Rainer Lohmann, University of Rhode Island , Providence, RI, USA 
  11:15  Wrap -up: Consequences and challenges of microplastics in the world’s oceans  
 Dr. Joel Baker , University of Washington Tacoma , Tacoma, WA, USA 
 12:00  Lunch Media Availability – Tacoma Room  
 Session V : Breakout Groups 
1:00 Introduce breakout sessions  
A. Sources (accumulation) and sinks (uptake) of plastics in the marine environment  (GWP 212)  
B. Importance of physical impacts (ingestion) vs. other impacts of microplastic debris  (GWP 216)  
C. Overa ll accumulation of microplastics in organisms, potential to bioaccumulate POPs  (GWP 220)  
 
1:30 Breakout groups discuss their perspectives on major questions  
 15:00  Break  
 
15:30  Reconvene to discuss breakout group reports (Carwein Auditorium)  
 
16:15  Discussion of future research initiatives  
 17:00  Closing Remarks  and Adjourn Workshop – Dr. Joel Baker  
  
Thursday, 11 September 2008  
Session VI : Preparation of Workshop Proceedings (Cherry Parkes 103)  
   
8:30 - 12:0 0  Steering Committee only  APPENDIX B: CHARGE TO BREAKOUT GROUPS  
 
A. Sources  and sinks of  plastics in the marine environment  Session V: Breakout Groups  
 Lead* : Anthony Andrady  
 Rappateur : Nir Barnea  
Participants: Miriam Doyle, Michael Seki, Dave Foley, Dominic Gregorio, Pete Dinger, 
Marcus Eriksen, Joseph Greene  
Locati on: GWP 212  
 
B. Effects of microplastic debris on marine organisms  
 Lead* : Richard Thompson  
 Rappateur : Kris McElwee  
Participants: Heidi Auman, Jan van Franeker, Ashley Greene, LeeAnn Woodward, Beth 
Phillips, Doug Helton  
 Location: GWP 216  
  C. Role of mic roplastics in POP cycling and exposure  
 Lead* : Rainer Lohmann  
 Rappateur : Amy Merten  
Participants: Alan Mearns, Shige Takada, Emma Teuten, Tara Conrad, Benjamin 
Applegate, Aja Reyes, Fung -chi Ko, Stan Phillippe  
 Location: GWP 220  
 
 
1. Review white paper for any major omissions of  published literature.  Charge to breakout groups  
 
2. Identify key gaps in our current knowledge.  Are there any products, techniques, or technologies 
required that are not currently available?  
 
3. Describe potential research projects and best methods to achieve filling the gaps in research.  
  *The lead should be prepared to present the breakout group’s collective thoughts to the workshop 
participants.  APPENDIX C: WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS  
 
*speaker  Benjamin Applegate  
University of Alaska Fairbanks 
ASET Lab, SCI 127 1350 Alumni Loop Anchorage, AK 99508 USA  
Tel: 1. 907.786.1252 
Email: 
anbla@uaa.alaska.edu   
 
Anthony Andrady , Ph.D. * 
Research Triangle Institute 
3040 Cornwallis Road Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 USA Tel: 1.919.541.6713 Email: 
andrady@rti.org   
 
Courtney Arthur  
Research Analyst / Knauss Sea Grant Fellow  
NOAA Marine Debris Program  
Office of Response & Resto ration  
N/ORR, SSMC -4, Room 10240 
1305 East- West Highway  
Silver Spring, MD 20910 USA 
Tel: +1. 301.713.2990 ext. 188 
Email: courtney.arthur@noaa.gov  
 
Heidi J. Auman , Ph.D.* 
Science Officer  
Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP) 
Suite 25- 26 Salamanca Square  
GPO Box 824 Hobart, Tasmania Australia 7001 Tel: +613 6233 3719 Email: 
Heidi.Auman@acap.aq   
 
Joel Baker, Ph.D. * 
Port of Tacoma Chair in Environmental Sciences and Professor  
University of Washington Tacoma 
Box 358436, 1900 Commerce Street Tacoma, WA 98402 USA Tel: +1.253.692.5659 Email: 
jebaker@u.washington.edu   
 
Holly A. Bamford, Ph.D. 
Program Director, Marine Debris  
NOAA Office of Response & Restoration  
N/ORR, SSMC -4, Room 10201 
1305 East- West Highway  
Tel: +1.301.713.2990 ext. 106 *speaker  Email: holly.bamford@noaa.gov   
 
Nir Barnea  
Physical Scientist NOAA M arine Debris Program  
Office of Response & Restoration  
Building 3, Room 2024 7600 Sand Point Way, NE Seattle, WA 98115-6349 USA Tel: +1.206.526.6943 Email: 
nir.barnea@noaa.gov   
 Tara Conrad 
Science Advisor  
Office of the Assistant Secretary – Water and Science  
US Department of the Interior 
1849 C Street NW, Rm 6642, MS 6640 Washington, DC 20240 USA Tel: +1.202.208.4323 Email: 
Tara_Conrad@ios.doi.gov   
 
Peter W.  Dinger  
Senior Director Technology 
Plastics Division, American Chemistry Council 1300 Wilson Boulevard Arlington, VA 22209 USA 
Tel: +1.703.741.5597 Email: 
Pete_Dinger@americanchemistry.com   
 
Miriam Doyle , Ph.D.*  
Joint Institute for the Study of the Atmosphere and Oceans , University of Washington 
U.W. Box 354925 
Seattle, WA 98195 USA Tel: +1.206.526.4318 Email: 
miriam.doyle@noaa.gov   
 
Marcus Eriksen , Ph.D. 
Director of Research and Education  
Algalita Marine Research Foundation 
148 N Marina Drive Long Beach, CA 90803 USA 
Tel: +1.562.598.4889 Email: 
marcuseriksen@hotmail.com   
 
Dave Foley, Ph.D.  
CoastWatch Coordinator, West Coast  
Environmental Research Division 
NOAA Southwest Fisheries Science Center  
1352 Lighthouse Ave. Pacific Grove, CA 93950 USA *speaker  Tel: +1.831.333.9258 
Email: dave.foley@noaa.gov   
 Upal Ghosh, Ph.D.*  
Associate Professor and Graduate Program Director  
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering  
University of Maryland Baltimore County  Technology Research Center Room 184 5200 Westland Blvd. Baltimore, MD, 21227 USA Tel: +1.410.455.8665 Email: 
ughosh@umbc.edu   
 
Ashley Greene  
ORISE Fellow  
US Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., Mail Code 4504T Washington, DC 20460 USA Tel: +1.202.566.1738 Email: 
greene.ashle y@epa.gov   
 
Joseph P. Greene, Ph.D.  
Professor  
Department of Mechanical Engineering Mechatronic Engineering and Manufacturing 
Technology California State University, Chico  
Chico, CA 95929-0789 USA Tel: +1.530.898.4977 Email: 
jpgreene@csuchico.edu   
 
Dominic Gregorio  
Senior Environmental Scientist 
Ocean Unit, Division of Water Quality (California) State Water Resources Control Board  P.O. Box 100 Sacramento, CA 95812-0100 Tel: +1.916.341.5488 Email: 
dgregorio@waterboards.ca.gov  
 
Doug Helton 
Emergency Response Division 
NOAA Office of Response & Restoration  
7600 Sand Point Way, NE Seattle, WA 98115-6349 USA Tel: +1.206.526.4563 Email: 
doug.helton@noaa.gov   
 
Fung -chi Ko , Ph.D.  
Director, Dept. of Biology, National Museum of Marine Biology and Aquarium 
Institute of Marine Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology, National Don Hwa University *speaker  2, Houwan Road, Checheng, Pingtung, 944, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
Tel: +011 -886-8-8825001 ext. 8057 
Email: ko@nmmba.gov.tw   
 Rainer Lohmann, Ph.D.*  
Assistant Professor  
Graduate School of Oceanography 
University of Rhode Island South Ferry Road Narragansett, RI 02882-1197 USA Tel: +1.401.874.6612 Email: 
lohmann@gso.uri.edu   
 
Kris McElwee 
Pacific Islands Program Coordinator 
NOAA Marine Debris Program  
737 Bishop Street Mauka Building, Suite 2250 Honolulu, HI 96813-3213 US A 
Tel: +1.808.532.3207 Email: 
kris.mcelwee@noaa.gov   
 
Alan J. Mearns , Ph.D.* 
Senior Staff  Scientist 
Emergency Response Division (formerly Hazardous Materials Response Division) 
National O ceanic and Atmospheric A dministration  
7600 Sand Point Way, NE Seattle, WA, 98115 USA Tel: +1.206.526.6336 Email: 
alan.mearns@noaa.gov  
 
Amy A. Merten , Ph.D. 
NOAA Co -Director, Coastal Response Research Center  
Office of Response & Restor ation  
7600 Sand Point Way, NE, Building 3 
Seattle, WA 98115 USA Tel: +1.206.526.6829 Email: 
amy.merten@noaa.gov   
 
Carey Morishige  
Pacific Islands Outreach Coordinator   
NOAA Marine Debris Program  
6600 Kalaniana’ole Hwy., Suite 301 
Honolulu, HI  96825 USA 
Tel: +1.808.397.2651 x256 Email: 
carey.morishige@noaa.gov   
 
Peter Murphy  
NOAA Marine Debris Program  
Office of Response & Restoration  *speaker  7600 Sand Point Way, NE, Building ?  
Seattle, WA  98115-6349 USA 
Tel: +1.206.526.xxxx Email: 
peter.murphy@noaa.gov   
 
Stan Phillippe  
Office of the Chief Scientist  
Department of Toxic Substances Control 
California Environmental Protection Agency 1001 I St. PO Box 806 Sacramento, CA 95812 USA Tel: +1.916.323.5347 Email: 
SPhillip@dtsc.ca.gov  
 
Elizabeth M. Phillips  
Research Associate  
Moss Landing Marine Laboratories  / 
California State Universities  
8272 Moss Landing Road 
Moss Landing, CA 95039 USA CIMRS -NOAA Fisheries  
Pt. Adams Research Station  
PO Box 155 Hammond, OR 97121-0155 USA Tel: +1. 503.861.1818 
Email: 
ephillips@mlml.calstate.edu   
 
Aja Reyes  
Tetra Tech – Guam  
P. O. Box 5413 UOG Station 
Mangilao, GU 96923 USA Tel: +1.671.649.1297 Email: 
aja.reyes@tetratech.com  , aja.environmental@gmail.com   
 
Michael  P. Seki , Ph.D.* 
Deputy Director, Pacific Islands Fisheries Science Center  
National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA  
2570 Dole Street 
Honolulu, HI 96822-2396 USA Tel: +1.808.983.5393 Email: 
michael.seki@noaa.gov   
 
Hideshige Takada , Ph.D.* 
Professor  
Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry (LOG)  
Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, 
Fuchu, Tokyo 183- 8509, Japan 
Tel: +81 -423-67-5825 
Email: shige@cc.tuat.ac.jp   *speaker   
Emma Teuten , Ph.D.* 
[in transition ] 
Email: emma.teuten@gmail.com   
 Richard C. Thompson, Ph.D.* 
Reader in Marine Ecology  
Programme Leader BSc (Hons) Marine Biology  
School of Biological Sciences  
University of Plymouth 
Drake  Circus, Plymouth 
PL4 8AA, UK Tel: +44 01752 584651 Email: 
R.C.Thompson@plymouth.ac.uk   
 
J. A. van Franeker , Ph.D.* 
Wageningen IMARES  
PO Box 167,  
1790 AD Den Berg (Texel), The Netherlands Tel: +31 -317.487.085 
Email: 
jan.vanfraneker@wurl.nl   
 
Stephen Weisberg , Ph.D. * 
Executive Director  
Southern California Coastal Water Research Project Authority  
3535 Harbor Blvd. 
Costa Mesa, CA 92626 USA Tel: +1.714.755.3203 Email: 
stevew@sccwrp.org   
 
Lee Ann Woodward, Ph.D. 
Resource Contaminants Specialist  
Hawaii & Pacific Islands NWRC  
Papahanaumokuakea Marine National Monument 
US Fish & Wildlife Service  
300 Ala Moana Blvd., Rm 5-231 Honolulu, HI 96850 USA Tel: +1.808.792.9562 Email: 
Lee_Ann_Woodward@fws.gov   
  APPENDIX D: GROUP PHOTOGRAPH  
 
 
International Research Workshop on the Occurrence, Effects and Fate of 
Microplastic Marine Debris.  Photo taken on the University of Washington Tacoma campus, 9 September 2008.  
 
From left:
  D. Gregorio, E. Teuten, M. Eriksen, C. Morishige, B. Applegate, D. 
Foley, M. Doyle, E. Phillips, S. Weisberg, C. Arthur, H. Takada, R. Lohmann, U. Ghosh, R. Thompson, J. van Franeker, S. Phillippe, P. Dinger, J. Greene, M. Seki, F. Ko, A. Mearns, K. McElwee, J. Baker, N. Barnea, L. Woodward, A. Merten, D. Helton, H. Au man, A. Greene, A. Reyes  Carlos M. Gutierrez
United States Secretary of Commerce
William J. Brennan, Ph.D.
Acting Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere
John H. Dunnigan 
Assistant Administrator for Ocean Service and Coastal Zone Management
