243 This Week’s Citation ClassicTM
The approach to rationalize the fragmentation
behaviour of organic molecules ionized byelectron impact by formulating bond fission and
rearrangement processes triggered by a
localized charge allowed systemization of thevast experimental material and thus enabledthe organic chemist to use mass spectrometryefficiently in his work. [The  SCI
® indicates that
this book has been cited in over 2,700
publications since 1967.]
Herbert Budzikiewicz
Institute for Organic Chemistry
Universität zu Köln
D-5000 Köln 41 Federal Republic of
Germany
Carl Djerassi
Department of Chemistry Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
Dudley H. Williams
University Chemical Laboratory
University of Cambridge
Cambridge CB2 1EW
England
June 23, 1982
“Though mass spectrometry had been used
for many years —especially in the petrolindustry —to characterize and identify
organic substances, only vague ideas had
been developed regarding the fate of amolecule after ionization. The earlyobservation that mass spectra may show ionswhich do not correspond to structural sub-units present in the original molecule had
led to ideas of a complete (‘sudden death’)
or partial (‘hydrogen soup’) breakdown of themolecular structure upon ionization withsubsequent recombination of atoms to givestable ions which then were responsible forthe fragmentation pattern. At best, some
wiggly lines were drawn across a molecule to
indicate where fragmentation might haveoccurred. A theoretical approach to explainand predict fragmentation patterns —the so-called quasi-equilibrium theory based onkinetic considerations —was not of much
help in praxi either because molecules
larger than small hydrocarbons were beyondits
scope. For these reasons standardized mass
spectra were indeed employed asBudzikiewicz H, Djerassi C & Williams D H. Mass spectrometry of organic
compounds. San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1967. 690 p.
[Technische Hochschule, Braunschweig, Federal Republic of Germany;Dept. Chem., Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA; and Univ. Chem. Lab.,Univ. Cambridge, Cambridge, England]
1. McLafferty F W. Mass spectrometry of organic ions. New Y ork: Academic Press, 1963. 730 p.
2. Biemann K. Mass spectromelry, organic chemical applications. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1962. 370 p.
3. Budzikiewicz H, Djerassi C & Williams D H. Interpretation of mass spectra of organic compounds.
San Francisco: Holden-Day, 1964. 271 p.
4.Mass spectrometry. London: Chemical Society, 1971-1982. Vols. 1-6.‘fingerprints’ for the identification of a
compound, but their use for structure
elucidation of an unknown (except for thedetermination of the molecular weight) wasrather limited. Thus, it was a ratherrevolutionary idea when F.W. McLafferty
1
and, in particular, K. Biemann2 pointed out
that especially compounds containing
heteroatoms did not decompose in anunpredictable manner and that theirfragmentation could be described by specificreaction mechanisms.
“In the group of C. Djerassi, the idea to
rationalize fragmentations wherever possible
by formulating bond fissions triggered by alocalized charge was applied consequently.In this way it was possible to derivegeneralizations which allowed us to predictthe behaviour of related compounds. These
results were the basis for our first book,
3 where
the characteristics of the various functionalgroups were described in terms familiar toorganic chemists. Although the ‘mechanisticapproach’ to the interpretation of massspectra was not accepted generally for
theoretical reasons (a referee of a renowned
journal even in 1963 called it ‘a hoax to thescientific community’), it was extremelyuseful for practical purposes. The followingthree years were filled with lively researchinto the behaviour of organic compounds
under electron impact. Virtually all common
and even most esoteric functional groupswere examined and the increasing use ofexact mass measurements and iso-topiclabelling helped to strengthen or to reviseearlier conclusions. Thus, in 1967 so much
material had accumulated that a new
compilation became necessary. In Mass
Spectrometry of Organic Compounds the
tried principle of presentation of the material
was retained.
“This book (which has been translated into
Russian and Japanese) has been highly
cited because it became the standardreference work for practical electron impactmass spectrometry of organic compounds —even the nomenclature laid down in it hasbeen used as a basis for the IUPAC
recommendations—and in a way still is. At
least, no publication with similar intentionshas appeared in the meantime. For progressreports in the field of organic spectrometrysee Mass Spectrometry.”
4CC/NUMBER 34
AUGUST 23,1982