Water Research 38 (2004) 1376–1389
Anaerobic sludge granulation
L.W. Hulshoff Pol, S.I. de Castro Lopes, G. Lettinga, P.N.L. Lens*
Sub-Department of Environmental Technology, Agricultural University of Wageningen, ‘‘Biotechnion’’ Bomenweg 2,
PO Box 8129, 6700 EV Wageningen, The Netherlands
Abstract
This paper reviews different theories on anaerobic sludge granulation in UASB-reactors that have been proposed
during the past two decades.The initial stages of the formation of anaerobic granules follow the same principles as
bioﬁlm formation of bacteria on solid surfaces.There exist strong evidence that inert carriers play an important positive
role in granulation.Most researchers conclude that Methanosaeta concilii is a key organism in granulation.Only the
Cape Town Hypothesis presumes that an autotrophic hydrogenotrophic organism, i.e., Methanobacterium strain AZ,
growing under conditions of high H 2-pressures, is the key organism in granulation.Many authors focus on the initial
stage of granulation, and only a few contributions discuss the latter stages in granulation: granule maturation and
multiplication.Granule enhancing factors in the latter stages predominantly rely on manipulation of the selectionpressure, through which selectively heavier sludge particles are retained in the UASB reactor.
r2003 Elsevier Ltd.All rights reserved.
Keywords: Granulation; UASB; Anaerobic treatment; Bacterial adhesion
1. Introduction
The formation of anaerobic granular sludge ( Fig.1 )
can be considered as the major reason of the successfulintroduction of the Upﬂow Anaerobic Sludge Bed
(UASB) reactor concept for anaerobic treatment of
industrial efﬂuents.This granulation process allowsloading rates in UASB reactors far beyond the common
loading rates applied so far in conventional activated
sludge processes.The resulting reduction in reactor sizeand required area for the treatment leads to lowerinvestment costs in addition to the reduced operating
costs due to the absence of aeration.
Two main factors made these high loading rates
possible:
(a) The superior settling characteristics of granular
sludge.Settling velocities of granular sludge of
approximately 60 m/h are common, whereas the
superﬁcial upﬂow velocities in UASB reactors areusually kept below 2 m/h, in practice.This allows an
extreme uncoupling of the hydraulic retention time
from the solid retention time (or sludge age).Solid
retention times of over 200 days can be achieved athydraulic retention times of only 6 h.
(b) The high speciﬁc methanogenic activities of granular
sludge.It could be demonstrated that high volu-metric loading rates of over 50 kg Chemical Oxygen
Demand (COD) per m
3per day could be well
accommodated under mesophilic conditions, withspeciﬁc methanogenic activities of more than2 kg COD/kg VSS day [1].Studies on the micro-
morphology of the granules demonstrated that
colonies of acetogenic bacteria are closely linkedwith micro-colonies of hydrogenotrophic methano-
genic archaea allowing an efﬁcient interspecies
hydrogen transfer and as a result, high degradationrates.
Granules had already been observed with the Anae-
robic Filter by Young and McCarty [2], and with the
Dorr’Oliver Clarigesters in South Africa in 1979
(Lettinga, personal communication).Clarigesters are
clariﬁers converted into anaerobic digesters, which wereARTICLE IN PRESS
*Corresponding author.Tel. : +31-317-483851; fax: +31-
317-482108.
E-mail address: piet.lens@wur.nl (P.N.L. Lens).
0043-1354/$ - see front matter r2003 Elsevier Ltd.All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.watres.2003.12.002used for agro-industrial efﬂuent treatment, operated in
an upﬂow mode.Little attention was paid however to
this sludge type.In the Netherlands, granular sludge was
discovered in 1976 in a 6 m3pilot plant at the CSM
sugar factory in Breda.Due to this sludge, the results
obtained in the pilot plant were superior to results of
previous studies in the laboratory of the WageningenUniversity [3].In the report of the pilot plant study, the
importance of granulation was well appreciated, but it
was also indicated that little understanding of the
process of granulation existed at that time and therewas a strong need for further study on this.Now more than 25 years later, numerous researchers
from all over the world have studied the granulation
process.However, there is still no consensus about the
determining mechanism triggering granulation.Thispaper gives an overview of different granulation theories
and factors promoting granulation.
A key organism in anaerobic sludge granulation is
Methanosaeta concilii .Most studies cited use its
synonym Methanothrix soehngenii .However this name
was later considered illegitimate, since the isolated
organism [4]was not pure [5].In this review, the names
mentioned in the studies have not been changed, which
means that mostly Methanothrix soehngenii has
been used.
2. Theories on granulation
The theories on anaerobic sludge granulation re-
viewed in this article are organized in three groups,namely physical, microbial and thermodynamic ap-proaches, which are considered as the main factor
responsible for granule formation ( Table 1 ).However,
this division is not completely tight as some theorieshave features that could ﬁt also other classiﬁcation.
2.1. Physical theories
In this granulation approach, the phenomenon is
explained in terms of the consideration of the physicalconditions prevailing in the reactor.Liquid and gasARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig.1. Anaerobic granules from the UASB reactor of
Papierfabriek Roermond.
Table 1Overview of the different theories on anaerobic sludge granulation
Approach References Name of theoryPhysical Hulshoff Pol et al. [6] Selection pressure
Pereboom [7] Growth of colonized suspended solids
Microbial Physiological Dolﬁng [8] —
Sam-Soon et al. [9] Cape Town hypothesis
Growth Wiegant [10] Spaghetti theory
Chen and Lun [11] —
Ecological Dubourgier et al. [12] Bridging of microﬂocs
Morgan et al. [13] Bundles of methanothrix
De Zeeuw (1980) Three types of VFA degrading granulesMcLeod et al. [14] —
Vanderhaegen et al. [15] —
Ahn [16] —
Wu et al.(1996) [50] Anaerobic granulation with deﬁned species
Thermodynamic Zhu et al.(1997) [51] Crystallized nuclei formation
Thaveesri et al. [17] Surface tension model
Schmidt and Ahring [18] —
Tay et al. [19] Proton translocation–dehydrationL.W. Hulshoff Pol et al. / Water Research 38 (2004) 1376–1389 1377upﬂow velocities, suspended solids in the efﬂuent or seed
sludge, attrition and removal of excess sludge from the
reactor are considered as the factors responsible for
granulation.
Selection pressure theory (1983): The essence of the
granulation process in a UASB reactor, in this theory, is
believed to be the continuous selection of sludgeparticles that occurs in the reactor [6].The selection
pressure can be regarded as the sum of the hydraulic
loading rate and the gas loading rate (dependent on the
sludge loading rate).Both factors are important in theselection between sludge components with different
settling characteristics.
Under conditions of high selection pressure, light and
dispersed sludge will be washed out while heavier
components can be retained in the reactor.Thus, growth
of ﬁnely dispersed sludge is minimised and the bacterialgrowth is delegated to a limited number of growth-
nuclei, that can consist of inert organic and inorganic
carrier materials or small bacterial aggregates present inthe seed sludge [20].These growth nuclei increase in size
until a certain maximum size, after which parts of the
granules detach, producing a new generation of growth
nuclei, and so on.
The ﬁrst generation consists of relatively voluminous
aggregates, but gradually they become denser due to
bacterial growth on the outside and inside of theaggregates.Moreover, bacterial growth is stimulated in
the more voluminous aggregates as the substrate can
penetrate deeper in the aggregates due to less diffusionlimitation and lower volumetric bacterial activity insidethese aggregates as compared to denser aggregates.The
ﬁlamentous granules that exist in the initial stages of the
granulation process become denser due to this ageingprocess.
Under conditions of low selection pressure, growth
will take place mainly as dispersed biomass, which givesrise to the formation of a bulking type of sludge.In
anaerobic reactors, the predominant organism is Metha-
nothrix , which can form very long ﬁlaments (200–
300mm).When these organisms grow without attach-
ment to a solid support particle, a loosely intertwined
structure of ﬁlaments, with very poor settling character-istics will be obtained.Moreover, through the attach-ment of gas bubbles to these loosely intertwined
ﬁlaments, the sludge even has a tendency to ﬂoat [20].
Growth of colonised suspended solids (1994): Pereboom
[7]states that granules originate from ﬁnes formed by
attrition and from colonisation of suspended solids from
the inﬂuent ( Fig.2 ).Moreover, according to this author,
granule size increase is only due to growth and therefore,
the concentric layers observed on sliced granules are
related to small ﬂuctuations in growth conditions.
Pereboom [7]reported that the most signiﬁcant
process limiting the maximum granule size in normal
operation is the regular discharge of surplus biomass.Reactor turbulence and internal gas production appear
to have no inﬂuence on the size distribution.These shear
forces are not responsible for breaking or disintegratingof granules and only cause attrition of small particles
from the granules.The latter is not expected to be
signiﬁcant to the removal of large granules.
According to the same author, the granular size
distribution in UASB reactors seems to be the result of
growth from small particles (being washed into the
reactor or developed in the reactor by attrition) intolarger granules and the removal of representative
amounts of granules from all size classes by sludge
discharge ( Fig.2 ).Moreover, wastewaters with a high
concentration of suspended solids result in short size
distributions while little or no suspended solids in the
inﬂuent leads to wide size distributions.
2.2. Microbial theories
The theories aggruped in this section explain sludge
granulation mainly based on the characteristics of
certain microorganisms.In this approach, the physical
factors presented above are often also integrated.Theobservation of granular characteristics, namely granule
structure and correspondent microbiology, coupled to
the conditions prevailing in the reactor (hydrodynamics,substrate and intermediates concentration proﬁles along
the reactor, etc) are the basis of the theories presented.
Surface thermodynamics as the determining factor ingranulation is presented in the next section.
2.2.1. Physiological approach
The production of extracellular polymers by some
microorganisms under certain conditions is considered
by several authors, after Dolﬁng [8], as the factor res-
ponsible for the phenomenon of anaerobic granulation.
Cape Town hypothesis (1987): According to Sam-Soon
et al. [9], granulation depends on Methanobacterium
strain AZ, an organism that utilises H
2as its sole energy
source and can produce all its amino acids, with the
exception of cysteine.When this microorganism is in an
environment of high H 2partial pressure, i.e., excessARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig.2. Size distribution model for methanogenic granules [7].L.W. Hulshoff Pol et al. / Water Research 38 (2004) 1376–1389 1378substrate, cell growth and amino acid production will be
stimulated.However, as Methanobacterium strain AZ
can not produce the essential amino acid cysteine, cell
synthesis will be limited by the rate of cysteine supply.Additionally, if ammonium is available, there will be a
high production of the other amino acids, which
Methanobacterium strain AZsecretes as extracellular
polypeptide, binding Methanobacterium strain AZ and
other bacteria together to form granules.However, the
authors admit the possibility that other anaerobic
bacteria may have characteristics similar to Methano-
bacterium strain AZand thus also contribute to granule
formation.
This hypothesis was proposed following the analysis
as a function of height of a UASB reactor treating a
substrate mainly consisting of sugars with negligible
nitrogen content and with adequate nutrients and traceelements for growth.
Supporting observations for this hypothesis were that
the net sludge production per unit mass of COD wasexceptionally high in the high H
2partial pressure zone,
much higher than the yield normally expected in
anaerobic systems and that the growth of sludge mass
was conﬁned to that high H 2partial pressure zone.
Furthermore, the generation of soluble organic nitrogen
in the high H 2partial pressure zone, combined with a
decrease of ammonium ( Fig.3 ), could not be attributed
to cell growth or death.In fact, the decrease of
ammonium was much more than the experimental
maximum growth yield, which means that just a partof the ammonium could have been utilised for proto-plasm synthesis.On the other hand, if the generation of
organic nitrogen would have been a result of death of
organisms, the death rate would have greatly exceededthe cell growth rate.This means that the death of
microorganisms could not explain the observed genera-
tion of organic nitrogen in this lower active zone.Thus,the acceptable explanation given for this nitrogen
behaviour was that the generation of organic nitrogen
was due to the secretion of amino acids by Methano-bacterium strain AZ, under high H
2partial pressure, in
cysteine-deﬁcient medium and with an adequate supply
of NH 4+–N.
According to this hypothesis, the conditions that
favour granulation are the following:
*environment with a high H 2partial pressure;
*plug ﬂow or semi-plug reactor (in order to achievephase separation) with a nearly neutral pH;
*non-limiting source of nitrogen, in the form ofammonium;
*limited amount of cysteine.
Thus, granulation is very likely to occur during the
conversion of carbohydrate substrates in a plug ﬂow
system.H 2is released during the conversion of the
carbohydrates to volatile fatty acids (VFA).Under high
loading conditions, the H 2uptake rate by the H 2
utilising organisms is lower than the H 2production rate
and a region of high H 2partial pressure develops.This
high H 2partial pressure zone can be maintained in a
plug ﬂow system, thus providing conditions for thedevelopment of Methanobacterium strain AZ.
The situations in which granulation is unlikely to
occur, according to the Cape Town hypothesis, are the
following:
*systems where the substrate does not yield H 2in the
fermentation process (e.g. acetate) or only can bedegraded under low H
2partial pressure conditions
(e.g. propionate and lipids);
*completely mixed systems, because of the ‘dilution’ ofthe high H
2partial pressure.
However, granulation has been observed in UASB
reactors treating acetate [11,21,22] , indicating that the
theory does not hold.Moreover, the hydrodynamicbehaviour in UASB reactors approaches usually acompletely mixed regime, which means that there will
be not a steep hydrogen proﬁle over the height of the
reactor.ARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig.3. Concentration proﬁles observed in a UASB [9].L.W. Hulshoff Pol et al. / Water Research 38 (2004) 1376–1389 1379Moosbrugger et al. [23] reported that also with
protein-containing substrate (casein), the granulation
in a UASB reactor was easily achieved and that the
system behaviour was very similar to the same systemtreating carbohydrate substrates.
2.2.2. Growth of ‘microbial nuclei’
The‘‘Spaghetti theory ’’ (1987): Wiegant [10]proposed
a ‘Spaghetti theory’ on sludge granulation in UASB
reactors treating acidiﬁed wastewaters, solutions of
acetate or mixtures of VFA with predominant Metha-
nothrix bacteria.Although reactors with predominant
Methanosarcina species can perform ‘spontaneous gran-
ulation’, this type of granules has less practical
importance in the UASB reactors as they bringoperational problems [24].Therefore, when the relative
concentration of Methanothrix bacteria is not high
enough, a strong selection towards these bacteria hasto be imposed.This can be done by using low acetate
concentrations during the start-up phase, as Methano-
thrix has a higher substrate afﬁnity for acetate compared
toMethanosarcina [25].
Wiegant [10] divides the granule formation in two
phases:
1.formation of precursors
2.actual growth of the granules from these precursors.
The ﬁrst step is considered the most crucial part of the
granule formation.Initially, Methanothrix bacteria form
very small aggregates, due to the turbulence generated
by the gas production, or attach to ﬁnely dispersed
matter.The concentration of suspended solids shouldnot be too high, otherwise the increase in size of the
aggregates will be too slow.Selection for aggregates is
done by imposing an increasing upﬂow velocity.Oncethe precursors are formed and a proper step-up routine
is followed, granulation is inevitable.The growth of the
individual bacteria and the entrapment of non-attachedbacteria lead to the growth of the precursor particles toform granules, which due to the hydraulic shear forces
of the upﬂowing biogas acquire a spherical shape.The
granules in this phase still present a ﬁlamentousappearance, like a ball of spaghetti formed of very long
Methanothrix ﬁlaments, of which part is loose and part
in bundles.With time, rod-type granules are formedfrom these ﬁlamentous granules at a high biomass
retention time, due to the increase in the density of the
bacterial growth.
Similarly to Wiegant [10], Chen and Lun [11]
formulated a hypothesis for the anaerobic sludge
granulation in a UASB fed with fermented alcohol
stillage divided in two steps:
1.nucleus formation
2.nucleus growing into a granule.Both Methanothrix and Methanosarcina are consid-
ered the organisms responsible for the nucleus forma-
tion.The former due to its good adhering capacities andthe latter for its capacity of growing into clumps by
excreting extracellular polymers (ECP), onto which
Methanothrix can attach.Although the turbulence
generated by the gas production is not given such an
important role as in the ‘Spaghetti theory’, also the
‘selection pressure’ and the acetic acid concentration arethe driving forces for the nucleus formation.
During the second step, in which the nucleus develops
into a granule, various other bacteria with which themethanogens must grow syntrophically play a veryimportant role, especially with complex substrates.In
mature granules, methanogens do not predominate on
the surface but, instead, are mixed with a variety ofother bacteria [11].
2.2.3. Ecological approach
Bridging of microﬂocs by Methanothrix ﬁlaments
(1987): From microscopic examination and activity
measurements, Dubourgier et al. [12]suggests that the
granulation mechanism starts by the covering ofﬁlamentous Methanothrix by colonies of cocci or rods
(acidogenic bacteria), forming microﬂocs of 10–50 mm.
Next, Methanothrix ﬁlaments, due to its particular
morphology and surface properties, might establishbridges between several microﬂocs forming larger
granules (>200 mm).Further development of acidogenic
and syntrophic bacteria favors the growth of thegranules.Therefore, these authors support the idea that
Methanothrix plays an important role in granule
strength by forming a network that stabilises the overallstructure but also emphasise the role of extracellularpolymers and cell walls.
Bundles of Methanothrix surrounded by ECP (1991):
Morgan et al. [13,26] suggested a possible mechanism
involved in the growth of anaerobic granules based on
the examination of granules treating papermill and
sugar reﬁnery efﬂuents.In their opinion, granulesdevelop from a precursor that consists of a small
aggregate of Methanothrix and other bacteria.Growth
of the Methanothrix ﬁlaments form characteristic
bundles separated by a surrounding matrix in which
other methanogenic and non-methanogenic bacteria are
embedded.As the bundles increase in size the surroud-ing matrix becomes excluded leading to a region towardsthe center of the granule, which consists exclusively of
compact ﬁlaments of Methanothrix and where discrete
bundles are not distinguishable.Thus, these authorssupport previous suggestions on the importance of
Methanothrix and bacterial polymers in the growth of
the granules.
Three types of VFA degrading granules (1980): In this
granulation theory, two bacterial genera are proposed to
be of predominant importance to granule formation:ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.W. Hulshoff Pol et al. / Water Research 38 (2004) 1376–1389 1380Methanothrix and Methanosarcina .From the research
developed in 1980, De Zeeuw [27]explains the formation
of the different types of granules developed in labora-
tory UASB reactor start-up experiments from digestedsludge as seed material and VFA as substrate.The cha-
racteristics of the formed granules were the following:
(A) Compact spherical granules mainly composed of
rod-shaped bacteria resembling Methanothrix
soehngenii in short chains or single cells (rod-
granules) ( Fig.4a ).
(B) More or less spherical granules mainly consisting of
loosely intertwined ﬁlamentous bacteria attached toan inert particle (ﬁlamentous granules) ( Fig.4b ).
The prevailing bacteria resembled Methanothrix
soehngenii .
(C) Compact spherical granules composed predomi-
nantly of Methanosarcina -type bacteria ( Fig.5 ).
The development of each type of granular sludge was
explained on the basis of seed sludge selection and
sludge bed erosion and expansion, and the consequent
differences in selection pressure and mean sludgeresidence time. Methanosarcina granules develop due
to the capacity of this genus to produce clumps of
bacteria, independently of the selection pressure.Theclumps can reach macroscopic dimensions and show
cavities, which can be inhabited by other species [28].
However, this kind of granules were just found inexperiments where the concentration of acetate as a solesubstrate was maintained above 1 kg COD/m
3, which
means that Methanosarcina was able to outcompete
Methanothrix [25].At the low loading rates (low selection pressure)
applied during the initial phase of the start-up of a
UASB reactor, Methanothrix ﬁlaments will grow in and
on small ﬂocs present in the seed sludge leading to theformation of a ‘bulking’ anaerobic sludge.
When a high selection pressure is applied, Methano-
thrix , that has a high afﬁnity to attach to all kind of
surfaces [29], attach to carrier materials originating from
the seed sludge or from the wastewater thus forming
ﬁlamentous granules (type B).
More compact Methanothrix granules (rod granules,
type A) are thought to be formed by the colonisation of
the central cavities of Methanosarcina clumps by
Methanothrix bacteria, which have a higher acetate
afﬁnity, eventually leading to a loss of the outer layer ofARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig.4. SEM of Methanothrix cells growing (a) in long ﬁlaments and (b) in short chains [1].
Fig.5. Aggregate of Methanosarcina present at the bottom of a
UASB reactor [52].L.W. Hulshoff Pol et al. / Water Research 38 (2004) 1376–1389 1381Methanothrix .Another explanation for these rod-type
granules can be the ﬁlling of the ﬁlamentous granules
with more bacteria, leading to a more compact
Methanothrix granule.
The development of A or B type granules is related
to the average biomass retention time taking place in
the start-up process.When the average biomass reten-tion time is too short, compact bacterial granulesconsisting almost exclusively of bacterial matter do
not have the chance to be formed.This means that
large conglomerates of bacteria can only be formedthrough attachment to inert support particles, which are
heavy enough to be retained longer in the reactor (type
B).Only if the average biomass retention time is bigenough, compact bacterial granules (type A) can be
formed.
Multi-layered granules with Methanothrix aggregates
as nucleation centres (1990): McLeod et al. [14], working
with a UASB-ﬁlter hybrid reactor, suggested a hypoth-
esis in which the Methanothrix aggregates function as
nucleation centres that initiate granule development(Fig.6 ) of sucrose degrading granules.Acetate produ-
cers, including H
2-producing acetogens would then
attach to this framework, providing the substrate tothe Methanothrix and, together with H
2-consuming
organisms, form a second layer around the Methano-
thrix core.Consecutively, fermentative bacteria adhere
to this small aggregate forming the exterior layer of the
granule, where they are in contact with their substrates,
present in the bulk solution.The products of thefermentative bacteria would then serve as substrates tothe underlying acetogens.Moreover, the fact that also
methanogen-like organisms were found in the exterior
layer lead to the idea that these H
2-consuming organ-
isms could consume any free H 2, avoiding its diffusion
into the second layer, where other H 2-consuming
organisms would then be able to remove the remainingH
2produced by the acetogens.Thus, such a spatial
arrangement of the different trophic groups guarantees a
high level of acetogenic activity.Also Fang [30]states that granules do not develop by
the random aggregation of suspended bacteria, but that
bacteria search for strategic positions for supply of
substrates and for removal of products, as the layeredmicrostructure of certain granules suggest.Once a
nucleus is formed, bacteria start to proliferate leading
to a growth of the size of the granule that only stopswhen the interfacial area between bacteria and the mixedliquor decreases to a critical level in relation to the initial
hydrolysis or fermentation that takes place at the
granule surface.
Vanderhaegen et al. [15], although supporting the
multi-layered granule structure proposed by McLeod
et al. [14], state that sugar fermentative acidogens form
sufﬁcient biomass and polymers to act as ‘nucleation’
centers in which the rest of the methanogenic associa-
tions can develop.
Ahn [16] proposed a similar granulation model as
presented in Fig.7 .At the initial stage of granulation,
aceticlastic methanogens (ﬁlamentous) and other organ-isms grow dispersed in the medium.By bridging androlling effects due to the hydrodynamic behaviour of the
UASB, small loose conglomerates mainly composed of
the ﬁlamentous methanogens are eventually formed.Following on, acetogens attach to this conglomerate, in
syntrophic relationship with the aceticlastic methano-
gens, thus forming a small granule with a dense core.Then, acidogens and hydrogenotrophs in syntrophic
relationship with the acetogens adhere to the small
granule and due to the extracellular polymers excretionby the hydrogenotrophs, the granule is allowed to grow.
2.3. Thermodynamic theories
Some authors have analysed the granulation mechan-
ism in terms of the energy involved in the adhesion itself,
due to the physico–chemical interactions between cellswalls or between cells walls and alien surfaces.Aspects
like hydrophobicity and electrophoretic mobility are
objectively taken into account.Also the inﬂuence of theproton translocating activity across the bacterial mem-branes surface causing its energisation is added to the
factors responsible for granulation.
Four step model for granule and bioﬁlm formation
(1996): Schmidt and Ahring [18] suggest that the
granulation process in UASB reactors follows the well-
described four steps of bioﬁlm formation [31–34] :
(1)Transport of cells to the surface of an uncolonised
inert material or other cells (substratum).
(2) Initial reversible adsorption by physicochemical
forces to the substratum.
(3) Irreversible adhesion of the cells to the substratum
by microbial appendages and/or polymers.
(4)Multiplication of the cells and development of the
granules.ARTICLE IN PRESS
MethanosaetaH2 producing organisms 
H2 consuming organisms Acidogens 
H2 consuming organisms
Fig.6. Granule composition as proposed by McLeod et al. [14].L.W. Hulshoff Pol et al. / Water Research 38 (2004) 1376–1389 1382In a UASB reactor, the cells are transported by one or
a combination of the following mechanisms: diffusion
(Brownian motion), advective (convective) transport byﬂuid ﬂow, gas ﬂotation or sedimentation.The initialadsorption can take place after a collision between the
cells and the substratum.The substratum can either beother cells or bacterial aggregates present in the sludge
or organic or inorganic materials that can function as
growth nuclei [18].
The initial adsorption can be approximately described
by the DLVO theory, presented by Derjaguin, Landau,
Verwey and Overbeek between 1940 and 1950, with theaim of explaining colloid stability.This theory canexplain and/or predict microbial adhesion using calcula-
tions of adhesion free energy changes.By using this
theory, the assumption is made that bacteria behave asinert particles and that bacterial adhesion can be
understood by a physico-chemical approach.The
DLVO theory postulates that the total long-rangeinteraction over a distance of more than 1 nm is a
summation of Van der Waals and Coulomb (electro-
static) interactions.According to this theory, threedifferent situations can occur ( Fig.8 ):
1.a repulsion when electrostatic interactions dominate;
2.a strong irreversible attraction when Van der Waals
forces are dominant (primary minimum);
3.a weak, reversible attraction when cells are located
a certain distance from each other (secondary
minimum).
The initial adhesion takes place predominantly in the
secondary minimum of the DLVO free energy curve.
The strength of adsorption depends on different
physicochemical forces like ionic, dipolar, hydrogenbonds or hydrophobic interactions.The secondary
minimum does not usually reach large negative values
and particles captured in this minimum generally showARTICLE IN PRESS
Appearance Stage Diameter Approximate  
PH2 condition 
(logPH2, atm) 
 (A) growth of filamentous (aceticlastic) 
methanogens and other microorganisms in low 
hydrogen partial pressure condition Filament Low 
( ≈ -6) 
 (B) bridging and rolling effects on the growth of 
filamentous methanogens < 100 µm  
 (C) growth of a small conglomerate as a loose  
core; crowded syntrophic acetogens around the 
surface of the core < 1 mm  
 (D) growth of a small granule with a dense core; 
crowded syntrophic hydrogenotrophs and 
acidogens around the surface of a small granule 1-2 mm  
 (E) growth of a large granule with multi-layered 
structure, due to accumulation of extracellular 
polymers by hydrogenotrophs 2-5 mm High  
( -2.7 ~ -3.7) 
Fig.7. Ahn’s proposed model (2000) for the anaerobic sludge granulation.
Fig.8. Total interaction Gibbs energy ( GT;which is a
summation of GA;free energy of the Van der Waals forces
andGE;free energy if the electrostatic interaction) as a function
of the distance between a spherical between a bacterium and anegatively charged surface (after Ref. [53]).L.W. Hulshoff Pol et al. / Water Research 38 (2004) 1376–1389 1383reversible adhesion.In this case, there is a separation
distance between the adhering bacteria and a thin water
ﬁlm remains present between the interacting surfaces.
However, if a bacterium can reach the primary mini-mum, short-range interaction forces become effective
and irreversible adhesion occur.
Irreversible adhesion can occur due to speciﬁc
bacterial characteristics such as appendages, cell surfacestructures or polymers [18,33] .However, it is not clear if
bacteria ﬁrst adhere reversibly and then produce ECP or
if bacteria ﬁrst produce ECP and then adhere irrever-sibly [18].
When the bacterium is adhered, colonisation has
started.The immobilised cells start to divide within theECP matrix so that the cells are trapped within the
bioﬁlm structure.This results in the formation of
microcolonies of identical cells.The granulation processdepends on cell division and recruitment of new bacteria
from the liquid phase.The granular matrix can also
contain trapped extraneous molecules, e.g. precipitates[35].The organization of the bacteria in the granules can
ease the transfer of substrates and products.The
arrangement may depend on the local hydrophobicity,
local presence of polymers or cell geometry [18].
Surface tension model (1995): Thaveesri et al. [17]
related the adhesion of bacteria involved in anaerobic
consortia in UASB reactors to surface thermodynamics.They found that bacteria can only obtain the maximum
possible free energy of adhesion ( DG
adh) when the liquid
surface tension ( gLV) is sufﬁciently low or high, as
indicated in Fig.9 .In the high gLVregion (zone B), low-
energy surface types of bacteria (low bacterium surface
tension ( gBV) or hydrophobic bacteria) can adhere in
order to obtain minimal energy, while in the low- gLV
region (zone A), high-energy surface types of bacteria
(high-gBVor hydrophilic bacteria) exhibit a greater
decrease in free energy upon aggregation and thus areselected to compose aggregates.A third zone is
arbitrarily deﬁned between g
LVvalues of 50 and
55 mN/m, and in this zone aggregation of neitherhydrophobic nor hydrophilic cells is favoured (low
DG
adhpotential).Daffonchio et al. [36]used the contact
angle technique to evaluate the hydrophobicities ofmixed cell cultures of bacteria involved in anaerobicdigestion.They showed that most acidogens are hydro-
philic (contact angle o45
/C14) but most of the acetogens
and methanogens isolated from granular sludge arehydrophobic (contact angle >45
/C14).Thus, operating a
system at a high gLVshould favor aggregation of (rather)
hydrophobic bacteria, and operating a system at a lowg
LVshould favour aggregation of (rather) hydrophilic
bacteria [17].
According to these authors, the granules formed at
lowgLV;with acidogens as solid-phase emulsiﬁers
around a methanogenic association allow a more stable
reactor performance, as they are less susceptible ofadhesion to gas bubbles and consequent wash-out.The
formation of these kinds of granules is shown in Fig.10 .
Acidogens (round cells) aggregate by means of formingECP, enclosing some methanogens (rectangular cells),
while dispersed cells are washed-out leading to the
formation of a granule with outer elastic hydrophiliclayer formed by ECP-rich acidogens and an inner core
of hydrophobic methanogens [37].
Proton translocation–dehydration theory (2000): Tay
et al. [19] proposed a theory for the (molecular)
mechanism of sludge granulation, based on the proton
translocation activity at bacterial membrane surfaces.Inthis theory, the sludge granulation process was con-
sidered to proceed in the four following steps ( Fig.11 ):
(a) Dehydration of bacterial surfaces;
(b) Embryonic granule formation;
(c) Granule maturation
(d) Post-maturation.
(a)Dehydration of bacterial surfaces : Hydrophobic
interaction between the bacterial surfaces is con-sidered supportive for the initiation of bacterial
adhesion [38,39] .However, with decreasing surface
separation distance between two bacterial cells,strong repulsive hydration interactions between the
two approaching bacteria exist, due to the energy
required for the removal of the tightly bonded waterARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig.10.Scheme of granule formation according to Thaveesri
et al. [17].
Fig.9.Free energies of adhesion ( DGadh) for bacteria with
different gBVvalues as a function of gLV:[17].L.W. Hulshoff Pol et al. / Water Research 38 (2004) 1376–1389 1384from the bacterial surfaces.In fact, under normal
physiological conditions, a bacterial surface has a
high negative charge which facilitates hydrogenbonding with water molecules, resulting in a net-
work of water surrounding the bacterial surface [40],
i.e., a hydration layer. However, the hydrationrepulsion does not normally affect the initial step of
the bacterial reversible adhesion stage to a signiﬁ-
cant extent.
The authors argue that acidogenic bacteria,
during the acidiﬁcation of substrates, pump protons
from the cytoplasmic side of the membrane to theexterior surface of the membrane.This protontranslocation activity energizes the surface and
may induce breaking of the hydrogen bonds
between the negatively charged groups and thewater molecules.Thus, a partial neutralisation of
the negative charges on their surfaces occurs,
causing the dehydration of the cell surfaces.
(b)Embryonic granule formation : Acidogens, acetogens
and methanogens may adhere to each other forming
embryonic granules, as a consequence of the upﬂowhydraulic stress, of this weakened hydration repul-
sion and of the hydrophobic nature of the cells.Moreover, due to the transfer of metabolites
between cells, a further de-hydration of the bacterial
surfaces takes place leading to a strengthening of
these initial granules.In this stage of development,the new physiological environment starts to induce
the excretion of ECP to the embryonic granule
surfaces.
(c)Granule maturation : In this stage, the original
bacterial colonies continue to grow while also other
dispersed bacteria may adhere to the embryonic
granules.The transfer of intermediates determinesthe distribution of micro-colonies within the gran-
ule, eventually leading to well-structured bacterial
aggregates as mature granules.On the other hand,the multiplication of bacterial cells is controlled due
to space restriction.Moreover, ECP is produced in
large quantities, causing the hydration of granulesurfaces and protecting granules against the shear
stress and attachment to gas bubbles, with sub-
sequent biomass loss by ﬂotation as ECP is highlyhydrophilic and biogas bubbles are highly hydro-phobic.
(d)Post-maturation : In the post-maturation stage, the
proton translocating activity keeps the bacterialsurfaces at a relatively hydrophobic state and is the
main responsible in maintaining the structure of the
mature granules.On the other hand, the ECP layeroutside of a granule causes the hydration of the
granule surface, protecting the granule against
attachment to gas bubbles and shear stress in theUASB reactor [41].
The authors claim that some phenomena of
sludge granulation like the advisable high-energy
carbohydrate feeding during the UASB start-upperiod, the granular sludge washout when changing
the carbon source, the existence of both uniform
and layered granules and the inﬂuence of ECP in thegranulation process can be adequately explained by
this proton translocation–dehydration theory.
3. Enhancement of granulation by growth nuclei
One of the contributing factors to the development of
granules from suspended sludge is the presence of nucleior bio-carriers for microbial attachment [42,43] .The
attachment of cells to these particles has been proposed
as the initiation step for granulation.Since the second
step was the formation of a dense and thick bioﬁlm onthe cluster of the inert carriers, this step could be
considered as bioﬁlm formation.In other words, once
the initial aggregates are formed, subsequent granula-tion could be regarded as a mere phenomenon of
an increase of bioﬁlm thickness.Hence, the sludge
granulation process in UASB reactors with added inertARTICLE IN PRESS
Fig.11. Schematic representation of proton translocation–
dehydration model for sludge granulation: (a) dehydration ofbacterial surfaces; (b) embryonic granule formation; (c) granule
maturation and (d) post-maturation [19].L.W. Hulshoff Pol et al. / Water Research 38 (2004) 1376–1389 1385particles might be interpreted as a bioﬁlm-forming
phenomenon [44].
Several investigators have studied the effect of inert
particles in granulation.Hulshoff Pol [1]demonstrated
the importance of inert support particles in the granula-
tion process.When the inert particles (40–100 mm in size)
were removed from the inoculated sewage sludge,granulation was not observed within the period oftime required for granulation of dispersed sludge
with no removal of inert particles in the seed sludge.
Table 2 shows that inert materials can accelerate
sludge granulation.
Yu et al. [44]proposed the following guidelines for the
carefully choice of the inert materials to be used in orderto enhance sludge granulation:
*high speciﬁc surface area;
*speciﬁc gravity similar to anaerobic sludge;
*good hydrophobicity;
*spherical shape.
Lettinga et al. [47]stated that clay and other inorganic
particles seemed to be harmful to the formation of
granular sludge.Also Hickey et al. [48]did not ﬁnd any
difference in thermophilic granulation with or without
the addition of sand (50–10 mm in size) into inoculateddigested sludge, although the granules formed included
sand particles [48].This can be attributed to the greater
speciﬁc gravity of some inert particles, like sand
particles, in relation to the biomass.More biomassmay accumulate in the upper portion of the reactor
while the sand particles tend to accumulate in the
reactor bottom.Therefore, the chance of contactbetween the particles and biomass, which is beneﬁcialfor microbial attachment, may be signiﬁcantly
reduced, resulting in no signiﬁcant enhancement of
granulation [42].
A high concentration of poorly ﬂocculating sus-
pended matter in the wastewater is detrimental to the
development of granular sludge [47].Also Hulshoff Pol
et al. [6]reported that in liquid wastes with a high
fraction of ﬁnely dispersed suspended solids, the
attachment of bacteria to the dispersed particles canlead to the wash-out of viable bacteria.According to
Hulshoff Pol et al. [20], a high concentration of
dispersed inert solids is prejudicial to the granulationprocess because in the case that the surface areaoffered for growth is very big for the bacteria available,
concentrated growth will be limited.As granulation
is strongly dependent on bacterial growth, a reducedgrowth leads to a slow down in the granulation
process.ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 2
Inﬂuence of addition of various inert materials on the sludge granulation
Inert
materialSeed
sludgeReactor Media
size (mm)Substrate Granulation
time
shorten (d)Granular
size (mm)Predominant
bacteriaReference
Foam Flocculent Packed bed
85 and 200 ml5.0 Propionate — 7.8–8.0 Methanothrix Fukuzaki
et al. [45]
Zeolite Thin anaerobic
bioﬁm on the
zeolite particles,
grown on aVFA mixtureMCB 9.4 l 0.1 VFA 20 1.0–2.0 Methanothrix Yoda
et al. [46]
MCB 4.0 l Glucose
Hydro-anthracite — 0.1 VFA 14 2.0 Methanothrix Hulshoff Pol
[1]
WAP Non-granular
anaerobic
digested sludgeUASB 1.3 l 0.1–0.2 Glucose 20 1.8–1.9 rod-type
MethanothrixImai
et al. [42]
VFA Stimulated
granulation/C32.1–2.3 Filamentous-type
Methanothrix
UASB 10 l 10 —
GAC UASB 0.75 l 0.32 Sucrose — 0.4 Methanothrix Morgan
et al. [26]
GAC UASB 7.3 l 0.4 Glucose+
peptone+
meat extract35 2.0–4.0 Methanothrix Yu
et al. [44]
PAC 0.2 30 2.0–4.0 Methanothrix
MCB—micro-carrier bed, WAP—water-absorbing polymer, GAC—granular activated carbon, PAC—powdered activated carbon.L.W. Hulshoff Pol et al. / Water Research 38 (2004) 1376–1389 13863.1. Activated carbon
Ross [49] reported that the presence of spent
powdered active carbon enhanced the settleability of asludge treating maize-processing efﬂuent.The carbon
provides an additional surface area for attached-growth
bacteria, which increases the density of the resultantbiomass, with concomitant improved settling.
Also according to Morgan et al. [26], the addition of
supplements to a non-granular inoculum during the
start-up of UASB reactors appears to be beneﬁcial.Agranular activated carbon (GAC) supplement offers two
advantages: sheltered ecological niches that enhance
biological attachment and thus initiate granule forma-tion and, possibly, a capacity for the adsorption of
pollutants, that can then be degraded in the immobilised
state.However, this latter feature does result in what canonly be described as a lag phase.The activated carbon
particles enhance the development of an attached
bioﬁlm and, as such, act as a nucleus for granuleformation.
Yu et al. [44]studied the effects of powdered activated
carbon (PAC) and GAC on sludge granulation during
start-up of UASB reactors.The results showed that theaddition of PAC or GAC clearly enhanced the sludge
granulation process and accelerated the start-up process.
Sludge granulation, deﬁned as the time by which 10% ofthe granules are larger than 2.0 mm, took approximately
95 days to be achieved in the reactor with no addition of
inert materials and was reduced by 25 and 35 days in thePAC and GAC-added reactors, respectively.Besides, theaddition of GAC and PAC provoked higher biomass
concentrations throughout the experiment, earlier ob-
servation of visible granules and improved the volu-metric COD removal capacity.Moreover, the addition
of GAC showed slightly more beneﬁcial effects for the
start-up of UASB reactors than PAC.The enhancedgranulation by the addition of PAC or GAC was
attributed to a better attachment of the ﬁlamentous
bacteria on the activated carbon.However, in this study,the characteristics of PAC and GAC were not examined
in detail.The different characteristics are likely respon-
sible for the minor difference between the PAC andGAC-added reactors.
3.2. Water absorbing polymer
Imai et al. [42] studied the effects of adding water
absorbing polymer (WAP) particles into the inoculated
sludge.WAP is a resin, mainly composed of acryliccompounds and shows a complex network structure
with a high speciﬁc surface for microbial attachment.
Moreover, it shows a low density (wet density of 1.0 g/ml), which means that the contact between the particles
and biomass is improved, when comparing to sand and
other materials.Although not inﬂuencing the averagegranule size, the addition of WAP clearly enhanced the
granulation in the lab-scale and pilot scale UASB
reactors using glucose or VFA as substrates ( Table 2 ),
serving as a bio-carrier to allow more biomass to attachon them.After the granules were formed, the WAP was
slowly decomposed by the anaerobic bacteria, which
caused the granules to split into several small fragmentsthat grew up again forming more mature granules.Eventually, all particles were digested and the granules
formed did not contain visible WAP particles anymore.
Based on the experiments performed, the authorsrecommended a dosage of WAP of approximately
750 mg/l of reactor volume for the enhancement of
granulation.
4. Conclusion
Most theories on granulation conﬁrm that the
acetotrophic methanogen Methanosaeta plays a key role
in granulation.Some believe that Methanosarcina
clumps enhance granule formation.The only theory
that states that other organisms cause granulation is theCape Town Hypothesis, which is based on the excessiveECP production of Methanobacterium strain AZunder
conditions of high H
2-partial pressures, unlimited
ammonium and cysteine limitation.
There is considerable consensus that the initial stage
of granulation is bacterial adhesion (a physical–chemical
process) parallel to the early stage of bioﬁlm formation.However, treating bacterial adhesion only as a physico–
chemical process is limited in explaining all the complex
aspects of bacterial adhesion.Bacteria do not have asharp surface boundary, simple geometry or uniformmolecular surface composition.In fact, internal chemi-
cal reactions can lead to changes in molecular composi-
tion both in the interior and at the surface, andmolecules and ions may cross the bacterium/water
surface and these processes continue also after adhesion.
Anyway, this physico–chemical approach has value informing a framework in which biological factors can be
added to form a unifying theory of granulation.
Although much attention in granulation theories goes
to the conditions affecting bacterial adhesion, still the
selective wash-out of dispersed sludge, resulting in an
increased growth of retained (heavier) sludge agglomer-ates is more crucial for the granulation process.In thisrespect, the presence of inert particles serving at surfaces
on which bacteria can adhere is clearly advantageous.
Nevertheless, the particles should be well settleable, ifnot it may cause unwanted sludge wash-out.
Little attention is given to the fact that granulation
strongly depends of growth.This means that simply byoptimising the conditions for growth granulation can be
strongly enhanced.Optimal conditions for growth can
be deducted from information of the effect of pH andARTICLE IN PRESS
L.W. Hulshoff Pol et al. / Water Research 38 (2004) 1376–1389 1387temperature on the growth rate of Methanosaeta concilii ,
the key organism in granulation.
References
[1] Hulshoff Pol LW.The phenomenon of granulation of
anaerobic sludge.Ph. D.Thesis, Agricultural UniversityWageningen, The Netherlands, 1989.
[2] Young JC, McCarty PL.The anaerobic ﬁlter for waste
treatment.J Water Pollut Control Federation 1969;41R:160–73.
[3] Lettinga G, Pette KC, de Vletter R, Wind E.Anaerobic
treatment of beet sugar wastewater on semi-technical scale.
CSM-report.The Netherlands: Amsterdam; 1977 [inDutch].
[4] Huser BA.Methanbildung aus Acetat.Ph. D.Thesis
EAWAG, Zurich, Switzerland, 1981.
[5] Boone DR, Kamagata Y.Rejection of the species
Methanothrix soehngenii
VPand the genus Methanothrix
VPasnomina confusa , and transfer of Methanothrix
thermophilaVPto the genus MethanosaetaVPasMethano-
saeta thermophila comb.Nov.Request for an opinion.Int
J Syst Bacteriol 1998;48:1079–80.
[6] Hulshoff Pol LW, De Zeeuw WJ, Velzeboer CTM,
Lettinga G.Granulation in UASB reactors.Water SciTechnol 1983;15(8/9):291–304.
[7] Pereboom JHF.Size distribution model for methanogenic
granules from full scale UASB and IC reactors.Water Sci
Technol 1994;30(12):211–21.
[8] Dolﬁng J.Microbiological aspects of granular methano-
genic sludge.Ph. D.Thesis, Agricultural University Wa-
geningen, The Netherlands, 1987.
[9] Sam-Soon PALNS, Loewenthal RE, Dold PL, Marais
GvR.Hypothesis for pelletisation in the upﬂow anaerobic
sludge bed reactor.Water SA 1987;13(2):69–80.
[10] Wiegant WM.The ‘spaghetti theory’ on anaerobic sludge
formation, or the inevitability of granulation.In: LettingaG, Zehnder AJB, Grotenhuis JTC, Hulshoff Pol LW,
editors.Granular anaerobic sludge: Microbiology and
technology.The Netherlands: Pudoc.Wageningen; 1987.p.146–52.
[11] Chen J, Lun S-Y.Study on mechanism of anaerobic sludge
granulation in UASB reactors.Water Sci Technol 1993;28(7):171–8.
[12] Dubourgier HC, Prensier G, Albagnac G.Structure and
microbial activities of granular anaerobic sludge.In:
Lettinga G, Zehnder AJB, Grotenhuis JTC, Hulshoff PolLW, editors.Granular anaerobic sludge: microbiology andtechnology.The Netherlands: Pudoc Wageningen; 1987.
p.18–33.
[13] Morgan JW, Evison LM, Forster CF.Internal architecture
of anaerobic sludge granules.J Chem Technol Biotechnol
1991;50:211–26.
[14] McLeod FA, Guiot SR, Costerton JW.Layered structure
of bacterial aggregates produced in an upﬂow anaerobicsludge bed and ﬁlter reactor.Appl Environ Microbiol
1990;56(6):1598–607.
[15] Vanderhaegen B, Ysebaert K, Favere K, van Wambeke M,
Peeters T, Panic V, Vandenlangenbergh V, Verstraete W.Acidogenesis in relation to in-reactor granule yield.Water
Sci Technol 1992;25(7):21–30.
[16] Ahn Y-H.Physicochemical and microbial aspects of
anaerobic granular pellets.J Environ Sci Health 2000;
A35(9):1617–35.
[17] Thaveesri J, Daffonchio D, Liessens B, Vandermeren P,
Verstraete W.Granulation and sludge bed stability inupﬂow anaerobic sludge bed reactors in relation to surface
thermodynamics.Appl Environ Microbiol 1995;61(10):
3681–6.
[18] Schmidt JE, Ahring BK.Review: granular sludge forma-
tion in upﬂow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactors.
Biotechnol Bioeng 1996;49:229–46.
[19] Tay JH, Xu HL, Teo KC.Molecular mechanism of
granulation.I: H
+translocation–dehydration theory.
J Environ Eng 2000;126:403–10.
[20] Hulshoff Pol LW, Heijnekamp K, Lettinga G.The
selection pressure as a driving force behind the granulationof anaerobic sludge.In: Lettinga G, Zehnder AJB,
Grotenhuis JTC, Hulshoff Pol LW, editors.Granular
anaerobic sludge: microbiology and technology.TheNetherlands: Pudoc.Wageningen; 1987.p.153–61.
[21] Ahring BK, Schmidt JE, Winther-Nielsen M, Macario
AJL, Macario EC.Effect of medium composition and
sludge removal on the production, composition, andarchitecture of thermophilic (55
/C14C) acetate-utilizing gran-
ules from and upﬂow anaerobic sludge blanket reactor.
Appl Environ Microbiol 1993;59(8):2538–45.
[22] Morvai L, Mihaltz P, Czako L.The kinetic basis for a new
start-up method to ensure the rapid granulation of
anaerobic sludge.Water Sci Technol 1992;25(7):113–22.
[23] Moosbrugger RE, Loewenthal RE, Marais GvR.Pelleti-
zation in a UASB system with protein (casein) as substrate.Water SA 1990;16(3):171–8.
[24] Wiegant WM, De Man AWA.Granulation of biomass in
thermophilic upﬂow anaerobic sludge blanket reactorstreating acidiﬁed wastewaters.Biotechnol Bioeng 1986;28:718–27.
[25] De Zeeuw WJ.Acclimatization of anaerobic sludge for
UASB reactor start-up.Ph. D.Thesis, Agricultural Uni-versity Wageningen, The Netherlands, 1984.
[26] Morgan JW, Evison LM, Forster CF.Upﬂow sludge
blanket reactors: the effect of bio-supplements on perfor-mance and granulation.J Chem Technol Biotechnol1991;52:243–55.
[27] De Zeeuw WJ.Granular sludge in UASB reactors.In:
Lettinga G, Zehnder AJB, Grotenhuis JTC, Hulshoff PolLW, editors.Granular anaerobic sludge: Microbiologyand technology.The Netherlands: Pudoc.Wageningen;
1987.p.132–45.
[28] Bochem HP, Schoberth SM, Sprey B, Wengler P.
Thermophilic biomethanation of acetic acid: morphology
and ultrastructure of a granular consortium.Canad
J Microbiol 1982;28:500–10.
[29] Van den Berg L, Kennedy KJ.Support materials for
stationary ﬁxed ﬁlm reactors for high-rate methanogenic
fermentations.Biotechnol Lett 1981;3:165–70.
[30] Fang HHP.Microbial distribution in UASB granules and
its resulting effects.Water Sci Technol 2000;42(12):201–8.
[31] Costerton JW, Cheng KJ, Geesey GG, Ladd TI,
Nickel JC, Dasgupta M, Marrie TJ.Bacterial bioﬁlmsARTICLE IN PRESS
L.W. Hulshoff Pol et al. / Water Research 38 (2004) 1376–1389 1388in nature and disease.Annu Rev Microbiol 1987;41:
435–64.
[32] Gantzer CJ, Cuunningham AB, Gujer W, Gutekunst B,
Heijnen JJ, Lightfoot EN, Odham G, Rittmann BE,Rosenberg E, Stolzenbach KD, Zehnder AJB.Exchangeprocesses at ﬂuid-bioﬁlm interface.In: Characklis WG,
Wildered PA, editors.Structure and function of bioﬁlms.
Chichester: Wiley; 1989.p.73–90.
[33] Van Loosdrecht MCM, Zehnder AJB.Energetics of
bacterial adhesion.Experientia 1990;46:817–22.
[34] Verrier D, Mortier B, Dubourguier HC, Albagnac G.
Adhesion of anaerobic bacteria to inert supports anddevelopment of methanogenic bioﬁlms.In: Hall ER,Hobson PN, editors.Anaerobic digestion.Oxford: Perga-
mon Press; 1988.p.61–70.
[35] Costerton JW, Marrie TJ, Cheng KJ.Phenomena of
bacterial adhesion.In: Savage DC, Fletcher M, editors.
Bacterial adhesion.Mechanisms and physiological signiﬁ-
cance.New York: Plenum Press; 1990.p.3–43.
[36] Daffonchio D, Thaveesri J, Verstraete W.Contact angle
measurement and cell hydrophobicity of granular sludge
from upﬂow anaerobic sludge bed reactors.Appl Environ
Microbiol 1995;61:3676–80.
[37] Kalogo Y, Verstrate W.Potentials of anaerobic treatment
of domestic sewage under temperate climate conditions.In:
Lens P, Zeeman G, Lettinga G, editors.Decentralised
sanitation and reuse: concepts, systems and implementa-tion.London: IWA Publishing; 2001.p.181–204.
[38] Mahoney EM, Varangu LK, Cairns WL, Kosaric N,
Murray R.The effect of calcium on microbial aggregationduring UASB reactor start-up.Water Sci Technol 1987;19:249.
[39] Van Loosdrecht MCM, Lykema J, Norde W, Schraa G,
Zehnder AJB.The role of bacterial cell wall hydrophobi-city in adhesion.Appl Environ Microbiol 1987;53(8):1893–7.
[40] Smith CA, Wood FJ.Molecular and cell biochemistry:
biological molecules.London: Chapman&Hall; 1991.
[41] Liu Y, Xu HL, Yang SF, Tay JH.Mechanisms and models
for anaerobic granulation in upﬂow anaerobic sludge
blanket reactor.Water Res 2003;37:661–73.
[42] Imai T, Ukita M, Liu J, Sekine M, Nakanishi H,
Fukagawa M.Advanced start up of UASB reactors byadding of water absorbing polymer.Water Sci Technol
1997;36(7):399–406.
[43] Teo KC, Xu HL, Tay JH.Molecular mechanism of
granulation.II: proton translocating activity.J EnvironEng 2000;126:411–8.
[44] Yu HQ, Tay JH, Fang HHP.Effects of added powdered
and granular activated carbons on start-up performance of
UASB reactors.Environ Technol 1999;20:1095–101.
[45] Fukuzaki S, Nishio N, Nagai S.The use of polyurethane
foam for microbial retention in methanogenic fermenta-
tion of propionate.Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 1990;34:
408–13.
[46] Yoda M, Kitagawa M, Miyaji Y.Granular sludge
formation in the anaerobic expanded micro carrier process.
Water Sci Technol 1989;21:109–22.
[47] Lettinga G, Van Velsen AFM, Hobma SW, De Zeuw W,
Klapwijk A.Use of the upﬂow sludge blanket (USB
reactor concept for biological waste water treatment,
especially for anaerobic treatment.Biotechnol Bioeng1980;22:699–734.
[48] Hickey RF, Wu WM, Veiga MC, Jones R.Start up,
operation, monitoring and control of high rate
anaerobic treatment systems.Water Sci Technol 1991;24(8):207–55.
[49] Ross WR.Anaerobic digestion of industrial efﬂuents with
emphasis on solids-liquid separation and biomass reten-
tion.Ph. D.Thesis, University of the Orange Free State,South Africa, 1984.
[50] Wu Wei-min, Jain MK, Zeikus JG.Formation of fatty
acid-degrading, anaerobic granules by deﬁned species.Appl Env Microbiol 1996;62(6):2037–44.
[51] Zhu J, Hu J, Gu X.The bacterial numeration and the
observation of a new syntrophic association for granular
sludge.Wat Sci Tech 1997;36(6/7):133–40.
[52] Grotenhuis JTC, Koornneef E, Plugge CM.Immobiliza-
tion of anaerobic bacteria in methanogenic aggregates.In:
Lettinga G, Zehnder AJB, Grotenhuis JTC, Hulshoff Pol
LW, editors.Granular anaerobic sludge: Microbiologyand technology.Wageningen, The Netherlands: Pudoc;1987.p.187–94.
[53] Rouxhet PG, Mozes N.Physical chemistry of the
interaction between attached microorganisms and theirsupport.Water Sci Technol 1990;22:1–16.ARTICLE IN PRESS
L.W. Hulshoff Pol et al. / Water Research 38 (2004) 1376–1389 1389