Leading Edge
Review
The Human Gut Microbiome:
From Association to Modulation
Thomas S.B. Schmidt,1Jeroen Raes,2,3,*and Peer Bork1,4,5,6, *
1European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology Unit, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany
2KU Leuven – University of Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega Institute, Herestraat 49, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
3VIB, Center for Microbiology, Heerestraat 49, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
4Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit, University of Heidelberg and European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
5Max-Delbru ¨ck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, 13125 Berlin, Germany
6Department of Bioinformatics, Biocenter, University of Wu ¨rzburg, 97074 Wu ¨rzburg, Germany
*Correspondence: jeroen.raes@kuleuven.vib.be (J.R.), bork@embl.de (P.B.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.02.044
Our understanding of the human gut microbiome continues to evolve at a rapid pace, but practical
application of thisknowledge is still in its infancy. This review discusses the type of studies that will
be essential for translating microbiome research into targeted modulations with dedicated beneﬁts
for the human host.
The human microbiota is the focus of one of the most dynamic
research ﬁelds of our time, and most efforts are directed at the
gastrointestinal tract, which harbors most of our microbes. In
the past decade, our understanding of the organisms inhabitingour gut, their functionality, and their roles in human health and
disease has advanced greatly, facilitated by fast technological
development. Research on the gut microbiome is progressingthrough several steps that mirror those of other ﬁelds on other
biological systems: (1) compilation of parts lists, (2) association
of the system or its components to external factors, (3) establish-ment of functional knowledge, and (4) translation of that knowl-edge into applications. For the gut microbiome, this is reﬂected
in the following developments.
(1) The compilation of gut microbiome ‘‘parts lists’’ has been in
full swing for more than a decade and is now almost complete,
for the dominating prokaryotic domains, and at the resolution
of genera and species. Several studies established the baselinestructure and function of the microbiome—that is, lists of species
and their genes—with major contributions from two large collab-
orative efforts of the MetaHIT ( Li et al., 2014; Qin et al., 2010 ) and
Human Microbiome Project (HMP) ( Nelson et al., 2010; Human
Microbiome Project Consortium, 2012 ) consortia. Although
novel diversity continues to be discovered, in particular at sub-species and strain level, and although a large fraction of microbi-al genes remains functionally uncharacterized, the census of the
most dominant lineages in industrialized populations is arguably
approaching completion (e.g., Zhou et al., 2018 ).
(2) Using these parts list, a wealth of studies has probed for as-
sociations of the gut microbiome to disease, host factors, or the
wider environment. As coverage and scope increase, these havebeen collectively referred to as metagenome-wide association
studies (MWASs) ( Wang and Jia, 2016 ), in analogy to genome-
wide association studies (GWASs). Recently, MWASs havereached population level, as large-scale cross-sectional studies
(Falony et al., 2016; Zhernakova et al., 2016 ) started to provide
an integrated view of the relative impact of various host and envi-ronmental factors on microbiome composition (see Box 1 ).(3) Associations identiﬁed by MWASs are observational, can
be indirect or confounded by underlying factors, and do not
easily translate into causal links. However, for a functional under-
standing of a complex system such as the gut microbiome, it isnecessary to connect parts lists (1D) to networks (2D) in a spatial
(3D) and temporal (4D) context ( Raes and Bork, 2008 ), and this
requires adapted concepts (see below) and methodological ap-proaches (see Box 2 ). Although the study of the microbiome’s
taxa interaction networks (2D), i.e., the interactions between its
parts (1D), is ongoing, the inference of species interactionsfrom cross-sectional data remains challenging ( Weiss et al.,
2016 ). This is in part because current readouts (fecal samples)
are still mostly non-quantitative ( Vandeputte et al., 2017c ) and
poorly reﬂect the spatial organization of the intestinal tract(3D). Moreover, interactions and microbiome function are dy-
namic, and in consequence, individual gut microbes and entire
communities need to be studied in the context of time (4D),though longitudinal studies so far remain scarce. Perturbation
experiments, in particular, enable the study of a system’s dy-
namics, both at the level of individual parts and the entire system.An increasing number of intervention studies adds to our func-
tional understanding of the gut microbiome, but it remains un-
clear whether observed responses are generic, stratiﬁed, orindeed personal (see Box 3 ).
(4) Finally, knowledge on the microbiome begins to be trans-
lated into applications, and this entails a move from perturbation
to modulation. Perturbations may trigger microbiome shifts, butmost of these are unforeseeable or not intended. Targeted micro-
biome modulation, preferably with predictable outcome in terms
of response and without side effects, will require a functionalunderstanding of the system, but also an accepted operational
deﬁnition of desired ‘‘healthy’’ endpoints, both intrinsically and
in relation to the host. Given these, we expect microbiome mod-ulation to become a major translational asset in the near future,
establishing the microbiome as a versatile therapeutic target.
In this review, we focus on active and emerging areas in the
context of the above (see Figure 1 ), and especially on studies
1198 Cell 172, March 8, 2018 ª2018 Elsevier Inc.of the human gut microbiome in natura , with less emphasis on
in vivo work in animal models. Speciﬁcally, we highlight recent
ﬁndings on co-variates associated to microbiome composition,
discuss the strengths and limitations of MWASs, and arguethat a strong push toward longitudinal and perturbation-based
study designs is essential for a deeper functional understanding
of the gut microbiome, as well as for the development of micro-biome modulation strategies toward improved health and
well-being.
Co-variates Associated to Human Gut Microbiome
Composition
Taxonomic composition of the gut microbiome varies greatly be-tween individuals, due to both microbiome-intrinsic and micro-biome-extrinsic factors (see Figure 2 ). The former depend on
the microbiome’s state, e.g., following maturation during life-
time, which feeds back on itself, e.g., via taxa interactions. Thelatter (microbiome-extrinsic) factors refer to the various environ-
mental layers that impact on or interact with the gut microbiome.
These can explain part of the observed variation within a popu-lation and can be classiﬁed empirically into three overlapping
categories: host-extrinsic factors (i.e., factors inﬂuenced by
host lifestyle to some extent, such as dietary habits), host-intrinsic factors (e.g., host genetics), and environmental factors(e.g., the vertical transmission of maternal strains to neonates,
or neocolonization constraints by regional strain pools; Figure 2 ).
Many small- to medium-scale MWASs have linked gut micro-
biome composition to such factors (see e.g., Lynch and Peder-
sen, 2016; Wang and Jia, 2016 for reviews). The majority of these
studies have probed associations of taxonomic composition,usually of genera or species, whereas functional composition,
i.e., gene and functional repertoire, has received less attention,
Figure 1. The Route toward Targeted
Microbiome Modulation Entails Three Con-secutive and Mutually Dependent Lines ofInvestigation
A ‘‘parts list’’ of the microbiome’s structure and
function has now been mostly established, andmetagenome-wide association studies (MWASs)
have identiﬁed important co-variates of micro-
biome composition (see Figure 2 ). At the same
time, longitudinal studies have started to provide
important insights into the microbiome’s intrinsic
dynamics. Taken together, these provide ﬁrst cuestoward a functional understanding of the gut
microbiome. Perturbation experiments can signif-
icantly extend this, while also providing insights
into the microbiome’s ecological dynamics—the
‘‘wiring’’ of the system in terms of interactionsbetween its parts. An integrated functional under-
standing will be essential toward translating mi-
crobiome research into targeted modulations, withdedicated beneﬁts for the human host.
mostly due to technical and economical
constraints. Moreover, only recentlyhave increasing cohort sizes and compre-
hensive phenotyping enabled the identiﬁ-
cation of associations to a wide range ofco-variates with sufﬁcient statistical po-
wer ( Falony et al., 2016; Goodrich et al., 2016; Turpin et al.,
2016; Wang et al., 2016a; Zhernakova et al., 2016 ). For the ﬁrst
time, such studies have allowed to quantify the relative contribu-tions of relevant co-variates to microbiome composition. A key
ﬁnding has been that even the strongest co-varying factors
explain only a surprisingly small fraction of inter-individual gutmicrobiome variation, at an estimated combined effect size in
the range of 10%–15% (see Box 1 ). This is, nevertheless, consid-
erably larger than technical variation ( Costea et al., 2017b ) and
known co-variates should therefore be taken into account as po-
tential confounders of MWASs (see below). Here, we summarize
previous ﬁndings on co-variates of human gut microbiomecomposition, with a focus on recent work.Microbiome State, Including Disease Association and
Host Age
Microbiome compositional state is associated with micro-biome-extrinsic factors and shaped by stochastic or ecological
effects (e.g., founder effects when re-seeding from the environ-
ment) but also potentially self-reinforcing. Differences in micro-biome state may underlie differential associations to extrinsic
factors, and it is necessary to stratify analyses accordingly
(see Box 3 ). One such intrinsic stratifying factor is probably
the gut enterotype, although it is not clear whether such com-munity types follow external co-variates such as diet, transit
time, or inﬂammation or represent intrinsically different compo-
sitional optima with similar functionality or both ( Costea et al.,
2018 ). Importantly, microbiome associations are often complex
and seldom unidirectional: an external inﬂuence may trigger a
compositional shift that then becomes entrenched in an adapt-ed microbiome state, but microbiome state also feeds back to
the host in various ways (e.g., via the production of certain me-
tabolites).
Cell 172, March 8, 2018 1199An example of this is the complex association between micro-
biome state and diseases from various medical indication areas(Gilbert et al., 2016; Lynch and Pedersen, 2016; Wang and Jia,
2016 ). In some, such as in the case of colorectal cancer ( Zeller
et al., 2014 ) or arthritis ( Scher et al., 2013; Tito et al., 2017; Zhang
et al., 2015b ), individual marker taxa are associated to the dis-
ease, whereas effects on overall composition are mild. Other dis-
ease states, in contrast, are associated with marked shifts in
overall compositional features, such as reduced diversity or rich-ness, as is, for example, the case for obesity ( Le Chatelier et al.,
2013; Turnbaugh et al., 2009 ) or inﬂammatory bowel disease
(IBD) ( Manichanh et al., 2006; Ott et al., 2004 ). However, for any
detected association, it is not clear a priori whether microbiome
shifts cause the disease or vice versa, or whether both the dis-
ease state and observed microbiome effects are caused by athird factor. Indeed, a recent meta-study of 28 MWAS datasets
found an overlap of microbiome signatures between different dis-
eases, implying that several reported disease-microbiome linksmight be non-speciﬁc ( Duvallet et al., 2017 ) and possibly linked
to other factors such as transit time or inﬂammation (see also Fal-
ony et al., 2016 ). Hence, disease speciﬁcity of reported micro-
biome markers needs to be established and preferably testedpost hoc, e.g., if comorbidities or shared symptoms are known,
as is the case for colorectal cancer and IBD ( Zeller et al., 2014 ).
Other well-established differences in microbiome state follow
host age (reviewed recently by Kundu et al., 2017; Lynch and
Pedersen, 2016 ). Some age-related transitions are gradual,
Figure 2. Microbiome Composition Is Asso-
ciated to Several Known Co-variates
Microbiome-extrinsic factors can be empirically
classiﬁed into three categories: host-intrinsic,host-extrinsic, and environmental. Moreover, mi-
crobiome state feeds back upon itself and thereby
contributes to compositional variation betweenindividuals. Clearly, these categories overlap, and
many factors are also associated to each other.
For example, diet contains microbes from envi-
ronmental strain pools which may colonize the gut
or even, in the case of food poisoning, trigger ashift into a diseased microbiome state that sub-
sequently becomes entrenched intrinsically, but
also prompts medication. In practice, it is thereforechallenging to disentangle the effect size of indi-
vidual factors, and it is often necessary to stratify
for other co-variates, in particular also for micro-
biome state (see Box 3 ). Indeed, the overall effect
of known co-variates on human gut microbiomevariation is surprisingly small ( Box 1 ).
while others are more clearly deﬁned,
e.g., between neonates and older infants,and can correlate with lifestyle changes,
such as the cessation of breastfeeding.
After birth, infants are colonized by spe-cies present in the environment and themother ( Tamburini et al., 2016 ). Strain-
level analyses have recently conﬁrmed
that a signiﬁcant fraction of the devel-oping microbiome is indeed of maternal
origin but that seeding is selective, as
strains from certain phyla are acquired from the environment(Korpela et al., 2018 ). Neonate and early-life microbiome compo-
sition has been linked to several childhood diseases, including
atopy and asthma (e.g., by Fujimura et al., 2016; Stokholm
et al., 2018 ). It has been suggested that this may be due to early
life disturbances of the microbiome, e.g., as a side effect of anti-
biotic treatment (reviewed by Langdon et al., 2016 ). Other early
life events such as birth mode (Caesarean section versus vaginalbirth) or feeding (breastfeeding versus formula) have been asso-
ciated with developing or adult microbiome composition
(recently reviewed by Tamburini et al., 2016 ), but more recent
evidence with regard to longer-term effects is mixed ( Chu
et al., 2017; Falony et al., 2016 ). Diversity increases after infancy
and compositional shifts continue more gradually during latechildhood, adolescence, and adulthood ( Kundu et al., 2017;
Odamaki et al., 2016 ). Elderly people show signatures of diver-
sity loss, decreased temporal compositional stability, andcompositional shifts, all of which are associated to general healthbut also to confounders like diet and housing environment, a
more constrained lifestyle ( O’Toole and Jeffery, 2015 ), or medi-
cation ( Ticinesi et al., 2017 ).
Extrinsic Host Factors Including Medication, Diet,
Lifestyle, BMI, and Stool Consistency
A wealth of studies tested associations of the adult gut micro-biome to factors that are host extrinsic (i.e., inﬂuenced by host
lifestyle at least to some extent). For instance, medication is
emerging as a major co-variate. It is commonly accepted that
1200 Cell 172, March 8, 2018broad-spectrum antibiotics—administered to diminish patho-
gens—impact the gut microbiota as a side effect, both on
immediate and longer timescales ( Becattini et al., 2016; Lang-
don et al., 2016 ). Perhaps more surprisingly, an increasing
number of reports also link non-antibiotic drugs to microbiome
modulation (reviewed by Le Bastard et al., 2018 and Maier and
Typas, 2017 ). For example, the type 2 diabetes drug metformin
has been shown to have a stronger impact on microbiomecomposition than the disease condition itself ( Forslund et al.,
2015 ), an effect that has recently been corroborated in a ran-
domized crossover study ( Wu et al., 2017 ). Similarly, proton
pump inhibitors ( Freedberg et al., 2015; Imhann et al., 2016;
Jackson et al., 2016 ), atypical antipsychotics ( Bahr et al.,
2015; Flowers et al., 2017; Ma ¨kivuokko et al., 2010 ), and non-
steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs ( Rogers and Aronoff, 2016 ),
among others, have been reported to impact the gut
microbiome. In the Flemish Gut Flora Project (FGFP) study,medication (including antibiotics, but also anti-histamines andhormones, for example) was found to be the most important
co-variate of microbiome composition ( Falony et al., 2016 ). In
a recent large-scale in vitro screen testing 1,200 marketed
drugs, around half of non-bacterial anti-infectives and a quarter
of all human-targeted drugs were found to inhibit at least
one gut commensal ( Maier et al., 2018 ), implying that the
effect of medication on the gut microbiome remains massively
underexplored.
Most drugs are deﬁned chemical compounds, but the gut
microbiome is regularly confronted with a complex mix of mil-
lions of compounds of dietary origin. As gut commensals
contribute to food digestion, links between diet and the micro-biome have been studied for years, at different levels of resolu-tion (reviewed e.g., by Flint et al., 2012; Sonnenburg and
Ba¨ckhed, 2016 ). These include microbiome signatures of broad
nutritional categories, such as plant- and animal-based diets(David et al., 2014; Muegge et al., 2011 ), and longer-term dietary
patterns ( Smits et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2011 ). However, although
diet-microbiome associations were conﬁrmed in cross-sectionalstudies ( Falony et al., 2016; Zeevi et al., 2015; Zhernakova et al.,
2016 ), diet explained only a low single digit percentage ofobserved microbiome variation after adjusting for covariates.
This range likely represents a lower limit, as most cross-sectional
studies rely on self-reported dietary data, which has various
issues ( Ioannidis, 2013 ).
Several lifestyle factors such as cigarette smoking ( Bieder-
mann et al., 2013 ), alcohol usage ( Dubinkina et al., 2017 ), and
physical exercise ( Barton et al., 2017; Clarke et al., 2014; Pe-
tersen et al., 2017 ) have been linked to microbiome composition
but were not among the top-ranking covariates in recent popula-
tion studies. Microbiome associations to body mass index (BMI)
and obesity have received considerable attention, with links re-ported to decreased taxonomic ( Turnbaugh et al., 2009 ) and
functional ( Le Chatelier et al., 2013 ) diversity. More recently,
this observation was extended to subspecies resolution ( Costea
et al., 2017a ). A signiﬁcant but mild BMI-microbiome link was
found in the FGFP ( Falony et al., 2016 ), in line with recent
meta-analyses ( Finucane et al., 2014; Sze and Schloss, 2016;
Walters et al., 2014 ).
Stool consistency, as assessed by the Bristol stool scale, was
the factor with the overall largest effect size in the FGFP study,
accounting for /C245% of observed compositional variation ( Falony
et al., 2016 ). First quantiﬁed in a small-scale cohort ( Vandeputte
et al., 2016 ), this factor was recently conﬁrmed in independent
cohorts ( Tigchelaar et al., 2016; Vandeputte et al., 2017c; Zher-
nakova et al., 2016 ), shown to be independent of water activity
(Vandeputte et al., 2017a ) but driven by transit time ( Roager
et al., 2016 ).
Clearly, many of these host-extrinsic factors are not indepen-
dent of each other (e.g., diet and transit time, BMI and drug us-
age) and may moreover be linked to host-intrinsic or environ-mental factors. It is therefore important to note that manyobserved microbiome signatures may be driven by mixed
effects.
Intrinsic Host Factors such as GeneticsSome of the above factors (e.g., BMI) can be partially attributed
to genetics. For other factors, a host genetic component is more
tangible: for example, the microbiome is intricately and recipro-cally linked to both the innate and adaptive immune system
(reviewed by Belkaid and Hand, 2014; Hooper et al., 2012;Box 1. Why Can We Explain So Little of Observed Microbiome Variation?
It has been a sobering observation that the combined effect size of different microbiome co-variates (both technical and biological) appears to be
intriguingly low: in the Flemish Gut Flora Project and LifeLines-DEEP cohorts, the total non-redundant compositional variation explained was in th e
single digit percent range ( Falony et al., 2016; Zhernakova et al., 2016 ), the inﬂuence of host genetics has been reported in a similar range ( Bonder
et al., 2016; Turpin et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016a ) or below ( Rothschild et al., 2018 ), as have disease associations ( Duvallet et al., 2017 ). This could
be due to the fact that (1) there are further important uncharacterized co-variates or the current ones are not measured accurately enough, that (2)
associations of individual taxa are more relevant than global compositional shifts, that (3) intrinsic compositional constellations or stable sta tes are
resilient, that (4) true effects can only be detected at higher taxonomic resolution ( Costea et al., 2017a ), or that (5) neutral or stochastic processes
(drift) have a stronger impact than previously appreciated. Moreover, (6) the gut microbiome’s intrinsic ecological dynamics and interactions,
ecological succession, and ecosystem maturation (G. Falony, S. Viera-Silva, and J.R., unpublished data) are possible factors that have so far re-
mained understudied, in part due to a lack of longitudinal data.Nevertheless, the current total quantiﬁcation of external factors to microbiome variation is probably in the range of 10%–15%, and thus of signiﬁcan t
enough effect size to be considered in clinical studies, as even some individual factors can confound associations. This likely remains true even if
one extends the deﬁnition of MWAS to ‘‘microbiome-wide association studies’’ by also taking into account other data types, such as metatranscrip-
tomic or metabolomic readouts, as recently suggested ( Gilbert et al., 2016 ). Therefore, the proper consideration of and stratiﬁcation for known mi-
crobiome covariates as potential confounders will greatly improve the accuracy of MWASs but can also inform the interpretation of longitudinal andinterventional datasets.
Cell 172, March 8, 2018 1201Thaiss et al., 2016 ), though it has remained challenging to quan-
tify the immune system’s impact in shaping the gut microbiome
independently of other factors. Similarly, there is increasing evi-dence for a reciprocal brain-gut-microbiota axis (reviewed e.g.,
byCarabotti et al., 2015 ).Several studies have probed for more direct associations of
the microbiome with individual host genetic loci (reviewed by
Hall et al., 2017; Kurilshikov et al., 2017 ). In a large cross-
sectional study of British twins, relative abundances of several
genera were found to be heritable ( Goodrich et al., 2016,Box 2. Methodological Advances to Boost Microbiome Research
Microbiomics, as a research ﬁeld, evolves at a breakneck pace, and this is certainly true with regard to methodological advances (see Mallick et al.,
2017 for a recent review). Here we highlight recent developments that we expect to make a strong impact in the near future, enabling us to tackle new
questions and further complementing the transition from observational to interventional study designs.
MULTI-OMICS
High-throughput 16S rRNA amplicon and whole-genome shotgun (WGS) metagenomic sequencing have boosted microbiome research for more
than a decade, and these technologies continue to dominate the ﬁeld. More recently, however, the taxonomic and functional census provided by
metagenomics is increasingly complemented by readouts on activity , provided by metatranscriptomics, metaproteomics, and metabolomics (re-
viewed by Franzosa et al., 2015; Mallick et al., 2017 ). Metabolomic analyses, in particular, have served as independent lines of evidence to conﬁrm
hypotheses generated in MWASs, for example conﬁrming a link of microbial metabolism to cardiovascular disease ( Wang et al., 2011 ) or the impact
of gut microbiome metabolism on insulin sensitivity ( Pedersen et al., 2016 ).
Metatranscriptomic analyses provide a more direct readout on microbial gene expression proﬁles, and relating this information to baseline micro-biome functional potential can reveal novel insights (see Abu-Ali et al., 2018; Schirmer et al., 2018 for recent examples). The gut metaproteome, in
contrast, has not been analyzed on a large scale, although a few pilot-sized studies exist ( Erickson et al., 2012; Heintz-Buschart et al., 2016; Kol-
meder and de Vos, 2014 ).
An important challenge to multi-omic microbiome research is integration: the different data types provide intermingled layers of evidence and needto be interpreted in light of each other, and integrated analysis concepts ( Heintz-Buschart et al., 2016; Mallick et al., 2017 ) start challenging common
conceptions on the microbiome, e.g., on the relative importance of functional plasticity ( Heintz-Buschart and Wilmes, 2017 ).
QUANTITATIVE MICROBIOME PROFILING (QMP)
Most microbiome studies rely on compositional data—relative abundances of taxa or genes are scaled by non-informative total library sizes, and
compositionality effects may introduce false positive taxa-taxa or taxa-covariate associations ( Faust and Raes, 2012; Friedman and Alm, 2012;
Weiss et al., 2017 ). The use of spiked-in standards ( Satinsky et al., 2013 ), known cell numbers ( Sta¨mmler et al., 2016 ), or ﬂow cytometry ( Props
et al., 2017; Vandeputte et al., 2017c ) can enable absolute microbial quantiﬁcation. Indeed, total microbial load showed large inter-individual vari-
ation, was linked to community composition, and was decreased in Crohn’s disease ( Vandeputte et al., 2017c ). Thus, QMP can increase sensitivity
and speciﬁcity in MWASs.
IN VITRO MICROBIOMICS AND MICROFLUIDICS
While in vitro approaches have long been used to probe the microbiome in classical reductionist setups, they are currently experiencing a renais-
sance in high-throughput, explorative analyses. Several microﬂuidics-based ‘‘gut on a chip’’ systems provide increasingly better approximation so f
the human intestinal environment ( Kim et al., 2012; Marzorati et al., 2014; Shah et al., 2016 ). At the same time, high-throughput cultivation now en-
compasses fastidious, anaerobic organisms ( Rettedal et al., 2014 ), even in deﬁned media ( Tramontano et al., 2018 ).
EXTENDED TAXONOMIC BREADTH AND RESOLUTION
As bacteria account for the vast majority of gut ﬂora biomass and are most accessible to cultivation, microbiome research has mostly focused on the
bacterial domain. Eukaryal ( Parfrey et al., 2011; Wlodarska et al., 2015 ), archaeal ( Gaci et al., 2014 ), and viral ( Hurwitz et al., 2016; Ogilvie and Jones,
2015; Yutin et al., 2018 ) members of the gut ﬂora have been studied in the past, and now are receiving renewed attention ( Conceic ¸a˜o-Neto et al.,
2017; Sokol et al., 2017 ). At the same time, reference genomic representation of the archaeal and bacterial domain have increased greatly, in part
due to coordinated efforts to sequence type strains ( Mukherjee et al., 2017 ). This illustrates the dynamics of the ﬁeld: just over a decade ago, early
human fecal metagenomes contained mostly unclassiﬁable reads ( Eckburg et al., 2005 ), and even in 2013, only around half the reads in a gut meta-
genome mapped to reference genomes ( Sunagawa et al., 2013 ). Only a few years later, this gap may soon be closed, at least for the major prokary-
otic lineages (e.g., Zhou et al., 2018 ).
This increase in taxonomic coverage is complemented by a similar increase in taxonomic resolution. Following a ﬁrst mapping of the landscape ofmicrobial single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in the microbiome ( Schloissnig et al., 2013 ), several tools to call microbial SNVs and to proﬁle subspecies
to strain-level variation have been developed ( Costea et al., 2017c; Nayfach et al., 2016; Quince et al., 2017; Scholz et al., 2016; Truong et al., 2017 )
and applied to the human gut microbiome. Several species-level observations of the Human Microbiome Project were recently extended to strain
level ( Lloyd-Price et al., 2017 ), and associations of subspecies to co-variates were reported that were not apparent at lower taxonomic resolution
(Costea et al., 2017a ). This indicates that a resolution subordinate to species may help uncover novel and previously overlooked microbiome fea-
tures and links.
1202 Cell 172, March 8, 20182014 ); this observation was later corroborated at species level
and extended to function (gene content) on a smaller sub-cohort
(Xie et al., 2016 ). A study of 1,561 North Americans likewise re-
ported taxa heritability, as well as an association of 6 humanSNPs to taxa abundance ( Turpin et al., 2016 ), which has the
same order of magnitude as the 9 and 33 loci associated with mi-
crobial taxa and pathways, respectively, reported in the DutchLL-DEEP cohort ( Bonder et al., 2016 ). A study on a large North-
ern German cohort reported that 42 human SNPs accounted for
/C2410% of observed microbiome compositional variation ( Wang
et al., 2016a ). In contrast, a recent re-analysis of the above data-
sets, extended by 696 Israeli individuals, estimated that host ge-
netics account for less than 2% of microbiome variation ( Roths-
child et al., 2018 ). Overall, the impact of host genetics on the gut
microbiota appears signiﬁcant, but with very low effect size. Po-
tential discrepancies, such as with subject sex (reported among
the highest-ranking co-variates in the FGFP and LL-DEEPstudies), may be due to indirect effects, e.g., to culturally inﬂu-enced behavioral, dietary, or proteotypic differences that cannot
be pinpointed to the genome, such as hormone levels.
Environmental FactorsEnvironmental factors beyond the control of the human host
have so far remained understudied, although geographical pat-
terns in community composition have been reported, possiblyconnected to lifestyle (e.g., Suzuki and Worobey, 2014; Yatsu-
nenko et al., 2012 ). When extending the taxonomic resolution
to subspecies level or to a loose operational deﬁnition of strains,much more deﬁned geographical patterns become obvious
(Costea et al., 2017a; Truong et al., 2017 ), implying the existence
of regional strain pools that harbor different functionality. Indeed,this can be further reﬁned to the level of household and familywhere replacement of gut strains can happen in adulthood ( Kor-
pela et al., 2018 ), which may be part of the reason why family
members show a more similar taxonomic composition thannon-family members ( Song et al., 2013 ). The study of effects of
household in a broader context, the (built) environment ( Hoising-
ton et al., 2015; Lax et al., 2014 ), and close contact with nature
(Obregon-Tito et al., 2015 ) will likely reveal further environmental
factors inﬂuencing the individual gut microbiome.
Limitations to Studying Microbiome Associations
Increased cohort sizes, improved study designs, and compre-
hensive metadata surveys have greatly enhanced the statisticalpower of MWASs. However, they cannot overcome inherent
limitations to association studies, which are ampliﬁed by the
complexity and variation of the underlying data, and whichneed to be accounted for when interpreting and comparing
MWAS results.
Technical VariationLike other omics-driven research ﬁelds, MWASs are prone towithin-study and between-study batch effects. Two recent
meta-analyses of microbiome-disease association studies
found that between-study variation required explicit or implicitbatch effect correction ( Duvallet et al., 2017; Pasolli et al.,
2016 ). Almost every step in a typical microbiomics study,
including sample collection and storage ( Hang et al., 2014;
Song et al., 2016; Vandeputte et al., 2017d; Voigt et al., 2015 ),
DNA extraction and processing ( Costea et al., 2017b; Sinhaet al., 2017 ), and bioinformatic analyses ( Mallick et al., 2017 ),
has been identiﬁed as an important source of technical variation.
Indeed, two recent large-scale studies on technical limits to
reproducibility have reported large variation between differentworkﬂows as well as between replications of the same workﬂow
in the same and in different laboratories ( Costea et al., 2017b; Si-
nha et al., 2017 ). This calls for reﬁned standards, at least in com-
parison to reference standard operating procedures ( Costea
et al., 2017b ).
Speciﬁcity and Indirect Associations
Even if technical variation can be reduced, there are several lim-itations common to association studies in general. First, the
speciﬁcity of any link cannot be proven within such a study. For
instance, discovery of a disease association does not necessarilyimply that observed differences can serve as speciﬁc markers
without independent replication and comparison with other
phenotypes. Second, any association can be indirect. A case inpoint are the repeatedly reported microbiome associations toHIV that have recently been called into question, as most of the
observed signal comes from one of the risk groups, men having
sex with men ( Noguera-Julian et al., 2016 ). Even this more direct
association is probably confounded by further untested factors,
such as sexual practices, social status, or lifestyle. Similarly, con-
founders are likely due to question several previously reporteddisease associations. For example, usage of the drug metformin
caused the majority of the signal underlying earlier reports on a
strong microbiome association with type 2 diabetes (
Forslund
et al., 2015 ). A comprehensive survey indicated that indeed, a
wide range of previously reported associations are at least in
part confounded by secondary factors ( Falony et al., 2016 ).
Taxonomic Resolution and Lack of FunctionalCharacterization
The majority of MWASs to date have relied on amplicon
sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene. This approach is compara-tively cost effective and has enabled a dramatic scale-up in
cohort sizes. However, reliable taxonomic classiﬁcation of cur-
rent 16S amplicon sequences is generally limited to genus level(Matias Rodrigues et al., 2017 ), and several recent analyses indi-
cate that many taxonomic associations might emerge only at
levels subordinate to species (e.g., Costea et al., 2017a; Lloyd-
Price et al., 2017 ). Moreover, amplicon approaches often limit
the taxonomic scope to bacteria and archaea, thereby missing
potentially informative signals on eukaryal and viral members
of the gut ﬂora. However, these limits to taxonomic resolutionand scope may soon be overcome as whole-genome shotgun
metagenomic sequencing becomes more affordable (see
Box 2 ). This approach also provides readouts on the micro-
biome’s gene and functional repertoires, but this valuable infor-
mation often remains untapped, partially due to a blatant lack in
functional annotation: a large fraction of gut microbial genes,both from cultured isolates and metagenomes, is uncharacter-
ized to date.
Correlation Does Not Imply CausationIt has become a scientiﬁc truism in microbiome research thatcorrelation does not imply causation: while causal directionality
is trivial for some associations (e.g., antibiotics treatment im-
pacts the microbiome, and not vice versa), it is difﬁcult or impos-sible to infer for others, based on observational data only.
Cell 172, March 8, 2018 1203Several mathematical approaches for causality inference that
have been applied successfully in other ﬁelds start to be adopted
for microbiome data, such as structural equation modeling or
Bayesian network inference. However, their wider utilizationhas been hampered by constraints on data size and complexity,
and many inference frameworks require repeated (longitudinal)
observations (see below).
The gold standard for assessing causality of individual associ-
ations are classical, reductionist approaches, often relying on
mouse models. For example, a potentially protective role for
Clostridium immunis was recently discovered in a murine colitis
model, using a framework dubbed microbe-phenotype triangu-
lation ( Surana and Kasper, 2017 ) that satisﬁes a ‘‘commensal’’
version of Koch’s postulates ( Neville et al., 2017 ). However,
such workﬂows require the successful isolation and cultivation
of targeted taxa, which often remains challenging in practice.
In some cases, MWAS ﬁndings are validated experimentally bytransplanting human fecal microbiota into mouse models (re-viewed by Wang and Jia, 2016 ). However, while murine models
allow for controlled experimental setups, they suffer from several
limitations, including anatomical and physiological differencesbetween the human and murine digestive tract, cage effects
due to coprophagy, fundamentally different microbiome compo-
sition with little species overlap, and different host immune pres-sures affecting transplanted microbiotas ( Hugenholtz and de
Vos, 2018; Nguyen et al., 2015 ). In consequence, the translation
ofin vitro orin vivo ﬁndings to human context often remains
difﬁcult.
Understanding Microbiome Dynamics via Longitudinal
Studies
Despite the discussed caveats, metagenome-wide association
studies have identiﬁed important microbiome-disease linksthat can be followed up for diagnostic purposes and revealed
major co-variates of gut microbiome composition. However,
most of these studies were cross-sectional and hence mecha-nistic insights remain limited. Large-scale generation of longitu-
dinal data, covering (1) baseline dynamics of the unperturbed gut
microbiome and (2) the response to various perturbations (seenext section), is crucial to understand the ‘‘wiring’’ of the gutecosystem—temporal resolution of stimulus and response can
help disentangle cause-effect directionality of microbiome asso-
ciations in natura (i.e., directly in the human host).
Many studies have concluded that the gut microbiome is
remarkably stable over time at baseline, in the absence of inter-
vention, both in terms of taxonomic and functional composition.For example, intra-individual genus- and species-level composi-
tional variation over time is lower than inter-individual differences
(see e.g., Faith et al., 2013; Human Microbiome Project Con-
sortium, 2012 , among others), an observation that has since
been extended to strain-level resolution ( Costea et al., 2017a;
Lloyd-Price et al., 2017; Schloissnig et al., 2013 ). More recently,
the fecal microbiome has been reported to be transcriptomicallystable over time as well, albeit to a lesser extent ( Abu-Ali et al.,
2018 ). In contrast to this general temporal stability of the adult
unperturbed microﬂora, clear successional dynamics havebeen described for the developing microbiome of infants
(Ba¨ckhed et al., 2015; Koenig et al., 2011; La Rosa et al.,2014 ), and elderly people can show a marked loss of microbiome
stability depending on further lifestyle factors ( Jeffery
et al., 2016 ).
All in all, however, the temporal variation of the human gut
microbiota remains understudied and most of the currently pub-
lished studies are statistically underpowered, either in number of
individuals, in number of time points, or in temporal resolution.High-resolution studies with sufﬁcient cohort sizes are essentialto build predictive models of gut microbiome dynamics, which
can then be challenged to model perturbation response ( Bucci
and Xavier, 2014; Faust et al., 2015 ). This will not be a trivial
task: even the relatively deﬁned community succession in neo-
nates has proven elusive to predictive modeling, probably due
to the relative importance of both maternally and environmentallycontributed strains ( Asnicar et al., 2017; Korpela et al., 2018 ).
Disentangling the Microbiome’s ‘‘Wiring’’ via
Perturbations
Perturbation experiments have long been a framework of choice
in both systems biology ( Jansen, 2003 ) and community ecology
(Bender et al., 1984 ), as community-level responses to a pertur-
bation allow inferences about interactions between its members.
Although the blind application of classical ecological theory tothe microbiome is not without risk ( Koskella et al., 2017 ), the
value of perturbation designs in microbial ecology has been
demonstrated repeatedly ( Faust et al., 2015; Shade et al.,
2012 ). Indeed, perturbation experiments are much more infor-
mative toward the development of (dynamic) predictive models
for microbial community ecology than cross-sectional studies,
in particular when complemented with in vitro and in vivo ap-
proaches (see Box 2 ). Such a perturb-to-predict paradigm can
provide testable hypotheses and will be essential toward a tar-
geted modulation of the gut microbiome, which in turn is at theheart of translational work (see next section).
Here, we review examples of how interventional studies can
advance our understanding of the gut microbiome and highlightemerging trends. We use a broad deﬁnition of perturbation,
including stimuli such as medication or dietary intervention.
Perturbation Response as a Window into MicrobiomeCommunity Structure and DynamicsWhereas longitudinal analyses are essential to understand
baseline microbiome dynamics, perturbation of a microbial
system allows much deeper insights into its ecological makeup(Faust et al., 2015; Shade et al., 2012; Sommer et al., 2017 ).
Arguably, the longest-lasting perturbation experiment on the hu-
man gut microbiome is diet intake, as this natural process hasevolved over millions of years. After adopting a more sedentary
lifestyle, humans have adapted to an omnivore diet with high va-
riety, and the impact of moderate dietary shifts should thereforebe limited and transient. Indeed, several studies have shown thatdietary interventions often seem to elicit only speciﬁc effects (see
Zmora et al., 2016 for a recent review), although more extreme
shifts can show more pronounced signatures. For example,radical switches to all-plant- or animal-based diets on the micro-
biome have a differential impact, and speciﬁc groups of taxa
respond similarly across individuals ( David et al., 2014 ). Another
study found a consistent ecosystem-wide increase in gene rich-
ness in response to an energy-restricted high-protein diet in
1204 Cell 172, March 8, 2018obese patients ( Cotillard et al., 2013 ). In general, most studies to
date have investigated rather broadly deﬁned dietary shifts, e.g.,
to overall varying levels of non-speciﬁc nutrient classes such asproteins or carbohydrates, but the effects of deﬁned, speciﬁc di-etary interventions are only beginning to be explored.
In contrast to dietary shifts, clinical interventions can be ex-
pected to elicit more drastic responses, as they can dramaticallychange environmental conditions in the intestine. Bowel
cleansing, often performed in preparation of other treatments,
may be followed by a rapid recovery of overall microbiomecomposition ( Voigt et al., 2015 ), though it may trigger the persis-
tent loss of individual taxa ( Jalanka et al., 2015 ). Other clinical in-
terventions with long-term microbiome effects include bariatricsurgery ( Tremaroli et al., 2015 ) or induced iso-osmotic diarrhea.
The latter has been reported to induce marked but transient
effects, with post-perturbation recovery following a consistent
succession across subjects ( Fukuyama et al., 2017 ). Treatment
with broad-spectrum antibiotics can have pronounced, persis-
tent, and often non-speciﬁc effects, and recovery of composi-
tional state post perturbation is sometimes incomplete, due toa loss of taxa from the community ( Dethlefsen and Relman,
2011; Dethlefsen et al., 2008; Jakobsson et al., 2010; Jernberg
et al., 2007; Voigt et al., 2015 ). Similarly, treatment with the
narrow-spectrum antibiotic cefprozil triggered consistent re-
sponses of individual taxa, while community-level response
was stratiﬁed ( Raymond et al., 2016 ).
In general, one must note that most controlled interventional
studies focus on a putative role of the microbiome in host
response to perturbation, rather than on the microbiome’s
response itself. Host and microbiota effects are often difﬁcultto disentangle: while antibiotics treatment, for example, clearly
affects the microbiome (which may then mediate indirect effects
on the host), the independent host and microbiome responses todietary intervention are more difﬁcult to unravel. In consequence,
many perturbation studies have been conducted in mousemodels which allow control of host effects to some extent, in
spite of other limitations ( Nguyen et al., 2015 ). Moreover,
in vitro approaches are gaining renewed attention (see Box 2 ),
as these allow fairly straightforward probing of the response ofcommunities or individual strains to speciﬁc perturbations, inde-
pendently of the host ( Maier and Typas, 2017 ).In vitro screens
are scalable and can go down to the resolution of individualgenes in individual strains (e.g., Galardini et al., 2017 ), while at
the same time allowing for very broad designs, a recent example
being a screen of 1,200 drugs screened against 40 gut microbialstrains ( Maier et al., 2018 ). Thus, in vitro screens can serve as
massive hypothesis generators to guide the study of microbiome
perturbation responses in vivo , either in animal models or directly
in humans, as shown in a recent study on the impact of salt onthe microbiome ( Wilck et al., 2017 ).
Nevertheless, systematic perturbation studies in humans with
the sole purpose of understanding the microbial ecology of thegut microbiota will be needed as well. Larger and more
controlled prospective and interventional study designs are
increasingly adopted, metadata acquisition becomes more andmore comprehensive and sophisticated, and data generation
gets more affordable. This will enable us to probe taxonomic
and functional interactions among the microbiome and to under-stand the factors underlying differential perturbation response.
Given the complexity of the human-microbiome symbiosis,
only ‘‘real life’’ data will yield the necessary information for build-ing realistic predictive models.From Perturbation to Prediction
So far, predictive modeling of perturbation responses has proven
extremely challenging ( Bucci and Xavier, 2014; Faust et al., 2015 ),
both because of complexity and variation and also because of our
limited functional understanding of the wiring of the gut micro-
biome (see above). Moreover, it has been argued that the micro-biome’s response to many perturbations is inherently stochastic
(Zaneveld et al., 2017 ) and therefore not fully predictable.Box 3. The Microbiome Stratiﬁes and Personalizes Host Response to Perturbations
It is becoming increasingly clear that inter-individual microbiome variation is associated with differential response to perturbations. The huma n gut
microbiome stratiﬁes into distinct compositional types, termed enterotypes (Arumugam et al., 2011; Costea et al., 2018 ). First studies suggest that
enterotypes are stable over time ( Costea et al., 2018; Ding and Schloss, 2014 ), perhaps even upon short-term dietary intervention ( Roager et al.,
2014; Wu et al., 2011 ). Enterotypes may contribute to several microbiome-disease associations and have been linked to differential pharmacoki-
netics and drug metabolism (see Costea et al., 2018 for a recent review). For example, it was shown that Prevotella copri andBacteroides vulgatus ,
two hallmark species underlying enterotype splits, mediate insulin resistance ( Pedersen et al., 2016 ). The Prevotella/Bacteroides ratio was also
found to predict improved glucose metabolism upon a dietary intervention ( Kovatcheva-Datchary et al., 2015 ), and enterotype was found to be pre-
dictive of the response to treatment with the antibiotic cefprozil ( Raymond et al., 2016 ), reinforcing the idea that enterotypes may underlie stratiﬁed
responses to perturbation.
Several studies have demonstrated stratiﬁcation of drug responses by speciﬁc microbiome features (recently reviewed by Va´zquez-Baeza et al.,
2018 ). For example, speciﬁc strains of Eggerthella lenta have been shown to metabolize the cardiac drug digoxin, rendering it inefﬁcient in some
patients ( Haiser et al., 2013 ). The efﬁcacy of anti-PD1 and anti-CTLA4 chemotherapy in melanoma patients has been shown to depend on the
gut microbiome, with predictive compositional differences between treatment responders and non-responders ( Gopalakrishnan et al., 2018; Mat-
son et al., 2018; Routy et al., 2018; Sivan et al., 2015; Ve ´tizou et al., 2015 ). Similarly, recent work in C. elegans demonstrated how gut bacteria differ-
entially modulate the metabolism of ﬂuoropyrimidine chemotherapeutics ( Garcı ´a-Gonza ´lez et al., 2017; Scott et al., 2017 ).
The microbiome is also thought to mediate host response to dietary intervention ( Sonnenburg and Ba ¨ckhed, 2016 ), although in this case, even more
complex and personalized patterns have emerged ( Zmora et al., 2016 ). It was reported that complex models (including lifestyle and blood param-
eters beyond microbiome features) could successfully predict response to dietary intervention, as validated in a randomized control study ( Zeevi
et al., 2015 ). Similarly, microbiota-wide metabolic models could successfully predict differential effects of a dietary intervention ( Shoaie et al., 2015 ).
Such studies illustrate how the microbiome may mediate and thereby stratify and personalize host-level response to intervention, and that micro-
biome stratiﬁcation is a relevant factor to account for in practice.
Cell 172, March 8, 2018 1205Yet, a number of predictive models of microbiome dynamics
at the level of individual taxa or taxa groups exist ( Bucci and Xav-
ier, 2014 ). For example, Lotka-Volterra models were used to pre-
dict community dynamics in response to Clostridium difﬁcile
infection in mice ( Stein et al., 2013 ). The resulting models could
subsequently predict the success of a C. difﬁcile -protective pro-
biotic treatment ( Bufﬁe et al., 2015 ). Moreover, using complex
models trained on both microbiome composition and non-mi-crobiome features, the impact of personalized dietary interven-
tions on select microbiome features could be predicted to
some extent ( Shoaie et al., 2015; Zeevi et al., 2015 ).
Despite such progress, even higher-level perturbation re-
sponses are often difﬁcult to predict, such as the gain or loss
of taxonomic and functional diversity, or the overall strength(let alone direction) of compositional shifts. This is also true for
microbiome resilience—the extent to which a perturbed system
recovers to a pre-perturbation state ( Shade et al., 2012 ). As dis-
cussed above, the microbiome has been reported to be gener-ally resilient to smaller perturbations, though more pronounced
disturbances can have lasting effects. It has been argued that
the differential resilience between individuals could be indicativeof health and disease ( Lloyd-Price et al., 2016; Sommer et al.,
2017 ), even though the factors and mechanisms underlying mi-
crobiome resilience remain poorly understood, and though it re-mains challenging to predict how resilient to perturbation a given
microbiome will be.
From Perturbation toward Modulation
Empirical therapeutic modulation of the gut ﬂora has been per-
formed for thousands of years, for example implicitly in the useof traditional herbal medication ( Xu et al., 2015 ) or consciously
by fecal microbiota transplantation ( de Groot et al., 2017 ).
Despite a wealth of reports over the last decade, links betweenthe gut microbiota and diseases continue to be discovered
(Lynch and Pedersen, 2016 ), and in consequence the human
gut microbiome continues to gain attention as a therapeutictarget ( Langdon et al., 2016; Walsh et al., 2014 ).
Here, we review recent progress on attempts at both untar-
geted and targeted microbiome modulation. In the context ofthis review, we broadly deﬁne modulation as an interventionwith the intent of pushing the gut microbiome toward a desired
state. This includes, among others, fecal microbiota transplanta-
tion, probiotic and prebiotic treatment, and directed dietary in-terventions.
Fecal Microbiota Transplantation (FMT)
An FMT is the prime example of an untargeted microbiome mod-ulation: stool from a (healthy) donor is transferred into the gastro-
intestinal tract of a recipient, with the aim of improving their
health or an undesired microbiome state. FMTs have beenshown to be highly efﬁcient in the treatment of recurrent Clos-
tridium difﬁcile infection (RCDI), and indeed seem more suited
than antibiotics for this disease ( van Nood et al., 2013 ). Although
success is less pronounced in other areas, such as for ulcerativecolitis ( Narula et al., 2017 ) or metabolic syndrome ( Vrieze et al.,
2012 ), FMTs are explored as a treatment option for a growing
list of indications, with close to 200 registered clinical trials atthe time of writing ( clinicaltrials.gov , accessed January 2018).
An obvious long-term goal is the replacement of rather undeﬁneddonor stool samples with formulated, recipient-tailored mixes of
deﬁned microbial strains.
FMTs are often preceded by preparatory antibiotics treatment
or bowel cleansing in the clinical practice, and effects can bedifﬁcult to disentangle. Several studies have investigated micro-
biome-level effects of FMT and reported that the treatment is
followed by an increase of alpha diversity in the recipient’s mi-crobiome, and a shift in community structure toward donorcomposition in RCDI patients ( Fuentes et al., 2014; Seekatz
et al., 2014 ), a trend that was also observed in IBD ( Vermeire
et al., 2016 ). In contrast, post-FMT community composition
was only mildly associated with recipient pre-FMT composition
in trials on metabolic syndrome ( Kootte et al., 2017 ) and ulcera-
tive colitis ( Fuentes et al., 2017 ), calling for higher taxonomic res-
olution. Indeed, at the level of strain populations, engraftment of
donor strains could be demonstrated, although successful colo-
nization was more likely if strains of the same species were pre-sent in the recipient prior to the transplant ( Li et al., 2016 ). More-
over, donor and recipient strains were found to co-exist in the
recipient for prolonged periods of at least several months post
FMT ( Li et al., 2016 ), a ﬁnding that has since been corroborated
on independent cohorts for different indications ( Kumar et al.,
2017; Lee et al., 2017; Moss et al., 2017 ).
While this is encouraging toward future adapted treatment
options, our mechanistic understanding of the microbiome’s
response to FMT remains so far insufﬁcient. Indeed, from a mi-
crobial ecology point of view, FMTs provide a unique setup tostudy microbiome colonization resistance, succession, and
overall resilience.
ProbioticsProbiotics, deﬁned as ‘‘live microorganisms which whenadministered in adequate amounts confer a health beneﬁt on
the host’’ ( Hill et al., 2014 ), have been shown to be clinically
efﬁcient treatment options in some indications ( Ford et al.,
2014 ). In contrast to FMTs, probiotic treatment is an attempt
at targeted modulation of the gut microbiota, notably by adding
the probiotic to the community. However, microbiome-level ef-fects of probiotics treatment may be mild: a recent systematic
review of seven randomized clinical trials found no effects of
different probiotics on microbiota composition and no evidencefor persistent probiotic engraftment ( Kristensen et al., 2016 ).
This reafﬁrms the notion of gut microbiota colonization resis-
tance, both to probiotics and pathogens. Studies in mice, in
contrast, have concluded that engraftment success maydepend on how complementary the probiotic is to the recipi-
ent’s baseline microbiome composition. For example, adminis-
tration of Clostridium scindens was found to metabolically
complement the recipient’s microbiota and to enhance coloni-
zation resistance to Clostridium difﬁcile (Bufﬁe et al., 2015 ).
This outcome was based on clinical data, mouse models,and mathematical modeling, and illustrates that an ecology-
inspired approach can enable successful microbiome modula-
tion. The future of next-generation probiotics thus lies not onlyin supplementing beneﬁcial functionalities, but also in providingthe necessary ecological context to sustain them. Moreover,
the shift of microbiome composition as a whole by supplemen-
tation of more complex mixtures of organisms will arguablysoon be within reach.
1206 Cell 172, March 8, 2018Prebiotics and Dietary Intervention
Prebiotics, deﬁned as ‘‘substrate[s] that [are] selectively utilized
by host microorganisms conferring a health beneﬁt’’ ( Gibson
et al., 2017 ), are another means of targeted microbiome modula-
tion. In contrast to the direct administration of probiotics, prebi-
otics treatment aims to confer a selective advantage to beneﬁcial
members of the microbiota. While several studies suggest a ther-apeutic potential of prebiotics for different indications ( Beserra
et al., 2015; Ford et al., 2014 ), surprisingly little is known about
their effect on whole microbiome composition. Increased Prevo-
tella/Bacteroides ratios and improved glucose metabolism have
been reported to follow a transient shift to a ﬁber-rich diet
(Kovatcheva-Datchary et al., 2015 ). Similarly, a ﬁber-rich diet,
supplemented by other prebiotics, shifted gut microbiome func-tional composition and contributed to weight loss in obese
children ( Zhang et al., 2015a ). Treatment with inulin-type fruc-
tans was reported to trigger an increase in Biﬁdobacterium and
Anaerostipes with hardly any community-level effects ( Vande-
putte et al., 2017b ).
Beyond the supplementation of usually deﬁned prebiotics,
diet represents a vast pool of chemical and biomolecular com-pounds, often implicitly amended with microbes. As such, it is
an important factor in shaping microbiome composition, as dis-
cussed above (reviewed by Flint et al., 2017 ). In consequence,
directed dietary interventions can not only provide informative
perturbation experiments but also are explored as mild, micro-
biome-mediated therapy options ( Suez and Elinav, 2017 ). Micro-
biome-wide metabolic models have been used to successfully
predict microbiome metabolic responses to a dietary interven-
tion in obese and overweight individuals, stratiﬁed by baselinemicrobial gene richness ( Shoaie et al., 2015 ). Similarly, in using
microbiome, clinical, and dietary data to train complex models,
personalized dietary interventions toward improved glycemic re-
sponses were suggested and validated in a blinded randomizedtrial ( Zeevi et al., 2015 ). Although both these studies optimized
for host effects, the authors were also able to predict micro-
biome responses to intervention, to some extent. Importantly,both studies found that the microbiome stratiﬁed intervention
effects and that the response to diet might be truly individual
(see Box 3 ). Moreover, it remains to be determined how much
of these inter-individual differences in response to interventioncan be attributed to microbiome-intrinsic or host factors (see
Figure 2 ).
Toward Targeted and Predictable Modulation of the GutMicrobiome
The potential of targeted microbiome modulation has been
demonstrated in several recent studies, albeit in mouse models.For example, it was found that Clostridium sporogenes metabo-
lizes aromatic amino acids into several compounds that accu-
mulate in the host’s blood serum and that the replacement ofwild-type C. sporogenes with a genetically engineered strain in
gnotobiotic mice decreased serum levels of these metabolites
and affected gut permeability and host immune response(Dodd et al., 2017 ). More recently, it was reported that tungstate
treatment selectively inhibited overgrowth of certain Enterobac-
teriaceae and ameliorated symptoms in a murine colitis model
(Zhu et al., 2018 ). The authors had previously found that molyb-
denum-dependent enzymes (that are inhibited by tungsten) wereimplied in Enterobacteriaceae blooms during induced colitis in
mice ( Hughes et al., 2017 ), and this ecological and functional
insight enabled a successful gut microbiome modulation.
Such studies reafﬁrm the notion that targeted, hypothesis-
driven modulation requires an understanding of the taxonomic
and functional composition, the mutual interaction structure,
and the relevant ecological dynamics of the microbiome. Asthis functional understanding is only beginning to emerge, cur-rent models have limited power to predict the outcome of
microbiome modulations, and for many clinically effective inter-
ventions it is unclear how the microbiome mediates host-leveleffects. There are numerous macro-ecological examples of un-
expected or catastrophic effects of human intervention on
incompletely understood ecosystems. For instance, the invasivetoxic cane toad ( Bufo marinus ) in Australia, originally introduced
as a biological pest control in the 1930s, has since developed
into a major burden on the local ecosystem ( Phillips and Shine,
2004 ). In analogy, (rare) adverse effects have been reported for
microbiome modulatory interventions, most prominently for
FMT ( Wang et al., 2016b ), and microbiome-related causes of
these remain poorly understood.
The majority of studies to investigate microbiome-level effects
of modulation did so at genus or species level. However, for
several probiotics, only speciﬁc strains of a given species werefound to be clinically effective ( Kristensen et al., 2016 ), and the
efﬁcacy of a given strain probably depends on the recipient’s
microbiome. Indeed, some strains of Escherichia coli are highly
beneﬁcial probiotics ( Wassenaar, 2016 ), whereas others are
potent pathogens ( Kaper et al., 2004 ). This illustrates the impor-
tance of an appropriate taxonomic resolution to successfulmicrobiome modulation (see Figure 3 ): precise intervention re-
quires a precise understanding of the target system.
Deﬁning a Healthy Microbiome in a Healthy Individual
The deﬁnition of appropriate target endpoints remains a centralchallenge to microbiome modulation, as a consensus on micro-
biome ‘‘health’’ so far remains elusive (see Lloyd-Price et al.,
2016 for a recent review). Recently, a microbiome ‘‘Global Posi-
tioning System’’ was proposed, in which healthy and diseased
states are distinguished based on multi-omic readouts ( Gilbert
et al., 2016 ). However, while some disease states may be associ-
ated with speciﬁc microbiome signatures, microbiome statesthat are unequivocally ‘‘healthy’’ across cohorts are yet to be
established ( Lloyd-Price et al., 2016 ). Others have suggested
distinctly time-resolved deﬁnitions of microbiome health, e.g.,with regard to distinct and characteristic patterns of temporal
variability to distinguish healthy and diseased states ( Martı ´
et al., 2017 ). Similarly, it has been proposed that microbiome
health manifests itself in the response to perturbations, and that
an ‘‘Anna Karenina’’ principle applies to the microbiome—that,
in variation of Tolstoy, ‘‘healthy microbiomes are all alike; eachunhealthy microbiome is unhealthy in its own way’’ ( Zaneveld
et al., 2017 ). Moreover, it has been repeatedly suggested that it
is less the response to perturbation, but rather post-perturbationresilience, that is a hallmark of health ( Sommer et al., 2017 ).
Certainly, any deﬁnition of microbiome health will depend on the
frame of reference. From a clinical perspective, health is deter-
mined with a view of the human host—any microbiome state asso-ciated with a healthy host state could be considered ‘‘healthy.’’ But
Cell 172, March 8, 2018 1207such a host-centric deﬁnition is arguably incomplete and problem-
atic for several reasons. As discussed above, links between host
and microbiome are multivariate and complex, so that many dis-
eases of the host do not necessarily carry clear and speciﬁc micro-biome signatures, while even for well-described associations, the
direction of causality is usually unclear. And while disease-associ-
ated microbiome imbalances are thus difﬁcult to deﬁne, this hasproven even more challenging for unequivocally health-associ-
ated microbiome states. Although microbiome and host health
are clearly linked, multiple healthy microbiome states can prob-ably exist within the healthy host space.
Conclusion and Perspective
Our understanding of the human gut microbiome continues toevolve at a rapid pace. The census of the microbiome—the
establishment of its ‘‘parts lists’’—is arguably approaching
completion for the major prokaryotic lineages, although a sur-prising amount of novel diversity continues to be discovered at
sub-species and strain level, implying that the identiﬁcation of
novel genes in the gut is ongoing. Although prokaryoticlineages contribute the vast majority of the gut microbiome by
abundance, important players may still be missed as the eu-karyal and viral microbiome remain incompletely charted. Meta-
genome-wide association studies have identiﬁed major drivers
of microbiome composition and linked individual microbial taxa
and genes to diseases, host lifestyle, and physiology. However,they have also revealed that known factors can account only for
a surprisingly small fraction of total microbiome variation, at least
without stratiﬁcation for microbiome state. Longitudinal studieshave begun to establish a baseline on the gut microbiome’s tem-
poral dynamics and found it to be remarkably stable over time.
The study of perturbations has further advanced our functionalunderstanding of the microbiome, both with regard to its intrinsic
interaction structure—the ‘‘wiring’’ of its parts—and to cause-ef-
fect relationships with external factors. Moreover, it is becomingincreasingly clear that the microbiome mediates, stratiﬁes, andpossibly personalizes host-level responses to intervention.
The increasing functional understanding of the microbiome
begins to be translated into practice, in the form of targeted mi-crobiome modulation. Most attempts at in vivo microbiome
modulation are of therapeutic intent: researchers aim to improve
the wellbeing of patients, by proxy of the microbiome. However,a consensus on desired microbial endpoints—on what a
‘‘healthy’’ microbiome actually is—has yet to emerge.
Figure 3. Microbiome Research Advances Rapidly, but Current Approaches Abstract the Gut Microbiome via Gradual Approximations from
Different Angles
A few of these access routes are depicted and categorized here, and the required level of abstraction may vary between scientiﬁc questions or study des igns.
(A) Microbial composition is usually determined at genus level based on 16S rRNA amplicon data, although many features in association studies emerge at higher
resolution. More recently, the focus shifts further to reach the level of strains, the preferred taxonomic unit in microbiology.
(B) Functional associations are often determined for entire functional classes or more ﬁne-grained functional units, although even individual gen es can be
informative in some contexts.
(C) Microbiome associations have been tested at the level of entire populations or of certain cohorts, though it is becoming increasingly clear that s tratiﬁcation is
often necessary to increase observed signals. In some instances, associations are speciﬁc even at the level of individuals.
(D) For experimental access, simpler systems allow for higher throughput, but they are also less representative of the microbiome in natura , i.e., in humans with an
individual environment.
1208 Cell 172, March 8, 2018Currently, understanding lags behind application: the underly-
ing reasons why an untargeted intervention like FMT is effective
in some cases but not others are mostly unclear, and effective
informed, precise microbiome modulation is still in its infancy.This argues for a push toward more and larger-scale longitudinal
and interventional studies, with an updated methodological
toolkit, including multi-omic techniques and novel in vitro ap-
proaches, and with a focus less on the host, but on the micro-biome in its own right. Such studies will further advance our
understanding of the microbiome, have the power to elucidate
missing links, and will enable us to better predict responses tointervention. The integrated study of perturbations will thereby
allow us to truly advance research on the human gut micro-
biome, moving from association to modulation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by EMBL and by the European Research
Council MicrobioS grant (ERC-AdG-669830, P.B.), the Luxembourg NationalResearch Fund (FNR) CORE microCancer grant (T.S.B.S.), and by KULeuven/Rega, VIB, and the FWO EOS programme (G0G4118N, J.R.). We thankLuis Pedro Coelho and Lisa Maier of EMBL for helpful comments on themanuscript, and all members of the Bork and Raes labs for insights that ledto this synthesis.
REFERENCES
Abu-Ali, G.S., Mehta, R.S., Lloyd-Price, J., Mallick, H., Branck, T., Ivey, K.L.,
Drew, D.A., DuLong, C., Rimm, E., Izard, J., et al. (2018). Metatranscriptomeof human faecal microbial communities in a cohort of adult men. Nat. Micro-biol. 106,1.
Arumugam, M., Raes, J., Pelletier, E., Le Paslier, D., Yamada, T., Mende, D.R.,
Fernandes, G.R., Tap, J., Bruls, T., Batto, J.-M., et al.; MetaHIT Consortium
(2011). Enterotypes of the human gut microbiome. Nature 473, 174–180 .
Asnicar, F., Manara, S., Zolfo, M., Truong, D.T., Scholz, M., Armanini, F., Fer-
retti, P., Gorfer, V., Pedrotti, A., Tett, A., and Segata, N. (2017). Studying ver-tical microbiome transmission from mothers to infants by strain-level metage-nomic proﬁling. mSystems 2, e00164–e16 .
Ba¨ckhed, F., Roswall, J., Peng, Y., Feng, Q., Jia, H., Kovatcheva-Datchary, P.,
Li, Y., Xia, Y., Xie, H., Zhong, H., et al. (2015). Dynamics and stabilization of thehuman gut microbiome during the ﬁrst year of life. Cell Host Microbe 17,
690–703 .
Bahr, S.M., Tyler, B.C., Wooldridge, N., Butcher, B.D., Burns, T.L., Teesch,
L.M., Oltman, C.L., Azcarate-Peril, M.A., Kirby, J.R., and Calarge, C.A.(2015). Use of the second-generation antipsychotic, risperidone, and second-ary weight gain are associated with an altered gut microbiota in children.Transl. Psychiatry 5, e652 .
Barton, W., Penney, N.C., Cronin, O., Garcia-Perez, I., Molloy, M.G., Holmes,
E., Shanahan, F., Cotter, P.D., and O’Sullivan, O. (2017). The microbiome of
professional athletes differs from that of more sedentary subjects in composi-tion and particularly at the functional metabolic level. Gut 313, 627 .
Becattini, S., Taur, Y., and Pamer, E.G. (2016). Antibiotic-induced changes in
the intestinal microbiota and disease. Trends Mol. Med. 22, 458–478 .
Belkaid, Y., and Hand, T.W. (2014). Role of the microbiota in immunity and
inﬂammation. Cell 157, 121–141 .
Bender, E.A., Case, T.J., and Gilpin, M.E. (1984). Perturbation experiments in
community ecology: theory and practice. Ecology 65, 1–13 .
Beserra, B.T.S., Fernandes, R., do Rosario, V.A., Mocellin, M.C., Kuntz,
M.G.F., and Trindade, E.B.S.M. (2015). A systematic review and meta-analysisof the prebiotics and synbiotics effects on glycaemia, insulin concentrationsand lipid parameters in adult patients with overweight or obesity. Clin. Nutr.34, 845–858 .Biedermann, L., Zeitz, J., Mwinyi, J., Sutter-Minder, E., Rehman, A., Ott, S.J.,
Steurer-Stey, C., Frei, A., Frei, P., Scharl, M., et al. (2013). Smoking cessationinduces profound changes in the composition of the intestinal microbiota inhumans. PLoS ONE 8, e59260 .
Bonder, M.J., Kurilshikov, A., Tigchelaar, E.F., Mujagic, Z., Imhann, F., Vila,
A.V., Deelen, P., Vatanen, T., Schirmer, M., Smeekens, S.P., et al. (2016).The effect of host genetics on the gut microbiome. Nat. Genet. 48,
1407–1412 .
Bucci, V., and Xavier, J.B. (2014). Towards predictive models of the human gut
microbiome. J. Mol. Biol. 426, 3907–3916 .
Bufﬁe, C.G., Bucci, V., Stein, R.R., McKenney, P.T., Ling, L., Gobourne, A., No,
D., Liu, H., Kinnebrew, M., Viale, A., et al. (2015). Precision microbiome recon-stitution restores bile acid mediated resistance to Clostridium difﬁcile . Nature
517, 205–208 .
Carabotti, M., Scirocco, A., Maselli, M.A., and Severi, C. (2015). The gut-brain
axis: interactions between enteric microbiota, central and enteric nervous sys-tems. Ann. Gastroenterol. 28, 203–209 .
Chu, D.M., Ma, J., Prince, A.L., Antony, K.M., Seferovic, M.D., and Aagaard,
K.M. (2017). Maturation of the infant microbiome community structure andfunction across multiple body sites and in relation to mode of delivery. Nat.Med. 23, 314–326 .
Clarke, S.F., Murphy, E.F., O’Sullivan, O., Lucey, A.J., Humphreys, M., Hogan,
A., Hayes, P., O’Reilly, M., Jeffery, I.B., Wood-Martin, R., et al. (2014). Exerciseand associated dietary extremes impact on gut microbial diversity. Gut 63,
1913–1920 .
Conceic ¸a˜o-Neto, N., Deboutte, W., Dierckx, T., Machiels, K., Wang, J., Yinda,
K.C., Maes, P., Van Ranst, M., Joossens, M., Raes, J., et al. (2017). Low
eukaryotic viral richness is associated with faecal microbiota transplantationsuccess in patients with UC. Gut 315, 281 .
Costea, P.I., Coelho, L.P., Sunagawa, S., Munch, R., Huerta-Cepas, J., For-
slund, K., Hildebrand, F., Kushugulova, A., Zeller, G., and Bork, P. (2017a).Subspecies in the global human gut microbiome. Mol. Syst. Biol. 13, 960 .
Costea, P.I., Zeller, G., Sunagawa, S., Pelletier, E., Alberti, A., Levenez, F., Tra-
montano, M., Driessen, M., Hercog, R., Jung, F.-E., et al. (2017b). Towardsstandards for human fecal sample processing in metagenomic studies. Nat.Biotechnol. 35, 1069–1076 .
Costea, P.I., Munch, R., Coelho, L.P., Paoli, L., Sunagawa, S., and Bork, P.
(2017c). metaSNV: A tool for metagenomic strain level analysis. PLoS ONE12, e0182392 .
Costea, P.I., Hildebrand, F., Manimozhiyan, A., Ba ¨ckhed, F., Blaser, M.J.,
Bushman, F.D., de Vos, W.M., Ehrlich, S.D., Fraser, C.M., Hattori, M., et al.(2018). Enterotypes in the landscape of gut microbial community composition.Nat. Microbiol. 3, 8–16 .
Cotillard, A., Kennedy, S.P., Kong, L.C., Prifti, E., Pons, N., Le Chatelier, E.,
Almeida, M., Quinquis, B., Levenez, F., Galleron, N., et al.; ANR MicroObesconsortium (2013). Dietary intervention impact on gut microbial gene richness.Nature 500, 585–588 .
David, L.A., Maurice, C.F., Carmody, R.N., Gootenberg, D.B., Button, J.E.,
Wolfe, B.E., Ling, A.V., Devlin, A.S., Varma, Y., Fischbach, M.A., et al.(2014). Diet rapidly and reproducibly alters the human gut microbiome. Nature505, 559–563 .
de Groot, P.F., Frissen, M.N., de Clercq, N.C., and Nieuwdorp, M. (2017). Fecal
microbiota transplantation in metabolic syndrome: History, present and future.Gut Microbes 8, 253–267 .
Dethlefsen, L., and Relman, D.A. (2011). Incomplete recovery and individual-
ized responses of the human distal gut microbiota to repeated antibioticperturbation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108 (Suppl 1 ), 4554–4561 .
Dethlefsen, L., Huse, S., Sogin, M.L., and Relman, D.A. (2008). The pervasive
effects of an antibiotic on the human gut microbiota, as revealed by deep 16S
rRNA sequencing. PLoS Biol. 6, e280 .
Ding, T., and Schloss, P.D. (2014). Dynamics and associations of microbial
community types across the human body. Nature 509, 357–360 .
Cell 172, March 8, 2018 1209Dodd, D., Spitzer, M.H., Van Treuren, W., Merrill, B.D., Hryckowian, A.J., Hig-
ginbottom, S.K., Le, A., Cowan, T.M., Nolan, G.P., Fischbach, M.A., andSonnenburg, J.L. (2017). A gut bacterial pathway metabolizes aromatic aminoacids into nine circulating metabolites. Nature 551, 648–652 .
Dubinkina, V.B., Tyakht, A.V., Odintsova, V.Y., Yarygin, K.S., Kovarsky, B.A.,
Pavlenko, A.V., Ischenko, D.S., Popenko, A.S., Alexeev, D.G., Taraskina,A.Y., et al. (2017). Links of gut microbiota composition with alcohol depen-dence syndrome and alcoholic liver disease. Microbiome 5, 141 .
Duvallet, C., Gibbons, S.M., Gurry, T., Irizarry, R.A., and Alm, E.J. (2017). Meta-
analysis of gut microbiome studies identiﬁes disease-speciﬁc and shared re-sponses. Nat. Commun. 8, 1784 .
Eckburg, P.B., Bik, E.M., Bernstein, C.N., Purdom, E., Dethlefsen, L., Sargent,
M., Gill, S.R., Nelson, K.E., and Relman, D.A. (2005). Diversity of the human in-testinal microbial ﬂora. Science 308, 1635–1638 .
Erickson, A.R., Cantarel, B.L., Lamendella, R., Darzi, Y., Mongodin, E.F., Pan,
C., Shah, M., Halfvarson, J., Tysk, C., Henrissat, B., et al. (2012). Integratedmetagenomics/metaproteomics reveals human host-microbiota signaturesof Crohn’s disease. PLoS ONE 7, e49138 .
Faith, J.J., Guruge, J.L., Charbonneau, M., Subramanian, S., Seedorf, H.,
Goodman, A.L., Clemente, J.C., Knight, R., Heath, A.C., Leibel, R.L., et al.(2013). The long-term stability of the human gut microbiota. Science 341,
1237439 .
Falony, G., Joossens, M., Vieira-Silva, S., Wang, J., Darzi, Y., Faust, K., Kuril-
shikov, A., Bonder, M.J., Valles-Colomer, M., Vandeputte, D., et al. (2016).Population-level analysis of gut microbiome variation. Science 352, 560–564 .
Faust, K., and Raes, J. (2012). Microbial interactions: from networks to models.
Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 10, 538–550 .
Faust, K., Lahti, L., Gonze, D., de Vos, W.M., and Raes, J. (2015). Metagenom-
ics meets time series analysis: unraveling microbial community dynamics.Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 25, 56–66 .
Finucane, M.M., Sharpton, T.J., Laurent, T.J., and Pollard, K.S. (2014). A taxo-
nomic signature of obesity in the microbiome? Getting to the guts of the mat-ter. PLoS ONE 9, e84689 .
Flint, H.J., Scott, K.P., Louis, P., and Duncan, S.H. (2012). The role of the gut
microbiota in nutrition and health. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 9,
577–589 .
Flint, H.J., Duncan, S.H., and Louis, P. (2017). The impact of nutrition on intes-
tinal bacterial communities. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 38, 59–65 .
Flowers, S.A., Evans, S.J., Ward, K.M., McInnis, M.G., and Ellingrod, V.L.
(2017). Interaction between atypical antipsychotics and the gut microbiomein a bipolar disease cohort. Pharmacotherapy 37, 261–267 .
Ford, A.C., Quigley, E.M.M., Lacy, B.E., Lembo, A.J., Saito, Y.A., Schiller, L.R.,
Soffer, E.E., Spiegel, B.M.R., and Moayyedi, P. (2014). Efﬁcacy of prebiotics,probiotics, and synbiotics in irritable bowel syndrome and chronic idiopathicconstipation: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am. J. Gastroenterol.109, 1547–1561, quiz 1546, 1562 .
Forslund, K., Hildebrand, F., Nielsen, T., Falony, G., Le Chatelier, E., Suna-
gawa, S., Prifti, E., Vieira-Silva, S., Gudmundsdottir, V., Pedersen, H.K.,et al.; MetaHIT consortium (2015). Disentangling type 2 diabetes and metfor-
min treatment signatures in the human gut microbiota. Nature 528, 262–266 .
Franzosa, E.A., Hsu, T., Sirota-Madi, A., Shafquat, A., Abu-Ali, G., Morgan,
X.C., and Huttenhower, C. (2015). Sequencing and beyond: integrating molec-ular ‘omics’ for microbial community proﬁling. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 13,
360–372 .
Freedberg, D.E., Toussaint, N.C., Chen, S.P., Ratner, A.J., Whittier, S., Wang,
T.C., Wang, H.H., and Abrams, J.A. (2015). Proton pump inhibitors alter spe-ciﬁc taxa in the human gastrointestinal microbiome: a crossover trial.Gastroenterology 149, 883–885 .
Friedman, J., and Alm, E.J. (2012). Inferring correlation networks from genomic
survey data. PLoS Comput. Biol. 8, e1002687 .
Fuentes, S., van Nood, E., Tims, S., Heikamp-de Jong, I., ter Braak, C.J., Kel-
ler, J.J., Zoetendal, E.G., and de Vos, W.M. (2014). Reset of a criticallydisturbed microbial ecosystem: faecal transplant in recurrent Clostridium difﬁ-
cileinfection. ISME J. 8, 1621–1633
.
Fuentes, S., Rossen, N.G., van der Spek, M.J., Hartman, J.H., Huuskonen, L.,
Korpela, K., Saloja ¨rvi, J., Aalvink, S., de Vos, W.M., D’Haens, G.R., et al. (2017).
Microbial shifts and signatures of long-term remission in ulcerative colitis afterfaecal microbiota transplantation. ISME J. 11, 1877–1889 .
Fujimura, K.E., Sitarik, A.R., Havstad, S., Lin, D.L., Levan, S., Fadrosh, D., Pan-
zer, A.R., LaMere, B., Rackaityte, E., Lukacs, N.W., et al. (2016). Neonatal gutmicrobiota associates with childhood multisensitized atopy and T cell differen-tiation. Nat. Med. 22, 1187–1191 .
Fukuyama, J., Rumker, L., Sankaran, K., Jeganathan, P., Dethlefsen, L., Rel-
man, D.A., and Holmes, S.P. (2017). Multidomain analyses of a longitudinalhuman microbiome intestinal cleanout perturbation experiment. PLoS Com-put. Biol. 13, e1005706 .
Gaci, N., Borrel, G., Tottey, W., O’Toole, P.W., and Bruge `re, J.-F. (2014).
Archaea and the human gut: new beginning of an old story. World J. Gastro-enterol. 20, 16062–16078 .
Galardini, M., Koumoutsi, A., Herrera-Dominguez, L., Cordero Varela, J.A.,
Telzerow, A., Wagih, O., Wartel, M., Clermont, O., Denamur, E., Typas, A.,and Beltrao, P. (2017). Phenotype inference in an Escherichia coli strain panel.
eLife 6,6 8.
Garcı ´a-Gonza ´lez, A.P., Ritter, A.D., Shrestha, S., Andersen, E.C., Yilmaz, L.S.,
and Walhout, A.J.M. (2017). Bacterial metabolism affects the C. elegans
response to cancer chemotherapeutics. Cell 169, 431–441.e8 .
Gibson, G.R., Hutkins, R., Sanders, M.E., Prescott, S.L., Reimer, R.A., Salmi-
nen, S.J., Scott, K., Stanton, C., Swanson, K.S., Cani, P.D., et al. (2017). Expertconsensus document: The International Scientiﬁc Association for Probioticsand Prebiotics (ISAPP) consensus statement on the deﬁnition and scope ofprebiotics. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 14, 491–502 .
Gilbert, J.A., Quinn, R.A., Debelius, J., Xu, Z.Z., Morton, J., Garg, N., Jansson,
J.K., Dorrestein, P.C., and Knight, R. (2016). Microbiome-wide associationstudies link dynamic microbial consortia to disease. Nature 535, 94–103 .
Goodrich, J.K., Waters, J.L., Poole, A.C., Sutter, J.L., Koren, O., Blekhman, R.,
Beaumont, M., Van Treuren, W., Knight, R., Bell, J.T., et al. (2014). Human ge-netics shape the gut microbiome. Cell 159, 789–799 .
Goodrich, J.K., Davenport, E.R., Beaumont, M., Jackson, M.A., Knight, R.,
Ober, C., Spector, T.D., Bell, J.T., Clark, A.G., and Ley, R.E. (2016). Geneticdeterminants of the gut microbiome in UK twins. Cell Host Microbe 19,
731–743 .
Gopalakrishnan, V., Spencer, C.N., Nezi, L., Reuben, A., Andrews, M.C., Kar-
pinets, T.V., Prieto, P.A., Vicente, D., Hoffman, K., Wei, S.C., et al. (2018). Gutmicrobiome modulates response to anti-PD-1 immunotherapy in melanomapatients. Science 359, 97–103 .
Haiser, H.J., Gootenberg, D.B., Chatman, K., Sirasani, G., Balskus, E.P., and
Turnbaugh, P.J. (2013). Predicting and manipulating cardiac drug inactivationby the human gut bacterium Eggerthella lenta . Science 341, 295–298 .
Hall, A.B., Tolonen, A.C., and Xavier, R.J. (2017). Human genetic variation and
the gut microbiome in disease. Nat. Rev. Genet. 18, 690–699 .
Hang, J., Desai, V., Zavaljevski, N., Yang, Y., Lin, X., Satya, R.V., Martinez, L.J.,
Blaylock, J.M., Jarman, R.G., Thomas, S.J., and Kuschner, R.A. (2014). 16S
rRNA gene pyrosequencing of reference and clinical samples and investiga-
tion of the temperature stability of microbiome proﬁles. Microbiome 2,3 1.
Heintz-Buschart, A., and Wilmes, P. (2017). Human gut microbiome: function
matters. Trends Microbiol. Published online November 22, 2017. S0966-
842X(17)30251-2 .
Heintz-Buschart, A., May, P., Laczny, C.C., Lebrun, L.A., Bellora, C., Krishna,
A., Wampach, L., Schneider, J.G., Hogan, A., de Beaufort, C., and Wilmes, P.(2016). Integrated multi-omics of the human gut microbiome in a case study offamilial type 1 diabetes. Nat. Microbiol. 2, 16180 .
Hill, C., Guarner, F., Reid, G., Gibson, G.R., Merenstein, D.J., Pot, B., Morelli,
L., Canani, R.B., Flint, H.J., Salminen, S., et al. (2014). Expert consensus docu-ment. The International Scientiﬁc Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics
1210 Cell 172, March 8, 2018consensus statement on the scope and appropriate use of the term probiotic.
Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 11, 506–514 .
Hoisington, A.J., Brenner, L.A., Kinney, K.A., Postolache, T.T., and Lowry, C.A.
(2015). The microbiome of the built environment and mental health. Micro-
biome 3,6 0.
Hooper, L.V., Littman, D.R., and Macpherson, A.J. (2012). Interactions be-
tween the microbiota and the immune system. Science 336, 1268–1273 .
Hugenholtz, F., and de Vos, W.M. (2018). Mouse models for human intestinal
microbiota research: a critical evaluation. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 75, 149–160 .
Hughes, E.R., Winter, M.G., Duerkop, B.A., Spiga, L., Furtado de Carvalho, T.,
Zhu, W., Gillis, C.C., Bu ¨ttner, L., Smoot, M.P., Behrendt, C.L., et al. (2017). Mi-
crobial respiration and formate oxidation as metabolic signatures of inﬂamma-tion-associated dysbiosis. Cell Host Microbe 21, 208–219 .
Human Microbiome Project Consortium (2012). Structure, function and diver-
sity of the healthy human microbiome. Nature 486, 207–214 .
Hurwitz, B.L., U’Ren, J.M., and Youens-Clark, K. (2016). Computational pro-
specting the great viral unknown. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 363, fnw077 .
Imhann, F., Bonder, M.J., Vich Vila, A., Fu, J., Mujagic, Z., Vork, L., Tigchelaar,
E.F., Jankipersadsing, S.A., Cenit, M.C., Harmsen, H.J.M., et al. (2016). Protonpump inhibitors affect the gut microbiome. Gut 65, 740–748 .
Ioannidis, J.P.A. (2013). Implausible results in human nutrition research. BMJ
347, f6698 .
Jackson, M.A., Bell, J.T., Spector, T.D., and Steves, C.J. (2016). A heritability-
based comparison of methods used to cluster 16S rRNA gene sequences intooperational taxonomic units. PeerJ 4, e2341 .
Jakobsson, H.E., Jernberg, C., Andersson, A.F., Sjo ¨lund-Karlsson, M., Jans-
son, J.K., and Engstrand, L. (2010). Short-term antibiotic treatment hasdiffering long-term impacts on the human throat and gut microbiome. PLoSONE 5, e9836 .
Jalanka, J., Salonen, A., Saloja ¨rvi, J., Ritari, J., Immonen, O., Marciani, L.,
Gowland, P., Hoad, C., Garsed, K., Lam, C., et al. (2015). Effects of bowelcleansing on the intestinal microbiota. Gut 64, 1562–1568 .
Jansen, R.C. (2003). Studying complex biological systems using multifactorial
perturbation. Nat. Rev. Genet. 4, 145–151 .
Jeffery, I.B., Lynch, D.B., and O’Toole, P.W. (2016). Composition and temporal
stability of the gut microbiota in older persons. ISME J. 10, 170–182 .
Jernberg, C., Lo ¨fmark, S., Edlund, C., and Jansson, J.K. (2007). Long-term
ecological impacts of antibiotic administration on the human intestinal micro-biota. ISME J. 1, 56–66 .
Kaper, J.B., Nataro, J.P., and Mobley, H.L.T. (2004). Pathogenic Escherichia
coli. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2, 123–140 .
Kim, H.J., Huh, D., Hamilton, G., and Ingber, D.E. (2012). Human gut-on-a-chip
inhabited by microbial ﬂora that experiences intestinal peristalsis-like motionsand ﬂow. Lab Chip 12, 2165–2174 .
Koenig, J.E., Spor, A., Scalfone, N., Fricker, A.D., Stombaugh, J., Knight, R.,
Angenent, L.T., and Ley, R.E. (2011). Succession of microbial consortia inthe developing infant gut microbiome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108 (Suppl
1), 4578–4585 .
Kolmeder, C.A., and de Vos, W.M. (2014). Metaproteomics of our microbiome
- developing insight in function and activity in man and model systems.J. Proteomics 97, 3–16 .
Kootte, R.S., Levin, E., Saloja ¨rvi, J., Smits, L.P., Hartstra, A.V., Udayappan,
S.D., Hermes, G., Bouter, K.E., Koopen, A.M., Holst, J.J., et al. (2017).Improvement of insulin sensitivity after lean donor feces in metabolic syn-drome is driven by baseline intestinal microbiota composition. Cell Metab.26, 611–619 .
Korpela, K., Costea, P.I., Coelho, L.P., Kandels-Lewis, S., Willemsen, G.,
Boomsma, D.I., Segata, N., and Bork, P. (2018). Selective maternal seedingand environment shape the human gut microbiome. Genome Res. https://
doi.org/10.1101/gr.233940.117 .
Koskella, B., Hall, L.J., and Metcalf, C.J.E. (2017). The microbiome beyond the
horizon of ecological and evolutionary theory. Nat. Ecol. Evol. 1, 1606–1615 .Kovatcheva-Datchary, P., Nilsson, A., Akrami, R., Lee, Y.S., De Vadder, F.,
Arora, T., Hallen, A., Martens, E., Bjo ¨rck, I., and Ba ¨ckhed, F. (2015). Dietary ﬁ-
ber-induced improvement in glucose metabolism is associated with increasedabundance of Prevotella . Cell Metab. 22, 971–982 .
Kristensen, N.B., Bryrup, T., Allin, K.H., Nielsen, T., Hansen, T.H., and Peder-
sen, O. (2016). Alterations in fecal microbiota composition by probioticsupplementation in healthy adults: a systematic review of randomizedcontrolled trials. Genome Med. 8,5 2.
Kumar, R., Yi, N., Zhi, D., Eipers, P., Goldsmith, K.T., Dixon, P., Crossman,
D.K., Crowley, M.R., Lefkowitz, E.J., Rodriguez, J.M., and Morrow, C.D.(2017). Identiﬁcation of donor microbe species that colonize and persist longterm in the recipient after fecal transplant for recurrent Clostridium difﬁcile .
NPJ Bioﬁlms Microbiomes 3,1 2.
Kundu, P., Blacher, E., Elinav, E., and Pettersson, S. (2017). Our gut micro-
biome: the evolving inner self. Cell 171, 1481–1493 .
Kurilshikov, A., Wijmenga, C., Fu, J., and Zhernakova, A. (2017). Host genetics
and gut microbiome: challenges and perspectives. Trends Immunol. 38,
633–647 .
La Rosa, P.S., Warner, B.B., Zhou, Y., Weinstock, G.M., Sodergren, E., Hall-
Moore, C.M., Stevens, H.J., Bennett, W.E., Jr., Shaikh, N., Linneman, L.A.,et al. (2014). Patterned progression of bacterial populations in the prematureinfant gut. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 12522–12527 .
Langdon, A., Crook, N., and Dantas, G. (2016). The effects of antibiotics on the
microbiome throughout development and alternative approaches for thera-peutic modulation. Genome Med. 8,3 9.
Lax, S., Smith, D.P., Hampton-Marcell, J., Owens, S.M., Handley, K.M., Scott,
N.M., Gibbons, S.M., Larsen, P., Shogan, B.D., Weiss, S., et al. (2014). Longi-
tudinal analysis of microbial interaction between humans and the indoor envi-ronment. Science 345, 1048–1052 .
Le Bastard, Q., Al-Ghalith, G.A., Gre ´goire, M., Chapelet, G., Javaudin, F.,
Dailly, E., Batard, E., Knights, D., and Montassier, E. (2018). Systematic review:human gut dysbiosis induced by non-antibiotic prescription medications.Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 47, 332–345 .
Le Chatelier, E., Nielsen, T., Qin, J., Prifti, E., Hildebrand, F., Falony, G.,
Almeida, M., Arumugam, M., Batto, J.-M., Kennedy, S., et al.; MetaHIT con-sortium (2013). Richness of human gut microbiome correlates with metabolicmarkers. Nature 500, 541–546 .
Lee, S.T.M., Kahn, S.A., Delmont, T.O., Shaiber, A., Esen, O ¨.C., Hubert, N.A.,
Morrison, H.G., Antonopoulos, D.A., Rubin, D.T., and Eren, A.M. (2017).Tracking microbial colonization in fecal microbiota transplantation experi-ments via genome-resolved metagenomics. Microbiome 5,5 0.
Li, J., Jia, H., Cai, X., Zhong, H., Feng, Q., Sunagawa, S., Arumugam, M., Kul-
tima, J.R., Prifti, E., Nielsen, T., et al.; MetaHIT Consortium (2014). Anintegrated catalog of reference genes in the human gut microbiome. Nat. Bio-technol. 32, 834–841 .
Li, S.S., Zhu, A., Benes, V., Costea, P.I., Hercog, R., Hildebrand, F., Huerta-
Cepas, J., Nieuwdorp, M., Saloja ¨rvi, J., Voigt, A.Y., et al. (2016). Durable
coexistence of donor and recipient strains after fecal microbiota transplanta-tion. Science 352, 586–589 .
Lloyd-Price, J., Abu-Ali, G., and Huttenhower, C. (2016). The healthy human
microbiome. Genome Med. 8,5 1.
Lloyd-Price, J., Mahurkar, A., Rahnavard, G., Crabtree, J., Orvis, J., Hall, A.B.,
Brady, A., Creasy, H.H., McCracken, C., Giglio, M.G., et al. (2017). Strains,functions and dynamics in the expanded Human Microbiome Project. Nature550, 61–66 .
Lynch, S.V., and Pedersen, O. (2016). The human intestinal microbiome in
health and disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 375, 2369–2379 .
Maier, L., and Typas, A. (2017). Systematically investigating the impact of
medication on the gut microbiome. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 39, 128–135 .
Maier, L., Pruteanu, M., Kuhn, M., Zeller, G., Telzerow, A., Anderson, E.E., Bro-
chado, A.R., Fernandez, K.C., Dose, H., Mori, H., et al. (2018). Extensiveimpact of non-antibiotic drugs on human gut microbiota. Nature. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nature25979 .
Cell 172, March 8, 2018 1211Ma¨kivuokko, H., Tiihonen, K., Tynkkynen, S., Paulin, L., and Rautonen, N.
(2010). The effect of age and non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs on humanintestinal microbiota composition. Br. J. Nutr. 103, 227–234 .
Mallick, H., Ma, S., Franzosa, E.A., Vatanen, T., Morgan, X.C., and Hutten-
hower, C. (2017). Experimental design and quantitative analysis of microbialcommunity multiomics. Genome Biol. 18, 228 .
Manichanh, C., Rigottier-Gois, L., Bonnaud, E., Gloux, K., Pelletier, E., Fran-
geul, L., Nalin, R., Jarrin, C., Chardon, P., Marteau, P., et al. (2006). Reduced
diversity of faecal microbiota in Crohn’s disease revealed by a metagenomicapproach. Gut 55, 205–211 .
Martı ´, J.M., Martı ´nez-Martı ´nez, D., Rubio, T., Gracia, C., Pen ˜a, M., Latorre, A.,
Moya, A., and P Garay, C. (2017). Health and disease imprinted in the time vari-ability of the human microbiome. mSystems 2, e00144–e16 .
Marzorati, M., Vanhoecke, B., De Ryck, T., Sadaghian Sadabad, M., Pinheiro,
I., Possemiers, S., Van den Abbeele, P., Derycke, L., Bracke, M., Pieters, J.,et al. (2014). The HMI /C212module: a new tool to study the Host-Microbiota Inter-
action in the human gastrointestinal tract in vitro. BMC Microbiol. 14, 133 .
Matias Rodrigues, J.F., Schmidt, T.S.B., Tackmann, J., and von Mering, C.
(2017). MAPseq: highly efﬁcient k-mer search with conﬁdence estimates, forrRNA sequence analysis. Bioinformatics 33, 3808–3810 .
Matson, V., Fessler, J., Bao, R., Chongsuwat, T., Zha, Y., Alegre, M.-L., Luke,
J.J., and Gajewski, T.F. (2018). The commensal microbiome is associated withanti-PD-1 efﬁcacy in metastatic melanoma patients. Science 359, 104–108 .
Moss, E.L., Falconer, S.B., Tkachenko, E., Wang, M., Systrom, H., Mahaba-
munuge, J., Relman, D.A., Hohmann, E.L., and Bhatt, A.S. (2017). Long-termtaxonomic and functional divergence from donor bacterial strains following
fecal microbiota transplantation in immunocompromised patients. PLoS
ONE 12, e0182585 .
Muegge, B.D., Kuczynski, J., Knights, D., Clemente, J.C., Gonza ´lez, A., Fon-
tana, L., Henrissat, B., Knight, R., and Gordon, J.I. (2011). Diet drivesconvergence in gut microbiome functions across mammalian phylogeny andwithin humans. Science 332, 970–974 .
Mukherjee, S., Seshadri, R., Varghese, N.J., Eloe-Fadrosh, E.A., Meier-Kolth-
off, J.P., Go ¨ker, M., Coates, R.C., Hadjithomas, M., Pavlopoulos, G.A., Paez-
Espino, D., et al. (2017). 1,003 reference genomes of bacterial and archaealisolates expand coverage of the tree of life. Nat. Biotechnol. 35, 676–683 .
Narula, N., Kassam, Z., Yuan, Y., Colombel, J.-F., Ponsioen, C., Reinisch, W.,
and Moayyedi, P. (2017). Systematic review and meta-analysis: fecal micro-biota transplantation for treatment of active ulcerative colitis. Inﬂamm. BowelDis. 23, 1702–1709 .
Nayfach, S., Rodriguez-Mueller, B., Garud, N., and Pollard, K.S. (2016). An in-
tegrated metagenomics pipeline for strain proﬁling reveals novel patterns ofbacterial transmission and biogeography. Genome Res. 26, 1612–1625 .
Nelson, K.E., Weinstock, G.M., Highlander, S.K., Worley, K.C., Creasy, H.H.,
Wortman, J.R., Rusch, D.B., Mitreva, M., Sodergren, E., Chinwalla, A.T.,
et al.; Human Microbiome Jumpstart Reference Strains Consortium (2010).
A catalog of reference genomes from the human microbiome. Science 328,
994–999 .
Neville, B.A., Forster, S.C., and Lawley, T.D. (2017). Commensal Koch’s pos-
tulates: establishing causation in human microbiota research. Curr. Opin.Microbiol. 42, 47–52 .
Nguyen, T.L.A., Vieira-Silva, S., Liston, A., and Raes, J. (2015). How informa-
tive is the mouse for human gut microbiota research? Dis. Model. Mech. 8,
1–16 .
Noguera-Julian, M., Rocafort, M., Guille
´n, Y., Rivera, J., Casadella `, M., Nowak,
P., Hildebrand, F., Zeller, G., Parera, M., Bellido, R., et al. (2016). Gut micro-biota linked to sexual preference and HIV infection. EBioMedicine 5, 135–146 .
O’Toole, P.W., and Jeffery, I.B. (2015). Gut microbiota and aging. Science 350,
1214–1215 .
Obregon-Tito, A.J., Tito, R.Y., Metcalf, J., Sankaranarayanan, K., Clemente,
J.C., Ursell, L.K., Zech Xu, Z., Van Treuren, W., Knight, R., Gaffney, P.M.,et al. (2015). Subsistence strategies in traditional societies distinguish gut mi-crobiomes. Nat. Commun. 6, 6505 .Odamaki, T., Kato, K., Sugahara, H., Hashikura, N., Takahashi, S., Xiao, J.-Z.,
Abe, F., and Osawa, R. (2016). Age-related changes in gut microbiota compo-sition from newborn to centenarian: a cross-sectional study. BMC Microbiol.16,9 0.
Ogilvie, L.A., and Jones, B.V. (2015). The human gut virome: a multifaceted
majority. Front. Microbiol. 6, 918 .
Ott, S.J., Musfeldt, M., Wenderoth, D.F., Hampe, J., Brant, O., Fo ¨lsch, U.R.,
Timmis, K.N., and Schreiber, S. (2004). Reduction in diversity of the colonic
mucosa associated bacterial microﬂora in patients with active inﬂammatory
bowel disease. Gut 53, 685–693 .
Parfrey, L.W., Walters, W.A., and Knight, R. (2011). Microbial eukaryotes in the
human microbiome: ecology, evolution, and future directions. Front. Microbiol.2, 153 .
Pasolli, E., Truong, D.T., Malik, F., Waldron, L., and Segata, N. (2016). Machine
learning meta-analysis of large metagenomic datasets: tools and biological in-sights. PLoS Comput. Biol. 12, e1004977 .
Pedersen, H.K., Gudmundsdottir, V., Nielsen, H.B., Hyotylainen, T., Nielsen,
T., Jensen, B.A.H., Forslund, K., Hildebrand, F., Prifti, E., Falony, G., et al.;MetaHIT Consortium (2016). Human gut microbes impact host serum metab-olome and insulin sensitivity. Nature 535, 376–381 .
Petersen, L.M., Bautista, E.J., Nguyen, H., Hanson, B.M., Chen, L., Lek, S.H.,
Sodergren, E., and Weinstock, G.M. (2017). Community characteristics of the
gut microbiomes of competitive cyclists. Microbiome 5,9 8.
Phillips, B.L., and Shine, R. (2004). Adapting to an invasive species: toxic cane
toads induce morphological change in Australian snakes. Proc. Natl. Acad.Sci. USA 101, 17150–17155 .
Props, R., Kerckhof, F.-M., Rubbens, P., De Vrieze, J., Hernandez Sanabria,
E., Waegeman, W., Monsieurs, P., Hammes, F., and Boon, N. (2017). Absolutequantiﬁcation of microbial taxon abundances. ISME J. 11, 584–587 .
Qin, J., Li, R., Raes, J., Arumugam, M., Burgdorf, K.S., Manichanh, C., Nielsen,
T., Pons, N., Levenez, F., Yamada, T., et al.; MetaHIT Consortium (2010). A hu-man gut microbial gene catalogue established by metagenomic sequencing.Nature 464, 59–65 .
Quince, C., Delmont, T.O., Raguideau, S., Alneberg, J., Darling, A.E., Collins,
G., and Eren, A.M. (2017). DESMAN: a new tool for de novo extraction of
strains from metagenomes. Genome Biol. 18, 181 .
Raes, J., and Bork, P. (2008). Molecular eco-systems biology: towards an
understanding of community function. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 6, 693–699 .
Raymond, F., Ouameur, A.A., De ´raspe, M., Iqbal, N., Gingras, H., Dridi, B.,
Leprohon, P., Plante, P.-L., Giroux, R., Be ´rube´,E`., et al. (2016). The initial state
of the human gut microbiome determines its reshaping by antibiotics. ISME J.10, 707–720 .
Rettedal, E.A., Gumpert, H., and Sommer, M.O.A. (2014). Cultivation-based
multiplex phenotyping of human gut microbiota allows targeted recovery ofpreviously uncultured bacteria. Nat. Commun. 5, 4714 .
Roager, H.M., Licht, T.R., Poulsen, S.K., Larsen, T.M., and Bahl, M.I. (2014).
Microbial enterotypes, inferred by the prevotella-to-bacteroides ratio, re-
mained stable during a 6-month randomized controlled diet intervention withthe new nordic diet. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 80, 1142–1149 .
Roager, H.M., Hansen, L.B.S., Bahl, M.I., Frandsen, H.L., Carvalho, V., Gøbel,
R.J., Dalgaard, M.D., Plichta, D.R., Sparholt, M.H., Vestergaard, H., et al.(2016). Colonic transit time is related to bacterial metabolism and mucosalturnover in the gut. Nat. Microbiol. 1, 16093 .
Rogers, M.A.M., and Aronoff, D.M. (2016). The inﬂuence of non-steroidal anti-
inﬂammatory drugs on the gut microbiome. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 22,
178.e1–178.e9 .
Rothschild, D., Weissbrod, O., Barkan, E., Korem, T., Zeevi, D., Costea, P.I.,
Godneva, A., Kalka, I.N., Bar, N., Zmora, N., et al. (2018). Environmental fac-tors dominate over host genetics in shaping human gut microbiota composi-tion. Nature. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25973 .
Routy, B., Le Chatelier, E., Derosa, L., Duong, C.P.M., Alou, M.T., Daille `re, R.,
Fluckiger, A., Messaoudene, M., Rauber, C., Roberti, M.P., et al. (2018). Gut
1212 Cell 172, March 8, 2018microbiome inﬂuences efﬁcacy of PD-1–based immunotherapy against
epithelial tumors. Science 359, 91–97 .
Satinsky, B.M., Gifford, S.M., Crump, B.C., and Moran, M.A. (2013). Use of in-
ternal standards for quantitative metatranscriptome and metagenome anal-ysis. Methods Enzymol. 531, 237–250 .
Scher, J.U., Sczesnak, A., Longman, R.S., Segata, N., Ubeda, C., Bielski, C.,
Rostron, T., Cerundolo, V., Pamer, E.G., Abramson, S.B., et al. (2013). Expan-sion of intestinal Prevotella copri correlates with enhanced susceptibility to
arthritis. eLife 2, e01202 .
Schirmer, M., Franzosa, E.A., Lloyd-Price, J., McIver, L.J., Schwager, R.,
Poon, T.W., Ananthakrishnan, A.N., Andrews, E., Barron, G., Lake, K., et al.(2018). Dynamics of metatranscription in the inﬂammatory bowel disease gut
microbiome. Nat. Microbiol. 7,1.
S c h l o i s s n i g ,S . ,A r u m u g a m ,M . ,S u n a g a w a ,S . ,M i t r e v a ,M . ,T a p ,J . ,
Zhu, A., Waller, A., Mende, D.R., Kultima, J.R., Martin, J., et al.(2013). Genomic variation landscape of the human gut microbiome. Na-ture 493, 45–50 .
Scholz, M., Ward, D.V., Pasolli, E., Tolio, T., Zolfo, M., Asnicar, F., Truong, D.T.,
Tett, A., Morrow, A.L., and Segata, N. (2016). Strain-level microbial epidemi-ology and population genomics from shotgun metagenomics. Nat. Methods13, 435–438 .
Scott, T.A., Quintaneiro, L.M., Norvaisas, P., Lui, P.P., Wilson, M.P., Leung, K.-
Y., Herrera-Dominguez, L., Sudiwala, S., Pessia, A., Clayton, P.T., et al. (2017).Host-microbe co-metabolism dictates cancer drug efﬁcacy in C. elegans . Cell
169, 442–456 .
Seekatz, A.M., Aas, J., Gessert, C.E., Rubin, T.A., Saman, D.M., Bakken, J.S.,
and Young, V.B. (2014). Recovery of the gut microbiome following fecal micro-biota transplantation. MBio 5, e00893–e14 .
Shade, A., Peter, H., Allison, S.D., Baho, D.L., Berga, M., Bu ¨rgmann, H.,
Huber, D.H., Langenheder, S., Lennon, J.T., Martiny, J.B.H., et al. (2012).Fundamentals of microbial community resistance and resilience. Front.Microbiol. 3,4 1 7 .
Shah, P., Fritz, J.V., Glaab, E., Desai, M.S., Greenhalgh, K., Frachet, A., Nie-
gowska, M., Estes, M., Ja ¨ger, C., Seguin-Devaux, C., et al. (2016). A microﬂui-
dics-based in vitro model of the gastrointestinal human-microbe interface.
Nat. Commun. 7, 11535 .
S h o a i e ,S . ,G h a f f a r i ,P . ,K o v a t c h e v a - D a t c h a r y ,P . ,M a r d i n o g l u ,A . ,S e n ,
P., Pujos-Guillot, E., de Wouters, T. ,J u s t e ,C . ,R i z k a l l a ,S . ,C h i l l o u x ,
J., et al.; MICRO-Obes Consortium (2015). Quantifying diet-inducedmetabolic changes of the human gut microbiome. Cell Metab. 22,
320–331 .
Sinha, R., Abu-Ali, G., Vogtmann, E., Fodor, A.A., Ren, B., Amir, A., Schwager,
E., Crabtree, J., Ma, S., Abnet, C.C., et al.; Microbiome Quality Control ProjectConsortium (2017). Assessment of variation in microbial community ampliconsequencing by the Microbiome Quality Control (MBQC) project consortium.Nat. Biotechnol. 35, 1077–1086 .
Sivan, A., Corrales, L., Hubert, N., Williams, J.B., Aquino-Michaels, K., Earley,
Z.M., Benyamin, F.W., Lei, Y.M., Jabri, B., Alegre, M.-L., et al. (2015).Commensal Biﬁdobacterium promotes antitumor immunity and facilitatesanti-PD-L1 efﬁcacy. Science 350, 1084–1089 .
Smits, S.A., Leach, J., Sonnenburg, E.D., Gonzalez, C.G., Lichtman, J.S.,
Reid, G., Knight, R., Manjurano, A., Changalucha, J., Elias, J.E., et al. (2017).Seasonal cycling in the gut microbiome of the Hadza hunter-gatherers ofTanzania. Science 357, 802–806 .
Sokol, H., Leducq, V., Aschard, H., Pham, H.-P., Jegou, S., Landman, C., Co-
hen, D., Liguori, G., Bourrier, A., Nion-Larmurier, I., et al. (2017). Fungal micro-biota dysbiosis in IBD. Gut 66, 1039–1048 .
Sommer, F., Anderson, J.M., Bharti, R., Raes, J., and Rosenstiel, P. (2017). The
resilience of the intestinal microbiota inﬂuences health and disease. Nat. Rev.Microbiol. 15, 630–638 .
Song, S.J., Lauber, C., Costello, E.K., Lozupone, C.A., Humphrey, G., Berg-
Lyons, D., Caporaso, J.G., Knights, D., Clemente, J.C., Nakielny, S., et al.(2013). Cohabiting family members share microbiota with one another and
with their dogs. eLife 2
, e00458 .
Song, S.J., Amir, A., Metcalf, J.L., Amato, K.R., Xu, Z.Z., Humphrey,
G., and Knight, R. (2016). Preservation methods differ in fecal micro-biome stability, affecting suitability for ﬁeld studies. mSystems 1,
e00021–e16 .
Sonnenburg, J.L., and Ba ¨ckhed, F. (2016). Diet-microbiota interactions as
moderators of human metabolism. Nature 535, 56–64 .
Sta¨mmler, F., Gla ¨sner, J., Hiergeist, A., Holler, E., Weber, D., Oefner, P.J.,
Gessner, A., and Spang, R. (2016). Adjusting microbiome proﬁles for differ-ences in microbial load by spike-in bacteria. Microbiome 4,2 8.
Stein, R.R., Bucci, V., Toussaint, N.C., Bufﬁe, C.G., Ra ¨tsch, G., Pamer, E.G.,
Sander, C., and Xavier, J.B. (2013). Ecological modeling from time-series infer-ence: insight into dynamics and stability of intestinal microbiota. PLoS Com-put. Biol. 9, e1003388 .
Stokholm, J., Blaser, M.J., Thorsen, J., Rasmussen, M.A., Waage, J., Vinding,
R.K., Schoos, A.-M.M., Kunøe, A., Fink, N.R., Chawes, B.L., et al. (2018).Maturation of the gut microbiome and risk of asthma in childhood. Nat. Com-mun. 9,1 4 1 .
Suez, J., and Elinav, E. (2017). The path towards microbiome-based metabo-
lite treatment. Nat. Microbiol. 2, 17075 .
Sunagawa, S., Mende, D.R., Zeller, G., Izquierdo-Carrasco, F., Berger, S.A.,
Kultima, J.R., Coelho, L.P., Arumugam, M., Tap, J., Nielsen, H.B., et al.(2013). Metagenomic species proﬁling using universal phylogenetic markergenes. Nat. Methods 10, 1196–1199 .
Surana, N.K., and Kasper, D.L. (2017). Moving beyond microbiome-wide asso-
ciations to causal microbe identiﬁcation. Nature 375, 2369 .
Suzuki, T.A., and Worobey, M. (2014). Geographical variation of human gut mi-
crobial composition. Biol. Lett. 10, 20131037 .
Sze, M.A., and Schloss, P.D. (2016). Looking for a signal in the noise: revisiting
obesity and the microbiome. MBio 7, e01018–e16 .
Tamburini, S., Shen, N., Wu, H.C., and Clemente, J.C. (2016). The microbiome
in early life: implications for health outcomes. Nat. Med. 22, 713–722 .
Thaiss, C.A., Zmora, N., Levy, M., and Elinav, E. (2016). The microbiome and
innate immunity. Nature 535, 65–74 .
Ticinesi, A., Milani, C., Lauretani, F., Nouvenne, A., Mancabelli, L., Lugli, G.A.,
Turroni, F., Duranti, S., Mangifesta, M., Viappiani, A., et al. (2017). Gut
microbiota composition is associated with polypharmacy in elderly hospital-
ized patients. Sci. Rep. 7, 11102 .
Tigchelaar, E.F., Bonder, M.J., Jankipersadsing, S.A., Fu, J., Wijmenga, C.,
and Zhernakova, A. (2016). Gut microbiota composition associated with stoolconsistency. Gut 65, 540–542 .
Tito, R.Y., Cypers, H., Joossens, M., Varkas, G., Van Praet, L., Glorieus, E., Van
den Bosch, F., De Vos, M., Raes, J., and Elewaut, D. (2017). Brief report: dia-lister as a microbial marker of disease activity in spondyloarthritis. Arthritis
Rheumatol. 69, 114–121 .
Tramontano, M., Andrejew, S., Pruteanu, M., Klu ¨nemann, M., Kuhn, M., Galar-
dini, M., Jouhten, P., Zelezniak, A., Zeller, G., Bork, P., et al. (2018). Nutritionalpreferences of human gut bacteria reveal their metabolic idiosyncrasies. Nat.Microbiol. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-018-0123-9 .
Tremaroli, V., Karlsson, F., Werling, M., Sta ˚hlman, M., Kovatcheva-Datchary,
P., Olbers, T., Fa ¨ndriks, L., le Roux, C.W., Nielsen, J., and Ba
¨ckhed, F.
(2015). Roux-en-Y gastric bypass and vertical banded gastroplasty inducelong-term changes on the human gut microbiome contributing to fat mass
regulation. Cell Metab. 22, 228–238 .
Truong, D.T., Tett, A., Pasolli, E., Huttenhower, C., and Segata, N. (2017). Mi-
crobial strain-level population structure and genetic diversity from metage-nomes. Genome Res. 27, 626–638 .
Turnbaugh, P.J., Hamady, M., Yatsunenko, T., Cantarel, B.L., Duncan, A., Ley,
R.E., Sogin, M.L., Jones, W.J., Roe, B.A., Affourtit, J.P., et al. (2009). A core gutmicrobiome in obese and lean twins. Nature 457, 480–484 .
Cell 172, March 8, 2018 1213Turpin, W., Espin-Garcia, O., Xu, W., Silverberg, M.S., Kevans, D., Smith,
M.I., Guttman, D.S., Grifﬁths, A., Panaccione, R., Otley, A., et al.; GEMProject Research Consortium (2016). Association of host genome with in-testinal microbial composition in a large healthy cohort. Nat. Genet. 48,
1413–1417 .
van Nood, E., Vrieze, A., Nieuwdorp, M., Fuentes, S., Zoetendal, E.G., de Vos,
W.M., Visser, C.E., Kuijper, E.J., Bartelsman, J.F.W.M., Tijssen, J.G.P., et al.
(2013). Duodenal infusion of donor feces for recurrent Clostridium difﬁcile .
N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 407–415 .
Vandeputte, D., Falony, G., Vieira-Silva, S., Tito, R.Y., Joossens, M., and
Raes, J. (2016). Stool consistency is strongly associated with gut micro-biota richness and composition, enterotypes and bacterial growth rates.Gut 65, 57–62 .
Vandeputte, D., Falony, G., D’hoe, K., Vieira-Silva, S., and Raes, J. (2017a).
Water activity does not shape the microbiota in the human colon. Gut 66,
1865–1866 .
Vandeputte, D., Falony, G., Vieira-Silva, S., Wang, J., Sailer, M., Theis, S., Ver-
beke, K., and Raes, J. (2017b). Prebiotic inulin-type fructans induce speciﬁcchanges in the human gut microbiota. Gut 66, 1968–1974 .
Vandeputte, D., Kathagen, G., D’hoe, K., Vieira-Silva, S., Valles-Colomer, M.,
Sabino, J., Wang, J., Tito, R.Y., De Commer, L., Darzi, Y., et al. (2017c). Quan-titative microbiome proﬁling links gut community variation to microbial load.Nature 551, 507–511 .
Vandeputte, D., Tito, R.Y., Vanleeuwen, R., Falony, G., and Raes, J. (2017d).
Practical considerations for large-scale gut microbiome studies. FEMS Micro-
biol. Rev. 41(Supp_1), S154–S167 .
Va´zquez-Baeza, Y., Callewaert, C., Debelius, J., Hyde, E., Marotz, C., Morton,
J.T., Swafford, A., Vrbanac, A., Dorrestein, P.C., and Knight, R. (2018). Impactsof the human gut microbiome on therapeutics. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol.58, 253–270 .
Vermeire, S., Joossens, M., Verbeke, K., Wang, J., Machiels, K., Sabino, J.,
Ferrante, M., Van Assche, G., Rutgeerts, P., and Raes, J. (2016). Donor spe-cies richness determines faecal microbiota transplantation success in inﬂam-matory bowel disease. J. Crohn’s Colitis 10, 387–394 .
Ve´tizou, M., Pitt, J.M., Daille `re, R., Lepage, P., Waldschmitt, N., Flament, C.,
Rusakiewicz, S., Routy, B., Roberti, M.P., Duong, C.P.M., et al. (2015). Anti-cancer immunotherapy by CTLA-4 blockade relies on the gut microbiota. Sci-ence 350, 1079–1084 .
Voigt, A.Y., Costea, P.I., Kultima, J.R., Li, S.S., Zeller, G., Sunagawa, S., and
Bork, P. (2015). Temporal and technical variability of human gut metage-nomes. Genome Biol. 16,7 3.
Vrieze, A., Van Nood, E., Holleman, F., Saloja ¨rvi, J., Kootte, R.S., Bartelsman,
J.F.W.M., Dallinga-Thie, G.M., Ackermans, M.T., Serlie, M.J., Oozeer, R., et al.(2012). Transfer of intestinal microbiota from lean donors increases insulin
sensitivity in individuals with metabolic syndrome. Gastroenterology 143,
913–916 .
Walsh, C.J., Guinane, C.M., O’Toole, P.W., and Cotter, P.D. (2014). Beneﬁcial
modulation of the gut microbiota. FEBS Lett. 588, 4120–4130 .
Walters, W.A., Xu, Z., and Knight, R. (2014). Meta-analyses of human gut mi-
crobes associated with obesity and IBD. FEBS Lett. 588, 4223–4233 .
Wang, J., and Jia, H. (2016). Metagenome-wide association studies: ﬁne-min-
ing the microbiome. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 14, 508–522 .
Wang, Z., Klipfell, E., Bennett, B.J., Koeth, R., Levison, B.S., Dugar, B.,
Feldstein, A.E., Britt, E.B., Fu, X., Chung, Y.-M., et al. (2011). Gut ﬂorametabolism of phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease. Na-ture 472, 57–63 .
Wang, J., Thingholm, L.B., Skiecevi /C20cien _e, J., Rausch, P., Kummen, M., Hov,
J.R., Degenhardt, F., Heinsen, F.-A., Ru ¨hlemann, M.C., Szymczak, S., et al.
(2016a). Genome-wide association analysis identiﬁes variation in vitamin D re-ceptor and other host factors inﬂuencing the gut microbiota. Nat. Genet. 48,
1396–1406 .Wang, S., Xu, M., Wang, W., Cao, X., Piao, M., Khan, S., Yan, F., Cao, H., and
Wang, B. (2016b). Systematic review: adverse events of fecal microbiotatransplantation. PLoS ONE 11, e0161174 .
Wassenaar, T.M. (2016). Insights from 100 years of research with probiotic
E. coli . Eur. J. Microbiol. Immunol. (Bp.) 6, 147–161 .
Weiss, S., Van Treuren, W., Lozupone, C., Faust, K., Friedman, J., Deng, Y.,
Xia, L.C., Xu, Z.Z., Ursell, L., Alm, E.J., et al. (2016). Correlation detection stra-
tegies in microbial data sets vary widely in sensitivity and precision. ISME J. 10,
1669–1681 .
Weiss, S., Xu, Z.Z., Peddada, S., Amir, A., Bittinger, K., Gonzalez, A., Lozu-
pone, C., Zaneveld, J.R., Va ´zquez-Baeza, Y., Birmingham, A., et al. (2017).
Normalization and microbial differential abundance strategies depend upondata characteristics. Microbiome 5,2 7.
Wilck, N., Matus, M.G., Kearney, S.M., Olesen, S.W., Forslund, K., Bartolo-
maeus, H., Haase, S., Ma ¨hler, A., Balogh, A., Marko ´, L., et al. (2017). Salt-
responsive gut commensal modulates T
H17 axis and disease. Nature 551,
585–589 .
Wlodarska, M., Kostic, A.D., and Xavier, R.J. (2015). An integrative view of mi-
crobiome-host interactions in inﬂammatory bowel diseases. Cell Host Microbe17, 577–591 .
Wu, G.D., Chen, J., Hoffmann, C., Bittinger, K., Chen, Y.Y., Keilbaugh, S.A.,
Bewtra, M., Knights, D., Walters, W.A., Knight, R., et al. (2011). Linking
long-term dietary patterns with gut microbial enterotypes. Science 334,
105–108 .
Wu, H., Esteve, E., Tremaroli, V., Khan, M.T., Caesar, R., Mannera ˚s-Holm, L.,
Sta˚hlman, M., Olsson, L.M., Serino, M., Planas-Fe `lix, M., et al. (2017). Metfor-
min alters the gut microbiome of individuals with treatment-naive type 2diabetes, contributing to the therapeutic effects of the drug. Nat. Med. 23,
850–858 .
Xie, H., Guo, R., Zhong, H., Feng, Q., Lan, Z., Qin, B., Ward, K.J., Jackson,
M.A., Xia, Y., Chen, X., et al. (2016). Shotgun metagenomics of 250 adult twinsreveals genetic and environmental impacts on the gut microbiome. Cell Syst.3, 572–584 .
Xu, J., Lian, F., Zhao, L., Zhao, Y., Chen, X., Zhang, X., Guo, Y., Zhang, C.,
Zhou, Q., Xue, Z., et al. (2015). Structural modulation of gut microbiota duringalleviation of type 2 diabetes with a Chinese herbal formula. ISME J. 9,
552–562 .
Yatsunenko, T., Rey, F.E., Manary, M.J., Trehan, I., Dominguez-Bello, M.G.,
Contreras, M., Magris, M., Hidalgo, G., Baldassano, R.N., Anokhin, A.P.,et al. (2012). Human gut microbiome viewed across age and geography. Na-ture 486, 222–227 .
Yutin, N., Makarova, K.S., Gussow, A.B., Krupovic, M., Segall, A., Edwards,
R.A., and Koonin, E.V. (2018). Discovery of an expansive bacteriophage familythat includes the most abundant viruses from the human gut. Nat. Microbiol. 3,
38–46 .
Zaneveld, J.R., McMinds, R., and Vega Thurber, R. (2017). Stress and stability:
applying the Anna Karenina principle to animal microbiomes. Nat. Microbiol.2, 17121 .
Zeevi, D., Korem, T., Zmora, N., Israeli, D., Rothschild, D., Weinberger, A.,
Ben-Yacov, O., Lador, D., Avnit-Sagi, T., Lotan-Pompan, M., et al. (2015).
Personalized nutrition by prediction of glycemic responses. Cell 163,
1079–1094 .
Zeller, G., Tap, J., Voigt, A.Y., Sunagawa, S., Kultima, J.R., Costea, P.I., Amiot,
A., Bo ¨hm, J., Brunetti, F., Habermann, N., et al. (2014). Potential of fecal micro-
biota for early-stage detection of colorectal cancer. Mol. Syst. Biol. 10, 766 .
Zhang, C., Yin, A., Li, H., Wang, R., Wu, G., Shen, J., Zhang, M., Wang, L., Hou,
Y., Ouyang, H., et al. (2015a). Dietary modulation of gut microbiota contributesto alleviation of both genetic and simple obesity in children. EBioMedicine 2,
968–984 .
Zhang, X., Zhang, D., Jia, H., Feng, Q., Wang, D., Liang, D., Wu, X., Li, J.,
Tang, L., Li, Y., et al. (2015b). The oral and gut microbiomes are perturbedin rheumatoid arthritis and partly normalized after treatment. Nat. Med. 21,
895–905 .
1214 Cell 172, March 8, 2018Zhernakova, A., Kurilshikov, A., Bonder, M.J., Tigchelaar, E.F., Schirmer, M.,
Vatanen, T., Mujagic, Z., Vila, A.V., Falony, G., Vieira-Silva, S., et al.;LifeLines cohort study (2016). Population-based metagenomics analysis re-veals markers for gut microbiome composition and diversity. Science 352,
565–569 .
Zhou, W., Gay, N., and Oh, J. (2018). ReprDB and panDB: minimalist data-
bases with maximal microbial representation. Microbiome 6,1 5.Zhu, W., Winter, M.G., Byndloss, M.X., Spiga, L., Duerkop, B.A.,
Hughes, E.R., Bu ¨ttner, L., de Lima Roma ˜o, E., Behrendt, C.L., Lopez,
C.A., et al. (2018). Precision editing of the gut microbiota amelioratescolitis. Nature 553, 208–211 .
Zmora, N., Zeevi, D., Korem, T., Segal, E., and Elinav, E. (2016). Taking it
personally: personalized utilization of the human microbiome in health and dis-ease. Cell Host Microbe 19, 12–20 .
Cell 172, March 8, 2018 1215