15th Swiss Geoscience Meeting, Davos 2017 
 
Spatial distribution of mer cury and methylmercury in 
an industrially pollu ted floodplain soil. 
 
Lorenz Gfeller*, Adrien Mestrot* 
 
*Institute of Geography, University of Bern, Hallerstrasse 12, CH-3012 Bern 
(lorenz.gfeller@giub.unibe.ch) 
 
Mercury (Hg) is a ubiquitous global pollutant cycling through a ll environmental 
compartments. Microbially formed methylmercury (MeHg) is the mo st toxic and 
bioavailable form of Hg (Sakamoto et al. 2012). The bio-methyla tion of mercury 
is well studied in the marine environment. However, there is st ill a lack of 
knowledge concerning MeHg formation soils. The aim of this stud y is to 
characterize parameters potentially driving MeHg formation in a gricultural soils 
and terrestrial ecosystems. 
 
From the 1930s to 1980s, the agricultural floodplain between Vi sp and Raron 
(Canton of Valais) was polluted by an acetaldehyde producing pl ant. The 
chemical plant released an estimated 50 t of Hg into a discharg e canal. During 
this period, the canal was dredged multiple times. The extracte d Hg-rich canal 
sediments were used to fertilize agricultural fields and privat e gardens.  To 
estimate the extent of the Hg p ollution in the area, a screenin g was conducted 
by a geo engineering office. Despite these efforts, little is k nown about the 
meter-scale distribution of Hg and the concentration of MeHg in  the agricultural 
soils in Valais.  
 
As a first step, we aim to assess  the three-dimensional distrib ution of Hg 
species in the area. Based on the previous screening, five site s were selected 
for this study. Soil was sampled  in a rectangular grid system t o a depth of 50 
cm. MeHg is extracted with a newly developed method including a  three-step 
selective extraction with 35% HCl, dichloromethane and L-cystei ne. The Hg 
species are measured with HPLC-I CP-MS, while total Hg, and a ra nge of 
selected metals, are measured by ICP-MS. Further, parameters po tentially 
affecting MeHg formation (organ ic C, N, S, and pH) are measured . Maximum 
Hg concentrations (59.3  mg kg-1) in the agricultural soils are almost 3 times the 
federal threshold value of 20 mg kg-1. 
 In the terrestrial environment, future impacts on Hg cycling du e to changes in 
climate and land-use remain unclear. Changes in soil saturation  and redox may 
potentially promote Hg release and biomethylation. Our future r esearch will 
include soil incubation experiments to assess the influence of flooding and 
agricultural practices on the mobilization and biomethylation o f Hg in soils. 
 
 
REFERENCES  
Sakamoto, M., Murata, K., Akiyo shi, K., Sasaki, M., 2012: A rev iew of mercury 
toxicity with special reference th methylmercury, In: Guanglian g L., Nelson J. 
OD. und Yong C., Environmental ch emistry and toxicology of merc ury. 
Hoboken, N.J Wiley, 501–516. 