CORRESPONDENCE  311
CAN J ANESTH 55: 5    www.cja-jca.or g    May, 2008and Transplantation Committee; Quality of Care 
and Outcomes Research and Functional Genomics 
and Translational Biology Interdisciplinary Working 
Groups; and Council on Epidemiology and Prevention. Circulation
 2006; 113: 1807–16.
 3 Mingo S, Benedicto A, Jimenez MC, Perez MA, Montero 
M. Dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction secondary to catecholamine excess in a normal ventri
-
cle. Int J Cardiol  2006; 112: 393–6.
 4 Maron BJ, McKenna WJ, Danielson GK, et al.  
American College of Cardiology/European Society 
of Cardiology clinical expert consensus document 
on hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation Task 
Force on Clinical Expert Consensus Documents and 
the European Society of Cardiology Committee for Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol
 2003; 42: 
1687–713.
Reply:
I thank Drs. Geier et al. for their interest in the recently 
published Images in Anesthesia feature.1 Dr. Geier is 
correct in detailing the etiology and pathophysiology of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). The case report however, does not in any way imply that the cause for the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction was the presence of the long standing hypertension. It rather highlighted the positive findings of the clinical history and physical exam, with the main emphasis being on the echocardiography images. As mentioned, most patients with HCM are asymptomatic.
2 However, dynamic 
LVOT obstruction can occur in patients with normal 
ventricles,3 as well as in patients with hypertensive heart 
disease. In context of an Images in Anesthesia feature, the main purpose was to demonstrate the echocardio
-
graphic images of LVOT obstruction, and to highlight the importance of the intraoperative echocardiography as a monitor in confirming the diagnosis. 
Ashraf Fayad 
MD FRCPC
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
E-mail: afayad@ottawahospital.on.ca
References
 1 Fayad A. Left ventricular outflow obstruction in a 
patient with undiagnosed hypertrophic cardiomyopa -
thy. Can J Anesth 2007; 54: 1019–20.
 2 Spirito P, Seidman CE, McKenna WJ, Maron BJ. The management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. N Engl 
J Med 1997; 336: 775–85
.
 3 Mingo S, Benedicto A, Jimenez MC, Perez MA, Montero M. Dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction 
secondary to catecholamine excess in a normal ven -
tricle. Int J Cardiol 2006; 112: 393–6.
Methylene blue is a potent monoamine 
oxidase inhibitor
To the Editor:
I was pleased to read Dr. Ng’s case report, for which he sought my expertise and assistance, but sorry he did not avail himself of our results, that have established the monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI) potency of methylene blue, published in September 2007.
1
It is therefore worthwhile adding the ‘final chapter’ 
to this interesting story for your readers, and rectifying some particulars that are unclear or inexact in his dis
-
cussion. My initial report in 20062 postulated that the 
severity of the serotonin toxicity symptoms in these cases was such as to indicate methylene blue 
must be 
acting as an MAOI. I stated ‘… further corroboration and quantification of methylene blue’s potency (as an MAOI) is in progress.’ That paper has confirmed the prediction by demonstrating experimentally, that it is a potent tight binding MAO-A inhibitor at nanomolar concentrations: i.e., it is ~ 100 times more potent than 
moclobemide.1 There can now be no doubt about 
the cause effect relationship of drugs [methylene blue + selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)] to symptoms (serotonin toxicity).
Furthermore, serotonin toxicity is predictable 
because the spectrum concept explains it as a con
-
tinuum of increasing effects, not an idiosyncratic reaction like neuroleptic malignant syndrome (this is why it is clearer to stick to the term serotonin toxic
-
ity, and avoid serotonin syndrome). This, and other aspects of serotonin toxicity, are covered in reviews.
3,4 
Different classes of drugs exhibit distinct degrees to which they can elevate serotonin.
5 Thus, over-doses 
of SSRIs produce only mild to moderate degrees of serotonin toxicity, whereas combinations of mono
-
amine oxidase inhibitors, (including reversible inhibi -
tors of monoamine oxidase-A like moclobemide) with any serotonin reuptake inhibitor, predictably and 
frequently precipitate severe serotonergic side effects that can progress to frank serotonin toxicity (depend
-
ing on dose).
I do endorse Dr. Ng’s point ‘This illustrates the 
importance of a high level of clinical suspicion and an appropriately focussed assessment.’ But it is also crucial to link that idea to the spectrum concept, and to appreciate that increasing serotonergic side effects and serotonin toxicity is likely, not just possible, with 312 CANADIAN  JOURNAL  OF ANESTHESIA
CAN J ANESTH 55: 5    www.cja-jca.or g    May, 2008therapeutic doses of this drug combination (MAOI 
+ SRI). If such drugs have been used, the clinician needs to have a low threshold for suspecting a ser
-
otinergically-mediated adverse drug reaction, and to act even if the full gamut of typical symptoms are not yet present. Thus, if an overdose of moclobemide plus an SSRI has been ingested, one should not wait for symptoms to emerge, one should prepare to act as if they are likely to manifest soon and severely. One should also note anesthetics, benzodiazepines and muscle relaxants will substantially alter the picture by suppressing and masking symptoms. Indeed they constitute ‘treatment’, and withdrawing them may precipitate an exacerbation.
It is only drugs with SRI properties that need to 
be avoided preoperatively for a few days (depending on half-life: fluoxetine may need a 30-day washout): drugs with other mechanisms of serotonergic action will not be dangerous. Further detailed information, references and discussion is available through my web 
site www.psychotropical.co m
P. Ken Gillman MRCP sych
Mackay, Queensland, AustraliaE-mail: kg@matilda.net.au; ken.psychotropical@gmail.
comAccepted for publication February 21, 2008.
References
 1 Ramsay RR, Dunford C, Gillman PK. Methylene blue 
and serotonin toxicity: inhibition of monoamine oxi -
dase A (MAO A) confirms a theoretical prediction. Br 
J Pharmacol 2007; 152: 946–51.
 2 Gillman PK. Methylene blue implicated in potentially 
fatal serotonin toxicity. Anaesthesia 2006; 61: 1013–4.
 3 Whyte IM. Serotonin toxicity (syndrome). In: Dart 
RC (Ed.). Medical Toxicology, 3rd ed. Baltimore: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2004: 103–6.
 4 Isbister GK, Bowe SJ, Dawson A, Whyte IM. Relative 
toxicity of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs) in overdose. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2004; 42: 
277–85.
 5 Gillman PK. A review of serotonin toxicity data: impli -
cations for the mechanisms of antidepressant drug action. Biol Psychiatry 2006; 59: 1046–51.
Reply:
We appreciate Dr. Gillman’s comments and recent 
assistance in providing some of his references. The pub -
lication of methylene blue’s experimental properties as a monoamine oxidase inhibitor was subsequent to our sub
-
mission. We are pleased that it has been highlighted.1Based on two published cases, it was hypothesized that 
serotonin syndrome could be the result of a drug inter -
action between methylene blue and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
2 Our review suggests that this com -
bination may be responsible for the majority of reported cases, but one case had methylene blue alone causing 
delirium.3 Serotonin reuptake inhibitors are frequently 
prescribed, and it must be presumed that many patients receiving these medications have been exposed to methy
-
lene blue without any obvious ill effect. There are cur -
rently no data to suggest this is a predictable, or frequent reaction.
There is a need to act early in the context of a suspect
-
ed reaction, but there is no definitive cure or treatment for serotonin syndrome. We advocate prevention through a multidisciplinary approach, with cooperation between anesthesia, psychiatry and surgery. Anesthesiologists and surgeons need to be vigilant for potential interactions during preoperative assessments, and discuss with psy
-
chiatric colleagues the option of discontinuing medica -
tions or delaying surgery. However, in complex clinical scenarios, such solutions may be neither pragmatic nor convenient, and surgeons should consider alternative techniques to localize the parathyroid glands.
Until further data become available, we disagree 
that this is the final chapter to an unusual and challeng
-
ing clinical problem.
Bradley K.W. Ng FRANZCP  
Andrew J.D. Cameron FANZCA
Rhea W.Y. Liang FRACS
Middlemore Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand
E-mail: bkwng@hotmail.com
References
 1 Ramsay RR, Dunford C, Gillman PK. Methylene blue 
and serotonin toxicity: inhibition of monoamine oxi -
dase A (MAO A) confirms a theoretical prediction. Br 
J Pharmacol 2007; 152: 946–51.
 2 Gillman PK. Methylene blue implicated in potentially 
fatal serotonin toxicity. Anaesthesia 2006; 61: 1013–4.
 3 Patel AS, Singh-Ranger D, Lowery KA, Crinnion JN . 
Adverse neurologic effect of methylene blue used dur -
ing parathyroidectomy (Letter). Head Neck 2006; 28: 
567–8.
Problems with laryngeal mask airway 
cuff pressure
To the Editor:Regarding the recently-published article by Lardner 
et 
al.1, one concern of any supraglottic inflatable airway 