Anaerobic –aerobic sequencing batch reactor treating
azo dye containing wastewater: effect of high nitrateions and salt
Ali Assadi, Morteza Naderi and Mohammad Reza Mehrasbi
ABSTRACT
In this work, the treatment of wastewater containing azo dye using anaerobic –aerobic sequencing
batch reactor (SBR) based on mixed culture for its ef ﬁcacy in decolorization and reduction in chemical
oxygen demand (COD) under different operational conditions has been analyzed. Effects of hydraulicretention time (HRT), salts content and nitrate ion concentration on the rate and extent of color andCOD removal through 180 days containing steady-state and acclimation periods were investigated.Solid retention time was kept constant at 20 days in all experiments. Almost complete decolorizationcould be achieved at dye concentrations between 5 and 500 mg/L, but the removal of COD decreasedgradually from 90 to 65% with increasing dye concentration. The results indicated that color wasmainly removed under anaerobic conditions and it was almost ﬁlled out within 2 –3 h of the anaerobic
residence time with up to 98% decolorization ef ﬁciency. Besides, cutting the cycle time from 24 to 8 h
does not have an effect on color removal. Increases in HRT provide enough time for partialmineralization of COD and intermediates in SBR system. The rates of color and COD removalsdecreased with increasing salt content and nitrate ion concentration in the feed wastewater.Ali Assadi (corresponding author)
Morteza NaderiMohammad Reza MehrasbiDepartment of Environmental Health Engineering,Zanjan University of Medical Sciences,Zanjan,IranE-mail: assadi@zums.ac.ir
Key words |anaerobic –aerobic treatment, azo dye, decolorization, sequencing batch reactor
INTRODUCTION
Textile wastewater is a complex and highly variable mixture
of various pollutants such as degradable organics, dyes,nutrients, salts, sulfur, toxicants and refractory organics.Azo dyes account for more than 50% of the dyes used in tex-tile processing industries and are the most commonsynthetic dyes discharged into the environment ( Khouni
et al. ). Azo dyes are characterized by the presence of
one or more azo bonds ( –N¼N–) connecting aromatic
rings. Different substitutions on aromatic nucleus give astructurally diverse and most versatile group of compoundswhich makes them recalcitrant and xenobiotic ( Ali).
Wastewaters from the textile industry can produce severeenvironmental problems due to their toxicity, mutagenicity
and carcinogenicity effects to aquatic life and hence needto be treated before being released into the environmentor any reuse program ( Tony et al. ;Iasur-Kruh et al.
). Hence, there is an urgent need for a technically feasible
and cost-effective treatment method ( Popli & Patel ).
Several physicochemical technologies such as coagu-
lation, electrocoagulation, adsorption, membrane ﬁltration,
ion-exchange, irradiation and oxidation have been employedfor the removal of azo dyes from wastewaters ( Forgacs et al.
;Singh & Arora ). The disadvantages of using these
treatment methods are high cost, low ef ﬁciency, change of
pollutants phase, toxic intermediates and production ofhazardous sludge which are hard to dispose of ( Singh
et al. ). As a consequence, biological treatment is an
environmental friendly and cost effective alternative with
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Licence (CC BY 4.0), which permits copying,adaptation and redistribution, provided the original work is properly cited(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).251 © 2018 The Authors Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.2|2018
doi: 10.2166/wrd.2017.132
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/2/251/240606/jwrd0080251.pdf
by guest
on 07 December 2019the ability to produce safe sludge ( Baban et al. ;Cham-
pagne & Ramsay ;Kolekar et al. ;Maet al. ).
Azo dye removal has been studied using both pure and
mixed mediums ( Lourenco et al. ). Although consider-
able results have been achieved using pure mediums(Ghodake et al. ;Parshetti et al. ;Silveira et al.
), these seem to be not usable at full scale facilities for
real textile wastewater treatment. Many works have rec-ommended that mixed medium may be more appropriatefor decolorization of azo dyes ( Coughlin et al. ;Guo
et al. ;Koupaie et al. b). Thus, the mixed mediums
can perform tasks better than or equivalent to that of anindividual pure culture without any precautions to preventcontamination ( Popli & Patel ). Biological treatment
can lead to complete mineralization of organic pollutantsat low cost. The development of high-rate systems, inwhich hydraulic retention time (HRT) are uncoupled
from solid retention time (SRT), facilitate the removal of
dyes from textile processing wastewaters ( Forgacs et al.
).
Sequential or two stage anaerobic –aerobic processes are
one of the most accepted technologies for bioremediation ofazo dye-containing wastewaters. During the anaerobic stage,decolorization occurs through a microbiological process inwhich the azo bond is reductively cleaved to aromaticamines ( Anjaneyulu et al. ;Is ̧ık & Sponza ;
Jonstrup et al. ;Singh & Arora ). These resultant aro-
matic amines are also required to be mineralized duringthe subsequent aerobic stage. Aromatic amines can bemineralized by means of aerobic treatment of non-speci ﬁc
enzymes through hydroxylation and ring- ﬁssion of aromatic
compounds. If azo dyes are not reduced and cleaved in theanaerobic stage, they most probably leave the aerobic stageintact. To alleviate this problem an anaerobic –aerobic treat-
ment system has been proposed in which the dead-end toxic
byproducts generated under anoxic conditions can be
broken down aerobically ( Forgacs et al. ;Supaka
et al. ;
Anjaneyulu et al. ). The extent and rate of
anaerobic color removal of azo dyes are in ﬂuenced by
various parameters such as color structure, color concen-tration, retention times, supplementation with differentcarbon and nitrogen sources, electron donor, redoxmediator and salts ( Van der Zee & Villaverde ;Ali
;da Silva et al. ;Popli & Patel ).Anaerobic –aerobic sequencing batch reactor (SBR) sys-
tems have been widely used in recent works to achieve thedesired dye removal with bio ﬁlm or suspended growth
mode ( Van der Zee & Villaverde ;Somasiri et al. ;
Koupaie et al. b;Franca et al. ;Popli & Patel ).
Color removal, especially from textile wastewaters, hasbeen a huge challenge over the last decades, and up to nowthere is no single and economically attractive treatment thatcan effectively remove colors. Also, the reuse of water fromefﬂuents in the production process or treatment plant leads
to a reduction in costs for the textile industry. In a study forpossibility of wastewater reuse the authors have shown thatthe use of advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) can reusethe ef ﬂuent water by up to 10 times in the dyeing process
(Rosa et al. ). The presence of dye and high concen-
trations of salt complicates the treatment of textilewastewaters. Many microbial species are able to decolorize
some azo dyes anaerobically within a certain limit of salt,
but most of them are unable to decolorize azo dyes in highsalt conditions ( dos Santos et al. ;Uddin et al. ).
The primary purpose of this study was to determine the
performance of an anaerobic –aerobic SBR technology for
the removal of azo dye. Likewise, the effects of some oper-ational parameters such as cycle times, high total dissolvedsolids (TDS) and nitrate concentration were determined.
METHODS
Experimental set-up
A laboratory scale SBR system consisted of a 10 L cylindri-
cal reactor made of plexiglass with an inner diameter of17 cm (working volume of 8 L). The scheme of the SBRsystem is shown in Figure 1 . The reactor was operated
with cycle times of 8, 12 and 24 h and the volume exchangein each cycle was 4 L (volumetric exchange ratio 0.5). Thesystem was ﬁrst operated under anaerobic conditions with
a slight mixing to obtain homogenous conditions. After
that, the anaerobic step was completed. The peristalticpump, mixer, blower and solenoid valve were controlledby a PLC time controller (Omron, Japan). Phase durationand operating condition of the system ’s working cycles are
presented in Table 1 .252 A. Assadi et al .|Anaerobic –aerobic sequencing batch reactor treating azo dye containing wastewater Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.2|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/2/251/240606/jwrd0080251.pdf
by guest
on 07 December 2019Characterization of synthetic wastewater
Synthetic wastewater was prepared with ordinary tap water
and dye, and glucose as sources of carbon and energy. Syntheticwastewater used throughout this survey is presented in Table 2 .
The commercial basic dye used as a pollutant in the presentstudy was C.I. Basic Red 46 (BR46), which was purchasedfrom Alvan Sabet Co. (Hamedan, Iran). This dye is soluble inwater and belongs to the cationic basic dye group. The chemical
structure and other characteristics of BR46 are shown inTable 3 . Dye solutions were prepared by dissolving dye in
water. Glucose (contributed to chemical oxygen demand
Figure 1 |Diagram of pilot scale of SBR.
Table 1 |Details of working cycles in the SBR system
Cycles FillReact
Anaerobic Aerobic Settle Decant
24 h 10 min 16 h 6 h,
40 min60 min 10 min
12 h 6 h 4 h,
40 min
8h 2h 4h ,
40 min
Feed pump On Off Off Off OffBlower Off Off On Off OffMixer Off On On Off OffDecant
valveOff Off Off Off On
Condition Anoxic Anaerobic Aerobic Anoxic AnoxicTable 2 |Feed wastewater characteristics
Constituents Concentration (mg/L)
NH 4Cl 286.61
HBO 3 0.35
MnCl 2.4H 2O 0.50
ZnCI 2 0.05
K2HPO 4 84.29
KH 2PO4 65.85
Na2SO3.5H 2O 0.164
(NH 4)6MO 7O24.4H 2O 0.05
CaCl 2.2H 2O2 2
MgCl 2 15
CuCl 2·2H 2O 0.038
FeCl 3·6H 2O5
NiCL 2·6H 2O 0.09
AlCl 3·6H 2O 0.09
CoCl 2·6H 2O1
Basic Red 46 5 –500
Glucose as a COD 1,500253 A. Assadi et al .|Anaerobic –aerobic sequencing batch reactor treating azo dye containing wastewater Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.2|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/2/251/240606/jwrd0080251.pdf
by guest
on 07 December 2019(COD) of 1,500 mg/L after start-up) was added into the media
to offer a readily biodegradable carbon source, while at thesame time it provided the electrons for the reductive cleavageof the BR46 dye. All chemicals were analytical grade (Merck,Germany) and were used without any further puri ﬁcation.
Experiments
The activated sludge medium obtained from the sludge return
line from Zanjan municipal wastewater treatment plant wasapplied as the seed sludge. At ﬁrst the sludge was passed through
a screen to remove existing gravel. Dilution was performed sev-eral times until mixed liquor suspended solids (MLSS) wereadjusted to approximately 3,0 00 mg/L in the reactor. In order
to achieve stability conditions, the COD content of the ﬁll waste-
water was kept constant at 1,000 ±25 mg/L glucose as sources
of carbon and energy. During the start-up of the reactor, HRT
w a sk e p tc o n s t a n tf o r2 4ha n dS R Tw a sa d j u s t e dt o2 0db yremoving a certain amount of sludge daily. This procedurewas performed until the system was able to reach an entirelystable condition and COD removal was over 90%. After thestart-up, the inlet COD into the reactor was raised to 1,500 ±
25 mg/L and in order to acclimatize the biomass, BR46 contentof between 5 and 500 mg/L was added gradually. This step wascontinued until the system was able to return to the primarystable condition. The variations of cycle times were studied inthe range of 8 –2 4hi nt h er e a c t o r .T h ee f f e c t so fT D Sa n dn i t r a t e
on the performance of SBR were also investigated in the rangeof 1,000 –8,500 mg/L and 10 –120 mg/L, respectively.
Analysis
Samples were withdrawn from the sample port of the reac-
tor at predetermined time intervals and were centrifugedbefore analyses. The concentration of the dye was deter-
mined by measuring the absorption intensity at themaximum absorbent wavelength of BR46 (530 nm) usingUV –vis spectrophotometer (DR 4000, HACH, USA). Also,
COD, nitrate, total suspended solids (TSS), MLSS andTDS concentrations were determined according to Standard
Methods (APHA ).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Dye and COD removal
Start-up with the glucose as growth substrate was quite
prompt and high COD removal of up to 90% was achievedat two steps COD increment from 1,000 to 1,500 mg/L.Therefore, after three weeks of stable operating conditions,a biomass concentration of about 3,000 mg/L and SRT of20 d were obtained. In the next step of study, biomass wasacclimated to BR46 and the feed BR46 content was graduallyincreased from 5 to 500 mg/L for 68 d. The MLSS concen-trations were found to vary in the range of 3,400 –4,000 mg/L
for the operation period. With increasing color concentration,COD of color is added for COD induced by glucose in waste-water. Figure 2 shows the detail of acclimation.
The results demonstrated that activated sludge from
municipal wastewater treatment plants have high capabilityin color and COD removal from synthetic wastewater. Aswith increasing color concentration, almost all of the color
was removed in the operation period. However, the removal
of COD decreased gradually from 90 to 65% with increasingcolor concentration. The anaerobic phase providesTable 3 |Commercial dye used in the study
Color index Basic Red 46 Dye structure
Type cationic
Azo group 1
λmax 530
Molecular formula C 18H21BrN 6
Molecular weight 401.3
Figure 2 |Effects of initial dye concentration on dye and COD removal by SBR.254 A. Assadi et al .|Anaerobic –aerobic sequencing batch reactor treating azo dye containing wastewater Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.2|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/2/251/240606/jwrd0080251.pdf
by guest
on 07 December 2019signiﬁcant COD reduction. However, aeration promoted the
COD removal. No signi ﬁcant difference was obtained
between the repeated experimental conditions. Kapdan &
Oztekin ( )found that about 70% of COD was removed
in the ﬁrst 5 h of the anaerobic phase using anaerobic/
aerobic SBR (including 12 h anaerobic and 11 h aerobicphase) and glucose as growth substrate. Compared to theanaerobic phase, the much lower COD removal rate in theaerobic phase could be because of the insuf ﬁcient amount
of readily biodegradable substrate that remained after theanaerobic stages. The main carbon source of the reactorwas glucose with an attribution of 1,500 mg/L COD. Sincethe anaerobic phase was the ﬁrst stage of the SBR, the glu-
cose was rapidly reduced in the anaerobic stage byanaerobic organisms to serve as an electron donor andcarbon source, thereby causing higher COD removal intheﬁrst 2 h of the anaerobic stage. This result is in agree-
ment with previous studies. COD removal ef ﬁciency in the
anaerobic phase of SBR was found to depend on dyestufftype, amount of initial COD concentration and anaerobiccycle time ( Çınaret al. ;da Silva et al. ;Hakimelahi
et al. ;Cirik et al. ;Franca et al. ). According to
other research, only about 81 and 91% of the COD removaloccurred in the wastewater containing 500 and 1,000 mg/Lof Acid Red 18 using an anaerobic SBR/moving bed sequen-cing batch bio ﬁlm reactor and combined anaerobic/aerobic
granular activated carbon-sequencing batch bio ﬁlm reactor
(GAC-SBBR), respectively ( Hosseini Koupaie et al. ;
Koupaie et al. a). Similarly, overall COD removal
values in the range of 81 –90% for RB5 concentrations in
the range of 500 –100 mg/L were obtained for sequential
anaerobic –aerobic reactor ( Bonakdarpour et al. ). Con-
sidering the obtained results, the application of anaerobic-aerobic SBR is comparable for azo dye BR46 containingwastewater in the present study.
Approximately total color removal occurs in the anaero-
bic phase and sequencing aerobic phase which causesfurther reduction of COD. A similar relation between dyeconcentrations and its removal ef ﬁciencies was reported
by another study group ( Is ̧ık & Sponza ;Hakimelahi
et al. ;Wang et al. ). Therefore, at high concen-
trations, the almost whole color removal takes place in theearly hours of the anaerobic phase. In low concentrations(less than 100 mg/L) the sequencing aerobic phase causesonly a small amount of color removal (less than 1%), how-
ever in higher concentrations of 100 mg/L not only does
this phase not help with the color removal, but it alsocauses very slight color formation (approximately 1%).This may be formed due to the recolorization or intermedi-ate oxidation of azo dye BR46. To explain the possiblereasons for formation of color the mechanisms responsiblefor color change in the aerobic phase of an anaerobic –
aerobic process should be looked at. According to previouswork the major azo dye removal mechanism during aerobicbiological processes is adsorption to the biomass ( Panswad
et al. ). On the other hand, aerobic color formation
can occur as the result of the autooxidation of dye reductionmetabolites ( da Silva et al. ;Wang et al. ). Moreover,
oxygen is a more effective electron acceptor than azo dyes,which justi ﬁes the low decolorisation rates under aerobic
conditions ( dos Santos et al. ).
These ﬁndings are in agreement with previously pub-
lished works where the majority of color was removed inthe anaerobic stage; in the aerobic stage in some runs nochange in color was observed ( Sponza & Is ̧ık;Çınar
et al. ;Bonakdarpour et al. ;da Silva et al. ).
The color and COD removal have obtained 90 –99 and
80% respectively for a combined SBR treating 100 mg/L ofazo dye ( Albuquerque et al. ). It is noteworthy that the
high color concentration of 500 mg/L in the in ﬂuent of
the present study was ﬁnally reduced to less than 5 mg/L
in the reactor ef ﬂuent. Variation of color and COD removal
in the reactor at anaerobic and aerobic phases is depicted inFigure 3 .
Figure 3 |Fraction of anaerobic and aerobic phases in dye and COD removal by SBR.255 A. Assadi et al .|Anaerobic –aerobic sequencing batch reactor treating azo dye containing wastewater Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.2|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/2/251/240606/jwrd0080251.pdf
by guest
on 07 December 2019With increasing color concentration to 500 mg/L, the
anaerobic phase contribution in COD removal decreasedfrom 94 to 43% and the aerobic phase contribution increasedfrom 10 to more than 22%. This is probably because aromaticcompounds resulting from azo bond breaking have moretoxic effects on the biomass and for this reason anaerobicphase contribution in the COD removal reduces very signi ﬁ-
cantly. The azo dyes, however, are reduced and hencedecolorized when acting as electron acceptors for themicrobial electron transport chain, then a source of labilecarbon is required ( Supaka et al. ;Cirik et al. ).
COD from the soluble microbial products (SMP) throughsubstrate metabolism and biomass decay should be con-sidered because the ef ﬂuent soluble COD could be mostly
SMP (50 –90%) ( Is ̧ık & Sponza ). The restrictions in
single step anaerobic decolorization processes are lowCOD removal and formation of toxic aromatic amines as a
result of azo dye degradation. However, an aerobic unit
sequential to anaerobic treatment provides enhanced CODand toxic substances removal from the anaerobic unit ef ﬂu-
ent, rather than decolorization. It has been shown that anaerobic unit after anaerobic decolorization is necessary inorder to obtain the ef ﬂuent discharge permit ( Shaw et al.
;Kapdan & Oztekin ). Hence, from the presented
results, post-treatment is necessary not only to reduceresidual color and COD from anaerobic ef ﬂuent but also to
mineralize the aromatic amines generated, which are poten-tially carcinogenic and mutagenic ( Is ̧ık & Sponza ;
Pandey et al. ;da Silva et al. ). Probably the main
reason for reduction in COD removal is aromatic compoundsresulting from the breakdown of BR46 color, and the biomassof the aerobic phase does not have the ability to degrade themcompletely. As a result, the aromatic compound discharges as
COD in the ef ﬂuent. Aeration degrades these intermediates.
Their mineralization is desirable to reduce toxicity ( Tan
et al. ;Jonstrup et al. ). In a study using granular
sludge with SBR ( Franca et al. ), COD removal ef ﬁciency
was affected neither by the presence of the azo dye nor by thatof its breakdown metabolites and high COD removal wasproduced within the 80 –90% range, with 55%, on average,
occurring during the anaerobic phase.
Effect of different cycle times on color and COD removal
There is a direct relationship between the HRT of the
anaerobic biological treatment unit and the color removalefﬁciencies ( Jonstrup et al. ;da Silva et al. ;Popli
& Patel ). The results of the color and COD removal
for total cycle times of 8, 12 and 24 h in the SBR reactorare presented in Figure 4 . The initial color concentration
was kept constant at 200 mg/L, while the SRT was 20 d.
The results showed that total color ( ∼100%) was removed
in the ﬁrst hours of the anaerobic phase and reducing
cycle times from 24 to 8 h did not have an effect on colorremoval. Hence, the reason for using a long anaerobicphase time was to obtain the most COD removal opportu-
nity that was exerted due to biodegradation of BR46 and
glucose. It can be concluded that the contribution of aerobicphase to decolorization was almost none. A cycle of 8 hcaused 81% removal of COD and residual of the anaerobicand aerobic phase in cycles 12 and 24 h had no effect onreactor effectiveness in the COD removal. Most of theCOD removal occurred on the anaerobic stage of the reactorfor all operational conditions. It was found that a small
Figure 4 |Dye and COD removal rates in SBR with three different total cycle times: (a) 24 h, (b) 12 h and (c) 8 h.256 A. Assadi et al .|Anaerobic –aerobic sequencing batch reactor treating azo dye containing wastewater Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.2|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/2/251/240606/jwrd0080251.pdf
by guest
on 07 December 2019portion of COD removal was achieved in the aerobic cycle
of the SBR. The pH is a good indicator to monitor the stab-ility of the reactor. The pH did not change much at thedifferent cycle times studied and was always in the rangeof 7 –8. These results are in agreement with earlier works
(Lourenço et al. ;Çınaret al. ). Moreover, they
found that the ef ﬂuent degradation is vastly improved by
the HRT in the activated sludge system. The application ofan anaerobic (HRT of 4 h)/aerobic (HRT of 20 h) SBRsystem to treat a synthetic Remazol Rot-containing waste-water (70 mg/L) with glucose as carbon source haveshown the same results as other researchers. They foundCOD removal of 50% during the anaerobic phase andreached 80% after aerobic treatment. However, as theanaerobic residence time was increased, the contributionof the aerobic phase of COD removal was negligible. Themain reason for this result could be the toxic effect of metab-
olites of the anaerobic phase. Due to batch operation in
SBR, they accumulated in the system and long termexposure of the cultures to these metabolites may haveinhibited the activity of aerobic organisms. Moreover, tran-sition between anaerobic to aerobic phases may have notenhanced the growth of aerobic organisms and they wereeliminated from the system ( Kapdan & Oztekin ).
They have also indicated that the minimum HRT in theanaerobic phase should be 6 h for ef ﬁcient color removal.
The SBR system requires long aeration periods to decreasethe ef ﬂuent COD concentration to less than 100 mg/L.
The results of Albuquerque et al. ’s()study have
shown 49 –71% COD removal in 10.5 h anaerobic reaction
phases. In the present study, the outstanding capacity ofthe SBR to remove COD under anaerobic conditions inmuch shorter cycles was demonstrated, a feature which isof much importance for performance optimization in waste-water treatment.
It may also be necessary to combine AOPs with biologi-
cal processes to achieve the required degree of treatment ofdye containing wastewaters so that regulatory standards canbe met ( Popli & Patel ). With the high potential for deco-
lorization and application for reuse of treated textilewastewater ef ﬂuent, AOPs are viable and competitive treat-
ment alternatives when compared with conventionalprocesses for ef ﬂuent treatment. In addition, conventional
bioreactors may be ineffective in treating sludge formationand the large number of aromatic rings present in organic
dye compounds ( Rosa et al. ,;Azizi et al. ).
Effect of TDS on reactor stability
Textile ef ﬂuents contain various acids, alkalis, salts, or metal
ions as impurities. Thus, microbial species capable of toler-ating salt stress will be important for treating such
wastewaters ( Ali).
Figure 5 shows the SBR performance during 43 days of
operation in which the TDS ranged from 1,000 to 8,500 mg/Lat HRT of 12 h. The initial color concentration was keptconstant at 200 mg/L, while the SRT was 20 d. The reactorwas kept stable during the whole performance, maintainingthe pH of the ef ﬂuent between 7 and 8. As with an increas-
ing TDS concentration of feed wastewater, the ef ﬁciency of
color and COD removal reduces to 77.6 and 53.4%, respect-ively. In the ﬁrst step (0 –29 days of operation), increasing
TDS to 5,800 mg/L does not have much consequence onthe reactor performance in terms of color and COD removaland the reactor can remove more than 91% of dye and 70%of COD. In the second step (29 –43 days of operation), with
increasing TDS up to 8,500 mg/L, the reactor effectivenessdecreases greatly in color and COD removal.
In recent years, several studies have been focused on
halophilic and halotolerant microorganisms and their abil-
ities for decolorization of azo dyes ( Amoozegar et al. ;
Meng et al.
). Due to the complexity of substrate and pro-
cesses in real textile wastewater, mixed culture appearsmore effective than pure cultures in degradation of azodyes. The pure culture may attack the dye molecule at differ-ent positions or may use decomposition products produced
Figure 5 |Effects of TDS concentration on dye and COD removal rates by SBR.257 A. Assadi et al .|Anaerobic –aerobic sequencing batch reactor treating azo dye containing wastewater Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.2|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/2/251/240606/jwrd0080251.pdf
by guest
on 07 December 2019by another strain for further decomposition ( Forgacs et al.
). The ﬁndings of the present work indicate that pre-
adaptation of the activated sludge cultures to the azo dyecan improve the rate and the extent of biodegradation inhigh salt conditions. This offers further support to the earliersupposition that the capability of biomass in degrading bio-refractory compounds is limited by the induction of thesynthesis of the enzymes able to develop speci ﬁc metabolic
pathways; this process is favored by dynamic conditions thatare typical of periodic systems ( Shaw et al. ;Van der
Zee & Villaverde ;Lourenço et al. ;Movahedyan
et al. ).
The solid content of the reactor was monitored through-
out the study of the TDS effect to measure the viability of thesuspended biomass during SBR operation with a TSS ofefﬂuents ( Figure 6 ). The MLSS were found to vary in the
range of 2,200 –3,600 mg/L during reactor operation at con-
stant SRT and dye concentration. With the increase in TDS
concentration, the MLSS content slowly decreased, indicat-ing the inhibitory nature of the ef ﬂuent feed on biomass
growth. Reducing the biomass concentration while increas-ing TDS resulted in a considerable decrease (from 99 to77%), of the color removal ef ﬁciency. This ﬁnding can be
explained by the fact that the accumulation of toxic inter-mediates of the dye biodegradation in an anaerobic reactormay have adversely affected the microbial growth as wellas causing dif ﬁculties in complete mineralization at the
high salt conditions. This result is in agreement with thosereported by other researchers ( Kapdan & Alparslan ;
Uddin et al. ;Azizi et al. ). Besides, the lowerCOD removal ef ﬁciency of the reactor may be due to the
higher production of toxic intermediates and these ﬁndings
were also con ﬁrmed by the results of MLSS concentration in
the reactor ( Figure 5 ). Very little wash out of the reactor
solids occurred during the operation period in term ofTSSe and turbidity. The suspended solid concentrationvaried between 18 and 43 mg/L in the ef ﬂuent of the reac-
tor. Sludge volume index (SVI) is one of the mostimportant parameters to measure the suitability of sludgein any biological suspended growth system. The SVI had atriﬂing variation in the range of 19 –24 mL/g during acclim-
ation of biomass. Similarly, the results of a study showedthat the biomass in the combined SBR supplemented withazo dye (Acid Red 14) maintained its granular structureand low SVI values up to the end of the operationalperiod with stable dye removal above 90% in the anaerobicphase ( Franca et al. ). In another study, the average of
SVI numbers for SBR treating Acid Red 18 were in the
range of 35 –45 mL/g. These data showed good settling prop-
erties and increasing the initial dye concentration from 0 to280 mg/L resulted in no signi ﬁcant variations in the average
of SVI numbers ( Hakimelahi et al. ). The good sludge
settleability could be explained by the feast and famine con-ditions prevailing in the reactor which favored ﬂoc forming
organisms (
Lourenço et al. ;Movahedyan et al. ).
High removal ef ﬁciency and good settling characteristics
of sludge makes an anaerobic –aerobic SBR suitable for
enhancing the microorganism potential for biodegradationof inhibitory compounds ( Basheer & Farooqi ;Franca
et al. ). The variation of SVI is presented in Figure 6 .
Figure 6 |Variation of solids and sludge settleability with increasing initial TDS concentration.258 A. Assadi et al .|Anaerobic –aerobic sequencing batch reactor treating azo dye containing wastewater Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.2|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/2/251/240606/jwrd0080251.pdf
by guest
on 07 December 2019Effect on nitrate on color and COD removal
Nitrate was a typical salt species included in dye baths for
promotion of dye ﬁxation to the textile ﬁbers and commonly
found in saline textile wastewaters ( Carliell et al. ;
Varsha & Seema ). Therefore, it is necessary to examine
their effects on azo dye decolorization. Figure 7 shows the
SBR performance during 27 days of operation in whichthe nitrate concentrations increased up to 120 mg/L. Asshown in Figure 7 , near complete color removal could be
obtained at 12 h cycle times under typical conditions. Theinitial color concentration was kept constant at 200 mg/L,while the SRT was 20 d. The presence of high nitrate con-centrations had a very low effect on the decolorizationperformance of biomass, which could even completelyremove BR46. However, gradual inhibition on CODremoval was observed in nitrate above 30 mg/L and COD
removal was decreased to 62.3% with increasing nitrate con-
centration. This provides further backing to the earliersupposition that reduction of azo dyes is an oxidation –
reduction reaction in which the dye acts as an electronacceptor ( Popli & Patel ). The presence of an alternative
electron acceptor (nitrate) may compete with the azo dye forreducing equivalents in the anaerobic phase of SBR fed withsimulated textile wastewater ( Lourenco et al. ;Franca
et al. ). The presence of nitrate was shown to slow
down decolorization ( Van der Zee & Villaverde ;
Khalid et al. ). In agreement with the present study,
nitrate was not found to inhibit azo dye decolorization byShewanella strain J18 143 ( Pearce et al. ). In contrast,
Cirik et al. ()compared anaerobic color removal rate
constants for Remazol Brilliant Violet 5R in the presenceand absence of nitrate. The authors noted a decrease indecolorization from 93 to 63% with an increase in concen-
tration of nitrate from 0 to 113 mg/L. Similarly, the resultsof the present study con ﬁrm the need for more acclimation
time in order to develop a more capable population in theaerobic phase, degrading residual COD of ef ﬂuent in the
presence of nitrate. Another study on the removal of azodye Reactive Red 141 under anaerobic conditions hasproved that nitrate delays the onslaught of decompositionwhile sulfate did not in ﬂuence the biodegradation process
(Carliell et al. ).
CONCLUSIONS
The outcome of this work indicated that an anaerobic –
aerobic SBR system has proven to be successful androbust in achieving the complete decolorization of azodye. Color removal occurs in the anaerobic phase and thesequencing aerobic phase is needed to further reduce theCOD ef ﬂuents. A reduction of HRT from 24 to 8 h does
not affect color removal. Increases in HRT provide enoughtime for mineralization of residual COD in the SBRsystem. The rates of color and COD removals decreasedwith increasing salt content and nitrate ion concentrationin the feed wastewater. Likewise, operating SBR with anoptimized cycle time may help the formation of sludgewith good settleability and retain comparable removal ofcolor and COD. It could be reasoned that this type of reactorconﬁguration has potential in treating textile wastewater
that varies in both ﬂow and concentration, allowing waste-
water recycling.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to express their gratitude for the ﬁnancial
funding of research and technology vice chancellor of theZanjan University of Medical Sciences (Project No. A-11-321-4).
REFERENCES
Albuquerque, M., Lopes, A., Serralheiro, M., Novais, J. &
Pinheiro, H.  Biological sulphate reduction and redox
mediator effects on azo dye decolourisation in anaerobic –
 Figure 7 |Effects of nitrate concentration on dye and COD removal by SBR.259 A. Assadi et al .|Anaerobic –aerobic sequencing batch reactor treating azo dye containing wastewater Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.2|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/2/251/240606/jwrd0080251.pdf
by guest
on 07 December 2019aerobic sequencing batch reactors .Enzyme Microb. Technol.
36, 790 –799.
Ali, H. Biodegradation of synthetic dyes –a review .Water. Air
Soil. Pollut. 213, 251 –273.
Amoozegar, M. A., Hajighasemi, M., Hamedi, J., Asad, S. &
Ventosa, A. Azo dye decolorization by halophilic and
halotolerant microorganisms .Ann. Microbiol. 61, 217 –230.
Anjaneyulu, Y., Chary, N. S. & Raj, D. S. S.  Decolourization
of industrial ef ﬂuents –available methods and emerging
technologies –a review .Rev. Environ. Sci. Biotechnol. 4,
245 –273.
APHA  Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater , 15th edn. APHA American Public Health
Association, Washington, DC, USA.
Azizi, A., Moghaddam, M. A., Maknoon, R. & Kowsari, E. 
Comparison of three combined sequencing batch reactor
followed by enhanced Fenton process for an azo dye
degradation: bio-decolorization kinetics study .J. Hazard.
Mater. 299, 343 –350.
Baban, A., Yediler, A., Avaz, G. & Hostede, S. Biological and
oxidative treatment of cotton textile dye-bath ef ﬂuents by
ﬁxed and ﬂuidized bed reactors .Bioresour. Technol. 101,
1147 –1152.
Basheer, F. & Farooqi, I. H. Development of aerobic granules
in sequencing batch reactor with p-nitrophenol as solecarbon source .J. Water Reuse Desalin. 2,2 2 –32.
Bonakdarpour, B., Vyrides, I. & Stuckey, D. C. Comparison of
the performance of one stage and two stage sequentialanaerobic –aerobic biological processes for the treatment of
reactive-azo-dye-containing synthetic wastewaters .
Int.
Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 65, 591 –599.
C a r l i e l l ,C . ,B a r c l a y ,S . ,S h a w ,C . ,W h e a t l e y ,A .&B u c k l e y ,C . The
effect of salts used in textile dyeing on microbial decolourisationof a reactive azo dye .Environ. Technol. 19, 1133 –1137.
Champagne, P.-P. & Ramsay, J.  Dye decolorization and
detoxi ﬁcation by laccase immobilized on porous glass beads .
Bioresour. Technol. 101, 2230 –2235.
Çınar, Ö., Yas ̧ar, S., Kertmen, M., Demiröz, K., Yigit, N. Ö. &
Kitis, M.  Effect of cycle time on biodegradation of azo
dye in sequencing batch reactor .Process Saf. Environ. Prot.
86, 455 –460.
Cirik, K., Kitis, M. & Cinar, O. The effect of biological sulfate
reduction on anaerobic color removal in anaerobic –aerobic
sequencing batch reactors .Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 36, 579 –
589.
Coughlin, M. F., Kinkle, B. K. & Bishop, P. L.  High
performance degradation of azo dye Acid Orange 7 andsulfanilic acid in a laboratory scale reactor after seeding withcultured bacterial strains .Water Res. 37, 2757 –2763.
da Silva, M. E. R., Firmino, P. I. M., de Sousa, M. R. & dos Santos,
A. B. Sequential anaerobic/aerobic treatment of dye-
containing wastewaters: colour and COD removals, andecotoxicity tests .Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 166, 1057 –1069.
dos Santos, A. B., Cervantes, F. J. & van Lier, J. B.  Review
paper on current technologies for decolourisation of textilewastewaters: perspectives for anaerobic biotechnology .
Bioresour. Technol. 98, 2369 –2385.
Forgacs, E., Cserhati, T. & Oros, G.  Removal of synthetic
dyes from wastewaters: a review .Environ. Int. 30, 953 –971.
Franca, R. D., Vieira, A., Mata, A. M., Carvalho, G. S., Pinheiro, H. M.
&L o u r e n ç o ,N .D . 
Effect of an azo dye on the performance
of an aerobic granular sludge sequencing batch reactor treatinga simulated textile wastewater .Water Res. 85,3 2 7 –336.
Ghodake, G., Jadhav, S., Dawkar, V. & Govindwar, S. 
Biodegradation of diazo dye Direct brown MR byAcinetobacter calcoaceticus NCIM 2890 .Int. Biodeterior.
Biodegrad. 63, 433 –439.
Guo, J., Zhou, J., Wang, D., Tian, C., Wang, P., Uddin, M. S. & Yu,
H. Biocalalyst effects of immobilized anthraquinone on
the anaerobic reduction of azo dyes by the salt-tolerantbacteria .Water Res. 41, 426 –432.
Hakimelahi, M., Moghaddam, M. R. A. & Hashemi, S. H. 
Biological treatment of wastewater containing an azo dyeusing mixed culture in alternating anaerobic/aerobicsequencing batch reactors .Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng. 17,
875 –880.
Hosseini Koupaie, E., Alavi Moghaddam, M. R. & Hashemi, S. H.
Investigation of decolorization kinetics and
biodegradation of azo dye Acid Red 18 using sequentialprocess of anaerobic sequencing batch reactor/moving bedsequencing batch bio ﬁlm reactor .Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad.
71,4 3 –49.
Iasur-Kruh, L., Hadar, Y., Milstein, D., Gasith, A. & Minz, D. 
Microbial population and activity in wetland microcosmsconstructed for improving treated municipal wastewater .
Microb. Ecol. 59, 700 –709.
Is ̧ık, M. & Sponza, D. T.  Monitoring of toxicity and
intermediates of CI Direct Black 38 azo dye throughdecolorization in an anaerobic/aerobic sequential reactorsystem .J. Hazard. Mater. 114,2 9 –39.
Is ̧ık, M. & Sponza, D. T.  Biological treatment of acid dyeing
wastewater using a sequential anaerobic/aerobic reactorsystem .Enzyme Microb. Technol. 38, 887 –892.
Jonstrup, M., Kumar, N., Murto, M. & Mattiasson, B. 
Sequential anaerobic –aerobic treatment of azo dyes:
decolourisation and amine degradability .Desalination 280,
339 –346.
Kapdan, I. K. & Alparslan, S.
 Application of anaerobic –
aerobic sequential treatment system to real textile wastewaterfor color and COD removal .Enzyme Microb. Technol. 36,
273 –279.
Kapdan, I. K. & Oztekin, R.  The effect of hydraulic residence
time and initial COD concentration on color and CODremoval performance of the anaerobic –aerobic SBR system .
J. Hazard. Mater. 136, 896 –901.
Khalid, A., Arshad, M. & Crowley, D. E.  Decolorization of
azo dyes by Shewanella sp. under saline conditions .Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 79, 1053 –1059.
Khouni, I., Marrot, B. & Amar, R. B. Treatment of
reconstituted textile wastewater containing a reactive dye in260 A. Assadi et al .|Anaerobic –aerobic sequencing batch reactor treating azo dye containing wastewater Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.2|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/2/251/240606/jwrd0080251.pdf
by guest
on 07 December 2019an aerobic sequencing batch reactor using a novel bacterial
consortium .Sep. Purif. Technol. 87, 110 –119.
Kolekar, Y. M., Nemade, H. N., Markad, V. L., Adav, S. S., Patole,
M. S. & Kodam, K. M. Decolorization and
biodegradation of azo dye, reactive blue 59 by aerobicgranules .Bioresour. Technol. 104, 818 –822.
Koupaie, E. H., Moghaddam, M. A. & Hashemi, S. a
Successful treatment of high azo dye concentrationwastewater using combined anaerobic/aerobic granularactivated carbon-sequencing batch bio ﬁlm reactor (GAC-
SBBR): simultaneous adsorption and biodegradationprocesses .Water Sci. Technol. 67, 1816 –1821.
Koupaie, E. H., Moghaddam, M. A. & Hashemi, S. bEvaluation
of integrated anaerobic/aerobic ﬁxed-bed sequencing batch
bioﬁlm reactor for decolorization and biodegradation of azo
dye Acid Red 18: comparison of using two types of packing
media .Bioresour. Technol. 127, 415 –421.
Lourenco, N., Novais, J. & Pinheiro, H.  Effect of some
operational parameters on textile dye biodegradation in asequential batch reactor .J. Biotechnol. 89, 163 –174.
Lourenço, N. D., Novais, J. M. & Pinheiro, H. M.  Kinetic
studies of reactive azo dye decolorization in anaerobic/aerobic sequencing batch reactors .Biotechnol. Lett. 28, 733 –
739.
Ma, H., Bonnie, N. A., Yu, M., Che, S. & Wang, Q. Biological
treatment of ammonium perchlorate-contaminatedwastewater: a review .J. Water Reuse Desalin. 6,8 2 –107.
Meng, X., Liu, G., Zhou, J., Fu, Q. S. & Wang, G. Azo dye
decolorization by Shewanella aquimarina under salineconditions .Bioresour. Technol. 114,9 5 –101.
Movahedyan, H., Assadi, A. & Amin, M.  Effects of 4-
chlorophenol loadings on acclimation of biomass withoptimized ﬁxed time sequencing batch reactor. Iran. J.
Environ. Health Sci. Eng. 5, 225 –
234.
Pandey, A., Singh, P. & Iyengar, L.  Bacterial decolorization
and degradation of azo dyes .Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 59,
73–84.
Panswad, T., Techovanich, A. & Anotai, J. Comparison of dye
wastewater treatment by normal and anoxic þanaerobic/
aerobic SBR activated sludge processes. Water Sci. Technol.
43, 355 –362.
Parshetti, G., Telke, A., Kalyani, D. & Govindwar, S. 
Decolorization and detoxi ﬁcation of sulfonated azo dye
methyl orange by Kocuria rosea MTCC 1532 .J. Hazard.
Mater. 176, 503 –509.
Pearce, C. I., Christie, R., Boothman, C., von Canstein, H., Guthrie,
J. T. & Lloyd, J. R.  Reactive azo dye reduction by
Shewanella strain J18 143 .Biotechnol. Bioeng. 95,6 9 2 –703.
Popli, S. & Patel, U. D. Destruction of azo dyes by anaerobic –
aerobic sequential biological treatment: a review .Int. J.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 12, 405 –420.
Rosa, J. M., Tambourgi, E. B., Santana, J. C. C., de Campos Araujo,
M., Ming, W. C. & Trindade, N.  Development of colorswith sustainability: a comparative study between dyeing of
cotton with reactive and vat dyestuffs .Text. Res. J. 84, 1009 –
1017.
Rosa, J. M., Fileti, A. M., Tambourgi, E. B. & Santana, J. C. 
Dyeing of cotton with reactive dyestuffs: the continuousreuse of textile wastewater ef ﬂuent treated by Ultraviolet/
Hydrogen peroxide homogeneous photocatalysis .J. Clean.
Prod. 90,6 0 –65.
Shaw, C., Carliell, C. & Wheatley, A.  Anaerobic/aerobic
treatment of coloured textile ef ﬂuents using sequencing batch
reactors .Water Res. 36, 1993 –2001.
Silveira, E., Marques, P. P., Macedo, A. C., Mazzola, P. G., Porto,
A. L. F. & Tambourgi, E. B. 
Decolorization of industrial
azo dye in an anoxic reactor by PUF immobilizedPseudomonas oleovorans .J. Water Reuse Desalin. 1,1 8 –26.
Singh, K. & Arora, S. Removal of synthetic textile dyes from
wastewaters: a critical review on present treatment
technologies .Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 41, 807 –878.
Singh, P., Iyengar, L. & Pandey, A. Bacterial decolorization
and degradation of azo dyes. In: Microbial Degradation of
Xenobiotics (S. N. Singh, ed.). Springer, Berling, Heidelberg,
pp. 101 –133.
Somasiri, W., Li, X.-F., Ruan, W.-Q. & Jian, C.  Evaluation of
the ef ﬁcacy of up ﬂow anaerobic sludge blanket reactor in
removal of colour and reduction of COD in real textilewastewater .Bioresour. Technol. 99, 3692 –3699.
Sponza, D. T. & Is ̧ık, M.  Toxicity and intermediates of CI
Direct Red 28 dye through sequential anaerobic/aerobictreatment .Process Biochem. 40, 2735 –2744.
Supaka, N., Juntongjin, K., Damronglerd, S., Delia, M.-L. &
Strehaiano, P.  Microbial decolorization of reactive azo
dyes in a sequential anaerobic –aerobic system .Chem. Eng. J.
99, 169 –176.
Tan, N., Borger, A., Slenders, P., Svitelskaya, A., Lettinga, G. &
Field, J.  Degradation of azo dye Mordant Yellow 10 in a
sequential anaerobic and bioaugmented aerobic bioreactor.Water Sci. Technol. 42, 337 –344.
Tony, B. D., Goyal, D. & Khanna, S.  Decolorization of textile
azo dyes by aerobic bacterial consortium .Int. Biodeterior.
Biodegrad. 63, 462 –469.
Uddin, M. S., Zhou, J., Qu, Y., Guo, J., Wang, P. & Hong Zhao, L.
Biodecolorization of azo dye acid red B under high salinity
condition .Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 79,4 4 0 –444.
Van der Zee, F. P. & Villaverde, S.
 Combined anaerobic –
aerobic treatment of azo dyes –a short review of bioreactor
studies .Water Res. 39, 1425 –1440.
Varsha, G. & Seema, S. Physico-chemical analysis of textile
efﬂuents of dye and printing clusters of Bagru region, Jaipur,
India. J. Environ. Res. Dev. 8, 11.
Wang, X., Cheng, X., Sun, D., Ren, Y. & Xu, G.  Fate and
transformation of naphthylaminesulfonic azo dye ReactiveBlack 5 during wastewater treatment process .Environ. Sci.
Pollut. Res. 21, 5713 –5723.
First received 20 July 2016; accepted in revised form 9 December 2016. Available online 7 February 2017261 A. Assadi et al .|Anaerobic –aerobic sequencing batch reactor treating azo dye containing wastewater Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |08.2|2018
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/8/2/251/240606/jwrd0080251.pdf
by guest
on 07 December 2019