Magazine
R
seawater and sinks out of suspension 
to sediments; >25% of microplastics 
sampled from estuarine sediments 
inhabited by A. marina  were PVC [5]. 
Thus, we selected UPVC, mimicking 
the size and shape of sediment ( 30 
µm mean diameter; Figure E). We 
assessed chronic effects on feeding 
activity, immunity and energy reserves 
and made short term observations on 
gut residence times.
Worms chronically exposed to 5% 
UPVC by weight displayed significantly 
reduced feeding activity compared to control and % UPVC-exposed 
worms (Figure A), supporting recent 
findings whereby 7.4% polystyrene 
by weight inhibited feeding activity in 
A. marina  over 0 days [6]. Reduced 
feeding activity implies that either 
fewer particles are ingested overall 
or a lack of a protein coating on the 
clean UPVC weakens particle adhesion 
to the worm’s feeding apparatus, 
reducing uptake efficiency. Suppressed 
feeding activity may decrease energy 
assimilation, compromising fitness. It 
could also decrease bioturbation and 
therefore oxygenation of the sediment, 
which is crucial for maintaining infaunal 
diversity.
Chronic UPVC exposure significantly 
increased the phagocytic activity of 
A. marina’s  immune cells, although 
this was not dose-dependent (Figure C). Enhanced phagocytic activity is 
indicative of an inflammatory response, 
which is a metabolically demanding 
process. Interestingly, the UPVC powder 
is classified as an irritant to human 
health following dermal contact. 
The total available energy reserves in 
worms chronically exposed to % and 
5% UPVC by weight were significantly 
reduced compared to pre-exposure 
and control animals. Worms exposed to 
5% UPVC by weight had approximately 
50% less total available energy reserves compared to controls (Figure D) 
and all UPVC-exposed animals had 
significantly lower lipid reserves than 
controls (Supplemental information). 
Jonker et al. [7] found lipid reserves 
declined in a freshwater oligochaete 
worm ( Lumbriculus variegatus ), 
following chronic exposure to powdered 
activated carbon, presumably due 
to reduced feeding activity. In our 
experiments, depleted energy reserves, 
which closely followed the trend for lipid 
reserves, could compromise somatic 
maintenance and growth, maturity and 
reproduction.Microplastic 
ingestion decreases 
energy reserves in 
marine worms
Stephanie L. Wright1, Darren Rowe1, 
Richard C. Thompson2,  
and Tamara S. Galloway1*
The indiscriminate disposal of plastic 
to the environment is of concern. 
Microscopic plastic litter (<5mm 
diameter; ‘microplastic’) is increasing in 
abundance in the marine environment, 
originating from the fragmentation 
of plastic items and from industry and personal-care products [ ]. On 
highly impacted beaches, microplastic concentrations (< mm) can reach 
3% by weight, presenting a global 
conservation issue [2]. Microplastics 
are a novel substrate for the adherence of hydrophobic contaminants [ ], 
deposition of eggs [3], and colonization 
by unique bacterial assemblages [4]. 
Ingestion by indiscriminate deposit-
feeders has been reported, yet 
physical impacts remain understudied []. Here, we show that deposit-
feeding marine worms maintained in 
sediments spiked with microscopic 
unplasticised polyvinylchloride (UPVC) 
at concentrations overlapping those 
in the environment had significantly 
depleted energy reserves by up to 50% (Figure ). Our results suggest that 
depleted energy reserves arise from a 
combination of reduced feeding activity, 
longer gut residence times of ingested 
material and inflammation. 
Seabeds worldwide are composed 
of a range of organic and inorganic 
sediments that sustain a vast range of 
marine species. The polychaete worm 
Arenicola marina (lugworm) of the 
globally distributed family Arenicolidae  
is a keystone species inhabiting 
intertidal sediments in Northern 
Europe; it bioturbates and irrigates the 
sediment and is an important secondary 
producer, as a prey species for fish 
and wading birds. Using a laboratory 
mesocosm, we performed chronic 
(four weeks) and short-term (48 hours) 
experiments, exposing A. marina  to 
natural sediments containing clean, 
chemically-inert UPVC ranging from 
0–5% by weight.  PVC is denser than CorrespondenceWe determined the time it took 
ingested material to traverse the gut 
and found intervals between egestion events were .5 times longer (mean 
086 seconds) in animals exposed to 
5% UPVC by weight, with an average of 0.33 ±  (median ± range) hourly 
egestion events compared to control worms ( .33 ± 2.33 (median ± range); 
Figure B; Supplemental information). 
A. marina’s digestion is characterised 
by material continuously entering 
and exiting the digestive tract, with 
negligible mixing during passage. 
Prolonged gut residence times imply 
that microplastics, which are of low 
nutritional value, are being retained and 
subjected to extensive digestion, at an 
energetic cost.
Polychaete worms exhibit positive 
correlations between organic content 
and feeding activity [8]. We therefore 
tested the hypothesis that UPVC 
reduced the organic content of the 
sediment to a level at which food 
concentration becomes a limiting factor. 
When A. marina  was exposed to natural 
sediment of varying organic content 
— altered by adding clean silica sand 
— there was no significant reduction 
in feeding activity (Supplemental 
information). This suggests that the 
observed reduction in feeding activity 
of 5% UPVC-exposed worms is likely 
attributed to a characteristic of the 
UPVC and not the secondary effect of 
decreased food concentration. 
At a density of 85 individuals per m2, 
which is typical of a tidal flat habitat, A. 
marina  is estimated to process 400cm3 
of sediment annually [9]. Microplastic debris (< mm) comprising 3. 7% 
by weight of the sediment has been 
reported, which when adjusted for 
density could represent up to 6.34% of 
the sediment volume at contamination 
hotspots [2]. Using the Wadden Sea, 
where A. marina  is a keystone species, 
as an example, if contamination 
accumulated to such levels in situ , A. 
marina  could consume up to 33m3 
of microplastics annually. We found 
overall feeding activity reduced by 
approximately 25% in worms exposed 
to 5% UPVC by weight for a month. 
Using the Wadden Sea example, this would result in 30m
3 less sediment 
being reworked annually. Our current observations indicate that % 
microplastics by weight can reduce 
total energy reserves by approximately 
30%, mainly linked to a reduction 
in lipid reserves. We propose a conceptual model (Figure F), whereby 
brought to you by CORE View metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk
provided by Open Research ExeterCurrent Biology  Vol 23 No 23
R2
high concentrations of microplastics 
could induce suppressed feeding 
activity, prolonged gut residence 
times, inflammation and reduced 
energy reserves, impacting on growth, 
reproduction and ultimately survival. 
We have shown that microplastics can 
cause physical harm to an important 
marine species, emphasizing the 
need to reconsider how discarded 
PVC, polystyrene, polyurethane 
and polycarbonate (30% of global 
production), are classified in terms of 
hazard [ 0]. 
Supplemental Information
Supplemental Information including experi -
mental procedures and two figures can be 
found with this article online at http://dx.doi.
org/0.06/j.cub.20 3.0.068.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs; -SW-P-N2-000-03 -DN-A -0502. We thank Peter 
Splatt for SEM imaging assistance, Professor 
Stuart Bearhop for invaluable comments on 
the manuscript and Dr. Adil Bakir for UPVC 
chemistry analyses.
References
 . Wright, S.L., Thompson, R.C., and Galloway, 
T.S. (203). The physical impacts of 
microplastics on marine organisms: A review. 
Environ. Poll. 178, 483–492.
 2. Carson, H.S., Colbert, S.L., Kaylor, M.J., and 
McDermid, K.J. (20). Small plastic debris 
changes water movement and heat transfer 
through beach sediments. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 62, 
708–73.
 3. Goldstein, M.C., Rosenberg, M., and Cheng, L. 
(202). Increased oceanic microplastic debris 
enhances oviposition in an endemic pelagic 
insect. Biol. Lett. 8, 87–820.
 4. Zettler, E.R., Mincer, T.J., and Amaral-Zettler, 
L.A. (203). Life in the “Plastisphere”: Microbial 
Communities on Plastic Marine Debris. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 737–746.
 5. Browne, M.A., Galloway, T.S., and Thompson, R.C. (200). Spatial Patterns of Plastic Debris 
along Estuarine Shorelines. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 44, 3404–3409.
 6. Besseling, E., Wegner, A., Foekema, E.M., 
van den Heuvel-Greve, M.J., and Koelmans, 
A.A. (202). Effects of Microplastic on Fitness and PCB Bioaccumulation by the Lugworm 
Arenicola marina (L.). Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 
593–600.
 7. Jonker, M.T.O., Suijkerbuijk, M.P .W., Schmitt, 
H., and Sinnige, T.L. (2009). Ecotoxicological 
Effects of Activated Carbon Addition to 
Sediments. Environ. Sci. Technol. 43, 
5959–5966.
 8. Hymel, S.N., and Plante, C.J. (2000). Feeding 
and bacteriolytic responses of the deposit-
feeder Abarenicola pacifica (Polychaeta: 
Arenicolidae) to changes in temperature and 
sediment food concentration. Mar. Biol. 136, 
09–027.
 9. Cadée, G.C. (976). Sediment reworking by 
arenicola marina on tidal flats in the Dutch 
Wadden Sea. Netherlands J. Sea Res. 10, 
440–460.
 0. Rochman, C.M., Browne, M.A., Halpern, B.S., 
Hentschel, B.T., Hoh, E., Karapanagioti, H.K., 
Rios-Mendoza, L.M., Takada, H., Teh, S., and Thompson, R.C. (203). Policy: Classify plastic 
waste as hazardous. Nature 494, 69–7.
Biosciences, College of Life and 
Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, 
Exeter, Devon EX4 4QD, United Kingdom. 
2School of Marine Science and Engineering, 
University of Plymouth, Plymouth, 
Devon PL4 8AA, United Kingdom.  
*E-mail: T.S.Galloway@exeter.ac.uk
iC
Diiiii
iv
1. Feeding activity
Microplastics
3. Phagocytosis4.2 Total energy
reserve s
4.1 Lipid reserves
2. Gut residenc e
 timeBioturbationBE
F
Current Biology012Hourly no. of egestion eventsControl 5%
Microplastics (by weight)0102030% Phagocytic cells
Control 0.5% 1% 5%
Control 0.5% 1% 5%Microplastics (by weight)
Microplastics (by weight)p=0.01
p=0.003p=0.0032000
1000
0
–1000
–2000
–3000∆ Total energy reserves 
(J g–1 ww)Control
0.5%
1%
5%p=0.002
1 2 3 4
WeekA
45678910Weekly no. of casts
Figure . The impacts of microscopic UPVC on A. marina .
(A) The effects of UPVC exposure on weekly feeding activity (Generalised Estimating Equation (GEE); p=0.002 for ‘time*treatment’). Data are 
presented as weekly average (mean ± SE) per worm. ( B) The average (median ± range) hourly number of egestion events following 48 h expo -
sure (Mann Whitney U test, p=0.003). ( C) Effects of UPVC exposure on phagocytosis (one-way ANOVA, p=0.0), which was enhanced for 0.5% 
and 5% exposed worms (Fisher’s LSD test, p=0.002 and p=0.03 for 0.5% and 5%, respectively). ( D) The effects of UPVC exposure on total 
available energy reserves in A. marina . Data presented as average (median ± range) compared with pre-exposure baseline (dotted line) (one 
way ANOVA, p=0.003). For % and 5% exposed worms, p=0.036 and 0.00, respectively (Fisher’s LSD test). ( E) Scanning electron micrographs 
of i) natural sediment (x33, scale bar 500 µm); ii) UPVC  (x220, scale bar 00 µm); iii) natural sediment (x350, scale bar 50 µm); iv) UPVC (x700, 
scale bar 20 µm). ( F) A conceptual model of the effects of microscopic UPVC on A. marina : ) suppressed feeding activity; 2) prolonged gut 
residence times; 3) inflammation; and 4) reduced lipid and total available energy reserves. Horizontal bars indicate a significant difference at the 
0.05 confidence level. Data for the following can be found in Supplemental Information: statistical output; impacts on average feeding activity, 
cumulative number of casts, feeding status and egestion time; feeding activity in reduced food concentration; grain size distribution of natural 
sediment and UPVC; differences in weight (pre and post exposure); impacts on lipid, protein and sugar reserves.Magazine
R3