InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 8  
 
 
 
Ozonation of Remazol Brilliant Blue R in Semi-Batch 
Reactor 
 
Mustapha Ibrahim Audu 
Department of Environmental Science, Cyprus International University, Haspolat, Nicosia 
Cyprus | Email: mustaaudu@gmail.com 
Mohammed Danladi 
School    of Environmental Science, Adamawa state polytechnic PMB 2146,Yola | Email: 
lawandanladi@gmail.com  
Ibrahim Umar 
School of Environmental Science, Adamawa state polytechnic PMB 2146,Yola | Email: 
ibrahim84umar@gmail.com   
  
Abstract: Textile wastewater that contain dyes has serious problem when it release to the environment. Advance 
oxidation processes has proven to be a promising treatment technique for textile wastewaters.  The six classes of dyes 
listed in the environmental Protection Agency because of their toxic and hazardous effects on health and environment 
such as (1) Azoic dyes, (2) Basic dyes, (3) Disperse dyes, (4) Acid dyes, (5) Direct dyes and (6) Fiberre reactive dyes. 
Remazol Brilliant Blue R (RBBR) is one of the group of Azo dye which is used and applied to fabric which include 
nylon, wool and silk etc. In this study Ozonation was used to investigate the treatment of aqueous dye solution, which 
is Remazol Brilliant Blue R (RBBR). The effect of pH on ozonation was studied. 100 mg/L of aqueous solution of RBBR 
was treated by Ozonation and catalytic Ozonation under three different pH value 3, 7 and 10. Adsorption test was also 
carried out to observe the interaction between the solid catalyst and RBBR. Result indicated that the removal of RBBR 
by Ozonation only observed under pH 10 is more efficient than pH 3 and 7. The application of solid CuO catalyst the 
first order reaction rate constant to 0.35 min-1 at pH 10 condition and for pH 3 and 7 no change of application was 
observed. 
Keywords: Ozonation, Catalytic Ozonation, Advance Oxidation Process, RBBR.  
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
CHARACTERISTICS OF TEXTILE WASTEWATERS AND TARGET CONTAMINANT 
The need of manufacturing of textile production around the globe today has rapidly increased. 
Statistics show that, due to global textile production, the textile industry in the world produced 
140.84 million tons approximately in the year 2012, when relating with 2008 statistical analysis 
show that there is additional of 25.7% (Zhu, 2012). The world textile manufacturing industry 
growing on and on at the rate of 6.5% in future (Xu and Jiang, 2009). Today, China is one of the 
world largest country in the production of textile products globally that has about 79.29 million 
tons of textile production in the year 2012, with 56.3% of world production (Huang, et al., 2017). 
 InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research                                         
ISSN: 5280-5269 | Volume 9, Issue 9 | September, 2023 | pages 8 – 52                                                                                                                
DOI: 222944283142527277992                                                                                                                           
Double Blind Peer Reviewed InternaƟonal Research Journal                                                      
hƩps://accexgate.com                                                                            
journalsaccexgate@gmail.com  InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 9  
 The significant sector of the world economy today is the textile industry where it mostly located 
in many countries around the world such as Pakistan, China, Malaysia, India, and Bangladesh. 
Poland, employment in the year 2014 in textile industry reached about 114 thousand people, with 
the profit of about 3.85 billion euro (statistics for companies employing additional than 9 
employees, clothing and textile sector) (Lucyna Biliriska et al., 2016). 
 
Figure 1.1Global textile industry dominated in China and India 
(Fibre 2 Fashion, 2017)  
Textile industries are one of the major cause of water pollution observed in environmental sources 
(B. Neppolian et al., 2002).Large amount of water is consumed and therefore polluted during the 
manufacturing in textile industry (Figure 1.2). More than 100,000 dye structure were synthesized, 
over 0.7 million tons of different dyestuff used in different industries such as paper, textile, 
cosmetics, and pharmaceutical industry, provide in a year (Yamjala et al., 2016). About 7000 
compounds required huge amount of water (Hessel, et al. 2007). 
 
InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 10  
  
Figure 1.2 Water consumption in textile industries 
(Textile Learner, 2017) 
  
Huge quantities of textile industry are usually produces wastewater that is been characterized by 
high chemical oxygen demand (COD), strong color and highly fluctuating pH. General 
characteristics of textile wastewater are given in Table 1.1. 
  
Table 1.1 Textile industry wastewater characteristics (Textile Learner, 2017) 
Parameters  Standard 
effluent Cotton Synthetic Wool 
pH 5.5-9.0 8.0-12 7.0-9.0 3.0-10 
BOD 30-350 ppm 150-750 ppm 150 – 200 ppm 5000 – 8000 ppm 
COD 100-250 ppm 200-2400 ppm 400-650 ppm 10.000-20.000 
ppm 
TS 1500-2100 ppm 2100 – 7700 
ppm 1060 – 1120 
ppm 10.000 – 15.000 
ppm 
 
 
1–15% of finishing and dyeing processes is lost during its released into wastewater (Daneshver et 
al., 2015). Dye effluent contains chemicals that can be categorized as teratogenic and carcinogenic 
to the various living organisms (Daneshvar et al., 2003). 
Teratogenic is explained asthe effects of an ecological agent on the fetus or embryo because of its 
chemical or physical characteristics as well as some numerous other factors such as dose, path, 
and dimension of exposure, the growing period at which the experience occurs; the genetic 
weakness of the mother and fetus or; and the existence and natural surroundings of concurrent 
experiences [Wilson (1977), Brent (2001)].  
InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 11  
 Teratogenic experiences during prenatal growth effect disruptions regardless of the progressive 
point or site of achievement. Most operational defects triggered by teratogenic contacts arise 
throughout the embryonic duration, which is when critical growing measures are compelling place 
and the fundamentals of organ structures are being recognized Gilbert (2003). Unlike organ 
systems which is having a different episodes of weakness to exogenous agents. 
Congenital malformations can be caused by three factors: 1) genetic factors (chromosomal 
abnormalities as well as single gene defect); 2) environmental factors (drugs, toxins, infectious 
etiologies, mechanical forces) and multifactorial etiologies which include the combination of 
environmental and genetic factors. Teratogenic agents are the cause of about 7% of congenital 
malformations. A teratogenic agent is a chemical, infectious agent, physical condition or 
deficiency that, on extreme exposure, can disrupt fetal morphology or subsequent function. 
Teratogenicity is dependent on the ability of the agent to cross the placenta. The embryo is more 
vulnerable to teratogenic agent during the period of rapid differentiations. The development stage 
of the embryo determines the susceptibility of the teratogen.   
Carcinogenic might be explained as the ability of the substance to cause damage to the genome or 
to the disorder caused in the cellular metabolic process. Numerous radioactive substances are 
considered as carcinogens, but their carcinogenic nature is attributed to the radiation they emit. 
Carcinogenicity is also associated with synthetic chemicals. Carcinogens are not always toxic but 
they tend to bio accumulate and their effect is gradual and harmful. There are several natural 
carcinogens which are produce by some fungus and some and some certain viruses. Co-
carcinogens are chemicals which do not always cause cancer on their own, but can induce the 
activity of other carcinogens in causing cancer. Textile dyes are regarded as carcinogenic 
chemicals.  
In general production of fabric, materials and chemicals, used for production of fabric, cause 
ecological balance and decline. The chemicals which are being used in textile products can cause 
health risk (Hatch 1984). They can develop over the skin, or into digestion (Golka et al., 2004). 
Allergic reactions can also cause from the textile materials (Hatch and Maibach 1995). Textile 
materials can be mutagenic and carcinogenic (Moll and Malliand 1991; Busk and Ahlbarg. 1982, 
and Esancy et al. 1990; Myslak et al., 1991) Textile effluents are also teratogenic which their 
presence may result with malformations in the development of fetus.  
The textile dyes can be classified in to many ways and depending on different functions which can 
be used in textile dyeing process. The classification is: 
 
1. Azoic dyes: Azo group containing (N=N) dye molecules. 
2. Disperse dyes: Smallest dye molecules that contain anthraquinone (aromatic organic 
compound) or azo benzene (two phenyl rings attached to N=N) group in its structure.  
3. Acid dyes: Dyes having aromatic structure and connected to sulphuric, carboxylic or 
phenolic organic acid.  
4. Direct dyes (substantive):  Molecules that are water soluble and contains azo structures.  InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 12  
 5. Basic dyes: Dye molecules having amino functional group which is responsible for positive 
charge.  
6. Fiberre active dyes: Dye molecules that are attached on fiber and not easily removed.  
7. Sulfur dyes: Molecules that contain di-sulphide (S-S) connections in their molecular 
structure.  
8. Oxidation dyes: Dye molecules that have aromatic structure having common chemical 
character as diamines, aminophenols and phenols.  
9. Vat dyes: This classification can contain all dyes that are processed in a vat.  
10. Optical brighteners: Dye molecules that can absorb UV-light.  
11. Mordant (chrome) dyes: The molecules that are used for fixation for other molecules.  
12. Pigments: the molecules that react in the presence of light.  
13. Developed dyes: The molecules having azo dyes characteristics that can be further 
processed.  
14. Solvent dyes: Molecules that can be dissolved in organic solvents and can give color for 
different materials.  
Among all, the first six groups have been listed in Environmental Protection Agency Toxic 
Substances list because of their hazard effects to health and the environment.  
One of the most significant type of textile industrial dyes is Remazol Brilliant Blue R (RBBR). It 
is used and applied to fabric which include wool, nylon and silk to produce a varieties of bright 
hues and colourfast. The RBBR dye is not  focusing only on textile industry it require some other 
dyeing process such as printing and paper on other principal substrates which include inks and 
leather (Nomalzutul et al., 2016).  
 
RBBR has a chemical formula C 22H16N2Na2O11S3 with 626.54 g/mol molecular weight. It is the 
one that highly have stable anthraquinone aromatic structure as shown in Figure 1.3. Some of its 
physico-chemical properties are given in Table 1.2.  
 InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 13  
   
Figure 1.3 Molecular structure of Remazol Brilliant Blue R (RBBR) 
Table 1.2 some physico-chemical properties of RBBR (Normaizatul et al., 2016) 
Properties  Values 
Molecular formula   C22H16N2Na2O11S3 
Molecular weight  626.54 mol-1 
Maximum wavelength  590nm 
Water solubility (mg.L-1 25oC) 314.4 mg/L  
Vapor pressure (25oC) 3.41x10-27 mmHg 
EC50 green algae  68.154 mg.L-1 
 
Water solubility is the amount of substance to be dissolved in water to give a saturated solution 
under controlled temperature and pressure. It is measured in mg/L. The weight of a substance (in 
milligram) that will dissolve in one litre of water (L). Low water solubility less than 10 mg/L, 
moderate water solubility 10 – 1000 mg/L, High water solubility more than 1000 mg/L. RBBR 
molecule has low-moderate water solubility.  
Vapour pressure is the pressure at which water vapour is in thermodynamic equilibrium with its 
condensed stage. This value shows the ability of a molecule to transfer to the gaseous state. RRBR 
molecule has too low vapour pressure showing that it cannot be volatilized easily from 
environmental matrices after its discharge to nature.  
EC50 is the effective concentration of a molecule to effect 50% of a living population. Low EC 50 
value indicates that there is serious toxicity possessing chemicals whereas; higher values represent 
the chemical is not toxic. RBBR molecule possesses moderate-high toxicity.  
InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 14  
  TREATMENT OF TEXTILE WASTEWATERS  
Dye wastewaters have low BOD/COD ratio. Biodegradable organics are the degradable pollutants 
in waste water that needs to treated prior to discharge into aquatic environment; however if 
untreated and discharge into aquatic environment it can lead to depletion of natural oxygen; and 
also they are measured in-terms of COD and BOD. 
 
Biological Oxygen Demand is applied to water and wastewater to remove organic pollutant 
biologically takes 5 days (BOD 5) it include the determination of Dissolved Oxygen (DO) applied 
by microorganism. Therefore BOD is used to measure biodegradable organic carbon in 
wastewater, the amount of Oxygen required by microorganism while stabilizing (transform of 
organic pollutant into non-toxic or hazardous ends products).  
 
However, since BOD is a bioassay procedure is significant that the environmental condition to be 
suitable for living organism. Therefore, the BOD test result can be determine by the size of the 
wastewater treatment facilities, determine how to measure the accuracy of some treatment process 
and also to determine the people complaining the wastewater release without permit.   
 
Chemical Oxygen Demand is providing knowledge regarding the contamination power of 
wastewater that can be chemically degradable. COD is constantly higher than BOD in the process 
of water and wastewater treatment. Microorganism is not capable of breaking all kind of organic 
carbon. Why because of this reasons (1) organic material that is hard to handle biologically for 
example lignin, can be handled chemically. (2) Some organic matter perhaps exposed to the 
microorganisms if utilized in BOD test. (3) An inorganic material that is eliminated by dichromate 
improve the rate of organic comfortable of a sample. 
Subsequently, the COD charges can extremely be utilized only if there is inorganic material in 
water. By every sign COD test hold, one principal benefit is that, be performed in 2 hours only 
associated by BOD within 5-days or further than that. To reduce the COD test time more expansion 
was added to 15 min time. 
Different biological treatment processes should be proposing, for instants in respect of biological 
nutrient that is more vital to separate using COD. The key separation is soluble and particle COD. 
Hence, in the biological treatment experiments, the division of the solvent and particle remain 
separated to charge the treatable wastewater. The division done is included, (1) regularly 
biodegradable colloidal and particulate COD (2) fixed biodegradable solvent COD, (3) non-
biodegradable colloidal and particulate COD, (4) non-biodegradable soluble COD. The fixed 
biodegradable soluble COD is the one that has already divided into complex COD which can be 
acidifying to volatile fatty acid. 
Interaction between BOD and COD 
Interaction exists within the BOD and COD is within the content of the ratio of domestic 
wastewater between 0.3 to 0.8 which can be show in Table 1.3. When the ratio of BOD/COD is 
0.5 or bigger than that, the wastewater can be simply treated biological method therefore when 
ratio is less than 0.3 the waste maybe consider as toxic compounds that can be treated chemically. 
 
 
 InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 15  
 Table 1.3 Comparison of BOD/COD Ration of various parameter used to characterize 
wastewater (Metcalf and Eddy, fourth edition). 
Type of wastewater BOD/COD Ratio 
Untreated 0.3 - 0.8 
After primary settling 0.4 - 0.6 
Final effluent 0.1 - 0.3 
 
BOD test is limit only when the concentration is highly active, there is need of pre-treatment when 
considering hazardous or toxic substance, and it only measure biodegradable organic substance, 
BOD also take much time to get the result. From the above all limitation the most important one 
is that of 5-days test time may or may not be equal with the soluble organic matter which is used 
presently.  
The manufacturing dyeing method of wastewater that led various artificial color that recognizes 
the effluents on several parameters. This involves the physical characteristics such as turbidity, 
color, dissolved and suspended particles etc. nevertheless Chemical characteristics which 
introduce the effluent of Azo dyes, basic dyes, acidic dyes and complex dyes etc. moreover, 
wastewater is competent and slightly improved in treatment. Colour profluent can be developed 
by Oxygenation or aeration. Decolourization strength be accomplished by removal of nitrogen-
nitrogen bonds, this can simply be performed in the appearance of NO and NO 2 radicals 
 
pH is an essential parameter used in every experiment is used to express the intensive of the Acid 
and Alkaline condition in a solution. Usually, used to express the concentration of hydrogen ion 
which is also express as the negative logarithm. The effluent of wastewater may affect the 
concentration of natural water. For the treatment of wastewater effluent that release in to the 
environment the suitable pH for the treatment of such waste is ranging from 7 to 9 approximately. 
It determine by colour measurement of paper and solution to different colour standard. It can also 
express as  
 
𝑝𝐻= −𝑙𝑜𝑔ଵ଴ [𝐻ା] 
Total solid or maybe total suspended solid (TSS): Total suspended solids (TSS) are known to be 
particles that are greater than 2 microns and observed in the water column. Dissolved solid that 
are less than 2 microns that area normally separate; is considered dissolved solid. More so, 
suspended solids are formed up of both inorganic matters. Though bacteria and algae can also 
donate to the total solids concentration. 
Moreover, TSS is the measure of the entire suspended, colloidal and dissolved solid in a water 
sample; and they are increasing the temperature of water since they adsorb extra energy from light. 
Total solids can be prepared by drying of the water sample. The water is dried at a distinct InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 16  
 temperature (103 – 105 0 C) and the residue taken is concentrated and the measured as the total 
solids. Total solid in a water is essentially characterized into total suspended solid (TSS), Total 
dissolve solids (TDS) and Settleable solid (SS). 
Carbon is the major element of the organic materials discovered in wastewater. It is biodegraded 
by the microorganisms in activated sludge below anaerobic positions, in an anoxic environment 
and also in the aerated portion of a biological step (nitrification zone). Furthermore, 
microorganisms apply the carbon mixtures to form cell structures and to generate power for their 
growth. Carbon mixtures (in water/ wastewater) are limited as BOD 5 or TOC, COD.  
Nitrogen inflow of wastewater processing plants, nitrogen application to be present in it 
organically bonded structure and also as ammonium nitrogen; nevertheless, when the biological 
wastewater processing, organic N is transformed to NH 4-N by the bacteria in the initiated sludge. 
Moreover, the NH 4-N and the NH 4-N from the inflow is transformed to nitrite which in change is 
turned, to nitrate (nitrification). Although, any mixtures (nitrogen are not biodegraded in the 
activated sludge; this type of nitrogen  are changed in anoxic positions (an aerobic condition) to 
basic nitrogen (denitrification). Usually, nitrogen composites are measured as NH 4-N, NO 2-N, 
NO 3-N and TN (total nitrogen). 
The phosphorus load in the inflow of a wastewater treatment plant is in combination (made-up) of 
orthophosphate-phosphorus (PO 4-P), organic phosphorus compounds polyphosphates. In 
summation, they give the sum parameter ‘total phosphorus’ (Ptot). More so, during biological 
wastewater treatment, polyphosphates and organically attached phosphorus are converted to 
orthophosphate. The P demand of the organisms is due to the special role of phosphorus in their 
energy for metabolism. P is required to form the cell membrane and DNA. Some of the phosphorus 
in wastewater is eliminated biologically. The remaining ones can be eliminated by chemico-
physical phosphate precipitation. 
A broad variety of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) chemicals, are usually developing from 
distinct group or classes of specific chemicals (for instance, 209 another PCBs, changing from one 
to extra by a level of chlorination and change positions). Hence, POPs are rigid in the environment 
for controlling large lives both in the air and soils or sediments. Though, there is no consent 
agreement about the long life continuation for the duration refractory. But, POPs would become a 
half-life duration of the practice or extra decades in soil and in the atmosphere. POPs are classic 
‘water-hating’ and ‘fat-loving’ chemicals, i.e. hydrophobic and lipophilic. In water systems and 
soils, they wall strongly to solids, notably organic material, withdrawing the aqueous form. Also 
barrier into lipids in organisms slightly than entering the aqueous setting of cells and enhance 
saved in a fatty membrane.  
Most usually found poisonous heavy metals in wastewater are Cadmium Arsenic, Lead, Mercury 
while the few common: Copper, Chromium, Nickel, and Zinc.  A principal cause of heavy metal 
in wastewater are Manufacturing causes: e.g. metal finishing and plating, Printed board 
production, semiconductor production, textile dyes; though Road flows and Landfills. Many heavy 
metals remain vital trace parts for individuals, animals, and plants in less quantity. Though, higher 
amounts cause serious and persistent toxicity and it is associated with training disabilities, cancers 
and also death at any levels Moreover, heavy metals possess inhibitory impacts toward the 
biological treatment process at the wastewater processing plants.  InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 17  
 Table 1.4 Heavy metals permissible limit in waterSource. R. Pehlivan et al. (2012) 
Parameter  
 Who (Drinking 
water) EPA 2009 
(Drinking 
Water) EU 
98/83/EC 
(Drinking 
Water) TS 266 and 
RG25730 
(Spring water) 
Al3- 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 
Fe3+ 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 
As3+ 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 
Ag3+ 0.005 0.1 X X 
Hg2+ 0.001 0.002 0.001 0.001 
Co2+ X X X X 
Cd2+ 0.003 0.005 0.005 0.005 
Cr3+ 0.05 0.1 0.05 0.05 
Pb2+ 0.01 0.015 0.01 0.01 
Ni2+ 0.02 X 0.02 0.02 
Ti4+ X 0.002 X X 
Ba2+ 0.7 2.0 X X 
Mn 0.5 0.05 0.05 0.05 
Zn2+ 0.01 5 X X 
Cu2+ 2.0 1.3 2.0 2.0 
Se4+ 0.01 0.05 0.01 0.01 
Sb3+ 0.005 0.006 0.005 0.005 
U3+ 0.015 0.03 X X 
Tubidity 5 NTU 0.3 NTU 1 NTU 1 NTU 
 
 InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 18  
 Surface water are coloured by organic materials like tannic acids, humic and fulvic. They resulted 
from the decomposition of vegetables materials and are usually related to compound like phenol 
that have carbon-carbon bond. Ozone break organic double bond very fast and the colour will 
remove rapidly.  
 
The issue of industrial toxic waste treatment is very important in recent period of time. The factory 
that produce chemicals, especially which release large quantity of hazardous materials in to the 
environment. This waste comes in the processes of dilution, are not sufficiently by anti-pollution 
measure. Because it has high concentration aspect when consider as toxic. Therefore ozone is used 
in the treatment of toxic waste to attack all the harmful pollutant. Ozone in this have additive 
advantage in this treatment that prove the removal of toxic. 
 
The toxic which know as heavy metals from industrial effluents such as cyanides, heavy metals 
that are presence in water in the system of complex mixtures in water. Ozone reacts to changeover 
the metals to the highest reaction stage that are normally generate less soluble oxides, which is 
simple to remove by filtration. Also there are some metals such as copper, manganese, lead, zinc 
etc. can all be treated the same way. Generally ozone reacts on this heavy metals to generate 
hydroxide or metallic oxide that can simply be precipitate off and remove from water. Ozone here 
used to remove or eliminate heavy metals which produce from many industrial effluents.  
 
Advantages of ozone: 
 
1. Ozone can react with deferments variety of organic compounds which contain organic-by 
products 
 
2. Ozone is a strong Oxidant that is available in the treatment of aqueous solutions and 
gaseous mixture. 
 
3. After Ozone oxidizes, it decomposes into Oxygen.  
 
4. Ozone in gaseous phase is a promising deodorizer for a different of odorous materials. 
 
5. Safe to handle because it cannot be stored and, therefore must be generated and used on 
site. 
 
 
 
 
 
 InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 19  
 Disadvantages of ozone: 
 
1. Higher equipment, operational cost and maintenance. 
 
2. Ozonation provides no disinfection residual to prevent or inhibit regrowth. 
 
3. Ozone is less soluble in water, compared to chlorine. 
 
4. Toxicity and fire hazards issues are associate with the ozone generator.  
 
Physical processes such as adsorption process, coagulation, filtration and flocculation are engaged 
in treating textile wastewaters. This technique gives a huge quantity of sludge, not really effectual 
and costs a lot of money (Holker et al. 2014, Robison et al. 2001, Vandevivere et al. 1998, 
Anjneyudu et al., 2005). 
 
Ground waters and surface waters are both compr ൴sed of d൴ssolved and suspended const ൴tuents. 
Coagulat൴on and flocculat ൴on are both engaged to ൴solate suspended sol ൴ds from waste waters. 
Flocculat൴on and coagulat ൴on are h൴nged on certa ൴n cr൴ter൴a such as charge, dens ൴ty, part൴cle s൴ze(s) 
and form. In water, when suspended sol ൴ds come together, they repel each other due to the negat ൴ve 
charge they possess and the same k ൴nd of surface charge they exh ൴b൴t. Due to th ൴s, suspended sol ൴ds 
w൴ll cont൴nue ൴n suspens ൴on and w ൴ll not cluster w ൴th each other and settle out of water unless 
flocculat൴on and actual coagulat ൴on ൴s ult൴mately employed. The repel ൴ng stops the part ൴cles from 
comb൴n൴ng enabl൴ng them to rema ൴n ൴n a suspended state. Flocculat ൴on and coagulat ൴on take place 
൴n sequent ൴al order del ൴brately to shatter the forces balanc ൴ng the part ൴cles ൴n suspens ൴on br൴ng൴ng 
about smash ൴ng of the part ൴cles and format ൴on of flocs wh ൴ch eventually settles and ൴s then 
extracted from the water.  Flocculat ൴on and coagulat ൴on are methods to cater to ൴ndustr൴al and 
domest൴c waste water ൴n order to erad ൴cate suspended part ൴cles from the water.  
A Coagulat ൴on ൴s a process whereby a chem ൴cal known as Coagulant ൴s added ൴nto a sample 
conta൴n൴ng suspenden sol ൴d so as to cause the suspendent sol ൴d to settle down. The suspendent 
sol൴ds conta൴ned S൴m൴lar charges (negat ൴ve chages), wh ൴ch prvent them from  com൴ng together to 
form setteble sol ൴ds. The negat ൴ve charge effects of the suspended sol ൴ds (ss) can be neutral ൴ze by 
the add൴t൴onal of chem ൴cal known as coagulant wh ൴ch has a chage oppos ൴te to that of the suspendent 
sol൴ds. 
More so, the neutralization of the negative charges by the coagulant allows the smaller perticles to 
come together thereby becoming heavier enough to settle. 
Flocculation: is a process that involve a show or gentle mixing stage and this increases the particle 
size from non – visible (submicroscopie) to visible solids in a sample. The micro floes particles InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 20  
 collide with one another resulting into a bond formation producing pinflocs which is larger and 
visible. With the additional of supplemented inorganic or organic polymers, the size of the flocs 
build due to the additional collision and interface and hence microflocs are formed. 
The coagulation and fluclation are usually applied before the physical separation processe in the 
wastewater treatment processes. 
Most common chemical substances (reagents) are: organic and/ or mineral coagulants (basically 
aluminium salt, iron, and organic polymers), flocculation additives such as activated carbon, 
talcum and activated silica Etc. 
The advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) was proposed in 1980s as a potable water treatment 
process (Glaze et al., 1987). This process involved the generation of hydroxyl radicals (OH.) and 
their subsequent interaction with the organic contaminants thereby influencing the water 
purification. These hydroxyl radicals generated are powerful and one of the most acceptable 
oxidizing agents when AOPs are to be used for the treatment of water and wastewaters. The AOPs 
treated water and wastewaters are less or even non-toxic products and hence a proper solution for 
the wastewater treatment (Huang et al., 1993). 
 
The AOPs are considered to be two steps processes that involved the production of an oxidant 
(such as hydroxyl radicals) and then the reaction of these radicals with the organic contaminants. 
More so, in the water treatment applications, the AOPs is a subsection of the processes that 
involved ozone (O 3), hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) and/or UV light. However, with regards to this 
work the AOPs will be applied to a more general group of processes that include titanium (iv) 
oxide (TiO 2) catalysis, cavitation, E-beam irradiation as well as Fento’s reaction. Indeed, all the 
aforementioned processes can successfully generate the hydroxyl radical that subsequently remove 
the organic contaminants. In general, the effectiveness of AOPs is proportional to its ability to 
generate hydroxyl radical. Though a number of processes mentioned above may have other 
mechanism for the removal of organic contaminants.   
 
The system of an AOP is controlled by the emanating contaminant concentration, victim influent 
contaminant concentration, wanted current speed, and background water characteristic parameters 
such as pH, bromide application, and alkalinity. The principal system parameters for AOPs 
comprises; the chemical dosages and the rates including other chemicals, and also reactor contact 
time, and reactor form. The proper dosages, rates, and contact form are water-specific and 
processing scenario-specific and are normally measured within pilot studies using the water matrix 
of interest. 
 
There are many advantages of AOPs over conventional methods. For instance the oxidation of the 
organic compounds to carbon dioxide (CO 2) and water H 2O with no sludge production and hence 
may not require another process for the destruction or treatment of the sludge. Equally, APO is 
much better when compared with other methods (such as biological process) in the treatment of 
the refractory pollutants (Baczkaj and Fermandes, 2017). Additionally, AOP is a treatment process 
that can be used in water and wastewaters with less organic loads, ppb that contain dissolved 
organic compounds. On the other hand the AOP is not cost effective due to the involvement of InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 21  
 ozone, electrical energy and ultraviolet. As a result of this issue therefore, there is need to explore 
other alternative wastewater treatment methods (Mota et al., 2009, Poyatos et al., 2010, Sayen and 
Nejati 2007, M. Litter, 2005). 
 
Commonly used advance Oxidation processes that are applied in industrial wastewater 
applications are Fenton’s process, Ozonation and UV irradiation (Olivia et al., 2006).  
 
Hydrogen peroxide and iron (II) react to form Fenton’s reagent (an unstable iron-oxide complex) 
that subsequently generate hydroxyl radicals (Fenton, 1894). The reaction is shown below: 
 
 
Fe2+ +H2O2→ Fe3+ +OH• + OH− 
 
Dye + OH• → CO 2+ H2O + other products 
 
Ozone is a strong oxidant that decompose radicals under alkaline conditions. Nevertheless, both 
ozone and radicals have the oxidizing potential of dye molecules. The reaction pathway is 
represented below: 
 
O3 + H2O  2HOO• 
O3 + HOO• OH• +2O2 
UV irradiation exits catalysts in aqueous phases and as a result, radicals are formed as represented 
below: 
H2O2 + hυ 2OH• 
H2O2 HO2- +H+ 
HO2- + hυ OH• +O•- 
Vilhunen et al., (2010). Reported that when H 2O2 solution reacts with UV irradiation there will be 
energy from the light where it will break the bonds and subsequently generate HO* as the following 
mechanisms are shown below:  
H2O2+ hv →2HO* 
 
Similarly, when UV react with H 2O2/O3, it generates HO* and can efficiently influence the amount 
of degradation as revealed by Kusic et al., (2006), the mechanisms is revealed below:  
 InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 22  
 O3+H2O2 +hv →3O 2+ 2HO* 
The name Ozone was formed from the Greek word “Ozein” by Schonbein 1785; where it was 
described as smelling since 1840. Just few scientist found around the odor of Ozone in 1785. 
Furthermore, Schonbein further, explains that ozone destroys potassium iodine and produce iodine 
ions in a solvent.  
(Saltuk, P., 2008) confirms that ozone is a strong gas that is unstable, the investigation more prove 
that ozone has odor features and It is a blued color gas; though is extremely difficult to perceive 
the color when is produced from wastewater/water processing applies at fewer concentrations 
levels. Ozone decomposes in an aqueous mechanism to oxygen fast though, this transfers on the 
quality of the contaminants and concentration level.  
 
The structure of ozone is presented below as discussed in the literature as a hybrid of the four 
canonical forms (Rip G and Aharon Netzer 1982).  
 
 
 
Ozonation process is commonly used in various industries and known for centuries in the use of 
disinfection purposes based on it oxidative properties. Furthermore; It can be employed in 
Wastewater Treatment, Drinking Water purification, Odour Removal, Air Purification, color 
Removal and in Removal of pesticides among others.  
 
Ozone is a strong oxidant (Oxidant are the reactant that removes from other reactants. Example 
ozone, nitric acid and hydrogen peroxide, Oxidation is the loss of an electron).Which oxidizes 
pollutants by two different oxidative species. There are two different oxidative ways in Ozonation 
which are the direct or indirect way. A direct way of Ozonation (acidic pH conditions) is done by 
the ozone molecule and indirect oxidation way occurs as the outcome of decomposition of ozone 
which at the end forms hydroxyl radicals (Dong, et al., 2008).  
Hydroxyl radicals’ production was described to developed ozone breakdown by existing type on 
catalyst cover (Park et al 2004, Zhang et al., 2008). from the different site, the outcome of catalytic 
based on the adsorption on   surface of the catalyst and changed reflection on the surface was 
reported in three complex processes in the study of (Hardren et al., 2003) as (i) adsorption of target 
substance on the catalyst surface, moreover oxidation with aqueous ozone, (ii) ozone adsorption 
on the catalyst surface, resistance of bonded ozone particles with the aqueous target mixtures and 
(iii) adsorption of the ozone and target substances, then the catalyst reaction on the surface. Truly, 
from any of the cases, aqueous Ozonation reactions will be used into consideration. Beltran et al 
(Beltran et., al 2005).  
The hydroxyl radicals can be produced by combining chemicals and improving the pH solution to 
be used during Ozonation (Salome et., al 2006, Meamtu et al., 2002, Hordem, et al., 2003). Ozone 
decomposition at basic conditions is given.  
InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 23  
 O3 + OH- → O2* +HO2* (Alkaline pH)  
O3 + HO2* ↔2O2 + HO* 
2HO2* → O2 + H2O2 
O3 + OH* →O2 + HO2*↔ O2* + H+ 
The above Ozonation mechanism reaction clearly shows that increasing pH value will yield 
increased hydroxyl radical generation.  
  
(Chu and Ma, 2000) investigated that the ozone ruled oxidation process at low pH the hydroxyl 
radical displays more important impact at high pH. As the result of the gradual flow of 
decomposition (i.e., the reaction of O 3 with less abounding OH-) at low pH, O 3 make up in the 
aqueous phase to a higher intensity (that is the powerful O 3 saturation concentration at less pH). 
Moreover, owing to the impact of OH- with the reaction of O 3 of more great reactions happens at 
greater pH, the time of concentration of the formation of more hydroxyl radicals are generated 
while the O 3 in water is overcome at greater pH. 
Certain interactions limit the color discharge in the aqueous phase by the following conditions: (1) 
hydroxyl radical is governed the oxidation process at greater pH position, and (2) the molecule of 
O3 dominated the oxidation process at less pH condition. The oxidation capacity of hydroxyl 
radical meaningfully exceeded that the molecule of ozone (Shu et al., 2005).  
AIM OF THE STUDY  
The aim of this study is listed below 
 Study RBBR removal by Ozonation under different initial RBBR concentration. 
 Study RBBR removal by Ozonation under different pH conditions. 
 Monitor mineralization. 
 Apply CuO to check the effects on Ozonation process. 
 LITERATURE REVIEW  
In literature review, various researchers have been investigated in different articles on the removal 
or degrade the Remazol Brilliant Blue R molecule from the aqueous solution. 
Recently there is a global concern on the increase of wastewater generation owing to the high 
industrial activity from dye (textile) industries (K.K. Panda and A.P. Mathews 2014). Similarly, 
Akmar N et al., (2016). Reported that textile industry are sources of wastewater, and argues that 
the treatment of wastewaters from textile industries has been the current problem of wastewater 
management. Furthermore, dyes in combination of other organic pollutants, dyes bring additional 
problems for the environment when participate in the natural waters, nonetheless wastewaters 
containing dyes may overload the self-purification mechanism or may even reduce photosynthetic 
process if not prevented. This is known to have a carcinogenic impact on the ecosystem (Aznier 
M 2010).   
Sequel to the discovery of refractory compounds that are toxic and carcinogenic among other 
problems in water supplies has leads to the concern for the improvement of the current 
technologies and the development of new techniques to cover these persistent organic pollutants InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 24  
 in water reported by Osma et al., (2010). Various dyes, drugs, pharmaceutical products and 
synthetic organic chemicals are not captured by the current treatment processes and discharged to 
surface waters. The new oxidation methods using ozone, UV photons, supercritical water, electron 
beam irradiation, ultrasound irradiation and non-thermal plasmas were being developed or perhaps 
improved to tackle this problem Hoeben W et al., (1999). Among the advanced oxidation 
processes, ozone has been attaining acceptance as an oxidant either by itself alone or in 
combination with UV or hydrogen peroxide to produce hydroxyl radicals for oxidation of 
persistent organics and the decontamination of water supplies. 
Mostly, volatile dyes are comprises of an efficient groups similar to azo, phthalocyanine, 
anthraquinone, formazane, and oxazine as chromophore. Throughout the process of dyeing, under 
an intensive heat in alkaline environments, a dye's volatile locations act in response with a well-
organized sets of fiber. Although a huge portion of the theoretical reactive dye is misused since in 
the procedure of dyeing volatile dye is hydrolyzed to a certain level and some of the volatile 
dyestuff are deactivated via this hostile hydrolysis reaction. Associated with additional peroxides, 
volatile dyes symbolize plain toxins (Pearce et al., 2003). One of the major problem of 
environmental problem is complete removal of dyes even in a very low amount in the dye 
industries. Therefore, removal of dyes from textile dyeing wastewaters is a major environmental 
problem and complete dye removal is necessary because dyes will be visible even at very low 
concentrations (Kannan smith. 2001: Golob smith. 2005). Several techniques have been 
considered for treating dye wastes, established on physical and chemical methods, in addition to 
their mixtures, such as coagulation electro flotation, electro kinetic coagulation, precipitation, 
oxidation, ozonation, adsorption and biosorption. Selcuk (2005) the coagulation/flocculation 
method is widespread use for pre-treating of dyes waste water, foremost, and post-treatment. 
Though, in removal of dyes and organic materials comprising of coagulation and sedimentation, 
pre-treatment process is needed. Polymeric coagulants is progressively used for water treatment 
plant for waste water, swimming pool water, drinkable water and so on (Joo et al., 2007), amongst 
which polyaluminium chloride (PAC), a polymerized usage of alum, is repeatedly used. PAC has 
demonstrated itself as a resourceful coagulant particularly aimed at removal of biological materials 
existing in water, independent from their source and difficult structure (Dimzoski smith 2006). The 
aim of this study was to examine the application of PAC as a coagulant/flocculant for the 
elimination of textile dyes in Wastewater treatment, and to control the ideal of coagulation 
situations for wastewater pre-treatment. Present work describes the PAC as inorganic coagulant 
for the adsorption of Remazol Brilliant Blue R dye (C. I. 61200).  
 
Ozone holds significant oxidation potential of 2.08 that is higher than chlorine which holds 
significant oxidation potential of exactly 1.36, being essentially reported by F. Erol and T.A. 
Özbelge (2008 ) and ozone does not generate chlorinated disinfection by-products which remain 
toxic and carcinogenic. Consequently, the possibilities for application of ozone oxidation 
technology remains crucial owing upon its huge technological practicability.  W.T. Shin et al., 
(2000); reported that, within the group of oxidation methods, ozonation has demonstrated to be a 
promising technique for the color extraction in textile industrial wastewaters. Moreover, within the 
ozonation process, ozone molecules hastily and selectively strike and attack unsaturated bonds of 
chromophores ending toward some quick extraction of color W.T. Shin et al., (2000). 
 
Notwithstanding, specific oxidation process concerning dye molecules creates certain ozonation 
by-products, which is difficult to oxidize with ozone molecules totally, these comprise organic InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 25  
 acids, aldehydes, and ketones among others. Sequentially, the mineralization remains measured 
based on the chemical oxygen demand (COD) and total organic carbon (TOC) or some 
modifications cannot be accomplished adequately (H. Einaga, S. Futamura 2004). M. Meamtu et 
al., (2002) and M. Hassan et al., (2006); authenticates the stability concerning ozonation side -
products via further oxidation with ozone, owing to the fact that the low solubility couple with low 
stability of ozone within water and again, the tremendously huge cost of ozone production demand 
special utilization of an advanced oxidation technology for huge treatment capability. 
Moreover, advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) occurred due to the production of hydroxyl 
radicals which remain highly strong than ozone and also catalytic Ozonation implying one example 
of these processes investigated widely. Catalytic Ozonation analysis are categorized based on two 
sections such as heterogeneous and homogeneous which for homogeneous catalytic Ozonation 
process investigates transition metals like Cu(II), Cr(III),  Co(II), Ag(II),  Mn(II),  Cd(II), Fe(II), 
Ni(II),  Zn(II) involved utilization as homogeneous solutions within an Ozonation mechanism M. 
Meamtu et al., (2002). 
 
Nevertheless, since heterogeneous catalytic Ozonation investigations are conducted by utilizing 
metal oxides, and also those metals which rely upon metal oxides. In a north shell, synthesized 
catalysts were utilized considering the catalytic Ozonation reas ons; despite MnO 2, TiO2, SiO2, 
Al2O3 and also any metals or metal oxides lıke Ru, Pt, Fe 2O3, Pd, Co, Cu, Pb, etc. as reported by 
M. Meamtu et al., (2002). 
Furthermore, Park, J. et al., (2004) state that catalytic ozonation wıth synthesized catalysts together 
with some natural catalysts, were also used during the ozonation of organic materials in water. The 
study furthermore examines catalytic ozonation using natural goethite in the treatment of para-
chlorobenzoic acid. They further reported that positive impact on this Fe-based catalyst in the 
oxidation of para- chlorobenzoic acid; and they recommend a pH -dependent catalytic mechanism 
based on surface reaction, bulk reaction, and reactions taking place at catalyst–liquid interface. 
They noted radical generation with the interaction of ozone and catalyst surface. Several 
researchers have conducted numerous studies and have been made for the catalytic ozonation of 
organics in either homogeneous or heterogeneous phase with numerous various catalysts.  
Studies were conducted by Cooper, and R. Burch, (1999):  published that, degradation doxalic acid 
to be 85%, 88%, and 87% in catalytic ozonation with Fe 2O3/Al2O3, Al2O3, TiO2/Al2O3, 
respectively. For similar circumstances, the target acid degradation only 15% was completely 
achieved by ozone alone. Similarly, Ernst et al. (2004) observed that, the catalyst effect on the 
Ozonation of oxalic, succinic and salicyclic acids by use of Al 2O3. Nevertheless, in non-buffered 
circumstances, the starting DOC was decreased at 90% in catalytic Ozonation than the 20% in 
Ozonation solely. 
Shuang Song, et al., (2007) investigated that the effects of Operational Parameters on the 
decolourization of C.I. Reactive Blue 19 in aqueous solution by Ozone enhanced 
electrocoagulation. In the study the initial pH was 10.0, and the initial dye concentration of 100 
mg/L and the ozone flow rate of 20 mL/min, were they reported that over, 96% of the color was 
removed after 10 min; so also the total organic carbon (TOC) removal was over 80% as the 
experiment was observed under the temperature of 30 ˚C. However, the degradation of 
anthraquinon dye C.I Reactive Blue 19 in aqueous solution by Ozonation; also shows that, 
detoxification was observed following the biodegradability enhancement by the increasing 
BOD/COD ratio of 0.15 to 0.33 after 10 minutes of Ozonation (Fanchiang and Tseng, 2009). InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 26  
 Enes Sayan and M.Esra (2008); reviewed the Optimization study using response surface method 
on the decolourization of Reactive Blue 19 from aqueous solution by ultrasound. The research 
shows that the utilization of ultrasonic irradiation remained advantageous for decolourization of 
RB 19 of an aqueous solution through adsorption. Furthermore, the decolourization of RB 19 
remained accomplished at maximum conditions utilizing ultrasound, activated carbon and 
combined ultrasound/activated carbon as a distinct percentage of 36%, 91%, and 99.9%, 
sequentially. The research further presumes that the dye intensity, time and activated carbon 
concentration are essential to processing parameters influencing the decolourization performance.
  
Nur Azimah Jamalluddin and Ahmad Zuhairi Abdullah, (2010) review that reactive dye 
degradation by combined Fe(III)/TiO 2 catalyst and ultrasonic irradiation on the effect of Fe(III) 
loading and calcination temperature ; in their investigations,  Fe(III)/TiO 2 were synthesized 
employing a Sol-gel procedures including the addition of tetrabutyl–or tatitanate (TBT) into the 
solution of ethanol at room temperature. Specific investigation showed that aeration produces a 
meaningful improvement to the reaction rate and stated that 96% of RB4 extraction could be 
achieved with the mixture of 0.4 Fe (III)/TiO 2 and aeration amount underneath ultrasonic 
irradiation.  
T.Y. Chen, et al, (2009). Study the application of Ozone on the decolourization of reactive dyes – 
orange-13 and Blue 19. In 14 L reactor use in the research and prepared with a gas provider at the 
bottom to spare the ozone/air stream within the water remaining dealt with in the research, 
furthermore the pH 3 and 10 was effective in the decolourization of Blue 19 and Orange 13 strongly 
within the duration of 30 min with ozone rate of 2.66 g/h. Furthermore, the result demonstrated 
that decolourization of colors Orange-13 and Blue-19 with various ozone measurements exist 
independently as shown under standard conditions. Similarly, the result shows that more strong 
decolourization was seen at 2.7 or 4.0g/h over 1.3g/h of O 3. 
Mohammad A. N.K, et al., (2015) investigate the removal of reactive blue 19 dye by sono, photo 
and sonophotocatalytic oxidation using visible light and reported that 90% degradation was 
achieved within 120 min as revealed by the GCMS results the reactive blue 19 (20 mgL-1) during 
the studies. 
Dutta, et al., (2016) investigated that rapid reductive degradation of azo and anthraquinone dyes 
by nanoscale zero-valent iron. In their studies the  reactive dyes was used, Remazol brilliant orange 
3RID (RBO 3RID) and reactive blue MR (RBMR), P initial pH value of dye concentration were 
measured with the pH of (2-12), 80% of dyes removal was achieved within the first 15 min of 
reaction. 
 
Ahmed M.A and Altrozi. R (2010). Investigated that the Optimization of preparation conditions 
for mangosteen peel-based activated carbons for the removal of Remazol Brilliant Blue R using 
response surface methodology. According to their investigation they used with MP activated 
carbon to treat carbon dioxide gasification with the preparation of physiochemical method. The 
effect of temperature on CO 2 activation on temperature, CO 2 activation on time and KOH ration 
was also studies to remove the percentage RBBR with the used of activated carbon. The important 
aspect in any of the experimental design was identified from the analysis of variance. The 
conditions that resulted for MP activated carbon under the temperature of  828 ˚C within the period InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 27  
 of 1h and IR of 3.0.accouding to their study the RBBR removal was achieved in 80.35% and 
20.76% with activated carbon respectively. 
 
Sathishkumar, et al., (2001). Study the utilization of agro industrial waste jatropha curcas pods as 
a carbon for removal of Remazol brilliant blue R, they examine the removal of RBBR by activated 
carbon within the range of 2h. Also investigate that the effect of pH values between 1 and 8 the 
dye adsorbed on JCPAC in the maximum of pH 3. In their result they found that 90% of RBBR 
dye absorption by 0.2g of jotropha pods activated carbon, also showed that the jotropha pods 
activated carbon is finally achieved more than absorption for the degradation of reactive dye RBBR 
in aqueous solution. 
Ahmed, M.A and Alrozi, R; (2011) examined the optimization of rambutan peel based on the 
activated carbon preparation condition for the removal of RBBR, was examined through the 
application of absorption and effective treatment technique of the degradation of the contaminant 
of water and wastewaters are further researched. 0.3g of RPAC combined with the aqueous dyes 
solution concentration of RBBR dye extract utilizing double UV-vis spectrophotometer. Based on 
their investigation, RBBR extraction and RPAC were observed varying from 28.78% to 80.93% 
and 13.67 to 21.83% sequentially. The result revealed that 88.7% of entire removal of RBBR and 
RPAC are removed respectively.     
Normaizatul A, R et al., (2016) studied the investigation of the remazol brilliant blue R removal 
using Agricultural waste, according to the experiment conducted the concentration of dye from the 
initial is 500mg/L and the result showed that they achieved more than 90% of the removal of 
remazol brilliant blue R, and also result that lime peels act as adsorbents for good function in the 
removal of remazol brilliant blue R.  
Chun He, et al, (2016). Examine the evaluation of sono-electrocoagulation for the removal of 
reactive blue 19 by ultrasound. In the research, the stock solution of RB 19 was introduced by 
dissolving in deionized water and also diluted the wastewater fixation to (99% in immaculateness). 
They noted that electrochemical technique in any of the submersed of 50cm2 ozone, a special 
research was completely prepared in a batch electrochemical reactor using 2000ml limit and also 
was well blended to mix the solution homogeneously when run and use approximately 60 min. 
Result prove that the anode impedance increased throughout the EC Process but was lessen despite 
the sono-EC process. The result also illustrates that weight film can be dislodged from the anode 
used by ultrasound and that lead to more creation of coagulant metals by the electrode. 
Mohammad Abdul N.K, et al., (2015). Studies the removal of reactive blue 19 by sono, photo and 
Sono photocatalytic oxidation. Recognized that the artificial utilized were all achieved with the 
utilization of deionized water and the investigation was focused on varying pH level from 3-11 
and unique ultrasound power (40-100). In their research, the result showed that the reactive blue 
19 was removed by 90% in the span of 120 min. The result accomplished that the rate of color 
depleted was degraded with expanded absorption of color in all of the approaches and keep up the 
catalyst fixed.  
Siddique, et al, (2010). Study the decomposition of reactive blue 19 dye in ultrasound assisted 
electrochemical reactor. In their research, the RB 19 dye was established from the stock solution 
of 20, 40, 60, 80 and 100 mg/L. Additionally, they noted that at different pH level ranging between InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 28  
 3-9, the different ultrasonic frequencies (20-80 KHZ) with the used of 50mg/L for 120min at color 
absorption. Furthermore, the primary concentration of pH test was applied to examine the results 
of the color focus from the beginning. In the research, the result illustrates that the rate of 
disintegration progressed with the pH increase from acidic to basic form 67.6% of the most 
advanced breakdown was analyzed at the pH 8. The additional result showed that if the value of 
pH shift from 2-8, dissolution rate will expand. 
Zhiqiao He, et al., (2008). Investigate the mineralization of C.I Reactive Blue 19 by Ozonation 
combined with Sonolysis; Performance Optimization and degradation mechanisms. They 
examined the various forces of operational parameters that involved the principal concentration of 
color, the thickness of ultrasonic energy, pH and Ozone measurement, which oxidized the Total 
Organic Carbon (TOC). The result illustrates the mineralization of O 3/US note that regular 
extraction rate of TOC was oxidized at 3.4× 10-4, 5.9×10-3, and 8.4×10-3 min-1 for US, O 3 and 
O3/US utterly. And they further concluded that combination of two technique for AOP showed that 
synergistic was expanded in all of the mineralization rates. 
Siddiqu, et al, 2013 investigate that degradation of synergistic effects of Combining Ultrasound 
with Fenton process. The study showed that RB19 Stock Solution arranged in 1 gram of color 
associated to the unification of each experiment of 25 mg/L (4×10-5 mol/L), sulphuric acid and 
sodium hydroxide utilized to change the pH of the color formation. According to the investigation, 
they noted the greatest degree of decoloration of approximately 78% was detected in the copulated 
ultrasound and H 2O2/FeSO 4 without ultrasound. Moreover, show that using ultrasound can develop 
the action of the H 2O2/FeSO 4 so that the exploratory parameter was analyzed to look at the source 
of the influence.  
Saltuk and Tulay A. 2009 studied the comparison of non – catalyst and catalytic Ozonation process 
of three different aqueous single dye solutions with respect to powder copper sulfide catalyst. The 
study investigates that Ozonation and Catalytic Ozonation analysis was carried in a 1L semi-batch 
reactor at a several initial ozone application of gas on the pH of 3, 7 and 10. All noted that the 
charge of RBBR and AR-151 aqueous solution also the TOC discharge of about 90% of aqueous 
dyes been discharge and were detected in the reactant Ozonation by CuS since various colors only 
at pH 10. The outcome shows that TOC discharge at the limit of 80min by 123%, 65% and 58% 
in the treatment of 100mg/L RBBR, RB 5 and AR-151 aqueous solutions, was absolutely 
discharged at pH3. 
Mahbubul Hassan and Christopher J. (2002). Investigate the feral – catalyzed ozonation of aqueous 
dye in the bubble-column reactor. According to the study, an aqueous solution of colors was used 
at a part of the study of decolourization colors by ozone inside the sight of feral. Ozonation studies 
were performed in a semi-continuous method in 1.51 end or limit. Outcome shows that feral 
improved in the decolourization potency for EYMR, moreover after the 60s of ozonation 91% of 
dyes was strongly eliminated, though within that period only 59% of color elimination was 
accomplished by sole ozone. Also in the situation of HRD5BN color for around 90s of ozonation 
in the appearance of feral the elimination of dyes performance only 93% were accomplished out 
feral and it was only 84%.  
Though, some basic application of ozone in the treatment of wastewater is restricted at instant due 
to the nearly huge cost of Ozonation. 
 InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 29  
 Table 2.1 Summary of the process efficiencies used in literature 
Process Efficiency  Reference  
 
Catalytic ozonation 
 88 % dye removal C. Cooper, and R. Burch, 
(1999). 
 
Sono. photo and 
sonophotocatqlytic 
 90% dye removal Khan,et al;(2015). 
Sono Electrocoagulation  97% 0f Rb 19 removal  Chun et al ;( 2016 ). 
Catalytic Ozonation  98.9% removal  Erol, et al ;( 2008). 
Non- catalyst and catalytic 
Ozonation  65% removal Saltuk and Tulay A, 
(2009). 
Ultrasound assisted 
electrochemical reactor  90% removal Siddqu et al ;(2011). 
Ozone enhanced electro 
coagulation  96% removal Song et al; (2008) 
Ozonation 95% removal Fanchiang and tseng 
(2009). 
Ultrasound irradiation 90% removal Jamalluddin and Abdullah 
(2011). 
Ultrasound  99.9% removal  Sayan and Edecan (2008).  
Feral catalyzal Ozonation 93% removal Mahbubul Hassan and 
Christopher J (2002).  
Applicaton of Ozone  83% removal  Chen et al; (2009).  
Ultrasound with Fenton 
process 78% and 50% removal Siddique et al; (2014). 
Ultrasound process 56.6% removal Vajnhandl S. and Le 
Marechal (2005).  
Adsorption process 95% removal Sathislkumar p. et, al; 
(2012). 
Coagulation Process  97.01% removal  Li et al; (2016).  
Absorption process  74% removal  Isah A. et al; (2015).  
Ozonation 88.7% removal Ahmed, M. A and Alrozi 
R, (2011).  
 
Advanced oxidation processes (AOP) are technologies based on the generation of highly reactive 
species, the hydroxyl radicals, used in oxidative degradation procedures for organic compounds 
dissolved or dispersed in aquatic media. These processes are promising alternatives for 
decontamination of media containing dissolved recalcitrant organic substances, which would not 
be efficiently removed by conventional methods. Therefore, Advance Oxidation Process (AOP S) 
are promising to be used for textile dye effluent according the results summarized in the literature. InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 30  
  MATERIALS AND METHODS  
 MATERIALS  
 Remazol Brilliant Blue R, sodium thiosulphate ( Na 2S2O3, 97%), were supplied from Merck 
KGaA 64271 Darmstadt Germany, potassium iodide (KI, 99%, supplied from Sigma Aldrich and 
purchased from Tin Muhendislik Turkey.), sulfuric acid (96% purity),  sodium chloride (NCl, 
99.5% for analysis), sodium carbonate (99.9% purity), sodium bicarbonate, potassium hydrogen 
phthalate (99.5% purity), hydrochloric acid (HCl, 37%, analytical grade), copper oxide, were all 
the products of Merck and purchased from Dorhan Medical, North Cyprus. Distilled water 
supplied from Sartorius 61316 and purchased from Sartonet, Turkey. OPAL 400 bench type of 
ozone generator was obtained from Tin Mühendislik, Turkey.  
 
 METHODS  
 KI Method for Gaseous Ozone Measurement  
The reaction between the iodide ions with the ozone gas lead to formation of iodine based on the 
following reaction: 
O3 + 2I- → I2 + O2 + OH-      
The amount of iodine produced directly related with the concentration of ozone gas and determined 
through the titration with the sodium thiosulfate: 
2S2 O32- + I2 → S4O62- + 2I- 
Reagents  
The following are the reagent used in the measurement of gaseous ozone concentration using KI 
method: 
1. KI solution: 20 g of potassium Iodide (KI) were dissolved in 1000 ml of water to make a 
0.1205M KI solution.  
2. Starch indicator: 0.5 g of starch was added to 100 ml of distilled water.  
3. 1N H2SO4: 13.6 ml of stock H 2SO4 solution was place in a 500 ml of volumetric flask and 
diluted with distilled water. 
4. 0.1M of Na 2SO4: 1.5811 g of sodium thiosulfate (Na 2S2O3) was added to a 100 ml 
volumetric flask and diluted with distilled water. 
 Procedure  
200 ml KI solution was transferred into an Erlenmeyer flask and exposed to ozone for 1 minute. 
After that the KI solution was titrated with sodium thiosulfate. This procedure repeated three times. 
Titration set up is given in Figure 3.1.  
 
 
 InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 31  
  
Figure 3.1 Titration setup for gaseous ozone measurement 
Calculation  
The Concentration of gaseous ozone was calculated by the used of the following equation: 
M  O3  = A x M x 24000                                                                                 Equation.1  
    L            ml sample 
Where A is the volume of Na 2S2O3 consumed in the titration of the KI solution, M is the molarity 
of Na2S2O3, which was 0.1M. 
The consumed volume of the titrant is given in Table 3.1 and the gaseous ozone concentration 
calculation was made for each test. The average concentration was found as 24.76 mg.L-1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 32  
 Table 3.1 Gaseous ozone measurement (25˚C ± 0.5). 
Titrant consumed (ml)   Gaseous ozone concentration (mg L-1) 
1.9        22.8 
2.4        28.8 
2.2        26.4 
1.9        22.8 
1.8        21.6                                          
2.9        34.8 
2.4        28.8 
2.3        27.6 
2.8        33.6 
1.8        21.6 
                                 2.0                           24.0 
2.1        25.2 
1.8        21.6 
1.7        20.4 
2.2        26.4 
1.9        22.8 
2.2        26.4 
2.1        25.2 
2.1        25.2 
1.9        22.8 
2.0        24.0 
2.4        28.8 
2.1        25.2 
2.3        27.6 
2.0        24.0 
2.2        26.4 
2.3        27.6 
2.0        24.0 
2.1        25.2 
2.2        26.4 
1.9        22.8 
2.2        26.4 
 InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 33  
  RBBR CONCENTRATION MEASUREMENT  
The concentration of RBBR was determined by Schimadzu UV-2450 spectrophotometer (Figure 
3.2). Standard RBBR solutions were prepared from 1000 mg.L-1 stock solution and the absorbance 
readings were recorded at 600 nm wavelength. The calibration curve is shown in Figure 3.3 and 
the data is represented in Table 3.2.  
 
 
Figure 3.2 Schimadzu UV-2450 type of UV-visible spectrophotometer 
 
 
RESULTS  
 MODELLING OF REACTION KINETICS  
Changes in RBBR concentration by time have been conducted in semi-batch reactor. A constant 
dose of ozone gas was continuously added to the solution during the reaction whereas there was 
no other input or output of mass in/from the reactor. Based on these conditions the reaction rate 
can be expressed as follows: 
 
dC =  k x [ RBBR ] m                                              Equation 3                                                                                           
dt 
 
Where; 
ௗ஼
ௗ௧ : Concentration change over time  
k : Reaction rate constant 
[RBBR]: Concentration of RBBR 
m: order of the reaction  
InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 34  
  
Equation 3 is solved in literature for zero, first and second order conditions are the mathematical 
expression for these are given in Equation 4, 5 and 6. 
 
𝐶௧= 𝐶଴+ 𝑘𝑡(m=0)                                                                                      Equation 4 
 
ln𝐶௧= ln𝐶௢+ 𝑘𝑡 (m=1)                                                                              Equation 5 
 
ଵ
஼೟= ଵ
஼బ− 𝑘𝑡(m=2)                                                                                         Equation 6 
 
Where; 
Ct: Concentration of RBBR at time t  
C0: Concentration of RBBR at the beginning 
k: Reaction rate constant 
t: Time  
 
All of the three equations are linear line equations. In order to reveal which one shows the order 
of the ozonation of RBBR, samples were collected during the ozonation under three different pH 
conditions at different time intervals.  Data were plotted in Microsoft Excel where x-axis 
represented the time intervals and y-axis represented the concentration values (C t for zero order, 
ln Ct for first order and C t-1 is for second order). The coefficient of determination was used to 
reveal the best fitted data.  
OZONATION OF RBBR  
This study was conducted under pH 3, 7 and 10 were used to test the performance of Ozonation 
for the removal of RBBR. The data are represented in Table 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3.  
The concentration values were converted to ln C and C-1 in order to reveal the order of the reaction 
under each pH conditions (Table 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6). After 10 minutes the data were not involved in 
kinetic modelling because there wasn’t considerable concentration change after this time.  
 Linear lines were plotted for zero, first and second order conditions and the coefficient of 
determination were calculated by Microsoft Excel. According to the results, the obtained data were 
best fitted to first-order model where the highest value of the coefficient of determination was 
observed (Table 4.7). 
The first-order degradation curves for pH 3, 7 and 10 are given in Figure 4.1 and the observed 
first-order reaction rate constants are represented in Table 4.8.  
 
 
 
 InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 35  
 Table 4.1 Data for Ozonation of RBBR under pH 3 
Time (min) Average RBBR concentration (mg.L-1) 
0 95 ± 2.4 
1 71 ± 1.9 
3 44 ± 2.6 
5 27 ± 2.2 
7 19 ± 2.1 
10 11 ± 1.5  
30 2.6 ± 0.2  
60 1.1 ± 0.3 
90 0.4 ± 0.3 
 
Table 4.2 Data for Ozonation of RBBR under pH 7 
Time (min) Average RBBR concentration (mg.L-1) 
0 97 ± 0.8 
1 76 ± 2.8 
3 61 ± 2.4  
5 42 ± 2.0  
7 31 ± 2.0 
10 22 ± 4.5  
30 2.6 ± 0.7 
60 1.5 ± 0.4 
90 0.3 ± 0.3  
 
 
 
 
 
 InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 36  
 Table 4.3 Data for Ozonation of RBBR under pH 10 
Time (min) Average RBBR concentration (mg.L-1) 
0 96 ± 2.3  
1 58 ± 6.5 
3 29 ± 5.0 
5 18 ± 6.7  
7 9.6 ± 4.4 
10 4.5 ± 1.0 
30 2.5 ± 0.6  
60 1.3 ± 0.4  
90 0.6 ± 0.6  
 
 
Table 4.4 Investigation of reaction order under pH 3 conditions 
T൴me (m൴n) C (mg.L-1) ln C C-1 
0 95 4.6 0.01 
1 71 4.3 0.01 
3 44 4.0 0.02 
5 27 3.5 0.03 
7 19 3.0 0.05 
10 11 2.7 0.07 
 
Table 4.5 Investigation of reaction order under pH 7 conditions 
T൴me (m൴n) C (mg.L-1) ln C C-1 
0 97 4.6 0.01 
1 76 4.3 0.01 
3 61 4.1 0.02 
5 42 3.7 0.02 
7 31 3.4 0.03 
10 22 3.09 0.05 InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 37  
  
Table 4.6 Investigation of reaction order under pH 10 conditions 
T൴me (m൴n) C (mg.L-1) ln C C-1 
0 96 4.6 0.01 
1 58 4.1 0.02 
3 29 3.4 0.03 
5 18 2.6 0.07 
7 9.6 2.3 0.10 
10 4.5 1.9 0.15 
 
Table 4.7 Values for estimated orders under three different pH conditions for the Ozonation of 
RBBR 
 pH   Order r2 
3   Zero 0.872 
1st 0.992 
2nd 0.951 
7 Zero 0.889 
1st 0.992 
2nd 0.961 
10 Zero 0.752 
1st 0.991 
2nd 0.888 
 
 
 InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 38  
 Figure 4.1 
First-order degradation curves for RBBR under Ozonation treatment at pH 3, 7and 10 
Table 4.8 The observed first-order reaction rate constants for Ozonation of RBBR at pH 3, 7 and 
10 
pH Reaction rate constant (min-1)  
3 0.148 
7 0.183 
10 0.298 
 
 
Ozone is a strong oxidant which oxidizes pollutants by two different oxidative ways: direct or 
indirect oxidation. Direct way of Ozonation is done by the ozone molecule under acidic conditions 
whereas; indirect oxidation occurs as a result of decomposition  of ozone into hydroxyl radicals 
that are the responsible species for the oxidation under neutral to alkaline conditions (Dong, et al 
2008).  
Ozone decomposition under alkaline conditions are represented by the following reaction 
pathways:  
 
O3 + OH- → O2* +HO2* (Alkaline pH)  
 
O3 + HO2* ↔2O2 + HO* 0.000.501.001.502.002.503.003.504.004.505.00
0 2 4 6 8 10ln C
Time (min)pH 3pH 7pH 10InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 39  
  
2HO2*→ O2 + H2O2 
 
O3 + OH* →O2 + HO2*↔ O2* + H+ 
 
The above Ozonation mechanism reaction clearly shows that, increasing pH value will yield 
increased hydroxyl radical generation. It is known that hydroxyl radicals have higher oxidation 
potential than the ozone molecule. In this study, alkaline pH conditions resulted with faster RBBR 
removal (the highest reaction rate constant) which indicates the hydroxyl radicals were dominant.   
 
Figure 4.2 Experimental sample for the Ozonation of RBBR under pH 3 
 
InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 40  
  
Figure 4.3 Experimental sample for the Ozonation of RBBR under pH 7 
InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 41  
  
Figure 4.4 Experimental sample for the Ozonation of RBBR under pH 10 
 CATALYTIC OZONATION OF RBBR  
Metals were found to increase the efficiency of pollutant removal during the ozonation. In this 
study, a solid catalyst CuO was used in order to reveal its effect on ozonation of the RBBR.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 42  
 Adsorption Test  
Adsorption tests were carried out in order to observe interaction between the solid catalyst and 
RBBR molecule. First, the 100 mg.L-1 aqueous solution of RBBR was continuously mixed with 
0.75 g solid catalyst (Dose: 1g.L-1) and kept for 24 hours (Figure 4.5).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.5 Adsorption test for solid catalyst (a) at pH 3, (b) at pH 7, (c) pH 10 . 
According to the results no reasonable adsorption were occurred (Table 9).  
 
Table 4.9 Adsorption test results in the presence of 0.75 g/L solid catalyst 
pH Initial Absorbance of RBBR at 590 nm  Absorbance after 24 h  
3 0.502 0.673 
7 0.740 0.685 
10 0.615 0.671 
Electr൴c൴ty 
100 mg.L-1 
RBBR 
Magnet൴c St൴rrer 
750 ml 
0.75 gram CuO  
pH 3 
(a) 
Electr൴c൴ty 
100 mg.L-1 
RBBR 
Magnet൴c St൴rrer 
750 ml 
0.75 gram CuO  
pH 7 
(b) 
Electr൴c൴ty 
100 mg.L-1 
RBBR 
Magnet൴c St൴rrer 
750 ml 
0.75 gram CuO  
pH 10 
(c) InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 43  
  
Results for Catalytic Ozonation of RBBR  
Application of 1g.L-1 dose of solid CuO catalyst increased the first-order reaction rate constant to 
0.35 min-1 at pH 10 conditions (Figure 3). However for pH 3 and 7 applications no change was 
observed.  
 
Figure 4.6 Ozonation in the presence of CuO under alkaline conditions for the removal of RBBR 
MINERALIZATION OF RBBR  
Mineralization measurement were done in order to reveal the remaining organic molecules in the 
solution. The RBBR molecules were decolorized during the ozonation however, it is important to 
search for either they have transformed into some other products (by-products) or they have turned 
into simple inorganic molecules such as CO 2 and H 2O.  The results showed that only 6-8 % TOC 
was removed from the system during the ozonation (Table 4.10).  
 
Table 4.10 TOC data for the Ozonation of RBBR under three different pH conditions 
% TOC 
Removal  pH 3 pH 7  pH 10 
6.05 5.80 8.27 
 
 
As reported as elsewhere (J.‐M. Fanchiang & D.‐H. Tseng, 2009) initially 100 mg.L-1 RBBR 
solution has 9.1 mg.L-1 SO42- concentration. 10 minutes ozonation resulted with the sulfate 0.000.501.001.502.002.503.003.504.004.505.00
0 2 4 6 8 10ln C
Time (min)pH 10 pH 10 + CuOInternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 44  
 concentration of 30 mg.L-1 and nitrate was found as 10 mg.L-1. However, nitrate concentration has 
increased enormously which can be related to ionic by-product’s interference.  
 
 
 
Figure 4.7 NO 3- and SO 42- concentration after Ozonation 
  
 
Table 4.11 Results for N-mineralization and S-mineralization 
Time (min)  Concentration of NO 3- (mg.L-1) Concentration of SO 42- (mg.L-1) 
10 10  30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 45  
 CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION  
 
A study on the removal of RBBR by ozonation in a semi-batch reactor was conducted in the 
laboratory. Modelling of the reaction kinetics of the system was carrried out by observing changes 
in the RBBR concentration by time. Ozonation of RBBR was conducted under pH of 3, 7 and 10 
to check the performance of ozonation for the removal of RBBR. According to the result of the 
kinetics modelling, the data obtained were best fitted to first-order model where the highest value 
was observed. In this study, alkaline pH conditions resulted to faster RBBR removal and which 
indicates that hydroxyl radicals were dorminant in the system. Catalytic ozonation of RBBR was 
also conducted where metals were found to increase the efficiency of pollutant removal during the 
ozonation of RBBR, in which solid catalyst CuO was used to reveal its effect on ozonation. 
Adsorption test were aslo carried out in order to observe interaction between the solid catalyst and 
RBBR molucules. From the adsorption test, result indicates that application of 1g/L dose of solid 
CuO catalyst increased the first-order reaction rate constant to 0.35 min-1  at a condition of pH 10. 
Mineralization measurement of RBBR were carried out in order to reveal the remaining organic 
molecules in the solution. From the observation, results showed that only 6-8% of TOC was 
removed from the system during the ozonation. 
Based on the results and findings in this research work so far, the mineralization was very poor 
and following recommendations were suggested for future investigations: 
 More ozone dose should be added to the system so as to make the removal of RBBR faster 
and effective. 
 The time for the reaction between ozone and RBBR should be increased for the effective 
removal of RBBR from the system. 
 The catalyst dose should also be adjusted so as to yield a better result for the removal of 
RBBR using Ozonation. 
 Other catalyst which might have higher reaction rate than CuO can be applied to yield a 
better result. 
 Mineralization is an important for the efficiency of Ozonation treatment, however, the 
results of this study has not shown any positive or significant influence of pH range on 
mineralization. Therefore this study will recommend that other catalyst should be tested to 
study the efficiency of mineralization on RBBR removal. 
 Furthermore, leaching studies is also recommended as further studies; where a 
heterogonous and homogenous catalyst should tried at the same conditions in order to 
evaluate the processes efficiency. 
 It should be noted that for industrial scale application, these findings should be modified 
for larger volumes.  
 Other matrix parameters such as presence of other organic materials and heavy metals 
should be tested for their effect on RBBR removal. InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 46  
  Toxicity evaluation of treated effluents is important. Microtox toxicity test using 
luminescent bacteria such as Vibrio Fischeri might give an idea about EC 50 of the treated 
solutions. 
  In this study, there was no significant mineralization of RBBR molecule. This means that, 
color causing functional group of RBBR has been broken and smaller products are formed. 
These smaller products are named as “byproducts”. Byproducts are important monitoring 
parameter in oxidation studies especially when there is no complete mineralization. 
Byproducts might be more toxic than the main molecule of RBBR. Therefore, byproducts 
should be monitored during and after treatment of oxidation experiments.  
 AOPs ultimate aim is to convert organic molecules to smallest harmless minerals such as 
CO2, NO3- and H 2O. Complete mineralization is hard to achieve therefore, increasing the 
BOD of the treated effluents might help these effluents to be degraded biologically. 
Therefore; BOD monitoring is important in oxidation studies 
REFERENCES  
Ahmad, M. A., & Alrozi, R. (2010). Optimization of preparation conditions for mangosteen peel-
based activated carbons for the removal of Remazol Brilliant Blue R using response surface 
methodology. Chemical Engineering Journal , 165(3), 883-890. 
Ahmad, M. A., & Alrozi, R. (2011). Optimization of rambutan peel based activated carbon 
preparation conditions for Remazol Brilliant Blue R removal. Chemical Engineering Journal , 
168(1), 280-285. 
Akarslan, F., & Demiralay, H. (2015). Effects of Textile Materials Harmful to Human Health. Acta 
Physica Polonica A , 128(2B). 
Beltrán, F. J., Rivas, F. J., & Montero-de-Espinosa, R. (2005). Iron type catalysts for the ozonation of 
oxalic acid in water. Water Research , 39(15), 3553-3564. 
Bilińska, L., Gmurek, M., & Ledakowicz, S. (2016). Comparison between industrial and simulated 
textile wastewater treatment by AOPs–Biodegradability, toxicity and cost assessment. Chemical 
Engineering Journal , 306, 550-559. 
Bin, X., & Jiangyong, L. U. (2009). Foreign direct investment, processing trade, and the 
sophistication of China's exports. China Economic Review , 20(3), 425-439. 
Boczkaj, G., & Fernandes, A. (2017). Wastewater treatment by means of Advanced Oxidation 
Processes at basic pH conditions: a review. Chemical Engineering Journal . 
Brent, R. L. (2001). The cause and prevention of human birth defects: What have we learned in the 
past 50 years?. Congenital anomalies , 41(1), 3-21. 
Busk, L., & Ahlborg, U. G. (1982). Retinoids as inhibitors of ortho-aminoazotoluene-induced 
mutagenesis in the Salmonella/liver microsome test. Mutation Research Letters , 104(4-5), 225-
231. 
Busk, L., & Ahlborg, U. G. (1982). Retinoids as inhibitors of ortho-aminoazotoluene-induced 
mutagenesis in the Salmonella/liver microsome test. Mutation Research Letters , 104(4-5), 225-
231. 
Buxton, G. V., Greenstock, C. L., Helman, W. P., & Ross, A. B. (1988). Critical review of rate 
constants for reactions of hydrated electrons, hydrogen atoms and hydroxyl radicals ( ⋅ OH/⋅ O− in 
aqueous solution. Journal of physical and chemical reference data , 17(2), 513-886. InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 47  
 Carrillo Pedroza, F. R., Aguilar, M. D. J. S., Martínez Luévanos, A., & González Anaya, J. A. (2007). 
Ozonation pretreatment of gold-Silver pyritic minerals. Ozone: Science and Engineering , 29(4), 
307-313. 
Chang, S. H., Chuang, S. H., Li, H. C., Liang, H. H., & Huang, L. C. (2009). Comparative study on 
the degradation of IC Remazol Brilliant Blue R and IC Acid Black 1 by Fenton oxidation and Fe 
0/air process and toxicity evaluation. Journal of hazardous materials , 166(2), 1279-1288. 
Chen, T. Y., Kao, C. M., Hong, A., Lin, C. E., & Liang, S. H. (2009). Application of ozone on the 
decolorization of reactive dyes—Orange-13 and Blue-19. Desalination , 249(3), 1238-1242. 
Cho, M., Chung, H., Choi, W., & Yoon, J. (2005). Different inactivation behaviors of MS-2 phage 
and Escherichia coli in TiO2 photocatalytic disinfection. Applied and environmental microbiology , 
71(1), 270-275. 
Chu, W., & Ma, C. W. (2000). Quantitative prediction of direct and indirect dye ozonation kinetics. 
Water Research , 34(12), 3153-3160. 
Cooper, C., & Burch, R. (1999). An investigation of catalytic ozonation for the oxidation of 
halocarbons in drinking water preparation. Water Research , 33(18), 3695-3700. 
Daneshvar, N., Ashassi-Sorkhabi, H., & Tizpar, A. (2003). Decolorization of orange II by 
electrocoagulation method. Separation and purification Technology , 31(2), 153-162. 
Daneshvar, N., Rabbani, M., Modirshahla, N., & Behnajady, M. A. (2005). Photooxidative 
degradation of Acid Red 27 in a tubular continuous-flow photoreactor: influence of operational 
parameters and mineralization products. Journal of hazardous materials , 118(1), 155-160. 
De Moraes, S. G., Freire, R. S., & Duran, N. (2000). Degradation and toxicity reduction of textile 
effluent by combined photocatalytic and ozonation processes. Chemosphere , 40(4), 369-373. 
Deive, F. J., Domínguez, A., Barrio, T., Moscoso, F., Morán, P., Longo, M. A., & Sanromán, M. A. 
(2010). Decolorization of dye Reactive Black 5 by newly isolated thermophilic microorganisms 
from geothermal sites in Galicia (Spain). Journal of hazardous materials , 182(1), 735-742. 
Delee, W., O'Neill, C., Hawkes, F. R., & Pinheiro, H. M. (1998). Anaerobic treatment of textile 
effluents: a review. Journal of chemical technology and biotechnology , 73(4), 323-335. 
Dong, H. P., Wang, D. Z., Dai, M., & Hong, H. S. (2010). Characterization of particulate organic 
matter in the water column of the South China Sea using a shotgun proteomic approach. Limnology 
and Oceanography , 55(4), 1565-1578. 
Dong, Y., Yang, H., He, K., Wu, X., & Zhang, A. (2008). Catalytic activity and stability of Y zeolite 
for phenol degradation in the presence of ozone. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental , 82(3), 163-
168. 
Dutta, S., Saha, R., Kalita, H., & Bezbaruah, A. N. (2016). Rapid reductive degradation of azo and 
anthraquinone dyes by nanoscale zero-valent iron. Environmental Technology & Innovation , 5, 
176-187. 
Einaga, H., & Futamura, S. (2004). Catalytic oxidation of benzene with ozone over alumina-
supported manganese oxides. Journal of Catalysis , 227(2), 304-312. 
Ernst, M., Lurot, F., & Schrotter, J. C. (2004). Catalytic ozonation of refractory organic model 
compounds in aqueous solution by aluminum oxide. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental , 47(1), 
15-25. 
Erol, F., & Özbelge, T. A. (2008). Catalytic ozonation with non-polar bonded alumina phases for 
treatment of aqueous dye solutions in a semi-batch reactor. Chemical Engineering Journal , 139(2), 
272-283. InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 48  
 Erol, F., & Özbelge, T. A. (2008). Catalytic ozonation with non-polar bonded alumina phases for 
treatment of aqueous dye solutions in a semi-batch reactor. Chemical Engineering Journal , 139(2), 
272-283. 
Esancy, J. F., Freeman, H. S., & Claxton, L. D. (1990). The effect of alkoxy substituents on the 
mutagenicity of some aminoazobenzene dyes and their reductive-cleavage products. Mutation 
Research/Reviews in Genetic Toxicology , 238(1), 1-22. 
Fanchiang, J. M., & Tseng, D. H. (2009). Degradation of anthraquinone dye CI Reactive Blue 19 in 
aqueous solution by ozonation. Chemosphere , 77(2), 214-221 
Fanchiang, J. M., & Tseng, D. H. (2009). Degradation of anthraquinone dye CI Reactive Blue 19 in 
aqueous solution by ozonation. Chemosphere , 77(2), 214-221. 
Garoma, T., Gurol, M. D., Osibodu, O., & Thotakura, L. (2008). Treatment of groundwater 
contaminated with gasoline components by an ozone/UV process. Chemosphere , 73(5), 825-831. 
Gilbert-Barness, E. (2010). Teratogenic causes of malformations. Annals of Clinical & Laboratory 
Science, 40(2), 99-114. 
Glaze, W. H. (1987). Drinking-water treatment with ozone. Environmental science & technology , 
21(3), 224-230. 
Glaze, W. H., Kang, J. W., & Chapin, D. H. (1987). The chemistry of water treatment processes 
involving ozone, hydrogen peroxide and ultraviolet radiation. 
Golka, K., Kopps, S., & Myslak, Z. W. (2004). Carcinogenicity of azo colorants: influence of 
solubility and bioavailability. Toxicology letters , 151(1), 203-210. 
Hassan, M. M., & Hawkyard, C. J. (2002). Ferral-catalyzed ozonation of aqueous dyes in a bubble-
column reactor. Catalysis Communications , 3(7), 281-286. 
Hassan, M. M., Hawkyard, C. J., & Barratt, P. A. (2006). Decolourisation of dyes and dyehouse 
effluent in a bubble‐column reactor by ozonation in the presence of H2O2, KMnO4 or Ferral. 
Journal of Chemical Technology and Biotechnology , 81(2), 158-166. 
He, C. C., Hu, C. Y., & Lo, S. L. (2016). Evaluation of sono-electrocoagulation for the removal of 
Reactive Blue 19 passive film removed by ultrasound. Separation and Purification Technology , 
165, 107-113. 
He, Z., Lin, L., Song, S., Xia, M., Xu, L., Ying, H., & Chen, J. (2008). Mineralization of CI Reactive 
Blue 19 by ozonation combined with sonolysis: Performance optimization and degradation 
mechanism. Separation and Purification Technology , 62(2), 376-381. 
Hessel, C., Allegre, C., Maisseu, M., Charbit, F., & Moulin, P. (2007). Guidelines and legislation for 
dye house effluents. Journal of environmental management , 83(2), 171-180. 
Hoeben, W. F. L. M., Van Veldhuizen, E. M., Rutgers, W. R., & Kroesen, G. M. W. (1999). Gas phase 
corona discharges for oxidation of phenol in an aqueous solution. Journal of physics D: Applied 
physics, 32(24), L133. 
Hoigné, J. (1998). Chemistry of aqueous ozone and transformation of pollutants by ozonation and 
advanced oxidation processes. In Quality and treatment of drinking water II  (pp. 83-141). Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg. 
Holkar, C. R., Pandit, A. B., & Pinjari, D. V. (2014). Kinetics of biological decolorisation of 
anthraquinone based Reactive Blue 19 using an isolated strain of Enterobacter sp. F NCIM 5545. 
Bioresource technology , 173, 342-351. 
Huang, B., Zhao, J., Geng, Y., Tian, Y., & Jiang, P. (2017). Energy-related GHG emissions of the 
textile industry in China. Resources, Conservation and Recycling , 119, 69-77. InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 49  
 Huang, B., Zhao, J., Geng, Y., Tian, Y., & Jiang, P. (2017). Energy-related GHG emissions of the 
textile industry in China. Resources, Conservation and Recycling , 119, 69-77. 
Huang, C. P., Dong, C., & Tang, Z. (1993). Advanced chemical oxidation: its present role and 
potential future in hazardous waste treatment. Waste management , 13(5-7), 361-377. 
Husain, Q. (2010). Peroxidase mediated decolorization and remediation of wastewater containing 
industrial dyes: a review. Reviews in Environmental Science and Biotechnology , 9(2), 117-140. 
Ikai, H., Nakamura, K., Shirato, M., Kanno, T., Iwasawa, A., Sasaki, K., ... & Kohno, M. (2010). 
Photolysis of hydrogen peroxide, an effective disinfection system via hydroxyl radical formation. 
Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy , 54(12), 5086-5091. 
Jamalluddin, N. A., & Abdullah, A. Z. (2011). Reactive dye degradation by combined Fe (III)/TiO 2 
catalyst and ultrasonic irradiation: effect of Fe (III) loading and calcination temperature. 
Ultrasonics Sonochemistry , 18(2), 669-678. 
Kasprzyk-Hordern, B., Ziółek, M., & Nawrocki, J. (2003). Catalytic ozonation and methods of 
enhancing molecular ozone reactions in water treatment. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental , 
46(4), 639-669. 
Khan, M. A. N., Siddique, M., Wahid, F., & Khan, R. (2015). Removal of reactive blue 19 dye by 
sono, photo and sonophotocatalytic oxidation using visible light. Ultrasonics sonochemistry , 26, 
370-377. 
Khan, M. A. N., Siddique, M., Wahid, F., & Khan, R. (2015). Removal of reactive blue 19 dye by 
sono, photo and sonophotocatalytic oxidation using visible light. Ultrasonics sonochemistry , 26, 
370-377. 
Kusic, H., Koprivanac, N., & Bozic, A. L. (2006). Minimization of organic pollutant content in 
aqueous solution by means of AOPs: UV-and ozone-based technologies. Chemical Engineering 
Journal, 123(3), 127-137. 
Lee, Y. H., & Pavlostathis, S. G. (2004). Decolorization and toxicity of reactive anthraquinone textile 
dyes under methanogenic conditions. Water Research , 38(7), 1838-1852. 
Lin, S. H., & Leu, H. G. (1999). Operating characteristics and kinetic studies of surfactant wastewater 
treatment by Fenton oxidation. Water Research , 33(7), 1735-1741. 
Litter, M. (2005). Introduction to photochemical advanced oxidation processes for water treatment. 
Environmental photochemistry part II , 325-366. 
Loprieno, N. (1975). International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) monographs on the 
evaluation of carcinogenic risk of chemicals to man:“Relevance of data on mutagenicity”. 
Mutation Research/Environmental Mutagenesis and Related Subjects , 31(3), 201. 
Mendelsohn, J. B., Li, Q. Z., Ji, B. T., Shu, X. O., Yang, G., Li, H. L., ... & Zheng, W. (2009). Personal 
use of hair dye and cancer risk in a prospective cohort of Chinese women. Cancer science , 100(6), 
1088-1091. 
Miligi, L., Costantini, A. S., Benvenuti, A., Veraldi, A., Tumino, R., Ramazzotti, V., ... & Stagnaro, 
E. (2005). Personal use of hair dyes and hematolymphopoietic malignancies. Archives of 
environmental & occupational health , 60(5), 249-256. 
Mondal, S. (2008). Methods of dye removal from dye house effluent—an overview. Environmental 
Engineering Science , 25(3), 383-396. 
Mota, A. L. N., Albuquerque, L. F., Beltrame, L. C., Chiavone-Filho, O., Machulek Jr, A., & 
Nascimento, C. A. O. (2009). Advanced oxidation processes and their application in the petroleum 
industry: a review. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas , 2(3). InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 50  
      MRWA (Editor) (2003): Coagulation and Flocculation Process Fundamentals. MRWA: Minnesota 
Rural Water Association. URL [Accessed: 30.11.2011].SNF FLOERGER (Editor) (2003): 
Coagulation Flocculation. URL [Accessed: 30.11.2011]. 
Myslak, Z. W., Bolt, H. M., & Brockmann, W. (1991). Tumors of the urinary bladder in painters: A 
case‐control study. American journal of industrial medicine , 19(6), 705-713. 
Neamtu, M., Siminiceanu, I., Yediler, A., & Kettrup, A. (2002). Kinetics of decolorization and 
mineralization of reactive azo dyes in aqueous solution by the UV/H 2 O 2 oxidation. Dyes and 
pigments, 53(2), 93-99. 
Neppolian, B., Choi, H. C., Sakthivel, S., Arabindoo, B., & Murugesan, V. (2002). Solar light induced 
and TiO 2 assisted degradation of textile dye reactive blue 4. Chemosphere , 46(8), 1173-1181. 
Neyens, E., & Baeyens, J. (2003). A review of classic Fenton’s peroxidation as an advanced oxidation 
technique. Journal of Hazardous materials , 98(1), 33-50. 
Panda, K. K., & Mathews, A. P. (2014). Ozone oxidation kinetics of Reactive Blue 19 anthraquinone 
dye in a tubular in situ ozone generator and reactor: Modeling and sensitivity analyses. Chemical 
Engineering Journal , 255, 553-567. 
Panda, K. K., & Mathews, A. P. (2014). Ozone oxidation kinetics of Reactive Blue 19 anthraquinone 
dye in a tubular in situ ozone generator and reactor: Modeling and sensitivity analyses. Chemical 
Engineering Journal , 255, 553-567. 
Panswad, T., & Luangdilok, W. (2000). Decolorization of reactive dyes with different molecular 
structures under different environmental conditions. Water Research , 34(17), 4177-4184. 
Park, J. S., Choi, H., & Cho, J. (2004). Kinetic decomposition of ozone and para-chlorobenzoic acid 
(pCBA) during catalytic ozonation. Water research , 38(9), 2285-2292. 
Paz, A., Carballo, J., Pérez, M. J., & Domínguez, J. M. (2017). Biological treatment of model dyes 
and textile wastewaters. Chemosphere , 181, 168-177. 
Pirgalıoğlu, S., & Özbelge, T. A. (2009). Comparison of non-catalytic and catalytic ozonation 
processes of three different aqueous single dye solutions with respect to powder copper sulfide 
catalyst. Applied Catalysis A: General , 363(1), 157-163. 
Poyatos, J. M., Muñio, M. M., Almecija, M. C., Torres, J. C., Hontoria, E., & Osorio, F. (2010). 
Advanced oxidation processes for wastewater treatment: state of the art. Water, Air, & Soil 
Pollution, 205(1), 187-204. 
Pratt, M., & Taraska, V. (2000). Disperse blue dyes 106 and 124 are common causes of textile 
dermatitis and should serve as screening allergens for this condition. American Journal of Contact 
Dermatitis , 11(1), 30-41. 
Rahmat, N. A., Ali, A. A., Hussain, N., Muhamad, M. S., Kristanti, R. A., & Hadibarata, T. (2016). 
Removal of Remazol Brilliant Blue R from Aqueous Solution by Adsorption Using Pineapple Leaf 
Powder and Lime Peel Powder. Water, Air and Soil Pollution , 227(4), 1. 
Rauscher, G. H., Shore, D., & Sandler, D. P. (2004). Hair dye use and risk of adult acute leukemia. 
American journal of epidemiology , 160(1), 19-25. 
Robinson, T., McMullan, G., Marchant, R., & Nigam, P. (2001). Remediation of dyes in textile 
effluent: a critical review on current treatment technologies with a proposed alternative. 
Bioresource technology , 77(3), 247-255. 
Saien, J., & Nejati, H. (2007). Enhanced photocatalytic degradation of pollutants in petroleum 
refinery wastewater under mild conditions. Journal of hazardous materials , 148(1), 491-495. InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 51  
 Saratale, R. G., Saratale, G. D., Chang, J. S., & Govindwar, S. P. (2011). Bacterial decolorization and 
degradation of azo dyes: a review. Journal of the Taiwan Institute of Chemical Engineers , 42(1), 
138-157. 
Şayan, E., & Edecan, M. E. (2008). An optimization study using response surface methods on the 
decolorization of Reactive Blue 19 from aqueous solution by ultrasound. Ultrasonics 
sonochemistry , 15(4), 530-538. 
Shin, W. T., Yiacoumi, S., Tsouris, C., & Dai, S. (2000). A pulseless corona-discharge process for the 
oxidation of organic compounds in water. Industrial & engineering chemistry research , 39(11), 
4408-4414. 
Shu, H. Y., & Chang, M. C. (2005). Decolorization effects of six azo dyes by O 3, UV/O 3 and UV/H 
2 O 2 processes. Dyes and Pigments , 65(1), 25-31. 
Siddique, M., Farooq, R., & Price, G. J. (2014). Synergistic effects of combining ultrasound with the 
Fenton process in the degradation of Reactive Blue 19. Ultrasonics sonochemistry , 21(3), 1206-
1212. 
Siddique, M., Farooq, R., Khan, Z. M., Khan, Z., & Shaukat, S. F. (2011). Enhanced decomposition 
of reactive blue 19 dye in ultrasound assisted electrochemical reactor. Ultrasonics sonochemistry , 
18(1), 190-196. 
Soares, O. S. G., Orfao, J. J., Portela, D., Vieira, A., & Pereira, M. F. R. (2006). Ozonation of textile 
effluents and dye solutions under continuous operation: Influence of operating parameters. Journal 
of hazardous materials , 137(3), 1664-1673. 
Solís, M., Solís, A., Pérez, H. I., Manjarrez, N., & Flores, M. (2012). Microbial decolouration of azo 
dyes: a review. Process Biochemistry , 47(12), 1723-1748. 
Song, S., Yao, J., He, Z., Qiu, J., & Chen, J. (2008). Effect of operational parameters on the 
decolorization of CI Reactive Blue 19 in aqueous solution by ozone-enhanced electrocoagulation. 
Journal of hazardous materials , 152(1), 204-210. 
Sumandono, T., Saragih, H., Watanabe, T., & Amirta, R. (2015). Decolorization of Remazol Brilliant 
Blue R by new isolated white rot fungus collected from tropical rain forest in East Kalimantan and 
its ligninolytic enzymes activity. Procedia Environmental Sciences , 28, 45-51. 
Takkouche, B., Etminan, M., & Montes-Martínez, A. (2005). Personal use of hair dyes and risk of 
cancer: a meta-analysis. Jama, 293(20), 2516-2525. 
Tchobanoglous, G., & Burton, F. L. (1991). Wastewater engineering. Management , 7, 1-4. 
Torrades, F., Pérez, M., Mansilla, H. D., & Peral, J. (2003). Experimental design of Fenton and photo-
Fenton reactions for the treatment of cellulose bleaching effluents. Chemosphere , 53(10), 1211-
1220. 
Tripathy, T., & De, B. R. (2006). Flocculation: a new way to treat the waste water. 
Vajnhandl, S., & Le Marechal, A. M. (2005). Ultrasound in textile dyeing and the 
decolouration/mineralization of textile dyes. Dyes and Pigments , 65(2), 89-101. 
Vandevivere, P. C., Bianchi, R., & Verstraete, W. (1998). Treatment and reuse of wastewater from the 
textile wet‐processing industry: Review of emerging technologies. Journal of Chemical 
Technology and Biotechnology , 72(4), 289-302. 
Wagler, J. L., & Malley, J. P. (1994). Removal of methyl tertiary-butyl ether from a model ground 
water using UV/Peroxide oxidation. Journal of New England Water Works Association , 108(3), 
236-260. 
Wilson, J. G. (1977). Current status of teratology. In General Principles and Etiology  (pp. 47-74). 
Springer US. InternaƟonal Academic Journal of Advanced Pure & Applied Science Research  
Page | 52  
 Yamjala, K., Nainar, M. S., & Ramisetti, N. R. (2016). Methods for the analysis of azo dyes employed 
in food industry–a review. Food chemistry , 192, 813-824. 
Zhang, T., & Ma, J. (2008). Catalytic ozonation of trace nitrobenzene in water with synthetic goethite. 
Journal of Molecular Catalysis A: Chemical , 279(1), 82-89. 
 
 
 