  HOMOGENEOUS AND HETEROGENEOUS OXIDATION OF THE AZO 
DYE ORANGE II WITH FENTON ’S REAGENT -BASED PROCESSES  
 
 
 
Dissertation presented for the  
Doctor of Philosophy degree in 
Chemical and Biological Engineering at the  
Faculty of Engineering - Porto University – by 
 
  
JOSÉ HERNEY RAMÍREZ FRANCO 
 
 
 
Supervisors: Prof. Luis Miguel Palma Madeira  
  Prof. Carlos Albino Veiga da Costa 
  
 
 
 
LEPAE - Laboratory for Process, Environmental and Energy Engineering 
Chemical Engineering Department 
Faculty of Engineering – University of Porto 
May 2008. 
 
    
        
 
                                          ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
I will try to express my gratitude to people who made this thesis possible and 
enriched my life. 
First of all, to my wife Alis Yovana Pataquiva Mateus. I am immensely grateful 
to my adored “Princesa and Muñeca”, who has always supported me and has been believed in me. Her love, patience, help, a nd understanding during the past few years 
have been determinant for the good devel opment of my work and for everything we 
have shared, my deepest gratitude. Alt hough my daughter has not been born, I would 
like to thank to Alis because my dream of all the life is being made now, thanks for 
make me so happy! 
In second place to my mother, who has supported me and has been willing to 
make considerable sacrifices for giving to me  all possible advantages in my life. I thank 
her for his affection and love. She always  has been and will be my inspiration.  
I am very grateful to my brothers fo r supporting our mother in difficult moments 
when I was not present. Especi ally I am deeply grateful to  my brother Julian who helps 
us very much when we decided to come to Portugal. 
I am profoundly grateful to my research  Supervisor, Prof. Luis Miguel Palma 
Madeira for his proficient guida nce, for interesting scientific  discussions we had for the 
preparation of scientific papers, support and encouraging attitude during the course of this research work. From deep insi de, thank you Professor Madeira for your 
unconditional and invaluable support and your  always opportune and heartfelt help and 
guidance. 
 I would like to extend my  sincere thanks to my Co -Supervisor, Prof. Carlos 
Albino Veiga da Costa, who supported my work  from the beginning to the end, with his 
both valuable guidance and experience of paramount importance for me and my 
scientific production. Thanks again for our fruitful discussions.  
Thanks to Prof. Fernando Martins for his collaboration and help in the 
simulation and modeling section of this wor k. Also, thanks to Dr. Rui Boaventura for 
allowing me to use its laboratory.     During my Ph.D. work, I also performe d lab work at the University of 
Salamanca, and at the UNED University (Madri d), Spain. I am very  grateful to Prof. 
Miguel Angel Vicente (Salamanca University) fo r the interesting scientific discussions 
and technical guidance during the synthesis and characteriz ation of the clays. My 
acknowledgments also to Profs. Rosa Martín  Aranda, Maria Luisa Rojas Cervantes and 
Antonio López Peinado (UNED University) for their technical guidance and support 
during the course of the clays characterization.  
Many thanks to Prof. Francisco Maldonado Hódar from Granada University, for 
the collaboration in the prepar ation, interpretation of results  and characterization of the 
carbon catalysts used in this work.    
I would like to offer my sincere thanks and my special recognition to all 
undergraduate students who have  contributed, in one way or another, to the realization 
of this work. They are: Antia, Erdal, Murat, Matti, Umut and Filipa. 
I want to thank to Luis Carlos Matos by his friendship and help in the assembly 
of the experimental set-up. I am also gratef ul with Mr. Sousa Vale, Mrs. Maria do Céu, 
Zé Luis, Mr. Serafim and Luis Martins.     
Also I would like to thank all my frie nds from FEUP: Tiago, Ratola, Mónica, 
Olga, Filipa, Manuela, Adriano, Pedro, Renato, Sofia, Joana, Clara, Vânia, Daniela, 
Diogo and João Ferra. Also I would like to thank all my Colombians and no 
Colombians friends Alejo, Andrea, Ivan, Mariana, Loic, Marta, Ricardo, Oscar, 
Serafina, Luis, Esperanza, Sofia and Jaime.  
I want to thank to LEPAE (Laboratory for Process, Environmental and Energy 
Engineering) and to DEQ (Chemical Engineering De partment) for their great facilities.      
Finally, I would like to thank the fina ncial support of Programme Alßan (high 
level scholarship programme to Latin America students) Ref. I03D-00045CO, 
“Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia” (FCT) Ref. SFRH / BD / 24435 / 2005 for 
making this thesis possible trough the fina ncing of my scholarship, and to Acção 
Integrada Luso-Espanhola Nº E-31/06, 2006, fo r the economical support to carry out the 
experimental work in Salamanca and Madrid. 
   PREFACE  
 
This PhD thesis structure results fr om different papers published and/or 
submitted for publication in in ternational journals, during the work carried out at 
LEPAE (Laboratório de Engenharia de Processo s, Ambiente e Energia) in the Chemical 
Engineering Department of FEUP (Faculty of Engineering - University of Porto), 
throughout the period between November 2003 and April 2008. 
The main goal of this dissertation was to try understanding the basis of the 
homogeneous and heterogeneous Fenton syst em, and to determine the factors that 
control the decomposition of organic com pounds present in wastewaters by hydrogen 
peroxide, in the presence of iron and iron-based catalysts. As model compound, a non-
biodegradable azo dye was se lected: Orange II (OII). This knowledge can help to 
increase the efficiency of Fenton’s-based tr eatment processes when applied to textile 
wastewaters. 
The dissertation is organized in 8 chapte rs. The first one (part I) considers a 
general introduction and review of the state of the art focuse d in the Fenton’s system, an 
advanced oxidation process (AOP) often empl oyed for wastewater treatment. Emphasis 
is put in the treatment of textile dyeing wastewaters, and alternative AOPs to the 
Fenton’s process are briefly described. The basics of th e oxidation with Fenton’s 
reagent are remarked, which is based on ferr ous or ferric ion and hydrogen peroxide and 
exploits the very high reactiv ity of the hydroxyl radical pro duced in acidic solution by 
the catalytic decomposition of H 2O2. 
The experimental set-up is described in chapter 2 (part II); in particular, the 
specifications of the batch and continuous reactors employed are presented, along with 
the analytical techniques use d. Finally, it is provided a s hort description of the solid 
catalysts synthesis and characteri zation techniques employed.    
The use of a statistical to ol (design of experiments – DOE), using JMP software, 
for the optimization of the homogeneous proces s was examined in chapter 3. Herein it is 
studied with detail the importance of the va riables that affect the homogeneous Fenton 
process, such as temperature, H 2O2 concentration and Fe2+:H2O2 ratio. With this tool a 
statistical model was obtained that represents  well the experimental data of orange II 
degradation under different experimental conditions.    In chapter 4, the experimental work regarding the homogeneous process is 
finished (part III). Now, a more phenomenol ogical approach is used, with the objective 
of analyzing the kinetics of the OII degrada tion and establishing a reaction rate, to be 
further validated in a continuous stirred tank reactor. 
Part IV of the thesis is dedicated to the heterogeneous Fenton’s process, being 
composed by chapters 5 to 7. In chapte r 5, several catalysts based on Al-pillared 
saponite impregnated with iron salts were prep ared. The effectiveness of these catalysts 
in the oxidation of the dye in a batch reactor, as well as the influence of the variables of 
the synthesis and of the reaction conditions  on the catalytic activity is discussed. 
Chapter 6 is mostly addressed to the us ed of activated carbons as iron supports, 
but a comparison between clay- and carbon-lik e supports was also made. Two different 
types of carbon materials were used: i) an ac tivated carbon prepared from agricultural 
by-products (olive stone) and ii) a carbon aerogel prepared  by sol-gel technology. Both 
types of materials can be considered as examples of the cla ssical and new carbon 
materials form. The performance of both materials was compared and the effect of the most relevant operating conditions in Fenton’s oxidation evaluated.  
In chapter 7 a design of experiment s (DOE) approach is employed for 
optimization of the heterogeneous process usi ng a pillared clay impregnated with iron 
(III) acetylacetonate. The optim um conditions to maximize both color and total organic 
carbon removal, while minimizing the iron lo ss from the support, were found using the 
DOE tool. 
Finally, in chapter 8, the main conclusi ons are summarized and future work is 
proposed.  VIICONTENTS  
 
F i g u r e  C a p t i o n s          X I I I  
T a b l e  C a p t i o n s          X I X  
A b s t r a c t           X X I  Sumário          XXIII Résumé          XXV N o m e n c l a t u r e           X X I X   
Part I – Introduction
 
 1 .  I n t r o d u c t i o n          1   
1.1 Water and Environmental Problems      1 
1.2 The Textile Industry in Portugal      1 
1.3 D y e s           3  
1.4 Orange II Azo Dye        4 
1.5 Wastewater Treatment Processes      5 
1.6 Advanced Oxidation Processes       7 
1.6.1 Fenton’s Reagent (H
2O2/Fe2+/Fe3+)      9 
1.6.2 Heterogeneous Fenton Reagent’s (H 2O2/Fe2+-solid)  12 
1.6.3 Photo-Fenton’s Reagent (H 2O2/Fe2+/UV)    15 
1.6.4 H2O2/UV Reagent       16 
R E F E R E N C E S         1 6  
 
Part II – Experimental Section  
 2. Experimental Section       27 
 
2.1 M a t e r i a l s          2 7  
2.2 Oxidation Experiments       27 
2.2.1 B a t c h  R e a c t o r         27  VIII2.2.2 Continuous Reactor       28 
2.3 Analytical Techniques       29 
2.4 Synthesis of Solid Catalysts       32 
2.4.1 Pillared Clay-Based Catalysts     32 
2.4.2 Carbon-Based Catalysts      33 
2.5 Techniques used for Characterization of Solid Catalysts   34 
2.5.1 Pillared Clay-Based Catalysts     34 
2.5.2 Carbon-Based Catalysts      35 
REFERENCES  
 
Part III – Homogeneous System  
 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degradation of the Synthetic  
Dye Orange II using Fenton’s Reagent     39 
 
A B S T R A C T          3 9  
3.1 Introduction         40 3.2  Materials and Methods       40 
3.3 Results and Discussion       41 
3.3.1 Preliminary Experiments      41 
3.3.2 Design of Experiments      44 
3.4 Conclusions         53 
R E F E R E N C E S         5 4  
 
4. Modeling of the synthetic dye oran ge II degradation using Fenton’s  
reagent: from batch to conti nuous reactor operation   57 
 
A B S T R A C T           5 7  
4.1 Introduction         58 4.2 Materials and Methods       59 4.3 Results and Discussion       60 
4.3.1 Batch Reactor - Kinetic study     60 
4.3.2 Batch Reactor – Effect of the Main Operating Conditions  62 
4.3.2.1 Effect of the pH      62  IX4.3.2.2 Effect of the Chloride Anion Concentration   65 
4.3.2.3 Effect of the Initial Or ange II Concentration   65 
4.3.2.4 Effect of the Initial Hydr ogen Peroxide Concentration 66 
4.3.2.5 Effect of the Initial Fe rrous Ion Concentration  67 
4.3.2.6 Effect of the Temperature     68 4.3.2.7 Rate Equation for the Degradation of OII in a Batch  
Reactor       69  
4.3.3 Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR) Experiments  71 
4.3.4 Validation of the Model in  the Continuous Reactor   76 
4.4 Conclusions         79 
R E F E R E N C E S         8 0  
 
Part IV – Heterogeneous System
 
 5. Fenton-like oxidation of Orange II solutions using heterogeneous  
catalysts based on saponite clay      85  
 
A B S T R A C T          8 5  
5.1 Introduction         86 
5.2 Materials and Methods       87 
5.2.1 Preparation and Characterization  of the Catalysts   87 
5.2.2 Catalytic Activity       88 
5.3 Results and Discussion       88 
5.3.1 Characterization of the Catalysts     88 
5.3.2 Catalytic Behavior       94 
5.3.2.1 Effect of the Precursor Na ture and Iron Load on the  
Degradation of   OII Solution    94 
5.3.2.2 Temperature Effect      99  
5.3.2.3 pH Effect       101 5.3.2.4 Initial H
2O2 Concentration Effect    103 
5.3.2.5 Stability and Recycling of the Catalyst   105 
5.4 Conclusions         106  
REFRENCES         107   X6. Azo-dye Orange II degradation by heterogeneous Fenton-like  
reaction using carbon-Fe catalysts      111 
 
ABSTRACT         111 
6.1 Introduction         112 
6.2 Materials and Methods       113 
6.2.1 Preparation and Characterization of the Catalysts   113 
6.2.2 Catalytic Activity       113 
6.3 Results and Discussion       113 
6.3.1 Catalysts Characterization      113 
6.3.2 Catalytic Activity       117 
6.3.2.1  Role of the Supports      117 
6.3.2.2  Influence of the Experimental Conditions in the  
Iron-supported Catalysts Performance   120 
6.4 Conclusions         129 
REFERENCES        131 
 
7. Experimental design to optimize  the oxidation of Orange II  
dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst   135
    
ABSTRACT         135 
7.1 Introduction         136 
7.2 Materials and methods       136 
7.2.1 Catalyst Preparation and Characterization    136 
7.2.2 Oxidation Runs       137 
7.3 Results and Discussion       137 
7.3.1 Effect of Operating Conditions on Catalytic Activity  138 
7.3.1.1  Temperature Effect      138 
7.3.1.2  Catalyst concentration effect     139 
7.3.1.3  Hydrogen Peroxide Effect     141 
7.3.2 Design of experiments      142 
7.3.2.1  Color Removal      149 
7.3.2.2  Total Organic Carbon Removal    150 
7.3.2.3  Iron Leaching       152   XI7.3.3 Optimum conditions       153 
7.4 Conclusions         155 
REFERENCES        156  
Part V – Conclusions and Suggestions of the Future Work
 
 
8. Conclusions and Suggestions of the Future Work   161 
8.1 Conclusions         161 
8.1.1 Homogeneous System       161 
8.1.2 Heterogeneous System      162 
8.2 Future Work         165 
8.2.1 Homogeneous System       165 
8.2.2. Heterogeneous System      166 
 
Appendix 
Appendix I –Supporting Information       171  XII XIIIFIGURE CAPTIONS  
 
Fig. 1.1 Localization of textile industries in Portugal. 2 
Fig. 1.2 Azo dye Orange II structure. 5 
Fig. 1.3 Pillared clays synthesis. 14 
Fig. 2.1 Experimental set-up used in the batch reactor runs. 28 
Fig. 2.2 Experimental set-up used in the CSTR runs. 29 
Fig. 2.3 Chemical structure of the OII molecule. 30 
Fig. 2.4 Typical calibration curve for O II quantification at 486 nm. 30 
Fig. 2.5 UV-Vis spectrum of an OII solution (concentration 5×10-5 M). 31 
Fig. 3.1 UV-Vis absorption spectra of Orange II before (A) and after (B) 
oxidation, in the following conditions: T = 28.9 ˚C, =
22OHC 1×10-2 
M and Fe2+/H2O2 ratio = 0.125 (w/w). Initial pH = 3.  42 
Fig. 3.2 Discolouration (A) and mineralizati on (B) of the Orange II solution 
as a function of time: see experimental conditions in Table 3.1.  43 
Fig. 3.3 Experimental and calculated result s of the experimental design for 
Orange II oxidation. Responses considered are: Y 1 - colour removal 
(%) and Y 2 - TOC removal (%).  47 
Fig. 3.4 Response surface showing the colour removal (%) of the Orange II 
solution as a function of: A) Fe2+/ H 2O2 ratio and H 2O2 
concentration (for different  temperatures) and B) H 2O2 
concentration and temperature (for different Fe2+: H2O2 ratios).  48 
Fig. 3.5 Response surface showing the TOC removal (%) of the Orange II 
solution as a function of: A) Fe2+/H2O2 ratio and H 2O2 
concentration (for different  temperatures) and B) H 2O2 
concentration and temperature (for different Fe+2:H2O2 ratios).  50 
Fig. 3.6 TOC removal of the Orange II so lution along time, for some runs 
(experimental conditions shown in Table 3.1). 51 
 
  XIVFig. 3.7 Colour (A) and TOC (B) removal along time using the optimized 
conditions: A) Colour removal with T = 29 ˚C, =
22OHC 1×10-2 M 
and Fe+2:H2O2 ratio = 0.08 w/w; B) TOC removal with T = 50 ˚C, 
=
22OHC 1.4×10-2 M and Fe+2:H2O2 ratio = 0.05 w/w. 52 
Fig. 4.1 Typical plot of the OII concentra tion over time in the batch reactor. 
Experimental Conditions: M C
oOII4101.1−× = , M C
oOH4102
22−×= , 
M C
o Fe61052−×=+ , T = 303 K and pH = 3. 62 
Fig. 4.2 Plot of the linearized (ln) norma lized dye concentration over time 
in the Fenton-like stage at different pH values. For the experimental 
conditions please refer to Table 4.1. 63 
Fig. 4.3 (A) Plot of the linearized (ln) normalized dye concentration over 
time in the Fenton-like stage at di fferent initial OII concentrations. 
(B) Effect of the initial OII conc entration on the apparent rate 
constant of OII degradation. For the experimental conditions please 
refer to Table 4.1. 66 
Fig. 4.4 (A) Plot of the linearized (ln) normalized dye concentration over 
time in the Fenton-like stage at different initial H 2O2 
concentrations. (B) Effect of the initial H 2O2 concentration on the 
apparent rate constant of OII de gradation. For the experimental 
conditions please refer to Table 4.1. 67 
Fig. 4.5 (A) Plot of the linearized (ln) normalized dye concentration over 
time in the Fenton-like stage at different initial Fe2+ concentrations. 
(B) Effect of the initial Fe2+ concentration on the apparent rate 
constant of OII degradation. For the experimental conditions please 
refer to Table 4.1. 68 
Fig. 4.6 (A) Plot of the linearized (ln) normalized dye concentration over 
time in the Fenton-like stage at different temperatures. (B) Arrhenius plot of the apparent rate  constant of OII degradation. For 
the experimental conditions please refer to Table 4.1. 69 
Fig. 4.7 Plot of kap obtained from Eq. (4.9) and predicted from Eq. (4.14). 70 
 
  XVFig. 4.8 Orange II concentration histor ies in the batch reactor when 
changing: (A) the initial OII c oncentration; (B) the initial H 2O2 
concentration; (C) the initial Fe2+ concentration; and (D) the 
temperature. For the experimental conditions please refer to Table 
4.1. 71 
Fig. 4.9 Typical experimental data (Danckwerts’ C curve) for a tracer 
experiment and corresponding model fit. Flow rate = 0.58 ml s-1. 72 
Fig. 4.10 Effect of the inlet dye concen tration on the steady-state OII 
conversion in the continuous reactor. For the experimental conditions please refer to  Tables 4.2 and 4.3. 75 
Fig. 4.11 Effect of the inlet H 2O2 concentration on the steady-state OII 
conversion in the continuous reactor. For the experimental conditions please refer to Table 4.2. 75 
Fig. 4.12 Effect of the inlet Fe2+ concentration on the steady-state OII 
conversion in the continuous reactor. For the experimental conditions please refer to  Tables 4.2 and 4.3. 75 
Fig. 4.13 Effect of the temperature on the steady-state OII conversion in the 
continuous reactor. For the experime ntal conditions please refer to 
Tables 4.2 and 4.3. 75 
Fig. 4.14 Effect of the space time on the steady-state OII c onversion in the 
continuous reactor. For the experime ntal conditions please refer to 
Tables 4.2 and 4.3. 75 
Fig. 4.15 Parity plot comparing OII conve rsion obtained experimentally 
versus OII conversion pred icted by the CSTR model. 79 
Fig. 5.1 XRD diffractograms of the support a nd catalysts with 7.5 wt.% of 
iron, calcined at 500 ºC. 89 
Fig. 5.2 FT-IR spectra of the support and impregnated solids, before and 
after calcination: (A) Fe(II) oxalate 17.0 and (B) Fe(II) acetylacetonate 17.0. 90 
Fig. 5.3 Thermogravimetric analysis of different dried samples: (A) Fe(II) 
acetate, (B) Fe(II) oxalate, (C) Fe(II) acetylacetonate and (D) Fe(III) acetylacetonate. 93 
  XVIFig. 5.4 DSC curves of the samples impre gnated with 13.0 wt. % of Fe: (A) 
Fe(II) acetate and  Fe(III) acetylac etonate and (B) Fe(II) oxalate 
and Fe(II) acetylacetonate. 94 
Fig. 5.5 UV-Vis spectral changes of OII solution along time using as 
catalyst the Fe (II) oxalate 13. 0 sample. Reaction conditions:  
pH = 3, =
22OHC 6×10-3 M, T = 30 ºC. 96 
Fig. 5.6 Effect of the precursor nature on the degradation of  the OII solution 
for different iron loads: (A) 7.5 wt. %; (B) 13.0 wt. % and (C) 17.0 
wt. %. pH = 3, =
22OHC 6×10-3 M, T = 30 ºC. 97 
Fig. 5.7 Temperature effect on the degradation of OII solution using 
different catalysts: (A) Fe(II) oxa late 7.5 and (B) Fe(II) oxalate 
17.0. pH = 3, =
22OHC 6×10-3 M. 100 
Fig. 5.8 pH effect on the degradation of  OII solution using different 
catalysts: (A) Fe(II) oxalate 7.5 and (B) Fe(II) oxalate 17.0. 
=
22OHC 6×10-3 M, T = 30 ºC. 102 
Fig. 5.9 Iron leaching for experiments at different pH values and using 
different catalysts: (A) Fe(II) oxa late 7.5 and (B) Fe(II) oxalate 
17.0. =
22OHC 6×10-3 M, T = 30 ºC. 103 
Fig. 5.10 Effect of the hydrogen peroxide con centration on the degradation of 
OII solution using different catalyst s: (A) Fe(II) oxalate 7.5 and (B) 
Fe(II) oxalate 17.0. pH = 3, T = 30 ºC. 104 
Fig. 5.11 Effect of consecutive experime nts with the Fe(II) oxalate 17.0 
catalyst on the degradation of O II solution. pH = 3, T = 30 ºC, 
=
22OHC 6×10-3 M. 106 
Fig. 6.1 SEM images of the carbon M-Fe (A) and H-Fe (B) catalysts. 114 
Fig. 6.2 Pore size distribution in the meso and macropore range of both 
carbon supports, obtained by mercury porosimetry. 115 
Fig. 6.3 XRD-patterns of the catalysts and of the H support. 116 
Fig. 6.4 High-resolution transmission elec tron microscopy of the M-Fe 
catalyst. 116 
  XVIIFig. 6.5 XPS patterns of the Fe2p region for catalyst M-Fe and 
deconvolution of the corresponding peaks (BE = 711 and 713 eV confirm the presence of Fe(II) and Fe(III)). 117 
Fig. 6.6 Un-catalyzed orange II re moval by hydrogen peroxide (
22OHC = 
6×10-3 M) and adsorption on supports H and M and iron catalysts, 
H-Fe and M-Fe ( Ccarbon  = 0.2 g/L, T = 30 ºC, pH = 3). 118 
Fig. 6.7 Orange II removal through adso rption and through oxidation on 
both carbon supports and catalysts  (T = 30 ºC, pH = 3,  
Ccarbon  = 0.2 g/L, 
22OHC = 6×10-3 M). 119 
Fig. 6.8 pH effect on the degradation of OII solution (A), in TOC removal 
(B) and in iron leaching (C) usi ng M-Fe and H-Fe catalysts  
(T = 30 ºC, Ccat. = 0.2 g/L,
22OHC = 6×10-3 M). 121 
Fig. 6.9 Effect of catalyst concentration in  the degradation of OII solution 
(A), in TOC removal (B), in iron concentration in solution (C) and in percentage of iron lost by the M-Fe catalysts (D) (T = 30 ºC,  
pH = 3,
22OHC = 6×10-3 M). 123 
Fig. 6.10 Hydrogen peroxide concentration e ffect on the degradation of OII 
solution (A), in TOC removal (B) and in iron leaching (C) using  
M-Fe catalysts (T = 30 ºC, pH = 3, Ccat. = 0.2 g/L). 125 
Fig. 6.11 Temperature effect on the degradation of OII solution (A), in TOC 
removal (B) and in iron leachi ng (C) using M-Fe catalysts  
(
22OHC = 6×10-3 M, pH = 3, Ccat. = 0.2 g/L). Plot (D) represents the 
temperature dependence of the appa rent pseudo-first order kinetic 
constant. 126 
Fig. 6.12 Effect of consecutive experiment s with the M-Fe catalyst on the 
degradation of OII solution (A), in TOC removal (B) and in iron 
leaching (C) (
22OHC = 6×10-3 M, pH = 3, T  = 30 ºC, Ccat. = 0.2 g/L). 
Oxidation performance is also compared with homogeneous 
catalytic process, using iron (II) or iron (III) salts (1.5 mg/L). 128 
Fig. 7.1 Temperature effect on: (A) dye de gradation (B) mineralization and 
(C) iron loss. C catalyst . = 70 mg/L, =
22OHC 1.3×10-2 M. 139 
  XVIIIFig. 7.2 Catalyst concentration effect on: (A) dye degradation (B) 
mineralization and (C) iron loss. T = 40 ºC, =
22OHC 1.3×10-2 M,  
pH = 3. 140 
Fig. 7.3 Hydrogen peroxide concentration effect on: (A) dye degradation 
(B) mineralization and (C) iron loss. T = 40 ºC, C catalyst . = 70 mg/L, 
pH = 3. 142 
Fig. 7.4 Experimental and calculated result s of the experimental design for 
OII oxidation after 2 h and 4 h. 148 
Fig. 7.5 Effect of process variables in the color removal at different reaction 
times: (A) 1 h, (B) 2 h, (C) 3 h, (D) 4 h. 150 
Fig. 7.6 Effect of the process variables in the TOC removal at different 
reaction times: (A) 1 h, (B) 2 h, (C) 3 h, (D) 4 h. 152 
Fig. 7.7 Effect of the process variables in  the iron loss at different reaction 
times: (A) 1 h, (B) 2 h, (C) 3 h, (D) 4 h. 153 
Fig. 7.8 Optimal ranges of temperature a nd catalyst concentration that 
simultaneously satisfy the three responses (Y 1, Y2 and Y 3). For 1 h: 
Y1>99%, Y 2>60%, Y 3<1%; for 2 h: Y 1>99%, Y 2>70%, Y 3<2%, for 
3 h: Y 1>99%, Y 2>85%, Y 3<3% and for 4 h: Y 1>99%, Y 2>90%, 
Y3<4%. 154 
  XIXTABLE CAPTIONS  
Table 1.1 Standard reduction potential of so me oxidants in acidic media. 8 
Table 2.1 Chemical composition of the natu ral clay, expressed in oxides 
form, and referred to water-free solid. 32 
Table 3.1 Codified and experimental values  of the experimental design. 45 
Table 3.2 Experimental results of the experimental design for Orange II 
oxidation. Responses considered are: Y 1 - colour removal (%) and 
Y2 - TOC removal (%). 46 
Table 4.1 Effect of initial pH, ch loride ion, dye, hydrogen peroxide or ferrous 
ion concentrations and temperatur e on the apparent pseudo-first-
order rate constant ( kap). 64 
Table 4.2 Experimental and model predic tion of OII conversion in the 
continuous stirred tank reactor, under conditio ns within the batch 
study range. 73 
Table 4.3 Experimental and model predic tion of OII conversion in the 
continuous stirred tank reactor, under conditions above the batch 
study range. 74 
Table 5.1 Characterization data and catalyt ic behavior of the catalysts. 92 
Table 5.2 TOC removal (%) af ter 4h of oxidation.  101 
Table 6.1 Textural data of the supports used.  114 
Table 6.2 Elemental analysis of both suppor ts (data given are in a weight 
percent basis).  115 
Table 6.3 Comparison of reaction performance in terms of OII degradation, OII mineralization and iron leachin g of the carbon catalysts with 
two clay-based samples.
 129 
Table 7.1 Levels of the independent variab les used in the experimental 
design.  143 
Table 7.2 Codified and experimental values  of the runs performed in the 
experimental design. 144 
Table 7.3 Average absolute differences for the responses (in %). 148  XXTable 7.4 Optimum values for the maximum Color removal. 150 
Table 7.5 Optimum values for the maximum TOC removal. 151 
   XXIABSTRACT  
 
In this dissertation the factors that in fluence the Fenton’s reagent oxidation of 
the azo dye Orange II (OII) in homoge neous and heterogeneous systems were 
investigated. This compound was selected as model molecule to represent the concerned 
dye group because it is inexpensive and very  used in the textile, pulp and paper 
industries. 
The first part of the thesis  experimental work is de dicated to the homogeneous 
process, wherein the catalyst (Fe2+) is dissolved in the orig inal solution. Firstly, an 
experimental design methodology was applie d having in mind the optimization of the 
Orange II degradation in a batch reactor, at  fixed dye concentration. The variables 
considered were the temperature, H 2O2 concentration and the Fe2+:H2O2 ratio, at 
optimum pH of 3. It was found that both H 2O2 concentration and temperature have an 
important effect in the organic matter degr adation efficiency, being possible, under the 
optimum conditions, to reach color removals  of 99.7% and mineralization degrees as 
high as 70.7% in only 2 hours of operation.  
After this statistical approach, a mo re phenomenological modelling technique 
was employed. For this, a simple kinetic mode l was used to study the degradation of the 
dye using Fenton’s reagent in the Fenton-like stage. The effect of pH, temperature, Cl- 
concentration and initial concentration of OII, hydrogen peroxide and ferrous ion on the degradation rate were investigated in a ba tch reactor. A pseudo-first-order reaction rate 
with respect to OII concentra tion was found to be adequate to fit the experimental data, 
in which the apparent kinetic constant depends on the initial conditions following a 
power-law dependency. This e quation, without further fittin g parameters, was then used 
to validate experiments perfor med in a continuous stirred ta nk reactor, also carried out 
in a wide range of experimental conditions. 
In a second stage, the degradation and mi neralization of Orange II solutions was 
studied using catalysts in which the iron was incorporated into di fferent solid supports 
(pillared clays and activated carbons). All the catalysts were characterized through 
commonly used techniques and the experime nts were performed in a slurry batch 
reactor. Firstly, several runs were perfor med using a pillared saponite that was 
impregnated with different iron salts (Fe(II) acetate, Fe(II) oxalate, Fe(II) 
acetylacetonate and Fe(III) acetylacetonate) and three iron loads (7.5, 13.0 and 17.0  XXIIwt.%). For the most promising catalysts, a pr eliminary analysis of the main operating 
conditions effects during OII degradation was carried out. It is wo rth mentioning that 
these solids present good cat alytic properties (above 99 % dye degradation and 90% 
total organic carbon – TOC – removal in  4 hours), using less than 0.1 g catalyst /L, with 
simultaneous low leaching degrees (final concentration of iron < 1 ppm).  
As above-mentioned, a heterogeneous Fe nton-like oxidation process was also 
tested using two carbon-based  supports, impregnated with  7.0 wt.% iron. The carbon 
supports employed are quite different, being one  of them an activat ed carbon prepared 
from agricultural by-products, while the other one is a carb on aerogel. In this catalyst, 
characterization data point for a very good iron dispersion on the carbon surface, which 
is related with the better catalytic performances exhibited by this sample. However, iron leaching from the support is considerable , leading to a progressive deactivation in 
consecutive reaction cycles. 
Finally, an experimental design methodol ogy was applied to further analyze and 
optimize the Fenton-like process of Orange II degradation while minimizing also the 
leaching of iron. The independent variable s considered were the temperature, H
2O2 
concentration and catalyst (iron-impregna ted pillared saponite clay) load. The 
multivariate experimental design allowed de veloping empiric quadratic models for dye 
degradation, TOC removal and iron leaching after 1, 2, 3 and 4 h of reaction, which were adequate to predict responses in all the range of experimental conditions used. 
Data obtained revealed that the optimal  conditions depend on the response factor 
considered, being advisable to  use less-aggressive conditions  if responses are taken at 
longer reaction times. Particularly temperature,  but also catalyst concentration, were 
found out to be the main parameters affec ting all the responses, while the effect of 
initial H
2O2 concentration was found out to be ne gligible. It is remarkable the low 
leaching values attained (in the range 0.7- 5.0%), pointing for a good stability of the 
catalyst. 
 
  XXIIISUMÁRIO  
 
Nesta dissertação estudou-se o efeito dos  factores que influenciam a oxidação do 
corante azo Orange II (OII) usando o reagen te de Fenton, em sistemas homogéneos e 
heterogéneos. Este composto foi seleccionado como molécula modelo para representar o grupo de corantes em estudo por  ser barato e muito utilizado nas indúst rias têxtil e do 
papel.    
A primeira parte do trabalho experimental  reportado na tese diz respeito ao 
processo homogéneo, onde o catalisador (Fe
2+) é dissolvido na solução original. 
Inicialmente, foi usada uma metodologia de planeamento de experiências tendo como 
objectivo a optimização da degradação do cora nte Orange II num reactor fechado, com 
uma concentração constante de corante. As va riáveis consideradas foram a temperatura, 
a concentração de H 2O2 e a razão Fe2+:H2O2, ao pH óptimo de 3. Verificou-se que tanto 
a concentração de H 2O2 como a temperatura têm uma influência significativa na 
eficiência da degradação da matéria orgâ nica, sendo possível, nas condições óptimas, 
atingir remoções de cor de 99,7 % e um grau  de mineralização de 70,7 %, em apenas 2 
horas de operação. 
Depois desta abordagem estatística,  recorreu-se a um modelo mais 
fenomenológico. Para tal, util izou-se um modelo cinético simples para se estudar a 
degradação do corante com reagente de Fent on, na fase tipo-Fenton (segunda fase deste 
proceso). Avaliou-se o efeito do pH, temperatura, concentração de Cl- e concentração 
inicial de OII, peróxido de hidrogénio e iã o ferroso na velocidade de degradação, em 
reactor fechado. Verificou-se que uma ciné tica reaccional de pseudo-primeira ordem, 
relativamente à concentração de OII, er a adequada e se ajustava aos resultados 
experimentais, na qual a constante cinética ap arente depende das condições iniciais com 
um comportamento tipo lei de potência. Esta equação, sem nenhum parâmetro de ajuste adicional, foi usada para validar ensaios ef ectuados num reactor contínuo perfeitamente 
agitado, também realizados numa vasta gama de condições experimentais. 
Na segunda parte, estudou-se a degradação e mineralização de soluções de 
Orange II usando catalisadores nos quais o fe rro foi incorporado em diferentes suportes 
sólidos (argilas pilareadas e carvões activados). Todos os catalisadores foram 
caracterizados usando técnicas vulgarmente  empregues e os ensaios foram novamente 
conduzidos num reactor fechado, agora tipo 
slurry . Primeiramente, realizaram-se  XXIValgumas experiências usando uma argila sapon ita pilareada, a qual foi impregnada com 
diferentes sais de ferro (acetato de Fe(II),  oxalato de Fe(II), acetilacetonato de Fe(II) e 
acetilacetonato de Fe(III)) e três teores de ferro (7,5, 13,0 e 17,0 % em peso). Para os 
catalisadores mais promissores, realizou-s e uma análise preliminar dos efeitos das 
principais condições operatór ias na degradação do OII. Importa mencionar que estes 
sólidos apresentam boas propriedades catalí ticas (degradação do corante superior a 99 
% e remoções de 90 % do carbono orgânico total – COT – em 4 horas), usando-se 
concentrações inferiores a 0,1 g catalisador /L, com baixos níveis de lixiviação 
(concentração final de ferro < 1 ppm). 
Como foi referido anteriormente, testou-se  igualmente um processo de oxidação 
heterogéneo tipo-Fenton usando-se dois s uportes de carbono, impregnados com 7,0 % 
(p/p) de ferro. Os suportes de carbono util izados são bastante diferentes, sendo um 
deles um carvão activado preparado a partir  de sub-produtos agrícolas e o outro um 
aerogel de carbono. Neste catalisador, os dados da caracterização apontam para uma 
muito boa dispersão do ferro na superfície  do carbono, o que está relacionado com o 
melhor desempenho catalítico ex ibido por esta amostra. No  entanto, a lixiviação do 
ferro do suporte é considerável, conduzindo à progressiva desactivação do catalisador 
quando usado em ciclos de reacção consecutivos.  
Finalmente, aplicou-se uma metodologia de planeamento de experiências foi 
para se analisar mais em detalhe e optimi zar o processo tipo-Fenton da degradação do 
Orange II, minimizando-se também a lixivia ção do ferro. As variáveis independentes 
consideradas foram a temperatura, a concentração de H 2O2 e o teor do catalisador 
(argila saponita, pilareada e impregnada com ferro). O planeamento de experiências multivariável permitiu desenvol ver modelos quadráticos em píricos para a degradação 
do corante, para a remoção do COT e para a lixiviação do ferro após 1, 2, 3 e 4 horas de reacção, os quais se revelaram serem adequados para preverem as respostas em todo o domínio de condições experime ntais utilizado. Os resultad os obtidos revelaram que as 
condições óptimas dependem do factor de resposta considerado, sendo recomendável o uso de condições menos agressivas se as re spostas forem consideradas a tempos de 
reacção longos. Em particular a temper atura, mas também a concentração de 
catalisador, revelaram ser os parâmetros que mais afectam todas as respostas, ao passo que o efeito da concentração inicial de H
2O2 pode ser considerado desprezável. São 
notórios os baixos valores de lixiviação at ingidos (entre 0,7-5,0 %), sugerindo uma boa 
estabilidade do catalisador.   XXVRÉSUMÉ  
 
Dans cette thèse, les facteurs qui affect ent l’oxydation du colora nt azo Orange II 
(OII) par réaction de Fenton dans des systèmes homogènes et hétérogènes ont été étudiés. Ce composé a été sélectionné co mme molécule modèle représentative du 
groupe de colorant concerné puisqu’il est bon ma rché et très utilis é dans les industries 
du textile et du papier. 
La première partie de la thèse es t consacrée à une étude expérimentale du 
procédé homogène où le catalyseur (Fe
2+) est dissout dans la solution originelle. 
Premièrement, une méthode de design e xpérimental a été appliquée avec comme 
objectif l’optimisation de la dégradation de l’ Orange II dans un réacteur de type batch, à 
concentration fixe en colorant. Les variable s considérées furent la température, la 
concentration de H 2O2 et le rapport Fe2+:H2O2, à un pH optimum de 3. Il s’est avéré que 
la concentration de H 2O2 et la température ont toutes les deux un effet important sur 
l’efficacité de la dégradation de la matiè re organique, rendant possible, dans les 
conditions optimales, l’élimination de 99. 7% de la couleur avec des degrés de 
minéralisation allant jusqu’à 70.7 % en  seulement 2 heures d’opération.  
A la suite de cette approche statisti que, une technique de  modélisation plus 
phénoménologique a été employée. Un simple  modèle cinétique a été utilisé pour 
étudier la dégradation du colorant au moye n du réactif Fenton (dans la seconde phase du 
procédé de type Fenton). Les effets du pH, de la température, de la concentration en Cl- 
et de la concentratio n initiale de OII, de peroxyde d’ hydrogène et d’ion ferrique sur le 
taux de dégradation ont été étudiés dans un réacteur de type batch. Une vitesse de 
réaction de type pseudo premie r ordre s’est avérée adéquate afin d’ajuster les données 
expérimentales de la concentration en OII. La constante apparente de la cinétique est 
fonction des conditions ini tiales avec une dépendance en  loi de puissance. Cette 
équation, qui ne contient pas d’autres paramètres additionne ls pour l’ajustement, a alors 
été utilisée pour valider les expériences menées dans un r éacteur tank à agitation 
continue avec également une gamme él argie de conditions expérimentales. 
Dans une deuxième partie, la dégradati on et la minéralisation des solutions 
d’Orange II ont été étudiées en utilisant des catalyseurs dans lesquels le fer a été 
incorporé dans différents supports solides (charbons activés et argiles). Tous les 
catalyseurs ont été caractérisés au moyen de techniques courantes et les expériences ont  XXVIété menées en réacteur clos. D’abord, plus ieurs essais ont été entrepris avec de la 
saponite imprégnée de différents sels de fe r (acétate de Fe(II), oxalate de Fe(III), 
acétyle acétonate de Fe(II) et de Fe(III)) et trois teneurs en fer (7.5, 13.0 e 17.0 % en 
poids). Pour les catalyseurs les plus pr ometteurs, une analyse préliminaire des 
principales conditions d’opérati on durant la dégradation de OII a été entreprise. Il est 
intéressant de souligner que tous ces solides présentent de bonnes propriétés 
catalytiques (une dégradation du colorant s upérieure à 99% et une  élimination de 90% 
du carbone organique total - COT – en 4 heures), obtenues en utilisant une 
concentration en catalyseur inférieure à 0.1 g/L, et présentant si multanément un taux de 
lessivage bas (la concentration finale  en fer est inférieure à 1 ppm).  
Comme mentionné ci-dessus, un procéd é d’oxydation hétérogène de type 
Fenton a également été essayé où deux suppor ts de carbone imprégnés de 0.7 % en 
poids de fer ont été utilisés. Les supports de carbone utilisés sont assez différents 
puisque l’un d’eux est un charbon activé prépar é à partir de résidus de l’agriculture, 
tandis que l’autre est un aérogel  de carbone. Pour ce dern ier, les résultats de la 
caractérisation indiquent une bonne dispersion du fer sur la  surface de carbone, ce qui 
est associé avec de meilleures performances catalytiques. Cependant, la perte de fer 
dans le support est importante  et entraîne une désactivati on progressive lors de cycles 
successifs de réaction. 
Finalement, une méthodologie de design expérimental a ét é appliquée afin 
d’analyser et d’optimiser le procédé de type Fenton de dégr adation de l’Orange II tout 
en minimisant le lessivage du fer. Les vari ables indépendantes considérées furent la 
température, la concentration en H 2O2 et la charge de catalyseur (argile de saponite 
imprégnée de fer). Le design expérimental à variables multiples a permis de développer des modèles quadratiques empiriques pour décrire la dégrad ation du colorant, 
l’élimination du COT et le lessivage du fer ap rès 1, 2, 3 et 4 heures de réaction. Ces 
modèles se sont avérés être adaptés à la pr édiction des réponses dans toute la gamme de 
conditions expérimentales utilisée. Les donn ées obtenues ont révélé que les conditions 
optimales dépendent du facteur de réponse consid éré, et qu’il est conseillé d’utiliser les 
conditions les moins agressives si les répons es à obtenir le sont pour des temps de 
réaction plus longs. En particulier, la te mpérature ainsi que la concentration en 
catalyseur se sont avérées être les principa ux paramètres affectan t toutes les réponses, 
tandis que l’effet de la concentration initiale en H
2O2 s’est avéré être négligeable. Il est  XXVIIà noter que les basses valeurs de lessivag e atteintes (dans la gamme de 0.7-5%) 
suggèrent une bonne stabilité du catalyseur.  XXVIII XXIXNOMENCLATURE  
 
Latin characters 
 A  Pre-exponential coeffici ent of the kinetic law (s
-1) 
Ci  Concentration of species i (M) 
C(t)  Danckwerts’ C curve (dimensionless) E(t)  Residence-time distribution function (s
-1) 
Ea  Apparent activation energy (kJ mol-1) 
Fi  Molar flow rate of species i (mol s-1) 
kap  Apparent kinetic rate constant (s-1) 
ki  Rate constant for elementary Fenton reaction step i (M-1s-1 or s-1) 
Q  Volumetric flow rate (L s-1) 
()OIIr−  Reaction rate for orange II consumption (mol L-1 s-1) 
R  Ideal gas constant (J mol-1 K-1) 
t  Time (s) 
T  Temperature (K) V  Volume of reactor (L) X  Orange II conversion (%)  Greek symbols  λ  Wavelength 
τ  Space-time (s) 
 Subscripts  batch  Refers to batch reactor; Cl
-  Refers to chloride ion 
exp  Refers to experimental conditions Fe
2+  Refers to ferrous ion 
Fe3+  Refers to ferric ion 
H2O2  Refers to hydrogen peroxide  XXXin   Refers to inlet conditions (continuous reactor) 
mod  Refers to model prediction o   Refers to initial conditions (batch reactor) 
OII  Refers to Orange II out  Refers to outlet condi tions (continuous reactor) 
 
Superscripts 
 a  Reaction order with respect to Orange II concentration b  Reaction order with respect to H
2O2 concentration 
c  Reaction order with respect to Fe2+ concentration 
o   refers to initial conditions (c ontinuous reactor – tracer experiments) 
 Abbreviations  OII  Orange II dye TOC  Total Organic Carbon AOPs  Advanced Oxidation Processes DOE  Design of Experiments 
HO•  Hydroxyl Radical 
PILCs  Pillared clays 
Al-PILCs Al-pillared saponite impregnated with iron salts   
 
 
   
   
 
      
PART I 
INTRODUCTION    Chapter 1. Introduction   
 1CHAPTER 1 – INTRODUCTION  
 
1.1 Water and Environmental Problems 
 
Everyone needs water everyday to cover the daily demand in food, domestic 
use, etc. Water is used in agriculture, cons truction, transport, chemical industry, and 
numerous other activities of human beings. According to the United Nations, the first 
priority of poor countries, especially in Africa, should be not financial support or 
technological knowledge but clean wa ter supply to the population [1]. 
Unfortunately, despite the fact that most of the planet is covered by water, only a 
small amount of this water is available as fresh water. Almost 97.5% of the total is in oceans and it is not suitable for drinking, wa tering, or industrial use. The remaining 
2.5% is fresh water. According to the Eu ropean Commission, less than 1% of the 
planet’s water is available for human consum ption and more than 1. 2 billion people in 
the world have no access to safe drinking water [1].  
On the other hand, the domestic use and industrial activity, of especially impact 
among the developed countries, generate high amounts of residual wastewater, whose 
direct disposal to natural cour ses causes a considerable effect in the environment. This 
fact, together with the need to restore this water for new uses, makes practically essential the purification of wastewater to achieve the desired degree of quality. 
Recently, reflecting a new environmental conscience, the European Directive 
2000/60/CE [2] stresses the need to adopt meas ures against water pollution in order to 
achieve a progressive reduction of pollutants.   
1.2 The Textile Industry in Portugal 
 
The textile industry is an example of the industrial sector wh ere large quantities 
of water are used, basically as a solvent. This industry plays a pa rt in the economy of 
several countries around the world. China is  the largest exporter of textile products 
around the world, and the European Union (m ainly Italy, Germany, France and United 
Kingdon), USA, Japan, Pakistan, Turkey, Taiw an and Korea are the top ten of world 
exporters [3]. Dyeing is a fundamental opera tion during textile fibr e processing, which 
causes the production of more or less colored wastewaters [4]. On this way, use and Chapter 1. Introduction   
 2disposal of wastewater from textile indus tries are important considerations when 
assessing environmental impact of textiles.  
At the beginning of the 20th century, the importance of the textile industry in the 
Portuguese economy increased until representing  up to 50% of the na tional exportations 
[5]. Nowadays, Portuguese textiles and clothes have permitted to Portugal having a relevant position in the ranking of exporters  from the European Union. Since 2000, 
Portugal has been ranked in the first ten highest exporters of textiles in the European 
Union, corresponding to 4.3% of the to tal exportations and 18.5% of national 
exportations [6]. 
In Portugal the textile indus try is concentrated in th ree regions: North, Centre 
and Lisbon. Being evident, in the last years (1999-2002), a littl e increase of this 
industry in the north and even  centre of the country when  compared with the Lisbon 
zone (see Figure 1.1) [7].  
01000200030004000
North Centre Lisbon Alentejo Algarve Açores Madeira1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
 
Fig. 1.1 – Localization of textile industries in Portugal. Adapted from [7]. 
 
In particular the Ave hydrografic bay is characterized by a strong 
industrialization, spreading through Porto and Braga dist ricts, where the biggest 
factories of most important i ndustries in the textile sector  are found. The highly polluted 
effluents of the textile industries, even mo re of concern than the high flow rates, 
significantly contribute to pollu te the hydric reserves of th e country. Actually, it is 
observed a significant potential pollution by dangerous substances associated to 
industrial effluents, namely textile industr ies, in middle and low Ave and Este and 
Chapter 1. Introduction   
 3Vizela rivers, due to the natu re of the industrial park settled and the insufficient 
installations of adequate treatment systems [8]. 
The high number of pollution risk points in  the Ave river, as well as, the high 
human occupation and the significant number of  pollute industrial unities, are causes of 
the extreme situation of pollu tion in the Ave hydrographic bay. In 1985, the “Comissão 
de Gestão Integrada da Bacia Hidrográfica do Ave” prepared a general plan of de-
pollution in this region, which was approve d in 1990 [6]. This commission proposed the 
construction of three stations of residual water treatment (ETARs from the name in 
Portuguese): the ETARs of Gondar, Rabada and Agra in Porto and Braga, which are 
working up to now. 
Nowadays, the textile activity is regulari zed by the portaria sectorial nº 423/97 
of June 25th and by Annex XVIII of decree law no 236/98 of August 1st, with the 
objective to obligate for an efficient treat ment of textile effluents [6].    
 
1.3 Dyes 
 
Kirk-Othmer defines dyes as intensely co lored or fluorescent organic substances 
which impart color to a substrate by selectiv e absorption of light [9]. Dyes are used to 
color fabrics, leather, paper, ink, lacquers, varnishes, plastics, cosmetics, and some food 
items. Several thousands of individual dyes of various colors and types are 
manufactured worldwide. This large number is attributable to the many different types 
of materials to which dyes ar e applied and the different c onditions of service for which 
dyes are required [10]. Commercial dyes ar e sold in several physical forms including 
granular, powders, liquid solutions, and pastes [11].  
Organic dyes are classified in seve ral ways, including according to their 
chemical structure or class, general dye chemistry, and application process. In 
particular, the chemical stru cture classifications divides them into azo dyes, triaryl-
methanes, diphenyl-methanes, anthraquinones,  stilbenes, methines, polymethines, 
xanthenes, phthalocyanines, sulfurs and so  on. Kirk-Othmer [9] describes the common 
application process classes of dyestuffs to include acid dyes, mordant dyes, metal 
complex dyes, direct dyes, fiber reactive dyes, basic dyes, vat dyes, sulfur dyes, 
disperse dyes, ingrain dyes, azoic dyes, and other dyes. Using the general dye chemistry 
approach, textile dyes typical ly are grouped into the follo wing categories: acid dyes, 
direct (substantive dyes), azoic dyes, disper se dyes, sulphur dyes, fiber reactive dyes, Chapter 1. Introduction   
 4basic dyes, oxidation dyes, mordant (chrome) dyes, developed dyes, vat dyes, pigments, 
optical/fluorescent brighteners, and solvent dyes [12].  
In the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C) colorants are dyes and 
pigments that have been certified or pr ovisionally certified by the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) for use in food items, dr ugs, and/or cosmetics. The International 
Association of Color Manufacturers (IACM ) represents certain FD&C colorant 
manufacturing facilities. Typically, FD &C colorants are azo, anthraquinone, or 
triarylmethane dyes with azo representing the largest category. Actually, azo dyes make up 60-70% of all textile dyestuffs and are not removed from  wastewaters via 
conventional biological treatments [13]. 
Of the dyes available on the market t oday, up to 70% are azo compounds [14]. 
Azo dyes can be divided into monoazo, diaz o and triazo classes, according to the 
presence of one or more azo bonds (–N= N–). Nevertheless, according to the 
classifications above mentione d, they are found in various other categories, i.e. acid, 
basic, direct, disperse, azoic and pigmen ts [15,16]. Some azo dyes and their dye 
precursors have been shown to be or are su spected to be human carcinogens as they 
form toxic aromatic amines [17-19]. 
Unfortunately, the exact amount of dyes produced in the world is not known. 
Exact data on the quantity of dyes discharged into the environment are also not available. It is assumed that a loss of 1–2% in production and 1–10%  loss in use are a 
fair estimate [20]. Because of  their commercial importance, the impact and toxicity of 
dyes that are released in the environment ha ve been extensively studied. As several 
thousand different synthetic dyes that are em ployed exhibit various bi ological activities, 
it is understandable that our knowledge concer ning their behaviour in the environment 
and health hazards involved in thei r use is still incomplete [20]. 
 
1.4 Orange II Azo Dye 
 
Orange II (OII), also called acid orange 7, is a molecule that has O–H... N and 
N=N bonds (see Figure 1.2). It is widely us ed in the dyeing of textiles, food, and 
cosmetics and thus is found in the wastewater s of the related industries [21]. For these 
reasons, OII degradation has been studied widely [22].  Chapter 1. Introduction   
 5
 
Fig. 1.2 – Azo dye Orange II structure. 
 
OII is possibly the most studied compound among the azo dyes as far as its 
catalytic degradation under several expe rimental conditions is concerned. The 
degradation pathways and the formation of by-products is also fully described [23-34]; 
thus, OII could be used as a model compound for oxidative degradation studies of azo 
dyes. The oxidative attack of an azo dye from the phenyl azonapht hol family as OII 
leads to benzene sulfonate and naphthoqui none as primary degradation products. 
Vinodgopal et al.  [25] reported the formation of four by-products (benzene sulphonic 
acid, sulphoanilic acid, 1,4-naphtho quinone and phthalic acid) and Bauer et al.  [26] 
have identified in addition quinone and 4-hydroxybenzene sulphonic acid during the 
first steps of Vis/TiO 2 photosensitized degradation of OII. The former products were 
also identified by Stylidi et al.  [17], which studied the co mplete degradation of OII 
under solar light irradiation. Twenty-two tr ansformation products were identified in 
total, including 2-naphthol, 2-hydroxy-1, 4-naphthoquinone, smaller aromatic 
intermediates such as pthalic acid and phtalimide and aliphatic acids such as fumaric, succinic, maleic and malonic acids. The lo west molecular weight compounds detected 
in that study are oxalic, acetic and formic acids.   
1.5 Wastewater Treatment Processes  
 
The waste management is a very broa d area, and therefore only wastewater 
treatment will be briefly focused in this section, which will in concrete be applied on the 
removal of an organic non-biodegradable dye (O range II), because it is toxic, frequently 
encountered in today’s industr ial effluents, and can not be  efficiently treated by the 
conventional methods. However, to give a more  complete picture of  the situation, the 
main types of pollutants and treatmen t methods are briefly mentioned.  Chapter 1. Introduction   
 6There is a big variety of water polluta nts from diverse sources. Physically, 
wastewater is usually charac terised by its colour (e.g. gr ey), odour (e.g. musty), and 
solids content, which can be suspended (e.g. about 30%) as well as dissolved (e.g. about 
70%) [27]. Chemically, wastewater might be composed of organic and inorganic 
compounds, as well as various dissolved ga ses. Organic compone nts may consist of 
carbohydrates, proteins, fats and greases, surf actants, oils, pesticides, phenols, etc. 
Inorganic components may consist of h eavy metals, nitrogen, phosphorus, sulphur, 
chlorides, among others. Gases commonly dissolved in wastew ater are hydrogen 
sulphide, methane, ammonia, oxygen, carbon di oxide and nitrogen. The first three gases 
result from the decomposition of organic matte r present in the wastewater. Biologically, 
wastewater may contain many pathogenic organisms, whic h generally originate from 
human beings [27].   
The typical processes used to dec ontaminate wastewaters are physical, 
biological and chemical treatm ents. Flocculation, sedimenta tion, flotation, filtration, 
extraction and adsorption, for instance on act ivated carbon, are typical physical or 
physicochemical operations.  
On the other hand, the biological treatment usually refers to the use of 
microorganisms (bacteria) in engineered react or systems for effecting the removal of 
certain constituents, such as organic com pounds, trace elements and nutrients. In 
aerobic systems, oxygen is provided and used by  the bacteria to bio-chemically oxidise 
organic matter to carbon dioxide and water. In an anaerobic syst em, oxygen is excluded 
and the microorganisms utilise compounds other than molecular oxygen for the 
completion of metabo lic processes [28]. 
Finally, chemical treatment processes “man ipulate” the chemical properties of 
the contaminants to facilitat e their removal from the bulk wastewater or to decompose 
them within the waste stream. Chemical prec ipitation, for instance, is used for removal 
of phosphorus and enhancement of suspended so lids removal. Disinfection is a selective 
destruction of disease-causing organisms.  Chemical oxidation/reduction is applied 
basically for treatment of hazardous or ganic wastes, but also inorganic. 
All above-mentioned treatments can be used  separately or combined with other 
processes to enhance the treatment efficien cy of the process [29,30]. For example, a 
flocculation stage may be often followed by a secondary biological process. The choice 
of the correct system must be carried out considering se veral factors, both technical Chapter 1. Introduction   
 7(treatment efficiency, plant simplicity, et c.) and economical (inve stment and operating 
costs). 
Generally, in the case of high organic pollutant concentrations and high flow 
rates, classic incineration is most widely used for liquid (and solid) waste destruction [31]. For wastes with only low to moderate  concentration of organic material, the 
process is not self sustainable and auxiliar y fuel has to be adde d. Due to the high 
temperature required, incineration needs an extremely high energetic input. The implant 
of air pollution control devices is even ra ising the cost of this process. Another 
alternative is separation and re use of organics, but it requir es additional energy costs for 
the facilities construc tion and operation [31]. 
For low to mediate concentration of dissolved organics, there are several 
ways/possibilities to treat liquid waste stream s. One option is the adsorption, namely on 
activated carbon [32], but the sa turated carbon is a hazardous waste, requiring either 
regeneration or transportation to a hazardous waste landfill [33]. An  apparent low cost 
option is offered by the biological oxidatio n, but the organic pol lutant has to be 
biodegradable, dilute and of low toxicity. However, the process usually proceeds at low rates and generates a huge amount of sludges [34]. This high sludge generation requires 
physical treatments for sludge volume reduction, and the subsequent landfilled leading to a potential secondary  pollution source [30]. 
Summarising, the actual conventional met hods are clearly not suitable to treat 
toxic, non-biodegradable orga nic pollutants, and new improved treatment methods have 
to be developed and tested. Recent progress in the removal of such type of compounds 
and particularly dyes has led to the deve lopment of advanced oxidation processes 
(AOPs), described in detail in the follo wing section. Due to increasing amounts and 
complex composition of real organic efflue nts, advanced oxidation technologies will 
probably constitute the best option in the near future, as they can treat wastes with high 
total organic carbon (TOC) and chemical  oxygen demand (COD) contents [35]. 
 
1.6 Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs) 
 
To overcome the inconveniences of c onventional treatment methods such as 
biological treatment, physical adsorption or incineration, various  chemical oxidation 
techniques have emerged in the last decades, in particular for the treatment of industrial wastewaters. Among these techniques, th e so-called advanced oxidation processes Chapter 1. Introduction   
 8appear to be a promising field of study, which have been reported to be effective for the 
degradation of soluble organi c contaminants from waters and soils, because they can 
often provide an almost total degrada tion, under reasonably mild conditions of 
temperature and pressure [36-48].  
AOPs utilise chemical reactions, electron beams, UV light or ultrasound pulses 
to obtain high oxidation rates through the ge neration of free radi cals (mainly hydroxyl 
radicals). Indeed, highly reactive hydroxyl  radicals ( HO•) are traditionall y thought to be 
the main active species responsible for the de struction of pollutants [36, 49-52]. Thanks 
to its high standard reduction potential of 2.8 V in acidic media (see Table 1.1), these 
radicals would be able to oxidize almost all organic co mpounds to carbon dioxide and 
water, except for some of the simplest organic compounds, such as acetic, maleic and 
oxalic acids, acetone or simple chloride deri vatives as chloroform [53]. These species 
are however of a very intere sting kind because they are typical oxidation products of 
larger molecules after fragmentation, being continuously ge nerated by chemical, 
photochemical or electrochemical reactions . Depending on the nature of the parent 
organic species, two types of initial attack might be possible by th at radical: it might 
abstract a hydrogen atom in the case of alkane s and alcohols, or it might attach itself to 
a molecule in the case of aromatic compounds, such as dyes.  
 
Table 1.1 – Standard reduction potential of some  oxidants in acidic media. Adapted from [53]. 
Oxidant Standard Reduction Potential (V) 
Fluorine (F 2) 3.03 
Hydroxyl Radical ( HO•) 2.80 
Atomic Oxygen 2.42 
Ozone (O 3) 2.07 
Hydrogen Peroxide (H 2O2) 1.77 
Potassium Permanganate (KMnO 4) 1.67 
Hypobromous Acid (HBrO) 1.59 
Chlorine Dioxide (ClO 2) 1.50 
Hypochlorous Acid (HClO) 1.49 
Chlorine (Cl 2) 1.36 
Bromine (Br 2) 1.09 
 
 Chapter 1. Introduction   
 9This work is specially focused in ho mogeneous and heterogeneous advanced 
oxidation process based on hydrogen peroxide, whic h is supposed to ma inly give rise to 
hydroxyl radicals after catalytic decomposition, a nd for this reason a brief review of 
these processes is treated here. Hydrogen pero xide is a safe, effi cient and easy to use 
chemical oxidant, suitable for wide usag e on contamination prev ention. Discovered by 
Thenard in 1818, it was first used to reduce odor in wastewater treatment plants, and 
from then on, it became widely employed in wastewater treatment [54]. However, since 
hydrogen peroxide itself is not an excelle nt oxidant for many organic pollutants ( cf. 
Table 1.1), it must be combined with UV li ght, salts (particularly metals) or ozone to 
produce the desired de gradation results.  
 
1.6.1 Fenton’s Reagent (H 2O2/Fe2+/Fe3+) 
 
More than 110 years ago Fenton (1894) reported that ferrous ions strongly 
promote the oxidation of tartaric acid by hydrogen peroxide [55]. Forty years later, 
Haber and Weiss (1934) discovered that the h ydroxyl radical is the actual oxidant in 
such systems [56]. In real ity, the Fenton catalyst (Fe2+/Fe3+ system) causes the 
dissociation of hydrogen peroxide an d the formation of highly reactive HO radicals that 
attack and destroy the organic compounds. This  reaction is a widely  used and studied 
catalytic process based on an electron transfer between H 2O2 and a metal (usually 
transition metal) acting as a homogeneous cat alyst [57,58]. By far, the most common of 
these ones is iron [53, 59]. 
Oxidation with Fenton’s reagent is base d on ferrous or ferric ion and hydrogen 
peroxide and exploits the ve ry high reactivity of the hydroxy l radical produced in acidic 
solution by the catalytic decomposition of H 2O2 [59]. The mechanism of Fenton’s 
oxidation involves basically the following steps (Eqs. (1.1) to  (1.6)), wherein the kinetic 
constants are given in M-1s-1 (with the exception of k 5) and were taken from the 
literature: 
  
• − + ++ + → + HO HO Fe OH Fe3
222                       k1 = 51-100 (1.1) 
− + • ++ → + HO Fe HO Fe3 2                                  k2 = 3-4.3 ×108 (1.2) 
• + + ++ + → +22
223HO H Fe OH Fe                       k3 = 0.05-0.27 (1.3) 
OH HO HO OH2 2 22 + → +• •                               k4 = 1.2-4.5 ×107 (1.4) Chapter 1. Introduction   
 10OH O OH2 2 22 2/1 + →                                          k5 = 0.001 s-1 (1.5) 
22 2 OH HO →•                                                      k6 = 5.3 ×109 (1.6) 
 
The HO• species produced through reaction given by Eq. (1.1) will then attack the 
organic matter present in the reaction me dium, because the hydroxyl radical is a 
powerful inorganic oxidant that reacts non- selectively with numerous compounds (rate 
constants in the range 107-1010 M-1s-1) [59]. In the case under st udy in this dissertation, 
such process is initiated by the following reaction:    
OH products HO OII2+ → +•              (1.7) 
 
Fenton’s reagent can be employed to tr eat a variety of industrial wastes 
containing a broad range of organic compounds like phenols, formaldehyde, pesticides, 
wood preservatives, plastic additives, dyes and rubber chemicals, for instance [60-70]. 
A large quantity of information exists regarding the mechanism and kinetics of 
HO• production during the decomposition of H 2O2 by Fe2+ and Fe3+ [56,71-77]. For 
example, the generally accepted mech anism of the decomposition of H 2O2 by Fe3+ 
consists of a chain reaction wi th the iron cycles between Fe3+ and Fe2+ as H 2O2 is 
consumed [56,73,77]. This can be simplified into the above mentioned equations, but many other are found in the litera ture. Nevertheless, the rate constants vary from author 
to author, and the activation ener gies are not well documented.   
The main factors that influence the Fe nton’s processes are the medium pH, the 
contaminant nature/character and its concen tration, the concentration of iron species 
and their nature, the hydrogen peroxide quant ity required for oxidation, and finally the 
temperature [78]. Below the influence of some of these parameters on Fenton's 
oxidation performance is shortly described. 
Regarding the last parameter mentioned, it is worth of noting that the Fenton’s 
reagent has been often used at room temperat ure, but rarely at hi gher temperatures [79]. 
The main reason for this is the acc elerated thermal decomposition of H
2O2 into oxygen 
and water at higher temperatures, such  non-productive decomposition affecting 
obviously the process performance.  
In what concerns the pH of the reactio n medium, a range of 2 to 4 has been 
repeatedly described as optimum for free ra dicals generation [ 80-83]. The explanation Chapter 1. Introduction   
 11of why acidic pH values are optimum for Fenton’s process was given by Walling 
(1975), among others, who simplified the overall Fenton chemistry by accounting for 
the following reaction [59]:  
OH Fe H OH Fe23
2222 2 2 2 + → + ++ + +     (1.8) 
 
This equation suggests that the presence of H+ is required in the decomposition of H 2O2, 
indicating the need for an acid envir onment to produce the maximum amount of 
hydroxyl radicals. A dependence of the reactio n performance with the pH is normally 
observed in homogeneous reaction, and the decreased performance at lower pHs is 
usually attributed to the inhi bition of the reaction between Fe3+ and hydrogen peroxide, 
because the formation of the iron(III) per oxocomplexes (as intermediates) decreases 
when pH decreases [69]. Above pH 4, the rapid H 2O2 decomposition produces 
molecular oxygen without formation of appr eciable amounts of hydroxyl radicals [84]. 
Many times the quantity of hydrogen peroxide used is bigger than the 
stoichiometric quantity, because the consumption of H 2O2 is not equal to the formation 
rate of hydroxyl radicals, once a part of th e hydrogen peroxide d ecomposes into water 
and oxygen via non-radical pathways [85] . Even if the increase in the H 2O2 load 
improves significantly the conversion of COD, for instance, there is a maximal peroxide 
dose, above which the process performance does not improve anymore [76]. The main 
reason for this is due to the well-known hydroxyl radicals scavenging effect [59,86]: 
 
22 2 2HO H O HO H O• •+→+        ( 1 . 9 )  
 
The use of high ferrous ion concentrations is believe d to be appropriate for 
producing large quantities of HO• within a short period of time [87]. Precisely the 
increase in the iron (catalyst) concentration seems to increase the oxidation rate [82] and COD reduction [88]. However, this is not always the case. Yoon 
et al . [87] 
observed that ferrous ions disa ppeared very rapidly in the ab sence of organic, but not in 
its presence. On the other hand hydrogen pe roxide is consumed within seconds, 
independently on the presence or absence of  organics. So, the presence of organics 
affects the behaviour of ferrous  ions, because both compete for HO radicals. This is 
because as hydrogen peroxide decomposes to yield HO radicals, they mainly react with Chapter 1. Introduction   
 12ferrous ion and not with hydroge n peroxide (in absence of or ganic matter), due to the 
fact that the reaction between HO radicals and ferrous ions is ten times faster than 
between HO radicals and hydr ogen peroxide ( cf. rate constants for Eqs. (1.2) Vs. (1.4)).  
In the industrial applications  of Fenton’s oxidation the Fe2+/H2O2 ratio is usually 
high. The initial ferrous ion and hydrogen per oxide are consumed in a few seconds, and 
consequently the use of high concentrati ons of ferrous ion produces the sufficient 
quantity of HO radicals in a short period of time. However, such a high Fe2+ 
concentration can cause three problems. First,  the high ratios of ferrous ion to hydrogen 
peroxide can decrease the efficiency of HO radicals for degradation of organics as 
ferrous ion itself can be HO radicals scavenger, as above-m entioned. Second, very rapid 
production of organic radical may cause depletion of dissolved oxygen and in that way 
decrease the mineralization grade. Third, such a quantity of iron will result in big amount of iron sludge [87]. Therefore, th e doses employed have to be carefully 
analysed, varying according to  the application intended and type of wastewater to be 
handled. 
 
1.6.2 Heterogeneous Fenton Reagent’s (H 2O2/Fe2+-solid) 
 
The Fenton’s process can be conducted homogeneously, when iron is dissolved 
into the reaction solution, or heteroge neously. However, homogeneously catalyzed 
reactions need up to 50-80 ppm of Fe ions  in solution, which is well above the 
European Union directives that allow only 2 ppm of Fe ions in treated water to dump 
directly into the e nvironment [89]. In a ddition, the removal/treatment of the sludge-
containing Fe ions at the end of the wastewater treatment is expensive and needs large 
amount of chemicals and manpower.  
To overcome the disadvantages of the ho mogeneous Fenton process, and also 
considering the possibility of r ecovering the catalyst, some attempts have been made to 
develop heterogeneous catalysts, prepared by incorporating Fe ions or Fe oxides into 
porous supports [90-93]. Other transi tion metal complexes supported on several 
surfaces such as metal oxides, resins, and mi xed (Al-Cu) pillared clay have also been 
used as potentially active catalysts for the decomposition of H 2O2 and for the oxidative 
degradation of organics [ 94]. Among the porous solids us ed as supports for the iron 
phases, it is worth mentioning  the use of silica, alumin a, silica-alumina and cation-
exchanged resins, which have been used in the degradati on and mineralization of dyes Chapter 1. Introduction   
 13[90]. More complex systems have been prepared by modifying a polyacrylonitrile 
(PAN) fibre by treatment with a mixture of  hydrazine and hydroxylamine to introduce 
chelating functional groups ont o the fibre surface. These f unctional groups are used to 
coordinate the transition metal cations Fe3+, Co2+, Ni2+ and Cu2+ to the fibre to act as the 
active catalytic sites for decomposition of  the hydrogen peroxide [91]. Using an 
alternative strategy, other cat alytic systems have been pr epared by co-intercalation of 
two natural smectites (Wyoming SWy-1 and Tunisia-Gafsa VI) with Fe-Al polycations, 
obtained by polymerisati on of a mixture of FeCl 3 and chlorhydrol [92]. Tachiev et al.   
[93] have reported other catalysts, in which Fe(II) and Fe(III) cati ons are complexed by 
the ligands DTPA, EDTA, EGTA, and NTA. The use of zeolites [95,96] and carbons 
[97,98] to support iron catalysts is also worth mentioning.  
The mechanism of H 2O2 decomposition by homogeneous  Fenton’s oxidation is 
not well (or at least unambiguously) establishe d, where several oxidising agents have 
been suggested to be involved in th e oxidation reactions, in addition to the HO• radicals. 
For the heterogeneous systems this is still less clear, being a ma tter of controversy. 
Some authors suggest an initial st ep of fast adsorption of the H 2O2 molecule on 
(≡Fe(III)) sites [98] and others the adsorpti on of the organics [99]. Nevertheless, the 
involvement of the following steps has been suggested in most of  the works found in 
the literature, which  correspond to Fe3+ reduction with genera tion of less oxidative HO 2• 
radicals, followed by Fe3+ regeneration with formation of the hydroxyl radicals: 
 
 + • + ++ + − → + − H HO FeX OH FeX22
223    (1.10) 
• − + ++ + − → + − HO OH FeX OH FeX3
2 22    (1.11) 
 
where X represents the surface of the catalyst. Ho wever, it must be remarked that the 
radicals can also be generated in the surface of  the solid so they ar e actually "caged" in 
the solid structure, subsequently reacting w ith the adsorbed reagent(s) without radicals 
generation. Obviously, besides the indicated steps many other radical reactions occur, 
including those involving th e reaction intermediates. 
Among the above-mentioned catalyst supports, some will be briefly mentioned, 
as they are used in later chapters of this work. Is the case of pillared clays (PILCs in 
short), which is one of the families of  microporous solids developed by Molecular 
Engineering that have been more studied in  recent years, because of their particular Chapter 1. Introduction   
 14properties and structures (with tunable pore si ze), as well as the abundance and low cost 
of natural clay minerals. Besides, they lead to active and stable so lids in aqueous media, 
usually being very stable against leaching [100]. The PILCs synthe sis procedure can be 
divided into three main steps: i) preparat ion of polyoxocations by careful hydrolysis of 
certain multivalent cations, which under appr opriate conditions gi ve rise to cationic 
polymeric species, ii) ionic exchange of th e original charge-compensating cations of 
swellable smectite clays by the polyoxocations be fore synthesized, this exchange giving 
rise to the so called “intercalated clays”, and iii) stabilisation of th e intercalated clays by 
calcination at relatively high temperat ures, which transform the metastable 
polyoxocations into “pillars”, stable metallic  clusters, close to oxi-hydroxidic phases, 
which maintain the layers of the clays sepa rated to a long distance [101], thus able to 
accommodate large molecules susceptible to undergo chemical transformations. These 
solids are called “pillared cl ays”, showing a bidimensi onal microporous network of 
molecular dimensions, with the pillars occ upying the interlayer space defined by the 
clay layers. The number and size of the pill ars in the interlayer region are responsible 
for the pore parameters of the pillared clay structure (see Figure 1.3) [102]. 
 
 
Fig. 1.3 – Pillared clays synthesis. 
 
Recently, Feng and co-workers [99, 103] synthesized clay-based Fe 
nanocomposites by the so-called pillaring tech nique and used them as heterogeneous 
catalysts for the photo-Fenton discoloratio n and mineralization of azo-dyes. Their 
results clearly indicate that the solids are promising photo catalysts, but the use of light 
increases the costs of the overall process as compared to dark Fenton oxidation. Chapter 1. Introduction   
 15However, in their conditions the oxidation is much faster, which is also important to be 
taken into account in economical analysis. 
On the other hand, activated carbon is a member of a family of carbons ranging 
from carbon blacks to nuclear graphite, from  carbon fibers and composites to electrode 
graphite, and many more [104]. Classical activated carbons are cheap materials 
prepared from very different raw precursors , but are heterogeneous solids with variable 
composition, depending on the raw material  used. On the contrary, carbon aerogels 
(also used in this work, chapter 6) offe r purity, homogeneity and controlled porosity, 
but are however more expensive because th e synthesis method needs very specific 
equipment, such as the supercritical drying.  Carbon aerogels have two main advantages 
over other carbon supports: i) their structure and pore te xture can be designed at 
nanometer scale and ii) they can be prepared  in the form of monoliths, beads, powders 
or thin films [105]. 
 
1.6.3 Photo-Fenton’s Reagent (H 2O2/Fe2+/UV) 
 
The photo-Fenton reaction is also well- known in the literature [58,106,107], 
which is an efficient and inexpensive met hod for wastewater and soil treatment [108-
112]. Photo-Fenton is known to be able to im prove the efficiency of dark Fenton or 
Fenton-like reagents, respectively, by means of  the interaction of radiation (UV or Vis) 
with Fenton’s reagent [69,70,113, 114]. With light, the rate of HO• formation is 
increased by photoreactions involving H 2O2 (λ < 360 nm) and/or Fe (III) (Eqs. (1.12)-
(1.14)) that produce HO• directly or regenerate Fe(II),  which can in turn yield more 
radicals through reaction (1.1)  [115]: 
 
•⎯→⎯ HO OHhv22 2         ( 1 . 1 2 )  
• + − ++ ⎯→⎯ HO Fe OH Fehv 2 3) (       ( 1 . 1 3 )  
) ( )(2 3Ligand OrganicLL Fe L Fehv= + ⎯→⎯• + − +    (1.14) 
 
This process has been suggested to be  feasible and promising to remove 
pollutants from natural and industrial wate rs and increase the biodegradability of 
wastewaters, being used as a pre-treatment  method to decrease the toxicity of water 
[47,116-118]. However, artificial UV/UV–vi s light source was employed in most Chapter 1. Introduction   
 16studies, which is uneconomical for practical applications. Indeed, the solar irradiation 
offers an inexpensive and environmental frie ndly source of energy, and therefore will 
be particularly advantageous if applied to wastewater treatment processes, particularly 
in countries like Portugal where an important  part of the year has a large quantity of 
hours of sun. Some innovative applications dealing with photo-Fenton’s reagent include 
oxalate as a ligand of iron ions [119]. 
 
1.6.4 H2O2/UV Reagent 
 
This AOP is based on the formation of HO• radicals by means of the photolysis 
of hydrogen peroxide and the s ubsequent propagation reactions: 
 
•→ + HO hv OH 22 2         ( 1 . 1 5 )  
 
The molar absorptivity of hydrogen peroxide at 253.7 nm is low, about             
20 M−1 cm−1, and HO• radicals are formed per incide nt photon absorbed [36]. At this 
wavelength, the rate of photolysis of a queous hydrogen peroxide is about 50 times 
slower than ozone. This technique require s therefore a relatively high dose of H 2O2 
and/or a much longer UV-exposure time than, for example, the UV/O 3 process. On the 
other hand, the rate of photolysis of hydr ogen peroxide has been found to be pH 
dependent and increases when more alkaline  conditions are used, because, at 253.7 nm, 
peroxide anions HO 2− may be formed, which display a higher molar absorptivity than 
hydrogen peroxide, 240 M−1 cm−1 [36].  
 
References 
 
 1. Inglezakis, V. J.; Poulopoulos. S. G. Adso rption, ion exchange and catalysis - Design of 
operations and environmental applications. Elsevier B. V. 2006 . 
 2. EC Directive 2000/60/EC of the European parliament and of the council of october 23. 
Establishing a framework for community action in the field of water policy 2000 . 
 3. Rocha, E. O.; Sousa, M. J.; Ferreira. M. L. Como evoluíram os clusters do têxtil e 
vestuário em portugal durante o período de desmantelamento do acordo multi-fibras 
(1995-2005)?. Universidade Católica Portuguesa 2006 . Chapter 1. Introduction   
 17 4. Orfão, J. J. M.; Silva, A. I. M.; Pereira, J.  C. V.; Barata, S. A.; Fonseca, I. M.; Faria, P. C. 
C.; Pereira. M. F. R. Adsorption of a r eactive dye on chemically modified activated 
carbons-Influence of pH. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 2006 , 296, 480. 
 5. Indústria Têxtil e do Vestuário em Po rtugal - Informe Universidade do Minho – 2008 . 
(https://repositorium.sdum.uminho.pt/b itstream/1822/943/8/AnexosIV.pdf)  
 6. Ribeiro da Cunha Figueiredo. S. A. Re moção de corantes têxteis em solução aquosa 
usando materiais naturais contendo quitina. PhD Dissertation, FEUP 2002 . 
 7. Vasconcelos, E. Análise da indústria têx til e do vestuário Estudo EDIT VALUE Empresa 
Júnior N.º 02 2006 . 
 8. Hidrorumo, Hidro4, Procesl, Prosiste mas, (Rev. 1 – 00/01/15). Plano de Bacia 
Hidrografica do Rio ave, 1ª Fase e diagnostic o da situação de referencia, vol. III. 
 9. Othmer, K. Dyes and dye intermediates. Encyclopedia of chemical technology. 4th 
Edition. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 1993 , V. 8. 
 10. Synthetic organic chemicals United States production and sales, 1991,’’ USITC 
Publication 2607, 1993 . 
 11. Chemical economic handbook marketing r esearch report—dyes,’’ SRI International, 
2000 . 
12. Kulkarni, S. V.; Blackwell, C. D.; Blackard, A. L.; Stackhouse, C. W.; Alexander, M. W. 
U.S. Environmental protection agency, Air a nd energy engineering research laboratory, 
‘‘Project summary textile dyes and dyeing e quipment: classification, properties, and 
environmental aspects’’ EPA/600/S2–85/010 1985 . 
13. Carliell, C. M.; Barclay, S. J.; Naidoo, N.; Buckely, C. A.; Mulholland, D. A.; Senior. E. 
Microbial decolourisation of reactive azo dye under anaerobic conditions. Water S.A. 
1995 , 21, 61. 
14. Carliell, C. M., Barclay, S. J., Shaw, C., Wh eatley, A. D.; Buckley, C. A. The effect of 
salts used in textile dyeing on microbial  decolourisation of a reactive azo dye. 
Environmental Technology 1998 , 19, 1133. 
15. Rafols, C.; Barcelo. D. Determination of  mono- and disulphonated azo dyes by liquid 
chromatography–atmospheric pressure ionization mass spectrometry. Journal of Chromatography A 1997 , 777, 177. 
16. Vandevivere, P. C.; Bianchi, R.; Verstraete. W. Treatment and reuse of wastewater from 
the textile wet-processing industry: review of  emerging technologies. Journal of Chemical 
Technology and Biotechnology 1998 , 72, 289. 
17. Stylidi, M.; Kondarides, D. I. ; Verykios. X. E. Pathways of solar light-induced 
photocatalytic degradation of azo dyes in aqueous TiO
2 suspensions. Applied Catalysis B: 
Environmental 2003 , 40, 271. Chapter 1. Introduction   
 1818. Gomes da Silva, C.; Faria. J. L. Degrad ation of an azo dye in aqueous solution by UV 
irradiation. Journal of Photochemi stry and Photobiology A: Chemistry 2003 , 155, 133. 
19. Brown, M. S.; De Vito. S. C. Predicting azo dye toxicity. Critical Reviews in 
Environmental Science and Technology 1993 , 23, 249. 
20. Forgacs, E.; Cserhati, T.; Oros. G. Removal of synthetic dyes from wastewaters: a review. 
Environment International 2004 , 30, 953. 
21. Méndez-Paz, D.; Omil, F.; Lema. J. M. Anaerobic treatment of azo dye Acid Orange 7 
under fed-batch and continuous conditions. Water Research 2005 , 39, 771. 
22. Oakes, J.; Gratton. P. J. Kinetic investig ations of azo dye oxidation in aqueous media. 
Chemical Society Perkin Transactions 1998 , 2, 1857. 
23. Chen, F.; Xie, Y.; Zhao, J.; Lu, G. Photo catalytic degradation of dyes on a magnetically 
separated photocatalyst under visible and UV irradiation. Chemosphere 2001 , 44, 1159. 
24. Conçalves, M. S. T.; Oliveira-Campos, A. M. F.; Pinto, M. M. S.; Plasencia, P. M. S.; 
Queiroz, M. J. R. P. Photochemical treatment of solutions of azo dyes containing TiO 2. 
Chemosphere 1999 , 39, 781. 
25. Vinodgopal, K.; Wynkoop, D.; Kamat. P. Environmental photochemistry on 
semiconductor surfaces: photosensitized degrada tion of a textile azo dye, acid orange 7, 
on TiO 2 particles using visible light. E nvironmental Science and Technology 1996 , 30, 
1660. 
26. Bauer, C.; Jacques, P.; Kalt. A. Photooxidation of an azo dye induced by visible light 
incident on the surface of TiO 2. Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: 
Chemistry 2001 , 140, 87. 
27. Paradowska. M. A. Tailored chemical oxidation techniques for the abatement of bio-toxic 
organic wastewater pollutants: An experimental study. Dissertation Escola Tècnica Superior de Enginyeria Química Departament d’Enginyeria Química Universitat Rovira i 
Virgili Tarragona. 2004 . 
28. Brock, T. D.; Madigan, M. T. Biology  of microorganisms. Prentice Hall: Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ 1988 . 
29. Abderrazik, N. B.; Al-Momani, F.; Sans, C.; Esplugas, S. Combined Photo-Fenton with 
biological treatment. Afinidad 2002 , 59, 498. 
30. Bertanza, G.; Collivignarelli, C.; Pedrazzani.  R. The role of chemical oxidation in 
combined chemical-physical and biological processes: experiences of industrial 
wastewater treatment. Water Science and Technology 2001 , 44, 109. 
31. Santoleri. J. J. Liquid-injection inci nerators, Standard Handbook of Hazardous Waste 
Treatment and Disposal, H.M. Freeman (ed.), McGraw-Hill, New York, 1988 . 
32. Matatov, M. Y. I.; Sheintuch. M. Catalytic  abatement of water pollutants. Industrial and 
Engineering Chemistry Research 1998 , 37, 309. Chapter 1. Introduction   
 1933. Voice, T. C. Activated carbon adsorpti on, Standard Handbook of Hazardous Waste 
Treatment and Disposal, H.M. Freeman (ed), McGraw-Hill, New York, 1988 . 
34. Irvine, R. L.; Wilderer. P. A. Aerobic processes, Standard Handbook of Hazardous Waste 
Treatment and Disposal, H.M. Freeman (ed), McGraw-Hill, New York, 1988 . 
35. Yue, P.L. Oxidation reactors for water and wastewater treatment. Water Science 
and Technology 1997 , 35, 189. 
36. Glaze, W. H.; Kang, J. W.; Chapin. D. H.  The chemistry of water treatment processes 
involving ozone, hydrogen peroxide and u ltraviolet radiation, Ozone Science and 
Engineering 1987 , 9, 335. 
37. Andreozzi, R.; Caprio, V.; Insola, A.; Ma rtota, R. Advanced oxidation processes (AOP) 
for water purification and recovery. Catalysis Today 1999 , 53, 51. 
38. Benítez, F. J.; Beltrán-Heredia, J.; Acero,  J. L.; Pinilla. M. L. Ozonation kinetics of 
phenolic acids present in industrial wastew aters from olive oil mills. Industrial and 
Engineering Chemistry Research 1997 , 36, 638. 
39. Benítez, F. J.; Beltrán-Heredia, J.; González, T.; Real. F. Photooxidation of carbofuran by 
a polychromatic UV irradiation without and with hydrogen peroxide. Industrial and 
Engineering Chemistry Research 1995 , 34, 4099. 
40. Casero, I.; Sicilia, D.; Rubio, S.; Perez-Be ndito, D. Chemical degradation of aromatic 
amines by Fenton’s reagent. Water Research 1997 , 31, 1985. 
41. Guittoneau, S. ; De Laat, J. ; Dore, M.; Duguet, J. P.; Bonnel. C. Comparative study of 
the photodegradation of aromatic compounds in water by UV and H 2O2/UV. 
Environmental Technology Letters 1988 , 9, 1115. 
42. Hoigne, J.; Bader. H. Rate constants of reactions of ozone with organic and inorganic 
compounds in water—I. Water Research 1983 , 17, 173. 
43. Hoigne, J.; Bader. H. Rate constants of reactions of ozone with organic and inorganic 
compounds in water—II. Water Research 1983 , 17, 185. 
44. Legrini, O.; Oliveros, E.; Braun, A. M. Photochemical processes for water treatment. 
Chemical Reviews 1993 , 93, 671. 
45. Masten, S. J.; Davies, S. H. The use of ozonation to degrade organic contaminants in 
wastewaters. Environmental Science and Technology 1994 , 28, 180. 
46. Meunier, B.; Sorokin, A. Oxidation of pollutants catalyzed by metallophthalocyanines. 
Accounts of Chemical Research 1997 , 30, 470. 
47. Miller, R. M.; Singer, G. M.; Rosen, J.  D.; Bartha, R. Sequential degradation of 
chlorophenols by photolytic and microbial treatment, Environmental Science and 
Technology 1988 , 22, 1215. 
48. Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 6th ed., Wiley, New York, 1998 . Chapter 1. Introduction   
 2049. Braun, A. M.; Jacob, L.; Oliveros, E.; Do Nascimento, C. A. O. Up-scaling 
photochemical reactions, in: D. Volman, G.S.  Hammond, D.C. Neckers (Eds.), Advances 
in Photochemistry, vol. 18, Wiley, New York, 1993 . 
50. Glaze, W. H.; Kang, J. W. Advanced oxida tion processes. Description of a kinetic model 
for the oxidation of hazardous materials in aqueous media with ozone and hydrogen 
peroxide in a semi-batch reactor. Indus trial and Engineering Chemistry Research 1989 , 
28, 1573. 
51. Haag, W. R.; Yao, C. C. D. Rate constant s for reaction of hydroxyl radicals with several 
drinking water contaminants. Envi ronmental Science and Technology 1992 , 26, 1005. 
52. Peyton, G. R.; Huang, F. R.; Burleson, J. L.; Glaze, W. H. Destruction of pollutants in 
water with ozone in combination with ultrav iolet radiation. 1. General principles and 
oxidation of tetrachloroethylene. E nvironmental Science and Technology 1982 , 16, 448. 
53. Bigda, R. J. Consider Fenton chemistry fo r wastewater treatment. Chemical Engineering 
and Processing 1995 , 91, 62. 
54. Elizardo, K. Fighting pollution with hydrogen peroxide. Pollution Engineering 1991 , 106. 
55. Fenton, H. J. H. Oxidation of tartaric aci d in presence of iron. Journal of the Chemical 
Society 1894 , 65, 899. 
56. Haber F.; Weiss J. The catalytic deco mposition of hydrogen per oxide by iron salts. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society London 1934 , 147, 332. 
57. Lücking, F.; Köser, H.; Jank, M.; Ritter, A. Iron powder, graphite and activated carbon as 
catalysts for the oxidation of 4-chlorophenol w ith hydrogen peroxide in aqueous solution. 
Water Research 1998 , 32, 2607. 
58. Safarzadeh-Amiri, A.; Bolten, J.R.; Cater,  S.R. The use of iron in advanced oxidation 
processes. Journal of Advanced Oxidation Technologies 1996 , 1, 18. 
59. Walling, C. Fenton’s reagent revis ited. Accounts of Chemical Research  1975 , 8, 125. 
60. Barbeni, M.; Minero, C.; Pelizzetti, E.; Borgarello, E.; Serpone, N. Chemical degradation 
of chlorophenols with Fenton’s reagent. Chemosphere 1987 , 16, 2225. 
61. Bishop, D. F.; Stern, G.; Fleishman, M.; Marshall, L. S. Hydrogen peroxide catalytic 
oxidation of refractory organics in municipa l waste waters. Journal of the American 
Chemical Society Division Waste Water Chemical 1964 , 4, 85. 
62. Gau, S. H.; Chang, F. H. Improved Fent on method to remove recalcitrant organics in 
landfill leachate. Water Science and Technology 1996 , 34, 455. 
63. Lipczynska-Kochany, E.; Sprah, G.; Harm s, S. Influence of some groundwater and 
surface waters constituents on the degradation of  4-chlorophenol by the Fenton reaction. 
Chemosphere 1995 , 30, 9. 
64. Lipczynska-Kochany, E.; Bolton, J. R. Fl ash photolysis/HPLC applications. 2. Direct 
photolysis vs hydrogen peroxide mediated photodegradation of 4-chlorophenol as studied Chapter 1. Introduction   
 21by a flash photolysis/HPLC technique. Environmental Science and Technology 1992 , 26, 
259. 
65. Lipczynska-Kochany, E. Degradation of aqueous nitrophenols and nitrobenzene by means 
of Fenton reaction, Chemosphere 1991 , 22, 529. 
66. Miller, C. M.; Valentine, R. L.; Roehl, M. E.; Alvarez, P. P. J. Chemical and 
microbiological assessment of pendimethalin-c ontaminated soil after treatment with 
Fenton’s reagent. Water Research 1996 , 30, 2579. 
67. Moza, P. N.; Fytianos, K.; Samanidou, V.; Korte, F. Photodecomposition of 
chlorophenols in aqueous medium in the presence of hydrogen peroxide. Bulletin of 
environmental contamination and toxicology 1988 , 41, 678. 
68. Murphy, A. P.; Boegli, W. J.; Price, M. K.; Moody, C. D. A Fenton-like reaction to 
neutralize formaldehyde waste solutions . Environmental Science and Technology 1989 , 
23, 166. 
69. Pignatello, J. J. Dark and photoassisted Fe3+-catalyzed degradation of chlorophenoxy 
herbicides by hydrogen peroxide. En vironmental Science and Technology 1992 , 26, 944. 
70. Spacek, W.; Bauer, R.; Heisler, G. Heterogeneous and homogeneous wastewater 
treatment—comparison between  photodegradation with TiO 2 and the photo-Fenton 
reaction. Chemosphere 1995 , 30, 477. 
71. Barb, W. G.; Baxendale, J. H.; George, P.; Ha rgrave, K. R. Reactions  of ferrous and ferric 
ions with hydrogen peroxide. Part I.—The ferrous ion reaction. Transactions of the 
Faraday Society 1951 , 97, 462.  
72. Barb, W. G.; Baxendale, J. H.; George, P.; Ha rgrave, K. R. Reactions  of ferrous and ferric 
ions with hydrogen peroxide. Part II.—The ferric ion reaction. Transactions of the 
Faraday Society 1951 , 97, 591.  
73. Walling, C.; Goosen, A. Mechanism of the ferric ion catalyzed decomposition of 
hydrogen peroxide. Effect of organic substrates. Journal of the American Chemical Society 1973 , 95, 2987.  
74. Abbot, J.; Brown, D. G. Kinetics of Iron-catalyzed decomposition of hydrogen peroxide 
in alkaline solution. Internationa l Journal of Chemical Kinetics 1990 , 22, 963.  
75. Millero, F. J.; Sotolongo, S.; Stade, D. J.; Ve ga, C. A. Effect of ionic interactions on the 
oxidation of Fe(II) with H
2O2 in aqueous solutions. Journal of Solution Chemistry 1991 , 
20, 1079.  
76. Voelker, B. M.; Sulzberger, B. Effects of  Fulvic Acid on Fe(II) Oxidation by hydrogen 
peroxide. Environmental Science and Technology 1996 , 30, 1106.  
77. De Laat, J.; Gallard, H. Catalytic Deco mposition of hydrogen peroxide by Fe(III) in 
homogeneous aqueous solution: Mechanism and kinetic modeling. Environmental 
Science and Technology 1999 , 33, 2726. Chapter 1. Introduction   
 2278. Kakarla, P. K.; Andrews, T.; Greenberg, R.  S.; Zervas, D. S. Modified Fenton's processes 
for effective in-situ chemical oxidation - La boratory and field evaluation. Remediation 
Journal 2002 , 12, 23. 
79. Koubek, E. Photochemically induced oxi dation of refractory organics with hydrogen 
peroxide. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Process Design and Development 1975 , 
14, 348.  
80. Watts, R. J.; Bottenberg, B. C.; Hess, T. F.; Jensen, M. D.; Teel, A. L. Role of reductants 
in the enhanced desorption and transformati on of chloroaliphatic compounds by modified 
Fenton's reactions. Environmen tal Science and Technology 1999 , 33, 3432. 
81. Rivas, F. J.; Navarrete, V.; Beltran, F. J.; Garcia-Araya. J. F. Simazine Fenton’s oxidation 
in a continuous reactor. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2004 , 48, 249. 
82. Neyens, E.; Baeyens, J. A review of classic Fenton’s peroxidation as an advanced 
oxidation technique. Journal of Hazardous Materials 2003 , 98, 33.  
83. Neyens, E.; Baeyens, J.; Weemaes, M.; de Heyder, B. Pilot-scale peroxidation (H 2O2) of 
sewage sludge. Journal of Hazardous Materials 2003 , 98, 91. 
84. Guo, J.; Al-Dahhan, M. Catalytic wet oxidation of phenol by hydrogen peroxide over 
pillared clay catalyst. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 2003 , 42, 2450. 
85. Southworth, B. A.; Voelker, B. M. Hydr oxyl radical production via the Photo-Fenton 
reaction in the presence of fulvic acid. Environmental Science and Technology 2003 , 37, 
1130. 
86. De Laat, J. ; Le, T. G. Effects of chlori de ions on the iron(III)-catalyzed decomposition of 
hydrogen peroxide and on the efficiency of the Fenton-like oxidation process. Applied 
Catalysis B: Environmental 2006 , 66, 137. 
87. Yoon, J.; Lee, Y.; Kim, S. Technol. Inves tigation of the reaction pathway of OH radicals 
produced by Fenton oxidation in the conditions of wastewater treatment. Water Science 
and Technology 2001 , 44, 15. 
88. Rivas, F. J.; Beltran, F. J.; Gimeno, O.; Fr ades, J. Treatment of o live oil mill wastewater 
by Fenton's reagent. Journal of  Agricultural and Food Chemistry 2001 , 49, 1873. 
89. EEC List of Council Directives 76/4647. European Economic Community. Brussels, 
Belgium, 1982 . 
90. Gemeay, A. H.; Mansour, I. A.; El-Sharkawy,  R. G.; Zaki, A. B. Kinetics and mechanism 
of the heterogeneous catalyzed oxidative de gradation of indigo carmine Journal of 
Molecular Catalysis A: Chemical 2003 , 193, 109. 
91. Ishtchenko, V. V.; Huddersman, K. D.; V itkovskaya, R. F. Part 1. Production of a 
modified PAN fibrous catalyst and its op timization towards the decomposition of 
hydrogen peroxide. Applied Catalysis A: General 2003 , 242, 123. Chapter 1. Introduction   
 2392. Letaief, S.; Casal, B.; Aranda, P.; Martín -Luengo, M. A.; Ruiz-Hitzky, E. Fe-containing 
pillared clays as catalysts for phenol hydroxylation. Applied Clay Science 2003 , 22, 263. 
93. Tachiev, G.; Roth, J. A.; Bowers, A. R.  Kinetics of hydrogen peroxide decomposition 
with complexed and free iron catalysts. Inte rnational Journal of Chemical Kinetics 2000 , 
32, 24. 
94. Carriazo, J. G.; Guelou, E.; Barrault, J.; Tatibouët, J. M.; Moreno, S. Catalytic wet 
peroxide oxidation of phenol over Al–Cu or Al –Fe modified clays Applied Clay Science 
2003 , 22, 303. 
95. Neamtu, M.; Zaharia, C.; Catrinescu, C.; Yediler, A.; Macoveanu, M.; Kettrup, A. Fe-
exchanged Y zeolite as catalyst for wet per oxide oxidation of reactive azo dye Procion 
Marine H-EXL. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2004 , 48, 287. 
96. Maurya, M. R.; Titinchi, S. J. J.; Chand, S. Oxidation of phenol with H 2O2 catalysed by 
Cr(III), Fe(III) or Bi(III) N,N’-bis(salicylidene) diethylenetriamine (H 2saldien) complexes 
Encapsulated in zeolite-Y. Journal of Molecular Catalysis A Chemical 2003 , 193, 165. 
97. Zazo, J. A.; Casas, J. A.; Mohedano, A. F.; Rodriguez, J. J. Catalytic wet peroxide 
oxidation of phenol with a Fe/Active carbon cat alyst. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 
2006 , 65, 261. 
98. Dantas, T. L. .P.; Mendonça, V. P.; Jose, H. J.; Rodrigues, A. E.; Moreira. R. F. P. M. 
Treatment of textile wastewater by heter ogeneous Fenton process using a new composite 
Fe2O3/carbon. Chemical Engineering Journal 2006 , 118, 77. 
99. Feng, J.; Hu, X.; Yue, P. L.; Zhu, H. Y.; Lu. G. Q. A novel laponite clay-based Fe 
nanocomposite and its photo-catalytic activity in  photo-assisted degradation of Orange II. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2003 , 58, 679. 
100. Catrinescu, C.; Neamtu, M.; Miehe-Brendle, J.; Garcia, M. G.; Kettrup, A. Catalytic wet 
oxidation of reactive azo dyes over iron-contai nign pillared beidellite catalyst. In: M.A. 
Vicente, M. Suarez, V. Rives, M. J. Sanchez (Eds.), Materiales Arcillosos: de la Geologia 
a las Nuevas Aplicaciones, Salamanca, 2006 , 87. 
101. Belver, C.; Banares-Munoz, M. A.; Vicente,  M. A. Fe-saponite p illared and impregnated 
catalysts: I. Preparation and characterization. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2004 , 
50, 101. 
102. Gil, A.; Gandia, L. M.; Vicente, M. A. Recent advances in the synthesis and catalytic 
applications of pillared clays. Cataly sis Reviews - Science and Engineering 2000 , 42, 
145. 
103. Sum, O. S. N.; Feng, J.; Hu, X.; Yue, P.L. Pillared laponite clay-based Fe nanocomposites 
as heterogeneous catalysts for photo-Fenton degradation of acid black 1. Chemical 
Engineering Science 2004 , 59, 5269. 
104. Marsh, H.; Rodriguez-Reinoso, F. Activated carbon. Elsevier B. V. 2006 .  Chapter 1. Introduction   
 24105. Padilla-Serrano, M. N.; Maldonado-Hodar, F. J.; Moreno-Castilla, C. Influence of Pt 
particle size on catalytic combustion of xylenes on carbon aerogel-supported Pt catalysts. 
Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2005 , 61, 253. 
106. Kiwi, J.; Pulgarin, C.; Peringer, P. Bene ficial effects of homogeneous photo-Fenton pre-
treatment upon the biodegradation of anthraqui none sulfonate in wastewater treatment. 
Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 1993 , 3, 85. 
107. Ruppert, G.; Bauer, R.; Heisler, G. J.  The photo-Fenton reaction - an effective 
photochemical wastewater treatment process. Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry 1993 , 73, 75. 
108. Bauer, R.; Fallmann, H. The photo-Fenton oxidation - a cheap and efficient wastewater 
treatment method. Research on Chemical Intermediates 1997 , 23, 341. 
109. Chen, R.; Pignatello, J. J. Role of quinon e intermediates as electro n shuttles in Fenton and 
photoassisted Fenton oxidations of aroma tic compounds. Environmental Science and 
Technology 1997 , 31, 2399. 
110. Krutzler, T.; Fallmann, H.; Maletzky, P.; Bauer, R.; Malato, S.; Blanco, J. Solar driven 
degradation of 4-chlorophenol. Catalysis Today 1999 , 54, 321. 
111. Ruppert, G.; Bauer, R.; Heisler, G. J. UV-O
3, UV-H 2O2, UV-TiO 2 and the photo-Fenton 
reaction - comparison of AOP’s for wastewater treatment. Chemosphere 1994 , 28, 1447. 
112. Sauleda, R.; Brillas, E. Mineralization of anliline and 4-chlorophenol in acidic solution by 
ozonation catalysed with Fe2+ and UVA light. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2001 , 
29, 135. 
113. Hislop, K. A.; Bolton, J. R. The photochemical generation of hydroxyl radicals in the 
UV-Vis/ferrioxalate/H 2O2 system. Environmental Science and Technology 1999 , 33, 
3119. 
114. Sundstrom, D. W.; Weir, B. A.; Klei, H. A. Destruction of aromatic pollutants by UV 
light catalysed oxidation with hydr ogen peroxide. Environmental Progress 1989 , 8, 6. 
115. Pignatello, J. J.; Liu, D.; Huston, P. Evidence for an additional oxidant in the 
photoassisted fenton reaction.  Envi ronmental Science and Technology 1999 , 33, 1832. 
116. Fallmann, H.; Krutzler, T.; Bauer, R.; Ma lato, S.; Blanco, J. Applicability of the photo-
Fenton method for treating water cont aining pesticides, Catalysis Today 1999 , 54, 309. 
117. Fallmann, H.; Krutzler, T.; Bauer, R.; Mala to, S.; Blanco, J. Detoxification of pesticide 
containing effluents by solar driven Fenton process. Z. Phys. Chem. 1999 , 213, 67. 
118. Maletzky, P.; Bauer, R. The photo-Fenton method—degradation of nitrogen containing 
organic compounds. Chemosphere 1998 , 37, 899. 
119. Aplin, R.; Freitz, A. J. Effect of Fe(II)-ligand properties on effectiveness of modified 
photo-Fenton processes. Water Science and Technology 2001 , 44, 23. 
    
  
   
 
      
PART II 
EXPERIMENTAL SECTION     
  Chapter 2. Experimental Section 
 27CHAPTER 2 – EXPERIMENTAL SECTION  
 
2.1 Materials 
 
The dye used in all the experi ments was Orange II (OII - C 16H11N2NaO 4S), also 
known as acid orange 7, from Fluka p.a.  For oxidation runs in homogeneous phase, 
solid iron sulphate (FeSO 4.7H 2O, from Panreac) was used. As oxidant, hydrogen 
peroxide solution (30% w/w,  from Merck) was always employed (i.e., in either 
homogeneous or heteroge neous Fenton process). 
The initial pH of the solutions was adjusted through addition of 1 M NaOH 
(prepared with NaOH p.a. from  Merck, 99 %) or 0.1 M H 2SO 4 (prepared with H 2SO 4 
95-97 % from p.a. Merck) solutions. 
 For the total organic carbon (TOC) analysis of samples taken along reaction 
time in batch experiments, the Fenton reaction was stopped by adding excess Na 2SO 3 
p.a. from Riedel-de Haen, 96 %.  
 
2.2 Oxidation Experiments 
 
Oxidations experiments were performed either in a batch or in a continuous 
mode, both using stirred reac tors, as described below. 
 
2.2.1 Batch Reactor 
 
Chemical oxidation of an aqueous so lution of the azo dye  Orange II was 
conducted in a stirred jacketed  glass batch reactor, bei ng the temperature controlled 
through a Huber thermostatic bath (Polystat CC1 unit) – cf. Fig. 2.1. The reactor (0.3 or 
1.5 L capacity) was equipped with a Falc F 30ST magnetic stirrer fo r continuous stirring 
of the reaction mixture (230 rpm), and a thermocouple was used to assess the temperature in the liquid phase. The ab sorbance and the pH were continuously 
monitored, using a Philips PU8625 UV/VIS spectrophotometer and a pH-meter from 
EDT instruments (RE 357 TX  electrode), respectivel y. For on-line absorbance 
measurements (at λ
max = 486 nm – cf. section 2.3), a flow-through cell was used, being 
the recirculation of  the solution made with the help of a Watson-Marlow 5055 Chapter 2. Experimental Section 
 28peristaltic pump, at very high flow rate. Data acquisition (at a frequency of 0.3 s-1), with 
displaying and saving capabi lities in a PC, was perfor med using a home-designed 
interface with the software Labview 5.0, from National Instruments. 
The assembly shown in Fig. 2.1 allows an almost in-situ monitoring of the dye 
concentration in the reaction mixture, wh ich, coupled with a high data frequency 
acquisition, provided a good pers pective of the concentration history. However, in most 
figures not all the data are includ ed, for a better visualization. 
 
 
Fig. 2.1 – Experimental  set-up used in the batch reactor runs. 
 
In the experiments, the dye solution wa s first prepared, and the required volume 
put in the reactor. The dye was used as rece ived. In all the runs the initial pH was 
adjusted through addition of NaOH or H 2SO 4 solutions. Then, and depending if the 
runs concern homogenous (chapters 3 and 4) or  heterogeneous (chapters 5-7) catalysis, 
iron sulphate or powder solid catalyst was added, respectively. This was followed by 
the hydrogen peroxide solution addition (initial instant of the runs – t = 0), with 
intermediate pH adjustment when necessary.   
2.2.2 Continuous Reactor 
 
Experiments were also conducted in a j acketed continuous stirred tank reactor 
(CSTR), with 0.92 L capacity. The reactor is  provided with the same magnetic stirrer 
and thermostatic bath as the batch one, and the pH and temperature were also Chapter 2. Experimental Section 
 29continuously monitored, as above. Figure 2.2 shows a sketch of the experimental set-
up. 
 
 
Fig. 2.2 – Experimental set-up used in the CSTR runs. 
 
For operation of the CSTR, the Watson- Marlow 5055 peristaltic pump was used 
to feed two streams: one acidic containing th e dye solution with the iron catalyst, and 
another with the H 2O2 solution. Both flasks are placed within the thermostatic bath and 
the corresponding tubes thermally isolated, fo r a better control of temperature. The 
flow rates were carefully measured so that  the concentration of each species, at the 
reactor inlet, was known. The exit stream  was flowed through the spectrophotometer 
until a steady dye concentration was measured.  
 
2.3 Analytical Techniques  
 
The oxidation degree of the Fenton’s pr ocess was evaluated in terms of: i) 
decrease of dye concentration (or simply color), and ii) minera lization degree, as 
described in this section. 
Figure 2.3 illustrates the azo dye Orange  II structure, which is basically 
consisted by an azo (N=N) linkage, a be nzene ring and a napht halene ring. Its 
concentration was obtained from  a calibration curve (Fig. 2.4) at the characteristic dye 
wavelength (486 nm, as shown in Fig. 2.5), because this corresponds  to the absorption 
maximum and in this range interference by oxidation products does not exist ( cf. 
chapter 5, section 5.3.2.1). For this reason, in  most chapters the te rms discolorisation or 
OII removal will be indifferently used. 
 Chapter 2. Experimental Section 
 30
 
Fig. 2.3 – Chemical structure of the OII molecule. 
 
 The calibration curve shown in Fig. 2. 4 is a typical one, which was up-dated 
whenever necessary (usually each 2 mont hs). A good linear relationship between dye 
concentration ( COII) and absorvance at 486 nm is noticed, for COII values up to 1×10-4 
M. Absorbances were monitored in a Philips PU8625 UV/VIS spectrophotometer.  
0.0 2.0x10-54.0x10-56.0x10-58.0x10-51.0x10-40.00.51.01.50.0 2.0x10-44.0x10-46.0x10-48.0x10-41.0x10-30.00.51.01.52.02.53.0Absorbance
COII (M)Absorbance
COII (M)
 
Fig. 2.4 – Typical calibration curve for OII qu antification at 486 nm. Using plastic cell. 
 
Figure 2.5 shows the UV-Vis spectrum recorded for the original dye solution, 
which is the expected one [1,2], with th e characteristic absorb ance peaks at around 235, 
315 and 486 nm.  Chapter 2. Experimental Section 
 31
 
Fig. 2.5 – UV-Vis spectrum of an OII solution (concentration 5×10-5 M). Using quartz cell. 
 
Degradation of OII (or discoloration of th e dye solution) does not mean that it 
has been completely oxidized into CO 2 and H 2O, as reaction intermediates can be 
formed during oxidation. Therefore, it is important to evaluate the mineralization 
degree. So, total organic carbon (TOC) was measured by catalytic  oxidation followed 
by IR spectrometry for CO 2 quantification using a Shim adzu 5000A instrument, model 
TOC-5000 CE, equipped with an automatic samp le injector. TOC wa s calculated as the 
difference between the total carbon (TC) and inorganic carbon (IC) in the liquid 
sample. TOC values represent the average of at least two measurements; in most cases 
each sample was injected three times, which is validated by the apparatus only if the 
standard deviation is less than 3%. For such  analysis samples were withdrawn from the 
reactor at several times, and reaction was stopped by adding excess Na 2SO 3, which 
instantaneously consumes the rema ining hydrogen peroxide. When using 
heterogeneous catalysts, the sample was previously submitted to filtration (by means of 0.8 µm glass fibre paper) for separation of the catalyst from the liquid phase.
 
When performing heterogeneous experiment s, it is important to evaluate the 
amount of metal (iron) lost from the support. For that reason, the to tal Fe in the solution 
was determined is the same samples take n along the batch process using a UNICAM 
939/959 atomic absorption spectrophotometer. 
    
 Chapter 2. Experimental Section 
 322.4 Synthesis of Solid Catalysts 
 
In this work two main types of heterogeneous catalysts were employed: i) 
pillared clay-based ( cf. chapters 5 and 7) and carbon-based ( cf. chapter 6), which 
synthesis is described below. 
 
2.4.1 Pillared Clay-Based Catalysts 
 
Saponite clay (catalyst s upport) from Yunclillos (Toledo, Spain) was kindly 
supplied by TOLSA (Madrid, Spain). The frac tion with particle size smaller than 2 µm, 
obtained by dispersion in water and controlled decantation of the natural clay, was used 
for intercalation/pillaring.  Its chemical composition is give n in Table 2.1. It is a well 
ordered smectite with ba sal spacing of 14.4 Å, a BET specific area of 152 m2/g and a 
cation exchange capacity  of 0.9 meq/g.  
 
Table 2.1 –  Chemical composition of the natural clay, expressed in oxides form,  
and referred to water-free solid. 
Element SiO 2 MgO Al 2O3 Fe 2O3 TiO 2 Na 2O K 2O CaO 
wt. % 62.21 29.45 5.21 1.46 0.30 0.54 0.30 0.53 
 
 Saponite was intercalated with [Al 13O4(OH) 24(H2O)12]7+ polycations (in short, 
Al13), by using a standard procedure [3,4]. First, the Al 13 solution to be intercalated was 
obtained by careful hyd rolysis of an Al3+ solution, derived from AlCl 3⋅6H2O (Panreac, 
purissimum ), with 1M NaOH (Panreac, purissimum ), using a ratio -3 +OH /Al =2.2 , 
stirring vigorously to avoid lo cal increases of pH that may lead to the precipitation of 
aluminum hydroxide, and aging 24 h (final pH  = 4.1). After that, the solution was added 
to the saponite, employing an Al/clay rati o of 5 mmol/g clay. In order to favor 
intercalation, the clay had been swollen by preparing an aqueous suspension 12 hours 
before the addition of the intercalating solu tion. The new suspension was stirred for 24 
h, and then washed by centrifugation and dialys is until absence of chloride (evaluated 
by the Ag+ test). The solid obt ained was dried at 70 °C for 16 h, and then heated to 500 
ºC at a heating rate of 1 ºC/min under air at mosphere and maintained at this temperature 
for four hours. The solid obtained, designated as Al 13-500, was used as support for the 
preparation of the supported catalysts. Chapter 2. Experimental Section 
 33Impregnation of the support was carried out by means of the incipient wet 
impregnation method, by using four Fe-salts as precursors, namely Fe(II) acetate, Fe(II) oxalate, Fe(II) acetylacetonate and Fe(III) acetylacetonate. For each precursor, the amounts needed for obtaining a given amount (wt.  %) of iron in the final catalysts were 
dissolved in the minimum amount of the appr opriate solvent, wate r for the acetate and 
the oxalate, and acetone for bot h acetylacetonates. The first two salts were very soluble 
and a single impregnation step was needed, while five cycles were needed for both 
acetylacetonates because of their low solubi lity. After completing the impregnation, the 
solid was dried at 70 ºC for 16 h and then calcined at 500 °C following the calcination 
procedure described for Al
13-500, thus obtaining th e final catalysts.  
 
2.4.2 Carbon-Based Catalysts 
 
Two different carbon materials were used  as Fe-supports: an  activated carbon 
and a carbon aerogel. The activated carbon was prepared from olive stones by carbonization of the raw materi al at 1123 K for 15 min in N
2 flow (300 cm3/min), and 
activation at 1123 K in CO 2 flow (300 cm3/min) to 22% of burn-o ff. The synthesis of 
the carbon aerogel involves the synthesis and carbonization of an  organic aerogel 
prepared from resorcinol (R) – formalde hyde (F) polymerization in aqueous solution 
[5]. The polymerization and, therefore, the textural characteristic s of the final aerogel 
strongly depend on the synthesis conditions [6].  In this case, the molar ratios employed 
for water (W), R, F and Na 2CO 3 used as polymerization cata lyst (C) were as follows: 
R/F = 0.5, R/W = 0.07 and R/C = 300. The obtained pH was 6.5. Polymerization was 
allowed to proceed during 7 days, controlling the temperature (25 ºC in the first day, 50 
ºC in the second one, and 80 ºC afterwards). After this  period, the polymer was 
removed from the moulds and introduced in acetone for 2 days before the supercritical 
drying in CO 2. The obtained aerogel was carbonized in N 2 atmosphere (100 cm3/min) at 
500 ºC for 5h, increasing the temperature at a rate of 1.5 ºC/min. Then, the oven is turned-off and the sample allowed cooling down in the same N
2 stream.  
Finally, both supports were milled and scre ened and the fraction with a particle 
size smaller than 200 µm impregnated by means of the classical impregnation method 
with aqueous solution, using ferrous acetate (FeAc 2) as precursor. Thus, the amount of 
FeAc 2 needed for obtaining 7 wt. % of iron in the final catalyst was dissolved in the 
minimum amount of water and added dr op by drop on the corresponding carbon Chapter 2. Experimental Section 
 34support. After impregnation, the samples we re dried over night at  100ºC and finally 
treated in N 2 flow at 200 ºC for 2 h. TG and FTIR analyses showed that this thermal 
treatment is enough for the acetate decomposition.  
 
2.5 Techniques used for Characterization of Solid Catalysts 
 
In the following sections the physical-che mical techniques used to characterize 
the above-mentioned heterogeneous  catalysts are described. 
 
2.5.1 Pillared Clay-Based Catalysts 
 
Elemental chemical analyses were performed to determine the composition of 
the original clay (support) and the exact am ount of iron in the final catalysts, by using 
scanning electronic microscopy (SEM-J EOL-JSM6301-F) with an Oxford 
INCA/ENERGY-350 microanalysis system. The samples were covered with carbon by 
vaporization.  
Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of  the solids were recorded in the 2 θ 
range of 2-65º by a Siemens D-500 diffract ometer at 40 kV and 30 mA using filtered 
Cu K α radiation ( λ = 1.5418 Å).   
FT-Infrared spectra were recorded in the 4000-350 cm-1 region with a Perkin-
Elmer 1730 FT-IR spectrometer, using a He-Ne laser source ( λ = 632.8 nm), in KBr 
pellet (0.001 g sample with 0.3 g KBr), a nd 15 scan per minute to improve the signal-
to-noise ratio.  
BET specific surface areas were determined by adso rption of nitrogen at 77K, 
measuring five adsorption points by usi ng a Micromeritics Gemini apparatus and 
measuring five adsorption points between 0.01 and 0.2 of relative pressure. The samples 
were previously outgassed by treatment at 110 ºC for 2 h, under flow of nitrogen. 
Simultaneous thermal gravimetric (TG) and differential scanning calorimetric 
(DSC) analyses of samples were carried  out using a TA-SDT  Q600 Instrument. 
Samples of about 40 mg were heated in  air (flow rate = 100 mL/min) from room 
temperature up to 900 ºC, with a heating rate of 10 ºC/min.   Chapter 2. Experimental Section 
 352.5.2 Carbon-Based Catalysts 
 
 Textural characterization was carried out by N 2 and CO 2 adsorption at -196 and 
0 ºC respectively, and mercury por osimetry. The BET surface areas (S BET) were 
calculated from the corresponding nitroge n adsorption isotherms. The micropore 
volume (W 0) and mean micropore width (L 0) were calculated by the application of the 
Dubinin-Raduskevich equation to CO 2 adsorption isotherms [7 ]. Mercury porosimetry 
was obtained up to a pressure of 4200 kg cm-2 using a Quantachrome Autoscan 60 
equipment. With this technique, the followi ng parameters were obtained: pore size 
distribution of pores with a diameter greater than 3.7 nm ; surface area of these pores, 
which will be referred to as external surface area, S ext; pore volume corresponding to 
pores with a diameter between 3.7 and 50 nm, V 2, referred to as “mesopore” volume 
(one should note that the me sopore volume range is define d as 2-50 nm); pore volume 
of pores with a diameter greater than 50 nm, or macropore volume, V 3; and particle 
density, ρ. 
The morphology of the supports  and catalysts was analy zed by scanning electron 
microscopy. Experiments were carried out  with a ZEISS DSM 950 (30 kV) microscope. 
Metal dispersion and nature were followed by high-resolution tr ansmission electron 
microscopy (HRTEM) using a Phillips CM- 20 electron microscope and XRD using a 
Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer. Finally , X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) 
measurements were performed using an ESCALAB 200A, VG Scientific (UK) system, 
with PISCES software for data acquisition and analysis. An achromatic Al (Ka) X-ray source operating at 15kV (300 W) was used, and the spect rometer, calibrated with 
reference to Ag 3d5/2 (368.27 eV), was opera ted in CAE mode with  20 eV pass energy. 
Data acquisition was performed w ith a pressure lower them 10
-6 Pa. Spectra analysis 
was performed using peak fitting with Gaussian-Lorentzian peak shape and Shirley type background subtraction.  
References 
 
1. Mielgo, I.; Moreira, M. T.; Feijoo, G.; Le ma, J. M. A packed-bed fungal bioreactor for 
the continuous decolourisation of azo-dy es (Orange II). Journal of Biotechnology 2001 , 
89, 99. Chapter 2. Experimental Section 
 362. Mu, Y.; Yu, H. Q.; Zheng, J. C.; Zhang, S. J. TiO 2-mediated photocatalytic degradation of 
Orange II with the presence of Mn2+ in solution. Journal of Photochemistry and 
Photobiology A: Chemistry 2004 , 163, 311. 
3. Lahav, N.; Shani, V.; Shabtai, J. Cross- Linked Smectites. I. Synthesis and Properties of 
Hydroxy-Aluminum-Montmorillonite. Clays and Clay Minerals 1978 , 26, 107. 
4. Bottero, J. Y.; Cases, J. M.; Flessinger, F.; Po rlrier, J. E. Studies of hydrolyzed aluminum 
chloride solutions. 1. Nature of aluminum species and composition of aqueous solutions. 
Journal of Physical Chemistry 1980 , 84, 2933. 
5. Pekala, R. W. Organic aerogels from the polycondensation of resorcinol with 
formaldehyde. Journal of Materials Science 1989 , 24, 3221. 
6. Maldonado-Hódar, F. J.; Ferro-García, M.  A.; Rivera-Utrilla, J.; Moreno-Castilla, C. 
Synthesis and textural characteristics of or ganic aerogels, transition-metal-containing 
organic aerogels and their carbonized derivatives. Carbon 1999 , 37, 1199. 
7. Bansal, R. C.; Donnet, J. B.; Stoeck li, F. Active Carbon, Dekker, New York, 1998 . 
  
   
   
 
     
 
PART III 
HOMOGENEOUS SYSTEM  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
   
 
  
 
  
 
 Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 39
 CHAPTER 3 – EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN TO OPTIMIZE 
THE DEGRADATION OF THE SYNTHETIC DYE ORANGE 
II USING FENTON ’S REAGENT * 
 
 
  
Abstract 
 
The experimental design methodology was applied having in mind the 
optimization of the azo dye Orange II degrad ation using the Fenton’s reagent (mixture 
of H 2O2 and Fe2+). The variables considered were the temperature, H 2O2 concentration 
and Fe2+:H2O2 ratio, for a dye concentration of 3×10-4 M and pH = 3. The multivariate 
experimental design allowed to develop quadra tic models for: i) colour removal and ii) 
total organic carbon (TOC) reduction (both after 2 hours of reaction), which were 
adequate to predict responses  in all the range of experi mental conditions used. Under 
the optimum conditions, performances of  99.7% and 70.7% for colour and TOC 
removal, respectively, were experiment ally reached. It was found that both H 2O2 
concentration and temperature have an important effect in the organic matter 
degradation efficiency. 
            
                                                
 
* Adapted from : Ramirez, J. H.; Costa, C. A.; Madeira. L. M. Catalysis Today  2005 , 107-108, 68. Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 40
 3.1 Introduction 
 
To achieve high performances in the Fenton’s process, the experimental 
conditions must be optimised. And this is not an easy task sin ce in Fenton oxidation 
several parameters affect the oxidation effi ciency, like the pH of the reaction medium, 
the temperature, the hydrogen peroxide con centration and the amount of catalyst used, 
usually expressed as the Fe2+/H2O2 ratio. Although many researchers have usually only 
focussed on the single-factor-at-a-time ap proach, studying the effect of each 
experimental parameter on the process perf ormance while keeping all other conditions 
constant, this approach does not take into account cros s effects from the factors 
considered and leads to a poor optimizati on result. When a multifactor system is 
present, it is more appropriate to employ statistically-based optimization strategies to achieve such goal, with the minimum numb er of experiments [1,2]. Indeed, an 
alternative to the above-mentioned univari ate strategy is the experimental design 
approach, which implies the use of statistical  tools that allow the simultaneous change 
of several variables (multivariate analysis) [1]. The experimental design methodology is a modern approach which has been widely used  in several applications [e.g., 3-5], also 
allowing the modelling of the pr ocess. In fact, the design of  experiments (DOE) is used 
to identify or screen the important factors affecting a process or product and to develop 
statistically significant empirical models. 
This study concerns the de gradation of the non-biodegr adable azo dye Orange II 
by Fenton’s reagent. As azo dyes are extensiv ely used in textile dyeing and finishing 
processes [6], orange II was selected as the test chemical to represent the concerned dye 
group because it is inexpensive and very used in  the textile, pulp and paper industries. It 
is also a main goal of the present work to  find the optimum conditions to maximize both 
colour and total organic carbon (TOC) remova l, and so a DOE tool will be used.  
 
3.2 Materials and Methods 
 
The batch reactor, with 0.3 L capacity, th e chemical reagents, the experimental 
set-up and the analytical techni ques used in this chapter are described with more detail 
in chapter 2. 
In all experiments a reaction volume  of 0.2 L was used, with a 3×10-4 M dye 
concentration (to which corresponds a tota l organic carbon content of 58.6 mg/L) and Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 41
 the runs were carried out at pH = 3. This pH value was set based on previous 
experimental results [7] and agrees with lite rature findings, as it is usually accepted that 
acidic pH levels near 3 are usually op timum for Fenton oxidation [8,9,10]. All 
experiments were run up to 120 min and replicates of some of them allowed concluding 
that experimental data do not differ, on average, more than 10%. 
A DOE approach was used to model and optimize the process performance. The 
model considered to describe our data was a second order polynomial, and the 
corresponding coefficients were calculated from the experimental responses by means 
of least squares regression, us ing the JMP501 software [11]. 
 
3.3 Results and Discussion 
 
3.3.1 Preliminary Experiments 
 
Figure 2.3 shows the dye molecule, whic h is basically consisted by an azo 
(N=N) linkage, a benzene ring an d a naphthalene ring, all of  them exhibiting different 
absorbance peaks. Indeed, the chromophore- containing azo linkage  has absorption in 
the visible region, while the benzene ring a nd the naphthalene ring absorb in the UV. 
Besides, the naphthalene ring absorption wavelength is higher  than that of the benzene 
one. The exact values can be seen in Fig. 3.1, which shows the UV-Vis spectra recorded before and after oxidation. The spectrum reco rded for the original dye solution is the 
expected one [12,13], with the characteristic absorb ance peaks at around 235, 315 and 
486 nm. Figure 3.1 also puts into evidence th at the treated dye sample was almost 
colourless and did not show significant absorb ance in the visible re gion, indicating that 
colour removal was practically complete (for the employed conditions). Indeed, the disappearance of the absorbance signal at 486  nm reflects, unequivocally, an almost 
complete decolourization and the breakdown in the chromophoric group. However, the 
spectrum in the UV region shows that the dye  was not mineralized completely, though 
absorption reduced over the UV range. The diminution of the absorbance peak at 235 nm is related to the cleavage of the benzene gr oup present in the orig inal structure of the 
dye ( cf. Fig. 2.3). 
 Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 42
 
 
Fig. 3.1 – UV-Vis absorption spectra of Orange II before (A) and after (B) oxidation, in the following 
conditions: T = 28.9 ˚C, M COH2101
22−×=  and Fe2+/H2O2 ratio = 0.125 (w/w). Initial pH = 3. 
 
Blank experiments showed that neither decolourization nor mineralization of 
Orange II occurs in the presence of Fe2+ ions alone (Figs. 3.2A and 3.2B). Colour 
removal was also negligible in the presence of only H 2O2 (Fig. 3.2A), but in such 
conditions a slight TOC reduction was noticed (Fig. 3.2B).  
In Fig. 3.2 are also shown, merely as illustrative examples, some other curves, 
which illustrate that after 2 h of oxidation decolourisations as high as 99.0% can be 
achieved, but after 10 min of  operation a colour removal of  97% was already reached. 
Simultaneously, it is possible to  attain mineralization effici encies above 70% in 2 h of 
operation. 
For most of the experiments where a si gnificant colour (and/or TOC) removal 
was reached, it is evident that the process is mu ch faster in the first 5-10 min, and then it 
proceeds at a slower reaction rate. Recently,  a similar behaviour was found during cork 
cooking wastewater mineralization [14], while Malik and Saha [9] also found that direct 
dyes are decomposed in a two-stage reaction w ith Fenton’s reagent. In the first stage 
dyes are decomposed rapidly and somewhat le ss rapidly in the second stage. The main 
reason for this well-known behaviour is th at ferrous ions reac t very quickly with 
hydrogen peroxide (rate constant is 53 mol-1dm3s-1) to produce large amounts of 
hydroxyl radicals (Eq. (3.1)), which can then react rapidl y with the dye (so-called 
Fe2+/H2O2 stage) [9].  
 
• − + ++ + → + HO OH Fe OH Fe3
222 (3.1) Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 43
 0 20 40 60 80 100 1200.00.20.40.60.81.0A/Ao
Time (min) CH2O2 = 9x10-3 M, T = 30 ºC, No iron
 CFe2+ = 7x10-4 M, T = 30 ºC, No H2O2
 Run 1
 Run 2
 Run 3A
0 20 40 60 80 100 1200102030405060TOC Removal (mg C/L)
Time (min)B
Fig. 3.2 – Discolouration (A) and mineralization (B) of the Orange II solution as a function of time. For 
the experimental conditions of runs 1 to 3, please refer to Table 3.1.  
  
 
Ferric ions produced can react with H 2O2 to produce hydroperoxyl radicals 
(HO 2•) and restore ferrous ions through the following reaction scheme [15,16]: 
 
32
22 FeH O F e O O H H++ + ⎯⎯→ +− + ←⎯⎯   (3.2) 
+ • ++ → −2
22Fe HO OOHFe  (3.3) 
 
However, the reaction rate for iron regeneration is much slower than that in Eq. 
(3.1) (rate constant is now 2×10-2 mol-1dm3s-1) [9]. Consequently, the rate of oxidation 
in the second stage (Fe3+/H2O2 stage) is slower than in the first one due to the slow 
production of Fe(II) from Fe(III). Concluding, we  can say that the reaction rate decrease 
on the 2nd stage of the Fenton oxidation is basica lly due to the fact that ferrous ions are 
consumed quickly, but reproduce slowly. C onsequently, the oxidation rate of organic 
compounds is fast when large amounts of ferr ous ions are present because large amount 
of hydroxyl radicals are produced . However, due to the slow Fe2+ 
production/regeneration, the Fenton’s reac tion slows down. Moreover, the hydroperoxyl 
radicals produced in the second stage have  a much smaller oxidation potential compared 
to HO• [17], thus also justifying the slower oxidation rate in  the second step. Finally, 
there are several competitive reactions that also consume hydroxyl radicals, or reactions 
with the intermediate products formed from the dye decomposition when the process advances, which hinder the de cay of the parent compound.  In conclusion, there are 
several factors that contribute to the decr ease of the Orange II decomposition rate at Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 44
 higher times of reaction, and this is the r eason why several authors propose two kinetics 
for the Fenton's reaction with organic compounds.  The experimental results of this work 
also demonstrate this situation.  
3.3.2
 Design of Experiments 
 
A central composite design (response surface design) was carried out 
considering the minimum and maximum levels for temperature (10-50 ºC), 
22OHC  
(3×10-3-1.5×10-2 M) and Fe2+:H2O2 ratio (0.05-0.2 w/w). It is  noteworthy that the ranges 
considered for the three studied variables were chosen based on literature findings [6,8-10,18], as well as in experiments previously  performed by the author [7]. Assuming a 
second order polynomial model, at least 13 expe riments must be carri ed out to solve the 
matrix (including the cross effects between variables and two centre points), for which 
software JMP 501 was used. Table 3.1 shows th e description of the experiments and the 
relationship between codified and real valu es. Low and high levels are denoted by (-1) 
and (+1), respectively, and the central poi nts as (0). It is noteworthy that the 
methodology used requires that experiments out side the experimental range previously 
defined should be performed to allow pr ediction of the respons e outside the cubic 
domain (denoted as +1.682). 
As above-mentioned, the obj ective functions to maximi se are both the colour 
and TOC removal (after 120 min of oxidation) . These are the respon ses which will be 
called Y
1 and Y2, respectively. The 13 experiments i ndicated in Table 3.1 were then 
performed in a random order to  minimise systematic erro rs, and the response factors 
evaluated. Table 3.2 shows the experimental responses. 
The coefficients of the quadratic model in the polynomial expr ession were then 
calculated by multiple regression analysis, using the above-mentioned DOE software. It 
must be stressed that such coefficients repr esent the weight of each variable by itself, 
the weight of the quadratic effect and the weight of the first order interactions between the coded variables. Equations (3.4) and (3.5) represent the two responses, where Y
1 and 
Y2 are in %: 
 
2
12 3 2
2
31 2 1 3 2 398.42( 4.47) 4.52( 2.16) 2.73( 2.16) 5.26( 2.69)
2.71( 2.69) 4.00( 2.24) 5.75( 2.24) 3.75( 2.24)YA A A
AA A A A A A=± + ± − ± − ±
− ± −± −± −± (3.4) Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 45
  
21 2 3
22
12 1 356.92( 5.22) 8.02( 2.52) 19.02( 2.52) 2.73( 2.52)
5.39( 3.15) 11.93( 3.15) 2.75( 2.62)YA A A
AA A A=± + ± +± − ±
−± − ± − ±  (3.5) 
where: 
1
130
20XA−= ; 2
29
6XA−= ;  3
30.125
0.075XA−=  (3.6) 
 
X1, X2 and X3 denote the variables temperature, H 2O2 concentration and Fe2+:H2O2 ratio, 
respectively. Since the differe nt factors present different units, they are given in the 
form of dimensionless coded variables ( A1 to A3) in order to permit comparison between 
them. It must be remarked that in the cases where the error in Eqs. (3.4) and (3.5) was equal or higher than the co rresponding coefficient, the as sociated variab le, quadratic 
effect or first-order interaction was ignored  and was not expressed in the models, as 
usual [1]. 
Table 3.1 – Codified and experimental values of the experimental design. 
Codified values Experimental values 
Temperature 22OHC  Fe2+:H2O2  Run 
No. Temperature 22OHC  Fe2+:H2O2 
 (ºC) (mM) (w/w) 
1 +1 +1 -1 50 15 0.05 
2 +1 +1 +1 50 15 0.2 
3 +1 -1 -1 50 3 0.05 
4 0 0 +1.682 30 9 0.25 
5 +1 -1 +1 50 3 0.2 6 -1 +1 -1 10 15 0.05 7 -1 -1 -1 10 3 0.05 
8 0 +1.682 0 30 19.1 0.125 
9 -1 -1 +1 10 3 0.2 
10 +1.682 0 0 63.6 9 0.125 11 -1 +1 +1 10 15 0.2  12 0 0 0 30 9 0.125 
13 0 0 0 30 9 0.125 
  
As can be seen in Fig. 3.3, the valu es predicted by the second order models 
agree reasonably with the experimental data. For instance, in what concerns the colour removal, absolute errors are always below 6. 6% (with an average of 2.7%). Even for the Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 46
 other response, both values are very clos e, indicating a good correspondence between 
the model prediction and the experiments (avera ge absolute error of 3.7%). In addition, 
the analysis of variance yielde d significance probabilities ( F-test) of 95.2% and 95.9% 
for colour and TOC removal, respectively (95% confidence level), thus evidencing the 
existence of a regression effect [11]. 
 
Table 3.2 – Experimental results of the e xperimental design for Orange II oxidation.  
Responses considered are: Y 1 - colour removal (%) and Y 2 - TOC removal (%). 
Experimental results  
Run No. Y1 Y 2 
1 99.0 72.3 
2 72.1 62.0 
3 92.1 37.0 4 91.6 66.5 5 80.2 22.8 
6 97.8 56.4 
7 74.7 14.1 8 96.2 61.0 9 86.1 19.1 
10 97.9 60.3 
11 93.9 47.7 
12 98.1 58.2 13 98.4 55.7 
 
Considering just the first order effects of each variable in Eqs. (3.4) and (3.5), it 
is clear that the main factor that  affects colour removal is the H 2O2 concentration, while 
for TOC reduction temperature also plays a si gnificant role. In both cases, all the cross 
and quadratic effects are nega tive, suggesting that optimum values must exist for each 
parameter, as discussed below. 
Figure 3.4 presents the response surf ace modelling in a three dimensional 
representation to put into eviden ce the effects of temperature, H 2O2 concentration and 
Fe2+:H2O2 ratio on the colour removal after 2 hours of reaction. 
As a general trend, we can see that depending on the reaction temperature, the 
H2O2 concentration and Fe2+:H2O2 ratio may have a positive or negative effect on dye 
decolouration (Fig. 3.4A). Indeed, for low te mperatures both parameters seem to affect 
positively the final performance, while for high temperatures an excessive oxidant load Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 47
 may have a detrimental effect. At the highe st temperature (T=50º C) low catalyst doses 
are required, possibly because reactions are faster. 
 
70 75 80 85 90 95 100707580859095100Y1 Calc
Y1 ExpA
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 001020304050607080Y2 Calc
Y2 ExpB
Fig. 3.3 – Experimental and calculated results of the experimental design for Orange II oxidation. 
Responses considered are: Y 1 - colour removal (%) and Y 2 - TOC removal (%). 
 
A similar behaviour is noticed wh en changing the temperature and H 2O2 
concentration, at constant Fe2+:H2O2 ratio (Fig. 3.4B). Thus, we can say that all 
variables may affect positively or negati vely the colour removal, depending on the 
values of the other experimental conditions (cross effects). This justifies the use of DOE tools for process optimisation.  It must however be remarked that in some cases the 
second-order model yields response values slightly above 100%, which is due to the 
error in the numerical fit and reflects the pr oblem associated with the interpolation once 
very high colour removal efficiencies were attained. 
The fact that in some conditions very high H
2O2 concentration values lead to a 
decrease in the final discolouration is pos sibly due to the competition between these 
species for hydroxyl radicals. Indeed, HO● radicals are quite non-selective, reacting 
with the organic matter present but also w ith other species. A maximum value for the 
discolouration performance is achieved with a peroxide con centration of ca. 10 mM due 
to the following reaction [10,19,20]: 
 
• •+ → +2 2 22 HOOH HO OH       ( 3 . 7 )  
 
 Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 48
 T = 10ºC (A) 
 
707580859095100105
468101214
0,080,100,120,140,160,18
0,20
Colo
ur
 rem
ov
al (%
)
H2O2 Concentration (mM)
Fe2+:H2O2 Ratio (w/w)
 T = 50ºC (A) 
 
7580859095100105110
468101214
0,080,100,120,140,160,18
0,20
Colou
r rem
ov
al (%
)
H2O2 Concentration (mM)
Fe2+:H2O2 Ratio (w/w)
Fe2+/H2O2 = 0.05 (w/w) (B) 
7580859095100105110
101520253035404550
4
6
8
10
12
14
Colou
r rem
ov
al 
(%)
Temperature (oC)
H2O2 Concentration (mM)
  Fe2+/H2O2 = 0.20 (w/w) (B) 
80859095100105
101520253035404550
4
6
8
10
12
14
Co
lour rem
oval (%
)
Temperature (oC)
H2O2 Concentration (mM)
 
Fig. 3.4 – Response surface showing the colour removal (%) of the Orange II solution as a function of: A) 
Fe2+/ H 2O2 ratio and H 2O2 concentration (for different temperatures) and B) H 2O2 concentration and 
temperature (for different Fe2+: H 2O2 ratios).  
 
 
Therefore, at high oxidant loads su ch scavenging effect becomes more 
significant, which leads to the non-producti ve decomposition of hydrogen peroxide and 
limits the yield of hydroxylated (oxidised)  organic compounds. Although other radicals 
(2HO•) are produced, their oxidation potential is much smaller than that of the HO• 
species [17]. It must however be stressed that when increasing the H 2O2 concentration, 
keeping the Fe2+:H2O2 ratio constant, higher catalyst loads are employed, which may 
also have a scavenging effect, as discussed below (see Eq. (3.8)). Thus, this effect may 
also contribute to the decline in the overall  efficiency recorded at high oxidant loads. Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 49
 In this work it was found that the di scolouration rate (and also the TOC 
reduction rate) is strongly dependent on the amount of H 2O2 added. But the effect 
caused by temperature is also considerable ; when the reaction was performed at low 
temperatures (~10 ºC) both ra tes decreased, due to the Arrhenius dependence of the 
kinetic constants. However, da ta shown in Figs. 3.4A and 3. 4B refer to the performance 
achieved after 2h of oxidation. It is visi ble that depending on the experimental 
conditions, the colour removal may be positiv ely affected by the re action temperature, 
while in some cases high temperatures lead  to a decrease in the overall performance. 
Thus, an optimum value must exist, what is in agreement with other results found in the 
literature [14,21]. Some authors [14,18] re port that at high temperatures hydrogen 
peroxide decomposition into oxygen and water becomes very fast, leading to a decline 
in the overall efficiency. This was confirmed experimentally in this work ( cf. section A1 
of appendix I).  
Finally, for the Fe2+:H2O2 ratio an optimum range wa s also noticed, and this 
behaviour was also found by other authors in  the Fenton process [e.g., 9]. An increase 
in the Fe2+:H2O2 ratio implies higher Fe2+ loads, and therefore more HO• radicals are 
available for oxidation. Excess catalyst  may however lead to a loss of HO• species by 
the following scavenging reaction [19]: 
 
− + • ++ → + OH Fe HO Fe3 2       ( 3 . 8 )  
 
The polynomial expression in Eq. (3.5) was used to calculate the response 
surface illustrated in Figs. 3.5A and 3.5B , showing the TOC removal after 2 hours of 
reaction (initial TOC = 58.6 mg/L). Conclusi ons are similar to those described for 
colour removal, evidencing that process vari ables may have a positive or negative effect 
on the final performance, depending on the other experimental parameters. Once again, optimum values for both H
2O2 concentration and temper ature are found, although 
shifted for higher values as compared to col our removal. This could be expected, once 
to achieve mineralization more aggressive conditions are required than those employed 
to simply break the chromophore group . 
 
    Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 50
 T = 10ºC (A) 
 
102030405060
468101214
0,080,100,120,140,160,18
0,20
TOC rem
oval (%
)
H2O2 Concentration (mM)
Fe2+:H2O2 Ratio (w/w)
 
 T = 50ºC (A) 
 
20304050607080
468101214
0,080,100,120,140,160,18
0,20
TOC re
m
ov
al (%
)
H2O2 Concentration (mM)
Fe2+:H2O2 Ratio (w/w)
Fe2+/H2O2 = 0.05 (w/w) (B) 
01020304050607080
101520253035404550
4
6
8
10
12
14
TOC rem
ov
al 
(%
)
Temperature (oC)
H2O2 Concentration (mM)
 Fe2+/H2O2 = 0.20 (w/w) (B) 
10203040506070
101520253035404550
4
6
8
10
12
14
TOC re
m
oval (%
)
Temperature (oC)
H2O2 Concentration (mM)
 
Fig. 3.5 – Response surface showing the TOC removal (% ) of the Orange II solution as a function of: A) 
Fe2+/H2O2 ratio and H 2O2 concentration (for different temperatures) and B) H 2O2 concentration and 
temperature (for different Fe+2:H2O2 ratios). 
 
It is known that complete discolouration of the solution does not mean that the 
dye is completely oxidised, and so the mineralization and colour removal processes were investigated simultaneously. Conseque ntly, the TOC of the reaction mixture was 
also measured along time in all experiments, some of them shown in Fig. 3.6. For run 
no. 1 a TOC removal of 72% was reached after 2h, with ~99% of colour removal (Table 
3.2). It must however be stressed that  good conditions for mineralization do not 
necessarily imply good results for decolour isation. For instance, in run no. 2 a good 
TOC reduction was attained (62%), with a ve ry inefficient colour removal (see Table 
3.2). Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 51
 0 20 40 60 80 100 12001020304050607080TOC Removal (%)
Time (min) Run 1
 Run 3
 Run 6
 Run 12
 Run 13
 
Fig. 3.6 – TOC removal of the Orange II solution along time, for some runs (experimental 
conditions shown in Table 3.1). 
 
With the goal in mind of process optimization, two more experiments were 
performed in the optimum conditions found regarding colour and TOC removal. These runs also allowed us to check the validity  of the developed models. Once Eq. (3.4) 
predicts that colour can be completely re moved in a wide range of the experimental 
parameters, we decided to use conditions that  do not require excessive consumption of 
reagents neither too high temperatures. For TOC, the optimum values found through 
nonlinear optimization (maximum in Eq. (3 .5)) were employed. The experimental 
conditions are described in the caption of Fi g. 3.7. It is noteworthy that a high H
2O2 
load and temperature is required for good TOC reduction, while for colour removal 
reaction conditions do not need to be so  severe. For those experiments the model 
predicts efficiencies of 99.9% and 72.6%, fo r colour and TOC reduction, respectively. It 
is remarkable that an experimental decolour isation of 99.7% was reached after 2 h (see 
detail in Fig. 3.7A). In what concerns the TOC removal, a mineralization degree of 
70.7% was achieved (Fig. 3.7B). Howeve r, this figure suggests that higher 
mineralization degrees could be achieved w ith longer experiments. As shown in Fig. 
3.7A, colour removal is very fast, being possible to achieve a performance above 98% 
in just 5 min. On the other hand, complete oxidation proceeds at a much slower reaction 
rate.  Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 52
 012345020406080100
02 0 4 0 6 0 8 0 1 0 0 1 2 0020406080100Colour Removal (%)
Time (min)Colour Removal (%)
Time (min)A
0 20 40 60 80 100 12001020304050607080TOC Removal (%)
Time (min)B
 
Fig. 3.7 – Colour (A) and TOC (B) removal along time using the optimized conditions: A) Colour 
removal with T = 29 ˚C, =22OHC 1×10-2 M and Fe+2:H2O2 ratio = 0.08 w/w; B) TOC removal with T = 
50˚C, =22OHC 1.4×10-2 M and Fe+2:H2O2 ratio = 0.05 w/w.  
 
 The DOE methodology used has shown to  be a valuable tool to model a 
complex process such as th e Fenton oxidation, and to ac hieve optimal experimental 
conditions without a detailed knowledge of the reaction sequences involved, which are 
most often complex. In fact, the DOE appr oach allows the modeling of the process 
through statistically significant but empiri cal models, of the “black-box” type. 
However, a deep knowledge of the process is of  crucial importance, particularly in what 
concerns the reaction mechanism and r eaction kinetics (although requiring a 
mathematical description of the phenomena i nvolved in the process). Nevertheless, it is 
reasonable to assume that minerali zation of the dye might yield HSO 4- and 
predominantly NH 4+ (among other compounds) [6], but the formation of intermediate 
Fe-complexes consisting of Fe-chelates leading to carboxylic acids should be also 
considered, as found in previous studies. In  particular, oxalic, formic, and acetic acid 
along with smaller concentratio ns of other short non-branc hed and branched aliphatic 
acids (C 3–C7) have been reported [22]. In what concerns possible reaction 
intermediates, it is also  important to remark th e nice study presented by Nam et al.  [23] 
using the FeIII-EDTA-H 2O2 system. The authors propose a detailed mechanism for the 
Orange II degradation, with several in termediates involved, particularly 4-
hydroxybenzenesulfonic acid and 1,2-naphtoqu inone. Finally, the work by Bandara et 
al. [6] should be also stressed, although the re sults concern the use of sunlight induced 
reactions. Based on their results, the follo wing mechanism could be  suggested for the Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 53
 decomposition of Orange II, taking also in to account the above-mentioned equations, 
particularly Eqs. (3.1) to (3.3):  
 
2 4 2 11 16 4 2 11 16 ) ( CO tes Intermedia OHS NaONHC HOS NaONHC + + − → +• (3.9) 
 
where the oxidized intermediates might, through subsequent reactions with the HO 
radicals, lead to aromatic and aliphatic intermediates, and finally to carbon dioxide and water (along with NO
-3, NH 4+, NaHSO 4- and H+). Among other compounds, the 
formation of nitrogen and sulfo-containing pr oducts is described by the authors, being 
also noteworthy the evolution of N 2 when the N=N bond is cleaved [6]. 
 
3.4 Conclusions 
 
• A central composite design was used to ev aluate the effect of temperature, H 2O2 
concentration and Fe+2:H2O2 ratio in the Fenton’s oxidation of the azo dye 
Orange II, at pH = 3. The responses considered were the colour ( Y1) and TOC 
(Y2) removal after 2h of oxidation. It wa s found that the se cond order models 
developed for both Y1 and Y2 fit quite reasonably the experimental data in the 
ranges studied. 
• The dye seems to be decomposed in a two-stage reaction with the Fenton’s 
reagent, being degraded very qui ckly in the first 5-10 min (Fe2+/H2O2 stage), 
with a slower reaction rate later on (Fe3+/H2O2 stage). The first stage is 
particularly fast for colour removal, be ing possible to achieve a decolourisation 
above 98% in just 5 min of reaction time, although in some cases efficiencies higher than 90% can be reached in only 1 min. 
•
 Data obtained revealed that  the Fenton’s reagent is pr omising for degradation of 
the dye, as decolourisation efficiencies  clearly above 99% and mineralization 
degrees higher than 70% were reached in 2h. However, to achieve these results, operating conditions must be carefully selected. Indeed, the surface response 
plots of the models showed  that for both factors ( Y
1 and Y2) optimum values for 
the process variables exist, what is a typical behaviour in the Fenton process. 
Though TOC reduction requires aggr essive conditions (high H 2O2 concentration 
and temperature) decolourisation doe s not requires high stringency. The Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 54
 hydrogen peroxide concentration and the te mperature showed to  be the variables 
with higher impact into the final perform ance. In particular, temperature turns 
into a key parameter when it is desira ble to reduce reagents consumption. 
• Although the model predicts that colour can be completely removed for a wide 
range of experimental conditions, we d ecided to test its validity with an 
additional run were excessive use of r eagents and high temperature should be 
avoided. An additional experiment was al so carried out in the conditions found 
by nonlinear optimizati on regarding TOC reduction (maximum of Y2). The 
following performances were achieved: 
- Colour removal = 99.7%, for T = 29 ˚C, =
22OHC 1×10-2 M and Fe+2:H2O2 ratio = 
0.08 (w/w); 
- TOC removal = 70.7%, for T = 50 ˚C, =
22OHC  1.4×10-2 M and Fe+2:H2O2 ratio = 
0.05 (w/w). 
 
References 
 
1. D.C. Montgomery. Design and analysis of  experiments, Fifth Edition, John Wiley & 
Sons, New York, 2001 . 
 2. Öberg, T. G.; Deming, S. N. Find optimum operating conditions fast. Chemical 
Engineering Progress 2000 , 96, 53. 
 3. Machado, H.; Coelho, V.; Feyo, I.; Braga, F.; Oliveira, F.; Nogueira, J.; Mendes, A. Cost 
optimisation by using DOE. European Coatings Journal 2003 , 3, 279. 
 4. Fernandez, J.; Kiwi, J.; Lizama, C.; Fr eer, J.; Baeza, J.; Mansilla. H. D. Factorial 
experimental design of Orange II photo catalytic discolouration. Journal of 
Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry 2002 , 151, 213. 
 5. Baçaoui, A.; Dahbi, A.; Yaacoubi, A.; Be nnouna, C.; Maldonado-Hódar, F. J.; Rivera-
Utrilla, J.; Carrasco-Marín, F.; Moreno-Cas tilla, C. Experimental design to optimize 
preparation of activated carbons for use in water treatment. Environmental Science and 
Technology 2002 , 36, 3844. 
 6. Bandara, J.; Morrison, C.; Kiwi, J.; Pulgarin , C.; Peringer, P. Degradation/decoloration of 
concentrated solutions of Orange II. Kine tics and quantum yield for sunlight induced 
reactions via Fenton type reagents. Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: 
Chemistry 1996 , 99, 57. Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 55
  7.  Ramirez, J. H.; Costa, C. A.; Madeira,  L. M. Descoloração do corante Orange II usando 
reagente de Fenton. in Proc. XIX Simpos io Iberoamericano de Catálisis (México) 2004 , 
p. 14 (CD: p. 259). 
 8. Swaminathan, K.; Sandhya, S.; Sophia, A. C.; Pachhade, K.; Subrahmanyam, Y. V. 
Decolorization and degradation of H-aci d and other dyes using ferrous–hydrogen 
peroxide system. Chemosphere 2003 , 50, 619. 
 9. Malik, P. K.; Saha, S. K. Oxidation of di rect dyes with hydrogen peroxide using ferrous 
ion as catalyst. Separation and Purification Technology 2003 , 31, 241. 
10. Neyens, E.; Baeyens, J. A review of classic Fenton’s peroxidation as an advanced 
oxidation technique. Journal of Hazardous Materials 2003 , 98, 33. 
11. SAS, JMP, The statistical discovery software, www.jmp.com/product/jmp_intro.shtml. 
Last access April 25, 2008 .     
12. Mielgo, I.; Moreira, M. T.; Feijoo, G.; Le ma, J. M. A packed-bed  fungal bioreactor for 
the continuous decolourisation of azo-dyes (Orange II). Journal of Biotechnology 2001 , 
89, 99. 
13. Mu, Y.; Yu, H. Q.; Zheng, J. C.; Zhang, S. J. TiO 2-mediated photocatalytic degradation of 
Orange II with the presence of Mn2+ in solution. Journal of Photochemistry and 
Photobiology A: Chemistry 2004 , 163, 311. 
14. Guedes, A. M. F. M.; Madeira, L. M. P.; Boaventura, R. A. R.; Costa, C. A. V. Fenton 
oxidation of cork cooking wastewater—ove rall kinetic analysis. Water Research 2003 , 
37, 3061. 
15. Chen, R.; Pignatello, J. J. Role of quinon e intermediates as electron shuttles in Fenton and 
photoassisted Fenton oxidations of aroma tic compounds. Environmental Science and 
Technology 1997 , 31, 2399. 
16. Pignatello, J. J. Dark and photoassisted Fe3+-catalyzed degradation of chlorophenoxy 
herbicides by hydrogen peroxide. En vironmental Science and Technology 1992 , 26, 944. 
17. Bigda, R. J. Consider Fenton chemistry fo r wastewater treatment. Chemical Engineering 
Progress 1995 , 91, 62. 
18. Dutta, K.; Mukhopadhyay, S.; Bhattacharj ee, S.; Chaudhuri, B. Chemical oxidation of 
methylene blue using a Fenton-like reac tion. Journal of Hazardous Materials 2001 , 84, 
57. 
19. Walling, C. Fenton’s reagent revis ited. Accounts of Chemical Research 1975 , 8, 125. 
20. Fernández, J.; Kiwi, J.; Baeza, J.; Freer , J.; Lizama, C.; Mansilla, H. D. Orange II 
photocatalysis on immobilised TiO 2: Effect of the pH and H 2O2. Applied Catalysis B: 
Environmental 2004 , 48, 205. 
21. Lin, S. H.; Lo, C. C. Fenton process for treatment of desizing wastewater. Water Research 
1997 , 31, 2050. Chapter 3. Experimental Design to Optimize the Degrad ation of the Synthetic Dye OII using Fenton’s Reagent 
 56
 22. Nadtochenko, V.; Kiwi, J. Photoinduced  adduct formation between Orange II and 
[Fe3+(aq)] or Fe(ox) 33-–H 2O2 Photocatalytic degradation a nd laser spectroscopy Journal of 
the Chemical Society, Faraday Transactions 1997 , 93, 2373. 
23. Nam, S.; Renganathan, V.; Tratnyek, P. G.  Substituent effects on azo dye oxidation by the 
FeIII–EDTA–H 2O2 system. Chemosphere 2001 , 45, 59.  
 Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’s reag ent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 57CHAPTER 4 – MODELLING OF THE SYNTHETIC DYE  
ORANGE II DEGRADATION USING FENTON ’S REAGENT : 
FROM BATCH TO CONTINUO US REACTOR OPERATION * 
 
  
 
Abstract  
In this chapter, a simple kinetic model was used to study th e degradation of the 
azo dye orange II (OII) using Fe nton’s reagent, in the Fenton -like stage. The effect of 
pH, temperature, Cl- concentration and initial concentr ations of OII, hydrogen peroxide 
(H2O2) and ferrous ion catalyst (Fe2+) on the degradation rate ha s been investigated in a 
batch reactor. The apparent kinetic constants, kap, for OII degradation were determined 
in the following range of e xperimental conditions: 2.0 ≤ pH ≤ 4.0, 283 ≤ T ≤ 323 K,      
0 ≤ −ClC ≤ 1×10-2 M, 3 ×10-5 ≤ oOIIC ≤ 1×10-4 M, 1 ×10-4 ≤ 
oOHC22 ≤ 1×10-3 M and         
2.5×10-6 ≤ 
o FeC+2 ≤ 2×10-5 M. A pseudo-first-order reaction rate with respect to OII 
concentration was found to be adequate to fit the data in these experiments, in which the 
apparent kinetic constant depends on the initial conditions following a power-law 
dependency (at optimum pH of 3 and absence of chloride io ns). This equation, without 
further fitting parameters, was used to validate the experiments performed in a 
continuous stirred tank reacto r, particularly when usin g a range of experimental 
conditions within the range us ed in the batch reactor.  
 
                                                 
* Adapted from : Ramirez, J. H.; Duarte, F. M. ; Martins, F. G.; Costa, C. A.; Madeira, L.A. submitted.  Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’s reag ent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 584.1 Introduction 
 
Recent progress in the decontaminati on of wastewater has led to the 
development of advanced oxidation pro cesses. Among them, the oxidation using 
Fenton’s reagent has proved to be a promis ing and attractive treatment method for the 
effective decolourization and degradation of dyes, as well as for the destruction of a 
large number of hazardous and organic pollu tants [1-4]. Moreover, the process is 
simple, taking place at low temperatures  and atmospheric pressure [5].  
Oxidation with Fenton’s reagent is ba sed on ferrous ion an d hydrogen peroxide 
and exploits the very high reactivity of th e hydroxyl radical produced in acidic solution 
by the catalytic decomposition of H 2O2, cf. Eq. (4.1)  [6]. The mechanism of Fenton’s 
oxidation involves basically the following step s (Eqs. (4.1) - (4.6)), wherein the kinetic 
constants are given in M-1s-1 (with the exception of k 5) and were taken from the 
literature [6-12]:     
  
• − + ++ + → + HO HO Fe OH Fe3
222                       k1 = 51-100 (4.1) 
− + • ++ → + HO Fe HO Fe3 2                                  k2 = 3-4.3 ×108 (4.2) 
• + + ++ + → +22
223HO H Fe OH Fe                       k3 = 0.05-0.27 (4.3) 
OH HO HO OH2 2 22 + → +• •                               k4 = 1.2-4.5 ×107 (4.4) 
OH O OH2 2 22 2/1 + →                                          k5 = 0.001 s-1 (4.5) 
22 2 OH HO →•                                                      k6 = 5.3 ×109 (4.6) 
 
The HO• species produced through r eaction given by Eq. (4.1) will then attack the 
organic matter present in the reaction me dium, because the hydroxyl radical is a 
powerful inorganic oxidant that reacts non- selectively with numerous compounds (rate 
constants in the range 107-1010 M-1s-1) [6,13]:   
 
OH oducts HO OII2 Pr + → +•              (4.7) 
 
Several studies can be found in the literat ure focusing the kinetic analysis of the 
Fenton process. However, due to the asso ciated complexity (besides the above-
mentioned many other reaction steps ha ve to be taken into account), a Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’s reag ent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 59phenomenological study requires a set of at least 20 or 30 differential equations. Even 
so, the rate constants vary from paper to paper, and for several of them activation 
energies are not documented. Therefore, it is also a main goal of the present chapter to find a simple empirical equation that describe s the kinetic degradation of Orange II in a 
batch reactor by the Fenton’s reagent, informa tion that is required for modeling, design 
and optimization of chemical reactors for pollutants degradation. Many operational 
parameters, such as pH, OII concentration, H
2O2 dosage, Fe2+ concentration and 
temperature, affecting the OII degradation effi ciency, were investigated. Also, the effect 
of Cl- concentration on the oxidation efficiency was studied, because this species is 
usually present in the textile effluents and is  inhibitory in the Fe nton process. Finally, 
the kinetic law obtained is used to validate the experiments carried out in a continuous 
reactor. To the best of th e author knowledge, there are available only a few studies 
about Fenton’s reagent application in con tinuous reactors [e.g., 7,14,15], and none was 
found for the OII dye.   
 
4.2 Materials and Methods 
 
Chemical oxidation of azo dye Orange II aqueous solutions was conducted in 
two stirred jacketed glass reac tors; the first one a batch a nd the second one a continuous 
stirred tank reactor (CSTR), with 0.30 L and 0.92 L capacity, respectively. Both set-ups 
and operation procedures are describe d with more detail in chapter 2. 
In the CSTR operation, all the runs were  carried out at pH ~3.0. Besides, in 
experiments carried out in duplicate, conversion  varied by less than 10%. 
To obtain the residence time distribution in the continuous reactor, i.e., for 
studying the mixing characteristic s in such reactor, a tracer  stimulus-response technique 
was used. The reactor was fed with distille d water and after bei ng filled the tracer (OII 
in this work) was suddenly added (pulse inpu t with a syringe). Then, its concentration 
was measured along time in th e outlet stream. Runs were pe rformed at different feed 
flow rates. 
    
 Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’s reag ent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 604.3 Results and Discussion 
 
4.3.1 Batch Reactor - Kinetic Study 
 
In the Fenton’s process, it is generally considered that the reactions between 
hydrogen peroxide and ferrous iron in aci dic aqueous medium involve the steps 
presented above (Eqs. (4.1)-(4.6)), a lthough some authors propose a much more 
complex mechanism, with several other r eactions and involving many radicals [e.g., 
16]. In this process, the formation of hydr oxyl radicals was demonstrated by several 
researchers [17] and has been suggested to be  the main oxidant speci es. In spite of the 
oxidation kinetics complexity, it is often assumed that, under certain conditions, the 
mechanism of the process can be significantly simplified, being of particular relevance 
reaction given by Eq. (4.7) [17]. The co rresponding kinetic equation for OII and HO• 
reaction, assumed to be elementary, can thus be expressed as follows:  
 
()OII ap OII HO OII Ck C Ck r = = − • 7       ( 4 . 8 )   
 
where kap is an apparent pseudo fi rst-order kinetic constant that involves the radical HO 
concentration (assumed to remain constant along one experiment, due to the hypothesis 
of a pseudo steady-state concentration of hydroxyl radicals). The value of this rate 
constant depends therefore on the initial reactants concentrations (H 2O2 and Fe2+), 
temperature and also on the concentration of  scavenger species present in the reaction 
mixture (such as intermediates, HOO•, etc.) [17]. On the other hand, these scavenger 
species concentrations depend on the initial orange II concentration, and for this reason 
kap is a function of all these variables [17]: ), , , ( 2 22 T C C Cf ko Fe oOH OIIo ap+ = . 
The dependence of kap from the operating conditions can be found by 
performing independent experiments, changing each factor at a time, after appropriate 
linearization of the data. This can be achieved from the corresponding mass balance in 
the batch reactor (OII ap OII Ck dt dC . / −= , wherein the hypothesi s of ideal mixing 
conditions has been verified by simple tr acer experiments), thus yielding:   
 
tkCC
ap
OIIoOII−= ln         ( 4 . 9 )  Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’s reag ent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 61If the relationship between ln(C OII/COIIo) vs. time (t) is linear, then the degradation of 
OII will follow a pseudo-first-order reaction and the values of kap, at given experimental 
conditions, can be obtained fr om the slopes of these pl ots. However, the reaction 
exhibits a change on its kinetics, which is  a consequence of the complexity of the 
mechanism. This has been widely reported in  the literature associated with the Fenton 
process, and for that reason the kap values were calculated from experimental data 
covering only the Fenton-like phase of the process, this means where most of the Fe2+ 
has been converted into Fe3+ (also called as stage II). Actually, it is known that the 
Fenton process is divided in  two stage-reactions. In the first stage the organic 
compounds are decomposed rapidly and somewh at less rapidly in  the second one, as 
described in chapter 3. The main reason fo r this well-known behaviour is that ferrous 
ions react very quickly with hydrogen pero xide to produce large amounts of hydroxyl 
radicals ( cf. Eq. (4.1) and correspondi ng rate constant), which can then react rapidly 
with the dye (so-called Fe2+/H2O2 stage) [3]. Ferric ions pr oduced can then react with 
H2O2 to produce hydroperoxyl radicals  and restore ferrous ions ( cf. Eq. (4.3)). However, 
the rate of oxidation in the second stage (Fe3+/H2O2 stage) is slower than in the first one 
due to the slow production of Fe2+ from Fe3+ [18]. Because the reaction in which Fe2+ is 
converted into Fe3+ is very fast, the first stage is shor t (or very short) and afterwards the 
process enters into a so-calle d pseudo steady-state, wherein Fe is mainly in the 3+ 
oxidation state. 
Figure 4.1 shows the transient OII concen tration curve in a typical experiment, 
evidencing clearly the existence of this two-stage process. For that reason the fitting of a single kinetic equation along all the process is not straightforward and so we used data 
only in the second stage of the process (pseudo steady-state, 
t > t1). This means that, in 
general, ca. 90% of the experimental data in  a single run are used in the regression, and 
in all cases it is warranted that the conversion of Fe2+ into Fe3+ is higher than 95% ( cf. 
Eq. (4.10), derived from Eq. (4.1 ), taking into account that H 2O2 is present in large 
excess with respect to Fe2+).  In all experiments fitting of  Eq. (4.9) to experimental data 
provided average relative error be low 6.5 %, as described in the following section.    
 
22 11050
OHCk.lnt⋅−>         ( 4 . 1 0 )  
 Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’s reag ent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 620 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 35000.01.0x10-52.0x10-53.0x10-54.0x10-55.0x10-5COII (M)
Time (s) Run 13
 Trendline
t1 Eq. (10)
 
Fig. 4.1 – Typical plot of the OII concentration over time in the batch reactor. Experimental 
conditions: M CoOII4101.1−× = , M C
oOH410222−×= , M C
o Fe61052−×= + , T = 303 K and pH = 3.  
 
4.3.2 Batch Reactor – Effect of the Main Operating Conditions 
 
In the closed reactor, several experime nts on Orange II degradation by Fenton’s 
reagent were conducted by varying the te mperature (283-323 K) and the initial 
concentrations of OII (3 ×10-5-1×10-4 M), H 2O2 (1×10-4-1×10-3 M) and Fe2+ (2.5 ×10-6- 
2×10-5 M). The effect of the pH and of a scav enger usually present in textile effluents 
(chloride ion), was also analysed.  
 
4.3.2.1  Effect of the pH  
 
The influence of initial pH in the degradat ion of OII was first studied. Figure 4.2 
shows the fittings to the dye concentrati on data over time using Eq. (4.9), showing 
clearly that the OII degradati on in the Fenton-like stage (d ata in the first stage were 
omitted) fits well the pseudo- first order kinetic model (average relative error < 1.0 %), 
whatever is the reaction pH (in the range 2-4). 
 Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’s reag ent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 630 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 45000.00.20.40.6- ln(COII/COIIo)
Time (s) pH = 4.0
 pH = 3.0
 pH = 3.0
 pH = 2.0
 
  Fig. 4.2 – Plot of the linearized (ln) normalized dye concentration over time in the Fenton-like stage at 
different pH values. For the experimental  conditions please refer to Table 4.1. 
  
Table 4.1 shows the effect of the pH on th e apparent kinetic constant (runs 1-4), 
from which it is evident that  when the initial pH increases from 2 to 3 the value of kap 
quickly increases, and then suddenly decreases wh en the pH is raised from 3 to 4. This 
behaviour was mentioned in the previous chap ter and agrees with li terature findings, as 
it is usually accepted that acidic pH levels  near 3 are usually optimum for Fenton 
oxidation [6,7,19]. At pH < 3, the process becomes less effective. Indeed, in such 
conditions the regeneration of Fe2+ (through reaction between Fe3+ and H 2O2) is 
inhibited, because the formation of the Fe3+-peroxocomplexes (as intermediates) 
decreases [20]. At a pH above 3.5 the pe rformance significantly decreases, mainly 
because the dissolved fraction of iron speci es decreases [21]. Ac tually, at high pHs 
Fe(III) precipitates, therefor e decreasing the concentrati on of dissolved Fe(III). 
Consequently, the concentration of Fe(II) species also decreases because iron(III) 
hydroxides are much less reactive than dissolved Fe(III) species towards H 2O2. The 
process performance is then affected becau se a smaller steady-state concentration of 
hydroxyl radicals is attained.  
It is worth noting that two experi ments performed at pH 3.0 provided kap values 
that differ just 2.7%. 
 
 
 Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’s reag ent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 64Table 4.1 – Effect of initial pH, chloride i on, dye, hydrogen peroxide or ferrous ion 
concentrations and temperature on the appa rent pseudo-first-order rate constant ( kap). 
Run pH )(M CCl−  )(M CoOII  )(22M C
oOH  )( 2M C
o Fe+  T (K) )(1−skap  
1 2.0 2.5×10-5 
2 3.0 1.1×10-4 
3 3.0 1.1×10-4 
4 4.0 0 5.0×10-5 2.0×10-4 5.0×10-6 303 
7.3×10-5 
5 0 1.1×10-4 
6 1.0×10-3 7.3×10-5 
7 4.0×10-3 4.9×10-5 
8 3.0 
1.0×10-2 5.0×10-5 2.0×10-4 5.0×10-6 303 
5.8×10-5 
9 1.1×10-4 6.7×10-5 
10 5.9×10-5 9.7×10-5 
11 5.1×10-5 1.1×10-4 
12 4.1×10-5 1.2×10-4 
13 3.0 0 
3.2×10-5 2.0×10-4 5.0×10-6 303 
1.6×10-4 
14 1.0×10-4 7.4×10-5 
15 2.0×10-4 9.8×10-5 
16 4.0×10-4 1.6×10-4 
17 6.0×10-4 3.1×10-4 
18 8.0×10-4 3.2×10-4 
19 3.0 0 5.0×10-5 
1.0×10-3 5.0×10-6 303 
4.0×10-4 
20 2.5×10-6 4.7×10-5 
21 5.0×10-6 1.1×10-4 
22 1.0×10-5 4.0×10-4 
23 1.5×10-5 5.8×10-4 
24 3.0 0 5.1×10-5 2.0×10-4 
2.0×10-5 303 
8.3×10-4 
25 283 2.0×10-5 
26 293 5.3×10-5 
27 303 1.1×10-4 
28 313 2.2×10-4 
29 3.0 0 5.3×10-5 2.0×10-4 5.0×10-6 
323 4.2×10-4 
 
   Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 654.3.2.2  Effect of the Chloride  Anion Concentration 
 
Inorganic anions (Cl-, SO 42-, H 2PO 4- /HPO 42-, etc.) present in wastewater may 
have a significant effect on the overall reaction rates in the Fenton process [22]. 
Moreover, the textile effluents contain a large number of inorga nic salts [23] and 
inorganic anions, such as ch loride ions, are very common in most wastewaters [24]. 
Therefore, it is important to evaluate their effect on the performance of the process.  
The effect of the chloride anion (Cl-) on the degradation of OII by Fenton’s 
reagent was thus investigated and the results ar e shown in Table 4.1. It can be seen that 
the oxidation power of the Fenton process was decreased in the presence of Cl-, as 
revealed by its effect on th e kinetic constant associated with the reaction between OII 
and HO• species ( kap). The reason for this might therefor e be attributed to a decrease in 
the amount of hydroxyl radicals available as  a consequence of the following parallel 
scavenging reactions [3]: 
 
−• • −→ + ClHO HO Cl        ( 4 . 1 1 )  
+ − − + −•+ + → +3 2Fe OH Cl Fe ClHO      ( 4 . 1 2 )  
 
This inhibitory effect is in agreement with others reported in the literature for 
2,4-dichlorophenol [25], Orange  II [26] and other dyes [27]  degradation, although some 
others point for other parallel reactions be tween Cl anions and other species [22, 26]. 
Finally, it is worth mentioning that Malik and Saha [3] repor ted that the presence of Cl- 
on direct dyes oxidation decreases the extent of degradation, when Cl- concentration 
ranges similar to those used in this chapter were employed. 
 The effect of the remaining operating variables will now be addressed, in order 
to establish the reaction rate equation, in absence of chloride ions and at the optimum 
pH of 3.  
 
4.3.2.3  Effect of the Initial Orange II Concentration  
 
The effect of the initial dye concentration was tested  at constant initial H 2O2 and 
Fe2+ concentrations, 2 ×10-4 and 5 ×10-6 M, respectively, with T = 303 K and initial pH = 
3. Results are shown in Fig. 4.3A, with  the corresponding fitting lines (in the Fenton-Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 66like stage), and the obtained apparent kinetic constants are reported in Table 4.1 (runs 9-
13). Results show that the degradat ion rate decreases for increasingoOIIC, in the chosen 
range. The apparent rate order for Orange II wa s then determined to be -0.67 from a ln 
kap vs. ln 
oOIIC plot (Fig. 4.3B). The negative effect  of the parent organic compound on 
the apparent kinetic constant was also re ported by other authors [e.g., 17,28]. Because 
the amount of hydrogen peroxide molecules availa ble is the same, this  indicates that the 
higher the dye concentration in the reactor, the smalle r is the hydroxyl radicals 
concentration at the pseudo steady-state.  
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 45000.00.20.40.6- ln(COII/COIIo)
Time (s) COIIo = 1x10-4 M
 COIIo = 6x10-5 M
 COIIo = 5x10-5 M
 COIIo = 4x10-5 M
 COIIo = 3x10-5 MA
-10.5 -10.0 -9.5 -9.0-9.5-9.0-8.5ln kap
ln COIIoSlope = -0.67
R2 = 0.996B
Fig. 4.3 – (A) Plot of the linearized (ln) normalized  dye concentration over time in the Fenton-like stage 
at different initial OII concentrations. (B) Effect of  the initial OII concentration on the apparent rate 
constant of OII degradation. For the experimental conditions please refer to Table 4.1. 
 
 
4.3.2.4  Effect of the Initial Hydroge n Peroxide Concentration  
 
Figure 4.4A shows the normalized OII c oncentration histories for different 
oxidant doses and the corresponding fittings, from which the apparent kinetic constants were computed. 
The effect of the initial hydr ogen peroxide concentration (
22 oHOC ) on kap can be 
observed in runs 14-19 (Table 4.1), and th e results show that the degradation rate 
increases for increasing hydrogen peroxide load s, in the range studi ed. This trend was 
expectable. However, in the previous ch apter it was found that when the value of 
oOHC22 
is very high, the degradation efficiency keep s constant or even decreases. The fact that 
in some conditions very high H 2O2 concentration values lead to a decrease in the final 
discolouration and rate of degradation is possibly due to the competition between these species for hydroxyl radicals (scavenging effect, Eq. (4.4 )). Indeed, HO radicals are Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 67quite non-selective, reacting w ith the organic matter present but also with other species. 
Laat and Gallard [8] have also stated that when the molar ratio 
oOHC22/
o FeC+2 is very high 
(> 500), a detrimental effect might be observe d. This was not observed in this work and 
much lower ratios have been employed (< 200). 
The apparent rate order for initial H 2O2 concentration was determined to be 0.77 
from a ln kap vs. ln 
oOHC22plot (see Fig. 4.4B). 
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 45000.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4- ln(COII/COIIo)
Time (s) CH2O2o = 1x10-4 M
 CH2O2o = 2x10-4 M
 CH2O2o = 4x10-4 M
 CH2O2o = 6x10-4 M
 CH2O2o = 8x10-4 M
 CH2O2o = 1x10-3 MA
-9.5 -9.0 -8.5 -8.0 -7.5 -7.0 -6.5-10-9-8ln kap
ln CH2O2oSlope = 0.77
R2 = 0.977B
Fig. 4.4 – (A) Plot of the linearized (ln) normalized  dye concentration over time in the Fenton-like stage 
at different initial H 2O2 concentrations. (B) Effect of the initial H 2O2 concentration on the apparent rate 
constant of OII degradation. For the experimental conditions please refer to Table 4.1.  
 
4.3.2.5  Effect of the Initial Ferrous Ion Concentration  
  
The procedure described above was also  applied to analyze the effect of 
o FeC+2 
(Fig. 4.5A and Table 4.1). The linear fit is once again quite reasonable (average relative 
error < 6.5 %), even for the higher iron c oncentrations for which dye conversion is 
above ~90% at the end of the run (and theref ore its concentration is  in the range of 10-6 
M). 
Data obtained put into evidence that the de gradation rate is very sensitive to the 
iron concentration, because it acts as catalys t in the Fenton or Fent on-like process. In 
the range used, i.e., 2.5 ×10-6 < 
o FeC+2< 2.0 ×10-5 M and 10 < 
oOHC22/
o FeC+2< 80 (mol.), the 
degradation rate increa ses with the ferrous iron content.  Other authors found that, if the 
ratio 
oOHC22/
o FeC+2 is between 50-500, kap increases linearly with 
o FeC+2 [8]. The rate order 
for initial Fe2+ dose was determined to be 1.43 from a ln kap vs. ln 
o FeC+2 plot (Fig. 4.5B) 
with a very good linear fit.  Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 680 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 40000.00.51.01.52.02.53.0- ln(COII/COIIo)
Time (s) CFe2+
o = 2.5x10- 6 M
 CFe2+
o = 5.0x10- 6 M
 CFe2+
o = 1.0x10- 5 M
 CFe2+
o = 1.5x10- 5 M
 CFe2+
o = 2.0x10- 5 MA
-13.0 -12.5 -12.0 -11.5 -11.0 -10.5-11-10-9-8-7-6ln kap
ln CFe2+
oSlope = 1.43
R2 = 0.995B
Fig. 4.5 – (A) Plot of the linearized (ln) normalized  dye concentration over time in the Fenton-like stage 
at different initial Fe2+ concentrations. (B) Effect of the initial Fe2+ concentration on the apparent rate 
constant of OII degradation. For the experimental conditions please refer to Table 4.1. 
 
4.3.2.6  Effect of the Temperature  
 
The temperature effect on kap, deduced again from the fittings shown in Fig. 
4.6A,  can be observed in runs 25-29, with constantoOIIC,
oOHC22, pH and
o FeC+2 (Table 4.1). 
It is observed that the temperature has a st rong effect on the OII degradation rate, which 
is increased at high temperatures due to an  increment in the pseudo-first-order rate 
constant. The data exhibit Arrhenius-type be haviour, with an appa rent activation energy 
of 58.1 kJ mol-1, calculated from the usual ln kap vs. 1/T plot (Fig. 4.6B). The value 
obtained is very similar to that reported in chapter 6 for a Fe-impregnated activated 
carbon (56.1 kJ mol-1). It is interesting to note that such activation energies are 
somewhat higher than the values measur ed for: i) photo-assisted catalytic 
decomposition of Orange II through a Fe /C structured so lid - 43.55 kJ mol-1  [29] and ii) 
photo-Fenton reactions on structured C-Nafion/Fe-ion surfaces - 41.03 kJ mol-1 [30].  
 Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 690 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 45000.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.6- ln(COII/COIIo)
Time (s) T = 283 K
 T = 293 K
 T = 303 K
 T = 313 K
 T = 323 KA
3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6-11.0-10.5-10.0-9.5-9.0-8.5-8.0-7.5ln kap
1/T (x103 K-1)y = 6986.9x + 13.9
R2 = 0.998B
Fig. 4.6 – (A) Plot of the linearized (ln) normalized  dye concentration over time in the Fenton-like stage 
at different temperatures. (B) Arrhenius plot of the apparent rate constant of OII degradation. For the 
experimental conditions please refer to Table 4.1.  
 
4.3.2.7  Rate Equation for the Degradation of OII in a Batch Reactor 
 
The rate equation can be expressed in a simple way (pseudo first-order), as 
shown in Eq. (4.8), wherein kap depends on the initial conditions as follows: 
 
)RT/Ea exp( C C AC kc
Feb
OHa
OII apo o o− = +222       ( 4 . 1 3 )    
 
where Ea is the apparent activation energy for OII degradation and the exponents a, b 
and c represent the apparent reaction orders for OII, H 2O2 and Fe2+, respectively.  The 
pre-exponential coefficient A was then calculated by regres sion minimising the sum of 
the square residues between the kap data obtained from Eqs. (4.9) and (4.13), for each 
experiment. The value obtained wi th this procedure was A = 4.06 ×1013 s-1 and the 
resulting parity plot is s hown in Fig. 4.7, evidencing a good agreement between the 
data. Concluding, the power-law equation fo r the apparent rate constant of OII 
oxidation via Fenton’s reagent, in th e Fenton-like stage, is given by: 
 
)RT/ exp( C C C . k.
o Fe.
oOH.
OIIo ap 58092 10064431 770 670 13
222− × = +−  (4.14) 
     Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 700.0 2.0x10-44.0x10-46.0x10-48.0x10-40.02.0x10-44.0x10-46.0x10-48.0x10-4kap from Eq. (4.14) (s-1)
kap from Eq. (4.9) (s-1)R2 = 0.983
  
Fig. 4.7 – Plot of kap obtained from Eq. (4.9) and predicted from Eq. (4.14). 
 
Up to now it was established a first-or der rate law for OII degradation, which 
can be useful for predicting the pseudo steady-st ate (i.e., when Fe is essentially at the 3+ 
oxidation state) in a chemical reactor. Obvious ly, in a batch system this can fail (and 
really does, as shown below), depending on the initial conditions and extension of the 
initial (Fenton) phase, which is most experime nts performed is short.  However, it can be 
valuable to predict the beha viour of open reactors, operati ng at steady-state conditions, 
if the residence time is enough so that Fe2+ is almost completely converted into Fe3+. 
To predict the dye concentration histor y in the batch reactor, the mass balance 
yields the typical exponentia l curve (Eq. (4.9)), where kap is computed from Eq. (4.14). 
Figures 4.8A to 4.8D show th e transient curves in which ex perimental and model results 
are compared, for the main parameters studied in this work. In most runs there is an 
underprediction of the model, which has also  some problems in predicting the initial 
data, as expected (Fenton stage). It is wo rth noting that the mode l has a better accuracy 
when a fast transition from stage I to stage II is ensured. This means high concentration 
of hydrogen peroxide (average absolute e rror of 4.9 % vs. 6.5 % for the lowest 
concentration, Fig. 4.8B) or high temperature (average absolu te error of 1.2 % vs. 7.0 % 
for the lowest temperature, Fig. 4.8D), wh ich is in good agreement with Eq. (4.10). In 
Fig. 4.8A the concentration of orange II wa s varied, but again fo r simplicity only two 
experiments of those used in the kinetic study are shown in the graphic, corresponding 
to the highest and lowest dye concentrations used. An additional run was still carried Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 71out at a higher temperature, putting into evidence the better adherence of the model 
under such conditions.  
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 35000.00.20.40.60.81.0COII/COIIo
Time (s) COIIo = 1.1x10-4 M
 COIIo = 3.2x10-5 M
 COIIo = 3.2x10-5 M, T = 323 K
 ModelA
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 35000.00.20.40.60.81.0COII/COIIo
Time (s) CH2O2o = 1x10-4 M
 CH2O2o = 4x10-4 M  
 CH2O2o = 8x10-4 M
 ModelB
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 35000.00.20.40.60.81.0
 CFe2+
o = 2.5x10-6 M 
 CFe2+
o = 5.0x10-6 M
 CFe2+
o = 2.0x10-5 M
 ModelCOII/COIIo
Time (s)C
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 35000.00.20.40.60.81.0COII/COIIo
Time (s) T = 283 K 
 T = 313 K   
 T = 323 K  
 Model D
Fig. 4.8 – Orange II concentration histories in the batch reactor when changing: (A) the initial OII 
concentration; (B) the initial H 2O2 concentration; (C) the initial Fe2+ concentration; and (D) the 
temperature. For the experimental co nditions please refer to Table 4.1. 
 
 
4.3.3 Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor (CSTR) Experiments 
 
In an ideal CSTR (or perfectly mixed r eactor), the contents are well-stirred and 
uniform throughout; therefore th e exit stream has the same  composition as the fluid 
within the vessel. Tracer e xperiments have confirmed that  the reactor used in this 
chapter closely matches these ideal mixing c onditions, as evidenced in Fig. 4.9, where 
the theoretical curve is give n by the typical Danckwerts’ C curve, i.e., the normalized 
response to a pulse input [31, 32]: 
  Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 72() ⎟
⎠⎞⎜
⎝⎛− = =τt
Ct CtCooutexp)(         ( 4 . 1 5 )  
 
For a CSTR, the space-time in Eq. (4.15) is equal to the mean residence time. In 
this case, the difference between the resi dence time obtained from the experimental 
tracer data fit and the formula value ( τ = V/Q) varies between 2.4 and 5.0 %, for 
different flow rates in the range of the experiments. 
   
 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 100000.00.20.40.60.81.0
 Experimental
 ModelCout/Co
Time (s)
 
 Fig. 4.9 – Typical experimental data (Danckwerts’ C curve) for a tracer experiment and corresponding 
model fit. Flow rate = 0.58 ml s-1. 
 
Table 4.2 shows the experiments carried  out in the con tinuous reactor at 
different experimental conditions. In this case, the inlet OII, H 2O2 and Fe2+ 
concentrations, temperature and residence time  were changed, within  the range used in 
the batch reactor. However, experiments out of  such range were also performed, shown 
in Table 4.3, in which higher catalyst dosages have been used in order to shift the 
steady-state conversions to values close to 100%. Both tables include also the 
experimental conversion and the model pred iction (described later on), calculated as 
follows: 
 
100×−
=
inout in
OIIOII OII
CC C
X        ( 4 . 1 6 )  
 Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 73where OIIinC is the inlet OII concentration and OIIoutC  the outlet one. 
 
Table 4.2 – Experimental and model prediction of  OII conversion in the continuous stirred tank 
reactor, under conditions within  the batch study range. 
Run )(M C
inOII )(
22M C
inOH )( 2M C
in Fe+ )(sτ  T (K) X exp(%) X mod (%) 
1 4.0×10-5 1136.7 18.0 21.0 
2 7.0×10-5 1142.2 16.0 15.5 
3 1.0×10-4 4.0×10-4 5.0×10-6 
1147.2 303 
12.9 12.7 
4 4.0×10-4 1221.6 69.2 64.0 
5 3.0×10-4 1222.7 63.8 58.7 
6 2.0×10-4 1199.7 58.3 50.6 
7 1.0×10-4 1195.8 50.8 37.4 
8 5.0×10-5 
5.0×10-5 2.0×10-5 
1238.1 303 
34.6 26.7 
9 2.5×10-5 1284.31 2.1 3.0 
10 5.0×10-5 1284.31 5.5 5.0 
11 2.0×10-4 1268.26 13.2 13.0 
12 4.0×10-4 1268.26 20.3 20.3 
13 5.0×10-5 
9.0×10-4 5.0×10-6 
1278.29 303 
27.4 32.4 
14 5.0×10-6 1302.3 23.1 20.7 
15 1.0×10-5 1265.4 46.0 40.6 
16 5.0×10-5 4.0×10-4 
2.0×10-5 1221.6 303 
70.0 64.0 
17 1284.31 288 9.2 7.2 
18 1284.31 318 46.3 43.4 
19 5.0×10-5 4.0×10-4 5.0×10-6 
1268.26 333 71.5 67.0 
20 1136.7 18.0 21.0 
21 1485.5 25.3 25.7 
22 5.0×10-5 4.0×10-4 5.0×10-6 
2341.3 303 
36.8 35.3 
 
 
 
    
 
 Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 74Table 4.3 – Experimental and model prediction of  OII conversion in the continuous stirred tank 
reactor, under conditions above  the batch study range. 
Run )(M C
inOII )(
22M C
inOH )( 2M C
in Fe+ )(sτ  T (K) X exp(%) X mod (%) 
23 3.0×10-5 1247.1 95.3 92.4 
24 4.0×10-5 1302.3 89.3 91.5 
25 5.0×10-5 1302.3 87.2 90.1 
26 7.0×10-5 1247.1 72.9 87.4 
27 1.0×10-4 4.0×10-4 6.0×10-5 
1247.1 303 
64.5 84.8 
28 3.0×10-5 1265.0 77.8 76.6 
29 4.0×10-5 1265.4 81.4 83.2 
30 6.0×10-5 1302.3 87.2 90.1 
31 1.0×10-4 1228.7 87.8 94.7 
32 5.0×10-5 4.0×10-4 
2.0×10-4 1302.3 303 
90.0 98.1 
33 1238.1 283 75.0 62.9 
34 1247.1 296 80.8 83.4 
35 1302.3 303 87.2 90.1 36 1247.1 315 89.4 95.5 37 1238.1 323 93.5 97.4 
38 1238.1 336 94.6 98.8 
39 2054.5 283 77.8 74.6 40 2060.7 299 94.2 91.8 41 2504.3 300 90.2 93.6 
42 2476.2 323 96.3 98.7 
43 5.0×10
-5 4.0×10-4 6.0×10-5 
2407.9 334 97.3 99.3 
44 1302.3 87.2 90.1 
45 1760.6 88.9 92.5 
46 5.0×10-5 4.0×10-4 6.0×10-5 
2504.3 303 
90.2 94.6 
 
In the next plots (Figs. 4.10 to 4.14) the effect of the reagents concentrations (at 
the reactor inlet), temperat ure and residence time on the steady-state conversion is 
shown. In all of them clos ed symbols refer to conditi ons within the batch range, 
whereas open symbols to values above it, in  terms of iron concentration. It can be 
concluded that the effect of each paramete r on the OII conversion is similar to that 
observed in the batch reactor.  Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 752.0x10-54.0x10-56.0x10-58.0x10-51.0x10-4020406080100X (%)
COIIin (M) CFe2+ = 5x10-6 M 
 CFe2+ = 6x10-5 M 
 Model
Fig. 4.10 – Effect of the inlet dye concentration on 
the steady-state OII conversion in the continuous 
reactor. For the experimental conditions please 
refer to Tables 4.2 and 4.3.  0.0 3.0x10-46.0x10-49.0x10-4020406080X (%)
CH2O2in (M) CFe2+ = 2x10-5 M
 CFe2+ = 5x10-6 M
 Model
Fig. 4.11 – Effect of the inlet H 2O2 concentration 
on the steady-state OII conversion in the 
continuous reactor. For the experimental 
conditions please refer to Table 4.2.  
 
0.0 5.0x10-51.0x10-41.5x10-42.0x10-4020406080100X (%)
CFe2+
in (M) Low Fe concentrations
 high Fe concentrations
 Model
Fig. 4.12 – Effect of the inlet Fe2+ concentration on 
the steady-state OII conversion in the continuous 
reactor. For the experimental conditions please 
refer to Tables 4.2 and 4.3.  280 290 300 310 320 330 340 350020406080100X (%)
Temperature (K) CFe2+ = 5x10-6 M
 CFe2+ = 6x10-5 M
 Model
Fig. 4.13 – Effect of th e temperature on the steady-
state OII conversion in the continuous reactor. For 
the experimental conditions please refer to Tables 
4.2 and 4.3.  
1200 1500 1800 2100 2400020406080100X (%)
τ (s) CFe2+ = 5x10-6 M
 CFe2+ = 6x10-5 M
 Model
 
Fig. 4.14 – Effect of the spac e time on the steady-state OII  
conversion in the con tinuous reactor. For the experimental conditions 
please refer to Tables 4.2 and 4.3.  Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 76First, the OII conversion decreases when  the dye concentration in the reactor 
feed increases (see Fig. 4.10). In terms of  hydrogen peroxide concentration (Fig. 4.11), 
it is evident that when the H 2O2 concentration is increased in the feed, an increment in 
the OII conversion is noticed, because mo re hydroxyl radicals are available for 
oxidation, in the range studied. The same beha vior is observed when the ferrous iron is 
changed, as showed in the previous figures and also in Fig. 4.12.  In the latter, an 
increase in the Fe2+ load fed to the reactor from 5 ×10-6 to 6 ×10-5 M lead to an increase 
in the steady-state OII conversion from 23% to 87%, however runs car ried out at higher 
Fe2+ doses (1-2 ×10-4 M) resulted in no appreciable di fferences in terms of OII removal 
(up to 90%). Temperature eff ect was investigated in the range 283 to 336 K, showing to 
be an important parameter in  the Fenton process (Fig. 4. 13), particularly when low 
catalyst doses are employed. Finally, when the residence time was incremented, better 
results were obtained in terms of OII convers ion at steady-state, as  expected (see Fig. 
4.14).    
 
4.3.4 Validation of the Model in  the Continuous Reactor 
 
From a simple mass balance to the CSTR, at steady-state:  
V)r( F F
out OII OII OIIout in−+ =        ( 4 . 1 7 )  
 
where FOIIin and FOIIout denote the dye molar flow rate at the reactor inlet and outlet, 
respectively. Since the reaction is of a pse udo first-order type (Eq. (4.8)), the outlet 
concentration of OII can be give by: 
 
τkC
C
apOII
OIIin
out+=1        ( 4 . 1 8 )  
 
where τ = V/Q is the space-time, V is the reacto r volume (0.92 L), Q is the total flow 
rate and kap is obtained by Eq. (4.14) , based on the concentratio n of each species at the 
reactor inlet, because these are the conditions  that determine the steady-state radicals 
concentration. This issue can also be rati onalized from the well known total segregation 
model [31,32], which assumes that all flui d elements having the same age (residence 
time) “travel together” in the reactor and do  not mix with elements of different ages, Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 77until they exit the reactor. Because there is no interchange of matter between fluid 
elements, each one acts as a batch reactor a nd so the mean steady-state conversion in 
the reactor is given by:  
∫∞
⋅ =
obatch dttEt X X )()(         ( 4 . 1 9 )  
 
where Xbatch(t) refers to the transient conver sion equation in a batch reactor 
(( )tk
batchape X−−=1 , because the reaction is pseudo first-order - cf. Eq. (4.9)), and E(t) is 
the residence-time distribution function ( ( )τt expττ)t(C)t(E − = = 1 , cf. Eq. (4.15)). 
What is important to remark is that in this model, the computation of conversion in a 
continuous reactor by Eq. (4.19) makes use of  an expression for a “micro” batch reactor 
that is based on the reactor feed conditions. 
The model conversion (X mod) was then obtained using Eqs. (4.16) and (4.18) 
(the total segregation model yi elds the same value, because  the reaction is pseudo first 
order – linear system). The previous figures (4.10 to 4.14) show the model predictions 
for all the experiments performed.  
In what concerns the effect of the inle t OII concentration (Fig. 4.10), it is 
remarkable the adherence of the model to experimental data in which iron 
concentrations within the range used in th e batch runs have been employed (maximum 
absolute error of 3%). However, even wh en catalyst doses one order of magnitude 
higher are employed, the model is able to pr edict the negative effect of increasing dye 
concentrations, although with hi gher deviations. This negative  effect is related with a 
decrease in the number of oxidant molecule s (or radicals) available per dye molecule 
(lower H 2O2/OII ratios).  
The model fits also reasonably the da ta obtained in experiments where 
increasing oxidant dosages are employed (Fig . 4.11), particularly for low iron loads. 
The model adherence is however worst when the catalyst concentration approaches the 
upper limit employed in the kinetic study. The difficulty in predicting conversions 
under experimental conditions in the limits of the range employed in the kinetic study is 
also evident in terms of hydrogen peroxide conc entrations. This can be seen in the first 
data series, for lower Fe2+ loads (5×10-6 M), because the radicals scavenging effect that Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 78occurs at high oxidant loads ( cf. Eq. (4.4)) is not taken in to account in the power law 
type rate equation. 
Figure 4.12 reinforces what was said in  the previous paragraph, i.e. the good 
adherence of the model to experimental data when using conditions (now iron concentrations) within those employed when establishing the rate equation. However it 
has some difficulties to predict the scavengi ng effect, i.e., the pa rallel and undesirable 
reaction that occurs between the catalyst and the hydroxyl radicals (Eq.  (4.2)) at high Fe 
loads. 
The results obtained when the temperat ure and residence time were changed 
(Figs. 4.13 and 4.14, respectively) show that  the model also predicts well the positive 
effect of both parameters; this applies particularly for low iron loads, and even reasonably when iron concentrations above those employed in the kinetic study were 
used.      
Finally, in Fig. 4.15 is shown the comparison between the experimental 
conversion data and the model prediction, for all experiments of Tables 4.2 and 4.3. In 
the parity plot it is observed that there is a reasonably good adherence of the model, in 
spite no fitting parameters exist. The more  significant deviations concern experiments 
performed off the kinetic study range (e.g. ru ns 26 and 27, absolute  errors of 15 and 
20%, respectively), although on average predictions differ less than 5%. The model 
revealed, therefore, to be effective for predicting either experiments carried out within the range used in the batch re actor or out of it (high catalyst concentrations), the later 
being performed also with the goal of exte nding the OII conversion range, approaching 
values close to 100%. Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 790 2 04 06 08 0 1 0 0020406080100XMod (%)
XExp (%) Experiments within the batch range
 Experiments out of the batch range  
R2 = 0.968
 
Fig. 4.15 – Parity plot comparing OII conversion obtained experimentally versus OII conversion 
predicted by the CSTR model . 
 
4.4 Conclusions 
 
• Performances reached during Orange II degradation by means of Fenton’s 
reagent highly depend on operating c onditions, i.e. reagents dosage, 
temperature, pH and time of reaction (batch reactor) or residence time 
(continuous reactor). 
• In this study, and particularly in th e batch reactor experiments, low initial 
concentrations of hydrogen peroxide and ferrous ion were applied to eliminate 
the useless use of excessive reag ent doses, usually found at high Fe2+ and/or 
H2O2 doses. Depending on the initial condi tions, about 14-95 % of Orange II 
was removed in 1 h. 
• Experiments carried out in the batch reac tor evidenced that the optimum pH is 
around 3 and the negati ve effect of Cl- concentrations. It was also observed the 
positive effect of increasing the reaction temperature, H 2O2 or Fe2+ 
concentrations, and the negative effect of  increasing dye concentrations, trends 
that were corroborated with experiments in the CSTR. 
• The dye history concentration showed a ch ange in the kinetics, typical of this 
process, being initia lly very rapid (Fenton stage)  and afterwards the slower 
Fenton-like stage proceeds, where iron is mostly in the 3+ oxidation state. For 
the longer and last stage a pseudo st eady-state approach was employed to Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 80deduce the reaction rate, wh ich was found to be of th e first-order type with 
respect to OII concentration. The dependen ce of the apparent kinetic constant on 
the initial operating conditions was then deduced, leading to a power-law rate 
equation with Arrhenius dependenc y (apparent activati on energy of               
58.1 kJ mol-1). In experiments carried out in duplicate, kap varied by less than 
10%. 
• This rate equation revealed to be somewhat useful to predict dye concentration 
histories in the batch reactor (based on the known initial conditions) and the 
steady-state dye conversion in the CSTR (b ased on inlet conditions), wherein Fe 
is essentially at the 3+ oxidation state.  However, under certai n conditions some 
underprediction was observed. 
• A large set of experiments was performed in the continuous reac tor, in order to 
analyze the effect of all the variables involved. In all cases it was observed a 
reasonably good agreement between experime ntal and model results, even for 
experiments performed with iron concentr ations out of the range used in the 
batch kinetic study. It is important to re mark the ability of the model to predict 
data in a wide range of dye conve rsions values, from 2 to 97 %. 
 
References  
 1. Dutta, K.; Mukhopadhyay, S.; Bhattacharjee, S.; Chaudhuri, B. Chemical oxidation of 
methylene blue using a Fenton-like reaction. Journal of Hazardous Materials 2001 , 84, 
57. 
 2. Swaminathan, K.; Sandhya, S.; Sophia, A. C.; Pachhade, K.; Subrahmanyam, Y. V. 
Decolorization and degradation of H-aci d and other dyes using ferrous–hydrogen 
peroxide system. Chemosphere 2003 , 50, 619. 
 3. Malik, P. K.; Saha, S. K. Oxidation of di rect dyes with hydrogen peroxide using ferrous 
ion as catalyst. Separation and Purification Technology 2003 , 31, 241. 
 4. Lin, S. H.; Lo, C. C. Fenton process for treatment of desizing wastewater. Water 
Research 1997 , 31, 2050. 
 5. Bigda, R. J. Consider Fenton chemistry for wastewater treatment. Chemical Engineering 
and Processing 1995 , 91, 62. 
 6. Walling, C. Fenton’s reagent revis ited. Accounts of Chemical Research  1975 , 8, 125.  
 7. Rivas, F. J.; Navarrete, V.; Beltran, F. J. ; Garcia-Araya, J. F. Simazine Fenton’s oxidation 
in a continuous reactor. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2004 , 48, 249. Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 81 8. De Laat, J.; Gallard, H. Catalytic d ecomposition of hydrogen peroxide by Fe(III) in 
homogeneous aqueous solution: mechanism and kinetic modeling. Environmental 
Science and Technology 1999 , 33, 2726. 
 9. Dionysiou, D. D.; Suidan, M. T.; Baudin, I.; Laîne, J. M. Effect of hydrogen peroxide on 
the destruction of organic contaminants-syn ergism and inhibition in a continuous-mode 
photocatalytic reactor. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2004 , 50, 259. 
10. Henle, E. S.; Luo, Y.; Linn, S. Fe2+, Fe3+, and oxygen react with DNA-derived radicals 
formed during iron-mediated Fenton reactions. Biochemistry 1996 , 35, 12, 212. 
11. Rivas, F. J.; Beltran, F. J.; Frades, J.; Buxeda, P. Oxidation of p-hydroxybenzoic acid by 
Fenton's reagent. Water Research 1997 , 35, 387. 
12. Chen, R.; Pignatello, J. J. Role of quinone  intermediates as electron shuttles in Fenton 
and photoassisted Fenton oxidations of arom atic compounds. Environmental Science and 
Technology 1997 , 31, 2399. 
13. Haag, W. R; Yao, C. C. D. Rate constant s for reaction of hydroxyl radicals with several 
drinking water contaminants. Envi ronmental Science and Technology 1992 , 26, 1005.  
14. Zhang, H.; Choi, H. J.; Huang, C. P. Treat ment of landfill leachate by Fenton's reagent in 
a continuous stirred tank reactor . Journal of Hazardous Materials 2006 , 136, 618. 
15. Oh, S. Y.; Chiu, P. C.; Kim, B. J.; Cha, D. K. Enhancing Fenton oxidation of TNT and 
RDX through pretreatment with zero-valent iron. Water Research 2003 , 37, 4275. 
16. Gallard, H.; De Laat, J. Kinetic modelling of Fe(III)/H 2O2 oxidation reactions in dilute 
aqueous solution using atrazine as a model organic compound. Water Research 2000 , 34, 
3107. 
17. Sun, J. H; Sun, S. P.; Fan, M. H.; Guo, H. Q.; Qiao, L. P.; Sun, R. X. A kinetic study on 
the degradation of p-nitroaniline by Fenton oxidation process. Journal of Hazardous Materials 2007 , 148, 172. 
18 Benitez, F. J.; Real, F. J.; Acero, J. L.; Garcia C.; Llanos E. M. Kinetics of phenylurea 
herbicides oxidation by Fenton and photo-Fe nton processes. Journal of Chemical 
Technology and Biotechnology 2007 , 82, 65.  
19 Neyens, E.; Baeyens, J. A review of classic Fenton’s peroxidation as an advanced 
oxidation technique. Journal of Hazardous Materials 2003 , 98, 33. 
20. Pignatello, J. J. Dark and photoassisted ir on(3+)-catalyzed degradation of chlorophenoxy 
herbicides by hydrogen peroxide. En vironmental Science and Technology 1992 , 26, 944. 
21. Pera-Titus, M.; Garcia-Molina, V.; Baños, M.  A.; Gimenez, J.; Esplugas, S. Degradation 
of chlorophenols by means of advanced oxi dation processes: A general review. Applied 
Catalysis B: Environmental 2003 , 47, 219. Chapter 4. Modelling of the synthetic dye OII degradation using Fenton’ s reagent: from batch to CSTR operation 
 8222. De Laat, J.; Giang T. L.; Legube, B. A co mparative study of the effects of chloride, 
sulfate and nitrate ions on the rates of decomposition of H 2O2 and organic compounds by 
Fe(II)/H 2O2 and Fe(III)/H 2O2. Chemosphere 2004 , 55, 715.  
23. Chen, G.; Chai, X.; Yue, P.; Mi, Y. Treatment of textile desizing wastewater by pilot 
scale nanofiltration membrane separatio n. Journal of Membrane Science 1997 , 127, 93. 
24. Lu, M. C.; Chen, J. N.; Chang, C. P. Effect of inorganic ions on the oxidation of 
dichlorvos insecticide with Fenton's reagent. Chemosphere 1997 , 35, 2285. 
25. Tang, W. Z.; Huang, C. P. 2,4-Dichlorophenol oxidation kinetics by Fenton's reagent. 
Environmental Technologies 1996 , 17, 1371. 
26. Kiwi, J.; Lopez, A.; Nadtochenko, V. Mechanism and kinetics of the OH-radical 
intervention during Fenton oxidation in the presence of a significant amount of radical 
scavenger (Cl-). Environmental Science and Technology 2000 , 34, 2162. 
27. Guillard, C.; Lachheb, H.; Housa, A.; Ksibi,  M.; Elaloui, E.; Herrmann, J. M. Influence 
of chemical structure of dyes, of pH and of inorganic salts on their photocatalytic 
degradation by TiO 2 comparison of the efficiency of powder and supported TiO 2. Journal 
of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry 2003 , 158, 27. 
28 Rodriguez, M. L.; Timokhin, V. I.; Contreras, S.; Chamarro, E.; Esplugas, S. Rate 
equation for the degradation of nitrobenzen e by ‘Fenton-like’ reagent. Advances in 
Environmental Research 2003 , 7, 583. 
29. Yuranova, T.; Enea, O.; Mielczarski, E.; Mi elczarski, J.; Albers, P.; Kiwi. J. Fenton 
immobilized photo-assisted catalysis through a Fe/C structured fabric. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2004 , 49, 39. 
30. Parra, S.; Guasaquillo, I.; Enea, O.; Mielczar ski, E.; Mielczarki, J.; Albers, P.; Kiwi-
Minsker, L.; Kiwi. J. Abatement of an azo dye on structured C-Nafion/Fe-ion surfaces by photo-Fenton reactions leading to carbox ylate intermediates with a remarkable 
biodegradability increase of the treated solu tion. Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2003 , 
107, 7026. 
31. Fogler, H. S. Elements of chemical reaction engineering. Prentice-Hall, 3rd ed., N.J. 
1999 .  
32. Rodrigues, A. E. Theory of residence time distributions, in Multiphase Chemical 
Reactors, A.E. Rodrigues, J.M. Calo and N. H. Sweed (Eds.), NATO ASI Series, Sijthoff 
Noordhoff, 1981 , 51, Vol. I, 225.  
  
   
 
      
PART IV 
HETEROGENEOUS SYSTEM  
 
    
  
  
 
  Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 85CHAPTER 5 – FENTON -LIKE OXIDATION OF ORANGE II 
SOLUTIONS USING HETEROGENEOUS CATALYSTS 
BASED ON SAPONITE CLAY * 
 
   
Abstract 
 In this chapter, the degradation and mi neralization of Orange II solutions (1×10-4 
M) using catalysts based on pillared saponite  impregnated with di fferent iron salts is 
reported. Oxidation is carried out in a ba tch reactor, in presen ce of various hydrogen 
peroxide concentrations, and in a wide range of temperat ure and pH values. Twelve 
samples were prepared, with three different  iron loads (7.5, 13.0 and 17.0 wt. %), and 
using four iron salts as precursors, name ly Fe(II) acetate, Fe(II) oxalate, Fe(II) 
acetylacetonate and Fe(III) acetylacetonate. The samples were characterized using X-ray diffraction, thermal analysis, infrared spectroscopy, energy dispersive spectroscopy 
and adsorption of nitrogen at 77 K. The catalyt ic results show that these solids present 
good catalytic properties for the degradation a nd mineralization of Orange II solutions, 
allowing to reach, in the best conditions and after 4 h of oxidation, 99% of dye 
degradation with 91% of TOC (Total Organi c Carbon) reduction (at 70 ºC), using only 
ca. 90 mg of clay catalyst per liter of solu tion. Nevertheless, 96% of dye removal with 
82% of mineralization were also reached at 30 ºC. Besides, the amount of iron released 
into the final solution is lower than 1 ppm, in the worst of the cases, and 0.09 ppm in the 
best case.    
                                                
 
* Adapted from : Ramirez, J. H.; Costa, C. A.; Madeira, L. M.; Mata, G.; Vicente, M. A.; Rojas-Cervantes, 
M. L.; Lopez-Peinado, A. J.; Martin-Aranda R. M. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental  2007 , 71, 44. Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 865.1 Introduction 
 
The oxidation using Fenton’s reagent (a powerful source of oxidative HO• 
radicals generated from H 2O2 in the presence of added Fe2+ ions [1]) has proved to be a 
promising and attractive treatment method for the effective destruction of a large 
number of hazardous and organic pollutants [2-6]. The generated HO• radicals are 
highly oxidative, non-selectiv e, and able to decompos e many organic compounds, 
including dyes [7]. However, it should be  pointed out that the homogeneous Fenton 
process has a significant disadvantage. Hom ogeneously catalysed reactions need up to 
50-80 ppm of Fe ions in solution, which is  well above the Europ ean Union directives 
that allow only 2 ppm of Fe i ons in treated water to dump directly into the environment 
[8]. In addition, the removal/treatment of th e sludge-containing Fe ions at the end of the 
wastewater treatment is expensive and need s large amount of chem icals and manpower.  
 To overcome the disadvantages of the homogeneous Fenton process, and also 
considering the possibility of r ecovering the catalyst, some attempts have been made to 
develop heterogeneous catalysts, prepared by incorporating Fe ions or Fe oxides into 
porous supports [9-14]. Even so, some works can be found in the l iterature with other 
transition metals and different types of supports, as mentioned in chapter 1.  
 Among the above-mentioned catalyst supports, pillared clays (PILCs in short) is 
one of the families of microporous solids developed by Molecular Engineering that have been more studied in recent years, because of their par ticular properties and 
structures (with tunable pore si ze), as well as the abundance a nd low cost of natural clay 
minerals. Besides, they lead to active and st able solids in aqueous media, usually being 
very stable against leaching [15]. The PILCs synthesis procedure can be divided into 
three main steps: i) preparation of pol yoxocations by careful hydrolysis of certain 
multivalent cations, which under appropriate co nditions give rise to cationic polymeric 
species, ii) ionic exchange of the original  charge-compensating cations of swellable 
smectite clays by the polyoxocations before synthesized, this exchange giving rise to the so called “intercalated clays”, and iii)  stabilisation of the intercalated clays by 
calcination at relatively high temperat ures, which transform the metastable 
polyoxocations into “pillars”, stable metallic  clusters, close to oxi-hydroxidic phases, 
which maintain the layers of the clays sepa rated to a long distance [16], thus able to 
accommodate large molecules susceptible to undergo chemical transformations. These solids are called “pillared cl ays”, showing a bidimensi onal microporous network of Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 87molecular dimensions, with the pillars occ upying the interlayer space defined by the 
clay layers. The number and size of the pill ars in the interlayer region are responsible 
for the pore parameters of the pillared clay structure [17]. 
Recently, Feng and co-workers [18, 19] synthesized clay-based Fe 
nanocomposites by the so-called pillaring tech nique and used them as heterogeneous 
catalysts for the photo-Fenton discoloratio n and mineralization of azo-dyes. Their 
results clearly indicate that the solids are promising photo catalysts, but the use of light 
increases the costs of the overall process as compared to dark Fenton oxidation. 
However, in their conditions the oxidation is faster, which is also important to be taken 
into account in economical analysis. 
In this chapter, several heterogeneou s catalysts based on Al-pillared saponite 
impregnated with iron salts were prepared, wh ich advantages were previously remarked 
(cf. 1st chapter, section 1.6.2). A saponite has be en intercalated with Al polycations, and 
the pillared solid obtained afte r calcination at 500 ºC has been used as support for the 
impregnation with iron. Four iron salts have be en used as precursors with three different 
loads of iron. The obtained heterogeneous ca talysts were tested in the Fenton-like 
oxidation of the non-biodegradable azo-dye Or ange II (OII) in water solution, using a 
slurry batch reactor. The effectiveness of th ese catalysts in the oxi dation of the dye, as 
well as the influence of the synthesis vari ables and of the reaction conditions on the 
catalytic activity are discussed. 
 
5.2 Materials and Methods 
 
5.2.1 Preparation and Characterization of the Catalysts 
 
The procedure used to synthesize the clay-based catalysts is described in detail 
elsewhere ( cf. chapter 2), as well as the techniques  employed to characterize the solids. 
As mentioned above, four iron salts (namel y, Fe(II) acetate, Fe (II) oxalate, Fe(II) 
acetylacetonate and Fe(III) a cetylacetonate) have been used as precursors and three 
different loads of iron have  been used (7.5, 13.0 and 17. 0 wt. %). These catalysts are 
designated herein by a precu rsor-amount notation, for example Fe(II) acetate 7.5 
designates the solid prepared using Fe(II) acetate as precurs or and containing 7.5 wt. % 
of Fe in the final catalyst.   Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 885.2.2 Catalytic Activity 
 
Chemical oxidation of Orange II wa s carried out using 1 L of a 1×10-4 M 
solution in a batch reactor, under continuous stirring and w ith a permanent control of 
the temperature ( cf. chapter 2), which is in the range of azo dyes’ concentrations usually 
found in industrial waste streams [20]. It is worth of mentioning that due to the low 
mass of catalyst used (91.5 mg, with an average volumetric diameter of 3.342 µm – 
determined in a Coulter Counter particle size analyser, ref.: LS 230), no interf erence in 
the absorbance data was noticed. In the runs where a significant concentration of clay 
was used (1 g/L), samples taken along time were filtered before measurement of absorbance. All the experiments were repeated  at least twice (the average relative error 
along the runs was of 11%, while  at the end of the oxidation, t = 4h, conversion values 
differed only, on average, 2%).  
5.3 Results and Discussion 
 
5.3.1 Characterization of the Catalysts 
 
 Intercalation/pillaring experiment, as de scribed in chapter 2, was carried out 
under standard conditions, and proceeded su ccessfully. The solid intercalated with Al 13 
polycations and then calcined at 500 ºC, us ed as support for further experiments, shows 
the typical features of Al-PIL Cs. It has a layered structur e with a basal spacing of 18.2 
Å (Fig. 5.1), and a BET specific surface area of 240 m2/g. Its thermal analysis curves 
and FT-IR spectrum (vide infra) also s how the typical behaviour of Al-PILCs. 
The impregnated solids also maintain the layered structure, but with a 
remarkable loss of ordering if compared to th e support. These catalysts, once calcined at 
500 ºC, show a weak diffraction peak, between 16.8 and 17.3 Å (2 θ = 5-7 ºC), due to 
001 reflection (Fig. 5.1). However, as can be  observed in these di ffractograms, although 
the long-range ordering in the c-axis is low, it is not negligible, and all solids show a 
certain degree of layered-stru cture ordering. At the same time, the impregnation-drying 
process, mainly in the solids treated with  acetylacetonate solutions, for which various 
impregnation cycles are needed, and the furt her calcination at 500 ºC, produce a certain 
collapse and delamination of the stru cture. Reflections independent of c-axis ordering Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 89do not show any variation with  respect to the support, indi cating that the impregnation 
does not affect the individual la yers, but only their stacking.  
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 054321000 cps18.2 A1. Support
2. Fe(III) acetylacetonate 7.5 
3. Fe(II) acetylacetonate 7.5
4. Fe(II) oxalate 7.5
5. Fe(II) acetate 7.5Intensity (cps)
2θ (degrees)1
 
Fig. 5.1 – XRD diffractograms of the support and catalysts with 7.5 wt.% of iron, calcined at 500 ºC. 
 
 On the other hand, it may be underlined  that no peaks due to iron phases are 
observed in the diffractograms, even for samp les with 17.0 wt.% of iron (not shown in 
the figure). Considering the preparation me thod used and the results obtained from 
other techniques, it may be reasonably expe cted that phases of composition close to 
Fe2O3 be formed after calcination of the impr egnated solids at 500 ºC, by the removal of 
the organic moieties of the precursors, and ox idation, if needed, of iron. However, no 
peaks of oxides or oxi-hydr oxides are found in the diffractograms, although the 
amounts of iron used in the impregnations are relatively high. So, it may be proposed 
that iron is in form of a very disperse phase on the surface of the support (very small 
crystallite size, thus not detected by XRD). The presence of such well dispersed phase 
on the catalyst surface, particularly Fe(III) oxide, was confirmed by XPS. 
FT-IR spectra of the support and of vari ous impregnated solids, both dried and 
calcined, are shown in Fig. 5.2. The FT-IR spectrum of the support shows, as indicated 
before, the characteristic bands of Al-PILCs. Thus, in the high wave number region, the 
spectrum is dominated by the stretching vi brations of the hydroxyl groups bonded to 
metallic cations and to water molecules. Be nding of water molecules also produces an 
important effect close to 1630 cm-1, while the bands characteristic of the tetrahedral 
layer of the clay dominate the region of  low wave numbers, the band at 1007 cm-1, 
assigned to Si-O-Si bonds, being the most intense of th e spectrum, and the bands due to Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 90M-O bonds in the octahedral layer (mainly Mg-O and Fe-O, because of the chemical 
nature of saponite, see Table 2.1) appearing at lower wave numbers. 
 
 
4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 50020 (%)Calcined impregnated clay 
No calcined impregnated clay
SupportTransmittance
Wavenumber (cm-1)A
4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500B20 (%)Calcined impregnated clay
No calcined impregnated clay 
SupportTransmittance
Wavenumber (cm-1)
Fig. 5.2 – FT-IR spectra of the support and impregnated solids, before and after calcination:  
(A) Fe(II) oxalate 17.0 and (B) Fe(II)  acetylacetonate 17.0. 
 
 Spectra of solids impregnated and dried show, in all cases, the bands due to the 
support and bands assigned to the precursors.  The first bands do not display important 
variations with respect to those of the s upport (they only show small differences in the 
intensity). This is an expectable observa tion, because of the low influence of the 
impregnation on the structural bonds of the clay, where only surface hydroxyl groups 
may be affected, giving rise to in terfacial coordination bonds with Fe2+ and Fe3+ cations 
of the precursors. On the other hand, the bands due to the precursors are strongly 
intense, as can be expected  because precursors containing organic moieties have been 
employed. The characteristic bonds of each pr ecursor are observed in each case, with 
vibrations of C-H bonds, carboxyl ate or carbonyl groups, etc. All these bands disappear 
completely when the impregnated solids ar e calcined at 500 ºC, meaning that organic 
moieties are completely removed at this temp erature, by transformation of the precursor 
molecules into iron oxide-like phases. Howe ver, no peak due to Fe-oxides neither oxy-
hydroxides are observed in the spectra.   The contents of Fe (determined by el emental analyses) present in the final 
catalysts are shown in Table 5.1, together with the BET specific surface areas. Slight 
variations (<8.3%) are noticed  between the expected and the determined iron content of 
the samples, which is due to the high hydration degree of the solids at different stages of 
the preparation procedure, thus making difficu lt to obtain the targeted iron contents. The Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 91values of specific surface areas are comprised between 128 and 192 m2/g, which 
represents a percentage of 53 - 80% of the value of th e support. These values are 
relatively high considering the subsequent steps of the preparation of the catalysts, including impregnation, drying,  and calcination at 500 ºC. It has been  reported that the 
impregnation of clay supports with precurs ors containing organic moieties causes a 
strong decrease in surface area, by blocking of the interlayer porosity by such organic 
groups, sometimes the impregnated solids only showing the external surface area of the 
support. However, the further calcination of  the impregnated solids produces, if the 
temperature is high enough to remove all the organic moieties, the recuperation of the access to the internal porosity of the support [16]. Sometimes, these successive 
processes cause a strong deleterious effect  in the surface properties of the solids, 
although this is not the case for the solids prepar ed in this work. It may be noticed that 
part of this surface area may be due to the particles of iron incorporated, considering 
that they form phases of composition close to  iron oxide phase and that they are very 
dispersed on the support surface. 
The thermogravimetric analyses curv es of the impregnated samples are 
displayed in Fig. 5.3. Several weight losses can be observed. The removal of adsorbed water and physisorbed solvent occurs until ca. 150 ºC. This is associated with a weight 
loss of around 7-8 wt. % for samples containi ng acetate and lower (3 wt. %) for those 
prepared with oxalate and acetylacetona tes. The decomposition of the organic 
precursors occurs in the 150-325 ºC range fo r Fe(II) acetate and Fe (II) acetylacetonate 
samples and in a wider range (150-425 ºC) for the rest of samples. In addition, when 
using oxalate and acetylacetonate as precursor s, the complexity of the salts, which are 
decomposed in several successive steps, de termines the presence of more steps of 
weight loss in the corresponding TG curves of these samples than in those of the acetate 
samples.         Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 92 Table 5.1 – Characterization data and catalytic behavior of the catalysts. 
Sample Fe content 
(wt. %) a BET surface area 
(m2/g) TOC removal 
(%) b Iron leached 
(wt. %) b,c 
Fe (II) Acetate 7.5 8.12 170 66.7 7.5 
Fe (II) Acetate 13.0 13.85 192 68.3 8.0 
Fe (II) Acetate 17.0 16.50 141 70.9 4.0 
Fe (II) Oxalate 7.5 7.87 160 70.3 2.6 
Fe (II) Oxalate 13.0 13.81 151 72.8 4.2 
Fe (II) Oxalate 17.0 17.29 141 81.6 1.4 
Fe (II) Ac. Acetonate 7.5 8.02 155 62.1 2.6 
Fe (II) Ac. Acetonate 13.0 13.89 162 68.0 0.9 
Fe (II) Ac. Acetonate 17.0 17.03 137 68.9 0.6 
Fe (III) Ac. Acetonate 7.5 7.54 154 53.2 2.2 
Fe (III) Ac. Acetonate 13.0 14.02 136 63.8 1.2 
Fe (III) Ac. Acetonate 17.0 17.56 128 69.5 2.2 
a The Fe content was determined over the catalysts calcine d at 500 ºC and kept in closed polyurethane flasks;  
b  T = 30 ºC, pH = 3, =22OCH 6×10-3 M; 
c Amount (wt. %) of iron lost into the so lution after reaction as refereed to the to tal Fe initially present in the catalyst. Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 93The values of total weight loss of the samples prepared in this work are 
comprised between 19.5 wt.% for Fe 7.5 acet ate and 47 wt.% for Fe 17.0 oxalate, the 
values depending on the nature of the precursor  used and the load of the same. The final 
weight loss observed in all cases in the 415-825 ºC range is due to the dehydroxilation 
of the clay. For all samples, it is clear that  the temperature of calcination guarantees the 
removal of the organic fragments and the obtaining of iron-like phases. 
 
0 200 400 600 800 10006080100Weight(%)
Temperature (oC) 7.5
 13.0
 17.0A
0 200 400 600 800 10006080100
 7.5
 13.0
 17.0Weight (%)
Temperature(oC)B
0 200 400 600 800 10006080100
 7.5
 13.0
 17.0Weight (%)
Temperature(oC)C
0 200 400 600 800 10006080100
 7.5
 13.0
 17.0Weight (%)
Temperature(oC)D
Fig. 5.3 – Thermogravimetric anal ysis of different dried samples:  (A) Fe(II) acetate, (B) Fe(II) 
oxalate, (C) Fe(II) acetylacetonate and (D) Fe(III) acetylacetonate. 
 
 The DSC curves for the samples containing 13 wt.% of Fe are shown in Fig. 5.4. 
An endothermic peak is observed in the 30 -150 ºC for the sample containing acetate 
(Fig. 5.4A), as consequence of the highest weight loss of adsorbed water and solvent 
detected in the TG curve of this sample, with respect to those prepared with other 
precursors. The DSC peak corresponding to th e decomposition of the most part of the 
organic material is centred at ar ound 315 ºC for acetate, 275 ºC for Fe(II) Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 94acetylacetonate and 350 ºC for oxalate and Fe (III) acetylacetonate. For these last three 
samples, other exothermic peaks of lower intensity can be observed in the 150-275 ºC 
interval with associat ed weight losses in their corres ponding TG curves. The removal of 
the last hydroxyl groups in the clay is obser ved as a clear weight  loss close to 800ºC, 
associated to an endothermal effect, and once this dehydroxilation is completed, it is 
followed by an exothermal effect corres ponding to the phase transformation from 
saponite to enstatite, not asso ciated with any weight loss in the TG curves. No peaks 
that could be associated to transf ormation of iron phases are observed. 
0 200 400 600 800 10000100200300400500Heat  transfer (W/g)
Temperature (oC) Fe(II) Acetate
 Fe(III) Acetylacetonate
ExothermalA
0 200 400 600 800 10000100200300400500Heat  transfer (W/g)
Temperature (oC) Fe(II) Oxalate
 Fe(II) Acetylacetonate
ExothermalB
Fig. 5.4 – DSC curves of the samples impregnated with  13.0 wt. % of Fe: (A) Fe(II) acetate and  Fe(III) 
acetylacetonate and (B) Fe(II) oxa late and Fe(II) acetylacetonate. 
 
 
5.3.2 Catalytic Behaviour 
 5.3.2.1
 Effect of the Precursor Nature and Iron Load on the Degradation of OII Solution 
 Although the natural clay has already some  iron (ca. 1 wt.%, see Table 2.1), no 
degradation of the OII solution was noticed when using it as catalyst under the typical 
conditions adopted in this work (
=
22OHC 6×10-3 M, T = 30ºC, pH = 3, w clay = 91.5 
mg/L,  t = 4h), which may be related to the inaccessibility of such iron, located in the 
octahedral positions of the clay structure. Besides, dye removal by adsorption (blank run in the same conditions but without hydroge n peroxide) was not de tectable, what is 
due to the remarkably low concentrations of cl ay used in this work. Actually, the use of 
w
clay = 1 g/L, an amount commonly found in th e literature, provide d about 36% removal 
by adsorption after 4 h (but no equilibration was yet reached). Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 95Figure 5.5 shows the UV/Vis spectrum obtained for the dye solution (1×10-4 M) 
and also for samples taken along time in a typical experiment. Regarding the dye spectrum, it is characterized by two bands in  the ultraviolet region located at ca. 235 
and 315 nm and by one band in the visible re gion, with a maximum located at 486 nm. 
The absorbance peaks in the UV region are due to the benzene and naphthalene rings of 
OII, respectively [21], while the band in the visible region is due to the chromophore-
containing azo linkage [22] ( vide Fig. 2.3). If one compares the original spectrum with 
that achieved after 240 min of oxidation, it is evident that the treated dye sample was 
almost colourless and did not show signi ficant absorbance in the visible region, 
indicating that colour removal was practic ally complete. The disappearance of the 
absorbance peak at 486 nm reflects, une quivocally, the breakdown in the chromophoric 
group. However, the spectrum in the UV regi on shows that the dye was not completely 
mineralized, even though the absorption in tensity was reduced within the UV range. 
The slower decrease of the intensities of the bands at 235 and 315 nm, with respect to 
that of the azo bond, can be at tributed to the formation of intermediates, resulting from 
the degradation of the azo dye , which still contain benzoic-  and naphthalene-type rings. 
Another issue of interest is that the spectrum of the 60 min sample is, in the visible region, quite similar to that of the OII solution. Actually, both spectra almost overlap 
(by multiplying the original one by a factor smaller than 1), and no additional bands appear, indicating that intermediates formed  do not absorb in the visible wavelengths, 
although they do it in the UV. This is also co rroborated by other authors. For instance, 
Bandara and Kiwi [23] mention that in late r stages discoloration of the OII leads to 
long-lived intermediates which absorb the smaller UV component, while Fernández et 
al. [24] refer that no coloured intermediate species were generated in solution. Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 96200 300 400 500 600 700 800 90001234
240 min60 minAbsorbance
Wavelength (nm)0 min
 
Fig. 5.5 – UV-Vis spectral changes of OII solution along time using as catalyst the Fe (II) oxalate 13.0 
sample. Reaction conditions: pH = 3, =22OHC 6×10-3 M, T = 30 ºC. 
 
Mechanistic studies reported in the literature, either in homogeneous or 
heterogeneous processes, point for nume rous intermediates formed from OII 
degradation, which include, among others, HSO 4-, NH 4+, and NO 3-,                            
4-hydroxybenzenesulfonic acid, nitroge n and sulfo-cont aining products, 
benzenesulfonate, carboxylic and dicarboxylic  acids and their anions, and also iron 
complexes [25-30]. However, none of these compounds absorb in the visible region, 
indicating that the ab sorbance decrease at 486 nm is onl y due to the dye degradation. 
 The results obtained for the oxidation of OII solution with the twelve catalysts 
prepared are displayed in Fig. 5.6. The effect  of the nature of the precursor as well as 
the amount of active phase used  on the catalytic act ivity can be observed. In each case, 
the referred concentration of OII is normali zed with respect to the initial one (1×10
-4 
M), and plotted as a function of the reacti on time. The degradation reached after 4 h 
was, in most cases, quite significant. For the catalyst with lowest (7.5 wt.%) and highest 
(17.0 wt.%) iron contents, the best results we re always reached when using the oxalate 
precursor (Figs. 5.6A and 5. 6C, respectively), while for the catalysts containing the 
intermediate concentration (13.0 wt.%), the best sample seems to be that prepared with 
the acetate precursor (Fig. 5.6B). Using th e clay impregnated with 13.0% of Fe(II) 
acetate and 17.0% of Fe (II) oxalate, degradations of 95. 2 and 95.9% were obtained after 
4 h, respectively. In contrast, the precursor th at gave rise to the less active catalysts was 
the Fe(II) acetylacetonate with 13.0% of Fe , which produced an efficiency of only 
66.4%.  Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 97It is noteworthy that for samples with ca. 7.5, 13.0 or 17.0 wt. % of Fe, Figs. 
5.6A, 5.6B and 5.6C, respectively, there is no apparent relationship between the 
reaction rate for each set of catalysts and th e effective amount of iron in the samples. 
This means that the slight differences in the amount of iron between different samples, 
which range between 7.54-8.12, 13.81-14.02 an d 16.50-17.56 wt. % of Fe, respectively, 
for each one of the iron contents targeted (see Table 5.1), are not responsible for the 
differences recorded. On the other hand, the sa mple that exhibits hi gher reaction rate in 
Fig. 5.6B (Fe(II) acetate) is  the one that looses more ir on (Table 5.1), suggesting that 
the homogeneous process cont ribution could be of impor tance. However, for the 
samples with 7.5 or 17.0% of Fe (Figs. 5.6A  and 5.6C, respectively)  such relationship is 
not observed. Therefore, not only the hom ogeneous, but also the heterogeneous 
catalytic process, seems to have an impor tant role in the degradation reaction. 
012340.00.20.40.60.81.0COII/COIIo
Time (h) Fe(II) Acetate
 Fe(II) Oxalate
 Fe(II) Acetylacetonate
 Fe(III)AcetylacetonateA
012340.00.20.40.60.81.0
 Fe(II) Acetate
 Fe(II) Oxalate
 Fe(II) Acetylacetonate
 Fe(III)AcetylacetonateCOII/COIIo
Time (h)B
012340.00.20.40.60.81.0
 Fe(II) Acetate
 Fe(II) Oxalate
 Fe(II) Acetylacetonate
 Fe(III)AcetylacetonateCCOII/COIIo
Time (h)
 
Fig. 5.6 – Effect of the precursor nature on the degradation of the OII solution for different iron loads:  
(A) 7.5 wt. %; (B) 13.0 wt. % and (C) 17.0 wt. %. pH = 3, =22OHC 6×10-3 M, T = 30 ºC. 
 Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 98It can also be observed in Fig. 5.6 that the influence of the iron concentration on 
the degradation of Orange II is  not equal for all the precursor s, but, in general, the final 
performances are not too different (with a few exceptions). The reason behind this fact 
is not yet clear, and a deeper insight regard ing the mechanisms occurring in the system 
is required. Nevertheless, Tabl e 5.1 shows clearly that TOC elimination, at the end of 
the runs, increases, for each precursor, with the iron load. This increment in the 
mineralization with the iron concentration o ccurs because when the amount of catalyst 
increases, more radicals are produced for th e oxidation reaction (Eqs. (5.1)-(5.2), where 
X  represents the surface of the catalyst, cf. section 1.6.2):  
 
+ • + ++ + − → + − H HO FeX OH FeX22
223    (5.1) 
• − + ++ + − → + − HO OH FeX OH FeX3
222    (5.2) 
 
To use a heterogeneous catalytic system in  industrial practice, it is important to 
evaluate the loss of catalyst from the suppor t. This was done by measuring the iron 
concentration in the soluti on along time (samples were ta ken every hour, although in 
Table 5.1 only data after 4 h of reaction time are shown). Some important results must 
be stressed. First, in almost all cases the iron leaching is considerably low (<1 mg/L, 
thus being below the EU directives (<2 mg/L )). Secondly, catalysts that exhibit higher 
iron leaching values are those prepared with the acetate precursor, independently of the iron load. Finally, the 17.0 wt.% samples are those that loose a smaller percentage of iron (except Fe (III) acetylacetonate). This is particularly interesting from the practical point of view due to the possibility of usi ng these last catalysts for a longer operation 
time (slower deactivation). In this concern, it  is especially remark able the Fe(II) oxalate 
17.0 catalyst, which shows a very good behavi or in terms of mine ralization (81.6% of 
TOC reduction) and discoloration (95.9% of  OII removal), and its performance seems 
to be mainly due to the heterogeneous Fenton-like process. 
The importance of the heterogeneously catalyzed reaction is also put in evidence 
when one compares the performance of the ca talysts prepared with precursors of Fe(II) 
vs. Fe(III). While OII degradation is much more significant for the Fe(III) 
acetylacetonate 17.0 sample as compared with the Fe(II) one (Fig. 5.6), in agreement 
with the iron leaching (Table 5.1), thus supporting the importance of the 
homogeneously catalyzed process, any relatio nship exists between these parameters for Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 99the 13 wt. % catalysts. In this case, the Fe (III) sample shows ag ain better catalytic 
performance, without significant differe nce in iron leaching, which mean an 
involvement of the solid surf ace on the catalytic process. 
The catalytic differences observed when different precursors are used are not 
clear, and could be the aim of further work (anion nature and iron oxidation state 
effect). Nevertheless, severa l factors might be indicated, which are known to affect the 
catalytic performance: i) the ir on dispersion [31], ii) the Fe 2O3 crystalline form 
(hematite or maghemite-Q) [ 19], iii) the location of the iron species (bonded to the 
aluminium pillars or engaged in small oxide clusters dispersed in the solid, inside or 
outside the porosity) [32], or iv) the oxidation stat es, nature and coor dination of the iron 
species [15]. 
Based on the results described above, two catalysts were chosen to study into 
more detail the effect of the temperature, pH and initial H 2O2 concentration. They were 
those prepared with oxalate with Fe conten t of 7.5 and 17.0 wt. %. As shown in Table 
5.1, the best performances for mineralization are achieved for the catalysts prepared with oxalate, for all the iron contents. The sa me applies for the co lor removal, except 
for the 13.0 wt. % samples, where Fe(II) ace tate 13.0 provides the best results (Fig. 
5.6B). However, this sample looses much more iron than the rest (Table 5.1). Among 
the 13.0 wt. % catalysts, the Fe(II) oxala te sample also s hows good decolorisation 
results, but differences between performances  achieved by this ca talyst and the Fe(II) 
oxalate 7.5 are minimal, thus being preferable , from an economical point of view, to use 
the catalyst with less iron content.   5.3.2.2
 Temperature Effect 
 
The results obtained for the OII degradati on at four different temperatures (10, 
30, 50 and 70 oC), using catalysts prepared with Fe (II) oxalate with 7. 5 and 17.0 wt. %, 
are shown in Fig. 5.7. The results show cl early that the reaction rate increases when 
increasing the temperature, which was exp ected due to the exponential dependency of 
the kinetic constants with the reaction temp erature (Arrhenius la w). Nevertheless, the 
final OII concentrations, af ter 4 hours of oxidation, are very similar at 50 and 70 oC. In 
fact, the eliminations obtained at these temp eratures are already quite similar after two 
hours of reaction, with values around 98% , whereas at 10ºC the elimination is 
practically negligible (ca. 8%  after 4 h of reaction for both samples). Other authors have Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 100also found similar results during catalytic we t peroxide oxidation of phenol over Fe-
exchanged clays [33,34]. 
 
 
012340.00.20.40.60.81.0
 T = 10oC 
 T = 30oC
 T = 50oC
 T = 70oC 
Time (h)COII/COIIoA
012340.00.20.40.60.81.0
 T = 10oC 
 T = 30oC
 T = 50oC
 T = 70oC COII/COIIo
Time (h)B
Fig. 5.7 – Temperature effect on the degradation of  OII solution using different catalysts: (A) Fe(II) 
oxalate 7.5 and (B) Fe(II) oxalate 17.0. pH = 3, =22OHC 6×10-3 M. 
 
 Table 5.2 shows the overall TOC removal for both catalysts at different temperatures (Runs 1 to 4). Once again, and as expected, the mineralization increases with the temperature, the performances reach ed being better for Fe oxalate 17.0, in 
agreement with previous results (Table 5.1). For this sample, it is remarkable that the 
TOC removal is near 91% at T = 70 ºC and around 82% at 30 ºC. The fact that at higher 
temperatures performances do not increase so markedly as at lower temperatures can be 
due to the accelerated decomposition of hydrogen peroxide into oxygen and water 
[33,34].  
Although lower than those obt ained at higher temperatur es, the values of OII 
and TOC removal achieved at 30 ºC might be  considered satisfactory. Taking into 
account that a lower temperature might reduce the process costs, 30 ºC was then chosen 
to carry out the following runs, where other parameters are changed. In addition, the 
iron leaching is smaller at 30 ºC  than at 70 ºC and is not very significant after 4 h (<0.25 
mg/L, thus being below the value of the EU directives). 
     Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 101Table 5.2 –  TOC removal (%) after 4h of oxidation.  
Experimental conditions  Catalyst  
Run No.  Temperature 
(ºC) pH oOHC
22  
(M) Fe(II)  
oxalate 7.5  Fe(II)  
oxalate 17.0  
1 10 3.0 6×10-3 8.0 8.2 
2 30 3.0 6×10-3 70.3 81.6 
3 50 3.0 6×10-3 80.5 87.5 
4 70 3.0 6×10-3 84.7 90.6 
5 30 2.0 6×10-3 61.6 71.8 
6 30 3.5 6×10-3 39.8 44.3 
7 30 3.0 3×10-3 67.3 75.4 
8 30 3.0 1.2×10-3 64.6 78.1 
9 30 3.0 2.4×10-3 66.2 74.6 
 
 5.3.2.3
 pH Effect  
  The results obtained for the OII degradat ion using the Fe(II) oxalate catalysts at 
three different pH values ar e displayed in Fig. 5.8. Th e best results of the OII 
degradation were obtained at pH 3.0, for bot h iron loads. At the lowest value of pH 
tested, pH = 2.0, the reaction is very slow and an important increase of decolorisation 
activity was only noticed after ca. 2.5 hour s of reaction. However, at pH 3.5 
performances achieved are even worst, with color removals after 4h of only 43 and 51% 
for 7.5 or 17.0 wt.% of Fe, respectively (Figs.  5.8A and 5.8B). It mu st be stressed that 
additional experiments have also  been performed at pH 4.0 (not shown) but practically 
no dye degradation was produced, even for mu ch longer reaction times. Regarding TOC 
removal, conclusions are similar, with bett er performances for both samples at pH 3.0 
(Table 5.2). Curiously, this was ex actly the best pH value found by Feng et al.  [35] 
during OII degradation using clay-based Fe  nanocomposites with photo-Fenton process, 
with a reaction rate decrease similar to that reported by us when one deviates from such 
pH value. Other authors also found, using pill ared clays, that the reaction rate was much 
higher for the pH value corresponding to  the optimum pH determined when 
homogeneous Fe species were  used as catalysts [36]. Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 102012340.00.20.40.60.81.0
A
 pH = 2.0
 pH = 3.0
 pH = 3.5COII/COIIo
Time (h)012340.00.20.40.60.81.0B
 pH = 2.0
 pH = 3.0
 pH = 3.5COII/COIIo
Time (h)
 
Fig. 5.8 – pH effect on the degradation of OII solution using different catalysts: (A) Fe(II) oxalate 7.5 and 
(B) Fe(II) oxalate 17.0. =22OHC 6×10-3 M, T = 30 ºC. 
 
A dependence of the reaction performance with the pH similar to that reported 
in Fig. 5.8 is normally observed in homogenous reaction, and the decreased 
performance at lower pHs is usually attribut ed to the inhibition of the reaction between 
Fe3+ and hydrogen peroxide, because the forma tion of the iron(III) peroxocomplexes (as 
intermediates) decreases when pH decreases [37]. Besides, the stability of H 2O2, which 
is independent of having a hom ogenous or heterogeneous pro cess, is affected by the pH, 
with the lower degree of decomposition obser ved at pH values between 3 and 4 [34]. 
Above pH 4 the rapid H 2O2 decomposition produces molecular oxygen without 
formation of appreciable am ounts of hydroxyl radicals.  
Figure 5.9 shows the effect of the reacti on pH on the iron leaching. It is clear 
that iron lost is more significant at pH 2. 0, especially for the 7.5 wt.% catalyst. 
Therefore, for long-term stability it would be  preferable to work at higher pH values. 
Feng et al.  [35] also found that iron leaching wa s much more significant at pH around 2. 
The Fe leaching at this low initial solution pH can be attributed to the dissolution of iron oxide at very acidic conditions. 
At pH 2.0 the amount of iron leached in to solution is much  higher for the Fe 
oxalate 7.5 than for the Fe oxalate 17.0 (F ig. 5.9A vs. 5.9B), although the catalytic 
performance of the first catalys t is not better (Fig. 5.8A vs. 5.8B and Table 5.2), thus 
supporting the importance of the heterogene ous catalytic process. Finally, it is 
noteworthy that in the pH range studied (2.0 -3.5) the sample with more iron (17.0 wt.%) 
shows almost always lower per centages of iron lost (Figs. 5. 9A and 5.9B), and thus can 
be in practice used for more operation cycles. Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 103  
 
012340.00.20.40.60.81.0
02468101214
 pH = 2.0
 pH = 3.0
 pH = 3.5Fe leached (mg/L)
Time (h)A
Fe leached (%)
012340.00.10.20.30.4
02
Fe leached (%)Fe leached (mg/L)
Time (h)B pH = 2.0
 pH = 3.0
 pH = 3.5
Fig. 5.9 – Iron leaching for expe riments at different pH values and using different catalysts:  
(A) Fe(II) oxalate 7.5 and (B) Fe(II) oxalate 17.0. =22OHC 6×10-3 M, T = 30 ºC. 
 
 5.3.2.4
 Initial H 2O2 Concentration Effect 
 
The initial hydrogen peroxide concen tration was varied between 3×10-3 and 
2.4×10-2 M, using the same catalysts as in prev ious sections. The re sults obtained (Fig. 
5.10) show, for both samples, a similar beha vior in terms of dye  degradation for the 
intermediate H 2O2 concentrations (6×10-3 and 1.2×10-2 M), whereas the reaction goes 
by more slowly when the c oncentration is lower (3×10-3 M) or higher (2.4×10-2 M). The 
increase of the oxidant concentration from 3×10-3 to 1.2×10-2 M leads to an increase in 
the reaction rate, as expected , because more radicals will be  formed (Eqs. (5.1)-(5.2)). 
Nevertheless, for a very high hydroge n peroxide concentration (2.4×10-2 M) the 
performance decreases. The existence of an optimum hydrogen peroxide concentration 
is typical and well-known in Fenton’s oxida tion. This optimum value was previously 
found to be 1×10-2 M for OII degradation in hom ogenous Fenton reaction, using a 
solution of Fe(II) sulphate as catalyst ( cf. chapter 3). At higher H 2O2 concentrations the 
scavenging of HO• radicals will occur, which can be expressed by the following 
reaction: 
 
22 2 2HO H O HO H O• •+→+        ( 5 . 3 )  
 Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 104Although other radicals ( HO 2•) are produced, their oxidation potential is much smaller 
than that of the HO• species [38]. 
It is important to remark that all d ecolorisation curves in Fig. 5.10 show a 
sigmoidal profile, which is typical for autocatalytic or radical reactions, and that it was also observed in other studies concerning organics degradation with pillared clay catalysts [34]. Basically two regions can be identified, the initial one representing the induction period, and the sec ond one after the inflection point representing the steady-
state. 
The influence of the H
2O2 concentration on the minera lization (see Table 5.2) is 
similar as for decolorisation, with an  optimum oxidant co ncentration of 6×10-3 M for 
both catalysts. In spit e of the final performances atta ined seem to be only slightly 
affected by the peroxide dose, it is clear that for H 2O2 concentrations above that value 
the final TOC removal decreases a little bit, this effect being sim ilar to those reported 
by other researchers [39,40]. 
Regarding iron leaching, it is noteworthy that, once again, the concentrations 
reached are always small (below 0.4 mg/L for both samples), but we haven’t found any 
relationship between the loss of catalyst fr om the support and the hydrogen peroxide 
concentration. 
 
012340,00,20,40,60,81,0
A
 CH2O2o=3.0x10-3  M
 CH2O2o=6.0x10-3  M
 CH2O2o=1.2x10-2  M
 CH2O2o=2.4x10-2  MCOII/COIIo
Time (h)012340,00,20,40,60,81,0
 CH2O2o=3.0x10-3 M
 CH2O2o=6.0x10-3 M
 CH2O2o=1.2x10-2 M
 CH2O2o=2.4x10-2 MBCOII/COIIo
Time (h)
Fig. 5.10 – Effect of the hydrogen peroxide concentration on the degradation of OII solution using 
different catalysts: (A) Fe(II) oxalate 7.5 and (B) Fe(II) oxalate 17.0. pH = 3, T = 30 ºC. 
 
 
  Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 1055.3.2.5  Stability and Recycling of the Catalyst 
  For a practical implementation of a heterogeneous catalytic system, it is crucial to evaluate the stability of the catalysts. For that purpose, a sample that shows a low 
iron leaching, but presenting simultaneously  good catalytic performance, should be 
selected. The Fe (II) oxalate 17.0 sample meet s all these criteria, as shown before (see 
section 5.3.2.1). 
 Figure 5.11 shows the performance reach ed in terms of OII degradation in 4 
consecutive runs. To recover the catalyst, the final effluent was filtered. After the first cycle, and in order to check if  the leached iron was responsible for the catalytic activity, 
both OII and H
2O2 were added to the solution in the same concentrations as at the 
beginning of the experiment. Figure 5.11 show s that in these conditions OII conversion 
is only a very small fraction of that recorded in the presence of the pillared clay, thus 
demonstrating that the Fe leached is not capable to destroy the dye, i.e., the process is essentially heterogeneous. For subsequent cy cles, the filtered clay was dried overnight 
between consecutive runs. Even though a slig ht activity decay is observed, which might 
be due to the iron loss (ca. 1.5% per cycle that represents a final concentration smaller than 0.3 mg/L), OII conversion decreases onl y from 95.8 to 90.3% in 4 cycles, i.e., 16 h 
of operation. Regarding TOC reduction, in th e 4 cycles final values were: 81.6, 81.4, 
78.5 and 77.1%. In practice, this small deactiv ation could be compensated, if required, 
by adapting the reaction conditions (for instance slightly increasing the temperature along time). Other authors reported similar results, but they attributed the loss of 
activity to poisoning of the active catalytic sites due to adsorbed organic species [41]. However, this could be avoided by submitting th e catalyst to an intermediate calcination 
step, thus restoring its catalytic activity [41]. Nevertheless, catalyst deactivation may occur due to a diversity of factors, as pointed by Guo and Al-Dahhan [34], including 
reduction of the catalyst specific surface ar ea, poisoning of the catalytic agents by 
compounds formed during oxidation, surface deposition and strong adsorption of a polymeric carbon layer or even the dissolution of some metal oxides from catalysts into 
the hot acidic reaction medium.  Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 106012340.00.20.40.60.81.0
 COII/COIIo
Time (h) 1st run
 2nd run
 3rd run
 4th run
 Filtered solution
 
Fig. 5.11 – Effect of consecutive experiments with the Fe(II) oxalate 17.0 catalyst on the degradation of 
OII solution. pH = 3, T = 30 ºC, =22OHC 6×10-3 M. 
 
5.4 Conclusions 
 
• Twelve supported Fe-saponite catalysts have been prepared, by means of the 
incipient wet impregnation method, using a pillared clay support and four salts 
of Fe precursors at different Fe loads.  The characterization of the catalysts 
shows that the decomposition of the precurs ors gives rise to solids that present 
laminar structure, with active phases of  Fe highly dispersed on the support, and 
high specific surfaces (in most of the cas es with values comprised between 130 
and 170 m2/g), characteristics that make th em potentially good catalysts for 
oxidation in the Fenton-like process.  
• All the catalysts revealed to be quite active in the Fenton-like oxidation of 
Orange II, because clay concentrations used are much below than those usually 
found in the literature (t ypically around 1 g/L). 
• The effects of the nature of the catalyst’s precursor , hydrogen peroxide 
concentration, temperature and pH of th e reaction medium were analysed in the 
present work. The obtained results show a high degradation of OII and of the 
intermediary oxidised compounds. At optimal conditions, 99% discoloration and 91% of mineralization were reached (aft er 4 h of reaction), using the catalyst 
prepared from Fe(II) oxalate with 17.0 wt.% of Fe and in the following reaction Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 107conditions: T = 70ºC, pH = 3.0 and 
226
oHOCm M = . However, good 
performances with high selectivities to CO 2 and H 2O were also reached at 
significantly lower temperatures (30 ºC). 
• All the catalysts exhibit not only good cat alytic activity but also a reasonable 
small iron leaching (below the EU directiv es values), indicating that the active 
phases are strongly fixed to the suppor t (possibly iron strongly bonded to the 
aluminium pillars or engaged in small oxi de clusters dispersed in the solid, 
inside or outside the porosity). This  characteristic makes possible the Fe-
saponite catalysts to have long-term stab ility, without gene rating iron hydroxide 
sludges. 
• Is was shown that the nature of the salt  and the content of iron used to prepare 
the catalyst have a signif icant effect on the process performance, the Fe(II) 
oxalate 17.0 being the most  promising one. Consecutive  reaction cycles carried 
out with this sample showed a minor deac tivation, which is possibly due to some 
iron leaching, thus evidencing the possi bility of being used in continuous 
processes.  
 
References   
 
 1. Walling, C. Fenton’s reagent revi sited. Accounts of Chemical Research 1975 , 8, 125. 
 2. Kavitha, V.; Palanivelu, K. Destruction of cresols by Fenton oxidation process. Water 
Research 2005 , 39, 3062. 
 3. Oliveira, R.; Almeida, M. F.; Santos, L.; Madeira, L. M. Experimental design of 2,4-
Dichlorophenol oxidation by Fenton’s reacti on. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry 
Research  2006 , 45, 1266. 
 4. Pignatello, J. J.; Sun, Y. Organic intermediates in the degradation of 2,4-
dichlorophenoxyacetic acid by iron(3+)/hydrogen peroxide and iron(3+)/hydrogen 
peroxide/UV. Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry 1993 , 41, 1139.  
 5. Sedlak, D. L.; Andren, W. A. Oxidati on of chlorobenzene with Fenton's reagent. 
Environmental Science and Technology 1991 , 25, 777. 
 6. Xiang-Rong, X.; Zhen-Ye, Z.; Xiao-Yan, L.; Ji-Dong, G. Chemical oxidative degradation 
of methyl tert-butyl ether in aqueous so lution by Fenton’s reagent. Chemosphere 2004 , 
55, 73. Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 108 7. Swaminathan, K.; Sandhya, S.; Sophia, A. C.; Pachhade, K.; Subrahmanyam, Y. V. 
Decolorization and degradation of H-aci d and other dyes using ferrous–hydrogen 
peroxide system. Chemosphere 2003 , 50, 619. 
 8. Sabhi, S.; Kiwi, J. Degradation of 2,4-Dichlorophenol by immobilized iron catalysts. 
Water Research 2001 , 35, 1994. 
 9. Gemeay, A. H.; Mansour, I. A.; El-Sharkawy, R. G.; Zaki, A. B. Kinetics and mechanism 
of the heterogeneous catalyzed oxidative de gradation of indigo carmine. Journal of 
Molecular Catalysis A: Chemical 2003 , 193, 109. 
10. Ishtchenko, V. V.; Huddersman, K. D.; V itkovskaya, R. F. Part 1. Production of a 
modified PAN fibrous catalyst and its optimization towards the decomposition of 
hydrogen peroxide. Applied Catalysis A: General 2003 , 242, 123. 
11. Letaief, S.; Casal, B.; Aranda, P.; Martín -Luengo, M. A.; Ruiz-Hitzky, E. Fe-containing 
pillared clays as catalysts for phenol hydroxylation. Applied Clay Science 2003 , 22, 263. 
12. Tachiev, G.; Roth, J. A.; Bowers, A. R.  Kinetics of hydrogen peroxide decomposition 
with complexed and free iron catalysts. Inte rnational Journal of Chemical Kinetics 2000 , 
32, 24. 
13. Neamtu, M.; Zaharia, C.; Catrinescu, C.; Ye diler, A.; Macoveanu, M.; Kettrup, A. Fe-
exchanged Y zeolite as catalyst for wet per oxide oxidation of reactive azo dye Procion 
Marine H-EXL. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2004 , 48, 287. 
14. Dantas, T. L. .P.; Mendonça, V. P.; Jose, H. J.; Rodrigues, A. E.; Moreira. R. F. P. M. 
Treatment of textile wastewater by heter ogeneous Fenton process using a new composite 
Fe2O3/carbon. Chemical Engineering Journal 2006 , 118, 77. 
15. Catrinescu, C.; Neamtu, M.; Miehe-Brendle, J.; Garcia, M. G.; Kettrup, A. Catalytic wet 
peroxide oxidation of reactive azo dyes over ir on-containing pillared beidellite catalyst. 
In: M.A. Vicente, M. Suarez, V. Rives, M. J.  Sanchez (Eds.), Materiales Arcillosos: de la 
Geologia a las Nuevas Aplicaciones, Salamanca, 2006 , 87. 
16. Belver, C.; Banares-Munoz, M. A.; Vicente,  M. A. Fe-saponite p illared and impregnated 
catalysts: I. Preparation and characterization. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2004 , 
50, 101. 
17. Vicente, M. A.; Gil, A.; Gandia, L. M. Recent advances in the synthesis and catalytic 
applications of pillared clays. Cataly sis Reviews, Science and Engineering 2000 , 42, 145. 
18. Feng, J.; Hu, X.; Yue, P. L.; Zhu, H. Y.; Lu, G. Q. A novel laponite clay-based Fe 
nanocomposite and its photo-catal ytic activity in photo-assisted  degradation of Orange II. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2003 , 58, 679. 
19. Sum, O. S. N.; Feng, J.; Hu, X.; Yue, P.L. Pillared laponite clay-based Fe 
nanocomposites as heterogeneous catalysts for photo-Fenton degradation of acid black 1. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2004 , 59, 5269. Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 10920. Ong, S. A.; Toorisaka, A.; Hirata, M.; Ha no, T. Decolorization of azo dye (Orange II) in 
a sequential UASB–SBR system. Separation and Purification Technology 2005 , 42, 297. 
21. Feng, W.; Nansheng, D.; Helin, H. Degradation mechanism of azo dye C. I. reactive red 2 
by iron powder reduction and photooxida tion in aqueous solutions. Chemosphere 2000 , 
41, 1233. 
22. Bauer, C.; Jacques, P.; Kalt. A. Photooxidation of an azo dye induced by visible light 
incident on the surface of TiO 2. Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: 
Chemistry 2001 , 140, 87. 
23. Bandara, J.; Kiwi, J. Fast kinetic sp ectroscopy, decoloration and production of H 2O2 
induced by visible light in oxygenated solutio ns of the azo dye Orange II New Journal of 
Chemistry 1999 , 23, 717. 
24. Fernandez, J.; Kiwi, J.; Lizama, C.; Fr eer, J.; Baeza, J.; Mansilla. H. D. Factorial 
experimental design of Orange II photocatalytic discolouration. Journal of 
Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry 2002 , 151, 213. 
25. Bandara, J.; Morrison, C.; Kiwi, J.; Pulgarin , C.; Peringer, P. Degradation/decoloration of 
concentrated solutions of Orange II. Kinetics and quantum yield for sunlight induced reactions via Fenton type reagents. Journa l of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: 
Chemistry 1996 , 99, 57. 
26. Nadtochenko, V.; Kiwi, J. Photoinduced  adduct formation between Orange II and 
[Fe3+(aq)] or Fe(ox)33-–H
2O2 Photocatalytic degradation and laser spectroscopy Journal 
of the Chemical Society, Faraday Transactions 1997 , 93, 2373. 
27. Nam, S.; Renganathan, V.; Tratnyek, P. G. Substituent effects on azo dye oxidation by 
the FeIII–EDTA–H 2O2 system. Chemosphere 2001 , 45, 59. 
28. Liakou, S.; Kornaros, M.; Lyberatos, G. Pretreatment of azo dyes using ozone. Water 
Science and Technology 1997 , 36, 155. 
29. Yuranova, T.; Enea, O.; Mielczarski, E.; Mi elczarski, J.; Albers, P.; Kiwi. J. Fenton 
immobilized photo-assisted catalysis through a Fe/C structured fabric. Applied Catalysis 
B: Environmental 2004 , 49, 39. 
30. Stylidi, M.; Kondarides, D. I. ; Verykios. X. E. Pathways of solar light-induced 
photocatalytic degradation of azo dyes in aqueous TiO 2 suspensions. Applied Catalysis 
B: Environmental 2003 , 40, 271. 
31. Carriazo, J.; Guelou, E.; Barrault, J.; Tatibouet, J. M.; Molina, R.; Moreno, S. Catalytic 
wet peroxide oxidation of phenol by pilla red clays containing Al–Ce–Fe. Water 
Research 2005 , 39, 3891. 
32. Barrault, J.; Abdellaoui, M.; Bouchoule, C.; Majesté, A.; Tatibouët, J. M.; Louloudi, A.; 
Papayannakos, N.; Gangas, N. H. Catalytic wet peroxide oxidation over mixed (Al–Fe) 
pillared clays. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2000 , 27, 225. Chapter 5. Fenton-like oxidation of OII solutions us ing heterogeneous catalysts  based on saponite clay 
 11033. Catrinescu, C.; Teodosiu, C.; Macoveanu, M.; Miehe-Brendle, J.; Dred, R. L. Catalytic 
wet peroxide oxidation of phenol over Fe-e xchanged pillared beide llite. Water Research 
2003 , 37, 1154. 
34. Guo, J.; Al-Dahhan, M. Catalytic wet oxidation of phenol by hydrogen peroxide over 
pillared clay catalyst. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 2003 , 42, 2450. 
35. Feng, J.; Hu, X.; Yue, P. L. Effect of in itial solution pH on the degradation of Orange II 
using clay-based Fe nanocomposites as hete rogeneous photo-Fenton catalyst. Water 
Research 2006 , 40, 641. 
36. Barrault, J.; Tatibouët, J. M.;  Papayanna kos, N. Catalytic wet peroxide oxidation of 
phenol over pillared clays containing ir on or copper species. Comptes Rendus de 
l'Académie des Sciences - Series IIC – Chemistry  2000 , 3, 777. 
37. Pignatello, J. J. Dark and photoassisted Fe3+-catalyzed degradation of chlorophenoxy 
herbicides by hydrogen peroxide. En vironmental Science and Technology 1992 , 26, 944. 
38. Bigda, R. J. Consider Fenton chemistry for wastewater treatment. Chemical Engineering 
and Processing 1995 , 91, 62. 
39. Guedes, A. M. F. M.; Madeira, L. M. P.; Boaventura, R. A. R.; Costa, C. A. V. Fenton 
oxidation of cork cooking wastewater—ove rall kinetic analysis. Water Research 2003 , 
37, 3061. 
40. Dutta, K.; Mukhopadhyay, S.; Bhattacharjee, S.; Chaudhuri, B. Chemical oxidation of 
methylene blue using a Fenton-like reaction. Journal of Hazardous Materials 2001 , 84, 
57. 
41. Centi, G.; Perathoner, S.; Torre, T.; Ve rduna, M. G. Catalytic wet oxidation with H 2O2 of 
carboxylic acids on homogeneous and heter ogeneous Fenton-type catalysts. Catalysis 
Today 2000 , 55, 61. 
   
 
 Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 111CHAPTER 6 – AZO-DYE ORANGE II DEGRADATION BY 
HETEROGENEOUS FENTON -LIKE REACTION USING 
CARBON -FE CATALYSTS * 
  
 
  
Abstract 
In this work, the degradation and mine ralization of the non- biodegradable azo 
dye Orange II (OII) was studied, making use of a heterogeneous Fenton-like oxidation 
process. For that, hydrogen peroxide activat ion was achieved by means of two different 
carbon-based catalysts, which have been impr egnated with 7 wt.% of iron. The carbon 
supports employed are quite different, being on e of them an activated carbon prepared 
from agricultural by-products  (olive stone), while the ot her one is a carbon aerogel, 
prepared by carbonization of  an organic resorcinol-formaldehyde polymer. The solids 
have been characterized using several techniques, namely N 2 and CO 2 adsorption at       
-196 and 0º C, respectively, mercury porosimetry, SEM, HRTEM, XRD and XPS. 
Then, the catalyst’s performances in the Fenton-like oxidation of OII were compared, 
and the effects of the most relevant opera ting conditions (pH, cat alyst concentration, 
H2O2 concentration and temperature) analyzed  for the most promising one (the carbon 
aerogel based catalyst). In this catalyst, characteri zation data point for a very good iron 
dispersion on the carbon surface. This sample showed very good catalytic 
performances, with mineralization degrees as high as 90%. However, iron leaching 
from the support is also considerable l eading to a progressive deactivation in 
consecutive reaction cycles. 
 
   
                                                 
* Adapted from : Ramirez, J. H.; Maldonado- Hodar, F. J.; Perez-Cardenas , A. F.; Moreno Castilla, C.; 
Costa, C. A.; Madeira, L. M. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental  2007 , 75, 312. Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 1126.1 Introduction 
 
The homogeneous Fenton process has a si gnificant disadvantag e, as mentioned 
in the previous chapter: homogeneously ca talyzed reactions need up to 50–80 ppm of 
Fe ions in solution, which is well above the European Union directives that allow only 2 ppm of Fe ions in treated water to dump dir ectly into the environment [1]. In addition, 
the removal/treatment of the sludge-containing Fe ions at the end of the wastewater 
treatment is expensive and needs larg e amount of chemicals and manpower. 
To overcome the disadvantages of th e homogeneous Fenton or Fenton-like 
processes (the later one referring to the us e of ferric rather than ferrous ions), the 
immobilization of the catalyst on inert support surfaces has been tried in order to avoid 
the catalyst-recovering step. Indeed, some attempts have been made to develop heterogeneous catalysts, prepared by incorpor ating Fe ions or Fe  oxides into porous 
supports, subsequently used in a wide range of applications. Among others, it is worth 
of mentioning the use of clays as supports for dyes degradat ion [2], of activated carbons 
for phenol [3], textile wastewaters [4] or 4- chlorophenol [5] oxidation, or of zeolites for 
phenol [6] or ethanol [7] oxidation. 
This chapter deals with the degradation of the non-biodegradable azo dye 
Orange II by heterogeneous Fenton’s reagen t (a catalytic wet peroxide oxidation – 
CWPO – process) using carbon based-catalysts . Two different types of carbon materials 
were used as Fe supports: i) an activated carbon (herein denoted as carbon H) prepared 
from agricultural by-products  (olive stone) and ii) a carbon aerogel (sample M) 
prepared by sol-gel technology. Both types of materials can be considered as examples 
of the classical and new carbon materials form. Both of them present different characteristics that could de termine their applications: cl assical activat ed carbon are 
cheap materials prepared from very differe nt raw precursors, but  are heterogeneous 
solids with variable composition, depending on  the raw material used. On the contrary, 
carbon aerogels offer purity, homogeneity an d controlled porosity, but are however 
more expensive because the synthesis method needs very specific equipment, such as 
the supercritical drying. The performance of both materials was compared and the effect 
of the most relevant operating conditi ons in Fenton’s oxidation evaluated.  
  
 Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 1136.2 Materials and Methods 
 
6.2.1 Preparation and Characterisation of the Catalysts 
 
As above-mentioned, two different carbon materials were used as Fe-supports, 
an activated carbon and a carbon aerogel, whic h synthesis is described in chapter 2, 
along with the procedure employed for their im pregnation (with 7 wt. % of iron). In that 
chapter is also provided information regard ing the techniques used for the catalyst’s 
characterisation. 
 
6.2.2 Catalytic Activity 
 
Chemical oxidation of Or ange II was carried out  using 0.2 L of a 1×10-4 M 
solution, in a jacketed glass batch reactor as described in chapter 2. Along the reaction, 
the solution pH kept almost unc hangeable (± 0.1), which is certainly related to the low 
concentration of the OII solution used. Repli cates of some of th e experiments allowed 
to conclude that, for each run, experimental  data do not differ, on average, more than 
5% (maximum errors recorded in a single data were below 10%). 
The Total Organic Carbon (TOC) and the to tal Fe in the solution were measured 
using the equipments de scribed in chapter 2. 
 
6.3 Results and Discussion 
 
6.3.1 Catalysts  Characterization 
 
The morphology of the catalysts was anal yzed by SEM. Their structures, which 
are defined by those of the corresponding s upports, are shown in Fig. 6.1. The carbon 
aerogel structure (Fig. 6.1A) is composed by nearly spherical particles with smooth 
surfaces and nanometric size fo rming a network with “coral type” structure. According 
to its pore texture the microporosity is located  into these primary particles, while the 
meso and macropore volume is determined by th e inter-particle space, and therefore is 
related with the primary particle size, shap e and overlapping degree [8]. The activated 
carbon morphology shown in Fig. 6.1B howev er presents a more heterogeneous 
appearance with large pores and large edges that come from the decomposition of the Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 114lignocellulosic materials. Bo th kinds of structures we re previously observed in 
materials of similar origin [9,10].  
 
A) 
 
B) 
Fig. 6.1 – SEM images of the carbon  M-Fe (A) and H-Fe (B) catalysts. 
 
Textural data of both supports are presen ted in Table 6.1. The BET surface areas 
of both supports ob tained from the N 2 adsorption isotherms are similar. However, the 
CO 2 adsorption experiments, usually devel oped to study the narrowest microporosity 
[11], pointed out that support H ha s a more developed microporosity (W 0, L0) favoured 
by the CO 2 activation process. On the contrary , the porosity range studied by mercury 
porosimetry is larger for support M. This support presents high values of meso (V 2) and 
macropores (V 3) volumes and a high external surface (S ext). Moreover, support H is 
mainly a macroporous material, and thus the external surface area is lower than for support M. The corresponding pore size distributions (PSD) are shown in Fig. 6.2. It is 
observed that support H presen ts a monomodal PSD centred in macropores with 150 nm 
of radius, while the typical porosity in car bon M are mesopores with 5 nm of radius. 
 
Table 6.1 – Textural data of the supports used. 
Sample V 2  
(cm3 / g ) V3  
(cm3 / g) W0 
(cm3 / g) L0 
(nm) Sext 
(m2 / g) SBET 
(m2 / g) 
Support M 1.02 0.99 0.19 0.61 337 641 
Support H 0.12 0.41 0.29 1.10 55 691 
V2 - volume of pores with a diameter between 3.7 and 50 nm; V 3 - volume of pores with a diameter 
larger than 50 nm; W 0 – micropore volume; L 0 – mean micropore width; Sext - external surface area of 
pores with a diameter larger than 3.7 nm and smaller than 50 nm; S BET - BET surface area obtained by 
N2 adsorption. Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 1150123456
1 10 100 1000 10000Radius (nm)dV/dLog Rcarbon M carbon H
 
Fig. 6.2 – Pore size distribution in the meso and macropore range of both carbon supports, obtained by 
mercury porosimetry. 
 
The composition of both supports, determined by elemental analysis, is shown in 
Table 6.2. The main composition difference between both supports is due to the higher oxygen content of the carbon aerogel. It is well known that the ch emical structure of 
resorcinol-formaldehyde aerogels is define d by the formation of methyl and methyl-
ether bridges between aromatic resorcinol st ructures, that also maintain unreacted -OH 
groups [8]. The low carbonization temperatur e of this carbon aerogels favour the high 
oxygen content observed which brings about a surface with a lower pHpzc than the activated carbon H. 
 
Table 6.2 – Elemental analysis of both supports (data given are in a weight percent basis). 
Support pHpzc % C % H % N % O % Ash 
H 9.9 95.7 0.4 0.5 3.0 0.4 
M 8.4 87.2 2.6 0.0 10.2 0.0 
 
The iron chemical state and dispersion we re studied by XRD, XPS and HRTEM. When 
carbon H is used as support, the XRD pattern of the corresponding Fe-catalyst (Fig. 6.3) 
shows small and width diffraction peaks at 2 θ = 35.48, 62.62, 30.12, 57.02 and 43.12º 
that were assigned to (311), (440), (220), (511) and (400) planes of Fe 3O4 (JCPDS 88-
0866), together with two broad bands, locate d at around 22 and 42º, associated to the 
002 and 101 diffraction peaks of graphite, resp ectively. Obviously, only the latter can 
be found in the XRD analysis of the H support. When carbon M was used as iron Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 116support, the XRD pattern do not present any diffraction peaks (Fig. 6.3). It is worth 
noting that the iron particles in this catalys t are difficult to detect even using HRTEM, 
as shown in Fig. 6.4. These results pointed out that in spite Fe is well dispersed in both 
cases, dispersion is worse when support H is used, probably due to the smaller external 
surface area ( cf. Table 6.1). 
 
 30,1 
62,6 43,1 57,0 35,5 
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
2θIntensity
M-FeH-Fe
H
 
Fig 6.3 – XRD-patterns of the catalysts and of the H support. 
 
 
 
Fig. 6.4 – High-resolution transmission electron microscopy of the M-Fe catalyst. 
  
Looking information about the chemical  state of iron on support M, the 
corresponding catalyst was analyzed by XPS. The surface metal content determined by this technique is 6.2 wt.%, t hus, taking into account that th e total loading is 7.0%, it is 
also deduced that iron is uniformly distribut ed and highly dispersed. The XPS pattern of Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 117the Fe2p region is shown in Fig. 6.5. Two components are observed, located at 711.1 
and 713.4 eV respectively. These components ar e indicative of the pr esence of iron with 
different oxidation states and are consiste nt with the binding energy (BE) values 
previously published for magnetite (Fe 3O4) [12] and ferric ions , either as hydrated 
(goethite, FeOOH) or anhydrous (Fe 2O3) oxides [13,14], alt hough in our case BE 
appear at around 0.5 eV higher. This occurs  because the neighbour atoms in a disperse 
system are fewer than in the bulk, and so th e electrons are also fe wer. The consequence 
is a less effective core-hole screening and th e BE of the orbital sh ifts to hi gher energy 
[15].  
705 710 715 720 725 730 735
Binding energy (eV)Arbitrary units
 
Fig. 6.5 – XPS patterns of the Fe2p region for catalyst M-Fe and deconvolution of the corresponding 
peaks (BE = 711 and 713 eV confirm th e presence of Fe(II) and Fe(III)). 
 
 
6.3.2 Catalytic Activity 
 
6.3.2.1  Role of the Supports 
 
Before comparing the behavior of both ir on-containing catalysts, it is important 
to evaluate the OII elimination process, i.e., if OII removal occurs through adsorption, through a catalytic reaction or through both pr ocesses. For that reason, several runs 
were then performed.  Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 118The first one was a blank, carried out to evaluate the ability of H 2O2 to eliminate 
OII in aqueous solutions without the addition of any heterogeneous catalyst. Figure 6.6 shows that OII degradation due  to hydrogen peroxide is almo st negligible (<1.0% after 
4 h and 3.6% after 20 h), which might be at tributed to its low oxidation potential as 
compared to hydroxyl or perhydroxyl radicals [16].  
0 5 10 15 20 250.00.20.40.60.81.0
H
MM-FeCOII/COIIo
Time (h)H2O2
H-Fe
 
Fig. 6.6 – Un-catalyzed orange II removal by hydrogen peroxide (22OHC = 6×10-3 M) and adsorption on 
supports H and M and iron catalysts, H-Fe and M-Fe ( Ccarbon = 0.2 g/L, T = 30 ºC, pH = 3). 
 
To determine the influence of the ad sorption processes experiments without 
H2O2 were carried out. Figure 6.6 shows that both carbon supports have a high 
adsorption capacity, being more important for carbon M (53.0 vs. 34.5% after 20h). The 
different adsorption capacities are relate d with the differences in the pore size 
distribution, thus the adsorpti on capacity is greater in support M in spite of the greater 
micropore volume of sample H, pointing out  the importance of mesoporosity in the 
adsorption of large macromolecules. Figure 6.6 also shows that the adsorption capacity of the catalysts is, in both cases, smalle r than those of the corresponding support.  
Whether this adsorption is an advantage or not is not yet clear. While most 
authors consider that this pre-concentrati on of the substrates to be oxidized in the 
vicinity of reactive centres is beneficial, Georgi and Kopinke [17] consider to be a 
disadvantage because they claim that the pre dominant degradation pathway is the attack 
of HO
• species on the organic contaminants fr action that is freely dissolved in the 
aqueous pore volume of the activated carbon, whereas the adsorbed fraction is nearly 
unreactive. Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 119Carbon materials are, moreover, good catal yst in different reactions [e.g., 18,19]. 
For that reason, the catalytic behaviour of both supports was evaluated in the presence 
of H 2O2 (Fig. 6.7). The decolourization percenta ge increases regarding the adsorption 
conditions showing that both supports are catal ytically active. The pollutant is however 
more deeply degraded in th e presence of support H. Differe nt aspects of the samples 
can contribute to this behavi our. First, the large microporosit y of sample H, that is not 
accessible to the dye, can however favour the H 2O2 decomposition. On the other hand, 
it is well known that the interaction of carbon materials with po llutants in aqueous 
solution strongly depends on their surface chemistry [20]. For instance, Huang et al.  
[21] found that the H 2O2 decomposition was suppressed by decreasing the pHpzc of 
granular activated carbons, however, the degradation of 4-chorophenol by H 2O2 is 
enhanced by the same acid groups . On the other hand, Oliveira et al.  [22] indicate that 
basic sites generated during H 2 pre-treatment at different temperatures enhanced the 
formation of HO• species from H 2O2.  
The obtained results are therefore in good agreement with these conclusions. 
The catalytic activity of the supports seems to be more directly  related with their 
different surface chemistry. The greater activity of support H is favoured by its 
heterogeneous structure, and greater basic ch aracter pointed out by the values of pHpzc 
(Table 6.2).  
0 1 02 03 04 05 00.00.20.40.60.81.0
M + 6 mM H2O2M
H + 6 mM H2O2COII/COIIo
Time (h)H
 
Fig. 6.7 – Orange II removal through adsorption and through oxidation on both carbon supports and 
catalysts (T = 30 ºC, pH = 3, Ccarbon = 0.2 g/L, 22OHC = 6×10-3 M). 
 
 Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 1206.3.2.2  Influence of the Experimental Cond itions in the Iron-Supported Catalysts 
Performance 
 
Although the results summarized in Fig. 6.7 puts into ev idence the possibility of 
using directly the carbon suppor ts as catalysts, the catalytic role of iron is clearly 
evidenced in this section when one compar es the performances shown by the supports 
with those exhibited by their corresponding Fe -catalysts. Actually, while with the best 
support (support H) one needs 15-20 h to reach high OII de gradation levels (>95%), 
with the Fe-catalysts this can be achieved in  only ca. 1.5-3 h in the same experimental 
conditions. Thus, while the use of carbon mate rials as catalysts can present several 
advantages such as lower price or no leachin g of metallic pollutants, the use of iron 
catalyst is necessary when operation time should be shorte ned. The parameters that 
control their catalytic performance will be studied bellow. 
 
• Influence of pH 
 
The catalytic performances of Fe-cat alysts are obviously better than their 
corresponding support. It is well known that this metal is able to transform H 2O2 into 
HO• species [23]. Figure 6.8 shows a compar ative performance of both catalysts at 
different pH values. It is noteworthy that th e M-Fe catalyst is more active than the H-Fe 
one at any pH studied (between 2 and 4) in  spite of the greater catalytic activity of 
support H. This fact should be related with the bett er dispersion of Fe into the large 
external surface provided by mesoporosity of sample M, although the hypothesis that 
the larger adsorption capacity of  this sample can favour the degradation of pollutants in 
neighbour Fe particles can not be ruled out. The importance of the iron dispersion in 
composite materials for Fenton oxidation was also pointed out by other authors [24].  
With both catalysts used, the higher the pH (in the range 2-4), the slower is the 
reaction rate (Fig. 6.8A). For catalyst M-Fe, dye degradation at pH 2 or 3 proceeds at 
almost the same rate, being practically comp lete after 2 h of reaction. This is an 
important advantage because it allows using le ss acid to acidify the medium. It must be 
stressed that another experiment, performed at pH 1 with the M-Fe catalyst, showed a 
marked decrease in the performance: 72.2% af ter 4h; the reason for this was previously 
discussed ( cf. section 5.3.2.3) 
 Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 121012340.00.20.40.60.81.0COII/COIIo
Time (h) pH = 2 H-Fe   pH = 2 M-Fe
 pH = 3 H-Fe   pH = 3 M-Fe
 pH = 4 H-Fe   pH = 4 M-FeA
01234020406080100 pH = 2 H-Fe   pH = 2 M-Fe
 pH = 3 H-Fe   pH = 3 M-Fe
 pH = 4 H-Fe   pH = 4 M-Fe
Time (h)TOC Removal (%)B
012340.00.40.81.21.6 pH = 2 H-Fe   pH = 2 M-Fe
 pH = 3 H-Fe   pH = 3 M-Fe
 pH = 4 H-Fe   pH = 4 M-Fe
Time (h)Iron leaching (mg/L)C
 
Fig. 6.8 – pH effect on the degrad ation of OII solution (A), in TOC re moval (B) and in iron leaching (C) 
using M-Fe and H-Fe catalysts (T = 30 ºC, Ccat. = 0.2 g/L,22OHC = 6×10-3 M). 
 
 
In terms of TOC removal (Fig. 6.8B),  conclusions are similar as for OII 
degradation: for both carbons a better performan ce is reached when the pH is lower. In 
addition, catalyst M-Fe shows always bett er performances as compared to H-Fe, 
reaching mineralization degrees after 4 h above 80%. Thus, while almost total 
elimination of OII pollutant is achieved, its oxidation produces intermediate products 
which mineralization is not complete at a ny pH. The worst performance of both samples 
at high pH values can be as cribed to the stability of H 2O2, which starts to rapidly 
decompose into molecular oxygen without formation of appreciable amounts of 
hydroxyl radicals [25]. In the mild operating conditions used, it is expected that the 
formed O 2 is not capable to effici ently oxidize the organics.  
Another important parameter to quantif y is the iron leaching, which should 
ideally be null to prov ide long-term stability. Figure 6. 8C shows that leaching increases 
when the medium is more acid. This result is in agreement with other authors [3,26]. Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 122Carbon M shows slightly higher iron lixiviation, especially at pH = 2,  what is probably 
related with the better dispersion and accessibi lity of Fe-particles. On the other hand, 
the activity of the leached iron could, in pa rt, explain the better performance of this 
sample. However, not only the homogeneous but also the he terogeneous process is of 
importance. This can be concluded from the OII degradation and mineralization degrees 
at pH 2 or 3, which are similar (Figs. 6.8A a nd 6.8B), in spite of the higher Fe loss from 
the support for pH 2 vs. pH 3 (10.1% vs. 6. 9% after 4h for carbon M,  where the values 
refer to the amount - wt.% - of Fe lost as refereed to the to tal Fe initially present in the 
catalyst). 
 It can therefore be concluded that the better experimental conditions are reached 
using pH = 3 with sample M, where the OII de gradation is similar than at pH = 2, but 
lower iron leaching is produced. The subsequent  runs will consequently be carried out 
at pH 3 using the best sa mple: the Fe-M catalyst.  
 
• Effect of the Catalyst Concentration 
  As expected, when the amount of cata lyst employed increa ses, OII and TOC 
elimination rates also increase (Figs. 6.9A and 6.9B), due to the increasing amount of 
active sites for H
2O2 decomposition and, less important but also of concern, for organic 
compounds adsorption. Nevertheless, the ma ximum mineralization reached is around 
90% (only attained for a catalyst concentration of 0.30 g/L at t = 4h), although 
decolourisation is almost complete for any catalyst concentration used. Moreover, while 
differences in terms of dye removal for catal yst concentrations betw een 0.2 and 0.3 g/L  
are not too significant, TOC removal homog eneously increases with the catalyst 
concentration. It is also noteworthy that, as found by other authors [3], a high reduction 
of TOC is observed at the re action beginning, but the rate of mineralization slows down 
possibly due to the lower oxidation rate of  reaction products and the development of 
parallel reactions between excess ferrous iron and hydroxyl radicals (as occurs in a 
homogeneous process – cf. Eq. (4.2)), or to the scavenging of those or other radicals by 
present iron species [23,27,28]:  
− + • ++ → + OH Fe HO 2  FeOH 3  (6.1) 
− + • ++ → +23
22HO Fe HO Fe    (6.2) Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 123+ + • ++ + → + H O Fe HO Fe22
23   (6.3) 
 
These undesirable reactions may also account for the very similar OII history profiles in 
Fig. 6.9A when the catalyst concentrati on is 0.20 or 0.30 g/L. For this reason, 
subsequent runs will be performed using a catalyst concentration of 0.20 g/L. 
Finally, iron concentration in soluti on increases with the amount of M-Fe 
catalyst used (Fig. 6.9C), reaching however values always below EU guidelines (< 2 
ppm), even when using a catalys t concentration of 0.3 g/L. In terms of percentage of 
iron lost from the solid, referred to the total Fe initially incorporated, Fig. 6.9D shows 
that differences are small, i.e., the percenta ge of iron that has been leached out does not 
depend on the catalyst concentration employed in the catalytic runs. 
012340.00.20.40.60.81.0COII/COIIo
Time (h)A  Ccatalyst = 0.15 g/L
 Ccatalyst = 0.20 g/L
 Ccatalyst = 0.30 g/L
01234020406080100
 Ccatalyst = 0.15 g/L
 Ccatalyst = 0.20 g/L
 Ccatalyst = 0.30 g/LTOC Removal (%)
Time (h)B
 
012340.00.51.01.5 Ccatalyst = 0.15 g/L
 Ccatalyst = 0.20 g/L
 Ccatalyst = 0.30 g/LIron leaching (mg/L)
Time (h)C
0123402468 D Ccatalyst = 0.15 g/L
 Ccatalyst = 0.20 g/L
 Ccatalyst = 0.30 g/LIron leaching (%)
Time (h) 
Fig. 6.9 – Effect of catalyst concentration in the degradation of OII solution (A), in TOC removal (B), in 
iron concentration in solution (C) and in percen tage of iron lost by the M-Fe catalysts  
(D) (T = 30 ºC, pH = 3,22OHC = 6×10-3 M). 
 
 
 Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 124• Effect of the Hydrogen Peroxide Concentration 
 
The effect of the hydrogen peroxide was analysed by varying its initial 
concentration between 3×10-3 and 4.8×10-2 M. According to Feng et al.  [26], 42 mol of 
H2O2 are theoretically needed to comp letely degrade 1 mol of the dye (C 16H11N2NaO 4S 
+ 42H 2O2 → 16CO 2+ 46H 2O + 2HNO 3 + NaHSO 4). Based on this, the concentrations 
employed are between 0.71 and 11.4 (molar rati o) of the overall stoichiometry for the 
complete mineralization of OII. 
Increasing H 2O2 load from 3×10-3 to 6×10-3 M increases reaction performance 
(Figs. 6.10A and 6.10B) because more radi cals are formed. However, a significant 
improvement is not seen fo r a higher c oncentration (
22OHC = 2.4×10-2 M). Moreover, 
performance either in terms of OII degrad ation or in terms of  mineralization drops 
down for an excessive peroxide load (
22OHC = 4.8×10-2 M) due to the well-known 
hydroxyl radicals scave nging effect [23,27]: 
 
22 2 2HO H O HO H O• •+→+        ( 6 . 4 )  
 
Such reaction reduces the probability of  attack of organic molecules by hydroxyl 
radicals, and caused the oxidation rate  to drop. Although other radicals ( HO 2•) are 
produced, their oxidation potential is much smaller than that of the HO• species [16]. 
Therefore, in the subsequent runs, 
22OHC = 6×10-3 M will be used. 
Figure 6.10C evidences that H 2O2 concentration does not seem to affect iron 
leaching. This is in agreement with some works found in the literat ure either with Fe- 
[29] or Cu-based catalysts [30], showing however that the leaching experiments are 
nicely reproducible (lines for different runs practically overlap). It is however important 
to highlight that iron leaching increases from 3 to 4 h of reaction, a behaviour that can 
also be noticed in other figures, e.g. Fig 6. 9. In spite th e total amount of iron in the 
system is the same, a larger fraction is in  solution, from which one could expect an 
increase in the mineralization degree. Howe ver, such trend is not accompanied by a 
significant change in TOC removal, which might  indicate that the products formed are 
refractory, hard to further oxidise. Sotelo et al.  [30] also pointed for the formation of 
refractory compounds in the second stage of the degradation kinetics, which showed a Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 125fast removal stage followed by a slower sec ond step where TOC conversion is levelled 
off. 
012340.00.20.40.60.81.0 CH2O2 = 3 mM
 CH2O2 = 6 mM
 CH2O2 = 24 mM
 CH2O2 = 48 mMCOII/COIIo
Time (h)A
01234020406080100
 CH2O2 = 3 mM
 CH2O2 = 6 mM
 CH2O2 = 24 mM
 CH2O2 = 48 mMTOC Removal) (%)
Time (h)B
 
012340.00.51.0 CH2O2 = 3 mM
 CH2O2 = 6 mM
 CH2O2 = 24 mM
 CH2O2 = 48 mMIron leaching (mg/L)
Time (h)C
 
Fig. 6.10 – Hydrogen peroxide concentration effect on the degradation of OII solution (A), in TOC 
removal (B) and in iron leaching (C) usin g M-Fe catalysts (T = 30 ºC, pH = 3, Ccat. = 0.2 g/L). 
 
 
• Effect of the Reaction Temperature 
 
When the temperature of the reaction me dium is increased, oxidation proceeds 
at a faster rate (Figs. 6.11A and 6.11B) due  to the exponential dependence of the kinetic 
constants on it (Arrhenius law), as show n below. However, after ca. 1.5 h dye 
degradation is similar for temperatures in the range 30-70 ºC (Fig. 6.11A), with almost 
100% decolorisation.  
The mineralization degree increases with increasing temperature, although total 
mineralization is not attained even at 70 ºC. The most significant difference is noted 
when reaction temperature increases from 10-30 ºC (Fig. 6.11B). In this temperature Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 126range TOC removal increases from ca. 50 to  almost 80%, however, each progressive 
20ºC increase only produces ar ound 3% of TOC increase. This is possibly due to the 
accelerated thermal decomposition of H 2O2 into oxygen and water [31-33]. For this 
reason, final experiments will be carried out at 30 ºC. In addition, the higher the reaction temperature, the higher the iron lo st from the catalysts (Fig.6.11C), in 
agreement with other studies repo rted in the literature [3]. 
012340.00.20.40.60.81.0 T = 10ºC
 T = 30ºC
 T = 50ºC
 T = 70ºCACOII/COIIo
Time (h)
 01234020406080100
 T = 10ºC
 T = 30ºC
 T = 50ºC
 T = 70ºCTOC Removal) (%)
Time (h)B
012340.00.51.01.52.0
 T = 10ºC
 T = 30ºC
 T = 50ºC
 T = 70ºCCIron leaching (mg/L)
Time (h)
  
Fig. 6.11 – Temperature effect on the degradation of OII solution (A), in TOC removal (B) and in iron 
leaching (C) using M-Fe catalysts (22OHC = 6×10-3 M, pH = 3, Ccat. = 0.2 g/L). Plot (D) represents the 
temperature dependence of the apparent pseudo-first order kinetic constant. 
 
 Assuming, as commonly found, a pseudo-first order for the dye degradation, the mass balance in the batch reactor yields:  
() WCk WrdtdCVOII ap OIIOII−= −−=       ( 6 . 5 )  
 2.8x10-33.0x10-33.2x10-33.4x10-33.6x10-30123456ln k (dm3 h-1 gcatalyst-1)
1/T (K-1)D
 62412 6747 .T. klnap +⎟⎠⎞⎜⎝⎛× −=Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 127where COII is the orange II concentration at instant t, kap is the apparent  pseudo-first 
order kinetic constant, W is the mass of catalyst and V is the reaction volume. 
Integration of such equation provides  the theoretical history profiles: 
 
⎟
⎠⎞⎜
⎝⎛− = tVWk exp C Cap oOII OII        ( 6 . 6 )  
 
to which the data shown in Fig. 6.11A were fitted. The fittings ( R2 > 0.99) at different 
temperatures were performed using data  up to 95% OII conve rsion, except for T = 10 
ºC, where all data have been used. The dependence of the kinetic constant on the 
reaction temperature shown in  Fig. 6.11D evidences Arrhenius behaviour, with an 
activation energy of 56.1 kJ/mol. Others au thors [34] have found the same dependence 
with the temperature in a phot o-assisted process through a Fe /C structured catalyst for 
the degradation of Orange II, and in such case the value of the activation energy for the dye discoloration was 47.4 kJ/mol (in a similar temperature range).  
 
•
 Stability and Recycling of the Fe-M Catalyst 
 
To use in real practice a heterogeneous  catalyst in Fenton-like oxidation, it is 
crucial to evaluate the stability of the solids. With that goal in mid, consecutive experiments were performed with the same sample, recovered by filtration after each 
cycle. Figure 6.12 shows that after the firs t 2 experiments, reaction performance, 
particularly OII degradation rate, is sign ificantly affected. Mi neralization is also 
affected, with values after 4 h of reacti on decreasing in the 3 consecutive cycles from 
76.5, to 71.4 and finally to 55.9%. This is in part a consequence of the iron lost from the 
support, which amounts to 24% of the initial ir on after the 3 cycles (ca. 8% per cycle – 
cf. Fig. 6.12C).  
The iron leaching is not the only reason for the observed activity decay. 
Actually, based on the effective amount of iron available at the beginning of each cycle, 
the initial reaction rates have b een computed (using Eq. (6.5) for t = 0). The values 
obtained for the 3 consecutive cycles (5.5 ×10
-6, 4.0×10-6 and 1.1 ×10-6 mmol s-1 mg Fe-1, 
respectively) show that iron deactivation is also produced, although the reasons behind 
that are not yet clear. Zazo et al.  [3] attributed the Fe/activ e carbon catalyst deactivation 
observed to Fe complexation by oxalic acid (resulting from phenol oxidation) and/or to Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 128active sites blockage due to polymeric depos its, with partial reactivation being reached 
after washing with 1N NaOH solution.  
012340.00.20.40.60.81.01.2COII/COIIo
Time (h) 1st Run
 2nd Run
 3rd Run
 Fe2+
 Fe3+A
01234020406080100 1st Run
 2nd Run
 3rd Run
 Fe2+
 Fe3+
Time (h)TOC Removal (%)B
012340.00.51.01.5
 1st Run
 2nd Run
 3rd Run
Time (h)Iron leaching (mg/L)C
 
Fig. 6.12 – Effect of consecutive experiments with the M-Fe catalyst on the degradation of OII solution 
(A), in TOC removal (B) an d in iron leaching (C) (22OHC = 6×10-3 M, pH = 3, T  = 30 ºC, Ccat. = 0.2 g/L). 
Oxidation performance is also compared with homogeneous catalytic process, using iron (II) or iron (III) 
salts (1.5 mg/L). 
 
Based on the amount of iron lost from the M-Fe catalyst after the first cycle, two 
experiments were performed in homogene ous phase using iron salts in similar 
concentration as that produced by leaching (1 .5 mg/L). From Figs. 6.12A and 6.12B one 
can clearly seen that both OII degradation a nd particularly mineralization with the iron 
salts proceeds much slowly than with the car bon-based catalyst, i.e.  the iron (in the 2+ 
or 3+ oxidation state) presen t in solution is not capable to catalyze the process so 
efficiently. Therefore, the process studied in this work using the carbon-based catalysts 
is essentially heterogeneous, not homogeneous . Finally, the faster reaction rate with 
Fe(II) vs. Fe(III) salts (Figs. 6.12A and 6. 12B) is due to the faster reaction with Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 129hydrogen peroxide in Fenton (reaction with ferrous iron) compared to Fenton-like 
(reaction with ferric ir on) processes [35-37]. 
Finally, and due to reasonable performan ces reached by the carbon catalysts, we 
decided to compare them with catalysts ba sed on pillared saponite  impregnated with 
iron salts, reported in chapte r 5. Then, the carbon-based catalysts were tested in 
identical conditions as clays, which contain the same iron content ( ca. 7-8 wt.%). Table 
6.3 shows that in terms of OII degradation or TOC removal, the final performance ( t =  
4 h) of the M-Fe catalyst is similar to that found with the best of the clays, i.e., the one 
using the iron (II) oxalate salt as precursor . However, OII degradation proceeds at a 
much faster reaction rate with the aerogel catalyst ( cf. values for t = 2 h). Once again, 
carbon H-Fe presents a worst performance. Ho wever, one important disadvantage of the 
carbon catalysts is the amount of iron lost fr om the support, which is much higher than 
that reached with the oxalate clay sample . Nevertheless, if one  compares the iron 
leaching of the carbon catalysts with that of a clay sample in which the iron precursor was the same as in the carbons catalysts, i.e.  acetate, it comes that iron lixiviation data 
become similar, even though cat alytic performance of this other clay is worst (Table 
6.3). It seems therefore that the precursor us ed might have an important role in fixing 
the iron to the support.  
 
Table 6.3 – Comparison of reaction perform ance in terms of OII degradation, OII 
mineralization and iron leaching of the carbon catalysts with two clay-based samples.* 
Sample OII degradation,  
t = 2h (%) OII degradation,  
t = 4h (%) TOC Removal,  
t = 4h (%) Iron Leaching,  
t = 4h (mg/L)+ 
M-Fe 79.0 94.6 58.8 0.642 (10.0%) 
H-Fe 26.2 55.0 23.0 0.498 (7.8%) 
Clay Oxalate 35.9 92.9 70.3 0.190 (2.6%) Clay Acetate 30.5 79.3 66.7 0.558 (7.5%) 
* Reaction conditions: T = 30 ºC, pH = 3, 22OHC = 6×10-3 M, Ccat. = 91.5 mg/L. 
+ Percentage values refer to the amount (wt.%) of Fe lost into the solution after reaction, based on the 
total iron initially present in the samples. 
 
6.4 Conclusions 
 
• Two carbon samples have been employed as  supports for iron pa rticles with the 
aim of using them in the Fenton-like oxidation of Orange II. The carbon samples 
used are quite different, a classical activat ed carbon (sample H) and a carbon Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 130aerogel (sample M). They differ largely in the porosity: while carbon H is a 
macro and microporous material, car bon M has a large mesopore volume. 
Chemically, the carbon aerogel has a great er oxygen content, which brings about 
a lower pHpzc value. The adsorption capacity depends on the textural characteristics, while the catalytic activ ity in the Orange OII degradation is 
mostly related with the chemical ones. 
•
 The catalysts have been prepared through wet impregnation using ferrous 
acetate. The XPS and XRD experiments s howed that Fe presents different 
oxidation state (Fe (II) and Fe  (III)) that is more disper sed in the case of support 
M because of the large mesopore volum e and external surface area of this 
sample. 
• The good iron dispersion in carbon M may be one reason for th e better catalytic 
behaviour of this sample in the Fe nton-like process. Indeed, the Fe-doped 
aerogel showed better catalytic performances, mainly higher reaction rates, than those reached with the activated carbon catalyst.  
•
 With both activated carbon-based catalys ts, OII elimination is due to two 
processes – adsorption and catalysis – bei ng however the last the most relevant 
one. Although a homogeneous catalytic  contribution also exists, as a 
consequence of the iron leaching, the process is essentially heterogeneous. When choosing the reaction conditions, one has to found a compromise between 
high reaction performances, with low iron leaching. For that reason, it is 
advisable to operate at pH around 3.0, T = 30ºC, and a hydrogen peroxide 
concentration of 6×10
-3 M (for a dye concentration of 1×10-4 M). 
• The catalysts studied have however an important limitation for their use in 
industrial practice – the hi gh iron loss from the supports . To overcome this, it is 
advisable the preparation of carbon aerogels in which iron is within the aerogel 
structure. Nevertheless, even in th e worst conditions tested the iron 
concentration in solution is always be llow the EU guidelines (< 2 ppm) and the 
catalytic performances reached are quite  good, with mineralization degrees as 
high as 90%, for catalysts concentra tion not higher than 0.20 to 0.30 g/L. 
Decolourisation might however be almost complete. This means that the dye is 
being transformed into intermediate  products that evolve towards CO 2 and H 2O 
as the reaction proceeds, remaining however some refractory compounds. Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 131• Finally, consecutive experiments performed with the M-Fe sample showed some 
activity decay, which is due to both ir on leaching and catalyst deactivation.  
 
References  
 1. Sabhi, S.; Kiwi, J. Degradation of 2,4-Dichlorophenol by immobilized iron catalysts. 
Water Research 2001 , 35, 1994. 
 2. Sum, O. S. N.; Feng, J.; Hu, X.; Yue, P.L. Pillared laponite clay-based Fe 
nanocomposites as heterogeneous catalysts for photo-Fenton degradation of acid black 1. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2004 , 59, 5269. 
 3. Zazo, J. A.; Casas, J. A.; Mohedano, A. F.; Rodriguez, J. J. Catalytic wet peroxide 
oxidation of phenol with a Fe/Active carbon catalyst. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2006 , 65, 261. 
 4. Dantas, T. L. .P.; Mendonça, V. P.; Jose, H. J.; Rodrigues, A. E.; Moreira. R. F. P. M. 
Treatment of textile wastewater by heter ogeneous Fenton process using a new composite 
Fe
2O3/carbon. Chemical Engineering Journal 2006 , 118, 77. 
 5. Lücking, F.; Köser, H.; Jank, M.; Ritter, A. Iron powder, graphite and activated carbon as 
catalysts for the oxidation of 4-chlorophenol w ith hydrogen peroxide in aqueous solution. 
Water Research 1998 , 32, 2607. 
 6. Calleja, G.; Melero, J. A.; Martínez, F. ; Molina, R. Activity and resistance of iron-
containing amorphous, zeolitic and mesostructur ed materials for wet peroxide oxidation 
of phenol. Water Research 2005 , 39, 1741. 
 7. Kuznetsova, E. V.; Savinov, E. N.; Vost rikova, L. A.; Parmon, V. N. Heterogeneous 
catalysis in the Fenton-type system FeZSM-5/H 2O2. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 
2004 , 51, 165. 
 8. Al-Muhtaseb, S. A.; Ritter, J. A. Preparation and Properties of Resorcinol-Formaldehyde 
Organic and Carbon Gels. Advanced Materials 2003 , 15, 101. 
 9. Maldonado-Hódar, F. J.; Moreno-Castilla, C.; Pérez-Cadenas, A. F. Surface morphology, 
metal dispersion, and pore texture of tr ansition metal-doped monolithic carbon aerogels 
and steam-activated derivatives. Microporous and Mesoporous Materials 2004 , 69, 119. 
10. Ubago-Pérez, R.; Carrasco-Marín, F.; Fair én-Jiménez, D.; Moreno-Castilla, C. Granular 
and monolithic activated carbons from KOH-activation of olive stones. Microporous and 
Mesoporous Materials 2006 , 92, 64. 
11. Cazorla-Amorós, D.; Alcañiz-Monge, J.; De  la Casa-Lillo, M. A.; Linares-Solano, A. 
CO 2 as an adsorptive to characterize car bon molecular sieves and activated carbons. 
Langmuir 1998 , 14, 4589. Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 13212. Mukh-Qasem, R. A.; Gedanken, A. Sonochemical synthesis of stable hydrosol of Fe3O4 
nanoparticles. Journal of Co lloid and Interface Science 2005 , 284, 489. 
13. Liu, C.; Tseng, D.; Wang, C. Effects of ferrous ions on the reductive dechlorination of 
trichloroethylene by zero-valent iron. Journal of Hazardous Materials 2006 , 136, 706. 
14. Wagner, C. D.; Riggs, W. M.; Davis, L. E.; Moulder, J. F.; Muilenberg, G. E. Handbook 
of X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, Perkin-Elmer, Physical Electronics Division: Eden Prairier, M.I., 1978 . 
15. Kónya, Z.; Kiss, J.; Oszkó, A.; Siska, A. ; Kiricsi, I. XPS characterisation of catalysts 
during production of multiwalled carbon nanot ubes. Physical Chemistry Chemical 
Physics 2001 , 3, 155. 
16. Bigda, R. J. Consider Fenton chemistry for wastewater treatment. Chemical Engineering 
and Processing 1995 , 91, 62. 
17. Georgi, A.; Kopinke, F. D. Interaction of  adsorption and catalytic reactions in water 
decontamination processes: Part I. Oxida tion of organic contaminants with hydrogen 
peroxide catalyzed by activated carbon. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2005 , 58, 9. 
18. Maldonado-Hódar, F. J.; Madeira, L. M.; Portela, M. F. The use of coals as catalysts for 
the oxidative dehydrogenation of n-butane. Applied Catalysis A: General 1999 , 178, 49. 
19. Carrasco-Marín, F.; Mueden, A.; Moreno- Castilla, C. Surface-treated activated carbons 
as catalysts for the dehydration and dehydroge nation reactions of ethanol. Journal of 
Physical Chemistry B 1998 , 102, 9239. 
20. Radovic, L. R.; Moreno-Castilla, C.; Rivera -Utrilla. J. Chemistry and physics of carbon, 
V. 27, Marcel Dekker, New York 2000 . 
21. Huang, H.; Lu, M.; Chen, J.; Lee, C. Catalytic decomposition of hydrogen peroxide and 
4-chlorophenol in the presence of mo dified activated carbons. Chemosphere 2003 , 51, 
935. 
22. Oliveira, L. C. A.; Silva, C. N.; Yosh ida, M. I.; Lago, R. M. The effect of H
2 treatment on 
the activity of activated carbon for the oxidati on of organic contaminants in water and the 
H2O2 decomposition. Carbon 2004 , 42, 2279. 
23. Walling, C. Fenton’s reagent revis ited. Accounts of Chemical Research  1975 , 8, 125. 
24. Oliveira, L. C. A.; Gonçalves, M.; Guerreiro, M. C.; Ramalho, T. C.; Fabris, J. D.;  
Pereira, M. C.; Sapag. K. A new catalyst material based on niobia/iron oxide composite 
on the oxidation of organic contaminants in water via heterogeneous  Fenton mechanisms. 
Applied Catalysis A: General 2007 , 316, 117. 
25. Guo, J.; Al-Dahhan, M. Catalytic wet oxidation of phenol by hydrogen peroxide over 
pillared clay catalyst. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 2003 , 42, 2450. Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 13326. Feng, J.; Hu, X.; Yue, P. L. Effect of in itial solution pH on the degradation of Orange II 
using clay-based Fe nanocomposites as hete rogeneous photo-Fenton catalyst. Water 
Research 2006 , 40, 641. 
27. De Laat, J. ; Le, T. G. Effects of chloride ions on the iron(III)-catalyzed decomposition of 
hydrogen peroxide and on the efficiency of the Fenton-like oxidation process. Applied 
Catalysis B: Environmental 2006 , 66, 137. 
28. Carriazo, J.; Guélou, E.; Barrault, J.; Tatibouët, J. M.; Molina, R.; Moreno, S. Synthesis 
of pillared clays containing Al, Al-Fe or Al -Ce-Fe from a bentonite: Characterization and 
catalytic activity. Catalalysis Today 2005 , 107-108, 126. 
29. Melero, J. A.; Calleja, G.; Martínez, F. ; Molina, R.; Pariente, M. I. Nanocomposite 
Fe2O3/SBA-15: An efficient and stable catalyst for the catalytic wet peroxidation of 
phenolic aqueous solutions. Chemical Engineering Journal 2007 , 131, 245. 
30. Sotelo, J. L.; Ovejero, G.; Martínez, F.; Me lero, J. A.; Milieni, A. Catalytic wet peroxide 
oxidation of phenolic solutions over a LaTi 1−xCuxO3 perovskite catalyst. Applied 
Catalysis B: Environmental 2004 , 47 281. 
31. Dutta, K.; Mukhopadhyay, S.; Bhattacharjee, S.; Chaudhuri, B. Chemical oxidation of 
methylene blue using a Fenton-like reaction. J. Hazard. Mater. 2001 , 84, 57. 
32. Guedes, A. M. F. M.; Madeira, L. M. P.; Boaventura, R. A. R.; Costa, C. A. V. Fenton 
oxidation of cork cooking wastewater—ove rall kinetic analysis. Water Research 2003 , 
37, 3061. 
33. Catrinescu, C.; Teodosiu, C.; Macoveanu, M.; Miehe-Brendle, J.; Dred, R. L. Catalytic 
wet peroxide oxidation of phenol over Fe-e xchanged pillared beide llite. Water Research 
2003 , 37, 1154. 
34. Yuranova, T.; Enea, O.; Mielczarski, E.; Mi elczarski, J.; Albers, P.; Kiwi. J. Fenton 
immobilized photo-assisted catalysis through a Fe/C structured fabric. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2004 , 49, 39. 
35. Chen, R.; Pignatello, J. J. Role of quinone  intermediates as electron shuttles in Fenton 
and photoassisted Fenton oxidations of arom atic compounds. Environmental Science and 
Technology 1997 , 31, 2399.  
36. Gallard, H.; De Laat, J. Kinetic modelling of Fe(III)/H
2O2 oxidation reactions in dilute 
aqueous solution using atrazine as a model organic compound. Water Research 2000 , 34, 
3107. 
37. De Laat, J.; Gallard, H.; Ancelin, S.; Legube , B. Comparative study of the oxidation of 
atrazine and acetone by H 2O2/UV, Fe(III)/UV, Fe(III)/H 2O2/UV and Fe(II) or 
Fe(III)/H 2O2. Chemosphere 1999 , 39, 2693. 
 
 Chapter 6. Azo-dye OII degradation by heterogene ous Fenton-like reaction us ing carbon-Fe catalysts 
 134  Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   135CHAPTER 7 – EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN TO OPTIMIZE 
THE OXIDATION OF ORANGE II DYE SOLUTION USING 
A CLAY -BASED FENTON -LIKE CATALYST * 
 
 
  
Abstract 
 
In this work an experimental design  methodology was applied to optimize the 
degradation of an Orange II  (OII) solution, while minimi zing also the leaching of iron 
from the catalyst support in  a heterogeneous Fenton-like  process. The independent 
variables considered were the temperature, H 2O2 concentration and catalyst (iron-
impregnated pillared saponite clay) load. The multivariate experimental design allowed developing empiric quadratic models for dye degradation, TOC removal and iron 
leaching after 1, 2, 3 and 4 h of reaction, wh ich were adequate to predict responses in 
all the range of experiment al conditions used. Data obtained revealed that the 
heterogeneous Fenton-like process is promisi ng for degradation of the studied azo dye. 
Actually, after 4 hours oxidation color removals near 100% and TOC reductions of at least 65% were experimentally achieved, wh en the temperature was 40 ºC or higher. 
Iron leaching was also quite small after 4 hours oxidation (in the range 0.7-5.0 %), 
pointing for a good stability of the catalyst. Besides, the optimal conditions depend on the response factor considered , being advisable to use le ss-aggressive conditions if 
responses are taken at longer r eaction times. Particularly temp erature, but also catalyst 
concentration, were found out to be the ma in parameters affecting all the responses 
(dye degradation, TOC removal and iron l eaching), whereas the effect of initial H
2O2 
concentration was found out to be neglig ible. Finally, the process was optimized 
considering the three responses  simultaneously, allowing defining optimal regions for 
the significant process variables (temperatu re and catalyst dose in the slurry batch 
reactor). 
 
 
                                                 
* Adapted from : Ramirez, J. H.; Lampinen, M.; Vicente, M. A.; Costa, C. A.; Madeira. L. M. Industrial & 
Engineering Chemistry Research  2008 , 47, 284. Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   1367.1 Introduction 
 
The oxidation with Fenton´s reagent, in either homogeneous or heterogeneous 
processes, and the advantages of using the la tter have been described in the previous 
chapters, being noteworthy the use of pill ared clays because of their particular 
properties and structures as well as their abundance and low cost.  
In the Fenton-like processes, several pr ocess variables are in volved that affect 
process efficiency (e.g. pH, temperature, oxi dant and catalyst c oncentrations, etc.). 
Therefore, process optimization is not straightforward. Although many researchers 
have usually only focused on the single-facto r-at-a-time approach, studying the effect 
of each experimental parameter on the process performance while keeping all other conditions constant, this approach does not take into account cross-effects from the factors considered, is time consuming and l eads to a poor optimization result. When a 
multifactor system is present, it is more appropriate to employ statistically-based optimization strategies to achieve such goal,  with the minimum number of experiments 
[1-2]. Indeed, an alternative to the above-m entioned strategy is the experimental design 
approach, which implies the use of statistical tools that allow the simultaneous change of several variables (mul tivariate analysis) [3]. 
This study concerns the de gradation of the non-biodegrad able azo dye orange II 
(OII) by heterogeneous Fenton’s reagent, using as catalyst a pillared clay impregnated with iron (III) acetylacet onate (one of the best samples tested in chapter 5). It is also a 
main goal of the present work to find the optimum conditions to maximize both color and total organic carbon (TOC) removal,  while minimizing the iron loss from the 
support, and so a design of experiments (DOE) tool will be used. 
 
7.2 Materials and Methods 
 
7.2.1 Catalyst Preparation and Characterization 
 
The catalyst used was a pillared clay  (support) impre gnated with Fe(III) 
acetylacetonate, which synthesis has been repor ted in detail in chapter 2. Iron content 
of the catalyst prepared was experimenta lly found to be 26.2 wt. %, the elemental 
analyses being performed with  the microanalysis system coupled to a SEM apparatus 
(cf. section 2.5.1).  Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   1377.2.2 Oxidation Runs 
 
All the experiments were conducted in a jacketed glass batc h reactor, with a 
capacity of 1.2 L. More detail about the equipment and reagents used are shown in 
chapter 2. A reaction volume of 1L with a dye concentration of 1×10-4 M 
(corresponding to a total organic carbon, TOC,  content of 19.2 mg/L) was used in every 
experiment, which is in the range of azo  dyes’ concentrations usually found in 
industrial waste streams (bet ween 10 and 50 mg/L) [4]. 
All of the runs were carrie d out at pH 3, which was chosen based on the results 
shown in chapter 5. Along the reaction, th e solution pH kept almost unchangeable (± 
0.1), which is certainly related to the low concentration of the OII solution used. All 
experiments were run at least up to 4 h. 
For TOC and Fe analysis, samples were withdrawn from the reactor every hour. 
Used sample volume was 15 mL, and reaction was stopped as described in chapter 2. 
The H 2O2 concentration was determined by a spectrophotometric  analysis using 
the potassium titanium (IV) oxalate method [5]. 
 
7.3 Results and Discussion 
 
As above-mentioned, several variables a ffect the heterogene ous dye oxidation 
and mineralization efficiency, namely th e pH, temperature, hydrogen peroxide 
concentration and catalyst load, for a given dye  concentration. Therefore, the use of a 
four factor experimental design becomes too heavy when considering the number of 
runs to be performed [3]. For that reason, and on the basis of the results obtained in 
chapter 5, the pH was kept constant. Therein, an optimal pH of 3 was found, which is in 
agreement with most papers reviewed [6-8] that mention the most favourable pH being 
between 3.0 and 3.5. The analysis of the effect of temperature, catalyst and hydrogen 
peroxide concentration on the catalytic performance is based on the experiments 
proposed by the design of experiments, as mentioned below. Nevertheless, two blank 
experiments were first performed to observe the H 2O2 and the catalyst effect 
independently. When an experime nt was carried out with a 6×10-3 M H 2O2 
concentration and without a catalyst, the co lor removal was less than 5% after 4 h of 
reaction. Compared with the results show n below, this performance is almost 
negligible, proving that although H 2O2 has some oxidation ability (oxidation potential Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   138of 1.78 V) [9], much more pow erful oxidising species have to be formed to initiate the 
process, breaking down the dye molecu les – mainly the hydroxyl radical ( HO• - 2.80 
V), with smaller contribution of others (e.g. HO 2• - 1.70 V) [9]. Likewise, with 91.5 
mg/L of catalyst and absence of H 2O2 the color removal was < 1% after 4 h, meaning 
that dye adsorption is negligible. Both expe riments were performed at 30 ºC and pH 3. 
Before proceeding, it is worth nothing th at it was previously found that the 
process is essentially hete rogeneous, not homogenous ( cf. chapter 5). Actually, 
although the homogeneous contribution due to  leached iron from the support cannot be 
neglected, its contribution to the overall performance is in most conditions minor. 
In the following section the effect of the main parameters is briefly discussed, 
aiming mainly to provide a better insigh t of the transient evolution of process 
performance (histories of the three res ponses), using some of the experiments 
performed in the DOE, which is analysed in detail afterwards.  
7.3.1
 Effect of Operating Conditions on Catalytic Activity 
 
7.3.1.1  Temperature Effect 
 
From Fig. 7.1A it can be seen that th e reaction temperature has an important 
effect on the dye degradation transient curv es. Total color removal can be reached in 
less than 30 minutes when working at a te mperature of 73.6 °C (Run 10, described 
below), but at lower temperatures the pr ocess slows down signifi cantly. This kind of 
effect was expected, since it is known th at kinetic constants (either for radicals 
productions or for iron regeneration) ha ve exponential dependency with reaction 
temperature (Arrhenius law), and has also been reported by other authors [10]. For 
TOC removal (Fig. 7.1B) the same kind of eff ect can be seen as for dye degradation. 
Temperature increase leads to better TOC removal but the difference between temperatures of 40 °C and 73.6 °C is not  as significant as it was observed for color 
removal. This is probably due to the fact that H
2O2 decomposes into oxygen and water 
at high temperatures ( cf. Figure A1 of appendix I) affecting mineralization of all of the 
organics, which proceed more slowly than OII degradation. In addition, when the 
temperature increases the iron loss also increases ( cf. Fig. 7.1C), a similar behaviour to 
that found previously in chapte r 6 and by other authors [11]. Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   139012340.00.20.40.60.81.0COII/COIIo
Time (h) T = 6.4oC
 T = 40oC
 T = 73.6oCA
 01234020406080
 T = 6.4oC
 T = 40oC
 T = 73.6oCTOC Removal (%)
Time (h)B
 
02401234
 T = 6.4oC
 T = 40oC
 T = 73.6oCIron leaching (%)
Time (h)C
 
Fig. 7.1 – Temperature effect on: (A) dye degradation (B) mineralization and (C) iron loss. 
Ccatalyst . = 70 mg/L, =22OHC 1.3×10-2 M.  
 
7.3.1.2  Catalyst Concentration Effect 
 
The effect of the catalyst concentrati on on the dye degradation histories is 
shown in Fig. 7.2. It can be seen that the catalyst load affects positively the dye 
degradation rate, as expected, because more  radicals are produced, thus leading to a 
faster color removal. It is also noteworthy that after three hours the concentration of 
dye is the same, and practically  null, for all catalyst loads (i n the conditions tested). In 
terms of TOC removal, 70 mg/L  of catalyst leads to better  results as compared to 
catalyst loads of 19.5 and 120.5 mg/L, which provide similar TOC removals after 3 or 
4 hours of oxidation. This indicates that af ter a certain point th e catalyst load has a 
detrimental effect in the mineralization degr ee, what can be explained by the formation 
of iron complexes (iron + organics) when excess amounts of catalys t are present, and 
other authors have also found this kind of  behaviour with heterogeneous systems 
[12,13]. The scavenging of hydroxyl radicals (reaction (7.1)) might also explain this Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   140kind of effect [14], although other undesirabl e reactions between iron and other radicals 
could also be mentioned [14-16]: 
 
− + + •+ → + OH Fe Fe HO3 2       ( 7 . 1 )  
− + • ++ → + OH Fe HO FeOH 23      ( 7 . 2 )  
− + • ++ → +23
22HO Fe HO Fe       ( 7 . 3 )  
+ + • ++ + → + H O Fe HO Fe22
23      ( 7 . 4 )  
 
Finally, in terms of percentage of iron lo st from the solid, referred to the total Fe 
initially incorporated, Fig. 7.2C  shows that differences are small, i.e., the percentage of 
iron that has been leached out depends onl y slightly on the cat alyst concentration 
employed in the catalytic runs. It seems howe ver that higher percentages of Fe are lost 
from the clay support when sma ller catalyst doses are used.  
012340.00.20.40.60.81.0
 Ccat = 19.5 mg/L
 Ccat = 70.0 mg/L
 Ccat = 120.5 mg/LCOII/COIIo
Time (h)A
01234020406080
 Ccat = 19.5 mg/L
 Ccat = 70.0 mg/L
 Ccat = 120.5 mg/LTOC Removal (%)
Time (h)B
 
024024
 Ccat = 19.5 mg/L
 Ccat = 70.0 mg/L
 Ccat = 120.5 mg/LIron leaching (%)
Time (h)C
 
Fig. 7.2 – Catalyst concentration effect on: (A) dye degradation (B) mineralization and  
(C) iron loss. T = 40 ºC, =22OHC 1.3×10-2 M, pH = 3. 
 Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   1417.3.1.3  Hydrogen Peroxide Effect 
 
The effect of the hydrogen peroxide was analysed by varying its initial 
concentration in a wide range, between 1.2×10-3 and 2.5×10-3 M. According to Feng et 
al. [17], 42 mol of H 2O2 are theoretically needed to completely degrade 1 mol of the 
dye (C 16H11N2NaO 4S + 42H 2O2 → 16CO 2+ 46H 2O + 2HNO 3 + NaHSO 4). Based on 
this, one can easily conclude that the c oncentrations employed are between 0.29 and 
5.9 (molar ratio) of the overall stoichiometr y for the complete mineralization of the OII 
solution used. The H 2O2 concentration effect is shown in Fig. 7.3, where it can be seen 
that the amount of H 2O2 has a negligible influence on the dye degradation and also 
quite small in TOC removal and iron lost . The reason why color removal does not 
increase when increasing H 2O2 concentration is possible due to the fact that at higher 
oxidant concentrations the scavenging of HO• radicals will occu r, as expressed by 
reaction (7.5). This way, there is a competition of H 2O2 and OII for the HO• radicals 
through parallel undesired reacti ons. Although other radicals ( HO 2•) are produced, their 
oxidation potential is much smaller than that of the HO• species [9]. It is noteworthy 
that some authors suggest that the influence of hydrogen peroxide depends on the nature of the organic compounds present in the reaction medium, the oxidation of some 
being hydrogen peroxide independent [13].  
 
• •+ → +2 2 22 HOOH OH HO       ( 7 . 5 )  
 
Another explanation for the observed effect is that H 2O2 is not the only source 
of oxidant species. This can be inferred from the fact that for a concentration               of 1.2×10
-3 M, which represents 29% of the stoichiometric dose for the mineralization 
of the dye, one can observe a 75% removal of TOC (Fig. 7.3B). To evaluate the 
possible effect of dissolved  oxygen, its concentration wa s markedly decreased (by 
bubbling N 2 through the reaction mixture). Alt hough catalytic activity  was affected, 
pointing for a role of dissolved oxygen as oxi dant, the decrease was not too significant 
(TOC elimination was only ca. 10% smaller).  This suggests that iron redox reactions 
might also have a role in the oxidation process, as sugge sted by other authors [14]. 
  Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   142012340.00.20.40.60.81.0
 CH2O2 = 1.2 mM
 CH2O2 = 13 mM
 CH2O2 = 24.8 mMCOII/COIIo
Time (h)A
 01234020406080
 CH2O2 = 1.2 mM
 CH2O2 = 13.0 mM
 CH2O2 = 24.8 mMTOC Removal (%)
Time (h)B
 
024012
 CH2O2 = 1.2 mM
 CH2O2 = 13.0 mM
 CH2O2 = 24.8 mMIron leaching (%)
Time (h)C
 
Fig. 7.3 – Hydrogen peroxide concentration effect on: (A) dye degradation (B) mineralization and (C) 
iron loss. T = 40 ºC, Ccatalyst . = 70 mg/L, pH = 3. 
 
The effect of H 2O2 concentration on iron leaching is almost negligible. In the 
previous chapters of this dissertation, part IV, it was also found that there is no 
relationship between iron leaching and the hydrogen peroxide concentration, either 
when using a clay (chapter 5) or carbon (chapter 6) as Fe support. Similar conclusions 
were observed by Melero et al.  [11] using nanocomposite Fe 2O3/SBA-15 as catalyst. 
 
7.3.2 Design of Experiments 
 
The central composite design or CCD is  the most popular class of response 
surface design methodologies used for fitting second-order models in design of experiments (DOE) [3]. The CCD was used in  this work, considering the minimum and 
maximum levels for temperature (20–60 ºC), H
2O2 concentration (6×10-3–2×10-2 M) 
and catalyst concentration (40–100 mg/L) ( cf. Table 7.1). It is noteworthy that the 
ranges considered for the three studied indepe ndent variables were chosen based on the Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   143previous experiments reported in chapter 5.  Table 7.1 shows the description of the 
experimental ranges and the relationship be tween codified and real values. Low and 
high levels are denoted by (-1) and (+1), resp ectively, and the central points as (0). The 
methodology (CCD) used requires that expe riments outside the experimental range 
previously defined should be performed to allow prediction of th e response functions 
outside the cubic domain (denoted as ±1.682) . Because the different factors (natural 
variables) present different units, they are gi ven in the form of the dimensionless coded 
variables to permit comparison between them. The transformation is made on the basis of the following equation
 [3]: 
 
jj ij
ijUU UX∆−=º        ( 7 . 6 )  
 
where Xij is the value of the independent coded variable j in experiment i; Uij is the 
value of the natural variable j in experiment i; Ujº is the value of the natural variable j in 
the centre of the domain of interest, which corresponds to Xj = 0; and ∆Uj is the 
variation of the natural variable j corresponding to a variati on of the coded variable j 
equal to +1.  
Table 7.1 – Levels of the independent variables used in the experimental design. 
Level 
Variable 
-1.682 -1 0 +1 +1.682 
T (ºC) 6.4 20 40 60 73.6 
22OHC  (M) 1.2×10-3 6.0×10-3 1.3×10-2 2.0×10-2 2.5×10-2 
Ccatalyst . (mg/L) 19.5 40 70 100 120.5 
 
Assuming a second-order polynomial model,  at least 17 experiments must be 
carried out to solve the matrix, for which statistical software JMP 501 was used. Those 
17 experiments required are described in  Table 7.2. The run corresponding to the 
central point was repeated three times (runs  11, 13 and 17 in Table 7.2) to check the 
reproducibility and evaluate the experimental error of the re sults obtained in the DOE.  
  
 Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   144Table 7.2 – Codified and experimental values of the runs performed in the experimental design. 
 Codified values  Experimental values 
 
Run nº Temperature 
(X1) 22OHC  
(X2) Ccatalyst . 
(X3)  Temperature 
(ºC) 22OHC   
(M) Ccatalyst . 
(mg/L)   
1 0 -1.682 0  40 1.2×10-3 70 
2 +1 -1 +1  60 6.0×10-3 100 
3 -1.682 0 0  6.4 1.3×10-2 70 
4 0 0 -1.682  40 1.3×10-2 19.5 
5 +1 -1 -1  60 6.0×10-3 40 
6 -1 -1 +1  20 6.0×10-3 100 
7 0 1.682 0  40 2.5×10-2 70 
8 -1 +1 +1  20 2.0×10-2 100 
9 0 0 1.682  40 1.3×10-2 120.5 
10 1.682 0 0  73.6 1.3×10-2 70 
11 0 0 0  40 1.3×10-2 70 
12 +1 +1 -1  60 2.0×10-2 40 
13 0 0 0  40 1.3×10-2 70 
14 +1 +1 +1  60 2.0×10-2 100 
15 -1 -1 -1  20 6.0×10-3 40 
16 -1 +1 -1  20 2.0×10-2 40 
17 0 0 0  40 1.3×10-2 70 
 
Each response can be described by an empirical second-order model, adequate 
for predicting them in the space domain analyzed, 
 
∑∑ ∑∑
>= ==+ + + =n
jin
ji j jin
jn
jj jj j j o XXa Xa Xa aY
1 112    (7.7) 
 
where Y is the response factor  or objective function (d ependent variable); Xj is the 
coded independent variable related to parameter j (which, in the present case, varies 
between 1 and 3); ao is the intercep t term, a constant that co rresponds to the response 
when Xj is zero for each factor; a1 determines the influence of temperature in the 
response factor; a2 is the influence of per oxide concentration; and a3 is the catalyst 
concentration effect. Finally, a12, a13, and a23 are the interaction effects, while a11, a22, Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   145and a33 can be regarded as curv e “shape” parameters. The me thod of least squares is 
used to estimate the parameters  in the interpolating polynomials. 
As above-mentioned, the objective functions  to maximise are both the color and 
TOC removal (to evaluate the catalyst activit y), and the objective function to minimize 
is the iron loss (to evaluate the catalyst stab ility). These are the response factors which 
we will call Y1, Y2 and Y3, respectively. The 17 experiments indicated in Table 7.2 were 
then performed in a random order to minimi se systematic errors, with experimental 
data collected every hour ( cf. Tables A1 and A2 in appendi x I), and the response factors 
evaluated. 
The probability values ( P value) from the analysis of variance for models Y1, Y2 
and Y3 were then determined ( cf. appendix I, Tables A3 to A14). The calculation 
procedure is made by the statis tical software JMP to get the values of each column in 
such tables, the definition of each can be f ound in most statistics books or relevant 
literature [3]. Briefly, the analysis of vari ance allows to conclude that the quadratic 
models developed are statistica lly consistent (for a 95% c onfidence level) and therefore 
appropriate for predicting all th e responses considered, i.e., Y1, Y2 and Y3 for 1, 2, 3 and 
4 h of reaction ( p < 0.05). Moreover, the de termination coefficients ( R2), which will be 
also included in the inspection of the agreem ent between the experimental data and the 
mathematical model, are always above 0.89,  indicating that the model can explain at 
least 89% of the objective func tion variations. Finally, in th e analysis of variance the F 
values are in all cases higher than  the value from Fisher tables ( F9,7 = 3.80, for a 95% 
confidence level), meaning that  the variations in the resp onses are associated to the 
model, not to random variations.  
The coefficients of the quadratic model in the polynomial expression ( cf. Eq. 
(7.7)) were calculated by multiple nonlinear  regression analysis, using the above-
mentioned DOE software. In the cases wh ere the influence of  one factor on the 
objective function is significant,  the corresponding probability ( P) value is small (test t 
of Student). If the P value is larger than 0.05, the confidence level of this factor is 
below 95%. Therefore, when the P value was equal or higher  than 0.05 (see appendix I 
- Tables A15 to A26), the associated variable , quadratic effect or first-order interaction 
was ignored and was not expressed in the reduced  model, as usual [2,3], resulting in the 
regression equations shown below (Eqs. (7.8 )-(7.19)). In such equations, obtained 
values are in percentage, and the terms between parentheses describe the error 
associated to each coefficient of the equation. Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   1461h:   
1 1 )70.5(25.39)13.12(23.74 X Y ± + ± =      ( 7 . 8 )  
2
1 1 2 )51.2(45.6 )28.2(47.18)86.4(03.41 X X Y ± − ± + ± =    (7.9) 
3 1 3 )03.0(08.0 )03.0(33.0)06.0(40.0 X X Y ± − ± + ± =     ( 7 . 1 0 )  
 
2h:  
2
1 1 1 )38.5(27.21 )89.4(10.37)41.10(64.99 X X Y ± − ± + ± =    (7.11) 
2
32
13 1 2
)41.2(85.5 )41.2(83.8)19.2(49.6 )19.2(55.22)67.4(60.55
X XX X Y
± − ± −± + ± + ± =
   (7.12) 
3 1 3 )07.0(16.0 )07.0(48.0)14.0(64.0 X X Y ± − ± + ± =    (7.13) 
 
3h:  
2
1 1 1 )13.4(34.20 )76.3(08.32)01.8(71.99 X X Y ± − ± + ± =    (7.14) 
2
13 1 2
)49.2(34.13)26.2(11.6 )26.2(04.24)82.4(28.76
XX X Y
± −± + ± + ± =
   (7.15) 
1 3 )13.0(95.0)28.0(07.1 X Y ± + ± =       ( 7 . 1 6 )  
 
4h:  
 2
1 3 13 1 1
)14.3(06.18 )73.3(64.13)85.2(00.8 )85.2(65.25)08.6(37.99
X XXX X Y
± − ± −± + ± + ± =
   (7.17) 
2
1 3 13 1 2
)90.2(60.11 )44.3(31.11)63.2(88.7 )63.2(79.19)60.5(20.78
X XXX X Y
± − ± −± + ± + ± =
   (7.18) 
3 13 1 3
)16.0(37.0)12.0(37.0 )12.0(47.1)25.0(24.2
XXX X Y
± −± − ± + ± =    ( 7 . 1 9 )   
 
The results show that the P values for X1 (temperature) are always smaller than 
0.05, meaning that this factor is extremel y important in affecting the three responses 
(Y1, Y2 and Y3) at any reaction time. In addition, the X3 factor (catalyst concentration) 
presents a lower impact than the temperat ure, in agreement with the results shown 
above (Figs. 7.1 and 7.2), and in some cases it has no effect at all. Finally, it is worth 
nothing that the H 2O2 concentration ( X2) does not affect any response factor, in any Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   147case, corroborating the results shown in Fi g. 7.3. The inter active influence of X1X3 is 
observed only after 4 hours of reaction, while the other interactions are not significant. 
Particularly remarkable are the first-order te mperature coefficients, showing its critical 
influence mainly in the dye degradation and TOC removal, similarly to what was 
recently found by Melero et al.  [11] during catalytic wet peroxide mineralization of 
phenol. 
Figure 7.4 shows the predictions of th ese equations as compared to the 
experimental data, for 2 and 4 hours of reacti on. For other reaction times, the reader can 
consult the appendix I (Fig. A2). From these figures it can be seen that the values 
predicted by the second-order models agre e reasonably with the experimental data, 
even though the simplified equations (7.8) to (7.19) have been used. Obviously, the data will fit better when the complete equation, obtained from JMP software, is used. The figures also show that the TOC removal data are smaller than the OII elimination, 
showing clearly that OII oxidation takes place in multiple steps and results in several by-products rather than CO
2 only. The graphics also put  into evidence some problems 
with the polynomial fit in wide ranges, result ing in some cases in values above 100% or 
below 0%. As recently pointed by Pérez-Moya et al.  [18], the failure of this 
methodological approach is often noticed, due to the wide range of results that the 
model must cover. In their and in this work, two different tendencies are clearly 
appearing: from one side, a group of experi ments for which the degradation is almost 
complete, and another set for which the system conditions do not allow further degradation. Multivariate analysis leads to interesting qualitative results (regarding the weight of the different variab les in the system response, th e trend of this  response, and 
the interaction among the variables). Howeve r, the assumption of a polynomial model 
is questionable from the quantitative point of  view [18]. Even so, the models presented 
herein showed statistical consistency.        Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   148-25 0 25 50 75 100-250255075100Color removal calculated (%)
Color removal experimental (%) 2 h
 4 h
 0 2 55 07 50255075TOC removal calculated (%)
TOC removal experimental (%) 2 h
 4 h
 
012345012345Iron lost calculated (%)
Iron lost experimental (%) 2 h
 4 h
 
Fig. 7.4 – Experimental and calculated results of the experimental design for OII oxidation  
after 2 h and 4 h.    
 
Table 7.3 shows the average errors be tween the experimental data and the 
model predictions. The values are reasona bly acceptable, being evident that the 
maximum errors occur usually for short reac tion times, but for longer times the errors 
decrease considerably, especially in what  concerns prediction of color removal ( Y1).  
 
Table 7.3 – Average absolute diffe rences for the responses (in %). 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 Following the models established for each response, one can represent 
graphically the corresponding surfaces, at diffe rent reaction times. In most cases, all the Time (h) Y 1 Y 2 Y 3 
1 19.7 8.5 0.1 
2 14.1 5.2 0.2 
3 9.0 7.7 0.4 4 5.5 5.4 0.3 Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   149cross- and quadratic effects are negative, s uggesting that optimum values must exist for 
each parameter, as shown below.  
 
7.3.2.1  Color Removal 
 
Figure 7.5 shows the response surfaces generated by equations (7.8), (7.11), 
(7.14) and (7.17). As it can be seen, there is  an important influence of the temperature, 
allowing a relevant increase in the color rem oval, regardless of th e amount of catalyst 
and hydrogen peroxide concentration employe d. This enhancement is more pronounced 
for initial reaction times, being color removal just temperature dependent for the first 3 h of reaction. In Fig 7.5A, after 1 h of reac tion, the trend of the color removal with the 
temperature is linear, and at ca. 50 ºC one can obtain almost 100% dye degradation, 
using the minimum catalyst load (19.5 mg /L) and hydrogen peroxide concentration 
(1.2×10
-3 M). Figures 7.5B and 7.5C show a sim ilar trend (a quadratic behaviour), and 
in these cases using a temperature of appr oximately 56 ºC the color removal is 100%. 
Finally, after 4 hours of reaction, several lo cal optimum points exis t for the oxidation of 
Orange II; this means that there is a large region on Fig. 7.5D where the color removal 
is nearly 100%. Because of the energy cost, this optimum point can be chosen in a medium temperature range (e.g. 46 ºC), which requires a medium consumption of 
catalyst (70 mg/L) and minimum H
2O2 concentration (1.2×10-3 M). On the other hand, 
if one selects a lower Ccatalyst ., the rate of reaction is slower and in this case we need a 
higher temperature to obtain complete dye de gradation (see Fig. 7.5D). Finally, if 
initial Ccatalyst .. is higher the rate of reaction is high er as well and then operation can be 
done at a lower temperature. Concluding, as it can be seen from Fig. 7.5, the color 
removal depends almost exclusively on the temperature, which means that minimal 
amounts of H 2O2 and catalyst concentrations coul d be used. Besides, the optimal 
temperature decreases along time ( cf. Table 7.4), implying that for longer reaction 
times one do not need so critical conditions because thermal decomposition of H 2O2 
(into water and oxygen) might be more impor tant [11], as mentioned above (see also 
Figure A1 in appendix I).     Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   150Temperature (ºC)0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 0Color Removal (%)
020406080100120140160A
Temperature (ºC)0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 0Color Removal (%)
-20020406080100120140B
 
Temperature (ºC)0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 0Color Removal (%)
020406080100120C
-40-20020406080100120140
10203040506070
20406080100120
Color Rem
oval (%
)
Temperature (ºC)
Ccatalyst (mg/L)D
Fig. 7.5 – Effect of process variables in the color removal at different reaction times:  
(A) 1 h, (B) 2 h, (C) 3 h, (D) 4 h. 
 
Table 7.4 – Optimum values for the maximum color removal. 
Time  
(h) Color Removal  
(%) ** T  
(ºC) Ccatalyst   
(mg/L) * 22OHC   
(M) * 
1 100 73.6 - - 
2 100 57.4 - - 
3 100 55.8 - - 4 100 46.0
*** 70.0 - 
* In some cases, several parameters do no t affect the response (denoted as “-”). 
** Model predicts values that are mean ingless, i.e. not physically possible. 
*** Other temperatures exist which provide also complete OII removal.  
 
7.3.2.2  Total Organic Carbon Removal 
 
Equations (7.9), (7.12), (7.15) and (7.18) are graphically represented in Fig. 7.6, 
where one can see a significant influence of the temperature, and in some cases of the catalyst concentration, in the TOC removal. The catalyst effect incr eases when the time 
increases; this means that for short times the principal variable that affects the TOC Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   151removal is the temperature, while for long times the catalyst concentration becomes 
also important. Thus, in such circumstan ces the presence of catalyst to improve 
reaction performance, that is, to obtain a good mineralization de gree, is required. 
Although the highest TOC conversions are ach ieved at relatively high temperatures, 
there is an optimal point for TOC removal ( cf. Table 7.5), which is due to the 
predominant non-efficient peroxide decompositi on. In some cases one can also see an 
optimum in terms of catalyst concentration, wh at can be due to a loss of radicals by the 
above-mentioned scavenging react ions in the presence of ex cess of iron (Eqs. (7.1)-
(7.4)) and the formation of ir on complexes with organics. 
 
Table 7.5 – Optimum values for the maximum TOC removal.  
Time  
(h) TOC Removal  
(%) T  
(ºC) Ccatalyst   
(mg/L) 22OHC   
(M) * 
1 54.3 68.7 - - 
2 72.2 65.8 86.6 - 
3 97.5 58.0 120.5 - 4 90.9 40.2
** 120.5** - 
* In some cases, several parameters do no t affect the response (denoted as “-”). 
** Other conditions exist which provide higher TOC reductions.   
 
For 4 h of reaction time, Fi g. 7.6D, it is clear that there is a wide range of 
conditions at which high mine ralization degrees can be re ached (>90%), similarly to 
what was previously found in terms of color removal (Fig. 7.5D). Therefore, and for 
the same reasons above-mentioned, one coul d select a temperature not too high that 
provides good TOC reduction performances , even though the optimum (97.4% 
mineralization degree) is reac hed at the maximum temperat ure. Such conditions were 
included in the last row of Table 7.5, which also shows the optimal values of 
temperature and catalyst concentration for the maximal TOC removal at smaller times. 
It is worth noting that, once again, when the time increases the optimal temperature 
decreases. Mineralization of the organic matter requires mo re drastic conditions than 
simple color removal, and therefore the catal yst concentration plays an important role 
in TOC reduction. Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   152Temperature (ºC)0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 0TOC Removal (%)
-20-100102030405060A
 
-60-40-20020406080
10203040506070
20406080100120
TOC Rem
oval (%
)
Temperature (ºC)
Ccatalyst (mg/L)B
 
020406080100
10203040506070
20406080100120
TOC Rem
oval (%
)
Temperature (ºC)
Ccatalyst (mg/L)C
 
-40-20020406080100
10203040506070
20406080100120
TOC Re
m
oval (%
)
Temperature (ºC)
Ccatalyst (mg/L)D
 
Fig. 7.6 – Effect of the process variables in the TOC removal at different reaction times: (A) 1 h, (B) 2 h, 
(C) 3 h, (D) 4 h. 
 
7.3.2.3  Iron Leaching 
 
Another important parameter to quantif y is the iron leaching, which should 
ideally be null to provide long- term stability. This is partic ularly interesting from the 
practical point of view due to the possibility of using these catalysts for a longer operation time. Figure 7.7 shows the iron loss fro m the support after 1, 2, 3 and 4 hours 
of reaction. In all cases it is remarkable the importance of the temperature, although in 
some the catalyst concentration is also relevant.   
It is obvious that the concentration of iron in solution increases with the amount 
of catalyst within the reactor (data not shown), but in relati ve terms the percentage of 
iron leached out from the support behaves diffe rently. That’s why a negative effect is 
observed ( cf. Fig. 7.7 and corresponding equations). Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   153Figure 7.7 also shows that in terms of ir on loss, the process is again practically 
independent of the H 2O2 concentration, and in all cases is clear that when working at 
lower temperatures the iron lo ss is negligible, thus providi ng long-term stability for the 
catalyst.  
-0,20,00,20,40,60,81,01,2
10203040506070
20406080100120
Iron lost (%
) 
Temperature (ºC)
Ccatalyst (mg/L)A
-0,50,00,51,01,52,0
10203040506070
20406080100120
Iron lost (%
)
Temperaure (ºC)
Ccatalyst (mg/L)B
Temperature (ºC)0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 0Iron lost (%)
0123
C
 
02468
10203040506070
20406080100120
Iron lost (%
)
Temperature (ºC)
Ccatalyst (mg/L)D
 
Fig. 7.7 – Effect of the process variables in the iron loss at different reaction times: 
(A) 1 h, (B) 2 h, (C) 3 h, (D) 4 h. 
 
7.3.3 Optimum Conditions  
 
Figure 7.8 shows the optimal ranges for the variables affecting the process 
performance (temperature and catalyst concentr ation) that verify c onstrains imposed to 
optimize, at the same time, the three res ponses at different reaction times. Obviously, 
the constrains imposed (e.g. Y1>99%, Y2>60% and Y3<1.0% for 1h) are more drastic for 
longer reaction times. In addition, the ranges defined in the graph would become much Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   154wider if less demanding conditi ons would be imposed. Howeve r, this would not affect 
the conclusions draw. 
Temperature (ºC)10 20 30 40 50 60 70Ccatalyst  (mg/L)
20406080100120
2 h1 h
3 h4 h
4 h
 
Fig. 7.8 – Optimal ranges of temperature and catalyst concentration that simultaneously satisfy the three 
responses (Y 1, Y 2 and Y 3). For 1 h: Y 1>99%, Y 2>60%, Y 3<1%; for 2 h: Y 1>99%, Y 2>70%, Y 3<2%, for 3 
h: Y 1>99%, Y 2>85%, Y 3<3% and for 4 h: Y 1>99%, Y 2>90%, Y 3<4%. 
 
From Fig. 7.8 it is evident that as th e time of reaction increases, the range of 
optimal conditions shifts towards less drastic values (smaller catalyst concentrations and temperatures). For instance, after 1 h of reaction, temperat ures above 57 ºC and 
catalyst concentrations higher than 110 mg/L have to be employed (for color removal 
above 99%, TOC>60% and iron loss<1.0%). After 3 h, high color and TOC removals 
(>99% and >85%, respectively) with minimu m iron loss (<3.0%) are possible to obtain 
in a wide range of conditions  (40 ºC<T<71 ºC and 60 mg/L<
 Ccatalyst .<120.5 mg/L), 
which are not so demanding as for 1 h becau se oxidation does not needs to proceed so 
fast. The graph obtained is quite interesting and allows one to select the conditions to 
adopt, depending on the performances aimed. Obviously, when a wide range is possible 
for certain objectives, it is more reasonabl y to use mild temperatures and catalyst 
concentrations because of the associated costs.  
Finally, it is worth noting that after 4 h of reaction it is pos sible to use either 
high temperatures with low catal yst concentrations or high ca talyst concentrations with 
lower temperatures to reach ve ry good performances. This is  a particular behaviour, but 
was up to a certain point expected. If highly demanding conditions are employed, 
reaction rate is fast and good performan ces are reached at short reaction times. 
However, the thermal decomposition of hydrogen peroxide and/or the above-mentioned Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   155parallel and undesired reactions  associated with high catalyst doses become evident at 
longer reaction times. So, high values of bot h variables should not be simultaneously 
employed, unless one aims to optimize the process having in mind to operate the batch reactor during short times.   
 
7.4 Conclusions 
 
• A central composite design was used to evaluate the effect of temperature, 
catalyst load and H 2O2 concentration in the heter ogeneous Fenton-like oxidation 
of the dye Orange II, at pH 3. As catalyst, a Fe-impregnated pillared clay 
(saponite) was used. Color removal ( Y1) and TOC removal ( Y2) were the 
responses to maximize after 1, 2, 3 and 4 hours oxidation. Response factor 
considered to minimize was the iron leaching ( Y3), at the same times of 
oxidation. It was found out that the s econd-order models developed for these 
responses are statistically consistent a nd fit quite reasonably the experimental 
data in the ranges studied. The temperatur e and catalyst load were found out to 
be the main parameters affecting color and TOC removal and iron leaching, but the effect of temperature was in most cases the predominant one. The effect of 
initial H
2O2 concentration was null in all the responses.  
• In the dye oxidation process, the releva nt independent vari ables (temperature 
and catalyst dose) usually have a positive effect, but up to a certain point. In some circumstances, excessive temperat ures revealed to be detrimental, 
attributed to the thermal decomposition of hydrogen peroxide. For the catalyst concentration, a similar effect was reco rded, which might be due to undesirable 
parallel reactions (scave nging of radicals by the catal yst and formation of Fe 
complexes with organics). These tradeoffs lead to a more complex process optimization.  
•
 The optimal values of temperature and catalyst concentration that should be 
employed to optimize the process (taki ng into account simultaneously all the 
responses) depend on the time of reaction;  this means that for short reaction 
times more drastic conditions are necessa ry than for longer operation times, at 
which one cannot use simultaneously high temperatures and high catalyst doses. 
For instance, and according to the reduced model predictions, high color (>99%) and TOC (>90%) removals with small iron loss from the support (<4%) Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   156can be reached in 4 hours when using eith er high temperatures (57 ºC<T<68 ºC) 
with low catalyst concentrations (C catalyst <43 mg/L) or low temperatures 35 
ºC<T<45 ºC) with hi gh catalyst load (C catalyst > 118 mg/L). 
• The Fe-doped pillared clay catalyst employed showed to be very promising as it 
simultaneously exhibits high activity (high dye oxidation and mineralization 
rates) with very good stability (low iron leaching, yielding Fe concentrations 
always below 2 ppm).  
 
References 
 
 1. Oliveira, R.; Almeida, M. F.; Santos, L. ; Madeira. L. M. Experimental design of 2,4-
Dichlorophenol oxidation by Fenton’s reacti on. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry 
Research 2006 , 45, 1266. 
 2. Wang, H. C.; Wu, C. Y.; Chung, C. C.; Lai, M. H.; Chung. T. W. Analysis of parameters 
and interaction between parameters in preparation of uniform silicon dioxide 
nanoparticles using response surface methodolog y. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry 
Research 2006 , 45, 8043. 
 3. Montgomery, C. Design and analysis of experiments, 5th ed.; John Wiley & Sons: New 
York, 2001 . 
 4. Ong, S. A; Toorisaka, E.; Hirata, M.; Ha no, T. Decolorization of Azo Dye (Orange II) in 
a Sequential UASB–SBR System. Separation and Purification Technology 2005 , 42, 297. 
 5. Sellers, R.M. Spectrophotometric Determin ation of hydrogen peroxide using potassium 
titanium (IV) oxalate. Analysts 1980 , 150, 950. 
 6. Pera-Titus, M.; García-Molina, V.; Baños, M. A.; Giménez, J.; Esplugas, S. Degradation 
of chlorophenols by means of advanced oxi dation processes: A general review. Applied 
Catalysis B: Environmental 2003 , 47, 219. 
 7. Guo, J.; Al-Dahhan, M.  Catalytic wet oxidation of phenol by hydrogen peroxide over 
pillared clay catalyst. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 2003 , 42, 2450. 
 8. Feng, J.; Hua, X.; Yue, P. L; Zhu, H. Y.; Lu. G. Q. A Novel laponite clay-based Fe 
nanocomposite and its photo-catalytic activity in  photo-assisted degradation of Orange II. 
Chemical Engineering Science 2003 , 58, 679. 
 9. Bigda, R. J. Consider Fenton chemistry for wastewater treatment. Chemical Engineering 
and Processing 1995 , 91, 62. 
10. Yuranova, T.; Enea, O.; Mielczarski, E.; Miel czarski, J.; Albers, P.; Kiwi. J. Fenton 
immobilized photo-assisted catalysis through a Fe/C structured fabric. Applied Catalysis 
B: Environmental 2004,  49, 39.  Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   15711. Melero, J. A.; Calleja, G.; Martínez, F.; Molina, R.; Pariente. M. I. Nanocomposite 
Fe2O3/SBA-15: An efficient and stable catalyst for the catalytic wet peroxidation of 
phenolic aqueous solutions. Chemical Engineering Journal 2007 , 131, 245. 
12. Zazo, J.A.; Casas, J.A.; Mohedano, A.F.; Rodriguez, J.J. Catalytic Wet peroxide 
oxidation of phenol with a Fe/Active carbon catalyst. Applied Catalysis B: 
Environmental 2006 , 65, 261. 
13. Molina, R.; Martínez, F.; Melero, J. A.; Brem ner, D. H.; Chakinala, A. G. Mineralization 
of phenol by a heterogene ous ultrasound/Fe-SBA-15/H 2O2 process: Multivariate study by 
factorial design of experiments. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 2006 , 66, 198. 
14. Walling, C. Fenton’s reagent revis ited. Accounts of Chemical Research 1975 , 8, 125. 
15. De Laat, J. ; Le, T. G. Effects of chlori de ions on the iron(III)-catalyzed decomposition of 
hydrogen peroxide and on the efficiency of the Fenton-like oxidation process. Applied 
Catalysis B: Environmental 2006 , 66, 137. 
16. Carriazo, J.; Guélou, E.; Barrault, J.; Tatibouet, J. M.; Molina, R.; Moreno, S. Synthesis 
of pillared clays containing Al, Al-Fe or Al -Ce-Fe from a bentonite: Characterization and 
catalytic activity. Catalysis Today 2005 , 107–108, 126. 
17. Feng, J.; Hu, X.; Yue, P. L. Effect of in itial solution pH on the degradation of Orange II 
using clay-based Fe nanocomposites as he terogeneous photo-Fenton catalyst. Water 
Research 2006 , 40, 641. 
18. Pérez-Moya, M.; Graells, M.; Del Valle, L. J.; Centelles, E.; Mansilla, H. D. Fenton and 
photo-Fenton degradation of  2-Chlorophenol: Multivariate analysis and toxicity 
monitoring. Catalalysis Today 2007 , 124, 163. 
 
    
 
   
 
    
 Chapter 7. Experimental design to optimize the oxidation of OII dye solution using a clay-based Fenton-like catalyst 
 
   158 
   
 
    
 
    
   
 
      
PART V  
CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS 
FOR FUTURE WORK   
 Chapter 8. Conclusions and suggestions for future work 
 
 161CHAPTER 8 – CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR 
FUTURE WORK  
 
 8.1  Conclusions  
The main conclusions of this thesis are divided in two sections; in the first one 
are mentioned those concerning the homogene ous system, where statistical tools were 
used and kinetics studies performed to have a better insight of the Fenton’s process. In 
the second section are reporte d the main conclusions con cerning a deep study about the 
preparation, characterization and use of di fferent kind of hete rogeneous catalysts, 
prepared using two types of suppor ts (clay and activated carbons). 
 
8.1.1 Homogeneous System 
 
In the first stage of this thesis a statistical tool (Design of Experiments - DOE) 
was used to find optimal conditions rega rding Orange II (OII) decolourisation ( Y1) and 
mineralization ( Y2) in a batch reactor, after 2 hours of reaction. For that a central 
composite design was used and th e effect of temperature, H 2O2 concentration and 
Fe+2:H2O2 ratio was evaluated, at pH = 3. It was found that the second order models 
developed for both Y1 and Y2 fit quite reasonably the experimental data in the ranges 
studied, the models being subsequently used for the process optimization. 
Such study allowed also be tter understanding the proce ss kinetics. Actually, the 
dye is decomposed in a two-st age reaction, being degraded ve ry quickly in the first 5-10 
min (Fe2+/H2O2 or Fenton stage), with a slow er reaction rate later on (Fe3+/H2O2 or 
Fenton-like stage). Da ta obtained revealed that the Fe nton’s reagent is promising for 
degradation of the dye, as decolourisat ion efficiencies clearly above 99% and 
mineralization degrees higher than 70% were re ached in 2 h. However, to achieve these 
results operating conditions must be carefully  selected, for what the DOE tool revealed 
to be quite effective. Indeed , the surface response plots of the models showed that for 
both responses (color and TOC removal) opt imum values for the process variables 
exist. Besides, though TOC reduction requires  aggressive conditi ons, decolourisation 
does not require high stringency. The hydrogen peroxide concentration and the 
temperature showed to be the variables with higher impact into the final performance. Chapter 8. Conclusions and suggestions for future work 
 
 162In particular, temperature turns into a key parameter when it is  desirable to reduce 
reagents consumption. 
The kinetic studies then performed show ed that the Orange II degradation by 
means of Fenton’s reagent highly depends on  the operating conditio ns, i.e. reagents 
dosage, temperature, pH and time of reac tion (batch reactor) or residence time 
(continuous reactor). Besides, the experiments carried out in  the batch reactor evidenced 
that the optimum pH is around 3 and the negative effect of Cl-, a species usually found 
in textile dyeing wastewaters th at acts as scavenger of the hy droxyl radicals. It was also 
observed the positive effect of incr easing the reaction temperature, H 2O2 or Fe2+ 
concentrations, and the negative effect of increasing dye concentrations, trends that 
were corroborated with experiments in a continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR). 
A phenomenological approach that make s use of an empirical power-law 
equation was adopted to deduce the OII degr adation rate law. Accordingly, for the 
longer and last stage (the Fenton-like one) a pseudo stead y-state approach (regarding 
hydroxyl radicals concentration) was employe d to deduce the reaction rate, which was 
found to be of the first-order type with resp ect to OII concentration. The dependence of 
the apparent kinetic constant on the init ial operating conditions was then deduced, 
leading to a power-law rate equation with  Arrhenius dependency (apparent activation 
energy of 58.1 kJ mol-1). This rate equation revealed to  be somewhat useful to predict 
dye concentration histories in  the batch reactor and the st eady-state dye conversion in 
the CSTR, both type of experiments being pe rformed in a wide range of experimental 
conditions. Actually, the range of the CS TR runs was extended using higher iron 
concentrations in the feed, and even in such conditions it is remarkable the ability of the 
model to predict data in a ra nge of conversion values from 2 to 97 %, without further 
fitting parameters.  
8.1.2 Heterogeneous System 
 
In this section, the main conclusions  concerning the studies in which the 
heterogeneous catalysts have been employed are reported. Firstly, twelve supported Fe-
saponite catalysts have been prepared, by means of the incipien t wet impregnation 
method, using a pillared clay support and four  salts of Fe precursors at different Fe 
loads. The characterization of the catalys ts showed that the decomposition of the 
precursors gave rise to solids that present laminar structure, with active phases of Fe Chapter 8. Conclusions and suggestions for future work 
 
 163highly dispersed on the support, and reasonabl y high specific surfaces  (in most of the 
cases with values comprised between 130 and 170 m2/g), characteristics that make them 
potentially good catalysts for oxidation in the Fenton-like process. This was confirmed 
experimentally; all the catalysts revealed to be quite active in the Orange II oxidation, requiring clay concentrations much below thos e usually found in the literature (typically 
around 1 g/L). 
The effects of the nature of the catalyst’s precursor , hydrogen peroxide 
concentration, temperature and pH of the r eaction medium were then analyzed, putting 
into evidence a high degradation of OII a nd of the intermediary oxidised compounds. 
Actually, 99% discoloration and 91% of mi neralization were reached (after 4 h of 
reaction), using the catalyst prepared from Fe (II) oxalate with 17.0 wt.% of Fe and in 
the following reaction conditions: T = 70ºC, pH = 3 and 
=22OHC 6×10-3 M. However, 
good performances with high selectivity to CO 2 and H 2O were also reached at 
significantly lower temperatures (30 ºC). 
All the catalysts tested exhibited not only good catalytic ac tivity but also a 
reasonable small iron leaching (b elow the EU directives va lues), indicating that the 
active phases are strongly fixed to the suppor t. This characteristic  makes possible the 
Fe-saponite catalysts to ha ve long-term stab ility, without gene rating iron hydroxide 
sludges. Actually, a reasonable stable catalyt ic performance was no ticed in consecutive 
reaction cycles, although a small minor deactiv ation was recorded, possibly due to some 
iron leaching. Nevertheless, it was confir med that the process is predominantly 
heterogeneous. 
In a second stage of this part, two diffe rent carbon samples have been employed 
as supports for the iron particles: i) a cla ssical activated carbon (sample H) and ii) a 
carbon aerogel (sample M). Both materials ca n be considered as  examples of the 
classical and new carbon materials form. Moreover, they present different characteristics that could determine their ap plications, differing largely in the porosity: 
while carbon H is a macro and microporous  material, carbon M has a large mesopore 
volume.  
The catalysts have been prepared thr ough wet impregnation using ferrous acetate 
and their physical-chemical ch aracterisation showed that Fe is more dispersed in the 
case of support M because of the large mes opore volume and external surface area of 
this sample. This may be one reason for the better catalytic behaviour of this sample in Chapter 8. Conclusions and suggestions for future work 
 
 164the Fenton-like process. Indeed, the Fe -doped aerogel showed better catalytic 
performances, mainly higher reaction rates,  than those reached with the activated 
carbon catalyst.  
Differently to what happened in expe riments performed using the clay-based 
catalyst, wherein the dye adsorption is almost negligible (in the conditions of the catalytic runs), with both activated carbon-based samples O II elimination is due to two 
processes – adsorption and catalysis – being however the last the most relevant one. 
Once again, although a homogene ous catalytic contribution ex ists, as a consequence of 
the iron leaching, the process is essentially heterogeneous.  
The carbon-based catalysts studied have however an important limitation for 
their use in industrial practice – the high iron loss from the supports. To overcome this, 
it is advisable the preparati on of carbon aerogels in whic h iron is within  the aerogel 
structure, as described below. Nevertheless, even in the worst conditions tested the iron 
concentration in solution is always bellow the European Union  guidelines (< 2 ppm) 
and the catalytic performances  reached are quite good, with mineralization degrees as 
high as 90%, for catalysts concentratio n not higher than 0.20 to 0.30 g/L. 
Decolourisation might however be almost co mplete. As a consequence of the leaching 
phenomenon but also due to catalyst deactiva tion, activity decay in the M-Fe sample 
was noticed in consecutive cycles. The pe rformance of the carbon-based catalysts was 
then compared with the clay ones, which revealed to be more promising (from the 
catalytic point of view), and were th erefore used in the following chapter. 
 In the last chapter of part IV, a central composite design methodology was once 
again used to evaluate the effect of the e xperimental variables (at constant pH and dye 
concentration) in the heter ogeneous Fenton-like process. As catalyst, a Fe-impregnated 
pillared clay (saponite) was used. The responses consider ed were the color removal 
(Y
1), the TOC removal ( Y2) and the iron leaching ( Y3), after 1, 2, 3 and 4 hours of 
oxidation. It was found out that the second-or der models developed for these responses 
are statistically consistent and fit quite reasonably the experimental data in the ranges studied.  
In the dye oxidation process, the releva nt independent variables (temperature 
and catalyst dose) usually have a positive effect, but up to a certain point. In some circumstances, excessive temperatures revealed to be detrimental, attributed to the experimentally observed thermal decompositi on of hydrogen peroxide . For the catalyst 
concentration a similar effect was recorded, which might be due to undesirable parallel Chapter 8. Conclusions and suggestions for future work 
 
 165reactions (scavenging of radicals by the catal yst and formation of Fe complexes with 
organics). These tradeoffs lead to a more complex process optimization, a task that 
becomes facilitated when using the “black-box”  type tools employed. Actually, it is in 
these somewhat complex systems that th e usefulness of DOE methodologies becomes 
more evident, allowing also to reduce the efforts put in terms of experimentation. 
The optimal values of temperature and catalyst concentration that should be 
employed to optimize the process (taking into account simultaneously all the responses) 
depend on the time of reaction; this means that for short reaction times more drastic 
conditions are necessary than for longer operation times, at which one cannot use 
simultaneously high temperatures and high catalyst doses, due to the undesirable 
effects above-mentioned. Finally, it is worth of noting that the Fe-doped pillared clay 
catalyst employed showed to be very prom ising as it simultaneously exhibits high 
activity (high dye oxidation and mineralization rates) with very good chemical stability 
(low iron leaching, yielding Fe conc entrations always below 2 ppm).  
 
8.2 Future Work 
 
8.2.1 Homogeneous System 
 
Many topics related to the Fenton a nd Fenton-like systems remain to be 
explored. For instance, the mechanism and quantification of the elementary rate 
constants (and associated activat ion energies) that describe the Fenton’s process are still 
incomplete, possibly due to the complexity of the reaction scheme. For this reason, a deep study of the Fenton’s reagent mechanism could be very useful, and for that it is 
suggested to perform a preliminary analysis  in the absence of organic compounds (i.e., 
with only iron salts and hydrogen peroxide). Then, the system complexity could be 
increased, with addition of target organic compounds (e.g. Orange II) and identification 
(and quantification) of react ion intermediates, iron complexes and other species. For 
example, reactive species such as superoxide (O
2-) or perhydroxyl radical (HO 2•) are 
also produced in the Fenton’s system, and they can be involved in reactions that 
transform the parent pollutants or reaction intermediates. A better understanding of this 
pathway could increase the applicability of  the Fenton’s system for wastewater 
treatment and remediation, and could help in  process (particularl y reactors) design and 
optimization. Chapter 8. Conclusions and suggestions for future work 
 
 166 Another topic that needs to be further ex amined is to evaluate the feasibility of 
implementing the homogeneous system in practi ce. In this topic, several issues should 
be addressed, namely the identification of  the oxidation by-products and evaluation of 
their potential toxicity. Besides, and even though the process can be implemented as a 
final treatment for simple color removal of treated effluents, it is well known that the 
Fenton’s reagent can increase or ganics biodegradabi lity, and so its integration with a 
biological degradation unit is also of impor tance. In particular, it is suggested the 
Fenton’s process integration with a sequenci ng batch reactor (SBR) for real wastewaters 
treatment, for instance containing Orange II or  other dyes. That integrated process could 
then be optimized with the type of DOE tools used in this dissertation.  
8.2.2 Heterogeneous System 
 
In terms of the heterogeneous systems test ed, and particularly in the case of the 
carbon-based samples, it was observed an importa nt disadvantage from  the viewpoint of 
practical implementation: the deactivation of th e catalyst. In this sense it is important to 
try to reduce the lost of iron from the support, what could be done by synthesizing 
carbon aerogels with the metal ca talyst being incorporated w ithin their structure (i.e., by 
doping and not impregnation of the support). This would certa inly decrease the leaching 
phenomenon, but would possibly turn the soli d into a much less active material (once 
the metal would be less accessible towards the H
2O2 molecules). To overcome that, one 
could use a photo-Fenton process, because radiation would accele rate the radicals 
generation. 
Still in what concerns the carbon aeroge l catalysts, it is important to better 
comprehend the reasons for thei r deactivation, which are no t only due to loss of metal 
from the support (as remarked in chapter 6) . Obviously, it would be also of utmost 
importance to comprehend how to restore the catalyst activity, for what a deep characterization of the used materials is mandatory. 
Future work should also be addressed in  trying to establish a phenomenological 
model for the heterogeneous system(s). Neve rtheless, due to the process complexity a 
lumped model is certainly easier to deal w ith, and equally important for process/reactor 
design. This model should be tested for batch experiments and, if po ssible, validated in 
a continuous slurry reactor (e.g., CSTR ), as performed in chapter 4 for the 
homogeneous system. For practical applications  the continuous reactor could be instead Chapter 8. Conclusions and suggestions for future work 
 
 167of the fixed-bed type, and consequently the model should be exte nded, in particular 
taking into account flow hydr odynamics and internal/externa l mass transfer resistances. 
In such case, the catalysts (c arbon aerogels or clay s) should be prepar ed as pellets or 
monoliths.    
 
                           Chapter 8. Conclusions and suggestions for future work 
 
 168    
  
   
 
      
APPENDIX I 
SUPPORTING INFORMATION     
 Appendix I – Supporting Information for Chapter 7   
 171APPENDIX I – SUPPORTING INFORMATION FOR 
CHAPTER 7 *  
 
 
  
In this appendix it is presented th e history of the hydrogen peroxide 
decomposition at different temperatures and th e main results concerning chapter 7. In 
this concern, it is included the experiment al results of the res ponses (color removal, 
TOC reduction and iron leaching) considered in the design of experiments at different 
times, as well as the analysis of varian ce for the model and for the responses, and 
finally the comparison between calculated and experimental  results for 1 and 3 hours. 
 
 
                                                 
* Adapted from : Ramirez, J. H., Lampinen, M.; Vicente, M. A.; Costa, C. A.; Madeira. L. M: Industrial & 
Engineering Chemistry Research  2008 , 47, 284 (Supporting Information). Appendix I – Supporting Information for Chapter 7   
 172A.1 Thermal Decomposition of Hydrogen Peroxide 
 
Figure A1 shows the transi ent evolution of the H 2O2 concentration in a run 
carried out without catalyst. As expected, its decomposition is accelerated at higher 
temperatures, reaching values of 48% at 60 ºC after 4h.  
0153045
012345
Tim e (h)% H 2O2 Decomposition20ºC
40ºC
60ºC
 
Figure A1 – Hydrogen peroxide decomposition along time for different temperatures.  
=22OHC  1.3×10-2 M, pH = 3.0.  
 
 
A.2 Design of Experiments – DOE 
 
Tables A1 and A2 show the experimental results obtained in the DOE: OII 
discoloration ( Y1), TOC removal ( Y2) and iron loss ( Y3) for different times of reaction 
(1, 2, 3 and 4 h).   
 
 
 
   
 
  Appendix I – Supporting Information for Chapter 7   
 173Table A1 – Experimental results of the DOE for OII oxidation, TOC removal and iron leaching 
for 1 and 2h of reaction time. 
   1h           2h  
Run no. Y 1 Y 2 Y 3 Y 1 Y 2 Y 3 
1 65.3 32.5 0.11 98.7 46.3 0.54 
2 98.0 65.7 0.47 98.7 76.7 0.71 
3 2.5 2.4 0.00 3.8 3.8 0.00 4 16.6 19.7 0.35 73.6 29.1 1.35 5 98.5 40.6 0.90 99.3 54.4 1.12 
6 6.9 4.2 0.00 19.3 12.4 0.12 
7 84.3 41.4 0.40 98.9 56.0 0.65 8 6.8 6.8 0.00 19.7 19.3 0.04 9 94.4 36.2 0.28 98.6 53.9 0.74 
10 97.8 46.3 1.13 99.7 62.3 1.94 
11 75.9 37.1 0.51 97.9 52.7 0.69 
12 99.4 41.7 0.85 100.0 58.6 1.29 13 69.1 40.0 0.32 98.3 55.3 0.56 14 98.5 46.5 0.59 98.4 62.0 0.90 
15 2.1 3.4 0.00 5.6 5.3 0.11 
16 2.9 1.6 0.22 6.5 5.2 0.39 17 76.2 45.5 0.37 98.5 58.0 0.61 
 
 
 The ANOVA (Analysis of Va riance) for the model is presented in Tables A3 to 
A14. There, several parameters are shown: the degrees of freedom (DF), which total in 
our case is 16, the sum of squares,  the mean of the squares, the F ratio that is the ratio 
between the mean square of the model and the mean square of the er ror, and finally the 
value of the probability for a confidence level of 95%.    
 
    Appendix I – Supporting Information for Chapter 7   
 174Table A2 – Experimental results of the DOE for OII oxidation, TOC removal and iron leaching 
for 3 and 4h of reaction time. 
   3h           4h  
Run no. Y 1 Y 2 Y 3 Y 1 Y 2 Y 3 
1 99.2 71.2 0.79 99.4 74.5 2.05 
2 98.1 80.6 1.70 98.7 82.3 3.34 
3 5.0 4.3 0.00 5.8 5.7 0.00 4 96.4 62.9 1.46 97.7 65.7 3.44 5 99.1 72.2 3.10 99.1 78.4 4.92 
6 45.0 39.9 0.38 76.7 62.3 0.71 
7 99.0 79.1 1.07 99.4 80.4 2.25 8 46.2 46.2 0.21 79.3 78.5 0.66 9 97.8 65.1 1.38 98.9 67.9 2.40 
10 99.4 81.2 2.39 99.0 83.3 3.73 
11 98.2 76.6 1.04 98.5 78.1 2.32 
12 100.0 73.7 3.90 100.0 80.3 5.00 13 98.7 75.9 0.96 98.9 78.5 2.20 14 98.7 82.4 1.81 99.5 83.2 3.45 
15 11.8 12.4 0.43 22.0 22.6 0.74 
16 13.6 11.2 0.55 25.8 21.0 0.82 17 98.8 74.9 1.28 99.3 78.3 2.24 
 
 
Table A3 – Analysis of model for Y 1 after 1 h of reaction. 
Source DF sum of squares mean square F ratio prob. > F 
Model 9 24103.38 2678.15 6.04 0.014 
Error 7 3102.62 443.23   
Total 16 27206.00    
R2 =  0.89     
 
 
Table A4 – Analysis of model for Y 2 after 1 h of reaction. 
Source DF sum of squares mean square F ratio prob. > F 
Model 9 5709.22 634.36 8.91 0.004 
Error 7 498.11 71.16   
Total 16 6207.33    
R2 =  0.92     Appendix I – Supporting Information for Chapter 7   
 175Table A5 – Analysis of model for Y 3 after 1 h of reaction. 
Source DF Sum of squares mean square F ratio prob. > F 
Model 9 1.74 0.19 17.83 <0.001 
Error 7 0.08 0.01   
Total 16 1.81    R
2 =  0.96     
 
Table A6 – Analysis of model for Y 1 after 2 h of reaction. 
Source DF Sum of squares mean square F ratio prob. > F 
Model 9 24495.50 2721.72 8.33 0.005 
Error 7 2285.98 326.57   
Total 16 26781.48    R
2 =  0.91     
 
Table A7 – Analysis of model for Y 2 after 2 h of reaction. 
source DF sum of squares mean square F ratio prob. > F 
Model 9 8610.14 956.68 14.59 0.001 
Error 7 459.12 65.59   
Total 16 9069.26    
R2 =  0.95     
 
Table A8 – Analysis of model for Y 3 after 2 h of reaction. 
Source DF sum of squares mean square F ratio prob. > F 
Model 9 3.88 0.43 7.46 0.001 
Error 7 0.40 0.06   
Total 16 4.29    R
2 =  0.91     
 
Table A9 – Analysis of model for Y 1 after 3 h of reaction. 
Source DF sum of squares mean square F ratio prob. > F 
Model 9 19690.88 2187.88 11.33 0.002 
Error 7 1352.10 193.16   
Total 16 21042.98    
R2 =  0.94     
 
 Appendix I – Supporting Information for Chapter 7   
 176Table A10 – Analysis of model for Y 2 after 3 h of reaction. 
source DF sum of squares mean square F ratio prob. > F 
Model 9 10833.87 1203.76 17.23 0.001 
Error 7 489.09 69.87   
Total 16 11322.96    R
2 =  0.96     
 
Table A11 – Analysis of model for Y 3 after 3 h of reaction. 
source DF sum of squares mean square F ratio prob. > F 
Model 9 15.51 1.72 7.25 0.008 
Error 7 1.66 0.24   
Total 16 17.17    R
2 =  0.96     
 
Table A12 – Analysis of model for Y 1 after 4 h of reaction. 
source DF sum of squares mean square F ratio prob. > F 
Model 9 15305.61 1700.62 15.28 0.001 
Error 7 779.03 111.29   
Total 16 16084.64    
R2 =  0.95     
 
Table A13 – Analysis of model for Y 2 after 4 h of reaction. 
source DF sum of squares mean square F ratio prob. > F 
Model 9 9007.82 1000.87 10.59 0.003 
Error 7 661.66 94.52   
Total 16 9669.48    R
2 =  0.93     
  
Table A14 – Analysis of model for Y
3 after 4 h of reaction. 
source DF sum of squares mean square F ratio prob. > F 
Model 9 33.68 3.74 19.25 <0.001 
Error 7 1.36 0.19   
Total 16 35.04    
R2 =  0.96     
 Appendix I – Supporting Information for Chapter 7   
 177 In Tables A15 to A26 are shown the ANOVA data for each parameter in the 
equations (responses) at different times of reaction, which were once again obtained by 
the used DOE software (JMP 501). The parameters indicated in such tables are the coefficients (estimate) and the associated standard error, the t ratio (ratio between the 
estimate value and the standard error), and the probability value for a confidence level of 95%. 
 
Table A15 – Analysis of variance for the response color removal (Y 1)  
after 1 h of reaction. 
Term Estimate Std Error t ratio Prob 
Intercept 74.23 12.13 6.12 <0.01 
X1 39.25 5.70 6.89 <0.01 
X2 2.49 5.70 0.44 0.67 
X3 10.12 5.70 1.78 0.12 
X1*X 2 0.09 7.44 0.01 0.99 
X1*X 3 -1.26 7.44 -0.17 0.87 
X2*X 3 -0.16 7.44 -0.02 0.98 
X12 -10.05 6.27 -1.60 0.15 
X22 -1.33 6.27 -0.21 0.84 
X32 -8.15 6.27 -1.30 0.23 
 
 
Table A16 – Analysis of variance for the response TOC removal (Y 2) 
after 1 h of reaction. 
Term Estimate Std Error t ratio Prob 
Intercept 41.03 4.86 8.44 <0.01 
X1 18.47 2.28 8.09 <0.01 
X2 -0.17 2.28 -0.07 0.94 
X3 4.66 2.28 2.04 0.08 
X1*X 2 -2.38 2.98 -0.80 0.45 
X1*X 3 2.99 2.98 1.00 0.35 
X2*X 3 -1.98 2.98 -0.66 0.53 
X12 -6.45 2.51 -2.57 0.04 
X22 -2.01 2.51 -0.80 0.45 
X32 -5.17 2.51 -2.06 0.08 
 
 
 Appendix I – Supporting Information for Chapter 7   
 178Table A17 – Analysis of variance for the response iron loss (Y 3) 
after 1 h of reaction. 
Term Estimate Std Error t ratio Prob 
Intercept 0.40 0.06 6.67 <0.01 
X1 0.33 0.03 11.68 <0.01 
X2 0.06 0.03 2.02 0.08 
X3 -0.08 0.03 -2.67 0.03 
X1*X 2 -0.02 0.04 -0.51 0.63 
X1*X 3 -0.06 0.04 -1.60 0.15 
X2*X 3 -0.01 0.04 -0.17 0.87 
X12 0.06 0.03 1.89 0.10 
X22 -0.05 0.03 -1.64 0.14 
X32 -0.03 0.03 -0.96 0.37 
 
 
 
Table A18 – Analysis of variance for the response color removal (Y 1) 
after 2 h of reaction.  
Term Estimate Std Error t ratio Prob 
Intercept 99.64 10.41 9.57 <0.01 
X1 37.10 4.89 7.59 <0.01 
X2 0.13 4.89 0.03 0.98 
X3 4.88 4.89 1.00 0.35 
X1*X 2 -0.10 6.39 -0.02 0.99 
X1*X 3 -3.63 6.39 -0.57 0.59 
X2*X 3 -0.20 6.39 -0.03 0.98 
X12 -21.27 5.38 -3.95 0.01 
X22 -4.65 5.38 -0.86 0.42 
X32 -9.12 5.38 -1.69 0.13 
 
 
  
 
    
 
    Appendix I – Supporting Information for Chapter 7   
 179Table A19 – Analysis of variance for the response TOC removal (Y 2) 
after 2 h of reaction.  
Term Estimate Std Error t ratio Prob 
Intercept 55.60 4.67 11.92 <0.01 
X1 22.55 2.19 10.29 <0.01 
X2 0.93 2.19 0.42 0.69 
X3 6.49 2.19 2.96 0.02 
X1*X 2 -2.16 2.86 -0.75 0.48 
X1*X 3 0.56 2.86 0.19 0.85 
X2*X 3 -1.49 2.86 -0.52 0.62 
X12 -8.83 2.41 -3.66 0.01 
X22 -2.44 2.41 -1.01 0.34 
X32 -5.85 2.41 -2.42 0.04 
 
 
Table A20 – Analysis of variance for the response iron loss (Y 3) 
after 2 h of reaction. 
Term Estimate Std Error t ratio Prob 
Intercept 0.64 0.14 4.61 <0.01 
X1 0.48 0.07 7.45 <0.01 
X2 0.05 0.07 0.84 0.43 
X3 -0.16 0.07 -2.44 0.04 
X1*X 2 0.02 0.09 0.24 0.82 
X1*X 3 -0.06 0.09 -0.68 0.52 
X2*X 3 -0.04 0.09 -0.50 0.63 
X12 0.06 0.07 0.80 0.45 
X22 -0.08 0.07 -1.05 0.33 
X32 0.08 0.07 1.17 0.28 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 Appendix I – Supporting Information for Chapter 7   
 180Table A21 – Analysis of variance for the response color removal (Y 1) 
after 3 h of reaction. 
Term Estimate Std Error t ratio Prob 
Intercept 99.71 8.01 12.45 <0.01 
X1 32.08 3.76 8.53 <0.01 
X2 0.30 3.76 0.08 0.94 
X3 4.82 3.76 1.28 0.24 
X1*X 2 -0.19 4.91 -0.04 0.97 
X1*X 3 -8.51 4.91 -1.73 0.13 
X2*X 3 -0.11 4.91 -0.02 0.98 
X12 -20.34 4.13 -4.91 <0.01 
X22 -3.75 4.13 -0.91 0.39 
X32 -4.47 4.13 -1.08 0.32 
 
 
Table A22 –Analysis of variance for the response TOC removal (Y 2) 
after 3 h of reaction. 
Term Estimate Std Error t ratio Prob 
Intercept 76.28 4.82 15.84 <0.01 
X1 24.04 2.26 10.63 <0.01 
X2 1.60 2.26 0.71 0.50 
X3 6.11 2.26 2.701 0.03 
X1*X 2 -0.22 2.96 -0.071 0.94 
X1*X 3 -5.67 2.96 -1.92 0.10 
X2*X 3 0.96 2.96 0.32 0.76 
X12 -13.34 2.49 -5.36 <0.01 
X22 -1.87 2.49 -0.75 0.48 
X32 -5.81 2.49 -2.33 0.05 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 Appendix I – Supporting Information for Chapter 7   
 181Table A23 – Analysis of variance for the response iron loss (Y 3) 
after 3 h of reaction 
Term Estimate Std Error t ratio Prob 
Intercept 1.07 0.28 3.82 0.01 
X1 0.95 0.13 7.19 <0.01 
X2 0.10 0.13 0.74 0.48 
X3 -0.29 0.13 -2.23 0.06 
X1*X 2 0.12 0.17 0.70 0.51 
X1*X 3 -0.39 0.17 -2.25 0.06 
X2*X 3 -0.12 0.17 -0.71 0.50 
X12 0.11 0.15 0.74 0.48 
X22 0.01 0.15 0.10 0.93 
X32 0.19 0.15 1.29 0.24 
 
 
Table A24 – Analysis of variance for the response color removal (Y 1) 
after 4 h of reaction 
Term Estimate Std Error t ratio Prob 
Intercept 99.37 6.08 16.35 <0.01 
X1 25.65 2.85 8.98 <0.01 
X2 0.59 2.85 0.21 0.84 
X3 8.00 2.85 2.80 0.03 
X1*X 2 -0.59 3.73 -0.16 0.88 
X1*X 3 -13.64 3.73 -3.66 0.01 
X2*X 3 -0.16 3.73 -0.04 0.97 
X12 -18.06 3.14 -5.75 <0.01 
X22 -1.44 3.14 -0.46 0.66 
X32 -1.83 3.14 -0.58 0.58 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    Appendix I – Supporting Information for Chapter 7   
 182Table A25 – Analysis of variance for the response TOC removal (Y 2) 
after 4 h of reaction 
Term Estimate Std Error t ratio Prob 
Intercept 78.20 5.60 13.96 <0.01 
X1 19.79 2.63 7.52 <0.01 
X2 2.00 2.63 0.76 0.47 
X3 7.88 2.63 3.00 0.02 
X1*X 2 -1.48 3.44 -0.43 0.68 
X1*X 3 -11.31 3.44 -3.29 0.01 
X2*X 3 2.10 3.44 0.61 0.56 
X12 -11.60 2.90 -4.01 0.01 
X22 0.05 2.90 0.02 0.99 
X32 -3.71 2.90 -1.28 0.24 
 
 
Table A26 – Analysis of variance for the response iron loss (Y 3) 
after 4 h of reaction  
Term Estimate Std Error t ratio Prob 
Intercept 2.24 0.25 8.83 <0.01 
X1 1.47 0.12 12.31 <0.01 
X2 0.04 0.12 0.34 0.74 
X3 -0.37 0.12 -3.11 0.02 
X1*X 2 0.02 0.16 0.13 0.90 
X1*X 3 -0.37 0.16 -2.36 0.05 
X2*X 3 -0.01 0.16 -0.08 0.94 
X12 -0.11 0.13 -0.81 0.45 
X22 -0.01 0.13 -0.04 0.97 
X32 0.27 0.13 2.03 0.08 
 
The comparison between experimental a nd calculated results, for 1 and 3 h 
hours of reaction, is plot in Figure A2.  Appendix I – Supporting Information for Chapter 7   
 18302 5 5 0 7 5 1 0 0 1 2 50255075100125Color removal calculated (%)
Color removal experimental (%) 1 h
 3 h
 0123401234Iron lost calculated (%)
Iron lost experimental (%) 1 h
 3 h
 
0123401234Iron lost calculated (%)
Iron lost experimental (%) 1 h
 3 h
 
Fig. A2 – Experimental and calculated results of the experimental design  
for OII oxidation after 1 h and 3 h. 
 
               Appendix I – Supporting Information for Chapter 7   
 184 