Identification of novel members of the bacterial azoreductase family  in 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa  
Authors: Vincenzo Crescente ; Sinead M. Holland ; Sapna Kashyap ; Elena Polycarpou;  Edith Sim; Ali 
Ryan1  
*Faculty of Science , Engineering and Computing, Kingston University, Penhryn Road, Kingston -upon -
Thames,  UK, KT1 2EE  
1 Corresponding author: Dr Ali Ryan, e -mail: a.ryan@kingston.ac.uk . 
Knowledge Environment: BJ Biomolecules  
Running title: Characterisa tion of novel bacterial azoreductases  
Abstract:  
Azoreductases are a family of diverse enzymes found in many pathogenic bacteria as well as distant 
homologues being present in eukarya. In addition to  having azoreductase activity these enzymes  are 
also suggest ed to have NAD(P)H quinone oxidoreductase activity  which lead s to a proposed role in 
plant pathogenesis . Azoreductases have  also been suggest ed to play role in the mammalian 
pathogenesis of Pseudom onas aeruginosa. In view of the importance of  P. aeruginosa as a pathogen, 
we therefore characterised recombinant enzymes  following expression of a group of putative 
azoreductase genes from P. aeruginosa  expressed in Escherichia  coli. The enzymes include members 
of the “Arsenic resis tance protein  H” (ArsH) , “tryptophan repressor binding protein A”  (WrbA) , 
“modulator of drug activity B ” (MdaB)  and YieF families.  The ArsH, MdaB and YieF family members 
all show azoreductase and NAD(P)H quinone oxidoreductase activities . In contrast , WrbA  is the first 
enzyme to show NAD(P)H quinone oxidoreductase activity but does not  reduce any of the 11 azo 
compounds tested under a wide range of conditions.  These studies will allow further investigation 
of the possible role  of these enzymes in the path ogenesis of P. aeruginosa . 
Keywords:  azoreductase, Pseudomonas aeruginosa , mammalian infection , modulator of drug 
activity B,  YieF, ArsH .1 
Summary Statement  
Azoreductases are a family of enzymes found in many pathogenic bacteria. Members of this family 
are required for pathogenicity in Pseudomonas aeruginosa . Three novel classes of azoreductases 
were characterised, aiding in the identification of enzymes for b ioremediation . 
  
                                                           
1 Aqn: anthraquinone -2-sulphonate, ArsH: Arsenic resistance protein H, Bzq: Benzoquinone, Dcb: 2,5 -
dichlorobenzoquinone, DSF: Differential scanning fluorimetry, Ibc: 2,6 -dichloroquinone -4-chloromide, Jug: 
Juglone, Law: Lawsone, MdaB: Modulator of drug activity B, Men: Menadione NQO: NAD(P)H quinone 
oxidoreductase, Onq:  1,2-napthoquinone, paAzoR: P. aeruginosa azoreductase, Phb: Phenol blue, Plu: 
Plumbagin, T M: melting temperature, and WrbA: Tryptophan repressor binding protein A.  Introduction  
Azoreductases are a group of flavoenzymes which have been characterised in both aerobic [1] and 
anaerobic  bacteria [2] as well as higher organisms such as yeast [3] and mammals [4]. Although 
these enzymes are found ubiquitous ly in bacteria l genomes  and ar e constitutively expressed  in vitro  
[5-9], their physiological role remains unclear. To date their role has been tied to their participation  
in the detoxification of cytotoxic quinones produced as antibacterial compounds by many plants [1]. 
A transcriptome  study in Salmonella  typhi murium  has show n >100 -fold up -regulation of an 
azoreductases during growth in lesions on cilantro and lettuce  leaves  versus in vitro  growth [10]. A 
second study also showed significant up -regulation of Escherichia coli  azoreductase during infe ction 
of radishes [6]. Studies in  Pseudomonas aeruginosa  using single gene deletion mutants have shown 
that azoreductase 1 ( paAzoR1 ) is required f or systemic infection of mice by a clinical strain  of P. 
aeruginosa   [11]. In addition  both paAzoR1 and azoreductase 2  (paAzoR2 ) are required for systemic 
infection of mice by P. aeruginosa  PA14 [12]. Taken as a whole , this data suggests  a role  for 
azoreductases  in bacterial pathogenicity.    
One of the reasons for the  lack of understanding  of the physiological  role of this enzyme family  is 
that in addition to azo compounds  (Sup Fig 1)  they reduce a broad range of substrates , including 
quinones [13] and nitrofurans [14]. As a result of their azoreductase activity much research has 
focused on the identification of azoreductases for the bioremediation of azo dye containing waste 
waters [15, 16] and engineering of these enzyme s for this purpose [17]. The identification of novel 
families of enzymes a ble to reduce azo compounds would allow the exploration of a much wider 
variety of enzyme for the use in bioremediation and may allow dual use enzymes as some 
azoreductase -like enzymes can reduce heavy metals [18].  
Mechanistic studies identified a common mechanism for the reduction of azo and quinone 
substrates [13, 19] and le d to the proposition that azoreductases (EC: 1.7.1.6) and NAD(P)H quinone 
oxidoreductases (EC: 1.6.99.2) are members of a single superfamily [1]. One of t he reason s these 
two functional classes  were kept separate is the sequence diversity among the members. Proteins 
with sequence identities of <10% can have  the same ov erall fold [1] and the same enzymatic 
activities . This makes identification of family members via b ioinformatics  challenging . A recent re -
evaluation of the available data [1] provided evidence that the azoreductase family is sig nificantly 
larger than previously  thought . The superfamily  is proposed  to incorporate a number of previously 
distinct  enzyme famili es including  the Modulator of drug activity B ( MdaB ), tryptophan repressor 
binding protein A  (WrbA ), YieF  (also known as ChrR)  and ArsH  families . In total seven new 
azoreductases were predicted to be encoded by the P. aeruginosa  PAO1 genome via an improved 
bioinformatics method  (Table 1  [1]). In view of the challenging nature of the bioinformatics work, 
and the low level of sequence identity, it is important to test the hypothesis by determining  whether 
the putative enzymes do have the activities proposed . We have therefore undertaken to 
characterise the azoreductases identified through bioinformatics and describe here t he 
characterisation of 4 members of the MdaB, ArsH, WrbA and YieF , famil ies encoded by P. 
aeruginosa . We have chosen thes e enzymes initially since these  families occur in the genomes of 
many  bacterial species  [20-23].  
  
 
 
 
 
 Experimental : 
All chemicals were obtained from Sigma Aldrich unless specified. NADH, NADPH and IPTG were 
purchased from Apollo Scientific, FMN and FAD were obtained from Tokyo Chemical Industries. 
Restriction enzymes were purchased from New England Biolabs.   
Cloning of azoreductases  
Genomic DNA was extracted from  overnight cultures of  P. aeruginosa  PAO1 grown in LB at 37°C 
using a Gentra P uregene Yeast/Bacteria kit (Qiagen) and was used as a template to amplif y the 
gene s pa0949  (paWrbA ), pa1204  (paYieF ), pa2280  (paArsH ) and pa2580  (paMdaB ). PCR was 
performed using  a Hotstar  Hifidelity Taq kit (Qiagen) and  the primers described in supplementary 
table 1. All PCR products were  digested using NdeI and SacI prior to cloning into a similarly digested 
pET-28b plasmid  (Novagen) . Ligation of the genes into pET -28b was performed using T4 DNA ligase 
(Promega) and  pET-28b including azoreductase genes were transformed into E. coli  JM109  
(Promega). T ransformants were selected on LB agar containing 30 g/mL kanamycin . The sequence s 
of al l clones were confirmed (Eurofins MWG biotech) prior to transformation into E. coli  BL-21 
(Promega) . 
Expression  and purification  of azore ductases  
All azoreductase genes  were expressed as described for paAzoR1 -3 [19]. Briefly , E. coli  BL-21 cells 
were grown in LB supplemented with 1 M Sorbitol, 2.5 mM betaine and 30 g/mL k anamycin . 
Cultures were grown to an OD 600 0.4-0.5 and induced with 0.5 mM IPTG for 16 hours at 1 8 °C.  
Cultures were centrifuged for 20 minutes at 6,000  g at 4°C and supernatant removed. Cells were 
then resuspended in lysis buffer containing complete protease inhibitors (Roche) sonication. The 
suspension  was the centrifuged at 16,000  g to remove debris and the clarified supernatant applied 
to a Ni -NTA (Invitrogen) column. Pro tein was eluted via increasing i midazole concentration in the 
elution buffer from 0 -250 mM stepwise.  The exception being paYieF  whic h required a 500 mM 
imidazole wash for complete elution .  
Prior to storage , all samples containing pure azoreductase were dialysed overnight against 20 mM 
Tris-HCl pH 8, 100 mM NaCl at 4°C in 14 kDa cutoff dialysis tubing.  Protein concentration and overall  
yield were determined using the following 280 values obtained using Protparam  [24]: paWrbA  - 
16,055 M-1cm-1, paYieF  – 19,940 M-1cm-1, paArsH – 29,575 M-1cm-1 and paMdaB - 39,420 M-1cm-1. All 
samples were aliquoted and stored at -80°C in 5% (v/v) glycerol.  
UV/VIS Absorbance scans were performed on 100 L of 1 mg/mL azoreductase in a 1 mL cuvette  in a 
M200 Infite Pro (Tecan) plate reader.  
TLC 
Flavin cofactors were identified via the use of TLC as described previously [25]. Briefly , a mobile 
phase of  2:1:1 mix of n -butanol: acetic acid: water  was used with a  0.2 mm  silica gel  coated plate . 
Pure stocks of FMN and FAD were spotted as standards for comparison. Plates were visualised under 
UV illumination .      
Differential scanning fluorimetry  (DSF)   
DSF was performed via a protocol similar to that described previously  [26]. Azoreductases were 
diluted to 64 g/mL in 20 mM Tris -HCl pH 8, 100 mM NaCl. The buffer contained Sypro O range  
(Invitrogen) and was supplemented with either 1 M or 20 M FMN or FAD as indicated . 
Fluorescence measurements were made  in an Mx3005p qRT -PCR instrument ( Stratagene) and the 
tempe rature was increased from 25 -95°C at 1°C/min. Data analysis was performed in Graphpad 
Prism with fitting to a Boltzman sigmoidal function .  Enzymatic assays  
The putative azoreductases were screened against a range of azo and quinone substrates (Sup Fig 2).  
Azoreductase and nitrofurazone reductase assays were performed in 100 L final volume with a 
reaction mixture as follows, 1.6-100 g/mL azoreductase , 50 M azo /nitrofuran substrate , 500 M 
NAD(P)H , 1 M FMN/FAD, in 20 mM Tris -HCl pH 8, 100 mM NaCl. The concentration of enzyme was 
adjusted to maintain a linear rate of reaction for 1 minute to allow accurate rate determination.  
Reactions were monitor ed at the optimal wavelength for each substrate  in an M200 Infinite Pro 
plate reader (Tecan) . Rates wer e determined over the initial linear portion of the graph . Quinone 
reductase assays were performed as described previously [14] with addition of 1 M flavin  to the 
reaction buffer . 
The effect of FMN concentration on enzymatic activity was measured using Phenol Blue ( Phb) as the 
substrate.  The reaction mixture was  as follows: 0.2-10 g/mL azoreductase, 100 M Phb, 500 M 
NAD(P)H, 1 -20 M FMN/FAD, in 20 mM Tris -HCl pH 8, 100 mM NaCl. A fixed concentration of  each  
azoreductase was used for assays at all concentrations of flavin.  Phb reduction was measured via the 
change in  absorbance at 660 nm.   
Homology modelling  
A homology model for paM daB was generated using the phyre2 web server [27] in intensive mode. 
The paMdaB model was based upon the structures of MdaB from Yersiniae pestis  (PDB: 3RPE – 59% 
identical) and E. coli  (PDB: 2AMJ [28] – 61% identical).  
 
Results and Discussion  
Recomb inant azoreductase e xpression  
High yields of pure recombinant  paWrbA, paYieF , paArsH and paMdaB were obtained via growth and 
expression under the same conditions as previously  used  for paAzoR1 -3 (Fig 1). Under these 
conditions the combination of E. coli BL-21 expression and His -tag purification yielded  large 
quantitie s of pur e protein (Fig 1) for all four azoreductases . The highest yield from a single culture 
was 54 mg paYieF (paWrbA 28  mg and paMdaB 30.2 mg) from 1 L E. coli  culture .  
Nicotinamide c ofactor selectivity  
As methyl red has previously been shown to be a good substrate for many proteins able to reduce 
azo compounds [19, 22] all four proteins were initially tested for their ability to reduce methyl red in 
the presence of a 5 fold molar excess of either NADH or NADPH (Fig 2). paArsH and paMdaB were 
able to reduce methyl red at a significantly higher rate when using NADPH compar ed to NADH as the 
nicotinamide cofactor (Fig 2C and 2 D respectively).  
paYieF was unable to reduce methyl red under these conditions , however when it was tested for 
reduction of the quinone Men it was able to reduce it in the presenc e of both NADH and NADP H (Fig 
2B). In this case paYieF showed a significantly higher rate of reduction when using NAD PH when 
compared to NAD H. This is consistent with a previous study of paYieF which showed selectivity with 
NADPH [29]. Consistent with the absence of a flavin spot on the TLC plate (Sup Fig 3A), paWrbA was 
unable to reduce either quinones or azo compounds under these initial conditions. Instead it was 
necessary to add FMN to the reactio n mixture to allow turnover. With the inclusion of FMN and 
using Men as a substrate paWrbA showed significantly higher rates of reduction of Men with NADPH 
as the hydrid e donor rather than NADH (Fig 2A).   
 Flavin cofactor selectivity  
Prior to characterisation of the enzyme specificity  it was necessary to ascertain whether flavin was 
present in the recombinant  azoreductases. All enzymes were expected to be flavin -dependent 
azoreductases however whether flavin was incorporated during expression i n E. coli  was uncertain. 
UV/V is spectra were collected for each of the expressed azoreductases (Sup Fig 4). paWrb A lacked 
the characteristic flavin absorption peaks found in other azoreductases [13]. The peaks were present 
in all of the other proteins but were not as well defined  as one would expect.  In order to further 
investigate the incorporation of flavin  measurements of absorbance at both 280 nm (protein) and 
450 nm (flavin) were taken t o determin e the approximate protein:flavin  molar  ratio for the 
expresse d protein s. One would expect a 1:1 protein: flavin  molar  ratio under ideal conditions  [5], 
however the actual ratio varies from 3:1 ( paMdaB) to 6 :1 (paWrbA) which is consistent with the poor 
intensity of fl avin peaks in the UV/V is spectra . This result  indicate s that the flavin has  either  become 
dissociated from the expressed protein or was not sufficiently incorporated during expression . Loss 
or non -incorporation of flavin during recombinant expression is a frequent problem and is expected 
for these proteins as to obtain crystals of paWrbA and paYieF in complex with FMN it was necessary 
to soak preformed  crystals in FMN prior to data col lection [29, 30]. Dissociation of flavin from the 
azoreductases occurs because the flavin is not covalently bound to t he enzyme [19].   
To confirm which  flavin  (FMN or FAD ) was incorporated into the protein, samples  were analysed  via 
TLC (Sup Fig 3). Of the four enzymes paMdaB was the only  one with an in tense flavin spot via TLC 
(Sup Fig 3D), which suggests FAD incorporation into the enzyme.  The selectivity of paMdaB for FAD 
and NADPH is consistent with the result from a study of E. coli  MdaB (75% sequence similarity) that 
found  the enzyme had the same cofactor preferences when reducing quinones [31]. In paWrbA and 
paArsH  (Sup Fig 3A and C) a flavin spot  was not present  in the expressed protein  and in  paYieF  the 
spot for FAD  was very weak  (Sup Fig 3B). 
A characteristic quenching of native flavin  fluorescence  was observed upon titration of the 
recombinant azoreductases suggesting binding of the flavin to the protein. DSF was used to monitor  
the effect of adding  extra FMN or FAD on the stability of the  azoreductases. Thermostability 
measurements for each of the azoreductases were performed in the presence and absence of flavin 
and the T M was measured (Table 2). An increase in T M upon addition of flavin would indicate flavin  
binding  to the protein . The binding of flavin within the active site will significantly stabilise the 
structure of the azoreductase due to the number of hydrogen bonds formed between the flavin and 
the protein backbone [19].    
A significant  thermal shift was observed upon addition of 1 M of either flavin  to paMdaB  however 
the shift was much larger with FAD than FMN (16°C with FAD compared to 5°C wi th FMN) . This data 
combined with the appearance  of an FAD spot on TLC (Sup Fig 3B) suggests  that FAD is the cofactor 
used by paMdaB.  paArsH shows a small but significant thermal shift as a result of addition of 1 M 
FMN however no change was observed upon addition of 1 M FAD.  This suggests selective binding 
of FMN to the protein, which is consistent with results from ArsH in Sinorhizobium meliloti  [32]. In 
the case of both paWrbA and paYieF no significant thermal shift was observed upon addition of  
either 1 or 5 M flavin and only after  addition of 20 M flavin was a significant shift observed. 
paYieF was destabilised by addition of 20 M FMN , in contrast to a significant increase in 
thermostability (>6°C) result ing from the addition of 20 M FAD. This data in combination with a 
weak FAD s pot on TLC (Sup Fig 3C) suggests that FAD is the cofactor used by paYieF.  This is 
inconsistent with a previous crystallographic study where  the structure of  paYieF was solved with 
FMN bound at the active site [29], however as mentioned previously the FMN was added after 
crystal formation and no experimental evidence was p rovided  for th e addit ion of FMN over FAD . 
paWrbA was stabilised in the presence of both FMN and FAD however the stabilisation was far 
greater with FMN (12°C with FMN compared to 2°C with FAD)  suggesting FMN would be selectively incorporated into paWrbA  which  is consistent with  FMN  being highly selectively incorporated into E. 
coli WrbA  [23].  
In order to further analyse the flavin selectivity of the azoreductases we monitored t he effect of 
addition of each flavin on azoreductas e activity and this is covered  in the NAD(P)H quinone 
oxidoreductase section.  
Azoreductase specificity profiles of the new enzymes  
paMdaB, paArsH , paWrbA  and paYieF  were screened against the same azo compounds which had 
previously been used to screen paAzoR1 -3 (Sup Fig 2 [19]). Results showed that paMdaB, paArsH 
and paYieF  were able to reduce  a variety of azo compounds (Fig 3). As the enzymatic activity of 
paArsH has never been determined this data confirms its role as an azoreductase. I n the case s of 
paMdaB and paYieF this is the first time any member of the se famil ies have been shown to reduce 
azo compounds.   
Rates of azo bond cleavage were of the same order of magnitude as those previously seen for 
paAzoR1 -3 [19]. Interestingly all three enzymes reduced olsalazine which was a compound which 
showed very little reduction by paAzoR1 -3 [19]. paArsH in particular shows a pr opensity  for azo dyes 
whose hydrazo -tautomers would form napthoquinones  (e.g. Sudan I and olsalazine). paYieF  and 
paMdaB do not show a particular preference for those  azo dyes  that form either benzo or 
napthoquinones in their hydrazo -tautomers.  
The inclusion of the MdaB enzyme family into the azoreductase family is significant as this family is 
also required for  systemic infection of mice in both Helicobacter  pylori  [20] and Francise lla novocida  
[33] as well as P. aeruginosa  PA14 [12].  Both paYieF  and paArsH have also been shown to be 
required for systemic infection in mice by P. aeruginosa  PA14  [12]. This data supports the hypothesis 
that azoreductases are required for bacterial pathogenicity . The r educed infectivity of azoreductase 
gene deletion strains may be related to a reduced ability to survive within host macrophage which 
has been  illustrated with azoreductase gene deletion  strains of a range of bacteria  [34-36].  
paYief is likely to be of particular  use to the  bioremediation  industry  due to its unusual ly high 
thermostability (Table 2 ) and the fact that  members of this family are able  to reduce  azo bonds . A  
previous study showed that E. coli  YieF is able to reduce  heavy metal  ions such as Cr6+ and U6+ to the 
less water soluble Cr3+ and U3+ [37]. As a result engineered members of the YieF family could well be 
used for bioremediation of both heavy metals and azo dyes. Directed evolution stud ies have  already 
been performed  to improv e reduction of metals by E. coli  YieF [18, 38] it is therefore possible that 
this could also lead to increased azo dye reduction .  
In contrast paWrbA appear ed to be  unable  to reduce any of the azo compounds  we h ave tested 
under any of the conditions used  in this study . The enzyme is functional due to its ability  to reduce 
quinones (Fig 3A). The enzyme paWrbA is the most distantly related of all of the azoreductase -like 
enzymes thus far  identified in P. aeruginosa  [1]. When the  overall structure of the  paWrbA  [30] was 
compared to those of classical a zoreduct ases (e.g. paAzoR1) it wa s found that paWrbA  showed  some 
major  differences (Fig 4). One of the key differences in the two structures is the complete truncation 
in paWrbA of the -hairpin that forms the lid of the paAzoR1 active site . The residue s in the -
hairpin  have been show to play a crucial  role in determining the substrate specificity of 
azoreductases [39]. In paWrbA the “lid” of the active site is formed by Trp 99 (Fig 4 A) which would be 
able to maintain some of the hydrophobic and - stacking interactions which characterise binding 
of many of the substrates. The l ack of the -hairpin structure leads to a much more open active site 
in paWrbA compared to classical azoreductases (Fig 4 C vs 4D) which would bind the azo dye much 
more loose ly and would lead to poorer rates of reduction . 
Another possible explanation for the lack of azoreduction by paWrbA  is a change to an  important 
residue in the active site of an azoreductase which  is the residue equivalent to Trp105 in E. faecalis  azoreduct ase  as site directed mutagenesis has shown that substitutions at this position can 
completely abrogate activity [40]. This residue is  an aromatic  residue  in most azoreductases (Tyr98 
in paAzoR1 – Fig 4b and Tyr96 in E. coli  azoreductase) that forms - stacking interactions with FMN 
and also hydrogen bonds with the phosphate group of FMN. As a result this residue plays an 
important role in stabilising the binding of FMN to the protein. Substitution of tryptophan for small 
non-aromatic amino acids was s hown to destabilise binding of FMN to E. faecalis  azoreductase [40]. 
The effect of substitution to arginine  (Arg80) , present at this position in paWrbA  (Fig 4 A), was not 
tested however it is likely to be detrimental as arginine would be unable to form - stacking 
interactions and in the confirmation in the crystal structure is too far (4.8 Å) to form a salt bridge 
interaction with the phosphate group of FMN.  
NAD(P)H quinone oxido reductase a ctivity  
All four azoreductases were tested for their ability to reduce a range of quinones ( Fig 5 and Sup Fig 
2). For the first time paArsH was shown to reduce quinones (Fig 5C). As was recently  reported [41], 
paMdaB, paWrbA and paYieF  also show quinone reductase activity . As previously shown in paAzoR1 -
3 [1] quinone reduction by these enzymes is an order of magnitude faster than reduction of azo 
compounds.  This supports the idea  that a quinone  is more likely to be their physiological substrate.  
paArsH as was noted for  azo dye reduction , showed  a preference for napthoquinone substrates ( Fig 
5C) with the one exception being phenol blue . Both paYieF  and paMdaB also show a significant 
preference for napthoquinones e.g. Plu and Men ( Fig 5B and D). Unlike paAzoR1 -3 which all reduce  
Bzq at a significant rate  [1] there is relatively little  reduction of Bzq by any of the azoreductases 
tested here.   
The rate of reduction of quinones by paWrbA was slower than that of the other azoreductases 
characterised here and is  comparable to the rates of reduction previously observed for paAzoR1 [1]. 
These results proved to be consistent with recently published work by Green et al . [41] where 
paWrbA was shown to be less active than  paMdaB  and paYieF.   
To determine whether  FMN or FAD was the preferred Flavin , the reduc tion of Phb by the different 
recombinant enzymes was measured in the presence of increasing concentrations of each flavin.  Phb 
was selected as the substrate as it is a universal substrate for the enzymes (Fig 5) and reduction was  
measured at 660 nm which would not be confounded by  interference from  flavin absorbance . 
paWrbA showed a very clear preference for FMN with no reduction  observed in the presence of FAD 
at any of the concentrations tested (Fig 6A). This agrees with literature [30] and DSF results (table 1). 
Likewise the increase in rate of reduction of Phb by paArsH with increasing flavin concentration was 
much steeper with FMN than FAD (Fig 6C) agreeing with previous data suggesting  that FMN  is the 
preferred flavin. The result  of addition of either FMN o r FAD to paMdaB was very similar (Fig 6D) and 
so it was not possible to determine a preference via this method. Hence there is no reason to doubt 
the preference for FAD which was illustrated by the TLC data (Sup Fig 1 ). paYieF though is a 
conundrum as the enzymatic assay (Fig 6 C) indicates a preference for FMN over FAD.  This is 
inconsistent  with  TLC which showed a weak FAD spot  (Sup Fig 1)  and DSF where  a small but 
significant T M shift was observed upon  addition of 1 M FAD (table 2)  whereas no change was 
observed with FMN. This data does however support  a study by Agarwal et al.  [29] where the crystal 
structure was solved in the presence of FMN although n o experimental evidence was put forward 
for inclusion of FMN over FAD .       
To help better understand the substrate specificity profiles of paYieF and paMdaB it was necessary 
to compare the structures of their active sites (Fig 7) . With this in mind a  hom ology model was 
generated for paMdaB for compar ison with  the the crystal structures of paAzoR1  (Fig 4 B) and 
paYieF. The structure of the active site of paMdaB  (Fig 7B) is very similar to that of paAzoR1 (Fig 4A), 
it is a predominantly hydrophobic pocket surrounded by aromatic residues. In paMdaB Thr87 is in a 
similar position to Phe60 in paAzoR1 which has previously been identified to be important for determini ng substrate specificity of azoreductases [42]. In a model of paAzor3 it was suggested that  
the equivalent residue (Thr60) , due to its strategic position at one of the entrances to the active site, 
would determine the accessibility to the active site for l arger substrates [19]. Both paMdaB (Fig 5D) 
and paAzoR3 [1] show a preference for napthoquinones which would fit with the hypothesis that the 
residue in this position has a gatekeeper role.  
 In comparison, the active site of  paYieF is more open with one side  dominated by the positively 
charged side chain of Arg100 (Fig 4B). The presence of this positive side chain might be expected to 
disrupt the binding of the predominantly hydrophobic substrates however rates of reduction of azo 
and quinone substrates are comparable to those of paMdaB (Figs 3 and 5). A possible explanation 
for this would be the proximity of Glu52 to the guanidinium group of Arg100 (~3 Å) which is likely to 
aid in neutralising the positive charge. The proximity of these charged residues in an otherwise 
hydrophobic environment would facilitate the opposing ionisation states of these residues.  It is 
worth noting that the azoreductase from E. coli  (PDB 2Z98 [42]) has Arg59 in a simila r position to 
Arg100 and Arg59 was linked to the preferen ce for interaction with specific substrate carboxyl 
groups.  
 
Nitrofurazone reduction  
Nitrorfurazone is  a topical antibiotic which is  activated by reduction  of its nitro group  to a 
hydroxylamine which is able to covalently modify DNA [14]. As well as activation by azoreductases 
nitrofurazone can also be activated by more specialised nitroreductases such as NfsB [42]. 
All of the enzymes tested were shown to reduce nitrofurazone. The rate of r eduction  of 
nitrofurazone by paYieF  and paWrbA  (Fig 8) are comparable to that measured previously for 
paAzoR1 (Vmax =9.8 M.s-1.mg of protein-1 under s imilar experimental conditions [14]). In contrast 
paArsH and paMdaB have rates that are approximately 5 and 3 fold faster respectively.  This is the 
first evidence of nitroreductase activity of these enzymes present in P. aeruginosa  as a previous 
study [43] using an indirect readout showed no activity over background during overexpression of 
these enzymes in cancer cell lines .    
 
Conclusions  
The work described here  proves  predictions [1] based on bioinformatics analysis that the 
azoreductase family in P. aeruginosa  might be significantly larger than original ly thought ( Table 1).  
This was controversial due to the low sequence homology between some of the predicted enzymes. 
We also show that members of the widely studied bacterial MdaB and YieF families can act as 
azoreductases  and identify  an NAD(P)H quinone  oxidoreductase which does not have azoreductase 
activity.  These two activities are not inextricably linked in all enzymes. As the azoreductases which 
have now been identified are also known to be required for infection , this data paves the way for 
furthe r investigation of their role in bacterial pathogenicity.      
Author Contribution  
VC, S MH and SK all collected data that was included in the manuscript. EP helped supervise the 
project and commented on drafts of the manuscript. AR and ES wrote the manuscri pt and devised as 
well as  supervised the project.  
Funding:  
This work has been supported by a New Lecturer Award from the S ociety for  Applied M icrobiology.  
  
Figure list  
Fig 1: Recombinant p roduction of pure azoreductase  
Purity of all recombinant azoreductases after IMAC chromatography  determined via SDS -PAGE .   
Fig 2: Nicotinamide  selectivity of the azoreductase -like enzyme s. 
Enzymatic activities of the following azoreductase -like enzymes (A) pa WrbA , (B) pa YieF, (C) paArsH , 
(D) pa MdaB . Activities were measured using the following substrates Men (A & B) and methyl red (C 
& D) otherwise reactions  were performed as described in materials and methods. All experiments 
were performed in triplicate and error bars represent ±standard deviation . Significance was 
measured  via a one way ANOVA  (p <0.0 1) using Graphpad Prism .  
Fig 3: Substrate specificity  profiles  of azoreductases reducing  azo dyes.  
Azoreductase activity of the following proteins (A) paYieF , (B) paArsH, (C) paMdaB. Specific activity  
measurements were performed as described in the materials and methods  and protein 
concentration was adjusted to maintain a linear rate . All measurements were performed  in triplicate 
and error bars represent ±standard deviation.   
Fig 4: A comparison of the  active sites  of paAzoR1 and  paWrbA .  
(A) The structure of the paWrbA active site. (B) The structure of the paAzoR1 active site. (C) 
Electrostatic s urface representation of paWrbA. (D) Electrostatic s urface representation of paAzoR1. 
In (A) and (B) Each monomer is coloured differently, blue  and gold. FMN is shown with yellow carbon 
atoms  and side chains are coloured according to the monomer they belong to . All images and 
surfaces were generated in CCP4MG [44] and were based upon PDB files paAzoR1 – 2V9C  [5] and 
paWrbA - 1ZWL [30].  
Fig 5: Quinone  substrate specificity profiles of azoreductases .  
Each graph represents the NAD(P)H quinone  oxidoreductase activity of the following proteins (A) 
paWrbA, (B) paYieF, (C) paArsH, (D) paMdaB.  Specific activity measurements were performed as 
described in the materials and methods  and protein concentration was adjusted to maintain a linear 
rate. All measurements were carried out in triplicate and error bars represent ±standard deviation .  
Fig 6: Activity assays for all azoreductases in the presence of varying concentrations of flavin.  
The enzymes were as follows  (A) paWrbA, (B) paYieF, (C) pa ArsH, (D ) paMdaB. The enzyme 
concentration was kept constant at all concentrations of flavin, paWrbA – 10 g/mL, paYieF - 1 
g/mL, paArsH – 0.2 g/mL and paMdaB - 5 g/mL. Phb reduction was m easured  by monitoring the 
change in absorbance at 660 nm.  Blue symbols sh ow the effect of FMN on activity and red symbols 
show the effect of FAD. All measurements were performed in triplicate and error bars represent 
±standard deviation.  
Fig 7: Comparison of the active sites of paYieF ( A), and paMdaB ( B). 
The structure of paYie F is based upon X -ray crystallographic data (PDB code 1X77 [29]) whereas 
paMdaB is based upon a homology model generated as described in the  materials and methods. In 
both cases monomer A is shown in gold while monomer B is shown in light blue, while FMN (paYieF) 
or FAD (paMdaB) are in yellow.  
 
 Fig 8: Reduction of nitrofurazone by azoreductases  
All activit y measurements  were performed  as desc ribed in the materials and methods  section . All 
measurements were carried out in triplicate and error bars represent ±standard deviation.  
Azoreductase  Gene code  
paAzoR1# pa0785  
paWrbA * pa0949  
paYieF * pa1204  
paNQO1  pa1224  
paNQO2  pa1225  
paAzoR2# pa1962  
paArsH * pa2280  
paMdaB * pa2580  
paAzoR3# pa3223  
paNQO3  pa4975  
Table 1: List of genes encoding  azoreductase -like enzymes in the genome of P. aeruginosa  PAO1  
*azoreductases  characterised in this manuscript.  # previously characterised azoreductases [19]. Gene 
numbers are as listed in the Pseudocap database [45].  
Azoreductase  TM /°C TM + FMN /°C  TM + FAD /°C  
paWrbA  b 55.7 ±0.3  67.4 ±0.8  57.7 ±0.3  
paYieF  b 71.1 ±0.6  49.2 ±2 77.3 ±0.5  
paArsH  a 47.3 ±0. 1 49.1 ±0.7 47.4 ±0.2  
paMdaB  a 47.1 ±0.1  52.6 ±0.2  63.5 ±0.1  
Table 2: Binding of flavin cofactors to new azoreductases.  
Changes in  protein  thermostability are measured in response to addition of eithe r FMN or  FAD.  a 1 
M or b 20 M flavin . Protein was at 64 g/mL in 20 mM Tris pH 8 100 mM NaCl. All measurements 
were performed  in triplicate . 
Sup Fig 1 : Reaction scheme for the reduction of olsalazine.  
A general scheme showing the bi -bi ping pong mechanism of red uction of a typical azo compound  
(olsalazine)  by flavin dependent azoreductases such as paAzoR1 [39]. 
Sup Fig 2: structures for all substrates used for enzyme characterisation.  
Quinones are abbreviated as follows: Aqn: anthraquinone -2-sulphonate, Bzq: Benzoquinone, Dcb: 
2,5-dichlorobenzoquinone, Ibc: 2,6 -dichloroquinone -4-chloromide, Jug: Juglone, Law: Lawsone, 
Men: Menadione, Onq:  1,2-napthoquinone, Phb: Phenol blue and Plu: Plumbagin.  
Sup Fig 3: TLC plates for azoreductases . 
The TLC plates analy se flavin incorporation into the following azoreductase -like enzy mes (A) paYieF, 
(B) paMdaB, (C) paArsH and (D) paWrbA.  20 g of enzyme and 2 g of each flavin was spotted  onto 
the silica  plate. A mobile phase of 2:1:1 N -butanol: acetic acid: water was us ed to achieve 
separation.   
Sup Fig 4: UV/VIS spectra of azoreductases  
The absorption spectra are for the following azoreductases (A) paYieF, (B) paMdaB, (C) paArsH, (D) 
paWrbA.  The absorption spectra for free FMN and FAD are also shown for comparison.  All spectra 
were collected at a protein concentration of 1 mg/mL and a path length of 1 cm .  References:  
1 Ryan, A., Kaplan, E., Nebel, J. -C., Polycarpou, E., Crescente, V., Lowe, E., Preston, G. M. and 
Sim, E. (2014) Identification of NAD(P)H quinone oxidoreductase activity in azoreductases from P. 
aeruginosa : azoreductases and NAD(P)H quinone oxidoreductases belong to the same FMN -
dependent sup erfamily of enzymes. PLoS ONE. 9, e98551  
2 Morrison, J. M., Wright, C. M. and John, G. H. (2012) Identification, Isolation and 
characterization of a novel azoreductase from Clostridium perfringens . Anaerobe. 18, 229 -234 
3 Liger, D., Graille, M., Zhou, C. Z., Leulliot, N., Quevillon -Cheruel, S., Blondeau, K., Janin, J. and 
van Tilbeurgh, H. (2004) Crystal structure and functional characterization of yeast YLR011wp, an 
enzyme with NAD(P)H -FMN and ferric iron reductase activit ies. J Biol Chem. 279, 34890 -34897  
4 Wu, K., Knox, R., Sun, X. Z., Joseph, P., Jaiswal, A. K., Zhang, D., Deng, P. S. K. and Chen, S. 
(1997) Catalytic properties of NAD(P)H:Quinone Oxidoreductase -2 (NQO2), a dihydronicotinamide 
riboside dependent oxidoredu ctase. Arch Biochem Biophys. 347, 221 -228 
5 Wang, C. J., Hagemeier, C., Rahman, N., Lowe, E., Noble, M., Coughtrie, M., Sim, E. and 
Westwood, I. (2007) Molecular cloning, characterisation and ligand -bound structure of an 
azoreductase from Pseudomonas aerug inosa . J Mol Biol. 373, 1213 -1228  
6 Landstorfer, R., Simon, S., Schober, S., Keim, D., Scherer, S. and Neuhaus, K. (2014) 
Comparison of strand -specific transcriptomes of enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7 
EDL933 (EHEC) under eleven different enviro nmental conditions including radish sprouts and cattle 
feces. BMC Genomics. 15, 353  
7 He, M., Li, X., Guo, L., Miller, S. J., Rensing, C. and Wang, G. (2010) Characterization and 
genomic analysis of chromate resistant and reducing  Bacillus cereus  strain SJ 1. BMC Microbiol. 10, 
221 
8 Chen, H., Hopper, S. L. and Cerniglia, C. E. (2005) Biochemical and molecular characterization 
of an azoreductase from  Staphylococcus aureus , a tetrameric NADPH -dependent flavoprotein. 
Microbiology. 151, 1433 -1441  
9 Liu, Z. J., Chen, H., Shaw, N., Hopper, S. L., Chen, L., Chen, S., Cerniglia, C. E. and Wang, B. C. 
(2007) Crystal structure of an aerobic FMN -dependent azoreductase (AzoA) from Enterococcus 
faecalis . Arch Biochem Biophys. 463, 68-77 
10 Goudeau, D. M., Parker, C. T., Zhou, Y., Sela, S., Kroupitski, Y. and Brandl, M. T. (2013) The 
Salmonella transcriptome in lettuce and cilantro soft rot reveals a niche overlap with the animal host 
intestine. Appl Environ Microbiol. 79, 250 -262 
11 Rakhimova, E., Munder, A., Wiehlmann, L ., Bredenbruch, F. and Tummler, B. (2008) Fitness 
of isogenic colony morphology variants of Pseudomonas aeruginosa  in murine airway infection. PLoS 
One. 3, e1685  
12 Skurnik, D., Roux, D., Aschard, H., Cattoir, V., Yoder -Himes, D., Lory, S. and Pier, G. B. (2013) 
A comprehensive analysis of In Vitro  and In Vivo  genetic fitness of Pseudomonas aeruginosa  using 
high -throughput sequencing of transposon libraries. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003582  
13 Ryan, A., Wang, C. J., Laurieri, N., Westwood, I. and Sim, E. (2010) Rea ction mechanism of 
azoreductases suggests convergent evolution with quinone oxidoreductases. Protein Cell. 1, 780 -790 
14 Ryan, A., Kaplan, E., Laurieri, N., Lowe, E. and Sim, E. (2011) Activation of nitrofurazone by 
azoreductases: multiple activities in on e enzyme. Sci Rep. 1, DOI:10.1038/srep00063  
15 Mendes, S., Farinha, A., Ramos, C. G., Leitao, J. H., Viegas, C. A. and Martins, L. O. (2011) 
Synergistic action of azoreductase and laccase leads to maximal decolourization and detoxification of 
model dye -containing wastewaters. Bioresour Technol. 102, 9852-9859  
16 Lang, W., Sirisansaneeyakul, S., Ngiwsara, L., Mendes, S., Martins, L. O., Okuyama, M. and 
Kimura, A. (2013) Characterization of a new oxygen -insensitive azoreductase from Brevibacillus 
laterosporus TISTR1911: toward dye decolorization using a packed -bed metal affinity reactor. 
Bioresour Technol. 150, 298 -306 
17 Brissos, V., Goncalves, N., Melo, E. P. and Martins, L. O. (2014) Improving kinetic or 
thermodynamic stability of an azoreductase by directed  evolution. PLoS One. 9, e87209  18 Barak, Y., Ackerley, D. F., Dodge, C. J., Banwari, L., Alex, C., Francis, A. J. and Matin, A. (2006) 
Analysis of novel soluble chromate and uranyl reductases and generation of an improved enzyme by 
directed evolution. App l Environ Microbiol. 72, 7074 -7082  
19 Ryan, A., Laurieri, N., Westwood, I., Wang, C. J., Lowe, E. and Sim, E. (2010) A novel 
mechanism for azoreduction. J Mol Biol. 400, 24-37 
20 Wang, G. and Maier, R. J. (2004) An NADPH quinone reductase of Helicobacter p ylori  plays 
an important role in oxidative stress resistance and host colonization. Infect Immun. 72, 1391 -1396  
21 Gonzalez, C. F., Ackerley, D. F., Lynch, S. V. and Matin, A. (2005) ChrR, a soluble quinone 
reductase of  Pseudomonas putida  that defends agai nst H 2O2. J Biol Chem. 280, 22590 -22595  
22 Vorontsov, II, Minasov, G., Brunzelle, J. S., Shuvalova, L., Kiryukhina, O., Collart, F. R. and 
Anderson, W. F. (2007) Crystal structure of an apo form of  Shigella flexneri  ArsH protein with an 
NADPH -dependent FMN  reductase activity. Protein science 16, 2483 -2490  
23 Kishko, I., Carey, J., Reha, D., Brynda, J., Winkler, R., Harish, B., Guerra, R., Ettrichova, O., 
Kukacka, Z., Sheryemyetyeva, O., Novak, P., Kuty, M., Kuta Smatanova, I., Ettrich, R. and Lapkouski, 
M. (2013) 1.2 Å resolution crystal structure of Escherichia coli  WrbA holoprotein. Acta Crystallogr D 
Biol Crystallogr. 69, 1748 -1757  
24 Gasteiger, E., Hoogland, C., Gattiker, A., Duvaud, A., Wilkins, M., Appel, R. D. and Bairoch, A. 
(2005) Protein Identifica tion and Analysis Tools on the ExPASy Server. In The Proteomics Protocols 
Handbook (Walker, J. M., ed.). pp. 571 -607, Humana Press, Totowa  
25 Liu, J., Krulwich, T. A. and Hicks, D. B. (2008) Purification of two putative type II NADH 
dehydrogenases with dif ferent substrate specificities from alkaliphilic Bacillus pseudofirmus  OF4. 
Biochim Biophys Acta. 1777 , 453 -461 
26 Niesen, F. H., Berglund, H. and Vedadi, M. (2007) The use of differential scanning fluorimetry 
to detect ligand interactions that promote pro tein stability. Nat Protoc. 2, 2212 -2221  
27 Kelley, L. A., Mezulis, S., Yates, C. M., Wass, M. N. and Sternberg, M. J. (2015) The Phyre2 
web portal for protein modeling, prediction and analysis. Nat Protoc. 10, 845 -858 
28 Adams, M. A. and Jia, Z. (2006) Mo dulator of drug activity B from  Escherichia coli : crystal 
structure of a prokaryotic homologue of DT -diaphorase. J Mol Biol. 359, 455 -465 
29 Agarwal, R., Bonanno, J. B., Burley, S. K. and Swaminathan, S. (2006) Structure determination 
of an FMN reductase f rom Pseudomonas aeruginosa  PA01 using sulfur anomalous signal. Acta 
Crystallogr D. 62, 383 -391 
30 Gorman, J. and Shapiro, L. (2005) Crystal structures of the tryptophan repressor binding 
protein WrbA and complexes with flavin mononucleotide. Protein Sci. 14, 3004 -3012  
31 Hayashi, M., Ohzeki, H., Shimada, H. and Unemoto, T. (1996) NADPH -specific quinone 
reductase is induced by 2 -methylene -4-butyrolactone in Escherichia coli . Biochim Biophys Acta. 
1273 , 165 -170 
32 Ye, J., Yang, H. C., Rosen, B. P. and Bhatta charjee, H. (2007) Crystal structure of the 
flavoprotein ArsH from Sinorhizobium meliloti . FEBS Lett. 581, 3996 -4000  
33 Kraemer, P. S., Mitchell, A., Pelletier, M. R., Gallagher, L. A., Wasnick, M., Rohmer, L., 
Brittnacher, M. J., Manoil, C., Skerett, S. J . and Salama, N. R. (2009) Genome -wide screen in  
Francisella novicida  for genes required for pulmonary and systemic infection in mice. Infect Immun. 
77, 232 -244 
34 Sabbagh, S. C., Lepage, C., McClelland, M. and Daigle, F. (2012) Selection of Salmonella 
enterica  serovar Typhi genes involved during interaction with human macrophages by screening of a 
transposon mutant library. PLoS One. 7, e36643  
35 Asare, R., Akimana, C., Jones, S. and Abu Kwaik, Y. (2010) Molecular bases of proliferation of 
Francisella tula rensis  in arthropod vectors. Environ Microbiol. 12, 2587 -2612  
36 Green, L. (2012) in vitro  and in vivo  characterisation of P. aeruginosa  oxidoreductase 
enzymes in pathogenesis and therapy. In School of Biological Sciences ed.)^eds.). p. 205, Victoria 
Unive rsity of Wellington, Wellington, NZ  37 Ackerley, D. F., Gonzalez, C. F., Park, C. H., Blake, R., 2nd, Keyhan, M. and Matin, A. (2004) 
Chromate -reducing properties of soluble flavoproteins from Pseudomonas putida  and Escherichia 
coli. Appl Environ Microbiol . 70, 873 -882 
38 Barak, Y., Nov, Y., Ackerley, D. F. and Matin, A. (2008) Enzyme improvement in the absence 
of structural knowledge: a novel statistical approach. ISME J. 2, 171 -179 
39 Wang, C. J., Laurieri, N., Abuhammad, A., Lowe, E., Westwood, I., Ryan,  A. and Sim, E. (2010) 
Role of Tyrosine 131 in the active site of paAzoR1, an azoreductase with specificity for the 
inflammatory bowel disease pro -drug balsalazide. Acta Crystallogr F. 66, 2-7 
40 Chen, H., Xu, H., Kweon, O., Chen, S. and Cerniglia, C. E. ( 2008) Functional role of Trp -105 of 
Enterococcus faecalis  azoreductase (AzoA) as resolved by structural and mutational analysis. 
Microbiology. 154, 2659 -2667  
41 Green, L. K., La Flamme, A. C. and Ackerley, D. F. (2014) Pseudomonas aeruginosa  MdaB and 
WrbA are water -soluble two -electron quinone oxidoreductases with the potential to defend against 
oxidative stress. J Microbiol. 52, 771 -777 
42 Race, P. R., Lovering, A. L., Green, R. M., Ossor, A., White, S. A., Searle, P. F., Wrighton, C. J. 
and Hyde, E. I. (2 005) Structural and mechanistic studies of Escherichia coli  nitroreductase with the 
antibiotic nitrofurazone. Reversed binding orientations in different redox states of the enzyme. J Biol 
Chem. 280, 13256 -13264  
43 Green, L. K., Syddall, S. P., Carlin, K. M., Bell, G. D., Guise, C. P., Mowday, A. M., Hay, M. P., 
Smaill, J. B., Patterson, A. V. and Ackerley, D. F. (2013) Pseudomonas aeruginosa  NfsB and nitro -CBI-
DEI--a promising enzyme/prodrug combination for gene directed enzyme prodrug therapy. Mol 
Cancer. 12, 58 
44 McNicholas, S., Potterton, E., Wilson, K. S. and Noble, M. E. M. (2011) Presenting your 
structures: the CCP4mg molecular -graphic s software. Acta Crystallogr D. 67, 386 -394 
45 Winsor, G. L., Lam, D. K., Fleming, L., Lo, R., Whiteside, M. D., Yu, N. Y., Hancock, R. E. and 
Brinkman, F. S. (2011) Pseudomonas Genome Database: improved comparative analysis and 
population genomics capabil ity for Pseudomonas genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, D596 -600 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1  
  
 
Figure 2  
 
Figure 3
 
Figure 4  
 
Figure 5  
  
Figure 6  
 
Figure 7  
 
Figure 8  
 
 
 
 
