Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology    
All Rights Reserved Euresian Publication © 2012 eIS SN 2249 0256  
Available Online at: www.environmentaljournal.org 
Volume 2, Issue 2: 1-18       
   
 
Open Access                                                                                                                                              Review Article  
1 
Mathur et al. Review of the Mutagenicity of Textile Dye Products 
 
Nupur Mathur 1*, Pradeep Bhatnagar 2, Pratibha Sharma 1 
 
1Depatrment of Zoology, University of Rajasthan, Jaip ur 302004, Rajasthan, India 
2International College for Girls, Mansarovar, Jaipur 302020, Rajasthan, India  
 
Corresponding author: nupurmathur123@rediffmail.com  
Abstract: 
A review of the literature on the mutagenicity of t extile dye products is presented in this article. T his review 
discusses genetic hazards associated with the produ ction and use of textile dyes throughout the world.  
Mutagenicity of azo and non azo dyes has been consi dered due to extensive recent data on the carcinoge nicity 
and mutagenicity of this group of dyes. In addition , a section on Salmonella  mutagenicity bioassay has been 
included. The data discussed mainly concerns the ac tivities of these dyes in short-term tests for muta genicity 
whilst reference only is made to animal carcinogeni city and non-specific toxicity. Environmental impac t of these 
dyes has been assessed and an attempt has been made  to evaluate the data with respect to correlation w ith 
tumour-inducing ability and to cause cancer. 
 
Keywords: Mutagenicity, Textile dye products, Textile dyes, Salmonella  Mutagenicity Test  
 
1.0 Introduction: 
Dyes comprise one of the major groups of chemicals 
besides fertilizers, pharmaceuticals and 
petrochemicals. During ancient times, people used 
dyes from natural resources like tesu flowers, to 
make their clothes bright and colorful. Likewise, 
indigo, logwood, madder, etc. are natural dyes 
originating from plants; while Tyrian purple, kermes , 
cochineal etc. are natural dyes of animal origin. S uch 
dyes were almost biodegradable, therefore were not 
hazardous. However, these dyes are very expensive 
and require a lot of labor in their manufacture and  
use. Therefore, use of preferably cheaper and easil y 
available sources, such as chemicals, as dyes, began .  
Perkin was the pioneer in producing man made 
organic dye, mauve, as early as 1856. The first 
synthetic organic dye was produced in 1871 when 
Woulfe prepared picric acid by treating the natural 
dye, indigo with nitric acid. Since then several new  
chemical dyes have been added to the ever-
increasing list of dyes. These dyes, pigments and 
colors form around 27% of the chemical industries i n 
India. Dyes are coloring pigments that impart colour  
to the substrate and find application in variety of  
industries like textiles, leather, paper, printing i nk 
and food technology. Intermediaries are basically 
compounds that are formed during the preparation 
of a dye. Dyestuff is a broad term that includes dy es, 
intermediates and pigments. The dyestuff sector represents an important segment of the chemical 
industry having forward and backward linkages with 
a wide range of industries.  
 
In the last years, the dyestuff industry has grown 
many folds. The world’s annual production of dye 
stuffs accounts to more than 7×10 5 tones (Moosvi et 
al., 2007). Though the overall growth of dyestuffs 
industry during the last 5 years has slowed down, 
the industry is still expected to maintain a growth of 
about 2% per annum in the next decade. In India, 
the per capita consumption of dyes is 50 gms, which 
is very low as compared to a world consumption of 
425 gms, which indicates that there is a tremendous 
potential for growth of this sector in India. India 
accounts for around 5 percent of the global output. 
The dyestuffs market is expected to grow at the rate  
of 2 percent per annum during the next decade.  
 
The textile industry accounts for the largest 
consumption of dyestuffs at nearly 70 percent. 
Reactive Dyes, Vat Dyes & Azo Dyes are mainly 
required for dyeing and printing of cotton fibers. 
Disperse dyes constitute the largest market with 
about 21% share followed by direct dyes and 
reactive dyes with 16% and 11% respectively. Textil e 
dyes are generally classified either in accordance 
with their chemical constitution or their applicati on 
to textile fibers and other coloring applications. T he Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
2 
Mathur et al. chemical constitution is shown by a Colour Index (C I) 
number. CI number determines properties of dyes 
such as suitability for dyeing a specific substrate and 
the fastness properties of dyed goods. Classificati on 
based on chemical composition is useful to chemists  
and manufacturers of dyestuffs while application or  
usage based classification is of vital importance to  
the dyers. Dyes are derived synthetically from raw 
materials like hydrocarbons, benzene, toluene, 
naphthalene and anthracene using coal tar obtained 
from distillation of coal. Dyes are retained in 
substrates by physical absorption, metal complex 
formation or by the formulation of covalent 
chemical bonds. Dyes obtain their colour due to 
electronic transitions between various molecular 
orbital. The intensity of the colour is determined by 
the probability of these transitions.  
 
In the past few years, performance of the dyestuff 
industry has been dismal. The ban on application of  
Azo dyes by Germany and other European countries 
had an adverse impact on the dyestuff exports. 
Besides the dye stuff industry has increasingly 
experienced pressure from the Sino-Chem army in 
the international markets. The problems of the 
industry were further compounded by cheap 
imports and recession in the textile sector. The 
industry has also not kept pace with the 
developments in the west. Lastly during the last 
decade, environmental issues associated with 
dyestuff production and application have grown 
significantly and are indisputably among the major 
driving forces affecting the textile dye industry 
today. The main environmental issues related to the  
dyestuff industry can be grouped into air, water, 
land use, health and safety, and waste management 
issues. It is generally assumed that substances whic h 
are used to produce textiles are thoroughly tested 
regarding their health consequences. However in 
recent years various researchers have identified 
mutagenic effects of textile samples and waste 
water of the textile industry (Knasmüller  et al ., 1993, 
Deutsches et al ., 1994 and Jäger, 1998).Further 
investigations showed that the dyes used for textile  
finishing are mainly responsible for the mutagenic 
effects observed. Besides, effluent discharge from 
textile and dyestuff industries to neighbouring water  
bodies and wastewater treatment systems is 
currently causing significant health concerns to 
environmental regulatory agencies. Colour removal, 
in particular, has recently become of major scienti fic 
interest, as indicated by the multitude of related research reports on this issue (Banat  et al ., 1996, 
Jäger et al ., 2004 and Schneider et al ., 2004). 
  
1.1 Previous References to the Literature:   
A numbers of reviews concerning the genotoxicity of 
natural and synthetics dyes, especially those used in 
food, drug, cosmetics and textile, have been 
published (Combes and Haveland-Smith, 1982,). 
Recently, Puvneshwari et al.  (2006) have reviewed 
the toxicity assessment of azo dyes. Chung (2006) 
has discussed the mutagenicity of benzidine, 
benzidine analogues, and benzidine-based dyes. 
Industrial and environmental aspects have been 
debated by Anliker (1977) and Houk (1992). 
Epidemiologic evidence of cancer risk in textile 
industry workers was reviewed by Mastrangelo 
(2002). 
 
1.2 Mutagenicity of Benzidine, Benzidine 
Analogues, and Benzidine-Based Dyes: 
Many of the dyes used to color textiles; drugs, 
cosmetics, paper and food are azo dyes. Benzidine 
and its congeners are dye intermediates, i.e., 
precursors of dyes. A common method used to 
prepare benzidine and congeners involves the 
reduction of nitro benzenes followed by the acid 
catalyzed intra molecular rearrangement of the 
resulting hydrazobenzenes. Subsequently, the dyes 
are produced by the diazotization of the amino 
groups on the benzidines and azo coupling to 
reactive aromatic ring systems (other dye 
intermediates). Metallizing of dyes sometimes is 
carried out to improve the stability of the azo 
groups; however, the mechanism by which the 
added metal chelates with the dye is not always wel l 
understood. Azo-dyes account for the largest 
proportion of all synthetic dyes in terms of number  
and amount of production. They include approx. 70 
% of all organic dyes, which are currently on the 
market and are manufactured mainly in China, India,  
Korea, Taiwan, and Argentina.  
 
Possible genotoxic effects of textile dyes are most 
often discussed with respect to selected azo dyes 
(Platzek, 1996). Some of these dyes, which contain 
an azo group (-N=N-), are able to split off genotoxic  
and carcinogenic amines (e.g. Acid Red 85, which 
releases benzidine). An azo compound if ingested 
orally can be reduced by anaerobic intestinal micro  
flora and possibly by mammalian azo reductases in 
the intestinal wall or in the liver, to free aromat ic 
amines. Reduction of orally ingested azo compounds Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
3 
Mathur et al. to aromatic amines occurs in a wide variety of 
mammalian species, including mice (Tsuda et al., 
2001), Rhesus monkeys (Rhinde and Troll, 1975) and 
humans (Watabe et al., 1980). Since many aromatic 
amines are known mutagens, a complete evaluation 
of the safety of these dyes in the human 
environment must include an evaluation of their 
genotoxicity or mutagenicity.  The use of these dyes 
has been drastically reduced in Europe due to 
national regulations (e.g. by the German Food and 
Commodities Act; similar regulations exist in the 
Netherlands and France) and textile quality labels 
but may still be a problem in non-European 
countries (Claxton  et al.,  2001). Azo dyes are 
believed to posses carcinogenic properties. Most 
carcinogenic benzidine analogues are also 
mutagenic, and their metabolism to electrophiles 
that interact with DNA, leading to mutations, plays a 
central role in their carcinogenesis. Mutagenicity o f 
many benzidine congeners and their N-acetylated 
and N, N’- diacetylated derivatives in different strains 
of Salmonella typhiimurium  has been reported.  
Certain azo compounds are known to be mutagenic 
in bacterial tests (Venitt & Bushell, 1976 and Kaur , 
1993a) . Many of these dyes have been tested for 
mutagenicity using Salmonella  assay (Garner and 
Nutman, 1977,Venturini and Tamaro, 1979, Prival 
and Mitchell, 1982, Wuebbles and Felton 1985 and 
Schneider et al ., 2004). Kaur (1993a and 1993b) 
screened textile azo dyes for mutagenicity with 
Ames/ Salmonella  assay with and without metabolic 
activation. 
 
Discussion of genotoxic substances on textiles in 
recent years focused on azo dyes splitting off 
carcinogenic amines. And indeed, recent 
investigations state that these dyes can still be fo und 
on fabric (Yassini et al., 1997, Danish EPA, 1998 and 
Zeilmaker et al., 2000). The participating TFCs 
banned these hazardous azo dyes already years ago 
from their production process. But these azo dyes 
may be a problem especially with textile products 
imported to Europe (Lokhande and Naik, 1996).  
Gregory (1981) evaluated the mutagenic activity of a 
series of diazo compounds derived from benzidine 
and its congener’s o-tolidine, o-dianisidine and 3, 3'-
dichlorobenzidine as well as several monoazo 
compounds. All of the benzidine and o-tolidine dyes  
tested were clearly mutagenic. The o-dianisidine 
dyes except for Direct Blue 218 were also mutagenic.  
Direct Blue 218 is a copper complex of the 
mutagenic o-dianisidine dye Direct Blue 15. Pigment 
Yellow 12, which is derived from 3, 3’-dichlorobenzidine, could not be detected as 
mutagenic, presumably because of its lack of 
solubility in the test reaction mixture. Of the 
monoazo dyes tested, methyl orange was clearly 
mutagenic, while C.I. Acid Red 26 and Acid Dye (C.I.  
16155; often referred to as Ponceau 3R) had 
marginal to weak mutagenic activity.  
 
Prival and Mitchell (1982) reported that all solubl e 
dyes tested, with the exception of Direct Blue 218 
(copper chelated), produced frame shift mutations i n 
Salmonella  when tested under conditions that 
fostered reduction of the azo bonds. Only Direct 
Black 38 and Direct Blue 2 were found to be 
mutagenic without activation, possibly due to the 
presence of mutagenic impurities in these dye 
preparations. Such information supports the results  
of metabolism studies relative to the mechanisms of  
genotoxic action, and increases confidence in 
predicting the carcinogenicity of these chemicals. In  
a number of instances, however, the mutagenic 
responses following reduction of the dye and 
subsequent oxidative metabolism of the reduced 
products was greater than that obtained following 
similar treatment of the parent congener amine 
(Prival  et al ., 1984). This suggests that the 
chromophore was also mutagenic. Prival and 
Mitchell (1982) further documented that although 
benzidine (Bz), 4-aminobiphenyl (ABP), 3,3'-
dichlorobenzidine HCl (DCBz), 3,3'-
dimethylbenzidine (DMBz), 3,3'-dimethoxybenzidine 
(DMOBz) and the benzidine congener-based dye 
trypan blue (TB) produce primarily frame shift 
mutations in Salmonella typhimurium,  the base-
substitution strain TA100 also responds to these 
compounds when S9 is present. Performing DNA 
sequence analysis, other investigators have shown 
that ABP induces frame shift, base-pair and complex  
mutations. Mutagenicity studies provided evidence 
that the benzidine- and benzidine congener-derived 
dyes require reductive metabolism before they are 
mutagenic (Reid et al ., 1984).  
 
A series of direct dyes based on two non-mutagenic 
benzidine analogs, 2, 2′-dimethyl-5,5′-
dipropoxybenzidine and 3,3′-dipropoxybenzidine, 
were evaluated for mutagenic activity in Salmonella 
typhimurium  strains TA98 and TA100 by Bae (2006). 
While some toxicity was seen with some dyes at high 
doses, all of the dyes examined were judged non-
mutagenic with and without metabolic activation in 
the standard Salmonella  plate-incorporation assay. 
The results in the standard test were consistent wi th Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
4 
Mathur et al. the properties of the diamines themselves. However,  
only one of the dyes was non-mutagenic when a 
reductive-metabolism pre-incubation assay was 
used. The results of this study suggest that although 
benzidine analogs are potential replacements for 
benzidine, there is a need to understand which 
mutagenic products are produced when reductive 
metabolism is present. There is also a need to know  
whether or not metal complexes of these dyes are 
mutagenic. Such information will allow the 
development of new non-mutagenic azo dyes 
 
Benzidine and 12 related aromatic amines have been 
studied by Sinsheimer (1992) for the effects of 
substituents groups and π orbital conjugation on 
their genotoxicity as measured by their mutagenicity 
in vitro with Salmonella  and by chromosomal 
aberrations (CA) in vivo in the bone-marrow cells o f 
mice. The in vitro studies indicated increases in 
mutagenicity with increases in the electron 
withdrawing ability of para'  substituents. 
Mutagenicity also increases with increased 
conjugation as shown by the degree of planarity of 
the biphenyl compounds and by comparing the 
mutagenecities of biphenyl amines to stilbenes as 
well as to ethylene bridged diphenyl compounds. 
The relative in vitro mutagenicity results were not 
predictive of relative in vivo CA results. The 3 mo st 
genotoxic compounds in vivo were the conjugated 
amines without substituents in the para'  position. 
These in vivo results indicate increased genotoxicit y 
for benzidine analogs without substitution in the 
para'  position. 
 
Bakshi  and Sharma (2003) evaluated mutagenicity 
for 14 commercial textile dyes used extensively in 
the northern part of India using both the Ames 
Salmonella typhimurium  microsome reversion test 
as well as the recombination-repair ( rec )-assay. The 
Ames test revealed that 57.14% of dyes were 
mutagenic and acting directly. The rec-assay 
detected 50% of dyes to be mutagenic; of these, 
71.43% were direct acting, whereas 28.57% required 
Aroclor-induced exogenous metabolic activation. 
Used together, the two tests detected 78.57% of the 
dyes to be mutagenic, and a 50% correlation was 
found between these two tests. Groupwise, three 
out of four azo dyes and all five anthraquinone dye s 
were found to be mutagenic by the Ames assay; the 
rec-assay detected methine/polymethine (1 out of 
3), an oxazine, and a triphenylmethane dye to be 
mutagenic, besides the azo (1 out of 4) and the 
anthraquinone (3 out of 5) dyes. The structure-activity analysis attributed the mutagenicity of dy es 
to the structural alerts such as phenylenediamine, 
amino and nitro- groups, methylation, CH=CH, and 
chloro groups; whereas deamination, bulkier groups, 
and sulfonation may be responsible for diminishing 
mutagenicity.  
 
Wollin and Gorlitz (2004) studied the genotoxic 
activity of ten selected commercial textile dyestuf fs, 
which are made up of mixtures of azo dyes and azo 
metal complex dyes as well as two anthraquinone 
dyestuffs. Salmonella  mutagenicity assay and 
cultured human keratinocytes (HaCaT cell line) were  
used In the S. typhimurium  strain TA98, with and 
without S9, eight often dyestuffs investigated, and in 
strain TA 100, with and without S9, six often dyes 
caused frame shift mutations and base-pair 
substitutions in a dose-related manner. All dyes, 
including those negative in the Salmonella  
mutagenicity assay, induced clastogenic effects in 
the in vitro micronucleus (MN) test in HaCaT cells as 
direct-acting mutagens cells. In the single cell 
gel/comet assay, all ten dyestuffs investigated 
caused DNA damage in HaCaT keratinocytes. 
 
Chung (2006) reviewed the mutagenicity of 
benzidine analogues (including benzidine-based 
dyes), with a primary emphasis on evaluating results  
of the Salmonella /microsome mutagenicity assay. 
Many of these amines were found to be mutagenic 
in tester strains TA98 and TA100 but require 
exogenous mammalian activation (S9) for activity. A 
few amines with halogen or nitro-groups in the 
structure were reported to be direct-acting 
mutagens. The addition of a sulfonic acid moiety to 
the molecule of benzidine reduced the mutagenicity 
of benzidine; whereas, methoxy, chloro, or methyl 
group additions did not. Complexation with a metal 
ion also decreased the mutagenicity. A substitution 
of an alkyl group on the ortho  position next to an 
amine group also influenced the mutagenicity.  
 
1.3 Mutagenicity of other Non Azo Textile 
Dyes:  
Whereas hazards resulting from azo textile dyes, 
which give rise to carcinogenic amines, are 
recognized and controlled, this is not the case for 
textile dyes in general. Because of the wide spread 
use and potential carcinogenicity of certain dyes, 
there has been a growing interest in assessing the 
hazards associated with dyes available in local 
markets. Most of such dyes, being openly sold in the  Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
5 
Mathur et al. markets have no information regarding their 
chemical nature, purity or possible mutagenicity. 
Unlimited and uncontrolled use of such dyes can 
lead to grave consequences in terms of human 
health and ecological balance. 
  
In a modified Ames test with fabric tested in situ 
(“Ames spot test”), 9.2% of 196 tested textile 
samples showed mutagenic effects in TA98 and/or 
TA100 (Knasmüller et al., 1993). It was concluded 
that mutagenic effects of poorly investigated textil e 
dyes pose a problem. Moawad (2003) evaluated 
toxicity of eight textile dyes using two bioassays 
namely: Ames test and seed germination test. The 
eight-textile dyes and Eithidium bromide dye (as 
positive control) were tested with five his  
Salmonella typhimurium  strains: TA 100; TA 98; TA 
1535; TA 1537; TA 1538. Most of the dyes were 
found to be mutagenic for the test strains used in 
this study. The high concentrations of dye eliminate d 
microbial colonies due to the high frequency of 
mutation causing lethal effect on the cells. 
Mutagenic Activity of Some Textile Dyes in Different  
Test Systems has been discussed by Przybojewska 
(1998). 
 
Textile dyes used within the European Union (EU) 
were examined for available published and 
unpublished mutagenicity data (EC, European 
Commission, 2001). Fifty-three dye products that 
had so far not been investigated for mutagenicity 
were tested in the bacterial reverse mutation assay  
with Salmonella typhimurium  (Ames test) according 
to a modification of the OECD 471 guidelines 
(instead of five strains, only TA98 and/or TA100 
were used with and without metabolic activation 
(S9-mix)). About 28% (15 out of 53) of the dye 
samples were positive in the Ames test. Fifteen 
samples showed positive results with TA98, two 
were positive in TA100. The mutagenicity of nine 
Ames-positive textile dye products was further 
investigated in the mouse lymphoma assay (MLA) 
(OECD 476). Sixty-seven percent (6 out of 9) induce d 
genotoxic effects in the MLA. The results confirmed 
previous findings that dye products are marketed 
that are not sufficiently tested and that show 
mutagenic effects in in-vitro tests. The evaluation 
performed indicates that dyes with potential 
mutagenic effects are in use in the textile finishin g 
industry. 
 
Currently, there are several thousand textile dyes 
from various chemical classes in use in Europe. 281  textile dye products in use at nine textile finishi ng 
companies from eight European countries were 
assessed for potential mutagenic properties by 
Schneider (2004). Most of them belonged to the so-
called existing substances, which have been placed 
on the European market before an effective 
chemical regulation has been installed in 1983. 
Toxicological data are often scarce for these 
substances. Four dye stuffs contained in seven dye 
products in use at the textile finishing companies 
were judged to be mutagenic, based on published 
data from the literature. Mutagenicity testing using 
Salmonella typhimurium , strains TA98 and TA100, 
revealed positive results for about 28% (15 out of 
53) of the dye products investigated. Upon further 
testing with the mouse lymphoma assay (L5178Y/TK 
(+/-)) 67% (6 out of 9) of Ames-positive dyes prove d 
to be mutagenic in this mammalian cell test. All dat a 
sources combined led to an overall assessment of 14  
dye products out of 281 being mutagenic. For 16 
there is a suspicion of mutagenicity due to positiv e 
responses in one test but 71 of the dye products ar e 
without any data on mutagenicity.  
 
The genotoxicity of indigo naturalis was assessed 
recently using micronucleus test by Dominici (2010).  
This study estimated the genotoxicity of water and 
DMSO solutions of indigo naturalis (prepared from 
Indigofera tinctoria leaves) using the cytokinesis-
blocked micronucleus (CBMN) assay in the human 
metabolically active HepG2 cell line. The cytotoxic  
effects of indigo solutions were first assessed by 
propidium iodide and fluorescein-diacetate 
simultaneous staining. The results of this study 
indicated that indigo naturalis exhibits neither 
cytotoxicity, nor genotoxicity for all concentration s 
tested, which may justify excluding indigofera and it s 
components from the list of carcinogenic agents. 
Rannug (1992) tested Extracts of pure cotton and 
jeans fabrics for mutagenicity in Salmonella 
typhimurium  strains TA98 and TA100. The vat dye 
indigo, technical grade as well as 98% and greater 
than 99.5% pure, was also tested for mutagenicity. 
The mutagenicity of the extracts was associated with  
the cotton denim and non dyed cotton gave only 
marginal effects. The mutagenicity of the indigo 
dyed fabrics was dependent on type and treatment 
of the fabrics. Extracts of both bleached and non 
bleached jeans gave mutagenic effects on TA98 +/- 
S9 and TA100 +/- S9. The greatest effects were seen 
in the presence of S9. Bleaching gave an additional 
increase in the mutagenicity in the absence of S9. 
Normal washing of the fabrics after bleaching Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
6 
Mathur et al. reduced the mutagenicity. Synthetic indigo of 
technical grade or 98% pure showed mutagenic 
effects, especially on TA98 + S9. Considering the 
amount of indigo in the extracts and its low 
mutagenicity, the genotoxicity of jeans extracts must  
be caused by other unknown components. Presence 
of impurities in many of the commercially available  
dyes has also been reported to contribute to the 
mutagenicity of these dyes (Prival and Mitchell, 
1984).  
 
Most of the dyes, presently being used in textile 
industry are known only by their trade name like 
Golden Top, Grey, etc. while their chemical nature,  
constituents, purity and possible biological hazard s 
are not known. Data on mutagenicity are virtually 
absent for many of such dyes. A number of dyes 
from local markets of India tested for their 
mutagenicity, using strains of Salmonella 
typhimurium have been reported to be mutagenic 
(Mathur et al ., 2005a, Mathur et al ., 2005b, Mathur 
and Bhatnagar, 2005a and Mathur and Bhatnagar,  
2007b).  
 
1.4 Mutagenicity bioassay: The Salmonella  
Mutagenicity Test:  
Micro-organisms have demonstrated several 
attributes that make them attractive for use in qui ck 
screening of effluents and chemicals for toxicity. 
More than 200 short-term tests utilizing micro-
organisms, insects, plants and animals, have been 
developed over the last 20-25 years, to aid in the 
identification of agents that pose genetic hazard to 
humans (Waters et al., 1988). The use of bioassays is 
an essential part of the hazard assessment and 
control procedures of toxic chemicals (Auletta et al., 
1993 and Kirkland, 1993). 
 
Developed by B.N. Ames and co-workers in early 
1970’s (Ames et al., 1973 and 1975) the Salmonella  
assay has been used worldwide for nearly 4 decades,  
to evaluate the mutagenicity of pure chemicals and 
complex environmental mixtures. The test detects a 
wide variety of mutagens, including those activated 
by mammalian liver enzymes. In assays on more 
than 300 chemicals, the histidine requiring 
Salmonella  tester strains responded positively to 
90% of the known carcinogens (Ames et al., 1973, 
Ashby and Tennant, 1988 and Ashby et al., 1989). 
The genetic damage expressed by the Salmonella  
assay represents a class of DNA damage called gene 
or point mutation. The Salmonella /microsome assay is based on the premises that bacterial assay 
systems provide an efficient way to detect agents, 
which could interact with DNA and cause mutations. 
Such agents would probably also be capable of 
causing mutations in other species, including man.  
Secondly, there is an association between 
mutagenicity and carcinogenicity, based on the 
empirical observation that many mutagens detected 
in bacterial systems have been shown to be 
carcinogens. 
 
The Ames test has several advantages over the use 
of mammals for testing compounds. Mutagenicity 
assays are relatively cost effective, only a few da ys 
are required for testing a compound and the test is 
performed with microgram quantities of the 
material. Such assays are performed on 
approximately 100 million organisms rather than on 
a limited number of animals. Thus the Ames test is 
used widely, which accounts for its validity and an  
extensive database of tested chemicals (Kier et al., 
1986, Ashby and Tennant, 1988 and Ashby et al., 
1991). Both Kier et al.  (1986) and Auletta and Ashby 
(1988) recommend use of Salmonella  assay in any 
screening program, to set priorities for further 
testing by identification of potentially mutagenic an d 
carcinogenic agents.  For all these reasons, the 
Salmonella  assay is also included in the Office of 
Pesticide Programs (OPP) and Office of Toxic 
Substances (OTS) battery (Dearfield et al., 1991, 
Auletta et al., 1993 and Kirkland, 1993).  
 
The Salmonella  or histidine reversion assay, is based 
on the use of several selected, modified strains of  
Salmonella typhimurium  that revert from histidine 
dependence (auxotrophy) to histidine independence 
(prototrophy) at an increased frequency or rate, in  
presence of a mutagen. The test uses a number of 
Salmonella  strains with pre-existing mutations that 
leave the bacteria unable to synthesize the require d 
amino acid, histidine, and thereby unable to grow 
and form colonies in its absence. New mutations at 
the site of these pre-existing mutations or nearby i n 
the gene can however, restore the gene function 
and allow the cells to synthesize histidine. The ne wly 
mutated cells can grow in the absence of histidine 
and form colonies. For this reason, the test is oft en 
referred to as a reversion assay. Since innumerable  
dyes are available in local markets, chemical analy sis 
of each and every dye is not possible because of th e 
time and cost involved. Recent evidence showed 
that textile dye stuffs caused frame shift mutation  in 
Salmonella mutagenicity assay (Wollin and Gorlitz, Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
7 
Mathur et al. 2004). Base-level testing of textile dye products 
requires two in vitro  assays, a bacterial test (usually 
reverse mutations in S. typhimurium ) and a 
mammalian cell genotoxicity test (MCGT) (Table 1). I f 
available , in vivo  results are regarded as superior to 
in vitro  tests (Schneider et al.,  2004).  
 
Table 1: Mutagenicity assessment criteria for texti le 
dye products (Schneider et al., 2004) 
 
Category  Definition  
Not mutagenic  Base -level requirements fulfilled, 
bacterial test and/or MCGT 
negative 
Not 
mutagenic/ 
incomplete Base -le vel requirements not 
fulfilled, available test(usually 
bacterial test) negative 
One test 
positive 
 One test positive, without 
refutation by other tests (e.g. the 
bacterial test is the only test 
available and leads to positive 
results), includes also some cases 
with controversial data 
Mutagenic  
 Base -level requirements fulfilled, 
both tests or MCGT positive 
(other data, e.g . in vivo  tests for 
clastogenicity or 32 P post 
labeling, are also considered, if 
available) 
Not tested  
 Mutagenicity data on the dye 
product or on components are 
lacking 
No data  
 
 No data on identity or 
genotoxicity provided by the 
producer, other kind of data also 
lacking 
 
Evidence indicates that there is of the order of 
ninety percent correlation between bacterial 
mutagenicity and long-term animal experiments 
(McCann et al., 1975). For this reason compounds 
that are bacterial mutagens, but have not been 
tested in long-term animal carcinogenicity 
experiments, are viewed with suspicion as being of 
potential hazard. Results from genetic bioassays ar e 
relevant to human health because the toxicological 
target is DNA, which exists in all cellular life for ms. 
Thus it can be extrapolated that compounds shown 
to be reactive with DNA in one species have the 
potential to produce similar effects in other speci es.  
In general, perturbations of genetic material are deleterious to the organisms and can lead to severe 
and irreversible health consequences.        
   
The Ames test has several advantages over the use 
of mammals for testing compounds. Mutagenicity 
assays are relatively cost effective, only a few da ys 
are required for testing a compound and the test is 
performed with microgram quantities of the 
material. Such assays are performed on 
approximately 100 million organisms rather than on 
a limited number of animals. Much of the published 
textile dye products mutagenicity/genotoxicity 
studies employ Salmonella  mutagenicity test with 
strains TA98 and/or TA100 with and/or without 
metabolic activation. Testing of chemicals for 
mutagenicity in Salmonella typhimurium  is based on 
the knowledge that a substance that is mutagenic in 
the bacterium is likely to be a carcinogen in 
laboratory animals, and thus, by extension, present  a 
risk of cancer to humans. Although about three-
fourths of chemicals that are positive in the 
Salmonella  test are found to be rodent carcinogens, 
not all substances that cause cancer in laboratory 
animals are mutagenic in this assay. However, the 
ease, rapidity (results in 3-4 weeks) and low cost of 
the test make it an important tool for screening 
substances for potential carcinogenicity. 
 
Several strains of the Salmonella typhimurium  
bacterium may be used for testing. Each is 
genetically different, so using several strains in a test 
increases the opportunity of detecting a mutagenic 
chemical. The most frequently used strains are TA97 , 
TA98, TA100, TA102, TA104, TA1535, TA1537, and 
TA1538. All strains of Salmonella typhimurium  used 
for mutagenicity testing carry a defective (mutant) 
gene that prevents them from synthesizing the 
essential amino acid histidine from the ingredients in 
standard bacterial culture medium. Therefore, these  
"tester" strains can only survive and grow on 
medium that contains excess histidine. However, in 
the presence of a mutagenic chemical, the defective 
histidine gene may be mutated back to the 
functional state, allowing the bacterium to grow on 
standard medium that does not contain 
supplemental histidine. These mutations, which lead  
to a regaining of normal activity or function, are 
called "back" or "reverse" mutations and the proces s 
is referred to as "reversion." The mutant colonies,  
which can make histidine, are called "revertants." 
(There are other mutagenicity assays using other 
cell-types that measure "forward" mutations, that i s, Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
8 
Mathur et al. mutations that alter a functional gene in a way that  
causes a loss, rather than a gain, of function.) . 
 
 In the Salmonella  assay, a test tube containing a 
suspension of one strain of Salmonella typhimurium  
plus S9 mix or plain buffer without S9, is incubate d 
for 20 minutes at 37º C with the test chemical. 
Control cultures, with all the same ingredients 
except the test chemical, are also incubated. In 
addition, positive control cultures are also prepar ed; 
these contain the particular bacterial tester strai n 
under investigation, the various culture ingredients,  
and a known potent mutagen. After 20 minutes, 
agar is added to the cultures and the contents of th e 
tubes are thoroughly mixed and poured onto the 
surface of petri dishes containing standard bacteria l 
culture medium. The plates are incubated, and 
bacterial colonies that do not require an excess of  
supplemental histidine appear and grow. These 
colonies are comprised of Salmonella  that have 
undergone reverse mutation to restore function of 
the histidine-manufacturing gene. The number of 
colonies is counted after 2 days (Maron and Ames, 
1983). Spontaneous mutations (those that occur by 
chance, not by chemical treatment) will appear as 
colonies on the control petri dishes. If the test 
chemical was mutagenic to any particular strain of 
bacterium, the number of histidine-independent 
colonies arising on those plates will be significantl y 
greater than the corresponding control plates for 
that strain of Salmonella . The positive control plates 
are also counted, and the number of mutant 
colonies appearing on them must be significantly 
increased over the spontaneous control number for 
the test to be considered valid. Failure of the 
positive control chemical to induce mutation is 
reason to discard the experiment. 
 
Several doses (at least 5) of each test chemical an d 
multiple strains of Salmonella typhimurium  are used 
in each experiment. In addition, cultures are set u p 
with and without added S9 liver enzymes at varying 
concentrations. Therefore, a variety of culture 
conditions are employed to maximize the 
opportunity to detect a mutagenic chemical. In 
analyzing the data, the pattern and the strength of 
the mutant response are taken into account in 
determining the mutagenicity of a chemical. All 
observed responses are verified in repeat tests. If  no 
increase in mutant colonies is seen after testing 
several strains under several different culture 
conditions, the test chemical is considered to be n on 
mutagenic in the Salmonella  test. The most common method of evaluation of data from the Salmonella  
assay is the “two fold rule” according to which 
doubling of spontaneous reversion rate at one or 
two test chemical concentrations constitutes a 
positive response (Mortelmans and Zeiger, 2000). 
This rule specifies that if tests compound doubles or 
more than doubles, the mean spontaneous mutation 
frequency obtained on the day of testing, then the 
compound is considered significantly mutagenic.  
 
Using this procedure the following criteria were used  
to interpret results: 
 
 Positive: A compound is considered a 
mutagen if it produces a reproducible, dose-
related increase in the number of revertant 
colonies in one or more strains of Salmonella 
typhimurium . A compound is considered a weak 
mutagen if it produces a reproducible dose-
related increase in the number of revertant 
colonies in one or more strains but the number 
of revertants is not double the background 
number of colonies.   
 Negative:  A compound is considered a non-
mutagen if no dose-related increase in the 
number of revertant colonies is observed in at 
least two independent experiments.  
 Inconclusive: If a compound cannot be 
identified clearly as a mutagen or a non-
mutagen, the results are classified as 
inconclusive (e.g. if there is one elevated count). 
 
For this analysis the dose related increases in the  
number of revertant colonies were observed for the 
test compounds and Mutagenicity ratios are 
calculated. Mutagenicity ratio is the ratio of avera ge 
induced revertants on test plates (spontaneous 
revertants plus induced revertants) to average 
spontaneous revertants on negative control plates 
(spontaneous revertants). Mutagenicity ratio of 2.0  
or more is regarded as a significant indication of 
mutagenicity. Many chemicals are not mutagenic (or 
carcinogenic) in their native forms, but they are 
converted into mutagenic substances by metabolism 
in the liver. Since the Salmonella  bacterium does not 
have the same metabolic capabilities as mammals, 
some test protocols utilize extracts of rat or hams ter 
liver enzymes (S9) to promote metabolic conversion 
of the test chemical. This permits the investigator to 
determine if a chemical must be metabolized to 
express mutagenic activity. Some mutagenic 
chemicals are active with and without metabolism, 
while others are active only under one condition or  Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
9 
Mathur et al. the other. Ames test can thus easily and quickly 
assess mutagenic potential of these dyes. Besides 
the genotoxicity of various dyes can also be 
compared using the Ames test.  Thus, this assay 
should be used as a regular monitoring tool for 
assessing the dyes. 
 
1.5 Environmental Impact: 
Dyes are introduced into the environment through 
industrial effluents from food, drug, cosmetic, text ile 
and dyestuff factories. The effluents from dyeing an d 
textile industries contain chemicals with intense 
colors and the release of these effluents to receiv ing 
streams may be objectionable for various aesthetic 
reasons. Excess salts used in the dyeing process, to  
increase fixation of reactive dyes to fibers, as we ll as 
heavy metal components of some dye waste waters, 
may adversely affect the aquatic biota of the 
receiving streams (Wells et al ., 1994 and Law, 1995). 
A number of dyes and chemicals used by these 
textile industries are not degradable. Further, thes e 
colored dye wastes contain compounds that are 
difficult to treat biologically due to their resist ance 
against biodegradation (Ogawa et al., 1981, Seshdari 
et al., 1994 and Suzuki et al., 2001). These dyestuffs 
are highly structured polymers and are very difficul t 
to decompose biologically (Neppolian et al., 1999). 
They are thus, a potent hazard to the natural sourc es 
like soil, water, flora, fauna, livestock and human  
population. Since large quantities of dyes are used,  
such pollution due to dyes may occur on a significan t 
scale. 
 
Considerable amounts of dyes have been noticed in 
these textile wastewaters, due to their incomplete 
use and washing operations. It is stable and fast, 
difficult to degrade, toxic, rendering the water unf it 
for its intended use. Further, the color removal is  
also not adequate by the conventional chemical and 
biological treatment. Such dyestuffs can reach the 
aquatic environment, primarily dissolved or 
suspended in water, since the conventional 
treatment of wastewaters from textile mills and 
dyestuff factories are unable to remove most of the  
azo and other dyes effectively. Ecological and 
toxicological problems due to the discharge of textil e 
wastewaters, in natural water bodies, have been one  
of the most important water pollution problems 
throughout the world. The most obvious impact of 
the discharge of dye colored effluent is the persist ing 
nature of the color. It is stable and fast, difficu lt to 
degrade, toxic, rendering the water unfit for its intended use. Thus, dye related industries, in 
particular, appear to produce consistently genotoxic  
effluents that have been shown by many scientists, 
to be potent, relative to other industrial discharge s. 
In the comparative potency rankings of mutagenic 
wastes, reviewed by Houk (1992), the textile and dy e 
industries generated wastes and effluents of 
moderate mutagenecities. This review further 
suggests that the genetic damage induced by the 
effluents, from this industrial category, includes 
mutations and chromosomal abnormalities. Dyes 
and heavy metals have been considered to be the 
possible source of genotoxic activity.  
 
Dyes and dyestuffs find use in a wide range of 
industries but are of primary importance to textile  
manufacturing. Wastewater from the textile industry 
can contain a variety of polluting substances 
including dyes. Increasingly, environmental 
legislation is being imposed to control the release o f 
dyes, in particular azo-based compounds, into the 
environment. Further as shown by Knasmüller et al.  
(1993) with the Ames spot test, a relevant 
proportion of dyes (9.2%), which are active in S. 
typhimurium , are leachable from textile samples. To 
verify whether dyes emitted within the discharge of 
a dye processing plant were contributing to the 
mutagenicity repeatedly found in the Cristais River,  
Sao Paulo, Brazil.  de Aragão et al.  (2005) chemically 
characterized the following mutagenic samples: the 
treated industrial effluent, raw and treated water,  
and the sludge produced by a Drinking Water 
Treatment Plant (DWTP) located approximately 6 km 
from the industrial discharge. Considering that 20% 
of the dyes used for coloring activities might be lo st 
to wastewaters and knowing that several dyes have 
mutagenic activity, it is natural that these dyes 
contributed to the mutagenic activity found in the 
Cristais River and were indirectly affecting the 
quality of the related drinking water. Wastewater 
effluents from certain textile, dyeing and finishin g 
operations exhibited a low degree of toxicity to 
freshwater cladoceran, Daphnia pulex , in acute, 
static, 48 hr testing (Wells et al., 1994). Kurde and 
Singh (1995) reported adverse effects of textile 
effluents and dyes on certain hematological 
parameters of wistar rats. The effluents of textile  
dyeing and printing industries are complex in nature,  
rich in dissolved and suspended solids, organic 
compounds, heavy metals and have high pH. These 
effluents have been known to pollute rivers 
(Srivastava et al., 1994), soil characteristics (Raj et 
al., 1997 and Nema et al., 1984)  and have toxic Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
10 
Mathur et al. effects on a number of plants (Khandelwal et al., 
1996 and Raj et al., 1997) and animals (Kundu et al , 
1997, Chhaya et al., 1997 and Smith et al., 1999).  
 
Ecological and toxicological problems due to the 
discharge of textile wastewaters, in natural water 
bodies, have been one of the most important water 
pollution problems (Chan et al., 2003). In a study on 
industrial effluents, McGeorge et al . (1985), found 
final effluents, from 4 different dye-related 
industries, to be mutagenic. In fact, of the various  
different industrial facilities sampled in this stu dy, 
the dye producing industries generated some of the 
most mutagenic wastes tested. Further, Sanchez et 
al . (1988) assessed 9 textile/dye industry 
wastewaters in their evaluation of urban discharges 
into the rivers of Greater Sao Paulo, Brazil. Resul ts 
from two microbial mutagenicity assays showed that 
of the industrial categories tested, the textile 
industries contributed the highest percentage (67%) 
of mutagenic effluents. It was speculated that the 
activity was associated with the use of mutagenic 
dyes. Chhoakar et al . (2000) characterized the 
effluents emanating from Pali, and reported high 
salinity, BOD (400-800 mg/l) and COD (900-1500 
mg/l); excessive concentration of sodium and 
carbonate ions; high alkalinity (pH 10.0-11.5); and 
low concentrations of calcium in the textile 
effluents. The total chromium and phenolic 
compounds in the effluents of Pali have been found 
to be 0.18 mg/l and 0.24 mg/l, respectively, whereas 
the mixed industrial effluents (mainly from textile s 
industries) are known to have pH range 9.0 to 10.0. 
Occurrence of magnesium ions in concentrations 
less than 21mg/l and excess of carbonate ions (as 
high as 30 mg/l) have also been observed in these 
effluents (Gupta, 1992).Khan et al . (1995) have 
reported high levels of various metals (Ni, Zn, Cd, Fe 
and Pb) in their case study on the effect of textil e 
effluents on physico-chemical characteristics of 
Amani Shah Nallah. There is still a dearth of studi es 
pertaining to possible mutagenicity of the dyes being  
used here and the textile industry effluents. 
 
1.5 Epidemiology: 
The International Agency for Research on Cancer 
(IARC) has classified various chemicals as being 
associated with cancer in humans (IARC, Suppl. 4, 
1982). Benzidine, an aromatic amine is one of them 
(Shelby, 1988 and Shelby and Zeiger, 1990). 
Experimental studies with rats, dogs and hamsters 
have shown that animals administered with BN and BN based dyes excrete potentially carcinogenic 
aromatic amines and their N-acetyled derivatives in  
their urine (Powell et al.,  1979, Boeniger, 1980 and 
Nony and Bowmann, 1980). In tests on other 
laboratory animals, two benzidine dyes, Direct Blue  
6 and Direct Black 38, have been reported to be suc h 
potent carcinogens that hepatocellular carcinomas 
and neoplastic liver nodules occurred in rats after  
only 13 weeks of exposure (Robens et al., 1980). 
Since benzidine is used as a reactant in dye 
synthesis, workers could be directly exposed to the  
carcinogen (Mirkova and Lalchev, 1990). DNA 
damage induced by textile dyes and their effluents 
have been demonstrated on  tadpoles (Rajaguru et 
al.,  2001) and fishes (Al-Sabti, 2000 and Sumathi et 
al.,  2001).The deleterious effects of many dyes have 
been studied in a wide variety of mammalian 
species, including dogs (Lynn et al., 1980), Rhesus 
monkeys (Rhinde and Troll, 1975) and humans 
(Watabe et al., 1980 and Clonfero, 1990).  
 
Textile industry has been reported to pose threat o f 
various types of occupational diseases (MacGregor 
et al .1980, Pal and Brijmohan, 1980, Kumar et al. , 
1992 and Gonzales,1998).The main routes of human 
exposure to azo dyes identified are a) oral ingestio n, 
mainly referring to the sucking of textiles by babies  
and young children, b) dermal absorption, the route 
of primary concern for consumers wearing azo 
compound-dyed products, as well as for workers in 
dye production and use plants, and c) inhalation, a  
route of concern for workers in dye production and 
use industries as well as those handling newly dyed 
products. Contact with aromatic amines entering the 
environment through the whole life-cycle of azo 
dyes in colored clothes is an additional potential 
source of human exposure. Textiles are made from 
synthetic or natural fibers, or both. Generally, th e 
actual fibers are not allergenic; rather, the dyes u sed 
to color the fabrics or formalin finishing resins ad ded 
to make them wrinkle-resistant, shrink-proof, or 
easily laundered, are the responsible contactants. 
The most common sensitizers belong to the disperse 
dye application class, which loosely hold onto the 
fibers and are easily rubbed off (Hatch and Maibach , 
2000 and Pratt and Taraska, 2000). Disperse blue 
106 and disperse blue 124 have been reported to 
cause an allergic contact dermatitis to a variety of  
garments, which include underwear, blouses, pants, 
swimming suits, pantyhose, shoulder pads, and the 
velvet material of leggings and body suits. Exposure 
to consumers can prove fatal when these chemicals Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
11 
Mathur et al. come in contact with the skin as they might generate 
incurable diseases (Joe, 2001).  
 
Genotoxic risk of workers from textile dyeing plants  
has thus been reported by a number of workers 
(Kumar  et al.,  1992 and Dönbak, et al.,  2006). 
Yoshida and Miyakawa (1973) reported that 
occupational exposure to benzidine dyes might have 
possibly resulted in bladder cancer amongst kimono 
painters in Japan. Eczema, contact dermatitis, 
asthma, chronic bronchitis, tuberculosis, 
haematoma, bladder cancer and irritation to eyes, 
have been reported amongst the workers of textile 
industries in Sanganer by Usha (1989). In 42 
rotogravure printers exposed to rotogravure printing 
dyes high incidence of chromosomal aberrations 
were reported by Pelclova (1990). Occupational 
Bladder Cancer in Textile Dyeing and Printing 
Workers and their Significance for Screening 
Programs has been discussed by Frumin 
(1990).Triple primary cancers involving kidney, 
urinary bladder and liver in a dye worker have also  
been reported (Morikawa et al., 1997).  
 
1.6 Conclusion:  
Currently the Indian dyestuff industry is in the mi dst 
of major restructuring and consolidation phase. In 
response to German ban on azo dyes (Bahorsky, 
1997) numerous Indian companies are trying to 
develop herbal dyes, organic cotton and other 
ecofriendly textiles. An environmental crack down i n 
heart of India’s small-scale dyestuff industry has 
resulted in more than 70 of the listed 100 companie s 
installing primary and secondary treatment 
plan(Roberts, 1995).Now the shift in emphasis is on  
product innovation, brand building and 
environmental friendliness. This industry is 
increasingly moving towards greater customer 
orientation. Even though India enjoys an abundant 
supply of basic raw materials it will have to build  up 
on technical services and marketing capabilities to 
face global competition and increase its share of 
exports. Indian companies in future will have to 
meet customer requirements of quality and delivery 
on time backed by prompt technical service to 
compete with the global players 
 
The textile industries use synthetic organic dyes li ke 
yarn dye, direct dye, basic dye, vat dye, sulfur dy e, 
nepthol dye, developed dye and reactive dye. The 
large variety of chemicals used in bleaching and 
dyeing process render them very complex. These chemicals are used in an attempt to make more 
attractive popular shades of fabrics for a competit ive 
market (Rajagopalan, 1990). The textile industries 
are to satisfy the ever growing demands in terms of 
quality, variety, fastness and other technical 
requirements, but the use of dye stuffs has become 
increasingly a subject of environmental concern. 
Therefore, it is essential to evolve regulations 
designated to improve the health and safety and the 
human and natural environment. Research in this 
area began about three decades ago, and a relatively 
large and comprehensive body of scientific data has 
been generated since that time. Many of the dyes 
and their intermediates have been banned in 
countries like U.K. and Germany. Their manufacture 
is now prohibited or closely regulated. Nevertheless , 
various benzidine derivatives are manufactured for 
azo dye production and although the manufacture of 
the starting materials is strictly controlled, the e nd 
use of the dyes is not. 
 
Further this review has shown that the mutagenic 
potential of textile dyes can be reliably and 
expeditiously measured using short-term genetic 
bioassays. Although more than 200 short term 
genetic bioassays are available to aid in the 
identification of agents that pose a genetic hazards 
to humans, only a few have been used extensively to  
analyze industrial waste and effluents. Evaluation of 
mutagenicity far out numbers any other type of 
analysis. The Salmonella  mutagenicity assay is cited 
more often than any other test system. Other tests 
that have been used to assess textile dyes for 
mutagenic potential include the bacterium E.coli  
WP2, the fungi A. nidulans,  the yeast S.cerevisiae , 
the plant Arabidopsis , and mammalian cell culture 
system such as the mouse lymphoma assay. Test 
systems that detect a somewhat broader range of 
genetic damage include the “rec” assay for DNA 
repair in B. subtilis  and the prophage induction assay 
in E.coli . Chromosomal damage induced has been 
evaluated in fungi, plants and cultured mammalian 
cells. Short term in vivo assay that detect urinary  
mutagenicity, micronuclei, and DNA adducts have 
been used to a limited extent on textile dyes due t o 
their complexity and expense. Chemicals analyses 
are indispensable for identifying and quantitating 
the hazardous chemical nature of dyes but 
toxicology assessment establish which compounds 
or effluents pose the greatest risk. Both approaches  
can be used to identify the source of the genotoxic 
constituents, to explain the processes leading to 
their formation, and to determine the effectiveness  Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
12 
Mathur et al. of treatment technologies. Unfortunately, the 
activities of the environment chemist and 
toxicologist often remain parallel and distinct, and  
bilateral investigative studies are uncommon.    
 
The release of azo dyes into the environment is a 
concern due to coloration of natural waters and due  
to the toxicity, mutagenicity and carcinogenicity of  
the dyes and their biotransformation products. They  
are generally considered as the xenobiotic 
compounds, which are very recalcitrant to 
biodegradation. In recent years, use of microbial 
biomass for decolourization of textile industry 
wastewater is becoming a promising alternative in 
which a number of bacteria (Chen  et al , 2003, 
Fontenot et al., 2003, Lee  et al. , 2006, Hsueh and 
Chen, 2007, Kalme et al., 2007, Moosvi et al. , 2007, 
Dawkar  et al. , 2008, Hsueh and Chen , 2008 and 
Khalid  et al. , 2008), yeast (Jadhav and Govindwar , 
2006, Jadhav  et al. , 2007 and Yu and Wen , 2005) 
and fungi (Spadaro  et al. ,1992, Chagas et al. , 2001, 
Yesilada et al., 2003, Levin et al., 2004, Kalyani  et al. , 
2008 and Shedbalkar  et al. , 2008) are used to 
replace present treatment processes. The dye 
degrading microbial strains have been isolated from 
the textile dyes contaminated soils (Jadhav  et al. , 
2008, Ramya  et al. , 2008 and Kolekar et  al. , 2008); 
industrial wastewaters (Meehan  et al., 2001); sludge 
samples and mud lakes( Chen et al ., 2003). Such 
strains are likely to have potential application in  dye 
wastewater treatment. Microbial consortiums 
consisting of a white-rot fungus and a Pseudomonas 
have also been isolated from wastewater treatment 
facilities of a local dyeing house and used for rapi d 
decolorization of dyes (He  et al.,  2004). Among the 
27 strains of halophilic and halotolerant bacteria 
isolated from effluents of textile industries, thre e 
showed remarkable ability in decolorizing the widely  
utilized azo dyes (Asad et al ., 2007). exploitation of 
such salt-tolerant bacteria in the bio-treatment 
system would also be a great improvement of 
conventional biological treatment systems and the 
bio-treatment concept. Studies were carried out on 
the decolorization of textile azo dyes by newly 
isolated halophilic and halotolerant bacteria (Uddi n  
et al.,  2007 and Guo et al., 2008). 
 
Indiscriminate use of synthetic chemical dyes shoul d 
however be restricted or the workers while handling  
these dyes should at least take proper precautions.  
These dyes should be replaced by vegetable dyes, 
which are eco-friendly. Besides, before using the 
dyes at large scale, their mutagenic potential should  be assessed by biological assays like Ames test. Th is 
bioassay can be used as an initial screening test to  
analyze various dyes and dye containing effluents, 
which are causing major damage to the aquatic 
environment. The mutagenicity of textile dyes is an 
important consideration for the assurance of 
consumer protection and work safety. The 
mutagenicity testing of textile dyestuffs is crucial for 
accurately predicting health risks for consumers and  
workers exposed to dyes. Protective measures such 
as masks and gloves are desirable for preventing or 
minimizing the occupational exposure (Dönbak et 
al.,  2006). 
 
1.7 Acknowledgement: 
The authors are thankful to CSIR Junior Research 
Fellowship; F. No. 09/149(0581)/2010-EMR-I and 
UGC support for the Major Research Project in Bio 
Sciences entitled ‘Genotoxicity evaluation of hospi tal 
wastewaters’, F. No. 40-113/2011 (SR).  
 
References:   
1)  Al-Sabti, K. (2000): Chlorotriazine Reactive Azo 
Red, 120 Textile Dye Induces Micronuclei in Fish. 
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Safety,  47: 149–155. 
2)  Alves de Lima, R. O., Bazo, A. P., Salvadori, D.M.,  
Rech, C. M., de Palma Oliveira, D. and de Aragão 
Umbuzeiro, G. (2007): Mutagenic and 
carcinogenic potential of a textile azo dye 
processing plant effluent that impacts a drinking 
water source. Mutat. Res.,  626 (1-2): 53-60.  
3)  Ames, B. N., Durston, W. E., Yamasaki, E. and 
Lee, F. D. (1973): Carcinogens are mutagens: a 
simple test system combining liver 
homogenates for activation and bacteria for 
detection. Proc. of the Nat. Acad. of Sci. U.S.A.,  
70: 2281-2285. 
4)  Ames, B. N., McCann, J. and Yamasaki, E. (1975): 
Methods of detecting carcinogens and 
mutagens with the Salmonella /mammalian 
microsome mutagenicity test.  Mutat. Res.,  31: 
347-364.  
5)  Anliker, R. (1977): Color Chemistry and the 
environment. Ecotox. Environ. Safety,  1: 211-
237. 
6)  Asad, S., Amoozegar, M. A., Pourbabaee, A. A., 
Sarbolouki, M. N., Dastgheib, S. M. (2007): 
Decolorization of textile azo dyes by newly 
isolated halophilic and halotolerant bacteria. 
Bioresour. Technol.,  98(11): 2082-8. 
7)  Ashby, J. and Tennant, R. W. (1988): Chemical 
structure, Salmonella  mutagenicity and extent Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
13 
Mathur et al. of carcinogenicity as indicators of genotoxic 
carcinogenesis among 222 chemicals tested in 
rodents by the U.S. NCI/NTP. Mut. Res ., 204: 17-
115. 
8)  Ashby, J., Tennant, R. W., Zeiger, E. and 
Stasiewicz, S. (1989): Classification according to 
chemical structure, mutagenicity to Salmonella  
and level of carcinogenicity of a further 42 
chemicals tested for carcinogenicity by the U.S. 
National Toxicology Program. Mut. Res ., 223: 
73-103. 
9)  Ashby, J., Tinwell, H., Callander, R. D. and Clare,  
N. (1991): Genetic activity of the human 
carcinogen sulphur mustard towards Salmonella  
and the mouse bone marrow. Mut. Res.,  257: 
307-311. 
10)  Auletta, A. E., Dearfield, K. L. and Cimino, M. C. 
(1993): Mutagenicity Test Schemes and 
Guidelines: USEPA Office of Pollution Prevention 
and Toxics and Office of Pesticide Programs. 
Environmental and Molecular Mutagensis,  21: 
38-45.  
11)  Bae, J. S., Freeman,  H. S., Warren, S. H. and 
Claxton, L. D. (2006): Evaluation of new 2,2′-
dimethyl-5,5′-dipropoxybenzidine- and 3,3′-
dipropoxybenzidine-based direct dye analogs for 
mutagenic activity by use of the 
Salmonella /mammalian mutagenicity assay. 
Mutation Research/Genetic Toxicology and 
Environmental Mutagenesis,  603 (2): 173-185. 
12)  Bahorsky, M. S. (1997): Textiles. Water 
Environment Research,  69: 658-664. 
13)  Bakshi, D. K. and  Sharma, P. (2003): 
Genotoxicity of Textile Dyes Evaluated with 
Ames test and rec-Assay. J. Env. Path. Tox. 
Oncol.,  22(2 ): 30-40. 
14)  Banat,  I. M., Nigam, P., Singh, D. and Marchant, 
R. (1996): Microbial decolorization of textile-
dyecontaining effluents: A review. Bioresource 
Technology,  58(3): 217-227. 
15)  Boeniger, M. (1980): The carcinogenicity and 
metabolism of azo dyes, especially those 
derived from benzidine. National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health Technical 
Report, U.S Department of Health and Human 
Services, Washington D.C. 3. 
16)  Chagas, E. P. and Durrant, L. R. (2001): 
Decolorization of azo dyes by Phanerochaete 
chrysosporium  and Pleurotus sajorcaju.  Enzyme 
and Microbial Technology,  29(8-9):  473-477 
17)  Chan, Y. K., Wong, C. K. and Hsieh, D. P. (2003): 
Application of a Toxicity Identification 
Evaluation for a Sample of Effluent Discharged from a Dyeing Factory in Hong Kong. Environ. 
Toxicol.,  18: 312–316. 
18)  Chen, K. C., Wu, J. Y., Liou, D. J., Hwang, S. C. 
(2003): Decolorization of the textile dyes by 
newly isolated bacterial strains. J.  Biotechnol.,  
27(1): 57-68. 
19)  Chhaya, J., Thaker, J., Nuzhat, S., Mansuri, A. P. 
and Kundan, R. (1997): Influence of textile 
dyeing and printing industry effluent on ATPases 
in liver, brain and muscle of mudskipper 
Periophthalmus dipes . Bull. Environ. Contam. 
Toxicol.,  58: 793 -800. 
20)  Chhoakar, P. K., Datta, S. P., Joshi, H. C. and 
Pathak, H. (2000): Impact of industrial effluents 
on soil health and agriculture-Indian experience: 
Part-II tannery and textile industrial effluents. J. 
Scientific and Industrial research,  59: 446-454. 
21)  Chung, K., Ssu-Ching, C. and Claxton, L. D. 
(2006): Review of the Salmonella typhimurium  
mutagenicity of benzidine, benzidine analogues, 
and benzidine-based dyes. Mutation 
Research/Reviews in Mutation Research,   
612(1): 58-76. 
22)  Claxton, L. D., Hughes, T. J., Chung, K. T. (2001): 
Using base-specific Salmonella  tester strains to 
characterize the types of mutation induced by 
benzidine and benzidine congeners after 
reductive metabolism. Food Chem. Toxicol. , 
39(12): 1253-61. 
23)  Clonfero, E., Venier, P., Granella, M. and Levis, 
A. G. (1990): Leather azo dyes: mutagenic and 
carcinogenic risks. Med. Lav.,  81(3): 222-9.  
24)  Combes, R. D. and Haveland-Smith, R. B. (1982): 
A review of the genotoxicity of food, drug and 
cosmetic colors and other azo, 
triphenylmethane and xanthene dyes. Mut. Res ., 
98: 101-248. 
25)  Danish EPA (1998): Azocolorants in Textiles and 
Toys,  Environmental Health Assessment . 
Environmental Project no. 416. Danish 
Environmental Protection Agency. 
26)  Dawkar, V. V., Jadhav, U. U., Jadhav, S. U. and 
Govindwar, S. P. (2008): Biodegradation of 
disperse textile dye Brown 3REL by newly 
isolated Bacillus sp. VUS.  J. Appl. Microbiol.,  
105(1): 14-24. 
27)  de Aragão Umbuzeiro, G., Freeman, H. S., 
Warren, S. H., de Oliveira, D. P., Terao, Y., 
Watanabe, T. and Claxton, L. D. (2005): The 
contribution of azo dyes to the mutagenic 
activity of the Cristais River. Chemosphere,  
60(1): 55-64.  Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
14 
Mathur et al. 28)  Dearfield, K. L., Auletta, A. E., Cimino, M. C. and  
Moore, M. M. (1991): Considerations in the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency’s testing 
approach for mutagenicity. Mut. Res ., 258: 259-
283. 
29)  Deutsches Wollforschungsinstitut an der TH 
Aachene. V. (1994): Untersuchungen zur 
Gentoxizität vonveredelten Textilien. 
Abschlussbericht zum AIFForschungsvorhaben,  
9207. 
30)  Dominici, L., Cerbone, B., Villarini, M., Fatigoni, 
C. and Moretti, M. (2010): In vitro testing for 
genotoxicity of indigo naturalis assessed by 
micronucleus test. Nat. Prod. Commun.,  
5(7):1039-42. 
31)  Dönbak, L., Rencüzoğullari, E., Topaktas, M. and 
Sahin,  G. (2006): A  biomonitoring study on the 
workers from textile dyeing plants. Russian 
Journal of Genetics,  42( 6 ):  613-618. 
32)  European Commission (2001): White Paper: 
Strategy for a future chemicals policy. 
COM(2001),  88.  
33)  Fontenot, E. J., Lee, Y. H., Matthews, R. D., Zhu, 
G. and Pavlostathis, S. G. (2003): Reductive 
decolorization of a textile reactive dye bath 
under methanogenic conditions. Appl. Biochem. 
Biotechnol ., 109(1-3): 207-25. 
34)  Frumin, E., Velez, H. and Bingham, E. (1990): 
Occupational Bladder Cancer in Textile Dyeing 
and Printing Workers: Six Cases and their 
Significance for Screening Programs. J. Occup. 
Med.,  32: 887–890. 
35)  Garner, R. C. and Nutman, C.A. (1977): Testing 
of some Azo dyes and their reduction products 
for mutagenicity using Salmonella typhimurium 
TA 1538 . Mut. Res., 44:  9-19.  
36)  Gonzales, C. A., Riboli, E. and Lopez-Abente, G. 
(1998): Bladder Cancer among Workers in the 
Textile Industry: Results of a Spanish Case-
Control Study. Am. J. Med.,  14: 673–680. 
37)  Gregory, A. R., Elliott, J., Kluge, P. (1981): Ames 
testing of Direct Black 38 parallels 
carcinogenicity testing. J. Appl Toxicol.,  1(6): 
308-13.  
38)  Guo, J. B., Zhou, J. T., Wang, D., Wang, J., Yu, H. 
and Song, Z. Y. (2005): Decolorization of azo 
dyes with high salt concentration by salt-
tolerant mixed cultures under anaerobic 
conditions. J. Environ. Sci., 17(6): 984-8. 
39)  Guo, J., Zhou, J., Wang, D., Tian, C., Wang, P. and 
Uddin, M. S. (2008): A novel moderately 
halophilic bacterium for decolorizing azo dye under high salt condition. Biodegradation , 19(1): 
15-9.  
40)  Gupta, S. C. (1992): Industrialization and 
chemical hazards. Swasth Hind, Water pollution , 
124. 
41)  Harrington-Brock, K., Parker, L. and Doerr, C. 
(1991): Analysis of the Genotoxicity of 
Anthraquinone Dyes in the Mouse Lymphoma 
Assay. Mutagenesis,  6: 35–46.  
42)  Hatch, K. L. and Maibach, H. I. (2000): Textile 
dye allergic contact dermatitis prevalence. 
Contact Dermatitis,  42(4): 187-95.  
43)  He, F., Hu, W. and Li, Y. (2004): Biodegradation 
mechanisms and kinetics of azo dye 4BS by a 
microbial consortium. Chemosphere , 57(4): 293-
301.   
44)  Hesbert, A., Bottin, M. C., de Ceaurriz, J., 
Protois, J. C. and Cavelier, C. (1984): Testing 
natural indigo for genotoxicity. Toxicol. Lett., 
21(1): 119-25. 
45)  Houk, V. S. (1992): The Genotoxicity of Industrial 
Wastes and Effluents: A Review. Mutat. Res.,  
277: 91–138. 
46)  Hsueh, C. C. and Chen, B.Y. (2007): Comparative 
study on reaction selectivity of azo dye 
decolorization by Pseudomonas luteola.  J. 
Hazard Mater.,  141(3): 842-9. 
47)  Hsueh, C. C. and Chen, B.Y. (2008): Exploring 
effects of chemical structure on azo dye 
decolorization characteristics by Pseudomonas 
luteola . J. Hazard Mater ., 154(1-3): 703-10. 
48)  International Agency for Research on Cancer, 
Suppl. 4 (1982): IARC Monographs on the 
evaluation of the carcinogenic risk of chemicals 
to humans, chemicals, industrial processes and 
industries associated with cancer in humans, 
IARC, Lyon. 
49)  Jadhav, J. P. and Govindwar, S. P. (2006): 
Biotransformation of malachite green by 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae MTCC 463.  Yeast , 
23(4): 315-23. 
50)  Jadhav, J. P., Parshetti, G. K., Kalme, S. D. and 
Govindwar, S. P. (2007): Decolourization of azo 
dye methyl red by Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
MTCC 463 . Chemosphere, 68(2): 394-400.  
51)  Jadhav, U. U., Dawkar, V. V., Ghodake, G. S. and 
Govindwar, S. P. (2008): Biodegradation of 
Direct Red 5B, a textile dye by newly isolated 
Comamonas sp. UVS . J. Hazard. Mater., 158: 
507-516.  
52)  Jäger, I. (1998): Research Feasibility Study , 
Hydrotox GmbH, Report to the European 
Commission. Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
15 
Mathur et al. 53)  Jäger, I., Hafner, C. and Schneider, K. (2004): 
Mutagenicity of different textile dye products in  
Salmonella typhimurium  and mouse lymphoma 
cells.  Mutat. Res., 561(1-2): 35-44. 
54)  Janik-Spiechowicz, E., Dziubaltowska, E. and 
Wyszynska, K. (1997): Mutagenic and Genotoxic 
Activity Detected by the Ames, Micronucleus 
and SCE Tests under the Influence of Samples of 
Dyes Manufactured in Poland. Int. J. Occup. 
Med. Environ. Health,  10: 55–65. 
55)  Joachim, F., Burrel, A. and Andersen, J. (1985): 
Mutagenicity of Azo Dyes in the 
Salmonella /Microsome Assay Using in Vitro and 
in Vivo Activation. Mutat. Res.,  156: 131–138. 
56)  Joe, E. K. (2001): Allergic Contact Dermatitis to 
Textile Dyes. Dermatology Online Journal,  7(1): 
9.  
57)  Kalme, S. D., Parshetti, G. K., Jadhav, S. U. and 
Govindwar, S. P. (2007): Biodegradation of 
benzidine based dye Direct Blue-6 by 
Pseudomonas desmolyticum NCIM 2112.  
Bioresource Technol., 98(7): 1405-10.  
58)  Kalyani, D. C., Patil, P. S., Jadhav, J. P. and 
Govindwar, S. P. (2008): Biodegradation of 
reactive textile dye Red BLI by an isolated 
bacterium Pseudomonas sp. SUK1.  Bioresour. 
Technol., 99(11): 4635-41.  
59)  Kaur, A., Sandhu, R. S. and Grover, I. S. (1993a): 
Screening of azo dyes for mutagenicity with 
Ames/ Salmonella  assay. Environ. Mol. 
Mutagen ., 22(3): 188-90.  
60)  Kaur, A., Singh, R. S. and Grover, I. S. (1993b): 
Mutagenicity testing of textile (azo) dyes with 
Salmonella /microsome assay.  J. Environ. Biol.,  
14: 327-333. 
61)  Khalid, A., Arshad, M. and Crowley, D. E. (2008): 
Accelerated decolorization of structurally 
different azo dyes by newly isolated bacterial 
strains. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 78(2): 361-
9. 
62)  Khan, T. I., Kaur, N. and Vyas, P. C. (1995): 
Effects of industrial effluents on physico-
chemical characteristics of Amani Shah Nallah-A 
case study. J. Environ. Pollution,  2(3): 147-150. 
63)  Khandelwal, S. (1996): Impact of dyeing 
industries, wastewater on vegetation of Luni 
catchment area: A case study through remote 
sensing technique. J. Environ. Poll ., 3 (2): 77-78. 
64)  Kier, L. E., Brusick, D. J., Auletta, A. E., Von Ha lle, 
E. S., Brown, M. M., Simmon, V. F., Dunkel, V., 
McCann, J., Mortelmans, K., Prival, M., Rao, T. K. 
and Ray, V. (1986): The Salmonella typhimurium  
/ mammalian microsomal assay. A report of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Gene Tox 
Program. Mut. Res ., 168: 69-240. 
65)  Kirkland, D. J. (1993): Genetic toxicology testing 
requirements: Official and unofficial views from 
Europe. Environmental and Molecular 
Mutagenesis,  21: 8-14.  
66)  Knasmüller, S., Zöhrer, E., Kainzbauer, E., Kienzl,  
H., Colbert, B., Lamprecht, G. and Schulte-
Hermann, R. (1993): Detection of mutagenic 
activity in textiles with Salmonella typhimurium . 
Mutat. Res.,  299: 45-53. 
67)  Knasmüller, S., Zöhrer, E., Kainzbauer, E., Kienzl,  
H., Colbert, B., Lamprecht, G. and Schulte- 
Hermann, R. (1993): Detection of mutagenic 
activity in textiles with Salmonella typhimurium . 
Mutation Research,  299: 45-53.  
68)  Kolekar, Y.M., Pawar, S.P., Gawai, K.R., 
Lokhande, P.D., Shouche, Y.S. and Kodam, K.M. 
(2008): Decolorization and degradation of 
Disperse Blue 79 and Acid Orange 10, by Bacillus 
fusiformis  KMK5 isolated from the textile dye 
contaminated soil. Bioresour Technol.,   99(18): 
8999–9003.  
69)  Kumar, R. M., Chandrasekar, R. and Rani, M. V. 
(1992): Chromosomal Aberrations and Sister-
Chromatid Exchange Frequencies in Workers 
Occupationally Exposed to Textile Dyes. Hum. 
Exptl. Toxicol.,  11: 275–277.  
70)  Kundu, R., Chhaya, J., Thaker, J., Mittal, R., Khan , 
S. N., Singh, S. and Mansuri, A. P. (1997): 
Influence of textile dyeing and printing industry 
effluent on somatic development and growth 
dynamics of myotomal muscle fibres in two 
freshwater major carp species. Ind. J. 
Experimental Biology,  35: 987-993. 
71)   Kurde, S. and Singh, R. (1995): Effects of two 
samples of textile effluents and dyes on total 
erythrocyte count and related parameters of 
wistar rats. Proc. Acad. Environ. Biol.,  4 (2): 177-
181. 
72)  Law, S. E. (1995): Electric discharge generated 
ozone and its beneficial agricultural/biological 
applications. ESA’95 23 rd annual conference, 
University of Rochester, New York. 
73)  Lee, Y. H., Matthews, R. D., Pavlostathis, S. G. 
(2006): Biological decolorization of reactive 
anthraquinone and phthalocyanine dyes under 
various oxidation-reduction conditions. Water 
Environ. Res.,  78(2): 156-69. 
74)   Levin, L., Papinutti, L. and Forchiassin, F. (2004 ): 
Evaluation of Argentinean white rot fungi for 
their ability to produce lignin-modifying Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
16 
Mathur et al. enzymes and decolorize industrial dyes. 
Bioresour. Technol.,  94(2): 169-76. 
75)  Lokhande, H. T. and Naik, S. R. (1996): Role of 
eco-standards in textile exports.  Colourage,  19-
30. 
76)  Lynn, R. K., Donielson, D. W., Ilias, A. M. and 
Kennish, K. (1980): Metabolism of bisazo-
biphenyl dyes derived from benzidine, 3,3’- 
dimethylbenzidine or 3,3’- dimethoxy-benzidine 
to carcinogenic aromatic amines in the dog and 
rat. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacology,  56: 248-258. 
77)  MacGregor, J. T., Diamond, M. J., Mazzeno, L. 
W. and Friedman, M. (1980): Mutagenicity tests 
of fabric-finishing agents in Salmonella 
typhimurium : fiber-reactive wool dyes and 
cotton flame retardants. Environ. Mutagen.,  
2(3): 405-18. 
78)  Maron, D. M. and Ames, B. N. (1983): Revised 
methods for the Salmonella  mutagenicity test. 
Mut. Res ., 113: 173-215. 
79)  Mastrangelo, G., Fedeli, U. and Fadda, E. (2002): 
Epidemiologic Evidence of Cancer Risk in Textile 
Industry Workers: A Review and Update. 
Toxicol. Ind. Health,  18: 171–181. 
80)  Mathur, N. and Bhatnagar, P. (2005a):  
Mutagenicity Assessment of Textile Dyes from 
Sanganer, Jaipur (India)-A case study. J. 
Ecophysiol. Occup. Hlth.,  5: 99-103. 
81)  Mathur, N. and Bhatnagar, P. (2007b): 
Mutagenicity Assessment of Textile Dyes from 
Sanganer (Rajasthan). J. Environ. Biol.,  28(1): 
123-126. 
82)  Mathur, N., Bhatnagar, P. and Bakre, P. (2005a): 
Assessing Mutagenicity of Textile Dyes from Pali 
(Rajasthan) using Ames bioassay. Applied 
Ecology and Environmental Research  4(1): 111-
118.  
83)  Mathur, N., Bhatnagar, P., Dhewa, T., Bose, T. 
and Chug, S. (2005b): Genotoxic effects of Black 
RL and Green 6B Dyes used in Textile Industries. 
Toxicology International,  12 (1): 5-8.  
84)  McCann, J., Choi, E., Yamasaki, E. and Ames, B. 
N. (1975): Detection of carcinogens as mutagens 
bacterial tester strains with R factor plasmids. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 72: 979- 983.  
85)  McGeorge, L. J., Louis, J. B., Atherholt, T. B. and 
McGarity, G. J. (1985): Mutagenicity analyses of 
industrial effluents: results and considerations 
for integration into water pollution control 
programs,  In Short -term bioassays in the 
analysis of complex environmental mixtures, 
Vol. IV, Waters, M.D., Sandhu, S.S., Lewtas, J., Claxton, L., Strauss, G. and Nesnow, S.(eds),  
Plenum Press, New York:  247-268. 
86)  Meehan, C., Bjourson, A. J. and McMullan, G. 
(2001): Paenibacillus azoreducens  sp. nov., a 
synthetic azo dye decolorizing bacterium from 
industrial wastewater. Int. J. Syst. Evol. 
Microbiol ., 51(5): 1681-1685.  
87)  Mirkova, E. T. and Lalchev, S. G. (1990): The 
genetic toxicity of the human carcinogens 
benzidine and benzidine based dyes: 
chromosomal analysis in exposed workers. Prog. 
Clin. Biol. Res.,  340: 397−405.  
88)  Moawad, H., Abd El-Rahim, W. M.  and 
Khalafallah, M. (2003): Evaluation of biotoxicity 
of textile dyes using two bioassays. J. Basic 
Microbiol ., 43(3): 218-29.  
89)  Moosvi, S., Kher, X., Madamwar, D. (2007): 
Isolation, characterization and decolorization of 
textile dyes by a mixed bacterial consortium JW-
2. Dyes and Pigments, 74(3): 723-729. 
90)  Morikawa, Y., Shiomi, K., Ishihara, Y. and 
Matsuura, N. (1997): Triple primary cancers 
involving Kidney, Urinary Bladder and Liver in a 
dye workers. Am. J. of Indus. Med.,  31: 44-49. 
91)  Mortelmans, K. and Zeiger, E. (2000): The Ames 
Salmonella  / microsome mutagenicity assay. 
Mut. Res.,  455: 29-60. 
92)  Nema, P., Mehta, C. G. and Rajagopalan, S. 
(1984): Characterization, treatment of synthetic 
textile mill wastewaters. A case study. Ind. J. 
Environ. Hlth.,  26(4): 323-334. 
93)  Neppolian, B., Sakthivel, S., Arbindo, B., 
Palanichamy, M. and Murugesan, V. (1999): 
Degradation of textile dye by solar light using 
TiO 2 and ZnO photocatalyst. J. Environ. Sci. 
health,  34 (9): 1829-1838. 
94)   Nony, C. R. and Bowmann, M. C. (1980): Trace 
analysis of potentially carcinogenic metabolites 
of an azo dye and pigment in hamster and 
human urine as determined by two 
chromatographic procedures. J. Chromatogr. 
Sci.  18: 64. 
95)  Ogawa, T., Idaka, E. and Yatome, C. (1981): 
Influence of azo dye on synchronized cells of 
Bacillus subtilis . Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol . 
26: 38-41. 
96)  Pal, P. B. and Brijmohan (1980): Management of 
occupational environment in textile industry. 
Indian J. Environ. Prot ., 10 (10): 767-772. 
97)  Pelclova, D., Rossner, P. and Pickova, J. (1990): 
Chromosme aberrations in rotogravure printing 
plant workers. Mutat. Res.,  245: 299−303. Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
17 
Mathur et al. 98)  Platzek, T. (1996): Wie groß ist die 
gesundheitliche Gefährdung durch Textilien 
wirklich?.  Melliand Textilberichte, Sonderdruck . 
99)  Powell, R., Murray, M., Chen, C. and Lee (1979): 
A Survey of the manufacture import and uses of 
benzidine related substances and related dyes 
and pigments, E.PA. Report. 560: 1379 −1405.  
100)  Pratt, M. and Taraska, V. (2000): Disperse blue 
dyes 106 and 124 are common causes of 
textile dermatitis and should serve as 
screening allergens for this condition. Am. J. 
Contact Dermat., 11(1): 30-41.  
101)  Prival, M. J. and Mitchell, V. D. (1982): 
Analysis of a method for testing azo dyes for 
mutagenic activity in Salmonella typhimurium  
in the presence of flavin mononucleotide and 
hamster liver S9. Mut. Res.,  97: 103-116. 
102)  Prival, M. J., Bell, S. J., Mitchell, V. D. and 
Vaughan, V. L. (1984): Mutagenicity of 
benzidine and benzidine congener dyes and 
selected monoazo dyes in a modified 
Salmonella  assay. Mut. Res., 136: 33-47.  
103)  Przybojewska, B., Baranski, B., Spiechowiecz, 
E. and Sitarrek, K. (1998): Mutagenic Activity 
of Some Textile Dyes in Different Test 
Systems. Toxicol. Lett., 40: 183–192. 
104)  Puvaneshwari, N., Muthukrishnan, J. and 
Gunashekaran, P. (2006): Toxicity assessment 
and microbial degradation of azo dyes. Indian 
Journal of Experimental Biology , 44: 618-626. 
105)  Raj, G. B., Patnaik, M. C. and Subbaiah, V. V. 
(1997): Heavy metal pollution in soil and 
fodder (paragrass) irrigated with sewage and 
effluent water all along Musi River. Proc. 
Acad. Environ. Biol.,  6 (2): 177-182. 
106)  Rajagopalan, S. (1990): Water pollution 
problem in Textile Industry and Control, in: 
Pollution Management in Industries.  
107)  Rajaguru, P., Kalpana, R., Hema, A., Suba, S., 
Baskarasethupathi, B., Kumar, P.A. and 
Kalaiselvi, K. (2001): Genotoxicity of some 
sulphur dyes on tadpoles (Rana hexadactyla) 
measured using the comet assay. Environ. 
Mol. Mutagen ., 38: 316−322. 
108)  Ramya, M., Anusha, B. and Kalavathy, S. 
(2008): Decolorization and biodegradation of 
Indigo carmine by a textile soil isolate 
Paenibacillus larvae. Biodegradation , 19(2): 
283-91.  
109)  Rannug, U., Bramstedt, H. and Nilsson, U. 
(1992): The presence of genotoxic and 
bioactive components in indigo dyed fabrics-- a possible health risk?. Mutat. Res.,  282 (3): 
219-25. 
110)  Reid, T. M., Wang, C. Y., King, C. M. and 
Morton, K. C. (1984): Mutagenicity of some 
benzidine congeners and their N-acetylated 
and N, N’- diacetylated derivatives in different 
strains of Salmonella typhimurium . Environ. 
Mutagen.,  6: 145-151. 
111)  Rhinde, E. and Troll, W. (1975): Metabolic 
reduction of Azo dyes to benzidine in the 
Rhesus  monkey. J. Natl. Cancer Inst ., 55: 181-
182.  
112)  Robens, J. F., Dill, G. S., Ward, J. M., Joiner, J.  
R., Griesemer, R. A. and Douglas, J. F. (1980): 
Thirteen-week subchronic toxicity studies of 
Direct Blue 6, Direct Black 38 and Direct 
Brown 95 dyes. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol ., 54: 
431-442. 
113)  Roberts, M. (1995): Dyes: Effluent down, 
prices up.  Chem. Week,  157: 51. 
114)  Sanchez, P. S., Sato, M. I. Z., Paschoal, C. M. R. 
B., Alves, M. N., Furlan, E. V. and Martins, M. 
T. (1988): Toxicity assessment of industrial 
effluents from S. Paulo state, Brazil, using 
short term microbial assays. Toxicity 
Assessment,  3: 55-80. 
115)  Schneider, K., Hafner, C. and Jager, I. (2004): 
Mutagenity of Textile Dye Products. J. Appl. 
Toxicol., 24: 83–91.  
116)  Seshdari, S., Bishop, P. L. and Agha, A. M. 
(1994): Anaerobic-aerobic treatment of 
selected azo dyes in wastewater. Waste 
Manag., 15: 127. 
117)  Shedbalkar, U., Dhanve, R. and Jadhav, J. 
(2008): Biodegradation of triphenylmethane 
dye cotton blue by Penicillium ochrochloron  
MTCC 517. J. Hazard. Mater., 157(2-3):472-9. 
118)  Shelby, M. D. (1988): The genetic toxicity of 
human carcinogens and its implications. Mut. 
Res.,  204: 3-15.  
119)  Shelby, M. D. and Zeiger, E. (1990): Activity of 
human carcinogens in the Salmonella  and 
rodent bone-marrow cytogenetics tests. Mut. 
Res ., 234: 257-261.  
120)  Sinsheimer, J. E. B. H., Hooberman, S. K., Das, 
M. D. and Brezzell, Z. (1992): The in vivo and 
in vitro genotoxicity of aromatic amines in 
relationship to the genotoxicity of benzidine. 
Mutation Research/Fundamental and 
Molecular Mechanisms of Mutagenesis,  268 
(2): 255-264.  
121)  Smith, A. K. and Suthers, I. M. (1999): Effects 
of sewage effluent discharge on the Universal Journal of Environmental Research and Tec hnology     
18 
Mathur et al. abundance, condition and mortality of 
hulafish, Trachinops taeniatus  (Plesiopidae). 
Environ. Poll., 106:  97-106. 
122)  Spadaro, J. T., Gold, M. H. and Renganathan, 
V. (1992): Degradation of azo dyes by the 
lignin - degrading fungus Phanerochaete 
chrysosporium.  App. Environ. Microbiol ., 58: 
2397-2401.  
123)  Srivastava, S. K., Kumar, R. and Srivastava, A. 
K. (1994): Effect of textile industry effluents 
on the biology of river Tons at Mau (U.P.) I-
Physico-chemical characteristics. Poll. Res ., 
13(4): 369-373.  
124)  Sumathi, M., Kalaiselvi, M., Palanivel, P. and 
Rajaguru, P. (2001): Genotoxicity of Textile 
Dye Effluent on Fish ( Carprinus carpio ) 
Measured Using the Comet Assay. Bul. 
Environ. Contam. Toxicol.,  66: 407–411. 
125)  Suzuki, T., Tinolei, S., Kurunczi, L., Dietze, U. 
and Schu u  irmann, G. (2001): Correlation of 
aerobic biodegradability of sulfonated Azo 
dyes with the chemical structure. 
Chemosphere,  45: 1-9. 
126)  Trivedy R.K. (Ed.), Environmental Pollution, 
Karad, India , 21-45. 
127)  Tsuda, S., Murakami, M., Matsusaka, N., Kano, 
K., Taniguchi, K. and Sasaki, Y. F. (2001): DNA 
damage induced by red food dyes orally 
administered to pregnant and male mice . 
Toxicol. Sci. , 61(1):92-9. 
128)  Uddin, M. S., Zhou, J., Qu, Y., Guo, J., Wang, P. 
and Zhao, L. (2007): Biodecolorization of azo 
dye acid red B under high salinity condition. 
Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol ., 79(4): 440-4. 
129)  Usha, M. (1989): Impact analysis of Industries 
in Sanganer. P.G. Diploma Field Study Report 
submitted to Indira Gandhi center for HEEPS, 
University of Rajasthan, Jaipur (India).  
130)  Venitt, S. and Bushell, O. T. (1976): 
Mutagenicity of the food colour Brown FK and 
constituents in Salmonella typhimurium . 
Mutation Research,  40: 309-316. 
131)  Venturini, S. and Tamaro, M. (1979): 
Mutagencity of Anthraquinone and Azo dyes 
in Ames Salmonella typhimurium  test. Mut. 
Res ., 68: 307-312. 
132)  Watabe, T. N., Ozawa, F., Kobayashi, and 
Kuruta, H. (1980): Reduction of sulphonated 
water-soluble azo dyes by microorganisms 
from human faeces. Food Cosmet. Toxicol.,  
18: 349-352. 
133)  Waters, M. D., Stack, H. F., Brady, A. L., 
Lohman, P. H. M., Haroun, S. and Vainio (1988): Use of computerized data listings and 
activity profiles of genetic and related effects 
in the review of 195 compounds. Mut. Res ., 
205: 295-312. 
134)  Wells, M. J. M., Rossano, A. J., Jr. and Roberts, 
E. C. (1994): Textile wastewater effluent 
toxicity identification evaluation. Environ.   
Contam. Toxicol ., 27: 555-560.  
135)  Wollin, K. M. and Gorlitz, B. D. (2004): 
Comparisons of genotoxicity of textile 
dyestuffs in Salmonella  mutagenicity assay in 
vitro micronucleus assay and single cell gel, 
comet assay. J. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. Oncol.  
23: 267 −278.  
136)  Wuebbles, B. J. and Felton, J. S. (1985): 
Evaluation of laser dye mutagenicity using the 
Ames/ Salmonella  microsome test. Environ. 
Mutagen ., 7(4): 511-22.  
137)  Yassini, S., Popp, W., Müller, G. and Norpoth, 
K. (1997): Aromatische Amine in Textilien – 
Ein kanzerogenes Risiko für den Menschen? In 
Psychomentale Belastungen und 
Beanspruchungen im Wandel von Arbeitswelt 
und Umwelt. Kanzerogenese und 
Synkanzerogenese. 37. Jahrestagung der 
Deutschen Gesellschaft für Arbeitsmedizin 
und Umweltmedizin e.V. in Wiesbaden vom 
12. Borsch-Galetke E., Struwe F (eds.). 
Druckerei Rindt: Fulda; 441-443.  
138)  Yesilada, O., Asma, D. and Cing, S. (2003):  
Decolorization of textile dyes by fungal 
pellets.  Process. Biochemistry,   38( 6): 31933-
938. 
139)  Yoshida, O. and Miyakawa (1973): Etiology of 
bladder cancer: “Metabolic aspects”, In: 
Analytical and experimental epidemiology of 
cancer. Proceedings of the Third International 
Symposium on the Princess Takmutsu Cancer 
Research fund.  
140)  Yu, Z. S. and Wen, X. H. (2005): Decolorization 
of synthetic dyes with a new isolated yeast 
Candida krusei.  Huan Jing Ke Xue ., 26(5): 137-
42.  
141)  Zeilmaker, M. J., van Kranen, H. J., van Veen, 
M. P. and Janus, J. A. (2000): Cancer Risk 
Assessment of Azo dyes and Aromatic Amines 
from Tattoo Bands, Folders of Paper, Toys, 
Bed Clothes, Watch Straps and Ink. RIVM, 
Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieu: 
Bilthoven, RIVM Report 601503 019. 
 