Review Article
Early-Onset Epileptic Encephalopathies: Ohtahara Syndrome and Early
Myoclonic Encephalopathy
Jules C. Beal MDa,b,*, Koshi Cherian MDa,b, Solomon L. Moshe MDa,b,c,d
aSaul R. Korey Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Monte ﬁore Medical Center, Bronx, New York
bEpilepsy Management Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine and Monte ﬁore Medical Center, Bronx, New York
cDepartment of Pediatrics, Children ’s Hospital at Monte ﬁore Medical Center and Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York
dDominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York
article information
Article history:
Received 28 March 2012
Accepted 11 June 2012abstract
Ohtahara syndrome and early myoclonic encephalopathy are the earliest presenting of the
epileptic encephalopathies. They are typically distinguished from each other according to
speci ﬁc clinical and etiologic criteria. Nonetheless, considerable overlap exists between the
two syndromes in terms of clinical presentation, prognosis, and electroencephalographic
signature. Newer understandings of underlying etiologies of these conditions may support the
previously suggested concept that they represent a single spectrum of disease rather than two
distinct disorders. We review both syndromes, with particular focus on the underlying
genetics and pathophysiologyand implications regarding the classi ﬁcation of these conditions.
/C2112012ElsevierInc.
Introduction
Early myoclonic epilepsy and early infantile epileptic
encephalopathy (or Ohtahara syndrome) constitute the
earliest presenting of the age-dependent epileptic enceph-
alopathy syndromes. They are electroclinical syndromes,
deﬁned by their clinical features and electroencephalo-
graphic ﬁndings. They are classically distinguished from
each other according to their presentations and differing
etiologies, but they do share certain clinical, electroen-
cephalographic, and prognostic features. This review will
discuss the presentation, diagnosis, and pathogenesis of
these syndromes, with special consideration for new
understandings of pathophysiology and genetics, as well as
difﬁculties in differentiating between the two disorders.
Historic background and classi ﬁcation
In 1976, Ohtahara et al. described an epilepsy syndrome
affecting very young infants with characteristic electro-encephalographic changes, and termed it “early infantile
epileptic encephalopathy with suppression-burst ”[1].
Ohtahara further observed that this condition frequently
evolved into West syndrome and Lennox-Gastaut syndrome
[2]. The eponym Ohtahara syndrome, which is synonymous
with early infantile epileptic encephalopathy, came into
prominent use in the mid-1980s [3].
What came to be known as early myoclonic encepha-
lopathy was ﬁrst described 2 years after Ohtahara
syndrome, in 1978, in neonates with erratic myoclonus and
other seizure types [4]. Numerous terms have been applied
to this condition, including myoclonic epilepsy with
neonatal onset, neonatal epileptic encephalopathy with
periodic electroencephalogram bursts, and early myoclonic
epileptic encephalopathy [5].
In 2001, the Task Force on Classi ﬁcation and Terminologyof
the International League Against Epilepsy included both
“Ohtahara syndrome ”and “early myoclonic encephalopathy ”
within the category of epileptic encephalopathies [6].T h i s
term describes epilepsy syndromes in which seizures and
epileptiform electroencephalographic abnormalities are
thought to contribute to progressive cerebral dysfunction.
Other syndromes in this group include West syndrome, Dra-
vet syndrome, Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, Landau-Kleffner
syndrome, and electrical status epilepticus during sleep.*Communications should be addressed to: Dr. Beal; Department of
Pediatric Neurology; Monte ﬁore Medical Center; 111 East 210th Street;
Bronx, NY 10467.
E-mail address: jbeal@monte ﬁore.org
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Pediatric Neurology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pnu
0887-8994/C2112012ElsevierInc.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2012.06.002Pediatric Neurology 47 (2012) 317 e323
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
brought to you by CORE View metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk
provided by Elsevier - Publisher Connector More recently, the proposed organization by the Classi-
ﬁcation Commission of the International League Against
Epilepsy termed both Ohtahara syndrome and early
myoclonic encephalopathy as “electroclinical syndromes, ”
characterized by their clinical and electroencephalographic
characteristics [7].
Clinical presentation
Ohtahara syndrome
Ohtahara syndrome presents in early infancy, within the
ﬁrst 3 months of age, and often within the ﬁrst 2 weeks [8].
Infants acutely develop tonic spasms that can be either
generalized or lateralized, can occur both singly or in clus-ters, and are independent of the sleep cycle. Spasms typi-
cally last up to 10 seconds, and can occur hundreds of times
per day [9]. Approximately one third of patients with
Ohtahara syndrome will also develop other seizure types,
most commonly focal motor seizures, hemiconvulsions, or
generalized tonic-clonic seizures [10].
Electroencephalograms in Ohtahara syndrome indicate
a suppression burst pattern, comprising bursts of high-amplitude spikes and polyspikes that alternate ata regular rate with periods of electric suppression (Fig 1 ).
The bursts coincide with the tonic spasms [11]. The pattern
typically remains unchanged during both wakefulness andsleep.
The prognosis is generally poor. Patients with Ohtahara
syndrome frequently die during infancy [10], and survivors
invariably manifest psychomotor impairments, whether ornot the seizures are ultimately controlled [5].
In some cases, Ohtahara syndrome can transition into
West syndrome over time, and can further evolve intoLennox-Gastaut syndrome. In the series of Yamatogi and
Ohtahara, 75% of patients developed West syndrome
between 2 and 6 months of age, and 12% subsequentlydeveloped Lennox-Gastaut syndrome [10]. The transition is
accompanied by changes in electroencephalographic
pattern. The evolution to West syndrome is marked by
a transition from suppression burst to hypsarhythmia, andfurther progression to Lennox-Gastaut syndrome is accom-
panied by the development of a generalized, slow spike-wave pattern. The close relationship among these three
syndromes has led to the theory that they represent age-speci ﬁc reactions in the brain to similar exogenous in ﬂu-
ences, and to the proposal that they be classi ﬁed together as
the age-dependent epileptic encephalopathies [2,8] .
Early myoclonic encephalopathy
Considerable similarities characterize the clinical
presentations of Ohtahara syndrome and early myoclonicencephalopathy. Like Ohtahara syndrome, early myoclonicencephalopathy presents during the neonatal period,
usually within the ﬁrst 3 months of age, and sometimes as
early as a few hours after birth. The initial presentation
typically involves the onset of focal myoclonus, usually ofthe face or extremities and or of only a small area, such as
aﬁnger or eyelid. The jerks are often described as erratic or
fragmentary because they can shift from one area of the
body to another in an asynchronous, seemingly random
pattern.
Focal seizures are also very common, and occur in more
than 80% of cases [12]. These seizures may be overt,
involving deviation of an eye or tonic posturing, or they may
be subtle, sometimes involving only autonomic signs suchas facial ﬂushing or apnea. Tonic spasms are also frequent,
occurring both singly and in clusters.
The key electroencephalographic feature in early
myoclonic encephalopathy comprises a suppression burstpattern, much like that in Ohtahara syndrome (Fig 1 ). In the
case of early myoclonic encephalopathy, however, thispattern is not continuous, and is often more distinct duringsleep. It was reported exclusively during sleep in 33% of
cases in one study [12]. The suppression burst pattern in
early myoclonic encephalopathy may not be appreciated at
disease onset, and follow-up electroencephalograms may
be necessary to arrive at the diagnosis [13]. The myoclonic
movements themselves are not associated with electro-
graphic changes.
The suppression burst pattern can evolve into an atypical
pattern of hypsarrhythmia in up to 50% of patients, typicallyoccurring at 3-5 months of age [12]. This change is generally
transient, lasting months, with a subsequent return to burst
suppression, which can last throughout childhood [14].
Figure 1. Electroencephalogram indicates typical suppression burst pattern that can be observed in both Ohtahara syndrome and early myoclonic
encephalopathy. This recording is of a 3-month-old girl with Ohtahara syndrome. Time base, 30 mm/second; sensitivity, 10 mV/mm.J.C. Beal et al. / Pediatric Neurology 47 (2012) 317 e323 318The prognosis is generally very poor. Up to half of
patients die by 2 years of age [5]. The remainder manifest
severe psychomotor impairments, including some patients
who remain in a persistent vegetative state [15].
Etiology and pathogenesis
Ohtahara syndrome
Ohtahara syndrome can result from a variety of etiologies,
but the majority of cases have been associated with struc-
tural brain abnormalities. Cases related to genetic mutations
and metabolic abnormalities have also been described,
although at least some of these cases also exhibited associ-ated structural malformations. Even in some cases when no
structural lesion was evident on cranial imaging, post-
mortem examinations demonstrated evidence of a migra-tion disorder or dysgenesis that was not previously
appreciated on neuroimaging [3,16] .
Avariety of structural malformations have been associated
with Ohtahara syndrome, including hemimegalencephaly
[11,17] , agenesis of the corpus callosum [3,8] , porencephaly
[8], agenesis of the mamillary bodies [18], and dentato-
olivary dysplasia [17]. Hypoxic injury [3], cortical dyspla-
sias, and cerebral migration disorders are also frequentlydescribed [16,19,20] .
Metabolic disorders that were reported to accompany
Ohtahara syndrome include nonketotic hyperglycinemia[3], cytochrome C oxidase de ﬁciency [21], pyridoxine
dependency, carnitine palmitoyltransferase de ﬁciency [11],
and a case of Leigh encephalopathy [22]. More recently,
a patient with biotinidase de ﬁciency [23] and two patients
with mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I de ﬁciency
were described [24,25] . One of the patients with respiratory
chain complex I deﬁciency also manifested microcephaly,
thinning of the corpus callosum, and cortical atrophy [24].
The other patient with a similar complex 1 de ﬁciency
demonstrated normal cranial imaging [25].D eﬁciencies in
cytochrome C oxidase or respiratory chain complex I may
result in energy depletion during development, in turnleading to demyelination and abnormalities in neuronal
migration [26].
Underlying genetic mutations have been increasingly
reported with Ohtahara syndrome. Mutations in the syn-taxin binding protein 1 ( STXBP1 ) gene, for example, have
been described in Ohtahara syndrome since 2008 [27].A
proportion of patients with known Ohtahara syndrome is
now thought to manifest underlying STXBP1 mutations,
although the exact number of such patients has varied fromstudy to study, ranging from 10-13% [28,29] to 38% in the
original report [27]. Similarly, mutations of the Aristaless-
related homeobox ( ARX) gene have also been associated
with Ohtahara syndrome [30-32] . In keeping with the close
relationship between the age-dependent epileptic
encephalopathies, mutations in both ARX and STXBP1 ha
 ve
also been described in patients with West syndrome
[28,29,31] . Finally, two reports described patients with
Ohtahara syndrome who had mutations in the solute
carrier family 25 ( SLC25A22 ) gene. Both patients were born
to consanguinous parents [33].
As with the metabolic disturbances, the mechanisms
by which these genetic abnormalities cause Ohtaharasyndrome are thought to be related to brain dysgenesis or
neuronal dysfunction. The SLC2A22 gene is involved in
mitochondrial glutamate transport. Mutations could lead to
energy depletion during development, or to neuronal
dysfunction and cell death [26]. The ARX gene plays a role in
regulating neuronal differentiation and proliferation, aswell as the migration of neuron progenitors to the devel-
oping cortex [26,34,35] . Mutations of the ARX gene have
been associated with structural abnormalities such as
hypoplastic corpus callosum, small basal ganglia and
hippocampi, a defect of the cavum septum pellucidum, and
cerebral atrophy [30-32] . Dysfunctional differentiation may
also lead to a deﬁciency of inhibitory interneurons, partly
accounting for the intractable seizures observed in thesepatients [34]. The STXBP1 gene is involved in the regulation
of synaptic vesicle release, and thus, like ARX, also plays
a role in neuronal progenitor cell differentiation and
migration, because the release of
g-aminobutyric acid and
glutamate are important for these functions [26,35] .
Moreover, mutations of STXBP1 may lead to brainstem
abnormalities. Widespread cell death in the brainstem has
been observed in STXBP1 null mice [34]. Brainstem
dysfunction was previously implicated in Ohtahara
syndrome because the tonic seizures that are prevalent in
the syndrome are thought to be generated in the brainstem,and brainstem abnormalities are frequently reported in
autopsies of patients with Ohtahara syndrome [36]. Inter-
estingly, brainstem dysfunction is also thought to
contribute to the development of hypsarrhythmia ininfantile spasms [37], and may play a role in the transition
from Ohtahara syndrome to West syndrome.
Early myoclonic encephalopathy
Similar to Ohtahara syndrome, the pathogenesis of early
myoclonic encephalopathy is variable, with structural,metabolic, and genetic abnormalities all playing a role. Theoverall picture in early myoclonic encephalopathy seems to
involve a diffuse process particularly involving the brain-
stem and white matter, possibly leading to deafferentationand hyperexcitability of the cortex.
Unlike Ohtahara syndrome, focal structural abnormali-
ties are not frequently observed in early myoclonicencephalopathy. However, progressive, diffuse cortical
atrophy has been reported in most cases [12]. Once again,
thisﬁnding is suggestive of an underlying metabolic or
degenerative disorder [9].
Associated metabolic abnormalities are frequently
described. In particular, nonketotic hyperglycinemia has
been associated with a large numberof cases [38-40] , and this
entity was suggested to constitute the most common etiology
of early myoclonic encephalopathy [41]. Cases have also been
reported in association with
D-glyceric acidemia, propionic
aciduria, molybdenum cofactor de ﬁciency, pyridoxine de ﬁ-
ciency, methylmalonic acidemia, sul ﬁte oxidase de ﬁciency,
Menkes disease, and Zellweger syndrome [39-44] .
Pathologic ﬁndings in early myoclonic encephalopathy
include demyelination, multifocal spongy changes in thewhite matter, imperfect lamination of the deep cortical
layers, perivascular concentric bodies, and astrocyticproliferation [45]. Autopsy reports described prevalent
white matter abnormalities and brainstem pathology [36].J.C. Beal et al. / Pediatric Neurology 47 (2012) 317 e323 319The presence of numerous spiny neurons dispersed in the
white matter has also been reported, which is suggestive ofimpaired neuronal migration and apoptosis [20].
Using functional neuroimaging techniques in a patient
with early myoclonic encephalopathy, Hirose et al. [46]
demonstrated hypoperfusion and hypometabolism in thebasal ganglia and thalami interictally, with ictal hyper-
perfusion of the basal ganglia, thalami, brainstem, and deep
front-parietal cortex. This ﬁnding was indicative of
dysfunction in these regions, and was thought to suggest
a functional deafferentation of the cortex from subcortical
structures [46].
A number of familial cases of early myoclonic encepha-
lopathy have been reported [14,40] , raising the question of
whether the disease involves a genetic component. A likelygenetically mediated case was reported in association with
Schinzel-Giedion syndrome, a rare genetic multiple mal-
formation disorder [47]. In 2009, early myoclonic enceph-
alopathy was reported in association with a mutation of thev-erb-a erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homologue
4(ErbB4 gene), which is involved in the migration of
interneurons to the cortex [48]. This genetic abnormality is
consistent with the persistence of spiny neurons in the
white matter on pathologic examination, and of the func-
tional deafferentation described by Hirose et al. [46], both of
which seem to indicate impaired neuronal migration to the
cortex, suggesting a degree of “cortical isolation ”in the
brains of these patients [20,46,48] .
Assessment and treatment
The diagnosis of both Ohtahara syndrome and early
myoclonic encephalopathy is based on a typical clinical
picture and associated electroencephalographic ﬁndings, as
already described. The prognosis is universally poor. Neu-roimaging to assess for structural brain abnormalities isgenerally recommended in cases of Ohtahara syndrome.
Brainstem evoked potentials are occasionally abnormal in
both conditions, but normal studies do not exclude thepossibility of disease [36].
Only anecdotal evidence supports the use of speci ﬁc
antiepileptic drugs in these conditions. Phenobarbital, val-proate, pyridoxine, zonisamide, and benzodiazepines haveall demonstrated limited effectiveness in seizure control in
Ohtahara syndrome [10,49] . Adrenocorticotropic hormone
therapy also exerts limited ef ﬁcacy, and may be particularly
beneﬁcial in cases of Ohtahara syndrome that progress to
West syndrome [3,9] . None of the antiepileptic medicationshas been effective in treating early myoclonic encephalop-
athy, nor have alternative methods of seizure managementsuch as adrenocorticotropic hormone therapy, corticoste-
roids, and pyridoxine. Cases have been reported in which
the early myoclonic encephalopathy worsened after anadministration of vigabatrin [50]. Some success in control-
ling seizures has been reported with the ketogenic diet in
Ohtahara syndrome, but not in early myoclonic encepha-
lopathy [3,51] .
The correction of underlying metabolic disorders may
lead to more favorable outcomes. In particular, patientswith Ohtahara syndrome have been reported to do rela-tively well after the correction of underlying pyridoxine
deﬁciencies [11] or biotinidase de ﬁciencies [23]. In cases of
early myoclonic encephalopathy associated with non-
ketotic hyperglycinemia, treatment with sodium benzoate,
ketamine, and dextromethorphan has been used, some-
times in combination with tryptophan, strychnine, orimipramine [41,52,53] . These treatments can improve the
neonatal course, but do not seem to affect long-term
outcomes [53].
Cases with operable structural abnormalities such as
hemimegalencephaly or cortical dysplasia can bene ﬁt from
neurosurgical intervention with focal resection or hemi-
spherectomy [54].
Differentiation
Early myoclonic encephalopathy and Ohtahara syndrome
share many features, including age at presentation, a similarelectroencephalographic pattern, intractable seizures, and
poor prognosis. Tonic seizures and focal motor seizures are
frequently observed in both syndromes. Thus differenti-ating between the two conditions can be dif ﬁcult, especially
early in their course, and they have been conceptualized bysome as part of the same continuum of disease [34,36] .
In 2006, Ohtahara and Yamatogi [9]highlighted the
differences between the syndromes, indicating that theywere separate and distinguishable diseases (Table 1 ).
Speci ﬁcally, they pointed out the prevalence of structural
abnormalities in Ohtahara syndrome vs metabolic diseasein early myoclonic encephalopathy, and emphasized thatthe suppression burst pattern is present equally in wake-fulness and sleep in Ohtahara syndrome, whereas it is either
exclusively present during sleep or more distinct during
sleep in early myoclonic encephalopathy. Furthermore, theevolution of disease can differ. Ohtahara syndrome can
progress to West syndrome and then to Lennox-Gastaut
Table 1. Classic differentiation between Ohtahara syndrome and early myoclonic epilepsy
Ohtahara Syndrome Early Myoclonic Encephalopathy
EEG pattern Continuous suppression burst Discontinuous pattern, suppression burst not always
evident at ﬁrst, and often more distinct during sleep
Primary seizure type Tonic spasms Myoclonus
Other seizure types Focal motor seizures
Hemiconvulsions
Generalized tonic-clonic seizuresFocal motor seizuresTonic spasms
Major etiology Structural lesions Metabolic abnormalities
Evolution of disease 75% progress to West syndrome, 12% progress to Lennox-
Gastaut syndromeUp to 50% develop transient atypical hypsarrhythmia, withsubsequent return to the suppression burst pattern
Abbreviation:
EEG¼ElectroencephalogramJ.C. Beal et al. / Pediatric Neurology 47 (2012) 317 e323 320syndrome, or can transition to severe focal epilepsy. Early
myoclonic encephalopathy typically remains unchanged foryears or transiently evolves to an atypical hypsarrhythmia
pattern, which is thought to differ signi ﬁcantly from typical
West syndrome in terms of seizure type and atypical elec-
troencephalographic ﬁndings. Finally, Ohtahara and Yama-
togi [9]emphasized that although some seizure types do
overlap between the two syndromes, tonic spasms are theﬁrst seizure type observed in Ohtahara syndrome, whereasfocal seizures and erratic myoclonus occur ﬁrst in early
myoclonic encephalopathy [9].
Although these differences are helpful in differentiating
between the two conditions in their purest forms, consid-
erable clinical overlap may still occur in practice. As already
described, Ohtahara syndrome has been associated withmultiple metabolic disturbances in addition to structuralabnormalities. Furthermore, Schlumberger et al. reported
on several patients with Ohtahara syndrome in whom the
suppression burst pattern was not present equally in sleepand wakefulness as expected, but was present only during
sleep or more marked during sleep [17]. The evolution of
disease can also be misleading, because the transient hyp-
sarrhythmia sometimes observed in early myoclonic
encephalopathy may be interpreted as indicating a transi-
tion to West syndrome. Persistence of the suppression burstpattern has been reported in Ohtahara syndrome, although
this persistence is generally thought to be more consistent
with the natural history of early myoclonic encephalopathy[55]. Differences in seizure type may not help to differen-
tiate the two diseases, because tonic spasms and focal
motor seizures are a prominent feature of both.
Some authors proposed that the two syndromes may
actually involve one spectrum of disease, and that differ-ences in seizure pattern re ﬂect the differing progression of
pathology. In reviewing autopsy reports of patients with
Ohtahara syndrome and early myoclonic encephalopathy,
Djukic et al. [36] observed that brainstem pathology was the
only consistent ﬁnding in every reported case. Brainstem
dysfunction was presumed to be the source of the tonic
seizures in these syndromes. Djukic et al. [36] hypothesized
that the brainstem dysfunction may occur earlier in Ohta-hara syndrome, leading to early tonic seizures at presen-tation. Brainstem involvement in early myoclonic
encephalopathy may be less severe initially but may prog-
ress over time, possibly as a result of a kindling process ora release of the brainstem from cortical inhibitory control,
leading to the emergence of tonic seizures later in the
course of disease. Thus the differences between the twosyndromes may re ﬂect disease burden in the brain, rather
than an indication that they are two separate entities [36].
Based on newer understandings of the genetics under-
lying these disorders, both syndromes were also postulatedto represent a “phenotypic continuum ”in which multiple
underlying genetic abnormalities led to similar metabolicand structural defects, producing a clinical spectrum ofdisease [34].Table 2 summarizes some prominent examples
of genetic and phenotypic overlap among the epilepticencephalopathy syndromes. Many of these conditions canbe caused by multiple different genetic mutations, and
certain gene mutations can cause multiple syndromes. This
ﬁnding would indicate that differing underlying abnor-malities can lead to common pathophysiologic pathways,resulting in a range of clinical phenotypes. In the case ofOhtahara syndrome and early myoclonic encephalopathy,both syndromes may result from processes leading to
impaired neuronal differentiation and migration, as already
described. Speci ﬁcally, the ARX and STXBP1 mutations and
complex I de ﬁciency associated with Ohtahara syndrome,
theErbB4 mutation and multiple metabolic abnormalities
correlated with early myoclonic encephalopathy, and theprominent brainstem pathology in both syndromes all
suggest a common pathophysiologic pathway leading to
abnormal neuronal migration and a functional isolation ofthe cortex from the brainstem. Thus, multiple underlyinganomalies may lead to similar impairments in neuronal
differentiation and migration, resulting in a spectrum of
epileptic encephalopathies with clinical similarities that
encompasses
Ohtahara syndrome and early myoclonic
encephalopathy.
Conclusion
Ohtahara syndrome and early myoclonic encephalop-
athy, as electroclinical syndromes, are de ﬁned by their
clinical presentations and speci ﬁc electroencephalographic
ﬁndings. Based on these criteria, they are traditionallydistinguished from each other according to differing seizuretypes, differences in their pattern of suppression burst, anddiffering etiologies. Speci ﬁcally, in its purest form, Ohtahara
syndrome is thought to result mostly from structural mal-formations, whereas early myoclonic encephalopathy isassociated with metabolic abnormalities. However, consid-
erable clinical overlap between these conditions can occur.
Newer understandings of the genetic and pathophysio-
logic mechanisms underlying these diseases have revealedfurther similarities between them. Broadly speaking, both
syndromes frequently seem associated with conditions thatlead to abnormal neuronal migration, possibly leading toboth structural brain abnormalities and a functional
disconnection between the cortex and the deep brain and
brainstem [20,26,34,46,48] . The prominence of brainstem
abnormalities in both syndromes similarly indicates
a disconnect between the cortex and subcortical structures.Table 2. Genetic mutations associated with epileptic encephalopathies
Mutation
SiteOhtaharaSyndromeEME West
SyndromeSMEI Atypical RTT
with EarlyEpilepsyEFMR
ARX Yes Yes
CDKL5 Yes Yes
ErbB4 Yes
MAGI2 Yes
PCDH19 Yes Yes
PNKP Yes Yes
SCN1A Yes
SLC25 A22 Yes
STXBP1 Yes Yes
Abbreviations:
EFMR ¼Epilepsy and mental retardation limited to females
EME ¼Early myoclonic encephalopathy
RTT ¼Rett syndrome
SMEI ¼Severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (also known as Dravet syndrome)
Only epileptic encephalopathy syndromes presenting during infancy are included.Some mutations may also be associated with other conditions, e.g., the SCN1A
mutation is associated with generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures.J.C. Beal et al. / Pediatric Neurology 47 (2012) 317 e323 321This so-called “cortical deafferentation ”may play a role in
the intractable nature of the seizures as well the prevalence
of tonic seizures in both syndromes [34,36,46] .
Thus, to think of Ohtahara syndrome and early myoclonic
encephalopathy as part of a spectrum may be possible. Themultiple etiologies identiﬁed in these conditions lead
to similar pathophysiologic pathways. These pathways
may result in a range of similar disease states involving
tonic seizures, a suppression burst electroencephalographicpattern, onset during infancy, and progressive encephalop-
athy with psychomotor retardation. The two syndromes may
therefore not involve two distinct diseases, but rather mayform part of a continuum of disease.
S.L.M. has received research support from the National Institutes of Health (grant
R01 NS20253 as principal investigator, grant R01-NS43209 as investigator, and grant2UO1-NS45911 as investigator) and the Heffer Family Foundation.
References
[1] Ohtahara S, Ishida T, Oka E, Yamatogy Y, Inoue H. On the speci ﬁc
age-dependent epileptic syndromes: The early-infantile epileptic
encephalopathy with suppression-burst. No To Hattatsu 1976;8:270e80.
[2] Ohtahara S. A study on the age-dependent epileptic encephalop-
athy. No To Hattatsu 1977;9:2 e21.
[3] Clarke M, Gill J, Noronha M, McKinlay I. Early infantile epileptic
encephalopathy with suppression burst: Ohtahara syndrome. DevMed Child Neurol 1987;29:520 e8.
[4] Aicardi J, Goutieres F. Encephalopathie myoclonique neonatale. Rev
Electroencephalographr Neurophysiol Clin 1978;8:99 e101.
[5] Ohtahara S, Yamatogu Y. Epileptic encephalopathies in early
infancy with suppression burst. J Clin Neurophysiol 2003;20:
398e407.
[6] Engel J. A proposed diagnostic scheme for people with epileptic
seizures and with epilepsy: Report of the ILAE Task Force on
Classi ﬁcation and Terminology. Epilepsia 2001;42:796 e803.
[7] Berg AT, Berkovic SF, Brodie MJ, et al. Revised terminology and
concepts for organization of seizures and epilepsies: Report of the
ILAE Commission on Classi ﬁcation and Terminology, 2005 e2009.
Epilepsia 2010;51:676 e85.
[8] Ohtahara S. Seizure disorders in infancy and childhood. Brain Dev
1984;6:509 e19.
[9] Ohtahara S, Yamatogi Y. Ohtahara syndrome: With special reference
to its developmental aspects for differentiating from early myoclonic
encephalopathy. Epilepsy Res 2006;70(Suppl. 1):S58 e67.
[10] Yamatogi Y, Ohtahara S. Early-infantile epileptic encephalopathy
with suppression-bursts, Ohtahara syndrome: Its overview refer-ring to our 16 cases. Brain Dev 2002;24:13 e23.
[11] Fusco L, Pachatz C, Di Capua M, Vigevano F. Video-EEG aspects of
early-infantile epileptic encephalopathy with suppression-bursts(Ohtahara syndrome). Brain Dev 2001;23:708 e14.
[12] Murakami N, Ohtsuka Y, Ohtahara S. Early infantile epileptic
syndromes with suppression-bursts: Early myoclonic encephalop-athy vs. Ohtahara syndrome. Jpn J Psychatr Neurol 1993;47:197 e200.
[13] Ozyurek H, Turanli G, Aliefendioglu D, Coskun T. Repetitive EEG
recordings are necessary for the diagnosis of early myoclonicencephalopathy. Neurol India 2005;53:235 e7.
[14] Dalla Bernardina B, Dulac O, Fejerman N, et al. Early myoclonic
epileptic encephalopathy (E.M.E.E.). Eur J Pediatr 1983;140:248e52.
[15] Aicardi J, Ohtahara S. Severe neonatal epilepsies with suppression-
burst pattern. In: Roger J, Bureau M, Dravet CH, Genton P,Tassinari CA, Wolf P, editors. Epileptic syndromes in infancy,childhood and adolescence. 3rd ed. London: John Libbey &
Company Ltd.; 2002. p. 33 e44.
[16] Miller SP, Dilenge ME, Meagher-Villemure K, O ’Gorman AM,
Shevell MI. Infantile epileptic encephalopathy (Ohtahara syndrome)
and migrational disorder. Pediatr Neurol 1998;19:50 e4.[17] Schlumberger E, Dulac O, Plouin P. Early-infantile epileptic
syndrome(s) with suppression-burst: Nosological considerations.In: Roger J, Bureau M, Dravet CH, Dreifuss FE, Perret A, Wolf P,editors. Epileptic syndromes in infancy, childhood, and adoles-
cence. London: John Libbey & Company Ltd.; 1992. p. 35 e42.
[18] Trinka E, Rauscher C, Nagler M, et al. A case of Ohtahara syndrome
with olivary-dentate dysplasia and agenesis of the mamillary
bodies. Epilepsia 2001;42:950 e3.
[19] du Plessis AJ, Kaufmann WE, Kupsky WJ. Intra-uterine onset
myoclonic encephalopathy associated with cerebral cortical
dysgenesis. J Child Neurol 1993;8:164 e70.
[20] Sprea ﬁco R, Angelini L, Binelli S, et al. Burst suppression and
impairment of neocortical ontogenesis: Electro-clinical and
neuropathologic ﬁndings in two infants with early myoclonic
encephalopathy. Epilepsia 1993;34:800 e8.
[21]
Williams AN, Gray RG, Poulton K, Ramani P, Whitehouse WP.
A case of Ohtahara syndrome with cytochrome oxidase de ﬁciency.
Dev Med Child Neurol 1998;40:568 e70.
[22] Tatsuno M, Hayashi M, Iwamoto H, Sasaki Y, Hara M. Autopsy case
of Leigh ’s encephalopathy with wide lesions in central nervous
system and early infantile epileptic encephalopathy with burstsuppression. No To Hattatsu 1984;16:68 e75.
[23] Singhi P, Ray M. Ohtahara syndrome with biotinidase de ﬁciency.
J Child Neurol 2011;26:507 e9.
[24] Castro-Gago M, Blanco-Barca MO, Gómez-Lado C, Eirís-Puñal J,
Campos-González Y, Arenas-Barbero J. Respiratory chain complex Ideﬁciency in an infant with Ohtahara syndrome. Brain Dev 2009;
31:322 e5.
[25] Seo JH, Lee YM, Lee JS, Kim SH, Kim HD. A case of Ohtahara
syndrome with mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I de ﬁ-
ciency. Brain Dev 2010;32:253 e7.
[26] Molinari F. Mitochondria and neonatal epileptic encephalopathies
with suppression burst. J Bioenerg Biomembr 2010;42:467 e71.
[27] Saitsu H, Kato M, Mizuguchi T, et al. De novo mutations in the gene
encoding STXBP1 (MUNC18-1) cause early infantile epileptic
encephalopathy. Nat Genet 2008;40:782 e8.
[28] Milh M, Villeneuve N, Chouchane M, et al. Epileptic and non-
epileptic features in patients with early onset epileptic encepha-lopathy and STXBP1 mutations. Epilepsia 2011;52:1828 e34.
[29] Otsuka M, Oguni H, Liang JS, et al. STXBP1 mutations cause not only
Ohtahara syndrome but also West syndrome: Results of Japanesecohort study. Epilepsia 2010;51:2449 e52.
[30] Kato M, Saitoh S, Kamei A, et al. A longer polyalanine expansion
mutation in the ARX gene causes early infantile epileptic enceph-
alopathy with suppression-burst pattern (Ohtahara syndrome).Am J Hum Genet 2007;81:361 e6.
[31] Eks ¸i o/C21glu YZ, Pong AW, Takeoka M. A novel mutation in the Aris-
taless domain of the ARX gene leads to Ohtahara syndrome, global
developmental delay, and ambiguous genitalia in males and
neuropsychiatric disorders in females. Epilepsia 2011;52:984 e92.
[32] Giordano L, Sartori S, Russo S, et al. Familial Ohtahara syndrome
due to a novel ARX gene mutation. Am J Med Genet [A] 2010;152A:
3133e7.
[33] Molinari F, Kaminska A, Fiermonte G, et al. Mutations in the
mitochondrial glutamate carrier SLC25A22 in neonatal epileptic
encephalopathy with suppression bursts. Clin Genet 2009;76:
188e94.
[34] Pavone P, Spalice A, Polizzi A, Parisi P, Ruggieri M. Ohtahara
syndrome with emphasis on recent genetic discovery. Brain Dev2012;34:459 e68.
[35] Mastrangelo M, Leuzzi V. Genes of early-onset epileptic encepha-
lopathies: From genotype to phenotype. Pediatr Neurol 2012;46:
24e31.
[36] Djukic A, Lado FA, Shinnar S, Moshé SL. Are early myoclonic
enceph
alopathy (EME) and the Ohtahara syndrome (EIEE) inde-
pendent of each other? Epilepsy Res 2006;70:68 e76.
[37] Lado FA, Moshé SL. Role of subcortical structures in the patho-
genesis of infantile spasms: What are possible subcortical media-tors? Int Rev Neurobiol 2002;49:115e 40.
[38] Dalla Bernardina B, Aicardi J, Goutières F, Plouin P. Glycine
encephalopathy. Neuropadiatrie 1979;10:209 e25.
[39] Lombroso C. Early myoclonic encephalopathy, early infantile
epileptic encephalopathy and benign and severe infantile myoclonic
epilepsies: A critical review and personal contributions. J Clin Neu-rophysiol 1990;7:380 e408.J.C. Beal et al. / Pediatric Neurology 47 (2012) 317 e323 322[40] Wang PJ, Lee WT, Hwu WL, Young C, Yau KI, Shen YZ. The
controversy regarding diagnostic criteria for early myoclonic
encephalopathy. Brain Dev 1998;20:530 e5.
[41] Lee WT. Disorders of amino acid metabolism associated with
epilepsy. Brain Dev 2011;33:745 e52.
[42] Aukett A, Bennett MJ, Hosking GP. Molybdenum cofactor de ﬁ-
ciency: An easily missed inborn error of metabolism. Dev MedChild Neurol 1988;30:531 e5.
[43] Plasse M, Serre JC, Joannard A, et al. L’acidémie d-glycérique: A
propos d ’une nouvelle observation anatomo-clinique. Arch Fr
Pediatr 1980;37:577 e84.
[44] Vigevano F, Cincinnati P, Bertini E, Bosman C, Gisondi A,
Maccagnani F. Encefalopatia mioclonica precoce associata ad altilivelli di acido propionico nel siero. Boll Lega Ital Epil 1982;39:181 e2.
[45] Aicardi J. Early myoclonic encephalopathy. In: Roger J, Dravet C,
Bureau M, Dreifuss FE, Wolf P, editors. Epileptic syndromes ininfancy, childhood and adolescence. London: John Libbey Eurotext;
1985. p. 12 e21.
[46] Hirose M, Haginoya K, Yokoyama H, et al. Functional cortical
deafferentation from the subcortical structures in a patient with
early myoclonic encephalopathy: A functional neuroimagingstudy. Epilepsia 2010;51:699 e702.
[47] Watanabe S, Murayama A, Watanabe S, et al. Schinzel-Giedion
syndrome: A further cause of early myoclonic encephalopathy andvacuolating myelinopathy. Brain Dev 2012;34:151 e5.[48] Backx L, Ceulemans B, Vermeesch JR, Devriendt K, Van Esch H.
Early myoclonic encephalopathy caused by a disruption of theneuregulin-1 receptor ErbB4 . Eur J Hum Genet 2009;17:378 e82.
[49] Ohno M, Shimotsuji Y, Abe J, Shimada M, Tamiya H. Zonisamide
treatment of early infantile epileptic encephalopathy. PediatrNeurol 2000;23:341 e4.
[50] Tekgul H, Serdaroglu G, Karapinar B, et al. Vigabatrin caused
rapidly progressive deterioration in two cases with earlymyoclonic encephalopathy associated with non ketotic hyper-glycinemia. J Child Neurol 2006;21:82 e4.
[51] Ishii M, Shimono M, Senju A, Kusuhara K, Shiota N. The ketogenic
diet as an effective treatment for Ohtahara syndrome. No ToHattatsu 2011;43:47 e50.
[52] Kamate M, Mahantshetti N, Chetal V. Early myoclonic encepha-
lopathy. Indian Pediatr 2009;46:804 e6.
[53] Rossi S, Daniele I, Bastrenta P, Mastrangelo M, Lista G. Early
myoclonic encephalopathy and nonketotic hyperglycinemia.
Pediatr Neurol 2009;41:371 e4.
[54] Komaki H, Sugai K, Sasaki M, et al. Surgical treatment of a case
of early infantile epileptic encephalopathy with suppression-
bursts associated with focal cortical dysplasia. Epilepsia 1999;40:365e 9.
[55] Saneto RP, Sotero de Menezes M. Persistence of suppression-bursts
in a patient with Ohtahara syndrome. J Child Neurol 2007;22:631e4.J.C. Beal et al. / Pediatric Neurology 47 (2012) 317 e323 323