Applicant Submission
ORI ( Code assigned by DOJ ) Authorized Applicant Type
Type of License/Certification/Permit OR Working Title  ( Maximum 30 characters - if assigned by DOJ, use exact title assigned )
Contributing Agency Information:
Agency Authorized to Receive Criminal Record Information
Street Address or P.O. Box
City State ZIP CodeMail Code (five-digit code assigned by DOJ)
Contact Name (mandatory for all school submissions)
Contact Telephone Number
Applicant Information:
Last Name First Name Middle Initial Suffix
Other Name: (AKA or Alias)
Last Name First Name Suffix
Date of BirthSex Male Female
Driver's License Number
Height Weight Eye Color Hair Color
Place of Birth (State or Country) Social Security Number
Home 
Address Street Address or P.O. Box City ZIP CodeBilling 
Number
(Agency Billing Number)
Misc. 
Number
(Other Identification Number)
Your Number:
OCA Number (Agency Identifying Number)Level of Service:  DOJ
If re-submission, list original ATI number: 
(Must provide proof of rejection) Original ATI Number
 
Employer (Additional response for agencies specified by statute):
Employer Name
Street Address or P.O. Box
City ZIP Code Mail Code (five digit code assigned by DOJ)Telephone Number (optional)
 
Live Scan Transaction Completed By:
Name of Operator Date
Transmitting Agency LSID ATI Number Amount Collected/BilledState
State
STATE OF CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
BCIA 8016CCPP 
(Orig. 09/2022)
REQUEST FOR LIVE SCAN SERVICE 
(Check Casher Permit )Page 1 of 4
Date Applicant Signature I have received and read the included Privacy Notice, Privacy Act Statement, and Applicant's Privacy Rights.  AdoptPrivacy Notice 
As Required by Civil Code § 1798.17 
 
Collection and Use of Personal Information.  The Check Casher Permit Program (CCPP) in the 
Department of Justice collects the information requested on this form as authorized by California Civil 
Code section 1789.37(b). The CCPP uses this information to process applications pertaining to the 
issuing of a permit to operate a check cashing business in the State of California. In addition, any 
personal information collected by state agencies is subject to the limitations in the Information Practices 
Act and state policy. The Department of Justice's general privacy policy is available at:  
https://oag.ca.gov/privacy-policy . 
 
Providing Personal Information.   All the personal information requested in the form must be provided. 
Failure to provide the requested information will result in a delay in processing and/or denial of the 
application.  
 
Access to Your Information.  You may review the records maintained by the CCPP in the Department of 
Justice that contain your personal information, as permitted by the Information Practices Act.  See below 
for contact information. 
 
Possible Disclosure of Personal Information.  In order to process the information pertaining to 
operating a check cashing business in the State of California, we may need to share the information you 
give us with federal, state, city, county, government and/or law enforcement agencies.  
 
The information you provide may also be disclosed in the following circumstances: 
 
• With other persons or agencies where necessary to perform their legal duties, and their use of 
your information is compatible and complies with state law, such as for investigations or for 
licensing, certification, or regulatory purposes.  
• To another government agency as required by state or federal law. 
 
Contact Information.  For questions about this notice or access to your records, you may contact the 
CCPP by e-mail at  chkcashpermit@doj.ca.gov, by phone at (916) 210-4103, or via mail at: 
 
California Department of Justice 
Bureau of Criminal Information and Analysis 
Check Casher Permit Program 
P.O. Box 160207 
Sacramento, CA 95816-0207 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
BCIA 8016CCPP 
(Orig. 09/2022)
REQUEST FOR LIVE SCAN SERVICE 
(Check Casher Permit )Page 2 of 4Page 3 of 4DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
REQUEST FOR LIVE SCAN SERVICE 
(Check Casher Permit )BCIA 8016CCPP 
(Orig. 09/2022)STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Privacy Act Statement 
 
Authority.  The FBI's acquisition, preservation, and exchange of fingerprints and associated 
information is generally authorized under 28 U.S.C. 534. Depending on the nature of your 
application, supplemental authorities include Federal statutes, State statutes pursuant to Pub. L. 
92-544, Presidential Executive Orders, and federal regulations. Providing your fingerprints and 
associated information is voluntary; however, failure to do so may affect completion or approval of 
your application. 
 
Principal Purpose . Certain determinations, such as employment, licensing, and security 
clearances, may be predicated on fingerprint-based background checks. Your fingerprints and 
associated information/biometrics may be provided to the employing, investigating, or otherwise 
responsible agency, and/or the FBI for the purpose of comparing your fingerprints to other 
fingerprints in the FBI's Next Generation Identification (NGI) system or its successor systems 
(including civil, criminal, and latent fingerprint repositories) or other available records of the 
employing, investigating, or otherwise responsible agency. The FBI may retain your fingerprints 
and associated information/biometrics in NGI after the completion of this application and, while 
retained, your fingerprints may continue to be compared against other fingerprints submitted to or 
retained by NGI. 
 
Routine Uses.  During the processing of this application and for as long thereafter as your 
fingerprints and associated information/biometrics are retained in NGI, your information may be 
disclosed pursuant to your consent, and may be disclosed without your consent as permitted by 
the Privacy Act of 1974 and all applicable Routine Uses as may be published at any time in the 
Federal Register, including the Routine Uses for the NGI system and the FBI's Blanket Routine 
Uses.  Routine uses include, but are not limited to, disclosures to: employing, governmental, or 
authorized non-governmental agencies responsible for employment, contracting, licensing, 
security clearances, and other suitability determinations; local, state, tribal, or federal law 
enforcement agencies; criminal justice agencies; and agencies responsible for national security or 
public safety.Page 4 of 4DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
REQUEST FOR LIVE SCAN SERVICE 
(Check Casher Permit )BCIA 8016CCPP 
(Orig. 09/2022)STATE OF CALIFORNIA
Noncriminal Justice Applicant's Privacy Rights 
 
As an applicant who is the subject of a national fingerprint-based criminal history record check for 
a noncriminal justice purpose (such as an application for employment or a license, an immigration 
or naturalization matter, security clearance, or adoption), you have certain rights which are 
discussed below.  
 
 • You must be provided written notification 1 that your fingerprints will be used to check the 
    criminal history records of the FBI.   
 • You must be provided, and acknowledge receipt of, an adequate Privacy Act Statement 
    when you submit your fingerprints and associated personal information. This Privacy Act 
    Statement should explain the authority for collecting your information and how your 
    information will be used, retained, and shared.  2  
 • If you have a criminal history record, the officials making a determination of your 
   suitability for the employment, license, or other benefit must provide you the opportunity 
   to complete or challenge the accuracy of the information in the record .  
 • The officials must advise you that the procedures for obtaining a change, correction, or 
   update of your criminal history record are set forth at Title 28, Code of Federal 
   Regulations (CFR), Section 16.34.   
 • If you have a criminal history record, you should be afforded a reasonable amount of time 
   to correct or complete the record (or decline to do so) before the officials deny you the 
   employment, license, or other benefit based on information in the criminal history record . 3 
 
You have the right to expect that officials receiving the results of the criminal history record check 
will use it only for authorized purposes and will not retain or disseminate it in violation of federal 
statute, regulation or executive order, or rule, procedure or standard established by the National 
Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact Council. 4  
 
If agency policy permits, the officials may provide you with a copy of your FBI criminal history 
record for review and possible challenge. If agency policy does not permit it to provide you a copy 
of the record, you may obtain a copy of the record by submitting fingerprints and a fee to the FBI. 
Information regarding this process may be obtained at https://www.fbi.gov/services/cjis/identity-
history-summary-checks .  
 
If you decide to challenge the accuracy or completeness of your FBI criminal history record, you 
should send your challenge to the agency that contributed the questioned information to the FBI. 
Alternatively, you may send your challenge directly to the FBI. The FBI will then forward your 
challenge to the agency that contributed the questioned information and request the agency to 
verify or correct the challenged entry. Upon receipt of an official communication from that agency, 
the FBI will make any necessary changes/corrections to your record in accordance with the 
information supplied by that agency. (See 28 CFR 16.30 through 16.34.) You can find additional 
information on the FBI website at https://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/background-checks .  
 
1 Written notification includes electronic notification, but excludes oral notification 
2 https://www.fbi.gov/services/cjis/compact-council/privacy-act-statement  
3 See 28 CFR 50.12(b) 
4 See U.S.C. 552a(b); 28 U.S.C. 534(b); 34 U.S.C. § 40316 (formerly cited as 42 U.S.C. § 14616), Article IV(c) 