i 
 MASTER OF SCIENCE IN AQUACULTURE  
AT 
 
 
An Economic Analysis of the use of Recirculating Aq uaculture 
Systems in the Production of Tilapia 
 
FRANK APPIAH-KUBI 
 
Main Supervisor 
Professor Hans Magnus Gjøen 
Department of Animal and Aquaculture Sciences 
Norwegian University of Life Sciences 
Ås, Norway 
 
Co-Supervisor 
Bjørn-Frode Ericsson  
Department of Mathematical Sciences and Technology 
Machine, Process, Water, Agriculture and Product Se ction 
Norwegian University of Life Sciences 
Ås, Norway 
  
ii 
 DECLARATION 
I hereby declare that this thesis is a bona fide re cord of research work done by me as a part of my 
master degree program from the Norwegian University  of Life Sciences (UMB), Ås, Norway. 
It has not previously formed the basis for the awar d of any degree, diploma, fellowship to me, or 
other similar title of any other university or soci ety. 
I hereby warrant that this thesis is based on work done by myself and where sources of 
information have been used, they have been acknowle dged.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ås, May 2012                                                                                         F . Appiah-Kubi 
 
                                                                                                         .. .…………………………. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 iii 
 PREFACE  
The submission of this master thesis marks the end of my MSc. Program in Aquaculture. The 
study was carried out at the Department of Animal a nd Aquacultural Studies of the Norwegian 
University of Life Sciences. 
Economic analysis of Recirculating Aquaculture Syst ems (RAS) in the production of tilapia has 
been the focus of many researchers worldwide. A gre at deal of emphasis was placed on the 
biological and engineering aspects of the productio n in these past researches. Research works 
which incorporates the biological and engineering d evelopments, together with the economics of 
RAS in tilapia production are scarce in Norway. Als o, advances in commercialization of RAS 
technology in tilapia production in Norway is widel y accepted to be in its infancy compared to 
other aquaculture production techniques. I believe this study incorporating the biological, 
engineering and economics associated with the produ ction of tilapia on a commercial scale 
would provide useful data for making logical and ap plicable inferences, as well as, basis on 
which future researches into the economics of RAS c ould be hinged. 
Differing from most of other studies on the economi cs of RAS in the production of tilapia, this 
analysis primarily focused on the operational (runn ing) costs using data from both the prototype 
RAS production and commercial scale production. Ano ther analysis which incorporated 
variables such as capital and infrastructure costs,  depreciation rates and tax rates was developed, 
but unfortunately excluded from this final report b ecause the plausibility of some data used could 
not be verified due to non availability of informat ion. The financial feasibility of the various 
production scenarios is discussed together with the  production variables found to have high 
impact on profitability. 
 
F. Appiah-Kubi                    Ås, May 2012             iv 
 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to  my  supervisor Hans Magnus Gjøen for his 
guidance, patience during my trying times and suppo rt in the course of conducting this 
experiment and the thesis write-up. I also extend m y sincere thanks to Bjørn-Frode Ericsson for 
his fatherly advice and taking time to discuss vari ous issues in relation to the RAS at UMB with 
me. God richly bless him for his support.  
I would also like to thank Bjørn Reidear Hansen, wh o helped me in the data collection and for 
his moral support. Mr. Godwin Acquah Dwomoh and Isa ac Kumah, your brotherly love and 
support cannot go unacknowledged. To all, who in di verse ways contributed directly and 
indirectly to the success of this thesis; I say, th ank you and may the Almighty God bless you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 v 
 DEDICATION 
This work is dedicated to my son Jerome Nyarko Appi ah-Kubi, my lovely wife Gloria Appiah-
Kubi, not forgetting my mum Madam Veronica Nyarko w hose singular efforts saw to my rise on 
the education ladder. To God be all the glory, hono ur and praise for how far he has brought me. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 vi 
 ABSTRACT 
An economic analysis of tilapia production was cond ucted using a recirculating aquaculture 
system facility, situated at the Norwegian Universi ty of Life Science (UMB). The goals were; (1) 
to evaluate and estimate the operational cost invol ved and from this, estimate the breakeven cost, 
(2) identify and describe the constraints unique to  the RAS, (3) to perform financial feasibility of 
a (hypothetical) scale-up production, and (4) to co nduct sensitivity analysis on some variables to 
highlight their effect on profitability. All assump tions made in this study, production scale and 
the economic analysis were based on the technology design, and production parameters existing 
at the UMB facility.  
Tilapia (0.36g), were stocked in the tanks; tempera ture and water quality parameters were 
carefully managed until the fish reached the harves table size (700g) after 140days. The survival 
rate and feed conversion ratio (FCR) were 91% and 0 .8 respectively. Economic analyses was 
conducted on three different production scenarios, (1) ‘actual’  production carried out at the 
UMB facility, (2) analysis on the same scale of pro duction, with the introduction of some 
correctional data from commercial productions, and (3) scale-up (hypothetical) production 
system based on the design criteria of the UMB faci lity.  
The results showed that, the operational cost invol ving the UMB production was high and 
economically not viable. A price of NOK 73 is requi red to be able to breakeven relative to the 
prevailing market price of NOK 40. The production i n this scenario needed to be increased by 
54.8%, to be able to breakeven.  
The introduction of cost data from commercial produ ctions in the second analysis resulted in a 
drastic reduction in operational cost. Breakeven pr ice and breakeven yield estimated were NOK 
42.7 and 1163kg respectively. However, for the scal e-up production, NOK 40.2 was the 
estimated cost to breakeven. The breakeven yield es timated for the scale-up production was 
109663kg of tilapia. Indications thus, were that, p rospects for economic success with RAS under 
Norwegian conditions can be improved by a large sca le production.  The sensitivity analysis 
revealed that, reductions in the cost of production  variables such as labour, feed, and electricity, 
have marginal effects on profitability. Increases i n sales price and production scale were found 
to have the highest impacts on profitability and im provements in these variables would yield 
maximum profit.  
Key words:  Scale-up, sensitivity analysis, breakeven yield, b reakeven cost, economic analysis. vii 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
  
DECLARATION…………………………………………………………………………... 
 II 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS……………………………………………………………….. 
 III 
DEDICATION…………………………………………………………………………….. IV 
Abstract……………………………………………………………………………………..  V 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 VI 
List of tables……………………………………………………………………………….. 
 VIII 
List of figures……………………………………………………………………………..... 
 VIII 
Abbreviations……………………………………………………………………………….  X 
1.0 INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………. 
 1 
   1.1 Species and production parameters…………………………………… …………….. 2 
   1.2 Culture attributes of Tilapia……………………………………… …………………..  2 
   1.3 World Production and Trade……………………………………………… ………… 3 
   1.4 Recirculatory Aquaculture Systems…………………………… ……………………. 5 
      1.4.1 Advantages of Recirculating Aquaculture  Systems……………………………... 6 
      1.4.2 Risk Management……………………………………………………………… ... 6 
      1.4.3 Recirculating Systems in Norwegian Aqua culture industry……………………...  7 
2.0 MATERIALS AND METHODS…………………………………………………….  8 
   2.1 Description of the UMB fish laboratory……………… ……………………………... 8 
   2.2 Production Setup…………………………………………………………………….. .  9 
   2.3 Production scenarios and models of estimatio ns…………………………………….. 11 
      2.3.1 Biological model…………………………………………………………… …….  11 
      2.3.2 Economic (model) analysis techniques……… ………………………………….. 12 viii 
          2.3.2.1 Cost Volume Analysis…………………………………… ………………….. 12 
   2.4 Sensitivity analysis……………………………………………………………… …... 14 
   2.5  Alternative budget and Economies of scale (scale-up  production)…………………..  15 
   2.6  Cost estimations of the main operational areas in t he production……………………  17 
      2.6.1  Fingerlings………………………………………………………………………..  17 
      2.6.2 Feed and feeding…………………………………………………………………  17 
      2.6.3 Labour costs………………………………………………………………………  17 
      2.6.4 Electricity…………………………………………………………………………  18 
      2.6.5 Water analysis………………………………………………………………… …. 19 
      2.6.6 Chemical analysis (Bicarbonate/lime)-pH  control……………………………….  20 
      2.6.7 Slaughtering………………………………………………………………………  20 
   2.7 Operational cost analysis-UMB RAS facility…… …………………………………..  21 
   2.8 Alternative Budget……………………………………………………………………  21 
   2.9 Scale-up production………………………………………………………………… ..  21 
3.0 RESULTS……………………………………………………………………………...  22 
4.0 DISCUSSION………………………………………………………………………….  28 
   4.1 Cost of labour………………………………………………………………………...  28 
   4.2 Electricity……………………………………………………………………………..  28 
   4.3 Cost of feed…………………………………………………………………………..  29 
   4.4 Fingerlings…………………………………………………………………………… 29 
   4.5 Economies of scale…………………………………………………………………. ..  31 
   4.6 Sensitivity analysis……………………………………………………………… …... 31 
5.0 CONCLUSION……………………………………………………………………….. 32 ix 
    5.1 Limitations of the study…………………………………………………… …………  32 
6.0 REFERENCES………………………………………………………………………..  33 
7.0 APPENDIX…………………………………………………………………………….  40 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES  
Figure 1 : Major Tilapia  producing countries in the world ………………................................. 4 
Figure 2: Global Aquaculture  production of Nile Tilapia ………………………………...…….5 
Figure 3:  A schematic design of the basic components  of the facility...……………………………. 9  
Figure 4: The hatchery (part) used in the productio n of fingerlings …………………………….10 
Figure 5: The weaning tanks used in the production ……………………………………………10 
 
 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 : Summary of variables used in sensitivity analyses a nd the corresponding variations          
 applied to assess the potential impacts on the fin ancial performance of the UMB facility       
and the scaled-up production…………………………………………………………… ……… 15 
Table 2 : Basic costs and units of economic, engineering and biological parameters monitored                          
  at the UMB facility……………………………………………………………………………… 16 
Table 3 : Shows the various components where electricity usag e occurs and the amount  
 consumed………………………………………………………………….…………………….. 18 
Table 4 : Summarizes the fixed and variable costs, cost of pr od. Kg of tilapia and the % of    
             parameters to total production cost (U MB laboratory)…………………………………..... 22 
Table 5:  Summarizes the estimations from the economic models  for the UMB facility…… …….23 
Table 6:  Summarizes the operational costs, cost of producing  a kg of tilapia and the %   
           Impact of   each parameter to total prod uction cost for the alternative budget............. .... 23 x 
 Table 7:  Summarizes the results of the economic model estima tions for the alternative budget ..24 
Table 8:   Summarizes the fixed and variable costs,  total operation costs, cost of producing a kg  
              of tilapia and the % impact of each parameter on th e total production cost for the       
             scaled-up production……………………………………………… ……………………………. 25 
Table 9:  Summarizes the results of economic model estimation s for the scaled-up  
(hypothetical) production…………………………………………………………………… …………… 26 
Table 10:  Summarizes the results of the sensitivity analysis performed for the identified  
               variables……………………………………………………………………… …………………. 26  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 xi 
 ABBREVIATIONS 
UMB: Norwegian University of Life Sciences 
RAS: Recirculating Aquaculture Systems 
FAO: Food and Agriculture Organization of the Unite d Nations 
EU: European Union 
TAN: Total Ammonia Nitrogen 
UAN: Unionized Ammonia Nitrogen 
FCR: Feed conversion Ratio 
CVP: Cost -Volume –Profit 
Kg: kilogram 
NOK: Norwegian Kroner 
GIFT: Genetically Improved Farmed Tilapia 
NCRAC: North Central Regional Aquaculture Center 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 1.0 Introduction 
Aquaculture is one of the fastest growing sectors o f food production in the world. Cultured 
species such as tilapia, catfish, salmon, trout, oy sters and clams are high in demand and the profit 
level is very high. The boom in this industry can b e attributed to the growing demand for a 
healthy, tasty and affordable food as well as the s harp decline in wild fish populations as a result 
of overharvest and water pollution (Helfrich & Libe y, a). The rampant pollution of fresh water 
resources has also necessitated the need for the cu lturing of fish in waters free from 
contamination. Recirculating aquaculture system (RA S) technology has been found to provide a 
way in solving this problem. This is a technology d esigned for holding and growing a wide 
variety of aquatic species and defined as productio n units which recycle water by passing it 
through filters to remove metabolic and other waste  products (Kazmierczak & Caffey, 1995). 
The systems can be designed to cater for different capacities and efficiencies. In comparison to 
the traditional aquaculture practices, RAS offers m ore independence from the external 
environment (i.e. increased levels of control) whic h provides a basis for improved risk 
management (Rawlinson, 2002). Majority of the world s tilapia productions are done using the 
pond systems, however, in the temperate regions, RA S is employed in the production due to the 
cold climatic conditions. This makes the production  cost higher since huge capital is expended 
on the RAS construction and the running of other pr oduction mechanisms such as heating, 
pumping and filtering of the water (Alceste & Jory,  2002). A lot of European countries are now 
using RAS in fish production; however, production l evel is very low compared to other forms of 
fish culture (Martins et al.,  2010). The construction and operation of these fac ilities require high 
capital injection and this sometimes serves as disi ncentive to prospective investors (Schneider et 
al., 2006).  To make up for this, high stocking den sities are required in the productions to be able 
to cover the investment costs and generate profit. However, the need for high stocking densities 
also comes with some welfare challenges (Martins et al.,  2005). Aquaculture production using 
RAS has been the focus of research and developmenta l efforts of many groups for decades. Most 
of the research has been going on outside Norway; w hereas here, it has almost exclusively been 
aimed at cold water species and there is consequent ly no data on the economic performance of a 
commercial scale recirculating production systems f or tilapia in Norway.  2 
 The purpose of this thesis project was to conduct a n economic analysis on the production of 
tilapia using recirculating systems and from this d educe the following: 
•  The operational cost involved in a closed recircul ation systems in a temperate region. 
• Identify and describe the constraints unique to the  closed system culture. 
• Conduct sensitivity analysis to highlight the varia bles that affects profitability 
• To perform an economic analysis (financial feasibil ity) of the systems in a bigger set 
up.  
• Suggest key areas where more attention should be fo cused in future researches. 
1.1 Species and Production Parameters 
Tilapia, commonly, refers to a group cichlids consi sting of three economically important genera. 
These are taxonomically distinguished from each oth er according to their reproductive 
behaviours: Tilapia, Oreochromis and Sarotherodon, all commonly known as “tilapia” (Mjoun 
& Rosentrater, 2010). The Nile tilapia ( Oreochromis niloticus ) and various hybrids are the most 
commonly produced tilapia species (Green, 2006). Ot her less commonly cultured species include 
Blue tilapia (O. aureus), Mozambique tilapia ( O. mossambicus ), Zanzibar tilapia ( O. urolepis 
hornorum ) and red tilapia ( T. rendalli and T. zilli ). O. niloticus represents about 75% of the 
world production (FAO, 2009a). Tilapia culture can be in either fresh or salt water, in tropical 
and subtropical climates, but the culture can be co nstrained in temperate climates where 
production must be carried out in indoor tanks (Lim  & Webster, 2006 in  Mjoun & Rosentrater, 
2010). Optimal growing temperatures are typically b etween 22°C- 29°C and spawning normally 
occurs at temperatures greater than 22°C (Mjoun & R osentrater, 2010a). Most tilapia species are 
unable to survive at temperatures below 10°C, and g rowth is poor below 20°C (Mjoun and 
Rosentrater , 2010b). They can tolerate a pH range of 3.7-11 but  optimal growth rates are 
achieved between the pH of 7-9 (Ross, 2000).   
  
1.2 Culture Attributes of Tilapia 
The tilapias are second to carps in terms of produc tion as farmed table fish and they exhibit some 
unique characteristics that serve as a drive for it s continual growth and may soon surpass carp 
production. The global demand for their products is  high, can be cultured in a variety of 3 
 production systems and in different geographic regi ons to contribute to the high world 
production. They have been identified as a prime sp ecies for use in recirculating systems because 
of their tolerance to crowding and low water qualit y (Drennen & Malone 1990). They are known 
to have good-tasting, mild flavour flesh and widely  accepted as food fish, used in many cuisines. 
A range of variant coloration offers consumers diff erent choices.  Reproduction wise, they can 
breed in captivity without hormonal induction of sp awning. They produce large eggs, 
culminating in the production of large fry (at hatc hing) that are hardy and omnivorous at first 
feeding. Sexual maturity is reached in less than 6 months, making them good candidates for 
selective breeding. They are tolerant of a wide ran ge of environmental conditions (Chervinski, 
1982), including low dissolved oxygen levels (1 ppm ); high ammonia levels (2.4 to 3.4 mg/L 
unionized), and will grow in water ranging from aci dic (pH 4) to alkaline-pH 11 (El-Sayed, 
2006). Tilapia can tolerate CO ₂ up till 20mg/l and high H ₂S levels (Halver & Hardy, 2003) and 
various strains can be grown in water varying in sa linity from fresh water to full strength 
seawater (Watanabe et al., 1997). 
 They feed on a low trophic level with the constitu ents of the genus Oreochromis being 
omnivores, feeding on algae, aquatic plants, small invertebrates, detritus and in addition, a  
variety of feeds of animal origin (Watanabe, 2002).  The tilapias are able to grow rapidly on 
lower protein levels and tolerate higher carbohydra te than many carnivorous species cultured. 
They can be fed with prepared feed that includes a high percentage of plant proteins which are 
comparatively less expensive than feed containing a  high percentage of fish meal and other 
animal protein sources.  
 
1.3 World Production and Trade 
  In 2008, commercial aquaculture production was ab out 2.8 million tonnes with a corresponding 
estimated value of $3.7 billion. The production was  forecasted to reach 3.7 million tonnes by the 
end of 2010 (FAO, 2009; FAO GLOBEFISH, 2011a). By 2 015, world production is expected to 
reach between 4.6 million tonnes and 5 million tonn es (FAO, 2010). 
China is largest consumer and producer (produces ab out 50% of global production) of tilapia, 
with a production estimated at 1.15 million tonnes in 2009, from 1.13 million tonnes recorded in 
2007, from (FAO GLOBEFISH, 2010 and 2011b). In 2011 , China’s production was expected to 
reach 1.18 million tonnes by the end of the year (F AO, 2012). 4 
 According to the third quarter markets report for t he year 2011, the EU markets imported about 
15832 tonnes of tilapia and the figure shows a marg inal increase of 4% compared to the 
importations for the same period in 2010 (FAO GLOBE FISH, 2012b).  The EU markets are 
largely supplied by China, Indonesia, and Brazil. S pain has the highest imports of tilapia (3522 
tonnes), followed by Poland (2267 tonnes). The repo rt further asserts that, demand for the 
product is increasing and this has necessitated the  initiation of some innovative projects in other 
parts of the world, including in Africa to cater fo r the shortfalls. However, China’s contribution 
to production levels would still rank the highest a nd it is expected that, prices for the commodity 
would stabilize as the consumption grows. But as it  stands now, any reduction in production 
levels and exports from China would likely have an impact on the market price indices (FAO 
GLOBEFISH, 2012c). 
 
 
Figure 1: Major Tilapia producing countries in the world 
 World Tilapia production of 3,200,000 China 
Egypt 
Philippines 
Mexico 
Thailand 
Taiwan 
Brazil 
Indonesia 
Bangladesh 
Colombia 
Cuba 
Ecuador 
Vietnam 
Costa Rica 
Honduras 
Malaysia 
USA 
Saudi Arabia 
Others 5 
   Figure 2: Global Aquaculture production of Nile Til apia.FAO Fishery Statistic, 2011.  
 
1.4 Recirculatory Aquaculture Systems 
Recirculation aquaculture systems (RAS) are new and  a unique way to culture fish. In place of 
the old conventional methods of growing fish, RAS o ffers a means to rear fish in indoor tanks 
where the environment can be controlled. The system  filters and cleans the water for recycling 
back through fish culture tanks (Helfrich & Libey, b). In RAS, more than 90% of the water is 
recirculated through a series of biological and mec hanical filtration systems so that only a 
fraction of the water is consumed (Rawlinson & Fost er, 2000). “New” water is added to the tanks 
only to make up for losses through splash outs; eva poration and for those that is used to flush out 
waste materials. Fish cultured using this technolog y must be provided with a congenial 
environment and conditions suitable for growth and to remain healthy. Clean water, dissolved 
oxygen, and optimal temperatures are required to en sure better growth. These are achieved by 
the filtration system, aerators and heaters incorpo rated in the technology design. The filtration 
system purifies the water and removes or detoxifies  products harmful to the culturing media and 
species. Organic particles from faeces and uneaten feed are removed by the mechanical particle 
filters, whereas the poisonous metabolic waste prod ucts TAN and NO2 (total ammonium 
nitrogen and nitrite) are oxidized to less toxic co mpounds (NO3) in nitrification filters. These 
6 
 filters are sometimes referred to as aerobic biofil ters or nitrification filters. In the construction of 
the RAS facility, proper sizing of all system compo nents is very important. When the RAS plant 
is oversized for its application, the system would function but the cost of running the facility 
would be high. Undersized RAS, on the other hand, w ould not be able to maintain proper 
environment to sustain fish production. 
 1.4.1 Advantages of RAS 
RAS offer various advantages ranging from reduction  water consumption (Verdegem et al., 2006 
in  Martins et al., 2010),  to the provision of improved opportunities for waste management and 
nutrient recycling (Piedrahita, 2003 in  Martins et al., 2010). The systems environment can  be 
controlled to achieve better hygiene and disease ma nagement (e.g. Summerfelt et al., 2009; Tal 
et al., 2009 in Martins et al.,  2010). It offers a near complete environmental cont rol to maximize 
fish growth year-round, and the flexibility to loca te production facilities near large markets 
(Masser et al., 1999; Schneider et al., 2010) to de liver a fresher, safer product and lower 
transport cost (Timmons et al., 2001).  In terms of product security RAS offers a high degr ee of 
product traceability (Smith, 1996; Jahncke & Schwar z, 2000) and biological pollution control 
(no escapees, Zohar et al., 2005 in  Martins, et al., 2010). They may be used as grow-o ut systems 
to produce food fish or as hatcheries to produce eg gs and fingerling, for stocking and ornamental 
fish for home aquariums (Helfrich & Libey, c) 
 
 1.4.2 Risk Management and General Production techn iques  
 The systems are complex and require personnel with  the required expertise to successfully 
manage. Regular monitoring and management are requi red to maintain the complex system 
which involves heating, aeration, circulation and b iofilter systems. Any electrical or mechanical 
breakdown may result in huge mortalities and this i s a major concern when culturing fish using 
this system. To operate the system at maximum or ne ar maximum carrying capacity, contingency 
measures in the form of emergency alarms and backup  power and pump systems needs to be 
installed. Biological risk factors are very high in  the use of this technology and constant attention 
is required to swiftly deal with any anomaly which may occur in order to prevent huge losses.  
A recirculation system grows two organisms; fish an d a culture of bacterial resident in the 
biofilter. This requires constant monitoring of the  biofilters to ensure optimum fish growth since 
the efficiency of the biofilters is very critical t o the success of the production (Kazmierczak & 7 
 Cafey, 1995b). However, these biofilters have their  limitations and management of other parts of 
the system may not compensate for the risks posed a nd the system may fail. Thus, technical 
competence is required to perform various tasks suc h as planning, implementation and 
measurement of the performance of processes involve d in the running of the setup and to 
compare it to standards practices. Although product ion is the main priority, insight about 
marketing trends are very important in order to max imize profit. Data collection by the manager 
would provide a basis for comparison of the actual outcome of the production process with the 
average performance data (Huirne et al., 1992). A s uccessful combination of the different areas 
of management would ensure maximum outcome. 
 
1.4.3 Recirculation Systems in Norwegian Aquacultur e industry 
The production of freshwater fish for consumption i s very limited in Norway. Eikebrokk & 
Ulgenes, (1997) identified strict environmental reg ulations introduced to minimize the risk of 
eutrophication of fresh water resources, disease tr ansfer to wild fish stocks, and escapees making 
a possible genetic impact on wild fish stock, as th e reasons for the limited culture of freshwater 
species. Recirculation which offers an alternative means is somehow considered uneconomical 
due to the availability of good quality fresh and s aline water in Norway. However, the trend is 
changing and many farmers are now employing the rec irculation technology. They further stated 
that, the change in trend may be attributed to the demand for reduced water consumption rates, 
the increase in biomass production per unit volume of water, and the need for more economically 
viable effluent treatment solutions that would tack le the environmental issues related to particle 
separation and disinfection requirements.  
Almost all the commercial scale recirculating syste ms are for salmon farming and none is known 
to produce tilapia on a commercial scale.  About 85  million smolts are produced using RAS in 
Norway (Del Campo et al., 2010) and these smolts ar e very high in quality; with high rate of 
survival and growth after sea transfer (Terjesen et  al., 2008). The culture of tilapia using RAS in 
Norway is expected to receive much attention in the  near future due to the growing world 
population, high demand for the commodity, pollutio n of fresh water resources and climatic 
changes. 
 
 8 
 2.0 Materials and Methods  
2.1 Description of the UMB tilapia laboratory  
The tilapia laboratory at the Norwegian University of Life Sciences (UMB) was established in 
2006 and the first tilapia cultured ( Oreochromis niloticus,  Nile tilapia), came from a Genomar 
hatchery in Singapore as a yolk sac fry. This popul ation has been reproduced at the laboratory 
ever since.  
The Tilapia laboratory consists of 3 separate rooms ; feeding section, reproduction room and 
water treatment section. The feeding room has 10 bi g tanks each 250L and 10 small tanks each 
with a capacity of 100L.In addition 5 bigger tanks of capacity 400L is also incorporated in the 
system.  All the tanks are connected to the re-use system with automatic feeders installed on each 
tank. Feeding and light regimes can be easily adjus ted using the automatic feeders and the 
lightening system. The total water volume of the sy stem is 7000L and  more than 99% of the 
water is re-used in normal operations, allowing for  addition of only 2L freshwater per minute 
(Hansen, pers.com). The flow rate is averagely 150L /min and a water temperature of 26°C is 
maintained throughout the system.  
The volume of media in the biofilter is 1.1m³ and a  1kg feed input would produce 0.04kg TAN 
in the system, with a TAN removal rate of 25deg. Th e filter media used is 1.2kg/m³ per day in 
normal operations. A level sensor in the biofilter tank is also connected to the fish lab alarm 
system. Each fish tank has an individual aeration t o keep oxygen at an acceptable level for some 
hours in case the circulation pump or the central a irblower fails.  
The facility was constructed by the University for research purposes and various research works 
involving growth studies, nutrition and production are conducted here. The facility is manned by 
qualified technicians who manage the day to day run ning and also act as resource persons to 
students when the need arises. Actual data on the R AS at this facility and some other data on 
commercial scale tilapia productions for this thesi s work were collated under the guidance of 
Bjorn Reidear, Hansen (a technician at the laborato ry). 
Figure 3 below, shows the technology design and the  main components of the system. The water 
is aerated in the biofilter with the use of air blo wers.  Figure 3: A schematic design of the basic component s of the facility. 
 
 
2.2 Production Setup 
The study was carried out for a 20 week 
period in Norway). About 1500 f 
the hatchery setup at the facility and 
(such as feeding, heating, and chemical analysis) 
harvesting . A total of 1364 market size 
were harvested at the end of production for the mar ket. 
survival rate, temp erature and pH 
feed, electricity cost, Labour, 
data obtained were analysed and used in the 
production.  
 
9 Figure 3: A schematic design of the basic component s of the facility.  
The study was carried out for a 20 week  period; from November 2010 
About 1500 f ingerlings of 0.36g size (1- 1.5cm length) were 
the hatchery setup at the facility and  stocked in the tanks. T he various p 
(such as feeding, heating, and chemical analysis) were managed daily till they were ready for 
. A total of 1364 market size (average weight of 0.7kg) tilapia and weighing 1091.2kg 
were harvested at the end of production for the mar ket.  Data on the bio logical parameters ( 
erature and pH ), engineering parameters and economical parameters (cost of 
feed, electricity cost, Labour, market price) were recorded, and are summarized in Table 
analysed and used in the economic model ( budget 
 
from November 2010 -March 2011 (winter 
1.5cm length) were produced using 
he various p roduction parameters 
till they were ready for 
and weighing 1091.2kg 
logical parameters ( feed, 
and economical parameters (cost of 
summarized in Table  3. The 
budget ) estimations for the 10 
  
Figure 4: The hatchery (part) used in the productio n of fingerlings. 
 
 
Figure 5: The weaning tanks used in the production.  
 
11 
  2.3 Production scenarios and models for estimation s  
Three scenarios of production were developed and pr esented in this project. The first scenario 
deals with the actual production carried out at the  prototype (UMB laboratory) facility. A second 
scenario) budget was prepared for the same level of  production. Some correctional factors (cost 
from commercial level production) were introduced i n this budget since the running of the 
facility and other auxiliary activities carried out  are geared towards research goals and may be 
unrealistic in normal operations of a commercial RA S facility.  In the third scenario, production 
was scaled-up by the ratio 1/100. The models for es timations were applied to all three scenarios 
of production and the various estimations, made for  each scenario are presented in the results 
chapter.  
The models for estimations are the calculatory mode ls based on which the various estimations 
were made. Some of these tools would be described i n detail under the various sub-headings. 
 
2.3.1 Biological Model 
These tool were used to estimate incomes and produc tion; growth and mortality. The simplest 
tool to use is the formulas for biomass, B (t),  and biomass value, V (t):  
                                                                     
 =                                                                                                                                     1                   
Where N is the number of fish at time t, and w is the weight of the fish at time t. The sales output 
(value of the fish) from the production is calculat ed by multiplying price with quantity: 
                                                              
   
=                                                                                                                                    2       
Where V(t) is the biomass value and p(w)  is the price pr. kg fish. The kg price is assumed t o 
increase as the weight of the fish increases (p’ (w) > 0) .  This formula does not take into 
consideration the effect of seasonal variations on the price of fish (Bjørndal 1987). 
 
Feed Conversion Ratio (FCR): 
This is another important biological production par ameter to consider. 
                                                                                        
  =       
₂₁                                                                                                                          3                                                                                                12 
 Where FCR  is kg consumed feed per kg growth, FB consumed feed in kg, BM ₂ is biomass at 
harvest, BM ₁ is start biomass, or biomass at stocking, and FT i s fish lost to mortality (Einen & 
Roem, 1997).  
 
 2.3.2 Economic (model) Analysis techniques 
These are the theoretical concept that represents t he economic processes underlying the set of 
production variables and shows quantitatively, the relationship between these variables. The 
economic analysis methods employed in this thesis p roject are: 
i.  Cost-volume-profit analysis (breakeven analysis and  profitability analysis) 
ii.  Sensitivity analysis 
 
2.3.2.1 Cost-volume-profit (CVP) analysis   
The volume of fish sales relative to its expenses h as an important influence on financial 
feasibility. Understanding the relationship between  the volume of production and expenses 
involved in the production plays a key role in achi eving profitability objectives (O’Rourke, 
1996). When sales volume is less than anticipated, expenses as a percent of sales must be much 
higher than anticipated. In order to be more profit able, there must be an increase in 
production/sales or decrease expenses or both. The relationship between sales and expenses as 
well as the nature of the expenses is very importan t in determining profitability of the venture. 
This technique is used to examine changes in profit s in response to changes in sales volumes, 
costs, and prices.  CVP analysis is done to plan fu ture levels of operating activity and provide 
information about the products of services to empha size; volume of sales needed to breakeven 
and achieve a targeted level of profit; the amount of revenue required to avoid losses; know 
whether to increase fixed costs; determine how much  to budget for discretionary expenditures 
and to know whether fixed costs expose the organiza tion to an unacceptable level of risk. 
Breakeven analysis forms an integral part of this f orm of analysis. 
 
 The net income of the production can be estimated using the following formula: 
  =   !"# −   !%# &                                                 (4)  
 
 13 
 Variable unit cost: 
According to Hoff, (1998), Variable unit costs repr esent the cost involved to produce a kg of the 
produce and it’s given by the formula:            
   
"!'  # () & =           "!'  && 
*!"&% &&                                                                5   
 
Marginal Contribution: 
The marginal contribution is the amount of money ne eded to cover the fixed costs and an 
eventual profit. 
 
   ,!)  !'# = -!   − 
!'   &&                                   6   
  
The marginal contribution  per unit  represents the profit per unit sale. It is a usefu l quantity in 
carrying out various calculations, and can be used as a measure of production leverage. 
The marginal contribution per unit  (C)  in kg is given by Unit Revenue (Price, P)  minus Unit 
Variable Cost (V): 
 
     C=P−V                                                                                                                                  (7)                                                                                                        
 
The Contribution Margin Ratio  is the percentage of Contribution over Total Reven ue, which can 
be calculated from the unit contribution over unit price or total contribution over Total Revenue: 
 

/=/ − 
/× 100 =       =  !)  !'# 
  "# × 100%                                    8  
 
 
Marginal contribution in kg 
This gives the kg required to cover the operational  costs and profit equals zero. 
 
m!)  !'#  () =   ,!)  !'# -5
& 6 !%. ! ()      -5                                 9  14 
 Breakeven analysis  
Breakeven analysis informs producers about the pric e they need to receive for their product in 
order to cover all costs of production. It also ind icate to the producer, the kilogram of fish, and 
price for the fish needed to cover the variable, fi xed, and total costs of production.  
 
Breakeven price and breakeven yield/produce  
The breakeven cost/price is the price at which the product must be sold in order for profit to be 
zero. It is also the sales level at which the accru ing revenue is exactly equal to the cost of making 
the output. 
 
!("  =  & 6 !%# 
9#: () !%#%                                                       10  
 
.  The breakeven per unit yield represents the number of units, or kilograms needed  to be sold in 
order to break even. 
 
!("/ # () =  & 6 !%# 
 < ! ! ()                                                     11  
 
It should be noted that CVP is a short run, and mar ginal analysis which assumes that, unit 
variable costs and revenues are constant. It also a ssumes that, fixed cost and variable costs are 
separate and different. 
 
2.4 Sensitivity Analysis of identified variables th at may affect Profitability 
Sensitivity analysis was conducted to compare the e ffect of some variables on the profitability of 
the productions and to know the areas where an impr ovement in performance may have a 
positive impact on the economic performance of the RAS (Losordo & Westerman, 1994). The 
simplest form of sensitivity analysis (one-way sens itivity analysis) was employed. This was done 
by varying one variable by a (+/-) percentage and t he impact on the financial performance of the 
production were examined.  The analysis was then re peated for the other variables identified in 
the operational costs. Table 1, shows the important  variables that were included in the analyses 
based on the results obtained from the UMB laborato ry and the scaled-up (hypothetical) 15 
 production. Feed, labour, and electricity cost were  the main costs involved in the operation of the 
prototype (UMB) facility and were used in the sensi tivity analysis. Market/sale price was 
included in the analysis to cater for the ever-chan ging pricing level. The identified cost variables 
were varied by +/- 20% since such variations usuall y occur in commercial productions (De Ionno 
et al.,  2006). The price instability on the market was cate red for by comparing the performance at 
prices NOK32 and NOK48. 
 
Table 1: Summary of variables used in sensitivity a nalyses and the corresponding variations 
applied to assess the potential impacts on the fina ncial performance of the UMB facility and the 
scaled-up production. 
Variable Degree of variation 
Operational costs  
   Feed +/-20% 
   Electricity +/-20% 
   Labour +-20% 
Production +/-20% 
Revenue  
   Sales price NOK32  vs. NOK 48 
 
 
2.5 Alternative budget and Economies of scale (scal ed-up production). 
In order to assess and compare the dynamics and eff ects of the production parameters on the 
profitability, an alternative budget for the same l evel of production at the UMB facility was 
developed using data on some operational costs from  commercial scale production. Another 
economic model (budget) was developed for a scale-u p production (hypothetical) based on the 
UMB facility design criteria, with a scale-up ratio  of 1/100. 
 
 
 
 16 
 Table 2: Basic costs and units of economic, enginee ring and biological parameters monitored at 
the UMB facility.  
Economic parameters Unit Unit price 
Market Price/kg NOK 40NOK 
Fingerling cost/g NOK/fing. 0.25NOK 
Initial no. of fingerlings # 1500 
No. Harvested # 1364 
Feed cost NOK/kg 9NOK 
Amount of feed used kg 1705kg 
Electricity cost NOK/kW/Hr 1NOK 
Labour NOK/hr 200NOK 
Engineering cost   
Production Cycle-days # 140 
Production cycle weeks # 20 
Number of tanks # 15 
System volume liters 7000l 
Cost of Water use NOK/1000liters 30NOK/m³ 
Flow rate l/min 150l/min 
Electricity used kW/hr 8.6kW 
Biological Parameters   
Initial Biomass kg 0.36kg 
Final biomass kg 1091.2kg 
Survival rate % 90.9% 
Feed conversion ratio # 0.8 
Harvestable weight kg 0.7kg 
Slaughtering cost NOK 3NOK/fish 
Water Analysis NOK 10NOK each 
Price of 1kW/Hr from Statistics Norway (2011). The price per kg of tilapia was arrived at after a 
market survey conduct in Oslo. 
 
 17 
 2.6 Cost estimations of the main operational areas in the production setup 
The various costs involved in the operation of the recirculating system for the UMB and scale-up 
productions; the amount of feed required in produci ng a kilogram of tilapia, electricity, labour 
and maintenance were estimated individual as shown below: 
  
2.6.1 Fingerlings 
The fingerlings used in the production were produce d at the laboratory using the hatchery setup. 
The eggs were manually striped, fertilized from the  broodstock and under careful temperature 
regime manipulations, the fingerlings were produced  to feed the weaning tanks. A total of 1500 
fingerlings, averagely 2.5cm in length and weighing  0.36g were produced for the study. It must 
be noted that, the cost of the fingerlings produced  was estimated and used in the budget 
estimations.  The cost of one (1-1.5 inches) fingerling (0.36g) o n the market is approximately 
0.25NOK depending on the volume being purchased (Ha nsen, pers. Com, November 4, 2010). 
The total cost of the fingerlings was estimated to be NOK 375.  
 
2.6.2 Feed and feeding 
A feed containing all the essential minerals and vi tamins for a higher growth performance was 
used in the production, with an estimated FCR of 0. 8. Strict adherence was given to the regular 
feeding schedules. Automatic feeders were used to e nsure frequent feeding intervals per day to 
ensure high conversion rate and feed was evenly dis tributed on the feeders to ensure even growth 
and prevent stunting. Total amount of feed used was  estimated to be 1705kg. The price of a kg of 
the feed was pegged at NOK9 (Hansen, pers, com, Nov ember 4, 2010). Generally, feed 
constitutes the highest variable cost in every prod uction and it is expected to vary with an 
increase in production level. In the commercial lev el (scaled up-1/100) production, the quantity 
and cost of feed is expected to vary commensurately  with scale of production. 
  
2.7.3 Labour Costs 
 RAS systems are highly sensitive to changes in the  normal operations. Changes in flow rate, 
accumulation of waste particles and feed may cause high mortalities and poor product quality. 
Due to its sensitivity to changes, well trained per sonnel are required to manage the abnormalities 
which may occur daily. The labour cost for the UMB laboratory production was estimated from 18 
 one hour per day’s work, with an hour’s wage pegged  at 200NOK (Hansen, pers, com, 
November 4, 2010). Assuming a greater level of auto mation and economies of scale, an 
estimated labour cost of NOK1.5 (Hansen, pers.com, November 5, 2010) was assumed per a kilo 
of tilapia produced for both the alternative and hy pothetical commercial scale production 
budgets. This figure was arrived at after consideri ng the labour cost in producing a kilo of 
Atlantic salmon. According to Statistics Norway (20 11), the estimated labour cost for producing 
a kilo of Atlantic salmon is NOK1.5. Due to the una vailability of data on labour cost on tilapia 
production, the labour cost for Atlantic salmon was  assumed for the estimation purposes though 
it is a known fact that the modes of culturing are different (salmon production is in net pens 
whereas the tilapia was in tanks). Since this thesi s project is for educational purposes only, the 
adopted figure for labour in these budgets was assu med to be within range. 
 
2.6.4 Electricity 
The main components of the system that consumes a c onsiderable amount of power are the 
heaters, pumps, and the feeders . The system has 2 heaters with 3kW capacity each. Th ree pumps 
were identified namely, pump for drum filter, and p ump for circulation and the airblower for 
cleaning the drum filter.   
 
Table 3: Shows the various components where electri city usage occurs and the amount 
consumed. 
Component Number kW consumed Total (kW) 
Heater 2 3Kw/each 6 
Pumps 
   Drum filter 
   Circulation 
   Airblower  
1 
1 
1  
0.75 
0.75 
0.6  
 
2.1 
Hatchery/Feeders                   0.5 0.5 
TOTAL 8.6 
Price of 1kW/Hr of electricity is approximately 1kr . (Statistics Norway, 2011). 
 19 
 The heaters are thermostat regulated and are switch ed on/off after use. The filters, pumps and 
airblower are situated in a different room some few  meters away from the tanks room. Energy 
loss occur in the form of heat through the transfer  process, building due to inadequate insulation 
system, evaporation from the water surface, waste a ccumulation and splash out from the tanks. 
Notwithstanding, about 75% of the heat generated ar e recycled (Hansen, pers.com, November 4, 
2010). About 80% of total electricity produced is u sed in the running of the UMB facility 
(Hansen, pers. Com, November 4, 2010).The price of 1Kw/Hr of electricity is approximately 
NOK1 (Statistics Norway, 2011). The same percentage  was used in the electricity estimations for 
the alternative budget and the scale-up production budget.             
 
2.6.5 Water analysis  
 Feeding and subsequent growth leads to the generat ion of waste products which reduces the 
oxygen level in the system. These waste products ne ed to be removed because of their potential 
negative impact on fish growth, and mortality. Meta bolic waste products take two forms in most 
recirculating systems; solids and total ammonia nit rogen (TAN). The toxic portion of TAN, 
NH ₃-unionized ammonia nitrogen (UAN), is a component o f the feedback mechanism that can 
inhibit fish growth through loss of appetite and in  high levels, may cause fish mortality. 
 The biofilters control the buildup of UAN in the r ecirculating system whereas suspended solids 
are removed from the system by the mechanical filte rs. This makes the efficient operations of the 
biological and mechanical filters very critical to the growth of the fish and the stability of the 
recirculating system. An efficient operation of bot h filters leads to the absence of growth 
reduction or mortality feedbacks (Kazmierczak & Caf ey, 1995c).  
Three different analyses were conduction during the  ‘actual’ production; TAN, NO ₂ and NO ₃ 
analysis. A total of 150 analysis each were conducted durin g the production at an estimated unit 
cost of NOK10 (Hansen, pers.com). Cheaper methods w ere employed in carrying out these tests 
during the production. According to Hansen, (pers.c om, March 30, 2011), the ‘normal’ number 
of chemical analyses conducted at the laboratory wa s high and thus a reduction in number 
(60analysis) was recommended for the alternative bu dget and the scale-up production.  
 
 
 20 
 2.6.6 Chemicals (Bicarbonate/Lime)-pH control :  
In the RAS technology, the biofilters are incorpora ted to oxidise the ammonia generated. The 
process proceeds in two stages; Nitrosomas bacteria  oxidize ammonia to nitrite and the 
Nitrobacter bacteria oxidize nitrite to nitrate. Fo r each gram of ammonia nitrogen oxidised, 4.57g 
of oxygen and 7.14mg of alkalinity as CaCO3 are req uired and if the alkalinity is not replaced, 
the pH of the water would drop (Hutchison et al.,  2004). A way of replacing the alkalinity 
consumed is to add sodium bicarbonate to the system  at rates up to 250g for every 1kg of food 
introduced into the RAS (Wheaton et al. 2002). The estimated cost of lime used at the laboratory 
facility was 5000NOK (Hansen, pers.com, March 30, 2 011). For the alternative budget, 
efficiency of more than 95% was assumed and thus a drastic reduction is expected in the cost of 
bicarbonate used. The cost of bicarbonates used for  the estimations involving the alternative 
budget and the commercial level budget was pegged a t NOK1, 000 and NOK10, 000 
respectively. The cost of bicarbonates is expected to go up with an increase in scale of 
production since the amount of feed usage would inc rease with an increase in production. 
 
2.6.7 Slaughtering  
Tilapia is processed by filleting, gutting or decap itation of the head. The cost of preparing each 
tilapia for the market was pegged at approximately 3NOK (Hansen, pers.com, March 30, 2011). 
This figure was arrived at relative to the cost of slaughtering a kg salmon in Norway. According 
to statistics Norway (2011), the slaughter cost for  a kilogram of salmon is NOK3. 
Comparatively, the fillet yield from a kg salmon is  higher than tilapia. This clearly indicates that 
a considerable effort is required in slaughtering t ilapia compared to salmon. This figure was used 
in all the budget estimations for every kilo of til apia slaughtered.                                                              
 
2.7 Operational cost Analysis –UMB RAS facility  
The units cost of the Economic, Biological and Engi neering parameters are shown in Table 1. 
The economic aspect deals with the unit cost of fin gerlings, market price of a kg of tilapia, cost 
of a kg of feed and the amount of feed used during the entire production. It also takes into 
consideration the amount and cost of the electricit y used and labour cost relative to hours of 
work per day. The engineering parameters include th e system volume, unit cost of water, the 21 
 flow rate, as well as the production cycle. Water a nalysis, FCR, initial biomass, final biomass, 
survival rate and slaughtering costs constitute the  biological parameters. 
 
2.8 Alternative budget 
As indicated earlier, a careful assessment of the h igh costs involved in the operations of the 
UMB laboratory production, necessitated the develop ment of an alternative budget for the same 
level of production with the introduction of some c orrectional factors. This was done by the 
introduction of some data (costs) obtained from com mercial scale production. Table 6 and 7, 
summarizes the various cost estimates involved in t he production and the economic model 
estimates respectively. 
 
2.9 Scale-up  
For the purpose of this thesis projects, the physic al model for scaling was employed and some 
assumptions were made to support the model. It was assumed that, geometric, dynamic, 
kinematic, thermal and biological similarities exis t between the prototype (UMB facility) and the 
commercial scale (hypothetical) recirculating syste m. Although some of these assumptions 
(dynamic, kinematic and biological) are difficult t o fulfill in practical sense, they were assumed 
to be achievable in this project. 
The production level at the prototype setup was sca led up by the ratio 1/100, with an assumed 
survival rate of 91%. The amount of power consumed was assumed to be 80% of the total energy 
produced as in the earlier estimations (Hansen, per s.com, November 4, 2010). Cost estimates 
were developed using data from industry suppliers, statistics Norway and discussions with the 
facility attendant at the UMB laboratory. A budget was prepared for this scale of production and 
the various economic analyses were developed. 
 
 
 
 
 22 
 3.0 Results 
The operating costs for the various scenarios were developed for comparison purposes between 
the different production scales and the results are  presented individually below. 
 
Table 4: Summarizes the fixed and variable costs, c ost of prod. Kg of tilapia and the % of 
parameters to total production cost (UMB laboratory ). 
Parameters/category Total cost Cost/ kg prod/NOK % of total cost 
Fixed cost    
Electricity 23116.8 21.2 29.0 
Fingerlings 375 - 0.5 
Labour 28000 25.7 35.2 
Water Analysis 4500 4.1 5.7 
Bicarbonates 5000 4.6 6.3 
Total fixed cost 60991.8   
%of fixed cost to prod. cost   76.6 
Variable costs    
Feed 15345 14.1 19.3 
Slaughtering 3273.6 3.0 4.0 
Total variable cost 18618.6   
%of variable cost to prod. cost   23.4 
Total prod. cost 79610.4   
Cost of prod. kg tilapia 73.0   
 
Labour recorded the highest percentage cost involve d in the production carried out at the UMB 
facility, followed by electricity and feed in that order. In this production, labour was treated as a 
fixed cost since the hours of work and cost of work  per hour by the facility attendant was fixed 
and not subject to any increment regardless of the level of production. Although costs of 
fingerlings are sometimes treated as a variable cos t, it was not done so in this case. In this 
scenario, the level of production was up to the car rying capacity of the facility and there was no 
room for an increase in production level.  
 23 
 Table 5: Summarizes the estimations from the econom ic models for the UMB facility . 
Economic model Formula No. Amount 
Sales/income 2 43648 
Net Operating income/PL 4 -359662 
Variable unit (kg) cost                          NO K 5 17.1 
Marginal contribution                            NO K 6 25029.4 
Marginal contribution                               kg 9 343 
Marginal contribution pr unit(kg)         NOK 7 22. 9 
Gross margin ratio  8                       57 
Break even cost/price                              NOK   10 73.0 
Break even yield/produce                            kg 11 1990.26 
 
The net operating income shown from the table indic ates a loss relative to the production cost. 
This is due to the high level of fixed costs involv ed in this production. More was contributed to 
overcoming the fixed cost than to profit. 
  
Table 6: Summarizes the operational costs, cost of producing a kg of tilapia and the % impact of 
each parameter to total production cost for the alt ernative budget. 
Parameters/category Total cost Cost/ kg prod/NOK % of total cost 
Fixed cost    
Electricity 23116.8 21.2 49.7 
Fingerlings 375 - 0.8 
Water Analysis 1800 1.7 3.9 
Bicarbonates 1000 0.9 2.1 
Total fixed cost 26291.8   
%of fixed cost to prod. Cost   56.5 
Variable costs    
Feed 15345 14.1 33.0 
Labour 1636 1.5 3.5 
Slaughtering 3273.6 3.0 7.0 24 
 Total variable cost 20254.6   
% of variable cost to prod. cost   43.5 
Total prod. cost 46546.4   
Cost of prod. kg tilapia 42.7   
 
Electricity recorded the highest percentage cost fo llowed by feed. Labour is the least costs in the 
variables and this is due to the assumed unit cost relative to the level of production. As 
mentioned earlier, labour shows economies of scale when the scale of production is high and 
therefore exhibited this tendency in the scale-up p roduction. Therefore, the labour cost is 
expected to increase with any increase in productio n. Table 7, shown below indicates the various 
economic model estimations. 
 
Table 7: Summarizes the results of the economic mod el estimations for the alternative budget . 
Economic model Formula No. Amount 
Sales/Income 2 43648 
Net Operating income/PL 4 -2898.4 
Variable unit (kg) cost                                    NOK 5 18.6 
Marginal contribution                                     NOK 6 23393.4 
Marginal contribution                                        kg 9 657.3 
Marginal contribution pr unit (kg)                  NOK 7 21.4 
Gross margin ratio 8 53.5 
Break even cost                                               NOK   10 42.7 
Breakeven yield/produce                                     kg                   11 1163 
 
The net operating income estimated indicates a marg inal loss. However, the potential to 
breakeven with an increase production is high.  
The production would be able to break even, when th e kilogram produced from the setup equals 
the breakeven yield. Any additional kilogram of fis h produced after the breakeven yield would 
result in profit.  25 
 Table 8: Summarizes the fixed and variable costs,  total operation costs, cost of producing a kg of 
tilapia and the % impact of each parameter on the t otal production cost for the scaled-up 
production.  
Parameters/category Total cost Cost/ kg prod/NOK % of total cost 
Fixed cost    
Electricity 2311680 21.2 52.7 
Water Analysis 1800 0.02 0.04 
Bicarbonates 10000 0.10 0.23 
Total fixed cost 2323480   
%of fixed cost to prod. Cost   53.0 
Variable costs    
Fingerlings 37500 0.34 0.86 
Feed 1534500 14.1 35.0 
Labour 163680 1.50 3.70 
Slaughtering 327360 3.0 7.50 
Total variable cost 2063040   
% of variable cost to prod. cost   47.0 
Total prod. cost 4386520   
Cost of prod. Kg tilapia 40.2   
 
Electricity constitutes the highest cost in the pro duction, with cost of fingerlings being the least 
among the main variables that affect profitability.  Costs of fingerlings, feed, and labour were 
treated as variable cost in this scenario, since th ey are expected to vary with an increase in 
production.  Total fixed cost in this production se tup, was reduced drastically and the potential 
for further reduction is high. This can be achieved  by the introduction of energy efficient 
equipment which would reduce the power consumption level of the system.  
 
 
 26 
 Table 9:  Summarizes the results of economic model estimations for the scaled-up (hypothetical) 
production.  
Economic model Formula No. Amount 
Sales/Income 2 4364800 
Net Operating income/PL 4 -21720 
Variable unit (kg) cost                                    NOK 5 18.9 
Marginal contribution                                      NOK 6 2301760 
Marginal contribution                                          kg 9 57544 
Marginal contribution pr unit (kg)                  NOK 7 21.1 
Gross margin ratio 8 52.7 
Break even cost                                               NOK   10 40.2 
Breakeven yield/produce                                     kg                  11 109663 
 
The PL estimated in this scenario indicates a margi nal loss in revenue (negative). However, there 
is the possibility of making profit with a further increase in production since the loss recorded is 
very marginal and increase in sales would offset th e loss incurred.  
 
Table 10: Summarizes the results of the sensitivity  analysis performed for the identified 
variables. 
 Production cost 
Variable UMB Scaled-up prod. 
Electricity costs   
   +20% -40585.8  -484056 
   -20% -31339.0 440616 
Feed costs   
   +20% -39031.4 -328620 
   -20% -32893.4 285180 
Labour costs   
   +20% -41562.4 -54456 27 
    -20% -30362.4 11016 
Production output   
   +20%  -8729.6 -872960 
   -20%  8729.6 872960 
Sales price   
   NOK48 -8729.6 -872960 
   NOK32 8729.6 872960 
 
The results from the production output and sales pr ice sensitivity analysis produced identical 
results for both scenarios analysed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 28 
 4.0 Discussion  
The operating costs were estimated for the various scenarios and compared. The facility sizes 
and the scale of production, labour, electricity, f eed and FCR, were found to be the principal 
areas that have significant impact on the operation s of RAS. These together with the limitations 
of the study are discussed individually below. 
4.1 Cost of Labour 
 According to Samples & Leung, (1986), in practical studies, labour expenses are generally 
considered as fixed cost since they do not vary in response to an increase in production scale. 
Labour (35.2%) in the UMB production estimations, w as treated as fixed costs since the cost 
would remain the same regardless of an increase in production scale.  However, in the alternative 
and scaled up production estimates, labour and fing erlings were considered as variables costs. 
This is because the assumed cost of labour per kg o f tilapia produced is expected to increase with 
an increase in production. In the alternative budge t, labour formed 3.5% and 3.7% in the scale-up 
budget. In commercial scale production, additional labour may be required in areas of marketing, 
management and general production. The amount of la bour utilized on farms varies widely, but, 
with increasing scale of production, specialization  of tasks by individuals and the introduction of 
labour saving devices (automation of some productio n components), it is expected that the unit 
cost of labour per kg of tilapia produced will decr ease.  
 
4.2 Electricity 
Electricity constituted 29.0% of the total producti on costs in the UMB budget. The percentage 
increase highlighted in the alternative and scaled- up budget estimations (49.7% and 52.7% 
respectively) is attributable to the influence of l abour cost reduction in these budgets. A 
reduction in energy use is  possible by improving the system design and managem ent of airlifts 
and biofilters (Roque d’Orbcastel et al., 2009) and  the incorporation of denitrification in the 
recycling loop (Eding et al., 2009). Decreasing hea d losses associated with moving water 
through the larger pipes, and an increase in pump e fficiencies at higher flow rates in the scale-up 
productions would further reduce energy cost.  
 
 29 
  4.3 Cost of feed  
Feed formed 19.3% in the UMB facility productions. In the alternative and scale-up budgets, 
33% and 35% were for electricity estimated respecti vely. These results highlight that, feed 
constitute the highest variable cost and varies wit h scale of production as shown in the scale-up 
budget. An improvement in feed quality is expected to reduce the amount required and impact 
positively on the production cost. Poor quality fee d usage would add on to the running cost since 
more feed would be required to achieve the same wei ght gain. The feed used for this project was 
of high quality (FCR 0.80).  
4.4 Fingerlings 
The GIFT strains used in the production are genetic ally superior compared to other strains like 
the red tilapia in terms of survival, feed consumpt ion and conversion rate. They are more 
efficient in conversion of ingested feed into body mass. According to a study conducted by 
Wing-Keong et al  (2008),  the GIFT tilapia showed up to 33% better feed conve rsion rate, and 
greater potential for growth with a high dietary pr otein levels and greater feed intake depending 
on diet, than that observed in the red tilapia. Thi s makes them good candidates for commercial 
scale production using RAS. The costs of fingerling s estimated for the UMB and scale-up 
productions, were seen to be low and meet the FAO c riteria for buying fingerlings. According to 
FAO, (2003), the unit cost must be low to make the on-rearing economically viable, and still 
allow a reasonable profit by the producer (FAO, 200 3). However, internal production of 
fingerlings is widely seen to be the best option fo r commercial scale productions.   
4.5 Economies of Scale 
The financial estimations showed that the UMB facil ity standard and capacity constitute a risk 
factor in terms of profit maximization. The budget estimations from the UMB facility production 
showed a large loss (NOK-359662) relative to the pr oduction cost. This is attributable to the high 
fixed cost involved in the operations and the limit ed carrying capacity of the facility. Labour and 
electricity costs were found to be high for such a scale of production. The result from the 
estimations is an indication that, the facility is incapable of becoming profitable regardless of any 
realistic variations in the identified operational variables which are known to impact on 
profitability. This confirms the generally known as sertion that, small RAS are more expensive to 30 
 operate per unit of biomass held than larger units.  However, since the facility is for only research 
purposes, operations and costs involved are quite u nique to the facility.  
 The alternative budget estimations highlighted how  some of the production variables that affect 
profitability, behave with an increase in productio n scale. Electricity, Labour and feed were 
found to be the principal parameters that affect pr ofit margins. In small production levels, these 
parameters are seen to impact negatively on profit margin but shows varying degree of 
economies of scale with an increase in production l evel. In that budget, labour showed the 
highest potential for economies of scale within the  variable costs. This was confirmed in the 
budget for the scale-up production. Although, this budget estimation also recorded a loss, it 
showed that with realistic reductions in labour and  feed costs, an increase in production has a 
strong potential of breaking-even.  
The scale-up budget estimations also recorded a los s. However, this loss was marginal compared 
to that obtained for the UMB facility production. T he possibility of breaking even and eventually 
profit through an increase in production was very h igh for this production scenario. The 
breakeven price estimation in this production was N OK 40.2. This means, a loss of NOK-0.2 is 
made on each kg sale. It is therefore projected tha t, a further 600kg increase in production would 
be enough to post some profit. The drastic reductio n in production cost shown in the scale-up 
production compared to the UMB production, was due to the increase in sales volume from the 
scale-up production. The contribution from each sal e towards fixed cost coverage became less 
relative to the contribution to profit. As a result , more was contributed to profitability in the 
scale-up production, than to the coverage of fixed cost since production cost per unit kg 
decreased with the increase in production. The Scal e-up production therefore showed economies 
of scale and the potential to breakeven and eventua lly make profit was high for this scenario.  
According to a NCRAC tilapia report (2002), on a st udy of the economic analysis of RAS for the 
production of tilapia on commercial scale (1814.369  tonnes), the breakeven cost per kg of tilapia 
was estimated to be USD2.46 (equivalent to NOK13.78  ), with a production cost of USD 
4,461,921 (equivalent to NOK24986757.6). The estima tions were based only on the fixed and 
variable costs excluding capital costs. These resul ts are in sharp contrast to the results obtained 
from the scale-up production of this study, which h ad a breakeven price of NOK 40.2 compared 
to NOK 13.78 obtained for the NCRAC study. These ob servable contradictions can be attributed 31 
 to the wide difference in scale of production (1091 20kg for this study compared to 1814369kg 
for the study conducted in the USA at Grayson Hills  Farms in Harrisburg, Illinois). The 
economic conditions of the country where the study was conducted also influences the 
production cost. This is because, costs of electric ity, labour, feed etc differ from country to 
country. Another difference observed was the inclus ion of the costs of oxygen, maintenance and 
interest rates in the estimations. These variables were not factored into the estimations involving 
this study. The NCRAC study is believed to have ben efited from economies of scale due to the 
high level of production involved.  
 
4.6 Sensitivity Analysis 
From the sensitivity analysis conducted, a decrease  in the cost of production variables such as 
labour, feed, and electricity, produced marginal ef fects on profitability. Increase in sales price 
and production were found to have the highest impac ts on profitability.  These findings support 
the earlier findings highlighted in Losordo (1991) and Losordo & Westerman (1991). It must be 
pointed out that, the findings herein referred to, included gains realized from an increase in FCR 
and reduction in overall system cost. A variation o f +/-10% was used to analyse the input 
variables. However, these two variables (FCR and ca pital cost) were not factored into the 
sensitivity analysis in this study. This due to the  high quality feed used for the study (FCR 0.8) 
and the uncertainties associated with the cost of t he system used for the study. Nonetheless, these 
findings show the areas where further improvements may have huge impacts on the profitability 
of commercial scale production using RAS. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 32 
 5.0 Conclusion 
The results from the thesis project have shown the effect, scale of productions have on per unit 
cost of production. Thus, the scale-up facility ben efited from economies of scale compared to the 
UMB production. It has also shown that, variables s uch as increases in production, and sales 
price, reduction in labour, feed and electricity co sts influences profitability. It was gleaned from 
the results that, small scale productions are not e conomically viable compared to large scale 
productions.  
 The study did not ﬁrmly establish profitability du e to its focus, and the exclusion of capital cost 
and interest rates. However, it did show that, pote ntial for economic success with the scale-up 
production was high. Thus, amortization of injected  capital in the construction of RAS facility 
could be achieved within a short period by increasi ng production. It is important to note that, the 
financial estimations in this study reflect only th e production conditions in Norway. Therefore, 
the potential for profitability in other countries may differ due to differences in environmental 
conditions (the need for heating etc), technology d esign, labour, feed and energy costs. 
 An in-depth study, should be conducted in future, with a facility that meet the standard for 
commercial production in order to obtain credible d ata that will form the basis for all 
assumptions and further research in the production of tilapia using RAS in Norway.  
 
5.1 Limitations of the study  
The economic models and some of the cost figures us ed in the analysis were based on certain 
assumptions. While some of these assumptions are ed ucated guesses, others are closer to reality 
and thus, may impact on the validity of the costs e stimations and economic analyses (Calberg, 
2007). Notwithstanding, the potential accuracy of t he assumptions can be improved by adopting 
conservative approaches to the use of these assumpt ions. In practice, the scale-up facility may 
not provide all the engineering assumptions made an d would impact negatively on the 
production. However, this can be addressed by selec ting and adapting the technology to fit the 
scale of production and environmental requirements of the area where the facility is to be sited 
(Summerfelt et al., 2001). 
 33 
 References:  
Alceste, C.C. and Jory, D.E. (2002). World tilapia farming. available at: 
               http://www.aquaculturemag./com/sitee nglish/printed/buyers/web.tilapia.html. 
Bjørndal, T. (1987). Bioeconomic analyse, pp. 92-13 1. In T. Bjørndal (ed.) Aquaculture   
                economics, pages 173. J. W. Cappele ns, J.W. Publisher AS, Oslo, Norway.                                  
Calberg, C. (2007). Business Analysis with Microsof t Excel. 3 rd  Edition. Que Publishing,   
 Indianapolis,USA. URL: http://www.quepublishing.co m/store/. 
 
Caffey, R.H. (1994). A Bioeconomic Model of Fish Pr oduction in Recirculating Aquaculture 
Systems. Masters Thesis, Department of Agricultural  Economics and Agribusiness, Louisiana 
State University. 
 
Chervinski, J. (1982). Environmental physiology of tilapias. page. 119-128. In Pullin, R.S.V., 
and Lowe-McConnell, R.H. (eds.). The Biology and Cu lture of Tilapias. ICLARM          
Conference Proceedings. Page 7, 360.  
 
Drennen, D.G., and Malone, R.F. (1990).  Design of recirculating systems for intensive tilapia   
culture. Presented paper at the 1991 Louisiana Aqua culture Conference, Baton Rouge,     
Louisiana and In Kazmierczak Jr., R.F., Caffey, R.H . (1995). Management ability and the 
economics of recirculating aquaculture production s ystems. Published in Marine 
Resource Economics volume 10, 187–209. Accessed on World Wide Web on: 
http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/bitstream/49031. 
 
De Ionno, P.N., Wines, G.L., Jones, P.L., Collins, R.O. (2006). A bioeconomic evaluation of a  
commercial scale recirculating finfish growout syst em: An Australian perspective. 
Published in Aquaculture journal volume 259, - page  315–327. 
 
Eikebrokk, B., and Ulgenes, Y. (1998). Recirculatio n technologies in Norwegian Aquaculture.  
Proceedings of 2nd International Conference on Reci rculating Aquaculture, Roanoke 
VA, USA, July 16-19. 
 
Einen, O., & Roem, A.J. 1997. Dietary protein/energ y ratios for Atlantic salmon in relation to  
fish size: growth, feed utilization and slaughter q uality. Aquaculture Nutrition, 3:115– 
126. 
 
El-Sayed, A.F.M. (2006). Environmental Requirements . Tilapia Culture.1st Edition, CABI  
            Publishing, Cambridge, pp34-46. 
 
FAO. (2009). Fisheries global information system. I n FAO, accessed on World Wide Web:   
 http://www.fao.org/fishery/statistics/en. 
 
  34 
 FAO. (2010 ). Fisheries global information system. In FAO, accessed on World Wide Web: 
http://www.fao.org/fishery/statistics/en. 
 
 
FAO. (2011 ). Fisheries global information system. In FAO, accessed on World Wide Web. 
URL: http://www.fao.org/fishery/statistics/ 
 
FAO. (2012). Fisheries global information system. I n FAO.  Assessed on the World Wide Web.  
URL:http://www.fao.org/fishery/statistics/en. 
 
FAO GLOBEFISH. (2010). Tilapia Market Report. URL: http://www.globefish.org/tilapia- 
january-2010-china.html. 
 
FAO GLOBEFISH (2011a) Tilapia Market Report. URL: h ttp://www.globefish.org/tilapia- 
            february-2012.html. 
 
FAO GLOBEFISH. (2011b). Tilapia Market Report. URL:  http://www.globefish.org/global-  
production-and-demand-for-tilapia-is-steady.html. 
  
FAO GLOBEFISH. (2012a). Tilapia Market Report. URL:  http://www.globefish.org/tilapia- 
           march-2012.html. 
 
FAO GLOBEFISH. (2012b). Tilapia Market Report. URL:  http://www.globefish.org/tilapia-
march-2012.html. 
 FAO GLOBEFISH. (2012c). Tilapia Market Report. Acc essed on World Wide Web on: 
http://www.globefish.org/tilapia-march-2012.html. 
Green, B.W. (2006). Tilapia fingerling production s ystems.  Pages 181–210. In: Mjoun, K.,  
Rosentrater, K.A., and Brown, M.L. (2010). Tilapia:  Profile and Economic Importance. 
North Central Agricultural Research Laboratory, USD A Agricultural Research and 
Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Sciences, Sout h Dakota State University. accessed 
at http://pubstorage.sdstate.edu/agBio_Publications /articles/FS963-01.pdf.  
 
Halver, J. E. and Hardy, R. W. (2003). Fish nutriti on. San Diego, San Diego. Page 824. 
Helfrich, L.A., and Libey, G. (a). Fish Farming in Recirculating Aquaculture Systems.  
            Department of Fisheries and Wildlife Sc iences, Virginia Tech, Virginia. Accessed on the  
            URL: http://www.aces.edu/dept/fisheries /aquaculture/documents/recirculatingVT.pdf. 
 
Helfrich, L.A., and Libey, G. (b). Fish Farming in Recirculating Aquaculture Systems.  
Department of Fisheries and Wildlife Sciences, Virg inia Tech, Virginia. URL: 
http://www.aces.edu/dept/fisheries/aquaculture/docu ments/recirculatingVT.pdf. 
 
 35 
  
Helfrich, L.A., and Libey, G. (b). Fish Farming in Recirculating Aquaculture Systems.  
Department of Fisheries and Wildlife Sciences, Virg inia Tech, Virginia. URL: 
http://www.aces.edu/dept/fisheries/aquaculture/docu ments/recirculatingVT.pdf. 
 
Hoff, K. G. (1998). Cost performance volume analysi s, p. 379-403. In K. G. Hoff (ed.) Basic     
          Business Management, 493 p. Tano Aschehou g, AiT Enger AS, Otta, Norway. 
 
Huirne, R.B.M., Dijkhuizen, A.A., Renkema, J.A., P.  (1992). Computerized Analysis of  
Individual Sow-Herd Performance. American Journal o f Agriculture Economics 74, 388-
399. 
 
Hutchinson, W., Mathew, J., O’Sullivan, D.D., Casem ent, D., and Clarke, S. (2004a).  
Recirculating Aquaculture Systems: Minimum Standard s for Design, Construction and 
Management. Prepared for the Inland Aquaculture Ass ociation of South Australia Inc.  
URL: http://www.northernaquafarms.com/knowledgelibr arys. 
 
Hutchinson, W., Mathew, J., O’Sullivan, D.D., Casem ent, D., and Clarke, S. (2004b).  
Recirculating Aquaculture Systems: Minimum Standard s for Design, Construction and 
Management. Prepared for the Inland Aquaculture Ass ociation of South Australia Inc.  
URL: http://www.northernaquafarms.com/knowledgelibr arys.   
           
Investopia, (2012), Amortization definition. URL: h ttp://www.investopia.com/terms/a/amortizat-                       
            ization.asp. 
 
Jahncke, M.L., Schwarz, M.H. (2000). Application of  hazard analysis and critical control point  
(HACCP) Principles as a risk management approach fo r re-circulating aquaculture 
systems (RAS). Proceedings of the Third Internation al Symposium on Recirculating 
Aquaculture Systems, Roanoke, Virginia, July. 
 
Kam, L.E. and Leung, P., (2008). Financial risk ana lysis in aquaculture. In Bondad, M.G.,  
Reantaso, Arthur, J.R., and Subasinghe, R.P. (eds).  Understanding and applying risk  
analysis in aquaculture.  FAO Fisheries and Aquacul ture Technical Paper. No. 519. Rome, 
FAO.    Pages153–207. 
 
Kazmierczak Jr., R.F., Caffey, R.H. (1995a). Manage ment ability and the economics of  
recirculating aquaculture production systems. Publi shed in Marine Resource Economics 
volume 10, 187–209. URL: http://ageconsearch.umn.ed u/bitstream/49031. 
 
Kazmierczak Jr., R.F., Caffey, R.H. (1995b). Manage ment ability and the economics of  
recirculating aquaculture production systems. Publi shed in Marine Resource Economics 
volume 10, 187–209. URL: http://ageconsearch.umn.ed u/bitstream/49031. 36 
  
Kazmierczak Jr., R.F., Caffey, R.H. (1995b). Manage ment ability and the economics of   
recirculating aquaculture production systems. Publi shed in Marine Resource Economics 
volume 10, 187–209. URL: http://ageconsearch.umn.ed u/bitstream/49031. 
 
Lim, C. E., and C. D. Webster. 2006. Nutrient requi rements. Pages 469–501.  Tilapia: biology,  
culture and nutrition. The Haworth.  Press, Inc., B inghamton, New York.   In Mjoun, K., 
Rosentrater, K.A., and Brown, M.L. (2010a). Tilapia : Profile and Economic Importance. 
North Central Agricultural Research Laboratory, USD A Agricultural Research and 
Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Sciences, Sout h Dakota State University. accessed 
at http://pubstorage.sdstate.edu/agBio_Publications /articles/FS963-01.pdf. 
 
Losordo, T. M., and P. Westerman., (1991a). An Anal ysis of Biological, Economic, and   
Engineering Factors Affecting the Cost of Fish Prod uction in Recirculating Aquaculture 
Systems. Pages 1-9 In Workshop on the Design of Hig h-Density Recirculating 
Aquaculture Systems.  Louisiana Sea Grant College Program, Louisiana Stat e University, 
Baton Rouge. 
 
Losordo, T. M., and P. Westerman., (1991b). An Anal ysis of Biological, Economic, and  
Engineering Factors Affecting the Cost of Fish Prod uction in Recirculating Aquaculture 
Systems. Pages 1-9 In Workshop on the Design of Hig h-Density Recirculating 
Aquaculture Systems.  Louisiana Sea Grant College Program, Louisiana Stat e University, 
Baton Rouge. 
 
Losordo, T.M. (1991). Engineering Considerations in  Closed Recirculating systems. Page 58-69.  
In: Proceeding of Aquaculture engineering society s ession. World Aquaculture Society 
22 nd  Annual General Meeting, June. Page 138. 
 
Martins, C.I.M., Eding, E.H., Verdegem, M.C.J., Hei nsbroek, L.T.N., Schneider, O., Blancheton,  
J.P., Rogue d’Orbcastel E., and Verreth J.A.J. (201 0) : New developments in 
recirculating aquaculture systems in Europe: A pers pective on environmental 
sustainability. Aquacultural Engineering, November 2010, Volume 43, Issue 3, Pages 83-
93. 
 
Martins, C.I.M., Eding, E.H., Schneider, O., Rasmus sen, R., Olesen, B., Plesner, L., Verreth,  
J.A.J. (2005). Recirculation Aquaculture Systems in  Europe. CONSENSUS. Oostende, 
Belgium, Consensus working Group, European Aquacult ure Society: 31. 
 
Masser, M.P., Rakocy, J. and Losordo, T.M. (1999). Recirculating Aquaculture Tank Production  
Systems: Management of Recirculating Systems. SRAC Publication No. 452, Page 12. In 
Martins, C.I.M., Eding, E.H., Verdegem, M.C.J., Hei nsbroek, L.T.N., Schneider, O., 
Blancheton, J.P., Rogue d’Orbcastel E., and Verreth  J.A.J. (2010): New developments in 
recirculating aquaculture systems in Europe: A pers pective on environmental 
sustainability. Aquacultural Engineering, November 2010, Volume 43, Issue 3. 
 37 
  
Mjoun, K., Rosentrater, K.A., and Brown, M.L. (2010 a). Tilapia: Profile and Economic  
Importance. North Central Agricultural Research Lab oratory, USDA Agricultural 
Research and Department of Wildlife and Fisheries S ciences, South Dakota State 
University. accessed at http://pubstorage.sdstate.e du/agBio_Publications/articles/FS963-
01.pdf.  
 
Mjoun, K., Rosentrater, K.A., and Brown, M.L. (2010 b). Tilapia: Profile and Economic  
Importance. North Central Agricultural Research Lab oratory, USDA Agricultural 
Research and Department of Wildlife and Fisheries S ciences, South Dakota State 
University. accessed at http://pubstorage.sdstate.e du/agBio_Publications/articles/FS963-
01.pdf.  
 
Muir, J. F. (1981).  Management and Cost Implicatio ns in Recirculating Water Systems. Pages  
116-127. In Bio-Engineering Symposium for Fish Cult ure. FCS Publication volume 1. 
American Fisheries Society, Bethesda, MD. 
 
Naylor, R.L., Goldburg, R.J., Primavera, J.H., Kaut sky, N., Beveridge, M.C.M., Clay, J., Folke,  
C., Lubchenco, J., Mooney, H., Troell, M. (2000). E ffect of Aquaculture on World Fish 
Supplies. Nature, volume 405, Pages 1017-1024. 
 
O'Rourke, P. D. (1991). Current Status on Profits i n Recirculating Systems. Pages 65-99 In  
Regional Workshop on Commercial Fish Culture Using Water Recirculating Systems. 
IL-IN-SG-E-91-8. Illinois/Indiana Sea Grant, Illino is State University, Normal, Illinois. 
 
Piedrahita, R.H. (2003). Reducing the Potential Env ironmental Impact of Tank Aquaculture   
Effluents through Intensification and Recirculation . Aquaculture. 226, pp 35-44. In In 
Martins, C.I.M., Eding, E.H., Verdegem, M.C.J., Hei nsbroek, L.T.N., Schneider, O., 
Blancheton, J.P., Rogue d’Orbcastel E., and Verreth  J.A.J. (2010): New developments in 
recirculating aquaculture systems in Europe: A pers pective on environmental 
sustainability. Aquacultural Engineering, November 2010, Volume 43, Issue 3. 
 
Rawlinson, P. and Forster, A. (2001). The Economics  of Recirculation Aquaculture. Fisheries  
Victoria. Department of Natural Resources and Envir onment. Australia. URL: 
http://oregonstate.edu/dept/IIFET/2000/papers/rawli nson.pdf. 
 
Rawlinson, P. (2002). The economic efficiencies of partial and intensive recirculation  
aquaculture systems for Murray cod. In: Ingram, B.A . (Ed.), Murray Cod Aquaculture: 
Now and Into the Future. Victorian Institute of Ani mal Science, Attwood, Victoria, 
Australia, page 17–18. 
 
Ross, L.G., 2000. Environmental physiology and ener getics. In: Beveridge, M.C.M., McAndrew,  
B.J. (Eds.), Tilapias: biology and exploitation. Kl uwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 
Pages 89-128.  
 38 
  
Samples, K.C. and Leung, P.S. (1986). The effect of  production variability on financial risks of  
freshwater prawn farming in Hawaii. Can. J. Fish. A quaculture Science. page 307–311. 
In Kam, L.E. and Leung, P. (2008). Financial risk a nalysis in aquaculture. Department of 
Molecular Biosciences, University of Hawaii 
URL:  ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/011/i0490e/i0490e01i.p df. 
 
Schneider, O., Blancheton, J. P., Varadi, L., Eding , E. H., and Verreth, J. A. J. (2006). Cost price  
and Production Strategies in European Recirculation  Systems. Linking Tradition & 
Technology Highest Quality for the Consumer, Firenz e, Italy. World Aquaculture Society 
Conference proceedings.  
 
 
Schneider, O., Schram, E., Poelman, M., Rothuis, A. , van Duijn, A., van der Mheen, H., 2010.  
Practices in managing finfish aquaculture using ras  technologies, the dutch example. 
OECD workshop on Advancing the Aquaculture Agenda, Paris, France, OECD. In 
Martins, C.I.M., Eding, E.H., Verdegem, M.C.J., Hei nsbroek, L.T.N., Schneider, O., 
Blancheton, J.P., Rogue d’Orbcastel E., and Verreth  J.A.J. (2010): New developments in 
recirculating aquaculture systems in Europe: A pers pective on environmental 
sustainability. Aquacultural Engineering, November 2010, Volume 43, Issue 3. 
 
Smith, S.A. (1996). HACCP Program for Disease and T herapeutics for Intensive Culture of Food  
Fish. In. Libey, G.S. and Timmons, M.B., eds. Succe sses and Failures in Commercial Re-
circulating Aquaculture. In: Proceedings of an Inte rnational Workshop, Roanoke, 
Virginia, July 19–21, 1996 pp. 344–345. 
 
Statistics Norway, (2011-12). Index on Fishing and fish Farming.  
URL:  http://www.ssb.no/english. 
 
Summerfelt, S.T. (1996). Engineering design of modu lar and scalable RAS containing circular  
tanks, micro screen filtering, fluidized sand bio f ilter, cascade aeration, and low-head or 
U-tube oxygenation. pp. 217–244 In: Libey, G.S., M. B,. Timmons, eds. Successes and 
Failures in Commercial Re-circulating Aquaculture. Proceedings of an International 
Workshop, Roanoke, Virginia, July 19–21. 
 
Summerfelt, S.T., Bebak, J., and Tsukuda, S. (2001) .  Fish Hatchery Management. 2nd  Edition,  
PA Fish and Boat Commission. In Bijo, P. A. (2007).  Feasibility study of Recirculation 
Aquaculture Systems. Thesis submitted at the United  Nations University in Iceland. 
 
Summerfelt, S.T., Sharrer, M.J., Tsukuda, S.M., Gea rheart, M. (2009). Process Requirements for  
Achieving full-flow Disinfection of Recirculating w ater using ozonation and UV 
irradiation Aquaculture. Eng. 40, 17-27. In Martins , C.I.M., Eding, E.H., Verdegem, 
M.C.J., Heinsbroek, L.T.N., Schneider, O., Blanchet on, J.P., Rogue d’Orbcastel E., and 
Verreth J.A.J. (2010): New Developments in Recircul ating Aquaculture Systems in 
Europe: A Perspective on Environmental Sustainabili ty. Aquacultural Engineering, 
November 2010, Volume 43, Issue 3. 39 
  
Terjesen, B. F., Ulgenes, Y., Færa, S. O., Summerfe lt, S. T., Brunsvik, P., Baeverfjord, G.,  
Nerland, S., Takle, H., Norvik, O. C., Kittelsen, A ., 2008. RAS research facility 
dimensioning and design: a special case compared to  planning production systems. In 
Aquaculture Engineering Society Issues Forum Procee dings. Roanoke, Virginia, 23rd-
24th July, 223-238. 
 
Timmons, M. D., 2002. Entrepreneurial and economic issues of recirculating aquaculture   
ventures. In: Proceedings of the third Internationa l conference on recirculating 
aquaculture  (Eds) Libey, G. S., Timmons, M. B., Fl ick, G. J., Rakestraw, T. T. Sea Grant 
Publication  VSG 00 09. 
 
Timmons, M.B, Ebeling, J.M., Wheaton, F.W, Summerfe lt, S.T., Vinci, B.J. (2001).  
Recirculating Aquaculture Systems. NRAC Publication  no. 01-002, Cayuga Aqua 
Ventures, Ithaca, NY, Page-650. 
 
Verdegem, M. C. J., Bosma, R. H., Verreth, J. A. J.  (2006). Reducing water use for animal  
production through aquaculture. International journ al on Water Resource Development. 
22, 101-113. In Martins, C.I.M., Eding, E.H., Verde gem, M.C.J., Heinsbroek, L.T.N., 
Schneider, O., Blancheton, J.P., Rogue d’Orbcastel E., and Verreth J.A.J. (2010): New 
developments in recirculating aquaculture systems i n Europe: A perspective on 
environmental sustainability. Aquacultural Engineer ing, November 2010, Volume 43, 
Issue 3, Pages 83-93. 
 
Watanabe, W.O., Olla, B.L., Wicklund, R.I. and Head , W.D.  (1997).  Saltwater culture of the  
Florida red tilapia and other saline-tolerant tilap ias: a review. Pages 54-141 in Costa-
Pierce, B.A, and Rakocy, J.E. (eds).  Tilapia Aquac ulture in the Americas, Volume 1. 
The World Aquaculture Society, Baton Rouge, Louisia na. 
 
Wing-Keong N, Hanim, R, and Sih-Win T.(2008). Malay sia study: GIFT Tilapia show greater  
FCR, growth potential than Red Tilapia. Published i n Global Aquaculture Advocate, 
January/February. 
 
Zohar, Y., Tal, Y., Schreier, H. J., Steven, C., St ubblefield, J. and Place, A. (2005).  
Commercially feasible urban recirculated aquacultur e: Addressing the marine sector. In 
Martins, C.I.M., Eding, E.H., Verdegem, M.C.J., Hei nsbroek, L.T.N., Schneider, O., 
Blancheton, J.P., Rogue d’Orbcastel E., and Verreth  J.A.J. (2010): New developments in 
recirculating aquaculture systems in Europe: A pers pective on environmental 
sustainability. Aquacultural Engineering, November 2010, Volume 43, Issue 3, Pages 83-
93. 
 
 40 
 Appendix 
Conversion Rates from DNB, Norway.  
Accessed on: https://www.dnb.no/en/fx-rates 
1 USD ≡ NOK 5.6 
 
Definitions 
Economies of scale  refer to the potential reduction in per unit produ ction costs resulting from 
increased scale of production, realized through ope rational efficiencies. 
 
Amortization  refers to the act of spreading payments of capital  expenses over a period of time 
(Investopia, 2012). 
 