 
J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci .                                                         J. Adv.  Biomed . & Pharm.  Sci. 2 (2019) 164-481 
 
 
 
Colon Drug Delivery Systems for the Treatment of Inflammatory Bowel Disease  
Milad Reda Qelliny *, Usama  Farghly  Aly, Omar Helmy Elgarhy, Khaled A ly khaled  
 
Department of Pharma ceutics , Faculty of Pharmacy, Minia  University, 61519 Minia, Egypt  
 
                  Received : Augus t, 2, 201 9; revised : September  17, 201 9; accepted : September  18, 201 9 
 
Abstract  
 
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is one of the most common chronic diseases that affect the entire gastrointestinal tract (GI T) 
especially the colon. Its symptoms extend from mild diarrhea, abdominal pain, and bloody diarrhea to severe conditions which 
affect the quality of life. Many treatments have been developed to treat and cure IBD and to improve patient’s quality of life. The 
big challenge faces the newly developed treatments is the site of action as the colon presents at the distal end of the GIT a nd have a 
complex  biological environment. Many technologies have been investigated to target the colon, load higher amounts of active 
ingredients, and decrease unwanted side effects resulted from upper GIT absorption. This review briefly discusses the IBD, 
treatment lines, physiological considerations, and all methods of colon targeting technologies starting from the traditional m ethods 
which based on pH, time, and microbial content of the colon. Also, we discussed in detail all new techniques based on Micro and 
Nanotechnology which improve the effectiveness of used therapeutics.   
 
Key words  
Inflammatory bowel disease , colon drug delivery systems , OROS -CT, pH-dependent carriers , CODESTM, novel colon approaches   
 
1. Introduction  
Newelly designed pharmaceutical drug delivery 
systems focus on delivering existing drugs with improved safety 
and efficacy together with lower dose frequency [1]. Also, the 
choice of  the most appropriate administration route is ve ry 
important in order to achieve the required therapeutic response. 
[2]  
In comparison with the alternative r outes of drug delivery, oral 
route and oral delivery systems are considered to be most 
suitable and best to administer drugs. Oral route has many 
advantages above other routes such as easiness in 
administration, low cost, and patient noncompliance. [3] The 
main drawbacks and the most serious problem in the oral route 
and using conventional drug delivery systems are allowing the 
amount of active drug level in plasma devoid of any control 
over the delivery of active su bstance [4]. In addition, drug 
absorption from gastrointestinal tract (GIT) regions depends 
mainly on physicochemical properties of the active ingredient. 
[5]  
Modified -release systems showed a control led manner of the 
required plasma levels and steady -state concentration for a long 
period [4]. The advanced drug delivery systems planned to 
control drug release in the oral route also, planned to control  the 
release of poorly water -soluble drugs and to target specific GIT 
sites [6]. 
Pharmaceutical researchers  extensively studied and developed 
in the area of drug targeting and/or site -specific drug delivery. 
Delivery of drugs to specific sites or to treat specific diseases is 
very important and essential to improving therapeutic effic iency 
by increasing the dose of the desired drug at the site of action. 
Also, to reduce undesirable side effects and cost [7]. Colon drug delivery systems (CDDS) are an example of drug 
targeting which has promising developments in the area of local 
and systemic treatment. At the same time, CDDS have various 
challenges as reaching the distal part of GIT presents significant 
physiological difficulties and environmental barriers  [8, 9 ]. 
Targeting drug to the colon is highly valuable for local 
treatment of numerous diseases such as ulcerative colitis, 
Crohn’s disease and colonic cancer  [10]. Also, for the systemic 
delivery of drugs such as proteins and peptides which may be 
unstable in the stomach and small i ntestine due to many 
problems like hydrolysis and lower absorption from the lumen 
of upper GIT due to their relatively large molecular weight  [11]. 
2. Anatomical and physiological considerations related to 
the colon  
The colon is the terminal part of the GIT. It is a part of the large 
intestine and has the following anatomical features: -   
1. The length of the colon is about 1.5 – 1.66 m (5 ft).  
2. Having an internal diameter of 2.5 cm and a surface area 3 
m2. 
3. Starts from th e ileum by a small junction called ileocecal 
sphincter and ends with the anus.  
4. According to the anatomical structure, the large intestine is 
divided into four anatomical positions are cecum, colon, 
rectum, and anal canal.  
5. The colon is divided into four re gions are ascending colon, 
transverse colon, descending colon, and sigmoid colon [8, 
12, 13 ]. Journal of Advanced Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences 
Journal Homepage: http:// jabps.journals.ekb.eg  
 
* Correspondence:  Milad Reda Qelliny  
Tel.:  +2 01228281799 ; Fax:  +20 862369 075 
Email Address:   mila_reda @mu.edu.eg   
 461 
 
  J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 As the colon is the distal part of the digestive system, so having 
some particular physiological features rather than the upper GI 
tract as (Figure 1):-  
1. Colon fluids: - colon have a 178 ml of total fluids and about 
13 ml of free fluids, which are a very little amount of water 
to solubilize drugs [8] and considered a big challenge to drug 
absorption.  
2. Microbial flora: - a large number of microorganisms occupy 
the colon, which approximately accounts and more than 
3000 different species  [14]. These microorganisms are able 
to digest many contents of the colon as polysaccharides, 
proteins, peptides, and drugs. Over than 30 drugs have been 
identified to be subjected to microbial digestion in the colon 
[15]. 
3. Transit time: - the colon shows a big variation in re sidence 
time; the residence time in the colon can be from around 1 hr 
up to several days [16] and this could affect drug absorption 
and subsequently affects drug bioavailability [17].   
4. Digestion in the colon consists of two main mechanisms, the 
first one is mechanical digesti on in which digestion starts 
when the chyme passes through the ileocecal sphincter; the 
characteristic movement of the colon is haustral churning in 
which colon walls contract and squeeze contents into the 
second haustrum. The final digestion mechanism is chemical 
digestion in which microorganisms that inhabit the lumen of 
the large intestine digest and ferment colon contents and 
release gases as carbon dioxide, two mechanisms are 
challenging drug absorption from the colon [12]. 
3. Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)  
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a relapsing and chronic 
inflammatory disease of bowel mucosa [18], more susceptible to 
the colon [19]. IBD is a chronic, progressive, disabling disease 
[20], characterized by the unknown origin and both long -term 
and short -term inflammation [21]. IBD is a term used to 
describe both ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD) 
[22-24]. Both diseases are thought to be a result  of dysregulated 
mucosal response in the bowel function  [25]. Both UC and CD 
are usually extending over many years and sometimes 
impossible to differentiate between them [23]. Whatever both 
are characterized by similar symptoms, for example, severe 
diarrhea, bodyweight loss, bloody stool and abdominal pain 
[23]. Pathological lesions and the position of the inflammation 
can distinguish between UC and CD to some extent [26]. In the 
case of UC, inflammation mainly affects the innermost mucosa 
and not involve the deeper tissues like serosa and muscularis. 
The lesion mainly is confined to the colon and rectum. But in 
case of CD, inflammation is transmural, affects the en tire wall 
of the intestine, and deeper to the serosal layer. The lesion 
occurs over the length of the large intestine and small intestine, 
sometimes even reach to the mouth [27, 28 ]. IBD characterized 
by alternative cycles of remission and relapse [22, 29 ]. 
Although IBD has been extensively studied for many years, its 
pathogenesis remains idiopathic and unknown [30].  The pathogenesis for IBD ( Figure 2) is to some level can be 
explained and understood, IBD is believed to occur due to 
dysregulation of the immune response to commensal microbiota 
in genetically susceptible individuals  [26, 31 ]. Much clinical 
evidence consider dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiome with 
developing of UC and CD [22, 32 ]. IBD has both genetic and 
environme ntal risk factors [23]. Genetic related factors include 
i.e, the mutation of NOD 2 encoding genes and HLA*103 
which associated with severe UC. Approximately 15 % of the 
patients with IBD have a first degree - relative to the disease, but 
the inheritance pattern of the disease is not clear [33, 34 ]. Many 
new studies discuss NOD 2 genes mutations which considered 
as the main driver of early onset of CD [35]. On the other hand , 
many environmental factors related to IBD and not clearly 
understood such as occupation, breastfeeding, oral 
contraceptives, stress, smoking, microbes, drugs, and diets [36-
39].  
Pathophysiology of IBD i nvolves multiple complex pathways in 
the deregulation of the inflammatory cascade, which include 
increased intestinal permeability and lower intestinal barrier 
resistance of inflamed cells [40]. Mechanisms include bacteria 
taken up by specialized M -cells and enter the lamina propria 
through ulcerated mucosa [23], T-cell mediated disruption of 
tight junctions proteins [41, 42 ], increased levels of cytokines 
and interleukin 12 (IL -12) [43], resistance of activated T -cells to 
normal apoptosis, and finally, high response of T -cells to 
interferon γ (INF -γ) release [44]. 
4. Drug molecules for IBD tre atment  
Pharmacological treatment of ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s 
disease is very difficult and depends mainly on the location and 
activity of the disease. The main goal of treatment is to prolong 
remission cycles and decrease relapsing cycles. IBD treatment is 
long-life treatment [45]. Wide range of medicinal agents used 
for the treatment of IBD as 5 -aminosalicylates, glucocorticoids, 
antibiotics, thiopurines, methotrexate, and biological treatment 
as TNF -α antibodies [23].  
5-aminosalicylates are the first line of the treatment for patients 
having mild to moderate UC and have a big role in induction 
and maintenance of remission periods at doses of 3000 -4500 mg 
per day for sulfasalazine [26].  
Aminosalicylates group include sulfasalazine [46], mesalazine 
[47], olsalazine [48, 49 ], and balsalazide [50, 51 ]. The action of 
aminosalicylates depends on the modulation of cytokines 
released from bowel mucosa [23]. Also, by decreasing the 
nuclear localization of nuclear factor -kappaB (NF -kB) through 
peroxisome proliferator -activated receptor gamma (PPAR -γ) 
mediation [24]. Aminosalicylates are the most common 
treatment of ulcerative colitis [24, 46 ], and have no proven role 
in the treatment of Crohn’s disease  [23]. Sulfasalazine having 
more side effects due to sulfapyridine -related intolerance in 
some patients [52], so the use of sulfasalazine is limited. Other 
agents as mesalazine, olsalazine, and balsalazide are more 
tolerated.   
 466 
 
 
J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 
  
 
          Figure 1: The most important colon environment conditions.  
 
 
Figure 2: Pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease.  
 
461 
 
  J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 Glucocorticoids are considered to be the first line for the  
treatment of active IBD based on clinical and experimental 
findings. About 54 % of patients with UC showed complete 
remission over one month of the treatment, 30 % showed partial 
remission and 16  % showed no remission. In CD patients, 
glucocorticoids treatment course for one month showed that 58 
% of patients with complete remission, 26 % showed partial 
remission and 16 % of patients showed no response [53]. 
Glucocorticoids used in the treatment of inflammatory bowel 
disease include prednisolone [54, 55 ], hydrocortisone [23], and 
budesonide [23, 24, 56, 57 ]. Corticosteroids action depends 
mainly on the potent anti -inflammatory effect which 
characterizes this group. Generally, corticosteroids are effective 
in the treatment of moderate to severe ulcerative colitis and 
having no role in the maintenance treatment of both ulcerati ve 
colitis and Crohn’s disease [24]. Administration of 
corticosteroids may be oral, intravenous or topical as an enema 
[23]. Budesonide is considered the potent corticosteroid, having 
fewer side effects [24] and used for the treatment of active 
disease especially ileitis, ileocolitis, and Crohn’s disease.  
In case of patients with severe IBD and do not respond to 
aminosalicylates or glucocorticoids treatment due to corticoid 
dependency and resistance [58] can be treated with 
immunosuppressive agents as methotrexate, cyclosporins, 
azathioprine [59] and mercaptopurine [60].  
Targeting inflammatory cascade at the main point is considering 
a good feature in the treatment of IBD [61], targeting includes 
TNF -α which is a main inflammatory mediator and involved in 
many systemic and cutaneous inflammat ory disorders [62]. In 
this case, antibodies used to neutralize TNF -α, the human 
chimeric monoclonal antibodies infliximab that binds to the 
soluble sub -unit and the membrane -bound precursor of TNF -α 
[63]. Other antibodies approved by the FDA and used for IBD 
treatment as adalimumab and certolizumab [24, 64 ].  
5. Drug delivery strategies for IBD therapy  
5.1. Colonic absorption  
The colon has a different physiological environment and in the 
case of IBD, the colon environment becomes more complex due 
to the disease severity and location of the lesion in the distal 
part. Also, treatment becomes more difficult due to the previous 
conditions and due to colonic absorption, which hardly to be 
predicted as the small intestine. Irrespective of  therapy required 
for local or systemic drug delivery, drug absorption from the 
colon mainly depends on three major factors include pH, transit 
time, and microbial flora of the colon [65]. The large intestine 
characterized by the small surface area 3 m2 [8]. The small 
surface area of the colon is overcompensated by the very long 
transit time (≤ 48 h.) [66] and the absence of digestive enzymes.  
Drugs which reached to the colon may be absorbed by two main 
mechanisms, the first one is the transcellular transport in which 
the drug passes  through colonocytes, and the other is the 
paracellular transport in which drug passes through the 
junctions between adjacent colonocytes [67]. The paracellular 
pathway is highly difficult and more restricted in the colon  due to very small gaps between colonocytes -very tight junctions -
only molecules of 60 molecular weight or lower can be 
absorbed paracellular. Absorption in the colon occurs by the 
second transcellular pathway (passive transcellular diffusion) in 
which lipo philic drugs pass through colonocytes but not similar 
to the small intestine as the colon having lower water volume 
and small surface area available for drug absorption [68].  
Drug delivery strategies to the colon ( Figure 3) include at the 
first rectal preparations like suppositories, enemas, and foams. 
Rectal preparations have been efficiently used for the treatment 
of lesions in the lower part of the colon, but not effective in 
some cases in which the inflammation w as located in the upper 
part of the colon such as pancolitis [26]. The traditional oral 
route is considering an effective route for the treatment of IBD 
especially lesions that extend to the small intestine and ever to 
mouth. Oral route has many limitations as extensive first -pass 
metabolism, side effects due to drug ab sorption from upper GIT 
and only a small amount of the active drug reach to the inflamed 
areas of the colon.  
5.2. Factors affecti ng drug absorption from colon  
5.2.1. Drug related factors  
Drug absorption from the colon differs from other sites of GIT 
as th e colon is the distal part of the alimentary canal and having 
some different features. Also, drug properties affect drug 
absorption from the colon as [69, 70 ]:- 
1. Drug solubility, drug log P, and permeability at the site of 
action [71]. 
2. Physicochemical properties of the drug as pKa and degree of 
ionization.  
3. Drug degradation and stability in the colon [72]. 
4. The drug should be in solution before reaching the colon, 
where the water volume and fluids content is low [73]. 
5.2.2. Colon related factors  
The colon environment has a big role in drug absorption by 
different and various factors which affect the absorption rate as 
[74]:- 
1. Lumen pH level.  
2. Transit time of the colon which has higher values and big 
variations.  
3. Bacterial enzymes activity against drugs.  
4. Mucous binding and selectivity to drugs.  
5. Disease state of the colon.  
6. Local physiological action of the drugs.  
5.2.3. Formulation related factors   
Colon targeted drug delivery systems should be formulated in a 
manner which produces the highest drug targeting and highest 
drug absorption from the colon. Many formulation factors can 
affect drug absorption as: -   
1. Type of drug delivery system.  468 
 
 
J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 
2. Polymer an d excipients nature.  
3. Drug delivery system release manner, which should be able 
to control release in the stomach, upper gastrointestinal tract, 
and able to release the drug in the colon  [71] [75]. 
4. Particle size as microparticle or nanoparticle delivery 
systems.  
5. Using of absorption enhancers.  
6. Colon drug delivery systems (CDDS) should be able to 
delay drug release till reaching the colon, in which 
formulation may release the drug in burst manner or 
sustained -release  [76].   
7. Formulation factors, retention time, and retrograde spreading 
influence drug concentration reaches the colon [77].  
5.3. Physiological consideration in colon  drug delivery 
systems design  
5.3.1. Transit time  
A big variation in physiological state occurs in IBD patients and 
becomes dynamic, more inter -related, and difficult to examine 
correctly in isolation. Transit time across the gastrointestinal 
tract (Orocecal transit time, OCTT) has been shown to be 
delayed in both ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease [22] [78].  
Patients with ulcerative colitis hav e colonic transit time twice 
faster than normal persons due to high secretions and diarrhea, 
leading to challenges in targeting the colon using conventional 
formulations. OCTT in the normal and IBD patients shown in 
(Table 1 ). Using the delayed -release con ventional formulations 
is not effective in colon targeting and showing bidistribution 
phase as higher drug concentration in the proximal colon and 
lower drug concentration in the distal colon [79].  
5.3.2. Microbial contents   
Normal flora occupies our gastrointestinal tract from mouth to 
the colon and plays a big role in GIT physiology as digestion of 
carbohydrates, proteins, and fatty acids. In normal conditions, 
the GIT hosts over 500 distinct species  [22], and many studies 
estimating the number of species to 2000  [80].  Gastrointestinal 
microbiota is a complex system includes bacteria, yeasts, archei, 
and fungi [14]. The colon contains at leas t about 1011 - 1012 
CFU of microorganisms and the most common types in the 
colon are Bacteroids , Clostridium group IV, XIV , 
Bifidobacteria , and Enterobacteriace  [22, 80 ]. 
Ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease occur in the colon and 
distal ileum, which having the highest concentration of 
microbiota. Both composition and function of intestinal 
microorganisms in UC, CD, and pouchitis  are abnormal [80]. 
Dysbiosis is the imbalance of  the normal microbial flora and 
considered as one of the common theories of IBD pathogenesis, 
in which occur an increase in the  concentration of anaerobic 
bacteria, particularly gram -negative (G -Ve) bacteria as 
Bacteroids , and reduction in beneficial bac teria as 
Bifidobacteria  [81]. Also, dysbiosis of commensal microbiota 
includes decreased the ratio of protective/ aggressive bacteria, 
decreased the microorganisms whi ch produce short -chain fatty acids (SCFA), and increased the concentration of aggressive 
bacterial species as hydrogen sulfide reducing bacteria, 
Bacteroids , Enterobacteriace , and Candida albicans  [80]. 
Normal microbial flora and dysbiosis are presented in ( Tabl e 
2).  
5.3.3. Colonic pH   
Gastrointestinal pH changes along different regions of 
alimentary canal as shown in ( Table 3 ). The highly acidic 
stomach secretions and contents rapidly changed to slightly 
acidic pH in the duodenum and then rose to basic pH at the 
terminal ileum [22, 82 ]. 
The colon pH in normal individuals changes from cecal pH of 6 
to the rectum pH of 6,7 [71, 83 ]. The slightly  acidic pH of the 
colon is due to the production of short -chain fatty acids (SCFA) 
by the abundant bacterial microbiota of the colon [84]. The 
gastrointestinal pH controlled by many factors as the food and 
fluid intake, microbial digestion and fermentation process, and 
gastrointestinal secretions [85]. During the active phase of 
inflammatory bowel disea se occurs disruption in three main 
mechanisms which control luminal pH level, microbial 
fermentation and digestion process especially SCFA production 
in the colon, bile acid metabolism of fatty acids, and 
bicarbonate/carbonate secretions mechanism [82]. Disruption of 
these mechanisms leads to alterations in the colon pH from 6,8 
to 5,5 in active UC,  [71] and 5,3 in CD [22, 83 ]. Alterations in 
pH lead to a change in transit time and microbial flora contents, 
which signific antly affects drug release from traditional 
formulations [86]. 
5.3.4. Intestinal membrane integrity  
Normal intestinal barrier composed mainly of the following 
three layers: -  
1. Thick mucus layer, which composed of two main layers, the 
outer mucus layer, and the inner mucus layer. Mucus 
produced by goblet cells consisting of a thick layer of about 
150 µm an d acts as a chemical barrier by protecting the 
intestinal epithelium by its viscosity. Mucus layer contains a 
high concentration of glycosylated mucins, and trefoil 
factors (TFFs), which acts as a defensive mechanism. Also, 
acting by entrapping bacteria [87]. 
2. A Monolayer of epithelial cells, which mainly composed of 
colonocyte s, and goblet cells. The epithelial cells regulate 
the intestinal permeability between  the cells by junctions, 
the most common types of colonocytes junctions are 
desmosomes, adherent junctions (AJs), and tight junctions 
(TJs) [87] [(88, 89 ]. 
3. The lower barrier, which composed mainly of a group of 
cells as macrophages, mesenchymal cells, dendritic cells, 
and lymphocytes. Thes layer acts mainly as a protective 
layer.  
Chronic inflammation of intestinal membrane as in both UC and 
CD leads to destructive changes in the intestinal barrier as: -  
1. Disruption of intestinal membrane characterized by mucosal 
surface changes and crypt distortion [22]. 461 
 
  J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
  
  
 
Figure 3: Colon -targeted drug delivery systems.  
 
Table 1:  OCCT in normal individuals and IBD patients.  
Transit time  (Hours) Normal IBD 
1. Stomach.  1 – 2 hr.  Increased 30% 
2. Small intestine.  
1. Duodenum  
2. Jejunum  
3. Ileum  3 – 4 hr.  Increased 30% 
2 hr. 
1.5 hr. 
1.5 hr. 
        3. Large intestine.  6 – 70 hr.  24 hr. 
 
Table 2:  Commensal microbial content of gastrointestinal tract in healthy individuals and IBD .  
GIT parts Microorganism count Species in healthy Species in IBD 
1. stomach 
2. small intestine 
1. duodenum 
2. jejunum 
3. ileum 10 2 Clostridiales 
Streptococcus 
Bacteroids 
Actinomycinae 
Lactobacillus 
Corynebacteria Increased E.coli.  
Decrease Clostridium   
104 
105 
107 
3. colon 1011 Firmicutis 
Bacteroids 
Proteobacteria 
Actinobacteria Increase bacteroids , Eubacteria , 
Peptostreptococcus , and decrease 
Bifidobacteria  and E.coli.  
 411 
 
 
J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 
2. Reduction in a number of goblet cells, reduction in mucus 
production, reduced mucus layer thickness, and altered 
mucus composition [90].  
3. Infiltration of inflammatory immune cells as lymphocytes, 
neutrophils, and macrophages.   
4. Changes in mucosal physiology and metabolism, as 
membrane trying to repair and limit damage of cells, the 
compensation mechanism leads to activation of a number of 
protective pathways as the oxygen -sensing transcription 
factor, and hypoxia -inducible factor  (HIF) mediates 
increased expressions of mucus components as mucins, and 
TFs, subsequently leading to mucus viscosity changes, 
which may affect permeability of lipophilic drugs [91]. 
5. Changes in mucosal membrane transport mechanisms as 
downregulation of TJ complex, which associated with loss 
of intestinal integrity [22], and increased paracellular 
absorption in patients with IBD [92]. TJ complex is 
considered as an attractive target for drug absorption [93]. 
Also, HIF transcriptionally regulates multi -drug resistance 
gene 1 (MDR 1), which  stimulate both xenobiotic drug 
efflux pump, and P -glycoprotein (P -gp), which actively 
acting in the transportation of the drug back again to the 
lumen, and contributes to many drug resistance, For 
example, glucocorticoids [94, 95 ]. 
5.4. Primary approaches for colon drug delivery  
Main strategies for the colon drug delivery systems include 
primary or traditional approaches such as tablets which mainly 
depends on three main mechanisms namely,  enzymatic or 
microbial approach which mainly acts by the aid of colonic 
microbial enzymes, pH-dependent approach, and time -
dependent approach.  
In microbial or enzymatic approach, targeting depends mainly 
on drug activation by colonic microbial enzymes. The colon 
contains at least about 1011 - 1012 CFU of microorganisms and 
the most common types  are Bacteroids , Clostridium group IV, 
XIV, Bifidobacteria , and Enterobacteriace . [22, 80 ] The main 
drawbacks of this system are its dependency on the enzymatic 
activity of colonic normal flora that may be totally disrupted in 
case of IBD.  Dysbiosis, which is defined as the imbalance of 
the normal mi crobial flora and considered as one of the 
common theories of IBD pathogenesis, is not common in case 
of UC, but in CD many variations in microbial enzymes have 
been observed [96, 97 ]. The microbial -based approach includes 
using of prodrugs, the most common example is sulfasalazine 
and 5 -ASA which cleaved microbially and activated to 
mesalazine and sulfonamide [98, 99 ]. Also, include the use of 
conjugates like azo -bond conjugates, glucuronide conjugates, 
cyclodextrin conjugates , dextran conjugates, and amino acids 
conjugates [69, 100 -102]. Finally, this system is widely 
available using a variety of polysaccharides (Table  4).  
In the pH -dependent approach, a widely used approach and 
depends mainly on the retardation of drug release at lower pH 
values. Therefore, drug release occurs only at pH of distal ileum 
(pH > 6). Patients with IBD showed lower colonic pH ranging from 5 to 7  and in some cases drops to 2.3 which cause 
incomplete drug release at the site of treatment [71, 82 ].  
Time -dependent systems or time -controlled systems are usually 
known as delayed -release systems or sigmoidal -release systems 
[103]. The system is designed mainly to resist the acidic 
medium of the stomach, prevent drug release in the upper GIT, 
and unaffected by the intestinal bacteria or enzymes [70, 104, 
105].  The main drawbacks of time -dependent approach may be 
concluded in the following: the gastric emptying time is 
variable, inconsistent between individuals and depends mainly 
on food intake, type of food, size, shape, the density of the 
dosage form, disease c onditions, and gastric motility associated 
with the physiological condition of the patient [105-111]. The 
release of the drug from time -dependent systems occurs by 
different mechanisms such as swelling mechanism, osmosis 
mechanis m or combination of  both [104, 112 ].  Erodible 
polymers (Table 5)  are most common used for time -controlled 
systems as a lag time can be built in it to allow drug release 
from the dosage form after this time, such as Eudragit RS 100, 
Eudragit RL 100, hy droxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC), 
hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC), and hydroxyethyl cellulose 
(HEC) [5, 9, 113 ].   
5.5. Novel drug d elivery systems   
5.5.1. Pressure controlled drug delivery systems (PCDCS)  
The large intestine has more peristaltic movements than the 
small intestine producing a higher -pressure property. Taking 
into consideration this point, Takaya et al.  [114] developed a 
new technique depends on the pressure difference between the 
small intestine and the colon. The new drug delivery system is 
based mainly upon the using of ethyl cellulose which is a water -
insoluble polymer. The system is composed mainly of a drug 
containing capsule covered with ethyl cellulose polymer. The 
drug release is controlled by the disintegration of the polymer 
due to the pressure inside the lumen of the colon. The main 
driving paramet er controlling the drug release is the thickness of 
the capsule shell [10, 72, 108, 115, 116 ].  
5.5.2. Osmotic controlled drug delivery systems (OROS -CT) 
Generally, osmotic based drug delivery systems are very 
common drug carriers in the oral route. The system mainly 
designed upon the difference in the osmotic pressure generated 
between the system and the lumen of the colon. The colon has 
osmolarity of 81 mOsm/Kg, which is the main driving force 
affecting the drug release from the osmotic based systems. This 
system is designed to target and treat colon conditions like IBD 
or to attain drug release for many drugs tha t degraded in the 
small intestine. The OROS -CT may be composed of one unit or 
5-6 push -pull units, encapsulated within a hard gelatin capsule. 
The main composition of osmotic based drug delivery carriers is 
the main unit which containing osmotic drug compa rtment and 
osmotic push compartment covered with a semipermeable 
membrane with a small orifice drilled through the drug  
 414 
 
  J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
   Table 3: Gastrointestinal luminal pH in Healthy individuals and IBD patients.  
GIT parts Normal pH IBD pH 
1. Stomach  
       1. fed state  
       2. fasted state  1.5  
3 – 5   
1.5 – 2.0   
2. Small intestine  
       1. Duodenum  
       2. Jejunum  
       3. Ileum   
6 7.4 
6.8 – 7  7 
7.4 7.4 
3. Colon  
       1. Ascending colon  
       2. Transverse colon  
       3. Descending and sigmoid   
6 – 8 (6.4)  2.3 – 6.5  
6 – 8 (6)  2.3 – 6.5  
6.7 2.3 – 6.5 
 
Table 4: Polysaccharides used for colon drug delivery.  
No. Polysaccharide Properties Bacteria species that degrade 
the polymer. 
1 Amylose Unbranched ingredient of starch Bacteroids 
2 Arabinogalactan Natural pectin Bifidobacterium 
3 Chitosan Deacetylated chitin Bacteroids 
4 Dextran Plasma expanders Bacteroids 
5 Chondroitin sulfate Mucopolysaccharide contains sulfate ester Bacteroids 
6 Cyclodextrin Cyclic structure of 6,7, and 8 units Bacteroids 
7 Guar gum Galactomannan, thickening agent Bacteroids and Ruminococous 
8 Pectin Partial methyl ester, thickening agent Bacteroids 
Bifidobacterium 
Eubacterium 
9 Inulin polysaccharide composed of a mixture of  oligomers and polymers  Bifidobacterium 
10 Xylan Abundant hemicellulose Bacteroids 
11 Chitosan derivatives Chitosan succinate and phthalate Bacteroids 
12 Locust bean gum Mainly galactomannan units Bacteroids 
 411 
 
 
J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 
compartment. The entire unit is covered with an enteric 
impermeable membrane ( Figure 4).  
The mechanism of drug release from osmotic based systems 
could follow the following cascade ; first, the gelatin capsule 
dissolves immediately after the system is swallowed. The entire 
system is covered with an impermeable membrane which resists 
drug release at the acidic pH of the stomach. Secondly, at the 
higher pH of the intestine (pH >  7) the semipermeable 
membrane starts to dissolve, and the water enters to the central 
unit causing the osmotic push compartment to swell and creates 
a flowable gel in the drug unit. Finally, the swelled osmotic 
push unit forces the drug gel out of the orifice, an d the drug 
release occurs at a controlled manner and over a precise time 
[10, 72, 108, 115, 116 ].  
5.5.3. A novel colon targeted system (CODESTM )  
A new technique was developed to overcome the drawbacks of 
the pH and time -dependent drug delivery systems. The 
CODESTM system ( Figure 5) is mainly composed of a simple 
tablet core containing the active ingredient and coated with 
acid-soluble polymer and a degradable polysaccharide such as 
lactulose layer, then a new layer of the enteric polymer Eudragit 
L 100 or hydroxy methylcellulose (H PMC) polymeric coat is 
added and finally the tablet was coated with Eudragit E 
polymer. The enteric polymer protects the system inside the 
stomach and until the system delivered to the small intestine. At 
the higher pH of the small intestine, the enteric c oat starts to 
dissolve with the presence of barrier layers such as HPMC or 
Eudragit L 100 to prevent the interaction between polymeric 
coats. At the colon, lactulose starts to dissolve by the aid of 
microflora producing a sufficient acid media capable for 
dissolving the acid layer surrounding the drug and affect the 
drug dissolution rate [10, 72, 108, 115, 116 ].  
5.5.4. Pulsatile drug delivery system (PulsinCap® ) 
Simply, the system is mainly based on the time -dependent 
approach and the PulsinCap® is the most common one. The new 
technology composed of insoluble half capsule body filled with 
an active ingredient, the open end of the capsule sealed with a 
fixed amount of hydrogel plug, the  plug coated with water -
soluble cap, and finally, the whole capsule coated with an 
enteric polymer film ( Figure 6). The capsule is resistant to 
various degradation processes in the stomach and the polymeric 
coat starts to dissolve at higher pH of the small  intestine. The 
plug composed of semipermeable materials which permit water 
transfer to the drug compartment. The length of the fixed plug 
controls the rate of drug release from the system  [10, 72, 108, 
115, 116 ].  
5.5.5. Multipar ticulate drug delivery systems  
A multiplicity of small dis crete units such as pellets, granules, 
beads, microparticles, or nanoparticles filled into a sachet or 
compressed into a tablet matrix. In these dosage forms, the 
system able to escape from the upper gastrointestinal degradation due to their relatively sma ll size. Lower and 
uniformity of the particle size ensure more uniform GIT 
dispersion and uniform drug release manner. The main 
advantage of this system is lower inter and intra -subject 
variability in gastrointestinal transit time as the smaller particle 
size is less dependent on the gastric emptying time [66, 116 ].  
5.5.6. Hydrogels drug delivery systems   
A network of materials capable of absorbing water but 
remaining insoluble and mainly formed by two mechanisms: 
covalent crosslinking of linear hydrophilic polymers and 
heterogeneous polymer mixtures. The most common hydrogels 
available for colon targeting purpose are mainly based on azo 
polymeric networks such as inulin, polyvinyl alcohol, guar gum, 
and dextran [72, 104, 107, 108, 116, 117 ]. 
5.5.7. Time clo ck-based drug delivery systems  
The new technology designed to release the drug at the colon 
and after a specific time. The system composed mainly of solid 
dosage forms such as tablets or capsules and covered with a 
hydrophobic surfactant layer. Finally, an outer coat of water -
soluble polymer is added to increase adhesion to the core. The 
outer coat disperses in the aqueous media of the GIT in a time 
proportional to the thickness of the coat. After total redispersion 
of the coat, the core is then available for redispersion and drug 
release starts. Many studies showed that the lag time is 
independent on the digestive enzymes, and the mechanical 
action of the stomach [72, 104, 107, 108, 116, 117 ].  
5.5.8. Chronotropic drug delivery systems   
An oral drug delivery system is used to target site -specific 
diseases such as IBD. Chronotropic systems ( Figure 7) are 
mainly designed to achieve time -dependent drug release. In 
general, a drug -containing reservoir coated with a water -soluble 
polymer like HPMC, and the final coat is a ga stroprotective 
polymeric film, which is responsible for the drug -resistant to the 
degradation in the stomach. The polymeric film starts to 
dissolve at higher alkaline pH of the small intestine, and the 
drug release lag time is dependent on the thickness of  the water -
soluble coat and the viscosity of the polymer used [72, 104, 107, 
108, 116, 117 ].  
5.5.9. Other novel drug delivery systems   
A wide range of newly designed colon drug delivery systems 
have been evaluated in the last decade to enhance colon -specific 
drug targeting. For example, bioadhesive -based systems using 
various polymers such as polycarbophils, and polyurethanes, 
redox -based systems, COLAL® tableting technology, MMX® 
technology, and PHLORAL® technology  (Table 6 ).  
 
  411 
 
  J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 
 
  Table 5: Enteric polymers investigated for colon -based drug delivery systems.  
No. Polymer Properties pH or time dissolution threshold 
A. pH-sensitive polymers:  
1 Eudragit L 30 D -55  30% aqueous dispersion Above pH 5.5 
2 Eudragit L 100 -55  Powder Above pH 5.5 
3 Eudragit L 100 Powder Above pH 6.0 
4 Eudragit L 12.5 12.5 % organic solution Above pH 6.0 
5 Eudragit S 100 Powder Above pH 7.0 
6 Eudragit S 12.5 12.5 % organic solution Above pH 7.0 
7 Eudragit FS 30D 30 % aqueous dispersion Above  pH 7.0  
8 PVAP Powder Above pH 5.0 
9 Shellac Dry flakes Above pH 7.0 
10 HPMCP -50 and 55  Powder Above pH 5.5 
11 HPMCAS Powder Above pH 6.0 
12 CAT Powder Above pH 5.5 
B. Time -dependent polymers  
13 Eudragit RS 100 Granules Sustained release 
14 Eudragit  RL 100  Granules Sustained release 
15 Eudragit RL 12.5 12.5 % organic solution Sustained release 
16 Eudragit NE 30 D 30 % aqueous dispersion Sustained release 
 
N.B: PVAP; Polyvinyl acetate phthalate, HPMCP; Hydroxypropyl  methylcellulose phthalate, HPMCAS; Hydroxypropyl methylcellulose acetate 
succinate, CAT; Cellulose acetate trimelitate.  
 
 
Figure 4: Schematic diagram of OROS -CT drug delivery system.  
 
411 
 
 
J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 
 
  
 
Figure 5: Schematic diagram of the new technology drug delivery system CODESTM. 
 
 
Figure 6: Schematic diagram of PulsinCap technology.  
 
 
Figure 7: Schematic diagram of chronotropic drug delivery system.  
 
411 
 
  J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.6. Micro and Nano based drug del ivery systems  
5.6.1. Microparticles and IBD  
In the last decade, the technology of drug delivery systems was 
directed into the approaches of decreasing particle size as the 
lower particle size of drug carries was capable of providing 
many advantages such as higher surface area, alteration of drug 
biodistribution and clearance, and the ability to target specific 
components in the inflammatory cascade such as in IBD. 
Coating drugs with biodegradable polymers in the size of 
microparticles providing a gastroprotective property and 
allowing the transportat ion of higher drug loading into the 
targeted site. Many studies showed an effective microparticles 
drug delivery systems for the treatment of IBD [118] (Table 7 ).  
5.6.2. Liposomes and IBD.  
Liposomal drug delivery systems for the colon targeting could 
be used after the inclusion of gastroprotective  polymeric coat at 
the surface of liposomes or by encapsulating liposomes inside 
gastro -resistant capsules. The polymeric coats will protect the 
liposomes from the hostile environment of the GIT and protect 
the bilayer lipid from the digestion by bile salt s and digestive 
enzymes. Many polymeric coats could be manipulated for this 
purpose such as chitosan, Eudragit L 100, Eudragit S 100, and 
pectin [119]. 
5.6.3. Nanotechnology and IBD.  
The term "nanotechnology " have many definitions as "the art of 
manipulating material on an atomic or molecular scale, 
especially to build microscopic devices " [120]. Also, defined as 
"the synthesis and the manipulation of particles having 
dimensions in nanometer scal e" [121]. Another wide definition 
is "the science and engineering involved in the de sign, 
synthesis, characterization, and application of materials and 
devices whose smallest functional organization in at least one 
dimension is on the nanometer scale " [122, 123 ].  
From the point of medical view, a new term widely used related 
to nanotechnology is "nanobiotechnology " or "nanomedicine " 
or "nanomaterial " which is a branch of the science of drug 
delivery to specific cells in the form of nano -sized particles 
[124]. Nanomaterials having many advantages over 
microparticles or liposomes in drug delivery as the potential of 
nanomedicines to achieve both passive and active targeting to   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
diseased location, ability to modify biodistribution and 
clearance of molecules, controlling drug release over time, and 
protection of drug molecules from degradation [125-127]. 
Nanoparticles for oral drug delivery are able to protect drug 
against environmental conditions of GIT, allow delivery of 
fragile drugs as prote ins, peptides, and biological molecules as 
antibodies. More important, nanoparticles are able to passively 
target inflamed area, increase drug deposition at the diseased 
site, extended the desired pharmacological drug effect, and 
lower side effects. Based on that, nanoparticles have great 
potential to be a better drug delivery system for IBD [128-131]. 
Nanoparticles as drug delivery systems for the oral route having 
the ability to load and incorporate both hydrophilic and 
lipophilic drugs which allow ease of delivering both soluble and 
poorly soluble drugs.  
Some physiological consideration to be taken into account to 
produce and design efficient colon targeted nanoparticles for the 
treatment of IBD. Transit time in patients with ulcerative colitis 
has a colonic transit time twice faster than normal persons due 
to high secretions and diarrhea, leading to challenges in 
targeting the colon using conventional formulations especially 
delayed s ystems [79]. Also, lu minal pH changed during the 
active phase of inflammatory bowel disease [83]. Alterations in 
pH lead to change in the transit time and microbial flora 
contents which significantly affected drug release from 
traditional formulations [86]. In the same way, distortion of 
intestinal membrane integrity critically affected the drug 
deposition and absorption at th e inflamed site [93-95]. Changes 
in intestinal contents, fluid volume, and microbial contents 
greatly affect nanoparticle activity.  
From the previously discussed points, nanoparticles for IBD 
designed to overcome physiological c onditions by its 
fundamental properties such as  particle size and surface charge. 
Mean particle size and surface charge  affect cellular uptake and 
interactions of nanoparticles with biomolecules. Generally, 
particles with size about 100 nm having more bi nding to the 
inflamed area compared to microparticles [132]. On the other 
hand, nanoparticles characterized by higher surface area -to-
volume ratio have rapid drug release [133].  Table 6:  Advanced drug delivery systems for colon targeting.  
No. Drug carrier Properties 
1 COLAL® technology  Microflora activated system 
2 MMX® technology  pH responsive system 
3 PHLORAL® technology  pH and microflora activated system 
4 Bioadhesive -based  Crosslinked polymers with charged coats 
5 Redox based system Azo reduction by enzymatically generated reduced flavins  
 
 416 
 
 
J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 
5.7. Nanotechnology strategies for drug delivery to IBD.  
5.7.1. Nano -delivery of small molecules.  
Nanoparticles for delivering small drug molecules designed in a 
manner which allowed efficient drug targeting. Many strategies 
used for nanoparticle preparation and surface decoration to 
allow drug deposition in the colon with efficient drug absorption 
and minimum undesirable effects.  
 The first strategy depends mainly on particle size reduction to 
the nanoscale range. Particles in nano -range showed many 
advantages over larger particles such as efficient colon transport 
and targeting through improving colonic residence time in the 
inflamed regions [134]. Also, smaller size allowed particles 
uptake by targeting immune cells like macrophages and 
decrease rapid elimination due to diarrhea whic h characterizes 
IBD [135]. This explained that accumulation of particles in the 
inflamed cells is size -dependent [132]. 
Another strategy is surface decorated nano -delivery  systems, 
many techniques have been used to modify nanoparticles’ 
surface to achieve good nanoparticle targeting, drug release 
retardation and increase drug distribution by preventing 
opsonization and mucus membrane adherence [136]. A study 
carried out by Lautenschlager et al  [137] about the preparation  
of PEG -modified PLGA nanoparticles (300 nm) and 
microparticles (3000 nm). Modification of nanoparticles with 
PEG showed significantly enhanc ed particle translocation and 
deposition in the inflamed area compared to chitosan and non -
coated PLGA nanoparticles. The PEG -modified surface is the 
most common and most applicable surface decoration 
mechanism [137, 138 ].  
A surface charged nano -delivery systems is another approach. 
CD is characterized by excessive muc us secretion forming a 
thick mucus layer in the inflamed area. Mucus layer is 
composed mainly of mucins (a long chain hydrocarbons 
substrates with sulfates and sialic acid residues) that provides a 
negatively charged surface. Anionic mucus provides a 
mucoa dhesion property which considered a promising colon 
targeting strategy with increased drug retention in the inflamed 
area [139-143]. Cationic nanoparticles adhere efficiently with 
the mucosal membrane [144]. From the other side, IBD is 
characterized by highly inflammable regions in which the 
inflamed cells have higher levels of cationic char ge as well as 
infiltration of eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) and transferrin 
has been presented in higher concentrations in inflamed cells 
[145-150]. Anionic nanoparticles attach to inflamed cells via 
electrostatic interaction, but the main challenge is the drug 
delivery system must cross through thick mucus layer present in 
IBD [132].  
The key feature of the pH -dependent strategy for colon drug 
delivery is the difference in pH in various sites of GIT and the 
use of pH -sensitive polymers [82, 151 ]. The selected polymers 
must be able to resist drug release in the upper g astrointestinal 
tract (lower pH -regions) (152]. The most simple method is 
coating dosage form with pH -sensitive polymers [153] such as  
Eudragit®. Methacrylic acid copol ymers (Eudragit  S100) that dissolve at pH above 7, (Eudragit  L100) that dissolves at pH 
above 6 and a special type (Eudragit FS 30D) that dissolves at 
pH above 6.5 [66, 154 ]. Many studies showed a significant 
reduction in the drug release in upper GIT [155-164].   
5.7.2. Nano -delivery of  biological molecules  
Delivery of biological molecules using nanoparticles provided 
not only targeting but also afford protection against the upper 
gastrointestinal environment. Also, resolved issues of shorter 
half-life time of labile biological molecules  in blood circulation 
[26]. Many biological molecules were approved for the 
treatment of IBD as, monoclonal antibodies infliximab, 
adalimumab and certo lizumab, low molecular -weight heparin 
(LMWH), CD98 -siRNA, TNF -α-siRNA, and the anti -
inflammatory tripeptide Lys -Pro-Val (KPV) [26, 165 ].  
6. Preparation of nanoparticles for the treatment of IBD.  
6.1. Methods of nanoparticles preparation.  
The term nanoparticles are defined as solid, colloidal particles 
in the nanoscale range. The term nanoparticles are a collective 
term which includes any polymeric nanoparti cles but 
specifically, describe both Nanospheres and Nanocapsules [166-
168]. One of the most fundamental characters of the 
nanoparticles is their size, which is generally taken to be in the 
range of 5 -10 nm with an upper limit of 1000 nm, but the 
obtained size is generally around 100 -500 nm [168, 169]. 
Nanospheres are known as a matrix particle in which the drug 
molecules may be dissolved, dispersed in the polymer matrix. 
On the other hand, Nanocapsules are defined as vesicular 
systems in which the drug molecules are confined in a cavity 
core co nsisting of a liquid lipid or water and surrounded by 
polymeric membrane coat [169, 170 ].  
6.1.1. Dispersion of preformed polymers (One -step methods)  
The most common technique for the preparation of 
nanoparticles mainly used to manufacture nanoparticles in one -
step by the dispersion of preformed polymers. Many 
biodegradable and biocompatible polymers are used i.e. poly 
(D,L -Lactide -co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)  [171, 172 ], poly (lactic 
acid) (PLA) [173], poly -epsilon -caprolactone (PCL) [174], poly 
(cyanoacrylate) (PCA) [175, 176 ] and methacrylate copolymers 
as Eudragit® [177-182].  
Nanoprecipitation method is the most common and widely used 
method [183-186]. Simple, rapid, less energy -consuming, and 
timesaving. Nan oprecipitation is known as solvent displacement 
method or interfacial deposition method [187]. For the synthesis 
of nanoparticles, the method requires two main phases first, 
solvent phase (organic phase) consisting of solvent as acetone, 
polymer, surfactant, and drug. Oil is required in case of 
nanocapsules preparation . Secondly, the non -solvent phase 
(aqueous phase) consisting of water or buffer and stabilizer. The  
organic phase should be completely miscible with non -solvent 
phase [188]. The method is based mainly on spontaneous 411 
 
  J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 emulsification of organic phase into the non -solvent phase 
(aqueous phase) [189]. The rapid diffusion of solvent phase into 
the aqueous phase leads to precipitation and formation of 
nanoparticles [190].  
The emulsification techniques are widely applicable methods 
for the preparation of nanoparticles that mainly depends upon 
the formation of a nanoemulsion firstly before the nanoparticle 
formation [189]. The techniques include emulsification -
diffusion, emulsification -coacervation, emulsification -
evaporation, and double or multiple emulsific ation methods. 
Emulsification -diffusion is the most common method and 
widely used for lipophilic drugs. The method was described by 
Leroux et al.  [191] for the preparation of nanospheres and by 
Quintanar et al.  [192] for the preparation of polymeric 
nanocapsules. Generally, the technique consisted of three main 
phases, organic ph ase, aqueous phase and dilution or external 
phase [193]. In this case, the organic solvent should be partially 
miscible with the non -solvent phase.                       
Many solvents i.e. benzyl alcohol [191], propylene carbonate  
[193] and ethyl acetate [194] could be used. The resulting size is 
about 150 -200 nm. The emulsion -diffusion method is 
considered as a modification of emulsion -evaporation technique 
[195, 196 ]. On the same way, emulsification -evaporation 
technique or emulsification -solvent evaporation technique is a 
technique based mainly on the formation of O/W emulsion and 
suitable for the preparation of nanoparticles for lipophilic drugs 
[197]. The method is usually depending on the preparation of 
nanoemulsion and followed by solvent evaporation leading to 
polymer precipitation as nanoparticles [198]. The main 
drawback of this method is the formation of multiple interfaces 
in organic and aqueous phases leading to the restriction of 
solvent diffusion [189]. Furthermore, the multiple -
emulsification technique and the most common form, the 
double -emulsification method is a modified form of the 
emulsion -evaporation technique [199, 200 ], in which multiple 
emulsions to be formed before solvent evaporation. The method 
is used for encapsulation of both hydrophilic and lipophilic drug 
molecules by the formation of  W/O/W [201, 202 ] and O/W/O 
emulsions, respectively [203, 204 ]. Finally, the emulsion -
coacervation method is mainly used for t he manufacturing of 
nanoparticles from natural polymers like gelatin and sodium 
alginate [189]. The method depends mainly on the formation of 
nanoemulsion then coacervation which results in polymer 
precipitation. The coacervation can be done by many methods 
such as dehydrating agents [205], electrolyte addition [206, 207 ] 
and temperature modification [208]. In order to stabilize the 
aqueous dispersion of the prepared nanoparticles, a cross -
linking step is required by the using of the cross -linking agent or 
by changing the temperature or the pH [205-208].  
The salting -out technique is based upon the formation of the 
emulsion by a solvent which is totally miscible with the aqueous 
phase [209]. After the emulsification of the polymer is formed, 
the salting -out agent is used at a high concentration of salts or 
sucrose. Magnesium chloride, s odium chloride, calcium 
chloride, and magnesium acetate are commonly used 
electrolytes [210-215].  6.1.2. Polymerization  of monomers (two -step methods)  
In this method, the drug could be encapsulated during the 
formation of polymers from starting monomers or by adsorption 
on the prepared nanoparticles [168, 216 ]. Three main techniques 
used for the polymerization of monomers are emulsion -
polymerization method, mini -emulsion, and microemulsion 
polymerization method. Excess drug and surfactant used during 
the preparation of nanoparticles could be removed either by 
flow filtration techniques or by centrifugation. Many monomers 
used for the preparation of nanoparticles by polymerization 
methods [217, 218 ]. 
7. Physico -chemical characterization of prepared 
nanoparticles  
7.1. Behavior of  nanopar ticles as drug delivery systems  
Nanoparticles properties and characterization are based upon 
some physicochemical properties like particle size, surface 
charge and the particle morphology [189]. It is very important 
properties for the interactions between the nanoparticles and 
biological systems and control nanoparticles therapeutic activity 
and its toxicity. Many techniques used for determination of 
particle size and particle size distribution as photon correlation 
spectroscopy (PCS), atomic forced microscopy (AFM), electron 
microscopy (EM) and dynamic light scattering (DLS). The 
surface charge or zeta -potential is a very important parameter 
that determines the total surface charge and used to p redict the 
stability of nanoparticle dispersion [219].  
7.2. In-vitro  drug re lease from loaded nanoparticles   
7.2.1. Barriers affecting oral drug deli very  
Oral drug delivery systems and especially delivery to the distal 
region of the GIT encountered many barriers like the harsh 
acidic environment of the stomach and intestine, gastric and 
bacterial enzymes, mucus layer especially thicker mucus layer 
in IBD, and tight junctions of the epithelium [139, 220 ].  The 
acidic environment of the GIT includes highly acidic pH of the 
stomach which ranged from 1.2 to 2.5 and the pH -value raised 
to 6.6 -7.5 at the duodenum and the distal part of the intestine 
then pH drops again  to 6.4 at the cecum which making the 
design of nanoparticles more difficult [221, 222 ].  Also, the 
mucus layer that becomes thicker in the case of IBD and rapid 
turnover of mucus leading to the rapid clearance of 
nanoparticles rather than the physical barrier [223-225].  
7.2.2.  In vitro  drug modeling for nanoparticles.  
In order to develop a successful drug delivery system to the 
colon, the drug release from loaded nanoparticles is one of the 
very important factors that control drug delivery designs. The 
Release rate from loaded nanoparticles especially nanocapsules 
depen ds on a great variety of factors including nanocapsules -
related factors i.e. drug concentration, drug solubility and 
oil/water partitioning, Physico -chemical properties, molecular 418 
 
 
J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 
weight and concentration of the polymer matrix, the oil nature, 
and the size  of the prepared nanocapsules. Release media 
conditions -related factors i.e. medium pH, medium temperature, 
release enhancers, and contact time. The method of the 
preparation -related factors i.e. method of the drug incorporation 
which includes adsorption a nd other incorporation techniques 
[226].  
For in-vitro  drug release analysis, three main methods had been 
used namely, 1. Sample and separate (SS) and its modification 
such as ultracentrifugation, ultrafiltration and centrifugal 
ultrafiltration technique, 2. Continuous flow (CF), and 3. 
Dialysis membrane (DM)  and its modification such as dialysis 
bag diffusion technique and reverse dialysis sac technique [26, 
227].  
In the case of sample and separate method, the nanoparticles 
introduced into the release media at a constant temperat ure and 
agitation rate. At different time intervals, samples were taken 
(supernatant, filtrate or nanoparticles) and measured analytically 
[179, 228 -231]. The nanoparticle solution is separated from the 
release media with two main methods. The first method is to 
separate nanoparticles from the release media after sampling by 
the mean of ultracentrifugation, ultrafiltration or centrifugal 
ultrafiltration,  and for larger nanoparticles might require only 
filtration using syringe filter 0.45 µm. Sample analysis was 
carried out by the using of supernatant, filtrate or destructive 
techniques for analysis of separated nanoparticles, then the 
release media replac ed with fresh media [138, 232 -234]. The 
second method for nanoparticle separation is the using of 
dialysis membrane with specific MWCO, but the drug can be 
equilibrated between the two -compartment and nanoparticles 
cannot cross the dialysis membrane [235]. For the colon 
targeted nanoparticles, to simulate the colon conditions, release  
studies were performed in different pH -values [236, 237 ].  
8. Biopharmaceutical aspects  
Different studies have been introduced to study nanoparticles’ 
cytotoxicity as human exposure to nanomedicines is inevitable. 
The most important tests for cell viability studies are LDH 
(lactate dehydroge nase) which is normally released by the 
destroyed and damaged cells, the amount of LDH is directly 
proportional to the number of dead cells. On the other hand, 
MTT (methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium) test is used to differentiate 
between dead and live cells. MT T is a pale yellow dye 
converted into dark blue farmazan product only in the viable 
cells and could be determined spectrophotometrically [238, 
239].   
In order to understand IBD and especially disease pathogenesis, 
animal models have been used and particularly mouse models. 
Experimental colitis could be induced by many techniques 
include chemically induced colitis, bacterial -induced colitis, and 
genetically induced colitis. Transgenic (Tg) and gene knockout 
(KO) strains have been developed as genetically -induced 
models [240, 241 ]. The most common chemical -induced models 
are dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) model [242-245], oxazolone model, TNBS model [246-249], and acetic acid model [250, 
251].  
Acetic acid -induced colitis was performed by many techniques 
including instillation of 3 -6 % of acetic acid (2 mL) 
transrectally for 2 minu tes in rats and animals were kept in a 
horizontal position to avoid leakage of the solution then the 
colon was rinsed with saline. In the case of mice, injection of 4 -
5 % v/v of acetic acid (1 mL) in 0.9 saline solution in the colon 
lumen approximately abo ut 4 cm from the anus [250, 251 ]. 
Successful colitis model was evaluated by the clinical scoring 
system depending  on some criteria i.e. animal activity, bloody 
stool, diarrhea, animal weight, and histopathological 
examination of the colon.  
Clinical application of nanoparticles for the treatment of IBD in 
humans is limited due to human patients are more complex than 
the animal models. Passive targeting technique for the treatment 
of IBD may not be sufficient to obtain a therapeutic outcome. 
Therefore, active targeting techniques such as targeting cell 
receptors which extensively expressed in the case of 
inflammation a nd mucus targeting are a promising technique for 
colitis treatment with lower adverse effects and higher drug 
therapeutic concentration at the site of inflammation.  
Many studies should be done to successfully translate the 
concept of active targeting from  animal studies to human 
application. In order to translate animal studies into the clinic, 
many studies should explain some of the important points about 
nanoparticles i.e. the safety of administered nanoparticles 
following uptake, studies about the stabi lity of nanoparticle 
structure through the GIT transit, and in -vitro/ex vivo stability. 
Finally, increased drug residence time at the site of 
inflammation should be optimized. From another point of view, 
the commercial point, the design of nanoparticles fo r drug 
delivery to the colon requires being simplified to allow efficient 
manufacturing at a large scale [22]. A stud y by Schmidt et al. 
[252]  showed that the application of PLGA nanoparticles and 
microparticles on human patients for the first time provides 
passive targeting depend ing on their particle size alone could be 
applied to human.  
Conclusion:  
Site-specific drug delivery systems offer many advantages over 
other drug carriers especially in the oral route such as protection 
of the drug from the harsh environment of the gastr ointestinal 
tract, loading high amount of the drug to the site of action, and 
decreasing unwanted side effects. Colon drug delivery systems 
are one of the most rapidly growing delivery technologies in the 
pharmaceutical field. The newly developed systems a re directed 
to treat local diseases such as colon cancer, inflammatory bowel 
disease, and other colon conditions. Also, many colon drug 
delivery systems are used for the protection of drugs and 
biologically active ingredients such as peptides and antibodie s 
which easily degraded in the upper gastrointestinal tract. All 
colon drug delivery systems even the newly developed 
technologies are based on three colon conditions: pH of the 
colon, transit time, and microbial content.  411 
 
  J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 
References  
[1] Hirani JJ, Rathod DA, Vadalia KR. Orally disintegrating tablets: a review. 
Trop J Pharm Res . 2009;8(2):161 -72. 
[2] Coelho JF, Ferreira PC, Alves P, Cordeiro R, Fonseca AC, Góis JR, et al. 
Drug delivery systems: Advanced technologies potentially applicable in 
personalized treatments. The EPMA Journal . 2010;1(1):164 -209. 
[3] Yadav V, Gaisford S, Merchant HA, Basit AW. Colonic bacterial 
metabolism of corticosteroids. International journal of pharmaceutics . 
2013;457(1):268 -74. 
[4] Chien YW, Swarbrick J. Novel d rug delivery systems. 1992.  
[5] Chourasia M, Jain S. Pharmaceutical approaches to colon targeted drug 
delivery systems. J Pharm Pharm Sci.  2003;6(1):33 -66. 
[6] Ohara T, Kitamura S, Kitagawa T, Terada K. Dissolution mechanism of 
poorly water -soluble drug fr om extended release solid dispersion system with 
ethylcellulose and hydroxypropylmethylcellulose. International journal of 
pharmaceutics.  2005;302(1):95 -102. 
[7] Krishnaiah Y, Satyanarayana S, Prasad YR, Rao SN. Evaluation of guar 
gum as a compression coat  for drug targeting to colon. International journal of 
pharmaceutics. 1998;171(2):137 -46. 
[8] Rathbone MJ. Controlled Release in Oral Drug Delivery. Rathbone MJ, 
editor. New York Dordrecht Heidelberg London: springer ; 2013 2011. 415 p.  
[9] Basit AW, McConn ell EL. Drug Delivery to the Colon. In: Wilson CG, 
Crowley PJ, editors. Controlled Release in Oral Drug Delivery. Boston, MA: 
Springer US;  2011. p. 385 -99. 
[10] Philip AK, Philip B. Colon targeted drug delivery systems: a review on 
primary and novel approaches. Oman medical journal.  2010;25(2):79 -87. 
[11] Friend DR. Colon -specific drug delivery. Advanced drug delivery reviews.  
1991;7(1):149 -99. 
[12] Tortora GJ, De rrickson BH. Principles of anatomy and physiology: John 
Wiley & Sons ; 2008.  
[13] Meyers M. The Colon: Normal and Pathologic Anatomy.  Dynamic 
Radiology of the Abdomen: Normal and Pathologic Anatomy.  New York, NY: 
Springer New York;  2005. p. 665 -709. 
[14] Rajilić‐Stojanovi ć M, Smidt H, De Vos WM. Diversity of the human 
gastrointestinal tract microbiota revisited. Environmental microbiology.  
2007;9(9):2125 -36. 
[15] Sousa T, Paterson R, Moore V, Carlsson A, Abrahamsson B, Basit AW. 
The gastrointestinal microbi ota as a site for the biotransformation of drugs. 
International journal of pharmaceutics . 2008;363(1):1 -25. 
[16] Wilding I. The enterion capsule: a novel technology for understanding the 
biopharmaceutical complexity of new molecular entities (NMEs). Drug D eliv 
Tech . 2001;1(1):8 -11. 
[17] Tuleu C, Basit A, Waddington W, Ell P, Newton J. Colonic delivery of 
4‐aminosalicylic acid using amylose –ethylcellulose ‐coated 
hydroxypropylmethylcellulose capsules. Alimentary pharmacology & 
therapeutics. 2002;16(10):1771 -9. 
[18] Coco R, Plapied L, Pourcelle V, Jerome C, Brayden DJ, Schneider YJ, et 
al. Drug delivery to inflamed colon by nanoparticles: comparison of different 
strategies. International journal of pharmaceutics . 2013;440(1):3 -12. 
[19] Carter MJ, Lobo AJ, Travi s SP. Guidelines for the management of 
inflammatory bowel disease in adults. Gut. 2004;53(suppl 5):v1 -v16. 
[20] Peyrin -Biroulet L, Sandborn W, Sands B, Reinisch W, Bemelman W, 
Bryant R, et al. Selecting therapeutic targets in inflammatory bowel disease 
(STRIDE): determining therapeutic goals for treat -to-target. The American 
journal of gastroenterology . 2015;110(9): 1324 -38. 
[21] Hanauer SB, Robinson M, Pruitt R, Lazenby AJ, Persson T, Nilsson LG, et 
al. Budesonide enema for the treatment of active, distal ulcerative colitis and 
proctitis: A dose -ranging study. Gastroenterology . 1998;115(3):525 -32. 
[22] Hua S, Marks E, Schneider JJ, Keely S. Advances in oral nano -delivery 
systems for colon targeted drug delivery in inflammatory bowel disease: 
selective targeting to diseased versus healthy tissue. Nanomedicine : 
nanotechnology, biology, and medicine . 2015; 11(5):1117 -32. 
[23] Walker BR, Colledge NR. Davidson's principles and practice of medicine: 
Elsevier Health Sciences ; 2013.  
[24] Fauci AS. Harrison's principles of internal medicine: McGraw -Hill, 
Medical Publishing Division ; 2008.  
[25] Klotz U, Schwab M. T opical delivery of therapeutic agents in the treatment 
of inflammatory bowel disease. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews.  
2005;57(2):267 -79. [26] Ali H, Collnot E -M, Windbergs M, Lehr C -M. Nanomedicines for the 
treatment of inflammatory bowel diseases. Europea n Journal of Nanomedicine . 
2013;5(1):23 -38. 
[27] Podolsky DK. Inflammatory bowel disease. New England Journal of 
Medicine.  1991;325(14):1008 -16. 
[28] Meissner Y, Lamprecht A. Alternative drug delivery approaches for the 
therapy of inflammatory bowel diseas e. Journal of pharmaceutical sciences.  
2008;97(8):2878 -91. 
[29] Han J, Wang J, Wang JH. How to achieve deep remission in the treatment 
of inflammatory bowel disease. Journal of Traditional Chinese Medicine . 
2013;33(4):549 -52. 
[30] Fiorino G, Fries W, De La  Rue S, Malesci A, Repici A, Danese S. New 
drug delivery systems in inflammatory bowel disease: MMX™ and tailored 
delivery to the gut. Current medicinal chemistry . 2010;17(17):1851 -7. 
[31] Kaplan GG, Ng SC. Understanding and Preventing the Global Increase of 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Gastroenterology . 2017;152(2):313 -21. e2.  
[32] Sartor RB, Wu GD. Roles for Intestinal Bacteria, Viruses, and Fungi in 
Pathogenesis of Inflammatory Bowel Disea ses and Therapeutic Approaches. 
Gastroenterology . 2017;152(2):327 -39. e4.  
[33] Ogura Y, Bonen DK, Inohara N, Nicolae DL, Chen FF, Ramos R, et al. A 
frameshift mutation in NOD2 associated with susceptibility to Crohn's disease. 
Nature . 2001;411(6837):603 -6. 
[34] Ogura Y, Inohara N, Benito A, Chen FF, Yamaoka S, Núñez G. Nod2, a 
Nod1/Apaf -1 family member that is restricted to monocytes and activates NF -
κB. Journal of Biological Chemistry . 2001;276(7):4812 -8. 
[35] Horowitz J, Warner N, Staples J, Crowley E, Mu rchie R, Van Hout C, et al. 
Mutation spectrum of NOD2 reveals recessive inheritance as a main driver of 
Early Onset Crohn′ s Disease. bioRxiv . 2017:098574.  
[36] Koutroubakis I, Manousos O, Meuwissen S, Pena A. Environmental risk 
factors in inflammatory bow el disease. Hepato -gastroenterology . 
1995;43(8):381 -93. 
[37] Ananthakrishnan AN. Environmental risk factors for inflammatory bowel 
disease. Gastroenterol Hepatol . 2013;9(6):367 -74. 
[38] Molodecky NA, Kaplan GG. Environmental risk factors for inflammatory 
bowel disease. Gastroenterol Hepatol (NY) . 2010;6(5):339 -46. 
[39] Lakatos PL. Recent trends in the epidemiology of inflammatory bowel 
diseases: up or down? World  Journal of Gastroenterology . 2006;12(38):6102 -8. 
[40] Irvine EJ, Marshall JK. Increased intesti nal permeability precedes the onset 
of Crohn's disease in a subject with familial risk. Gastroenterology . 
2000;119(6):1740 -4. 
[41] Söderholm JD, Olaison G, Peterson K, Franzen L, Lindmark T, Wirén M, 
et al. Augmented increase in tight junction permeability  by luminal stimuli in 
the non -inflamed ileum of Crohn's disease. Gut. 2002;50(3):307 -13. 
[42] Heller F, Florian P, Bojarski C, Richter J, Christ M, Hillenbrand B, et al. 
Interleukin -13 is the key effector Th2 cytokine in ulcerative colitis that affects 
epithelial tight junctions, apoptosis, and cell restitution. Gastroenterology . 
2005;129(2):550 -64. 
[43] Pallone F, Monteleone G. Interleukin 12 and Th1 responses in 
inflammatory bowel disease. Gut. 1998;43(6):735 -6. 
[44] Boirivant M, Marini M, Di Felice G, Pronio AM, Montesani C, Tersigni R, 
et al. Lamina propria T cells in Crohn's disease and other gastrointestinal 
inflammation show defective CD2 pathway -induced apoptosis. 
Gastroenterology . 1999;116(3):557 -65. 
[45] Modigliani R, Mary J -Y, Simon J -F, Cortot A, Soule J -C, Gendre J -P, et al. 
Clinical, biological, and endoscopic picture of attacks of Crohn's disease. 
Evolution on prednisolone. Groupe d'Etude Thérapeutique des Affections 
Inflammatoires Digestives. Gastroe nterology . 1990;98(4):811 -8. 
[46] Gisbert JP, Gomollón F, Maté J, Pajares JM. REVIEW: Role of 5 -
Aminosalicylic Acid (5 -ASA) in Treatment of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A 
Systemic Review. Digestive diseases and sciences . 2002;47(3):471 -88. 
[47] Criscuoli V,  Modesto I, Orlando A, Cottone M. Mesalazine for the 
treatment of inflammatory bowel disease. Expert opinion on pharmacotherapy . 
2013;14(12):1669 -78. 
[48] Meyers S, Sachar DB, Present DH, Janowitz HD. Olsalazine sodium in the 
treatment of ulcerative coliti s among patients intolerant of sulfasalazine: A 
prospective, randomized placebo -controlled, double -blind, dose -ranging clinical 
trial. Gastroenterology . 1987;93(6):1255 -62. 
[49] Grevenitis P, Thomas A, Lodhia N. Medical Therapy for Inflammatory 
Bowel Disea se. Surgical Clinics of North America . 2015;95(6):1159 -82. 481 
 
 
J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 
[50] Pruitt R, Hanson J, Safdi M, Wruble L, Hardi R, Johanson J, et al. 
Balsalazide is superior to mesalamine in the time to improvement of signs and 
symptoms of acute mild -to-moderate ulcerative c olitis. The American journal of 
gastroenterology . 2002;97(12):3078 -86. 
[51] Green JR, Lobo AJ, Holdsworth CD, Leicester RJ, Gibson JA, Kerr GD, et 
al. Balsalazide is more effective and better tolerated than mesalamine in the 
treatment of acute ulcerative c olitis. Gastroenterology . 1998;114(1):15 -22. 
[52] Winship DH, Summers RW, Singleton JW, Best WR, Becktel JM, Lenk 
LF, et al. National Cooperative Crohn's Disease Study: study design and 
conduct of the study. Gastroenterology . 1979;77(4 Pt 2):829 -42. 
[53] Faubion WA, Loftus EV, Harmsen WS, Zinsmeister AR, Sandborn WJ. 
The natural history of corticosteroid therapy for inflammatory bowel disease: a 
population -based study. Gastroenterology . 2001;121(2):255 -60. 
[54] McPhee SJ, Papadakis MA, Tierney LM. Current medical diagnosis & 
treatment 2010: McGraw -Hill Medical New York :; 2010.  
[55] Van Assche G, Manguso F, Zibellini M, Nuño JLC, Goldis A, Tkachenko 
E, et al. Oral prolonged release beclomethasone dipropionate and prednisone in 
the treatment of active ulcerat ive colitis: results from a double -blind, 
randomized, parallel group study. The American journal of gastroenterology . 
2015;110(5):708 -15. 
[56] Bar–Meir S, Chowers Y, Lavy A, Abramovitch D, Sternberg A, 
Leichtmann G, et al. Budesonide versus prednisone in t he treatment of active 
Crohn's disease. Gastroenterology . 1998;115(4):835 -40. 
[57] Kolkman JJ, Möllman HW, Möllman AC, Nelis FG, Viergever P, Peñna S. 
Beneficial effect of oral budesonide for distal ulcerative colitis: A comparative 
study of Budenofalk® 3 mg tid vs 9 MG OD. Gastroenterology . 2000;118(4, 
Part 1):A779.  
[58] HO GT, Chiam P, Drummond H, Loane J, Arnott I, Satsangi J. The 
efficacy of corticosteroid therapy in inflammatory bowel disease: analysis of a 
5‐year UK inception cohort. Alimentary pharma cology & therapeutics . 
2006;24(2):319 -30. 
[59] Fraser A, Orchard T, Jewell D. The efficacy of azathioprine for the 
treatment of inflammatory bowel disease: a 30 year review. Gut. 
2002;50(4):485 -9. 
[60] Present DH, Meltzer SJ, Krumholz MP, Wolke A, Korelitz  BI. 6 -
Mercaptopurine in the management of inflammatory bowel disease: short -and 
long-term toxicity. Annals of Internal Medicine.  1989;111(8):641 -9. 
[61] Baumgart DC, Sandborn WJ. Inflammatory bowel disease: clinical aspects 
and established and evolving th erapies.  The Lancet.  2007;369(9573):1641 -57. 
[62] Robert C, Kupper TS. Inflammatory skin diseases, T cells, and immune 
surveillance.  New England Journal of Medicine . 1999;341(24):1817 -28. 
[63] Knight DM, Trinh H, Le J, Siegel S, Shealy D, McDonough M, et a l. 
Construction and initial characterization of a mouse -human chimeric anti -TNF 
antibody. Molecular immunology . 1993;30(16):1443 -53. 
[64] Swora E, Samborski P, Raniszewska M. Biological treatment of 
inflammatory bowel disease.  Nowiny Lek . 2009;78:3 -4. 
[65] Yang L, Chu JS, Fix JA. Colon -specific drug delivery: new approaches and 
in vitro/in vivo evaluation. International journal of pharmaceutics.  
2002;235(1):1 -15. 
[66] Asghar LFA, Chandran S. Multiparticulate formulation approach to colon 
specific drug deli very: current perspectives. J Pharm Pharm Sci . 2006;9(3):327 -
38. 
[67] Vyas S, Roop K. Khar (ed). Systems for colon specific drug delivery. 
Controlled drug delivery concepts and advances, 1st ed, Delhi . 2006:218 -56. 
[68] Sarasija S, Hota A. Colon -specific d rug delivery systems. Indian journal of 
pharmaceutical sciences . 2000;62(1):1 -8. 
[69] Verma S, Kumar V, Mishra D, Singh S. Colon targeted drug delivery: 
current and novel perspectives. International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 
and Research. 2012;3(5):1274.  
[70] Kinget R, Kalala W, Vervoort L, Van den Mooter G. Colonic drug 
targeting. Journal of drug targeting. 1998;6(2):129 -49. 
[71] Nugent S, Kumar D, Rampton D, Evans D. Intestinal luminal pH in 
inflammatory bowel disease: possible determinan ts and implications for therapy 
with aminosalicylates and other drugs. Gut. 2001;48(4):571 -7. 
[72] Kolte BP. Colon targeted drug delivery system -a novel perspective. Asian 
journal of biomedical and pharmaceutical sciences. 2012;2(14):21.  
[73] Arora S, Ali J, Ahuja A, Baboota S, Qureshi J. Pulsatile drug delivery 
systems: An approach for controlled drug delivery. Indian Journal of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences. 2006.  [74] Aggarwal S, Sharma S, Lal S, Choudhary N. Recent trend in colon targeted 
drug delivery system . RJPBS. 2011;2:406 -15. 
[75] Ahrabi SF, Madsen G, Dyrstad K, Sande SA, Graffner C. Development of 
pectin matrix tablets for colonic delivery of model drug ropivacaine. European 
Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences. 2000;10(1):43 -52. 
[76] Vyas S, Khar R. Gast ro-retentive system In: Controlled Drug Delivery 
System: Concept & Advances. Ist Ed New Delhi: Vallabh Prakashan. 
2002;1(2):417 -41. 
[77] Wood E, Wilson CG, Hardy JG. The spreading of foam and solution 
enemas. International journal of pharmaceutics. 1985;25 (2):191 -7. 
[78] Rana S, Sharma S, Malik A, Kaur J, Prasad K, Sinha S, et al. Small 
intestinal bacterial overgrowth and orocecal transit time in patients of 
inflammatory bowel disease. Digestive diseases and sciences. 2013;58(9):2594 -
8. 
[79] Hebden Ja, Blac kshaw P, Perkins A, Wilson C, Spiller R. Limited exposure 
of the healthy distal colon to orally -dosed formulation is further exaggerated in 
active left -sided ulcerative colitis. Alimentary Pharmacology and Therapeutics. 
2000;14(2):155 -62. 
[80] Sartor RB. M icrobial influences in inflammatory bowel diseases. 
Gastroenterology. 2008;134(2):577 -94. 
[81] Tamboli CP, Neut C, Desreumaux P, Colombel JF. Dysbiosis in 
inflammatory bowel disease. Gut. 2004;53(1):1 -4. 
[82] Fallingborg J, Christensen LA, Jacobsen BA, Rasmussen SN. Very low 
intraluminal colonic pH in patients with active ulcerative colitis. Digestive 
diseases and sciences. 1993;38(11):1989 -93. 
[83] Sasaki Y, Hada R, Nakajima H, Fukuda S, Munakata A. Improved 
localizing method of radiopill in measurement  of entire gastrointestinal pH 
profiles: colonic luminal pH in normal subjects and patients with Crohn's 
disease. American Journal of Gastroenterology. 1997;92(1).  
[84] Yuasa H. Drug absorption from the colon in situ.  Drug absorption studies: 
Springer; 20 08. p. 77 -88. 
[85] Ibekwe VC, Fadda HM, McConnell EL, Khela MK, Evans DF, Basit AW. 
Interplay between intestinal pH, transit time and feed status on the in vivo 
performance of pH responsive ileo -colonic release systems. Pharmaceutical 
research. 2008;25(8): 1828 -35. 
[86] McConnell EL, Fadda HM, Basit AW. Gut instincts: explorations in 
intestinal physiology and drug delivery. International journal of pharmaceutics. 
2008;364(2):213 -26. 
[87] Roda G, Sartini A, Zambon E, Calafiore A, Marocchi M, Caponi A, et al. 
Intestinal epithelial cells in inflammatory bowel diseases. World Journal of 
Gastroenterology  : WJG . 2010;16(34):4264 -71. 
[88] Farhadi A, Banan A, Fields J, Keshavarzian A. Intestinal barrier: an 
interface between health and disease. Journal of gastroenter ology and 
hepatology.  2003;18(5):479 -97. 
[89] Groschwitz KR, Hogan SP. Intestinal Barrier Function: Molecular 
Regulation and Disease Pathogenesis. The Journal of allergy and clinical 
immunology . 2009;124(1):3 -22. 
[90] Michielan A, D'Incà R. Intestinal Perm eability in Inflammatory Bowel 
Disease: Pathogenesis, Clinical Evaluation, and Therapy of Leaky Gut. 
Mediators of Inflammation . 2015;2015:628157.  
[91] Goggins BJ, Chaney C, Radford -Smith GL, Horvat JC, Keely S. Hypoxia 
and integrin -mediated epithelial rest itution during mucosal inflammation. 
Frontiers in immunology . 2013;4.  
[92] Söderholm JD, Peterson KH, Olaison G, Franzén LE, Weström B, 
Magnusson K -E, et al. Epithelial permeability to proteins in the noninflamed 
ileum of Crohn's disease? Gastroenterology . 1999;117(1):65 -72. 
[93] Wang X, Maher S, Brayden DJ. Restoration of rat colonic epithelium after 
in situ intestinal instillation of the absorption promoter, sodium caprate. 
Therapeutic delivery . 2010;1(1):75 -82. 
[94] Comerford KM, Wallace TJ, Karhausen J,  Louis NA, Montalto MC, 
Colgan SP. Hypoxia -inducible factor -1-dependent regulation of the multidrug 
resistance (MDR1) gene. Cancer research . 2002;62(12):3387 -94. 
[95] Creed T, Probert C. Review article: steroid resistance in inflammatory 
bowel disease –mechanisms and therapeutic strategies. Alimentary 
pharmacology & therapeutics.  2007;25(2):111 -22. 
[96] Carrette O, Favier C, Mizon C, Neut C, Cortot A, Colombel J, et al. 
Bacterial enzymes used for colon -specific drug delivery are decreased in active 
Crohn's disease. Digestive diseases and sciences . 1995;40(12):2641 -6. 484 
 
  J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 [97] Carrette O, Favier C, Mizon C, Ne ut C, Cortot A, Colombel JF, et al. 
Bacterial enzymes used for colon -specific drug delivery are decreased in active 
Crohn's disease. Digestive Diseases and Sciences . 1995;40(12):2641 -6. 
[98] Khan AA, Piris J, Truelove S. An experiment to determine the acti ve 
therapeutic moiety of sulphasalazine. The Lancet.  1977;310(8044):892 -5. 
[99] Campieri M. New steroids and new salicylates in inflammatory bowel 
disease: a critical appraisal. Gut. 2002;50(suppl 3):iii43 -iii6. 
[100] Gangurde HH, Chordiya MA, Tamizharasi S, Sivakumar T. Diseases, 
approaches and evaluation parameterrs for colon specific drug delivery: a 
review.  International Journal of Drug Research and Technology . 2017;2(3):23.  
[101] Singh A, Sharma A. Novel approaches for colon targeted drug delivery 
system. 2014.  
[102] Singh KI, Singh J, Sharma D, Sharma A. Colon specific drug delivery 
system: review on novel approaches. International Journal of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences and Research.  2012;3(3):637.  
[103] Jose S, Dhanya K, Cinu TA, Litty J, Chacko AJ. Colon  targeted drug 
delivery: Different approaches. Journal of Young Pharmacists . 2009;1(1):13.  
[104] Lautenschläger C, Schmidt C, Fischer D, Stallmach A. Drug delivery 
strategies in the therapy of inflammatory bowel disease. Advanced Drug 
Delivery Reviews . 201 4;71:58 -76. 
[105] Aurora J, Talwar N, Pathak V. Colonic drug delivery challenges and 
opportunities -an overview. European Gastroenterology Review . 2006;1:1 -4. 
[106] Antonin K, Rak R, Bieck P, Preiss R, Schenker U, Hastewell J, et al. The 
absorption of human  calcitonin from the transverse colon of man. International 
journal of pharmaceutics.  1996;130(1):33 -9. 
[107] Anuj S, Amit JK. Colon targeted drug delivery using different approaches. 
Int J Pharm Stud Res . 2010;1(1):60.  
[108] Basit AW. Advances in colonic drug delivery. Drugs . 2005;65(14):1991 -
2007.  
[109] Davis S, Hardy J, Fara J. Transit of pharmaceutical dosage forms through 
the small intestine. Gut. 1986;27(8):886 -92. 
[110] Davis S, Hardy J, Taylor M, Whalley D, Wilson C. The effect of food on 
the gastrointestinal transit of pellets and an osmotic device (Osmet). 
International journal of pharmaceutics . 1984;21(3):331 -40. 
[111] Devereux J, Newton J, Short M. The influence of d ensity on the 
gastrointestinal transit of pellets. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology . 
1990;42(7):500 -1. 
[112] Colombo P, Bettini R, Massimo G, Catellani PL, Santi P, Peppas NA. 
Drug diffusion front movement is important in drug release control from 
swellable matrix tablets. Journal of pharmaceutical sciences . 1995;84(8):991 -7. 
[113] Maroni A, Zema L, Cerea M, Foppoli A, Palugan L, Gazzaniga A. 
Erodible drug delivery systems for time -controlled release into the 
gastrointestinal tract. Journal of Drug Deli very Science and Technology . 
2016;32, Part B:229 -35. 
[114] Takaya T, Niwa K, Muraoka M, Ogita I, Nagai N, Yano R -i, et al. 
Importance of dissolution process on systemic availability of drugs delivered by 
colon delivery system.  Journal of Controlled Release . 1998;50(1):111 -22. 
[115] Prasanth V, Jayaprakash R, Mathew ST. Colon Specific Drug Delivery 
Systems: A Review on Various Pharmaceutical Approaches . 2012.  
[116] Amidon S, Brown JE, Dave VS. Colon -Targeted Oral Drug Delivery 
Systems: Design Trends and Appr oaches. AAPS PharmSciTech . 
2015;16(4):731 -41. 
[117] Choudhury PK, Panigrahi TK, Murthy PN, Tripathy NK, Behera S, 
Panigrahi R. Novel approaches and developments in colon specific drug 
delivery systems -a review. 2012.  
[118] Nidhi, Rashid M, Kaur V, Hallan S S, Sharma S, Mishra N. Microparticles 
as controlled drug delivery carrier for the treatment of ulcerative colitis: A brief 
review. Saudi pharmaceutical journal : SPJ : the official publication of the Saudi 
Pharmaceutical Society . 2016;24(4):458 -72. 
[119] Gupta AS, Kshirsagar SJ, Bhalekar MR, Saldanha T. Design and 
development of liposomes for colon targeted drug delivery. Journal of Drug 
Targeting . 2013;21(2):146 -60. 
[120] Dictionary M -W. Merriam -Webster Online Dictionary. Retrieved 
November.  2010;6.  
[121] Viscido A, Capannolo A, Latella G, Caprilli R, Frieri G. Nanotechnology 
in the treatment of inflammatory bowel diseases. Journal of Crohn's and Colitis . 
2014;8(9):903 -18. 
[122] Emerich DF, Thanos CG. Nanotechnology and medicine. Expert Opinion 
on Biologica l Therapy.  2003;3(4):655 -63. [123] Sahoo SK, Labhasetwar V. Nanotech approaches to drug delivery and 
imaging. Drug discovery today . 2003;8(24):1112 -20. 
[124] Maitra A. Opinion: Does nanomedicine really belong to the field of 
nanotechnology. 2010.  
[125] Mog himi SM, Hunter AC, Murray JC. Long -circulating and target -
specific nanoparticles: theory to practice. Pharmacological reviews.  
2001;53(2):283 -318. 
[126] Panyam J, Labhasetwar V. Biodegradable nanoparticles for drug and gene 
delivery to cells and tissue. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews.  2003;55(3):329 -
47. 
[127] Singh R, Lillard Jr JW. Nanoparticle -based targeted drug delivery. 
Experimental and Molecular Pathology . 2009;86(3):215 -23. 
[128] Ulbrich W, Lamprecht A. Targeted drug -delivery approaches by 
nanoparti culate carriers in the therapy of inflammatory diseases. Journal of The 
Royal Society Interface . 2009:rsif20090285.  
[129] Mahajan N, Sakarkar D, Manmode A, Pathak V, Ingole R, Dewade D. 
Biodegradable nanoparticles for targeted delivery in treatment of ulce rative 
colitis. Advanced Science Letters.  2011;4(2):349 -56. 
[130] Xiao B, Merlin D. Oral colon -specific therapeutic approaches toward 
treatment of inflammatory bowel disease. Expert opinion on drug delivery . 
2012;9(11):1393 -407. 
[131] Collnot E -M, Ali H, L ehr C -M. Nano -and microparticulate drug carriers 
for targeting of the inflamed intestinal mucosa.  Journal of Controlled Release . 
2012;161(2):235 -46. 
[132] Lamprecht A, Schäfer U, Lehr C -M. Size -dependent bioadhesion of 
micro -and nanoparticulate carriers to the inflamed colonic mucosa. 
Pharmaceutical research . 2001;18(6):788 -93. 
[133] Hörter D, Dressman J. Influence of physicochemical properties on 
dissolutio n of drugs in the gastrointestinal tract. Advanced drug delivery 
reviews . 2001;46(1):75 -87. 
[134] Hua S, Marks E, Schneider JJ, Keely S. Advances in oral nano -delivery 
systems for colon targeted drug delivery in inflammatory bowel disease: 
Selective target ing to diseased versus healthy tissue. Nanomedicine: 
Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine . 2015;11(5):1117 -32. 
[135] Lamprecht A, Yamamoto H, Ubrich N, Takeuchi H, Maincent P, 
Kawashima Y. FK506 microparticles mitigate experimental colitis with minor 
renal  calcineurin suppression. Pharmaceutical research.  2005;22(2):193 -9. 
[136] Owens Iii DE, Peppas NA. Opsonization, biodistribution, and 
pharmacokinetics of polymeric nanoparticles. International Journal of 
Pharmaceutics.  2006;307(1):93 -102. 
[137] Lautenschl äger C, Schmidt C, Lehr C -M, Fischer D, Stallmach A. PEG -
functionalized microparticles selectively target inflamed mucosa in 
inflammatory bowel disease. European Journal of Pharmaceutics and 
Biopharmaceutics . 2013;85(3):578 -86. 
[138] Danhier F, Lecouturier  N, Vroman B, Jérôme C, Marchand -Brynaert J, 
Feron O, et al. Paclitaxel -loaded PEGylated PLGA -based nanoparticles: in vitro 
and in vivo evaluation. Journal of Controlled Release.  2009;133(1):11 -7. 
[139] Antoni L, Nuding S, Wehkamp J, Stange EF. Intestinal barrier in 
inflammatory bowel disease. World J Gastroenterol.  2014;20(5):1165 -79. 
[140] Condello M, De Berardis B, Ammendolia MG, Barone F, Condello G, 
Degan P, et al. ZnO nanoparticle tracking from uptake to genotoxic damage in 
human colon carcinoma cells . Toxicology in Vitro . 2016;35:169 -79. 
[141] Larsson JMH, Karlsson H, Sjövall H, Hansson GC. A complex, but 
uniform O -glycosylation of the human MUC2 mucin from colonic biopsies 
analyzed by nanoLC/MSn. Glycobiology . 2009;19(7):756 -66. 
[142] Maisel K, Ensig n L, Reddy M, Cone R, Hanes J. Effect of surface 
chemistry on nanoparticle interaction with gastrointestinal mucus and 
distribution in the gastrointestinal tract following oral and rectal administration 
in the mouse. Journal of Controlled Release . 2015;197:48 -57. 
[143] Salatin S, Maleki Dizaj S, Yari Khosroushahi A. Effect of the surface 
modification, size, and shape on cellular uptake of nanoparticles. Cell biology 
international.  2015;39(8):881 -90. 
[144] Niebel W, Walkenbach K, Béduneau A, Pellequer Y, Lamprecht A. 
Nanoparticle -based clodronate delivery mitigates murine experimental colitis. 
Journal of controlled release . 2012;160(3):659 -65. 
[145] Jubeh T, Barenholz Y, Rubinstein A. Differential adhesion o f normal and 
inflamed rat colonic mucosa by charged liposomes. Pharmaceutical research . 
2004;21(3):447 -53. 481 
 
 
J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 
[146] Bischoff S, Wedemeyer J, Herrmann A, Meier P, Trautwein C, Cetin Y, et 
al. Quantitative assessment of intestinal eosinophils and mast cells in 
inflammatory bowel disease. Histopathology . 1996;28(1):1 -13. 
[147] Carlson M, Raab Y, Peterson C, Hällgren R, Venge P. Increased 
intraluminal release of eosinophil granule proteins EPO, ECP, EPX, and 
cytokines in ulcerative colitis and proctitis in segment al perfusion. The 
American journal of gastroenterology . 1999;94(7):1876 -83. 
[148] Nagashima R. Mechanisms of action of sucralfate. Journal of clinical 
gastroenterology.  1980;3(Suppl 2):117 -27. 
[149] Peterson CG, Eklund E, Taha Y, Raab Y, Carlson M. A new m ethod for 
the quantification of neutrophil and eosinophil cationic proteins in feces: 
establishment of normal levels and clinical application in patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease. The American journal of gastroenterology . 
2002;97(7):1755 -62. 
[150] Tirosh B, Khatib N, Barenholz Y, Nissan A, Rubinstein A. Transferrin as 
a luminal target for negatively charged liposomes in the inflamed colonic 
mucosa. Molecular pharmaceutics.  2009;6(4):1083 -91. 
[151] Bratten J, Jones MP. New directions in the assessment  of gastric function: 
clinical applications of physiologic measurements. Digestive Diseases.  
2006;24(3 -4):252 -9. 
[152] Davaran S, Rashidi M, Hashemi M. Synthesis and characterization of 
methacrylic derivatives of 5 -amino salicylic acid with pH -sensitive sw elling 
properties.  AAPS PharmSciTech . 2001;2(4):80 -5. 
[153] Ashford M, Fell JT, Attwood D, Sharma H, Woodhead PJ. An in vivo 
investigation into the suitability of pH dependent polymers for colonic targeting. 
International journal of pharmaceutics. 1993;95(1 -3):193 -9. 
[154] Joshi M. Role of Eudragit in targeted drug delivery. Int J Curr Pharm Res . 
2013;5(2):58 -62. 
[155] Makhlof A, Tozuka Y, Takeuchi H. pH -Sensitive nanospheres for colon -
specific drug delivery in experimentally induced colitis rat mod el. European 
Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics.  2009;72(1):1 -8. 
[156] Barea M, Jenkins M, Gaber M, Bridson R. Evaluation of liposomes coated 
with a pH responsive polymer. International journal of pharmaceutics . 
2010;402(1):89 -94. 
[157] Kshirsag ar SJ, Bhalekar MR, Patel JN, Mohapatra SK, Shewale NS. 
Preparation and characterization of nanocapsules for colon -targeted drug 
delivery system. Pharmaceutical development and technology . 2012;17(5):607 -
13. 
[158] Ali H, Weigmann B, Collnot EM, Khan SA, Wi ndbergs M, Lehr CM. 
Budesonide Loaded PLGA Nanoparticles for Targeting the Inflamed Intestinal 
Mucosa --Pharmaceutical Characterization and Fluorescence Imaging. 
Pharmaceutical research . 2016;33(5):1085 -92. 
[159] Ali H, Weigmann B, Neurath M, Collnot E, Win dbergs M, Lehr C -M. 
Budesonide loaded nanoparticles with pH -sensitive coating for improved 
mucosal targeting in mouse models of inflammatory bowel diseases.  Journal of 
Controlled Release . 2014;183:167 -77. 
[160] Naeem M, Choi M, Cao J, Lee Y, Ikram M, Yoon S, et al. Colon -targeted 
delivery of budesonide using dual pH -and time -dependent polymeric 
nanoparticles for colitis therapy. Drug design, development and therapy . 
2015;9:3789.  
[161] Naeem M, Kim W, Cao J, Jung Y, Yoo J -W. Enzyme/pH dual sensitive 
polymeri c nanoparticles for targeted drug delivery to the inflamed colon. 
Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces . 2014;123:271 -8. 
[162] Beloqui A, Coco R, Memvanga PB, Ucakar B, des Rieux A, Préat V. pH -
sensitive nanoparticles for colonic delivery of curcumin in inflammatory bowel 
disease. International journal of pharmaceutics . 2014;473(1):203 -12. 
[163] Lamprecht A, Yamamoto H, Takeuchi H, Kawashima Y. A pH -sensitive 
microsphere system for the colon delivery of tacrolimus containing 
nanoparticles.  Journal of Controlled release.  2005;104(2):337 -46. 
[164] Qelliny MR, Aly UF, Elgarhy OH, Khaled KA. Budesonide -Loaded 
Eudragit S 100 Nanocapsul es for the Treatment of Acetic Acid -Induced Colitis 
in Animal Model. J AAPS PharmSciTech . 2019;20(6):237.  
[165] Rutgeerts P, Vermeire S, Van Assche G. Biological Therapies for 
Inflammatory Bowel Diseases. Gastroenterology . 2009;136(4):1182 -97. 
[166] Couvre ur P. Polyalkylcyanoacrylates as colloidal drug carriers. Critical 
reviews in therapeutic drug carrier systems . 1987;5(1):1 -20. 
[167] Fattal E, Vauthier C. Nanoparticles as drug delivery systems. 
Encyclopedia of Pharmaceutical Technology . 2002;2:811 -33. 
[168] Vauthier C, Bouchemal K. Methods for the preparation and manufacture 
of polymeric nanoparticles. Pharmaceutical research . 2009;26(5):1025 -58. [169] Quintanar -Guerrero D, Allémann E, Fessi H, Doelker E. Preparation 
techniques and mechanisms of formation  of biodegradable nanoparticles from 
preformed polymers. Drug development and industrial pharmacy . 
1998;24(12):1113 -28. 
[170] Vauthier C, Couvreur P. Development of nanoparticles made of 
polysaccharides as novel drug carrier systems. Handbook of pharmaceut ical 
controlled release technology,  Marcel Dekker, New York. 2000:413 -29. 
[171] Alshamsan A. Nanoprecipitation is more efficient than emulsion solvent 
evaporation method to encapsulate cucurbitacin I in PLGA nanoparticles. Saudi 
Pharmaceutical Journal.  2014;22(3):219 -22. 
[172] Stecanella LA, Taveira SF, Marreto RN, Valadares MC, Vieira MdS, Kato 
MJ, et al. Development and characterization of PLGA nanocapsules of grandisin 
isolated from Virola surinamensis: in vitro release and cytotoxicity studies. 
Revista Brasileira de Farmacognosia . 2013;23(1):153 -9. 
[173] Pandey SK, Patel DK, Thakur R, Mishra DP, Maiti P, Haldar C. Anti -
cancer evaluation of quercetin embedded PLA nanoparticles synthesized by 
emulsified nanoprecipitation. International journal of biologica l 
macromolecules . 2015;75:521 -9. 
[174] Byun Y, Hwang JB, Bang SH, Darby D, Cooksey K, Dawson PL, et al. 
Formulation and characterization of α -tocopherol loaded poly ɛ-caprolactone 
(PCL) nanoparticles. LWT -Food Science and Technology . 2011;44(1):24 -8. 
[175] Gonz lez -Mart  n G, Figueroa C, Merino I, Osuna  .  llopurinol 
encapsulated in polycyanoacrylate nanoparticles as potential lysosomatropic 
carrier: preparation and trypanocidal activity. European journal of 
pharmaceutics and biopharmaceutics.  2000;49(2): 137-42. 
[176] Sham JO -H, Zhang Y, Finlay WH, Roa WH, Löbenberg R. Formulation 
and characterization of spray -dried powders containing nanoparticles for aerosol 
delivery to the lung. International Journal of Pharmaceutics . 2004;269(2):457 -
67. 
[177] Ahuja M, Dhake AS, Sharma SK, Majumdar DK. Diclofenac -loaded 
Eudragit S100 nanosuspension for ophthalmic delivery. Journal of 
microencapsulation.  2011;28(1):37 -45. 
[178] Cerchiara T, Bigucci F, Corace G, Zecchi V, Luppi B. Eudragit -coated 
albumin nanospheres carryi ng inclusion complexes for oral administration of 
indomethacin. Journal of Inclusion Phenomena and Macrocyclic Chemistry . 
2011;71(1 -2):129 -36. 
[179] Cetin M, Atila A, Kadioglu Y. Formulation and in vitro characterization 
of Eudragit® L100 and Eudragit® L10 0-PLGA nanoparticles containing 
diclofenac sodium. AAPS PharmSciTech . 2010;11(3):1250 -6. 
[180] Mandal B. Preparation and physicochemical characterization of 
Eudragit® RL100 Nanosuspension with potential for Ocular Delivery of 
Sulfacetamide: University of T oledo ; 2010.  
[181] Santos SS, Lorenzoni A, Ferreira LM, Mattiazzi J, Adams AI, Denardi 
LB, et al. Clotrimazole -loaded Eudragit® RS100 nanocapsules: Preparation, 
characterization and in vitro evaluation of antifungal activity against Candida 
species. Materials Science and Engineering: C . 2013;33(3):1389 -94. 
[182] Yadav SK, Mishra S, Mishra B. Eudragit -Based Nanosuspension of 
Poorly Water -Soluble Drug: Formulation and In Vitro –In Vivo Evaluation. 
AAPS PharmSciTech . 2012;13(4):1031 -44. 
[183] Aghajani M, Shahverdi AR, Rezayat SM, Amini MA, Amani A. 
Preparation and optimization of acetaminophen nanosuspension through 
nanoprecipitation using microfluidic devices: an artificial neural networks study. 
Pharmaceutical development and technology.  2013;18(3):609 -18. 
[184] Bilati U, Allémann E, Doelker E. Nanoprecipitation versus emulsion -
based techniques for the encapsulation of proteins into biodegradable 
nanoparticles and process -related stability issues. Aaps Pharmscitech. 
2005;6(4):E594 -E604.  
[185] Jayanta K. Critical process parameters evaluation of modified 
nanoprecipitation method on lomustine nanoparticles and cytostatic activity 
study on L132 human cancer cell line. Journal of Nanomedicine & 
Nanotechnology . 2012;3:8.  
[186] Lepeltier E, Bourgaux C, Couvreur P. Nanoprecipitation and the ―Ouzo 
effect‖:  pplication to drug delivery devices. Advanced drug delivery reviews . 
2014;71:86 -97. 
[187] Reis CP, Neufeld RJ, Ribeiro AJ, Veiga F. Nanoencapsulation I. Methods 
for preparation of drug -loaded polymer ic nanoparticles. Nanomedicine: 
Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine . 2006;2(1):8 -21. 
[188] Fessi H, Devissaguet JP, Puisieux F, Thies C. Procédé de préparation de 
systèmes colloïdaux dispersibles d'une substance, sous forme de nanoparticules. 
French paten t. 1986;2:988.  481 
 
  J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 [189] Ahmed N, Mora ‐Huertas C, Jaafar ‐Maalej C, Fessi H, Elaissari A. 
Polymeric drug delivery systems for encapsulating hydrophobic drugs.  Drug 
Delivery Strategies for Poorly Water -Soluble Drugs. West Sussex,UK: Wiley ; 
2012. p. 151 -97. 
[190] Fessi H, Puisieux F, Devissaguet JP, Ammoury N, Benita S. Nanocapsule 
formation by interfacial polymer deposition following solvent displacement. 
International journal of pharmaceutics . 1989;55(1):R1 -R4. 
[191] Leroux J -C, Allémann E, Doelker E, Gurny R. New approach for the 
preparation of nanoparticles by an emulsification -diffusion method. European  
journal of pharmaceutics and biopharmaceutics. 1995;41(1):14 -8. 
[192] Quintanar -Guerrero D, Fessi H, Allémann E, Doelker E. Influence of 
stabilizing agents an d preparative variables on the formation of poly (D, L -lactic 
acid) nanoparticles by an emulsification -diffusion technique. International 
Journal of Pharmaceutics . 1996;143(2):133 -41. 
[193] Quintanar -Guerrero D, Allémann E, Doelker E, Fessi H. Preparation and 
characterization of nanocapsules from preformed polymers by a new process 
based on emulsification -diffusion technique. Pharmaceutical research.  
1998;15(7):1056 -62. 
[194] Moinard -Chécot D , Chevalier Y, Briançon S, Beney L, Fessi H. 
Mechanism of nanocapsules formation by the emulsion –diffusion process. 
Journal of colloid and interface science . 2008;317(2):458 -68. 
[195] Niwa T, Takeuchi H, Hino T, Kunou N, Kawashima Y. Preparations of 
biodeg radable nanospheres of water -soluble and insoluble drugs with D, L -
lactide/glycolide copolymer by a novel spontaneous emulsification solvent 
diffusion method, and the drug release behavior. Journal of Controlled Release . 
1993;25(1 -2):89 -98. 
[196] Wehrle P,  Magenheim B, Benita S. The influence of process parameters 
on the PLA nanoparticle size distribution, evaluated by means of factorial 
design. European journal of pharmaceutics and biopharmaceutics . 
1995;41(1):19 -26. 
[197] Bodmeier R, Huagang C. Indomethac in polymeric nanosuspensions 
prepared by microfujidization. Journal of Controlled Release.  1990;12(3):223 -
33. 
[198] Pisani E, Fattal E, Paris J, Ringard C, Rosilio V, Tsapis N. Surfactant 
dependent morphology of polymeric capsules of perfluorooctyl bromide : 
influence of polymer adsorption at the dichloromethane –water interface.  
Journal of colloid and interface science . 2008;326(1):66 -71. 
[199] Blanco M, Alonso M. Development and characterization of protein -loaded 
poly (lactide -co-glycolide) nanospheres. European Journal of Pharmaceutics 
and Biopharmaceutics . 1997;43(3):287 -94. 
[200] Lamprecht A, Ubrich N, Pérez MH, Lehr C -M, Hoffman M, Maincent P. 
Biodegradable monodispersed nanoparticles prepared by pressure 
homogenization -emulsification. International Jour nal of Pharmaceutics . 
1999;184(1):97 -105. 
[201] Cohen -Sela E, Chorny M, Koroukhov N, Danenberg HD, Golomb G. A 
new double emulsion solvent diffusion technique for encapsulating hydrophilic 
molecules in PLGA nanoparticles. Journal of controlled release . 
2009;133(2):90 -5. 
[202] Meng FT, Ma GH, Qiu W, Su ZG. W/O/W double emulsion technique 
using ethyl acetate as organic solvent: effects of its diffusion rate on the 
characteristics of microparticles. Journal of controlled release . 2003;91(3):407 -
16. 
[203] Garti  N. Double emulsions —scope, limitations and new achievements. 
Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects . 
1997;123:233 -46. 
[204] Georgieva D, Schmitt V, Leal -Calderon F, Langevin D. On the possible 
role of surface elasticity in emulsi on stability. Langmuir. 2009;25(10):5565 -73. 
[205] Krause H -J, Rohdewald P. Preparation of gelatin nanocapsules and their 
pharmaceutical characterization. Pharmaceutical research . 1985;2(5):239 -43. 
[206] Lertsutthiwong P, Noomun K, Jongaroonngamsang N, Rojsitthisak P, 
Nimmannit U. Preparation of alginate nanocapsules containing turmeric oil. 
Carbohydrate Polymers . 2008;74(2):209 -14. 
[207] Lertsutthiwong P, Rojsitthisak P, Nimmannit U. Preparation of turmeric 
oil-loaded chitosan -alginate biopolymeric nanocapsules. Materials Science and 
Engineering: C.  2009;29(3):856 -60. 
[208] Lutter S, Koetz J, Tiersch B, Boschetti -de-Fierro A, Abetz V. Form ation 
of gold nanoparticles in triblock terpolymer -modified inverse microemulsions. 
Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects . 
2008;329(3):169 -76. [209] Bindschaedler C, Gurny R, Doelker E. Process for preparing a powder of 
water -insoluble polymer which can be redispersed in a liquid phase, the 
resulting powder and utilization thereof. Google Patents ; 1990.  
[210] Allémann E, Gurny R, Doelker E. Preparation of aqueous polymeric 
nanodispersions by a reversible salting -out process: influ ence of process 
parameters on particle size. International Journal of Pharmaceutics . 1992;87(1 -
3):247 -53. 
[211] De Jaeghere F, Allémann E, Leroux J -C, Stevels W, Feijen J, Doelker E, 
et al. Formulation and lyoprotection of poly (lactic acid -co-ethylene oxi de) 
nanoparticles: influence on physical stability and in vitro cell uptake. 
Pharmaceutical research . 1999;16(6):859 -66. 
[212] Konan YN, Gurny R, Allémann E. Preparation and characterization of 
sterile and freeze -dried sub -200 nm nanoparticles. Internation al journal of 
pharmaceutics . 2002;233(1):239 -52. 
[213] Nguyen CA, Allémann E, Schwach G, Doelker E, Gurny R. Synthesis of a 
novel fluorescent poly (D, L -lactide) end -capped with 1 -pyrenebutanol used for 
the preparation of nanoparticles. European journal of  pharmaceutical sciences . 
2003;20(2):217 -22. 
[214] Zweers ML, Engbers GH, Grijpma DW, Feijen J. In vitro degradation of 
nanoparticles prepared from polymers based on DL -lactide, glycolide and poly 
(ethylene oxide). Journal of Controlled Release. 2004;100(3 ):347 -56. 
[215] Zweers ML, Engbers GH, Grijpma DW, Feijen J. Release of anti -
restenosis drugs from poly (ethylene oxide) -poly (DL -lactic -co-glycolic acid) 
nanoparticles. Journal of controlled release . 2006;114(3):317 -24. 
[216] Chern C -S. Principles and app lications of emulsion polymerization: John 
Wiley & Sons ; 2008.  
[217] Landfester K, Musyanovych A, Mailänder V. From polymeric particles to 
multifunctional nanocapsules for biomedical applications using the 
miniemulsion process. Journal of Polymer Science P art A: Polymer Chemistry . 
2010;48(3):493 -515. 
[218] Norakankorn C, Pan Q, Rempel GL, Kiatkamjornwong S. Factorial 
experimental design on synthesis of functional core/shell polymeric 
nanoparticles via differential microemulsion polymerization. Journal of ap plied 
polymer science. 2010;116(3):1291 -8. 
[219] Barratt G. Characterization of colloidal drug carrier systems with zeta 
potential measurements. Pharm Technol Eur. 1999;11:25 -32. 
[220] Gamboa JM, Leong KW. In vitro and in vivo models for the study of oral 
delivery of nanoparticles. Advanced drug delivery reviews. 2013;65(6):800 -10. 
[221] Evans D, Pye G, Bramley R, Clark A, Dyson T, Hardcastle J. 
Measurement of gastrointestinal pH profiles in normal ambulant human 
subjects. Gut. 1988;29(8):1035 -41. 
[222] O’Neill MJ, Bourre L, Melgar S, O’Driscoll CM. Intestinal delivery of 
non-viral gene therapeutics: physiological barriers and preclinical models. Drug 
discovery today. 2011;16(5):203 -18. 
[223] Allen A, Snary D. The structure and function of gastric mucus. Gut . 
1972;13(8):666.  
[224] Ensign LM, Cone R, Hanes J. Oral drug delivery with polymeric 
nanoparticles: the gastrointestinal mucus barriers. Advanced drug delivery 
reviews. 2012;64(6):557 -70. 
[225] Lai SK, Wang Y -Y, Hanes J. Mucus -penetrating nanoparticles fo r drug 
and gene delivery to mucosal tissues. Advanced drug delivery reviews. 
2009;61(2):158 -71. 
[226] Mora -Huertas C, Fessi H, Elaissari A. Polymer -based nanocapsules for 
drug delivery. International journal of pharmaceutics. 2010;385(1):113 -42. 
[227] D’So uza S. A Review of In Vitro Drug Release Test Methods for Nano -
Sized Dosage Forms. Advances in Pharmaceutics. 2014;2014.  
[228] Heng D, Cutler DJ, Chan H -K, Yun J, Raper JA. What is a suitable 
dissolution method for drug nanoparticles? Pharmaceutical resear ch. 
2008;25(7):1696 -701. 
[229] Sanna V, Roggio AM, Siliani S, Piccinini M, Marceddu S, Mariani A, et 
al. Development of novel cationic chitosan -and anionic alginate -coated poly (D, 
L-lactide -co-glycolide) nanoparticles for controlled release and light prot ection 
of resveratrol.  Int J Nanomedicine . 2012;7(2):5501 -16. 
[230] Verreck G, Chun I, Rosenblatt J, Peeters J, Van Dijck A, Mensch J, et al. 
Incorporation of drugs in an amorphous state into electrospun nanofibers 
composed of a water -insoluble, nonbiodegr adable polymer. Journal of 
Controlled Release . 2003;92(3):349 -60. 
[231] Zhang Y, Wang H, Li C, Sun B, Wang Y, Wang S, et al. A novel three -
dimensional large -pore mesoporous carbon matrix as a potential nanovehicle for 481 
 
 
J. Adv. Biomed. & Pharm. Sci . Qelliny  et al. 
 
the fast release of the poorly water -soluble drug, celecoxib. Pharmaceutical 
research.  2014;31(4):1059 -70. 
[232] Mahkam M, Hosseinzadeh F, Galehassadi M. Preparation of ionic liquid 
functionalized silica nanoparticles for oral drug delivery. 2012.  
[233] Wallace SJ, Li J, Nation RL, Boyd BJ. Drug release from nanomedicines: 
selection of appropriate encapsulation and release methodology. Drug delivery 
and translational research . 2012;2(4):284 -92. 
[234] Yue P -F, Lu X -Y, Zhang Z -Z, Yuan H -L, Zhu W -F, Zheng Q,  et al. The 
study on the entrapment efficiency and in vitro release of puerarin submicron 
emulsion.  Aaps Pharmscitech . 2009;10(2):376 -83. 
[235] Panyam J, Sahoo SK, Prabha S, Bargar T, Labhasetwar V. Fluorescence 
and electron microscopy probes for cellular and tissue uptake of poly (D, L -
lactide -co-glycolide) nanoparticles. International journal of pharmaceutics.  
2003;262(1):1 -11. 
[236] Prasad S, Dangi J. Development and characterization of pH responsive 
polymeric nanoparticles of SN -38 for colon cancer. Artificial cells, 
nanomedicine, and biotechnology . 2015:1 -11. 
[237] Sun S, Liang N, Yamamoto H, Kawashima Y, Cui F, Yan P. pH -sensitive 
poly (lactide -co-glycolide) nanoparticle composite microcapsules for oral 
delivery of insulin. International journal of nanomedicine . 2015;10:3489.  
[238] Henderson R, Benson J, Hahn F, Hobbs C, Jones R, Mauderly J, et al. 
New approaches for the evaluation of pulmonary toxicity: bronchoalveolar 
lavage fluid analysis.  Toxicological Sciences . 1985;5(3):451 -8. 
[239] Price P, Mc Millan TJ. Use of the tetrazolium assay in measuring the 
response of human tumor cells to ionizing radiation. Cancer research . 
1990;50(5):1392 -6. 
[240. Dothel G, Vasina V, Barbara G, De Ponti F. Animal models of 
chemically induced intestinal inflammation: predictivity and ethical issues. 
Pharmacology & therapeutics . 2013;139(1):71 -86. 
[241] Low D, Nguyen DD, Mizoguchi E. Animal models of ulcerative colitis 
and their application in drug research. 2013.  
[242] Beloqui A, Coco R, Alhouayek M, Solinís MÁ, Rodríg uez-Gascón A, 
Muccioli GG, et al. Budesonide -loaded nanostructured lipid carriers reduce 
inflammation in murine DSS -induced colitis.  International journal of 
pharmaceutics.  2013;454(2):775 -83. 
[243] Dai C, Zheng C -Q, Meng F -j, Zhou Z, Sang L -x, Jiang M. VS L# 3 
probiotics exerts the anti -inflammatory activity via PI3k/Akt and NF -κB 
pathway in rat model of DSS -induced colitis. Molecular and Cellular 
Biochemistry . 2013;374(1 -2):1-11. 
[244] Dharmani P, Leung P, Chadee K. Tumor necrosis factor -α and Muc2 
mucin p lay major roles in disease onset and progression in dextran sodium 
sulphate -induced colitis. PLoS One . 2011;6(9):e25058.  
[245] Laroui H, Viennois E, Xiao B, Canup BS, Geem D, Denning TL, et al. 
Fab'-bearing siRN  TNFα -loaded nanoparticles targeted to colon ic 
macrophages offer an effective therapy for experimental colitis. Journal of 
Controlled Release . 2014;186:41 -53. 
[246] Fuss IJ, Heller F, Boirivant M, Leon F, Yoshida M, Fichtner -Feigl S, et al. 
Nonclassical CD1d -restricted NK T cells that produce IL -13 characterize an 
atypical Th2 response in ulcerative colitis. The Journal of clinical investigation . 
2004;113(10):1490 -7. 
[247] Martínez -Moya P, Romero -Calvo I, Requena P, Hernández -Chirlaque C, 
Aranda CJ, González R, et al. Dose -dependent antiinflammatory effect of 
ursodeoxycholic acid in experimental colitis. International 
immunopharmacology . 2013;15(2):372 -80. 
[248] Neurath MF, Fuss I, Kelsall BL, Stüber E, Strober W. Antibodies to 
interleukin 12 abrogate established experimental colitis in mice. Journal of 
Experimental Medicine . 1995;182(5):1281 -90. 
[249] Rachmilewitz D, Simon PL, Schwartz LW, Griswold DE, Fondacaro JD, 
Wasserman MA. Inflammatory mediators of experimental colitis in rats. 
Gastroenterology . 1989;97(2):326 -37. 
[250] MacPherson B, Pfeiffer C . Experimental production of diffuse colitis in 
rats. Digestion . 1978;17(2):135 -50. 
[251] Yalniz M, Demirel U, Orhan C, Bahcecioglu IH, Ozercan IH, Aygun C, et 
al. Nadroparin sodium activates Nrf2/HO -1 pathway in acetic acid -induced 
colitis in rats. Inflam mation . 2012;35(3):1213 -21. 
[252] Schmidt C, Lautenschlaeger C, Collnot E -M, Schumann M, Bojarski C, 
Schulzke J -D, et al. Nano -and microscaled particles for drug targeting to 
inflamed intestinal mucosa —A first in vivo study in human patients. Journal of  
controlled  release . 2013;165(2):139 -45.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 