Summary
Rüegg S. Non-convulsive status epilepticus in 
adults – an overview. Schweiz Arch Neurol Psy-chiatr. 2008;159:53–83.
Status epilepticus (SE) is the most frequent neu-
rological emergency requiring admission on theintensive care unit (ICU). The classification ofstatus epilepticus may be dichotomised into the “convulsive” and the “non-convulsive” form.Whereas the diagnosis of generalised convulsivestatus epilepticus (GCSE) is easily made in view ofthe evident manifestation, the diagnosis of non-convulsive status epilepticus (NCSE) may becomevery difficult according to its non-spectacular andprotean presentation. Non-convulsive status epi-lepticus is a common cause of altered mental status and delirium; and a substantial number ofcomatose patients in the intensive care unit maysuffer from NCSE. The most important part ofmaking a diagnosis of NCSE is to think of it at all.The definite diagnosis of NCSE is dependenton electroencephalographic (EEG) confirmation.Repetitive or, optimally, continuous EEG record-ing may help to closely monitor seizure activity andto guide the therapy in order to protect the patientfrom under- and/or over-treatment. The interpre-tation of EEG recordings of NCSE may becomechallenging because of numerous artifacts causedby the patient, caregivers and devices, and becauseof trace elements of ambiguous significance and of waveforms mimicking epileptic activity.
Non-convulsive status epilepticus was histori-
cally subdivided into the groups of complex-partialstatus epilepticus (focal; CPSE) and absence status(generalised; AS). Most recently, a classificationproposed by the International League AgainstEpilepsy (ILAE) has subdivided focal NCSE intoaura continua (non-convulsive simple partial SEwith maintained consciousness) and into dys-cognitive SE (with impaired consciousness) of
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 53Non-convulsive status epilepticus in adults – 
an overview
nS. Rüegg
Division of Clinical Neurophysiology, Department of Neurology, University Hospital Basel
Correspondence:
Stephan Rüegg, MDDivision of Clinical NeurophysiologyDepartment of NeurologyUniversity Hospital Petersgraben 4CH-4031 Basele-mail: srueegg@uhbs.chReview article
abbreviations
AED antiepileptic drug
AS absence status
BD benzodiazepines
CISE critical illness status epilepticus
CPR cardiopulmonary resuscitation
CPSE complex-partial status epilepticus
CSE convulsive status epilepticus
CSF cerebrospinal fluid
CT computer tomography
CYP450 cytochrome P 450
DTI diffusion tensor imaging
DWI diffusion-weighted imaging
EEG electroencephalography
GCSE generalised convulsive status epilepticus
HIV human immunodeficiency virus
ICU intensive care unit
IGE idiopathic generalised epilepsy
LEV levetiracetam
LZP lorazepam
MDL midazolam
MRI magnetic resonance imaging
MSE myoclonic status epilepticus
NCSE non-convulsive status epilepticus
PET positron emission tomography
PHT phenytoin
PLED periodic lateralised epileptiform discharges
RSE refractory status epilepticus
SE status epilepticus
SGSE secondarily generalised status epilepticus
SPECT single-photon emission computer tomography
TPW triphasic waves
VPA valproic acidmesial temporal or neocortical origin. Several
patients with focal NCSE or AS were known forpre-existing epilepsy. In addition, other types ofNCSE have been reported, like “subtle” SE whereconvulsions in patients with GCSE clinically stop,but the continuous epileptic activity electroen-cephalographically still persists. Another variantbelongs to those patients with critical illness wherethe serious disorder and/or medications may trig-ger an acute,prolonged and all too often very-hard-to-treat epileptic condition (“critical illness SE”[CISE]). The majority of these patients will neverhave had seizures before. Of note, none of the cur-rently proposed classifications has gained broadacceptance and official approval.
Since the need for immediate and intensive
treatment of GCSE is beyond debate, the insi-diously calm presentation of NCSE may mislead to a much less aggressive therapeutic approach.However, experimental and clinical data suggestthat continuous epileptic activity in the brainduring NCSE associated with consecutive (gluta-matergic) hyperexcitation triggers neurotoxicityand proapoptotic mechanisms which eventuallymay lead to irreversible brain damage and theonset of a chronic epileptic disorder or to an irre-versible neurological deficit. Thus, recent nationaland international guidelines and reviews recom-mend immediate and intensive treatment forNCSE as well as for GCSE.With a few exceptions,the first drug is an intravenous benzodiazepine,mainly lorazepam; intravenous phenytoin or val-proate should be started without delay. Persistenceof NCSE after administration of these two classesof drugs heralds refractory SE (RSE) where singleor combinations of drugs in anaesthetic dosagesrequiring intubation and enteral antiepileptics may be added except for the cases of AS or anunderlying terminal disease.The outcome of NCSEis mainly determined by the type, duration, causeand the severity of concomitant diseases.
Keywords: non-convulsive status epilepticus;
intensive care unit; diagnosis; electroencephalogra-phy; treatment; benzodiazepines
Introduction
Status epilepticus (SE) is the most common neuro-
logical emergency requiring treatment in the in-tensive care unit (ICU). After the first depictionalmost 3000 years ago, SE has only gained in-creased attention since a few decades because ofthe improved availability of neurophysiologicaltechniques, the better understanding of the me-chanisms of seizure propagation and termination,the advances in intensive care medicine and thegrowing number of antiepileptic drugs availablefor treatment. From an operational and clinicalviewpoint,SE is divided into two main entities,con-vulsive SE (CSE) and non-convulsive SE (NCSE).Convulsive SE includes the focal and generalised(GCSE) forms, while NCSE encompasses all othernon-convulsive forms of prolonged, not self-limit-ed focal and generalised epileptic manifestations.While a widely accepted definition of GCSE exists,such a definition for NCSE is still lacking. Theuncertainties in NCSE considerably augment withrespect to the yet unresolved issues of types repre-senting NCSE, the almost unknown epidemiology,the immense number of causes, the difficulties todetermine the prognosis and, especially, to thedebates about best treatment [1]. Although guide-lines approved by specialty boards and neurolo-gical societies exist, they lack high-level evidencedue to the almost absence of high-quality (level of evidence class I- or II-) studies. Thus, severalimportant issues regarding NCSE urgently needfurther investigation:How to improve awareness ofNCSE? Which clinical signs point to the presenceof NCSE? Is there a valid score to build? Which isthe best treatment? What is the role of the newerantiepileptic drugs? The value of steroids or otherimmunotherapeutics in the treatment of NCSE isstill unclear, but increasing, mainly experimental,evidence points to an important contribution inRSE. On the more pathophysiological level, thecrucial question “Does non-convulsive status epi-lepticus damage the brain?” is still waiting for aconclusive answer. Basic and clinical research on the mechanisms and treatment of NCSE mayenormously profit from the formation of a world-wide and interdisciplinary network.The presentarticle tries to address these issues in the light ofthe current literature; it has to be considered as amomentarily valuable, but not definitively evidentand conclusive statement.
History
The term “status epilepticus” was introduced in
1824 by Calmeil as the French expression “état de mal” when he was writing his thesis on theexperiences he had made at the Salpêtrière andCharenton Asylum [2]. While the ancient Greek-Roman medicine assumed that epilepsy andseizures may be an impressive but not lethal dis-ease, the probably very first account of SE and its serious prognosis can even earlier be found onthe Neo-Babylonian Akkadian cuneiform in the25/26 Sakikku (718–612 BC) [3]. Almost half a
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .sanp.ch 159 n2/2008 54century after Cameil, the term “status epilepticus”
appeared for the first time in a textbook of clinicalmedicine when Bazire translated Trousseau’s book“Leçons en Médecine Clinique” [4]. At that time,it became clear that there were different types ofSE, the obvious form with convulsions as well as the more “silent” variants of the “dreamy state” orthe “fugue épileptique” or the prepsychotic “twi-light states”, well depicted by the eminent French(Charcot, Bourneville, Trousseau) and British(Jackson, Gowers) neurologists. The advent ofclinical electroencephalography (EEG) [5] al-lowed for better differentiation of the clinicallyalmost indistinguishable states of purely postictalalterations and non-convulsive status epilepticus.The typical EEG picture of absence status (AS)was discovered by Lennox and co-workers [6].Theoccurrence of long-lasting,continuous neurologicalsigns as a result of epileptic activity recorded byEEG was presented in a hallmark paper by Scottand Masland in 1953 [7]. Penfield and Jasperreported the existence of continuous somato-sen-sory SE for which they coined the term “aura con-tinua” [8]. Landolt emphasised the usefulness ofEEG for the discrimination between AS and com-plex-partial SE (CPSE) which clinically often arebarely to distinguish [9]. Karbowski having organ-ised a symposium on psychomotor status (i.e.CPSEfrom temporal origin) in 1979 compiled 36 alreadypublished and eight own cases, all supported byEEG, in the conference monograph [10]. The XthMarseille Colloquium on Epilepsy held in 1962 wasthe first conference devoted to classify the variousforms of SE. However, there were “as many formsof SE as types of seizures exist” as Gastaut stated,and the classification was only published 8 yearslater and received almost no attention [11].Despitethe Santa Monica Meeting on SE in 1980 [12], SEwas not included in the still valid “Classification ofEpilepsy and Epileptic Syndromes” of the Inter-national League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) of 1989[13].The most recent attempts of a classification ofSE have come from the ILAE and the ClevelandClinic Group [14, 15], and, with special regard toNCSE, from Shorvon [16, 17].
This lack of a broadly accepted classification is
the more unsatisfying,as it impedes research effortsfor better epidemiological treatment and prognos-tic data, and as it obscures prognosis and strongerevidence for the treatment of particularly NCSE.
Definition
There is no accepted definition of NCSE. One
carefully elaborated definition recently proposedby Shorvon states: “Non-convulsive status epilep-ticus is a term used to denote a range of condi-tions in which electrographic seizure activity isprolonged and results in non-convulsive clinicalsymptoms.”[16,17] These clinical symptoms mainlyinclude focal deficits like aphasia and amnesia,an impairment of consciousness or an altered be-haviour ranging from stupor and coma to deliriumand frantic psychosis. Occasionally, automatisms or subtle facial, periorbicular, abdominal and limb twitches, tonic eye deviation or spontaneous(mostly horizontal) nystagmus-like movements,and extensor response(s) of the big toe(s) may bepresent [18].
How long is prolonged? Thirty minutes were 
the historically determined duration of GCSE [19];however, this view has been challenged after thehallmark Veterans Affairs-study published in 1998,evaluating the best first-line treatment of GCSE[20], by Lowenstein et al. who proposed a substan-tially shorter duration of five minutes [21]. Thisproposal was adopted by several groups and in-corporated into national guidelines, like the Swissone [22]. In the case of NCSE, the situation is muchmore equivocal as an expert panel first recom-mended 60 minutes [19], whereas Jordan six yearslater proposed 15 to 30 minutes [23] and the mostrecent comprehensive overview has reiterated aduration of 30 minutes [24]. The author favours amuch shorter duration of five minutes identical tothe one used in GCSE. This opinion relies on twopivotal facts: first, from the brain’s perspective, itdoes not make a big difference whether a motorneuron or a non-motor neuron is exposed toprolonged continuous epileptic discharges – bothneurons risk to be damaged by excitotoxic me-chanisms leading to neuronal death and impairedneurological function.Second,sound data supportsthe observation that 80% of seizures last less thanone minute and more than 90% are terminatedwithin two minutes, i.e., self-terminating seizurespersisting for five minutes or more may be very rareand indicate that the usually self-restricting, in-herent antiepileptic mechanisms were insufficientand fail to stop the epileptic activity [25–27]. It isalso important to underscore that the shorter thetime of diagnosis and the start of treatment ofNCSE are, the faster NCSE can be stopped and the better its outcome may be. Conversely, delayeddiagnosis and therapy of NCSE may result in a vicious circle of progressive brain damage and increasing resistance to the antiepileptic drugsapplied which all together then may prolong theduration of NCSE and impair its treatment andprognosis [28–36].
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 55Types, clinical and electroencephalographic
manifestations of NCSE
In general, NCSE in adults is subdivided into the
two main groups of focal and generalised NCSE,where simple-partial SE (SPSE) and CPSE, and AS are the principal types, respectively [37]. Themost recent proposal of classification has beencreated by a group of foremost experts in the fieldof epilepsy on behalf of the ILAE [14]. However,this group too was unable to unanimously settlewith their own proposal what may reflect the dif-ficulties encountered in establishing a useful andcorrect classification of seizure, epilepsy and statusepilepticus. The group introduced the term “auracontinua” globally encompassing all forms of non-convulsive SPSE where maintained consciousnessis a prerequisite. Thereby, they left the more re-stricted definition of “aura continua” of Penfieldwho assigned only the forms with continuoussomatosensory sensations to “aura continua”. TheILAE also replaced CPSE by the term “dyscogni-tive” SE making an additional subdivision intothose forms attributed to derive from the “mesialtemporal” and those from the “neocortical” brainareas.Both forms essentially require impaired con-sciousness. While the forms originating from themesial temporal lobe regions may be summarisedas “limbic status” manifesting with limbic sensa-tions, the manifestations of the neocortical formsreflect the region of origin involved – in the case ofaphasia,for example,the inferior frontal lobe or thesuperior temporal gyrus.
With respect to the advent of advanced life sup-
port and the astounding progress of (critical care)medicine the author of this review would like tointroduce a third group of subtypes of NCSEconcerning seriously affected patients in intensivecare units (ICU).This group will be called “criticalillness SE” (CISE) and more extensively delineat-ed below. An overview of the different types ofNCSE is given in figure 1.
The primary generalised NCSE may occur as
typical or atypical AS, where the former is presentin adults with a known history of idiopathic gener-alised epilepsy (IGE). The onset of typical AS isalmost always precipitated by a medication error,malcompliance or provocative factors, like feverand infection or sleep disturbances; clinically thepatients show a confusional state, but often wereable to perform complex activities of daily living.Duration can last from half an hour up to weeks[38–40]. The EEG shows the classical generalised3/sec spike-wave pattern;the interictal backgroundactivity is normal. Atypical AS in adults may man-ifest either in patients with complex epileptic syn-dromes or “de novo” in patients without history ofepilepsy. Clinical differentiation of atypical fromtypical AS may be difficult; however, the presenceof additional subtle signs like eyelid myocloni,perioral automatisms has been proposed to rather point to atypical AS. Some authors suggest that the level of impaired consciousness and the deficitsin performing complex tasks may be more pro-nounced [24]. The EEG shows less regular spike-wave activity of 2.5–4 Hz and the interictal back-ground activity is slow [41]. The “de novo” AS inadults results from benzodiazepine withdrawal inthe majority of cases, but it may also occur withoutany precipitating factor [42]. The EEG is charac-terised by spike-wave activity of markedly unsta-ble frequency ranging from 0.5 to 4 Hz (fig. 2).
The clinical manifestations of aura continua are
as various as there are distinct focal neurologicalnon-convulsive deficits. Aura continua manifestswith the typical “plus” symptoms of the involvedcortical area and its adjacent tissues in the form ofsomatosensory perceptions, illusions or hallucina-tions. The quality of the experience is determinedby the localisation of the epileptic focus, for in-stance, aura continua originating in the temporallobe manifests by gustatory, olfactory, auditory orrising epigastric sensations, while somatosensoryand visual illusions or hallucinations point to aparieto-(temporo-)occipital focus. The unspectac-ular appearance of aura continua may have led toonly a few of publications;nevertheless,these formsof NCSE may be by far more frequently present inclinical practice. Other rare manifestations of auracontinua include the opercular type with pharyn-geal myoclonus and anarthria [43], the inhibitory
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .sanp.ch 159 n2/2008 56Figure 1 Types of non-convulsive status epilepticus.
The three main groups are the (primary) generalised (red), 
the focal (blue) and the group of acutely and severely affectedpatients with markedly impaired consciousness (green).
(paretic,aphasic and amaurotic),emetic,pilomotor
and the gelastic types [44–50]. The surface EEGshows focal slowing with repetitive, regular and/or irregular spike-wave discharges of various fre-quencies (fig. 3 and 4).Patients with cognitive, purely amnesic limbic 
or isolated fear SE were at the borderline betweenaura continua and dyscognitive SE of the mesialtemporal supgroup according to the ILAE classi-fication [51–55]. The surface EEG often eludes
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 57Figure 2 EEG in absence status.
35-year-old computer engineer, having acute phases of confusion, but during them is able to drive a car. No intake of medica-
tion nor illicit drugs. Emergency EEG about 5 hours after start of confusional state. Patient walks around and talks intelligib ly, 
however, he was unable to add 5 + 7. Note the aperiodic, but almost continuously generalised epileptic spikes and spike-wavedischarges (1–2.5 Hz), pronounced over the frontal regions (fig. 2a). After administration of 5 mg lorazepam, the epileptic activity disappears and is replaced by an almost normal background alpha activity (fig. 2b).
a b
Figure 3 Aura continua with tonic spasms of the right leg.
38-year-old business man, operated for parietal meningeoma six months ago. Levetiracetam tapered to 500 mg/d. Start of 
feelings of “something is wrong in my head” followed by permanent spasms and short subtle myocloni of the left leg two days before admission. The EEG shows right parieto-central almost continuous beta activity typical of tonic seizures, intermingled with small spike-like discharges with phase reversal over electrode C4, the motor cortex region of the left leg.
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .sanp.ch 159 n2/2008 58Figure 4 Aura continua with repetitive adversive seizures.
82-year-old woman without pre-existing medical history presenting with speech arrest and prolonged adversive head version to 
the left. EEG showing slightly irregular/aperiodic spike-wave discharges mainly on the right lateral brain regions with extensi on 
to closer to the midline interrupted by short episodes of rhythmic delta waves (fig. 4a–c). This pattern may resemble periodic lateralised epileptiform discharges (PLEDs), but is sometimes slightly irregular (aperiodic) and – together with the clearly ic tal 
semiology – was viewed to reﬂect epileptic activity which responded well to the application of lorazepam (ﬁg. 4d). Repetitive brainimaging and CSF examinations did not reveal a causative process and the dyscognitive status epilepticus was considered to beof kryptogenic origin.
a b
c d
Figure 5 Symptomatic dyscognitive status epilepticus.
74-year-old retired high-school teacher suddenly experiencing sensorimotor aphasia, stupor and right-upper-sided eye deviation.
EEG showed continuous periodic abortive spike-wave discharges, i.e. PLED, over the left hemisphere with predominance in theparieto-temporo-occipital region and also extending to the contralateral right side (fig. 5a). Administration of lorazepam imme -
diately led to abolition of stupor, exe deviation and global aphasia; however, profound sensory (Wernicke’s) aphasia persisted(fig. 5b). Eventually, diffusely expansive glioblastoma multiforme originating from the left parieto-occipital territory was fo und. 
a brecognition because of the localisation of the focus
in the deeply “covered” limbic structures [53] or the ictal activity is represented by rhythmic mid-temporal high-amplitude delta waves [56].Dyscognitive SE (formerly CPSE) belongs to
the group of focal NCSE in which an impairmentup to the complete loss of consciousness is manda-tory [14, 57]. In addition to the key cognitive and
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 59Figure 6 Subtle status epilepticus / symptomatic dyscognitive status epilepticus.
55-year-old man suffering from pneumococcal sepsis with meningo-encephalitis, undergoing repetitive tonic-clonic generalised
seizures, but later showed periodic episodes of tonic head version to the left. Continuous EEG shows short phases of slowlow-amplitude theta-delta activity (fig. 6a) with series of repetitive seizures starting from the right temporo-central region with
low-amplitude high-(beta) frequency discharges typical of initiation of tonic seizures (fig. 6b). This activity evolves into hi gher-
amplitude slower epileptic discharges over the next ca 90 sec (fig. 6c–e) with attenuation over the next ca 80 sec (fig. 6e–h)when a new seizure starts from the right parietal region (fig. 6h–l). The patient did not regain consciousness within theseizures. These episodes were considered to represent “subtle” SE. The patient was aggressively treated with midazolamanaesthesia, intravenous phenytoin and levetiracetam and high-dose topiramate by nasogastric tube and recovered well.
abcd
ef gh
ijk l
Figure 7 Drug-induced generalised critical illness status epilepticus.
89-year-old man admitted to another hospital for abdominal pain. Sigmoid diverticulitis was suspected and treated with the 
4th-generation cephalosporine cefepime. The patient slowly became comatose and he was referred to the tertiary care centre. Head CT and CSF were normal. The EEG showed almost absent background activity replaced by generalised partially rhythmicdelta activity mixed with a few multifocal epileptic spikes (fig. 7a). After administration of 1 mg midazolam, the patient imme -
diately regained consciousness and started to talk relentlessly; theta background activity reappeared (fig. 7b). Some days later he returned home in a good condition. 
a bbehavioural changes, some subtle clinical signs like
discrete nystagmus,automatisms,muscle twitching,(unilateral) mydriasis or extensor response uponplantar stimulation may be present. DyscognitiveSE usually originates from the temporal and lessfrequently from the frontal lobes [58–61], rarely it originates from the parietal or occipital lobes.The long-lasting episodes of dyscognitive SE often
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .sanp.ch 159 n2/2008 60Figure 8A Triphasic waves or epileptic discharges? Stimulus-sensitive triphasic waves.
57-year-old woman with subarachnoid haemorrhage (Fischer Grade IV) and clipping of aneurysms of the left anterior and 
medial cerebral artery. The patient remained at GCS 4–6 without sedation. The EEG revealed a biphasic curve pattern withslowed background activity and focal slowing in the delta/subdelta range in the left frontal region (fig. 8A-a) which spontane-ously or after acoustic stimulation (fig. 8A-b) changed into high-amplitude serial triphasic waves (fig. 8A-c).
abc
Figure 8B Triphasic waves are sensitive to benzodiazepines.
45-year-old woman with end-stage metastatic leiomyosarcoma of stomach undergoing chemotherapy with high-dose ifosfamide.
The patient was comatose. The EEG showed almost continuous generalised, frontally accentuated triphasic waves and a few
multifocal epileptic spikes (ﬁg. 8B-a). These triphasic waves were markedly reduced in amplitude after administration of 5 mg of lorazepam (fig. 8B-b).
a
 b
Figure 8C Triphasic waves resulting from accumulation of opioids – response to the opioid antagonist naloxone.
74-year-old man undergoing pancreatojejunostomy for pancreatic cancer. Postoperatively, he had multiorgan failure. Analgetic
management included fentanyl. The patient did not regain consciousness and NCSE was suspected. The EEG revealed per-manent rhythmically generalised, frontally accentuated triphasic waves mixed with some multifocal epileptic discharges (fig. 8C-a); the triphasic waves almost completely disappeared after administration of naloxone while the epileptic dischargespersisted (fig. 8C-b).
a
 bare also called “psychomotor status”, emphasising
the “strange”coincidence of severely impaired con-sciousness and altered behaviour together with an almost perfectly preserved functioning of themotor system allowing for extensive and oftenseemingly purposeful activities. It is well under-standable that these episodes often were believedto be of “psychogenic” origin by the lay peoplealready a long time ago [62]. In fact, the differen-tiation of this type of dyscognitive SE from non-epileptic conditions without EEG and by pureclinical means may become challenging even forthe skilled epileptologist [63, 64]. The differen-tiation of NCSE from non-epileptic psychogenicpseudostatus is very important since the treatmentof pseudostatus as SE may put these patients at life-threatening risks [65, 66]. Furthermore, it maybecome especially difficult to diagnose dyscogni-tive SE in elderly patients in whom it is as fre-quent as of 40% [67–69]. Typical psychiatric mani-festations of dyscognitive SE include delirium [67, 70, 71], stupor or catatonia [72, 73], mentalslowing [74], cognitive decline [75], aggressivebehaviour [76] and psychotic depression [77].Whenspreading to the neocortical areas of the temporallobes, auditory or visual hallucinations may occur[78, 79]. The EEG of dyscognitive SE is charac-terised by irregular or regular focal spikes or spike-wave activity similar to the one observed in auracontinua;however,the ictal activity in dyscognitive SE tends to involve a larger area which increasesthe likelihood to detect it by surface EEG (fig. 5)[80, 81].
In this context, the significance of “periodic
lateralised epileptiform discharges” (PLED), as
they are present in figures 4a and b and figure 5a,should be discussed. The EEG pattern of PLEDwas first described by Chatrian et al. [82] and de-notes periodic lateralised spike(-wave)-like acti-vity of about 0.5–1.5 Hz which may occur after avariety of cerebral events like tumours, bleedingsand ischaemic strokes.They often persist for weeksand months and may poorly respond to antiepilep-tic treatment; the authors already doubted their true epileptic nature by choosing the term “epi-leptiform”.However,he also occasionally observedPLED of epileptic nature. Pohlmann-Eden et al.in their seminal review proposed that PLED maynot represent a specific single entity of pathological EEG activity, but a continuum ranging from ratherbenign epileptiform activity to clear-cut continuousictal activity, i.e. SE [83]. This view was supportedby later studies which stated that PLED followingGCSE or serial epileptic seizures have to beconsidered as an ictal pattern; these PLED alsoresponded to antiepileptic treatment [84]. Thestudy of Assal et al. by using SPECT elegantlyshowed that PLED following SE or repetitiveseizures were coupled with hypermetabolismwhich switched to hypo-/(normo-)metabolism as
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 61Figure 9 Postanoxic myoclonic status epilepticus – differentiation
from generalised convulsive status epilepticus.
79-year-old man undergoing aortocoronary bypass surgery.
Some hours later on the same day he had cardiac arrest andwas electromechanically resuscitated during 10 minutes. He had repetitive subtle generalised myoclonic seizures. The EEG revealed a slow low-amplitude background activity(fig. 9a) alternatively changing with generalised epileptic spike-wave discharges of 1 Hz (fig. 9b) which ceased after the administration of lorazepam and resulting in a diffuselyspreading, non-reactive, frontally accentuated theta activity, a so-called theta coma often seen in postanoxic encephalo-pathy (fig. 9c). The patient did not regain consciousness and died 13 days later from septic pneumonia.
a
b
csoon as PLED ceased, again pointing to PLED as
an ictal pattern [85].
The last group includes the “critical illness SE”
(CISE) where patients experience NCSE becauseof (multi-)organ failure and/or often complexpolypharmacotherapy [18].The most frequent typeobserved clinically and electroencephalogra-phically resembles dyscognitive SE with oftensecondary generalisation.The background activityin the EEG is usually very slow, and serial epi-leptic seizures without interictal recovery of thepatient (instead of continuous epileptic activity)might be observed (fig. 6). Some of the CISE wereinduced by drugs, notably those targeting the CNS,but also antibiotics, like carbopenems, chinolones(gyrase inhibitors) and most prominently, thefourth-generation cephalosporine cefepime [86–88]. These CISE mostly show a generalised ictalpattern with a very polymorphous backgroundslowing, rhythmic delta activity and multifocal orgeneralised spike-wave activity.The EEG may alsodisplay triphasic waves (TPW) (fig. 7) which maybecome very rhythmic and sharply contoured,mimicking spike-wave activity of (NC)SE. How-ever, these TPW were not ictal, but reflect ence-phalopathy [81, 89].Although first described in thecontext of hepatic encephalopathy [90, 91], TPWmay occur in any other type of encephalopathy,likerenal, postanoxic and drug-induced (cytostaticdrugs, opiates) encephalopathy. Importantly, TPW
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .sanp.ch 159 n2/2008 62Figure 10 Postanoxic myoclonic status epilepticus with subclinical seizures.
81-year-old man undergoing cardiac arrest and cardiopulmonary resuscitation. He was treated with midazolam anaesthesia 
for 3 days, but did not awake after stopping anaesthesia. The EEG showed a non-reactive, very low amplitude (sensitivity of 2 µV/mm) fast beta activity of 20–25 Hz (fig. 10a). This background activity was interrupted by extensive bursts of generalisedmyocloni, most probably originating from the reticular brain-stem region (“reticular myoclonus”) (fig. 10b). But there were als o
generalised seizures with evolving delta activity, sometimes intermingled with the myoclonic bursts (fig. 10c–f). This activityeventually responded to anaesthesia with propofol and midazolam (fig. 10g). Nevertheless, the patient died 2 days later ofnon-epileptic complications.
ef g
a b
c dmay disappear after administration of benzo-
diazepines (fig. 8a and 8b) (or naloxone in the caseof opiate-overdose [fig. 8c]) [92, 93]. Thus, theresponse of this EEG pattern to benzodiazepinesdoes not help to distinguish TPW from ictal spike-wave activity. A more detailed analysis for thedifferentiation of NCSE from TPW is given by arecent study by Boulanger et al. [94].Another subtype is called “subtle”SE,denoting
those cases of NCSE which smoothly develop frompreceding overt GCSE, a concept built upon theexperimental work of Treiman et al. [29] and clini-cally supported by DeLorenzo and colleagues [95].
The third subtype encompasses the postanoxic
myoclonic SE (MSE) where patients experiencebursts, clusters or continuous, focal or generalised,symmetric, rhythmic myocloni [96, 97]. Clinicallyand electrographically this state may be sometimesdifficult to separate from the putatively non-epi-leptic, often symmetric reticular myoclonus [98].Occasionally, stimulus-sensitive focal or general-ised subtle myocloni associated with epileptic discharges in the EEG can be observed in patientsafter cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR); evolu-tion from severely suppressed background activityinto an ictal pattern and attenuation followingadministration of i/v midazolam represent seizureactivity and not a purely encephalopathic pattern(fig.9).Alternating reticular brain-stem and epilep-tic cortical activity can occasionally be recorded inEEG of patients after CPR (fig. 10). Subtle gener-alised MSE initially may respond to midazolam,but can become increasingly resistant to furthertreatment (fig. 11).
Several authors do not consider postanoxic
myoclonic SE as a form of NCSE because its treat-ment very often clinically does not improve thegeneral serious condition of the patient. How-ever, continuous clinical and electrographicalpostanoxic (subtle) myoclonic epileptic activity is
SE, irrespective of the lack of substantial responseto treatment.This resistance to therapy may ratherreflect the very severe global brain damage in these patients making recovery implausible (cf.also paragraph on prognosis).
Epidemiology
Sound epidemiological data about the incidence 
of NCSE and its subtypes are not available yet be-cause of the lack of an accepted definition and as a result from using different criteria including andexcluding some forms of NCSE. Additionally, it islikely that the protean, often unspectacular andcalm presentation of NCSE is frequently missed,leading to a substantially underestimated incidence of NCSE when compared to GCSE with its self-evident clinical manifestation. There are five largepopulation-based studies and an overview aboutthe incidence of SE in general [99–104].Their dataare summarised in table 1a and 1b after beingpooled and weighted according to their size; infor-mation about the incidence of specifically NCSE
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 63Figure 11 Generalised subtle myoclonic status epilepticus.
64-year-old woman undergoing cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion after ventricular fibrillation. She remained comatose and had bilateral eyelid myoclonus, tonic left upper gaze deviation and irregular body myocloni. The EEG revealed generalised (slightly a-)periodic epileptiform discharges(GPED) which – together with the subtle ictal semiology –were considered to be of epileptic nature (fig. 11a). The initial response to intravenous midazolam led to the suppres-sion of the epileptic discharges (fig. 11b). However, the generalised epileptic discharges reappeared some hours later (fig. 11c) and neither high-dose midazolam nor propofoldid abort this activity and barbiturates could not be adminis-tered because of the cardiac frailty. The patient died 3 dayslater.
a
b
cand its subtypes is extracted as much as possible.
The incidence of NCSE may be 6/100 000, repre-senting about 40% of all SE; however, when look-ing at this proportion in a tertiary care centre wherecritically ill patients are more frequent, it may bemarkedly increased. About 8% of all comatosepatients in a tertiary-care-centre ICU had NCSE[105]. It is important to use the EEG as an addi-tional tool to examine patients in coma of unknownorigin and know the various patterns of EEGchanges associated with coma of both NCSE andmetabolic encephalopathy, respectively [81, 89].About two thirds of NCSE are dyscognitive SE.The incidence of NCSE in males is twice that offemales.
Causes
Two general conditions have to be considered when
looking at the causes of NCSE:first,NCSE in thosepatients with known epilepsy and, second, in thosepatients with no history of epilepsy.
The main reasons for NCSE in epileptic patients
are changes in AED levels. They include loweringof levels by purposeful or inadvertent reduction ofAED dosages, or by non-compliance [106]. Toxiclevels of AED too may cause NCSE [107]. Almostall AED may provoke worsening of seizures oreven of an epileptic syndrome in some patients[108].The AED tiagabine, inhibiting the re-uptakeof GABA from the synaptic cleft by blocking theGABA transporter-1, may induce NCSE by inter-ference with the pre- and postsynaptic GABA
A/B
receptors and other mechanisms modulating trans-mitter release [109, 110]. Antiepileptic drug levelsimpaired by co-administration of other enzyme-inducing drugs may also facilitate the onset ofNCSE. Other reasons may be inappropriate AEDselection, for example, carbamazepine or pheny-toin (PHT) for an IGE syndrome [111, 112]. Ex-
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .sanp.ch 159 n2/2008 64Table 1a Incidence of NCSE: synopsis of five population-based studies on the epidemiology of status epilepticus.
Bologna Marburg Geneva Rochester, Richmond,
(I)a, e (D)a, e (CH)a MN (USA)b VA (USA)a
(Vignatelli 2003) (Knake 2001) (Coeytaux 2000) (Hesdorffer 1998) (DeLorenzo 1996)
types of status (n = 336.876) (n = 743.285) (n = 1.735.420) (n = ~544.215) (n = 202.774)
epilepticus <4% non-whites <4% non-whites 4% non-whites 4% non-whites 57%non-whites
absence status 2.0 6.0 3.5 0.6 (3.3)d 1.0
CPSE 16.0 43.3 26.7 7.1c(38.9)d 3.0 (?)*
subtle – – 1.2 – –
myoclonic 16.0 – – 1.9 (10.4)d 2.0
(others) 7.0 4.0 6.4 1.2 (6.5)d 1.0
GCSE 9.0 14.0 33.1 4.6 (25.1)d 29
SGSE 41.0 19.3 13.9 2.9 (15.8)d 43 (?)*
other 9.0 13.4 15.2 – 21 (?)
totalb 10.7 17.1 10.3 18.3 50
gender: /L50919//L50920b 9.7/11.5 26.1/13.7 12.1/7.8 23.2/13.1 not available
aValues in per cent.
bIncidences per 100 000.
cClassification “partial” only, no further subdivision into “simple” or “complex”.
dA substantial proportion of CPSE may be included in the category “partial, secondarily generalised”.
eAdults > age 20 only.
* Some cases of NCSE probably included in the group of SGSE.
all studies all studies, population-weighted
percentual percentual absolute
[%] [%] per 100 000 p.
non-convulsive forms
absence status 3.16 3.71 0.531
CPSE 25.58 29.67 4.219
myoclonic 5.68 3.22 0.510
subtle 0.24 0.58 0.060
others 4.98 5.66 0.745
total 39.64 42.84 6.065 39.80%
convulsive forms
GCSE 22.04 25.38 3.647
SGSE 26.60 19.54 3.559
others 11.72 11.48 2.340
total 60.36 56.40 9.173 60.20%
total 100.00 99.24 15.238 100.00%Table 1b Incidence of different types of NCSE according to the results
of population-based studies on the epidemiology of statusepilepticus.ternal factors, like fever, drugs, sleep shifts and
deprivation, photic stimulation and hormonalchanges also may trigger NCSE in epileptic pa-tients [32].
Structural and metabolic-toxic changes are the
principal causes of NCSE in patients without ahistory of epilepsy. Non-convulsive status epilep-tici resulting from structural alterations includeacute events like intracranial haemorrhages, trau-matic brain injuries and ischaemic strokes [113–116]. Subacutely, primary brain tumours and meta-stases may provoke NCSE [117–119]. Infections,like herpes encephalitis, neurosyphilis and Creutz-feldt-Jakob disease, may be associated with NCSE[120–122]. Chronically progressing conditionscausing seizures encompass all the different formsof neurodegenerative disorders, like Alzheimer’sdisease, frontotemporal dementia spectrum, cere-bral amyloid angiopathy, etc. [123, 124]. Severalmetabolic conditions may be associated with NCSEas an epileptic reaction to the changed cerebralphysiological environment. Both hypoglycaemicand hyperglycaemic states may be associated withNCSE [125, 126]. Hyperthyroidism and hypothy-roidism are causes of NCSE; while the first isknown in thyrotoxic crisis [127], the latter occurs in myxoedema [128] or steroid-responsive ence-phalopathy associated with autoimmune thyroi-ditis (the former “Hashimoto encephalopathy”)where NCSE occurs with a frequency of 10 to 15%[129–133]. Disturbances of sodium, potassium andcalcium homoeostasis may be associated withNCSE [37, 78, 134–136]. Hypomagnesaemia in-duced by therapies with cis-platin, amphothericinB and so on can cause NCSE [137].Numerous other(illicit and approved) drugs are known to lowerseizure threshold (table 2). The most importantdrug causing NCSE is alcohol withdrawal and onlyvery rarely alcohol intoxication [138]. It is of spe-cial interest to the neurologist that – beyond drugslike antibiotics,anticancer and immunosuppressivedrugs – some antipsychotic drugs, antidepressantsand some antiepileptic drugs (tiagabine, viga-batrine, gabapentin, carbamazepine, phenytoin)may cause NCSE [139]. This list would be incom-plete if increasing age as “risk factor”for NCSE wasnot mentioned [140, 141]; an epidemiological studyin the Hong Kong population showed a 3- to 8-foldincrease in the incidence of SE [142].
Diagnosis and differential diagnosis
The diagnosis of NCSE relies on the combination
of the patient’s history, the clinical signs and theEEG. Sometimes, the clinical and electroen-cephalographic response to the administration ofbenzodiazepines may help to confirm the diagno-sis.The broad range of clinical signs and symptomswere mentioned in the section on the differenttypes of NCSE.Their protean, often unspectacularmanifestations make it very difficult to diagnoseNCSE on clinical grounds alone. Nevertheless, aremote condition facilitating the onset of an epi-leptic disorder, severely impaired consciousnessand spontaneous eye movements (i.e. horizontalnystagmus) were significantly associated with thepresence of NCSE [143].A history of epilepsy mayfacilitate to think of NCSE; absence of such ahistory will not exclude the presence of NCSE inpatients, since NCSE may often be the first mani-festation of an epileptic condition in patients ad-mitted to hospitals [30, 144, 145]. However, NCSEdoes not exclusively start in ICUs or hospitals, butalso at home, in psychiatric institutions, in nursinghomes and asylums.
According to Jordan, the following conditions
warrant further evaluation regarding a possiblediagnosis of NCSE [23]:– episodes of blank staring, automatisms, aphasia
or perseverations of actions;
– unexplained onset of impaired consciousness,
especially if its level fluctuates;
– fluctuating aphasia without structural lesion
explaining the aphasic deficit;
– impaired consciousness or mentation asso-
ciated with minimal clinical signs, like eyelid,facial or truncal subtle myoclonus, horizontalnystagmus and spontaneous extensor positionof one or both big toes;
– prolonged postictal state or postictal unaware-
ness of longer duration than 15 to 30 minutes;
– protracted state of reduced alertness after brain
surgery or any other surgery where cerebralfunctions are at risk.
To confirm the diagnosis of NCSE warrants theexclusion of other diagnoses.The differential diag-nosis of NCSE encompasses acute stroke, inflam-mation (like limbic or paraneoplastic encephalitis),infection (like herpes simplex encephalitis), pri-mary brain tumours and metastases in the non-motor areas, “pure” psychiatric causes of deli-rium, stupor and delusions or hallucinations, andnon-epileptic, psychogenic pseudostatus. Severalapproved and illicit drugs as well as metabolic andelectrolyte alterations may produce neurologicaland behavioural states resembling NCSE withoutdetectable ictal activity in the concurrently record-ed EEG.
To conclude, the most important step in the
diagnosis of NCSE is “to think of it at all!” [18]. Inaddition, the value of 24-hour availability of EEG
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 65cannot be overestimated if NCSE is clinically sus-
pected, but warrants definitive confirmation. Thevarious EEG patterns of NCSE and its con-founders were already presented in the “types ofNCSE” section of this article; more detailed infor-mation is displayed in several excellent reviewselsewhere [37, 41, 56, 81, 89, 146].
The diagnostic value of other paraclinical ex-
aminations may depend on the very specific con-text. Thus, analysis of cerebrospinal fluid may help to diagnose an underlying CNS infection;unspecifically and as a bystander phenomenon,there may be pleocytosis of up to about 30 cells andslightly elevated protein levels in the CSF of non-infectious NCSE [147].An increase of neuron-spe-cific enolase upon NCSE was suggested [148–150].The various imaging modalities may be of lesservalue in the emergency diagnosis of NCSE,but mayreveal valuable localisatory, structural (CT, MRI,DTI), pathophysiological (DWI, SPECT) and
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .sanp.ch 159 n2/2008 66approved medications
CNS active drugs
neuroleptics
especially: clozapine
chlorpromazine
olanzapine
lithium
antidepressants
tricyclic (-“pramins”)
tetracyclic (maprotilin, mianserin)
not (or even anticonvulsant): SSRI
stimulants
theophylline
appetite moderators
(methylphenidate; effect not definitely determined)
mid- and high-dose opiates
flumazenil
benzodiazepine withdrawal
antiepileptic drugs
tiagabine
vigabatrine
carbamazepine
phenytoin
antibiotics
penicillin (derivatives)
penicillin G
mezlocillin
piperacillin
calvulanic acid
cephalosporins
cefepime
ceftazidime
gyrase inhibitors
ciprofloxacin
ofloxacin
enoxacin
exception: norfloxcain (does not cross the BBB)carbopenems
imipenem
meropenem
anticancer drugs
ifosfamide
busulphaneimmunosuppressants
cyclosporine
mycophenolate mofetil
tacrolimusintravenous contrast mediumsantiarrhythmics
illicit drugs
tranquillisers/sedatives
benzodiazepine withdrawal
barbiturate withdrawalopiates
mid to high doses of all opiates
(low doses probably anticonvulsive)
morphine
heroin
buprenorphine
(hydr-)oxycodon
stimulants
cocaine
amphetamine
designer amphetamines
paramethoxyamphetamine (PMA)
paramethoxymethamphetamine (PMMA)
(benzyl-)piperazines
alcohol
withdrawal
(excessively high intake)
Abbreviations: 
BBB: blood-brain barrier; SSRI: selective serotonine 
re-uptake inhibitors.Table 2 Drugs causing non-convulsive status epilepticus.metabolic (PET) information about the involved
brain areas, especially when used in a combined,complementary manner [151–154]. The readilyavailability, the ease of acquisition and the im-portant information displayed in acute strokeplaced DWI among the most performed imagingmodalities, increasingly also in an emergency set-ting. In the context of NCSE, it is of note thathyperintense DWI changes (with or without re-duced ADC maps) may also be observed. How-ever, the hyperintensities in NCSE are very oftenless bright, show a very cortical pattern, often notexactly respecting a perfusion territory typical of a specific cerebral artery and they may disappearwithin 5 to 7 days – in contrast to the ischaemicDWI hyperintensities persisiting for 2 to 6 weeks[155–158].
Pathophysiological aspects
Pathophysiological aspects of NCSE are similar to
those observed in the convulsive forms of SE on thecellular and local network (neuronal/astroglial)level, but they may be different on the level of thebrain and the whole body [31, 159, 160].
Neurons, astroglial cells and small local net-
works affected by continuous epileptic activity ofGCSE and almost all forms of NCSE (except forAS) display a cascade of electrochemical eventstriggered by the synchronous hyperexcitability.This hyperexcitability may result from a direct in-crease of excitatory mechanisms or a reduction of the local inhibitory network (i.e. disinhibition),or both of them. Hyperexcitability usually is linkedwith an excessive glutamatergic spillover of neu-rons which also exceeds the capacity of glutamate-reuptake (“buffering”) by astroglial cells. Toxicamounts of extracellular glutamate overstimulateglutamate receptors and induce a disruption of theextra-/intracellular Ca
2+-homoeostasis with accu-
mulation of cytotoxic intraneuronal Ca2+-concen-
trations. Excess of the second messenger Ca2+-ion
paralyses or overdrives numerous downstreammetabolic processes vital for the neurons and mayinduce acute cell death or apoptosis [161].The highenergy demands of the hyperexcited neuronsexhaust the pool of energy sources of the brainwhich is almost exclusively dependent on glucose.Energy failure leads to a loss of function of theNa
+/K+ -ATPase which is followed by a breakdown
of the ionic transmembraneous homoeostasis andby subsequent concomitant water influx into theneurons and astroglial cells,cell swelling and death.As another consequence, toxic metabolites, nitricoxide formed upon activation of the neuronal andinducible forms of NO synthase, and radicals mayaccumulate intra- and extracellularly, and furtheract as cytotoxic substances, especially to cell mem-branes, or as chemoattractants for inflammatorycells. Eventually, there may be local destruction offunctional brain tissue and gliosis with loss of func-tion leading to persistent neurological deficits orthe onset or aggravation of an epileptic disorder.
On the level of the whole body, GCSE has the
additional consequence of exhaustive motor activ-ity which will lead to profound metabolic changessuch as lactic acidosis, hyperthermia and sympa-thetic overdrive in the phase of decompensation[162, 163]. When persisting, these factors maycreate an immediate life-threatening condition. Incontrast, NCSE will not induce whole-body ener-gy exhaustion with its metabolic sequelae becauseof the lack of excessive motor activity, but it isessential to note that continuous epileptic activityin non-motor brain regions, like in the temporallobes or the insular and opercular cortex, maydirectly overstimulate autonomic sympathetic and parasympathetic centres which in turn mayinduce life-threatening autonomic hyper- or hypo-activity, most importantly ventricular arrhythmiasor asystolia and bronchospasm [164].An overviewof these mechanisms is schematically drawn infigure 12.
Prognosis
The prognosis of a disorder in general refers to 
the outcome with regard to survival or death (i.e.mortality), to deficits, disabilities or handicaps, andto the response to treatment. Prognosis is essential
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 67Figure 12 Pathophysiological aspects and sequelae of non-convulsive
status epilepticus.
to determine the need, the immediacy and the in-
tensity of the treatment; it also serves to handle thequestions and expectations of the patients and theirrelatives.
Overall mortality of SE in general ranges with-
in 10–33% in the population-based epidemiolo-gical studies [165]. Short-term mortality was 19%in a large population-based study irrespective ofthe type of SE; however, the data were collectedfrom 1965 to 1984, at a time when treatment and ICU care of SE were not at the level of nowadaysstandards [166]. The long-term mortality over thefirst 10 years after SE in the same population was40% and thus threefold higher than that of thematched general population [167]. Older patientswith NCSE also share a higher mortality than thosewithout [142]. Mortality of specifically NCSE hasbeen 19% in a more recent study; mortality wassignificantly associated with symptomatic NCSE[168]; accordingly, an earlier study observed a much higher mortality of 57% in patients withexclusively symptomatic NCSE on an ICU [169].Additionally, the prognosis of NCSE may not onlyinclude the issues of mortality and response totreatment,but also those of the mid- and long-termsequelae,like the likelihood of recurrence of NCSEand the onset of epilepsy after NCSE [136]. Recentdata suggest that the risk of recurrence of (NC)SEranges from 30 to 100% depending on the under-lying cause of NCSE [170]. About 40% of patientswill experience an unprovoked seizure within 10years after one or repetitive episodes of (NC)SE[171].
For several reasons the prognosis of NCSE is
one of its most equivocal and debated topics[172–174]. First, there is no broadly accepted defi-nition which leads to the inclusion and/or exclusionof some forms of NCSE depending on the specificcriteria of the investigators in these studies whichin turn may have weakened the strength of the re-sults and made it difficult to compare these studies.Second, it is important to respect the variety andheterogeneity of types of NCSE which render itimpossible to make a universal prognosis for NCSE[175].Third, it has become clear that any prognosisin any form of NCSE has to be considered withinthe specific context of the presence of underlying(causative) or concomitant (non-causative) dis-orders [1, 37, 174]. Fourth, the prognosis of NCSEis influenced by the time until adequate treatmentwill have been installed, i.e., delayed diagnosis andtherapy will impact the outcome in a negative way[35, 37]. Fifth, there is increasing doubt as towhether the vast amount of experimental animaldata on (NC)SE in fact strongly relates to NCSE in humans [176]. Many of these data were derivedfrom specific animal models, often at differentdevelopmental stages or periods of postnatal life.The uncertainty of the reliability of the results ofthese studies was best reflected in one issue ofProgress in Brain Research by addressing the yet
unresolved question “Do seizures damage thebrain?” [177]. In recent years, however, there hasbeen increasing evidence from pathological andimaging data that all types of NCSE except for AS may damage the brain [178–183].
Keeping these issues in mind, the prognosis 
of the different types of NCSE will be discussedaccording to the classification shown in figure 1.Additionally, it seems helpful to place these typesof NCSE into a Cartesian graph where the x-axisdenotes non-epileptic factors increasingly respon-sible for the patient’s state and prognosis, andwhere the y-axis assigns increasing importance tothe epileptic activity determining the patient’sglobal state and prognosis (fig.13).Thus,it becomesclear that in the case of AS (left top) the epilepticactivity is almost completely responsible for thepatient’s state, while, at the other end (right bot-tom), the epileptic activity in postanoxic MSE maycontribute only little to the patient’s global state ofalmost always deep coma. However, a recent studyhas shown that the occurrence of MSE in patientsafter cerebral anoxia represents an independentpoor-outcome predictor, emphasising that MSEmight be more than an innocent bystander ofhypoxic brain damage [184]. Nevertheless, it fol-lows that the prognosis of AS is closely linked tothe response to antiepileptic treatment, whereasthe prognosis of MSE is mainly dependent on theseverity of global brain damage and the failure ofother vital organs, and less on the result of the
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .sanp.ch 159 n2/2008 68Figure 13 Prognosis of different forms of non-convulsive status epilep-
ticus according to the impact of the underlying condition.
antiepileptic treatment.Accordingly,the prognosis
of CISE is mainly determined by the prognosis and response to treatment of the underlying criti-cal illness.
As an approximate rule, the types of NCSE
where the epileptic activity largely contributes tothe patient’s impairment share a better prognosisthan those forms where patients suffer from criticalillness.This fact has been corroborated by a simpleclinical score for the prognosis of SE in adults,using consciousness, type of SE, age and history ofseizures as items. The patients with the highestscores corresponding to the poorest prognosis were those without history of seizures, age over 65,NCSE and coma [185]. Absence status has an ex-cellent prognosis with respect to response to treat-ment and outcome [37]. An exception might be denovo AS in adults caused by withdrawal of benzo-diazepines; here, the prognosis is influenced by the interference of benzodiazepine addiction. Theprognosis of atypical AS also is good, especiallywhen atypical AS occurs de novo in non-epilepticpatients; however, it has often to be consideredwith respect to an underlying more severe idio-pathic generalised epileptic syndrome which per semay be associated with a more serious outcome.Aura continua often shares a good prognosis, butthis is again dependent on the cause of aura con-tinua and concomitant diseases; aura continua dif-ficult to control may be caused by malformations,astroglial tumours,(residual) intracerebral haema-tomas or mitochondrial diseases. The prognosis ofdyscognitive SE is good in general, but also deter-mined by the presence or absence of structurallesions and concomitant disorders.The prognosis ismuch more serious in most forms of CISE becauseof the underlying disorder; however, the NCSEplays an important contributory role to the courseof the disease as it may additionally worsen the global outcome of the patient. Subtle SE also shares a serious prognosis with respect to the long-lasting persisting epileptic activity which impairsresponse to treatment (inducing the vicious circledescribed earlier) which may increase the likeli-hood of irreversible brain damage.The worst prog-nosis must be attributed to postanoxic MSE,whereabout 80% of patients die and the surviving almostnever return to a conscious life remaining in thepermanent vegetative state. This outcome reflectsthe catastrophic brain damage caused by anoxia;MSE has to be considered not as a main causativefactor, but as an indicator and epiphenomenonreflecting the disinhibitive state after abolition ofinhibitory mechanisms of the brain and the globalcerebral spillover with hyperexcitatory transmit-ters and excitotoxic metabolites [184, 186–188].Treatment
The treatment of NCSE basically follows the same
principles as do therapeutic algorithms for GCSE,although there is an appalling lack of studies spe-cifically devoted to the optimal treatment of NCSEwhich would fulfil the criteria of evidence classes Ior II. Again, this absence of data may result fromthe absence of an accepted definition of NCSE,from its heterogeneity and the divergent opinionseven of experts whether NCSE might damage thebrain or not implicating a more or less aggressivetreatment strategy [1,172,173].Nevertheless,morerecent reviews and guidelines emphasise the needfor immediate, resolute and type-adapted treat-ment of NCSE [18, 22, 24, 33, 189]. It is importantto note that the most studies providing data dis-cussed below were predominantly carried out inpatients with GCSE and not in patients with NCSE.However, their evidence may also apply to thepatients having NCSE, at least not until novel spe-cific data will provide different results. As men-tioned in the previous paragraph, the antiepileptictreatment becomes the more important, the morethe epileptic activity per se contributes to thepatient’s state, whereas in the symptomatic formsof NCSE like CISE the successful therapy of theunderlying and concomitant non-epileptic disor-ders will mainly determine prognosis and outcomeof the patient.
Once NCSE has been diagnosed, the patient
should be checked and stabilised for the basic vitalparameters.Then,thiamine 250 mg should be givenintravenously before any glucose-containing fluidsor higher concentrated glucose solutions for cor-rection of hypoglycaemia will have been adminis-tered; this schedule is especially recommended inthe case of suspected alcohol addiction or mal-nutrition, but may be performed in all patients with NCSE with regard to its harm-sparing poten-tial and the low risk of adverse effects.
The initiation of the antiepileptic treatment
without delay is one of the most important factorsin the therapy of NCSE: the longer NCSE persists,the more difficult it is to be terminated.
The immediate administration of intravenous
benzodiazepines (BD) is the unequivocal,evidence-based ﬁrst step for the efﬁcient treatment of NCSE;caregivers hereby should be prepared to ventilatethe patient if respiratory depression will occur. Themost frequently used BD are diazepam, lorazepam(LZP), midazolam (MDL) and  clonazepam (only in Europe where an i/v-formulation is available).Al-though these substances share the same basic modeof action, they differ in many pharmacokinetic andpharmacodynamic aspects [190–192].
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 69The most used BD diazepam is highly lipophilic,
enters the brain very quickly and binds to the
GABA Areceptor. However, it then rapidly disso-
ciates from this receptor subsequently equilibringwith fat tissue.This may explain the often observedrecurrence (“breakthrough”) of (NC)SE after ad-ministration of diazepam. If additional doses ofdiazepam are given,the patient is at risk to be over-dosed as soon as a new equilibrium level is reachedand the diazepam accumulated in the fat tissue redistributes to the brain and its receptors [193].This phenomenon and the fact that diazepam undergoes complex metabolism generating morethan 40 active metabolites make this substance very demanding to handle and achieve predictablelevels and effects [190, 191]. Thus – and againstwidely common practice – diazepam is no longerthe BD of choice in SE.
The less lipophilic BD LZP which is not meta-
bolised to further active compounds accordinglyhas become the BD of choice for the first-line treat-ment of (NC)SE [194]. Lorazepam additionallyleads to less respiratory depression [195] whencompared to other BD and – most important for a sustained antiepileptic effect and the avoidanceof recurrence of SE – it seems to bind in a semi-covalent manner at the GABA
Areceptor site 
extending its effect up to about 24 hours despitefalling blood levels [196–199]. The dominant roleof LZP in the treatment of (NC)SE was definitivelyestablished by the hallmark multicentre pros-pective double-blind Veterans Affairs-Study pub-lished in the New England Journal of Medicine in
1998, comparing four different first-line regimens(phenytoin [PHT], diazepam followed by PHT,phenobarbital and LZP) where LZP showed to besignificantly superior to PHT, but not to the otherdrugs; it was, however, easier to handle [20]. Thepre-hospital use of LZP for the treatment of serialseizures or SE was safe and efficient in a large studyin adults 3 years later.Unexpectedly (but calming),respiratory problems were significantly more fre-quent in the placebo group; it also seemed likelythat LZP was superior to diazepam in terms ofefficacy [200]. Unfortunately, lorazepam is still not approved by the Swiss authorities (Swissmedic)for the use in SE.
Midazolam (MDL) is a very rapidly acting BD
with a short half-time [190, 191]; therefore, stableantiepileptic effect needs repetitive or continuousadministration [201–203]. It also has markedlysedative and stronger respiratory depressive pro-perties which make it less suitable for first-linetreatment of SE, but it is widely used for thetreatment of refractory SE (RSE, cf. below).Nevertheless, for pharmacological reasons and inthe specific ICU environment, the ultra-fastantiepileptic activity of MDL may be exploited byfirst-line administration of a bolus of 1 to 5 mg toinduce the very immediate effect,while at the sametime also lorazepam 2–8 mg is given which will start to exert its sustained effect just at the declinephase of MDL. Midazolam can also be safely ad-ministered intramuscularly and may be preferredin those SE where i/v access is not available or itsinstallation at risk [203, 204].
Clonazepam may have a profile similar to that
of LZP and is widely used in French-speaking coun-tries; however, sound studies are lacking probablybecause of no available intravenous formulation insome Anglo-American countries [205–207].
While BD are being given as first-line treat-
ment, the patient should undergo laboratory exams including haematological and chemical parameters as well as checking for thyroid hor-mone status, infectious diseases (especially her-pes encephalitis) and an extensive drug screen because several “club drugs”like amphetamine andits (“designer-”)derivatives (paroxymethamphet-amine [PMA], paramethoxymethamphetamine[PMMA], [benzyl-]piperazines and cocaine) mayprovoke NCSE [208–214].
Since BD are not the mid- or long-term treat-
ment of epileptic disorders and these medicationsimpair the patient’s awareness, memory and con-sciousness which may impede the judgement of the patient’s neurological state in the course of the disease, the concomitant administration of a“classic”AED should be put ahead.Actually, thereare three different compounds with an intravenousformulation available on the market:PHT,valproicacid (VPA) and levetiracetam (LEV), but onlyPHT is approved for the treatment of (NC)SE inSwitzerland.
Phenytoin was the first antiepileptic drug
beyond the sedatives BD and barbiturates to beadministered intravenously. The feasibility, safetyand efficacy of i/v PHT was demonstrated in theearly 1950s, however, not in studies which wouldsatisfy standards of nowadays [215, 216]. The onlystudy yielding Class-I evidence for i/v PHT inGCSE was the already cited VA study; it showedthat PHT alone was significantly inferior to lora-zepam to stop SE, but it was efficient when giventogether with i/v diazepam [20]. The use of the i/vformulation of the drug implicates to keep severalcautions in mind: the solution has to be stabilisedat a high, very basic pH, which necessitates a cen-tral line and a infusion rate of no more than 50 mgper minute. The substance by itself and the addi-tives of the i/v formulation may induce seriouscardiac and local cutaneous (“purple-glove syn-
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .sanp.ch 159 n2/2008 70drome”) adverse effects [217–219]. In addition,
phenytoin is highly protein bound and metabo-lised by the cytochrome P 450 (CYP450) system,mainly the 2C9 and 2C19 variants, which pro-duces several pharmacokinetic and -dynamic in-teractions, especially to be observed when cou-marins, dexamethasone, cytostatic drugs, otherAED or some antibiotics were co-administered[220–224]. The non-linear pharmacokinetics ofPHT bear a high risk of toxic levels; their closemonitoring is essential. The prodrug fosphenytoinis stabilised at a physiological pH and free of car-diotoxic additives which allows for a much fasterinfusion rate and also for intramuscular adminis-tration [225], but there is no advantage in terms offaster reaching the therapeutic level because theprodrug has to be metabolised by plasma phos-phatases into phenytoin [226, 227]. These pro-perties, together with an about 10 times higherprice than PHT, resulted in a lack of approval inalmost all European countries, Switzerland in-cluded [228, 229].
Intravenous valproic acid (VPA) has been
available in central European countries for morethan 20 years und may be an alternative to PHT inthe treatment of SE [230–232].Valproic acid has thebroadest spectrum off all AED to date and does not induce marked impairment of consciousness.It is a weak to moderate inhibitor of the CYP450system and, as a short-chain fatty acid, metabol-ised by beta-oxidation in the liver and renallyeliminated after glucuronidation [233–238]. Thesubstance leads to the production of ammonia(sometimes dramatically exacerbated by the pre-sence of a mitochondrial urea-cycle enzyme defectlike ornithyl-carbamoyl-transferase deficiency)which should be closely controlled after fastloading; levels of ammonia up to 70 μ mol (normal
7–34) usually were well tolerated, whereas levels>90 μmol may lead to substantial obtundation
which warrants for a dose reduction [239–241].During i/v therapy for SE, levels of free (unbound)VPA should be monitored, because this fraction(normally 10–15%) rises overproportionally in thecase of high doses and hypoalbuminaemia [242,243] and may induce toxicity (sedation, elevatedliver enzymes, low platetelet count, reversibleparkinsonism, pancreatitis) [244–246]. The use ofVPA in patients with intracranial bleedings is ques-tionable because of the various effects of VPA onplatelet number and function as well as on severalclotting factors [247, 248]. But, in general, the safe-ty of i/v VPA, even at high doses, fast infusion ratesand in cardiac instable patients, was demonstratedin several studies [249–259]. However, prospec-tive randomised well-(i.e. PHT-)controlled studieswhich had provided the Class-I evidence necessaryto gain approval by regulatory boards (includingSwissmedic) are still lacking. Nevertheless, somecountries (Norway, Canada, Singapore) approvedthe drug on “summative, use-proven evidence”;i/v VPA was lately approved for the treatment ofGCSE also in Germany after recommendationsupon an extensive review of an expert panel [260].A randomised double-blind pilot trial, using PHTor VPA as first-line treatment before administration
of benzodiazepines, showed a trend to superiority
of VPA against PHT;however,the study was under-powered and statistically flawed; thus, these resultsshould be interpreted with caution and furtherstudies are warranted [261, 262]. Most recently, acontrolled randomised prospective trial comparingi/v VPA with i/v PHT (n = 50 in each group) afterfailure of BD has shown a significantly superiorefficacy of VPA compared to PHT (p >0.05); thestudy also reiterated the importance of a treatmentas soon as possible [263].
An intravenous formulation of levetiracetam
(LEV) has recently been introduced, but has notgained approval for SE yet. This drug has a veryfavourable pharmacokinetic and -dynamic profilewith no known interaction with any drug and onlyvery few adverse effects (mainly slight somnolenceand behavioural alterations which play no role inthe acute treatment of SE) [264–266]. Levetira-cetam has a substantial first-dose effect [267] andits fast i/v-application in healthy volunteers is safeand leads to high drug levels [268, 269]. After anexperimental study had performed and shown animportant anticonvulsant effect in SE [270], smallstudies used LEV as a third- or fourth-line treat-ment in refractory SE, often also given by naso-gastric tube [271–275]. There are two reports of afew cases of NCSE probably induced by LEV , butthese intriguing observations await further confir-mation by other studies [276, 277].
The administration of LEV seems to be most
favourable in critically ill,post-transplantation andHIV patients with (NC)SE on therapy with multi-ple drugs where the risk of significant adverseeffects and interactions is especially high.
All the three substances discussed have the
advantage that they can be switched 1:1 from thei/v-dose to oral administration without problems.
The success rate of the administration of one
BD and an i/v AED (PHT/VPA/LEV) depends onthe type of NCSE. It is almost 100% in all forms ofAS and it is high in epileptic patients with aura con-tinua or dyscognitive SE.The rate drops in patientswith aura continua or dyscognitive SE resultingfrom structural lesions (tumours,haemorrhages) orin patients with CISE due to multiorgan failure. It
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 71is lowest in patients with subtle SE and especially
in postanoxic MSE [184, 185, 278].
Status epilepticus persisting after the adminis-
tration of two AED is called refractory SE whichoccurs in about (20–)30% of all cases of SE [279–281]. It is treated by induction of anaesthesia afterintubation of the patient with either midazolam,lorazepam, propofol and midazolam, or thiopental[282–298]. Studies evaluating these treatments areof small size and often not directly comparablebecause of different parameters used, especiallyelectroencephalographic titration of depth of coma(suppression of epileptic activity vs burst suppres-sion vs electrocerebral silence) [299–303].A meta-analysis could not find a superiority of any of thesetreatments in terms of outcome [303].
Midazolam lowers blood pressure and under-
goes tachyphylaxis because of alterations of theGABA
Areceptor subunit composition upon long-
term stimulation like in SE [304]. It also bears the risk of accumulation accompanied by a veryprolonged recovery from coma in patients withimpaired renal function due to the pharmacolo-gically active glucuronated metabolite α–1–OH-
midazolam [305].
Propofol is a highly lipophilic, very short-acting
anaesthetic which functions as an anticonvulsant atdifferent sites (GABA
Areceptor,NMDA receptor,
voltage-gated Ca2+-channels) [294,306–311].When
used as single anaesthetic compound,the substancemay cause myocloni resembling seizures; however,this phenomenon is non-epileptic and most proba-bly related to disinhibition of subcortical structures[312, 313].To avoid the phenomenon or true “with-drawal” seizures, it is recommended to use propo-fol always combined with (a small dose of) a BD[22]. Anaesthesia with propofol is associated withintake of 1200–1500 kcal of lipids due to the sol-vent based on soy oil.The drug should not be usedlonger than 5 days because it may cause the life-threatening “propofol-infusion syndrome”consist-ing of severe acidosis, liver failure and extensiverhabdomyolysis [314]. A pilot trial using propo-fol in 31 episodes of patients with refractory SEshowed control of SE in two thirds of the patientswithout serious adverse effects [315].
When MDL and propofol fail,barbiturate coma
with thiopental may be started. Barbiturates arevery potent antiepileptic drugs and additionallydownregulate global brain metabolism leading toa sort of “hibernating” brain state and, thus, reducethe risk of hyperexcitation and the accrual of toxicmetabolites. However, they are markedly cardio-depressive and may induce severe hypotension.Barbiturate coma in SE is accompanied by a mor-tality of 30–50% [303]. Unfortunately, the barbitu-rate easiest to handle, pentobarbital, is no longeron the market in Europe. Thus, thiopental is theonly available drug for this purpose; it is initiallyultra-fast and -short acting because it is highlylipophilic, and it quickly crosses the blood-brainbarrier, but it immediately accumulates also in thefatty tissues. From there, it will again equilibrateand redistribute to the brain structures. This even-tually leads to very prolonged recovery from comaafter stopping the drug [316, 317].
Other (additional) therapeutic options in RSE
include the administration of all available i/v-AED(i.e. VPA and LEV , when PHT was first used) orenteral AED by nasogastric tube. Among thoseAED, high-dose topiramate was successfully usedin small case series [318–320].Lidocaine,ketamine,etomidate and clomethiazole were also “rescue”therapeutics [321–332], while others reported suc-cessful use of inhalative anaesthetics (“-fluranes”)despite reports of a possible proconvulsant effectof some compounds of this class [333–338].
Intravenous steroids may become another
therapeutic alternative in RSE because there isincreasing evidence that continuous epilepticactivity stimulates the production of proinflamma-tory mediators like cytokines (especially interleu-kin-1/betatwo [339]) and helps to sustain epileptic acti-
vity. Steroids also are effective in some paediatricepilepsy syndromes, like infantile spasms, Landau-Kleffner syndrome and Rasmussen encephalitis[340–342]. The reported clinical experience in adult patients is small, but some cases with RSE responded to treatment with steroids [343, 344].
To summarise, a treatment algorithm of NCSE
is proposed in figure 14 and dosages of the drugsdiscussed in this section are shown in table 3.
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .sanp.ch 159 n2/2008 72Figure 14 Therapy algorithm of non-convulsive status epilepticus.
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 73Drug dosing for non-convulsive status epilepticus.
drug dosing
A. first-line
lorazepam <60 y 4 mg i/v repeat once
60–80 y 2 mg i/v repeat 1–3 times
>80 y 1 mg i/v repeat up to 5 times
clonazepam <60 y 1 mg i/v repeat 1–2 times
60–80 y 0.75 mg i/v repeat 1–3 times
>80 y 0.50 mg i/v repeat up to 3 times
midazolam <60 y 5 mg i/v repeat several times, if necessary
60–80 y 2 mg i/v repeat several times, if necessary
>80 y 1 mg i/v repeat several times, if necessary
diazepam <60 y 10 mg i/v repeat 1–2 times
60–80 y 5 mg i/v repeat 1–3 times
>80 y 2.5 mg i/v repeat up to 5 times
B. second-line
phenytoin
loading 15–18 mg / kg body weight 
at 50 mg/min
maintenance <70 kg 150 mg i/v every 12 h; start 6 h after loading
70–90 kg 175 mg i/v every 12 h; start 6 h after loading
>90 kg 200 mg i/v every 12 h; start 6 h after loading
valproic acid
loading <60 y 30–45 mg i/v / kg body weight 
in 30 min
60–80 y 20–30 mg i/v / kg body weight 
in 30 min
>80 y 15–25 mg i/v / kg body weight 
in 30 min
maintenance start the same dose as the loading 
dose concomitantly over 24 h
levetiracetam
loading <60 y 25–30 mg i/v / kg body weight 
in 15 min
60–80 y 15–25 mg i/v / kg body weight 
in 15 min 
>80 y 10–20 mg i/v / kg body weight 
in 15 min
maintenance* <60 y 1000–1500 mg every 12 h
60–80 y 750–1000 mg every 12 h
>80 y 500–750 mg every 12 h
C. third-line
midazolam (100–) 300–600 (–4000) µg/min
propofol (100–) 300–600 (–1000) mg/hour
(+ midazolam or lorazepam!)
thiopenthal
bolus 100–250 mg repeat until seizures stop
maintenance 3–5 mg / kg body weight / hourTable 3
D. additional (“fourth-line”, “rescue”) therapy
i/v
lidocaine
loading dose 1.5–2.0 mg/ kg body weight repeat once after 20–30 min
maintenance 3–4 mg/ kg body weight/ hourConclusions
Non-convulsive status epilepticus is one of the 
most important neurological emergencies requir-ing rapid diagnosis, being confirmed by EEG and treated without delay and with appropriateaggressiveness. The often unspectacular and un-specific clinical manifestation of NCSE makes it important to “think of it at all” in any patientpresenting with unexplained new onset of behav-ioural changes, impaired consciousness and/orfocal, non-convulsive neurological deficits. Treat-ment of NCSE closely follows the rules of the other forms of SE.
References
1 Kaplan PW. Assessing the outcomes in patients with 
nonconvulsive status epilepticus: nonconvulsive status
epilepticus is underdiagnosed, potentially overtreated,and confounded by comorbidity. J Clin Neurolphysiol. 1999;16:341–52.
2 Calmeil LF. De l’épilepsie. Paris: Didot; 1824. p. 13.
3 Wilson JVK, Reynolds EH. Translation and analysis 
of a cuneiform text forming part of a Babylonian treatiseon epilepsy. Med Hist. 1990;34:185–98.
4 Trousseau A. Lectures on Clinical Medicine. Volume 1.
Translated by Bazier PV. London: New Sydenham Society; 1867. p. 53–4.
5 Berger H. Über das Elektrenkephalogramm des Menschen.
Arch Psychiatrie. 1929;87:527–70.
6 Gibbs FA, Davis H, Lennox WG. The EEG in epilepsy 
and in the impaired states of consciousness. Arch Neurol Psychiatry. 1935;34:1133.7 Scott JS, Masland RL. Occurrence of “continuous symp-
toms” in epilepsy patients. Neurology. 1953;3:297–301.
8 Penfield W, Jasper HH. Epilepsy and Functional Anatomy
of the Human Brain. Boston: Little Brown; 1954.
9 Landolt H. Die Dämmer- und Verstimmungszustände 
bei Epilepsie und ihre Elektroencephalographie. Z Gesamte Inn Med. 1963;185:411–30.
10 Karbowski K. Status psychomotoricus. Klinische und
elektroenzephalographische Aspekte. In: Karbowski K,Herausgeber. Status psychomotoricus und seine Diffe-rentialdiagnose. Bern: Hans Huber; 1980. S. 39–71. 
11 Gastaut H. Clinical and electroencephalographic classifi-
cation of epileptic seizures. Epilepsia. 1970;11:102–13.
12 Delgado-Escueta AV, Wasterlain CG, Treiman DM, 
Porter RJ, editors. Status epilepticus. Mechanisms of brain damage and treatment. Adv Neurol. 1983;34:1–541.
13 Commission on Classification and Terminology of the 
International League Against Epilepsy. Proposal for revised clinical and electroencephalographic classifica-tion of epileptic seizures. Epilepsia. 1989;30:389–99.
14 Engel J Jr. Report of the ILAE Classification Core Group.
Epilepsia. 2006;47:1558–68.
15 Rona S, Rosenow F, Arnold S, Carreno M, Diehl B, 
Ebner A, et al. A semiological classification of statusepilpeticus. Epileptic Disord. 2005;7:5–12. 
16 Shorvon S. The classification of status epilepticus.
Epileptic Disord. 2005;7:1–3.
17 Shorvon S. What is non-convulsive status epilepticus,
and what are its subtypes? Epilepsia. 2007;48(Suppl 8):S35–8. 
18 Rüegg SJ, Dichter MA. Diagnosis and treatment of 
nonconvulsive status epilepticus in an intensive care unitsetting. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2003;5:93–110.
19 Working Group on Status Epilepticus. Treatment of 
convulsive status epilepticus. Recommendations of the Epilepsy Foundation of America’s Working Group on Status Epilepticus. JAMA. 1993;270:854–9. 
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .sanp.ch 159 n2/2008 74ketamine
loading dose 0.7–2.0 mg/ kg body weight
maintenance 2–6 mg/ kg body weight/ hour
clomethiazole
loading dose 5–12 mg/ kg body weight
maintenance 0.6–4.0 mg/ kg body weight/ hour
etomidate
loading dose 0.25 mg/ kg body weight as bolus
within 30 sec
maintenance 0.02 mg/ kg body weight per minute
as continuous infusion
inhalative
isoflurane
loading 0.5 (–3.0)% of end-tidal volume
maintenance 0.8–2.0% of end-tidal volume
oral
topiramate 100–400 mg every 12 hours
oxcarbazepine 600–1200 mg every 12 hours; monitor sodium!
* dose must be adapted if renal function is impaired20 Treiman DM, Meyers PD, Walton NY, Collins JF, Colling C,
Rowan AJ, et al. A comparison of four treatments for 
generalized convulsive status epilepticus. Veterans Affairs Status Epilepticus Cooperative Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:792–8.
21 Lowenstein DH, Bleck T, MacDonald RL. It’s time to 
revise the definition of status epilepticus. Epilepsia. 1999;40:120–2.
22 Leppert D, Stöckli HR, Fuhr P. Richtlinien für die 
Behandlung des Status epilepticus. Schweiz Ärztezeitung. 2005;86:2097–100. Full e-textavailable by: www.saez.ch/status_epilepticus_d.pdf.
23 Jordan KG. Continuous EEG monitoring in the neuro-
science intensive care unit and emergency department. J Clin Neurophysiol. 1999;16:14–39.
24 Meierkord H, Holtkamp M. Non-convulsive status 
epilepticus in adults: clinical forms and treatment.Lancet Neurol. 2007;6:329–39.
25 Theodore WH, Porter RJ, Penry JK. Complex partial
seizures: clinical characteristics and differential diagnosis. Neurology. 1983;33:1115–21. 
26 Theodore WH, Porter RJ, Albert P, Kelley K, Bromfield E,
Devinsky O, et al. The secondarily generalized tonic-clonic seizure: a videotape analysis. Neurology. 1994;44:1403–7.
27 Jenssen S, Gracely AJ, Sperling MR. How long do most
seizures last? A systematic comparison of seizuresrecorded in the epilepsy monitoring unit. Epilepsia. 2006;47:1499–503.
28 Lowenstein D, Aminoff M, Simon R. Barbiturate
anesthesia in the treatment of status epilepticus: clinical experience with 14 patients. Neurology. 1988;38:395–400.
29 Treiman DM, Walton NY, Kendrick C. A progressive
sequence of electroencephalographic changes duringgeneralized convulsive status epilepticus. Epilepsy Res. 1990;5:49–60.
30 Scholtes FB, Renier WO, Meinardi H. Generalized
convulsive status epilepticus: causes, therapy, and out-come in 346 patients. Epilepsia. 1994;35:1104–12.
31 Fountain NB, Lothman EW. Pathophysiology of status
epilepticus. J Clin Neurophysiol. 1995;12:326–42.
32 Fountain NB. Status epilepticus: risk factors and 
complications. Epilepsia. 2000;41(Suppl 2):S23–30.
33 Walker MC. Diagnosis and treatment of nonconvulsive
status epilepticus. CNS Drugs. 2001;15:931–9.
34 Walker MC, White HS, Sander JW. Disease modiﬁcation
in partial epilepsy. Brain. 2002;125:1937–50.
35 Eriksson K, Metsäranta P, Huhtala H, Auvinen A, 
Kuusela AL, Koivikko M. Treatment delay and the risk of prolonged status epilepticus. Neurology. 2005;65:1316–8.
36 Sheth RD, Drazkowski JF, Sirven JI, Gidal BE, Hermann BP.
Protracted ictal confusion in elderly patients. Arch Neurol. 2006;63:529–32.
37 Kaplan PW. The clinical features, diagnosis, 
and prognosis of nonconvulsive status epilepticus. Neurologist. 2005;11:348–61.
38 Tomson T, Lindbom U, Nilsson BY. Nonconvulsive status
epilepticus in adults: thirty-two consecutive patients from a general hospital population. Epilepsia. 1992;33:829–35.39 Gaitanis JN, Drislane FW. Status epilepticus: a review 
of different syndromes, their current evaluation, and treatment. Neurologist. 2003;9:61–76.
40 Tay SK, Hirsch LJ, Leary L, Jette N, Wittman J, Akman CI.
Nonconvulsive status epilpeticus in children: clinical and EEG characteristics. Epilepsia. 2006;47:1504–9.
41 Brenner RP. EEG in convulsive and nonconvulsive status
epilepticus. J Clin Neurophysiol. 2004;21:319–31.
42 Thomas P, Beaumanoir A, Genton P, Dolisi C, Chatel M.
“De novo” absence status of late onset: report of 11 cases. Neurology. 1992;42:104–10.
43 Thomas P, Borg M, Suisse G, Chatel M. Opercular 
myoclonic-anarthric status epilepticus. Epilepsia. 1995;36:281–9.
44 Raze A, Osborn MA, Vern BA, Molinari GF. Epileptic 
aphasia: first onset of prolonged monosymptomatic status epilepticus in adults. Arch Neurol. 1980;37:419–22.
45 Barry E, Sussman NM, Bosley TM, Harner RN. 
Ictal blindness and status epilepticus amauroticus.Epilepsia. 1985;26:577–84.
46 Roze E, Oubary P, Chédru F. Status-like recurrent 
pilomotor seizures: case report and review of the litera-ture. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2000;68:647–9.
47 Armon C, Radtke RA, Friedman AH. Inhibitory simple 
partial (non-convulsive) status epilepticus after intra-cranial surgery. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2000;69:18–24.
48 Kramer RE, Lüders H, Goldstick LP, Dinner DS, Morris HH,
Lesser RP, et al. Ictus emeticus: an electroclinical analysis. Neurology. 1988;38:1048–52.
49 DeToledo JC, Minagar A, Lowe MR. Persisting aphasia 
as the sole manifestation of partial status epilepticus.Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2000;102:144–8.
50 Palmini A, van Paesschen W, Dupont P, Van Laere K, 
van Driel G. Status gelasticus after temporal lobectomy:ictal FDG-PET findings and the question of dual pathologyinvolving hypothalamic hamartomas. Epilepsia. 2005;46:1313–6.
51 McLachlan RS, Blume WT. Isolated fear in complex 
partial status epilepticus. Ann Neurol. 1980;8:639–41.
52 Sacquegna T, Pazzaglia P, Baldrati A, De Carolis P, 
Gallassi R, Maccheroni M. Status epilepticus with cognitive symptomatology in a patient with partial complex epilepsy. Eur Neurol. 1981;20:319–25.
53 Wieser HG, Hailemariam S, Regard M, Landis T. 
Unilateral limbic epileptic status activity: stereo EEG, behavioural, and cognitive data. Epilepsia. 1985;26:19–29.
54 Lee BI, Lee BC, Hwang YM, Sohn YH, Jung JW, Park SC,
et al. Prolonged ictal amnesia with transient focal abnormalities on magnetic resonance imaging. Epilepsia. 1992;33:1042–6.
55 Vuilleumier P, Despland PA, Regli F. Failure to recall 
(but not to remember): pure transient amnesia duringnonconvulsive status epilepticus. Neurology. 1996;46:1036–9.
56 Kaplan PW. The EEG of status epilepticus. 
J Clin Neurophysiol. 2006;23:221–9. 
57 Kaplan PW. Behavioral manifestations of nonconvulsive
status epilepticus. Epilepsy Behav. 2002;3:122–39.
58 Wieser HG. Temporal lobe or psychomotor status 
epilepticus. A case report. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1980;48:558–72.
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 7559 Williamson PD, Spencer DD, Spencer SS, Novelly RA,
Mattson RH. Complex partial status of frontal origin. 
Ann Neurol. 1985;18:497–504.
60 Williamson PD, Spencer DD, Spencer SS, Novelly RA,
Mattson RH. Complex partial status epilepticus: a depth-electrode study. Ann Neurol. 1985;18:647–54.
61 Thomas P, Zifkin B, Migneco O, Lebrun C, Darcourt J, 
Andermann F. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus of frontalorigin. Neurology. 1999;52:1174–83.
62 Ayres S. Sudden and temporary mental aberration – 
unconscious automatism – temporary irresponsiblestates. JAMA. 1902;38:315–6.
63 Drislane FW, Blum AS, Schomer DL. Focal status 
epilepticus: clinical features and significance of differentEEG patterns. Epilepsia. 1999;40:1254–60.
64 Riggio S. Psychiatric manifestations of nonconvulsive
status epilepticus. Mt Sinai J Med. 2006;73:960–6.
65 Reuber M, House AO. Treating patients with psychogenic
non-epileptic seizures. Curr Opin Neurol. 2002;15:207–11.
66 Reuber M, Baker GA, Gill R, Smith DF, Chadwick DW. 
Failure to recognize psychogenic nonepileptic seizuresmay cause death. Neurology. 2004;62:834–5.
67 Towne AR. Epidemiology and outcomes of status epilep-
ticus in the elderly. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2007;81:111–27.
68 Primavera A, Giberti L, Scotto P, Cocito L. Nonconvulsive
status epilepticus as a cause of confusion in later life:report of 5 cases. Neuropsychobiology. 1994;30:148–52. 
69 Fernandez-Torre JL, Diaz-Castroverde AG. Non-convulsive
status epilepticus in elderly individuals: report of fourrepresentative cases. Age Ageing. 2004;33:78–81.
70 Kanemoto K, Tomikimi T, Kawasaki J. Prolonged post-
ictal confusion as a manifestation of continuous complexpartial status epilepticus: a depth EEG study. Seizure. 2000;9:151–5.
71 Cocito L, Audenino D, Primavera A. Altered mental state
and nonconvulsive status epilepticus in patients withcancer. Arch Neurol. 2001;58:1310–5.
72 Lim J, Yagnik P, Schraeder P, Wheeler S. Ictal catatonia
as a manifestation of nonconvulsive status epilepticus. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1986;49:833–6.
73 Swartz CM, Bottum KM, Salazar LS. Suppression of 
catatonia-like signs by lorazepam in nonconvulsive statusepilepticus without seizure termination. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2002;10:348–50.
74 McCarron MO, Tyagi A, Thomas SR, Sweeney BJ, Bone I.
Non-convulsive status epilepticus of frontal origin follow-ing surgery for craniopharyngeoma. Eur J Neurol. 2002;9:178–9.
75 Jacobs DA, Fung KM, Cook NM, Schlaepfer WW, 
Goldberg HI, Stecker MM. Complex partial status epilep-ticus associated with anti-Hu paraneoplastic syndrome. J Neurol Sci. 2003;211:77–82. 
76 Feddersen B, Bender A, Arnold S, Klopstock T, 
Noachtar S. Aggressive confusional state as a clinicalmanifestation of status epilepticus in MELAS. Neurology. 2003;61:1149–50.
77 Griffiths H, Farmer A. Psychotic depression presenting as
status epilepticus. Br J Psychiatry. 1990;157:909–11.
78 Kümpfel T, Lechner C, Auer D, Kraft E, Lydtin H,
Trenkwalder C. Non-convulsive status epilepticus withmarked neuropsychiatric manifestations and MRIchanges after treatment of hypercalcemia. Acta Scand Neurol. 2000;102:337–9. 79 Fernandez-Torre JL, Sanchez JM, Gonzalez C, 
Fernandez-Guinea O. Complex partial status epilepticusof extratemporal origin in a patient with systemic lupuserythematodes. Seizure. 2003;12:245–8.
80 Granner MA, Lee SJ. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus:
EEG analysis in a large series. Epilepsia. 1994;35:42–7.
81 Brenner RP. The interpretation of the EEG in stupor 
and coma. Neurologist. 2005;11:271–84.
82 Chatrian GE, Shaw CM, Leffman H. The significance 
of periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges in EEG: an electrographic, clinical and pathological study. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1964;17:177–93.
83 Pohlmann-Eden B, Hoch DB, Cochius JI, Chiappa KH. 
Periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges – a critical review. J Clin Neurophysiol. 1996;13:519–30.
84 Garzon E, Fernandez RM, Sakamoto AC. Serial EEG 
during human status epilepticus: evidence for PLED as an ictal pattern. Neurology. 2001;57:1175–83.
85 Assal F, Papazyan JP, Slosman DO, Jallon P, Goerres GW.
SPECT in periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges(PLEDs): a form of partial status epilepticus? Seizure. 2001;10:260–4.
86 Dixit S, Kurle P, Buyan-Dent L, Sheth RD. Status epilepti-
cus associated with cefepime. Neurology. 2000;54:2153–5.
87 Barbey F, Bugnon D, Wauters JP. Severe neurotoxicity 
of cefepime in uremic patients. Ann Intern Med. 2001;135:1011.
88 Martinez-Rodriguez JE, Barriga FJ, Santamaria J, Iranzo A,
Pareja JA, Revilla M, et al. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus associated with cephalosporins in patientswith renal failure. Am J Med. 2001;111:115–9.
89 Kaplan PW. The EEG in metabolic encephalopathy 
and coma. J Clin Neurophysiol. 2004;21:307–18.
90 Foley JM, Watson CM, Adams RD. Significance of the
electroencephalographic changes in hepatic coma. Trans Am Neurol Assoc. 1950;75:161–4. 
91 Bickford RG, Butt HR. Hepatic coma: the encephalo-
graphic pattern. J Clin Invest. 1955;34:790–9.
92 Fountain NB, Waldman WA. Effects of benzodiazepines
on triphasic waves. Implications for nonconvulsive statusepilepticus. J Clin Neurophysiol. 2001;18:345–52.
93 Bertran F, Denise P, Letellier P. Nonconvulsive status
epilepticus: the role of morphine and its antagonists.Clin Neurophysiol. 2000;30:109–12. 
94 Boulanger JM, Deacon C, Lécuyer D, Gosselin S, Reiher J.
Triphasic waves versus nonconvulsive status epilepticus:EEG distinction. Can J Neurol Sci. 2006;33:175–80. 
95 DeLorenzo RJ, Waterhouse EJ, Towne AR, Boggs JG, 
Ko D, DeLorenzo GA, et al. Persistent nonconvulsive status epilepticus after the control of convulsive statusepilepticus. Epilepsia. 1998;39:833–40.
96 Lowenstein DH, Aminoff MJ. Clinical and EEG features 
of status epilepticus in comatose patients. Neurology. 1992;42:100–4.
97 Jumao-as A, Brenner RP. Myoclonic status epilepticus: 
a clinical and electroencephalographic study. Neurology. 1990;40:1199–202.
98 Hallett M. Physiology of human posthypoxic myoclonus.
Mov Disord. 2000;15(Suppl 1):S8–13.
99 DeLorenzo RJ, Hauser WA, Towne AR, Boggs JG, 
Pellock JM, Penberthy L, et al. A prospective, population-based epidemiologic study of status epilepticus in Richmond, Virgina. Neurology. 1996;46:1029–35. 
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .sanp.ch 159 n2/2008 76100 Hesdorffer D, Logroscino G, Cascino G, Annegers JF,
Hauser WA. Incidence of status epilepticus in Rochester
Minnesota 1965–84. Neurology. 1998;50:735–41.
101 Coeytaux A, Jallon P, Galobardes B, Morabia A. 
Incidence of status epilepticus in French-speakingSwitzerland (EPISTAR). Neurology. 2000;55:693–7.
102 Knake S, Rosenow F, Vescovi M, Oertel WH, Mueller HH,
Wirbatz A, et al. Incidence of status epilepticus inadults in Germany: a prospective, population-basedstudy. Epilepsia. 2001;42:714–8. 
103 Vignatelli L, Tonon C, D’Alessandro R. Incidence and
short-term prognosis of status epilepticus in adults in Bologna, Italy. Epilepsia. 2003;44:964–8. 
104 Chin RF, Neville BG, Scott RC. A systematic review 
of the epidemiology of status epilepticus. Eur J Neurol. 2004;11:800–10.
105 Towne AR, Waterhouse EJ, Boggs JG, Garnett LK, 
Brown AJ, Smith Jr JT, et al. Prevalence of non-convulsive status epilepticus in comatose patients.Neurology. 2000;54:340–5.
106 Barry E, Hauser WA. Status epilepticus and antiepileptic
medication levels. Neurology. 1994;44:47–50.
107 Spiller HA, Carlisle RD. Status epilepticus after massive
carbamazepine overdose. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2002;40:81–90. 
108 Sazgar M, Bourgeois BF. Aggravation of epilepsy by 
antiepileptic drugs. Pediatr Neurol. 2005;33:227–34.
109 Kellinghaus C, Dziewas R, Lüdemann P. Tiagabine-
related non-convulsive status epilepticus in partialepilepsy: three case reports and a review of the literature. Seizure. 2002;11:243–9.
110 Vinton A, Kornberg AJ, Cowley M, Matkovic Z, 
Kilpatrick C, O’Brien TJ. Tiagabine-induced generalisednon convulsive status epilepticus in patients with lesional focal epilepsy. J Clin Neurosci. 2005;12:128–33.
111 Osorio L, Reed RC, Peltzer JN. Refractory idiopathic 
absence status epilepticus: a probable paradoxical effect of phenytoin and carbamazepine. Epilepsia. 2000;41:887–94.
112 Thomas P, Valton L, Genton P. Absence and myclonic
status epilepticus precipitated by antiepileptic drugs in idiopathic generalized epilepsy. Brain. 2006;129:1281–92.
113 Vespa PM, Nuwer MR, Nenov V, Ronne-Engstrom E, 
Hovda DA, Bergsneider M, et al. Increased incidenceand impact of nonconvulsive and convulsive seizures after traumatic brain injury as detected by continuouselectroencephalographic monitoring. J Neurosurg. 1999;91:750–60.
114 Velioglu SK, Ozmenoglu M, Boz C, Alioglu Z. Status
epilepticus after stroke. Stroke. 2001;32:1169–72.
115 Afsar N, Kaya D, Aktan S, Aykut-Bingol C. Stroke and
status epilepticus: stroke type, type of status epilep-ticus, and prognosis. Seizure. 2003;12:23–7.
116 Little AS, Kerrigan JF, McDougall CG, Zabramski JM, 
Albuquerque FC, Nakaji P, et al. Nonconvulsive statusepilepticus in patients suffering spontaneous subarach-noid hemorrhage. J Neurosurg. 2007;106:805–11. 
117 Hormigo A, Liberato B, Lis E, DeAngelis LM. 
Nonconvulsive status epilepticus in patients with cancer. Imaging abnormalities. Arch Neurol. 2004;61:362–5.118 Blitshteyn S, Jaeckle KA. Nonconvulsive status 
epilepticus in metastatic CNS disease. Neurology. 2006;66:1261–3.
119 Cavaliere R, Farace E, Schiff D. Clinical implications 
of status epilepticus in patients with neoplasms. Arch Neurol. 2006;63:1746–9.
120 Gunduz A, Beskardes AF, Kutlu A, Ozkara C, Karaagac N,
Yeni SN. Herpes encephalitis as a cause of non-convulsive status epilepticus. Epileptic Disord. 2006;8:57–60.
121 Ances BM, Shellhaus R, Brown MJ, Rios OV, Herman ST,
French JA. Neurosyphilis and status epilepticus: casereport and literature review. Epilepsy Res. 2004;59:67–70.
122 Cohen D, Kutluay E, Edwards J, Peltier A, Beydoun A.
Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease presenting with nonconvulsive status epilepticus. Epilepsy Behav. 2004;5:792–6.
123 Rosen I. Electroencephalography as a diagnostic tool in
dementia. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 1997;8:110–6.
124 Armon C, Peterson GW, Liwnicz BH. Alzheimer’s disease
underlies some cases of complex partial status epilep-ticus. J Clin Neurophysiol. 2000;17:511–8.
125 Manford M, Fuller GN, Wade JP. “Silent diabetes”: 
non-ketotic hyperglycemia presenting as aphasic statusepilepticus. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1995;59:99–100.
126 Kawai N, Miyake K, Kuroda Y, Yamashita S, Nishiyama Y,
Monden T, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging andpositron emission tomography findings in status epilepticus following severe hypoglycaemia. Ann Nucl Med. 2006;20:371–6.
127 Safe AF, Griffiths KD, Maxwell RT. Thyrotoxic crisis 
presenting as status epilepticus. Postgrad Med J. 1990;66:150–2.
128 Woods KL, Holmes GK. Myxoedema coma presenting 
in status epilepticus. Postgrad Med J. 1977;53:46–8.
129 Chong JY, Rowland LP, Utiger RD. Hashimoto 
encephalopathy: syndrome or myth? Arch Neurol. 2003;60:164–71.
130 Schäuble B, Castillo PR, Boeve BF, Westmoreland BF.
EEG findings in steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune thyroiditis. Clin Neurophysiol. 2003;114:32–7.
131 McKeon A, McNamara B, Sweeney B. Hashimoto’s
encephalopathy presenting with psychosis and general-ized absence status. J Neurol. 2004;251:1025–7. 
132 Ferlazzo E, Raffaele M, Mazzu I, Pisani F. Recurrent
status epilepticus as the main feature of Hashimoto’sencephalopathy. Epilepsy Behav. 2006;8:328–30.
133 Tsai MH, Lee LH, Chen SD, Lu CH, Chen MT, Chuang YC.
Complex partial status epilepticus as a manifestation of Hashimoto’s encephalopathy. Seizure. 2007;16:713–6.
134 Primavera A, Fonti A, Giberti L, Cocito L. Recurrent 
absence status epilepticus and hyponatremia in a patientwith polydipsia. Biol Psychiatry. 1995;38:189–91.
135 Kline CA, Esekogwu VI, Henderson SO, Newton KI. 
Non-convulsive status epilepticus in a patient withhypocalcemia. J Emerg Med. 1998;16:715–8.
136 Krumholz A. Epidemiology and evidence for morbidity 
of nonconvulsive status epilepticus. J Clin Neurophysiol. 1999;16:314–22.
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 77137 Conolly RM, Doherthy CP, Beddy P, O’Byrne K.
Chemotherapy induced reversible posterior leuko-
encephalopathy syndrome. Lung Cancer. 2007;56:459–63.
138 Hillbom M, Pieninkeroinen I, Leone M. Seizures in alco-
hol-dependent patients: epidemiology, pathophysiologyand management. CNS Drugs. 2003;17:1013–20.
139 Miyata H, Kubota F, Shibata N, Kifune A. Non-convulsive
status epilepticus induced by antidepressants. Seizure. 1997;6:405–7.
140 Bottaro FJ, Martinez OA, Pardal MM, Bruetman JE,
Reisin RC. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus in the elderly: a case-control study. Epilepsia. 2007;48:966–72. 
141 Waterhouse EJ, DeLorenzo RJ. Status epilepticus 
in older patients: epidemiology and treatment options.Drugs Aging. 2001;18:133–42.
142 Sung CY, Chu NS. Status epilepticus in the elderly: 
etiology, seizure type, and outcome. Acta Neurol Scand. 1989;80:51–6.
143 Husain AM, Horn GJ, Jacobson MP. Non-convulsive 
status epilepticus: usefulness of clinical features in selecting patients for urgent EEG. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2003;74:189–91. 
144 Dunne JW, Summers QA, Stewart-Wynne EG. 
Non-convulsive status epilepticus: a prospective studyin an adult general hospital. QJM. 1987;238:117–26.
145 Haffey S, McKernan A, Pang K. Non-convulsive status
epilepticus: a profile of patients diagnosed within a tertiary referral centre. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2004;75:1043–4.
146 Brenner RP. Is it status? 
Epilepsia. 2002;43(Suppl 3):S103–13. 
147 Barry E, Hauser WA. Pleocytosis after status epilepticus.
Arch Neurol. 1994;51:190–3.
148 DeGiorgio CM, Gott PS, Rabinowicz AL, Heck CN, 
Smith TD, Correale TD. Neuron-specific enolase, a marker for acute neuronal injury, is increased in complex partial status epilepticus. Epilepsia. 1996;37:606–9.
149 DeGiorgio CM, Correale JD, Gott PS, Ginsburg DL,
Bracht KA, Smith T, et al. Serum neuron-specific enolase in human status epilepticus. Neurology. 1995;45:1134–7.
150 DeGiorgio CM, Heck CN, Rabinowicz AL, Gott PS, 
Smith T, Correale J. Serum neuron-specific enolase in the major subtypes of status epilepticus. Neurology. 1999;52:746–9.
151 Chung PW, Seo DW, Kwon JC, Kim H, Na DL. 
Nonconvulsive status epilepticus presenting as a sub-acute progressive aphasia. Seizure. 2002;11:449–52.
152 Oishi M, Otsubo H, Kameyama S, Wachi M, Tanaka K,
Masuda H, et al. Ictal magnetoencephalographic discharges from elementary visual hallucinations of status epilepticus. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2003;74:525–7.
153 Kutulay E, Beattie J, Passaro EA, Edwards JC, 
Minecan D, Milling C, et al. Diagnostic and localizingvalue of ictal SPECT in patients with nonconvulsive status epilepticus. Epilepsy Behav. 2005;6:212–7.
154 Wiest R, von Bredow F, Schindler K, Schäuble B, 
Slotboom J, Brekenfeld C, et al. Detection of regionalblood perfusion changes in epileptic seizures with dynamic brain perfusion CT – a pilot study. Epilepsy Res. 2006;72:102–10.155 Lansberg MG, O’Brain MW, Norbash AM, Moseley ME,
Morell M, Albers GW. MRI abnormalities associated withpartial status epilepticus. Neurology. 1999;52:1021–7.
156 Lazeyras F, Blanke O, Zimine I, Delavelle J, Perrig SH,
Seeck M. MRI, 1H-MRS, and functional MRI during 
and after prolonged nonconvulsive seizure activity. Neurology. 2000;55:1677–82.
157 Hong K-S, Cho YJ, Lee SK, Jeong SW, Kima WK, Oh EJ.
Diffusion changes suggesting predominant vasogenicoedema during partial status epilepticus. Seizure. 2004;13:317–21.
158 Szabo K, Poepel A, Pohlmann-Eden B, Hirsch J, Back T,
Sedlaczek O, et al. Diffusion-weighted and perfusionMRI demonstrates parenchymal changes in complexpartial status epilepticus. Brain. 2005;128:1369–76.
159 Chen JW, Wasterlain CG. Status epilepticus: 
pathophysiology and management in adults. Lancet Neurol. 2006;5:246–56.
160 Murdoch D. Mechansims of status epilepticus: 
an evidence-based review. Curr Opin Neurol. 2007;20:213–6.
161 DeLorenzo RJ, Sun DA. Basic mechanisms in status
epilepticus: role of calcium in neuronal injury and the induction of epileptogenesis. Adv Neurol. 2006;97:187–97. 
162 Shorvon S. The management of status epilepticus. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2001;70(Suppl 2):S22–7.
163 Manno EM, Pfeifer EA, Cascino GD, Noe KH, Wijdicks EF.
Cardiac pathology in status epilepticus. Ann Neurol. 2005;58:954–7.
164 Leung H, Kwan P, Elger CE. Finding the missing link 
between ictal bradyarrhythmia, ictal asystole, and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav. 2006;9:19–30.
165 Logroscino G, Hesdorffer DC, Cascino G, Hauser WA,
Coeytaux A, Galobardes B, et al. Mortality after a firstepisode of status epilepticus in the United States and Europe. Epilepsia. 2005;46(Suppl 11):S46–8.
166 Logroscino G, Hesdorffer DC, Cascino G, Annegers JF,
Hauser WA. Short-term mortality after a first episode of status epilepticus. Epilepsia. 1997;38:1344–9.
167 Logroscino G, Hesdorffer DC, Cascino GD, Annegers JF,
Bagiella E, Hauser WA. Long-term mortality after a firstepisode of status epilepticus. Neurology. 2002;58:537–41.
168 Shneker BF, Fountain NB. Assessment of acute 
morbidity and mortality in nonconvulsive status epilep-ticus. Neurology. 2003;61:1066–73.
169 Young GB, Jordan KG, Doig GS. An assessment of 
nonconvulsive seizures in the intensive care unit usingcontinuous EEG monitoring: an investigation of variables associated with mortality. Neurology. 1996;47:83–9.
170 Hesdorffer DC, Logroscino G, Cascino G, Annegers JF,
Hauser WA. Risk of unprovoked seizure after acutesymptomatic seizure: effect of status epilepticus. Ann Neurol. 1998;44:908–12.
171 Hesdorffer DC, Logroscino G, Cascino GD, Hauser WA.
Recurrence of afebrile status epilepticus in a population-based study in Rochester, Minnesota. Neurology. 2007;69:73–8.
172 Aminoff M. Do nonconvulsive seizures damage the
brain? – No. Controversies in neurology. Arch Neurol. 1998;55:119–21.
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .sanp.ch 159 n2/2008 78173 Young GG, Jordan KG. Do nonconvulsive seizures 
damage the brain? – Yes. 
Arch Neurol. 1998;55:117–20.
174 Kaplan PW. No, some types of nonconvulsive status
epilepticus cause little permanent neurologic sequelae(or: “the cure may be worse than the disease”). Neurophysiol Clin. 2000;30:377–82.
175 Kaplan PW. Prognosis in nonconvulsive status epilep-
ticus. Epileptic Disord. 2000;2:185–93.
176 Sloviter RS. The neurobiology of temporal lobe epilepsy:
too much information, not enough knowledge. C R Biol. 2005;328:143–53.
177 Sutula T, Pitkänen A, editors. Do seizures damage 
the brain? Prog Brain Res. 2002;135:1–531.
178 Wasterlain CG, Fujikawa DG, Penix L, Sankar R. 
Pathophysiological mechanisms of brain damage from status epilepticus. Epilepsia. 1993;34(Suppl 1):S37–53.
179 Fujikawa DG, Itabashi HH, Wu A, Shinmei SS. 
Status epilepticus-induced neuronal loss in humanswithout systemic complications or epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2000;41:981–91.
180 Men S, Lee DH, Barron JR, Munoz DG. Selective 
neuronal necrosis associated with status epilepticus:MR findings. AJNR. 2000;21:1837–40.
181 Nixon J, Bateman D, Moss T. An MRI and neuropatho-
logical study of a case of fatal status epilepticus.Seizure. 2001;10:588–91.
182 Shiraska Y. Lack of neuronal damage in atypical 
absence status epilepticus. Epilepsia. 2002;43:1498–501.
183 Young GB. Status epilepticus and brain damage: 
pathology and pathophysiology. Adv Neurol. 2006;97:217–20.
184 Rossetti AO, Logroscino G, Liaudet L, Ruffieux C, 
Ribordy V, Schaller MD, et al. Status epilepticus. An independent outcome predictor after cerebral anoxia.Neurology. 2007;69:255–60.
185 Rossetti AO, Logroscino G, Bromfield EB. A clinical
score for prognosis of status epilepticus in adults. Neurology. 2006;66:1736–8.
186 Krumholz A, Stern BJ, Weiss HD. Outcome from coma
after cardiopulmonary resuscitation: relation toseizures and myoclonus. Neurology. 1988;38:401–5.
187 Wijdicks EF, Parisi JE, Sharbbrough FW. Prognostic value
of myoclonus status in comatose survivors of cardiacarrest. Ann Neurol. 1994;35:239–43.
188 Hui AC, Cheng C, Lam A, Mok V, Joynt GM. Prognosis
following postanoxic myoclonus status epilepticus. Eur Neurol. 2005;54:10–3.
189 Walker MC. Treatment of nonconvulsive status 
epilepticus. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2007;81:287–97.
190 Arendt RM, Greenblatt DJ, deJong RH, Bonin JD, 
Abernethy DR, Ehrenberg BL, et al. In vitro correlates of benzodiazepine cerebrospinal fluid uptake, pharma-codynamic action and peripheral distribution. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1983;227:98–106.
191 Treiman DM. Pharmacokinetics and clinical use 
of benzodiazepines in the management of status epilepticus. Epilepsia. 1989;30(Suppl 2):S4–10.
192 Rey E, Treluyer JM, Pons G. Pharmacokinetic optimiza-
tion of benzodiazepine therapy for acute seizures. Focus on delivery routes. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1999;36:409–24.193 Walker MC, Tong X, Brown S, Shorvon SD, Patsalos PN.
Comparison of single- and repeated-dose pharmaco-kinetics of diazepam. Epilepsia. 1998;39:283–9.
194 Lowenstein DH. Treatment options for status epilepticus.
Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2005;5:334–9.
195 Terndrup TE, Fordyce WE. Respiratory drive during 
status epilepticus and its treatment: comparison of diazepam and lorazepam. Epilepsy Res. 1995;20:21–30.
196 Leppik IE, Derivan AT, Homan RW, Walker J, Ramsay E,
Patrick B. Double-blind study of lorazepam and diazepam in status epilepticus. JAMA. 1983;249:1452–4.
197 Levy RJ, Krall RL. Treatment of status epilepticus
with lorazepam. Arch Neurol. 1984;41:605–11.
198 Appleton R, Sweeney A, Choonara I, Robson J,
Molyneux E. Lorazepam versus diazepam in the acutetreatment of epileptic seizures and status epilepticus.Dev Med Child Neurol. 1995;37:682–8.
199 Cock HR, Schapira AHV. A comparison of lorazepam 
and diazepam as initial therapy in convulsive statusepilepticus. Q J Med. 2002;95:225–31.
200 Alldredge BK, Gelb AM, Isaacs SM, Corry MD, Allen F,
Ulrich S, et al. A comparison of lorazepam, diazepam,and placebo for the treatment of out-of-hospital statusepilepticus. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:631–7.
201 Parent JM, Lowenstein DH. Treatment of refractory
generalized status epilepticus with continuous infusionof midazolam. Neurology. 1994;44:1837–40.
202 Koul RL, Aithala GR, Chacko A, Joshi R, Elbualy MS.
Continuous midazolam infusion as treatment of statusepilepticus. Arch Dis Child. 1997;76:445–8.
203 Fountain NB, Adams RE. Midazolam treatment of acute
and refractory status epilepticus. Clin Neuropharmacol. 1999;22:261–7.
204 Towne AR, DeLorenzo RJ. Use of intramuscular 
midazolam for status epilepticus. J Emerg Med. 1999;17:323–8.
205 Gastaut H, Courjon J, Poiré R, Weber M. Treatment of
status epilepticus with a new benzodiazepine more active than diazepam. Epilepsia. 1971;12:197–214.
206 Singh AN, Le Morvan P. Treatment of status epilepticus
with intravenous clonazepam. Prog Neuropsycho-pharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 1982;6:539–42.
207 Greenblatt DJ, Miller LG, Shader RI. Clonazepam 
pharmacokinetics, brain uptake, and receptor interac-tions. J Clin Psychiatry. 1987;48(Suppl):S4–11.
208 Merriam AE, Medalia A, Levine B. Partial complex 
status epilepticus associated with cocaine abuse. Biol Psychiatry. 1988;23:515–8.
209 Alldredge BK, Lowenstein DH, Simon RP. 
Seizures associated with recreational drug abuse. Neurology. 1989;39:1037–9.
210 Dhuna A, Pascual-Leone A, Langendorf F, Anderson DC.
Epileptogenic properties of cocaine in humans. Neurotoxicology. 1991;12:621–6.
211 Refstad S. Paramethoxyamphetamine (PMA) poisoning:
a “party drug” with lethal effects. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2003;53:1298–9.
212 Staack RF. Piperazine designer drugs of abuse. 
Lancet. 2007;369:1411–3.
213 Wood DM, Dargan PI, Button J, Holt DW, Ovaska H,
Ramsey J, et al. Collapse, reported seizure – and an unexpected pill. Lancet. 2007;369:1490.
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 79214 Gee P, Richardson S, Woltersdorf W, Moore G. 
Toxic effects of BZP-based herbal party-pills in humans:
a prospective study in Christchurch, New Zealand. N Z Med J. 2005;118:U1784.
215 McWilliam PK. Intravenous phenytoin sodium in 
continuous convulsions in children. Lancet. 1958;272:1147–9.
216 Wallis W, Kutt H, McDowell F. Intravenous diphenyl-
hydantoin in treatment of acute repetitive seizures.Neurology. 1968;18:513–25.
217 Russell MA, Bousvaros G. Fatal results from diphenyl-
hadantoin administered intravenously. JAMA. 1968;206:2118–9.
218 Burneo JG, Anandan JV, Barkley GL. A prospective 
study of the incidence of the purple glove syndrome.Epilepsia. 2001;42:1156–9.
219 O’Brien TJ, Meara FM, Matthews H, Vajda FJ. Prospec-
tive study of local cutaneous reactions in patients receiving IV phenytoin. Neurology. 2001;57:1508–10.
220 Nation RL, Evans AM, Milne RW. Pharmacokinetic drug
interactions with phenytoin (part I). Clin Pharmacokinet. 1990;18:37–60.
221 Nation RL, Evans AM, Milne RW. Pharmacokinetic 
drug interactions with phenytoin (part II). Clin Pharmacokinet. 1990;18:131–50.
222 Cuttle L, Munns AJ, Hogg NA, Scott JR, Hooper WD,
Dickinson RG, et al. Phenytoin metabolism by human cytochrome P450: involvement of P450 3A and 2Cforms in secondary metabolism and drug-protein adductformation. Drug Metab Dispos. 2000;28:1361–8.
223 Relling MV, Pui CH, Sandlund JT, Rivera GK, Hancock ML,
Boyett JM, et al. Adverse effect of anticonvulsants on efficacy of chemotherapy for acute lymphoblasticleukaemia. Lancet. 2000;356:285–90.
224 Rüegg S. Dexamethasone/phenytoin interactions: 
neurooncological concerns. Swiss Med Wkly. 2002;132:425–6.
225 Pryor FM, Gidal B, Ramsay RE, DeToledo J, Morgan RO.
Fosphenytoin: pharmacokinetics and tolerance of intra-muscular loading doses. Epilepsia. 2001;42(2):245–50.
226 Browne TR. Fosphenytoin (Cerebyx). 
Clin Neuropharmacol. 1997;20:1–12.
227 Fischer JH, Patel TV, Fischer PA. Fosphenytoin: clinical
pharmacokinetics and comparative advantages in theacute treatment of seizures. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2003;42:33–58.
228 DeToledo JC, Ramsay RE. Fosphenytoin and phenytoin
in patients with status epilepticus. Improved tolerabilityversus increased costs. Drug Safety. 2000;22:459–66.
229 Touchette DR, Rhoney DH. Cost-minimization analysis 
of phenytoin and fosphenytoin in the emergency depart-ment. Pharmacotherapy. 2000;20:908–16.
230 Nitsche V, Mascher H. The pharmacokinetics of valproic
acid after oral and parenteral administration in healthyvolunteers. Epilepsia. 1982;23:153–62.
231 Hönack D, Löscher W. Intravenous valproate: onset and
duration of anticonvulsant activity against a series of electroconvulsions in comparison with diazepam and phenytoin. Epilepsy Res. 1992;13:215–21.
232 Kaplan PW. Intravenous valproate treatment of 
generalized nonconvulsive status epilepticus. Clin Electroencephalogr. 1999;30:1–4.233 Perucca E, Gatti G, Frigo GM, Crema A. Pharmacokinet-
ics of valproic acid after oral and intravenous adminis-tration. J Clin Pharmacol. 1978;5:313–8.
234 Ramsay RE, Uthman B, Leppik IE, Pellock JM, Wilder BJ,
Morris D, et al. The tolerability and safety of valproatesodium injection given as an intravenous infusion. J Epilepsy. 1997;10:187–93.
235 Löscher W. Basic pharmacology of valproate. A review
after 35 years of clinical use for the treatment of epilepsy. CNS Drugs. 2002;16:669–94.
236 Perucca E. Pharmacological and therapeutic properties
of valproate: a summary after 35 years of clinical experience. CNS Drugs. 2002;16:695–714.
237 Lindsay C, De Vane LC. Pharmacokinetics, drug inter-
actions, and tolerability of valproate. Psychopharmacol Bull. 2003;37:25–42.
238 Cloyd JC, Dutta S, Cao G, Walch JK, Collins SD, 
Granneman GR. Valproate unbound fraction and distribution volume following rapid infusions in patientswith epilepsy. Epilepsy Res. 2003;53:19–27.
239 Hamer HM, Knake S, Schomburg U, Rosenow F. 
Valproate-induced hyperammonemic encephalopathy in the presence of topiramate. Neurology. 2000;54:230–2.
240 Verrotti A, Trotta D, Morgese G, Chiarelli F. 
Valproate-induced hyperammonemic encephalopathy.Metab Brain Dis. 2002;17:367–73.
241 Segura-Bruna N, Rodriguez-Campello A, Puente V,
Roquer J. Valproate-induced hyperammonemic encephalopathy. Acta Neurol Scand. 2007;114:1–7.
242 Gomez-Bellver MJ, Garcia-Sanchez MJ, 
Alonso-Gonzalez AC, Santos-Beluga D, Dominguez-Gil A.Plasma protein binding kinetics of valproic acid over a broad dosage range: therapeutic implications. J Clin Pharm Ther. 1993;18:191–7. 
243 Hermida J, Tutor JC. A theoretical method for 
normalizing total serum valproic acid concentrations in hypoalbuminemic patients. J Pharmacol Sci. 2005;97:489–93.
244 Gidal B, Spencer N, Maly M, Pitterle M, Williams E,
Collins MN, et al. Valproate-mediated disturbances of hemostasis: relationship to dose and plasma concentration. Neurology. 1994;44:1418–22.
245 Easterford K, Clough P, Kellett M, Fallon K, Duncan S.
Reversible parkinsonism with normal b-CIT-SPECT 
in patients exposed to sodium valproate. Neurology. 2004;62:1435–7.
246 Gerstner T, Busing D, Bell N, Longin E, Kasper JM,
Klostermann W, et al. Valproic acid-induced pancreatitis:16 new cases and a review of the literature. J Gastroenterol. 2007;42:39–48. 
247 Loiseau P. Sodium valproate, platelet dysfunction, 
and bleeding. Epilepsia. 1981;22:141–6.
248 Kreuz W, Linde R, Funk M, Meyer-Schrod R, Föll E,
Nowak-Göttl U, et al. Valproate therapy induces vonWillebrand disease Typ I. Epilepsia. 1992;33:178–84.
249 Devinsky O, Leppik I, Wilmore I, Pellock J, Dean C,
Gates J. Safety of intravenous valproate. Ann Neurol. 1995;38:670–4.
250 Wheless J, Venkataraman V. Safety of high intravenous
valproate loading doses in epilepsy patients. J Epilepsy. 1998;11:319–24.
251 Venkataraman V, Wheless JW. Safety of rapid intra-
venous infusion of valproate loading doses in epilepsypatients. Epilepsy Res. 1999;35:147–53.
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .sanp.ch 159 n2/2008 80252 Naritoku DK, Mued S. Intravenous loading of valproate
for epilepsy. Clin Neuropharmacol. 1999;22:102–6.
253 Limdi NA, Faught E. The safety of rapid valproic acid 
infusion. Epilepsia. 2000;41:1342–5.
254 Sinha S, Naritoku DK. Intravenous valproate is well 
tolerated in unstable patients with status epilepticus.
Neurology. 2000;55:722–4.
255 Dutta S, Cloyd JC, Granneman GR, Collins SD. 
Oral/intravenous maintenance dosing of valproate following intravenous loading: a simulation. Epilepsy Res. 2003;53:29–38.
256 Ramsay RE, Cantrell D, Collins SD, Walch JK, 
Naritoku DK, Cloyd JC, et al. Safety and tolerance of rapidly infused Depacon
®. A randomized trial 
in subjects with epilepsy. Epilepsy Res. 2003;52:189–201.
257 Wheless JW, Vazquez BR, Kanner AM, Ramsay RE, 
Morton L, Pellock JM. Rapid infusion with valproatesodium is well tolerated in patients with epilepsy. Neurology. 2004;63:1507–8.
258 Limdi NA, Shimpi AV, Faught E, Gomez CR, Burneo JG.
Efficacy of rapid IV administration of valproic acid forstatus epilepticus. Neurology. 2005;64:353–5.
259 Peters CNA, Pohlmann-Eden B. Intravenous valproate 
as an innovative therapy in seizure emergency situations including status epilepticus-experience in 102 adult patients. Seizure. 2005;14:164–9.
260 Krämer G, Bergmann A, Despland PA, König S, 
Kurlemann G, Kurth C, et al. Derzeitiger Stellenwert intravenöser Valproinsäure in der Therapie des generalisierten tonisch-klonischen Status epilepticus.Akt Neurol. 2005;32:263–74.
261 Misra UK, Kalita J, Patel R. Sodium valproate vs. 
phenytoin in status epilepticus: a pilot study. Neurology. 2006;67:340–2.
262 Rossetti AO. Sodium valproate vs. phenytoin in status
epilepticus: a pilot study. Neurology. 2007;68:709.
263 Agarwal P, Kumar N, Chandra R, Gupta G, Antony AR,
Garg N. Randomized study of intravenous valproate and phenytoin in status epilepticus. Seizure. 2007;16:527–32.
264 Perucca E, Gidal BE, Baltes E. Effects of antiepileptic
comedication on levetiracetam pharmacokinetics: a pooled analysis of data from randomized adjunctivetherapy trials. Epilepsy Res. 2003;53:47–56.
265 Sirsi D, Safdieh JE. The safety of levetiracetam. 
Expert Opin Drug Saf. 2007;6:241–50.
266 De Smedt T, Raedt R, Vonck K, Boon P. Levetiracetam:
part II, the clinical profile of a novel anticonvulsantdrug. CNS Drug Rev. 2007;13:57–78. 
267 French J, Arrigo C. Rapid onset of action of levetiracetam
in refractory epilepsy patients. Epilepsia. 2005;46:324–6. 
268 Ramael S, De Smedt F, Toublanc N, Otoul C, 
Boulanger P, Riethuisen JM, et al. Single-dose bio-availability of levetiracetam intravenous infusion relativeto oral tablets and multiple-dose pharmacokinetics and tolerability of levetiracetam intravenous infusioncompared with placebo in healthy subjects. Clin Ther. 2006;28:734–43.
269 Ramael S, Daoust A, Otoul C, Toublanc N, Troenaru M,
Lu Z, et al. Levetiacetam intravenous infusion: a randomized, placebo-controlled safety and pharmaco-kinetic study. Epilepsia. 2006;47:1128–35.270 Mazarati AM, Baldwin R, Klitgaard H, Matagne A,
Wasterlain CG. Anticonvulsant effects of levetiracetamand levetiracetam-diazepam combinations in experimen-tal status epilepticus. Epilepsy Res. 2004;58:167–74.
271 Rossetti A, Bromfield EB. Levetiracetam in the 
treatment of status epilepticus in adults: a study of 13 episodes. Eur Neurol. 2005;54:34–8.
272 Rossetti AO, Bromfield EB. Determinants of success 
in the use of oral levetiracetam in status epilepticus.Epilepsy Behav. 2006;8:651–4.
273 Falip M, Carreno M, Amaro S, Donaire A, Delgado R,
Toledo M, et al. Use of levetiracetam in hospitalized patients. Epilepsia. 2006;47:2186–8.
274 Rupprecht S, Franke K, Fitzek S, Witte OW, Hagemann
G. Levetiracetam as a treatment option in non-convulsive status epilepticus. Epilepsy Res. 2007;73:238–44. 
275 Schulze-Bonhage A, Hefft S, Oehl B. Termination of
complex partial status epilepticus by intravenous levetiracetam – a case report. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2007; online first, published on March 12, 2007 as 10.1136/jnnp.2006.113951
276 Atefy R, Tettenborn B. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus
on treatment with levetiracetam. Epilepsy Behav. 2005;6:613–6.
277 Nakken KO, Eriksson AS, Lossius R, Johannessen SI. 
A paradoxical effect of levetiracetam may be seen in both children and adults with refractory epilepsy.Seizure 2003;12:42–6.
278 Claassen J, Lokin JK, Fitzsimmons BF, Mendelsohn FA,
Mayer SA. Predictors of functional disability and mortality after status epilepticus. Neurology. 2002;58:139–42.
279 Mayer SA, Claassen J, Lokin J, Mendelsohn F, Dennis LJ,
Fitzsimmons BF. Refractory status epilepticus. Frequency, risk factors, and impact on outcome. Arch Neurol. 2002;59:205–10.
280 Rossetti AO, Logroscino G, Bromfield EB. Refractory
status epilepticus: effect of treatment aggressivenesson prognosis. Arch Neurol. 2005;62:1698–702; Erratum in: Arch Neurol. 2006;63:1482.
281 Holtkamp M. The anaesthetic use and intensive care of
status epilepticus. Curr Opin Neurol. 2007;20:188–93.
282 Kumar A, Bleck TP. Intravenous midazolam for the 
treatment of refractory status epilepticus. Crit Care Med. 1992;20:483–8.
283 Labar DR, Ali A, Root J. High-dose intravenous lorazepam
for the treatment of refractory status epilepticus. Neurology. 1994;44:1400–3.
284 Claassen J, Hirsch LJ, Emerson RG, Bates JE, 
Thompson TB, Mayer SA. Continuous EEG monitoringand midazolam infusion for refractory nonconvulsivestatus epilepticus. Neurology. 2001;57:1036–42.
285 Denzel D, Burstein AH. Midazolam in refractory status
epilepticus. Ann Pharmacother. 1996;30:1481–3.
286 Mackenzie SJ, Kapadia F, Grant IS. Propofol infusion 
for control of status epilepticus. Anaesthesia. 1990;45:1043–5.
287 Pitt-Miller PL, Elcock BJ, Maharaj M. The management
of status epilepticus with a continuous propofol infusion. Anesth Analg. 1994;78:1193–4.
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 81288 Stecker MM, Kramer TH, Raps EC, O’Meeghan R, 
Dulaney E, Skaar DJ. Treatment of refractory status
epilepticus with propofol: clinical and pharmacokineticfindings. Epilepsia. 1998;39:18–26.
289 Begemann M, Rowan AJ, Tuhrim S. Treatment of 
refractory complex-partial status epilepticus with propofol: case report. Epilepsia. 2000;41:105–9.
290 Prasad A, Worrall BB, Bertram EH, Bleck TP. 
Propofol and midazolam in the treatment of refractorystatus epilepticus. Epilepsia. 2001;42:380–6.
291 Wijdicks EFM. Propofol in myoclonus status epilepticus
in comatose patients following cardiac resuscitation. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2002;73:94–5.
292 Niermeijer JM, Uiterwaal CS, van Donselaar CA. 
Propofol in status epilepticus: little evidence, many dangers? J Neurol. 2003;250:1237–40.
293 Rossetti AO, Reichhart MD, Schaller MD, Despland PA,
Bogousslavsky J. Propofol treatment of refractory status epilepticus: a study of 31 episodes. Epilepsia. 2004;45:757–63.
294 Parviainen I, Usuaro A, Kalviainen R, Merväälä E,
Ruokonen E. Propofol in the treatment of refractory status epilepticus. Intensive Care Med. 2006;32:1075–9.
295 Lowenstein DH, Aminoff MJ, Simon RP. Barbiturate
anesthesia in the treatment of status epilepticus: clinical experience with 14 patients. Neurology. 1988;38:395–400.
296 Osorio I, Reed RC. Treatment of refractory generalized
tonic-clonic status epilepticus with pentobarbital anesthesia after high-dose phenytoin. Epilepsia. 1989;30:464–71.
297 Mirski MA, Williams MA, Hanley DF. Prolonged pento-
barbital and phenobarbital coma for refractory generalized status epilepticus. Crit Care Med. 1995;23:400–4.
298 Parviainen I, Uusaro A, Kälviäinen R, Kaukanen E, 
Mervaala E, Ruokonen E. High-dose thiopental in thetreatment of refractory status epilepticus in intensivecare unit. Neurology. 2002;59:1249–51.
299 Van Ness PC. Pentobarbital and EEG burst suppression
in treatment of status epilepticus refractory to benzo-diazepines and phenytoin. Epilepsia. 1990;31:61–7.
300 Yaffe K, Lowenstein DH. Prognostic factors of pento-
barbital therapy for refractory generalized status epilepticus. Neurology. 1993;43:895–900.
301 Krishnamurthy KB, Drislane FW. Relapse and survival
after barbiturate anesthetic treatment of refractory status epilepticus. Epilepsia. 1996;37:863–7.
302 Krishnamurthy KB, Drislane FW. Depth of EEG 
suppression and outcome in barbiturate anesthetictreatment for refractory status epilepticus. Epilepsia. 1999;40:759–62.
303 Claassen J, Hirsch LJ, Emerson RG, Mayer SA. 
Treatment of refractory status epilepticus with pento-barbital, propofol, or midazolam: a systematic review.Epilepsia. 2002;43:146–53.
304 Jones-Davies DM, MacDonald RL. GABA(A) receptor
function and pharmacology in epilepsy and statusepilepticus. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2003;3:12–8.
305 Bauer TM, Ritz R, Haberthür C, Ha HR, Hunkeler W,
Steight AJ, et al. Prolonged sedation due to accumulation of conjugated metabolites of midazolam.Lancet. 1995;346:145–7.306 De Riu PL, Petruzzi V, Testa C, Mulas M, Melis F, 
Caria MA, et al. Propofol anticonvulsant activity in experimental epileptic status. Br J Anaesth. 1992;69:177–81.
307 Orser BA, Wang LY, Penefather PS, MacDonald JF.
Propofol modulates activation and desensitization of GABA Areceptors in cultured murine hippocampal
neurons. J Neurosci. 1994;14:7747–60. 
308 Orser BA, Bertlik M, Wang LY, MacDonald JF. Inhibition
by propofol (2.6 di-isoprophylphenol) of the N-methyl-D-aspartate subtype of glutamate receptor in culturedhippocampal neurones. Br J Pharmacol. 1995;116:1761–8.
309 Holtkamp M, Tong X, Walker MC. Propofol in sub-
anesthetic doses terminates status epilepticus in a rodent model. Ann Neurol. 2001;49:260–3.
310 Lingamaneni R, Hemmings HC. Differential interaction
of anaesthetics and antiepileptic drugs with neuronalNa
+channels, Ca2+channels, and GABAAreceptors. 
Br J Anaesth. 2003;90:199–211.
311 Feng HJ, MacDonald RL. Multiple actions of propofol 
on alphabetagamma and alphabetadelta GABAA
receptors. Mol Pharmacol. 2004;66:1517–24.
312 Mäkelä JP, Iivanainen M, Pieninkeroinen IP, Waltimo O,
Lahdensuu M. Seizures associated with propofol anesthesia. Epilepsia. 1993;34:832–5.
313 Walder B, Tramèr MR, Seeck M. Seizure-like 
phenomena and propofol: a systematic review. Neurology. 2002;58:1327–32.
314 Vasile B, Rasulo F, Cnadiani A, Latronico N. The patho-
physiology of propofol infusion syndrome: a simplename for a complex syndrome. Intensive Care Med. 2003;29:1417–25.
315 Rossetti AO, Reichhart MD, Schaller MD, Despland PA,
Bogousslavsky J. Propofol treatment of refractory status epilepticus: a study of 31 episodes. Epilepsia. 2004;45:757–63.
316 Stanski DR, Mihm FG, Rosenthal MH, Kalman SM. 
Pharmacokinetics of high-dose thiopental used in cere-bral resuscitation. Anesthesiology. 1980;53:169–71.
317 Russo H, Bressolle F. Pharmacodynamics and 
pharmacokinetics of thiopental. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1998;35:95–134.
318 Reuber M, Evans J, Bamford JM. Topiramate in 
drug-resistant complex partial status epilepticus. Eur J Neurol. 2002;9:111–2.
319 Towne AR, Garnett LK, Waterhouse EJ, Morton LD, 
DeLorenzo RJ. The use of topiramate in refractory status epilepticus. Neurology. 2003;60:332–4.
320 Bensalem MK, Fakhoury TA. Topiramate and status
epilepticus: report of three cases. Epilepsy Behav. 2003;4:757–60.
321 Bernhard CG, Bohm E, Höjeberg S. A new treatment 
of status epilepticus. Intravenous injections of a localanesthetic (lidocaine). Arch Neurol Psychiatry. 1955;74:208–14.
322 De Giorgi C, Altman K, Hamilton-Byrd E, Rabinowicz AL.
Lidocaine in refractory status epilepticus: conﬁrmation of efﬁcacy with continuous EEG monitoring.Epilepsia. 1992;33:913–6.
323 Pascual J, Ciudad J, Berciano J. Role of lidocaine 
(lignocaine) in managing status epilepticus. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1992;55:49–51.
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .sanp.ch 159 n2/2008 82324 Agrawal P, Wali JP. Lidocaine in refractory status epilep-
ticus: a forgotten drug in the emergency department.
Am J Emerg Med. 1993;11:243–4.
325 Teng E, Wilkins P. Lidocaine in status epilepticus. 
Ann Pharmacother. 1994;28:1248–9.
326 Walker LA, Slovis CM. Lidocaine in the treatment 
of status epilepticus. Acad Emerg Med. 1997;4:918–22.
327 Sawaishi Y, Yano T, Enoki M, Takada G. Lidocaine-
dependent early infantile status epilepticus with highlysuppressed EEG. Epilepsia. 2002;43:201–4.
328 Thulasimani M, Ramaswamy S. The role of paraldehyde
and lidocaine in the management of status epilepticus.Anaesthesia. 2002;57:99–100.
329 Fujikawa DG. Neuroprotective effect of ketamine 
administered after status epilepticus onset. Epilepsia. 1995;36:186–95.
330 Kofke WA, Bloom MJ, Van Cott A, Brenner RP. 
Electrographic tachyphylaxis to etomidate and ketamineused for refractory status epilepticus controlled withisoflurane. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol. 1997;9:269–72.
331 Sheth RD, Gidal BE. Refractory status epilepticus: 
response to ketamine. Neurology. 1998;51:1765–6.
332 Borris DJ, Bertram EH, Kapur J. Ketamine controls 
prolonged status epilepticus. Epilepsy Res. 2000;42:117–22.
333 Kofke WA, Young RS, Davis P, Woelfel SK, Gray L, 
Johnson D, et al. Isoflurane for refractory status epilepticus: a clinical series. Anesthesiology. 1989;71:653–9.
334 Schultz A, Schultz B, Grouven U, Beger FA, Korsch G.
Sharp transients in the EEGs of non-epileptic adult patients receiving sevoflurane. Pharm World Sci. 2001;23:82–5.
335 Sharpe MD, Young GB, Mirsattari S, Harris C. 
Prolonged desflurane administration for refractory status epilepticus. Anesthesiology. 2002;97:261–4.336 Jääskeläinen SK, Kaisti K, Suni L, Hinkka S, Scheinin H.
Sevoflurane is epileptogenic in healthy subjects at surgical levels of anesthesia. Neurology. 2003;61:1073–8.
337 Mirsattari SM, Sharpe MD, Young GB. Treatment of 
refractory status epilepticus with inhalational anesthetic agents isoflurane and desflurane. Arch Neurol. 2004;61:1254–9.
338 Hentschke H, Schwarz C, Antkowiak B. Neocortex is the
major target of sedative concentrations of volatileanaesthetics: strong depression of firing rates and increase of GABA Areceptor-mediated inhibition. 
Eur J Neurosci. 2005;21:93–102.
339 Vezzani A, Granta T. Brain inflammation in epilepsy: 
experimental and clinical evidence. Epilepsia. 2005;46:1724–3.
340 Lux AL, Edwards SE, Hancock E, Johnson AL, 
Kennedy CR, Newton RW, et al.; United Kingdom Infantile Spasms Study. The United Kingdom InfantileSpasms Study (UKISS) comparing hormone treatmentwith vigabatrin on developmental and epilepsy outcomes to age 14 months: a multicentre randomisedtrial. Lancet Neurol. 2005;4:712–7.
341 Sinclair DB, Snyder TJ. Corticosteroids for the 
treatment of Landau-Kleffner syndrome and continuousspike-wave discharges during sleep. Pediatr Neurol. 2005;32:300–6.
342 Bahi-Buisson N, Villanueva V, Bulteau C, Delalande O,
Dulac O, Chiron C, et al. Long-term response to steroidtherapy in Rasmussen encephalitis. Seizure. 2007;16:485–92. Epub 2007 Apr 3.
343 Robakis TK, Hirsch LJ. Literature review, case report,
and expert discussion of prolonged refractory statusepilepticus. Neurocrit Care. 2006;4:35–46.
344 Bonati LH, Naegelin Y, Wieser HG, Fuhr P, Rüegg S. 
Beta activity in status epilepticus. Epilepsia. 2006;47:207–10.
SCHWEIZER ARCHIV FÜR NEUROLOGIE UND PSYCHIATRIE w w w .asnp.ch 159 n2/2008 83