PPuurrppoossee::  We report on a primiparous woman who suffered recur-
rent seizure activity after repeated small doses of epidural morphineto highlight the neuroexcitation potential of neuraxial opioids in theepileptic patient.
CClliinniiccaall  ffeeaattuurreess::  Seizure activities as a complication of opioid
administration have been reported in laboratory animals andhumans. We report the case of a 30-yr-old primiparous womanwith a history of epilepsy under carbamazepine treatment, who hadepidural anesthesia for elective Cesarean section at 38 weeks ges-tation. Postoperatively, 1.5 mg of morphine were administeredepidurally for pain control. Three hours later the patient sufferedfrom clonic movements of the right arm without loss of conscious-ness. One day later, she again received 1 mg of epidural morphinetwice at a 12-hr interval and similar seizure episodes recurred eighthours after each dose. A relation between the administration ofmorphine and seizure activity was suspected and the use of opioidsfor pain control was stopped. The patient was discharged on thefifth postoperative day and, more than one year after the lastepisode, she remains free of any seizure activity.
CCoonncclluussiioonn::  Our report indicates that even a remote history of
epilepsy carries a pro-convulsant potential in the peripartum peri-od, even following the administration of small doses of epiduralmorphine.
Objectif : Présenter une primipare qui a souffert d’épilepsie récur-
rente, après avoir reçu de petites doses répétées de morphine péridu-rale, pour souligner le potentiel neuroexcitateur des opioïdesneuraxiaux chez l’épileptique.
Éléments cliniques : Les crises d’épilepsie comme complication de
l’administration d’opioïde ont été constatées chez les animaux de la-boratoire et chez les humains. Nous présentons le cas d’une primiparede 30 ans, épileptique traitée avec de la carbamazépine, qui a reçuune anesthésie péridurale pour une césarienne réglée à 38 semainesde grossesse. Après l’opération, elle a reçu 1,5 mg de morphine pour
l’analgésie péridurale. Trois heures plus tard, elle a souffert de mouve-ments cloniques du bras droit sans perte de conscience. Le lendemain,elle a reçu deux doses de 1 mg de morphine péridurale, à 12 h d’in-tervalle et des crises similaires sont survenues huit heures aprèschaque dose. Une relation entre la morphine et l’activité épileptique aété présumée et l’administration de morphine a été stoppée. Lapatiente a quitté l’hôpital au cinquième jour postopératoire et n’a subiaucune crise plus d’un an après le dernier épisode.
Conclusion : Notre article indique que même une histoire ancienne
d’épilepsie comporte un potentiel pro-convulsivant en période postpar-
tum, après l’administration péridurale de petites doses de morphine.
ENTRAL nervous system excitation1is
among the less common side effects ofepidural opioids. Seizure activity as a com-plication of opioid administration has been
reported in laboratory animals,
2adult humans1,3,4and
neonates.5Myoclonic activity has been described after
high-dose intrathecal,6epidural1,4oriv4opioids.
However, only one report in the literature describes thedevelopment of seizures after epidural morphine in apatient with a known history of epilepsy.
7We report the
case of a primiparous woman with a history of simplepartial seizure with secondary generalization, whoexperienced recurrence of motor seizure activity afterepidural administration of a small dose of morphine forpostoperative pain control.
CCaassee  rreeppoorrtt
After obtaining consent from the patient according to
patient health information guidelines of the ChangOBSTETRICAL AND PEDIATRIC ANESTHESIA 727
CAN J ANESTH 2005 / 52: 7 / pp 727–729Recurrent seizure activity after epidural morphine
in a post-partum woman
[Activité épileptique récurrente après une anesthésie péridurale avec morphine
chez une femme en postpartum]
Chih-Jen Shih MD,* Anthony G. Doufas MD P hD,† Hsu-Chu Chang MD,* Chun-Ming Lin MD*
From the Department of Anesthesiology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital,* Tao Yuan, Taiwan; and the Department of Anesthesiology
and Perioperative Medicine and OUTCOMES RESEARCH™ Institute,† University of Louisville, Kentucky, USA.
Address correspondence to : Dr. Chun-Ming Lin, Department of Anesthesiology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 5, Fu-Hsing St., 
Tao Yuan, Taiwan. E-mail: sam2498@adm.cgmh.org.tw. Reprints will not be available by the authors.
Accepted for publication January 4, 2005.Revision accepted March 4, 2005.CGung Memorial Hospital, we describe a 30-yr-old
primiparous woman who presented for electiveCesarean section at 38 weeks gestation. She was gen-erally healthy except for a remote history of a seizuredisorder which consisted of three isolated episodes atthe age of 17. She denied a history of head trauma orany developmental problems. The first seizure attackwas associated with tonic-clonic convulsions accompa-nied by loss of consciousness. Computed tomographydid not reveal any intracerebral pathology, while elec-troencephalography (EEG) revealed epileptic activityover the left temporal lobe. A diagnosis of simple par-tial seizure with secondary generalization was made,and the patient was treated with carbamazepine, 200mg podaily. Shortly after treatment initiation, the
seizure activity recurred twice in the form of clonicconvulsions of the right arm and carbamazepine wasincreased to 200 mg pobid. The patient was followed
regularly in our neurology clinic and she remainedseizure-free on the higher dose of carbamazepine. 
Epidural anesthesia was accomplished with an 18-G
Tuohy needle via the L4–5 intervertebral space, usinga midline, loss-of-resistance approach with 2 mL air. A3-mL test dose of lidocaine was given before the lido-caine bolus and a total bolus of 20 mL 2% lidocainewith 1:200,000 epinephrine and 50 µg fentanyl wasadministered through the needle and an epiduralcatheter was placed atraumatically. The dermatomallevel achieved was T6 20 min after induction ofepidural anesthesia. The operation was completedwithout any complications and the newborn wasextracted in good health. The patient was comfortableupon arrival in the postanesthesia care unit and 1.5 mgof morphine sulfate diluted in 10 mL normal salinewere administered epidurally for pain control. 
After resolution of the sensory block to L1 level,
the patient was discharged to the ward. Two hourslater and three hours after the morphine administra-tion, she suffered from involuntary movements of theright arm without loss of consciousness. At the begin-ning, we did not know the reason why she had suchabnormal movements. We immediately checked elec-trolytes, blood glucose, magnesium, and calcium lev-els which were all within their normal ranges. Thepatient described her symptoms as being similar tothose she had experienced during the seizure attacks atthe age of 17. Since she had used carbamazepine toachieve succesful control her epilepsy, we gave her 200mg of carbamazepine po. The seizure activity lasted for
approximately one hour with several brief seizure-freeintervals, and it gradually resolved after the 200 mgdose of carbamazepine. One day later, she againreceived epidurally 1 mg of morphine (2nd and 3rddoses) within a 12-hr interval, and a similar seizure
episode occurred eight hours after each dose. Becausethe seizures occurred at the same relative time aftermorphine injection, a relation between the adminis-tration of morphine and the seizure activity was sus-pected and the use of opioids for pain control wasstopped. No more seizure activity occurred after dis-connection of the intermittent administration ofepidural morphine. The normal carbamazepine regi-men of 200 mg pobid was continued throughout the
perioperative period. The patient was discharged onthe fifth postoperative day. After discharge, an EEGevaluation showed no change from the previous exam-ination. The patient was followed by the neurologyservices and she remained free of any seizure over aone-year follow-up period.
DDiissccuussssiioonn
The exact mechanism of opioid-induced neuroexcitation
remains to be elucidated. Direct opioid and non-opioidreceptor-mediated excitatory, as well as inhibitory sys-tems have been implicated. Active metabolites and drugpreservatives have been also incriminated, as well as apro-convulsant effect of opioids in association with meta-bolic and other toxic factors.
Animal models8,9show that opioid-induced
seizures may involve multiple opioid receptor-mediat-ed mechanisms, while a stereospecific kappa-receptormechanism is directly implicated.
8Nonetheless, evi-
dence that naloxone was unable to completely reverseopioid-induced myoclonous
2disputes opioid recep-
tors as mediators of neuroexcitation. Indirect opioid-induced effects on different excitatory and inhibitorysystems at various central nervous system levels mayexplain this discrepancy.
2,10Thus, N-methyl-D-aspar-
tate mediated excitation,11as well as gamma-
aminobutyric acid (GABA)-mediated inhibition12
have been also a factor in opioid-induced neuroexcita-tion, while morphine-induced glycine and GABAantagonism were associated with paroxysmal depolar-izations of spinal cord neurons in vitro .
10
Active metabolites,13as well as preservatives3of dif-
ferent opioid agents have been implicated in causinggeneralized seizures in humans after systemic adminis-tration of high dose opioids, although the parent com-pounds have their own neuroexcitatory potential.
Neuroexcitation usually occurs after large doses of
intrathecal,
6epidural14or iv4opioids. None of the
patients described in the literature had a history ofseizure disorder and myoclonic activity was neverobserved with an epidural dose of morphine lowerthan 12 mg·hr
–1.4Nonetheless, tonic-clonic activity
has been reported in an epileptic woman who had728 CANADIAN JOURNAL OF ANESTHESIAelective Cesarean section, six hours after the epidural
administration of 3 mg of morphine.7
Human studies have shown that central effects of
epidurally administered morphine, like delayed ventila-tory depression
14and nausea,15are mostly due to ros-
tral spread of the drug through the cerebrospinal fluidand have an onset time between four and nine hours. Inour case, myoclonic activity occurred three and eighthours after epidural administration of 1.5 and 1 mg ofmorphine, respectively. Thus, the time course of theseizure effect supports a central mechanism of actionthrough the cephalad spread of morphine. 
Despite the fact that systemic administration of low
doses of morphine has a rather anticonvulsant effect,neuroexcitation can also occur in a pro-convulsantenvironment.
16,17The endogenous opioid system has
been implicated in exerting a continuous anti-convul-sant action.
16,18A step rise in plasma endogenous opi-
oids during late pregnancy and parturition19might be
responsible for decreased seizure susceptibility.16
However, the acute resolution of this situation in thepost-partum period could also have a pro-convulsant"opioid withdrawal" effect,
20especially on the
grounds of seizure disorder.
Our patient, and that described by Borgeat et al.,7
share a history of epilepsy and recent pregnancy. An
epileptic pathology, even with the form of a dormantfocus, might have interacted with the condition ofpregnancy to produce a pro-convulsant environmentfor the seizure-inducing effect of small doses of mor-phine. The time course and the pattern of convulsiveactivity, as well as the fact that it promptly resolvedwith carbamazepine support the case of seizure recur-rence due to epidural morphine administration. 
Our report indicates that a remote history of
epilepsy carries a pro-convulsant potential in the peri-partum period, even following the administration ofsmall doses of epidural morphine.
RReeffeerreenncceess
1Jayawardena B, Hill DJ . Myoclonic spasms after
epidural diamorphine infusion. Anaesthesia 1991; 46:473–4.
2Shohami E, Evron S . Intrathecal morphine induces
myoclonic seizures in the rat. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol(Copenh) 1985; 56: 50–4.
3Gregory RE, Grossman S, Sheidler VR . Grand mal
seizures associated with high-dose intravenous mor-phine infusions: incidence and possible etiology. Pain1992; 51: 255–8.
4Rozan JP, Kahn CH, Warfield CA . Epidural and intra-
venous opioid-induced neuroexcitation. Anesthesiology1995; 83: 860–3.5Young GB, da Silva OP. Effects of morphine on the elec-
troencephalograms of neonates: a prospective, observa-tional study. Clin Neurophysiol 2000; 111: 1955–60.
6De Conno F, Caraceni A, Martini C, Spoldi E, Salvetti
M, Ventafridda V. Hyperalgesia and myoclonus with
intrathecal infusion of high-dose morphine. Pain 1991;47: 337–9.
7Borgeat A, Biollaz J, Depierraz B, Neff R . Grand mal
seizure after extradural morphine analgesia. Br JAnaesth 1988; 60: 733–5.
8Bansinath M, Ramabadran K, Turndorf H, Shukla
VK. Intracerebroventricular administration of kappa-
agonists induces convulsions in mice. Brain Res Bull1991; 27: 75–9.
9Crain SM, Shen KF . Opioids can evoke direct receptor-
mediated excitatory effects on sensory neurons. TrendsPharmacol Sci 1990; 11: 77–81.
10Werz MA, Macdonald RL . Opiate alkaloids antagonize
postsynaptic glycine and GABA responses: correlationwith convulsant action. Brain Res 1982; 236: 107–19.
11Chen L, Huang LY. Sustained potentiation of NMDA
receptor-mediated glutamate responses through activa-tion of protein kinase C by a mu opioid. Neuron 1991;7: 319–26.
12Foote F, Gale K . Morphine potentiates seizures induced
by GABA antagonists and attenuates seizures inducedby electroshock in the rat. Eur J Pharmacol 1983; 95:259–64.
13Yaksh TL, Harty GJ . Pharmacology of the allodynia in
rats evoked by high dose intrathecal morphine. JPharmacol Exp Ther 1988; 244: 501–7.
14Knill RL, Clement JL, Thompson WR. Epidural mor-
phine causes delayed and prolonged ventilatory depres-sion. Can Anaesth Soc J 1981; 28: 537–43.
15Bromage PR, Camporesi EM, Durant PA, Nielsen CH .
Nonrespiratory side effects of epidural morphine.Anesth Analg 1982; 61: 490–5.
16Frenk H . Pro- and anticonvulsant actions of morphine
and the endogenous opioids: involvement and interac-tions of multiple opiate and non-opiate systems. BrainRes 1983; 287: 197–210.
17Bertran F, Denise P, Letellier P . Nonconvulsive status
epilepticus: the role of morphine and its antagonist.Neurophysiol Clin 2000; 30: 109–12.
18Frost JJ, Mayberg HS, Fisher RS, et al. Mu-opiate recep-
tors measured by positron emission tomography areincreased in temporal lobe epilepsy. Ann Neurol 1988;23: 231–7.
19Abboud TK. Maternal and fetal beta endorphin: effects of
pregnancy and labour. Arch Dis Child 1988; 63: 707–9.
20Smolen A, Smolen TN, van de Kamp JL . The effect of
naloxone administration on pregnancy-associatedseizures. Life Sci 1986; 38: 1899–905.Shih et al.: EPIDURAL MORPHINE AND SEIZURES 729