TOXICOLOGICAL SCIENCES 113(1) , 254–266 (2010)
doi:10.1093/toxsci/kfp213Advance Access publication October 7, 2009
The Role of Hypoxia in 2-Butoxyethanol–Induced Hemangiosarcoma
Daphna Laifenfeld,* Annalyn Gilchrist,* David Drubin,* Milena Jorge,* Sean F. Eddy,* Brian P. Frushour,* Bill Ladd,*
Leslie A. Obert, †Mark M. Gosink, †Jon C. Cook, †Kay Criswell, †Christopher J. Somps, †Petra Koza-Taylor, †Keith
O. Elliston,* and Michael P. Lawton †,1
*Genstruct, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02140; and †Pﬁzer Global Research and Development, Groton, Connecticut 06340
1To whom correspondence should be addressed at Pﬁzer Global Research and Development, Eastern Point Road, MS8274-1234, Groton, CT 06340.
E-mail: michael.lawton@pﬁzer.com.
Received July 6, 2009; accepted September 4, 2009
To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying
compound-induced hemangiosarcomas in mice, and therefore,
their human relevance, a systems biology approach was un-dertaken using transcriptomics and Causal Network Modelingfrom mice treated with 2-butoxyethanol (2-BE). 2-BE is a hemo-
lytic agent that induces hemangiosarcomas in mice. We hypoth-
esized that the hemolysis induced by 2-BE would result in localtissue hypoxia, a well-documented trigger for endothelial cell
proliferation leading to hemangiosarcoma. Gene expression data
from bone marrow (BM), liver, and spleen of mice exposed toa single dose (4 h) or seven daily doses of 2-BE were used to develop
a mechanistic model of hemangiosarcoma. The resulting mecha-
nistic model conﬁrms previous work proposing that 2-BE inducesmacrophage activation and inﬂammation in the liver. In addition,
the model supports local tissue hypoxia in the liver and spleen,
coupled with increased erythropoeitin signaling and erythropoiesisin the spleen and BM, and suppression of mechanisms thatcontribute to genomic stability, events that could be contributing
factors to hemangiosarcoma formation. Finally, an immunohisto-
chemistry method (Hypoxyprobe) demonstrated that tissue hypoxiawas present in the spleen and BM. Together, the results of this study
identify molecular mechanisms that initiate hemangiosarcoma,
a key step in understanding safety concerns that can impact drugdecision processes, and identiﬁed hypoxia as a possible contributing
factor for 2-BE–induced hemangiosarcoma in mice.
Key Words: hemangiosarcoma; hypoxia; angiogenesis;
endothelial cells; endothelial p recursor cells; mechanism of
action; human relevance; 2-butoxyethanol.
Hemangiosarcomas are endothelial cell (EC)–derived tumors
that are comprised of poorly differentiated, proliferating ECs(Mendenhall et al. , 2006). These tumors form spontaneously and
in response to many different compounds in mice (NTP, 1993;Wagner and Risau, 1994) but are rare in humans (Mendenhall
et al. , 2006). Compounds that induce hemangiosarcomas in mice
have a wide range of biological activity and include industrial,natural, and pharmaceutical compounds (Chan, 1993; Cohenet al. , 2009; El-Hage, 2004; NTP, 1989, 1993, 1997, 2000,2004). The discovery that a potentially therapeutic compound
induces hemangiosarcomas in mice may limit it from furtherdevelopment or broader applications. A detailed understanding
of the molecular mechanisms underlying the formation of these
tumors in mice may therefore lead to a better assessment of therisk to humans from exposure to such compounds.
Many of the compounds that induce hemangiosarcomas in
mice, including 2-butoxyethanol (2-BE), p-chloroaniline
(Nyska et al. , 2004), p-nitroaniline (Nyska et al. , 2004), 2-
biphenylamine (Abdo et al. , 1982), and phenylhydrazine
(Goldberg and Stern, 1977; Toth et al. , 1978), are hemolytic
in nature. 2-Butoxyethanol, a chemical solvent that has been
shown to induce hemangiosarcomas mainly in livers of male
mice (Nyska et al. , 2004), with some occurrence in the bone
marrow (BM) and spleen after inhalation exposure (NTP,2000), has been used as a model hemangiosarcoma-inducing
agent to further understand the mode of action of tumor
formation (Cohen et al. , 2009; Corthals et al. , 2006; Klaunig
and Kamendulis, 2005; Park et al. , 2002a,b; Siesky et al. ,
2002). The results of this work support a nongenotoxic mode
of action that centers on macrophage activation due to ironaccumulation resulting from the hemolytic effect of thecompound (Elliot and Ashby, 1997; Klaunig and Kamendulis,
2005; Park et al. 2002a,b). Macrophage activation, in turn, is
proposed to promote EC proliferation and DNA damage via theproduction of reactive oxygen species and cytokines thatstimulate EC proliferation (Klaunig and Kamendulis, 2005;
Park et al. , 2002a; Siesky et al. , 2002).
In addition to the proposed EC proliferation caused by
macrophage activation, it is possible that localized or systemic
hypoxia associated with hemolysis can also contribute to EC
proliferation. Hypoxia and activation of the hypoxia-inducible
factor, Hif1, have been shown to promote EC proliferation(Otrock et al. , 2009; Yamakawa et al. , 2003), which, if
sustained, can result in cellular transformation as a result of
errors during DNA replication that are not repaired. There is
also growing evidence that hypoxia can drive and maintaingenetic instability leading to increased rates of mutagenesis,
/C211The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society of Toxicology. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@ oxfordjournals.org.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.or g/licenses/by-nc/2.5/uk/) which
permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.thus contributing to a ‘‘mutator’’ phenotype (Bristow and Hill,
2008). Taken together, it is plausible that the signiﬁcanthemolysis caused by 2-BE results in local tissue hypoxia,which may in turn contribute to EC proliferation leading to the
induction of hemangiosarcoma in mice.
To investigate whether tissue hypoxia plays a role in the
induction of hemangiosarcoma by 2-BE, a systems biologyapproach called Causal Network Modeling (CNM) wasundertaken, in which transcriptomic signatures of 2-BE inliver, spleen, and BM from mice were used to elucidate themolecular pathways that contribute to hemangiosarcomaformation. CNM is a systematic computational analysis that
identiﬁes upstream changes in gene regulation that can serve as
explanations for observed changes in gene expression. Thisapproach has been successfully used to identify molecularmechanisms involved in Sirtuin 1-induced keratinocyte dif-ferentiation (Blander et al. , 2009) and the development of type
II diabetes (Pollard et al. , 2005).
The present study is the ﬁrst to identify molecular
mechanisms underlying hematopoietic events that contribute
to hemangiosarcoma formation in mice treated with 2-BE. The
results conﬁrm previously identiﬁed mechanisms associatedwith hemangiosarcoma formation, including inﬂammation andmacrophage activation. Moreover, novel mechanisms ascontributing factors to hemangiosarcoma formation were alsoidentiﬁed, including hypoxia, leading to increased Erythro-poeitin (Epo) signaling and erythropoiesis in the spleen andBM, as well as suppression of mechanisms that contribute to
genomic stability. These results also support the recruitment of
proliferating endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) in the BM tosites of inﬂammation in the liver as a mechanism ofhemangiosarcoma formation. The proposed mode of action isconsistent with that recently reported by Cohen et al. (2009)
and may serve as a general framework for other hemolyticcompounds that also cause hemangiosarcomas in mice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animal studies (general). In all, 9- to 11-week-old B6C3F1 male mice,
weighing about 30 g (Charles River Breeding Laboratories, Raleigh, NC) were
acclimatized, randomized into treatment groups, and housed individually in
each study. Room environmental conditions had design speciﬁcations asfollows: minimum of 12 air changes per hour with air ﬁltered through 90–95%efﬁciency ﬁlters and then through high efﬁciency particulate air ﬁlters, relative
humidity of 50 ±10%, temperature of 70 /C176F±5/C176F, and a 12-h light/dark cycle.
Certiﬁed Rodent Diet 5002 (PMI Feeds, Inc., St. Louis, MO) and municipaldrinking water, further puriﬁed by reverse osmosis, were provided ad libitum .
The animal care and experimental procedures of these studies were conducted
in compliance with the U.S. Animal Welfare Act and were performed in
accordance with the standards of the Institute of Laboratory Animal ResourcesGuide (1996). The Association for Assessment and Accreditation of LaboratoryAnimal Care International has accredited the Pﬁzer facility in which the studies
were conducted.
2-BE studies. Mice were administered either 900 mg/kg 2-BE (Sigma-
Aldrich, St Louis, MO) in deionized water or deionized water alone by oral
gavage daily for 7 days (10 animals per treatment group). Each dose group wasfurther divided into two arms, one ( n¼5) for Hypoxyprobe (NPI, Burlington,
MA) immunohistochemical (IHC) staining and the other ( n¼5) for RNA
isolation and transcriptional proﬁling. Hypoxyprobe was injected i.p. 2.5 hprior to sacriﬁce. Additional treatment groups (four animals per group) receivedonly a single dose of 2-BE (900 mg/kg) or deionized water by oral gavage and
were sacriﬁced 4 h after dosing for gene expression analysis. Red blood cell
(RBC) counts and hemoglobin (Hgb) were determined using an Advia 120hematology analyzer (Siemens, Tarrytown, NY) to verify hemolytic effects. All
animals were anesthetized with ketamine and sacriﬁced by cervical dislocation.
BM (left femur), liver, and spleen were collected in 10% neutral bufferedformalin (NBF) and processed using routine methods for microscopicevaluation. The dose chosen for the 2-BE studies (900 mg/kg) was based on
Siesky et al. (2002), where treatment of mice with 900 mg/kg 2-BE for 7 days
produced a signiﬁcant decrease in hematocrit, and on Park et al. (2002b), where
900 mg/kg 2-BE for 7 days also produced oxidative stress in the liver.
Hypoxia studies. Mice were subjected to either whole-body hypoxia or
normoxia. Unrestrained mice were treated in a plethysmography chamber (PLY3211; Buxco Research Systems, Wilmington, NC) connected to a Bias FlowRegulator (PLY1040; Buxco Research Systems), which provided normobaric
airﬂow of 1.0–1.5 ml/min. Mice ( n¼4) were exposed to hypoxia that followed
a course of 8% O
2pretreatment for 30 or 60 min followed by a 60- to 90-min
6% O 2treatment. Control mice ( n¼4) were exposed to normal air in the
plethysmography chambers for an equal duration. Mice were sacriﬁced by
cervical dislocation immediately following hypoxia treatment. Tissues were
evaluated for gene expression or Hypoxyprobe immunohistochemistry.
Hypoxyprobe IHC staining. Hypoxyprobe (pimonidazole HCl) uses an
IHC method for the detection of local tissue hypoxia (http://www.hypoxypro-
be.com). In a low oxygen environment, the pimonidazole is reductivelyactivated and binds to cysteine residues and thiols forming protein adducts inhypoxic cells that are detected using standard IHC methods. The reagent has
been used to detect local tissue hypoxia in liver (Arteel et al. , 1996). Liver,
spleen, and BM (from femurs) from mice injected with Hypoxyprobe wereextracted and immediately placed in ice-cold 10% NBF for 24 h. BM samples
were subsequently placed in ImmunoCAL (Decal Chemical, Tallman, NY) for
an additional 24 h. All tissues were processed and embedded in parafﬁn blocksaccording to standard procedures. Tissue sections were cut at 5 lm and placed
on glass slides. Citrate antigen retrieval was done using high heat and pressure
(Chemicon, Temecula, CA) followed by peroxidase block (Sigma-Aldrich) and
protein block (Dako, Carpinteria, CA). IHC staining was performed at roomtemperature on an automated Dako Autostainer (Dako). The Hypoxyprobereagent was run at a dilution of 1/500 for 60 min, detected using Dako
Envision þRabbit HRP Polymer for 30 min at room temperature, and then
visualized with Dako Liquid DAB þ. Slides were counterstained with Mayer’s
hematoxylin and cover slipped. Negative controls for the study included
a rabbit isotype control antibody (Dako) incubated for 60 min. In addition,
tissue samples from animals not treated with pimonidazole were stained withthe same protocol to show the absence of nonspeciﬁc anti-Hypoxyprobeantibody staining. All images were captured at 320 using a Hammamatsu
NanoZoomer (Olympus, Center Valley, PA) slide scanner and stored in a Bacus
image format. Deﬁniens (Munich, Germany) image analysis software was usedto calculate the stain ratio (stain area/tissue area). See Supplementary Materialsfor more details on image quantiﬁcation.
RNA isolation and transcriptional proﬁling. A portion of the left lateral
liver lobe and a half cross-section of spleen were rapidly dissected from mice
and ﬂash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The BM cells were collected via a BM ﬂushutilizing 700 ll Paxgene BM buffer (Qiagen, Inc., Valencia, CA) from the right
humerus and frozen at /C080/C176C. Total RNA was extracted from a minimum of
four mice per treatment group, along with corresponding vehicle controls. The
frozen liver and spleen were crushed, and 50–100 mg of the crushed tissue wasused to prepare total RNA by extracting in Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA)
followed by puriﬁcation on a Qiagen RNeasy Mini column as recommended by
the manufacturer (Qiagen, Inc.). Total RNA was isolated from the BM inPaxgene buffer as recommended by the manufacturer (Qiagen, Inc.). TheSYSTEMS BIOLOGY STUDY OF 2-BE–INDUCED TUMORS
255quantity and purity of the RNA were determined by absorbance at 260 and 260
nm/280 nm absorbance ratio, respectively. Each of the total RNA preparations
was individually assessed for RNA quality based on the 28S/18S ratiomeasured on an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer system using the RNA 6000 NanoLabChip Kit. complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized using 2 lgo f
high-quality total RNA. SuperScript II (Invitrogen) was used to reverse
transcribe the mRNA in the presence of a T7-containing oligo-dT24 primerfollowed by second-strand synthesis as recommended by Affymetrix (SantaClara, CA) cDNA was puriﬁed using RNAClean magnetic beads (Agencourt
Bioscience Corp., Beverly, MA) and used as a template for in vitro
transcription using the GeneChip One-Cycle Labeling Kit from Affymetrix.Complmentary RNA (cRNA) was puriﬁed using magnetic beads fromAgencourt Bioscience Corp., and the quantity and purity of the cRNA were
determined by absorbance at 260 and 260 nm/280 nm absorbance ratio,
respectively. The quality of the cRNA was evaluated by assessing the sizedistribution of the cRNA using a 1.25% 3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid gel.
The labeled cRNA was fragmented as recommended by Affymetrix and 10
lg was added to a hybridization cocktail prior to loading onto individual Mouse
430 2.0 GeneChip microarrays. The microarrays were hybridized at 45 /C176C for
16–24 h and washed and stained on an Affymetrix FS450 ﬂuidics station
according to the manufacturer recommendations. The microarrays were
scanned on a GeneChip Scanner 3000.
Array data quality was evaluated using a proprietary high-throughput
application that assesses the data against multiple objective standards including
5#/3#glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase ratio, signal/noise ratio, and
background as well as other additional metrics (e.g., outlier, vertical variance)and a visual inspection of the chip image for surface defects. All samples
passed these data quality assessments.
Determination of signiﬁcant RNA expression changes. RNA expression
data were analyzed using the ‘‘affy’’ and ‘‘limma’’ packages of theBioconductor suite of microarray analysis tools available for the R statistical
environment (Gentleman, 2005; Gentleman et al. , 2004; Irizarry et al. , 2003;
R Development Core Team, 2007). Robust microarray analysis backgroundcorrection and quantile normalization were used to generate microarray
expression values. Prior to analysis of changing genes, data were visualized
using principal components analysis and hierarchical clustering to identifyoutlier samples. Three samples (one control each in 2-BE 7-day liver, 2-BE4-h liver, and hypoxia BM) were judged to be sufﬁciently different from
others in their treatment cohorts that they were not used for further analysis.
An overall linear model was ﬁt to the data for all sample groups, and speciﬁccontrasts of interest were evaluated to generate raw pvalues for each probe set on
the expression array (Smyth, 2004). The Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery
rate method was then used to correct for multiple testing effects. Probe sets
were considered to have changed qualitatively in a speciﬁc comparison if anadjusted pvalue of 0.05 was obtained, their average expression intensity was
above 150 in either treatment group, and they had an absolute fold change greater
than 1.3. Genes represented by multiple probe sets were considered to havechanged if at least one probe set was observed to change. Gene expressionchanges that met these criteria were called statistically signiﬁcant RNA
expression changes and have the directional qualities of ‘‘up’’ or ‘‘down’’ (i.e.,
they can be upregulated or downregulated in response to treatment).
Knowledgebase and mouse knowledge assembly model. The substrate for
analysis of statistically signiﬁcant RNA gene expression changes in response to
a given treatment is the mouse knowledge assembly Model, which is derived
from the global Genstruct Knowledgebase. This knowledge base is a collectionof biological concepts and entities and their causal relationships that is derivedfrom peer-reviewed scientiﬁc literature as well as public and proprietary
databases. The Mouse Knowledge Assembly Model is the set of mouse-speciﬁc
causal assertions that has been augmented with orthologous causal assertionsderived from either rat or human sources and is competent for causal modeling.An example causal assertion would be increased transcriptional activity of
nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF- jB)
complex causing an increase in the gene expression of the insulin receptorsubstrate 1 (Irs1) (Ruan et al. , 2002). Each causal assertion has a speciﬁc
scientiﬁc citation, and the assembled collection of these causal assertions is
referred to as the Mouse Knowledge Assembly Model in this article.
The CNM. In the case of RNA expression data, CNM interrogates the
Mouse Knowledge Assembly Model to identify upstream controllers for the
statistically signiﬁcant gene expression changes observed in the experiment.
These upstream controllers are called hypotheses as they are statisticallysigniﬁcant potential explanations of the gene expression changes. Hypothesis
generation is performed automatically by a computer program that utilizes the
Mouse Knowledge Assembly Model to identify hypotheses that explain theinput gene expression changes, prioritized by multiple statistical criteria. Eachhypothesis is scored according to two probabilistic scoring metrics, richness
and concordance, that examine distinct aspects of the probability of
a hypothetical cause explaining a given number of statistically signiﬁcantgene expression changes. Richness is the probability that the number ofobserved gene expression changes connected to a given hypothesis could have
occurred by chance alone. Concordance is the probability that the number of
observed gene expression changes that match the directionality of thehypothesis (e.g., increased or decreased kinase activity for a kinase, increased
or decreased transcriptional activity for a transcription factor, etc.) could have
occurred by chance alone. For each hypothesis ‘‘Score’’ is the number of geneexpression changes that support the hypothesis in its statistically signiﬁcantdirection, and ‘‘Contra’’ is the number of gene expression changes that support
an opposite direction for the hypothesis. A hypothesis was considered to be
statistically (although not necessarily biologically) signiﬁcant if it met richnessand concordance probability cutoffs of 0.05 and marginally signiﬁcant if it metrichness and concordance probability cutoffs of 0.1. These hypotheses are
further investigated and prioritized by evaluation of their biological relevance
to the experimental context, whether they are causally linked to phenotypes andprocesses relevant to hemangiosarcoma formation in the literature and if theyare causally downstream of the experimental treatments. The models for each
organ in response to 2-BE were merged to create the overall mechanistic model
for hemangiosarcoma formation.
RESULTS
Conﬁrmation of Hemolysis Induced by 2-BE
Hematology. As shown in Table 1, RBC and Hgb were
decreased 23% at 4 h. After 7 days of treatment, RBC wasdecreased 23% and Hgb was decreased 19%. Reticulocytecounts were unchanged from untreated controls at 4 h but
increased by 6.1-fold at 7 days. These results conﬁrm that active
hemolysis was present within 4 h of 2-BE administration andthat RBC and Hgb remained signiﬁcantly decreased compared tountreated controls regardless of enhanced erythropoietic activity(i.e., increased reticulocyte counts) after 7 days of treatment.
Histopathology. After 7 days of 2-BE treatment, micro-
scopic ﬁndings included increased splenic extramedullaryhematopoiesis (EMH) and decreased BM myeloid:erythroid(M:E) ratio. Increased splenic EMH was characterized byincreased numbers of hematopoietic precursors in the medul-lary red pulp with a predominance of erythroid lineage cells.Similarly, the decreased M:E ratio observed in the BM was
characterized by increased numbers of erythroid lineage cells
(i.e., erythroid hyperplasia) compared to myeloid precursors.These ﬁndings are consistent with a compensatory mechanismto replenish the RBC pool following 2-BE–induced hemolysis.Histopathology was not measured at the 4-h time point.256
LAIFENFELD ET AL.Overview of CNM Results
To build a model of 2-BE–induced hemangiosarcoma, CNM
was used to identify statistically signiﬁcant explanations orhypotheses for the observed gene expression changes induced by4 h and 7 days 2-BE treatment in the BM, spleen, and liver of
B6C3F1 mice (Table 2); 7-day treatment was used to identify
molecular mechanisms that can lead to hemangiosarcomaformation, while the 4-h treatment served to identify potentialinitiating events for these mechanisms. The model was thencompared to the transcriptomic ﬁngerprint generated in micetreated directly with hypoxia (2 h, 6–8% O
2). Table 2 lists the
number of gene expression changes and hypotheses that explainthese changes for all treatments and tissue combinations.
Conﬁrmation of Previous Findings that 2-BE Induces
Macrophage Activation and Inﬂammation in the Liver
Analysis of mice treated with 2-BE for 4 h identiﬁed
increased transcriptional responses to inﬂammation andoxidative stress in spleen and liver (Supplementary Figs. 1A–
D). At the 7-day time point, CNM also predicted an increase ininﬂammation in the liver (Fig. 1), which, like the results at 4 h,is consistent with publications from Klaunig and colleagues(Corthals et al. , 2006; Klaunig and Kamendulis, 2005). An
TABLE 2
Overview of the Number of RNA Expression Changes and
Hypotheses Identiﬁed in Each Tissue in Response to Each
Treatmenta
Tissue TreatmentGene expression
changesBiologically relevant
hypotheses
BM 2-BE 4 h 0 ND
2 BE 7 days 1236 72
Hypoxia 511 74
Spleen 2-BE 4 h 465 144
2 BE 7 days 2115 NDHypoxia 1442 74
Liver 2-BE 4 h 200 71
2 BE 7 days 155 26Hypoxia 781 81
Note. ND, not determined (see the ‘‘Results’’section for explanations).
aThe process used to identify the gene expression changes meeting statistical
signiﬁcance and the number of hypotheses identiﬁed by CNM for each
treatment and network are outlined in the ‘‘Materials and Methods’’ section.
More details about the individual hypotheses can be found in SupplementaryTable 1.
FIG. 1. Seven-day 2-BE treatment induces inﬂammation in the liver. CNM
based on gene expression changes supports a proinﬂammatory response inwhich Tlr4 induces an increase in NF- jB transcriptional activation, leading to
cytokine production and macrophage activation. Notation and color guide:
Numbers in brackets indicate the number of gene expression changes
supporting a given hypothesis; catof(X) is catalytic activity of X; kaof(X) iskinase activity of X; taof(X) is transcriptional activity of X; yellow boxes are
statistically signiﬁcant predicted increases in the activity or abundance of the
protein indicated in a given hypothesis with a concordance pvalue less than
0.05; white boxes with an arrow are signiﬁcant hypotheses with a concordancepvalue between 0.05 and 0.1; white boxes without an arrow are not signiﬁcant
hypotheses and are presented for clarity; connecting lines with arrowheads
indicate a causal activation. Genes that support the hypotheses listed in thisﬁgure can be found in Supplementary Table 2.TABLE 1
RBC Counts, Hgb Concentrations, and Reticulocyte Counts in Mice following 2-BE Administration for 4 h or 7 Daysa
ParameterUntreated control
(4 h, n¼10)2-BE (900 mg/kg)
(4 h, n¼10)Untreated control
(7 days, n¼5)2-BE (900 mg/kg)
(7 days, n¼4)
RBC (106/ll) 9.63 ±0.43 7.38 ±0.73b9.71 ±0.33 7.47 ±0.40b
Hgb (g/dl) 14.6 ±0.87 11.2 ±0.69b15.1 ±0.50 12.2 ±0.77b
Reticulocyte count (103/ll) 248.3 ±43.7 299.6 ±86.9 171.7 ±28.0 1045.5 ±245.2b
aFour-hour hematology data were collected from earlier 2-BE studies and reported here for reference.
bGroup mean signiﬁcantly different from control at level p¼0.01. Arithmetic means and SDs were calculated, and treatment comparisons were performed using
Student’s t-test applied at the two-tailed 1% signiﬁcance level.SYSTEMS BIOLOGY STUDY OF 2-BE–INDUCED TUMORS 257increase in inﬂammation was supported by increased catalytic
activity of Tlr4, evidenced by eight gene expression changes(Supplementary Table 2). Increases in the levels of theproinﬂammatory cytokines Il1b and Il6 in the liver were alsosupported by eight and six gene expression changes, re-spectively (Fig. 1). Increases in cytokines are consistent withmacrophage activation. As illustrated in Figure 1, Tlr4promotes inﬂammation by inducing the transcriptional activity
of NF- jB, which leads to proinﬂammatory cytokine production
(O’Neill and Bowie, 2007) that in turn activates AP-1signaling, which has been shown to stimulate cell proliferation
(Ballermann et al. , 1998).
Support for Hypoxia as an Initiating Event for 2-BE–Induced
Hemangiosarcoma
In addition to conﬁrming previously reported increases in
inﬂammation and oxidative stress, CNM also identiﬁedhypoxia as a molecular response in spleen and liver in mice
treated with 2-BE for 4 h and in spleen and BM in mice treated
with 2-BE for 7 days. This response was then compared to thetranscriptomic ﬁngerprint generated in mice treated directlywith reduced oxygen as a positive control for hypoxia. Inaddition, Hypoxyprobe immunohistochemistry was used toquantitate hypoxia in the same organs following these treat-ments. The sections that follow describe the support forhypoxia as an initiating event. See Supplementary Materials for
a more detailed overview of the CNM and IHC results
following treatment with hypoxia. Brieﬂy, CNM providedevidence for oxidative stress and a transcriptional response tohypoxia in liver, spleen, and BM of mice following exposure to6–8% O
2for 1.5–2.5 h.
2-BE 4-h treatment leads to hypoxia in spleen and liver. A
transcriptional response to hypoxia was supported in responseto the 2-BE 4-h treatment in both the spleen and liver (Fig. 2Band Supplementary Figs. 1C and D). Detection of a transcrip-tional response in the spleen that supports hypoxia after 2-BE4-h treatment is consistent with the Hypoxyprobe results for
this organ after 2-BE 7-days treatment, where a 19-fold
increase was observed in IHC staining for hypoxia (Fig. 2A,panel B, Table 3). The transcriptional response in the spleenthat supports hypoxia includes the activation of the hypoxia-inducible transcription factors Hif1a, Epas1, and Arnt,supported by 35, 20, and 10 gene expression changes,respectively (Fig. 2B). Similarly, in the liver, CNM identiﬁedincreased transcriptional responses to hypoxia after 4-h
FIG. 2. 2-BE treatment leads to hypoxia in the spleen. (A) IHC detection
of hypoxia by Hypoxyprobe after seven consecutive doses of 2-BE and after
acute hypoxia (6–8% O 2, 1.5–2.5 h). Representative images of tissue sections
from animals treated with 2-BE (A, control; B, treated) or hypoxia (C, control;
D, treated) are shown. (B) Molecular response to hypoxia in the spleen 4 h
following a single dose of 2-BE based on CNM. For notation and color guide,see Figure 1 legend. Genes that support the hypotheses listed in Figure 2B canbe found in Supplementary Table 3.TABLE 3
Summary of Hypoxyprobe Immunohistochemistry Quantitation
Data from BM, Spleen, and Liver of Mice Treated with 2-BE
(900 mg/kg) or Hypoxia (6–8% O 2, 1.5–2.5 h)a
Tissue TreatmentFold change (over
control)b
BM 2-BE 7 days [2.41 ( p¼0.044)
Hypoxia [6.89 ( p¼0.015)
Spleen 2-BE 7 days [19.00 ( p¼0.028)
Hypoxia [5.60 ( p¼0.094)
Liver 2-BE 7 days No change
Hypoxia [3.05 ( p¼0.005)
aExperimental details for the hypoxia treatment can be found in the
Supplementary Materials.
bA two-sample t-test was used to compare the treated and control groups. A
Levene’s test was applied to determine if the t-test would be performed under
unequal or equal variance conditions.258 LAIFENFELD ET AL.treatment with 2-BE, which is supported by increases in the
activities of Hif1a and Epas1 and evidenced by 15 and 9 geneexpression changes, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 2A). 2-BE 4-h treatment in the BM did not yield signiﬁcant gene
expression changes for CNM (Table 2).
2-BE 7-day treatment leads to hypoxia in the spleen and
BM. In the BM, CNM identiﬁed inhibition of Hif1a
transcriptional activity as well as a decrease in a general
transcriptional response to hypoxia after 2-BE 7-day treatment,supported by 48 and 157 gene expression changes, respectively(Supplementary Fig. 3). These molecular responses areconsistent with a response in mice to prolonged hypoxia thatleads to Hif1a desensitization (Ginouves et al. , 2008; Stroka
et al. , 2001). Hypoxyprobe was used to determine whether 2-
BE treatment for 7 days leads to immnohistochemically
detectable hypoxia in the BM, spleen, and liver. Increased
hypoxia was detected by Hypoxyprobe in both the spleen (Fig.2A, panels A and B) and the BM after 2-BE 7-day treatment(Table 3). CNM was not performed on the spleen 2-BE 7-daytreated data set due to the robust induction of erythropoiesis inthis organ. In the liver, CNM and Hypoxyprobe measurementsafter 2-BE 7-day treatment did not support hypoxia ora hypoxic response (data not shown).
Hypoxia Can Lead to Epo-Induced Cell Proliferation and
Differentiation following 2-BE Treatment
2-BE 7-day treatment increases epo-induced erythrocyte
differentiation and proliferation and EPC/EC proliferation in
the BM. CNM supports an induction of Epo signaling in the
BM of B6C3F1 mice in response to 2-BE 7-day treatment,consistent with the stimulatory effect of hemolysis onerythropoiesis. An increase in Epo levels was supported inthe BM by 58 gene expression changes (Supplementary Table4). Epo triggers differentiation and proliferation of erythroidcells via kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (Kras)
and the phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B
(Akt) pathway (Bouscary et al. , 2003; Zhang and Lodish,
2005), resulting in phosphorylation and activation of theerythroid differentiation transcription factor Gata1 (Jelkmann,2004) (Fig. 3). Consistent with this, CNM identiﬁed activationof Kras, supported by 37 gene expression changes, as well asactivation of the PI3K/Akt pathway (Fig. 3). Activation of thelatter pathway was supported via decreased activities of the
PI3K/Akt pathway inhibitor, Pten (Chow and Baker, 2006) and
Foxo1, which are negatively regulated by Akt (Burgering andKops, 2002). Decreased Pten and Foxo1 activities weresupported by 72 and 36 gene expression changes, respectively.In addition, increased Gata1 activity was supported in the BMby 23 gene expression changes (Fig. 3). CNM also supportsincreased iron accumulation in the BM via an increase in thetransferrin receptor, Tfrc, which is involved in transporting iron
into the cell for erythropoiesis. Together, increased Epo, Akt
signaling, Gata1 activity, and iron accumulation supportincreased erythroid differentiation and proliferation in the
BM (Fig. 3), an expected response to 2-BE treatment due to itshemolytic effects.
In addition to its role in erythropoiesis, Epo signaling has
also been shown to stimulate the differentiation and pro-
liferation of EPCs and ECs via activation of the PI3K/Aktpathway (Bahlmann et al. , 2004; Urao et al. , 2006). CNM
supports increased Epo signaling via activation of the PI3K/Akt pathway following 2-BE treatment (Fig. 3). Sincehemangiosarcomas are tumors of endothelial origin, increasedEpo signaling and activation of the PI3K/Akt pathwayfollowing 2-BE treatment should lead to increased EPC/EC
cell proliferation in the BM.
2-BE 7-day treatment increases epo-induced erythrocyte
differentiation and proliferation and EPC/EC proliferation inthe spleen. The spleen has been reported to be the main site for
stress-induced erythropoiesis in mice (Hiroyama et al. ,2 0 0 8 ) ,
and EMH would be anticipated as a stress response to
a hemolytic agent. The induction of Epo in response to 7-day
2-BE treatment conﬁrmed the induction of erythropoiesis in thespleen. Consistent with this, increased expression of multiplemarkers of nucleated erythrocytes (Chambers et al. , 2007) and
enzymes involved in synthesizing Hgb (Table 4) (Heinemannet al. , 2008), the oxygen-binding component of erythrocytes,
were observed in the spleens of mice after 2-BE 7-day treatment.Additionally, increased expression of Tfrc, which is necessary
for iron import into the cell for heme synthesis, was also
observed (Table 4). Notably, of the gene expression changesobserved in the spleen, genes related to erythropoiesis(Chambers et al. ,2 0 0 7 ;D i n g et al. ,2 0 0 4 ;P e t e r s et al. ,1 9 9 9 ;
Taoet al. ,2 0 0 0 ;Y i et al. , 2006) showed the highest expression
changes with 2-BE treatment (Supplementary Table 5),supporting massive erythropoiesis in this organ. The robustinduction of erythropoiesis led to an uneven distribution of cell
types between control and treated samples, with the treated
samples having a much larger proportion of erythrocytescompared to control. This uneven cell type distribution did notallow for a meaningful comparison between treated and controlsamples, and therefore, CNM was not carried out for this organ.As previously described, Epo signaling in the BM can result notonly in erythropoiesis but also in proliferation of EPCs/ECs.
Additional Effects on Cell Proliferation, Differentiation, and
Genomic Stability
In addition to the conﬁrmation of previous ﬁndings
supporting inﬂammation and macrophage activation, and the
complementary evidence of hypoxia, 2-BE was also found to
induce several other processes not previously identiﬁed butrelevant for events that contribute to hemangiosarcomas.
2-BE 7-day treatment induces cell cycle progression in the
BM. Multiple mechanisms leading to cell cycle progression
were supported in the BM of 2-BE–treated mice at 7 days.SYSTEMS BIOLOGY STUDY OF 2-BE–INDUCED TUMORS 259These cell cycle mechanisms can be induced by Akt signaling,
consistent with the previously mentioned role of the Aktpathway in triggering proliferation of erythrocytes and EPCs/ECs (Bahlmann et al. , 2004; Urao et al. , 2006). CNM supports
increased protein levels of cell cycle activators, including thecyclin Ccnd1 and the transcription factors Myc, E2f1, andE2f3, supported by 21, 62, 15, and 5 gene expression changes,
respectively (Fig. 4). Moreover, decreased cell cycle inhibitors
were observed, including decreased levels of Cdkn1a andCdkn2a, and in the transcriptional activities of Rb1 and E2f4,supported by 21, 13, 26, and 23 gene expression changes,respectively (Fig. 4). Increased expression of Ccne1, a cellcycle activator, was also observed. Together, these factorsconstitute a robust pathway (Fig. 4), contributing to theincrease in proliferation of both erythrocytes and EPCs/ECs in
the BM in response to 2-BE 7-day treatment.
2-BE 7-day treatment decreases levels of Bnip3l. CNM
supports decreased Bnip3l protein abundance in the BM, basedon 49 gene expression changes (Supplementary Table 3). Since
Bnip3l is essential for autophagic removal of mitochondriaduring maturation of erythroid cells (Sandoval et al. , 2008),
decreased Bnip3l abundance can result in an overall decrease inthe number of mature erythrocytes despite a robust reticulocyteresponse. As observed in the current studies, 2-BE adminis-tration in mice results in extravascular erythrocyte destruction
and splenomegally consistent with sustained downregulation of
Bnip3l.
2-BE 7-day treatment induces genomic instability in the
BM. A decrease in the expression of transcripts that
contribute to mechanisms involved in genomic stability wassupported in the BM in response to 2-BE treatment. Thesemechanisms include the predicted decreases in the transcrip-tional activity of Trp53 (p53) and Brca1 protein levels, whichare supported by 57 and 47 gene expression changes,respectively (Supplementary Table 6 and data not shown).Trp53 and Brca1 have been shown to function in cell cycle
FIG. 3. Seven-day 2-BE treatment leads to erythropoiesis and EC/EPC proliferation in the BM. CNM based on BM gene expression changes predicts
increased Epo signaling that leads to erythropoiesis via increased transcriptional activity of Gata1. Notation and color guide: paof(X) is phospha tase activity of X;
gtpof(X) is guanosine triphosphate-bound activity of X; exp(X) is expression of X; connecting lines with arrowheads indicate a causal activation; l ines with bars
indicate causal inhibition; blue boxes are statistically signiﬁcant predicted decreases in the activity or abundance of the protein indicated in a g iven hypothesis with
a concordance pvalue less than 0.05; green and red boxes are statistically signiﬁcant increases or decreases in the expression levels of the indicated mRNA,
respectively. For additional notation, see Figure 1. Genes that support the hypotheses listed in this ﬁgure can be found in Supplementary Table 4.260 LAIFENFELD ET AL.checkpoint control and induce cell cycle arrest upon DNA
damage (Bargonetti and Manfredi, 2002; Hartman and Ford,2003). Therefore, decreased functionality of both proteins
impairs the ability of the cell to compensate for and repair
DNA damage secondary to increased cell proliferationresulting in decreased genomic stability.
DISCUSSION
The present study was aimed at gaining a better un-
derstanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying heman-giosarcoma formation to help determine the relevance of drug-induced hemangiosarcomas in mice to cancer risk in humans.As summarized in Figure 5, CNM on transcriptomic data fromBM, spleen, and liver of mice treated with the hemangiosar-coma-causing agent, 2-BE, revealed multiple interrelatedprocesses that comprise a mechanistic model of hemangiosar-
coma formation. Speciﬁcally, analysis of the transcriptomic
data demonstrated support for an inﬂammatory response in theliver, including activated macrophages and cytokine productionin response to 2-BE. This response is consistent with previousreports investigating the mechanism of action of 2-BE(Corthals et al. , 2006; Klaunig and Kamendulis, 2005).
Importantly, our data demonstrate the potential role forhypoxia, secondary to 2-BE–induced hemolysis, as an
initiating event in hemangiosarcoma. In addition, CNM
supported a role for Epo signaling that, coupled with decreasedgenomic stability in hematopoietic organs, could stimulate theproliferation of EPCs and increase the probability of sponta-neous mutations of this cell type. These results also support therecruitment of proliferating EPCs in the BM to sites ofinﬂammation in the liver as an additional contributor tohemangiosarcoma formation. This study illustrates the use of
such a model to further the mechanistic understanding of
hemangiosarcoma. Importantly, the mode of action outlined inFigure 5 is consistent with that published in a recent review,where a generalized mode of action of hemangiosarcoma
formation was proposed (Cohen et al. , 2009).
Hypoxia Can Contribute to the Initiation of
Hemangiosarcoma
2-BE–induced hypoxia in the liver, spleen, and BM was
demonstrated by transcriptomics, CNM, and phenotypically viathe use of Hypoxyprobe. We propose that hypoxia maymediate previously identiﬁed mechanisms of 2-BE–induced
hemangiosarcoma. For example, hypoxia can serve as an
initiating event to iron-induced oxidative stress previouslyobserved in response to 2-BE treatment (Klaunig andKamendulis, 2005; Nyska et al. , 2004). Local tissue hypoxia
generates an acidic environment that stimulates iron releasefrom hemosiderin leading to the production of hydroxylradicals in vitro (Ozaki et al. , 1988), and without an acidic
environment, iron is not as efﬁciently released from hemosid-
erin (Ozaki et al. , 1988). Furthermore, Hif1a, the hypoxia-
responsive transcription factor, has been shown to induce ROSproduction, likely via the Fenton reaction (Hervouet et al. ,
2008), which has also been implicated in the oxidative stresseffects of 2-BE (Klaunig and Kamendulis, 2005). Therefore, itis possible that hypoxia may function upstream of andcontribute to iron-induced oxidative stress in response to 2-BE.
In addition to its role in oxidative stress, hypoxia and
activation of Hif1a have been shown to induce processes that
can increase the supply of oxygen. This is achieved through thetranscription of genes that function in processes such asangiogenesis and EC proliferation (Otrock et al. , 2009;
Yamakawa et al. , 2003). Among these genes is Vegf, a well-
known growth factor that has been shown to induceangiogenesis (Forsythe et al. , 1996; Levy et al. , 1995). Since
hemangiosarcomas are EC-derived tumors (Mendenhall et al. ,
2006), the discovery of high expression levels of Hif1a, Hif2a,
as well as the Hif target genes, Vegf and Epo, in a renalangiosarcoma (Rathmell et al. , 2004) is consistent with the role
of these factors in EC proliferation.
Continuous Epo Signaling Results in Erythropoiesis and
EPC/EC Proliferation in Spleen and BM
As described above, the proposed mechanistic model for
induction of hemangiosarcoma identiﬁes continuous Eposignaling in the BM as a key event leading to the differentiation
and proliferation of EPCs and ECs in hematopoietic organs
(BM and spleen). The RBC hemolysis induced by 2-BE likelyserves as the initial stimulus for Epo signaling (Leng et al. ,
1999). The induction of Epo serves to ameliorate the anemiaresulting from RBC hemolysis, by signaling for production oferythrocytes. Interestingly, the present study found tran-scriptomic data consistent with a decrease in Bnip3l (alsocalled Nix) protein levels in the BM of 2-BE–treated mice
compared to controls. Bnip3l is a Bcl2-interacting protein
family member (Schweers et al. , 2007) that, when knockedTABLE 4
Increased Spleen RNA Expression Changes ( p<0.05) of
Nucleated Erythrocyte Markers after 7 Days of 2-BE Treatment
Gene symbol Gene name Fold change
Ache Acetylcholinesterase 3.76
Slc4a1 Erythrocyte membrane protein band 3, Diego
blood group19.6
Cd47 CD47 antigen 2.12
Tfrc Transferrin receptor 16.5Gypa Glycophorin A 11.4Hbb-y Hemoglobin Y, beta-like embryonic chain 2.18
Hbb-bh1 Hemoglobin Z, beta-like embryonic chain 1.56
Hba-x Hemoglobin X, alpha-like embryonic chain
in Hba complex1.37
Rhd Rh blood group, D antigen 9.82
Itga4 Integrin, alpha 4 1.36SYSTEMS BIOLOGY STUDY OF 2-BE–INDUCED TUMORS
261down, has been shown to hinder the process of mitochondria
removal and apoptosis in erythrocytes during their maturation(Diwan et al. , 2007; Schweers et al. , 2007; Sandoval et al. ,
2008). Loss of Bnip3l has also been characterized using Nix /C0//C0
mice, which demonstrate anemia, reduced erythrocyte lifespanin vivo , reticulocytosis, and splenomegaly (Diwan et al. , 2007).
Decreased Bnip3l protein levels in response to 2-BE, therefore,
results in an increase in mitochondria-containing erythrocytes,which are targeted for removal by the spleen. Increasedelimination of mature erythrocytes results in a sustaineddecrease in the number of mature erythrocytes despite robustreticulocytosis. This decrease in mature erythrocyes, in turn,leads to continuous Epo signaling in an attempt to replenisherythrocyte levels to normal values (Noguchi et al. , 2008;
Weidemann and Johnson, 2009). Reduced apoptosis of spleen
and BM erythrocyte populations results in the aberrant survivalof committed erythroblasts contributing to erythroblastosis(Diwan et al. , 2007). Additionally, Bnip3l has been shown tobe regulated by hypoxia, and deregulation has been associated
with tumor growth (Zhang and Ney, 2009). Experimentally,downregulation of Bnip3l increased the growth of osteosar-coma cells in a tumor transplant model, suggesting that Bnip3lis needed to inhibit tumor growth under hypoxic conditions.
Epo has been shown in previous studies to stimulate EC and
EPC proliferation (Bahlmann et al. , 2003). EPCs derived from
hematopoietic organs that circulate in the blood have the abilityto differentiate into ECs (Shi et al. , 1998). Sustained Epo
signaling due to decreased Bnip3l levels and sustained effectson erythropoiesis would result therefore in continuous pro-liferation of ECs and EPCs, contributing to hemangiosarcomaformation. Supporting the notion of EPCs as central tohemangiosarcomas, EPC-like hematopoietic precursors have
been shown to be the main source of ECs in canine
hemangiosarcomas (Lamerato-Kozicki et al. , 2006). Moreover,
preliminary results have demonstrated that after 7-daytreatment with 2-BE, there are increases in proliferation of
FIG. 4. Seven-day 2-BE treatment leads to cell cycle progression in the BM. CNM based on BM gene expression changes predicts increased Epo signaling
that leads to changes in activity and abundance of proteins resulting in cell cycle progression. For notation and color guide, refer to Figures 1 and 3. Genes that
support the hypotheses listed in this ﬁgure can be found in Supplementary Table 4.262 LAIFENFELD ET AL.ECs/EPCs in both spleen and BM (Criswell, K. A.,
Sokolowski, S., and Aubrecht, J.), consistent with the proposedmechanistic model.
Inﬂammation in the Liver Leads to Recruitment of EPCs/ECs
from the Spleen and BM
The liver is the main site of hemangiosarcoma formation in
mice in response to 2-BE. Therefore, processes identiﬁed in theliver deﬁne mechanisms that may preferentially lead tohemangiosarcoma formation in this organ. CNM of the livergene expression data revealed activation of inﬂammatoryprocesses after acute and chronic 2-BE treatment (Fig. 1).This response is consistent with previous 2-BE studies where
activation of Kupffer cells and IL-6 induction were found
(Corthals et al. , 2006; NTP, 2000). These inﬂammatory
processes can contribute to local hemangiosarcoma formationby recruiting circulating EPCs/ECs to the site of inﬂammation(Fan et al. , 2008). Therefore, while EPC/ECs proliferate and
acquire mutations secondary to increased cell proliferation inthe BM and spleen, hemangiosarcomas are formed at the sitesof recruitment of these EPC/ECs. Indeed, EPC/EC recruiting
signals are commonly associated with sites of hemangiosar-
coma formation. This has been observed for compounds suchasp-nitroaniline and Elmiron, which induce hemangiosarco-
mas in the liver where iron accumulation and Kupffer cellactivation is observed (Abdo et al. , 2003; NTP, 1993, 2004).
For other compound classes that induce mouse-speciﬁchemangiosarcoma, such as peroxisome proliferator-activatedreceptor gamma agonists, pro-angiogenic growth factors have
been observed (Sotiropoulos et al. , 2006), and these may serve
as EPC/EC recruiting signals (Chen et al. , 2008). Taken
together, these studies indicate a key role for EPC/ECrecruiting signals in hemangiosarcoma formation, somethingthat was also suggested in a recent review on hemangiosarcomain rodents (Cohen et al. , 2009).
Species-Speciﬁc Mechanisms Are Identiﬁed within the
Mechanistic Model for Hemangiosarcoma
Hemangiosarcomas are rare in humans but are more
commonly found in mice. Of the processes identiﬁed in thisstudy, increased hypoxia exhibits species differences that mayhelp explain the different rates of hemangiosarcoma occurrencebetween mice, rats, and humans. Because 2-BE causeshemolysis only in mice and rats, humans should not be subjectto the subsequent hypoxia (Udden, 2002); therefore, thestimulus for sustained Epo signaling that results from 2-BE
treatment does not occur in humans. Mice may also be more
vulnerable to oxidative stress stemming from hypoxicconditions since they have been shown to have lower hepaticlevels of the antioxidant, vitamin E, compared to rats andhumans (Siesky et al. , 2002). Thus, hypoxia as an initiating
event to 2-BE–induced hemangiosarcoma is consistent withpreviously identiﬁed species-speciﬁc differences that predisposemice to hemangiosarcoma formation. Additionally, there are no
reports of increased hemangiosarcomas in humans with chronic
FIG. 5. Proposed mechanistic model of 2-BE–induced hemangiosarcoma. The proposed model is based on CNM analysis of transcriptomic data, EC
proliferation, and Hypoxyprobe data from liver, spleen, and BM of mice treated for 4 h and 7 days with 2-BE. The main processes identiﬁed are (1) hypoxia , (2)
dysregulated erythropoiesis, decreased genomic stability, and Epo signaling that can lead to EC proliferation and differentiation in the hematopo ietic organs, and
(3) inﬂammation that can lead to EC proliferation and EC/EPC recruitment in the liver.SYSTEMS BIOLOGY STUDY OF 2-BE–INDUCED TUMORS 263hemolytic disease or in people living at high altitudes, so
hypoxia alone is likely not an operational component ofhemangiosarcoma formation in humans. Interestingly, Mori-Chavez et al. (1970) report that exposure of mice to high altitude
does increase the incidence of spontaneous ovarian angiomas.
In summary, this is the ﬁrst study to use transcriptomic data
linked to pathways analysis to develop a mechanistic, temporal,and multiorgan model of hemangiosarcoma. The resultingmodel conﬁrms that 2-BE induces macrophage activation andinﬂammation in the liver as previously proposed (Corthalset al. , 2006; Klaunig and Kamendulis, 2005). In addition, the
model speciﬁcally supports local tissue hypoxia, increased Eposignaling and erythropoiesis in the spleen and BM, and
suppression of mechanisms that contribute to genomic stability
as contributing factors to hemangiosarcoma in mice (Fig. 6).The key processes emerging from this model are sustained Eposignaling in the BM leading to proliferation of EPCs/ECs andrecruitment signals for EPCs/ECs in the liver, the main site ofhemangiosarcoma formation. Finally, these mechanisms, andin particular hypoxia as an initiating event, are consistent witha generalized mode of action framework that was developed
with multiple other mouse-speciﬁc hemangiosarcoma-causing
agents and that was published in a recent review (Cohen et al. ,
2009).
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Supplementary Figures 1–3, Tables 1–6, and other supple-
mentary materials are available online at http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge Martin Sanders, Chin-
Hu Huang, and Damir Simic for their execution of the hypoxiastudies; Marc Roy, Alan Opsahl, and Timothy Coskran fortheir expertise in generating and analyzing the HypoxyprobeIHC data; and Susan Eddy for her help with BM isolations.
REFERENCES
Abdo, K. M., Johnson, J. D., and Nyska, A. (2003). Toxicity and
carcinogenicity of Elmiron in F344/N rats and B6C3F1 mice following 2years of gavage administration. Arch. Toxicol. 77,702–711.
Abdo, K. M., Murthy, A. S., Haseman, J. K., Dieter, M. P., Hildebrandt, P., and
Huff, J. E. (1982). Carcinogenesis bioassay in rats and mice fed dietscontaining 2-biphenylamine hydrochloride. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 5,
201–210.
Arteel, G. E., Raleigh, J. A., Bradford, B. U., and Thurman, R. G. (1996).
Acute alcohol produces hypoxia directly in rat liver tissue in vivo: Role of
Kupffer cells. Am. J. Physiol. 271, 494–500.
Bahlmann, F. H., DeGroot, K., Duckert, T., Niemczyk, E., Bahlmann, E.,
Boehm, S. M., Haller, H., and Fliser, D. (2003). Endothelial progenitor cellproliferation and differentiation is regulated by erythropoietin. Kidney Int.
64,1648–1652.
Bahlmann, F. H., De Groot, K., Spandau, J. M., Landry, A. L., Hertel, B.,
Duckert, T., Boehm, S. M., Menne, J., Haller, H., and Fliser, D. (2004).Erythropoietin regulates endothelial progenitor cells. Blood 103, 921–926.
Ballermann, B. J., Dardik, A., Eng, E., and Liu, A. (1998). Shear stress and the
endothelium. Kidney Int. Suppl. 67,S100–S108.
Bargonetti, J., and Manfredi, J. J. (2002). Multiple roles of the tumor
suppressor p53. Curr. Opin. Oncol. 14,86–91.
Blander, G., Bhimavarapu, A., Mammone, T., Maes, D., Elliston, K., Reich, C.,
Matsui, M. S., Guarente, L., and Loureiro, J. J. (2009). SIRT1 promotesdifferentiation of normal human keratinocytes. J. Invest. Dermatol. 129,
41–49.
Bouscary, D., Pene, F., Claessens, Y. E., Muller, O., Chre ´tien, S., Fontenay-
Roupie, M., Gisselbrecht, S., Mayeux, P., and Lacombe, C. (2003). Critical
role for PI 3-kinase in the control of erythropoietin-induced erythroid
progenitor proliferation. Blood 101, 3436–3443.
Bristow, R. G., and Hill, R. P. (2008). Hypoxia and metabolism. Hypoxia,
DNA repair and genetic instability. Nat. Rev. Cancer 8,180–192.
Burgering, B. M., and Kops, G. J. (2002). Cell cycle and death control: Long
live forkheads. Trends Biochem. Sci. 27,352–360.
Chambers, S. M., Boles, N. C., Lin, K. Y., Tierney, M. P., Bowman, T. V.,
Bradfute, S. B., Chen, A. J., Merchant, A. A., Sirin, O., and Weksberg, D. C.
(2007). Hematopoietic ﬁngerprints: An expression database of stem cells andtheir progeny. Cell Stem Cell 1,578–591.
Chan, P. (1993). NTP technical report on the toxicity studies of Riddelliine
(CAS No. 23246-96-0) administered by gavage to F344 rats and B6C3F1mice. Toxic. Rep. Ser. 27,1–D9.
Chen, L., Tredget, E. E., Wu, P. Y., and Wu, Y. (2008). Paracrine factors of
mesenchymal stem cells recruit macrophages and endothelial lineage cells
and enhance wound healing. PLoS One 3,e1886.
Chow, L. M., and Baker, S. J. (2006). PTEN function in normal and neoplastic
growth. Cancer Lett. 241, 184–196.
Cohen, S. M., Storer, R. D., Criswell, K. A., Doerrer, N. G., Dellarco, V. L.,
Pegg, D., Wojcinski, Z., Malarkey, D. E., Jacobs, A. C., Klaunig, J. E., et al.
(2009). Hemangiosarcoma in rodents: Mode-of-action evaluation and human
relevance. Toxicol. Sci. 111, 4–18.
Corthals, S. M., Kamendulis, L. M., and Klaunig, J. E. (2006). Mechanisms of
2-butoxyethanol-induced hemangiosarcomas. Toxicol. Sci. 92,378–386.
Ding, Y., Jiang, W., Su, Y., Zhou, H., and Zhang, Z. (2004). Expression and
puriﬁcation of recombinant cytoplasmic domain of human erythrocyte band3 with hexahistidine tag or chitin-binding tag in Escherichia coli. Protein
Expr. Purif. 34,167–175.
Diwan, A., Koesters, A. G., Odley, A. M., Pushkaran, S., Baines, C. P.,
Spike, B. T., Daria, D., Jegga, A. G., Geiger, H., and Aronow, B. J. (2007).Unrestrained erythroblast development in Nix /C0//C0mice reveals a mecha-
nism for apoptotic modulation of erythropoiesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 104, 6794–6799.
El-Hage, J. (2004). Preclinical and Clinical Safety Assessments for PPAR
Agonists, Drug Information Association meeting, Washington, DC.
Elliott, B. M., and Ashby, J. (1997). Review of the genotoxicity of 2-
butoxyethanol. Mutat. Res. 387, 89–96.
Fan, Y., Ye, J., Shen, F., Zhu, Y., Yeghiazarians, Y., Zhu, W., Chen, Y.,
Lawton, M. T., Young, W. L., and Yang, G. Y. (2008). Interleukin-6stimulates circulating blood-derived endothelial progenitor cell angiogenesis
in vitro. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 28,90–98.
Forsythe, J. A., Jiang, B. H., Iyer, N. V., Agani, F., Leung, S. W., Koos, R. D.,
and Semenza, G. L. (1996). Activation of vascular endothelial growth factorgene transcription by hypoxia-inducible factor. Mol. Cell Biol. 16,
4604–4613.264 LAIFENFELD ET AL.Gentleman, R. (2005). Bioinformatics and computational biology solutions
using R and bioconductor. Stat. Biol. Health xix,397–420.
Gentleman, R., Carey, V. J. C., Bates, D. M., Bolstad, B., Dettling, M.,
Dudoit, S., Ellis, B., Gautier, L., Ge, Y., and Gentry, J. (2004).
Bioconductor: Open software development for computational biology and
bioinformatics. Genome Biol. 5,R80.
Ginouve `s, A., Ilc, K., Macı ´as, N., Pouysse ´gur, J., and Berra, E. (2008).
PHDs overactivation during chronic hypoxia ‘‘desensitizes’’ HIFalpha
and protectscells from necrosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
4745–50.
Goldberg, B., and Stern, A. (1977). The mechanism of oxidative hemolysis
produced by phenylhydrazine. Mol. Pharmacol. 13,832–839.
Hartman, A. R., and Ford, J. M. (2003). BRCA1 and p53: Compensatory roles
in DNA repair. J. Mol. Med. 81,700–707.
Heinemann, I. U., Jahn, M., and Jahn, D. (2008). The biochemistry of heme
biosynthesis. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 474, 238–251.
Hervouet, E., Cizkova, A., Demont, J., Vojtı ´skova ´, A., Pecina, P., Franssen-van
Hal, N. L., Keijer, J., Simonnet, H., Iva ´nek, R., Kmoch, S., et al. (2008). HIF
and reactive oxygen species regulate oxidative phosphorylation in cancer.Carcinogenesis 29,1528–1537.
Hiroyama, T., Miharada, K., Sudo, K., Danjo, I., Aoki, N., and Nakamura, Y.
(2008). Establishment of mouse embryonic stem cell-derived erythroidprogenitor cell lines able to produce functional red blood cells. PLoS One 3,
e1544.
Irizarry, R. A., B. H., Collin, F., Beazer-Barclay, Y. D., Antonellis, K. J.,
Scherf, U., and Speed, T. P. (2003). Exploration, normalization, and
summaries of high density oligonucleotide array probe level data. Bio-
statistics 4,249–264.
Jelkmann, W. (2004). Molecular biology of erythropoietin. Intern. Med. 43,
649–659.
Klaunig, J. E., and Kamendulis, L. M. (2005). Mode of action of
butoxyethanol-induced mouse liver hemangiosarcomas and hepatocellular
carcinomas. Toxicol. Lett. 156, 107–115.
Lamerato-Kozicki, A. R., Helm, K. M., Jubala, C. M., Cutter, G. C., and
Modiano, J. F. (2006). Canine hemangiosarcoma originates from hemato-poietic precursors with potential for endothelial differentiation. Exp.
Hematol. 34,870–878.
Leng, H. M., Albrecht, C. F., Kidson, S. H., and Folb, P. I. (1999).
Erythropoietin production in anemia associated with experimental cancer.
Exp. Hematol. 5,806–810.
Levy, A. P., Levy, N. S., Wegner, S., and Goldberg, M. A. (1995).
Transcriptional regulation of the rat vascular endothelial growth factor gene
by hypoxia. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 13 333–13 340.
Mendenhall, W. M., Mendenhall, C. M., Werning, J. W., Reith, J. D., and
Mendenhall, N. P. (2006). Cutaneous angiosarcoma. Am. J. Clin. Oncol. 29,
524–528.
Mori-Chavez, P., Upton, A. C., Salazar, M. J., and Conklin, J. W. (1970).
Inﬂuence of altitude on late effects of radiation in RF/Un mice: Observations
on survival time, blood changes, body weight, and incidence of neoplasms.
Cancer Res. 30,913–928.
Noguchi, C. T., Wang, L., Rogers, H. M., Teng, R., and Jia, Y. (2008). Survival
and proliferative roles of erythropoietin beyond the erythroid lineage. Expert
Rev. Mol. Med. 10,e36.
NTP (1989). Toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of para-
chloroaniline hydrochloride (CAS No. 20265-96-7) in F344/N rats and
B6C3F1 mice (gavage studies). Natl. Toxicol. Program Tech. Rep. Ser.
351, 1–256.
NTP (1993). Toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of p-nitroaniline (CAS No.
100-01-6) in B6C3F1 mice (gavage studies). Natl. Toxicol. Program Tech.
Rep. Ser. 418, 1–203.NTP (1997). Toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of tetraﬂuoroethylene
(CAS No. 116-14-3) in F344 rats and B6C3F1 mice (inhalation studies).
Natl. Toxicol. Program Tech. Rep. Ser. 450, 1–321.
NTP (2000). Toxicology and carcinogenesis studies 2-butoxyethanol (CAS
NO. 111-76-2) in F344/N rats and B6C3F1 mice (inhalation studies). Natl.
Toxicol. Program Tech. Rep. Ser. 484, 1–290.
NTP (2004). Technical report on the toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of
Elmiron (Cas No. 37319-17-8) in F344/N rats and B6C3F1 mice (gavage
studies). Natl. Toxicol. Program Tech. Rep. Ser. 7–289.
Nyska, A., Haseman, J. K., Kohen, R., and Maronpot, R. R. (2004).
Association of liver hemangiosarcoma and secondary iron overload in
B6C3F1 mice—The National Toxicology Program experience. Toxicol.
Pathol. 32,222–228.
O’Neill, L. A., and Bowie, A. G. (2007). The family of ﬁve: TIR-domain-
containing adaptors in Toll-like receptor signalling. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7,
353–364.
Otrock, Z. K., Hatoum, H. A., Awada, A. H., Ishak, R. S., and
Shamseddine, A. I. (2009). Hypoxia-inducible factor in cancer angiogenesis:
Structure, regulation and clinical perspectives. Crit. Rev. Oncol. Hematol.
70,93–102.
Ozaki, M., Kawabata, T., and Awai, M. (1988). Iron release from haemosiderin
and production of iron-catalysed hydroxyl radicals in vitro. Biochem J. 250,
589–595.
Park, J., Kamendulis, L. M., and Klaunig, J. E. (2002a). Mechanisms of 2-
butoxyethanol carcinogenicity: Studies on Syrian hamster embryo (SHE) cell
transformation. Toxicol. Sci. 1,43–50.
Park, J., Kamendulis, L. M., and Klaunig, J. E. (2002b). Effects of
2-butoxyethanol on hepatic oxidative damage. Toxicol. Lett. 126(1), 19–29.
Peters, L. L., Jindel, H. K., Gwynn, B., Korsgren, C., John, K. M., Lux, S. E.,
Mohandas, N., Cohen, C. M., Cho, M. R., Golan, D. E., et al. (1999). Mild
spherocytosis and altered red cell ion transport in protein 4. 2-null mice. J.
Clin. Invest. 103, 1527–1537.
Pollard, J., Jr., Butte, A. J., Hoberman, S., Joshi, M., Levy, J., and Pappo, J.
(2005). A computational model to deﬁne the molecular causes of type 2diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Technol. Ther. 7,323–336.
R Development Core Team. (2007). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. ISBN
3-900051-07-0. Available at: http://www.R-project.org. Accessed July 6, 2009.
Rathmell, W. K., Acs, G., Simon, M. C., and Vaughn, D. J. (2004). HIF
transcription factor expression and induction of hypoxic response genes in
a retroperitoneal angiosarcoma. Anticancer Res. 24,67–169.
Ruan, H., Hacohen, N., Golub, T. R., Van Parijs, L., and Lodish, H. F. (2002).
Tumor necrosis factor-alpha suppresses adipocyte-speciﬁc genes and activates
expression of preadipocyte genes in 3T3-L1 adipocytes: Nuclear factor-
kappaB activation by TNF-alpha is obligatory. Diabetes 51,1319–1336.
Sandoval, H., Thiagarajan, P., Dasgupta, S. K., Schumacher, A., Prchal, J. T.,
Chen, M., and Wang, J. (2008). Essential role for Nix in autophagicmaturation of erythroid cells. Nature 454, 232–235.
Schweers, R. L., Zhang, J., Randall, M. S., Loyd, M. R., Li, W., Dorsey, F. C.,
Kundu, M., Opferman, J. T., Cleveland, J. L., and Miller, J. L. (2007). NIXis required for programmed mitochondrial clearance during reticulocyte
maturation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 19500–19505.
Shi, Q., Raﬁi, S., Wu, M. H., Wijelath, E. S., Yu, C., Ishida, A., Fujita, Y.,
Kothari, S., Mohle, R., Sauvage, L. R., et al. (1998). Evidence for circulating
bone marrow-derived endothelial cells. Blood 92,362–367.
Siesky, A. M., Kamendulis, L. M., and Klaunig, J. E. (2002). Hepatic effects of
2-butoxyethanol in rodents. Toxicol. Sci. 70,252–260.
Smyth, G. K. (2004). Linear models and empirical Bayes methods for assessing
differential expression in microarray experiments. Stat. Appl. Genetics Mol.
Biol. 3,1.SYSTEMS BIOLOGY STUDY OF 2-BE–INDUCED TUMORS
265Sotiropoulos, K. B., Clermont, A., Yasuda, Y., Rask-Madsen, C., Mastumoto, M.,
Takahashi, J., Della Vecchia, K., Kondo, T., Aiello, L. P., and King, G. L.(2006). Adipose-speciﬁc effect of rosiglitazone on vascular permeability and
protein kinase C activation: Novel mechanism for PPARgamma agonist’s
effects on edema and weight gain. FASEB J 20,1203–1205.
Stroka, D. M., Burkhardt, T., Desbaillets, I., et al. (2001). HIF-1 is expressed in
normoxic tissue and displays an organ-speciﬁc regulation under systemichypoxia. FASEB J 15,2445–2453.
Tao, D., Shen, Y., Feng, X., and Chen, H. (2000). The application of CD71 and
Hoechst33258 to staining method for sorting fetal nucleated red blood cells
in the peripheral blood of pregnant women. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue
Za Zhi 17,352–354.
Toth, B., Nagel, D., Patil, K., Erickson, J., and Antonson, K. (1978). Tumor
induction with the N’-acetyl derivative of 4-hydroxymethyl-phenylhydrazine,a metabolite of agaritine of Agaricus bisporus. Cancer Res. 38,177–180.
Udden, M. M. (2002). In vitro sub-hemolytic effects of butoxyacetic acid on
human and rat erythrocytes. Toxicol. Sci. 69,258–264.
Urao, N., Okigaki, M., Yamada, H., Aadachi, Y., Matsuno, K., Matsui, A.,
Matsunaga, S., Tateishi, K., Nomura, T., Takahashi, T., et al . (2006).
Erythropoietin-mobilized endothelial progenitors enhance reendothelializa-tion via Akt-endothelial nitric oxide synthase activation and prevent
neointimal hyperplasia. Circ. Res. 98,1405–1413.
Wagner, E. F., and Risau, W. (1994). Oncogenes in the study of endothelial cell
growth and differentiation. Semin. Cancer Biol. 5,137–145.
Weidemann, A., and Johnson, R. S. (2009). Nonrenal regulation of EPO
synthesis. Kidney Int. 75,682–688.
Yamakawa, M., Liu, L. X., Date, T., Belanger, A. J., Vincent, K. A.,
Akita, G. Y., Kuriyama, T., Cheng, S. H., Gregory, R. J., and Jiang, C.
(2003). Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 mediates activation of cultured vascular
endothelial cells by inducing multiple angiogenic factors. Circ. Res. 93,
664–673.
Yi, Z., Cohen-Barak, O., Hagiwara, N., Kingsley, P. D., Fuchs, D. A.,
Erickson, D. T., Epner, E. M., Palis, J., and Brilliant, M. H. (2006). Sox6
directly silences epsilon globin expression in deﬁnitive erythropoiesis. PLoS
Genet. 2,e14.
Zhang, J., and Lodish, H. F. (2005). Identiﬁcation of K-ras as the major
regulator for cytokine-dependent Akt activation in erythroid progenitors in
vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 14605–14610.
Zhang, J., and Ney, P.a (2009). Role of Bnip3l and Nix in cell death,
autophagy, and mitophagy. Cell Death Differ. 16,934–946.266 LAIFENFELD ET AL.