J. Algal Biomass Utln .  2012, 3 (2): 9- 13               Microalgae for nutrient removal  
© PHYCO SPECTRUM INC   
 
 
 
 
Microalgae Cultivation in Wastewater for Nutrient Removal  
 
S. Sriram  and R. Seenivasan  
School of Bio Sciences and Technology, VIT University, Vellore – 632014 , India  
 
 
Abstract  
Wastewater is the spent or used water conta ining dissolved or suspended solids such as pollutants and microbes, including nutrients. The wastewater 
discharged into the water bodies are hazardous to environment  and cause various health problems in human beings. Eutrophication is one such major 
envir onmental problem caused due to the discharge of nutrient rich wastewater into the nearby water bodies. Several methods , commonly  chemical 
treatment  and conventional biological methods are used to remov e nutrients (phosphorus and nitrogen) from wastewater . However, high cost and more 
sludge production, are the  major disadvantages limiting it s use and hence  researchers are now focusing on  microalgae for nutrient removal from 
wastewater as it is less expensive and results in less sludge production. This paper provides a short review on the current scenario  in the cultivation of 
microalgae in wastewater for nutrient removal. The resulting biomass from the treatment process can be used for the biodiesel  production or for 
bioactive compound extraction.  
Key words: Waste water, microalgae, nitrogen, phosphorous, immobilization.  
 
Introduction  
 
Wastewater is a general term used to represent the water with 
poor quality that contains more amounts  of pollutants and 
microbes. If wastewater is discharged into the  nearby  water 
bodies, it can cause  serious environm ental and health 
problems to  human beings. Wastewater treatment is an 
important measure to reduce the pollutant and other 
contaminants present in wastewater.  The first step in 
wastewater treatment method is p rimary treatment which 
remove s the solids, oil, and grease from  wastewater. 
Secondary treatment or biological treatment  is the second step, 
which exploits microorganisms to eliminate the chemicals 
present in wastewater. Final step is the tertiary treatment; 
which eliminate s the m icrobes from  wastewater before 
discharging into the river (Rawat et al., 2010).   
  
Effluent produced from the sec ondary treatment plant  contains  
more amounts  of nutrients  (nitrogen and phosphorus)  and if 
these  effluents are disc harged into water bodies; it cause s 
eutrophicati on and affect s the ecosystem . To r emove these 
nutrients, several processes  are used, but the disadvantages of 
this type of treatment are  high cost and increased sludge 
production  (Yuan et al ., 2011) . As an a lternati ve to the 
conventional treatment methods , microalgae are suggested to 
remove the nutrients from wastewater  (Mallick,  2002) .  The 
use of microalgae or macroalgae  (seaweeds)  to remove 
pollutants and nutrients from the wastewater is called  
phycoremediation . Microalgae wastewater treatment is eco 
friendly and offers the advantage of a cost effective way of 
nutrient removal and biomass production (Mulbry et al ., 
2008 ). The microalgae grown in wastewater can be used as 
energy source, fertilizer,  fine chemicals pr oduction and as feed 
to animals ( Vilchez et al., 1997 ; Mulbry et al., 2006 ). The aim 
of this paper is to summarize  the different types of strategies    
 
currently examined  to cultivate the microalgae in wastewater 
for nutrient removal.  
 
Processing of wastewat er 
 
Wastewater contains different types of materials like soluble 
organic, inorganic, insoluble inorganic materials, macro solids, 
toxins, etc.  By processing, it is ensured that only the soluble 
fraction of the waste like carbon, nitroge n and phosphate are  
used for the microalgae cultivation. Besides pollutants, 
bacteria and protozoa are also present in wastewater. If this 
wastewater is used as a culture medium, microbes present in it 
will compete for microalgae growth and nutrition. Hence u ltra 
violet ligh t source, filtration, autoclaving and centrifugation 
are the different types of pre -treatment method used to remove 
suspended solids and  algae feeding organism like protozoa and 
bacteria. Filtration of secondary effluent using 0.20 µm pore 
filters gave the  highest biomass growth ( Chlorella  sp.) with 
the total nitrogen removal of 92 % and  total phosphorus 
removal of 86 %. In case of UV radiation (pre -treatment 
method), UV - B at the dose of 1620 mJ cm -2 gave the 
maximum biomass growth ( Chlorella  sp.) when comp ared to 
270 mJ cm -2  of  UV - B dose ( Cho et al., 2011). The Chlorella 
sp. cultivated in the autoclaved centrate showed higher growth 
rate than the raw centrate (Li et al., 2011).  After sterilizing  
the wastewater, phosphorus level in it gets reduced and i t 
might have effect on the algal growth. This nutrient level is 
increased by adding the chemicals likes KH 2PO 4, K 2HPO 4 and 
Na2HPO 4. In some pre -treatment process , centrifugation alone 
is used to process the wastewater e.g. piggery wastewater, but 
in case o f wastewater from olive oil mill, both filtration and 
centrifugation are used to condition wastewater (Hodaifa et 
al., 2010).  The debris present in the wastewater is removed by J. Algal Biomass Utln .  2012, 3 (2): 9- 13               Microalgae for nutrient removal  
© PHYCO SPECTRUM INC   
 
 filtration method using cotton gauze and diatomaceous earth 
filters (Chinnasam y et al., 2010).  
 
 Microalgae cultivation in artificial wastewater for nutrient 
removal 
 
 Artificial wastewater is defined as a synthetic medium, which 
contains an inorganic nutrient composition similar to real 
wastewater , however it lacks toxic comp onents,  microbes, etc., 
which are  originally  present in real wastewater.  Artificial 
wastewater is used to analyse  the nutrient removal ability of 
the microalgae, acclimatization of the cells prior to cultivating 
in real secondary effluent  and to identify the grow th inhibiting 
concentration of cer tain types of nutrients. One major  
drawback  of using the artificial wastewater is that the result 
obtained in it could not be reproduced in real secondary 
effluent  (Pittman et al., 2011).   
  
Some species of microalgae are  used in the biologi cal 
treatment of the wastewater  e.g., Chlorella  sp. Chlorella 
sorokiniana  (C. sorokiniana ) and Chlorella vulgaris  (C. 
vulgaris ) efficiently remove nitrogen than phosphorous from 
effluent . Hernandez et al., 2006  carried out extensive res earch 
to anal yze the effect of starvation and  co-immobilization of C. 
sorokiniana , C. vulgaris  with m icroalgae growth -promoting 
bacterium  (MGPB) Azospirillum brasilense  for nutrient 
removal capability. The synthetic wastewater used mimicked 
the chemical co mposition similar to real domestic wastewater 
collected from the city of Mexico. Both the C. sorokiniana 
and C. vulgaris  microalgae cultures were co -immobilized wit h 
bacteria and starved for 3  and 5 days by cultivating in sterile 
saline with continuous lig ht. This study conc luded that the 
starvation for 3 days  does not affect the growth of C. vulgaris 
and C. sorokiniana , whereas starvation for 5 days negatively 
affects the growth of C. vulgaris . In case of nutrient removal 
efficiency, both the cultures show ed more phosphorus removal 
capability when co -immobilized with Azospirillum brasilense 
and starvation of these cultures further increased the 
phosphorus removal efficiency of C. sorokiniana . 
  
Several  studies examined the effect of semi -continuous  culture 
method on the nutrient removal ability of the Scenedesmus  sp. 
The artificial wastewater used in this study to culture 
Scenedesmus  sp. had the nutrient content composition similar 
to that of  secondary wastewater treatment effluent of 
Ensenada , Mexico . The Scenedesmus  sp. was cultured in  
artificial wastewater with a daily replacement of  30% and 50% 
of the culture with fresh medium (semicontinous culture). The 
result of this study showed that the Scenedesmus  sp. had  
 higher biomass concentration in 3 0% dilution  and removed 
more than 50% of the phosphorus in both the dilutions. In case 
of nitrogen remov al, 50% dilutions showed 66% of remo val, 
whereas 30% diluted culture  showed 50% of removal 
(Voltolina et al., 1998).  
   
In another study , the same artificial medi um was used to 
analyze  the amount of nitrogen incorporated  into Scenedesmus 
obliquus  (S. obliquus)  biomass and also the loss of  nitrogen  in 
the form of  ammonium . S. obliquus  was cultivated in an 
artificial medium with the daily replacement of 50% and 70%  
of the cell suspension with the fresh medium. The result of this 
study concluded that only lesser amount of nitrogen in the 
form of nitrate were utilized from the medium by S. obliquus  
and the remaining form of nitrogen is lost by ammonia 
stripping (Nunez  et al., 2001).  
  
Microalgae cultivation in real wastewater for nutrient 
removal   
 
Wastewater contains large amount of materials like toxins, 
microbes, etc. Processing is the main step to remove these 
unwanted materials from wastewater . The type of processin g 
in turn depends  on the characteristics of wastewater. For 
nutrient removal from the wastewa ter, single microalgae strain 
or consortium of microalgae along with microalgae growth - 
promoting bacteria are used.   
  
Several studies were performed to analyze  the capability of 
microalgae consortium along with symbiotic bacteria for 
nutrient removal capacity from wastewater. One such study 
was the analysis of euglenophyt , cyanobacterium , green 
micro algae and two types of indigenous microalgae 
consortium along wi th symbiotic bacteria for the nutrient 
removal capability from diluted (1:4 & 1:8) piggery 
wastewater. The result of this study showed that the unialgal 
cultures like Euglena viridis  (E. viridis ), Chlorella  
sorokiniana  (C. sorokiniana ) were able to grow in  both types 
of diluted wastewater, while  Scenedesmus obliquus ( S. 
obliquus ) and consortium 2 were able to grow in eight times 
(1:8) diluted wastewater, whereas consortium1 and Spirulina 
platensis  showed no growth. In case of phosphorus and 
nitrogen removal  capacity, E. viridis and C. sorokiniana 
showed more nitrogen removal  in both the dilutions ; on the 
other hand, C. sorokiniana, S. obliquus and E. viridis showed 
phosphorus ( 20 - 65%) removal in eight times diluted 
wastewater (de-Godos et al., 2010).   
 
 
 
 J. Algal Biomass Utln .  2012, 3 (2): 9- 13               Microalgae for nutrient removal  
© PHYCO SPECTRUM INC   
 
 Table 1 . Microalgal  cultures examined for piggery wastewater treatment  
S. 
No Types of Cultures  Microalgae  
1 Consortium 1  Scenedesmus  Chlamydomonas  
Microspora  
Oocystis  
Chlorella  
Nitzschia  
2 Consortium 2  Chlorella strains  
3 Green microalgae  Chlorella sorokiniana Scenedesm us 
obliquus  
4 Cyanobac terium  Spirulina platensis  
5 Euglenophyt  Euglena viridis  
 
In a similar  study, nat ive microalgae consortium (lacking  
symbiotic bacteria) ; fresh water  and marine microalgae were 
analyzed for the biomass production and nutrient removal 
capability from the treated carpet mill effluent. Totally, fi fteen 
microalgae were isolated from the wastewater using BG11 
medium. Pure cultures of the isolate were mixed in equal 
proportion to form the native microalgae consortia. In addition 
to the native algal consortia, two fresh water micro algae 
(Botryococcus b raunii, Chlorella saccharophila var. 
saccharophila ) and marine algae ( Dunaliella tertiolecta  and 
Pleurochrysis carterae ) were selected for this study. The 
result of this study, indicated that the native alga l consortia 
showed better biomass production  in both treated and 
untreated wastewater  than the unialgal cultures and the 
nutrient removal capability of native microalgae consortia 
showed more phosphate (98.8 –99.1%) and nitrate 
removal(99 .7– 99.8% ) in 72 hours ( Chinnasamy et al., 2010).   
                                                                
 
Immobilized microalgae for n utrient removal from wastewater  
 
In phycoremediation, the main p roblem identified is the 
harvesting of microalgae after treating the wastewater  (James, 
1998; Mallick, 2002; Aslan and Kapdan, 2006) . 
Immobilization of microalgae is one of the solutions for 
harvesting problem  (Vılchez et al., 2001; Jimnez -Perez et al., 
2004) . Carrageenan , chitosan  and alginate are commonly used 
polymers for the microalgae immobilization.  Immobilized 
microalgae beads a re easy to harvest and reuse. There are 
several factors affecting the nutrient removal efficiency of 
immobilized microalgae  
1. Number of microalgae immobilized beads inoculated to treat wastewater  
2. Gel permeability for the nutrients pr esent in the wastewater .  
3. Cell density present in e ach bead . 
4. Environmental fact ors. 
5. Chemical components present in wastewater . 
6. Type of gel matrix used for immobilization.   
  
Some studies were done to identify the key factor affecting the 
immob ilized microbe’s nutrient removal efficiency. In one 
study, the effect of two key factors such as gel thickness and 
cell concentration in  the gel were analyzed for the nutrient 
removal efficiency. Scenedesmus  sp. used in this study was 
isolated from the mu nicipal wastewater and immobilized in 
calcium alginate screen with two different gel thicknesses  
(2mm & 3mm).  This study concluded that the cell density 
within the gel was an important factor affecting the 
orthophosphate and ammonia removal  than gel thick ness. In 
the same study, effect of starvation on nutrient removal 
efficiency of  the immobilized Scenedesmus  sp. was also  
evaluated. Scenedesmus  sp. was starved for 48 hours in a 
photo bioreactor  at 100% relative humidity and used to treat 
both the artifici al and real  secondary effluent. The result  of 
this study concluded that the cell concentrations in the gel and 
microalgae starvation were  considered as important factors  to 
enhance the ammonia and orthophosphat e removal from the 
effluent. Scenedesmus  sp. showed more nutrient removal in 
real secondary effluent than in artificial wastewater (Zhang et 
al., 2008).   
 
Effect of immobilization on the growth and nutrient removal 
of Scenedesmus  obliquus (S. obliquus)  and Chlorella  vulgaris 
(C. vulgaris)  in artificia l and urban wastewater was analyzed. J. Algal Biomass Utln .  2012, 3 (2): 9- 13               Microalgae for nutrient removal  
© PHYCO SPECTRUM INC   
 
 Both the cultures were immobilized in alginate beads . 
Immobilized cultures showed immediate growth when 
inoculated into the medium than the free cell , which showed 
lag pe riod. C. vulgaris  had higher cell densities withi n the 
beads than S. obliquus . In case of nitrogen uptake , 
immobilized microalgae had higher nitrogen uptake than the 
free cell in both the types of wastewater but in phos phorus 
removal  efficiency , immobilized cultures  removed more 
phosphorus in artificial wastewater than in urban wastewater  
(Ruiz-Marin et al., 2010).     
 
Conclusions  
  
Based on this review, it was  concluded that the microalgae 
alone cannot efficiently remove th e nutrients from the 
wastewater. The microalgae g rowth  - promoting bacteria  
(MGPB ), starvation and dilution of the wastewater are the  
different ways used to enhance microalgae nutrient removal 
rate. Microalgae cultivated in the wastewater can be used for 
the biodiesel production  and as feed for animals . This dual 
process (microalgae cu ltivation in effluent coupled with 
biodiesel production) h as several advantages such as less cost 
and less energy input for biodiesel production , and less 
greenhouse gas emission during biodiesel production.    
  
 References     
 
Aslan, S., I.  K. Kapdan. 2006. Batch kinetics of nitrogen and 
phosphorus removal from synthetic wastewater by algae. Ecol. 
Eng. 28: 64–70. 
  
Chinnasamy, S., A. Bhatnagar, R. Claxton and  K.C. Das.  
2010. Biomass and bioenergy production potential of 
microalgae consortium in open and cl osed bioreactors using 
untreated carpet industry effluent as growth medium. 
Bioresour . Technol . 101: 6751 –6760.  
  
Chinnasamy, S., A. Bhatnagar, R.  W. Hunt and K.  C. Das. 
2010. Microalgae cultivation in a wastewater dominated by 
carpet mill effluents for bio fuel applications. Bioresour . 
Technol . 101: 3097 –3105.  
  
Cho, S., T. T. Luon g, D. Lee, Y . Oh and T. Lee.  2011. Reuse 
of effluent water from a municipal wastewater treatment plant 
in microalgae cultivation for biofuel production. 
doi:10.1016/Bioresour. Tech nol.2011.03.037.  
  
de-Godos, I.,  V. A. Vargas,  S. Bl anco,  M. C. Garcia -
Gonzalez, R. Soto, P. A. Garcia - Encina, E. Becares and R. 
Muioz.  2010. A comparative evaluation of microalgae for the 
degradation of piggery wastewater under photosynthetic 
oxygenati on.  Bioresour . Technol . 101: 5150 –5158.  
  
Hernandez, J. P., L. E.  de-Bashan and Y. Badhan.  2006. 
Starvation enhances phosphorus removal from wastewater by 
the microalga Chlorella spp. co -immobilized with Azospirillum brasilense . Enzyme  Microb . Technol . 38: 190–
198.  
  
Hodaifa, G., M. E. Martinez, R. Orpez and S. Sanchez.  2010.  
Influence of hydrodynamic stress in the growth of 
Scenedesmus obliquus  using a culture medium based on olive -
mill wastewater. Chemical  Engineering and Processing . 49: 
1161 –1168.  
  
Jime nez-Perez, M.V., P. Sanchez -Castillo, O. Romerab, D. 
Ferna ndez-Moreno and C. Perez -Martınez.  2004. Growth and 
nutrient removal in free and immobilized planktonic green 
algae isolated from pig manure. Enzyme Microb . Technol . 34: 
392–398. 
  
James, P.H.  1998. Wastewater treatment with suspended and 
nonsuspended algae . J. Appl. Phyco l. 34: 757–763. 
  
Li, Y., Y. Chen, P. Chen, M. Min, W. Zhou, B. Martinez, J. 
Zhu and R. Ruan.  2011. Characterization of a microalgae 
Chlorella  sp. well adapted to highly concentrated municipal 
wastewater for nutrient removal and biodiesel production.  
Bioresour . Technol . 102: 5138 –5144.  
  
Mallick, N.  2002. Biotechnological potential of immobilized 
algae for wastewater N, P and metal removal: a review. 
BioMetals . 15: 377 –390. 
  
Mulb ry, W. , S. Kondrad, C. Pizarro and E. Kebede -West head. 
2008. Treatment of dairy  
manure effluent using freshwater algae: Algal productivity and 
recovery of manure nutrients using pilot -scale algal turf 
scrubbers. Bioresour . Technol . 99: 8137 –8142.  
Mulbry, W., S.  Kondrad  and P. Pizarro.  2006. Biofertilizers 
from algal treatment of dairy  and swine manure effluents: 
characterization of algal biomass as slow release  fertilizer . J. 
Vegetable Sci . 12: 107–125. 
Nunez, V. J., D. Voltolina, M. Nieves, P. Pina, A. Medina and 
M. Guerrero.  2001. Nitrogen budget in Scenedesmus obliquus 
cultures with artificial wastewater. Bioresour . Technol . 78: 
161-164. 
Pittman, J.  K., A. P. Dean and O. Osundeko.  2011. The 
potential of sustainable algal biofuel production using 
wastewater r esources. Bioresour . Technol . 102: 17–25. 
Rawat, I., R. Ranji th Kumar, T. Mutanda and F. Bux.  2010.  
Dual role of microalgae: Phycoremediation of domestic 
wastewater and biomass production for sustainable biofuels 
production. App Energy . doi:10.1016/j.ape nergy.2010.11.025.  
 Ruiz-Marin, A., L. G. Men doza-Espinosa and T. Stephenson. 
2010. Growth and nutrient removal in free and immobilized 
green algae in batch and semi -continuous cultures treating real 
wastewater.  Bioresour . Technol . 101: 58–64. J. Algal Biomass Utln .  2012, 3 (2): 9- 13               Microalgae for nutrient removal  
© PHYCO SPECTRUM INC   
 
   
Vılchez, Carlos, Garbayo, Ines, Markvicheva, Elena, Galvan, 
Francisco, Leon  and Rosa.  2001. Studies on the suitability of 
alginate -entrapped Chlamydomonas reinhardtii  cells for 
sustaining nitrate consumption processes. Bioresour . Technol . 
78: 55–61. 
Vilchez, C., I . Garhayo, M. V. Lobato, and J. M. V ega. 1997. 
Microalgae -mediated chemicals production and wastes 
removal . Enzyme Microb . Technol . 20: 562-572. 
Voltolina, D., B. Cor dero, M. Nievesc and L. P. Soto.  1998. 
Growth of Scenedesmus sp. in artificial wastewater . Bioresour . 
Technol . 68: 265-268. 
Yuan,  X., A. Kumar, A. K. Sahu and S. J. Ergas.  2011. Impact 
of ammonia concentration on Spirulina platensis  growth in an 
airlift photobioreactor. Bioresour . Technol . 102:  3234 –3239.  
Zhang, E., B. Wang , Q. Wang, S. Zhan g and B. Zhao.  2008. 
Ammonia –nitrogen and orthophosphate removal by 
immobilized Scenedesmus  sp. isolated from municipal 
wastewater for potential use in tertiary treatment. Bioresour . 
Technol . 99: 3787 –3793.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   