 
 
 
                   Website: www.aerobiology.net  
43760 Trade Center Place, Suite 100, Dulles, VA 20166 (703) 648- 9150 Fax (703) 6 48-0963 e-mail: lab@aerobiology.net 
4501 Circle 75 Parkway, Ste A1190, Atlanta GA 30339 (770) 947-2828 Fax (770) 947-2938 e-mail: ATL@aerobiology.net 
 
 
BACTERIA  
 
 Bacteria are unicelled prokaryot ic organisms.  Typi cal bacterial cells ar e about 1µm in width 
compared to a eukaryotic cell a nd are ubiquitous in nature. Dependi ng on the environmental factors 
like moisture, temperature, oxygen level, they multiply  rapidly in nature. Bacteria are unstable in the 
outdoor environment due the environmental stress. In the indoor environmen t, when conditions are 
appropriate they multiply rapidly resulting in emi ssion of toxins into the surrounding environment. 
 Bacteria are of different shapes.  The most common forms are the r ods (bacillus) and round (cocci). 
For identification, these microorga nisms are again classified on the basis of their staining ability. 
The common stain used is Gram’s stain. They are classified as:  
Gram positive – stains purple 
 
 
       
 
Source : Shawn Becker; Soil microbiol ogy: cell wall components. 
                  http://filebox.vt .edu/users/chagedor/biol_4684/Methods/cellwalls.html 
Gram negative – stains red 
 
 
Source : Shawn Becker: Soil microbiol ogy; cell wall components. 
                  http://filebox.vt.edu/users/chagedor /biol_4684/Methods/cellwalls.html  
 
 
COMMON ORGANISMS:  
 
1. GRAM POSITIVE ORGANISMS : 
 
Aerococcus viridans:  This bacterium is found in air, m eat brines, and processed vegetables. 
Commonly found as airborne organisms in hospitals. 
 Arthrobacter globiformis : This bacterium is widely distributed in the environment, particularly in 
soil.  Bacillus cereus : Bacillus sp.  are ubiquitous in nature and occurring in soil, water and airborne dust. 
B. cereus  can cause food poisoning associated with inge stion of meats, vegeta bles, pasta, desserts, 
cakes, sauces and milk. B. cereus  spores can survive cooking and then germinate to produce viable 
bacteria than can divide on foodstuffs. It can also cause eye infecti ons and wound infections 
following surgery, accidents, and burns.  
 Bacillus subtilis : Bacillus sp.  is common in the indoor and outdoor  environments. This bacterium 
inhabits soil, dust, water and mate rials of plant and animal origin. 
 Clostridium spp.:  widespread in the environment. Many species produce potent exotoxins and are 
pathogenic.  Corynebacterium spp. : Widely distributed in nature. Normal  skin flora and co mmonly found in soil 
and water. Corynebacterium diphtheriae  causes diphtheria due to production of exotoxin. Also 
causes cutaneous infection .  Dermabacter hominis : This bacterium can be found on human skin. 
 Dermococcus nishinomiyaensis: widespread in nature and co mmonly found on human skin and 
other mammals.  Enterococcus faecalis: They are commonly found in soil and in water. Enterococcus sp.  is   also 
normal flora of the gastrointestinal tract of humans.  Enterococcus saccharolyticus : Occur widely in the environment. 
 Gemella bergi : Normal flora of oral cavity or upper respiratory tract. 
 Kocuria rosea : Kocuria sp.  can be found in freshwater environments and the soil. 
 Kurthia:  They are common in animal feces, meat products and widely distributed in the 
environment. Non-pathogenic.  
Lactobacillus spp : Widely distributed in nature, especially  in animals and vegetable products. They 
normally inhabit the gastrointe stinal tract of birds and ma mmals. Rarely pathogenic. 
  Listeria spp .: Commonly found in nature and has been isolated from soil, water, sewage and 
decaying vegetable matter. Causes food poisoning a nd some species are pathogenic to humans and animals.  
 Micrococcus luteus : Ubiquitous in the environment, a lthough, it is primarily isolated from 
mammalian skin and soil. 
 
Pediococcus acidilactici : Found naturally on plants. Commonl y found in food and vegetation.  
 Rhodococcus equi : Widely distributed and commonl y found in soil and herbivore dung. 
   Streptococcus pyogenes : Members of the Streptococcus  genus may be isolated from the blood, 
alimentary, respiratory, and genital tract of huma ns. In the environment they have been found in 
milk and dairy products, soil, fecal-contaminated water and contaminated dust. This particular 
species is responsible for the classic strep throat . They are rarely transm itted by indirect contact 
through objects.  Staphylococcus epidermis : Is present as normal flora on th e skin and mucous membranes of 
humans. The presence of “slime” resu lts in the production of biofilm. Th is particular species is of 
low virulence, and an individual is usually immu nocompromised in some way for an infection to 
develop.  Staphylococcus aureus : This organism is commonly shed from skin and mucous membranes 
humans or warm-blooded animals.  It can cause opportunistic inf ection and also food poisoning. It 
may be isolated from the air and from indoor surfaces.  Staphylococcus saprophyticus : They are widespread in nature and commonly associated with skin 
and mucous membrane of humans and animals.  This species shares many characteristics with S. 
epidermidis  except that this species is important opportuni stic pathogen in urinar y tract infections in 
young women.  
 
  References:
 
 
Patrick .R. Murray (2003); Manual of Clinical Microbiology: 8th edition: pp 445 
 Diagonstics Microbiology 11
th Edition: Betty A. Forbes, Daniel F. Sahm, and Alice.S. Weissfeld. 
 John.G.Holt, Noel R.Krieg, Peter H.A. Sneath, Ja mes T. Staley, Stanley T. Williams; Bergey’s 
Manual Of Determinative Bacteriology: 9
th Edition.  
 Patrick R.Murray, Ken S.Rosenthal, George S. Kobayashi and Michael A.Pfailer; Medical 
Microbiology, 3
rd Edition: pp209 
 Information provided by AIHA EMPAT program  
MRSA (METHICILLIN RESISTANT STAPHYLOCOCCUS ):
 
 MRSA are a classification of staphylococcus bacter ium that are resistant to common antibiotics like 
penicillin, oxacillin, vancomycin and methicillin. Th ese are different from other Staph. spp. in that 
they are coagulase tests positive. These bacteria  are commonly found in nose, skin and mucous 
membranes of humans. They are non-pathogenic unl ess entry into the body through wounds or cuts. 
Formerly they were considered to be nosocomial infection i.e. hospital ac quired. Infections outside 
the hospital and health care facilit ies are becoming more prevalent. 
 MRSA is classified into two groups:  CA-MRSA
 (Community acquired): These ar e infections acquired outside the hospital or health care 
facilities. They are spread from person to person through contact  or use of contaminated items. They 
are commonly seen in children (schools), athletes  (school, gyms, locker rooms), offices, military 
recruits etc.  HA- MRSA
 (Hospital acquired): These ar e infections acquired after treatment from hospitals and 
health care facilities. They are commonl y seen in immunocompromised patients. 
 
Surface samples are the appropriate method for determining the presence of MRSA in an 
environment.  The area of the sample is dependent upon if the sample is taken as an assessment sample or a post cleanup sample and the actual location, such as a locker room, wrestling room, 
surgical suites, or mechanical systems.  Viable ai r samples are taken by an Andersen style sampler.  
Air samples are collected on a general lab media a nd a selective media.  The total air volume is 
dependent upon the site and the desired sensitivity.   When MRSA is the target organism it is best to 
discuss sampling strategies  with your laboratory. 
  
 
  
 
Analysis Matrix Test code Requirements 
 
 
 
 
MRSA & Total 
Bacterial 
culture W/ ID Air 1121 BAP, 
Maconkey, 
MSA plates 
Wipe 1122 BAP, 
Maconkey, 
MSA plates 
Water 1123 BAP, 
Maconkey, 
MSA plates 
Bulk 1124 BAP, 
Maconkey, 
MSA plates 
 References and Informative websites : 
Patrick .R. Murray (2003); Manual of Clinical Microbiology: 8th edition: pp 384 
 John.G.Holt, Noel R.Krieg, Peter H.A. Sneath, Ja mes T. Staley, Stanley T. Williams; Bergey’s 
Manual Of Determinative Bacteriology: 9
th Edition.  
 Bailey and Scott’s Diagonstics Microbiology 11
th Edition: Betty A. Forbes, Daniel F. Sahm, and 
Alice.S. Weissfeld.  Information provided by AIHA EMPAT program  
¾ 
http://www.oregon.gov/DHS/ph/acd/ diseases/mrsa/mrsa.shtml   
¾ http://www.lapublichealth.org/acd/docs/MRSA/MRSA_Guideline_12_20_04.pdf   
¾  http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/ar_mrsa.html  
¾ Management of antimicrobial-resistant organisms in long-term care facilities  (.pdf 
developed by Oregon ARM taskforce, June 1998; PDF 43k)  
¾ CDC guidelines on hand hygiene in healthcare settings  (MMWR article)  
¾ Learning about MRSA: A guide For Patient s: Minnesota Department For Health: 
http://www.health.state.mn.us/divs/idepc/diseases/mrsa/book.html  
ANTHRAX  
 
The organism involved is Bacillus anthracis . These are gram-positive rod and spore forming 
bacteria. They are commonly found in soil, where it  is contracted by various  herbivores and causes 
diseases in these animals. Not a part of normal huma n flora. Infections occur by inhalation of spores 
or the introduction through break s in the skin or mucous membranes. Produces exotoxin and are 
causative organisms of cutaneous, pulm onary and gastrointe stinal anthrax. 
   
 
 
 
 
    
Source : Public health image library (PHIL) 
  
 
Bacillus anthracis - positive gram stain 
Source : Communicable disease control and prevention; San Francisco department of public health 
 
Analysis  Matrix  Test code  Requirement  
 
 
Anthrax analysis Air 2098 Blood agar or 0.4 μ 
cassette 
Wipe 2099 Swab 
Bulk 2003 Bulk 
 
 
References and Informative websites:  
 
Patrick .R. Murray (2003); Manual of Clinical Microbiology: 8th edition: pp 445 
 Diagonstics Microbiology 11
th Edition: Betty A. Forbes, Daniel F. Sahm, and Alice.S. Weissfeld. 
 John.G.Holt, Noel R.Krieg, Peter H.A. Sneath, Ja mes T. Staley, Stanley T. Williams; Bergey’s 
Manual Of Determinative Bacteriology: 9
th Edition.  
 Patrick R.Murray, Ken S.Rosenthal, George S. Kobayashi and Michael A.Pfailer; Medical 
Microbiology, 3
rd Edition: pp209 
 Information provided by AIHA EMPAT program  Images from public health image library (PHIL)  
¾ Center for Infectious Disease Prepared ness and Reponse (CIDRAP) - Anthrax site  
¾ Centers for Disease Cont rol (CDC) - Anthrax site  
 
      
2. GRAM NEGATIVE:  
 
FERMENTATIVE GRAM NEGATIVE RODS (FGNR)  
 
Campylobacter spp.:  They microaerobic inhabitants of the gast rointestinal tract of various animals. 
They are known to contaminate drinking water a nd also associated with  improperly pasteurized 
milk. Causes gastrointestinal and extra intestinal infections. 
 
Citrobacter freundii:  Citrobacter sp.  are enteric organisms that inhab it the intestinal tract of humans 
and animals. They can be found in soil, water, sewage and food. 
  Edwardseilla tarda:  Occurs in the intestine of cold-blooded animals and their environment 
especially in fresh water. Occasionally f ound in humans and warm-blooded animals. 
 Enterobacter agglomerans (Pantoea agglomerans):  This organism is found in water, soil and other 
parts of the environment. It is  occasionally isolated from human s and has been implicated in 
neonatal meningitis and sepsis.  Enterobacter cloacae : Part of the normal flora of human in testinal tract. Ca n cause opportunistic 
infection of urinary tract as well as other parts of the body. 
 Erwinia spp.:  Rarely isolated from humans. Associated  with plants as pathogens, saprophytes or 
part of the epiphytic flora.  Escherichia coli:   E.coli is an enteric organism found in the ga strointestinal trac t of humans and 
animals. It can also be found environmen tally in soil, sewage, and in water. 
 
Hafnia alvei:  This genus contains only this one species. Hafnia alvei  is found in animal feces, 
sewage, soil, water and dairy products.   Klebsiella oxytoca/pneumoniae:  Organisms in the genus Klebsiella  can be found in human feces, 
soil, water, grain, fruits and vegetables. These or ganisms are responsible for a variety of nosocomial 
infections.  Leclercia adecarboxylata : Isolated from food, water and the environment. An occasional human 
pathogen.  Morganella morganii : Occurs in the faeces of human, d ogs and other mammals and reptiles. 
Opportunistic human pathogen.  
 
   Proteus vulgaris:  Proteus sp.  are enteric organisms found in huma n and animal intestines, manure, 
soil, and polluted waters. They can cause a myriad of extra-intestinal infections.  Providencia stuartii : Widely distributed in plants and soil, water and in the intestine of humans and 
animals.  Serratia marcescens : Commonly found in water, soil, food, pl ant surfaces and contaminated indoor 
environments. Prominent opportunistic pathogen for hospital patients causing septicemia and 
urinary tract infection.  Shigella :  Commonly found in overcrowde d areas. Causes shigellosi s and not present in the 
common human bowel flora. Isolated from  areas of poor sani tary conditions. 
 Salmonella chloraesius:  Salmonella sp.  occurs in humans, warm and cold-blooded animals, and in 
the environment. Bacteria in this genus are pa thogenic for humans. They can cause typhoid fever, 
enteric infections and sepsis.  Yersinia spp .: Primarily environmental organisms but mo re adapted to aquatic environment. May 
colonize warm or cold-blooded host in a transient manner.   
NON FERMENTATIVE GRAM NEGATIVE RODS (NFGNR ) 
 
Aeromonas hydrophila :  Aquatic environments worldwide. It is also recovered from a variety of 
grocery store produce and seafood.  Acaligenes:  Occur in soil and water. some are saprophy tic inhabitants of in testinal tract of 
vertebrates. Are opportuni stic human pathogens. 
  Acinetobacter baumanii :   Acinetobacter sp. are widely distributed in nature including soil, water, 
and sewage. Human infections usually follow col onization of hospitalized patients and may involve 
the urinary tract, respirator y tract, wounds, soft tissue infections and bacteremia. 
 Brucella: They are intracellular parasites. Causes brucellosis. Infection by ingestion of 
contaminated food, inhalation of the spores  and consumption of unpasteurized milk. 
 
 Burkholderia cepacia: Burkholderia  bacterium is an environmenta l organism found commonly in 
water, soil, and plants. They are often isolated fr om hospital environments due to their ability to 
survive in aqueous environments. B. cepacia  causes opportunistic infec tions associated with 
hospital equipment, medication and disinfectants. It is often isol ated from patients with chronic 
granulomatous disease and cystic fibrosis.  Budvicia aquatica : Commonly found in fresh water. 
  Brevundimonas diminuta : Widely distributed. Commonly found in water, soil and plants mainly on 
fruits and vegetables.   Chromobacterium violaceum :  C. violaceum  is common in temperate climates where it is present in 
soil and surface waters. It can cause sepsis, ly mphadenitis and other infections in humans. 
 Chryseomonas meningoseptica: Widely distributed in the e nvironment. Commonly saprophytic 
and rarely pathogenic.  
 
Delfia acidovorans : Have been isolated from soil, sediment activated sludge crude oil, brine, water 
and various clinical specimens.   Flavobacterium: Widely distributed in soil and water; al so found in raw meat, milk and in hospital 
environment.  
 
Francisella tularensis:  Causative agent of tularemi a in humans and animals. 
 Moraxella spp: Widely spread in nature. Rarely infecti ous. Commonly infects the urogenitial tracts, 
mucous membranes covering the nose, throat and othe r parts of the respirator y tracts. May colonize 
the skin. Can cause bacterima, sepsis and endocarditis.  Myroides odoratus/Myroides odoratimimus:  These bacteria used to be known as Flavobacterium 
odoratum.  Human infections are rare w ith these organisms, however, th ey have been isolated from 
urine, sputum and wounds. They occur environm entally in soil, water, plants and foodstuffs. 
 Oligella urethralis : Widely distributed in nature. 
 
Pleisiomonas shigelloides:  Occurs in fresh surface water, fish, sh ellfish and other aquatic animals. It 
is associated with opportunistic human infections  Pseudomonas aeruginosa : Widely distributed in soil, water a nd plants. It survives in hot tubs, 
whirlpools, contact lens solution, sinks and show ers. It can cause a nu mber of opportunistic 
infections including infecti ons of the skin, external ear canal and of the eye. 
 Pseudomonas alcaligenes/orizyhabitans/stutzeri:  All commonly found in the environment. 
 Ralstonia pickettii : Widely distributed in nature. Found in soil, water and plants. 
 Sphingobacterium: Commonly isolated from water, soil and plants. Not a human pathogen. 
 
Stenotromonas maltophila : Found in soil, water and food. 
   Analysis Matrix Test code Requirement 
 
 
Total bacterial count 
w/ID Air 1005 TSA 
Bulk 1008 Sterile container 
Water 1007 Sterile bottle 
w/Na 2S2O3 
Wipe /surface 1006 Sterile swab 
 
Total bacterial count  Air 1001 TSA 
Bulk 1004 Sterile container 
Wipe/surface 1003 Sterile swab 
Heterotrophic plate 
count  Water 2056 Sterile bottle 
w/Na 2S2O3 
    
COLIFORMS
: 
 
These are gram-negative bacteria that come under Enterobacteriaceae. These are commonly found in 
the environment and also in the feces of human a nd warm-blooded animals. Coliforms are used as an 
indicator for contamination of drinking water by fecal and environmental sources. They enter the 
water sources from untreated human sewage, fail ing septic tanks, agricultural runoff and animal 
waste run off. Naturally in the environment, they  are not pathogens but wh en present in drinking 
water can cause health problems.  Coliforms include bacteria like:  
• E.coli 
 
 
 
 
  
   
• Serratia 
 
             
Source : Public health image library (PHIL) 
 
• Klebsiella 
 
 
 
Source : Public health image library (PHIL) 
 
 
 
• Citrobacter 
 
• Yersinia 
 
• Hafnia  
  
 
• Enterobacter 
 
 
 
Source : Public health image library (PHIL) 
 
 
  
Coli forms are divided into:  Total coli forms
: These coliforms are commonly found in th e environment (soil and vegetation) and 
are harmless. They are opportunistic pathogens a nd include fecal coliforms. Presence of these 
coliforms shows contamination of water from envi ronmental sources and also indicates a probable 
contamination by fecal coli forms.  Fecal coli forms
: These are coliforms found in the inte stine of warm-blooded animals and in 
humans. These are released to the environment by fecal contamination of the drinking water.  These 
are indictor of recent sewage or  animal waste contamination. The most common genera are E.coli, 
Klebsiella, Citrobacter and Serratia.          
E.coli (Escherichia coli):  
 
 
E.coli  on Maconkey agar (pink color) 
 
This group of bacteria comes under fecal coliforms. The presence of these bacteria in water is an 
indicator of water contamination with human an d animal waste. They are commonly found in the 
intestines of humans and animals. They enter the water sources after run o ff by rain or snow. When 
these water sources are not treated and used as dr inking water, results in E.coli infection. Not all 
types of E.coli are pathogenic and cause gastrointestinal diseases. Th e main groups of E.coli that are 
pathogenic are:  
• Enteroinvasive E.coli (EIEC): Commonly fo und in humans only. They cause diarrhea 
similar to shigellosis. Th ey do not produce any toxins. 
 
• Enterotoxigenic E.coli (ETEC): Causes diarrhea in humans and animals. they produce 
enterotoxins. 
 
• Enteropathogenic E.coli (EPEC): Causes diarrh ea in humans and animals. Causes the change 
in intestinal cell structure. Sy mptoms similar to shigellosis. 
 
• Enteroaggregative E.coli (EAggEC): Causes aggregation of tissues in humans only. 
 
• Enterohaemorraegic E.coli (EHEC): Found in humans and animals. Includes the virulent 
type O 157: H7. Causes diarrhea in humans.  
        Analysis Matrix Test code Requirement 
 
 
Total coliforms /E.coli  Air 1074 TSA & Maconkey 
plates 
Bulk 1013 Bulk 
Wipe /surface 1012 Sterile swab 
 
Potable, Total 
coliforms/E.coli*  Water 1010 Sterile bottle w/ 
Na2S2O3 
Non-potable, Total 
coliforms /E.coli* Water 1011 Sterile bottle w/ 
Na2S2O3 
 * 
Potable and non-potable test gives only qualitative analysis of th e sample i.e. it shows only the presence/absence of coliforms . Number of organisms 
not available .   
 
References and Informative websites:  
 
Patrick .R. Murray (2003); Manual of Clinical Microbiology: 8th edition:  
 Diagonstics Microbiology 11
th Edition: Betty A. Forbes, Daniel F. Sahm, and Alice.S. Weissfeld. 
 John.G.Holt, Noel R.Krieg, Peter H.A. Sneath, Ja mes T. Staley, Stanley T. Williams; Bergey’s 
Manual Of Determinative Bacteriology: 9
th Edition.  
 Patrick R.Murray, Ken S.Rosenthal, George S. Kobayashi and Michael A.Pfailer; Medical 
Microbiology, 3
rd Edition:  
 Information provided by AIHA EMPAT program  
¾ http://www.doh.wa.gov/ehp/DW/Programs/coliform.htm
 
 ¾ http://www.epa.gov/safewater/contaminants/ecoli.html
 
 
¾ CDC: E.coli: http://www.cdc.gov/ecoli/  
          
LEGIONELLA:  
 
They are widely distributed in nature mainly in  lakes and ponds.  These are gram-negative rods and 
require selective media (BCYE) for their isol ation and growth. Commonl y found in natural and 
man-made environment. Natural r ubber, plastics and wood influence the growth of legionella while 
copper inhibits the growth . Legionella sp.  can be isolated from surface water, mud and from 
thermally polluted lakes and streams, this organism  can also be found in water-cooling towers, hot 
water tanks, evaporative condenser s, spas, respiratory therapy equi pment, showers, water faucets, 
decorative fountains, ultrasonic mist machines, tec hnical-medical equipments and damp potting soil. 
They can survive extreme range of e nvironments for long period of time. 
  
 
 
 
Source : Public health image library(PHIL) 
 
Causative agent of Legionnaire’s Disease and Ponti ac Fever. Legionella infection is mainly from 
environmental sources. Disease transmission occurs  mainly by inhalation of the infectious aerosols 
from work place, hospitals or industrial settings. Water and wipe samples are more viable than air 
samples. Air samples can indicate the level of Legionella contamination from water into air. 
Disinfection methods include chlori nation, ozonation, use of ultra vi olet, heat-flush (heat shock) 
method and copper silver ion sytems.    
Analysis Matrix Test code Requirements 
Legionella  Water  1015 Sterile bottle 
w/Na 2S2O3 
Air  1016 BCYE, DGVP & 
BAP plates 
Wipe  1017 Sterile swab 
Bulk  1063 Bulk sample 
 
  References and Informative websites:  
  
Bioaerosols: Assessment And C ontrol: ACGIH; 1999: CHAPTER 18. 
 Patrick .R. Murray (2003); Manual of Clinical Microbiology: 8
th edition. 
 Diagonstics Microbiology 11
th Edition: Betty A. Forbes, Daniel F. Sahm, and Alice.S. Weissfeld. 
 John.G.Holt, Noel R.Krieg, Peter H.A. Sneath, Ja mes T. Staley, Stanley T. Williams; Bergey’s 
Manual Of Determinative Bacteriology: 9
th Edition.  
 Patrick R.Murray, Ken S.Rosenthal, George S. Kobayashi and Michael A.Pfailer; Medical 
Microbiology, 3
rd Edition. 
  
¾ ASHRAE GUIDELINE: Minimizing the Risk of  Legionellosis associated with building 
water systems. 
 
 
 
¾ Environmental sampling: http://www.cdc.gov/legionella/fi les/LegionellaProcedures.pdf
 
 
¾ Legionella: Current Status And Emerging Pe rspectives: James. M.Barbaree, Robert 
F.Briman and Alfred P. Dufour; 1993 
   
 
¾ Disinfecting plumbing systems of Legionella. 
 
 
 
¾ Minimizing the risk of legionella in c ooling towers and other HVAC equipment. 
 
 
 
 
¾ Legionella environmental sampling guide 
  
 
 
      
 
¾ Getting help with legionella pr oblems: guidance for good decisions. 
 
 
 
  
MYCOBACTERIUM:
 
 
           
Source : Public health image library(PHIL) 
 
These are rod shaped, slow growing bacteria that are widely distribut ed in soil and water. They may 
be branched or filamentous or mycelium like. These organisms are acid fast (stain) due the presence 
of waxy coating on cell wall (mycolic acid) . The two human pathogenic strains are: Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis  and Mycobacterium leprae . Some common species of environmental mycobacterium 
are: 
 Mycobacterium fortuitum : This Mycobacterium sp.  can be isolated from water, soil and dust. 
They can be linked to hypersensitivity pneumonitis  reactions in health sp a whirlpools. They are 
the most common species to be associated w ith nosocomial outbreaks due to rapid growth. 
Commonly found in water, soil and dust.    
Mycobacterium avium : This species of Mycobacterium  is ubiquitous in nature and has been 
isolated from water, soil, plants, house dus t and a number of other environmental sources. 
 Mycobacterium chelonae:  C ommonly found in soil, dust.  Linked to hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis in metal working fluids.  Mycobacterium smegmatis : Commonly found in soil and are non pathogenic. 
  
Analysis Matrix Test code Requirements 
Mycobacterium Water  1096  Sterile bottle  
Air  1067 Middlebrook agar  
Wipe  1068 Sterile swab 
 
References and Informative websites:  
 
Bioaerosols: Assessment And C ontrol: ACGIH; 1999: CHAPTER 18. 
 Patrick .R. Murray (2003); Manual of Clinical Microbiology: 8
th edition. 
 Diagonstics Microbiology 11
th Edition: Betty A. Forbes, Daniel F. Sahm, and Alice.S. Weissfeld. 
 John.G.Holt, Noel R.Krieg, Peter H.A. Sneath, Ja mes T. Staley, Stanley T. Williams; Bergey’s 
Manual Of Determinative Bacteriology: 9
th Edition.  
 Patrick R.Murray, Ken S.Rosenthal, George S. Kobayashi and Michael A.Pfailer; Medical 
Microbiology, 3
rd Edition. 
 Information provided by AIHA EMPAT program.    
4. ACTINOMYCETES : 
 These are gram-positive organisms but are filamentous and highly branched. They are slow growers and widely distributed in nature.     
Streptomyces griseus colonies 
 
Streptomyces spp .:  They are found in the soil, decaying ve getation, agricultural work environment. 
May also be found in carpets, HVAC and other indoor sources. 
 
Nocardia spp .:  They help in decomposition of organic plant material. They are opportunistic human 
pathogens and also infect animals. Causes damage in wastewater and sewage  plants due to bulking 
(floating of sludge). 
 
Rhodococcus spp .: Commonly isolated from soil, and farm  animals and also from fresh and salt 
waters. Rhodococcus equi is only species associated with human infection mainly 
immunocompromised individuals. 
 .   
Analysis Matrix Test code Requirement 
 
Total Thermophilic 
Actinomycete Count Air 1045 TSA &nutrient agar
Bulk 1048 Sterile container 
Wipe /surface 1046 Sterile swab 
Water 1047 Sterile container 
 
 
References  
 
Bioaerosols: Assessment And Control: ACGIH; 1999. Patrick .R. Murray (2003); Manual of Clinical Microbiology: 8
th edition. 
 Betty A. Forbes, Daniel F. Sahm, and Alice. S. Weissfeld: Diagonsti cs Microbiology :11
th Edition: 
 John.G.Holt, Noel R.Krieg, Peter H.A. Sneath, Ja mes T. Staley, Stanley T. Williams; Bergey’s 
Manual Of Determinative Bacteriology: 9
th Edition.  
   Patrick R.Murray, Ken S.Rosenthal, George S. Kobayashi and Michael A.Pfailer;  Medical 
Microbiology: 3rd Edition. 
 Information provided by AIHA EMPAT program. 
 
5. MISCELLANEOUS BACTERIAL ANALYSIS :  
 
¾ Nitrifying bacteria:   
These bacteria convert organic nitrogenous materials from ammoni um to nitrates. In water, 
aggressive nitrifers can result in production of high concentration of  nitrogen. They are of potential 
health risk especially to infants. The presence of these bacteria indicates degradation of nitrogen rich 
organic matter, pollution of water by these orga nisms from septic tanks, sewage systems and 
industrial wastes.  
¾ Sulphur reducing bacteria   
These bacteria generate hydrogen sulphide. They clog water wells and pipelines, corrode pumps, 
catalyze reactions soils and cause built structures to decay. They cause a number of significant problems with water ra nging from “rotten egg”  odor to the blackening of equipment, slime 
formation and initiation of corrosion.  They are difficult to detect and are found deep in the biofilm. 
  
¾ Iron filamentous bacteria 
These bacteria have outer coating called “sheath” which contain the cells. They use iron for their 
metabolism. Taste, odor problems and “red wate r” are the common symptoms related to iron 
bacteria. They commonly grow in  ferrous iron containing natural waters; fresh water & marine 
habitats. They are frequently found in ferruginous  mineral springs, wells, drain pipes & storage 
basins in water works. They cause problems in pipelines.  Eg: Gallionella , Leptospirillum ,Crenothrix, Sphaer otilus, Siderocapsa and Thiobacillus ferroxidans 
 
Analysis Test code Requirement 
Nitrifying bacteria  1070 Sterile bottle 
Sulphur reducing 
bacteria 1072 Sterile bottle 
Filamentous iron 
bacteria 1071 Sterile bottle 
 
References: 
a. Product insert from Bart TM Droycon bioconcepts, Inc. 2004. 
b. Bergey’s manual of systematic bacterio logy, volume 20.section 20, “iron and manganese 
oxidizing and /or depositing bacteria”. 1989 
   
HEALTH CONDITIONS ASSO CIATED WITH BACTERIA : 
 Several health conditions are related to exposure to bacteria, bacterial antigens, endotoxins and 
by-products.   Bacterial antigens can be found in the outdoor air, in se ttled dust, active indoor 
reservoirs and humidifiers or other water related sources.  
Some of the conditions related to exposure to b acteria are asthma, buildi ng-related symptom (BRS), 
humidifier/inhalation fever, hypersensitivity diseas es (allergy), infectious diseases, Legionnaires’ 
disease and pneumonia.  
 
Building related asthma is characterized by complaints of chest tightness, wheezing, cough, and shortness of breath that is wors e on workdays and improves on week ends or vacations.  Symptoms 
may occur within an hour of exposure, onset may be delayed for 4 to 12 hours, or both.  A 
work-related pattern of reduced peak airflows often indicates that asthma is due to a building-related exposure.  Exposure to bacterial antigens from offi ce cool-mist humidifiers has been established.  
Asthma has also been seen in th e industrial setting in high preval ence among workers with elevated 
daily endotoxin exposures from contaminated water sprays.   
 Building-related symptoms (BRS)  has been correlated with humidification and cooling systems 
due to microbial contamination.  The chief candidates for relationships between BRSs and 
bioaerosols are endotoxins from gram-negative b acterial cell walls and microbial volatile organic 
compounds (MVOCs).   
 
Humidifier/inhalation fever  is a flu-like illness, characteri zed by fever, chills, muscle aches, 
malaise, and check symptoms.  These symptoms us ually arise within 4 to 8 hours of exposure and 
subside within 24 hours, us ually with long-term effects.  People with humidifier fever rarely consult 
physicians for this short-lived, flu-like illness.    Recent work suggests that intermittent, high 
exposure to endotoxin may cause humi difier fever, whereas daily e ndotoxin exposure may result in 
asthma.  Repeated, severe episodes of inhalati on fever due to endotoxin exposure may lead to 
emphysema.  Hypersensitivity diseases  result from exposure to bacterial antigens, which stimulate a specific 
immunological response.  It is a disease for whic h a subsequent exposure to an antigen produces a 
greater effect than that produced on initial expo sure.   Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) is an 
inflammatory disease of the lung due to cel l-mediated immunological r eactions in pulmonary 
tissues.  It is associated with  antigen-specific immunoglobulin G (Ig G), elevated T lymphocytes in 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, a nd granuloma on lung biopsy.   
 Other antigen-mediated diseases, allergic rhinitis, sinus responses and most allergic asthma occur in 
persons with a genetic makeup that allows production of an tigen-specific IgE.    HP and elevated 
asthma risk can co-exist in problem buildings.  Most building-related antigens are assumed to be 
bacterial or fungal origin, but prot ozoa have also been implicated. 
    HP is characterized by (a) acute,  recurrent pneumonia with fever,  cough, chest tightness and lung 
infiltrates, (b) progression of cough,  shortness of breath, fatigue, and chronic lung fibrosis, or (c) an 
intermediate pattern of acute and chronic lung disease.    Often the specific microorganism(s) 
involved in an HP outbreak or it source is not know n.  Indoor environment that may harbor bacteria 
known to cause HP are mists in industrial setti ngs, indoor swimming pools,  indoor humidifiers, 
contaminated air –handling units an d bioaerosols from water damaged materials.  Typical bacterial 
agents of HP are mycobacterium species, th ermophilic actinomycetes, Bacillus subtilis, 
Sphinobacterium in addition to others.   
 
Legionnaire’s Disease is a bacterial pneumonia caused by Legionella pneumophila.   It is typically 
caused by inhalation of aerosols fro m cooling towers, evaporative condensers, misters and other 
water associated devices. It is also been documen ted to cause the infecti on by drinking contaminated 
water followed by aspiration.  After exposure the incubation period for ons et of symptoms is 2 to 10 
days.   
 
Recent infections caused by Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus  (MRSA)  in 
non-healthcare setting, designated CA-MRSA,  community acquired MR SA, have increased 
significantly since the 1990’s.  Healthcare-acquire d MRSA, HA-MRSA has been a significant agent 
of nosocomial infections since th e 70’s.   Approximately 25 % to 30% of the population is colonized 
with S. aureus in the nasal passages.   Staph aureus  is one of the most common causes of skin 
infections in the US but can also cause serious infections following surg ical procedures and may 
cause sepsis.  About 0.8%, or 2.4 million people in the US, is thought to  be colonized with MRSA.  
REFERENCES:
 
 
IICRC S500: Standard And Reference Guide Fo r Professional Water Da mage Restoration: 
ANSI/IICRC S500: THIRD EDITION: 2006   Microorganisms In Home And Indoor Work Environments; Diversity, Healthy Impacts, 
Investigation and Control: Brian Flanniga n, Robert A. Samson, J David miller: 2001 
  
 
TERMS ASSOCIATED WITH BACTERIA:
 
 
Aerobic bacteria : These are bacteria that  require oxygen for growth. 
 Anaerobic bacteria : These are bacteria not dependent on oxygen for growth. 
 
α -Hemolytic streptococcus : These are commonly found in the mouth and nasal flora. These are 
gram-positive chaining bacteria. 
    Bacteremia : Presence of bacteria in blood. 
 Bacillus:  Rod shaped bacteria. 
 Bactericidal : Toxin produced from bacteria ca pable of killing other bacteria. 
 Coliforms : Gram-negative bacteria that can fermen t carbohydrates like lactose with acid and gas 
formation at 35 °c within 48 hrs. 
 
 CONS (coagulase negative staphylococcus) : These are commonly staphylococcus spp. that are 
coagulase test negative.  They are present as normal flora on the skin and mucous membranes of 
humans. They are of low virulen ce, and an individual is usually immunocompromised in some way 
for an infection to develop. Eg: Staphylococcus epidermis. 
 Enterics : These bacteria belong to the group Enterobacteriaceae. 
 Endocarditis:  Inflammation of the lining of heart. 
 Endotoxin:  Are “toxins” found in the outer membrane of  gram-negative rods.  They are comprised 
of lipopolysaccharides.  Endotoxins ar e encountered in the environment as part of the whole cell or 
fragments of the membrane.  Endotoxin is a powerfu l, non-specific stimulant to the immune system 
and exposure to elevated concentrations can caus e fever and malaise, changes in white blood cell 
counts and respiratory distress.   Endospore:  Thick walled spore formed inside the bacterial cell 
 Exotoxin : These are protein toxins released from th e bacterial cells into the surrounding medium. 
 
Fermentation : Ability of the bacterial cells to degrade carbohydrates enzymatically. 
 Fermentative gram- negative rods : These bacteria can ferment carbohyd rates like lactose, cellulose, 
sucrose etc. 
 
Multiple gram-negative rods : Represents the presence of different types of gram-negative bacteria 
in the given sample.   Non-fermentative rods : These bacteria can not ferment carbohydrates like lact ose,sucrose ane 
cellulose.  Nosocomial infection:  Infection acquired from hospita ls and health care facilities. 
     Opportunistic pathogen : Organisms that originally do not ca use diseases but become pathogenic 
under certain circumstances.  Saprophytes:  An organism that lives on dead organic matter. 
 Septicemia : Condition due to the multiplicati on of bacterial cell in blood. 
  Zoonosis:  Diseases transmitted from animals to humans 
    
GENERAL REFERENCES:  
 
Morey Feely Otten: Biological Contamin ants In Indoor Environments: ASTM 
 Standard Methods For Examinati on Of Water And Wastewater: 19
TH EDITION 1995 
 Field Guide For The Determination Of Biological C ontaminants In Environmental Samples: Second 
Edition: AIHA  IICRC S500: Standard And Reference Guide Fo r Professional Water Da mage Restoration: 
ANSI/IICRC S500: Third Edition: 2006   Microorganisms In Home And Indoor Work Environments; Diversity, Healthy Impacts, 
Investigation and Control: Brian Flanniga n, Robert A. Samson, J David miller: 2001 
 
Bioaerosols: Assessment And Control: ACGIH: 1999.  
 Patrick .R. Murray (2003); Manual of Clinical Microbiology: 8
th edition. 
 Diagonstics Microbiology 11
th Edition: Betty A. Forbes, Daniel F. Sahm, and Alice.S. Weissfeld. 
 John.G.Holt, Noel R.Krieg, Peter H.A. Sneath, Ja mes T. Staley, Stanley T. Williams; Bergey’s 
Manual Of Determinative Bacteriology: 9
th Edition.  
 Patrick R.Murray, Ken S.Rosenthal, George S. Kobayashi and Michael A.Pfailer; Medical 
Microbiology, 3
rd Edition. 
 Information provided by AIHA EMPAT program.  Images from: Public health  image library (PHIL)  
             http://phil.cdc.gov/phil/quicksearch.asp
 
 
   
 
SAMPLING MEDIA FOR BACTERIA:  
     
 
TSA  contains trypticase soy broth. For 
isolation and cultivation of fastidious 
and non-fastidious bacteria.  
BA (blood agar) contains trypticase soy 
broth and 5% sheep’s blood. Used for the cultivation of fastidious 
microorganisms & determination of 
hemolysis.  
Maconkey  used for isolation and 
differentiation of fermenting and non-fermenting gram-negative bacteria 
 
MUELLER HINTON agar used for 
the antisusceptability disc diffusion test 
for MRSA. 
 
MIDDLE BROOK agar used for 
isolation and cultivation of mycobacteria. 
 
PLET  used for selective isolation of 
Bacillus anthracis from environmental 
samples, animal products and 
non-sterile sites.  
BCYE (buffered charcoal yeast agar) 
used for the cultivation and isolation of legionella spp.    
 
DGVP  contains dye, glycine, 
vancomycin and poymixin B for the 
isolation and differentiation of 
legionella spp.  
MANNITOL agar  used for selective 
isolation and identification of staphylococcus spp. 
NUTRIENT AGAR  
Contains nutrients required for the 
growth of actinomycte. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
43760 Trade Center Place, Suite 100, Dulles, VA 20166 (703) 648- 9150 Fax (703) 6 48-0963 e-mail: lab@aerobiology.net 
4501 Circle 75 Parkway, Ste A1190, Atlanta GA 30339 (770) 947-2828 Fax (770) 947-2938 e-mail: ATL@aerobiology.net 
 Organisms  Sampling Media  
 TSA  BA Maconkey Supplemental  
 CONS ; ; NA  
Micrococcus ; ; NA  
Staphylococcus ; ; NA  
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) ; ; NA Mannitol 
Bacillus  ; ; NA  
Bacillus anthracis ; ; NA PLET 
Corynebacterium  ; ; NA  
Mycobacterium  ; ; NA Middlebrook 
E.coli  ; NA ;  
Coliforms  ; NA ;  
Legionella  NA ; NA BCYE, DGVP
Pseudomonas  ; NA ;  
Acinetobacter  ; NA ;  
Gram negative rods  ; NA ;  
Klebsiella  ; NA ;  
Listeria  ; ; NA  
Yersinia  ; NA ;  
Streptococcus  ; ; NA  
Salmonella  ; ; NA  
Citrobacter  ; ; NA  
Enterococcus  ; ; NA  
Gram positive bacteria ; ; NA  
Enterobacter  ; NA ;  
Serratia  ; NA ;  
Proteus  ; NA ;  
Streptomyces  ; NA NA Nutrient agar 
Aeromonas  ; NA ;  