1
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:19671 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19671www.nature.com/scientificreportsThe Dilemma of Derelict Gear
A. M. Scheld , D. M. Bilkovic  & K. J. Havens
Every year, millions of pots and traps are lost in crustacean fisheries around the world. Derelict fishing 
gear has been found to produce several harmful environmental and ecological effects, however socioeconomic consequences have been investigated less frequently. We analyze the economic 
effects of a substantial derelict pot removal program in the largest estuary of the United States, the 
Chesapeake Bay. By combining spatially resolved data on derelict pot removals with commercial blue crab (Callinectes sapidus) harvests and effort, we show that removing 34,408 derelict pots led to significant gains in gear efficiency and an additional 13,504 MT in harvest valued at US $21.3 million—a 
27% increase above that which would have occurred without removals. Model results are extended 
to a global analysis where it is seen that US $831 million in landings could be recovered annually by removing less than 10% of the derelict pots and traps from major crustacean fisheries. An unfortunate common pool externality, the degradation of marine environments is detrimental not only to marine organisms and biota, but also to those individuals and communities whose livelihoods and culture 
depend on profitable and sustainable marine resource use.
The financial ruin of commercial fisheries, thought to squander US $50 billion in economic benefits annually
1, has 
long been attributed to the common-pool nature of the resource2. Much like the 19th century dilemma of over -
grazing common pasture, economically rational, self-interested fishers reap the benefit of their labors individually 
while sharing in the cost of a depleted stock. Unfortunately for the fisher, a common fish stock is not all that is shared. The environment in which harvest occurs is also a common resource, whose collective maintenance or degradation affects individual efficiencies and economic returns. Across many of the world’s oceans and water -
ways, Hardin’s tragedy
3 is multifaceted and complex.
Growth in global economies, together with the increasing use of long-lasting synthetic materials, has led to 
significant concerns surrounding marine debris4,5. Derelict fishing gear—the nets, lines, traps, and other recre-
ational or commercial fishing equipment that has been lost, abandoned, or otherwise discarded6,7—is a major 
source of marine debris which has been charged with damaging sensitive habitats8, creating navigational hazards9, 
as well as reducing populations of target and non-target species10–16. Derelict gear may also compromise the 
economic vitality of fishery dependent businesses and communities as it competes with active gear and acts as a deterrent or distraction to target stocks, generating production inefficiencies which erode industry profits and inhibit commercial fishery success. These purely economic costs can be considered independent of the negative biological effects which might result from the continual capture of animals by derelict gear, termed ‘ghost fishing’ . 
That is, derelict gear may impose an economic cost, in terms of reduced gear efficiency, even in cases of little to 
no ghost fishing mortality.
The United States Atlantic blue crab commercial fishery lands over 77,000 metric tons (MT) worth US $150–
200 million annually
17. In the Chesapeake Bay, which accounts for nearly half of all US blue crab landings, it is 
thought that 20% of the approximately 800,000 fished hard crab pots become derelict each year15. Derelict pots 
may self-bait and ghost fish for several years8 and experiments in the Chesapeake indicate structural integrity is 
generally maintained for two years or more18. Blue crabs are known to be attracted to pots as bottom structure 
whether or not any bait is present18-20, and it has also commonly been observed that crustaceans enter and leave 
pots frequently, with retention rates varying according to pot design and intra and inter-species interactions20-24. 
In the United States’ largest estuary, conservative estimates would suggest over 300,000 derelict pots are contin-ually attracting, capturing, and possibly even killing, blue crab and other species (Fig. 1). As a result, active gear efficiency, harvests, and resource rents may be reduced considerably.
In 2008, following many years of declining harvests, the Chesapeake Bay blue crab industry was declared 
a commercial fishery failure by the US Department of Commerce, unleashing $30 million in disaster relief. A small portion of these funds was used to support the Virginia Marine Debris Location and Removal Program, a novel initiative in which commercial crabbers were hired during the winter closed fishing seasons to find, document, and remove derelict gear. The program proved to be a success, offering fishers an opportunity to earn 
Virginia Institute of Marine Science, College of William & Mary, 1375 Greate Rd., Gloucester Point, Virginia, 23062 
U.S.A. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.M.S. (email: scheld@vims.edu)Received: 01 October 2015
Accepted: 16 December 2015
Published: 21 January 2016OPENwww.nature.com/scientificreports/2
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:19671 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19671supplemental income while also removing considerable amounts of marine debris and generating useful scientific 
data25. From 2008 to 2014, 34,408 derelict pots were removed (Supplementary Fig. S1). Throughout the removal 
program, harvests and gear efficiency were observed to increase dramatically (Supplementary Fig. S2).
Results
Chesapeake Bay.  A spatially explicit harvest model was used to predict harvests under two scenarios: actual 
removals and a counterfactual of zero removals (i.e., what would  have been harvested had no derelict pots been 
removed). In the counterfactual it was assumed that the observed increases in blue crab abundance were the result of contemporaneous conservation measures or advantageous environmental conditions, allowing identification of harvest increases arising solely from reduced gear competition. Model results indicate that removing only 9% 
of the derelict gear in Virginia waters increased harvests by 13,504 MT (SE  =  1,660), or 27% (Fig. 2a). Harvest 
increases resulting from gear efficiency improvements averaged 0.22 kg/pot (SE  =  0.03). During the removal 
effort, each actively fished pot was harvesting an additional blue crab on every pull—crab which would have been 
captured or attracted to the now absent derelict gear.
Without the removal program, US $21.3 million in blue crab revenues would have been lost. These benefits far 
outweighed the program’s total cost of US $4.2 million. Derelict pot removals were found to be net beneficial in every year of the program, though the difference between average benefits and costs per pot removed was great-est during the last two seasons, when limited program funds were used to target derelict gear hotspots (Fig. 2b). During targeted removals, a small group of commercial crab fishers focused removal efforts in areas which reg-
ularly experience high rates of potting activity and gear loss. Removals from these areas were more effective, 
and in general, areas which regularly experience high levels of effort and harvest, such as the mouths of major tributaries, saw greater program benefits (Fig. 2c). Considerable spatial and temporal heterogeneity in program effects suggests area and time prioritization of removals can be successful in producing significant economic benefit. For example, a removal effort at 10% the scale of the actual program (i.e., 3,441 removals), but focused on only the ten most heavily fished sites, would have increased harvests by 8,144 MT (SE  =  1,328), or about 60% the 
improvement seen following the full removal program, ceteris paribus .
Global Analysis. Derelict fishing gear is a global problem16. High rates of gear loss plague many of the world’s 
crustacean fisheries (Table 1) and, as a result, fishing traps and pots are thought to be one of the most common types of derelict gear worldwide
26. Modern pots and traps are often constructed from rigid and durable materi-
als16 and may cause environmental, ecological, and economic damage for many years.
Total global landings from all crustacean trap fisheries grossing US $20 million or more annually (Fig. 3) 
average 615,560 MT and are worth US $2.5 billion (Table 1). Together, these high-value fisheries deploy tens of millions of pots and traps, millions of which become derelict each year. Extending findings from Chesapeake Bay blue crab to global crustacean fisheries suggests that removing less than 10% of the derelict pots and traps 
in these fisheries could increase landings by 293,929 MT, at a value of US $831 million annually. For blue crab in 
the United States, extensive removals from Atlantic and Gulf state fisheries might increase landings by over 40%, generating US $62 million in annual revenue benefits. In these and other pot and trap fisheries, substantial levels of gear loss likely lead to costly and inefficient outcomes. Net benefits of removal programs will ultimately depend upon removal costs however, which may vary widely.
Discussion
Increases in severe weather, boating traffic, and gear conflicts, arising from continued climate change27 and global 
economic growth28,29, could intensify gear loss over the coming decades. Preventative measures which incentivize 
gear conservation have been advocated in place of widespread removals on the basis of cost-effectiveness and 
Figure 1. Side-scan sonar image of active/buoyed (left) and derelict (right) crab pots in the Chesapeake Bay 
(credit: CCRM/VIMS). www.nature.com/scientificreports/3
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:19671 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19671sustainability11,26. In deep-water fisheries utilizing heavy gear, derelict gear location and removal may remain cost 
prohibitive30. Here it was seen that removal efforts can be economically viable, generating harvest and revenue 
benefits in excess of program costs. Simple, low-cost, and easily enforceable preventative measures should be 
introduced when possible, however a “one size fits all” approach has been argued to be problematic12 and more 
research comparing cost-effectiveness of different measures is currently needed26. As all gear loss cannot be pre-
vented, a combination of preventative and mitigating measures, such as the incorporation of effective biodegrad-able escape mechanisms
13,30, together with removals that target areas of high fishing pressure, is likely to yield 
benefits superior to any individual strategy in isolation. For small-scale removal programs, removing derelict gear from areas which regularly experience intense effort is recommended.
The harvest enhancing effects of derelict gear removals explored here were entirely the result of reduced gear 
competition and improved efficiency. Other studies have found derelict gear to be a source of mortality for target 
and non-target species
10–16, indicating the benefits of removals estimated here, though considerable, may be a 
lower bound. If removals led to a healthier and more abundant blue crab population, and this then led to harvest 
increases, total program benefits should increase. As crab and other crustaceans are generally attracted to bottom structure, and have been observed to regularly approach both active and derelict pots
19–23, it is likely that the 
use of biodegradable escape mechanisms would reduce, though not eliminate, the efficiency reducing effects of derelict gear.
Improvements in crustacean harvests resulting from the removal or reduction of rival derelict pots and traps 
can be biologically sustainable and offer clear, unfettered economic benefits. In the removal program analyzed 
here, it is estimated that approximately 60 million additional crab were harvested over the program’s six years. 
This level of supplementary take averaged 2% of the estimated annual abundance, and throughout the removal program, commercial exploitation rates were found to be well within or below biological targets
31. By 2012, blue 
crab abundance had increased 160% above 2008 estimates and a large number of juveniles were also observed. Following three seasons of intense removal efforts in which 80% of all removals occurred, there was no indica-tion that the enhanced harvests afforded through derelict pot removals compromised blue crab recruitment or stock health. It is clear from our analysis however, that, absent the Virginia Marine Debris Location and Removal 
Program, the briefly bountiful blue crab would have yielded less harvest and economic benefit.
The economic costs of derelict gear examined here are likely not unique to pot and trap fisheries. Lost 
trammel-nets, gillnets, longlines, and bottom trawl gear pollute marine environments all over the world
11,26 and 
attract target and non-target species in much the same way as derelict pots and traps24. In these fisheries, it might 
be expected that active gear is underproductive. In addition to lost harvests arising from stock depletion by ghost 
fishing derelict gear, and any other detrimental biological or ecological effects, competition with active gear may generate economic inefficiencies similar to those found for Chesapeake Bay blue crab.
Figure 2. Economic effects of derelict pot removals. (a) 95% confidence region of Virginia blue crab harvest 
with (blue) and without (red) the Virginia Marine Debris Location and Removal Program. (b) Average benefits (circles) and costs (squares) per pot removed. Average benefits equal estimated total revenue increase divided by derelict pots removed. Average costs equal total compensation paid for removals divided by derelict pots removed. Vertical dashed line denotes start of removals from targeted hotspot areas. (c) Map of predicted 
harvest increases. Hatched area is a no-take crab sanctuary. Map created using Esri ArcGIS 10.0 (http://www.
esri.com/software/arcgis).www.nature.com/scientificreports/4
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:19671 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19671The dilemma of derelict gear is, at its core, a common property problem. Assets which are owned by all are 
all too often of value to no one. The lost time, effort, and materials which result from needlessly inefficient gear 
represent a source of non-recoverable economic waste. These costs, though previously unacknowledged, are per -
haps equally tragic to the ecological and environmental damage more commonly associated with derelict gear. Reducing or removing dominant sources of marine debris from the world’s oceans, bays, and estuaries is essential 
not only to restoring and protecting local ecologies and environments, but also to revitalizing resource dependent 
communities and cultures.
Methods
Chesapeake Bay. The Virginia Marine Debris Location and Removal Program employed commercial crab-
bers to locate and remove derelict fishing gear from Virginia tidal waters. Participants were assigned to broad areas according to anticipated derelict pot abundance, travel time, and other logistical considerations such that excessive overlap was avoided. Individuals were provided with a side imaging unit (Humminbird
™  1197SI side 
imaging unit, dual frequency 455–800  kHz) preprogrammed to scan using 23  m (75  ft) swaths and acquire GPS 
points (survey tracks) every 30 seconds. The date, time, and location (waypoint), as well as various item descrip-
tors, were recorded for all retrieved pots. During the first four years of the program (2008–2012), 32,421 derelict blue crab, peeler, and eel pots were recovered. The last two years of the program saw an abbreviated removal 
program in which 1,987 derelict pots were removed.
There are approximately 300,000 pots licensed and fished in Virginia, 20% of which, or about 60,000, are lost 
each year
15. Assuming half of all derelict pots completely degrade each year—a conservative assumption as struc-
tural integrity has been shown to last for at least two years18—Virginia’s “stock” of derelict pots can be described 
by the discrete time equation: =. +, −− D DR05 60000tt t 1 , where Dt and Rt are the stock and removals of dere-
lict pots in year t , respectively. Using this formulation, intense removal efforts during the first three years of the 
program would have decreased the standing stock of derelict pots by 15%. Targeted hotspot removals later in the 
program likely led to localized decreases, however, the total stock of derelict pots would have increased during this time. Over the program’s six years, removals are thought to have reduced the quantity of derelict pots by ~9% 
on average.
To investigate the impact of the removal program on the blue crab fishery, harvests were modeled using a 
modified Schaefer
32 specification which included derelict pot removals:
=

=
>,
()ηη
ηη η′′
HqE Xi fR
qE XR ifR00
1ititit t it
itit t it itex
ex r
where Hit is the harvest in area i  at time t ; qit is an area- and time-specific catchability coefficient; Eit is the effort in 
area i at time t; Xt is the stock at time t; Rit is the amount of derelict gear removed from area i at time t; and ηe, ηx, 
and ηr are elasticity parameters.
Data necessary to estimate equation (1) was acquired from several different sources. Annual blue crab harvests 
and effort (number of pots) from 1994–2014 for 54 management delineated fishing areas were obtained from the 
Virginia Marine Resources Commission, the state agency responsible for managing blue crab. The 34,408 derelict pot removals were then overlaid into georeferenced management areas using the Identity operation in ArcGIS SpeciesAnnual Gear Loss 
(% Deployed)*Landings 
(MT)Revenues 
(US$) Major Producers
Blue swimmer crab Portunus pelagicus 70 173,647 $199M† China, Philippines, 
Indonesia, Thailand, Vietnam
American lobster Homarus americanus 20–25 100,837 $948M Canada, USA
Blue crab Callinectes sapidus 10–50 98,418 $152M USA
Queen crab/snow crab Chionoecetes opilio NA 113,709 $401MCanada, St. Pierre and 
Miquelon (France), USA
Edible crab Cancer pagurus NA 45,783 $49M‡ United Kingdom, Ireland, 
Norway, France
Dungeness crab Metacarcinus magister 11 35,659 $169M USA, Canada
Spiny lobster Panulirus argus 10–28 34,868 $500M§ Bahamas, Brazil, Cuba, 
Nicaragua, Honduras, USA
King crab Paralithodes camtschaticus 10 10,137 $99M USA
Stone crab Menippe mercenaria||NA 2,502 $24M USA
TOTAL 615,560 $2.5B
Table 1.  Gear loss and global landings for major crustacean pot and trap fisheries. Average MT and 
US $ 2003–2012. Data from: NOAA Office of Science and Technology, National Marine Fisheries Service, Commercial fisheries statistics http://www.st.nmfs.noaa.gov/st1/commercial/index.html; Food and Agriculture Organization, United Nations, Fisheries and Aquaculture Department, http://www.fao.org/fishery/search/en, Fisheries and Oceans Canada http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/stats/commercial/sea-maritimes-eng.htm. 
*Estimates 
from Bilkovic et al. (2012). †Based on an average price of US $1.15/kg (35). ‡Based on 2004–2012 average price 
of US $1.07/kg (36). §See (37). ||Claws only.www.nature.com/scientificreports/5
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:19671 | DOI: 10.1038/srep1967110.0 and matched by year to harvests and effort. High-quality stock abundance estimates, derived from an annual 
winter dredge survey which samples ~1,500 sites throughout the Chesapeake Bay31, were appended to harvest, 
effort, and derelict pot removal data. Equation (1) was estimated using a flexible transcendental logarithmic for -
mulation which allowed for area random effects (see Supplementary Table S1).
Evaluating the impact of removals on harvests was accomplished through comparison of model predictions 
with and without derelict pot removals:
=− ,( ) ˆˆ EffectH H 2it itA
itCf
where ˆHitA and ˆHitCfare harvest predictions from equation (1) given actual removals and a counterfactual of zero 
removals. Effectit is the difference in predicted harvests for area i  at time t  attributable to the removal of derelict 
gear. Summation of equation (2) over i  and t  produced a measure of total program effects. Harvest effects were 
converted to revenues using average annual ex-vessel prices for Virginia hard shell blue crab in 2014 dollars.
While the potential for confounding bias in equation (2) cannot be totally eliminated, several aspects of the 
data and statistical model used reduce its likelihood. First, of the 54 management areas where harvest and effort 
were observed, 12 (22%) saw no removals during any year of the program. The number of areas experiencing 
removals in any given year averaged 32 (59%) and never exceeded 41 (76%). Overall, removals were found to exhibit a high degree of temporal and spatial variation (cv (R
t) =  0.73, cv(Ri) =  1.52), providing a rich set of data 
with which to identify marginal removal effects. Second, effort did not appear to respond to removals. That is, areas which saw more removals did not experience corresponding increases in effort. Were this not the case, a more complex counterfactual environment would be required to evaluate the removal program. Finally, the statistical harvest model included parameters to control for extraneous factors affecting harvests that were unre-
lated to the removal program. Area random effects enabled differences in catchability across areas to be mod-
eled apart from any differences in area-specific removals, while a dummy indicator variable was included to 
control for exogenous shifts in catchability occurring contemporaneously with the removal program. Similar 
quasi-experimental empirical methods have been used to evaluate fisheries policies and isolate program effects 
in other contexts
33,34 (see Supplementary Information for additional background and description of the data and 
harvest model).
Global Analysis.  To calculate the global impacts of wide-spread derelict gear removal or reduction, it was 
assumed that the following ratio would be maintained across crustacean pot and trap fisheries:
%=%.()VA HarvestIncrease
VA Gear LossRateFisheryi HarvestIncrease
Fisheryi Gear LossRate 3
Rather, the increase in harvests which could be expected to result after removing derelict gear from the grounds of fishery i, in an amount proportionate to that removed through the Virginia Marine Debris Location and Removal 
Program (i.e., ~9%), would depend on the rate of gear loss in that fishery. This relationship might be expected as most crustacean fisheries utilize pots and traps constructed from similar materials and operate in near-shore coastal environments, suggesting similar rates of gear decay. Proportionate removals from a fishery with a high 
rate of gear loss would imply many pots and traps were removed, and thus a large harvest increase should be 
Figure 3. Global distribution of major crustacean pot and trap fisheries. Map created using Esri ArcGIS 10.0 
(http://www.esri.com/software/arcgis).www.nature.com/scientificreports/6
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:19671 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19671expected. Additionally, as removals from areas of high potting effort were found to be more effective at enhancing 
harvests, removal benefits should be greater in fisheries with large stocks of derelict gear experiencing significant production inefficiencies.
To predict harvest increases using the ratio (3), our estimate of a 27% increase in blue crab harvests in Virginia, 
where the gear loss rate has been found to be 20%, was applied to global landings and gear loss data (Table 1). 
Mean loss rates were used for those fisheries where a range was reported, while a conservative 20% was applied to 
three fisheries without gear loss rate measurements (snow crab Chionoecetes opilio , edible crab Cancer pagurus , 
and stone crab Menippe mercenaria). Average prices were used to calculate revenues
35–37. Large increases in land-
ings could have offsetting price effects, however, due to data limitations, this possibility was not investigated here. Additionally, as multiple commercial fisheries exist for each of the included species, overall gear loss rates may differ from those used here. Differences in habitat and gear across fisheries may affect results, though attraction to bottom structure is a commonly observed crustacean behavior
19–23 and removal of derelict gear from global 
crustacean fisheries could hold similar efficiency improving effects to those observed for Chesapeake Bay blue crab if animals attracted to derelict gear might otherwise be caught by actively fished gear.
References
1. Willman, R., Kelleher, K., Arnason, R. & Franz, N. The sunken billions: the economic justification for fisheries reform. (Joint 
publication of The World Bank and the FAO, 2009).
2. Gordon, H. S. The economic theory of a common-property resource: the fishery. J. Polit. Econ. 62, 124–142 (1954).
3. Hardin, G. The tragedy of the commons. Science . 162, 1243–1248 (1968).
4. Jeftic, L., Sheavly, S. B. & Adler, E. Ed. Meith, N. Marine litter: a global challenge (UNEP Regional Seas, 2009).
5. Jambeck, J. R. et al. Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean. Science . 347, 768–771 (2015).
6. United Nations Environment Programme. Marine litter: an analytical overview (Regional Seas, 2005).
7. Sheavly, S. B. National marine debris monitoring program: final program report, data analysis & summary. (Prepared for U.S. EPA by 
Ocean Conservancy, Washington, DC, 2007).
8. Arthur, C., Sutton-Grier, A. E., Murphy, P . & Bamford, H. Out of sight but not out of mind: harmful effects of derelict traps in selected U.S. coastal waters. Mar. Pollut. Bull.  86, 19–28 (2014).
9. Johnson, L. D. Navigational hazards and related public safety concerns associated with derelict fishing gear and marine debris. (Paper presented at the International Marine Debris Conference on Derelict Fishing Gear and the Ocean Environment, Honolulu, HI, 2000).
10. Guillory, V . Ghost fishing by blue crab traps. North Am. J. Fish. Manag. 13, 459–466 (1993).
11. Brown, J. & Macfadyen, G. Ghost fishing in European waters: Impacts and management responses. Mar. Policy . 31, 488–504 (2007).
12. Brown, J., Macfadyen, G., Huntington, T., Magnus, J. & Tumilty, J. Ghost fishing by lost fishing gear. (Final Report to DG Fisheries and Maritime Affairs of the European Commission, Institute for European Environmental Policy, Poseidon Aquatic Resource 
Management Ltd joint report, 2005).
13. Bilkovic, D. M., Havens, K. J., Stanhope, D. M. & Angstadt,K. T. Use of fully biodegradable panels to reduce derelict pot threats to 
marine fauna. Conserv. Biol. 26, 957–966 (2012).
14. Maselko, J., Bishop, G. & Murphy, P . Ghost fishing in the Southeast Alaska commercial Dungeness crab fishery. North Am. J. Fish. Manag . 33, 422–431 (2013).
15. Bilkovic, D. M., Havens, K. J., Stanhope, D. M. & Angstadt,K. T. Derelict fishing gear in Chesapeake Bay, Virginia: Spatial patterns 
and implications for marine fauna. Mar. Pollut. Bull.  80, 114–123 (2014).
16. Uhlmann, S. S. & Broadhurst, M. K. Mitigating unaccounted fishing mortality from gillnets and traps. Fish Fish.  16, 183–229 (2015).
17. National Marine Fisheries Service. Fisheries Economics of the United States, 2012. (U.S. Dept. Commerce, NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-F/SPO-137, 2012).
18. Havens, K. J., Bilkovic, D. M., Stanhope, D. M., Angstadt, K. T. & Hershner, C. The effects of derelict blue crab traps on marine 
organisms in the lower Y ork River, Virginia. North Am. J. Fish. Manag. 28, 1194–1200 (2008).
19. Eggleston, D. B., Etherington, L. L. & Elis, W . E. Organism response to habitat patchiness: species and habitat-dependent recruitment of decapod crustaceans. J. Experi. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 223, 111–132 (1998).
20. Sturdivant, S. K. & Clark, K. L. An evaluation of the effects of blue crab (Callinectes sapidus ) behavior on the efficacy of crab pots as 
a tool for estimating population abundance. Fish. Bull. 109, 48–55 (2011).
21. Parrish, F. A. & Kazama, T. K. Evaluation of ghost fishing in the Hawaiian lobster fishery. Fish. Bull. 90, 720–725 (1992).
22. Jury, S. H., Howell, H., O’Grady, D. F. & Watson III, W . H. Lobster trap video: in situ  video surveillance of the behaviour of Homarus 
Americanus  in and around traps. Mar. Freshwater Res. 52, 1125–1132 (2001).
23. Godoy, H., Furevik, D. & Stiansen, S. Unaccounted mortality of Red King Crab ( Paralithodes camtschaticus ) in deliberately lost pots 
off Northern Norway. Fish. Res. 64, 171–177 (2003).
24. Matsuoka, T., Nakashima, T. & Nagasawa, N. A review of ghost fishing: scientific approaches to evaluation and solutions. Fish. Sci. 71, 691–702 (2005).
25. Havens, K. J., Bilkovic, D. M., Stanhope, D. M. & Angstadt, K. T. Fishery failure, unemployed commercial fishers, and lost blue crab 
pots: an unexpected success story. Environ. Sci. Policy. 14, 445–450 (2011).
26. Macfadyen, G., Huntington, T. & Cappell, R. Abandoned, lost or otherwise discarded fishing gear (UNEP Regional Seas Reports and 
Studies, No. 185; FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Tech. Paper, No. 523; Rome, 2009).
27. IPCC Eds. Pachauri, R. K. & Meyer, L. A. Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC; Geneva, Switzerland, 151 pp., 2014)
28. Small, C. & Nicholls, R. J. A global analysis of human settlement in coastal zones. J. Coastal Res. 19, 584–599 (2003).
29. Halpern, B. S. et al. A global map of human impact on marine ecosystems. Science. 319, 948–952 (2008).
30. Antonelis, K., Huppert, D., Velasquez, D. & June, J. Dungeness crab mortality due to lost traps and a cost-benefit analysis of trap removal in Washington State waters of the Salish Sea. North Am. J. Fish. Manag. 31, 880–893 (2011).
31. Chesapeake Bay Stock Assessment Committee. 2014 Chesapeake Bay Blue Crab Advisory Report. (Chesapeake Bay Program, 2014).
32. Schaefer, M. B. Some considerations of population dynamics and economics in relation to the management of the commercial marine fisheries. J. Fish. Board Can. 14, 669–681 (1957).
33. Smith, M. D., Zhang, J. & Coleman, F. C. Effectiveness of marine reserves for large-scale fisheries management. Can. J. Fish. Aqua. 
Sci. 63, 153–164 (2006).
34. Scheld, A. M., Anderson, C. M. & Uchida, H. The economic effects of catch share management: the Rhode Island fluke sector pilot 
program. Mar. Res. Econ. 27, 203–228 (2012).
35. The World Bank. Evaluation of new fishery performance indicators (FPIs): a case study of the blue swimming crab fisheries in 
Indonesia and Philippines. (Agriculture and Rural Development Discussion Paper 52, 2012).
36. Norwegian Directorate of Fisheries. Economic and biological figures for Norwegian fisheries, 2014. (Fiskeridirektoratet, Bergen, 2015).
37. Gongora, M. Assessment of Spiny Lobster (Panulirus argus ) of Belize based on fishery dependent data. (United Nations University 
Fisheries Training Programme, Iceland, 2010).www.nature.com/scientificreports/7
Scientific  RepoRts  | 6:19671 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19671Acknowledgements
We thank R. O’Reilly, J. Grist, and S. Iverson of the Virginia Marine Resources Commission for data support 
in model development; T. Rudnicky of the Center for Coastal Resources Management for development of georeferenced management areas; and all the Virginia commercial crabbers who took part in the removal program. This paper is Contribution No. 3522 of the Virginia Institute of Marine Science, College of William & Mary. Data collection was funded by NOAA/NMFS through the fisheries disaster relief and also by NFWF and 
the Office of the Virginia Secretary of Natural Resources. This research was supported by NOAA ’ s Marine Debris 
Program.
Author Contributions
K.J.H. and D.M.B. led derelict pot removal program; A.M.S. and D.M.B. compiled data; A.M.S. performed data analyses; and all authors contributed to the writing.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.How to cite this article: Scheld, A. M. et al. The Dilemma of Derelict Gear. Sci. Rep. 6, 19671; doi: 10.1038/
srep19671 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Supplementary Information  for: The Dilemma of Derelict Gear  
A.M. Scheld, D.M. Bilkovic, K.J. Havens 
 
Background  
 
 
Figure S1 | Map of derelict pot removals.  Dark grey lines define management area boundaries. The main  stem of 
the bay is closed to all harvests.  Map created using E sri ArcGIS 10.0 (http://www.esri.com/software/arcgis).  
 
From 1994 until 2008, Virginia blue crab harvests and effort largely declined as managers 
tightened effort restrictions in response to poor stock conditions. During this p eriod, harvest per 
pot averaged 0.75 kg/pot ( SD = 0.24).  Beginning in the 2008, the Virginia Marine Debris 
Location and Removal Program funded commercial crabbers during the winter closed fishing 
season to find and remove derelict fishing gear. Over six consecutive winters, from 2008 -2014, 
34,408 de relict pots were removed (Fig.  S1).   
 
 
 
Figure S2 | Annual Virginia blue crab pot fishery.  Harvests shown in black and effort in green. Inset figure plots 
annual Chesapeake Bay estimated blue crab abundance. Dashed lines  at first year of the Virginia Marine Debris 
Location and Removal Program.  The open crabbing season lasted from April 1st through the end of November in all 
years except 2014, when the season was extended by two weeks.  
 
From  the onset of  the re moval program , harvests and gear efficiency were see n to increase 
dramatically (Fig.  S2). During the program’s first three years, when over 80% of all removals 
occurred, harvest per pot increased to 0.97 kg/pot (SD = 0.31), indicating each fished pot was 
yielding an additional blue crab on average (1 crab ≈ 0.22 kg). As removal efforts declined, so 
too did harvests and gear efficiency, returning to pre -removal levels during the last three years of 
the program (harvest per pot: M = 0.76 kg, SD = 0.26).   
Annu al blue crab abundance estimates showed considerable stock improvements 
contemporaneous with derelict pot removal efforts. While it was anticipated that removal of 
derelict gear would be biologically beneficial, concurrent closure of the controversial wint er 
dredge fishery, which primarily targets females as they lay dormant in the lower bay, 
complicates identification of the program’s biological effects. Additionally, though it might be 
expected that the removal of derelict pots would enhance harvests and gear efficiency due to the 
reduction of rival ghost fishing gear, this conclusion is confounded by abundance increases 
which would also be expected to enhance harvests and gear efficiency. To separate out the 
effects of changes in abundance, effort, and de relict gear removals on harvests, it is necessary to 
first construct a model of blue crab production.  
 
Model Specification  
A flexible Schaefer harvest function can  be written as:  
 
(S1)                   
ex
it it it tH q E X , 
 
where Hit is the harvest in area i at time t; qit is an area - and time -specific catchability coefficient; 
Eit is the effort in area i at time t; Xt is the stock at time t; and  ηe and ηx are effort and stock 
elasticity parameters. The harvest function (S1) allows ha rvests to vary spatially with effort, 
temporally with effort and stock, and also allows for area - and time -specific shifts in catchability. 
The inclusion of elasticity parameters enables a flexible harvest response to both effort and 
stock. To model the ef fects of derelict gear removals, equation (S1) was modified to include the 
amount of derelict gear removed from area i at time t (see Methods).  Data  
The Virginia Mar ine Resources Commission (VMRC)  requires fishers to submit weekly reports 
which specify total pots (and other gear) fished, their location, and pounds of blue crab 
harvested. From these weekly reports, aggregate annual data on area -specific harvest and potting 
effort from 1994 -2014 for 43 unique management areas and 11 area -aggregates was obt ained. 
Harvest and effort in reporting areas which were visited by fewer than three individuals in a 
given year were aggregated by the VMRC to a higher spatial level (river system) to maintain 
confidentiality. Approximately 10% of harvests occurred in 11 s patial aggregations representing 
31 separate management reporting areas. There were two management areas with no recorded 
harvest s or effort.  
The final dataset consisted of 1 ,058 observations of annual harvest and effort from 43 
management areas ( n = 903) and 11 area aggregates ( n = 155); 21 annual observations of 
estimated blue crab abundance; and 286 annual area removal observations. Abundance and 
removal observations were matched to harvest s and effort by year and area -year, respectively.  
Though all incl uded areas (and area -aggregates) experienced effort and harvest during the 
removal program, over 20% saw no derelict pots removed. Areas and times which experienced 
no removals were coded as “0”. The resulting panel of data was slightly unbalanced as some 
management areas, included in the area aggregates, were infrequently visited. Balancing the 
panel did not change model parameter estimates, results, or general conclusions.  
Annual price data was obtained from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administra tion’s Office of Science and Technology, who maintain an updated online database of 
commercial fisheries landings, searchable by state.  
 Econometric Estimation  
To estimate equation (1), a transcendental logarithmic formulation was employed:  
 
(S2)          
0 1 2 3 4 5
6 7 8 9 10ln ln ln ln ln ln ln ln
ln ln ln ln ln ln ln lnit it t it it it t t
it it it t it it t it t i itH E X R E E X X
R R E X E R X R I     
            
       , 
 
where Hit is the kg of blue crab harvest in management area i and year t; Eit is the number of blue 
crab pots fished in management area i and year t; Xt is an estimate of blue crab abundance in year 
t; Rit is the number of derelict pots removed from area i in year t (occurring before effort and 
harvest of  year t but subsequent to that of year t-1); It is an indicator function which equals one 
during years of the removal program and zero otherwise; αi is an area specific effect; and εit is a 
normally distributed  random error term. Before estimation, one unit was added to all derelict pot 
removal observations.  
The catchability and elasticity parameters of  equation  (1) can be derived from parameters 
in the specification ( S2) as: 
 
(S3a)      
 0 10 expit t iqI     ;  
(S3b)                 
1 4 7 8 ln ln lne it t it E X R         ;  
(S3c)                   
2 5 7 9 ln ln lnx t it it X E R         ;  
(S3d)                  
3 6 8 9 ln ln lnr it it t R E X         . 
 
In equation (S3a), the catchability coefficient of equation (1) is shown to vary by area due to the 
inclusion of αi, an area specific effect. The indicator variable It allows for a shift in catchability occurring contemporaneously with, but unrelated to, derelict pot removals . Equations (S3b-d) 
show that  elasticity parameters from the harvest function (1) are modeled to be extremely 
flexible, permitted to change in response to values of included independent variables . 
Statistical analyses and estimation were done in R38. Equation ( S2) was initially 
estimated in both fixed and random effects frameworks (i.e., in separate specifications αi, the 
individual area effect, was modeled as resulting from fixed, non -random processes as well as  
random factors). A Hausman test indicated the indivi dual area effects ( αi’s) were not correlated 
with the model’s independent variables ( H = 14.99 ~ χ2(10), p = 0.13), implying a random effects 
specification was both consistent and efficient.  The final random effects model was fit using 
lmer in the lme4 package39. A large amount of  the variance in  harvest s was explained through 
the model’s fixed factors (marginal R2 = 0.942), while area random effects explained a lesser 
amount (conditional R2 = 0.974)40. The  strong fit suggests equation ( S2) does well in explaining 
the harvest process, which is largely determined through effort, stock, and, when applicable, 
derelict gear removals. A  residual bootstrap procedure , also contained in the lme4 package, was 
used to sample 10,000 parameter vectors. During bootstr ap sampling, random effects were held 
fixed at the original model estimates, i.e., only residuals were resampled in constructing 
synthetic observations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Table S1 | Mean bootstrapped parameter estimates . Elasticities calculated at  the mean of all vari ables . n = 
10,000 bootstrap samples . Parameter significance: *** 0.01; ** 0.05; * 0.1.  
 
 
Parameter (Model)  Estimate (SE)  
0(S2)
 -10.794  (3.120)***  
1(S2)
 1.202  (0.144)***  
2(S2)
 3.145  (0.953)***  
3(S2)
 -0.133  (0.101)  
4(S2)
 0.001  (0.005)  
5(S2)
 -0.210  (0.077)***  
6(S2)
 -0.003  (0.004)  
7(S2)
 -0.035  (0.016)**  
8(S2)
 0.008  (0.004)*  
9(S2)
 0.017  (0.014)  
10(S2)
 -0.044  (0.023)**  
(1)e
 1.026  (0.048)***  
(1)x
 1.500  (0.489)***  
(1)r
 0.054  (0.010)***  
 
All harvest function  (equation 1)  production elasticities were found to be positive and 
statistically significant  (Table S1) . The mean values of ηe and ηx suggest increases in both factors 
led to more than proportionate percentage increases in harvest, though neither elasticity was 
greater than one at a 95% confidence level. A strictly positive bootstrapped distribution of ηr 
indicated that harvests increas ed significantly in response to derelict pot removals, supporting the 
hypothesis that derelict gear reduces har vests. Catchability (equation S3 a) varied by area due to 
the inclusion of area random effects, though this variation was relatively minor ( cv(qit) = 0.23). 
Additionally, catchability was seen to decrease by 4% during the removal program as a result of 
factors unrelated to removals, effort, or stock abundance. This suggests that the Virginia Marine 
Debris Location and Removal Program occurred contem poraneously with poor environmental 
conditions or other factors not conducive to blue crab harvest.   Program Evaluation  
To uncover the effects of the Virginia Marine Debris Location and Removal Program on harvests  
and gear efficiency , the empirical harves t model (S2)  was used to generate predictions under two 
different scenarios: actual removals and zero removals. In the zero removals counterfactual, all 
removal observations were set to zero before predicting harvests (note that one unit was added to 
all removals  before model estimation ; in the counterfactual , all removal observations equaled 
one, the natural logarithm of which is zero).   
During counterfactual estimation, the values of effort and stock remained fixed. Thus, the 
counterfactual comparison was  between harvests with and without derelict gear removals, 
assuming effort and stock  were not directly affected by the program . This simple hypothetical  is 
justifiable for several reasons. First, there is a high degree of site fidelity, habitual behavior, and 
territoriality among Virginia crabbers. A regression of the number of active pots per area and 
year on removals, controlling for constant effort differences between areas  and increased total 
effort during the program’s first three years, yielded an insignificant result ( p = 0.31) . This 
finding indicates  that effort did not respond directly to the level of removals , and therefore it is 
valid to use observed effort in the co unterfactual . Second, though removal of derelict gear 
benefit ed the blue crab stock by re ducing ghost fishing mortality, contemporaneous c hanges in 
bay-wide population abundance were likely the result of  management  measures and 
environmental conditions. Total estimated abundance increased by 160% from 2008 to 2012  and 
then dropped sharply by more than 60% over the next two years.  During the removal program, 
estimated abundance varied by  44% year-to-year on average. This level of population change is 
far bey ond that which might be expected to result from removing 9% of derelict gear.  Finally, aside from the removal of rival gear, which might reduce efficiency of active gear, there was no 
indication that the program significantly affected other variables poten tially related to harvests.  
 
Sensitivity Analysis  
Concerns surrounding effort reporting accuracy were addressed through sensitivity analyses. The 
econometric specification of harvest ( equation S2) utilized log transformations for all variables, 
thus relati onships were evaluated in terms of percentage changes and not actual values. Constant 
effort misreporting would therefore have no effect on model results (e.g., if harvesters always 
used 50% more pots than reported, predicted program effects  would remain u nchanged). 
Variable or irregular misreporting, where data on potting effort in certain areas or at certain times 
is inaccurate, could affect parameter estimates , model results , and general conclusions however.  
 
 
Figure  S3 | Sensitivity analysis of program effects . Three alternative scenarios were considered ( n = 10,000 
simulations under each scenario): a ) half of all observations unde rreport actual effort by 50% ; b ) three -quarters of 
all observations unde rreport actual effort by 50% ; and c ) one -quarter of all observations underreport effort by 50% 
while one -quarter of all observati ons overreport effort by 50% . Dashed lines specify  95% confidence interval and 
black triangle is placed at mean effects from the null model (zero misreporting). Bin width  is 500 MT.  
 
To evaluate the impact of variable effort misreporting on the predicted effects of derelict 
gear removal, three alternative scenarios were investigated: 1) half of all observations 
underreport actual effort by 50%; 2) three -quarters of all observations underreport actual effort 
by 50%; and 3) one -quarter of all observations underreport effort by 50% while one -quarter of 
all observations overreport effort by 50%. The range of scenarios considered allowed for both 
under - and overreporting , though managers  indicat ed that underreporting  of effort  is likely more 
commonplace (Rob O’Reilly,  personal communication). For each scenario, those observations 
considered to be misreporting effort were randomly selected from the pool all observations 
accordi ng to scenario -specific probabilities of under - and overreporting. The number of pots 
reported in selected misreporting observations were then rescaled to reflect under - or 
overreporting and all models were re -estimated. This process was repeated 10,000 ti mes for each 
of the three scenarios, storing mean predicted program  effects following model estimation at 
each iteration  (Fig. S3) . 
In all cases, variable misreporting tended to decrease mean effects. If misreporting is 
occurring, the degree of upward bias  in program effects estimated by the null model (zero 
misreporting) would depend on the variance in measurement error. Highly variable misreporting 
(both in magnitude and direction) implies observed/recorded effort is a poor proxy for actual  
effort and the  strong fit of  equation  (S2) is reduced considerably. The e ffects of derelict gear 
removal are then reduced as removals were found to be significantly more effective in areas and 
years of high potting effort. Fortunately, there is little reason to believe misreporting is highly 
variable. It is more likely that effort is consistently underreported, the effects of which appear to 
be minimal. In all scenarios considered, harvest improvements remain large and positive despite 
variable effort misreporting. Gener al results and conclusions surrounding the effects of derelict 
gear removals on harvests are therefore considerably robust to misreporting of effort.  
 References  
38. R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. (R Foundation 
for Statistical Computing; Vienna, Austria, 2013; http://www.R -project.org/ ). 
39. Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B. & Walker, S. lme 4: Linear mixed -effects models 
using Eigen and S4. ( R Package Version 10 -5, 2014; http://CRAN.R -
project.org/package=lme4 ). 
40. Nakagawa, S . & Schielzeth , H. A general and simple method for obtaining R2 fro m 
generalized linear mixed ‐effects models.  Methods in Ecology and Evolution  4, 133-142 
(2013) . 
 