Journal of Hazardous Materials B136 (2006) 203–212
Oxidation of various reactive dyes with in situ electro-generated active
chlorine for textile dyeing industry wastewater treatment
D. Rajkumar, Jong Guk Kim∗
Department of Environmental Engineering, Chonbuk National University, Chonju 561-756, South Korea
Received 24 March 2005; received in revised form 3 October 2005; accepted 8 November 2005
Available online 7 February 2006
Abstract
The present investigation revealed that all the reactive dyes were degraded in chlorine mediated electrochemical oxidation. Titanium based
dimensionally stable anode (DSA) was used for in situ generation of chlorine in the dye solution. All classes of reactive dyes (100 mg/L) showed acomplete color removal at a supporting electrolyte concentration of 1.5 g/L NaCl and 36.1 mA/cm
2current density. The chemical oxygen demand
(COD) and total organic carbon (TOC) removals were from 39.5 to 82.8% and from 11.3 to 44.7%, respectively, for different reactive dyes. It canbe concluded in general that the triazine containing higher molecular weight diazo compounds takes more time for complete de-colorization thanthe mono azo or anthraquinone containing dye compounds. The degradation rate of mixed dye compounds was affected by reaction temperature,current density, NaCl concentration and initial dye concentration. However, the initial pH of the dye solution ranging from 4.3 to 9.4 did not showsigniﬁcant effect on de-colorization. A complete color removal with 73.5% COD and 32.8% TOC removals were obtained for mixed reactive dyes(200 mg/L) at the end of 120 min of electrolysis under the optimum operating conditions of 4 g/L NaCl concentration and 72.2 mA/cm
2current
density.© 2006 Published by Elsevier B.V .
Keywords: Reactive dyes; Electrochemical oxidation; DSA; Active chlorine; COD; TOC; UV–vis spectra; Wastewater treatment
1. Introduction
Textile processing industries nowadays are widespread sec-
tors in developing countries. Among the various processes in thetextile industry, dyeing process uses large volume of water fordyeing, ﬁxing and washing process. Thus, the wastewater gener-ated from the textile processing industries contains, suspendedsolids, high amount of dissolved solids, un-reacted dyestuffs(color) and other auxiliary chemicals that are used in the vari-ous stages of dyeing and other processing. The presence of evensmall amount of dye in water (example 10–20 mg/L) is highlyvisible and affects the water transparency and the gas solubilityof water bodies [1]. Among several classes of textile dyestuffs,
the reactive dyes contribute about 50% [2]of the total market
share and the most common group used as chromophore is theazo (70%), followed by anthraquinone [3].
Several wastewater treatment technologies have been applied
for color removal, including physical, chemical and biological
∗Corresponding author. Tel.: +82 63 270 2448; fax: +82 63 270 2449.
E-mail address: kjongguk@chonbuk.ac.kr (J.G. Kim).process. All of them have advantages and drawbacks and a com-
bination of different technologies are generally required. Thebiological treatment of textile wastewater showed low degrada-tion efﬁciency because of the presence of biologically inert highmolecular weight dyestuffs [4,5] . The conventional method of
textile wastewater treatment consists of chemical coagulation(using ferrous, lime and polyelectrolytes), biological treatmentfollowed by activated carbon adsorption. The conventional coag-ulation process generates huge volume of hazardous sludge andposes a problem of sludge disposal. In order to meet the legalrequirements for the discharge of textile wastewater, researchersare attempting a combination of two or more treatment methodsfor the complete and successful removal. Combination of elec-trochemical treatment and chemical coagulation [6], combined
chemical coagulation, electrochemical oxidation, and activatedsludge process [7], and combination of electrochemical method,
chemical coagulation, and ion exchange [8]were reported for
textile efﬂuent treatment to comply with the legal require-ments or for reuse standards. However the previous investigatorsdemonstrated combined process successfully, the generation ofiron sludge due to the usage of sacriﬁcial iron electrodes isanother problem.
0304-3894/$ – see front matter © 2006 Published by Elsevier B.V .
doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2005.11.096204 D. Rajkumar , J.G. Kim / Journal of Hazardous Materials B136 (2006) 203–212
Hence, many investigators are studying alternative oxidation
methods like ozonation, photocatalytic oxidation, electrochem-ical oxidation, etc. The photocatalytic oxidation experimentswere conducted for acid blue 80 [9], acid orange 7 [10], bril-
liant orange K-R [11], and reactive orange 16 [12]. However,
this process may not have practical feasibility for real textileindustry wastewater treatment due to the inhibition of photocat-alytic activity at low pH. Because, the isoelectric point of TiO
2
is around 6.3, so the TiO 2particles carry positive charges when
the solution pH is lower than 6.3. Thus, chloride ions can beadsorbed to the positively charged TiO
2particle surface at low
pH due to ionic force. Similarly, surﬁcial holes of TiO 2will be
blacked by chloride ions will lead to decrease the formation ofhydroxyl radicals, resulting in the low photocatalytic efﬁciencysince the dyeing industry wastewater contains large amount ofchloride in the efﬂuent. The electrochemically assisted photo-chemical degradation was also conducted to improve the degra-dation efﬁciency of the dye [13]. Ozonation process was studied
for the removal of color and chemical oxygen demand (COD)[14]; however, this process showed a less COD removal [15].
Electrochemical treatment is an emerging technology used
for the removal of organic and inorganic impurities from waterand wastewater. Hence, many researchers are attempting to useelectrochemical methods for the treatment of wastewater. In theelectrochemical process, the pollutants are destroyed by eitherthe direct or indirect oxidation process. In a direct anodic oxi-dation process, the pollutants are ﬁrst adsorbed on the anodesurface and then destroyed by the anodic electron transfer reac-tion. In an indirect oxidation process, strong oxidants such ashypochlorite/chlorine, ozone, and hydrogen peroxide are elec-trochemically generated. The pollutants are then destroyed in thebulk solution by oxidation reaction of the generated oxidant. Allthe oxidants are generated in situ and are utilized immediately[16]. Among the oxidants, generation of hypochlorite is cheaper
and most of the efﬂuents have a certain amount of chloride.Though direct electrolysis of organic compounds at the anodesurface is also possible, a major portion of oxidation is medi-ated by active chloro species when conducting electrochemicaloxidation in the presence of chloride using an undivided cell.
Anode:
2Cl
−→Cl2+2e−(1)
Cathode:2H
2O+2e−→H2+2OH−(2)
Bulk solution:Cl
2+H2O→HOCl +H++Cl−(3)
HOCl →H++OCl−(4)
The application of indirect electrochemical oxidation medi-
ated by chlorine/hypochlorite was studied for textile industryefﬂuents by several investigators. Vlyssides and Israilides [17]
studied the electrochemical degradation of textile dye and ﬁnish-ing wastewater using Ti/Pt anode. At the end of 40 min of elec-trolysis, there was 92% COD, 92.2% BOD and 94% color reduc-
tion with energy consumption of 44 kWh/kg of COD removal.Szpyrkowicz et al. [18] conducted experiments using seven
different electrode materials for the degradation of dispersedyes. The best results were obtained in a chloride rich mediumunder acidic pH using Ti/Pt–Ir anode. Muthukumar et al. [19]
studied the textile wastewater treatment using Ti/RuO
2anode
and reported that a maximum COD reduction was observedat an optimum operating conditions of 80 dm
3/h ﬂow rate and
5 A/dm2current density. Recently, boron doped diamond (BDD)
anode was studied for dye degradation using sodium sulfate assupporting electrolyte. Degradation of acid orange 7 by electro-chemical method using BDD anode showed a complete colorremoval with more than 90% COD reduction [20]. Similarly,
Chen et al. [21] reported a very high COD removal for vari-
ous dye compounds with high current efﬁciency using the BDDelectrode.
Since the real textile dyeing industry is using different kinds
of dyestuffs with varying concentrations, nine dye compoundscontaining azo, antraquinone and triazine groups were selectedfor chlorine mediated electrochemical degradation. Though,sodium sulfate or sodium chloride is the common salts usedfor the dyeing process, most of the textile processing industriesare using sodium chloride due to less cost. Hence, it was decidedto study with sodium chloride as supporting electrolyte using atitanium based dimensionally stable anode (DSA).
2. Materials and methods
Bulk oxidation of reactive dyes was carried out using an
undivided electrochemical cell in a galvanostatic condition. Theanode was a titanium mesh coated with oxides of titanium,ruthenium and iridium available in the commercial market. Thecathode was stainless plate. The effective surface area of anodeand cathode were 27.7 and 50 cm
2, respectively. The electrodes
were positioned vertically and parallel to each other with aninter-electrode gap of 10 mm in a 1 L reactive dye solution. A dcpower supply was used as the source of constant electric currentfor the experiments (UP-3010S model, Unicorn Co. Limited,South Korea). To enhance the mass transport and to maintaina uniform concentration of the electrolyte, the reactor solutionwas constantly stirred at 300 rpm using a magnetic stirrer. Thetemperature of the reactor was maintained constantly using anexternal water re-circulation system. A schematic illustration ofthe experimental setup is shown in Fig. 1 .
The temperature and pH values were measured using Hanna
Instruments pH meter equipped with a temperature sensor.The initial pH of the dye solution was set appropriatelyusing dilute solutions of either sodium hydroxide or sulfuricacid. UV–visible spectra during the degradation of dyes wererecorded between 200 and 800 nm using a scanning UV–visiblespectrophotometer (Jasco model V-530, Japan). The visiblecolor removals for the mixed reactive dyes were measured atoptimum absorption wavelength of 516 nm in order to study theeffects of various operating parameters. The color removals dur-ing the experiments with individual dye compound were mea-sured at their optimum visible absorption wavelength. SamplesDownload English Version:
https://daneshyari.com/en/article/585525
Download Persian Version:
https://daneshyari.com/article/585525
Daneshyari.com