ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
122 
 Optimization of environmental parameters on the decolorization of Reactive Brilliant 
Blue dye by yeast isolates from textile effluent  
Sanaa, M. Ashour ; Hoda, H. Abo - Ghalia and Doaa, S. Abdel maksoud  
Botany Department, Faculty of Women for Arts, Science and Education - Ain Shams  
University  
Abstract  
    The present study was conducted to investigate the decolorization and degradation of 
Reactive Brilliant Blue dye using yeasts isolated from the effluent treatment of the textile 
industries and the identified yeast strains under optimal conditions using the  standard methods. 
Among twenty -four yeast strains, only five yeasts have the ability to decolorize the dye 
(2.8%). Three yeast strains; Rhodotorula glutinis , Candida utilis(1) and Candida sphaerica  as 
well as the local two yeast isolates which were identi fied as Rhodotorula rubra  and 
Cryptococcus albidus  showing high decolorization rate, they were used for the decolorization 
of Reactive Brilliant Blue dye in a medium containing glucose and yeast extract as a best 
carbon and nitrogen sources, the pH of medium varied among the yeasts, C. utilis(1) , R. rubra   
and C. albidus was 4, while C. sphaerica and R. glutinis  was 6 and5.5, respectively. All yeast 
strains were incubated for 18 h at 25˚C except C. utilis(1)  at 37˚C. C. utilis(1) , R. glutinis and 
C. sphaerica  showed high decolorization rate under static ae robic conditions. While  R. rubra 
and C. albidus  showed decolorization under static anaerobic conditions. According to the 
potentiality of yeast strains; C. sphaerica  could achieved a removal ratio of 68.83%, while  C. 
albidus  68.40%,  R. rubra  67.75%, R. glu tinis 66.88% and C. utilis(1)  63.85% of Reactive 
Brilliant Blue dye in a concentration of 10 mg/L. The highest biodegradation of the dye by the 
five yeast strains was confirmed by using plain distilled water as a decolorization medium. In 
conclusion, yeast  strains could be used for the biodegradation of dye - polluted waters 
including rate of degradation of anthraquinone dye.  
Key words: Yeast - Reactive Brilliant Blue dye - Decolorization - Optimization  
_________________________________________________________ ___________  
Corresponding author: lastmaster_7799@yahoo.com  
 
 ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
123 
 1.Introduction  
Textile dyes are engineered to be resistant to environmental conditions. During recent 
years the treatment of textile dye effluents has been the focus of significant research because 
of the potentially low cost of the process (Pajot et al., 2011).  Many syn thetic dyes belong to 
xenobiotic chemicals that are degraded with difficulty in nature, and therefore their removal 
from aqueous effluents from the textile industry has been receiving considerable environment 
research attention ( Borchert and Libra, 2001). Large amount of synthetic structurally varied 
dyes are being used extensively in textile , paper, printing, leather, paints, plastic, cosmetic, 
food industries and dye houses due to their ease of production, fastness and color variety as 
compared to natural  dyes( Cristovao et al., 2009; Waghmode et al.,  2011). The disposal of the 
effluent from these industries and dye houses into the environment causes change in pH, 
increase COD(chemical oxygen demand), TOC(total organic carbon) and also affects 
photosynthetic  activity of aquatic life due to reduced light penetration and gas solubility in 
water bodies which leads to adverse effects on aquatic life( Aksu and Donmez, 2003; 
Saratale et al.,  2009.  A large  number of synthetic dyes with specific chemical groups ( azo , 
acid, base, anthracene, triphenylmethane etc.) are widely used in the textile, cosmetic and 
pharmaceutical industry ( Pavko, 2011 ),in addition, a significant amount of these compounds 
are discharged into the environment through effluents (Christiane et al., 2013).  Because color 
in waste water is highly visible and affects esthetics, water transparency and gas solubility in 
water bodies and especially because many dyes are made from known carcinogens such as 
benzidine and other aromatic compounds, waste wat ers with dye have to be treated (Dong et 
al., 2003 and Ayed et al., 2011).  The presence of very low concentration of dyes in effluent is 
highly visible and undesirable (Nigam et al ., 2000; Robinson et al ., 2001). The excessive 
discharge of the effluents fro m the textile industries contains toxic chemicals such as azo dyes 
and reactive dyes which adversely affect the natural resources, soil fertility and aquatic 
organisms and disturb the integrity of the ecosystem (Puvaneswari et al.,  2006 and Sudha et 
al., 2014).   Conventional wastewater treatment system is inefficient because of the recalcitrant 
nature of dyes (Waghmode et al.,  2011) . Existing physical and chemical technologies are 
expensive, time consuming and produce a large amount of sludge or cause secon dary pollution 
((Telke et al.,  2009 and Tamboli et al.,  2010).  
Mechanisms of biological decolorization of textile dye depend greatly on the chemical 
structure of the dye and the microorganisms used (Pajot et al., 2011).  Numerous studies have 
indicated tha t biodegradation by microorganisms is a promising approach for treating dyes ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
124 
 contained in wastes (Fu and Viraraghavan, 2001). Over past decades many microorganisms 
have been found to be capable of degrading dyes; these include bacteria (Sani and Banerjee, 
1999),  filamentous fungi (Swamy and Ramsay, 1999; Balan and Monteiro, 2001), yeasts 
(Martorell et al.,  2012), actinomycetes (Zhou and Zimmermann, 1993)  and algae (Dilek et 
al., 1999).  filamentous fungi are well recognized for dye decolorization, while the reports on 
textile dye decolorization mechanisms of yeasts have been scare (Pajot et al., 2011).  Fungal 
ligninolytic enzyme system (lignin peroxidase, manganese peroxidase and laccase ) may also 
be involved in the bio -oxidation of dyes (Gold and Alic, 1993).  However, the requirement for 
low pH (Swamy and Ramsay, 1999)  for optimum enzyme activity and the long hydraulic 
retention time for complete decolorization (Swamy and Ramsay, 1999)  are major 
disadvantages in using fungi. In addition, growth of filamentous fungi is slow compared with 
most single -cell microorganisms and the production of mycelium often makes filamentous 
fungi poorly adaptable to wastewater treatments (Yu and Wen, 2005).   Compared to bacteria 
and filamentous fungi, yeasts have many advantages. They are not only grow rapidly like 
bacteria but also they are filamentous fungi have the ability to resist unfavorable environments 
(Martorell et al.,  2012) . Besides, yeasts have b een found to be very efficient in treating high 
strength organic wastewaters, such as food, molasses and oil manufacture industrial effluents 
(Yang et al.,  2008 and Martorell et al.,  2012).  
 Only a few reports on the degradation of azo dyes or anthraquinon e dyes by yeasts have 
appeared (Yu and wen, 2005; Pajot et al., 2011).  
In the present study, we have focused our attention on the use of local yeasts isolated from 
the effluent treatment of the textile industries. These identified yeast strains were used f or the 
bioremediation purpose, especially for the textile effluent treatment containing Reactive 
Brilliant Blue as an industrial dye under optimum conditions.  
2-Materials and methods  
 2.1. Collection of samples  
The samples were collected from the effluent treatment of the textile industries and soil 
surrounding areas of Atlas and Miser Spain industries located in Shobra El -khiema, where the 
coloured effluent was used as the source of yeast isolation in the present study. The samples 
were kept in sterile gla ss bottles and preserved at 4˚C in refrigerator and were tested within 24 
h of the collection time.  
 ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
125 
  2.2. Isolation, identification and maintenance of dye degrading yeasts  
Pour plate technique was used for the isolation of dye decolorizing yeast onYeast E xtract 
Peptone Dextrose agar medium (YEPD ) (Chen et al., 2002), contains (g   L); glucose, 20; 
peptone, 20; yeast extract, 10; agar, 20. Well grown yeast colonies were picked and further 
purified by streaking method. The isolated strains were maintained at  4˚C on universal agar 
slants at pH 4.7 and contains (g   L); glucose, 10; peptone, 5; yeast extract, 3; malt extract, 3 
(Suzuki et al., 1989). Identification of the yeast isolates was carried out using morphological 
and biochemical characteristics (Barnett et al.,  2000)  and integral system plus. In addition to 
ten yeast strains, obtained from Microbiological Resources Center (MIRCEN), Ain shams 
University, Cairo, Egypt. All yeast strains were tested as dye degrading yeasts.  
2.3. Dye stuff  
    Anthraquinone dye (Reactive  rilliant  lue) was obtained from Sigma Aldrich and was 
employed in this work by dissolving powdered dye stuff in hot ethyl alcohol up to a 
concentration of 10 mg   L.  
2.4. Screening of dye degrading yeast  
2.4.1. Inoculum preparation  
   Yeasts were individually tested for their growth and decolorization ability on agar mediu m 
of pH 5 - 6 (Yu and Wen,2005)  and contains (g   L): glucose, 10; KH2PO4,1; (NH4)2SO4,1; 
MgSO4.7H2O, 0.5; yeast extract, 0.2 and supplemented with  10 mg/ L of React ive Brilliant 
 lue dye and the plates were incubated at 25˚C till decolorization zone formation and 
secondary screening was performed with the same procedure on broth medium.  
 
2.4.2. Dye decolorization experiments  
Dye decolorization experiments were carried out in 50 ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing 10 
ml of broth decolorization medium inoculated with 1ml of the yeast suspension (OD 
at620=0.3) which prepared from an old yeast culture of 18 h. The inoculated flasks we re 
incubated under static aerobic conditions for a period of 24 h at 25˚C. Uninoculated 
decolorization medium was also incubated under the same conditions as a control to check 
abiotic decolorization of the dye. After incubation, the samples were centrifug ed for 10 min at 
6000g and the decolorization was assesed by measuring the absorbance of the supernatant at 
620 nm (Yu and Wen, 2005).  
 
 ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
126 
 2.4.3. Decolorization assay  
     Dye decolorization assay was measured in terms of percentage decolorization using UV -
spectrophotometer. The percentage was calculated from the following equation, % 
Decolorization= (Intitial OD - Final OD X 100) / Initial OD  
Each decolorization value i s the mean of three parallel experiments (Christiane et al.,  2013).  
 
 2.5. Optimization of environmental parameters that affect the decolorization process  
   Various factors were optimized to achieve the highest decolorization rate of Reactive Brilliant Bl ue 
using the selected yeasts. All the experiments were conducted in triplicate.  
Decolorization experiment was performed for all the following parameters as described before in 2.4.2  
2.5.1. Temperature  
Decolorization of Reactive Brilliant Blue by the select ed yeasts was studied at different 
temperatures such as 20, 25, 30, 37, 45 and 55˚C. Decolorization medium was used for this 
purpose containing, 0.1 g   L of the dye. Decolorization experiment was performed as 
described before.  
2.5.2. Incubation time  
The effect of different incubation times 2, 4, 6, 12, 18, 24, 48, 72 and 96 h were carried out 
on decolorization efficiency of the selected yeasts. Incubation temperature was at 25  C except 
one yeast strain at 37˚C.  
 
2.5.3. PH value  
Effect of different pH values of the medium in ranging from 3 to 6.5 (0.5 intervals) was 
examined on the decolorization efficiency of the selected yeast strains.The incubation 
temperature was maintained at 25˚C  except one yeast strain at 37˚C for 18 h. The  pH was 
adjusted by using 0.1N HCL and 0.1N NaOH solutions.  
 
  2.5.4. Aerobic and anaerobic conditions  
Aerobic and anaerobic conditions during incubation time of the selected strains were used 
to find the best condition for maximum decolorization. Two grou ps of flasks containing 
decolorization medium that was enriched with 0.1 g / L of the dye adjusted at optimum pH for 
biodegradation. One group of flasks was incubated under static aerobic condition and the 
second group was incubated under static anaerobic condition at 25˚C  except one yeast strain at ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
127 
 37˚C for 18h. Anaerobic conditions were achieved by adding sterile paraffin oil on the surface 
of the broth medium.  
 
 2.5.5. Inoculum size   
 Different inoculum concentrations of 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 4 5, and 50 %  
(v/ v) were used to find the best inoculum concentration to achieve the maximum 
decolorization efficiency. The different inoculum concentrations were added to the 
decolorization medium ( 10ml) containing 0.1 g   L of Reactive  rilliant  lue dye .The liquid 
medium was adjusted at optimum pH for biodegradation. The flasks were incubated at 25˚C  
except one yeast strain at 37˚C under static aerobic conditions except two yeast strains under 
anaerobic conditions for 18h.  
 
 2.5.6. Dye concentration  
Six levels of Reactive Brilliant Blue dye 10, 50, 100, 200, 300 and 500 mg/l were used to 
find the best concentration for maximum decolorization. Four ml of yeast suspension (OD 
at620= 0.3) were prepared from an old yeast culture of 18 h and were added to 10 ml of 
decolorization medium. The flasks were adjusted at optimum pH for biodegradation and were 
incubated at 25˚C  except one yeast strain at 37˚C. The flasks were incubated under static 
aerobic conditions except two yeast strains were incubated under an aerobic conditions for 18h.  
 
2.5.7. Carbon source  
In order to assess the effect of different carbon sources on yeast decolorization, four 
different carbon sources, namely sucrose, lactose, maltose and starch were used by replacing 
D- glucose in decolorizat ion medium. Four ml of yeast suspension (OD at620= 0.3) prepared 
from an old selected yeast culture and were added to 10 ml of decolorization medium 
containing 0.01g/L of Reactive Brilliant Blue dye. The flasks were adjusted at optimum pH for 
biodegradatio n and were incubated at 25˚C  except one yeast strain at 37˚C. The flasks were 
incubated under static aerobic conditions except two yeast strains were incubated under 
anaerobic conditions for 18h.  
 
 2.5.8. Nitrogen source  
The effect of five different nitrog en sources yeast extract, peptone, ammonium nitrate, 
sodium nitrate and Beef extract was examined on the decolorization efficiency of the selected 
yeast isolates. . Four ml of yeast suspension (OD at620= 0.3) were prepared from an old 
selected yeast cultur e of 18 h and were added to 10 ml of decolorization medium containing ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
128 
 0.01g/L of Reactive Brilliant Blue dye. The decolorization medium was adjusted at optimum 
pH for biodegradation. The flasks were incubated at 25˚C  except one yeast strain at 37˚C. All 
selected yeasts were incubated under static aerobic conditions except two yeast strains under 
anaerobic conditions for 18h.  
 
 2.5.9. Type of medium  
 Different types of media; decolorization medium, plain distilled wat er, distilled water with 
5% glucose and distilled water with 1% glucose plus 0.1% peptone plus 0.1% yeast extract 
were used to know the best recommended medium for maximum decolorization. Four ml of 
yeast suspension (OD at620= 0.3) were prepared from an ol d selected yeast culture of 18 h and 
were added to 10 ml of decolorization medium containing 0.01g/l of Reactive Brilliant Blue 
dye. The decolorization medium was adjusted at optimum pH for biodegradation. The flasks 
were incubated at 25˚C  except one yeast  strain at 37˚C. The flasks were incubated under static 
aerobic conditions except two yeast strains were incubated under anaerobic conditions for 18h.  
 
2.6. Statistical analysis  
All values and data points presented in this work are the means of at least t riplicate 
determinations of independent assays. Data were analyzed using (Two -way ANOVA) two -
way analysis of variance (Field, 2013).  
 
3. Results and Discussion  
3.1 Results  
 3.1.1. Screening of dye degrading yeast  
All of the 14 isolates and 10 strains of the yeast were screened for their efficiency to 
remove anthraquinone. The results indicated that out of the 24 yeasts, 5 yeast isolates (2,8%) 
showed variable potential to decolorize 10 mg /l Reactive Brilliant Blue  in decolorization 
medium. In addition to the three yeast strains namely; Candida utilis 1, C.sphaerica , 
Rhodotorula glutinis.  Two yeast isolates (6, 7) were isolated from the effluent treatment of 
the textile industry and were identified as Rhodotorula ru bra and Cryptococcus  albidus . 
These yeast isolates were selected for further experiments in this study, based on their 
remarkable abilities to remove this dye color (Table 1).  
 
 
 ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
129 
 Table 1: Decolorization screening on solid and broth media for twenty four yeasts with 
decolorization medium mixed with Reactive  rilliant  lue ( 10 mg/L) grown at 25  C for 24h.  
 
 
 
 
 Tested yeast  Solid medium  Broth medium  
Zone decolorization (mm)  Colour reduction  
Candida utilis(1)  30 +ve 
Candida utilis(2)  -ve -ve 
Candida utilis(3)  -ve -ve 
Candida utilis(22)  -ve -ve 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae(43)  -ve -ve 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae(44)  -ve -ve 
Rhodotorula glutinis  35 ++ve  
Candida sphaerica  60 +++ve  
Candida famata  -ve -ve 
Cryptococcus albidus(1)  -ve -ve 
Isolate 1  -ve -ve 
Isolate 2  -ve -ve 
Isolate 3  -ve -ve 
Isolate 4  -ve -ve 
Isolate 5  -ve -ve 
Isolate 6  38 ++ve  
Isolate 7  43 ++ve  
Isolate 8  -ve -ve 
Isolate 9  -ve -ve 
Isolate 10  -ve -ve 
Isolate 11  -ve -ve 
Isolate 12  -ve -ve 
Isolate13  -ve -ve 
Isolate 14  -ve -ve ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
131 
 3.1.2. Environmental parameters that affect the decolorization process  
3.1.2.1. Temperature  
Incubation temperature in a range from 20 to 55˚C was used to find out the optimal 
temperature for the decolorization of Reactive Brilliant Blue dye using the sele cted yeast 
strains in broth medium. It was observed that an increase in the temperature from 20 to 37˚C 
had a significant effect on the decolorization of Reactive Brilliant Blue dye (Fig.1). However, 
the optimal temperature for decolorization was at 25˚C f or all the tested yeast strains except 
for Candida utilis (1 ) was at 37˚C.  
 
LSD at 5%          0.002  
Fig.(1): Effect of incubation temperature on the decolorization by the selected yeast strains  
 
 
 
 
 
ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
131 
 3.1.2.2. Incubation time  
Incubation times in a range from 2 to 96h  were used to know the optimal incubation time 
for the decolorization of Reactive Brilliant Blue dye using the selected yeast strains in broth 
medium (Fig. 2). It was observed that the increase in incubation time from 2 to 18h had a 
significa nt effect on the decolorization rate of the dye. However, the optimal incubation time 
to decolorize the dye for all tested strains was 18h. The decolorization rate in all yeast strains 
was dropped sharply as the incubation time increased from 24 to 96h.  
 
 
LSD at 5%          0.006  
Fig.(2): Effect of incubation time on the decolorization by the selected yeast strains  
 
ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
132 
 3.1.2.3. pH value  
PH range from 3 to 6.5 was used to know the optimal pH value for dye degrading yeasts 
that achieve the highest decolorizati on of Reactive Brilliant Blue dye. It was observed that the 
optimum pH of the five selected strains was different (Fig. 3). In case of Candida sphaerica, 
the increase in pH from 3 to 6 had a significant effect on the decolorization of dye and the 
optimal p H for decolorization was at 6.However, the decolorization rate dropped 6.5. In case 
of Cryptococcus albidus, Rhodotorula rubra  and Candida utilis (1) , there was an increase in 
the rate of decolorization from 3 to 4 and the optimal pH for decolorization was 4. While, in 
case of Rhodotorula glutinis , the optimal pH for decolorization was 5.5.  
 
 
LSD at 5%         0.01  
Fig.(3): Effect  of PH value on de colorization rate  
 
 
ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
133 
 3.1.2.4. Aerobic and anaerobic conditions  
The decolorization rate of Reactive Brilliant Blue dye was increased significantly when 
Candida sphaerica, Rhodotorula glutinis  and Candida utilis(1) were  incubated under aerobic 
conditions.Whereas, the decolorization rate of Cryptococcus albidus and Rhodotorula rubra 
was increased significantly under anaerobic conditions (fig. 4).  
 
 
 
LSD at 5%              0.205  
Fig.(4): Effect of aerobic and anaerobic c onditions of incubation on the decolorization by the 
selected yeast strains  
 
 
 
ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
134 
  3.1.2.5. Inoculum size  
From Fig. (5), shows the increasing of inoculum size from 5 to 40% (v/v) of all selected 
yeast strains had a significant increase on the decolorization o f Reactive Brilliant Blue dye. 
However, the optimal inoculum size of all yeast strains to decolorize dye was 40%. The 
inoculum size has significantly affected the decolorization.  
 
 
LSD at 5%          0.009  
Fig.(5): Effect of inoculum size on the decolorization bythe selected yeast strains  
 
 
 
 
 
ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
135 
 3.1.2.6. Dye concentration  
The effect of initial concentration of Reactive Brilliant Blue dye on the % decolorization 
was investigated and the percentage of decolorization decreased with an increase in the i nitial 
concentration (fig. 6). Maximum decolorization was observed at a concentration of 10 mg /L 
for all the selected yeast strains. However, decolorization rate in all yeast strains was dropped 
sharply from 200 to 300 mg /L but no decolorization was obse rved at 500 mg/ L.Dye 
concentration significantly has affected the decolorization.  
 
  
LSD at 5%           0.009  
Fig.(6): Effect of dye concentration on the decolorization by the selected yeast strains  
 
 
 
 
ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
136 
 3.1.2.7. Carbon source  
The results of decolorization rate indicated that glucose is the best carbon source for all yeasts 
that decolorize Reactive Brilliant Blue dye (fig.7). However, the rate of decolorization by all 
the selected yeast strains was lower when starch was supplied as a carbon so urce.  
 
 
 
LSD at 5%            0.018  
Fig.(7): Effect of carbon source on the decolorization by the selected yeast strains  
 
 
 
 
ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
137 
 3.1.2.8. Nitrogen source  
The results in figure(8) showed that Yeast extract is the optimum and best nitrogen source for 
decoloriz ation of Reactive Brilliant Blue dye for all the selected yeast strains in comparing 
with other tested nitrogen sources. However, the decolorization rate in case of other nitrogen 
sources is different according to the yeast strain.  
 
 
 LSD at 5%           0.001  
Fig.(8): Effect of nitrogen source on the decolorization by the selected yeast strains  
 
 
 
 
ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
138 
 3.1.2.9. Type of medium  
 Different types of media were used for culturing yeasts to know the best medium 
composition for the decolorization of Reactive Brilliant Blue dye. All types of used media 
showed a decolorization of dye. However, the best results were obtained when plain d istilled 
water was used (fig. 9).  
 
 
LSD at 5%           0.003  
Fig.(9): Effect of  medium composition on the decolorization by the selected yeast strains  
Note:  
(A)Decolorization medium, (B) plain distilled water, (C) Distilled water with 5% 
glucose and (D) Distilled water with 1% glucose, 0.1% peptone and 0.1% yeast 
extract.  
 
 
ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
139 
 3.2 Discussion  
     Industrial effluent is not stable and it varies often in a wide range depending upon the 
process practiced. South Asian countries are experiencing in severe en vironmental problems 
due to the rapid industrialization. This phenomenon is very common where the polluting 
industries like textile dyeing, leather tanning, paper and pulp processing, sugar manufacturing, 
etc. thrive as clusters. Among these the textile in dustries are large industrial consumers of 
water as well as producers of waste water. The effluent discharged by this industry leads to 
serious pollution of groundwater and soils and ultimately affects the livelihood of the poor 
(Jiunkins, 1982 and Shah et al., 2013).  Some studies have shown that yeast species acted as a 
promising dye adsorbent capable to uptake higher dye concentration such as Galactomyces 
getrichum , Saccharomyces cerevisiae  and Trichosporon beigilli , etc. (Jadav et al.,  2008 and 
Lavanya et al.,  2014).   In this study, out of twenty -four yeast isolates and strains, only five 
strains (2.8%) have the ability to decolorize Reactive Brilliant Blue dye.  
 Decolorization of Reactive Brilliant Blue by the selected yeast strains was investigated 
over a temperature range of 25 -55˚C. The increase in temperature from 25 to 37˚C caused an 
increase in decolorization within 18 h of incubation. However, further rise in temperature from 
37˚C to onward had negative effect on decolorization of Reactive  rilli ant Blue. Decrease in 
decolorization at higher temperature may be due to the thermal deactivation of the enzyme 
responsible for decolorization ( Shah et al.,  2013).  It is very likely that all selected yeast strains 
were mesophilic yeasts because they all sh owed better decolorization in temperature range of 
25 to 37˚C. The mesophilc range is traditionally used since it is generally thought that 
maintaining high temperature would be uneconomical, while degradation within the 
psychrophilic range is too slow (Varel et al.,  1980).  Similar optimum temperature was 
observed in the decolorization of Remazole black B by Kluyveromyces maxianus IMB3 
(Meehan et al., 2000)  in case of Candida utilis1  but the remaining strains in contrast with this 
result.  
Textile effluent has alkaline pH due to substantial presence of salts during dyeing process. 
High pH level of textile effluents is one of problems in their biological treatment. Therefore, 
tolerance to high PH is important to make this technology valuable (Shah et al.,  2013). 
Another limiting factor for microbial activities and anthraquinone dye decolorization is the PH 
of medium. Optimum pH for growth and decolorization of the selected yeast strains is 
different. It is very likely that all selected yeast strains were acido philic yeasts because they all ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
141 
 showed better decolorization in pH range of 3 to 6. It is also likely that pH might also have 
affected the enzymatic activity involved in decolorization of dye, in addition to the cellular 
growth of inocula. It was observed t hat rate of decolorization increased with increase in 
inoculum concentration. Maximum rate of decolorization was observed at a 20% (v/v) 
inoculum concentration. There was no proportionate increase of decolorization with increase 
inoculum concentration when  inoculated in textile effluent (Moosvi et al.,  2005).  
Decolorization rate of all the selected yeast strains was reduced when the concentration of 
dye was more than 200 mg/L, this might be due to the toxic effect of the dye against the yeast 
growth or enz ymatic activity responsible for the degradation of the dye or inadequate biomass 
concentration for the uptake of higher concentrations of dye (Jadhav et al., 2007).  In 
literature, the concentrations usually used are less than 0.2 g/L ( Bibi and Bhatti, 2012 ; 
Moreira -Neto et al.,  2013).  Previous investigations have shown that the dye concentration 
does affect the rate of biodegradation and the optimum dye level could also vary from 
microbial species to species and in general higher color removal efficiencies have been 
observed at medium dye concentrations (Sponza and Isik, 2005; Khalid et al., 2008).  
 Different carbon and nitrogen sources were investigated for their impact on the 
decolorization of Reactive Brilliant Blue dye by the selected yeast cultures. Amo ng these 
glucose and yeast extract supported the highest biodegradation reaction. This observation 
could be explained that glucose acted as a co -substrate and electron donor which favored the 
yeast growth and Reactive Brilliant Blue decolorization. In cont rast addition of glucose as a 
carbon source seemed to be effective to promote the decolorization, probably due to the 
preference of the cells in assimalting the added carbon sources over using the dye compound 
as the carbon source. Hence the foregoing resu lts suggested that the addition of glucose and 
yeast extract in synthetic media showed maximum decolorization of Reactive Brilliant Blue by 
all the selected yeast strains. Similar results of decolorization and biodegradation of textile 
Navy blue HER by Trichosporon beigelii  NCIM -3326 for nitrogen source but in contrast with 
the results of carbon source (Saratale et al.,  2009).  
Effect of type of medium on the decolorization of Reactive Brilliant Blue was assessed and 
the best results were obtained, when distilled water was used as the medium. The results 
indicate the influence of type of medium and faster biodegradation of Reacti ve Brilliant Blue 
than decolorization medium. Similarly the results were obtained by (Jadhav et al.,  2007)  for 
the decolorization of azo dye methyl red by Saccharomyces cerevisiae  MTCC 463.  ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
141 
 4. Conclusion  
The present study revealed that the selected five ye asts can be used for decolorizing 
Reactive Brilliant Blue dye. The cultures exhibited maximum decolorization ability under 
optimum environmental conditions. The decolorization rate increased up to 69% in some 
selected strains. Yeast strains can be further studied for bioremediation of dye -polluted waters 
including the degradation of anthraquinone dye.  
References  
Aksu, Z. and Donmez, G. A, comparative study on the biosorption characteristics of some 
yeasts for Remazole blue reactive dye. Chemosphere, 50: 107 5-1083 (2003) . 
Ayed, L.; Mahdhi, A.; Cheref, A. and Bakhrouf, A., Decolorization and degradation of azo 
dye methyl red by an isolated Sphingomonas paucimobilis : Biotoxicity and metabolites 
characterization . Desalination, 274: 272 - 277(2011) . 
Balan, D.S.I. a nd Monteiro, R.T.R, Decolorization of textile indigo dye by ligninolytic 
fungi. Journal of Biotechnology, 89: 141 - 145 (2001).   . 
Barnett, J.A.; Payne, R.W. and Yarrow, D., Yeasts, Characteristics and identification, 
Cambridge: University Press (2000).  
Bibi, I. and Bhatti, H.N., Enhanced biodecolorization of reactive dyes by basidiomycetes 
under static conditions. Applied Biochemistry Biotechnology, 166: 2078 - 2090 (2012).  . 
Borchert, M. and Libra, J.A., Decolorization of reactive dyes by the white rot fungu s 
Trameters versicolor in sequencing batch reactors. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 75: 
313- 321(2001) . 
Chen, K.; Wu, J.; Liou, D. and H Wang, S.J., Decolorization of the textile dyes by newly 
isolated bacterial strains. Journal of Biotechnology, 101: 57 - 68 (2002) . 
Christiane, A.; Steeve, M.; Jean Bosco, S.T.; Kor, N.M.; Brama, I.; Eric, G. and Philippe, 
G., Biodegradation of Reactive Blue 4 and Orange G by Pycnoporus sanguineus strain 
isolated in Gabon. Bioremediation and Biodegradation,4: 206 (2013).  . ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
142 
 Cristovao, R.O.; Tavares, A.P.M.; Loureiro, J.M.; Boaventura, R.A.R. and Macedo, 
E.A., Treatment and kineti c modeling of a stimulated dye house effluent by enzymatic 
catalysis. Bioresource Technology, 100 : 6236 - 6242 (2009) . 
Dilek, F.B.; Taplamacioglu, H.M. and Tarlan, E., Color and Aox removal from pulping 
effluents by algae. Applied Microbiology and Biotechno logy,52:581 -591(1999) . 
Dong, X.; Zhou, J. and Liu,Y., Peptone -induced biodecolorization of Reactive Brilliant 
Blue(KN -R) by Rhodocycus gelatinosus  XL-1,process. Biochemistry, 39: 89 - 94 (2003).  
Field, A.P.,  Discovering statistics using IBM SPSS statistics  and sex and drugs rock n rol (4th 
Edition) london.sage (2013) . 
Fu, Y. and Virarahavan, T., Fungal decolorization of dye wastewaters:  
 A review. Bioresource Technology, 79: 251 - 262 (2001).  
Gold, M.H. and Alic, M., Molecular biology of lignin -degradaing ba sidiomycete 
Phanerochaete chrysosporium. Microbiological Reviews, 57: 605 - 622 (1993).  
Jadhav, J.P.; Parshetti, G.K.; Kalme, S.D. and Govindwar, S.P., Decolourization of azo 
dye methyl red by Saccharomyces cerevisiae MTCC463. Chemosphere, 68: 394 - 400 (2007). 
Jadav, S.U.; Kalme, S.D. and Govindwar, S.P., Biodegradation of methyl red by 
Galactomyces geotrichum  MTCC 1360. International Biodeterioration and Biodegradation, 
62: 135 -142(2008).  
Jiunkins, R., Pretreatment of textile wastewater, proceedings of 37th Industrial waste 
conference. Purdue university, Lafayette, USA (1982).  
Khalid, A.; Arshad, M. and Crowley, D.E., Accelerated decolorization of structurally 
different azo dyes by newly isolated bacterial strains. Applied Microbiology Biotechnology, 
78: 361 - 369(2008).  
Lavanya, C.; Rajesh, D.; Sunil, C. and  Sarita, S., Degeadation of toxic dyes: A review. 
International Journal of Current Microbiology and Applied Sciences, 6: 189 - 199 (2014).  
Martorell, M.M.; Pajot, H.F. and Defigueroa, L.I.C., Dye- decolorization yeasts isolated 
from Las Yungas rain forest.Dye assimilation and removal used as selection criteria. 
International Biodeterioration and Biodegradation, 66: 25 - 32(2012).  ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
143 
 Meehan, C.; Bannat, I.M.; McMullan, G.; Nigam, P.; Smyth, F. and Marcha nt, R., 
Decolorization of Remazole Black using a thermotolerant yeast, Kluyveromyces marixanus 
IBM3. Environment International, 26: 75 - 79 (2000).  
Moosvi, S.; Keharia, H. and Madamwar, D., Decolourization of textile dye Reactive Violet 
5 by a newly isolate d bacterial Consortium RVM11.1. World Journal of Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 21: 667 - 672 (2005).  
Moreira -Neto, S.I.; Mussatto, S.I.; Machado, K.M. and Milagres, A.M., Decolorization of 
salt-alkaline effluent with industrial reactive dyes by laccase -producing Basidiomycetes 
strains. Letter Applied Microbiology, 56: 283 - 290(2013).  
Nigam, P.; Armour, G.; Banat, I.M.; Singh, D. and Marchant, R., Physical removal of 
textile dyes and solid state fermentation of dye adsorbed agricultureal residues. Bioresour ce 
Technology, 72: 219 - 226 (2000).  
Pajot,H.F. Farina,J.I. and Figueroa,L.I.C., Evidence on manganese peroxidase and 
tyrosinase expression during decolorization of textile industry dyes by Trichosporon 
akiyoshidainum . International Biodeterioration and Bio degradation, 65: 1199 -1207 (2011).  
Pajot, H.F.; Delgado, O.D.; Figueroa, L.I.C. and Farina, J.I., Unravelling the 
decolourizing ability of yeast isolates from polluted and virgin environment: an ecological and 
taxonomical over review. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoe k, 99: 443 - 456(2011)  
Pavko, A., Fungal decolorization and degradation of synthetic dyes. Some chemical 
EngineeringAspects. In: Wastewater treatment and Reutilization, Intech, Croatia (2011).  
Puvaneswari, N.; Muthukrishnan, J. and Gunasekaran, P., Toxicity  assessment and 
microbial degradation of azo dyes. Indian JEXP Biology, 44: 618 -626 (2006).  
Robinson, T.; McMullan, G.; Marchant, R. and Nigam, P., Remediation of dyes textile 
effluent: A critical review on current treatment technologies with a proposed al ternative. 
Biosource Technology, 77: 247 - 255(2001).  
Sani, R.K. and Banerjee, U.C., Decolorization of triphenylmethane dyes and textile and dye 
stuff effluent by Kurthia sp . Enzyme and Microbial Technology, 24: 433 - 437  (1999).  ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
144 
 Saratale, R.G.; Saratale, G .D.; Chang, J.S. and Govindwar, S.P., Decolorization and 
Biodegradation of textile dye Navy blue HER by Trichosporon beigelli NCIM 3326. Journal 
of Hazardous Materials, 166: 1421 - 1428 (2009).  
Shah, M.P.; Patel, K.A.; Nair, S.S. and Darji, A.M., Optimizati on of environmental 
parameters on microbial degradation of Reactive Black dye. Bioremediation and 
Biodegradation, 4: 3 (2013).  
Sudha, M.; Saranya, A.; Selvakumar, G. and Sivakumar, N., Microbial degradation of azo 
dyes: A review. International Journal ofCu rrent Microbiology and Applied Sciences, 3(2): 
670- 690(2014).  
Sponza, D.T. and Isik,M., Reactor performances and fate of aromatic amines through 
decolorization of Direct Black 38 dye under anaerobic – aerobic sequentials. Process 
Biochemistry, 40: 35 - 44 (2005).  
Suzuki, C.; Yamada, K.; Okada, N. and Nikkuni, S., Isolation and characterization of halo 
tolerant killer yeasts from fermented foods. Agricultural and Biological Chemistry, 53: 2593 - 
2597 (1989).  
 Swamy, J. and Ramsay, J.A., The evaluation of whi te rot fungi in the decolorization of 
textile dyes. Enzyme and Microbial Technology, 24: 130 - 137 (1999).  
Tamboli, D.P.; Kagalkar, A.N.; Jadhav, M.U.; Jadhav, J.P. and Govindwar, S.P., 
Production of poly hydroxyl hexadecanoic acid by using waste biomass of  Sphingo bacterium 
sp. ATM generated after degradation of textile dye Direct Red 5B. Bioresource Technology , 
101: 2421 - 2427 (2010).  
Telke, A.A.; Kalyani, D.C.; Davkar, V.V. and Govindwar, S.P., Influence of organic and 
inorganic compounds on oxidoreductive decolorization of sulfanated azo dye C.I. Reactive 
Orange 16. Journal of Hazardous Material, 172: 298 -309(2009).  
Varel, V.H.; Hashimoto, A.G. and Chen, Y.R., Effect of temperature and retention time on 
methane production from beef cattle was te. Applied Environmental Micrbiology, 40: 217 - 
222(1980).  ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
145 
 Waghmode, T.R.; Kurade, M.B. and Govindwar, S.P., Time -dependent degradation of 
mixture of structurally different azo and non azo dyes by using Galactomyces geotrichum 
MTCC 1360. International Biod eterioration and Biodegradation , 65: 479 - 486(2011).  
Yang, Q.; Tao, L.; Yang, M. and Zhang, H., Effect of glucose on the decolorization of 
Reactive Black 5 by yeast isolates. Journal of Environmental Science, 20: 105 - 108 (2008).  
Yu, Z. and Wen, X., Scree ning and identification of yeast for decolourizing synthetic dyes in 
industrial wastewater. International Biodeterioration and Biodegradation, 56: 109 - 114 (2005).  
Zhou,W. and Zimmermann, W., Decolorization of industrial effluents containing reactive 
dyes by actinomycetes. FEEMS Microbiology Letters, 107: 157 -162(1993).  
 ـــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ   J. Sci. Res. Sci.,Vol.(3 2), part: 1, 201 5 ــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــــ  
 
146 
 
أنًهخص انعشثٍ 
أُؼب٣٤ش اُج٤ئ٤خ أُضِ٢ ُزؾَِ فجؾ Reactive Brilliant Blue    ثبُخٔبئش أُؼضُٝخ ٖٓ اُ٘لب٣بد اُغبئِخ الفجبؽ
أُ٘غٞعبد 
ع٘بء ٓؾٔذ ػبؽٞس ، ٛذٟ ؽغٖ اثٞ ؿبُ٤خ ، دػبء فبثش ػجذ أُوقٞد اُلشٓبٟٝ 
هغْ اُ٘جبد – ًِ٤خ اُج٘بد  – عبٓؼٚ ػ٤ٖ ؽٔظ  
اعش١ ٛزا اُجؾش ثـشك دساعخ رأص٤ش دٝس اُخٔبئش أُؼضُٝخ ٖٓ اُ٘لب٣بد اُغبٓخ اُ٘برغخ ٖٓ ف٘بػبد اُـضٍ 
ٝاُ٘غ٤ظ ٝاص٘بٕ ٖٓ عالالد اُخٔ٤شح أُؼشكخ ثبعزخذاّ اُطشم اُ٘ٔٞرع٤خ ٝاُ٘بٓ٤خ رؾذ اُظشٝف أُضِ٠ ػِ٠ 
رؾِ٤َ فجـخ  .Reactive Brilliant Blue  
( أظٜشد اُ٘زبئظ أٗٚ ٖٓ ث٤ٖ أسثؼخ ٝػؾشٕٝ عالُخ ٖٓ اُخٔ٤شح خٔغخ أٗٞاع 2.8%  كوو هبدسح ػِ٠ إصاُخ ُٕٞ  )
رْ رؼش٣ق صالس ٜٓ٘ب ػِ٠ أٜٗب. اُقجـخ     Rhodotorula glutinis  ٝ Candida utilus(1)  ٝ Candida  
sphaerica    ثبإلمبكخ إُ٠ اُغالُز٤ٖ أُؼشكز٤ٖ ٝٛٔب Rhodotorula rubra  and Cryptococcus 
albidus. 
 رْ اعزخذاّ اُغالالد اُخٔغخ ك٢ رؾِ٤َ اُقجـخ ثبعزخذاّ ث٤ئخ رؾزٞ١ ػِ٠ اُغًِٞٞص ٝٓغزخِـ اُخٔ٤شح
ٝهذ ُٞؽع إٔ دسعخ اُؾشاسح أُضِ٠ ُِزؾِ٤َ اُؾ٤ٞ١ . ًٔقذس٣ٖ ُؼ٘قش١ اٌُشثٕٞ ٝاُ٘٤زشٝع٤ٖ ػِ٠ اُزٞاُ٢ 
ُِقجـخ ُألسثغ أٗٞاع ٖٓ اُخٔبئش ًبٗذ25      ّ  ثؼذ18   عبػخ ث٤٘ٔب ًبٗذ ػ٘ذ33     (  ّ  ُِغالُخ اُخبٓغخ C . 
utilis 1    ٝهذ ًبٕ ٓؼبَٓ األط اُٜ٤ذسٝع٤٘٢ األٓضَ ٓخزِق ثبُ٘غجخ ُِغالالد أُخزِلخ ، كوذ ًبٕ ٓؼبَٓ .  )
األط اُٜ٤ذسٝع٤٘٢ 4   ػ٘ذ اعزخذاّ اُغالالد C. utilis(1)   ٝ  R. rubra    ٝ C. albidus   ث٤٘ٔب ًبٕ6  ػ٘ذ
اعزخذاّ C. spha erica   ٝ5،5   ػ٘ذ اعزخذاّ R. glutinis  .  
 ٝٝعذ إٔ اُغالالد C. utilis(1)  ٝ R. glutinis   ٝ  C. spharica   هذ أظٜشد ٓؼذٍ ػبٍ ُِزؾِ٤َ رؾذ
اُظشٝف اُٜٞائ٤خ ث٤٘ٔب اُغالالد  R. rubra  ٝ C. albidus    هذ أظٜشد ٓؼذٍ ٓشرلغ رؾذ اُظشٝف
.اُالٛٞائ٤خ 
أٝمؾذ اُذساعخ إٔ ٗغجخ رؾَِ اُقجـخ ًبٕ 68 83 ُغالُخ % C. spharica  ٝ68 44 ُغالُخ% R. rubra 
ٝ63 5 ُغالُخ % R. glutinis   ٝ63 85 ُغالُخ % C. utilis(1)  ًٔب ُٞؽع إٔ ٗزبئظ اُزؾَِ اُؾ٤ٞ١ .  
.ُِقجـخ ًبٗذ ٓؼ٘ٞ٣خ ػ٘ذ اعزخذاّ أُبء أُوطش ًج٤ئخ ُزؾَِ اُقجـخ   
ك٢ اُخزبّ، ٣ٌٖٔ اعزخذاّ عالالد اُخٔبئش ُِزؾَِ اُؾ٤ٞ١ ُِقجـخ أُِٞصخ ُٔ٤بٙ اُقشف اُق٘بػ٢ ٓزنٔ٘خ رؾَِ 
فجـخ anthraquinone.  
  