Review
Degradation of conventional plastic wastes in the environment: A review
on current status of knowledge and future perspectives of disposal
Sameh Samir Alia,b, Tamer Elsamahya, Eleni Koutrac,d, Michael Kornarosc,d, Mostafa El-Sheekhb,
Esraa A. Abdelkarima, Daochen Zhua, Jianzhong Suna,⁎
aBiofuels Institute, School of the Environment and Safety Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, China
bBotany Department, Faculty of Science, Tanta University, Tanta 31527, Egypt
cLaboratory of Biochemical Engineering & Environmental Technology (LBEET), Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Patras, 1 Karatheod ori Str., University Campus, 26504 Patras,
Greece
dINVALOR: Research Infrastructure for Waste Valorization and Sustainable Management, University Campus, 26504 Patras, Greece
HIGHLIGHTS
•The main hazardous effect of plastic is
its accumulation in the environment.
•An effective eco-friendly management
practice for plastic wastes is still absent.
•Invertebrates gut microbiota could play
an important role in plastic degradation.
•Plastic degradation can improve by
combining various degradation tech-niques.
•Plastic degradation calls for future stud-
ies to develop biodegradation processes.GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT
abstract article info
Article history:
Received 19 October 2020Received in revised form 30 November 2020Accepted 21 December 2020Available online 21 January 2021
Editor: Yucheng Feng
Keywords:
PollutionPlasticPolymerBiodegradation
Insects
Degradation mechanismsAccumulation of plastic wastes has been recently recognized as one of the most critical environmental challenges,
affecting all life forms, natural ecosystems and economy, worldwide. Under this threat, ﬁnding alternative
environmentally-friendly solutions, such as biodegradation instead of traditional disposal, is of utmost impor-
tance. However, up to date, there is limited knowledge on plastic biodegradation mechanisms and ef ﬁciency.
From this point of view, the purpose of this review is to highlight the negative effects of the accumulation ofthe most conventional plastic waste (polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene, polyvinylchloride, polyethyleneterephthalate and polyurethane) on the environment and to present their degradability potential through abiotic
and biotic processes. Furthermore, the ability of different microbial species for degradation of these polymers is
thoroughly discussed. The present review also addresses the contribution of invertebrates, such as insects, inplastic degradation process, highlighting the vital role that they could play in the future. In total, a schematic
pathway of an innovative approach to improve the disposal of plastic wastes is proposed, with view to establish-
ing an effective and sustainable practice for plastic waste management.
©2 0 2 1E l s e v i e rB . V .A l lr i g h t sr e s e r v e d .Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
⁎Corresponding author at: Biofuels Institute, School of the Environment and Safety Engineering, Jiangsu University, Xuefu Rd. 301, 212013 Zhenjian g, China.
E-mail address: jzsun1002@ujs.edu.cn (J. Sun).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.144719
0048-9697/© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Science of the Total Environment
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/scitotenvContents
1 . I n t r o d u c t i o n ................................................................ 2
2 . I m p a c t s o f p l a s t i c w a s t e s ' a c c u m u l a t i o n................................................... 2
2 . 1 . E n v i r o n m e n t a l i m p a c t ........................................................ 3
2 . 2 . E f f e c t s o n h u m a n h e a l t h ....................................................... 5
3 . D e g r a d a t i o n o f p l a s t i c w a s t e s ........................................................ 5
3 . 1 . P l a s t i c p o l y m e r s ' p r o p e r t i e s..................................................... 5
3 . 2 . E n v i r o n m e n t a l f a c t o r s ........................................................ 6
4 . P h y s i c o c h e m i c a l d e g r a d a t i o n ........................................................ 7
4 . 1 . P h o t o d e g r a d a t i o n .......................................................... 7
4 . 2 . H y d r o l y s i s............................................................. 7
4 . 3 . T h e r m a l d e g r a d a t i o n ........................................................ 8
5 . M i c r o b i a l d e g r a d a t i o n........................................................... 9
5 . 1 . M i c r o b i a l p o t e n t i a l f o r p l a s t i c b i o d e g r a d a t i o n............................................. 9
5 . 2 . M e c h a n i s m o f m i c r o b i a l d e g r a d a t i o n o f p l a s t i c w a s t e s ........................................ 1 1
6 . I n v e r t e b r a t e s a s e f f e c t i v e p l a s t i c b i o d e g r a d e r s ............................................... 1 5
7 . R e c o m m e n d a t i o n s f o r f u t u r e r e s e a r c h ................................................... 1 6
8 . C o n c l u s i o n............................................................... 1 7
D e c l a r a t i o n o f c o m p e t i n g i n t e r e s t ........................................................ 1 7
Acknowledgements..............................................................1
R e f e r e n c e s .................................................................. 1 8
1. Introduction
Plastic represents one of the most essential and widely used mate-
rials in the world, owing to desired properties, including light weight,
low maintenance requirements, weathering resistance, low toxicity,
transparency, and low price, which facilitate plastic applications in var-
ious industrial, commercial and agricultural activities ( Jenkins et al.,
2020 ;Amobonye et al., 2021 ). Because of their stability and durability,
emanating from their polymeric nature ( Rivard et al., 1995 ), plastics
have attracted huge attention compared to any other solid component.
However, most plastic types are non-degradable and it takes centuries
for complete degradation. As a result, plastics tend to accumulate rather
than decompose in land ﬁlls or the natural environment ( Barnes et al.,
2009 ;Matja šičet al., 2021 ). Furthermore, the common monomers
used for the synthesis of plastic polymers (e.g., ethylene and propylene)
commonly derive from fossil hydrocarbons. Also, polymeric structure
makes them resistant to microbial degradation, while their relatively
short presence in nature hinders the appearance of new enzymes that
could degrade conventional polymers ( Mueller, 2006 ;Amobonye
et al., 2021 ).
Currently, the most widely used plastics are polyethylene (PE), poly-
propylene (PP), polystyrene (PS), polyvinylchloride (PVC), polyethyl-
ene terephthalate (PET) and polyurethane (PU) ( Gewert et al., 2015 ),
which are classi ﬁed into two categories: C \\Cb a c k b o n ep o l y m e r sa n d
heteroatomic polymers ( Fig. 1 ). C\\C backbone polymers, including
PE, PVC, PS and PP, represent 77% of the total market share, while
heteroatomic polymers, such as PET and PU, represent ~18% of the mar-
ket share ( Gewert et al., 2015 ;Danso et al., 2019 ). C\\Cb a c k b o n ep o l y -
mers are resistant to hydrolysis and biodegradation and susceptible to
thermal oxidation ( Krueger et al., 2015 ), while heteroatomic polymers
may be processed through photo-oxidation, hydrolysis, and biological
degradation ( Gewert et al., 2015 ).
The global plastic production from 1950 to 2018 was estimated at
8.3 billion metric tonnes, with an increase of 5% (185 million tonnes)
every year ( Jambeck et al., 2015 ;Geyer et al., 2017 ;Amobonye et al.,
2021 ). However, 76% of the total plastic production ends as wastes,
which can be further divided into 14% recycled, 14% incinerated and
72% land ﬁlled or released in the environment ( Ellen MacArthur
Foundation, 2015 ). Therefore, pollution from plastic wastes' accumula-
tion in the environment constitutes an ever-increasing environmental
threat to natural ecosystems and public health ( Shah et al., 2008 ),
while an environmentally friendly practice for effective treatment hasnot been found yet. In this concern, several reports highlight the poten-
tial of the microbial degradation of plastic wastes ( Yoshida et al., 2016 ;
Sarkhel et al., 2020 ;Zhang et al., 2020 ). However, there is a gap in our
knowledge on the available biodegradation mechanisms and their ef ﬁ-
ciency. Under this scope, the purpose of the present review is to address
the effects of different plastic types on the environment and human
health and to present in detail the biodegradation process of synthetic
plastic, including the factors affecting the process. Also, the algal, fungal,
bacterial and insects' contribution to plastic biodegradation is analyzed.
Lastly, a strategy to improve the ef ﬁciency of biodegradation for biofuel
production such as biogas, bioethanol and/or biodiesel is proposed.
2. Impacts of plastic wastes' accumulation
According to the United Nations, since 2020 over 400 Mt. of plastic
wastes will be annually produced, while plastics production is expected
to double by 2035 reaching 800 Mt., and 1600 Mt. by 2050 ( Barra and
Leonard, 2018 ). The plastic manufacturing process releases a huge
quantity of harmful gaseous substances into the air, including carbon
monoxide, dioxins, nitrogen oxides and hydrogen cyanide, which pose
a serious threat to the environment and human health. For example,
Royer et al. (2018) reported that the trace gases produced from low-
density polyethylene (LDPE) increase with incubation time (212 days)
and reached 5.8 nmol methane/g/day, 14.5 nmol ethylene/g/day,
3.9 nmol ethane/g/d and 9.7 nmol propylene/g/d. Also, LDPE's emission
rates are ~2 and ~76 times higher for methane and ethylene, respec-
tively, when incubated in air compared to water, highlighting that plas-
tics could be an unrecognized source of climate change-relevant trace
gases that are expected to increase as more plastic is produced and ac-
cumulated in the environment. Concerning plastic disposal ( Fig. 2 ), 6.3
billion metric tonnes of the global plastic production from 1950 to
2018 ended as waste and more than 4 billion tonnes have been used
just once prior to disposal ( Geyer et al., 2017 ). Moreover, about 4.5 bil-
lion tonnes of total plastic wastes end up in land ﬁlls, or are released in
the environment, negatively affecting microbial content of soil.
Landﬁlling results in soil infertility, since more than 500 years are
needed for complete decomposition ( Chamas et al., 2020 ), while plastic
degradation also releases toxins ( Webb et al., 2013 ). In case of biode-
gradable plastics, there are many microorganisms which accelerate bio-
degradation in land ﬁlls, including bacteria such as Pseudomonas sp.,
nylon-eating bacteria, and ﬂavobacteria, which break down nylon
through the activity of the nylonase enzyme ( Negoro, 2000 ).S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
282.1. Environmental impact
In 2020, 195 countries were estimated to produce about 400 Mt. of
plastic waste, with about 8.8 Mt. entering the ocean ( Koller and
Braunegg, 2018 ;Serrano-Ruiz et al., 2021 ). Based on United Nations
Centre for Regional Development (UNCRD) report, the southeastern
countries of Asia (China, Indonesia, Philippine, Vietnam, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Malaysia, and Bangladesh) are ranked ﬁrst in plastic wastes
mismanagement, with 88% of plastic wastes ending up in water bodies
(UNCRD, 2019 ). Plastic wastes can act as a carrier for organic pollutants,
chemicals, heavy metals, and pathogens ( Cregut et al., 2013 ;Galloway
and Lewis, 2016 ;Chen et al., 2019 ;Chamas et al., 2020 ;Tang et al.,
2021 ). Furthermore, abiotic degradation of plastic releases highly toxic
compounds, deteriorating the quality of soil and water ( Chen et al.,
2019 ), with oceans loaded with 5.25 trillion nano-, macro-, and
microplastic particles weighing 269 t ( Eriksen et al., 2014 ). Several
plastic-type wastes have a hydrophobic nature that enhances aggrega-
tion with other pollutants, such as polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs),organic pollutants and polychlorinated biphenyls ( L i ue ta l . ,2 0 1 6 ).
This reactivity depends on hydrophobicity and the ratio of the surface
area to volume and makes plastic debris ef ﬁcient sorbents. Additionally,
the long-lasting accumulation of microplastic can affect the food chain,
since microplastics can be ingested by animals ( Frias et al., 2010 ).Li
et al. (2020a) highlighted the histopathological damage in ﬁsh tissues
in response to plastic pollution and showed that the abundance of
microplastics in the guts of Hemiculter leucisculus ranged from <1 mm
to 3 mm and was estimated by 2.3 –15.8 items/g of digestive tissue.
Undoubtedly, biota face serious water pollution by plastic waste
discarded in different water bodies including lakes, rivers, ponds, etc.
The lakes in the megacity of Dhaka represent one of the best examples
of pollution by plastic bottles, cans, bags and other plastic products fre-
quently thrown by visitors. The presence of plastic wastes in water bod-
ies disturbs natural ﬂow, limits the ability of ﬁsh to reproduce and
destroys vital organisms, while polymers in the oceans could contribute
to global warming by creating a shaded canopy hindering plankton to
grow ( Proshad et al., 2018 ).
Fig. 1. The most used plastic types, their market share and classi ﬁcation based on chemical backbone structure.S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
3In terms of soil contamination, various types of plastic wastes con-
taminate the soil either by settling on the surface or penetrating the
soil layers from different routes such as sludge, fertilizers, irrigation
using wastewater, land ﬁlling, biosolids or from other sources ( Horton
et al., 2017 ;Darwesh et al., 2021 ). The fragmentation of plastics intomicroplastics (MP) on the soil surface results from temperature and
photo-oxidation ( Horton et al., 2017 ). This fragmented MP can be
translocated, as shown in Table 1 , deeper into the soil by plants and
the activity of soil organisms ( Zhu et al., 2018 ), contaminating ground-
water and deteriorating soil properties ( Scheurer and Bigalke, 2018 ).
Fig. 2. Plastic wastes fate and their harmful impacts on the environment.
Table 1
Effect of plastic on soil invertebrates.
Plastic
typeaConcentration Size Organism Time
(day)Plastic effect References
PES Five concentrations
ranging from 0.02 –1.5%
w/w12μm–2.87 mm and
4–24 mmEnchytraeids ( Enchytraeus
crypticus ), isopods ( Porcellio
scaber ), oribatid mites ( Oppia
nitens ), and springtails ( Folsomia
candida )28 Insigni ﬁcant effects on the soil invertebrates
were observed. However, the energy reserves ofthe isopods were decreased. The reproductiondecreased up to 30%, but only for long ﬁbers in
soil. The short ﬁbers were clearly ingested. The
authors ′also showed that the plastic can enter
terrestrial food chain.Selonen et al.,
2020
PVC 1 –5% w/w 130 μm Lugworm ( Arenicola marina ) 28 Reduction of feeding activity and energy
reserves was depletedWright et al.,
2013
PE 0.4% w/w Plastic bag ﬁlm (183
±9 3 μm) and facial
cleanser (137 ± 51 μm)Common rough woodlouse
(Porcellio scaber )14 No effect of plastic on P. scaber Kokalj et al.,
2018
10% w/w 250 –1000 μm Earthworms ( Eisenia andrei ) 28 No effect on E. andrei , but histopathological
alterations of the gut epithelium and immune
response in coelomocytes were observedRodriguez-Seijo
et al., 2017
7% w/w <150 μm to 1 mm Earthworms ( Lumbricus terrestris ) 14 Earthworms can transport the smaller MP
particles (<250 μm) from the soil surface and
plastic can be leached into drainage.Yu et al., 2019
7, 28, 45, and 60% w/w <150 μm Earthworms ( Lumbricus terrestris ) 60 Worms's mortality increased and growth rate
was reduced at 28, 45, and 60% of microplastics.Huerta Lwanga
et al., 2016
0%, 0.005%, 0.02%, 0.1%,
0.5%, and 1% w/w<500 μm Springtails ( Folsomia candida ) 28 PE showed a signi ﬁcant toxic effect on
springtails. Also, changed their gut microbial
community.Ju et al., 2019
aPE, Polyethylene; PES, Polyester; and PVC, Polyvinyl chloride.S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
4Many researchers have investigated the effects of macro- and
microplastic wastes on soil organisms, demonstrating the accumulation
of plastic in organisms' bodies causing histological damages ( Bravo
Rebolledo et al., 2013 ;Bråte et al., 2016 ;Diepens and Koelmans,
2018 ). Furthermore, Lozano and Rillig (2020) showed that micro ﬁbers
added to the soil strongly affect soil community, in terms of biomass
and biodiversity which could affect ecosystems equilibrium.
Lastly, plastic wastes incineration releases several pollutants into the
atmosphere and is considered as one of the main sources of air pollution
nowadays. The main pollutants released through incineration, as shown
inFig. 2 , include particulate matters (PMs), metals, aldehyde (-CHO),
methane (CH 4), nitrogen oxides (NOx), carbon monoxide (CO), carbon
dioxide (CO 2), furan (C 4H4O), polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), vola-
tile organic compounds (VOCs), and other substances such as solid ma-
terial (i.e., ash, as residue) which increases the levels of heavy metals,
inorganic salts, and organic compounds in the environment ( Sabiha-
Javied and Khalid, 2008 ;Sharma et al., 2013 ). PMs can be released as
solids or aerosol and may contain heavy metals, acids, and/or trace or-
ganic compounds. Concerning the process of incineration, the level of
PMs control and gas temperature affects the produced emissions. How-
ever, most incinerators operate without add-on air pollution control de-
vices, which further leads to the release of harmful gases in the
atmosphere ( Sharma et al., 2013 ). Moreover, numerous chemical sub-
stances with unknown toxicity are emitted, while the entire range of
the effects on human health caused by the exposure to the whole mix-
ture of emitted substances through plastic incineration is still unknown
(Sharma et al., 2013 ).
2.2. Effects on human health
Plastic disposal can have a signi ﬁcant impact on human health, ei-
ther directly or indirectly through inhalation and digestion, respectively
(Fig. 3 ). In particular, the persistence of microplastics may lead to sev-
eral biological responses such as in ﬂammation, genotoxicity, apoptosis,
oxidative stress, and necrosis ( Proshad et al., 2018 ;Prata et al., 2019 ),
while a range of severe outcomes can ensue in case of continuous expo-
sure, including tissue damage, ﬁbrosis and carcinogenesis ( Wright and
Kelly, 2017 ). Polymers composition itself may have a series of chemical
effects by the leaching of unbound chemicals and/or residual mono-
mers; or the associated hydrophobic organic contaminants desorption,
resulting in human health deterioration ( Wright and Kelly, 2017 ).
Micro- and nano-plastics' uptake by human and animals could allow
the cellular entry of adhered or endogenous contaminants ( Khan et al.,
2015 ;Wright and Kelly, 2017 ;Prata et al., 2019 ). The cellular response
to micro- and nano-plastics vary from a few scattered cells to macro-
phages extensive aggregations ( Urban et al., 2000 ). PE particles
(0.5 –50μm), which can locate to neighboring vessels where transporta-
tion via the perivascular lymph spaces occurs ( W i l l e r te ta l . ,1 9 9 6 ), pro-
voke a nonimmunological foreign body response ( Doorn et al., 1996 ).
Also, PMs can cause oxidative stress due to inhalation and subsequently
result in in ﬂammation and intestinal ﬁbrosis ( Nel et al., 2006 ). In this
concern, Barabad et al. (2018) studied the PMs produced through
vinyl or plastic incineration, reporting the release of high concentrations
of harmful pollutants, ﬁne and ultra ﬁne particles, while acetone, ben-
zene and other toxic compounds were also detected. At a heat ﬂux of
25 kW/m2, the production of PMs of 0.35 μm was highest at 63.0 μg/
m3, while at ﬂuxes of 35 and 50 kW/m2, PMs production of 0.45 μm
was highest at 67.8 and 87.7 μg/m3, respectively.
Moreover, all plastics contain reactive oxygen species (ROS), which
concentration can signi ﬁcantly increase due to the interaction with
light or the presence of transition metals ( Wright and Kelly, 2017 ), lead-
ing to free radical formation by the dissociation of the C \\Hb o n d s
(White and Turnbull, 1994 ;Gewert et al., 2015 ). In addition, Lithner
et al. (2011) showed that certain types of plastic, such as PU, PVC,
styrenic polymer (such as PS) and epoxy resin, can generate hazardous
monomers, includin mutagenic and/or carcinogenic resin monomers.Concerning the transfer of micro- and macro-plastic wastes in the
food chain ( Fig. 3 ),Huerta Lwanga et al. (2017) studied the low-
density polyethene microparticles (LDPE-MPs) transfer via chickens
and earthworms, demonstrating LDPE-MPs concentration of 129.8
MPs/g feces in chickens and 10.2 MPs/gizzard, respectively. Lastly, in
contrast to seabirds, direct transfer of additives from plastic to human
has not yet been con ﬁrmed ( Tanaka et al., 2013 ). Overall, the plastics
consumption per annum can be estimated as 840 plastic particles/per-
son ( Huerta Lwanga et al., 2017 ). Thus, by taking into consideration
the mismanagement of plastic wastes and the global impacts of plastic
on the environment, wildlife and human health, there is an urgent
need for new technologies of plastic wastes treatment and disposal.
Under this scope, physicochemical degradation and biodegradation
could be considered as a promising environmentally friendly approach
to overcome plastic pollution.
3. Degradation of plastic wastes
Plastic wastes can be processed through physicochemical degrada-
tion (abiotic) and biodegradation, which initially break down the phys-
ical forces of the polymeric materials ( Kyrikou and Briassoulis, 2007 ).
Photodegradation, thermo-oxidative degradation, hydrolytic degrada-tion and biodegradation have been reported as the main mechanisms
for plastic degradation in the environment ( Andrady, 2011 ). In nature,
degradation of plastic starts with photodegradation, followed by hydro-
lysis and thermo-oxidation process. These processes lead to plastic
wastes breakage into low molecular weight (MW) compounds, which
can subsequently be metabolized by microbial activity ( Andrady,
2011 ;Webb et al., 2013 ). However, this process is very slow, and it
can take centuries to complete ( Chamas et al., 2020 ).
3.1. Plastic polymers' properties
The process of plastic degradation is determined by both environ-
mental conditions and physicochemical properties of polymeric sub-stances, as depicted in Fig. 4 . The physicochemical properties of plastic
play an important role in the degradation process. Plastic susceptibility
to abiotic and biotic degradation depends on backbone composition and
chain length, with long carbon chain such as PP, making polymers resis-
tant to degradation ( Huerta Lwanga et al., 2016 ;Fotopoulou and
Karapanagioti, 2017 ). However, the incorporation of heteroatoms,
such as in PET and PU (oxygen-containing polymers) constitutes plastic
susceptible to biodegradation and thermal degradation ( Singh and
Sharma, 2008 ). Also, the polymer hydrophobicity affects the degrada-
tion ef ﬁciency, where the degradation rate increases with increasing hy-
drophilicity ( Padsalgikar, 2017 ). Furthermore, the degradation rate
depends on the polymer crystallinity ( Jenkins and Harrison, 2008 );
the more crystalline the polymeric structure, more water and oxygen
are needed for degradation. Therefore, an increase in either molecular
weight or degree of crystallinity reduces degradation rate ( Jenkins and
Harrison, 2008 ). On the other hand, the amorphous polymeric structure
can be attacked by water and oxygen. The polymer amorphous regions
are also considered more suitable for thermal oxidation ( Li et al., 2019 ).
In this concern, the polymer MW can affect the degradation rate, while
high MW polymers exhibit a slower degradation rate because of their
lower relative surface area ( Singh and Sharma, 2008 ).
Interestingly, plastic manufacturing, in terms of production tech-
niques and the additives used, strongly affects degradation rate of
the produced plastic. For instance, PP made by bulk (mass) polymer-
ization or by Ziegler-Natta catalyst is characterized by higher suscep-
tibility to photodegradation than the co-polymerized PP ( Tang et al.,
2005 ). Also, PS formed polymers throu gh free radicals polymeriza-
tion were less stable against photo-oxidation than the PS produced
through the anionic polymerization technique, due to the presence
of functionalizing group (peroxide residue) ( Pospí šil et al., 2006 ).
Furthermore, several additives such as stabilizers that are usedS.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
5tend to decrease degradation rate and chromophores (carbonyl and
hydroperoxide groups) ( Aldas et al., 2018 ). For instance, chromo-
phores presence lead to photochemically generated radicals that ini-
tiate the photodegradation due to the presence of many available
sites for photo-oxidation. Also, the presence of metal-metal
bonds can improve the photodegradation process because of
the homolytical bond cl eavage upon irradiation ( Daglen and Tyler,
2010 ). Likewise, the morphological features of plastic should betaken into consideration, as the degradation rate tends to increase
in case of rough surfaces that are more suitable for bio ﬁlm formation
than smooth ones ( Booth et al., 2017 ).
3.2. Environmental factors
The geographical location, climatic conditions, smog and pollutants
among others, affect the mechanisms and rate of plastic degradation
Fig. 3. The direct and indirect effect of plastics on human health.S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
6(Andrady et al., 2003 ). Sunlight is of utmost importance for plastic deg-
radation, with light intensity increasing the photo-oxidation reaction
rate and therefore the degradation rate of plastic ( Kitamoto et al.,
2011 ). Furthermore, the rate of abiotic degradation also increases
a l o n gw i t ha ni n c r e a s ei nt e m p e r a t u r e( Pischedda et al., 2019 ),
where the reaction rate duplicates per 10 °C increase. Temperature
also affects the polymer chain mobility, which subsequently affects
the enzymatic activity during micro bial degradation, as well as the
hydrolysis process rate by affecting the formation of free radicals,
the oxygen diffusion rate and humidity ( Booth et al., 2017 ). PET
chain scission was higher by 500% at 100% relative humidity and
60 °C, in comparison with 45% relative humidity ( Edge et al., 1991 ).
Also, humidity enhanced the photodegradation of PP ( Fernando
et al., 2009 ), PE ( Jin et al., 2006 ), and PVC ( James et al., 2013 ), by in-
creasing the hydroxyl radicals concentration. However, a reduction
of UV light intensity in the seawater leads to a decrease in the
photodegradation rate. In contrast, a high level of humidity at the
sea surface enhances the light degradation process because of the
solubility of certain photo-stabilizers into the water, leading to effec-
tive degradation ( Booth et al., 2017 ).
Oxygen availability also affects the degradation rate of plastic
during photodegradation and biodegradation ( Queste et al., 2013 ).
Price and Horrocks (2013) reported that the polymeric degradation
process is accelerated in the presence of high oxygen concentration,
because of the fast reaction between oxygen and carbon-centered
radicals released from the initi al degradation products. Suchinteractions cause an increased polymer alkyl radicals' concentra-
tion, leading to higher levels of scission and cross-linked products.
In addition, water availability is an essential factor during biotic
and abiotic process of degradation, because of the hydrolysis process
that causes the cleavage of functional groups, leading to the cleavage
of the polymeric chain ( Pitt, 1992 ).
4. Physicochemical degradation
Abiotic degradation of plastic occurs naturally, as in case of mechan-
ical degradation caused by the tidal forces, waves and abrasion by
stones. This fragmentation process causes the formation of plastic de-
bris. Naturally, the effect of photo-oxidation and hydrolysis process gen-
erate a brittle material and mechanical degradation can easily ensue
leading to the formation of micro- and nano-plastic fragments. How-
ever, during chemical fragmentation, the polymer MW is decreased, in
contrast to mechanical fragmentation, where no change in the MW is
observed ( Lambert and Wagner, 2016 ). This process is controlled by
many factors, including polymer chain length, intramolecular forces be-
tween polymer chains, mechanical stability, polymer crystallinity and
plastic weight.
4.1. Photodegradation
Photodegradation is considered as the most important abiotic degra-
dation pathway in aerobic outdoor environments ( Gijsman et al., 1999 ).
Photo-oxidation causes plastic's surface oxygenation which increases
the polymer hydrophilicity and enhances the microbial bio ﬁlm forma-
tion on the polymer surface. As illustrated in Fig. 5 , PE, PP and PS are sus-
ceptible to photo-initiated oxidative degradation. The mechanism of
plastic photodegradation includes three main stages; namely, initiation,
propagation and termination. During the initiation stage, polymer chain
chemical bonds are broken by light or heat to produce free radicals
(Yousif and Haddad, 2013 ). However, the polymers must contain unsat-
urated chromophoric groups that absorb light energy ( Gijsman et al.,
1999 ;Gewert et al., 2015 ). Several plastic types, such as PE and PP do
not contain any unsaturated double bonds in their polymeric backbone,
therefore these compounds are expected to be resistant to
photodegradation. However, small amounts of external impurities orstructural abnormalities can allow the initiation step of photo-
degradation to occur ( Gijsman et al., 1999 ;Scott, 2002 ). Subsequently,
during the propagation stage the polymer radicals react with oxygen
and form peroxy radicals. Besides the formation of hydroperoxides, fur-
ther complex radical reactions take place and lead to auto-oxidation
(Singh and Sharma, 2008 ). Propagation ultimately leads to chain scis-
sion or crosslinking ( Tolinski, 2009 ). Termination of the radical reaction
occurs when inert products are formed from the combination of two
radicals ( Peacock, 2000 ). Therefore, due to oxidation, random chain
scission is performed to produce oxygen-containing functional groupssuch as ole ﬁn, ketone and aldehyde compounds ( Scott, 2002 ). Due to
the presence of unsaturated double bonds, these compounds are con-
sidered more susceptible to photo-initiated degradation. This process
leads to a reduction in plastic MW. Therefore, the produced compounds
surface area is increased, making them more susceptible to the frag-
mentation process. In this concern, Albertsson and Karlsson (1988) in-
vestigated PE photo-degradation in an inert system for more than
10 years, demonstrating that PE degradation rate was characterized by
three stages, including a rapid CO
2release and O 2uptake during the
1ststage until the equilibrium phase, a decline of the degradation rate
during the 2ndstage and lastly, a rapid deterioration of the surface struc-
ture and an increase in the degradation rate during the 3rdstage.
4.2. Hydrolysis
Hydrolysis of plastic represents one of the main steps during the abi-
otic degradation pathway. Hydrolysis is accelerated by the presence of
Fig. 4. Factors affecting the plastic abiotic degradation rate.S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
7catalysts, such as ions released through this reaction ( Baes and Mesmer,
1976 ). The hydrolysis rate depends on the susceptibility of polymeric
chemical bonds to water attack and its concentration inside the mate-
rial. Also, the rate of water diffusion in the polymeric material is a critical
factor ( Crawford et al., 1988 ;Padsalgikar, 2017 ). During hydrolysis,
water reacts with the polymer causing physicochemical changes and
this process is chemically or biologically catalyzed, as illustrated in
Fig. 6 (A). In the acid-base catalyzed reactions, the mechanism involves
a nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl group in esters or amides bonds(Hosseini et al., 2007 ). Also, there are several factors affecting the hy-
drolysis rate, including polymeric molecules MW, where the hydrolysis
rate decreases by increasing the molecular weight. Likewise, reaction
rate is affected by the molecules mobility and hydrophobicity or hydro-
philicity ( Booth et al., 2017 ). Moreover, based on the experimental rule
(Newman's rule of six), the hydrolysis rate depends on the chain's ste-
reochemical composition, where hydrogen, oxygen and carbon atomsinterfere sterically with rotations of other groups which limit the num-
ber of conformations that allow attack by OH or H ions. Polyesters (PES)
are particularly stable with a large number of atoms in the sixth position
(Lopalco et al., 2016 ).
4.3. Thermal degradation
Plastic's thermal degradation can be performed at high tempera-
tures, usually higher than 100 °C, depending on the plastic polymer
type and characteristics. The antioxidant additives incorporated
through plastic manufacture prevents thermal oxidation at low temper-
atures. In contrast, the degradation due to heat oxidation is accelerated
by stress and exposure to other reactive compounds, like ozone. In gen-
eral, the resistance to degradation depends on the chemical composi-
tion of the polymer, with PP, PVC and polybutadiene (PBD) being
susceptible to thermal degradation. In contrast, polymers such as
Fig. 5. Plastic photodegradation mechanism.S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
8polysulfone, polyether ketone, and polysiloxanes are thermally resistant
owing to the strong bonds in their backbone. Overall, the contribution of
thermal degradation under normal environmental conditions globally is
considered negligible, particularly in cold, marine environments
(Kitamoto et al., 2011 ;Booth et al., 2017 ). The mechanism and factors
affecting thermal degradation are presented in Fig. 6 (B), as previously
reported ( Van Krevelen and Te Nijenhuis, 2009 ).
5. Microbial degradation
The biodegradation process refers to the conversion of organic com-
pounds into biogas and residual biomass, as a result of microbial activity
(Ali and Sun, 2019 ;Ali et al., 2019a, 2019b ), that can utilize plastic as
carbon source ( Shah et al., 2008 ;Magnin et al., 2020 ). Synthetic plastics,
including PES, polyvinyl, polyamide (PA) and PU, represent the most
widely used materials around the globe. However, only a small fraction
of their wastes can be biodegraded due to the nature of plastic and its
physicochemical properties, since plastic is a weak growth substrate
for microorganisms ( Bifﬁnger et al., 2014 ). The enzymatic degradation
of plastic through hydrolysis can be performed by binding the enzyme
to the polymer to catalyze the hydrolytic cleavage of polymers intooligomers, dimers, and monomers, and ﬁnally to be mineralized to
CO2and H 2O. The ability of fungi, bacteria and algae as polymer
degrading microorganisms has been previously highlighted and several
species have been reported to grow on easily degradable polymers, such
as cellulose and lignin ( Ali and Sun, 2015 ) or resistant to degradation
polymers such as PE and PU ( Shah et al., 2008 ;Raghavendra et al.,
2016 ;Zhang et al., 2020 ;Cassone et al., 2020 ).
5.1. Microbial potential for plastic biodegradation
The extensive surface area of the fungal mycelial can penetrate
the polymeric substance surface in order to effectively access and de-
grade the conventional plastic polymers ( Sánchez, 2020 ). Also, ex-
tracellular enzymes (e.g., depolymerase) can be secreted by the
mycelia and breakdown polymers into oligomers, dimers and mono-
mers ( Ameen et al., 2015 ;Ali et al., 2021 ), while compared to bacte-
ria, the concentration of enzymes secreted by a fungus is
signi ﬁcantly higher ( Gangola et al., 2019 ). Subsequently, the pro-
duced monomers can be assimilated and mineralized by fungal in-
tracellular enzymes. White-rot and brown-rot fungi can
signi ﬁcantly contribute to plastic and other polymeric substances
Fig. 6. Abiotic degradation of polyester. A, hydrolysis process and B, thermal degradation process.S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
9Table 2
The ef ﬁciency of fungal species in plastic polymers degradation.
Polymer type* Microorganism Isolation source Time (day) Conclusions References
PE•Mucor rouxii NRRL 1835
•Aspergillus ﬂavusFreshwater 28 A slight weight reduction El-Shafei et al., 1998
•Penicillium simplicissimum Soil and leaves 90 A reduction in molecular weight was recorded Yamada-Onodera et al., 2001
•Aspergillus terreus
•Aspergillus fumigatus
•Fusarium solaniSoil 100 These strains could utilize LDPE as a carbon
sourceZahra et al., 2010
•Aspergillus niger
•Lysinibacillus xylanilyticusSoil 126 A degradation percentage of 29 and 16% for the
UV and non-UV treated ﬁlms, respectively.Esmaeili et al., 2013
•Aspergillus japonicas
•Fusarium sp.
•Aspergillus ﬂavus.Soil 30 These strains degraded 30 –36% of LDPE
substrate weight.Singh and Gupta, 2014
•Aspergillus ﬂavus
•Aspergillus tubingensisSoil 30 Bio ﬁlm formation, weight loss, and HDPE
surface modi ﬁcationSangeetha Devi et al., 2015
•Aspergillus caespitosus
•Aspergillus terreus
•Alternaria alternate
•Eupenicillium hirayamae
•Phialophora alba
•Paecilomyces variotiiSeawater 28 Biodegradation of the ﬁlms was revealed by
SEM, CO 2emission, and enzymatic activity
(Laccase, MnP, and LiP)Ameen et al., 2015
•Penicillium oxalicum
•Penicillium chrysogenumSoil 90 Morphological damages on PE sheets Ojha et al., 2017
•Zalerion maritimum Seawater 28 Decreased pellets mass and size Paço et al., 2017
•Aspergillus oryzae Soil 120 A reduction in LDPE sheets weight was reported Muhonja et al., 2018
*PE, Polyethylene; LDPE, Low-density polyethylene; HDPE, High-density polyethylene.
Polymer type* Microorganism Isolation source Time (day) Conclusions References
PE •Trichoderma viride
•Aspergillus nomiusSoil 45 A reduction in LDPE ﬁlm's weight Munir et al., 2018
•Aspergillus terreus MANGF1/WL
•Aspergillus sydowii PNPF15/TSSoil 60 Weight reduction Sangale et al., 2019
•Aspergillus ﬂavus PEDX3 Galleria
mellonella gut28 A reduction in the molecular weight was
observedZhang et al., 2020
PET •Penicillium citrinum Cutinase- and
polyesterase-
producing fungi.21 Proved that polyesterase could hydrolyze PET Liebminger et al., 2007
•Penicillium funiculosum Soil 84 Chemical changes in polymeric chains were
observedNowak et al., 2011
•Penicillium sp. The plastic
wastes dumpedsoil28 Morphological changes were detected Sepperumal et al., 2013
•Pichia pastoris Engineered yeast
strain18 h PETase-displaying a promising route for
efﬁcient biological recycling of PETChen et al., 2020
•Aspergillus sp. Seawater 42 A reduction in plastic weight by 22% Sarkhel et al., 2020
PBS and PBSA •Pseudozyma spp. Leaves and husks
of paddy rice42 A degradation activity on PBS and PBSA. P.
antarctica produced two lipases (A and B) on
media containing oilKitamoto et al., 2011
PE and PP •Aspergillus sp.
•Paecilomyces lilacinus
•Lasiodiplodia theobromaeEndophytic fungi
from endemic
plants90 Only L. theobromae could degrade irradiated PP
ﬁlmSheik et al., 2015
*PE, Polyethylene; PET, Polyethylene terephthalate; PBS, poly-butylene succinate; PBSA, poly-butylene succinate-co-adipate; PP, Polypropyle ne.
Polymer type* Microorganism Isolation source Time (day) Conclusions References
PCL •Alternaria alternata -ST01 NA 15 High growth and enzymatic activity (cutinase).
The degradation rate reached 93.3%. Also, SEMshowed cracks on the PCL ﬁlm surfaceAbdel-Motaal et al.,
2020
•Aspergillus brasiliensis (ATCC 9642)
•Trichoderma virens (ATCC 9645)
•Chaetomium globosum (ATCC 16021)
•Penicillium funiculosum (ATCC 11797)
•Paecilomyces variotii (ATCC 16023)Standard strains 28 Visible growth was observed. C. globosum was a
pioneer in PCL degradationVivi et al., 2019
PPU •Pestalotiopsis microspora Plastic-degrading
fungi16 A clearance of the medium was observed Russell et al., 2011
•Aspergillus tubingensis Soil 60 A complete degradation into smaller pieces was
reportedKhan et al., 2017
•Cladosporium cladosporioides
•Leptosphaeria sp.
•Penicillium griseofulvum
•Xepiculopsis gramineaPlastic debris
ﬂoating in
shoreline6–14 A visible halo zone on agar plates was observed Brunner et al., 2018
PVC •Phanerochaete chrysosporium PV1
•Lentinus tigrinus PV2
•Aspergillus niger PV3
•Aspergillus sydowii PV4PVCﬁlms buried
in the soil300 A morphological deterioration was observed Ali et al., 2013S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
10biodegradation, due to their ability to produce several extracellular
enzymes such as lignin peroxidase, manganese peroxidase, versatile
peroxidase and multi ‑copper oxidase laccase to decompose lignin
and convert it into CO 2and H 2O(Ameen et al., 2015 ;Ali et al.,
2020a ). Interestingly, lignin is simila r to plastic, in terms of certain
physical properties such as hydrop hobicity and chemical structure,
including non-phenolic aromatic rings and presence of ether bonds
and carbon skeleton which are oxidized during the degradation of
lignin ( Kim et al., 2011 ;Ali et al., 2020b ). Such similarities enable
certain lignin-modifying enzymes, like laccase and manganese per-
oxidase to degrade certain plastic polymers such as PE and PP
(Jeyakumar et al., 2013 ). InTable 2 , effective fungal strains for degra-
dation of plastic wastes are listed. Our investigation revealed that As-
pergillus spp. and Penicillium spp. have been highlighted as
promising strains for plastic biodegradation, while Aspergillus ﬂavus
r e p r e s e n t st h em o s tc o m m o n l yu s e da n dt h em o s te f f e c t i v es t r a i n
in plastic degradation. Concerning the isolation source, contami-
nated soil and seawater have been the predominant sources of
plastic-degrading fungal strains . Currently, most studies have been
focused on PE as a fungal substrate, however more plastic types
and different fungal strains should be investigated.
Similarly, bacterial strains can inhabit the plastic contaminated soil
or water and metabolize plastic substances. Several studies indicated
that biodegradation of plastic by specialized bacteria could be an effec-
tive bioremediation strategy ( Yoshida et al., 2016 ). In this respect, our
literature review showed that among all tested bacterial strains, Bacillus
spp., Pseudomonas spp. and Streptomyces spp. show high ef ﬁciency
against different plastic polymers, as shown in Table 3 . However, the
predominant species was by far Bacillus cereus and the plastic contami-
nated soil was the main source of isolation. Although the fungal degra-
dation rate is higher than the bacterial rate ( Muhonja et al., 2018 ),
plastic degradation by fungi requires more stable conditions than in
case of bacteria ( Artigas, 2008 ). However, further research is needed
to fully unravel bacterial potential and prove the effectiveness of bacte-
rial consortia in plastic degradation.
Recently, a limited number of studies have revealed the ability of
algal species to degrade plastic polymers, as presented in Table 4 . Inter-
estingly, the ﬁlamentous blue-green algae, such as Anabaena spiroides ,
are able to grow on the surface of PE wastes because of the availability
of critical factors, including sunlight, water, and nutrients ( Kumar
et al., 2017 ), showing the potential of microalgae to colonize plastic sur-
faces. Furthermore, several species of diatoms and cyanobacteria have
shown ef ﬁciency against PE biodegradation ( Kumar et al., 2017 ;Moog
et al., 2019 ). However, the effectiveness of microalgae as plastic de-
graders needs further investigation.5.2. Mechanism of microbial degradation of plastic wastes
The microbial degradation of plastic wastes is carried out
viaﬁve main steps, including colonization, biodeterioration,
biofragmentation, assimilation and mineralization, as shown in
Fig. 7 .T h e ﬁrst stage of microbial degradation mechanism is the
colonization of microbial species on the plastic surface, during
which the microorganisms involved form consortia leading to bio-
ﬁlm formation, which provokes severe damages on the polymer
surface ( Gu, 2003 ). Microbial adhesion to the polymer surface is
performed by the production of various proteins and polysaccha-
rides ( Capitelli et al., 2006 ), which in ﬁltrate into the material
pores leading to an alteration in pores' size. Consequently, the bio-
deterioration step is carried out a s a result of the microbial adhe-
sion and activity on the plastic surface. During this stage, surface
degradation occurs that alters th e physicochemical properties of
the plastic polymer.
Concerning the activity of various microorganisms, ﬁlamentous
fungi use their mycelia to penetrate into the polymeric material to in-
crease the size of the pores and induce the formation of cracks, leading
to decreased polymer resistance and durability ( Bonhomme et al.,
2003 ). Also, the microbial penetration rate can be enhanced by the
microbial secretion of extracellular substances that affect hydrophobic
and hydrophilic phases. These extracellular substances enhance the
accumulation of pollutants, which enhance microbial growth and
also biodeterioration rate ( Zanardini et al., 2000 ). Furthermore, micro-
bial deterioration is more effective when is carried out by consortia
instead of sole strains ( Skariyachan et al., 2016 ). More speci ﬁcally,
chemolithotrophic microorganisms, such as Nitrosomonas spp.,
Nitrobacter spp., and Thiobacillus spp., can release active chemicals, in-
cluding sulphuric and nitric acid ( Ranalli et al., 2009 ). Also, microorgan-
isms that use chemical bonds in organic substrates and/or oxygen as an
energy source (chemo-organotrophic) can release organic acids
(e.g., gluconic, oxalic, glyoxylic, citric, oxaloacetic, glutaric, etc.)
(Jenings and Lysek, 1996 ). Concomitantly, the medium pH is modi ﬁed
because of the formation of acids and bases during the microbial meta-
bolic activity, which can lead to increased surface erosion ( Lugauskas
et al., 2003 ). Also, it is worth noting, that the ef ﬁciency of mineral
acids in biodeterioration by ﬁxing cations is lower than that of organic
acids that are necessary for process completion ( Warscheid and
Braams, 2000 ).
Physical biodeterioration may be carried out by ﬁlamentous micro-
organisms (bacteria and fungi) that can invade the polymer material
and subsequently increase the pores and cracks ( Hakkarainen et al.,
2000 ). However, some microbial species can also perform oxidation-Table 2 (continued )
Polymer type* Microorganism Isolation source Time (day) Conclusions References
PP (MI-PP;
ST-PP)•Phanerochaete chrysosporium NCIM
1170
•Engyodontium album MTP091Soil 360 18.8 and 9.42% gravimetric weight loss, TGA
weight loss estimated by 79% and 57% with UVpretreated MI-PPJeyakumar et al., 2013
*PCL, Poly ( ε-caprolactone); PPU, Polyester polyurethane; PVC, Polyvinylchloride; PP, Polypropylene; MI-PP, pro-oxidant blended polypropylene; ST-PP, sta rch blended
polypropylenes; NA, not available.
Polymer type* Microorganism Isolation source Time (day) Conclusions References
P4 •Fusarium sp. Soil 60 Morphological damages were observed Tachibana et al., 2010
PPS •Gloeophyllum trabeum DSM 1398 Fruit bodies on
rotting oak wood20 A reduction in molecular mass by 50% was
reportedKrueger et al., 2015
PE and PU •Aspergillus fumigatus
•Aspergillus niger
•Fusarium oxysporum
•Penicillium sp.
•Lasiodiplodia crassispora
•Trichoderma harzianumSoil 90 Morphological degradation and a halo zone was
observed on the growing culture on both LDPE
and PU mediaRaghavendra et al., 2016
*P4, Polyamide 4; PSS, Polystyrene sulfonate; PE, Polyethylene; PU, Polyurethane.S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
11Table 3
The ef ﬁciency of bacterial species in plastic polymers degradation.
Polymer type* Microorganism Isolation source Time (day) Conclusions References
PE •Streptomyces viridosporus T7A
•Streptomyces badius 252
•Streptomyces setonii 75Vi2Standard lignocellulose-degrading
strains20 Streptomyces spp. demonstrated a
further reduction in percent elongationand PE molecular weight averageLee et al., 1991
•Streptomyces spp. Freshwater 28 A slight weight reduction was
observedEl-Shafei et al., 1998
•Bacillus pumilus
•Bacillus haldenitri ﬁcans
•Bacillus cereusBacterial strains adopted with PE
as carbon source14 The abiotic treatment and biological
pretreatment reduced plastic weightby 8.4%Roy et al., 2008
•Pseudomonas sp. Soil 45 Degraded LDPE up to 5.0%. Tribedi and Sil, 2013
•Enterobacter asburiae
•Bacillus sp.Plodia interpunctella 60 The bacterial strains were able to
degrade approximately 6.1% and 10.7%of the PE ﬁlmsYang et al., 2014
•Streptomyces spp.
•Pseudomonas spp.Soil 180 Reduction of 46.7 and 24.2% in weight
with Streptomyces spp. and
Pseudomonas spp., respectivelyDeepika and Jaya, 2015
•Lysinibacillus fusiformis
•Bacillus cereusSeawater and Soil 60 The maximum percentage in weight
reduction (21.9%) was recorded withL. fusiformis at pH 3.5 at 25 °CShahnawaz et al., 2016
•Ideonella sakaiensis Screening strains exposed to PET
in the environment70 Detected the production of two
enzymes capable of hydrolyzing PET
and the reaction intermediate.Yoshida et al., 2016
•Pantoea sp.
•Enterobacter sp.Soil 120 81 and 38% of weight reduction for
LDPE strips and LDPE pellets,respectively.Skariyachan et al., 2016
•Rhodococcus ruber C208 NA 7 Degraded LDPE at a rate of 0.86% per
week.Sivan et al., 2006
•Sphingobacterium moltivorum Soil Bacterial growth on pretreated LDPE
surfaceMontazer et al., 2018
•Pseudomonas spp. Water and soil 90 The plastic weight reduction was
assessed by 35 –40% and production of
extracellular lipase was observedSkariyachan et al., 2015
•Brevibacillus borstelensis Coastal regions 30 Weight reduction was evaluated by
11.4%Mohanrasu et al., 2018
*PE, Polyethylene; LDPE, Low-density polyethylene; HDPE, High-density polyethylene; NA, not available.
Polymer type* Microorganism Isolation source Time (day) Conclusions References
PE •Acinetobacter spp. Galleria mellonella 3 The intestinal microbiome of G.
mellonella is intricately associated with
PE biodegradationCassone et al., 2020
•Microbulbifer hydrolyticus IRE-31 Marine pulp mill wastes rich in
lignin30 Polymer surface morphological
changes were observed and ketonegroup was formedLi et al., 2020b
•Lysinibacillus macrolides
•Pseudomonas putida
•Bacillus subtilis
•Brevibacillus borstelensis
•Cellulosimicrobium funkeiSoil 120 A reduction in LDPE sheets weight was
reported. Also, the highest degradationactivity for bacteria was 36% and 20%attributed to B. cereus and B.
borstelensis , respectivelyMuhonja et al., 2018
PE and PS •Citrobacter sp.
•Kosakonia sp.Tenebrio molitor 32 Mass conversion estimated by 49.0%
and the MW decreased by 40% in
PE-fed worms and by 13% in PS-fed
wormsBrandon et al., 2018
•Serratia spp.
•Bacillus sp.Galleria mellonella 21 Loss of plastic mass using 150 larvae
fed on either PS or PELou et al., 2020
PU •Corynebacterium sp.
•Bacillus sp.
•Pseudomonas sp.
•Micrococcus sp.
•Arthrobacter sp.Soil 28 Zones of hydrolysis were observed
besides the release of CO
2Shah et al., 2008
PET •Vibrio sp. Seawater 42 The weight reduction of plastic
polymer by 35% was recordedSarkhel et al., 2020
P4 •Stenotrophomonas sp. Soil 60 Morphological damages were observed Tachibana et al., 2010
*PE, Polyethylene; PU, Polyurethane; P4, Polyamide 4; LDPE, Low-density polyethylene; PET, Polyethylene terephthalate.
Polymer type* Microorganism Isolation source Time (day) Conclusions References
PE and PVC •Acanthopleurobacter pedis
•Microbacterium sp.
•Pseudomonas putida
•Pseudomonas aeruginosa
•Pseudomonas otitidis
•Bacterium Te68 R
•Bacillus aerius
•Bacillus cereusSoil 70 Morphological damages were observed. Sah et al., 2011
•Acanthopleurobacter pedis
•Pseudomonas otitidisThe bacterial strains were selected
based on their potential to70 A relatively better biodegradation
potential of developed consortium for PVCAnwar et al., 2013S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
12reductions and chemical biodeterioration, such as chemolithotrophic
microorganisms that can uptake manganese and/or iron (Fe3+) cations,
through speci ﬁc proteins in the microbial cell membrane ( Pelmont,
2005 ). In case of enzymatic biodeterioration, several extracellular en-
zymes are involved in this process, such as peroxidases ( Otsuka et al.,
2003 ). However, certain plastic polymers are resistant to degradation,
such as PU and PVC ( Shah et al., 2008 ). Under this scope, microorgan-
isms tend to produce some enzymatic groups, such as lipases, esterases,
ureases and proteases to overcome these polymers' crystallinity(Ameen et al., 2015 ;Yoshida et al., 2016 ).
Fragmentation is a lytic process, e ssential for the degradation of
polymers into monomers, dimers, and/or oligomers, as shown in
Fig. 7 . Through this process, microorganisms use different mecha-
nisms to cleave polymers, including secretion of speci ﬁce n z y m e s
such as oxidoreductases and hydrolases and/or free radicals. The
chemical bonds linking the plastic forming monomers are similar
to those found in natural polymers such as lignocellulosic com-
pounds. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that most of the ligno-
celluloses degrading enzymes can degrade plastic polymers as well
(Chen et al., 2020 ). The microbial endo -a n d exo-enzymes involved
in this process are not synthesized immediately. Instead, it takes
time to start up the cell machinery for speci ﬁc enzymes synthesis
(Lucasa et al., 2008 ). Moreover, enzymes concentration increases as
a function of time and the activity terminates with substrate exhaus-
tion, explaining the long time that microorganisms need to degrade
plastic ( Tables 2 –4). Furthermore, the hydrolysis stage is strongly
determined by the activity of various enzymes. For instance, the
depolymerase enzyme and its reaction mechanism is based on the
reaction between aspartate, histidine, and serine. This catalytic
triad generates a nucleophilic alkoxide group attacking the ester
bond to form alcohol and acyl-enzyme complex ( Gewert et al.,
2015 ;Austin et al., 2018 ). Because of the polymer hydrophobiccrystalline nature, the polymer chain scission reactions can be com-
plicated. Thus, the reaction needs the implication of more enzymes
to transform polymer structure. For example, mono and
dioxygenases that form alcohol and /or peroxyl groups can increase
polymer structure polarity that makes the biodegradation process
more effective. Furthermore, peroxidases catalyze reactions be-
tween peroxyl molecules, such as hydrogen peroxide (H
2O2), or-
ganic peroxide, phenol, and/or aliphatic unsaturation ( Hofrichter,
2002 ). Also, oxidases containing copper atoms (metalloproteins)
are secreted by most ligninolytic microbial cells to catalyze hy-
droxylation and/or oxidation reactions ( Chiellini et al., 2006 ).
On the other hand, the free radical oxidation aims at increasing the
molecule polarity by the addition and/ or formation of a hydroxyl function
and carbonyl or carboxyl group. The increased hygroscopic properties in-
crease microbial attack. Furthermore, several oxidation reactions can be
catalyzed by several enzymes that can generate free radicals inducing ox-
idative stress that lead to chain reactions and induce the polymeric struc-
ture conversion and degradation. However, linear polymeric compounds
degradation through enzymatic react ions is extremely constrained since
the enzymes cannot interact with the internal part of these structures
(Lucasa et al., 2008 ;Phaniendra et al., 2014 ). Furthermore, several micro-
bial degraders, including bacteria, fungi, and algae, can produce H 2O2
(Diaz et al., 2018 ). Concerning the oxidation ability of algal species, Diaz
et al. (2018) demonstrated that extracellular superoxide and H 2O2were
produced by ﬁve marine harmful bloom-forming algae (HBA) species, in-
cluding Aureococcus anophagefferens ,Pseudonitzschia sp.,Heterosigma
akashiwo ,Chattonella marina ,a n d Karenia brevis .
Concerning the assimilation of the produced monomers, the micro-
bial cell obtains the energy sources from these integrated monomers,
allowing the microbial cell to grow. Some monomers penetrate the
cell through individual-speci ﬁc membrane carriers. However, other
molecules cannot be assimilated due to cell membrane permeability.
Table 4
The ef ﬁciency of algal species in plastic polymers degradation.
Polymer typeaMicroorganism Isolation
sourceTime (day) Conclusions References
PE •Navicula pupula (diatom)
•Scenedesmus dimorphus
(green microalgae)
•Anabaena spiroides
(cyanobacteria)PE bags and
watersamples45 Growth of microalgae on the polyethylene sheet and the
erosion cum degradation was observedKumar et al., 2017
•Phormidium lucidum
•Oscillatoria subbrevisDomestic
sewagewater42 A rapid growth of cyanobacterial species on the PE surface
and a reduction in crystallinity thickness and weight of theLDPE ﬁlm was observedSarmah and Rout,
2018
•Nostoc carneum
(cyanobacteria )Domestic
sewagewater42 FT-IR and NMR spectroscopy indicated the presence of
ethanol and ethyl propanoate as a result of thebiodegradation of PE. Also, the growth of N. carneum was
inversely proportional to plastic thickness and weight lossSarmah and Rout,
2019
PET and PETG •Phaeodactylum
tricornutum (diatom)Genetically
modi ﬁed
diatomspecies7 Diatom producing PETase was active against industrially
shredded PETMoog et al., 2019
PET and PP •Spirulina sp.
(cyanobacteria )NA 112 Tensile strength and PE carbon decreased Khoironi et al., 2019
aLDPE, Low-density polyethylene; PE, Polyethylene; PETG, polyethylene terephthalate glycol; PET, Polyethylene terephthalate; PP, polypropylen e; NA, not available.Table 3 (continued )
Polymer type* Microorganism Isolation source Time (day) Conclusions References
•Bacillus aerius
•Bacillus cereusdegrade PVC than the LDPE
PE and PP •Aneurinibacillus spp.
•Brevibacillus spp.Sewage treatment plants and
waste management land ﬁlls140 The loss of weight for plastic pellets was
45.7, 37.2, and 44.2%, respectively.Skariyachan et al., 2018
*PE, Polyethylene; PVC, Polyvinylchloride; LDPE, Low-density polyethylene; PP, Polypropylene.S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
13Subsequently, the microbial cell may use the non-assimilated mono-
mers via the biotransformation process including enzyme-catalyzed
conversion ( Lucasa et al., 2008 ;Al-Tohamy et al., 2020a ), as shown in
Fig. 8 . Inside the microbial cell, the degraded monomers are oxidizedusing the microbial catabolic pathways to produce cell organelles and
energy-carrying molecules such as adenosine triphosphate (ATP),
which is carried out through three pathways (aerobic respiration, an-
aerobic respiration, and fermentation), in both aerobic and/or anaerobic
Fig. 7. Microbial degradation stages of plastic polymers.S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
14environment ( Hong and Gu, 2009 ;Al-Tohamy et al., 2020b ;Ali et al.,
2020c, 2020d ).
6. Invertebrates as effective plastic biodegraders
Invertebrates' digestive tract has inspired many researchers, due to
their ability to feed on wood, plastic wastes or other polymeric com-
pounds. Such species include waxworms ( Plodia interpunctella ),
superworms ( Zophobas atratus ), mealworm ( Tenebrio molitor )a n d
wood-feeding termite ( Reticulitermes chinensis ), the greater wax moth
(Galleria mellonella ), land snail ( Achatina fulica ) and other invertebrates
(Yang et al., 2014 ;Ali et al., 2017a ;Ali et al., 2018 ;Song et al., 2020 ;
Yang et al., 2020 ). Also, social insect species that live in colonies and
are characterized by group integration, labour division and generation'soverlap, such as bees, waxworms, and termites that have the most spe-
ciﬁc and harmonious gut communities, with signi ﬁcant and bene ﬁcial
functions in nutrition may provide an opportunity for plastic biodegra-
dation. Therefore, the question arises about which bacterial or fungal
species contained in invertebrates and especially insects have the ability
to degrade plastic polymers and which mechanism is applied for this
biodegradation process?
In this concern, Dowd and Shen (1990) found that the Lasioderma
serricorne digestive tract is inhabited by symbiotic yeasts, which can
produce hydrolytic enzymes that degrade alkaloid esters and phenoliccompounds. Also, according to Yang et al. (2014) , the insect's digestive
tract provides an ideal environment for microbial colonization and dis-
plays a broad platform of speci ﬁc microbial consortia for particular func-
tions that provide several bene ﬁts to the hosts. Under this scope,
Riudavets et al. (2007) investigated the degradation activity of the ciga-
rette beetle ( L. serricorne ), the rice weevil ( Sitophilus oryzae ) and lesser
grain borer ( Rhyzopertha dominica ) on packaging and multilayer ﬁlms
of PP, PE, and PES. Also, Yang et al. (2014) reported the ability of
P. interpunctella to digest PE ﬁlms owing to the insect's digestive tract
that could be an outstanding source for the isolation of PE-degrading
microorganisms, such as Enterobacter asburiae andBacillus sp. In addi-
tion, Yang et al. (2015) investigated Bacillus sp. YP1 genome and
found 182 genes responsible for the xenobiotic's catabolic activity and
biodegradation pathway. Subsequently, Brandon et al. (2018)
studied
the ability of T. molitor for PE and PS digestion and estimated 49% of
PE mass conversion to CO 2, while the MW of polymer residues de-
creased by 40% and 13% in PE-fed mealworms and PS-fed mealworms,
respectively, due to the catabolic activity of Citrobacter sp. and Kosakonia
sp. Also, Yang et al. (2020) found that PS foam-fed Z. atratus digested
0.58 mg/day/superworm, which was four times higher than T. molitor .
Also, PS foam-fed superworm could live normally for 28 days with sty-
rofoam as the carbon source, showing the ability of superworm as an ef-
fective plastic waste biodegrader. Between the most remarkable results
currently reported, Bombelli et al. (2017) investigated the ability of
Fig. 8. Enzymatic reactions and mechanisms involved in PET degradation.S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
15G. mellonella against PE and PP and found that they could degrade
1.84 mg/day/worm, which stands for degradation of 92% of total plastic.
Downs et al. (2002) reported that G. mellonella can degrade long-
chain fatty acids in beeswax by breaking ester bonds, owing to its ability
to produce esterase and lipase enzymes. In addition, Kong et al. (2019)
stated that beeswax-fed G. mellonella can produce lipase, carboxylesterase
a n df a t t y - a c i dd e g r a d i n ge n z y m e s . Zhang et al. (2020) explained that the
outstanding activity of G. mellonella in plastic biodegradation derives from
t h ep r e s e n c eo f Aspergillus ﬂavus in their gut, as well as the production of
laccases and laccase-like multi ‑copper oxidases. In contrast, Cassone et al.
(2020) attributed this performance to the activity of Acinetobacter sp. that
plays an important role for lepidopterans regarding PE biodegradation. In
this context, the insect's role in plastic waste biodegradation is anticipated
to prevail in the future, however further investigation is needed, since in-
sects' intestinal microbiome still remains poorly understood. In Fig. 9 the
predominant microbial species in the plastic degrading insects' gut are
presented, including fungal species ( Aspergillus spp.) and bacterial species
(Bacillus spp., Enterobacter spp., Pseudomonas spp., and Staphylococcus
spp.). Lastly, in vitro studies revealed the ability of the Antarctic krill
(Euphausia superba ) to degrade micro-plastics into nano-plastics through
digestive fragmentation ( Dawson et al., 2018 ). Hence, it is highly recom-
mended to investigate more species, either insects or invertebrates such
as enchytraeids ( Enchytraeus crypticus ), isopods ( Porcellio scaber ), oribatid
mites ( Oppia nitens ) and springtails ( Folsomia candida ), that can degrade
and digest short ﬁber PE ( Ali et al., 2017b ;Selonen et al., 2020 ).7. Recommendations for future research
Plastic is one of the most widespread materials globally and one of
the main pollutants in the environment. On the other hand, the micro-
bial consortia in the contaminated environment play an important
role in plastic degradation through their enzymatic activity. The occur-
rence of polymer-degrading microbes varies depending on the environ-ment. Therefore,
1. Further study on the harmful effects of accumulated plastic wastes in
the marine and soil environments is needed, along with their impact
on fauna and ﬂora, in order to protect human health and natural
environment.
2. It is necessary to investigate polymer-degrading microbes' mecha-
nisms, including the abiotic and biotic factors affecting plastic degra-
dation in various ecosystems.
3. Single microbial species lack the ability to degrade all plastic types
because of the lack of a suitable or speci ﬁc enzyme. From this point
of view, we recommend the exploitation of the synergisms between
different microbial species that would enlighten the way toward
plastics biodegradation improvement. In parallel, the use of molecu-
lar techniques to determine effective consortia involved in polymers
chain degradation will be critical. Thus, researchers should focus ontheﬁeld of genomics and proteomics.
Fig. 9. Insects species involved in the plastic polymer degradation process.S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
164. We recommend the wider use and more intense research on
cyanobacterial species that can produce free radicals, as promising
microbial species for polymer biodegradation.
5. The plastic-eating insects, such as G. mellonella ,h a sb e e nr e -
ported that could degrade ~92% of total plastic production, and
their outstanding abilities should provide a wide platform for
scienti ﬁc research and, even more for industrial applications.
In general, further advanced studies should be performed,
aiming at investigating new species and developing new prom-
ising technologies able to utilize plastic wastes for recycling or
production of biofuels.
In total, the challenge of plastics biodegradation lies in their
polymeric structure that limits the polymer breakdown into mono-
mers. However, the microbial enzymes are ineffective when
attacking non-hydrolyzable synthetic plastic polymers. Thus, it is
recommended to replace these polymers with biodegradable poly-
mers, known as bioplastics. Hence, the newly formed polymer such
as polylactide or polyhydroxyalkanoates, PHAs which are industri-
ally used for packaging can enhance the biodegradation rate.
Furthermore, in Fig. 10 we illustrate our proposal for a simple
industrial-scale reactor with view to enhance the biodegradation pro-
cess and link the physical and chemical pretreatment techniques that
are currently available, and degrade most of the synthetic plastic
types. Initially, abiotic degradation occurs to degrade the plastic poly-
mer into monomers, dimers, and oligomers, while the pretreatment is
based on several techniques using UV or chemical methods, in order
to subsequently enable microbial growth on the produced compounds.
These compounds mixed with organic materials such as lignocellulosic
wastes through the biological pretreatment stage will provide the opti-
mum medium for microbial growth ( Fig. 11 ). Afterwards, the hydroly-
sate of the hydrolysis and biological pretreatment stage will be
subjected to anaerobic digestion in the presence of methanogens and
ultimately the degraded plastic polymer will result in methane gas (bio-
fuel) production.
8. Conclusion
Plastics are between the most indispensable materials in our
daily life, because of their unique properties. However, plastic uti-
lization and accumulation tend to continuously increase, posing aserious environmental and health threat. Our review article dem-
onstrated the harmful effects of mismanaged plastic wastes on
the environment and human health, concurrently addressing the
need for an environmentally friendly processing practice, including
biodegradation. However, the physicochemical characteristics of
plastics challenge the microbial degradation. Nevertheless, in na-
ture several microorganisms signi ﬁcantly contribute to plastic bio-
degradation. Correspondingly, t he importance of insects' gut
microorganisms in biodegradation process cannot be neglected.
Our review also highlights the vital role of pretreatment, either
physical and/or chemical as a main step to enhance the degradation
of all polymeric materials. Under this scope, it is necessary to cope
with and possibly alter the polymer nature and composition before
the biological treatment in order to apply suitable physicochemical
pretreatment techniques, such as gamma- or UV-irradiation and
chemical pretreatment using acidic or alkaline solutions. However,
an effective environmentally friendly, economical and widely used
plastic-degrading process is still unavailable and further investiga-
tion is needed to develop new technologies to degrade plastic
wastes.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence
of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential con ﬂict of interest.
Fig. 10. Physical and chemical pretreatment of plastic wastes.S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
17Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China
(2018YFE0107100), the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(31772529), and the Project funded by the Priority of Academic Pro-
gram Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD
4013000011). Prof. Michael Kornaros acknowledges that his work was
supported by the project “INVALOR: Research Infrastructure for Waste
Valorization and Sustainable Management ”(MIS 5002495) which is
implemented under the Action “Reinforcement of the Research and
Innovation Infrastructure ”, funded by the Operational Programme
“Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation ”(NSRF 2014 –2020)
and co- ﬁnanced by Greece and the European Union (European Regional
Development Fund).
References
Abdel-Motaal, F.F., Mahmoud, W.N., El-Zayat, S.A., 2020. Eco-friendly biodegradation of
poly ( ε-caprolactone) (pcl) by the fungus Alternaria alternata -ST01. PCBMB 20,
1447 –1455. https://www.ikprress.org/index.php/PCBMB/article/view/4908 .
Albertsson, A.-C., Karlsson, S., 1988. The three stages in degradation of polymers —poly-
ethylene as a model substance. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 35 (5), 1289 –1302. https://doi.
org/10.1002/app.1988.070350515 .
Aldas, M., Paladines, A., Valle, V., Pazmiño, M., Quiroz, F., 2018. Effect of the prodegradant-
additive plastics incorporated on the polyethylene recycling. Int. J. Polym. Sci., 1 –10
https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/2474176 .
Ali, S.S., Sun, J., 2015. Physico-chemical pretreatment and fungal biotreatment for park
wastes and cattle dung for biogas production. SpringerPlus 4, 712. https://doi.org/
10.1186/s40064-015-1466-9 .
Ali, S.S., Sun, J., 2019. Effective thermal pretreatment of water hyacinth ( Eichhornia
crassipes ) for the enhancement of biomethanation: VIT® gene probe technology for
microbial community analysis with special reference to methanogenic Archaea.
J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 7, 102853. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2018.102853 .
Ali, M.I., Ahmed, S., Robson, G., Javed, I., Ali, N., Atiq, N., Hameed, A., 2013. Isolation and
molecular characterization of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic degrading fungal iso-
lates. J. Basic Microbiol. 54, 18 –27.https://doi.org/10.1002/jobm.201200496 .
Ali, S.S., Abomohra, A., Sun, J., 2017a. Effective bio-pretreatment of sawdust waste with a
novel microbial consortium for enhanced biomethanation. Bioresour. Technol. 238,
425 –432. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2017.03.187 .
Ali, S.S., Wu, J., Xie, R.R., Zhou, F., Sun, J.Z., Huang, M., 2017b. Screening and characterizing
of xylanolytic and xylose-fermenting yeasts isolated from the wood-feeding termite,
Reticulitermes chinensis . PLoSOne 12 (7), e0181141. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0181141 .
Ali, S.S., Al-Tohamy, R., Sun, J., Wu, J., Huang, M., 2018. The role of gut symbionts from ter-
mites: a unique hidden player from yeasts. Acta Microbiol Sin. 58 (6), 1004 –1015.
https://doi.org/10.13343/j.cnki.wsxb.201706 .
Ali, S.S., Al-Tohamy, R., Manni, A., Luz, F.C., Elsamahy, T., Sun, J., 2019a. Enhanced digestion
of bio-pretreated sawdust using a novel bacterial consortium: microbial community
structure and methane-producing pathways. Fuel 254, 115604. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fuel.2019.06.012 .
Ali, S.S., Nessem, A.A., Sun, J., Li, X., 2019b. The effects of water hyacinth pretreated
digestate on Lupinus termis L. seedlings under salinity stress: a complementary
study. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 7, 103159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2019.103159 .Ali, S.S., Al-Tohamy, R., Koutra, E., El-Naggar, A.H., Kornaros, M., Sun, J., 2020a. Valorizing
lignin-like dyes and textile dyeing wastewater by a newly constructed lipid-
producing and lignin modifying oleaginous yeast consortium valued for biodieseland bioremediation. J. Hazard. Mater. 403, 123575. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2020.123575 .
Ali, S.S., Al-Tohamy, R., Xie, R., El-Sheekh, M.M., Sun, J., 2020b. Construction of a new
lipase- and xylanase-producing oleaginous yeast consortium capable of reactive azo
dye degradation and detoxi ﬁcation. Bioresour. Technol. 313, 123631. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.biortech.2020.123631 .
Ali, S.S., Kornaros, M., Manni, A., Sun, J., El-Shanshoury, A.E.R., Kenawy, E.-R., Khalil, M.A.,
2020c. Enhanced anaerobic digestion performance by two arti ﬁcially constructed mi-
crobial consortia capable of woody biomass degradation and chlorophenols detoxi ﬁ-
cation. J. Hazard. Mater. 389, 122076.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.122076 .
Ali, S.S., Mustafa, A.M., Kornaros, M., Manni, A., Sun, J., Khalil, M.A., 2020d. Construction of
novel microbial consortia CS-5 and BC-4 valued for the degradation of catalpa saw-
dust and chlorophenols simultaneously with enhancing methane production.Bioresour. Technol. 301, 122720. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2019.122720 .
Ali, S.S., Sun, J., Koutra, E., El-Zawawy, N., Elsamahy, T., El-Shetehy, M., 2021. Construction
of a novel cold-adapted oleaginous yeast consortium valued for textile azo dye
wastewater processing and biore ﬁnery. Fuel 285, 119050. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fuel.2020.119050 .
Al-Tohamy, R., Sun, J., Fareed, M., Kenawy, E.-R., Ali, S.S., 2020a. Ecofriendly biodegrada-
tion of Reactive Black 5 by newly isolated Sterigmatomyces halophilus SSA1575, val-
ued for textile azo dye wastewater processing and detoxi ﬁcation. Sci. Rep. 10,
12370. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-69304-4 .
Al-Tohamy, R., Kenawy, E.R., Sun, J., Ali, S.S., 2020b. Performance of a newly isolated
salt-tolerant yeast strain Sterigmatomyces halophilus SSA-1575 for azo dye decol-
orization and detoxi ﬁcation. Front. Microbiol. 11, 1163. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmicb.2020.01163 .
Ameen, F., Moslem, M., Hadi, S., Al-Sabri, A.E., 2015. Biodegradation of low density poly-
ethylene (LDPE) by mangrove fungi from the Red Sea Coast. Prog. Rubber. Plast.Recycl. 31, 125 –144. https://doi.org/10.1177/147776061503100204 .
A m o b o n y e ,A . ,B h a g w a t ,P . ,S i n g h ,S . ,P i l l a i ,S ., 2021. Plastic biodegradation: frontline
microbes and their enzyme s. Sci. Total Environ. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2020.143536 .
Andrady, A.L., 2011. Microplastics in the marine environment. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 62,
1596 –1605. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2011.05.030 .
Andrady, A.L., Hamid, H.S., Torikai, A., 2003. Effects of climate change and UV-B on
materialsThis article is published as part of the United Nations Environmental Pro-
gramme: environmental effects of ozone depletion and its interactions with climate
change: 2002 assessment. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 2 (1), 68. https://doi.org/
10.1039/b211085g .
Anwar, M.S., Negi, H., Zaidi, M.G.H., Gupta, S., Goel, R., 2013. Biodeterioration studies of
thermoplastics in nature using indigenous bacterial consortium. Braz. Arch. Biol.
Technol. 56, 475 –484. https://doi.org/10.1590/S1516-89132013000300016 .
Artigas, J., 2008. The Role of Fungi and Bacteria on the Organic Matter Decomposition Pro-
cess in Streams: Interaction and Relevance in Bio ﬁlms. (PhD thesis). Universitat de
Girona (Corpus ID: 129318960).
Austin, H.P., Allen, M.D., Donohoe, B.S., Rorrer, N.A., Kearns, F.L., Silveira, R.L., Pollard, B.C.,
Dominick, G., Duman, R., ElOmari, K., Mykhaylyk, V., Wagner, A., Michener, W.E.,Amore, A., Skaf, M.S., Crowley, M.F., Thorne, A.W., Johnson, C.W., Woodcock, H.L.,
McGeehan, J.E., Beckham, G.T., 2018. Characterization and engineering of a plastic-
degrading aromatic polyesterase P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115 (19), E4350 –E4357.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1718804115 .
Baes, C., Mesmer, R., 1976. The Hydrolysis of Cations. Wiley, New York.
Barabad, M.L.M., Jung, W., Versoza, M.E., Kim, M., Ko, S., Park, D., Lee, K., 2018. Emission
characteristics of particulate matter, volatile organic compounds, and trace elements
from the combustion of coals in Mongolia. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 15, 1706.
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15081706 .
Fig. 11. Biogas production using anaerobic co-digestion of plastic and organic wastes.S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
18Barnes, D.K.A., Galgani, F., Thompson, R.C., Barlaz, M., 2009. Accumulation and fragmenta-
tion of plastic debris in global environments. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 364, 1985 –1998.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2008.0205 .
Barra, R., Leonard, S.A., 2018. Plastics and the circular economy. 54th Global Environment
Facility Council Meeting, Da Nang, Viet Nam. June 24 –26.
Bifﬁn g e r ,J . C . ,B a r l o w ,D . E . ,P i r l o ,R . K . ,B a b s o n ,D . M . ,F i t z g e r a l d ,L . A . ,Z i n g a r e l l i ,S . ,
Nadeau, L.J., Crookes-Goodson, W.J., Russell Jr., J.N., 2014. A direct quantitative
agar-plate based assay for analysis of Pseudomonas protegens Pf-5 degradation
of polyurethane ﬁlms. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 95, 311 –319. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ibiod.2014.09.005 .
Bombelli, P., Howe, C.J., Bertocchini, F., 2017. Polyethylene bio-degradation by caterpillars
of the wax moth Galleria mellonella . Curr. Biol. 27 (8), R292 –R293. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cub.2017.02.060 .
Bonhomme, S., Cuer, A., Delort, A.-M., Lemaire, J., Sancelme, M., Scott, G., 2003. Environ-
mental biodegradation of polyethylene. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 81, 441 –452. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0141-3910(03)00129-0 .
Booth, A.M., Kubowicz, S., Beegle-Krause, C., Skancke, J., Nordam, T., Landsem, E., Throne-
Holst, M., Jahren, S., 2017. Microplastic in Global and Norwegian Marine Environ-
ments: Distributions, Degradation Mechanisms and Transport. Norwegian Environ-
ment Agency (M-918. Available at https://www.miljodirektoratet.no/globalassets/publikasjoner/M918/M918.pdf).
Brandon, A.M., Gao, S.-H., Tian, R., Ning, D., Yang, S.-S., Zhou, J., Wu, W.-M., Criddle, C.S.,
2018. Biodegradation of polyethylene and plastic mixtures in mealworms (larvae of
Tenebrio molitor ) and effects on the gut microbiome. Environ. Sci. Technol. 52,
6526 –6533. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b02301 .
Bråte, I.L.N., Eidsvoll, D.P., Steindal, C.C., Thomas, K.V., 2016. Plastic ingestion by Atlantic
cod ( Gadus morhua ) from the Norwegian coast. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 112 (1 –2),
105 –110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.08.034 .
Bravo Rebolledo, E.L., Van Franeker, J.A., Jansen, O.E., Brasseur, S.M.J.M., 2013. Plastic in-
gestion by harbour seals (Phoca vitulina) in The Netherlands. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 67,200 –202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2012.11.035 .
Brunner, I., Fischer, M., Rüthi, J., Stierli, B., Frey, B., 2018. Ability of fungi isolated from plas-
tic debris ﬂoating in the shoreline of a lake to degrade plastics. PLoS One 13,
e0202047. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0202047 .
Capitelli, F., Principi, P., Sorlini, C., 2006. Biodeterioration of modern materials
incontemporary collections: can biotechnology help? Trends Biotechnol. 24 (8),
350 –354. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2006.06.001 .
Cassone, B.J., Grove, H.C., Elebute, O., Villanueva, S.M.P., LeMoine, C.M.R., 2020. Role of the
intestinal microbiome in low-density polyethylene degradation by caterpillar larvae
of the greater wax moth, Galleria mellonella . Proc. R. Soc. B 287, 20200112. https://
doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2020.0112 .
Chamas, A., Moon, H., Zheng, J., Qiu, Y., Tabassum, T., Jang, J.H., Abu-Omar, M., Scott, S.L.,
Suh, S., 2020. Degradation rates of plastics in the environment. ACS Sustain. Chem.
Eng. 8, 3494 –3511. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b06635 .
Chen, Q., Allgeier, A., Yin, D., Hollert, H., 2019. Leaching of endocrine disrupting chemicals
from marine microplastics and mesoplastics under common life stress conditions. En-
viron. Int. 130, 104938. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2019.104938 .
Chen, C.-C., Dai, L., Ma, L., Guo, R.-T., 2020. Enzymatic degradation of plant biomass and
synthetic polymers. Nat. Rev. Chem. 4, 114 –126. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41570-
020-0163-6 .
Chiellini, E., Corti, A., Del Sarto, G., D'Antone, S., 2006. Oxo-biodegradable polymers-effect of
hydrolysis degree on biodegradation behavi our of poly(vinyl alcohol). Polym. Degrad.
Stab. 91, 3397 –3406. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. polymdegradstab.2006.05.021 .
Crawford, D.M., Teets, A.R., Flanagan, D., 1988. Differential scanning calorimetry as a
method for indicating hydrolysis of urethane elastomers. Technical Report. US
Army, Belvoir Research, Fort Belvoir, Virginia 2463.
Cregut, M., Bedas, M., Durand, M.-J., Thouand, G., 2013. New insights into polyurethane
biodegradation and realistic prospects for the development of a sustainable wasterecycling process. Biotechnol. Adv. 31 (8), 1634 –1647. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biotechadv.2013.08.011 .
Daglen, B.C., Tyler, D.R., 2010. Photodegradable plastics: end-of-life design princi-
ples. Green Chem. Lett. Reviews 3 (2), 69 –82. https://doi.org/10.1080/
17518250903506723 .
Danso, D., Chow, J., Streit, W.R., 2019. Plastics: environmental and biotechnological per-
spectives on microbial degradation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 85 (19), e01095-19.
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01095-19 .
Darwesh, O.M., Ali, S.S., Matter, I.A., Elsamahy, T., 2021. Nanotextiles waste management:
controlling of release and remediation of wastes. In: Ehrmann, A., Nguyen, T.A., Tri,P.N. (Eds.), Nanosensors and Nanodevices for Smart Multifunctional Textiles, Micro
and Nano Technologies. Elsevier, pp. 267 –286https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
820777-2.00010-8 .
Dawson, A., Huston, W., Kawaguchi, S., King, C., Cropp, R., Wild, S., Eisenmann, P.,
Townsend, K., Nash, B.S., 2018. Uptake and depuration kinetics in ﬂuence microplastic
bioaccumulation and toxicity in Antarctic Krill ( Euphausia superba ). Environ. Sci.
Technol. 52, 3195 –3201. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b05759 .
Deepika, S., Jaya, M.R., 2015. Biodegradation of low density polyethylene by microorgan-
isms from garbage soil. J. Exp. Biol. Agric. Sci. 3, 15 –21.https://doi.org/10.35378/
gujs.496392 .
Diaz, J.M., Plummer, S., Tomas, C., Alves-de-Souza, C., 2018. Production of extracellular su-
peroxide and hydrogen peroxide by ﬁve marine species of harmful bloom-forming
algae. J. Plankton Res. 40 (6), 667 –677. https://doi.org/10.1093/plankt/fby043 .
Diepens, N.J., Koelmans, A.A., 2018. Accumulation of plastic debris and associated contam-
inants in aquatic food webs. Environ. Sci. Technol. 52 (15), 8510 –8520. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.est.8b02515 .Doorn, P.F., Campbell, P.A., Amstutz, H.C., 1996. Metal versus polyethylene wear particles
in total hip replacements. A review. Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 329 (329 Suppl),
S206 –S216. https://doi.org/10.1097/00003086-199608001-00018 .
Dowd, P.F., Shen, S.K., 1990. The contribution of symbiotic yeast to toxin resistance of the
cigarette beetle ( Lasioderma serricorne ). Entomol. Exp. Appl. 56, 241 –248. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1570-7458.1990.tb01402.x .
Downs, C.T., van Dyk, R.J., Iji, P., 2002. Wax digestion by the lesser honeyguide Indicator
minor comp. Biochem. Physiol. A. Mol. Integr. Physiol. 133, 125 –134. https://doi.
org/10.1016/s1095-6433(02)00130-7 .
Edge, M., Hayes, M., Mohammadian, M., Allen, N.S., Jewitt, T.S., Brems, K., Jones, K., 1991.
Aspects of poly(ethylene terephthalate) degradation for archival life and environ-
mental degradation. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 32 (2), 131 –153. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0141-3910(91)90047-U .
Ellen MacArthur Foundation and McKinsey Center for Business and Environment, 2015.
Growth Within: A Circular Economy Vision for a Competitive Europe (https://
tinyurl.com/jec5ykg).
El-Shafei, H.A., Abd El-Nasser, N.H., Kansoh, A.L., Ali, A.M., 1998. Biodegradation of dispos-
able polyethylene by fungi and Streptomyces species. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 62 (2),
361 –365. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0141-3910(98)00019-6 .
Eriksen, M., Lebreton, L.C.M., Carson, H.S., Thielm, M., Moore, C.J., 2014. Plastic pollution in
the world's oceans: more than 5 trillion plastic pieces weighing over 250,000 tons
aﬂoat at sea. PLoS One 9 (12), 1 –15.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0111913 .
Esmaeili, A., Pourbabaee, A.A., Alikhani, H.A., Shabani, F., Esmaeili, E., 2013. Biodegradation
of low-density polyethylene (LDPE) by mixed culture of Lysinibacillus xylanilyticus
and Aspergillus niger in soil. PLoS One 8, e71720. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0071720 .
Fernando, S.S., Christensen, P.A., Egerton, T.A., White, J.R., 2009. Humidity dependence of
carbon dioxide generation during photodegradation of biaxially oriented polypropyl-ene in oxygen. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 94 (1), 83 –89.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
polymdegradstab (2008.10.007).
Fotopoulou, K.N., Karapanagioti, H.K., 2017. Degradation of various plastics in the envi-
ronment. The Handbook of Environmental Chemistry Hazardous Chemicals Associ-
ated With Plastics in the Marine Environment, pp. 71 –92https://doi.org/10.1007/
698_2017_11 .
Frias, J.P., Sobral, P., Ferreira, A.M., 2010. Organic pollutants in microplastics from two
beaches of the Portuguese coast. Mar. Pollut. Bull. Portugal 60, 761 –767. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2010.07.030 .
Galloway, T.S., Lewis, C.N., 2016. Marine microplastics spell big problems for future
generations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113, 2331 –2333. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1600715113 .
Gangola, S., Joshi, S., Kumar, S., Pandey, S.C., 2019. Comparative analysis of fungal and bac-
terial enzymes in biodegradation of xenobiotic compounds. Smart Bioremediation
Technologies, 169 –189https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-818307-6.00010-x .
Gewert, B., Plassmann, M.M., MacLeod, M., 2015. Pathways for degradation of plastic
polymers ﬂoating in the marine environment. Environ Sci Process Impacts 17,
1513. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5EM00207A .
Geyer, R., Jambeck, J.R., Law, K.L., 2017. Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made.
Sci. Adv. 3 (7), e1700782. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1700782 .
Gijsman, P., Meijers, G., Vitarelli, G., 1999. Comparison of the UV-degradation chemistry of
polypropylene, polyethylene, polyamide 6 and polybutylene terephthalate. Polym.
Degrad. Stab .65, 433 –441. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0141-3910(99)00033-6 .
Gu, J.-D., 2003. Microbiological deterioration and degradation of synthetic polymeric ma-
terials: recent research advances. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegradation 52, 69 –91.https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0964-8305(02)00177-4 .
Hakkarainen, M., Karlsson, S., Albertsson, A.-C., 2000. Rapid (bio)degradation of
polylactide by mixed culture of compost microorganisms –low molecular weight
products and matrix changes. Polymer 41, 2331 –2338. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0032-3861(99)00393-6 .
Hofrichter, M., 2002. Review: lignin conversion by manganese peroxidase (MnP). Enzym.
Microb. Technol. 30, 454 –466. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0141-0229(01)00528-2 .
Hong, Y., Gu, J.-D., 2009. Bacterial anaerobic respiration and electron transfer relevant to
the biotransformation of pollutants. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegradation 63 (8), 973 –980.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibiod.2009.08.001 .
Horton, A.A., Walton, A., Spurgeon, D.J., Lahive, E., Svendsen, C., 2017. Microplastics in
freshwater and terrestrial environments: evaluating the current understanding to
identify the knowledge gaps and future research priorities. Sci. Total Environ. 586,127 –141. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.01.190 .
Hosseini, S.S., Taheri, S., Zadhoush, A., Mehrabani-Zeinabad, A., 2007. Hydrolytic degrada-
tion of poly(ethylene terephthalate). J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 103 (4), 2304 –2309. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0014-3057(91)90237-I .
Huerta Lwanga, E., Gertsen, H., Gooren, H., Peters, P., Salanki, T., van der Ploeg, M.,
Besseling, E., Koelmans, A.A., Geissen, V., 2016. Microplastics in the terrestrial ecosys-
tem: implications for Lumbricus terrestris (Oligochaeta, Lumbricidae). Environ. Sci.
Technol. 50, 2685 –2691. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b05478 .
Huerta Lwanga, E., Mendoza Vega, J., Quej, V.K., Chi, J.A., del Cid, L.S., Chi, C., Segura, G.E.,
Gertsen, H., Salánki, T., van der Ploeg, M., Koelmans, A.A., Geissen, V., 2017. Field ev-
idence for transfer of plastic debris along a terrestrial food chain. Sci. Rep. 7, 14071.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-14588-2 .
Jambeck, J.R., Geyer, R., Wilcox, C., Siegler, T.R., Perryman, M., Andrady, A., Narayan, R.,
Law, K.L., 2015. Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean. Science 347 (6223),
768 –771. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1260352 .
James, S.L., Robinson, A.J., Arnold, J.C., Worsley, D.A., 2013. The effects of humidity on
photodegradation of poly(vinyl chloride) and polyethylene as measured by the CO
2
evolution rate. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 98 (2), 508 –513. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
polymdegradstab (2012.12.007.).S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
19Jenings, D.H., Lysek, G., 1996. Fungal Biology: Understanding the Fungal Lifestyle. BIOS
Scientic Publisher, Oxford, pp. 63 –65.
Jenkins, M.J., Harrison, K.L., 2008. The effect of crystalline morphology on the degradation
of polycaprolactone in a solution of phosphate buffer and lipase. Polym. Adv. Technol.
19 (12), 1901 –1906. https://doi.org/10.1002/pat.1227 .
Jenkins, S., Quer, A.M.I., Fonseca, C., Varrone, C., 2020. Microbial degradation of plastics:
new plastic degraders, mixed cultures and engineering strategies. In: Jamil, N.,
Kumar, P., Batool, R. (Eds.), Soil microenvironment for bioremediation and polymer
production. Scrivener Publishing LLC, pp. 213 –238 https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781119592129.ch12 .
Jeyakumar, D., Chirsteen, J., Doble, M., 2013. Synergistic effects of pretreatment and
blending on fungi mediated biodegradation of polypropylenes. Bioresour. Technol.
148, 78 –85.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2013.08.074 .
Jin, C., Christensen, P.A., Egerton, T.A., Lawson, E.J., White, J.R., 2006. Rapid measurement
of polymer photo-degradation by FTIR spectrometry of evolved carbon dioxide.
Polym. Degrad. Stab. 91 (5), 1086 –1096. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab
(2005.07.011.).
Ju, H., Zhu, D., Qiao, M., 2019. Effects of polyethylene microplastics on the gut microbial
community, reproduction and avoidance behaviors of the soil springtail, Folsomia
candida . Environ. Pollut. 247, 890 –897. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2019.01.097 .
Khan, F.R., Syberg, K., Shashoua, Y., Bury, N.R., 2015. In ﬂuence of polyethylene
microplastic beads on the uptake and localization of silver in zebra ﬁsh (Danio
rerio). Environ. Pollut. 206, 73 –79.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2015.06.009 .
Khan, S., Nadir, S., Shah, Z.U., Shah, A.A., Karunarathna, S.C., Xu, J., Khan, A., Munir, S.,
Hasan, F., 2017. Biodegradation of polyester polyurethane by Aspergillus tubingensis .
Environ. Pollut. 225, 469e480. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2017.03.012 .
Khoironi, A., Anggoro, S., Sudarno, S., 2019. Evaluation of the interaction among
microalgae Spirulina sp, plastics polyethylene terephthalate and polypropylene in
freshwater environment. J. Ecol. Eng. 20 (6), 161 –173. https://doi.org/10.12911/
22998993/108637 .
Kim, S., Chmely, S.C., Nimos, M.R., Bomble, Y.J., Foust, T.D., Paton, R.S., Beckham, G.T., 2011.
Computational study of bond dissociation enthalpies for a large range of native and
modi ﬁed lignins. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2, 2846 –2852. https://doi.org/10.1021/
jz201182w .
Kitamoto, H.K., Shinozaki, Y., Cao, X., Morita, T., Konishi, M., Tago, K., Kajiwara, H.,
Koitabashi, M., Yoshida, S., Watanabe, T., Sameshima-Yamashita, Y., Nakajima-
Kambe, T., Tsushima, S., 2011. Phyllosphere yeasts rapidly break down biodegradableplastics. AMB Express 1 (1), 44. https://doi.org/10.1186/2191-0855-1-44 .
Kokalj, A.J., Horvat, P., Skalar, T., Kr zan, A., 2018. Plastic bag and facial cleanser de-
rived microplastic do not affect feeding behaviour and energy reserves of terres-
trial isopods. Sci. Total Environ. 615, 761 –766. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2017.10.020 .
Koller, M., Braunegg, G., 2018. Advanced approaches to produce polyhydroxyalkanoate
(PHA) biopolyesters in a sustainable and economic fashion. The EuroBiotech Journal
2 (2), 89 –
103. https://doi.org/10.2478/ebtj-2018-0013 .
Kong, H.G., Kim, H.H., Chung, J.H., Jun, J., Lee, S., Kim, H.-M., Jeon, S., Park, S.G., Bhak, J., Ryu,
C.-M., 2019. The Galleria mellonella hologenome supports microbiota-independent
metabolism of long-chain hydrocarbon beeswax. Cell Rep. 26 (9), 2451 –2464 (e5).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.02.018 .
Krueger, M.C., Harms, H., Schlosser, D., 2015. Prospects for microbiological solutions to en-
vironmental pollution with plastics. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 99, 8857 –8874.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-015-6879-4 .
Kumar, R.V., Kanna, G.R., Elumalai, S., 2017. Biodegradation of polyethylene by green pho-
tosynthetic microalgae. J. Bioremediat. Biodegrad. 8 (1), 1000381. https://doi.org/
10.4172/2155-6199.1000381 .
Kyrikou, I., Briassoulis, D., 2007. Biodegradation of agricultural plastic ﬁlms: a critical
r e v i e w .J .P o l y m .E n v i r o n .1 5( 2 ) ,1 2 5 –150. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10924-007-
0053-8 .
Lambert, S., Wagner, M., 2016. Characterisation of nanoplastics during the degrada-
tion of polystyrene. Chemosphere 145, 265 –268. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2015.11.078 .
Lee, B., Pometto, A.L., Fratzke, A., Bailiey Jr., T.B., 1991. Biodegradation of degradable plas-
tic polyethylene by Phanerochaete andStreptomyces species. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
57, 678 –685. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.57.3.678-685.1991 .
Li, J., Wang, Y., Wang, X., Wu, D., 2019. Crystalline characteristics, mechanical properties,
thermal degradation kinetics and hydration behavior of biodegradable ﬁbers melt-
spun from polyoxymethylene/poly(l-lactic acid) blends. Polymers 11 (11), 1753.https://doi.org/10.3390/polym11111753 .
Li, B., Su, L., Zhang, H., Deng, H., Chen, Q., Shi, H., 2020a. Microplastics in ﬁshes and their
living environments surrounding a plastic production area. Sci. Total Environ. 727,
138662. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138662 .
Li, Z., Wei, R., Gao, M., Ren, Y., Yu, B., Nie, K., Xu, H., Liu, L., 2020b. Biodegradation of low-
density polyethylene by Microbulbifer hydrolyticus IRE-31. J. Environ. Manag. 263,
110402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.110402 .
Liebminger, S., Eberl, A., Sousa, F., Heumann, S., Fischer-Colbrie, G., Cavaco-Paulo, A.,
Guebitz, G.M., 2007. Hydrolysis of PET and bis-(benzoyloxyethyl) terephthalate
with a new polyesterase from Penicillium citrinum . Biocatal. Biotransformation 25,
171 –177. https://doi.org/10.1080/10242420701379734 .
Lithner, D., Larsson, A., Dave, G., 2011. Environmental and health hazard ranking and as-
sessment of plastic polymers based on chemical composition. Sci. Total Environ. 409
(18), 3309 –3324. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.04.038 .
Liu, L., Fokkink, R., Koelmans, A.A., 2016. Sorption of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons to
polystyrene nanoplastic. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 35, 1650 –1655. https://doi.org/
10.1002/etc.3311 .Lopalco, A., Douglas, J., Denora, N., Stella, V.J., 2016. Determination of p K
aand hydration
constants for a series of α-keto-carboxylic acids using nuclear magnetic resonance
spectrometry. J. Pharm. Sci. 105 (2), 664 –672. https://doi.org/10.1002/jps.24539 .
Lou, Y., Ekaterina, P., Yang, S., Lu, B., Liu, B.-F., Ren, N., Corvini, P.F.-X., Xing, D., 2020. Bio-
degradation of polyethylene and polystyrene by greater wax moth larvae ( Galleria
mellonella L.) and the effect of co-diet supplementation on the core gut microbiome.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 54, 2821 –2831. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b07044 .
Lozano, Y.M., Rillig, M.C., 2020. Effects of microplastic ﬁbers and drought on plant com-
munities. Environ. Sci. Technol. 54 (10), 6166 –6173. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
est.0c01051 .
Lucasa, N., Bienaimeb, C., Belloyc, C., Queneudeca, M., Silvestred, F., Nava-Saucedob, J.-E.,
2008. Polymer biodegradation: mechanisms and estimation techniques.
Chemosphere 73, 429 –442. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2008.06.064 .
Lugauskas, A., Levinskaite, L., Peciulyte, D., 2003. Micromycetes as deterioration agents of
polymeric materials. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegradation 52, 233 –242. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0964-8305(03)00110-0 .
Magnin, A., Pollet, E., Phalip, V., Avérous, L., 2020. Evaluation of biological degrada-
tion of polyurethanes. Bi otechnol. Adv. 39, 107457. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biotechadv.2019.107457 .
Matja šič, T., Sim čič, T., Medve šček, N., Bajt, O., Dreo, T., Mori, N., 2021. Critical evaluation
of biodegradation studies on synthetic plastics through a systematic literature re-
view. Sci. Total Environ. 752, 141959.
Mohanrasu, K., Premnath, N., Prakash, G.S., Sudhakar, M., Boobalan, T., Arun, A., 2018. Ex-
ploring multi potential uses of marine bacteria; an integrated approach for PHB pro-
duction, PAHs and polyethylene biodegradation. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B. 185,
55–65.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2018.05.014 .
Montazer, Z., Habibi-Naja ﬁ, M.B., Mohebbi, M., Oromiehei, A., 2018. Microbial degradation
of UV-pretreated low-density polyethylene ﬁlms by novel polyethylene-degrading
bacteria isolated from plastic-dump soil. J. Polym. Environ. 26, 3613 –3625. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10924-018-1245-0 .
Moog, D., Schmitt, J., Senger, J., Zarzycki, J., Rexer, K.H., Linne, U., Erb, T., Maier, U.G., 2019.
Using a marine microalga as a chassis for polyethylene terephthalate (PET) degrada-
tion. Microb. Cell Factories 18 (1), 171. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-019-1220-z .
Mueller, R.J., 2006. Biological degradation of synthetic polyesters —enzymes as potential
catalysts for polyester recycling. Process Biochem. 41, 2124 –2128. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.procbio.2006.05.018 .
Muhonja, C.N., Makonde, H., Magoma, G., Imbuga, M., 2018. Biodegradability of polyeth-
ylene by bacteria and fungi from Dandora dumpsite Nairobi-Kenya. PLoS One 13 (7),
e0198446. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0198446 .
Munir, E., Harefa, R.S.M., Priyani, N., Suryanto, D., 2018. Plastic degrading fungi
Trichoderma viride and Aspergillus nomius isolated from local land ﬁll soil in Medan.
IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci. 126, 012145. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/
126/1/012145 .
Negoro, S., 2000. Biodegradation of nylon oligomers. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 54,
461 –466. https://doi.org/10.1007/s002530000434 .
Nel, A., Xia, T., Madler, L., Li, N., 2006. Toxic potential of materials ̈at the nanolevel. Science
311 (5761), 622 –627. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1114397 .
Nowak, B., Paj ąk, J., Łabużek, S., Rymarz, G., Talik, E., 2011. Biodegradation of poly (ethyl-
ene terephthalate) modi ﬁed with polyester “Bionolle ”byPenicillium funiculosum .
Polimery 56, 35 –44.https://doi.org/10.14314/polimery.2011.035 .
Ojha, N., Pradhan, N., Singh, S., Barla, A., Shrivastava, A., Khatua, P., Rain, V., Bose, S., 2017.
Evaluation of HDPE and LDPE degradation by fungus, implemented by statistical op-
timization. Sci. Rep. 7, 39515. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep39515 .
Otsuka, Y., Sonoki, T., Ikeda, S., Kajita, S., Nakamura, M., Katayama, Y., 2003. Detection and
characterization of a novel extracellular fungal enzyme that catalyses the speci ﬁca n d
hydrolytic cleavage of lignin guaiacylglycerol b-aryl ether linkages. Eur. J. Biochem.
270, 2353 –2362. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1432-1033.2003.03545.x .
Paço, A., Duarte, K., da Costa, J.P., Santos, P.S.M., Pereira, R., Pereira, M.E., Freitas, A.C.,
Duarte, A.C., Rocha-Santos, T.A.P., 2017. Biodegradation of polyethylene microplastics
by the marine fungus Zalerion maritimum . Sci. Total Environ. 586, 10 –15.https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.02.017 .
Padsalgikar, A.D., 2017. Biological properties of plastics. Plastics in Medical Devices for
Cardiovascular Applications, pp. 83 –102 https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-323-
35885-9.00004-7 .
Peacock, A.J., 2000. Handbook of Polyethylene: Structures, Properties and Applications.
Marcel Dekker, New York.
Pelmont, J., 2005. Biodégradations et métabolismes. Les bactéries pour les technologies de
l’environnement. EDP Sciences, Les Ulis.
Phaniendra, A., Jestadi, D.B., Periyasamy, L., 2014. Free radicals: properties, sources, tar-
gets, and their implication in various diseases. Indian J. Clin. Biochem. 30 (1),
11–26.https://doi.org/10.1007/s12291-014-0446-0 .
Pischedda, A., Tosin, M., Degli-Innocenti, F., 2019. Biodegradation of plastics in soil: the ef-
fect of temperature. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 170, 109017. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
polymdegradstab.2019.109017 .
Pitt, C.G., 1992. Non-microbial degradation of polyesters: mechanism and modi ﬁcations.
In: Vert, M., Feijen, J., Albertsson, A. (Eds.), Biodegradable Polymers and Plastics.
The Royal Society of Chemistry, p. 719.
Pospí šil, J., Pila ř, J., Billingham, N.C., Marek, A., Horák, Z., Ne špůrek, S., 2006. Factors affect-
ing accelerated testing of polymer photostability. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 91 (3),
417 –422. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2005.01.049 .
Prata, J.C., da Costa, J.P., Lopes, I., Duarte, A.C., Rocha-Santos, T., 2019. Environmental expo-
sure to microplastics: an overview on possible human health effects. Sci. Total Envi-
ron., 134455 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.134455 .
Price, D., Horrocks, A.R., 2013. Combustion processes of textile ﬁbres. Handbook of Fire
Resistant Textiles. University of Bolton, UK, pp. 3 –25.S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
20Proshad, R., Kormoker, T., Islam, M.S., Haque, M.A., Rahman, M.M., Mithu, M.M.R., 2018.
Toxic effects of plastic on human health and environment: a consequences of health
risk assessment in Bangladesh. International Journal of Health 6 (1), 1 –5.https://doi.
org/10.14419/ijh.v6i1.8655 .
Queste, B.Y., Fernand, L., Jickells, T.D., Heywood, K.J., 2013. Spatial extent and historical
context of North Sea oxygen depletion in August 2010. Biogeochemistry 113 (1),53–68.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10533-012-9729-9 .
Raghavendra, V.B., Uzma, M., Govindappa, M., Vasantha, R.A., Lokesh, S., 2016.
Screening and identi ﬁcation of polyurethane (PU) and low density polyethylene
(LDPE) degrading soil fungi isolated from municipal solid waste. Int. J. Curr. Res.
8, 34753 –34761 (http://www.journalcra.com/sites/default/ ﬁles/issue-pdf/
16398_0.pdf).
Ranalli, G., Zanardini, E., Sorlini, C., 2009. Biodeterioration –including cultural heritage.
Encycl. Microbiol., 191 –205https://doi.org/10.1007/s00248-019-01366-y .
Riudavets, J., Salas, I., Pons, M.J., 2007. Damage characteristics produced by insect pests in
packaging ﬁlm. J. Stored Prod. Res. 43 (4), 564 –570. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jspr.2007.03.006 .
Rivard, C., Moens, L., Roberts, K., Brigham, J., Kelley, S., 1995. Starch esters as biodegrad-
able plastics: effects of ester group chain length and degree of substitution on anaer-
obic biodegradation. Enz Microbial Tech 17, 848 –852. https://doi.org/10.1016/0141-
0229(94)00120-G .
Rodriguez-Seijo, A., Lourenço, J., Rocha-Santos, T.A.P., da C osta, J., Duarte, A.C., Vala,
H . ,P e r e i r a ,R . ,2 0 1 7 .H i s t o p a t h o l o g i c a la n dm o l e c u l a re f f e c t so fm i c r o p l a s t i c si n
Eisenia andrei Bouche. Environ. Pollut. 220, 495 –503. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envpol.2016.09.092 .
R o y ,P . K . ,T i t u s ,S . ,S u r e k h a ,P . ,T u l s i ,E . ,D e s h m u k h ,C . ,R a j a g o p a l ,C . ,2 0 0 8 .D e g r a d a t i o no fa b i -
otically aged LDPE ﬁlms containing pro-oxidant by bacterial consortium. Polym. Degrad.
Stab. 93, 1917 –1922. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. polymdegradstab.2008.07.016 .
Royer, S.-J., Ferrón, S., Wilson, S.T., Karl, D.M., 2018. Production of methane and ethylene
from plastic in the environment. PLoS One 13 (8), e0200574. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0200574 .
Russell, J.R., Huang, J., Anand, P., Kucera, K., Sandoval, A.G., Dantzler, K.W., Hickman, D.,
Jee, J., Kimovec, F.M., Koppstein, D., Marks, D.H., Mittermiller, P.A., Núñez, S.J.,Santiago, M., Townes, M.A., Vishnevetsky, M., Williams, N.E., Percy, M., Vargas, N.,
Boulanger, L.-A., Bascom-Slack, C., Strobel, S.-A., 2011. Biodegradation of polyester
polyurethane by endophytic fungi. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77, 6076 –6084.
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00521-11 .
Sabiha-Javied, T.M., Khalid, S., 2008. Heavy metal pollution from medical waste incinera-
tion. Microchem. J. 90, 77 –81.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.microc.2008.03.010 .
Sah, A., Negi, H., Kapri, A., Anwar, S., Goel, R., 2011. Comparative shelf life and ef ﬁcacy of
LDPE and PVC degrading bacterial consortia under bioformulation. Ekologija 57,55–61.https://doi.org/10.6001/EKOLOGIJA.V57I2.1885 .
Sánchez, C., 2020. Fungal potential for the degradation of petroleum-based polymers: an
overview of macro- and microplastics biodegradation. Biotechnol. Adv. 40, 107501.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2019.107501 .
Sangale, M.K., Shahnawaz, M., Ade, A.B., 2019. Potential of fungi isolated from the dump-
ing sites mangrove rhizosphere soil to degrade polythene. Sci. Rep .9, 5390. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-41448-y .
Sangeetha Devi, R., Rajesh Kannan, V., Nivas, D., Kannan, K., Chandru, S., Robert Antony, A.,
2015. Biodegradation of HDPE by Aspergillus spp. from marine ecosystem of Gulf of
Mannar, India. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 96 (1-2), 32 –40.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
marpolbul.2015.05.050 .
Sarkhel, R., Sengupta, S., Das, P., Bhowal, A., 2020. Comparative biodegradation study of
polymer from plastic bottle waste using novel isolated bacteria and fungi from ma-
rine source. J. Polym. Res. 27, 16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10965-019-1973-4 .
Sarmah, P., Rout, J., 2018. Ef ﬁcient biodegradation of low-density polyethylene by
cyanobacteria isolated from submerged polyethylene surface in domestic sewage
water. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 25, 33508 –33520. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-
018-3079-7 .
Sarmah, P., Rout, J., 2019. Cyanobacterial degradation of low-density polyethylene (LDPE)
byNostoc carneum isolated from submerged polyethylene surface in domestic sew-
age water. Energ. Ecol. Environ .4, 240 –252. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40974-019-
00133-6 .
Scheurer, M., Bigalke, M., 2018. Microplastics in Swiss ﬂoodplain soils. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 52, 3591 –3598. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b06003 .
Scott, G., 2002. Degradable Polymers Principles and Applications. Springer, Netherlands,
Dordrecht.
Selonen, S., Dolar, A., Kokalj, A.J., Skalar, T., Dolcet, L.P., Hurley, R., van Gestel, C.A.M., 2020.
Exploring the impacts of plastics in soil –the effects of polyester textile ﬁbers on soil
invertebrates. Sci. Total Environ. 700, 134451. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2019.134451 .
Sepperumal, U., Markandan, M., Palraja, I., 2013. Micromorphological and chemical
changes during biodegradation of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) by Penicillium
sp. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. Res. 3, 47 –53.
Serrano-Ruiz, H., Martin-Closas, L., Pelacho, A.M., 2021. Biodegradable plastic mulches:
impact on the agricultural biotic environment. Sci. Total Environ. 750, 141228.
Shah, A.A., Hasan, F., Hameed, A., Ahmed, S., 2008. Biological degradation of plastics: a
comprehensive review. Biotechnol. Adv. 26 (3), 246 –265. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biotechadv.2007.12.005 .
Shahnawaz, M., Sangale, M.K., Ade, A.B., 2016. Rhizosphere of Avicennia marina (Forsk.)
Vierh. as a landmark for polythene degrading bacteria. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 23,
14621 –14635. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-016-6542-3 .
Sharma, R., Sharma, M., Sharma, R., Sharma, V., 2013. The impact of incinerators on
human health and environment. Rev. Environ. Health 28 (1), 67 –72.https://doi.
org/10.1515/reveh-2012-0035 .Sheik, S., Chandrashekar, K.R., Swaroop, K., Somashekarappa, H.M., 2015. Biodegradation
of gamma irradiated low density polyethylene and polypropylene by endophytic
fungi. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegradation 105, 21 –29.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ibiod.2015.08.006 .
Singh, J., Gupta, K.C., 2014. Screening and identi ﬁcation of low density polyethylene
(LDPE) degrading soil fungi isolated from polythene polluted sites around Gwalior
city (M.P.). Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. App. Sci. 3, 443 –448.
Singh, B., Sharma, N., 2008. Mechanistic implications of plastic degradation. Polym.
Degrad. Stab. 93, 561 –584. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2007.11.008 .
Sivan, A., Szanto, M., Pavlov, V., 2006. Bio ﬁlm development of the polyethylene-degrading
bacterium Rhodococcus ruber . Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 72, 346 –352. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00253-005-0259-4 .
Skariyachan, S., Megha, M., Kini, M.N., Mukund, K.M., Rizvi, A., Vasist, K., 2015. Selection
and screening of microbial consortia for ef ﬁcient and ecofriendly degradation of plas-
tic garbage collected from urban and rural areas of Bangalore, India. Environ. Monit.Assess. 187 (1), 4174. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-014-4174-y .
Skariyachan, S., Manjunatha, V., Sultana, S., Jois, C., Bai, V., Vasist, K.S., 2016. Novel bacte-
rial consortia isolated from plastic garbage processing areas demonstrated enhanceddegradation for low density polyethylene. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 23 (18),
18307 –18319. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-016-7000-y .
Skariyachan, S., Patila, A.A., Shankar, A., Manjunath, M., Bachappanavar, N., Kiran, S., 2018.
Enhanced polymer degradation of polyethylene and polypropylene by novel thermo-
philic consortia of Brevibacillus sps. and Aneurinibacillus sp. screened from waste
management land ﬁlls and sewage treatment plants. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 149,
52–68.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2018.01.018 .
Song, Y., Qiu, R., Hu, J., Li, X., Zhang, X., Chen, Y., Wu, W.M., He, D., 2020. Biodegradation
and disintegration of expanded polystyrene by land snails Achatina fulica .S c i .T o t a l
Environ. 746, 141289. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.141289 .
Tachibana, K., Hashimoto, K., Yoshikawa, M., Okawa, H., 2010. Isolation and characteriza-
tion of microorganisms degrading nylon 4 in the composted soil. Polym. Degrad.
Stabil. 95, 912 –917. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2010.03.031 .
Tanaka, K., Takada, H., Yamashita, R., Mizukawa, K., Fukuwaka, M., Watanuki, Y.,
2013. Accumulation of plastic-derived chemicals in tissues of seabirds ingesting
marine plastics. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 69 (1 –2), 219 –222. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
marpolbul.2012.12.010 .
Tang, L., Wu, Q., Qu, B., 2005. The effects of chemical structure and synthesis method on
photodegradation of polypropylene. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 95 (2), 270 –279. https://doi.
org/10.1002/app.21272 .
Tang, Y., Liu, Y., Chen, Y., Zhang, W., Zha, J., He, S., Yang, C., Zhang, T., Tang, C., Zhang, C.,
Yang, Z., 2021. A review: research progress on microplastic pollutants in aquatic en-vironments. Sci. Total Environ. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142572 .
Tolinski, M., 2009. Additives for Polyole ﬁns Getting the Most out of Polypropylene, Poly-
ethylene and TPO. William Andrew Pub., Oxford.
Tribedi, P., Sil, A.K., 2013. Low-density polyethylene degradation by Pseudomonas sp.
AKS2 bio
ﬁlm. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 20, 4146 –4153. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11356-012-1378-y .
United Nations Centre for Regional Development (UNCRD), 2019. EARLY RELEASE “State
of Plastics Waste in Asia and the-Paci ﬁc - Issues, Challenges and Circular Economic
Opportunities ”. The Secretariat of the Regional 3R Forum in Asia and the Paci ﬁc
(https://www.uncrd.or.jp/content/documents/7838Report-State%20of%20Plastics-
rev-20%20August%202019.pdf).
Urban, R.M., Jacobs, J.J., Tomlinson, M.J., Gavrilovic, J., Black, J., Peoc ’h, M., 2000. Dissemi-
nation of wear particles to the liver, spleen, and abdominal lymph nodes of patients
with hip or knee replacement. J. Bone Joint Surg. 82 (4), 457. https://doi.org/10.2106/
00004623-200004000-00002 .
Van Krevelen, D.W., Te Nijenhuis, K., 2009. Chemical degradation. Properties of Polymers.
Elsevier B.V, pp. 779 –786https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-08-054819-7.00022-4 .
Vivi, V.K., Martins-Franchetti, S.M., Attili-Angelis, D., 2019. Biodegradation of PCL and
PVC: Chaetomium globosum (ATCC 16021) activity. Folia Microbiol. 64, 1 –7.https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12223-018-0621-4 .
Warscheid, T., Braams, J., 2000. Biodeterioration of stone: a review. Int. Biodeterior. Bio-
degradation 46, 343 –368. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0964-8305(00)00109-8 .
Webb, H.K., Arnott, J., Crawford, R.J., Ivanova, E.P., 2013. Plastic degradation and its envi-
ronmental implications with special reference to poly (ethylene terephthalate). Poly-
mers 5 (1), 1 –18.https://doi.org/10.3390/polym5010001 .
White, J., Turnbull, A., 1994. Weathering of polymers: mechanisms of degradation and
stabilization, testing strategies and modelling. J. Mater. Sci. 29 (3), 584 –613.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00445969 .
Willert, H.G., Semlitsch, M., Peltier, L.F., 1996. Tissue reactions to plastic and metallic wear
products of joint endoprostheses. Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 333, 4 –14.
Wright, S.L., Kelly, F.J., 2017. Plastic and human health: a micro issue? Environ. Sci.
Technol. 51, 12, 6634 –6647. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b00423 .
Wright, S.L., Rowe, D., Thompson, R.C., Galloway, T.S., 2013. Microplastic ingestion de-
creases energy reserves in marine worms. Curr. Biol. 23, 1031 –1033. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cub.2013.10.068 .
Yamada-Onodera, K., Mukumoto, H., Katsuyaya, Y., Saiganji, A., Tani, Y., 2001. Degradation
of polyethylene by a fungus, Penicillium simplicissimum YK. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 72
(2), 323 –327. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0141-3910(01)00027-1 .
Yang, J., Yang, Y., Wu, W.-M., Zhao, J., Jiang, L., 2014. Evidence of polyethylene biodegra-
dation by bacterial strains from the guts of plastic-eating waxworms. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 48 (23), 13776 –13784. https://doi.org/10.1021/es504038a .
Yang, Y., Chen, J., Wu, W.-M., Zhao, J., Yang, J., 2015. Complete genome sequence of Bacil-
lussp. YP1, a polyethylene-degrading bacterium from waxworm ’s gut. J. Biotechnol.
200, 77 –78.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2015.02.034 .S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
21Yang, Y., Wang, J., Xia, M., 2020. Biodegradation and mineralization of polystyrene by
plastic-eating superworms Zophobas atratus . Sci. Total Environ. 15 (708), 135233.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.135233 .
Yoshida, S., Hiraga, K., Takehana, T., Taniguchi, I., Yamaji, H., Maeda, Y., Toyohara, K.,
Miyamoto, K., Kimura, Y., Oda, K., 2016. A bacterium that degrades and assimilates
poly(ethylene terephthalate). Science 351 (6278), 1196 –1199. https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.aad6359 .
Yousif, E., Haddad, R., 2013. Photodegradation and photostabilization of polymers, espe-
cially polystyrene: review. SpringerPlus 2, 398. https://doi.org/10.1186/2193-1801-
2-398 .
Yu, M., van der Ploeg, M., Huerta Lwanga, E., Yang, X., Zhang, S., Ma, X., Ritsema, C.J.,
Geissen, V., 2019. Leaching of microplastics by preferential ﬂow in earthworm
(Lumbricus terrestris ) burrows. Environ. Chem. 16, 31 –40.https://doi.org/10.1071/
EN18161 .Zahra, S., Abbas, S.S., Mahsa, M.T., Mohsen, N., 2010. Biodegradation of low-density poly-
ethylene (LDPE) by isolated fungi in solid waste medium. Waste Manag. 30, 396 –401.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2009.09.027 .
Zanardini, E., Abbruscato, P., Ghedini, N., Realini, M., Sorlini, C., 2000. In ﬂuence of atmo-
spheric pollutants on the biodeterioration of stone. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegradation
45, 35 –42.https://doi.org/10.1016/S0964-8305(00)00043-3 .
Zhang, J., Gao, D., Li, Q., Zhao, Y., Li, L., Lin, H., Bie, Q., Zhao, Y., 2020. Biodegradation of
polyethylene microplastic particles by the fungus Aspergillus ﬂavus from the guts of
wax moth Galleria mellonella . Sci. Total Environ. 704, 135931. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.135931 .
Zhu, D., Chen, Q.L., An, X.L., Yang, X.R., Christie, P., Ke, X., Wu, L.H., Zhu, Y.G., 2018. Expo-
sure of soil collembolans to microplastics perturbs their gut microbiota and alters
their isotopic composition. Soil Biol. Biochem. 116, 302 –310. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.soilbio.2017.10.027 .S.S. Ali, T. Elsamahy, E. Koutra et al. Science of the Total Environment 771 (2021) 144719
22