 
 ii 
                         
 
                
Copyright 2007 
by 
Eric James Peters  iiiACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
 
Knowledge is priceless.  Perhaps this is b ecause the process of acquiring it is painfully 
slow - entire careers and coun tless hours of work have been performed in hopes of adding 
just small pieces to our fragmented understand ing of the natural world.  Frustrations and 
setbacks abound, as experiments fail and assays  stop working when needed most.  But the 
prospect of improving human health, advancing a field, or simply being the first to know 
something has a certain appeal.  What is cl ear is that knowledge cannot be pursued as a 
solo endeavor.  I was fortunate to have the support of a tremendous group of colleagues, 
family and friends.  Without them, I woul d not never made it through the process. 
 First and foremost, I would like to th ank Steve Hamilton.  His guidance is the 
reason my graduate school career had the bright  spots that it did.  He has taught me that 
science, at its very core, is not about a single experime nt or laboratory technique.  
Instead, it is about the pursu it of knowledge, and to be a successful scientist one cannot 
succumb to tunnel vision.  I’ve spent many engaging hours in his office discussing such 
varied topics as genetics, ps ychiatry, and religion, and he  has always encouraged any 
curiosity or interest that I felt a need to di scuss, no matter how irrelevant it was to my 
thesis project.  He has also taught me the art of presenting scien ce that is both exciting 
and accessible to the audience, which is an invaluable tool for any independent investigator.  His commitment to science is an  inspiration to me, as  are his dedication to 
mentoring, patient care, and his family.   I would also like to th ank Deanna Kroetz and Pui-Yan Kwok, my thesis 
committee, for their invaluable advice and in sight.  In addition to technical expertise,  ivtheir guidance helped me focus my experiment s on specific, attainable goals and taught 
me the value of well thought out scientific inquiries.  Also, Leslie Benet and David 
Glidden, who served on my qualification co mmittee, taught me the importance of 
examining proposed research from se veral directions and disciplines. 
 I am lucky to be Steve’s first graduate  student, and as such I have witnessed 
several extraordinary people join his scientif ic team.  Each has helped in some way on 
this project or making the lab a fun place to “work”.  In particular, Jeff Kraft, another 
graduate student in the lab, has been an impor tant collaborator both in lab and out.  Also, 
our basement neighbors the Genomics Core F acility, led by Elaine Carlson, have been 
incredible roommates and collaborators.  W ithout their technical advice and skill, this 
project would have taken ma ny more years to complete. 
 The ups and downs of graduate school re quire people to lean on outside of the lab, 
and I have been fortunate to have many.  Dive rsions are necessary to  survive, and I’ve 
had the pleasure to have several partners in  crime to pursue academic interests with:  
Ryan and Leslie Owen, Jeff (and Molly) Kraft, Kim Fife, Jason Gow, and Jim Shima.  I 
would also like to thank Tom Urban, who I became friends w ith at our student orientation 
and have had entertaining times with since.  I expect nothing less to o ccur in the future.   
 My greatest discovery in graduate school  had nothing to do with science.  I found 
my best friend, the person that would touch my  very core.  I met my wife, Leah, during 
my second year, and we have been inseparable since.  Her sweet, kind spirit radiates from 
her everyday and I am blessed to be close to it.  She has had great patience with me, as 
afternoon forays into lab turned into midni ght experiments, she was understanding, and 
quite often by my side.  She is my inspir ation and my motivati on, and has incredible  vstrength of character.  The st ories of our adventures and e xperiences together could fill 
several books, and these are what have shaped  who I am today.  She has taught me what 
is important in life; that we  are guaranteed nothing but righ t now and so we had better 
make the most of it – thank you, Leah.  With Leah came the rest of her famil y, who accepted me from the beginning as 
one of their own.  Her parents, Jimmy and Lody Lagpacan, along with her sisters Leanna 
and Lara, brother-in-law Michael and niece Ma lia, have all shown us their support and 
thoughtfulness, and trusted me with their be loved daughter, sister, and aunt.  I’m also 
fortunate to have meet Leah’s extended fam ily, and all of them have also helped us 
greatly along the way. 
My parents, Frederick and Sharon Peters, and my brother Jason and sister-in-law 
Kathy, have been a huge influence in my life.   I’m confident that the reason I have a 
passion for science is because of my i nquisitive and creative father, who would 
encourage any science fair project or quest ion about the world around us.  My mother 
encouraged me to read when I was young, and would take me to the library whenever I 
wanted a new book on the animals of the African  savanna or the ocean deep.  I’m lucky 
to have been a graduate student, and now to  pursue new knowledge as a career.  I would 
not have this chance without my  parents, who always inspired  and allowed me to further 
my education, even when it took me far from their home.  Even at a distance, it is a 
simple fact that, without their love and support, I would not have made it through 
graduate school and be wh ere I am today.  Thank you. 
        E r i c  J a m e s  P e t e r s           March, 2007  vi
 
 
               
 
       vii 
  viiiABSTRACT 
Pharmacogenetics of Antidepressant Response 
Eric J. Peters 
 
Major depressive disorder is one of th e most common and debilitating psychiatric 
disorders.  While psychopharm acological treatments exist,  they are not universally 
effective and can produce significant side e ffects in some patients.  The most common 
psychopharmacological agents used to treat ma jor depression are th e selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs.  Often, these dr ugs take several weeks to relieve depressive 
symptoms.  If the initial therapy fails, other antidepressants are often prescribed.  This “trial and error” process crea tes a delay in remission which can be frustrate the patient 
and lead to further decreased well-being.  Individualized therapy would have great 
clinical utility by identifying patients th at are likely to respond positively to SSRI 
therapy.  The goal of this thesis is to inve stigate the use of genetic markers for guiding 
treatment with SSRIs.  We utilized several complementary pharmacogenetic approaches and two depressed populations treated with SSRIs.  Th e first was a small (N=96) population given 
fluoxetine, and the second was a large (N= 1,953) population taking citalopram.  We used 
the fluoxetine population and a linkage disequ ilibrium mapping approa ch to investigate 
variants in seven pharmacodynamic candidate  genes for associat ion to response and 
specificity of response.  Several variants in HTR2A and TPH1 were associated with 
fluoxetine outcome.  We then resequenced  the coding region and 5’ conserved non-
coding regions of these genes in the fluoxe tine population in order to uncover novel  ixvariation and additional tagging SNPs.  Thes e tagging SNPs were genotyped in our 
citalopram population, and none of the SNPs were  associated with clinical outcome.  We 
then genotyped known, functional polymorphisms in relevant pharmacokinetic genes for association to citalopram response and tole rance.  Using a two-stage study design, none 
of the variants were signi ficantly associated with outcome following citalopram 
treatment.  We also utilized a whole genome association study using over 590,000 SNPs 
from across the genome.  Using a two-stag e study design, none of the most highly 
associated markers in the discovery sample were  also associated in the validation sample.  
Similar non-significant results were obtained using multi-SNP decision trees.  However, 
further genotyping is necessary  in the validation sample, as the most highly associated 
SNPs may not be the most consistently associated.      
 
       xTABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
A c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s           iii 
A b s t r a c t           viii 
L i s t  o f  T a b l e s           xvi 
L i s t  o f  F i g u r e s          xix 
 
Chapter 1. 
Introduction to Antidepressant Pharmacogenetics 
1.1 Major depressive disorder        
1.1.1  Scope of disease        1 1.1.2  Response to antidepressants       2 
1.2  Antidepressant pharmacogenetics       
 1.2.1  Pharmacogenetics overview      3 
 1.2.2  Pharmacogenetics of res ponse to older antidepressants  4 
 1.2.3  Pharmacogenetics of SSRI response – pharmacodynamic genes 5 
 1.2.4  Pharmacogenetics of SSRI response – pharmacokinetic genes 7 
1.3  Genomics and association mapping        1.3.1  Overview        7  1.3.2  Genetic association studies      8  1.3.3  Whole genome association studies     10 1.4  Challenges to association mapping        1.4.1  Phenotypic heterogeneity      11  xi 1.4.2  Marker selection       12 
 1.4.3  Multiple testing burden       13  1.4.4  Confounding due to populat ion stratification    14 
 1.4.5  Detecting SNP interactions      16 1.5  Summary of chapters        18 1.6  References         22  
Chapter 2. 
Linkage Disequilibrium Mapping of Vari ants in Pharmacodynamic Candidate 
Genes for Association with Response to Fluoxetine 
2.1  Introduction         38 
2.2  Methods            2.2.1  Fluoxetine study population      40 
 2.2.2  SSRI pharmacodynamic gene SNP genotyping   43 
 2.2.3  SSRI pharmacodynamic gene repeat polymorphism genotyping 54  2.2.4  Genomic control SNP genotyping     56  2.2.5  Statistical analysis       58 2.3 Results  2.3.1  Single locus association results      60  2.3.2  Pharmacodynamic gene haplot ype association results   62 
 2.3.3  Assessment of population stra tification using ge nomic control 65 
 2.3.4  Assessment of linkage disequilibrium (LD)    65  2.3.5  Primate genotyping results      67  xii2.4  Discussion         67 
2.5  References         76  
Chapter 3. 
Sequencing of Pharmacodynamic Candidate Genes 
3.1  Introduction         86 
3.2  Methods         3.2.1  Study populations       87  3.2.2  Pharmacodynamic gene variant discovery    88  3.2.3  TPH2 Arg441His variant genotyping     93  3.2.4  Characterization of va riable amino acids    94 
 3.2.5  Population genetic parameter estimation    94  3.2.6  Single locus association analysis     96 
 3.2.7  Haplotype association analysis      96 
3.3  Results  3.3.1  DNA sequencing       97  3.3.2  TPH2 Arg441His variant      103  3.3.3  Single locus association analysis     107  3.3.4  Haplotype analysis       109 3.4  Discussion           113 3.5  References         119    xiiiChapter 4. 
Pharmacodynamic Candidate Gene Tagging  SNP Selection and Association of 
Tagging SNPs to Citalopram Response   
4.1  Introduction         124 
4.2  Methods  4.2.1  STAR*D sample set       125  4.2.2  STAR*D response phenotypic definitions    127  4.2.3  Tagging SNP selection       130  4.2.4  DNA amplification       131  4.2.5  Tagging SNP genotyping using FP-TDI    131  4.2.6  Tagging SNP genotyping usin g 5’ exonuclease fluorescence  
           assay         134 4.2.7  Statistical analysis       134 
4.3  Results 
 4.3.1  Tagging SNP selection       136  4.3.2  Tagging SNP association to citalopram response   140 4.4  Discussion         143 4.5  References          148  
Chapter 5. 
Testing Functional Variation in Phar macokinetic Genes for Association to 
Citalopram Response and Tolerance  
5.1  Introduction          152  xiv5.2  Methods 
5.2.1  STAR*D clinical sample      155 5.2.2  Phenotypic definitions       156 5.2.3  Molecular methods       157 5.2.4  Statistical methods       159 
5.3  Results          162 5.4  Discussion         163 5.5  References         172  
Chapter 6. 
Whole Genome Association Study of Citalopram Remission and Tolerance 
6.1  Introduction         178 
6.2  Methods 
 6.2.1  STAR*D study population      180 
 6.2.2  Discovery set genotyping      180  6.2.3  Validation set genotyping      180  6.2.4  WGA data manipulation and quality control    182  6.2.5  LD analysis        184  6.2.6  structure  analysis       184 
 6.2.7  Single locus analysis       184  6.2.8  Interactions        185 6.3  Results 
6.3.1  WGA data descriptions and QC     186  xv6.3.2  Structure  analysis         189 
6.3.3  LD analysis        195 6.3.4  Single locus association – discovery set    199 6.3.5  Single locus association – validation set    208 6.3.6  Interaction analysis – discovery set     212 6.3.7  Interaction analysis – validation set     212 
6.4  Discussion         218 6.5  References         224  
Chapter 7.   
Summary and Future Directions  
7.1  Summary of thesis        227 
7.2  Future directions         229 
7.3  References         237 
  xviLIST OF TABLES 
 Chapter 2. 
Table 2.1  Pharmacodynamic candidate gene SNP assay descriptions  48 
Table 2.2  Pharmacodynamic gene repeat polymorphism assay descriptions 55 Table 2.3  Genomic control SNP assay descriptions     57 Table 2.4  Single locus associ ation results      61 
Table 2.5  Full length and htSNP haplotype analysis results    63  
Chapter 3. 
Table 3.1  Sequencing amplicon information.     90 
Table 3.2  Pharmacodynamic gene variants uncovered during resequencing 99 Table 3.3  SIFT scores for the 11 non-synonymous SNPs    101 
Table 3.4  Population genetic paramete rs for the pharmacodynamic genes  102 
Table 3.5  Probability of not detecting th e variant TPH2 His441 allele in 2,036  
      depressed subjects        105 
Table 3.6  Results of experiments with the TPH2 His441Arg control samples 106 
Table 3.7  Variants nominally associated (p<0.05) with response to fluoxetine 112 
Table 3.8  Haplotype block distribu tion and association results   114 
 
Chapter 4. 
Table 4.1  Baseline demographic and clin ical characteristic s of the STAR*D  
     sample         128  xviiTable 4.2  Tagging SNPs assayed in the STAR*D population   132 
Table 4.3  Tagging SNP association results  for the citalopr am response and  
      remission phenotype comparisons     141 
Table 4.4  Tagging SNP association results for the citalopram specific response  
         phenotype comparisons       142  
Chapter 5. 
Table 5.1  List of genotyped varian ts in pharmacokinetic genes   158 
Table 5.2  Sample sizes and frequency dist ribution of race and gender in the    
                 discovery and validation sets for each phenotype comparison  161 Table 5.3  Single locus results for tests that were significant (p<0.05) in the  
     discovery sample set.         164 
Table 5.4  Effect of metabolizer status on final citalopram dose prescribed  165 
 
Chapter 6. 
Table 6.1  Sample sizes for the discov ery and validation sample sets  181 
Table 6.2  Follow-up SNPs genotyped in the validation sample set   183 Table 6.3  The most highly associated SN Ps for the remission phenotype in    
      the non-Hispanic White subgroup in the discovery set   202 
Table 6.4  The most highly associated SN Ps for the intolera nce phenotype in  
      the non-Hispanic White subgroup in the discovery set   206 
Table 6.5  Single locus association results for the remission phenotype  
      follow-up SNPs in the validation sample set    210  xviiiTable 6.6  Single locus a ssociation results for th e intolerance phenotype  
     follow-up SNPs in the validation sample set    213 
Table 6.7  Decision tree predictions for the remission phenotype in the  
     discovery and validation sample sets     215 
Table 6.8  Decision tree predictions for the intolerance phenotype in the  
     discovery and validation sample sets     217  
 
 
 
 
  xixLIST OF FIGURES 
 Chapter 1. 
Figure 1.1  Flow chart of work de scribed in this thesis    19 
 
Chapter 2. 
Figure 2.1  Phenotype classifications in the fluoxetine sample set   44 
Figure 2.2  Pharmacodynamic candi date gene schematics    45 
Figure 2.3  Linkage disequili brium plots      66 
Figure 2.4  Putative ancest ral allele state of SN Ps interrogated   68 
 
Chapter 3. 
Figure 3.1  hTPH2 clone schematic       89 
Figure 3.2  Primer location and sequen ces for the TPH2 Arg441His (G1463A)  
                    variant         95  Figure 3.3  Results of PCR experiment s on TPH2 Arg441His control samples 108 
Figure 3.4.  Power to detect association to categorical response in fluoxetine       
                    sample (N=95)        110  
Chapter 4. 
Figure 4.1  Effect of minor allele fr equency on tagging SNP selection  137   
Figure 4.2  Accuracy of haplotype infere nce for three sets of tagging SNPs  139 
Figure 4.3  Power to detect association to  categorical response to citalopram   xx                   in the STAR*D population (N=1,914)     144 
 
Chapter 5. 
Figure 5.1  Metabolism of citalopram by CYP enzymes    154 
Figure 5.2  Survival curves displaying frac tion of subjects remaining in the trial, 
        separated by cytochrome P 450 metabolizer status for the Caucasian  
       subgroup         166 
Figure 5.3  Survival curves displaying frac tion of subjects remaining in the trial, 
        separated by cytochrome P450 metabolizer status for the African 
        American subgroup       167   
Chapter 6. 
Figure 6.1  SNP marker density across the genome     187 
Figure 6.2  Hisotgram of inter-marker distances     190 Figure 6.3  Histogram of SNPs by minor allele frequencies (MAF) in each   
       racial subgroup        191 
Figure 6.4  Scatterplot of SNP allele frequency by racial subgroup   192 
Figure 6.5  Results of Structure analysis using 500 random SNPs in the  
       discovery sample set       193 
Figure 6.6  Average pairwise r
2 between SNPs by intermarker distance  196 
Figure 6.7  Redundancy of co mmon SNPs at various r2 thresholds in each 
       racial subgroup        197  xxiFigure 6.8  Single locus asso ciation results in the di scovery sample set for  
       the remission phenotype in the non-Hispanic White subgroup  200 
Figure 6.9  Quantile-Quantile ( QQ) plots of single locus associations for the  
       remission phenotype in the non-Hispanic White subgroup  203 
Figure 6.10  Single locus asso ciation results in the di scovery sample set for  
         the intolerance phenot ype in the non-Hispanic White subgroup 204 
Figure 6.11  Quantile-Quantile ( QQ) plots of single locus associations for the  
         intolerance phenotype in  the non-Hispanic White subgroup  207 
Figure 6.12  Taqman results for SN P rs4246510 across the entire STAR*D  
         sample set        209 
Figure 6.13  Taqman results for SN P rs6489035 across the entire STAR*D  
         sample set        211 
Figure 6.14  Decision tree for the remi ssion phenotype in the non-Hispanic  
         White discovery sample set      214 
Figure 6.15  Decision tree for the intole rance phenotype in the non-Hispanic  
         White discovery sample set      216     
  1CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION TO ANTIDEPRESSANT PHARMACOGENETICS 
 
1.1  Major depressive disorder 
1.1.1  Scope of disease.  Major depression is one of th e most common and disabling 
psychiatric disorders (1).  Depression is st rongly associated with suicide, which is the 
eleventh leading cause of death in the US ove rall, and the fourth leading cause of death 
among 25-44 year olds (2;3).  On average,  treatment of depression costs patients over 
$2000 per year and overall exacts an  annual cost of more than $40 billion in the United 
States (4;5).   Depression is a leading cause  of disability worldwid e (2;6).  The average 
age of onset for major depression is 25 y ears, and depression is often chronic and 
characterized by recurrences throughout the lif espan, with some estimates of recurrence 
as high as 85% (7).  Major depressive disorder, as defined in the DSM-IV, is 
characterized by at least two weeks of pervasively depressed mood and/or diminished 
interest accompanied by vegetative and cognitive  symptoms, including sleep and appetite 
disturbances, psychomotor and energy dist urbances, cognitive changes and suicidal 
thoughts (8).  Depression ha s high comorbidity with other psychiatric disorders and 
substance abuse, and recent studies suggest that depression may be an independent risk 
factor for some somatic disorders such as  heart disease and diabetes (9).  Major 
depression affects 16% of the population in the United States and the societal burden due 
to depression is tremendous (1;10).  
As with most psychiatric disorders, se veral different underlying etiologies are 
likely to be responsible for the disease we la bel major depressive disorder.  Fortunately it  2appears that most patients with major depr ession respond to a variety of treatments, 
including psychotherapies, psychotropic medica tions, and other somatic treatments such 
as electroconvulsive thera py (11).  Psychopharmacological treatment is currently the 
most common and is expanding given the development of numerous classes of 
antidepressants over the past tw o decades (12).  In particular , selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs) have become the most fre quently prescribed antid epressant, due in part 
to their favorable safety profiles compared to older tricyclic antidepressants (13).  1.1.2  Response to antidepressants.  While effective treatmen ts for depression are 
available, it is clear that there is grea t clinical heterogeneity in response to 
antidepressants.  The response rate  to most antidepressants in c linical trials is on the order 
of 50-60%, with an even lower remission rate of  35-45% (14;15).  Thus far, no clinical or 
demographic characteristic has been consis tently associated with poor response to 
antidepressants (16).  Nor have any reliabl e biological predictors been found to be 
associated with antidepressant response (17).  Thus, patients who do not respond to first 
line antidepressant treatment often have to undergo additional trials with other 
antidepressants in order to ach ieve remission.  This trial and error process is even more 
debilitating given the length of  treatment required to gauge clinical effectiveness of 
antidepressants (typically 4 weeks or longer).  Adverse e ffects of antidepressants also 
represent a substantial clinical problem, yet th ere is also currently no way to predict their 
occurrence.  With the use of  selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) such as 
fluoxetine and citalopram, side effects such  as nausea, sexual dysfunction, headache, 
sleep disturbance, tremor, and weight disturbances are commonly reported.  One example 
of the magnitude of the problem is sexual side  effects, which can o ccur in ~50% of those  3taking SSRIs.  These adverse effects often result in non-compliance and discontinuation 
of treatment with no relief in depression seve rity.  A potentially deva stating side effect 
involves increases in suicidal thinking  among depressed patients, particularly 
adolescents, prescribed SSRIs (18).  Other studies have show n no increased risk in self 
harm due to SSRI use and the controversial issue remains unresolved in the field (19).  
 
1.2  Antidepressant pharmacogenetics 
1.2.1  Pharmacogenetics overview.  Pharmacogenetics, defined as the study of genetic 
variability between individuals in response to exogenous substa nces, as a field dates back 
to the late 1950s.  The earliest modern pharmacogenetic discoveries of hereditary 
variation in drug response involved drugs such as succi nylcholine, primaquine, and 
isoniazid.  These classic studies set th e stage for subsequent pharmacogenetic 
investigation, which currently focus on the gene s that contribute to the pharmacokinetics 
(the actions of the body on drugs over a period of time) and pharmacodynamics (the 
biochemical and physiological effects of drugs  and their mechanisms of action) of a 
particular drug (20).  A great  deal is known about the comm on inter-indivi dual variation 
in Phase I (oxidation, reduction, or hy drolysis) and Phase II (conjugation) drug 
metabolizing enzymes, at both the enzyma tic and DNA sequence levels (21).  For 
example, an extensive catalog of functional variants and hapl otype configurations in the 
genes encoding cytochrome P450 enzymes has been amassed (22).  A major example of 
the success of pharmacogenetics involves  the drug metabolizing enzyme, thiopurine 
methyltransferase (TPMT).  Children who inheri t two defective copies of this gene can 
experience fatal hematological side effect s when administered 6-mercaptopurine, a  4chemotherapeutic agent used in pediatric leukemia, while patients with two normal 
copies of the gene for this enzyme requi re higher doses of the medication (23).  
Numerous examples exist for members of the cytochrome P450 family of metabolic 
enzymes.  Efforts at identifying genes i nvolved in pharmacodynamics for particular 
medications have also been su ccessful.  Individual variations and haplotypes in the gene 
encoding for the type 2 β-adrenergic receptor have been f ound to correlate with response 
to β-agonists in the treatment of asthma (24) .  In addition, the dosing of warfarin, an 
anticoagulant with a narrow therapeutic inde x, was recently shown to be significantly 
influenced by the subject’s genotype at  a pharmacodynamic target of the drug ( VKORC1 ) 
(25).   1.2.2  Pharmacogenetics of response to older antidepressants.  Studies performed in 
the 1960s and 1970s revealed that upon repeated administration of one or another class of 
antidepressants, both response and non-re sponse to antidepressant class were 
significantly concordant between family me mbers (26;27).  This finding has been 
replicated more recently in re latively small samples (28;29 ).  The important role of 
cytochrome P450s in tricyc lic antidepressant (TCA) metabolism is well-documented, and 
is reflected in the extensive work showing correlation between blood levels and response 
and toxicity, as well as the pot ential benefits of therapeu tic drug monitoring for patient 
safety and reduced costs (30).  Pharmacoge netic analysis guided by these observations 
revealed in one study that pati ents missing CYP2D6 could not be effectively treated with 
TCAs (31).  In particular, persons experien cing adverse effects were more likely to be 
deficient for CYP2D6.  This locus, which is highly polymorphic in the human population, 
has been suggested to account for 34% of th e variation in plasma nortriptyline levels  5(32).  Some authors recommend that pharmac ogenetic considerations be taken into 
account with the use of TCAs, suggesting subs tantial dose reductions in persons with the 
“poor metabolizer” phenotype of CYP2D6 or CYP2C19 (33).  Although commercial 
molecular diagnostics for CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 exist (e.g., AmpliChip CYP450 by 
Roche), there is currently little evidence ju stifying their use in psychiatry.  Some 
investigators have advocated the use of  CYP genotyping for antidepressant therapy 
including SSRI treatment despite the lack of adequately powered studies showing 
benefits to clinical decision making (34;35).  
1.2.3  Pharmacogenetics of SSRI response – pharmacodynamic genes.  The current 
widespread use of SSRIs in depression along wi th recent advances in molecular genetics 
have resulted in a sizeable body of literatu re on SSRI pharmacogenetics (36).  The 
majority of these studies focus on put ative pharmacodynamic genes related to 
monoamine function, including the serotonin transporter (the mo lecular target for SSRIs), 
tryptophan hydroxylase 1, monoamine  oxidase A, and the 1A and 2A serotonin receptors.  
These case-control studies as a whole examin e a small number of polymorphic loci in 
these genes, and utilize fairly small sa mple sizes, ranging from 60-260 subjects.  
In a sample of 222 Chinese patients w ith major depression, variants in the 
serotonin 1A receptor ( HTR1A ) were not associated with response to fluoxetine (37).  
Two SNP variants in the serotonin receptor 2A ( HTR2A ) gene (-1420A>G and 102T>C) 
were not associated with response to fl uvoxamine or paroxetine in a sample of 443 
patients (38).  A variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) promoter polymorphism that 
influences the in vitro activity of the monoamine oxidase A ( MAOA ) gene also did not 
significantly influence SSRI response outco me in this study, or in a similar study  6conducted in Japan (38;39).  There have been two studies investigating the role of an 
A218C polymorphism (rs1800532) in intron 7 of the tryptophan hydroxylase 1 gene (TPH1 ), both yielding significant associations to  SSRI treatment respon se.  In one study, 
the TPH*A/A genotype was associated with a slower response to fluvoxamine treatment 
only in patients not taking pindolol concomita ntly (40).  In another study by the same 
group, the TPH*A/A and TPH*A/C genotypes were  associated with a poorer response to 
paroxetine treatment, with this association also not seen in the pindolol augmentation 
patients (41). 
 An Italian group has shown in a series of  studies some evidence of an association 
between the long allele of a functional promoter polymorphism in the serotonin 
transporter and loosely defined depression, in cluding cases of bipol ar disorder in the 
depressed phase of the illness (40;42-44).  Other groups have reported similar findings 
(45-47).  These reports are of interest as this polymorphism  is usually defined by the long 
and short alleles, with the long allele leadi ng to increased in vitr o transcription of the 
SLC6A4  gene and serotonin uptake in cell lines (48).  Additional notable findings in the 
pharmacogenetics of SSRI response have included associations to tryptophan 
hydroxylase (40), G protein β3 (49;50), angiotensin converting enzyme (51), and the 
glucocorticoid receptor FKBP5 (52).  There has been little explor ation of association 
between genetic variants in any of these genes and adverse events related to SSRI 
treatment.  A small study showed that the short allele of the serotonin transporter 
promoter polymorphism was associated with the development of insomnia and agitation 
in a population of 36 outpatients (53).  A study by Murphy et al. of 124 subjects with 
geriatric depression treated w ith the SSRI paroxetine showed that the genotype for a  7variant in the 2A serotonin receptor ( HTR2A ) predicted both greater rates of 
discontinuation and severity of  adverse events (54).   
1.2.4  Pharmacogenetics of SSRI response – pharmacokinetic genes.  Previous studies 
investigating the relationship between SSRI medications and pharmacokinetic genes have 
been limited.  The pharmacokinetics of many SS RIs, including citalopram, are affected 
by CYP2D6  and CYP2C19  genotype status, although ther e is no evidence regarding how 
plasma levels of citalopram influence clinical  efficacy or tolerance (55).  In a study of 53 
Chinese patients with major depression taking citalopram, CYP2C19  genotype status was 
significantly associated with clearance of citalopram and the metabolic ratio of desmethylcitalopram to citalopram, but not a ssociated with the primary clinical outcome 
of patient side effect burden (56).  In the study by Murphy et al. cited above, they 
reported no significant influence of CYP2D6  genotype status on paroxetine tolerance.  
Another study reported, in a sample of 100 de pressed Japanese subjects, a gene by gene 
interaction between patient ge notype at a variant in the HTR2A  receptor and CYP2D6  
genotype status that significan tly influenced risk of devel oping gastrointestinal side 
effects (57).   
1.3  Genomics and association mapping 
1.3.1  Overview.   The effort to sequence the human genome has dramatically altered the 
potential impact of pharmacogenetics on human  health.  The vast majority of human 
genes have now been localized and annotat ed, although the biological function of many 
of these genes is unknown (58;59).  One offshoot  of this endeavor has been the discovery 
of the incredible level of sequence diversity between humans, largely in the form of  8single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).  SN Ps are the most abundant type of DNA 
variation with over 12 million individual va riants having already been identified and 
referenced at dbSNP, the SNP database hoste d by the National Center for Biotechnology 
Information in collaboration with the NHGRI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).  Single 
nucleotide polymorphisms have come under in tense scrutiny as e ffective markers for 
genetic studies, partly out of their abundance, but also due to the development of efficient 
and inexpensive methodologies for assaying SN Ps (60).  Pharmacogenetics can now be 
broadened to “pharmacogenomics” in the cont ext of the Human Genome Project, with 
our new annotated knowledge of genes, prot eins, and SNPs allowing a more general 
analysis of the many different genes that dete rmine drug behavior or even of the majority 
of the genes in the genome.  The availability  of other vertebrate genomes will aid in the 
identification of conserved non-coding elements  that could have important developmental 
and regulatory consequences if they cont ain variation (61).  Along similar lines, 
additional primate genomes (e.g., chimpanzee, gorilla, rhesus) will allow the 
identification of more subtle primate lineag e-specific genetic elements that may be 
missed with more distant evolutionary comparisons (62).  1.3.2  Genetic association studies.   Pharmacogenetic phenotypes are complex traits with 
contributions from pharmacodynamic genetic  variants (transpor ters, receptors), 
pharmacokinetic genetic variants (absor ption, metabolism, elimination), and 
environmental exposures.  Given the genetic complexity of antidep ressant response, the 
most powerful strategy for determining these genetic factors would be through use of an 
association study, also termed linkage di sequilibrium (LD) mapping (63).  In LD 
mapping, unobserved historical recombinations in an outbr ed population are used to  9identify disease genes by exploiting the physic al proximity between a susceptibility gene 
and a marker locus (64).  LD mapping thus assumes that some proportion of the cases 
have a common ancestor who had the disease-as sociated variation.  The individuals who 
share this variation are also likely to share alleles at site s neighboring the actual disease 
locus due to linkage disequilibrium (65).  The main advantage of this approach rests on the statistical power derived from the ability to collect substantial numbers of unrelated 
cases and controls (66).  A number of interacting factor s influence the likelihood of 
success in LD mapping designs, including the eff ect size of the trait variant, frequencies 
of marker and trait alleles, as well as LD re lationships (67).  Family based studies, while 
an attractive approach in disease mapping st udies, are difficult to efficiently design and 
conduct in pharmacogenetic studies, given th e low likelihood that an extended pedigree 
would have sufficient numbers of members treated with the same medication.     
A disadvantage of LD mapping is the reliance on the assumption that common 
disorders are caused by high population freque ncy variants, which is known as the 
common disease-common variant hypothesis (CDCV) (68;69).  This assumption is useful 
for LD mapping, since rare alle les (which are “newer”) gene rally do not have significant 
LD (based on the r
2 measure) with neighboring alleles.  Unless the actual causative rare 
allele is genotyped, it will generally not be captured by LD mapping.  One potential way 
to circumvent this limitation of LD ma pping is to use haplotypic (chromosomal 
configuration of several closely linked alleles) testing in order to “tag” rare alleles that 
were not genotyped.  While haplotype testing can help capture rare  SNPs and has other 
potential advantages, the utility and inte rpretation of haplotypic mapping remains 
controversial (70).  The CDCV  hypothesis states that comm on alleles, each contribute by  10themselves very small increases in risk (i.e ., odds ratios from 1.5 - 2.5 for single alleles), 
but when combined and interacting with each other can determine the overall genetic risk 
for an individual (71).  This underpinni ng for complex genetic phenotypes is not 
universally accepted, and an alternative fram ework known as the common disease rare 
variant (CDRV) hypothesis has been proposed.  This hypothesis states that for any given 
complex phenotype several (on the order of  100s – 1,000s) of rare variants exist in 
different genes and pathways that each are individually sufficient to cause the trait 
(72;73).  This model is similar to th e molecular basis of most known Mendelian 
disorders, modified for more common, co mplex phenotypes.  Unfortunately, using 
outbred populations it is diffi cult to collect enough samples to have adequate power to 
detect extremely rare variants (<0.01 minor al lele frequency) and family based studies are 
often not practical in pharmacogenetics.  Fu rthermore, since the population attributable 
risk of rare variants will be low, they may ha ve limited utility as diagnostic tests.  In any 
case, a complicated matrix of rare and co mmon variants are likel y to play roles in 
pharmacogenetic phenotypes, even within the same gene (74). 
1.3.3  Whole genome association studies.  The vast majority of genetic association 
studies thus far have been ca ndidate gene studies.  Typical ly, candidate genes are chosen 
based on a biological hypothesis that connect s the pathogenesis of  the disease being 
studied with the function of the candidate ge ne.  Often, theses studies are performed as 
“direct” association studies, meaning that a single DNA variant that is known to change 
the function of a gene product is genotyped in cases and controls.  The major limitation 
of this direct approach is the necessity fo r some level of understa nding of the biology of 
the gene and disease being studied.  Often, for complex genetic disorders, we do not  11know a priori  what genes will be involved.  Candidate gene studies can also be 
performed as “indirect” association studies  (LD mapping) by genotyping several markers 
within a gene and testing for association, re lying on LD between the markers genotyped 
and the actual, unknown causal alle le in order to uncover an a ssociation.  An extension of 
LD mapping involves interrogating several t housands of markers across the entire 
genome and has been termed “whole genome as sociation” (68).  A major advantage of 
whole genome studies is that no understand ing of the biological mechanism of the 
phenotype is required a priori , allowing susceptibility genes to  be identified that were not 
considered candidate genes for the phe notype.  To date only a few whole genome 
association studies have b een published, and while there have been a few exceptional 
findings, results have been mixed and debate  remains regarding the utility of these 
endeavors (75-78).  
 
1.4  Challenges to association mapping 
1.4.1  Phenotypic heterogeneity.  There are several challenges  to genetic association 
studies in either a candidate ge ne or whole genome context.  As with all genetic studies, 
phenotypic heterogeneity is a concern.  We can sa fely assume that the majority of clinical 
diagnoses, as has been shown with several types of cancer, are composed of different 
subtypes with distinct molecular mechanisms .  Diagnostic techniques are limited in all 
fields of medicine and rare ly identify the molecular ca uses underlying a disease or 
phenotype.  This concern is even greater for psychiatric phenotypes, since these usually 
require the use of structured interviews or questionnaires for diagnos is.  In our study, we 
attempted to limit phenotypic heterogeneity t hough the use of respons e pattern analysis  12(79;80).  SSRI and other antidepressant medi cations have high pl acebo response rates, 
reaching 50% in some clinical trials.  It ha s been shown that patients who have a delayed 
response (>2 week) to active medication and co ntinue to maintain their response every 
week until week 12 (“specific responders”) are mo re likely to relapse if blindly switched 
to placebo than patients displaying an ear ly and inconsistent response (“non-specific 
responders”) (80).  Although the delayed re sponse may not be a critical factor in 
determining true drug response, a sustained response seems to strongly predict specific 
response status (81).  Thus, a subset of pa tients that appear to be responding to the 
medication are in fact having a placebo, or non-specific response.  We performed 
association tests with these phenotypic s ubtypes in order to limit heterogeneity by 
accounting for non-specific res ponse to SSRI medication.   
1.4.2  Marker selection.   Another obvious issue is whic h SNPs to genotype: with over 
12 million known SNPs in the human genom e and candidate genes often extending 
beyond 100 kb, current genotyping te chnologies prohibit complete ascertainment of all 
the SNPs within most candidate genes or all the SNPs in the human genome in reasonably sized clinical samples.  Theref ore, several groups have developed methods 
that exploit the LD between markers in order to reduce genotyping redundancy while 
maintaining the genetic divers ity within a region.  One of the computationally simplest 
methods attempts to select proxies, or “tagSN Ps”, in order to capture allelic information 
at other loci based so lely on the pairwise r
2 measure of LD (82).  Other methods select 
SNPs (haplotype tagging, or htSNPs) that  capture the underlying haplotype structure 
(83;84).  Still other methods select SNPs that , in combination, capture alleles at other, un-
genotyped loci (85).  There is no consensus in the field on which method has the most  13efficiency or power in association studies.   For the candidate gene investigations 
performed in this study, we compared the effi ciency and accuracy of several methods for 
selecting tagSNPs.  For whole genome associ ation studies the SNP marker panels are on 
fixed arrays in order to redu ce production costs, therefore th e investigator cannot change 
the SNPs to be genotyped.  Current marker  panels for whole genome studies have 
focused on gene-centric SNPs (ParAlle le Biosciences), evenly spaced SNPs 
(Affymetrix), or used public resources like HapMap to sele ct SNPs based on patterns of 
LD (Illumina).  In our whole genome asso ciation study, we used a combination of 
approximately 40,000 gene-centric markers, 500,000 evenly spaced SNPs, and 50,000 SNPs chosen based on patterns of LD. 1.4.3  Multiple testing burden.  Another challenge to associat ion studies is the issue of 
multiple comparisons.  Put another way, the like lihood of type I statistical error increases 
when one subjects a number of independent  observations to the same significance 
criterion that would be used when consider ing a single event.  In LD mapping, often 
several SNPs per gene are genotyped (or seve ral thousand in whole genome studies), and 
some markers will reach statistical significance due to chance alone.  One way to account 
for these multiple comparisons is to use a Bonferroni correction.  For instance, if we set a p<0.05 Type I ( α) error rate as our study-wide criter ia for significan ce and interrogate 
500 markers, the Bonferroni corrected cr iteria for significance would be p<0.0001 ( α/N) 
for each individual SNP comparison.  Bonferr oni correction assumes the individual tests 
are independent of each other and clearly this is not the case for closely linked SNPs due 
to linkage disequilibrium, therefore this correction is generally considered overly 
conservative by geneticists (86).  Permutati on based empirical significance testing can  14allow for more accurate assessment of a ssociation in the presence of linkage 
disequilibrium, however computational constrai nts limit the application of some of these 
methods (87).  An alternative method for cont rolling false positive rates is through use of 
a false discovery rate (FDR), or q-value (88) .  Instead of a simple p-value which can be 
interpreted as the probability that a test sta tistic as large or greater would occur by chance 
alone, a q-value is the proporti on of tests above a threshold p-value that are likely false 
positives.  A FDR threshold, which is not dependent on the actual number of tests performed, is determined from the observed p- value distribution and hence is adjustable 
to the amount of signal in the data and the number of false positives the investigator can 
tolerate in follow up studies.  An additiona l method for controlling multiple comparisons 
is to use a split sample study design (89).  With this method a study sample would be split into two roughly equal halves: a discove ry set, in which all markers will be 
genotyped, and a replication set, in which only the markers that reached the stated 
significance threshold in the discovery set ar e genotyped.  Besides the cost-savings in 
terms of genotyping load this method also si desteps some of the multiple testing issues 
since in the validation set only a subset of the total markers are tested, which requires less 
adjustment.  However, by splitting the sample , we also greatly sacrifice power.  We 
utilized a split sample de sign for our whole genome asso ciation study.  There is still 
debate on which design is most powerful for whole genome association studies and it is 
likely that the underlying genetic mechanis m, which is typically unknown, will determine 
the optimal study design (90).  1.4.4  Confounding due to po pulation stratification.  One of the main concerns for 
genetic association studies is population stratification.  Indeed, fear of population  15stratification has caused family-based associa tion tests to become quite popular in human 
genetics (91).  Unfortunately, as stated a bove, pharmacogenetic studies generally cannot 
efficiently collect family based samples.  P opulation stratification oc curs when cases and 
controls have different allele frequencie s attributable to diversity in background 
population that is unrelated to outcome status.  In the work described in this thesis, the 
majority of markers investigat ed showed some level of diffe rentiation in allele frequency 
based on self-reported race.  For population stra tification to have a detrimental effect on 
genetic association studies (i.e ., to create confounding), there al so must be a difference in 
baseline response (or diseas e) rates between the ancestr y subgroups (92).  In the 
STAR*D sample set, described in Chapters 4, 5, and 6, using self-reported race as a 
proxy for ancestry, several differences in res ponse and tolerance ex isted across racial 
groups, indicating the need to  adjust for population stratif ication in this sample.  
Uncorrected population stratifica tion can cause false positive associations and can also 
mask true associations that occur within subpopulations (92).  Several methods have been 
proposed to adjust and correct for populat ion stratification.  The simplest involves 
subdividing the clinical populati on based on self-reported race and testing for association 
within each substratum.  It has been shown that self-repo rted race correlates well with 
genetic ancestry based on microsatellite and large-scal e SNP genotyping (93;94).  We 
used this method in our candidate gene studi es in the STAR*D sample.  Another method, 
known as genomic control (GC), uses unlinke d markers across the genome to produce a 
scaling factor that is proportio nal to the degree of stratificatio n (95).  This scaling factor 
is then used to adjust the χ2 value of individual SNP test s for differences in population 
background.  The disadvantage of this method is that it applies the same scaling factor to  16all SNPs tested, when clearly some SNPs ar e more differentiated across populations than 
others.  We used this GC procedure in our candidate gene studies in the fluoxetine 
sample, as described in Chapter 2.  An alte rnative to the GC procedure is structured 
association, which also uses unlinked markers to detect stratification but attempts to 
define underlying subgroups within the stratif ied sample (96).  After subpopulations are 
identified, association testing can then be  performed within homogeneous subpopulations 
and additionally, a composite te st statistic across all subpopula tions can be calculated.  A 
popular Markov chain Monte Carlo (M CMC) method for modeling population 
substructure is implemented in the program structure , which estimates the proportion of 
ancestry (Q) from “K” populations for each  individual (97).  Given that population 
subdivisions may be not occur as  discrete clusters and the presumed levels of admixture 
in samples drawn from the United States, corre ctly choosing “K” is a difficult task.  One 
way to select “K” is to run the model for several values of “K”, and then use the 
estimates of the posterior probability of the model fit to select the most parsimonious 
value.  In our whole genome association study described in Chapter 6, we used a 
structured association method to correct for popula tion stratification wi thin the STAR*D 
sample.   1.4.5  Detecting SNP interactions.  Another major challenge in association studies of 
complex genetic diseases is the issue of in teracting loci.  An a ssumption of the CDCV 
hypothesis is that several loci, through inte raction with each other and environmental 
factors, determine the indi vidual’s risk of response or adverse events from 
pharmacotherapy (98).  A major limitation of det ecting interaction loci is sample size.  
For average sized association studies (~100 cases and controls), even for two-way (SNP x  17SNP) interactions the cell sizes (number of  individuals with a particular genotype 
combination) often are too small to have suffici ent power to detect moderate effects.  The 
problem of insufficient power becomes even greater when investigating uncommon SNPs 
or considering higher order (i.e., three-way) interactions.  Furthermore, the number of 
statistical tests that result from interacti on testing increases the need for large sample 
populations.  For two-way (pairwise) testing, th e number of pairwise  tests (t) increases 
with the number of SNPs (n) in  an exponential fashion (t = 0.5n2 – 0.5n).  In order to test 
all pairwise interactions in our whol e genome study involving approximately 590,000 
makers, we would have to perform 1.74 x 1011 statistical tests.  Since most association 
studies to date have not been  adequately powered to dete ct interactions, replicated 
interaction effects and validated methods fo r testing interactions  are underdeveloped in 
the literature.  One st raightforward method for testing pa irwise interaction is to use 
logistic regression modeling with an interact ion term, and likelihood ratio testing to asses 
the significance of this model compared to  the reduced model without the interaction 
term.  We used logistic regres sion to test interactions in our  candidate gene studies in the 
STAR*D sample.  Inadequate power precluded testing for interacti ons in the fluoxetine 
sample.  While this method accommodates testin g of small numbers of interactions, due 
to computational limitations, it is not applicab le to whole genome data.  For large scale 
datasets, tree-based methods such as recursiv e partitioning have been proposed (99).  The 
main limitation of this method is the need to balance power to detect interactions with the 
tendency for models to over-fit the data, given the vast amount of data available.  Cross-
validation and bootstrapping may help reduce e rror rates using these models (100).  We  18used recursive partitioning to explore gene  by gene interactions  in our whole genome 
data.   
 
1.5  Summary of chapters 
 In this study, we interrog ated naturally occurring gene tic variants for association 
to antidepressant response.  The goal of this work is to identify genetic markers that can 
help guide drug choice or dosing of psychopha rmacological therapy with an SSRI.  This 
work was performed using two clinical populat ions of depressed subjects administered 
SSRIs: a small (N=96) populat ion taking fluoxetine (Chapter s 2 and 3), and a larger 
(N=1,953) population taking cita lopram (Chapters 4, 5, and 6).  A flow chart of the 
projects described in this thesis is shown in Figure 1.1. 
In Chapter 2  of this dissertation, we utili zed an LD-based candidate gene 
approach to investigate likely SSRI pharmac odynamic target genes: serotonin transporter 
(SLC6A4 ), serotonin 1A, 2A, and 2C receptors ( HTR1A, HTR2A, HTR2C ), tryptophan 
hydroxylase 1 and 2 ( TPH1  and TPH2 ), and monoamine oxidase A ( MAOA ), for 
association to fluoxetine response.  We  genotyped 110 largely non-coding publicly 
available SNPs and 4 VNTRs across these se ven candidate genes.  Several SNPs and 
haplotypes of SLC6A4 , TPH1 , TPH2 , and HTR2A  were nominally associated (p<0.05) 
with fluoxetine response or  response specificity.   
Chapter 3 attempts to expand on these results by resequencing the coding 
regions, intron-exon boundaries and 5’ c onserved non-coding sequence of these 
candidate genes in the fluoxetin e population.  This was performed in order to uncover 
any potentially functional varian ts and to capture any additi onal tagSNPs that were not  19Fluoxetine 
sample 
N = 96 
Serotonin gene 
LD mapping 
Chapter 2 
Serotonin gene 
sequencing 
Chapter 3 
 Citalopram 
sample 
(STAR*D) 
N = 1,953 
Serotonin gene 
LD mapping 
Chapter 4 
 PK gene direct 
association 
Chapter 5 Whole genome 
LD mapping 
Chapter 6 
 
 
Figure 1.1  Flow chart of work  described in this thesis. 
             20captured with our genotyping in Chapter 2.   
In Chapter 4 , we utilized the dense marker da ta (N=188 SNPs) that we had for 
these pharmacodynamic candidate genes in the fluoxetine populat ion in order to select 
tagSNPs (N=27) to be genotyped in our larger clinical popul ation taking the SSRI 
citalopram.  No tagSNPs or haplotypes, includi ng the variants that were associated with 
fluoxetine response in Chapter 1, were significantly associated with citalopram response 
or response specificity.    
  Chapter 5  explores the role of pharmacokinetic  gene variants in SSRI response.  
We utilized a direct association approach with known functional variants to investigate the relevant pharmacokinetic genes for citalopram: cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP3A4 , 
CYP3A5 , CYP2D6  and CYP2C19 , and P-glycoprotein ( ABCB1 ), for association to 
citalopram response and intolerance.  In orde r to limit Type 1 error we used a two-stage 
study design.  None of the va riants that were nominally associated with remission or 
intolerance in the discovery set were also a ssociated in the validation set.  A trend was 
seen with the CYP2C19 *2 variant and intolerance in the overall sample (p<0.01), 
however this is not significant given the large nu mber of independent tests performed.      
In Chapter 6 , we make use of a gene-agnostic approach by genotyping 
approximately 590,000 SNP markers spread across the genome in the discovery set of the citalopram population.  The most strongly asso ciated SNPs were then genotyped in the 
remaining half of the citalopram population, in an  effort to validate the initial association.   
We attempted to replicate four SNPs that we re most highly associated with remission and 
five SNPs that were most highly associated  with intolerance.  None of these SNPs 
replicated their initia l association in the va lidation set, though one SNP in the intolerance  21phenotype was close (p=0.06).  We also atte mpted to construct multi-SNP decision trees 
in the discovery set, but again, these models  did not replicate in the validation set.  
However, the analysis presented here of  the whole genome data was designed to 
investigate only the “low hanging fruit”, a nd additional, more comprehensive genotyping 
of the validation set may yield interesting results.  The whole genome work may also 
identify potential pathways for citalopram’s molecular mechanism of action, which is not 
fully understood.   Chapter 7 summarizes these results and disc usses the current challenges facing 
pharmacogenetics and complex disease associ ation mapping in general, and offers 
suggestions for future directions.      
 
           221.6  References  
1.     Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, Jin R, Koretz D, Merikangas KR, Rush AJ, 
Walters EE, Wang PS. The epidemiology of majo r depressive disorder: results from the 
National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R). JAMA  2003; 289(23):3095-3105. 
2.     Wong ML, Licinio J. Research and treatment approaches to depression. Nat Rev 
Neurosci  2001; 2(5):343-351. 
3.     Hoyert DL, Heron MP, Murphy SL, Kung HC. Deaths: final data for 2003. Natl 
Vital Stat Rep  2006; 54(13):1-120. 
4.     Luppa M, Heinrich S, Angermeyer MC, Konig HH, Riedel-Heller SG. Cost-of-illness studies of depression: A systematic review. J Affect Disord  2007; 98(1-2):29-43. 
5.     Berto P, D'Ilario D, Ruffo P, Di VR, Rizzo F. Depression: cost-of-illness studies in 
the international literature, a review. J Ment Health Policy Econ  2000; 3(1):3-10. 
6.      The Global Burden of Disease. Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1996. 
7.     Mueller TI, Leon AC, Keller MB, So lomon DA, Endicott J, Coryell W, Warshaw 
M, Maser JD. Recurrence after recovery from  major depressive disorder during 15 years 
of observational follow-up. Am J Psychiarty  1999; 156(7):1000-1006. 
8.     American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, 4th Edition. 1994. 9.     Evans DL, Charney DS, Lewis L, Golden RN, Gorman JM, Krishnan KRR, Nemeroff CB, Bremner JD, Carney RM, Coyne JC. Mood disorders in  the medically ill: 
scientific review and recommendations. Biol Psychiatry  2005; 58(3):175-189. 
10.     Pincus HA, Pettit AR. The societal costs of chronic major depression. J Clin 
Psychiatry  2001; 62 Suppl 65-9.  2311.     Duval F, Lebowitz BD, Macher JP. Treatments in depression. Dialogues Clin 
Neurosci  2006; 8(2):191-206. 
12.     Pacher P, Kecskemeti V. Trends in  the development of new antidepressants. Is 
there a light at the end of the tunnel? Curr Med Chem  2004; 11(7):925-943. 
13.     Stafford RS, MacDonald EA, Finkels tein SN. National patt erns of medication 
treatment for depression, 1987 to 2001. Prim Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry  2001; 
3(6):232-235. 14.     Stahl SM, Entsuah R, Rudolph RL. Co mparative efficacy between venlafaxine and 
SSRIs: a pooled analysis of patients with depression. Biol Psychiatry  2002; 52(12):1166-
1174. 15.     Entsuah AR, Huang H, Thase ME. Response and remission rates in different 
subpopulations with major depressive disord er administered venl afaxine, selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or placebo. J Clin Psychiatry  2001; 62(11):869-877. 
16.     Esposito K, Goodnick P. Pr edictors of response in depression. Psychiatr Clin North 
Am 2003; 26(2):353-365. 
17.     Perlis RH, Iosifescu DV, Renshaw PF.  Biological predictors of treatment response 
in affective illness. Psychiatr Clin North Am  2003; 26(2):323-44, vii. 
18.     Fergusson D, Doucette S, Glass KC , Shapiro S, Healy D, Hebert P, Hutton B. 
Association between suicide attempts and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors: 
systematic review of randomised controlled trials. BMJ  2005; 330(7488):396. 
19.     Simon GE, Savarino J, Operskalski B,  Wang PS. Suicide risk during antidepressant 
treatment. Am J Psychiatry  2006; 163(1):41-47. 
20.     Weber WW: Pharmacogenetics. Ne w York, Oxford University Press, 1997.  2421.     Evans WE, Relling MV. Moving to wards individualized medicine with 
pharmacogenomics. Nature  2004; 429(6990):464-468. 
22.     Ingelman-Sundberg M, Oscarson M,  Daly AK, Garte S, Nebert DW. Human 
cytochrome P-450 (CYP) genes: a web pa ge for the nomenclature of alleles. Cancer 
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev  2001; 10(12):1307-1308. 
23.     Weinshilboum R. Inheritance and drug response. N Engl J Med  2003; 348(6):529-
537. 24.     Drysdale CM, McGraw DW, Stack CB, Stephens JC, Judson RS, Nandabalan K, 
Arnold K, Ruano G, Liggett SB. Complex prom oter and coding region beta 2-adrenergic 
receptor haplotypes alter receptor expression and predict in vivo responsiveness. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A  2000; 97(19):10483-10488. 
25.     Rieder MJ, Reiner AP, Gage BF , Nickerson DA, Eby CS, McLeod HL, Blough 
DK, Thummel KE, Veenstra DL, Rettie AE. Effect of VKORC1 haplotypes on 
transcriptional regulati on and warfarin dose. N Engl J Med  2005; 352(22):2285-2293. 
26.     Pare CMB, Rees L, Sainsbury MJ. Di fferentiation of two gene tically specific types 
of depression by the res ponse to anti-depressants. Lancet  1962; 21340-1343. 
27.     Pare CMB, Mack JW. Differentiati on of two genetically specific types of 
depression by the response to antidepressant drugs. J Med Genet  1971; 8306-309. 
28.     Franchini L, Serretti A, Gasperini M, Smeraldi E. Familial concordance of fluvoxamine response as a tool for di fferentiating mood disorder pedigrees. J Psychiatr 
Res 1998; 32(5):255-259. 
29.     O'Reilly RL, Bogue L, Singh SM. Pharmacogenetic response to antidepressants in a multicase family with affective disorder. Biol Psychiatry  1994; 36(7):467-471.  2530.     Burke MJ, Preskorn SH. Therapeutic  drug monitoring of antidepressants: cost 
implications and relevance to clinical practice. Clin Pharmacokinet  1999; 37(2):147-165. 
31.     Chen S, Chou WH, Blouin RA, Mao Z,  Humphries LL, Meek QC, Neill JR, Martin 
WL, Hays LR, Wedlund PJ. The cytoch rome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) enzyme 
polymorphism: screening costs and influen ce on clinical outcom es in psychiatry. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther  1996; 60(5):522-534. 
32.     Kvist EE, Al Shurbaji A, Dahl ML, No rdin C, Alvan G, Stahle L. Quantitative 
pharmacogenetics of nortrip tyline: a novel approach. Clin Pharmacokinet  2001; 
40(11):869-877. 33.     Kirchheiner J, Brosen K, Dahl ML, Gr am LF, Kasper S, Roots I, Sjoqvist F, Spina 
E, Brockmoller J. CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 genotype-based dose recommendations for antidepressants: a first step towa rds subpopulation-specific dosages. Acta Psychiatr 
Scand  2001; 104(3):173-192. 
34.     Mrazek DA, Smoller JW, de LJ. Inco rporating pharmacogenetics into clinical 
practice: Reality of a new tool in psychiatry. CNS Spectr  2006; 11(3 Suppl 3):1-13. 
35.     de Leon J, Susce MT, Murray-Carmichael E. The AmpliChip CYP450 genotyping test: Integrating a new clinical tool. Mol Diagn Ther  2006; 10(3):135-151. 
36.     Lerer B, Macciardi F. Pharmacogene tics of antidepressant and mood-stabilizing 
drugs: a review of candida te-gene studies and future research directions. Int J 
Neuropsychopharmacol  2002; 5(3):255-275. 
37.     Yu YWY, Tsai SJ, Liou YJ, Hong CJ, Chen TJ. Association study of two serotonin 
1A receptor gene polymorphisms and fluoxetin e treatment response in Chinese major 
depressive disorders. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol  2006; 16(7):498-503.  2638.     Cusin C, Serretti A, Zanardi R, Lattuad a E, Rossini D, Lilli R, Lorenzi C, Smeraldi 
E. Influence of monoamine oxidase A and se rotonin receptor 2A polymorphisms in SSRI 
antidepressant activity. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol  2002; 5(1):27-35. 
39.     Yoshida K, Naito S, Takahashi H, Sato K, Ito K, Kamata M, Higuchi H, Shimizu T, Itoh K, Inoue K, Tezuka T, Suzuki T,  Ohkubo T, Sugawara K, Otani K. Monoamine 
oxidase: A gene polymorphism, tryptopha n hydroxylase gene polymorphism and 
antidepressant response to fluvoxamine in Ja panese patients with major depressive 
disorder. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry  2002; 26(7-8):1279-1283. 
40.     Serretti A, Zanardi R, Rossini D, Cu sin C, Lilli R, Smeraldi E. Influence of 
tryptophan hydroxylase and serotonin transp orter genes on fluvoxamine antidepressant 
activity. Mol Psychiatry  2001; 6(5):586-592. 
41.     Serretti A, Zanardi R, Cusin C, Ro ssini D, Lorenzi C, Smeraldi E. Tryptophan 
hydroxylase gene associated with pa roxetine antidepressant activity. Eur 
Neuropsychopharmacol  2001; 11(5):375-380. 
42.     Smeraldi E, Zanardi R, Benedett i F, Di Bella D, Perez J, Catalano M. 
Polymorphism within the promoter of the se rotonin transporter ge ne and antidepressant 
efficacy of fluvoxamine. Mol Psychiatry  1998; 3(6):508-511. 
43.     Zanardi R, Benedetti F, Di Bella D, Catalano M, Smeraldi E. Efficacy of paroxetine in depression is influenced by a functional polymorphism within the promoter 
of the serotonin transporter gene. J Clin Psychopharmacol  2000; 20(1):105-107. 
44.     Zanardi R, Serretti A, Rossini D, Franchini L, Cusin C, Lattuada E, Dotoli D, 
Smeraldi E. Factors affecting fluvoxamine an tidepressant activity: influence of pindolol  27and 5-HTTLPR in delusional a nd nondelusional depression. Biol Psychiatry  2001; 
50(5):323-330. 45.     Kim DK, Lim SW, Lee S, Sohn SE , Kim S, Hahn CG, Carroll BJ. Serotonin 
transporter gene polymorphism and antidepressant response. NeuroReport  2000; 
11(1):215-219. 46.     Pollock BG, Ferrell RE, Mulsant BH, Mazumdar S, Miller M, Sweet RA, Davis S, Kirshner MA, Houck PR, Stack JA, Reynolds CF , Kupfer DJ. Allelic variation in the 
serotonin transporter promoter affects onset of  paroxetine treatment response in late-life 
depression. Neuropsychopharmacology  2000; 23(5):587-590. 
47.     Arias B, Catalan R, Gasto C, Gutie rrez B, Fananas L. 5-HTTLPR polymorphism of 
the serotonin transporter gene  predicts non-remission in majo r depression patients treated 
with citalopram in a 12-weeks follow up study. J Clin Psychopharmacol  2003; 
23(6):563-567. 
48.     Lesch K-P, Bengel D, Heils A, Sabol  SZ, Greenberg BD, Petri S, Benjamin J, 
Müller CR, Hamer DH, Murphy DL. Associatio n of anxiety-related traits with a 
polymorphism in the serotonin tr ansporter gene regulatory region. Science  1996; 
274(5292):1527-1531. 49.     Zill P, Baghai TC, Zwanzger P, Schule C, Minov C, Riedel M, Neumeier K, Rupprecht R, Bondy B. Evidence for an asso ciation between a G- protein beta3-gene 
variant with depression and respons e to antidepressant treatment. NeuroReport  2000; 
11(9):1893-1897. 50.     Lee HJ, Cha JH, Ham BJ, Han CS, Kim YK, Lee SH, Ryu SH, Kang RH, Choi MJ, 
Lee MS. Association between a G-protein beta3 subunit gene polymorphism and the  28symptomatology and treatment responses  of major depressive disorders. 
Pharmacogenomics J  2004; 4(1):29-33. 
51.     Baghai TC, Schule C, Zwanzger P, Minov C, Schwarz MJ, de Jonge S, Rupprecht R, Bondy B. Possible influence of the inser tion/deletion polymorphism  in the angiotensin 
I-converting enzyme gene on therapeutic  outcome in affective disorders. Mol Psychiatry  
2001; 6(3):258-259. 52.     Binder EB, Salyakina D, Lichtner P,  Wochnik GM, Ising M, Putz B, Papiol S, 
Seaman S, Lucae S, Kohli MA, Nickel T, Kunzel HE, Fuchs B, Majer M, Pfennig A, Kern N, Brunner J, Modell S, Baghai T, Deiml T, Zill P, Bondy B, Rupprecht R, Messer T, Kohnlein O, Dabitz H, Bruckl T, Muller N,  Pfister H, Lieb R, Mueller JC, Lohmussaar 
E, Strom TM, Bettecken T, Meitinger T, Uh r M, Rein T, Holsboer F, Muller-Myhsok B. 
Polymorphisms in FKBP5 are associated w ith increased recurrence of depressive 
episodes and rapid response to  antidepressant treatment. Nat Genet  2004; 36(12):1319-
1325. 
53.     Perlis RH, Mischoulon D, Smolle r JW, Wan YJY, Lamon-Fava S, Lin KM, 
Rosenbaum JF, Fava M. Serotonin transporte r polymorphisms and adverse effects with 
fluoxetine treatment. Biol Psychiatry  2003; 54(9):879-883. 
54.     Murphy GM, Jr., Kremer C, Rodrigue s HE, Schatzberg AF. Pharmacogenetics of 
antidepressant medication intolerance. Am J Psychiatry  2003; 160(10):1830-1835. 
55.     Grasmader K, Verwohlt PL, Rietsche l M, Dragicevic A, Muller M, Hiemke C, 
Freymann N, Zobel A, Maier W, Rao ML. Impact of polymorphisms of cytochrome-
P450 isoenzymes 2C9, 2C19 and 2D6 on plasma concentrations and clinical effects of  29antidepressants in a natura listic clinical setting. Eur J Clin Pharmacol  2004; 60(5):329-
336. 56.     Yin OQ, Wing YK, Cheung Y, Wang ZJ, Lam SL, Chiu HF, Chow MS. 
Phenotype-genotype relationship and clinical effects of citalopram in Chinese patients. J 
Clin Psychopharmacol  2006; 26(4):367-372. 
57.     Suzuki Y, Sawamura K, Someya T. Polymorphisms in the 5-hydroxytryptamine 
2A receptor and cytochrome P4502D6 genes synergistically predict fluvoxamine-induced 
side effects in Japanese depressed patients. Neuropsychopharmacology  2006; 31(4):825-
831. 58.     Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Zody MC, Baldwin J, Devon K, 
Dewar K, Doyle M, FitzHugh W, Funke R, Ga ge D, Harris K, Heaford A, Howland J, 
Kann L, Lehoczky J, LeVine R, McEwan P,  McKernan K, Meldrim J, Mesirov JP, 
Miranda C, Morris W, Naylor J, Raymond C, Rosetti M, Santos R, Sheridan A, Sougnez 
C, Stange-Thomann N, Stojanovic N, Subraman ian A, Wyman D, Rogers J, Sulston J, 
Ainscough R, Beck S, Bentley D, Burton J, Clee C, Carter N, Coulson A, Deadman R, 
Deloukas P, Dunham A, Dunham I, Durbin R, French L, Grafham D, Gregory S, 
Hubbard T, Humphray S, Hunt A, Jones M, Lloyd C, McMurray A, Matthews L, Mercer 
S, Milne S, Mullikin JC, Mungall A, Plum b R, Ross M, Shownkeen R, Sims S, 
Waterston RH, Wilson RK, Hillier LW, McPherson JD, Marra MA, Mardis ER, Fulton LA, Chinwalla AT, Pepin KH, Gish WR, Chissoe SL, Wendl MC, Delehaunty KD, 
Miner TL, Delehaunty A, Kramer JB, Cook LL, Fulton RS, Johnson DL, Minx PJ, 
Clifton SW, Hawkins T, Branscomb E, Predki  P, Richardson P, Wenning S, Slezak T, 
Doggett N, Cheng JF, Olsen A, Lucas S, Elki n C, Uberbacher E, Frazier M, Gibbs RA,  30Muzny DM, Scherer SE, Bouck JB, Sodergre n EJ, Worley KC, Rives CM, Gorrell JH, 
Metzker ML, Naylor SL, Kucherlapati RS, Nelson DL, Weinstock GM, Sakaki Y, 
Fujiyama A, Hattori M, Yada T, Toyoda A, It oh T, Kawagoe C, Wata nabe H, Totoki Y, 
Taylor T, Weissenbach J, Heilig R, Saurin W, Artiguenave F, Brottier P, Bruls T, 
Pelletier E, Robert C, Wincker P, Smith  DR, Doucette-Stamm L, Rubenfield M, 
Weinstock K, Lee HM, Dubois J, Rosenthal A, Platzer M, Nyakatura G, Taudien S, 
Rump A, Yang H, Yu J, Wang J, Huang G, Gu J, Hood L, Rowen L, Madan A, Qin S, 
Davis RW, Federspiel NA, A bola AP, Proctor MJ, Myers RM, Schmutz J, Dickson M, 
Grimwood J, Cox DR, Olson MV, Kaul R,  Raymond C, Shimizu N, Kawasaki K, 
Minoshima S, Evans GA, Athanasiou M, Schultz  R, Roe BA, Chen F, Pan H, Ramser J, 
Lehrach H, Reinhardt R, McCombie WR, de la  BM, Dedhia N, Blocker H, Hornischer K, 
Nordsiek G, Agarwala R, Aravind L, Baile y JA, Bateman A, Batzoglou S, Birney E, 
Bork P, Brown DG, Burge CB, Cerutti L, Ch en HC, Church D, Clamp M, Copley RR, 
Doerks T, Eddy SR, Eichler EE, Furey TS, Galagan J, Gilbert JG, Harmon C, 
Hayashizaki Y, Haussler D, Hermjakob H, Hokamp K, Jang W, Johnson LS, Jones TA, 
Kasif S, Kaspryzk A, Kennedy S, Kent WJ, K itts P, Koonin EV, Korf I, Kulp D, Lancet 
D, Lowe TM, McLysaght A, Mikkelsen T, Mo ran JV, Mulder N, Pollara VJ, Ponting CP, 
Schuler G, Schultz J, Slater G, Smit AF, Stupka E, Szustakowski J, Thierry-Mieg D, 
Thierry-Mieg J, Wagner L, Wallis J, Wheeler  R, Williams A, Wolf  YI, Wolfe KH, Yang 
SP, Yeh RF, Collins F, Guyer MS, Peterson J, Felsenfeld A, Wetterstrand KA, Patrinos 
A, Morgan MJ, Szustakowki J, de Jong P, Catanese JJ, Osoegawa K, Shizuya H, Choi S. Initial sequencing and analys is of the human genome. Nature  2001; 409(6822):860-921.  3159.     Venter JC, Adams MD, Myers EW, Li PW, Mural RJ, Sutton GG, Smith HO, 
Yandell M, Evans CA, Holt RA, Gocayne JD, Amanatides P, Ballew RM, Huson DH, Wortman JR, Zhang Q, Kodira CD, Zheng XH, Chen L, Skupski M, Subramanian G, Thomas PD, Zhang J, Gabor Miklos GL, Ne lson C, Broder S, Clark AG, Nadeau J, 
McKusick VA, Zinder N, Levine AJ, Robert s RJ, Simon M, Slayman C, Hunkapiller M, 
Bolanos R, Delcher A, Dew I, Fasulo D, Fl anigan M, Florea L, Halpern A, Hannenhalli 
S, Kravitz S, Levy S, Mobarry C, Reinert K,  Remington K, Abu-Threideh J, Beasley E, 
Biddick K, Bonazzi V, Brandon R, Cargill M, Chandramouliswaran I, Charlab R, Chaturvedi K, Deng Z, Di F, V, Dunn P, Eilbeck K, Evangelista C, Gabrielian AE, Gan 
W, Ge W, Gong F, Gu Z, Guan P, Heiman TJ, Higgins ME, Ji RR, Ke Z, Ketchum KA, 
Lai Z, Lei Y, Li Z, Li J, Liang Y, Lin X,  Lu F, Merkulov GV, Milshina N, Moore HM, 
Naik AK, Narayan VA, Neelam B, Nusskern D, Rusch DB, Salzberg S, Shao W, Shue B, 
Sun J, Wang Z, Wang A, Wang X, Wang J, Wei M, Wides R, Xiao C, Yan C, Yao A, Ye 
J, Zhan M, Zhang W, Zhang H, Zhao Q, Zheng L, Zhong F, Zhong W, Zhu S, Zhao S, 
Gilbert D, Baumhueter S, Spier G, Carter C, Cravchik A, Woodage T, Ali F, An H, Awe A, Baldwin D, Baden H, Barnstead M, Barrow I, Beeson K, Busam D, Carver A, Center 
A, Cheng ML, Curry L, Danaher S, Davenport L, Desilets R, Dietz S, Dodson K, Doup L, Ferriera S, Garg N, Gluecksmann A, Hart B, Haynes J, Haynes C, Heiner C, Hladun S, 
Hostin D, Houck J, Howland T, Ibegwam C, Johnson J, Kalush F, Kline L, Koduru S, 
Love A, Mann F, May D, McCawley S, McIntosh T, McMullen I, Moy M, Moy L, Murphy B, Nelson K, Pfannkoch C, Pratts E, Puri V, Qureshi H, Reardon M, Rodriguez 
R, Rogers YH, Romblad D, Ruhfel B, Scott R, Sitter C, Smallwood M, Stewart E, Strong 
R, Suh E, Thomas R, Tint NN, Tse S, Vech  C, Wang G, Wetter J,  Williams S, Williams  32M, Windsor S, Winn-Deen E, Wolfe K, Zaveri  J, Zaveri K, Abril JF, Guigo R, Campbell 
MJ, Sjolander KV, Karlak B, Kejariwal A, Mi  H, Lazareva B, Hatton T, Narechania A, 
Diemer K, Muruganujan A, Guo N, Sato S, Ba fna V, Istrail S, Lippert R, Schwartz R, 
Walenz B, Yooseph S, Allen D, Basu A, Baxendale J, Blick L, Caminha M, Carnes-Stine J, Caulk P, Chiang YH, Coyne M, Dahlke C,  Mays A, Dombroski M, Donnelly M, Ely 
D, Esparham S, Fosler C, Gire H, Gla nowski S, Glasser K, Glodek A, Gorokhov M, 
Graham K, Gropman B, Harris M, Heil J, Henderson S, Hoover J, Jennings D, Jordan C, 
Jordan J, Kasha J, Kagan L, Kraft C, Levitsky A, Lewis M, Liu X, Lopez J, Ma D, Majoros W, McDaniel J, Murphy S, Newman  M, Nguyen T, Nguyen N, Nodell M. The 
sequence of the human genome. Science  2001; 291(5507):1304-1351. 
60.     Kwok PY. Methods for genotypi ng single nucleotide polymorphisms. Annu Rev 
Genomics Hum Genet  2001; 2235-258. 
61.     Dermitzakis ET, Reymond A, Scamuf fa N, Ucla C, Kirkness E, Rossier C, 
Antonarakis SE. Evolutionary discrimi nation of mammalian conserved non-genic 
sequences (CNGs). Science  2003; 302(5647):1033-1035. 
62.     Wang QF, Prabhakar S, Chanan S, Cheng JF, Boffelli D, Rubin EM. Detection of 
weakly conserved ancestral mammalian re gulatory sequences by primate comparisons. 
Genome Biol  2007; advanced on line publication. 
63.     Risch N, Merikangas K. The future of genetic studies of complex human diseases. 
Science  1996; 273(5281):1516-1517. 
64.     Ott J, Hoh J. Statistic al approaches to gene mapping. Am J Hum Genet  2000; 
67(2):289-294.  3365.     Cardon LR, Bell JI. Associatio n study designs for complex diseases. Nat Rev Genet  
2001; 2(2):91-99. 66.     Risch N, Teng J. The relative power of family-based and cas e-control designs for 
linkage disequilibrium studies of complex human diseases. Genome Res  1998; 
8(12):1273-1288. 67.     Zondervan KT, Cardon LR. The comp lex interplay among factors that influence 
allelic association. Nat Rev Genet  2004; 5(2):89-100. 
68.     Collins FS, Guyer MS, Charkravarti A. Variations on a theme: cataloging human DNA sequence variation. Science  1997; 278(5343):1580-1581. 
69.     Reich DE, Lander ES. On the allelic spectrum of human disease. Trends in 
Genetics  2001; 17(9):502-510. 
70.     Clark AG. The role of hapl otypes in candidate gene studies. Genet Epidemiol  2004; 
27(4):321-333. 
71.     Newton-Cheh C, Hirschhorn JN. Gene tic association studies  of complex traits: 
design and analysis issues. Mutat Res  2005; 573(1-2):54-69. 
72.     Weiss KM, Terwilliger JD. How many diseases does it take to map a gene with 
SNPs? Nat Genet  2000; 26(2):151-157. 
73.     Pritchard JK. Are rare variants respons ible for susceptibility to complex diseases? 
Am J Hum Genet  2001; 69(1):124-137. 
74.     Wen G, Mahata SK, Cadman P, Ma hata M, Ghosh S, Mahapatra NR, Rao F, 
Stridsberg M, Smith DW, Mahboubi P, Schor k NJ, O'Connor DT, Hamilton BA. Both 
rare and common polymorphisms contribute functional variati on at CHGA, a regulator of 
catecholamine physiology. Am J Hum Genet  2004; 74(2):197-207.  3475.     Maraganore DM, de Andrade M, Le snick TG, Strain KJ, Farrer MJ, Rocca WA, 
Pant PVK, Frazer KA, Cox DR, Ballinge r DG. High-resolution whole-genome 
association study of Parkinson disease. Am J Hum Genet  2005; 77(5):685-693. 
76.     Klein RJ, Zeiss C, Chew EY, Ts ai JY, Sackler RS, Haynes C, Henning AK, 
SanGiovanni JP, Mane SM, Mayne ST, Bracken MB, Ferris FL, Ott J, Barnstable C, Hoh 
J. Complement Factor H polymorphism in age-related macular degeneration. Science  
2005; 308(5720):385-9. 77.     Lawrence RW, Evans DM, Cardon LR. Prospects and pitfalls in whole genome 
association studies. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci  2005; 360(1460):1589-1595. 
78.     Herbert A, Gerry NP, McQueen MB, Heid IM, Pfeufer A, Illig T, Wichmann HE, 
Meitinger T, Hunter D, Hu FB, Colditz G, Hi nney A, Hebebrand J, Koberwitz K, Zhu X, 
Cooper R, Ardlie K, Lyon H, Hirschhor n JN, Laird NM, Lenburg ME, Lange C, 
Christman MF. A common genetic variant is associated with adult and childhood obesity. 
Science  2006; 312(5771):279-283. 
79.     Quitkin FM, Rabkin JD, Markowitz JM, Stewart JW, McGrath, PJ, Harrison W. 
Use of pattern analysis to identify  true drug response. A replication. Arch Gen Psychiatry  
1987; 44(3):259-264. 80.     McGrath PJ, Stewart JW, Petkova E, Quitkin FM, Amsterdam JD, Fawcett J, 
Reimherr FW, Rosenbaum JF, Beasley CM, Jr. Predictors of relapse during fluoxetine 
continuation or maintenance treatment of major depression. J Clin Psychiatry  2000; 
61(7):518-524.  3581.     McGrath PJ, Stewart JW, Quitkin FM, Chen Y, Alpert JE, Nierenberg AA, Fava 
M, Cheng J, Petkova E. Predictors of relapse in a prospec tive study of fluoxetine 
treatment of major depression. Am J Psychiatry  2006; 163(9):1542-1548. 
82.     Carlson CS, Eberle MA, Rieder MJ, Yi Q, Kruglyak L, Nick erson DA. Selecting a 
maximally informative set of single-nucleotid e polymorphisms for association analyses 
using linkage disequilibrium. Am J Hum Genet  2004; 74(1):106-120. 
83.     Ke X, Cardon LR. Efficient sel ective screening of haplotype tag SNPs. 
Bioinformatics  2003; 19(2):287-288. 
84.     Stram DO, Haiman CA, Hirschhorn JN, Altshuler D, Kolonel LN, Henderson BE, 
Pike MC. Choosing haplotype-tagging SNPS based on unphased genotype data using a 
preliminary sample of unrelated subjects with  an example from the Multiethnic Cohort 
Study. Hum Hered  2003; 55(1):27-36. 
85.     Weale ME, Depondt C, Macdonald SJ, Smith A, Lai PS, Shorvon SD, Wood NW, 
Goldstein DB. Selection and evaluation of ta gging SNPs in the neuronal-sodium-channel 
gene SCN1A: implications for li nkage-disequilibrium gene mapping. Am J Hum Genet  
2003; 73(3):551-565. 86.     Devlin B, Roeder K, Wasserman L. Analysis of multilocus models of association. Genet Epidemiol  2003; 25(1):36-47. 
87.     Dudbridge F, Koeleman BP. Effici ent computation of significance levels for 
multiple associations in large studies of correlated data, including genomewide 
association studies. Am J Hum Genet  2004; 75(3):424-435. 
88.     Storey JD, Tibshirani R. Statis tical significance for genomewide studies. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A  2003; 100(16):9440-9445.  3689.     Wang H, Thomas DC, Pe'er I, St ram DO. Optimal two-stage genotyping designs 
for genome-wide association scans. Genet Epidemiol  2006; 30(4):356-368. 
90.     Skol AD, Scott LJ, Abecasis GR, Boehnk e M. Joint analysis is more efficient than 
replication-based analysis for two-st age genome-wide association studies. Nat Genet  
2006; 38(2):209-213. 91.     Laird NM, Lange C. Family-based designs in the age of large-scale gene-
association studies. Nat Rev Genet  2006; 7(5):385-394. 
92.     Cardon LR, Palmer LJ. Population stra tification and spurious  allelic association. 
Lancet  2003; 361(9357):598-604. 
93.     Tang H, Quertermous T, Rodriguez B, Kardia SL, Zhu X, Brown A, Pankow JS, Province MA, Hunt SC, Boerwinkle E, Schork NJ, Risch NJ. Genetic structure, self-
identified race/ethnicity, and confounding in case-control association studies. Am J Hum 
Genet  2005; 76(2):268-275. 
94.     Shriver MD, Mei R, Parra EJ, S onpar V, Halder I, Tishkoff SA, Schurr TG, 
Zhadanov SI, Osipova LP, Brutsaert TD, Friedlaender J, Jorde LB, Watkins WS, 
Bamshad MJ, Gutierrez G, Loi H, Matsuzaki H, Kittles RA, Argyropoulos G, Fernandez JR, Akey JM, Jones KW. Large-scale SNP an alysis reveals clus tered and continuous 
patterns of human genetic variation. Hum Genomics  2005; 2(2):81-89. 
95.     Devlin B, Roeder K, Wasserman L. Genomic control, a new approach to genetic-
based association studies. Theor Popul Biol  2001; 60(3):155-166. 
96.     Pritchard JK, Rosenberg NA. Use of unlinked genetic markers to detect population 
stratification in association studies. Am J Hum Genet  1999; 65(1):220-228.  3797.     Falush D, Stephens M, Pritchar d JK. Inference of population structure using 
multilocus genotype data: linked loci and correlated allele frequencies. Genetics  2003; 
164(4):1567-1587. 98.     Heidema AG, Boer JM, Nagelkerke N, Mariman EC, van der AD, Feskens EJ. The 
challenge for genetic epidemiologists: how to  analyze large numbers of SNPs in relation 
to complex diseases. BMC Genet  2006; Apr 21:7-23. 
99.     Young SS, Ge N. Recursive partitioning analysis of complex disease pharmacogenetic studies: I. Motivation and overview. Pharmacogenomics  2005; 6(1):65-
75. 100.     Zaykin DV, Young SS. Large recursive partitioning analysis of complex disease pharmacogenetic studies: II. St atistical considerations. Pharmacogenomics  2005; 
6(1):77-89.  
  
 38CHAPTER 2 
LINKAGE DISEQUILIBRIUM MA PPING OF VARIANTS IN 
PHARMACODYNAMIC CANDIDATE GE NES FOR ASSOCIATION WITH 
RESPONSE TO FLUOXETINE* 
 
2.1  Introduction 
Major depression has one of the hi ghest lifetime incidence rates among 
psychiatric disorders (1;2).  Thus, antid epressant medications are among the most 
commonly prescribed pharmacological agents.  However, despite recent advances in 
antidepressant pharmacotherapy, pa tient response rates can sti ll be as low as 60% for the 
first drug administered (3).  Inter-indivi dual variation in antidepressant efficacy is 
thought to be at least partly under genetic c ontrol (4-6).  Selectiv e serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs), commonly prescribed medications, are believed to exert their 
antidepressant effect through inhibiting the serotonin transporter, which terminates 
serotonin (5-HT) transmission.  A number of studies have tested th e association between 
DNA variations in the serotoni n transporter and response to  various SSRIs (4).  The 
majority of these studies re ly on assaying a common insertio n/deletion polymorphism in 
the SLC6A4  promoter that alters in v itro transcription of the gene  (7).  This 43 base pair 
insertion/deletion primarily comes in long (“l” ) and short (“s”) forms,  with the long form 
being more transcriptionally active in vitro .  In Caucasian subjects taking SSRIs, the 
presence of the long allele has been associat ed with response in multiple studies (8),  
                                                           
*  This chapter has been published previously:  Peters E.J., Slager S.L., McGrath P.J., Knowles J.A., 
Hamilton S.P. “Investigation of serotonin-re lated genes in antidepressant response.”  Mol Psychiatry 2004; 
9(9): 879-889. Reprinted with permission  
 39while in a Korean population, the short allele has been associ ated with a more favorable 
response (9).  In a second Korean population, the long allele was asso ciated with a better 
response (10).  The reason for this discrepanc y has not been addressed, but is likely to 
involve the unique popula tion histories of the SLC6A4  locus between the European/U.S. 
subjects and the Asian subjects (for detailed summary see (11)).  Furthermore, even in 
positive studies, this polymorphism does not explain all of the variance seen in response suggesting the involvement of othe r variants within other genes or environmental factors.   
As serotonin appears to play an important  role in depression, we first chose to 
pursue an analysis of a group of genes in  the serotonin pathway.  These genes are 
involved with the synthesis, si gnal transduction, transport, an d catabolism of serotonin.  
Tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH1) catalyzes the rate -limiting step in the biosynthesis of 5-
HT.  Recently, Walther et al.  described a second isof orm of tryptophan hydroxylase 
(TPH2), which was shown to be the major form  expressed in the brain, with TPH1 being 
expressed mainly in the periphery (12) , although central TPH1  function in early 
development appears critical (13).  Serotoni n receptors 1A (HTR1A), 2A (HTR2A), and 
2C (HTR2C) are involved in the neurotransmi ssion of 5-HT.  The serotonin transporter 
(SLC6A4 ), is involved with clearing the synapse of 5-HT.  Finally, monoamine oxidase A 
(MAOA) is one of the main enzymes involved in the degradation of 5-HT.  Monoamine 
oxidase inhibitors have been used for decades  to treat Major Depressive Disorder.  SSRIs 
have antagonistic properties at  serotonin receptors, while th e functional effect of SSRIs, 
increased synaptic 5-HT, has an indirect  effect on HTR1A, HTR2A, and HTR2C 
function (14-16).  SSRIs can modulate the expression of tryptophan hydroxylase mRNA, 
and inhibition of tryptophan hydroxylase activity  has dramatic effects on brain serotonin  
 40levels (17-19).  A number of studies have i ndividually investigated th e role of several of 
these genes in antidepressant response (20-23). 
Given the small number of reports at the time the work described in this chapter 
was performed, as well as biological data implic ating their role in se rotonergic function, 
we investigated the association between treatment response to fluoxetine and a large 
number of publicly available SNPs (N=110) in TPH1 , TPH2 , HTR1A , HTR2A , HTR2C , 
SLC6A4 , and MAOA .  We used a well-phenotyped population of persons with unipolar 
major depression and carried ou t an analysis of associati on between these variants and 
response to fluoxetine.  We attempted to limit phenotypic heterogeneity through use of 
response pattern analysis that classifies pati ents as non-responders, specific responders, 
or placebo responders to fluoxetin e (24).  We also utilized both single SNPs as well as 
haplotypes for detecting an association to SSRI response and a genomic control technique 
to correct for possible popul ation stratification.    
 
2.2  Methods 
2.2.1  Fluoxetine study population.  The study population consis ted of 96 research 
subjects enrolled in an ongoing NIMH-funded protocol (Patrick J. McGrath, Columbia 
University, principal investigator) to a ssess relapse following fluoxetine discontinuation 
in depressed subjects who had responded to fl uoxetine.  Inclusion in that clinical trial 
required subjects to be in a cu rrent episode of Major Depressi on, to be aged 18-65 years, 
and to give informed consent to be randomi zed to either fluoxetine continuation or to 
placebo substitution should they respond to acute treatment (24;25).  There was no 
depression severity threshold for inclusion.  The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM- 
 41IV Axis I Disorders - Patient Edition (SCID -I/P) was used to esta blish all psychiatric 
diagnoses (26).  Subjec ts with any history of psychosis, mania, organic mental syndrome, 
a history of substance abuse or dependence ac tive within the previous six months, with 
the exception of nicotine dependence, current  bulimia nervosa, or unstable physical 
illnesses were excluded.  Other Axis I co-morbid disorders were not exclusionary.  Medications known to cause or exacerbate  depression, such as beta-blockers or 
corticosteroids, or to have significant anit idepressant or anxiolytic properties, were 
exclusionary.  Study subjects were included if they took occasional hypnotic medication of a non-benzodiazepine type, oral contraceptiv es which were not temporally associated 
with onset or exacerbation of depression, or thyroid hormone replacement which was at a 
constant and effective dose for three mont hs prior to study.  Concomitant medications 
such as diuretics and antihypertensives were permitted.  Only data from the initial 12 week trial were used in these analyses as the number of subjects was considered to be 
inadequate to use follow-up data where subjects were randomized to fluoxetine or 
placebo and either maintained th eir response or relapsed (25). 
Patients were categorized as non-responde rs, specific pattern responders, or 
placebo-pattern responders by pattern analysis  after 12 weeks of open-label fluoxetine 
treatment (24).  Fluoxetine daily dosage was 10 mg for one week, 20 mg daily for three 
weeks, 40 mg for four weeks, and 60 mg for the remaining four weeks.  Dosage 
increments were made only in those tolerating the medication well and insufficiently responsive to 40 mg.  Response in any week was judged by the use of  the Clinical Global 
Impression Improvement score where a scor e of “much improved” or “very much 
improved” was required for response.  This cr iterion was applied with the definition that  
 42“much improved” characterized someone that the clinician believed was sufficiently 
improved that no change in treatment was warranted.  This usually corresponded to a 
decrement of between 50 and 75% in base line depression ratings on the Hamilton 
Depression Scale, the traditional measure of antidepressant efficacy.  Subjects responding 
at week 12 whose response began after the s econd week and were sustained until week 
12 were considered “specifi c-pattern” res ponders; subjects whose response began in 
weeks one or two but whose response was not sustained for all subs equent weeks until 
week 12 were considered “placebo-pattern” or  “non-specific” responders.  In short, 
pattern analysis draws on the observation that a specific response to medication is 
associated with a delayed response to active medication that is pers istent once achieved, 
while a non-specific response has an earlier onset of response and/or lack of persistence 
in improvement after onset.  This is base d on the observation, repl icated in several 
independent samples, that “placebo” or “non-specific” patterns are found equally among 
patients on active drug and on placebo, while only specific patterns are significantly more 
common on active medication (25;27).  While pa ttern analysis clearly does not perfectly 
characterize placebo and active medication response  (28), it is an attempt to deal with the 
problem that approximately half of all subjec ts (one quarter in th is study) who respond to 
medication treatment are having a placebo respon se (29).  Informed consent was obtained 
from each research participant, as was IRB approval from the New York State Psychiatric 
Institute and the University of California at San Francisco.  In this group, the average age 
was 37.1±11.6 years, and the male/female ratio was 47 to 49.  There were 77 (80%) responders and 19 (20%) non-responders to a 12 -week trial of fluoxetine.  The subjects 
were 78% Caucasian, 6% African-American, 7%  Hispanic, 5% Asian, and 3% other.   
 43There were no significant differe nces in ethnicity (by exact te st, p=0.07) or age (by t-test, 
p=0.19) between responders and non-responders .  Using a clinical pattern analysis 
paradigm, 20 of the 77 responders (26%) we re determined to be “non-specific” 
responders to fluoxetine (Figure 2.1). 
Four chimpanzee ( Pan troglodytes ) and one bonobo ( Pan paniscus ) genomic 
DNA samples were obtained from the Coriel l Institute for use in determining the 
ancestral allele at candidate SNPs (Coriell Institute for Medical Research, Camden, NJ) 
(30). 2.2.2  SSRI pharmacodynamic gene SNP genotyping.  Patient genomic DNA was 
extracted from whole blood using a Purege ne genomic DNA purification kit (Gentra 
Systems, Minneapolis, MN).  DNA was qua ntified using a ND-1000 spectrophotometer 
(NanoDrop Technologies, Rockland, DE).  A total of 165 SNPs were identified from publicly available databases or the 
literature and were chosen with an unbiased approach in an effort to distribute them 
evenly across the seven candidate genes (Fi gure 2.2).  These SNPs, very few of which 
were previously validated, re presented the best available at the time these experiments 
were carried out.  SNPs in the 5’ and 3’ re gion flanking the gene we re also included in 
this study.  One hundred ten of the 165 were used for genotyping, as 32 were 
monomorphic in our populati on and an adequate SNP ge notyping assay could not be 
developed for the final 23.  Of the 110 SNPs us ed in this study, 66 were intronic, 10 were 
exonic (4 non-synonymous and 6 synonymous ch anges), and 34 were located in the 5’ 
and 3’ flanking regions.  Fluor escence polarization detection of template-directed dye-
terminator incorporation (FP-TDI) was used to genotype SNPs, as described elsewhere   
 44 
        Figure 2.1.  Phenotype classifications in the fluoxetine sample set.  A.)  Breakdown of 
sample by primary phenotype comparison of categorical responders versus non-
responders.  B.)  Additional sub-classificati on of sample set based on specific and non-
specific response.        
 
    
Responders (N=77)
Non-Responders (N=19)Specific Responders (N=57)
Non-Reponders (N=19)
Non-Specific Responders (N=20)A. B. 
  
            
 
        Figure 2.2.  Pharmacodynamic candidate gene schematics. 
45 
  
     
Figure 2.2 (continued).  Pharmac odynamic candidate gene schematics.  Schema tic diagrams of the seven serotonergic 
genes studied.  Genes are showing in the 5’ to 3’ direction with solid boxes repr esenting exons.  SNPs assayed are shown 
as vertical lines with nomenclature used  in this paper given above the gene and any alternative nomenc lature given below 
the gene. 
 
   
46 
 47(31;32).  Briefly, the first step  involves polymerase chain reac tions (PCR) of 5 microliters 
(µl) containing 200 nM of the forward and reverse primers (Table 2.1), 20 ng genomic 
DNA template, 50 µM dNTPs (Roche, Indianap olis, IN), 1M anhydrous betaine (Acros 
Organics, Geel, Belgium), 50 mM KCl,  20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.4), 2.5 mM MgCl 2, and 
0.25 units Platinum Taq DNA polymerase (Invitr ogen, Carlsbad, CA).  All primers and 
TDI probes were designed using Primer3 soft ware and were manufa ctured by Invitrogen 
(Carlsbad, CA)(33).  Samples were cycled us ing a touchdown protocol at 94°C for 3 min, 
followed by 7 cycles of 94°C for 30 sec, 65° to 59°C for 30 sec (decreased by 1°C 
intervals per cycle), and 72°C for 30 sec, fo llowed by 38 cycles of 90°C for 30 sec, 58°C 
for 30 sec, and 72°C for 30 sec, with a final 10 min at 72°C.  The reactions were 
performed on an Applied Biosystems Ge neAmp PCR System 9700 (Foster City, CA, 
USA) using 384-well plates (MJ Research, Waltham, MA).  SLC6A4  SNPs were cycled 
on a DNA Engine Tetrad PTC-225 thermal cycl er in 384-well plates (MJ Research, 
Waltham, MA).  PCR conditions for SLC6A4  SNPs 9 and 11 were 1.5 mM magnesium 
with the following protocol: 94°C for 3 min, followed by 45 cycles of  90°C for 30 sec, 
55°C for 30 sec, and 72°C for 30 sec, with a final 10 min at 72°C.  The excess primers 
and deoxynucleotides in the PCR reaction we re then degraded by adding 0.2µl of 10X 
PCR Clean-Up Reagent (containing a mixtur e of shrimp alkaline phosphatase and 
exonuclease I) and 1.8 µl of PCR Clean-Up Dilution Buffer to each 5 µl PCR reaction 
(PerkinElmer, Boston, MA, USA).  The mixtur e was then incubated at 37°C for 60 min, 
followed by inactivation for 15 min at 80°C.  The final step was the addition of a 13 µl 
solution containing a final concentration of 0.38 µM TDI probe (Table 2.1), 2 µl of 10X  
 48SNP ID dbSNP rs# Position Alleles Allele freq. Size Forward / Reverse / FP Probe
HTR1A-1 rs968555 5' G/T 0.03 248 catgtgttgtttgacacaattctta
gatttgtgaaggtatctatttccactt
aaagctgaattatctaaaattaaactttgaaa
HTR1A-2 rs6295 5' C/G 0.52 94 gcgagaacggaggtagcttt
ggtgaacagtcctgggtcag
ggaagaagaccgagtgtgtcttc
HTR1A-3 rs6294 Exon (S) A/G 0.02 173 gacctcatggtgtcggtgtt
gtgatggcccagtacctgtc
atggccgcgctgtatcaggt
HTR1A-4 rs1800044 Exon (S) G /T 0.99 238 tc gctcactt ggcttatt gg
cggtcttctccacctttttg
gttctctatgggcgcatattcc
HTR1A-5 rs878567 3' C/T 0.50 217 aagcgacattggctcagact
ttcccaaacctcaagtccaa
cctgtatcatcagttttgatcccag
HTR1A-6 rs749098 3' C /G 0.73 236 attgcaaaaattgccagtga
ttcactgcagacccttctca
agagctgtcctttcactttcttaattataaa
HTR1A-7 rs749099 3' A /G 0.50 250 caaaccccaaatttgctcat
aaagcatcaggcactcttttg
ccatttatttgtgtcttttacagaattgt
HTR1A-8 rs1423691 3' A /G 0.50 152 taacccgaaagggtcttgg
ccaccctgttgcaactcttt
tcagaatgaggagagaatcattaacc
HTR1A-9 rs970453 3' A/G 0.49 197 gcaggacttggtgtctggat
ctgccatctggatttggaat
cttttgcagcttcatcggtaaac
HTR1A-10 rs1364043 3' G/T 0.27 167 ttt gaagagggcacaattcc
aagcgaactcaaacagcaaaa
ccattcttaatacactacttaacatggtatttt
HTR2A-1 rs6311 5' C/T 0.55 208 atggccttttgtgcagattc
ctagccaccctgagcctatg
cctcggagtgctgtgagtgtc
HTR2A-2 rs6312 5' C /T 0.08 236 ggccaagcatgatttcaaac
gctcttgcatgcagtttttg
tgagaacttacatttgtcttcagggt
HTR2A-3 rs6313 Exon (S) A/G 0.45 295 acccttcacaggaaaggttg
cagcatgtacaccagcctca
tgcatcagaagtgttagcttctcc
HTR2A-4 rs6304 Exon (NS) C/T 0.02 218 ttcagaaagcacgaactgtca
ggatttacctggacgtgctc
cctactgatatggtccaaacagcaa
HTR2A-5 rs6305 Exon (S) A/G 0.02 218 ttcagaaagcacgaactgtca
ggatttacctggacgtgctc
ttctggatggcgacgtagcg
HTR2A-6 rs2025296 Intron C/T 0.91 233 tcataaaccaaccaactttgtca
ttttgtttgctttgtgtgtgg
agtctagctggaattttaaaatatgatctaac
HTR2A-7 rs927544 Intron A/G 0.74 161 ct gggaatgtcctcca gtgt
agcatgctcatttaggtccaa
tcaagcattttttttccagaagatac
HTR2A-8 rs1928039 Intron C /T 0.04 153 ca gcagatgggatctggttt
aatgccccttaattcccatc
cctgcatttcatgcagtttcct
HTR2A-9 rs666693 Intron A/G 0.12 249 cgtgcaaaaaggacacatga
atattctcagggcccattcc
tgagaagcactgcctacactatca
HTR2A-10 rs2770296 Intron C/T 0.26 230 aggcttaccgagaaagctga
tcaaagccaggtcttgtgact
ctgtgcaatcaactcaggcct
HTR2A-11 rs659734 Intron A /G 0.93 222 gcaggaatggaaagctgact
cacgtcagcccaagtttaca
ataatagctggtaggaaattgaactgaa
HTR2A-12 rs2246127 Intron C/T 0.40 233 aagcaaaacaatccctcgtaga
cttcaaaaccctgctgcatt
cccacttgctttgttcagaaaaa                  
Table 2.1.  Pharmacodynamic candidate gene SNP assay descriptions.  
 49SNP ID dbSNP rs# Position Alleles Allele freq. Size Forward / Reverse / FP Probe
HTR2A-13 rs619549 Intron A/G 0.01 189 gtccca gtcatc ggtagcat
tctcctgaaagcccatcact
ttttgctttggaatattatcaaatagc
HTR2A-14 rs1923884 Intron A/G 0.14 202 tctcatctt ggccttgctct
gcccaggggcactaatctat
tggtacaaatagtgtcagctgatcag
HTR2A-15 rs1923882 Intron C /T 0.70 195 ca gcctgggagaaaaa gtca
gatggcaagagtgaggcagt
catattatcagcacactcagaattgtagaa
HTR2A-16 rs6314 Exon (NS) A/G 0.10 250 ccac ggcaacta gcctatca
ttcagtgtcagtacaaggaaaacaa
gctattgtctttagaagcctcttcagaat
HTR2A-17 rs3125 3' UTR C /G 0.18 165 ccaa gcacacatttt gtagca
caactgtggaaggcacactg
agtctagtggaaccaacgatcatatct
HTR2C-1 rs540285 5' C /T 0.59 202 gtgttccatcatt gcctca g
aagggtatcccaggcaaaa
aatgagagtctcagcacacagca
HTR2C-2 rs527236 5' A/G 0.23 249 a ggcagatttgctgctgatt
tcacttcaaaactgccagga
aaaatttcagtaatgcaaatatttaaaaagtaat
HTR2C-3 rs493533 5' C /T 0.61 174 gagatggctttca ggactgc
tcattgctctattagccaacca
tctatcatatttaccctttggaattgtg
HTR2C-4 Yuan C-759T 5' C /T 0.85 172 gtgcatct gaggaaggaagc
gcactaagagaccggtccaa
ttggctcctcccctcatcc
HTR2C-5 rs518147 5' UTR C /G 0.39 172 gtgcatct gaggaaggaagc
gcactaagagaccggtccaa
taggcgctctggtgcttgc
HTR2C-6 rs543229 Intron C /T 0.25 152 aa gcaccccaaatcctacct
cctggggagggaagaaaata
tgcaatcaacaagccttatcca
HTR2C-7 rs538680 Intron C/T 0.98 222 ttagctggagagggatgacg
tttcccctcaatttttcaagg
aggcttgactcaattataatgttgga
HTR2C-8 rs556677 Intron C /T 0.76 226 atat ggtggctgttgcactg
aaggccttctggtccctaaa
agctattagaaagcctttagaactgcat
HTR2C-9 rs498177 Intron A/G 0.55 249 ccaca gtactggacttctccaa
tgatctgagcccaggtagaaa
gttatttca gggtagaaaga ccatacttg
HTR2C-10 rs1023574 Intron C /G 0.62 201 gccaatac ggcttacatttca
aaataagaaagcttagccaggaaa
ggtattcatttagtaacaccatatttcaattat
HTR2C-11 rs2192371 Intron A/G 0.61 160 t gggatcagaccaa gttacca
ctccaatatgggctgaaaaca
gtctggtaaaccacctgtctaatctatta
HTR2C-12 rs2192372 Intron A /G 0.39 172 tccataaccc gattgctctt
tctgaaggcaattcaagcaa
ccagcaaatatttagacatgtgacatttt
HTR2C-13 rs2248440 Intron C /T 0.77 249 gcaagccatttat gcagattt
tctctccccagaaaggatga
gcaagctaccaagcaaagttatctttt
HTR2C-14 rs2428727 Intron C /T 0.23 229 ccctttac ggcagtcctaca
ggcccatcttgagtgtcatt
ggctatatactaagttggcacaggc
HTR2C-15 rs6318 Exon (NS) C/G 0.77 186 aatttgaagcgtccaccatc
gttgttttgcatgagcaacg
gctactgggctcacagaaatatca
HTR2C-16 rs2497527 Intron G/T 0.19 243 tttct ggaggacccttcctt
tggaaattggcagtcattca
tgtagtttaatcctgcaaagctacatagat
HTR2C-17 rs2497522 Intron C /T 0.77 154 ttttt gggtgaatgcctgag
cccttcacaaagtccctctg
tcaagatcagccctgtggaata  
Table 2.1 (con’t).  Pharmacodynamic candi date gene SNP assay descriptions.  
 50SNP ID dbSNP rs# Position Alleles Allele freq. Size Forward / Reverse / FP Probe
HTR2C-18 rs2428698 Intron C /T 0.81 172 cacctc ggaaaataccatt ga
cataacagaaaatgtttggcaga
tgacagatgaactgacatggcac
HTR2C-19 rs1414334 Intron C /G 0.24 214 ca gggataaaatt ggcctca
tcacacacaggccatgagat
gcttatctacagtgactttgctaccct
HTR2C-20 rs1360851 Intron A/C 0.79 199 tgctcaaaattccacacagaa
gatggctgggctgagtctaa
gtaaaatgtagagttgggagatatgcagt
HTR2C-21 rs1360852 Intron C /T 0.78 199 tgctcaaaattccacacagaa
gatggctgggctgagtctaa
gaaaagattctctttttagcaagggtttt
HTR2C-22 rs1414324 3' C/T 0.77 154 tattatttgccagccgcttc
gatgctggattgagaacacattt
ccattcacctctgtgtgatttga
HTR2C-23 rs1414327 3' A/G 0.22 250 caatacagcagttccttgcaca
tgctgccctatgaaaaaggt
tcaacatggtttctttataacatcgatac
HTR2C-24 rs2310797 3' C /T 0.23 219 tggggctttaatccctatctg
caccctcgataactggcatt
aactcacttgcctagggtcacag
HTR2C-25 rs1335617 3' C /T 0.25 189 tggagctttgtctcctcagc
cagggacaaacagatcagca
ttttaagttttgtcatcccaacctta
MAOA-1 rs2310820 5' G/T 0.73 190 cttggctggcagagactttc
ggagaaacggttcagaggaa
aaactttatctctctttctgaaaggaaac
MAOA-2 rs1181275 5' A/G 0.09 267 atccctaatgggagttgcac
aagagtgaaacgccatctcaa
ttttcaaaaatatataggaaggataaatc
MAOA-3 rs1465107 Intron C /T 0.71 298 ttt gccattcaaatca gcag
tgaagggttaaggtttaagttatttagg
ggagctcagaaatcttttgtaatgtaataac
MAOA-4 rs1465108 Intron A /G 0.31 298 ttt gccattcaaatca gcag
tgaagggttaaggtttaagttatttagg
gtaaacatgcaaactgaaacattagc
MAOA-5 rs2179098 Intron C /T 0.99 230 ctcccaaact gctgggatta
tggcatctgtgaaagaggaa
ttaagatagaaacaataatgagttcttctgg
MAOA-6 rs6323 Exon A /C 0.69 250 t gaggaaatt gacagaccaa ga
ccagagcttccagcagagag
aatgacagctcccattggaag
MAOA-7 rs979606 Intron C/T 0.30 373 aag aaatggggattttgacaac
caaaaggccattgcttggta
ctttttgttaaagcaacgatattattgact
MAOA-8 rs979605 Intron A /G 0.31 373 aagaaatggggattttgacaac
caaaaggccattgcttggta
caaatttaaaaggaaaagcagagttca
TPH1-1 Rotondo T-7180G 5' A /C 0.66 248 attcactaatgttgcaggatacaaa
aggattcttccgatccatga
caaaggagtgaaagatctctacaatga
TPH1-2 Rotondo T-7065C 5' C/T 0.65 248 attcactaatgttgcaggatacaaa
aggattcttccgatccatga
tgttcaccattggcatacagaaa
TPH1-3 Rotondo T-5806G 5' G /T 0.66 248 gccgtccttaaccacacaag
gttgctctgcctcaaggaat
tattaaatagcccagaagcacagaga
TPH1-4 rs652458 5' C /T 0.43 217 tgccctaggaattaggcattt
ggggtctttgtctatttgtttgc
ttatatcataaagcaacttttccacatg
TPH1-5 rs623580 5' A/T 0.30 226 tcagggatggcctcagataa
cttgcctagatggatttgcag
agtatgggcgacgttgtccta
TPH1-6 rs685249 Intron A /C 0.55 187 gggagggaggtggtatcagt
acataccatattctcagtcccactc
caacctcttttaactatttctggtcgtt  
Table 2.1 (con’t).  Pharmacodynamic candi date gene SNP assay descriptions.  
 51SNP ID dbSNP rs# Position Alleles Allele freq. Size Forward / Reverse / FP Probe
TPH1-7 rs684302 Intron A /G 0.45 220 ggaatgaagagagatggagca
cccagtccttccaaatctga
aataaaatacctgtatgtcttcttccatca
TPH1-8 rs211107 Intron G/T 0.55 229 gatggggg tgctctgtgtat
ttcttcgcagcccttaccta
ggagattatctgctctaaccttctcatt
TPH1-9 rs172423 Intron C/T 0.21 208 gggacttggggaagtagctc
ttcactcgaggcaaaagaca
aatagcagtcctgattacacctcaaata
TPH1-10 rs211105 Intron A /C 0.79 214 tcaggttgatgtctaagttttgga
agatcaaggtggcaaagacaa
atttctaagatcttttccatcggc
TPH1-11 rs2056246 Intron A /C 0.45 262 gctcttttccaagggtgagg
accatgctcagccattttgt
acaagatatagtcaaatgattaaggaaaaaa
TPH1-12 rs1607395 Intron A/G 0.55 210 tgctttgttttctccactatggta
gaggcataaacaaagggtaagg
tttgttccttttagttctttatatttgtttg
TPH1-13 rs2237907 Intron C /G 0.55 170 tgcagatatccccttccaac
gatttggaggaaacgctttg
gctgatctcttagggtctggagc
TPH1-14 rs1800532 Intron G /T 0.55 221 tttcccccactggaatacaa
tttttggtgtgcgaggatta
tccctatgctcagaatagcagcta
TPH1-15 rs1799913 Intron G/T 0.55 164 accgttgccagtttttgaac
cactgcagcgtgacaaactt
agttcatggcaggtatctctgaaa
TPH1-16 rs211102 Intron A/G 0.17 151 actctgctccagcttcttgc
tcctgggagaaggacatctg
agcacatcactcattttccatca
TPH1-17 rs1134530 3' A/T 0.02 409 ttt gcttaca gtagatttcctt gc
catcagcttcctttcccagt
ctaatcaactcttaagtatacatttgatggtaaa
TPH1-18 rs2108977 3' C /T 0.60 409 ttt gcttaca gtagatttcctt gc
catcagcttcctttcccagt
ctataaatcagataatcaatatttcaaatgattc
TPH1-19 rs521318 3' C/T 0.03 291 a gttgtggattataa ggctgtgc
ttggttgcaaggaaatctactg
cgttatcaaagttgtatgaaaataacca
TPH2-1 rs2129575 Intron G /T 0.76 210 act ggaaagcatttggcaag
cagcaaggtcagtggttcct
ggatcaatgcctggacactaaa
TPH2-2 rs1386488 Intron G/T 0.21 229 tcctgtgaggcgaatttttc
gtcgtggagaaaggacgaag
cttctcatctgtcttaagcaccatg
TPH2-3 rs1843809 Intron G /T 0.21 238 ttgggggctgttacaatgat
catgaggttcatgggctacc
aggccctgagctcctactttaattat
TPH2-4 rs2171363 Intron C/T 0.53 205 caaccgccaggtagaaatgt
gggtaagggaatgggtgaat
ccccacctttggtgtttctg
TPH2-5 rs1386492 Intron A/G 0.75 216 ttgctgggcattagacttca
ctgcgagaagtggagtaggg
cctgggaggatggtgtaccac
TPH2-6 rs1386491 Intron C/G 0.22 216 ttgctgggcattagacttca
ctgcgagaagtggagtaggg
ctgctgcccagtaagggtcc
TPH2-7 rs1843812 Intron C /T 0.81 240 gaatcctcacttggggtctg
cccctcacaagcctatttcc
gtgaaatgatgtcactgtatgattcat
TPH2-8 rs1487281 Intron G/T 0.19 214 tcctcaggcagaaggaccta
aggcacattatccctccaca
tgatctttggagagaaaaaagcttta
TPH2-9 rs1386497 Intron G /T 0.22 209 caagagccacataccatcca
ttgtttctgcaagtgggtca
ggctggttggaatctgtggg  
Table 2.1 (con’t).  Pharmacodynamic candi date gene SNP assay descriptions.  
 52SNP ID dbSNP rs# Position Alleles Allele freq. Size Forward / Reverse / FP Probe
TPH2-10 rs1487284 Intron A/G 0.24 242 aaa gggcgaaattcatt gtg
ctctcagcatgagaaagtactggt
gcttttggtggtcatgaatcac
TPH2-11 rs1487278 Intron C/T 0.20 215 ggcccct ggagagtttctta
tctccaaggagaagctcgac
cctctaactttcaacaactcacgtt
TPH2-12 rs1487276 Intron C /T 0.78 173 gcaaagggtcatttggaaaa
tgcaggtattttgcctttca
aatgagtgagactgctgaatataaaactag
TPH2-13 rs1386487 Intron G/T 0.34 247 gacagcgtgtttggatttca
cctcccaaattgaagggtatc
ggtctgagctatcatttctgttttg
TPH2-14 rs1872824 3' A /G 0.31 215 gaatgttggtggtgctgaca
gcaggtgaaccttttctgga
cctctcatctccccaaatgc
SLC6A4-1 rs25533 5' C/T 0.07 166 ctgcgagcgtgtgtgtgt
cgtcactttgaggcgaataaa
ccgtagcgcggcccctccc
SLC6A4-2 rs2020934 Intron C/T 0.53 125 tctgtgtgaagccactgagg
ttgctcaatttgcacaaacc
ggtggcagtgaccgttccaa
SLC6A4-3 rs2066713 Intron C/T 0.62 104 ctctctacccaggcccaga
actgctcactgctgctgcta
gatggaccgcatttcccttc
SLC6A4-4 rs2020936 Intron A/G 0.81 179 gctaggggctgtgtgtgtgt
aaggccaggcagtagcataa
gaaggatatgaattctgacaagagcg
SLC6A4-5 rs2020937 Intron A/T 0.62 179 gctaggggctgtgtgtgtgt
aaggccaggcagtagcataa
tgttgggccctccrccaccc
SLC6A4-6 rs2020938 Intron A/G 0.78 179 gctaggggctgtgtgtgtgt
aaggccaggcagtagcataa
accrcacttgttgggccctcc
SLC6A4-7 rs2020939 Intron C/T 0.60 179 gctaggggctgtgtgtgtgt
aaggccaggcagtagcataa
tggyggagggcccaacaagtg
SLC6A4-8 rs25528 Intron G/T 0.21 143 ccagagctgagctgacttcc
gggagaagagtgtgcaggtt
ctgatgctggggtggttggt
SLC6A4-9 rs6354 5' UTR G/T 0.19 148 caccccagcatcagtaacct
cactgctgctcaccatttgt
gctaagccccttgttattctgcaa
SLC6A4-10 rs6355 Exon (NS) C/G 0.99 151 agcagttccaagtcctggtg
gtccacagcatagccaatca
ggatagagtgccgtgtgtcatct
SLC6A4-11 rs2020942 Intron A/G 0.35 114 cctgaggtctgtgcaaatca
agcaaactctttggaggaagg
cacatggttttattctcgagcc
SLC6A4-12 rs140699 Intron A/G 0.01 127 taacaggccaacccctca
actcctggaacactggcaac
ctgaagaattttacacgtaagtgcac
SLC6A4-13 rs140700 Intron C/T 0.89 110 gaggtgggtgaatggatgtc
atccgatccctgtgtgactc
tgaagaccttgagaaaggaggg
SLC6A4-14 rs717742 Intron A/T 0.79 137 ggttagcctggaactcctga
catgcccttcggttttgt
ctcttattatttttatatacaggagcgc
SLC6A4-15 rs140701 Intron A/G 0.42 139 agtgtgaggacgcacttggt
agaggaggaggtggttgaca
cacacataaggtcttgtgatgagaatt
SLC6A4-16 rs6353 Exon (S) C/T 0.99 148 agaagcgatagccaacatgc
gctgagtcctcctcctttcc
atttccccttcccatttcctcac
SLC6A4-17 rs1042173 3' UTR A/C 0.56 130 aaactgcgtaggagagaacagg
cttcctttcctgatgccaca
aggttctagtagattccagcaataaaatt  
Table 2.1 (con’t).  Pharmacodynamic candi date gene SNP assay descriptions.  
 53The following SNPs were not 
polymorphic in our sample:FP-TDI assays could not be 
developed for the following assays:
rs3033664 rs918643
rs1800043 rs1328685
rs1800042 rs1805055
rs1048281 rs6308
rs968554 rs1048952
rs1800045 rs505971rs1800041 rs2376488rs1799920 rs2497541rs1799921 rs2310883rs2149433 rs3027393rs2070038 rs1801291
rs1058576 rs593414
rs1058573 Rotondo (1999) G-6526A
Yuan (2000) G-995A rs2732333
rs2228669 rs2468922rs3027394 rs2732330rs2283726 rs2468912rs1799835 rs2468913rs1800465 rs25530rs1803986 rs25531
rs3027408 rs25532
rs1133758 rs956304
rs211100 rs745706rs211101rs490895rs503964
rs2887148rs2887147rs1007023rs2468918
rs6352
rs140702
 
 
Table 2.1 (con’t).  Pharmacodynamic gene SNP assay descriptions. Shown are all SNPs 
investigated in this current study.  Position co lumn indicates region of gene where SNP is 
located, according to UCSC genome browse r (http://genome.ucsc.edu).  Interrogated 
shows acycloterminators used for assay, and under lined is the ancestral allele, as inferred 
by genotyping primate DNA samples (not performed on SLC6A4  variants).  Allele 
frequency is given for the firs t allele listed.  Size of the P CR product is shown, as well as 
the forward, reverse and FP pr obe sequences in descending order.  For SNPs without an 
assigned dbSNP ID, references are given fo r the following manuscripts: Yuan (34) and 
Rotondo (35).  
 54TDI Reaction Buffer, 0.5 µl of AcycloTerm inator Mix (containing R110 and TAMRA 
labeled AcycloTerminators, corresponding to the polymorphic base), and 0.025 µl of 
AcycloPol DNA polymerase (PerkinElmer).  Th is mixture was cycled at 95°C for 2 min, 
followed by 25 cycles of 94°C for 15 sec a nd 55°C for 30 sec.  Following template-
directed incorporation, fluorescence pol arization was read using a Victor2 1420 
Multilabel Counter (PerkinElmer).  For the SLC6A4  SNPs, the genotypes were read using 
a TECAN Ultra plate reader ( TECAN-US, Research Triangle Park, NC).  Data output is 
expressed in dimensionless units, mP , as previously described (31;36). 
2.2.3  SSRI pharmacodynamic gene repeat polymorphism genotyping.  PCR 
amplification of the VNTR in the upstream  regulatory region of MAOA was carried out 
using the primers listed in Table 2.2.  Amplifi cations were performed in a final volume of 
10 µl containing 20 ng of genomic DNA template, 50 µM dNTPs, 1M anhydrous betaine, 
50 mM KCl, 20 mM Tris-H Cl (pH 8.4), 1.5 mM MgCl 2, and 0.5 units Platinum Taq 
DNA polymerase.  Samples were denatured at 95ºC for 4 min, followed by 35 cycles of 
95ºC for 1 min, 62ºC for 1 min, and 72ºC for 1 min, with a final 10 min step at 72ºC (37).  
PCR products were separated on an ABI Pr ism 3700 DNA Analyzer and alleles were 
scored using Genotyper 3.5 NT so ftware (Applied Biosystems). 
 PCR amplification of the tandem repeat polymorphisms in the upstream regulatory region (5-HTTLPR) and intron 4 (I ntron 2 VNTR) of SLC6 A4 was carried out 
with fluorescent dye-labeled pr imers listed in Table 2.2, as was amplification of a simple 
sequence repeat in intron 9 (Intron 7 [GAAA] n).  Of note, marker names are keyed to 
traditional names for continuity with the l iterature, despite the misnaming due to the 
discovery of additional non-coding exons.  For these polymorphisms, amplification was  
 55Gene Polymorphism Forward Reverse Size
SLC6A4 5-HTTLPR atgccagcacctaacccctaatgt ggaccgcaaggtgggcggga 418
SLC6A4 Intron 2 VNTR tgttcctagtcttacgccagtg cagaatggagggggtcagta 311SLC6A4 Intron 7 (GAAA)n accgcaccccgtctctctcttt acacctgtaagcacagccacttg 269
MAOA MAOA VNTR acagcctgaccgtggagaag gaacggacggctccattcgga 323
 
 
Table 2.2.  Pharmacodynamic gene repeat polym orphism assay descriptions.  Shown are 
the primers for all repeat (VNTR) polymorphism s investigated in this current study.  Size 
represents size of amplicon in base pairs according to the sequence of the associated clone.   
 56performed in a final volume of 5 µl containing 20 ng of genomic DNA template, 50 µM 
nucleotide mix (i.e., 50 µM each of dATP, dCTP, dTTP, and 25 µM each of dGTP and 7- 
deaza-dGTP), 1M anhydrous betaine, 5% DMSO, 50 mM KCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 
8.4), 1.83 mM MgCl 2, 200 nM primers, and 0.25 units Platinum Taq DNA polymerase.  
Samples were denatured at 95ºC for 5 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95ºC for 30 sec, 61ºC for 30 sec, and 72ºC for 1 min, with a final 6 min step at 72º C.  For the Intron 2 
VNTR, amplification was perfor med in a final volume of 5 µl containing 20 ng of 
genomic DNA template, 50 µM dNTPs, 1M anhydrous betaine, 5% DMSO, 50 mM KCl, 
20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.4), 1.5 mM MgCl
2, 300 nM primers, and 0.25 units Platinum Taq 
DNA polymerase.  Samples were denatured at 95ºC for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of 
95ºC for 30 sec, 56ºC for 30 sec, and 72ºC for 40 sec, with a final 6 min step at 72ºC 
(38).  Intron 7 (GAAA)n was amplified using the same conditions and cycling protocol 
described above for SNPs.  PCR products for all three SLC6A4  repeat polymorphisms 
were separated on an ABI Prism 3100 DNA Anal yzer and alleles were scored using 
Genotyper 3.5 NT software (Applied Biosystems).  2.2.4  Genomic control SNP genotyping.  In order to correct for any population 
stratification within the sample  collection, the method of genom ic control (GC) was used.  
A collection of 20 unlinked C/T SNPs were chosen randomly throughout the genome 
(Table 2.3).  They were chosen from a collection of 18,150 SNPs assayed using a pooled 
sequencing strategy by Dr. Pui-Yan Kwok for th e Allele Frequency Project of the SNP 
Consortium (http://snp.cshl.org/al lele_frequency_project/).  Candidate SNPs were then 
chosen by iterative elimination if the SN P a) failed in the 3 populations tested 
(Caucasian, African-American, Asian), b) wa s non-polymorphic in Caucasians, the   
 57Location SNP ID Freq (Cau) Freq (AA) Freq (Asian) Size Forward / Reverse / FP Probe
1p31 rs997532 0.70 0.80 0.35 144 tcattcgtcacatcctgatttt
gcccaggcttctgttttaca
tcaattaaaatcatagcattcttaatttca
1q42 rs734551 0.50 0.35 0.50 99 ccccagagaaacggaacat
caatttggagtcgattcctgt
aacttggactttgcaacatctttt
2p11 rs735738 0.65 0 .30 0.10 107 aggttcattctggacaagcaa
tatcgggggtcccttttaat
caactctgcataagttcctgaaca
2p23 rs734693 0.30 0 .40 0.35 110 cttaggccaatggggaaact
gacactcagcatgccaggta
gggaaggtgacccaagtgga
3p24 rs952134 0.30 0 .50 0.40 96 ctcatctgcaggtcccactg
ccttgcagggcattaggtat
tgatctattaaagaacagaaccaatatagagata
4p12 rs728292 0.45 0.50 1.00 98 cactgtgcctttccagacct
acccccaccttcacattctt
tcatatcctttcagaatgaaggga
5q13 rs28137 0.57 0.74 0.47 141 agcgtcagtttactccactcg
accctactcccacagctaagaa
tttcaaaatcactactctataatttcaagaaa
6q27 rs1123365 0.50 0.60 0.55 138 cacaggggtgtgaaattcct
ttccaacatttggcaaacaa
acccgttacgtccccaagc
7q31 rs1343903 0.70 0.70 0.60 300 caggcacataaagcccattt
tcttcatctggccatggaat
aatttttcatgttttataggaattatttctatct
8q23 rs722740 0.40 0.25 0 .50 99 gcagcctgagatctagctttg
gcagtcctgtcctcagcatt
ttctggtttgtttatgataacttgcc
9p22 rs718623 0.37 0.51 0.11 121 tgatatgccaatcaaacacaatct
aaggaagtaaggcaaccagga
gctagtggtgttctggtattagtcaca
10q22 rs768498 0.50 0.68 0.90 131 tgagagggatttgggtgtgt
tcccagactttctggctttc
gcattttaacttcctcgttcctgt
11p11 rs730129 0.6 1 0.53 N 132 agccatg aagaaggtggaca
ccctctggatcatgagctgt
gggaaccgcaccctctcctc
12q13 rs998820 0.65 0.50 0.8 4 97 ggctcagcttgtctttccac
caaagggacccaggaataca
aaagggagagagcattgtttcc
13q14 rs730924 0.45 0.60 0.85 109 ctatctctgagaat gaatggagacc
gttgaggcgacagaagtcct
caagtacctacctgatacgaacaaaatt
14q32 rs1005788 0.33 0.57 0.55 105 gaaggtggaagaagctgtgg
ccgtggacctcactggataa
tcattgagatgctggctcaag
15q13 rs883473 0.50 0.25 0.25 117 gcccaaggtcactctgtgat
tgactttgttctgccgaagtt
ccaagtctaaaggaagcagcaga
16p12 rs24656 0.50 0.85 0.20 107 cctgagcatggatgggaata
tggagccggataattaccaa
gtggaaacaagtcaatcaggaaca
17q24 rs719615 0.60 0.80 0.5 0 166 ctagcaaa tggccaatcctg
aaataatgttccacagaaaactaaagg
aatgttcaagaaaatatattctatttccca
20q13 rs47223 0.60 0.62 0.68 101 gcacaaagccaacagtcctt
cttgacaaggccgtcaattt
gaaaagtgatggaaacgccc  
Table 2.3.  Genomic control SNP assay descri ptions.  Shown are the 20 SNPs used for 
the genomic control procedure. Listed are the chromosomal locations, as well as the 
dbSNP ID, and the allele frequency in Caucas ian, African-American, and Asian samples.  
PCR amplicon size and primer and FP probe sequences are also shown.  
 58predominant group in this study, c) was non- polymorphic in the 3 populations, d) had a 
minor allele frequency <0.3 in  Caucasians, e) failed in African-American population, and 
f) was a non-C/T SNP.  This yi elded 1,423 SNPs eligible for use.  Of these, SNPs were 
chosen at random and were analyzed bioi nformatically to determine chromosomal 
location.  This process was stopped when at leas t two SNPs were localized to each of the 
22 autosomes.  Then the genome was essent ially divided into 20 segments, and SNPs 
were chosen to fit into each  of these segments.  Naturall y, very large chromosomes would 
be over-represented due to th e proportion of the genome fo und on those chromosomes.  
SNPs near genes are over-represented, with 11 occurring in non-gene regions and 9 occurring in the introns of known genes.  There were no exonic SNPs in this group.  
SNPs were limited to C/T SNPs based on laboratory convenience and uniformity.  These SNPs were genotyped using FP-TD I, as described above.    
2.2.5  Statistical analysis.  Single point association tests were performed via logistic 
regression using the statistical package R 1.6.1 (39).  Alleles were coded as 0, 1, or 2 
corresponding to the presence of 0, 1, or 2 copies  of the rare allele.  This coding scheme 
was chosen because of its robustness to depart ure from the true additive genetic model   
(40).  For each SNP, three phenotypic compar isons were made based on the results from 
the response pattern analysis described in  the Sample description.  The comparisons 
made were: (1) all responde rs (specific and non-specific)  versus non-responders, (2) 
specific responders versus both non-specifi c responders and non-responders, and (3) 
specific responders versus non-specific respond ers.  Empirical p-values were obtained 
based on 100,000 simulations using the CLUMP computer program (41).  This program 
holds the marginal allele frequencies c onstant and permutes the cell counts in a  
 59contingency table.  For each SNP with no minally significant asso ciation, odds ratio 
estimates and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were computed, comparing carriers of the rare allele to non-carriers.  Haplotypes using all markers from each gene were constructed 
and frequencies estimated using an Expect ation Maximization (EM)  algorithm in the 
Arlequin 2.0 program (42).  For selection of  “tag” SNPs (htSNPs), haplotype frequency 
estimations for each gene region were ente red into the SNPtagger program (43).  A 
“coverage value” of 80% was set in order to capture the major haplotype diversity while 
excluding the extremely rare haplotypes.  Ha plotype frequency differences were then 
tested for significance using the three respons e phenotype comparisons listed above with 
the CLUMP computer program (41)  Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE) was determined for each SNP using the Arlequin 2.0 program (42).  Linkage disequilibrium acro ss each candidate gene was 
assessed using the computer program GOLD (44).  For MAOA and HTR2C, the X-linked 
option was chosen.  We accounted for popula tion stratification through the use of GC 
(45).  This was determined by adjusting the single point χ
2 statistic by a correction factor 
λ.  Briefly, the χ2 statistic is generated for each GC SNP.  These numbers are then 
averaged, generating λ.  The χ2 for each candidate associatio n test is computed and then 
divided by λ, approximating a χ2 with one degree of freedom.  The significance level was 
set at p < 0.05 after GC correction.  This si gnificance threshold, wh ile liberal given the 
number of SNPs that we tested, reflects our acknowledgment of the limited statistical 
power of this sample as well as the fact that this study is inte nded to be hypothesis 
generating as opposed to a strict replicati on or validation of previously suspected 
variants.    
 602.3  Results 
2.3.1  Single locus association results.  In our primary phenotypic comparison, response 
versus non-response to fluoxetine, three SNPs in the TPH1  gene were significantly 
associated (p<0.05) (Table 2.4).  Odds ratio estimates indicate d a protective effect, i.e., 
carriers of the rare allele were less likely to  respond to treatment.  However, both of the 
previously studied A218C and A779C TPH1  SNPs (22) did not re ach significance in our 
study.  A single SLC6A4  SNP showed nominally significa nt association to treatment 
response (p=0.037).  None of th e SNPs investigated in the TPH2 , HTR1A , HTR2A , 
HTR2C , or MAOA  gene region reached significan ce in this phenotypic comparison.  
 In an effort to utilize detailed clinical information in order to provide more precise 
phenotypic definitions, we attempted to further delineate treatment response phenotypes using clinical data.  We performed two such alternative phenotypic comparisons 
involving subgroups of the patients by specific ity of response type as classified through 
use of pattern analysis.  Th e first comparison is based on the hypothesis that specific 
responders differ genetically from all other subjects.  The second comparison is a variation of this hypothesis: among responde rs, specific responders differ genetically 
from non-responders.  In the specific respons e vs. all others (non- specific response and 
non-response) comparison, one SNP in the HTR2A  gene and three SNPs in the TPH2  
gene led to significant associ ations (Table 2.4).  None of  the SNPs tested in the HTR1A , 
HTR2C , SLC6A4 , TPH1 , or MAOA  gene regions yielded signif icant association with this 
phenotypic comparison.      
 Gene SNP p-value Odds Ratio* (95% CI) p-value Odds Ratio* (95% CI ) p-value Odds Ratio* (95% CI) R vs NR S vs NS and NR S vs NS
SLC6A4 1 0 . 0 3 7 0 . 3 3  ( 0 . 0 8  -  1 . 3 5 ) ---- 5 / 1 6 - -
TPH1 1 0.022 0.41 (0.11 - 1.37) ---- 3 0 / 5 0- -
TPH1 2 0.035 0.43 (0.12 - 1.45) ---- 3 1 / 5 0- -
TPH1 3 0.022 0.41 (0.11 - 1.37) ---- 3 0 / 5 0- -
HTR2A 15 - - 0.016 0.34 (0.13 - 0.86) 0.0008 0.17 (0.04 - 0.66) - 23/40 23/53
HTR2A 16 ---- 0 . 0 2 0 0.30 (0.08 - 1.15) -- 8 / 2 3
HTR2A 17 ---- 0 . 0 2 6 0 . 2 7  ( 0 . 0 8  -  0 . 8 7 ) - -1 3 / 3 0
TPH2 3 - - 0.020 2.60 (0.96 - 7.17) - - - 27/13 -
TPH2 5 - - 0.042 2.33 (0.92 - 6.02) - - - 31/17 -
TPH2 12 - - 0.035 3.00 (1.11 - 8.25) - - - 27/14 -
MAOA 4 ---- 0 . 0 2 7 0.34 (0.10 - 1.09) - - 27/50
MAOA 6 ---- 0 . 0 4 9 0.27 (0.08 - 0.90) - - 27/46S vs NS Minor allele frequencies (%) R vs NR S vs NS and NR
 
Table 2.4.  Single locus associati on results.  SNPs with an unadj usted permutation p-value <0.05 are shown. Minor allele freque ncies 
for each phenotype classification (e.g., R % / NR %) are displayed. R = response; NR = non-response; S = specific response; NS = 
nonspecific response. *Odds ratios compare ca rrier of rare allele rela tive to non-carrier.  95% co nfidence intervals (CIs) are also 
shown for the odds ratios.   
61  
 62In our third phenotypic comparison, specifi c response vs. non-sp ecific response, 
both the HTR2A  and the MAOA  gene regions contained signif icantly associated SNPs.  In 
the HTR2A  gene region, 3 SNPs located at the 3’ end of the coding region showed 
significant negative associati ons (Table 2.4).  While the MAOA -VNTR failed to show 
significance in this st udy, two SNPs in the MAOA  gene did show nominal significance.  
None of the SNPs studied in the HTR1A , HTR2C , SLC6A4 , TPH1 , or TPH2  gene regions 
had significant association us ing this phenotypic comparison.  
2.3.2  Pharmacodynamic gene haplotype association results.  To examine interaction 
of alleles from different SNPs within a gene , haplotypes (i.e., those including information 
from all markers at the locus) were inferre d and tested for association using the three 
phenotypic comparisons (Table 2.5).   Initially, all SNPs were considered and included in 
haplotype construction for each gene.  Haplotypes for three genes ( TPH2 , SLC6A4 , and 
HTR2A ) were significantly associated with the specific response versus all others 
phenotype, and haplotypes for MAOA , SLC6A4 , and HTR2A  were associated with the 
specific responder versus non-specific responde r comparison.  For example, full length 
haplotypes construc ted with all 17 HTR2A  SNPs examined in this study and tested using 
the specific response versus all other subjects comparison showed significant association 
(p=0.011).  When the phenotypic comparison wa s narrowed to specific responder versus 
non-specific responder, HTR2A  haplotypes were still associ ated with specific response 
(p=0.001).  In general, positive haplotype a ssociation results followed the positive single 
locus results, however, full length haplotype testing of TPH1  failed to reach significance 
in the response vs. non-response comparison.      
 Gene Phenotypic 
comparisonTotal number 
of SNPs p-value (all SNPs)htSNPs 
requiredhtSNP number of 
haplotypes tagged p-value (htSNP)
TPH2 R vs. NR 14 0.42 4 9 0.0005
TPH1 R vs. NR 19 0.39 2 4 0.0006
HTR2A R vs. NR 17 0.67 9 22 0.004
TPH2 S vs. NS and NR 14 0.04 4 9 0.007
HTR2A S vs. NS and NR 17 0.01 9 22 0.0001
SLC6A4 S vs. NS and NR 21 0.02 6 12 0.17
MAOA S vs. NS 9 0.04 2 3 0.19
HTR2A S vs. NS 17 0.001 9 22 0.0001
SLC6A4 S vs. NS 21 0.004 6 12 0.08 
Table 2.5.  Full length and htSNP haplotype an alysis results.  Total number of SNPs investigated in each gene are shown, along with 
the number of htSNPs needed to capture 80% of haplotype diversity in our sample  population.  Number of inferred haplotypes 
captured by the htSNP set are also shown.  Only genes with significantly different (p <0.05) haplotype distri butions between flu oxetine 
response phenotypes are shown, as determined using the CLUMP program.  
63  
 64Knowledge of extensive LD and the existen ce of haplotype blocks in the human genome 
suggest that a limited number of SNPs may capture a substantial amount of haplotypic 
diversity in a population (46).  We sought to de termine if a subset of the SNPs we have 
genotyped in our sample could be used to test for association between multi-marker 
haplotypes and our clinical phenotypes.  One approach to accomplish this is to use 
haplotype tag SNPs (htSNPs), as identified us ing the SNPtagger program (43).  We chose 
a coverage value of 80%, as we wanted to  capture the most common haplotypes and a 
number of the less common haplotypes, but ex clude the substantial number of haplotypes 
estimated to occur one or fewer times in our sample.   After htSNPs yielding at least 80% cove rage of the haplotypic diversity were 
identified in each gene region, haplotypes were constructed from genotypes of this 
smaller set of SNPs using Arlequin and tested  for association to the phenotype using the 
CLUMP program.  In general, the use of ht SNPs to construct haplotypes led to more 
significant associations than using all of the SNPs screen ed, with the exception of the 
SLC6A4  and MAOA  genes (Table 2.5).  We found that  this procedure indicated that the 
majority of haplotypes could be  captured with a limited numb er of SNPs.  For example, 
we initially genotyped 19 SNPs in the TPH1  gene region, but after haplotype frequency 
estimations were calculated it was apparent th at only two SNPs were needed to capture 
the four most common haplotypes, which acc ounted for 87% (167/192) of the haplotypes 
seen in our study population.  The use of htSNPs also implicated the TPH1 , TPH2  and 
HTR2A  gene regions in the primary comparis on, response vs. non-response, which were 
not significant when all possible SNPs we re used for haplotype construction.  For 
instance, the TPH1  gene region, which contained six a ssociated SNPs in the categorical  
 65response versus non-response comparison, was not significantly associated when all 19 
SNPs were used to construct haplotypes (p =0.387).  However, when only the two htSNPs 
were used to construct haplotypes, a positive association was seen (p=0.0006).  2.3.3  Assessment of population stratifi cation using genomic control.  There has been 
much debate about the role of population stra tification in case-cont rol studies with the 
attendant possibility of false positive asso ciations, and less discussed, false negative 
findings (47).  A number of approaches ha ve been proposed to estimate the role of 
stratification using the genome itself to dete rmine population heterogeneity (48;49).  Here 
we use the genomic control (GC) approach of Devlin, in which anonymous markers from across the genome are genotyped in cases and cont rols, and the association test statistic is 
rescaled based upon the degree of observed stratification (45;48).  We chose 20 SNPs 
distributed across the genome, and genotyped ou r sample for those SNPs, as described in 
the Methods.  Allele frequenc y results for those SNPs are available on request.  When 
comparing the response group vs. non -response group, GC analysis produced λ of 1.21, 
indicating perhaps a need to adjust the p-va lues for slight popul ation stratification.  
However, since the stratification for this phe notype comparison was slight at best and we 
have limited statistical power, we did not adju st the test statistics.  For the other two 
phenotypic comparisons made, specific response vs. all others and specific response vs. 
non-specific response, GC analysis yielded a λ of <1.0, indicating that the patient 
populations were not significan tly stratified given the limits of the small sample size. 
2.3.4  Assessment of linkage disequilibrium (LD).  Levels of linkage disequilibrium 
were calculated for each gene region using ge notypic data (Figure 2.3).  As can be seen 
from the pairwise ⏐D’⏐values shown in the figure, levels of LD were generally  
 66
HTR2A (63Kb)
HTR2C (395Kb)HTR1A (10Kb) TPH1 (29Kb)
MAOA (79Kb) TPH2 (90Kb)
HTR2A (63Kb)
HTR2C (395Kb)HTR1A (10Kb) TPH1 (29Kb)
MAOA (79Kb) TPH2 (90Kb)
SLC6A4 (40Kb)
SLC6A4 (40Kb)
  
Figure 2.3.  Linkage disequilibriu m plots.  The above plots ar e the graphical outputs of 
linkage disequilibrium from the GOLD program.  They represent the pairwise marker D’ scores starting with the first marker in the lowe r left corner of each plot and continuing in 
the X and Y directions to the last marker.  Lighter areas have high levels on LD, whereas 
darker areas indicate lower levels of LD.  
 67substantial, but variable between the gene re gions screened.  Although there is a trend for 
increased LD across smaller gene regions, this  was not an absolute rule as one of the 
smaller gene regions ( HTR2A  – 63Kb) showed significantly less LD than the largest gene 
region ( HTR2C  – 395Kb).  
2.3.5  Primate genotyping results.   SNPs examined in all genes this study except for 
SLC6A4  were also genotyped in five primat e genomic DNA samples, four unrelated 
chimpanzees and one bonobo, using the same primers and conditions as used for the human genotyping.  Of the 93 SNPs investigated in total, six failed to produce readable 
genotype results.  Four SNPs had at least one heterozygotic chimpanzee sample, indicating present day variati on within this species.  There were 83 SNPs where the 
primate samples were all homozygous for the same allele, implicating it as the ancestral 
allele for humans (Table 2.1).  The most frequent (major) SNP allele in our human 
population matched this presumed  ancestral allele in 46 out of 83 cases (Figure 2.4).    
 
2.4  Discussion 
 There has been much recent interest in  the use of genetic variants for the 
prediction of medication treatment response (50) .  This interest is quite strong for the 
psychopharmacologic treatment of psychiatric diso rders, which in general are still treated 
empirically, with an unacceptabl e rate of failure for first-line treatments.  The recent 
collection of large amounts of DNA variants  in the form of SNPs and inexpensive 
genotyping technologies make more comprehens ive analyses of genetic variation in 
genes of interest for treatment response feasible .  We have utilized th ese tools in order to  
 68(9/13 sites)(2/4 sites)(5/5 sites)(4/9 sites)(4/8 sites)(10/21 sites)(0/6 sites)(0/3 sites)(2/4 sites)(1/10 sites)
0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.000.50-0.550.56-0.600.61-0.650.66-0.700.71-0.750.76-0.800.81-0.850.86-0.900.91-0.950.96-1.0major human allele frequency
fraction of sites with newly derived major allele
 
Figure 2.4.  Putative ancestral a llele state of SNPs  interrogated.  Co rrelations between 
human allele frequencies and putative ancestral  allele state for the 83 SNPs which were 
monomorphic in our non-human primate sample s.  SNPs were binned into one of ten 
major allele frequency groupings as shown on the y-axis.  The fraction of occurrences 
where the major human SNP allele corresponds to a newly derived human allele is shown on the x-axis.       
 69perform an in-depth analysis of common vari ants in seven genes involved in serotonin 
function.  We have genotyped a well-character ized sample of patients with unipolar  
Major Depressive Disorder at a number of SNPs within each gene, and tested for 
association to a treatment response phenotype  using individual loci and multi-locus 
haplotypes.  Using convergent analytic stra tegies, we found associ ation between several 
of these genes and antidepressant res ponse phenotype.  For our primary phenotype, 
categorical response versus non-response, several TPH1  SNPs were negatively associated 
with the phenotype.  Odds ratios estimates indi cated that carriers of the rare allele had a 
higher risk of not responding to treatment.  This comparison also yielded a negative 
association to a single SLC6A4  SNP.  The location of this SNP, some 200 bases 5’ to 
exon 1a, raises suspicion about  a potential role in regulatory elements.  But without 
biological evidence, it is premature to speculate  on the function of this SNP.  Our results 
differ in regard to a number of other studies  in which associations were found between 
response and 5-HTTLPR.  It might be argue d that perhaps our popul ation differs from 
other Caucasian samples in which this association has been noted.  However, for the SLC6A4  promoter polymorphism, we observed population alle le frequencies (short 
=0.43, long = 0.57) that were close to t hose found in other European American 
populations (51;52).  Our own obs ervations also closely match those reported in a recent 
study of 847 Caucasians in New Zealand, which revealed an allele frequency for the long 
allele of 0.57 (53).  Likewise, the intr on 2 VNTR allele frequencies (9 = 0.005, 10 = 
0.390, 12 = 0.605) that we observed matched thos e seen in European Americans (54), 
although we did observe an under-representation of the rarer 9 allele when compared to 
Gelernter, et al (52).  We observed association be tween our second phenotype, specific  
 70responders versus all other subjects, at two genes, HTR2A  and TPH2 .  With this 
comparison, our data supported an increased ri sk of specific response of carriers of the 
less frequent TPH2  allele, but decreased risk  of carriers of the minor HTR2A  allele.  
Finally, we observed negative associ ations between SNPs coming from HTR2A  and 
MAOA  and our third phenotype, specific respon ders versus non-specific responders.  We 
are intrigued by the finding that in almost  all cases in which we had significant 
association between a response phenotype and a SNP, it was carrier status of the minor 
allele that appeared to  be associated with non-response  or the  non-specific pattern of 
response .  Does this suggest that the defau lt genetic and biological substrate for 
fluoxetine treatment leads to sp ecific response, while the pr esence of less common alleles 
somehow degrades response or changes the specificity of the response?  Given the 
limitations of this study, this speculation is  premature, but nevertheless a potentially 
exciting observation. 
 We have attempted to analyze multiple genetic components of the serotonin 
pathway for their role in antidepressant re sponse.  The use of both single locus and 
haplotypic association is not novel, but it is still un common to see a coordinated 
investigation of multiple genes.  It will be  important to extend our findings by employing 
a joint analysis of the pathway, but such me thods are currently in development or are 
untested. 
Thus far, the vast majority of studies  on serotonin pathway gene variants in 
antidepressant response have fo cused on single SNP associations .  The use of haplotypes, 
or particular combinations of alleles obs erved in a population, has been shown both 
theoretically and empirically to be a powerful approach fo r the dissection of complex  
 71genetic traits (55-58).  We found haplotypes associated with  our response phenotypes for 
several of the genes we inve stigated.  Further, using a haplotype SNP tagging approach, 
we were able to reduce the number of SNPs  required to represent the majority of 
haplotypes, and generally noted  even greater association be tween these htSNP haplotypes 
and phenotype.  It has become commonplace to note that limited haplotypic diversity 
exists in many regions of the genome, and th e seven genes we investigated proved to be 
no exception.  The use of multiple SNPs also allows for estimation of linkage disequilibrium (LD) within a given gene , which provides useful information for 
association mapping, particularly for the selectio n of markers.  We were not surprised to 
find extensive LD across the genes under examination here. 
Accurate assessment of clinical response  is essential in pharmacogenetic studies, 
as there is a need to limit the amount of phe notypic heterogeneity.  Th is is particularly 
true with antidepressant therapy, as placebo response rates can be as high as 60% for 
patients with Major Depressive Disorder (2 9;59).  Previous studies with serotonin 
pathway gene variants and SSRI antidepressa nt response have failed to address these 
concerns.  It is reasonable to hypothesize th at genetic factors ma y influence placebo 
response to antidepressants, gi ven recent evidence showing that subjects homozygous for 
the long allele of the 5-HTTLPR were more likely to respond to placebo in a fluoxetine 
trial in 51 depressed subjects (60).  In this study, we utilized a valid ated response pattern 
algorithm to classify patients as non-res ponders, specific responders, or placebo (non-
specific) responders to fluoxetine (24;25;27).  We were thus able to obtain a more precise 
assessment of clinical response phenotype, a nd potentially identify phenocopies.  The use 
of pattern analysis to define respons e type reduced the amount of phenotypic  
 72heterogeneity in our comparison groups and was integral in uncovering some of our 
findings.  Indeed, had we only investigat ed the most obvious phenotypic comparison, 
responders versus non-responders, we would ha ve found negligible association between 
response and genotype.  What is interesting in  the current work is that we detected a 
number of differences between treatment  populations using more precise phenotypic 
stratification, namely by trying to separa te specific responders from non-specific 
responders.  A number of our findings suggest that specific responders differ genetically 
from all others (i.e., from non-resp onders and non-sp ecific responders) ( HTR2A , 
SLC6A4 , and TPH2 ).  Similar findings indicate that  even among responders, specific 
responders may differ at several candid ate loci from non-specific responders ( HTR2A  and 
MAOA ).  This suggests that there may be  heritable differences underlying the nature  of 
response to fluoxetine.  This is interesting in the context of imaging data that shows 
differential brain glucose metabolism in pers ons with depression administered placebo or 
fluoxetine (61).  Specifically, hospitalized males receiving placebo or fluoxetine for 
unipolar depression underwent positron emission tomography before and after six weeks 
of treatment.  The authors found that place bo response was associated with specific 
regional changes in brain function.  Remark ably, these regions showed overlap with 
changes seen in fluoxetine responders, but were  not identical.  Similar differences were 
seen using quantitative electroencephalogra phy, suggesting different biological responses 
underlying specific response, non-specific resp onse, or non-response to antidepressant 
medication (62).  Although our methodology fo r assessing the placebo phenotype differs 
from that of Rausch et al. (60), it is interesting to note that our most positive findings for 
the serotonin transporter are seen when we  attempted to dissect out placebo-responsive  
 73subjects in the work described here.  Gi ven the high placebo response rate for many 
antidepressants, it may prove necessary to  control for non-specific responses in 
pharmacogenetic studies on antidepressant response. 
An important issue that has been ove rlooked in many case-control association 
studies of antidepressant res ponse (or association studies in general) is population 
stratification, or differences in allele fre quencies between populati ons that may lead to 
spurious associations.  One method that has been used to deal with population 
stratification is the use of ethnically matched cases and controls.  However, a significant 
amount of “cryptic stratification” may still ex ist even after cases a nd control are carefully 
matched (63).  We employed the method of genomic control (GC) to correct for any underlying stratification within our population.  This method us es allele frequency data 
for a number of unlinked loci to quantitatively assess the de gree of stratification present 
within the study population (45;64).  This produc es a correction factor which is used to 
adjust the critical level of significance require d for a positive association at the candidate 
SNPs, thereby reducing the rate of false pos itives (45).  In ge neral, we found little 
evidence for population stratification in our  sample, suggesting that the genetic 
differences detected between our phenotypic groups are unlikely to be due to ethnic 
stratification.  Although our genomic control ma rkers suggest minimal stratification, it is 
also possible that the sample size or number  of markers may not be  large enough to allow 
a more accurate estimation of stratification. 
Genotyping of five primate samples gave in sight into the evolu tionary history of 
these polymorphic sites.  Ancestral allele was inferred if the human SNP site was monomorphic across all non-human  primate samples screened.  A high fraction (37/83)  
 74of SNPs had discrepancy between the most common allele seen in humans and the most 
common allele from non-human primates.  The correlation between human common allele state and ancestral  allele state was similar to prev ious findings, indicating caution is 
in order when assigning ancestr al allele state based exclus ively on major human allele 
frequency (Figure 2.4) (65).  An cestral allele state was not pr edictive of association to 
fluoxetine response. 
While this study produced several encouragi ng results, it was also subject to some 
limitations.  The most obvious drawback of th is study is the small sample size.  This 
contributes to wide confidence intervals and diminished power to detect associations 
between genotype and phenotype.  For exam ple, to detect a difference in allele 
frequencies of 0.2 between responders and non-responders with α = 0.05 and 1- β = 0.8 
would require almost a tripling of the total sa mple size (66).  This is a critical limitation, 
as it suggests a much higher likelihood that  our observations may contain more false 
negative results than if we had a much larger sample size.  We  also believe that the highly 
characterized phenotypes used in this study help s to compensate for this limitation.  Also, 
multiple statistical comparisons  were made with the data generated from this study.  
However, at this point, it is unclear how to correct for multiple testing with data of this type, since the comparisons made were not  independent.  High levels of linkage 
disequilibrium and low haplotype diversity indicate that the individual loci are correlated 
and that using a standard Bonferroni correc tion would be overly conservative.  Further 
research into this statistical  problem needs to be perfor med to fully understand how to 
interpret data from associati on studies investigating large nu mber of SNPs and thus these 
results should be considered preliminary until replicated.  A further limitation may  
 75involve our choice of D’ to estimate LD.  Although D’ can be upwardly biased with small 
sample sizes, it is robust to differences in al lele frequencies and our sample of 96 may be 
adequate to capture a reasonable estimate of LD  in the gene regions studied (67).  A final 
limitation might be our focus on a binary trai t, antidepressant response, as our primary 
outcome variable.  Continuous outcome vari ables (such as quantitative changes in 
symptoms) can often provide more informati on than a binary trait.  However, the 
difficulty is in selecting which one to use.  Trying them all would compromise our type I 
error rate significantly.  We thus chose the most straightforward outcome variable for the 
present analyses. 
In summary, we have used a number of innovative molecular, phenotypic, and 
statistical approaches to i nvestigate the role of DNA vari ants in candidate genes for 
fluoxetine response and found several interesting associations.  The TPH1  and SLC6A4  
genes seem to be nominally associated with response to fluoxetine.  The HTR2A , MAOA  
and TPH2  genes appear to be involved in dete rmining the specificity of response to 
fluoxetine.  If confirmed in further studies , polymorphisms in these genes could be a 
useful tool for a genetically-infor med psychopharmacology of depression. 
  
     
 762.5  References 
1.     Kessler RC, McGonagle KA, Zhao S, Nelson CB, Hughes M, Eshleman S, Wittchen 
HU, Kendler KS. Lifetime and 12-month prev alence of DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders 
in the United States. Results from the National Comorbidity Survey. Arch Gen Psychiatry  
1994; 51(1):8-19. 2.     Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, Jin R, Koretz D, Merikangas KR, Rush AJ, Walters EE, Wang PS. The epidemiology of majo r depressive disorder: results from the 
National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R). JAMA  2003; 289(23):3095-3105. 
3.     Sackeim HA. The definition and m eaning of treatment-resistant depression. J Clin 
Psychiatry  2001; 62 Suppl 1610-17. 
4.     Serretti A, Lilli R, Smeraldi E. Pharmacogenetics in affective disorders. Eur J 
Pharmacol  2002; 438(3):117-128. 
5.     Veenstra-VanderWeele J, Anderson GM, Cook EH, Jr. Pharmacogenetics and the 
serotonin system: initial studi es and future directions. Eur J Pharmacol  2000; 410(2-
3):165-181. 6.     Lerer B, Macciardi F. Pharmacogene tics of antidepressant and mood-stabilizing 
drugs: a review of candida te-gene studies and future research directions. Int J 
Neuropsychopharmacol  2002; 5(3):255-275. 
7.     Lesch K-P, Bengel D, Heils A, Sabol SZ, Greenberg BD, Petri S, Benjamin J, Müller CR, Hamer DH, Murphy DL. Associatio n of anxiety-related traits with a 
polymorphism in the serotonin tr ansporter gene regulatory region. Science  1996; 
274(5292):1527-1531.  
 778.     Serretti A, Benedetti F, Zanardi R,  Smeraldi E. The influence of Serotonin 
Transporter Promoter Polymorphism (SER TPR) and other polymorphisms of the 
serotonin pathway on the efficacy of antidepressant treatments. Prog 
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry  2005; 29(6):1074-1084. 
9.     Kim DK, Lim SW, Lee S, Sohn SE, Kim S, Hahn CG, Carroll BJ. Serotonin transporter gene polymorphism and antidepressant response. NeuroReport  2000; 
11(1):215-219. 10.     Yu YW, Tsai SJ, Chen TJ, Lin CH , Hong CJ. Association study of the serotonin 
transporter promoter polymorphism and symp tomatology and antidepressant response in 
major depressive disorders. Mol Psychiatry  2002; 7(10):1115-1119. 
11.     Kraft JB, Peters EJ, Slager SL, Je nkins GD, Reinalda MS, McGrath PJ, Hamilton 
SP. Analysis of association between the sero tonin transporter and antidepressant response 
in a large clinical sample. Biol Psychiatry  2006; advanced online publication. 
12.     Walther DJ, Peter JU, Bashammakh S,  Hortnagl H, Voits M, Fink H, Bader M. 
Synthesis of serotonin by a s econd tryptophan hydroxylase isoform. Science  2003; 
299(5603):76. 13.     Nakamura K, Sugawara Y, Sawabe K, Ohashi A, Tsurui H, Xiu Y, Ohtsuji M, Lin 
QS, Nishimura H, Hasegawa H, Hirose S. La te developmental stage-specific role of 
tryptophan hydroxylase 1 in brain serotonin levels. J Neurosci  2006; 26(2):530-534. 
14.     Sanchez C, Hyttel J. Comparison of  the effects of antidepressants and their 
metabolites on reuptake of biogeni c amines and on receptor binding. Cell Mol Neurobiol  
1999; 19(4):467-489.  
 7815.     Sargent P, Williamson DJ, Pearson G, Odontiadis J, Cowen PJ. Effect of 
paroxetine and nefazodone on 5-HT1A receptor sensitivity. Psychopharmacology (Berl)  
1997; 132(3):296-302. 16.     Zanardi R, Artigas F, Moresco R, Colombo C, Messa C, Gobbo C, Smeraldi E, Fazio F. Increased 5-hydroxytryptamine-2 rece ptor binding in the frontal cortex of 
depressed patients responding to paroxetin e treatment: a positron emission tomography 
scan study. J Clin Psychopharmacol  2001; 21(1):53-58. 
17.     Kim SW, Park SY, Hwang O. Up-regul ation of tryptophan hydroxylase expression 
and serotonin synthesis by sertraline. Mol Pharmacol  2002; 61(4):778-785. 
18.     Stokes AH, Xu Y, Daunais JA, Tami r H, Gershon MD, Butkerait P, Kayser B, 
Altman J, Beck W, Vrana KE. p-ethynylphe nylalanine: a potent i nhibitor of tryptophan 
hydroxylase. J Neurochem  2000; 74(5):2067-2073. 
19.     Zimmer L, Luxen A, Giacomelli F, Pu jol JF. Short- and long-term effects of p-
ethynylphenylalanine on brain serotonin levels. Neurochem Res  2002; 27(4):269-275. 
20.     Yoshida K, Naito S, Takahashi H, Sato K, Ito K, Kamata M, Higuchi H, Shimizu T, Itoh K, Inoue K, Tezuka T, Suzuki T,  Ohkubo T, Sugawara K, Otani K. Monoamine 
oxidase: A gene polymorphism, tryptopha n hydroxylase gene polymorphism and 
antidepressant response to fluvoxamine in Ja panese patients with major depressive 
disorder. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry  2002; 26(7-8):1279-1283. 
21.     Cusin C, Serretti A, Zanardi R, Lattuad a E, Rossini D, Lilli R, Lorenzi C, Smeraldi 
E. Influence of monoamine oxidase A and se rotonin receptor 2A polymorphisms in SSRI 
antidepressant activity. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol  2002; 5(1):27-35.  
 7922.     Serretti A, Zanardi R, Rossini D, Cu sin C, Lilli R, Smeraldi E. Influence of 
tryptophan hydroxylase and serotonin transp orter genes on fluvoxamine antidepressant 
activity. Mol Psychiatry  2001; 6(5):586-592. 
23.     Serretti A, Zanardi R, Cusin C, Ro ssini D, Lorenzi C, Smeraldi E. Tryptophan 
hydroxylase gene associated with pa roxetine antidepressant activity. Eur 
Neuropsychopharmacol  2001; 11(5):375-380. 
24.     McGrath PJ, Stewart JW, Petkova E, Quitkin FM, Amsterdam JD, Fawcett J, 
Reimherr FW, Rosenbaum JF, Beasley CM, Jr. Predictors of relapse during fluoxetine 
continuation or maintenance treatment of major depression. J Clin Psychiatry  2000; 
61(7):518-524. 25.     Stewart JW, Quitkin FM, McGrath PJ, Amsterdam J, Fava M, Fawcett J, Reimherr 
F, Rosenbaum J, Beasley C, Roback P. Use of pattern analysis to predict differential 
relapse of remitted patients with major depression during 1 year of treatment with 
fluoxetine or placebo. Arch Gen Psychiatry  1998; 55(4):334-343. 
26.     First MB, Spitzer RL, Gibbon M, Willia ms JBW: Structured Clinical Interview for 
DSM-IV Axis I Disorders-Patient Editi on (SCID-I/P). New York, Biometrics 
Department, New York State Psychiatric Institute, 1995. 
27.     Quitkin FM, Rabkin JG, Ross D, Stewar t JW. Identification of  true drug response 
to antidepressants. Use of pattern analysis. Arch Gen Psychiatry  1984; 41(8):782-786. 
28.     McGrath PJ, Stewart JW, Quitkin FM, Chen Y, Alpert JE, Nierenberg AA, Fava 
M, Cheng J, Petkova E. Predictors of relapse in a prospec tive study of fluoxetine 
treatment of major depression. Am J Psychiatry  2006; 163(9):1542-1548.  
 8029.     Quitkin FM. Placebos, drug effects,  and study design: a clinician's guide. Am J 
Psychiatry  1999; 156(6):829-836. 
30.     Iyengar S, Seaman M, Deinard AS, Rosenbaum HC, Sirugo G, Castiglione CM, Kidd JR, Kidd KK. Analyses of cross species polymerase chain reaction products to infer 
the ancestral state of human polymorphisms. DNA Seq  1998; 8(5):317-327. 
31.     Chen X, Levine L, Kwok PY. Fluor escence polarization in  homogeneous nucleic 
acid analysis. Genome Res  1999; 9(5):492-498. 
32.     Hamilton SP, Slager SL, Heiman GA,  Deng Z, Haghighi F, Klein DF, Hodge SE, 
Weissman MM, Fyer AJ, Knowles JA. Eviden ce for a susceptibility locus for panic 
disorder near the catechol-O-methyltransferase gene on chromosome 22. Biol Psychiatry  
2002; 51(7):591-601. 33.     Rozen S, Skaletsky HJ: Primer3 on the WWW for general users and for biologist 
programmers., in Bioinformatics Methods and Protocols. Edited by Krawetz S, Misener 
S. Totowa, NJ, Human Press, 2000, pp 365-386. 
34.     Yuan X, Yamada K, Ishiyama-Shigemo to S, Koyama W, Nona ka K. Identification 
of polymorphic loci in the promoter region of the serotonin 5-HT2C receptor gene and 
their association with obes ity and type II diabetes. Diabetologia  2000; 43(3):373-376. 
35.     Rotondo A, Schuebel K, Bergen A, Aragon R, Virkkunen M, Linnoila M, Goldman D, Nielsen D. Identification of four varian ts in the tryptophan hydroxylase promoter and 
association to behavior. Mol Psychiatry  1999; 4(4):360-368. 
36.     Hamilton SP, Slager SL, Heiman GA,  Deng Z, Haghighi F, Klein DF, Hodge SE, 
Weissman MM, Fyer AJ, Knowles JA. Eviden ce for a susceptibility locus for panic  
 81disorder near the catechol-O-methyltransferase gene on chromosome 22. Biol Psychiatry  
2002; 51(7):591-601. 37.     Hamilton SP, Slager SL, Heiman GA, Haghighi F, Klein DF, Hodge SE, Weissman 
MM, Fyer A.J., Knowles JA. No genetic li nkage or association between a functional 
promoter polymorphism in the monoamine  oxidase-A gene and panic disorder. Mol 
Psychiatry  2000; 5(5):465-466. 
38.     Melke J, Landen M, Baghei F, Rosm ond R, Holm G, Bjorntorp P, Westberg L, 
Hellstrand M, Eriksson E. Serotonin transpor ter gene polymorphisms are associated with 
anxiety-related personality traits in women. Am J Med Genet  2001; 105(5):458-463. 
39.     Ihaka R, Gentleman R. R: A la nguage for data analysis and graphics. J Comput 
Graph Stat  1996; 5(3):299-314. 
40.     Freidlin B, Zheng G, Li Z, Gastwi rth JL. Trend tests for case-control studies of 
genetic markers: power, sample size and robustness. Hum Hered  2002; 53(3):146-152. 
41.     Sham PC, Curtis D. Monte Carlo test s for associations betw een disease and alleles 
at highly polymorphic loci. Ann Hum Genet  1995; 59(Pt 1):97-105. 
42.     Schneider S, Roessli D, Excoffier L. Arlequin: A software for population genetics 
data analysis.  2000; Genetics and Biometry  Lab, Dept.of Anthropology, University of 
Geneva, version 2.000. 43.     Ke X, Cardon LR. Efficient sel ective screening of haplotype tag SNPs. 
Bioinformatics  2003; 19(2):287-288. 
44.     Abecasis GR, Cookson WO. GOLD--graphi cal overview of linkage disequilibrium. 
Bioinformatics  2000; 16(2):182-183.  
 8245.     Bacanu SA, Devlin B, Roeder K. The Power of Genomic Control. Am J Hum 
Genet  2000; 66(6):1933-1944. 
46.     Johnson GC, Esposito L, Barratt BJ, Smith AN, Heward J, Di Genova G, Ueda H, Cordell HJ, Eaves IA, Dudbridge F, Twells RC, Payne F, Hughes W, Nutland S, Stevens 
H, Carr P, Tuomilehto-Wolf E, Tuomilehto J, Gough SC, Clayton DG, Todd JA. Haplotype tagging for the identifi cation of common disease genes. Nat Genet  2001; 
29(2):233-237. 47.     Cardon LR, Palmer LJ. Population stra tification and spurious  allelic association. 
Lancet  2003; 361(9357):598-604. 
48.     Devlin B, Roeder K, Wasserman L. Genomic control, a new approach to genetic-
based association studies. Theor Popul Biol  2001; 60(3):155-166. 
49.     Pritchard JK, Rosenberg NA. Use of unlinked genetic markers to detect population 
stratification in association studies. Am J Hum Genet  1999; 65(1):220-228. 
50.     Weinshilboum R. Inheritance and drug response. N Engl J Med  2003; 348(6):529-
537. 51.     Pollock BG, Ferrell RE, Mulsant BH, Mazumdar S, Miller M, Sweet RA, Davis S, Kirshner MA, Houck PR, Stack JA, Reynolds CF , Kupfer DJ. Allelic variation in the 
serotonin transporter promoter affects onset of  paroxetine treatment response in late-life 
depression. Neuropsychopharmacology  2000; 23(5):587-590. 
52.     Gelernter J, Kranzler H, Coccaro EF, Siever LJ, New AS. Serotonin transporter 
protein gene polymorphism and personality m easures in African American and European 
American subjects. Am J Psychiatry  1998; 155(10):1332-1338.  
 8353.     Caspi A, Sugden K, Moffitt TE, Taylor  A, Craig IW, Harrington H, McClay J, Mill 
J, Martin J, Braithwaite A, Poulton R. Infl uence of life stress on depression: moderation 
by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene. Science  2003; 301(5631):386-389. 
54.     Gelernter J, Kranzler H, Cubells JF. Serotonin transporter protein (SLC6A4) allele 
and haplotype frequencies and linkage disequ ilibria in African- and European-American 
and Japanese populations and in  alcohol-dependent subjects. Hum Genet  1997; 101243-
246. 55.     Gabriel SB, Schaffner SF, Nguyen H, Moore JM, Roy J, Blumenstiel B, Higgins J, 
DeFelice M, Lochner A, Faggart M, Liu-Cord ero SN, Rotimi C, Adeyemo A, Cooper R, 
Ward R, Lander ES, Daly MJ, Altshuler D. The structure of hapl otype blocks in the 
human genome. Science  2002; 296(5576):2225-2229. 
56.     Rioux JD, Daly MJ, Silverberg MS, Li ndblad K, Steinhart H, Cohen Z, Delmonte 
T, Kocher K, Miller K, Guschwan S, Kul bokas EJ, O'Leary S, Winchester E, Dewar K, 
Green T, Stone V, Chow C, Cohen A, La ngelier D, Lapointe G, Gaudet D, Faith J, 
Branco N, Bull SB, McLeod RS, Griffiths AM, Bitton A, Greenberg GR, Lander ES, Siminovitch KA, Hudson TJ. Genetic variation in the 5q31 cytokine gene cluster confers 
susceptibility to Crohn disease. Nat Genet  2001; 29(2):223-228. 
57.     Martin ER, Lai EH, Gilbert JR, Rogala  AR, Afshari AJ, Riley J, Finch KL, Stevens 
JF, Livak KJ, Slotterbeck BD, Slifer SH , Warren LL, Conneally PM, Schmechel DE, 
Purvis I, Pericak-Vance MA, Roses AD, Va nce JM. SNPing away at complex diseases: 
analysis of single-nucleotide polymorphi sms around APOE in Alzheimer disease. Am J 
Hum Genet  2000; 67(2):383-394.  
 8458.     Zhang K, Calabrese P, Nordborg M,  Sun F. Haplotype block structure and its 
applications to association st udies: power and study designs. Am J Hum Genet  2002; 
71(6):1386-1394. 59.     Bialik RJ, Ravindran AV, Bakish  D, Lapierre YD. A comparison of placebo 
responders and nonresponders in subg roups of depressive disorder. J Psychiatry Neurosci  
1995; 20(4):265-270. 60.     Rausch JL, Johnson ME, Fei YJ, Li JQ, Shendarkar N, Hobby HM, Ganapathy V, 
Leibach FH. Initial conditions of serotonin transporter kine tics and genotype: influence 
on SSRI treatment trial outcome. Biol Psychiatry  2002; 51(9):723-732. 
61.     Mayberg HS, Silva JA, Brannan SK, Tekell JL, Mahurin RK, McGinnis S, Jerabek 
PA. The functional neuroanato my of the placebo effect. Am J Psychiatry  2002; 
159(5):728-737. 62.     Leuchter AF, Cook IA, Witte EA, Morgan M, Abrams M. Changes in brain 
function of depressed subjects during treatment with placebo. Am J Psychiatry  2002; 
159(1):122-129. 63.     Reich DE, Goldstein DB. Detecti ng association in a ca se-control study while 
correcting for popula tion stratification. Genet Epidemiol  2001; 20(1):4-16. 
64.     Devlin B, Roeder K, Bacanu SA. Unbiased methods for population-based 
association studies. Genet Epidemiol  2001; 21(4):273-284. 
65.     Hacia JG, Fan JB, Ryder O, Jin L, Edgemon K, Ghandour G, Mayer RA, Sun B, 
Hsie L, Robbins CM, Brody LC, Wang D, La nder ES, Lipshutz R, Fodor SP, Collins FS. 
Determination of ancestral alleles for human single-nucleotide polymorphisms using 
high-density oligonuc leotide arrays. Nat Genet  1999; 22(2):164-167.  
 8566.     Dupont WD, Plummer W.D. PS: A power and sample  size program available for 
free on the Internet. Controlled Clin Trials  1997; 18(2):274-280. 
67.     Weiss KM, Clark AG. Linkage dise quilibrium and the mapping of complex human 
traits. Trends Genet  2002; 18(1):19-24. 
 
  
 86CHAPTER 3 
SEQUENCING OF PHARMACODYNAMIC CANDIDATE GENES* 
 
3.1  Introduction 
In the previous chapter, I describe an  indirect associati on study, in which I 
genotyped evenly spaced, largely non-coding, publicly available SNPs (N=93) in six 
serotonin genes in a well characterized samp le (N=96) of depressed individuals taking 
fluoxetine (2).  Several varian ts were significantly (p<0.05)  associated with fluoxetine 
response and response specificity, including variants in HTR2A, TPH1, TPH2, and 
MAOA.  Odds ratios for these single locus associations ranged fr om 2-5 (rare allele 
carrier relative to non-carrier).  Full-length haplotypes of SNPs in these genes were also 
associated with response and response specifi city.  These initial results prompted the 
work described in this chapter, which has tw o main goals.  The first is to follow-up on the 
positive indirect association study by reseque ncing all exons, intron-exon boundaries, and 
5’ conserved non-coding sequence of six pha rmacodynamic genes in the same depressed 
population taking fluoxetine.  We resequenced the HTR1A , HTR2A , HTR2C , TPH1 , 
TPH2 , and MAOA  genes, but not the serotonin transporter ( SLC6A4 ) which was similarly 
sequenced in previous work by another gr aduate student in our group (3).  By 
undertaking this, we hope to uncover any poten tially functional variants in coding and 
regulatory regions that are in  linkage disequilibri um (LD) with previously associated 
SNPs.  The second goal, which will be expanded on in the next chapter, is to use the combined variant data set (results from prev ious genotyping and current resequencing) to 
                                                
 
* Components of this work have been published (1) and are reprinted with permission.  Other sections have 
been submitted for publication (Peters E.J., Slager S.L., McGrath P.J., Hamilt on S.P. 2007 “Sequencing 
and tagging SNP selection in serotonin-related candida te genes and association to citalopram response.”)  
 87define the LD structure of these six genes and select tagging SNPs for future studies.  The 
high density of the 188 variants in the combined data set allows us to define the variation 
in these six important serotonin candidate gene s, which will be useful in larger studies 
investigating anti-depressant response and other serotone rgic psychiatric phenotypes. 
While this project was ongoing, Zhang et al.  reported on a naturally occurring, 
functional,  Arg441His (R441H) missense vari ant in the human tr yptophan hydroxylase 2 
(TPH2 ) gene (4).  The frequency of the His441 allele was higher in the 87 depressed 
patients (0.06) than among 219 controls samples (0.009).  This association is strengthened by their in vitro  work, which showed that this substitution reduced serotonin 
synthesis by approximately 80% in a heterologous expression a ssay in a rat cell line.  We, 
along with our collaborators, sequenced exon 11 and genotyped a number of samples 
(N=2,519) of subjects with and without depres sion and did not detect a single His441 
allele, as detailed in our letter to the journal Neuron  and expanded on in this chapter (1).   
 
3.2  Methods 
3.2.1  Study populations.  The study population consisted of 95 research subjects 
enrolled in an NIMH-funded protocol (Pat rick J. McGrath, Columbia University, 
principal investigator) to assess relapse fo llowing fluoxetine discontinuation in depressed 
subjects who had responded to fluoxetine.  The sample used in this current study is a 
subset of a larger population (N =96) that has been extensivel y described in the previous 
chapter as part of our study us ing publicly available markers (2).  In searching for the 
R441H TPH2  variant described by Zhang et al., we also utilized the Coriell Human 
Variation Collection panel of 100 unrelated  Caucasians and panel of 100 unrelated  
 88African Americans, as well as the STAR*D sample set which is described in detail in the 
next chapter.  Several genomic DNA (gDNA)  samples were kindly provided by Marc 
Caron’s group (Duke Univers ity) to assist in assay de velopment; these included two 
Arg441 (GG) homozygote samples, a heteroz ygote (AG) sample, and a His441 (AA) 
homozygote sample.  Additionally, they grac iously provided samples of the DNA clone 
used in their lab for genotyping assa y development (Figure 3.1).     
3.2.2  Pharmacodynamic gene variant discovery.  Patient genomic DNA was extracted 
from whole blood using a Puregene genomic  DNA purification kit (Gentra Systems, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA).  DNA was quantif ied using an ND-1000 spectrophotometer 
(NanoDrop Technologies, Rockland, DE, USA).  PCR primers were designed to amplify 
all exons and ~20 bp of flanki ng intronic sequence of the six genes.  We also sequenced 
5’ proximal conserved non-coding sequence (CNS) identified using mammalian global 
sequence alignments.  For this study, we us ed the VISTA genome browser and searched 
5 kb of DNA 5’ proximal of the transcripti onal start site and defined CNS as sequence 
that had at least 70% identity in bot h human-mouse and human-rat comparisons 
(minimum window size = 100 bp) (5).  Primer s were designed using Primer3 software 
and were manufactured by Invitrogen (Carlsba d, CA, USA) (6).  Primer sequences and 
amplicon information are shown in Table 3.1.  PCR reactions of 5 microliters ( µl) 
containing 200 nM of the forward and reve rse primers, 20 ng genomic DNA template, 50 
µM dNTPs (Roche, Indianapolis, IN, USA) , 1M anhydrous betaine (Acros Organics, 
Geel, Belgium), 50 mM KCl, 20 mM  Tris-HCl (pH 8.4), 2.5 mM MgCl 2, and 0.25 U 
Platinum Taq DNA polymerase (Invitrogen, Carl sbad, CA, USA).  Samples were cycled 
using a touchdown protocol at 94°C for 3 min, followed by seven cycles of 94°C for 30 s,   
 89h441H clone
T7 T3 FP-2 FP-1
Variant His (A-allele) inserth441R clone
Wildtype Arg (G-allele) insertT3 T7 FP-2 FP-1
h441H clone
T7 T3 FP-2 FP-1
Variant His (A-allele) inserth441R clone
Wildtype Arg (G-allele) insertT3 T7 FP-2 FP-1h441R clone
Wildtype Arg (G-allele) insertT3 T7 FP-2 FP-1
 
Figure 3.1.  hTPH2 clone schematic. These clones were used for genotyping assay 
development by the Caron group, whom kindl y provided them to our group.  These 
vectors each have a 492bp insert, however, the variant His (A) insert has the opposite 
orientation compared to the wildtype Arg (G) insert.  Al so shown are the two FP probes 
(FP-1 and FP-2) we used to determine insert orientation.      
      
 90Amplicon name BAC Chr.  Length Start Stop Forward / Reverse primer seq
HTR1A Pro Amp 1 AC122707 5 455 63293984 63294439 CGGAGGTACCGTTTTGTTGT
TCCCTCTAGCTCAGCGTCTT
HTR1A Pro Amp 2 AC122707 5 849 63293256 63294105 GGTGGTGATGTGGTGTTGTT
TGGAGGCGGAGTTTATTTGT
HTR1A Amp 1 AC122707 5 649 63291642 63292291 GGCGGCTGTGTGTACAGTTT
GCCCGAGAGAGGAAGACAGT
HTR1A Amp 2 AC122707 5 685 63292199 63292884 CAGAACAAGAGCCACGATGA
ACCCCATCGACTACGTGAAC
HTR1A Amp 3 AC122707 5 696 63292722 63293418 CCATGATCCTTGCTAATGGTG
CATTCCCTTCCTCCGAAACT
HTR2A Pro Amp 1 AL160397 13 661 46368351 46369012 CGCTCGGGAAGATAAATGTC
GCCAACAGGATCCTAGCAGT
HTR2A Pro Amp 2 AL160397 13 812 46368036 46368848 GGGTGGCATATTTCTGCTG
TTCTGTGACTCGCTGCATCT
HTR2A Pro Amp 3 AL160397 13 829 46369887 46370716 GGCAAGCAGGGTACAGGTAG
CCCTGGACAAATTCAACCAC
HTR2A Amp 1 AL160397 13 693 46367533 46368226 GCCACCACAGTTCAGTTCTTT
TAGTTTGTTTGCCCCCTGAG
HTR2A Amp 2 AL160397 13 561 46364361 46364922 GCATTCATCAGCCAGTGCTA
TCTTTCCTGAAGCGAATCTGA
HTR2A Amp 3 AL136958 13 683 46307367 46308050 ATAATCAGAAAAATGTGGCATAAAA
ATGAAGAAAGGGCACCACAT
HTR2A Amp 4 AL136958 13 676 46306774 46307450 GTCCATCAGCAATGAGCAAA
TGCTGTCAGAACATTTTCCAAG
HTR2A Amp 5 AL136958 13 699 46306243 46306942 CACACTGAGCAAGTTTTCACCT
AAGACCACACTGGAAATTCAGA
HTR2A Amp 7 AL136958 13 598 46305183 46305781 TTTGGGAGGCTGAGATGG
TGAAATGAGTGAGTTTTTGGAGA
HTR2C Pro Amp 1 AC007022 X 840 113722477 113723317 CTCCGGCTCAGTCTTACAGG
GAATCCTCTGATTCCCTCCA
HTR2C Pro Amp 2 AC007022 X 451 113724506 113724957 TTTGGGGAGGGGTATGCTAT
TCATATGCAATCGGCAGGTA
HTR2C Amp 2 AC007022 X 493 113754293 113754786 CCCAGCCTCTATTCACGATG
TCAGGTTGCATTAAAATGCTGT
HTR2C Amp 3 AC004822 X 449 113867246 113867695 TGAAGCCATGTCTACTCCAAGA
GAGCAAGCTACCAAGCAAAGTTA
HTR2C Amp 4 AC004822 X 664 113871881 113872545 GTTGTTTTGCATGAGCAACG
GCAACTAACTGTTCATTCATTGTTT
HTR2C Amp 5 AL590097 X 392 113988669 113989061 CACCATCATCATCCCTATAGAAAA
TAGCCGCTGCAATTCTTATG
HTR2C Amp 6 AL355812 X 823 114047268 114048091 TCGATTATGCCGTGAATAGC
TAAGCTCCCTCCCAGACAAA
HTR2C Amp 7 AL355812 X 672 114048032 114048704 GCCTCCTGTCAGGCAGATT
GAGCAGAGCAAGAATGTAAAGTG
HTR2C Amp 8 AL355812 X 665 114048641 114049306 CAAATTCAGTGGACATTTGTTCTG
GGGCCCAATTCTGTAGTCCT
HTR2C Amp 9 AL355812 X 843 114049128 114049971 TGTGCTTCACACAAAGTGAAAT
TGGCAGTGTTGCAAATCAA  
Table 3.1.  Sequencing amplicon information. 
  
 91Amplicon name BAC Chr.  Length Start Stop Forward / Reverse primer seq
HTR2C Amp 10 AL355812 X 659 114049899 114050558 ACAAGGGCAGTGGAAGAGC
TTGTTTCATACCAAACTGCACA
HTR2C Amp 11 AL355812 X 691 114050440 114051131 CAGCACATTTGTTAATGATTCTTG
TCATGAGGAATTGGTGATGCT
MAOA Pro Amp 3 AL109855 X 698 43399643 43400341 GGTCTTAGCGAGAGTACTGACTCC
GGGAGCTGGGCACTGAGA
MAOA Amp 1 AL109855 X 500 43400159 43400659 CCACCTCAGTGCCTGACA
GGTTCCCCTACCCCTCACT
MAOA Amp 2 AL109855 X 200 43427664 43427864 GCATTTGAATGTTACGTTGCTC
TCCAGTGGTGCCACTTGTAG
MAOA Amp 3 AL020990 X 369 43437307 43437676 ATTGTGCCCCAGTTCTTGAG
TGTTTTCTCAAATAAAATGCTTCC
MAOA Amp 4 AL020990 X 269 43472299 43472568 AAACATGACATTCTCTGACTCCTG
CCTGGGAGAAAGCAAAATCA
MAOA Amp 5 AL020990 X 830 43475376 43476206 ATTTTCCTTCCTTGGGCTTT
GTGTGGCCAAGGATATGAGG
MAOA Amp 6 AL020990 X 212 43476825 434770 37 ATGTGTGTATG GGTGTCTCTGAT
CCAATACATCAACACAATTTGGAA
MAOA Amp 7 AL020990 X 246 43480356 43480602 AAAGGGCAGCTCTTAAAATAAACA
GGTTGGTTTGTTGGAATTTTG
MAOA Amp 8 AL020990 X 247 43484814 43485061 CCCATCAGTTACTCCTTCCCTA
TTATCCTCCAAGTTAAGCATATCG
MAOA Amp 9 AL020990 X 228 43486083 43486311 ACTCGCAGCATTTCAGCTTT
TGCATTGAACTCTGCTTTTCC
MAOA Amp 10 AL020990 X 490 43487939 43488429 CCCACCTTCCCAAGTAACTC
GGAGATGTGAGTTTTATGTTCCA
MAOA Amp 11 AL020990 X 595 43488501 43489096 TTTGTTCCTCCTTGTCAGCA
CCTACTCCACCTCCACAGACA
TPH1 Pro Amp 1 AC055860 11 793 18024031 18024824 GTTGCTCTGCCTCAAGGAAT
GACTTGGGTTGGACTCTGGA
TPH1 Pro Amp 2 AC055860 11 800 18023634 18024434 CGCCCGCTTCTATAAGAGAC
TTTCCTGGGTTAGCAAGTTCA
TPH1 Pro Amp 3 AC055860 11 538 18023011 18023549 ATATGTTATCACTGAGGTCCATTTGT
CCAACTGGTACCCTTTTCTCA
TPH1 Amp 2 AC055860 11 509 18013970 18014479 GTTTCTGGAGGATGGGATGA
GCAATTTGGAGAGCTTGTGTT
TPH1 Amp 3 AC055860 11 478 18011614 18012092 AGCTAAAATTAAAACTCTCATCCAA
GAGACCAAGGCAGGTGGA
TPH1 Amp 4 AC055860 11 526 18007242 18007768 TTCCCAAATATCATTTGTCAAGTA
AACAGAGTTCAGCAACTCCCTTA
TPH1 Amp 5 AC055860 11 299 18004542 18004841 ACGTGTTACTTGGTGCCACT
AACCCATAAGGTAGATGCCATT
TPH1 Amp 6 AC055860 11 390 18003578 18003968 TTTGATTAGTGTCCTTTGTGATCC
ACTGCAACCTCCAAGCAAAG
TPH1 Amp 7 AC055860 11 296 18001898 18002194 GGGTATTTTGGGTCAGTGACTA
GACATCCCCAAGTATGTTCCAT
TPH1 Amp 8 AC055860 11 316 18000814 18001130 TGAGCCAATTATGGAAGTTGC
TCCTTGTGGGCTTCAAATTA  
Table 3.1 (con’t).  Sequencing amplicon information. 
  
 92Amplicon name BAC Chr.  Length Start Stop Forward / Reverse primer seq
TPH1 Amp 9 AC055860 11 398 17999453 17999851 GGGACCTCTGCAAATGTAGTGTA
CAAGAGATGGCCCAGACCT
TPH1 Amp 10 AC055860 11 669 18025553 18026222 TGGGTAGCATGGACATTTGA
AGGGGTGGCTCTAAGACGTT
TPH1 Amp 11 AC055860 11 680 18024938 18025618 CACTTTTGCTTGATTATTGATGGT
TTGTGAACAACAGGACATAGAGG
TPH2 Pro Amp 1 AC090109 12 662 70616773 70617435 CTTGGCACGTTTGTTGAAAA
TGTAAGGGTCAGCTCTAATCAGC
TPH2 Pro Amp 2 AC090109 12 576 70617608 70618184 TCAAACAAGCACATTTGGTCA
TTGTGCATGCAAATGTGTGA
TPH2 Pro Amp 3 AC090109 12 691 70618300 70618991 TGTTCGGGAGCACAATAATTT
GCGGAGATTGAGAGGAAGG
TPH2 Amp 1 AC090109 12 577 70618626 70619203 GGCAGGCTTGAGAGATGAGA
GGTGAGGAGAAGATGGTCACA
TPH2 Amp 2 AC090109 12 279 70621573 70621852 GGAGGATTCTGGAACCCTAACTA
CATAGCAGATAACAGGTTTGTACCC
TPH2 Amp 3 AC090109 12 582 70624239 70624821 GTGTGGGTACTTGGCACCTT
AGCATTGCAGCACAGAACAT
TPH2 Amp 4 AC090109 12 494 70629416 70629910 TTAGCCTGAATTGCCACACA
TGTGGCTCACAGGTCTCATT
TPH2 Amp 5 AC090109 12 441 70652414 70652855 TGCACAACATTAGAAGGTTAGCAT
CTGCAACCTGTGTCCTTGG
TPH2 Amp 6 AC090109 12 296 70658921 70659217 AAATAGTAGAAGCTCCTGCTTGG
AACAGGGCCTAAGTCATTTTCA
TPH2 Amp 7 AC090109 12 381 70674353 70674734 TCCCAGCATTGATGAACTGTA
GGTAAATTCACCATGTTTTCTCC
TPH2 Amp 8 AC090109 12 467 70702260 70702727 CATTCAACCTAGGGAGAGAATACTG
AAAGGCATGACCCATTTTCA
TPH2 Amp 9 AC090109 12 780 70711239 70712019 TGTGATGTCATGGAGCTTCG
AGATGCAGTTTGGTTAAGGACA
TPH2 Amp 10 AC090109 12 692 70711917 70712609 TCCAATGGCAGATAACCACTC
CTGCTTCAGGCAAATCACAA  
 
Table 3.1 (con’t).  Sequencing amplicon inform ation.  Amplicons with “Pro” listed after 
the gene name amplify putative promoter re gion DNA, all other amplicons target exonic 
sequence.  The BAC that the amplicon maps to is shown, as well as the length in basepairs.  Chromosomal start and stop coordinates of the amp licons are listed relative to 
the March 2006 assembly (hg18) of the human genome.    
     
 9365–59°C for 30 s (decreased by 1°C intervals pe r cycle), and 72°C for 30 s, followed by 
38 cycles of 90°C for 30 s, 58°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 30 s, with a final 10 min at 72°C.  
The reactions were performed on an App lied Biosystems GeneAmp PCR System 9700 
(Foster City, CA, USA) using 384-well plates  (MJ Research, Waltham, MA, USA).  PCR 
products were run on a 1% agarose gel to conf irm the specificity of the reaction and that 
product was of expected size.  Unsuccessful  reactions were redesigned with different 
primers.  PCR products were prepared for sequencing by incubating product with 
exonuclease I (0.5 U/sample) and shrimp alka line phosphatase (2.5 U/sample) at 37°C for 
90 min and inactivating the enzymes at 95°C for 15 min.  DNA sequencing of PCR 
product as template was performed usi ng BigDye cycle sequencing on an ABI 3730 
DNA analyzer.  All amplicons in all samples (N=95) were sequenced in at least one 
direction, with the optimal strand choice based on sequencing both stra nds of a subset of 
these samples (N=6).  Sequencing traces were analyzed for polymorphisms using 
Mutation Surveyor v2.4.1 (Soft Genetics, St ate College, PA) and confirmed by visual 
inspection.  Variants identified on only one or two chromosomes in our population were 
confirmed by sequencing the opposite strand.  Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium for each 
SNP was calculated using the Arle quin 2.0 software suite (7). 
3.2.3  TPH2 Arg441His variant genotyping.  In addition to the 95 depressed subjects 
taking fluoxetine, we sequenced 200 Coriell Human Diversity samples for TPH2  exon 
11, using the same methods described above.  Furthermore, we used several different 
methods to genotype the control DNA sent from the Caron group, including allele 
specific PCR (AS-PCR), Taqman and FP-TDI.  FP-TDI was performed as described in 
Chapter 2, and Taqman was performed as  described in Chapter 4.  AS-PCR was  
 94performed as described in Zhang et al. (4).  Primer sequences and locations can be found 
in Figure 3.2.  The RNAse P quantitative PCR assay was run in duplicate using 1 ul or 2 
ul of control gDNA from the Caron group, on an ABI 7900 according to manufacturers’ 
protocol.    
3.2.4  Characterization of variable amino acids.  In order to investig ate whether any of 
the cSNPs that we uncovered may affect protein function, we tested the level of 
conservation for each variable amino acid pos ition using the SIFT (Sorting Intolerant 
From Tolerant) program (8).  This program uses protein sequence as input, and then 
performs an iterative psi-bl ast of the SWISSPROT/TrEMBL database in order to create 
an alignment of all available orthologous a nd paralogous protein sequences above a user 
defined cutoff for median conservation.  We  used a median conservation of 3.9 and 
dropped sequences with >95% iden tity in this analysis. The sc ore for whether a particular 
amino acid change is predicted to be tolerate d is based on the site specific conservation; a 
low score (e.g., <0.05) indicates that this posit ion is highly conserved in the alignment, a 
higher score indicates that this  position is variable.    
3.2.5  Population genetic parameter estimation.  We calculated two estimators of the 
population mutation parameter theta ( θ), based on the number of segregating sites ( θs), 
and the mean number of pairwise differences ( π).  θs was estimated as (S/a 1)/B, where S 
is the number of segregating sites, B is the number of nucleotides sequenced, and a 1 = 
n - 1
i = 11 i∑ , where n is the number of chromosomes investigated (a 1 = 5.827 for autosomal  
 
   
 95 
            
 
    Figure 3.2.  Primer location and sequences for the TPH2 Arg441His (G1463A) variant.  
Taqman primers and probes, which are not shown on the schematic, flank the SNP by a 
total of ~40 bp on each side.      
  
Primer Name Sequence
hOuterF ATGTGTGAAAGCCTTTGACCCAAAGACA
hOuterR TGCGTTATATGACATTGACTGAACTGCTAS-G-allele TAGGGATTG AAGTATACTGAGAAGGCAC
AS-A-allele TAGGGATTGAAGTATACTGAGAAGGCAT
5.9-F TGTGATGTCATGGAGCTTCG5.9-R AGATGCAGTTTGGTTAAGGACAFP-1 GGGATTGAAGTA TACTGAGAAGGGA
FP-2 TTGCAAAGTCAATTACCC
Taqman-F CTGTTTATTCTGCAGGGACTTTGCTaqman-R TCTGTGTGTA GGGATTGAAGTATACTGA
Taqman AlleleG (VIC) TCAATTACCCGTCCCTTC
Taqman AlleleA (FAM) CAATTACCCATCCCTTC 
 96genes and 5.550 for X-linked genes in this study) (9). π was estimated as 
(S
jj
j = 1 2p (1- p )∑ )/((1-(1/n)) divided by the number of  nucleotides sequenced, where p j is 
the observed frequency of the jth SNP (10).  We calculated θs and π for the coding 
regions of all genes, and calculated aggreg ate values for each functional gene region 
using the autosomal gene data.  We tested for selective effects using Tajima’s D statistic, 
which quantifies the deviation from the neutral expectation of θs = π (11).  Significance of 
Tajima’s D statistic was tested empirically  by generating random samples (N=10,000) 
under the hypothesis of selective neutrality and population equilibrium using a coalescent simulation algorithm, as implemented in the software suite Arlequin (7). 
3.2.6  Single locus association analysis.  Single locus associations were tested via 
logistic regression using a cust om script for the statistical  package R v1.6.1 (12).  For 
each SNP, three phenotypic comparisons were made based on the results from the response pattern analysis desc ribed in the sample description.  The comparisons made 
were: (1) all responders (specific and nonspecific) vs nonresponders, (2) specific 
responders vs both nonspecific responders  and nonresponders, and (3) specific 
responders vs nonspecific responders.  Genotypes were coded as 0, 1, or 2 corresponding 
to the presence of 0, 1, or 2 copies of the rare allele, and unconditional logistic regression was used to assess the association between genotype and response phenotype.  For each 
SNP with significant genotypi c association (p<0.05), odds  ratio estimates and 95% 
confidence intervals were computed, comparing carriers of the rare al lele to non-carriers. 
 
3.2.7  Haplotype association analysis.  Haplotype analysis was performed using all 
common SNPs (>10% minor allele frequency,  N=97) identified in this population, 
including 63 SNPs genotyped in the study descri bed in the previous chapter.  Haplotypes  
 97were inferred using a PL-EM algorithm, as implemented in the program TagSNPs (13).  
In order to limit haplotype diversity for hapl otype association testing, regions of low 
haplotype diversity (“hapl otype blocks”) were chosen using the program 
HAPLOBLOCKFINDER (14).  We de fined haplotype blocks as regions in which at least 
80% of chromosomes assayed were repres ented by 3 or less common haplotypes.  
Common haplotypes (>0.01 popula tion frequency) within blocks were tested for 
association with antidepressant response using COCAPHASE v2.43 (15).  This program 
uses an EM algorithm to obtain maximum lik elihood estimates of haplotype frequencies 
and uses standard unconditional logistic re gression to calculate likelihood ratio tests 
under a log-linear model of the probability th at a haplotype belongs  to the case rather 
than the control group.  
 
3.3  Results 
3.3.1  DNA sequencing.  In order to expand on the resu lts of an earlier indirect 
association study using evenly spaced publicly  available SNP makers, we sequenced the 
coding region, intron-exon boundaries, and 5’ flanking conserved non-coding sequence 
(CNS) of six serotonin pathway genes ( HTR1A , HTR2A , HTR2C , TPH1 , TPH2 , and 
MAOA ) in a subset (N=95) of the clinical popu lation used in our previous study.  This 
sample set consisted of subjects of primarily Caucasian descent, as identified by self-report. With this sample set, we ha d 85.2% power to detect autosomal (
HTR1A , HTR2A , 
TPH1 , and TPH2 ) gene variants at 1% MAF and 76.7% power to detect X-linked ( MAOA  
and HTR2C ) gene variants at 1% MAF.  We had >99.9% power to detect variants with 
5% MAF in all genes investigated.  We sequenced approximately 32 kb of DNA per  
 98subject (3 Mb overall) and identified 115 vari ants (Table 3.2).  Most of the variants 
identified were rare, in fact 52 of the vari ants were seen on only one of 190 chromosomes 
screened (N=144 chromosomes for X-linked MAOA  and HTR2C ).  Two single and one 
two basepair insertion-deleti on (indel) polymorphisms were observed; the rest of the 
variants were SNPs.  All three indels were  only seen on a single chromosome and had no 
entry in dbSNP build 124.  We identified 60 polymorphisms that were novel and not in 
public databases, none of these we re common in our population.   
 Of the 115 variants that we uncovered in these six genes, 11 of them were non-
synonymous (Table 3.3).  We identified four  novel cSNPs, however, all of them were 
seen on only a single chromosome in our population and thus ar e not likely to be 
common in future studies of these genes in Caucasian individuals.  We analyzed the amino acid conservation of the variants with the SIFT algorithm.  Four SNPs had SIFT 
scores <0.05, and thus altered an evolutionar ily conserved amino acid.  While three of the 
four SNPs predicted to be intolerable cha nges were seen on a singl e chromosome in our 
population, a notable exception was th e His452Tyr substitution in the 
HTR2A  receptor 
which had a SIFT score of 0.02 and had a MAF of 11% in our population.           
We estimated the population genetic parameters θs and π for each of the genes 
investigated (Table 3.4).  Since our seque ncing data is unbiased in terms of SNP 
selection, the comparison of these two estimat es of nucleotide diversity can be used to 
calculate Tajima’s D statistic.  Tajima’s D statistic can indicate wh ether these genes are 
under strong negative sel ective pressure (high frequency of rare variants), or under strong 
positive selection pressure (high frequency of common variants).  Given that the entire fluoxetine sample set has major depression, indica tors of strong selecti on in serotonergic   
 99Gene Amplicon MAF Position RegionAA 
Change FP? dbSNP ID Singleton? Indel? Context Sequence
HTR1A Pro 1 0.474 -1019 CNS - FP rs6295 - - GTAGCTTTTTAAAAA(G/C)GAAGACACACTCGGT
HTR1A Pro 2 0.005 -117 CNS - - - Singleton - CCTGCTTGGGTCTCT(G/T)CATTCCCTTCCTCCG
HTR1A 3 0.005 81 NS Ile->Val - rs1799921 Singleton - GGCAACACTACTGGT(A/G)TCTCCGACGTGACCG
HTR1A 3 0.005 194 S Arg-> - - Singleton - CATCGCCTTGGAGCG(C/T)TCCCTGCAGAACGTG
HTR1A 3 0.021 293 S Val-> FP rs6294 - - CGCGCTGTATCAGGT(G/A)CTCAACAAGTGGACA
HTR1A 3 0.005 506 S Ile-> - - Singleton - CTTCCTCATCTCTAT(C/T)CCGCCCATGCTGGGC
HTR1A 2 0.026 551 S Pro-> - rs1800043 - - AGACCGCTCGGACCC(C/T)GACGCATGCACCATT
HTR1A 2 0.005 658 NS Arg->Leu FP rs1800044 Singleton - ATGGGCGCATATTCC(G/T)AGCTGCGCGCTTCCG
HTR1A 1 0.005 1444 3' - - - Singleton - TCCACGGCAGGGCCC(T/G)TTGTGCAAAGGAGAC
HTR1A 1 0.495 1528 3' - - rs6449693 - - CATTGGCTCAGACTT(C/T)GCCTGTATCATCAGT
HTR1A 1 0.495 1555 3' - FP rs878567 - - CAGTTTTGATCCCAG(T/C)AATTGCCTCTTCTCT
HTR2A Pro 3 0.011 -2609 CNS - - - - - CACTCCCATGCCTAC(A/T)CTCCTGCAGTCCCTT
HTR2A Pro 3 0.005 -2563 CNS - - - Singleton - TCATTCCTATTGATA(T/G)TCTTACTGATATTAA
HTR2A Pro 3 0.005 -2500 CNS - - - Singleton - ATGTGTGTAAGTATT(T/C)GGCCCATGTCTGGCT
HTR2A Pro 3 0.111 -2263 CNS - - rs731244 - - GCCCCCCTCACTGCC(A/C)TGCCTGCCACCCTCC
HTR2A Pro 3 0.437 -2225 CNS - - rs731245 - - GAGATCTAGCCACCT(A/G)TTTCCTGGGTGGGTG
HTR2A Pro 3 0.005 -2135 CNS - - - Singleton - TGCCAGATCCCACTT(C/T)GTCTCCGGTGCTACC
HTR2A Pro 2 0.447 -1437 CNS - FP rs6311 - - AGTGCTGTGAGTGTC(C/T)GGCACTTCCATCCAA
HTR2A Pro 2 0.063 -1420 CNS - - rs6306 - - AAACAGTATGTCCTC(G/A)GAGTGCTGTGAGTGT
HTR2A Pro 2 0.026 -1272 CNS - - rs6315 - - GCTACATATTAATAT(T/C)GGGAAGTTTTCCTTT
HTR2A Pro 2 0.005 -1182 CNS - - rs6316 Singleton - TCAGACCTCCCTCTA(T/C)GTGTATGTCATAAGC
HTR2A Pro 2 0.005 -1007 CNS - - - Singleton Indel GGTTCCTCCCTCCCT(/het_insC)GTGCGGCTCGCCTCA
HTR2A Pro 1 0.005 -883 CNS - - - Singleton - TTCCACCAGCATAAT(A/G)TGATAGTAATTTGGT
HTR2A Pro 1 0.079 -783 CNS - FP rs6312 - - ATTTGTCTTCAGGGT(C/T)CACACATGAGATACA
HTR2A Pro 1 0.005 -559 CNS - - rs6309 Singleton - TCTCAGCCATTCTTA(A/G)GCTGAATTGCCACAG
HTR2A 1 0.011 73 NS Thr->Asn - rs1805055 - - TTACTGTAGAGCCTG(G/T)TGTCATCATTTAATT
HTR2A 1 0.005 92 S Asp-> - - Singleton - TTCTCCGGAGTTAAA(G/A)TCATTACTGTAGAGC
HTR2A 1 0.447 101 S Ser-> FP rs6313 - - AGTGTTAGCTTCTCC(G/A)GAGTTAAAGTCATTA
HTR2A 1 0.005 217 NS Glu->Gly - - Singleton - GCAGACCAGTTTTTT(T/C)CCTGGAGATGAAGTA
HTR2A 2 0.300 3260 Intron - - rs2296973 - - CTCCTGGAGCACATG(T/G)ATCCCTATCCTATGA
HTR2A 2 0.016 3419 S Asp-> FP rs6305 - - GATGGCGACGTAGCG(G/A)TCCAGCGAGATGGCG
HTR2A 2 0.016 3492 NS Ile->Val FP rs6304 - - TGGTCCAAACAGCAA(T/C)GATTTTCAGAAATGC
HTR2A 2 0.005 3602 Intron - - - Singleton - GATTGAGGATGTCAG(G/A)TTTCAGTACAACAAA
HTR2A 4 0.005 60893 S Thr-> - - Singleton - GGCCAAAGCCGGTAT(T/A)GTGTTCACTAAAATT
HTR2A 4 0.105 61008 NS His->Tyr FP rs6314 - - AAGCCTCTTCAGAAT(G/A)CTGCTTTCCTAGAGC
HTR2A 4 0.005 61037 S Ser-> - - Singleton - TTCATTCACTCCGTC(G/A)CTATTGTCTTTAGAA
HTR2A 5 0.179 61191 3' UTR - FP rs3125 - - ATAAAATGAGGCATA(C/G)AGATATGATCGTTGG
HTR2A 5 0.200 61472 3' UTR - - rs3803189 - - AAAATTTTCACTATT(T/G)ATAGCTATTTTTATT
HTR2A 6 0.005 62101 3' UTR - - - Singleton - ATAAATAGTATAAAC(C/T)GATGGATCTGAAAGC
HTR2A 7 0.011 62550 3' - - - - - AGTTTAGTCATTTTC(T/C)TTTTTTCTTTCTTTT
HTR2A 7 0.005 62580 3' - - - Singleton - CTGTATATATTTTTT(G/T)ACTAAGACCATTTCA
HTR2A 7 0.116 62612 3' - - rs11148016 - - GGAAATAAGTTGAAA(T/G)GATTCTAAAAATAAG
HTR2C Pro 1 0.007 -144652 CNS - - - Singleton - TTCTGGCGGGACTCG(T/A)ATTTATTTTGTCAGA
HTR2C Pro 1 0.153 -144529 CNS - - rs3795182 - - ACAGTAATTTATAAA(T/C)ATGGAAGAGAAAACG
HTR2C 1 0.153 -142827 CNS - FP rs3813929 - - TCTTGGGCCAAAAGC(G/A)GGATGAGGGGAGGAG
HTR2C 1 0.389 -142765 5' UTR - FP rs518147 - - GAAGGAAGCGTCCTC(C/G)GCAAGCACCAGAGCG
HTR2C 1 0.007 -142619 5' UTR - - - Singleton - GCGACGACTCCGACG(A/T)CAACGATGTACAGAC
HTR2C 2 0.021 -113028 5' UTR - - - - - TTTTTGAAGGATGGC(G/A)TCAGTTGGCCTATGT
HTR2C 2 0.021 -112989 Intron - - - - - AAGAGTCTTGAGGCA(C/T)GCTTATGTGTATACT
HTR2C 2 0.007 -112853 Intron - - - Singleton - TTTACCAATTACATA(A/G)TATTCTT TTTCAAAC
HTR2C 3 0.007 -277 Intron - - - Singleton - TTATTTATCATCGCA(G/A)TTTTTAAAAATTTTC
HTR2C 3 0.007 -176 Intron - - - Singleton - TGCACTTAATGGTGA(T/A)AAGAAACAGTTATTA
HTR2C 3 0.229 63 Intron - FP rs2248440 - - GCAAAGTTATCTTTT(C/T)ACT AAAATAATAAGT
HTR2C 4 0.222 4388 NS Cys->Ser FP rs6318 - - CTCACAGAAATATCA(C/G)ATTGCCAAACCAATA
HTR2C 5 0.181 121190 Intron - - rs5946005 - - GAGAAGACAAGAACA(C/T)GTCATCCAAATTGTA
HTR2C 6 0.007 180119 NS Arg->Gln - - Singleton - ACCAGAACGCACGCC(G/A)AAGAAAGAAGAAGGA
HTR2C 7 0.007 181019 3' UTR - - - Singleton - ATGACAGTGGTTATA(T/G)TTCAACCACACCTAA
HTR2C 8 0.056 181359 3' UTR - - rs1801412 - - ACTTCTTAAGGACAG(T/G)GTTCAAATTCTGATT
HTR2C 8 0.007 181432 3' UTR - - - Singleton - TTAGTAAATTCCTAA(T/C)TCTATGATTAAACTG
HTR2C 8 0.014 181443 3' UTR - - - - - CTAATTCTATGATTA(A/C)ACTGGGAAATGAGAT
HTR2C 9 0.007 182160 3' UTR - - - Singleton - GAATTCATGATGCTA(G/A)TTCTTACGCTTGACA
HTR2C 10 0.007 182360 3' UTR - - - Singleton - CTCTATTTGATTTGC(A/G)ACACTGCCAAACATC
HTR2C 10 0.007 182365 3' UTR - - - Singleton - TTTGATTTGCAACAC(T/G)GCCAAACATCAGTCA
HTR2C 11 0.028 183284 3' - - rs5987830 - - ATTAAATGTTGGCTA(A/C)TATGTCACATGTCTT  
Table 3.2.  Pharmacodynamic gene variants uncovered during resequencing.  
     
 100Gene Amplicon MAF Position RegionAA 
Change FP? dbSNP ID Singleton? Indel? Context Sequence
TPH1 10 0.337 -7228 CNS - FP rs6486405 - - GAGTATTTTATAGTT(T/G)TCATTGTAGAGATCT
TPH1 10 0.347 -7113 CNS - FP rs6486404 - - ATTGGCATACAGAAA(C/T)GCTATTGATTTTTGT
TPH1 10 0.011 -7067 CNS - - rs11024455 - - CCTGCAACATTAGTG(A/C)ATTATTTAATCAGTT
TPH1 10 0.005 -6951 CNS - - - Singleton Indel TCCAGTTTGGATGCC(C/het_del)TTTATTTCTTCTCTT
TPH1 10 0.011 -6873 CNS - - rs11024454 - - GGTGAAATTGGGCAT(C/A)CTTATCGTGTTCCAG
TPH1 10 0.005 -6867 CNS - - - Singleton - ATTGGGCATCCTTAT(C/T)GTGTTCCAGATCTAC
TPH1 11 0.005 -6616 CNS - - - Singleton - TGTACCTCATAGAAG(C/T)ATTATACAGATAAAA
TPH1 11 0.358 -6574 CNS - - rs4537731 - - AGAAAAGCTGTAAAG(A/G)TCCTGAGCTTTAAAG
TPH1 11 0.005 -6501 CNS - - - Singleton - ACAAATCACTAATAC(C/T)TGCATGAAACTCAAA
TPH1 11 0.011 -6398 CNS - - rs12273833 - - AAGGCAAAACTGTGG(A/G)GACAGAAATCAGATC
TPH1 12 0.332 -5855 CNS - FP rs7130929 - - CCAGAAGCACAGAGA(G/T)GTGTGGGAGGTGGGG
TPH1 12 0.011 -5776 CNS - - - - - GCAGGTCATTGTGTC(G/C)ATAATAGGCGTTATC
TPH1 Pro 2 0.005 -5277 CNS - - - Singleton Indel GGAGAAAAGACACTT(TT/het_del)TGAGTGCCTCCTGTG
TPH1 Pro 2 0.332 -4873 CNS - - rs6486403 - - GTCAGTTAAGAGTCC(G/A)TGTGAACTCAACCTT
TPH1 Pro 3 0.358 -4353 CNS - - rs7122118 - - TGTGCTTCCTAGATC(C/A)GGTAAATATAAATTA
TPH1 1 0.200 -174 CNS - - rs10488682 - - TTTTGGTCTCACTAG(A/T)TTCTTGCAAAGCTTA
TPH1 3 0.453 7531 Intron - - rs10832874 - - AGTCTTGCTCTGCTG(T/C)CCAGACTGGAGTGCA
TPH1 4 0.005 11318 Intron - - - Singleton - AGAATAAATTGTGTT(C/T)ATTTGGTAAGTAGAA
TPH1 4 0.011 11466 S Gln-> - - - - GGGAACCGTATTCCA(A/G)GAGCTCAACAAACTC
TPH1 5 0.016 14284 Intron - - - - - GCCGTAAGTACTTCT(A/G)TTTCAGCCAGGAATT
TPH1 6 0.453 15053 Intron - FP rs1799913 - - CAAACTTGTACCTCT(C/A)TTTCAGAGATACCTG
TPH1 8 0.005 17898 S Leu-> - - Singleton - CAAACAGGAATGTCT(T/C)ATCACAACTTTTCAA
TPH1 9 0.005 19795 Intron - - - Singleton - GTCATCCAGGAACAT(T/C)TGAGCATCAATTCGG
TPH1 9 0.005 19800 Intron - - - Singleton - CCAGGAACATTTGAG(C/T)ATCAATTCGGAGGTC
TPH2 Pro 1 0.021 -1971 CNS - - - - - GGTTCAGCTTTCCCA(T/G)GACTGCAAAGCCTTT
TPH2 Pro 1 0.084 -1913 CNS - - rs11178996 - - TAATTTTTTGTTGCC(A/G)TTGTTTTCCAACTTA
TPH2 Pro 1 0.005 -1782 CNS - - - Singleton - TTATAAATAAATTAC(T/G)TTTAATATCTTTTTT
TPH2 Pro 1 0.021 -1666 CNS - - - - - CATTAGCTACTATTA(T/C)TGTCATTAGTTCATT
TPH2 Pro 2 0.005 -1178 CNS - - - Singleton - TAACGCACAGATCTC(G/T)TATATTTAAGTAGCA
TPH2 Pro 2 0.005 -888 CNS - - - Singleton - GCCCTTTTATGAAAG(C/T)CATTACACATATATA
TPH2 Pro 3 0.084 -614 CNS - - rs11178997 - - TTTGATCATTACACA(T/A)TGTACGCTTGTGTCA
TPH2 1 0.011 -52 5' UTR - - rs11178998 - - TCCGCCAGCGCTGCT(A/G)CTGCCCCTCTAGTAC
TPH2 2 0.005 2613 NS Ser->Tyr - - Singleton - TAAATAAACCTAACT(C/A)TGGCAAAAATGACGA
TPH2 4 0.026 10520 Intron - - rs11179003 - - AATTGAACACTCAGA(C/T)ACCACAGTGATTTTC
TPH2 5 0.458 33419 Intron - - rs7963720 - - TGGGATCCTTTCAGA(C/T)GCTCATGTGCTCCAC
TPH2 6 0.432 40095 S Pro-> - rs7305115 - - TCCCCTCTACACCCC(A/G)GAACCGTGAGTACCT
TPH2 7 0.189 55607 Intron - - rs1007023 - - CAACTTAAAACCAGT(G/T)CTATTTATGTCCATT
TPH2 7 0.026 55657 Intron - - - - - CAGGATTATTGACTA(T/C)GAGTTATAGGTAAAT
TPH2 8 0.347 83468 S Ala-> - rs4290270 - - AGGGCAACTGCGGGC(A/T)TATGGAGCAGGACTC
TPH2 9 0.016 92483 Intron - - - - - CTTTTATCTATCCCT(C/T)GTACCAATGAGGGTT
TPH2 10 0.116 93187 3' UTR - - - - - CATCACAATAACAAA(G/A)GTTCAATATTCTATT
TPH2 10 0.005 93218 3' UTR - - - Singleton - TCAAAAATTGTTGAG(G/A)TAACACAGCAGTTGG
MAOA Pro 3 0.007 -579 CNS - - - Singleton - GGGACCTCCTATACC(C/T)AATGACCTTTCGCAA
MAOA Pro 3 0.007 -537 CNS - - - Singleton - AGCACCTCCTACACC(C/T)AGTAACACCCCCGAG
MAOA 4 0.007 53505 Intron - - - Singleton - ACAGGAGTCAGAGAA(T/A)GTCATGTTTTTACAA
MAOA 5 0.007 56904 Intron - - - Singleton - CAACCAAGGCTGGTA(A/G)TTTGGAAGACTGAGG
MAOA 6 0.306 57177 S Arg-> FP rs6323 - - AGCTCCCATTGGAAG(C/A)CGCTGAATTAACTGG
MAOA 10 0.035 69450 Intron - - - - - GAGGCTGTATAGTTT(C/T)TACAGATTCAAGGCC
MAOA 10 0.306 69532 S Asp-> - rs1801291 - - TTCTTGTACCCAGAT(A/G)TCTTTCTCGGTCACC
MAOA 10 0.007 69533 NS Ile->Val - - Singleton - GTTCTTGTACCCAGA(T/C)ATCTTTCTCGGTCAC
MAOA 11 0.007 69876 NS Lys->Arg - rs1800466 Singleton - GGCAGGAGCTTGTAT(T/C)TGTACAGCACAAACC  
Table 3.2 (con’t).  Pharmacodynamic gene va riants discovered during resequencing.  
Displayed are all 115 variants discovered dur ing resequencing, as well as the amplicon, 
minor allele frequency (MAF), and position from the translati onal start site.  Also shown 
are the region (CNS – conserved non-codi ng region, S – synonymous change, NS – non-
synonymous change, 5’ – 5’ proximal regi on, 3’ – 3’ proximal region, UTR – 
untranslated region) and amino acid change if applicable.  SNPs also assayed via FP-TDI 
are indicated as “FP”, and dbSNP IDs are shown for known SNPs (dbSNP build 124).  
SNPs with alleles seen on a single chromo some are designated with “Singleton” and 
insertion/deletion polymorphism are designate d with as “Indel”.  DNA sequence flanking 
the variants is also shown.    
 101GeneAA 
position dbSNP rs#No. of 
chromsomes No. of seqs 
used for 
alignment SIFT score 
HTR1A I28V 1799921 1 11 0.32
HTR1A R220L 1800044 1 13 0.02
HTR2A T25N 1805055 2 7 0.18
HTR2A E73G N/A 1 7 0.00
HTR2A I197V 6304 3 13 0.76
HTR2A H452Y 6314 20 13 0.02
HTR2C C23S 6318 32 5 0.10
HTR2C R288Q N/A 1 16 0.36
TPH2 S41Y N/A 1 12 0.91
MAOA I471V N/A 1 18 0.04
MAOA K520R 1800466 1 17 0.10 
Table 3.3.  SIFT scores for the 11 non-synonymous SNPs.  The SIFT algorithm was used 
to predict in silico the function of the amino acid alte ring SNPs.  A median conservation 
of 3.9 was used and we dropped sequences with  >95% identity for th is analysis.  Where 
applicable, dbSNP IDs are shown.  Also s hown are the number of chromosomes that the 
minor allele was observed (N =190).  A SIFT score of <0.05 indicates a lack of 
conservation and thus potentially altered prot ein function.  Only one common variant, the 
well-known His452Tyr SNP in HTR2A, was predic ted to have altered function using this 
method.  
        
 102 DNA sequenced
 (kb) θs x 104 π x 104 Number of SNPs 
uncovered Number of novel 
SNPs 
5' Conserved non-coding 11.1 7.7 7.1 51 (30) 24 (5) 
Intronic 6.6 5.8 4.9 22 (13) 14 (5) 
Untranslated region 6.0 4.6 2.7 16 (8) 11 (3) 
        
Amino acid coding 8.2 5.0 3.8 26 (12) 11 (1) 
Synonymous    15 (8) 7 (1) 
Non-synonymous    11 (4) 4 (0) 
        
Total 31.9     115 (63) 60 (14)  
Table 3.4a  
  
Gene θs x 104 π x 104 Tajima's D P(D obs > D sim) 
HTR1A 8.12 1.06 -1.78 0.02 
HTR2A 11.14 5.85 -1.09 - 
HTR2C 2.62 2.63 0.00 - 
TPH1 2.57 0.24 -1.25 - 
TPH2 3.50 6.51 1.39 - 
MAOA 5.25 6.42 0.42 - 
       
Average 5.53 +/- 3.45 3.79 +/- 2.83 -0.38 +/- 1.19 -  
Table 3.4b 
 Table 3.4.  Population genetic parame ters for the pharmacodynamic genes.   
a)  Variant identification summary for the six genes. θ
s and π are shown per nucleotide 
sequenced.  Values in parentheses are for a s ubset of SNPs in which the minor allele was 
seen in at least 2 out of 190 chromosomes (i .e., non-singletons).  Novel SNPs are defined 
as variants that were not in dbSNP build 124. b)  Population genetic parameter estimates fo r coding regions of the six candidate genes. 
θ
s and π are shown per nucleotide sequenced.  Over all parameter estimates are listed as 
mean +/- SD for the six genes.  Significance of Tajima’s D departure from neutrality is 
also shown if nominally significant (p<0.05).    
 103candidate genes in this p opulation may lend additional ev idence to the serotonergic 
hypothesis of depression.  The coding region of the TPH1  gene had the lowest nucleotide 
diversity, with only two low frequency synonymous variants detected ( π = 2.4 x 10-5).  
Tajima’s D estimates for coding regions were ne gative for half of the genes investigated, 
and was significantly negative for the HTR1A  coding region.  While a negative Tajima’s 
D can be caused by negative selection pressure , the estimates for these genes are within 
the range of values previously  reported for other genomic re gions and consistent with a 
recent expansion of the human population (16;17).  Nucleotide diversity ( π) was highest 
in the CNS ( π = 7.1 x 10-4) and lowest in the protein coding (3.8 x 10-4) and untranslated 
regions (2.7 x 10-4) of these genes.  
Our resequencing effort identified 20 SN Ps that were initially genotyped using 
fluorescence polarization detection of templa te-directed dye-terminator incorporation 
(FP-TDI) in our previous study. We found 2 out  of 1900 matched calls were inconsistent 
between genotyping using FP-TDI and seque ncing, yielding a reproducibility across 
assays of 99.89%.  This value is reassuring given the substantial effect genotyping errors 
can have on haplotype inference (18). 
3.3.2  TPH2 Arg441His variant.  A highly publicized report of the functional 
Arg441His TPH2 variant by Zhang et al. was of substantial interest to us, since we had 
not observed this variant in our fluoxetine population (N=95) .  We thus sequenced an 
additional 200 unrelated indi viduals (Coriell Diversity Pa nel) for exon 11 and did not 
observe a single His441 allele.  The STAR*D sample set (N =1,941) was also genotyped 
for this variant by our colleagues, and not a single instance of the His441 allele was 
found.  Thus, we genotyped 2,036 DNA samples from patients with major depression for  
 104a total of 4,072 alleles and did not see this non-synonymous variant.  Using our data and 
assuming a binomial distribution, we can rule out the His441 allele as being as frequent 
as 0.06 in depressed individuals (Table 3.5).  Based on a threshold probability of 0.01, the 
maximum allele frequency in major depression is 0.001.  
  In order to validate our genotyping assa ys, we received four genomic DNAs from 
the Caron group; two homozygous Arg (GG) sa mples, a heterozygous (AG) sample, and 
a homozygous His (AA) sample.  Several expe riments were performed on these control 
samples, and the results are summarized in Table 3.6.  We initially performed the ARMS 
ASPCR method that is described in Zhang et al., and all the genotypes were concordant 
with the expected genotypes.  Next, a Taqman allelic discrimination assay for the Arg441His variant was run on the controls, and again the resu lts were concordant with 
expected genotypes.  We then ran an FP-TD I assay specific for the Arg441His variant on 
the controls.  For the initial PCR step of the FP-TDI, I used the sequencing primers for 
exon 11 (5.9-F and 5.9-R).  The genotypes were concordant with expected for all samples 
except  the His homozygote sample (AA), which was genotyped by FP-TDI as GG.  Note 
that the primers for this assay lie outside the cloned 492 bp insert region (Figure 3.2).  
The control samples were then amplifie d using the exon 11 sequencing primers and 
products were sequenced.  Genotyping results we re again concordant with expected for 
all samples except  the His homozygote sample (AA), which again was genotyped as GG.  
We then amplified the control samples with the primers for the ASPCR (hOuterF and hOuterR, which are internal to the cloned insert region), and se quenced the products.  
Using these primers, results were concorda nt with expected genotypes for all control 
samples.  At this point, contamination of genomic DNA with clone seemed like a   
 105His allele 
frequency
0.06 7x10-116
0.03 3x10-58
0.01 7x10-20
0.005 3x10-10
0.0025 2x10-5
0.001 0.01
0.0005 0.11Probability of not 
detecting allele
 
Table 3.5.  Probability of not detecting the variant TPH2 His441 allele in 2,036 depressed 
subjects.  Several putative His allele population frequencies are shown, with the 
corresponding probability of not  detecting the variant allele  in our population, assuming a 
binomial distribution.   
 
      
 
  
  Exp Method Primer F Primer R Internal primer(s) GG-1 GG-2 AG AA Arg (G) His (A)
1 ASPCR hOuterF hOuterR A or G AS-primer GG GG AG AA2 Taqman Taqman-F Taqman-R Taqman Allele A + G GG GG AG AA3 FP-TDI 5.9-F 5.9-R FP-1 GG GG AG GG
4 Sequencing 5.9-F 5.9-R GG GG AG GG
5 Sequencing hOuterF hOuterR GG GG AG AA
6R N A s e  P  q P C R + + + -7 P C R T 7 F P - 1 ---- + -8 P C R T 7 F P - 2 ---+ - +9 P C R T 3 F P - 1 ---+ - +
1 0 P C R T 3 F P - 2 ---- + -Control gDNA samples
Clone DNA samples
 
 
Table 3.6.  Results of experiments with the TPH2 His441Arg c ontrol samples.  Genotyping results  using each method are shown, wi th 
the expected genotype shown in the first row of the table.  Primer sequences and posit ions are shown in Figure 3.2.  For the RN Ase P 
qPCR method, a + or – indicates th e presence or absence, respectively, of detect able genomic DNA in the sample.  For the PCR 
methods, a + or – indicates the presence or absence, respectively,  of a specific band of the expe cted size, as shown in Figure 3.3.   
 
   
106 
 107possibility.  In order to quan tify the amount of genomic DNA in these control samples, an 
RNAse P quantitative PCR assay was performe d.  All samples had expected amounts of 
signal from the RNAse P probe, expect  for the His homozygote sample (AA), which had 
no detectable product.   So as to verify that  the discordant genotypi ng results were due to 
clone contamination in the sample, four PCRs  were performed (Table 3.6, experiments 7-
10), using universal cloning primers T3 a nd T7, and primers FP-1 and FP-2, which are 
internal to the clone insert and face in opposite  directions (Figure 3.1).  The two clones, 
His441 and Arg441 have their insert in th e opposite directions, allowing us to 
differentiate between them.  The results of  these PCR experiments are shown in Figure 
3.3.  This gel confirms that the AA cont rol, which was supposed to contain genomic 
DNA representing the AA homozygote, actual ly contained the His441 clone, as it 
produced the specified band using T7 and FP- 2 primers or T3 and FP-1 primers.  The 
very small amount of genomic DNA (based on the RNAse P assay) in the AA control 
sample appeared to actually be homozygous GG. 
3.3.3  Single locus association analysis.  Variants identified during resequencing were 
tested for association to fluoxetine response or response specificity.  Three phenotypic 
comparisons were made: (1) responders (N= 76) vs. non-responders (N=19), (2) specific 
responders (N=56) vs. non-specific and non-responders (N=39), and (3) specific 
responders vs. non-specific responders (N=20) .  Genotypic association was tested using 
logistic regression.  Given th e low minor allele frequency of the coding region variants 
identified (80% had a MAF <0.10), our power to  detect association of these variants was  
limited in this sample.  For instance, for me dium risk alleles (e.g., OR=2.5), we had 
  
 108 
 
               Figure 3.3.  Results of PCR experiments on TPH2 Arg441His control samples.  Shown 
are the PCR products on a 2% agarose gel, with  a 100 bp ladder in th e first lane of each 
primer combination, which is listed at the top of  the gel.  Lane 1: clone His (A), lane 2: 
clone Arg (G), lane 3: Control AG gDNA, la ne 4: Control AA gDNA, lane 5: Control 
GG-1 gDNA, lane 6: Control GG-2 gDNA,  lane 7: H2O control.     
 
 
        
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1  2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1  2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
 109greater than 80% power to detect association of variants with >0.10 MAF (Figure 3.4).  
Four SNPs in the promoter region of TPH1  showed nominally significant association to 
categorical response to fluoxetine (Table 3.7).  These SNPs have extensive LD and occur 
in conserved mammalian sequence 5’ proximal of the TPH1  gene.  Two coding region 
SNPs in the HTR2A  gene were associated with the sp ecificity of response (specific vs. 
non-specific), including the evol utionarily conserved His 452Tyr substitution.  Two 
synonymous SNPs in the MAOA  gene were also associated with response specificity.  Six 
of these eight associated variants were also  genotyped in our previous work (2).   
3.3.4  Haplotype analysis.  Levels of LD varied acro ss the genes sequenced, with 
HTR1A , HTR2C , TPH1  and MAOA  exhibiting strong LD and TPH2  and HTR2A  showing 
much lower levels of LD.  In order to take advantage of all the information available on 
these genes, we combined the genotype data  from our previous study and the current 
sequencing data for haplotype analysis.  In our previous work, we genotyped 
approximately 8-10 SNPs per gene region.  Genotyped SNPs were largely non-coding, 
with average spacing of 7.6 kb (median, 2.7 kb).  The combined data set (N=188 unique 
SNPs) included 97 common SNPs (>10% MAF) , consisting of 63 from our previous 
genotyping work, 19 from the current sequencing effort, and 15 that were assayed in both 
studies.  Levels of LD may be overestim ated for genomic regions when only coding 
region variants are included in the analysis  due to the low density and minor allele 
frequency of these variants.  This  is illustrated by the results for HTR2A , in which we had 
genotype information for 15 common SNPs acr oss the gene region, which yielded 25 
inferred common haplotypes (data not shown).  As expected, the addition of non-coding 
SNPs increased the haplotype diversity for th is gene region when compared to a recent  
 00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
Minor Allele FrequencyPower
00.10.20.30.40.50.6
Proportion of SNPsOR=1.5 OR=2.5 OR=3.5 Sequencing SNPs FP SNPs
 
Figure 3.4   
110 
 111Figure 3.4.  Power to detect association to categorical response in fluoxetine sample 
(N=95).  On the left y-axis is the power (1- β) of detecting an association at the various 
minor allele frequencies shown on the x-axis .  Three different effect sizes (dominant 
ORs) are shown, indicated by the lighter lines .  Power was calculated using the method of 
Purcell et al. (19).  The right y-axis shows the proportion of SNPs at each minor allele 
frequency (binned in 0.02 intervals).  Th e variants uncovered dur ing resequencing (dark 
dashed line) and the variants assayed in our previous study via FP-TDI are also shown 
(dark solid line).     
      
 
        
 112FP? SNP type p-value OR Lower Upper p-value OR Lower Upper
HTR2A
90473 SH51 Y NS - 0.02 0.30 0.08 1.1590290 SH53 Y 3' UTR - 0.03 0.27 0.08 0.87
TPH1
71715 SH102 Y CNS 0.02 0.41 0.11 1.11 -
71830 SH103 Y CNS 0.04 0.43 0.13 1.35 -
73088 SH112 Y CNS 0.02 0.41 0.11 1.09 -74070 SH115 N CNS 0.02 0.41 0.11 1.09 -
MAOA
74459 SH182 Y S - 0.05 0.27 0.08 0.90
62104 SH186 N S - 0.05 0.32 0.12 0.92Response vs. Non-response
Specific response vs. Non-specific response
 
 
Table 3.7. Variants nominally associated (p<0.05) with response to fluoxetine.  Gene 
name is displayed as well as SNP position.   Variants genotyped via FP-TDI in our 
previous study (described in Chapter 2) are designated with a “Y”.  Odds ratios (OR) 
shown are calculated for variant carrier  vs. non-carrier, and 95% lower and upper 
confidence intervals are also shown.    
             
 113coding region centered screening in a Caucas ian population of similar size (20).  Full 
length haplotypes using all common SNPs were  inferred for each gene using the EM 
algorithm.  All of the common SNPs in HTR1A , TPH1  and MAOA  had strong LD and 
thus limited haplotype diversity and were te sted for association to response using the 
likelihood ratio test procedure in COCAPH ASE (Table 3.8).  The other genes had 
moderate to weak LD, which made full gene length haplotype testing problematic due to 
the uncertainty associated with the inferen ce of rare haplotypes.  Gene regions were 
therefore partitioned into blocks of low ha plotype diversity using the 0.8 chromosome 
coverage criteria of HAPLOBL OCKFINDER.  Block size varied  by gene region, with an 
average size of 70 kb (median = 23 kb) a nd an average of 1.5 blocks per gene 
investigated (Table 3.8).  Av erage block size was larger than  reported in previous studies 
on random genomic regions using Caucasian samp les, which was due to the large blocks 
observed in the X-linked genes MAOA  and HTR2C  (21). 
Haplotypes were constructed within blocks  and tested for association to fluoxetine 
response (Table 3.8).  A block of six SNPs in 3’ end of the HTR2A  gene was associated 
with response in our second phenotypic comparison, specifi c response versus all other 
responses (global p = 0.05), as well as in our  third comparison, specific responders versus 
non-specific responders (global p = 0.01).  Haplotypes of the MAOA  gene region, which 
was contained in a single block, were nominally  associated to respons e specificity in our 
third comparison (global p = 0.05).  
 
3.4  Discussion 
 In this study, we sought to expand on th e results of our previous indirect   
 114Gene Block no. Block size (kb) SNPs/BlockResponse vs. 
non-responseSpecific vs. all 
othersSpecific  vs. non -
specific
HTR1A 1 7.7 8 - - -
TPH1 1 26.7 22 - - -TPH2 1 64.9 14 - - -TPH2 2 21.1 5 - - -
HTR2A 1 21.7 5 - - -
HTR2A 2 23.4 4 - - -
HTR2A 3 14.4 6 - 0.04 0.01
HTR2C 1 367.4 26 - - -
MAOA 1 81.3 7 - - 0.04
Average 69.8 10.8
Median 23.4 7
 
 
Table 3.8.  Haplotype block di stribution and association results . Size of haplotype blocks 
and number of SNPs within each block are show n.  Within-block haplotype distributions 
with global p-values <0.05 are shown for each phenotypic comparison, as tested in 
COCAPHASE.    
      
 
       
 115association study, which utilized evenly sp aced, publicly available SNP markers in a well 
phenotyped patient population taki ng fluoxetine.  Since most of the SNPs used in our 
previous indirect association study were intronic and non-codi ng, we wanted to identify 
putative functional SNPs asso ciated with antidepressant  response by resequencing all 
exons, intron-exon boundaries, and 5’ cons erved non-coding sequence (CNS) in this 
patient population. We uncovered 60 novel SN Ps during resequencing, none of which 
were common (>10% MAF). We identifie d four novel non-synonymous SNPs, however 
these were all seen on only a single chromo some in our study populat ion. This indicates 
that public databases such as dbSNP contai n the majority of common cSNPs, and that 
further cSNP (or tagSNP) discovery efforts may be unnecessary for these genes.  The database of SNPs has expanded considerably si nce this work was performed, and the lack 
of additional common variants in these genes supports this  contention.  We found two 
exonic substitutions (His452Tyr and a 3’ UTR SNP) in the 
HTR2A  gene and two linked 
synonymous SNPs in the MAOA  gene that were associated with response specificity. The 
association of response subtype with  the His452Tyr substitution in the HTR2A  gene is 
strengthened by the evolutionary conservation seen at this genomic location and the fact 
that several studies have suggested that  this polymorphism has altered function  in vitro 
(22;23).  
While most Mendelian disorders studied to date have been shown to be caused by 
non-synonymous coding variants or  splicing variants, there is evidence that this may not 
be true for common, complex genetic diso rders (24).  Several reports have shown 
substantial differences in allelic expression across the human genome, and variation in 
regulatory DNA is a likely candidate for complex genetic phenotypes (25;26).   
 116Unfortunately, identification of regulatory DNA elements is not as straightforward as 
identifying protein coding sequence.  We used  comparative genomics in order to identify 
potentially functional 5’ re gulatory DNA sequence (CNS), and then sequenced these 
CNS elements in order to uncover any varian ts.  The nucleotide diversity parameters π 
and θ were higher for CNS than any other region investigated, indicati ng that this gene 
region harbors substantial variat ion.  Furthermore, much of this variation has not been 
investigated as we found more  novel variation in CNS than in coding regions, which is 
where most previous variant screens have fo cused.  By uncovering this variation, we 
were able to define the hapl otype block structure in putativ e regulatory regions of these 
genes.  In our association testing, we f ound four linked SNPs in the 5’ CNS of the TPH1  
gene that displayed significant single locus association to categorical antidepressant 
response.  Additionally, these SNPs have b een shown to affect transcription of the TPH1  
gene in vitro (27).  
While in silico  methods such as comparative genomics can help to identify 
potentially functional elements in the genome,  certain functional elements may be missed 
due to lack of conservation across species.  Th is is especially true if primate-specific 
functional elements are present, as mammalian alignments (i.e., human and mouse, rat, or 
dog) might not show conservation (28).  A dditionally, we did not sequence the entire 
intronic region of these genes or CNS lo cated outside of 5 kb upstream of the 
transcriptions state site, and t hus may have missed functional SN Ps that affect splicing or 
gene regulation.  This may explain why we failed to find putatively functional SNPs in 
the coding region and 5’ CNS of the TPH2  gene, where we previously had seen an 
association using non-coding SNPs (2).  In our population, the TPH2  gene region  
 117contained only one non-synonymous SNP (S41Y), and this variant was seen on a single 
chromosome in our screen.  
One limitation of this study is the small sample size of our population (N=95), 
which limited our power to detect associati on of low to medium risk alleles with 
antidepressant response (Figure 3.4).  As most of the pr otein altering variants we 
uncovered by resequencing were extremely ra re, they will require further testing in 
larger, perhaps family-based, clinical populati ons.  Our limited statistical power to detect 
association also precluded us from performi ng analysis of joint a ssociation (interaction 
effects) between pairs of SNPs or hapl otypes in these serotonergic genes and 
antidepressant response.  
In order to expand on a previous indire ct association study of antidepressant 
response, we sequenced the coding regions, intron-exon boundaries and 5’ CNS of six 
serotonergic candidate genes in order to id entify any potentially functional SNPs.  We 
found four SNPs in the 5’ CNS region of TPH1  that were associated with categorical 
response, and found the previously descri bed His452Tyr variant and two synonymous 
SNPs in the MAOA  gene to be associated with response subtype.  The majority (6 of 8) of 
these variants were assayed in our previous  work using publicly available markers.  
While the His452Tyr and 5’ TPH1 variants ha ve been shown to aff ect protein function 
and expression in vitro , further association studies in la rger clinical populations will be 
required to determine if these variants influence patient response to antidepressants.   
Given that several other gr oups (29-31) besides our own (1) have published letters 
stating they have not observed the His441 alle le in unrelated sample sets, along with the 
fact that we were able to detect clone contamination in their control genomic DNA  
 118samples, it seems unlikely that this allele ex ists an any appreciable frequency in outbred 
human populations.  It should be noted that the control His/Arg heterozygote gDNA did 
appear to be uncontaminated and real.  However, based on our genotyping of 2,036 
subjects with major depression and never obs erving the allele (eve n as a heterozygote), 
the maximum allele frequency of this vari ant is 0.001, far from the 0.06 reported in 
Zhang et al. (Table 3.5).  A check of Hardy-Wei nberg equilibrium on the data reported 
by Zhang et al. also points to possible genotyping  problems.  They report having found 
six heterozygotes and three homozygous His sa mples in their depression cohort of 87 
patients.  They also report on two heteroz ygotes and one homozygous His sample in their 
cohort of 219 control patients.  Both the depressed cohort ( χ2=19.5, df=1, p<3.7x10-10) 
and the control cohort ( χ2=53.5, df=1, p<1.2x10-36) had genotype dist ributions displaying 
an abundance of His homozygotes, several more  than would be expected based on the 
observed minor allele frequency and Hardy-We inberg equilibrium.  Thus, it appears this 
variant does not contribute to the genetic risk of major de pression in outbred populations. 
          
 1193.5  References 
1.     Zhou Z, Peters EJ, Hamilton SP, McMahon F, Thomas C, McGrath PJ, Rush J, 
Trivedi MH, Charney DS, Roy A. Response to Loss-of-function mu tation in Tryptophan 
Hydroxylase-2 identified in unipolar ma jor depression. Neuron 45, 11-16. Neuron  2005; 
48(5):702-703. 2.     Peters EJ, Slager SL, McGrath PJ , Knowles JA, Hamilton SP. Investigation of 
serotonin-related genes in antidepressant response. 
Mol Psychiatry  2004; 9(9):879-889. 
3.     Kraft JB, Slager SL, McGrath PJ, Ha milton SP. Sequence analysis of the serotonin 
transporter and associations w ith antidepressant response. Biol Psychiatry  2005; 
58(5):374-381. 4.     Zhang X, Gainetdinov RR, Beaulieu JM, Sotnikova TD, Burch LH, Williams RB, Schwartz DA, Krishnan KR, Caron MG. Loss-of-function mutation in Tryptophan 
Hydroxylase-2 identified in unipolar major depression. 
Neuron  2005; 45(1):11-16. 
5.     Couronne O, Poliakov A, Bray N, Ishkhanov T, Ryaboy D, Rubin E, Pachter L, 
Dubchak I. Strategies and tool s for whole-genome alignments. Genome Res  2003; 
13(1):73-80. 6.     Rozen S, Skaletsky HJ: Primer3 on the WWW for general users and for biologist 
programmers., in Bioinformatics Methods and Protocols. Edited by Krawetz S, Misener 
S. Totowa, NJ, Human Press, 2000, pp 365-386. 7.     Schneider S, Roessli D, Excoffier L. Arlequin: A software for population genetics 
data analysis.  2000; Genetics and Biometry Lab, Dept.of Anthropol ogy, University of 
Geneva, version 2.000.  
 1208.     Ng PC, Henikoff S. SIFT: Predic ting amino acid changes that affect protein 
function. Nucleic Acids Res  2003; 31(13):3812-3814. 
9.     Watterson GA. On the number of segr egating sites in genetical models without 
recombination. Theor Popul Biol  1975; 7(2):256-276. 
10.     Tajima F. Evolutionary relationsh ip of DNA sequences in finite populations. 
Genetics  1983; 105(2):437-460. 
11.     Tajima F. Statistical method fo r testing the neutral mutation hypothesis by DNA 
polymorphism. Genetics  1989; 123(3):585-595. 
12.     Ihaka R, Gentleman R. R: A Language for Data Analysis and Graphics. J Comput 
Graph Stat  1996; 5(3):299-314. 
13.     Stram DO, Haiman CA, Hirschhorn JN, Altshuler D, Kolonel LN, Henderson BE, 
Pike MC. Choosing haplotype-tagging SNPS based on unphased genotype data using a 
preliminary sample of unrelated subjects with  an example from the Multiethnic Cohort 
Study. Hum Hered  2003; 55(1):27-36. 
14.     Zhang K, Jin L. HaploBlockFinder: haplotype block analyses. Bioinformatics  
2003; 19(10):1300-1301. 15.     Dudbridge F. Pedigree disequi librium tests for multilocus haplotypes. 
Genet 
Epidemiol  2003; 25(2):115-121. 
16.     Stephens JC, Schneider JA, Tanguay DA,  Choi J, Acharya T, Stanley SE, Jiang R, 
Messer CJ, Chew A, Han JH, Duan J, Carr JL, Lee MS, Koshy B, Kumar AM, Zhang G, Newell WR, Windemuth A, Xu C, Kalbflei sch TS, Shaner SL, Arnold K, Schulz V, 
Drysdale CM, Nandabalan K, Judson RS, Ru ano G, Vovis GF. Haplotype variation and 
linkage disequilibrium in 313 human genes. 
Science  2001; 293(5529):489-493.  
 12117.     Cargill M, Altshuler D, Ireland J, Sklar P, Ardlie K, Pa til N, Lane CR, Lim EP, 
Kalayanaraman N, Nemesh J, Ziaugra L, Frie dland L, Rolfe A, Warrington J, Lipshutz R, 
Daley GQ, Lander ES. Characterization of single-nucleotide polymorphisms in coding 
regions of human genes. Nat Genet  1999; 22(3):231-238. 
18.     Kirk KM, Cardon LR. The impact of  genotyping error on ha plotype reconstruction 
and frequency estimation. Eur J Hum Genet  2002; 10(10):616-622. 
19.     Purcell S, Cherny SS, Sham PC. Ge netic Power Calculator: design of linkage and 
association genetic mapping studies of complex traits. Bioinformatics  2003; 19(1):149-
150. 20.     Glatt CE, Tampilic M, Christie C, DeYoung J, Freimer NB. Re-screening serotonin 
receptors for genetic variants identifies population and molecular genetic complexity. 
Am 
J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet  2004; 124(1):92-100. 
21.     Patil N, Berno AJ, Hinds DA, Barre tt WA, Doshi JM, Hacker CR, Kautzer CR, 
Lee DH, Marjoribanks C, McDonough DP, Nguyen BT, Norris MC, Sheehan JB, Shen 
N, Stern D, Stokowski RP, Thomas DJ, Tr ulson MO, Vyas KR, Frazer KA, Fodor SP, 
Cox DR. Blocks of limited haplotype divers ity revealed by high-re solution scanning of 
human chromosome 21. Science  2001; 294(5547):1719-1723. 
22.     Ozaki N, Manji H, Lubierman V, Lu SJ, Lappalainen J, Rosenthal NE, Goldman D. A naturally occurring amino acid substitution of the human serotonin 5-HT2A receptor 
influences amplitude and timing of intracellular calcium mobilization. 
J Neurochem  
1997; 68(5):2186-2193. 23.     Hazelwood LA, Sanders-Bush E. His452Tyr polymorphism in the human 5-HT2A receptor destabilizes the signaling conformation. 
Mol Pharmacol  2004; 66(5):1293-1300.  
 12224.     Thomas PD, Kejariwal A. Coding single-nucleotide polymorphisms associated 
with complex vs. Mendelian disease: evoluti onary evidence for differences in molecular 
effects. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  2004; 101(43):15398-15403. 
25.     Yan H, Yuan W, Velculescu VE, V ogelstein B, Kinzler KW. Allelic variation in 
human gene expression. Science  2002; 297(5584):1143. 
26.     Morley M, Molony CM, Weber TM , Devlin JL, Ewens KG, Spielman RS, Cheung 
VG. Genetic analysis of genome-wide variation in human gene expression. Nature  2004; 
430(7001):743-747. 27.     Sun HS, Fann CS, Lane HY, Chang YT, Chang CJ, Liu YL, Cheng AT. A functional polymorphism in the promoter re gion of the tryptophan hydroxylase gene is 
associated with alcohol dependence in one aboriginal group in Taiwan. 
Alcohol Clin Exp 
Res 2005; 29(1):1-7. 
28.     Boffelli D, McAuliffe J, Ovchar enko D, Lewis KD, Ovcharenko I, Pachter L, 
Rubin EM. Phylogenetic shadowing of primat e sequences to find f unctional regions of 
the human genome. Science  2003; 299(5611):1391-1394. 
29.     Glatt CE, Carlson E, Taylor TR, Risch N, Reus VI, Schaefer CA. Response to 
Loss-of-Function Mutation in Tryptophan Hydr oxylase-2 Identified in Unipolar Major 
Depression. Neuron 45, 11-16. Neuron  2005; 48(5):704-705. 
30.     Van Den Bogaert A, De Zutter S, Heyrman L, Mendlewicz J, Adolfsson R, Van Broeckhoven C, Del-Favero J. Response to  Loss-of-Function Mutation in Tryptophan 
Hydroxylase-2 Identified in Unipolar  Major Depression. Neuron 45, 11-16. 
Neuron  2005; 
48(5):704.  
 12331.     Garriock HA, Allen JJB, Delgado P, Nahaz Z, Kling MA, Carpenter L, Burke M, 
Burke W, Schwartz T, Marangell LB, Husain  M, Erickson RP, Moreno FA. Lack of 
association of TPH2 exon XI polymorphisms with major depression and treatment 
resistance. Mol Psychiatry  2005; 10(11):976-977. 
   
 124CHAPTER 4 
PHARMACODYNAMIC CANIDATE GENE  TAGGING SNP SELECTION AND 
ASSOCIATION OF TAGGING SNPS TO CITALOPRAM RESPONSE* 
 
4.1  Introduction 
The genotype data from our previous i ndirect association study (Chapter 2) 
combined with the genotype data from our se quencing effort (Chapt er 3) provided dense 
marker coverage within these pharmacodynamic serotonin candidate genes from which we could chose tagging SNPs.  Here I descri be our criteria and performance assessment 
of tagging SNPs (tagSNPs), as well as our expl oration of the role of common variation in 
these candidate genes on antidepressant respon se in a large clinic al population taking the 
SSRI citalopram.  For this purpose, we genot yped a subset of patients (N=1,953) from the 
Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Relie ve Depression (STAR*D) study, which is a 
prospective, multi-center, randomized clini cal trial involving 4,041 depressed outpatients 
in both primary and specialty car e settings (1).  The overall go al of the STAR*D trial was 
to define what subsequent treatment strategi es, in what order or sequence, and in what 
combination prove most efficacious and tole rable to patients whom have failed to 
respond to an initial trial with the SSRI c italopram.  STAR*D clin ical findings suggest 
that patients who fail init ial treatment with citalo pram can respond to other 
antidepressants (including other SSRIs) a nd treatments (2), however their odds of 
responding decrease as more trea tments are needed (3).   
                                                
 
* This work has been submitted for publication (Peters E.J., Slager S.L., McGrath P.J., Hamilton S.P. 2007 
“Sequencing and tagging SNP selection in serotonin-related candidate genes and association to citalopram 
response.”)  
 125In this report, we focus on five pharmacodynamic candidate genes ( HTR1A , 
HTR2A , TPH1 , TPH2  and MAOA ); the HTR2C  gene was not investigated due to lack of 
any association to fluoxetine in our previous wo rk (4).  While not the focus of the work 
reported here, we also interrogated taggi ng SNPs in the serotonin transporter ( SLC6A4 ) in 
the STAR*D population, which were not associat ed to citalopram response or response 
specificity (5).  We also report on the co mparison of tagSNP selection methods.  In 
response to the substantial levels of linkage disequilibrium (LD) in the human genome and the high density SNP marker informati on being generated, seve ral tagSNP selection 
methods have been developed to reduce redundancy in downstream genotyping and retain the genetic diversity.  Some of thes e methods focus on using tagSNPs as proxies 
for untyped SNPs and thus exploit pairwise SN P LD (6).  Other methods attempt to tag 
multimarker haplotypes, with no formal regard fo r pairwise SNP LD (7-9).  It is unclear 
which method is superior, but this will like ly depend on study design and resources as 
well as local patterns of LD.  Here we us e our high density SNP data to test the 
performance of tagSNPs selected using pa irwise LD in reco nstructing underlying 
haplotypes.  This is an importa nt comparison as we are intere sted in testing for haplotypic 
associations using haplotypes inferr ed from tagSNP genotypes.    
 
4.2  Methods 
4.2.1  STAR*D sample set.  Of the 4,041 subjects, DNA was obtained from 1,953 
subjects as part of the NIMH Human Genetic s Initiative.  The desi gn of STAR*D was to 
enroll adults experiencing a major depr essive episode who exhibited neither an 
inadequate response nor intolerance to an ade quate trial of any of the STAR*D protocol  
 126treatments during the current episode.  The overall aim of STAR*D (P.I., A. John Rush, 
NIMH Contract N01-MH-90003) was to prospe ctively determine which of a number of 
treatments are beneficial for subjects experi encing an unsatisfactory clinical outcome 
following treatment with citalopram.  Since the STAR*D design tria l has been described 
extensively we shall only br iefly summarize it here (1;10;11 ).  In order to make the 
findings as generalizable as possible, ST AR*D utilized broad inclusion criteria and 
enrolled a diverse populati on, including good minority repres entation.  Diagnoses were 
made using the Psychiatric Diagnostic Sc reening Questionnaire,  while depressive 
symptoms were assessed with the 16-i tem Quick Inventory of Depressive 
Symptomatology collected at c linic visits (Self-Report [QID S-SR] version) (12).  The 
QIDS-SR is highly correlated with the 17- item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression 
(HRSD17), and scores can be converted re adily between the two instruments (12).  
Subjects meeting criteria and providing consen t were administered citalopram as the 
initial treatment.  The protocol encouraged 12 weeks of treatment with vigorous dosing of 
open-label citalopram (20-60 mg/day).  Th e sub-sample of 1,953 participants who 
consented to provide DNA samples was 61.8% female and 38.2% male, and with ethnic 
proportions of 78.1% Caucasians, 16.1% Af rican-Americans, 3.5% multi-racial, 1.1% 
Asian, 1.2% Pacific Islander/Native America n, and 0.1% unspecified.  Further, 14.0% of 
the sample reported being Hispanic, and 43.5%  of the sample came from primary care 
clinics, with the remaining 56.5%  coming from specia lty clinics.  At the time of this 
report, we have received DNA from 1,914 participants (98%).  Baseline demographic and 
clinical data on these 1,914 subjec ts are presented in Table 4.1.  
 127Access to the DNA samples and clinical  data was approved by the STAR*D 
Ancillary Studies Committee, and clinical data was obtained from the Data Coordinating Center of STAR*D.  Approval to carry out the work descri bed here was obtained by the 
Committee on Human Research at the Univ ersity of California, San Francisco. 
4.2.2  STAR*D response phenotypic definitions.  We define five inter-related response 
phenotype definitions of response to citalopr am.  The first two are responders and non-
responders: responders are subjects who had at least 42 days of treatment and whose 
QIDS-SR on their final clinical visit shows ≥50% reduction in score; the remaining 
subjects, who had at least 42 days of treatment, were then considered non-responders.  
The ≥50% reduction in symptom severity on th e HRSD17 is the conventional definition 
of response in clinical trials.  We used th e QIDS-SR score to estimate severity since all 
subjects had this rating and it correlates highly with the HRSD17 scores (12).  We 
required this 42 day (or six week) threshold to ensure an adequate e xposure to citalopram 
and to enhance the power to find associ ations between genotype and response by 
reducing potential heterogeneit y. Using this threshold, we found no statistical difference 
in the average total dosage of citalopram betw een those who were on the trial for at least 
42 days (average total dosage = 29.9 mg) and those who were not (average total dosage = 
30.4 mg).  The 254 subjects with < 42 days of treatment were excluded from analysis.  
The third phenotype definition is remission.  Remission was defined as a QIDS-SR score 
≤5, which closely corresponds to the conven tional definition of a HSRD score of ≤7 (12).  
The final two phenotypes are based on our at tempt to further reduce heterogeneity by 
attempting to separate placebo response from true drug response in antidepressant trials 
(13).  Some response to antidepressant medi cation is a placebo response, which we posit  
 Baseline VariableTotal 
subjects in 
Analysis 
(N=1,914)Subjects 
classified as 
Responders 
(N=991)Subjects classified 
as   Non-
Responders 
(N=669)p valueSubjects classified 
as Specific 
Responders 
(N=679)Subjects classified 
as Non-Specific 
Responders 
(N=187)Subjects 
Classified as 
Remitters 
(N=826)
Number in Race / Ethnicity (%)
Caucasian 1,501 (78.4) 799 (80.6) 509 (76.1) 0.06 559 (82.3) 146 (78.1) 679 (82.2)
African American 299 (15.6) 130 (13.1) 121 (18.1) 77 (11.3) 28 (15.0) 100 (12.1)
Other (Multi-racial) 68 (3.6) 36 (3.6) 23 (3.4) 23 (3.4) 9 (4.8) 25 (3.0)Asian 21 (1.1) 15 (1.5) 5 (0.7) 12 (1.8) 2 (1.1) 13 (1.6)
Pacific Islander/Native American 24 (1.2) 11 (1.1) 11 (1.6) 8 (1.2) 2 (1.1) 9 (1.1)
Unspecified 1 (0.1) 0 0
Number of Hispanic (%) 269 (14.1) 122 (12.3) 102 (15.2) 0.09 82 (12.1) 25 (13.4) 96 (11.6)
Number of Females (%) 1,179 (61.6) 621 (62.7) 404 (60.4) 0.35 424 (62.4) 126 (67.4) 518 (62.7)
Mean Age in Years (SD) 42.6 (13.4) 42.2 (13.4) 43.0 (13.2) 0.11 41.7 (13.3) 43.4 (14.0) 42.0 (13.7)Mean Years of Schooling (SD) 13.6 (3.3) 14.1 (3.3) 13.2 (3.1) <0.001 14.2 (3.3) 13.9 (3.3) 14.2 (3.3)
Marital Status
Married 819 (42.8) 435 (43.9) 290 (43.3) 0.27 301 (44.3) 76 (40.6) 377 (45.6)
Never Married 536 (28.0) 278 (28.1) 185 (27.7) 190 (28.0) 53 (28.3) 239 (28.9)
Divorced 483 (25.2) 249 (25.1) 162 (24.2) 169 (24.9) 52 (27.8) 189 (22.9)Widowed 76 (4.0) 29 (2.9) 32 (4.8) 19 (2.8) 6 (3.2) 21 (2.5)
Clinical Characteristics
Age at first MDE (SD) 26.1 (14.9) 26.2 (14.4) 25.6 (14.9) 0.19 26.4 (14.6) 24.8 (13.7) 26.4 (14.5)
Months in current MDE (SD) 25.0 (53.9) 21.6 (45.8) 31.7 (65.8) <0.001 20.4 (45.5) 24.6 (51.5) 21.3 (45.9)
Index Length 24+ Months (%) 487 (25.4) 230 (23.2) 203 (30.3) 0.001 142 (20.9) 53 (28.3) 187 (22.6)
Presence of Recurrent Depression (%) 1,347 (70.4) 701 (70.7) 469 (70.1) 0.71 481 (70.8) 130 (70.0) 574 (69.5)Presence of Family History of Depression (%) 1,037 (54.2) 557 (56.2) 346 (51.7) 0.09 382 (56.3) 103 (55.1) 466 (56.4)
Baseline QIDS (SD) 16.4 (3.4) 16.2 (3.3) 16.6 (3.4) 0.008 16.2 (3.3) 16.1 (3.1) 15.8 (3.3)
Years Since 1st MDE (SD) 16.6 (13.9) 16.0 (13.8) 17.5 (14.0) 0.018 15.4 (13.8) 18.6 (14.6) 15.7 (13.8)
 
 
Table 4.1.  Baseline demographic and clinical characteristic s of the STAR*D sample.  Data shown are for the subset of DNA sampl es 
received at the time of this report (N =1,914).  Tests of differences between res ponders and non-responders, using chi-square fo r 
categorical data and t-tests for continuous data, are presented in the column labeled “p-value”. 
128 
 129may have either no genetic determinant or a different underlying genetic mechanism than 
"true" drug response.  Thus, it is of interest  to limit our definition of response to true 
pharmacologic response rather than placebo re sponse.  For these phenotypes, a “specific” 
pattern of response was defined by persistenc e, or the maintenance of response for the 
remainder of the study once it was attained.  Previous studies considered "specific" 
patterns to be further characterized by dela yed response, i.e., afte r the first two weeks 
(14;15).  We were unable to employ this criterion because the ST AR*D study design did 
not include ratings before week two.  We defi ned persistent responders as those subjects 
who had a sustained response at all consecuti ve visits following the first visit with 
response, as measured by ≥50% reduction in QIDS-SR scores.  Those whose response 
occurred only at the last visit were removed from the analysis .  In contrast, “non-specific” 
responders were those subjects who did not maintain their respons e following the first 
visit with a response. Note that "specific" and "non-specific" responders are a subset of 
responders (as defined by the response phenotyp e above).  Moreover, because visits were 
at least two weeks apart, we  assumed that intervening w eeks were characterized by the 
response defined by the previous visit.  We compared "specific" responders to 
nonresponders, allowing us to test the hypothe sis that the "specific" response to 
citalopram represented a more geneti cally homogenous group of persons taking 
citalopram.  We also compared "specific" res ponders to "non-specifi c" responders to test 
whether there are genetic differences betw een "true drug" responders and "placebo" 
responders, as suggested in our  previous work (4).  Tabl e 4.1 presents the demographic 
and clinical characteristic s of our phenotype groups.  
 1304.2.3  Tagging SNP selection.  All Caucasian samples in our population taking 
fluoxetine (N=75) were used in tagSNP sel ection, regardless of response phenotype.  We 
used the method of Carlson et al (“ldselect .pl”), which is based on pairwise LD between 
SNP markers and does not require haplotype block-like structure ( 16).  We ran this 
algorithm to group SNPs into high LD “bins”, which contain SNPs with a minimum pairwise r
2 of 0.80.  A single tagSNP from each “bin” was then chosen to represent that 
group of SNPs in future studies.  We were also  interested in testing for haplotype specific 
effects in the study, thus we wanted to explore how accurately the tagSNPs chosen using a pairwise r
2 threshold could reconstruct the under lying haplotypes.  In order to limit 
haplotype diversity and facil itate haplotype inference, ha plotype blocks were chosen 
using the program HAPLOBLOCKFINDER (17) .  We defined haplotype blocks as 
regions in which at least 80% of chromosomes assayed were represented by three or less 
common haplotypes.  Within each haplotype  block, we then employed two haplotype 
tagging approaches.  We used the method of Stram et al (“TagSNPs”), which selects 
haplotype tagging SNPs in order to optimize R h2, which is the s quared correlation 
between estimates of the number of copies of a particular haplotype h (inferred using 
only the tagSNPs) and the true number of copies of haplotype h carried by a subject 
(inferred using the entire SNP set), averag ing over all possible genotype data under an 
assumption of Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (8 ).  We also selected haplotype tagging 
SNPs using the pattern r ecognition approach of Ke et al., which does not account for the 
uncertainty of inferring haplot ypes for genotypic data (9).  Using these three sets of 
tagging SNPs, we then calculated the minimum R h2 for all common (>1%) haplotypes  
 131within each haplotype block in  order to asses how well these sets predict the underlying 
haplotype structure. 4.2.4  DNA amplification.  PCR reactions of 5 microliters (µl) containing 200 nM of the 
forward and reverse primers, 10 ng genomic DNA template, 50 µM dNTPs (Roche, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA), 1M anhydrous betaine (Acros Organics, Geel, Belgium), 50 mM 
KCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.4), 2.5 mM MgCl
2, and 0.25 U Platinum Taq DNA 
polymerase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA).  Samples were cycled using a touchdown 
protocol at 94°C for 3 minutes, followed by seven cycles of 94°C for 30 seconds, 65–
59°C for 30 seconds (decreased by 1°C inte rvals per cycle), and 72°C for 30 seconds, 
followed by 38 cycles of 90°C for 30 seconds, 58°C for 30 seconds, and 72°C for 30 seconds, with a final 10 minutes at 72°C.  The reactions were performed on an Applied 
Biosystems GeneAmp PCR System 9700 (Foste r City, CA, USA) using 384-well plates 
(MJ Research, Waltham, MA, USA). 
4.2.5  Tagging SNP genotyping using FP-TDI.  Genotyping of tagSNPs was performed 
using either fluorescence polarization detec tion of template-directed dye-terminator 
incorporation (FP-TDI) or 5’ exonuclease fluorescen ce assays (TaqMan) (Table 4.2).  For 
tagSNPs genotyped by FP-TDI, following P CR the excess primers, deoxynucleotides, 
and pyrophosphate in the PCR reaction were degraded by adding 0.1 µl of 10X PCR 
Clean-Up Reagent, containing a mixture of shrimp alkaline phosphatase and exonuclease 
I (PerkinElmer, Wellesley, MA, USA), 0.1 µl of inorganic pyrophosphatase (Roche 
Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN, USA),  and 0.8 µl of PCR Clean-Up Dilution Buffer 
to each 5 µl PCR reaction (PerkinElmer, Wellesle y, MA, USA).  The mixture was then 
incubated at 37°C for 60 minutes, followed by inactivation for 15 minutes at 80°C.    
  Gene SNP Assay method Common name Also captures 
HTR1A rs6295 FP-TDI C-1019G rs6449693, rs878567, rs749099, rs1423691, rs970453
HTR1A rs1364043 C___1393788_10 rs749098
HTR2A rs731245 FP-TDI -
HTR2A rs6313 C___3042197_1_ T102C rs6311 (A-1438G)
HTR2A rs2296973 FP-TDI -
HTR2A rs927544 FP-TDI -
HTR2A rs666693 FP-TDI -
HTR2A rs2770296 FP-TDI -
HTR2A rs2246127 FP-TDI -
HTR2A rs1923884 C__11696916_10 -
HTR2A rs1923882 FP-TDI -
HTR2A rs6314 FP-TDI His452Tyr -
HTR2A rs3125 FP-TDI rs3803189
TPH1 rs7130929 FP-TDI rs6486405, rs6486404, rs4537731, rs6486403, rs7122118
TPH1 rs623580 FP-TDI -
TPH1 rs684302 FP-TDI rs1799913 (A779C), rs1800532 (A218C), rs2056246, rs1607395, rs2237907, rs10832874, 
rs652458, rs685249, rs211107
TPH1 rs211105 FP-TDI rs10488682, rs172423
TPH1 rs211102 FP-TDI -
TPH1 rs2108977 FP-TDI -
TPH2 rs2129575 FP-TDI -
TPH2 rs2171363 C__15836061_10 rs7963720, rs7305115
TPH2 rs1007023 C___8872308_10 rs1386488, rs1843809,  rs1386492, rs1843812, rs1487281, rs1386497
TPH2 rs1487278 Custom Taqman rs1386491, rs1487284
TPH2 rs1487276 FP-TDI -
TPH2 rs1386487 Custom Taqman rs4290270
TPH2 rs17110747 Custom Taqman -
TPH2 rs1872824 C__11407441_10 -
MAOA rs1465108 FP-TDI rs2310820, rs1465107, rs6323, rs979606, rs979605, rs1801291 
Table 4.2
132 
 133Table 4.2.  Tagging SNPs assayed in the STAR *D population.  Listed are the 28 tagSNPs 
chosen from our genotype data in the fluoxe tine population (N=75 Caucasians), using the 
method of Carlson et al.(section 4.3.1) (1).  One SNP (rs2246127) was removed from the 
analysis after genotyping due to HWE vi olations.  SNPs assayed via FP-TDI are 
designated as “FP-TDI”; details on these a ssays can be found in Chapter 1.  SNPs 
interrogated using the Taqman assay indicate their Applied Biosystems assay ID (C…), 
assays that were custom designed by A pplied Biosystems are designated “Custom 
Taqman”.  Also shown are the dbSNP IDs of  the additional SNPs that are in high LD 
(r2>0.8) with the assayed SNPs in the Ca ucasian subset of the fluoxetine sample. 
 
      
 
         
 134The final step was the addition of a 4 µl solution containing a final concentration of 0.5 
µM TDI probe, 1 µl of 10X TDI Reaction Buffer, 0.5 µl of AcycloTerminator Mix 
(containing R110 and TAMRA-labeled Acyc loTerminators, corresponding to the 
polymorphic base), and 0.025 µl of AcycloPol DNA polymerase (PerkinElmer).  This 
mixture was cycled at 95°C for 2 minutes,  followed by 25 cycles of 94°C for 15 seconds 
and 55°C for 30 seconds. Following template -directed incorporation, fluorescence 
polarization was read using a VICTOR2 1420 Multilabel Counter (PerkinElmer), and 
genotypes were scored using custom software. 4.2.6  Tagging SNP genotyping using 5’  exonuclease fluorescence assay.  For tagSNPs 
genotyped using 5’ exonuclease fluorescen ce (Taqman) assays (Table 4.2), 5 µl reactions 
containing 10 ng of dried genomic DNA template, 2.5 µl of Universal Taqman PCR 
Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), 0.085 µl of 20X Taqman assay probe (Applied 
Biosystems), and 2.42 µl of sterile H
20 were cycled at 95°C for 10 minutes, followed by 
40 cycles of 92°C for 15 seconds and 60°C fo r 1 minute.  Reaction fluorescence was read 
and genotypes were scored on an ABI 7900HT Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems).  4.2.7  Statistical analysis.  The frequency distributions of  demographic and clinical 
variables were examined in the combined sa mple and by the five phenotypes.  To control 
for any potential population stratification, all an alyses were stratified by race categories: 
Caucasian and African-American.  Other racial categories were  not considered because of 
the small numbers of those samples.  We te sted for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium within 
both the Caucasian and African-American group s, and all subjects fr om a stratum were  
 135used in the analysis since all subjects had depression and the evaluated polymorphisms 
were not suspected to influe nce risk of depression.   
 We used unconditional logistic  regression analysis to ex amine associations of the 
eleven genetic polymorphisms and each of the four phenotypic comparisons.  These comparisons are (1) responder vs. non-responder, (2) remitter vs. non-responders, (3) specific responders vs. both non-responders a nd non-specific responders, and (4) specific 
responders vs. non-specific responders.  Each  polymorphism was modeled individually as 
gene-dosage effects in the regression models.  This coding scheme was chosen because of 
its robustness to departure from the true additive genetic model (18).   Regression 
analyses were performed either unadjusted or  adjusted for potential confounding effects, 
including sex, age, education (years of school), months in  current major depressive 
episode (MDE), and years since first MDE.   We found that adjustment for potential 
confounders did not significantly influence the results, thus the values  reported here are 
unadjusted.  We estimated odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the 
carriers of the minor allele versus non-carriers of the minor allele.   Because of the large 
number of statistical tests, significance threshold was set at 0.01, and permutation tests 
were performed on any test th at resulted in an asympto tic p value of 0.01 or less. 
Association between haplotypes within the haplotype blocks and citalopram 
response were calculated using a score test implemented in the computer program HAPLO.SCORE (19).  This test uses the expe ctation-maximization algorithm to estimate 
the posterior probability of each person’s hapl otype.  These posterior probabilities are 
then used to calculate a person’s expected haplotype score in th e logistic regression 
analyses.  All haplotypes with frequencies > 0.01 were simultaneously tested in the  
 136analysis.  Global p values and individual hapl otype p values were obtained.  Statistical 
tests were performed in SAS version 8.2 or Sp lus version 6.2.1 statistical packages.     
 
4.3  Results 
4.3.1  Tagging SNP selection.   We utilized the combined dataset of variant information 
from our previous resequencing (Chapter 3) and genotyping (Chapter 2)  efforts to select 
maximally informative tagSNPs for use in  our larger clini cal population taking 
citalopram.  The combined dataset consis ted of 145 SNPs; 77 from resequencing, 52 
from our previous genotyping effort, and 16 th at were assayed usi ng both methods.  For 
tagSNP selection, we only used  data from a subgroup of Cauc asian individuals (N=75) in 
our patient population taking fl uoxetine. Difficulties arise from  attempting to predict rare 
genotypes (defined here as <10% minor allele frequency) or haplotype s (defined here as 
<1% population frequency) using a reduced ta gging SNP set, as has been noted using 
other datasets and tagg ing methods (20;21).  Attempts to  tag rare SNPs resulted in the 
majority of these rare SNPs being selected as  tagSNPs (Figure 4.1).  The inclusion of rare 
SNPs almost doubled the number of tagging SN Ps selected (28 for common SNPs vs. 51 
for all SNPs).  Similarly, for haplotype ta gging methods such as the approach of Stram et 
al., tagging rare recombinant haplotypes required large increases in tagging SNP 
selection.  In several instances, rare hapl otypes were not tagged accurately (i.e., R h2 <0.8) 
even when all SNPs within a block were se lected as tagging SNPs (data not shown).  
Here, we thus limited our analysis of tagS NP performance to the tagging of common 
SNPs (N=71 SNPs) and common haplotypes.        
 137 
05101520253035404550
0-5 5-10 10-15 15-20 20-25 25-30 30-35 35-40 40-45 45-50
SNP minor allele frequency (%)No. of SNPsTag SNPs
 
Figure 4.1.  Effect of minor allele fre quency on tagging SNP selection.  The above 
histogram displays the number of SNPs (N= 145 total) at each minor allele frequency bin 
(solid black bars).  The striped bars indicat e the number of SNPs, in each minor allele 
frequency bin, that were selected as  tagSNPs using the method of Carlson et al. (6)   
 
 
       
 138In addition to serving as proxies for ot her SNPs, we sought to investigate how 
accurately these tagSNPs would infer the underlying haplotype structure.  In order to aid 
haplotype tagging SNP selection we selected regions of limite d haplotype diversity, also 
known as haplotype blocks.  In total, eight haplotype blocks were identified, with an 
average length of 33 kb, us ing the chromosomal covera ge criteria of Zhang et al.  The 
HTR2A  gene was composed of three blocks, while the TPH2  gene had two blocks and the 
three other genes were all captu red by a single haplotype block. 
As shown in Figure 4.2, tagSNP s selected using Carlson et al.’s pairwise r2 
criteria predicted all the common haplotype s well in all blocks investigated (>0.75 
average minimum R h2).  The tagSNPs selected by the method of Stram et al. predicted all 
common haplotypes in all blocks acc urately (>0.80 average minimum R h2), which is not 
surprising given that this method selects tagSNPs based solely on satisfying the R h2 
threshold.  In contrast, tagSNPs chosen us ing the pattern recognition approach of Ke et 
al. do not predict all common haplotypes well for 4 of the 8 blocks (<0.60 average  
minimum R h2).  The three methods varied in thei r efficiency in reducing number of 
tagSNPs to be genotyped.  The patte rn recognition approach of Ke et al. was the most 
efficient, and selected 16 tagSNPs for the fi ve genes out of a total of 71 common SNPs.  
The Stram et al. method selected 21 tagSNPs, and the Carlson et al. method selected 28 
tagSNPs overall.  Given th at using a pairwise r2 criteria is analyti cally straightforward 
and that the tagSNPs chosen will be sufficien t in accurately reconstructing the underlying 
common haplotypes, we attempted to genotype  the 28 tagSNPs selected by the method of 
Carlson et al in our clinical population taki ng citalopram (STAR*D) .  Of these 28 SNPs, 
a single SNP in the HTR2A  gene (rs2246127) was out of Ha rdy-Weinberg equilibrium   
 1390.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0
HTR1A HTR2A
Block 1HTR2A
Block 2HTR2A
Block 3TPH1 TPH2
Block 1TPH2
Block 2MAOAAverage minimum Rh2 for tagSNPsCarlson
Stram
Ke
 
Figure 4.2.  Accuracy of haplotype  inference for three sets of  tagging SNPs.  Each of the 
eight haplotype blocks are shown on th e x-axis.  The minimum haplotype R h2 value for 
all common haplotypes reconstructed from each tagSNP set is shown on the y-axis.  Due 
to the fact that methods of Carlson et al. (6) and Ke et al. (9) do not output a unique set of 
tagSNPs, average (± SD) minimum R h2 of all combinations of  tagSNPs are shown.   
 
 
        
 140and thus dropped from the analysis.  
4.3.2  Tagging SNP association to citalopram response.  We sought to test two main 
hypotheses with the tagSNPs selected in these candidate genes using the response 
phenotypes described above.  We first tested wh ether these variants were associated with 
overall response to citalopram  by comparing responders to non-responders and remitters 
to non-responders.  We also tested whether th ese variants affect “true” or specific drug 
response by comparing specific responders to non-responders and specific responders to 
non-specific responders.  All analyses were  stratified by self-reported ethnicity 
(Caucasian or African-American) to limit pot ential population stratif ication.       
 Table 4.3 shows the association result s for our primary phenotypic comparison; 
response versus non-response.  As can be s een, none of the tagS NPs were significantly 
associated with citalopram response at the p<0.01 threshold in this phenotypic 
comparison.  The only variant to meet this  threshold was an intronic SNP in the HTR2A  
gene (rs1923884) in a related phenotypic comparison; remitter versus non-responder 
(p<0.008, OR=0.72, 95% C.I. 0.55-0.93).  This a ssociation was seen in the Caucasian 
subset, but was not significant within the Af rican American samples (data not shown).  
No tagSNPs met our threshold for signifi cance (p<0.01) in our “true” drug response 
comparisons; specific responders versus non -responders, and specific responders versus 
non-specific responders (Table 4.4).  As expected based on our tagSNP ascerta inment, allelic association between the 
variants was low in our citalopr am population, with no pairwise r
2 value greater than 0.8 
in the STAR*D sample set.  We inferred hapl otypes within each ha plotype block in the 
five candidate genes and tested them globally for association to  citalopram response.  No   
 141NR Resp NR Remit
HTR1A rs6295 0.48 0.47 - - 0.48 0.47 - -
HTR1A rs1364043 0.22 0.21 - - 0.22 0.22 - -
HTR2A rs731245 0.47 0.47 - - 0.47 0.47 - -
HTR2A rs6313 0.42 0.40 - - 0.42 0.39 - -
HTR2A rs2296973 0.30 0.32 - - 0.30 0.31 - -
HTR2A rs927544 0.27 0.28 - - 0.27 0.27 - -
HTR2A rs666693 0.19 0.20 - - 0.19 0.20 - -
HTR2A rs2770296 0.25 0.29 0.07 1.13 (0.90, 1.43 ) 0.25 0.29 0.06 1.16 (0.91, 1.47 )
HTR2A rs1923884 0.15 0.12 0.02 0.75 (0.59, 0.97 ) 0.15 0.12 0.008 0.72 (0.55, 0.93 )
HTR2A rs1923882 0.25 0.23 - - 0.25 0.23 - -
HTR2A rs6314 0.10 0.09 - - 0.10 0.09 - -
HTR2A rs3125 0.16 0.14 - - 0.16 0.14 - -
TPH1 rs7130929 0.40 0.38 - - 0.40 0.37 - -
TPH1 rs623580 0.32 0.33 - - 0.32 0.33 - -
TPH1 rs684302 0.41 0.42 - - 0.41 0.42 - -
TPH1 rs211105 0.23 0.21 - - 0.23 0.21 - -
TPH1 rs211102 0.18 0.18 - - 0.18 0.19 - -
TPH1 rs2108977 0.45 0.44 - - 0.45 0.44 - -
TPH2 rs2129575 0.26 0.25 - - 0.26 0.25 - -
TPH2 rs2171363 0.43 0.42 - - 0.43 0.42 - -
TPH2 rs1007023 0.15 0.15 - - 0.15 0.15 - -
TPH2 rs1487278 0.21 0.22 - - 0.21 0.23 - -
TPH2 rs1487276 0.17 0.17 - - 0.17 0.17 - -
TPH2 rs1386487 0.40 0.36 0.08 0.87 (0.69, 1.10 ) 0.40 0.36 - -
TPH2 rs17110747 0.15 0.15 - - 0.15 0.15 - -
TPH2 rs1872824 0.39 0.35 0.05 0.81 (0.64, 1.02 ) 0.39 0.36 - -
MAOA rs1465108 0.29 0.3 - - 0.29 0.3 - -GeneMAF
p-value tagSNP Odds ratio (95% CI) p-valueResponders (Resp, N=789) vs.            
non-responders (NR, N=501)
MAFRemitters (Remit, N=669) vs.              
non-responders (NR=501)
Odds ratio (95% CI)
 
Table 4.3.  Tagging SNP association results fo r the citalopram response and remission 
phenotype comparisons.  Minor allele frequency in each phe notype group are shown, as 
well as the p-value and odds rati o for all SNPs with a p<0.1.   
 
 
       
 142NS Spec NS+NR Spec
HTR1A rs6295 0.46 0.47 - - 0.48 0.47 - -
HTR1A rs1364043 0.19 0.22 - - 0.22 0.22 - -
HTR2A rs731245 0.43 0.47 - - 0.46 0.47 - -
HTR2A rs6313 0.36 0.39 - - 0.41 0.39 - -
HTR2A rs2296973 0.34 0.32 - - 0.30 0.32 - -
HTR2A rs927544 0.30 0.28 - - 0.28 0.28 - -
HTR2A rs666693 0.23 0.20 - - 0.20 0.20 - -
HTR2A rs2770296 0.29 0.29 - - 0.26 0.29 - -
HTR2A rs1923884 0.12 0.12 - - 0.14 0.12 0.06 0.81 (0.62, 1.05 )
HTR2A rs1923882 0.23 0.23 - - 0.24 0.23 - -
HTR2A rs6314 0.10 0.09 - - 0.10 0.09 - -
HTR2A rs3125 0.13 0.14 - - 0.16 0.14 - -
TPH1 rs7130929 0.33 0.39 0.07 1.65 (1.13, 2.41 ) 0.39 0.39 - -
TPH1 rs623580 0.33 0.34 - - 0.33 0.34 - -
TPH1 rs684302 0.45 0.40 - - 0.42 0.40 - -
TPH1 rs211105 0.18 0.22 - - 0.22 0.22 - -
TPH1 rs211102 0.19 0.18 - - 0.18 0.18 - -
TPH1 rs2108977 0.44 0.44 - - 0.45 0.44 - -
TPH2 rs2129575 0.27 0.25 - - 0.26 0.25 - -
TPH2 rs2171363 0.45 0.42 - - 0.44 0.42 - -
TPH2 rs1007023 0.15 0.15 - - 0.15 0.15 - -
TPH2 rs1487278 0.24 0.22 - - 0.22 0.22 - -
TPH2 rs1487276 0.17 0.18 - - 0.17 0.18 - -
TPH2 rs1386487 0.34 0.37 - - 0.38 0.37 - -
TPH2 rs17110747 0.16 0.15 - - 0.16 0.15 - -
TPH2 rs1872824 0.37 0.36 - - 0.39 0.36 - -
MAOA rs1465108 0.34 0.27 0.05 0.66 (0.3, 0.95 ) 0.31 0.27 - -Gene tagSNPSpecific responders (Spec, N=553) vs.         
Non-specific responders (NS, N=146)Specific responders (Spec, N=553) vs. Non-
specific and non-responders (NS+NR, N=645)
MAF
p-valueMAF
p-value Odds ratio (95% CI) Odds ratio (95% CI)
 
Table 4.4.  Tagging SNP association result s for the citalopram specific response 
phenotype comparisons.  Minor allele frequency in each phe notype group are shown, as 
well as the p-value and odds rati o for all SNPs with a p<0.1.    
 
         
 143significant haplotypic associations were obser ved in any of the haplotype blocks using 
our four phenotypic comparis ons (data not shown).   
 
4.4  Discussion 
 In this chapter, we sought to test wh ether DNA variation in five serotonergic 
candidate genes is associated with clinical response to citalopram treatment.  To 
accomplish this we used our previous genotype information and complete exon resequencing to select tagSNPs within these genes and then examined them in a large 
population taking citalopram.  In our pr imary phenotypic, responders versus non-
responders, no variants met our significance threshold (p<0.01).  While a single SNP 
exceeded this threshold in a related phenotype comparison, remitters versus non-responders, the association is at best consid ered marginal given the large number of 
statistical tests that were  performed.  Additionally, no variants met our significance 
threshold in our other phenot ypic comparisons investigating association to “true”, or 
specific drug response.  Similar results were  obtained using infe rred haplotypes within 
these genes.  Given that we had adequate pow er to detect reasonabl e effect sizes (Figure 
4.3), it appears that variation in  these five genes does not si gnificantly influence patient 
response to citalopram.  We had previously reported an associa tion to fluxoetine response for several of 
these variants, but none of them were significan tly associated with citalopram response in 
our current study.  Several factors could expl ain this difference, including different 
underlying mechanisms of action for the two dr ugs, differences in patient ascertainment   
 00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
Minor Allele FrequencyPower
OR=1.25 OR=1.5 OR=2.0
 
Figure 4.3.  Power to detect association to categorical response to citalopram in th e STAR*D population (N=1,914).  On the y-ax is is 
the power (1- β) of detecting an association at the various minor allele frequencies shown on the x-axis.  Three different effect sizes 
(dominant ORs) are shown.  Power was calculate d using the method of Purcell et al (23).  SNPs that we re associated with respons e in 
the fluoxetine sample had ORs ranging from 2-5, thus we had adequa te power to replicate these fi ndings in the STARD population.
144  
 145between the two studies, cryptic  population stratification, or simply Type I error.  We 
attempted to control for populat ion stratification in this study by analyzing the data 
within self-identified ethnic groups, as this has been shown to correlate well with marker 
allele frequencies (22).   
One strength of this study is the comprehensive approach we took to selecting 
tagSNPs within these candidate genes using dense marker data in our small population 
taking fluoxetine.  It could now be argued th at simply using markers from the HapMap 
Project (24) would suffice, although there are several reas ons why our approach had 
merit. First, the HapMap was not available when many of the experiments were carried 
out. Second, our resequencing prov ides finer granularity  in our data, particularly for less 
common variants. Finally, the characteristics of the markers were measured in a population much like our test population, raising the possibility that the empirically tested 
marker set would be useful in the STAR*D da taset.  Our coverage of variants within 
African American samples in this study was limited, due to the fact that our discovery 
sample was enriched with Caucasian sample s.  Our comparison of haplotype and SNP 
tagging methods revealed that the methods va ry in the number of tagSNPs selected and 
their ability to accurately reconstruct common haplotypes.   The pattern recognition 
approach to selecting hapl otype tagging SNPs was the most efficient at reducing 
genotyping load, however within several bl ocks the tagSNPs could not accurately 
reconstruct the underlying haplotypes.  This is  not surprising given that this method does 
not take into account the uncertainty invol ved in predicting haplotypes from genotypic 
data.  The R
h2 method of Stram et al. accounts for this uncertaint y, and selected a greater 
number of tagSNPs to be genotyped.  The pairwise r2 SNP tagging method of Carlson et   
 146al. was the least efficient at re ducing genotyping costs.  Howeve r, we were able to show 
that the tagSNPs selected using pairwise r2 measures were sufficient to tag the common 
haplotypes as well.  Given the computational simplicity of this method and since it allows 
us to test for both single locus and haplot ypic effects, we chose to use the tagSNPs 
selected by this method in our citalopram population.    While we have attempted to capture th e majority of common variation within 
these genes, current genotypi ng costs prohibit complete asce rtainment of all variants.  
Interestingly, a recent study by McMahon et al which utilized the same STAR*D clinical 
population reported a significant a ssociation between a SNP in the HTR2A  gene 
(rs7997012) and citalopram remission af ter interrogating 768 SNPs in 68 
pharmacodynamic candidate genes (25).  This intronic SNP was not initially included in 
our study, though we subsequently genotyped it in our STAR*D sample.  This SNP was 
not in significant LD with any of our  tagSNPs within this gene (max r
2 = 0.19).  In fact, 
Phase 2 HapMap data shows that only one variant (rs9567732) within  1Mb of this SNP 
has moderate (r2 > 0.80) LD with it.  Analysis of  this SNP using our phenotypic 
definitions and statistical methods also s howed modest associa tion with citalopram 
remission (p<0.002), however, our level of si gnificance was two orders of magnitude less 
than reported by the McMahon group (p<0.00004).  This is largely due to the fact that we 
stratified our analyses by race, whereas thei r primary analysis is performed on the entire 
sample.  We stratified our analysis since both remission rate and the minor allele 
frequency of rs7997012 are strongly correlated with self-reported race in the STAR*D 
sample.  Thus, confounding due to populati on stratification seem s to increase the 
significance of their finding, though within racial subgroups, the variant is still nominally   
 147associated with remission.  As always, repl ication of this findi ng in an independent 
sample is critical, and because the effect si ze of the variant was sm all, additional risk 
variants are required in order to utilize ge netic information in clinical decision making. 
In summary, our study has attempted to br oadly investigate th ese five serotonin 
genes for association to citalopram respons e in a large patient population.  Using both 
single locus and haplotype tests, none of the polymorphisms we interr ogated appear to be 
strongly associated with citalopram respons e or response specificity in the STAR*D 
population. Given that little is known about ex actly how SSRIs exert their antidepressant 
effects in vivo , interrogation of DNA varia tion in other neuronal pathways or across the 
entire genome may be required to gain further insight. 
   
 
        
   
 1484.5  References 
1.     Trivedi MH, Rush AJ, Wisniewski SR, Nierenberg AA, Warden D, Ritz L, Norquist 
G, Howland RH, Lebowitz B, McGrath PJ, Shores-Wilson K, Biggs MM, Balasubramani GK, Fava M, Team DS. Evaluation of outco mes with citalopram for depression using 
measurement-based care in STAR*D: Im plications for clinical practice. Am J Psychiatry  
2006; 163(1):28-40. 2.     Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Wisniewski SR, Stewart JW, Nierenberg AA, Thase ME, 
Ritz L, Biggs MM, Warden D, Luther JF, Shores-Wilson K, Niederehe G, Fava M, the 
STAR. Bupropion-SR, Sertrali ne, or Venlafaxine-XR after failure of SSRIs for 
depression. N Engl J Med  2006; 354(12):1231-1242. 
3.     Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Wisniewski SR, Nierenberg AA, Stewart JW, Warden D, 
Niederehe G, Thase ME, Lavori PW, Lebowitz BD, McGrath PJ, Rosenbaum JF, Sackeim HA, Kupfer DJ, Luther J, Fava  M. Acute and longer-term outcomes in 
depressed outpatients requiring one or seve ral treatment steps: a STAR*D report. Am J 
Psychiatry  2006; 163(11):1905-1917. 
4.     Peters EJ, Slager SL, McGrath PJ , Knowles JA, Hamilton SP. Investigation of 
serotonin-related genes in antidepressant response. Mol Psychiatry  2004; 9(9):879-889. 
5.     Kraft JB, Peters EJ, Slager SL, Je nkins GD, Reinalda MS, McGrath PJ, Hamilton 
SP. Analysis of association between the sero tonin transporter and antidepressant response 
in a large clinical sample. Biol Psychiatry  2006; advanced online publication. 
6.     Carlson CS, Eberle MA , Rieder MJ, Yi Q, Kruglyak L, Nickerson DA. Selecting a 
maximally informative set of single-nucleotid e polymorphisms for association analyses 
using linkage disequilibrium. Am J Hum Genet  2004; 74(1):106-120.   
 1497.     Sebastiani P, Lazarus R, Weiss ST , Kunkel LM, Kohane IS, Ramoni MF. Minimal 
haplotype tagging. PNAS  2003; 100(17):9900-9905. 
8.     Stram DO, Haiman CA, Hirschhorn JN, Altshuler D, Kolonel LN, Henderson BE, 
Pike MC. Choosing haplotype-tagging SNPS based on unphased genotype data using a 
preliminary sample of unrelated subjects with  an example from the Multiethnic Cohort 
Study. Hum Hered  2003; 55(1):27-36. 
9.     Ke X, Cardon LR. Efficient sel ective screening of haplotype tag SNPs. 
Bioinformatics  2003; 19(2):287-288. 
10.     Fava M, Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Nierenberg AA, Thase ME, Sackeim HA, Quitkin FM, Wisniewski S, Lavori PW, Rosenbaum JF , Kupfer DJ. Background and rationale for 
the sequenced treatment alternatives to relieve depression (STAR*D) study. Psychiatr 
Clin North Am  2003; 26(2):457-94, x. 
11.     Rush AJ, Fava M, Wisniewski SR, Lavori PW, Trivedi MH, Sackeim HA, Thase 
ME, Nierenberg AA, Quitkin FM, Kashner TM . Sequenced treatment alternatives to 
relieve depression (STAR*D): rationale and design. Controlled Clinical Trials  2004; 
25(1):119-142. 12.     Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Ibrahim HM, Carmody TJ, Arnow B, Klein DN, Markowitz JC, Ninan PT, Kornstein S, Manber R. The 16-Item quick inventory of depressive 
symptomatology (QIDS), clin ician rating (QIDS-C), and self-report (QIDS-SR): a 
psychometric evaluation in patients  with chronic major depression. Biol Psychiatry  2003; 
54(5):573-583. 13.     Ross DC, Quitkin FM, Klein DF. A typological model for estimation of drug and 
placebo effects in depression. J Clin Psychopharmacol  2002; 22(4):414-418.   
 15014.     Quitkin FM, Rabkin JD, Markowitz JM, Stewart JW, McGrath, PJ, Harrison W. 
Use of pattern analysis to identify  true drug response. A replication. Arch Gen Psychiatry  
1987; 44(3):259-264. 15.     Stewart JW, Quitkin FM, McGrath PJ, Amsterdam J, Fava M, Fawcett J, Reimherr 
F, Rosenbaum J, Beasley C, Roback P. Use of pattern analysis to predict differential 
relapse of remitted patients with major depression during 1 year of treatment with fluoxetine or placebo. Arch Gen Psychiatry  1998; 55(4):334-343. 
16.     Carlson CS, Eberle MA, Rieder MJ, Yi Q, Kruglyak L, Nick erson DA. Selecting a 
maximally informative set of single-nucleotid e polymorphisms for association analyses 
using linkage disequilibrium. Am J Hum Genet  2004; 74(1):106-120. 
17.     Zhang K, Jin L. HaploBlo ckFinder: haplotype block analyses. Bioinformatics  
2003; 19(10):1300-1301. 18.     Freidlin B, Zheng G, Li Z, Gastwi rth JL. Trend tests for case-control studies of 
genetic markers: power, sample size and robustness. Hum Hered  2002; 53(3):146-152. 
19.     Schaid DJ, Rowland CM, Tines DE , Jacobson RM, Poland GA. Score tests for 
association between traits and haplot ypes when linkage phase is ambiguous. Am J Hum 
Genet  2002; 70(2):425-434. 
20.     Weale ME, Depondt C, Macdonald SJ, Smith A, Lai PS, Shorvon SD, Wood NW, 
Goldstein DB. Selection and evaluation of ta gging SNPs in the neuronal-sodium-channel 
gene SCN1A: implications for li nkage-disequilibrium gene mapping. Am J Hum Genet  
2003; 73(3):551-565.   
 15121.     Goldstein DB, Ahmadi KR, Weale ME, Wood NW. Genome scans and candidate 
gene approaches in the study of common diseases and variable drug responses. Trends 
Genet  2003; 19(11):615-622. 
22.     Tang H, Quertermous T, Rodriguez B, Kardia SL, Zhu X, Brown A, Pankow JS, Province MA, Hunt SC, Boerwinkle E, Schork NJ, Risch NJ. Genetic structure, self-
identified race/ethnicity, and confounding in case-control association studies. Am J Hum 
Genet  2005; 76(2):268-275. 
23.     Purcell S, Cherny SS, Sham PC. Gene tic Power Calculator: design of linkage and 
association genetic mapping studies of complex traits. Bioinformatics  2003; 19(1):149-
150. 24.     The International HapMap Consortiu m. A haplotype map of the human genome. 
Nature  2005; 437(7063):1299-1320. 
25.     McMahon FJ, Buervenich S, Charney D, Lipsky R, Rush AJ, Wilson AF, Sorant 
AJ, Papanicolaou GJ, Laje G, Fava M, Triv edi MH, Wisniewski SR, Manji H. Variation 
in the gene encoding the serotonin 2A r eceptor is associated with outcome of 
antidepressant treatment. Am J Hum Genet  2006; 78(5):804-814. 
   
 152CHAPTER 5 
TESTING FUNCTIONAL VARIATION IN  PHARMACOKINETIC GENES FOR 
ASSOCIATION TO CITALOPRAM RESPONSE AND TOLERANCE* 
 
5.1  Introduction 
 Significant inter-individual variation exists in clinical response to and tolerance of 
antidepressant medication. Common genetic variation may be pa rtly responsible for these 
phenotypic differences. The use of genotype in formation in clinical psychopharmacology 
could potentially help clinicians avoid the st andard trial and error approach, and allow a 
more efficient way to maximize efficacy and mi nimize toxicity (1) as  is done in certain 
situations with cancer treatment (2).  
Drug metabolism and transport genes such as CYP2D6  and CYP2C19  are obvious 
pharmacogenetic candidate genes given their kn own interaction with drugs like selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors  (SSRI) and their metabolites in vivo (3).  For example, Yin 
et al. found that homozygous carriers of the non-functional allele of CYP2C19  show a 
42% decrease in clearance of  the SSRI citalopram compared to that of homozygous 
carriers of the wild type allele (4).  Mo reover, several of these pharmacokinetic genes 
harbor common variants that have been shown to impair enzyme function (5).  
 Despite these known  in vivo relationship between antidepressant medications and 
pharmacogenetic genes, few epidemiologica l studies investigating the relationship 
between antidepressant response and pharmacoki netic gene variants have been carried 
out.  In a prospective study of s ubjects taking the SSRI paroxetine, CYP2D6  genotype 
                                                 
* This work has been submitted for publication (Peters E.J., Slager S.L., Kraft J.B., Jenkins G.D., Reinalda 
M.S., McGrath P.J., Hamilton S.P. 2007 “Pharmacokinetic genes do not influence response or tolerance to 
citalopram in the STAR*D sample.”)  
 153was not associated with side effect burden (6).  Another recent study found that CYP2D6  
genotype does not influence the frequency of gastrointestinal side effects, although when 
CYP2D6  genotype is combined with a serotoni n 2A receptor polymorphism, the authors 
did observe such an associati on (7).  Despite the equivocal results of these studies, some 
investigators have advocated the use of pha rmacokinetic enzyme variant information to 
guide clinical therapy of SSRIs, particularly by adjustment of the dose prescribed (8;9).  
Here, we investigate the poten tial role of five pharmacoki netic genes on the response to 
and tolerance of citalopram using a large clin ical sample of depressed patients who are 
enrolled in the Sequenced Treatment Alte rnatives to Relieve Depression (STAR*D) 
study (10).   The majority of the metabolism of cita lopram occurs through two sequential N-
methylations, the first to form desmethylc italopram (DCT) and the second to form 
didesmethylcitalopram (DDCT) (11).  The first step is primarily catalyzed by the 
CYP2C19 enzyme with some contribution from CYP3A4, and the second step is 
primarily catalyzed by the CYP2D6 enzy me (12).  P-glycoprotein (encoded by ABCB1 ) 
is thought to contribute to the control of citalopram flux across the blood brain barrier 
(13).  At steady state, DCT and DDCT are ha lf and one-tenth as abundant, respectively, 
in plasma compared to unchanged citalopr am (11).  Furthermore, DCT and DDCT are 
0.12 fold and 0.08 fold less potent, respectivel y, at inhibiting the serotonin transport in 
vitro  than the parent compound ( 14) (Figure 5.1).  The combination of low plasma 
concentrations and weak inhibition of the serotonin transporter suggest that DCT and 
DDCT do not contribute significantly to cita lopram’s antidepressant effects.   
  
 154 
       
 
Figure 5.1.  Metabolism of citalopram by CYP en zymes.  Steady state plasma levels and 
in vitro  serotonin transporter (SERT) inhibi tion are shown relative to the parent 
compound.   
 
 
 
         
CYP2C19
CYP3A4 CYP2D6
SERT
inhibition
Plasma
concentrationcitalopram
1.0 x1.0 xdesmethylcitalopram
0.12 x
0.5 xdidesmethylcitalopram
0.08 x
0.1 x
CYP2C19
CYP3A4 CYP2D6
SERT
inhibition
Plasma
concentrationcitalopram
1.0 x1.0 xdesmethylcitalopram
0.12 x
0.5 xdidesmethylcitalopram
0.08 x
0.1 x 
 1555.2  Methods 
5.2.1  STAR*D clinical sample.  Subjects are those enrolled in STAR*D who consented 
to give DNA (N=1,953). The STAR*D trial wa s a large NIMH-sponsored treatment trial 
involving 4,041 subjects that was designed to  assess effectiveness of antidepressant 
treatments in generalizable samples, and to determine outcomes for outpatients with non-
psychotic major depressive disorder (MDD) treated with citalopr am.  The study design 
and methods for this clinical tr ial are reviewed in Chapter 4 as well as in the literature 
(15).  Further demographic information on the cohort that consented to give DNA is 
presented in our previous work (16) (T able 4.1).  The aim of STAR*D was to 
prospectively determine which of a number of  treatments are beneficial for subjects 
experiencing an unsatisfactory response to c italopram.  To increase the generalizability of 
the findings, STAR*D utilized broad inclusion cr iteria and enrolled an ethnically diverse 
population (10).   Diagnosis was made us ing the Psychiatric Diagnostic Screening 
Questionnaire, and depressive symptoms were  assessed with the 16-item Quick Inventory 
of Depressive Symptomatology (Self-Report [QIDS-SR] version)  (17) collected at clinic 
visits.  Subjects meeting criter ia and providing consent were administered citalopram for 
12 weeks of treatment with vigorous dosing (20- 60 mg/day).  The subset of subjects who 
provided DNA samples was 61.8% female, and was 78.1% Caucasian, 16.1% African-
American, and 5.8% other races (16).  Hispan ics accounted for 14.0% of the sample.  The 
average citalopram dose at study exit was 45.5 mg (s.d. = 15.7).  Subjects were consented 
for genetic studies as part of  the National Institute of Me ntal Health’s Human Genetic 
Initiative, and the work described here was approved by the institutional review board of the University of California, San Francisco.  
 1565.2.2  Phenotypic definitions.  We defined six phenotypes to  evaluate citalopram 
response and tolerability. The first two were responders  and non-responders : 
responders are subjects who had at least 42 days of treatment and whose QIDS-SR score 
on their final clinical visit shows ≥50% reduction in score; th e remaining subjects, who 
also had at least 42 days of treatment, we re then considered non-responders.  The ≥50% 
reduction in symptom severity on the HRSD 17 is the conventional definition of response 
in clinical trials.  We used the QIDS-SR scor e to estimate severity since all subjects had 
this rating and it correlates highly with the 17-item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression 
(HRSD 17) score (17).  We required this 42 day th reshold to ensure an  adequate exposure 
to citalopram and to enhance the power to  find associations between genotype and 
response by reducing potential hetero geneity.  The third phenotype was remission , 
defined as a final QIDS-SR score ≤5.  Our specific  response phenotype is based on our 
attempt to further reduce heterogeneity by a ttempting to separate placebo response from 
true drug response in antidepr essant trials (18).  Some response to antidepressant 
medication is a placebo response, which we pos it may have either no genetic determinant 
or a different genetic underpinning than "true"  drug response.  Thus it is of interest to 
limit our definition of response to true pharmacologic response rather than placebo response.  For these phenotypes, a “speci fic” pattern of response was defined by 
persistence, or the maintenance of respons e for the remainder of the study once it was 
attained.  Previous studies considered "speci fic" patterns to be further characterized by 
delayed response, i.e., after the first two weeks (19).  We  were unable to employ this 
criterion because the STAR*D study design did not include ratings before week two.  We 
defined persistent, or “ specific ” responders, as those subjects who had a sustained  
 157response at all consecutive visits following the first visit with respons e, as measured by 
≥50% reduction in QIDS-SR scores.  Those whos e response occurred onl y at the last visit 
were removed from the analysis.  Note that  "specific" responde rs are a subset of 
responders (as defined by the response phenotyp e above).  Moreover, because visits were 
at least two weeks apart, we  assumed that intervening w eeks were characterized by the 
response defined by the previous visit.  Ou r tolerance outcome was based on study exit 
data; all patients who continued with citalopram at the end of STAR*D Level 1 treatment 
were considered tolerant , while patients who refused to continue citalopram or left the 
study due to side effects were considered intolerant .  For those who left Level 1 for 
further treatment but did not want to con tinue with citalopram, their phenotype was 
probably tolerant, probably intole rant, or intolerant based on th e level of side effects at 
the study exit based on the Global Rating of Side Effect Burden (20).  In order to reduce 
heterogeneity, we did not use subjects who were  considered probably tolerant or probably 
intolerant.  
5.2.3  Molecular methods.  Several cytochrome P450 genes ( CYP2C19 , CYP2D6 , 
CYP3A4 , CYP3A5 ) as well as the P-glycoprot ein transporter protein ( ABCB1 ) are thought 
to be involved in the metabolism and dist ribution of citalopram, based on human and 
animal model pharmacokinetic studies (12;13).   We chose to examine DNA variants in 
cytochrome P450 genes that cause or are susp ected to cause severe functional changes in 
the targeted proteins.  We also i nvestigated three common SNPs in the ABCB1  gene 
(C1236T, G2677T, and C3435T) which may be associated with treatment outcome in acute myeloid leukemia patients and reduced P-glycoprotein expression in vivo , though 
results are not unequivocal  (21;22).    
 158Gene Variant CaucasianAfrican-
AmericanEnzyme function in vivo
CYP2D6 *3 0.02 0.003 none
CYP2D6 *4 0.19 0.07 none
CYP2D6 *5 0.03 0.06 none
CYP2D6 *6 0.01 0.003 none
CYP2D6 *7 0.0003 0.002 none
CYP2D6 *8 - - none
CYP2D6 *9 0.03 0.005 decreased
CYP3A4 *1B 0.04 0.65 unknown
CYP3A5 *3C 0.09 0.70 decreased
CYP2C19 *2 0.13 0.19 none
CYP2C19 *3 - 0.02 none
CYP2C19 *17 0.21 0.20 increased
ABCB1 C1236T 0.44 0.19 unknown
ABCB1 G2677T 0.44 0.08 unknown
ABCB1 C3435T 0.51 0.21 unknown
CYP2D6 PM 0.05 0.02 none
CYP2C19 PM 0.02 0.02 none 
Table 5.1.  List of genotyped variants in pharm acokinetic genes. Vari ants are listed by 
gene (accepted nomenclature at ( http://www.cypalleles.ki.se/  for cytochrome P450 
genes), allele frequencies in the STAR*D sample, and known functional status of the 
variant. PM, poor metabolizer, de fined as described in Methods. 
 
 
 
      
 159Patients were genotyped for CYP3A5 *3C, all three CYP2C19  variants (*2, *3, 
*17), and all three ABCB1  variants using commercial ly available 5’ exonuclease 
fluorescence (Taqman) assays (see section 4.2.7 for laboratory assay conditions). CYP2D6 *5 deletion status was determined using a previously published tetra-primer long 
range PCR assay (23).  All other CYP2D6  alleles (*3, *4, *6, *7, *8, *9) were determined 
by first specifically amplifying the CYP2D6  gene as a 5.1kb long range PCR product (as 
described in (23)) followed by direct sequenc ing of two regions containing exons 3-4 
(sequencing primer: AAAGAGTGGGCC CTGTGACCAGCT) and exons 5-6 
(sequencing primer: GGGTGTCCCAGC AAAGTTCATGG).  This two step 
amplification procedure was pe rformed in order to avoid non-specific amplification of 
the CYP2D6  pseudogene located near the CYP2D6  gene.  CYP3A4 *1B genotype was 
determined by direct sequencing of a 320 bp PC R product that specifically amplifies the 
5’ proximal region of the CYP3A4  gene (24).  A synopsis of the 15 variants is shown in 
Table 5.1.  Direct sequencing genotypes were  scored using Mutation Surveyor v2.61. 
5.2.4  Statistical methods.  To reduce type I error, we relied on a two-stage design for 
analysis (25).  Within each ethnic group, gende r, and response to citalopram (using only 
our responder and nonresponder phenotypes), we randomly split our subjects a priori  into 
a discovery set and validation set.  Within each set, we stratified all analyses by self-
reported ethnicity due to the large allele fr equency differences and phenotype prevalence 
differences between ethnic groups.  Only th e two largest ethnic groups (Caucasian and 
African-American) were analy zed.  Hardy-Weinberg equilibri um was evaluated for each 
SNP within the discovery set using all partic ipants within each ethnic group.  This is 
because all subjects had depression, and we do not  suspect the variants to influence risk  
 160of depression.  No SNPs were found to vi olate Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium using a 
Bonferroni-corrected threshold.  We used unconditional logistic regression analysis to examine associations between each ge netic polymorphism and each phenotypic 
comparison.  Comparisons performed were: 1) responders vs. non-responders , 2) 
remitters vs. non-responders , 3) specific responders vs. non-responders , and  4) tolerant  
vs. intolerant .  Table 5.2 displays the sample si zes of our phenotypic comparisons and 
race and gender information for each group.  Each polymorphism was modeled 
individually as gene-dosage effects in the regression models, and odds ratios (OR) and 
95% confidence intervals were estimated.  For the CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 genes, we 
also modeled the putative metabolism status of the subjects as follows.  Individuals with 
two (phase known) non-functional alleles in these genes were considered poor 
metabolizers (PMs); all other genotypes were considered extensive metabolizers (EMs).  
Ultra rapid metabolizers (UMs) were not  detectable by our genotyping methodology.  
Association between haplotypes and the phenotyp es were calculated using a score test 
implemented in the computer program HAPL O.SCORE (26).  Pair-wise interactions 
among all independent SNPs were tested using logistic regression.  A likelihood ratio test 
was used to test for significance of the interac tion effect.  Only those SNPs with a p-value 
of <0.05 from the single SNP analyses in the discovery set were evaluated in the 
validation set.  Those SNPs in the validati on set that had a p-value <0.05 and the same 
directionality of association as that in th e screening set were reported as statistically 
significant.  We used survival analysis to examine whether metabolizer status influenced 
the ability to complete the trial.  Survival curves were generated by the   
 
 
Table 5.2.  Sample sizes and frequency distribution of race and gender in the discovery and validation sets for each phenotype 
comparison.    
  
161  
 162method of Kaplan-Meier, and differences betw een PM and EM curves were tested using 
the log rank statistic.  We also examined th e relationship between metabolizer status and 
citalopram dose, comparing final dose betw een extensive and poor metabolizers at the 
CYP2D6  and CYP2C19  loci with a t-test.  
 
5.3  Results 
Patients were genotyped for 15 polymorphisms in the CYP2D6 , CYP2C19 , 
CYP3A4 , CYP3A5 , and ABCB1  genes.  We compared genotype frequencies between 
responders and non-responders, remitters and non-responders, and specific responders and non-responders within each racial subgr oup.  Note that remitters and specific 
responders are subsets of responders.  We also compared genotype frequencies of 
subjects intolerant to citalopram to those who could tolerate the medication.  Table 5.2 
displays the frequency distribution of the phenotypes by ethnicity among subjects for the 
discovery and validation sets.  Because one of  our criteria for splitting our sample was 
based on the response/non-response phenotype s, the distribution of response and non-
response are similar between the discovery and validation set.  In th e discovery set, we 
found seven variants to be associated (p<0.05) with citalopram response or tolerance.  All 
but one of these were found in the African -American ethnic group.  However, none of 
these SNPs were replicated in our validation set (Table 5.3).  It is of note that the point 
estimates for the odds ratios for nearly all of these variants switched directionality in the 
second stage, most likely as a result of small samples sizes and the low allele frequencies 
of those variants.  Similar non-significant results were obt ained using haplotype testing 
(results not shown).  CYP2D6 or CYP2C19 metabolizer status (PM vs. EM) was also not  
 163associated with citalopram response or tolera nce in the first stage (results not shown).  
We also found no evidence for interaction (P > 0.05) between the variants in any of the 
genes tested (results no t shown).  We further sought to determine if metabolizer genotype 
was correlated with other clinical variables of  interest, namely the dosage of citalopram 
and the length of time a subject would con tinue with citalopram treatment.  For all 
subjects, regardless of outcome or length of trial, dose was not correlated with CYP2D6 
or CYP2C19 metabolizer status (Table 5.4).  Additionally, CYP2C19 or CYP2D6 
metabolizer status did not signi ficantly influence the subject’s ability to remain in the 
trial (Figure 5.1).   
 
5.4  Discussion 
There is growing interest in the util ity of pharmacokinetic gene polymorphism 
screening in psychopharmacological treatmen t, particularly with antipsychotic 
medications and older antidepressa nt agents (5).  Others have  further argued that the use 
of most psychotropics could be impacted  by DNA variants in pharmacokinetic genes, 
with decisions about which drug to use, as  well as the appropriate dosing, based on 
genotypic information (8;9).  The pharm acokinetics of many SSRIs, including 
citalopram, are affected by CYP2D6  and CYP2C19  genotype status, al though there is no 
evidence regarding how plasma levels of citalo pram influence clinical  efficacy (27).  For 
example, CYP2C19 poor metabolizers show a 42% decrease in citalopram clearance 
when compared to homozygous extensive meta bolizers, yet there was no difference in 
side effects.  Despite the intuitive appeal of ascribing differences  in drug tolerance and 
efficacy to variation in pharmacokinetic ge nes (9;28), no adequately powered studies 
  
Discovery set Validation set 
Ethnicity Phenotypic comparison Gene Variant p-value (OR, 95% CI) p-value (OR, 95% CI)
Caucasian Tolerant vs. intolerant CYP2C19 *2 0.005 (0.44, 0.24 - 0.81) 0.86 (1.00, 0.63 - 1.57)
African Amer. Responders vs. non-responders ABCB1 C3435T 0.01 (0.36, 0.17 - 0.75) 0.59 (1.51, 0.70 - 3.26)
African Amer. Remitters vs. non-responders ABCB1 C3435T 0.02 (0.36, 0.16 - 0.78) 0.85 (1.28, 0.56 - 2.93)
African Amer. Specific responders vs. non-responders CYP2D6 *5 0.03 (4.44, 1.07 - 18.39) 0.32 (0.45, 0.09 - 2.37)
African Amer. Specific responders vs. non-responders CYP2D6 *4 0.04 (0.26, 0.05 - 1.23) 0.96 (1.24, 0.35 - 4.41)
African Amer. Specific responders vs. non-responders ABCB1 C3435T 0.02 (0.40, 0.17 - 0.93) 0.71 (1.39, 0.58 - 3.35)
African Amer. Tolerant vs. intolerant CYP3A5 *3 0.04 (0.32, 0.08 - 1.37) 0.33 (1.57, 0.48 - 5.07) 
Table 5.3.  Single locus results for tests th at were significant (p<0.05) in the discovery sample se t.  Significance was assess ed using 
logistic regression, and odds rati os (OR) and confidence intervals (CI) shown ar e for minor allele carrier versus non-carrier.  No 
variants were significantly associated in both the discovery and validation sets. 
 
      
164  
 165Table 5.4 a) 
Metabolizer status Mean final dose (s.d.) p-value
CYP2C19 EM 45.3 (15.7) 0.13
CYP2C19 PM 40.7 (16.4)
CYP2D6 EM 45.4 (15.8) 0.25
CYP2D6 PM 43.2 (16.8) 
 
 Table 5.4 b) 
Metabolizer status Mean final dose (s.d.) p-value
CYP2C19 EM 46.7 (15.6) 0.87
CYP2C19 PM 45.7 (15.1)
CYP2D6 EM 46.7 (15.7) 0.30
CYP2D6 PM 53.3 (10.3) 
 
 Table 5.4.  Effect of metabolizer  status on final citalopram dose prescribed.  Mean final 
dose (mg) for each metabolizer group is show n, along with the standard deviation (s.d.) 
and significance level assessed using Student ’s t test.  Results are shown for the 
Caucasian subgroup (a), as well as the African-American subset (b). 
 
      
 166Figure 5.2 a)  
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00Fraction remaining
0 14 28 42 56 70 84
Days of treatment
CYP2C19 EM CYP2C19 PMp = 0.650.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00Fraction remaining
0 14 28 42 56 70 84
Days of treatment
CYP2C19 EM CYP2C19 PMp = 0.65
 
Figure 5.2 b) 
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00Fraction remaining
0 14 28 42 56 70 84
Days of treatment
CYP2D6 EM CYP2D6 PMp = 0.940.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00Fraction remaining
0 14 28 42 56 70 84
Days of treatment
CYP2D6 EM CYP2D6 PMp = 0.94
 
Figure 5.2.  Survival curves displaying frac tion of subjects remaining in the trial, 
separated by cytochrome P450 metabolizer status for the Caucas ian subgroup.  a)  
Subjects who were poor metabolizers (PM) for CYP2C19 were not significantly more 
likely to drop out of the trial earlier than extensive metabolizers (EM).  b) Similar non-
significant results were observed fo r subjects who were CYP2D6 PMs 
  
 167Figure 5.3 a)  
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00Fraction remaining
0 14 28 42 56 70 84
Days of treatment
CYP2C19 EM CYP2C19 PM
 
Figure 5.3 b) 
0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00Fraction remaining
0 14 28 42 56 70 84
Days of treatment
CYP2D6 EM CYP2D6 PM
 
Figure 5.3.  Survival curves displaying frac tion of subjects remaining in the trial, 
separated by cytochrome P450 metabolizer stat us for the African American subgroup.  a)  
Subjects who were poor metabolizers (PM) for CYP2C19 were not significantly more 
likely to drop out of the trial earlier than extensive metabolizers (EM).  b) Similar non-
significant results were observed fo r subjects who were CYP2D6 PMs 
 p = 0.89 
p = 0.94  
 168have been published that consistently report a significant clinical effect.  Considerable 
debate exists regarding the relevance of drug metabolizing enzymes for the clinical 
pharmacology of SSRIs (11).  The flat dose-re sponse curve and wide toxicity index argue 
against a strong relationship be tween plasma levels and clinical response (29).  This 
appears to be the case for citalopram, whic h has few drug-drug interactions based on in 
vitro and in vivo studies ( 12).  Nevertheless, polymorphisms in enzymes involved in 
citalopram metabolism, such as CYP2C19 a nd CYP2D6, do alter ci talopram disposition 
(4;30-32).  For example, in one study of se ven non-responders to citalopram, six of seven 
were extensive metabolizers for CYP2D6 and all seven were CYP2C19 extensive metabolizers (33).  When given an inhibito r of these two enzymes, citalopram serum 
levels rose in all seven subjects, with six of them showing substantial clinical 
improvement. These data suggest that enzy mes involved in citalopram metabolism may 
contribute to response, at least in some exte nsive metabolizers.  There are no similar data 
regarding side effects, although a sizable (n=749) Swedish study f ound no difference in 
citalopram or desmethylcitalopram levels  between those experiencing a number of 
common side effects compared w ith those who did not (34).   
The size of the STAR*D study provides a clin ical sample with statistical power to 
detect moderately sized genetic influences.  In this study, we de tected no significant 
association between any of the polymorphism s and our treatment phenotypes.  Our two-
stage analysis allowed us to c ontrol type I error by requiring validation of our results in a 
second sample.  However, by splitting our sample as such, we sacrificed  statistical power.  
For our response phenotype in the discovery se t, we had 80% power to detect a minimum 
detectable odds ratio of 1.9 assuming an allele frequency of 0.05 and 5% significance  
 169level and using our Caucasian sample.  The minimum detectable odds ratio increased to 
2.74 for the tolerant phenotype.  Given the l ack of a dose-response relationship with 
citalopram in the literature, we expected that the results for the response phenotypes 
would not be significant.  The negative asso ciation results for the tolerance phenotype in 
our Caucasian sample, however, were unexpecte d, as alterations of circulating drug or 
metabolite levels could conceivably lead to medication side effects and intolerance (27), 
although the power to detect sm all effects with this phenotyp e was limited.  It is possible 
that genetic influence on a patient’s medication toleran ce is derived largely from 
pharmacodynamic as opposed to pharmacokinetic gene variation, as observed in a study of paroxetine tolerance by Murphy et al. (6). 
The study described here has several limita tions.  Given the heterogenous sample, 
population stratification may be a potential explanation for our negative findings, with 
true associations being obscured by unobser ved population sub-stru cture.  However, 
population studies have found that self-repor ted ethnicity is a close surrogate for 
underlying genetic ancestry information (35).  We limited our genotyping of 
pharmacokinetic candidate genes to known, de leterious alleles that are common in 
Caucasian populations.  In order to compre hensively screen these genes, rare and 
functionally unknown variants would need to be genotyped.  The STAR *D clinical study, 
while large and broad in scope, was not desi gned for pharmacogenetic studies of this 
type.  For instance, citalopram was chosen pa rtly due to its lower potential for influence 
by pharmacokinetic polymorphism.  Citalopr am dosage was also not fixed, though the 
majority of subjects (78%) were receiving 40 -60 mg per day at the end of the study.  The 
final citalopram dosage prescribed was not in fluenced by the subject’s genotype status.   
 170This is consistent with work carried out with many of the same functional DNA variants 
in the Clinical Antipsychotic  Trials of Intervention E ffectiveness (CATIE) study, in 
which there was no association to dosing, efficacy, or tolerab ility to five antipsychotics 
(Iris Grossman and David Goldstein, pers onal communication).  This observation is 
particularly interesting in that others ha ve noted a strong correlation between maximum 
prescribed dose of phenytoin or carbamazep ine in epilepsy and genetic variants in 
CYP2C9  or SCN1A  , suggesting the utility of clinical adjustment of dose in response to 
genotype (36).  An additional limitation involves the allowance of concomitant 
medications in the STAR*D trial that poten tially interfere with or accelerate the 
metabolism of citalopram. Without having data  on co-administered medications, we were 
unable to control for this theore tical drug-drug interaction effect .  It is noteworthy that the 
analysis of the CATIE study indicates that using concomitant medi cations known to alter 
metabolic status did not alter the results.  Additionally, circulating concentrations of 
citalopram or citalopram metabolites were not  obtained, which might have been useful as 
a proxy measure of compliance.  Finally, our findings regarding citalopram may not be 
generalizable to other SSRIs, each of which has a unique metabolic disposition.  Any broadly administered pharmacogenetic test will  have to tolerate similar limitations in 
order to be clinically useful.  Thus, at leas t for citalopram, it appears to be premature to 
advocate routine pharmac okinetic gene analysis for dose ad justment or clinical decision 
making. 
In summary, here we have tested kno wn functional variation in relevant 
pharmacokinetic genes for association to citalo pram response and tolerance.  Using a two 
stage study design and the STAR *D clinical population, none of these variants were  
 171significantly associated with clinical out come in both our discovery and validation 
sample sets.  Furthermore, combinations of  these variants in the form of predicted 
metabolizer status for CYP2D6 and CYP2C 19 (EM vs. PM) were not associated with 
clinical outcome.  Final prescribed citalopr am dose and length of time in trial was also 
not associated with pharmacokinetic gene va riants.  Thus, this study does not support a 
strong role for common pharmacokinetic gene va riants in patient outcome from treatment 
with citalopram.         
 
          
 1725.5  References  
1.     Goldstein DB. Pharmacogenetic s in the laboratory and the clinic. N Engl J Med  
2003; 348(6):553-556. 2.     Eichelbaum M, Ingelman-Sundberg  M, Evans WE. Pharmacogenomics and 
individualized drug therapy. Annual Review of Medicine  2006; 57(1):119-137. 
3.     Brosen K. Some aspects of geneti c polymorphism in the biotransformation of 
antidepressants. Therapie  2004; 59(1):5-12. 
4.     Yin OQ, Wing YK, Cheung Y, Wang ZJ , Lam SL, Chiu HF, Chow MS. Phenotype-
genotype relationship and clin ical effects of citalopram in Chinese patients. J Clin 
Psychopharmacol  2006; 26(4):367-372. 
5.     Kirchheiner J, Nickchen K, Bauer M,  Wong ML, Licinio J, Roots I, Brockmoller J. 
Pharmacogenetics of antidepressants and an tipsychotics: the contribution of allelic 
variations to the phenotype of drug response. Mol Psychiatry  2004; 9(5):442-473. 
6.     Murphy GM, Jr., Kremer C, Rodrigue s HE, Schatzberg AF. Pharmacogenetics of 
antidepressant medication intolerance. Am J Psychiatry  2003; 160(10):1830-1835. 
7.     Suzuki Y, Sawamura K, Someya T.  Polymorphisms in the 5-hydroxytryptamine 2A 
receptor and cytochrome P4502D6 genes synergistically predict fluvoxamine-induced side effects in Japanese depressed patients. Neuropsychopharmacology  2006; 31(4):825-
831. 8.     Mrazek DA, Smoller JW, de LJ. Inco rporating pharmacogenetics into clinical 
practice: Reality of a new tool in psychiatry. CNS Spectr  2006; 11(3 Suppl 3):1-13.  
 1739.     de Leon J, Armstrong SC, Cozza KL. Clin ical guidelines for psyc hiatrists for the use 
of pharmacogenetic testing for CYP450 2D6 and CYP450 2C19. Psychosomatics  2006; 
47(1):75-85. 10.     Rush AJ, Fava M, Wisniewski SR, Lavori PW, Trivedi MH, Sackeim HA, Thase ME, Nierenberg AA, Quitkin FM, Kashner TM . Sequenced treatment alternatives to 
relieve depression (STAR*D): rationale and design. Controlled Clinical Trials  2004; 
25(1):119-142. 11.     Hiemke C, Hartter S. Pharmacokinetics  of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. 
Pharmacology & Therapeutics  2000; 85(1):11-28. 
12.     Brosen K, Naranjo CA. Review of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interaction studies with citalopram. European Neuropsychopharmacology  2001; 
11(4):275-283. 13.     Uhr M, Grauer MT. abcb1ab P-glycoprotei n is involved in the uptake of citalopram 
and trimipramine into the brain of mice. Journal of Psych iatric Research  2003; 
37(3):179-185. 14.     Hyttel J. Comparative pharmacology of  selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs). Nord J Psychiatry  1993; 47(suppl 30):5-12. 
15.     Trivedi MH, Rush AJ, Wisniewski SR, Nierenberg AA, Warden D, Ritz L, 
Norquist G, Howland RH, Lebowitz B, McGrath PJ, Shores-Wilson K, Biggs MM, 
Balasubramani GK, Fava M, Team DS. Eval uation of outcomes with citalopram for 
depression using measurement-based care in ST AR*D: Implications for clinical practice. 
Am J Psychiatry  2006; 163(1):28-40.  
 17416.     Kraft JB, Peters EJ, Slager SL, Je nkins GD, Reinalda MS, McGrath PJ, Hamilton 
SP. Analysis of association between the sero tonin transporter and antidepressant response 
in a large clinical sample. Biol Psychiatry  2006; advanced online publication. 
17.     Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Ibrahim HM, Carmody TJ, Arnow B, Klein DN, Markowitz JC, Ninan PT, Kornstein S, Manber R. The 16-Item quick inventory of depressive 
symptomatology (QIDS), clin ician rating (QIDS-C), and self-report (QIDS-SR): a 
psychometric evaluation in patients  with chronic major depression. Biol Psychiatry  2003; 
54(5):573-583. 18.     Ross DC, Quitkin FM, Klein DF. A typological model for estimation of drug and 
placebo effects in depression. J Clin Psychopharmacol  2002; 22(4):414-418. 
19.     Quitkin FM, Rabkin JD, Markowitz JM, Stewart JW, McGrath, PJ, Harrison W. 
Use of pattern analysis to identify  true drug response. A replication. Arch Gen Psychiatry  
1987; 44(3):259-264. 
20.     McMahon FJ, Buervenich S, Charney D, Lipsky R, Rush AJ, Wilson AF, Sorant 
AJ, Papanicolaou GJ, Laje G, Fava M, Triv edi MH, Wisniewski SR, Manji H. Variation 
in the gene encoding the serotonin 2A r eceptor is associated with outcome of 
antidepressant treatment. Am J Hum Genet  2006; 78(5):804-814. 
21.     Illmer T, Schuler US, Thiede C,  Schwarz UI, Kim RB, Gotthard S, Freund D, 
Schakel U, Ehninger G, Schaich M. MDR1 gene polymorphisms affect therapy outcome 
in acute myeloid leukemia patients. Cancer Res  2002; 62(17):4955-4962. 
22.     Hoffmeyer S, Burk O, von RO, Arnold HP, Brockmoller J, Johne A, Cascorbi I, 
Gerloff T, Roots I, Eichelbaum M, Bri nkmann U. Functional polymorphisms of the 
human multidrug-resistance gene: multiple sequence variations and correlation of one  
 175allele with P-glycoprotein e xpression and activity in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  
2000; 97(7):3473-3478. 23.     Hersberger M, Marti-Jaun J, Rentsc h K, Hanseler E. Rapid detection of the 
CYP2D6*3, CYP2D6*4, and CYP2D6*6 alle les by tetra-primer  PCR and of the 
CYP2D6*5 allele by multiplex long PCR. Clin Chem  2000; 46(8 Pt 1):1072-1077. 
24.     Rodriguez-Antona C, Sayi JG, Gustafsson LL, Bertilsson L, Ingelman-Sundberg M. Phenotype-genotype variability in the human CYP3A locus as assessed by the probe 
drug quinine and analyses of  variant CYP3A4 alleles. Biochem Biophys Res Commun  
2005; 338(1):299-305. 25.     Satagopan JM, Venkatraman ES, Be gg CB. Two-stage designs for gene-disease 
association studies with sample size constraints. Biometrics  2004; 60(3):589-597. 
26.     Schaid DJ, Rowland CM, Tines DE , Jacobson RM, Poland GA. Score tests for 
association between traits and haplot ypes when linkage phase is ambiguous. Am J Hum 
Genet  2002; 70(2):425-434. 
27.     Grasmander K, Verwohlt PL, Rietschel M, Dragicevic A, Muller M, Hiemke C, 
Freymann N, Zobel A, Maier W, Rao ML. Impact of polymorphisms of cytochrome-
P450 isoenzymes 2C9, 2C19 and 2D6 on plasma concentrations and clinical effects of 
antidepressants in a natura listic clinical setting. Eur J Clin Pharmacol  2004; 60(5):329-
336. 28.     Mrazek DA. New tool: genotyping ma kes prescribing safer,  more effective. Curr 
Psych  2004; 3(9):11-23.  
 17629.     Rasmussen BB, Brosen K. Is therapeutic drug monitoring a case for optimizing 
clinical outcome and avoiding in teractions of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors? 
Ther Drug Monit  2000; 22(2):143-154. 
30.     Rudberg I, Hendset M, Uthus LH, Molden E, Refsum H. Heterozygous mutation in CYP2C19 significantly increases the concentrat ion/dose ratio of racemic citalopram and 
escitalopram (S-citalopram). Ther Drug Monit  2006; 28(1):102-105. 
31.     Yu BN, Chen GL, He N, Ouyang DS, Chen XP, Liu ZQ, Zhou HH. Pharmacokinetics of citalopram in relati on to genetic polymorphism of CYP2C19. Drug 
Metab Dispos  2003; 31(10):1255-1259. 
32.     Herrlin K, Yasui-Furukori N, Tybri ng G, Widen J, Gustafsson LL, Bertilsson L. 
Metabolism of citalopram enantiomers in  CYP2C19/CYP2D6 phenotyped panels of 
healthy Swedes. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology  2003; 56(4):415-421. 
33.     Bondolfi G, Chautems C, Rochat B, Bertschy G, Baumann P. Non-response to 
citalopram in depressive patients: pharm acokinetic and clinical consequences of a 
fluvoxamine augmentation. Psychopharmacology (Berl)  1996; 128(4):421-425. 
34.     Reis M, Lundmark J, Bengtsson F. Therapeutic drug monitoring of racemic 
citalopram: a 5-year experience in Sweden, 1992-1997. Ther Drug Monit  2003; 
25(2):183-191. 35.     Tang H, Quertermous T, Rodriguez B, Kardia SL, Zhu X, Brown A, Pankow JS, Province MA, Hunt SC, Boerwinkle E, Schork NJ, Risch NJ. Genetic structure, self-
identified race/ethnicity, and confounding in case-control association studies. Am J Hum 
Genet  2005; 76(2):268-275.  
 17736.     Tate SK, Depondt C, Sisodiya SM, Ca valleri GL, Schorge S, Soranzo N, Thom M, 
Sen A, Shorvon SD, Sander JW, Wood NW, Go ldstein DB. Genetic predictors of the 
maximum doses patients receive during clin ical use of the anti-epileptic drugs 
carbamazepine and phenytoin. PNAS  2005; 102(15):5507-5512. 
   
 178CHAPTER 6 
WHOLE GENOME ASSOCIATION STUDY OF CITALOPRAM REMISSION AND 
TOLERANCE 
 
6.1  Introduction 
 While candidate gene study designs are of ten utilized in the investigation of 
complex diseases, having a prioi  knowledge of the causative (or even likely causative) 
candidate genes is often difficult for most  phenotypes.  Indeed, identification of new 
genes is often the driving force behind comp lex disease studies.  Gene-agnostic genome-
wide linkage studies have been performed for years, but as discussed in Chapter 1, 
logistical difficulties arise from collecting families for pharmacogenetic studies.  Recent advances in SNP genotyping tec hnology and reduction in cost s have made whole genome 
association (WGA) studi es feasible (1).  The first re ports of WGA studies are just 
beginning to appear in the literature and there have been  some great success such as the 
CFH gene and macular degeneration (2), how ever, complexities and questions remain 
regarding the optimal analysis of WGA data (3 ).  The obvious strength of being able to 
assay most of the genes in the human genome is tempered by concerns about multiple testing penalties, population stratification, and the apparent non-replication of many 
smaller candidate gene association studies (4).  There is still much debate over the most powerful method for detecting in teracting loci (SNP x SNP), which will be critical for 
successful mapping in a common-disease co mmon-variant framework, where individual 
variants will not display great increases in risk of having the phenotype.  Despite these 
methodological considerations, large WGA studies are curren tly underway such as the  
 179Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC), which will genotype over 16,000 
subjects with various common diseases as we ll as 3,000 control samples, and the Genetic 
Association Information Network (GAIN).  Bo th of these projects are consortium-based 
and have pledged to make their raw genotype and clinical data publicly available shortly 
after it is generated, allowing ot her investigators to apply differ ent analytical strategies.   
We embarked on a large WGA study usi ng a subset of the STAR*D patient 
population for which DNA samples were collected, which consists of over 1,900 depressed subjects taking the SSR I citalopram.  In order to limit Type I erro r and reduce 
overall genotyping costs, we used a two-stage study design (5).  In the first stage, we 
genotyped approximately half of the sample (discovery set, N=967) for 591,158 SNPs distributed across the human genome.  The most highly associated SNPs were then 
genotyped in the second half of the sample (validation set, N=985) to assess if they 
would replicate the initial association.   
 Here we report the initial analysis of the WGA data, including descriptions of the 
genotype data manipulation and quality contro l checks.  Single locus SNP association 
results are reported for the remission and into lerance phenotypes in the self-identified 
Caucasian, non-Hispanic subjects, which is the largest racial subgroup.  In addition to 
single locus testing, we also report on the development and testing of multi-SNP clinical 
decision trees.  While none of  the putative associations inve stigated in the second stage 
replicated their strong in itial associations, as discussed be low, this is a very preliminary 
analysis involving the “lowest hanging fruit” and as such, broader, more comprehensive 
genotyping in the validation sample set needs to be performed.  The results of those 
experiments will be reported in the future elsewhere.   
 1806.2  Methods 
6.2.1  STAR*D study population.  The study population consiste d of the subjects who 
consented to give DNA from the STAR*D antid epressant trial, as reviewed elsewhere 
(see Chapter 5).  Within each ethnic group, a nd gender, we randomly split our subjects a 
priori  into a discovery and validation sample se t (Table 6.1).  The entire discovery set 
was genotyped using the WGA platforms.  Due to heterogeneity within our self-identified 
“White” subjects, as uncovered via the structure  analysis described below, all analyses 
were split into three racial  subgroups: White, non-Hispanic; White, Hispanic; and African 
American.  Other self-reported r ace classes were not analyzed.  
6.2.2  Discovery set genotyping.  A total of four high density SNP panels were used to 
genotype the discovery set.  The Affy metrix 500K array (6) was used (N=500,568 
successful SNPs), and genotypes were scored  using Affymetrix’s BRLMM algorithm (7).  
In addition, ParAllele’s molecu lar inversion probe (MiP) t echnology (8) was utilized to 
genotype a panel of coding region SNPs (c SNPs, N=19,986), a panel of gene-centric 
SNPs (N=20,127), and a “linker” panel designed to fill in the regions with low coverage 
on the 500K array (N=50,477).  In total, we rece ived successful genotype calls for a total 
of 591,158 SNPs.   6.2.3  Validation set genotyping.  SNPs that were significantly associated in the 
discovery set with c italopram remission or intoleran ce in the largest racial subgroup 
(Non-Hispanic White) were genotyped in the validation set using 5’ exonuclease 
(Taqman) assays.  A total of 14 SNPs were genotyped in the validati on set (Table 6.2), in 
an attempt to validate single locus associati ons and SNP interaction decision trees.  We   
 Non-Hispanic White Hispanic White African American N on-Hispanic White Hispanic White African American
Remitter 336 49 61 263 39 42
Non-Responder 238 61 73 186 33 55
Unclassified 62 13 16 194 52 66
Tolerant 506 91 104 427 60 78
Intolerant 52 7 9 101 26 14
Unclassified 78 25 37 115 38 71Discovery Set Validation Set
 
Table 6.1.  Sample sizes for the discovery and validation sample sets.  Shown are th e number of subjects with each phenotype 
classification for the remission vs. non-respond er (top) comparison, and the tolerant vs . intolerant (bottom) comparison.  Subj ects are 
divided into discovery and validation sets, and further subdivided by self reported race .  Unclassified refers to subjects who did not 
meet our classification criteria.  For th e remission phenotype, generally these subjec ts were not in the study long enough (<4 weeks) to 
make accurate determination of their respons e to citalopram.  For the intolerance phen otype, the unclassified subjects did not meet the 
STAR*D algorithm for intolerance or tolerance and were classified as probably intolera nt and probably tolerant; these subjects were 
not used in our analyses.    
    
181  
 182also re-genotyped the discovery set for these SNPs using the Taqman assays in order to 
assess the quality of the initial WGA genotypi ng.  For a description of the laboratory 
methods used for the Taqman assays, see section 4.2.7. 6.2.4  WGA data manipulation and quality control.  Raw genotype data files were 
output to us by Affymetrix in long (samples as columns in the database) form and were 
converted to wide (SNPs as columns) form in order to perform data analysis.  This 
transposition was accomplished using a custom Perl script kindly provided by Jason Peters (“transpose_rows_columns_NSP_STY.pl”).  We removed six samples from the datase t due to low sample call rates (<85%), 
leaving 633 White non-Hispanic, 121 White Hispanic, and 149 African American 
samples in the final discovery dataset.  Of the 591,158 SNPs that were successfully 
genotyped, we removed: 282 SNPs which ha d no chromosomal annotation in dbSNP, 
1,129 SNPs that had a call rate less that 85% across the entire discovery set, 1,589 SNPs 
that were monomorphic across the entire discovery set, and 5,935 SNPs that were 
duplicated across panels.  The remaining SN Ps (N=582,223) were used in the analyses 
described below.  In order to be tested fo r association to citalopram response phenotypes, 
SNPs were required to conform to Hardy-Wei nberg equilibrium (HWE).  SNPs with a  
significant departure from HWE (p<0.00001) were  excluded from association analysis.  
SNPs were tested for departure from HW E within each racial subgroup.  Using this 
threshold, 11,529 SNPs were dropped from analysis in the White, non-Hispanic 
subgroup.  This threshold is conservative, give n that our Bonferroni corrected p-value for 
582,223 tests at a study-wide alpha of 0.05 would be p<8.6x10
-8.   
SNP data quality control and descriptive statistics were gene rated using custom  
 183Phenotype  Analysis dbSNP ID ABI Taqman ID Gene Chr. Chr. position
Remission  single locus rs4246510 C___3147092_10 - 1 38886987
Remission  single locus rs6660134 C__30419851_10 - 1 38885739
Remission  single locus rs10183914 C____157561_10 NFE2L2 2 177923173
Remission  single locus / interaction rs12033075 C__31226656_10 - 1 53609538
Remission  interaction rs2514276 C___1747463_10 - 11 90945600
Remission  interaction rs4821197 C___2520477_10 - 22 32649854
Tolerance  single locus rs16900795 C__32750710_10 CDH6 5 31297645
Tolerance  single locus rs828360 C___8945981_10 HTR1E 6 87705285
Tolerance  single locus rs6489035 C__29408252_10 - 12 124928948
Tolerance  single locus rs7145321 C___1815889_10 - 14 65507316
Tolerance  single locus rs136784 1 C___205033 6_10 CPEB1 15 81107680
Tolerance  interaction rs4512110 C__28976342_10 COL4A3BP 5 74791977
Tolerance  interaction rs2648849 C__16055367_10 - 8 129251833
Tolerance  interaction rs17600619 C__33544364_10 - 13 58057924  
Table 6.2.  Follow-up SNPs genotyped in the validation sample set.  Four single locus 
associations were tested for the remission phe notype comparison, five were tested for the 
intolerance phenotype comparison.  Three SN Ps in each phenotype comparison were 
tested in the interaction analysis.  Shown are the dbSNP IDs for the 14 SNPs, as well as 
the ABI Taqman assay ID.  Chromosome, ch romosome position, and gene annotation (if 
applicable) are from NCBI build 35.  
             
 184do-files (“WGA_QC.do”, “MAF_Analysis .do”, “WGA_Spacing.do”, written by Eric 
Peters) and executed in STATA-MP version 9.   
6.2.5  LD analysis.  In order to assay the amount of  redundancy in the SNP genotype 
data, SNP binning ba sed on pairwise r2 values was performed.   Within each racial 
subgroup (White, non-Hispanic, White Hispanic , and African American), pairwise r2 for 
each SNP with all other SNPs within a 1 me gabase sliding window was calculated.  This 
process was repeated for all the SNPs in th e WGA panel.  Data was then complied, any 
redundancy was removed, and the numb er of proxy SNPs at several r2 thresholds was 
calculated.  This was performed using custom do-files (“LD_R2_binning.do” and 
“Appending_LD_bins.do”, written by Eric Pete rs) and executed in STATA-MP version 
9. 6.2.6  Structure  analysis.  In order to assess the levels of  genetic heterogeneity in the 
sample, the MCMC method of Pritchard et  al was performed, as implemented in 
Structure version 2.0 (9).  Using the discovery sa mple set and 500 random SNPs from the 
WGA data from across the genome, the algorithm was run using 100,000 burn-ins 
followed by 1,000,000 iterations.  Several runs were performed assuming from 1 to 4 
underlying subpopulations (“K”), and results for each “K” were stable in terms of 
estimates of alpha, Fst, and proportion ances try (“Q”) for each individual, indicating the 
algorithm had not inadvertently settled at a local maximum.  However, given that the 
validation sample set was genotyped for a very limited number of markers, a 
corresponding analysis could not be performed in that group.      
6.2.7  Single locus analysis.  In this report, we focused all the association analyses on the 
largest racial subgroup, self-ide ntified non-Hispanic White subj ects.  We investigated two  
 185clinical phenotypes, c italopram remission (defined as a fi nal QIDS score of less than 6), 
and intolerance to citalopram (defined usi ng clinical exit and GRSEB data).  Both of 
these phenotypes have been de scribed in detail previously for this study population (see 
section 5.2.2).  We used a custom do-file (“single_locus_analysis.do”, written by Eric 
Peters and incorporating the genass2.ado scri pt kindly provided by Dr. Neil Shephard) to 
test each SNP in the WGA panel for associa tion to the two phenotypes within the White 
non-Hispanic subgroup in the discovery set.  Only SNPs that passed the QC filters described above were used in the associati on analysis.  Given that we do not know the 
mode of inheritance a priori , we used a genotypic model (data coded as: AA, Aa, aa), and 
Fisher’s exact test to investigate single locus associations.  Dominant (minor allele carrier 
versus non-carrier) odds ratios for ea ch SNP were also calculated.   
 The selection of our sta tistical threshold for which SNPs to genotype in the 
validation sample set was based on the capacity  to genotype these samples in the lab for 
minimal costs.  As such, we only sought to in vestigate the most highly associated SNPs.  
Our threshold was a p- value of less than 1x10
-5 using the genotypic model in the 
discovery set, which yielded a reasonable number of SNPs to follow up using singleplex 
genotyping assays.  We then required thes e follow-up SNPs to have a p<0.05 in the 
validation sample set in order to  declare study-wide significance. 
6.2.8  Interactions.  In order to test for SNP x SNP inte ractions, as well as interactions 
between SNPs and clinical c ovariates, we developed decisi on trees using the discovery 
dataset and tested them using the validation sa mple set.  Decisions trees were constructed 
for both phenotype comparisons in the Wh ite, non-Hispanic subgroup.  The entire 
genotype data of the discovery set, along w ith age, gender, marital status, depression  
 186subtype, recurrence, and severity at baseline were a ll included in the model.  The decision 
tree was built using the most parsimonious spl it at each node, defined as the division of 
the data based on a single variable’s value th at creates the two most distinct subnodes, as 
measured by the frequency of the phenotype (e .g., remission) within those subnodes.  The 
data is split in this way until no further statistically significant splits can be made.  Genotypic splits were allowed using either recessive or dominant models.  Since this is the model generation step, we only required a Bonferroni corrected  p<0.1 to declare a 
split statistically significant.   
We used the validation data set to empiri cally assess the clinical significance of 
the decision trees.  In order to utilize thes e trees, a subject is “run” through the model 
(starting at the top, and conti nuing in whichever direction thei r genotype dictates), until a 
terminal node is reached.  That subject’s pr edicted probability of having the phenotype in 
question is equal to the frequency of that phe notype in the same te rminal node using the 
discovery set data.  We rounded the subject ’s phenotype probability to a dichotomous 
variable (e.g., 1 or 0) and assessed the signi ficance of the decision trees using standard 
diagnostic test metrics.  Alternatively, logist ic regression with the actual outcome as the 
dependent variable and the subject’s phenotype  probability (from the decision tree) as the 
independent variable was used to assess the st atistical significance of the decision trees.  
Interaction analyses were performed in HelixTree and STATA-MP version 9. 
        
6.3  Results 
6.3.1  WGA data descriptions and QC.  A total of 582,223 unique SNPs passed our QC 
filters that are described in the methods secti on.  Overall, these SNPs had a very high call   
 
0 200 400 600SNPs per mb
13 5 7 9 1 1 1 3 1 5 1 7 1 9 2 1 X Y
ChromosomeSNP density
 
Figure 6.1
187  
 188Figure 6.1.  SNP marker density across the genome.  Shown is the SNP density (y-axis, in 
SNPs per megabase) versus physical position across the genome, which is shown on the 
x-axis (chromosome 1 to Y, left to right).  Large gaps seen are centromeric and telomeric 
portions of the chromosomes, where hybrid ization-based SNP assays do not work.  
Average density is shown by horizontal dashed line, approximately 190 SNPs per megabase.  
        
 
        
 189rate (mean 99.1%, standard deviation 1.7%).  There were 5,935 SNPs that were assayed 
across multiple panels.  These duplicated SNPs had a genotype concordance of 99.59% 
(21,740 discordant genotypes out of 5,254,488 possible comparisons). 
 SNPs were not uniformly distributed acr oss the entire genome.  Large gaps exist 
in centromeric and telomeric re gions of some chromosomes, as seen in Figure 6.1.  This 
is due to technical difficulties that arise from assaying those regions which are abundant 
in repetitive DNA sequences.  On average, there were approximately 190 SNPs assayed 
per megabase of sequence. Assay covera ge was markedly lower on the X and Y 
chromosomes.  On average there was a marker every 4.9 kb (median 2.3 kb), though the 
distribution of intermarker dist ances is skewed due to a smal l number of very large gaps 
(Figure 6.2).  Marker minor allele distribution varied between racial subgroups.  The white non-
Hispanics subgroup had fewer SNPs with a minor  allele frequency greater than 5% than 
the African American subgroup (447,696 and 502,194, respectively, see Figure 6.3).  
Large differences in allele frequencies for individual SNPs  were observed between the 
White non-Hispanic and African American subgroups (Figure 6.4). This highlights the 
potential for confounding due to genetic structure, which we hope to avoid by testing for 
association within self-iden tified racial subgroups.  
6.3.2  Structure  analysis.  Population stratification can lead to confounding in case-
control association studies.  We ran a Structure  analysis on the discovery sample set 
using 500 random SNPs from across the genome (Figure 6.5).  Results indicated that a 
model with three genetic subgroups (i.e., K=3)  was the best fit for the data.  Clear 
distinction was   
 1900 .1 .2 .3 .4Fraction of gaps between SNPs
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Distan ce be twee n adja cen t SNPs (kb )
 
Figure 6.2.  Hisotgram of inter-marker distances.   Shown is the distance between adjacent 
SNPs (kb) on the x-axis (in 1 kb bins), and th e proportion of gaps with  that given distance 
(y-axis).  The distri bution is skewed (average gap = 4.9 kb, median = 2.3 kb) due to a 
small number of very large gaps.    
 
 
       
 191a) 
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1Fraction of total SNPs
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
MAF in White, Non-Hispanic subjects
 
b) 
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1Fraction of  total SNPs
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
MAF in African American subjects
 
Figure 6.3.  Histogram of SNPs by minor a llele frequencies (MAF) in each racial 
subgroup.  On the x-axis is the SNP MAF (in 1% bins), with each bin’s proportion of the 
total SNPs shown on the y-axis.  a)  Resu lts for the non-Hispanic White subgroup.  Note 
the skewed distribution, with al most 10% of the SNPs having a MAF of 1% or less.  Only 
77% of the total markers had a MAF greater than 5%.  b.)  Resu lts for the African 
American subgroup.  The distribu tion is almost flat, with 86% of the total markers having 
a greater than 5% MAF.    
 192
 
Figure 6.4.  Scatterplot of SN P allele frequency by raci al subgroup.  Each of the 
discovery set genotypes is represented as a si ngle point, with Afri can American allele 
frequency on the y-axis and non-Hispanic White allele frequency on the x-axis.   
 
         
 193White, Non-Hispanic
White, Hispanic
African-AmericanWhite, Non-Hispanic
White, Hispanic
African-American
 
-562000-560000-558000-556000-554000-552000-550000-548000-546000-544000-542000
01234
No. of subpopulations (K)LnP(D)
 
Figure 6.5 
  
 194Figure 6.5.  Results of Structure analysis using 500 random SNPs  in the discovery sample 
set.  Top plot shows the percent identity (Q ) from the three historical subpopulations for 
each subject.  Subjects are ordered based on sel f-reported race, as s hown to the right of 
the Structure plot.  Also shown is a graph of the posterior probability of the model at 
various numbers of historical subpopulations (K).  As can be seen, the addition of a 4th 
subpopulation does not significantly  strengthen the model fit, thus a K=3 was used.   
 
        
 
          
 195seen between the self-reporte d African American and White samples, and the third 
genetic subpopulation correlated we ll with Hispanic ancestry.  Due to the fact that we did 
not genotype enough markers in th e validation set for a similar structure analysis, we 
used self-reported racial and ethnic status as a proxy for gene tically determined ancestry.  
Thus, all analyses presented here are w ithin these subgroups (non-Hispanic White, 
Hispanic White, African American ), unless otherwise noted.   
6.3.3  LD analysis.  Not surprisingly, given the marker density in this study, there was a 
great amount of LD between the SNPs on our WGA panels.  As expected based on 
population history, the African American subgr oup showed less LD on average than the 
non-Hispanic White subgroup (Figure 6.6).  For instance, for common SNPs (MAF>5%) within 5 kb of each other, the average pairwise r
2 was 0.4 in the non-Hispanic White 
subgroup, and 0.27 in the African American subgroup.  Average LD decayed relatively 
uniformly with distance, but as can be seen below, there were clus ters of SNPs with 
locally high levels of LD. 
 In order to get a sense of the redundan cy of the genotype data, which is an 
important consideration in de termining the number of inde pendent tests performed, we 
ran an r2 threshold binning approach on the co mmon SNPs in the WGA panels (Figure 
6.7a).  Using a sliding window  of 1mb around the target SNP, the number of proxy SNPs 
was determined using various thresholds of r2.  These analyses revealed significant 
redundancy in the SNPs genotyped.  In th e non-Hispanic White subgroup, using an r2=1 
threshold, which means the genotype of one SNP perfectly predicts the genotype of 
another SNP in all cases, over 9% of the SNPs have at least one perfect proxy.  At a reduced, but still conser vative, threshold of r
2=0.95, over 30% of the SN Ps have at least   
 19600.050.10.150.20.250.30.350.40.450.5
5 50 95 140 185 230
Inter-SNP distance (kb)pairwise r2White, Non-Hispanic
African-American
 
Figure 6.6.  Average pairwise r2 between SNPs by intermarker distance.  Distance 
between SNPs is shown on the x-axis, in  5 kb intervals. Average pairwise r2 for all SNP 
pairs with intermarker distances within that interval is shown on the y-axis.  Results for 
the non-Hispanic White subgroup are shown in  red, African American results are in 
green.  Only common SNPs (>5% MAF)  were used in this analysis. 
 
 
        
 197a)050,000100,000150,000200,000250,000300,000350,000400,000450,000500,000550,000
1.00 0.95 0.80
r2 thresholdNo. of SNPs31-100
11-30
6-10
2-5
1
0Number of proxy SNPs
 
b)-50,000100,000150,000200,000250,000300,000350,000400,000450,000500,000550,000
1.00 0.95 0.80
r2 thresholdNo. of SNPs31-100
11-30
6-10
2-5
1
0Number of proxy SNPs
 
 
Figure 6.7   
 198Figure 6.7.  Redundancy of co mmon SNPs at various r2 thresholds in each racial 
subgroup.  All common SNPs (>5% MAF) ar e shown on the y-axis.  Using a sliding 
window of 1mb around the target SNP, the number of proxy SNPs (SNPs in LD above 
the threshold) for each SNP was determined using an r2 threshold of 1, 0.95 and 0.8 (x-
axis).  a)  Results for the non-Hispanic Wh ite subgroup.  b)  Results for the African 
American subgroup.  
        
 
          
 199one very good proxy in the dataset.  In the African American subgroup, redundancy was 
still high, though less than in the non-Hispanic Whites (Figure 6.7b). 
6.3.4  Single locus association – discovery set.  We performed two phenotype 
comparisons in our non-Hispanic White subjects; remitters versus non-remitters, and citalopram intolerant versus tolerant.  The results for all the SNPs across the genome for 
the remission phenotype are shown in Figure 6.8.  While no SNP was significant using a 
Bonferroni corrected threshold (p < 8.6x10
-8), four SNPs met our threshold (p < 1x10-5) 
for follow-up in the validation sample set.   Dominant odds ratios for these SNPs, 
transformed to >1, ranged from 2 - 3.15 (Table 6.3).  None of these variants were also 
nominally (p<0.05) associated in our other tw o racial subgroups. Qu antile-Quantile (QQ) 
plots for this phenotype comparison showed  no gross inflation of the chi-squared 
statistics (Figure 6.9).  Systematic infla tion can be indicative of confounding due to 
population stratification or other factors. 
 The results for the intolerance pheno type are shown in Figure 6.10.  Again, no 
SNPs met a strict Bonferroni  corrected threshold, however five SNPs met our threshold 
for follow-up in the validation sample set, with dominant ORs, transformed to >1, 
ranging from 1.5 to 12.6 (Table 6.4).  None of the SNPs were also nominally associated 
(p<0.05) with intolerance in our other two ra cial subgroups.  QQ plot s for this phenotype 
showed an inflation of the chi-squared statis tics (Figure 6.11).  While this inflation may 
be driven by unaccounted for population st ratification in our non-Hispanic White 
subgroup, results of analyzing th e entire discovery se t, regardless of se lf-identified race, 
did not seem to increase the in flation of the chi-squared.  T hus, the initial result may be 
due to the fact that the intole rance phenotype is rare (~9% in  the discovery set) and we   
  
Figure 6.8.   
200  
 201Figure 6.8.  Single locus associa tion results in the discovery sample set for the remission 
phenotype in the non-Hispanic White subgroup.  Each point represents a single SNP.  
The negative log of the p-valu e for association is shown on the y-axis, and the variants 
are in order across the genome from chromo some 1-22 on the x-axis.  Chromosome X 
and Y are not shown, but no significant resu lts were obtained on t hose chromosomes.  
The dashed line at 1x10-7 is approximately the thres hold for Bonferroni corrected 
significance (no SNPs meet  this criteria).  The dashed line at 1x10-5 represents our 
criteria for testing the association in the validation sample set (four SNPs). 
 
      
 
          
 202dbSNP ID Remit NR p-value OR (95% CI)
rs4246510 0.39 0.53 3.9E-06 0.39 (0.26, 0.59)rs6660134 0.42 0.58 1.8E-06 0.40 (0.26, 0.60)
rs12033075 0.16 0.06 1.5E-07 3.15 (1.97, 5.14)rs10183914 0.35 0.40 6.0E-06 0.50 (0.35, 0.72)Discovery set
 
Table 6.3.  The most highly associated SNPs  for the remission phenotype in the non-
Hispanic White subgroup in the discovery set.   Shown are the minor allele frequencies in 
the remitters (“Remit”) and non-responders (“ NR”).  The p-value for association is 
shown, as well as the odds ratio (OR) a nd 95% confidence intervals.  ORs were 
calculated using a dominant model (minor  allele carrier vs. non-carrier). 
 
           
 
  
  
Figure 6.9.  Quantile-Quantile (QQ) plots of single locus associations for the remission phenotype in the non-Hispanic White 
subgroup. The quantiles for the expected chi- squared distribution are shown on the x-axis , and the quantiles for the actual chi -squared 
distribution are shown on the y-axis.  The distribution appears to follow unity (line at 45° from origin) well, indicating that  gross 
inflation of the chi-squared (due to strati fication or other reasons) is not present.  The four follow up SNPs are seen at the very right-
most portion of the plot.  While these are a bove the unity line, the major ity of the data is consiste nt with what one would exp ect by 
chance. 
203  
  
Figure 6.10.   
204  
 205Figure 6.10.  Single locus association result s in the discovery sample set for the 
intolerance phenotype in the non-Hispanic White subgroup.  Each point represents a 
single SNP.  The negative log of the p-value for association is s hown on the y-axis, and 
the variants are in order across the genom e from chromosome 1-22 on the x-axis.  
Chromosomes X and Y are not shown, but no si gnificant results were obtained on those 
chromosomes.  The dashed line at 1x10-7 is approximately the threshold for Bonferroni 
corrected significance (no SNPs meet this  criteria).  The dashed line at 1x10-5 represents 
our criteria for testing the association in  the validation sample set (five SNPs). 
 
      
 
          
 206dbSNP ID Intolerant Tolerant p-value OR (95% CI)
rs16900795 0.16 0.04 6.30E-06 0.17 (0.08, 0.37)
rs828360 0.02 0.18 6.92E-06 12.69 (3.26, 108.64)
rs6489035 0.28 0.53 5.18E-06 3.61 (1.93, 6.75)
rs7145321 0.37 0.22 5.67E-06 0.66 (0.36, 1.22)rs1367841 0.56 0.33 3.11E-06 0.16 (0.06, 0.39)Discovery set
 
Table 6.4.  The most highly associated SNPs  for the intolerance phenotype in the non-
Hispanic White subgroup in the discovery set.   Shown are the minor allele frequencies in 
the citalopram tolerant and intolerant subjec ts.  The p-value for association is shown, as 
well as the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confiden ce intervals.  ORs were calculated using a 
dominant model (minor allele carrier vs. non-carrier).    
 
               
 
 
Figure 6.11.  Quantile-Quantile (QQ) plots of single locus associ ations for the intolerance phenotype in the non-Hispanic White  
subgroup.  The quantiles for the expected ch i-squared distribution are shown on the x-ax is, and the quantiles for the actual ch i-squared 
distribution are shown on the y-axis.  The distribution does not follow unity (line at 45° from origin) well, indicating that g ross 
inflation of the chi-squared (due to stra tification or other reasons) is  present.  The reason for this is unknown, but may be d ue to the 
rareness of the intolerance phenotype (and se veral SNPs) and thus the inappropriateness of comparing our results to the standar d chi-
squared distribution.  The five follow-up SNPs are s een at the very right-most portion of the plot.  
207  
 208have several rare SNPs in the panels, thus  comparing our results to the standard chi-
squared distribution may not be appropriate assumption.  
6.3.5  Single locus association – validation set.  In order to verify the genotype data we 
received from our Affymetrix panels wa s accurate through use of an alterative 
genotyping method (e.g., Taqman), we genotype d the discovery set as well as the 
validation set in the second phase of the study.  For the remission phenotype, genotype 
data for three of the four SNPs had high c oncordance with the Affy metrix genotype calls 
(99.9%).  For one SNP (rs4246510), 31 subj ects with homozygous genotypes in the 
Affymetrix data had heterozygous genotype s using the Taqman assay, which appear 
unambiguous (Figure 6.12).  Furthermore, by ad justing the Affymetrix genotype calls in 
this way SNP rs4246510 has near perfect LD with SNP rs6660134, which is less than 2 kb away.  Indeed these two SN Ps are in perfect LD (e.g., r
2=1) in HapMap data from 
Caucasian individuals.  None of these four SNPs yielded a significant association to 
remission in the validation sample (p<0.05), using the same genotypic model and data 
coding format as in the discove ry set analysis (Table 6.5). 
 The genotype concordance between the Affymetrix and Taqman calls was high 
(99.8%) for all of the SNPs that were se lected for follow-up using the citalopram 
intolerance phenotype.  Interestingly, one SN P (rs6489035) showed four distinct clusters 
on the Taqman raw data plot as opposed to the expected three cl usters (Figure 6.13).  
Subjects that were in the intermediate cluste r were scored as missing in our Taqman data 
for the validation sample set, while they were  generally scored as heterozygotes in the 
Affymetrix data.  The intermediate fourth  cluster accounted for approximately 6% of 
subjects.  Distinct extra clusters can be cau sed by repeated DNA segments or variation in   
 209rs4246510 Taqman results
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
0 . 00 . 51 . 01 . 52 . 02 . 53 . 0VIC intensityFAM intensity
 
Figure 6.12.  Taqman results for SNP rs4246510 across the entire STAR*D sample set. 
VIC and FAM label intensities are on the x-  and y-axis, respectively.  Results appear 
unambiguous, though 31 samples, called via Taqman as heterozygotes, were called 
homzygotes (FAM) in the Affymetrix data.   
 
 
 
       
 210dbSNP ID Remit NR p-value OR (95% CI)
rs4246510 0.44 0.49 0.42 0.77 (0.49, 1.19)rs6660134 0.45 0.50 0.32 0.74 (0.47, 1.15)
rs12033075 0.12 0.14 0.57 0.85 (0.53, 1.36)
rs10183914 0.34 0.36 0.81 0.98 (0.65, 1.46)
dbSNP ID Remit NR p-value OR (95% CI)
rs4246510 0.41 0.51 2.4E-05 0.53 (0.39, 0.71)rs6660134 0.42 0.52 3.9E-05 0.54 (0.40, 0.72)
rs12033075 0.14 0.09 0.004 1.68 (1.22, 2.32)rs10183914 0.35 0.38 0.002 0.68 (0.52, 0.89)OverallValidation set
 
 
Table 6.5.  Single locus associ ation results for the remissi on phenotype follow-up SNPs 
in the validation sample set.   Shown at th e top are the results for the validation sample 
set, and below it are the results for the overall sample (joint analysis).  Shown are the minor allele frequencies in the remitters (“Remit”) and non-responders (“NR”).  The p-
value for association is shown, as well as  the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence 
intervals.  ORs were calculated using a dom inant model (minor allele carrier vs. non-
carrier).  None of these SNPs were signifi cantly associated (p< 0.05) in the validation 
sample set.  
 
      
 211rs6489035 Taqman results
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
VIC intensityFAM intensity
 
Figure 6.13.  Taqman results for SNP rs6489035 acr oss the entire STAR*D sample set.  
VIC and FAM label intensities are on the x- and y-axis, respectively.  Clearly visible is 
an intermediate fourth cluster, which we c oded as “missing” in our Taqman data but was 
scored as heterozygous in the Affymetrix da ta.  The reason for this fourth cluster is 
unknown, though it could be caused by structural va riation or mis-priming of the probe to 
related sequence.     
 
       
 212DNA copy number.  None of these five SNPs showed significant a ssociation (p<0.05) to 
intolerance in the validation sample set us ing the same analytic methods as in the 
discovery set analysis (Table 6.6).  A single SNP (rs7145321), had a trend (p<0.06) 
towards significance in the validation sample set and the effect had the same directionality as the one obser ved in the discovery set.  
6.3.6  Interaction analysis – discovery set.   Multi-node decision trees were generated 
for each phenotypic comparison, as described in detail in section 6.2.8.  Briefly, the discovery population is “split” based on the most parsimonious SNP (i.e., the SNP that 
produces the most differentiated sub-nodes).  This process is repeated until no more 
significant splits can be made.  The re mission phenotype comparison yielded a tree 
incorporating three SNPs (Figure 6.14).  One of these SNPs, rs12033075, was also 
significantly associated in the discovery set in  our single locus testing above.  This final 
tree predicted the remission status correctly for 395 out of 571 subj ects (69%) in the 
discovery (“training”) data set (Table 6.7).  The decisi on tree for the intolerance 
phenotype included three SNPs (Figure 6.15).  This tree was able to correctly predict 
intolerance status in 514 out of 555 (92%) subjec ts in the discovery set (Table 6.8).     
6.3.7  Interaction analysis – validation set.   Concordance between Affymetrix and 
Taqman genotype calls was high (99.8%) for the six SNPs used in the remission and 
intolerance decision tree.  For the remission phenotype comparison, using the validation 
sample set genotype data and the predicted pr obabilities of the term inal nodes from the 
training set, the decision tr ee correctly predicted only 227 out of 441 (52%) subject’s 
remission status (Table 6.7).  The results  were similarly non-significant for the 
intolerance decision tree, w ith only 415 out of 522 (80%) of the validation sample   
 213dbSNP ID Intolerant Tolerant p-value OR (95% CI)
rs16900795 0.06 0.04 0.27 0.70 (0.33, 1.60)
rs828360 0.16 0.15 0.75 0.97 (0.59, 1.65)
rs6489035 0.55 0.47 0.15 0.72 (0.40, 1.25)
rs7145321 0.26 0.21 0.06 0.88 (0.55, 1.40)
rs1367841 0.34 0.37 0.11 1.43 (0.90, 2.27)
dbSNP ID Intolerant Tolerant p-value OR (95% CI)
rs16900795 0.09 0.04 0.0009 0.39 (0.23, 0.66)
rs828360 0.11 0.17 0.01 1.79 (1.16, 2.84)
rs6489035 0.45 0.50 0.22 1.40 (0.94, 2.08)rs7145321 0.30 0.21 2.03E -06 0.78 (0.54, 1.13)
rs1367841 0.41 0.35 0.09 0.77 (0.53, 1.11)OverallValidation set
 
Table 6.6.  Single locus associ ation results for the intole rance phenotype follow-up SNPs 
in the validation sample set.  At the top are the results for the validation sample set, and below it are the results for the overall sample (j oint analysis).  Shown are the minor allele 
frequencies in citalopram tolerant and intolera nt subjects.  The p-value for association is 
shown, as well as the odds ratio (OR) a nd 95% confidence intervals.  ORs were 
calculated using a dominant model (minor allele  carrier vs. non-carrie r).  None of these 
SNPs were significantly associ ated (p<0.05) in the validatio n sample set, though a single 
SNP (rs7145321) was close, with a p=0.06 in the validation set. 
   
       
 214
rs12033075 rs12033075
rs4821197 rs4821197
rs2514276 rs2514276
rs12033075 rs12033075
rs4821197 rs4821197
rs2514276 rs2514276
 
Figure 6.14.  Decision tree for the remissi on phenotype in the non-Hispanic White 
discovery sample set.  The node at the top of this tree contains all the subjects (“n”), the 
percentage in that node that are remitters (“ u”), and the unadjusted p-value for the first 
split of the sample.  The first split (rs12033075) divides the sample into those carrying 
the “B_B” genotype and those that do not.  Pa rtitioning of the sample  continues with two 
additional SNPs.   
  
 215Actual Remit NR
Remit 269 65
NR 111 126
Sensitivity: 80.5%Specificity: 53.2%Positive predictive value: 70.8%
Negative predictive value: 66.0%
Correctly predicts 395 / 571 (69.2%)
Actual Remit NR
Remit 164 96
NR 118 63
Sensitivity: 63.1%
Specificity: 34.8%Positive predictive value: 58.2%Negative predictive value: 39.6%
Correctly predicts 227 / 441 (51.5%)Discovery set
Validation setTree prediciton
Tree prediciton
 
 
Table 6.7.  Decision tree predictions for th e remission phenotype in the discovery and 
validation sample sets.  Shown at top are th e predictions of the decision tree and the 
actual phenotype in the discove ry sample set (Remit – remitters, NR – non-responders).  
The bottom table shows the predictions and actual phenotypes in the validation sample 
set.  Sensitivity (percent of remitters predicte d to be remitters), specificity (percent of 
non-responders predicted to be non-responders), positive predictive value (percent of predicted remitters that are actual remitters ), and negative predictive value (percent of 
predicted non-responders that are actual  non-responders) are also displayed.   
 
    
 216
rs4512110 rs4512110
rs2648849 rs2648849
rs17600619 rs17600619
rs4512110 rs4512110
rs2648849 rs2648849
rs17600619 rs17600619
 
 
Figure 6.15.  Decision tree for the intolera nce phenotype in the non-Hispanic White 
discovery sample set.  The node at the top of this tree contains all the subjects (“n”), the 
percentage in that node that are tolerant to  citalopram (“u”), and the unadjusted p-value 
for the first split of the sample.  The first split (rs4512110) divides the sample into those 
carrying the “A_A” genotype and those that do no t.  Partitioning of the sample continues 
with two additional SNPs.    
 217Actual Intolerant Tolerant
Intolerant 11 41
Tolerant 0 503
Sensitivity: 21.2%Specificity: 100%Positive predictive value: 100%
Negative predictive value: 92.5%
Correctly predicts 514 out of 555 (92.6%)
Actual Intolerant Tolerant
Intolerant 2 97
Tolerant 10 413
Sensitivity: 2.0%
Specificity: 97.6%Positive predictive value: 16.7%Negative predictive value: 81.0%
Correctly predicts 415 out of 522 (79.5%)Tree prediciton
Tree predicitonDiscovery set
Validation set
 
Table 6.8.  Decision tree predictions for the intolerance phenotype in the discovery and 
validation sample sets.  Shown at top are th e predictions of the decision tree and the 
actual phenotype in the discove ry sample set.  The bottom table shows the predictions 
and actual phenotypes in the validation sample set.  Sensitivity (percent of intolerant 
predicted to be intolerant), specificity (percent of tolerant predicted to be tolerant), positive predictive value (percent of predicted in tolerant that are actually intolerant), and 
negative predictive value (percent of predicted tolerant that are actually tolerant) are also displayed.    
 
    
 218subject’s intolerance status predicted correctly (Table 6.8) .  Thus, the decision trees 
constructed were not prognostic for either remi ssion or intolerance, and likely over-fit the 
data in the discovery set.  Furthermore,  neither decision tree  yielded quantitative 
predictions that were significantly associ ated (p<0.05) with the true dichotomous 
phenotype status via logistic re gression (results not shown).   
  
6.4  Discussion 
 Association studies involving this density  of markers present unique analytical 
and computational challenges.  In our st udy, we pursued a limited number (N=9) of 
single locus associations in our  validation sample set, none of which replicated (p<0.05) 
the initial association for either pheno type comparison.  One SNP, rs7145321, trended 
towards significance (p<0.06) in  the validation sample set fo r the intolera nce phenotype, 
in the same directionality of association as s een in the discovery sample set.  While it did 
not meet our criteria for study- wide significance, this variant (which is greater than 200 
kb from any known gene) deserves follow-up testing in other study populations taking SSRIs.  It has been argued that a joint anal ysis of the combined discovery and validation 
sample sets is more powerful than the two- stage replication strategy (10).  However, 
given the low number of SNPs that we chose to  replicate here, it is unclear what the most 
statistically powerful strategy is.  We chos e a replication based strategy as we were 
chiefly interested in the ability of the putat ively associated SNPs to consistently show 
association in different populat ions.  In order for these SNPs  to be used in clinical 
decision making, replication in different popul ations is essential – non-replication of 
putative associations is a sobering realit y that is common with complex genetic  
 219phenotypes.  In addition to our  single locus testing, we al so genotyped five additional 
SNPs in the validation sample set in an a ttempt to replicate mu lti-SNP decision trees 
constructed for each phenotype using the discov ery dataset.  These decision trees did not 
have useful predictive power in the validation sample set.   
Given that we had an adequate sample size to replicate the initial associations in 
the validation set, the reason for the lack of  replication is unclear , though there could be 
several underlying causes.  In order to limit Type I error in  the screening stage and to 
limit the amount of replication SNPs to be ge notyped in-house with singleplex assays, we 
only attempted to replicate SNPs that were  associated above a conservative p-value 
threshold (p<1x10-5).  However, none of the associati ons in either phenotype comparison 
would survive a Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons, so there is a reasonable risk that these are false-positive signals in the discovery dataset.  Unfortunately, it’s unclear how many independent tests were perf ormed and thus require adjustment, given 
the high levels of LD seen in the data.  P opulation stratification c ould also be underlying 
the lack of replication.  We attempted to control for population stra tification using self-
reported race, including Hispan ic ancestry, as a proxy for gene tic ancestry.  This strategy 
was guided by a Structure  analysis using 500 SNPs in the discovery population dataset.  
Ideally, we would be able to cluster the subjects for analysis based solely on their 
estimated proportion of ancestr y, using the results from Structure or similar methods.  
We were unable to use this approach due to  lack of high density  SNP genotyping in the 
validation sample set.  Intere stingly, 8 out of 14 SNPs genot yped in the validation sample 
set had genotype distributi ons that significantly differed (p>0.05) between the non-
Hispanic White and Hispanic White subgroups, and 12 out of the 14 SNPs had  
 220significantly different distri butions between the non-Hi spanic White and African 
American subgroups.  While a large fraction of  SNPs in the genome display differences 
in allele frequencies across ra cial subpopulations, this does reinforce the possibility of 
confounding due to stratification.  The non-re plication could also be due to unknown 
heterogeneity between the discovery and valid ation sample sets.  This heterogeneity 
could be a clinical characteristic (e.g., depression subtype) or epistatic DNA variation 
that was not controlled for in the sample spli tting, but that nonetheless alters the strength 
of the association.  Genotype quality in the discovery set could also  be a concern.  We 
found two SNPs (rs4246510 and rs 6489035) out of the 14 that we assayed using Taqman 
had genotype differences between Affymetrix’s  call and our Taqman data, with the other 
12 SNPs having almost perfect concordance.  Given the large amount of data to be 
scored, perfectly accurate genotyping cannot be expected in every case, and indeed, 
follow-up genotyping of the entire set using a lternative methods will guard against false 
positive associations due to genotyping artifacts. However, false negative associations in 
the discovery set due to genotyping error will be harder to detect and perhaps more 
costly.  Extending or alteri ng the BRLMM algorithm, which is designed to give the 
highest call rates the data allows, to focus on call quality (and structural DNA variants, 
see below) will be useful and is under development (11).    As mentioned previously, this study wa s designed to inves tigate only the most 
“low hanging fruit”, and was not intended to be a comprehensive follow-up of the 
discovery sample set results.  Ce rtainly, additional genetic models need to be tested in the 
discovery set (dominant, recessive, etc.).  Also, a larger proporti on of follow-up SNPs 
will need to be genotyped.  This scale of  genotyping would be best performed using  
 221highly multiplexed assays such as the Mi P assay.  Given the two-stage study design, 
multiple correction penalties for the follow-up of  SNPs will be far less than the correction 
for the entire WGA panels, allowing for more liberal selection criteria.  The statistical sacrifice with the two-stage design is of c ourse a reduction in power.  However, even 
with a split sample, we can capture (and replicat e) clinically meaningf ul effect sizes with 
reasonable power.  An FDR based approach may be worthwhile given that the actual 
causative SNPs may not be the most highly a ssociated SNPs.  Inte restingly, applying an 
FDR approach to the data presented here reveals that only a single SNP (rs6489035) in 
the intolerance phenotyp e has a reasonable chance (q<0.10) of not being a false positive 
signal.  However, this SNP did not replicate the association in the validation sample set, 
and in fact the directionality of the asso ciation changed between the two sample sets. 
Permutation techniques could al so be used, but due to current computational limits, “stop 
points” for the analysis would have to  be specified, though newer techniques can 
approximate permutation results more quickly  (12).  Alternativel y, follow-up SNPs could 
also be selected using an effect-size (OR) threshold, instead of one based on an α 
threshold.  This approach may be of particular utility in pharmacogenetic studies, where 
the eventual goal is to develop genetic tests for use in clinical  treatment.  Fine mapping of 
SNPs in the validation set for regions surr ounding the putatively associated SNPs would 
also be beneficial, since di fferences in LD patterns acro ss the discovery and validation 
sample sets could complicate indirect associat ion analysis.  Indirect  association analysis 
could also possibly be improved through use of haplotype testing, with the hope of 
“tagging” untyped SNPs through use of multimarker haplotypes (13).  However, the statistical penalties for multiple testing and the computational burden may limit the utility  
 222of haplotype analysis in WG A studies.  Bayesian techniqu es, incorporating other SNP 
information (known functional change, cons erved genomic region, expression changes, 
etc.) as weights in determining the ranking of follow-up SNPs could also be used (14).  In 
addition to SNP data, the panels used to  genotype the discovery sample set yield 
quantitative hybridization data  that can in theory be used to score copy number 
variations, or CNVs (15).  Identifying a nd testing these CNVs for association to 
citalopram response would be worthwhile, t hough the techniques for performing this are 
still being developed.    For complex genetic diseases, the co mmon disease common variant hypothesis 
states that several DNA variants will, in comb ination, contribute a clinically meaningful 
risk of having the phenotype.  Techniques for uncovering interacting loci are poorly 
developed, largely due to the computational and statistical burden of the number of tests 
that can be performed.  For instance, perfor ming all pairwise comparisons (SNP x SNP) 
with our WGA panels would require 1.7 x 10
11 statistical tests.  With this many tests 
needing correction, sample sizes like the one us ed in this study have  power only to detect 
implausibly large interaction e ffects (16).  The correction pena lties for three and four way 
SNP interactions are even larger.  Additiona lly, as higher level interaction testing is 
performed, the number of subjects with the causative allelic combination is reduced, 
further decreasing statistical power.  Thus, for powerful interaction analysis, extremely 
large clinical populations will need  to be collected.  Here, we used decision trees as a way 
to test for interactions in a step-wise manner in order to avoid having to perform all pair-
wise comparisons.  Decision trees also have th e added benefit of bei ng easily interpreted.  
However, given the large number of possible trees, decision trees and related modeling  
 223methods have a tendency to over-fit the training set data.  This is likely why our decision 
trees were not predictive in the validati on sample set.  Thus, replication of SNP 
interactions in different populati ons will be essential in association studies, as well as the 
development of powerful interaction testing strategies utilized on real data (17-19). 
 In summary, here we have presented th e preliminary results of a two stage whole 
genome association study for citalopram re mission and intolerance using the STAR*D 
clinical population.  While none of the single locus associations (N=9 ) or SNP interaction 
decision trees in our discovery sample set me t our strict replication criteria in the 
validation sample set, further genotyping a nd analysis is required to comprehensively 
follow-up the discovery set results.  Given the lack of understanding of citalopram’s 
mechanism of action, gene-agnostic studies such  as these may be required to find genetic 
markers that are informative of remission or intolerance, if they exist.    
    
           
 2246.5  References   
1.     Syvanen AC. Toward genome-wide SNP genotyping. Nat Genet  2005. 
2.     Klein RJ, Zeiss C, Chew EY, Ts ai JY, Sackler RS, Haynes C, Henning AK, 
SanGiovanni JP, Mane SM, Mayne ST, Bracken MB, Ferris FL, Ott J, Barnstable C, Hoh 
J. Complement Factor H polymorphism in age-related macular degeneration. Science  
2005; 308(5720):385-9. 3.     Lawrence RW, Evans DM, Cardon LR. Prospects and pitfalls in whole genome association studies. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci  2005; 360(1460):1589-1595. 
4.     Tabor HK, Risch NJ, Myers RM. Opin ion: Candidate-gene approaches for studying 
complex genetic traits: practical considerations. Nat Rev Genet  2002; 3(5):391-397. 
5.     Wang H, Thomas DC, Pe'er I, Stra m DO. Optimal two-stage genotyping designs for 
genome-wide association scans. Genet Epidemiol  2006; 30(4):356-368. 
6.     Kennedy GC, Matsuzaki H, Dong S, Liu WM, Huang J, Liu G, Su X, Cao M, Chen 
W, Zhang J, Liu W, Yang G, Di X, Ryder T,  He Z, Surti U, Phillips MS, Boyce-Jacino 
MT, Fodor SP, Jones KW. Large-scale genotyping of complex DNA. Nat Biotech  2003; 
21(10):1233-1237. 7.     Rabbee N, Speed TP. A genotype calling algorithm for affymetrix SNP arrays. Bioinformatics  2006; 22(1):7-12. 
8.     Hardenbol P, Baner J, Jain M, Nilsson M, Namsaraev EA, Karlin-Neumann GA, 
Fakhrai-Rad H, Ronaghi M, Willis TD, Landegren U, Davis RW. Multiplexed genotyping with sequence-tagged molecular inversion probes. Nat Biotechnol  2003; 
21(6):673-678.  
 2259.     Falush D, Stephens M, Pritchard  JK. Inference of population structure using 
multilocus genotype data: linked loci and correlated allele frequencies. Genetics  2003; 
164(4):1567-1587. 10.     Skol AD, Scott LJ, Abecasis GR, Boehnk e M. Joint analysis is more efficient than 
replication-based analysis for two-st age genome-wide association studies. Nat Genet  
2006; 38(2):209-213. 11.     Hua J, Craig DW, Brun M, Webste r J, Zismann V, Tembe W, Joshipura K, 
Huentelman MJ, Dougherty ER, Stephan DA. SNiPer-HD: improved genotype calling accuracy by an expectation-maximization algorithm for high-density SNP arrays. 
Bioinformatics  2007; 23(1):57-63. 
12.     Seaman SR, Muller-Myhsok B. Rapid simulation of p-values for product methods 
and multiple-testing adjustment in association studies. Am J Hum Genet  2005; 76(3):399-
408. 
13.     Pe'er I, de Bakker PIW, Maller J, Ye lensky R, Altshuler D, Daly MJ. Evaluating 
and improving power in whole-genome associ ation studies using fixed marker sets. Nat 
Genet  2006; 38(6):663-667. 
14.     Hoti F, Sillanpaa MJ. Bayesian mapping of genotype x expression interactions in quantitative and qualitative traits. Heredity  2006; 97(1):4-18. 
15.     Komura D, Shen F, Ishikawa S, F itch KR, Chen W, Zhang J, Liu G, Ihara S, 
Nakamura H, Hurles ME, Lee C, Scherer SW, Jones KW, Shapero MH, Huang J, Aburatani H. Genome-wide detection of human copy number variations using high-
density DNA oligonucleotide arrays. Genome Res  2006; 16(12):1575-1584.  
 22616.     Evans DM, Marchini J, Morris AP, Cardon LR. Two-stage two-locus models in 
genome-wide association. PLoS Genet  2006; 2(9):e157. 
17.     Marchini J, Donnelly P, Cardon LR. Genome-wide strategies for detecting multiple 
loci that influence complex diseases. Nat Genet  2005; 37(4):413-417. 
18.     Kooperberg C, Bis JC, Marciante KD,  Heckbert SR, Lumley T, Psaty BM. Logic 
regression for analysis of the associati on between genetic vari ation in the renin-
angiotensin system and myocar dial infarction or stroke. Am J Epidemiol  2006. 
19.     Kooperberg C, Ruczinski I. Identifyi ng interacting SNPs using Monte Carlo logic 
regression. Genet Epidemiol  2005; 28(2):157-170. 
   227CHAPTER 7 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
 
7.1  Summary of thesis 
 The experiments described in the previous  chapters have attempted to establish 
genetic markers that are predictive of a de pressed subject’s clin ical outcome following 
antidepressant therapy.  To that end, severa l complementary genetic approaches have 
been utilized (outlined in Figure 1.1).  Our initial efforts focused on linkage 
disequilibrium (LD) mapping of several serotonin-relate d pharmacodynamic candidate 
genes ( HTR1A , HTR2A , HTR2C , TPH1 , TPH2 , and MAOA ) using 110 SNPs selected 
from the online database dbSNP.  In a sma ll but highly characteri zed (N=96) depressed 
patient population taking the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) fluoxetine, 
several SNPs and multimarker haplotypes in th ese genes were associated (p<0.05) with 
response and response specificity (1).  In order to uncover novel tagSNPs or potentially 
functional variants, the c oding regions, intron-exon boundaries, and conserved non-
coding regions were directly sequenced in all subjects in the fluoxetine population.  
While no obvious functional variants were disc overed in these genes, a few additional 
tagSNPs were identified, which provide more comprehensive coverage of the variation in 
these regions.  In an attempt to replicate th e initial associations, the tagSNPs were then 
genotyped in the large STAR*D population (N=1,953), which had been given the SSRI 
citalopram.  None of the variants were asso ciated with citalopram  response or response 
specificity.  This non-replicati on could be due to several fact ors including simple Type I  228error, differences between the drug’s m echanism of action, or unknown differences 
between the clinical  populations.   
 We then explored pharmacokinetic gene  variation as a possible modulator of 
citalopram response or tolerance.   Instead of the indirect LD  based approach we used for 
the pharmacodynamic candidate genes, here we  utilized a direct a ssociation approach 
since there are known, functiona l variants in several relevant pharmacokinetic genes 
(ABCB1 , CYP3A4 , CYP3A5 , CYP2C19 , and CYP2D6 ).  Using a two-stage study design, 
none of the pharmacokinetic variants that we  screened in the ST AR*D population were 
significantly (p<0.05) associated with cita lopram response or tolerance in both the 
discovery and validation sample sets.    Given the difficulty in predicting relevant candidate genes a priori , we used a 
whole genome association (WGA) platform and a two-stage study design to genotype 
over 590,000 SNPs in approximately half of th e STAR*D sample.  Several of these SNPs 
were associated with citalopram remission a nd tolerance at a very high significance level 
in the discovery sample set.  We attempte d to replicate the nine most significantly 
associated SNPs in the validation sample set.  However, none of the SNPs showed significant (p<0.05) association with remission or  tolerance in the validation sample set.  
Furthermore, the multi-SNP decision trees th at were constructed using the discovery 
sample dataset were not predictive of remissi on or tolerance using the validation sample 
set SNP data.  This non-replication could be  due to a variety of  factors, including 
uncorrected population stratific ation, unknown clinical confounders, or simple Type I 
error in the discovery set.  However, this was an attempt to replicate the “low hanging 
fruit” of the discovery portion of the WGA study.  For example, th e “truly” associated  229variants may not have provided the most extrem e estimates of statistical significance, and 
instead may be represented by more modest, but consistent, measures of significance. 
The most extreme values may be enriched with  signals due to the f actors listed above and 
others, such as genotyping errors. An unans wered question is how far to pursue findings 
for replication (e.g., absolute p-value threshold, effect size, significance in more than one 
subgroup of phenotype).  In order to fully expl ore the initial discove ry set findings, much 
more genotyping of the validation set will need to be performed.  This will allow 
additional analytical techniques,  such as different genetic mo dels, the ability to control 
for stratification in the validation set, and more  rigorous testing of variant interactions, all 
of which will be important to comprehensivel y explore the role of genetic variation in 
SSRI response.    
7.2  Future directions 
 The field of complex human phenotype ge netics has been evolving at an amazing 
pace since the sequencing of the human genome.  Much of the evolution of the field can 
be traced to rapidly advanci ng genotyping technologies that increase genotype throughput 
and reduce genotyping costs.  For instance, wh en this project was started in 2002, most 
genetic association studies i nvestigated less than a dozen candidate SNPs, with most 
focusing on a single marker.  Our initial fluoxetine pharmacodynamic gene project involving 110 SNPs was considered a formid able amount of genotyping at the time and 
the genotyping took approximately 4 months  to complete.  With current multiplex 
technologies, such as Illumina’s BeadArray assay (2), the genotyping would require less 
than a week of laboratory work and could ge notype many more SNPs (3).  Larger scale  230genotyping, like our WGA study involving 590,0 00 SNPs, can now be completed in a 
few weeks.  The scale of genotyping will contin ue to grow, as Affymetrix and Illumina 
have both already announced the commercializa tion of a 1 million SNP panel, part of 
which will be designed to detect copy number variants (CNVs).  It is now becoming clear 
that within the next decade, whole genome resequencing of large sample sets will become economically feasible.  A question with bot h practical and theoretical implications, 
however, is will the field be able to interpret such high density genetic data?  Analytical techniques in complex phenot ype genetics have not evolved as quickly 
as methods for genotyping.  For instance,  around 10 years ago, it was still unclear 
whether useful amounts of LD exist in the human genome (4).  It is clear now that 
significant LD extends to useful distances in  outbred human populations (5;6).  At the 
time of our initial fluoxetine pharmacodynamic project, it was still necessary to 
empirically measure LD in a region of intere st. Our work showed these serotonin-related 
genes to have extensive LD, which was not a foregone conclusion at the time.  
Unfortunately, this LD resulted in redunda ncy in our genotyping.  The international 
HapMap project, which was comple ted (phase II) after this proj ect, allows users to select 
tagging SNPs from the publicly avaiable da taset of dense markers across the genome, 
which is an invaluable resource to LD mapping.  However, much is still unclear about the 
most powerful way to utilize LD in associ ation studies.  For instance, the use of 
haplotypes in association studies needs furthe r development (7).  When this project was 
started, techniques for inferring haplotypes fr om unphased genotype data and testing for 
association were in their infancy (8).  Cu rrently, the utility of haplotype testing in 
association studies is still debatable, as  some feel it does not add enough additional  231information to single locus testing to justify the multiple correction penalties (9).  A 
substantial number of methods have been publis hed in the past five years that utilize LD 
in order to select tagging SNPs (10-14).  It seems that the most analytically 
straightforward, based on a threshold for pairwise r2, has also become the most popular 
method for selecting tagging SNPs, though other methods appear to be more efficient at 
reducing genotyping load.  It’s still unclear exactly how well tagging SNPs will transfer 
across different human populations, although mu ch research has focused on this question 
(15;16).  These may ultimately be moot considerations, given that whole genome 
resequencing will soon make tagging unnecessary.  One of the major hurdles in the developmen t of analytical methods is the issue of 
multiple testing (17).  It is difficult to sepa rate true associations from those caused by 
chance when performing 500,000 or more single locus tests.  When several phenotypes 
and several populations are examined, the pr oblem obviously is amplified.  The problem 
becomes much larger when searching for in teracting SNPs, which are a cornerstone of 
the common disease common variant hypothesis.   False discovery rate (FDR) methods 
can be used to gauge how many SNPs to move  forward in multi-stage studies, and aren’t 
affected by inter-marker relatedness (18).  In creases in computational power will allow 
for permutation based methods to be applie d across entire WGA panels, which will take 
into account inter-marker relatedness.  Ba yesian methodology, incorporating information 
from QTLs, multi-species alignments, or functional predictions may also be useful (19).  However, given the inherent risk of Type I error from the number of  tests and since we 
often have no a priori reason to believe putatively asso ciated SNPs in WGA studies, 
replication in separate populat ions will be of paramount importance.  Even this gold  232standard is problematic, when “indepe ndent” populations may differ subtly by 
phenotypic definition or less su btly by differences in populat ion ancestry or genotyping 
platform.  Statistical limits may make i nnovative study designs, along with the collection 
of large clinical populations for replication, the only way to get through the multiple 
testing concerns in large scale associations studies. 
 Another key to the success of future larg e scale association studies will be the 
development of statistically powerful techni ques for uncovering interacting SNPs.  The 
common disease common variant (CDCV) hypothe sis predicts that individual variants 
will have small phenotypic effect sizes (20) .  However, in combination, variants are 
thought to have clinically meaningful effect s, although there are few examples of such 
interactions (21;22).  In our  studies we attempted to fi nd variant interactions using 
logistic regression (for small numbers of SNPs) and decision trees (for the WGA data).  
While neither of these techniques uncovered si gnificantly interacting SNPs in our data, 
they may have utility in other studies.  However, one particular barrier for the 
development of interacting SNPs models is the multiple testing burden (which increases exponentially with the number of SNPs inve stigated); additionally, power is further 
reduced by the limited number of subjects with  each causative allelic combination.  The 
collection of large clinical samples is the only way to overcome these statistical limits.  Once interacting SNPs have been discovere d and validated in these large sample 
collections, easily interpretable clinical diagnostic models will also need to be developed.  
However, pharmacogenetic models that are limited to using only genetic markers for 
association to clinical outc ome may not be capturing a larg e portion of the variation in 
response.  Robust clinical models for pers onalized medicine will require non-genetic  233biomarkers (e.g., protein expres sion, liver function tests, etc.) as well as clinical 
demographics (age, concomitant medications , race, etc.) in order to have maximum 
utility.  Pharmacogenetic phenotypes, as oppos ed to most complex disease phenotypes, 
have the additional benefit of allowing fo r alteration of pharmacological treatment once 
susceptibility variants an d other factors are known. 
 A major concern for population based asso ciation studies has been the risk of 
confounding due to population stratification.  Popu lation stratification is thought to play a 
role in the non-repl ication of many associ ation studies, and as study populations become 
larger the risk of confoun ding also increases.  Current  methods for detecting and 
correcting for population st ratification, such as structure , can perform adequately, but for 
small scale genotyping studies they require additional marker genotyping which can be 
cost prohibitive (23).  The development of efficient ancestry informative marker (AIM) 
panels that have maximal allele frequenc y differences across subpopulations would have 
great utility in small scale association studies.  The selection of AIMs for distant 
subpopulations (e.g., Africans and Asians) in order to detect large levels of stratification 
is straightforward, given the dense marker da ta available from the HapMap project (24-
26).  Recent reports suggest population stratif ication may have a confounding effect even 
within isolated populations such as Icela nd and Europe, which were both thought to be 
relatively homogeneous (27;28).  Selecti on of AIMs for more subtle levels of 
stratification across continental clines will re quire more large scale genotyping in these 
subpopulations in order to define  their allele frequencies.  For WGA studies, and in the 
future whole genome resequencing studies, th e dense amount of marker data available  234should allow for accurate matching of cases and control based on ancestry and 
consequently little reduction in statistical power.   
 Single nucleotide polymorphisms have been  the workhorse of genetic association 
studies for the past decade, largely because of their ability to be easily assayed in a cost-
effective manner.  However, it is becoming clear that other types of variation, namely 
copy number variation (CNVs), is common in  the genome and may contribute to human 
phenotypes.  Copy number varian ts take the form of segmental duplications or deletions, 
and are thought to alter at leas t as much of the human genome as SNPs (29).  Given their 
sizable changes to the geno me, CNVs are reasonably t hought to cause considerable 
differences in expression or function of the genes they encompass, although there is little 
evidence for this as of yet.  Since the ma jority of genotyping techniques focus on a small 
area around the SNP of interest  (generally less than 100 bp), CNVs that encompass 
interrogated SNPs can have a detrimen tal and often unknown effect on genotype 
accuracy and quality.  Fortunately in WG A studies, current genotyping methods often 
rely on hybridization to a fixed DNA array, whic h yields quantitative data and thus can 
be scored for copy number variants as well as SNPs (30).  Currently limiting the widespread utilization of CNVs  in WGA studies are efficient algorithms for scoring them 
from the raw genotype data as well as a ca talog of common CNVs in the human genome, 
which would help by narrowing the search space .  A large, detailed search for common 
CNVs across the genome similar to the SNP Co nsortium project would greatly aid in the 
integration of CNVs into WGA studies.    As was mentioned above, large collections  of well-phenotyped subjects is crucial 
to the success of pharmacogenetics in the next decade.  Large populations are necessary  235in order to provide replication of initial fi ndings, to lessen the multiple testing burden by 
increasing power, and for studies of interacting SNPs, which is a crux of the common disease common variant hypothesis of complex diseases.  Alternatively, for the common 
disease rare variant hypothesis, where individual variants are thought to have large effect 
sizes but occur very infrequently, large collect ions of patients will be necessary to find 
adequate number of subjects carrying the risk variant.  Single inves tigators typically have 
the resources to collect on the order of hundr eds of patients at best.  Large government 
sponsored clinical trials (such as STAR*D) a nd late phase investigational drug trials can 
involve large numbers of subjects, but usually not more than two or three thousand.  Even 
with all the resources used to fund such studies, sufficiently powered pharmacogenetic 
studies will require many more, on the order of tens of thousands of patients.  For this 
scale of populations, large consortia will need  to be formed, where investigators share 
subject DNA, phenotype data, and ultimately, cr edit for any findings.  An example of an 
effort on a similar scale can be seen with th e Type I diabetes gene tic consortium (31).  
Having the foresight to collect DNA from all consenting individuals enrolled in a large 
Phase 3 drug trial will hopefully become more  common as the field develops.  The use of 
large health insurance registri es (such as Kaiser Permanente  in California) could aid in 
identifying subjects, but could prove complicated due to thei r retrospective nature.  As 
academic medical centers (such as UCSF) and large hospitals move towards fully electronic record keep ing, enrolling patients (and co llecting DNA) at admittance or 
discharge for pharmacogenetic st udies of common me dications may be a realistic way of 
enrolling large numbers of subjects.  As with  all epidemiological research, false positive 
and dashed hopes are common, and more subjec ts are always needed.  I feel with  236cooperation among researches, adequate resources, hard work and a little luck, in the next 
ten years there will be profound examples of th e clinical utility of prescribing the right 
drug to the right person at the right time and dose. 
          
 
        
  2377.3  References  
1.     Peters EJ, Slager SL, McGrath PJ , Knowles JA, Hamilton SP. Investigation of 
serotonin-related genes in antidepressant response. Mol Psychiatry  2004; 9(9):879-889. 
2.     Fan JB, Hu SX, Craumer WC, Barker  DL. BeadArray-based solutions for enabling 
the promise of pharmacogenomics. Biotechniques  2005; 39(4):583-588. 
3.     Liu ET. New technologies  for high-throughput analysis. Pharmacogenomics  2005; 
6(5):469-471. 4.     Huttley GA, Smith MW, Carrington M, O'Brien SJ. A scan for linkage disequilibrium across the human genome. Genetics  1999; 152(4):1711-1722. 
5.     Reich DE, Cargill M, Bolk S, Ireland J, Sabeti PC, Richter DJ, Lavery T, Kouyoumjian R, Farhadian SF, Ward R, Lande r ES. Linkage disequilibrium in the human 
genome. Nature  2001; 411(6834):199-204. 
6.     Ardlie KG, Kruglyak L, Seielstad M. Patterns of linkage disequilibrium in the 
human genome. Nat Rev Genet  2002; 3(4):299-309. 
7.     Schaid DJ. Evaluating associ ations of haplotypes with traits. Genet Epidemiol  2004; 
27(4):348-364. 8.     Stephens M, Smith NJ, Donnelly P. A new statistical method for haplotype 
reconstruction from population data. Am J Hum Genet  2001; 68(4):978-989. 
9.     Clark AG. The role of hapl otypes in candidate gene studies. Genet Epidemiol  2004; 
27(4):321-333. 10.     Carlson CS, Eberle MA, Rieder MJ, Yi Q, Kruglyak L, Nick erson DA. Selecting a 
maximally informative set of single-nucleotid e polymorphisms for association analyses 
using linkage disequilibrium. Am J Hum Genet  2004; 74(1):106-120.  23811.     Weale ME, Depondt C, Macdonald SJ, Smith A, Lai PS, Shorvon SD, Wood NW, 
Goldstein DB. Selection and evaluation of ta gging SNPs in the neuronal-sodium-channel 
gene SCN1A: implications for li nkage-disequilibrium gene mapping. Am J Hum Genet  
2003; 73(3):551-565. 12.     Ke X, Cardon LR. Efficient sel ective screening of haplotype tag SNPs. 
Bioinformatics  2003; 19(2):287-288. 
13.     Stram DO. Tag SNP selection for association studies. Genet Epidemiol  2004. 
14.     Liu Z, Lin S, Tan M. Genome-wide tagging SNPs with entropy-based Monte Carlo 
method. J Comput Biol  2006; 13(9):1606-1614. 
15.     De Bakker PI, Burtt NP, Graham RR, Guiducci C, Yelensky R, Drake JA, 
Bersaglieri T, Penney KL, Butler J, Young S,  Onofrio RC, Lyon HN, Stram DO, Haiman 
CA, Freedman ML, Zhu X, Cooper R, Groop L, Kolonel LN, Henderson BE, Daly MJ, 
Hirschhorn JN, Altshuler D. Transferability of tag SNPs in genetic association studies in 
multiple populations. Nat Genet  2006; 38(11):1298-1303. 
16.     Mueller JC, Lohmussaar E, Magi R, Remm M, Bettecken T, Lichtner P, Biskup S, 
Illig T, Pfeufer A, Luedemann J, Schreiber S,  Pramstaller P, Pichler I, Romeo G, Gaddi 
A, Testa A, Wichmann HE, Metspalu A, Me itinger T. Linkage disequilibrium patterns 
and tagSNP transferabilit y among European populations. Am J Hum Genet  2005; 
76(3):387-398. 17.     Carlson CS, Eberle MA, Kruglyak L, Nickerson DA. Mapping complex disease 
loci in whole-genome association studies. Nature  2004; 429(6990):446-452.  23918.     Fernando RL, Nettleton D, Southey BR, Dekkers JC, Rothschild MF, Soller M. 
Controlling the proportion of false pos itives in multiple dependent tests. Genetics  2004; 
166(1):611-619. 19.     Rannala B. Finding genes influenci ng susceptibility to comp lex diseases in the 
post-genome era. Am J Pharmacogenomics  2001; 1(3):203-221. 
20.     Mayeux R. Mapping the new fr ontier: complex genetic disorders. J Clin Invest  
2005; 115(6):1404-1407. 21.     Chumakov I, Blumenfeld M, Guerassi menko O, Cavarec L, Palicio M, Abderrahim 
H, Bougueleret L, Barry C, Tanaka H, La Ro sa P, Puech A, Tahri N, Cohen-Akenine A, 
Delabrosse S, Lissarrague S,  Picard FP, Maurice K, Essioux L, Millasseau P, Grel P, 
Debailleul V, Simon AM, Caterina D, Dufaur e I, Malekzadeh K, Belova M, Luan JJ, 
Bouillot M, Sambucy JL, Primas G, Saum ier M, Boubkiri N, Martin-Saumier S, 
Nasroune M, Peixoto H, Delaye A, Pinchot V, Bastucci M, Guillou S, Chevillon M, 
Sainz-Fuertes R, Meguenni S, Aurich-Costa J, Cherif D, Gimalac A, Van Duijn C, 
Gauvreau D, Ouellette G, Fortier I, Raelson J, Sherbatich T, Riazanskaia N, Rogaev E, 
Raeymaekers P, Aerssens J, Konings F, L uyten W, Macciardi F, Sham PC, Straub RE, 
Weinberger DR, Cohen N, Cohe n D, Ouelette G, Realson J. Genetic and physiological 
data implicating the new human gene G72 and the gene for D-amino acid oxidase in 
schizophrenia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  2002; 99(21):13675-13680. 
22.     Stoll M, Corneliussen B, Coste llo CM, Waetzig GH, Mellgard B, Koch WA, 
Rosenstiel P, Albrecht M, Croucher PJ, Seeg ert D, Nikolaus S, Hampe J, Lengauer T, 
Pierrou S, Foelsch UR, Mathew CG, Lagerstrom-Fermer M, Schreiber S. Genetic  240variation in DLG5 is associated with inflammatory bowel disease. Nat Genet  2004; 
36(5):476-480. 23.     Falush D, Stephens M, Pritchard JK. Inference of Population Structure Using 
Multilocus Genotype Data. Linked loci a nd correlated allele frequencies. Genetics  2003; 
164(4):1567-1587. 24.     Choudhry S, Coyle N, Tang H, Salari  K, Lind D, Clark S, Tsai HJ, Naqvi M, 
Phong A, Ung N, Matallana H, Avila P, Casal J,  Torres A, Nazario S, Castro R, Battle N, 
Perez-Stable E, Kwok PY, Sheppard D, Shri ver M, Rodriguez-Cint ron W, Risch N, Ziv 
E, Burchard E, Genetics of Asthma in  Latino Americans (GALA) Study. Population 
stratification confounds genetic a ssociation studies among Latinos. Hum Genet  2006; 
118(5):652-664. 25.     Seldin MF, Shigeta R, Villoslada P, Selmi C, Tuomilehto J, Silva G, Belmont JW, 
Klareskog L, Gregersen PK. European population substructure: clusteri ng of northern and 
southern populations. PLoS Genet  2006; 2(9):e143. 
26.     Tian C, Hinds DA, Shigeta R, Kittle s R, Ballinger DG, Seldin MF. A genomewide 
single-nucleotide-polymorphism panel with  high ancestry information for African 
American admixture mapping. Am J Hum Genet  2006; 79(4):640-649. 
27.     Helgason A, Yngvadottir B, Hraf nkelsson B, Gulcher J, Stefansson K. An 
Icelandic example of the impact of popul ation structure on association studies. Nat Genet  
2005; 37(1):90-95. 28.     Campbell CD, Ogburn EL, Lunetta KL, Lyon HN, Freedman ML, Groop LC, Altshuler D, Ardlie KG, Hirschhorn JN. De monstrating stratification in a European 
American population. Nat Genet  2005; 37(8):868-872.  24129.     Redon R, Ishikawa S, Fitch KR, Feuk L, Perry GH, Andrews TD, Fiegler H, 
Shapero MH, Carson AR, Chen W, Cho EK , Dallaire S, Freeman JL, Gonzalez JR, 
Gratacos M, Huang J, Kalaitzopoulos D, Ko mura D, MacDonald JR, Marshall CR, Mei 
R, Montgomery L, Nishimura K, Okamura K, Shen F, Somerville MJ, Tchinda J, 
Valsesia A, Woodwark C, Yang F, Zhang J, Ze rjal T, Zhang J, Armengol L, Conrad DF, 
Estivill X, Tyler-Smith C, Carter NP, A buratani H, Lee C, Jones KW, Scherer SW, 
Hurles ME. Global variation in c opy number in the human genome. Nature  2006; 
444(7118):444-454. 30.     Carson AR, Feuk L, Mohammed M, Sc herer SW. Strategies for the detection of 
copy number and other structural variants in the human genome. Hum Genomics  2006; 
2(6):403-414. 31.     Rich SS, Concannon P, Erlich H, Julier C, Morahan G, Nerup J, Pociot F, Todd JA. The Type 1 Diabetes Genetics Consortium. Ann N Y Acad Sci  2006; 10791-8. 
 
 