PHOTODEGRADATION OF DYES IN BINARY 
SYSTEM   USING TITANIUM DIOXIDE THROUGH  
STATISTICAL APPROACH  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHOON BAO LEE  
 
BACHELOR OF SCIENCE (HONS) CHEMISTRY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FACULTY OF SCIENCE  
UNIVERSITI TUNKU ABDUL RAHMAN  
MAY 2014  PHOTODEGRADATION OF DYES IN BINARY SYSTEM USING TITANIUM 
DIOXIDE THROUGH STATISTICAL APPROACH  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By 
PHOON BAO LEE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
A project report submitted to the Department of Chemical Science,  
Faculty of Science,  
Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman  
in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the degree of  
Bachelor of Science (Hons) Chemistry  
MAY 2014  
 ABSTRACT  
 
PHOTODEGRADATION OF DYE S IN BINARY SYSTEM USING TITANIUM 
DIOXIDE THROUGH STATISTICAL APPROACH  
 
Phoon Bao Lee  
 
 The photodegradation of Basic Blue 3 (BB3) and Congo Red (CR) by using TiO 2 
from company MERCK was investigated in this study. The experiment was carried out in 
batch study and immobilisation method was used. The removal of these dyes was pH 
dependent. First order kinetic model was fitted well in this study with rate constant 
0.0050, 0.0040, 0.0032 min-1 for concentrations 5, 15, 25 mg/L of BB3, respectively. For 
CR, the rate constant was 0.0035, 0.0031 and 0.0028 min-1 in 5, 15, 25 mg/L, 
respectively. A decrease in rate constant was observed when initial dye concentration is 
high. Four parameters were studied in this project, which are initial dye concentration an d 
irradiation time, photocatalyst loading, pH and reusability. Photodegradation efficiency 
was found to be lower after each repetitive usage of TiO 2 glass tank. SEM was used to 
study the surface morphology and characterisation of photocatalyst. Plackett -Burman 
design was used to determine the most significant parameters in removal of studied dyes 
using TiO 2 photocatalyst. Response Surface Methodology (RSM) was used to study the 
interaction between variables and the optimum condition for maximum percentage 
removal of BB3 and CR in binary system. The R2 for both models near to unity and the 
models were significant. The observed response was agreed well with the predicted response. The optimum condition for BB3 was found to be in pH 10 and 5 mg/L initial 
concen tration of dye with 77.06% removal was predicted under this condition. For CR, 
the optimum condition was found to be pH 6 and 5 mg/L initial dye concentration. The 
percentage efficiency was predicted to be 64.51% after 300 minutes of sunlight 
irradiation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ABSTRAK  
 
TiO 2 dari syarikat MERCK telah digunakan sebagai fotomangkin untuk membuat 
kajian fotodegradasi pewarna Basik Biru 3 (BB3) dan Kongo Merah (CR). Penyingkiran 
pewarna ini adalah bergantung kepada pH. Model kinetik kadar pertama be rsetuju dengan 
projek ini. Bagi pewarna BB3, kadar tetap adalah 0.0050, 0.0040, 0.0032 min-1 untuk 
kepekatan 5, 15, 25 mg/L masing -masing. Manakala bagi pewarna CR, kadar tetap adalah 
0.0035, 0.0031 and 0.0028 min-1 untuk 5, 15, 25 mg/L masing -masing. Penu runan kadar 
tetap berlaku apabilla kepekatan awal pewarna adalah tinggi. Empat parameter telah 
dikaji dalam projek ini, iaitu kesan kepekatan awal pewarna dan masa penyinaran, kesan 
amaun fotomangkin, kesan pH dan kesan gunapakai semula fotomangkin TiO 2. 
Kecekapan fotodegradasi didapati lebih rendah selepas setiap kali mengulang guna TiO 2. 
SEM telah digunakan untuk mengkaji morfologi dan pencirian fotomangkin. Plackett -
Burman telah digunakan untuk menentukan parameter yang paling penting dalam 
penyingkiran pewarna dikaji dengan menggunakan TiO 2 fotomangkin. RSM  telah 
digunakan untuk mengkaji interaksi antara pembolehubah dan keadaan optimum untuk 
peratusan penyingkiran maksimum BB3 dan CR dalam larutan pewarna binari. R2 untuk 
kedua -dua model berhampiran pe rpaduan dan model ketara. Peratusan diperhatikan telah 
dipersetujui dengan baik dengan peratusan yang diramalkan. Keadaan optimum untuk 
BB3 didapati bahawa dalam pH 10 dan 5mg/L kepekatan pewarna awal, 77.06 % 
penyingkiran telah diramalkan di bawah keadaan  ini. Untuk CR, keadaan optima ditemui 
pada pH 6 dan 5 mg/L kepekatan pewarna awal, kecekapan peratusan berkenaan akan 
menjadi 64.51 % selepas 300 minit pancara matahari.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
 
First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to my project sup ervisor, Asst. 
Prof. Dr Ong Siew Teng who was providing me guidance and advice throughout this 
final year project. During the period of my project, I would like to express my deepest 
appreciation for the encouragement, valuable information, concern and the  invaluable 
time that had been shared which has helped me to complete my project.  
 
Next, I would like to thank to Faculty of Science of Universiti Tunku Abdul 
Rahman (UTAR), for providing all the supports such as equipment’s and instruments to 
complete my project ― Photodegradation of dyes in binary system using Titanium 
Dioxide through statistical approach. Besides that, I also want to express my sincere 
thanks to all the laboratory staff in UTAR who always provide technical support and 
spend their prec ious time to provide guidance and assistance when I face problem.  
 
Then, I would like to thank to my beloved family members for their support, 
tolerance, faith and advice that really give me the momentum and energy to complete my 
project. Last but not lea st, I also want to thank to my friends, I really appreciate all the 
help and support that you all gave to me throughout the project and during my thesis 
preparation.  
 
 
 
 DECLARATION  
 
I hereby declare that the project report is based on my original work exc ept for 
quotations and citations which have been duly acknowledge. I also declare that it has not 
been previously or concurrently submitted for any other degree at UTAR or other 
institutions.  
 
 
 
 
 
__________________  
(PHOON BAO LEE)  
  Date:   _____________ ____            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
APPROVAL SHEET  
 
This project report entitled ― “PHOTODEGRADATION OF DYES IN 
BINARY SYSTEM USING TITANIUM DIOXIDE THROUGH STATISTICAL 
APPROACH”  was prepared by PHOON BAO LEE  and submitted as partial fulfilment 
of the requirements for the degree of Bachelor of Science (Hons) Chemistry at Universiti 
Tunku Abdul Rahman.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Approved by:  
____________________       Date: ____________  
( Asst. Prof. Dr. ONG SIEW TENG )  
Supervi sor  
Department of Chemical Science  
Faculty of Science  
University of Tunku Abdul Rahman   
FACULTY OF SCIENCE  
UNIVERSITY OF TUNKU ABDUL RAHMAN  
 
Date: ____________  
 
PERMISSION SHEET  
 
It is hereby certified that PHOON BAO LEE (ID No: 11ADB02989) has completed this 
final year project entitled ― “PHOTODEGRADATION OF DYES IN BINARY 
SYSTEM USING TITANIUM DIOXIDE THROUGH STATISTICAL 
APPROACH”  supervised by Asst. Prof. Dr. ONG SIEW TENG  from the Department 
of Chemical Science , Faculty of Science.  
 
I hereby give permission to my supervisor to write and prepare manuscripts of these 
research findings for publishing in any form, if I do not prepare it within six (6) months 
from this data, provided that my name is included as one of the authors for this article. 
The arrangement of the name depends on my supervisor.  
 
Yours truly,  
_______________  
(PHOON BAO LEE)  
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Page  
ABSTRACT           ii 
ABSTRAK           iv 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT         v 
DECLARATION          vi  
APPROV AL SHEET         vii 
PERMISSION SHEET         viii 
LIST OF TABLES          xiii 
LIST OF FIGURES          xv 
LIST OF ABBREVIATION        xvi 
 
CHAPTER  
1 INTRODUCTION  
 1.1  Environmental Issue        1 
 1.2  Dye         3 
  1.2.1  Basic Blue 3 (BB3)       4 
  1.2.2  Congo Red (CR)       6 
 1.3  Treatment of Wastewater Containing Dyes     8 
1.4  Advanced Oxidation Process (AOP)      9 
 1.4.1  Photodegradation       10 
1.5  Types of Photocatalyst       10 
 1.5.1  Zinc Oxide (ZnO)       10  1.5.2  Cadmium Sulfide (CdS)      11 
 1.5.3  Tin Dioxide (SnO 2)      11 
1.6  TiO 2 as Photocatalyst        12 
 1.6.1  Immobilisation Study       13 
1.7  Statistical Approach        14 
 1.7.1  Plackett -Burman (PB) Design     14 
 1.7.2  Response Surface Methodology (RSM)    15 
1.8  Objectives         15  
1.9  Scope of Study        16 
 
2 LITERATURE REVIEW       
 2.1  Immobilisation Method       17 
 2.2  Modification of TiO 2 Photocatalyst      18 
 2.3  Previous Study Photodegradation of Dye     21 
 2.4  Other Semiconductors Use as Photocatalyst     23  
 2.5  Photodegradation Parameters       24 
 2.6 Characterisation Study on Photocatalyst     26 
 2.7 Study the Photodegradation Intermediates     27 
2.8  Optimisation Study        27 
 2.9  Adsorption -Photodegradation Study      28 
 2.10 Photodegradation Study on Othe r Organic Compounds   29 
 
 3 MATERIALS AND METHODS  
 3.1 Preparation of Photocatalyst       31 
 3.2  Preparation of Dye        31  
 3.3 Batch Studies         32 
  3.3.1  Immobilisation of TiO 2 on Glass Tank    32 
  3.3.2  Batch Experiments       33 
  3.3.3  Effec t of Initial Concentration and Irradiation Time   34 
  3.3.4  Effect of Photocatalyst Loading     34 
  3.3.5  Effect of pH        34 
  3.3.6  Effect of Repetitive Usage and Recycle of Coated TiO 2 35 
 3.4 Optimisation Study of Dye Photodegradation  
  3.4.1  Placket t-Burman (PB) Design     35 
  3.4.2  Response Surface Methodology (RSM) Analysis   35 
 3.5  Instrumental Analysis  
  3.5.1 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)     36 
 
4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
 4.1 Characterisation of Photocatalyst       
  4.1.1  Scanning Electron  Microscope Studies (SEM)   37 
 4.2  Effect of Initial Concentration and Irradiation Time    39 
 4.3 Effect of Photocatalyst Loading      43 
 4.4  Effect of pH         46 
 4.5 Effect of Repetitive Usage and Recycle of Coated TiO 2   49 Glass Tank  
 4.6 Photodegradation Kinetic Study      51 
  4.6.1  Langmuir -Hinshelwood Kinetic Model    52 
  4.6.2  First Order Kinetic       53 
 4.7 Optimisation Study of Dye Photodegradation    
  4.7.1  Plackett -Burman (PB) Design     57 
  4.7.2  Response Surface Methodology (RS M) Analysis   62 
 
5 CONCLUSION  
 5.1  Conclusion         69 
 5.2  Further Studies        70 
 
LIST OF REFERENCES         72 
 
APPENDICES  
A UV-Vis Double Beam Spectrum of BB3 and CR in Binary System   77 
B Calibration curve of BB3 and CR        78 
C Effect of Initia l Dye Concentration and Irradiation Time    79 
D Effect of Photocatalyst Loading       81 
E Effect of pH          82 
F Effect of Repetitive Usage and Recycle of Coated TiO 2 Glass Tank   83 
G Kinetic First Order for Photodegradation      84 
H Variation of Rate Constant with Different Initial Dye Concentration  90  
LIST OF TABLES  
 
Table            Page  
1.1       Physical characteristic of wastewater and their sources    2 
1.2      Usage classification of dyes       5 
1.2.1       Details of BB3         6 
1.2.2       Detailed of CR         8 
2.3      Summary of the work done by various researchers in removal   22 
     different dyes using photodegradation method  
2.5      Band positions semiconductor photocatalysts in aqueous   24 
     solution at pH 1   
4.6.2 (a)    First order kinetic model for photodegradation of BB3 and CR   56 
4.6.2 (b)    Half -life of BB3 and CR in different initial dye concentration   57 
4.7.1 (a)    Plackett -Burman design and results of the removal BB3    59 
      from binary system  
4.7.1 (b)    Plackett -Burman design and results of the removal CR from   60 
      binary system  
4.7.1 (c)     Regression analysis (ANOVA) of Plackett -Burman for the   61 
       removal of BB3 from binary system  
4.7.1 (d)     Regression analysis (ANOVA) of Plackett -Burman for the   61 
       removal of BB3 from binary system  
4.7.2 (a)     RSM design and results of the removal BB3 from binary system  64 4.7.2 (b)     RSM design and results of the removal CR from binary system   65 
 
4.7.2 (c)     Regression analysis (ANOVA) of RSM for the removal of BB3 in  66 
       binary system  
4.7.2 (d)     Regression analysis (ANOVA) of RSM for the removal of CR in  66 
       binary system  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LIST OF FIGURES  
 
Figure            Page  
3.1       Glass tank coated with TiO 2 (Top view and Side view)    32 
4.1.1 (a)    SEM micrograph of Original MERCK TiO 2    38 
4.1.1 (b)    SEM micrograph of TiO 2 after undergo photodegradation   38 
      with BB3 and CR  
4.2 (a)        Graph percentage removal of BB3 v ersus time in binary system   40 
4.2 (b)        Graph percentage removal of CR versus time in binary system   41 
4.3       Effect of photocatalyst loading on percentage removal of   45 
      BB3 and CR dyes by TiO 2 photocatalyst  
4.4       Effect of pH on remo val of BB3 and CR by TiO 2 photocatalyst   47 
4.5       Effect of repetitive usage and recycle of coated TiO 2 glass tank  50 
      on percentage removal of BB3 and CR  
4.6.2 (a)     First order kinetics for the photodegradation of BB3 in binary   54 
      system 
4.6.2 (b)     First order kinetics for the photodegradation of CR in binary   55 
          system  
4.7 (a)        3D surface plot for removal of BB3 in binary system    67 
4.7 (b)        3D surface plot for removal of CR in binary system    68 
 
 
 LIST OF AB BREVIATIONS  
 
AOP    Advanced Oxidation Process  
AO7    Acid Orange 7  
BB3   Basic Blue 3  
BG   Brilliant Green  
CR   Congo Red  
CSB    Chicago Sky Blue 6B  
IC   Indigo Carmine  
MB   Methylene Blue  
MG    Malachite Green  
MO   Methyl Orange  
QY    Quinoline Yellow  
RB5   Reactive Black 5  
RhB   Rhodamine B  
RO16    Reactive Orange 16  
RO84    Reactive Orange 84  
RR2   Reactive Red 2  
Ag   Silver  
Cu   Copper  
Mn   Manganese  
Pt   Platinum  
Zn   Zinc OH●   Hydroxyl Radical  
CdS   Cadmium Sulphide  
CO 2   Carbon Dioxide  
H2O   Dihydrogen  Monoxide  
H2O2   Hydrogen Peroxide  
K2PtCl 6  Potassium Hexachloroplatinate  
SnO 2   Tin Dioxide  
TiO 2   Titanium Dioxide  
ZnO   Zinc Oxide  
ZnS   Zinc Sulphide  
AFM    Atomic Force Microscope  
ANOVA   Analysis of Variance  
BET    Brunauer -Emmett -Teller  
CCD    Central Composite Design  
LH   Langmuir -Hinshelwood  
PB   Plackett -Burman  
RSM    Response Surface Methodology  
SEM    Scanning Electron Microscope  
UV   Ultraviolet  
XPS   X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy  
XRD    X-ray Diffraction  
R2   Correlation Coefficient  
pHzpc   pH at Zero Point Charge  CHAPTER 1  
INTRODUCTION  
 
1.1  Environmental issue  
 
In many countries, the issue of e nvironmental poll ution has been a great concern . 
Wastewater is one of the major pollution . Wastewater is the spent water after homes, 
commercial establishments, industries and public institutions which used waters for 
various purposes. The main source of t hose polluted water is normally from domestic as 
well as  industries . Moreover , the growin g of population and industrial expansion making 
the environmental problem become serious, especially in the developing  countries.  
 
Depart ment of Environment (DOE) used Water Quality Index (WQI) to evaluate 
the status of the river water quality  which according to  six paramet ers: dissolved oxygen 
(DO) , ammonia nitrogen, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand 
(COD) , suspended solid (SS) , and pH . 
 
Contaminants such as heavy metal, cyanide, toxic organics, nitrogen, 
phosphorous, phenols, suspende d solids, colou r and turbidity from the untreated sewage 
sludge, industries and domestics are  becoming  a major  concern to the public health  and 
environment . 
 The presence of colour in effluent is an environment issue of continuing problem 
for dyest uff manufactures,  dyers, finishers and water companies. This is because the 
increasing stringent colour consent standard is being enforced by regulatory bodies to 
reduce the qua ntity of colour in effluent and water sources. As a result, Department of 
Environment has established interim national water quality standards for Malaysia. For 
example, the maximum contaminant level for colour is 15 colour units. The unit of 
measurement of colour is the K 2PtCl 6. 
 
Table 1.1 : Physical Characteristic of Wastewater  and Their Sources  
Physical Characteristic  Sources  
Colour  o Domestic and industrial wastes   
o Natural decay of organic materials  
Odour   Decomposing wastewater  
 Industrial waste  
Solids  o Domestic water supply  
o Domestic and industrial wastes  
o Soil corrosion  
o Inflow -infiltration  
Temperature   Domestic and industrial wastes  
Source: (Cheremisinoff, 1995)  
 
 
 1.2  Dye 
 
Colorant is the substances which imparts colour such as pigment and dye.  Dyes 
contain chromophore ( -C=N-, -C=O-, -C=C-, -N=N -, -NO 2 and quino ne), and 
auxochromes ( -OH, -COOH, -SO 3H and –NH3) which cause or intensify the colour of the 
chromophore by changing  the overall energy of the electron system. Dyes have an 
aesthetic effect because they are visible pollutants.  It is detectable even though in  low 
concentration  (few ppm) . There are various  industries dis posing synthetic organic dyes to 
the aqueous environments such as textile, clothing, dyestuff, leather, plastic, paper, food 
processing and cosmetic.  
 
In textile industry, it consumes huge amount of water during the dyeing process. 
By consider ing both volumes discha rged and effluent composition, textile industry 
wastewater is one of the highest  polluting among the entire industrial sector.  
Approximately 1 – 20 % of the total world production  of dyes is lost during the dyeing 
process and it has been released as effluents (Houas, et al., 2001).  
 
Presence of organic dyes in aqueous environments is one of the critical  
environmental problems because  the toxicity of organic dyes to aquatic life and  low 
biodegradability in such environments . Many dyes are made from known carcinogens 
such as benzidine and other a romatic compounds. Antroquinone -based dyes are most 
hardly to undergo  degradation due to their fused aromatic ring structure. Furthermore, the intense colour is able to attenuate  the sunlight  transmission into water. H ence, it can 
affect aquatic plants , which ultimately disturb aquatic ecosystem.  
 
Currently, there are about 3000 types of dyes that marketed worldwide. Dyes can 
be classified to  anionic, cationic and non -ionic. The classification of dyes and usage has 
shown in Table 1.2.  
 
1.2.1  Basic Blue 3 (BB3)  
 
Basic blue 3 (IUPAC name: 3,7 -Bis(diethylamino)phenoxazin -5-ium chloride) is 
a water soluble cationic dye with molecular formula C 20H26ClN 3O.  
 
Basic dye is  widely used in acrylic nylon and wool dyeing. The structures  of dye  
generally embody aromatic with several  functional groups. Basic dye can also cause skin 
irritation, allergic dermatitis , mutations  and cancer  (Khataee, Fatinia and Aber, 2011) . 
Therefore, it is utmost important to  remove th is dye. Table 1.3 shows the details of BB3 
dye. 
 
Cationic dye  is high toxic than the anionic dye. It can react easily with the 
negatively charged cells membrane surfaces and get into the cells which will then gather 
in cytoplasm (Oseroff, 1986).  
 
 Table 1.2 : Usage classifications of dyes  
Class  Principal substrates  Method of application  Chemical types  
Acid  Nylon, wool, silk, 
paper, inks and 
leather  Usually from neutral to 
acidic dyebaths  Azo, antraquinone, 
triphenylmethane, 
azine, xanthene, nitro 
and nitroso  
Basic  Paper, 
polyacrylonitrile, 
modified nylon, 
polyester and inks  Applied from acidic 
dyebaths  Cyanine, 
henucyanine, 
diazahemicyanine,  
diphenylmethane,  
triarylmethane, azo,  
azine, xanthen e, 
acridine, oxanine and 
anthraquinone  
Direct  Cotton, rayon,  
paper, leather and  
nylon  Applied from neutral or  
slightly alkaline baths  
containing additional  
electrolyte  Azo, phthalocyanine,  
stilbene and oxanine  
Disperse  Polyester,  
polyamide, acetate,  
acrylic and plastics  Fine aqueous dispersions 
often applied by high 
temperature/pressure or 
lower temperature carrier 
methods; dye may be 
padded on cloth and baked 
on or thermofixed  Azo, anthraquinone,  
styryl, nitro and  
benzodifuranone  
Reactive  Cotton, wool, silk  
and nylon  Reactive site on dye reacts  
with functional group on 
fiber to bind dye covalently 
under influence of heat and 
pH (alkaline)  Azo, anthraquinone,  
phthalocyanine,  
formazan, oxanine  
and basic  
Solvent  Plastics, gasoline,  
varnishes lacquers , 
stains, inks, fats,  
oils and waxes  Dissolution in the substrate  Azo, 
triphenylmethane,  
anthraquinone and  
phthalocyanine  
Sulphur  Cotton and rayon  Aromatic substrate vatted 
with sodium sulphide and  
reoxidised to insoluble  
sulphur -containing products 
on fiber  Indeterminate  
structures  
Vat Cotton, rayon and  
wool  Water -insoluble dyes  
solubilised by reducing with 
sodium hydrogensulphide, 
then exhausted on fiber and  
reoxidised  Anthraquinone  
(including polycyclic 
quinines) and 
indigoids  
Source: (Hunger, 2003)  Table 1. 2.1: Details of BB3   
Dye 
Empirical formula  
C.I. number  
Dye content  
Molecular weight  
Molecular structure  
 
 
 
λmax Basic Blue 3  
C20H26ClN 3O 
51004  
25 % 
359.89 g/mol  
 
654 nm 
 
1.2.2  Congo Red (CR)  
 
Congo Red, also named as “Direct Red 28”, (empirical formula C 32H22N6O6S2Na2) 
is a water -soluble anionic dye which  generally used as amyloid fibrils, and agricultural 
starch products. Some journal  papers  reported CR can be used to determine  cooked and 
damaged starch grains in archaeological residues (Lamb and Loy, 2005).  
 
CR is a diazo dye. It can also use in cellulose industries such as paper , wood pulp 
and cotton textile . Azo dye is an important class of synthetic, colo ured and organic 
compound. Azo dyes are generally non-biodegradable  because of  their complex 
structures (Hashemian and Foroghimoqhadam, 2014).  
 
 CR was in troduced  by a young chemist Paul Böttiger in year 1884  from German . 
He was planning to synthesi s a chem ical which able to serve as pH indicator. Therefore, 
the first “direct” dye that did not require additional substances for fixation to the texti le 
fibers was created. CR is in  sulphonazo form in basic solution  and chinone form in acidic 
solution , changing the colo ur from red to blue when decreas e in pH.  
 
CR is a benzidine based anionic dye. It is known to m etabolis e into benzidine, 
which suspected  carcinogen ic for human . Benzidine and CR were prohibited  in many 
countries due to health concerns. However, it is still widely used in some countries.  It 
was reported that brightly colo ured dyes such as the shimmering CR commonly used in 
silk clothing manufacture are well known  difficult  for discharge  to the environment 
(Sistla, et al., 2008). Hence, it is important to remove residual CR from water sources 
before discharge to receiving water bodies.  Table 1.4 shows the details of CR dye.  
 
Table 1. 2.2: Details of CR  
Dye 
Empirical formula  
C.I. number  
Dye content  
Molecular weight  
Molecular structure  
 
 
 
 
λmax Congo Red  
C32H22N6Na2O6S2 
22120  
91 % 
696.66 g/mol  
 
497 nm 
 
 
1.3  Treatment of Wastewater Containing Dyes  
  
 In conventional methods of dye treatment, it has been  classified to 3 categories, 
which are physical, chemical and biological.  
 
i. Physical treatment methods normally include  filtration, ion exchange, and 
membrane process. This physical treatment was the first method that applied in 
wastewater treatment due to it is derived from the human’s first observations of 
nature. It uses physical force to remove pollutants.   
 
ii. Chemical treatment methods involve  the usage of chemicals, normally reducing  
agents,  oxidizing agents, coagulants and other chemicals will be added , for 
example, chlorination  by adding Cl 2, precipitation -flocculation with 
Fe(II)/Ca(OH) 2, and O3 is used for ozonation . The chemical techniques are often 
expensive. Although the dyes can be removed  but it will build -up sludge and 
creates a dis posal  problem.  
 
iii. For biological treatment process, it uses bacteria or microorganisms to remove  the 
biodegradable substances . For example fungal decolour isation, bioremediation 
system, microbial degradation and adsorption by living or dead microbial biomass . 
These few method s are commonly applied to treat industrial effluents  due to 
various kinds  of microbes such as bacteria, yeasts, algae and fungi are able to 
gather and degrade differe nt pollutants  (Ong and Seou , 2013) . Nonetheless, a t certain condition, biological treatment is not favourable due to it need a large area 
and hardly to function well when in extreme pH.  
 
 However, some  of the techniques mentioned above were non -destructive. It only 
transfers the non -biodegradable matter to become sludge, introducing  of new type of 
pollution which requires  undergoing  post-treatment  (Bansal and Sud, 2011) . Therefore, 
attention has been focused on investigate an economic and alternative way to treat dye 
effluents.  
 
1.4  Advanced Oxidation Process (AOP)  
 
 Advanced Oxidation Process (AOP) is currently being developed for remediation 
of contaminated organic effluent. This process is prefer s because of no h azardous sludge 
is generate d. It is to generate highly reactive species namely hydroxyl radicals (OH●) to 
oxidis e the organic pollutants . So, it is able to remove indust rial wastewaters and convert 
into non -toxic end product such as CO 2, H 2O and mineral acids (Barka, et al. , 2010). 
APO has a few advantages over conventional methods such as complete mineralisation of 
pollutants, biologically and chemically inert, recyclable, and less energy consumptions.  
 
 
 
 
 1.4.1  Photodegradation  
  
 Photodegradation is a kind of AOP. This method used semiconductor as 
photocatalyst and the presence of light  with suitable wavelength  is required.  In order to 
apply semiconductor photocatalysts for wastewater treatment, some of the criteria must 
be fulfill ed (Akpan and Hameed, 2009) : 
 
i. Operation condition needs to be performed at room temperature/pressure  
ii. Complete minerali sation without producing secondary pollution  
iii. Able t o use repetitively and low cost  of operations  
 
1.5  Type s of photocatalyst  
  
 Under photocatalytic reaction, band gap of semiconductor energy with higher 
energy is used to emit light inside the semiconductor and induce a reaction with the 
pollutants on to its surface via redox reaction. All semiconducto rs can be used as 
photocatalyst due t o the characteristic of filled valence band  (VB) , and an empty 
conduction band  (CB) . 
 
1.5.1  Zinc Oxide  (ZnO)  
 
ZnO powder is white colour and  insoluble in water. It is widely used as paints, 
lubricants, cement, ceramic, glass and so on. ZnO can absorb UV irradiation at below 385 nm. ZnO has the similar band gap energy with TiO 2; the photocatalytic capacity is 
expected  to be about the same . However, for ZnO, photocorrosion often happens  with the 
illumination of UV light, leadi ng to a decrease of photocataly tic activity in aqueous 
solution (Barnes, et al., 2013) . 
 
1.5.2  Cadmium Sul phide  (CdS)  
 
 CdS is a yellowish powder under room temperature. It occurs as two kinds of 
crystalline structures, hawleyite and greenockite.  It has a small  band gap of 2.42 eV, and 
its valence electron can easily excited to conduction band under irradiation of visible 
light at 495 nm. One of the disadvantages for CdS is high photocorrosion in aqueous 
media and low photogenerated electron -hole pair separation  efficiency. As a result, CdS 
normally will combine with others semiconductor to minimi ze the drawbacks (Duan, et 
al., 2014).  
 
1.5.3  Tin Dioxide (SnO 2) 
 
 SnO 2 is a white powder. Cassiterite  is the main form of it. It widely use in glass 
coating, polishing, gas sensing and ceramic industry. SnO 2 has a large  band gap 
(approximately 3.6 eV) and no light absorption above 330 nm . Therefore, under visible 
light, the photocatalytic activity is limi ted. In fact, SnO 2 is low in quantum efficiency. 
Besides that, the photocatalytic activity of SnO 2 is restricted by the rapid recombination 
of photogenerated electron and hole pairs  (Vignesh, et al., 2013) . 1.6  TiO 2 as photocatalyst                                                                                                                        
 
 The efficiency of immobili sed TiO 2 in removal organic synthetic dyes for 
pollution prevention will be report  in this study . It is widely use d in dye removal as well 
as other  organic compounds.  
 
 TiO 2 is chosen as photoca talyst are based on two factors:  
i. Industrially mass -produced material which  easy to obtain and inexpensive.  
ii. Chemically and photochemically  stable, safe, non -toxic and non -photocorrosion.  
 
 TiO 2 has a strong oxidi sing power; it  has a band gap 3.2 eV. An n-type 
semiconductor  of TiO 2 is irradiated with li ght of wavelength below 390  nm and the 
electron -hole pair  is produced. The generated electron -hole pairs are capable of initiating 
reduction and oxidation  reaction on the surface of TiO 2 particles. In aqueous solution, the 
holes are scavenged by surface OH groups to generate  the strong ly oxidi sing hydroxyl 
radicals  (OH●). Later , the reactive OH● will react quickly  with organic dyes leading to 
the minerali sation of the organic dye (Zainal, et al ., 2005) . The reaction between 
photocatalyst surface and dyes can expressed  as below (Akpan and Hameed, 2009):  
 
 
 
 
 TiO 2 + hv → TiO 2(eCB- + h VB+)      (1) 
TiO 2(hVB+) + H 2O → TiO 2 + H+ + OH●     (2) 
TiO 2(hVB+) + OH- → TiO 2 + OH●      (3) 
TiO 2(eCB-) + O 2 → TiO 2 + O 2-●      (4) 
O2-● + H+ → HO 2●        (5) 
Dye + OH● → degradation products       (6) 
Dye + h VB+ → oxidation products       (7) 
Dye + e CB- → reduction products       (8) 
 
where h v is the energy of photon need ed to excite  TiO 2 electron from the VB region to 
CB region.  
 
Apart from environmental, TiO 2 photo catalyst also use in phot ocatalytic 
purification of food and medicine . In contr ast, some other semiconductors  cannot be used 
due to it may  dissolve and produce toxic by -product during the photocatalysis process.  
 
1.6.1  Immobili sation study  
  
 Immobili sation method is developed  to save  the extra  cost for separation of 
photocatalyst as well as simplify the purification procedure  (Chen, Wang and Lou, 2004) . 
Besides that, it helps to fulfil one of the crucial  criteria , which is attaching  the dye on the 
surface of TiO 2 for an eff ective  photosensiti sation to occur.   Since photocatalysis is mostly take place on the surface of photocatalyst, therefore, the surface area need to  be 
increased to  maximi ze the photodegradation rate.  
 
1.7  Statistical Approach  
 
 To determine the optimum condition, conventional method is time consuming 
because  it may need to conduct more experiments. On top of that, conventional method  
does not ensure the optimum condition will be found out  (Rajendran, et al., 2007) . In 
addition, investigating  a process by maintain other parameters involved at non -specific 
fixed  level by using conventional method does not describe the combine d effect of all the 
parameters concerned  (Ravikumar, et al ., 2006)  Therefore, Plackett -Burmann (PB) 
design an d Response Surface Method (RSM) were introduced to improve  the 
conventional method  to determine optimum condition . 
 
1.7.1  Plackett -Burman (PB) design  
 
 Plackett -Burmann design is to find out the significan t parameters for further 
optimis ation. It provides  unbiased estimation for all parameters with high accuracy for a 
given number of observations  (Rajendran, et al ., 2007) . Moreover, it brings several 
benefits of utilising factorial design to increase the efficiency; each variable is screened 
in the presenc e of all other variables, as different  to co nventional methods, and reducing  
the number of experiments as the number of experiments in conv entional method is 
usually  numerous  (Motola and Agharkar, 1992) . 1.7.2  Response Surface Method ology  (RSM)  
 
 RSM is to optimise all the affecting variables collectively  (Murat, 2002) . The goal 
of RSM is to identify the best  conditions of the experiment  (Myers and Montgomery, 
2002). On top of that, this method has a lot of benefits such as economical, reducing 
number of experiments, studying the relationship between parameters, predicting the 
result, and checking the adequate of method. Thus, investigation of dyes 
photodegradation using RSM is important.  
 
1.8  Objectives  
 
The aims of this project are : 
 To identify  the effect of various  parameters on removal  BB3 and CR by using 
TiO 2.  
 Effect of initial dye concentration and irradiation  time 
 Effect of catalyst loading  
 Effect of pH  
 Effect of repetitive usage and recycle of coated TiO 2 
 
 To identify the influential parameters in affecting the dyes removal by using the 
Plackett -Burman  (PB) design and Response Surface Method (RSM) . 
  To study the surface morphology of TiO 2 before and after  photodegradation 
process . 
 
1.9  Scope of study  
 
 Dye contaminants are present in wastewater from many industries such as textile, 
paper, printing, food processing and cosmetic. Dye removal has become a serious 
environmental conc ern because of its  toxicity. Titanium Dioxide is a large available 
photocatal yst which could be used for photodegradation of dye in wastewater. Therefore, 
this study focused on the photodegra dation capabilities of immobilis ed Titanium Dioxide 
to remove dyes under various conditions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER 2  
LITERATURE REVIEW  
 
2.1  Immobilisation method  
 
 Immobilisation method was introduced in photodegradation study. This is because 
immobilise TiO 2 can save the extra  cost to separate TiO 2 photocatalyst after irradiation. 
Under TiO 2 dispersion method, most of the time, the mixture of  dye and TiO 2 is need to 
undergo centrifugation and filtration before measure the absorbance  by using UV -Vis 
spectrophotometer . Gupta , et al.  (2012) done the study of removal quinolone yellow  (QY)  
by using TiO 2 photocatalyst. The photocatalyst was disperse d into photocatalytic reactor 
and mixed with dye solution. Although it has a good percentage removal within few 
hours, however, the mixture of TiO 2 and dye i s needed  to centrifuge  for about 15-20 
minutes  after irradiation . Besides that, the solution sometimes still contains  TiO 2 
suspension after centrifuge, which may affect the reading of UV absorbance.  
 
 There are many kind of immobili sation method which introduce by different 
journal paper s. Most of the time, to introduced immobilisation method, a f ew factor 
which need to consider, which are, cost, simple and reusability . Lee, et al. (2013) studied 
the removal of Malachite Green (MG)  by photodegradation. In this study, TiO 2 was 
immobilised on glass plates                      . Six TiO 2 coated  glass plates were used 
in each experiment  set up . The TiO 2 photocatalyst was immobilised on glass plate  and the 
maximum removal efficiency can reach up to 10 0 % under presence of sunlight . Therefore, this indicates that the immobilisation method is suitable  for photodegradation 
process .  
 
 Andronic and Duta (2008) conduct ed a photodegradation study of Methyl Orange 
(MO) . Authors  mentioned that TiO 2 films can prepare by many methods, for example, 
spray coating, spin coating, chemical vapour deposition , and magnetron sputtering. 
However, thin film of TiO 2 was prepared by doctor blade coating technique in this study 
due to it is a fast, easy and non -energy consuming even in mass production.  
  
 The study of photodegr adation of azo pyridine dye using TiO 2 films was 
conducted by Dostani ć, et al. (2012). Spray pyrolysis method was used to prepare the 
TiO 2 films due to it may save  the production cost. Authors  reported that thickness of 
films may affect the photo degradation rate due to increase in amount of photocatalyst.  
 
2.2  Modification of TiO 2 photocatalyst  
 
 The unmodified Degussa P-25 TiO 2 powder is 80 % anatase form, 20 % rutile 
form  with the particle size of 30  nm and 50 m2/g BET surface area. Many researchers 
studied on removal dye s by using the unmodified TiO 2. In order to improve the 
photodegradation efficiency, modified TiO 2 has becoming a great concern to remove 
organic dyes. There are few ways to modify TiO 2 photocatalyst, such as thermal 
modification and chemical modification.  
  According to  Dostani ć, et al. (2012), the TiO 2 films was undergo thermal 
treatment and it was notice that by increase the temperature of calcination from 500 to 
700°C, the photocatalytic activity will lost. This is because the anatase  form of TiO 2 is 
converted to rutile form , consequent to reduce the specific surface area and porosity and 
increase in crystalline size. Apart from that, the interaction between anatase and rutile 
phase may leads to fast e-/h+ recombination, another reason for decrease i n photocatalytic 
activity.  
 
 Chen, Wang and Lou (2004) conducted a study on photodegradation Acid Orange 
7 (AO7) under visible light irradiation. In this study, the TiO 2 was supported by SiO 2. 
The (TiO 2/SiO 2) was prepared by acid -cataly sed sol -gel method. The modified 
photocatalyst were characterised by BET analysis to determine surface area and pore 
volume, whereas XRD was used to identify the crystalline structure, and pHzpc 
measurement was done by using mass titration  method . By rising  the calcination 
temperature, the BET surface area drop linearly. The study was fit to kinetic first order. 
One of the parameter in this study is to make comparison between TiO 2/SiO 2 and pure 
TiO 2 (Degussa P -25). Authors found that photocatalyst TiO 2/SiO 2 after calcinated at 
300°C have larger surface area and great adsorption compared to the unmodified  TiO 2, 
the photo degradation rate i s fastening by 2.3 times.  
 
 Senthilkumaar, Porkodi and Vidyalakshmi (2005) used sol-gel derived TiO 2 as 
photocatalyst.  It is a nanocry stalline TiO 2 and 100  % anatase titania which prepared  by 
sol-gel method.  Titanium (IV) butoxide was mixed with glacial acetic acid, it was dried, calcin ed under temperature 500 °C, and the nanocrystalline TiO 2 was finally formed. 
Nanocrystalline  TiO 2 was preferred in this study due to smaller size of particles and 
large r surface area over volume. The average crystalline size was found to be 12 nm and 
the surface area of nanocrystalline is 128.2 m2/g. 
 
  Munusamy, Aparna and Prasad (2013) studied  the effect of dopants of TiO 2 on 
photodegradation of Brilliant G reen (BG). The TiO 2 was doped with Cu  and Zn. Under 
SEM analysis, it  showed that TiO 2/Cu has more porous structure than the unmodified 
TiO 2. Authors  mentioned that highly porous structure may  attribute to prevention of TiO 2 
aggregation.  TiO 2/Zn has similar structure with unmodified  TiO 2. These three types of 
photocatalysts were then undergoing testing of photodegradation efficiency. Highly 
porous TiO 2/Cu does not have bette r efficiency. This may because  presence of metal ions 
retards  the photo degradation rate. Besides that, authors mentioned that not every dopants 
able to enhance the photo degradation rate due to different positions of the dopant in lost 
lattice.  
 
 Sharma , et al. (2008) also s tudied the doping effect of TiO 2. Authors use d Mn 
doping by different amount, which are 0, 2, 5, 8 and 10 mol  %. After that, it was tried on 
experiment by photodegrade Methylene Blue (MB). Authors commented that Mn doped 
TiO 2 are more photoactive than the undoped one, and  it is based on three reasons:  
i. Improve  in life time of photogen erated charge carriers . 
ii. More adsorption due to the charged crystalline surface . 
iii. Small crystalline size and large surface area .  
2.3  Previous study photodegradation of  dye 
 
 Study on removal dyes using photodegradation method was conducted by many 
researchers . Most of it is focus on removal single dye. For example , Guo, et al. (2012) 
studied on removal Congo Red (CR) dye  by using sulfailic acid -modified TiO 2, Lee , et al.  
(2013) studied on removal Mala chite Green (MG) using unmodified TiO 2, Mahadwad , et 
al. (2011) studied on removal Reactive Black 5 (RB5) by using modified TiO 2. Table 2.3 
shows the summary of the work done by various researchers in photodegradation of dye.  
 
Nonetheless, removal of binary dy es is becoming a great concern nowadays . This 
is because in wastewater, it may contain more than one type of dyes in it. So, in terms to 
remove mixed dye from industrial effluent, removal of binary dyes is studied.  
 
 Juang, Lin and Hsueh (2010) studied removal of binary dyes under UV light 
photodegradation. The photodegradation efficiency of single dye was tried initially. For 
single dye, the photodegradation rate is faster than binary dye. For binary dye, different 
ratio concentrations of both dyes was tried, which are, 1:1, 2:1 and 1:2 ratio of Acid 
Orange 7 (AO7) and Reactive Red 2 (RR2).  
 
 
 
 Table 2.3: Summary of the work done by various resea rchers in removal different 
dyes using photo degradation method . 
Photocatalyst  Light 
irradiation  Dye Percentage 
removal (%)  Reference  
CdS Xenon  CR 
MB 84.0 
51.0 (Li, Zhu and Li, 
2012 ) 
(TiO 2/SiW 12)8 Visible  MO 95.5 (Niu and Hao, 
2014 ) 
SnS 2 Xenon  CR 
RhB 90.0 
10.0 (Li, Zhu and Li, 
2012 ) 
TiO 2  modified by 
acid catalyst sol -gel  
Fluorescent  MB 
MO 
IC 
CSB  90.3 
98.5 
92.4 
60.3 (Zainal , et al., 
2005 ) 
TiO 2 impregnated 
ZSM -5 UV RB 5  89.4 (Madhadwad , et 
al., 2011 ) 
Milennium PC -500 
TiO 2 UV BB3 N/A (Khataee, 
Fathinia and 
Aber, 2011 ) 
Degussa P -25 TiO 2 Visible  RO 84  
RB 5  
RO 16  47.0 
66.0 
59.0 (Chat terjee , et 
al., 2008 ) 
Degussa P -25 TiO 2 Sunlight  MG 100.0  (Lee, et al., 
2013 ) 
Degussa P -25 TiO 2 UV Procion Blue 
HERD  99.78  (Bansal and 
Sud, 2011 ) 
Degussa P -25 TiO 2 UV QY 92.6 (Gupta , et al., 
2012 ) 
TiO 2/SiO 2 Visible  AO7  99.0 (Chen, Wang 
and Lou, 2004 )  
Zainal , et al.  (2005) studied the photodegradation efficiency in mixture of  dyes. 
Mixture of dyes is usually difficult to undergo photodegradation. Therefore prolong of 
irradiation time may needed . Besides that, each of the dye have own characteristics  in 
binary system. T hus, longer time for photodegradation is required. On top of that, authors 
mentioned when two dyes mixed together, the initial concentration is two times higher 
than the single dye. So, higher concentration may be another  factor to make it difficult to 
undergo photodegradation.  
  
2.4  Other semiconductor use as photocatalyst  
 
 A study of TiO 2, ZnO and nanobimetallic silica cataly sed photodegradation of 
Methyl G reen (MeG)  was conducted by Senthivelan , et al. (2013). In this study, authors 
made comparison between the 3 photocatalyst. The nanobime tal silica is Ag and Pt doped 
silica sol -gel powder (SiO 2-Ag/Pt). The mechanisms of photocatalytic effect of those 
photocatalyst w ere discussed in this journal  and ZnO and TiO 2 was found have the 
similar mechanism.  However, silica sol -gel powder has better photodegradation 
efficiency.  
 
 Kansal, Singh and Sud (2007) studied the photodegradation efficiency by using 
different photocatalyst. TiO 2, ZnS, CdS, ZnO and  SnO 2 were tested on the Rhodamine 
6G (Rh6G)  and Methyl Orange (MO) . This study found ZnO has the be tter 
photodegradation efficiency due to it  having bigger quantum efficiency than other photocatalyst and ZnS has the lowest efficiency. Table 2.5 shows the details of some 
semiconductors:  
 
2.5  Photodegr adation parameters  
 
 Under photodegr adation study, there are few parameters is crucial, which are 
effect of initial dye concentration and irradiation time, effect of pH, and effect of 
photocatalyst loading. Most of the journal study will conduct these 3 parameters because 
it can tell the best condition s for photodegradation of dye. Apart from the 3 parameters, 
Lee, et al.  (2013 ) studied  the effect of light source parameter . Authors mentioned that 
light source is an indicator to assess the operating cost and photodegr adation efficiency. 
Three types of l ight sources  were used in the parameters, which are UV lamp, 
fluorescence lamp and sunlight .  
 
Table 2.5 : Band positions sem iconductor photocatalysts in aqueous solution at pH 1.  
Semiconductor  Valence Band  Conductance Band  Band Gap 
(eV) Band  Gap 
Wavelength (nm)  
TiO 2 + 3.1  - 0.1 3.2 387 
SnO 2 + 4.1  + 0.3  3.9 318 
ZnO  + 3.0  - 0.2 3.2 387 
ZnS + 1.4  - 2.3 3.7 335 
CdS + 2.1  - 0.4 2.5 496 
Source : (Kansal, Singh and Sud, 2007)   
 Senthikumaar , et al.  (2005) studied  the effect of H 2O2 on photodegradation. The 
concentration of H 2O2 will affect the photodegradation rate. This is because addition of 
H2O2 will increase the OH● radical. Moreover, authors mentioned that H 2O2 acts as two 
functions in the photodegradation system, which is form ing OH● radical as well as 
accepts photogenerated conduction band electron and therefore promotes the charge 
separations.  
 
 Niu and Hao (20 14) studied the effect of surfactant and inorganic salts on the 
photodegradation of organic dyes. In textile industry, the major role of surfactant is to 
increase the solubility of dyes in water, to improve the dye -uptake and dye fastness, and 
to reduce th e dyeing temperature. Therefore, the industrial dye waste may contain other 
auxiliaries like inorganic salts and surfactants, which m ight affect the efficiency of dye 
treatment. (TiO 2/SiW 12)8 was used as photocatalyst  in this study . Besides that, three 
surfactants , SDS (Sodium Dodecylsulphate) and Polyoxyethylene Dodecyl Ether (PDE) 
and Dodecyltrimethylammonium Bromide (DTAB)  were tried in different concentration. 
According to the outcome, PDE  enhanced the photodegradation efficiency. This is 
because the  extra lone pair s of electrons  from surfactant  can form weak complex with 
SiW 12 and reduce the electrostatic repulsion between negatively charged catalysts and 
MO dye. However, high concentrations of SDS lower the photodegradation efficiency of 
MO due to t he interaction between dye and anionic surfactant SDS, causing MO becomes  
inert to react with photocatalyst.  Cationic surfactant DTAB will form white precipitate with MO dye at low pH. This may due to formation of complexation between cationic 
surfactant and dye.  
 
 Under the same journal paper, effect of inorganic salts was done by adding 
Sodium Chloride ( NaCl ) and Sodium Sulphate ( Na2SO 4) on the dye solution. Niu and 
Hao (2014) mentioned that presence of inorganic salts can cause  the inhibition effect on 
degradation of MO dye. This often explained by the scavenging of OH● radicals by 
anionic ions. Na 2SO 4 bring the higher inhibition effect for the p hotodegradation process. 
This might  because the sulphonic  group promotes dye aggregation or association in water.  
   
2.6  Characterisation Study on Photocatalyst  
 
 The characterisation and surface morphology on photocatalyst can be done by 
several kinds of instrument. A SEM analysis was done by Mahadwad , et al.  (2011). Th is 
SEM studies have shown the modified photocatalyst is different from the or iginal 
photocatalyst in terms of shape  and size. An AFM investigation was performed by Niu 
and Hao (2014). It is to obtain the detailed information regarding the surfac e morphology 
and homogeneity of multilayer films. The surface of photocatalyst can be present by 
AFM image in 2 -dimen sional and 3 -dimensional way, so that can determine the 
roughness and size of particles.  
 
 X-ray crystallography method can be used to iden tify the arrangement  of TiO 2 of 
a crystalline solid in 3 -dimensional space . Munusamy , et al.  (2013) used XRD to determine the XRD patterns of doped TiO 2 and undoped TiO 2. Based on the intensity of 
diffraction, it can be seen that all samples is in anatase  form and the doped TiO 2 do not 
change the crystal form of TiO 2. 
 
 Besides that, Dostani ć, et al.  (2012) carried out the XPS measurements  to 
determine the chemical state and composition of a material. XPS measurement is  suitable 
for chemical modified photocatalyst such as metal doped TiO 2, as to identify the 
elemental composition and the empirical formula of modified photocatalyst.  
 
2.7  Study the photodegradation intermediates  
 
 Erdemoglu, et al.  (2008) studied the product of intermediates by using LC -MS 
technique. The intermediates identified by interpret mass spectra data presenting their 
molecule ion peaks with respect to m/z. CR dye is study in this journal paper. Acco rding 
to this journal, ph otodegradation of CR dye is based on four steps:  
i. Cleavage of aromatic ring.  
ii. Cleavage of C -S bond between benzene ring and sul phonate groups . 
iii. Cleavage of various C -N and C -C bonds of the chromophore group.  
iv. Cleavage of N=N  double bond.  
 
 
 
 2.8  Optimisation study  
 
 Zuorro, Fidaleo and Lavecchia (2013) conducted a study of removal Reactive 
Green 19 (RG19) by UV/H 2O2 process and RSM was used for analysis. Four parameters 
were considered. CCD matrix and RSM  was applied to evaluate the interactive initial dye 
concentration  effect , amount of H 2O2, irradiation  time and pH . The factor level is -2, -1, 0, 
+1 and +2. Total 31 sets of experiment were generated from this design, it was  run and 
the percentage removal  was recorded.  In order to assess the validation of RSM,  
comparison between observe value and predicted value was done and it is in good 
agreement with the predicted values fell into 95 % prediction intervals.  
 
 Cho and Zoh (2007) studied on photodegradation of Reactive Red 120 (RR120) in 
TiO 2/UV system. It als o undergo optimisation study, which used response surface 
methodology (RSM) based on the central composite design (CCD). The effect of TiO 2 
concentration, initial concentration  of dye  and light intensity were studied using CCD 
method. After running the 20 experiments of CCD, i t was found that initial concentration 
of dye was the most significant. The optimi se condition was found to be 1.63 g/L TiO 2 
photocatalyst loading, concentration 45.2 mg/L of dye, and 8.1 mW/cm2 of UV intensity 
and it able to attain  100 % removal.  Surface and contour plot s are plotted to show the 
relationship s between the variables. Besides that, main effect plot w as plotted to 
analysing data with respect to important factors which have 2 or more levels.  
 
 2.9  Adsorption -Photodegradation study  
 
 Zainal , et al. (2009) incorporated photodegradation and adsorption method to 
remove monoazo dye. In photodegradation, TiO 2 was used. For adso rption, chitosan was 
used. A 1:1 ratio of TiO 2 and chitosan were mixed together and immobilised on a glass 
plates , and it was undergo 100 °C of oven drying. Fluorescent light was used as light 
source in this study. Under XRD analysis, 3 dip -coated layers give the smallest 
crystalli ne size of TiO 2, whic h about 6 nm whereas 5 dip -coated layers give the largest 
crystallite size, 18 nm. Smaller crystallite size may have higher surface area. Under SEM  
analysis , the number of TiO 2 particles is increasing by increase the dip -coating. Also, it 
was suggested tha t the coating layer should not exceed 4 layers due to the penetration of 
light may be blocked. The kinetic study obeyed to Langmuir -Hinshelwood. The authors 
suggested that different ratios of TiO 2 and chitosan can try for further study.  
 
2.10 Photodegradation s tudy on other organic compounds  
 
 Apart from organic dye, photodegradation study can also apply for volatile 
organic compounds (VOCs). (Lee, Azelee and Ali, 2012) studied the photo degradation  of 
benzene -toluene -xylene (BTX) mixture in aqueous phase by using ZnO photocatalyst. 
The experiment was tried in 3 different set up, which are  
i. Presence of photocatalyst and light source . 
ii. Presence of light source but absence of photocatalyst . 
iii. Presence of photocatalyst but absence of light source.   
The photodegradation efficiency was found approximately 30 % in after 210 minutes  
irradiation  with presence of UV light and photocatalyst.  This indicates that both 
photocatalyst and light source must present in  order to undergo photodegradation process.  
 
 Photodegradation of bisphenol A (BPA) by using H 3PW 12O40/TiO 2 was done by 
Lu, et al. (2 013). The intermediates  and the pathways of degradation were analysed by 
using mass spectrometer. First order of kinetic model was obey  in this study.  The 
percentage removal was up to 75 %. Besides that, reusability of photocatalyst is studied 
in the research and it was found t he photocatalyst can reuse up to 10 times. 
Mineralisation and toxicity  test was done in this study in order to test the oxidising ability 
of the photocatalyst which could to degrade the BPA into non -toxic CO 2 and H 2O. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER 3  
MATERIALS AND MET HOD  
 
3.1  Preparation of photocatalyst  
 
Titanium dioxide, TiO 2 was selected as photocatalyst in this study. TiO 2 powder 
(mainly anatase form, mean the particle size of 30  nm, BET surface area of 50  m2/g) was 
purchased from MERCK.  
 
3.2  Preparation of dye  
 
The dyes being studied were Basic Blue 3 (BB3) (C.I. = 51004) and Congo Red 
(CR) (C.I. = 22120). Both dyes were  purchase d from Sigma -Aldrich (M) Sdn. Bhd. and 
used as received without further purification. For each dye, 100 mg/L of standard dye 
solution  was prepared as stock solution and afterwards  diluted when n eeded . All prepared 
dye solutions were kept in dark to prevent light degradation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3.3  Batch Studies  
 
3.3.1  Immobilisation of TiO 2 on glass tank  
 
TiO 2 suspension was prepared  by dissolv ing 5 g of TiO 2 in 50 mL of 99.9 % 
methanol solution. The mixture was stirred continuously until all the TiO 2 powders were 
uniformly dispersed. The TiO 2 was coated at inner surface of glass tank (15 cm   15 cm 
  11.5 cm) by using brush. The initial weight a nd final weight of glass tank were weighed  
to calculate the amount of TiO 2 coated.  
 
         
Figure 3.1: Glass tank coated with TiO 2 (Top view and Side view)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3.2  Batch experiments  
 
 Irradiation experiments were carried out by using 1000 mL of 15 mg/L of mixture 
dye solution (BB3 and CR) without changing its pH in a glass tank which coated  with 
TiO 2. For each experimental run, the weight of immobilised TiO 2 used was maintained at 
approximately 1.0 g. Aeration was provided by bubbling air into th e reaction solution by 
an air pump to ensure a constant supply of oxyg en. All experiments  were carried out 
under the similar  conditions . All experiments were repeated and average results were 
presented with relative standard deviation (RSD) less than 5  %. At given intervals of 
irradiation, approximately 10 mL of the solution was withdrawn from the reservoir and 
the dye concentration  in the solution was determined using Dynamica SB -10 UV/Vis 
spectrophotometer. All measurements were made at the wavelength cor responding to 
maximum adsorption; for BB3, λ max = 658 nm; for CR, λ max = 510 nm.  
 
 The percentage removal of dyes is calculated using equation 3.1:  
                                                          
                                [3.1]  
 
where  C o = Initial concentration of dye (mg/L)  
Ct = Concentration of dye at time t (mg/L)  
 
 
 
 3.3.3  Effect of initial dye concentration and irradiation  time  
 
 The effect of initial concentration s of dye  and irradiation  time was investigated 
using 1000 mL of dye concentration of 5, 15, 25 mg/L. The samples were withdrawn and 
analy sed for their dye concentrations at predetermined intervals 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 15, 30, 60, 
120, 180, 240 and 300 min utes. 
 
3.3.4  Effect of photocatalyst loading  
 
 The study on the effect of photocatalyst loading on the photodegradation 
efficiency was carried out by varying the mass of TiO 2 coated. The mass of TiO 2 coating 
studied was 0.2, 0.5, 1.0 and 3.0 g. The volume of dye solution used was 1000 mL. The 
initial dye concentration was used as 15 mg/L and the final concentration was measured 
after 300 minutes.  
 
3.3.5  Effect of pH  
 
 The effect of pH on the photodegradation of mixture of dye was tudied from  pH 
ranging  6-10. The desired pH value was adjusted by dropwise addition of hydrochloric 
acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH), prior to the experiment. The initial dye 
concentration was used as 15 mg/L and the final concentration was measured after 300 
minut es. 
 3.3.6  Effect of repetitive usage and recycle of coated TiO 2 
 
The effect of repetitive usage was  studied by repeating  the experiment  using the 
same glass tank. The TiO 2 glass tank was rinsed with distilled water and stored in dark 
area after each usage . After recycling, the TiO 2 glass tank was reused in order to study 
the efficiency of the recycled TiO 2 glass tanks in the subsequent photodegradation 
process.  
 
3.4  Optimisation of dye photodegradation  
 
3.4.1  Plackett -Burman  (PB) design  
 
Plackett -Burman design was used to assess  the effect of several  variables which  
affect  the removal  efficiency of dyes. In this study, 3 assigned variables (pH, initial dye 
concentration, and photocatalyst loading) were screened in 12 experimental designs.  
 
3.4.2  Response Surface Method ology  (RSM) analaysis  
 
RSM was used for optimisation study. Th ose variables studied were obtained 
from the result of Plackett -Burman study and the percentage removal  of dye was 
optimised using quadratic equation. All the experimental designs are tested  by Design 
Expert Version 7.1.3 software. S tatistical analysis of the data was carried out using the 
same software.  3.5  Instrumental analysis  
 
3.5.1  Scanning Electron Microscope  (SEM)  
 
The surface morphology of TiO 2 before and after photodegradation was studied 
using SEM which equipped with energy dispersive X -ray Spectrometer (SEMEDX) -
JOEL JSM -6400.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER 4  
RESULT AND DISCUSSION  
 
4.1  Characteri sation of photocatalyst  
 
4.1.1  Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) Studies  
 
 Scanning electron mi croscope wa s used to study the surface morphology of TiO 2. 
Figure 4.1.1 (a) and (b) presented  the SEM images of the TiO 2 before and after undergo 
photocatalysis with BB3 and CR dye.  
 
Based on Figure 4.1.1 (a) and (b), both SEM micrographs are look similar in 
terms of shape and size. However, by comparing both SEM micrographs, Figure 4.1.1 (a) 
looks less compact but Figure 4.1.1 (b) shows high in co mpactness. This may due to after 
undergo photodegradation, some dye molecules  (BB3 and CR)  is adhere to the TiO 2 and 
this can be further verify using AFM.  
 
  
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 4.1.1 SEM micrograph of TiO 2 (a) Original MERCK TiO 2, (b) TiO 2 after 
undergo photodegradation with BB3 and CR  
4.2  Effect of initial concentration and irradiation  time 
 
 The main goal to study  the initial concentrations and irradiation  time effect is to 
identify  the equilibrium time for maximum photodegradation.  Figure 4.2 (a) and (b) 
presented the photodegradation efficiency of BB3 and CR , respectively. Three different 
concentrations were studied , which are 5, 15 and 25 mg/L for both dyes. It was noticed 
the percentage removal increas e by prolonging  the irradiat ion time.  
 
According to the Figure 4.2 (a) and (b) , for both BB3 and CR, low er dye 
concentration has better efficiency compare to the higher concentration of dye. A 5 mg/L 
of BB3 was able to achieve 78 .64 % of removal within 300 minutes whereas 25 mg/L 
have 63 .35 % of removal  under the same condition. Besides that , 5 mg/L of CR can reach 
66.95 % of removal but 25 mg/L  concentration  of CR have only 60 .61 % under 
irradiation of sunlight .  
 
With increasing the initial dye concentration, more dye molecules was adsorbing  
on the surface of TiO 2. However, due to fixed amount of TiO 2 and l ow light penetration, 
dye molecules are not undergoing degrada tion immediately. Moreover,  high 
concentration of dye solution leads to high intensity colour ed, the path length o f photo ns 
entering solution is lower  and therefore insufficient photons reach the TiO 2 surface. This 
can explain why high concentration of dye will lower the photodegradation efficiency.   
Figure 4.2 (a): Graph of percentage removal of BB3 versus time in binary system.  
Condition: 1000 mL of 5, 15, and 25 mg/L of dye solution under sunlight  for 300 minutes 
in approximately 1.0 g photocatalyst.  0102030405060708090
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350Percentage removal (%)  
Time (min)  
 Percentage removal of BB3 versus time  
5 mg/L
15 mg/L
25 mg/L 
Figure 4.2 (b): Graph of percentage removal of CR versus time in binary system.  
Condition: 1000 mL of 5, 15, and 25 mg/L of dye solution under sunlight  for 300 minutes 
in approximately 1.0 g photocatalyst.  01020304050607080
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350Percentage removal (%)  
Time (min)  
 Percentage removal of CR versus time  
5 mg/L
15 mg/L
25 mg/L 
Furthermore, b y comparing both BB3 and CR dye, BB3 have higher percentage 
removal than CR.  Approximately 60 % of percentage removal  indicates  that CR is harder  
to undergo photodegradation. This may  related to the size of dye molecule s. By looking 
both molecular structure of BB3 and CR, BB3 structure has smaller size with molecular 
weight 359.89 g/mol  whereas for CR, it is a diazo dye which bulkier than BB3. The 
molecular weight of CR is 696.66 g/mol, about double weight of BB3. Zainal , et al. 
(2005) reported the similar result by compare d CSB with MB, MO, and IC. Authors 
mentioned that bulky molecular size may require a prolong irradiation time for it,  so that 
it can be photodegrade  completely. As a result, in order to increa se percentage removal of 
CR, a longer irradiation time i s required . 
 
Figure 4.2 (a) and (b) do not show equilibrium at 300 minutes. At the same time, 
the percentage removal was at the range of 60-80 %. This indicates that the 
photodegradation process was yet to complete. Juang, Lin and Hsueh  (2010) reported the 
photodegradation mixed dye is slow  compare to  single dye. This is the retarded effect. 
Thus, longer irradiation time may enhance the percentage removal of dye in binary 
system.  
 
Besides that, the experiment was stop  at 300 minutes even though it wa s yet to 
reach equilibrium. This is because the sunli ght intensity starts to turn weak at the location 
which conducts the experiment. Sunlight  is a free and natural source. In order to 
minimi ze the cost of dye treatment, sunlight  is encouraged to use.  Since the photodegradation process is required both photo catalyst and light source , 
so, weak intensity of sunlight  might slow down the process. However, th e slow 
photodegradation rate problem may improve by modifying photocatalyst. Chen, Wang 
and Lou (2004) reported that modified TiO 2 has better photodegrad ation  rate and 
Erdemoglu , et al.  (2008) reported nanocrystalline TiO 2 was able to photodegrade CR up 
to 90 % within 30 minutes.  
 
4.3  Effect of Photocatalyst Loading  
 
 The effect  of TiO 2 photo catalyst dosage was studied. Result of both BB3 and CR 
percentage removal was shown in Figure 4.3. Four different amount of photocatalyst w as 
tried, which are 0.2, 0.5, 1.0 and 3.0 g. According to the result of both BB3 and CR, 
rising  of photocatalyst  amount from 0.2 g to 1.0 g will lead to an increase  in percentage 
removal from 60.66 % to 66.60 % for BB3 , and 56.13 % to 60.12% for CR.  
 
The increas e of percentage removal by increasing photocatalyst loading is 
because the presence of more ready availab ility surface area, ca using the number of 
active site increase and therefore enhance  the phot odegradation rate (Chen, et al.,  2007).  
  
 Nevertheless, it was observed that the percentage removal of both BB3 and CR 
decreased  when 3.0 g of photocatalyst was applied in the experiment. This may due to 
excessive of photocatalyst lead to agglomeration and sedimentation of TiO 2 particles . In 
other words, 3.0 g of photocatalyst may consider  too much in  this experiment set up .   
Figure 4.3 Effect of photocatalyst  loading on percentage removal of BB3 and CR 
dyes by TiO 2 photocatalyst  
Condition: 1000 mL of 15 mg/L dye solution under sunlight  for 300 minutes without 
changing pH.  5456586062646668
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5Percentage removal (%)  
Photocatalyst loading (g)  Percentage removal versus photocatalyst loading for 
BB3 and CR  
BB3
CRTherefore, it was predicted that further increase of photocatalyst loading will even  lower 
the percentage of dyes removal. The photocatalyst may cluster together and lower the 
visible light penetration as well as  enhance  the light scattering effect.  
 
Erdemoglu , et al. (2008) reported the same trend in this parameter. A uthors 
mentioned that perhaps the decrease in photo degradation rat e at high photocatalyst 
loading is  because of  the activated molecules was deactivat e by collision with ground 
state molecules.  
 
Guo, et al. (2012) suggested that 1.0 g of photocatalyst will give the best 
percentage removal in the photodegradation experiment to remove CR dye under visible 
light.  
  
 Consequently, increase of photocatalyst loading can increase the percentage 
removal. However, when photocatalyst is in e xcessive amount, the photodegradation 
efficiency may decrease.  
 
4.4  Effect of pH  
 
 Effect of pH study was carried out in the range of pH 6 -10 on the percentage 
removal  of 15 mg/L of BB3 and CR. Figure 4.4 (a) show s the percentage remo val of BB3 
and CR versus pH. This  result indicates  that, there was a strong pH dependen t of the 
solution on the heterogeneous  photocatalytic process.   
Figure 4.4 Effect of pH on removal of BB3 and CR by TiO 2 photocatalyst  
Condition: 1.0 g of photocatalyst  in 1000 mL of 15 mg/L dye solution under sunlight  for 
300 minutes.  40455055606570
0 2 4 6 8 10 12Percentage removal (%)  
pH Percentage removal of BB3 and CR versus pH  
BB3
CR 
For BB3 dye, the percentage removal was the lowest at pH 6, which only 58.89 %  
of removal . Between the pH 6 -10, the percentage removal increased gradually and 
percentage removal was highe st at pH 10, which is 66.07 %. For CR dye, a dropping 
trend was noticed between pH 6 -10. CR dye has the highest percentage removal at pH 6, 
59.32 % removal and it has lowest percentage removal at pH 10, which only 47.89 %  
removal . 
 
Senthilkumaar, Porkodi  and Vidyalakshimi (2005) mentioned that hydroxyl group 
of TiO 2 may undergo 2 acid -base equilibria as shown below:  
TiOH 2+  ↔  TiOH   +     H+ 
TiOH    ↔  TiO-   +     H+ 
 
As general, a significant dependency of the photocatalytic  degradation efficiency 
on pH value had been observed for charged substrates. Since dye photooxidation  was 
followed by releasing photons, its degradation rate can be affected due to the reversible 
protonation of TiO 2 surface.  
 
The original pH of 15 mg/L BB3 in single dye system wa s 7.14 and the pH of 15 
mg/L CR was single dye system is 5.60. When these 2 dyes mixed together, the binary 
dye solution was at pH 6.35. The pH zpc or isoelectric point of unmodified TiO 2 was 
around pH 6.25, which means that below  pH 6.25, the surface of TiO 2 is positive charge 
whereas above pH 6.25, the surface of TiO 2 is negative  due to deprotonated  (Andronic and Duta, 2008). Sometimes, the presence of impurities or specific adsorption of ions on 
the TiO 2 surface may change the pHzpc value. In other literature, it was reported that the 
pHzpc value of TiO 2 is pH 6.1 (Chen, Wang and Lou, 2004).  
 
 For BB3 dye, it is cationic form  in aqueous solution and CR is anionic form in 
aqueous solution. When it is basic condition (pH > 6.25), that will have electrostatic 
interaction between surface of TiO 2 and cationic dye, which lead to strong attachment 
and therefore higher photodegradation rate. As the pH increase to higher, the TiO 2 
surface will have  more negatively charge and this explaine d why BB3 dye has highest 
percentage removal at pH 10.  
 
On the other hand, under  acidic condition (pH < 6.25), the surface of TiO 2 is 
positive, it will have electrostatic repulsion with the cationic dye, this explained  why BB3 
has lowest percentage removal  at pH 6. However, the positive charged surface of TiO 2 
will tend to attract negatively charged CR and this tells why CR has highest percentage 
removal at pH 6 but lowest percentage removal at  pH 10. This behaviour  was 
characteristics for majority  photodegradation systems and comparable results have been 
reported in other journal s (Konstantinou and Albanis, 2004) . 
 
 The experiment was not carr y out in acidic condition because CR dye will change 
the original red to blue colour at pH 5. 3 and below. Th erefore, a fair comparison may 
hard to be performed due to the differences in colour.  
  
4.5  Effect of repetitive usage and recycle of coated TiO 2 glass tank  
 
 Reusability parameter was performed  to determine the ability of repetitive usage. 
The technology of heterogeneous photocatalys is is applicable for practical usage due to 
the regeneration of TiO 2 photocatalyst. The higher reusability will bring benefits to the 
wastewater treatment industry. Figure 4.5 show s the effect of repetitive usage and recycle 
of coated TiO 2 glass tank on the percentage removal  of BB3 and CR. In this parameter, a 
repetitive us age of 6 times  was attempted .  
 
The result showed that the photodegradation rates decreased with increasing 
number of usage for both dyes. The percentage removal of BB3 under sunlight  for each 
cycles are 65.22, 64.92, 63.92, 62.32, 61.05, 59.81  % for 6 cycles of repetitive usage, 
respectively. In the first 2 times of recycle  usage , the percentage removal of BB3 was 
able to be maintain ed at about 65 % . However, it decreased  gradually  thereafter .  
 
For remova l of CR, the percentage removal s are 61.16, 60.29, 59.67, 58.73, 57.66, 
56.36 % for 6 times of reuse, respectively. For each time of reuse, the percentage removal  
was decrease by approximately 1 %. As a result, both BB3 and CR dyes are not suitable 
to reuse too much of  cycle as the removal efficiency might be affected.  
  
Figure 4.5 Effect of repetitive usage and recycle of coated TiO 2 glass tank on 
percentage remo val of BB3 and CR  
Condition: 1.0 g of photocatalyst in 1000 mL of 15 mg/L dye solution under sunlight  for 
300 minutes.  505254565860626466
1 2 3 4 5 6Percentage removal (%)  
Number of cycle  Percentage removal of BB3 and CR versus number of 
cycle  
BB3
CR 
 Each time of reuse  cycle  may cause the non -eligible dye molecules  to be attached  
on the TiO 2 surface. T hese attached dyes molecules  might  block the TiO 2 photocatalyst 
from being illuminated by the light source and therefore hindered the formation of 
electron -hole pairs and slowing down the formation of beneficial radicals.  
 
 The similar observations reported by Jiang , et al. (2014)  which can be reuse about 
3-4 times  to remove reactive brilliant red dye by using 250 W high -pressure mercury 
lamp at wavelength 365 nm .  
 
Besides that, according to Lee , et al.  (2013), the dye molecules which strongly 
attached on TiO 2 surfaces are unable to remove by recycling method  and therefore lower 
photodegradation efficiency was anticipated . 
 
4.6  Photodegradation kinetic study  
 
 Lee, et al. (2013) mentioned that kinetic study of photodegr adation  process can 
provide information regarding the mechanism of photodegradation and reaction pathways. 
This is crucial as it helps to maximi ze the photodegr adation efficiencies in organic 
pollutants removal. In addition, it also describes the rate of removal,  which in turn to 
control the irradiation  time (Ho and Mckay, 1998). The kinetics data obtained from 
photodegradation of BB3 and CR dyes using TiO 2 photocatalyst was studied by using 
Langmuir -Hinshelwood (LH) kinetics model.   
4.6.1   Langmuir -Hinshelwood (LH) Kinetic model  
 
Under LH kinetic model, it has five assumptions:  
 
i. Only one substrate able to  bind at each surface site.  
ii. The amount  of surface adsorption sites is constant  at equilibrium.  
iii. No interaction between adjacent adsorbed su bstrates.  
iv. Rate of surface adsorption is greater than the rate of any subsequent 
chemical reactions.  
v. The heat of adsorption by the substrate is identical for each site and is 
independent of surface coverage.  
 
Generally, the effect of initial organic pollutants concentration on the rate of 
photodegradation was expressed as equation 4.1:  
 
    
      
             [4.1]  
 
However, in low concentration of photocatalyst, the equation 4.1 able to  be 
simplified to first -order equation (equation 4.2)  
 
  (  
 )                     [4.2]  
 Where  
C0 is the initial concentration of the reactant (mg/L)  
C is the concentration of the reactant at time t (mg/L)  
t is the irradiation  time 
k’ is the reaction rate constant (min-1) 
K is the adsorption coefficient of reactant onto the semiconductor particles (L/mg)  
 r is the oxidation rate of the reactant (mg/L min)  
 
4.6.2  First -order Kinetic model  
 
 Figure 4.6.2 (a) and (b) presented  the graphs  of kinetic first order for both  BB3 
and CR dye. The plot of ln  (Co/C) versus t ime produce a straight line as indicated  in 
equation 4.2 . The rate constant, k’ is determined from the gradient of the straight line.  
 
   
  
Figure 4.6.2 (a): First order kinetics for the photodegr adation of BB3 in binary 
system . 
Condition: 1.0 g of photocatalyst in 1000 mL of 5, 15, 25 mg/L of dye solution under 
sunlight  for 300 minutes.  y = 0.005x + 0.1791  
R² = 0.9748  
y = 0.004x + 0.107  
R² = 0.9826  
y = 0.0032x + 0.0946  
R² = 0.9925  
00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.8
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350ln (Co/C) 
Time (min)  ln (Co/C) of BB3 versus time  
5 mg/L
15 mg/L
25 mg/L 
Figure 4.6.2 ( b): First order kinetics for the photode gradation of CR in binary 
system . 
Condition: 1.0 g of photocatalyst in 1000 mL of 5, 15, 25 mg/L of dye solution under 
sunlight  for 300 minutes.  y = 0.0035x + 0.1863  
R² = 0.9707  
y = 0.0031x + 0.0829  
R² = 0.9832  
y = 0.0028x + 0.0786  
R² = 0.9911  
00.20.40.60.811.21.4
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350ln (Co/C) 
Time (min)  ln (Co/C) of CR versus time  
5 mg/L
15 mg/L
25 mg/LTable 4.6.2  (a) listed the observed rate constant and the R2
 for both BB3 and CR dye at 
several initial dye concentrations. With the R2 above 0.9700, it means  that the first order 
kinetic which derived from Langmuir -Hinshelwood kinetic model seems to be fit in this 
study. Senthilkumaar , et al.  (2005) also reported the R2 for first order kinetic with the 
range of  0.9719 to 0.9900, which photodegradation of MB in 3 different concentrations.  
 
In addition, some journal study reported that first order kinetic is adequate to 
describe the photodegradation of organic dyes (Barka , et al.,  2010).   
 
 By comparison, t he rate constant value for BB3 wa s higher than CR. The rate 
constant was lower down from 0.0050 to 0.0032 min-1 when initial BB3 concentration 
was increase d. Similar observation was found in CR, whereby the rate constant decreased 
from 0.0035 to 0.0028 min-1 with adjusting  initial concentration of dye s from 5 mg/L to 
25 mg/L. This m ight due to less light penetration at higher dye concentrations  and the 
surface of TiO 2 was not fully irradiated . Juang, Lin and Hsueh (2010) reported the same 
trend regarding  the study of removal AO7 and RR2 in binary system.  
 
Table 4.6.2  (a): First order kinetic model for photodegradation of BB3 and CR  
Initial dye 
concentration (mg/L)  Basic Blue 3 (BB3)  Congo Red (CR)  
Rate, k 1 (min-1) R2 Rate, k 1 (min-1) R2 
5 0.0050  0.9748  0.0035  0.9707  
15 0.0040  0.9826  0.0031  0.9832  
25 0.0032  0.9925  0.0028  0.9911   
   
                    
         [4.3]  
 
Furthermore, half -life (t1/2), which showed in equation 4.3, is a useful indication 
for the chemical reaction which undergoes first order kinetic. It is able to describe time 
taken for dye to drop to half of its initial  concentration . Table 4.6.2 (b) shows the half -life 
of BB3 and CR in different initial dye concentration.  
 
Table 4.6.2 (b): Half -life of BB3 and CR in different initial dye concentration  
Initial dye 
concentration (mg/L)  Basic Blue 3 (BB3)  Congo Red (CR)  
Half -life, t 1/2 (min)  Half -life, t 1/2 (min)  
5 138.63  198.04  
15 173.29  223.60  
25 216.61  247.55  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4.7  Optimisation Study of Dye Photodegradation  
 
4.7.1  Plackett -Burman (PB) design  
 
 Plackett -Burman  design is a software which able to assess the relative importance 
of miscellaneous variables which affect the photodegradation efficiency. It provides 
unbiased estimation for all parameters with high accuracy for a given number of 
observations (Rajendran,  et al., 2007). Three parameters which most likely to influence 
the percentage removal are tested on their validity in this study by  using Plackett -Burman 
design. The parameters studied are initial dye concentrations, photocatalyst loading and 
pH. Tables 4 .7 (a) and (b) illustrates the validation result for the photodegradation of BB3 
and CR.  
 
The result of analysis of variance  (ANOVA) of both BB3 and CR dye solutions is 
presented in Tables 4.7.1 (c) and (d). The model was known as significant when the 
Prob >F value is below 0.05. Both models of BB3 and CR are significant since the values 
are Prob> F value of 0.0038 and 0.0232, respectively.  
 
However, the photocatalyst loading parameter in both dye of BB3 and CR shows 
insignificant with Prob> F 0.2057 and 0.198 6, respectively. This indicates that amount of 
photocatalyst does not bring much effect on percentage removal in this study. Apart from 
that, initial dye concentration and photocatalyst loading was found to be factors that will 
affect the percentage remova l for both BB3 and CR dye.  
 Table 4.7 .1 (a): Plackett -Burman design and results of the removal BB3 from binary 
system  
Experimental 
run Variables  
Observed 
response 
(%) Predicted 
response 
(%) Initial dye 
concentration  
(mg/L)  Photocatalyst 
loading  (g) pH 
1 5.00 0.20 10.00  69.03  72.26  
2 5.00 0.20 6.00 67.42  65.55  
3 25.00  3.00 6.00 60.24  61.73  
4 25.00  0.20 10.00  67.72  66.07  
5 5.00 3.00 10.00  72.84  74.57  
6 5.00 0.20 6.00 67.42  65.55  
7 25.00  3.00 10.00  71.75  68.38  
8 5.00 3.00 6.00 70.81  67.86  
9 25.00  0.20 10.00  67.72  66.07  
10 25.00  3.00 6.00 60.24  61.73  
11 5.00 3.00 10.00  72.84  74.57  
12 25.00  0.20 6.00 55.54  60.39  
 
 
 
 
 Table 4.7 .1 (b): Plackett -Burman design and results of the removal CR from binary 
system  
Experimental 
run Variables  
Observed 
response 
(%) Predicted 
response 
(%) Initial dye 
concentration  
(mg/L)  Photocatalyst 
loading  (g) pH 
1 5.00 3.00 6.00 87.88  80.00  
2 5.00 3.00 10.00  57.60  66.03  
3 25.00  3.00 6.00 57.77  63.08  
4 5.00 3.00 10.00  57.60  66.03  
5 5.00 0.20 10.00  66.43  58.03  
6 25.00  0.20 10.00  35.54  48.38  
7 25.00  3.00 6.00 57.77  48.38  
8 25.00  0.20 6.00 57.23  55.08  
9 25.00  3.00 10.00  68.73  54.90  
10 5.00 0.20 6.00 72.29  72.00  
11 5.00 0.20 6.00 72.29  72.00  
12 25.00  0.20 10.00  35.54  48.38  
 
 
 
 
 Table 4.7 .1 (c): Regression analysis (ANOVA) of Plackett -Burman for the removal 
of BB3 from binary system  
 
Table 4.7 .1 (d): Regression analysis (ANOVA) of Plackett -Burman for the removal 
of CR from binary system  
 Source  Sum of 
Squares  df Mean 
Square  F-Value  p-value  
(Prob >F) 
Model  265.91  3 88.64  10.49  0.0038  
A- Initial dye concentration  115.01  1 115.01  13.61  0.0061  
B- Catalyst Loading  16.03  1 16.03  1.90 0.2057  
C- pH 134.87  1 134.87  15.96  0.0040  
Residual  67.60  8 8.45   
Total  333.51  11    
Source  Sum of 
Squares  df Mean 
Square  F-Value  p-value  
(Prob>F) 
Model  1635.99  3 545.33  5.57 0.0232  
A- Initial dye concentration  858.69  1 858.69  8.77 0.0181  
B- Catalyst Loading  192.24  1 192.24  1.96 0.1986  
C- pH 585.06  1 585.06  5.98 0.0403  
Residual  782.96  8 97.87    
Total  2481.95  11    4.7.2   Response Surface Methodology (RSM) design  
 
Two parameters (initial dye concentration and pH) are tested on their validity in 
this study by using RSM design.  Total 13 sets of experimental run were generated for 
each dye. Table 4.7.2 (a) and (b) presented the validation result for photodegradation  of 
BB3 and CR dye in binary system.  The equations of percentage removal of both BB3 and 
CR dyes in binary system were generated by Design -Expert 7.1.3 as below:  
 
BB3 dye solution:  
                                                 
 
CR dye solution:    
                                                 
 
where ,   A is initial dye concentration  
 B is pH 
 
The result of analysis of variance (ANOVA) of both BB3 and CR dye solutions is 
presented in Tables 4.7.2 (c) and (d). According to the analysis, both model s are 
significant with Prob> F less than 0.0001. The R2 for both BB3 and CR model is 0.9963 
and 0.9651 respectively, this relatively high value and indicates that it has a good 
agreement between observed and predicted response. There is less than 0.01% opportunity  that a “Model F -value” this high could occur due to noise. As a result, eff ect 
of initial dye concentration and pH  effect  are significant for both BB3 and CR model.  
 
Adequate precision is to measure the signal to noise ratio. According to Design -
Expert software , value larger than 4 is preferable. Since the adequate precision for  both 
BB3 and CR was 50.148 and 22.190 respectively, so , it indicates an adequate signal. The 
predicted R2 for BB3 was found to be 0.9678, which was in reasonable agreement with 
the adjusted R2 value (0.9936). However, the predicted R2 for CR was not close  to the 
adjusted R2. This may indicate some possible problem with this model.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4.7.2 (a) : RSM design and results of the removal BB3 from binary system  
Experimental 
Run Variables  
Observed 
response (%)  Predicted 
response (%)  Initial dye 
concentration  pH 
1 5.00 8.00 74.50 75.24  
2 15.00  8.00 64.55  68.68  
3 15.00  8.00 64.55  68.68  
4 25.00  10.00  66.03  69.20  
5 5.00 6.00 76.46  75.12 
6 15.00  6.00 63.89  64.13  
7 15.00  10.00  66.07  66.42 
8 25.00  8.00 64.07  63.62  
9 5.00 10.00  75.80 77.06  
10 25.00  6.00 63.35  63.40  
11 15.00  8.00 64.55  68.68  
12 15.00  8.00 64.55  68.68  
13 15.00  8.00 64.55  68.68  
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 4.7.2 (b) : RSM design and results of the removal CR from binary system  
Experimental 
Run Variables  
Observed 
response (%)  Predicted 
response  (%) Initial dye 
concentration  pH 
1 15.00  8.00 55.02  54.67 
2 25.00  8.00 55.84  51.80 
3 15.00  8.00 54.02  54.67 
4 5.00 10.00 58.43  57.75  
5 15.00  10.00 47.89  48.46  
6 25.00  6.00 60.61  60.41  
7 5.00 6.00 66.29  64.50  
8 25.00  10.00 40.9 51.05  
9 15.00  8.00 54.02  54.67 
10 15.00  6.00 58.32  60.32 
11 15.00  8.00 54.02  54.67 
12 15.00  8.00 54.02  54.67 
13 5.00 8.00 59.34  61.81  
 
 
 
 
 Table 4.7.2 (c) : Regression analysis (ANOVA) of RSM for the removal of BB3 in 
binary system  
Source  Sum of 
Squares  df Mean 
Square  F-value  p-value  
(Prob> F) 
Model  299.00  5 59.80  374.71  < 0.0001  
Initial dye concentration  192.33  1 192.33  1205.12  < 0.0001  
pH 7.84 1 7.84 49.15  0.0002  
Residual  1.12 7 0.16   
Total  300.12  12    
 
R2: 0.9963, Adjusted R2: 0.9936, Predicted R2: 0.9678, Adequate precision: 50.148  
 
Table 4.7.2 ( d): Regression analysis (ANOVA) of RSM for the removal of CR in 
binary system  
Source  Sum of 
Squares  df Mean 
Square  F-value  p-value  
(Prob> F) 
Model  438.92  5 87.78  38.77  < 0.0001  
Initial dye concentration  150.46  1 150.46  66.45  < 0.0001  
pH 240.74  1 240.74  106.33  < 0.0001  
Residual  15.85  7 2.26   
Total  454.77  12    
 
R2: 0.9651, Adjusted R2: 0.9403, Predicted R2: 0.6783, Adequate Precision: 22.190  Figure 4.7 (a) and (b) shows  3D surface plot about the correlation between initial 
dye concentration and pH for removal BB3 and CR dye. For BB3, the maximum removal 
was achieve d when high pH and low initial dye concentration. For CR, the highest 
removal was attain ed in condition of l ow pH and low initial dye concentration. Based on 
the 3D plot, red colour region  identified as maximum level in percentage removal 
whereas blue colour region shows less desirability. Consequently, both dyes also have 
better percentage removal when in low i nitial dye concentration s. 
  
 
Figure 4.7 (a) : 3D surface plot for removal of BB3 in binary system  
 
 
Figure 4.7  (b): 3D surface plot for removal of CR in binary system  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 5  
CONCLUSION  
 
5.1  Conclusion  
 
 In this study, the effectiveness of  TiO 2 as photocatalyst for the photodegradation  
of BB3 and CR in binary dye system  was investigated. TiO 2 was found to be capable to 
remove BB3 and CR under batch studies. The surface morphology by study was carried 
out by using SEM and  it was  found that dye molecules adsorbed on the surface of TiO 2 
and the surface more compact after undergo photodegradation.  
 
 The optimum initial concentration for the removal studied dyes was observed in 
low concentration, which was 5 mg/L under irradiation of 300 minutes. The optimum 
photocatalyst loading was determined at 1.0 g. The optimum pH for the photo degradation  
of BB3 was known as  pH 10 . For CR, it was at pH 6. The glass tank which coated with 
photocatalyst is able to reuse  up to 2 -3 times.  
 
The kinetics of dye photodegradation obeys to first order kinetic which derived 
from Langmuir -Hinshelwood kinetic model. The rate constant was found to be 0.0050, 
0.0040 and 0.0032 min-1 at 5, 15, and 25 mg/L , respectively for BB3. For CR, the rate 
constant was 0.0035, 0.0031 and 0.0028 min-1 at 5, 15, 25 mg/L , respectively.  
  For optimi sation studies, Plackett -Burman design was used for determination  the 
most sign ificant variables  for removal dyes by using Ti O2 photocatalyst. Initial 
concentration  of dye  and pH is found to be the significant parameters for removal of both 
BB3 and CR dye solutions.  RSM was used to study the interaction between variables and 
the optimum levels  for maximum percentage removal of BB3 and CR in binary dye 
system . Both models are significant with R2 0.9963 and 0.9651 for BB3 and CR , 
respectively. The optimised condition for BB3 was at pH 10 and 5 mg/L initial 
concentration  of dye , the percentage rem oval was estimated  to be 77.06  % under this 
condition. For CR, the optimised condition is at pH 6 and 5 mg/L initial concentration  of 
dye, the percentage removal  was estimated  to be 64.51  %.  
 
5.2  Further Studies  
 
 Photodegradation by using TiO 2 method ha s shown its potential to remove binary 
mixture of BB3 and CR dyes in aqueous solution. For further studies, it could be carried 
out to the following areas:  
 
 Modification on TiO 2 to enhance the photodegradation efficiency and 
characterisation of photocataly st by using XRD, XPS, AFM and so on.  
 
 Study on parameters such as presence  of inorganic salts, effect of peroxides, 
effect of temperature, and determine the zero point charge  of TiO 2. 
  Study the mechanism of dye photodegradation process by using mass 
spect rometer, to identify the intermediates.  
 
 Incorporate adsorption technique with photodegradation method to increase the 
efficiency of the process.  
 
 To test the applicability of the current method with industrial wastewater.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 REFERENCES  
 
Journal  
Akpan U.G., Hameed B.H. 2009. Parameters affecting the photocatalytic degradation of 
dyes using TiO 2-based photocatalysts: A review.  Journal of Hazardous Materials , 170, 
pp. 520 -529. 
Andronic L., Duta A. 2008 . The influence of TiO 2 powder and film on the 
photodegradation methyl orange . Materials Chemistry and Physics , 112, pp. 1078 -1082.  
B. Karagozoglua, M. Tasdemir, E. Demirbas, M. Kobya 2007 . The adsorption of basic 
dye (Astrazon Blue FGRL) from aqueous solut ions onto sepiolite, fly ash and apricot 
shell activated carbon: Kinetic and equilibrium studies . Journal of Hazardous Materials , 
147(1-2), pp. 297 -306. 
Barka N., Qouzral S., Assabbane A, Ait -Ichou Y. 2010 . Kinetic modeling of the 
photocatalytic degradatio n methyl orange by supported TiO 2. Journal of Environmental 
Science and Engineering , 4, p. 5.  
Baughman, G.L. and T.A. Perenich 1988 . Fate of Dyes in Aquatic Systems . Journal 
Water Pollution Control Federation , 60, pp. 1646 -1655.  
Chatterjee D., Patnam V.R.,  Sikdar A., Joshi P., Misra R., Rao N.N. 2008 . Kinetics of the 
decolourization of reactive dyes over visible light irridiated T iO2 semiconductor 
photocatalyst.  Journal of Hazardous Materials , 156, pp. 435 -441. 
Chen C.C., Lu C.S., Chung Y.C., Jan J.L. 2007 . UV light induced photodegradation of 
malachite green on TiO 2 particles . Journal of Hazardous Materials , 141, pp. 520 -528. 
Cho, I.H., Zoh K.D. 2007 . Photocatalytic degradation of azo dye in TiO 2/UV system: 
Optimization and modeling using a RSM based on th e CCD .  Dyes and Pigments , 75, pp. 
533-543. Dostanic J., Grbic B., Radic N., Stefanov P., Saponj ic Z., Buha J., Mijin D. 2012. 
Photodegradation of an azo pyridone dye using TiO 2 films prepared  by the spray 
pyrolysis method , Chemical Engineering Journal , 180, pp. 57 -65. 
Erdemoglu S., Aksu S.K., Sayilkan F., Izgi B., Asilturk M., Sayilkan H., Frimmel F., 
Gucer S. 2008 . Photocatalytic degradation of Congo red by hydrothermally synthesized 
nanocrystalline TiO 2 and identification of degradation products by LC -MS. Journal of 
Hazardous Materials , 155, pp. 469 -476. 
Fathinia M., Khataee  A.R., Aber S., Zarei M. 2010. Comparative photocatalytic 
degradation of two dyes in immobilized TiO 2 nanoparticles: Effect of dye molecular 
structur e and response surface approach , Journal of Molecular Catalysis A: Chemical , 
333, pp. 73 -84. 
Guo H.X., Lin, K.L., Zheng Z.S., Xiao F.B., Li S.X. 2012. Sulfanilic acid -modified P25 
TiO 2 nanoparticles with improved photocatalytic degradation on  Congo Red under visible 
light.  Dye and Pigment s, 92, pp. 1278 -1284.  
Gupta V.K., Jain R., Agarwal S., Nayak A., Shrivastava M. 2012 . Photodegradation of 
hazardous dye quinoline yellow catalyzed by TiO 2. Journal of Colloid and Interface 
Science , 366, pp. 135 -140. 
Jenna Lamb, Tom Loy 2005 . Seeing red: th e use of Congo Red dye to identify cooked 
and damaged starch gra ins in archaeological residues.  Journal of Archaeological Science , 
32, no. 10, pp. 1433 -1440.  
Jiang P., Ren D.B., He D., Fu W., Wang J., Gu M. 2014 . An easily sedimentable and 
effective TiO 2 photocatalyst for removal of dyes in water . Separation and Purification 
Technology , 122, pp. 128 -132. 
Juang R.S., Lin S.H., Hsueh P.Y. 2010 . Removal of binary azo dyes from water by UV -
irradiated degradation in TiO 2 suspensions . Journal of Hazardous Materia ls, 182, pp. 
820-826. Kansal S.K., Singh M., Sud D. 2007 . Studies on photodegradation of two commercial 
dyes in aqueous phase using different photocatalysts . Journal of Hazardous Materials , 
141, pp. 581 -590. 
Khataee A.R., Fathinia M., Aber S. 2011.  Kinetic  study of photocatalytic decolourization 
of C.I. basic blue 3 solution on immobilized titanium dioxide nanoparticles . Chemical 
engineering research and Design , 89, pp. 2110 -2116.  
Konstantinou I.K., Albanis T.A. 2009 . TiO 2 assisted photocatalytic degradation of azo 
dyes in aqueous solution: kinetic and mechanistic investigations: A review . Applied 
Catalysis B: Environmental , 49, pp. 1 -14. 
Lee P.W., Ong S.T., Hung Y.T., Lee S.L. 2013 . Photodegradation of Malachite Green by 
immobilisation of ti tanium dioxide on glass plates.  Asian Journal of Chemistry , 2, pp. 
755-758. 
Lee S.Y., Park S.J. 2013. TiO 2 photocatalyst for water treat ment applications.  Journal of 
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry . 19, pp. 1761 -1769.  
Mahadwad O.K.,  Parikh P.A., Jasra R.V., Patil C. 2011 . Photocatalytic degradation of 
reactive black 5 dye using TiO2 impregnated ZSM -5. Indian Acadamy of Science , 34, pp. 
551-556. 
Munusamy S., Aparna R., Prasad R. 2013. Photocatalytic effect of TiO 2 and the effect of 
dopants on degradation of brilliant green.  Sustainable chemical process , 1, pp. 1 -8. 
Ong S.T., Khoo E.C., Keng P.S., Hii S.L., Lee S.L., Hun g Y.T., Ha S.T . 2011. Plackett -
Burman design and response surface methodlogy approach to optimize basic blue dues 
remo val using sugarcane bagasse.  Desalination and water treatment , 25, pp. 310 -318. 
Ong S.T., Seou C.K. 2013.  Removal of reactive black 5 from aqueous solution using 
chitosan beads: optimization by plackett -burman design and response surface analysis . 
Desalina tion and water treatment , pp. 1 -12. 
Oseroff, A.R. et al. 1986 . Intramitochrondial dyes allow selective in vitro photolysis of 
carcinoma cells . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 88, pp. 9729 -9733.  P. M onvisade, P. Siriphannon 2009. Chitosan intercalated montmorillonite: preparation, 
characterisation and cationic dye adsorption . Applied Clay Science , 42, pp. 427 -431. 
Petrea Frida, Sergey V. Anis imova, Natalija Popovicb 2007. Congo red and protein 
aggregatio n in neurodegenerative diseases , Brain Research Reviews , 53(1), pp. 135 -160. 
Phung Y .P., Ong S.T., Keng P.S. 2013. Determination of important parameters in 
affecting the uptake of reactive black 5 by chitosan bea ds though statistical approach.  
Journal of Chemistry . 
Romhanyi, G 1971 . Selective  differentiation between amyloid and connective tissue 
structures based on the collagen specific topooptical staining reaction with Congo red . 
Virchows Archiv A , 354 (3), pp. 209 -222. 
Saeedeh Hashemia n, Asiah Foroghimoqhadam 2014. Effect of copper doping on  Co/TiO 2 
ilmenite type nanoparticles for removal of congo red from aqueous solution . Chemical 
Engineering Journal , 235, pp. 299 -306. 
Senthilkumaar S., Po rkodi K., Vidyalakshmi R. 2005. Photodegradation of a textile dye 
catalyzed by sol -gel derived nanocrystalline T iO2 via ultrasonic irradiation.  Journal of 
Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry , 170, pp. 225 -232. 
Sharma S.D., Saini K.K., Kant C., Sharma C.P., Jain S.C. 2008 . Photodegradation of dye 
pollutant under UV light by nano -catalyst dop ed titania thin films . Applied Catalysis B: 
Environmental , 84, pp. 233 -240. 
Sistla, Srinivas; Chintalapati, Suresh 2008 . Sonochemical degradation of Congo Red . 
International Journal of Environment and Waste Management , 2(11)  pp. 309 -319. 
Sushanta Debnatha,  Arjun Maityc, d, Kriveshini Pillay 2013 . Impact of process 
parameters on removal of Congo red by graphene oxide from aqueous solution . Journal 
of Environmental Chemical Engineering . 
Twana A Tahir and Fauziah S Hamid 2012 . Vermicomposting of two types of c oconut 
wastes . International Journal of Recycling of Organic Waste in Agriculture . Wahi R.K., Yu W., Liu Y.P., Michelle L., Falkner C., Nolte W., Colvin V. 2005 . 
Photodegradation of Congo red catalyzed by nanosized TiO 2. Journal of Molecular 
Catalysis A: C hemical , 242, pp. 48 -56. 
Zainal Z., Lee K.H., Hussien M.Z, Yap Y.H., Abdullah A.H., Ramli I. 2005 . Removal of 
dyes using immobilized titanium dioxide illuminated by fluorescent lamps . Journal of 
Hazardous Materials , 125, pp. 113 -120. 
Zainal Z., Lee K.H., Hussien M.Z., Abdullah A.H., Hamadneh I.R. 2009 . 
Characterisation of TiO 2-Chitosan/Glass photocatalyst for the removal of a monoazo dye 
via phot odegradation -adsorption process.  Journal of Hazardous Materials , 164, pp. 138 -
145. 
Zollinger, H 1987 . Colour Che mistry -Synthesis, Properties and Application of Organic 
Dyes And Pigments . VCH Publishers . 
Zuorro A., Fidaleo M., Lavecchia R. 2013 . Response surface methodology analysis of 
photodegradation of sulfonated diazo dye reacti ve green 19 by UV/H 2O2 process.  Journal 
of Environmental Management , 127, pp. 28 -35. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 APPENDICES  
 
APPENDIX A  
 
UV-Vis double beam spectrum of BB3 and CR in binary system  
 
400.0 420 440 460 480 500 520 540 560 580 600 620 640 660 680 700 720 740 750.00.000.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.82.02.22.42.62.83.03.23.43.63.84.00
nmA 
658.90509.34APPENDIX B 
 
Calibration curve of BB3 and CR  
 y = 0.0574x + 0.0534  
R² = 0.9994  
y = 0.0588x - 0.0076  
R² = 0.9991  
00.20.40.60.811.21.4
0 5 10 15 20 25Absorbance (A)  
Concentration (mg/L)  Absorbance versus concentration  
BB3
CRAPPENDIX C 
 
Effect of initial dye concentration and irradiation time – BB3 
Time (minutes)  Percentage removal (%)  
5 mg/L  15 mg/L  25 mg/L  
0.5 8.63 5.15 6.84 
1 9.64 5.45 7.65 
2 11.42  7.10 7.71 
5 14.97  9.32 8.68 
10 18.78  15.68  11.85  
15 25.43  15.89  15.95  
30 32.68  24.1 18.54  
60 45.30  33.35  26.05  
120 59.39  46.11  39.69  
180 67.45  59.55  50.63  
240 74.87  66.33  59.67  
300 78.64  69.89  63.35  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Effect of initial dye concentration and irradiation time – CR 
Time (minutes)  Percentage removal (%)  
5 mg/L  15 mg/L  25 mg/L  
0.5 10.58  3.42 3.12 
1 11.01  4.15 5.91 
2 15.14  5.48 6.43 
5 18.15  7.74 8.45 
10 19.60  9.75 11.98  
15 22.46  15.56  12.86  
30 29.70  18.15  18.64  
60 36.81  28.18  23.20  
120 47.98  39.73  34.66  
180 57.57  50.72  43.78  
240 66.12  55.88  50.56  
300 66.95  62.09  60.61  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 APPENDIX D 
 
Effect of photocatalyst loading – BB3 
Photocatalyst loading (g)  Percentage removal (%)  
0.20 60.66  
0.50 63.30  
1.00 66.60  
3.00 65.13  
 
 
Effect of photocatalyst loading – CR 
Photocatalyst loading (g)  Percentage removal (%)  
0.20 56.13  
0.50 58.02  
1.00 60.12  
3.00 58.33  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 APPENDIX E 
 
Effect of pH – BB3 
pH Percentage removal (%)  
6 58.89  
7 60.30  
8 61.55  
9 64.05  
10 66.07  
 
 
Effect of pH – CR 
pH Percentage removal (%)  
6 59.32  
7 56.03  
8 54.02  
9 49.85  
10 47.89  
 
 
 
 
 APPENDIX F 
 
Effect of repetitive usage and recycle of coated TiO 2 glass tank – BB3 
Number of cycle  Percentage removal (%)  
1 65.22  
2 64.92  
3 63.92  
4 62.32  
5 61.05  
6 59.81  
 
 
Effect of repetitive usage and recycle of coated TiO 2 glass tank – CR 
Number of cycle  Percentage removal (%)  
1 61.16  
2 60.29  
3 59.67  
4 58.73  
5 57.66  
6 56.36  
 
 
 APPENDIX G 
 
Kinetic first order for photodegradat ion - BB3 
Time 
(minutes)  5 mg/L  
[C] [Co] [Co] / [C]  ln [C o] / [C]  
0.5 5.98365  6.56700  1.09749  0.09303  
1 5.93364  6.56700  1.10674  0.10142  
2 5.81696  6.56700  1.12894  0.12128  
5 5.58361  6.56700  1.17612  0.16222  
10 5.33360  6.56700  1.23125  0.20803  
15 4.89698  6.56700  1.34013  0.29277  
30 4.42091  6.56700  1.48544  0.39371  
60 3.59199  6.56700  1.82823  0.60335  
120 2.66685  6.56700  2.46246  0.90116  
180 2.13756  6.56700  3.07219  1.12239  
240 1.65009  6.56700  3.97979  1.38123  
300 1.40255  6.56700  4.68219  1.54375  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Kinetic first order for photodegradation - BB3 
Time 
(minutes)  15 mg/L  
[C] [Co] [Co] / [C]  ln [C o] / [C]  
0.5 17.21603  18.15000  1.05425  0.05283  
1 17.16085  18.15000  1.05764  0.05604  
2 16.86129  18.15000  1.07643  0.07365  
5 16.45855  18.15000  1.10277  0.09783  
10 15.30315  18.15000  1.1889  0.17303  
15 15.26621  18.15000  1.18603  0.17061  
30 13.76209  18.15000  1.31884  0.27675  
60 12.09718  18.15000  1.50035  0.40570  
120 9.78062  18.15000  1.85571  0.61827  
180 7.34169  18.15000  2.47218  0.90510  
240 6.11119  18.15000  2.96996  1.08855  
300 5.46433  18.15000  3.32154  1.20043  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Kinetic first order for photodegradation - BB3 
Time 
(minutes)  25 mg/L  
[C] [Co] [Co] / [C] ln [C o] / [C]  
0.5 26.08339  28.00000  1.07348  0.07091  
1 25.85793  28.00000  1.08284  0.07959  
2 25.84122  28.00000  1.08354  0.08023  
5 25.57101  28.00000  1.09499  0.09075  
10 24.68199  28.00000  1.13443  0.12613  
15 23.53396  28.00000  1.18977  0.17376  
30 22.80892  28.00000  1.22759  0.20505  
60 20.70638  28.00000  1.35224  0.30176  
120 16.88751  28.00000  1.65803  0.50563  
180 13.82327  28.00000  2.02557  0.70585  
240 11.29155  28.00000  2.47973  0.90815  
300 10.26197  28.00000  2.72852  1.00376  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Kinetic first order for photodegradation - CR 
Time 
(minutes)  5 mg/L  
[C] [Co] [Co] / [C]  ln [C o] / [C]  
0.5 4.44079  4.95770  1.11640  0.11011  
1 4.41182  4.95770  1.12373  0.11665  
2 4.20704  4.95770  1.17843  0.16418  
5 4.05783  4.95770  1.22176  0.20029  
10 3.98574  4.95770  1.24386  0.21822  
15 3.84431  4.95770  1.28962  0.25435  
30 3.48525  4.95770  1.42248  0.35240  
60 3.13295  4.95770  1.58244  0.45897  
120 2.57918  4.95770  1.92220  0.65347  
180 2.10426  4.95770  2.35603  0.85698  
240 1.67981  4.95770  2.95134  1.08226  
300 1.63839  4.95770  3.02596  1.10723  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Kinetic first order for photodegradation - CR 
Time 
(minutes)  15 mg/L  
[C] [Co] [Co] / [C]  ln [C o] / [C]  
0.5 15.76330  16.32826  1.03584  0.03521  
1 15.65314  16.32826  1.04313  0.04223  
2 15.43343  16.32826  1.05798  0.05636  
5 15.06366  16.32826  1.08395  0.08061  
10 14.73138  16.32826  1.10840  0.10292  
15 13.78692  16.32826  1.18433  0.16918  
30 13.36454  16.32826  1.22176  0.20029  
60 11.72670  16.32826  1.39240  0.33103  
120 9.84033  16.32826  1.65932  0.50641  
180 8.04740  16.32826  2.02901  0.70755  
240 7.20465  16.32826  2.26635  0.81817  
300 6.19001  16.32826  2.63784  0.96996  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Kinetic first order for photodegradation - CR 
Time 
(minutes)  25 mg/L  
[C] [Co] [Co] / [C]  ln [C o] / [C]  
0.5 27.68823  28.57868  1.03216  0.03165  
1 26.89100  28.57868  1.06276  0.06087  
2 26.74254  28.57868  1.06866  0.06641  
5 26.16376  28.57868  1.09230  0.08829  
10 25.15640  28.57868  1.13604  0.12755  
15 24.90343  28.57868  1.14758  0.13766  
30 23.25077  28.57868  1.22915  0.20632  
60 21.94814  28.57868  1.30210  0.26398  
120 18.67375  28.57868  1.53042  0.42554  
180 16.06744  28.57868  1.77867  0.57587  
240 14.12821  28.57868  2.02281  0.70449  
300 11.25712  28.57868  2.53872  0.93166  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 APPENDIX H 
 
Variation of rate constant with different initial dye concentration of BB3 and CR  
 y = -0.09x + 5.4167  
R² = 0.9959  
y = -0.035x + 3.6583  
R² = 0.9932  
0123456
0 5 10 15 20 25 30k x 10-3 (min-1) 
Initial dye concentration (mg/L)  Rate constant versus initial dye concentration  
BB3
CR