Contents
Cover
Half Title page
Title page
Copyright page
Preface
Part 1: Carbon Nanomaterials
Chapter 1: Easy and Large-Scale Synthesis of
Carbon Nanotube-Based Adsorbents for the
Removal of Arsenic and Organic Pollutants from
Aqueous Solutions
1.1 Introduction
1.2 Removal of Arsenic from Aqueous Solution
1.3 Removal of Organic Pollutants from Aqueous Solution
1.4 Summary and Outlook
Acknowledgment
References
Chapter 2: Potentialities of Graphene-Based
Nanomaterials for Wastewater Treatment
2.1 Introduction2.2 Graphene Synthesis Routes
2.3 Adsorption of Water Pollutants onto Graphene-Based
Materials
2.4 Comparison of the Adsorption Performance of Graphene-
Based Nanomaterials
2.5 Regeneration and Reutilization of the Graphene-Based
Adsorbents
2.6 Conclusion
Acknowledgements
Nomenclature
References
Chapter 3: Photocatalytic Activity of Nanocarbon-
TiO
2
 Composites with Gold Nanoparticles for the
Degradation of Water Pollutants
3.1 Introduction
3.2 Experimental
3.3 Results and Discussion
3.4 Conclusions
Acknowledgements
References
Chapter 4: Carbon Nanomaterials for Chromium
(VI) Removal from Aqueous Solution
4.1 Introduction
4.2 Carbon Nanomaterials for Heavy Metal Removal
4.3 Latest Progress in Nanocarbon Materials for Cr(VI)
Treatment
4.4 SummaryAcknowledgement
References
Chapter 5: Nano-Carbons from Pollutant Soot: A
Cleaner Approach toward Clean Environment
5.1 Introduction
5.2 Separation of Nano-carbon from Pollutant BC
5.3 Functionalization of Nano-Carbons Isolated from Pollutant
BC
5.4 Nano-Carbons from Pollutant Soot for Wastewater
Treatment
5.5 Conclusion
Acknowledgments
References
Chapter 6: First-Principles Computational Design
of Graphene for Gas Detection
6.1 Introduction
6.2 Computational Methodology
6.3 Nitrogen Doping and Nitrogen Vacancy Complexes in
Graphene
6.4 Molecular Gas Adsorptions
6.5 Summary
Acknowledgments
References
Part 2: Synthetic Nanomaterials
Chapter 7: Advanced Material for PharmaceuticalRemoval from Wastewater
7.1 Introduction
7.2 Advanced Materials in the Removal of Pharmaceuticals
from Wastewater
7.3 Activated Carbon (AC)
7.4 Modified Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs)
7.5 Modified Polysaccharide Matrices
7.6 Metal Organic Framework (MOF)
7.7 Reactive Composites
7.8 TiO
2
-Coated Adsorbents
7.9 Adsorption by Zeolite and Polymer Composites
7.10 Adsorption by Clay
7.11 Conventional Technologies for the Removal of PPCPs in
WWTP
7.12 Membrane Filtration
7.13 Ozonation and Advanced Oxidation Process (AOP)
7.14 Electro-oxidation
7.15 Adsorption by Coagulation and Sedimentation
7.16 Conclusion
References
Chapter 8: Flocculation Performances of Polymers
and Nanomaterials for the Treatment of Industrial
Wastewaters
8.1 General Introduction
8.2 Conventional Treatment of Water with Inorganic
Coagulants
8.3 Development of Polymer-Based Coagulants and
Mechanisms of Turbidity Removal8.4 Synthesis of Nanomaterials-Based Flocculants and
Utilisation in the Removal of Pollutants
8.5 Conclusion
References
Chapter 9: Polymeric Nanospheres for Organic
Waste Removal
9.1 Introduction
9.2 Method of Preparation of Nanospheres
9.3 Applications of Different Type of Nanospheres in Water
Purification
9.4 Future Aspects
9.5 Conclusions
Acknowledgment
References
Chapter 10: A Perspective of the Application of
Magnetic Nanocomposites and Nanogels as Heavy
Metal Sorbents for Water Purification
10.1 Introduction
10.2 Description of Magnetic Nanoparticles and Nanogels
10.3 Routes for the Synthesis of Magnetic Nanoparticles and
Nanogels
10.4 Heavy Metal Removal from Aqueous Solutions Using
Magnetic Nanomaterials and Nanogels
10.5 Desorption, Regeneration, and Final Disposal
10.6 Conclusions and Future Perspective
Acknowledgments
ReferencesChapter 11: Role of Core–Shell Nanocomposites in
Heavy Metal Removal
11.1 Introduction
11.2 Core and Shell Material: Synthesis and Properties
11.3 Nanocomposites Material: Synthesis and Properties
11.4 Nanocomposite Materials for Water Decontamination
Application
11.5 Stability of Metal Nanoparticles and Nanocomposites
Material
Acknowledgements
References
Part 3: Biopolymeric Nanomaterials
Chapter 12: Adsorption of Metallic Ions Cd
2+
,
Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
 from Water Samples Using Brazil
Nut Shell as a Low-Cost Biosorbent
12.1 Introduction
12.2 Materials and Methods
12.3 Results and Discussion
12.4 Conclusion
Acknowledgments
References
Chapter 13: Cellulose: A Smart Material for Water
Purification
13.1 Introduction
13.2 Cellulose: Smart Material for Water Treatment13.3 Conclusion
References
Chapter 14: Treatment of Reactive Dyes from
Water and Wastewater through Chitosan and its
Derivatives
14.1 Introduction
14.2 Dyes
14.3 Reactive Dyes
14.4 Dye Treatment Methods
14.5 Adsorption
14.6 Adsorbents for Dye Removal
14.7 Chitosan
14.8 Conclusions and Future Perspectives
Acknowledgement
References
Chapter 15: Natural Algal-Based Processes as
Smart Approach for Wastewater Treatment
15.1 Introduction
15.2 Algal Species Used in Wastewater Treatment
15.3 Factors Affecting the Growth of Algae
15.4 Microalgae and Wastewater Treatment
15.5 Case Study of Algal Approach in the Treatment of
Municipal Wastewater
15.6 Biofuel from Algae Treated Wastewater
15.7 Conclusions
Acknowledgment
ReferencesSmart Materials for Waste Water
ApplicationsScrivener Publishing
100 Cummings Center, Suite 541J
Beverly, MA 01915-6106
Publishers at Scrivener
Martin Scrivener(
martin@scrivenerpublishing.com
)
Phillip Carmical (
pcarmical@scrivenerpublishing.com
)Copyright © 2016 by Scrivener Publishing LLC. All rights reserved.
Co-published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Hoboken, New Jersey, and
Scrivener Publishing LLC, Salem, Massachusetts.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under
Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either
the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center,
Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978)
750-4470, or on the web at 
www.copyright.com
. Requests to the Publisher
for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011,
fax (201) 748-6008, or online at 
http://www.wiley.com/go/permission
.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author
have used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of
the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be
created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The
advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation.
You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the
publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other
commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical
support, please contact our Customer Care Department within the United
States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax
(317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some
content that appears in print may not be available in electronic formats. For
more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at
www.wiley.com
.For more information about Scrivener products please visit
www.scrivenerpublishing.com
.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
ISBN 978-1-119-04118-4Preface
Smart materials have been a thrust area to the researchers in the development
of new materials that lead to create new tools and techniques, which will help
in the development of advance technology. At the nano size, smart materials
often take on unique and sometimes unexpected properties. This means that
at the nanoscale, materials can be “tuned” to build faster, lighter, stronger and
more efficient devices and systems. “Smart materials” have been extensively
used in a variety of applications due to the change in the characteristics of the
materials with small variation on stimuli. They are also known as responsive
materials. Smart materials change their properties abruptly in response to
small changes in the environmental conditions such as pH, temperature,
electric and magnetic fields. Due to the versatility of such characteristics,
these materials are highly applicable in the area of materials science,
engineering, sensors and environmental applications. Besides, such materials
are applied to develop newer composites, ceramics, chiral materials, liquid
crystals, conducting polymers, hydrogels, nanocomposites and biomaterials.
These smart materials are highly suitable for environmental remediation.
Water used for drinking and household needs must have good taste and no
odour and be harmless to human health as well as the livestock. Clean water
is always a need, which often calls for a cheap and efficient water purification
system. There are several technologies and have been utilized for the water
treatment process. Smart materials have been used to develop more cost-
effective and high-performance water treatment systems as well as instant
and continuous ways to monitor water quality. Smart materials in water
research have been extensively utilized for the treatment, remediation and
pollution prevention. Smart materials can maintain the long-term water
quality, availability and viability of water resource. Thus, water via smart
materials can be reused, recycled and desalinized, and it can detect the
biological and chemical contamination as well as whether the source is from
municipal, industrial or man-made waste.
The present book describes the smart materials for waste water application
and it will be highly beneficial to the researchers working in the area of
materials science, engineering, environmental science, water research andwaste water applications. Chapters included in the book have been
differentiated in three sections: first section includes the various “carbon
nanomaterials” with a focus on use of carbon at nanoscale applied for waste
water research. Second section involves “synthetic nanomaterials” for
pollutants removal. The third section includes “biopolymeric nanomaterials”
where the authors have used the natural polymers matrices in a composite
and nanocomposite material for waste treatment. The potential researchers
working in the area will benefit from the fundamental concepts, advanced
approaches and application of various smart materials towards waste water
treatment described in the book. The book also provides a platform for all
researchers to carry out advanced research as well as to delve into the
background in the area. The book also covers recent advancement in the area
and prospects about the future research and development of smart materials
for the waste water applications.
Ajay Kumar Mishra
Editor
December 5, 2015Part 1
CARBON NANOMATERIALSChapter 1
Easy and Large-Scale Synthesis of
Carbon Nanotube-Based Adsorbents
for the Removal of Arsenic and
Organic Pollutants from Aqueous
Solutions
Fei Yu
1
 and Jie Ma
2
*
1
College of Chemistry and Environmental Engineering, Shanghai Institute of
Technology, Shanghai, P. R. of China
2
State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, College of
Environmental Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, P. R.
of China
*
Corresponding author:
 
jma@tongji.edu.cn
Abstract
The as-prepared carbon nanotubes (APCNTs) synthesized by chemical vapor
deposition method usually contained carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and quantities
of iron nanoparticles (INP)–encapsulated carbon shells. The traditional
research mainly focuses on how to remove the INPs using various chemical
and physical purification methods. In this chapter, we have synthesized many
kinds of CNTs-based adsorbents based on the aforementioned iron/carbon
APCNT composites without purification, which can be used for the removal
of arsenic and organic pollutants from aqueous solutions with excellentadsorption properties. This synthesis method is applicable to as-prepared
single-walled CNTs and multi-walled CNTs containing metal catalytic
particles (e.g., Fe, Co, Ni), and the resulting material may find direct
applications in environment, energy storage, catalysis, and many other areas.
Results of this work are of great significance for large-scale practical
applications of APCNTs without purification.
Keywords:
 Magnetic carbon nanotubes, arsenic, organic pollutants,
adsorption
1.1 Introduction
Magnetic carbon nanotubes (MCNTs) are of intense research interests
because of their valuable applications in many areas such as magnetic data
storage, magnetic field screening, and signal transmission [1]. Synthetic
methods of MCNTs include chemical and physical techniques. For instance,
magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs), such as cobalt, iron, or nickel and their
oxide NPs, can be encapsulated by carbon nanotubes (CNTs) [2, 3]. In
addition, MNPs could be deposited on the external surface of CNTs [4, 5].
However, existing synthesis methods may have the following critical
disadvantages: firstly, the as-prepared carbon nanotubes (APCNTs) are
usually purified using strong acids to remove metal particles and
carbonaceous byproducts [6], and then MNPs are loaded on the wall of
purified CNTs. As a result, the synthesis process is expensive and time
consuming with a low yield. Secondly, uncovered MNPs may agglomerate
when a magnetic field is applied. Thirdly, bare MNPs could be oxidized in air
or erode under acidic conditions [7]. These issues may ultimately hinder
widespread practical applications of the MCNTs composite. In recent years,
CNTs could be produced in ton-scale quantities per year with high quality.
However, APCNTs often contain a large fraction of impurities, including
small catalytic metal particles and carbonaceous byproducts such as
fullerenes, amorphous, or graphitic carbon particles. The current research
direction in this area mainly focuses on the purification of APCNTs through
physical separation [8], gas-phase oxidation [9], and liquid-phase oxidation
[6], aiming at applications of purified CNTs. However, these purificationprocesses are complex, time consuming, and environmentally unfriendly.
Hence, the existing approach is suitable for fundamental research but not for
large-scale applications of MCNTs.
To overcome the aforementioned issues, we herein report several new-
typed methods to produce MCNTs using APCNTs. We show that MCNTs
can be well dispersed in water with excellent magnetic properties. This facile
synthesis method has the following advantages: firstly, metal nanoparticles in
the APCNTs can be utilized directly without any purification treatment;
secondly, the carbon shells provide an effective barrier against oxidation, acid
dissolution, and movement of MNPs and thus ensure a long-term stability of
MNPs. MCNTs were used as adsorbents for the removal of environmental
pollutants in aqueous solutions, and arsenic and organic pollutants were
chosen as target pollutants. MCNTs exhibit excellent adsorption and
magnetic separation properties. After adsorption, the MCNTs adsorbents
could be effectively and immediately separated using a magnet, which
reduces potential risks of CNTs as another source of environmental
contaminant. Therefore, MCNTs can be used as a promising magnetic
adsorbent for the removal of arsenic and organic pollutants from aqueous
solutions.
1.2 Removal of Arsenic from
Aqueous Solution
1.2.1 Activated Magnetic Carbon Nanotube
1.2.1.1 Synthesis Method
The APCNTs were prepared using a chemical vapor deposition(CVD)
method [10]. Ethanol was used as the carbon feedstock, ferrocene was used
as the catalyst, and thiophene was used as the growth promoter. Argon flow
was introduced in the quartz tube in order to eliminate oxygen from the
reaction chamber. The ethanol solution dissolved with ferrocene and
thiophene was supplied by an electronic squirming pump and sprayedthrough a nozzle with an argon flow. After several hours of pyrolysis, the
supply of ethanol was terminated, and the APCNTs were collected from a
collecting unit connected to the quartz tube.
The Magnetic iron oxide/CNTs(MI/CNTs) composites were prepared by an
alkali-activated method using APCNTs. The APCNTs were prepared by the
catalytic chemical vapor deposition method [10]. In a typical synthesis,
APCNTs and KOH powder were mixed in a stainless steel vessel in an inter-
gas atmosphere. The weight ratio of KOH to APCNTs was 1:4. The APCNTs
and KOH powder were mixed for 10 min using a mortar, which resulted in a
uniformly powder mixture. The mixture was then heated to 1023 K for 1 h
under flowing argon in a horizontal tube furnace, washed in the deionized
water, and then dried.
1.2.1.2 Characterization of Adsorbents
Figure 1.1a
 displays the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of
APCNTs; the diameter of APCNTs is about 20–30 nm and the length is about
1 μm. After the activation treatment, the structure of APCNTs has been
clearly modified, and the length of MI/CNTs is obviously shortened.
Furthermore, part of the hollow tubular structure is destroyed, large quantities
of defects are produced, and many flaky apertures are generated on the
surface, as shown in 
Figure 1.1b
. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of
MI/CNT hybrids indicated that the MI/CNTs were a mixture of two/three
phases: γ-Fe
2
O
3
/Fe
3
O
4
 and CNTs. Well-resolved diffraction peaks reveal
the good crystallinity of γ-Fe
2
O
3
/Fe
3
O
4
 specimens; no peaks corresponding
with impurities were detected. Peaks of C with relatively high intensity and
symmetry are clearly observed in 
Figure 1.1c
. This observation suggests the
graphite structure remained, even after strong activation reaction; therefore,
we may conclude that MI/CNT heterostructures were formed using the KOH
activation method.
Figure 1.1
 TEM images of (a and b) APCNTs and MI/CNTs, (c) XRD
patterns, and (d) Raman spectrum of MI/CNTs.The Raman spectrum of MI/CNTs is shown in 
Figure 1.1d
. For MI/CNTs,
the remaining peaks at 224 and 285 cm
–1
 are assigned to the A1g and Eg
modes of α-Fe
2
O
3
, the peak at 397 cm
–1
 is assigned to the T2g modes of λ-
Fe
2
O
3
, and the peak at 667 cm
–1
 is assigned to the A1g modes of Fe
3
O
4
[11]. The results indicate that magnetic iron oxide in MI/CNTs may be a
mixture phase composed of α-Fe
2
O
3
, λ-Fe
2
O
3
, and Fe
3
O
4
. The G peak at
1585 cm
–1
 is related to E2g graphite mode [12–14]. The D-line at ~1345
cm
–1
 is induced by defective structures. The intensity ratio of the G and D
peaks (IG/ID) is an indicator for estimating the structure quality of CNTs, as
shown in 
Figure 1.1d
, which suggests the structure of the CNTs was
destroyed after the KOH activation process.
In 
Figure 1.2a
, the thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of the MI/CNTs
exhibits two main weight-loss regions. MI/CNTs are considerably stable and
show a little weight loss close to 5% below 200 °C in the first region, which
can be attributed to the evaporation of adsorbed water and the elimination ofcarboxylic groups and hydroxyl groups on the MI/CNTs. The rapid weight-
loss region can be due to the oxidation of CNTs. It is clearly seen that the
main thermal events temperature was at ~500 °C; however, the thermal
events temperature is so high that MI/CNTs could readily meet the
application needs of adsorbent in water treatment.
Figure 1.2
 (a) Thermal analysis and (b) adsorption/desorption isotherms of
N
2
 and pore distribution of MI/CNTs.
The specific surface area (SSA) and pore size characterization of MI/CNTs
were performed by nitrogen (77.4 K) adsorption/desorption experiments with
density functional theory (DFT) methods [15], as shown in 
Figure 1.2b
. The
MI/CNTs had a high SSA of ~662.1 m
2
/g (calculated in the linear relative
pressure range from 0.1 to 0.3). The SSA of MI/CNTs is drastically increased
by ~5 times than APCNTs; such increases correspond with a decrease in
mean pore diameter from ~11.03 to ~2.26 nm (BJH). After alkalis activation
treatment, not only the tube tip was opened, but also large quantities of new
micropore structures with small sizes were produced. This implies that the
MI/CNTs possess more small pores after the present activation treatment and
thus could lead to a higher SSA. The detailed features of the pore distribution
analysis are presented in 
Table 1.1
.
Table 1.1
 Physical properties of APCNTs and MI/CNTs.Figure 1.2b
 displays the results of the cumulative pore volume (PV) and
pore size analysis from nitrogen adsorption by applying a hybrid Non-local
Density Functional Theory (NLDFT) kernel, assuming a slitshape pore for
the micropores and a cylindrical pore for the mesopores. The obtained pore
size/PV distribution indicates this MI/CNTs sample is distinctive from
APCNTs. Compared with APCNTs, the total PV of MI/CNTs decreased due
to the disappearance of maro pores. The meso-PV and micro-PV of MI/CNTs
improved by almost ~1.48 and ~5.73 times than that of APCNTs. The
stronger peak of pore distribution of MI/CNTs exists at ~2 nm, which
indicates the presence of plenty of micropores after the alkalis activation
treatment.
The composition of MI/CNTs was further determined by XPS, as shown in
Figure 1.3
. Typical XPS survey scans of the MI/CNTs are shown in 
Figure
1.3a
. 
Figure 1.3b
 is the principal deconvoluted component of the C1s region
recorded for the MI/CNTs. We can see that the strongest peak at 284.6 eV is
assigned to double-bonding carbons for CNTs and results from non-
functionalized carbon. The peak at the binding energy of about 285.1 eV is a
consequence of single-bonding carbon for CNTs [16]. The O1s spectra
consist of three peaks that are assigned to Fe–O (529.8 eV), C=O (531.2 eV),
and C–O (533.0 eV) bonds [17], which suggests the introduction of new
functional groups and the iron oxide nanoparticle loading on the surfaces of
MI/CNTs. The Fe2p spectrum (
Figure 1.3c
) shows two broad peaks with
satellite peaks at 711.4 and 724.5 eV, representing Fe2p3/2 and Fe2p1/2,
respectively. The presence of these chemical bonds demonstrates that iron
oxide nanoparticles formed on the surface of MI/CNTs.
Figure 1.3
 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) survey scans of the
MI/CNTs (a) the C1s deconvolution of MI/CNTs (b), for Fe2p region of
MI/CNTs (c), and the O1s deconvolution of MI/CNTs (d).The magnetization properties of MI/CNTs were investigated at room
temperature by measuring magnetization curves (
Figure 1.4
). The saturation
magnetization (Ms) of MI/CNTs is 27.2 emu·g
–1
 for MI/CNTs (magnetic
field=+10 kOe), indicating that MI/CNTs have a high magnetism. The loop
of MI/CNTs exhibits very low coercive field (40 Oe) and remanence values
(0.76 emu·g
–1
), indicating that MI/CNTs hybrids are very close to behaving
as superaramagnets at room temperature, which can be beneficial to the reuse
without reunite for magnetization. After magnetic separation, the
concentration of residual CNTs in an aqueous solution was estimated using a
UV–visible absorption-based approach [18, 19].
Figure 1.4
 Hysteresis loop of MI/CNTs and the digital photograph of
MI/CNTs with magnetic separation.The MI/CNT powders can be well dispersed in water during adsorption, so
the removal of arsenic by MI/CNTs was found to be rapid at the initial period
(in the first 1 min) and then became slower (1–10 min). The rate of removal
reached a plateau after ~10 min of the experiment, as shown in 
Figure 1.5
.
Figure 1.5
 Kinetic curves of arsenic removal on MI/CNTs (As(V)/As(III)
concentration=2 mg/L, MI/CNTs=0.2 g/L).
1.2.1.3 Adsorption Properties
The MI/CNTs’ adsorption isotherms for removing As(V) and As(III) are
shown in 
Figure 1.6
, which indicates that APCNTs have a smaller adsorption
capacity of As(V)/As(III), due to poor interaction between CNTs and arsenic
pollutants. After the KOH activation treatment, a larger number of iron oxide
nanoparticles were decorated on the surface of MI/CNTs, and the resulting
adsorption capacity increased significantly, which suggests that the ironoxides contributed to the increase of adsorption capacity.
Figure 1.6
 Equilibrium adsorption isotherms of As(V) and As(III) on
APCNTs and MI/CNTs.
The equilibrium adsorption of arsenic on MI/CNTs was analyzed using the
Langmuir [20] and Freundlich [21] isotherm models. 
Figure 1.7
 shows the
isotherms based on the experimental data, and the parameters obtained from
linear regression using adsorption models are shown in 
Table 1.2
. Based on
the determination coefficient (
R
2
), Langmuir model fits the experimental data
better than the Freundlich model. The applicability of the Langmuir isotherm
suggests that specific homogenous sites within the adsorbent are involved
[22]. The computed maximum monolayer capacities have wonderful values
of ~9.74 mg/g for As(V) and ~8.13 mg/g for As(III) onto the MI/CNTs,
which are also higher than those of previously reported adsorbents [23–26].
These results suggest that MI/CNTs have great potential for As(V) and
As(III) removal. The Dubinin–Radushkevich (D–R) [27] isotherm model was
applied to distinguish between the physical and chemical adsorption of As(V)
and As(III) on MI/CNTs, as shown in 
Figure 1.7c
. The values of E (mean
energy of adsorption) exceed 16 10 kJ·mol
–1
 for As(V) and As(III),
suggesting the removal process may follow chemisorption between
As(V)/As(III) and MI/CNTs [28]. Surface structure information of MI/CNTs
was analyzed by XPS after arsenic adsorption. The XPS spectra of As 3d are
shown in 
Figure 1.8
. The quantitative analysis of As(III)-adsorbed MI/CNTs
shows 50.8% of As(III) and 49.2% of As(V) on the sorbent surface; however,
only As(V) exists on the As(V)-adsorbed MI/CNTs. This result indicatessolid-state oxidation between arsenate and arsenite on the surface of
MI/CNTs. It has been reported that the arsenic adsorption mechanism
involves electrostatic attraction [29] and surface complexation [30, 31]
between the arsenic species and iron oxides in solution. Arsenate surface
complexes possibly exist in three forms of binuclear, bidentate, and
monodentate complexes through the ligand exchange reaction [32]. After
arsenic adsorption, the atomic ratio of Fe on the surface decreased from
6.58% to 5.35% for As(III) and 5.86% for As(V) with the increase of As
atomic ratio, indicating that Fe atoms were overlaid by the adsorbed arsenic.
The higher adsorption capacity of MI/CNTs can be attributed to the following
reasons: first, a large number of Fe
2
O
3
 nanoparticles formed on the surface
of MI/CNTs, and iron oxide adsorbents have demonstrated superior
adsorption performance [33–35]. Second, oxygen-containing functional
groups of MI/CNTs would improve hydrophilicity and dispersibility in
aqueous solutions. For As(V)/As(III) with considerable solubility, a better
dispersion of MI/CNTs in water will increase the available adsorption sites,
which may be favorable for the aqueous-phase adsorption [36]. Third, the
increased SSA and meso-PV/micro-PV would provide more adsorption sites
for As(V)/As(III) [37]; therefore, the adsorption properties obviously
increased after the KOH activation treatment.
Figure 1.7
 (a) Langmuir, (b) Freundlich, and (c) D–R isotherms for As(V)
and As(III) adsorption onto MI/CNTs.Figure 1.8
 As 3d XPS spectra of MI/CNTs after As(III) (a) and As(V) (b)
adsorption.
Table 1.2
 Langmuir, Freundlich, and Dubinin–Radushkevich isotherms
parameters of As(V) and As(III) adsorption on MI/CNTs system.1.2.2 Sulfhydryl-Functionalized Magnetic
Carbon Nanotube
1.2.2.1 Synthesis Method
Briefly, APCNTs were firstly treated by a two-step heat treatment. In the first
step, the APCNTs were heated in the air at 400 °C for 60 min to destroy the
carbon cages and oxidize the iron nanoparticles (INPs). Air was introduced
into the quartz tube at a slow rate to provide oxygen continuously. In the
second step, the hybrids obtained from step one were heated at 850 °C for 60
min under Ar gas protection to remove the rest carbon by the redox reaction
between C and Fe
2
O
3
 through which Fe
2
O
3
 was reduced to Fe, FeO, or
Fe
3
O
4
 by the encapsulating C.
Before the Glutathione (GSH) functionalization, the FeO
x
/CNTs hybrids
were oxidized by NaClO solution. Five hundred milligrams FeO
x
/CNTs
hybrids were suspended in the 70% antiformin solution of 200 mL, and then
sonicated for 2 h in an ultrasonic bath. The suspension was stirred at 80 °C
for 5 h and cooled to room temperature. The oxidized FeO
x
/CNTs hybrids
(OMI-CNTs) were washed with deionized water for three times, and then
dried under vacuum at 80 °C overnight.
Subsequently, 400 mg OMI-CNTs was dispersed by sonication and
magnetic stirring in 200 mL N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) for 1 h. Then
1.5 g GSH was added into the suspension under stirring for 1 h. Afterward,
10 mg of coupling agent 2-(7-aza-1H-benzotriazole-1-yl)-1,1,3,3-
tetramethyluronium hexafluorophosphate (N-HATU) was added, and the
mixture was transferred to a water bath (60 °C) with stirring and reflux
condensation for 6 h. The product was washed with EtOH and deionizedwater for three times, respectively, and dried under vacuum at 80 °C for 12 h.
1.2.2.2 Characterization of Adsorbents
Scheme 1.1
 illustrates the synthesis process of GSH-functionalized MI-
CNTs. 
Figure 1.1a
 displays the TEM images of APCNTs. It was found that
entangled CNTs bundles were mixed with a high density of iron catalyst
particles, as indicated by the black dots. High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) (the
inset of 
Figure 1.1a
) image reveals that the INPs are covered with carbon
cages or shells with diameters ranging from 2 to 5 nm, and these cages
consist of several graphitic layers. After the heat treatment, the entangled
state of APCNTs was hardly changed. However, the carbon cages over the
INPs have been completely destroyed, which has been previously reported [6,
10]. This is beneficial for the contact between As(III) and the INPs.
Furthermore, the size of the INPs obviously increased after heat treatment,
which is due to the crystallization and growth of the nanoparticles at high
temperature. After GSH functionalization, no obvious change was observed
in the morphology of GMI-CNTs compared with MI-CNTs, as shown in
Figures 1.1b
 and 1.S1. The lattice interplanar spacings of 0.286 and 0.242 nm
correspond to the (220) and the (222) planes of Fe
3
O
4
, respectively,
revealing the Fe
3
O
4
 NPs are polycrystalline. The interplanar spacings of
0.221 and 0.252 nm are characteristics of the (113) plane of α-Fe
2
O
3
 and the
(311) plane of γ-Fe
2
O
3
, respectively.
Scheme 1.1
 Illustration of Glutathione functionalized magnetic carbon
nanotube (GMI-CNT) synthesis.
Figure 1.9d
 shows the XRD patterns of APCNTs, (magnetic carbon
nanotubes)MI-CNTs, (oxidized magnetic carbon naotubes)OMI-CNTs, and
GMI-CNTs. The peaks associated with the mixture of zero-valent Fe, γ-
Fe
2
O
3
/Fe
3
O
4
 appeared after the heat treatment. Well-resolved diffraction
peaks reveal the good crystallinity of Fe, γ-Fe
2
O
3
/Fe
3
O
4
. The peaks of C
with a relatively high intensity and symmetry are clearly observed, which
suggests that the graphite structure remained even after heat treatment.
Therefore, we can conclude that MI-CNT heterostructures were formed after
the heat treatment. In our study, APCNTs were firstly treated by a two-step
heat treatment. In the first step, the APCNTs were heated in the air at 400 °C
for 60 min to destroy the carbon cages and oxidize INPs: Fe + O
2
→fFe
2
O
3
.
In the second step, the hybrids obtained from step one were heated at 850 °C
for 60 min under Ar gas protection to remove the rest carbon by the redox
reaction between C and Fe
2
 O
3
: C + Fe
2
O
3
 → Fe +CO
x
 (
Scheme 1.2
). After
the oxidation step, the relative intensity of C peaks decreased, indicating
large quantities of defects were generated during the oxidation process.
Moreover, the intensity of Fe peaks also obviously decreased because the
zero-valent Fe was partially oxidized to α-Fe
2
O
3
, which was confirmed by
the appearance of new peaks located at 33.152°, 49.496°, and 54.089° in the
XRD pattern of OMI-CNTs. This result is consistent with the aforementioned
HRTEM analysis, and the iron of GMI-CNTs can be identified as FeO
x
 (
x
=0,
4/3, 3/2) (
Figure 1.9b
). The transformation of Fe states during the synthesis
process is illustrated in 
Scheme 1.2
. The XRD patterns of GMI-CNTs
indicate that the functionalization process did not change the component of
INPs on the surface of CNTs and would not inhibit the reaction between INPs
and As(III).
Figure 1.9
 TEM images of APCNTs and GMI-CNTs (a and b), HRTEM
image of INPs on GMI-CNTs (c), and XRD patterns of prepared samples (d).
The inset of (a) shows INPs in APCNTs covered with carbon cages.Scheme 1.2
 The transformation of Fe species during the synthesis process.
XPS was employed to analyze the surface chemical composition, as shown
in 
Figure 1.10
. Typical survey scans of GMI-CNTs and OMI-CNTs are
shown in 
Figure 1.10a
. After functionalization, the new peaks of S and N
appeared. For C 1s spectra in 
Figure 1.10b
, the peak of typical graphitic
carbon attributed to C 1s spectra was found at 284.6 eV. Other three peaks
located at 285.4, 286.8, and 288.7 eV are assigned to C–N, C–O, and C=O,
respectively. The S 2p peak was deconvoluted into two separate peaks at
163.8 and 165.1 eV, contributing to the –SH groups (
Figure 1.10c
) [38]. Thepeak located at ~400.2 eV corresponds to the –NH– groups (
Figure 1.2d
)
[39]. The O 1s spectra consist of three peaks at 530.1, 531.5, and 532.9 eV,
which are assigned to Fe–O, C=O, and O–C=O, respectively [17]. A broad
peak at 718.0 eV represents overlapping components for oxidized iron and
zero-valent iron [40]. The Fe 2p spectra show two broad peaks of Fe 2p3/2
and Fe 2p1/2 with satellite peaks at ~711.0 and ~724.8 eV, respectively
(
Figure 1.11
). The two peaks at 712.9 and 726.7 eV correspond to Fe
2
O
3
,
while peaks at 710.8 and 724.3 eV represent Fe
3
O
4
. The surface analysis
demonstrated the iron phase in GMI-CNTs was the mixture of zero-valent
iron and iron oxides which is in accordance with the TEM and XRD analyses
and confirmed that GSH molecules have been successfully grafted on the
OMI-CNTs.
Figure 1.10
 XPS survey scans of the GMI-CNTs (a), the core peaks of C 1s
(b), S 2p (c), and N1s (d) on the surface of GMI-CNTs.
Figure 1.11
 XPS Fe2p spectra of GMI-CNTs.
The Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectrum of OMI-CNTs and GMI-
CNTs provides further evidence of the successful graft of GSH on OMI-
CNTs (
Figure 1.12a
). The peak at ~3300 cm
–1
 corresponds to the O–H
stretching vibration of adsorbed water or some other O–H containing groups,
such as carboxyl [41]. The band at 1717 cm
–1
 attributes to the stretching
vibrations of C=O of the carboxyl groups, which confirms the formation of
carboxyl groups after the oxidation step [25, 42]. The peaks at 1654 and 1575
cm
–1
 indicate the formation of secondary amide on the OMI-CNTs resulting
from the functionalization [43]. The strong peak at 568 cm
–1
 corresponds to
the stretching vibration of large quantities of Fe–O. The FT-IR spectra also
confirm that the GSH molecules are covalently bonded to OMI-CNTs.
Figure 1.12
 FT-IR spectra (a) of OMI-CNTs and GMI-CNTs and TG-DSC
(b) of GMI-CNTs.The TGA indicated that the GMI-CNTs exhibit three main weight-loss
peaks (
Figure 1.12b
). The total weight loss of GMI-CNTs is approximately
45% before 550 °C, indicating the loading ratio of INPs on GMI-CNTs
reaches around 55%, which is much higher than many other iron oxide/CNTs
based composites. The result is consistent with the strong Fe–O peak in the
aforementioned FT-IR spectrum. A slight weight loss close to ~6% occurred
below ~180 °C, which is due to the evaporation of adsorbed water and the
elimination of carboxylic groups and hydroxyl groups on the GMI-CNTs [44,
45]. The second stage weight loss observed between ~180 and 400 °C is
associated with the thermal decomposition of GSH on the OMI-CNTs [46,
47]. The rapid weight-loss region between ~400 and ~540 °C is attributed to
the oxidation of CNTs. The TGA indicated that the stability of GMI-CNTs
can meet the application needs of adsorbents in water treatment.
The SSA and pore parameters of GMI-CNTs were measured by nitrogen
(77.4 K) adsorption/desorption experiments (
Figure 1.13a
). The SSA of MI-
CNTs (299.4 m
2
·g
–1
) significantly increased by ~2.6 times, corresponding
with the decrease in the average pore size from 11.03 to 5.01 nm (BJH). The
micropore volumes of APCNTs calculated by the NLDFT kernel before and
after heat treatment were both close to 0, indicating most surface area was
attributed to mesopores. The meso-PV and micro-PV of MI-CNTs (0.778
cc·g
–1
) slightly changed compared with that of APCNTs (0.897 cc·g
–1
).
However, the pore size becomes smaller and more centralized, indicating the
heat treatment can not only remove the carbon cages over the INPs but also
produce much smaller and more uniform micropore/mesopore structures,
which may finally result in the increase of SSA. After the functionalization,the SSA (139.9 m
2
·g
–1
) and micro-PV/meso-PV (0.501 cc·g
–1
) of GMI-
CNTs decreased compared with MI-CNTs, whereas the pore size was still
uniformly distributed with an average pore size of 5.0 nm, which is beneficial
for adsorption of pollutants. Although the SSA and meso-PV/micro-PV
decreased after the functionalization, adsorption capacity of GMI-CNTs for
As(III) is much higher than that of MI-CNTs, indicating the sulfhydryl
groups of GSH play a very important role in the enhancement of adsorption
capacity.
Figure 1.13
 (a) N
2
 adsorption/desorption isotherms and pore size distribution
(inset) of GMI-CNTs and (b) hysteresis loop of GMI-CNTs. The inset of (b)
is the digital photograph of GMI-CNTs dispersed in water (1) and separated
with magnetic separation (2).
The magnetization properties of GMI-CNTs were investigated at room
temperature by measuring magnetization curves, as shown in 
Figure 1.13b
.
The magnetization properties investigation showed the Ms of GMI-CNTs is
27.3 emu·g
–1
 with relatively low coercive force and remanence of 104.9 Oe
and 2.4 emu·g
–1
, which can be beneficial for the reuse without reunite for
magnetization. It can be found from the insets that the As(III)-loaded GMI-
CNTs can be easily separated from water by using a magnet (the inset of
Figure 1.13b
). The concentration of residual CNTs in an aqueous solution
was estimated nearly 0 g·L
–1
 by a UV–visible absorption-based approach
[45].1.2.2.3 Adsorption Properties
The amounts of adsorbed As(III) versus aqueous-phase concentration are
plotted as adsorption isotherms in 
Figure 1.14a
. The isotherms data were
fitted by two commonly used models, Langmuir (
Figure 1.14b
) and
Freundlich model (
Figure 1.14c
), in a linear way. It was observed that GMI-
CNTs exhibit significantly enhanced adsorption performance (19.12 mg·g
–1
)
for As(III) compared with OMI-CNTs (9.39 mg·g
–1
). The Langmuir and
Freundlich models were employed to fit the experimental data. The
Freundlich model describes the equilibrium on heterogeneous surfaces, while
the Langmuir model assumes all adsorption occurs through the same
mechanism on a homogeneous surface. Aforementioned TEM, XRD, and
XPS analyses have confirmed the Fe element exists as multiphase on the
surface of OMI-CNTs and GMI-CNTs. After the GSH functionalization, the
GMI-CNTs become more heterogeneous in terms of microstructure than
unmodified OMI-CNTs. Thus, we speculate that the adsorption mechanism
of As(III) on GMI-CNTs may involve not only the complexation with Fe
species but also the surface complexation with sulfhydryl groups carried by
GSH. A smaller intensity parameter 1
/n
 (0.214) of GMI-CNTs implies the
stronger adsorption bond and a more heterogeneous surface compared with
OMI-CNTs, while a larger capacity parameter 
K
F
 (12.56) of GMI-CNTs
reveals a higher adsorption capacity [48, 49]. The results clearly demonstrate
the improved adsorption performance of GMI-CNTs in comparison with
OMI-CNTs. The adsorption capacity is also much higher than that of other
carbon-based composites reported previously (
Table 1.3
).
Figure 1.14
 (a) Equilibrium adsorption isotherms of As(III) on APCNTs,
OMI-CNTs, and GMI-CNTs; equilibrium data of As(III) adsorption on GMI-
CNTs fitted by (b) Langmuir model and (c) Freundlich model in the linear
form; (d) pH effect on As(III) adsorption by GMI-CNTs.Table 1.3
 Comparison of the adsorption performance of GMI-CNTs with
other adsorbents.The effect of pH on As(III) adsorption by GMI-CNT was studied for
further understanding of adsorption mechanism. As shown in 
Figure 1.14d
, as
the pH increased from 2 to 10, the As(III) adsorption capacity increased to
the maximum and then decreased. The low As(III) removal efficiency at the
relatively strong acid condition is due to the release of Fe/FeO
x
 to the
solution (
Figure 1.14d
) and probably the hydrolysis of amide bond
connecting the OMI-CNTs and GSH. The maximum adsorption of As(III) by
GMI-CNTs was observed at pH ~7, where the As(III) exists predominantly as
H
3
AsO
3
. Thus, the enhanced As(III) adsorption by GMI-CNTs could not be
explained by the electrostatic interactions but explained by the binding of the
non-ionic H
3
AsO
3
 to the sulfhydryl groups. It has been reported that As(III)
reacts with the sulfhydryl groups by directly bonding with three S atoms [57].
However, the bonding between As(III) and the sulfhydryl groups is strongly
pH dependent that the pKa values of As(III)-GSH are 2.10, 3.59, and 8.68
(two carboxyl groups and sulfhydryl group, respectively) [58]. Therefore, the
significant decrease of As(III) uptake by GMI-CNTs in the pH range from 9
to 11 can be explained as: (a) the repulsive force between the ionized As(III)
species and negatively charged mercaptides formed due to the dissociation ofAs(III)-GSH and (b) the competitive adsorption between the ionized As(III)
species and hydroxyl ions. In the pH range from 6 to 8, As(III) can strongly
bond to the ionized GSH to form complexes of [As(GSH)
3
]
3−
 and [As(GSH)
(OH)
2
]
2−
 with releasing water molecules [58]. The results showed that GMI-
CNTs would be favorably used under pH range from 5 to 8. Near-edge x-ray
absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) studies of the Fe K-edge indicated that
there is no phase change of Fe before and after As(III) adsorption, suggesting
the Fe species are chemically stable and no redox reaction occurred in the
adsorption process (
Figure 1.15
). The intensity and position of all peaks
hardly changed, indicating As atoms were not directly bonded with Fe atoms.
Instead, the As atoms and Fe atoms might be connected by O atoms to form
surface complexes [59, 60]. Schematic illustration of the proposed
mechanism of As(III) adsorption by GMI-CNTs is shown in 
Schema 1.3
.
Figure 1.15
 Fe K-edge NEXAFS spectra.
Scheme 1.3
 Proposed mechanism of As(III) adsorption by GMI-CNTs.1.3 Removal of Organic Pollutants
from Aqueous Solution
1.3.1 Magnetic Carbon Nanotubes for Dye
Removal
1.3.1.1 Synthesis Method
The APCNTs samples were oxidized using 30% NaClO (70 mL of H
2
O + 30
mL NaClO) solution, with magnetic stirring at ambient temperature for 12 h.After oxidation, the mixture was filtered through a 0.45 μm millipore
polycarbonate membrane and the filtered solid was washed using deionized
water repeatedly until the solution pH became neutral.
1.3.1.2 Characterization of Adsorbents
The morphology of magnetic as-prepared carbon nanotubes (MAPCNTs) was
characterized by HRTEM as shown in 
Figure 1.16
. 
Figure 1.16a
 shows that
entangled MAPCNTs were mixed with some metallic particles, as indicated
by numerous black dots. 
Figure 1.16c
 and 
d
 reveals that the MNPs were
covered with carbon cages or shells with diameters ranging from 2 to 30 nm,
and these cages consisted of several graphitic layers, which were widely
observed in the synthesis of CNTs by all previous methods [61, 62]. It is
usually difficult to prevent metallic MNPs (Fe, Co, Ni) from oxidation under
conventional experimental conditions [6]. The carbon cages would provide
an effective barrier against oxidation and agglomeration of MNPs and ensure
a long-term stability. The special structure of MNPs encapsulated by
graphitic shells could be beneficial to the stable application of MAPCNTs
under high temperature or acid conditions. The elemental composition of
MAPCNTs was analyzed by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX)
(
Figure 1.17a
). The EDX results show that the MAPCNTs consisted of iron
and carbon, and the Cu peaks resulted from the copper grid used to support
the MAPCNTs.
Figure 1.16
 HRTEM images of MAPCNTs (a and b) and iron particles
embedded in graphitic shells (c and d).Figure 1.17
 Energy-dispersive X-ray spectrum (a) and room temperature
magnetization curve (b) of MAPCNTs.
The magnetization characteristics of MAPCNTs were investigated at room
temperature (
Figure 1.17b
). The Ms of MAPCNTs is 3.64 emu·g
–1
(magnetic field = ±10 kOe), indicating that MAPCNTs are ferromagnetic
materials, which can be attributed to the iron MNPs. From 
Figure 1.17b
, the
lower values of coercivities HC (285 Oe) show that MAPCNTs are softmagnetic materials, which could be used in transformer and inductor cores,
recording heads, microwave devices, and magnetic shielding. Kuryliszyn-
Kudelska examined the influence of chemical treatment on magnetic
properties of APCNTs [63, 64]; a significant change of Ms was observed
after chemical treatment. Therefore, proper chemical modification and heat
treatment technologies could control and improve the magnetic properties
and further expand the application fields of magnetic APCNTs.
The XRD patterns and Raman spectra of APCNTs and MAPCNTs are
shown in 
Figures 1.18
 and 
1.19
, both of which indicate that the MAPCNTs
were a mixture of two phases: Fe and CNTs. No other peaks corresponding to
impurities were detected.
Figure 1.18
 XRD patterns of APCNTs and MAPCNTs.
Figure 1.19
 Raman spectra of APCNTs and MAPCNTs.The XRD patterns of APCNTs and MAPCNTs are shown in 
Figure 1.18
,
which indicate that the MAPCNTs were a mixture of two phases: Fe and
CNTs. The diffraction peak at 2θ=26.2O is assigned to (002) plane of CNTs,
and the diffraction peak at 2θ=44.6O is assigned to (110) plane of Fe and
(101) plane of CNTs; the two peaks corresponding to the structure of
APCNTs also exist in the XRD pattern of the MAPCNTs. No other peaks
corresponding to impurities were detected after NaClO modification.
The Raman spectra of APCNTs and MAPCNTs are shown in 
Figure 1.19
.
No peaks have been found in the low frequencies (100~800 cm
–1
), which
indicates that no iron oxide exists in APCNTs or MAPCNTs. In APCNTs or
MAPCNTs samples, because INPs are encapsulated by graphitic shells and
iron has only one atom in the primitive unit cell, no optical-branch zero wave
vector vibrational modes exist and the Raman peak of iron is difficult to be
tested [65]. The G peak at 1,585 cm
–1
 is related to E2g graphite mode [12–
14]. The strong intensity of this peak indicates good graphitization of CNTs.
The D peak at around 1,345 cm
–1
 is induced by defective structures, which
could include minor amorphous carbon and some graphite particles seen inthe sample (
Figure 1.16
). G′ band and weak structures arising from double
resonance processes are observed in the second-order region of the spectra.
The intensity ratio of the G and D peaks (IG/ID) is an indicator of the
structure quality of CNT sample. As shown in 
Figure 1.19
, the higher IG/ID
ratio means a higher structure quality of CNTs after the modification process.
Therefore, we can see that MAPCNTs are less defective than APCNTs due to
the removal of amorphous carbon after NaClO modification.
The TGA results of all samples are presented in 
Figure 1.20
. The quantity
of iron MNPs in the APCNTs can be estimated as 16.38%, which is lower
than that in the MAPCNTs (18.62%). The increase of weight fraction of
MNPs can be attributed to the purification of carbonaceous byproducts by
NaClO solution. More importantly, the results indicate that the MNPs were
retained in carbon shells and did not erode or dissolve after NaClO
modification. The surface chemical properties of APCNTs and MAPCNTs
were further determined by XPS. MAPCNTs sample shows a small O1s peak
with an atomic content of 7.15 at.%, which is more than that of 2.88 at.% for
APCNTs. This observation reveals that the oxygen-containing functional
groups (carboxyls, phenolic, hydroxyls, carbonyls, etc.) were decorated on
the wall of MAPCNTs after NaClO modification.
Figure 1.20
 Thermal analysis curve of the APCNTs and MAPCNTs.
Next, APCNTs and MAPCNTs were dispersed in water to study the
dispersion properties with a concentration of 0.5 mg·mL
–1
 by ultrasonic
vibration. The optical images show that MAPCNTs could be dispersed in
water uniformly after ultrasonication for 15 min, and agglomeration and
settling were not observed after several days. In contrast, the APCNTs could
not be dispersed even after hours of ultrasonic vibration. Instead, they tended
to float on the surface of water or deposit on the bottom of the glass bottle.
The good dispersion of MAPCNTs in water could be attributed to hydrophilic
functional groups on the surface of MAPCNTs after NaClO treatment.
Compared with APCNTs, the total SSA and the PV of MAPCNTs are
increased to 186.3 cm
2
/g and 0.53 cm
3
/g, which can be attributed to opening
up of tube tips after the NaClO treatment.
1.3.1.3 Adsorption Properties
In this work, we aim at exploring the possibility to produce chemically
modified magnetic MAPCNTs with controllable characteristics as adsorbents
for dye removal from aqueous solutions. We compared the adsorption
capacity of APCNTs before and after the NaClO modification as shown in
Figure 1.21
. The results show that the adsorption capacity greatly increased
after the chemical modification. Moreover, the magnetic adsorbents could be
effectively and quickly separated by using a magnet after adsorption (
Figure
1.22
). The larger adsorption capacity of five types of dyes suggests that
MAPCNTs are effective broad-spectrum adsorbents for dye removal from
aqueous solutions.
Figure 1.21
 Comparison of adsorption capacity of APCNTs and MAPCNTs
[initial concentration: 28.8 mg/L (rhodamine B), 44.8 mg/L (Congo red), 79.0
mg/L (malachite green), 96.4 mg/L (methylene blue), 103.2 mg/L (neutral
red)].Figure 1.22
 Photographs of MAPCNTs adsorption behavior and magnetic
separation (with 10 mg/L initial concentration of dye solutions).
Furthermore, MAPCNTs’ adsorption isotherms for the removal of dyes are
shown in 
Figure 1.23
. The equilibrium adsorption was analyzed by using the
Langmuir [20], Freundlich [21], and the Dubinin-Radushkevich (D-R) [27]
isotherm models. The isotherms based on the experimental data and the
parameters obtained from linear regression using adsorption models are
shown in 
Figure 1.24
. Results indicate that Langmuir model fitted the
experimental data better than Freundlich model based on the determination
coefficient (R
2
) as shown in 
Figure 1.24a
 and 
b
 and 
Table 1.4
. The
applicability of Langmuir isotherm suggests that specific homogenous sites
within the adsorbent are involved. The computed maximum monolayercapacities have wonderful values of 107.53 mg/g for neutral red, 101.63 mg/g
for methylene blue, 94.34 mg/g for malachite green, 67.57 mg/g for Congo
red and 46.08 mg/g for rhodamine B onto the MAPCNTs, which are also
higher than those of previously reported adsorbents [66–69]. These results
suggest that the MAPCNTs have great potential for dye removal from
aqueous solutions. The D-R isotherm model was applied to distinguish
between the physical and chemical adsorption of dyes on MAPCNTs as
shown in 
Figure 1.24c
. The values of E (mean energy of adsorption) exceed
16 kJ·mol
–1
 for all five types of dyes, which suggests that the removal
process may follow ion exchange and chemisorption [28] between dyes and
MAPCNTs. The increase in the adsorption capacity of MAPCNTs can be
attributed to the following reasons: firstly, oxygen-containing functional
groups may affect the dispersibility of MAPCNTs and lead to water cluster
formation in aqueous solutions, which consequently can be favorable or
unfavorable for the aqueous phase adsorption [36]. For dyes with
considerable solubility, the surface functionalization of MAPCNTs would
improve their hydrophilicity and dispersibility in aqueous solutions. A better
dispersion of MAPCNTs in water will increase the available adsorption sites,
which may be favorable for the aqueous phase adsorption. Therefore, the
dispersive interactions are predominant. Secondly, the increased SSA and
meso-PV would provide more adsorption sites for dyes; hence, the adsorption
capacity obviously increased after NaClO modification. The presence of
more mesopore structures may render MAPCNTs attractive for applications
in lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors.
Figure 1.23
 Equilibrium adsorption isotherms of dyes on MAPCNTs.Figure 1.24
 (a) Langmuir, (b) Freundlich, and (c) D-R isotherms for dye
adsorption onto MAPCNTs.Table 1.4
 Langmuir, Freundlich, and D-R isotherms parameters of
MAPCNTs adsorbents.In summary, excellent magnetic materials MAPCNTs were prepared by
using a facile one-pot method based on APCNTs. The resulting MAPCNTs
have a higher SSA and better dispersion and magnetic properties, which
makes them promising for use as adsorbents for dye removal from aqueous
solutions with excellent adsorption capacity and magnetic separation
properties. Results of this work are of great significance for large-scale
practical applications of MAPCNTs without purification.
1.3.2 Magnetic CNTs/C@Fe/Chitosan for
Tetracycline Removal
1.3.2.1 Synthesis Method
The CNTs/C@Fe were prepared using a CVD method [10]. One gram of
chitosan (CS) and 1 g of CNTs were mixed in 100 mL 5 wt % dilute acetic
acid solution and stirred for 5–10 min; then 0.6 g NaHSO
3
 was added and
stirred till the bubbles became uniformly, and added 25 ml formaldehyde
solution, the solution was stirred for 5 min to become uniform and then stood
10 min. The mixture was filtered and washed by distilled water, and then it
was put into NaOH solution under pH 10. Ten milliliters of epichlorohydrin
was added into the above-mentioned mixture. The mixture was heated under
90 °C for 6 h followed by filtering and washing by distilled water. 1 mol/L
HCl solution was put and stirred for 30 min. The mixture was washed by
NaOH through extraction filtration till the filtrate became neutral. After
vacuum drying, CNTs/C@Fe/CS can be obtained.
1.3.2.2 Characterization of Adsorbents
Figure 1.25
 shows the TEM images of CNTs/C@Fe (
Figure 1.25a
 and 
b
) and
CNTs/C@Fe/CS (
Figure 1.25c
 and 
d
), it can be seen that the nanotubes were
decorated with INPs covered by carbon layers. Moreover, CNTs/C@ Fe has a
fibrous morphology, and the diameter is below 50 nm, as shown in 
Figure
1.1b
. In CNTs/C@Fe/CS, as shown in 
Figure 1.25d
, the tubes are connected
to each other in parallel by CS, and the agglomeration degrees are obviously
lower than CNTs/C@Fe. It can be inferred that the tubes are cross-linked byCS. To further investigation of structure, the XRD patterns of CNTs/C@Fe
and CNTs/C@Fe/CS are tested as shown in 
Figure 1.26
. It can be seen that
the CNTs/C@Fe were a mixture of two phases: Fe and CNTs. In
CNTs/C@Fe/CS, the CNTs and the Fe still have strong peaks indicating they
maintained their structures after CS modification, and the Fe nanoparticles
have not been oxidized.
Figure 1.25
 TEM of CNTs/C@Fe (a and b) and CNTs/C@Fe/CS (c and d).
Figure 1.26
 XRD of CNTs/C@Fe, CS, and CNTs/C@Fe/CS.XPS was employed to analyze the surface chemical composition, as shown
in 
Figure 1.27
. After functionalization, the new peaks of S and N appeared.
For the C 1s spectra as shown in 
Figure 1.2b
, the strongest peak at 284.6 eV
is assigned to C–C for CNTs and results from non-functionalized carbon and
the peak at the binding energy of about 285.1 eV is a consequence of single-
bonding carbon for CNTs. In O1s spectra as shown in 
Figure 1.27c
, peak at
531.5 eV is assigned to C=O. In N1s spectra in 
Figure 1.27d
, peak at 400.2
eV is assigned to –NH– groups. The O1s in CNTs/C@Fe/CS is stronger than
in CNTs/C@Fe, and the N1s appears in CNTs/C@Fe/CS rather than in
CNTs/C@Fe, indicating that CS has good combination with CNTs/C@Fe
and brings abundant oxygen- and nitrogen-containing functional groups into
the composite.Figure 1.27
 XPS survey scans (a) of the CNTs/C@Fe/CS and CNTs/C@Fe,
the core peaks of C 1s (b), O 1s (c), and N1s (d).
The TGA results of CNTs/C@Fe and CNTs/C@Fe/CS are presented in
Figure 1.28a
. The final weight of the remaining samples is 14% (CNTs/C@
Fe) and 13% (CNTs/C@Fe/CS) of the original weight. Assuming that the
final material is Fe
2
O
3
, the quantity of Fe in the CNTs/C@Fe (4.9%) is
lower than that in the CNTs/C@Fe/CS (4.6%). The reduction in the weight
fraction of iron in CNTs/C@Fe/CS can be attributed to the addition of GS.
The main thermal events may be identified from differential thermal analysis
(DTA) curves. Comparing CNTs/C@Fe with CNTs/C@Fe/CS, it is clearly
seen that the main thermal events temperature (Tm) decreased from ~570 to
~500 °C, which may be attributed to the CNTs/C@Fe/CS structure defects
and more oxygen-containing functional groups [70] brought from CS. The
thermal event temperature is so high that CNTs/C@Fe/CS could readily meet
the application needs of adsorbents in water treatment [71].Figure 1.28
 Characterization of CNTs/C@Fe and CNTs/C@Fe/CS: (a) TGA
and (b) magnetization characteristics.
The magnetization characteristics of CNTs/C@Fe and CNTs/C@Fe/CS
were investigated at room temperature (
Figure 1.28b
). The Ms of
CNTs/C@Fe is 9 emu·g–
1
 and CNTs/C@Fe/CS is 8 emu·g
–1
, which
indicated that CNTs/C@Fe/CS still has good magnetization property. The
loop of CNTs/C@Fe/CS exhibits very low coercive field (16 Oe) and
remanence values (2 emu·g–
1
), which can be beneficial for the reuse without
reunite for magnetization. It can be found from the insets of 
Figure 1.28
 that
the CNTs/C@Fe/CS could be well dispersed in water and can be easily
separated by using a magnet.
1.3.2.3 Adsorption Properties
Equilibrium adsorption isotherm is one of the most important data to
elucidate the adsorption mechanism, and then four typical isotherm equations
were selected to describe the adsorption process as shown in 
Figure 1.29
.
Maximum adsorption capacities of tetracycline on different adsorbents based
on Langmuir model are shown in 
Table 1.5
. In Langmuir model, the 
q
max
and K
L
 increases with increase in temperature due to the endothermic nature
of the adsorption process. The R
L
 values were between 0 and 1, proving that
the adsorption is a favorable process. The high correlation coefficients for all
temperatures indicate that the adsorption of tetracycline on CNTs/C@Fe/CS
is in compliance with the Freundlich isotherm. The high values of K
F
indicate a high adsorption capacity and good affinity between tetracyclineand CNTs/C@Fe/CS. The 1/
n
 values are far less than 1, implying that
favorable adsorption at all temperatures studied. The increase of Freundlich
constants (KF) with increase of temperature suggests that high temperature
favors adsorption and the adsorption is endothermic in nature. It is found that
the plots of Tempkin are deviate from linearity at all the temperatures. In D-R
model, the 
q
m
 was different from 
q
e
 derived from the Langmuir. The
difference may be attributed to the different definition of maximum
adsorption capacity in two models. In Langmuir model, 
q
e
 represents the
maximum adsorption at monolayer coverage, whereas 
q
m
 represents the
maximum adsorption at the total specific micropore volume of the adsorbent
in D-R model. The mean adsorption energy (
E
) was found to be lower than
the range of adsorption reaction 8–16 kJ/mol [72].
Figure 1.29
 Adsorption isotherms at different temperatures (15 °C, 25 °C,
and 40 °C, 100 mg/L, 1 mg/mL, 24 h). (a) Langmuir model, (b) Freundlich
model, (c) Tempkin model, and (d) D-R model.
Table 1.5
 Maximum adsorption capacities of tetracycline on different
adsorbents based on Langmuir model.
Adsorbent
qm (mg/g)
Ref.
GO functionalized magnetic particles
39.1
[73]
Macroporous polystyrene resins
98.04
[74]
Modified bio-char
17.0
[75]
Activated carbon
475.48
[76]
CNTs/C@Fe/CS
104
This study
In order to analyze the sorption kinetics, the pseudo-first-order, the pseudo-
second-order, and the intra-particle diffusion models were applied to the
experimental data as shown in 
Figure 1.30
. It is obvious that the correlation
coefficients 
R
2
 for the linear plots of the pseudo-second-order model is
higher than the correlation coefficients 
R
2
 for the pseudo-first-order model.
This indicates that the adsorption kinetic is better represented by the pseudo-
second-order model. The intraparticle diffusion model was proposed to
identify the adsorption mechanism and to predict the rate controlling step,
where 
C
 is the intercept and 
k
diff
 (mg/g·min 0.5) is the intraparticle diffusion
rate constant. The intraparticle diffusion model usually includes three steps.
The first portion is the external surface adsorption or boundary layer
diffusion. The second portion is the gradual stage of adsorption, which is the
intraparticle diffusion. If the plot of 
q
t
 versus 
t
0.5 is linear and passes through
the origin, then the intraparticle diffusion is the rate-controlling step. In this
adsorption, though the 
q
t
 and 
t
0.5 had linear relationship, the plot did not
pass through the origin, so the process is not rate controlling [77].
Figure 1.30
 Kinetic curves (a), kinetics analyses of pseudo-first-order model
(b), pseudo-second-order model (c), and intra-particle diffusion model (d).
(25 °C, 100 mg/L, 1 mg/mL).Influence of pH on adsorption is shown in 
Figure 1.31a
. Tetracycline is an
amphoteric molecule with multiple ionizable functional groups: a
tricarbonylamide group, a phenolic diketone group, and a dimethyl amino
group. Tetracycline can undergo protonation–deprotonation reactions and
present different species depending on the solution pH. Dissolved
tetracycline species may have net charges that are positive (H
3
TC
+
, pH <
3.3), neutral (H
2
TC
0
, 3.3 < pH < 7.68), one negative (HTC–, 7.68 < pH <
9.68), or two negative (TC
2–
, pH > 9.68) [78]. It can be seen from 
Figure
1.5b
 that the adsorption of tetracycline was pH dependent. CNTs/C@Fe/CS
had larger adsorption capacity under alkaline solution than acid
circumstances. This result might be attributed to the molecular structure of
tetracycline and the functional groups present on the surface of the
CNTs/C@Fe/CS. Possibly, the deprotonation of carboxyl groups of the
CNTs/C@Fe/CS was enhanced under alkaline conditions, whichstrengthened the electrostatic interaction with amino groups on tetracycline
[79]. Moreover, the variation in pH not only focuses on the protonation–
deprotonating transition of functional groups, but also results in a change in
chemical speciation [80]. Therefore, cation exchange reactions, as well as
surface complexation are expected to occur between the zwitterionic
tetracycline molecules and the respective ionic/polar sites on the adsorbent
surface. Moreover, the strong interactions of tetracycline directly with the
surface of carbon nanotube cannot be ignored [81].
Figure 1.31
 Influence of pH (a), Cu
2+
 and humic acid (b) on tetracycline
adsorption on CNTs/C@Fe/CS.
To evaluate the effects of heavy metals and organic matters on the
adsorption, Cu
2+
 or humic acid was simultaneously adsorbed with
tetracycline, respectively, as shown in 
Figure 1.31b
. The adsorption of
tetracycline on CNTs/C@Fe/CS is enhanced with an increase in Cu
2+
concentration. It was because that tetracycline has multiple ionizable
functional groups and various species in solution, which exhibit strong
complexing capability with Cu
2+
, tetracycline and Cu
2+
 might facilitate the
sorption of each other by the formation of tetracycline–Cu
2+
 complexes with
higher sorption affinity, and/or by the formation of surface-bridging
mechanism [82]. Humic acid could also promote the adsorption of
tetracycline on CNTs/C@Fe/CS. It was because that tetracycline could be
adsorbed by humic acid consistent with complexation between the
cationic/zwitterionic tetracycline species and deprotonated functional groupsin humic acid. Therefore, in the CNTs/C@Fe/CS–humic acid–tetracycline
ternary system, tetracycline can either complex with the surface sites of
CNTs/C@Fe/CS or interact with dissolved humic acid in solution or humic
acid sorbed with CNTs/C@ Fe/CS surfaces. It is reasonable to speculate that
humic acid might act as a bridge to complex with both CNTs/C@Fe/CS
surfaces and tetracycline molecules [83].
FT-IRs of CNTs/C@Fe/CS before and after adsorption are shown in 
Figure
1.32a
, and it can be seen that CNTs/C@Fe/CS contains many functional
groups. Band at 1089 cm
–1
 is assigned to the C–O bonds, and band at 1227
cm
–1
 is assigned to the C–OH [84]. Amide I (due to the high C=O group
extinction coefficient) and NH
2
 bands at 1647 and 1590 cm
–1
; the band at
around 3400 cm
–1
 is assigned to O–H, as well as to intermolecular hydrogen
bonding [85]. After adsorption, these bonds became weaker indicating
chemical adsorption existed. XPS of CNTs/C@Fe/CS before and after
adsorption are shown in 
Figure 1.8b
. It can be seen that CNTs/C@Fe/CS
does not have N1s peak before adsorption; however, the N1s appears in
CNTs/C@Fe/CS after adsorption as the tetracycline contains abundant N
elements. N
2
 adsorption and desorption curves of CNTs/C@Fe/CS before
and after adsorption are shown in 
Figure 1.8c
, and the pore size distributions
are shown in 
Figure 1.32d
. The specific area of CNTs/C@Fe/CS reduced
after adsorption, indicating physical adsorption took place. The total PV
reduced further proved that after adsorption the tetracycline occupied pores of
CNTs/C@Fe/CS.
Figure 1.32
 FT-IR (a), XPS (b), N
2
 adsorption and desorption curves (c),
and pore size distributions (d) characterization of CNTs/C@Fe/CS before and
after adsorption.1.4 Summary and Outlook
The existing synthesis methods of MCNTs are expensive, complex, time
consuming, and environmentally unfriendly, leading to a low-yield and
limited practical applications. In addition, there are serious concerns about
the health and environmental risks of iron oxide/CNT once they have been
released into the environment. These issues may ultimately hinder the
widespread practical applications of the iron oxide/CNT composites. In this
chapter, we report several new-typed method to synthesize MCNT
composites. Here, MI/CNTs were used as adsorbents to remove arsenate
pollutants, which exhibited excellent adsorption and magnetic separation
properties. The adsorption capacities are higher than what have been shown
in previous reports. After adsorption, the MI/CNT adsorbents could be
effectively and immediately separated using a magnet, thereby reducing the
potential risks from MI/CNT nanoparticles as an environmental contaminant.Moreover, improved manufacturing and large-scale production have already
caused the price of CVD-produced CNTs to fall substantially; therefore,
MI/CNTs may be a promising magnetic adsorbent for removing pollutants
using APCNTs. The results of this work are highly significant for practical
large-scale applications of as-prepared single-walled or multi-walled CNTs
containing Fe catalytic particles without the need for prior purification.
Acknowledgment
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (21207100 and 51408362).
References
1. P.R. Chang, P.W. Zheng, B.X. Liu, D.P. Anderson, J.G. Yu, and X.F. Ma,
Characterization of magnetic soluble starch-functionalized carbon nanotubes
and its application for the adsorption of the dyes. 
J. Hazard Mater.
, 186,
2144–2150, 2011.
2. M.H. Xu, W. Zhong, X.S. Qi, C.T. Au, Y. Deng, and Y.W. Du, Highly
stable Fe-Ni alloy nanoparticles encapsulated in carbon nanotubes: Synthesis,
structure and magnetic properties. 
J. Alloy Compd.
, 495, 200–204, 2010.
3. X.L. Li, J.D. Thompson, Y.Y. Zhang, C.I. Brady, G.F. Zou, N.H. Mack, D.
Williams, J.G. Duque, Q.X. Jia, and S.K. Doorn, Efficient synthesis of
tailored magnetic carbon nanotubes via a noncovalent chemical route.
Nanoscale
, 3, 668–673, 2011.
4. H.X. Wu, G. Liu, X. Wang, J.M. Zhang, Y. Chen, J.L. Shi, H. Yang, H.
Hu, and S.P. Yang, Solvothermal synthesis of cobalt ferrite nanoparticles
loaded on multiwalled carbon nanotubes for magnetic resonance imaging and
drug delivery. 
Acta Biomater.
, 7, 3496–3504, 2011.
5. F.D. Balacianu, A.C. Nechifor, R. Bartos, S.I. Voicu, and G. Nechifor,
Synthesis and characterization of Fe
3
O
4
 magnetic particles-multiwalled
carbon nanotubes by covalent functionalization. 
Optoelectron. Adv. Mat.
, 3,
219–222, 2009.6. J. Ma, and J.N. Wang, Purification of single-walled carbon nanotubes by a
highly efficient and nondestructive approach. 
Chem. Mater.
, 20, 2895–2902,
2008.
7. X.X. Zhang, G.H. Wen, S.M. Huang, L.M. Dai, R.P. Gao, and Z.L. Wang,
Magnetic properties of Fe nanoparticles trapped at the tips of the aligned
carbon nanotubes. 
J. Magn. Magn. Mater.
, 231, L9–L12, 2001.
8. L.A. Montoro, C.A. Luengo, J.M. Rosolen, E. Cazzanelli, and G. Mariotto,
Study of oxygen influence in the production of single-wall carbon nanotubes
obtained by arc method using Ni and Y catalyst. 
Diam. Relat. Mater.
, 12,
846–850, 2003.
9. J.L. Zimmerman, R.K. Bradley, C.B. Huffman, R.H. Hauge, and J.L.
Margrave, Gas-phase purification of single-wall carbon nanotubes. 
Chemistry
of Materials
, 12, 1361–1366, 2000.
10. J. Ma, J.N. Wang, and X.X. Wang, Large-diameter and water-dispersible
single-walled carbon nanotubes: Synthesis, characterization and applications.
J. Mater. Chem.
, 19, 3033–3041, 2009.
11. A.M. Jubb and H.C. Allen, Vibrational spectroscopic characterization of
hematite, maghemite, and magnetite thin films produced by vapor deposition.
Acs Appl. Mater. Inter.
, 2, 2804–2812, 2010.
12. Z.H. Yu, and L.E. Brus, (n, m) structural assignments and chirality
dependence in single-wall carbon nanotube Raman scattering. 
J. Phys. Chem.
B
, 105, 6831–6837, 2001.
13. A.G. Souza, A. Jorio, G.G. Samsonidze, G. Dresselhaus, M.A. Pimenta,
M.S. Dresselhaus, A.K. Swan, M.S. Unlu, B.B. Goldberg, and R. Saito,
Competing spring constant versus double resonance effects on the properties
of dispersive modes in isolated single-wall carbon nanotubes. 
Physical
Review B
, 67, 2003.
14. A. Gruneis, R. Saito, T. Kimura, L.G. Cancado, M.A. Pimenta, A. Jorio,
A.G. Souza, G. Dresselhaus, and M.S. Dresselhaus, Determination of two-
dimensional phonon dispersion relation of graphite by Raman spectroscopy.
Physical Review B
, 65, 155405–155411, 2002.
15. P.I. Ravikovitch, A. Vishnyakov, R. Russo, and A.V. Neimark, Unified
approach to pore size characterization of microporous carbonaceous materialsfrom N-2. Ar, and CO
2
 adsorption isotherms. 
Langmuir
, 16, 2311–2320,
2000.
16. C.C. Chen, C.F. Chen, C.M. Chen, and F.T. Chuang, Modification of
multiwalled carbon nanotubes by microwave digestion method as
electrocatalyst supports for direct methanol fuel cell applications.
Electrochem. Commun.
, 9, 159–163, 2007.
17. P.C.J. Graat, and M.A.J. Somers, Simultaneous determination of
composition and thickness of thin iron-oxide films from XPS Fe 2p spectra.
Appl. Surf. Sci.
, 100, 36–40, 1996.
18. S. Attal, R. Thiruvengadathan, and O. Regev, Determination of the
concentration of single-walled carbon nanotubes in aqueous dispersions using
UV-visible absorption spectroscopy. 
Anal. Chem.
, 78, 8098–8104, 2006.
19. S.H. Jeong, K.K. Kim, S.J. Jeong, K.H. An, S.H. Lee, and Y.H. Lee,
Optical absorption spectroscopy for determining carbon nanotube
concentration in solution. 
Synthetic Met.
, 157, 570–574, 2007.
20. I. Langmuir, The adsorption of gases on plane surfaces of glass, mica and
platinum. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc.
, 40, 1361–1403, 1918.
21. H.M.F. Freundlich, Over the adsorption in solution. 
J. Phys. Chem.
, 57,
385–471, 1906.
22. F. Yu, J.H. Chen, M.X. Yang, L. Zhou, L. Jin, C. Su, F.L. Li, L.Chen,
Z.W. Yuan, L.L. Yu, and J. Ma, A facile one-pot method for synthesis of
low-cost magnetic carbon nanotubes and their applications for dye removal,
New J. Chem.
, 36, 1940–1943, 2012.
23. B.S. Tawabini, S.F. Al-Khaldi, M.M. Khaled, and M.A. Atieh, Removal
of arsenic from water by iron oxide nanoparticles impregnated on carbon
nanotubes. 
J. Environ. Sci. Heal. A
, 46, 215–223, 2011.
24. S.A. Ntim, and S. Mitra, Iron oxide coated multiwall carbon nanotubes
for the removal of arsenic from water. 
Abstr. Pap. Am. Chem. S
, 240, 2010.
25. S.A. Ntim, and S. Mitra, Adsorption of arsenic on multiwall carbon
nanotube-zirconia nanohybrid for potential drinking water purification. 
J.
Colloid Interface Sci.
, 375, 154–159, 2012.
26. S.A. Ntim, and S. Mitra, Removal of trace arsenic to meet drinking water
standards using iron oxide coated multiwall carbon nanotubes. 
J. Chem. Eng.Data
, 56, 2077–2083, 2011.
27. B.M. Jovanovic, V.L. Vukasinovic-Pesic, and L.V. Rajakovic, Enhanced
arsenic sorption by hydrated iron (iii) oxide-coated materials-mechanism and
performances. 
Water Environ. Res.
, 83, 498–506, 2011.
28. S.S. Tahir, and N. Rauf, Removal of a cationic dye from aqueous
solutions by adsorption onto bentonite clay. 
Chemosphere
, 63, 1842–1848,
2006.
29. H.M. Guo, D. Stuben, and Z. Berner, Removal of arsenic from aqueous
solution by natural siderite and hematite. 
Appl. Geochem.
, 22, 1039–1051,
2007.
30. R.J. Donahoe, L. Yang, and A. Lanzirotti, Speciation and surface
complexation of as on hydrous ferric oxide in soils modified by in situ
chemical fixation. 
Geochim. Cosmochim. Ac.
, 69, A616–A616, 2005.
31. R.L. Vaughan, and B.E. Reed, Modeling As(V) removal by a iron oxide
impregnated activated carbon using the surface complexation approach.
Water Res.
, 39, 1005–1014, 2005.
32. D.M. Sherman, and S.R. Randall, Surface complexation of arsenie(V) to
iron(III) (hydr)oxides: Structural mechanism from ab initio molecular
geometries and EXAFS spectroscopy. 
Geochim. Cosmochim. Ac.
, 67, 4223–
4230, 2003.
33. M. Gallegos-Garcia, K. Ramirez-Muniz, and S.X. Song, Arsenic removal
from water by adsorption using iron oxide minerals as adsorbents: A review.
Miner. Process Extr. M
, 33, 301–315, 2012.
34. D. VanDorn, M.T. Ravalli, M.M. Small, B. Hillery, and S. Andreescu,
Adsorption of arsenic by iron oxide nanoparticles: A versatile, inquiry-based
laboratory for a high school or college science course. 
J. Chem. Educ.
, 88,
1119–1122, 2011.
35. X.D. Gao, and J. Chorover, Adsorption of perfluorooctanoic acid and
perfluorooctanesulfonic acid to iron oxide surfaces as studied by flow-
through ATR-FTIR spectroscopy. 
Environ. Chem.
, 9, 148–157, 2012.
36. F. Yu, J. Ma, and Y.Q. Wu, Adsorption of toluene, ethylbenzene and m-
xylene on multi-walled carbon nanotubes with different oxygen contents
from aqueous solutions. 
J. Hazard Mater.
, 192, 1370–1379, 2011.37. J. Ma, F. Yu, L. Zhou, L. Jin, M.X. Yang, J.S. Luan, Y.H. Tang, H.B.
Fan, Z.W. Yuan, and J.H. Chen, Enhanced adsorptive removal of methyl
orange and methylene blue from aqueous solution by alkali-activated
multiwalled carbon nanotubes. 
Acs Appl. Mater. Inter.
, 4, 5749–5760, 2012.
38. H.-J. Choi, I.-Y. Jeon, D.W. Chang, D. Yu, L. Dai, L.-S. Tan, and J.-B.
Baek, Preparation and electrocatalytic activity of gold nanoparticles
immobilized on the surface of 4-mercaptobenzoyl-functionalized multiwalled
carbon nanotubes. 
J. Phys. Chem. C
, 115, 1746–1751, 2011.
39. P. Kalimuthu, and S.A. John, Nanostructured electropolymerized film of
5-amino-2-mercapto-1,3,4-thiadiazole on glassy carbon electrode for the
selective determination of l-cysteine. 
Electrochem. Commun.
, 11, 367–370,
2009.
40. X.-q. Li, J. Cao, W.-x. Zhang, Stoichiometry of Cr (VI) immobilization
using nanoscale zerovalent iron (nZVI): A study with high-resolution X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (HR-XPS). 
Ind Eng Chem Res
, 47, 2131–2139,
2008.
41. T.A. Saleh, S. Agarwal, and V.K. Gupta, Synthesis of MWCNT/MnO
2
and their application for simultaneous oxidation of arsenite and sorption of
arsenate. 
Appl. Catal. B-Environ.
, 2011.
42. L. Ai, C. Zhang, F. Liao, Y. Wang, M. Li, L. Meng, and J. Jiang,
Removal of methylene blue from aqueous solution with magnetite loaded
multi-wall carbon nanotube: Kinetic, isotherm and mechanism analysis. 
J.
Hazard Mater.
, 198, 282–290, 2011.
43. Y. Liu, Y. Li, and X.-P. Yan, Preparation, characterization, and
application oflcysteine functionalized multiwalled carbon nanotubes as a
selective sorbent for separation and preconcentration of heavy metals. 
Adv.
Funct. Mater.
, 18, 1536–1543, 2008.
44. T.A. Pham, J.S. Kim, D. Kim, and Y.T. Jeong, Facile preparation of
water-dispersible graphene nanosheets by covalent functionalization with
poly(3-aminobenzene sulfonic acid). 
Polymer Engineering & Science
, 52,
1854–1861, 2012.
45. J. Ma, Z.L. Zhu, B. Chen, M.X. Yang, H.M. Zhou, C. Li, F. Yu, and J.H.
Chen, One-pot, large-scale synthesis of magnetic activated carbon nanotubes
and their applications for arsenic removal. 
J. Mater. Chem. A
, 1, 4662–4666,2013.
46. A. Amiri, H.Z. Zardini, M. Shanbedi, M. Maghrebi, M. Baniadam, and B.
Tolueinia, Efficient method for functionalization of carbon nano tubes by
lysine and improved antimicrobial activity and water-dispersion. 
Mater. Lett.
,
72, 153–156, 2012.
47. J. Li, W.-D. He, L.-P. Yang, X.-L. Sun, and Q. Hua, Preparation of multi-
walled carbon nanotubes grafted with synthetic poly(l-lysine) through
surface-initiated ring-opening polymerization. 
Polymer
, 48, 4352–4360,
2007.
48. D. Pokhrel, and T. Viraraghavan, Arsenic removal from an aqueous
solution by modified A-niger biomass: Batch kinetic and isotherm studies. 
J.
Hazard Mater.
, 150, 818–825, 2008.
49. B. Chen, Z. Zhu, J. Ma, Y. Qiu, and J. Chen, Surfactant assisted Ce–Fe
mixed oxide decorated multiwalled carbon nanotubes and their arsenic
adsorption performance. 
J. Mater. Chem. A
, 1, 11355–11367, 2013.
50. Addo S.Ntim, S.Mitra, Adsorption of arsenic on multiwall carbon
nanotube–zirconia nanohybrid for potential drinking water purification,
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science
, 375, 154–159, 2012.
51. Addo S. Ntim, S. Mitra, Removal of trace arsenic to meet drinking water
standards using iron oxide coated multiwall carbon nanotubes, 
Journal of
Chemical & Engineering Data
, 56, 2077–2083, 2011.
52. B. Tawabini, S. Al-Khaldi, M. Khaled, and M. Atieh, Removal of arsenic
from water by iron oxide nanoparticles impregnated on carbon nanotubes. 
J.
Environ. Sci. Heal. A,
 46, 215–223, 2011.
53. Z.M. Gu, B.L. Deng, and J. Yang, Synthesis and evaluation of iron-
containing ordered mesoporous carbon (FeOMC) for arsenic adsorption.
Micropor. Mesopor. Mater.,
 102, 265–273, 2007.
54. J.C. Moreno-Pirajan, and L. Giraldo, Activated carbon from bamboo
waste modified with iron and its application in the study of the adsorption of
arsenite and arsenate. 
Cent. Eur. J. Chem.,
 11, 160–170, 2013.
55. H.J. Zhu, Y.F. Jia, X. Wu, and H. Wang, Removal of arsenic from water
by supported nano zero-valent iron on activated carbon. 
Journal of
Hazardous Materials,
 172, 1591–1596, 2009.56. T. Budinova, N. Petrov, M. Razvigorova, J. Parra, and P. Galiatsatou,
Removal of arsenic(III) from aqueous solution by activated carbons prepared
from solvent extracted olive pulp and olive stones. 
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.,
 45,
1896–1901, 2006.
57. M.C. Teixeira, and V.S.T. Ciminelli, Development of a biosorbent for
arsenite: Structural modeling based on X-ray spectroscopy. 
Environ. Sci.
Techonol.,
 39, 895–900, 2005.
58. N.A. Rey, O.W. Howarth, and E.C. Pereira-Maia, Equilibrium
characterization of the As(III)-cysteine and the As(III)-glutathione systems in
aqueous solution. 
J. Inorg. Biochem.,
 98, 1151–1159, 2004.
59. T.J. Gallegos, Y.S. Han, and K.F. Hayes, Model predictions of realgar
precipitation by reaction of As(III) with synthetic mackinawite under anoxic
conditions. 
Environ. Sci. Techonol.,
 42, 9338–9343, 2008.
60. Y. Wang, G. Morin, G. Ona-Nguema, F. Juillot, F. Guyot, G. Calas, and
G.E. Jr. Brown, Evidence for different surface speciation of arsenite and
arsenate on green rust: An EXAFS and XANES study. 
Environ. Sci.
Techonol.,
 44, 109–115, 2009.
61. J.Y. Woo, D. Kim, J. Kim, J. Park, and C.S. Han, Fast and efficient
purification for highly conductive transparent carbon nanotube films. 
J. Phys.
Chem. C
, 114, 19169–19174, 2010.
62. S.H. Tseng, T.J. Palathinkal, and N.H. Tai, Nondestructive purification of
single-walled carbon nanotube rope through a battery-induced ignition and
chemical solution approach. 
Carbon,
 48, 2159–2168, 2010.
63. I. Kuryliszyn-Kudelska, A. Malolepszy, M. Mazurkiewicz, L. Stobinski,
K. J. Kurzydlowski, and W. Dobrowolski, Enhanced coercivity of as-
prepared and chemically modified multiwalled carbon nanotubes. 
Physica
Status Solidi a-Applications and Materials Science,
 208, 1787–1790, 2011.
64. I. Kuryliszyn-Kudelska, A. Malolepszy, M. Mazurkiewicz, L. Stobinski,
and W. Dobrowolski, Magnetic properties of “As-Prepared” and chemically
modified multiwalled carbon nanotubes. 
Acta Phys. Pol. A,
 119, 597–599,
2011.
65. J.A. Creighton, and R. Withnall, The Raman spectrum of gallium metal
Chem. Phys. Lett.,
 326, 311–313, 2000.66. L. Ai, H. Huang, Z. Chen, X. Wei, and J. Jiang, Activated
carbon/CoFe
2
O
4
 composites: Facile synthesis, magnetic performance and
their potential application for the removal of malachite green from water.
Chemical Engineering Journal
, 156, 243–249, 2010.
67. H.Y. Zhu, Y.Q. Fu, R. Jiang, J.H. Jiang, L. Xiao, G.M. Zeng, S.L. Zhao,
and Y. Wang, Adsorption removal of congo red onto magnetic
cellulose/Fe
3
O
4
/activated carbon composite: Equilibrium, kinetic and
thermodynamic studies. 
Chemical Engineering Journal
, 173(2), 494–502,
2011.
68. Z. Wang, X. Liu, M. Lv, K. Yang, and J. Meng, A facile co-gelation route
to synthesize FeCo/carbon nanocomposites and their application as
magnetically separable adsorber. 
Journal of Alloys and Compounds
, 509,
585–589, 2011.
69. X. Wang, and S. Dai, A simple method to ordered mesoporous carbons
containing nickel nanoparticles. 
Adsorption
, 15, 138–144, 2009.
70. J. Ma, F. Yu, Z. Wen, M. Yang, H. Zhou, C. Li, L. Jin, L. Zhou, L. Chen,
Z. Yuan, and J. Chen, A facile one-pot method for synthesis of low-cost iron
oxide/activated carbon nanotube electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries.
Dalton Transactions
, 42, 1356–1359, 2013.
71. J. Ma, Z. Zhu, B. Chen, M. Yang, H. Zhou, C. Li, F. Yu, and J. Chen,
One-pot, large-scale synthesis of magnetic activated carbon nanotubes and
their applications for arsenic removal. 
Journal of Materials Chemistry A
, 1,
4662, 2013.
72. W. Wang, B. Zheng, Z. Deng, Z. Feng, and L. Fu, Kinetics and
equilibriums for adsorption of poly(vinyl alcohol) from aqueous solution onto
natural bentonite. 
Chemical Engineering Journal
, 214, 343–354, 2013.
73. Y. Lin, S. Xu, and J. Li, Fast and highly efficient tetracyclines removal
from environmental waters by graphene oxide functionalized magnetic
particles. 
Chemical Engineering Journal
, 225, 679–685, 2013.
74. Y. Chao, W. Zhu, B. Yan, Y. Lin, S. Xun, H. Ji, X. Wu, and H. Li,
Changri, macroporous polystyrene resins as adsorbents for the removal of
tetracycline antibiotics from an aquatic environment. 
Journal of Applied
Polymer Science
, 131, 40561, 2014.75. P. Liu, W.J. Liu, H. Jiang, J.J. Chen, W.W. Li, and H.Q. Yu,
Modification of bio-char derived from fast pyrolysis of biomass and its
application in removal of tetracycline from aqueous solution. 
Bioresource
Technology
, 121, 235–240, 2012.
76. L. Huang, M. Wang, C. Shi, J. Huang, and B. Zhang, Adsorption of
tetracycline and ciprofloxacin on activated carbon prepared from lignin with
H
3
PO
4
 activation. 
Desalination and Water Treatment
, 52, 2678–2687, 2014.
77. D.K. Mahmoud, M.A.M. Salleh, W.A. Karim, A. Idris, Z.Z. Abidin,
Batch adsorption of basic dye using acid treated kenaf fibre char:
Equilibrium, kinetic and thermodynamic studies. 
Chemical Engineering
Journal
, 181–182, 449–457, 2012.
78. Y. Zhao, F. Tong, X. Gu, C. Gu, X. Wang, and Y. Zhang, Insights into
tetracycline adsorption onto goethite: Experiments and modeling. 
Sci. Total
Environ.
, 470–471, 19–25, 2014.
79. L. Zhao, P. Dong, J. Xie, J. Li, L. Wu, S.-T. Yang and, J. Luo, Porous
graphene oxide–chitosan aerogel for tetracycline removal. 
Mater. Res.
Express
, 1, 015601, 2013.
80. E.E. Ghadim, F. Manouchehri, G. Soleimani, H. Hosseini, S.Kimiagar,
and S. Nafisi, Adsorption properties of tetracycline onto graphene oxide:
Equilibrium, kinetic and thermodynamic studies. 
PLOS ONE
, 8, e79254,
2013.
81. L. Obeid, El N.Kolli, N. Dali, D. Talbot, S. Abramson, M. Welschbillig,
V. Cabuil, and A. Bee, Adsorption of a cationic surfactant by a magsorbent
based on magnetic alginate beads. 
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science
,
432, 182–189, 2014.
82. F. Lian, Z. Song, Z. Liu, L. Zhu, and B. Xing, Mechanistic understanding
of tetracycline sorption on waste tire powder and its chars as affected by
Cu(2+) and pH. 
Environmental Pollution
, 178, 264–270, 2013.
83. Y. Zhao, J. Geng, X. Wang, X. Gu, and S. Gao, Adsorption of
tetracycline onto goethite in the presence of metal cations and humic
substances. 
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science
, 361, 247–251, 2011.
84. Z. Yuan, Y. Fei, M. Jie, and C. Junhong, Graphene as a template and
structural scaffold for the synthesis of a 3D porous bio-adsorbent to removeantibiotics from wate. 
RSC Advances
, 5, 27964–27969, 2015.
85. A.L. Caroni, de C.R. Lima, M.R. Pereira, and J.L. Fonseca, Tetracycline
adsorption on chitosan: A mechanistic description based on mass uptake and
zeta potential measurements. 
Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces
, 100,
222–228, 2012.Chapter 2
Potentialities of Graphene-Based
Nanomaterials for Wastewater
Treatment
Ana L. Cukierman
1
–
3
*
, Emiliano Platero
1
, María E.
Fernandez
1
,
3
, and Pablo R. Bonelli
1
,
3
1
Programa de Investigación y Desarrollo de Fuentes Alternativas de
Materias Primas y Energía (PINMATE), Depto. de Industrias, Facultad de
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad
Universitaria, Buenos Aires, Argentina
2
Cátedra de Tecnología Farmacéutica II, Depto. de Tecnología
Farmacéutica, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos
Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina
3
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET),
Buenos Aires, Argentina
*
Corresponding author:
 
analea@di.fcen.uba.ar
, 
anacuki@ffyb.uba.ar
Abstract
Due to its exceptional properties and potentialities for technological
innovations in several fields, graphene – a single atomic layer of sp
2
-bonded
carbon atoms densely arranged into a two-dimensional (2D) honeycomb
lattice – has been the subject of intense research worldwide since its
discovery in 2004. In particular, its remarkably high theoretical surface area
has led to explore the feasibility of using nanomaterials related to this newcarbon allotrope, such as graphene oxide (GO), reduced GO, and graphene-
based nanocomposites, for wastewater treatment. Within this scenario, the
present chapter provides an overview of recent research studies and advances
concerned with the potential of graphene-based nanomaterials as novel
promising adsorbents for the removal of various pollutant species, such as
heavy metals, dyes, phenolic compounds, and emerging contaminants, from
wastewater. A brief description of main routes to synthesize graphene, as
well as attempts to regenerate and reuse the adsorbents loaded with the
contaminants after saturation, are also included.
Keywords:
 Graphene, graphene oxide, reduced graphene oxide, pollutant
adsorption, nanostructured adsorbents, regeneration
2.1 Introduction
The discharge of effluents containing pollutants generated from
anthropogenic activities into water bodies constitutes a serious environmental
problem that affects water quality. Different kinds of contaminants, including
from conventional species, such as toxic metals, anions, and organics, to
emerging contaminants, i.e. pharmaceuticals, steroid hormones, pesticides,
and personal care products, may be present [1–2]. It is well recognized that
concentrations of contaminant species above admissible thresholds in aquatic
environments cause harmful effects on humans and a variety of other living
species because of their toxicity, persistence, and accumulation in living
tissues throughout the food chain [1]. Besides, growing water shortage in
several regions worldwide, as a result from increasing population and rapid
urbanization, is capturing attention to water recycling and reuse as a reliable,
economically feasible, and environmentally sensitive means to maximize
water resources [3].
Among the technologies proposed to remove low concentrations of
pollutants from waste streams or drinking water, adsorption has demonstrated
to be robust, economically favorable, and technically easy, although it
requires highly efficient adsorbents [4–5]. Carbon-based materials, especially
activated carbons, have been mostly used in wastewater treatment because of
their high specific surface area, versatility, chemical and mechanicalstabilities, and suitability for large-scale production [6].
In the search of novel, more efficient and selective alternative adsorbents,
graphene, and related nanomaterials based on this new carbon allotrope have
recently emerged as promising nano-platforms with great potentialities for
environmental applications. Graphene – a single atomic layer of sp
2
-bonded
carbon atoms densely arranged into a two-dimensional (2D) honeycomb
crystal lattice – has been the subject of intense research worldwide since its
discovery [7]. Its unique nanostructure confers graphene nanosheets
exceptional properties that have attracted increasing attention due to their
potentialities for technological innovations in different fields [8–10]. In
particular, the large theoretical surface area of graphene nanosheets (2630 m
2
g
–1
) makes this novel carbon allotrope and graphene-related materials, such
as graphene oxide (GO), reduced GO (RGO), and graphene-based
nanocomposites (GNCs), potentially suitable candidates for the removal of
various environmental pollutants [11]. Compared to carbon nanotubes and its
predecessor allotrope, main advantages of graphene are lower cost and
content of metallic impurities [12].
Although some reviews on graphene-based materials targeted at the
removal of pollutant species from wastewater have been recently published
[11, 13–14], the dramatic growth of publications reported in the last few
years deserves to examine, at least in a complementary way, the advances
attained. Within this framework, the present chapter focuses on graphene-
derived materials as nano-adsorbents for wastewater treatment. A brief
overview of the two general routes adopted for graphene synthesis including
representative methods of each one is first presented. Special attention on the
mostly convenient methods for cost-effective, massive production of
graphene, pristine, oxidized or reduced, is paid taking into account the
potentially large demand of material required for full-scale tertiary
wastewater treatment. Attempts to improve these methods are also included.
Then, information concerned with potentialities of nanomaterials derived
from graphene for the removal of heavy metals and different kinds of organic
pollutants is revised. Main characteristics of the methods employed for
preparation of the nano-adsorbents as well as their possible regeneration and
reutilization after saturation are briefly summarized.2.2 Graphene Synthesis Routes
The method adopted for graphene synthesis is important in connection with
graphene properties and, consequently, with projected applications of this
novel carbon allotrope. Graphene synthesis has been carried out through two
major routes depending on whether it is derived from graphite or other
carbon sources [15]. They are known as “top-down” and “bottom-up” routes,
respectively. 
Figure 2.1
 shows an illustrative scheme of representative
methods of each of these routes and main applications of the graphene
derived.
Figure 2.1
 Schematic illustration of top-down and bottom up routes for
graphene synthesis, representative methods, and applications.
In the bottom-up route, graphene is directly synthesized from small organic
molecules or atoms by chemical processes. Epitaxial growth on electrically
insulating surfaces such as silicon carbide, chemical vapor deposition, either
thermal or plasma enhanced on various metal substrates, and solvo-thermal
process are representative examples of the bottom-up route [15–18]. This
route leads to highly defect-free graphene nanosheets, especially suitable for
electronic applications, even though at the expense of low yields and high
processing costs.
On the other hand, the top-down route involves graphite sources as starting
material and physical or chemical methods to yield a mixture of single and
few layer graphene nanosheets (
Figure 2.1
). Graphene was obtained for the
first time through this route by applying micromechanical exfoliation from a
graphite piece, known as the “Scotch” tape method [7].
The most commonly applied top-down method, with great potential for
large-scale production due to its simplicity and high yield, is based on the
reduction of highly oxidized GO nanosheets, a nonconductive hydrophilic
carbon material. The Hummers method is first used to generate graphite
oxide through the addition of KMnO
4
 to a solution of flake graphite, NaNO
3
,
and concentrated H
2
SO
4
 acid [19]. The acid is used to intercalate graphite
with the assistance of NaNO
3
, and KMnO
4
 to oxidize the acid- intercalated
graphite [15, 20]. The strong oxidizing agents introduce functional groups
that increase the distance between nanolayers and facilitate their isolation.
Graphite oxide is subsequently peeled off usually by ultrasonic exfoliation
in water to obtain GO followed by centrifugation. Thermal expandable
exfoliation, static exfoliation, and chemical exfoliation are other techniques
applied [21–24]. The supernatant from water exfoliation is colloidal and
contains few- and single-layer sheets of GO. Successive washing of the
supernatant with water is performed to remove the oxidizing agents. H
2
O
2
 is
often added to reduce the remaining KMnO
4
. Oxygen-containing
functionalities in the resulting GO sheets include carboxyl and carbonyl
groups at the sheet edges, and hydroxyl and epoxy (1,2-ether) functional
groups on the basal plane, that can alter van der Waals’ interactions leading
to a range of solubility in water and organic solvents [25]. GO has attracted
special attention not only as a precursor for large-scale production ofgraphene but also for adsorption applications because of its large theoretical
surface area, oxygen surface groups, high water dispersibility, stability, and
ease of synthesis [26].
Improvements to the Hummers method in order to make it more efficient
and environmentally friendly have been explored. For instance, exclusion of
NaNO
3
, increase in KMnO
4
 amount, and use of 9:1 mixture of concentrated
H
2
SO
4
/H
3
PO
4
 led to enhance the efficiency of the oxidation process, thus
providing a higher yield of hydrophilic oxidized graphene with fewer defects
in comparison with the conventional Hummers method. Besides, NaNO
3
elimination avoids the release of toxic gases (NO
2
, N
2
O
4
) [27]. Additional
incorporation of H
3
PO
4
 but keeping all the other reagents has also been
reported [28]. Besides, GO with different oxidation degrees was synthesized
by varying the amount of KMnO
4
 [29]. Formation of different types of
oxygen-containing functional groups in GO and their influence on the
nanostructure were examined. The results revealed a disruption of the
graphitic amido black (AB) stacking order with the increase in the oxidation
level, and also the formation of hydroxyl and carboxyl groups at lower
oxidation levels and epoxide groups at the higher ones.
Other changes explored concern extra steps to improve the removal of
impurities, such as acids, manganese salts, resulting from graphite oxidation.
In this direction, additional multi-washing with different solvents, dead-end
filtration, and/or dialysis [30–32] have been adopted. To favor purification of
the large amounts of GO required at industrial-scale, cross-flow filtration has
been proposed [20, 33]. Nevertheless, all these methods require a previous
centrifugation stage to separate unoxidized graphite from the mixture.
Recently, Chen 
et al.
 [20] developed an improved Hummers’ method using
graphite with small flake sizes (3–20 μm) to produce GO with a significantly
higher yield and simplicity in purification with respect to those involving
large graphite flakes (10–100 μm). Purification involves dialysis for 1 week
using a dialysis membrane with a molecular weight cutoff of 8,000–14,000 g
mol
–1
 to remove the remaining acid and metal species. Due to the high
maximized yield of GO, this method avoids centrifugation for separating the
unoxidized graphite, thus reducing costs and favoring full-scale GO
production.In order to obtain graphene, GO is chemically reduced to RGO in a second
stage by employing different reducing agents, being hydrazine hydrate the
reagent mostly used currently [15]. Other reducing agents include sodium
borohydryde (NaBH
4
), p-phenylene diamine, hydroquinone, and sodium
hydrosulfite [34, 35]. All these agents are hazardous to human health and to
the environment. Accordingly, alternative environmental friendly chemicals,
such as ascorbic acid, baker’s yeast, and aluminum powder, polyphenol
present in green tea solution, among others, have been tested [12].
Hydrothermal reduction has also been proposed [36, 37]. A main drawback
of chemical reduction of GO is that the pristine graphene structure is not
completely restored. Defects introduced into the nanostructure during
oxidation cannot be completely removed by subsequent reduction, thus
weakening graphene properties and restricting some potential applications
[15, 27]. It should also be mentioned that the oxidation degree in both GO
and RGO obtained through the Hummers method is very variable even
following the same procedure, thus generating structural variability and
changes in the proportion of graphene single- or multilayers.
Other chemical methods following the top-down route include intercalation
compounds exfoliation and reduction of fluoride graphite, using either the
commercial product or samples obtained by reaction of F
2
 and graphite [22].
Liquid-phase exfoliation, which is based on the use of surfactants or solvents
that intercalate between graphite layers to facilitate graphene nanosheets
separation, is another example of the top-down methods. Thorough founded
reviews of major methods for graphene synthesis along with their advantages
and drawbacks may be found elsewhere [11, 14, 15, 38, 39].
2.3 Adsorption of Water Pollutants
onto Graphene-Based Materials
Recently, graphene-derived adsorbents have become an interesting research
topic due to exceptional individual properties of graphene and the possibility
of synergism in composite adsorbents, for instance, dispersed in polymers or
decorated with metallic nanoparticles. Graphene in pure form is seldom usedas nano-adsorbent [40]. A major drawback for water treatment is that it tends
to agglomerate or restack to form graphite through π–π stacking and van der
Waals’ interactions during processing [41].
On the other hand, GO and RGO have proven their ability as adsorbents for
the removal of a variety of inorganic and organic pollutants. However, their
separation and recycling after adsorption also tend to be quite difficult to
handle because of their nanometer size and tendency to aggregate after
adsorption, in particular as a consequence of the decreased electrostatic
repulsion between oxygen-containing groups in the case of GO [42]. As they
disperse very well in water, unpractical high-speed centrifugation is usually
required [43, 44]. To facilitate phase separation of the contaminant-loaded
adsorbents, several attempts have been made. They include fabrication of
GO/RGO composites with other materials, functionalization, or coupling
with magnetic nanoparticles [41]. 
Figure 2.2
 displays scanning electronic
microscopy (SEM) images portraying surface structures that characterize
some representative graphene-based adsorbents reported in the literature.
Their preparation is concisely depicted in the tables presented in the
following.
Figure 2.2
 SEM images of different graphene-derived adsorbents: (a)
sponge, (b) aerogel, (c) 3D foam, (d) monolith, and (e) magnetic particles.
Reprinted from Ref. [37, 45–48], respectively. Copyright (2015), with permission from Elsevier.Adsorption of inorganic and organic contaminants employing GO, RGO,
and derived adsorbents are presented in the following subsections. In most
cases, their ability to remove a target contaminant is evaluated from
experimental determination of the adsorption isotherms and their modeling.
Conventional two-parameter models, mostly the Langmuir and Freundlich
ones, are applied. Besides, different mechanisms are considered to govern the
adsorption of contaminants depending on the kind of compound involved,
either inorganic or organic species, and on whether the adsorbent is based on
GO or RGO [13]. For inorganics, such as metal ions, although physical
adsorption and electrostatic attraction can be involved, the interaction would
mainly occur by chemical adsorption involving surface complexation of the
metals with the oxygenated groups on GO sheets. Their delocalized π-
electron systems could form electron donor–acceptor complexes with heavy
metal ions through Lewis acid base interaction. As a consequence of these
oxygenated groups, GO adsorption capacity is higher than that of RGO. In
the case of organic compounds, noncovalent interactions are usually
involved. Abundant functional groups in GO could form hydrogen bondingor electrostatic interactions with these compounds containing O– and N–
groups. Conversely, RGO has large delocalized π-electron systems, which
may interact with aromatic rings of the organic adsorbates through π–π
interaction.
2.3.1 Adsorption of Heavy Metals
Heavy metals represent an important kind of pollutant species that are
discharged from a large variety of industries such as metal smelting and
finishing, electroplating, papermaking, and mining [49]. 
Table 2.1
summarizes some selected studies reported over the past 5 years regarding
adsorption of heavy metals onto GO, RGO, and related materials. A concise
description of the preparation method used in each case is included.
Likewise, main experimental conditions applied in adsorption assays, as well
as adsorption capacities are listed.
Table 2.1
 Selected studies on adsorption of heavy metal ions using graphene-
based adsorbentsAs seen in 
Table 2.1
, copper, iron, lead, cadmium, and chromium are
among the most commonly heavy metals tested as target contaminants.
Likewise, the modified Hummers method is almost exclusively employed to
synthesize the GO used as such or to further develop GO/RGO-based
adsorbents. As for conventional carbon-based adsorbents, the adsorption of
heavy metal ions depends on the solutions’ pH as well as on the temperature
[68–70]. The pH affects the surface charge of the adsorbents as well as the
speciation of the metal ions [60]. In most cases, pH below 6 was carefully
chosen to avoid precipitation of the metal hydroxides formed at higher pH
values. However, some works [55] report adsorption capacities at pH 10. The
influence of temperature is also frequently determined and thermodynamic
parameters are reported. Most authors agree in that heavy metals adsorption
on GO/RGO and on their based adsorbents is a spontaneous, endothermic
process [43, 49, 53, 62, 64, 66].
For the majority of the heavy metals investigated, the Langmuir model
usually fitted better than the Freundlich one, thus indicating a uniform
binding energy and a monolayer coverage of the metal ions onto the
adsorbents. For the sake of comparison, maximum adsorption capacities as
evaluated from the Langmuir model are reported in 
Table 2.1
, when informed
by the authors; otherwise, removal efficiencies are presented. High
adsorption capacities for heavy metals were obtained using dispersed GO
sheets [50, 53, 54]. It is worth noting that differences in the adsorption
capacities for a given metal ion may be related not only to the adsorption
experimental conditions but also to the variability usually observed in GO
structure when obtained as a product of graphite oxidation, since it depends
on the oxidants and their amounts, on the graphite source, and on the reaction
conditions employed [71].
As mentioned previously, the disadvantages of using disperse GO and
RGO have led to the development of a variety of functionalized and
composite adsorbents. Functionalization of GO with polymers have been
largely investigated. Recently, Tan 
et al.
 [42] prepared different GO
membranes loaded with polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), by varying the volume of
the PVA solution while keeping the amount of GO constant (best ratio 1 GO:
3 PVA). The amount of PVA anchored on the interlamination of the GO
membranes was a crucial factor in determining the adsorption capacity ofCu(II), Cd(II), and Ni(II). PVA not only seems to act as a cross-linking agent
and supporting pillar, preventing aggregation, but also the enlargement of the
layer-to-layer distance of GO sheets (d-spacing of 1.13 nm) favors the
availability of more adsorption sites and the diffusion of the metal ions. PVA
caused negligible impact on the structure of GO and their interactions were
attributed to hydrogen bonding between the oxygen-containing groups on GO
and the hydroxyl groups on PVA chains.
Mejias Carpio 
et al.
 [50] functionalized GO with EDTA and evaluated the
adsorption capacity for Cu(II) and Pb(II) ions. The time to achieve
equilibrium of adsorption was as fast as 5 min, which was explained by the
2D sheets structure and the accessibility of metal ions to EDTA on the GO
sheets. The higher maximum adsorption capacity for Pb(II) than for Cu(II)
ions (
Table 2.1
) was attributed to a higher affinity for the former. It was also
higher than that obtained by using only GO. The behavior was related to an
increased number of carboxyl groups supplied by EDTA which enhanced
adsorption by chelation. In another study [57], the presence of EDTA in the
metal ions solutions was also found to increase more than three times the
adsorption of Cu(II) and Pb(II).
Xu 
et al.
 [52] prepared polyacrylamide grafted RGO (PAM-γ-RGO) by γ-
rays-induced reduction of the synthesized GO. C/O molar ratio increased
from 1.9 in GO to 10.3 after irradiation, indicating the elimination of most
functional groups and a partial reduction of the sheets. The degree of grafting
with PAM was about 24% and the resulting BET surface area of PAM-γ-
RGO was 128 m
2
 g
−1
. This low surface area was related to the aggregation
that occurs when the adsorbent is dried. Despite this value, a very high
maximum adsorption capacity for Pb(II) in solution was achieved, due to the
good dispersibility of the adsorbent in water and the functional groups on
PAM. To overcome the low compatibility of some polymers with GO sheets,
which may result in low grafting rates by direct functionalization, Dong 
et al.
[45] added polydopamine (PD) as an interlayer to bind GO and
polyethylenimine (PEI) to produce composite nanosheets of nano-thick PEI
layer coated PD-modified GO (PEI–PD/GO). PD not only enhanced the
hydrophilicity of GO sheets but also provided abundant active sites for
further grafting PEI with a high density, and improved the poor dispersity of
simple PEI/GO. After grafting PEI onto PD/GO surface, the PEI–PD/GOcomposite still maintained the nanosheet structure and the thickness increased
from 1 nm (for GO sheets) to 7 nm. Adsorption of Pb(II) increased in the
order GO<PD/GO<PEI/GO<PEI–PD/GO. For the four metals tested,
improved adsorption was obtained with PEI–PD/GO.
Aerogels and sponges represent other promising designs. Hydrothermal
reduction of the nanosheets detailed above [45] led to RGO, PD/RGO,
PEI/RGO, and PEI–PD/GO aerogels. Although RGO displayed much larger
open pores than PEI–PD/RGO, which showed smaller but more uniform
pores, both materials had similar surface areas (~370 m
2
 g
−1
). Interestingly,
the latter was strong enough to support a weight 1300 times heavier than
itself. The adsorption performance was also enhanced by the use of PD. PEI–
PD/RGO showed a greater adsorption of the four metal ions investigated.
Hybrid GO–biopolymer gels were obtained using bovine serum albumin
(BSA), chitosan (CS), and double-stranded DNA as polymeric cross-linking
agents [6]. Uniform distributions of the biopolymers chains with GO sheets
were achieved and these gels were tested for the removal of two cationic
dyes, Cu(II) and Pb(II) ions. Similar adsorption capacities with the three
biopolymeric gels were obtained (
Table 2.1
). Adsorption equilibrium was
attained sooner for the metal ions than for the dyes, since the metal ions have
smaller diameters and greater diffusion coefficients than the cationic
molecules. A higher adsorption was obtained for Cu(II). It was attributed to a
higher stability constant for the complexation of Cu with GO–biopolymer
gels compared to that for Pb(II). An S-doped graphene sponge was prepared
by Zhao 
et al.
 [37] by a one-step hydrothermal method, during which the
reduction of GO and the doping of sulfur were simultaneously achieved. A
mass ratio of 1:1 of GO and l-cystine was found as the best one to achieve
good structure and adsorption capacity for Cu(II) (228 mg g
−1
), as can be
seen in 
Table 2.1
. The mass ratio had to be carefully selected since for other
ratios (1:2 or 2:1), the sponges collapsed and adsorption capacities decreased
sharply (71 mg g
−1
 for 1:2 and 58 mg g
−1
 for 2:1). The adsorption capacity
of Cu(II) on S-doped RGO sponge was determined at four temperatures
between 0 °C and 55 °C, but it was not sensitive to this variation. It was also
found ionic strength-independent, attributable to the strong affinity between S
atoms and Cu(II). Sulfur, as sulfhydryl groups, was also introduced into GOsheets by Li 
et al.
 [49], leading to improve the thermostability of the material.
GO-SH was further self-assembled with CS to fabricate an hybrid
nanocomposite (CS/GO-SH) which combined the abundant –NH
2
 and –OH
groups of CS with the –COOH, –OH, and –SH groups of GO. This
nanocomposite proved to have a strong ability to catch metal ions through
chelate reactions, even from multi-ions systems. The convenience of mixing
CS goes beyond the introduction of functional groups. For the aerogel
developed by Yu 
et al.
 [43], the GO was aggregated to CS in order to
facilitate the separation by filtration or by low speed centrifugation, and over
stacking of GO sheets was avoided in the aerogel.
Several authors have also investigated GO as reinforcing filler for
polymeric adsorbents. GO–CS monoliths were developed by unidirectional
freeze-drying [56]. This technique is attractive because water can be used as
the porogen. Adding GO increased the compressive strength of the monoliths
in wet state and the unidirectional porous structures obtained also facilitated
the diffusion of Cu(II) and Pb(II) ions. Micro-ribbons, formed during freeze-
drying, enlarged the surface area of the adsorbent; therefore, more functional
groups (for example, carboxyl and amino groups) were exposed. Addition of
GO was also found to change the balance of chelating groups (amino groups
in CS, and carboxyl and hydroxyl groups in GO), influencing the maximum
adsorption capacities for the metal ions. This effect was stronger on Pb(II)
adsorption, possibly because the binding force between chelating groups and
Pb(II), with higher electronegativity and a larger ionic radius than Cu(II), was
greater than the interactions among the chelating groups. This effect was
barely perceived for Cu(II). The same research group developed another GO–
CS monolith with the addition of gelatin [57]. The monoliths had similar
structural characteristics to those described earlier. Hydroxyl and carboxyl
groups on the GO nanosheets appeared to increase the hydrophilicity and
water permeability of the monoliths, which should further facilitate the
diffusion of metal ions. Interestingly, the monoliths without GO almost
completely collapsed after 5 days. Besides, a great influence of the pH of the
Cu(II) solution was observed. Removal increased from 16% to 89% as pH
changed from 2 to 6. The trend was mainly related to electrostatic
interactions. More recently, foamy monoliths of ordered porous architecture
were prepared with GO and carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) [47]. The size ofthe pores developed was found significantly larger as the GO concentration
increased and many micro-ribbons were also observed, protruding from the
pore walls. They seemed to improve the compressive strength of the monolith
as well as to increase its ability to adsorb metal ions.
Another significant group of GO/RGO-based adsorbents are magnetic
composites, which are often developed under the premise of ease of
separation from the water treated. A thiol-functionalized magnetic graphene
composite was synthesized via simultaneous hydrothermal reduction of GO
and coating with Fe
3
O
4
 nanoparticles, where thiol groups could provide of
extra ion exchange sites for Cd(II) [62]. Adsorption equilibrium was achieved
within 30 min. Fast kinetics is usually reported for the adsorption of heavy
metal ions onto GO/RGO-based adsorbents [46, 60, 64] and even equilibrium
attained immediately after contact has been reported [37]. Fan 
et al.
 [58] and
Li 
et al.
 [59] investigated the adsorption of Pb(II) and Cr(VI), respectively,
using hybrid GO–CS composites with magnetic properties. GO was added to
strengthen magnetic Fe
3
O
4
 particles covered with CS [58]. The mesoporous
adsorbent had a moderate surface area (S
BET
 = 382 m
2
 g
−1
) and a reduced
saturation magnetization due to the CS coating. The latter was still sufficient
to achieve separation of the adsorbent by means of a magnet. Adsorption was
attributed to chelation and interactions with functional groups of GO and CS.
Li 
et al.
 [59] added β-cyclodextrin (CD) into the composite, resulting in a
mutual structural benefit: GO sheets appear to hinder agglomeration of CD-
CS spheres and, in turn, the latter separated GO sheets and prevented their
aggregation. The saturation magnetization was also sufficient for a proper
separation from water, and a higher S
BET
 was obtained (~446 m
2
 g
–1
).
Removal of Cr(VI) was best at low pH (
Table 2.1
) and would occur by a
combination of adsorption by electrostatic attraction, reduction to Cr(III) and
joint bonding with Cr(VI) into stable inclusion complexes. A similar
adsorption capacity for Cr(VI) was obtained with magnetic β CD-
ethylenediamine/GO particles [61]. Jabeen 
et al.
 [64] reported the reduction
of Pb(II) ions by nano-zerovalent-iron (ZVI) enhanced by graphene sheets in
RGO/ZVI nanoparticles. They not only scavenged free Pb(II) ions from water
by adsorption, but immobilized the reduced Pb(0) very efficiently, as this
reduction facilitates magnetic separation of the adsorbent from water. In theabsence of RGO, ZVI nanoparticles not only aggregated into chainlike
structures but also their adsorption capacity was lower because they mainly
adsorbed Pb(II). RGO sheets, decorated with non-aggregated iron
nanoparticles, could adsorb both Pb(II) and free Pb(0) through basic
functional groups in RGO.
Multi-solute adsorption of heavy metals and possible interferences are other
relevant issues for a closer approach to real wastewater systems. Competitive
adsorption of Cd(II), Pb(II), and Cu(II) ions from a ternary mixture was
found to decrease the adsorption capacity of CS/SH-GO composite with
respect to those for the individual metal ions [49]. Kinetics of adsorption was
also affected by multi-ions presence; most of them were removed within 10
min from single-solute solutions but removal from ternary solutions lasted 40
min. The impact of the presence of the other ions was less significant for Cd
(II), which presented the lowest adsorption from single metal ion systems. On
the contrary, in another study [65], adsorption of Cd(II) onto magnetic GO
supported SAc composite was strongly affected by background electrolyte
cations (Na
+
, K
+
, Ca
2+
, Mg
2+
, Mn
2+
, Zn
2+
, and Ni
2+
) and anions (Cl
−
,
NO
3
−
, ClO
4
−
, and PO
4
3–
). Even more, when facing real effluents, results
might change drastically. Luo 
et al.
 [51] performed selectivity adsorption
tests with different ions in solution, finding that the efficiency of removal was
in the order: Cu > Pb > Cd > Mn > Zn > Ni. However, when a real smelter
industry effluent was used as feed solution, only Pb and Fe (out of eight
metal cations) were removed, probably due to the stronger coordination
ability of these ions. The presence of other metal ions was not the only reason
for a diminished adsorption capacity. Li 
et al.
 [44] found that the adsorption
of Cu(II) using GO was also affected by the presence of humic and fulvic
acids. Likewise, the presence of aniline also affected the adsorption of
Cr(VI), whether enhancing or reducing it at low and high pH values,
respectively [61].
2.3.2 Adsorption of Organic Contaminants
The vast amount of different organic contaminants generated from several
industries makes difficult the development of specific adsorbents, even more
than in the case of metals. Accordingly, the search for effective alternativeadsorbents is in steady progress, and graphene-based materials have also been
explored within this framework. The performance of these nanomaterials in
the adsorption of dyes, the most commonly organic contaminants tested, and
of other organic compounds, such as phenols, oils, and pharmaceuticals, from
single-solute solutions is reviewed below. It is worth mentioning that
competitive multi-solute adsorption of organic contaminants has not been
reported in the literature revised.
2.3.2.1 Dyes
The presence of synthetic dyes in wastewaters is of major concern due to the
large amounts produced and discarded worldwide by industries, their toxicity,
non-biodegradability, and effects on biota. A summary of the main
information regarding recent studies for the adsorption of dyes using
GO/RGO-based adsorbents, as well as of the method for their preparation and
conditions of the adsorption experiments, is displayed in 
Table 2.2
.
Table 2.2
 Summary of selected studies on the adsorption of dyes using
graphene-based adsorbents.Methylene blue (MB) is a dye extensively employed in industry and
frequently used as model molecule in adsorption assays. Other dyes studied
include rhodamine B (RB), cationic red X-GRL (CR), and orange G (OG),
which have been efficiently adsorbed using GO and RGO (
Table 2.2
). As
known, several conditions affect the adsorption efficiency, including
temperature, pH, initial concentration, and contact time. However, even for
similar conditions, pronounced differences in MB adsorption capacity for
GO, of approximately 10 times, have been reported [72, 73]. In the particular
case of GO and derived adsorbents, other factor that should be taken into
account is the oxidation degree of GO. For instance, prior to graphite
oxidation by the Hummers method, the addition of a pre-oxidation step with
H
2
SO
4
, K
2
S
2
O
8
, and P
2
O
5
 [73] resulted in a better exfoliation and higher
oxidation degree of GO and, as a consequence, in a possible increase of the
surface area and of functional groups content.
Investigations in dyes adsorption have demonstrated that GO is a better
adsorbent for cationic dyes, while RGO is better for the removal of anionic
dyes, likely because GO has a net high negative charge density conferred by
oxygen-containing functional groups. They should interact strongly with the
positive charges of cationic dyes and reject the negative charges of anionic
dyes. On the other hand, due to the low quantity of functional groups of
RGO, π–π interactions have been suggested as the main adsorption
mechanism [74]. Some researchers [76] have controlled the exposure time to
laser irradiation during reduction of GO to obtain RGO with different
oxidation degrees. It was observed that not-irradiated GO and GO highly
irradiated could uptake up to 700 mg g
−1
 of MB, while for moderately
irradiated GO the adsorption capacity slightly increased up to 746 mg g
−1
.
The longest time of irradiation led to some fragmentation of the porous
network, possibly inducing a reduction in adsorption.
In general, experimental adsorption isotherms for the dyes were better fitted
to the Langmuir model and kinetics followed pseudo-second-order rate
expression. Thermodynamic analysis usually showed adsorption of dyes as a
spontaneous, endothermic process [75]. However, results reported for the
adsorption of MB onto grapheme–alginate composites indicated an
exothermic process [72, 79].Again, the strategy proposed to overcome the difficulties of separating GO
and RGO from the solution concerns creation of 3D graphene-based
structures. Liu 
et al.
 [78] used a RGO sponge for the adsorption of MB and
methyl violet (MV). It behaved as a fast, efficient adsorbent; the sponge with
the dye adsorbed was easily separated by filtration on a cellulose acetate
membrane. Ma 
et al.
 [79] produced 3D graphene-based gels with sodium
alginate (GO-SA, RGO-SA) as polymerization agent. These monolithic gels
showed good adsorption and advantageously easy separation. As mentioned
earlier, the oxidation level played an important role due to the variety of
oxygen-containing groups in GO–SA and RGO–SA gels, and in connection
with adsorption mechanisms. In MB adsorption onto GO-SA, electrostatic
interactions were predominant, while π–π stacking should be the primary
interactions between RGO–SA and MB. The adsorption of MB onto GO–SA
and RGO–SA was exothermic and endothermic, respectively. As previously
mentioned, the work by Cheng 
et al.
 [6] used biopolymers (BSA, CS, and
DNA) to obtain 3D GO-based gels (GO-BP) with well-defined and
interconnected porous networks, high adsorption of MB and MV, and easy
separation by filtration.
Other way to isolate the adsorbents from the solution is by magnetic
separation. For this purpose, nanoparticles with magnetite have been
explored. Ai 
et al.
 [81] produced RGO-based nanoparticles of Fe
3
O
4
 (RGO-
Fe
3
O
4
). They were easy to separate but showed a lower adsorption
performance compared with some other graphene-based polymers (
Table
2.2
). Wang 
et al.
 [83] obtained high adsorption of safranine T (ST), neutral
red (NR), and victoria blue (VB) using RGO-SO
3
H/Fe
3
O
4
 nanoparticles.
Reportedly, the sulfonic acid groups had a dual function, to act as a linker
with magnetite particles and to enhance the distance between sheets. A
greater sheet separation increased the surface area and stabilized the graphene
single layer. Also, it is a common strategy to add other metals in the
preparation of magnetite-RGO particles. Addition of Co was found to
increase the magnetic and adsorption properties, while Mn provided the
possibility to combine the adsorption property of RGO and the magnetic,
photo-catalytic property of MnFe
2
O
4
 nanoparticles [82, 88].2.3.2.2 Other Organic and Emerging Contaminants
Besides dyes, there is a large set of other organic contaminants frequently
present in wastewaters. Examples of recent studies on the removal of some of
these compounds using adsorbents related to graphene are presented in 
Table
2.3
.
Table 2.3
 Summary of studies on the adsorption of some organic compounds
using graphene-based adsorbents.Mostly, GO and RGO have been tested as adsorbents, and the literature on
the use of composite adsorbents based on graphene is scarce. Recently, Yan
et al.
 [90] used GO with different degrees of oxidation, obtained by varying
the oxidation time and KMnO
4
 amount, to adsorb aniline, nitrobenzene, and
chlorobenzene (
Table 2.3
). Adsorption of the two latter compounds was not
evidently influenced by pH. However, the pH affected aniline adsorption
likely due to the presence of the amino group that may confer a better water
solubility and hydrogen bonding ability. GO with lower oxidation degree led
to higher removal efficiencies. The Freundlich model fitted the experimental
adsorption isotherms slightly better than the Langmuir one, indicating a
possible multilayer heterogeneous adsorption.
On the other hand, pesticides are also a matter of major concern due to their
indiscriminate use and widespread presence in surface and ground waters.
For instance, the adsorption of endosulfan, chlorpyrifos, and malathion using
GO and RGO was investigated [36]. The kinetics was very fast and more
than 90% of the pesticides were removed in less than 10 min, with RGO
being 10–20% more effective than GO. Adsorption of the pesticides was
independent on pH, since none of the pesticides are ionizable. Their removal
was related to the formation and precipitation of grapheme–water–pesticide
complexes through electrostatic interactions. GO was also used for the
adsorption of lysozyme, as a model protein of naturally occurring organic
matter [91]. It was suggested that abundance of –OH and –COOH groups on
GO surface facilitates the electrostatic bonding with lysozyme molecules, of
zwitterionic nature. GO exhibited a sharp decrease in lysozyme adsorption
capacity (200–300 mg g
−1
) when monoand divalent cations were dissolved
in the protein solutions, possibly due to double-layer interactions on both,
lysozyme and GO. Commercial graphene was also tested but a significantly
lower adsorption capacity was obtained (52 mg g
−1
).
Phenol, recognized as a priority contaminant, and phenolic compounds are
common targets of adsorption studies. In particular, the use of graphene-
based adsorbents has been implemented by Wang 
et al.
 [93] who investigated
the effect of the reduction degree of RGO and the amounts and distributions
of remaining oxygen-containing functional groups on the adsorption of ten
phenolic compounds (
Table 2.3
). Higher adsorption levels were found forcompounds with one or more electron-donating and withdrawing groups on
the benzene ring. A linear correlation between their adsorption and the
reduction degree of RGO was established. π–π interactions between aromatic
molecules and RGO apparently increased with the more extended RGO
reduction. Notably, firstly obtained GO sheets were less crumpled but RGO
sheets were more folded and agglomerated, yet similar surface areas (~940
m
2
 g
−1
) were obtained in suspension. Previously, Li 
et al.
 [92] had achieved
similar values of maximum adsorption capacity for phenol (
Table 2.3
) using
RGO but for samples with considerable less surface area (
S
BET
=306 m
2
 g
−1
).
The removal of organic solvents and hydrocarbons is a less explored topic.
Compact porous RGO sponges with good structural stability were developed
and used to adsorb chloroform and diesel oil with high removal capacity [94].
The specific surface area of the RGO sponge played a predominant role in the
adsorption of these contaminants, whereas the surface charge had almost no
effect. A remarkable feature, in terms of reuse of the adsorbent, is that the
adsorbed oil and other organic solvents can be easily eliminated by their
burning in air without destroying the sponge structure.
Emerging contaminants constitute another currently popular group that is
receiving growing attention. They are new products or chemical compounds
without regulatory status and whose effects on environment and human
health are sometimes unknown. They include phthalates, bisphenol A (BPA),
personal care products, and pharmaceuticals drugs and their metabolites,
among others [95]. 
Table 2.4
 summarizes some of the most recent studies
reported using GO/RGO-based adsorbents.
Table 2.4
 Summary of recent studies on the adsorption of emerging
contaminants using graphene-based adsorbents.BPA is a well-recognized endocrine disruptor, which interferes with
metabolic processes of natural hormones. RGO and magnetic RGO have been
applied to its removal. Xu 
et al.
 [99] achieved good adsorption capacity for
BPA (
Table 2.4
) using RGO with moderate specific surface area (
S
BET
 =
327 m
2
 g
−1
). The increase in temperature led to a decrease in the adsorption
capacity of 30% at 69 °C. On the other hand, the RGO-Fe
3
O
4
 [100] greatly
improved dispersibility of the magnetic particles and reduced their
agglomeration; however, some lost in adsorption capacity was observed as
the amount of iron salts increased in the composite. Similarly to RGO, the
adsorption capacity decreased with increasing temperature and the solution
pH influenced the adsorption, mainly at alkaline values. As already
mentioned in the section concerning graphene synthesis routes, interesting
green alternatives to conventional chemical reduction using hydrazine have
been proposed. Thakur and Karak [101] used banana peel ash base source
and 
C. esculenta
 leaves extract as the reducing agent. Reduction of GO could
be due to formation of complexes between polyphenols in the leaves with
Fe(III) ions with a high release of protons and electrons. RGO-Fe
3
O
4
 was
applied to the adsorption of tetrabromobisphenol A (TBBPA) removal, a
BPA derivative used as flame retardant.
In the case of pharmaceutical products removed by grapheme-based
adsorbents, recent works include the use of commercial GO with
considerable specific surface area (
S
BET
 = 762 m
2
 g
−1
). A high adsorption
capacity for clofibric acid (CA) (
Table 2.4
), an active metabolite of blood
lipid regulators frequently detected in water, was obtained [97]. CA
adsorption was pH dependent and affected by the presence of humic acids,
which might act as a “bridge” between GO and CA at low pH values.
Adsorption of antibiotics has also been scarcely studied. Mainly GO and
magnetic graphene-based adsorbents have been applied to adsorb
fluoroquinolones, a group of frequently detected antibiotics [48]. The
adsorption of ciprofloxacin (CIP) and norfloxacin (NOR) by RGO-Fe
3
O
4
was reported as a spontaneous and exothermic process, and a synergic
structural effect was suggested regarding the hindrance of the aggregation of
magnetic microparticles and the improvement of the stability of RGO sheets
[48]. Lab-prepared GO was used to test tetracycline (TC) adsorption [96] andanother commercial GO displayed a very high adsorption capacity for
sulfamethoxazole (SMX) [98]. It was proposed that the adsorption
mechanism was mainly based on hydrophobic interactions and that the amine
aromatic ring of SMX was oriented parallel to the surface of GO, while the
second ring was oriented away from the GO surface. Additionally, further
sonication of this commercial GO improved adsorption more than twice,
allegedly due to a reduction in the density of oxygen-containing functional
groups in GO surface.
Regarding personal care products, the use of a magnetic β-CD-GO/Fe
3
O
4
nanocomposite for the adsorption of p-phenylenediamine (PPD), a toxic
component of hair coloration products, was studied [102]. CD was suggested
to increase the adsorption capacity of the adsorbent through the formation of
inclusion complexes in solution with organic molecules through host–guest
interactions. Adsorption was found to increase with temperature (
Table 2.4
).
2.4 Comparison of the Adsorption
Performance of Graphene-Based
Nanomaterials
Meaningful direct comparisons of the performance of graphene-based
nanomaterials in the adsorption of a particular pollutant, as evaluated from
the maximum adsorption capacities detailed in the former tables, are difficult
since strictly identical experimental conditions are required. Nevertheless,
taking into account the data reported under quite similar conditions, some
information about the suitability of the different nanoadsorbents for the
removal of a targeted contaminant may be inferred, at least as an approach.
For instance, for Pb (II) ion adsorption under quite similar conditions (pH =
5; T≈ 20–30 °C), RGO/zerovalent iron nanoparticles appear as the best
candidate with a maximum adsorption capacity of 585 mg g
–1
, followed in
decreasing order by CS/SH-GO nanocomposite (447 mg g
–1
), and by amino-
siloxane-oligomer-linked GO (312 mg g
–1
). It should be mentioned that a
markedly higher adsorption capacity of Pb(II) has been reported for PAM-γRGO (~820 mg g
–1
) but at pH = 6. The results in 
Table 2.1
 also indicate a
better performance of the CS/SH-GO composite in the adsorption of both
Cu(II) (425 mg g
–1
) and Cd(II) (117 mg g
–1
) in comparison with that
reported for the others adsorbents at similar conditions, with the exception of
thiol-functionalized magnetic GO, which shows a slightly higher adsorption
capacity of Cd (II) ion (125 mg g
–1
).
Similarly, a rough comparison of the results in 
Table 2.2
 for the adsorption
of MB, that has been mostly tested as probe organic molecule, at similar
experimental conditions, points to pre-oxidized GO as the nanoadsorbent
with the best performance (1939 mg g
–1
), followed in decreasing sequence
by 3 D GO-DNA hydrogel (1100 mg g
–1
). Other materials tested with
adsorption capacities of around a half of the former are RGO by laser
irradiation and RGO–sodium alginate composite.
2.5 Regeneration and Reutilization
of the Graphene-Based Adsorbents
Some of the works earlier revised have extended the adsorption studies to
evaluate the possibility of regenerating and reusing the GO/RGO-based
adsorbents. For this purpose, desorption experiments have been performed
using the adsorbents loaded with inorganic and organic contaminants. 
Table
2.5
 summarizes the results reported for heavy metals.
Table 2.5
 Summary of desorption studies performed for the graphene-based
adsorbents loaded with metal ions.In general, up to three adsorption/desorption cycles still allowed graphene-
based adsorbents to retain 90% or more of its removal capacity. After six
cycles, this capacity was reduced in merely additional 10–15%. Desorption
obtained from a magnetic CS/GO composite [58] with HCl was similar at pH
1 and 2. Apparently, amino groups in CS are easily protonated in acidic
medium, creating electrostatic repulsion with the metal ions, so they are
liberated from CS/GO adsorbents [57]. Moreover, in the case of the CS/GO
monolith developed, unidirectional porous structure facilitated the release of
Cu(II) ions from the adsorption sites. Besides the desorption efficiencies, Li
et al.
 [59] found that even after several adsorption/desorption cycles, neither
visible changes in the treated water nor detectable weight loss were observed
in the magnetic GO composite. Morphological structures were also preserved
after the adsorption/desorption cycles for RGO aerogel [45], RGO sponge
[37], and CS/GO monolith [57], suggesting that RGO and GO may improve
the compressive strength of the adsorbents and stability during the recycling
[56]. For CS/GO-SH composite [49], adsorption capacities for Cu (II), Cd
(II), and Pb (II) decreased slightly with increasing cycle number. This
reduction is attributed to the imperfect desorption of metal ions which were
adhered to the functionalized groups such as –COOH, –OH, –SH, and –NH
2
and, consequently, to the loss of binding sites after each cycle [42]. Liu 
et al.
[53] investigated the effect of changing the concentration of thiourea (0.2–1.5
M) in desorbing solutions of thiourea or thiourea HCl. They obtained
desorption levels of 62–75% for Au(III) and 69–94% for Pd(II) using only
thiourea and 90–99% for both metals using thiourea HCl solutions, although
no clear tendency was observed regarding the desorbing agent’s
concentration. In addition to the desorption studies, the reutilization of loaded
adsorbents was further investigated, and reduced Ni-GO/CMC monoliths
were used as catalyst to reduce 4-nitrophenol [47].
On the other hand, 
Table 2.6
 summarizes some desorption studies for the
nano-adsorbents loaded with organic compounds previously revised. Dyes
were the compounds mostly investigated and therefore acids (HCl or
CH
3
COOH) and alcohols (EtOH or MeOH), or a combination of them, were
mainly used as desorbing agents. In general, and similarly to the studies
targeting heavy metals removal, the adsorbents used for organic compounds
did not show significant changes in their structure, even after repeated use[36]. For instance, the RGO sponge developed by Zhao 
et al.
 [94] kept its
original structure and no sheets loss was observed. This fact would be
responsible for the high cycling stability obtained. Complementary, the time
required to achieve adsorption equilibrium with the reutilized adsorbent was
investigated. Time prolongation was found to increase less than 4% after six
adsorption/desorption cycles. Desorption of MB was very slow for PES/GO
[80]; therefore, the refreshing of the HCl solution used as desorbing agent for
three times every 24 h and the effect of increasing the solution volume were
investigated. It was found that refreshing the solution improved the desorbing
ratios for a given total volume of HCl. The adsorption capacity decreased in
each of the five subsequent cycles using β-CD/poly(acrylic acid)-GO [12]
due to incomplete desorption of the dyes. Nevertheless, it was pointed out
that these nanocomposites could be reused with acceptable performance.
Cheng 
et al.
 [6] compared the desorption efficiency of MB and MV for GO
biopolymers gels with a control GO sponge and found that the desorption
ratio for both dyes was about a half lower using the GO sponge, indicating a
better performance of the former in terms of reuse. Ethanol allowed 20%
more desorption of MB than HCl in the first cycle, but similar desorption
efficiencies were obtained for MV with both agents. In all cases, it is worth
noting that desorption dramatically decreased in the second and third cycle.
Organic contaminants make more difficult the reutilization of the GO/RGO-
based adsorbents, in agreement with the behavior frequently found for other
carbon-based adsorbents. NaOH was also used as desorbing agent for some
of the magnetic GO-based nanoparticles [101]. In the case of magnetic
adsorbents, possible leached Fe is pointed out as an additional factor to be
taken into account [81].
Table 2.6
 Summary of desorption studies performed for organic compounds.2.6 Conclusion
Graphene-based materials reviewed in the present chapter show good
potentialities as advanced adsorbents for the removal of different kinds of
contaminant species present in wastewater. Despite the significant advances
achieved, however, more efforts are still required before sustainable
technologies based on the adsorption of contaminants onto nanostructured-
graphene materials can be applied to full-scale wastewater treatment. First,
low-cost massive production of these nano-adsorbents should be necessary to
satisfy the extensive demand involved in water treatment. In this sense,
although GO and RGO show good ability for the removal of pollutants and
their industrial manufacture appears as relatively accessible, their large-scale
use is restricted due to difficulties concerned with variability occasioned by
the synthesis method, separation and recycling after adsorption, as well as
with their utilization in continuous packed-bed columns. In turn, most studies
carried out to overcome these inconveniences employ very interesting
GO/RGO-based adsorbents/composites but mostly involving lab-scale
preparation. On the other hand, it is important to conduct adsorption studies
for multicomponent systems, which should also include the presence of
anions and organic matter that have been almost unexplored, to attain a closer
approach to real wastewater as well as assays in dynamic conditions to
achieve reliable information for the proper design and operation of large-
scale treatment units. All the aforementioned aspects along with
complementary studies about regeneration/reuse of the loaded adsorbents and
total cost evaluations should be carefully investigated for making full-scale
implementations possible.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from Universidad de
Buenos Aires, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas
(CONICET), and Fondo para la Investigación Científica y Tecnológica
(FONCYT) – Ministerio de Ciencia, Tecnología e Innovación Productiva(MINCYT) from Argentina.
Nomenclature
AB:
amido black
BPA:
bisphenol A
CA:
clofibric acid
CD:
cyclodextrin
CIP:
ciprofloxacin
CMC:
carboxymethyl cellulose
CR:
cationic red X-GRL
CS:
chitosan
CVD:
chemical vapor deposition
DCC:
N,N′
-dicyclohexyl carbodiimide
DCF:
diclofenac
DEG:
diethylene glycol
DMA:
Ν,Ν
-dimethyl acetamide
DMAP:
4-(Dimethylamino) pyridine
DMF:
N,N
-Dimethylformamide
ED:
ethylenediamine
EDC:
1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminoprophy) carbondiimide hydrochloride
EDC:
1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminoprophy) carbondiimide hydrochloride
EDTA:
ethylenediamine tetracetic acid
FU:
fuchsin
GNCs:
graphene-based nanocomposites
GO:
graphene oxide
HM:
Hummers’ method
MB:
methylene blue
MCG:
β-cyclodextrin-graphene oxide nanocomposite
MG:
malachite green
MGO:
magnetic GO
MHM:
modified Hummers’ method
MO:
methyl orange
MPTES:
3-mercaptopropyl trimethoxysilane
MV:
methyl violet
NHS:
N
-hydroxyl succinimideNHS:
N
-hydroxysuccinimide
NOR:
norfloxacin
NR:
neutral red
ZVI:
zerovalent iron
OG:
orange G
PAA:
poly(acrylic acid)
PAM:
polyacrylamide
PAS:
poly-3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane
PD:
polydopamine
PEI:
polyethylenimine
PES:
polyethersulfone
PFTE:
polytetrafluoroethylene
PPD:
phenylene diamines
PVA:
polyvinyl alcohol
RB:
rhodamine B
RGO:
reduced graphene oxide
SA:
sodium alginate
SAc:
sulfanilic acid
SMX:
sulfamethoxazole
ST:
safranine T
TA:
tannin acid
TBBPA:
tetrabromobisphenol A
TC:
tetracycline
VB:
victoria blue
References
1. A.L. Cukierman, Development and environmental applications of activated
carbon cloths. 
ISRN Chem. Eng.,
 2013, Article ID 261523, 31 pages, 2013.
2. M.E. Fernandez, Ledesma, B.S. Roman, P.R. Bonelli, and A.L.
Cukierman, Development and characterization of activated hydrochars from
orange peels as potential adsorbents for emerging organic contaminants.
Bioresource Technol
., 183, 221–228, 2015.
3. H. Rashidi, A. GhaffarianHoseini, A. GhaffarianHoseini, N.M. Sulaiman
Nik, J. Tookey, and N.A. Hashim, Application of wastewater treatment insustainable design of green built environments: A review. 
Renew. Sust.
Energ. Rev.
, 49, 845–856, 2015.
4. G.V. Nunell, M.E. Fernández, P.R. Bonelli, and A.L. Cukierman,
Conversion of biomass from an invasive species into activated carbons for
removal of nitrate from wastewater. 
Biomass Bioenerg.
, 44, 87–95, 2012.
5. G.V. Nunell, M.E. Fernández, P.R. Bonelli, and A.L. Cukierman, Nitrate
uptake improvement by modified activated carbons developed from two
species of pine cones. 
J. Colloid Interf. Sci.
, 440, 102–108, 2015.
6. C.S. Cheng, J. Deng, B. Lei, A. He, X. Zhang, L. Ma, and C. Zhao,
Toward 3D graphene oxide gels based adsorbents for high-efficient water
treatment via the promotion of biopolymers. 
J. Hazard Mater.
, 263, 467–478,
2013.
7. K.S. Novoselov, A.K. Geim, S.V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S.V.
Dubonos, and A.A. Firsov, Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon
films. 
Science
, 306, 666–669, 2004.
8. D. Li, M.B. Müller, S. Gilje, R.B. Kaner, and G.G. Wallace, Processable
aqueous dispersions of graphene nanosheets. 
Nat. Nanotechnol.
, 3, 101–105,
2008.
9. M. Batzill, The surface science of graphene: Metal interfaces, CVD
synthesis, nanoribbons, chemical modifications, and defects. 
Surf. Sci. Rep.
,
67, 83–115, 2012.
10. U. Mogera, N. Kurra, D. Radhakrishnan, C. Narayana, and G.U.
Kulkarni, Low cost, rapid synthesis of graphene on Ni: An efficient barrier
for corrosion and thermal oxidation. 
Carbon
, 78, 384–391, 2014.
11. J.-G. Yu, L.-Y. Yu, H. Yang, Q. Liu, X.-H. Chen, X.-Y. Jiang, and F.P.
Jiao, Graphene nanosheets as novel adsorbents in adsorption,
preconcentration and removal of gases, organic compounds and metal ions.
Sci. Total Environ.
, 502, 70–79, 2015.
12. J. Liu, G. Liu, and W. Liu, Preparation of water-soluble β-
cyclodextrin/poly(acrylic acid)/graphene oxide nanocomposites as new
adsorbents to remove cationic dyes from aqueous solutions. 
Chem. Eng. J.
,
257, 299–308, 2014.
13. X. Wang, B. Liu, Q. Lu, and Q. Qu, Graphene based materials:Fabrication and application for adsorption in analytical chemistry. 
J.
Chromatogr. A
, 1362, 1–15, 2014.
14. S. Chowdhury, and R. Balasubramanian, Recent advances in the use of
graphene-family nanoadsorbents for removal of toxic pollutants from
wastewater. 
Adv. Colloid. Interfac.
, 204, 35–56, 2014.
15. K.E. Whitener, and P.E. Sheehan, Graphene synthesis. 
Diam. Relat.
Mater.
, 46, 25–34, 2014.
16. K.V. Emtsev, A. Bostwick, K. Horn, J. Jobst, G.L. Kellogg, L. Ley, and
T. Seyller, Towards wafer-size graphene layers by atmospheric pressure
graphitization of silicon carbide. 
Nat. Mater.
, 8, 203–207, 2009.
17. M. Choucair, N. Tse, M.R. Hill, and J.A. Stride, Adsorption and
desorption characteristics of 3-dimensional networks of fused graphene. 
Surf.
Sci.
, 606, 34–39, 2012.
18. L.A. Razak, D. Tobino, and K. Ueno, Improvement of multilayer
graphene quality by current stress during thermal CVD. 
Microelectron. Eng.,
120, 200–204, 2014.
19. W.S. Hummers, and R.E. Offeman, Preparation of Graphitic Oxide. 
J.
Am. Chem. Soc.,
 80 (1958) 1339.
20. J. Chen, Y. Li, L. Huang, C. Li, and G. Shi, High-yield preparation of
graphene oxide from small graphite flakes via an improved Hummers method
with a simple purification process. 
Carbon,
 81, 826–834, 2015.
21. Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F.M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, and
J.N. Coleman, High-yield production of graphene by liquid-phase exfoliation
of graphite. 
Nat. Nanotechnol.,
 3, 563–568, 2008.
22. A.B. Bourlinos, K. Safarova, K. Siskova, R. Zbořil, The production of
chemically converted graphenes from graphite fluoride. 
Carbon,
 50, 1425–
1428, 2012.
23. Z. Yang, Y. Sun, L.B. Alemany, T.N. Narayanan, and W.E. Billups,
Birch reduction of graphite. Edge and interior functionalization by hydrogen.
J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
 134, 18689–18694, 2012.
24. S. Park, and R.S. Ruoff, Chemical methods for the production of
graphenes. 
Nat. Nanotechnol.,
 4, 217–224, 2009.
25. T. Kuila, S. Bose, A.K. Mishra, P. Khanra, N.H. Kim, and J.H. Lee,Chemical functionalization of graphene and its applications. 
Prog. Mater.
Sci.,
 57, 1061–1105, 2012.
26. T.K. Das, and S. Prusty, Graphene-Based Polymer Composites and Their
Applications. 
Polym-Plast. Technol.,
 52, 319–331, 2013.
27. D.C. Marcano, D.V. Kosynkin, J.M. Berlin, A. Sinitskii, Z. Sun, A.
Slesarev, and J.M. Tour, Improved synthesis of graphene oxide. 
ACS Nano.,
4, 4806–4814, 2010.
28. J. Song, X. Wang, and C.T. Chang, Preparation and Characterization of
Graphene Oxide. 
J. Nanomater.,
 2014, Article ID 276143, 6 pages, 2014.
29. K. Krishnamoorthy, M. Veerapandian, K. Yun, and S.J. Kim, The
chemical and structural analysis of graphene oxide with different degrees of
oxidation, 
Carbon,
 53, 38–49, 2013.
30. Z. Geng, Y. Lin, X. Yu, Q. Shen, L. Ma, Z. Li, and X. Wang, Highly
efficient dye adsorption and removal: a functional hybrid of reduced
graphene oxide–Fe
3
O
4
 nanoparticles as an easily regenerative adsorbent. 
J.
Mater. Chem.,
 22, 3527–3535, 2012.
31. X. Yang, X. Zhang, Y. Ma, Y. Huang, Y. Wang, and Y. Chen,
Superparamagnetic graphene oxide–Fe
3
O
4
 nanoparticles hybrid for
controlled targeted drug carriers. 
J. Mater. Chem.,
 19, 2710–2714, 2009.
32. K.Z. Setshedi, M. Bhaumik, M.S. Onyango, and A. Maity, High-
performance towards Cr(VI) removal using multi-active sites of polypyrrole–
graphene oxide nanocomposites: Batch and column studies. 
Chem. Eng. J.,
262, 921–931, 2015.
33. F.J. Tölle, K. Gamp, and R. Mülhaupt, Scale-up and purification of
graphite oxide as intermediate for functionalized graphene. 
Carbon,
 75, 432–
442, 2014.
34. R. Ramachandran, M. Saranya, V. Velmurugan, B.P.C. Raghupathy, S.K.
Jeong, and A.N. Grace, Effect of reducing agent on graphene synthesis and
its influence on charge storage towards supercapacitor applications. 
Appl.
Energ.,
 153, 22–31, 2015.
35. M. Vinothkannan, C. Karthikeyan, G. Gnana kumar, A.R. Kim, and D.J.
Yoo, One-pot green synthesis of reduced graphene oxide (RGO)/Fe
3
O
4
nanocomposites and its catalytic activity toward methylene blue dyedegradation. 
Spectrochim. Acta A,
 136, 256–264, 2015.
36. S.M. Maliyekkal, T.S. Sreeprasad, D. Krishnan, S. Kouser, A.K. Mishra,
U.V. Waghmare, and T. Pradeep, Graphene: A reusable substrate for
unprecedented adsorption of pesticides. 
Small,
 9, 273–283, 2012.
37. L. Zhao, B. Yu, F. Xue, J. Xie, X. Zhang, R. Wu, R. Wang, Z. Hu, S.T.
Yang, and J. Luo, Facile hydrothermal preparation of recyclable S-doped
graphene sponge for Cu
2+
 adsorption. 
J. Hazard Mater.,
 286, 449–456,
2015.
38. S. Gadipelli, and Z.X. Guo, Graphene-based materials: Synthesis and gas
sorption, storage and separation. 
Prog. Mater. Sci.,
 69, 1–60, 2015.
39. V. Singh, D. Joung, L. Zhai, S. Das, S.I. Khondaker, and S. Seal,
Graphene based materials: Past, present and future. 
Prog. Mater. Sci.,
 56,
1178–1271, 2011.
40. S.C. Smith, and D.F. Rodrigues, Carbon-based nanomaterials for removal
of chemical and biological contaminants from water: A review of
mechanisms and applications. 
Carbon,
 91, 122–143, 2015.
41. H. Wang, X. Yuan, Y. Wu, H. Huang, X. Peng, G. Zeng, H. Zhong, J.
Liang, and M.M. Ren, Graphene-based materials: Fabrication,
characterization and application for the decontamination of wastewater and
wastegas and hydrogen storage/generation. 
Adv. Colloid Interfac.,
 195–196
(2013) 19–40.
42. P. Tan, J. Sun, Y. Hu, Z. Fang, Q. Bi, Y. Chen, and J. Cheng, Adsorption
of Cu
2+
, Cd
2+
 and Ni
2+
 from aqueous single metal solutions on graphene
oxide membranes. 
J. Hazard Mater.,
 297, 251–260, 2015.
43. B. Yu, J. Xu, J.H. Liu, S.T. Yang, J. Luo, Q. Zhou, J. Wan, R. Liao, H.
Wang, and Y. Liu, Adsorption behavior of copper ions on graphene oxide–
chitosan aerogel. 
J. Environ. Chem. Eng.,
 1, 1044–1050, 2013.
44. X. Li, X. Tang, and Y. Fang, Using graphene oxide as a superior
adsorbent for the highly efficient immobilization of Cu(II) from aqueous
solution. 
J. Mol. Liq
., 199, 237–243, 2014.
45. Z. Dong, F. Zhang, D. Wang, X. Liu, and J. Jin, Polydopamine-mediated
surface-functionalization of graphene oxide for heavy metal ions removal. 
J.
Solid State Chem.,
 224, 88–93, 2015.46. G. Chen, Y. Liu, F. Liu, and X. Zhang, Fabrication of three-dimensional
graphene foam with high electrical conductivity and large adsorption
capability. 
Appl. Surf. Sci.,
 311, 808–815, 2014.
47. Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Wang, Z. Sun, J. Ma, T. Wu, F. Xing, and J. Gao,
Porous graphene oxide/carboxymethyl cellulose monoliths, with high metal
ion adsorption. 
Carbohyd. Polym.,
 101 (2014) 392–400.
48. Y. Tang, H. Guo, L. Xiao, S. Yu, N. Gao, and Y. Wang, Synthesis of
reduced graphene oxide/magnetite composites and investigation of their
adsorption performance of fluoroquinolone antibiotics. 
Colloid Surface A,
424, 74–80, 2013.
49. X. Li, H. Zhou, W. Wu, S. Wei, Y. Xu, and Y. Kuang, Studies of heavy
metal ion adsorption on chitosan/sulfydryl functionalized graphene oxide
composites. 
J. Colloid Interf. Sci.,
 448, 389–397, 2015.
50. Mejias I.E. Carpio, J.D. Mangadlao, H.N. Nguyen, R.C. Advincula, and
D.F. Rodrigues, Graphene oxide functionalized with ethylenediamine
triacetic acid for heavy metal adsorption and anti-microbial applications.
Carbon,
 77, 289–301, 2014.
51. S. Luo, X. Xu, G. Zhou, C. Liu, Y. Tang, and Y. Liu, Amino siloxane
oligomerlinked graphene oxide as an efficienta dsorbent for removal of Pb(II)
from wastewater. 
J. Hazard Mater.,
 274, 145–155, 2014.
52. Z. Xu, Y. Zhang, X. Qian, J. Shi, L. Chen, B. Li, J. Niu, and L. Liu, One
step synthesis of polyacrylamide functionalized graphene and its application
in Pb(II) removal. 
Appl. Surf. Sci.,
 316, 308–314, 2014.
53. L. Liu, C. Li, C. Bao, Q. Jia, P. Xiao, X. Liu, and Q. Zhang, Preparation
and characterization of chitosan/ graphene oxide composites for the
adsorption of Au(III) and Pd(II). 
Talanta
, 93, 350–357, 2012.
54. D. Jiang, L. Liu, N. Pan, F. Yang, S. Li, R. Wang, I.W. Wyman, Y. Jin,
and C. Xia, The separation of Th(IV)/U(VI) via selective complexation with
graphene oxide. 
Chem. Eng. J.,
 271, 147–154, 2015.
55. Y. Lei, F. Chen, Y. Luo, and L. Zhang, Synthesis of three-dimensional
graphene oxide foam for the removal of heavy metal ions. 
Chem. Phys. Lett.,
593, 122–127, 2014.
56. Y.Q. He, N.N. Zhang, and X.D. Wang, Adsorption of grapheneoxide/chitosan porous materials for metal ions. 
Chin. Chem. Lett.,
 22, 859–
862, 2011.
57. N. Zhang, H. Qiu, Y. Si, W. Wang, and J. Gao, Fabrication of highly
porous biodegradable monoliths strengthened by graphene oxide and their
adsorption of metal ions. 
Carbon,
 49, 827–837, 2011.
58. L. Fan, C. Luo, M. Sun, X. Li, and H. Qiu, Highly selective adsorption of
lead ions by water-dispersible magnetic chitosan/graphene oxide composites.
Colloid Surface B,
 103, 523–529, 2013.
59. L. Li, L. Fan, M. Sun, H. Qiu, X. Li, H. Duan, and C. Luo, Adsorbent for
chromium removal based on graphene oxide functionalized with magnetic
cyclodextrin–chitosan. 
Colloid Surface B
, 107, 76–83, 2013.
60. X.J. Hu, Y.G. Liu, H. Wang, G.M. Zeng, X. Hu, Y. Guo, T.T. Li, A.W.
Chen, L.H. Jiang, and F.Y. Guo, Adsorption of copper by magnetic graphene
oxide-supported β-cyclodextrin: Effects of pH, ionic strength, background
electrolytes, and citric acid. 
Chem. Eng. Res. Des.,
 93, 675–683, 2015.
61. H. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Zeng, X. Hu, X. Hu, T. Li, H. Li, Y. Wang, and L.
Jiang, Grafting of β-cyclodextrin to magnetic graphene oxide via
ethylenediamine and application for Cr(VI) removal. 
Carbohyd. Polym.,
 113,
166–173, 2014.
62. J. Liu, H. Du, S. Yuan, W. He, and Z. Liu, Synthesis of thiol-
functionalized magnetic graphene as adsorbent for Cd(II) removal from
aqueous systems. 
J. Environ. Chem. Eng.,
 3, 617–621, 2015.
63. J. Sun, Q. Liang, Q. Han, X. Zhang, and M. Ding, One-step synthesis of
magnetic graphene oxide nanocomposite and its application in magnetic solid
phase extraction of heavy metal ions from biological samples. 
Talanta
, 132,
557–563, 2015.
64. H. Jabeen, K.C. Kemp, and V. Chandra, Synthesis of nano zerovalent
iron nanoparticles - Graphene composite for the treatment of lead
contaminated water. 
J. Environ. Manage.,
 130, 429–435, 2013.
65. X. Hu, Y. Liu, G. Zeng, S. You, H. Wang, H. Hu, Y. Guo, X. Tan, and F.
Guo, Effects of background electrolytes and ionic strength on enrichment of
Cd(II) ions with magnetic graphene oxide–supported sulfanilic acid. 
J.
Colloid Interf. Sci.,
 435, 138–144, 2014.66. X. Yuan, Y. Wang, J. Wang, C. Zhou, Q. Tang, and X. Rao, Calcined
graphene/MgAl-layered double hydroxides for enhanced Cr(VI) removal.
Chem. Eng. J.,
 221, 204–213, 2013.
67. R. Sitko, B. Zawisza, E. Talik, P. Janik, G. Osoba, B. Feist, and E.
Malicka, Spherical silica particles decorated with graphene oxide nanosheets
as a new sorbent in inorganic trace analysis. 
Anal. Chim. Act.
, 834, 22–29,
2014.
68. De J. Celis, N.E. Amadeo, and A.L. Cukierman, In situ modification of
activated carbons developed from a native invasive wood on removal of trace
toxic metals from wastewater. 
J. Hazard Mater.,
 161, 217–223, 2009.
69. A. Bhatnagar, W. Hogland, M. Marques, and M. Sillanpää, An overview
of the modification methods of activated carbon for its water treatment
applications. 
Chem. Eng. J.,
 219, 499–511, 2013.
70. D.A. Nabarlatz, De J. Celis, P.R. Bonelli, and A.L. Cukierman, Batch and
dynamic sorption of Ni(II) ions by activated carbon based on a native
lignocellulosic precursor. 
J. Environ. Manage,
 97, 109–115, 2012.
71. D.R. Dreyer, S. Park, C.W. Bielawski, and R.S. Ruoff, The chemistry of
graphene oxide. 
Chem. Soc. Rev.,
 39, 228–240, 2010.
72. Y. Li, Q. Du, T. Liu, X. Peng, J. Wang, J. Sun, and L. Xia, Comparative
study of methylene blue dye adsorption onto activated carbon, graphene
oxide, and carbon nanotubes. 
Chem. Eng. Res. Des.,
 91, 361–368, 2013.
73. W. Zhang, C. Zhou, W. Zhou, A. Lei, Q. Zhang, Q. Wan, and B. Zou,
Fast and considerable adsorption of methylene blue dye onto graphene oxide.
B Environ. Contam. Tox.,
 87, 86–90, 2011.
74. G.K. Ramesha, Vijaya A. Kumara, H.B. Muralidhara, and S. Sampath,
Graphene and graphene oxide as effective adsorbents toward anionic and
cationic dyes. 
J. Colloid Interf. Sci.,
 361, 270–277, 2011.
75. Y.H. Li, T. Liu, Q. Du, J. Sun, Y. Xia, Z. Wang, and D. Wuc, Adsorption
of cationic red X-GRL from aqueous solutions by graphene: Equilibrium,
kinetics and thermodynamics study. 
Chem. Biochem. Eng. Q,
 25, 483–491,
2011.
76. P. Russo, D’L. Urso, A. Hu, N. Zhou, and G. Compagnini, In liquid laser
treated graphene oxide for dye removal. 
Appl. Surf. Sci.,
 348, 85–91, 2015.77. K. Liu, H. Li, Y. Wang, X. Gou, and Y. Duan, Adsorption and removal of
rhodamine B from aqueous solution by tannic acid functionalized graphene
Colloid Surface
 A, 477, 35–41, 2015.
78. F. Liu, S. Chung, G. Oh, and T.S. Seo, Three-dimensional graphene oxide
nanostructure for fast and efficient water-soluble dye removal. 
ACS Appl.
Mater. Interf.,
 4, 922–927, 2012.
79. T. Ma, P.R. Chang, P. Zheng, F. Zhao, and X. Ma, Porous graphene gels:
Preparation and its electrochemical properties. 
Mater. Chem. Phys.,
 146,
446–451, 2014.
80. X. Zhang, C. Cheng, J. Zhao, L. Ma, S. Sun, and C. Zhao,
Polyethersulfone enwrapped graphene oxide porous particles for water
treatment. 
Chem. Eng. J.,
 215, 72–81, 2013.
81. L. Ai, C. Zhang, and Z. Chen, Removal of methylene blue from aqueous
solution by a solvo thermal-synthesized graph ene/magnetite composite. 
J.
Hazard Mater.,
 192, 1515–1524, 2011.
82. S. Bai, X. Shen, X. Zhong, Y. Liu, G. Zhu, X. Xu, and K. Chen, One-pot
solvothermal preparation of magnetic reduced graphene oxide-ferrite hybrids
for organic dye removal. 
Carbon,
 50, 2337–2346, 2012.
83. S. Wang, J. Wei, S. Lv, Z. Guo, and F. Jiang, Removal of organic dyes in
environmental water onto magnetic-sulfonic graphene nanocomposite. 
Clean,
41, 992–1001, 2013.
84. H. Yang, S. Kannappan, A.S. Pandian, Jang, J.-H., Y.S. Lee, and W. Lu,
Nanoporous graphene materials by low-temperature vacuum-assisted thermal
process for electrochemical energy storage. 
J. Power Sources
, 284, 146–153,
2015.
85. M. Liu, J. Xu, B. Cheng, W. Ho, and J. Yu, Synthesis and adsorption
performance of Mg(OH)
2
 hexagonal nanosheet–graphene oxide composites.
Appl. Surf. Sci.,
 332, 121–129, 2015.
86. Y. Wang, G. Xia, C. Wu, J. Sun, R. Song, and W. Huang, Porous
chitosan doped with graphene oxide as highly effective adsorbent for methyl
orange and amido black 10B. 
Carbohyd. Polym.,
 115, 686–693, 2015.
87. X. Zhang, H. Yu, H. Yang, Y. Wan, H. Hu, Z. Zhai, and J. Qin, Graphene
oxide caged in cellulose microbeads for removal of malachite green dye fromaqueous solution. 
J. Colloid Interf. Sci.,
 437, 277–282, 2015.
88. N. Li, M. Zheng, X. Chang, G. Ji, H. Lu, L. Xue, and J. Cao, Preparation
of magnetic CoFe
2
O
4
-functionalized graphene sheets via a facile
hydrothermal method and their adsorption properties. 
J. Solid State Chem.,
184, 953–958, 2011.
89. Z. Wu, H. Zhong, X. Yuan, H. Wang, L. Wang, X. Chen, and Y. Wu,
Adsorptive removal of methylene blue by rhamnolipid-functionalized
graphene oxide from wastewater. 
Water Research
, 67, 330–344, 2014.
90. H. Yan, H. Wu, K. Li, Y. Wang, X. Tao, H. Yang, and R. Cheng,
Influence of the surface structure of graphene oxide on the adsorption of
aromatic organic compounds from water. 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interf.,
 7, 6690–
6697, 2015.
91. S.C. Smith, F. Ahmed, K.M. Gutierrez, Frigi D. Rodrigues, A
comparative study of lysozyme adsorption with graphene, graphene oxide,
and single-walled carbon nanotubes: Potential environmental applications.
Chem. Eng. J.,
 240, 147–154, 2014.
92. Y. Li, Q. Du, T. Liu, J. Sun, Y. Jiao, Y. Xia, and D. Wu, Equilibrium,
kinetic and thermodynamic studies on the adsorption of phenol onto
graphene. 
Mater. Res. Bull.,
 47, 1898–1904, 2012.
93. X. Wang, S. Huang, L. Zhu, X. Tian, S. Li, and H. Tang, Correlation
between the adsorption ability and reduction degree of graphene oxide and
tuning of adsorption of phenolic compounds. 
Carbon,
 69, 101–112, 2014.
94. J. Zhao, W. Ren, and H.M. Cheng, Graphene sponge for efficient and
repeatable adsorption and desorption of water contaminations. 
J. Mater.
Chem.,
 22, 20197–20202, 2012.
95. T. Deblonde, Cossu-C. Leguille, and P. Hartemann, Emerging pollutants
in wastewater: A review of the literature. 
Int. J. Hyg. Envir. Heal.,
 214, 442–
448, 2011.
96. Y. Gao, Y. Li, L. Zhang, H. Huang, J. Hu, S.M. Shah, and X. Su,
Adsorption and removal of tetracycline antibiotics from aqueous solution by
graphene oxide. 
J. Colloid. Interf. Sci.,
 368, 540–546, 2012.
97. Y.L. Zhang, Y.J. Liu, C.M. Dai, X.F. Zhou, and S.G. Liu, Adsorption of
clofibric acid from aqueous solution by graphene oxide and the effect ofenvironmental factors. 
Water Air Soil Poll.
, 225, 2064–2073, 2014.
98. S.-W. Nam, C. Jung, H. Li, M. Yu, J.R.V. Flora, L.K. Boateng, and Y.
Yoon, Adsorption characteristics of diclofenac and sulfamethoxazole to
graphene oxide in aqueous solution. 
Chemosphere,
 136, 20–26, 2015.
99. J. Xu, L. Wang, and Y. Zhu, Decontamination of bisphenol A from
aqueous solution by graphene adsorption. 
Langmuir,
 28, 8418–8425, 2012.
100. Y. Zhang, Y. Cheng, N. Chen, Y. Zhou, B. Li, W. Gu, X. Shi, and Y.
Xian, Recyclable removal of bisphenol A from aqueous solution by reduced
graphene oxide–magnetic nanoparticles: Adsorption and desorption. 
J.
Colloid Interf. Sci.,
 421, 85–92, 2014.
101. S. Thakur, and N. Karak, One-step approach to prepare magnetic iron
oxide/reduced graphene oxide nanohybrid for efficient organic and inorganic
pollutants removal. 
Mater. Chem. Phys.,
 144, 425–432, 2014.
102. D. Wang, L. Liu, X. Jiang, J. Yu, X. Chen, and X. Chen, Adsorbent for
p-phenylenediamine adsorption and removal based on graphene oxide
functionalized with magnetic cyclodextrin. 
Appl. Surf. Sci.,
 329, 197–205,
2015.Chapter 3
Photocatalytic Activity of Nanocarbon-
TiO
2
 Composites with Gold
Nanoparticles for the Degradation of
Water Pollutants
L.M. Pastrana-Martínez
1
, S.A.C. Carabineiro
1
*
 J.G.
Buijnsters
2
, J.L. Figueiredo
1
, J.L. Faria
1
, and A.M.T. Silva
1
1
Laboratório de Catálise e Materiais (LCM), Laboratório Associado LSRE-
LCM, Departamento de Engenharia Química, Faculdade de Engenharia,
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal
2
Department of Precision and Microsystems Engineering, Research Group of
Micro and Nano Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The
Netherlands
*
Corresponding author:
 
scarabin@fe.up.pt
Abstract
Gold was loaded on different carbon–TiO
2
 composites [graphene oxide
(GO)–TiO
2
, carbon nanotubes–TiO
2
, nanodiamond–TiO
2
 and fullerenes–
TiO
2
] and on bare TiO
2
 by a liquid-phase reductive deposition method. The
obtained materials were characterized by scanning electron microscopy
(SEM), physical adsorption of nitrogen, diffuse reflectance UV–vis (DR-
UV–vis) and IR (DRIFT) spectroscopies and point of zero charge (pH
PZC
)
measurements.The photocatalytic performance was evaluated for the degradation of a
pharmaceutical water pollutant, diphenhydramine (DP). The best performing
photocatalyst was the Au-loaded GO–TiO
2
 composite that exhibited the
highest catalytic activity under both near-UV–vis and visible light irradiation,
outperforming the synthesized bare TiO
2
 material. The high efficiency of this
composite can be ascribed to the optimal assembly between the TiO
2
nanoparticles and GO sheets, permitting the material to act simultaneously as
an efficient electron acceptor and donor, a fact that results in the suppression
of charge recombination.
Keywords:
 Heterogeneous photocatalysis, diphenhydramine, carbon-TiO
2
composites, gold nanoparticles
3.1 Introduction
Water is essential for life on Earth and is needed in multiple human activities
like agriculture, industry, food preparation, cleaning and energy production.
The exponential population growth and intensification of agricultural and
industrial activities led to a continuous increase in the demands for fresh
water, which unfortunately has a limited supply. Therefore, it is very
important to protect the natural sources of water from the contamination with
priority and emerging pollutants, by developing new technologies for
wastewater treatment. Simple biological processes often require a lot of space
and create sludge – pollutant transfer. Chemical treatments constitute a
definite pollutant conversion, if the target molecule gets converted and
mineralized. However, in the case of refractory species, conversion could be
only partial, otherwise severe conditions may be required to handle those
compounds and their derivatives.
Heterogeneous photocatalysis can aid in these cases, if it is used as pre- or
post-treatment of biological processes, or even as complete solution,
operating normally under mild conditions (ambient temperature and
atmospheric pressure). It only requires an oxidizing agent (preferentially
atmospheric oxygen) and reagent photons of adequate wavelength (ideally
from the near UV/Vis and visible regions of the electromagnetic spectrum tofacilitate the use of solar light) [1–6], in the presence of a semiconductor
material (the photocatalyst) with a large bandgap (typically 3.2 eV in the case
of TiO
2
) in the range of the water redox potential.
TiO
2
 is the most frequently employed photocatalyst, due to its high
chemical stability, low cost and high photocatalytic activity [3, 6–12]. It
occurs naturally as ilmenite (FeO/TiO
2
), rutile or titanium slag. It can be
synthesized in four different forms (individually or combined between them)
namely as amorphous material, and as crystalline rutile, anatase or brookite.
The unit cells of those three crystal polymorphs are shown in 
Figure 3.1
.
These structures can be described as chains of TiO
6
 octahedra, where each
Ti
4+
 ion is surrounded by six O
2–
 ions at the vertices [9, 12, 13]. The crystal
structures differ by the distortion of each octahedron and the assembly
patterns of the octahedral chains. The octahedra are coupled by the vertices in
anatase (
Figure 3.1a
), by the edges in rutile (
Figure 3.1b
), and by both
vertices and edges in brookite (
Figure 3.1c
). These differences in lattice
structures are responsible for distinct mass densities and electronic band
structures of the three forms. The rutile phase is the most stable as a bulk
material. Anatase and brookite readily transform into rutile upon heating.
Figure 3.1
 Crystal structures of anatase (a), rutile (b) and brookite (c)
(adapted from Ref. [12]).
The production of commercial TiO
2
 powders is through the sulphate
process or the chloride process, the first being almost completely abandoned
due to environmental and cost issues. At the laboratory scale, the synthesis of
TiO
2
 is normally accomplished by a sol–gel method with hydrolysis oftitanium chlorides or alkoxides [6, 14–20]. A liquid suspension of solid
particles smaller than 1 μm (sol) is obtained by hydrolysis and partial
condensation of the metal alkoxide. A gel is formed by condensation of the
sol particles into a three-dimensional network. The phases normally obtained
by this sol–gel synthesis are anatase and rutile (along with some amorphous
titanate), depending on the calcination temperature [6, 18, 19].
In spite of its relatively large bandgap, TiO
2
 mostly absorbs UV light (only
5% of the solar spectrum) with a faint tail in the near-UV to visible region,
thus having limited activity under visible light irradiation. This prompted
researchers to search for modified TiO
2
 materials with extended absorption
in the visible light range. Gold is a noble metal that does not undergo
photocorrosion and can be strongly anchored on TiO
2
 surfaces, exhibiting a
characteristic surface plasmon band in the visible region, due to the collective
excitation of electrons in the gold nanoparticles [21, 22]. Doping with metals,
such as Au, has proven to be successful in enhancing photocatalytic activity
of TiO
2
 materials [23–37].
Alternatively, catalyst modifications can be achieved by addition of carbon
materials [38–49]. The use of TiO
2
 hybrids containing carbon materials, such
as activated carbon, carbon xerogel, carbon nanotubes (CNTs),
nanodiamonds (NDs), activated carbon fibres, graphene, graphene oxide
(GO) and reduced GO, has been reported as an effective approach to enhance
the semiconductor activity, both under UV and visible/solar light conditions
[38–49]. The effect of these materials has been ascribed to their role as co-
adsorbents, as TiO
2
 dispersing media and/or as photosensitizers.
In this work, we tried to combine the modification of TiO
2
 materials both
by addition of carbon materials, and at a later stage, by gold deposition. The
obtained catalysts were used for the degradation of a critical and emerging
pollutant present in wastewater, i.e., diphenhydramine (DP) hydrochloride,
also known as 2-(diphenylmethoxy)-
N,N
-dimethylethylamine hydrochloride.
DP is the active ingredient of Benadryl
®
, an antihistaminic drug that
combines sedative, antiemetic, antitussive and hypnotic properties, used in
the treatment of allergies, allergic rhinitis, hives, itching, insect bites and
stings [44, 49, 50]. DP has low biodegradability, so it is a persistent pollutant
in water [44, 49, 51], its removal being important.3.2 Experimental
3.2.1 Carbon Materials Preparation
GO was synthesized from synthetic graphite (particle size ≤ 20 μm, from
Sigma-Aldrich), prepared through the modified Hummers method [52, 53] as
described elsewhere [54]. Then, the oxidized material was dispersed in water
with subsequent exfoliation in an ultrasound bath (UP400S, 24 kHz) for 1 h.
Finally, the resulting sonicated dispersion was centrifuged for 20 min at 3000
r.p.m. to obtain a suspension of GO. Pristine multi-walled CNTs (>95%
purity) were purchased from Shenzhen Nanotechnologies Co. Ltd. Fullerenes
(C
60
 powder of 99.9% purity) were obtained from Materials and
Electrochemical Research MER Co. Ltd. Both materials were oxidized with a
saturated solution of (NH
4
)
2
S
2
O
8
 in 1 M H
2
SO
4
, as described elsewhere
[55]. NDs (<10 nm, Sigma-Aldrich) were produced by detonation of carbon
explosive materials in a closed chamber and immediately cooled at a rate
≥3000 °C min
–1
, as described elsewhere [56]. NDs were oxidized (ND
ox
) by
heating in an open air oven at 430 °C for several hours [57, 58].
3.2.2 Synthesis of Carbon–TiO
2
 Hybrid
Catalysts
TiO
2
-based hybrid catalysts: GO–TiO
2
, CNT–TiO
2
, ND–TiO
2
 and
fullerene–TiO
2
 (C
60
–TiO
2
) were prepared by the liquid-phase deposition
method (LPD) at room temperature, introducing GO, oxidised CNT, oxidised
ND and oxidised C
60
 as described elsewhere [45, 47, 59]. In this process,
ammonium hexafluorotitanate (IV), NH
4
TiF
6
 (0.1 mol L
–1
) and boric acid,
H
3
BO
3
 (0.3 mol L
–1
), were added to the carbon material suspensions and
heated at 60 °C for 2 h under continuous stirring. The materials were washed
with water and dried at 100 °C under vacuum for 2 h followed by a post-treatment under N
2
 atmosphere at 200 °C. The carbon loadings were ca. 4
wt.% for GO–TiO
2
, CNT–TiO
2
 and C
60
–TiO
2
, and 15 wt.% for ND–TiO
2
,
taking into account the best photocatalytic activity previously obtained with
these composites [45, 47]. Bare TiO
2
 was also prepared and treated by the
same method, without the addition of any carbon material (TiO2).
3.2.3 Synthesis of Au-Loaded TiO
2
Catalysts
Gold nanoparticles (1% wt.) were loaded on the TiO
2
-based composite
materials by a liquid-phase reductive deposition (LPRD) method, which
consists of mixing a solution of the gold precursor with a solution of NaOH
(with a ratio of 1:4 in weight) with stirring at room temperature [36, 60–65].
The resulting solution is aged for 24 h in the dark at room temperature to
complete the hydroxylation of Au
3+
 ions. Then, the appropriate amount of
support is added to the solution, and after ultrasonic dispersion for 30 min,
the suspension is aged in the oven at 100 °C overnight. In both cases, the
resulting solid is washed repeatedly with distilled water for chloride removal,
which is well known to cause sintering of Au nanoparticles, thus rendering
them inactive [63, 66, 67], and dried in the oven at 100 °C overnight. The
composites were labelled as Au/TiO
2
, Au/GO–TiO
2
, Au/ND–TiO
2
,
Au/CNT–TiO
2
 and Au/C
60
–TiO
2
.
3.2.4 Catalysts Characterization
Textural characterization of the materials was obtained from the nitrogen
adsorption–desorption isotherms determined at –196 °C in a Quantachrome
NOVA 4200e multi-station apparatus. The apparent surface area (
S
BET
) was
determined by applying the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) equation [68].
The point zero of charge (pH
PZC
) of the materials was determined following
the methodology described elsewhere [47]. Briefly, solutions with varying
initial pH (2–12) were prepared using 0.1 M HCl or 0.1 M NaOH and 0.01 M
NaCl as electrolyte. Each solution was contacted with 0.15 g of the material,and the final pH was measured after 24 h of continuous stirring at room
temperature. The point of zero charge (PZC) value of the material was
determined by intercepting the obtained final pH 
versus
 initial pH curve with
the straight line final pH = initial pH. The morphology of the composites was
determined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in a FEI Quanta 400FEG
ESEM/EDAX Genesis X4M instrument. Attenuated total reflection Fourier
transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectra were recorded on a NICOLET 510P
FTIR spectrometer using ZeSn as ATR crystal. The UV–Vis spectra of the
solid powder materials were measured on a JASCO V-560 UV–Vis
spectrophotometer equipped with an integrating sphere attachment (JASCO
ISV-469). Barium sulphate was used as a reference. The spectra were
recorded in diffuse reflectance mode and transformed by the instrument
software to equivalent absorption Kubelka–Munk units.
3.2.5 Photocatalytic Degradation of DP
Using Hybrid Catalysts
The photocatalytic experiments were performed in a quartz cylindrical
reactor (7.5 mL) at room temperature (25 °C), which was loaded with the DP
aqueous solution (3.40 × 10
–4
 M) and the catalyst powder (1 g L
–1
) as
described elsewhere [54]. The suspension was magnetically stirred, and a
dark period (30 min) was maintained before switching on the lamp, in order
to achieve the adsorption–desorption equilibrium condition. Experiments in
the absence of catalyst were also performed to determine the contribution
from direct photolysis. The reaction time was 60 or 240 min, for near-UV–
Vis and visible light irradiation, respectively. A Heraeus TQ 150 medium-
pressure mercury vapour lamp was used as irradiation source delivering near-
UV–Vis irradiation (λ > 350 nm), while a cut-off long-pass filter was used for
visible light experiments (λ > 430 nm). The irradiance reaching the
photocatalytic reactor was approximately 33 or 2.8 mW cm
–2
 for near-UV–
Vis or visible light irradiation, respectively, as determined by using a UV–
Vis spectroradiometer (USB2000+, OceanOptics, USA).
The concentration of DP was analysed by HPLC with a Hitachi Elite
LaChrom system equipped with a Hydrosphere C18 column (250 mm × 4.6mm; 5 μm particles), a Diode Array Detector (L-2450) and a solvent delivery
pump (L-2130). An isocratic method set at a flow rate of 1 mL min
–1
 was
used with the eluent consisting of an A:B (70:30) mixture of 20 mM
NaH
2
PO
4
 acidified with H
3
PO
4
 at pH = 2.80 (A) and acetonitrile (B).
Absorbance was found to be linear over the whole range considered. The
maximum relative standard deviation of HPLC measurements was never
larger than 2%.
The photocatalytic oxidation of the tested pollutants can be described by a
pseudo-first-order kinetic model, according to the following equation:
(3.1) 
where 
C
 corresponds to the pollutant concentration, 
k
 is the pseudo-first-
order kinetic constant, 
t
 is the reaction time and 
C
0
 is the pollutant
concentration at 
t =
 0. The values of 
k
 were obtained by non-linear regression
using the Marquardt–Levenberg algorithm.
3.3 Results and Discussion
3.3.1 Materials Characterization
Nitrogen adsorption isotherms at –196 °C were measured and used in the
determination of the surface area of the catalyst samples (
Table 3.1
).
Representative N
2
 adsorption–desorption isotherms for Au/TiO
2
 as well as
for the Au/carbon–TiO
2
 composites, are shown in 
Figure 3.2
.
Figure 3.2
 N
2
 adsorption-desorption isotherms at –196 °C for Au/TiO
2
 and
for the Au/carbon–TiO
2
 composites.Table 3.1
 Surface areas (S
BET
) and pH
PZC
 determined for Au/TiO
2
 and for
the Au/ carbon–TiO
2
 composites.
Catalyst
S
BET
 (m
2
/g)
pH
PZC
Au/TiO
2
121
3.9
Au/C
60
–TiO
2
78
5.6
Au/CNT–TiO
2
61
5.2
Au/GO–TiO
2
112
3.7
Au/ND–TiO
2
85
3.6
The results show that the 
S
BET
 area was comparable for Au/TiO
2
 (121 m
2
g
–1
) and Au/GO–TiO
2
 (112 m
2
 g
–1
) and higher than for the other
Au/carbon–TiO
2
 composites (85, 61 and 78 m
2
 g
–1
, for Au/ND–TiO
2
,
Au/CNT–TiO
2
 and Au/C
60
–TiO
2
, respectively). The lower values obtained
for the composites prepared with ND, CNT and C
60
 may be due to the
agglomeration of the TiO
2
 particles induced by the presence of these carbonmaterials, leading to the formation of larger TiO
2
 particles, compared to the
Au/TiO
2
 catalyst. However, a significant development of the porosity was
observed at high relative pressure in the case of GO–TiO
2
 composites,
together with a clear hysteresis loop (
Figure 3.2
).
The materials loaded with gold were also analysed by SEM. It can be seen
that images with topographic contrast (secondary electrons diffraction)
provide a better view of the supports morphology, while images with
composition/atomic number contrast (backscattered electrons detection)
allow a better visualization of the gold nanoparticles.
The bare TiO
2
 (
Figures 3.3a
 and 
b
) shows an agglomerated material,
consisting of anatase crystallites with an estimated size of 4–5 nm as
previously reported [45, 54]. TiO
2
–C
60
 composites show much larger
particles (
Figures 3.3c
 and 
d
). The TiO
2
–CNT composites show TiO
2
particles with sizes in the order of hundreds of nanometres, homogeneously
embedding carbon nanotubes (
Figures 3.3e
 and 
f
), as also shown in a
previous publication [69]. 
Figures 3.3g
 and 
h
 show TiO
2
 particles aggregated
on the top of GO layers, forming a kind of junction of GO platelets, as
previously observed [54]. A well-balanced TiO
2
 distribution on both sides of
the GO nanosheets seems to occur, indicating a good self-assembly of the
TiO
2
 nanoparticles on GO during preparation. The TiO
2
 composites
prepared with NDs show homogeneous particles, a little larger than those
found for bare TiO
2
, as already reported [45].
Figure 3.3
 SEM images of bare TiO
2
 (a and b), C
60
–TiO
2
 (c and d), CNT–
TiO
2
 (e and f), GO–TiO
2
 (g and h) and ND–TiO
2
 (i and j) with gold. On the
left, SEM images with topographic contrast (secondary electrons diffraction)
are shown (a, c, e, g and i). On the right, SEM images with
composition/atomic number contrast (backscattered electrons detection) can
be found (b, d, f, h and j). Shown scale bars are 2 μm. Gold nanoparticles are
seen as bright spots.The size distribution histograms of gold nanoparticles on the TiO
2
-based
supports were obtained from several SEM images and are shown in 
Figure
3.4
 and 
Table 3.2
. It can be seen that the lowest average size is for gold on
CNT–TiO
2
 that showed 13.8 nm. C
60
–TiO
2
, ND–TiO
2
 and bare TiO
2
 have
a similar size of ~17 nm. Interestingly, the size range of Au/ND–TiO
2
 is
narrower (1–35 nm) than that of the other materials (2–40 nm). The largest
sizes were obtained for Au/GO–TiO
2
 (23.7 nm in average). This material
also shows the largest and broadest size range (6–50 nm).
Figure 3.4
 Size distribution histograms of gold nanoparticles on bare TiO
2
(a), C
60
-TiO
2
 (b), CNT-TiO
2
 (c), GO-TiO
2
 (d) and ND-TiO
2
 (e).Table 3.2
 Size ranges and average gold nanoparticle sizes for the Au/TiO
2
-
based samples, obtained from measurements made on ~200–600 particles.
Catalyst
Au size range (nm)
Au nanoparticle size (nm)
Au/TiO
2
2–40
17.1
Au/C
60
–TiO
2
2–40
16.9
Au/CNT–TiO
2
2–40
13.8
Au/GO–TiO
2
6–50
23.7
Au/ND–TiO
2
1–35
17.0
ATR-FTIR spectra of Au/TiO
2
 and the respective Au/carbon-based TiO
2composites are depicted in 
Figure 3.5
. The ATR spectra recorded for
Au/TiO
2
 and all the Au/carbon-based TiO
2
 composites show mainly a broad
band between 2800 and 3600 cm
–1
, associated with stretching vibrations of
water molecules and hydroxyl groups. This is confirmed by the presence of
some weak bands around 1600 cm
–1
 caused by bending vibration of
coordinated water, although the presence of Ti–OH bonds could also have
certain contribution to this peak [70, 71]. The band corresponding to the
vibration of Ti–O–Ti bonds was situated between 800 and 950 cm
–1
 [72].
Figure 3.5
 ATR spectra of Au/TiO
2
 and Au/carbon–TiO
2
 composites.
The diffuse reflectance UV–Vis spectra (DRUV–Vis) of selected Au
materials, expressed in terms of Kulbelka–Munk absorption units, are
depicted in 
Figure 3.6
. The DRUV–Vis spectra for the Au/samples show the
characteristic absorption sharp edge rising at 400 nm due to the bandgap
transition of the TiO
2
 semiconductor. The addition of any carbon material
into the TiO
2
 increases the baseline absorbance in the visible region, leadingto a bandgap narrowing [47, 48]. Moreover, the addition of gold
nanoparticles into the TiO
2
 reveals the presence of one band in the visible
region with a wavelength maximum at around 550 nm, typical of the gold
surface plasmon [73, 74]. The increase in absorption in the visible region
depended on the type of nanocarbon used, a higher absorption in the visible
region being obtained for nanocomposites prepared with GO, then with CNT,
and finally with ND.
Figure 3.6
 DRUV–Vis spectra of Au/TiO
2
 and Au/carbon–TiO
2
 composites.
3.3.2 Diphenhydramine Photocatalytic
Degradation
The photocatalytic activity of the Au/TiO
2
 material as well as Au/carbon–
TiO
2
 composites was evaluated in the photodegradation of DP under near-
UV–Vis (
Figure 3.7a
) and visible light (
Figure 3.7b
) irradiation. The kinetic
parameters of the time profiles are gathered in 
Table 3.3
. DP is a veryresistant pollutant in the absence of a catalyst, since the DP conversion
observed under non-catalytic conditions is less than 5% in 60 min (
Figure
3.7a
). Moreover, in the dark, the adsorption capacity was not higher than 9%
of the initial DP concentration for all the photocatalysts tested.
Figure 3.7
 Photocatalytic degradation of DP under near-UV–Vis (a) and
visible light (b) irradiation over Au/TiO
2
 and Au/carbon–TiO
2
 composites.
Curves represent the fitting of the pseudo-first-order equation to the
experimental data.Table 3.3
 Pseudo-first-order kinetic rate constant (
k
) of DP degradation fordifferent experimental conditions and respective coefficient of variation
(CV), expressed as a percentage (
k
CV
) and regression coefficient (
r
2
) under
UV–Vis and visible light irradiation.
The photocatalytic activity of the gold catalysts follows the order (
Figure
3.7a
): Au/GO–TiO
2
 (23.3 × 10
–3
 min
–1
) ~ Au/ND–TiO
2
 (20.1 × 10
–3
 min
–
1
) > Au/CNT–TiO
2
 (10.0 × 10
–3
 min
–1
) > Au/C
60
–TiO
2
 (6.0 × 10
–3
 min
–
1
) > Au/TiO
2
 (4.8 × 10
–3
 min
–1
), where the values in brackets refer to the
pseudo-first-order rate constants (
Table 3.3
). These results indicate that the
presence of any carbon material leads to an increase in the efficiency for DP
removal in comparison to Au/TiO
2
, suggesting a synergistic effect between
the carbon phase and TiO
2
 particles which depends on the nature of the
carbon material [47]. In fact, the highest photocatalytic performances under
near-UV–Vis irradiation were found for the GO composite (Au/GO–TiO
2
)
and for the ND composite (Au/ND–TiO
2
).
The photocatalytic activity of these composites (but without the presence of
gold) has been already studied for the degradation of DP [45, 54]. The good
performance of GO–TiO
2
 (containing 4% wt. of GO) has been attributed to
the good TiO
2
 distribution in the composite prepared with this GO content,
leading to a good assembly and interfacial coupling between the GO sheets
and TiO
2
 nanoparticles, acting as an efficient electron acceptor and donor
[54]. In the case of the ND–TiO
2
 catalyst (also without gold), the bestphotocatalytic performance was observed when the composite was prepared
with 15% wt. of NDs, due to the presence of significant amounts of oxygen
surface species on ND and to the increased purity of the ND constituent after
the oxidation treatment [45]. In fact, the better performance for the
composites containing GO and NDs, in comparison with those prepared with
CNT or C
60
, may be related to the large amounts of surface functional
groups in both GO and ND materials [45, 47, 59], since these groups can
facilitate dispersion in the solution during the preparation of the composites,
as well as good anchoring of the TiO
2
 particles on the carbon material. These
effects can be responsible for the higher photocatalytic performance of both
Au/GO–TiO
2
 and Au/ND–TiO
2
 composites.
It can be seen that, in this case, contrarily to what is often reported in the
literature for gold catalysis in general [66, 67], the gold nanoparticle size has
no influence in the catalytic activity, since the sample with the largest size
(Au/GO–TiO
2
, 23.7 nm) is the most active, and that with the lowest size
(Au/CNT–TiO
2
, 13.8) has an intermediate behaviour.
The photocatalytic activity of Au/TiO
2
 and the Au/carbon–TiO
2
composites for the degradation of DP under visible light irradiation (λ = 420
nm) was also evaluated for a longer reaction time (240 min, 
Figure 3.7b
), and
the respective pseudo-first-order rate constants are shown in 
Table 3.3
. Once
again, the results show that the Au/GO–TiO
2
 composite exhibited the highest
photocatalytic activity (0.90 × 10
–3
 min
–1
). The observed enhancement of
the photocatalytic activity in the Au/GO–TiO
2
 composite could be in
principle accounted for by the interfacial charge transfer process from GO to
TiO
2
, attributed to the role of GO as photosensitizer [54].
On the other hand, both Au/TiO
2
 and Au/ND–TiO
2
 have the lowest
photocatalytic activity for DP degradation under visible light illumination,
which may be attributed to their low absorption in the visible spectral range
(
Figure 3.6
).
Therefore, the results obtained showed that, under the tested conditions,
both Au/GO–TiO
2
 and Au/ND-TiO
2
 presented the best photocatalytic
activity under near-UV–Vis irradiation, while the composites prepared with
GO and CNT exhibited the highest activity under visible light illumination.Gold particles have been used as surface modifiers because they possibly
inhibit charge recombination by accelerating transfer of photoexcited
electrons from titania to substrates. Another advantage of materials
containing gold is their absorption to induce photocatalytic reactions under
visible light irradiation [74]. Nevertheless, the results obtained for the Au
photocatalysts suggest the existence of different activation mechanisms
depending on the type of carbon material and on the irradiation wavelength
used [75].
3.4 Conclusions
The photocatalytic performance of different carbon–TiO
2
 composites was
evaluated for the degradation of the DP pharmaceutical water pollutant. The
presence of any carbon material leads to an increase in the efficiency for DP
removal in comparison to Au/TiO
2
, suggesting a synergistic effect between
the carbon phase and TiO
2
 particles, which depends on the nature of the
carbon material. The highest photocatalytic performance under near-UV–Vis
irradiation was found for the GO composite (Au/GO–TiO
2
) and for the ND
composite (Au/ND–TiO
2
), while the composites prepared with GO and CNT
exhibited the highest activity under visible light illumination.
The large amount of surface functional groups in both GO and ND
materials can explain the results, since these groups can facilitate dispersion
in the solution during the preparation of the composites, as well as good
anchoring of the TiO
2
 particles on the carbon material. The better
performance of Au/GO–TiO
2
 composite could be accounted for by the
interfacial charge transfer process from GO to TiO
2
 attributed to the role of
GO as photosensitizer. On the other hand, both Au/TiO
2
 and Au/ND–TiO
2
have the lowest photocatalytic activity for DP degradation under visible light
illumination, which may be attributed to their low absorption in the visible
spectral range.
Gold particles can possibly inhibit charge recombination by accelerating
transfer of photoexcited electrons from titania to substrates. Another
advantage of materials containing gold is their absorption to inducephotocatalytic reactions under visible light irradiation. Nevertheless, the
results obtained for the Au photocatalysts suggest the existence of different
activation mechanisms depending on the type of carbon material and on the
irradiation wavelength used. Moreover, the gold nanoparticle size has no
influence in the catalytic activity, since the sample with the largest size
(Au/GO–TiO
2
, 23.7 nm) is the most active, but the trend is not followed
when the other samples are compared.
Acknowledgements
Financial support for this work was provided by FCT/MEC and FEDER
under Programme PT2020 (Project UID/EQU/50020/2013), NORTE-07–
0162-FEDER-000050 and NORTE-07–0124-FEDER-000015 co-financed by
FEDER through ON2 and QREN. LMPM, SACC and AMTS acknowledge
Investigador FCT (IF/01248/2014, IF/01381/2013/CP1160/CT0007 and
IF/01501/2013, respectively), with financing from the European Social Fund
and the Human Potential Operational Program. Authors are thankful to Dr
Carlos M. Sá (CEMUP) for assistance with SEM analyses.
References
1. M.A. Fox, and M.T. Dulay, Heterogeneous photocatalysis. 
Chemical
Reviews,
 93, 341–357, 1993.
2. M.R. Hoffmann, S.T. Martin, W. Choi, and D.W. Bahnemann,
Environmental Applications of Semiconductor Photocatalysis
. Chemical
Reviews,
 95, 69–96, 1995.
3. A. Mills, and S. Le Hunte, An overview of semiconductor photocatalysis
.
Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry,
 108, 1–35, 1997.
4. J.M. Herrmann, Heterogeneous photocatalysis: State of the art and present
applications
. Topics in Catalysis,
 34, 49–65, 2005.
5. A. Fujishima, X. Zhang, and D.A. Tryk, Heterogeneous photocatalysis:
From water photolysis to applications in environmental cleanup
.
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy,
 32, 2664–2672, 2007.6. C.G. Silva, Synthesis, Spectroscopy and Characterization of Titanium
Dioxide Based Photocatalysts for the Degradative Oxidation of Organic
Pollutants, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Porto, 2008.
7. A.L. Linsebigler, G. Lu, and J.T. Yates, Photo catalysis on TiO
2
 Surfaces:
Principles, Mechanisms, and Selected Results
. Chemical Reviews,
 95, 735–
758, 1995.
8. U. Diebold, The surface science of titanium dioxide. 
Surface Science
Reports,
 48, 53–229, 2003.
9. O. Carp, C.L. Huisman, and A. Reller, Photoinduced reactivity of titanium
dioxide
. Progress in Solid State Chemistry,
 32, 33–177, 2004.
10. M. Kitano, M. Matsuoka, M. Ueshima, and M. Anpo, Recent
developments in titanium oxide-based photocatalysts. 
Applied Catalysis A:
General,
 325, 1–14, 2007.
11. K.-J. Hwang, J.-W. Lee, W.-G. Shim, H.D. Jang, S.-I. Lee, and S.-J. Yoo,
Adsorption and photocatalysis of nanocrystalline TiO
2
 particles prepared by
sol-gel method for methylene blue degradation. 
Advanced Powder
Technology,
 23, 414–418, 2012.
12. V.C. Fuertes, C.F.A. Negre, M.B. Oviedo, F.P. Bonafé, F.Y. Oliva, and
C.G. Sánchez, A theoretical study of the optical properties of nanostructured
TiO
2
. 
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter,
 25, 115304–115307, 2013.
13. M. Comotti, C. Weidenthaler, W.C. Li, and F. Schuth, Comparison of
gold supported catalysts obtained by using different allotropic forms of
titanium dioxide
. Topics in Catalysis,
 44, 275–284, 2007.
14. M. Moran-Pineda, S. Castillo, and R. Gomez, Low temperature CO
oxidation on Au/TiO
2
 sol-gel catalysts. 
Reaction Kinetics and Catalysis
Letters,
 76, 375–381, 2002.
15. B. Guo, Z. Liu, L. Hong, and H. Jiang, Sol gel derived photocatalytic
porous TiO
2
 thin films. 
Surface and Coatings Technology,
 198, 24–29, 2005.
16. K.K. Latt, and T. Kobayashi, TiO
2
 nanosized powders controlling by
ultrasound sol–gel reaction. 
Ultrasonics Sonochemistry,
 15, 484–491, 2008.
17. A. Di Paola, G. Cufalo, M. Addamo, M. Bellardita, R. Campostrini, M.
Ischia, R. Ceccato, and L. Palmisano, Photocatalytic activity of nanocrystalline TiO
2
 (brookite, rutile and brookite-based) powders prepared by
thermohydrolysis of TiCl
4
 in aqueous chloride solutions. 
Colloids and
Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects,
 317, 366–376, 2008.
18. C.G. Silva, and J.L. Faria, Anatase vs. rutile efficiency on the
photocatalytic degradation of clofibric acid under near UV to visible
irradiation. 
Photochemical & Photobiological Sciences,
 8, 705–711, 2009.
19. B.F. Machado, Novel Catalytic Systems for the Selective Hydrogenation
of alpha-beta Unsaturated Aldehydes, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Porto,
2009.
20. H.T. Gomes, B.F. Machado, A.M.T. Silva, G. Drazic, and J.L. Faria,
Photodeposition of Pt nanoparticles on TiO
2
-carbon xerogel composites
.
Materials Letters,
 65, 966–969, 2011.
21. A.M.T. Silva, N.R. Zilhão, R.A. Segundo, M. Azenha, F. Fidalgo, A.F.
Silva, J.L. Faria, and J. Teixeira, Photo-Fenton plus Solanum nigrum L. weed
plants integrated process for the abatement of highly concentrated metalaxyl
on waste waters. 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 184, 213–220, 2012.
22. M. Landmann, E. Rauls, and W.G. Schmidt, The electronic structure and
optical response of rutile, anatase and brookite TiO
2
. 
Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter,
 24, 195503–195506, 2012.
23. B.Z. Tian, J.L. Zhang, T.Z. Tong, and F. Chen, Preparation of Au/TiO
2
catalysts from Au(I)-thiosulfate complex and study of their photocatalytic
activity for the degradation of methyl orange. 
Applied Catalysis B:
Environmental,
 79, 394–401, 2008.
24. M.A. Centeno, M.C. Hidalgo, M.I. Dominguez, J.A. Navio, and J.A.
Odriozola, Titania-supported gold catalysts: Comparison between the
photochemical phenol oxidation and gaseous CO oxidation performances.
Catalysis Letters,
 123, 198–206, 2008.
25. H.F. Lu, Y. Zhou, B.Q. Xu, Y.F. Chen, and H.Z. Liu, Effect of gold
doping on the photocatalytic activity of the anatase TiO
2
. 
Acta Physico-
Chimica Sinica,
 24, 459–464, 2008.
26. T. Suprabha, H.G. Roy, and S. Mathew, Gold Loaded Titania
Nanostructures-Synthesis, Characterization and Morphology Dependence onPhotocatalysis. 
Science of Advanced Materials,
 2, 107–114, 2010.
27. D. Yang, and S.-W. Lee, Pohotocatalytic activity of Ag, Au-deposited
TiO
2
 nanoparticles prepared by sonochemical reduction method
. Surface
Review and Letters,
 17, 21–26, 2010.
28. X. Wang, and R.A. Caruso, Enhancing photocatalytic activity of titania
materials by using porous structures and the addition of gold nanoparticles.
Journal of Materials Chemistry,
 21, 20–28, 2011.
29. A. Primo, A. Corma, and H. Garcia, Titania supported gold nanoparticles
as photocatalyst. 
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics,
 13, 886–910, 2011.
30. J.T. Carneiro, T.J. Savenije, J.A. Moulijn, and G. Mul, The effect of Au
on TiO
2
 catalyzed selective photocatalytic oxidation of cyclohexane
. Journal
of Photochemistry and Photobiology A-Chemistry,
 217, 326–332, 2011.
31. S. Chusaksri, J. Lomda, T. Saleepochn, and P. Sutthivaiyakit,
Photocatalytic degradation of 3,4-dichlorophenylurea in aqueous gold
nanoparticles-modified titanium dioxide suspension under simulated solar
light. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 190, 930–937, 2011.
32. P. Fu, and P. Zhang, Enhanced photoelectrochemical properties and
photocatalytic activity of porous TiO
2
 films with highly dispersed small Au
nanoparticles. 
Thin Solid Films,
 519, 3480–3486, 2011.
33. M.C. Hidalgo, J.J. Murcia, J.A. Navio, and G. Colon, Photodeposition of
gold on titanium dioxide for photocatalytic phenol oxidation. 
Applied
Catalysis A: General,
 397, 112–120, 2011.
34. S. Oros-Ruiz, J.A. Pedraza-Avella, C. Guzman, M. Quintana, E.
Moctezuma, G. del Angel, R. Gomez, and E. Perez, Effect of Gold Particle
Size and Deposition Method on the Photodegradation of 4-Chlorophenol by
Au/TiO
2
. 
Topics in Catalysis,
 54, 519–526, 2011.
35. N. Wang, T. Tachikawa, and T. Majima, Single-molecule, single-particle
observation of size-dependent photocatalytic activity in Au/TiO
2
nanocomposites. 
Chemical Science,
 2, 891–900, 2011.
36. S.A.C. Carabineiro, A.M.T. Silva, C.G. Silva, R.A. Segundo, G. Dražić,
J.L. Figueiredo, and J.L. Faria, Titanium dioxide nanoparticle based materials
for photocatalytic conversion of water pollutants, in A.K. Mishra (Ed.) inNanocomposites for Waste Water Treatment
, Pan Stanford Publishing,
Singapore, pp. 247–269, 2014.
37. C.G. Silva, S.A.C. Carabineiro, M.J. Lima, G. Dražić, J.L. Figueiredo,
and J.L. Faria, Titanium dioxide-based photocatalysts for the conversion of
water pollutants, in J. Brown (Ed.) 
Titanium Dioxide: Chemical Properties,
Applications and Environmental Effects,
 Nova Science Pub Inc., New York,
pp. 49–64, 2014.
38. C.G. Silva, and J.L. Faria, Photocatalytic oxidation of benzene derivatives
in aqueous suspensions: Synergic effect induced by the introduction of
carbon nanotubes in a TiO
2
 matrix. 
Applied Catalysis B: Environmental,
 101,
81–89, 2010.
39. C.G. Silva, and J.L. Faria, Photocatalytic Oxidation of Phenolic
Compounds by Using a Carbon Nanotube-Titanium Dioxide Composite
Catalyst. 
ChemSusChem,
 3, 609–618, 2010.
40. C.G. Silva, W.D. Wang, and J.L. Faria, Nanocrystalline CNT-TiO
2
Composites Produced by an Acid Catalyzed Sol-gel Method, in A.T.
Marques, A.F. Silva, A.P.M. Baptista, C. Sa, F. Alves, L.F. Malheiros, and
M. Vieira (Eds.) 
Advanced Materials Forum Iv,
 Trans Tech Publications Ltd,
Stafa-Zurich, pp. 849–853, 2008.
41. W.D. Wang, P. Serp, P. Kalck, C.G. Silva, and J.L. Faria, Preparation and
characterization of nanostructured MWCNT-TiO
2
 composite materials for
photocatalytic water treatment applications. 
Mater. Res. Bull.,
 43, 958–967,
2008.
42. W.D. Wang, C.G. Silva, and J.L. Faria, Photocatalytic degradation of
Chromotrope 2R using nanocrystalline TiO
2
/activated-carbon composite
catalysts
. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental,
 70, 470–478, 2007.
43. S.M. Miranda, G.E. Romanos, V. Likodimos, R.R.N. Marques, E.P.
Favvas, F. K. Katsaros, K.L. Stefanopoulos, V.J.P. Vilar, J.L. Faria, P.
Falaras, and A.M.T. Silva, Pore structure, interface properties and
photocatalytic efficiency of hydration/dehydration derived TiO
2
/CNT
composites
. Applied Catalysis B-Environmental,
 147, 65–81, 2014.
44. S. Morales-Torres, L.M. Pastrana-Martinez, J.L. Figueiredo, J.L. Faria,
and A.M.T. Silva, Graphene oxide-P25 photocatalysts for degradation ofdiphenhydramine pharmaceutical and methyl orange dye
. Applied Surface
Science,
 275, 361–368, 2013.
45. L.M. Pastrana-Martinez, S. Morales-Torres, S.A.C. Carabineiro, J.G.
Buijnsters, J.L. Faria, J.L. Figueiredo, and A.M.T. Silva, Nanodiamond-TiO
2
Composites for Heterogeneous Photocatalysis. 
Chempluschem,
 78, 801–807,
2013.
46. L.M. Pastrana-Martinez, S. Morales-Torres, V. Likodimos, P. Falaras,
J.L. Figueiredo, J.L. Faria, and A.M.T. Silva, Role of oxygen functionalities
on the synthesis of photocatalytically active graphene-TiO
2
 composites.
Applied Catalysis B: Environmental,
 158, 329–340, 2014.
47. L.M. Pastrana-Martinez, S. Morales-Torres, S.K. Papageorgiou, F.K.
Katsaros, G. E. Romanos, J.L. Figueiredo, J.L. Faria, P. Falaras, and A.M.T.
Silva, Photocatalytic behaviour of nanocarbon-TiO
2
 composites and
immobilization into hollow fibres. 
Applied Catalysis B: Environmental,
 142,
101–111, 2013.
48. M.J. Sampaio, C.G. Silva, A.M.T. Silva, L.M. Pastrana-Martinez, C. Han,
S. Morales-Torres, J.L. Figueiredo, D.D. Dionysiou, and J.L. Faria, Carbon-
based TiO
2
 materials for the degradation of Microcystin-LA. 
Applied
Catalysis B: Environmental,
 170, 74–82, 2015.
49. S. Morales-Torres, L.M. Pastrana-Martínez, J.L. Figueiredo, J.L. Faria,
and A.M.T. Silva, Design of graphene-based TiO
2
 photocatalysts–A review.
Environmental Science and Pollution Research,
 19, 3676–3687, 2012.
50. L.M. Pastrana-Martínez, J.L. Faria, J.M. Doña-Rodríguez, C. Fernández-
Rodríguez, and A.M.T. Silva, Degradation of diphenhydramine
pharmaceutical in aqueous solutions by using two highly active TiO
2
photocatalysts: Operating parameters and photocatalytic mechanism
. Applied
Catalysis B: Environmental,
 113–114, 221–227, 2012.
51. C.A. Kinney, E.T. Furlong, S.L. Werner, and J.D. Cahill, Presence and
distribution of wastewater-derived pharmaceuticals in soil irrigated with
reclaimed water. 
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry Letters,
 25, 317–
326, 2006.
52. W.S. Hummers, and R.E. Offeman, Preparation of Graphitic Oxide.
Journal of the American Chemical Society,
 80, 1339–1339, 1958.53. S. Stankovich, D.A. Dikin, R.D. Piner, K.A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes,
Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S.T. Nguyen, and R.S. Ruoff, Synthesis of graphene-based
nanosheets via chemical reduction of exfoliated graphite oxide. 
Carbon,
 45,
1558–1565, 2007.
54. L.M. Pastrana-Martinez, S. Morales-Torres, V. Likodimos, J.L.
Figueiredo, J.L. Faria, P. Falaras, and A.M.T. Silva, Advanced
nanostructured photocatalysts based on reduced graphene oxide-TiO
2
composites for degradation of diphenhydramine pharmaceutical and methyl
orange dye
. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental,
 123, 241–256, 2012.
55. C. Moreno-Castilla, M.A. Ferro-Garcia, J.P. Joly, I. Bautista-Toledo, F.
Carrasco-Marin, and J. Rivera-Utrilla, Activated Carbon Surface
Modifications by Nitric Acid, Hydrogen Peroxide, and Ammonium
Peroxydisulfate Treatments
. Langmuir,
 11, 4386–4392, 1995.
56. A.M. Schrand, S.A.C. Hens, and O.A. Shenderova, Nanodiamond
Particles: Properties and Perspectives for Bioapplications
. Critical Reviews in
Solid State and Materials Sciences,
 34, 18–74, 2009.
57. S. Osswald, G. Yushin, V. Mochalin, S.O. Kucheyev, and Y. Gogotsi,
Control of sp
2
/sp
3
 Carbon Ratio and Surface Chemistry of Nanodiamond
Powders by Selective Oxidation in Air
. Journal of the American Chemical
Society,
 128, 11635–11642, 2006.
58. O. Shenderova, A. Koscheev, N. Zaripov, I. Petrov, Y. Skryabin, P.
Detkov, S. Turner, and G. Van Tendeloo, Surface Chemistry and Properties
of Ozone-Purified Detonation Nanodiamonds. 
The Journal of Physical
Chemistry C,
 115, 9827–9837, 2011.
59. M.J. Sampaio, L.M. Pastrana-Martínez, A.M.T. Silva, J.G. Buijnsters, C.
Han, C.G. Silva, S.A.C Carabineiro, D.D. Dionysiou, J.L. Faria,
Nanodiamond-TiO2 composites for photocatalytic degradation of
microcystin-LA in aqueous solutions under simulated solar light, 
RSC
Advances,
 5, 58363–58370, 2015.
60. S.A.C. Carabineiro, N. Bogdanchikova, M. Avalos-Borja, A. Pestryakov,
P.B. Tavares, and J.L. Figueiredo, Gold Supported on Metal Oxides for
Carbon Monoxide Oxidation. 
Nano Research,
 4, 180–193, 2011.
61. S.A.C. Carabineiro, N. Bogdanchikova, A. Pestryakov, P.B. Tavares,L.S.G. Fernandes, and J.L. Figueiredo, Gold nanoparticles supported on
magnesium oxide for CO oxidation. 
Nanoscale Research Letters,
 6 (2011).
62. S.A.C. Carabineiro, N. Bogdanchikova, P.B. Tavares, and J.L.
Figueiredo, Nanostructured iron oxide catalysts with gold for the oxidation of
carbon monoxide. 
Rsc Advances,
 2, 2957–2965, 2012.
63. S.A.C. Carabineiro, A.M.T. Silva, G. Drazic, P.B. Tavares, and J.L.
Figueiredo, Effect of chloride on the sinterization of Au/CeO
2
 catalysts.
Catalysis Today,
 154, 293–302, 2010.
64. V.P. Santos, S.A.C. Carabineiro, P.B. Tavares, M.F.R. Pereira, J.J.M.
Orfao, and J.L. Figueiredo, Oxidation of CO, ethanol and toluene over TiO
2
supported noble metal catalysts, 
Applied Catalysis B: Environmental,
 99,
198–205, 2010.
65. M.A. Soria, P. Perez, S.A.C. Carabineiro, F.J. Maldonado-Hodar, A.
Mendes, and L.M. Madeira, Effect of the preparation method on the catalytic
activity and stability of Au/Fe
2
O
3
 catalysts in the low-temperature water-gas
shift reaction
. Applied Catalysis A: General,
 470, 45–55, 2014.
66. S.A.C. Carabineiro, and D.T. Thompson, Catalytic Applications for Gold
Nanotechnology, In: E.U. Heiz, and U. Landman (Eds.), 
Nanocatalysis,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, pp. 377–489, 2007.
67. S.A.C. Carabineiro, and D.T. Thompson, Gold Catalysis, in: C. Corti, and
R. Holliday (Eds.) 
Gold: Science and Applications,
 CRC Press, Taylor and
Francis Group, Boca Raton, London, New York, pp. 89–122, 2010.
68. S. Brunauer, P.H. Emmett, and E. Teller, Adsorption of Gases in
Multimolecular Layers
. Journal of the American Chemical Society,
 60, 309–
319, 1938.
69. M.J. Sampaio, C.G. Silva, R.R.N. Marques, A.M.T. Silva, and J.L. Faria,
Carbon nanotube-TiO
2
 thin films for photocatalytic applications, 
Catalysis
Today,
 161, 91–96, 2011.
70. A.J. Maira, J.M. Coronado, V. Augugliaro, K.L. Yeung, J.C. Conesa, and
J. Soria, Fourier Transform Infrared Study of the Performance of
Nanostructured TiO
2
 Particles for the Photocatalytic Oxidation of Gaseous
Toluene
. Journal of Catalysis,
 202, 413–420, 2001.71. G. Martra, Lewis acid and base sites at the surface of microcrystalline
TiO
2
 anatase: Relationships between surface morphology and chemical
behaviour
. Applied Catalysis A: General,
 200, 275–285, 2000.
72. R. Yudianti, H. Onggo, Sudirman, Y. Saito, T. Iwata, and J. Azuma,
Analysis of Functional Group Sited on Multi-Wall Carbon Nanotube Surface.
The Open Materials Science Journal,
 5, 242–247, 2011.
73. C.G. Silva, M.J. Sampaio, S.A.C. Carabineiro, J.W.L. Oliveira, D.L.
Baptista, R. Bacsa, B.F. Machado, P. Serp, J.L. Figueiredo, A.M.T. Silva,
and J.L. Faria, Developing highly active photocatalysts: Gold-loaded ZnO for
solar phenol oxidation. 
Journal of Catalysis,
 316, 182–190, 2014.
74. E. Kowalska, O.O.P. Mahaney, R. Abe, and B. Ohtani, Visible-light-
induced photocatalysis through surface plasmon excitation of gold on titania
surfaces. 
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics,
 12, 2344–2355, 2010.
75. C. Gomes Silva, R. Juárez, T. Marino, R. Molinari, and H. García,
Influence of Excitation Wavelength (UV or Visible Light) on the Photo
catalytic Activity of Titania Containing Gold Nanoparticles for the
Generation of Hydrogen or Oxygen from Water. 
Journal of the American
Chemical Society,
 133, 595–602, 2011.Chapter 4
Carbon Nanomaterials for Chromium
(VI) Removal from Aqueous Solution
Pavel Kopel
1
,
2
, Vedran Milosavljevic
1
, Dorota Wawrzak
3
,
Amitava Moulick
2
, Marketa Vaculovicova
1
,
2
, Rene Kizek
1
,
2
,
and Vojtech Adam
1
,
2
*
1
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Mendel University in Brno,
Czech Republic
2
Central European Institute of Technology, Brno University of Technology,
Technicka, Czech Republic
3
Institute of Chemistry, Environmental Protection and Biotechnology, Jan
Dlugosz University of Czestochowa, Czestochowa, Poland
*
Corresponding author:
 
vojtech.adam@mendelu.cz
Abstract
The groundwater contamination due to heavy metals requires the
development of sustainable remediation technologies and methods for their
removal from environment. Chromium salts are widely used in metallurgy,
tanning and paint and dye making, but their manufacture results in large
amounts of slag which, if not processed, can form carcinogenic chromium
(VI). Groundwater contamination may occur due to seepage from chromate
mines or improper disposal of mining tools and supplies and improper
disposal of industrial manufacturing equipment. The problem with chromium
contamination occurs in countries like China, India and South Africa.Nanosized carbon materials have perfect mechanical, chemical and
electrochemical properties. Graphene and graphene oxide (GO) belong to the
most intensively explored carbon allotropes in materials science. Two-
dimensional layer of sp
2
-bonded carbon atoms and high specific surface area
are very promising for chromium adsorption. GO is even more suitable for
adsorption due to the presence of several functional groups on its surface
depending on the method of preparation.
In this chapter, we describe recent progress in utilization of graphene, GO
and their composites in water treatment. The most promising materials, which
can be used in remediation of chromium, seem to be composites based on
graphene and magnetic iron oxides. Recent progress in the development of
GO reduced with nitrogen containing ligands is also discussed as the
composites adsorbs high amount of chromium. For example, amine-
functionalized Fe
3
O
4
 microspheres–GO composite shows a maximum
adsorption capacity of 32.33 mg g
–1
 for Cr(VI).
Keywords:
 Carbon nanomaterials, chromium (VI), graphene, carbon
nanotubes
4.1 Introduction
Activated carbon adsorbents are found to be extensively used to remove
heavy-metal contaminants. Its large micropore and mesopore volumes and
the resulting high surface area made them very useful in this case. Different
researches are focussing to explore the usefulness of activated carbon in
removing heavy metals [1, 2]. Currently, the price of the commercial coal-
based activated carbon is increasing due to their depleted source, and in this
case, additives and activated carbon composite could be an option. Different
researchers showed that the additives of magnesium [3], alginate [4], tannic
acid [5], surfactants [6] and activated carbon composite could be significant
adsorbents for heavy metals.
The searching of good alternative activated carbon from abundant and
inexpensive sources is of great interest in the field heavy-metals remediation.
Many researchers have already reported that the carbonaceous materials canbe converted into activated carbon to remove heavy metals [7]. Kongsuwan
et al.
 [8] described the usage of activated carbon from eucalyptus bark in the
binary component sorption of Cu
2+
 and Pb
2+
. It has been shown that the
maximum sorption capacities for Pb
2+
 and Cu
2+
 were 0.53 and 0.45
mmol/g, respectively. It was proved that the major mechanism for the uptake
of both the heavy metals was the adsorption. Guo 
et al.
 [9]showed the
application of poultry litter as a precursor material to produce activated
carbon to treat heavy metal-contaminated water in a value-added strategy for
recycling the organic waste. They discovered that the poultry litter-based
activated carbon possessed potentially higher adsorption affinity and capacity
for heavy metals than commercial activated carbon derived from bituminous
coal and coconut shell [9].
Chromium exists in two main oxidation states in the environment, Cr(VI)
and Cr(III). Compared to Cr(III), Cr(VI) is more toxic due to its carcinogenic
and mutagenic effects for living organisms [10]. Currently, the chemical
treatment techniques for the Cr(VI) removal usually involve the reduction of
Cr(VI) to the less mobile and less toxic Cr(III) species using chemical
reagents. Cr(III) is then removed through precipitation by the adjustment of
solution pH to near-neutral condition [11–13]. Therefore, there is an
increasing demand for preparing new adsorbents with easy separation, large
surface area and high removal efficiency.
In recent years, many researchers focussed on preparation of materials
based on carbon nanoparticles, mainly graphene, graphene oxide (GO) and
carbon nanotubes (CNTs). That is why, the removal of Cr(VI) by these
carbon nanomaterials is the main topic of this chapter.
4.2 Carbon Nanomaterials for
Heavy Metal Removal
Researchers have reported different types of nanomaterials to remove heavy
metals from water or wastewater such as nanosorbents including CNTs,
graphene, GO (
Figure 4.1
), zeolites and dendrimers. These nanomaterials
show exceptional adsorption properties [14]. Among these nanomaterials,CNTs are very significant in adsorption of different metal pollutants such as
chromium [15], cadmium [16], lead [17], copper [18], nickel [19] and zinc
[20] and metalloids such as arsenic (As) compounds [21]. Some researchers
showed that the composites of CNTs with Fe and cerium oxide (CeO
2
) can
also remove heavy metal ions [12, 22, 23]. Di 
et al.
 [15] reported that cerium
oxide nanoparticles supported on CNTs can be used to remove As. CNTs
show fast adsorption kinetics, which is mainly due to the highly accessible
adsorption sites and the short intraparticle diffusion distance [24].
Figure 4.1
 The carbon-based materials for Cr(VI) remediation—single-wall
nanotubes (SWNT), multi-wall nanotubes (MWNT), graphene, GO and
activated carbon.
CNTs can be considered as very good candidates for adsorption kinetics
study because of their large specific surface area and the high thermal and
chemical stabilities, which is related to their easy large-scale synthesis [25]. It
has been found that the adsorption capacity of CNTs is much higher than that
of the activated carbon due to the high surface area, which helps in the strong
interaction between CNTs and dioxins [26].
The metal ions are sorbed onto CNTs using a very complicated mechanism
possibly involving electrostatic attraction, sorption–precipitation and
chemical interaction between the metal ions and the surface functional groups
of CNTs [24]. Raw CNTs show very low sorption capacities for the metal
ions, whereas oxidized CNTs (by HNO
3
, NaClO and KMnO
4
 solutions) can
show significantly higher sorption. The sorption capacities of metal ions by
raw CNTs are very low but significantly increase after oxidation. Wang 
et al.
[27] showed that MWNTs can adsorb Pb(II) after acidification, and they
found the oxygenous functional groups on MWNTs play an important role in
Pb(II) adsorption to form chemical complex adsorption.
In a separate study, Wang 
et al.
 [28] showed that the role of functional
groups in the adsorption of Pb
2+
 to create a chemical complex was critical
for efficient adsorption. MWNTs can adsorb lead in the form of PbO,
Pb(OH)
2
 and PbCO
3
. Result showed that the MWNTs can adsorb Pb
2+
species on their ends and at defective sites. Mn oxide–coated CNTs
(MnO
2
/CNTs) can also be used to remove Pb
2+
 from aqueous solution.
Wang 
et al.
 [29] showed that the removal capacity of MnO
2
/CNTs was
decreased with decreasing pH. The adsorption of lead ions started during the
first 15 min of contact with MnO
2
/CNTs, and full equilibrium was reached in
2 h.
Zinc can be considered as a common heavy metal contaminant in
wastewater. Zn ion can interact with neutral or ionic compounds of water to
form different compounds including inorganic salts, stable organic complexes
or inorganic or organic colloids. The adsorption of Zn by CNTs depends on
pH. Lu and Chiu [20] showed that this adsorption was increasing with
increasing pH and maximum was between pH of 8 and 11, whereas at pH 12
the adsorption was found to be decreased. The time taken for the adsorptionto reach the equilibrium for the CNTs (1 h) was shorter than that of powdered
activated carbon (2 h). The adsorption of Zn can also depend on the rising
temperature [30]. Through thermodynamic analysis, it has been found that
the sorption of Zn
2+
 onto the CNTs is endothermic and spontaneous. Results
showed that 0.1 mol/L nitric acid solution can be used to remove Zn
2+
 ions
easily from the surface site of the CNTs, and the sorption capacity was
maintained after 10 cycles of the sorption/desorption process. All these data
suggest that both the SWNTs and MWNTs can be reused through many
cycles of water treatment and regeneration.
Yang 
et al.
 [31] reported that the adsorption capacity of MWNTs increases
with increasing pH and the capacity can be 0–99% in the pH range of 2–9.
The experiment showed that oxidized MWNTs were the most suitable
material for the solidification and pre-concentration of Ni
2+
 from aqueous
solutions. Based on different experiment, it can be concluded that the CNTs
are the most effective nickel ion absorbent based on the high adsorption
capacity as well as the short adsorption time [19].
The graphene honeycomb lattice is composed of two equivalent sublattices
of carbon atoms bonded together with σ bonds. Each carbon atom in the
lattice has a π orbital that contributes to a delocalized network of electrons.
Graphene possess 1D structure, and monolayer or few layer graphene is
known. Graphene preparation by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth
on epitaxially matched metal surfaces was first reported by May [66] and
appeared term monolayer of graphite. Large-area monolayer or multilayer
graphene was prepared on copper by deposition of carbon [32–34]. GO is
also planar, but there are also oxygen atoms involved in the structure. GO is
mostly prepared by the Hummers method [35]. It involves oxidation of
graphite with potassium permanganate and sulphuric acid. Graphite salts
made by intercalating graphite with strong acids such as sulphuric acid, nitric
acid or perchlorate acid have also been used as precursors for the subsequent
oxidation to GO [36]. Both, graphene and GO have very large surface area
that can be used for a wide range of applications including adsorption of
metal ions. Oxygen atoms in the structure of GO can be used for
modifications of the surface and thus improve binding capacity of modified
or reduced GO.4.3 Latest Progress in Nanocarbon
Materials for Cr(VI) Treatment
4.3.1 Graphene and Graphene Oxide–Based
Materials
Ma 
et al.
 [37] reported preparation of ethylenediamine (EN)-reduced GO
(RGO) sheets by simple refluxing of GO solution with EN, which effectively
reduced toxic Cr(VI) to less toxic Cr(III) by an indirect reduction mechanism
with the assistance of π electrons on the carbocyclic six-membered ring of
EN-RGO [37].
A polyethyleneimine (PEI) and GO composite adsorbent through an
amidation reaction between the amine groups of the PEI and the carboxyl
groups of the GO was prepared. The prepared PEI-GO exhibited very high
uptake capacity of 539.53 mg g
–1
. The adsorption process was fast; within
the first 1 h, Cr(VI) ion adsorption onto the PEI-GO was about 71%, and the
adsorption equilibrium could be obtained within 14 h. The removal
mechanism of Cr(VI) from the solution consists of two steps: (1) Cr(VI) bind
to the PEI-GO composite by electrostatic interaction between the negatively
charged Cr(VI) and the protonated amine groups of the PEI-GO, and (2) a
few Cr(VI) were reduced to Cr(III) with the assistance of π electrons on the
carbocyclic six-membered ring of the PEI-GO and then bind by the
electrostatic interaction between Cr(III) and negatively charged carboxylate
groups [38].
Kumar 
et al.
 reported an interesting interaction between exfoliated GO
(EGO), ionic liquid (IL) Aliquat-336 and Cr(VI). GO was impregnated with
the IL, and the interaction primarily involves electrostatic affinity between
the quaternary ammonium cation and surface hydroxyl groups in EGO. The
IL-EGO adsorbent acts by cation-π, electrostatic as well as anion-π
interactions. A high Langmuir adsorption capacity of 285.71 mg g
–1
 is
augmented by the thermodynamically favourable adsorption process.
Moreover, the regeneration of the adsorbent could be accomplished withammonium hydroxide, and the potential of this adsorbent material has been
examined in the total removal of Cr(VI) from a tannery effluent sample [39].
Reduced GO decorated with TiO
2
 nanoparticles (TiO
2
-RGO) was
synthesized. Photo-reduction and removal of Cr(VI) from an aqueous
solution using the material were investigated under visible light irradiation.
Compared to pure TiO
2
, the TiO
2
-RGO exhibited an improved
photocatalytic performance in the reduction of Cr(VI) under visible light
irradiation, with a maximum removal of 86.5% versus 54.2% due to the
increased light absorption intensity and wavelength range. The adsorption
and photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI) decreased with increasing pH, due to
the decrease in the electrostatic interaction between Cr(VI) and TiO
2
-RGO
[40].
The interaction between EGO, trioctylamine (TOA) and Cr(VI) is reported
by Kumar 
et al.
 Trioctylamine in acetone was impregnated onto EGO, and
Cr(VI) was adsorbed on the surface at pH 2.5 through cation-π, lone pair-π
and electrostatic interactions. Characterization of the adsorbent was done
using FT-IR, SEM, EDAX and XRD studies. An adsorption capacity of
232.55 mg g
–1
 could be reached. Regeneration of the adsorbent was
accomplished using ammonium hydroxide [41].
Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide was chosen to modify graphene
prepared by modified Hummers’ method. The effect factors including pH,
contact time, temperature, and dosage on the adsorption properties of Cr(VI)
onto graphene and modified graphene were investigated. The results revealed
that the optimal pH for the adsorption was about 2, and the best suitable
temperature was at 293 K. The adsorption processes were rapid within the
first 5 min and reached equilibrium in about 40 min. The adsorption capacity
of Cr(VI) was 21.57 mg g
–1
 at 293 K [42].
Chemically reduced and functionalized GO was prepared by refluxing of
GO with EN using DMF as solvent. It was confirmed that both EN and DMF
contributed to the reduction and functionalization of GO. The resulting
adsorbent (EN-DMF-RGO) with amine groups was highly efficient in
removing Cr(VI) from its aqueous solution and could be easily separated by
filtration. The optimum pH for total Cr removal was observed at pH 2.0, and
the Cr(VI) removal capacity of EN-DMF-RGO at this pH was 92.15 mg g
–1
,which was about 27 times higher than that of activated carbon, even nearly
4–8 times higher than that of various modified activated carbons.
Interestingly, Cr(VI) was reduced to Cr(III) during the adsorption process
[43].
Nanocomposite of polyaniline (PANI) nanorods array on GO nanosheets
was obtained by polymerization under –20 °C. The composite exhibits
excellent water treatment performance with a removal capacity of 1149.4 mg
g
–1
 for Cr(VI) [44].
Li 
et al.
 reported synthesis of polypyrrole PPy/GO composite nanosheets.
During the polymerization of pyrrole on surface of GO nanosheets, MnO
2
was consumed. As a result, the PPy on the surface of GO nanosheets has the
morphology just like the MnO
2
 nanoslices. The as-prepared PPy/GO
composite nanosheets exhibited enhanced properties for Cr(VI) removal in
aqueous solution based on the synergy effect. The adsorption capacity of the
PPy/GO composite nanosheets is about two times as large as that of
conventional PPy nanoparticles [45].
Graphene/MgAl-layered double hydroxides (G-MgAl-LDH)
nanocomposite was prepared by urea-hydrolyzed hydrothermal reaction of
Al(NO
3
)
3
, Mg(NO
3
)
2
 and GO. The role of urea is reduction of GO and
induction of the nucleation of LDH crystallites on the nanosheets of
graphene. Both LDH and graphene layers were exfoliated in the
nanocomposite. The calcined G-MgAl-LDH was easily prepared by heating
G-MgAl-LDH at higher temperature and used as a potential nanoadsorbent to
remove Cr(VI) from the aqueous solution. Compared to virgin MgAl-LDH,
calcined G-MgAl-LDH exhibited higher adsorption efficiency with lower
dosage in removing Cr(VI) from aqueous solution. Maximum adsorption
capacity of approximately 172.55 mg g
–1
 with 1.0 g/L dosage of calcined G-
MgAl-LDH was achieved [46].
4.3.2 Magnetic-Based Graphene Materials
Magnetic graphene was prepared by microwave irradiation of GO and
ferrocene precursors. This superparamagnetic material was utilized for the
adsorption and magnetic separation of aqueous Cr(VI), As(V) and Pb(II) withsimilar to 99% removal efficiencies down to the 1 ppb level. The X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of magnetic graphene Cr(VI)
reveals the reduction of Cr(VI) to Cr(III), presumably due to the surface
phenolic groups and unprotected ferrous ions on the surface. The maximum
adsorption capacity is 4.86 mg g
–1
 for Cr(VI) at an initial concentration of
5.0 ppm [47].
A one-step solvothermal method was developed to prepare nearly cubic
ZnFe
2
O
4
 nanoparticles loaded on 1,6-hexanediamine-functionalized reduced
GO (HDA-RGO-ZnFe
2
O
4
) for fast removal of Cr(VI). Experimental results
indicated that Cr(VI) adsorption by HDA-RGO-ZnFe
2
O
4
 is strongly pH
dependent, and the adsorption equilibrium could be reached within 12 min.
The Langmuir isotherm model is consistent with the experimental data at
different temperatures and the maximum adsorption capacity was determined
to be 172.4 mg g
–1
. After adsorption, the HDA-RGO-ZnFe
2
O
4
 could be
quickly separated from the media by an external magnetic field and the
adsorption capacity can remain up to 82% after five times of usage [48].
Nanoscale iron particles decorated graphene sheets synthesized via sodium
borohydride reduction of GO, showed enhanced magnetic property, surface
area and Cr(VI) adsorption capacity compared to bare iron nanoparticles [49].
A magnetic β-cyclodextrin/GO nanocomposite (MCDGO) was prepared by
Fan 
et al.
 [50]. The MCDGO demonstrates extremely fast Cr removal from
wastewater with high removal efficiency within 60 min. The Cr removal
capability is more than 120 mg g
–1
 [50].
β-Cyclodextrin (CD) polymer adsorbent β-
cyclodextrin/ethylenediamine/magnetic GO (CD-EN-MGO) was synthesized
by Wang 
et al.
 The results indicated that CD-EN-MGO could effectively
remove Cr(VI) from aqueous solution and the sorption data could be well
described by the Langmuir model [51].
A composite of porous Fe
3
O
4
 microspheres modified by 3-
aminopropyltrimethoxysilane/GO (Fe
3
O
4
/GO) has been fabricated through a
facile self-assembly approach (see 
Figure 4.2
). The maximum sorption
capacity for Cr(VI) was 32.33 mg g
–1
, which was much higher than that ofFe
3
O
4
 microspheres. The GO sheets prevent agglomeration of the Fe
3
O
4
microspheres and enable a good dispersion and enhance the specific surface
area of the composite [52].
Figure 4.2
 Preparation and adsorption of Cr(VI) on composite based on iron
oxide-GO. Both the physical as well as chemical adsorption is operative, and
product of Cr(VI) adsorption can be easily removed from the solution by
external magnetic field.A facile thermodecomposition process to synthesize magnetic graphene
nanocomposites (MGNCs) is reported by Zhu 
et al.
 [53]. The MGNCs
demonstrate an extremely fast Cr(VI) removal from the wastewater with a
high removal efficiency and with an almost complete removal of Cr(VI)
within 5 min. The recycling process of both the MGNC adsorbents, and the
adsorbed Cr(VI) is more energetically and economically sustainable [53].Li 
et al.
 [16] synthesized magnetic cyclodextrin-chitosan/GO (CCGO). The
advantage of the composite is high surface area, hydroxyl and amino groups
of CCGO, and the magnetic property of Fe
3
O
4
. The novel adsorbent
exhibited the best Cr(VI) removal efficiency in solutions with low pH [16].
4.3.3 MWNT and SWNT
Jung 
et al.
 investigated adsorption of Cr(VI) on powered activated carbon
(PAC), chitosan (CS), SWNTs and MWNTs. PAC and CS provided the best
removal performance. The highly functionalized and porous PAC and the
protonated amines on CS enabled a better performance and resulted in high
Cr(VI) removal efficiencies of 99.4% and 94.7%, respectively, while the
removal efficiencies of SWNTs and MWNTs were 72.9% and 51.9%,
respectively. The monolayer adsorption was the main process operating with
an adsorption capacity of 46.9, 35.6, 20.3 and 2.48 mg g
–1
 for PAC, CS,
SWNTs and MWNTs, respectively. Both physisorption and chemisorption
were dominant, particularly for SWNTs. Anions such as Cl
−
 and SO
4
2–
 in
the solution competed with HCrO
4
−
, and this phenomenon resulted in
negative effects on Cr(VI) adsorption [54].
The interactions between MWNT and Cr(VI) in solutions of different pH
were investigated. Results revealed that MWNTs could be used for complete
Cr(VI) removal through the reduction of Cr(VI) to Cr(III) in the polluted
water with an initial Cr(VI) concentration ranging from 200 to 1000 μg L
–1
during half an hour treatment in a pH = 1.0 solution. The carboxyl and ether
functional groups were found on the MWNT surface after 5–30 min Cr(VI)
treatment [55].
Dodecyl benzene sulfonic acid (DBSA)-doped polyaniline/MWNT
(DP/MWNTs) nanocomposite was prepared by 
in situ
 oxidative
polymerization. The maximum monolayer adsorption capacity was found to
be 55.55 mg g
–1
. The desorption of Cr(VI) was found to increase with the
increase of pH and temperature [56].
Mubarak 
et al.
 [57] studied the adsorption capacity of Cr(VI) between
functionalized CNTs and non-functionalized CNTs. The analysis reveals thatthe optimum conditions for the highest removal of Cr(VI) are at pH 9, with
dosage 0.1 g, agitation speed and time of 120 rpm and 120 min, respectively.
For the initial concentration of 1.0 mg/L, the removal efficiency of Cr(VI)
using functionalized CNTs was 87.6% and 83% of non-functionalized CNTs.
The maximum adsorption capacities of functionalized and non-functionalized
CNTs were 2.517 and 2.49 mg g
–1
, respectively. This result proves that
functionalized CNTs are a better adsorbent with a higher adsorption capacity
compared with the non-functionalized CNTs [57].
The efficacy of a new CS-based functional gel (FG), comprising MWNT-
poly(acrylic acid) (PAA)-poly(4-amino diphenyl amine) (PADPA), was
investigated towards removal of Cr(VI). The new FG (CS-MWNT-PAA-
PADPA/FG) was synthesized by free radical polymerization and cross-
linking reactions. The maximum Cr(VI) adsorption capacity was achieved for
CS-MWNT-PAA-PADPA/FG owing to the synergistic effects from the
individual components. The individual component such as (MWNT, CS,
PAA and PADPA) in CS-MWNT-PAA-PADPA/FG plays a vital role to the
improvement in Cr(VI) adsorption/removal. PADPA provides additional –
NH
2
 sites over CS for Cr(VI) adsorption. The results suggest complexation
interactions between the multiple organic functional groups in FG and Cr(VI)
and transformation of Cr(VI) to Cr(III). Furthermore, the new CS-MWNT-
PAA-PADPA/FG is stable and recyclable, retaining about 85% of the
removal efficiency up to three adsorption cycles [58].
Kumar 
et al.
 report an interesting interaction between oxidized MWNTs,
tetra 
n
-heptylammonium bromide (IL) and total chromium. The interaction
between the IL and oxidized MWNTs primarily involves electrostatic affinity
between the quaternary ammonium cation, and surface carboxyl and
hydroxyl groups in MWNTs. The authors suggest that cation-π interactions,
electrostatic interactions and anion-π interactions are operative. The abundant
oxygen-containing functional groups on the surfaces of MWNTs play an
important role in Cr(VI)/Cr(III) sorption. The inductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) for Cr(VI) adsorption was studied and the
maximum adsorption capacity was found to be 85.83 mg g
–1
 from a
nonlinear Langmuir isotherm model. Effective regeneration of the adsorbent
could be accomplished with sodium hydroxide [59].Poly(
m
-phenylenediamine)-coated Fe
3
O
4
/MWNTs nanoparticles
(PmPD/Fe
3
O
4
/MWNTs) were synthesized by one-step chemical oxidation
polymerization. The materials were characterized by TEM, FTIR, XRD,
magnetometry and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller surface area measurement. The
adsorption isotherm of Cr(VI) onto PmPD/Fe
3
O
4
/MWNTs fitted the
Langmuir isotherm model and the maximum adsorption capacity was 346 mg
g
–1
. The adsorption mechanism included both the physical and the chemical
adsorption mechanisms. After adsorption, the composite can be separated
from the solution by an external magnetic, and the adsorption capacity can
remain at up to 52% after five times of usage [60].
Bayazit 
et al.
 studied Cr(VI) adsorption on magnetically modified MWNT
(M-MWNT) and activated carbon (M-AC). M-MWNT and M-AC were
prepared by co-precipitation method with Fe
2+
 and Fe
3+
 salts as precursors.
The theoretical adsorption capacities are 14.28 mg g
–1
 of M-MWNT and
2.84 mg g
–1
 of M-AC [61].
Luo 
et al.
 reported a simple route for the fabrication of manganese
dioxide/iron oxide/acid oxidized MWNT magnetic nanocomposites
(MnO
2
/Fe
3
O
4
/MWNT). Cr(VI) adsorption is strongly pH dependent, and the
maximum adsorption capacity was determined to be 186.9 mg g
–1
. A contact
time of different initial concentrations was about 150 min to attain adsorption
equilibrium. The adsorption mechanism included both the physical and the
chemical adsorption mechanisms, and adsorption capacity can remain up to
85% after five times of usage [62].
The Fe
3
O
4
/CNT composite was prepared by 
in situ
 reduction with post-
oxidation method. FTIR, Raman, XPS and TEM were employed to
characterize the physical–chemical properties of Fe
3
O
4
/CNT, demonstrating
that CNTs were successfully coated with iron oxide matrix. The adsorption
equilibrium of Cr(VI) on composite was reached within 30 min. The results
indicated that the Langmuir model can well describe the equilibrium data
with the maximum adsorption capacity of 47.98 mg g
–1
 at room temperature
and 83.54 mg g
–1
 at 353 K. The results suggest that large amounts of Cr(VI)
were adsorbed on Fe
3
O
4
/CNT surface by substituting the surface position of–OH and then reducing it to Cr(OH)
3
 and Cr
2
O
3
 [63].
4.3.4 Magnetic Carbon Adsorbents
Qui 
et al.
 report on magnetic carbon-iron nanoadsorbents fabricated by
carbonizing cellulose and magnetic Fe
3
O
4
 nanoparticles. Neutral solution 4.0
mg L
–1
 Cr(VI) was completely purified by 2.5 g L
–1
 of composite within 10
min. Cr(VI) solution 1000 mg L
–1
 at pH 1.0 was completely removed by the
nanoadsorbent in 10 min. The nanoadsorbents have removal percentage
98.1% and 93.5% at pH 7.0 and a removal capacity of 327.5 mg g
–1
 and
293.8 mg g
–1
 at pH 1.0, respectively. These nanoadsorbents could be easily
separated from solution by using a permanent magnet after being treated with
Cr(VI). The removal mechanism was proposed considering the Cr(VI)
reduction and precipitation of Cr(III) [64].
Magnetic carbon nanoadsorbents fabricated by using cellulose and
Fe(NO
3
)
3
 as the carbon and iron precursors have demonstrated great Cr(VI)
removal performance. The magnetic carbon synthesized at a carbonization
temperature of 700 °C has a removal capacity 22.8 mg g
–1
 in neutral
solutions. Moreover, the magnetic carbon fabricated at a carbonization
temperature of 800 °C has the highest Cr(VI) removal capacity 278.8 mg g
–1
in acidic solutions, much higher than those of cellulose 12.0 mg g
–1
 and zero
valent iron/CS (55.8 mg g
–1
) [65].
4.4 Summary
In this chapter, recent research achievements are reviewed on the application
of graphene and MWNT-based materials, which can be utilized in the
environmental protection and waste water treatment. There are many recently
published papers with the topic. In comparison with generally used activated
carbon, these combined nanomaterials are highly promising, and except for
high adsorption capacity, these can have, for example, magnetic properties
for easier removal from waste waters. The prepared composites showphysical as well as chemical adsorption properties and can also reduce Cr(VI)
to less toxic form Cr(III). Moreover, the effective regeneration of the
adsorbent can be accomplished with sodium or ammonium hydroxide.
Generally, for the Cr(VI) adsorption pH around 1 or 2 is the best, and with
pH increase the adsorption decreases. Till now, the best binding capacity for
Cr(VI) was found for a composite PANI-GO (1149.4 mg g
–1
) followed by
PEI-GO (539.5 mg g
–1
) and PmPD/Fe
3
O
4
/ MWNT (346 mg g
–1
). In future,
the materials based on graphene and GO with high surface area and
adsorption capacity combined with polymers and/or nanoparticles seem to be
the more perspective.
Acknowledgement
The financial support by CZ.1.05/2.1.00/03.0072 is highly acknowledged.
References
1. A. Jusoh, L. Su Shiung, N. Ali, and M.J.M.M. Noor, A simulation study of
the removal efficiency of granular activated carbon on cadmium and lead.
Desalination,
 206, 9–16, 2007.
2. K.C. Kang, S.S. Kim, J.W. Choi, and S.H. Kwon, Sorption of Cu
2+
 and
Cd
2+
 onto acid- and base-pretreated granular activated carbon and activated
carbon fiber samples. 
Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry,
 14,
131–135, 2008.
3. H. Yanagisawa, Y. Matsumoto, and M. Machida, Adsorption of Zn(II) and
Cd(II) ions onto magnesium and activated carbon composite in aqueous
solution. 
Applied Surface Science,
 256, 1619–1623, 2010.
4. H.G. Park, T.W. Kim, M.Y. Chae, and I.K. Yoo, Activated carbon-
containing alginate adsorbent for the simultaneous removal of heavy metals
and toxic organics. 
Process Biochemistry,
 42, 1371–1377, 2007.
5. A. Üçer, A. Uyanik, and Ş.F. Aygün, Adsorption of Cu(II), Cd(II), Zn(II),
Mn(II) and Fe(III) ions by tannic acid immobilised activated carbon.Separation and Purification Technology,
 47, 113–118, 2006.
6. C.K. Ahn, D. Park, S.H. Woo, and J.M. Park, Removal of cationic heavy
metal from aqueous solution by activated carbon impregnated with anionic
surfactants. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 164, 1130–1136, 2009.
7. J.M. Dias, M.C.M. Alvim-Ferraz, M.F. Almeida, J. Rivera-Utrilla, and M.
Sánchez-Polo, Waste materials for activated carbon preparation and its use in
aqueous-phase treatment: A review. 
Journal of Environmental Management,
85, 833–846, 2007.
8. A. Kongsuwan, P. Patnukao, and P. Pavasant, Binary component sorption
of Cu(II) and Pb(II) with activated carbon from Eucalyptus
camaldulensisDehn bark. 
Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry,
15, 465–470, 2009.
9. M. Guo, G. Qiu, and W. Song, Poultry litter-based activated carbon for
removing heavy metal ions in water. 
Waste Management,
 30, 308–315, 2010.
10. P. Miretzky, and A.F. Cirelli, Cr(VI) and Cr(III) removal from aqueous
solution by raw and modified lignocellulosic materials: A review. 
Journal of
Hazardous Materials,
 180, 1–19, 2010.
11. C.E. Barrera-Diaz, Lugo-Lugo, V. and B. Bilyeu, A review of chemical,
electrochemical and biological methods for aqueous Cr(VI) reduction.
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 223, 1–12, 2012.
12. Lu, C. and H. Chiu, Adsorption of zinc(II) from water with purified
carbon nanotubes. 
Chemical Engineering Science,
 61, 1138–1145, 2006a.
13. K. Mukherjee, R. Saha, A. Ghosh, and B. Saha, Chromium removal
technologies. 
Research on Chemical Intermediates,
 39, 2267–2286, 2013.
14. N. Savage, and M.S. Diallo, Nanomaterials and water purification:
Opportunities and challenges. 
Journal of Nanoparticle Research,
 7, 331–342,
2005.
15. Z.C. Di, J. Ding, X.J. Peng, Y.H. Li, Z.K. Luan, and J. Liang, Chromium
adsorption by aligned carbon nanotubes supported ceria nanoparticles.
Chemosphere,
 62, 861–865, 2006.
16. L.L. Li, L.L. Fan, M. Sun, H.M. Qiu, X.J. Li, H.M. Duan, and C.N. Luo,
Adsorbent for chromium removal based on graphene oxide functionalized
with magnetic cyclodextrin-chitosan. 
Colloids and Surfaces B-Biointerfaces,107, 76–83, 2013.
17. Y.H. Li, Z. Di, J. Ding, D. Wu, Z. Luan, and Y. Zhu, Adsorption
thermodynamic, kinetic and desorption studies of Pb
2+
 on carbon nanotubes.
Water Research,
 39, 605–609, 2005.
18. Y. Li, F. Liu, B. Xia, Q. Du, P. Zhang, D. Wang, Z. Wang, and Y. Xia,
Removal of copper from aqueous solution by carbon nanotube/calcium
alginate composites. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 177, 876–880, 2010.
19. M.I. Kandah, and J.L. Meunier, Removal of nickel ions from water by
multiwalled carbon nanotubes. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 146, 283–
288, 2007.
20. C. Lu, H. Chiu, and C. Liu, Removal of zinc(II) from aqueous solution by
purified carbon nanotubes: Kinetics and equilibrium studies. 
Industrial and
Engineering Chemistry Research,
 45, 2850–2855, 2006.
21. X. Peng, Z. Luan, J. Ding, Z. Di, Y. Li, and B. Tian, Ceria nanoparticles
supported on carbon nanotubes for the removal of arsenate from water.
Materials Letters,
 59, 399–403, 2005.
22. C. Lu, Y.L. Chung, and K.F. Chang, Adsorption of trihalomethanes from
water with carbon nanotubes. 
Water Research,
 39, 1183–1189, 2005.
23. K.L. Salipira, B.B. Mamba, R.W. Krause, T.J. Malefetse, and S.H.
Durbach, Carbon nanotubes and cyclodextrin polymers for removing organic
pollutants from water. 
Environmental Chemistry Letters,
 5, 13–17, 2007.
24. G.P. Rao, C. Lu, and F. Su, Sorption of divalent metal ions from aqueous
solution by carbon nanotubes: A review. 
Separation and Purification
Technology,
 58, 224–231, 2007.
25. Y. Wang, F. Wei, G.H. Luo, H. Yu, and G.S. Gu, The large-scale
production of carbon nanotubes in a nano-agglomerate fluidized-bed reactor.
Chemical Physics Letters,
 364, 568–572, 2002.
26. R.Q. Long, and R.T. Yang, Carbon nanotubes as superior sorbent for
dioxin removal. 
Journal of the American Chemical Society,
 123, 2058–2059,
2001.
27. H. Wang, R. DeSousa, J. Gasa, K. Tasaki, G. Stucky, B. Jousselme, and
F. Wudl, Fabrication of new fullerene composite membranes and their
application in proton exchange membrane fuel cells. 
Journal of MembraneScience,
 289, 277–283, 2007a.
28. H.J. Wang, A.L. Zhou, F. Peng, H. Yu, and J. Yang, Mechanism study on
adsorption of acidified multiwalled carbon nanotubes to Pb(II). 
Journal of
Colloid and Interface Science,
 316, 277–283, 2007b.
29. S.G. Wang, W.X. Gong, X.W. Liu, Y.W. Yao, B.Y. Gao, and Q.Y. Yue,
Removal of lead(II) from aqueous solution by adsorption onto manganese
oxide-coated carbon nanotubes. 
Separation and Purification Technology,
 58,
17–23, 2007c.
30. C.S. Lu, H. Chiu, and C.T. Liu, Removal of zinc(II) from aqueous
solution by purified carbon nanotubes: Kinetics and equilibrium studies.
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research,
 45, 2850–2855, 2006.
31. S.T. Yang, J.X. Li, D.D. Shao, J. Hu, and X.K. Wang, Adsorption of
Ni(II) on oxidized multi-walled carbon nanotubes: Effect of contact time, pH,
foreign ions and PAA. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 166, 109–116, 2009.
32. X.S. Li, W.W. Cai, J.H. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D.X. Yang, R. Piner, A.
Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S.K. Banerjee, L. Colombo, and R.S. Ruoff,
Large-Area Synthesis of High-Quality and Uniform Graphene Films on
Copper Foils. 
Science,
 324, 1312–1314, 2009.
33. X.S. Li, W.W. Cai, L. Colombo, and R.S. Ruoff, Evolution of graphene
growth on ni and cu by carbon isotope labeling. 
Nano Letters,
 9, 4268–4272,
2009.
34. X.S. Li, Y.W. Zhu, W.W. Cai, M. Borysiak, B.Y. Han, D. Chen, R.D.
Piner, L. Colombo, and R.S. Ruoff, Transfer of large-area graphene films for
high-performance transparent conductive electrodes. 
Nano Letters,
 9, 4359–
4363, 2009.
35. W.S. Hummers, and R.E. Offeman, Preparation of graphitic oxide.
Journal of the American Chemical Society,
 80, 1339–1339, 1958.
36. H.P. Boehm, M. Eckel, and W. Scholz, Untersuchungen am graphitoxid.
Uber den bildungsmechanismus des graphitoxids. 
Zeitschrift Fur
Anorganische Und Allgemeine Chemie,
 353, 236–242, 1967.
37. H.L. Ma, Y.W. Zhang, Q.H. Hu, D. Yan, Z.Z. Yu, and M.L. Zhai,
Chemical reduction and removal of Cr(VI) from acidic aqueous solution by
ethylenediamine-reduced graphene oxide. 
Journal of Materials Chemistry,22, 5914–5916, 2012.
38. J.H. Chen, H.T. Xing, H.X. Guo, W. Weng, S.R. Hu, S.X. Li, Y.H.
Huang, X. Sun, and Z.B. Su, Investigation on the adsorption properties of
Cr(VI) ions on a novel graphene oxide (GO) based composite adsorbent.
Journal of Materials Chemistry
 A, 2, 12561–12570, 2014.
39. A.S.K. Kumar, and N. Rajesh, Exploring the interesting interaction
between graphene oxide, Aliquat-336 (a room temperature ionic liquid) and
chromium(VI) for wastewater treatment. 
Rsc Advances,
 3, 2697–2709, 2013.
40. Y. Zhao, D.L. Zhao, C.L. Chen, and X.K. Wang, Enhanced photo-
reduction and removal of Cr(VI) on reduced graphene oxide decorated with
TiO
2
 nanoparticles. 
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science,
 405, 211–217,
2013.
41. A.S.K. Kumar, S.S. Kakan, and N. Rajesh, A novel amine impregnated
graphene oxide adsorbent for the removal of hexavalent chromium. 
Chemical
Engineering Journal,
 230, 328–337, 2013.
42. Y. Wu, H.J. Luo, H. Wang, C. Wang, J. Zhang, and Z.L. Zhang,
Adsorption of hexavalent chromium from aqueous solutions by graphene
modified with cetyltrimethylammonium bromide. 
Journal of Colloid and
Interface Science,
 394, 183–191, 2013.
43. Y.W. Zhang, H.L. Ma, J. Peng, M.L. Zhai, and Z.Z. Yu, Cr(VI) removal
from aqueous solution using chemically reduced and functionalized graphene
oxide. 
Journal of Materials Science,
 48, 1883–1889, 2013.
44. S.W. Zhang, M.Y. Zeng, W.Q. Xu, J.X. Li, J. Li, J.Z. Xu, and X.K.
Wang, Polyaniline nanorods dotted on graphene oxide nanosheets as a novel
super adsorbent for Cr(VI). 
Dalton Transactions,
 42, 7854–7858, 2013.
45. S.K. Li, X.F. Lu, Y.P. Xue, J.Y. Lei, T. Zheng, and C. Wang, Fabrication
of Polypyrrole/Graphene Oxide Composite Nanosheets and Their
Applications for Cr(VI) Removal in Aqueous Solution. 
Plos One,
 7, 2012.
46. X.Y. Yuan, Y.F. Wang, J. Wang, C. Zhou, Q. Tang, and X.B. Rao,
Calcined graphene/MgAl-layered double hydroxides for enhanced Cr(VI)
removal. 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 221, 204–213, 2013.
47. G. Gonavelli, C.C. Chang, and Y.C. Ling, Facile Synthesis of Smart
Magnetic Graphene for Safe Drinking Water: Heavy Metal Removal andDisinfection Control. 
Acs Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering,
 1, 462–472,
2013.
48. H.Z. Li, L. Zhang, Z.B. Sun, Y. Liu, B. Yang, and S.Q. Yan, One-step
synthesis of magnetic 1,6-hexanediamine-functionalized reduced graphene
oxide-zinc ferrite for fast adsorption of Cr(VI). 
Rsc Advances,
 5, 31787–
31797, 2015.
49. H. Jabeen, V. Chandra, S. Jung, J.W. Lee, K.S. Kim, and Bin Kim, S.
Enhanced Cr(VI) removal using iron nanoparticle decorated graphene.
Nanoscale,
 3, 3583–3585, 2011.
50. L.L. Fan, C.N. Luo, M. Sun, and H.M. Qiu, Synthesis of graphene oxide
decorated with magnetic cyclodextrin for fast chromium removal. 
Journal of
Materials Chemistry,
 22, 24577–24583, 2012.
51. H. Wang, Y.G. Liu, G.M. Zeng, X.J. Hu, X. Hu, T.T. Li, H.Y. Li, Y.Q.
Wang, and L.H. Jiang, Grafting of beta-cyclodextrin to magnetic graphene
oxide via ethylenediamine and application for Cr(VI) removal. 
Carbohydrate
Polymers,
 113, 166–173, 2014.
52. M.C. Liu, T. Wen, X.L. Wu, C.L. Chen, J. Hu, J. Li, and X.K. Wang,
Synthesis of porous Fe
3
O
4
 hollow microspheres/graphene oxide composite
for Cr(VI) removal. 
Dalton Transactions,
 42, 14710–14717, 2013.
53. J.H. Zhu, S.Y. Wei, H.B. Gu, S.B. Rapole, Q. Wang, Z.P. Luo, N.
Haldolaarachchige, D.P. Young, and Z.H. Guo, One-Pot Synthesis of
Magnetic Graphene Nanocomposites Decorated with Core@Double-shell
Nanoparticles for Fast Chromium Removal. 
Environmental Science &
Technology,
 46, 977–985, 2012.
54. C. Jung, J. Heo, J. Han, N. Her, S.J. Lee, J. Oh, J. Ryu, and Y. Yoon,
Hexavalent chromium removal by various adsorbents: Powdered activated
carbon, chitosan, and single/multi-walled carbon nanotubes. 
Separation and
Purification Technology,
 106, 63–71, 2013.
55. H.B. Gu, S.B. Rapole, Y.D. Huang, D.M. Cao, Z.P. Luo, S.Y. Wei, and
Z.H. Guo, Synergistic interactions between multi-walled carbon nanotubes
and toxic hexavalent chromium. 
Journal of Materials Chemistry A,
 1, 2011–
2021, 2013.
56. R. Kumar, M.O. Ansari, and M.A. Barakat, DBSA dopedpolyaniline/multiwalled carbon nanotubes composite for high efficiency
removal of Cr(VI) from aqueous solution. 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
228, 748–755, 2013.
57. N.M. Mubarak, R.K. Thines, N.R. Sajuni, E.C. Abdullah, J.N. Sahu, P.
Ganesan, and N.S. Jayakumar, Adsorption of chromium (VI) on
functionalized and non-functionalized carbon nanotubes. 
Korean Journal of
Chemical Engineering,
 31, 1582–1591, 2014.
58. M.K. Kim, K.S. Sundaram, G.A. Iyengar, and K.P. Lee, A novel chitosan
functional gel included with multiwall carbon nanotube and substituted
polyaniline as adsorbent for efficient removal of chromium ion. 
Chemical
Engineering Journal,
 267, 51–64, 2015.
59. A.S.K. Kumar, S.J. Jiang, and W.L. Tseng, Effective adsorption of
chromium(VI)/ Cr(III) from aqueous solution using ionic liquid
functionalized multiwalled carbon nanotubes as a super sorbent. 
Journal of
Materials Chemistry A,
 3, 7044–7057, 2015.
60. Z. Tian, B. Yang, G.J. Cui, L. Zhang, Y.P. Guo, and S.Q. Yan, Synthesis
of poly(m-phenylenediamine)/iron oxide/acid oxidized multi-wall carbon
nanotubes for removal of hexavalent chromium. 
Rsc Advances,
 5, 2266–
2275, 2015.
61. S.S. Bayazit, and O. Kerkez, Hexavalent chromium adsorption on
superparamagnetic multi-wall carbon nanotubes and activated carbon
composites. 
Chemical Engineering Research & Design,
 92, 2725–2733,
2014.
62. C. Luo, Z. Tian, B. Yang, L. Zhang, and S.Q. Yan, Manganese
dioxide/iron oxide/acid Oxidized multi-walled carbon nanotube magnetic
nanocomposite for enhanced hexavalent chromium removal. 
Chemical
Engineering Journal,
 234, 256–265, 2013.
63. R.H. Chen, L.Y. Chai, Q.Z. Li, Y. Shi, Y.Y. Wang, and A. Mohammad,
Preparation and characterization of magnetic Fe
3
O
4
/CNT nanoparticles by
RPO method to enhance the efficient removal of Cr(VI). 
Environmental
Science and Pollution Research,
 20, 7175–7185, 2013.
64. B. Qiu, H.B. Gu, X.R. Yan, J. Guo, Y.R. Wang, D.Z. Sun, Q. Wang, M.
Khan, X. Zhang, B.L. Weeks, D.P. Young, Z.H. Guo, and S.Y. Wei,
Cellulose derived magnetic mesoporous carbon nanocomposites withenhanced hexavalent chromium removal. 
Journal of Materials Chemistry A,
2, 17454–17462, 2014.
65. B. Qiu, Y.R. Wang, D.Z. Sun, Q. Wang, X. Zhang, B.L. Weeks, O’R.
Connor, X.H. Huang, S.Y. Wei, and Z.H. Guo, Cr(VI) removal by magnetic
carbon nano composites derived from cellulose at different carbonization
temperatures. 
Journal of Materials Chemistry A,
 3, 9817–9825, 2015.
66. J.W. May, A mechanism for surface reconstruction at room temperature.
Surface Science,
 18, 431–436, 1969.Chapter 5
Nano-Carbons from Pollutant Soot: A
Cleaner Approach toward Clean
Environment
Kumud Malika Tripathi
1
, Nidhi Rani Gupta
2
, and Sumit
Kumar Sonkar
3
*
1
Smart Plastics Group, University of South Brittany (UBS), LIMATB-UBS,
Lorient France
2
Department of Chemistry, GSSDGS Khalsa College, Punjab, India
3
Department of Chemistry, Malaviya National Institute of Technology,
Jaipur India
*
Corresponding author
: 
sksonkar.chy@mnit.ac.in
Abstract
Anthropogenic generated black carbon (BC) particulate matter as waste
“pollutant soot”, contributed significantly toward the degradation of air
quality, global warming, and several health issues. Researchers used this
pollutant BC as “free carbon precursor” for the synthesis of different shaped
nano-carbons with potential applicative prospects. Presently being used as the
fluorescent probe for multicolored bio-imaging, sensing biomolecules and
also used for water purification purposes.
Keywords:
 Black carbon, pollutant soot, diesel particulate matter,
photoluminescent, dye removal, metal sensing5.1 Introduction
Anthropogenic, black particulate matters generally dubbed as black carbon
(BC) is the most significant, aerosolic light-absorbing material and defined in
the literature as the most concerned noxious waste next to the carbon dioxide
[1–9]. BC emitted globally 
via
 the combustion of fossil, biofuel, and waste
biomasses in both outdoor and indoor atmosphere [5, 6, 10]. Outdoor BC
constitutes a major portion of diesel particulate matters (DPMs) [11] and are
very compelling because of its enormous adverse impacts [12], in terms of
concerning global warming, promoting air pollution, and several health issues
[8, 13, 14]. Few examples of the unusual behavior occurred due to outdoor
BC are the frequent observation of sudden warming and cooling the
environment [15]. Such as summer in south China, drought in north China,
dust storms in India [16], and high-density fog formation in winter season
particularly in urban area [17]. The rapid increase in industrialization and the
use of automobile transportation with continuous advances in technology
increases the density of BC in the outdoor atmosphere. 
Figure 5.1a
 and 
b
demonstrates a comparison of clean and polluted environment of USA and
Canada border in the months of September 2005 and January 2006,
respectively. In order to analyze the structural identities and shapes of BC
particulates, Murr 
et al.
 [9] collected a variety of BC (both from indoor and
outdoor atmospheres) directly on transmission electron microscope (TEM)
grid. This BC was characterized by various microscopic techniques. Such as
TEM and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) as illustrated in 
Figures 5.1c
,
d
, and 
g
 and 
5.1e
 and 
h
, respectively. TEM image along with its SAED
pattern, shows the presence of prominent graphite reflection rings for the
sample collected from diesel engine exhaust is shown in 
Figure 5.1c
. 
Figure
5.1e
 and 
g
 demonstrated the SEM, TEM characterization of soot collected
from candle and wood burning, respectively. Elementally, BC is
carbonaceous in nature having the mixture of different degree of
graphitic/amorphous carbon depending upon the quality and composition of
fuel, with its burning conditions. Not only the outdoor BC, anthropogenically
generated indoor BC (in confined areas), such as burning candles, incenses
are significantly affecting the indoor air-quality parameters, causing several
respiratory problems [18], importantly associated with the generation ofreactive oxygen species (ROS) [5, 7, 9].
Figure 5.1
 Early morning view (looking southwest) of particulate/smoke
inversion on the El Paso, TX, USA/Juarez, Mexico border region (just north
of the city centers); (a) Clean day view for reference in September 2005 and
(b) inversion in January 2006 in same area. Atmospheric (outdoor) BC
collections; (c) TEM image of soot (with SAED pattern), aggregate collected
at highway truck stop and presumed to be diesel BC; (d) soot BC and
fragments of chrysotile asbestos collected along interstate highway
traversing; (e) SEM image of candle soot collected on glass fiber filter; (g)
corresponding TEM image with its SAED pattern in (f) of the same candle
soot, as in (e); (h) SEM image of carbon dots (CDs) derived from wood soot
collected on a glass fiber filter [9].
(Reprinted with permission)
Atmospheric, particulate matters are generally divided into three categories
based upon their particle size, PM
10
 (diameter < 10 μm), PM
25
 (diameter <
2.5 μm) and PM
0.1
 (diameter < 0.1 μm) [19]. Out of these BC falls under thecategory of PM
2.5
 and are smaller [5]. Due to its smaller size and high
volume-to-surface ratio, ultra-small-sized particulates (PM
0.1
) are much
more hazardous than others [13]. As they are showing an active response to
the rapid adsorption of potentially toxic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons,
which can be easily and deeply penetrates inside the alveolar system of our
lungs [19] and increases health hazards, such as related cardiovascular
dysfunction, lung cancer [8, 9], chromosomal and DNA damage [12].
Based on the earlier discussed issues, ecological awareness for the stringent
control over the emissions of BC and alternatively its second life use into
valuable carbon nanostructures [7] have created a great interest. Till now,
except few reports [20], most of the scientific groups have focused on the
chemical, structural characterization [15, 21–23] of BC soot generated 
via
diesel engine exhaust and other anthropogenic sources. Knauer 
et al.
 used
Raman, high-resolution TEM (HRTEM), temperature-programmed
oxidation, and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) techniques to
investigate the effect of oxidation condition at different temperature with the
structural variation and reactivity of soot particles [24]. Müller 
et al.
investigated the impact of microstructures upon the oxidation behavior of
soot obtained from different exhausts of the diesel engine by using HRTEM
and thermogravimetric analysis [25]. In his another report, they analyzed
structural and electrical characterization of soot collected from different
sources using HRTEM, EELS, and XPS (X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy)
[26]. They did a correlation study between microstructure and electronic
structure of soot particles and concluded that increased “surface defects” [27,
28] help in the incorporation of heteroatom such as oxygen and hydrogen
[26]. Roden 
et al.
 did real-time field measurements and studied the optical
properties from traditional wood burning cook stoves [29]. They proposed
that variables such as temperature, moisture, time, fuel size, and design of
stoves are significantly affected the emission factor and change in the
chemical composition of emitted BC.
Recently, few groups were utilized this pollutant soot BC as “carbon
precursor” for the synthesis of nano-carbons, which displays the potential for
a wide range of multifunctional applications [20, 30–33], especially for
outdoor collected BC. Such as for imaging [30], heavy metal ion sensing
[31], biosensors, and wastewater treatment [34–37]. Among nano-carbons,conversion of BC to graphitic CDs, graphene quantum dots (GQDs) [38], and
carbon quantum dots exhibiting tunable multicolored emissions [39–41] with
novel physicochemical and optical properties [42] could be the simplest
approach. As mentioned in the literature, CDs were synthesized by a variety
of existing methods including both top-down and bottom-up approaches [27,
43–48]. More significantly, the use of different kinds and sometimes unusual
variety of precursor materials and diversity in synthetic techniques confirms
the reproducible nature of CDs with gram scale yield [41, 49–51]. Regarding
the potential properties of fluorescent CDs [41, 52], these are reasonably
competitive with conventional metal-based QDs (in terms of high quantum
yield value) [53–55], along with its bio-compatibility [56 57]. Besides
imaging [39, 40, 58, 59], these also exhibiting several other potential
applications, such as in electronic devices [60], batteries [61, 62], super-
capacitors [63], photo-catalysis [41, 64], sensors and actuators [49], drug
delivery [65], cancer treatment [66], and acting as plant growth promoter
[44]. As well used for sensing and separation of a variety of organic and
inorganic contaminants from water and could play a significant role in water
purification [36, 38, 51].
Uchida 
et al.
 used diesel soot [20] as “carbon precursor” for the synthesis
of SWCNTs using laser vaporization technique [67]. Wang 
et al.
 synthesized
fluorescent water-soluble carbon nanoparticles (wsCNPs) from the diesel
soot [31] and used these for metal sensing. Sarkar and coworkers used diesel
engine exhaust waste soot as DPM for the synthesis of water-soluble
fluorescent CDs (wsCDs) with near infrared (NIR) emissions [30]. Their
approach toward the use of waste soot is very simple, efficient, realistic, and
scalable for quantitative yield synthesis (yield ~90%) of soluble CDs, and
further applied for imaging 
Escherichia coli
 cells and sensing cholesterol
[30]. In-shed of earlier discussed reports; importantly, we do not need to
synthesize CDs. These were automatically formed during the combustion
process inside the engine and exhausted globally in atmosphere as BC.
Depending upon the burning conditions and nature of oil, these can be
varying in their composition and crystallinity, but this could be optimized
easily by varying few parameters. Our work could be simple and straight
forward, collect the soot, oxidize it and separate it based on degree of
functionalization and degree of crystallinity.Not only the air pollution another most challenging global issue for the
humankind is to avoid and secure water pollution. As worldwide ~1.8 million
child lost their life yearly due to diseases arises from the consumption of
contaminated water [68]. Addressing the issues associated with wastewater
treatment had a transformative impact, and being of great significance, if BC
soot can be utilized to purify water. Currently, there is a significant demand
of requirement for the robust of simple and cost-effective technique to
disinfect and decontaminate water, especially in developing countries [35].
Many allotropic forms of nano-carbons are currently being used for
wastewater management, such as CNTs [69, 70], graphene [71], activated
carbons (ACs) [72, 73], and CDs-based nanocomposites [37]. But the
wastewater treatment using CDs still needs to be addressed in detail. Till
now, only few researches applied CDs in water treatment technology. Sarkar
and coworkers report an effective technique for water purification by using
low-cost nano-carbons and their composites [37, 70].
5.2 Separation of Nano-carbon from
Pollutant BC
As discussed earlier, BC because of their small size and hydrophobicity
creates immense issue toward environmental safety [12]. Many groups used
this DPM, pollutant soot (as carbon precursor) for the isolation of nano-
carbons from waste. Tripathi 
et al.
 [30] used DPM soot collected from the
exhaust pipe of an opened heavy-duty diesel engine as “free carbon
precursor” for the synthesis of multicolored emissive wsCDs. In order to
remove, undesired impurities, DPMs was sequentially purified by Soxhlet
extraction [19] (with toluene, acetonitrile, pet ether, methanol, and finally in
acetone) [74]. For analyzing the graphitic nature of Soxhlet purified CDs,
they did the Raman analysis, which shows the two prominent characteristic
peaks, D and G band ~1353 and 1584 cm
–1
, respectively, as demonstrated in
Figure 5.2a
.
Figure 5.2
 (a) Raman spectrum of CDs and (b) FESEM image of CDs inset
showing diameter distribution histogram [30].(Reprint from the permission.)
G band are more intense in compare to D band hence confirm the presence
of sp
2
 carbon domains, while D band is assigned to surface defects (in terms
of sp
3
 carbons) [44, 75]. The visualization of the surface morphology of
Soxhlet purified DPM was done by FESEM (
Figure 5.2b
), which shows the
spherical nature of CDs having the diameter ranges from 60 to 120 nm
(histogram shown in inset of the figure) with a lot of amorphous carbon.
In an another report, Dikio and coworkers used the traditional way of
pyrolysis to generate DPM soot, instead of collecting waste soot [76]. They
pyrolyzed diesel oil (as a carbon source) in a simple laboratory lamp by using
a cotton wick, followed by the collection of its soot over the ceramic tile
plate. Synthesized CNPs were characterized by using various microscopic
and spectroscopic techniques as shown in 
Figure 5.3
. Spherical nature of
particles was confirmed by SEM (
Figure 5.3a
) and TEM (
Figure 5.3b
 and 
c
)
micrography. Powder XRD analysis (
Figure 5.3d
) confirms the graphitic
nature of CNPs, showing the presence of two prominent diffraction peak at
2θ
 = 23.68° and 42.01°. Furthermore, the crystallinity of obtained graphitic
was characterized by the Raman spectroscopy for the analysis of
characteristic D and G band as illustrated in 
Figure 5.3e
.
Figure 5.3
 Characterization of CNPs synthesized by pyrolysis of diesel: (a)
FESEM image, (b) low-resolution TEM image, (c) high-resolution TEM
image, (d) XRD spectra, and (e) Raman spectra [76].
(Reprint from the permission.)In contrast to earlier discussed reports for the separation of CDs and CNPs,
Jung 
et al.
 reported that combustion condition for the burning of diesel in
diesel engine fulfills the requirement for the synthesis of CNTs [33]. DPMs
were collected at different experimental condition by using three different
diesel engines, as John Deere T04045TF250, Caterpillar 3176 C-12, and
Onan-Cummins Quiet diesel engine set. Exhausted DPMs were directly
collected over a TEM grid for the direct analysis of its morphological
characterization. In entire cases, means for all the three engines they observed
rod-like morphology with the contamination of some spherical carbon cluster
(these days known as CDs). Finally, they conclude that during burning
process of fuel, CNTs were synthesized from both the doped and undoped
diesel engine fuels. But in comparisons to doped diesel engine oil CNTs were
less in quantity (yield) with undoped diesel fuel. However, releases of CNTs
in the environment are assumed to be more pronounced since diesel engine
vehicles are too common. In this manner, it is significant to acknowledge the
existence of outdoor CNTs in diesel engine exhaust soot even in a small
fraction because of their potential hazardous impacts on human healthbecause depending on the dimensions of nano-particles, they can easily reach
the respiratory tract as shown in 
Figure 5.4
 [77].
Figure 5.4
 Dependent on particle dimensions, a schematic diagram showing
the penetration of inhaled particles in the respiratory tract [77].
(Reprinted with permission)
Similarly, for analyzing the indoor BC, Sarkar and coworkers analyzed BC
deposited over indoor spider webs and reported the existence of spin
frustrated ferromagnetic MWCNTs [5]. These indoor trapped spin frustrated
MWCNTs are capable enough of generating ROS [6]. Anthropogenic
collected MWCNTs were isolated from indoor spider web 
via
 the oxidation
method, as shown in 
Figure 5.5 (a-d)
 [6] when exposed to aerial oxygen for
long term produces ROS. Generation of ROS from atmospheric oxygen was
investigated by nitro blue tetrazolium test [78]. Sonkar 
et al.
 [5] report the
ferromagnetic behavior of indoor collected MWCNTs. They investigated the
intrinsic ferromagnetic behavior of indoor MWCNTs at varied temperature
(100–600 K) and concluded that ferromagnetic behavior decreases with
increase in temperature. Magnetic hysteresis is observed magnetization
versus magnetic field at 300 K [5]. Ferromagnetic behavior arises due to
combination of diamagnetism arising from the graphitic carbon pools and
paramagnetism coming from carbon radicals due to high surfacial defects,
knick, and junctions as demonstrated in 
Figure 5.5 (a-d)
 [6]. These nano-
carbons isolated from indoor deposited BC possess ferromagnetic behavior
could used for further applications such as in spintronics.Figure 5.5
 (a) TEM image of insoluble black particulates from spider web
showing the presence of MWCNTs with junctions and kinks (inset
corresponding XRD image); (b) high resolution TEM image; (c) shows the
defects in channels with blockage (black arrows); (d) broken edges (outer
walls) marked with black arrows. [6].
(Reprinted with permission).
Using an alternative method, Uchida 
et al.
 introduced another fruitful
application to recycle diesel exhaust soot, a step toward the clean
environment [20]. They collected the DPM, just before to discharged in
environment 
via
 a special technique designed by Nishimoto [67]. The
collected DPMs were used as carbon precursor for the synthesis of SWCNT,
by using laser vaporization method. They proposed that diesel soot contains aportion of C
60
, C
70
, and other fullerenes type nanocarbons, which are found
to be appropriate for the growth of SWCNT as a carbon precursor when used
in laser decomposition method. The diameters of as synthesized SWCNT by
waste DPM lie majorly in the range of 1 nm.
5.3 Functionalization of Nano-
Carbons Isolated from Pollutant BC
Wang 
et al.
 [31] used the simple acid oxidation strategy to obtain the water-
soluble version of CNPs. Further size-dependent separation of synthesized
CNPs was done in mixture of solvents, water-acetonitrile (1:3) assisted with
high-speed centrifugation. The polarity of acetonitrile in comparison with
water is less and helps to hold larger particles in itself by the process of
precipitation, which helps to isolate small, soluble CNPs easily in the
collected upper layer of supernatant (ULCNPs). Rest bigger particles were
collected in the lower layer (LLCNPs). They noticed the difference in
chemical composition of nano-carbons for both ULCNPs and LLCNPs.
Regarding the higher content of oxygen and nitrogen, which suggested that
nitric acid oxidation incorporated high degree of nitrogen and oxygen,
containing groups on CNPs, which render them to often soluble in water. As
expected based upon the solubility 
via
 negative functional groups, ULCNPs
were rich in its oxygeneous content, small in size, in comparison with
LLCNPs. As shown in 
Figure 5.6a
 and 
b
, which describes the diameter range
of ULCNPs was lies in the range of ~50 nm, while LLCNPs were ranging of
~200 nm. Afterward, they investigated the effect of pH on optical properties
of CNPs, with the same concentration of both samples. They noticed the high
fluorescence intensity of ULCNPs than that of LLCNPs due to the presence
of high degree of quantum confined surface emissive traps over the surface of
small-sized CNPs. Fluorescence of both the particles was pH sensitive and
decreased after pH 7 and 6 for ULCNPs and LLCNPs (
Figure 5.6c
),
respectively. Size separation of CNPs attributed higher quantum yield 5%
(ULCNPs) without any further surface passivation.
Figure 5.6
 SEM images of size-separated CNPs: (a) ULCNPs, (b) LLCNPs,and (c) effect of pH on fluorescence intensity of CNPs, ULCNPs intensity are
shown by black line and LLCNPs intensities are shown by red lines [31].
(Reprint from the permission.)
CDs isolated from DPM are hydrophobic in nature and larger in size, so
inapt for biological applications. Tripathi 
et al.,
 [30] adapted oxidative
strategy for water solubilization of CDs. Oxidation of CDs in nitric acid leads
to surface modification of CDs in terms of the incorporation of high density,
surface functionalization by carboxylic and hydroxyl-type negative group
(confirmed by the high-negative value of zeta potential –30.15 mV) [79], as
“surface defects.” Structure morphology and internal surface characterization
of wsCDs was carried out with SEM and TEM techniques. It has been
reported that acid treatment cuts the particles in the smaller size and
incorporates water solubility [74, 80]. As separated CDs from DPM contains
some amorphous carbon as impurity (
Figure 5.2b
), while, after oxidation,wsCDs are homogenous in nature without showing any impurity (
Figure
5.7a
). wsCDs are ~10–30 nm in diameter, while CDs are ~60–100 nm in
diameter (
Figures 5.2b
 and 
5.7d
). TEM image reveals spherical morphology
(
Figure 5.7b
), and HRTEM shows the presence of surface defects (
Figure
5.7c
). Surface functionalization of wsCDs was corroborated by using FTIR
spectroscopy shows the presence of C–O (~1720 cm
–1
), C=O (~1720 cm
–1
),
–OH (~3425 cm
–1
) stretching peaks related to carbonyl groups as shown in
Figure 5.7e
, whereas the varying degree of carbon nature (sp
2
 and sp
3
) in
wsCDs was confirmed by Raman spectra (
Figure 5.7f
).
Figure 5.7
 (a) SEM image of wsCDs after oxidative treatment, (b) low-
resolution TEM image of wsCDs, (c) high-resolution TEM image of wsCDs
showing the curvature and graphitic layers, (d) size distribution histogram of
wsCDs after oxidative treatment, (e) FTIR spectrum, (f) Raman spectra
(excited with 532 nm laser at room temperature) [30].
(Reprinted with permission)
The presence of heavy density surface defects promotes the formation of
surface energy traps of different energy gaps, responsible for multicolor
tunable fluorescent emissions. wsCDs exhibit light green color under UVlight excitation (
Figure 5.8a
). The optical behavior of wsCDs studied at
different excitation wavelengths from 400 to 600 nm (
Figure 5.8b
). More
significantly, fluorescent emissions of wsCNDs extended up to NIR region as
shown in 
Figure 5.8c
. Emissions in NIR window are assumed to be very
important especially for bio-imaging purposes due to its deeper penetration
ability and lack of autofluorescence in this region [50]. wsCDs are resistant to
photo-bleaching confirmed by continuous excitation at 445 nm for five hours
(
Figure 5.8d
). Green and red fluorescence images of aqueous solution of
wsCDs after evaporation on a glass plate are shown in 
Figure 5.8e
 and 
f
,
respectively. We applied wsCDs for detection of cholesterol and cell imaging
of 
E. coli.
 Ion pair conjugation of wsCDs-Methylene blue (MB) was utilized
for the detection of cholesterol based upon fluorescence “turn off”/“turn on”
technique. The present method for the one-step isolation of wsCDs from the
waste soot and further application for multicolored imaging purposes
especially for biological imaging and sensing of biomolecules based upon
fluorescent “turn on”/“turn off” is very simple, convenient, reproducible, and
realistic approach for the high yield utilization of DPM.
Figure 5.8
 Optical properties of wsCDs: (a) digital photograph of aqueous
solution of wsCDs under daylight and UV light; (b) emission spectra of
aqueous solution of wsCDs recorded at 20 nm progressive increment of
excitation wavelength from 400 to 600 nm; (c) NIR emission profile of
wsCDs, zoomed image of (b); (d) photostability tests of wsCDs at 440 nm
excitation wavelength continuous for 5 h; (e and f) fluorescence images of
the wsCDs on glass slides after evaporating a very dilute solution, under the
band-pass filters (e) 488 nm and (f) 562 nm [30].
(Reprint from the permission.)Tian 
et al.
 synthesized fluorescent wsCNPs from the combustion of natural
gas soot [81]. They collected the indoor BC generated routinely in our daily
practice in an invert glass beaker placing upside of a natural gas burner. As
obtained, CNPs were thermally refluxed in nitric acid and purified by
dialysis, to achieve its fluorescent water-soluble version. Surface morphology
and crystalline nature of fluorescent wsCNPs were characterized by TEM
showing spherical and homogeneous size distribution ranged from 4.4 to 5.4
nm (
Figure 5.9a
) with its HRTEM image shown in 
Figure 5.9b
 illustrated the
lattice plane of graphitic carbon with 
d
-spacing equal to 0.208 nm. As well,
wsCNPs with tunable fluorescent emissions were also obtained from candle
soot [82].
Figure 5.9
 (a) TEM micrograph of wsCNPs inset shows the size distribution
histogram; (b) HRTEM image showing the interplanar distance of lattice
planes [81].
(Reprint from the permission.)To explore more about the applications, they further synthesized
nanocomposites of wsCNPs with metal by using metal salts [81]. In the
presence of CNPs, metal salts were reduced to metal nanoparticles with
ascorbic acid. They proposed that metal ions bound with surfacial carboxylic
acid groups reduce to metal atoms on the addition of reducing agent. Which
act as a nucleation core for the growth of metal nanoparticles. Composite
formation between CNPs and metal nanoparticles was characterized by
increase in size in TEM micrographs. TEM images of CNPs with three
different metals Ag, Cu, and Pd along with their size distribution histogram
are shown in 
Figure 5.10a–c
, respectively, and their corresponding HRTEM
images are shown in 
Figure 5.10d–f
. As illustrated in 
Figure 5.10
 insets, the
average diameters of the CNPs-metal nanocomposites are 16.4 nm, 18.6 nm,
and 20.4 nm, for Ag, Cu, and Pd, respectively.
Figure 5.10
 Representative TEM micrographs of carbon nanoparticles
functionalized with different metal nanostructures: panels (a) and (d), silver;
panels (b) and (e), copper; and panels (c) and (f), palladium. The crystalline
lattices were identified in the respective HRTEM images. The central insets
are the corresponding histograms of the overall particle size distribution. The
upper-right inset to panel (f) depicts the elemental mapping of a palladium
nanoparticle. Scale bars are 20 nm in the left panels and 2 nm in the right
ones [81].
(Reprint from the permission.)The fluorescent emissions of metal-CNPs nanocomposites did not exhibit
any significant changes in comparison to wsCNPs and exhibited distinct
photoluminescence properties (
Figure 5.11a
). They proposed that
photoluminescence arises from the electronic transitions between surface
energy traps of different energy states. More significantly, wsCNPs exhibit
electrochemical properties and show two peaks –0.28 V (Peak I) and –0.06 V
(Peak II) in the scan range of –0.1 to +0.1 V as shown in 
Figure 5.11b
.Electrochemical properties are pH dependent and on decreasing sweep rate
splitting of anodic peak merge while cathodic peaks remain defined and well
separated. Electrochemical measurement results are similar to the
phenanthrenequinone derivatives, hence suggest the functionalization of
CNPs surface with similar analogous.
Figure 5.11
 (a) Excitation and emission spectra of wsCNPs and their
composite with Ag, Cu, and Pd; (b) cyclic voltammograms of a glassy carbon
electrode (3 mm in diameter) in a water solution containing 0.1 MKCl and
1.5 mg/mL carbon nanoparticles (solid curves) at varied potential sweep rates
(depicted as figure legends). The voltammogram of the same electrode in a
0.1 MKCl water solution at 0.1 V/s was also included (dashed curve). Inset
shows the pH dependence of the formal potentials of Peaks I and II [81].
(Reprint from the permission.)
5.4 Nano-Carbons from Pollutant
Soot for Wastewater Treatment
5.4.1 Removal of Organic Pollutant
In these days, wastewater treatment for the removal of contaminated
potentially known as toxic organic pollutants (organic dyes) is a serious
environmental concern. Contamination of artificial dye in water even at very
low level of concentration causes several adverse environmental impacts[83]. Dye contamination is majorly responsible for effluent water color
interferes and blocks to enter sunlight deep into waters that inhibit
photosynthesis, which leads to retardation in the growth of aquatic
ecosystems and alters the solubilization of gas molecules in water bodies
[83]. Several methods such as photo-decomposition, ultrafiltration,
membrane filtration, electrochemical treatment, and adsorption [84] are in
use to remove organic dyes from wastewater [85]. Among all these available
methods, adsorption is one of the most important method due to the simple
and economical mode of operation [84]. Photo-induced adsorption is an
extensively applied tool for the degradation of organic pollutants because of
their easiness in handling more efficiency and almost negligible production
of toxic side products [86].
Our group demonstrated the absorption of organic pollutant MB dye from
aqueous solution over the surface of negatively charged wsCDs [30] 
via
 ion
pair interaction. We did investigate the photocatalytic activity of surface-
functionalized wsCDs and reduction of MB catalyzed by visible photons. The
high solubility of wsCDs in water facilitates photo-reduction of MB in
essentially required homogeneous reaction conditions. Reduction of MB was
observed by change in color and resultant concentrations of MB were
measured by UV–
vis
 spectroscopy. The blue color of MB turned into
colorless when subjected to photo-reduction with wsCDs. wsCDs efficiently
removed MB from aqueous solution even at very low concentration of
wsCDs. Concentration of MB gradually decreases with time and visible
photons, there is no MB in the colorless solution after 50 minutes as clear
from 
Figure 5.12b
.
Figure 5.12
 (a) Time-dependent UV–vis spectra of MB adsorption showing
reduction of MB over photo-catalyst by wsCDs; (b) picture showing
complete reduction of the aqueous solution of MB (1) to colorless solution
(2) after addition of wsCDs; (c) schematic representation for the mechanism
of adsorption of MB on wsCDs surface via ion-dipole interaction.
(Unpublished work.)Aqueous solution of MB shows a characteristic absorbance at 672 nm for
MB monomer and a shoulder at 619 nm for MB dimer [87]. Adsorption of
MB on wsCNDs surface was confirmed by the decrease in absorption
intensity in UV–vis spectra. Intensity of characteristic MB peak reduced
gradually with time (
Figure 5.12a
), and reaction is faster in the presence of
visible photons. Characteristic electron transfer properties of wsCDs
(presence of high-density unpaired electrons) as confirmed by EPR
measurements would be an advantage for photo-catalytic applications for
example degradation of MB. Our results concluded that ion-dipole interaction
takes place between wsCDs and MB molecules 
via
 absorbance of MB on the
wsCDs surface (
Figure 5.12c
).
5.4.2 Water Purification, Sensing, andRemoval of Heavy Metal Ions
Water pollution due to contamination of toxic heavy metal ions such as
As(III) and As(V) [88], Hg(II) [89], Ag(I) [34], Mn(II) [31], Pb(II) [90], in
drinking water is the most serious environmental concern even at very low
concentration [91]. Prolonged exposures of heavy metal ions in living
systems are carcinogenic, teratogenic, and mutagenic and disturb microbial
processes and alter the balance in ecosystem [92–94]. Approach toward the
sensing and removal of these metal ions, from aqueous solutions is
significantly increases for clean water quality. Monitoring of water quality is
a challenging issue due to the very low concentration of toxic metal ions and
their complexity of water matrices. In recent few years effective integration
of CNPs for the fabrication of sensitive and selective sensor for controlling
the water-quality parameters were investigated [35].
Nano-carbon-based composites have been proved to effective material for
water-quality treatment. Much of the research focused on the use of AC,
CNTs and graphenes only. The presence of oxygenated functional groups and
structural defects can act as adsorption sites for the interaction of positively
charge metallic ions and other organic pollutants [37]. Sarkar and coworkers
[37] used coconut charcoal derived CDs in water purification for water
filtration. In brief, they synthesized CDs from waste of coconut shell, and
wood dust 
via
 pyrolysis. CDs were further treated with concentrated nitric
acid to make them soluble. Further carboxylated group of CDs were
metallated with metal ions (such as ferric ions) to remove toxic metal ions
(such as arsenic). Arsenic is considered as one of the major water pollutants
even at ppb concentration level. Continuous consumption of As contaminated
water causes various health issues in humans such as the change in
pigmentation, neurological disorder, nausea, cancer, muscular weakness,
hyperkeratosis loss of appetite and many more [72]. Hence sensitive and
selective detection of Arsenic in water is imperative. In another report Sarkar
and coworkers used MWCNTs (synthesized in the same manner as they
generated anthropogenically in indoor) -based nanocomposites especially for
the removal of Arsenic [70]. These nano-carbon-based filtration beds are also
very effective for the removal of anions and pathogenic bacterial cells.
Chandra 
et al.
 [88] synthesized super-magnetic, water dispersible magnetite–
graphene hybrids composites (M-RGO) 
via
 a chemical reaction withmagnetite nanoparticles. The M-RGO has high density of conductivity and
adsorption sites, which makes these a promising candidate for metal removal.
M-RGO exhibits high efficiency toward arsenic removal and had removal
capacity ~99.9 % at ppb level [88]. Wang 
et al.
 proposed a low cost synthetic
method for the synthesis of amino functionalized CDs from glucose by
hydrothermal process [95]. These CDs were further employed for the
effective removal of Cr(VI) from water by adsorption process. They proposed
that amino group plays a major role in Cr(VI) adsorption. Amino-
functionalized CDs have ~6 times higher Cr(VI) removal capability in
comparison to non-functionalized CDs.
Zhou 
et al
. reported the selective detection of Hg(II)in complex matrix,
based upon fluorescence quenching by using wsCDs [89]. Wee 
et al.
developed a CDs-based sensor for the selective detection of Pb(II) via
fluorescence quenching method [90]. Suryawanshi 
et al.
 reported the amine
terminated GQDs synthesized from waste biomass for the highly selective
detection of Ag(I), 
via
 photoluminescence “on–off–on” technique [34]. The
fluorescence emission of GQDs was efficiently quenched by different metals
ions but the restoration fluorescence properties are very selective only with
Ag(I). Not only had the metal-based sensing. Dong 
et al.
 reported the
detection of free residual chlorine (higher chlorine concentrations in water are
potentially harmful for humans) in aqueous system by fluorescence
quenching technique [38]. They synthesized GQDs in a greener way by the
pyrolysis of citric acid. The fluorescence emission of GQDs, was effectively
quenched by the addition of free chlorine. This process offers detection limit
of ~0.05 μΜ, with improved sensitivity. Wang 
et al.
 [31] used wsCNPs for
the selective sensing of Mn(II). They demonstrated that size of CNPs plays a
major role for the sensing of metal ion from aqueous solution. CNPs having
lower size (~50 nm) selectively detect Mn(II) ion while CNPs with larger size
(~200 nm) are unable to detect any metal ion as demonstrated in 
Figure 5.13a
and 
b
. Fluorescence intensity of ULCNPs significantly decreases upon
addition of 2 × 10
–6
 mol/L Mn(II). Addition of Pb(II), Ca(II), Mg(II), and
Cd(II) did not show any influence on fluorescence intensity of CNPs. They
proposed the formation of stable complex between Mn(II) ion and functional
group present on CNPs and confirmed it from Stern–Volmer plot
fluorescence quenching that revels linear quenching (
Figure 5.13c
).Figure 5.13
 Effect of metal different metal ions on fluorescence emission of
(a) ULCNPs; (b) LLCNPs; (c) Stern–Volmer plots of ULCNP fluorescence
quenching by Mn(II). The concentrations of ULCNPs were 0.1 mg/mL, while
the concentration of Mn(II) ranged from 2.0 × 10
–6
 to 1.0 × 10
–5
 mol/L, Tris
buffer (pH 7.4) [31].
(Reprint from the permission.)
Environment friendly photoluminescent-based sensors are proven to be
very significant in order to determine the concentration, spatiotemporal
fluctuation and identification of analyte. Therefore to evaluate water quality
on a continuous basis, nano-carbon-based sensor offers distinct advantages,
due to its cost effective synthesis, ease of surface modification, chemical
stability, size tunable fluorescence properties, high quantum yield values
along with high photostability and bio-compatibility [96].
5.5 Conclusion
During the past few years, only a small progress has been made in the
research field of conversion of pollutant soot to applicative nano-carbons, for
the introduction of a practical approach toward the anthropogenic pollutant
waste management. Pollutant soot BC could convert to various nano-carbons
especially the simplest one as fluorescent CDs. Particularly CDs have shown
a unique and very useful array of optical properties in comparison with
metal-based QDs. Along with imaging, sensing and water purification
purposes, these could be used for the energy applications, such as photo-
energy conversion. The unique photo-induced electron transfer properties of
fluorescent wsCNDs will open the door for new opportunities of carbon-
based nanomaterials in environmental energy application. Emergence ofnano-carbons isolated from pollutant waste may offer the excellent
opportunities for the development of nano-carbon-based hybrid
nanotechnologies, for selective and sensitive removal of metal ions, pollutant
and advanced wastewater treatment. However, development of selective and
sensitive sensors as per the requirement from BC is still a great concern and
need to be address more. Consequently, these fluorescent-based nano-carbons
sensors offer the significant advantage for metal and biosensing in terms of
sensitivity, selectivity, simplicity and visual observation.
Acknowledgments
K.M.T. thanks European MEET program, for a postdoctoral research
fellowship and UBS for infrastructure. S. K. S thanks DST New Delhi for
funding [SB/EMEQ-383/2014]. N.R.G. thanks DST, New Delhi funding
under DISHA scheme [DST/DISHA/SoRF-PM/024/2013].
References
1. M. Yang, S.G. Howell, J. Zhuang, and B.J. Huebert, Attribution of aerosol
light absorption to black carbon, brown carbon, and dust in China –
interpretations of atmospheric measurements during EAST-AIRE.
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics,
 9, 2035–2050, 2009.
2. C. Venkataraman, G. Habib, A. Eiguren-Fernandez, A.H. Miguel, and S.K.
Friedlander, Residential biofuels in South Asia: Carbonaceous aerosol
emissions and climate impacts. 
Science,
 307, 1454–1456, 2005.
3. J.P. Schwarz, R.S. Gao, A.E. Perring, J.R. Spackman, and D.W. Fahey,
Black carbon aerosol size in snow. 
Scientific Reports,
 3, 2013.
4. A.H. Miguel, T.W. Kirchstetter, R.A. Harley, and S.V. Hering, On-Road
emissions of particulate polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and black carbon
from gasoline and diesel vehicles. 
Environmental Science & Technology,
 32,
450–455, 1998.
5. S.K. Sonkar, K.M. Tripathi, and S. Sarkar, Ferromagnetic behaviour of
anthropogenic multi-walled carbon nanotubes trapped in spider web indoor.Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,
 14, 2532–2538, 2014.
6. S.K. Sonkar, S. Tripathi, and S. Sarkar, Activation of aerial oxygen to
superoxide radical by carbon nanotubes in indoor spider web trapped aerosol.
Current Science,
 97, 1227–1230, 2009.
7. L.E. Murr, J.J. Bang, E.V. Esquivel, P.A. Guerrero, and D.A. Lopez,
Carbon nanotubes, nanocrystal forms, and complex nanoparticle aggregates
in common fuel-gas combustion sources and the ambient air
. Journal of
Nanoparticle Research,
 6, 241–251, 2004.
8. K.F. Soto, L.E. Murr, and K.M. Garza, Cytotoxic responses and potential
respiratory health effects of carbon and carbonaceous nanoparticulates in the
paso del norte airshed environment
. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health,
 5, 12–25, 2008.
9. L.E. Murr, and K.M. Garza, Natural and anthropogenic environmental
nanoparticulates: Their microstructural characterization and respiratory health
implications. 
Atmospheric Environment,
 43, 2683–2692, 2009.
10. M. Wang, B. Xu, J. Cao, X. Tie, H. Wang, R. Zhang, Y. Qian, P.J. Rasch,
S. Zhao, G. Wu, H. Zhao, D.R. Joswiak, J. Li, and Y. Xie, Carbonaceous
aerosols recorded in a southeastern Tibetan glacier: analysis of temporal
variations and model estimates of sources and radiative forcing. 
Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics,
 15, 1191–1204, 2015.
11. J. Lang, S. Cheng, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, and G. Wang, Air pollutant
emissions from on-road vehicles in China, 1999–2011. 
Science of The Total
Environment,
 496, 1–10, 2014.
12. L. Risom, M. Dybdahl, J. Bornholdt, U. Vogel, H. Wallin, P. Mùller, and
S. Loft, Oxidative DNA damage and defence gene expression in the mouse
lung after short-term exposure to diesel exhaust particles by inhalation.
Carcinogenesis,
 24, 1847–1852, 2003.
13. C.A. Pope, R.T. Burnett, M.J. Thun, E.E. Calle, D. Krewski, K. Ito, and
G.D. Thurston, Lung cancer, cardiopulmonary mortality, and longterm
exposure to fine particulate air pollution. 
The Journal of American Medical
Association,
 287, 1132–1141, 2002.
14. M.Z. Jacobson, Strong radiative heating due to the mixing state of black
carbon in atmospheric aerosols. 
Nature,
 409, 695–697, 2001.15. H. Cai, M.Q. Wang, Consideration of black carbon and primary organic
carbon emissions in life-cycle analysis of greenhouse gas emissions of
vehicle systems and fuels. 
Environmental Science & Technology,
 48, 12445–
12453, 2014.
16. S. Menon, J. Hansen, L. Nazarenko, and Y. Luo, Climate effects of black
carbon aerosols in China and India
. Science,
 297, 2250–2253, 2002.
17. S. Banerjee, S.N. Tripathi, U. Das, R. Ranjan, N. Jadhav, V.P. Singh, C.
Jariwala, S. Sonkar, and S. Sarkar, Enhanced persistence of fog under
illumination for carbon nanotube fog condensation nuclei. 
J. Appl. Phys.,
112, 24901–24904, 2012.
18. K.F. Soto, K.M. Garza, Y. Shi, and L.E. Murr, Direct contact cytotoxicity
assays for filter-collected, carbonaceous (soot) nanoparticulate material and
observations of lung cell response. 
Atmospheric Environment,
 42, 1970–
1982, 2008.
19. J. Xi, and B.-J. Zhong, Soot in diesel combustion systems. 
Chemical
Engineering & Technology,
 29, 665–673, 2006.
20. T. Uchida, O. Ohashi, H. Kawamoto, H. Yoshimura, K.-i. Kobayashi, M.
Tanimura, N. Fujikawa, T. Nishimoto, K. Awata, M. Tachibana, and K.
Kojima, Synthesis of single-wall carbon nanotubes from diesel soot. 
Jpn. J.
Appl. Phys,
 45, 8027–8029, 2006.
21. K.A. Katrlnak, P. Rez, and P.R. Buseck, Structural variations in
individual carbonaceous particles from an urban aerosol
. Environmental
Science & Technology,
 26, 1967–1976, 1992.
22. A. Evelyn, S. Mannick, and P.A. Sermon, Unusual carbon-based
nanofibers and chains among diesel-emitted particles. 
Nano Letters,
 3, 63–64,
2003.
23. L. Pahalagedara, H. Sharma, C.-H. Kuo, S. Dharmarathna, A. Joshi, S.L.
Suib, and A.B. Mhadeshwar, Structure and oxidation activity correlations for
carbon blacks and diesel soot. 
Energy Fuels,
 26, 6757–6764, 2012.
24. M. Knauer, M.E. Schuster, D. Su, R. Schlögl, R. Niessner, and N.P.
Ivleva, Soot Structure and reactivity analysis by raman microspectroscopy,
temperature-programmed oxidation, and high-resolution transmission
electron microscopy. 
The Journal of Physical Chemistry A,
 113, 13871–
13880, 2009.25. J.-O. Müller, D.S. Su, R.E. Jentoft, U. Wild, and R. Schlögl, Diesel
engine exhaust emission: Oxidative behavior and microstructure of black
smoke soot particulate. 
Environmental Science & Technology,
 40, 1231–
1236, 2006.
26. J.-O. Müller, D.S. Su, U. Wild, and R. Schlögla, Bulk and surface
structural investigations of diesel engine soot and carbon black. 
Physical
Chemistry Chemical Physics,
 9, 4018–4025, 2007.
27. P. Dubey, K.M. Tripathi, and S.K. Sonkar, Gram scale synthesis of green
fluorescent watersoluble onion-like carbon nanoparticles from camphor and
polystyrene foam
. RSC Advances,
 4, 5838–5844, 2014.
28. M. Ghosh, S.K. Sonkar, M. Saxena, and S. Sarkar, Carbon Nano-onions
for imaging the life cycle of drosophila melanogaster. 
Small,
 7, 3170–3177,
2011.
29. C.A. Roden, and T.C. Bond, Emission factors and real-time optical
properties of particles emitted from traditional wood burning cookstoves.
Environmental Science & Technology,
 40, 6750–6757, 2006.
30. K.M. Tripathi, A.K. Sonker, S.K. Sonkar, and S. Sarkar, Pollutant soot of
diesel engine exhaust transformed to carbon dots for multicoloured imaging
of E. coli and sensing cholesterol
. RSC Advances,
 4, 30100–30107, 2014.
31. Q. Wang, and Sheng-ruiZhang, Size separation of carbon nano particles
from diesel soot for Mn(II)sensing. 
Journal of Luminescence,
 146, 37–41,
2014.
32. M. Saxena, S. Maity, and S. Sarkar, Carbon nanoparticles in ‘biochar’
boost wheat (Triticum aestivum) plant growth. 
RSC Advances,
 4, 39948–
39954, 2014.
33. H.S. Jung, A. Miller, K. Park, and D.B. Kittelson, Carbon nanotubes
among diesel exhaust particles: real samples or contaminants? 
Journal of the
Air & Waste Management Association,
 63, 1199–1204, 2013.
34. A. Suryawanshi, M. Biswal, D. Mhamane, R. Gokhale, S. Patil, D. Guin,
and S. Ogale, Large scale synthesis of graphene quantum dots (GQDs) from
waste biomass and their use as an efficient and selective photoluminescence
on-off-on probe for Ag
+
 ions. 
Nanoscale,
 6, 11664–11670, 2014.
35. X. Qu, J. Brame, Q. Li, and P.J. Alvarez, Nanotechnology for a safe andsustainable water supply: Enabling integrated water treatment and reuse
.
Accounts of Chemical Research,
 46, 834–843, 2013.
36. W. Cayuela, M.L. Soriano, and M. Valcárcel, Photoluminescent carbon
dot sensor for carboxylated multiwalledcarbon nanotube detection in river
water
. Sensors and Actuators B,
 207, 596–601, 2015.
37. S. Sarkar, A. Allam, and I. Allam, US Patent Applications p. US
20120012522 A20120012521, 2012.
38. Y. Dong, G. Li, N. Zhou, R. Wang, Y. Chi, and G. Chen, Graphene
Quantum Dot as a Green and Facile Sensor for Free Chlorine in Drinking
Water. 
Analytical Chemistry,
 84, 8378–8382, 2012.
39. P.G. Luo, F. Yang, S.-T. Yang, S.K. Sonkar, L. Yang, J.J. Broglie, Y.
Liua, and Y.-P, Carbon-based quantum dots for fluorescence imaging of cells
and tissues. 
RSC Advances,
 4, 10791–10807, 2014.
40. P.G. Luo, S,S.-T. Yang, S.K. Sonkar, J. Wang, H. Wang, LeG.E. Croy, L.
Caoa, and Y.-P. Sun, Carbon “quantum” dots for optical bioimaging. 
Journal
of Materials Chemistry B,
 1, 2116–2127, 2013.
41. J. Wang, S. Sahu, S.K. Sonkar, K.N. Tackett II, K.W. Sun, Y. Liu, H.
Maimaiti, P. Anilkumara, and Sun, Y.-P., Versatility with carbon dots – from
overcooked BBQ to brightly fluorescent agents and photocatalysts. 
RSC
Advances,
 3, 15604–15607, 2013.
42. A. Begum, K.M. Tripathi, S. Sarkar, Water-induced formation,
characterization, and photoluminescence of carbon nanotube-based
composites of gadolinium(III) and platinum(II) dithiolenes. 
Chemistry - A
European Journal,
 20, 16657–16661, 2014.
43. H. Li, Z. Kang, Y. Liu, and S.-T. Lee, Carbon nanodots: synthesis,
properties and applications. 
Journal of Materials Chemistry,
 22, 24230–
24253, 2012.
44. S.K. Sonkar, M. Roy, D.G. Babar, and S. Sarkar, Water soluble carbon
nano-onions from wood wool as growth promoters for gram plants
.
Nanoscale,
 4, 7670–7675, 2012.
45. S.K. Sonkar, M. Saxena, M. Saha, and S. Sarkar, Carbon nanocubes and
nanobricks from pyrolysis of rice
. Journal of Nanoscience and
Nanotechnology,
 10, 4064–4067, 2010.46. P. Dubey, K.M. Tripathi, R. Mishra, A. Bhati, A. Singh and S.K. Sonkar,
A simple one -step hydrothermal route towards water solubilization of carbon
quantum dots from soya-nuggets for imaging applications. 5, 87528-87534,
2015.
47. M. Algarra, M. Pérez-Martín, M. Cifuentes-Rueda, J. Jiménez-Jiménez,
J.C.E.D. Silva, T.J. Bandosz, E. Rodríguez-Castellón, J.T. López, J.T.
NavarretefCasado, Carbon dots obtained using hydrothermal treatment of
formaldehyde. Cell imaging in vitro
. Nanoscale,
 6, 9071–9077, 2014.
48. B. Hu, K. Wang, L. Wu, S.-H. Yu, M. Antonietti, and M.-M. Titirici,
Engineering carbon materials from the hydrothermal carbonization process of
biomass
. Advanced Materials,
 22, 813–828, 2010.
49. L. Zhu, Y. Yin, C.-F. Wang, and S. Chen, Plant leaf-derived fluorescent
carbon dots for sensing, patterning and coding. 
Journal of Materials
Chemistry C,
 1, 4925–4932, 2013.
50. H.Y. Ko, Y.W. Chang, G. Paramasivam, M.S. Jeong, S. Cho, and a.S.
Kim, In vivo imaging of tumour bearing near infrared fluorescence- emitting
carbon nanodots derived from tire soot. 
Chemical Communications,
 49,
10290–10292, 2013.
51. A. Basu, A. Suryawanshi, B. Kumawat, A. Dandia, D. Guin, and S.B.
Ogale, Starch (Tapioca) to carbon dots: An efficient green approach to on-
off-on photoluminescence probe for fluoride ion sensing. 
Analyst,
 140, 1837–
1841, 2015.
52. L. Cao, M.J. Meziani, S. Sahu, and Y.-P. Sun, Photoluminescence
properties of graphene versus other carbon nanomaterials. 
Accounts of
Chemical Research,
 46, 171–180, 2013.
53. C.B. Murray, D.J. Norris, and M.G. Bawendi, Synthesis and
characterization of nearly monodisperse CdE (E = sulfur, selenium,
tellurium) semiconductor nanocrystallites. 
Journal of the American Chemical
Society,
 115, 8706–8715, 1993.
54. Y.-P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K.A. S. Fernando P. Pathak, M.J.
Meziani, B.A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. Wang, P.G. Luo, H. Yang, M.E. Kose,
B. Chen, L.M. Veca, and S.-Y. Xie, Quantum-sized carbon dots for bright
and colorful photoluminescence
. Journal of the American Chemical Society,
128, 7756–7757, 2006.55. S.-T. Yang, L. Cao, P.G. Luo, F. Lu, X. Wang, H. Wang, M.J. Meziani,
Y. Liu, G. Qi, and Y.-P. Sun, Carbon dots for optical imaging in vivo.
Journal of the American Chemical Society,
 131, 11308–11309, 2009.
56. F.R. Baptista, S.A. Belhout, S. Giordani, and S.J. Quinn, Recent
developments in carbon nanomaterial sensors. 
Chemical Society Reviews,
2015.
57. L. Cao, X. Wang, M.J. Meziani, F. Lu, H. Wang, P.G. Luo, Y. Lin, B.A.
Harruff, L.M. Veca, D. Murray, S.-Y. Xie, Y.-P. Sun, Carbon dots for
multiphoton bioimaging. 
Journal of the American Chemical Society,
 129,
11318–11319, 2007.
58. G.E. LeCroy, S.K. Sonkar, F. Yang, L.M. Veca, N. PingWang Kenneth, I.
Tackett, J.-J. Yu, E. Vasile, H. Qian, Y. Liu, P.G. Luo, and Y.-P. Sun,
Toward structurally defined carbon dots as ultracompact fluorescent probes.
ACS Nano,
 8, 4522, 2014.
59. S.K. Sonkar, M. Ghosh, M. Roy, A. Begum, and S. Sarkar, Carbon nano-
onions as nontoxic and high-fluorescence bioimaging agent in food chain—
An In vivo study from unicellular E. coli to Multicellular C. elegans
.
Materials Express,
 2, 105–114, 2012.
60. J. Bian, C. Huang, L. Wang, T. Hung, W.A. Daoud, and R. Zhang,
Carbon dot loading and TiO
2
 nanorod length dependence of
photoelectrochemical properties in carbon Dot/TiO
2
 nanorod array
nanocomposites. 
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces,
 6, 4883–4890, 2014.
61. M.A. Kumar, N.T. Narayanan, A.L.M. Reddy B.K. Gupta, B.
Chandrasekaran, S. Talapatra, P.M. Ajayan, and P. Thanikaivelan,
Transforming collagen wastes into doped nanocarbons for sustainable energy
applications. 
Green Chemistry,
 14, 1689–1695, 2012.
62. Y. Wang, F. Yan, S.W. Liu, A.Y. S. Tan H. Song, X.W. Sunbd, and H.Y.
Yang, Onion-like carbon matrix supported Co
3
O
4
 nanocomposites: a highly
reversible anode material for lithium ion batteries with excellent cycling
stability. 
Journal of Materials Chemistry A,
 1, 5212–5216, 2013.
63. A. Tyagi, K.M. Tripathi, and R.K. Gupta, Recent progress on micro-scale
energy storage devices and future aspects. 
Journal of Materials Chemistry A
,
3, 22507–22541, 2015.64. H. Li, X. He, Z. Kang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, J. Liu, S. Lian, C.H. A. Tsang
X. Yang, and S.-T. Lee, Water-soluble fluorescent carbon quantum dots and
photocatalyst design. 
Angewandte Chemie International Edition,
 49, 4430–
4434, 2010.
65. H. Ding, F. Du, P. Liu, Z. Chen, and J. Shen, DNA–carbon dots function
as fluorescent vehicles for drug delivery. 
ACS Applied Materials &
Interfaces,
 7, 6889–6897, 2015.
66. Y. Song, W. Shi, W. Chen, X. Li, and H. Ma, Fluorescent carbon
nanodots conjugated with folic acid for distinguishing folate-receptor-
positive cancer cells from normal cells. 
Journal of Materials Chemistry,
 22,
12568–12573, 2012.
67. T. Nishimoto, PCT Int. Appl, WO 2005049983, 2005.
68. M.A. Shannon, P.W. Bohn, M. Elimelech, J.G. Georgiadis, B.J. Mariñas,
and A.M. Mayes, Science and technology for water purification in the
coming decades
. Nature,
 452, 301–310, 2008.
69. G.P. Rao, C. Lu, and F. Su, Sorption of divalent metal ions from aqueous
solution by carbon nanotubes: A review. 
Separation and Purification
Technology,
 58, 224–231, 2007.
70. S. Sarkar, S.K. Sonkar, and S. Ghosal, “Fabrication of filter using
nanocomposite materials for the removal of toxic minerals and microbes from
water for drinking” Indian patent (2009) IPA, 4396, 2009.
71. L. Kui, Z. GuiXia, and W. XiangKe, A brief review of graphene-based
material synthesis and its application in environmental pollution
management
. Chinese Science Bulletin,
 57, 1223–1234, 2012.
72. Lalhmunsiama, D. Tiwari, and S.-M. Lee, Activated carbon and
manganese coated activated carbon precursor to dead biomass in the
remediation of arsenic contaminated water. 
Environmental Engineering
Research,
 17, 41–48, 2012.
73. D. Mohana, C.U. Pittman, Activated carbons and low cost adsorbents for
remediation of tri- and hexavalent chromium from water
. Journal of
Hazardous Materials B,
 137, 762–811, 2006.
74. P. Dubey, S.K. Sonkar, S. Majumder, K.M. Tripathi, and S. Sarkar,
Isolation of water soluble carbon nanotubes with network structurepossessing multipodal junctions and its magnetic property
. RSC Advances,
 3,
7306–7312, 2013.
75. K.M. Tripathi, A. Begum, S.K. Sonkar, and S. Sarkar, Nanospheres of
copper(III) 1,2-dicarbomethoxy-1,2- dithiolate and its composite with water
soluble carbon nanotubes
. New Journal of Chemistry,
 37, 2708–2715, 2013.
76. N.D. Shooto, and E.D. Dikio, Synthesis and characterization of diesel,
kerosene and candle wax soot’s. 
International Journal of Electrochemical
Science,
 7, 4335–4344, 2012.
77. J. Muller, F.o. Huaux, and D. Lison, Respiratory toxicity of carbon
nanotubes: How worried should we be? 
Carbon,
 44, 1048–1056, 2006.
78. D. Bhattacharya, S. Maji, K. Pal, and S. Sarkar, Formation of superoxide
anion on aerial oxidation of Cu(II)–porphyrinogen in the synthesis of
tetrakis(cyclohexyl)porphyrinogenCu(III) anion. 
Inorganic Chemistry,
 47,
5036–5038, 2008.
79. B. White, S. Banerjee, S. O’Brien, N.J. Turro, and I.P. Herman, Zeta-
potential measurements of surfactant-wrapped individual single-walled
carbon nanotubes. 
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C,
 111, 13684–13690,
2007.
80. D.G. Babar, S.K. Sonkar, K.M. Tripathi, and S. Sarkar, P
2
O
5
 Assisted
green synthesis of multicolor fluorescent water soluble carbon dots. 
Journal
of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,
 14, 2334–2342, 2014.
81. L. Tian, D. Ghosh, W. Chen, S. Pradhan, X. Chang, and S. Chen,
Nanosized carbon particles from natural gas soot
. Chemistry of materials,
 21,
2803–2809, 2009.
82. H. Liu, T. Ye, and C. Mao, Fluorescent carbon nanoparticles derived
from candle soot
. Angewandte Chemie International Edition,
 46, 6473–6475,
2007.
83. K.G. Bhattacharyya, and A. Sharma, Kinetics and thermodynamics of
Methylene Blue adsorption on Neem (Azadirachta indica) leaf powder. 
Dyes
and Pigments,
 65, 51–59, 2005.
84. A. Dąbrowski, Adsorption – from theory to practice. 
Advances in Colloid
and Interface Science,
 93, 135–224, 2001.
85. T. Robinson, G. McMullan, R. Marchant, and P. Nigam, Remediation ofdyes in textile effluent: a critical review on current treatment technologies
with a proposed alternative. 
Bioresource Technology,
 77, 247–255, 2001.
86. T. Lv, L. Pan, X. Liua, and Z. Suna, Enhanced photocatalytic degradation
of methylene blue by ZnO–reduced graphene oxide–carbon nanotube
composites synthesized via microwave-assisted reaction. 
Catalysis Science &
T
e
chnolo
g
y,
 2, 2297–2301, 2012.
87. F. Wang, C. Li, and J.C. Yu, Hexagonal tungsten trioxide nanorods as a
rapid adsorbent for methylene blue. 
Separation and Purification Technology,
91, 103–107, 2012.
88. V. Chandra, J. Park, Y. Chun, J.W. Lee, I.-C. Hwang, K.S. Kim, Water-
dispersible magnetite-reduced graphene oxide composites for arsenic
removal
. ACS Nano,
 4, 3979–3986, 2010.
89. L. Zhou, Y. Lin, Z. Huang, J. Ren, and X. Qu, Carbon nanodots as
fluorescence probes for rapid, sensitive, and label-free detection of Hg
2+
 and
biothiols in complex matrices. 
Chemical Communications,
 48, 1147–1149,
2012.
90. S.S. Wee, Y.H. Ng, and S.M. Ng, Synthesis of fluorescent carbon dots via
simple acid hydrolysis of bovine serum albumin and its potential as sensitive
sensing probe for lead(II)ions. 
Talanta,
 116, 71–76, 2013.
91. J.O. Nriagu, A silent epidemic of environmental metal poisoning
.
Environmental Pollution,
 50, 139–161, 1988.
92. P. Madoni, D. Davoli, G. Gorbi, and L. Vescovi, Toxic effect of heavy
metals on the activated sludge protozoan community. 
Water Research,
 30
(1996).
93. G. Cimino, and C. Caristi, Acute toxicity of heavy metals to aerobic
digestion of waste cheese whey. 
Biological Wastes,
 33, 201–210, 1990.
94. S, De Flora, Threshold mechanisms and site specificity in chromium(VI)
carcinogenesis. 
Carcinogenesis,
 21, 533–541, 2000.
95. X. Wang, J. Liu, and W. Xu, One-step hydrothermal preparation of
amino-functionalized carbon spheres at low temperature and their enhanced
adsorption performance towards Cr(VI) for water purification. 
Colloids and
Surfaces A: Physicochem. Eng. Aspects,
 415, 288–294, 2012.
96. Z. Yang, Z. Li, M. Xu, Y. Ma, J. Zhang, Y. Su, F. Gao, H. Wei, and L.Zhang, Controllable synthesis of fluorescent carbon dots and their detection
application as nanoprobes. 
Nano-Micro Letters,
 5, 247–259, 2013.Chapter 6
First-Principles Computational Design
of Graphene for Gas Detection
Yoshitaka Fujimoto
1
*
1
Department of Physics, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Meguro, Tokyo,
Japan
*
Corresponding author:
 
fujimoto@stat.phys.titech.ac.jp
Abstract
Introducing the impurities into graphene sheets can tailor the electronic
properties. The graphene doped with impurities might offer not only novel
physical/chemical properties but also device materials used in various
applications such as field-effect transistors, energy storages, and gas sensors.
This chapter provides a review of a first-principles density-functional study
for designing the grapheme-based sensing device materials. We show the
stabilities and the electronic properties of various defect configurations in
graphene induced by substitutionally doping with nitrogen atoms. We also
show adsorption effects of various gas molecules onto the graphene and
discuss the possibilities for detecting various molecular gases.
Keywords:
 Graphene, defect, gas sensing
6.1 Introduction
Since its successful exfoliation from multilayer of graphite, graphene, a
single atomic layer consisting of two-dimensional hexagon-shaped network,has been regarded as an interesting material in the field of nanoscience and
nanotechnology because of its unique physical and chemical properties [1–3].
One of the prominent features in graphene is that the electronic-band
structure near the Dirac point has a linear dispersion and thereby electrons
near the Fermi energy behave like massless Dirac fermions. From the
viewpoint of applicable nanoelectronics and relevant nanotechnology,
graphene has been also considered to be a good candidate for future
nanoelectronics materials because it possesses the extremely high carrier
mobility [3]. Graphene, therefore, has been expected to be applied to
nanoelectronics, optoelectronics, storages, sensors, etc. To obtain desired
applications, it is of great importance to understand how the electronic
structures of graphene-based materials can be controlled by introducing
lattice defects such as impurity dopants and atomic vacancies.
One of the effective ways to tailor the electronic properties of graphene is
to dope heteroatoms into the hexagonal carbon network of graphene. It is
known that as-prepared graphene is readily 
p
-doped by adsorption of
impurities [4]. On the other hand, substitution with nitrogen is expected to be
an effective way to provide 
n
-type doping property of graphene-based
materials for the fabrication of electron devices. The nitrogen doping into
graphene as well as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) has been performed by plasma
method and chemical vapor deposition, and the various nitrogen-defect
configurations in graphene and CNTs have been observed experimentally by
using x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and transmission electron
microscopy. These experimental observations have suggested that there are
two major nitrogen-defect configurations: one is a substitutional nitrogen
configuration where one C atom is simply replaced by one N atom, which is
three-fold coordinated with C atoms, and the other one is a pyridine-type
configuration where each N atom around a vacancy is two-fold coordinated
with C atoms [5–7]. Several theoretical calculations have revealed that the
substitutional nitrogen defect induces 
n
-type doping property, while the
pyridine-type defects give rise to the 
p
-type doping one [8–12].
The electronic structures of graphene can be also modified by molecular
adsorption. The adsorption of a NO
2
 molecule on graphene induces a strong
acceptor, and thereby is expected to be suitable for possible chemical sensor
applications [13]. The recent experiments suggest that gas molecularadsorption in graphene can be detected [14]. The electronic properties of
graphene can change from the (semi)-metallic to the semiconducting
properties by hydrogenation, and the band gap of the hydrogenated graphene
can be tuned depending on hydrogen coverages [15]. Substitutional doping
can often improve the adsorption effects of impurity molecules [16]. It has
been reported that boron-doped as well as phosphorus-doped graphenes
enhance gas sensing of several molecules of CO, NO, etc. [17, 18].
In this chapter, we review our first-principles electronic-structure study that
clarifies energetics and electronic properties of plausible nitrogen-defect
configurations in graphene and their adsorption effects of molecular gases. In
the first part, we study the possible atomic configurations of the nitrogen
defects in graphene and discuss the energetics associated with how the
pyridine-type defect configuration is formed. We also examine how the
nitrogen monovacancy and divacancy complexes modify the electronic
structures of graphene. In the next part, we further investigate the adsorptions
of several molecules on various nitrogen-defect configurations in graphene.
The adsorption energies of hydrogen, ammonia and water molecules onto the
substitutional nitrogen and the pyridine-type defects in graphene are
calculated to discuss the reactivity of the various nitrogen defects. The
electronic energy bands and the relevant properties are calculated and the
possibility to detect several gas molecules is discussed.
This chapter is organized as follows. In Section 6.2, we give the
computational details. In Section 6.3, we report the atomic configurations, the
stabilities and the electronic structures of plausible nitrogen defects in
graphene. In Section 6.4, we reveal the energetics and the electronic
properties of several gas molecules adsorbed on various N-doped graphenes.
In Section 6.5, we finally conclude together with discussions on the
possibility for detecting gas molecules.
6.2 Computational Methodology
First-principles total-energy calculations have been performed within the
framework of the density-functional theory (DFT) to determine the atomic
and the electronic structures [19]. The interactions between the ions and the
valence electrons are described by the norm-conserving Troullier–Martinspseudopotentials [20], and exchange-correlation effects are treated using the
local density approximation (LDA) parameterized by Perdew and Zunger
[21–23]. Wave functions in the Kohn–Sham equations are expanded in terms
of the plane-wave basis set with the cutoff energy of 50 Ry [24]. The vacuum
region of the supercell along the direction perpendicular to graphene is set to
be more than 12 Å for the calculations of the energetics and the electronic-
band structures. The Brillouin zone (BZ) integration is performed with 6 × 6
× 1 and 3 × 3 × 1 k-point samplings for the calculations of 4 × 4 and 8 × 8
supercells, respectively. Upon the geometry optimization, atomic
configurations are updated until Hellmann–Feynman forces acting on all
atoms are less than 0.05 eV/Å. All atomic geometries are fully optimized in
this manner. In addition to the LDA calculations, we have also performed the
electronic-structure calculations using the local spin density approximation
(LSDA) for the geometries optimized by LDA calculations in order to
examine the magnetic moments of the various N-doped graphenes [21–23].
In Section 6.3, we deal with five N-doped graphene systems and two
undoped defective graphene systems in order to discuss the energetics and the
electronic properties of nitrogen defects in a graphene. For the calculations of
the N-doped as well as the undoped defective graphenes, we use a 4 × 4
supercell along the directions parallel to the graphene sheet. 
Figure 6.1
exhibits the atomic structures of various N-doped and undoped graphenes. In
Figure 6.1a
, the substitutional nitrogen defect in graphene (CN), where one C
atom is simply replaced with one N atom. In 
Figure 6.1b
–
d
, the trimerized
defect (C
28
N
3
), the monomeric (C
30
 N), and the dimerized (C
29
N
2
)
pyridine-type formations are illustrated, respectively, where N atoms are
located around a monovacancy. In 
Figure 6.1e
, the tetramerized pyridine-type
formation in graphene (C
26
N
4
) is also shown, where four N atoms are placed
around a divacancy. In 
Figure 6.1f
 and 
g
, the undoped defective graphenes
with a monovacancy (C
31
) and a divacancy (C
30
) are shown, respectively.
Figure 6.1
 Atomic configurations of N-doped graphene and undoped but
defective graphene: (a) substitutional nitrogen defect (C
31
N), (b) trimerized
pyridine-type defect (C
28
N
3
), (c) monomeric pyridine-type defect (C
30
N),
(d) dimerized pyridine-type defect (C
29
N
2
), (e) tetramerized pyridine-type
defect (C
26
N
4
), (f) a monovacancy (C
31
), and (g) a divacancy (C
30
). In eachcase, the atomic geometry is fully optimized in the framework of the DFT
(see text). The dashed lines show the supercell.
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [11], copyright 2011 the American Physical Society.In Section 6.4, for the calculations of the energetics on the several
molecular adsorptions, the 4 × 4 supercell is used, whereas the 8 × 8 supercell
is used for the calculations of the energy-band structures (see 
Figure 6.3
).
6.3 Nitrogen Doping and Nitrogen
Vacancy Complexes in Graphene
6.3.1 Atomic Structures
To discuss the atomic structures and the structural stabilities, the geometry
optimizations of the pristine, the undoped defective, and the various nitrogen-
doped graphenes have been performed based on the LDA within the DFT.
We here show the optimized atomic structure of the pristine graphene. The
optimized lattice constant value of the pristine graphene is 2.44 Å. It agrees
well with an experimental value, 2.46 Å and is also in good agreement with
other calculated lattice constant values and bond lengths [25, 26].
We here consider the structural properties of the N-doped graphene. Let us
first begin with examining the atomic structure of the substitutional nitrogen
defect where one C atom is substituted with one N atom, as shown in 
Figure
6.1a
. The optimized C–N bond length of the substitutional N defect in
graphene is 1.40 Å, and it is found to be somewhat short compared with the
calculated C–C bond length of 1.41 Å in the pristine graphene. In addition, it
should be noted that the N atom resides in a planar graphene sheet and the
atomic geometry of the substitutional N-defective graphene has 
D
3h
symmetry.
We next consider the pyridine-type defects around a monovacancy, where a
single C atom is removed. In the case of the trimerized formation as shown in
Figure 6.1b
, each N atom is two-fold coordinated with the C–N bond length
of 1.33 Å, which is found to be much shorter than a C–C bond length in a
pristine graphene. In order to gain an insight into the structural properties of
the nitrogen vacancy complex defects, let us here consider the undoped but
defective graphene with a monovacancy, where one C atom is simply
removed. The structural relaxation near the monovacancy seems to proceedunder a Jahn–Teller distortion, i.e., two of three C atoms around the vacancy
approach each other, resulting in a pentagon-like structure [27, 28] and the
symmetry around the vacancy is lowered from 
D
3h
 to 
C
s
 (see 
Figure 6.1f
).
The distance between these two C atoms is much longer than the C–C bond
length in a pristine graphene, indicating that any interactions between two C
atoms seem to be relatively weak [26]. In the case of the trimerized pyridine-
type defects, three N atoms around the monovacancy move away from one
another (
Figure 6.1b
), and the trimerized pyridine-type defect still keeps 
D
3h
symmetry.
We also examine the monomeric and the dimerized formations of the
pyridine-type defects around the monovacancy. For the monomeric pyridine-
type defect formation (
Figure 6.1c
), two C atoms near the monovacancy
approach each other and the covalent bond is formed between the two C
atoms, resulting in the formation of a pentagon-like ring. This behavior is
similar to that around the monovacancy in undoped graphene, as discussed
earlier. In addition, the pentagon-like structure is also observed in the
monomeric formation of the pyridine-type defects in (10,0) CNT [10]. In the
case of the dimerized formation (
Figure 6.1d
), the distance between the C
atom and the N atom around the monovacancy, which is approximately 2.46
Å, is considerably large compared with the C–C bond length of the pristine
graphene. The C atom near the monovacancy thereby possesses an 
sp
2
-
dangling bond and the covalent bond between the C atom and the N atom
does not seem to be formed. The structural behavior is quite different from
that of the dimerized pyridine-type defects in the N-doped (10,0) CNT; the C
atom and the N atom in the dimerized pyridine-type defects of the N-doped
(10,0) CNT can form the covalent bond, while that of N-doped graphene
cannot form it. These differences would arise from curvature effects in CNTs
[10].
We further study the pyridine-type defect in N-doped graphene with a
divacancy where two C atoms are removed. In this case, we consider the
tetramerized pyridine-type formation where four N atoms are arranged
around the divacancy shown in 
Figure 6.1e
. The four N atoms in the defect
region move away from one another and the C–N bond lengths are found to
be approximately 1.32–1.33 Å after structural optimizations. On the other
hand, in the case of the undoped graphene with the divacancy, theneighboring C atoms around the divacancy approach each other, resulting in
the formation of the pentagon–octagon–pentagon rings after the structural
relaxation of the divacancy (
Figure 6.1g
). Thus, C atoms around the
divacancy favor the C–C bonding configurations to saturate dangling bonds
of the C atoms [27, 28], whereas the N atoms of the pyridine-type defects do
not prefer the N–N bonding ones.
6.3.2 Energetics
To examine the energetic stabilities of the various nitrogen-defect
configurations in graphene, we now define the formation energy 
E
f
associated with nitrogen doping into a graphene sheet as
(6.1) 
where 
E
tot
 is the total energy of the N-doped graphene; 
m
C
 and 
m
N
 are the
number of C and N atoms in a supercell, respectively; and 
µ
N
 and 
µ
N
 are the
chemical potentials of C and N atoms using pristine graphene and N
2
molecule as reference systems, respectively.
Table 6.1
 summarizes the calculated formation energies. The substitutional
nitrogen-defective graphene has the formation energy of 0.32 eV, which is
the lowest among various N-doped graphene systems treated here (see 
Figure
6.1
). This suggests that the substitutional N-defect configuration is the most
plausible structure when N atom is doped into a graphene sheet. On the other
hand, the formation energy of N-doped graphene with the trimerized
pyridine-type defects is found to be 2.51 eV and is the lowest among these
nitrogen vacancy complex defects. Thereby the trimerized pyridine-type
defects are expected to be the plausible defect structure if there are the
nitrogen vacancy complexes in graphene. The tetramerized pyridine-type
defects are also considered to be the possible defect configurations because
the formation energy of the tetramerized pyridine-type defect is 2.55 eV and
it is larger by only 40 meV than that of the trimerized pyridine-type
configurations [11].
Table 6.1
 Formation energies of various nitrogen defects in graphene.We further extend the discussion on the energetics of the N-doped
graphene. The formation energy discussed earlier implies the energetic
preferences of the nitrogen doping into a perfect graphene. We here consider
the energetics corresponding to the growth processes from the substitutional
nitrogen defect into the pyridine-type defects in graphene. For this purpose,
we define the relative energies, which are comparing directly the total energy
of the pyridine-type configuration with that of the substitutional N-defect
configuration, as
(6.2)
 
(6.3)
 
(6.4)
 
(6.5)
 
Here, 
E
tot
 (C
32
), 
E
tot
 (C
31
), and 
E
tot
 (C
30
) are the total energies of
pristine graphene, undoped graphene with a monovacancy, undoped graphene
with a divacancy, respectively, and 
E
tot
(C
28
N
3
), 
E
tot
(C
29
N
2
), 
E
tot
(C
30
N),
and 
E
tot
(C
31
N) are also total energies of N-doped graphenes with trimerized,
dimerized, monomeric pyridine-type defects, and substitutional N defect,
respectively. 
E
tot
(C
1
) is energy per atom in a pristine graphene, which is the
same as the chemical potential μ
C
 defined earlier.
We show in 
Table 6.2
 the relative energies 
E
1
–E
5
 defined by 
Eqs
(6.2
–
6.5)
. As can be seen from the definitions of 
E
1
 and 
E
2
 (
Eqs 6.2
 and 
6.3
),
the relative energies of 
E
1
 and 
E
2
 suggest the energetic preferences in the
presence of the monovacancy and the divacancy in graphene, respectively.
The relative energy 
E
1
 means that the trimerized pyridine-type configurationbecomes energetically favorable by 6.76 eV rather than the substitutional
nitrogen configuration in the presence of a monovacancy in graphene. In the
presence of a divacancy in graphene, the trimerized pyridine-type
configuration is also energetically favorable by 
E
2
 = –7.13 eV. We also
discuss the relative energies 
E
3
 and 
E
4
 defined by 
Eqs (6.4)
 and 
(6.5)
, which
correspond to the growth processes from the monomeric pyridine-type
defects and the dimerized pyridine-type defects into the trimerized pyridine-
type defects, respectively. The relative energy value 
E
3
 = –3.75 eV exhibits
that the trimerized pyridine-type configuration becomes more stable than the
monomeric pyridine-type one by 3.75 eV if two substitutional N defects are
present in graphene and they can react with the monomeric pyridine-type
defect. The relative energy 
E
4
 = –2.10 eV also means that the dimerized
pyridine-type defect formation is less stable than the trimerized one by 2.10
eV. Thus, the pyridine-type defect formations are found to be more stable in
energy than the substitutional nitrogen-defect formation in the presence of the
atomic vacancies in graphene. Furthermore, it is found that the trimerized
defect formation in the pyridine-type defect is preferred energetically rather
than the monomeric and the dimerized pyridine-type ones.
Table 6.2
 Calculated relative energies of nitrogen-doped graphenes.
6.3.3 Electronic Structures
We here study the electronic structures of N-doped graphenes with
substitutional nitrogen (
Figure 6.1a
), trimerized pyridine-type (
Figure 6.1b
),
and tetramerized pyridine-type (
Figure 6.1e
) defects. 
Figure 6.2a
 shows the
energy bands of the substitutional nitrogen defect in graphene. It is observed
that there is an impurity state induced by the substitutional nitrogen defect
near the conduction-band minimum, and the substitutionally N-doped
graphene thus would exhibit 
n
-type conducting behavior since N atompossesses extra one electron compared with C atom and it should behave as
the donor-type state. In 
Figure 6.2b
, we show the isosurface of electron
density of substitutionally N-doped graphene at the Γ point. The spatial
distribution of electron density related to the nitrogen impurity is delocalized
around the N atom rather than localized above the N atom. It is interesting
that this delocalization in the electron density is also observed in other defects
with three-fold symmetry as in the case of the impurity doped and impurity
adsorbed graphenes [29–31].
Figure 6.2
 Energy bands of N-doped graphenes with (a) substitutional N, (c)
trimerized pyridine-type, and (g) tetramerized pyridine-type defects.
Isosurfaces of electron density of (b) substitutional N, (d–f) trimerized
pyridine-type, and (h) tetramerized pyridine-type defects in graphene. The
isosurface value of electron density is set to 0.03 electron/Å
3
. The Fermi
energy is set to zero. The dashed lines show the supercell.
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [11], copyright 2011 the American Physical Society.Figure 6.2c
 exhibits the energy bands of the trimerized pyridine-type
defective graphene. Being different from the case of the substitutional
nitrogen-defective graphene, the energy bands of the trimerized pyridine-type
defective graphene shows sharp contrast: the impurity-induced states is
located near the valence-band maximum since the number of electrons of the
trimerized pyridine-type defective graphene is deficient compared with a
pristine graphene. Due to the electron deficiency, the acceptor-type state is
induced above the valence-band maximum and the trimerized pyridine-type
defective graphene would possess 
p
-type conducting property. It is observed
that there are three impurity-related states near the Fermi level induced by the
existence of the trimerized pyridine-type defects. 
Figure 6.2d
–
f
 displays the
isosurfaces of electron states of the trimerized pyridine-type defective
graphene, which are composed of a single state (
Figure 6.2d
) and doubly
degenerated states (
Figure 6.2e
 and 
f
) and at the Γ point. The single state is
mainly composed of the 
p
z
-orbital character, whereas the doubly degenerated
states are of 
p
x
-
 and 
p
y
-orbital characters. Interestingly, it is noted that the
feature of these impurity states induced by the trimerized pyridine-type defect
is similar to that of unrelaxed structure of undoped graphene with a
monovacancy [27].
We show in 
Figure 6.2g
 the energy bands of the tetramerized pyridine-type
defective graphene. It is also observed that there are several nitrogen-related
impurity states near the Fermi level, and the impurity state above the Fermi
level would behaves as an acceptor-type state since the number of the
electron is also deficient compared with a pristine graphene as in the case of
the trimerized pyridine-type defective graphene. Thereby, the graphene with
the tetramerized pyridine-type defects would possess the 
p
-type conductive
behavior. In 
Figure 6.2h
, we also show the isosurface of the electron state of
the tetramerized pyridine-type defective graphene above the Fermi level at
the Γ point. It is observed that the spatial distributions of the electronic
density of the impurity state induced by the tetramerized pyridine-type
defects are localized around the divacancy and it is composed of 
p
x
-
 and 
p
y
-
type orbital characters localized at the N atoms.
We have also calculated the magnetic moments of various N-doped
graphenes in 
Figure 6.1a
–
e
, based on the spin-polarized DFT. It is found thatonly the trimerized pyridine-type defective graphene (
Figure 6.1b
) shows the
magnetic moment of 0.89 μ
Β
 and the magnetic moments of other N-doped
graphenes are found to be zero. In addition, the total-energy difference
between spin-polarized and spin-unpolarized calculations of the trimerized
pyridine-type defective graphene is found to be only 20 meV. This implies
that the trimerized pyridine-type defective graphene has the magnetic
moment at low temperature. Therefore, it is interesting that the trimerized
pyridine-type defect is expected to behave as a source of magnetism in
graphene under the condition of the low temperature. Thus, the electron
deficiency and the atomic vacancies in the pyridine-type defects would give
rise to the rich electronic properties and enhance the reactivity of graphene,
and this leads to developments of the novel and/or the useful graphene-based
materials as discussed in the next section 1.4.
6.4 Molecular Gas Adsorptions
6.4.1 Energetics and Structure
6.4.1.1 Hydrogen Adsorption
To discuss the energetic stabilities, we define adsorption energy 
E
a
 of the
hydrogen atoms as
(6.6) 
where 
E
tot
 and 
E
sub
 are the total energies of graphenes with and without H
atoms, respectively, 
m
H
 is the number of H atoms adsorbed on a graphene,
and is the total energy of the H
2
 molecule. In the present study, we consider
the H
2
 molecule as hydrogen source and therefore its energy (
E
H
) is used in
the definition of the adsorption energy.
Before studying H atom adsorption on N-doped graphene, we start with
examining H atom adsorption on a pristine graphene. The adsorption energy
of H atoms on the top of the C atom in a pristine graphene is found to be 1.40
eV and is energetically unfavorable. The C–H bond length is approximately1.13Å and is in good agreement with previous reports [32, 33].
Let us here consider the adsorption of H atoms on the N-doped graphene.
We first consider the adsorption of one H atom near the substitutional
nitrogen defect in graphene. As adsorption sites of the H atom, there are three
different sites: the N atom (A
1
), the C atoms next to the N atom (A
2
), and the
second-nearest neighbor the C atoms (A
3
) (see 
Figure 6.3a
). In 
Figure 6.4a
,
we list the calculated adsorption energies at three sites (A
1
–A
3
). The
adsorption energy at A
2
 site is found to be the lowest among three adsorption
sites but it is still energetically unfavorable (
E
a
 = 0.27 eV) as in the case of
the pristine graphene. It is interesting that the adsorption energy at the C atom
next to the N atom (A
2
 site) is lower than that at the N atom (A
1
 site).
Figure 6.3
 Optimized atomic structures (upper panels) and band structures
(lower panels) of N-doped graphenes with (a) substitutional nitrogen defect,
(b) trimerized pyridine-type defects, and (c) tetramerized pyridine-type
defects. The hexagonal-lattice supercell is denoted by dotted line. The labels
A
1
–A
3
 and N
1
–N
3
 denote the adsorption sites of H atoms. The vacuum level
is set to be zero and the horizontal broken line represents the Fermi energy.
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [12], copyright 2014 the American Institute of Physics.
Figure 6.4
 (a) Adsorption energies at three different sites A
1
–A
3
 in
substitutional N-defective graphene. The sites A
1
–A
3
 are denoted in 
Figure
6.1a
. (b) Adsorption energies of H atoms on the trimerized and the
tetramerized pyridine-type defects in graphene as a function of the number ofH atoms.
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [12], copyright 2014 the American Institute of Physics.
This is because the extra electron in the substitutional N-defective graphene
is delocalized around the N atom (see 
Figure 6.2b
). In addition, it is also
noticed that the result in adsorption energy is different from that of (10,0)
CNT; In the case of substitutional N-defective (10,0) CNT, when one H atom
is adsorbed outside the CNT, the adsorption energy is –0.29 eV and becomes
energetically favorable [34], while the H atom adsorption becomes
energetically unfavorable by the adsorption energy of 0.78 eV when adsorbed
inside the CNT. Interestingly, the average of these two adsorption energies
takes almost the same value as the adsorption energy of the N-doped
graphene. Thus, the curvature effects would cause the difference in the
adsorption energy between the graphene and the CNT, implying that the
hydrogen favors the 
sp
3
-bonding configuration rather than the 
sp
2
-bonding
one [12, 34].
We next move on to the discussion of the adsorption of H atoms on the
pyridine-type defective graphene. In 
Figure 6.4b
, we show the adsorption
energies of H atoms for the trimerized pyridine-type as well as the
tetramerized pyridine-type defects in graphene as a function of the number of
H atoms. In the case of the trimerized pyridine-type defects, we consider
three N sites as possible adsorption sites of H atoms. The adsorption of H
atoms on the trimerized pyridine-type defects becomes energetically
favorable and the adsorption energy (
E
a
 = –3.19 eV) is found to be the lowest
when two H atoms are adsorbed. For the tetramerized pyridine-type defects,
the adsorption of H atoms is also an exothermic reaction for all four caseswith different numbers of H atoms adsorbed on the defect. As in the case of
the trimerized pyridine-type defects, it is found that the adsorption energy is
the lowest when two H atoms are adsorbed (
Figure 6.4b
). As the adsorption
sites of two H atoms, there are three possible different combinations: N
1
–N
2
,
N
1
–N
3
, and N
2
–N
3
 (see 
Figure 6.3c
). The adsorption energies (
E
a
) at N
1
–
N
2
, N
1
–N
3
, and N
2
–N
3
 sites are –4.11, –2.54, and –4.16 eV, respectively. It
is found that the adsorption energy (
E
a
 = –4.16eV) is the lowest when two H
atoms are adsorbed at N
2
 and N
3
 sites.
We further consider chemical dissociations of H
2
 molecules adsorbed on
the pyridine-type defects in graphene. 
Figure 6.5a
 and 
b
 illustrates initial
atomic configurations of H
2
 molecules on the trimerized and the tetramerized
pyridine-type defects at the beginning of the structural optimizations,
respectively. The distance between two H atoms in the H
2
 molecule is taken
to be 0.75 Å, and the H
2
 molecule is arranged at a distance of ~1.1 Å from
one of the N atoms in the pyridine-type defects. The final atomic
configurations after structural optimizations for the trimerized and the
tetramerized pyridine-type defects are shown in 
Figure 6.5c
 and d,
respectively. In both cases, the chemical dissociation of the H
2
 molecule is
found to take place without a reaction barrier, which means that the H
2
molecule near the pyridine-type defect can dissociate into two H atoms and
these two H atoms eventually bind with two different N atoms in the
pyridine-type defect. For the optimized structure of two H atoms adsorbed on
the trimerized pyridine-type graphene, the two N–H bond lengths are both
1.04 Å, and two H atoms are located at upper and lower positions from the
planar graphene sheet as shown in 
Figure 6.5c
 because of any electrostatic
repulsions between two H atoms.
Figure 6.5
 Initial geometries of H
2
 molecules on (a) the trimerized and (b)
the tetramerized pyridine-type defects in graphene. Top views (upper panel)
and side views (lower panel) of optimized geometries of two H atoms
adsorbed on (c) the trimerized pyridine-type defect and (d) the tetramerized
one.
Reproduced with permission from Ref [12], copyright 2014 the American Institute of Physics.For the tetramerized pyridine-type defects, the two N–H bond lengths are
both 1.08 Å and two H atoms are in the planar graphene sheet as shown in
Figure 6.5d
. This structural behavior differs from the case of the trimerized
pyridine-type defects because a void in a divacancy is larger than that in a
monovacancy. Thus, the high reactivities of the trimerized as well as the
tetramerized pyridine-type defects for the H
2
 molecule indicate the possible
high reactivities of these defects for other chemical species as well. Thereby,
graphene with pyridine-type defects would be useful as catalysts.
6.4.1.2 Water and Ammonia Molecular Adsorptions
We here study the structural properties of the adsorption of ammonia and
water molecules on the pyridine-type N-doped graphene. 
Figure 6.6a
 and 
b
shows the optimized atomic structures of NH
3
 and H
2
O molecules on the
pyridine-type defects in graphene, respectively. When the NH
3
 molecule isdissociated into H atom and NH
2
 molecule and they are chemically bound on
the pyridine-type N-doped graphene, two N-H bond lengths and N-N bond
length in the NH
2
 site are found to be both 1.03 Å and 1.41 Å, respectively.
The two bond angles of H-N-N bonds in the NH
2
 adsorption site are 107.4°
and 108.5° (see 
Figure 6.6a
). We also calculate the bond lengths and the bond
angles of the isolated NH
3
 molecule. The N-H bond length and the H-N-H
bond angle of the isolated NH
3
 molecule are 1.02 Å and 107.2° in our
calculation, respectively. In the case of the adsorption of H
2
O molecule, the
H atom and the OH molecule also bind chemically two different N atoms in
the pyridine-type defect. The lengths of O-H and N-O bonds are 1.02 Å and
1.41 Å, respectively, and the bond angle of H-O-N is 99.4°. On the other
hand, the O-H bond length and the H-O-H bond angle of the isolated H
2
O
molecule are 0.98 Å and 104.3°, respectively. Thus, the atomic
configurations of NH
2
 and OH still remain nearly unchanged compared with
those of isolated NH
3
 and H
2
O molecules when NH
2
 and OH are adsorbed
at the N atoms in the pyridine-type defect, respectively. On the other hand,
the adsorptions of NH
2
 and OH at the pyridine-type defect lead to the non-
planar deformation of the pyridine-type defective graphene: the N atom in the
pyridine-type defect protrudes from the planar graphene sheet [35].
Figure 6.6
 Optimized atomic structures of (a) NH
3
 and (b) H
2
O molecules
adsorbed on the pyridine-type N-doped graphene.To discuss the energetic stabilities of the molecular gases adsorbed at the
pyridine-type defects, we also define the adsorption energy 
E
a
 as
(6.7) 
where 
E
tot
 and 
E
sub
 are the total energies of the trimerized pyridine-type
defective graphenes with and without molecular gases, respectively, and
E
mol
 is also the total energies of the isolated NH
3
 and H
2
O molecules. 
Table
6.3
 shows the adsorption energies of NH
3
 and H
2
O molecules on the
trimerized pyridine-type N-doped graphene. In the case of the adsorption of
NH
3
 molecule, it is found that the adsorption of the NH
3
 molecule on the
pyridine-type defect, which is dissociated into H atom and NH
2
 molecule,
becomes energetically favorable (see 
Figure 6.6a
). On the other hand, the
adsorption of the NH
3
 molecule on the substitutional nitrogen-defective
graphene also becomes preferable energetically in other calculation and itwould correspond to physisorption rather than chemisorptions [18].
Therefore, the adsorption energy of NH
3
 onto the pyridine-type defect with
E
a
 = –1.21 eV is considerably lower than that onto the substitutional nitrogen
defect (–0.02 eV) [18]. For the adsorption of H
2
O molecule, its adsorption on
the pyridine-type defect is also found to be energetically preferable, and its
adsorption energy of 
E
a
 = –0.77 eV is considerably lower than that for the
adsorption on the substitutional nitrogen defect (–0.06 eV) [18]. The
pyridine-type defect, thus, is found to be more reactive than the substitutional
nitrogen defect. In addition, the adsorption of NH
3
 molecule is found to be
favorable in energy rather than that of the H
2
O molecule [35]. We thus find
that the pyridine-type defect in N-doped graphene really acts as a high
reactive site and would be useful for reaction centers in chemical processes
and for possible sensor applications as discussed earlier.
Table 6.3
 Adsorption energies of NH
3
 and H
2
O molecules on the pyridine-
type defective graphenes.
Molecules
Adsorption energy (eV)
NH
3
–1.21
H
2
O
–0.77
6.4.2 Electronic Properties
We finally examine the electronic structures of the pyridine-type defective
graphenes after two H atoms are adsorbed on the N-doped graphene. Before
studying the electronic structures of the N-doped graphene with adsorption of
H atoms, we show again the electronic structures of three types of N defects
in graphene. The substitutional nitrogen defect gives rise to a donor-like state
because the N atom has one extra electron compared with the C atom (
Figure
6.3a
). On the other hand, the trimerized pyridine-type and the tetramerized
pyridine-type defects have three N atoms around a monovacancy and four N
atoms around a divacancy, respectively. The trimerized pyridine-type defects
induce acceptor-like states around the Fermi energy (
Figure 6.3b
). The
tetramerized pyridine-type defects give rise to the impurity-related states near
the Fermi energy, and one of these states would behave as an acceptor as well(
Figure 6.3c
) [12]. These energy-band structures exhibit the similar behaviors
to those of the atomic structures shown in 
Figure 6.1a
–
c
 but the defect
densities are different each other: In 
Figure 6.3
, the supercells consist of 8 × 8
periodicity, whereas those are composed of 4 × 4 periodicity (see 
Figure 6.1
).
Thereby, it is interesting that the band gaps of the energy bands in 
Figure
6.3a
–
c
 are smaller than those in 
Figure 6.2a
, 
c
, and 
g
, respectively.
We here examine the energy-band structures of the pyridine-type defective
graphenes when the two H atoms are adsorbed on the N-doped graphene (see
Figure 6.5c
 and 
d
). We show in 
Figure 6.7a
 and 
b
 the energy bands of two H
atoms adsorbed on the trimerized and the tetramerized pyridine-type defects,
respectively. It is found that two H atoms adsorbed on the trimerized
pyridine-type defects give rise to the donor-like state around the Fermi
energy. In the tetramerized case, the impurity state appears around the Fermi
level and would also behave as a donor. The donor-like state induced by the
trimerized pyridine-type defects is partially occupied, whereas that of the
tetramerized pyridine-type defects is completely occupied.
Figure 6.7
 Band structures of graphene with two H atoms adsorbed on (a) the
trimerized and (b) the tetramerized pyridine-type defects. The vacuum level
is set to be zero, and the horizontal broken line represents the Fermi energy.
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [12], copyright 2014 the American Institute of Physics.In 
Figure 6.8
, we show the work functions of the pristine graphene and
several N-doped graphenes. Our calculated work function of the pristine
graphene is 4.44 eV, which is in good agreement with the experimental value
of 4.56 eV [36, 37]. When the substitutional nitrogen defect (SN) is doped,
the work function decreases to 3.9 eV, being consistent with its donor-type
behavior. On the other hand, for the trimerized (PN
3
) and the tetramerized
pyridine-type (PN
4
) defects.
Figure 6.8
 Work functions for pristine and N-doped graphenes with the
substitutional nitrogen (SN), the trimerized pyridine-type (PN
3
), the
tetramerized pyridine-type (PN
4
), two H atoms adsorbed on the trimerizedpyridine-type (H–PN
3
), and on the tetramerized pyridine-type (H–PN
4
)
defects. The horizontal broken line denotes the pristine graphene.
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [12], copyright 2014 the American Institute of Physics.
The work functions increase to approximately 4.8 eV. When the two H
atoms are adsorbed on the trimerized and the tetramerized pyridine-type
defects; however, the work functions of these systems (H–PN
3
 and H–PN
4
)
decrease again drastically, being much less than the pristine graphene value.
These work-function results as well as the change of the electronic structure
unambiguously indicate that a transition from 
p
-type to 
n
-type doping
properties occurs by hydrogen adsorption on the pyridine-type defects.
Several experimental XPS measurements have shown that the nitrogen
defects in graphene mainly consist of the pyridine-type defects rather than the
substitutional nitrogen defects [4, 38]. On the other hand, the electrical
conductivity of N-doped graphene exhibits 
n
-type doping property although
the pyridine-type defects are expected to have 
p
-type doping property [4, 38].
This discrepancy between the N-defect configuration and its electronic
property may reflect the aforementioned transition of the electronic properties
of N-doped graphene from 
p
-type to 
n
-type doping properties by adsorption
of two H atoms during a growth process of a nitrogen doping.6.5 Summary
We have shown the nitrogen doping as well as several molecular adsorption
effects on the atomic structures, the energetics, and the electronic properties
of the various graphene systems. In the former part, the possible N defects in
graphene have been revealed. The formation energy calculations indicate that
the substitutional N defect has the lowest energy among the possible N-
doping defects in graphene. The present relative energy calculations suggest
that the pyridine-type defects are energetically favorable rather than the
substitutional N defect in the presence of the vacancy in graphene. In
addition, not only the trimerized pyridine-type defect but also the
tetramerized pyridine-type defect in graphene is expected to be plausible
atomic configurations among various nitrogen vacancy complex
configurations due to their small difference in the formation energy. We have
examined the electronic structures of several N-doping configurations in
graphene. It is found that the impurity-induced states are induced near the
Fermi level, which show spatial distributions of electron densities localized
around N defects. In the latter part, we have shown the atomic structures, the
energetics, and the electronic properties of N-doped graphene regarding
several molecular adsorptions. It is found that the dissociative adsorptions of
the H
2
, the NH
3
, and the H
2
O molecules on the pyridine-type defects
become energetically favorable, while the adsorption of the H atom on the
substitutional N defect becomes unfavorable. The electronic properties of the
trimerized as well as the tetramerized pyridine-type defects drastically change
from 
p
-type doping property into 
n
-type one by adsorption of H atoms. Thus,
from the results of both the dissociative adsorption of several molecular gases
and the changes of conductive properties by gas adsorptions, we infer that the
pyridine-type defective graphene is useful for the possible gas sensors.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by MEXT Elements Strategy Initiative to Form
Core Research Center through Tokodai Institute for Element Strategy and
JSPS KAKENHI Grant No. 26390062. Computations were done at Institutefor Solid State Physics, the University of Tokyo, at Cybermedia Center of
Osaka University, and at Global Scientific Information and Computing
Center of the Tokyo Institute of Technology.
References
1. K.S. Novoselov, A.K. Geim, S.V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S.V.
Dubonos, I.V. Grigorieva, and A.A. Firsov, Electric field effect in atomically
thin carbon films. 
Science,
 306, 666, 2004.
2. S.V. Morozov, K.S. Novoselov, M.I. Katsnelson, F. Schedin, D.C. Elias,
J.A. Jaszczak, and A.K. Geim, Giant intrinsic carrier mobilities in graphene
and its bilayer. 
Physical Review Letters,
 100, 016602, 2008.
3. A.K. Geim and K.S. Novoselov, The rise of graphene. 
Nat. Mater,
 6, 183,
2007.
4. Y.-C. Lin, C.-Y. Lin, and P.-W. Chiu, Controllable graphene N-dopeing
with ammonia plasma. 
Appl. Phys. Lett.,
 96, 133110, 2010.
5. D. Wei, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Huang, and G. Yu, Synthesis of N-
doped graphene by chemical vapor deposition and its electrical properties.
Nano Lett.,
 9, 1752, 2009.
6. P. Ayala, A. Grüneis, T. Gemming, D. Grimm, C. Kramberger, M.H.
Rümmeli, L. Freire, Jr., H. Kuzmany, R. Pfeiffer, A. Barreiro, B. Büchner,
and T. Pichler, Tailoring N-doped single and double wall carbon nanotubes
from a nondiluted carbon/nitrogen feedstock. 
J. Phys. Chem. C,
 111, 2879,
2007.
7. B. Guo, Q. Liu, E. Chen, H. Zhu, L. Fang, and J.R. Gong, Controllable N-
doping of graphene. 
Nano Lett.,
 10, 4975, 2010.
8. Y.F. Li, Z. Zhou, and L.B. Wang, CN(x) nanotubes with pyridinelike
structures: P-type semiconductors and Li storage materials. 
J. Chem. Phys.,
129, 104703, 2008.
9. Y.S. Min, E.J. Bae, U.J. Kim, E.H. Lee, 
et al.,
 Unusual transport
characteristics of nitrogen-doped single-walled carbon nanotubes. 
Appl. Phys.
Lett.,
 93, 043113, 2008.
10. Y. Fujimoto and S. Saito, Energetics and electronic structures of pyridine-type nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes. 
Physica E,
 43, 677, 2011.
11. Y. Fujimoto and S. Saito, Formation, stabilities, and electronic properties
of nitrogen defects in graphene. 
Phys. Rev. B,
 84, 245446, 2011.
12. Y. Fujimoto and S. Saito, Hydrogen adsorption and anomalous electronic
properties of nitrogen-doped graphene. 
J. Appl. Phys.,
 115, 153701, 2014.
13. T.O. Wehling, K.S. Novoselov, S.V. Morozov, E.E. Vdovin, M.I.
Katsnelson, A.K. Geim, and A.I. Lichtenstein, Molecular Doping of
Graphene. 
Nano Lett.,
 8, 173, 2008.
14. F. Schedin, A.K. Geim, S.V. Morozov, E.W. Hill, P. Blake, M.I.
Katsnelson, and K.S. Novoselov, Detection of individual gas molecules
adsorbed on graphene. 
Nat. Mater.,
 6, 652, 2007.
15. D.C. Elias, R.R. Nair, T.M.G. Mohiuddin, S.V. Morozov, P. Blake, M.P.
Halsall, A. C. Ferrari, D.W. Boukhvalov, M.I. Katsnelson, A.K. Geim, and
K.S. Novoselov, Control of graphene’s properties by reversible
hydrogenation. 
Science,
 323, 610, 2009.
16. A.K. Singh, M.A. Uddin, J.T. Tolson, H. Maire-Afeli, N. Sbrockey, G.S.
Tompa, M.G. Spencer, T. Vogt, T.S. Sudarashan, and G. Kolley, Electrically
tunable molecular doping of graphene. 
Appl. Phys. Lett.,
 102, 043101, 2013.
17. Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, K. Zhou, C. Liu, J. Zeng, H. Zhang, and Y. Peng,
Improving gas sensing properties of graphene by introducing dopants and
defects: A first-principles study. 
Nanotechnology,
 20, 185504, 2009.
18. J. Dai, J. Yuan, and P. Giannozzi, Gas adsorption on graphene doped with
B, N, Al, and S: A theoretical study. 
Appl. Phys. Lett.,
 95, 232105, 2009.
19. P. Hohenberg and W.~Kohn, Inhomogeneous Electron Gas. 
Phys. Rev.,
136, B864, 1964.
20. N. Troullier and J.L. Martins, Efficient pseudopotentials for plane-wave
calculations. 
Phys. Rev. B,
 43, 1991, 1993.
21. W. Kohn and L.J. Sham, Self-Consistent Equations Including Exchange
and Correlation Effects. 
Phys. Rev.,
 140, A1133, 1965.
22. D.M. Ceperley and B.J. Alder, Ground state of the Electron gas by a
stochastic method. 
Phys. Rev. Lett.,
 45, 566, 1980.
23. J.P. Perdew and A. Zunger, Self-interaction correction to density-
functional approximations for many-electron systems. 
Phys. Rev. B,
 23, 5048,1981.
24. Computations have been performed using Tokyo Ab-initio Program
Package, TAPP) which is developed by a consortium initiated at University
of Tokyo: J. Yamauchi, M. Tsukada, S. Watanabe, and O. Sugino, First-
principles study on energetics of c-BN(001) reconstructed surfaces. 
Phys.
Rev. B,
 54, 5586, 1996.
25. J. Ito, J. Nakamura, and A. Natori, Semiconducting nature of the oxygen-
adsorbed graphene sheet. 
J. Appl. Phys.,
 103, 113712, 2008.
26. K.E. Kweon and G.S. Hwang, Formation, structure, and bonding of
boronvacancy pairs in graphene: A first-principles study. 
Phys. Rev. B,
 82,
195439, 2010.
27. H. Amara, S. Latil, V. Meunier, Ph. Lambin, and J.-C. Charlier, Scanning
tunneling microscopy fingerprints of point defects in graphene: A theoretical
prediction. 
Phys. Rev. B,
 76, 115423, 2007.
28. A.A. EI-Barbary, R.H. Telling, C.P. Ewels, M.I. Heggie, and P.R.
Briddon, Structure and energetics of the vacancy in graphite. 
Phys. Rev.
 B,
68, 144107, 2003.
29. O.V. Yazyev and L. Helm, Defect-induced magnetism in graphene. 
Phys.
Rev. B,
 75, 125408, 2007.
30. S. Caslo, O.M. Lowik, R. Martinazzo, and G.F. Tantardini,
Understanding adsorption of hydrogen atoms on graphene. 
J. Chem. Phys.,
130, 054704, 2009.
31. T.O. Wehling, A.V. Balatsky, M.I. Katsnelson, A.I. Lichtenstein, K.
Scharnberg, and R. Wiesendanger, Local electronic signatures of impurity
states in graphene. 
Phys. Rev. B,
 75, 125425, 2007.
32. Y.G. Zhou, X.T. Zu, F. Gao, J.L. Nie, and H.Y. Xiao, Adsorption of
hydrogen on boron-doped graphene: A first-principles prediction. 
J. Appl.
Phys.,
 105, 014309, 2009.
33. Y. Miura, H. Kasai, W.A. Dino, H. Nakanishi, and T. Sugimoto,
Effective Pathway for Hydrogen Atom adsorption on Graphene. 
J. Phys. Soc.
Jpn.,
 72, 995, 2003.
34. Y. Fujimoto and S. Saito, Structure and stability of hydrogen atom
adsorbed on nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes. 
J. Phys.: Conf. Ser.,
 302,012006, 2011.
35. Y. Fujimoto and S. Saito, Adsorption of molecules on Nitrogen-Doped
Graphene: A first-principles study. 
JPS Conf. Proc.,
 4, 012002, 2015.
36. Y.J. Yu, Y. Zhao, S. Ryu, L.E. Brus, K.S. Kim and P. Kim, Tuning the
graphene work function by electric field effect. 
Nano Lett.,
 9, 3430, 2009.
37. R. Yan, Q. Zhang, W. Li, I. Cakizo, T. Shen, C.A. Richter, A.R. H.-
Walker, X. Liang, 
et al
., Determination of graphene work function and
graphene-insulator-semiconductor band alignment by internal photoemission
spectroscopy. 
Appl. Phys. Lett.,
 101, 022105, 2012.
38. Z. Jin, J. Yao, C. Kittrel, and M. Tour, Large-scale growth and
characterizations of nitrogen-doped monolayer graphene sheets. 
ACS Nano,
5, 4112, 2011.Part 2
SYNTHETIC NANOMATERIALSChapter 7
Advanced Material for Pharmaceutical
Removal from Wastewater
Parisa Amouzgar, May Yuan Wong, Bahman Amini Horri, and
Babak Salamatinia
*
Discipline of Chemical Engineering, School of Engineering, Monash
University Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia
*
Corresponding author:
 
babak.salamatinia@monash.edu
Abstract
Pharmaceutical products are bioactive compounds designed to pose
therapeutic effects on living systems. In lieu with the increasing global usage
of these products ranging from perfumes to analgesics, numerous tests have
evidenced an alarming rise of concentration in water runoffs, despite various
secondary water treatment steps. Therefore, in order to ensure that water is
safe for consumption, tertiary treatment is devised for the efficient removal of
pharmaceuticals. More recently, the incorporation of advanced materials into
conventional techniques has been deemed as a prospective alternative as they
circumvent some of the major drawbacks. Various forms of advanced
materials that have been studied include polymers (e.g., dendrimers),
inorganics (e.g., carbon nanotubes, TiO
2
), semiconductors, zero-valence
metals (e.g., Fe
2
O
3
), and composite membranes. By virtue of its vast variety,
the compilation and review of this information are vital to enable comparison
of their performance. Here, we present a summarized critical review on these
advanced materials in the removal of pharmaceutical products in water.
Based on their properties and applications, the main objective of usingadvanced material is then to reduce the cost and ineffectiveness of
conventional wastewater treatment processes.
Keywords:
 Advanced material, adsorption, pharmaceuticals and personal care
products (PPCPs), wastewater treatment, environment
7.1 Introduction
The topic of pharmaceutical occurrence in water supplies first gained notice
in Western countries, particularly the United States, Canada, and Europe. In
1990, the first report on pharmaceutical detection was made in Germany
when environmental scientists discovered clofibric acid, a cholesterol
lowering drug in ground water below a water treatment plant. Then in mid-
1990s, Thomas Ternes, also a chemist from Germany, investigated the
consequences of pharmaceuticals after excretion. This investigation revealed
that up to 90% of the pharmaceutical components had remained in treated
and untreated sewage effluent, surface water, ground water and drinking
water, thereby concluding that most of the sewage treatment plants (STP)
were not designed to remove pharmaceuticals at that period of time.
As more investigations are conducted on pharmaceuticals in waste water
nowadays, it is observed that the advancement of technology has not relieved
the problem. In contrast, with a lower per-capita water use, smaller stream
flows and higher confluence of sewage outfalls in municipal urban areas
nowadays, the discharge concentrations of pharmaceuticals are rising
steadfastly. In Italy, it was reported that up to 95% of administered drug
doses were being excreted unmetabolized into domestic wastewater in 2013.
Based on this, prescribing up to 1500 tons of pharmaceuticals in Italy will
contribute to 1400 tons of pharmaceutical disposal annually. Simultaneously,
large quantities of unwanted and/or expired medications are being flushed
inappropriately into the water channels. The presence of several
pharmaceuticals in STP effluents has been confirmed in Germany (5, 6), the
Netherlands (7), Switzerland (8), United Kingdom (9), France, Greece,
Sweden and Italy (10), Spain (11), the United States (12, 13), Canada (14),
Brazil (15), and Australia (16).
Despite many countries have acknowledged the pollution of surface andground waters by pharmaceutical products, directives and legitimate
frameworks have not been properly set up for the control of pharmaceuticals
insofar [1]. As a result, pharmaceutical and personal care products (PPCPs)
are being continuously introduced into the environment. As they are
widespread at small concentrations [2], most of the PPCP remain potent and
extremely harmful toward the quality of human health and the balance of
ecosystem [3]. An instance of the issue therein refers to the feminization of
aquatic lives living downstream of wastewater treatment plants [4].
In a recent WHO publication entitled as “Pharmaceuticals in drinking
water”, the causes of pharmaceuticals accumulation in wastewaters were
highlighted into two main pathways. Primarily, pharmaceutical waste comes
from the direct disposal by manufacturers and the consumers; secondly the
leaching of chemicals from biosludge into soil and surface water after a series
of designated sewage treatment processes. With that pretext, domestic,
industrial, and hospital effluents have been known as the main contributors of
PPCPs in surface waters [5]. Depending on their hydrophobicity,
biodegradability, and temperature, these chemical components undergo
natural attenuation via adsorption, dilution or degradation in the environment.
The removal rate (RR) of PPCPs in STPs can thus be affected by several
factors, such as types of chemical components and treatment processes, age
of activated sludge, temperature, light intensity, and properties of the influent
[6].
The most detected pharmaceuticals in urban wastewaters include anti-
inflammatories, antibiotics, lipid regulators, tranquillizers, anti-depressants,
and X-ray contrast media [7–9] while common reported hormones in
wastewater include natural estrogens, estrone, and 17b-estradiol, as well as
the contraceptive 17a-ethinylestradiol [10]. Though not deliberately designed
to remove pharmaceuticals from wastewater, conventional STP techniques
have facilitated their removal to a certain extent. 
Table 7.1
 enlists the types of
pharmaceuticals compounds that were not removed in two wastewater
treatment plants Wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) in Germany [11]. For
instance, the removal of clofibric acid and bezafibrate through conventional
STP can reach up to 34–51% and 50–83%, respectively (5, 6), while removal
of ibuprofen may reach up to 90%. More specifically, their presence in
aquatic environment can often be traced up to a concentration of ng/L tomg/L [12]. In STP, the chemical effects of these pharmaceuticals may be
augmented after the cleaving of active moiety and their excretion as drug
conjugates.
Table 7.1
 List of pharmaceutical compounds that retained at least 50% of its
initial concentration in Clifyndd and Coslech WWTP, Germany [11].
Method of treatment
Activated sludge
Trickling filter
 
 Metronidazole
Dielofenac
Codeine
Tramadol
Carbamazepine
Propanolol
Metoprolol
Sulfasalazine
Trimethoprim
Sulfamethoxazole
Erythromycin
Metromidazole
Diclofenac
Mefenamic acid
Tramadol
Carbamazepine
Gabapentin
Propanol
Metoprolol
Clofibric acid
Benzafibrate
Raritidine
Cimetidine
Sulfasalazine
Sulfapyridine
5-Aminosalicylic aicd
Furosemide
Bendroflumethiazide
Vaisartan
Dilitiazem
In addition to that, pharmaceutical industry designated products that are
pharmacologically active and resistant to degradation. These compounds are
known as the active pharmaceutical ingredients (API), which are
characterized as being highly persistent in aqueous medium as they are
capable of forming large complexes with variable molecular weight,
structure, functionality, and shape. They can also be characterized as polar
molecules with more than one ionizable group [13]. An example of API is
carbamazepine, which is not degraded or adsorbed during wastewater
treatments [14].
Aggravated with the current trend of clean water scarcity, researches are
motivated to devise cost-effective and energy-efficient methods for the
purification of water. The technology for disinfection and decontamination of
water has to be improved, as well as efforts to increase water supplies
through the safe reuse of wastewater [15]. Conventional WWTP technologies
include primary settling, activated sludge, biological filtration and sand
filtration whereas more advanced technologies include ozonation, ultrasound,
dark and light fenton, microfiltration (MF), reverse osmosis (RO), photolysis,
and adsorption [6]. Adsorption is an efficient process for the removal of most
emerging organic contaminants (EOCs) from water as it possesses relativelyhigher capability in removing contaminant when comparing to other available
techniques [16]. Common adsorbents then include activated carbon (AC),
cellulose materials, clay, organoclay, zeolite, and even wastes from the
industry and agriculture such as sludge, fly ash, and red mud. Owing to the
advancement of material engineering and sciences, many alternative solid-
phase sorbents such as ion-imprinted polymer (IMP), magnetic nanoparticles,
and photo-regenerable nanoparticles have been introduced. With improved
physical and chemical properties, these new materials have proven to be more
superior to conventional platforms [17]. The key benefit of using adsorption
is that it does not culminate into the formation of by-products, which in some
cases could turn out to be more toxic than the parent compound.
Fundamentally, the selection of a PPCP removal technique should be built on
the basis that procedure is designed to be simple, rapid, cost effective,
reusable, and environmentally friendly.
This chapter summarizes some of the major works on the removal of
pharmaceuticals from wastewaters using advanced materials. While it is
important to compare between one method to the next, evaluation criteria
were identified as the capacity of adsorbent (percentage removal), reusability
and operating conditions.
7.2 Advanced Materials in the
Removal of Pharmaceuticals from
Wastewater
A review on the current application of advanced materials for the removal of
PPCPs from wastewater can be viewed from five main perspectives: AC,
modified carbon nanotubes (CNTs), modified polysaccharide matrices,
reactive composites, and metal organic framework (MOF). Other more recent
materials have also been reported such as molecular imprinted polymers
(MIPs), thermo-responsive gel, and magnetic nanoparticles, though
comparatively, they still lack development and supporting case studies.7.3 Activated Carbon (AC)
The suitability of using AC as an adsorbent in WWTP stems from the fact
that it can be incorporated as an end-of-pipe technology or as an accessory in
an existing WWTP, e.g., in a pumped bed membrane bioreactor [18]. It is
fundamentally a type of micro-mesoporous material that comes in various
forms: generic, powdered (PAC), or granular (GAC) [19–27]. Owing to its
large surface area, it serves as a common material in adsorptive processes.
Averaging the surface area of three typical AC: Carbopal AP, Hydraffin
XC30, and Norit SAE Super, we arrive at an average value of 967 m
2
g
–1
[18]. Additionally, the average pore volume is at 0.611 cm
3
g
–1
. In a study to
compare adsorptive behavior of AC, CNT, and carbon xerogel in the removal
of ciprofloxacin (CIP), the surface area of commercial AC (NORIT C-GRAN
NC01–125) was four times the surface area of a multiwalled CNTs
(MWNTs) [28].
Given a recent review on the adsorptive removal of antibiotics from
wastewater, the performance of AC adsorbent was compared with CNTs,
clay, ion exchange resin, and biochar (BC) [29]. Past literatures have studied
the adsorptive performance of AC on antibiotics such as β-
lactams/amoxicillin [19–21], cephalexin [20], imidazoles, nitroimidazoles,
dimetridazole, metronidazole [24], ronidazole, tinidazole [30], penicilin [20,
31], quinoxaline, sulphonamides [32], sulfamethoxazole (SMX) [33],
sulfamethazine, sulfathiazole, CIP [34], tetracycline (TET) [20, 27, 35],
trimethoprim (TRP) [36], and more. It was observed that the capacity of
removing a particular antibiotic with AC varies from one species to the other.
As a result of the review, it was agreed that most of the PACs with removal
efficiencies above 90% were able to yield better performance as compared to
the generic AC. In the case of removing β-lactams, 99% removal efficiency
was obtained, thereby marking its superiority to CNTs and clay. 
Table 7.2
compares the efficiency of AC, CNT, clay, ion exchange resin, and BC in the
removal of common antibiotics under various operating conditions.
Table 7.2
 Common pharmaceuticals removed via adsorption by AC, CNT,
clay, ion exchange resin, and BC.7.4 Modified Carbon Nanotubes
(CNTs)
The working principle of CNT revolves around the removal of contaminants
via adsorption. It has been known of removing heavy metals, metalloids,
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, endocrine-disrupting compounds, and
pharmaceuticals in waste treatment processes. In order to perform its
functions, CNT is freely suspended in solution, modified into gas permeable
flat sheets or adapted as multi-walled tubes. Depending on the chemical
species targeted for removal, various functionalizations of CNTs have also
been attempted. In one instance to investigate the photolytic decay of phenol,
CNT was coated with non-water-permeable TiO
2
. The adsorption capability
discovered therein inspired the use of CNT and TiO
2
 to act as a regenerable
platform in the degradation of pharmaceuticals from wastewater.
In 2013, the feasibility of removing pharmaceuticals from water using
photo-regenerable MWNT membranes was studied by Zaib 
et al.
 [45]. The
templates were represented by acetaminophen, carbamazepine and ibuprofen.
Removal efficiency was then tested on three different platforms: MWNTs,
MWNT coated with TiO
2
 (MWNT-TiO
2
), and lastly photoregenerated
MWNT-TiO
2
. As a result, the removal efficiency of carbamazepine was
highest in comparison to the other two pharmaceutical compounds [46]. More
specifically, its removal was up to 80%, as compared to 45% and 24% in
ibuprofen and acetaminophen. The high percentage of removal efficiency
indicates that MWNT-TiO
2
 has the highest affinity toward carbamezepine.
Nonetheless, they observed that despite the high removal efficiency of
carbamezepine, the membrane reaches saturation more quickly than in the
removal of ibuprofen and acetaminophen. After passing 50 ml of
carbamazepine through the membrane, the removal efficiency plunges to
below 5%, whereas 20% of ibuprofen can still be removed from the solution
after undergoing the same procedure.
Kim 
et al.
 [41] studied the adsorption of two antibiotics (lincomycine and
SMX) and one contrast medium (iopromide) on single-walled CNTs andMWNTs in batch-wise manner. As a result, they discovered that surface area
plays a significant impact on the adsorption of the pollutants. Vesna Rakic 
et
al.
 studied the adsorption of acetylsalicylic acid, salicylic acid, diclofenac-Na
and atenolol onto ACs. Surface concentrations of salicylic acid,
acetylsalicylic acid, atenolol, or diclofenac-Na were found to be between 0.1
and 0.4 mmol g
–1
 on ACs after removal [22]. Mestre 
et al.
 [47] reported that
the steam AC with well-developed pore structures removed acetylsalicylic
acid, clofibric acid, ibuprofen, paracetamol, caffeine and iopamidol with
removal percentages between 40% and 90%. Calisto 
et al.
 investigated the
adsorption of seven pharmaceuticals including SMX, piroxicam,
carbamazepine, oxazepam, venlafaxine, cetirizine, and paroxetine from water
onto a commercially available AC and a non-AC produced by pyrolysis of
primary paper mill sludge using a batch experimental approach [48]. The
results revealed that adsorption onto the commercially available AC are
strongly effective for the removal of pharmaceuticals from water [49].
7.5 Modified Polysaccharide
Matrices
Modified polysaccharide matrices can be found in the form of Chitosan or
cellulose beads. Similar to AC, Chitosan (poly-
b
-(1,4)-2-amino-2-deoxy-D-
glucose) has been one of the most commonly used base matrix for adsorption
processes. It is biocompatible, biodegradable, non toxic and considerably
cheaper than GAC. Presently, it is used for the removal of dyes [16] and
heavy metals [17, 18] from aqueous solutions. Its applications on the
adsorption of pharmaceutical compounds however are only starting to
emerge.
In 2013, the feasibility of functionalized chitosan was tested by Kyzas 
et al.
[50]. Therein, pramipexole dihydrochloride (PRM), a dopaminestimulating
drug was selected as a model template. By acknowledging that PRM is
cationic in nature, chitosan was grafted with anionic groups: sulfonate
(CsSLF) and carboxylate (CsNCB). In order to develop a resistance toward
extreme pH conditions used in the experiment, chitosan was cross-linkedwith glutaraldehyde. It was found that high pH enhances the adsorption of
PRM onto functionalized chitosan: at pH 10, PRM uptake was recorded at
82% in (CsNCB). The rationale was then provided based on the increase of
attraction between the carboxylate group with the primary amino group of
PRM. The attraction was then further strengthened by the interaction between
hydroxyl groups of chitosan and the secondary positive amino group of PRM.
Upon maintaining the same pH for desorption, it was discovered that the
percentage of PRM desorbed was only between 15% and 20%. By lowering
the pH to 2, it was discovered that maximum desorption could occur at 95%
for both CsSLF and CsNCB. Thus, from their findings, they conclude that in
acidic conditions, the electrostatic bonds between the amino group of PRM
and chitosan were weakened [50]. The significant impact of pH on the
adsorption of PPCP has reported in several literatures [51, 52].
The mechanism of metal adsorption on chitin and chitosan derivatives is
mostly formation of ion pairs in acidic media (ion exchange) [53]. Chitosan
has been prepared in form of membranes, microspheres, gel beads and films
and utilized to remove different pollutants from wastewater. Ionic charge of
the adsorbent, solution pH and the chemistry of the pollutant are the main
parameters impact in chitosan reaction [54, 55]. Chitin and chitosan
derivatives have gained wide attention as effective biosorbents due to their
low cost and high contents of amino and hydroxyl functional groups which
have shown significant adsorption potential for the removal of various
aquatic pollutants. Results have proven that chitin and chitosan derivatives
are capable of removing metal cations and metal anions [56], dyes [57],
phenol and substituted phenols [58], and different anions [59, 60]. Generally,
carbons present more stable adsorption properties and their adsorption
mechanism is based on diffusion phenomena. However, some other materials
like grafted chitosan demonstrated higher adsorption capacities (~330 mg/g)
as a result of strong electrostatic forces, but this phenomenon is intensely
dependent on the aqueous media pH.
Many researchers have examined the removal of metal anions by chitosan
and chitosan derivatives. Chitosan was found to be very efficient for the
removal and recovery of precious metals such as gold Au (III). Moreover
chitosan beads were used to remove As(III) and As(V) from water in both
batch and continuous operations while the mechanism of metal adsorption onchitosan has been mainly electrostatic interactions in acidic media (ion
exchange) [61].
Chitosan is cationic and hydrophilic naturally available biopolymers and
after cellulose it is the most abundant one. Chitosan and its derivatives have
been reported as potent bio-sorbents for removing different pollutant from
wastewater such as heavy metals [57] and dyes [60, 62]. Chitosan has some
chemical and mechanical weaknesses such as colloid formation in contact
with water, dissolution in acids, gel formation in aqueous solution, low
surface area and susceptibility to biochemical and microbiological
degradation [63]. Functionalization (grafting) and cross-linking can improve
the chemical stability of chitosan, while its mechanical strength could be
improved through physical modifications including granulation and
impregnation of its powder on a support [64]. Various forms of chitosan
composite adsorbents have been prepared with a view to improve its
applicability in adsorption processes. The main reported chitosan adsorbents
are magnetic chitosan [65], chitosan AC [63], chitosan clay [66], polyvinyl
alcohol chitosan [67], and others. Kyzas 
et al.
 synthesized a cross-linked
chitosan with glutaraldehyde and grafted with sulfonate as an efficient
adsorbent for removing PRM, a recently available non-ergot dopamine
agonist [50]. The same researchers also grafted chitosan nanocomposite with
graphite oxide/poly(acrylic acid) for the removal of dorzolamide in another
study [68]. Zhang 
et al.
 synthesized chitosan–Fe
3
O
4
 for fast separation of
carbamazepine (CBZ) from water [69].
7.6 Metal Organic Framework
(MOF)
MOF is a less conventional adsorbent in comparison to CNTs or chitosan. It
is a robust, crystalline, sponge-like material composed of two moieties: metal
ions and organic molecules (known as the linkers). The usage of MOF is due
to its 3 key attributes: large surface area [1 g of MOF material (about the size
of a pea) can have a surface area of up to forty tennis courts!], tunability of
structure, high mechanical strength and thermal stabilities [70]. The
combination of metal and linker pose significant impact on its resultingstructure and properties. In the case of removing pharmaceuticals from
wastewater, the choice of combination is then made based on the type of
chemical compound targeted for removal [70, 71].
With respect to the template of two typical PPCP: clofibric acid and
naproxen, removal efficiency of MOF was first tested by Hasan 
et al.
 in
2012. After examining their adsorption onto AC simultaneously, their results
evidenced superiority in MOF. More importantly, the adsorption of MOF
MIL-101 (MIL – Material of Institute Lavoisier) on clofibric acid marks an
unprecedented achievement when compared to other adsorbents that have
been reported in literatures so far [52]. From their outcomes, it is perceived
that the amount of clofibric acid adsorbed onto MIL-101 is approximately
12.5% higher than that of AC.
At various pH values, it was shown that the amount of adsorbed naproxen
decreases with increasing pH. At pH value higher than p
K
a of naproxen (pKa
= 4), the deprotonation of naproxen renders it ionic in aqueous form. With
increasing pH, the distribution of positive charge on MIL-101 decreases and
that leads to a comparatively weaker interaction between naproxen anion and
the adsorbent MIL-101. As a result, less naproxen can be adsorbed onto the
surface of the adsorbent weaker adsorption. Similarly, the adsorption of
clofibric acid is higher at low pH due to the similarity of functional group
(carboxylate) in both PPCP [72, 73].
7.7 Reactive Composites
Reactive composites typically consist of Granular AC (GAC), zero-valent
iron (ZVI) and organoclay. GAC is a form of processed carbon that has small
and low volume pores that facilitate quicker adsorption and chemical
reactions. Due to its granular nature, it has a larger particle size compared to
the powdered template (PAC) and is therefore more suitable for the
absorption of gases and vapors. In the past, AC has been employed in water
treatment processes, deodorization and separation of components in flow
systems. The key advantage of using AC in the removal of pharmaceuticals is
such that it does not generate any toxic or pharmacologically active products
[23]. Depending on the composition of pharmaceuticals, solution chemistry
and the type of AC, the capacity for adsorption varies accordingly [74].Generally, it has been reported that GAC is more effective than PAC in the
removal of antibiotics due to the larger surface area and hence larger amount
of adsorption sites. With that pretext, GAC is more suitable for its
implementation into post filtration processes [36].
ZVI, on the other hand is a typical candidate for groundwater remediation
in permeable reactive barriers (PRB). Owing to its reducing powers, the
degradation of contaminant is made possible via several pathways. The final
component organoclay is a specialty sorbent specifically designed to remove
organic substances such as oil, grease and other heavy organic compounds
present in aqueous streams [75]. In scenarios where oil and grease blind the
surface pores of GAC, the process of adsorbing contaminants such as
pharmaceutical components become greatly inefficiently. By pairing
organoclay with GAC, the blinding of surface pores with organic matter can
be prevented.
In 2010, Cai 
et al.
 investigated the capability of removing estradiol and
testosterone with a reactive substance as the adsorbent. For the choice of
reactive material and sorbent, they utilized Gotthart Maier ZVI in comparison
to Connelly ZVI and for sorptive material the AquaSorb 101 GAC and
OrganoLoc PM-100 organoclay. The method of solid-phase extraction (SPE)
resulted in 50% removal efficiency of estradiol and 92% removal for
testosterone [76]. Three years later, the same team proceeded to investigate
the removal efficiency of different reactive material in the treatment of
wastewater from a dairy farm. Throughout the two weeks duration of
experiment, the ostrogenic removal efficiency exhibited by Connelly ZVI,
Gotthart Maier ZVI, OrganoLoc PM-100 OC and AquaSorb 101 GAC was
up to 98%, 97%, 99% and 99% [77]. Results thus indicate that the application
of reactive materials is highly prospective and implementable.
7.8 TiO
2
-Coated Adsorbents
Sung 
et al.
 [78] prepared a substrate-immobilized (SI) TiO
2
 nanofiber (NF)
photo-catalyst for through electro-spinning and hot pressing and the
examined on the photodegradation of cimetidine (CMT), propranolol (PRP),
and carbamazepine (CBZ). The effects of pH on the photocatalyticdegradation rates of PRP and CMT using SI TiO
2
 NF was due to the
electrostatic interaction between the selected compounds and the surface of
TiO
2
 NFs. The pH dependence of the photocatalytic degradation rates of
PRP was explained by electrostatic interactions between the selected
compounds and the surface of TiO
2
 NFs. Dror Avisar 
et al.
 investigated
TiO
2
 on degradation of carbamazephine (CBZ) [79]. Carbamazepine is not
volatile from soil surfaces. Based on the lack of functional groups, it is not
easily hydrolyzed under environmental conditions. Carbamazepine can enter
the environment through discharge of wastewater, and has also been shown
to persist and accumulate in the organic components of soil and sludge [80].
According to an estimation based on statistics in 2008, 1014 tons of
carbamazepine are consumed annually worldwide [81]. In most cases studied
in the environment the removal efficiency of carbamazepine is less than 10%
[82]. Sludge retention time does not have an observable impact on the
removal efficiencies of either compound. As a result of ineffective removal,
they pass through waste water treatment plants and are widely detected in
water bodies, with flowing concentrations from WWTPs effluents. Removal
techniques need to be developed that are effective both in terms of yield and
cost [81, 83, 84].
7.9 Adsorption by Zeolite and
Polymer Composites
Zeolite is best described as a rigid crystal lattice made from environmentally
compatible crystalline aluminosilicate. Its molecular framework consists of
tetrahedral units of SiO
4
 and AlO
4
. Zeolite polarity is determined by the
silica alumina ratio (SAR). Their three-dimensional configuration provides
nanometer-sized channels and cavities, which supplies high porosity and
extended surface area [85, 86]. Three organophilic synthetic zeolites L ZSM-
5, MOR and Y zeolite were used as model adsorbent on the adsorption of
erythromycin, levofloxacin and carbamazepine from dilute solutions. Results
show that these drugs were almost completely adsorbed by Y-zeolite that
approves it could be employed for the removal of pharmaceuticals fromwastewater [85]. In other studies, it facilitated an almost complete removal of
sulphonamide antibiotics from water (>90%) (sulfadiazine, SMX, and
sulfachloropyridazine) [87]. Additionally, Verberk 
et al.
 investigated the
removal efficiency of two hydrophobic zeolites MOR200 and ZSM5 on
neutral nitrosamines from demineralised water [88]. The removal efficacy of
the aforementioned zeolites was found to be higher than AC. Nonetheless, it
should be noted that AC is effective in treatment of a vast range of solutes
whereas zeolites are relatively selective. Zeolites should not be used as a
substitute for AC due to its selective nature. However, they can act as an
additional reagent especially when a more targeted removal is required,
particularly when there is a high influent dosage or in regulation of strict
effluent rules [88].
Mesoporous silica materials have been the subject of great interest in
adsorption areas since the first siliceous mesoporous material was reported by
Mobil Oil Corporation in 1992 [89]. Mesoporous silica SBA-15 has high
specific surface area, evenly distributed pore structure, large pore volume,
chemical inertness and thermal stability [90]. Kim 
et al.,
 [90] investigated the
adsorption potential of SBA-15 through 12 pharmaceuticals including
dihydrocarbamazepine, cloprop, atenolol-
d
7
, estrone-
d
4
, ibuprofen-
d
3
,
iopromide-
d
3
, SMX-
d
4
, and TRP. Based on results, it is observed that the
interaction between pharmaceuticals and adsorbent is strongly dependant on
pH. The summary of pharmaceuticals removal with zeolites is tabulated in
Table 7.3
.
Table 7.3
 Summary of pharmaceutical removal via adsorption on zeolites.7.10 Adsorption by Clay
Clay minerals are natural hydrophilic compounds and mainly not suitable
adsorbents for organic compounds. Modification of surface structure in clays
by exchange of their inorganic cations with organic cations transforms them
in to organophilic adsorbents. Cationic surfactants are the most common
chemicals used for modification of clays [91]. Carla B. Vidal 
et al
. examinedthe Brazilian clay, Montmorillonite (Mt) pillared with SnO
2
 and tested as an
adsorbent for the removal pharmaceuticals TMP and SMX. Modification
with incorporation of tin oxide via the pillaring process showed extension in
clay’s interlayer space and growth in the volume of mesopores. The SnO
2
–
Mt sample showed an increase in TMP adsorption capacity compared to the
unmodified clay and when solar simulated light was used in the adsorption
process. This effect was linked to the specific acid–base and electrostatic
interactions of TMP with the Lewis acid sites of SnO
2
. The SMX was not
adsorbed on the surface of SnO
2
 modified clay owing to the acidic character
of the adsorbent and adsorbate [92]. Currently growing attention is the clay–
polymer nanocomposite (CPN) adsorbents. CPNs treat water by adsorption
and flocculation of both organic and inorganic micropollutants [93]. 
Table
7.5
 shows a brief summary of removing pharmaceuticals by clay. 
Table 7.4
 is
a short review on the advanced materials utilized in pharmaceutical removal
from wastewater.
Table 7.4
 A review on advanced materials used in the removal of
pharmaceuticals from wastewater.Table 7.5
 Summary of pharmaceutical removal via adsorption onto clay.
7.11 Conventional Technologies for
the Removal of PPCPs in WWTP
Standard water treatment plants are not equipped to remove pharmaceuticals
from water. Pharmaceuticals may change due to an enzyme reaction or
interaction with bacteria [108]. If the pharmaceuticals have an organic carbon
base, then disinfection by chlorine could potentially create dangerous by-
products [109]. The degree of removal and biodegradation of pharmaceutical
compounds during wastewater treatment varies considerably. In most cases
the technologies that have been used are membrane filtration [109, 110],
adsorption on ACs, and advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) that employ
ozone [98] (the purpose of the ozonation of pharmaceuticals is to transformthe compound so that it loses its biological activity while, some studies have
proven this cannot always be achieved [111]), ultraviolet radiation, gamma
radiation and electro-oxidation [112]. Micropollutants that resist conventional
processes can be removed by membrane filtration, nanofiltration, RO, or
adsorption on AC. However, the retention capacity of these methods can be
reduced through blockage by natural organic matter in water [98].
Estrogen has high estrogenic potency and is considered as one of the
endocrine-disrupting compounds (EDCs). It can cause significant disruption
onto the male reproductive system [113, 114]. While estrogen can be traced
from the excretion of human as well as farm animals, they eventually make
their way into the domestic wastewater systems [115, 116]. Most of the
studies specify that estrogens and progesterones tend to accumulate in solid
environmental matrices. As the removal of estrogen in urban treatment plants
is rather complex, even advanced treatments like filtration or phosphorous
removal do not have a clear and recognizable impact on improving its
removal [117].
7.12 Membrane Filtration
MF or ultrafiltration (UF) membranes are utilized for a high-quality final
effluent exit. Passing the wastewater through this type of membranes ensures
an efficient elimination of suspended contaminants, but it is generally not
able to remove pharmaceutical pollutants. The majority of pharmaceuticals
were not rejected when passing through an UF system [112]. Although the
technical feasibility of membranes has been proven, high investment and
operational costs keep their application very limited [110]. Currently,
membrane filtration, nanofiltration (NF), and RO) are almost exclusively
applied in drinking water treatment facilities, whereas their application during
wastewater treatment is scarce [118]. In addition, the combination of MF or
UF with RO as secondary effluent post-treatment seems to be efficient for the
removal of pharmaceuticals [26]. In Singapore and few cities in Australia a
combination of MF or UF with RO is to perform the biological treatment in a
Membrane bioreactor (MBR) followed by a RO system at full scale, which
has been operated at pilot scale first by Snyder 
et al.
 in 2007 [25]. Some
studies report that membrane bioreactors do a better job of removingmedicines from water since the plant cannot determine which
pharmaceuticals it removes [109].
7.13 Ozonation and Advanced
Oxidation Process (AOP)
During ozonation in wastewater, micropollutants can be directly oxidized by
O
3
 or by the hydroxyl radicals (HO•) which are formed during ozone decay.
Those pharmaceutical compounds that react rapidly with O
3
 will be oxidized
by direct reactions, whereas the rest will be oxidized by the HO• formed.
When there are ozone resistant contaminants, ozone is transformed to HO
radicals and the ozonation modifies to AOP. The purpose of AOP design is to
use HO• as a strong oxidant. The common way to transform a conventional
ozonation process into an AOP is to add H
2
O
2
 or UV irradiation [119]. The
advantage of ozonation as a post-treatment is to disinfect the final effluent
before discharge. However in most treatment plants, where disinfection of
final effluent is required, it is preferable to apply chlorination or UV
irradiation instead as they demand lower oxidation capacities. AOPs are very
effective in the oxidation of numerous organic and inorganic compounds.
However, these procedures are occasionally not capable of degrading
pollutants to the levels required and there has been little investigation of its
use against pharmaceuticals [120]. Only a limited number of STPs apply
ozonation for post-treatment to their secondary effluents [121]. Advanced
oxidation is not in widespread use due to inadequate knowledge of its
performance and the necessary safety conditions [98]. The main disadvantage
of ozonation is related to the byproducts, which can have toxic properties
[122].
7.14 Electro-oxidation
The most common electrochemical technique for wastewater remediation is
the electrochemical oxidation which also named anodic oxidation (AO) whenno chloride solutions are treated [123]. This procedure provides the oxidation
of pollutants in an electrolytic cell by first transferring electron to the anode
and then indirect oxidation with radicals such as OH or active oxygen at the
anode. In wastewater treatment, high cell voltages are required to obtain the
oxidation of pollutants and water maintaining the anode activity at the same
time. The main disadvantage of electro chemical oxidation is its high
operating costs. Moreover applying this technology is efficient when the
effluent is conducting and not many waste streams have sufficient
conductance [124]. Furthermore electrode fouling could occur as a result of
deposition of material on the electrode surface [125].
7.15 Adsorption by Coagulation and
Sedimentation
Coagulation primarily removes high molecular weight and micropollutants
with a log Kow value > 5. Coagulation had not been found to affect the
concentration of pharmaceuticals in water. Since a large number of the
studied pharmaceuticals are ionic, they may adsorb to particles in the
coagulation by electrostatic interactions. However, this elimination of the
pharmaceuticals seems to take place on average 3% [111]. Based on the
studies, the elimination of pharmaceuticals is very minor in treatment
processes that consist only of sedimentation, metal salt coagulation, and sand
filtration [111].
7.16 Conclusion
The inefficacy of conventional wastewater treatment techniques has led to the
buildup of pharmaceutical components in wastewater. As these components
are chemically reactive, their presence often leads to hazardous effects on
living bodies and the environment. In hopes to improve the existing
wastewater treatment techniques, many advanced materials have been tested
and studied so that eventually they can be incorporated as an end-of-pipe
technology. Among these advanced materials are AC, clay, modifiedcellulose, zeolite, MIP, and so on. After reviewing their capacity in the
removal of pharmaceuticals, it was found that no material can act as a single
universal matrix for the removal of different compounds. While different
mechanism exists in the removal of pharmaceutical compounds, adsorption
remains the most widely studied and employed. With that pretext, pH and
surface area of the adsorbent plays an important factor in governing the
removal efficacy. Judging from the fact that some removal percentage could
reach above 90%, it can be concluded that advanced material is a prospective
implementation, however requires more development in the years to come.
References
1. P. Quevauviller, 
et al.,
 Science-policy integration needs in support of the
implementation of the EU Water Framework Directive. 
Environmental
Science & Policy,
 8(3), 203–211, 2005.
2. T. Urase, and T. Kikuta, Separate estimation of adsorption and degradation
of pharmaceutical substances and estrogens in the activated sludge process
.
Water Research,
 39(7), 1289–1300, 2005.
3. O.A. Jones, J.N. Lester, and N. Voulvoulis, Pharmaceuticals: A threat to
drinking water? 
Trends in Biotechnology,
 23(4), 163–167, 2005.
4. G.Z. Kyzas, 
et al.,
 New approaches on the removal of pharmaceuticals
from wastewaters with adsorbent materials
. Journal of Molecular Liquids,
209, 87–93, 2015.
5. P. De Voogt, 
et al.,
 Development of a common priority list of
pharmaceuticals relevant for the water cycle. 
Water Science and Technology,
59(1), 39–46, 2009.
6. World Health Organization, Pharmaceuticals in drinking water. 2012.
7. M. Gros, 
et al.,
 Removal of pharmaceuticals during wastewater treatment
and environmental risk assessment using hazard indexes. 
Environment
International,
 36(1), 15–26, 2010.
8. X. Yuan, 
et al.,
 Rapid detection of multiple class pharmaceuticals in both
municipal wastewater and sludge with ultra high performance liquid
chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. 
Journal of EnvironmentalSciences,
 26(9), 1949–1959, 2014.
9. A. Jelic, 
et al.,
 Tracing pharmaceuticals in a municipal plant for integrated
wastewater and organic solid waste treatment. 
Science of the Total
Environment,
 433, 352–361, 2012.
10. D.W. Kolpin, 
et al.,
 Pharmaceuticals, hormones, and other organic
wastewater contaminants in US streams, 1999–2000: A national
reconnaissance. 
Environmental science & technology,
 36(6), 1202–1211,
2002.
11. K. Horderna, R.M. Dinsdaleb, and A.J. Guwyb, The removal of
pharmaceuticals, personal care products, endocrine disruptors and illicit
drugs during wastewater treatment and its impact on the quality of receiving
waters. 
Water Res,
 43(2), 363–380, 2008.
12. M.R. Boleda, M.T. Galceran, and F. Ventura, Behavior of
pharmaceuticals and drugs of abuse in a drinking water treatment plant
(DWTP) using combined conventional and ultrafiltration and reverse osmosis
(UF/RO) treatments. 
Environmental pollution,
 159(6), 1584–1591, 2011.
13. S.K. Khetan, and T.J. Collins, Human pharmaceuticals in the aquatic
environment: A challenge to green chemistry
. Chemical Reviews-Columbus,
107(6), 2319–2364, 2007.
14. H. Guasch, and A. Ginebreda, 
Emerging and Priority Pollutants in
Rivers
, A. Geiszinger, (Ed.) 2012.
15. R.L. McGinnis, and M. Elimelech, Global challenges in energy and water
supply: The promise of engineered osmosis. 
Environmental science &
technology,
 42(23), 8625–8629, 2008.
16. N. Bolong, 
et al.,
 A review of the effects of emerging contaminants in
wastewater and options for their removal. 
Desalination,
 239(1), 229–246,
2009.
17. P.A. Turhanen, J.J. Vepsäläinen, and S. Peräniemi, Advanced material
and approach for metal ions removal from aqueous solutions. 
Scientific
Reports,
 5, 2015.
18. P.C. Rúa-Gómez 
et al.,
 Upgrading of wastewater treatment plants through
the use of unconventional treatment technologies: removal of lidocaine,
tramadol, venlafaxine and their metabolites. 
Water Res.,
 4(3), 650–669, 2012.19. G. Moussavi, 
et al.,
 Preparation, characterization and adsorption potential
of the NH
4
Cl-induced activated carbon for the removal of amoxicillin
antibiotic from water. 
Chem. Eng. J.,
 217, 119–128, 2013.
20. H. Pouretedal, and N. Sadegh, Effective removal of amoxicillin,
cephalexin, tetracycline and penicillin G from aqueous solutions using
activated carbon nanoparticles prepared from vine wood. 
J. Water Process
Eng,
 1, 64–73, 2014.
21. E.K. Putra, 
et al.,
 Performance of activated carbon and bentonite for
adsorption of amoxicillin from wastewater: Mechanisms, isotherms and
kinetics. 
Water Res,
 43(9), 2419–2430, 2009.
22. V. Rakić, 
et al.,
 The adsorption of pharmaceutically active compounds
from aqueous solutions onto activated carbons. 
Journal of hazardous
materials,
 282, 141–149, 2015.
23. J. Reungoat, 
et al.,
 Removal of micropollutants and reduction of
biological activity in a full scale reclamation plant using ozonation and
activated carbon filtration. 
Water Research,
 44(2), 625–637, 2010.
24. J. Rivera-Utrilla, 
et al.,
 Removal of nitroimidazole antibiotics from
aqueous solution by adsorption/bioadsorption on activated carbon. 
J. Hazard.
Mater,
 170(1), 298–305, 2009.
25. S.A. Snyder, 
et al.,
 Role of membranes and activated carbon in the
removal of endocrine disruptors and pharmaceuticals. 
Desalination,
 202(1),
156–181, 2007.
26. C. Stoquart, 
et al.,
 Hybrid membrane processes using activated carbon
treatment for drinking water: A review. 
Journal of membrane science,
 411,
1–12, 2012.
27. J. Torres-Pérez, C. Gérente, and Y. Andrès, Sustainable activated carbons
from agricultural residues dedicated to antibiotic removal by adsorption
. J.
Chem. Eng,
 20(3), 524–529, 2012.
28. S.A.C. Carabineiroa, 
et al
., Comparison between activated carbon, carbon
xerogel and carbon nanotubes for the adsorption of the antibiotic
ciprofloxacin. 
Catalysis Today,
 186(1), 29–34, 2012.
29. M.B. Ahmed, 
et al.,
 Adsorptive removal of antibiotics from water and
wastewater: Progress and challenges. 
Sci. Total Environ,
 532, 112–126, 2015.30. J. Méndez-Díaz, 
et al.,
 Kinetic study of the adsorption of nitroimidazole
antibiotics on activated carbons in aqueous phase
. J. Colloid Interface Sci,
345(2), 481–490, 2010.
31. C.O. Ania, J.G. Pelayo, and T.J. Bandosz, Reactive adsorption of
penicillin on activated carbons. 
Adsorption,
 17(3), 421–429, 2011.
32. Y.W. Adams, L. K., and M. Meyer, Removal of antibiotics from surface
and distilled water in conventional water treatment processes. 
J. Environ.
Eng,
 128(3), 253–260, 2002.
33. P.E. Stackelberg, 
et al.,
 Efficiency of conventional drinking-water-
treatment processes in removal of pharmaceuticals and other organic
compounds. 
Sci. Total Environ.,
 377(2), 255–272, 2007.
34. N. Genç, and E.C. Dogan, Adsorption kinetics of the antibiotic
ciprofloxacin on bentonite, activated carbon, zeolite, and pumice
. Desalin.
Water Treat,
 53(3), 785–793, 2015.
35. A.C. Martins, 
et al.,
 Removal of tetracycline by NaOH-activated carbon
produced from macadamia nut shells: Kinetic and equilibrium studies. 
Chem.
Eng. J,
 260, 291–299, 2015.
36. C. Adams, 
et al.,
 Removal of antibiotics from surface and distilled water
in conventional water treatment processes. 
Journal of environmental
engineering,
 128(3), 253–260, 2002.
37. A. Mohammadi, 
et al.,
 Amoxicillin removal from aqueous media using
multi-walled carbon nanotubes. 
Fullerenes Nanotubes Carbon Nanostruct,
23(2), 165–169, 2015.
38. H. Kim, Y.S. Hwang, and V.K. Sharma, Adsorption of antibiotics and
iopromide onto single-walled and multi-walled carbon nanotubes
. Chem.
Eng. J,
 255, 23–27, 2014.
39. D. Avisar, 
et al.,
 Sorption of sulfonamides and tetracyclines to
montmorillonite clay. 
Water, Air & Soil Pollution,
 209(1–4), 439–450, 2010.
40. K.J. Choi, H.J. Son, and S.H. Kim, Ionic treatment for removal of
sulfonamide and tetracycline classes of antibiotic. 
Sci. Total Environ,
 387(1),
247–256, 2007.
41. H. Kim, Y.S. Hwang, and V.K. Sharma, Adsorption of antibiotics and
iopromide onto single-walled and multi-walled carbon nanotubes
. ChemicalEngineering Journal,
 255, 23–27, 2014.
42. L. Ji, 
et al.,
 Adsorption of sulfonamide antibiotics to multiwalled carbon
nanotubes
. Langmuir,
 25(19), 11608–11613, 2009.
43. A.M.L. Fernández, M. Rendueles, and M. Díaz, Competitive retention of
sulfamethoxazole (SMX) and sulfamethazine (SMZ) from synthetic solutions
in a strong anionic ion exchange resin. 
Solvent Extr. Ion Exch,
 32(7), 763–
781, 2014.
44. P. Liu, 
et al.,
 Modification of bio-char derived from fast pyrolysis of
biomass and its application in removal of tetracycline from aqueous solution
.
Bioresour. Technol,
 121, 235–240, 2012.
45. Q. Zaib, A.B. Mansoorb, and F. Ahmad, Photo-regenerable multi-walled
carbon nanotube membranes for the removal of pharmaceutical
micropollutants from water†. 
Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts,
 15, 1582–
1589, 2013.
46. 
Drugs.com
. Carbamazepine. 2015 [cited 2015 23rd June 2015]; Available
from: 
http://www.drugs.com/carbamazepine.html
.
47. A.S. Mestre, 
et al
., Activated carbons prepared from industrial pre-treated
cork: Sustainable adsorbents for pharmaceutical compounds removal.
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 253, 408–417, 2014.
48. V. Calisto, 
et al
., Adsorptive removal of pharmaceuticals from water by
commercial and waste-based carbons. 
Journal of Environmental
Management,
 152, 83–90, 2015.
49. C. Jung, 
et al
., Removal of endocrine disrupting compounds,
pharmaceuticals, and personal care products in water using carbon nanotubes:
A review
. Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry,
 27, 1–11, 2015.
50. G.Z. Kyzas, 
et al.,
 Environmental friendly technology for the removal of
pharmaceutical contaminants from wastewaters using modified chitosan
adsorbents. 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 2013.
51. E.M. Cuerda-Correaa, 
et al.,
 On the use of carbon blacks as potential low-
cost adsorbents for the removal of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
from river water. 
J. Hazard. Mater,
 177, 1046–1053, 2010.
52. T.X. Bui, and H. Cho, Adsorptive removal of selected pharmaceuticals by
mesoporous silica SBA-15. 
J. Hazard. Mater,
 168, 602–608, 2009.53. R. Schmuhl, H. Krieg, and K. Keizer, Adsorption of Cu (II) and Cr (VI)
ions by chitosan: Kinetics and equilibrium studies. 
Water Sa,
 27(1), 1–8,
2004.
54. J. Roussy, M. Van Vooren, and E. Guibal, Chitosan for the coagulation
and flocculation of mineral colloids. 
Journal of dispersion science and
technology,
 25(5), 663–677, 2005.
55. E. Guibal, T. Vincent, and C. Jouannin, Immobilization of extractants in
biopolymer capsules for the synthesis of new resins: A focus on the
encapsulation of tetraalkyl phosphonium ionic liquids. 
Journal of Materials
Chemistry,
 19(45), 8515–8527, 2009.
56. P.O. Boamah, 
et al.,
 Sorption of heavy metal ions onto carboxylate
chitosan derivatives—A mini-review. 
Ecotoxicology and Environmental
Safety,
 116, 113–120, 2015.
57. W.S. Wan Ngah, L.C. Teong, and M.A.K.M. Hanafiah, Adsorption of
dyes and heavy metal ions by chitosan composites: A review
. Carbohydrate
Polymers,
 83(4), 1446–1456, 2011.
58. J.-M. Li, 
et al
., Adsorption of phenol, p-chlorophenol and p-nitrophenol
onto functional chitosan. 
Bioresource Technology,
 100(3), 1168–1173, 2009.
59. M.N.V. Ravi Kumar, A review of chitin and chitosan applications.
Reactive and functional polymers,
 46(1), 1–27, 2000.
60. M. Vakili, 
et al.,
 Application of chitosan and its derivatives as adsorbents
for dye removal from water and wastewater: A review
. Carbohydrate
Polymers,
 113, 115–130, 2014.
61. E. Guibal, 
et al
., A review of the use of chitosan for the removal of
particulate and dissolved contaminants. 
Separation science and technology,
41(11), 2487–2514, 2006.
62. G. Crini, Kinetic and equilibrium studies on the removal of cationic dyes
from aqueous solution by adsorption onto a cyclodextrin polymer. 
Dyes and
Pigments,
 77(2), 415–426, 2008.
63. M. Auta, and B.H. Hameed, Coalesced chitosan activated carbon
composite for batch and fixed-bed adsorption of cationic and anionic dyes
.
Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces,
 105, 199–206, 2013.
64. L. Fan, 
et al.,
 Fabrication of magnetic chitosan nanoparticles grafted withβ-cyclodextrin as effective adsorbents toward hydroquinol. 
Colloids and
Surfaces B: Biointerfaces,
 95, 42–49, 2012.
65. M. Monier, D.M. Ayad, and D.A. Abdel-Latif, Adsorption of Cu(II),
Cd(II) and Ni(II) ions by cross-linked magnetic chitosan-2-aminopyridine
glyoxal Schiff’s base. 
Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces,
 94, 250–258,
2012.
66. L. Wang, 
et al.,
 Duplex DLC coatings fabricated on the inner surface of a
tube using plasma immersion ion implantation and deposition. 
Diamond and
Related Materials,
 17(1), 43–47, 2008.
67. B. Peng, 
et al.,
 Chemistry and applications of nanocrystalline cellulose
and its derivatives: A nanotechnology perspective. 
The Canadian Journal of
Chemical Engineering,
 89(5), 1191–1206, 2011.
68. G.Z. Kyzas, 
et al.,
 Removal of dorzolamide from biomedical wastewaters
with adsorption onto graphite oxide/poly(acrylic acid) grafted chitosan
nanocomposite. 
Bioresource Technology,
 152, 399–406, 2014.
69. Y.-L. Zhang, 
et al.,
 Sorption of carbamazepine from water by magnetic
molecularly imprinted polymers based on chitosan-Fe
3
O
4
. 
Carbohydrate
Polymers,
 97(2), 809–816, 2013.
70. MOF Technologies Ltd. Metal Organic Frameworks. 2012 [cited 2015
23rd June 2015]; Available from:
http://www.moftechnologies.com/MOFs.html
.
71. N.A. Khan, Z. Hasan, and S.H. Jhung, Adsorptive removal of hazardous
materials using metal-organic frameworks (MOFs): A review. 
Journal of
hazardous materials,
 244–245, 444–456, 2013.
72. Z. Hasan, J. Jeon, and S.H. Jhung, Adsorptive removal of naproxen and
clofibric acid from water using metal-organic frameworks. 
Journal of
Hazardous Materials,
 209–210, 151–157, 2012.
73. J.J. Zubair Hasan, and S.H. Jhun, Adsorptive removal of naproxen and
clofibric acid from water using metal-organic frameworks. 
Journal of
hazardous materials,
 209–210, 151–157, 2012.
74. L. Ji, 
et al
., Adsorption of monoaromatic compounds and pharmaceutical
antibiotics on carbon nanotubes activated by KOH etching
. Environmental
science & technology,
 44(16), 6429–6436, 2010.75. CETCO Mineral Technologies. Organic adsorption media for
environmental remediation applications. 2014 [cited 2015 22nd June];
Available from: 
http://www.cetco.com/en-us/Products/Environmental-
Products/Organoclays
.
76. K. Cai, 
et al.,
 Removal of Androgens and estrogens from water by
reactive materials* 
J. Water Resource and Protection,
 2, 990–993, 2010.
77. K. Cai, 
et al
., Removal of natural hormones in dairy farm wastewater
using reactive and sorptive materials. 
Science of The Total Environment,
461–462, 1–9, 2013.
78. S.K. Maeng, 
et al
., Substrate-immobilized electrospun TiO
2
 nanofibers
for photocatalytic degradation of pharmaceuticals: The effects of pH and
dissolved organic matter characteristics
. Water Research
.
79. D. Avisar, 
et al.,
 Impact of water quality on removal of carbamazepine in
natural waters by N-doped TiO
2
 photo-catalytic thin film surfaces. 
Journal of
hazardous materials,
 244–245, 463–471, 2013.
80. K. Stamatelatou, 
et al.,
 Pharmaceuticals and health care products in
wastewater effluents: The example of carbamazepine. 
Water Supply,
 3(4),
131–137, 2003.
81. Y. Zhang, S.-U. Geiβen, and C. Gal, Carbamazepine and diclofenac:
Removal in wastewater treatment plants and occurrence in water bodies.
Chemosphere,
 73(8), 1151–1161, 2008.
82. Y. Kim, 
et al.,
 Aquatic toxicity of acetaminophen, carbamazepine,
cimetidine, diltiazem and six major sulfonamides, and their potential
ecological risks in Korea. 
Environment International,
 33(3), 370–375, 2007.
83. S. Ortiz de García, 
et al.,
 Consumption and occurrence of pharmaceutical
and personal care products in the aquatic environment in Spain
. Science of
the Total Environment,
 444, 451–465, 2013.
84. S. Suarez, J.M. Lema, and F. Omil, Removal of Pharmaceutical and
Personal Care Products (PPCPs) under nitrifying and denitrifying conditions.
Water Research,
 44(10), 3214–3224, 2010.
85. A. Martucci, 
et al
., Adsorption of pharmaceuticals from aqueous
solutions on synthetic zeolites. 
Microporous and Mesoporous Materials,
148(1), 174–183, 2012.86. L.V.C. Rees, Introduction to zeolite science and practice, in Studies in
Surface Science and Catalysis, H. van Bekkum, E.M. Flanigen and J.C.
Jansen, (Ed.), Vol. 58, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1991, ISBN 0-444-88969-8,
12(6), p. 769, 1992.
87. I. Braschi, 
et al
., Removal of sulfonamide antibiotics from water:
Evidence of adsorption into an organophilic zeolite Y by its structural
modifications. 
Journal of hazardous materials,
 178(1–3), 218–225, 2010
88. D.J. de Ridder, 
et al.,
 Zeolites for nitrosamine and pharmaceutical
removal from demineralised and surface water: Mechanisms and efficacy.
Separation and Purification Technology,
 89, 71–77, 2012.
89. C. Kresge, 
et al
., Ordered mesoporous molecular sieves synthesized by a
liquid-crystal template mechanism. 
Nature,
 359(6397), 710–712, 1992.
90. Y. Kim, 
et al
., Removal of 12 selected pharmaceuticals by granular
mesoporous silica SBA-15 in aqueous phase. 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
256, 475–485, 2014.
91. S. Mirmohamadsadeghi, 
et al.,
 An efficient method for clay modification
and its application for phenol removal from wastewater
. Applied Clay
Science,
 59–60, 8–12, 2012.
92. C.B. Vidal, 
et al
., Reactive adsorption of pharmaceuticals on tin oxide
pillared montmorillonite: Effect of visible light exposure. 
Chemical
Engineering Journal,
 259, 865–875, 2015.
93. E.I. Unuabonah, and A. Taubert, Clay–polymer nanocomposites (CPNs):
Adsorbents of the future for water treatment
. Applied Clay Science,
 99, 83–
92, 2014.
94. Z. Es’haghi, 
et al.,
 Synthesis and application of a novel solid-phase
microextraction adsorbent: Hollow fiber supported carbon nanotube
reinforced sol–gel for determination of phenobarbital. 
Analytica Chimica
Acta,
 689(1), 122–128, 2011.
95. G.Z. Kyzas, 
et al.,
 Environmental friendly technology for the removal of
pharmaceutical contaminants from wastewaters using modified chitosan
adsorbents. 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 222, 248–258, 2013.
96. A. Sinha, and N.R. Jana, Graphene-based composite with γ-Fe
2
O
3
nanoparticle for the high-performance removal of endocrine-disruptingcompounds from water. 
Chemistry,
 8(4), 786–791, 2012.
97. K.J. Choia, S.G. Kima, and S.H. Kimb, Removal of antibiotics by
coagulation and granular activated carbon filtration
. Journal of hazardous
materials,
 151(1), 38–43, 2008.
98. J. Rivera-Utrilla, 
et al.,
 Pharmaceuticals as emerging contaminants and
their removal from water. A review. 
Chemosphere,
 2013.
99. E. Regulska, E. and J. Karpińska, Investigation of novel material for
effective photodegradation of bezafibrate in aqueous samples. 
Environ Sci
Pollut Res Int,
 21(7), 5242–5248, 2014.
100. P.S. Wang, Q. Shi, Y. Shi, K.K. Clark, G.D. Stucky, and A.A. Keller,
Magnetic permanently confined micelle arrays for treating hydrophobic
organic compound contamination. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
 131, 182–188, 2009.
101. H.T.K. Wang, A.A. Keller, and K.K. Clark, Natural organic matter
removal by adsorption onto magnetic permanently confined micelle arrays. 
J.
Hazard. Mater,
 2011(194): p. 156–161.
102. K.K. Clark, and A.A. Keller, Adsorption of perchlorate and other
oxyanions onto magnetic permanently confined micelle arrays (Mag-
PCMAs). 
Water Res.,
 46, 635–644, 2012.
103. Y.K. Huang, A.A.*, Magnetic nanoparticle adsorbents for emerging
organic contaminants. ACS 
Sustainable Chem. Eng.,
 7, 731–736, 2013.
104. B.L.N. Guieysse, M.M. Mattiasson, Removal of Endocrine Disrupting
Compounds using molecularly imprinted polymers: A review. 
In New
Membranes and Advanced Materials for Wastewater Treatment
, 7–20, 2009.
105. H. Yamamoto, 
et al
., Novel treatment process of harmful organic
materials in waste water using temperature-sensitive gel synthesized from
PVA. 
Materials Transactions
, 44(12), 2436–2440, 2003.
106. H.F. Lin, R. Ravikrishna, and K.T. Valsaraj, Reusable adsorbents for
dilute solution separation: Batch and continuous reactors for the adsorption
and degradation of 1,2-dichlorobenzene from dilute wastewater streams using
titania as a photo catalyst. 
Separation and Purification Technology,
 28(2),
87–102, 2002.
107. L. Wu, M. Shamsuzzoha, and S.M.C. Ritchie, Preparation of cellulose
acetate supported zero-valent iron nanoparticles for the dechlorination oftrichloroethylene in water
. Journal of Nanoparticle Research,
 7(3), 469–476,
2005.
108. A. Bjerga–Dec, and D. Acker, FNEHIN-First Nations Environmental
Health Innovation Network. 2012.
109. G.L. Echo, Pharmaceuticals difficult to treat in drinking water
K.C.f.E.J.a.M.S. University, Editor. 2012.
110. G. Lu, 
et al.,
 Inorganic membranes for hydrogen production and
purification: a critical review and perspective. 
Journal of Colloid and
Interface Science,
 314(2), 589–603, 2007.
111. N.M. Vieno, 
et al.,
 Occurrence of pharmaceuticals in river water and
their elimination in a pilot-scale drinking water treatment plant.
Environmental science & technology,
 41(14), 5077–5084, 2007.
112. S. Suárez, 
et al.,
 How are Pharmaceutical And Personal Care Products
(PPCPs) removed from urban wastewaters? 
Reviews in Environmental
Science and Bio/Technology
, 7(2), 125–138, 2008.
113. S. Wang, 
et al.,
 Analysis of steroidal estrogen residues in food and
environmental samples
. International Journal of Environmental and
Analytical Chemistry,
 88(1), 1–25, 2008.
114. E.L. Vermeirssen, 
et al.,
 Characterization of environmental estrogens in
river water using a three pronged approach: Active and passive water
sampling and the analysis of accumulated estrogens in the bile of caged fish.
Environmental science & technology,
 39(21), 8191–8198, 2005.
115. L.S. Shore, M. Gurevitz, and M. Shemesh, Estrogen as an environmental
pollutant
. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology,
 51(3),
361–366, 1993.
116. M.S. Colucci, H. Bork, and E. Topp, Persistence of estrogenic hormones
in agricultural soils. 
Journal of Environmental Quality,
 30(6), 2070–2076,
2001.
117. M.R. Servos, 
et al.,
 Distribution of estrogens, 17β-estradiol and estrone,
in Canadian municipal wastewater treatment plants. 
Science of the Total
Environment,
 336(1–3), 155–170, 2005.
118. T. Eggen, and C. Vogelsang, Chapter 7 - Occurrence and fate of
pharmaceuticals and personal care products in wastewater, in 
ComprehensiveAnalytical Chemistry,
 Y.Z. Eddy, (Ed.), Elsevier, 245–294, 2015.
119. M.M. Huber, 
et al.,
 Oxidation of pharmaceuticals during ozonation and
advanced oxidation processes. 
Environmental science & technology,
 37(5),
1016–1024, 2003.
120. T. Mackul’ak, 
et al.,
 Fenton-like reaction: A possible way to efficiently
remove illicit drugs and pharmaceuticals from wastewater
. Environmental
Toxicology and Pharmacology,
 39(2), 483–488, 2015.
121. M. Messner, 
et al.,
 An approach for developing a national estimate of
waterborne disease due to drinking water and a national estimate model
application. 
Journal of Water and Health,
 4(Suppl 2), 201–240, 2006.
122. S.M.d.A.G.U. de Souza, K.A.S. Bonilla, and A.A.U. de Souza, Removal
of COD and color from hydrolyzed textile azo dye by combined ozonation
and biological treatment. 
Journal of hazardous materials,
 179(1–3), 35–42,
2010.
123. I. Sirés, and E. Brillas, Remediation of water pollution caused by
pharmaceutical residues based on electrochemical separation and degradation
technologies: A review. 
Environment International,
 40, 212–229, 2012.
124. E. Brillas, and I. Sirés, Electrochemical removal of pharmaceuticals
from water streams: Reactivity elucidation by mass spectrometry. 
2015 TrAC
Trends in Analytical Chemistry.
125. A. Anglada A. Urtiaga, and I. Ortiz, Contributions of electrochemical
oxidation to waste-water treatment: Fundamentals and review of applications.
Journal of Chemical Technology & Biotechnology,
 84(12), 1747–1755, 2009.Chapter 8
Flocculation Performances of Polymers
and Nanomaterials for the Treatment
of Industrial Wastewaters
E. Fosso-Kankeu
1
*
, F. Waanders
1
, A.F. Mulaba-Bafubiandi
2
,
and A.K. Mishra
3
1
School of Chemical and Minerals Engineering, Faculty of Engineering,
North West University, Potchefstroom Campus, Potchefstroom, South Africa
2
Department of Extraction Metallurgy, Minerals Processing and Technology
Research Center, School of Mining, Metallurgy and Chemical Engineering,
Faculty of Engineering and the Built Environment, University of
Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South Africa
3
Nanotechnology and Water Sustainability Research Unit, College of
Engineering, Science and Technology, University of South Africa, Florida
Science Campus, Johannesburg, South Africa
*
Corresponding author:
 
24838616@nwu.ac.za
Abstract
Inorganic metal-based flocculants have been traditionally used for the
treatment of wastewaters; however, some limitations related to increased
concentration of metals in sludge and ineffective removal of particles in
solutions, have led to investigations over the years by researchers resulting in
the identification of polymers and nanomaterials-based flocculants, which
have been continuously improved to address the complexity of wastewaters.The source of wastewater whether from the mining industry, the textile
industry or domestic, influences the physicochemical characteristic of the
wastewater and this has often determined the choice of a type of flocculant as
well as its performance. This chapter will focus on the evaluation of the
performance and development of flocculants over the years to address the
diversity of pollutants in wastewater from various sources.
Keywords:
 Flocculation, polymers, nanomaterials, treatment, industrial,
wastewater
8.1 General Introduction
The growing population around the world has resulted to the booming of the
industry that generates large volume of polluted effluents contaminating the
limited water resources. The nature of pollutants vary with the activity of the
industries; mining industries, textile industries, sewage and waste water,
chemical fertilisers and pesticides, pulp and paper industries and the
metallurgical industries contribute significantly to the degradation of water
quality. Surface water therefore contains both dissolve and suspended
particles; the latter being of various particle size, composition and density.
The chemical and microbial contaminants are often entrapped in the
suspended particles, which increase the turbidity of water; the water
treatment or purification process will therefore require among others a
determinant step of turbidity removal to facilitate further purification steps.
8.2 Conventional Treatment of
Water with Inorganic Coagulants
Turbidity removal has been carried out over the years through the use of
inorganic coagulants, which are likely to promote the interaction between the
particles in solution and the formation of flocs, which separate from water. In
principles, the process involves two major steps namely the coagulation and
the flocculation; the first step starts immediately after the coagulants havebeen added to the solution and the contact promoted through rapid mixing,
this results in the neutralisation of the charges of particles in solution; the
flocculation step generally occurs during slow mixing allowing the
aggregation of colloids and formation of large flocs, which can be easily
removed in the subsequent clarification/filtration process.
8.2.1 Inorganic Coagulants
Aluminium sulphate and ferric chloride were the first two inorganic
coagulants used in full-scale water treatment plants as the modern use of
coagulants in water treatment started more than a century ago [1,2]. The
conventional chemical method has been implemented mostly for the decrease
of turbidity and colour, and for the removal of pathogens, this is being made
possible using mainly aluminium and iron salts, which hydrolyse to form
soluble monomeric and polymeric species when added to water. The general
mechanism of particles/colloids removal from water can be summarised as
sequence of two physicochemical events: (1) the double-layer compression a
process to allow the particles to overcome the repulsive forces and thus
agglomerate and precipitate and (2) precipitates enmeshment, a process in
which small particles are physically enmeshed by metal precipitates when
they are forming and settling. These mechanisms have been simply identified
as coagulation and flocculation respectively. The chemical treatment requires,
sufficient dose of Al/Fe(III) to be added to the natural water in the pH range
6–8, this results to the rapid hydrolysis of the salts which for complexes
possessing positive charges allowing them to strongly bind to negatively
charged colloids neutralising their charge. The success of this process is
determined by factors such as the type and dosage of coagulants, pH,
temperature, mixing conditions, the presence or absence of divalent cations
and concentrations of destabilising anions, and the properties (size,
functionality, charge and hydrophobicity) of the particles in solution [3, 4, 5,
6]. Excess increase of the salts concentration can, however, leads to the shift
of the coagulation mechanism into “sweep coagulation” as the particles and
dissolved organic species will get trapped into the hydroxyl forms (Al(OH)
3
and Fe(OH)
3
) of Al or Fe(III), which will eventually precipitate. High
coagulation doses is mostly used in low turbidity water as to enhance theflocculation kinetics where particles collision is most predominant than
chemical reaction resulting in the formation of stable floc and better removal
of trace impurities compared to the case of charge neutralisation. However, at
relatively low dose of Al/Fe(III) and with a colloidal concentration above
critical value in waters at pH < 6, chemical interaction may predominate if
the rate of coagulants–impurities interaction is faster than the rate of the
hydroxide precipitation. There was, however, continuous investigation to
determine suitable mechanism to form bigger and stable flocs and increase
the effectiveness of the process; eventually there was suggestion to use
coagulants aids, which included among other the bentonite clays, limestone
and silicates. The performance of alum and ferric salts for the removal of
natural organic matter is pH dependent as they seem to perform better at pH
< 6.0. The pH of the water is often lowered after application of ferric
sulphate, ferric chloride or alum, which are acidic inorganic coagulants; it is
therefore required to adjust the pH depending of the nature of the water; high
alkalinity waters often need to be lowered by addition of acid, while low
alkalinity waters will need addition of base to reach efficient pH range [3].
Effective removal of turbidity therefore requires to work under optimum
conditions consisting of adjustment of coagulant dose and solution pH; in the
case where the coagulation operate at low pH (<6) and the coagulant dose
exceeds the optimum, charge reversal at the colloidal surface may happen,
leading to colloidal destabilisation and further degradation of water quality.
Aluminium sulphate has been the most extensively used coagulants for
turbidity removal in water treatment plants, but due to the potential of
residual aluminium in water to cause Alzheimer’s disease, there have been
considerations to rather use ferric salts [4, 7]. Comparative investigations as
reported in the literature have shown that ferric-based coagulants are in most
cases more effective than aluminium-based coagulants for the removal of
NOM [8]. Assessing the removal of natural organic matter with different
chemical coagulants, Uygener 
et al.
 [9] found that the application of ferric
chloride as coagulant allowed to achieve higher DOC removal compared to
alum. Using ferric chloride and alum at different pH, Bell-Ajy 
et al.
 [10]
found that relatively lower concentration (30 mg/l) of FeCl
3
 was required to
remove 25% of TOC at pH 6.5, while higher concentration (50 mg/l) was
required to remove the same amount of TOC at pH between 7.5 and 8.0.Comparing iron and aluminium-based NOM systems, Sharp 
et al.
 [5]
concluded that the observed differences were mainly due to the affinity of
each coagulant for a particular surface or system rather than the electrical
character of the system.
Conventional treatment method using Al/Fe(III)-based salts in natural
waters has the disadvantage to lead to extremely rapid and uncontrolled
hydrolysis, which often results to rapid precipitation. The inability to control
the nature of the coagulant species formed, subject the system to failure as
changes in the nature of the raw water and in water temperature may
negatively affect the performance of Al/Fe(III) coagulants. To cope with such
changes and ensure the production of good-quality water, water treatment
plants normally operate coagulation at high doses and elevated pH (pH > 6).
Such approach requires excess use of coagulants and yield to large amount of
sludge to be disposed of, therefore increasing the overall cost of the operation
[11].
8.2.2 Electroflocculation
Electrocoagulation is a technique that was discovered and already
implemented for water treatment more than a century ago [12]. This process
has been profitably implemented at large scale and has the potential to
significantly reduce the disadvantages of the conventional techniques such as
excess production of sludge and inadequate control of chemicals [13]. The
concept of this method consists of electrochemically treating water using
electrodes; water or wastewater is then purified by electrolysis using
aluminium and iron corroding electrodes. The general mechanism involves
the dissolution of the electrode material to produce metal hydroxide flocs by
reaction at the electrodes followed by hydrolysis. After subsequent
investigations it was observed that aluminium electrodes could lead to the
formation of undesirable sediments [14], which resulted to some substantial
changes in the initial concept consisting to the replacement of aluminium
electrodes by iron electrode materials and use of alternating current in place
of direct current [15, 16]. According to Emamjomeh and Sivakumar [17], the
pollutants in water and wastewater being treated are removed by coagulant
species formed in situ; they continue by mentioning that electrocoagulation is
based on three main mechanisms including electrode oxidation, gas bubblegeneration and flotation and sedimentation of flocs formed. The operation of
an electrocoagulation reactor required that cell voltage and current are
controlled during the experiments. With monopolar connections an electric
potential is connected between n pairs of anodes and cathodes [18, 19]. The
effectiveness of the electrocoagulation reactor also depend of the type of
connections applied in the system, which influences the trajectory of the
current; it is suggested by Emamjomeh and Sivakumar [17] that an
application of electrical potential between two feeder electrodes, a series of
connections to bipolar electrodes will cause the current to pass through “n”
electrodes pairs, while the same current will pass across each electrode and
solution in case of normal parallel connections. The electrocoagulation
method could be referred as an environmental-friendly technique because of a
number of advantages as summarised by Khandegar and Saroha [20]: (1)
electrocoagulation removes many species that chemical coagulation cannot
remove; (2) electrocoagulation requires no addition of chemicals and
provides better removal capabilities for the same species than chemical
coagulation; (3) electrocoagulation produces less sludge, thus reducing the
sludge disposal cost; (4) electrocoagulation sludge is more readily filterable
and can be utilised as a soil additive; (5) electrocoagulation sludge contains
metal oxides that pass the leachability test; and (6) electrocoagulation
technique needs minimal start-up time; the process can be started by turning
on the switch. However, there are some limitations of the techniques that
have been identified by Mollah 
et al.
 [21]: (1) the use of electricity may be
expensive in many places; (2) high conductivity of the wastewater suspension
is required; (3) the “sacrificial electrodes” are dissolved into wastewater
streams as a result of oxidation and need to be regularly replaced; and (4)
gelatinous hydroxide may tend to solubilise in some cases.
As a water treatment technology, electrocoagulation has been used to remove
a wide range of pollutants from water and wastewater. This technique has
been used to treat wastewater containing synthetic detergent, chemical and
mechanical polishing waste, organic matter from landfill leachates, oil
wastes, dyes, foodstuff wastes, suspended particles, mine wastes and heavy
metal-containing solution [21, 22, 23, 24, 25]. Few studies reported in
literature have used electrocoagulation for the removal of metals or dyes from
the solutions and will be discussed in this section.Kobya 
et al.
 [26] investigated the effects of both aluminium and iron
connection modes and electrode materials on arsenic removal efficiency from
potable water by electrocoagulation; they achieved the highest arsenic
removal in the monopolar series electrode connection mode for both
electrodes, the optimum arsenic removal was 94.1% for Fe electrode and
93.5% for Al electrode. In a separate study El-Taweel 
et al.
 [27] assessed the
performance of electrocoagulation using iron electrodes for the removal of
chromium hexavalent ion from wastewater using fixed bed electrochemical
batch reactor.
The treatment of two wastewaters from textile industry was carried out by
Zongo 
et al.
 [28], in a discontinuous system provided with aluminium and
iron electrodes and with recirculation of the liquid; they found that the two
metals as electrode could exhibit comparable performance irrespective of the
quality of the phase separation in the flocculation section downstream of the
electrocoagulation cell. The treatment of wastewater contaminated with
Eriochrome Black T using electrocoagulation was modelled by means of the
pseudoequilibria approaches to explain the interaction between the different
aluminium and pollutants species; Canizares 
et al.
 [29] could therefore
explain the mechanism of electrocoagulation treatment in this case as the
enmeshment of EBT in a growing aluminium hydroxide precipitate as well as
charge neutralisation of EBT molecules. The factors that influence the
performance of electrocoagulation are still to be extensively investigated in
order to definitely consider this process as a replacement of the traditional
coagulation method. Some approaches have been considered to improve the
process; Nawel 
et al.
 [30] have used Opuntia ficus-indica pad juice to
improve the performance of electrocoagulation for the turbidity removal, they
achieved a maximum turbidity removal efficiency of 86.9%, which was better
than the conventional electrocoagulation method without juice addition.
8.3 Development of Polymer-Based
Coagulants and Mechanisms of
Turbidity Removal8.3.1 Inorganic and Organic Polymers
8.3.1.1 Inorganic Polymers
The limitations of the conventional methods such as the inability to control
the nature of the coagulant species formed rapidly during dilution under the
prevailing raw water conditions has motivated the use of pre-polymerised
inorganic coagulants to improve the coagulation. Considering the
coagulation–flocculation properties of inorganic polymer coagulants, they are
said to lie in a position between the traditional inorganic salts and the organic
flocculants [31]. Factors such as the anions in solution, the aging temperature
and time of the Al/Fe(III) solution, the mixing mode of base with the
Al/Fe(III) solution, the ratio of moles of base added and/or bound to the
moles of Al
3+
 or Fe
3+
 ions and the nature and strength of the base often
determine the nature of the polymeric species formed [11]. Gao 
et al.
 [32]
have enumerated a number of phenomena determining the performance of the
synthesise inorganic polymer coagulant, which include: (1) the addition of
preformed polymers may slow the rate of hydroxide precipitation upon
dilution [33] and consequently allow charged polymeric species to be
maintained for a greater duration, thereby enhancing the ability to effect
charge neutralisation; (ii) more often, the larger the preformed species, the
less they hydrolyse and the more strongly they adsorb at surfaces [34]; (iii) if
preformed polymers are relatively large, and carry a high cationic charge,
their enhanced surface activity and improved charge neutralising capacity
may make them more effective at a comparatively lower dose than the
coagulant species present by the direct addition of a conventional coagulant.
Better performance in pollutants removal by pre hydrolysed coagulants such
as polyaluminium chloride (PACl), polyaluminium ferric chloride,
polyferrous sulphate (PFS) and polyferric chloride was reported by Verma 
et
al.
 [35] who also suggested the ability of these polymers to produce lower
volume of sludge.
The most prominent aluminium-based inorganic polymer is PACl, which is
prepared by dissolving aluminium in a preheated solution of HCl, the PACl is
then formed following an exothermic reaction. Important parameters such as
mixing intensity, base injection rate and method, hydroxyl ligand number andaging were identified by Shen and Dempsey [36] to have a significant effect
on the composition of PACl. Prepared under mild conditions in the
laboratory, the PACl can be effectively applied for the treatment of
contaminated water; it was found to exhibit a comparative performance to the
commercial PACl [37]. PACl has been shown to be more effective than the
conventional coagulant Al in the decolourisation of solutions containing dyes
such as Direct Black 19, Direct Red 28 and Direct blue 86 [38]. Investigating
the mechanism of NOM removal by PACl, Yan 
et al.
 [39] found that
contaminants removal mostly occur through complexation, neutralisation and
adsorption. Relatively new kinds of aluminium-based polymers include
polyaluminium silicate sulphate, which is commercially available and has
been used for drinking water treatment at large scale. Improvement of the
performance of PACl has been attempted by several authors, some have
investigated the stability of flocs produced by PACl [40], while the effects of
slow mixing on the coagulation performance of PACl was investigated by
Zhongguo 
et al
. [41] who found that slow mixing has a more marked positive
influence on charge neutralisation coagulation than on sweep flocculation.
The health risk associated with the residual aluminium in treated water has
led to the preferable use of ferric-based polymers.
Polyferric sulphate (PFC) is one of the Fe-based polymers, which has been
extensively studied, it is prepared through the oxidation of ferrous state iron
solution under conditions of high temperature and/or high pressure, and
subsequently aging with heating and/or base addition. The PFC is very
attractive to the water industry for the fact that it is less sensitive to the water
temperature variation and produce lower volume of sludge. It has been
suggested that adsorption, entrapment and complexation rather than charge
neutralisation are the possible dominant removal mechanisms during PFC
coagulation [42]. The addition to the polymer of other components such as
polysilic acid, to produce new composite coagulants such as polysilicate-
ferric (PSF) and polyferric silicate sulphate can improve the efficiency of
polymeric coagulants [43–47]. The pH variation has been shown to be a
determinant parameter for the performance of PFC, influencing the removal
efficiency, floc growth, strength and regrowth capability [48].
There have been several attempts to improve the performance of Al/Fe(III)-
based polymers through insertion of coagulant aids. Activated silica has beenfound to enhance the bridging ability of PACl [49]. The performance of
polyaluminium-silicate-chloride has been investigated and it was found to be
more resistant to pH variations (effective pH 6.5–9) than PACl and flocs
formed under optimum conditions have been noticed to be bigger, thus
contributing to greater removal efficiency [50, 51]. Cationic polymers have
been found to be efficient coagulation aids in improving PACl coagulation
performance by enhancing the neutralisation ability of PACl [49] and
improving PFC ability to remove DOC and turbidity [42].
8.3.1.2 Organic Polymers
There is always a concern of secondary pollution when conventional
inorganic metal-based and synthetic polymeric flocculants are used for the
treatment of water and wastewaters. This has motivated the consideration of
natural polymers, which are widely available in replacement of metal-based
coagulants. Natural polymers provide additional advantage to be
environmentally friendly and biodegradable. A host of biological products
have been proposed and studied as effective coagulants and flocculants [52,
53, 54, 55, 56]; these products are also called “bioflocculants” and include
starches, chitosan, alginates and microbial materials produced by
microorganisms namely bacteria, fungi and yeast [57]. Bioflocculants have
particular macromolecular structures with a variety of functional groups,
which can interact with contaminants [58, 59]. These properties give the
bioflocculants the ability to destabilise particles, which are resistant to
aggregation through increase of the ionic strength or specifically adsorbing
counterions to neutralise the particle size. Removal of dissolved and
particulate contaminants using chitosan involved mechanisms such as charge
neutralisation, adsorption (related to protonated amine groups), precipitative
coagulation, bridge formation and electrostatic patch [60].
Among the natural coagulants that have been used for the treatment of
water and wastewaters, chitosan is the most promising cationic biopolymer
for extensive application; chitosan is a heteropolymer made of D-
glucosamine and 
N
-acetyl-D-glucosamine produced by the deacetylation of
chitin [61, 62]; chitosan is a derivative of chitin, which is widely available,
chitosan has a unique property among biopolymers especially due to the
presence of primary amino groups, which are easily protonated in acidicsolutions causing electrostatic attraction of anionic compounds [61]. The
other features of chitosan include biocompatibility, biodegradability,
hydrophobicity, antibacterial properties and a remarkable affinity for many
proteins [63]. Some characteristics of chitosan such as long polymer chains,
bridging of aggregates, high cationic charge density and precipitation (in
neutral or alkaline pH conditions) have been exploited for the design of
coagulation–flocculation processes applied for the treatment of [64] (1)
mineral suspension: bentonite [65] and kaolinite [66]; (2) organic suspension:
bacteria [67, 68], fish processing waste [69], and cheese residue [70, 71]; (3)
organic solutions: dyes [72] and humic acid (HA) [73]. The performance of
chitosan as flocculant was investigated during the removal of residue oil and
suspended solid in palm oil mill effluent; the researchers [74] found that
chitosan was more performant than PAC removing up to 95% of suspended
solid and residue oil. Investigating the ability of chitosan as coagulation–
flocculation polymer capable of superseding conventional treatment such as
sorption, Szygula 
et al.
 [75] obtained a 99% removal of Acid Blue 92 (a
sulfonic dye) from textile wastewater. In order to improve the performance of
chitosan used for the treatment of water, pre-treatment steps have been
considered to affect the chemical and physical properties of chitosan. Based
on the concept that protonated amine groups in acidic solutions are likely to
attract anions, Guidal and Roussy [76] dissolved powdered form of chitosan
in acetic acid solution and used the pretreated chitosan for the removal of
anionic dye namely Reactive Black 5. To exploit the advantages of both
inorganic and organic coagulants, the two have often been combined to form
a complex compound used in the treatment of water. A number of composite
inorganic–organic coagulants have been studied by researchers; these include
among others the PFC–PDADMAC, PFS–PAA and highly efficient PACl
(PHAC), which all have added advantages over the conventional polymers or
organic polymers used alone. Wei 
et al.
 [42] have achieved good removal of
turbidity, DOC and SUVA using PFC–PDADMAC exhibit stronger charge
neutralisation. PFS–PAA on the other hand has the potential to produce flocs,
which are larger and wider on size distribution range when compared to PSF
or PAA in combination or individually [31]. PHAC has been reported to be
very effective in alkaline water [49, 77], and was observed to achieve better
removal of the NOM than the conventional polymer. PHAC is prepared from
PACl and other organic and inorganic additives such as silicate andPDADMAC [49, 77, 78].
8.3.2 Copolymerisation
Techniques such as graft copolymerisation are often used for the
modification of the structure of biopolymers [79], which in most cases result
in the improvement of their performance as flocculants. It is suggested that
by grafting polyacrylamide branches on rigid backbone of natural
polysaccharides, the dangling grafted chains have easy approachability to the
contaminants in effluents, resulting in better removal capability [80, 81].
Several authors have reported that it was possible to develop efficient and
shear stable flocculants for wastewater treatment by grafting flexible
polyacrylamide chains onto the various polysaccharide backbones [82].
Grafted polysaccharide-based flocculants that have been effectively used for
the treatment of wastewaters include chitosan [83], carboxymethyl cellulose
[84], glycogen [85], amylopectin [86], starch [87], guar gum [88] and
tamarind kernel polysaccharide [89]. A newly developed chitosan prepared
by grafting poly[(2-methylmethacryloyloxyethyl) trimethyl ammonium
chloride] (PDMC) branches onto the backbone of carboxymethyl chitosan
(CMC) using potassium persulphate as initiator. The performance of the
novel chitosan-based flocculant (CMC-g-PDMC) was evaluated using kaolin
suspension, HA solution and kaolin-HA mixed suspension as synthetic
wastewater under acidic, neutral and alkaline conditions; Yang 
et al.
 [90]
therefore found that CMC-g-PDMC exhibited lower optimal dosage, higher
contaminant removal efficiency, wider applicable pH range, lower effluent
toxicity and better floc properties for handling and disposal, in comparison
with PACl. The physical and chemical structures of cellulose have also been
often modified by researchers in order to improve its performance for the
decontamination of wastewater; Mishra 
et al.
 [91] synthesised polyacrylic
acid grafted carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC-g-PAA) using microwave
radiation method, and found that the CMC-g-PAA grade with highest
hydrodynamic volume showed maximum flocculation efficacy compared to
the conventional alum and the non-grafted CMC. In a separate study,
polyacrylamide grafted hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose (HPMC-g-PAM)
was developed by Das 
et al.
 [92]. The HPMC is prepared through the
reaction of cellulose with chloromethane and epoxy propane and then graftedto polyacrylamide. The synthesised copolymer (HPMC-g-PAM) was then
used to treat different synthetic effluents such as iron ore and kaolin
suspensions; the results showed that HPMC-g-PAM flocculant performed
better than the base polysaccharide. A novel cross-linked starch-graft-
polyacrylamide-co-sodium xanthate (CSAX) was synthesised by Chang 
et al.
[93] through grafting copolymerisation reaction of corn starch, acrylamide
and sodium xanthate using epichlorohydrin as cross-linking reagent and ceric
ammonium nitrate as initiator in aqueous solution. The synthesised
copolymer (CSAX) was successfully used for the removal of turbidity and
copper from aqueous solution. Dye pollutants have also been effectively
removed from solution using the copolymerised flocculants developed from
starch [94].
8.4 Synthesis of Nanomaterials-
Based Flocculants and Utilisation in
the Removal of Pollutants
Recent developments in nanotechnology have prompted contemplation of its
application in a wide range of industries including the wastewater treatment.
Nanomaterials have large specific surface area and reactivity, making them
particularly attractive as separation and reactive media for water purification
[95, 96]. The four major classes of nanomaterials that have been often
considered for the treatment of water include Carbonaceous materials, metal
oxide nanoparticles, zeolites, and dendrimers. However, flocculants have
been developed mostly from carbonaceous- and magnetic-based
nanomaterials (
Table 8.1
).
Table 8.1
 Performance of flocculants derived from carbonaceous- and
magnetic-based nanoparticles.8.4.1 Flocculants Derived from
Carbonaceous Nonomaterials
Among the carbonaceous materials used to purify water, carbon nanotubes
(CNTs) have been on the leading edge of investigations and implementation
in various sectors of science and engineering. The high performance of CNTs
is supported by their physical and chemical properties as suggested by Fosso-
Kankeu 
et al.
 [96], namely high porous and hollow structure, light mass
density, high tensile strength, high conductivity, affinity to adsorbates and
large specific surface area. Each type of the CNT is based on the principle of
hybridised carbon atom layers in the walls of CNT and represents a hollow,
concentric cylindrical structure that is closed at both ends [96, 97]. CNTs can
be produced through the chemical vapour deposition method from the carbon
dioxide; specific characterisation techniques are required to ascertain the
structure, composition and morphology of the synthesised CNT.
Transmission electron microscopy is used to determine the morphological
pattern of the CNTs including tube dimensions and level of aggregation; the
surface morphology of the CNTs is obtained by using the scanning electron
microscopy; the thermogravimetric analyser is used to determine the carbon
content of the CNTs; Raman spectroscopy is used to determine the degree of
crystallinity and the structural characteristics of the CNTs and the BET
analyser is used for the determination of the surface area.
Very few studies have so far exploited the flocculation properties of CNTs;
however, CNTs possess a huge potential as flocculant/coagulant and are
likely to remove pollutants from wastewater through bridging flocculation by
drawing the particles together after adsorption onto separate colloidal
particles, or by neutralising the charge of particles, which results into the
dissipation of the ionic cloud and disappearance of electrostatic potential
therefore promoting the contact among the particles at near zero net charge
[98]. CNTs were effectively used for the removal of NOM from solution and
they exhibited superior performance to the granular activated carbon [99].
The removal strategy of CNTs was further explained by Su and Lu [100],
who suggested a thermodynamic change during the NOM removal; according
to them, the removal of NOM by CNTs is an exothermic process with apositive entropy value. Yan 
et al.
 [101] further clarified that the positive
change in entropy values was the result of the displacement of the water
molecules intercalated among the nanotubes by the NOM approaching the
CNTs. The performance of CNTs has also been improved to increase the
flocculation efficiency; Smith 
et al.
 [102] have claimed that the limitation of
the performance of CNTs may result from the fact that they minimise their
surface free energy by forming settleable aggregate in solution, this was
overcome by modifying the exterior surface of CNTs using a technique based
on the grafting of hydrophilic oxygen containing functional group into the
exterior surface by using strong oxidising agent. The flocculation
performance of graphene oxide was investigated by Yang 
et al.
 [103] for the
removal of kaolin, HA, hematite and cationic light yellow 7GL dye from
water; they found that graphene oxide was more effective in the removal of
cationic contaminants than the anionic contaminants.
8.4.2 Flocculants Derived from Magnetic
Nanomaterials
There is currently a growing interest for the application of magnetic
nanoparticles in the purification of water because of their unusual optical,
electronic and magnetic properties. The magnetic properties of nanoparticles
are dominated by two key issues, namely the finite-size effects and the
surface effects. Finite-size effects may result from the quantum confinement
of the electrons, while typical surface effects are related to the symmetry
breaking of the crystal structure at the boundary of each particle [104].
Magnetic nanoparticles of different compositions can be synthesised using
several specific methods; however, the stability of the particles under a range
of conditions will determine the success of their application in a given field.
According to Hyeon [105], several key issues must be considered during the
synthesis of nanoparticles; these include the particle size distribution
(uniformity), the particle size control, crystallinity and crystal structure, shape
control and alignment (alignment of nanoparticles on substrates in the case of
device applications). The potential of magnetic nanoparticles as
flocculants/coagulants for the treatment of water and wastewater has been
seriously considered by researchers and industries, for the main reasons thatthe presence of ferromagnetic materials and magnetic fields makes magnetic
collection and separation possible, leading to higher efficiency, larger
handling capacity, easier manipulation and comparatively lower energy
consumption [106]. Therefore, fast settling velocity and easy separation of
loaded magnetic nanoparticles from solution (effective management of
sludge) can be achieved using an external magnetic field [107], such
properties make the magnetic nanoparticles very attractive since they are
likely to outperform the traditional coagulants. This has motivated
investigation of the coagulation/flocculation potential of magnetic
nanoparticles with a particular focus on [108]: (1) integration of magnetic ion
exchange (MIEX
®
) hybrid systems [109] to improve treatment efficiency
[110, 111]; (2) seeding of the magnetic particles in the treating water to
produce magnetic flocs that can be rapidly collected in the magnetic separator
[112]; (3) development and improvement of the magnetic separation
system/instrument [113]; and (4) development of magnetic coagulants by
compounding magnetic materials with traditional coagulants.
Jiang 
et al.
 [107] found that the co-effect of PFC and magnetic
nanoparticles was responsible for better performance in the removal of
Microcystis aeruginosa
 from aqueous solutions; the composite coagulant
exhibited improved coagulation efficiency with higher removal values and
slighter pH dependence, the authors suggested that the magnetite acts as an
adsorber, favouring the 
M. aeruginosa
 removal by facilitating the formation
of settleable flocs and reducing the negative influence of NOM at optimal
dosage. To investigate the effects of magnetic nanoparticles on inorganic
coagulants, Zhang 
et al.
 [108] prepared a novel ferromagnetic nanoparticle
composited PACls by compounding the Fe
3
O
4
–SiO
2
 core-shell particle and
superfine iron with PACl of basicity 2.0; their overall observation was the
best performance of the novel coagulant, which effectively removed the
turbidity and the DOC. The functionalisation of magnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles with protein has been reported to provide a number of
advantages including low cost of materials, high efficiency, reduction of
chemical usage including sludge volume and fast separation due to its
magnetophoretic properties [114]. To prepare protein-functionalised
magnetic nanoparticles, Okoli 
et al.
 [115] have attached purified 
Moringa
oleifera
 protein onto microemulsions prepared magnetic iron oxidenanoparticles; the prepared functionalised nanoparticles was then used for the
removal of turbidity in both synthetic and surface water samples. It was
found that the newly developed coagulant performed better than the
traditional alum, improving removal velocity rate and prodding the
opportunity to recover the coagulant by washing with mild detergent or
cleaning solution.
8.5 Conclusion
The flocculation/coagulation techniques used for water and wastewaters
treatment have seriously evolved over the years, to overcome the limitations
of monomeric inorganic coagulants, effective polymers have been produced
from inorganic and/or organic matters. The physicochemical properties of
newly developed composites have tremendously improved the purification of
water through rapid formation of bigger flocs with the opportunity to
beneficiate sludge as fertiliser. The organic polymers provide the additional
advantages of being biodegradable, widely available and cost effective.
Further improvement has consisted to the formation of shear stable
flocculants through grafting process consisting of the addition of a monomer
to the polymer backbone in a chain propagation step; the synthesised
copolymer has shown in this case an enhanced capacity for the removal of
pollutants from wastewater. Recent development has mainly consisted of the
investigation towards the increase of flocculation velocity rate and
minimisation of the amount of sludge produced; such outcome has been made
possible with the use of nanomaterials based on carbonaceous or magnetic
compounds. There is, however, a concern with regard to the health impact of
nanomaterials on human and aquatic life, prompting proper investigation
prior to the use of nanomaterial flocculants in the treatment of wastewater.
References
1. J.Q. Jiang, Development of coagulation theory and new coagulants for
water treatment: Its past, current and future trend. 
Water Supply,
 1, 57–64,
2001.2. P.T. Austen, and F.A. Wilber, Annual Report of the State Geologist of
New Jersey, p. 141, 1884.
3. J.G. Jacangelo, DeMarco J, D.M. Owen, and S.J. Randtke, 
J. Am. Water
Works Assoc.,
 87, 64, 1995.
4. J. Duan, and J. Gregory, 
Adv. Colloid Interface,
 100–102: 475, 2003.
5. E.L. Sharp, A. Simon, S.A. Parsons, and B. Jefferson, The impact of
seasonal variations in DOC arising from a moorland peat catchment on
coagulation with iron and aluminium salts
. Environmental Pollution,
 140
,
436–443, 2006.
6. H.C. Kim, S. Lee, S.J. Byun, and M.J. Yu, 
Water Sci. Technol.,
 6(1), 49,
2006.
7. T.P. Flaten, Brain Tes. 
Bull,
 55, 187, 2001.
8. A. Matilainen, and V.M. Sillanpaa. Natural organic matter removal by
coagulation during drinking water treatment: A review. Advances in 
Colloid
and Interface Science,
 159, 189–197, 2010.
9. C.S. Uygener, M. Bekbolet, and H. Selcuk, A comparative approach to the
application of a physico-chemical and advanced oxidation combined system
to natural water samples
. Separation Science and Technology,
 42(7)
,
 1405–
1419, 2007.
10. K. Bell-Ajy, M. Abbaszadegan, E. Ibrahim, D. Verges, and M.
LeChevallier, Conventional and optimized coagulation for NOM removal.
American Water Works Association. 
Journal AWWA,
 92(10), 44–58, 2000.
11. J.Q. Jiang, and N.J.D. Graham, Pre-polymerised inorganic coagulants and
phosphorus removal by coagulation – A review. 
Water SA,
 24(3), 237–244,
1998.
12. M.J. Matterson, R.L. Dobson 
et al.,
 Electrocoagulation and separation of
aqueous suspensions of ultrafine particles. 
Colloids and Surfaces
 A.,
Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 104(1), 101–109, 1995.
13. K. Rajeshwar and J. Ibanez, Environmental electrochemistry
fundamentals and applications in pollution abatement. Academic Press.
London.
14. I.V. Savitskaya, V.M. Makarov, S.V. Vasilov, E.A. Indeikin, A.V.
Ivanov, A.P. Yusova, and V.F. Babanin, 
J. Appl. Chem. USSR,
 57, 491, 1984.15. V.M. Makarov, A.P. Yusova, V.F. Babanin, S.V. Vasilov, and A.V.
Ivanov, 
J. Appl. Chem. USSR,
 60, 21, 1987.
16. V.E. Gorodovykh, A.A. Kaplin, N.M. Svishchenko, and S.V. Obraztsov,
J. Appl. Chem.
 USSR. 61: 807, 1987.
17. M.M. Emamjomeh, and M. Sivakumar, Review of pollutants removed by
electrocoagulation and electrocoagulation/flotation processes. 
Journal of
Environmental Management,
 90
,
 1663–1679, 2009.
18. M.Y.A. Mollah, P. Morkovsky, J.A.G. Gomes, M. Kesmez, J. Parga, and
D.L. Cocke, Fundamentals, present and future perspectives of
electrocoagulation
. Journal of Hazardous Materials.
 114(1–3), 199–210.
2004.
19. J.Q. Jiang, N. Graham, C. Andre, G.H. Kelsall, and N. Brandon,
Laboratory study of electro-coagulation-flotation for water treatment. 
Water
Res.,
 36(16), 4064–4078, 2002.
20. V. Khandegar, and A.K. Saroha, Electrocoagulation for the treatment of
textile industry effluent – A review. 
Journal of Environmental Management,
128, 949–963, 2013.
21. M.Y.A. Mollah, R. Schennach, J.R. Parga, and D.L. Cocke,
Electrocoagulation(EC)-science and applications
. Journal of Hazardous
Materials.
 B24, 29–41, 2001.
22. X. Chen, G. Chen, and P.L. Yue, Separation of pollutants from restaurant
wastewater by electrocoagulation. 
Sep. Purif. Technol.,
 19(1–2): 65–76,
2000.
23. N. Adhoum, L. Monser, N. Bellakhal, and J. Belgaied, Treatment of
electroplating wastewater containing Cu
2+
, Zn
2+
 and Cr(VI) by
electrocoagulation. 
J. Hazard. Mater.,
 B112(3), 207–213, 2004.
24. F. Janpoor, A. Torabian, and V. Khatibikamal, Treatment of laundry
wastewater by electrocoagulation. 
J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol.,
 86(8),
1113–1120, 2011.
25. S.K. Verma, V. Khandegar, and A.K. Saroha, Removal of chromium
from electroplating industry effluent using electrocoagulation. 
J. Hazard.
Toxic. Radio. Waste,
 17(2), 146–152, 2013.
26. M. Kobya, F. Ulu, U. Gebologlu, E. Demirbas, and M.S. Oncel,Treatment of potable water containing low concentration of arsenic with
electrocoagulation: Different connection modes and Fe-Al electrodes.
Separation and Purification Technology,
 77, 283–293, 2011.
27. Y.A. El-Taweel, E.M. Nassef, I. Elkheriany, and D. Sayed, Removal of
Cr(VI) ions from waste water by electrocoagulation using iron electrode.
Egyptian Petroleum Research Institute. 
Egyptian Journal of Petroleum,
 24,
183–192, 2015.
28. I. Zongo, A.H. Maiga, J. Wethe, G. Valentin, J.-P. Leclerc, G. Paternotte,
Lapicque. Electrocoagulation for the treatment of textile wastewaters with Al
or Fe electrodes: Compared variations of COD levels, turbidity and
absorbance. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 169, 70–76, 2009.
29. P. Canizares, F. Martinez, M.A. Rodrigo, C. Jimenez, C. Saez, and J.
Lobato, Modelling of wastewater electrocoagulation processes Part II:
Application to dye-polluted wastewaters and oil-in-water emulsions.
Separation and Purification Technology,
 60, 147–154, 2008.
30. A. Nawel, D. Farid, M. Belkacem, L. Jean-Pierre, and M. Khodir,
Improvement of electrocoagulation-electroflotation treatment of effluent by
addition of 
Opuntiaficusindica
 pad juice. 
Separation and Purification
Technology,
 144, 168–176, 2015.
31. P.A. Moussas, and A.I. Zouboulis, 
Water Research,
 43
,
 3511, 2009.
32. B.Y. Gao, H.H. Hahn, and E. Hoffmann, Evaluation of aluminium-
silicate polymer composite as a coagulation for water treatment. 
Water
Research,
 36, 3573–3581, 2002.
33. H. Ratnaweera, J. Fettig, and H. Odegaard, Particle and phosphate
removal mechanisms with prepolymerized coagulants. In 
Chemical water
and wastewater treatment (II),
 H.H. Hahn, R. Klute, (Ed.), Berlin, Germany:
Springer. p. 3–17, 1992.
34. E. Matijevic, and N. Kolak, Coagulation of lyophobic colloids by metal
chelates. 
J. Coll. Interface Sci,
 24
,
 441–450, 1967.
35. A.K. Verma, R.R. Dash, and P. Bhunia, A review on chemical
coagulation/flocculation technologies for removal of colour from textile
wastewaters
. Journal of Environmental Management,
 93, 154–168, 2012.
36. Y.-H. Shen, and B.A. Dempsey, Synthesis and speciation ofpolyaluminium chloride for water treatment. 
Environment International,
24(8), 899–910, 1998.
37. A.I. Zoubilis, and N. Tzoupanos, Alternative cost-effective preparation
method of polyaluminium chloride (PAC) coagulant agent: Characterization
and comparative application for water/wastewater treatment
. Desalination,
250, 339–344, 2010.
38. B. Shi, G. Li, D. Wang, C. Feng, and H. Tang, Removal of direct dyes by
coagulation: The performance of preformed polymeric aluminium species.
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 143
,
 567–574, 2007.
39. M. Yan, D. Wang, J. Ni, J. Qu, C.W.K. Chow, and H. Liu, Mechanism of
natural organic matter removal by polyaluminium chloride: Effect of
coagulant particle size and hydrolysis kinetics
. Water Research,
 42
,
 3361–
3370, 2008.
40. Z. Zhang, D. Liu, D. Hu, D. Li, X. Ren, Y. Cheng, Z. Luan, Effects of
slowmixing on the coagulation performance of polyaluminum chloride
(PACl). 
Chin. J. Chem. Eng.,
 21(3), 318-323, 2013.
41. W.Z. Yu, J. Gregory, L. Campos, G.B. Li, The role of mixing conditions
on floc growth, breakage and re-growth. 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
171(2), 425-430, 2011.
42. J.C. Wei, B.Y. Gao, Q.Y. Yue, Y. Wang, and L. Lu, 
J. Hazard. Mater.,
165, 789, 2009.
43. A.I. Zouboulis, and P.A. Moussas, 
Desalination,
 224, 307, 2008.
44. F. Li, Y. Akira, and A. Yuka, 
Water Sci. Technol.,
 57(1), 83, 2008.
45. Y. Fu, S. Yu, and C. Han, 
Chem. Eng.
 J., 149: 1, 2009.
46. P.A. 
Moussas, and A.I.
 Zouboulis, 
Sep. Purif. Technol.,
 63, 475, 2008.
47. X. Xu, Yu S-I, W. Shi, Z. Jiang, and C. Wu, 
Sep. Purif. Technol.,
 66, 486,
2009.
48. B. Cao, B. Gao, X. Liu, M. Wang, Z. Yang, and Q. Yue, The impact of
pH on floc structure characteristic of polyferric chloride in a low DOC and
high alkalinity surface water. 
Water Research,
 45, 6181–6188, 2011.
49. M. Yan, D. Wang, J. Qu, J. Ni, and C.W.K. Chow, Enhanced coagulation
for high alkalinity and micro-polluted water: The third way through
coagulant optimization. 
Water Research,
 42(8–9), 2278–2286, 2008b.50. W.P. Cheng, F.H. Chi, C.C. Li, and R.F. Yu, 
Colloid Suf. A,
 312, 238,
2008.
51. A.I. Zouboulis, and N.D. Tzoupanos, 
J. Hazard. Mater.,
 162, 1379, 2009.
52. N. Maximova, and O. Dahl, Environmental implications of aggregation
phenomena: Current understanding. 
Curr. Opin. Colloid Int. Sci,
 11, 246–
266, 2006.
53. S. Deng, G. Yu, and Y.P. Ting, Production of a bioflocculant by
Aspergillus parasiticus and its application in dye removal. 
Colloids Surf. B
Biointerfaces,
 44, 179–186, 2005.
54. Y. Chen and B. Lian, Progress of microbial flocculant study and its
application. 
Bull. Mineral Petrol. Geochem.
, 23, 83–89, 2004.
55. J.-Q. Jiang, Development of coagulation theory and pre-polymerized
coagulants for water treatment. 
Separation and Purification Methods,
 30(1),
127–141, 2001.
56. H. Salehizadeh, and S.A. Shojaosadati, Extracellular biopolymeric
flocculants-recent trend and biotechnological importance. 
Biotechnol. Adv.,
19, 371–385, 2001.
57. H.C. Wang, M.H. Li, H.W. Tsang, M.M. Wu, and H.P.P. Lin, Novel
biological flocculants and production methods. United States Patent
US20070062865, 2007.
58. B.R. Sharma, N.C. Dhuldhoya, and U.C. Merchant, Flocculants-an eco-
friendly approach. 
J. Polym. Environ.,
 14, 195–202, 2006.
59. G. Crini, Recent developments in polysaccharide-based materials used as
adsorbents in wastewater treatment. 
Prog. Polym. Sci.,
 30, 38–70, 2005.
60. F. Renault, B. Sancey, P.-M. Badot, G. Crini, Chitosan for
coagulation/flocculation processes – An eco-friendly approach. 
European
Polymer Journal,
 45(5), 1337–1348, 2009.
61. G.A.F. Roberts, 
Chitin Chemistry.
 London: MacMillan, 1992.
62. K. Kurita, Chitin and chitosan: Functional biopolymers from marine
crustaceans
. Mar. Biotechnol.,
 8
,
 203–206, 2006.
63. R. Bassi, S.O. Prasher, and B.K. Simpson, Removal of selected metal
ions from aqueous solutions using chitosan flakes. 
Separation Science and
Technology,
 35, 547–560, 2000.64. E. Guidal, M. Van Vooren, B.A. Dempsey, and J. Roussy, A review of
the use of chitosan for the removal of particulate and dissolved contaminants
.
Separation Science and Technology,
 41, 2487–2514, 2006.
65. J. Roussy, M. Van Vooren, B.A. Dempsey, and E. Guidal, Influence of
chitosan characteristics on the coagulation and the flocculation of bentonite
suspensions. 
Water Res.,
 39(14), 3247–3258, 2005.
66. R. Divakaran, and V.N.S. Pillai, Flocculation of kaolinite suspensions in
water by chitosan. 
Water Res.,
 35(16), 3904–3908, 2001.
67. W. Xie, P. Xu, W. Wang, and Q. Liu, Preparation and antibacterial
activity of a water soluble chitosan derivative. 
Carbohydr. Polym.,
 5a(1), 35–
40, 2002.
68. S.P. Strand, K.M. Varum, and K. Ostgaard, Interactions between chitosan
and bacterial suspension – adsorption and flocculation. 
Colloid Surface B,
27(1), 71–81, 2003.
69. L. Guerrero, F. Omil, R. Mendez, and J.M. Lema, Protein recovery
during the overall treatment of wastewaters from fish-metal factories.
Bioresource Technol.,
 63(3), 221–229, 1998.
70. V.D. Savant, and J.A. Torres, Chitosan-based coagulating agents
treatment of Cheddar cheese whey. 
Biotechnol. Prog.,
 16(6), 1091–1097,
2000.
71. M. Fernandez, and P.F. Fox, Fractionation of cheese nitrogen using
chitosan. 
Food Chem,
 58(4), 319–322, 1997.
72. E. Guidal, E. Touraud, and J. Roussy, Chitosan interactions with metal
ions and dyes: Dissolved-state versus solid-state application. 
World J.
Microbiol. Biotechno.,
 21(6–7), 913–920, 2005.
73. S.Y. Bratskaya, S. Schwarz, and D. Chervonetsky, Comparative study of
humic acids flocculation with chitosan hydrochloride and chitosan glutamate.
Water Res.,
 38(12), 2955–2961, 2004.
74. A.L. Ahmad, S. Sumathi, and B.H. Hameed, Coagulation of residue oil
and suspended solid in palm oil mill effluent by chitosan, alum and PAC.
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 118, 99–105, 2006.
75. S. Agata, G. Eric, A.P. Maria, R. Montserrat and M.S. Ana, Removal of
an anionic dye (Acid Blue 92) by coagulation-flocculation using chitosan.Journal of Environmental Management
, 90, 2979–2986, 2009.
76. E. Guidal, and J. Roussy, Coagulation and flocculation of dye-containing
solutions using a biopolymer (chitosan)
. Reactive and Functional Polymers,
67, 33–42, 2007.
77. C. Zhao, J. Zhang, Z. Luan, X. Peng, X. Ren, Preparation of high
concentration polyaluminium chloride with high content of Alb or Alc.
Journal of Environmental Sciences
, 21, 1342–1346, 2009.
78. M. Yan, D. Wang, S. You, J. Qu, and H. Tang, Enhanced coagulation in a
typical North-China water treatment plant. 
Water Research,
 40(19), 3621–
3627, 2006.
79. E. Fosso-Kankeu, H. Mittal, S.B. Mishra, and A.K. Mishra, Gum ghatti
and acrylic acid based biodegradable hydrogels for the effective adsorption of
cationic dyes. 
Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry,
 22, 171–178,
2015.
80. R.P. Singh, G.P. Karmakar, S.K. Rath, N.C. Karmakar, S.R. Pandey, T.
Tripathy, J. Panda, K. Kannan, S.K. Jain, and N.T. Lan, Biodegradable drag
reducing agents and flocculants based on polysaccharides: Materials and
applications. 
Polym. Eng. Sci.,
 40, 46–59, 2000.
81. R.P. Singh, B.R. Nayak, D.R. Biswal, T. Tripathy, and K. Banik,
Biobased polymeric flocculants for industrial effluent treatment. 
Mater. Res.
Innov.,
 7, 331–340, 2003.
82. T. Tripathy, N.C. Karmakar, and R.P. Singh, 
J. Appl. Polym. Sci.,
 82,
375–382, 2001.
83. Y.B. Lu, Z. Qin, Y. Jiang, A. Chen, X. Qian, G. Wang, H. Yang, and R.
Cheng, The flocculation properties of chitosan-graft-polyacrylamide
flocculants (I)-effect of the grafting ratio. 
J. Appl. Polym. Sci.,
 117, 1876–
1882, 2010.
84. D.R. Biswal, and R.P. Biswal, Characterization of carboxymethyl
cellulose and polyacrylamide graft copolymer. 
Carbohydr. Polym.,
 57, 379–
387, 2004.
85. P. Adhikary, K.N. Tiara, and R.P. Singh, Synthesis, characterization and
flocculation characteristics of polyacrylamide-grafted glycogen. 
J. Appl.
Polym. Sci.,
 103, 773–778, 2007,86. S.K. Rath, and R.P. Singh, Grafted amylopectin: Application in
flocculation. 
Colloids Surf. A: Physicochem. Eng. Aspects,
 139, 129–135,
1998.
87. S.K. Rath, and R.P. Singh, Flocculation characteristics of grafted and
ungrafted starch, amylose and amylopectin. 
J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 66,
 1721–
1729, 1997.
88. A. Srivastava, V. Mishra, S.K. Singh, and R. Kumar, Vanadium
(V)/mandelic acid initiated graft copolymerization of acrylamide onto guar
gum in an aqueous medium. 
J. Appl. Polym. Sci.,
 115, 2375–2385, 2010.
89. S. Ghosh, G. Sen, U. Jha, and S. Pal, Novel biodegradable polymeric
flocculant based on polyacrylamide grafted tamaring kernel polysaccharide.
Bioresour. Technol.,
 101, 9638–9644, 2010.
90. Z. Yang, H. Li, H. Yan, H. Wu, H. Yang, Q. Wu, H. Li, A. Li, and R.
Cheng, Evaluation of a novel chitosan-based flocculant with high
flocculation performance, low toxicity and good floc properties
. Journal of
Hazardous Materials,
 276
,
 480–488, 2014.
91. S. Mishra, U.G. Rani, and G. Sen, Microwave initiated synthesis and
application of polyacrylic acid grafted carboxymethyl cellulose.
Carbohydrate Polymers,
 87, 2255–2262, 2012.
92. R. Das, S. Ghorai, and S. Pal, Flocculation characteristics of
polyacrylamide grafted hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose: An efficient
biodegradable flocculant. 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 229, 144–152,
2013.
93. Q. Chang, X. Hao, and L. Duan, Synthesis of crosslinked starch-graft-
polyacrylamide-co-sodium xanthate and its performances in wastewater
treatment. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 159, 548–553, 2008.
94. H. Rong, B. Gao, R. Li, Y. Wang, Q. Yue, and Q. Li, Effect of dose
methods of a synthetic organic polymer and PFC on floc properties in dyeing
wastewater coagulation process. 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 243, 169–
175, 2014.
95. N. Savage, and M.S. Diallo, Nanomaterials and water purification:
Opportunities and challenges. 
Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 7,
 331–342,
2005.96. E. Fosso-Kankeu, A.F. Mulaba-Bafubiandi, and A.K. Mishra,. Prospects
in the immobilization of microbial sorbents on carbon nanotubes for
biosorption: Bioremediation of heavy metals polluted water. in: 
Application
of Nanotechnology in Water Research,
 A.K. Mishra (Ed.), Wiley, Scrivener
Publisher. ISBN: 978-1-118-49630-5, 2014.
97. E. Fosso-Kankeu, and A.K. Mishra, Metal derived complexes for
improved fight against bacteria. in 
Smart Biomolecules in Medicine,
 A.K.
Mishra, A. Tiwari, and S.B. Mishra (Eds),. VBRI Press, India. ISBN 978-81-
920068-01. pp. 199–226, 2010.
98. G.S. Simate, S.E. Iyuke, S. Ndlovu, and M. Heydenrych, The
heterogenous coagulation and flocculation of brewery wastewater using
carbon nanotubes. 
Water Research,
 46, 1185–1197, 2012.
99. C. Lu, and F. Su, Adsorption of natural organic matter carbon nanotubes.
Sep. Purif. Technol.,
 58, 113–121, 2007.
100. F. Su, and C. Lu, Adsorption kinetics, thermodynamics, and desorption
of natural dissolved organic matter by multi walled carbon nanotubes. 
J.
Environ. Sci. Health Part A,
 42, 1543–1552, 2007.
101. X.M. Yan, B.Y. Shi, J.J. Lu, C.H. Feng, D.S. Wang, and H.X. Tang,
Adsorption and desorption of atrazine on carbon nanotubes. 
J. Colloid
Interface Sci.,
 321, 30–38, 2008c.
102. B. Smith, K. Wepasnick, K.E. Schrote, A.R. Bertele, W.P. Ball, C.
O’melia, and D.H. Fairbrother, Colloidal properties of aqueous suspensions
of acid-treated, multi-walled carbon nanotubes. 
Environ. Sci. Technol.,
 43,
819–825, 2009.
103. Z. Yang, H. Yan, H. Yang, H. Li, A. Li, and R. Cheng, Flocculation
performance and mechanism of graphene oxide for removal of various
contaminants from water
. Water Research,
 47
,
 3037–3046, 2013.
104. A.-H. Lu, E.L. Salabas, and F. Shuth, Magnetic nanoparticles:
Synthesis, protection, functionalization and application. 
Angewandte Chemie
International Edition,
 46(8), 1222–1244, 2007.
105. T. Hyeon, Chemical synthesis of magnetic nanoparticles. 
The Royal
Society of Chemistry,
 927–934, 2003.
106. R.D. Ambashta, and M. Sillanpaa, Water purification using magneticassistance: A review. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 180, 38–49, 2010.
107. C. Jiang, R. Wang, and W. Ma, The effect of magnetic nanoparticles on
Microcystis aeruginosa removal by a composite coagulant
. Colloids and
Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects,
 369, 260–267, 2010.
108. M. Zhang, F. Xiao, X.Z. Xu, and D.S. Wang, Novel ferromagnetic
nanoparticle composited PACls and their coagulation characteristics. 
Water
Research,
 46, 127–135, 2012.
109. P.C. Singer, and K. Bilyk, Enhanced coagulation using a magnetic ion
exchange resin. 
Water Research,
 36, 4009–4022, 2002.
110. R. Zhang, S. Vigneswaran, H. Ngo, and H. Nguyen, A submerged
membrane hybrid system coupled with magnetic ion exchange (MIEX
®
) and
flocculation in wastewater treatment. 
Desalination,
 216, 325–333, 2007.
111. M.K. Korbutowicz, K.M. Nowak, and T. Winnicki, Water treatment
using MIEX
®
 DOC/ultrafiltration process. 
Desalination,
 221, 338–344,
2008.
112. Y.R. 
Li, J.
 Wang, Y. 
Zhao,
 and Z.K. Luan, Research on magnetic
seeding flocculation for arsenic removal by superconducting magnetic
separation. 
Separation and Purification Technology,
 73, 264–270, 2010.
113. J. Svoboda, and T. Fujita, Recent development in magnetic methods of
material separation. 
Minerals Engineering,
 16, 785–792, 2003.
114. C. Okoli, M. Boutonnet, L. Mariey, S. Jaras, and G. Rajarao,
Application of magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles prepared from
microemulsions for protein purification. 
J. Chem. Technol. Biot.,
 86(11),
1386–1393, 2011.
115. C. Okoli, M. Boutonnet, S. Jaras, Rajarao-Kuttuva G. Protein-
functionalized magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles: Time efficient potential-
water treatment. 
J. Nanopart. Res.,
 14, 1194–1202, 2012.
116. H. Liimatainen, J. Sirvio, O. Sundman, O. Hormi, and J. Niinimaki, Use
of nanoparticular and soluble anionic celluloses in coagulation-flocculation
treatment of kaolin suspension. 
Water Research,
 26, 2159–2166, 2012.
117. H. Wang, A.A. Keller, ASCE M, and F. Li, Natural organic matter
removal by adsorption onto carbonaceous nanoparticles and coagulation,
2010.118. J.-F. Liu, Z.-S. Zhao, and G.-B. Jiang, Coating Fe
3
O
4
 magnetic
nanoparticles with humic acid high efficient removal of heavy metals in
water. 
Environ. Sci. Technol.
, 42(18), 6949–6954, 2008.
119. Y.F. Shen, J. Tang, T.Z.H. Nie, Y.D. Wang, Y. Ren, and L. Zuo,
Preparation and application of magnetic Fe
3
O
4
 nanoparticles for wastewater
purification, 68, 312–319, 2009.
120. X. Liu, Q. Hu, Z. Fang, X. Zhang, and B. Zhang, Magnetic
nanocomposites: A useful recycle tool for heavy metal ions removal, 25, 3–8,
2009.Chapter 9
Polymeric Nanospheres for Organic
Waste Removal
Ambika
1
 and Pradeep Pratap Singh
2
*
1
Department of Chemistry, Hans Raj College, University of Delhi, Delhi,
India
2
Department of Chemistry, Swami Shraddhanand College, University of
Delhi, Delhi, India
*
Corresponding author.
 
ppsingh@ss.du.ac.in
Abstract
The rapid population growth, industrialization, poor waste water
management, and global climate change have resulted in a greater demand of
drinking water with good quality. Improvement on these methods will occur
through advanced capabilities of hazard sensing technologies and these
capabilities are primarily achieved through improving the type of materials
used for sensing. Smart materials and structures is an emerging technology
with numerous potential applications in industries as diverse as consumer,
sporting, medical and dental, computer, telecommunications, manufacturing,
automotive, aerospace, as well as civil and structural engineering. Various
smart materials have been used in water remediation, which can remove a
series of pollutants effectively. This article will focus on the emerging
concept of waste water treatment using polymeric nanospheres as smart
materials.
Keywords:
 Polymeric, nanosphere, water remediation, organic waste9.1 Introduction
Water purification is essential to human health and also plays a critical role in
a variety of industries such as electronics, pharmaceuticals, and food. The
pollution of water due to organic waste such as dyes, pesticides, polynuclear
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), halogenated organics, toxic heavy metals etc.
from industries and agricultural waste is a current problem worldwide [1].
Many of these organic compounds contain highly toxic functionalities that
are resistant to biodegradation [2]. Therefore these compounds are present in
surface water, groundwater, drinking water and waste water at low but
increasing concentrations. Due to their low level of concentration, these
substances are called micropollutants. They show considerable toxic effects
even at very low concentrations in the parts per billion (ppb) levels [3]. The
removal of toxic organic pollutants from water is a problem, particularly
when they are present in low concentrations [4]. Various chemical and
physical treatments have been developed for waste water treatment [5, 6].
Existing water purification processes use high surface area materials such as
activated carbon [7, 8]. Many of these materials have some affinity to organic
compounds, but fail to remove contaminants to a suitable degree of low ppb
levels [9–12]. In recent years, various smart materials have been used in
water remediation such as graphene oxide, graphene oxide nanosheet,
zeolites, carbon nanotubes, polymeric nanospheres based on cyclodextrins,
functional copolymers, hydrogels, self-assembled monolayer on mesoporous
supports, biopolymers, singleenzyme nanoparticles and nanoscale
semiconductor photocatalysts etc. [13, 14].
Smart materials and structures is an emerging technology with numerous
potential applications in industries. The field of polymer nanoparticles
(PNPs) presents an important role in a wide spectrum of areas such as
conducting materials, sensors, medicine, biotechnology, pollution control and
environmental technology [15–23].
Polymeric nanoparticles are sub-µm colloidal particles. Nanoparticles can
be divided into two main families:
i.
 Nanocapsules, are core shell structure which have size in between 10–
1000 nm in diameter [24]. They are vesicular systems that are made up of
a polymeric membrane which encapsulates an inner liquid core at thenanoscale level (
Figure 9.1
).
ii.
 Nanospheres, have a homogeneous structure in the whole particle.
These are the spherical particles which have the size between 10–200 nm
in diameter and that exhibit some new enhanced size dependent
properties in comparison of larger spheres of the same material (
Figure
9.1
). These can be amorphous or crystalline in nature [25–28]. These
have been used in target drug delivery and pollution remediation. This
article will focus on the emerging concept of waste water treatment using
polymeric nanospheres as smart materials.
Figure 9.1
 (i) Nanosphere (ii) Nanocapsule.
9.2 Method of Preparation of
Nanospheres
The mode of preparation plays an important role to achieve the desired
properties of polymeric nanospheres (PNs) for a particular application. Thus,
to obtain such PNs specific preparation techniques are required. There are
various types of methods by which nanospheres are prepared:
9.2.1 Polymerization (Emulsification
Polymerization)
Emulsion polymerization is one of the fastest methods for nanospheres
preparation. Based on the use of an organic or aqueous continuous phase themethod is classified into two categories: A) The continuous organic phase
methodology involves the dispersion of monomer into, an emulsion or a
material in which the monomer is not soluble (nonsolvent) [29], e.g.
Polyacrylamide nanospheres [30, 31]. B) In the aqueous continuous phase the
monomer is dissolved in a continuous phase that is usually an aqueous
solution. The surfactants or emulsifiers are not required (
Figure 9.2a
) [32,
33].
Figure 9.2
 Schematic representation of: (a) Emulsification polymerization,
(b) Solvent evaporation, (c) Solvent displacement technique.9.2.2 Solvent Evaporation
In this method macromolecules (polymer) are dissolved in volatile organic
solvent to form emulsion. On evaporation of the solvent the emulsion is
converted into a nanoparticle suspension which is allowed to diffuse through
the continuous phase of the emulsion (
Figure 9.2b
). Particle size depends on
the type and concentrations of stabilizer, homogenizer speed and polymer
concentration. In order to produce small particle size, generally a high-speed
homogenization or ultrasonication can be employed. This method is used for
the preparation of nanosphere.
9.2.3 Solvent Displacement Technique
(Nanoprecipitation)
In this method polymer is dissolved in an organic, water miscible solvent and
then it is added into the aqueous phase in the presence or absence of a
surfactant. Addition of organic solvent from the oil phase to aqueous phase
can diffuse immediately by which precipitation of polymer occurs and
nanospheres are formed (
Figure 9.2c
) [34–38].
9.2.4 Phase Inversion Temperature Method
In this process, desolubilization of the polymer occurs with the help of nano-
emulsion droplets to formulate nanospheres [39].
9.3 Applications of Different Type
of Nanospheres in Water
Purification
The pollution of water has become an environmental and economic hazard as
a result of waste spillage, and industrial applications. Conventional treatment
techniques such as sand filtration, sedimentation, flocculation, coagulation,chlorination, and activated carbon are not very effective in reducing the
concentration of the organic pollutants in the presence of dissolved organic
matter. Recently nanospheres have been used in waste water remediation.
The different types of nanospheres and their applications have been discussed
below (
Table 9.1
).
Table 9.1
 Different organic pollutants and their adsorbents.
Class
Pollutant
Nanosphere as adsorbent
Dyes
Congo red
NiO [40]
Methylene blue
Fe
3
O
4
@HHSS [41]
C/SiO
2
 [42]
Polydopamine [43]
Eosin red, congo red, methylene blue
CdS [44]
Methylene blue methyl Violet 2B, malachite
green
Carbon colloidal [45]
Methylene blue, basic fuchsin
Magnetic microspheres [46]
Basic fuchsin, methyl violet
Porous magnetic microsphere [47]
Crystal violet
MnFe
2
O
4
 [48]
Rhodamine B
Hollow silica [49]
Amaranth
Iron oxide coated with CTAB [50]
Azo dye acid red B
Magnetic ferrite materials [51, 52]
Phenolics
Phenol, Bisphenol A
Mn
2
O
3
 [53], Spheric polymer [4]
Chlorophenols
Magnetically active polymeric particles
[54]
Hydrocarbons
Pyrene and phenanthrene
Organic–inorganic hybrid [55]
Perylene
(PCEMA-β-PAA) [56]
Aniline
Fe
3
O
4
 [57]
Pesticides
Diazinon
QD-MIP [58]
λ-Cyhalothrin
CdSe@SiO
2
@MIP [59]
Organochlorine
Fe
3
O
4
@PS [60]
Herbicides
Triasulfuron, prosulfuron, pyrazosulfuron-
ethyl
Magnetic molecularly imprinted
polymers [61]
Antibiotics
Penicillin G
Polyethersulfone (PES) matrices
embedded [4]9.3.1 Magnetic Polymer Nanospheres
Magnetic materials have been broadly applied in water remediation because
of their separation convenience from aqueous solutions under an external
magnetic field [62–64]. They have been used for the removal of arsenic,
transition metals and radioactive metals. Recently, iron oxide NMs have been
utilized for the efficient adsorption of organic contaminant from large-
volume of water samples 
via
 employing a strong external magnetic field [65–
68]. Surface modification of these NPs is employed due to their oxidation
susceptiblity especially in aqueous systems [69]. Moreover, the
functionalization of these materials could improve their surface
physiochemical properties and the adsorption of toxic metal ions and organic
pollutants [70–74]. Magnetic nanospheres can remove the majority of
hydrophilic and hydrophobic molecules from water [75]. Recently, various
magnetic nanospheres based on ion exchange separation have been employed
for the removal of heavy metal ions and organic pollutants (
Figure 9.3
).
Figure 9.3
 Magnetic separation based waste water treatment.
The efficiency of removal depends on the size, surface area, structure andsaturation magnetization of nanospheres, as well as functional groups on their
surfaces [76–79]. Fe
3
O
4
 magnetic nanospheres could remove phenol and
aniline from aqueous solution under acidic and neutral conditions in the
presence of H
2
O
2
 [67]. The iron oxide nanospheres coated with
cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) have been used in adsorption and
the removal of amaranth from an aqueous solution with high efficiency [60].
Magnetic ferrite materials showed excellent adsorption towards the azo dye
acid red B from water under acidic conditions. As the iron content and
surface area of the adsorbent increases, the adsorption capacity also increases
and can be easily separated, recovered and reused for several cycles without
any significant change in its activity [61, 62]. Magnetic microspheres with an
Fe
3
O
4
 core and a SiO
2
-TiO
2
 hybrid with the core-shell spheres possess
excellent adsorption toward basic dyes. The maximum adsorption capacities
were obtained at 147 mg/g for methylene blue and 124.6 mg/g for basic
fuchsin [45]. Furthermore, the dye saturated microspheres can be easily
recycled by an external magnetic field. Porous magnetic microspheres have
been used to remove basic fuchsin and methyl violet from aqueous solution
[46]. The granular nanospheres of Zn
0.5
Co
0.5
A
l0.5
Fe
1.46
La
0.04
O
4
 and
polymer blended Zn
0.5
Co
0.5
A
l0.5
Fe
1.46
La
0.04
O
4
/PVP core-shell
nanocomposite has been reported for purifying inked-water.
Zn
0.5
Co
0.5
A
10.5
Fe
1.46
La
0.04
O
4
 tookup 76% of the dye content, while the
dye-removal efficiency was increased to 90% when
Zn
0.5
Co
0.5
A
10.5
Fe
1.46
La
0.04
O
4
/PVP core-shell nanocomposite was
applied [80]. Fe
3
O
4
 hollow nanospheres, Fe
3
O
4
@hierarchica1 hollow silica
and spheres (Fe
3
O
4
@HHSS) have been used for the removal of dye
contaminants (methylene blue) from water with high adsorption capacity [53,
81]. The organic dyes and heavy metal ions could be effectively removed
from waste water using hierarchical flower-like α-Fe
2
O
3
 hollow spheres
[82]. Mesoporous magnetic iron oxide nanospheres in the presence of an
external magnetic field have been employed for the removal of metal ions
and 1-bis(4-chlorophenyl)-2,2,2-trichloroethane (DDT) from water [83, 84].
Magnetically active polymeric particles with specific structures can
effectively and rapidly remove low- or high molar-mass organic matter,inorganic matter, heavy metalloids, chlorophenols and pesticides over a wide
range of pH through Lewis acid-based interaction and ion exchange [53]. The
organochlorine pesticides (>93%) could be effectively adsorbed from
aqueous solution using magnetic nanospheres coated with polystyrene
(Fe
3
O
4
@PS) [70]. Magnetic molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs)
prepared from vinyl-modified Fe
3
O
4
@SiO
2
 nanoparticle showed high
affinity, recognition specificity, and efficient adsorption performance and
cross selectivity for herbicides triasulfuron, prosulfuron, and pyrazosulfuron-
ethyl [71]. A montmorillonite-Cu(II)/Fe(III)oxide magnetic material have
been used to remove harmful algae from water, and for the removal of
cyanobacterium 
Microcystis aeruginosa
 [85].
9.3.2 Silica Nanospheres
Silica nanospheres are commonly used as a core material to host guest shell
structures. Due to highly organized porosity, huge surface area, high pore
volume, controlled shape, size and wall thickness has been considered as a
perfect carrier for transporting organic compounds [86]. The hollow periodic
mesoporous organosilica (PMO) nanospheres have been reported to serve as
an efficient sorbent for removal of hydrophobic contaminants in water [87].
Magnesium silicate hollow spheres have been used for the removal of organic
compounds such as cationic dyes and heavy metal efficiently from waste
water [88]. Hollow silica nanoparticles have also been used for removing
hydrophilic dye (Rhodamine B) from water. These hollow shells could entrap
94% of the hydrophilic dye within 72 h of exposure [59]. Organic-inorganic
hybrid silica nanospheres can absorb two different categories of pollutants,
i.e. metal ions such as Pb
2+
, Cd
2+
, Hg
2+
, Cr
2
O
7
2–
, and polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons such as pyrene and phenanthrene. The absorbtion of hybrid
nanospheres gets largely enhanced in comparison with the corresponding
polymer-free silica nanospheres. This can be attributed to the formation of
conventional metal-ligand and charge-transfer complexes [65]. A double-
shelled C/SiO
2
 hollow spheres have been reported to adsorb methylene blue
and metal ions. Moreover they exhibit high adsorption capacities in
comparison to single-shelled silica hollow spheres [54]. Mesoporous silica
nanospheres functionalized by titania have been reported as light activatedantibacterial agents. The analysis of the antibacterial effects on 
E. coli
 shows
strong enhancement during the visible and ultraviolet light irradiation in
respect to the commercial catalyst and sample free from the nanomaterials
[86].
9.3.3 Carbon Nanospheres
Carbon-based materials are the most popular material types in industrial
applications because of their well-controlled nano-morphologies. They have
been used to adsorb various organic contaminants from waste water.
Colloidal carbon nanospheres (CNS) have been utilized for the adsorption of
basic dyes. Hydroxyl and carboxylic group rich surface of CNS exhibit
excellent adsorption performance toward basic dyes. The order of adsorption
capacities is as follows: methylene blue > methyl violet 2B > malachite
green. This can be attributed to the low mass transfer resistance due to the
nonporous structure and the abundant surface active sites [89]. The
chemically activated carbon sphere (ACSs) can effectively remove various
contaminants such as heavy metal ions (Pb
2+
 and Cu
2+
), phenol, methylene
green, acid red 1 from the environment [90]. Hollow porous carbon spheres
(HPCS) possess good monodispersity, uniform hollow morphology and very
high surface area. These nanospheres can efficiently adsorb phenol, bisphenol
A from the waste water [91, 92]. The oxidation of organic pollutants using
nanoscaled zerovalent iron (ZVI) encapsulated in carbon spheres (nano-
Fe0@CS) has been reported. The efficiency of nano-Fe0@ CS was found to
be higher than ZVI particles, iron ions, iron oxides, and a cobalt oxide [93].
9.3.4 Dendritic Polymer Nanospheres
Dendritic polymers can encapsulate water contaminants that depend on their
polarity and the interaction ability of their interior. Dendritic polymers have
been used to prepare silica/dendritic polymer nanospheres. The property of
dendritic polymers to encapsulate impurities remains intact, leading to
effective filtration/purification systems [94]. Molecularly imprinted
nanospheres (nano MIPs) have been utilized for the adsorption of
micropollutants from hospital waste water. Magnetic core allows the final
separation of the nano MIPs and to recognize pollutants from waste water[95]. 
Poly(2-cinnamoylethyl methacrylate)-block-poly(acrylic acid)
(PCEMA-β-PAA) nanospheres can uptake perylene, a PAH, from water.
Further, these nanospheres can be used in concentrating PAHs present in
trace amounts in water for chemical analysis or in the reclamation of waters
contaminatedby PAHs [66]. Nanoscaled spheric polymer with a variety of
chemical surface functionalities can absorb bisphenol A, and penicillin G
(potassium salt), together on one membrane [4].
9.3.5 Iron Oxide-graphene Oxide
Nanocomposite
Iron oxide-reduced graphene oxide nanocomposite (FGNC) possess excellent
removal of organic contaminant (rhodamine B) or inorganic contaminant
(As(V)) from water, for wastewater treatment [96, 97]. Graphene-Fe
3
O
4
 (G-
Fe
3
O
4
) shows extraordinary adsorption capacity for the removal of Pb metal
ions and organic dyes from aqueous solution. Also, G-Fe
3
O
4
 showed the
photo degradation of methylene blue [98].
9.3.6 Polyaniline (PANI) Nanospheres
Hollow and core-shell polyaniline (PANI) nanospheres have been used to
adsorb methyl orange from aqueous solution. PANI hollow spheres exhibited
a superior adsorption capacity (384.62 mgg
−1
) compared with other
absorbents [99]. Also, the polyaniline/hollow MnFe
2
O
4
 nanocomposite
possess high adsorption capacity of Crystal violet dye [58].
9.3.7 Quantum Dot-based Nanospheres
Quantum dot-based molecularly imprinted polymer (QD-MIP) composite
nanospheres have been used for quantification of the pesticide diazinon 
via
quenching of the system’s fluorescence [68]. Similarly, silica nanosphere-
embedded CdSe quantum dots modified with an MIP layer
(CdSe@SiO
2
@MIP) have been used for detection of the pyrethroid pesticide
lambda-cyhalothrin [69]. Also they have been reported with highly selectiverecognition ability in aqueous media and for biomedical/chemical sensing
applications [100].
9.3.8 Miscellaneous
The cross-linked cyclodextrin polymeric nanospheres exhibit a high ability to
absorb aromatic organic molecules such as toluene and phenol (
Figure 9.4
)
[101].
Figure 9.4
 Encapsultion of impurities from waste water in the cavity of
cyclodextrin.
Ag
3
PO
4
 nanospheres has been used as precursors for the synthesis of
AgI/Ag
3
PO
4
 composite that exhibited much higher activity than the pure
AgI and Ag
3
PO
4
 for eliminating methyl orange under visible light. NiO
hierarchical spheres exhibit a high adsorption capacity for Congo red dyefrom water [52]. Poly(cyclotri-phosphazene-co-4,4-sulfonyl-diphenol) (PZS)
nanospheres and polydopamine (PDA) microspheres were used as an
efficient adsorbent for the removal of methylene blue from aqueous solution
under the neutral and basic solutions [55, 102]. CdS nanospheres exhibit
superior photocatalytic activities by the photodegradation of eosin red, Congo
red and methylene blue under visible light irradiation, in a comparison with
the other CdS nanostructures, P
25
 and α-Fe
2
O
3
 powders. It demonstrates
potential applications in removal of organic dye molecules from waste water
[56]. Mn
2
O
3
 hollow spheres have been used as phenol adsorbents in water
treatment [63]. The acetylated lignin amphiphilic polymer nanoscale colloid
sphere has high loading capacity (>50%) for pesticide avermectin [103]. The
multifunctional composite imprinted nanosphere may be used for detection of
pesticide residue, by adsorbing pesticide molecules with the multifunctional
composite imprinted nanosphere [104].
9.4 Future Aspects
Polymeric nanospheres and their application is a new and effective area in
water remediation. The safety issues and working capabilities of nanospheres
is an important area to re-discover. Therefore, there is a need to develop more
efficient, selective, inexpensive, and eco-friendly nanospheres to play a key
role in future water treatment on a large scale. The polymeric materials used
for the preparation of nanospheres for water purification should be
biocompatible and biodegradable, eg. polyglycolic acid, polylactic acid etc.,
so that they themselves may not cause pollution. Toxicity of these
nanospheres must be ascertained before their introduction at a community
level. Also it should be taken care of that the transformation of pollutants
may not result into more toxic products.
9.5 Conclusions
The population growth, industrialization, poor waste water management, and
global climate change have resulted in a greater demand of good quality
drinking water. Water quality can be greatly enhanced using nanosorbents,nanocatalysts and bioactive NPs. Polymeric nanospheres are smart materials
with high surface area and functional groups. Nanospheres have been widely
used to effectively remove various pollutants from waste water. The different
methods have been developed using selection and combination of carrier
materials to obtain a suitable purifier. Also the surface modification of the
nanospheres have been developed that can recognize different types of
pollutants in water. The adsorption depends on adsorbate forms, ionic or
hydrophobic, size and surface properties. Nanospheres functionalized with
metal/oxide and organic compounds to form composites, can improve the
adsorption capacity and thus contribute to their target-specificity. Moreover,
some nanospheres possess antibacterial properties. Thus, nanospheres
represent a key milestone in water remediation.
Acknowledgment
The authors are thankful Swami Shraddhanand College, University of Delhi,
India and Hans Raj College, University of Delhi, India for their kind
cooperation.
References
1. US EPA, 
Edition of the Drinking Water Standards and Health Advisories,
822-R-02-038, Washington, DC, US EPA, 2002.
2. A. Hong, NOAA/UNH Report 2006.
3. K. Niedergall, M. Bach, T. Hirth, G.E.M. Tovar, and T. Schiestel,
Removal of micropollutants from water by nanocomposite membrane
adsorbers, 
Separation and Purification Technology,
 131, 60–68, 2014.
4. E.D. Stein, L.L. Tiefenthaler, and K. Schiff, Watershed-based sources of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in urban storm water, 
Environmental
Toxicology and Chemistry,
 25, 373–385, 2006.
5. M.M. Khin, A.S. Nair, V.J. Babu, R. Murugan, and S. Ramakrishna, A
review on nanomaterials for environmental remediation, 
Energy and
Environmental Science,
 5, 8075–8109, 2012.6. V.K. Gupta, I. Ali, T.A. Saleh, A. Nayak, and S. Agarwal, Chemical
treatment technologies for waste-water recycling-an overview, 
RSC
Advances,
 2, 6380–6388, 2012.
7. L.R. Radovic, C. Moreno-Castilla, and J. Rivera-Utrilla, 
Carbon materials
as adsorbents in aqueous solutions,
 New York, Marcel Dekker 2000.
8. Z.R. Yue, and J. Economy, Nanoparticle and nanoporous carbon
adsorbents for removal of trace organic contaminants from water, 
Journal of
Nanoparticle Research,
 7, 477–487, 2005.
9. M. Hodi, K. Polyak, and J. Hlavay, Removal of pollutants from drinking
water by combined ion-exchange and adsorption methods, 
Environment
International
, 21, 325–331, 1995.
10. Y. Takeuchi, K. Mochidzuki, N. Matsunobu, R. Kojima, H. Motohashi,
and S. Yoshimoto, Removal of organic substances from water by ozone
treatment followed by biological activated carbon treatment, 
Water Science
and Technology,
 35, 171–178, 1997.
11. M. Razvigorova, T. Budinova, N. Petrov, and V. Minkova, Purification of
water by activated carbons from apricot stones, lignites and anthracite, 
Water
Research,
 32, 2135–2139, 1998.
12. T. Otowa, Y. Nojima, and T. Miyazaki, Development of KOH activated
high surface area carbon and its application to drinking water purification,
Carbon,
 35, 1315–1319, 1997.
13. G.Z. Kyzas, E.A. Deliyanni, and K.A. Matis, Graphene oxide and its
application as an adsorbent for wastewater treatment, 
Journal of Chemical
Technology and Biotechnology,
 89, 196–205, 2014.
14. G. Ghasemzadeh, M. Momenpour, F. Omidi, M.R. Hosseini, M. Ahani,
and A. Barzegari, Applications of nanomaterials in water treatment and
environmental remediation, 
Frontiers of Environmental Science and
Engineering,
 8, 471–482, 2014.
15. G. Schmid, 
Nanoparticles: From Theory to Applications,
 Weinheim,
Germany, Wiley-VCH Publishers 2004.
16. K.E. Geckeler, and E. Rosenberg, 
Functional Nanomaterials
 Valencia,
USA, American Scientific Publishers, 2006.
17. M. Hosokawa, K. Nogi, M. Naito, and T. Yokoyama, 
NanoparticleTechnology Handbook,
 Amsterdam, Netherlands, Elsevier, 2007.
18. K.E. Geckeler, and H. Nishide, 
Advanced Nanomaterials,
 Weinheim,
Germany, Wiley-VCH Publishers 2010.
19. X. Wang, C.J. Summers, and Z.L. Wang, Large scale hexagonal patterned
growth of aligned ZnO nanorods for nano-optoelectronics and nanosensor
arrays, 
Nano Letters,
 4, 423–426, 2004.
20. J.S. Jang, and J.H. Oh, Novel crystalline supramolecular assemblies of
amorphous polypyrrole nanoparticles through surfactant templating,
Chemical Communications,
 19, 2200–2201, 2002.
21. H. Fudouzi, and Y. Xia, Photonic papers and inks: Color writing with
colorless materials, 
Advanced Materials,
 15, 892–896, 2003.
22. S. Brahim, D.N. Singh, and G.A. Elie, Amperometric determination of
cholesterol in serum using a biosensor of cholesterol oxidase contained
within a polypyrrole hydrogel membrane, 
Analytica Chimica Acta,
 448, 27–
36, 2001.
23. Q. Zhang, and K.T. Chuang, Adsorption of organic pollutants from
effluents of a kraft pulp mill on activated carbon and polymer resin, 
Advances
in Environmental Research,
 5, 251–258, 2001.
24. K.S. Soppimath, T.M. Aminabhavi, A.R. Kulkarni, and W.E. Rudzinski,
Biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles as drug delivery devices, 
Journal of
Controlled Release,
 70, 1–20, 2001.
25. A. Singh, G. Garg, and P.K. Sharma, Nanospheres: A novel approach for
targeted drug delivery system, 
International Journal of Pharmaceutical
Sciences Review and Research,
 5, 84–88, 2010.
26. G. Griffiths, B. Nystrom, S.B. Sable, and G.K. Khuller, Nanobead-based
interventions for the treatment and prevention of tuberculosis, 
Nature
Reviews Microbiology,
 8, 827–834, 2010.
27. S. Tejraj, M. Aminabhavi, A.R. Kulkarni, and W.E. Rudzinski,
Biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles as drug delivery devices, 
Journal of
Controlled Release,
 70, 1–20, 2001.
28. V.J. Mohanraj, and Y. Chen, Nanoparticles - A review, 
Tropical Journal
of Pharmaceutical Research,
 5, 561–573, 2006.
29. C.P. Reis, R.J. Neufeld, A.J. Ribeiro, and F. Veiga, Nanoencapsulation I.Methods for preparation of drug-loaded polymeric nanoparticles,
Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology, and Medicine,
 2, 8–21, 2006.
30. E.B. Sjfholm, I. Improved stability of proteins immobilized in
microparticles prepared by modified emulsion polymerization technique,
Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
 67, 693–696, 1978.
31. P.J. Lowe, and C.S. Temple, Calcitonin and insulin in
isobutylcyanoacrylate nanocapsules: Protection against proteases and effect
on intestinal absorption in rats, 
Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology,
 46,
547–552, 1994.
32. C. Vauthier, C. Dubernet, and E. Fattal, Pinto-Alphandary, H., P.
Couvreur, Poly(alkylcyano acrylates) as biodegradable materials for
biomedical applications, 
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews,
 55, 519–548,
2003.
33. J. Kreuter, The mechanism of termination in heterogeneous
polymerization, 
Journal of Polymer Science: Polymer Letters Edition,
 20,
543–545, 1982.
34. H. Fessi, F. Puisieux, J.P. Devissaguet, N. Ammoury, and S. Benita,
Nanocapsule formation by interfacial deposition following solvent
displacement, 
International Journal of Pharmaceutics,
 55, R1–R4, 1989.
35. J.M. Barichello, M. Morishita, K. Takayama, and T. Nagai,
Encapsulation of hydrophilic and lipophilic drugs in PLGA nanoparticles by
the nanoprecipitation method, 
Drug Development and Industrial Pharmacy,
2, 5471–5476, 1999.
36. S. Galindo-Rodriguez, E. Allemann, H. Fessi, and E. Doelker,
Physicochemical parameters associated with nanoparticle formation in the
salting-out, emulsification-diffusion, and nanoprecipitation methods,
Pharmaceutical Research,
 21, 1428–1439, 2004.
37. F. Ganachaud, and J.L. Katz, Nanoparticles and nanocapsules created
using the ouzo effect: Spontaneous emulsification as an alternative to
ultrasonic and high-shear devices, 
ChemPhysChem,
 6, 209–216, 2005.
38. Quintanar-Guerrero, D., E. Allemann, H. Fessi, and E. Doelker,
Preparation techniques and mechanism of formation of biodegradable
nanoparticles from preformed polymers, 
Drug Development and Industrial
Pharmacy,
 24, 1113–1128, 1998.39. A. Singh, G. Garg, and P.K. Sharma, Nanospheres: A novel approach for
targeted drug delivery system, 
International Journal of Pharmaceutical
Sciences Review and Research,
 5, 84–88, 2010.
40. T. Zhu, J.S. Chen, and X.W. Lou, (David), Highly efficient removal of
organic dyes from waste water using hierarchical NiO spheres with high
surface area, 
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C,
 116, 6873–6878, 2012.
41. J. Zhang, B. Li, W. Yang, and J. Liu, Synthesis of magnetic
Fe
3
O
4
@hierarchical hollow silica nanospheres for efficient removal of
methylene blue from aqueous solutions, 
Industrial and Engineering
Chemistry Research,
 53, 10629–10636, 2014.
42. F. Luo, X. Li, G. He, M. Li, and H. Zhang, Preparation of double-shelled
C/SiO
2
 hollow spheres with enhanced adsorption capacity, 
Industrial and
Engineering Chemistry Research,
 54, 641–648, 2015.
43. J. Fu, Z. Chen, M. Wang, S. Liu, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, R. Han, and Q. Xu,
Adsorption of methylene blue by a high-efficiency adsorbent (polydopamine
microspheres): Kinetics, isotherm, thermodynamics and mechanism analysis,
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 259, 53–61, 2015.
44. Z. Yu, B. Yin, F. Qu, and X. Wu, Synthesis of self-assembled CdS
nanospheres and their photocatalytic activities by photodegradation of
organic dye molecules, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 258, 203–209, 2014.
45. X. Song, Y. Wang, K. Wang, and R. Xu, Low-cost carbon nanospheres
for efficient removal of organic dyes from aqueous solutions, 
Industrial and
Engineering Chemistry Research,
 51, 13438–13444, 2012.
46. H. Zhang, X. Li, G. He, J. Zhan, and D. Liu, Preparation of magnetic
composite hollow microsphere and its adsorption capacity for basic dyes,
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research,
 52, 16902–16910, 2013.
47. Q. Liu, L. Wang, A. Xiao, J. Gao, W. Ding, and H. Yu, Templated
preparation of porous magnetic microspheres and their application in removal
of cationic dyes from wastewater, 
Journal of Hazardous Material,
 181, 586–
592, 2010.
48. R. Rahmatollah, K. Hamed, R. Mahboubeh, Seijas, J.A. V. Tato, and M.
Pilar, Adsorptive removal of crystal violet (CV), a carcinogenic textile dye,
from aqueous solution by conducting polyaniline/hollow manganese ferritenanocomposites, 
International Electronic Conference on Synthetic Organic
Chemistry (2010).
49. A. Baruah, S. Kumar, S. Vaidya, and A.K. Ganguli, Efficient entrapment
of dye in hollow silica nanoparticles: Direct evidence using fluorescence
spectroscopy, 
Journal of Fluorescence,
 23, 1287–1292, 2013.
50. B. Zargar, H. Parham, and A. Hatamie, Fast removal and recovery of
amaranth by modified iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles, 
Chemosphere,
 76,
554–557, 2009.
51. R. Wu, and J. Qu, Removal of water-soluble azo dye by the magnetic
material MnFe
2
O
4
, 
Journal of Chemical Technology and Biotechnology,
 80,
20–27, 2005.
52. R. Wu, J. Qu, and Y. Chen, Magnetic powder MnO-Fe
2
O
3
 composite-A
novel material for the removal of azo-dye from water, 
Water Research,
 39,
630–638, 2005.
53. J. Cao, Y. Zhu, K. Bao, L. Shi, S. Liu, and Y. Qian, Microscale Mn
2
O
3
hollow structures: Sphere, cube, ellipsoid, dumbbell, and their phenol
adsorption properties, 
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C,
 113, 17755–
17760, 2009.
54. L. Cumbal, J. Greenleaf, D. Leun, and A.K. SenGupta, Polymer
supported inorganic nanoparticles: Characterization and environmental
applications, 
Reactive and Functional Polymers,
 54, 167–180, 2003.
55. M. Arkas, and D. Tsiourvas, Organic/inorganic hybrid nanospheres based
on hyperbranched poly(ethylene imine) encapsulated into silica for the
sorption of toxic metal ions and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from
water, 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 170, 35–42, 2009.
56. G. Wang, F. Henselwood, and G. Liu, Water-soluble poly(2-
cinnamoylethylmethacrylate)-block-poly(acrylicacid) nanospheres as traps
for perylene, 
Langmuir,
 14, 1554–1559, 1998.
57. S.X. Zhang, X.L. Zhao, H.Y. Niu, Y.L. Shi, Y.Q. Cai, and G.B. Jiang,
Superparamagnetic Fe
3
O
4
 nanoparticles as catalysts for the catalytic
oxidation of phenolic and aniline compounds, 
Journal of Hazardous
Materials,
 167, 560–566, 2009.
58. Y. Zhao, Y. Ma, H. Li, and L. Wang, Composite QDs@MIP nanospheresfor specific recognition and direct fluorescent quantification of pesticides in
aqueous media, 
Analytical Chemistry,
 84, 386–395, 2012.
59. H. Li, Y. Li, and J. Cheng, Molecularly imprinted silica nanospheres
embedded CdSe quantum dots for highly selective and sensitive optosensing
of pyrethroids, 
Chemistry of Materials,
 22, 2451–2457, 2010.
60. L. Jing, C. Yang, and Z. Zongshan, Effective organochlorine pesticides
removal from aqueous systems by magnetic nanospheres coated with
polystyrene, 
Journal of Wuhan University of Technology-Material Science
Edition,
 29, 168–173, 2014.
61. S.S. Miao, M.S. Wu, H.G. Zuo, C. Jiang, S.F. Jin, Y.C. Lu, and H. Yang,
Core-shell magnetic molecularly imprinted polymers as sorbent for
sulfonylurea herbicide residues, 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry,
63, 3634–3645, 2015.
62. M. Ma, and D.Q. Li, New organic nanoporous polymers and their
inclusion complexes, 
Chemistry of Materials,
 11, 872–874, 1999.
63. I.T. Federico, A. Salvation, and B. Marion, Complexation of organic
compounds in the presence of Al
3+
 during micellar flocculation, 
Water
Research,
 38, 1477–1483, 2004.
64. P. Pandit, and S. Basu, Removal of ionic dyes from water by solvent
extraction using reverse micelles, 
Environmental Science and Technology,
38, 2435–2442, 2004.
65. H. Petra, E.R. Karl, and C. Kurt, Sorption of nonpolar aromatic
contaminants by chlorosilane surface modified natural minerals,
Environmental Science and Technology,
 35, 4260–4264, 2001.
66. K.G. Vinod, and A. Imran, Removal of DDD and DDE from wastewater
using bagasse fly ash, a sugar industry waste, 
Water Research,
 35, 33–40,
2001.
67. H.T. Zhao, and F.V. George, Sorption of trichloroethylene by organo-
clays in the presence of humic substances, 
Water Research,
 32, 3710–3716,
1998.
68. K. Ays, Removal of phenol and 4-chlorophenol by surfactant-modified
natural zeolite, 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 144, 307–315, 2007.
69. N. Savage, and M.S. Diallo, Nanomaterials and water purification:Opportunities and challenges, 
Journal of Nanoparticle Research
, 7, 331–342,
2005.
70. J.J. Hubbuch, D.B. Matthiesen, and T.J. Hobley, High gradient magnetic
separation 
versus
 expanded bed adsorption: A first principle comparison,
Bioseparation,
 10, 99–112, 2001.
71. G. Reiss, A. Hutten, Magnetic nanoparticles-applications beyond data
storage, 
Nature Materials,
 4, 725–726, 2005.
72. L.S. Zhong, J.S. Hu, and H.P. Liang, Self-assembled 3D flowerlike iron
oxide nanostructures and their application in water treatment, 
Advanced
Materials,
 18, 2426–2431, 2006.
73. C.T. Yavuz, J.T. Mayo, and W.W. Yu, Low-field magnetic separation of
monodisperse Fe
3
O
4
 nanocrystals, 
Science,
 314, 964–967, 2006.
74. B.S. Shaibu, M.L.P. Reddy, A. Bhattacharyya, Evaluation of cyanex 923-
coated magnetic particles for the extraction and separation of lanthanides and
actinides from nuclear waste streams, 
Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic
Materials,
 301, 312–318, 2006.
75. J. Hu, G. Chen, and I.M.C. Lo, Removal and recovery of Cr(VI) from
wastewater by maghemite nanoparticles, 
Water Research,
 39, 4528–4536,
2005.
76. H. He, Y. Zhang, C. Gao, and J. Wu, Clicked magnetic nanohybrids with
a soft polymer interlayer, 
Chemical Communications,
 1655–1657, 2009.
77. Q. Liu, L. Wang, A. Xiao, J. Gao, W. Ding, and H. Yu, Templated
preparation of porous magnetic microspheres and their application in removal
of cationic dyes from wastewater, 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 181, 586–
592, 2010.
78. D.B. Shieh, C.H. Su, F.Y. Chang, Y.N. Wu, W.C. Su, J.R. Hwu, J.H.
Chen, and C.S. Yeh, Aqueous nickel-nitrilotriacetate modified Fe
3
O
4
-NH
3
+
nanoparticles for protein purification and cell targeting, 
Nanotechnology,
 17,
4174–4182, 2006.
79. Z. Wu, J. Wu, H. Xiang, M.S. Chun, and K. Lee, Organosilane-
functionalized Fe
3
O
4
 composite particles as effective magnetic assisted
adsorbents, 
Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering
Aspects,
 279, 167–174, 2006.80. M.A. Ahmed, R.M. Khafagy, S.T. Bishay, and N.M. Saleh, Effective dye
removal and water purification using the electric and magnetic
Zn
0.5
Co
0.5
Al
0.5
Fe
1.4
6La
0.04
O
4
/polymer core-shell nanocomposites,
Journal of Alloys and Compounds,
 578, 121–131, 2013.
81. M. Iram, C. Guo, Y. Guan, A. Ishfaq, and H. Liu, Adsorption and
magnetic removal of neutral red dye from aqueous solution using Fe
3
O
4
hollow nanospheres, 
Journal of Hazardous Material,
 181, 1039, 2010.
82. D. Zhu, J. Zhang, J. Song, H. Wang, Z. Yu, Y. Shen, and A. Xie,
Efficient one-pot synthesis of hierarchical flower-like α-Fe
2
O
3
 hollow
spheres with excellent adsorption performance for water treatment, 
Applied
Surface Science,
 284, 855–861, 2013.
83. Y.Q. Zheng, C.Y. Tong, B. Wang, Y. Xie, H.D. Liao, and D. Li, The
development and application of tumor-targeting magetic nanoparticles FA-
StNP@ Fe
2
O
3
 for hyperthermia, 
Chinese Science Bulletin
, 54, 2998–3004,
2009.
84. H. Tian, J. Li, Q. Shen, H. Wang, Z. Hao, L. Zou, and Q. Hu, Using
shelltunable mesoporous Fe
3
O
4
@HMS and magnetic separation to remove
DDT from aqueous media, 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 171, 459–464,
2009.
85. Z.W. Gao, X.J. Peng, H.M. Zhang, Z.K. Luan, and B. Fan,
Montmorillonite-Cu(II)/Fe(III) oxides magnetic material for removal of
cyanobacterial 
Microcystis aeruginosa
 and its regeneration, 
Desalination,
247, 337–345, 2009.
86. K. Cendrowski, M. Peruzynska, A. Markowska-Szczupak, X. Chen, and
A. Wajda, Mesoporous silica nanospheres functionalized by TiO
2
 as a
photoactive antibacterial agent, 
Journal of Nanomedicine and
Nanotechnology,
 4, 182–187, 2013.
87. H. Zou, R. Wang, X. Li, X. Wang, S. Zeng, S. Ding, L. Li, Z. Zhang, and
S. Qiu, An organosilane-directed growth-induced etching strategy for
preparing hollow/yolk-shell mesoporous organosilica nanospheres with
perpendicular mesochannels and amphiphilic frameworks, 
Journal of
Materials Chemistry
 A, 2, 12403–12412, 2014.88. Y. Wang, G. Wang, H. Wang, C. Liang, W. Cai, and L. Zhang,
Chemicaltemplate synthesis of micro/nanoscale magnesium silicate hollow
spheres for wastewater treatment, 
Chemistry-A European Journal,
 16, 3497–
3503, 2010.
89. X. Song, Y. Wang, K. Wang, and R. Xu, Low-cost carbon nanospheres
for efficient removal of organic dyes from aqueous solutions, 
Industrial and
Engineering Chemistry Research,
 51, 13438–13444, 2012.
90. F.C. Huang, C.K. Lee, Y.L. Han, W.C. Chao, and H.P. Chao, Preparation
of activated carbon using micro-nano carbon spheres through chemical
activation, 
Journal of the Taiwan Institute of Chemical Engineers,
 45, 2805–
2812, 2014.
91. B. Chang, W. Shi, D. Guan, Y. Wang, B. Zhou, and X. Dong, Hollow
porous carbon sphere prepared by a facile activation method and its rapid
phenol removal, 
Materials Letters,
 126, 13–16, 2014.
92. P.K. Tripathi, L. Gan, M. Liu, X. Maa, Y. Zhao, D. Zhu, Z. Xu, L. Chen,
and N.N. Rao, One-pot assembly of silica@two polymeric shells for
synthesis of hollow carbon porous nanospheres: Adsorption of bisphenol A,
Materials Letters,
 120, 108–110, 2014.
93. H. Sun, G. Zhou, S. Liu, H.M. Ang, M.O. Tade, and S. Wang, Nano-Fe0
encapsulated in microcarbon spheres: Synthesis, characterization, and
environmental applications, 
ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces,
 4, 6235–
6241, 2012.
94. M. Arkas, D. Tsiourvas, and C.M. Paleos, Functional dendritic polymers
for the development of hybrid materials for water purification,
Macromolecular Materials and Engineering,
 295, 883–898, 2010.
95. T. Schreiber, A. Weber, K. Niedergall, J. Riegler, D. Bryniok, T. Hirth,
and G.E.M. Tovar, Water treatment by molecularly imprinted polymer
nanoparticles, 
Materials Research Society Symposium Proceedings (Spring
Meeting),
 1169, 21–28, 2009.
96. J. Ding, B. Li, Y. Liu, X. Yan, S. Zeng, X. Zhang, L. Hou, Q. Cai, and J.
Zhang, Fabrication of Fe
3
O
4
@reduced graphene oxide composite via novel
colloid electrostatic self-assembly process for removal of contaminants from
water, 
Journal of Materials Chemistry A: Materials for Energy and
Sustainability,
 3, 832–839, 2015.97. J. Ding, B. Li, Y. Liu, X. Yan, S. Zeng, X. Zhang, and L. Hou, Zhang,
Q.C.J., Fabrication of Fe
3
O
4
@reduced graphene oxide composite via novel
colloid electrostatic self-assembly process for removal of contaminants from
water, 
Journal of Materials Chemistry A,
 3, 832–839, 2015.
98. C. Santhosh, P. Kollu, S. Doshi, M. Sharma, and D. Bahadur,
Vanchinathan, M.T., Saravanan, P., Kime, B.S., Grace, A.N., Adsorption,
photodegradation and antibacterial study of grapheme-Fe
3
O
4
 nanocomposite
for multipurpose water purification application, 
RSC Advances,
 4, 28300–
28308, 2014.
99. X. Guo, G.T. Fei, H. Su, and L.D. Zhang, Synthesis of polyaniline
micro/nanospheres by a copper(II)-catalyzed self-assembly method with
superior adsorption capacity of organic dye from aqueous solution, 
Journal of
Materials Chemistry,
 21, 8618–8625, 2011.
100. Y. Zhao, Y. Ma, H. Li, and L. Wang, Composite QDs@MIP
nanospheres for specific recognition and direct fluorescent quantification of
pesticides in aqueous media, 
Analytical Chemistry,
 84, 386–395, 2012.
101. E. Baruch-Teblum, Y. Mastai, and K. Landfester, Miniemulsion
polymerization of cyclodextrin nanospheres for water purification from
organic pollutants, 
European Polymer Journal,
 46, 1671–1678, 2010.
102. Z. Chen, J. Fu, M. Wang, X. Wang, J. Zhang, and Q. Xu, Adsorption of
cationic dye (methylene blue) from aqueous solution using
poly(cyclotriphosphazeneco-4,4-sulfonyldiphenol) nanospheres, 
Applied
Surface Science,
 289, 495–501, 2014.
103. Q. Xueqing, D. Yonghong, Q. Yong, Y. Dongjie, O. Xinping, and Y.
Conghua, Acetylated lignin amphiphilic polymer nanoscale colloid spheres
and method for preparing the same, 
Faming Zhuanli Shenqing,
 CN
103242555 A 20130814, 2013.
104. L. Wang, and Y. Ma, Multifunctional composite imprinted nanosphere
and its application in detection of pesticide residue, 
Faming Zhuanli
Shenqing,
 CN 102553497A 20120711, 2012.Chapter 10
A Perspective of the Application of
Magnetic Nanocomposites and
Nanogels as Heavy Metal Sorbents for
Water Purification
Hilda Elizabeth Reynel-Avila
1
,
2
, Didilia Ileana Mendoza-
Castillo
1
,
2
, and Adrián Bonilla-Petriciolet
1
*
1
Chemical Engineering Department, Instituto Tecnológico de
Aguascalientes, Aguascalientes, México
2
Cátedras CONACYT, Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología, Distrito
Federal, México
*
Corresponding author:
 
petriciolet@hotmail.com
Abstract
Heavy metal removal from water has attracted considerable attention due to
the adverse effects of toxic metal ions on the environment and human health.
In the past decades, the sorption process has received a great attention due to
its effectiveness to remove these water pollutants. However, there is a need to
synthesize, study, and apply novel sorbents with outstanding capabilities for
reducing treatment costs and improving process performance. To face this
challenge, the nanoscience attempts to create smart materials with
extraordinary physical and chemical properties, which may show a
significant improvement in their performance when compared with the
conventional treatment systems. Nanosorbents may offer several advantagesfor water purification due to their unique features as affinity, selectivity,
capacity, and smart surface functionalization with the ability to undergo
different changes in response to external stimuli. This review discusses the
achievements and advances in nanomaterials for heavy metal removal from
water. This chapter highlights the application of magnetic nanocomposites
and nanogels for heavy metal removal, and it also illustrates the rapid growth
of this field, which is mainly due to the technological potential of these
nanomaterials to solve global environmental problems.
Keywords:
 Heavy metals, magnetic nanocomposites, nanogels, water
purification
10.1 Introduction
The toxicity of heavy metals for both ecosystems and human beings has been
widely documented in the literature even at trace concentrations [1]. During
the past years, significant efforts have been conducted in technological areas
such as photocatalysis, bioremediation, membrane filtration, and
electrochemistry as an attempt to face the water pollution by heavy metals [2,
3]. However, sorption is a technique that still offers simplicity and flexibility
in terms of design, operation, and low cost [4, 5]. In fact, the sorption process
has become one of the most used purification techniques for heavy metal
removal from water and industrial effluents [4]. The conventional sorbents
used for heavy metal removal from water include activated carbons,
biomasses, zeolites, clays, and polymeric materials [1]. Nevertheless, the
finding of new, smart, and promising sorbents is a relevant topic in current
studies for improving process efficacy and reducing treatment costs [1, 6].
Nanomaterials are attractive as an emerging, effective, and environmental-
friendly platform for water treatment due to their unique physicochemical
features [2, 6, 7]. These materials normally possess size-dependent
properties, which differ from their larger counterparts. Therefore, the use of
nanosorbents can be considered as an attractive alternative to remove priority
water pollutants [8].
In general, “smart” materials have the potential to be used in a variety of
applications. According to Gil and Hudson [9], these materials sufferphysical or chemical changes, which are relatively large and abrupt, in
response to small changes in the environmental conditions, e.g., pH,
temperature, electric or magnetic fields, and mechanical stress [9–11]. The
versatility obtained from these characteristics has prompted an intense
research about the use of smart nanomaterials for environmental applications.
Recently, several authors have reviewed and discussed the synthesis and
application of magnetic nanocomposites and nanogels [2–5, 7, 8, 12–14].
These reviews have highlighted that important contributions have been
performed in the synthesis of nanomaterials for environmental remediation.
In this chapter, we provide an overview of recent advances in
nanotechnology to produce magnetic nanocomposites and nanogels and their
application in the removal of heavy metals from water. Physicochemical
properties, methods of synthesis, and the application of these nanomaterials
to remove metallic ions in aqueous solution are summarized. Finally, we
discuss the desorption and regeneration processes as well as other interesting
aspects related to the application of these emerging sorbents for water
purification and wastewater treatment.
10.2 Description of Magnetic
Nanoparticles and Nanogels
Nanoscience has attempted to create smart materials, which may show a
significant improvement in their performance when compared with the
traditional systems. The last two decades, the nanotechnology has shown a
considerable growth [5, 15]. Several potential benefits of nanotechnology
have already been found in medicine, industry, and environment, including
water treatment [5]. Specifically, there are two innovative nanomaterials that
have gained an increasing attention: magnetic nanoparticles and nanogels.
The first material, the magnetic nanoparticle, has unique physicochemical
properties [13, 16, 17]. The magnetic nanoparticles have several applications
in magnetic resonance imaging, cancer biomarkers, catalysts, drug delivery,
magnetic data storage devices, pigments, coatings, and bioseparations [13,
16, 18–23]. According to Buzea 
et al.
 [24], magnetic nanomaterials have
typically one dimension smaller than 1 μm, and they can be manipulatedunder the influence of an external magnetic field. This is possible because
magnetism is a volume-dependent property; therefore, if the size decreases,
particles become superparamagnetic, which means that they lose their
permanent magnetic moments and can respond to an external magnetic field
[8]. These characteristics confer to magnetic nanomaterials a high surface
area and excellent chemical selectivity and stability.
On the other hand, nanogel is a cross-linked polymeric network (typically
20–250 nm) that exhibits properties between those of solids and liquids.
Additionally, they swell but do not dissolve in aqueous environments [9, 10,
25, 26]. Nanogels containing water are classified as hydrogels, whereas those
containing an organic liquid phase (e.g., oil or organic solvent) are known as
organogels [25]. As any nanoparticle, nanogel combines the advantages of its
macroscale counterpart (hydrogel) with those related to its nanoscale size.
Nanogels have particular physicochemical properties such as high specific
surface area, easy size modulation, stability in a wide range of pH and
temperature, good flexibility, tunable chemical and physical structures, and a
high surface/volume ratio for multivalent conjugation [11, 25]. Additionally,
the nanogels can bend and curl with external stimuli [9, 27]. These properties
are useful in several applications such as controlled drug delivery, separation
techniques, cosmetic industry, bioimaging, catalysis, sensors, and
regenerative medicine [10, 11, 27, 28]. Note that these materials are also
attractive for environmental applications including the removal of water
pollutants.
Nanosorbents may offer several advantages for water purification due to
their unique features as affinity, selectivity, capacity, and smart surface
functionalization with the ability to undergo different changes in response to
external stimuli. Magnetic nanomaterials and nanogels have gained an
increasing attention for the sorption of a wide variety of water pollutants
including metal ions (e.g., lead, mercury, cadmium, and arsenic), radioactive
particles, and dyes. They can exhibit improved sorption properties than those
reported for traditional sorbents [3, 5, 7, 8, 14, 15, 17]. However, the
physicochemical properties of these nanomaterials depend on their synthesis
conditions. In the following section, we briefly describe different routes for
the synthesis of these nanosorbents.10.3 Routes for the Synthesis of
Magnetic Nanoparticles and
Nanogels
According to Thatai 
et al.
 [7], nanomaterials can be classified based on the
materials used in their conformation, and they are simple or multiple
materials. Simple nanoparticles are made from a single material, while
multiple nanoparticles are made of two or more materials into nanocomposite
particles. This type of nanoparticles involves different physicochemical
combinations such as inorganic/inorganic, inorganic/organic, and
organic/organic depending on the desired functionalization, selectivity, and
application [7]. In the next subsections, we describe the methods commonly
used for the synthesis of magnetic nanoparticles, nanogels, and
nanocomposites.
10.3.1 Magnetic Nanoparticles
Magnetic nanoparticles are generally composed of magnetic elements such as
cobalt, iron, nickel, or their oxides like magnetite (Fe
3
O
4
), maghemite (γ-
Fe
2
O
3
), nickel ferrite (NiFe
2
O
4
), and cobalt ferrite (CoFe
2
O
4
) [13]. Several
chemical methods have been reported in the literature to synthesize magnetic
nanoparticles, and they include coprecipitation, microemulsion, sol–gel
synthesis, sonochemical reactions, hydrothermal reactions, solid-state
reactions, combustion, solvothermal synthesis, mechanosynthesis,
electrochemical, microwave-assisted, as well as combinations of these
methods [17, 29, 30]. The synthesis routes most used for the preparation of
magnetic nanoparticles are summarized in 
Table 10.1
.
Table 10.1
 General characteristics of methods used for the synthesis of
magnetic nanoparticles.In general, the coprecipitation is the preferred method for the synthesis of
magnetic nanoparticles due to its simplicity and efficacy [36]. It consists in
mixing ferric and ferrous salts in alkaline solutions. The shape and size of the
particle can be modified by changing the salt type, the ratio of ferric/ferrous
mixture, and the operational conditions such as pH and temperature [36]. In
the microemulsion method, the material is a stable isotropic dispersion of two
immiscible liquids, commonly water and oil, in the presence of a surfactant.
The surfactant molecules cause the formation of nanodroplets where aqueous
iron salt solutions are encapsulated by a surfactant coating that separates
them from the oil solution, forming self-assembled structures such as
spherical micelles or lamellar phases [35]. This method has the advantage of
generating diversity in shape and size of nanoparticles via variations in the
type and concentration of surfactant, temperature, and oil phase [35].
On the other hand, in the hydrothermal method, the reactions are performed
at pressure and temperature that can achieve values higher than 2000 psi and
200 °C, respectively. The formation of magnetic particles is via two
conditions: hydrolysis and oxidation, or neutralization of mixed metal
hydroxides. These two routes are very similar, except that ferrous salts are
needed in the first reaction process [36]. For example, magnetic nanoparticles
have been synthesized via reduction–oxidation hydrothermal process using
FeCl
3
 and diamine hydrate in the presence of polyethylene glycol into an
autoclave at 120 °C [37]. Finally, the sonochemical reaction technique can be
used for the synthesis of magnetic nanoparticles via the implosive collapse of
bubbles with acoustic cavitation. The hotspots can achieve extreme
conditions, which have a shear effect for agglomeration and are beneficial for
the particle formation.
10.3.2 Nanogels
Literature reports several methods for the preparation of nanogels and they
are divided in two general categories: chemically (covalent) and physically
(non-covalent) cross-linked nanogels [11]. The routes used to obtain physical
hydrogels include estereocomplexation [26], thermal gelation [38], and ionic
cross-linking [39]. On the other hand, the chemical hydrogels are synthesized
using photopolymerization, enzymatic cross-linking, irradiation methods(e.g., electron beam, gamma rays, and ultraviolet light), radical cross-linking
polymerization such as reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer,
atom transfer, dispersion, precipitation, and inverse microemulsion [11, 26,
40, 41]. 
Table 10.2
 summarizes some of the methods used for the synthesis of
these nanomaterials.
Table 10.2
 General characteristics of methods used for the synthesis of
nanogels.The ionic cross-linking is a physical gelation method widely applied.
Techniques such as microfluidic, photolithography, and micromolding are the
most used for obtaining nanogels with various shapes [39]. The click
reactions method is a promising and versatile strategy to prepare nanogels
due to its high reactivity, selectivity, and mild reaction conditions [26]. The
inverse microemulsion is a water-in-oil polymerization where nanogels are
obtained via dispersions in organic solvents [40]. For example, Guerrero-
Ramirez 
et al.
 [10] reported the synthesis of a pH-sensitive nanohydrogel by
inverse microemulsion polymerization of 
p
-nitrophenol acrylate with 
N
-
isopropylacrylamide using aerosol as a surfactant and ethylene glycol
dimethacrylate as a cross-linking reactive. Electron beam irradiation is a
standard method based on the irradiation of dilute polymer solutions. In this
method, the dilute polymer solution is ionized to generate polymer radicals,
which may decay where intra-molecular cross-linking reactions take place
and produce the nanogel [11, 42]. For example, An [42] employed
poly(vinylpyrrolidone) to produce a combined inter and intra-cross-linked
nanogel applying electron beam ionizing radiation. In other study, Gong 
et al.
[43] synthesized a functional superparamagnetic nanogel via photochemical
method at room temperature using Fe
3
O
4
 nanoparticles as photoinitiators.
They obtained a magnetic nanogel with high purity, as expected, due to the
use of emulsion and initiator-free aqueous medium solution.
10.3.3 Nanocomposites
Although nanoparticles can be separated from aqueous solutions after their
use, there are some concerns related to possible environmental impacts from
the application of these nanosorbents in wastewater treatment [50]. This is the
case of magnetic nanoparticles that tend to oxidation, corrosion, and
spontaneous aggregation [13]. Therefore, the immobilization of magnetic
nanoparticles on different supports represents a solution for preserving their
distinctive characteristics avoiding their potential negative impacts [36]. The
use of inorganic chemicals (e.g., metallic elements, metal oxides, and silica),
biological materials, or biomasses as coatings and supports improves the
mechanical properties of particles in solution and also provides new sites for
binding to the nanoparticle surface [13, 20]. These nanocomposites haveattracted attention with respect to unsupported magnetic nanoparticles
because they represent an excellent integration of nanoparticles and polymer
matrices, which offers a new class of materials. This integrated material
combines the functionalities of polymeric matrices with the unique
characteristics of the nanoparticles. The polymer matrix can be introduced as
a precursor, preformed polymer or as a polymer network, physically or
chemically cross-linked, while the nanoparticle can be introduced as a pre-
existing nanoparticle or as a precursor [51].
The modification of nanoparticles can be performed using different routes.
The traditional methods include blending, graft polymerization, sol–gel, and
surface modification. In particular, the blending method is the most simple,
and it is considered as an inexpensive alternative to synthesize new
nanostructured materials. This synthesis route consists in a simple mixing of
the polymer matrix and the nanoparticle by melt blending or solution
blending [51]. However, the formation of agglomerates represents a problem
since it is difficult to achieve an effective dispersion of the nanoparticles in
the polymer matrix [20]. Despite these inconveniences, Luo and Zhang [52]
have synthesized cellulose nanocomposites by blending cellulose with
Fe
2
O
3
, and they found that this material exhibited magnetic-inducted
response and its recovery was obtained applying a magnetic field.
The sol–gel technique involves the direct mixing of monomers with the
nanoparticle followed by a polymerization process at mild temperatures,
resulting in the formation of interpenetrated network between inorganic and
organic moieties. This network enhances the compatibility between
constituents [20]. The grafting technique enhances the chemical functionality
and changes the surface topology of the initial organic and inorganic
precursors. It is convenient to note that the selection of any of these synthesis
routes will depend on the features desired for the nanoparticles.
With respect to the support materials for obtaining nanocomposites, the
biopolymers are the most used. This is due to plant and animal wastes have
complex structure, an easy decomposition, low dispersity grade, and they are
considered as renewable and low-cost feedstocks. The traditional
biopolymers are proteins, lipids, polynucleotides, and polysaccharides. Some
examples of polysaccharides are cellulose, dextran, pectin, alginic acid, and
agar [53]. Cellulose, the most abundant biopolymer, has been considered asthe feedstock for the synthesis of numerous new materials due to its high
content of hydroxyl groups. This property makes it an excellent material to
prepare composites. Chang and Zhang [41] reported a review on the recent
developments in nanocomposites, specifically cellulose-based hydrogels,
emphasizing the synthesis conditions, properties, and applications. This type
of nanocomposites offers several advantages such as biodegradability, low
cost, non-toxicity, and hydrophilicity [41]. After cellulose, the chitosan is the
second most abundant polysaccharide resource. It is a natural biosorbent and
is capable of maintaining the shape and non-solubility of the composite. For
instance, magnetically tailored poly(
N
-isopropylacrylamide)-chitosan
nanohydrogels were synthesized via free radical polymerization method [54].
These authors showed that chitosan not only worked as a cross-linking agent
in polymerization, but also it was involved in the growth of nanogels. In other
study, Valderruten 
et al.
 [53] synthesized a chitosan-hydrogel cross-linked
using dicarboxylic acids. Characterization analysis showed that the hydrogel
was completely amorphous, and its properties highly depended on pH.
Finally, polysaccharides such as pectin, cashew gum, xanthan, alginate,
starch, and arabic gum have been also combined with nanoparticles to
produce nanocomposites [48, 55]. Guilherme 
et al.
 [55] have reviewed the
relevant aspects of synthesis, characterization, and application of
polysaccharides-based hydrogels, while Dragan [48] has published another
review about hydrogels and their synthesis.
Finally, the common inorganic supports to obtain nanocomposites include
hydroxyapatite, montmorillonite, kaolin, sepiolite, and magnetite [56]. For
example, the incorporation of Fe
3
O
4
 into the nanogel provides magnetic
properties for separation processes [57]. In addition, the polymer composites
reinforced with nanosilica are the most commonly reported in the literature.
They offer several advantages such as easy preparation, low-cost synthesis,
possible surface modifications, and biocompatibility with different functional
groups [51].
10.4 Heavy Metal Removal from
Aqueous Solutions Using MagneticNanomaterials and Nanogels
Water is indispensable for life and is an invaluable resource. Despite this fact,
it is widely recognized that certain human activities have caused a significant
environmental pollution generating new challenges in water treatment and
purification. The increasing pollution of water by heavy metals (e.g.,
cadmium, chromium, zinc, mercury, and lead) has become a major
environmental concern. Heavy metals are released into the environment by
different industrial activities such as plating, mining, painting, tanneries,
printing, photographic materials, explosives, ceramic and glass, battery,
chemicals, papers, pesticides, and fertilizers manufacture [7, 13, 58–60].
Although heavy metals have multiple applications, the major concern about
these pollutants is the fact that most of them are highly toxic, carcinogenic,
and mutagenic for human beings even at low concentrations [58]. These
pollutants are non-biodegradable and tend to accumulate and persist in living
organisms through food chain [13, 58]. Therefore, it is imperative to develop
effective processes for the removal of these metals from water resources
including wastewaters and industrial effluents. Of all the technologies that
have been proposed, sorption process is a cost-effective method for facing
water pollution caused by heavy metals. This leads to the fact that
nanotechnology offers the possibility of developing novel nanosorbents for
an effective removal of these toxic pollutants.
A general overview of sorption research using magnetic nanosorbents and
nanogels indicates that reported studies have focused on kinetic and
equilibrium experiments using mono-metallic solutions at different operation
conditions including their modeling with traditional models. Some papers
have also reported a thermodynamic analysis in order to evaluate the
feasibility and thermal nature of the sorption process. In the next sections, a
brief review of magnetic nanomaterials and nanogels used as heavy metal
sorbents is presented where the discussion is focused on the operational
conditions, sorption capacity and their physicochemical properties.
10.4.1 Magnetic Nanomaterials for Heavy
Metal RemovalAccording to the literature, the first materials with magnetic properties useful
for the separation of metallic pollutants were synthesized during the 1970s
and 1980s [61]. However, the application of magnetic sorbents for heavy
metal removal from water was reported until 1990s [62]. In particular,
Towler 
et al.
 [62] used manganese dioxide-coated magnetite to synthesize a
magnetic sorbent that was used to recover lead, polonium, and radium from
seawater [62]. Since then, several researchers have explored the application
of nanomagnetic sorbents to remove a wide variety of heavy metals from
water (e.g., mercury, lead, arsenic, nickel, cadmium, chromium, and copper)
with satisfactory results [12, 13]. Additionally, recent studies showed that the
sorption efficacy of nanomaterials can be enhanced by grafting organic
groups on the inorganic materials. These nanocomposites show higher
sorption capacities and specific surface areas and, consequently, faster
kinetics, shorter intraparticle diffusion distance and a larger number of
surface reaction sites [63, 64]. With illustrative purposes, 
Table 10.3
summarizes the results of some studies reported in the literature using
magnetic nanocomposites for the removal of heavy metal ions.
For example, Fe
3
O
4
 nanoparticles have been introduced as novel magnetic
nanosorbents to remove heavy metal ions. In particular, the performance of
monodisperse chitosan-bound Fe
3
O
4
 nanoparticles and S-doped Fe
3
O
4
core–carbon shell nanoparticles, respectively, was studied in the removal of
Cu
2+
 ions [6, 65]. On the other hand, Zhou 
et al.
 [66] prepared
carboxymethyl chitosan–Fe
3
O
4
 nanoparticles using a co-precipitation
method, which were applied in the removal of Zn
2+
 ions. Recently, Wang 
et
al.
 [67] and Tan 
et al.
 [68] studied the synthesis of amino-functionalized
magnetic nanoparticles for the removal of Pb
2+
, Cd
2+
, and Cu
2+
 ions. The
sorption of mercury ions has been studied using mercapto-functionalized
nano-Fe
3
O
4
 magnetic polymers [69] and thiol-modified silica-coated Fe
3
O
4
nanoparticles [70]. In these studies, the size, structure, surface charge, zeta
potential, functional groups, and other physicochemical characteristics of the
nanomaterials were determined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM),
X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns, zeta potential meter, and N
2
 adsorption–
desorption isotherms. Reported studies indicated that metal removal increases
with pH and temperature, which is a typical removal performance of othersorbents. Note that the magnetic nanosorbents can be recovered readily from
aqueous solution applying an external magnetic field [6, 67, 71]. Therefore,
different authors have concluded that Fe
3
O
4
 magnetic nanoparticles possess
a high potential for practical applications.
Table 10.3
 Magnetic nanoparticles used for the removal of heavy metals
from aqueous solution.Different research groups have also synthesized magnetic nanocomposites
to remove arsenic [72–76]. In particular, Badruddoza 
et al.
 [72] used
phosphonium–silane magnetic nanoparticles ionically modified to remove
arsenic from water. In this study, authors exploited the ion exchange
capability of the phosphonium ligand for the arsenic removal and the
superparamagnetic nature of iron oxide for physical separation of the sorbent
for its recovery and regeneration. Basu and Ghosh [73] reported the
synthesis, characterization, and arsenic sorption kinetics of nano-structured
iron–cerium mixed oxide in the presence of some co-ions. The iron–cerium
bimetal mixed oxide (NICMO) was obtained via the green synthetic route.
Different analyses were conducted in order to determine some
physicochemical parameter of NICMO, e.g., the degree of thermal stability,
point of zero charge, surface morphology, oxide composition, particle size,
surface area, pore width, and bond formation between different species.
Batch experiments were performed to study the arsenic sorption at different
pH conditions. This bimetal-mixed oxide showed a crystalline structure,
hetero-metal bridging, point of zero charge of 7.13, an average particle size,
specific surface area, pore volume, and maximum pore width of 3.56 nm, 104
m
2
/g, 0.13 cm
3
/g and 5.68 nm, respectively. This study showed that sorption
capacity of NICMO increased with the calcination temperature, from 100 °C
to 200 °C, and diminished above 200 °C. Sorption experiments indicated that
calcined NICMO could be used safely as a filtering material for arsenic
removal. With respect to the arsenic removal in the presence of groundwater
ions, the arsenic sorption capacity decreased with respect to the presence of
co-ions: chloride ~ silicate > sulfate > bicarbonate > phosphate.
Meanwhile, Cui 
et al.
 [74] focused on the synthesis of magnetic porous Fe–
Mn binary oxide nanowires to remove arsenic. The sorption capacity of this
composite improved with the increment of manganese oxide, and a maximum
arsenic uptake of 171 mg/g was obtained with an initial Fe:Mn molar ratio of
1:3 at pH 7. The authors also evaluated the effect of co-ions (chloride, nitrate,
and sulfate) on arsenic removal. Results showed that the presence of these
ions had no significant impact on arsenic sorption capacity. However, ionic
species such as phosphate and humic acid reduced the removal efficacy by
competing with arsenic species for sorption sites. Cobalt ferrite nanoparticles
are another magnetic sorbent to remove arsenic [75]. Herein, it is convenientto remark that the application of magnetic nanocomposites as sorbents to
remove arsenic has attracted significant attention. This is because traditional
sorbents (e.g., activated carbon) show low sorption capacities for arsenic
species, despite their good performance to remove a wide variety of organic
and inorganic pollutants [8].
Badruddoza 
et al.
 [72] have studied the ionic modification of magnetic
nanomaterials for arsenic and chromium removal from water. Specifically,
these researchers synthesized iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles, which were
modified with an ionic liquid ligand. The nanomaterial was characterized by
TEM, Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), Enegy Dispersive X-
ray Spectroscopy (EDX), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS), XRD,
and zeta potential in order to know their physical and chemical properties.
Arsenic and chromium removal was studied where the effect of pH, initial
concentration, contact time, and coexisting anions (nitrate, chloride,
phosphate, and sulfate) was analyzed. Also, the authors have reported kinetic
and equilibrium sorption studies, results of recovery and regeneration, and a
possible sorption mechanism. The maximum sorption capacities for arsenic
(50.5 mg/g) and chromium (35.2 mg/g) were obtained at pH 3. However, the
presence of phosphate ions decreased considerably the sorption of both
metals. Authors concluded that a synergy of electrostatic interaction and ion
exchange between anionic metals and the cation-modified magnetic
nanoparticles played a significant role in the removal of these pollutants.
Finally, this nanocomposite was easily regenerated and then reused for two
sorption–desorption cycles without any appreciable reduction in its sorption
capacity.
Bakhshayesh and Dehghani [77] studied the synthesis of magnetite–
porphyrin nanocomposite and its application in the removal of Pb
2+
, Cd
2+
,
and Hg
2+
 ions. Nanoscale magnetite powder was prepared with different
amines in alkaline media using a simple hydrothermal method. During this
stage, the authors studied the effect of synthesis parameters in controlling
shape and size of nanoscale magnetite. In fact, they analyzed the presence of
alkaline (NaOH), reaction time, kind of amine, and iron salt FeSO
4
, FeCl
2
,
FeCl
3
, and Fe
2
(SO
4
)
3
. It was observed that the purity of nanomaterials was
highly dependent on iron salt, while the morphology was affected by theamine used. Removal percentages ranged from 10% to 45.2%, and they
decreased in the following order: Pb
2+
>Cd
2+
>Hg
2+
.
Ballav 
et al.
 [78] used Fe
3
O
4
-coated glycine doped polypyrrole magnetic
nanocomposites in the removal of chromium. The nanosorbent was prepared
in situ
 via chemical oxidative polymerization, where Fe
3
O
4
 nanoparticles
were encapsulated by glycine-doped polypyrrole. Chromium removal
experiments were performed at different operating conditions (i.e., pH,
sorbent dose, temperature, initial concentration, contact time, and effect of
polyvalent anions such as phosphate, sulfate, carbonate, and silicate). The
reusability of the nanosorbent was determined via desorption and
regeneration studies. Results indicated that the sorption process was highly
pH dependent, and the maximum chromium removal (99.91%) was attained
at pH 2. The sorption capacities ranged from 238 to 303 mg/g at temperatures
of 25–45 °C. Sorption kinetics followed a pseudo-second-order model,
whereas the Langmuir isotherm model fitted the equilibrium data. The
sorption process with this nanomaterial was governed by ionic interactions
and the presence of co-ions had no impact on chromium removal. Desorption
studies showed that this nanocomposite can be regenerated and reused for
three consecutive sorption cycles with satisfactory results. Therefore, authors
concluded that this material is a promising nanosorbent for the selective
removal of chromium.
Recently, Cantu 
et al.
 [79] studied the removal of chromium using a
manganese oxide nanomaterial synthesized via precipitation method. This
nanomaterial had a crystal structure similar to hausmannite with an average
particle size of 19.5 nm. The optimum pH for removal of this pollutant was
3–4. Sorption capacities ranged from 5.8 to 54.4 mg/g. Thermodynamic
studies indicated that the chromium sorption was spontaneous, endothermic,
and mainly controlled by physisorption. On the other hand, Arshadi [63] and
Shan 
et al.
 [80] showed that immobilized Mn–Cl nanoparticles and poly(1-
vinylimidazole)-grafted Fe
3
O
4
@ SiO
2
 magnetic nanoparticles, respectively,
were suitable nanosorbents to remove Hg
2+
 ions at different operating
conditions (i.e., solution pH, contact time, sorbent dosage, and temperature).
Immobilized Mn–Cl nanoparticles were obtained from the Mn–Cl
nanoparticles Nano particles-functionalization of SiO
2
/Al
2
O
3
 using the sol–gel method. Kinetic and equilibrium studies were performed at batch
conditions. The highest sorption capacity (289 mg/g) was achieved at pH 6
and 25 °C. The sorption kinetics of mercury ions were fitted to the pseudo-
second-order rate model, while equilibrium results were correlated by the
Langmuir–Freundlich isotherm equation. Characterization results indicated
that most of the covalently bond active sites of the nanosorbents were in the
form of Mn
3+
 ions at the surface, and it was also confirmed that the sorbent
surface was occupied by Hg
2+
 ions. The high content of Mn ions improved
the sorbent properties via chemical modifications of SiO
2
–Al
2
O
3
 mixed
oxides. Sorption–desorption studies showed that the immobilized Mn
nanoparticles could be reusable several times. Poly(1-vinylimidazole)-grafted
Fe
3
O
4
@SiO
2
 magnetic nanoparticles showed a maximum Hg
2+
 sorption
capacity of 346 mg/g at pH 7 and 25 °C. The presence of co-ions (e.g., Na
+
,
K
+
, Ca
2+
, Mg
2+
, Cl
−
, NO
3
−
, and SO
4
2–
), up to 100 mM ionic strength,
slightly increased the mercury sorption. The regeneration of Hg-loaded
nanoparticles could be achieved with 0.5 M HCl, and the mercury removal
was >94% in five consecutive adsorption–desorption cycles. Finally, Arshadi
et al.
 [64] synthesized a novel mercury sorbent by covalent immobilization of
an amino acid on modified SiO
2
/Al
2
O
3
 mixed oxide nanoparticles. The
physicochemical characterization of this sorbent showed that methyl ester
groups of l-cystine were anchored onto SiO
2
/Al
2
O
3
 surface. Kinetic and
equilibrium experiments were obtained at different contact times, initial
concentrations, temperatures, and initial pH. Results showed that a maximum
sorption capacity of 3079 mg/g was attained at 45 min. This study concluded
that metallic co-ions affected the mercury uptake. In addition, this
nanosorbent can be reusable with satisfactory results after 12th sorption–
desorption cycles. Synthesized material was also applied in the removal of
mercury ions of Persian Gulf water obtaining removal percentages from 98%
to 99.9%.
In summary, the iron oxide nanostructures play an important role in the
synthesis of magnetic nanocomposites [77]. These compounds can be used as
effective nanosorbents to face water pollution caused by a variety of heavy
metals.10.4.2 Nanogels
Nanogels have been introduced as promising sorbents for heavy metal
removal [45]. To date, reported studies using nanogels have addressed the
attention on the improvement of gel strength, swelling ability, and thermal
and mechanical stability, and few studies have analyzed the removal of
metallic ions from aqueous solutions. In particular, 
Table 10.4
 describes
some studies related to heavy metal removal using nanogels.
Table 10.4
 Nanogels used for the removal of heavy metals from aqueous
solution.For example, Sahiner and Yasar [92] reported the synthesis of poly(4-vinyl
pyridine) particles using micro-emulsion polymerization technique and their
application in the removal of Co
2+
, Ni
2+
, and Cu
2+
 ions. This nanomaterial
was modified using various N-alkyl quaternizing agents. Sorption capacities
for Co
2+
 and Ni
2+
 ions increased from 15.9 to 22.1 mg/g and from 22.1 to
39.1 mg/g, respectively, after the particle modification. In contrast, the
unmodified nanosorbent showed a better removal for Cu
2+
 ions. The increase
in the sorption capacity after the amidoximation reaction was due to the
metal-binding ability of amidoxime groups. These results suggested that poly
(4-vinyl pyridine) particles were suitable materials for the preparation of
versatile nanosorbents with tunable charges, hydrophilic/hydrophobic
balance, dimensions, and functionality.
In other study, Abdel-Raouf 
et al.
 [93] synthesized different poly hydroxy
methyl methacrylate (PHEMA) magnetic nanogels for the sorption of copper
ions from industrial water. The sorbents were obtained from the surface
modification of Fe
3
O
4
 with PHEMA via photochemical method using UV
irradiation. Thermo Gravimetric (TGA) measurements indicated that these
magnetic nanogels contained around 85–92% of magnetite, and they showed
high thermal and oxidative stabilities. On the other hand, FTIR results
showed that PHEMAs were composed of Fe
3
O
4
 covered with the copolymer
formed from hydroxy methyl methacrylate (HEMA) and methylene bis-
acrylamide (MBA), respectively. TEM images indicated that morphology of
nanogel particles was spherical with a uniform size aggregate due to the
magnetic interactions. The maximum sorption percentage of copper (98.2%)
was attained at pH 6 and 40 °C. It was found that a ratio of 10% HEMA/20
mg MBA provided the highest copper sorption capacity. This study also
reported that metal uptake decreased remarkably at acidic pH and at a
temperature higher than 40 °C. The removal mechanism depended on the
interaction between the surface hydroxyl groups of polymer–Fe
3
O
4
composite and the copper ions present in the solution. Finally, the reusability
of these nanogels was also feasible.
The removal of Cu
2+
, Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, Co
2+
, Ni
2+
, and Cr
3+
 ions has been
studied using a nanogel and a superparamagnetic nanocomposite based onsodium alginate [94]. The sorption of all metallic ions on both nanosorbents
was favored at pH 7, since at low pH, the carboxylate (COO
−
) and sulfonate
(SO
3
−
) groups were in their protonated forms. Sodium alginate nanoparticles
increased their sorption capacity with the incorporation of macrocyclic
oligomers (e.g., thiacalix[4]arene tetrasulfonate) and iron salts (e.g., Fe
3
O
4
nanoparticles). In general, the nanocomposite had a higher affinity than
nanogel for selected metal ions. The sorption capacity decreased in the
following order: Pb
2+
> Cd
2+
> Cu
2+
> Cr
3+
> Co
2+
> Ni
2+
. Desorption
studies were performed employing the metal-loaded nanosorbents and HCl
(0.2 M). Results showed that desorption percentages of 87–96.5% can be
obtained for tested metals.
Finally, Mahida and Patel [45] synthesized a supersorbent poly
(NIPAAm/AA/N-allylisatin) nanohydrogel employing inverse microemulsion
polymerization. For this purpose, they used a specific amount of N-
isopropylacrylamide (NIPAAm) and changed the acrylic acid (AA) and N-
allylisatin content, respectively. This nanogel was successfully used in the
removal of arsenic and cadmium from aqueous solutions. Also, the swelling
behavior of the nanohydrogels in water and in metal ion solutions was
determined. This nanohydrogel was able to remove around 94% and 83% of
arsenic and cadmium, respectively.
10.5 Desorption, Regeneration, and
Final Disposal
Although the technical feasibility of magnetic nanocomposites and nanogels
as sorbents for water treatment has been widely reported in the literature,
their regeneration stage and material reusability have received less attention
in spite of their great importance for the process economy. The possibility of
regeneration depends on the strength and type of interactions between the
sorbent and the sorbate. If the interaction is physical, the regeneration may be
quite simple; however, in a chemisorption process, the sorbent could be
regenerated using drastic methods such as thermal treatments [3]. Theregeneration process needs an analysis in terms of cost-effectiveness, product
recovery, reusability, reduction of wastes, and final disposal. The selection of
a suitable eluent depends on the sorbate and the sorbent, besides other
operating variables such as pH, temperature, and contact time that can affect
the efficacy of the desorption process [13]. However, the desorption efficacy
might be enhanced by gaining insight into the sorption mechanisms.
Particularly, the desorption of heavy metals from loaded sorbents has been
performed with different solutions, which can be selected according to the
influence of the pH on the sorption process. Between regeneration solutions
to elute heavy metals from loaded magnetic nanocomposites and nanogels,
the sodium hydroxide and strong acids are the commonly used. For example,
Ballav 
et al.
 [78] used NaHCO
3
 and HCl as eluents for chromium recovery.
On the other hand, HCl can be employed as eluent agent for magnetic Fe
3
O
4
nanoparticles modified with silane and acrylic and crotonic acids. This acid
also can be used for metal recovery from nanogels [93, 94, 99]. According to
Dragan [48], the majority of composite nanogels show a high level of
reusability where desorption was achieved by using dilute solutions of
hydrochloric or nitric acids. However, more studies are required in this
direction based on the fact that it is a key stage in sorption processes.
On the other hand, the regeneration of the exhausted sorbents produces an
output stream of the eluent containing the target pollutants, which should be
managed in a proper way [13]. However, few studies have addressed the
management of the spent desorption solutions. According to Gómez-Pastora
et al.
 [13], there are three main alternatives for handling these effluents: (i)
the recovery of the desorbed species from the eluent solutions for reuse, (ii)
the degradation of the pollutants by destructive technologies, and (iii) the
disposal of the solution after its treatment using solidification/stabilization
process. In the case of heavy metals, the recovery and purification processes
could be a promising alternative for those materials with relatively high
market prices such as copper, palladium, nickel and platinum [13].
10.6 Conclusions and Future
PerspectiveNanotechnology can provide novel materials, such as magnetic
nanocomposites and nanogels, without standing sorption properties for facing
water pollution by heavy metals. It is evident that magnetic nanocomposites
and nanogels are a promising and versatile alternative to conventional
sorbents for water treatment. It is important to note that the maximum
sorption capacities reported in this chapter provide an idea about the
effectiveness of these sorbents and its potential applications for real-life
systems. However, the research of these novel materials should be focused on
the analysis and study of multicomponent systems to establish its feasibility
for treating real municipal and industrial wastewaters, which are usually
complex mixtures of several pollutants. In addition, there is a lack of
information about regeneration and reusability, nanoparticle’s life cycle,
release of metal ions, final disposal of pollutant-loaded nanoparticles, and
their impact and ecotoxicity on the ecosystems. A proper study of these
topics is fundamental to consolidate the application of nanomaterials in water
treatment and purification.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the support provided by CONACyT, Tecnológico
Nacional de México, and Instituto Tecnológico de Aguascalientes.
References
1. Z. Karimi, L. Karimi, and H. Shokrollahi, Nano-magnetic particles used in
biomedicine: Core and coating materials, 
Materials Science and Engineering
C,
 33, 2465–2475, 2013.
2. P. Xu, G.M. Zeng, D.L. Huang, C.L. Feng, S. Hu, M.H. Zhao, C. Lai, Z.
Wei, C. Huang, G.X. Xie, and Z.F. Liu, Use for iron oxide nanomaterials in
wastewater treatment: A review, 
Science of the Total Environment,
 424, 1–
10, 2012.
3. J. Trujillo-Reyes, J.R. Peralta-Videa, and J.L. Gardea-Torresdey,
Supported and unsupported nanomaterials for water and soil remediation: Arethey a useful solution for worldwide pollution?, 
Journal of Hazardous
Materials,
 280, 487–503, 2014.
4. M. Hua, S. Zhang, B. Pan, W. Zhang, L. Lv, and Q. Zhang, Heavy metal
removal from water/wastewater by nanosized metal oxides: A review,
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 211–212, 317–331, 2012.
5. G.Z. Kyzas, and K.A. Matis, Nanoadsorbents for pollutant’s removal: A
review, 
Journal of Molecular Liquids,
 203, 159–168, 2015.
6. F. Zhao, W.Z. Tang, D. Zhao, Y. Meng, D. Yin, and M. Sillanpää,
Adsorption kinetics, isotherms and mechanisms of Cd(II), Pb(II), Co(II) and
Ni(II) by a modified magnetic polyacrylamide microcomposite adsorbent,
Journal of Water Process Engineering,
 4, 47–57, 2014.
7. S. Thatai, P. Khurana, J. Boken, S. Prasad, and D. Kumar, Nanoparticles
and core-shell nanocomposite based new generation water remediation
materials and analytical techniques: A review, 
Microchemical Journal,
 116,
62–76, 2014.
8. X. Qu, P.J.J. Alvarez, and Q. Li, Applications of nanotechnology in water
and wastewater treatment, 
Water Research,
 47, 3931–3946, 2013.
9. E.S. Gil, and S.M. Hudson, Stimuli-responsive polymers and their
bioconjugates, 
Progress in Polymer Science,
 29, 1173–1222, 2004.
10. L.G. Guerrero-Ramírez, S.M. Nuño-Donlucas, L.C. Cesteros, and I.
Katime, Smart copolymeric nanohydrogels: Synthesis, characterization and
properties, 
Materials Chemistry and Physics,
 112, 1088–1092, 2008.
11. L. Corrales-Picos, A. Claveríe-Licea, and K.F. Arndt, Bisensitive core-
shell nanohydrogels by e-Beam irradiation of micelles, 
Reactive &
Functional Polymers
, 75, 31–40, 2014.
12. L. Carlos, F.S.G. Einschlang, M.C. Gonzalez, and D.O. Mártire,
Applications of Magnetite Nanoparticles for Heavy Metal removal from
Wastewater, 
INTECH,
 2013.
13. J. Pastora-Gómez, E. Bringas, and I. Ortiz, Recent progress and future
challenges on the use of high performance magnetic nano-adsorbents in
environmental applications, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 256, 187–204,
2014.
14. S. Chowdhury, and R. Balasubramanian, Recent advances in the use ofgraphene-family nanoadsorbents for removal of toxic pollutants from
wastewater, 
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science,
 204, 35–56, 2014.
15. M.E. Mahmoud, M.S. Abdelwahab, and E.M. Fathallah, Design of novel
nanosorbents- based on nano-magnetic iron oxide-bound-nano-silicon oxide-
immobilized-triethylenetetramine for implementation in water treatment of
heavy metals, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 223, 318–327, 2013.
16. Y.F. Lin, H.W. Chen, P.S. Chien, C.S. Chiou, and C.C. Liu, Application
of bifunctional magnetic adsorbent to adsorb metal cations and anionic dyes
in aqueous solution, 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 185, 1124–1130, 2011.
17. R. Galindo, N. Menendez, P. Crespo, V. Velasco, Bomati-O. Miguel, D.
Fernández-Díaz, and P. Herrasti, Comparison of different methodologies for
obtaining nickel nanoferrites, 
Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials,
361, 118–125, 2014.
18. J. Park, K. An, Y. Hwang, J.G. Park, H.J. Noh, J.Y. Kim, J.H. Park, N.M.
Hwang, and T. Hyeon, Ultra-large scale syntheses of monodisperse
nanocrystals, 
Nature materials,
 3, 891–895, 2004.
19. S. Laurent, and M. Mahmoudi, Superparamagnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles: Promises for diagnosis and treatment of cancer, 
International
Journal of Molecular Epidemiology and Genetics,
 2, 367–390, 2011.
20. S. Kango, S. Kalia, A. Celli, J. Njuguna, Y. Habibi, and R. Kumar,
Surface modification of inorganic nanoparticles for development of organic-
inorganic nanocomposites-A review, 
Progress in polymer Science,
 38, 1232–
1261, 2013.
21. R. Devi, M. Doble, and R. Verma, Nanomaterials for early detection of
cancer biomarker with special emphasis on gold nanoparticles in
immunoassays/sensors, 
Biosensors and Bioelectronics,
 68, 688–698, 2015.
22. M. Gawande, M. Monga, R. Zboril, and R.K. Sharma, Silica-decorated
magnetic nanocomposites for catalytic applications-Review, 
Coordination
Chemistry Reviews,
 288, 118–143, 2015.
23. E. Peng, F. Wang, and J. Xue, Nanostructured magnetic nanocomposites
as MRI contrast agents-Review Article, 
Journal of Materials Chemistry B,
 3,
2241–2276, 2015.
24. C. Buzea, I.I. Pacheco, and K. Robbie, Nanomaterials and nanoparticles:sources and toxicity, 
Biointerfaces,
 2, MR17-MR71, 2007.
25. M.D. Moya-Ortega, C. Lorenzo-Alvarez, A. Concheiro, and T. Loftsson,
Cyclodextrin-based nanogels for pharmaceutical and biomedical applications,
International Journal of Pharmaceutics,
 428, 152–163, 2012.
26. L. Jiang, and P. Liu, Covalently crosslinked fly ash/poly(acrylic acid-co-
acrylamide) composite microgels as novel magnetic selective adsorbent for
Pb
2+
 ion, 
Journal of Colloid and interface Science,
 426, 64–71, 2014.
27. N. Sahiner, Hydrogel nanonetworks with functional core–shell structure,
European Polymer Journal,
 43, 1709–1717, 2007.
28. F.A. Cupaioli, F.A. Zucca, D. Boraschi, and L. Zecca, Engineered
nanoparticles. How brain friendly is this new guest?, 
Progress in
Neurobiology,
 119–120, 20–38, 2014.
29. M. Shojai-Sadat, M-T. Khorasani, E. Khoshdargi-Dinpanah, and A.
Jamashidi, Synthesis methods for nanosized hydroxyapatite with diverse
structures, 
Acta Biomaterialia,
 9, 7591–7621, 2013.
30. R.M. Mohamed, and E.S. Aazam, Novel Ag/YVO
4
 nanoparticles
prepared by a hydrothermal method for photocatalytic degradation of
methylene-blue dye, 
Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry,
 20,
4377–4381, 2014.
31. I. Smolkova, N. Kazantseva, H. Parmar, V. Babayan, P. Smolka, and P.
Saha, Correlation between coprecipitation reaction course of magneto-
structural properties of iron oxide particles, 
Materials Chemistry and Physics,
155, 178–190, 2015.
32. D. Ramimoghadam, S. Bagheri, and S.B.A. Hamid, Progress in
electrochemical synthesis of magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles
, Journal of
Magnetism and Magnetic Materials,
 368, 207–229, 2014.
33. D. Maity, S. Choo, J. Yi, J. Ding, and J. Xue, Synthesis of magnetite
nanoparticles via a solvent-free thermal decomposition route, 
Journal of
Magnetism and Magnetic Materials,
 321, 1256–1259, 2009.
34. Z. Kozakova, I. Kuritka, P. Bazant, M. Pastorek, and V. Babayan,
Magnetic needle-like iron oxide particles prepared by microwave-assisted
thermal decomposition technique, 
Materials Letters,
 138, 116–119, 2015.
35. M.A. Malik, M. Wani, and M. Hashim, Microemulsion method: A novelroute to synthesize organic and inorganic nanomaterials, 
Arabian Journal of
Chemistry,
 5, 397–417, 2012.
36. M. Munoz, Z. de Pedro, A.J. Casas, and J.J. Rodriguez, Preparation of
magnetic-based catalysts and their application in heterogeneous oxidation –
A review, 
Applied Catalysis B: Environmental,
 176–177, 249–265, 2015.
37. J. Wang, P. Zhenmeng, Y. Huang, and Q. Chen, Growth of magnetite
nanorods along its easy-magnetization axis of [1 1 0], 
Journal of Crystal
Growth,
 263, 616–619, 2004.
38. L. Weng, L. Zhang, D. Ruan, L. Shi, and J. Xu, Thermal gelation of
cellulose in a NaOH/thiourea aqueous solution, 
Langmuir
, 20, 2086–2093,
2004.
39. J.K. Oh, D. Lee, and J. Park, Biopolymer-based microgels/nanogels for
drug delivery applications, 
Progress in Polymer Science,
 34, 1261–1282,
2009a.
40. J. Oh, S. Bencherif, and K. Matyjaszewski, Atom transfer radical
polymerization in inverse miniemulsion: A versatile route toward preparation
and functionalization of microgels/nanogels for targeted drug delivery
applications, 
Polymer
, 50, 4407–4423, 2009b.
41. C. Chang, and L. Zhang, Cellulose-based hydrogels: Present status and
application prospects-Review, 
Carbohydrate Polymers,
 84, 40–53, 2011.
42. J.C. An, Synthesis of the combined inter- and intra-crosslinked
nanohydrogels by e-beam ionizing radiation, 
Journal of Industrial and
Engineering Chemistry,
 16, 657–661, 2010.
43. Y. Gong, M. Fan, F. Gao, J. Hong, S. Liu, S. Luo, J. Yu, and J. Huang,
Preparation and characterization of amino-functionalized magnetic nanogels
via
 photopolymerization for MRI applications, 
Colloids and Surfaces B:
Biointerfaces,
 71, 243–247, 2009.
44. N. Ji, L. Ping-Jiang, D. Huan, and P. Cheng-Hong, Progress on click
chemistry and its application in chemical sensors, 
Chinese Journal of
analytical chemistry,
 43, 609–617, 2015.
45. V.P. Mahida, and M.P. Patel, Removal of some most hazardous cationic
dyes using novel poly (NIPAAm/AA/N-allylisatin) nanohydrogel, 
Arabian
Journal of Chemistry,
 In press, 2015.46. Y. Wang, Y. He, Q. Lai, and M. Fan, Review of the progress in preparing
nano TiO
2
: An important environmental engineering material, 
Journal of
Environmental Sciences,
 26, 2139–2177, 2014.
47. S.K.H. Gulrez, S. Assaf-Al, and G. Phillips, Analysis and Modeling to
Technology Applications, 
INTECH,
 2011.
48. E.S. Dragan, Design and applications of interpenetrating polymer
network hydrogels. A review, 
Chemical Engineering Journal
, 243, 572–590,
2014.
49. P. Krsko, and M. Libera, Biointeractive hydrogels, 
Materials Today,
 8,
36–44, 2005.
50. S.C.N. Tang, and I.M.C. Lo, Magnetic nanoparticles: Essential factors for
sustainable environmental applications, 
Water Research
, 47, 2613–2632,
2013.
51. A.M. Díez-Pascual, M. Fatou-Gómez, F. Ania, and A. Flores,
Nanoindentation in polymer nanocomposites, 
Progress in Materials Science,
67, 1–94, 2015.
52. X. Luo, and L. Zhang, High effective adsorption of organic dyes on
magnetic cellulose beadsentrapping activated carbon, 
Journal of Hazardous
Materials,
 171, 340–347, 2009.
53. N.E. Valderruten, J.D. Valverde, F. Zuluaga, and E. Durántez-Ruiz,
Synthesis and characterization of chitosan hydrogels cross-linked with
dicarboxylic acids, 
Reactive & Functional Polymers
, 84, 21–28, 2014.
54. M.K. Jaiswal, R. Banerjee, P. Pradhan, and D. Bahadura, Thermal
behavior of magnetically modalized poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)-chitosan
based nanohydrogel, 
Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces,
 81, 185–194,
2010.
55. M.R. Guilherme, F.A. Aouada, A.R. Fajardo, A.F. Martins, A.T. Paulino,
M.F.T. Davi, A.F. Rubira, and E.C. Muniz, Superabsorbent hydrogels based
on polysaccharides for application in agriculture as soil conditioner and
nutrient carrier: A review, 
European Polymer Journal,
 In press, 2015.
56. Y. Zheng, and A. Wang, Superadsorbent with three-dimensional
networks: From bulk hydrogel to granular hydrogel, 
European Polymer
Journal
, In press, 2015.57. S. Li, X. Liu, W. Huang, W. Li, X. Xia, and S. Yan, Magnetically
assisted removal and separation of cationic dyes from aqueous solution by
magnetic nanocomposite hydrogels, 
Polymer Advanced Technology,
 22,
2439–2447, 2011.
58. A.K. Meena, G.K. Mishra, P.K. Rai, C. Rajagopal, and P.N. Nagar,
Removal of heavy metal ions from aqueous solutions using carbon aerogel as
an adsorbent, 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 B122, 161–170, 2005.
59. Ö. Gercel, and H. Gercel, Adsorption of lead (II) ions from aqueous
solutions by activated carbon prepared from biomass plant material of
euphorbia rigida, Chemical Engineering Journal
, 132, 289–297, 2007.
60. Q. Fan, D. Shao, Y. Lu, W. Wu, and X. Wang, Effect of pH, ionic
strength, temperature and humic substances on the sorption of Ni(II) to Na–
attapulgite, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 150, 188–195, 2009.
61. D.H.K. Reddy, and S.M. Lee, Application of magnetic chitosan
composites foe the removal of toxic metal and dyes from aqueous solutions,
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science
, 201–202, 68–93, 2013.
62. P.H. Towler, J.D. Smith, and D.R. Dixon, Magnetic recovery of radium,
lead and polonium from seawater samples after preconcentration on a
magnetic adsorbent of manganese dioxide coated magnetite, 
Analytica
Chimica Acta
, 328, 53–59, 1996.
63. M. Arshadi, Manganese chloride nanoparticles: A practical adsorbent for
the sequestration of Hg(II) ions from aqueous solution, 
Chemical
Engineering Journal,
 259, 170–182, 2015.
64. M. Arshadi, A.R. Faraji, and M.J. Amiri, Modification of aluminum-
silicate nanoparticles by melamine-based dendrimer L-cysteine methyl esters
for adsorptive characteristic of Hg(II) ions from the synthetic and 
Persian
Gulf
 water, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 266, 345–355, 2015.
65. Y.C. Chang, and D.H. Chen, Preparation and adsorption properties of
monodisperse chitosan-bound Fe
3
O
4
 magnetic nanoparticles for removal of
Cu(II) ions, 
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science,
 283, 446–451, 2005.
66. L. Zhou, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, and Q. Huang, Carboxymethyl Chitosan-
Fe
3
O
4
 Nanoparticles: Preparation and Adsorption Behavior toward Zn
2+
Ions, 
Acta Physico-Chimica Sinica
, 22, 1342–1346, 2006.67. J. Wang, S. Zheng, Y. Shao, J. Liu, Z. Xu, and D. Zhu, Amino-
functionalized Fe
3
O
4
@SiO
2
 core-shell magnetic nanomaterial as a novel
adsorbent for aqueous heavy metals removal
, Journal of Colloid and
Interface Science,
 349, 293–299, 2010.
68. Y. Tan, M. Chen, and Y. Hao, High efficient removal of Pb (II) by
amino-functionalized Fe
3
O
4
 magnetic nano-particles, 
Chemical Engineering
Journal,
 191, 104–111, 2012.
69. S. Pan, H. Shen, Q. Xu, J. Luo, and M. Hu, Surface mercapto engineered
magnetic Fe
3
O
4
 nanoadsorbent for the removal of mercury from aqueous
solutions, 
Journal of colloid Interface Science,
 365, 204–212, 2012.
70. S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, Q. Xu, H. Xiao, X. Wang, H. Xu, and J.
Zhou, Thiol modified Fe
3
O
4
@SiO
2
 as a robust, high effective, and recycling
magnetic sorbent for mercury removal, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 226,
30–38, 2013.
71. Y. Ren, H.A. Abbood, F. He, H. Peng, and K. Huang, Magnetic EDTA-
modified chitosan/SiO
2
/Fe
3
O
4
 adsorbent: Preparation, characterization, and
application in heavy metal adsorption, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 226,
300–3011, 2013.
72. A.Z.M. Badruddoza, Z.B.Z. Shawon, M.T. Rahman, K.W. Hao, K.
Hidajat, and M.S. Uddin, Ionically modified magnetic nanomaterials for
arsenic and chromium removal from water, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
225, 607–615, 2013.
73. T. Basu, and U.C. Ghosh, Nano-structured iron(III)-cerium(IV) mixed
oxide: Synthesis, characterization and arsenic sorption kinetics in the
presence of co-existing ions aiming to apply for high arsenic groundwater
treatment, 
Applied Surface Science,
 283, 471–481, 2013.
74. H.J. Cui, J.K. Cai, H. Zhao, B. Yuan, C.L. Ai, and M.L. Fu, Fabrication
of magnetic porous Fe-Mn binary oxide nanowires with superior capability
for removal of As(III) from water, 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 279, 26–
31, 2014.
75. A. Dey, R. Singh, and M.K. Purkait, Cobalt ferrite nanoparticles
aggregated schwertmannite: A novel adsorbent for the efficient removal of
arsenic, 
Journal of Water process Engineering,
 3, 1–9, 2014.76. L. Önnby, P.S. Kumar, K.G.V. Sigfridsson, O.F. Wendt, S. Carlson, and
H. Kirsebom, Improved arsenic(III) adsorption by Al
2
O
3
 nanoparticles and
H
2
O
2
: Evidence of oxidation to arsenic(V) from X-ray absorption
spectroscopy, 
Chemosphere,
 113, 151–157, 2014.
77. S. Bakhshayesh, and H. Dehghani, Synthesis of magnetite-porphyrin
nanocomposite and its application as a novel magnetic adsorbent for
removing heavy cations, 
Materials Research Bulletin
, 48, 2614–2624, 2013.
78. N. Ballav, H.J. Choi, S.B. Mishra, and A. Maity, Synthesis,
characterization of Fe
3
O
4
@glycine doped polypyrrole magnetic
nanocomposites and their potencial performance remove toxic Cr(VI),
Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry,
 20, 4085–4093, 2014.
79. Y. Cantu, A. Remes, A. Reyna, D. Martinez, J. Villarreal, H. Ramos, S.
Trevino, C. Tamez, A. Martinez, T. Eubanks, and J.G. Parsons,
Thermodynamics, kinetics, and activation energy studies of the sorption of
chromium(III) and chromium(VI) to a Mn
3
O
4
 nanomaterial, 
Chemical
Engineering Journal,
 254, 374–383, 2014.
80. C. Shan, Z. Ma, M. Tong, and J. Ni, Removal of Hg(II) by poly(1-
vinylimidazole)-grafted Fe
3
O
2
@SiO
2
 magnetic nanoparticles, 
Water
Research,
 69, 252–260, 2015.
81. S.A. Baig, J. Zhu, N. Muhammad, T. Sheng, and X. Xu, Effect of
synthesis methods on magnetic Kans grass biochar for enhanced As(III, V)
adsorption from aqueous solutions, 
Biomass and Bioenergy,
 71, 299–310,
2014.
82. F. Ge, M.M. Li, H. Ye, and B.X. Zhao, Effective removal of heavy metal
ions Cd
2+
, Zn
2+
, Pb
2+
, Cu
2+
 from aqueous solution by polymer-modified
magnetic nanoparticles, 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 211–212, 366–372,
2012.
83. V.K. Gupta, and A. Nayak, Cadmium removal and recovery from
aqueous solutions by novel adsorbents prepared from orange peel and Fe
2
O
3
nanoparticles, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 180, 81–90, 2012.
84. K. Kalantari, M.B. Ahmad, H.R.F. Masoumi, K. Shameli, M. Basri, and
R. Khandanlou, Rapid and high capacity adsorption of heavy metals byFe
3
O
4
/montmorillonite nanocomposite using response surface methodology:
Preparation, characterization, optimization, equilibrium isotherms, and
adsorption kinetics study, 
Journal of the Taiwan Institute of Chemical
Engineers,
 000, 1–7, 2014.
85. A. Mahapatra, B.G. Mishra, and G. Hota, Electrospun Fe
2
O
3
-Al
2
O
3
nanocomposite fibers as efficient adsorbent for removal of heavy metal ions
from aqueous solution, 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 258, 116–123, 2013.
86. S. Nasirimoghaddam, S. Zeinali, and S. Sabbaghi, Chitosan coated
magnetic nanoparticles as nano-adsorbent for efficient removal of mercury
contents from industrial aqueous and oily samples, 
Journal of Industrial and
Engineering Chemistry,
 27, 79–87, 2015.
87. C. Shan, Z. Ma, and M. Tong, Efficient removal of trace antimony(III)
through adsorption by hematite modified magnetic nanoparticles
, Journal of
Hazardous Materials,
 268, 229–236, 2014.
88. R.K. Sharma, A. Puri, Y. Monga, and A. Adholeya, Newly modified
silicabased magnetically driven nanoadsorbent: A sustainable and versatile
platform for efficient and selective recovery of cadmium from water and fly-
ash ameliorated soil, 
Separation and Purification Technology,
 127, 121–130,
2014.
89. D. Singh, R.K. Gautam, R. Kumar, B.K. Shukla, V. Shankar, and V.
Krishna, Citric acid coated magnetic nanoparticles: Synthesis,
characterization and application in removal of Cd(II) ions from aqueous
solution, 
Journal of Water Process Engineering,
 4, 233–241, 2014.
90. W. Tang, Y. Su, Q. Li, S. Gao, and J.K. Shang, Superparamagnetic
magnesium ferrite nanoadsorbent for effective arsenic (III,V) removal and
easy magnetic separation, 
Water Research,
 47 (2013b) 3624–3634.
91. X. Xin, Q. Wei, J. Yang, L. Yan, R. Feng, G. Chen, B. Du, and H. Li,
Highly efficient removal of heavy metal ions by amine-functionalized
mesoporous Fe
3
O
4
 nanoparticles, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 184, 132–
140, 2012.
92. N. Sahiner, and A.O. Yasar, The generation of desired functional groups
on poly(4-vinyl pyridine) particles by post-modification technique for
antimicrobial and environmental applications
, Journal of Colloid andInterface Science,
 402, 327–333, 2013.
93. M.E.S. Abdel-Raouf, M.A.R. Abdul-Raheim, A.F. El-Kafrawy, N.E.S.
Maysour, A.K. Ibraheim, and A.A. Abdel-Azim, PHEMA magnetic nanogels
for removal of Cu (II) ions from aqueous solution, 
International Journal of
Chemistry and Material Science,
 1, 036–044, 2013.
94. M.M. Lakouraj, F. Mojerlou, and E.N. Zare, Nanogel and
superparamagnetic nanocomposite based on sodium alginate for sorption of
heavy metal ions, 
Carbohydrate Polymers
, 106, 34–41, 2014.
95. N. Sahiner, O. Ozay, N. Aktas, D.A. Blake, and V.T. John, Arsenic (V)
removal with modifiable bulk and nano p(4-vinylpyridine)-based hydrogels:
The effect of hydrogel sizes and quaternization agents, 
Desalination,
 279,
344–352, 2011.
96. J. Hu, I.M.C. Lo, and G. Chen, Comparative study of various magnetic
nanoparticles for Cr(VI) removal, 
Separation and Purification Technology,
56, 249–256, 2007.
97. J. Hu, G. Chen, and I.M.C. Lo, Removal and recovery of Cr(VI) from
wastewater by maghemite nanoparticles, 
Water Research,
 39, 4528–4536,
2005.
98. M.A. Akl, A.A. Sarhan, K.R. Shoueir, and A.M. Atta, Application of
Crosslinked Ionic Poly(Vinyl Alcohol) Nanogel as Adsorbents for Water
Treatment
, Journal of Dispersion Science and Technology,
 34, 1399–1408,
2013.
99. J. Wang, F. Liu, and J. Wei, Enhanced adsorption properties of
interpenetrating polymer network hydrogels for heavy metal ion removal,
Polymer Bulletin,
 67, 1709–1720, 2011.Chapter 11
Role of Core–Shell Nanocomposites in
Heavy Metal Removal
Sheenam Thatai
1
, Parul Khurana
2
, and Dinesh Kumar
1
1
Department of Chemistry, Banasthali University, Rajasthan, Banasthali,
India
2
Department of Chemistry, K.C. College, University of Mumbai, Mumbai,
India
*Corresponding author:
 
dsbchoudhary2002@gmail.com
Abstract
Release of heavy metals ions like Cd
2+
, Zn
2+
, Cu
2+
 and Pb
2+
 into natural
environment has resulted in environmental problems. Rapid progress of
advanced nanocomposites material production provides attractive
possibilities for development of rapid, ultrasensitive and inexpensive methods
for water treatment. Relevant examples of nanocomposites-based chemical
sensors are like SiO
2
@Au, SiO
2
@Ag, Fe
3
O
4
@SiO
2
, Fe
3
O
4
@Au, etc. It
has been observed that these nanocomposites have a strong tendency for the
detection and removal of heavy metal ions from water due to their porous
network structure, surface polarity and high surface area. In this chapter, we
explore several strategies that have been developed for the simple, rapid and
sensitive detection of heavy metal ions in water.
Keywords:
 Heavy metal ions, environmental problem, nanocomposites, water
treatment, detection and removal11.1 Introduction
Water is an essential natural source which is considered to be abundantly
available. Its security has been threatened by a broad range of chemical
contaminants produced by industry and agriculture activities, which include
organic hydrocarbons, inorganic gases and especially toxic metals such as
Hg, Cr, Cd, As and Pb [1–4]. The contamination of water is a serious
worldwide threat to human health, which has become a challenge for the
scientists as well as analytical chemists [5, 6]. These heavy metals can cause
long-term damage to biological systems and can even disrupt biological
events at the cellular level with significant oxidative damage. Another cause
is due to uncontrolled discharge of waste, use of agricultural herbicides,
pesticides, insecticides and sewage disposal, which are also considered as
major contributors of contaminants [7, 8]. So, high salt concentration in
groundwater in many parts of the world makes it unsuitable for direct
consumption and in some cases due to naturally occurring hazardous
contaminants.
The very first factor is “Industrialization” in various countries without
proper measures to control the mineral waste leads to unwanted sewage of
effluents in soil as well as in water. Another factor is due to world’s
increasing population, water pollution becomes more complex and difficult to
remove. Even global climate change threatens to exacerbate water scarcity in
many areas. Water scarcity is being recognized as a present and future threat
to human activity and as a consequence, so water purification technologies
are gaining major worldwide attention as given below.Nanotechnology
 is one of the new technologies that refer to the
development of devices, structures as well as systems whose size varies from
1 to 100 nanometres (nm). Presently, this technology is estimated to be
influential in all fields of science and technology [9–11]. The term 
nano
originates etymologically from the Greek, and it means “
dwarf
”
.
 This
indicates physical dimensions that are in the range of one-billionth of a meter.
Nanotechnology
 has been identified as one of the most promising
technologies that could play an important role in electronics, structural
materials, textile, biology, aerospace, automobile, agriculture and water
purification [12–14] with the use of different materials as seen in 
Figure 11.1
.
Figure 11.1
 Represents the different type of materials used for synthesis of
nanomaterials [12].11.1.1 Types of Materials
Substantial research has been done, which shows improved performance over
many conventional technologies. Within the nanoscale length, the properties
of matter are sufficiently different from individual atoms or molecules and
even from bulk materials, so this study has been recognized as a new area
generally termed as Nanoscience [9, 10]. The controlled impact of
nanomaterials mainly depends on their optical, catalytic, physical and
chemical properties. Metal nanoparticles show excellent electronic, optical
and biological properties as a consequence of their dimensions [15, 16].
By harnessing these new properties, researchers have found that they can
develop materials, devices and systems that are superior to those in use today
as represented in 
Figure 11.2
 [17, 18]. Developments are being made to
improve the properties of nanomaterials and to find alternative precursors that
can give desirable properties on the materials, so 
nanotechnology
 is receiving
a lot of attention across the globe. Further, there has been of considerable
interest in utilizing “Green Chemistry Principles” to synthesize noble metal
nanoparticles with controlled size and morphology [19].
Figure 11.2
 Represents improved properties in nanomaterials with existing
technologies [17].Green chemistry is the design, development and implementation of
chemical products and processes to reduce the use and generation of
substances hazardous to human health and even to the environment [20].
Green nanotechnology utilizes naturally occurring molecules as reducing and
capping agents, which has provided an alternative pathway to synthesize
stable Nanoparticles (NPs). The use of environmentally friendly materials has
evoked enhanced interest in the recent years. For example, tea/catechin is the
most widely used active drug in the world and has high water solubility and
low toxicity. Selective detection and removal of toxic metal ions present in
the water or biological samples become increasingly important.
11.2 Core and Shell Material:
Synthesis and Properties
In the existing phase, nanocomposites have gained importance because
properties of the matrices can be easily enhanced by appropriately
incorporating low volumes of nanofillers (nanocores), i.e. core and shell
precursors. Depending on the geometry of fillers, the relative properties of
the resulting nanocomposites can be altered to meet the required
performance. The incorporation of nanoscale metal and metal-based particles
into inorganic and polymeric/organic matrices represents an attractive field of
research as compared to conventional phase-separated macrocomposites [21].
Due to the high surface areas of the nanofillers and their molecularlevel
interactions with the matrix, there is great interest in nanocomposites due tosignificant scientific questions relating to interfacial chemistry and physics as
well as their greatly enhanced practical properties [22]. The new composite
systems consist of a wide range of metal and semiconductor core materials
with an outer inert shell. It leads to the discovery of novel nanocomposites
with a broad range of applications in areas such as energy, environment, solar
cells and catalysts, tissue engineering, gene and drug delivery, photo-thermal
therapy, cell tracking and storage systems.
Among this broad area of nanometre-sized systems, iron oxide nanocores
have gained special attention because of their unique physical properties in
which their size, morphology, composition and surface chemistry can be
tailored to many biological and biomedical applications [23, 24]. These
nanocores possess unique magnetic properties that facilitate proton relaxation
within specific tissues, thus making them suitable contrast agents for
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [25, 26]. Even though iron oxide
nanoparticles are good magnetic materials, the cores are susceptible to
corrosion in the presence of water [27]. Fe
3
O
4
@SiO
2
 nanoparticles were
synthesized using Fe
3
O
4
 core and mesoporous silica shell by using anionic
surfactants [28].
Currently, there is an extensive development of monometallic nanoshells
with minor attention given to nanosystems consisting of bimetallic and
trimetallic alloy shells. Recent research in this area has shown that gold–
silver alloy nanoshells have additional biomedical applications (e.g. cancer
screening) because of their distinct optical properties ranging from visible to
the near-Infrared (IR) wavelength region.
Polymer nanocomposites are composite materials that consist of a polymer
matrix with well-dispersed nanofillers clearly observed in 
Figure 11.3
. These
polymer nanocomposites show improved properties including enhanced
mechanical properties at low loading of nanofillers, increased gas barrier
properties while retaining clarity, dimensional stability, etc. [29]. Epoxy
resins are used in many different applications in the automotive, construction
and aerospace industries for their appropriate material properties including
mechanical properties, thermal and chemical stability [29].
Figure 11.3
 Monometallic metal nanoparticles preparation inside a polymeric
matrix where green spheres represent the cations and the black ones areobtained after the reduction [28, 29].
Different nanocores can be obtained by a variety of synthetic routes such as
electrochemical methods, decomposition of organometallic precursors,
reduction of metal salts in the presence of suitable (monomeric or polymeric)
stabilizers or vapour deposition methods [30]. Sometimes, the presence of
stabilizers is required to prevent the agglomeration of nanoclusters by
providing a steric and electrostatic barrier between the particles. In addition,
the stabilizers play a crucial role in controlling both the size and shape of
nanoparticles as shown in the following.
Shells are useful and versatile imaging agents due to their large extinction
cross sections, spectral tunability, electromagnetic near field enhancement
and enhanced luminescence. Essential properties of nanomaterials are
function of their size and shapes [31]. Surfactants are equally important, since
not only it stabilizes the nanoparticles but also makes them compatible for
various applications [31, 32].
Several methods have been developed to fabricate core and shell and that is
broadly classified into two categories: bottom-up and top-down.
The bottom-up approaches can be further segmented into three classes:
i.
 Simultaneous fabrication, where both the core and the protective shell
formation takes place simultaneously,
ii.
 Sequential fabrication, where the core is fabricated followed by the
formation of a protective shell,
iii.
 Displacement reaction (redox) fabrication, wherein the protective
shell is fabricated through the displacement of surface atoms of the metal
core.
Further, 
ex situ
 and 
in situ
 approaches are also followed for the synthesis of
core and shell material. In the 
ex situ
 synthesis, NPs are dispersed after their
synthesis in a solid or liquid medium by using different mechanochemical
approaches. The problem is that in these cases, the success of the stabilization
is limited by the possibility of re-aggregation of the MNPs along the time. On
another way, by the 
in situ
 synthesis, NPs are grown directly in the stabilizer
medium yielding a material that can be directly used for an expected purpose.
For this reason, 
in situ
 approaches are getting much attention because of their
technological advantages.
Due to decrease in the scale of the materials, their behaviour changes in a
remarkable form. In fact, the reduction of the bulk materials to a nanometric
size induces size-dependant effects resultant from the following:
An increase in the surface–volume ratio gives to an increase in the total
surface area and in turn entities on the surface of the material,
Changes in the electronic structure of the entities forming the
nanoparticles and in the nanoparticles as whole,
Changes in the interatomic distances of the entities, which are forming
the nanoparticles and presence of defects,
Confinement and quantic effects.11.3 Nanocomposites Material:
Synthesis and Properties
Nanoshells constitute a special class of nanocomposite materials have gained
considerable attention, which is obtained by thin coatings deposited on
nanofillers of different material [33]. Nanocomposite materials are highly
functional material with novel properties quite different than either of the
core or of the shell material [33, 34]. They show modified and enhanced
properties than their single component counterparts of the same size.
Therefore, nanocomposites are preferred over nanoparticles.
Nanocomposites consist of concentric particles, in which particles of one
material are coated with a thin layer of another material using specialized
procedures as clearly observed in 
Figure 11.4
 [33–35]. The properties can be
altered by altering the core to shell ratio. With new emerging techniques the
nanostructures in desired shape, size and morphology can be synthesized [36,
37]. Properties of shell materials (metal or semiconductor) having thickness
in nanometres, become important when they are coated on dielectric cores to
achieve higher surface area. Sometimes, these are also referred as core shell
or core–shell particles [36–38]. Thicker shells can also be prepared, but their
synthesis is restricted mainly to achieve some specific goal, such as providing
thermal stability to core particles. As it is not possible to synthesize all the
materials in desired morphologies, synthesis of nanoshells can be useful for
creating novel materials with different morphologies. These materials can be
of economic interest also, as precious materials can be deposited on
inexpensive cores. By doing so, expensive material is required in lesser
amount than usual. These particles are synthesized for a variety of purposes
like providing chemical stability to colloids enhancing luminescence
properties, engineering band structures, biosensors drug delivery [39, 40],
etc.
Figure 11.4
 Represents core-shell nanocomposite.Usually, dielectric materials such as silica and polystyrene are commonly
used as core because they are highly stable. They are chemically inert and
water soluble; therefore, they can be useful in biological applications.
Nanoshell particles can be synthesized in a variety of combinations such as
(core–shell) dielectric–metal, dielectric–semiconductor, dielectric–dielectric,
semiconductor–metal, metal–metal, semiconductor–semiconductor,
semiconductor–dielectric, metal–dielectric, and dye–dielectric [41–43].
Core–shell particles can be assembled and further utilized for creation of
another class of novel materials like colloidal crystal or quantum bubbles. It
is indeed possible to create unique core–shell structures having multishells.
Multishell particles can be visualized as core particles having a number of
shells around them as observed in 
Figure 11.5
. Core particles can be coated
with a shell to obtain a single nano shell. Further, these combinations of core
and shell can be repeated again to get multishells. By choosing different
combinations of core and shell, these structures show tunable optical
properties from the visible to infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum.
These optical phenomena are in large part due to a resonance phenomenon
known as surface plasmon resonance.
Figure 11.5
 Bimetallic core-shell metal nanoparticles preparation. Black
spheres represents metal nanoparticles obtained after reduction cycle, blue
spheres M
2+
 cations and the pink ones are the final core-shell metalnanocomposites.
11.4 Nanocomposite Materials for
Water Decontamination Application
Most interactions in decontamination processes occur at the interface
between the materials and pollutants. Due to highly accessible surface area,
nanomaterials have become highly promising candidates for decontamination
processes and have therefore been investigated widely. Compared to
materials at large scales, nanomaterials offer the following advantages.
1.
 
Better decontamination efficiency:
 Nanomaterials have more active
sites on their surfaces, including at corners, edges and dislocations which
helps to complete with the decontamination process at levels of
efficiency unobserved from the bulk materials. For example, the reaction
of chloroethyl ethyl sulphide with microcrystalline MgO does not occur,
but its decomposition by nanocrystalline MgO can be readily achieved
and observed.
2.
 
Faster decontamination rates:
 The reaction rate of the interaction is
proportional to the contact area, so nanomaterials are expected to show
faster decontamination rate than bulk materials. For example, nanoporous
MnO
2
 can destroy sulphur mustard three times faster than bulk materials.
Similarly, ZnO nanoparticles react with sarin six times faster than does
bulk ZnO.
3.
 
Enable design for multiple applications:
 Nanocomposite materials
meet the requirements for different applications, such as forming
composite materials with polymers as filter or casting films on thesurface as a protective coating. Furthermore, nanomaterials are not
generally corrosive as if we compare with conventional materials, which
are used in decontamination processes. Therefore, nanomaterials should
be applicable to all kinds of surfaces, including textiles, paper, skin,
metal and sensitive equipment. Furthermore, as these materials generally
are in the solid form, they can be easily cleaned up. Although
nanomaterials are used primarily as decontamination agents, the
colorimetric/spectroscopic changes during the decontamination process
can be utilized simultaneously in sensing applications as well.
So, nanocomposite material behaves as nanosensor built on the atomic
scale based in measurements of nanometres. There are different types of
nanosensors and even a number of ways to manufacture them as discussed
earlier. Two groups of receptor molecules form the majority of nanosensors,
which includes (a) affinity based and (b) catalytic based. Recently, water
quality has been associated with the development index of society. A number
of chemical and biological contaminants have endangered the quality of
drinking water.
Metal ion sensors are of considerable current interest for a broad range of
biological and environmental applications. The application of noble metal
nanoparticle-based chemistry for drinking water purification is summarized
in the following for major type of contaminants, i.e. heavy metals. It has been
increasingly recognized that certain metal ions such as Zn
2+
 are essential
nutrients to maintain regular cell functions [44]. On the other hand, the
chronic and acute exposure to toxic heavy metal ions such as Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
 and
Hg
2+
 can exert direct impact on human health and are linked to major human
diseases such as cancer and cardiovascular disease [45, 46]. Unlike organic
contaminants, heavy metals are not biodegradable and tend to accumulate in
living organisms and many heavy metal ions are known to be toxic or
carcinogenic. Exposure to heavy metals, even at trace level, is believed to be
a risk for human beings [46, 47].
Removal of heavy metal ions and micropollutants from aqueous streams
using nanomaterials continues to be extensively researched. The focus is
primarily on modifications to improve the detection efficiency and the
nanoparticle stability represented in 
Figure 11.6
. Currently, the most commonmethods to detect heavy metal ions include atomic absorption spectrometry
[48] and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry [49]; however, these
instrumentally intensive methods only measure the total metal ion content
and often require extensive sample preparation [50].
Figure 11.6
 Representation of nanoparticle system.
Thus, a simple and an inexpensive method that not only detects but also
quantifies heavy metal ions are desirable for real-time monitoring of
environmental, biological and industrial samples. Among various detection
techniques, optical detections (via colorimetric changes) are the most
convenient methods due to the simplicity and low detection limit.
Considerable efforts have been devoted to the development of fluorescent
and colorimetric sensors, which could selectively detect metal ions.
11.5 Stability of Metal
Nanoparticles and NanocompositesMaterial
Nanoparticles have a tendency to lower their very high surface energy, which
is the origin of their thermodynamic instability. Bare nanoparticles tend to
stabilize themselves either by sorption of molecules from the surroundings or
by lowering the surface area through coagulation and agglomeration. In order
to avoid this, nanoparticles have to be stabilized. In this aspect, two
stabilization methods can be achieved:
Electrostatic stabilization
Steric stabilization
When two particles are far apart or the distance between the surfaces of two
particles is larger than the combined thickness of two electric double layers of
two particles, there would be no overlap of diffusion double layers, and thus
there would be no interaction between two particles but when two particles
move closer and the two electric double layers overlap, a repulsion force is
developed. As the distance reduces, the repulsion increases and reaches the
maximum when the distance between two particle surfaces equals the
distance between the repulsive barrier and the surface as shown in 
Figure
11.7
. The 
DLVO
 (Derjaguin, Landau, Venvey and Overbeek) theory has been
widely applied in practice to demonstrate the small particle stability in
diffusive medium [78]. The DLVO theory describes the interaction between
two particles in dispersion as the potential combination of van der Waals’
attraction and repulsion magnetic field. The two opposite potentials van der
Waals attracttion and electrostatic repulsion are function of distance from the
surface of a spherical particle.
Figure 11.7
 Shows the theory works in explaining the interactions.Table 11.1
 Summary of toxicity study obtained by different researchers.
Toxicity study
Nanomaterial
Ref.
Colorimetric detection of Hg
2+
 and Pb
2+
 ions
Au NPs
[51]
Detection of Hg
2+
 stabilized with a dithia–diaza ligand
Au NPs
[52]
Colorimetric method for the determination of Pb
2+
 ions
Au NPs
[53]
Colorimetric sensors for the detection of Co
2+
 ions
Au NPs
[54]
Colorimetric sensing of Hg
2+
 ion
Ag NPs
[55]
Removal of Cu
2+
 and Cr
6+
 ions
Fe
3
O
4
 NPs
[56]
For selective detection of Cd
2+
 ions
Al
2
O
3
 NPs
[57]
Sensitive detection of Hg
2+
 ions
Au NPs
[58]
Sensitive and selective detection of Cd
2+
 ions
Au NPs
[59]
Sensing of Pb
2+
 ions
Au NPs
[60]
Detection of Hg
2+
 ions
Ag NPs
[61]
Simple and sensitive detection method for Cr
6+
 ions
CdTe QDs
[62]
Colorimetric sensors for the detection of Co
2+
 ions
Au NPs
[63]
Removal of heavy metal ions such as Hg
2+
, Hg
+
, Pb
2+
 and Cd
2+
 ions
Ag NPs
[64]
Highly sensitive detection of Hg
2+
 ions
Au QDs
[65]
Sensitive detection and removal of Hg
2+
 ions
Fe
3
O
4
 NPs
[66]Colorimetric detection of Pb
2+
 ions
Au NPs
[67]
Colorimetric detection method of Mn
2+
 ions
Ag NPs
[68]
Selective detection of Hg
2+
 ions
Au NPs
[69]
Colorimetric detection method of Cu
2+
 ions
Ag NPs
[70]
Selective detection of Hg
2+
 ions
Modified SiO
2
[71]
Detection of Hg
2+
 and F
−
 ions
Au@CdTe
[72]
Colorimetric detection method of trace Cr
6+
 ions
Ag@Au
[73]
Highly selective detection for Zn
2+
 ions
Fe
3
O
4
@SiO
2
[74]
Sensing of mercury and methylmercury ions
Fe
3
O
4
@SiO
2
[75]
For sensitive sensing of Cu
2+
 ions
Fe
3
O
4
@C@CdTe
[76]
Interactions and detection of heavy metal ions such as Hg
2+
, Pb
2+
 and
Cu
2+
 ions
CdTe/ZnO@SiO
2
[77]
Steric stabilization,
 also called 
polymeric stabilization,
 has been method
widely in stabilization of colloidal solution. Polymeric stabilization offers an
additional advantage in the synthesis of nanoparticles, particularly when
narrow size distribution is required. This process occurs when the metal
particle is covered with a layer of a voluminous material (polymer).
Polymeric layer absorbed on the surface of nanoparticles serves as a diffusion
barrier, resulting in a diffusion-limited growth in the subsequent growth of
nuclei and keep up the metal centres separated from each other, preventing
possible 
agglomeration.
 In this process, donor ligands such as P, N and S are
used. Another type of stabilization also used within the steric category is by
trapping of nanoparticles in a polymeric material poly(vinyl pyrrolidone)
(PVP), poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) and poly(methyl vinyl ether) (PMVE).
Metal nanoparticles exhibit strong absorption features or bands in the UV–
Visible regions of the electromagnetic spectrum due to the collective
electronic interactions between metal atoms and electrons [78]. The exact
wavelength and intensity of the surface plasmon (SP) band provide important
insight concerning particle size, shape, concentration and dielectric medium
properties. The unique surface plasmon characteristics of nanoparticles have
resulted in their use as active substrates for 
surface-enhanced Raman
scattering (SERS)
 and as diagnostic agents in ultrasensitive biological assays[79].
Gold nanoparticles
 (GNPs) have attracted a wide range of interest because
of increasing applications in sensors, biosensors and many emerging areas of
nanotechnology. Surface plasmon resonance bands of GNPs originate
because of the coherent excitation of free conduction electrons on
nanoparticle surfaces as electromagnetic waves interact with nanoparticle
surfaces, and the wavelengths of these bands depend on size, shape and
interparticle dipole interactions [80]. Transverse absorption bands occur
because of coherent electronic oscillation along the short axis and
longitudinal bands result from electronic oscillation along the long axis.
Similarly, silicon dioxide is the most popular semiconducting material and
most abundant substance in the Earth’s crust. SiO
2
 is the component of many
rocks, minerals, precious and semi-precious stones. In addition to amorphous
forms, silica has various crystalline forms, namely quartz and cristobalite or
tridymite [81, 82]. Silica is stable in water and at elevated temperatures. One
of the advantages of SiO
2
, especially for optical applications, is its
transparency to electromagnetic radiation in wavelength range from 300 to
800 nm. Silica nanoparticles in the form of precipitated amorphous silica,
sols, colloids and pyrogenic silica are used as additives to polymers and
rubbers in order to improve their mechanical properties, additives to liquid
phases for stabilization of suspensions [83] and also as fillers in a wide range
of polymer products, including dental materials. Silica nanoparticles are also
used for the synthesis of various nanoshells as depicted in 
Figure 11.8
,
consisting of a solid siliceous core and a nanoshell or vice versa.
Figure 11.8
 Silica-coating strategies [83].Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge Prof. Aditya Shastri, Vice-Chancellor
(Banathali Vidyapith), Banasthali. ST and PK would like to thank Dinesh
Kumar and Surendra Prasad for their support and encouragement. They are
also thankful to the University Grant Commission (UGC), New Delhi.
References
1. B. Nowack, and T. Bucheli, Occurrence, behavior and effects of
nanoparticles in the environment, 
Environmental Pollution,
 150, 5–22, 2007.
2. L. Järup, Hazards of heavy metal contamination, 
British Medical Bulletin,
68, 167–182, 2003.3. R. Singh, N. Gautam, and R. Gupta, Heavy metals and living systems: An
overview, 
Indian Journal of Pharmacology,
 43, 246–253, 2011.
4. S. Shirahata, T. Hamasaki, K. Haramaki, T. Nakamura, M. Abe, H. Yan, T.
Kinjo, N. Nakamichi, S. Kabayama, and K. Teruya, Anti-diabetes effect of
water containing hydrogen molecule and Pt nanoparticles, 
BioMed. Central
Proceedings,
 5, 18–20, 2011.
5. M. Schriks, M.B. Heringa, M.M.E. Vander Kooi, P. De Voogt, and A.P.
Van Wezel, Toxicological relevance of emerging contaminants for drinking
water quality, 
Water Research,
 44, 461–476, 2010.
6. F.X.R. Van Leeuwen, Safe drinking water: the toxicologist’s approach,
Food and Chemical Toxicology
, 38, 51–58, 2000.
7. S. Chouhan, and S.J.S. Flora, Arsenic and Flouride: Two major ground
water pollutants, 
Indian Journal of Experimental Biology,
 48, 666–678, 2010.
8. V. Demir, and S. Ergin, Occurrence and Assessment of Chemical
Contaminants in Drinking Water in Tunceli, Turkey, 
Journal of Chemistry
,
2013, 1–6, 2013.
9. K.J. Klabunde, and R.M. Richards, 
Nanoscale Materials In Chemistry,
John Wiley and Sons (2nd Edition), 2009.
10. A.S. Tawfik, A strategy for integrating basic concepts of nanotechnology
to enhance undergraduate nano-education: Statistical evaluation of an
application study, 
Journal of Nano Education,
 4, 1–7, 2012.
11. M.C. Roco, C.A. Mirkin, and M.C. Hersam, Nanotechnology research
directions for societal needs in 2020: Summary of international study,
Journal of Nanoparticle Research,
 13, 897–919, 2011.
12. R.V. Ramanujan, Nanostructured electronic and magnetic materials,
Sadhana,
 28, 81–86, 2003.
13. S. Thatai, P. Khurana, S. Prasad, and D. Kumar, A new way in
nanosensors: Gold nanorods for sensing of Fe(III) ions in aqueous media,
Microchemical Journal,
 113, 77–82, 2014.
14. S. Thatai, P. Khurana, J. Boken, S. Prasad, and D. Kumar, Nanoparticles
and core-shell nanocomposites: New generation water remediation materials,
Microchemical Journal,
 116, 62–76, 2014.
15. P.H.C. Camargo, K.G. Satyanarayana, and F. Wypych, Nanocomposites:synthesis, structure, properties and new application opportunities, 
Material
Research
, 12 (2009) 1–39.
16. M.M. Kin, S. Nair, J.B. Veluru, M. Rajendiran, and S. Ramakrishan, A
review on nanomaterials for environmental remediation, 
Energy &
Environmental Science,
 5, 8075–8109, 2012.
17. M. Patil, D.S. Dhoom Singh Mehta, and S. Guvva, Future impact of
nanotechnology on medicine and dentistry, 
Journal of Indian Society of
Periodontology,
 12, 34–40, 2008.
18. C. Sanchez, B. Julia, P. Belleville, and M. Popall, Applications of hybrid
organic–inorganic nanocomposites, 
Journal of Material Chemistry,
 15,
3559–3592, 2005.
19. H. Duan, D. Wang, and Y. Li, Green chemistry for nanoparticle
synthesis, 
Chemical Review,
 Doi: 10.1039/C4CS00363B, 2015.
20. A.S. Kumari, M. Venkatesham, D. Ayodhya, and G. Veerabhadram,
Green synthesis, characterization and catalytic activity of palladium
nanoparticles by xanthan gum, 
Applied Nanoscience,
 5, 315–320, 2015.
21. Z.S. Haidar, Bio-inspired/-functional colloidal core-shell polymeric-based
nanosystems: Technology promise in tissue engineering, bioimaging and
Nanomedicine, 
Polymers,
 2, 323–352, 2010.
22. R.R. Gonte, and K. Balasubramanian, Chemically modified polymer
beads for sorption of gold from waste gold solution, 
Journal of Hazardous
Materials,
 217–218, 447–451, 2012.
23. P. Tartaj, M.D.P. Morales, S. Veintemillas-Verdaguer, T. Gonzalez-
Carreno, and C.J. Serna, The preparation of magnetic nanoparticles for
applications in biomedicine, 
Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics,
 36, 182–
197, 2003.
24. A.K. Gupta, and M. Gupta, Synthesis and surface engineering of iron
oxide nanoparticles for biomedical applications, 
Biomaterials,
 26, 3995–
34021, 2005.
25. W.J.M. Mulder, G.J. Strijkers, G.A.F. Van Tilborg, A.W. Griffioen, and
K. Nicolay, Lipid based nanoparticles for contrast-enhanced MRI and
molecular imaging, 
NMR in Biomedicine,
 19, 142–164, 2006.
26. A. Bumb, M.W. Brechbiel, P.L. Choyke, L. Fugger, A. Eggeman, D.Prabhakaran, J. Hutchinson, and P.J. Dobson, Synthesis and characterization
of ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles thinly coated with
silica, 
Nanotechnology,
 19, 335601–335606, 2008.
27. J.P. Jolivet, and E. Tronc, Interfacial electron transfer in colloidal spinel
iron oxide. Conversion of Fe
3
O
4
 into γ-Fe
2
O
3
 in aqueous medium, 
Journal
of Colloid Interface and Science,
 125, 688–701, 1988.
28. E.A. Mohamed, I.M. Abbas, L.J. Puzon, K. Aslam, and A. Mansour,
Optimization of synthesis parameters for mesoporous shell formation on
magnetic nanocores and their application as nanocarriers for docetaxel cancer
drug, 
International Journal of Molecular Sciences,
 14, 11496–11509, 2013.
29. R.N. Patil, B.V. Sharma, and P.V. Mahanwar, Electrochemical
Impedance Spectroscopy of Hybrid Epoxy Resin Emulsion Coatings, 
Journal
of Minerals and Materials Characterization and Engineering,
 DOI:10.4236/
jmmce.2012.1110104, 2015.
30. C. Sanchez, B. Julian, P. Belleville, and M. Popall, Applications of hybrid
organic–inorganic nanocomposites, 
Journal of Materials Chemistry,
 15,
3559–3592, 2005.
31. C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan, and M. El-Sayed, The chemistry and
properties of nanocrystals of different shapes, 
Chemical Review,
 105, 1025–
1102, 2005.
32. X. Younan, P. Yang, S. Yugang, W. Yiying, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y.
Yadong, K. Franklin, and Y. Haoquan, One-dimensional nanostructures:
Synthesis, characterization and applications, 
Advanced Materials,
 15, 353–
389, 2003.
33. M. Liz-Marzan, M.A. Correa-Duarte, I. Pastoriza-Santos, P. Mulvaney,
T. Ung, M. Giersig, and N.A. Kotov, Core-shell nanoparticles and assemblies
thereof, 
Handbook of surface and interfaces of materials,
 3, 190–238, 2001.
34. M. Marini, B. Pourabbas, F. Pilati, and P. Fabbri, Functionally modified
core-shell silica nanoparticles by one-pot synthesis, 
Colloid and Surface A,
317, 473–481, 2008.
35. L. Wang, H.Y. Park, S.I. Lim, M.J. Schadt, D. Mott, J. Luo, X. Wang,
and C.J. Zhong, Core@shell nanomaterials: gold-coated magnetic oxide
nanoparticles, 
Journal of Material Chemistry
, 18, 2629–2635, 2008.36. Y. Cho, S.S. Lee, and J.H. Jung, Recyclable fluorimetric and colorimetric
mercury-specific sensor using porphyrin-functionalized Au@SiO
2
 core/shell
nanoparticles, 
Analyst,
 135, 1551–1555, 2010.
37. E.C. Cho, P.H.C. Xia, and Y.N. Xia, Synthesis and characterization of
noble-metal nanostructures containing gold nanorods at the center, 
Advanced
Material,
 22, 744–748, 2010.
38. G. Park, D. Seo, J. Jung, S. Ryu, and H. Song, Shape evolution and gram-
scale synthesis of gold@silver core-shell nanopolyhedrons, 
The Journal of
Physical Chemistry,
 115, 9417–9423, 2011.
39. P. Khurana, S. Thatai, P. Wang, P. Lihitkar, L. Zhang, Y. Fang, and S.K.
Kulkarni, Speckled SiO
2
@Au core-shell particles as surface enhanced
Raman scattering probes, 
Plasmonics
, 8, 185–191, 2013.
40. Q. Zeng, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Tu, Y. Wang, X. Kong, and H. Zhang,
Au/SiO
2
 core/shell nanoparticles enhancing fluorescence resonance energy
transfer efficiency in solution, 
Chemical Communication,
 46, 6479–6481,
2010.
41. A. Imhof, Preparation and characterization of titania-coated polystyrene
spheres and hollow titania shells, 
Langmuir,
 17, 3579–3585, 2001.
42. J. Zhang, J. Liu, S. Wang, P. Zhan, Z. Wang, and N. Ming, Facile
methods to coat polystyrene and silica colloids with metal, 
Advanced
Functional Material
, 14, 1089–1096, 2004.
43. B.R. Knappett, P. Abdulkin, E. Ringe, D.A. Jefferson, S. Lozano-Perez,
T.C. Rojas, A. Fernandez, and A.E.H. Wheatley, Characterization of
Co@Fe
3
O
4
 core@shell nanoparticles using advanced electron microscopy,
Nanoscale, 5, 5765–5772, 2013.
44. W. Domaille, L. Que, and J. Chang, Synthetic fluorescent sensors for
studying the cell biology of metal, 
Nature Chemical Biology,
 4, 168–175,
2008.
45. T. Anthony, Biosensors-sense and sensitivity, Science, 290, 1315–1317,
2000.
46. J. Liu, W. Qu, and M. Kadiiska, Role of oxidative stress in cadmium
toxicity and carcinogenesis, 
Toxicolology and Applied Pharmacology
, 238,
209–214, 2009.47. 
http://www.epa.gov/ogwdw/contaminants/index
48. O.T. Butler, J.M. Cook, C.M. Davidson, C.F. Harrington, and D.L. Miles,
Atomic spectrometry update. Environmental analysis, 
Journal of Analytical
Atomic Spectrometry,
 24, 131–177, 2009.
49. H. Kim, W. Ren, J. Kim, and J. Yoon, Fluorescent and colorimetric
sensors for detection of lead, cadmium, and mercury ions, 
Chemical Society
Review
, 41, 3210–3244, 2012.
50. D. Karunasagar, and J. Arunachalam, Determination of cadmium by
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry-reduction of molybdenum
oxide interferences by addition of acetonitrile, 
Analytica Chimica Acta,
 441,
291–296, 2001.
51. M. Knecht, and M. Sethi, Bio-inspired colorimetric detection of Hg
2+
and Pb
2+
 heavy metal ions using Au nanoparticles, 
Analytical and
Bioanalytical Chemistry
, 394, 33–46, 2009.
52. W. Chansuvarn, and A. Imyim, Visual and colorimetric detection of
mercury(II) ion using gold nanoparticles stabilized with a dithia-diaza ligand,
Microchimica Acta,
 176, 57–64, 2012.
53. H. Xu, B. Liu, and Y. Chen, A colorimetric method for the determination
of lead(II) ions using gold nanoparticles and a guanine-rich oligonucleotide,
Microchimica Acta,
 177, 89–94, 2012.
54. U. Patel, V. Mehta, M. Anil Kumar, and S. Kailasa, 4-Aminothiophenol
functionalized gold nanoparticles as colorimetric sensors for the detection of
cobalt using UV-Visible spectrometry, 
Research on Chemical Intermediates,
39, 771–779, 2013.
55. H. Tan, B. Liu, and Y. Chen, Effects of the electrostatic repulsion
between nanoparticles on colorimetric sensing: An investigation of
determination of Hg
2+
 with silver nanoparticles, 
Plasmonics,
 8, 705–713,
2013.
56. A. Zach-Maor, R. Semiat, and H. Shemer, Removal of heavy metals by
immobilized magnetite nano-particles, 
Desalination and Water treatment,
 31,
64–70, 2011.
57. A. Afkhami, T. Madrakian, R. Ahmadi, H. Bagheri, and M. Tabatabaee,
Chemically modified alumina nanoparticles for selective solid phaseextraction and preconcentration of trace amounts of Cd(II), 
Microchimica
Acta,
 175, 69–77, 2011.
58. B.C. Ye, and B.C. Yin, Highly sensitive detection of mercury(II) ions by
fluorescence polarization enhanced by gold nanoparticles, 
Angewante Chemie
International Edition
, 47, 1–6, 2008.
59. J. Yin, T. Wu, J. Song, Q. Zhang, S. Liu, R. Xu, and H. Duan, SERS-
active nanoparticles for sensitive and selective detection of cadmium ion
(Cd
2+
), 
Chemistry of Materials,
 23, 4756–4764, 2011.
60. Y. Kim, R. Johnson, and J. Hupp, Gold nanoparticle-based sensing of
Spectroscopically Silent heavy metal ions, 
Nano Letters,
 1, 165–167, 2001.
61. Y. Fan, Z. Liu, L. Wang, and J. Zhan, Synthesis of starch-stabilized Ag
nanoparticles and Hg
2+
 recognition in aqueous media, 
Nanoscale Research
Letters,
 4, 1230–1235, 2009.
62. L. Zhang, C. Xu, and B. Li, Simple and sensitive detection method for
chromium(VI) in water using glutathione-capped CdTe quantum dots as
fluorescent probes, 
Microchimica Acta
, 166, 61–68, 2009.
63. Y. Leng, F. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Fu, Y. Weng, L. Chen, and A. Wu, A
rapid and sensitive colorimetric assay method for Co
2+
 based on the
modified Au nanoparticles (NPs): Understanding the involved interactions
from experiments and simulations, 
Talanta
, 94, 271–277, 2012.
64. M.S. Bootharaju, and T. Pradeep, Uptake of toxic metal ions from water
by naked and monolayer protected silver nanoparticles: An X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopic investigation, 
Journal of Physical Chemistry C,
114, 8328–8336, 2010.
65. M.V. Gonzalez, and C.C. Carrion, Analytical strategies based on quantum
dots for heavy metal ions detection, 
Journal of Biomedical Optics,
 19,
101503–101512, 2014.
66. Z. Wang, D. Wu, G. Wu, N. Yang, and A. Wu, Modifying Fe
3
O
4
microspheres with rhodamine hydrazide for selective detection and removal
of Hg
2+
 ion in water, 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 244–245,621–627,
2013.
67. Y. Zhang, Y. Leng, L. Miao, J. Xin, and A. Wu, The colorimetricdetection of Pb
2+
 by using sodium thiosulfate and hexadecyl thimethyl
ammonium bromide modified gold nanoparticles, 
Dalton Transactions,
 42,
5485–5490, 2013.
68. Y. Gao, J. Xin, Z. Shen, W. Pan, X. Li, and A. Wu, A new rapid
colorimetric detection method of Mn
2+
 based on tripolyphosphate modified
silver nanoparticles, 
Sensors and Actuators B-Chemical,
 181, 288–293, 2013.
69. F. Chai, T. Wang, L. Li, H. Liu, L. Zhang, Z. Su, and C. Wang,
Fluorescent gold nanoprobes for the sensitive and selective detection for
Hg
2+
, 
Nanoscale Research Letters,
 5, 1856–1860, 2010.
70. L. Miao, J. Xin, Z. Shen, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, and A. Wu, Exploring a
new rapid colorimetric detection method of Cu
2+
 with high sensitivity and
selectivity, 
Sensors and Actuators B-Chemical
, 176, 906–912, 2013.
71. X. Wang, P. Wang, Z. Dong, Z. Dong, Z. Ma, J. Jiang, R. Li, and J. Ma,
Highly sensitive fluorescence probe based on functional SBA-15 for selective
detection of Hg
2+
, 
Nanoscale Research Letter,
 5, 1468–1473, 2010.
72. B. Paramanik, S. Bhattacharyya, and A. Patra, Detection of Hg
2+
 and F
−
ions using fluorescence switching of quantum dots in Au cluster-CdTe QDs
nanocomposites, 
Journal of European Chemistry,
 19, 5980–5987, 2013.
73. J. Xin, F. Zhang, Y. Gao, Y. Feng, S. Chen, and A. Wu, A rapid
colorimetric detection method of trace Cr (VI) based on the redox etching of
Ag(core)-Au(shell) nanoparticles at room temperature, 
Talanta
, 101, 122–
127, 2012.
74. Y. Wang, X. Peng, J. Shi, X. Tang, J. Jiang, and W. Liu, Highly selective
fluorescent chemosensor for Zn
2+
 derived from inorganic-organic hybrid
magnetic core/shell Fe
3
O
4
@SiO
2
 nanoparticles, 
Nanoscale Research
Letters,
 7, 86–98, 2012.
75. M. Park, S. Seo, I.S. Lee, and J.H. Jung, Ultraeffcient separation and
sensing of mercury and methylmercury ions in drinking water by using
aminonaphthalimide-functionalized Fe
3
O
4
@SiO
2
 core/shell magnetic
nanoparticles, 
Chemical Communication,
 46, 4478–4480, 2010.
76. H. Wang, L. Sun, Y. Li, X. Fei, M. Sun, C. Zhang, Y. Li, and Q. Yang,Layer-by-Layer assembled Fe
3
O
4
@C@CdTe core/shell microspheres as
separable luminescent probe for sensitive sensing of Cu
2+
 ions, 
Langmuir,
27, 11609–11615, 2011.
77. Y. Song, X. Cao, Y. Guo, P. Chen, Q. Zhao, and G. Shen, Fabrication of
mesoporous CdTe/ZnO@SiO
2
 core/shell nanostructures with tunable dual
emission and ultrasensitive fluorescence response to metal ions, 
Chemistry of
Materials
, 21, 68–77, 2009.
78. A.N. Shipway, E. Katz, and I. Willner, Nanoparticle arrays on surfaces
for electronic, optical and sensor applications, 
Physical Chemistry Chemical
Physics
, 1, 18–52, 2000.
79. V.P. Drachev, V.C. Nashine, M.D. Thoreson, D.B. Amotz, V.J. Davisson,
and V.M. Shalaev, Analytical technique for label-free multi-protein detection
based on western blot and surface-enhanced Raman scattering, 
Langmuir,
 21,
8368–8372, 2005.
80. C.S. Seney, B.M. Gutzman, and R.H. Goddard, Correlation of size and
surface-enhanced Raman scattering activity of optical and spectroscopic
properties for silver nanoparticles, 
Journal of Physical Chemistry C,
 113, 74–
80, 2009.
81. A.G. Brolo, Plasmonics for future biosensors, 
Nature Photonics,
 6, 709–
713, 2012.
82. T. Sen, and A. Patra, Formation of self-assembled Au nanoparticles and
the study of their optical properties by steady-state and time-resolved
spectroscopies, 
Journal of Physical Chemistry C,
 113, 13125–13132, 2009.
83. P.N. Njoki, I.S. Lim, D. Mott, H. Park, B. Khan, S. Mishra, R.
Sujakumar, J. Luo, and C. Zhong, Size correlation of optical and
spectroscopic properties for gold nanoparticles, 
Journal of Physical
Chemistry C,
 111, 14664–14669, 2007.Part 3
BIOPOLYMERIC
NANOMATERIALSChapter 12
Adsorption of Metallic Ions Cd
2+
,
Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
 from Water Samples
Using Brazil Nut Shell as a Low-Cost
Biosorbent
Juliana Casarin
1
, Affonso Celso Gonçalves Jr
1
*
, Gustavo
Ferreira Coelho
1
, Marcela Zanetti Corazza
2
, Fernanda Midori
de Oliveira
2
, César Ricardo Teixeira Tarley
2
, Adilson
Pinheiro
3
, Matheus Meier
1
, and Douglas Cardoso Dragunski
4
1
Universidade Estadual do Oeste do Paraná, UNIOESTE, Centro de
Ciências Agrárias, Rondon, Brazil
2
Departamento de Química, Centro de Ciências Exatas, Universidade
Estadual de Londrina, Londrina-, Brazil
3
Universidade Regional de Blumenau, FURB, Departamento de Engenharia
Civil, Blumenau, Brazil
4
Departamento de Química, Universidade Estadual do Oeste do Paraná,
Toledo-PR, Brazil
*
Corresponding author:
 
affonso133@hotmail.com
AbstractThe removal of heavy metals in the aquatic medium is one of the targets of
environmental researches. Therefore, the application of materials with high
adsorption capacity, reusability and low cost has been widely focused. In this
study, we have proposed for the first time the use of residues of brown
Bertholletia excelsa
 HBK, a natural adsorbent for removal of cadmium, lead,
and chromium from contaminated water. The kinetic model of pseudo-second
order was the best fit to the experimental values. For cadmium and lead, the
best adjustments were obtained by the Langmuir model and for chromium the
most appropriate was the Freundlich model. Due to the greater the
electronegativity and ionic radius smaller, of metal ions studied, the ion lead
was the one that presented the highest percentage of adsorption (90.69%)
under pH 5.0. The results showed that the biosorbent may constitute a
sustainable alternative for removal of metal ions.
Keywords:
 Biosorbent, contamination, adsorption
12.1 Introduction
Metals are common contaminants in industry. Since they are not
biodegradable, they present accumulated risks to the environment, in food
chain and in underground waters where they contaminate water and harm
animals, humans, and the biota [1].
The metals Cd
2+
 and Pb
2+
 are toxic, cancerogenous, or mutagenic even at
low concentrations [2]. Although Cr
3+
 is not considered toxic by several
authors [3, 4], its excess is associated with toxic effects in several animal
species and in humans. It decreases the activity of the immunological system
and affects the functions of the ion channels, receptors, and enzymes
immersed into the lipid part of cell membranes [5, 6].
Several techniques, among which activated coal [7], have been employed to
treat industrial effluents with heavy metals. Activated coal is a porous
material with a great surface area and high intrinsic adsorption qualities for
several chemical products, but its acquisition requires huge energy costs and
is frequently unfeasible [8].
Disadvantages and the need for cheaper and more efficient methods for therecuperation of metals from wastewaters triggered the development of
alternative separation technologies.
Several studies have been undertaken to obtain low-cost adsorbents, which
include meals of 
Crambe abyssinca
 Hochst [9], and 
Moringa oleífera
 Lam.
[10], macadamia bark [11], sugarcane bagasse [12], fungi [1], and others. The
shell of the Brazil nut is among the several biomass types that may be proved
to be an alternative. The specie eatable nut is frequently mentioned as the
most important product of the Amazon extractive reserves, which provide
income for the native population. Moreover, the matrixes are not destroyed
and the forest’s sustainability is preserved [13].
Thus, the aim of the present research was to study the applicability of in
natura Brazil nut alternative adsorbents for Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
 and Cr
3+
 from
strengthened water solutions, and compares the biosorbent with the widely
used commercial biosorbent activated coal.
12.2 Materials and Methods
12.2.1 Material
Brazil nut shells from native trees to Brazil were used for the experiment.
Strengthened water solutions were prepared from cadmium nitrate salts
[Cd(NO
3
)
2
. 4H
2
O. P.A.≥ 99%], lead nitrate [Pb(NO
3
)
2
 P.A. ≥ 99%] and
chromium nitrate III [Cr(NO
3
)
3
9H
2
O P.A. ≥ 99%] and ultrapure water
(Ultrapurificador Puritech).
Ions Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
 were determined by flame atomic absorption
spectrometry (FAAS), equipped with a hollow cathode lamp for Cd, Pb, and
Cr and a deuterium lamp for background correction. Morphological features
of the polymer were evaluated with a JEOL JSM 300-LV scanning electron
microscope (Tokyo, Japan). The biosorbent was coated with a thin layer of
gold/palladium alloy, using a Bal-Tec MED 020 equipment, in order to
minimize charging under the incident electron beam. A FTIR Shimadzu 8300
spectrometer operating in the transmission mode between 4000 and 400 cm
–1
 was employed to elucidate the functional groups present in the biosorbent.
12.2.2 Obtaining Biosorbent and its
Characterization
The point of zero charge (pH
PCZ
) was determined to find pH in which the
equilibrium between positive and negative charges on the material surface
was zero [14]. Further, 0.5 g of the biosorbent was added to 50 mL of the
water solution of potassium chloride (KCl, Vetec, 99%) at 0.5 mol L
–1
 in
initial pH rates ranging between 2.0 and 9.0, adjusted to hydrochloric (HCl,
Vetec, 37%) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH, Vetec, 99%) acid solutions at 0.1
mol L
–1
 concentration. After stirring for 24 h (200 rpm, 25 °C), pH final
rates were provided. A graph with initial pH variation was provided and
compared to the final pH [14].
Metals in the adsorbent were determined by nitro-perchloride digestion
[15], followed by the determination of the elements K, Ca, Mg, Cu, Fe, Zn,
Mn, Cd, Pb, and Cr by FAAS.
12.2.3 Studies on Adsorption as a Function
of pH and Biosorbent Mass
Assays on mass and pH with increasing quantities of adsorbent material,
between 200 and 1200 mg, were undertaken to verify the best adsorption
conditions. Further, 125 mL Erlenmeyer flasks with 50 mL of strengthened
mono-elementary water solution with metals Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
 (10 mg
L
–1
), at three pH conditions (4.0, 5.0, and 6.0), were prepared. They were
adjusted and buffered with hydrochloric (HCl, Vetec, 37%) or sodium
hydroxide (NaOH, Vetec, 99%) (0.1 mol L
–1
). After 1 h 30 ministering in a
thermostatized warm bath Dubnoff (Dubnoff Marconi MA 035) (200 rpm, 25
°C), the solutions were filtered in quality filter paper. Concentrations of
metals were calculated by FAAS. Moreover, pH was monitored to investigate
the influence of Brazil nut shell on the final pH of the solution.Quantity of adsorbed metal in equilibrium was determined by the following
equation:
(12.1)
 
where 
Q
eq
 is the number of ions adsorbed in equilibrium per adsorbent mass
unit (mg g
–1
), 
C
0
 is the initial concentration of the metal in the solution (mg
L
–1
), 
C
eq
 is the final concentration of the metal in the solution (mg L
–1
), 
V
is the volume of the solution (L), and 
m
 is the mass of the adsorbent
employed (g).
Percentage of metal adsorbed in equilibrium was calculated by the
following equation:
(12.2)
 
where %
R
 is the removal percentage of ion in the solution, 
C
eq
 is the final
ion concentration in the solution (mg L
–1
), and 
C
0
 is the initial concentration
of metal ion in the solution (mg L
–1
).
12.2.4 Adsorption Kinetics
Ideal conditions of mass and pH in previous tests were employed to
determine the adsorption kinetics for the biosorbent. The biosorbent was
stirred (200 rpm, 25 °C) in a thermostatized warm bath (Dubnoff Marconi
MA 035), with 50 mL of strengthened mono-elementary solutions of Cd
2+
,
Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
 in 125 mL Erlenmeyer flasks at time intervals ranging
between 5 and 180 min. Solutions were removed and filtered in filter paper
and the concentrations of metal were determined by FAAS.
The kinetic mechanism that controlled the adsorption process was
evaluated by linear model parameters of pseudo-first-order, pseudo-second-
order, Elovich, and intraparticle diffusion mathematical models [16–20].
12.2.5 Obtaining Equilibrium Isotherm
Adsorption tests based on results from previously ones were performed toobtain the isotherms (mass, pH, and time). Moreover, 50 mL of strengthened
mono-elementary solutions with Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
 at different initial
concentrations (5–200 mg L
–1
) were transferred to 125 mL Erlenmeyer
flasks with 0.6 g of the biosorbent. The system was stirred (200 rpm, 25 °C)
in a thermostatized warm bath (Dubnoff Marconi MA 035). The solution was
then filtered in quality filter paper to quantify the metals by FAAS.
Equation 12.1
 determined adsorbed quantity of each metal and the metal
removal percentage was calculated by results from the concentration in
equilibrium (
Equation 12.2
). Langmuir [21], Freundlich [22], and Dubnin–
Radushkevich (D–R) [23, 24] were the mathematical models used to describe
the adsorption processes.
12.2.6 Desorption
The waste employed to construct adsorption isotherms was separated, washed
in ultrapure water, and dried. It was then placed in contact with 50 mL of a
hydrochloric acid solution (HCl, Vetec, 37%) at 0.1 mol L
–1
, stirred (200
rpm, 25 °C) during 60 min in a thermostatized warm bath (Dubnoff Marconi
MA 035). The final concentration of the metal in the solution was determined
by the method above and de-sorption percentage calculated by the following
equation:
(12.3) 
where 
C
eq(des)
 (mg L
–1
) and 
C
eq(ads)
 (mg L
–1
) are, respectively, the
concentrations of heavy metals desorbed by Brazil nut shell and the adsorbed
concentration in equilibrium.
12.2.7 Adsorption as a Function of
Temperature
So that thermodynamic parameters could be obtained, 0.6 g of Brazil nut
shell was stirred (200 rpm) in a 50 mL strengthened mono-elementary
solution of Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
 at pH 5.0 with a concentration of 50 mgL
–1
 at five temperatures (15–55 °C) in a thermostatized warm bath (Dubnoff
Marconi MA 035). After 60 min, the solutions were filtered and the
concentrations of contaminant in the aliquot were determined by FAAS.
Thermodynamic parameters were evaluated from data obtained and the
process analyzed. Gibbs’s free energy (Δ
G
), enthalpy (Δ
Η
), and entropy (ΔS)
were calculated [3, 25].
12.2.8 Comparative Studies Between
Biosorbent and Activated Coal
The same conditions used to obtain isotherms and desorption tests for the
biosorbent from Brazil nut shells were applied to commercial adsorbent-
activated coal A.R. (Synth), with a particle size smaller than 365 mesh, a
commercial adsorbent widely used in the removal of pollutants [7].
12.3 Results and Discussion
12.3.1 Characterization of the Biosorbent
Scanning electron micrographs (SEM) of Brazil nut shells is depicted in
Figure 12.1
, magnification 160, 1200, 5000, and 12000. The adsorbent’s
surface has a fibrous and porous aspect and an irregular and heterogeneous
structure. Such morphology favors the adsorption of metals within the
different sections of the material [25].
Figure 12.1
 SEM images of Brazil nut shells: (a) magnification of 160, (b)
magnification of 1200, (c) magnification of 5000, and (d) magnification of
12000.FTIR spectra within the 400–4000 cm
–1
 interval for the Brazil nut shell
(
Figure 12.2
). The presence of strong broad band at 3458 cm
−1
 is attributed
to the OH vibration [26]. The band characterizes vibration stretching of the
hydroxyl group in carbohydrates, fatty acids, proteins, lignin units, cellulose,
and absorbed water [3, 27]. Sign at 2923 and 2852 cm
–1
 refers to the
vibration lengthening of C–H links of alkane and aliphatic group [28, 29]
present in the structure of lignin. Vibration lengthening of C–O links of
starch and carboxyl groups occurs at 1633 cm
–1
 [30]. Band at 1739 and 1525
cm
–1
 corresponds to the vibration lengthening of C–O links of starch and
carboxyl groups, whilst band may be attributed to the lengthening of C=C
link of aromatic structures [31, 32].
Figure 12.2
 FTIR spectra of the adsorbent 
B. excelsa
 HBK.Analysis of FTIR spectra suggests that the material presents functional
groups such as hydroxyls, starches, carbonyls, and carboxyls, which adsorb
metal ions [32, 26].
According to Mimura 
et al.
 [14], since metal ions are present in the water
medium as cations, their adsorption depends on anion groups at the surface of
the biosorbent. Since the surface of the Brazil nut shell had point of zero
charge equal to 4.4 (
Figure 12.3
), the presence of groups with negative
charge on the surface of the biosorbent, favoring the approximation of metal
cations, were predominant in the case of higher pH rates [33].
Figure 12.3
 Experiment curve for the determination of pH
pcz
.Table 12.1
 shows the chemical composition of metals in the adsorbent Cd,
Pb, and Cr rates above the quantification limits were not detected by the
method employed.
Table 12.1
 Chemical composition of adsorbent material.
12.3.2 Dependence of pH and Adsorbent
Mass
Adsorbent mass and pH are important parameters within the solubility and
biosorption capacity of metal ions [34]. This fact is partly due to H+ ions
being a strong adsorbate to compete with adsorption sites and also partly due
to the chemical speciation of metal ions affected by the solution’s pH.Figure 12.4
 shows the results of the influence of the biosorbents mass and
the pH of mono-elementary solutions of Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
.
Figure 12.4
 Effect of adsorbent mass and pH of solution in the removal of
Cd
2+
.
In the case of the adsorption of Cd
2+
 and Pb
2+
, the solutions pH did not
affect adsorption rate. In fact, initial pH for adsorption tests was fixed at 5.0
since carboxyl groups at low pH rates were not dissociated and could not be
linked to the metal ions in the solutions. A rise in pH rate would cause the de-
protonation of the groups [35].
Higher adsorption rates of the Cr
3+
 occurred in the solution with pH 4.0
(
Figure 12.6
). However, according to studies on pH
PCZ
, where metal
adsorption is favored in pH rates higher than 4.4, solutions at pH 5.0 were
selected in later adsorption tests.
Figure 12.5
 Effect of adsorbent mass and pH of solution in the removal ofPb
2+
.
Figure 12.6
 Effect of adsorbent mass and pH of solution in the removal of
Cr
3+
.Results from biosorbent mass (
Figures 12.4
–12.6) showed that 600 mg is
the adequate quantity for the removal of Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
 ions. In
higher quantities, removal percentage is not very feasible. There is a trend to
be a constant for Pb
2+
 and Cr
3+
 adsorption and to decrease adsorption rate in
the case of Cd
2+
. Increase in adsorbent quantity in the solution may cause a
decrease in the adsorption of ions per gram of the adsorbent (
Q
), which is due
to the reduction of total surface area of the biosorbent caused by the
formation of aggregates during the process [36].
Further, natural material also increases the solution’s pH rate (
Table 12.2
),
similar to that recommended by CONAMA (pH rates between 6 and 9) [37].
Table 12.2
 Final pH of the solution on the removal of Cd
2+
 (a) and Pb
2+
 (b)
and Cr
3+
 (
C
0
: 10 mg L
–1
; 200–1200 mg; 90 min; 200 rpm; 25 °C).12.3.3 Adsorption Kinetics
Removal percentage increases fast during the initial stage (0–20 min) and
reaches an equilibrium for the metals Cd
2+
 and Cr
3+
, whereas after
approximately 40 min after contact, an equilibrium is reached for the metal
Pb
2+
 (
Figure 12.7
). However, a longer time was required to obtain
adsorption isotherm (60 min). 
Table 12.3
 shows the results obtained by
following the kinetic models.
Figure 12.7
 Effect of the adsorbent’s contact time on the removal of the
metal ions Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+Table 12.3
 Kinetic parameters obtained by Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
 adsorption
on Brazil nut shell for pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order, Elovich,
and intraparticle diffusion models.The pseudo-first-order model does not explain sufficiently the observed
phenomenon since the coefficients of determination (
R
2
) are lower. In fact,
the model’s 
Q
eq
(
calc)
 rates are very low when compared to 
Q
eq(exp)
 ones.On the other hand, in the pseudo-second-order model, the combination
between 
R
2
 high rate and the closeness between 
Q
eq(exp.)
 and 
Q
eq(calc.)
suggests that adsorption process is a chemosorption [16, 38, 39].
The intraparticle diffusion model is an approximate representation of the
pore diffusion kinetics without taking into account the possible impacts of the
pores dimensions [40]. Rates of 
C
i
 straight line A and 
C
i
 straight line B rates
different from zero in current study show that the intraparticle diffusion
model is not the limiting state within the kinetic process [40, 41].
Since the Elovich model adjusted itself to studies on Pb
2+
 adsorption, a
possible chemosorption for the ion is possible [18].
12.3.4 Influence of Initial Concentrations of
Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
Table 12.4
 shows that, as a rule, the efficiency of the Brazil nut shell is
similar to activated coal at certain concentrations. In the case of initial
concentrations of Cd
2+
 and Cr
3+
 to 40 mg L
–1
, the biosorbent under
analysis adsorbed more than 95% of the metal ions and was similar to
activated coal with a 97–100% adsorption rates.
Table 12.4
 Removal percentage of metal ions Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
 by
adsorbent Brazil nut shell (CB) and activated coal (CA) in increasing initial
concentrations (
C
0
)
In the case of ion Pb
2+
, adsorption by the Brazil nut shell in solutions up to
120 mg L
–1
 had an approximately 98% removal, very close to the adsorption
of activated coal, featuring about 100% adsorption.
Data suggest the use of natural biosorbents is viable, being that activated
coal is the result of physical and chemical modifications with high production
costs, whereas natural adsorbents are low cost and highly available.
Further, studies by Oliveira [42] in battery and tanning industrial effluents
showed that Pb
2+
 and Cr
3+
 concentrations did not exceed 2.66 and 2.11 mg
L
–1
, respectively. Brazil nut shell may replace activated coal for the above
effluents.
12.3.5 Equilibrium Isotherms
Equilibrium isotherms describe the relationship between quantity of ions
adsorbed by the adsorbent mass related to the concentration of the solution in
dynamic equilibrium [19]. Adsorption by Brazil nut shell (
Figure 12.8a
) and
by commercial activated coal (
Figure 12.8b
) for the adsorption of metal ions
Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
 are provided.
Figure 12.8
 Equilibrium isotherms of adsorption of metal ions Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
,
and Cr
3+
 on the adsorbents Brazil nut (a) and activated coal (b).Figure 12.6
 shows that isotherms for the biosorption of Cd
2+
 and Cr
3+
 for
Brazil nut shell and Cd
2+
 for activated coal reveal a typical behavior of
group L (Langmuir), which indicate decrease in the availability of active sites
with high removal capacity in low concentration, with a trend towards
equilibrium in higher ones [43].
Adsorption isotherms obtained for Cr
3+
 adsorption for activated coal and
for Pb
2+
 for the biosorbents are characteristic of micropore solids and shows
an almost vertical branch in the first section of the curve, which may be
attributed to high adsorption ease in the materials pores. After replacement,
there is practically no other region in which adsorption is significant and the
system tends toward equilibrium [44].
In the case of Pb
2+
 adsorption in activated coal, removal percentage was
high with 100% in certain initial concentrations. This behavior may be
detected in the adsorption isotherm (
Figure 12.6b
) that shows nil rates for
C
eq
, making isotherm construction impossible. They may not be framed in
any classification proposed by Giles 
et al.
 (1960).
Langmuir, Freundlich, and D–R mathematical models were applied by
employing data from biosorption isotherms. 
Table 12.5
 shows results.
Table 12.5
 Parameters of Langmuir, Freundlich, and D–R mathematical
models for Brazil nut shell and activated coal in the adsorption of Cd
2+
,
Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
.Table 12.5
 shows that Langmuir’s model had the best adjustment for Cd
2+
adsorption either for the adsorption of Brazil nut shells or for the adsorption
of activated coal. Both demonstrated a satisfactory 
R
2
 (respectively, 0.994
and 0.989) and thus, according to Gonçalves Jr 
et al.
 [45], adsorption occurs
in monolayers.
The Langmuir model (
R
2
 = 0.998) had the best adjustment to Pb
2+
adsorption process and not getting satisfactory adjustment to the
mathematical models when related for the adsorption by activated coal. The
above may be due to the use of the best conditions for Brazil nut shell only,
and thus better adjustments are expected for this adsorbent material. It may
be thus inferred that active adsorption sites are distributed homogenously on
the adsorbents surface, without any interactivity among the molecules. Thelatter may be adsorbed till all the surface sites available are occupied,
corroborating monolayer adsorption [21].
Although Freundlich’s model (
R
2
 =0.996) had the best adjustment to Cr
3+
adsorption on the Brazil nut shell, adjustment was satisfactory for the
Langmuir and D–R models, with very close R
2
 rates. Cr
3+
 adsorption was
heterogeneous due to the fact that link sites had energy from different
adsorptions, with variations due to surface coverage [46, 47].
In the case of Cr
3+
 adsorption over activated coal, the best adjustment
occurred by Langmuir’s model (
R
2
 =0.993), which showed that adsorption
sites had the same energy and that adsorption occurred in monolayers
adsorption [34, 47].
With regard to Langmuir’s parameters (
Table 12.5
), maximum adsorption
quantity (
Q
m
) had satisfactory results for the Brazil nut shell with higher
rates for Cr
3+
 when compared to those for activated coal.
According to Lin and Juang [7], Langmuir’s parameter 
R
L
 is applied to
determine whether the process is spontaneous, classified favorable adsorption
when between 0 and 1. In current analysis, all 
R
L
 were satisfactory and lower
than 
R
L
 of the adsorbent activated coal.
Parameter 
n
 higher than 1 in Freundlich linearization indicates highly
energetic sites to the intensity of the interaction between the adsorbent and
the adsorbed [47]. High energetic interaction and high reactivity may be
observed for rates given in 
Table 12.5
 for all metals and in the two adsorbents
under analysis.
Mean sorption energy (
E
), related to D–R mathematical model, is free
energy involved in the transference of 1 mol of the solutions solute to the
adsorbents surface [47]. The parameter provides information of adsorption
and characterizes it either as chemical or physical. All 
E
 rates of the D–R
model lie between 8 and 20 kJ mol
–1
 and characterizes the predomination of
chemical adsorption [47, 49].
Mathematical parameters indicate that biosorbent from the Brazil nut shell
is an excellent low-cost biomaterial for the adsorption of Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, and
Cr
3+
 in contaminated solution.12.3.6 Desorption
Table 12.6
 shows that a high de-sorption percentage was obtained for Cd
2+
and Pb
2+
 from adsorbed total by the adsorbents under analysis. This is a
relevant characteristic when the recovery of metal ion and the reuse of these
materials for new adsorption processes are taken into account.
Table 12.6
 Adsorption and desorption percentage of ions Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, and
Cr
3+
 by Brazil nut shell (CB) and by activated coal.
However, extremely low de-sorption rates were obtained for Cr
3+
 in the
case of the adsorbents employed. It was observed that in great concentration
of the metal, the ion links itself primarily to higher affinity sites but and after
linking to low affinity ones. It is thus easier to recover Cr
3+
 linked to low
affinity sites. Meneguel 
et al.
 [10] obtained similar results. In fact, the
authors reported low de-sorption rates for the ion Cr
3+
 in 
Moringa oleífera
Lam. residues where, according to the researchers, low de-sorption indicates
strong interaction between the adsorbed and the adsorbent.
According to Ferraz 
et al.
 [50], chromium forms several sorption layers on
the biomass surface and makes the de-sorption of Cr
3+
 external layers easier
than that of the most internal layers linked to sites with the highest affinity.
12.3.7 Thermodynamic Parameters of
Adsorption
Table 12.7
 shows rates of thermodynamic parameters for the adsorption
process at different temperatures.Table 12.7
 
Q
e
 rates and thermodynamic parameters of Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
adsorption on the biosorbent Brazil nut shell.
Negative rate of free energy variation (Δ
G
) for the adsorption of Cd
2+
 and
Cr
3+
 indicates a spontaneous and favorable process without the need of any
energy introduction from the systems exterior [3, 25]. Further, Δ
G
 rates
decrease with an increase in temperature. According to Farooq 
et al.
 [23],
decrease in Δ
G
 rates in proportion to increase in temperature indicates a rise
in the process spontaneity.
Entropy’s positive rate (Δ
S
) for ions Cd
2+
 and Cr
3+
 suggests an increase in
the disorder within the solid–liquid interface and indicates an increase in the
system’s randomness [51].Δ
G
 rates are positive for Pb
2+
 and are prone to increase with temperature
rise. In fact, there was absorption of energy in the product’s formation,
showing the non-spontaneity of the reaction [25]. Δ
S
 negative rate
demonstrated a decrease in the disorder of the solid–liquid interface during
lead adsorption.
Δ
Η
 positive rates for ions Cd
2+
 and Cr
3+
 show an endothermal system
[53], whereas Δ
Η
 negative rate for Pb
2+
 (–0.012 kJ mol
–1
), shown in 
Table
12.7
, indicates the exothermal nature of adsorption [3, 25]. Enthalpy rates are
also lower than 40 kJ mol
–1
 and characterize a physical adsorption process
[14]. Other parameters, such as the rate of average sorption energy (
E
) and
the best adjustment by the pseudo-second-order model, confirm its chemical
nature.
12.4 Conclusion
Brazil nut shell effectively removes metal ions Cd
2+
, Pb
2+
, and Cr
3+
 from
contaminated solutions.
According to data from the pseudo-second order and the mean rate of
sorption energy (
E
), the process is chemical. Best adjustments for Cd
2+
 and
Pb
2+
 were obtained by Langmuir’s model, whereas for Cr
3+
, the best
adjustment was obtained by Freundlich’s model, respectively, indicated
adsorption in mono- and multilayers.
Biosorbent had adsorption percentages similar to those by activated coal for
initial concentration of Cd
2+
 and Cr
3+
 up to 40 mg L
–1
 and for Pb
2+
 up to
120 mg L
–1
.
Brazil nut shell as an adsorbent material aims at the valorization of this
low-cost and highly available co-product. It is actually a viable alternative for
the treatment of contaminated water solutions with an increase in the species’
production chain.Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the Brazilian National Counsel of
Technological and Scientific Development (CNPq) and the Brazilian
Ministry of Science and Technology (MCTI) for funding through the project
REPENSA.
References
1. L. Sun, R.F. Gibson, F. Gordaninejad, and J. Suhr, Energy absorption
capability of nanocomposites: A review, 
Composites Science and
Technology,
 69, 2392–2409, 2009.
2. Lux Research, The Nanotech Report (2004).
3. BCC Research Report Nanocomposites, Nanoparticles, Nanoclay, and
Nanotubes (2006).
4. R. Dhankhar, and A. Hooda, Fungal biosorption – an alternative to meet
the challenges of heavy metal pollution in aqueous solutions, 
Environ.
Technol.,
 32, 467–491, 2011.
5. M. Picardo, and A. Ferreira da Costa, Continuous thorium biosorption -
Dynamic study for critical bed depth determination in a fixed-bed reactor,
Biores. Technol.,
 100, 208–210, 2009.
6. Jr.A.C. Gonçalves, C. Selzlein, and H. Nacke, Uso de biomassa seca de
aguapé (Eichornia crassipes) visando à remoção de metais pesados de
soluções contaminadas, 
Acta Scientiarum. Technology
, 31, 103–108, 2009.
7. B. Brown, and M. Absanullah, Effects of heavy metals on mortality and
growth, 
Mar. Pollut. Bull
, 2, 182–187, 1971.
8. A. Speranza, P. Ferri, M. Battistelli, E. Falcieri, R. Crinelli, and V.
Scoccianti, Both trivalent and hexavalent chromium strongly alter in vitro
germination and ultrastructure of kiwifruit pollen, 
Chemosphere,
 66, 1165–
1174, 2007.
9. M. Suwalsky, R. Castro, F. Villena, and C.P. Sotomayor, Cr (
3+
) exerts
stronger structural effects than Cr(VI) on the human erythrocyte membrane
and molecular models, 
Journal of Inorganic Biochemistry,
 102, 842–849,2008.
10. S. Lin, and R. Juang, Adsorption of phenol and its derivatives from water
using synthetic resins and low-cost natural adsorbents: A review, 
Journal of
Environmental Management
, 90, 1336–1349, 2009.
11. A.M. Hayashi, Remoção de Cromo Hexavalente através de Processo de
Biossorção em Algas Marinhas, 2001. Tese de Doutorado em Engenharia
Química). Programa de Pós-graduação em Engenharia Química,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, 2001.
12. F. Rubio, Jr.A.C. Gonçalves, L. Strey, A.P. Meneghel, G.F. Coelho, and
H. Nacke, Applicability of Crambe abyssinica Hochst byproduct as
biosorbent in the removal of chromium from water, 
Spanish Journal of Rural
Development
, 4, 25–40, 2013.
13. A.P. Meneghel, Jr.A.C. Gonçalves, L. Strey, F. Rubio, D. Schwantes, and
J. Casarin, Biosorption and removal of chromium from water by using
moringa seed cake (Moringa oleifera Lam.), 
Química Nova,
 36, 1104–1110,
2013.
14. N. Vilas Boas, J. Casarin, J. Caetano, Jr.A.C. Gonçalves, C.R.T. Tarley,
and D.C. Dragunski, Biossorção de cobre utilizando-se o mesocarpo e o
endocarpo da macadâmia natural e quimicamente tratados, 
Revista Brasileira
de Engenharia Agrícola e Ambiental,
 16, 1359–1366, 2012.
15. V.C.G. Dos Santos, C.R.T. Tarley, J. Caetano, and D.C. Dragunski,
Assessment of chemically modified sugarcane bagasse for lead adsorption
from aqueous medium, 
Water Science and Technology,
 62, 457–465, 2011.
16. NYBG- The New York Botanical Garden. The Brazil nut Industry- Past,
present and the future. Disponível em: <
http://www.nybg.org/bsci/braznut/
>.
Acesso em: 19 ago. 2014.
17. A.M.S. Mimura, T.V.A. Vieira, P.B. Martelli, and H.F. Gorgulho,
Aplicação da casca de arroz na adsorção dos íons Cu
2+
, Al
3+
, Ni
2+
 e Zn
2+
,
Química Nova,
 33, 1279–1284, 2010.
18. AOAC. Official methods of analysis.18 ed. Maryland: AOAC, 2005.
3000 p.
19. Y.S. Ho, Citation review of Lagergren kinetic rate equation on adsorption
reactions, 
Scientometrics,
 59, 171–177, 2004.20. R.S. Juang, and M.L. Chen, Application of the Elovich equation to the
kinetics of metal sorption with solvent-impregnated resins, 
Ind. Eng. Chem.
Res.,
 36, 813–820, 1997.
21. A. Debrassi, M.C.T., Largura; C.A. Rodrigues, Adsorção do corante
vermelho congo por derivados da O-carboximetilquitosana hidrofobicamente
modificados, 
Química Nova,
 34, 764–770, 2011.
22. A. Witek-Krowiak, R.G. Szafran, and S. Modelski, Biosorption of heavy
metals from aqueous solutions onto peanut shell as a low-cost biosorbent,
Desalination,
 265, 126–134, 2011.
23. R. Han, L. Zhang, C. Song, M. Zhang, H. Zhu, L.J. Zhang,
Characterization of modified wheat straw, kinetic and equilibrium study
about copper ion and metylene blue adsorption in batch mode, 
Carbohydrate
Polymers,
 79, 1140–1149, 2010.
24. V.O. Njoku, E.E. Oguzie, C. Bi, O.S. Bello, and A.A. Ayuk, Adsorption
of Copper (
2+
) and Lead (
2+
) from Aqueous Solutions onto a Nigerian
Natural Clay, 
Australian Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences,
 5, 346–353,
2011.
25. E. Pehlivan, B.H. Yanik, G. Ahmetli, and M. Pehlivan, Equilibrium
isotherm studies for the uptake of cadmium and lead ions onto sugar beet
pulp, 
Bioresource Technology
, 99, 3520–3527, 2008.
26. U. Farooq, M.A. Khan, M. Athar, and J.A. Kozinski, Effect of
modification of environmentally friendly biosorbent wheat (Triticum
aestivum) on the biosorptive removal of cadmium (Cd
2+
) ions from aqueous
solution, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 171, 400–410, 2011.
27. M.H. Kalavanthy, and L.R. Miranda, Moringa oleifera – A solid phase
extractant for the removal of copper, nickel and zinc from aqueous solutions,
Chemical Engeneering Journal,
 158, 188–199, 2010.
28. A. Sari, M. Tuzen, D. Citak, and M. Soylak, Equilibrium, kinetic and
thermodynamic studies od adsorption of Pb (
2+
) from aqueous solution onto
Turkish kaolinite clay, 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 149, 283–291, 2007.
29. C.R.T. Tarley, and M.A.Z. Arruda, Biosorption of heavy metals using
Rice milling by-products. Characterization and application for removal of
metals from aqueous effluents, 
Chemosphere,
 54, 987–995, 2004.30. B. Stuart, 
Infrared Spectroscopy: Fundamentals and applications,
 1
a
 ed.
John Wiley & Sons Inc. (2004). 242 p.
31. M. Tsezos, Recovery of uranium from biological adsorbents–desorption
equilibrium, 
Biotechnol. Bioeng.,
 26, 973–981, 1984.
32. N. Kuyucak, and B. Volesky, Desorption of cobalt-laden algal biosorbent,
Biotechnol. Bioeng.,
 33, 815–855, 1988.
33. L.C.A. Barbosa, Infrared Spectroscopy For Characterization Of Organic
Compounds, Ed. UFV: Viçosa, 2007, 189 p.
34. B. Singha, and S.K. Das, Biosorption of Cr (VI) ions from aqueous
solutions: Kinetics, equilibrium, thermodynamics and desorption studies,
Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces,
 84, 221–232, 2011.
35. W.S. Wan Ngah, and M.A.K. Hanafiah, Biosorpiton of copper ions from
dilute aqueous solutions on base treated rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) leaves
powder: kinetics, isotherm, and biosorption mechanisms, 
Journal of
Environmental Sciences,
 20, 1168–1176, 2008.
36. G.V. Tagliaferro, P.H.F. Pereira, L.A. Rodrigues, and M.L.C.P. da Silva,
Adsorção chumbo, cádmio e prata em óxido de nióbio(V) hidratado
preparado pelo método da precipitação em solução homogênea, Química
Nova, 34, 101–105, 2011.
37. P.X. Sheng, Y.P. Ting, J.P. Chen, and L. Hong, Sorption of lead, copper,
cadmium, zinc, and nickel by marine algal biomass: characterization of
biosorptive capacity and investigation of mechanism, 
J. Colloid Interf. Sci.,
275, 131–141, 2004.
38. P.R. Bonelli, P.A. Della Rocca, E.G. Cerrella, and A.L. Cukierman,
Effect of pyrolysis temperature on composition, surface properties and
thermal degradation ates of Brazil Nut shells, 
Bioresource Technology,
 76,
15–22, 2001.
39. K.V. Kumar, and K. Porkodi, Mass transfer, kinetics and equilibrium
studies for the biosorption of methylene blue using Paspalum notatum,
Journal of Hazardous Materials
, 146, 214–226, 2007.
40. BRASIL. Ministério do Meio Ambiente. Resolução n° 357, Brasilia, DF,
23, 2005.
41. Febrianto, J., A.N. Kosasih, J. Sunarso, Y.H. Ju, and N.S. Indraswati,Equilibrium and kinetic studies in adsorption of heavy metals using
biosorbent: A summary of recent studies, 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
162, 616–645, 2009.
42. N. Feng, X. Guo, S. Liang, Y. Zhu, and J. Liu, Biosorption of heavy
metals from aqueous solutions by chemically modified orange peel, 
Journal
of Hazardous Materials,
 185, 49–54, 2011.
43. S.S. Gupta, and G.K. Bhattacharyya, Kinetics of adsorption of metal ions
on inorganic materials: A review, 
Advances in Colloid and Interface Science,
162, 39–58, 2011.
44. T.E.M. Carvalho, D.A. Fungaro, and J.C. Izidoro, Adsorção do corante
reativo laranja 16 de soluções aquosas por zeólita sintética, 
Química Nova, 33
358–363, 2010.
45. A.H.A. Oliveira, Remoção de Pb(
2+
) e Cr(VI) de efluentes industriais
utilizando resíduos de Ipê (Tabebuia spp.), Maçaranduba (Manikara spp.) e
Pequiá (Caryocar spp.). Dissertação (Mestrado em Química) - Universidade
de Brasília, Brasília, 60, 2008.
46. C.H. Giles, T.H. Macewan, S.N. Nakhwa, and D. Smith, Studies in
adsorption. Part XI. A system of classification of solution adsorption
isotherms, and its use in diagnosis of adsorption mechanisms and in
measurement of specific surface areas of solids, 
Journal Chemical Society,
3973–3993, 1996.
47. V.G. Teixeira, F.M.B. Coutinho, and A.S. Gomes, Principais métodos de
caracterização da porosidade de resinas à base de divinilbenzeno, 
Química
Nova,
 24, 808–81824, 2001.
48. A.C.Jr. Gonçalves, L. Strey, C.A. Lindino, H. Nacke, D. Schwantes, and
E.P. Seidel, Applicability of the Pinus bark (Pinuselliott
2+
) for the adsorption
of toxic heavy metals from aqueous solutions, 
Acta Scientiarum. Technology
,
34, 79–87, 2012.
49. A. Özcan, A.S. Özcan, S. Tunali, T. Akar, and I. Kiran, The equilibrium,
kinetic and thermodynamic parameters of adsorption of copper (
2+
) ion sonto
sedes of Capsicum annuum, 
Journal of Hazardous Materials,
 124, 200–208,
2005.
50. V.T. Fávere, H.G. Riella, and S. Rosa, Cloreto de N-(2-hidroxil) propil-3-trimetil amônio quitosana como adsorvente de corantes reativos em solução
aquosa, 
Química Nova,
 33, 1476–1481, 2010.
51. F.F. Sodré, E. Lenzi, and A.C. Costa, Utilização de modelos físico-
químicos de adsorção no estudo do Comportamento do cobre em solos
argilosos, 
Química Nova,
 24, 324–330, 2001.
52. T. Fan, Y. Liu, B. Feng, G. Zeng, C. Yang, M. Zhou, H. Zhou, Z. Tan,
and X. Wang, Biosorption of cadmium(
2+
), zinc(
2+
) and lead(
2+
) by
Penicillium simplicissimum: Isotherms, kinetics and thermodynamics,
Journal of Hazardous Materials
, 160, 655–61, 2008.
53. A. Ferraz, I. Tavares, and M.T.A.Jr. Teixeira, Cr(
3+
) removal and
recovery from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
105, 11–20, 2004.
54. F.A. Pavan, E.C. Lima, S.L.P. Dias, and A.C. Mazzocato, Methylene blue
biosorption from aqueous solutions by yellow passion fruit waste, 
Journal of
Hazardous Materials,
 150, 703–712, 2008.Chapter 13
Cellulose: A Smart Material for Water
Purification
Bharti Arora
1
, Eun Ha Choi
2
, Masaharu Shiratani
3
, and
Pankaj Attri
2
,
3
*
1
Department of Applied Science, The Northcap University (Formerly ITM
University), Gurgaon, Haryana, India
2
Department of Electrophysics, Plasma Bioscience Research Center,
Kwangwoon University, Seoul, Korea
3
Graduate School of Information Science and Electrical Engineering,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
*
Corresponding author:
 
chem.pankaj@gmail.com
Abstract
Poor water quality is a great threat to human health. Drinking water contains
various dissolved salts that are partially precipitated in the form of sediment,
which affects the operation of distillation. This motivates the scientific
community to formulate and design newer functional materials that can
remove the contaminants for wastewater remediation. Cellulose is the most
abundantly found material in nature, offering the promising properties, such
as great mechanical strength, biocompatibility, hydrophilicity, relative
thermostabilization, high sorption capacity, and alterable optical appearance.
“Smart” materials based on cellulose show intelligent behaviors in response
to stimuli in the vicinity, thus enabling them to be applied in many fields.
Cellulose acetate (CA) membranes have been used for reverse osmosismembranes. Functionalized CA/silica composite nanofibrous membranes
prepared by combining sol–gel and electro-spinning methods have been used
to remove Cr(VI) from aqueous solutions. Also, ion exchange cellulose fibers
have been used to purify water. Polymer–cellulose nanocomposite
membranes have also been widely used for water purification processes.
Keywords:
 Cellulose, cellulose acetate, nanocomposite, water purification,
membranes, heavy metals
13.1 Introduction
Water pollution by heavy metals has received great attention because of their
increased usage in the chemical industry. Poor water quality is a great threat
to human health. Drinking water contains various dissolved salts which are
partially precipitated in the form of sediment which affects the operation of
distillation. This motivates the scientific community to formulate and design
newer functional materials that can remove the contaminants for wastewater
remediation. Toxic metals, commonly found in high concentrations in landfill
leachate, seem to be a potential source of water pollution due to their
insolubility, accumulation, and biomagnification in the food chains [1–2].
Clean water (i.e., water that is free of toxic chemicals and pathogens) is
essential to human health. Normal water treatment processes like ozone, UV,
chlorination, reverse osmosis (RO) utilize polyamide layer, ultraviolet
radiations, chlorine, etc., which are very harmful to health and their
maintenance is also high [3]. The main merits and demerits of the different
methods being used for water decontamination generally are briefed in 
Table
13.1
.
Table 13.1
 The main merits and demerits of the different methods for water
decontamination.Many current treatments for the reclamation of contaminated water sources
are chemical intensive, energy intensive, and/or require post-treatment due to
unwanted by-product formation. Also, most of these methods are ineffective
and/or very costly, for removal of heavy metal ion from aqueous solutions [7,
8]. However, adsorption is one of the most popular methods to control these
pollutants [9]. But, the adsorption efficiency, selectivity, and regeneration are
dependent on adsorbent materials [10, 11]. For instance, activated carbon
suffers from some drawback including its expensive regeneration and
considerable loss of the substrate [12, 13]. Therefore, recently researchers
have starting focusing on the nanofiber membrane materials for adsorption
technology [14, 15].
13.2 Cellulose: Smart Material for
Water Treatment
Cellulose is a most abundantly found material in nature. It is a linear
polysaccharide consisting of β-D-glucopyranose units joined by β-1,4-
glycosidic linkages arranged in linear fashion. Cellulose chains can exist in
an ordered structure as there are no side chains or branches [16].Naturally occurring cellulose-based nanomaterials possess unique
structural, mechanical and optical properties. Apart from the applications of
cellulose and its derivatives in paper and packaging, automotive, personal
care, construction, and textiles industries, their usage for wastewater
remediation remains an intense area of research due to environmental
concerns.
13.2.1 Cellulose-Based Materials as
Contaminant Adsorbents
Contamination of water due to heavy metal ions is one of the serious
environmental challenges to scientific community. The toxicity of heavy
metals in living and non-living beings has motivated the world wide scientific
community to explore new methods over conventional methods.
Conventional methods such as chemical precipitation, filtration, ion
exchange, electrochemical treatment, membrane technologies, adsorption on
activated carbon, and evaporation have been utilized in past for
decontamination of removal of heavy metals from solutions [17]. Since
membrane technologies, activated carbon adsorption, and ion exchange
process cannot be used at large scale because cost ineffective reasons and
large quantity of sludge produced in the processes [18].
13.2.1.1 Heavy Metal Ion Removal from Wastewater
Because of non-biodegradable nature, heavy metals are considered to be the
most serious pollutants. For example, if Cu
2+
, Zn
2+
, Cd
2+
, and Pb
2+
consumed in high quantities can be carcinogenic to humans. Due to high
solubility and the presence of heavy metals in water bodies, they get
accumulated in ecosystem.
The use of biological macromolecules for wastewater remediation process
has been the growing concern of researchers of environmental issues, which
makes cellulose nanomaterials (CNs) as one of the reliable adsorbents
because of their high surface area-to-volume ratio, low cost, high natural
abundance, and inherent environmental inertness. Keeping in mind the
scientific importance of cellulosic biopolymers in different areas of scienceand technology, cellulosic biopolymers-based graft copolymers were
synthesized using free radical polymerization. Further, chemical modification
of these biofibers could result in better efficiency and enhance their
applicability widely [19]. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), thermogravimetric, and X-ray
diffraction (XRD) analysis were used to characterize the synthesized
cellulosic polymers. In addition, toxicity due to Cu
2+
, Zn
2+
, Cd
2+
, and Pb
2+
metal ions were successfully removed from wastewater by using modified
cellulosic biopolymer. The adsorption of metal ions on modified cellulosic
biopolymer measured in terms of thermodynamic parameters ΔΗ° and ΔG°
clearly revealed that adsorption process was exothermic and spontaneous
[20].
Carboxylation of CNs is one of the most studied methods to enhance their
sorptive capacity. It was found that the introducing succinic acid onto
cellulose nanocrystals resulted in the increased binding efficiency to Pb
2+
and Cd
2+
 from aqueous solutions [21]. The rate of decontamination of
solution from these toxic metal ions was further enhanced by conversion of
the carboxylic acid groups to sodiated carboxylates. Carboxylate-modified
cellulose nanofibrils demonstrated 3–10% higher efficiencies to sorb Ni
2+
and Cr
3+
 in addition to Cd
2+
 and Pb
2+
 than unmodified cellulose nanofibrils
[22]. Various other research groups have also reported that cellulose can
effectively adsorb metal ions [23, 24].
A simple one-pot solvothermal method was designed for growth of
aminated iron oxide particles onto a cellulose nanofibrils matrix for removal
of arsenic [25]. The robust cellulose nanofibrils matrix prevented particle
aggregation and allowed for increased modification of the magnetite particles
with amines. This resulted insignificant higher arsenic removal (36.49
mg/gAs(V)) when compared to previous iron oxide-based adsorbents.
Chromium in its hexavalent results in toxic effects [26]. Human exposure
to Cr(VI) compounds is closely associated with increased risk to respiratory
cancers [27]. Moreover, CN’s easily functionalizable surface provides the
opportunity for the attachment of chemical groups which may enhance the
binding efficiency of pollutants to the CN [28]. Novel NH
2
-functionalized
cellulose acetate (CA)/silica composite nanofibrous membranes weresuccessfully prepared by sol–gel combined with electrospinning technology.
The chemical and morphological structures of membrane were investigated
by SEM, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM)
images, XRD, element analyzer, FT-IR, and N
2
 adsorption desorption
isotherms. The composite nanofibrous membranes were found to exhibit high
surface area and porosity for adsorption of Cr(VI). The Langmuir adsorption
model is best suited to describe the adsorption behavior of Cr(VI), and the
maximum adsorption capacity for Cr(VI) was estimated to be 19.46 mg/g.
The membrane could be conveniently regenerated by alkalization. Thus, the
composite nanofibrous membranes have potential applications in the field of
water treatment [29].
13.2.1.2 Removal of Organic Compounds and Dyes
The organic compounds including aromatic, polyphenols, or
organochlorinated are believed to be the most hazardous chemicals in
environment. The organic compounds and the other organic pesticides bio-
accumulate in water bodies, thereby enhancing the chances of irreversible
contamination of the underground water sources [30]. High chemical stability
and generation of toxic substances such as dioxins and PCB, being very
stable in environment, pose a serious threat to living and non-living
ecosystems.
Previous works highlighted the ability of this natural biopolymer to adsorb
a certain number of pesticides [31, 32]. In previous studies, the adsorption of
cationic surfactant on bleached cellulose fibers has greatly enhanced the
aptitude of the substrate to uptake dissolved organic compound from aqueous
media [33, 34]. The accumulation of the organic solutes within the
aggregated domains formed by the self-assembly of surfactant monomers at
the cellulose/water interface led to the improved solute adsorption. The
retention capacity was found to be dependent on the structure of the
hydrocarbon tail of the adsorbed surfactant as well as amount of surfactant
adsorbed. It was observed that the increase in the chain length of hydrocarbon
led to higher uptake of the solute. The present approach could be promising
for the removal of organic pollutants and toxic substances in wastewaters.
The chemically modified cellulose fibers have been reported for the removal
of organic contaminant from wastewater [35].Additionally, it was reported that cellulose can absorb organic dyes as well
[36–38]. Hybrid Au/TiO
2
 and Ag/TiO
2
–cellulose nanofibrils composites
removed methylene blue (used as a organic contaminant), through both
adsorption and photocatalytic degradation by 75% and 70%, respectively,
after 1 h [39]. Another type of photocatalytic CN was prepared to grow
cadmium sulphide nanoparticles along cellulose nanofibrils using a
hydrothermal reaction [40]. These composite materials degraded methyl
orange up to 80% after 90 min irradiation with visible light.
13.2.2 Cellulose-Based Membranes for
Water Filtration
RO is a technology that is used to remove a large majority of contaminants
from water by pushing the water under pressure through a semipermeable
membrane. Basic studies relating to membranes and the RO processes
continue to provide the information for developing technology of RO.
Another significant process in wastewater treatment is membrane processes.
Additionally, use of nano-reactive membranes and advanced filtration
materials helps in water recycling and desalination. The conventional
treatment methods are incapable in removal of organic pollutants and
nutrients to meet the standard quality [41]. Recent studies have demonstrated
that membrane technology can be successfully applied to purify wastewater
released from textile, leather, food, electronic, diary industries, and municipal
wastewater [42, 43]. Common membrane processes used in water purification
systems include microfiltration, ultrafiltration (UF), and nanofiltration for
water treatment processes. It was found that biopolymer-based films can be
used for membrane applications. Therefore, current focus is to apply efficient
methods and materials for water remediation processes. Cellulose-based
materials can be exploited in the fabrication of membranes for water
treatment.
13.2.2.1 CA Membranes
RO is widely known for converting sea water into freshwater and for blood
dialysis. CA membranes have been used for membranes in RO. These CAhollow fiber membranes are prone to degradation by microorganism in the
raw water [44]. In order to prevent the microbial degradation of the
membrane, sterilization with sodium hypochlorite can be carried out
constantly or intermittently to purify water by the CA hollow fibers.
However, when sodium hypochlorite binds to humus in natural water,
sterilization by-products such as carcinogenic trihalomethane can be
generated.
CN–polymer blends may also be electrospun into fibers. The fabrication of
hollow fiber membranes loaded with silver nanoparticles has been used for
antibacterial applications has been reported [45]. Dry jet wet spinning
technique was used to spun silver-loading asymmetric CA hollow fiber
membrane. CA and AgNO
3
 were dissolved in Ν,Ν-dimethylformamide to
prepare a spinning solution. The silver ions were reduced in the spinning
dope into silver nanoparticles. Scanning electron microscope was used to
examine the morphology of the resulting hollow fibers. And, an inductively
coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometer was used determine the silver
content in the fiber. The antibacterial activities were evaluated. These hollow
fibers were found to have a sponge-like structure and dense inner and outer
surfaces. The silver content in the bulk of the hollow fibers decreased to 60%
after immersing in water bath for 180 days. Although, the silver content on
the surface was reduced to 10%, but it still showed antibacterial activity
against 
Escherichia coli
 and 
Staphylococcus aureus.
 However, the silver
content in the hollow fibers decreased after permeating with water for 5 days
and did not show antibacterial activity against 
E. coli
 and S. 
aureus.
 Thus,
silver content replenished periodically after permeation. The proper range of
AgNO
3
 in the spinning solution for CA hollow fiber was estimated to be
about 100–1000 ppm [45].
13.2.2.2 Chemically Modified Cellulose Membranes
Polymer–cellulose nanocomposite membranes have been used in variety of
membrane processes (i.e., microfiltration, UF, membrane distillation). The
most notable property enhancement leads to altered membrane properties
such as increased membrane tensile strength with small additions of CNs.
Additionally, other changes include membrane surface hydrophilicity, greater
permeability, greater selectivity, and greater resistance to biofouling [46].To provide the surface of UF membranes biocidal, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)
was used to modify the cellulose membranes. The variation in the
morphological structure of composite layers was achieved by altering the
pore sizes for employed membranes. The PVA/CA/PEG (polyethylene
glycol) composite multilayer membrane seemed to be acceptable for practical
uses in desalination of brackish, highly saline and sea (extremely saline
water) water, where the salt rejection (%) was 70, 63, and 59, respectively. In
other words, the water salinity of brackish (3333 mg/l), highly saline
groundwater (13986 mg/l), and sea water (42847 mg/l) became 933, 5059,
and 16722 mg/l after desalination time of 24 h for one run of such membrane
but these values of produced water salinity can be decreased by increasing
the number of the used membranes. On the other hand, the water flux
decreases with increasing feed concentration during operating time 24 h,
where water flux was 10.32, 9.26, and 8.18 (gm/cm
2
 s × 10
–5
) for brackish,
highly saline, and sea water, respectively. The lowering of water flux with the
increase of operation time is due to the accumulation of the salts in the pores
of membrane. The gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria were used to
investigate the importance of such structural differences of the prepared
membranes for antimicrobial activity. The degree of membrane modification
close to its maximal value helped in achieving the highest antimicrobial
activity of modified membranes. Antimicrobial efficiency improved with the
use of PEG and membranes with smaller pore sizes. Modification of
membranes with smaller pore sizes occurred entirely on the membrane
surface when membranes were modified with PEG. This results in the most
expanded layer of bound PEG with the highest activity against
Staphylococcus
 and 
Pseudomonas.
 In case of membranes, they are modified
with lower-molecular-weight PEG, the decrease in the antimicrobial
efficiency was more pronounced with the increase in the pore size [47].
13.2.2.3 Ultrafine Polysaccharide Nanofibers-Based
TFNC Membranes
Also, cellulose ultrafine polysaccharide nanofibers with 5–10 nm diameters
were used in a new class of thin-film nanofibrous composite (TFNC)
membranes as barrier layers for water purification. In addition, pH value andionic strength not only affected the concentration but also viscosity of the
polysaccharide nanofiber coating suspension. Using ultrafine cellulose
nanofibers-based TFNC membranes for UF of oil/water emulsions resulted in
10-fold higher permeation flux with above 99.5% rejection ratio when
compared to two commercial UF membranes (PAN10 and PAN400). High
virus adsorption capacity was verified by MS2 bacteriophage testing which
was attributed to high surface-to-volume ratio and negatively charged surface
of cellulose nanofibers. This paves the way for further opportunities in
drinking water applications. Ultrafine polysaccharide nanofibers-based TFNC
membranes compete with the conventional membrane systems in many
different water applications because of low cost of raw cellulose materials,
the environmentally friendly fabrication process, and the impressive high-
flux performance [48].
13.2.2.4 Cellulose Triacetate and Propionated Lignin
Vapor-induced phase separation method was used to prepare from
nanocomposite membranes for water treatment propionated lignin and
cellulose triacetate (CTA). Three kinds of lignin were used: Kraft,
Organosolv, and Hydrolytic, which were propionated for improving their
compatibility with CTA. FT-IR, UV spectrophotometry, and GPC were used
to analyze the chemical modifications in lignin. Morphology of all
membranes was investigated using field emission scanning microscopy and
atomic force microscopy, whereas mechanical properties were determined
using dynamic mechanical analyzer. Additionally, surface potential of all
membranes was explored using scanning Kelvin probe microscopy. The
groundwater from Chihuahua (Mexico) containing high concentrations of
fluoride, arsenic, calcium, sodium, and magnesium was filtrated for
determining membrane performance. Membrane rejection was 15–35% for
anions present, and 12–42% and 27–54% for monovalent and divalent
cations, respectively. The presence of ionic and organic matters in
groundwater affected the arsenic and fluoride removal by membranes [49].
13.3 ConclusionIn this chapter, we project cellulose as a great promise for water
decontamination and filtration membranes. Being an inexpensive, renewable
and biodegradable material, cellulose-based nanoparticles offer many
advantages over CNTs. Studies have shown that modified cellulosic
biopolymer can be used for removal of Cu
2+
, Zn
2+
, Cd
2+
, and Pb
2+
 toxic
metal ions from wastewater. As more industries rely on the potential of
cellulose-based nanoparticles and invest in their development, new efficient,
inexpensive methods of generation with increased yield will arise with time.
The nanocellulose-based nanocomposites offer many advantages, including
antimicrobial and catalytic activities, which can be utilized for water
purification. Although excellent cellulose-based smart materials have already
been applied successfully in various fields, still the scope for more work
always remain to explore new applications.
References
1. L. Zhang, and Y.L. Hsieh, Ultra-fine cellulose acetate/poly(ethylene oxide)
biocomponent fibers. 
Carbohydrate Polymers,
 71, 196–207, 2008.
2. S.L. Sun, Q. Wang, A.Q. Wang, Adsorption properties of Cu(II) ions onto
N-succinyl- chitosan and crosslinked N-succinyl-chitosan template resin.
Biochemical Engineering Journal,
 36, 131–136, 2007.
3. L. Abhishek, R.A. Karthick, K.D. Kumar, and G.Sivakumar, Efficient
water treatment using smart materials. 
International Conference on Smart
Structures & Systems,
 94–99, 2014.
4. N. Krishnamurthy, P. Vallinayagam, and D. Madhavan, 
Engineering
Chemistry,
 Prentice-Hall of India Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 58–59, 2007.
5. T. Mohammadi, A. Mohebb, M. Sadrzadeh, and A. Razmi, Modeling of
metal ion removal from wastewater by electrodialysis. 
Separation and
Purification Technology,
 41, 73–82, 2005.
6. V.K. Gupta, and I. Ali, Water treatment for inorganic pollutants by
adsorption technology. 
Environmental Water
, 29–91, 2013.
7. N. Li, and R. Bai, Copper adsorption on chitosan-cellulose hydrogel beads:
behaviors and mechanisms. 
Separation and Purification Technology,
 42,237–247, 2005.
8. K.C. Justi, V.T. Faivere, M.C.M. Laranjeira, A. Neves, and R.A. Peralta,
Kinetics and equilibrium adsorption of Cu(II), Cd(II), and Ni(II) ions by
chitosan functionalized with 2[-bis (pyridylmethyl)aminomethyl]-4-methyl-6-
formylphenol. 
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science,
 291, 369–374, 2005.
9. S. Wu, F. Li, Y. Wu, R. Xua, and G. Lib, Preparation of novel poly(vinyl
alcohol)/ SiO
2
 composite nanofiber membranes with mesostructure and their
application for removal of Cu
2+
 from waste water. 
Chemical
Communications,
 46, 1694–1696, 2010.
10. H. Yang, R. Xu, X.M. Xue, F.T. Li, and G.T. Li, Hybrid
surfactanttemplatedmesoporous silica formed in ethanol. 
Journal of
Hazardous Materials,
 152, 690–698, 2008.
11. X.M. Xue, and F.T. Li, Removal of Cu(II) from aqueous solution by
adsorption onto functionalized SBA-16 mesoporous silica. 
Microporous and
Mesoporous Materials,
 116, 116–122, 2008.
12. D.O. Cooney, A. Nagerl, and A.L. Hines, Solvent regeneration of
activated carbon. 
Water Research,
 17, 403–410, 1983.
13. R.G. Martin, and W.J. Ng, The repeated exhaustion and chemical
regeneration of activated carbon. 
Water Research
, 21, 965–965, 1997.
14. S. Wu, F. Li, Y. Wu, R. Xua, and G. Lib, Preparation of novel poly(vinyl
alcohol)/ SiO
2
 composite nanofiber membranes with mesostructure and their
application for removal of Cu
2+
 from waste water. 
Chemical
Communications,
 46, 1694–1696, 2010.
15. A.A. Taha, J. Qiao, F. Li, and B. Zhang, Preparation and application of
amino unfunctionalizedmesoporousnanofiber membrane via electrospinning
for adsorption of Cr
3+
 from aqueous solution. 
Journal of Environmental
Sciences,
 24, 610–616, 2012.
16. G. Gurdag, and S. Sarmad, 
Cellulose Graft Copolymers: Synthesis,
Properties, and Applications, in Polysaccharide Based Graft Copolymers,
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 
2013
.
17. C. Namasivayam, and K. Ranganathan, Removal of Pb(II), Cd(II) and
Ni(II) and mixture of metal ions by adsorption onto waste Fe(III)/Cr(III)hydroxide and fixedbed studies. 
Environment Technology
, 16, 851–860,
1995.
18. D.W.O. Connell, C. Birkinshaw, and T.F.O. Dwyer, Heavy metal
adsorbents preparedfrom the modification of cellulose: A review.
Bioresource Technology,
 99, 6709–6724, 2008.
19. A.W. Carpenter, C.F.D. Lannoy, and M.R. Wiesner, Cellulose
nanomaterials in water treatment technologies. 
Environment Science
Technology
, 49, 5277–5287, 2015.
20. A.S. Singha, and A. Guleria, Chemical modification of cellulosic
biopolymer and its use in removal of heavy metal ions from wastewater.
International Journal of Biological Macromolecules
, 67, 409–417, 2014.
21. X. Yu, S. Tong, M. Ge, L. Wu, J. Zuo, C. Cao, and W. Song, Adsorption
of heavy metal ions from aqueous solution by carboxylated cellulose
nanocrystals. 
Journalof Environment Sciences,
 25, 933–943, 2013.
22. S. Srivastava, A. Kardam, and K.R. Raj, Nanotech reinforcement onto
cellulose fibers: Green remediation of toxic metals. 
International Journal of
Green Nanotechnology,
 4, 46–53, 2012.
23. D. Zhou, L. Zhang, J. Zhou, and S. Guo, Cellulose/chitin beads for
adsorption of heavy metals in aqueous solution. 
Water Research,
 38, 2643–
2650, 2004.
24. M.A. Schneegurt, J.C. Jain, J.A. Menicucci, S.A. Brown, M.K. Kemner,
D.F. Garofalo, and M.R. Quallick, Biomass byproducts for the remediation of
wastewaters contaminated with toxic metals, 
Environment Science
Technology
, 35, 3786–3791, 2001.
25. I.F. Nata, M.S. Kumar, and C.-K. Lee, One-pot preparation of amine-rich
magnetite/bacterial cellulose nanocomposite and its application for arsenate
removal. 
RSC Advances,
 1, 625–631, 2011.
26. A.L. Rowbotham, L.S. Levy, and L.K. Shuker, Chromium in the
environment: an evaluation of exposure of the UK general population and
possible adverse health effects. 
J. Toxicol. Environ Health B Crit. Rev,
 3,
145–178, 2000.
27. IARC Monograph, 
Evaluation of carcinogenic risk to humansin:
Chromium, Nickel and Welding,
 (1990).28. A.W. Carpenter, C.F.D. Lannoy, and M.R. Wiesner, Cellulose
nanomaterials in water treatment technologies. 
Environment Science
Technology
, 49, 5277–5287, 2015.
29. A.A. Taha, J. Qiao, F. Li, and B. Zhang, Preparation and application of
amino unfunctionalized mesoporous nanofiber membrane via electrospinning
for adsorption of Cr
3+
 from aqueous solution. 
Journal of Environmental
Sciences,
 24, 610–616, 2012.
30. R.A. Leonard, 
Pesticides in surface waters, in: Environment Chemistry of
Pesticides, CRC press
, 1988.
31. Z.P. Liang, Y.Q. Feng, S.X. Mang, and Z.Y. Liang, Equilibrium and
kinetic modeling of adsorption of urea nitrogen onto chitosan coated
dialdehyde cellulose. 
Process Biochemistry
, 40, 3218–3224, 2005.
32. I.P. Bras, L. Santos, and A. Alves, Organochlorine pesticides removal by
pinus bark sorption, 
Environment Science Technology
, 33, 631–634, 1999.
33. F. Aloulou, S. Boufi, and M. Chachouk, Adsorption of octadecyltrimethyl
ammonium chloride and adsolubilization on to cellulosic fibers. 
Colloid and
Polymer Science
, 282, 699–707, 2004.
34. F. Aloulou, S. Boufi, N. Belgacem, and A. Gandini, Adsorption of
cationic surfactants and subsequent adsolubilization of organic compounds
onto cellulose fibers. 
Colloid and Polymer Science
, 283, 344–350, 2004.
35. F. Aloulou, S. Boufi, and L. Labidi, Modified cellulose fibres for
adsorption of organic compound in aqueous solution. 
Separation and
Purification Technology
, 52, 332–342, 2006.
36. C. Namasivayam, N. Muniasam, K. Gayatri, M. Rani, and K.
Ranganathan, Removal of dyes from aqueous solutions by cellulosic waste
orange peel. 
Bioresource Technology,
 57, 37–43, 1996.
37. L.C. Morais, E.P. Goncalves L.T. Vasconcelos, and C.G. Gonzalez,
Reactive dyes removal from wastewaters by adsorption on eucalyptus bark:
Variables that define the process. 
Water Research,
 33, 577–583, 1999.
38. Y.S. Ho, T.H. Chiang, and Y.M. Hsueh, Removal of basic dye from
aqueous solution using tree fern as a biosorbent. 
Process Biochemistry,
 40,
119–124, 2005.
39. A. Snyder, Z.Y. Bo, R. Moon, J.C. Rochet, and L. Stanciu, Reusablephoto catalytic titanium dioxide-cellulose nanofiber films. 
Journal of Colloid
and 
Interface Science,
 399, 92–98, 2013.
40. J. Yang, J. Yu, J. Fan, D. Sun, W. Tang, and X. Yang, Biotemplated
preparation of CdS nanoparticles/bacterial cellulose hybrid nanofibers for
photocatalysis application. 
Journal of Hazardous
 Materials, 189, 377–83,
2011.
41. H. Strathmann, Membrane separation processes: Current relevance and
future opportunities. 
American Institute of Chemical Journal,
 47, 1077–1087,
2001.
42. G.K. Pearce, UF/MF pre-treatment to RO in seawater and wastewater
reuse applications: A comparison of energy costs. 
Desalination,
 222, 66–73,
2008.
43. B.P.P. Sarkar, A. Chakrabarti, A. Vijaykumar, and V. Kale, Wastewater
treatment in dairy industries - possibility of reuse. 
Desalination
, 195, 141–
152, 2006.
44. S.W. Kang, J.H. Kim, D. Ko, C.K. Kim, J. Won, K. Char, and Y.S. Kang,
Complexation of phthalate oxygens in poly(ethylene phthalate) with silver
ions and its effect on the formation of silver nanoparticles. 
Journal of
Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics
, 42, 3344–3350, 2004.
45. W.-L. Chou, D.-G. Yu, and M.-C. Yang, The preparation and
characterization of silver-loadingcellulose acetate hollow fiber membrane for
water treatment. 
Polymers for Advanced Technologies
, 16, 600–607, 2005.
46. A.W. Carpenter, C.F.D. Lannoy, and M.R. Wiesner, Cellulose
nanomaterials in water treatment technologies. 
Environment Science
Technology
, 49, 5277–5287, 2015.
47. A.M. Hassanien, M.A. El-Hashash, M.A. Mekewi, D.B. Guirguis, and
A.M. Ramadan, Fabrication of Polyvinyl alcohol/cellulose acetate
(PVA/CA/PEG) antibacterial membrane for potential water purification
application. 
Hydrology: Current Research,
 4, 1–6, 2012.
48. H. Ma, C. Burger, S. Benjamin, B.S. Hsiao, and B. Chu, Ultra-fine
polysaccharide nanofibrous membranes for water purification.
Biomacromolecules,
 12, 970–976, 2011.
49. M.N. Laura, B.C. Lourdes, S.C. Oscar, C. Alain, F. Vanessa, I.G.Rigoerto, and G.S. Guillermo, Biopolymers-based nanocomposites:
Membranes from propionated lignin and cellulose for water purification.
Carbohydrate Polymers
, 86, 732–741, 2011.Chapter 14
Treatment of Reactive Dyes from
Water and Wastewater through
Chitosan and its Derivatives
Mohammadtaghi Vakili
1
, Mohd Rafatullah
1
*
, Zahra
Gholami
2
, and Hossein Farraji
3
1
School of Industrial Technology, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang,
Malaysia
2
Centralized Analytical Laboratory, Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS,
Perak, Malaysia
3
School of Civil Engineering, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia
*
Corresponding author:
 
mohd_rafatullah@yahoo.co.in
Abstract
Adsorption is a technique used to remove dyes from polluted aqueous
solutions. In recent years, the use of low-cost adsorbents, such as chitosan, in
wastewater treatment has increased. Chitosan is a safe, environmentally
friendly and cost-effective substance produced by alkaline de-
acetylation(DD) of chitin, which can be used as an adsorbent. Chitosan and
its derivatives have attracted considerable attention as an appropriate
adsorbent for dye removal due to their specific characteristics such as non-
toxicity, cationicity, biodegradability and high absorption capability. Many
chitosan derivatives have been obtained by chemical and physical
modifications of raw chitosan, including cross-linking and grafting newfunctional groups on the chitosan backbone to absorb dyes. This review
summarizes the applications of chitosan and its grafted and cross-linked
derivatives in removing dyes from wastewater. It also highlights notable
examples in the use of chitosan and its derivatives for dye removal from
aqueous solutions.
Keywords:
 Adsorption, chitosan, reactive dye, wastewater treatment
14.1 Introduction
Water is a vital substance for survival of life and health on earth. About 55%
of human body, 65% of animal’s tissue and 60% of plants are composed of
water. Although more than 70% of Earth’s surface is covered by water, but a
lot of people suffer from a shortage of potable water, because most of the
existing water on Earth is saline water in oceans, which cannot be used for
drinking, cooking, farming and industrial activities. The amount of available
fresh water on the Earth is very limited, and only 1% of the total existing
water on Earth is freshwater and usable, which unfortunately is not readily
available [1]. In recent decades, increases in the world’s population, rapid
technological development, unplanned urbanization, industrialization,
agricultural activities and expanded use of chemicals have resulted in
threatening the environment on Earth via emission of wastes and pollutants
[2]. The generated wastes by human activities contributed to the
contamination of water, which is increasing day by day. This phenomenon
leads to increasing the pollution of limited fresh water resources and thus
threatens human health and other living organisms [3]. The sources of
freshwater could be polluted by pollution transferred from an identifiable,
confined and discrete source (point source) like well, channel, tunnel pipe or
container or tank from which pollutants are discharged. In addition, the
pollution conveyed from diffuse sources caused by human activities or
naturally, which occurred over a wide area and is not attributed to a point
source (nonpoint source) like agricultural or urban runoff [4]. Various
industries discharge their generated waste and untreated effluents in water
flows, which is recognized as one of the environmental concerns and major
sources of water pollution [5].Dyeing industries such as paper, rubber, plastic, food, leather or textile are
the main sources of industrial wastewater. The wastewater generated by these
industries, with main characteristics of high salinity, high chemical oxygen
demand (COD) concentrations, high temperature, high fluctuation in pH (2–
12) and strong coloration is one of the most important environmental
concerns [6]. Some of the used dyes in these industries directly or during the
dyeing process are released to effluents. In the dyeing process, due to the low
level of dye–fibre fixation, about 10–15% of the used dyes are lost in
wastewater. Eventually, generated highly coloured wastewater gets its way to
the environment, which is problematic because of the high visibility,
resistance and toxic impact of the dyes exist in the wastewater [7, 8]. The
presence of dyes in the water, even at low concentration, reduces the
penetration of oxygen and light, which resulted in endanger the environment
by affect on biological cycles and photosynthetic activities. In addition, they
lead to toxic effects on human health such as jaundice, skin irritation,
allergies, heart defects and mutations [9]. According to the synthetic origin
and complex aromatic structures of dyes, they are resistant to biological
degradation. Therefore, dyes can remain stable under different conditions and
biological processes are not able to eliminate the dyes easily and completely
[10]. Therefore, a lot of efforts have been dedicated to the development of
different type of treatment processes in order to degrade the harmful
compounds by converting them to small chemical products.
14.2 Dyes
The dye is defined as a coloured chemical organic compound used for
imparting and provides colour to other substances [11]. The dyes can bind to
other materials surface by mechanical retention, by physical adsorption, by
forming covalent bond or complexes with salts or metals [12]. Dyes can be
classified according to their chemical structure. There are two major
components in the dyes molecule including chromophores (quinoid, carbonyl
(–C=O), azo (–N=N–), nitro (–NO
2
) and methine (–CH=) groups) and
auxochromes (hydroxyl (–OH), amine (–NH
3
), sulfonate (–SO
3
H) and
carboxyl (–COOH) groups) [13]. The chromophores are responsible to impartcolour to the dye and auxochromes are used as a supplement of
chromophores to deepen the colour and enhance the dye attachment towards
the fibres. It should be noted that the sulfonate groups confer very high
aqueous solubility to the dyes [14]. The ability to absorb light in the visible
region is a feature of all dyes [15]. Due to the structural diversity of dyes,
they can be classified in several ways such as chemical structure, application
class and their solubility. However, the classification based on their usage is
the most common method and they can be divided into anionic (acid, reactive
and direct dyes), cationic (basic dyes) and non-ionic (dispersed dyes) [11].
Anionic dyes normally have similar characteristics, e.g. negative charge,
ionic substituent, high water solubility and contain sulfonate (SO
3
Na) group
but possess dissimilar structure characteristics such as xanthenes,
anthraquinone, azonic and triphenylmethane, which increase dyes resistance
to degradation [16]. Anionic dyes are extensively used in dyeing of
polyamide and protein materials (acid dyes) and cellulosic substances
(reactive and direct dyes) [17]. The process of dyeing is frequently carried
out in acidic conditions due to the interaction between protonated amino
groups in fibres and negatively charged sulfonate groups of anionic dyes
structure in acidic solution [18].
On the other hand, positively charged dyes are known as cationic or basic
dyes [16]. Transformation of amino (–NH
2
) to ammonium (–NH
3
) groups is
the responsible for their basic and positive properties. This class of dyes is
widely used for acrylic fibres dyeing due to negative charge of these fibres,
which interact with the positively charged dye molecules [18]. The presence
of these functional groups in cationic dyes makes them more water soluble
and provides more visibility, brilliance and intensity of colours [19]. The
term of non-ionic is applied for the other group of dyes (disperse dye) with
small, planar and not ionized molecules (free from ionizing groups). Due to
the hydrophobic properties of disperse dyes (limited water solubility and the
presence of polar groups such as –NO
2
 and –CN), they are more suitable for
dyeing the hydrophobic fibres such as nylon, polyamide, polyester and
polyurethane [20, 21].14.3 Reactive Dyes
Reactive dye was discovered in 1954 and in 1956 was entered into the
commercial market [22]. Afterwards, due to the suitable dyeing properties,
this class of dyes has become one of the most popular and extensively applied
dyes for dyeing the cellulosic substrate such as polyamides, wool and cotton
[23]. Reactive dyes are possess interesting dyeing features such as wide
shade range, bright colours, ease of application and high colour fastness [24].
On the other hand, they suffer from some drawbacks such as high cost of dye,
long time for batch processing, a high salt content of the wastewater, low
adsorption ability, non-biodegradability, high water solubility and low degree
of fixation on the surfaces, which resulted in generating highly coloured
wastewater [25]. These kinds of dyes are called reactive dyes due to the
presence of reactive groups on dye molecules and capability of chemically
interaction (covalent bonds) with functional groups of fibre [26]. Reactive
dyes are characterized by azo-based chromophores with aromatic structure
combined with various types of reactive groups such as chlorotriazine, vinyl
sulfone, difluorochloropyrimidine and trichloropyrimidine [27]. The other
difference of reactive dyes with other dyes is in the dyeing process. The
anionic properties of both reactive dyes and cellulose reduce the interaction
between them, so the dyeing process is conducted in high concentrated
alkaline conditions (pH 9–12), salt concentration (40–100 g/L) and at high
temperatures (30–70 °C) [13]. However, in the presence of water, some of
dye molecules do not attach to surface of fibre due to the hydrolysis of their
reactive group with the hydroxyl group of water. Consequently, a high
amount of applied reactive dyes are wasted and discharged in the effluent
[28]. The presence of reactive dyes in environmental can threat the ecosystem
by their toxicity effects and sunlight transmission reduction through aquatic
environment. Therefore, this leads to complications and environmental
problems if the effluent passes to the environment without suitable treatment
for dye elimination.
14.4 Dye Treatment Methods
In recent years, the rapid expansion of the industry has led to an increase inindustrial effluents, which is considered as one of the environmental and
water pollution sources. Textile effluents constitute a major part of industrial
wastewater. Release of dyes to the environment by untreated wastewater
poses serious threat to the freshwater sources, aquatic life and human beings
[29]. Hence, given the importance of water for human life, an effective
method for treatment of dyes wastewater is necessary to control water
pollution in many countries. There are various methods have been applied for
the removal of dyes from contaminated waters and industrial effluents, which
are generally classified as physical, chemical and biological [30]. Biological
wastewater treatment is the most common method for removing dyes from
wastewater [31, 32]. In this method, bacteria are used to prepare the required
energy for microbial activities through various wastewater components [33].
This method is affected by factors such as dye concentration, temperature and
initial pH of the wastewater. Compared with other methods, biological
wastewater treatment is more environmental friendly, cost effective and
appropriate for the removal of different dyes. However, this method also has
drawbacks, including large area requirement, long decolourization time, and
lack of flexibility in operation and design [9, 34].
Oxidation methods, electrokinetic coagulation, electroflotation, irradiation
or electrochemical processes are some chemical treatment methods. This
method is effective in eliminating dyes from wastewaters by using chemical
reagents, such as aluminium, calcium, chlorine, lime or ferric ions [35]. This
method is useful for treating industrial wastewaters. Disadvantages of this
method include large volume of sludge generated as waste, pH dependence,
excessive chemical use and expensive reagents [36]. Physical methods
involve separation process, including sedimentation, membrane and
adsorption, do not require any chemical reagent, bacteria or microorganisms
to improve the quality of wastewater [2, 37]. Nevertheless, these methods
shows some limitations such as low efficiency, high operating or investment
costs, needing special equipment, use of chemicals and high sludge
production. All these limitations lead to inadequacy of these methods for dye
wastewater treatment in small-scale industries [38]. Adsorption is a simple
and effective process for elimination of dyes from wastewater. This method is
preferred by researchers over other methods and widely used in wastewater
treatment since the discharged effluent has high quality as well as the use oflow-cost and effective adsorbents instead of applying commercial adsorbents.
14.5 Adsorption
Adsorption is a simple and effective process of dye removal from
wastewater. The first application of the adsorption is not clear. However, the
capability of some special materials to eliminate the colour of solution, ability
of bone char for removal of colour from sugar solution and use of wood
charcoal for hospitals air purification is known in 15st, 18st and 19st
centuries, respectively. In addition, the first use of adsorption process in large
scale was in the early 1920 in Germany and United states [39]. Over the past
few decades, application of absorption has gained more importance in the
industry and has been further developed for environmental protection.
Adsorption is a separation process, in which the amount of chemical
components (adsorbate) is increased at the surface of a solid (adsorbent) [40].
This adsorption process involves both physical and chemical actions that
involve a van der Waals force or are action between an adsorbate and an
adsorbent [41]. Adsorption can function in solid or liquid matrices and
certainly can be used to remove pollutants from polluted aqueous solutions.
Adsorption is preferred over other methods because it is rapid, conveniently
designed and operated, impenetrable to toxic contaminants, discharging high-
quality effluent and does not produce hazardous by-products [42].
14.6 Adsorbents for Dye Removal
The degree of adsorption is affecting by many parameters such as adsorbent,
adsorbate and aqueous phase properties. The type and nature of the adsorbent
are the main parameters affecting the adsorption efficiency. Generally,
adsorbents with sufficient pore volume and size, large surface area,
mechanical stability, ease of regeneration, cost effectiveness and easy
accessibility, high selectivity and high adsorption capacity are acceptable and
appropriate adsorbents for elimination of dyes [43, 44]. Activated carbon,
activated alumina, silica gel and zeolite are the commonly used commercial
adsorbents for dye removal. Activated alumina is synthesized by the thermaltreatment of hydrous alumina granules. Specifically, thermal treatment
removes hydroxyl groups, thereby leaving a porous solid structure of
activated alumina with a large surface area (200–300 m
2
/g). The adequate
surface area of activated alumina makes it an appropriate adsorbent to
remove pollutants from aqueous solutions. Previous studies have evaluated
the capacity of activated alumina to remove dyes [45–47].
Zeolites are hydrated aluminosilicate minerals with a porous structure.
They are naturally formed through changes in glass-rich volcanic rocks (tuff)
by sea or playa lake water. Zeolites can also be synthesized. They are an
appropriate adsorbent for removing pollutants from wastewaters because of
their effective properties, including high ion exchange, and their applications
in molecular sieving, catalysis and sorption [48, 49]. Some zeolites can be
used for the removal of dyes [50, 51] and other pollutants, such as heavy
metals [52, 53]. Silica gel, invented in the 1920s, is a concentration of
Si(OH)
4
 in siloxane chains. It can have regular, intermediate, or low density
with a surface area of 750, 300–350 and 100–200 m
2
/g, respectively. Silica
gel is a suitable adsorbent because of its valuable physicochemical properties,
such as stability under acidic conditions, rapid adsorption and porous
structure with high surface area. Although it is also nontoxic, nonflammable
and chemically ineffective, the use of silica gel is limited by its high cost [54,
55]. Gaikwad and Misal [56] and Samiey and Toosi [57] used silica gel for
dye adsorption.
Activated carbon, with an outstanding capacity to absorb various
chemicals, is one of the oldest and important adsorbents utilized for
wastewater treatment worldwide [19]. Carbon is activated through
dehydration and carbonization in the presence of heat and in the absence of
oxygen. Produced activated carbon has an amorphous structure with tiny
pores and a large surface area of 300–4000 m
2
/g. Although activated carbon
is an effective adsorbent for eliminating different dyes, it is still limited by its
high cost and requirement of regeneration after adsorption, which leads to
decreased adsorption capability and increased cost [58].
Although activated carbon is an effective and most widely used adsorbent
for eliminating of different type of dyes from wastewater due to its specific
adsorption properties, but application of this adsorbent is restricted due to itspricey nature and requirement of regeneration after adsorption, which lead to
decrease adsorption capability and increase the cost [58] as well as the need
to the disinfection, precipitation, filtration and adjust the pH [59]. Moreover,
due to the bacterial growth increases, the carbon needs to be reactivated at
high temperatures to burn off the bacterial growth, which leads loss and
oxidation of material as well as increase the cost [60, 61]. Hence, due to these
drawbacks during the recent years, many efforts have been carried out by
researchers in order to production of more cost-effective alternative
adsorbents with effective adsorption capacity that can be used in dye
wastewater treatment. Recently, researchers have been focussed on utilization
of adsorbents composed of natural polymers that are not harmful to the
environment and also can be obtained in abundance especially
polysaccharides such as chitosan to serve as alternative adsorbents [62].
14.7 Chitosan
Chitosan is de-acetylated form of chitin (the second most abundant polymer
in the world). Chitin, as a naturally abundant and low-cost polymer, can be
used in adsorption because of the presence of acetamide and hydroxyl groups
in its structure [63]. Nevertheless, it is very resistant to biodegradation, which
has become a major environmental concern [62]. Converting this polymer to
chitosan is a suitable way to overcome this problem. In the 19th century,
Rouget boiled chitin in potassium hydroxide and produced an acid-soluble
product called chitosan [64]. Chitosan is chemically expressed as a
heterogeneous, linear, cationic and polysaccharide biopolymer with high
molecular weight. Compared with chitin, chitosan is chemically more
versatile because of its attractive inherent properties, including
biodegradability, biocompatibility, film-forming ability, bio-adhesivity,
polyfunctionality, hydrophilicity and adsorption capacity [65]. These
favourable properties make chitosan suitable for use in different industries,
including agriculture [66], food [67], cosmetics [65], biomedical [68],
pharmaceutical [69] and wastewater treatment [70].
To date, researchers are interested in selecting and using natural, effective
alternative materials as adsorbents in wastewater treatment [9]. Low-cost,
environmentally friendly and nontoxic materials with high surface area andhigh adsorption capacity are preferred [71]. Chitosan has been gained a lot of
attention by researchers for use as an appropriate adsorbent for dye removal
due to its specific adsorption properties such as the presence of different
adsorption sites on chitosan chain, versatility, biodegradability, cationicity,
high adsorption capability and selectivity, macromolecular structure,
abundance and low price [72]. Thus, there has been a growing interest in use
of chitosan as adsorbent in adsorption process for removal of dyes.
However, some weaknesses of chitosan such as low surface area, low
mechanical strength and solubility in acid limit the adsorption performance of
this material. Therefore, favourable adsorption characteristics of chitosan
could be modified through physical modification (conversion of raw chitosan
flakes into beads, film and membrane) or chemical modification (cross-
linking, impregnation and fictionalization) [73]. Many researchers have
investigated the adsorption performance of different forms of chitosan for
elimination of reactive dyes (
Table 14.1
).
Table 14.1
 Treatment of reactive dyes from aqueous solutions by chitosan
and its derivatives.14.7.1 Unmodified Chitosan
The obtained chitosan from chitin, a solid material with high crystallinity
called chitosan flakes, has been used by a few researchers as an adsorbent for
reactive dye removal from aqueous solutions (
Table 14.1
). Juang 
et al.
 [74]
analysed the sorption performance of reactive dyes on chitosan flakes as an
adsorbent. Results showed that the concentrations of adsorbate and adsorbent
affect the adsorption capacity and also increase in particle size of adsorbent
decreases adsorption capacity. The highest adsorption capacities of chitosan
flakes for Reactive Red 222 (RR222), Reactive Yellow 145 (RY145) and
Reactive Blue 222 were 380, 179 and 87 g/kg, respectively. Sakkayawong 
et
al.
 [75] investigated the ability of chitosan to remove Reactive Red 141
(RR141) from textile wastewater under acidic and caustic conditions. Results
indicated that the process is affected by pH of dye solution. Under acidic
conditions, electrostatic interaction occurs between the effective functional
groups (amino groups) and the dye. Adsorption under caustic conditions is
also affected by the covalent bonding of the dye and the hydroxyl groups of
chitosan. In addition, the adsorption mechanism under acidic conditions is
chemical, whereas that under caustic conditions is both physical and
chemical. However, the maximum adsorption capacities of chitosan increased
with increasing temperature. The maximum adsorption capacities of chitosan
in the study were 68, 110 and 156 mg/g under a system pH of 11 at 20 °C, 40
°C and 60 °C, respectively. The adsorption of Reactive Yellow 2 (RY2) and
Reactive Black 5 (RB5) by chitosan flakes was studied by Uzun [76]. He
found that for maximum adsorption, the dye adsorption by chitosan from
aqueous solutions must be studied at high temperature.
Annadurai 
et al
. [77] investigated adsorption and desorption of a reactive
dye (Remazol Black 13) using chitosan flakes from aqueous solutions in
batch system. Adsorption experiments performed under different conditions
including contact time, initial dye concentration (100–300 mg/L), particle
size (0.177, 0.384 and 1.651 mm), pH (6.7–9.0), and temperature (30–60 °C).
The maximum adsorption capacity was 91.47–130.0 mg/g. The amino group
nature of the chitosan provided reasonable dye removal capability.
Desorption studies elucidated the mechanism and recovery of the adsorbate
and adsorbent. The number of negatively charged sites increased withincreasing system pH. A negatively charged surface site on the adsorbent
favours the adsorption of dye electrostatic repulsion. Szygula 
et al.
 [78] also
investigated adsorption and desorption potentiality of an anionic dye on
chitosan. They employed RB5 and 87% de-acetylated chitosan flakes as
adsorbate and adsorbent, respectively, in a batch technique. Initial dye
concentration, pH and contact time were the parameters studied in the
experiment. Results showed that the maximum sorption capacity was 477
mg/g at optimum pH 1–3 and room temperature. Desorption studies
explained that this adsorbent can be regenerated easily by 0.01 M NaOH
solution and that adsorbed dye can be desorbed. Adsorption of RB5 onto
chitosan flakes in a fixed-bed column system was as well analysed by
Barron-Zambrano 
et al.
 [79]. Results showed that initial dye concentration,
superficial flow velocity, bed height and particle size significantly affect the
adsorption process. Analysis of the breakthrough curves indicated that
adsorption is affected by mass transfer limitations, probably because of
intraparticle diffusion. Regeneration experiment using 0.01 mol/L NaOH
represented that the chitosan to be regenerated and the dye to be recovered.
Several cycles of adsorption elution showed that chitosan is able to be
regenerated and retain good adsorption efficiency.
Li and Ding [80] conducted batch tests using chitosan flakes to remove
Reactive Black M-2R (RBM) from wastewater. In this experiment, the effects
of different temperatures (25–50 °C), chitosan dosage and degree of de-
acetylation (DD) (55%, 66% and 88%) on RBM removal were studied. The
sorption data showed that adsorption capacity decreases with increasing
temperature. Chitosan with 66% DD exhibited the highest sorption capacity
(146 mg/g) within 1 h by using 0.01 g adsorbent dosage, 298 K, and 19 mg/L
initial concentration. Ignat 
et al.
 [81] also studied the adsorption behaviour of
chitosan for elimination of reactive dyes, Reactive Red 3 (RR3) and Direct
Brown 95 (DB95) in a batch system. In this study, effect of chitosan
structure, contact time, initial dye concentration, pH, addition of sodium
chloride and temperature was assessed. Results showed that increase in
temperature, pH and concentration of sodium chloride decreased the
adsorption of both dyes on chitosan. Accordingly, the highest adsorption
values for RR-3 and DB-95 were 151.52 and 41.84 mg/g at 20 °C and 50 °C,
respectively. In this study, the chitosan flakes were ground and sieved to0.10–0.15 mm and used for adsorption experiments in a batch system.
14.7.2 Physically Modified Chitosan
Despite dye adsorption capability of chitosan, the applications of chitosan in
form of flakes are limited by some drawback such as low surface area,
hydrophilicity and adsorption capacity non-porosity, high crystallinity and
resistance to mass transfer. These drawbacks of chitosan flakes make them
unsuitable adsorbents. To overcome these problems, chitosan flakes are
usually subjected to physical modification by converting them into gel beads
to increase surface area, porosity and expand chitosan polymer chains,
decrease crystallinity, improve access to internal sorption sites and easily
separation of beads from the solution after adsorption. All these
modifications improve the adsorption capability of chitosan [73]. Since
during the bead preparation, conversion of chitosan flakes to dissolved-state
forms leads to breaking of hydrogen bonds between hydroxyl groups and
between amino groups. Therefore, accessibility of adsorption sites for
interacting with molecules of dyes and consequently adsorption capacity of
chitosan beads could be increased [82]. Other comparative studies found that
the adsorption capacity of chitosan flakes is lower than that of chitosan beads.
Numerous comparative studies have been carried out by researchers
explaining the adsorption performance of chitosan in form of flakes and
beads for removal of reactive dyes from aqueous solutions and it is reported
that chitosan beads have higher adsorption capacity than that of chitosan
flakes.
Adsorption performances of chitosan flakes and beads for RR222 dye
removal at 30 °C were analysed by Wu 
et al.
 [83]. Results illustrated that the
adsorption capacity of chitosan beads (1036 mg/g) is higher than that of
chitosan flakes (494 mg/g). This could be due to the higher due to the higher
surface area of chitosan beads (4–6 m
2
/g) than that of chitosan flakes (30–40
m
2
/g). In other study, Wu 
et al.
 [84] also reported that chitosan beads have
higher adsorption capability to eliminate reactive dyes [RR222, RY145 and
Reactive Black 222 (RB222)] compared with that of chitosan flakes.
Experimental data proved that compared with chitosan flakes, chitosan beads
increases the immobilization rate by 14 times, increases the absorption rateby 10% (RB222, RY145) to 40% (RR222), and increases the absorption
capacity by approximately 5 times. Filipkowska [85] evaluated the adsorption
capacity of reactive dyes [Reactive Yellow 84 (RY84), Reactive Red 11
(RR11), RB5 and Reactive Black 8 (RB8)] on chitin, chitosan flakes and
chitosan beads. Results showed that pH is crucial in the adsorption and the
highest dye removal efficiency of chitin occurred at pH 3, whereas that of
chitosan flakes and beads occurred at pH 5. Chitosan beads showed the
highest adsorption efficiency. Maximum adsorption capacities of chitin,
chitosan flake and chitosan beads were 350 mg/g for removal of RY84 and
450 mg/g and 690 mg/g for removal of RB5, respectively.
The adsorption capacity of chitosan beads for the removal of Reactive Red
195 (RR195) from wastewater in the presence of other substances was
studied by Wen 
et al.
 [86]. It is found that the presence of Ca
+
, Mg
2+
 and
Fe
2+
 decreases adsorption capacity, whereas the presence of Na+ does not
affect RR195 removal by chitosan. This result can be attributed to the
chelation between these cations and chitosan chains. Chelation decreases the
electrostatic interaction between RR195 and chitosan. Moreover, increasing
chitosan dose has a dramatic positive effect on dye removal. Phung 
et al.
 [87]
identified the adsorption ability of chitosan beads to remove RB5 from
aqueous solution in a batch system under different reaction conditions.
Experimental data revealed that the maximum adsorption capacity was 8.14
mg/g (more than 99% removal) obtained at optimum conditions (pH 4, 200
rpm agitation rate, 1.0 g sorbent dosage, 300 min contact time and initial dye
concentration of 25 mg/L). Ong and Seou [88] also assessed adsorption of
RB5 using chitosan beads. In present research, the maximum RB5 removal
percentage was about 96.22% with an initial RB5 concentration of 60 mg/L
for a duration of 182.5 min at pH 7 and agitation rate of 200 rpm.
14.7.3 Chemically Modified Chitosan
14.7.3.1 Cross-Linking
The pH value of the dye solution usually has a great effect on the adsorption
behaviour of the adsorbent. It changed the surface charge of the adsorbent
and influenced the chitosan structure at specific functional groups (OH and –NH
2
) [89]. It is found by researchers that at lower pH, the maximum reactive
dye removals by chitosan were found to be higher than that of at higher pH.
This could be due to the electrostatic interactions between anionic groups in
reactive dyes and cationic groups in chitosan. Sulfonate groups (–SO
3
H) of
reactive dyes could be converted in water to active negative sulfonate groups
(–SO
3
−
). In addition, protonation of amine groups in the chitosan at low pH
solution leads to increase in the adsorption of reactive dyes molecules on the
chitosan [90]. However, increasing the acidity of dye solution leads to a
decrease in the reactive dyes removal. This could be due to the instability and
dissolution tendency of chitosan under acidic environment occurred by the
protonation of its amine groups at low pH values. This is considered as one of
the weaknesses of chitosan that could limit the successful use of it as an
adsorbent in an acid environment for reactive dyes removal [73]. Therefore,
cross-linking is an effective way to overcome this problem. Cross-linkers
links chitosan chains resulted in improve the mechanical strength and acid
stability of chitosan [91]. There are some cross-linking agents have been used
for cross-linking the chitosan within adsorption of reactive dyes such as
epichlorohydrin (ECH), glutaraldehyde (GLA), tripolyphosphate (TPP) and
dimethylol dihydroxyethyleneurea (DMDHEU) [73].
Fahmy 
et al.
 [92] analysed adsorption of a reactive dye (Brilliant Red
M5BR-2) on chitosan cross-linked with DMDHEU. Experimental data
showed that cross-linked chitosan presented high affinity for the reactive dye
removal and the dye removal percentage decreased significantly by
increasing the pH and decreasing the time of process. The highest dye
removal percentage (full removal) was occurred after 30 min of adsorption
process at low pH value of 4.
14.7.3.1.1 GLA Cross-Linking
Guibal 
et al.
 [93] evaluated the capability of chitosan powder cross-linked
with GLA for RB5 removal from wastewater. Sorption was dependent on the
acidity of the dye solution. Protonation of amino groups on chitosan in the
solution with low pH leads to electrostatic interaction between these
protonated groups and anionic groups presented on reactive dye resulted in
the sorption of RB5 on chitosan. Cestari 
et al.
 [94] assessed adsorptionbehaviour of GLA cross-linked chitosan beads for elimination of Reactive
Red (RR), Reactive Blue (RB) and Reactive Yellow (RY) dyes from aqueous
solutions at pH 2. The results revealed that the adsorption mechanisms and
adsorption quantities were affected strongly by contact times, the
temperatures and the chemical structures of the dyes. Increased the
temperature from 25 °C to 50 °C led to decrease adsorption of the RB,
however, sorption of the RY decreased by increasing the temperature. In the
case of RR removal, decreased from 25 °C to 35 °C and increased from 45 °C
to 50 °C. Rosa 
et al.
 [95] analysed the removal of Reactive Orange 16
(RO16) dye from textile effluents on GLA chitosan flakes. The adsorption
experiments were conducted at different pH values and initial dye
concentrations. Adsorption was independent of solution pH. The adsorption
rate was dependent on dye concentration at the surface of the adsorbent for
each time period and on the amount of dye adsorbed. The maximum
adsorption capacity was 1060 mg/g, corresponding to 75% occupation of the
adsorption sites. The results demonstrated that the adsorbent material can
remove dyes from textile effluents independent of the pH of the aqueous
medium.
14.7.3.1.2 TPP Cross-Linking
Momenzadeh 
et al.
 [96] investigated the potentiality of removing an azo
reactive dye, Reactive Red 120 (RR120), from aqueous solution by using
chitosan and chitosan nanoparticles. In this study, sodium TPP was used as
ionic cross-linker, and results showed that the chitosan nanoparticles have
much higher adsorption capacity and faster adsorption kinetics than dissolved
chitosan. The adsorption capacity of the nanoparticles and dissolved chitosan
were 910 and 51 mg/g, respectively, at a pH of 4–5.
14.7.3.1.3 ECH Cross-Linking
Removal of Reactive Red 189 (RR189) using ECH cross-linked chitosan
beads as adsorbent studied by Chiou and Li [97]. Adsorption experiment was
conducted in a batch system under different reaction conditions such as pH
(1, 3, 6 and 9), temperature (30 °C, 40 °C and 50 °C), initial dye
concentration (4320, 5760 and 7286 g/m
3
), particle sizes (2.3–2.5, 2.5–2.7
and 3.5–3.8 mm) and cross-linking ratio (ECH/chitosan weight: 0.2, 0.5, 0.7and 1.0). Results showed that effect of both the pH of dye solution and the
initial dye concentration on adsorption capacity was significantly higher than
that of the cross-linking ratio and the temperature. A decrease in the solution
pH and also an increase in initial concentration of dye led to increase the
adsorption capacity of adsorbent. The maximum adsorption capacities of
small, medium and large particle sizes were 1936, 1686 and 1642 g/kg,
respectively, at 0.2 cross-linking ratio, 30 °C and pH 3. Chiou 
et al.
 [98]
applied ECH cross-linked chitosan beads for the adsorption of RR222, from
aqueous solution using a batch technique. The initial dye concentration and
the solution pH significantly affect the adsorption of RR222. An increase in
initial dye concentration results in the increase of adsorption capacity, which
also increases with decreasing pH. The maximum adsorption capacity was
2252 g/kg at pH 3 and 30 °C. Chiou and Chuang [99] analysed the adsorption
behaviour of an acid dye [Metanil Yellow (MY)] and a reactive dye, Reactive
Blue 15 (RB15), on ECH crosslinked chitosan beads in a batch system. The
adsorption capacities for MY and RB15 were 1334 and 722 mg/g,
respectively, at pH 4 and 30 °C.
Adsorption of RB5 on chitosan beads cross-linked by ECH from aqueous
solution was reported by Kim 
et al.
 [100]. Results indicated that the RB5
removal strongly affected by changing pH and temperature. An increase in
temperature and a decrease in pH of dye solution led to increase the
adsorption capacity of adsorbent. The maximum adsorption capacity of RB5
onto the ECH cross-linked chitosan beads was 2.06 mol/kg at pH 3 and 35
°C. The average pore size and surface area of the cross-linked chitosan beads
were 70.9 Å and 315 m
2
/g, respectively. Chiou 
et al.
 [101] synthesized an
adsorbent with high reactive dye adsorption capacity using ECH cross-linked
chitosan beads. This adsorbent was used to remove four reactive dyes,
namely, Reactive Blue 2 (RB2), Reactive Red 2 (RR2), RY2 and Reactive
Yellow 86 (RY86) from acid solutions in a batch system. The adsorption
capacity increased largely with the increase in dye initial concentration as
well as decreasing solution pH and adsorbent dosage. The maximum
adsorption capacities values at pH 3 and 30 °C for RY86, RR2, RY2 and
RB2 were 1911, 2422, 2436 and 2498 kg/g, respectively. In acidic solutions
the major adsorption site of chitosan (–NH
2
), easily protonated and convertedto (–NH
3
+
). Therefore, the strong electrostatic interaction between the –
NH
3
+
 of chitosan and dye anions can explain the high adsorption capacity of
anionic dyes onto chemically cross-linked chitosan beads.
In a comparative study, removal of RR189 dye from aqueous solution using
cross-linked chitosan beads with different cross-linking reagents (ECH, TPP
and ethyleneglycol diglycidyl ether (EDGE)) was investigated by Chiou and
Li [102]. Results revealed that a decrease in pH of dye solution and also
increasing concentration of dye increased the adsorption capacity of
adsorbents. Using ECH for cross-linking the chitosan beads led to improve
their adsorption performance, while TPP chitosan beads were more rigid. The
maximum adsorption capacity of ECH–TPP cross-linked chitosan beads was
1840 g/ kg at pH 3 and 30 °C, while non-cross-linked chitosan beads
exhibited lower adsorption capacity (950 g/kg) at pH 6. In addition,
desorption experiment showed that prepared cross-linked chitosan beads are
able to be reused to adsorb the dye and to reach the same capacity as that
before desorption. ECH as a proper cross-linking agent is an organic
molecule contains a highly reactive three-membered oxirane ring and oxygen
and chlorine heteroatoms. It is reported by many researchers that cross-linked
chitosan by ECH compared with other cross linkers can be used as a suitable
adsorbent with high acid stability and adsorption capacity. This could be
attributed to the fact that since ECH mostly binds with –OH group, the
availability of major adsorption sites (amine groups) is not compromised.
These sites are not eliminated during the cross-linking process of chitosan,
while other cross-linkers interact with the amine groups [73].
14.7.3.2 Functionalization
In order to improve the chemical resistance and mechanical strength of
chitosan against acids, alkali and chemicals, chitosan must be cross-linked to
avoid dissolution and to allow its use in acidic media [91]. Cross-linkers
contain minimum two reactive functional groups which links chitosan chains
with covalent bond. Since cross-linkers bind with functional groups presented
in chitosan chain, the availability of the free adsorption sites especially amine
groups and consequently adsorption capacity may decrease [82]. Therefore,
further chemical modification such as functionalization is required toovercome the limitation of cross-linking and improve the adsorption capacity
of adsorbents. Owing to presence of different reactive functional groups such
as acetamido, amino and hydroxyl groups on chitosan backbone, hence new
molecules are able to be coupled to chitosan chains. Therefore, the basic
properties of chitosan do not change after functionalization and the
physicochemical characteristics of the chitosan are maintained, it could
bringing new or improved properties. Introducing new functional groups can
impart new functionality to chitosan by increasing the density of sorption
sites or by increasing the selectivity for a target sorbate [82]. After
modification by functionalization, chitosan achieves much improved water
solubility, which increases the chelating or complexation properties or
enhances adsorption properties. Moreover, functionalization may modify the
chitosan properties such as mucoadhesivity, biocompatibility and
biodegradability [103]. 
Table 14.1
 presents various chitosan derivatives
synthesized by functionalization used for reactive dye elimination from
wastewater.
14.7.3.2.1 Chitosan Functionalized Amino Group
Elwakeel [104] analysed the elimination of an anion dye, RB5, from aqueous
solutions on magnetic resin derived from chemically modified chitosan using
batch and column methods. In this study, chitosan was cross-linked using
GLA and then chemically modified through the reaction with
tetraethylenepentamine followed by glycidyltrimethylammonium chloride to
produce chitosan/amino adsorbent (R1) and chitosan bearing both amine and
quaternary ammonium chloride moieties (R2), respectively. Results showed
that the nature of interaction between the anions and the adsorbent is
dependent upon the acidity and temperature of the medium. Both adsorbents
showed high affinity for the adsorption of RB5 and the maximum adsorption
capacities of R1 (0.70 mmol/g) and R2 (0.90 mmol/g) occurred at pH 3 and
45 °C. The higher adsorption capacity of R2 than that of R1 could be due to
the presence of both trimethylammonium and glycidyltrimethylammonium
chloride in R2 adsorbent. This led to improve adsorption performance of R2
in all pH ranges (acidic/neutral/basic), while R1 is just a suitable adsorbent in
acidic mediums.
Kyzas 
et al.
 [105] studied the adsorption and desorption performance ofmodified chitosan beads for treatment of industrial wastewater containing
reactive dyes [Remazol Red 3BS (RR), Remazol Blue RN (RB), and
Remazol Yellow Gelb 3RS (RYG3RS)]. In this study, chitosan beads first
cross-linked with both ECH and GLA and then modified using acrylamide
and poly ethylene imine (PEI). Results revealed that cross-linking led to
develop the capability of adsorbent for reuse for at least 10 cycles without
significant capacity loss (5%). In addition, modification of cross-linked
chitosan beads led to increase the sorption sites (amido and imino groups) on
adsorbents resulted in enhancing the adsorption capacity. Dye uptake
efficiency of absorbents presented highest level at acidic conditions (pH 2).
This could be due to the protonation of amine groups of chitosan and increase
the cationicity of adsorbents at acidic conditions. The adsorption capacity
followed the order chitosan–PEI>chitosan–acrylamide>chitosan. This was
attributed to the higher basicity (electro positivity) of imino groups
(chitosan–PEI) versus amide groups (chitosan–acrylamide). Thus, more
positively charged groups had the chance to occur on PEI derivative.
Chatterjee 
et al.
 [106] investigated the adsorption capacity of modified
chitosan beads to remove RB5 from aqueous solutions. Chitosan obtained
from crab shells was cross-linked using ECH, modified by PEI and sodium
dodecyl sulphate (SDS), and then used in the adsorption process. The
maximum adsorption capacity values of PEI–chitosan (709.27 mg/g) and
PEI–SDS–chitosan (413.23 mg/g) were higher than that of chitosan (201.90
mg/g) and SDS–chitosan (168.07 mg/g), indicating that the adsorption
performance of chitosan and cross-linked SDS–chitosan can be highly
enhanced by PEI grafting.
14.7.3.2.2 Chitosan Functionalized Carboxyl Group
Singha 
et al.
 [107] assessed adsorption performance of modified chitosan
using poly (methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) for elimination of reactive dyes
from textile industry effluent. Experimental results revealed that that
modification led to improve adsorption performance of chitosan. Moreover,
modified chitosan was insoluble in water or acidic solution (pH range of 4–
10). The adsorption rate was dependent on dye concentration, temperature
and pH of dye solution. The maximum adsorption capacities of chitosan for
RY86 (126 mg/g), Reactive Violet 5R (122 mg/g) and Reactive Blue 81(RB81) (123 mg/g) dyes were obtained at pH 4. After modification,
adsorption of yellow, violet and blue dyes on modified chitosan increased to
263, 384 and 204 mg/g, respectively, at pH 4. In addition, increase in
temperature and dye concentration decreased the adsorption capacity of
adsorbents.
Modification of chitosan using some poly (alkyl methacrylate), such as
poly(hexyl methacrylate) (PHMA), poly(ethyl methacrylate) (PEMA),
poly(butyl methacrylate) (PBMA) and PMMA was evaluated by Konaganti 
et
al.
 [108]. Prepared modified chitosan were applied for adsorption of a
reactive dye [Remazol Brill Blue R (RBBR)]. It was found that the
adsorption capacity followed the order chitosan–PMMA > chitosan–PEMA >
chitosan–PBMA > chitosan–PHMA > chitosan, with the adsorption
equilibrium capacity of chitosan–PMMA 4.5 times that of chitosan.
Modification of chitosan by PMMA for elimination of Reactive Blue 19
(RB19) from aqueous solutions also was investigated by Jiang 
et al.
 [109].
Results indicated that the RB19 adsorption on the chitosan–PMMA adsorbent
is pH dependent and the maximum adsorption capacity of modified chitosan
(1498 mg/g) obtained at pH 3 and 30 °C. In strong acidic solution (pH < 3),
beside the conversion of the amine groups (–NH
2
) of chitosan to (–NH
3
+
)
and dissolution of the chitosan in acidic solutions, the active negative
sulfonate groups –SO
3
−
 in reactive dye in acidic solution (pH<3) also could
be converted to active negative sulfonate groups –SO
3
−
. Hence, positive
charge of dye is increased which led to decrease binding the RB4 with
adsorbents [109]. In addition, by further increase in the pH of dye solution
(up to 9), the maximum amount of removed RB19 by chitosan–PMMA
decreased. This phenomenon could be explained by electrostatic interactions
between negatively charged sulfonate groups (–SO
3
−
) in RB19 and
positively charged amine groups in chitosan. In the solution with high pH
compared with solution with low pH, the amount of available protons (free
H
+
) is lower. Consequently, protonation of amine groups in chitosan–PMMA
at a high pH solution is not effective because of the low concentration of free
H
+
 in the solution. Hence, in a basic solution, the positively charged amino
groups on the surface of the chitosan–PMMA might be deprotonated andelectrostatically repelled from the anion dye molecules, resulting in a
decrease in the dye adsorption percentage [110].
Kyzas and Lazaridis [111] also modified the adsorption behaviour of GLA
cross-linked chitosan (either powder or beads) with poly acrylic acid (Aa)
and poly acrylamide (Aam) to eliminate RY dye and from aqueous solutions.
Results indicated that modification increased the adsorption capacity of both
chitosan beads and powder. Chitosan modified with amide groups was a
superior sorbent for RY at pH 2 and adsorption capacity was found to be
1211 mg/g. Chitosan powder presented higher sorption capacity than beads.
The maximum RY uptake percentages for all the adsorbents were observed at
optimum condition (pH 2, 4 h contact time, 1 g/L sorbent) with the following
order: (chitosan–Aam) powder, 100% > (chitosan–Aam) beads, 97% >
(chitosan–Aa) powder, 95% > (chitosan–Aa) beads, 90% > (chitosan)
powder, 90% > (chitosan) beads, 82%. Chitosan powders should be used only
in a batch-mode stirred reactor because of the high swelling degrees, whereas
the beads could be used in either batch mode or in fixed-bed configuration.
14.8 Conclusions and Future
Perspectives
In today’s world, the wastewater generated by the dyeing industries with
main characteristic of strong coloration, high COD concentration and high
fluctuation in pH (2–12), is one of the most important environmental
concerns. The presence of dyes in wastewater even in small amount can be
very harmful to the aquatic environment due to high visibility, toxicity and
non-biodegradability under different conditions. Among the wide range of
dyes, reactive dyes are one of the most used dyes in dyeing processes due to
their high stability and simple dyeing procedures. Nevertheless, removal of
this kind of dyes from wastewater by using conventional physiochemical
methods is difficult due their high solubility. Therefore, it is necessary to
select an appropriate treatment method to improve the quality of discharged
wastewater into the environment. Among all treatment strategies, adsorption
is proven to be an effective method for dye removal. It is found that
adsorption, using efficient adsorbents, is an effective method for eliminationof reactive dyes from wastewater. Adsorption efficiency is affected by the
nature and type of adsorbent. Generally, an ideal sorbent for the removal of
dyes from water is an adsorbent which is characterized by its low cost,
availability, environmentally friendly and high adsorption capability.
Therefore, adsorption of dyes on chitosan and its derivatives has been
considered by several researchers due to their specific adsorption
characteristics (high absorption capability, environmentally friendly,
biodegradability and low cost). Chitosan and its derivatives are efficient
adsorbents with extraordinary absorption capability for dye elimination.
Present study aimed to review and compare the reactive dyes adsorption on
chitosan and its derivatives. The comparison between the two adsorbents is
not possible because of the different experimental conditions, scarcity of
information and different chemical agents used to create chitosan derivatives.
We tried to highlight some points that may be useful for future research. We
found that chitosan possess ideal properties for reactive dye removal.
However, the applications of chitosan in form of flakes or powder are limited
by their low surface area, low hydrophilicity, high crystallinity, non-porosity,
low adsorption capacity and resistance to mass transfer. To overcome these
problems and improve the favourable adsorption characteristics, chitosan
could be modified through physical or chemical modification. Conversion of
chitosan into gel beads (physical modification) leads to decreased
crystallinity, expanded chitosan polymer chains, improved access to internal
sorption sites, increased porosity and increased surface area. Chemical
modification of chitosan by cross-linking and introducing various functional
groups is an effective approach to improve its adsorption properties and
achieve the success in use of chitosan as an effective adsorbent. All these
modifications lead to enhanced adsorption capacity. In addition, it is found
that few studies have been reported regeneration of chitosan and its
derivatives after reactive dyes adsorption. Therefore, regeneration studies
also need to be performed in detail to determine the reusability and improve
the economic feasibility of adsorbents.
Acknowledgement
The authors acknowledge the research grant provided by the Universiti SainsMalaysia under the Short Term Grant Scheme (Project No. 304/
PTEKIND/6312118).
References
1. V.J. Inglezakis, and S.G. Poulopoulos, 
1 - Air and Water Pollution,
 2006.
2. V.K. Gupta, and Suhas, Application of low-cost adsorbents for dye
removal – A review, 
Journal of Environmental Management,
 90, 2313–2342,
2009.
3. A. Dixit, S. Dixit, and C. Goswami, Study on the assessment of adsorption
potential of dry biomass of canna indica with reference to heavy metal ions
from aqueous solutions, 
Journal Chemical Engineering Process Technology,
5, 2–2.5, 2014.
4. J. Clemons, Addressing nonpoint source pollution in the fifth and eleventh
circuits: Could pronsolino happen in Mississippi and Alabama, 
Journal of
Land Use & Environmental Law,
 21, 55, 2005.
5. A.M. Abdel-Aty, N.S. Ammar, H.H.A. Ghafar, and R.K. Ali, Biosorption
of cadmium and lead from aqueous solution by fresh water alga Anabaena
sphaerica biomass, 
Journal of Advanced Research,
 4, 367–374, 2013.
6. D. El-Mekkawi, and H. Galal, Removal of a synthetic dye Direct Fast Blue
B2RL via adsorption and photocatalytic degradation using low cost rutile and
Degussa P25 titanium dioxide
, Journal of Hydro-environment Research,
 7,
219–226, 2013.
7. A. Demirbas, Agricultural based activated carbons for the removal of dyes
from aqueous solutions: A review, 
Journal of hazardous materials,
 167, 1–9,
2009.
8. N. Ali, A. Hameed, and S. Ahmed, Physicochemical characterization and
Bioremediation perspective of textile effluent, dyes and metals by indigenous
Bacteria, 
Journal of hazardous materials,
 164, 322–328, 2009.
9. G. Crini, Non-conventional low-cost adsorbents for dye removal: A
review, 
Bioresource Technology,
 97, 1061–1085, 2006.
10. S.P. Buthelezi, A.O. Olaniran, and B. Pillay, Textile dye removal from
wastewater effluents using bioflocculants produced by indigenous bacterialisolates, 
Molecules,
 17, 14260–14274, 2012.
11. M.T. Yagub, T.K. Sen, S. Afroze, and H.M. Ang, Dye and its removal
from aqueous solution by adsorption: A review
, Advances in Colloid and
Interface Science,
 209, 172–184, 2014.
12. F.M.D. Chequer, D.P. de Oliveira, E.R.A. Ferraz, G.A.R. de Oliveira J.C.
Cardoso, and M.V.B. Zanoni, Textile dyes: Dyeing process and
environmental impact, 
INTECH Open Access Publisher,
 2013.
13. A.B. dos Santos, F.J. Cervantes, and J.B. van Lier, Review paper on
current technologies for decolourisation of textile wastewaters: Perspectives
for anaerobic biotechnology
, Bioresource Technology,
 98, 2369–2385, 2007.
14. A. Bafana, S.S. Devi, T and. Chakrabarti, Azo dyes: Past, present and the
future, 
Environmental Reviews,
 19, 350–371, 2011.
15. M. Asgher, Biosorption of reactive dyes: A review, 
Water, Air, & Soil
Pollution,
 223, 2417–2435, 2012.
16. N. Tripathi, Cationic and anionic dye adsorption by agricultural solid
wastes: A comprehensive review
, Journal of Applied Chemistry,
 5, 91–108,
2013.
17. R.S. Gowri, R. Vijayaraghavan, and P. Meenambigai, Microbial
degradation of reactive dyes-A Review, 
International Journal Current
Microbiology And Applied Sciences,
 3, 421–436, 2014.
18. A.R. Tehrani-Bagha, and K. Holmberg, Solubilization of hydrophobic
dyes in surfactant solutions
, Materials,
 6, 580–608, 2013.
19. M.A.M. Salleh, D.K. Mahmoud, W.A. Karim, and A. Idris, Cationic and
anionic dye adsorption by agricultural solid wastes: A comprehensive review,
Desalination,
 280, 1–13, 2011.
20. C.V. Uliana, G.S. Garbellini, and H. Yamanaka, Evaluation of the
interactions of DNA with the textile dyes Disperse Orange 1 and Disperse
Red 1 and their electrolysis products using an electrochemical biosensor
,
Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical,
 178, 627–635, 2013.
21. B. Adinew, Textile effluent treatment and decolorization te chniques – A
review, 
Chemistry: Bulgarian Journal of Science Education,
 21, 434–456,
2013.
22. V.R. Kanetkar, Colour: History and advancements, 
Resonance,
 15, 794–803, 2010.
23. H.F. Rizk, S.A. Ibrahim, and M.A. El-Borai, Synthesis, fastness
properties, color assessment and antimicrobial activity of some azo reactive
dyes having pyrazole moiety, 
Dyes and Pigments,
 112, 86–92, 2015.
24. W.J. Epolito, Y.H. Lee, L.A. Bottomley, and S.G. Pavlostathis,
Characterization of the textile anthraquinone dye Reactive Blue 4, 
Dyes and
Pigments,
 67, 35–46, 2005.
25. G.M. Nabil, N.M. El-Mallah, and M.E. Mahmoud, Enhanced
decolorization of reactive black 5 dye by active carbon sorbent-immobilized-
cationic surfactant (AC-CS), 
Journal of Industrial and Engineering
Chemistry,
 20, 994–1002, 2014.
26. A. Soleimani-Gorgani, and J.A. Taylor, Dyeing of nylon with reactive
dyes. Part 1. The effect of changes in dye structure on the dyeing of nylon
with reactive dyes, 
Dyes and Pigments,
 68, 109–117, 2006.
27. Z. Aksu, N.K. Kiliç, S. Ertuğrul, and G. Dönmez, Inhibitory effects of
chromium(VI) and Remazol Black B on chromium(VI) and dyestuff
removals by Trametes versicolor, 
Enzyme and Microbial Technology,
 40,
1167–1174, 2007.
28. J.R. Patel, M.H. Patel, P.S. Shrivastav, and M. Sanyal, Synthesis and
dyeing behavior of two remazol reactive dyes with sulfo vinyl sulfone
functionality on cotton fabric and their degradation study
, Journal of Physical
and Chemical Sciences,
 1, 1–6, 2014.
29. S. Sathian, M. Rajasimman, G. Radha, V. Shanmugapriya, and C.
Karthikeyan, Performance of SBR for the treatment of textile dye
wastewater: Optimization and kinetic studies, 
Alexandria Engineering
Journal,
 53, 417–426, 2014.
30. G. Ratnamala, and K. Brajesh, Biosorption of remazol navy blue dye
from an aqueous solution using pseudomonas putida
, International Journal of
Science, Environment and Technology
, 2, 80–89, 2013.
31. B.E. Barragán, C. Costa, and M.C. Marquez, Biodegradation of azo dyes
by bacteria inoculated on solid media
, Dyes and Pigments,
 75, 73–81, 2007.
32. C. Frijters, R. Vos, G. Scheffer, and R. Mulder, Decolorizing and
detoxifying textile wastewater, containing both soluble and insoluble dyes, ina full scale combined anaerobic/aerobic system, 
Water research,
 40, 1249–
1257, 2006.
33. H.S. Rai, M.S. Bhattacharyya, J. Singh, T. Bansal, P. Vats, and U.
Banerjee, Removal of dyes from the effluent of textile and dyestuff
manufacturing industry: A review of emerging techniques with reference to
biological treatment
, Critical reviews in environmental science and
technology,
 35, 219–238, 2005.
34. M.A. Fayidh, S. Babuskin, K. Sabina, M. Sukumar, and M. Sivarajan,
Integrated approach to the problems of dye wastewater by sonolysis and
biological treatment
, Journal of Microbial And Biochemical Technology,
 3,
60–66, 2011.
35. M. Sabur, A. Khan, and S. Safiullah, Treatment of textile wastewater by
coagulation precipitation method, 
Journal of Scientific Research,
 4, 623–633,
2012.
36. A. Hassan, M. Ariffin, P.L. Tan, and Z.Z. Noor, Coagulation and
flocculation treatment of wastewater in textile industry using chitosan,
Journal of Chemical and Natural Resources Engineering,
 4, 43–53, 2009.
37. A.L. Ahmad, W.A. Harris, and B.S. Ooi, Removal of dye from
wastewater of textile industry using membrane technology, 
Journal
Teknologi,
 36, 31–44, 2012.
38. M. Kobya, E. Demirbas, E. Senturk, and M. Ince, Adsorption of heavy
metal ions from aqueous solutions by activated carbon prepared from apricot
stone
, Bioresource Technology,
 96, 1518–1521, 2005.
39. C. King, 
Handbook Of Separation Process Technology,
 (1987).
40. M. Vakili, M. Rafatullah, M.H. Ibrahim, A.Z. Abdullah, B. Salamatinia,
and Z. Gholami, in, Book 
Oil Palm Biomass as an Adsorbent for Heavy
Metals,
 2014.
41. L. Wang, R. Wang, and R. Oliveira, A review on adsorption working
pairs for refrigeration
, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
 13, 518–
534, 2009.
42. H. Qiu, and L. Lv, B.-c. Pan, Q.-j. Zhang, W.-m. Zhang, Q.-x. Zhang,
Critical review in adsorption kinetic models
, Journal of Zhejiang University
SCIENCE
 A, 10, 716–724, 2009.43. R. Egashira, S. Tanabe, and H. Habaki, Adsorption of heavy metals in
mine wastewater by Mongolian natural zeolite, 
Procedia Engineering,
 42,
49–57, 2012.
44. M. Najafi, R. Rostamian, and A. Rafati, Chemically modified silica gel
with thiol group as an adsorbent for retention of some toxic soft metal ions
from water and industrial effluent, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 168, 426–
432, 2011.
45. A. Adak, M. Bandyopadhyay, and A. Pal, Removal of crystal violet dye
from wastewater by surfactant-modified alumina, 
Separation and
Purification Technology,
 44, 139–144, 2005.
46. A. Adak, M. Bandyopadhyay, and A. Pal, Fixed bed column study for the
removal of crystal violet (CI Basic Violet 3) dye from aquatic environment
by surfactant-modified alumina, 
Dyes and Pigments,
 69, 245–251, 2006.
47. Y.-H. Huang, C.-L. Hsueh, C.-P. Huang, L.-C. Su, and C.-Y. Chen,
Adsorption thermodynamic and kinetic studies of Pb (II) removal from water
onto a versatile Al 2 O 3-supported iron oxide, 
Separation and Purification
Technology,
 55, 23–29, 2007.
48. F. Ji, C. Li, B. Tang, J. Xu, G. Lu, and P. Liu, Preparation of cellulose
acetate/zeolite composite fiber and its adsorption behavior for heavy metal
ions in aqueous solution, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 209, 325–333,
2012.
49. S. Wang, and Y. Peng, Natural zeolites as effective adsorbents in water
and wastewater treatment, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 156, 11–24, 2010.
50. S.K. Alpat, Ö. Özbayrak, Ş. Alpat, and H. Akçay, The adsorption kinetics
and removal of cationic dye, Toluidine Blue O, from aqueous solution with
Turkish zeolite
, Journal of hazardous materials,
 151, 213–220, 2008.
51. Y. Yu, B.N. Murthy, J.G. Shapter, K.T. Constantopoulos, N.H. Voelcker,
and A.V. Ellis, Benzene carboxylic acid derivatized graphene oxide
nanosheets on natural zeolites as effective adsorbents for cationic dye
removal, 
Journal of hazardous materials,
 260, 330–338, 2013.
52. S. Malamis, and E. Katsou, A review on zinc and nickel adsorption on
natural and modified zeolite, bentonite and vermiculite: Examination of
process parameters, kinetics and isotherms, 
Journal of hazardous materials,
252, 428–461, 2013.53. M.Š. Ivanović, I. Smičiklas, and S. Pejanović, Analysis and comparison
of mass transfer phenomena related to Cu
2+
 sorption by hydroxyapatite and
zeolite, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 223, 833–843, 2013.
54. O.E.A. Salam, N.A. Reiad, and M.M. ElShafei, A study of the removal
characteristics of heavy metals from wastewater by low-cost adsorbents
,
Journal of Advanced Research,
 2, 297–303, 2011.
55. H.-T. Fan, T. Sun, H.-B. Xu, Y.-J. Yang, Q. Tang, and Y. Sun, Removal
of arsenic (V) from aqueous solutions using 3-[2-(2-aminoethylamino)
ethylamino] propyl-trimethoxysilane functionalized silica gel adsorbent
,
Desalination,
 278, 238–243, 2011.
56. R. Gaikwad, and S. Misal, Sorption studies of methylene blue on silica
gel
, International Journal of Chemical Engineering and Applications,
 1,
342–345, 2010.
57. B. Samiey, and A.R. Toosi, Adsorption of malachite green on silica gel:
Effects of NaCl, pH and 2-propanol, 
Journal of hazardous materials,
 184,
739–745, 2010.
58. A. Bhatnagar, and A.K. Minocha, Utilization of industrial waste for
cadmium removal from water and immobilization in cement
, Chemical
Engineering Journal,
 150, 145–151, 2009.
59. I. Levchuk, A. Bhatnagar, and M. Sillanpää, Overview of technologies
for removal of methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) from water, 
Science of The
Total Environment,
 476, 415–433, 2014.
60. A. Giaya, R.W. Thompson, and Denkewicz Jr R., Liquid and vapor phase
adsorption of chlorinated volatile organic compounds on hydrophobic
molecular sieves, 
Microporous and Mesoporous Materials,
 40, 205–218,
2000.
61. M.A. Anderson, Removal of MTBE and other organic contaminants from
water by sorption to high silica zeolites
, Environmental science &
technology,
 34, 725–727, 2000.
62. G. Crini, and P.-M. Badot, Application of chitosan, a natural
aminopolysaccharide, for dye removal from aqueous solutions by adsorption
processes using batch studies: A review of recent literature, 
Progress in
Polymer Science,
 33, 399–447, 2008.63. P.K. Dutta, J. Dutta, and V. Tripathi, Chitin and chitosan: Chemistry,
properties and applications, 
Journal of Scientific and Industrial Research,
 63,
20–31, 2004.
64. K. Kavitha, T. Keerthi, and T.T. Mani, Chitosan polymer used as carrier
in various pharmaceutical formulations: Brief review, 
International Journal
Applied Biology Pharmaceutical Technology,
 2, 249–258, 2011.
65. M. Rinaudo, Chitin and chitosan: Properties and applications, 
Progress in
Polymer Science,
 31, 603–632, 2006.
66. N. Van Toan, and T.T. Hanh, Application of chitosan solutions for rice
production in Vietnam, 
African Journal of Biotechnology,
 12, 382, 2013.
67. D. Jianglian, and Z. Shaoying, Application of chitosan based coating in
fruit and vegetable preservation: A review, 
Journal of Food Processing &
Technology,
 2013.
68. H. Koo, K. Choi, I.C. Kwon, and K. Kim, Chitosan-Based Nanoparticles
for Biomedical Applications
, Pharmaceutical Sciences Encyclopedia,
 2013.
69. L. Hu, Y. Sun, and Y. Wu, Advances in chitosan-based drug delivery
vehicles, 
Nanoscale,
 5, 3103–3111, 2013.
70. K. Thirugnanasambandham, V. Sivakumar, and J.P. Maran, Application
of chitosan as an adsorbent to treat rice mill wastewater—mechanism,
modelling and optimization, 
Carbohydrate Polymers,
 97, 451–457, 2013.
71. I. Ali, M. Asim, and T.A. Khan, Low cost adsorbents for the removal of
organic pollutants from wastewater
, Journal of Environmental Management,
113, 170–183, 2012.
72. M. Sadeghi-Kiakhani, M. Arami, and K. Gharanjig, Preparation of
chitosanethyl acrylate as a biopolymer adsorbent for basic dyes removal from
colored solutions, 
Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering,
 1, 406–
415, 2013.
73. M. Vakili, M. Rafatullah, B. Salamatinia, A.Z. Abdullah, M.H. Ibrahim,
K.B. Tan, Z. Gholami, and P. Amouzgar, Application of chitosan and its
derivatives as adsorbents for dye removal from water and wastewater: A
review
, Carbohydrate Polymers,
 113, 115–130, 2014.
74. R.S. Juang, R.L. Tseng, F.C. Wu, and S.H. Lee, Adsorption behavior of
reactive dyes from aqueous solutions on chitosan, 
Journal of ChemicalTechnology and Biotechnology,
 70, 391–399, 1997.
75. N. Sakkayawong, P. Thiravetyan, and W. Nakbanpote, Adsorption
mechanism of synthetic reactive dye wastewater by chitosan
, Journal of
Colloid and Interface Science,
 286, 36–42, 2005.
76. I. Uzun, Kinetics of the adsorption of reactive dyes by chitosan, 
Dyes and
Pigments,
 70, 76–83, 2006.
77. G. Annadurai, L.Y. Ling, and J.-F. Lee, Adsorption of reactive dye from
an aqueous solution by chitosan: Isotherm, kinetic and thermodynamic
analysis, 
Journal of hazardous materials,
 152, 337–346, 2008.
78. A. Szygula, M. Ruiz, A. Sastre, and E. Guibal, Removal of an anionic
reactive dye by chitosan and its regeneration
,
 2008.
79. J. Barron-Zambrano, A. Szygula, M. Ruiz, A.M. Sastre, and E. Guibal,
Biosorption of reactive black 5 from aqueous solutions by chitosan: Column
studies, 
Journal of Environmental Management,
 91, 2669–2675, 2010.
80. F. Li, and C. Ding, Adsorption of reactive black M-2R on different
deacetylation degree chitosan, 
Journal of Engineered Fibers and Fabrics,
 6,
25–31, 2011.
81. M.-E. Ignat, V. Dulman, and T. Onofrei, Reactive Red 3 and Direct
Brown 95 dyes adsorption onto chitosan, 
Cellulose Chemistry and
Technology,
 46, 357–367, 2012.
82. E. Guibal, Interactions of metal ions with chitosan-based sorbents: A
review, 
Separation and Purification Technology,
 38, 43–74, 2004.
83. F.-C. Wu, R.-L. Tseng, and R.-S. Juang, Comparative adsorption of metal
and dye on flake-and bead-types of chitosans prepared from fishery wastes,
Journal of hazardous materials,
 73, 63–75, 2000.
84. F.-C. Wu, R.-L. Tseng, and R.-S. Juang, Enhanced abilities of highly
swollen chitosan beads for color removal and tyrosinase immobilization,
Journal of hazardous materials,
 81, 167–177, 2001.
85. U. Filipkowska, Adsorption and desorption of reactive dyes onto chitin
and chitosan flakes and beads
, Adsorption Science & Technology,
 24, 781–
795, 2006.
86. Y.-Z. Wen, W.-Q. Liu, Z.-H. Fang, and W.-P. Liu, Effects of adsorption
interferents on removal of Reactive Red 195 dye in wastewater by chitosan
,Journal of Environmental Sciences,
 17, 766–769, 2005.
87. Y.-P. Phung, S.-T. Ong, and P.-S. Keng, Determination of important
parameters in affecting the uptake of reactive black 5 by chitosan beads
through statistical approach, 
Journal of Chemistry,
 2013.
88. S.-T. Ong, and C.-K. Seou, Removal of reactive black 5 from aqueous
solution using chitosan beads: Optimization by Plackett–Burman design and
response surface analysis
, Desalination and Water Treatment,
 52, 7673–
7684, 2014.
89. V. Nair, A. Panigrahy, and R. Vinu, Development of novel chitosan–
lignin composites for adsorption of dyes and metal ions from wastewater,
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 254, 491–502, 2014.
90. Y. Li, J. Sun, Q. Du, L. Zhang, X. Yang, S. Wu, Y. Xia, Z. Wang, L. Xia,
and A. Cao, Mechanical and dye adsorption properties of graphene
oxide/chitosan composite fibers prepared by wet spinning
, Carbohydrate
Polymers,
 102, 755–761, 2014.
91. M.Y. Chan, S. Husseinsyah, and S.T. Sam, Chitosan/corn cob
biocomposite films by cross-linking with glutaraldehyde
, BioResources,
 8,
2910–2923, 2013.
92. H.M. Fahmy, Z.E. Mohamed, M.H. Abo-Shosha, and N.A. Ibrahim,
Thermosole cross-linking of chitosan and utilization in the removal of some
dyes from aqueous solution
, Polymer-Plastics Technology and Engineering,
43, 445–462, 2004.
93. E. Guibal, P. McCarrick and J.M. Tobin, Comparison of the sorption of
anionic dyes on activated carbon and chitosan derivatives from dilute
solutions
, Separation science and technology,
 38, 3049–3073, 2003.
94. A.R. Cestari, E.F. Vieira, A.G. Dos Santos, J.A. Mota, and V.P. de
Almeida, Adsorption of anionic dyes on chitosan beads. 1. The influence of
the chemical structures of dyes and temperature on the adsorption kinetics,
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science,
 280, 380–386, 2004.
95. S. Rosa, M.C. Laranjeira, H.G. Riela, and V.T. Fávere, Cross-linked
quaternary chitosan as an adsorbent for the removal of the reactive dye from
aqueous solutions, 
Journal of hazardous materials,
 155, 253–260, 2008.
96. H. Momenzadeh, A.R. Tehrani-Bagha, A. Khosravi, K. Gharanjig, and K.Holmberg, Reactive dye removal from wastewater using a chitosan
nanodispersion, 
Desalination,
 271, 225–230, 2011.
97. M.-S. Chiou, and H.-Y. Li, Equilibrium and kinetic modeling of
adsorption of reactive dye on cross-linked chitosan beads
, Journal of
hazardous materials,
 93, 233–248, 2002.
98. M.-S. Chiou, W.-S. Kuo, and H.-Y. Li, Removal of reactive dye from
wastewater by adsorption using ECH cross-linked chitosan beads as medium,
Journal of Environmental Science and Health, Part A,
 38, 2621–2631, 2003.
99. M.-S. Chiou, and G.-S. Chuang, Competitive adsorption of dye metanil
yellow and RB15 in acid solutions on chemically cross-linked chitosan beads,
Chemosphere,
 62, 731–740, 2006.
100. T.-Y. Kim, S.-S. Park, and S.-Y. Cho, Adsorption characteristics of
Reactive Black 5 onto chitosan beads cross-linked with epichlorohydrin,
Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry,
 18, 1458–1464, 2012.
101. M.-S. Chiou, P.-Y. Ho, and H.-Y. Li, Adsorption of anionic dyes in acid
solutions using chemically cross-linked chitosan beads
, Dyes and Pigments,
60, 69–84, 2004.
102. M. Chiou, and H. Li, Adsorption behavior of reactive dye in aqueous
solution on chemical cross-linked chitosan beads, 
Chemosphere,
 50, 1095–
1105, 2003.
103. N. Alves, and J. Mano, Chitosan derivatives obtained by chemical
modifications for biomedical and environmental applications
, International
journal of biological macromolecules,
 43, 401–414, 2008.
104. K.Z. Elwakeel, Removal of Reactive Black 5 from aqueous solutions
using magnetic chitosan resins, 
Journal of hazardous materials,
 167, 383–
392, 2009.
105. G.Z. Kyzas, M. Kostoglou, A.A. Vassiliou, and N.K. Lazaridis,
Treatment of real effluents from dyeing reactor: Experimental and modeling
approach by adsorption onto chitosan, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 168,
577–585, 2011.
106. S. Chatterjee, T. Chatterjee, and S.H. Woo, Influence of the
polyethyleneimine grafting on the adsorption capacity of chitosan beads for
Reactive Black 5 from aqueous solutions, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,166, 168–175, 2011.
107. V. Singh, A. Sharma, D. Tripathi, and R. Sanghi, Poly
(methylmethacrylate) grafted chitosan: An efficient adsorbent for anionic azo
dyes, 
Journal of hazardous materials,
 161, 955–966, 2009.
108. V.K. Konaganti, R. Kota, S. Patil, and G. Madras, Adsorption of anionic
dyes on chitosan grafted poly (alkyl methacrylate)s, 
Chemical Engineering
Journal,
 158, 393–401, 2010.
109. X. Jiang, Y. Sun, L. Liu, S. Wang, and X. Tian, Adsorption of CI
Reactive Blue 19 from aqueous solutions by porous particles of the grafted
chitosan, 
Chemical Engineering Journal,
 235, 151–157, 2014.
110. G.Z. Kyzas, N.K. Lazaridis, and M. Kostoglou, On the simultaneous
adsorption of a reactive dye and hexavalent chromium from aqueous
solutions onto grafted chitosan, 
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science,
407, 432–441, 2013.
111. G.Z. Kyzas, and N.K. Lazaridis, Reactive and basic dyes removal by
sorption onto chitosan derivatives
, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science,
331, 32–39, 2009.
112. E. Guibal, E. Touraud, and J. Roussy, Chitosan interactions with metal
ions and dyes: Dissolved-state vs. solid-state application, 
World Journal of
Microbiology and Biotechnology,
 21, 913–920, 2005.
113. T.K. Saha, N.C. Bhoumik, S. Karmaker, M.G. Ahmed, H. Ichikawa, and
Y. Fukumori, Adsorption characteristics of reactive black 5 from aqueous
solution onto chitosan, 
CLEAN–Soil, Air, Water,
 39, 984–993, 2011.Chapter 15
Natural Algal-Based Processes as
Smart Approach for Wastewater
Treatment
D. Annie Jasmine
1
, K.B. Malarmathi
2
, S.C.G. Kiruba Daniel
2
*
,
and S. Malathi
3
1
Department of Biotechnology, Anna University, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil
Nadu, India
2
Department of Intrumentation and Applied Physics, Indian Institute of
Science, Bangalore, India
3
Department of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Madras, Chennai, Tamil
Nadu, India
*
Corresponding author:
 
crossguevara@gmail.com
Abstract
The greatest challenge in the 21st century is to provide new innovative water
treatment methods. The conventional treatment processes are becoming
incompetent by demands of space, energy, and economy and environment
sustainability. The current, rapidly growing considerations have given room
for sustainable alternative approaches of being greener, cheaper and energy
efficient. Amongst various biological methods to treat municipal wastewater
like lagoons, aerobic oxidation ponds, anaerobic treatment chambers,
dissolved air floatation and others, recently algal-based treatments are being
most explored because of its viability for enhancement of treatmentefficiency and also advantage of added-value products. This chapter
elaborates the sustainable algal-based approaches for energy-efficient
municipal wastewater treatment. The natural algal consortia dynamics gives a
smart mode of enhancing the nutrient recovery and growth of algal biomass,
hence a proficient wastewater treatment. The chapter explores on the
unknown potentials of the algae for energy-efficient wastewater treatment.
The algal consortia treating the wastewater have innate ability of
bioflocculation, which exacerbates the energy efficiency of wastewater
treatment and its self-sustenance mode of operation.
Keywords:
 Algal consortia, smart approach, wastewater treatment
15.1 Introduction
Ninety-seven percent of earth’s surface is covered by water. Out of this 97%,
only 3% is fresh water, while the rest is salt water. Two-thirds of this fresh
water is frozen in glaciers and polar ice caps. So, the remaining one-third part
is only available for human activities [1]. Most part of this water is utilized
by industries and released as toxic effluent into the environment. This deed of
humans has drastically affected the environment and eventually becomes
fatal to humans and animals. Hence, various technologies were introduced a
long time ago in order to treat the effluents [2]. The treatment method usually
involves a continuous series of steps, which are included in 
Table 15.1
.
Table 15.1
 Generally followed four steps in wastewater treatment [2].
Preliminary
treatment
Removes large particles and solids in the wastewater
Primary treatment
Removes organic and inorganic solids by physical processes
Secondary
treatment
Breaks down remaining suspended and residual organic and compounds by
biological degradation
Tertiary treatment
Includes chemical process for residual disinfection
Various conventional techniques used to treat wastewater [3] are:
1.
 Gravity separation and skimming
2.
 Coagulation
3.
 Flocculation4.
 Adsorption
5.
 Dissolved air floatation
6.
 Electrosorption
Gravity separation and skimming is well suited to remove free oil from
wastewater. Coagulation and flocculation include addition of organic or
inorganic coagulants like aluminium sulphate and aluminium hydroxide, and
this assists 90% removal of suspended solids from wastewater, whereas
sedimentation can remove only coarse particles that settle by using the force
of gravity without adding chemicals.
Adsorption is generally preferred for removal of heavy metals such as
chromium, copper, lead, mercury, cadmium, zinc, etc., which are toxic to
human life [2]. Electrosorption is mainly the process of adsorption induced
by potential polarization on the surface of the electrodes. After the electrode
is polarized, the polar molecule/ions in the electrolyte solution adsorb onto
the surface of electrode and hence removed. The limitation of this process is
the performance of the material of the electrode. Membrane technology is
also an efficient method to treat wastewater [2]. It includes microfiltration
(MF), ultrafiltration (UF), nanofiltration and reverse osmosis. But the
limitations are scale-up becomes linear above certain size, so the capital cost
increases for effluent of larger volume and the polymeric membrane degrade
on continuous usage. Hence, this needs replacement and thus increases
capital cost. Chemical oxidation is also done to treat wastewater. It is mainly
used to treat non-biodegradable compounds [3]. Metal nanoparticle-based
water treatment strategies are also being currently developed [4]. Biological
treatment of wastewater is generally preferred because of its high efficiency
and cost effectiveness. Moreover, microorganisms like bacteria help to
recover energy with minimal impact to environment and reduces pollution.
But, there arises a problem with aerobic microbes that produce high biomass
yield and sludge with residual Biological Oxygen on Demand (BOD), which
has to be reduced.
Algae are eukaryotic organisms consisting of unicellular to multicellular
forms. Generally, they are said to be plants in simple form because they lack
true root, stem, leaves, stomata, and vascular tissues unlike other land plants
[5]. They also possess simple reproductive structures. Most of the algae are
photosynthetic and aquatic. Some terrestrial algae also prefer to grow only inmoist conditions. The size of the algae ranges from microscopic to
macroscopic and according to their sizes they are classified as microalgae and
macroalgae, respectively [5].
Algal approach to treat wastewater is highly advantageous because it
produces less sludge, and moreover, the algal sludge can be used as biofuel.
The algal biomass can produce electricity and heat on burning [6]. The
excessive CO
2
 released by algae is utilized by themselves for their growth.
Several species of algae are known to be utilized for various purposes like
making nutritive products because of its rich source of proteins, minerals and
other essential nutrition. In addition to that they serve a dual purpose of
wastewater treatment and algal biofuel production simultaneously [6]. This
serves as an alternative to the conventional techniques available for
wastewater treatment besides quenching the thirst to find an alternative
carbon neutral fuel source.
From the details mentioned in 
Table 15.2
, it is well known that almost all
algae need water source or moist condition for their growth. The water source
can be brackish, sea, fresh and wastewater. Usage of wastewater not only
helps in the growth of algae but also purifies the impurities present in it. This
is because the algae grow by accumulating all the impurities like N, P and C
present in the wastewater, utilizing atmospheric carbon dioxide and releases
oxygen to the atmosphere, thus benefitting the environment.
Table 15.2
 Classifications of algae based on phylogenetic groups [5].15.2 Algal Species Used in
Wastewater Treatment
Algal species are being used for wastewater treatment for a period of about
75 years [6]. 
Chlorella
 and 
Dunaliella
 sp. are some of the main species
utilized for wastewater treatment [6]. Large-scale culture systems are being
used for the treatment of different kinds of wastewater and also led to the
production of a number of high-value products like pharmaceutical and
genetically engineered products. Hence, we term algal-based wastewater
treatment as a Smart Approach of Treatment. Some of the prominent products
include antibacterial, antiviral, anticancer, antihistamine and many other
different products [6].
Many studies have been made on the ability of algae to grow in nutrient
rich wastewater resulting in the purified water. The total concentration of N
and P in municipal wastewater is around 10–1000 mg L
–1
 and in agricultural
effluents their concentration is greater than 1000 mg L
–1
 [7]. The wastewater
consists of higher concentration of nitrogen, phosphorus and toxic metals,
which when treated by chemical processes, the cost goes high [8]. It is also
well-known fact about the ability of microalgae to utilize the nutrients like
nitrogen, phosphorus and toxic metals present in the wastewater, thus
enabling sustainable and low-cost wastewater treatment technique [9–11].
Algal approach is a way better than conventional processes [10, 12].
Generally, conventional techniques involve chemical treatment of wastewater
or formation of activated sludge. The algal approach involves the use of
microalgae suspended in the ponds with mechanical stirring known as high-
rate algal ponds, which allows cost-effective treatment of wastewater.
Hoffmann 
et al.
 [10] discussed on the adverse effects of accumulation of
nutrient-rich wastewater in rivers and lakes leading to eutrophication and
suggested that algal treatment enables removal of phosphorus instead of it
being converted to insoluble form. During commercial processing of
wastewater, the phosphorus present in it is precipitated and forms into
insoluble compound or activated sludge due to microbial activity. Thus, algaltreatment serves as a best remedy for efficient wastewater treatment. The
high efficiency of microalgal approach in the removal of nitrogen and
phosphorus and its wide role in tertiary treatment step of wastewater
treatment as they are said to be rich in nutrient like nitrogen and phosphorus
[11, 13]. Moreover, the algae use atmospheric carbon dioxide for its growth
and releases oxygen. This oxygen can be used for oxygenation of ponds to
treat wastewater by employing heterotrophic aerobic bacteria [14]. In
addition to this, the microalgae growth using CO
2
 and releasing O
2
 reduce
the greenhouse gases (GHGs) in the atmosphere.
Moreover, Munoz and Guieysse (2006) [14] reported that algae use
atmospheric carbon dioxide for its growth and releases oxygen. This oxygen
can be used for oxygenation of ponds to treat wastewater by employing
heterotrophic aerobic bacteria. In addition to this, the microalgae growth
using CO
2
 and releasing O
2
 reduces the GHGs in the atmosphere.
Microalgae used to treat wastewater by utilizing and accumulating N and P in
themselves, causing more biomass production accompanied by wastewater
treatment [14, 15]. These biomass can be used as low-cost fertilizers or as an
animal feed stock. For example, Sustainable Waste to Bioproducts
Engineering Center of Utah State University [16] makes valuable
bioproducts, including bioplastics, biosolvents, transportation fuels,
biomethane and other high-value products from municipal and industrial
wastes through the use of “algal factories” (
Figure 15.1
). This is a smart way
of utilizing algae for both treating wastewater as well as generation of value-
added products.
Figure 15.1
 Flow chart describing the potential application of algae in the
conversion of wastewater into valuable bioproducts
(adapted from SWEBC of USU 2014 [16]).15.3 Factors Affecting the Growth
of Algae
Aeration, sunlight, carbon dioxide, nitrogen and phosphorus, excess BOD are
some of the major factors influencing the growth of algae. Photosynthetic
algae require sunlight for the synthesis of their own food. When the algae are
not exposed to sunlight or when they lack sufficient sunlight, their growth
gets affected. Oxygen transfer is another requirement for the growth of algae.
But at higher temperature, oxygen transfer is low and lower amount of
dissolved oxygen content affects algal growth.
15.3.1 Factors Increasing the Growth of
Algae
At summers, the temperature is very high and favours the growth of algaeand duckweed. Blue green algae, red algae, yellow algae and brown-coloured
algae are found widely during the period of high temperature and less oxygen
transfer and low rainfall. Growth of the planktons is possible with phosphate
of concentration 0.01 mg/l, whereas higher concentration of phosphate
ranging from 0.03 to 0.1 mg/l or even higher will stimulate algal bloom.
15.3.2 Harvesting Algal Biomass
The problem existing in case of algae cultivation and biofuel productivity is
harvesting. The reason why algal-based wastewater treatment is not
extensively used is due to the problems existing in harvesting. The techniques
involved in harvesting are flocculation, aggregation by alum, aggregation by
cationic polymers, bioflocculation, etc.
15.3.3 Flocculation
It is the first step involved in the process of bulk harvesting process. This
generally involves aggregation of cells, thus increasing the size of particle
[17].
15.3.4 Aggregation by Alum or Metal Salts
Generally, algal cells are said to possess negative charge that inhibits
aggregation of algal cells. Addition of metal salts like FeCl
3
 or alum
[Al
2
(SO
4
)
3
] can decrease the negative charge existing in the algal cells, thus
enabling the aggregation of algal cells, and this helps in easy harvesting [17].
15.3.5 Aggregation by Cationic Polymers
Addition of cationic polymers like chitosan enables aggregation of algal cells
thus helps in easy harvesting. In addition to that alkalis also play a major role
in increasing the pH of algal cells, thus enabling aggregation of algal cells.
15.3.6 Bioflocculation/Auto-Flocculation
This is the best alternative to chemically induced flocculation. Chemicallyinduced flocculation is expensive as compared to that of bioflocculation. This
technique uses many unicellular algal species, which can aggregate
spontaneously and settle down due to increased density. This settle biomass
can be easily harvested [18]. Further, assessment is required to confirm if
bioflocculation is suitable for wastewater medium.
15.3.7 Centrifugation/Gravity
Sedimentation
This is the common process carried out after flocculation. This is used in case
of large volume treatment and low biomass generation [17]. Due to the small
size of algae, their settling rate is very low, and harvesting is very difficult.
Centrifugation resolves this problem and enables easy settling and greater
range of harvesting, that is, greater than 95% of efficiency is achieved in
harvesting. Only disadvantage of centrifugation is that it is an energy
intensive process.
15.3.8 Filtration
Filtration uses vacuum pressure and in addition to that filter aids like
diatomaceous earth or cellulose are used for recovery of algae. But these
filter aids can be used to remove algae of size greater than 70 μm. For smaller
cells like 
Scenedesmus
 sp. and 
Chlorella
 sp. MF and UF are carried out. The
drawback of these filtration techniques is the cost of the membrane, and the
membrane has to be replaced more frequently [19].
15.3.9 Immobilization Techniques
Immobilization serves as a best alternative to the other techniques of
harvesting. Prior to cultivation or during cultivation, the algal cells are
immobilized in such a way that they can be easily retrieved after their growth
period. Alginate-immobilized microalgae are artificial techniques for
harvesting, and it is effective in accumulating N and P from wastewater. 
C.
vulgaris
 immobilized in alginate pellets can remove 80% of ammonia content
and 70% of phosphorus content in municipal wastewater [20].15.4 Microalgae and Wastewater
Treatment
Microalgae are being used extensively for the treatment of wastewater
treatment.
15.4.1 Algal Approach to Treat Municipal
Wastewater
Unicellular green microalgae like Chlorella and 
Scenedesmus
 genus are
commonly used to treat the nutrient-rich wastewater source. Travieso 
et al.
[20] reported that 
Chlorella vulgaris
 effectively utilizes all N and P from
wastewater than 
Chlorella kessleri,
 and Ruiz Marin 
et al.
 (2010) reported that
Scenedesmus obliquus
 effectively accumulates more nutrients in wastewater
than 
Chlorella vulgaris
 [21]. Martinez 
et al.
 (2000) and Ruiz-Marin 
et al.
(2010) estimated that greater than 80% or complete removal of nitrate or
ammonia, phosphorus is possible by using several species of Chlorella and
Scenedesmus
 [21, 22]. Ruiz-Marin 
et al.
 (2010) compared the growth of
Scenedesmus obliquus
 in batch culture and semi-continuous culture and
reported that 
S. obliquus
 cultured in semi-continuous culture showed more
growth than those cultured in batch culture, during few initial cycles of
culture [21]. Eventually, the algal growth in former culture decreases and
collapses due to decrease in chlorophyll content of the cells.
Microalgae are also involved in heavy metal removal, some of them are
included in 
Table 15.3
. Lau 
et al.
 (1995) attempted to primarily treat
municipal sewage using 
C. vulgaris
 and achieved 80% of removal of
phosphorus and 90% of removal of nitrogen [30]. He also compared the
effect of various density of inoculum in the removal of nutrients from
wastewater and concluded that varying the density of inoculum has no special
effect on the nutrient removal from wastewater and percentage of removal
was equivalent in all densities of inoculum.
Table 15.3
 Common microalgae involved in heavy metal removal.
Microalgae species
Heavy metal
Ref.Chlorella vulgaris
Copper(II)
[23]
Chlorella fusca
Copper(II)
[24]
Chlorella vulgaris
Copper(II)
[25]
Spirulina platensis
Copper(II)
[25]
Chlorella vulgaris
Copper(II)
[26]
Scenedosmus quadricauda
Copper(II)
[26]
Chlorella vulgaris
Copper(II)
[27]
Scenedesmus obliquus
Copper(II)
[27]
Synechocystis
 sp.
Copper(II)
[27]
Ascophyllum nodosum
Nickel(II)
[28]
Focus vesiculosus
Nickel(II)
[28]
Chlorella vulgaris
Nickel(II)
[27]
Scenedesmus obliquus
Nickel(II)
[27]
Synechocystis
 sp.
Nickel(II)
[27]
Chlorella vulgaris
Chromium(VI)
[23]
Cladophora crispata
Chromium(VI)
[29]
Chlorella vulgaris
Chromium(VI)
[27]
Scenedesmus obliquus
Chromium(VI)
[27]
Synechocystis
 sp.
Chromium(VI)
[27]
Wang 
et al.
 (2010) compared the percentage of removal of nitrogen,
phosphorus, metal ions and the growth of Chlorella in sewage water before
and after primary settling and reported that the percentage of removal of
nitrogen, phosphorus and metal ions were equivalent in both cases, but the
growth of the algae seems to be higher in the centrate wastewater, which is
generated from sludge centrifuge [31]. Bhatnagar 
et al.
 (2010) discussed on
the ability of 
Chlorella minutissima
 to grow in higher concentration of raw
sewage and reported that the species can grow mixotrophically in the
presence of light and heterotrophically in the absence of light using available
nitrate as nitrogen source, carbon substrates and tolerating even the presence
of salt [32]. The biomass yield was greater (379 mg L
–1
after 10 days of
growth) when cultured in mixotrophic condition as compared to that of
photoautotrophic condition (73.3 mg L
–1
).
15.4.2 Algal Approach to Treat AgriculturalWastewater
An 
et al.
 (2003) discussed about the treatment of piggery wastewater
containing 788 mg L
–1
 nitrate with 
Botryococcus braunii
 [32]. This species
enables 80% of removal of nitrate content.
Mulbry 
et al.
 (2008) and Mulbry and Wilkie (2001) reported on the
treatment of dairy manure with benthic freshwater algae grown in semi-
continuous culture, resulting in higher algal biomass productivity and
increased uptake of nutrients [33, 15].
15.5 Case Study of Algal Approach
in the Treatment of Municipal
Wastewater
15.5.1 Case Study 1: Collaborative Work of
Rice University and Houston Public Works
for Algal-Based Municipal-Based
Wastewater Treatment
Bioscientists of Rice University and Houston Public Works attempted to use
municipal wastewater to cultivate algae. This can simultaneously remove
90% of nitrates and 50% of phosphorus from the municipal wastewater used
as a feedstock. Moreover, the algal biomass cultivated may be oil rich, which
could be used for biodiesel production.
Nitrogen and phosphorus are the two major components of the chemical
fertilizers and are the causes of challenging environmental problems in
America reported by Environmental Protection Agency.
Rice University and Houston Public Works made a test on July 2013 with
12 open topped 600 gallon tanks filled with filtered wastewater at one of the
waste treatment plants. The test was carried out using various formulations ofalgae like monocultures or mixed cultures of algae and local algal stains, oil
rich stains. The results showed that monocultures without cross-
contamination, and fishes were preferable and they removed phosphorus and
nitrogen more effectively than Kansas study. This is due to the warmer
temperature. This confirms temperature is the key factor of algal cultivation.
Further studies are essential to find out other factors influencing large-scale
cultivation of algae.
Table 15.4
 Different parameters recorded during treatment on municipal
wastewater by Chlorella.
15.5.2 Case Study 2
A study was carried out to evaluate the growth and nutrient removal ability of
green algae Chlorella in municipal wastewater collected at four different
stages. The four different stages are wastewater before primary settling, after
primary settling, wastewater after cultivated sludge tank and centrate.
In centrate wastewater metal ions such as Al, Ca, Fe, Mg and Mn were
removed efficiently. This study concludes that centrate provides goodenvironment for the growth of algae, thus enabling nutrient removal and
biofuel feedstock production simultaneously.
15.6 Biofuel from Algae Treated
Wastewater
The production of bioethanol from biomass derived feedstocks has increased
dramatically after over the last half a decade during which most of its
production was either from corn or from sugarcane [34, 35]. But, the use of
food feedstock like corn has brought the food versus fuel debate, land
distribution and water issues [36]. Development of non-food feedstock (such
as switchgrass, miscanthus and bermuda grass) that can be grown on
marginal lands without much fertilizer and water input is one of the solutions,
but, the major challenge in the development of lignocellulosic biofuels would
depend on the removal or alteration of lignin and hemicellulose structure to
make the enzymes accessible for cellulose depolymerization [37, 38].
Like plants, algae can trap the solar energy and can autotrophically
synthesize polysaccharides 67% more efficiently than plants [39, 40]. They
have been widely studied for biodiesel production due to the presence of high
lipid concentrations but many algal species such as 
Scenedesmus
 and
Porphyridium
 have as high as 50% (dry basis) of carbohydrate concentrations
[41]. Such a high concentration of carbohydrates would be ideal for biofuel
production as existing technologies for hydrolysis of the polysaccharides
could be directly used with algal fermentations [42]. Furthermore, there are
two well-studied cultivation systems for microalgae: open raceway pond
system and closed photobioreactor system that would decrease the necessity
for research with novel bioreactor designs [39]. Gross (2008) mentioned that
algae can produce more fuel per famed area of land than cops like maize,
jatorpha or rapeseed [43]. Besides this, algal biomass that is a by-product in
biodiesel production can also be used for bioethanol production [39] or
biogas production under anaerobic fermentation. Since it uses CO
2
, it could
be attached directly to an industrial effluent gas stream, thereby reducing
GHG emission issues [44]. The algae that utilize more CO
2
 and yield highvolume of biofuel should be screened. The traditional method for screening
algae has always been a trade of with contamination, photo inhibition in
larger cell mass, eutrophication and large quantity of media utilization.
Microalgae have also been used for bio-remediation of heavy metals and
phosphorous contaminated waters [45, 46]. Recently, there are also reports of
self-fermenting algal system would function similar to the microbes present
in consolidated bioprocessing (CBP) [47]. Above all, microalgae already
have an existing market for food, cosmetics, antioxidants, antibiotics, toxins,
protein and vitamins that are potential by-product of an algal fermentation
depending on the species selected [48–50].
15.6.1 Algal Bioethanol Production Process
15.6.1.1 Process 1: Fermentation of Easily Available
Starch and Sugar in Microalgae to Ethanol
If algae have easily available carbohydrates as in 
Chlorococcomlittorale
 [51],
the starch can be converted into ethanol using yeasts and bacteria. A patent
by Bush and Hall (2006) describes the use of starch accumulating, filament
forming or colony forming algae to be first allowed to grow
photosynthetically followed by a mechanical separation process to obtain the
biomass. The biomass is then allowed to degrade itself by placing in sealed
environment without light. After this, the starch is gelatinized and converted
to ethanol using yeast by a process similar to corn ethanol production. Algae
from the genus 
Spirogyra, Cadophora, Oedogonium
 or a combination of
these can be used as a source of algal biomass [47]. A study by Harun 
et al.
(2010) using 10 g/l of lipid extracted 
Chlorococcomlittorale
 biomass as the
substrate for 
Saccharomyces bayanus
 fermentations showed 3.8 g/l of ethanol
[51]. This species was observed to have cellulose, xylose, galactose and
arabinose in its cell walls. For such a process, the flow diagram shown in
Figure 15.2
 can be employed. Microalgae can be grown on CO
2
 emitted by
the industries and can be separated into lipid fraction of biomass and starch
fraction. This process diagram is usually used in the biodiesel production, and
hence, the addition of the starch processing to the existing process is the only
capital costs that will be required for starting simultaneous bioethanol andbiodiesel production.
Figure 15.2
 Direct production of ethanol from a microalgae,
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii UTEX2247
(adapted from Ueda 
et al.
 [53]).
15.6.1.2 Process 2: Direct Production of Ethanol
from Microalgal Species
Hon-Nami (2006) described a unique unicellular marine microalgae
Chlamydomonas perigranulata
 that could grow phototrophically to produce
algal biomass initially and then be processed to bioethanol under anaerobic
conditions in the absence of light [52]. 
C. perigranulata
 had the ability to
produce ethanol and 2,3-butanediol. From these experiments, 17.3 g/l of
ethanol and 7.9 g/l of 2,3-butanediol were the highest concentration of the
products that were formed.
Similar work is disclosed in a patent by Ueda 
et al.
 (1996) that used the
microalgae, 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii UTEX2247.
 Results show that
ethanol at concentrations as high as 8 g/l could be achieved by maintaining
the pH at 8 since the fermentation also produced acetic acid. The same
processing technology was employed for a microalgae, 
Chlamydomonas
 sp.
MGA161,
 that had an ability to produce H
2
, ethanol, acetic acid and glycerol
under anaerobic conditions but in the presence of CO
2
 [53]. The problem
with co-product production (acetic acid) was reduced by increasing the
concentration of CO
2
 being used. CO addition also inhibited hydrogen
production, and the metabolic flux was diverted towards ethanol production.This process has advantages of employing lesser number of capital costs with
regard to number of processes and is more or less similar to the idea of CBP
as the microbe can consume the carbohydrate that it produced to form
bioethanol.
15.6.1.3 Process 3: Saccharification and
Fermentation of Microalgae for Ethanol Production
Yet, another process that can be employed for ethanol production from
microalgae is the saccharification and fermentation. Nguyen 
et al.
 (2009)
employed the microalgae 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
 UTEX90 that had high
abilities to accumulate 60% of starch [54]. The microalgae are first grown
photosynthetically in a photobioreactor. The biomass was then harvested and
was hydrolyzed with dilute acid (3%) at three different temperatures 100, 110
and 120 °C, from 20 to 120 min with an aim of optimizing the dilute acid
pretreatment step. From this experiment, it was observed that the highest
conversions (58 g glucose can be obtained from 100 g of substrate) were
obtained at 110 °C with a residence time of 30 min. Enzymatic hydrolysis
could be employed with algal biomass, as there is no lignin content but no
such studies were carried in the past and offer an promising opportunity of
research.
15.7 Conclusions
Dual use of microalgae in wastewater treatment and biofuel production from
biomass generated is the best choice for reduction in the cost of energy, GHG
emission. Further, the biomass generate during wastewater treatment can be
used as fertilizers, as it is rich in N and P. The biofuel generated from algal
biomass is cost effective, and the source is sustainable and renewable energy.
Algae are excellent source of sequestering the green house gas (GHG)
emissions and can be grown at very high rates. The solar utilization
efficiency of some microalgae is 2400% higher than plants (5% using some
microalgae as opposed to 0.2% for terrestrial plants) [55]. There is an
enormous opportunity to in harnessing the light energy and CO
2
 into
advanced fuels such as biodiesel and bioethanol.Wastewater-treated algae thus can be utilized for the development of
valuable products such as medical drugs, pigments, hormones, fertilizer and
other high value bioproducts [41]. Algae thus act as a smart tool for
wastewater treatment by utilizing sunlight and converting the energy into
potentially important products. Further research into this wonderful organism
can lead to highly sustainable energy generator by making use of municipal,
industrial and agricultural wastewater.
Acknowledgment
S.C.G. Kiruba Daniel would like to thank RFRS award from TNSCST,
Government of Tamilnadu during his research in Anna University,
Tiruchirappalli.
References
1. F.R. Rijsberman, Water scarcity: Fact or fiction?. 
Agricultural water
management,
 80, 5–22, 2006.
2. A. Sonune, and R. Ghate, Developments in wastewater treatment methods.
Desalination,
 167, 55–63, 2004.
3. M.O. Awaleh, and Y.D. Soubaneh, Waste water treatment in chemical
industries: the concept and current technologies. 
Hydrol Current Res,
 5, 1–
12, 2014.
4. S.C.G. Kiruba Daniel, S. Malathi, S. Balasubramanian, M. Sivakumar, and
T.A. Sironmani, Multifunctional Silver, Copper and Zero Valent Iron
Metallic nanoparticles for wastewater treatment In 
Application of
Nanotechnology, in Water Research,
 435–445, John Wiley & Sons, Inc,
2014.
5. K.D. Stewart, and K.R. Mattox, Comparative cytology, evolution and
classification of the green algae with some consideration of the origin of
other organisms with chlorophylls a and b. 
The Botanical Review,
 41, 104–
135, 1975.
6. N. Abdel-Raouf, A.A. Al-Homaidan and I.B.M. Ibraheem, Microalgae andwastewater treatment. 
Saudi Jour. Biol. Sci,
 19, 257–275, 2012.
7. J. De la Noue, G. Laliberte, and D. Proulx, Algae and waste water, 
J. Appl.
Phycol,
 4, 247–254, 1992.
8. J. Gasperi, S. Garnaud, V. Rocher, and R. Moilleron, Priority pollutants in
wastewater and combined sewer overflow. 
Sci. Total Environ,
 407, 263–272,
2008.
9. L.E. De-Bashan, and Y. Bashan, Immobilized microalgae for removing
pollutants: review of practical aspects. 
Bioresour. Technol,
 101, 1611–1627,
2010.
10. J.P. Hoffmann, Wastewater treatment with suspended and nonsuspended
algae, 
J. Phycol,
 34, 757–763, 1998.
11. N. Mallick, Biotechnological potential of immobilized algae for
wastewater N, P and metal removal: A review. 
BioMetals,
 15, 377–390,
2002.
12. F.B. Green, T.J. Lundquist, and W.J. Oswald, Energetics of advanced
integrated wastewater pond systems. 
Water Sci. Technol,
 31, 9–20, 1995.
13. S. Ahluwalia, and D. Goyal, Microbial and plant derived biomass for
removal of heavy metals from wastewater. 
Bioresour. Technol,
 98, 2243–
2257, 2007.
14. R. Munoz, and B. Guieysse, Algal–bacterial processes for the treatment
of hazardous contaminants: A review. 
Water Res,
 40, 2799–2815, 2006.
15. W.W. Mulbry, and A.C. Wilkie, Growth of benthic freshwater algae on
dairy manures. 
J. Appl. Phycol,
 13, 301–306, 2001.
16. Web source from University of Utah website (
www.swebc.com
).
17. T. Nakamura, R. Van Woesik, and H. Yamasaki, Photoinhibition of
photosynthesis is reduced by water flow in the reef-building coral 
Acropora
digitifera. Marine Ecology Progress Series,
 301, 109–118, 2005.
18. E. Molina Grima, E.H. Belarbi, F.G. Acien, Fernandez, Robles A. and
Medina, Y. Chisti, Recovery of microalgal biomass and metabolites: process
options and economics. 
Biotechnol. Adv,
 20, 491–515, 2003.
19. P.M. Schenk, S.R. Thomas-Hall, E. Stephens, U.C. Marx, J.H. Mussgnug,
C. Posten, and B. Hankamer, Second generation biofuels: High-efficiency
microalgae for biodiesel production. 
Bioenergy research,
 1, 20–43, 2008.20. M. Olaizola, Commercial development of microalgal biotechnology:
From the test tube to the marketplace. 
Biomol. Eng,
 20, 459–466, 2003.
21. L. Travieso, R.O. Canizares, R. Borja, F. Benitez, A.R. Dominguez, Y.R.
Dupeyrón, and V. Valiente, Heavy metal removal by microalgae. 
Bulletin of
environmental contamination and toxicology,
 62, 144–151, 1999.
22. A. Ruiz-Marin, L.G. Mendoza-Espinosa and T. Stephenson, Growth and
nutrient removal in free and immobilized green algae in batch and semi-
continuous cultures treating real wastewater. 
Bioresour. Technolm,
 101, 58–
64, 2010.
23. Z. Aksu, and T. Kutsal, A comparative study for biosorption
characteristics of heavy metal ions with C. vulgaris. 
Environmental
Technology,
 11, 979–987, 1990.
24. B. Wehrheim, and M. Wettern, Biosorption of cadmium, copper and lead
by isolated mother cell walls and whole cells of Chlorella fusca. 
Applied
microbiology and Biotechnology,
 41, 725–728, 1994.
25. E. Sandau, P. Sandau, and O. Pulz, Heavy metal sorption by microalgae.
Acta Biotechnologica
, 16, 227–235, 1996.
26. P.O. Harris, and G.J. Ramelow, Binding of metal ions by particulate
biomass derived from 
Chlorella vulgaris
 and 
Scenedesmus quadricauda.
Environmental science & technology,
 24, 220–228, 1990.
27. G.Ç. Dönmez, Z. Aksu, A. Öztürk, and T. Kutsal, A comparative study
on heavy metal biosorption characteristics of some algae. 
Process
biochemistry,
 34, 885–892, 1999.
28. Z.R. Holan, B. Volesky, and I. Prasetyo, Biosorption of cadmium by
biomass of marine algae. 
Biotechnology and bioengineering,
 41, 819–825,
1993.
29. Z. Aksu, D. Özer, H.I. Ekiz, T. Kutsal, and A. Çaglar, Investigation of
biosorption of chromium (VI) on Cladophora crispata in two-staged batch
reactor. 
Environmental technology,
 17, 215–220, 1996.
30. M.E. Martinez, S. Sanchez, J.M. Jimenez, F. El Yousfi, and L. Munoz,
Nitrogen and phosphorus removal from urban wastewater by the microalga
Scenedesmusobliquus. 
Bioresour, Technol,
 73, 263–272, 2000.
31. P.S. Lau, N.F.Y. Tam, and Y.S. Wong, Effect of algal density on nutrientremoval from primary settled wastewater, 
Environ. Pollut,
 89, 59–66, 1995.
32. Y.Q. Li, M. Horsman, B. Wang, N. Wu and C.Q. Lan, Effects of nitrogen
sources on cell growth and lipid accumulation of green alga
Neochlorisoleoabundans. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol,
 81, 629–636, 2008.
33. A. Bhatnagar, M. Bhatnagar, S. Chinnasamy, and K. Das, 
Chlorella
minutissima
 – a promising fuel alga for cultivation in municipal wastewaters.
Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol,
 161, 523–536, 2010.
34. J.Y. An, S.J. Sim, J.S. Lee, and B.W. Kim, Hydrocarbon production from
secondarily treated piggery wastewater by the green alga
Botryococcusbraunii. J. Appl. Phycol,
 15, 2003.
35. W. Mulbry, S. Kondrad, and J. Buyer, Treatment of dairy and swine
manure effluents using freshwater algae: Fatty acid content and composition
of algal biomass at different manure loading rates. 
J. Appl. Phycol.,
 20,
1079–1085, 2008.
36. Anonymous, Growing 
Innovation America’s Energy Future Starts at
Home,
 Washington, DC: Renewable Fuel Association, 2009.
37. J.M. Urbanchuk, Contribution of the ethanol industry to the economy of
the United States. 
Wayne,
 5, 2007.
38. D.P. Anderson, J.L. Outlaw, H.L. Bryant, J.W. Richardson, D.P. Ernstes,
J. Marc Raulston, J.M. Welch, G.M. Knapek, B.K. Herbst, and M.S. Allison,
The Effects of Ethanol on Texas Food and Feed,
 College Station: Texas
A&M Universtity, 39, 2008.
39. N. Mosier, C. Wyman, B. Dale, R. Elander, Y. Lee, M. Holtzapple, and
M. Ladisch, Features of promising technologies for pretreatment of
lignocellulosic biomass. 
Bioresource Technology
, 96, 673–686, 2005.
40. C. Wyman, B. Dale, R.M. Elander, M. Holtzapple, M. Ladisch, and Y.
Lee, Coordinated development of leading biomass pretreatment technologies.
Bioresource Technology,
 96, 1959–1966, 2005.
41. R. Harun, M. Singh, G. Forde, and M. Danquah, Bioprocess engineering
of microalgae to produce a variety of consumer products. 
Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews
 (2009).
42. D. Walker, Biofuels, facts, fantasy, and feasibility. 
Journal of Applied
Phycology,
 21, 509–517, 2009.43. E.W. Becker, Microalgae: Biotechnology and microbiology, in Oil
production, Baddiley, (Ed.), Cambridge University Press, 1994.
44. C.S. Goh, and K.T. Lee, A visionary and conceptual macroalgae-based
third-generation bioethanol (TGB) biorefinery in Sabah, Malaysia as an
underlay for renewable and sustainable development, 
Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews,
 14, 842–848, 2010.
45. M. Gross, Algal biofuel hopes. 
Current Biology,
 18, 46–47, 2008.
46. Y. Chisti, Biodiesel from microalgae. 
Biotechnology Advances,
 25 294–
306, 2007.
47. E. Romera, A. Ballester, M. Blázquez, and J. Muñoz, Biosorption of Cd,
Ni, and Zn with Mixtures of Different Types of Algae. 
Environmental
Engineering Science,
 25(7),999–1008, 2008.
48. J. Shi, B. Podola, and M. Melkonian, Removal of nitrogen and
phosphorus from wastewater using microalgae immobilized on twin layers:
an experimental study. 
Journal of Applied Phycology,
 19(5), 417–423, 2007.
49. R.A. Bush, and K.M. Hall, 
Process for the production of ethanol from
algae.
 United States, 2006.
50. E. Carballo-Cárdenas, P. Tuan, M. Janssen, and R. Wijffels, Vitamin E
(α-tocopherol) production by the marine microalgae 
Dunaliella tertiolecta
and 
Tetraselmis suecica
 in batch cultivation. 
Biomolecular engineering
, 20,
139–147, 2003.
51. R. Harun, M. Singh, G.M. Forde, and M.K. Danquah, Bioprocess
engineering of microalgae to produce a variety of consumer products.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
 14, 1037–1047, 2010.
52. K. Hon-Nami, A unique feature of hydrogen recovery in endogenous
starch-to-alcohol fermentation of the marine microalga 
Chlamydomonas
perigranulata,
 In 
Twenty-Seventh Symposium on Biotechnology for Fuels and
Chemicals,
 808–828, Humana Press, 2006.
53. I. Maeda, H. Hikawa, M. Miyashiro, K. Yagi, Y. Miura, H. Miyasaka,
and Y. Ikuta, Enhancement of starch degradation by CO
2
 in a marine green
alga, Chlamydomonas sp. MGA161. 
Journal of fermentation and
bioengineering,
 78, 383–385, 1994.
54. R. Ueda, S. Hirayama, K. Sugata, and H. Nakayama, Process for theproduction of ethanol from microalgae, US Patent 5578472 A.
55. M.T. Nguyen, S.P. Choi, J. Lee, J.H. Lee, and S.J. Sim, Hydrothermal
acid pretreatment of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii biomass for ethanol
production. 
Journal of microbiology and biotechnology,
 19, 161–166, 2009.Index
Acceptor
Acidic
Activated carbon
Activated carbon (AC)
carbon xerogel
carbopal AP
CNT
generic AC
granular (GAC)
hydraffin XC
norit SAE Super
powdered (PAC)
Activated coal
Activated magnetic carbon nanotube
Active pharmaceutical ingredients
Adsorb
Adsorbent
Adsorbents
Adsorption
Adsorption energy
Adsorption onto graphene-based nanomaterials
dyes
emerging contaminants
heavy metals
mechanisms
pesticides
pH dependency
phenols
solvents and hydrocarbonsAdvanced materials
Advanced technologies for the removal of PPCPs from wastewater
activated carbon
adsorption
dark and light fenton
metal organic framework
microfiltration
modified carbon nanotubes
modified polysaccharide matrices
ozonation photolysis
reactive composites
reverse osmosis
ultrasound
Agglomerate
Aggregate
Aggregation
Algae
Algal biomass
Alkaline
Alkalinity
Aluminium salts
Ammonia molecule
Anatase
Anionic
Anions
Anisotropic growth
Antibiotics
Arsenic
Articular cartilage
Attenuated total reflection Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR)
Bentonite clays
Bioactive compoundsBiochar (BC)
Biodegradable
Biodiesel
Biofuel
Biomass
Biosorbent
Brazil nut
Bridging
Brokite
By-products
Cadmium (Cd
2+
)
Carbon nanomaterials
Carbon nanotubes
Carbon-TiO
2
 hybrids
Cardiac grafts
Cardiomyocytes
Cationic
Cations
Charge
charge neutralisation
charge neutralising capacity
Chemical modification
Chitosan
bead
flake
powder
Chitosan grafted with anionic groups
CsNCB
CsSLF
Chondrocytes
Chromium (Cr
3+
)
Coagulationaluminium-based coagulant
chemical coagulants
chemical coagulation
coagulants
coagulants aids
colloids
ferric-based coagulant
inorganic coagulants
inorganic polymer coagulants
monomeric coagulants
organic coagulants
polymeric coagulants
precipitative coagulation
sweep coagulation
Collagen
Common adsorbents
activated carbon
cellulose materials
clay
fly ash
organo clay
red mud
sludge
zeolite
Complexation
Contaminants
Conventional WWTP technologies
activated sludge
biological filtration
primary settling
sand filtration
Copolymerization
Cross-linkingdimethylol dihydroxyethyleneurea
epichlorohydrin
ethyleneglycol diglycidyl ether
glutaraldehyde
tripolyphosphate
Crystallinity
Cyclodextrin
Density
Density-functional theory
Dental Pulp Stem Cells (DPSC)
Dermal wounds
Desorption
Destabilisation
Destabilising
Diffuse reflectance UV–Vis spectra (DRUV–Vis)
Dimerized formation
Diphenhydramine (DP) hydrochloride
Dissociation
Dissolved air floatation
Dissolved organic carbon (DOC)
Donor
Dosage
Dose
Drinking water
Dubnin–Radushkevich (D-R)
Dye
Dyes
anionic dye
cationic dye
non-ionic dye
reactive dye
Electrocoagulationelectrochemically
electrodes
electrolysis
Electronic structure
Electrosorption
Electrospinning
collector
spinneret
syringe pump
Taylor cone
Electrostatic
Elovich
Emulsification
Energetics
Energy band
Enmeshment
Enthalpy (ΔΗ)
Entrapment
Entropy (ΔS)
Fermentation
Fibroblasts
First-principles calculation
Flame Atomic Absorption Spectrometry (FAAS)
Flocculation
bioflocculant
chitosan-based flocculant (CMC-g-PDMC)
floc
flocculants
inorganic flocculants
metal-based flocculants
nanomaterials-based flocculants
organic flocculantspolymer-based flocculants
sweep flocculation
Flotation
Formation energy
Freundlich
FTIR
Fullerenes (C60)
Fulminant Hepatic Failiure (FHF)
Functional group
Functionality
Functionalization (grafting)
Functionalization of nano-carbons isolated from
Gibbs’s Free Energy (ΔG)
Glutaraldehyde
Gold (Au)
Grafting
Graphene
Graphene oxide
Hummers’ method
reduction
Graphene oxide (GO)
Graphene synthesis
botton-up route
top-down route
Graphene-based adsorbents
aerogels
composites and functionalization
graphene
graphene oxide (GO)/reduced
graphene oxide (RGO)
magnetic nanoparticles/composites
monolithssponges
Gravity separation
Ground water
Heavy metals
As
Cd
Co
Cr
Cu
desorption
eluent agents
Hg
Ni
Pb
Sb
Zn
Hepatocytes
Human Ligament Fibroblasts (HLF)
Hydrogen molecule
Hydrolysis
Hydrophobicity
Hydroxide
Hydroxyapatite
Hydroxyl
Industry
Inorganic salts
Intraparticle diffusion
Ion-imprinted polymer
Iron salts
Isotherms
Isotropic growth
KeratinocytesKinetics
Langmuir
Lead (Pb
2+
)
Limbal Stem Cell
Limestones
Liquid-phase reductive deposition (LPRD)
Local density approximation
Macroalgae
Magnetic carbon nanotubes
Magnetic CNTs/C@Fe/chitosan
Magnetic nanocomposites
Fe3O4-coated glycine doped polypyrrole magnetic nanocomposites
regeneration and final disposal
synthesis methods
Magnetic nanomaterials
Magnetic nanoparticles
magnetic porous Fe-Mn binary oxide nanowires
nano-structured iron–cerium mixed oxide
phosphonium–silane magnetic nanoparticles
poly(1-vinylimidazole)-grafted Fe
3
O
4
@SiO
2
 magnetic
nanoparticles
regeneration and final disposal
synthesis methods
Mass
Membrane technology
Mesenchymal Stem Cells (MSCs)
Mesoporous
Metal
Metals
Microalgae
Mixing
rapid mixingslow mixing
Molecularly imprinted polymers
Moleculor gas
Monomeric formation
Multi walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs)
Municipal wastewater
Murine myoblast cell line
MWNT membranes
Myocardium
N
2
 adsorption–desorption isotherms
Nanocapsule
Nanocomposite
Nanocomposite materials for water decontamination application
Nanocomposites
inorganic supports
magnetite–porphyrin nanocomposite
regeneration and final disposal
superparamagnetic nanocomposites based on sodium alginate
Nanodiamonds (NDs)
Nanogels
methods of preparation
poly(4-vinyl pyridine) particles
poly(NIPAAm/AA/N-allylisatin) nanohydrogel
polyhydroxy methyl methacrylate magnetic nanogels
regeneration and final disposal
Nanomaterials
carbon nanotubes (CNTs)
carbonaceous materials
carbonaceous-based nanomaterials
dendrimers
magnetic-based nanomaterials
Manganese oxide nanomaterialmetal oxide nanoparticles
zeolites
Nanoparticles
amino-functionalized magnetic nanoparticles
carboxymethyl chitosan–Fe3O4 nanoparticles
chitosan-hydrogel cross-linked
cobalt ferrite nanoparticles
Fe
3
O
4
 nanoparticles
iImmobilized Mn–Cl nanoparticles
magnetically tailored poly (N-isopropylacrylamide)-chitosan
nanohydrogels
mercapto-functionalized nano-Fe
3
O
4
 magnetic polymers
modification
regeneration and final disposal
SiO
2
/Al
2
O
3
 mixed oxide nanoparticles
sodium alginate nanoparticles
thiol-modified silica-coated Fe
3
O
4
 nanoparticles
Nanoprecipitation
Nanosorbents
Nanospheres
carbon
dendritic
magnetic
polyaniline
quantum dot
silica
Nanotechnology
future perspective
Natural organic matter (NOM)
Neural stem cells
Neurite outgrowth
NeuritesNeutralisation
Nitrogen-doped graphene
Organic contaminants
Osteoprogenitor cells
Particle
Periosteum
pH
Pharmaceutical and personal care products
Pharmaceutical products
acetaminophen
carbamazephine
cephalexin
ciprofloxacin
dimetridazole
estradiol
ibuprofen
metronidazole
naproxen
nitroimidazoles
penicilin
pramipexole dihydrochloride
quinoxaline
ronidazole
smx
sulfamethazine
sulfathiazole
testosterone
tetracycline
tinidazole
tmp
trimethoprim
β-lactams/amoxicillinPhenol
Photocatalytic Degradation
Photo-regenerable nanoparticles
Physical
Physical modification
Plasma treatment
Point of zero charge (pHpcz)
Pollutant
Pollutant BC
Nano-carbons from pollutant soot for
Polymers
aluminium sulphate
aluminium-based inorganic polymer
aluminium-based polymer
biopolymers
cationic biopolymer
cationic polymers
ferric chloride
ferric sulphate
ferric-based polymers
highly efficient PACl (PHAC)
PFC-PDADMAC
PFS-PAA
polyaliminium-silicate-chloride
polyaluminium chloride (PACI)
polyaluminium silicate sulphate
polyaluminiumferric chloride
polyferric chloride
polyferric silicate sulphate
polyferrous sulphate (PFS)
polysilic acid
polysilicate-ferric (PSF)
PrecipitatePrecipitation
Pseudo-First-Order
Pseudo-Second-Order
Pyridine-type defect
Re-epithelialization
Regeneration and reutilization of graphene- based adsorbents
adsorption/desorption cycles
desorbing agents
Regenerative medicine
Relative energy
Removal rate
Rutile
Saccharification
Salts
Scanning Electron Micrographs (SEM)
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
Sedimentation
Sediments
Sensor
Separation of nano-carbon from pollutant BC
Settling
Sewage effluent
Sewage treatment plants
Silicates
Size
Sludge
Sorption
Sorption energy
Stability of metal nanoparticles and nanocomposite materials
STP
Substitutional nitrogen defect
Sulfh ydryl-functionalized magnetic carbon nanotubeSurface area
Surface water
Sustainability
Technologies for the removal of PPCPs in WWTP
advanced oxidation process
coagulation
electro-oxidation
membrane filtration MF or UF,
sedimentation
Tetracycline
Tetramerized formation
Therapeutic effects
Thermodynamic
TiO
2
TiO
2
 modification
Total organic carbon (TOC)
Toxic effects
Treatment,
chemical treatment
conventional treatment
water Treatment
Trimerized formation
Turbidity
Turbidity removal
Wastewater treatment
Removal of organic pollutant
Water purification, sensing, and removal of heavy metal ions
Wastewater treatment plants (WWTP)
Water,
drinking water
raw water
surface waterwastewater
water quality
water treatment plants
Water molecule
Water remediation
Work function
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
Zero-valent iron (ZVI)Also of Interest
Application of Nanotechnology in Water Research
Edited by Ajay Kumar Mishra
2014 ISBN: 978-1-118-49630-5
Details the water research applications of nanotechnology in various areas
including environmental science, remediation, membranes, nanomaterials,
and water treatment.
Reverse Osmosis, 2nd edition
Design, Processes, and Applications for Engineers
By Jane Kucera
2015 ISBN: 978-1-118-63974-0
This is the most comprehensive and up-to-date coverage of the “green”
process of reverse osmosis in industrial applications, completely updated in
this new edition to cover all of the processes and equipment necessary to
design, operate, and troubleshoot reverse osmosis systems.
Green Chemistry for Dyes Removal from Waste Water
Research Trends and Applications
Edited by Sanjay K. Sharma
2015 ISBN: 978-1-118-72099-8
The book exclusively focuses on green chemistry and discusses tools and
techniques which are eco-friendly, nonhazardous, and low-waste generating
for removing dyes from waste water.
Smart Membranes and Sensors
Synthesis, Characterization, and ApplicationsEdited by Annarosa Gugliuzza
2015 ISBN: 978-1-118-42379-0
This important and ground-breaking book describes how nano-assembly
approaches are used to make molecular manipulation in membranes, thereby
tailoring desired properties on different length scales.
www.scrivenerpublishing.com