International Journal of Scientific & Engineering Research, Volume 7, Issue 1, January -2016                                                            392 
ISSN 2229-5518   
IJSER © 2016 
http://www.ijser.org  A REVIEW OF THE TEXTILE 
INDUSTRIES WASTE WATER 
TREATMENT METHODOLOGIES  
Deepa Chandran  
Abstract : Textiles is one of the largest industries in the world. The textile industry generates huge quantities of 
complex chemical substances as a part of unused materials including dyes in the form of wastewater during various 
stages of textile manufacturing and processing. The textile industry effluents which are discharged are treated with 
various physical and chemical treatments such as coagulation, flocculation, ozonation and biological treatment for the 
removal of nitrogen, phosphorous, organics and metal traces. This paper reviews the various treatment methodologies for textile wastewater with the advantages and disadvantages of the same.  
Introduction  
Textile s being the largest industries in the world, is one of the industries to cater to the basic 
needs of humans, and has been rapidly growing, more so in the developing countries. Different 
types of fibres that constitute the textile industry are cellulosic ei ther from natural sources or 
regenerated, protein fibres that are mostly animal derivatives and the manmade fibres that are 
synthesized. Each of these fibres require different class of dyes to color them. The cellulosic 
fibres like cotton, viscose etc. hav e affinity to direct dyes, indigo dyes, reactive and naphthol 
dyes. Protein fibres are good to dye with acid dyes. Manmade fibres have affinity to disperse dyes. Basic and direct dyes are also used here. In the process of producing textiles and in the appl ication of color on them, the textile industry gets chemically intensive and hence the major 
polluter of water. The textile industry generates huge quantities of complex chemical substances as a part of unused materials including dyes in the form of wastewater during various stages of textile manufacturing and processing. To produce 1kg of textile about 200L of water is consumed [1]. The chemicals present in the waste water cause harm to both human health and the environment. They block the sunlight passage  through the water, hamper 
photosynthesis, increase the biological oxygen demand and affect the aquatic life. The direct discharge of this waste water into the environment affect its ecological status by causing various undesirable changes. This has a high importance in terms of its environmental bearing, 
since it consumes considerably high quantity of water and produces highly polluted wastewater 
in large amounts.  
The textile industries are required to control their discharges and have effluent treatment 
plants for environment protection. To protect the environment from the harmful effect of the waste generated, the ministry of Environment, Government of India has set standards for the wastewater and other wastes which are discharged into the environment a fter treatment. To 
ensure that the wastes meet the norms set by the Government, all the textile mills adopt various processes and technologies available in this regard. It is increasingly important in today’s advanced way of life, to conserve the natural resources and the environment for the 
needs of the present and the future generations and economy.  
IJSERInternational Journal of Scientific & Engineering Research, Volume 7, Issue 1, January -2016                                                            393 
ISSN 2229-5518   
IJSER © 2016 
http://www.ijser.org  The waste water is the primary and the most polluting component of the textile industry’s 
effluent.  The conventional techniques adopted to treat the wastewat er are physical, chemical 
and biological methods.  
1. Physical – Sedimentation (Clarification), screening, aeration, Filtration, Flotation and 
skimming, degasification, Equalization.  
2. Chemical – Chlorination, Ozonation, Neutralization, Coagulation, Adsorp tion, Ion 
exchange  
3. Biological   
a. Aerobic – Activated sludge treatment methods, Trickling filtration, oxidation, 
ponds, lagoons, aerobic digestion  
b. Anaerobic – Anaerobic digestion, septic tanks, Lagoons  
The treatment process can be sequenced as below : 
I. Primary treatment – Removal of suspended solids, oil, grit etc.  
II. Secondary treatment – Use of microorganisms in either aerobic or anaerobic 
condition for the reduction of the BOD, removal of color, oil and phenol.  
III. Tertiary treatment – Use of e lectro dialysis, ion exchange and reverse osmosis 
for the final removal and purification of the wastewater  
The textile industry effluents which are discharged are treated with various physical and chemical treatments such as coagulation, flocculation, ozonation and biological treatment for the removal of nitrogen, phosphorous, organics and metal traces. The disadvantages of the physic – chemical processes are the formation of sludge, disposal of sludge and the space 
needed. The disadvantages of the biologic al processes are the presence of the toxic heavy 
metals which hamper the growth of microorganisms, most of the dye stuff used are non-
biodegradable in nature and the time requirement for the treatment is more [1].  
PRIMARY TREATMENT PROCESS  
The first step is the removal of suspended solids, excessive quantities of oil, grease and gritty 
materials. The effluent is first screened for coarse suspended materials such as yarns, lint, pieces of fabrics and rags using bar screens and fine screens [2]. The screened effluents then 
undergo settling for the removal of the suspended particles. The floating particles are removed by mechanical scraping systems. Ultrafiltration using modified poly vinylidene fluoride membrane which has 60% of styrene -acrylonitrile in conte nt and 40% poly vinylidene fluoride 
with a porous top layer and a sub- layer with a number of pores. The color removal and COD 
reduction is moderate accompanied by reduced membrane fouling for separation and 
purification of dye solutions [3].  
IJSERInternational Journal of Scientific & Engineering Research, Volume 7, Issue 1, January -2016                                                            394 
ISSN 2229-5518   
IJSER © 2016 
http://www.ijser.org   The treatment  by ultrafiltration and /or nano filtration nullify some of the limitations of 
the membrane process such as fouling, pore blocking and cake formation and enables water 
reuse [4]. The nano filtration techniques achieve a sharp reduction in COD along with the dyes removal from the permeate [5]. The cross flow nano filtration with the help of a thin film composite polysulfone membrane working at low pressures, relatively high fluxes are obtained, with an average dye rejection of 98% and NaCI rejections of less  than 14%. Thus, a high quality 
of reusable water is recovered [6].  
 The electro flotation technology is effective in removing colloidal particles, oil & grease, 
as well as organic pollutants with better performance than either dissolved air flotation, sedimentation, impeller flotation [7]. Electro deposition is effective in recovery of heavy metals 
from wastewater streams [7].  
 To reduce the acidic contents of the effluents neutralization is done. Sulphuric acid and 
boiler flue gas are the most commonly us ed chemicals to alter the pH. A pH value of 5 -9 is 
considered ideal for the treatment process [8] (Babu R et al., 2007). The screening is followed by sedimentation which makes use of gravity to settle the particles. Simple sedimentation is not effective an d is also space consuming process. Coagulation should be carried out which is 
advantageous, with ferrous sulphate, lime, alum, ferric sulphate or ferric chloride [9]. A combination of fluidized biofilm with chemical coagulation and electrochemical oxidatio n 
effectively decreases the pollutant loading on the post treatment process [10].  
 Electrocoagulation with aluminum, iron or the hybrid Al/Fe electrodes are suitable for 
water production or wastewater treatment [7]. Utilization of plant- based coagulants are 
comparable to their chemical counterparts in terms of efficiency. This represents important progress in sustainable environmental technology as they are renewable resources and their application is directly related to the improvement of quality of life  in the ecosystem [11]. The 
use of Ipomoea dasysperma seed gums is effective for decolourization of direct dye and in combination with conventional coagulants like polyaluminum chloride their coagulation 
efficiency is well extended even for reactive and ac id dyes [12].  
 Some novel pre -hydrolyzed coagulants such as a polyaluminum chloride, polyaluminum 
ferric chloride, polyferrous sulphate and polyferrous sulphate and polyferric chloride have been 
found to be more effective for decolourisation of the waste water. Use of natural coagulants for treatment has also been emphasized and encouraged as the viable alternative because of their eco-friendly nature. Synthetic metallic salts as well as synthetic and natural polymers from 
different origins have also been used for the removal of textile colors. [13].  
 For the specific removal of vat dye and reactive black, the application if a food grade 
polysaccharide namely Plantago psyllium mucilage shows that the flocculation efficiency is sensitive to pH when pure aqueous solutions of dyes are used, but it is relatively unaffected by pH change when salts are added to the dye solutions. The results show that the mucilage is 
more effective for removal of solubilized vat dye than for reactive black [14].  
 Some of the disadv antage with flocculation system are that they are in a risk of getting 
short -circuited and the floc formation in the system is difficult to control. Care should be taken 
IJSERInternational Journal of Scientific & Engineering Research, Volume 7, Issue 1, January -2016                                                            395 
ISSN 2229-5518   
IJSER © 2016 
http://www.ijser.org  that the sludge disposed from the bottom of the system would not suspend the solids into the 
system again [1].  
SECONDARY TREATMENT PROCESS  
Organic matter is a source of energy and nutrients for aerobic bacteria. They oxidize organic 
matter to from CO2 and water degrade nitrogenous organic matter into ammonia. Aerated lagoons, trickling filt er and activated sludge systems are among the aerobic system used in the 
secondary treatment. Anaerobic treatment is mainly used to stabilize the sludge thus generated 
[2]. 
 Aerated lagoons are one of the commonly used biological treatment process. This 
consists of a large holding tank lined rubber or polythene and the effluent from the primary 
treatment is aerated for about 2 -6 days and the formed sludge is removed. The BOD removal 
efficiency is up to 99% and the phosphorous removal is 15 -25%. The nitrific ation of ammonia is 
also found to occur in aerated lagoons. The major disadvantage of this technique is the large 
amount of space it occupies and the risk of bacterial contamination in the lagoons [2]. The removal of heavy metals such as Pb, Cd, Zn, Cu and Cr by using duckweed and algae ponds as a 
polishing step was found to not be very suitable [15].  
 Trickling filters are another common method of secondary treatment that mostly 
operates under aerobic conditions. The effluent for the primary treatment is t rickled or sprayed 
over the filter. The filter usually consists of a rectangular or circular bed of coal, gravel, poly 
Vinyl chloride (PVC), broken stones or synthetic resins [16]. A gelatinous film made up of 
microorganisms, is formed on the surface of the filter medium. These organisms help in the 
oxidation of organic matter in the effluent to carbon dioxide and water [17].  
 The microaerophilic aerobic sequential batch reactor for treatment of azo dyes help the 
facultative microorganisms decolorize azo dy es and total biodegradation occurs under aerated 
conditions resulting in 92.84% initial COD reduction along with 99.0% decolourization [18].  
 Trickling filters do not require huge space, and therefore are advantageous as compared 
to the aerated lagoons. However, their disadvantage is the high capital cost and odor emission [16].  
 Aerobic activated sludge process is the most commonly one. It involves a regular 
aeration of the effluent inside a tank allowing the aerobic bacteria to metabolize the soluble 
and suspended organic matters. A part of the organic matter is oxidized into CO2 and the rest 
are synthesized into new microbial cells. The effluent and the sludge generated from this process are separated using sedimentation; some of the sludge is returned to  the tank as a 
source of microbes. A BOD removal efficiency of 90 -95% can be achieved from this process, but 
is time consuming. Sludge formed as a result of primary and secondary treatment processes pose a major disposal problem. They cause environmental p roblems when released untreated 
as they consist of microbes and organic substances. Treatment of sludge is carried out both, aerobically and anaerobically by bacteria. Aerobic treatment involves the presence of air and 
aerobic bacteria which convert the sludge into carbon dioxide biomass and water.  
IJSERInternational Journal of Scientific & Engineering Research, Volume 7, Issue 1, January -2016                                                            396 
ISSN 2229-5518   
IJSER © 2016 
http://www.ijser.org   The recycled alum sludge (RAS) is an efficient way of removing hydrophobic dye, while 
simultaneously reducing the fresh alum dosage. This process is not recommended for the 
removal of hydrophilic dyes, since the  high solubility characteristics of such dyes may cause 
deterioration in the water quality during recycling [19].  
 For aerobically decolorizing and degrading the reactive azo dyes which generally are 
deficient in carbon content, starch is the best source of carbon [20]. Anaerobic treatment involves the absence of air and the presence of anaerobic bacteria, which degrade the sludge into biomass, methane and carbon dioxide [1]. The removal of water – soluble color from textile 
wastewater using whole bacterial cells are also suitable [21].  
 The conventional biological methods cannot be used for complete treatment of the 
effluent due to the increasing presence of molecules. Due to this, introduction of newer technologies such as cavitation, photo catalytic oxidation, Fenton’s chemistry (advanced oxidation process), ozonation and use of hydrogen peroxide ( chemical oxidation technologies) to degrade these refractory molecules into smaller molecules, which can be further oxidized by 
biological methods, are imperativ e [22].  
TERTIARY TREATMENT  
 There are several technologies used in tertiary treatments including electro dialysis, 
reverse osmosis and ion exchange process. Electrolytic precipitation of textile effluents is the 
process of passing electric current through  the textile effluents using electrodes.  As a result of 
electro chemical reactions, the dissolved metal ions combine with finely dispersed particles in the solutions, forming heavier metal ions that precipitate and can be removed later. One of the 
disadva ntage is that a high contact time is required between the cathode and the effluent [2].  
 Reverse osmosis is a process which uses membranes that can remove total dissolved 
solids. Electro dialysis another process that uses membranes that can separate the di ssolved 
salts. The ion exchange process involves the passage of effluents through the beds of ion 
exchange resins which are either cationic or anionic. The chemical coagulation treatment followed by ion -exchange methods are quite effective with a maximum COD reduction of about 
81.3% at 300mg/l of coagulant whereas electrocoagulation process, maximum COD removal is 92.31% [23]. Photo catalytic degradation is another method by which a wide range of dyes can be decolorized depending on their molecular structur e. 
 Adsorption is also found to be effective in removal of color. The effectiveness of orange 
peel as an adsorbent in the removal of acid violet 17 (acid dye) with a maximum removal of 87% at pH 2.0 for an adsorbent dose of 600 mg/50 ml of 10mg/L dye conce ntration. Adsorption 
increases with increase in pH [24]. The effectiveness of adsorption using Indian Rosewood (Dalbergia sissoo) sawdust, pretreated with formaldehyde and sulphuric acid, for the removal of dye methylene blue shows that with the increase in the amount of the adsorbent, the percentage of dye removal increases accordingly. Higher adsorption percentages are observed at lower concentrations of methylene blue. Sulphuric acid treated sawdust or formaldehyde 
IJSERInternational Journal of Scientific & Engineering Research, Volume 7, Issue 1, January -2016                                                            397 
ISSN 2229-5518   
IJSER © 2016 
http://www.ijser.org  treated sawdust of Indian Rosewood are attractive options for dye removal from dilute 
industrial effluents [25].  
The use of fly ash which is a major pollutant generated in coal -based thermal power plants as 
the adsorbent in treating the dye solutions of methylene blue or Congo red yields compar able 
results obtained by using activated carbon. The first -order adsorption rate constants decrease 
with temperature [26].  
The use of polymer carbon composite membrane system removes effectively the salts dissolved 
in the dye wastewater and the TDS removal  efficiency increases with decreasing flow rate of 
the wastewater [27]. The methylene blue adsorption on commercial activated carbon (CAC) and indigenously prepared activated carbons from bamboo dust, coconut shell, groundnut shell, rice husk and straw indicate that such carbons can be employed as low cost alternatives to commercial activated carbon in the treatment for the removal of color and dyes [28]. The use of activated carbon prepared from the coconut tree sawdust aids the removal of color, chemical oxygen demand (COD), biological oxygen demand (BOD), total solids and total 
hardness which increased with increase in carbon dose. The use of carbon is economical, since 
sawdust is a waste product and available in large quantities, especially in India [29] . 
The materials that are available in nature that have little or no use being used as low cost adsorbents for treatment of wastewater is seen as a growing approach [30].  
  
The removal of synthetic dyes from wastewaters by adsorption on various sorbents, chemical 
decomposition by oxidation, photo degradation and microbiological decoloration, employing activated sludge, pure cultures and microbe consortiums are effective [31]. Thermal 
evaporation using sodium per sulfate also has good oxidizing potential [2].  
 
 The decolourisation and removal of textile dyes by using potato (Solanum tuberosum) 
soluble and immobilized polyphenol oxidase results in remarkable loss of total organic carbon 
[32]. The peroxidases of immobilized bitter gourd (Momordica charantia) can  remove 
remarkably high concentrations of color from the effluent [33].  
ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESS (AOP)  
The mechanism of AOP is the production of OH radicals which are capable of destroying components that are hard to be oxidized. Generation of OH radical s are generally accelerated 
by the combinations of H2 O2, UV, O3, TiO2, Fe2+, electron beam irradiation and ultra sound.  
AOPs are classified under chemical, photochemical, catalytic, photo catalytic, mechanical and electrical processes. Generally these pr ocesses are found to reduce 70 -80% of COD when 
compared to 30- 45% reduction in the biological treatment [1].  
IJSERInternational Journal of Scientific & Engineering Research, Volume 7, Issue 1, January -2016                                                            398 
ISSN 2229-5518   
IJSER © 2016 
http://www.ijser.org   The review of the electrochemical technologies in wastewater treatment show that, 
electro oxidation is finding its application in wastewater treatment in combination with other 
technologies [7].  
  The depletion of Cl - ion concentration and the COD removal is comparatively high in the 
presence of graphite electrode as against the aluminum electrodes in the electrocoagulation and electro oxidation techniques for the synthetic polyester fabric industry effluent [34].  
  Use of mesoporous activated carbon as a heterogeneous catalyst, in the homogeneous 
and heterogeneous Fenton system yield enhanced rate of oxidation reaction, minimum sludge 
productio n, low electrical energy input and the COD removal is in excess as compared to the 
homogeneous Fenton oxidation by 30% [35].  
  The optimization of ozone treatment shows that the treatment time plays a major role 
in the decolouration and COD removal of the acid dye effluent [36]. ZnO as an effective 
semiconductor catalyst for photo catalytic degradation of dyes result in substantial reduction of 
COD and removal of color [37].  
By using a combined process consisting of biological pretreatment, chemical coagula tion and 
electrochemical oxidation the COD and color reduction by 98.5% [38] was achieved. In the 
decolourisation of commercially important azo dyes under anaerobic conditions, with no inhibition of methanogenesis with dye concentrations of up to 400 mg/l,  color removal of >99% 
, COD removal of up to 95% had been observed [39].  
The electrochemical method to treat the organic pollutants reduces the COD substantially and due to the strong oxidation potential treats water to be effectively reused for dyeing 
application [40].  
The recycling of wastewaters of textile dyeing industries using advanced treatment technology 
suggest that the dye bath water on treatment with sand, nano filtrations and then with multi effect evaporator / solar evaporation pond followed by treatment in a sequence of physicochemical and biological unit processes into two stages reverse osmosis membrane systems results in the removal of total dissolved solids, chemical oxygen demand, chloride and 
sodium were found to be in the range of 80 -97%, 91- 97%, 76- 97% and 96% respectively [41].  
The solar light induced degradation of textile dye reactive blue 4 is a viable technique for the 
color removal, since the dye gets totally mineralized when irradiated with TiO2 photo catalyst 
[42].  
Hybrid method s are majorly a combination of advanced oxidation processes viz Ultrasound / 
H2O2 or ozone, UV /H2O2 or ozone, Ozone / H2O2, sono- photochemical oxidation, Photo -
Fenton processes, catalytic advanced oxidation processes, use of advanced oxidation processes 
in conjunction with biological oxidation and sono chemical degradation followed by wet air 
oxidation [22].  
The bioremediation concepts for treatment of synthetic dye containing wastewater show that 
increasing number of microorganisms have the ability to dec olorize and degrade artificial dyes 
IJSERInternational Journal of Scientific & Engineering Research, Volume 7, Issue 1, January -2016                                                            399 
ISSN 2229-5518   
IJSER © 2016 
http://www.ijser.org  and novel bioremediation approaches for treatment of dye bearing wastewaters. The 
biotechnological applications are not only for color removal but also for the complete mineralization of dyes. Different microorganisms su ch as aerobic and anaerobic bacteria, fungi 
and actinomycetes catalyze dye decolourisation with good efficiencies [43].  
CONCLUSIONS:  
The textile industry is a major polluter of fresh and ground water, thereby rendering the effluent water mixed with toxic chemicals. The effluent hence is treated by various methods such as physical, chemical and biological methods. The removal of color from the textile wastewater by means of cheaper and environmental friendly technologies is still a major challenge. The remov al of color poses to be the subject of maximum scope with varied 
techniques to eliminate the color components.  
The physic -chemical means for the removal of dyes and pollutants are very costly and the 
concentrated sludge disposal is an issue.  For a high degree of efficiency and good economics none of the individual methods of wastewater treatment are suitable and hence hybrid 
methods are imperative.  
The materials available in nature that have little or no use being used as low -cost adsorbents 
for treatment of wastewater is seen as a growing approach. Novel bioremediation processes 
and increasing number of microorganisms have the ability to decolorize and degrade the dyes. The advanced oxidation process is gaining attention in the recent days due to its abili ty to treat 
almost all the solid components in the textile effluent. This process is also found to be much 
more efficient in the reduction of COD as compared to the biological processes.  
The studies on sustainability of wastewater treatment technologies and the development of a 
set of indicators that incorporate environmental, societal and economic sustainability are an increasing need, taking into consideration the global warming, resource shrinkage and global climate changes. While selection of a set of indicators is dependent on the geographic and demographic context of a particular community, the degree of sustainability of each technology 
is definitely the way forward.  
REFERENCES:  
[1] AE Ghaly, R Ananthashankar, M Alhattab and VV Ramakrishnan, (2014) Pr oduction, 
characterization and treatment of textile effluents: a critical review, Chemical Engineering and Process Technology, Volume 5, Issue 1, 1000182  
[2] Das S (2000) Textile effluent treatment - A Solution to the Environmental Pollution  
[3] Harsha P. Srivastava., G. Arthanareeswaran., N. Anantharaman., Victor M. Starov.,(2011) 
Performance of modified poly(vinylidene fluoride) membrane for textile wastewater 
ultrafiltration, Desalination, Vol 282, pp 87 –94.  
 
IJSERInternational Journal of Scientific & Engineering Research, Volume 7, Issue 1, January -2016                                                            400 
ISSN 2229-5518   
IJSER © 2016 
http://www.ijser.org  [4] Cheïma Fersi., Mahmoud Dhahbi.,(2008) Tr eatment of textile plant effluent by ultrafiltration 
and/or Nano filtration for water reuse, Desalination, Vol 222, Issues 1 –3,pp 263– 271.  
[5] S. Chakraborty., M.K. Purkait., S. Das Gupta., S. De., J.K. Basu., (2003) Nanofiltration of 
textile plant effluent for color removal and reduction in COD, Separation and Purification 
Technology, Vol 31, Issue 2, pp 141– 151.  
[6] C. Tang., V. Chen., (2002) Nano filtration of textile wastewater for water reuse, Desalination, Vol 143, Issue 1, pp 11– 20. 
[7] Guohua Chen.,  (2004) Electrochemical technologies in wastewater treatment, Separation 
and Purification Technology, Vol 38, Issue 1, pp 11 –41.  
[8] Eswaramoorthi S, Dhanapal K, Chauhan D (2008) Advanced in Textile Waste Water 
Treatment: The Case for UV -Ozonation and Membrane Bioreactor for Common Effluent 
Treatment Plants in Tirupur, Tamil Nadu, India. Environment with People’s Involvement & Co -
ordination in India. Coimbatore, India.  
[9] Chen X, Shen Z, Zhu X, Fan Y, W Wang (2005) Advanced Treatment of Textile Wastewater  for 
Reuse Using Electrochemical Oxidation and Membrane Filtration. Water SA Vol 31 No.1.  
[10] Tak -Hyun Kim., Chulhwan Park., Jinwon Lee., Eung -Bai Shin., Sangyong  Kim.,(2002) Pilot 
scale treatment of textile wastewater by combined process (fluidized biof ilm process –chemical 
coagulation –electrochemical oxidation, Water Research, Vol 36, Issue 16, pp 3979 -3988.  
[11] Chun -Yang Yin., (2010) Emerging usage of plant -based coagulants for water and 
wastewater treatment, Process Biochemistry, Vol 45, Issue 9, pp 1 437– 1444.  
[12] Rashmi Sanghi., Bani Bhattacharya., Awantika Dixit., Vandana Singh., (2006) Ipomoea dasysperma seed gum: An effective natural coagulant for the decolorization of textile dye 
solutions, Journal of Environmental Management, Vol 81, Issue 1, pp 36–41. 
[13] Akshaya Kumar Verma., Rajesh Roshan Dash., Puspendu Bhunia., (2011) A review on 
chemical coagulation/flocculation technologies for removal of colour from textile wastewaters, 
Journal of Environmental Management, Vol 93, Issue 1, pp 154 –168.  
[14] Anuradha Mishra., Malvika Bajpai., (2005) Flocculation behaviour of model textile 
wastewater treated with a food grade polysaccharide, Journal of Hazardous Materials, Vol 118, 
Issue 1, pp 213 -217.  
[15] Christian B. Sekomo.,Diederik P.L. Rousseau., Saleh  A. Saleh., Piet N.L. Lens.,(2012) Heavy 
metal removal in duckweed and algae ponds as a polishing step for textile wastewater treatment, Ecological Engineering, Vol 44, pp 102 –110.  
[16] Etter B, Tilley E, Khadka R, Udert KM (2011) Low -cost struvite production using source -
separated urine in Nepal. Water Res 45: 852 -862 
IJSERInternational Journal of Scientific & Engineering Research, Volume 7, Issue 1, January -2016                                                            401 
ISSN 2229-5518   
IJSER © 2016 
http://www.ijser.org  [17] NODPR (National Onsite Demonstration Project Results) – WATERLOO BIOFILTER. 1995. 
Trickling Filters - General  
[18] S. Sandhya., S. Padmavathy., K. Swaminathan., Y.V. Subrahmanyam., S.N. Kaul., (2005) 
Microaerophilic –aerobic sequential batch reactor for treatment of azo dyes containing 
simulated wastewater, Process Biochemistry, Vol 40, Issue 2, pp 885 –890.  
[19] W Chu., (2001) Dye Removal from Textile Dye Wastewater Using Recycled Alum Slu dge, 
Water Research, Vol 35, Issue 13, pp 3147– 3152.  
[20] S. Padmavathy., S. Sandhya., K. Swaminathan., Y. V. Subrahmanyam., T. Chakrabarti., S. N. Kaul., ( 2003) Aerobic Decolorization of Reactive Azo Dyes in Presence of Various Cosubstrates, 
Chem. Bioche m, pp 147– 151.  
[21] C.I. Pearce., J.R. Lloyd., J.T. Guthrie., (2003) The removal of colour from textile wastewater using whole bacterial cells: a review, Dyes and Pigments, Vol 58, Issue 3, pp179 –196.  
[22] Parag R. Gogate., Aniruddha B. Pandit., (2004) A review of imperative technologies for 
wastewater treatment II: hybrid methods, Advances in Environmental Research, Vol 8, Issues 3 –
4, pp 553– 597.  
[23] S. Raghu., C. Ahmed Basha.,(2007) Chemical or electrochemical techniques, followed by ion exchange, for r ecycle of textile dye wastewater, Journal of Hazardous Materials, Vol 149, Issue 
2, pp 324– 330.  
[24] Rajeshwari Sivaraj., C Namasivayam., K Kadirvelu., (2001) Orange peel as an adsorbent in the removal of Acid violet 17 (acid dye) from aqueous solutions, W aste Management, Vol 21, 
Issue 1, pp 105 -110.  
[25] V.K. Garg., Moirangthem Amita., Rakesh Kumar., Renuka Gupta., (2004) Basic dye (methylene blue) removal from simulated wastewater by adsorption using Indian Rosewood 
sawdust: a timber industry waste, Dyes and Pigments, Vol 63, Issue 3, pp 243 -250.  
[26] V.V. Basava Rao., S. Ram Mohan Rao., (2006) Adsorption studies on treatment of textile 
dyeing industrial effluent by fly ash, ARTICLE in CHEMICAL ENGINEERING JOURNAL 116, pp 77 -
84.  
[27] Yong Hwan Lee., Jae Yun Jeong., Jonggeon Jegal., Joong Hwan Mo., ( 2008) Preparation and characterization of polymer– carbon composite membranes for the removal of the dissolved 
salts from dye wastewater, Dyes and Pigments, Vol 76, Issue 2, 2008, pp 372 –378.  
[28] Nagarethinam Kannan., Mariappan Meenakshi Sundaram., (2001) Kinetics and mechanism of removal of methylene blue by adsorption on various carbons —a comparative study, Dyes 
and Pigments, Vol 51, Issue 1, pp 25 -40.  
[29] K Kadirvelu., M Palanival., R Kalpana., S Rajeswari ., (2000) Activated carbon from an 
agricultural by -product, for the treatment of dyeing industry wastewater, Bioresource 
Technology, Vol 74, Issue 3, pp 263- 265.  
IJSERInternational Journal of Scientific & Engineering Research, Volume 7, Issue 1, January -2016                                                            402 
ISSN 2229-5518   
IJSER © 2016 
http://www.ijser.org  [30] V. K. Gupta., P. J.M. Carrott., M. M.L. Ribeiro Carrott., Suhas., (2009) Low -Cost Adsorbe nts: 
Growing Approach to Wastewater Treatment —a Review, Critical Reviews in Environmental 
Science and Technology, Vol 39, Issue 10, pp 783 -842.  
[31] Esther Forgacs., Tibor Cserháti., Gyula Oros., (2004) Removal of synthetic dyes from 
wastewaters: a review,  Environment International, Vol 30, Issue 7, pp 953 –971.  
[32] Amjad Ali Khan., Qayyum Husain., (2007) Decolorization and removal of textile and non -
textile dyes from polluted wastewater and dyeing effluent by using potato (Solanum 
tuberosum) soluble and i mmobilized polyphenol oxidase, Bioresource Technology, Vol 98, Issue 
5, pp 1012– 1019.  
[33] Suhail Akhtar., Amjad Ali Khan., Qayyum Husain., (2005) Potential of immobilized bitter gourd (Momordica charantia) peroxidases in the decolorization and removal of textile dyes 
from polluted wastewater and dyeing effluent, Chemosphere, Vol 60, Issue 3, pp 291 –301.  
[34] G. Bhaskar Raju., M. Thalamadai Karuppiah., S.S. Latha., S. Parvathy., S. Prabhakar., (2008) 
Treatment of wastewater from synthetic textile industry by electrocoagulation –
electrooxidation, Chemical Engineering Journal, Vol 144, Issue 1, pp 51 –58.  
[35] S. Karthikeyan., A. Titus., A. Gnanamani., A.B. Mandal., G. Sekaran., (2011)Treatment of textile wastewater by homogeneous and heterogeneous Fenton oxidation processes, 
Desalination, 281, pp 438 -445.  
[36] M. Muthukumar., D. Sargunamani., N. Selvakumar., J. Venkata Rao., (2004) Optimisation of 
ozone treatment for colour and COD removal of acid dye effluent using central composite 
design experiment, Dyes an d Pigments, Vol 63, Issue 2, pp 127– 134.  
[37] Sampa Chakrabarti., Binay K. Dutta., (2004) Photocatalytic degradation of model textile 
dyes in wastewater using ZnO as semiconductor catalyst, Journal of Hazardous Materials, Vol 
112, Issue 3, pp 269– 278.  
[38] Sangyong Kim., Chulhwan Park., Tak -Hyun Kim., Jinwon Lee., Seung -Wook Kim., ( 2003) 
COD reduction and decolorization of textile effluent using a combined process, Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Vol 95, Issue 1, pp 102 -105.  
[39] B Manu., Sanjeev  Chaudhari., (2002) Anaerobic decolorisation of simulated textile 
wastewater containing azo dyes, Bioresource Technology, Vol 82, Issue 3, pp 225- 231.  
[40] N. Mohan., N. Balasubramanian., C. Ahmed Basha., (2007) Electrochemical oxidation of textile wastewater and its reuse, Journal of Hazardous Materials 147, pp 644 –651.  
[41] K. Ranganathan., K. Karunagaran., D.C. Sharma., (2007) Recycling of wastewaters of textile 
dyeing industries using advanced treatment technology and cost analysis —Case studies, 
Resources, Conservation and Recycling, Vol 50, Issue 3, pp 306– 318.  
IJSERInternational Journal of Scientific & Engineering Research, Volume 7, Issue 1, January -2016                                                            403 
ISSN 2229-5518   
IJSER © 2016 
http://www.ijser.org  [42] B. Neppolian., H.C. Choi., S. Sakthivel., B. Arabindoo., V. Murugesan., (2002) Solar light 
induced and TiO2 assisted degradation of textile dye reactive blue 4, Chemosphere, Vol 46, 
Issue 8, pp 1173– 1181.  
[43] André B. dos Santos., Francisco J. Cervantes., Jules B. van Lier., (2007) Review paper on 
current technologies for decolourisation of textile wastewaters: Perspectives for anaerobic 
biotechnology, Bioresource Technology, Vol 98, Issue 12, pp 2369– 2385.  
IJSER