 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recent developments in bioreactor scale production of bacterial
polyhydroxyalkanoates
Raza, Z. A., Tariq, M. R., Majeed, M. I., & Banat, I. (2019). Recent developments in bioreactor scale production
of bacterial polyhydroxyalkanoates. Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering , 42(6), 901-919. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00449-019-02093-x
Link to publication record in Ulster University Research Portal
Published in:
Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering
Publication Status:
Published (in print/issue): 01/06/2019
DOI:
10.1007/s00449-019-02093-x
Document Version
Author Accepted version
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via Ulster University's Research Portal is retained by the author(s) and / or other copyright
owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these
rights.
Take down policy
The Research Portal is Ulster University's institutional repository that provides access to Ulster's research outputs. Every effort has been
made to ensure that content in the Research Portal does not infringe any person's rights, or applicable UK laws. If you discover content in
the Research Portal that you believe breaches copyright or violates any law, please contact pure-support@ulster.ac.uk.
Download date: 29/08/20241 
 Recent developments in bioreactor scale production of bacterial polyhydroxyalkanoates  
Zulfiqar Ali Raza1,* Muhammad Rizwan Tariq1,2, Muhammad Irfan Majeed2 and Ibrahim M. 
Banat3 
1 Department of Applied Sciences, National Textile University, Faisalabad 37610, Pakistan  
2 Department of Chemistry, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad -Pakistan  
3 School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulster, Coleraine BT52 1SA, Northern Ireland, 
UK 
Running head: Bioreactor scale production of polyhydroxyalkanoates  
Abstract  
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs)  are biological plastics that are sustainable alternative to synthetic 
ones. Numerous microorganisms have been identified as PHAs producers they store  PHAs as 
cellular inclusion s to use as an energy  source  backup . They can be produc ed in shake flasks and 
in bioreactor s under defined fermentation and physiological culture conditions  using suitable  
nutrients . Their production at bioreactor scale depends o n various factors such as carbon source , 
nutrients supply, temperature, dissolved oxygen  level , pH and processes.  Once produced, PHAs 
find diverse applications in multiple fields of science and technology particularly in the medical 
sector . The present review covers some recent developments in sustainable bioreactor scale 
production of PHAs and identifies some  areas  in which future research in this field might be 
focused.  
Keywords:  Bioplastic, Biopolyester, Bioreactor, Fermentation, PHAs 
* Correspondence : Tel: +92 41 9230081, Fax: +92 41 9230098,  
E-mail address: zarazapk@yahoo.com  
1 History  
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) comprise a range of different biodegradable biopolymers - 
bioplastics or bio -polyesters synthesized by various microorganisms [1]. They were discovered, 
in 1888,  by Beijerinck as cellular inclusions of bacteria and other microorganisms [2]. In 1926 
Maurice Lemoigne, a French scientist, was  the first to synthesize a PHA (named poly -3-2 
 hydroxybutyric ac id) using a bacterial strain of Bacillus megaterium  [3]. Later on, in 1958, 
Macrae and Wilkinson  claimed that the bacterial cells play a role as cellular factories for PHAs 
synthesis and storage [4]. Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI), UK, initiated commercial 
production of PHAs  in 1961 ; whereas , Wallen and Rohwedder (1974)  reported synthesiz ing 
PHAs other than poly -3-hydroxybutyric acid. In 1980, ICI synthesized a copolymer of PHA via 
fermentation , while   in 1983,  [5] reported  synthesiz ing a medium chain length 
polyhydroxyalkanoate (mcl -PHAs) which in  turn became a milestone in the synthesis of PHAs. 
Also i n 1980, the researchers started  investigat ions on  the physiochemical properties of PHAs  
[6] and later on in 1990, scientists used them for the first time in the biomedical field . By 2010, 
the PHAs market  had reached up to 1010  US$ with a growth of 170 -180 Kt , annually [7].  
2 Introduction  
Plants have always been  used as a major source of polymers such as starch, cellulose, flax and 
rubber for thousands of years. During  the past few decades, plant polymers ha d extensively been 
replaced by petrochemical based polymers on mass scale production  [8]. At the end of the 20th 
century , it was realized that these  synthetic polymers are non -biodegradable, persistent and 
continually accumulate in the environment which ultimately represents a threat  to life on Earth. 
During the past two decades environmental protection agencies had started awareness programs 
for both the public , in general , and manufacturers , in specific , on the importance of preserving 
and protecting nature from toxic products and hazardous wastes [9]. These concerns had 
compelled scientists and researchers to further explore  new approaches to synthesis and use eco-
friendly bioplastics such as  PHAs as alternative materials  to plastics  [10].  
PHAs are biodegradable linear thermoplastic polyesters, which can b e used as alternative 
polymers to synthetic ones. They are synthesized by different bacterial strains (both Gram 
positive  and Gram negative) cultivated on  different carbon sources like sugars, alkanoic acids, 
alkanes, alkenes and other renewable carbon so urces [11]. During the last two decades, PHAs 
have attained much attention because of their diverse features such as hydrophobicity, 
elastomeric nature and biodegradability under a wide range of  environment al conditions. They 
also constitute a natural part of renewa ble carbon cycle and are used as alternatives to synthetic 
polyesters. Nevertheless, there are still some limitations  in their bulk scale production including 
low yield s and high production cost s [12].  3 
 Some 150 different types of PHAs congeners are known with different structures (varying side 
chains or functional groups) and properties had been synthesized using different microbial 
strains.  PHAs c an be synthesized though microbial fermentations both at laboratory  and pilot 
plant scales followed by appropriate downstream processing [13]. They are classified according 
to their chemical unit structure .  The polymer s containing repeating unit s with 3 -5 carbon atoms 
are known as s hort chain length PHA  (scl-PHA) and a polymer  with repeating unit s of 6-13 
carbon atoms are known as medium chain length PHA  (mcl-PHA), wh ile those with more than 
13 carbon atoms are known as long chain length PHA  (lcl-PHA). A copolymer like poly(3 -
hydroxybutyrate -co-4-hydroxyhexanoate) c ould be produced by simply mixing poly(3 -
hydroxybutyrate), a scl -PHAs, and poly(4 -hydroxyhexanoate), a mcl -PHAs monomers under 
desirable fermentation conditions [14]. A general structure of PHAs is shown in Figure 1.  
PHAs find a large number of applications in different fields of science and technology. For 
instance, a blend of poly (hydroxybutyrate ) P(HB) and poly(hydroxyoc tanoate ) P(HO) is used as 
food additive which is  approved by the US food and drug authority (FDA) [15]. PHB has also 
been used as a component in making plastic accessories, coating paper, biodegradable bottles, 
electronic accessories , pharmaceutical s, garments, upholstery  and pack aging materials [16]. In 
the field of medicine, PHAs allow us to control drug release and targeted drug action whereas 
PHB had been  used to produce different medical devices [17]. A drug  delivery system can be a 
sustainable way to administ rate certain drugs by minimiz ing their toxic effects. A n mcl-PHA had 
been used to administ rate drugs through a transdermal drug delivery system.  There are three 
basic components of drug delivery  systems; i.e. a carrier, a target moiety and an active part of the 
drug. Genetically , engineered bacterial strains produce PHAs and allow  us to utilize them in 
vascular grafting, blood vessel and heart valve development. P(3 -HAs) has also been suggested 
for use as a component of biofuels to reduce globa l warming [18]. The wide range of 
applications of PHAs in different fields of life is  listed in Table 1.  
In this review, we present recent developments in the bacterial production of PHAs on various 
carbon sources. We focused on the challenges in PHAs production in different types of 
bioreactors and operational regime using various bacterial strains. A particular emphas is is 
dedicated to current  limitations and  advantages of different bioreactor scale setup  while 
concentrating on  the efforts devoted to upgrade these  processes to industrial scales. Finally, we 
endeavour  to identify the most suitable downst ream processing technology.   4 
 3 Financial obstacles  in PHA s commercialization  
Commercialization  of a product mainly  depends on its production cost, potential applications and 
market requirement s. In the past decade s, magnific ent efforts ha d been made to improve PHAs 
yield  both at laboratory  and pilot plant scales [7]. The main challenges in the commercialization 
of PHAs had been their high production cost and low product yields. PHAs produced from 
different sources require different  tools  like fermenter , autoclave etc . with different fermentation 
approaches which  increase the production cost ultimately limit ing their commercialization. The 
inability to achieve  optimal bacterial growth conditions and production yields for PHAs had been 
a major disadvantage in this context  [19]. In addition,  PHAs have some disadvantages in their 
mechanical properties  including;  incompatibility with conventional thermal processing, limited 
functionalities, susceptibility to thermal degradation and production cost which limit s their 
competitiveness and application as an ideal biomaterial when compared with synthetic plastics.  
The possibility of commercialization of PHAs  might be  enhanced using mixed microbial culture  
(MMC)  with cheap carbon source like waste frying oil and crude oils. The main obstacle i n the 
commercialization of PHAs had been their production cost which c ould be reduced using edible 
oil as carbon source with non-sterilized  fermentation conditions  [11, 20]. 
4 Sustainable solutions  for PHAs production  
The economics of  PHA production mainly depends upon substrate cost and compatibility  to use 
product  in similar to those produced using expensive growth substrate , efficiency of production 
and downstream process ing [21]. Recent studies on PHAs production not only consider the 
sustainability of polymer but also its cost-effective ness. Nitrogen and carbon sources get 
significant share in  the production cost. Using cheap nitrogen sources such as urea and sodium 
nitrate reduces the cost of production  significantly [10]. The utilization of industrial waste s as 
carbon source to produce a competitive cost effective PHA has also been reported as a promising 
approach for decreasing  overall costs [2]. The economics of whole process is based on three 
approaches; large scale aerobic batch fermentation, use of cheap carbon source soybean and 
other waste frying oil s, and simplification of the downstream recovery process to achieved  an 
economical PHAs  production approach  [22]. PHAs bacterial sources and their chemical structure 
are listed in Table 2.  5 
 Other way s to meet financial barrier is  though  value addition by inserting new functionalities in 
PHAs to overcome their inherent limitations , improve their desirable  properties and enhance  
potential applications [20]. This is usually achieved by blending bio -polyesters with other natural 
biodegradable polymers, including cellulo se derivatives, poly lactic acid (PLA), starch, lignin 
and poly (caprolactone ). The introduction of different functional groups via chemical routes has 
been described with regard to the two main synthesis approaches, graft co -polymerization and 
block co -polymerization  [23]. Grafting of different functional groups on side chains of linear 
bio-polyester s introduces many additional properties, which make s them sustainable  with desired 
properties  and controlled polymer structure . For instance , grafting of chitosan on PHA produce s 
a copolymer P(H -co-chitosan) which is a sustainable biopolymer with some important 
application s in medical field.  A cost effective production has been reported, carried out using 
MMC, under un sterilized conditions  for example [20, 24]. 
5 PHA production in shake flasks  
Shake flask fermentations are normally carried out in laboratories  mainly to explore feasibility. 
Here, the  information is often  vogue  and the  experiment al expenditures are high with large 
number of trails typically required to identify a set of  optimum fermentation conditions. Such  
fermentations are usually carried out in Erlenmeyer flasks provided with minimal media, carb on 
source and any precursors at specific pH levels and incubated at certain temperature and shaking 
speed for a certain period of time.  During shake flask fermentation s, the process is followed up 
based on certain parameters such as  carbon source or any ot her nutrient s utilization, biomass 
formation or fermentation  kinetics . In the previous studies , bacterial production of PHAs had 
mostly been carried out using glucose as carbon source. Later on  Pseudomonas  sp. grows on  
MMC  had been employed with volatile fatty acid s (VFA s) as carbon source  and also used as 
precursor for PHAs production  with higher productivity [25]. The optimized fermentation  
conditions had been used to produce PHAs with efficient recovery. Different ratios of carbon and 
nitrogen sources had been  used to optimize product yield s. An ammonia fr ee fermentation  media  
were  used to accumulate PHAs with VFA s. During the first phase of fermentation,  glucose was 
used as carbon source after inoculating the media  in within an Erlenmeyer flask and cell biomass 
harvested by centrifugation at 6000 rpm and 4oC with 20 -40% g/g of product yield. The shake 
flask study was used to  determine  the feasibility of fermentation process with different 6 
 parameters. The main disadvantage of shake flask investigations is the wide variation in the 
quality  of produced  product  [26]. 
6 Kinetics of PHA  production  
The fermentation kinetics were previously investigated by determining the product yield s with 
respect to substrate consumption. The kinetics of production determines how much PHAs cell 
dry mass (CDM) are produced with respect to time and expressed as g L-1h-1. A linear increase in 
PHAs yield was observed  following a zero order reaction kinetics until the carbon source  growth 
substrate was depleted [27]. The kinetics of PHAs production f or different bacterial strain s with 
large number of substrates i.e. Azotobacter beijerinckii with glucose as growth substrate 
produce d 0.09 g L-1h-1 [28]. Burkholderia cepacia  bacterial strain was grown on glycerol as 
energy substrate produc ing 0.103 g L-1h-1  [29], Ralstonia eutropha  with butyrate, propanoic, 
lactic and acetate acid as growth substrate s produce d 0.001 -0.037 g L-1h-1 [30]. Alcaligenes 
eutrophus  was grown on potato starch and saccharified waste s as growth substrate s produc ing 
1.5 g L-1h-1 [31], Hydrogenophaga pseudoflava  with s ucrose and lactose as growth substrates 
produce d 0.02-0.12 g L-1h-1 [32]. Pseudomonas frederiksbergensis used terephthalic acid as 
growth substrate and produce d 0.004 g L-1h-1 [33], Pseudomonas putida KT 224 produce d 0.006 
g L-1h-1 of PHAs  using glucose as growth substrate [34]. Haloferax  mediterranei  produced 0.05-
0.2 g L-1h-1 PHAs  using vinasse  as growth substrate [35] and the same bacterial strain with 
glycerol produce d 0.12 g L-1h-1 [36]. Further kinetics of PHAs production with different bacterial 
sources, substrate s and production scale s are presented  in Table 3. 
7 Bioreactor scale production of PHAs  
Bioreactor  scale production of biopolymers is the most suitable produc tion technique on 
industrial  scale using  large working volume and avoiding many restrictions encountered under 
shake flask conditions . Because, PHAs biosynthesis constitutes a multiple phase process, both 
the feeding strategy and bioreactor operation mode needs to be adapted via optimization  of 
operation conditions . Industrial bioreactor scale production of PHAs  can also be operated under 
both fed batch and continuous fed batch feeding strategies . 
7.1 Single batch production  7 
 During batch production , desirable  amounts of different nutrients are added in the fermentation 
media. The s ingle batch production  process is simple but gives  low productivity . The maximum 
allowed concentration of both carbon and nitrogen sources are added at the beginning  of batch 
fermentation process es which would restrict nutrient addition during  PHAs production. In batch 
production s of PHAs , the amount of nitrogen source are typically added at 0.2-5 g/L and carbon 
source at 1-30 g/L at the beginning  of fermentation process [37]. Moreover, the excess amount of 
carbon source added in the presence of other growth limiting nutrients  such as  N, P, S and K . 
The single batch fermentation process is analogous to other PHAs production process es with 
minimum conversion toward biomass, CO 2, PHAs and other metabolites : thus resul ting in low 
overall conversion of growth substrate carbon source to PHAs cell biomass yield . Considering 
hypothetical  calculation s of carbon  to PHAs , when  conversion yield s are below 0.4 g/ g indicates  
that such process es are not economically  feasible. The single batch fermentation scale production 
of PHAs therefore suffers limitations which need  to be addressed. The main set back of batch 
scale production is that the nutrients are not further supplemented or provided while  inhibit ors or 
limitations continue to accumulate restricting  production of PHAs. If the fermentation process 
for PHAs is was carried out over seven day s and the maximum amount of PHAs produced  was 
achieved within a shorter period the bacteria start decay  and prod uct may be partially degraded . 
A list of single batch PHAs production using different bacterial strain s is shown  in Table 4. 
7.2 Sequence batch  fermentation production processes for PHAs  
In sequence batch bioreactor experiments, two or more reactor s are connected in series to 
perform different function s simultaneously to produce PHAs. Albuquerque and co -workers 
(2010) reported a study  of two-configuration s system used to produce PHAs from organic 
activated sludge waste as substrate. In the first conf iguration, nitrogen  (as ammonium)  was 
limited by simple conversion to  nitrate and bacteria start to respond these to these conditions  and 
produce PHAs.  Both aerobic feast ing stage  (ammonia conversion to nitrate ) and anoxic famine  
stage  (Denitri fying ) condition s drive internally store d PHAs as carbon source  [38].  
First configuration:  In the first configuration, continuous feeding with fix interval of 5 min  had 
been  carried throughout the fermentation process  until desired cell mass was achieved . The 
fermentation  medi um was allowed to settle down for 15 min and then fermentation proces s was 8 
 further  run under aerobic condition s for an hour which was followed by anaerobic fermentation  
condition to produce PHAs [38].  
Second configuration:  Here, the fermentation process  had been  carried  in two bioreactors  which 
are connected in a series  using connecting tubing  and each  performs  different  function s. In one 
of the bioreactor s, nitration was took place  and in second bioreactor , the desired COD/N for 
selection of PHAs cell mass from fermentation medium  occurred . The whole process of nitration  
was carried out under  aerobic fermentation  conditions  as mentioned above . After nitration  in the 
first bioreactor , the fermentation  medi um was further processed in the second reactor under 
aerobic feast and anoxic famine reaction condition s to accumulate high cell mass of PHAs  [38]. 
7.3 Fed batch production of PHAs  
During fed batch cultivation , the substrate is added through a pulse feeding when its 
concentration drops below its optimum value without removing any culture media . In the case of 
PHAs production, both carbon and nitrogen sources are added at periodic intervals according to 
their consumption by the microorganisms . In fed batch fermentation process , these substrates are 
added to avoid any depletion during the pr oduction process until the desired cell biomass  yield is 
achieved. Some researchers used fed batch process to produce 0.41 g/g of PHAs using  
Pseudomonas putida KT 2440 through  feeding  octanoic acid as  a carbon source  [39].   
The f ed batch production had also been used to examine the effect of different carbon to nitrogen 
(C/N) ratios on product yield. For that purpose,  nutrient enrich media had been prepared using  
the following recipe : MgCl 2.6H 2O, KCl, Fe2+, NaHCO 3, C6H12O6, NaCl, CaCl 2, MgSO 4.7H 2O, 
NH 4Cl, KH 2PO 4, NaBr and 1 mL  of trace element s solution.  An aliquot  amount of 60 mL of 
inoculum was added in the nutrient enrich media of sequence batch reactor after 48 h of  
cultivation . The pH of fermentation media was maintained at 7.5 -7.8 using 1 M NaOH and 1 M 
HCl solutions.  The amount of dissolved oxygen in the nutrient s enrich ed media was 100% at 
40oC for 72 h. The max imal substrate consumption, CDM and PHAs yield  decrease d with 
increas e in C/N ratio. The yield s of 0.97 0, 0.955 and 0.89 0 g/L of CDM were reported 
respectively  using  0.47, 1.95 and 7.64 g/L  of nitrogen concentration s [13]. 
7.4 Continuous production process  9 
 The fermentative  production processes are typically carried out in  continuous stirred tank 
bioreactors (CSTR) where process parameters like agitation speed, air flow, pH, substrate, 
product concentration and temperature are controlled to investigat e PHAs yield . The PHAs 
production using MMC  under continuous feeding strategies  had been established . Such a process 
produce d PHAs with improved composition on monomeric level and result s in a more 
sustainable  process. Continuous PHAs production process is clearly better than batch production 
in terms of composition, flexibility and productivity of bio -polyesters [38]. Pseudomonas putida 
had also been  reported to produce 80 % (g/g) PHAs, at both shake flask  and bioreactor scale 
fermentations . The pH of fermentation  media at lab scale were kept neutral using 2M NaOH and 
4M H 2SO 4 solutions at 30oC, 250 rpm and 20% of dissolved oxygen ( DO) throughout  
fermentation process . At pilot scale, CSTR fermentation with different working volumes has 
been  carried out  to produce PHAs. In CSTR , the fermentation  parameters were kept at pH 7 
(using 30% H 2SO 4and 2 M NaOH  solutions ), temperature 30oC, rate of agitation 100 -1000 rpm 
and aeration 0 -30 L min-1 to produce 0.53 g/g of PHAs.  The c ontinuous production of PHAs had 
been carried out at single, double and multiple stages to facilitate the bacteria during  
fermentation  process. In continuous production , each and every aspect regarding the 
fermentation process proceeded more accurately than fed batch mode. In fed batch pr oduction 
nutrients were added on deplet ion inside ferment ed media to produce  maximum PHAs  [40]. 
7.4.1 One stage continuous stirred tank reactor  
The efficiency  of a single stage continuous stirred tank reactor in term s of flexibility in polyester 
composition and productivity. The schematic diagram used is shown in Figure 2 a.  Single -stage 
continuous stirred tank reactor s (single SCSTR s) are not productive for PHAs cell biomass 
production, because intercellular product s of secondary metabolism  only boost  PHAs production 
under limited nutrient s growth condition s. Hence, it is not possible to continuously supply these 
nutrient s throughout the fermentation  process, that’s why optimization is needed for both 
intracellular PHAs mass and high biomass formation.  Ramsay et al, (1990)  reported on the 
validity of single SCSTR using  propionic acid  as gr owth substrate , Cupriavidus necator  bacterial 
strain and glucose as carbon source producing 0.33 g/g P(3 -HB-co-3-HV) co -polyesters. The 
amount of cell biomass and cell dry mass produced in single SCSTR was not competitive with 
fed batch process when using the same bacterial production strain  [41].  10 
 7.4.2 Two -stage continuous stirred tank reactor  
The two -stage continuous stirred tank reactor fermentation process is used to produce PHAs with 
maximum yield which is not possible under shake flask conditions and with single SCSTR.  A 
schematic diagram for this is shown in Figure 2 b . During two SCSTR fermentation process , 
different functions are ca rried out  in two bioreactors , simultaneously . Regarding the cell biomass 
accumulation for the bacterial strain and substrate ratio, it had been observed that autocatalytic 
growth was much higher than the PHAs accumulation process. Due to this reason, it is  
impossible to carry out s uch process with sufficient productivity at single SCSTR scale. 
Therefore, it was consequently demonstrated that two-stage  continuous stirred tank reactor (two 
SCSTR) process is better for such type of production. Here, in the first CSTR, a higher amount 
of cell biomass could be produced with higher density and continuously transferred to second 
CSTR, where large amount of carbon source are provided continuously, under limiting nitrogen  
substrate to stimulate PHA production  [42]. 
Ramsay et al. (1990) were first to demonstrate  the efficiency of the two SCSTR. The bacterial 
strain  of Alcaligenes lata  had been used to produce 0.38 g/g  of P(3-HB) and 0.55 g/g of P(3-HB-
co-3-HV) a copolymer using  propionic acid ( as precursor), residual sucrose ( as carbon source) in 
the minimal nutrient s media. In the first CSTR , the nitrogen source and precursor were 
completely utilized by the bacterial cells. The fermented broth containing residual sucrose was 
continuously transferred to the second CSTR, but no additional nutrient s were  added to facilitate 
the conversion of sucrose as growth substrate to increase PHAs content in the bacterial cell 
biomass  [43]. Hence, in this phase, bacterial cell was allowed to complete the fermentation 
process to  maxim ize PHAs yield while depleting the sucrose ( i.e. as carbon source) . In the 
context of two SCSTR, optimized bacterial strain  and substrate s were  used to produce  different 
scl-PHA, mcl -PHA  as homo  and hetero poly mers . Some researchers cultivated  the bacterial 
strain of P. putida GPo1  in two SCSTR with gaseous substrate n-octane as carbon source and 
produce d a blend of two different polymers with block structure s. The block copolymer  of 
poly(3-hydroxy -10-undecenoate -co-3-hydroxy -8-nonenoate -co-3-hydroxy -6-heptenoate) was 
produced  at 0.63 g/g . This observation is in contrast to other  reports, which  claim ed that block  
PHAs copolymers were only produce d when adding  sufficient amount of growth substrate during 
the intracellular  accumulation of PHAs  [44].   11 
 7.4.3 Multi  stage continuous stirred tank reactor  
In the case of multi stage CSTR , three or more bioreactor s are connected with each other  using 
plastic  tubing . The schematic diagram of continuous stirred tank bioreactor is shown in Figure 2 
c. PHAs can be produced with exponential growth rate under continuous  growth conditions  as 
used in two SCSTR . The culture condition can be used throughout the process until the desired 
cell biomass is achieved . The c oncentrated substrate was loaded to avoid any dilution of 
nutrients during continuous production  condition  in three SCSTR  [45]. 
8 Factors affecting the production of PHAs  
The b acterial production of PHAs through fermentation is influenced by different factors  such as, 
strain used,  growth substrate, C/N ratio, pH, DO and sodium chloride  which are further 
elaborated in the following subsections.     
8.1 Bacterial strains for PHAs production  
More than 300 types of different Gram positive, Gram negative and archaea bacteria had been 
reported to produce PHAs . Different carbon source and CDM, PHAs yields and production 
kinetics are shown have been reported in Table 3. 
8.2 Growth substrates  
The carbon source is  the most crucial and major factor during for bacterial  production of cellular 
metabolites like PHAs.  Several types of carbon sources such as  alkanes, polysaccharides, 
glycerides, acids, edible oils, gases, industrial waste, agricultural waste, carbohydrates, alcohols, 
petroleum products, animal waste , benzene and its derivatives had been investigated for PHAs  
production . The carbon source is u sed as basic food component to fulfil energy requirement s and 
to act as biogenetic substrate for microbial growth and precursor for PHAs biosynthesis. There 
are three basic function s for the carbon source within bacterial cell s such as  cell maintenance, 
cell biomass synthesis and polymerization of PHAs  molecules  [46]. The small amount of growth 
substrate was used to restrict  the molecular size of polymer during fermentation . Because 
bacteria have thick  and rigid cell wall , it does not allow large polymeric molecule to be 
transported into cell s. Different concentration s of glucose  (as carbon source)  had been  used t o 
optimize cellular  growth  and product yield . The results demonstrated  a proportional increase up 12 
 to a point after which glucose exhibited  an inverse effect on microbial growth . The effect of 
growth substrates on PHAs yield is entirely based on nutrient s media [47]. 
The selectivity of growth substrate not only depends upon their cost but also on their feasibility 
in the fermentation process. The selectivity of carbon source as growth substrate depends also on 
the bacterial strain used. The bacterial strain of P. aeruginosa shows compatibility for PHAs 
production with large number of growth substr ates like oils, polysaccharide’s and acids  [48]. 
Carbon sources as growth substrates generally belong to three main groups of triglycerol, sugars 
and hydrocarbons. The growth s ubstrate used include carbohydrates such as sucrose [49], lactose 
[50], starch [51] and lignocellulose [52]. Other substrates such as ethyl alcohol [11], methanol 
[53], methane [54] and triglycerol containing compounds such as animal fat [55], plant oils [11], 
fatty acid [56], glycerol [57] and waste frying oil [58] had also been reported. Hydrocarbon s had 
shown the hi ghest  affinity to produce PHAs including alkane, alkene, alkyne and a host of other 
hydrocarbons  [59]. The use of fats, salts, ashes, whey as carbon sou rces had  also been reported to 
have a large impact o n PHAs yield hence decreasing  production costs up to 50% . Both culture 
conditions and the substrate also shown  significant effects on both quality and quantity of the 
PHAs  produced [60]. A number of different carbon sources with specific bacterial s trains used in 
PHAs production are listed in Table 3.    
8.3 Nitrogen sources and limitation  
Several organic and inorganic nitrogen sources had been investigated for suitability and 
improve ment  of PHAs yield  including  different nitrogen source s such as; amides [61], 
ammonium sulphate  [26, 40 ], ammonium nitrate  and ammonia nitrogen [40, 62], ammonium 
bicarbonate [63], ammonium carbonate, ammonium chloride [13], polyamide poly -
-glutamate 
(PGA) [64], urea, nitrates [65] and sodium nitrate [27]. The amount of nitrogen sources like 
organic nitrogen and inorganic nitrogen sources had also shown linear relation with the bacterial 
growth  i.e. the number of bacterial cell s increase d with incr easing nitrogen  contents in the 
culture media . The PHAs stored inside bacterial cell and nitrogen source concentration had  an 
inverse effect on cell biomass yield  [66]. Lower concentration of nitrogen source showed better 
PHAs accumulation inside the bacterial cell but higher values increase d the biocatalyst activity 
to increase the number of bacterial cell in the fermentation media  [38]. The effect of organic and 
inorganic nitrogen sources on PHAs production a re listed in Table 5.  13 
 8.4 Carbon to nitrogen  ratio  
The effect of C/N ratio on PHA yield  had also been reported  elsewhere [68]. The concept of C/N 
ratio originated from the biological law according to which limitation of carbon and nitrogen 
control the molecular size of PHAs and number of bacterial cells .  A continuous increase in C/N 
ratio promotes the accumulation of bacterial cell mass with inverse effect on growth kinetics 
(yield with respect to time) of PHAs [11]. The depletion of nitrogen in  nutrient media promotes 
the accumulation of PHAs. The highest percentage of PHAs within cell dry mass was produced 
as 47.22% at 35 C/N ratio with Haloferax mediterranei  [13]. In another study using Cupriavidus 
necator , it was reported that the C/N ratio cause d a prominent effect on PHAs composition and 
accumulation where most of the cell mass formation  occurred during first 12 h of incubation 
[69]. The effect of C/N r atio on PHAs is determined from production kinetics of PHAs cell mass 
[68]. Increasing the nitrogen concentration had a positive effect on growth rate howeve r had 
negative effects on PHA yield. During fermentat ive production of PHAs , the excess amount of 
carbon source is typically used with limited nitrogen source . When investigating growth  
associated production of PHAs using Alcaligenes lata , it was observed that PHAs cell biomass 
yield weren’t enough until sufficient  amount of both carbon and nitrogen sources were provided . 
This C/N ratio generates high active biomass productivity with a sufficient PHAs yield  [13]. 
8.5 Effect of pH  
The pH value of extracellular environment greatly affects the bacterial enzymatic activity. A 
fermentation  medi um with neutral pH produces more PHAs than both under  acidic and basic 
environments, because enzymes are active through  higher accumulation rate. In case of pure 
culture media a ny fluctuation in neutral pH  slow s down the fermentative process , with a 
reduction in cellular activities of enzyme  i.e. Pha C and Ph a Z, thereby affects the growth rate, 
and ultimately survival of bacteria.  The overall  effect of pH on  PHAs production was totally  
depended on the composition of media. A general trend of increase or decrease in pH is usually 
observed for neutral fermentat ion media  after growth occurs . After loading with a  substrate, the 
pH of a fermentation  medi um continuously increase d in the early stages of incubation , and then 
followed by a period of decrease in pH to slightly acidic  conditions  [70]. The increase in pH of 
fermentation medi um was mainly due to the bacterial activity  and loading of growth substrate  14 
 which was also responsible for the PHAs production. The  same effect of pH had also been  
observed in both continuous and fed batch  culture fermentation conditions  [71].  
8.6 Dissolved  oxygen demand  
The gaseous requirement in most of the cells is atmospheric oxygen, which is essential for the 
bio-oxidative respiration process. Oxygen plays a vital role in adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
formation and produced energy which is utilizable in cellular activities.   Dissolved oxygen act s 
as carrier gas in the fermentation medi um during PHAs production  [72]. Under  anaerobic 
conditions bacterial  cells which lack the enzyme (Co A)  for the respiration in the presence of 
oxygen grow under anaerobic fermentatio n to produce PHAs . Both metabolic activity and 
amount of DO were reported to increase during continuous feeding and pulse feeding 
fermentation as process  proceed ed to PHAs production . In an MMC media , the amount of  DO 
the reverse effect on metabolic activity of bacterial cell  occured  [73]. The reversal effect of both 
pH and DO was observed in MMC when pH of the fermentative  media was less than 8 [74]. 
8.7 Concentration of phosphorus  
Phosphorus in the fermentation  media plays an important role  in the synthesis of protein s, 
carbohydrate and fats with some additional roles in cell repair and maintenance of growth rate. 
The amount of phosphoru s present in the nutrients enrich media also acts as buffer to resist the 
change in neutral pH throughout the fermentation  process. Various concentrations of phosphorus 
had been used to optimize the fermentation  condition with respect to product yield. The 
optimized concentration of phosphorus  should be used because at higher concentration  a reverse 
effect on product yield  has been reported [75, 76 ]. 
8.8 Production with PHAs precursor addition   
During the production of co -polyester , different monomers  are often used as precursor to 
produce such co-polymers. Over 150 different types of precursors ha ve been reported used, 
however  most of them were expensive, which limit their utilization at industrial scale.  Precursors 
are the substances which produce a number of different copolymers from simple linear polymer 
via metabolic reactions.  The chemical natur e and concentration of these precursors have to be 
controlled carefully to avoid any inhibition s, toxicity and to ensure the formation desired 
product.  Butyrate, citrate and acetate can act as precursors for PHAs producers. For example , 15 
 Ralstonia eutropha  showed compatibility with the precursors like propionate (poly -3-
hydroxybutyrate -co-3-hydroxyvalerate), gamma butyrolactone, 1,4 -butanediol and 4 -
hydroxybutyrate (poly -3-hydroxybutyrate -co-4-hydroxybutyrate). Fatty acids with odd number 
carbon atoms ha ve also been used as precursor s in PHAs co -polymer production [77]. Different 
organic acids such as propionic acid and alcohols like methanol ha d also been used as precursors 
in the biosynthesis of PHAs copolymer s. For example , the late addition of propionic acid to the 
fermentation media while us ing glucose as main substrate produce d poly-3-hydroxybutyrate -co-
3-hydroxyvalerate as co-polyester. Lignocellulosic  carbon sources mainly  present in liquefied 
wood have also been used as precursor in PHAs production [78]. The effect of these nutrients on 
PHA production was studied individually through optimization. The addition of these precursor s 
increase d the PHAs yield  when using butyrate, citrate and acetate  from 30 -35% [8]. The addition 
of precursor facilitates the format ion of co -polymer PHAs with remarkable properties which 
allowing using them  in different field of life. A co -polymer of PHAs showed different properties 
from the parent polymer in different aspect like drug delivery, durability, and many other s [79]. 
8.9 Additi on of sodium chloride  
The external stress factors such as increase d temperature or ionic species (NaCl) cause a stress 
response leading to enhance PHAs production.  The amount of 9 g/L NaCl was added 
additionally into nutrient enriches media.  The NaCl had been used as a cheap, non -toxic, 
sustainable, simple and nonreactive external stress factor which had been reported to increase 
PHAs productivity by 30% (w/w)  with Cupriavidus necator . The results  also demonstrate d that 
the nutrient s media sup plemented with NaCl produce d 6% (w/w)  more cell biomass as compare 
to negative control . The product yield increase d at a rate of 65 -77 % (w /w) in the presence of 
NaCl. This might be attributed to lower  DO in the media at higher salinities [80].   
8.10 Production of PHAs using gases  
In recent years, PHAs ha d been produced from industrial by -product gas es such as methane CH 4 
or CO 2. These greenhouse gases can be  fixed and used as carbon source s with additional 
advantages of cost effectiveness and sustainability [81]. A pre-treatment method ha s been 
assisted to utilize these gases as carbon source to produce PHAs. Continuous fed batch 
production process also accounts for PHAs productio n using gaseous carbon sources, CH 4 (by a 
methanotrophic bacterial strain) and CO 2 (autotrophs bacteria)  [82]. In the case of Cyanobacteria  16 
 sp, the availability of substrate to bacteria is limited by the solubility of these greenhouse gases, 
in the aqueous fermentation media . Both solubility and availability of substrate under these 
conditions are influenced  by parameters such as  pH value, size of gas bubble and temperature. A 
sufficient supply of these gaseous growth substrates to cell biomass is possible through a 
continuou s supply of these substrates [83]. The plants are natural sources to fix the se 
anthropogenic gases like CO 2. In recent days different approaches have been  consider ed to fix 
them using metal organic framework (MOF) and now PHAs are also produce d using them as 
growth substrate s. 
9 Downstream recovery processes  
The downstream recovery process ( DsRP) should be an economical eco-friendly  process in 
which toxic solvent s are not used [11]. In DsRP, organic solvent such as methylene, chloroform, 
carbonate, propylene and dichloroethane are used for ultimately degrading the cell wall and cell 
membrane to recover  the PHAs [67]. Polymer s recovery methods also contribute to production 
costs of polymers produced . The main purpose of DsRP is to minimize pr oduction cost, increase 
the purity of product,  obtain greater yield, avoid cell disruption and minimize the use of toxic 
solvent . In the case of DsRP , different parameters like purity of product, substrate used and 
properties required must be taken into consideration before a PHAs recovery [84]. A solvent free 
recovery method ( like sodium h ypochlorite recovery method) c ould also be used to recover cell 
biomass by simpl e dissolving the non -cellular mass with reduced molecular mass . The p olymers 
used in medical field must be of high purity with no impurit ies [85, 86 ]. Some downstream 
recovery processes and their advantage in purity and recovery of polymer are listed in Table 6. 
10 Future trends  
In the early stages, PHAs production had been  limited due to high costs which restrict ed their 
production. Researchers therefore had always been looking for low cost substrate s to reduce 
overall production cost.  In the recent years, large number of cheaper carbon sources  such as 
waste frying oil, vegetable oil, whey and organic substrate etc ., have been investigated  to 
minimize the production cost. A mutant strain of P.  aeruginosa produce d high yields of  PHAs 
using cheap carbon sources. The strain showed good synthesis of PHAs in preliminary 
investigation. The future development in PHA s production would be based on two factors ; (a) 
lower production cost with  higher yield (b)  wider applications  in different field s. Synthetic 17 
 biology and genetic engineering technique s are expected to  produce higher yield PHA s strain 
with high growing density under optimizing fermentation  conditions in short period of time . The 
purification technique s with controllable lysis can be  used to accumulate large size granules and 
reduce the cost of production. Continuous fermentation with MMC  can be  used to minimize the 
production cost  operated  in two  SCSTR and  three SCSTR  configu rations using cheap substrates 
to obtain higher yield . Different functional groups are attached  to the side chain of basic structure 
of PHA s to give them different properties. The molecular evolution technique should be used to 
produce the expected structu re product of short chain length or medium chain length PHA s. 
Downstream processing is needed to obtain the desired purity of product for specific application 
in the mechanical sector  and many other fields of science and engineering.  The mutant bacterial 
strain P. aeruginosa  was used with soybean oil always produces mcl -PHA like P(3 -HB).  P. 
aeruginosa  synthase has  a good ability to produce mcl -PHA monomers efficiently utilizing 
vegetable oil as growth substrate to produce PHA with low produ ction of by -products.  
Moreover, there is need to work on the production of desirable congener s of PHAs under 
controlled fermentation and to elucidate the physico -chemical and biological properties of each 
individual congener.  
Conclusions  
The present revie w exemplifies a number of different bioreactors (fed batch, continuous fed 
batch and multiple stages continuous stirring reactors) system s and bacterial strain s with large 
number of feeding regimes to produce PHAs of different molecular mass . It became cle ar that a 
number of different combination s of bacterial strain and substrate s demand different 
fermentation schemes , bioreactor facilities and feeding regime s. The cultivation time and process 
design have to be accommodated to the physiological kinetics of  the system to optimize the final 
cell biomass productivity and product quality. As a concluding result of recent studies or 
experiments, it c ould be expected that future PHAs production w ould be combined with 
continuous stirring method. Robust extremophil ic bacterial strain w ould be used to produce 
PHAs with minimum energy input . The utilization of cheap carbon enriched feed stocks  should 
be applied to minimize substrate cost and develop sustainable DsRP method for recovery and 
purification of PHAs. Only the combination of these different techniques would  allow for 
economic and sustainable production of PHAs biopolyesters. A downstream recovery process 
allow s us to obtain PHAs  with high purity to be used in for medical application . 18 
 Acknowledgement  
Authors a cknowledge the financial support of Higher Education Commission of Pakistan for this 
study.  
References  
[1] Mozejko -Ciesielska  J, Kiewisz K (2016) Bacterial polyhydroxyalkanoates: still fabulous. 
Microbiol Res 192:271 -282. 
[2] Khanna S, Srivastava  AK (2005) Recent advances in microbial polyhydroxyalkanoates . 
Pro Biochem 40 :607-619. 
[3] Lemoigne M (1926) Products of dehydration and of polymerization of β -hydroxybutyric 
acid. Bull Soc Chem Biol 8 :770-782. 
[4] Macrae R, Wilkinson  J (1958) Poly-β-hyroxybutyrate metabolism in washed suspensions 
of bacillus cereus and bacillus megaterium . Microbiol  19:210-222. 
[5] De Smet M, Eggink G, Witholt B, Kingma J, Wynberg  H (1983) Characterization of 
intracellular inclusions formed by Pseudomonas oleovo rans during growth on octane . J 
Bacteriol 154 :870-878. 
[6] Volova TG, Zhila NO, Shishatskaya EI, Mironov PV, Vasil’ev AD,  Sukovatyi AG, 
Sinskey AG  (2013) The physicochemical properties of polyhydroxyalkanoates with 
different chemical structures . Poly Sci Ser A 55 :427-437. 
[7] Virov P, (2013) Polyhydroxyalkanoates: Biodegradable polymers and plastics from  
renewable resources . Mater Tehnol 47 :5-12. 
[8] Colomb o B, Favini F , Scaglia B , Sciarria TP , D'Imp orzano G , Pognani M , Alekseeva 
A, Eisele G , Cosentino C , Adani F  (2017) Enhanced polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) 
production from the organic fraction of municipal solid waste by using mixed mi crobial 
culture . Biotechnol Biofuels 10: 201-215. 
 [9] Dietrich K, Dumont MJ, Del Rio  LF, Orsat  V, (2017) Producing PHAs in the 
bioeconomy -towards a sustainable bioplastic . Sustainable Production and Consumption 
9:58-70. 19 
  [10] Rai R, Roy I, (2011) Polyhydroxyalkanoates: the emerging new green polymers of choice 
in a handbook of applied biopolymer technology  79-101. 
[11] Raza ZA, Abid  S, Banat  IM (2018) Polyhydroxyalkanoates: characteristics, production, 
recent developments and applications . Int Biodeter Biodegr  126:45-56. 
 [12] Tan GYA, Chia -Lung Chen, Ling Li, Liya Ge, Wang Lin, Indah Mutiara, Ningtyas 
Razaad, Yanhong Li, Zhao Lei, Yu Mo, Jing -Yuan Wang  (2014 ) Start a research on 
biopolymer polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA): a review . Polym 6:706-754. 
  [13] Cui YW, Shi YP, Gong  XY (2017) Effects of C/N in the substrate on the simultaneous 
production of polyhydroxyalkanoates and extracellular polymeric substances by 
Haloferax mediterranei via kinetic model analysis . J Royal Soc Chem 7:18953 -1896.  
 [14] Kaur G, Roy I (2015) Strategies for large -scale production of polyhydroxyalkanoates . 
Chem Bioche Eng 29 :157-172. 
[15] Clarinval AM, Halleux  J (2005) Classification of biodegradable polymers in 
biodegradable polymers for industrial applications . CRIF, Franc e. 
[16] Chen GQ (2009) A microbial polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) based bio -and materials 
industry . Che Soc Rev  38:2434 -2446.  
 [17] Greene J (2013) PHA biodegradable blow -molded bottles: compounding and 
performance . Plastic Eng  69:16-21. 
 [18] Chen  GQ, Wu Q (2005) The application of polyhydroxyalkanoates as tissue engineering 
materials . Biomater  26:6565 -6578.  
 [19] Philip S, Keshavarz  T, Roy I (2007) Polyhydroxyalkanoates: biodegradable polymers 
with a range of applications . J Che Technol Biotechnol 82 :233-247. 
[20] Li Z, Yang  J, Loh  XJ (2016) Polyhydroxyalkanoates: opening doors for a sustainable 
future . NPG Asia Mater  8:265-330. 
 [21] Koller M, Sandholzer  D, Salerno  A, Braunegg  G, Narodoslawsky  M (2013) Biopolymer 
from industrial residues: Life cycle assessment of poly(hydroxyalkanoates) from whey . 
Resour  Conserv Recy 73 :64-71. 20 
  [22] Bohlmann  GM (2006) Polyhydroxyalkanoate production in crops . J Am Chem Soc 
921:253 -270. 
[23] Raza  ZA, Riaz  S, Banat  IM (2018) P olyhydroxyalkanoates: Properties and chemical 
modification approaches for their functionalization . Biotechnol Prog 34 :29-41. 
[24] Kleerebezem R, Van Loosdrecht  RL (2007) Mixed culture biotechnology for bioenergy 
production . Curr Opin Biotech  18:207-212. 
[25] Majone M, Massanisso  P, Carucci  A, Lindrea  K, Tandoi  V (1996) Influence of storage on 
kinetic selection to control aerobic filamentous bulking . Water Sci Technol 34 :223-232. 
[26] Martinez  GA,  Rebecchi  S,  Decorti  D, Domingos  JMB,  Rio DD, Bertin L,  Porto  CD, Fava F 
(2016) Towards multi -purpose biorefinery platforms for the valorisation of red grape 
pomace: production of polyphenols, volatile fatty acids, polyhydroxyalkanoates and 
biogas . Green Chem 18 :261-270. 
[27] Raza ZA, Abid  S, Rehman  A, Hussain  T (2016) Synthesis kinetics of poly(3 -
hydroxybutyrate) by using a Pseudomonas aeruginosa  mutant strain grown on 
hexadecane . Int Biodeter Biodegr  115:171-178. 
[28] Lasemi Z, Darzi  GN, Baei  MS ( 2013) Media optimization for poly (β -hydroxybutyrate) 
production using Azotobacter beijerinckii . I J Poly Mater Poly Biomate 62 :265-269. 
[29] Zhu C, Nomura  CT, Perrotta  JA, Stipanovic  AJ, Nakas  JP (2010) Production and 
characterization of poly ‐3‐hydroxybutyrate from biodiesel ‐glycerol by Burkholderia 
cepacia  ATCC 17759 . Biotechnol prog 26 :424-430. 
[30] Chakraborty  P, Gibbons  W, Muthukumarappan  K (2009) Conversion of volatile fatty 
acids into polyhydroxyalkanoate by Ralstonia eutropha . J Appl Microbiol 106 :1996 -
2005.  
[31] Haas  R, Jin B, Zepf  FT (2008) Production of poly(3 -hydroxybutyrate) from waste potato 
starch . Biosci Biotechno Biochem 72:253-256. 
[32] Povolo S , Romanelli MG , Basaglia  M, Ilieva VI , Corti A , Morelli A , Chiellini E , Casella 
S (2013) Polyhydroxyalkanoate biosynthesis by Hydrogenophaga pseudoflava DSM1034 
from structurally unrelated carbon sources . New Bio technol  30:629-634. 21 
 [33] Kenny  ST, Kaminsky  W, Wood T,  Babu  RP, Keely  CM, Blau  W, O’Connor  KE (2008) 
Up-cycling of PET (polyethylene ter ephthalate) to the biodegradable plastic PHA 
(polyhydroxyalkanoate) . Environ Sci Technol 42 :7696 -7701.  
 [34] Davis  R (2013) Conversion of grass biomass into fermentable sugars and its utilization 
for medium chain length polyhydroxyalkanoate (mcl -PHA) production by Pseudomonas 
strains . Bioresour Technol  150:202-209. 
[35] Bhattacharyya  A, Saha  J, Haldar  S, Bhowmic  A, Mukhopadhyay  UK, Mukherjee  J 
(2014) Production of poly -3-(hydroxybutyrate -co-hydroxyvalerate) by Haloferax 
mediterranei  using rice -based ethanol stillage with simultaneous recovery and re -use of 
medium salts . Extremophiles 18 :463-470. 
[36] Hermann -Krauss  C, Koller  M, Muhr  A, Fasl  H, Stelzer  F, Braunegg  G (2013) Archaeal 
production of polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) co  and ter -polyesters from biodiesel 
industry -derived by -products . Archaea  2013:1 -10. 
[37] Koller M , Bona R , Chiellini E , Fernandes EG , Horvat P , Kutschera C , Hesse P , Braunegg 
G (2008) Polyhydroxyalkanoate production from whey by Pseudomonas hydrogenovora . 
Bioresour Technol  99:4854 -4863.  
[38] Albuquerque  M, Torres  C, Reis  M (2010) Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) production by a 
mixed microbial culture using sugar molasses: effect of the influent substrate 
concentration on culture selection . Water Res 44 :3419-3433.  
[39] Follonier S, Riesen  R, Zinn  M (2015) Pilot -scale production of functionalized mcl -PHA 
from grape pomace supplemented with fatty acids . Chem Biochem Eng 29 :113-121. 
 [40] Kellerhals MB, Kessler  B, Witholt  B, Tchouboukov  A, Brandl  H (2000) Renewable long -
chain fatty acids for production of biod egradable medium -chain -length 
polyhydroxyalkanoates (mcl -PHAs) at laboratory and pilot plant scales . Macromole  
33:4690 -4698.  
[41] Atlic A , Koller M , Scherzer D , Kutschera C , Grillo -Fernandes E , Horvat P , Chiellini 
E, Braunegg G  (2011) Continuous production of poly (R -3-hydroxybutyrate) by 
Cupriavidus necator in a multistage bioreactor  cascade . Appl Microbiol Biot  91:295-304. 22 
  [42] Durner R, Witholt B, Egli  T (2000) Accumulation of poly[(R) -3-hydroxyalkanoates] in 
Pseudomonas oleovorans  during growth with octanoate in continuous culture at different 
dilution rates . Appl Environ Microbiol 66:3408 -3414.  
[43] Heinrich  D, Raberg  M, Fricke  P, Kenny  ST, Morales -Gamez  L, Babu  RP, O'Connor  
KE, Steinbuchel  A (2016) Synthesis gas (Syngas) -derived medium -chain -length 
polyhydroxyalkanoate synthesis in engineered Rhodospirillum rubrum . Appl Environ 
Micr ob 82:6132 -6140.  
[44] Pagliano G, Ventorino  V, Panico  A, Pepe  O (2017) Integrated systems for biopolymers 
and bioenergy production fro m organic waste and by -products: a review of microbial 
processes . Biotechnol Biofuels 10 :113-136. 
 [45] Ienczak JL, Schmidell W, De Arag ao GMAF (2013) High -cell-density culture strategies 
for polyhydroxyalkanoate production: a review . J Indust Microbiol Biotechnol 40 :275-
286. 
[46] Israni N, Shivakumar  S (2015) Evaluation of upstream process parameters influencing 
the growth associated PHA accumulation in Bacillus sp . J Sci Ind Res 74:290 -295. 
[47] Masood F, Abdul -Salam M, Yasin  T, Hameed  A (2017) Effect of glucose and olive oil as 
potential carbon sources on production of PHAs copolyme r and tercopolymer by Bacillus 
cereus  FA11 . 3 Biotech 7 :87-101. 
[48] Shahid S , Mosrati R , Ledauphin J , Amiel C , Fontaine P , Gaillard JL , Corroler D  (2013) 
Impact of carbon source and variable nitrogen conditions on bacterial biosynthesis of 
polyhydroxyalkanoates: evidence of an atypical metabolism in Bacillus megaterium  
DSM 509 . J Biosci Bioeng  116:302-308. 
[49] Park SJ , Jang YA , Noh W , Oh YH , Lee H , David Y , Baylon MG , Shin J , Yang JE , Choi 
SY, Lee SH , Lee SY  (2015) Metabolic engineering of Ralstonia eutropha for the 
production of polyhydroxyalkanoates from sucrose . Biotechnol Bioeng  112:638-643. 
[50] Eggink G, Steinbuchel A, Poirier  A, Witholt  B (1997 ) International Symposium on 
Bacterial Polyhydroxyalkanoates.  NRC Research Pr ess France . 
[51] Byrom D (1992) Production of poly -β-hydroxybutyrate: poly -β-hydroxyvalerate 
copolymers . FEMS Microbiol Lett 103 :247-250. 23 
 [52] Pandian SR, Deepak V, Kalishwaralal K, Rameshkumar N, Jeyaraj M, Gurunathan  S 
Optimization and fed -batch production of PHB utilizing dairy waste and sea water as 
nutrient sources by Bacillus megaterium  SRKP -3. Bioresour Technol 101 :705-711. 
[53] Kim SW, Kim P, Lee  HS, Kim  JH (1996) High production of poly -β-hydroxybutyrate 
(PHB) fro m Methylobacterium organophilum  under potassium limitation . Biotechnol 
Lett 18 :25-30. 
[54] Khosravi -Darani K, Mokhtari  ZB, Amai  T, Tanaka  K (2013) Microbial production of 
poly(hydroxybutyrate) from C 1 carbon sources . Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 97 :1407 -1424.  
[55] Muh r A (2013) Biodegradable latexes from animal -derived waste: Biosynthesis and 
characterization of mcl -PHA accumulated by Ps. citronellolis . React  Funct Poly m 
73:1391 -1398.  
 [56] Akiyama M, Taima  Y, Doi  Y (1992) Production of poly(3 -hydroxyalkanoates ) by a 
bacterium of the genus Alcaligenes  utilizing long -chain fatty acids . Appl Microbiol 
Biotechnol 37 :698-701. 
[57] Shay EG (1993) Diesel fuel from vegetable oils: status and opportunities . Biomass 
Bioenerg  4:227-242. 
[58] Rincon J, Camarillo  R, Rodriguez  L, Ancillo  V (2010) Fractionation of used frying oil by 
supercritical CO 2 and cosolvents . Ind Eng Chem Res 49 :2410 -2418.  
[59] Jiang  G Carbon sources for polyhydroxyalkanoates and an integrated biorefinery . Int J 
Mol Sci 17 :1157.  
 [60] Gumel A, Annuar M, Heidelberg  T (2014) Growth kinetics, effect of carbon substrate in 
biosynthesis of mcl -PHA by Pseudomonas putida  Bet001 . Braz J Microbiol 45 :427-438. 
[61] Kumar M, Singhal A, Verma  PK, Thakur  IS (2017) Production and characterization of 
polyhydroxyalkanoate from lignin derivatives by Pandoraea sp . ISTKB . J Am Chem Soc 
2:9156 -9163.  
[62] Hao J, Wang X, Wang  H (2017) Overall process of using a valerate -dominant sludge 
hydrolysate to produce high -quality polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) in a mixed c ulture. J 
Nat 7:6939 -6349 . 24 
  [63] Yu J, Si Y (2001) A dynamic study and modeling of the formation of 
polyhydroxyalkanoates combined with treatment of high strength wastewater . Environ  
Sci Technol 35 :3584 -3588.  
[64] Begun G, Palko A, Brown  L (1956) The ammonia -ammonium carbonate system for the 
concentration of nitrogen -15. J Phy Che 60 :48-51. 
[65] Hu D(2011) Biosynthesis and characterization of polyhydroxyalkanoate block copolymer 
P-3-HB-b-P-4-HB. Biomacromolecu le 12:3166 -3173.  
[66] Rehm BH (2010) Bacterial polymers: biosynthesis, modifications and applications . Nat 
Rev Microbiol  8:578. 
[67] Ivanov V, Stabnikov  V, Ahmed  Z, Dobrenko  S, Saliuk  A (2015) Production and 
applications of crude polyhydroxyalkanoate -containing bioplastic from the organic 
fraction of municipal solid waste . Int J Biotechnol  Technol 12 :725-738. 
[68] Sreekanth M, Vijayendra S, Joshi G, Shamala T (2013) Effect of carbon and nitrogen 
sources on simultaneous production of α -amylase and green food packaging polymer by 
Bacillus sp.  CFR 67," J Food Sci Technol 50 :404-408. 
[69] Zhao D (2013) Improving polyhydroxyalkanoate production by knocking out the genes 
involved in exopolysaccharide biosynthesis in Haloferax mediterranei . Appl Microbiol 
Biotechnol  97:3027 -3036.  
[70] Xu Z, Dai  X, Chai  X (2018) Effect of influent pH on biological denitrification using 
biodegradable PHBV/PLA blends as electron donor . Bioch em Eng J 131 :24-30. 
[71] Liu C, Luo  G, Wang  W, He Y, Zhang  R, Liu  G (2018) The effects of pH and temperature 
on the acetate produc tion and microbial community compositions by syngas 
fermentation . Fuel 224 :537-544. 
[72] Poblete -Castr I, Escapa IE,  Jager C, Puchalka J, Lam JMC, Schomburg D, Prieto MP,  
Dos Santos VAP (2012) The metabolic response of P. putid a KT2442 producing high 
levels of polyhydroxyalkanoate under single -and multiple -nutrient -limited growth: 
Highlights from a multi -level omics approach . Microb Cell Fact  11:1-21. 25 
 [73] Kang M, Peng  S, Tian  Y, Zhang  H (2018) Effects of dissolved oxygen and nutrient 
loading on phosphorus  fluxes at the sediment -water interface in the hai river estuary, 
China . Mar Pollut Bull 130 :132-139. 
[74] Third KA, Newland  M Cord‐Ruwisch  R (2003) The effect of dissolved oxygen on PHB 
accumulation in activated sludge cultures . Biotechnol Bioeng 82 :238-250. 
[75] De Almeida  A, Giordano  AM, Nikel  PI, Pettinari  MJ (2010) Effects of aeration on the 
synthesis of poly(3 -hydroxybutyrate) from glycerol and glucose in recombinant 
Escherichia coli . Appl Environ Microbiol 76 :2036 -2040.  
[76] Korkakaki E, Van Loosdrecht  MC, Kleerebezem  R (2017) Impact of phosphate limitation 
on PHA production in a feast -famine process . Water Res 126 :472-480. 
[77] Kolle r M(2015) Novel precursors for production of 3 -hydroxyvalerate -containing poly 
[(R)-hydroxyalkanoate]  s. Biocat al Biotransfor  32:161-167. 
[78] Kolle r M (2015) Liquefied wood as inexpensive precursor -feedstock for bio -mediated 
incorporation of (R) -3-hydroxyvalerate into polyhydroxyalkanoates . Mater 8 :6543 -6557.  
[79] De Paula FC, Kakazu  S, De Paula  CBC , Gomez  JGC,  Contiero  J (2017) 
Polyhydroxyalkanoate production from crude glycerol by newly isolated Pandoraea sp . J 
King Saud Uni  Sci 29 :166-173. 
[80] Passanha P, Kedia  G, Dinsdale  RM, Guwy  AJ, Esteves  SR (2014) The use of NaCl 
addition for the improvement of polyhyd roxyalkanoate production by Cupriavidus 
necator . Bioresour Technol 163 :287-294. 
[81] Ghysels S, Mozumder  MSI, De Wever  H, Volcke  EI, Garcia -Gonzalez  L (2018) Targeted 
poly(3 -hydroxybutyrate -co-3-hydroxyvalerate) bioplastic production from carbon 
dioxide . Bioresou r Technol 249 :858-868. 
[82] Garcia -Perez T, Lopez JC, Passos  F, Lebrero  R, Revah  S, Mu noz R (2018) Simultaneous 
methane abatement and PHB production by methylocystis hirsuta in a novel gas -
recycling bubble column bioreactor . Chem Eng J 334 :691-697. 
[83] Koller  M (2015) Cyanobacterial polyhydroxyalkanoate production: status quo and quo 
vadis . Current Biotechnol 4 :464-480. 26 
 [84] Ishak K , Annuar M, Heidelberg  H, Gumel  A (2016) Ultrasound -assisted rapid extraction 
of bacterial intracellular medium -chain -length poly(3 -hydroxyalkanoates)(mcl -PHAs) in 
medium mixture of solvent/marginal non -solvent . Arab ia J Sci Eng 41 :33-44. 
[85] Koller  M, Niebelschütz  H, Braunegg  G (2013) Strategies for recovery and purification of 
poly[R‐3‐hydroxyalkanoates]  (PHA) biopolyesters from surrounding biomass . Eng Life 
Sci 13 :549-562. 
[86] Pathak VM (2017) Review on the current status of polymer degradation: a microbial 
approach . Bioresour Bioprocess 4 :15. 
[87] Li ZJ, Cai  L, Wu  Q, Chen  GQ (2009) Overexpression of NAD kinas e in recombinant 
Escherichia coli  harboring the phbCAB operon improves poly(3 -hydroxybutyrate) 
production . Appl Microbiol Biotechnol  83:939-947. 
[88] Chen GQ, Wu Q (2005) Microbial production and applications of chiral 
hydroxyalkanoates . Appl Microbiol Biotechnol  67:592-599. 
[89] Massieu L, Haces M, Montiel  T, Hernandez -Fonseca  K (2003) Acetoacetate protects 
hippocampal neurons against glutamate -mediated neuronal damage during glycolysis 
inhibition . Neuroscience  120:365-378. 
[90] Kashiwaya Y, Takeshima T, Mori  N, Nakashima  K, Clarke  K, Veech  RL D -β-
hydroxybutyrate protects neurons in models of alzheimer's and prkinson's disease . P Nat 
Acad Sc i 97:5440 -5444.  
[91] Yao YC (2015) A specific drug targeting system based on polyhydroxyalkanoate granule 
binding protein PhaP fused with targeted cell ligands . Biomater 29 :4823 -4830.  
[92] Ahmed T, Mar cal H, Lawless  M, Wanandy  NS, Chiu  A, Foster  LJR (2010) 
Polyhydroxybutyrate and its copolymer with polyhydroxyvalerate as biomaterials: 
influence on progression of stem cell cycle . Biomacromolecules 11 :2707 -2715.  
[93] Gadgil  BST, Killi  N, Rathna  GV (2017) Polyhydroxyalkanoates as biomaterials . Med 
Chem  Comm 8 :1774 -1787.  27 
 [94] Furutate S, Nakazaki  H, Maejima  K, Hiroe  A, Abe  H, Tsuge  T (2017) Biosynthesis and 
characterization of novel polyhydroxyalkanoate copolymers consisting of 3 -hydroxy -2-
methylbutyrate and 3 -hydroxyhexanoate . J Poly m Res 24 :221. 
[95] Fukui T, Doi Y (1998) Efficient production of polyhydroxyalkanoates from plant oils by 
Alcaligenes eutrophus  and its recombinant strain . Appl Microbiol  Biotechnol 49 :333-336. 
[96] Yu P, Chua  H, Huang  A, Lo W, Chen  G (1998) Conversion of food industrial wastes into 
bioplastics . Appl Biochem Biotechnol 70 :603-614. 
[97] Yamane  T, Fukunaga  M, Lee  YW (1996) Increased P HB productivity by high ‐cell‐
density fed ‐batch culture of Alcaligenes latus , a growth ‐associated PHB producer," 
Biotechnol Bioeng 50 :197-202. 
[98] Aditi  S, Souza Shalet  NMD , Pranesh  R, Katyayini  T (2015) Microbial production of 
polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) from novel sources: a rev iew. Int J RBS 4 :16-28. 
[99] Gomez  J(1996) Evaluation of soil gram -negative bacteria yielding polyhydroxyalkanoic 
acids from carbohydrates and propionic acid . Appl Microbiol  Biotechnol 45 :785-791. 
[100] Pan W, Perrotta  JA, Stipanovic  AJ, Nomura  CT, Nakas  JP (2012) Production of 
polyhydroxyalkanoates by Burkholderia cepacia  ATCC 17759 using a detoxified sugar 
maple hemicellulosic hydrolysate . J Indust  Microbiol Biotechnol 39 :459-469. 
[101] Chee  JY, Tan  Y, Samian  MR, Sudesh  K (2010) Isolation and characterization of a 
Burkholderia sp.  USM (JCM15050) capable of producing polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) 
from triglycerides, fatty acids and glycerols . J Polym Environ 18 :584-592. 
[102] Qi Q, Rehm  BH (2001) Polyhydroxybutyrate biosynthesis in caulobacter crescentus: 
molecular characterization of the polyhydroxybutyrate synthase . Microbiol 1 47:3353 -
3358.  
[103] Valentin HE, Lee  EY, Choi  CY, Steinbüchel  A (1994) Identification of 4 -
hydroxyhexanoic acid as a new constituent of biosynthetic polyhydroxyalkanoic acids 
from bacteria . Appl Microbiol  Biotechnol  40:710-716. 
[104] Sonnleitner B, Heinzle  E, Braunegg  G, Lafferty  R (1979) Formal kinetics of poly -β-
hydroxybutyric acid (PHB) production in Alcaligenes eutrophus  H 16 and Mycoplana 28 
 rubra  R 14 with respect to the dissolved oxygen tension in ammonium -limited batch 
cultures . Europe J Appl Microbi ol Biotechnol 7 :1-10. 
[105] Ishizaki A, Tanaka  K (1991) Production of poly -β-hydroxybutyric acid from carbon 
dioxide by Alcaligenes eutrophus ATCC 17697T . J Ferment Bioeng 71 :254-257. 
[106] Kim BS, Lee  SC, Lee  SY, Chang  HN, Chang  YK, Woo  SI (1994) Production of poly (3 ‐
hydroxybutyric acid) by fed ‐batch culture of Alcaligenes eutrophus  with glucose 
concentration control . Biotechnol Bioeng 43 :892-898. 
[107] Beaulieu M, Beaulieu  Y, Melinard  J, Pandian  S, Goulet  J (1995) Influence of ammonium 
salts and cane molasses on growth of Alcaligenes eutrophus  and Production of 
polyhydroxybutyrate . Appl Environ Microbiol 61 :165-169. 
[108] Cavalheiro  JM, De Almeida  MCM , Grandfils  C, Da Fonseca  M (2009) Poly(3 -
hydroxybutyrate) production by Cupriavidus necator  using waste glycerol . Pro Biochem 
44:509-515. 
[109] Van‐Thuoc D, Quillaguaman  J, Mamo  G, Mattiasson  B (2008) Utilization of agricultur al 
residues for poly(3 ‐hydroxybutyrate) production by Halomonas boliviensis  LC1. J 
Appl Microbiol 104 :420-428. 
[110] Koller M, Hesse  P, Bona  R, Kutschera  C, Atli c A, Braunegg  G (2007) Potential of 
various archae ‐and eubacterial strains as industrial polyhydroxyalkanoate producers from 
whey . Macromol Biosci 7 :218-226. 
[111] Bourque D, Pomerleau  Y, Groleau  D (1995) High -cell-density production of poly -β-
hydroxybutyrate (PHB) from methanol by Methylobacterium extorquens : production of 
high-molecular -mass  PHB . Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 44 :367-376. 
[112] Wendlandt  KD, Jechorek  M, Helm  J, Stottmeister  U (1998) Production of PHB with a 
high molecular mass from methane . Polym Degrad Stabil 59 :191-194. 
[113] Smit  AM, Strabala  TJ, Peng L, Rawson  P, Lloyd -Jones  G, Jordan  TW (2012) Proteomic 
phenotyping of novosphingobium nitrogenifigens reveals a robust capacity for 
simultaneous nitrogen fixation, polyhydroxyalkanoate production, and resistance to 
reactive oxygen species . Appl Environ Microbiol 78 :4802 -4815.  29 
 [114] Yamane  T, Chen  X, Ueda  S (1996) Growth  associated production of Poly(3 -
hydroxyvalerate) from n -pentanol by a Methylotrophic  bacterium, Paracoccus  
denitrificans . Appl Environ Microbiol  62:380-384. 
[115] Tripathi AD, Yadav  A, Jha A, Srivastava  S (2012) Utilizing of sugar refinery waste (cane 
molasses) for production of bio -plastic under submerged fermentation process . J Poly 
Environ 20 :446-453. 
[116] Lee E, Jendrossek  D, Schirmer  A, Choi  C, Steinbüchel  A (1995) Biosynthesis of 
copolyesters consisting of 3-hydroxybutyric acid and medium -chain -length 3 -
hydroxyalkanoic acids from 1, 3 -butanediol or from 3 -hydroxybutyrate by Pseudomonas 
sp. A33 . Appl Microbiol Biotechnol  42:901-909. 
[117] Ward  PG, Goff  M, D onner  M, Kaminsky  W, Connor  KEQ (2006) A two step chemo -
biotechnological conversion of polystyrene to a biodegradable thermoplastic . Environ  Sci 
Technol 40 :2433 -2437.  
[118] Lageveen RG, Huisman  GW, Preusting  H, Ketelaar  P, Eggink  G, Witholt  B (1988) 
Formation of polyesters by Pseudomonas oleovorans : effec t of substrates on formation 
and composition of poly -(R)-3-hydroxyalkanoates and poly -(R)-3-hydroxyalkenoates . 
Appl Environ Microbiol 54 :2924-2932.  
[119] Sun Z, Ramsay  JA, Guay  M, Ramsay  BA (2007) Carbon -limited fed -batch production of 
medium -chain -length polyhydroxyalkanoates from nonanoic acid by Pseudomonas 
putida  KT2440 . Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 74 :69-77. 
[120] Nikodinovic  J, Kenny  ST, Babu  RP, Woods  T, Blau  WJ, O’Connor  KE (2008) The 
conversion  of BTEX compounds by single and defined mixed cultures to medium -chain -
length polyhydroxyalkanoate . Appl Microbiol Biotechnol  80:665-673. 
[121] Pantazaki  AA, Papaneophytou  CP, Pritsa  AG, Liakopoulou -Kyriakides  M, Kyriakidis  
DA (2009) Production of polyhydr oxyalkanoates from whey by thermus thermophilus 
HB8 . Process Bioche m 44:847-853. 
[122] Haywood GW, Anderson  AJ, Williams  DR, Dawes  EA, Ewing  DF (1991) Accumulation 
of a poly(hydroxyalkanoate) copolymer containing primarily 3 -hydroxyvalerate from 30 
 simple carbohydrate substrates by Rhodococcus sp . NCIMB 40126 . Int J Biol Macromol 
13:83-88. 
[123] Akar  A (2006) Accumulation of polyhydroxyalkanoates by Microlunatus phosphovorus 
under various growth conditions . J Indust Microbiol Biotechnol 33 :215-220. 
[124] Koller M, Atli c A, Gonzalez ‐Garcia  Y, Kutschera  C, Braunegg  G, (2008) 
Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) biosynthesis from whey lactose . Macromol Symp 272:87 -
92. 
[125] Cui B, Huang  S, Xu F, Zhang  R, Zhang  Y (2015) Improved productivity of poly(3 -
hydroxybutyrate)(PHB) in thermophilic Chelatococcus daeguensis  TAD1 using glycerol 
as the growth substrate in a fed -batch culture . Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 99 :6009 -6019.  
[126] Ng KS, Wong  YM, Tsuge  T, Sudesh  K (2011) Biosynt hesis and characterization of 
poly(3 -hydroxybutyrate -co-3-hydroxyvalerate) and poly (3 -hydroxybutyrate -co-3-
hydroxyhexanoate) copolymers using jatropha oil as the main carbon source . Process 
Biochem 46 :1572 -1578.  
[127] Sindhu R, Silviya  N, Binod  P, Pandey  A (2013) Pentose -rich hydrolysate from acid 
pretreated rice straw as a carbon source for the production of poly -3-hydroxybutyrate . 
Biochem Eng J  78:67-72. 
[128] Gomaa  EZ (2014) Production of polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) by Bacillus subtilis  and 
Escherichia  coli grown on cane molasses fortified with ethanol . Braz Archives Biol  
Technol 57 :145-154. 
[129] Negi S, Banerjee  R (2010) Optimization of culture parameters to enhance production of 
amylase and protease from Aspergillus awamori  in a single fermentation . African J  
Biochem Res 4 :73-80. 
[130] Shamala  T, Vijayendra  S, Joshi  G (2012) Agro -industrial residues and starch for growth 
and co -production of polyhydroxyalkanoate copolymer and α -amylase by Bacillus sp . 
CFR -67. Braz J Microbiol 43 :1094 -1102.  
[131] Rinn an R, Baath E (2009) Differential utilization of carbon substrates by bacteria and 
fungi in tundra soil . Appl Environ Microbiol  75:3611 -3620.  31 
 [132] Ryu HW, Cho  KS, Goodrich  PR, Park  CH (2008) Production of polyhydroxyalkanoates 
by Azotobacter vinelandii  UWD using swine wastewater: Effect of supplementing 
glucose, yeast extract, and inorganic salts . Biotechnol Biopro c Eng 13 :651-658. 
[133] Wei YH (2011) Screening and evaluation of polyhydroxybutyrate -producing strains from 
indigenous isolate Cupriavidus t aiwanensis strains . Int J Mol Sci  12:252-265. 
[134] Lopez -Abelairas M, García -Torreiro  M, Lu-Chau  T, Lema  J, Steinb uchel A (2015) 
Comparison of several methods for the separation of poly(3 -hydroxybutyrate) from 
Cupriavidus necator  H16 cultures . Biochem Eng  J 93:250-259. 
[135] Kapritchkoff FM (2006) Enzymatic recovery and purification of polyhydroxybutyrate 
produced by Ralstonia eutropha . J Biotechnol  122:453-462. 
[136] Kosseva  M, Webb  C (2013)  Food industry wastes: assessment and recuperation of 
commodities. Academic Press, 2013.  
 [137] Divyashree M, Shamala  T (2010) Extractability of polyhydroxyalkanoate synthesized by 
Bacillus flexus cultivated in organic and inorganic nutrient media . India J  Microbiol  
50:63-69. 
[138] Khosravi -Darani  K (2010) Research activities on supercritical fluid science in food 
biotechnology . Critic Rev  Food Sci Nutrit  50:479-488. 
[139] Murugan  P, Han L, Gan  CY, Maurer  FH, Sudesh  K (2016) A new biological recovery 
approach for PHA using mealworm,  tenebrio molitor . J Biotechnol 239 :98-105. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 32 
 Table 1 . Applications of PHAs in various fields  and their example  
Application  Example  
Packaging  A polymer used to pack material for short time period which includes daily consumable, films, 
and electronic appliances  
Printing  PHAs used as coloring agent in painting industry [87]. 
Bulk Chemical  PHA used as smart gels, heat sensitive adhesive, latex and nonwoven matrices to remove facial 
oils.  
Block co-
polymerization  A PHA with two hydroxyl group used as block co -polymer.  
Plastic processing  PHAs used to process plastic.  
Textile industry  PHA used in textile industry to produce nylon fibers through grafting polymerization of 
polyamide groups on side chain of linear polymer.  
Fine chemical 
industry  PHAs isomer with rectus (R) configuration were used to synthesize antibiotics [88]. 
Medical implants  PHA are used in medical implants due to t heir biodegradable nature [18]. 
Medical  The rectus (R) PHB used in treatment of Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s, osteoporosis and 33 
 improvement in memory [89]. 
Food additives  PHA oligomer with ketone moiety used as food additives approved by food and drug testing 
authority (FDA)  
Industrial 
microbiology  Operon produce from PHAs was used to either enhance the metabolic activity or resist process 
to improve industrial microbial strain [90]. 
Biofuels  PHA are hydrolyzed to produce hydroxyalkanoate, methyl ester which combustible in nature 
and used them as biofuels.  
Protein purification  PHA are binding protein to purifying them.  
Specific drug delivery  The co -expression of PHaP with specific ligands to achieve such properties like targeted drug 
delivery [91]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 34 
 Table 2: Polyhydroxyalkanoates bacterial source and their chemical structure  
Polymer name  Bacterial source  Chemical structure  Reference  
 
Poly-3-hydroxybutyrate P(3 -
HB)  
P. pseudomallei, P. putida, 
Azotobacterchrooccum, A. sp, 
R. eutropha, and 
Zoogloearamigera   
         
CH3 O
O HO H
 [56] 
Polyhydroxyvalerate P(HV)  P. oleovorans  
H3CO
O H
O Hn
 [92] 
Polyhydroxyhexanoate 
P(HHx)  P. putida  
H3C
O HO H
On
 [38] 35 
 Polyhydroxyheptanoate 
P(HHp)  P. putida  
H3C
OO
HO H
n
 [93] 
Polyhydroxyocantoate P(HO)  Streptmoyceslividans  
H3C O H
OO H
n
 [94] 
Polyhydroxynanoate P(HN)  Alcaligenes sp.  
H3C
O HO O H
n
 [95] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 36 
 Table 3. PHAs producing microbial strains, growt h substrates and their kinetics  
Microorganism  Growth substrate  PHA/monomer  Cell dry 
mass (  %, 
w/w)  Kinetics of PHA 
production (g L-1 h-1) Reference  
Gram negative bacteria  
Azohydromonas 
australica  Malt waste as carbon 
source  P(3-HB) 72  0.4-0.445 g  [96] 
Azohydromonas lata  Sucrose as carbon 
source  P(3-HB) 55-88  0.05-4.9 g  [97] 
Azotobacter vinelandii 
UWD  Sugar beet molasses  PHB  52-55  [98] 
Azohydromonas lata  Glucose and 
Fructose as carbon 
source   
P(3-HB) 76-79  0.121 -0.128 g  [99] 
Azotobacter beijerinckii  Glucose as sole 
carbon source  P(3-HB) 25  0.09 g  [28] 37 
 Burkholderia cepacia  Use large number of 
carbon sources 
xylose, glycerol, 
fructose, sucrose and 
glucose   
 
P(3-HB) Xylose 
58.4 Not measure  [100] 
Glycerol 
31.3 0.103 g  [29] 
50-59 Not measure  
 [99] 
Burkholderia sp.  Uses oleic acid, 
myristic acid, lauric 
acid,  palmitic acid 
and stearic acid as 
carbon source   
 
P(3-HB)  
1-69  
Not measured  [101] 
Caulobacter vibrioides  Uses Glucose as sole 
carbon source.  P(3-HB) 18.5 Produces  0.008 g  [102] 
Cupriavidus nec ator, 
Alcaligenes eutrophus, 
Wautersia eutropha and 
Ralstonia eutropha  Glucose and fructose 
as carbon source.  P(3-HB) 67-71 
 0.052 -0.067 g  [99] 
4-Hydroxyhexanoic 
acid as carbon P(3-HB) 76.3-78.5 Not measured  [103] 38 
 source.  
Corn, olive and palm 
oil as carbon source.  P(3-HB)  79-82 0.041 -0.047 g  [95] 
Butyrate, propanoic, 
lactic and acetate 
acid.  P(3-HB) and 
P(3-HV)  4-40.7 0.001 -0.037 g  [30] 
Carbondioxide.  P(3-HB)  89 0.230 g  [104] 
Alcaligenes eutrophus 
N9A, Cupriavidus necator 
and Ralstonia eutropha 
N9A. 4-Hydroxyhexanoic 
acid as sole C source   
P(3-HB) 65.5-66.2 Not measured  [103] 
Alcaligenes eutrophus 
TF93, Cupriavidus 
necator, Wautersia 
eutropha and , Ralstonia  
eutropha TF93  4-Hydroxyhexanoic 
acid P(3-HB) 67.2   Not measured  [103] 
Carbondioxide gas 
used as carbon 
source  P(3-HB) 60  0.6 g  [105] 
Alcaligenes eutrophus , Glucose as carbon P(3-HB) 76  2.4 g  [106] 39 
 Cupriavidus necator, 
Wautersia eutropha and , 
Ralstonia  
eutropha  source  
Saccharified waste 
and potato starch as 
carbon source  P(3-HB) 46  1.5 g  
 [31] 
When Molasses as 
carbon source  P(3-HB) 31-44 0.8-1.2 g  [107] 
Food waste  P(3-HB) 87   [14] 
Waste glycerol  P(3-HB) 15-36.1 0.3-4.2 g  [108] 
Wautersia eutropha  Canola Oil  P(3-HB-co-3-
HV-co- 
3-HO-3-HDD)  
  90   0.46 g  [14] 
Halomonas boliviensis 
LC1 Hydrolyzed starch as 
sole carbon source.  P(3-HB)  56  Not measured  [109] 
Hydrogenophaga 
pseudoflava  Sucrose and lactose 
as carbon source  P(3-HB-co-3-
HV) 20-62.5  0.02-0.12 g  [32] 
Valerate and P(3-HB-co-3- 46  s 0.5 g  [110] 40 
 Hydrolyzed whey 
used as carbon 
source  HV) 
Methylobacterium 
extorquens  Methanol used as 
carbon source  P(3-HB) 40-46  0.25-0.6 g  [111] 
Methylocystis sp. GB25  Methane gas used as 
carbon source  P(3-HB) 51  Not measured  [112] 
Novosphingobium 
nitrogenifigens Y88 Glucose a s carbon 
source  P(3-HB) 81  0.014 -0.02 g  [113] 
Paracoccus denitrificans  n-pentanol as carbon 
source  P(3-HV) 22-24  Not measured  [114] 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa  fructose, glucose, 
cane molasses, 
sucrose and glycerol 
as carbon source  P(3-HB) 12.4-62  0.01-0.1 g  [115] 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
PAO1  Polythene wax and 
oil as carbon source  mcl-PHA  25  Not measures  [33]  
Pseudomonas Terephthalic acid as mcl-PHA  24  Produce 0.004 g  [33] 41 
 frederiksbergensis GO23  carbon source  
Pseudomonas marginalis  Octanoate and 1,3 -
butanediol as carbon 
source  Scl-PHA  
mcl-PHA  12-31.4 Not measured  [116] 
Pseudomonas mendocina  Octanoate  and 1,3 -
butanediol as carbon 
source  Scl-PHA  
mcl-PHA  13.5-19.3  Not measured  [116] 
Pseudomonas oleovorans  4-Hydroxyhexanoic 
acid as carbon 
source.  Scl-PHA  
mcl-PHA  18.6  Not measured  [103] 
Pseudomonas putida  
CA-3 Styrene as sole 
carbon source  mcl-PHA  36.4  0.06 g  [117] 
Pseudomonas putida  
GO16   
Terephthalic acid  as 
carbon source.  mcl-PHA  27  0.005 -0.008 g  [33] 
Pseudomonas putida  
GO19  n-Alkanes used as 
carbon source  mcl-PHA  
scl-PHA,  23  0.005 -0.008 g  [33] 42 
 Pseudomonas oleovorans  n-Alkane as a sole  
carbon source  mcl-PHA  6-60  Not measured  [119] 
Pseudomonas putida 
KT2440  Nonanoic acid   
 
mcl-PHA  26.8-75.4  Produce 0.25 -1.1 g  [119] 
4-Hydroxyhexanoic 
acid 25-30  Not measured  [103] 
Glucose  32.1  Produce 0.006 g  [34] 
Pseudomonas putida F1 Toluene, benzene 
and ethyl benzene as 
C source  mcl-PHA  1-22  Not measured  [120] 
Pseudomonas putida mt-2 Pentanoic acid, 
acetic acid, glycerol, 
octanoic  
acid, citric acid, 
succinic acid and 
glucose used.   
mcl-PHA  4-77  Not measured  [48] 
Thermus thermophilus 
HB8  From whey  scl-mcl-PHA  35.6  0.024 g  [129] 43 
 Gram positive bacteria  
Bacillus megaterium  Citric acid, succinic 
acid, glucose, 
octanoic acid and 
glycerol.  P(3-HB) 
scl-mcl-PHA  
mcl-PHA  3-48  Not measured  [48] 
Bacillus megaterium 
SRKP -3 Dairy waste  P(3-HB)  0.311  [14] 
Corynebacterium 
glutamicum  Acetic acid, glucose, 
succinic acid, 
glycerol and citric 
acid P(3-HB) 
mcl-PHA  4-32  Not measured  [48] 
Corynebacterium 
hydrocarboxydans  Glucose and acetate  P(3-HB) 
P(3-HV) 8-21  Not measured  [122] 
Microlunatus 
phosphovorus  Glucose as sole C 
source  P(3-HB) 
P(3-HV) 20-30  Not measured  [123] 
Nocardia lucida  Succinate and 
acetate  P(3-HB) 
P(3-HV) 7-20  Not measured  [122] 44 
  
 
 
 
 Rhodococcus sp. Acetate, 1,4 -
butanediol, fructose, 
hexanoate,  lactate, 
succinate, 2 -
alkenoate, 5 -
chlorovalerate, 
glucose, molasses 
and valerate.   
P(3-HB-co-3-
HV) 4-53  Not measured  [122] 
Archaea       
Haloferax mediterranei  From vinasse   
P(3-HB-co-3-
HV) 50-73  0.05-0.2 g  [35] 
From hydrolyzed 
whey  72.8   0.09 g  [124] 
From glycerol  75-76   0.12 g  [36] 45 
 Table 4. Batch scale production of PHAs  
Bacterial strain  Carbon source  Yield (g/g)  Reference  
Chelatococcus daeguensis TAD 1  Glycerol  0.81 [125] 
Cupriavidus  necator H16  Jatropha oil  0.91 [126] 
Halomonas campisalis  Maltose  0.80 [26] 
Bacillus firmus NI 0830  Rice straw  0.89 [127] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 46 
 Table 5.  Different organic and inorganic nitrogen sources for PHAs production  
Nitrogen source 0.2 g L-1 PHAs produced g L-1 Reference  
Inorganic nitrogen sources  
Sodium nitrate  4.52 [113]  
Potassium nitrate  2.46 [128] 
Diammonium hydrogen 
orthophosphate  0.32 [129] 
Ammonium chloride  2.48 [108]  
Ammonium sulphate  2.02 [26] 
Ammonium nitrate  0.62 [39] 
Ammonium acetate  2.48 [130] 
Organic nitrogen sources  
Glycine  1.02 [131] 
Peptone  0.80 [132] 47 
 Beef extract  5.26 [68] 
Yeast extract  3.20 [132] 
Tryptone  0.68 [133] 
Urea  3.42 [67] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 48 
 Table 6: PHAs isolation methods and their advantages  
Method                    Recovery Method           Advantage  Reference  
Digestion 
method   Dissolve cell  mass to conserve PHA 
granules.  
 Alkali acid and strong oxidizing agent 
used to non -selective digestion method.  
 Protolytic enzyme and anionic 
surfactant used for selective digestion 
of non -cell dry mass.   98% purity of product.  
 Increase intracellular polyme r 
content recovery.  
 Appropriate size of PHA granule  
 Non cell dry mass converted to 
sustainable by value added way.  [134] 
Heat 
pretreatment   To assess the various enzyme (trypsin, 
lysozyme) for PHA extraction.   Greater yield with 99% purity.  
 Reutilization of nutrients released 
during enzymolysis.  [135] 
Digestion by 
acid  Sulphuric acid used for degradation of 
PHA    Define mechanical strength of 
PHA.  [82] 
Mechanical 
disruption 
method   Bead milling and high pressure 
homogenization used for disruption.  
 Purity of product was increased by 
using surfactant in process of recovery.   Minimum damage to  the 
environment and polymer.  [136] 49 
 Cell fragility   Gram positive and Gram negative 
bacteria both are used.  
 Cell wall strength of bacteria 
compromised by modifying the 
composition.  
 The accumulation of PHA in cell cause 
fragility.  
 Inorganic salt media was used which 
decrease other amino acids.   Inorganic media was used to 
recover the polymer with greater 
yield and eas e. [137] 
Supercritical 
fluid 
extraction   Supercritical fluid extraction method 
used to recover polymer with greater 
efficiency.  
 Recovery method totally based on 
disruption of cell to collect biomass 
with greater purity.   86-98% pure cell biomass were 
obtained.  
 Nontoxic, Non flammability and 
low reactivity  
 Purity of product  
 Low maintenance cost  [138] 
Solvent 
extraction   A solvent based recovery of PHA and 
collected out by precipitation method  
 Halogen containing solvent and other 
solvent also used like (Methanol)  
 Water can also be used as solvent.   Purity of product obtained from 95 -
97% 
 Solvent extraction agent work at 
100oC. 
 The use of water make process 
cheaper  [138] 50 
 Solvent 
gelation   Recovered PHA from mixed microbial 
culture and accounts for a quality of 
product in final applications.  
  Controlled microbial mass with 
tunable structure from batch to batch.  
 The rich solvent gelation blends with  
PHA to produce granules.  
 The solvent like ketone, alcohol, 
aliphatic, ester and aromatic 
hydrocarbon are solvent dissolve non 
rich cell mass on cooling.   A strict criterion  for polymer 
quality  
 The minimized recovery process 
steps  
 Optimization of solvent to  
minimize the production cost  
 Particle size from 0.77 -2 mm  [137] 
Ultrasound 
assisted 
extraction   The efficient mass transfer obtained 
through ultrasound radiation  
 Cell biom ass extracted from solvent 
and non -solvent base media by ultra 
sound radiation.  
 The heptane is used to extract non -
solvent based PHA recovery with 
higher yield.  
 A non -solvent mixed with an 
appropriate ratio minimizes the solvate 
ratio to dissolve solute.   Product obtained with 96% purity.  
 Reduce the cost of recovery process  
 Minimum volume of mild solvent 
used with reduced recovery time.  [137] 51 
  
  The post extraction method with 
optimal condition to define molecular 
weight, chemical structure and thermal 
properties.  
Usage of Ionic 
liquids   The biomass containing PHA were 
disclosed by using ionic l iquid.  
 PHA polymer dissolved in ionic liquid 
by gentle heating, sonication, agitation 
and radiation energy.   Accelerate the dissolution of 
polymer recovery.  [136] 
Insect based 
recovery of  
PHA   Insect have ability to lyophilized cell 
with polymer granules.  
 The larvas of Tenebrio molitor and 
mealworm beetle recover  PHA by 
engulfing them.   The cell biomass was  obtained with 
54% of yield.  [139] 
PHA recovery 
by Animal   The rats consumed freeze dried mass of 
Cupriavidus necator and excreted 
pellets of PHA pure cell biomass.  
 The pellets are washed with detergent 
to increase the purity of product.   The 82 -97% purity of the product 
obtained from this method.  
 No further use of solvent and 
ecofriendly process.  [206] 52 
 
C
HRO H
CHH
C
OO Hm
n 
Fig. 1. A general structure of PHAs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 53 
  
Fig. 2. Schematic  diagram s of continuous tank bioreactor s (a) single stage (b) two stage and (c) 
three stage.  
