COMMENTARY
Can 5-HT 3Antagonists Really Contribute to Serotonin Toxicity?
A Call for Clarity and Pharmacological Law and Order
Carlos H. Rojas-Fernandez
Published online: 17 October 2014
/C211The Author(s) 2014. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Since 2012, the World Health Organisation, US Food and Drug
Administration, and recently Health Canada have released
reports concluding that there i s a potential risk of developing
serotonin syndrome when 5-HT 3antagonists are used in
combination with serotonergic drugs. These reports do not
appear to have adequately cons idered current knowledge and
understanding of serotonin toxi city (ST), have made conclu-
sions based upon biologically im plausible mechanisms, and
have not provided health professi onals with accurate or useful
information. This commentary aims to clarify these miscon-ceptions in order to aid clini cal decision making when using
5-HT
3antagonists, which are unlikely to cause ST.
Key Points
Recent reports have suggested that 5-HT 3
antagonists contribute to serotonin syndrome when
used with serotonergic drugs.
Serotonin toxicity is a predictable consequence of
excessive synaptic and peripheral serotonin
secondary to the use of combinations of drugs that
can sufﬁciently raise serotonin levels.
The 5-HT 3antagonists do not possess the
pharmacological properties necessary to contribute
to serotonergic effects and are not reliablydocumented as causing or contributing to ST. To
justify the postulate that they are involved in ST will
require clear and convincing evidence, which does
not presently existIn May 2014, and without substantive evidential foun-
dation, Health Canada (HC) proposed the notion that
5-HT
3antagonists contribute to serotonin syndrome [SS,
a.k.a. serotonin toxicity (ST)] [ 1]. The World Health
Organisation (WHO) and US Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA) have recently come to similar conclusions [ 2,
3]. The analogy that appropriately describes this proposi-
tion is ‘‘the emperor’s new clothes’’ because there is
insufﬁcient scientiﬁc evidence to support it. It represents
the creation of a myth and falls into the realm of unsup-ported speculation.
The review by HC was prompted by a WHO report
indicating that ondansetron may contribute to the devel-opment of ST when used with serotonergic drugs. The
WHO report suggested that there may be an increased
vulnerability with the concomitant use of 5-HT
3antago-
nists and serotonergic drugs whereby excessive stimulation
of other serotonin (5-HT) receptors such as 5-HT 1aand
5-HT 2aresults from increasing levels of 5-HT due to 5-HT 3
receptor antagonism [ 2]. Similarly, HC concluded with a
notice that manufacturers have been requested to incorpo-
rate this information in the warnings and precautions sec-tion and issued an information update to the public
communicating the risk of ST when 5-HT
3antagonists are
used with serotonergic drugs [ 1].
The authors of the FDA, WHO, and HC reports do not
appear to recognise or assign sufﬁcient weight to the well-
established data concerning the pharmacology, mecha-
nisms, and characteristics of ST. This is surprising con-
sidering the availability of elegant reviews on this topic andthe availability of data from the Hunter Area Toxicology
Service data set, which have provided ample evidence for
the spectrum concept of ST and for a dose-response rela-tionship mediated by the degree of synaptic serotonin
elevation [ 4–7].C. H. Rojas-Fernandez ( &)
Schlegel Research Chair in Geriatric Pharmacotherapy Schlegel-
UW Research Institute on Ageing & School of Pharmacy,University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canadae-mail: crojas-f@uwaterloo.caDrugs - Real World Outcomes (2014) 1:3–5
DOI 10.1007/s40801-014-0004-3It is useful to address the misuse of the term ‘‘serotonin
syndrome’’. The term syndrome suggests an idiosyncratic
reaction, and although it may in part be accurate because of
its inherent deﬁnition, ‘‘ …the collection of signs and
symptoms that are observed in, and characteristic of, a
single condition’’, it tends to be misleading when referring
to pharmacological toxicity versus side effects [ 4]. Sero-
tonin toxicity predictably results from excessive synaptic
and peripheral serotonin due to use of combinations of
drugs that can sufﬁciently raise serotonin levels and is notidiosyncratic. Given its predictability, it is more accurate to
refer to this as serotonin toxicity, just as we refer to lithium
toxicity when plasma levels are sufﬁciently elevated versusadverse effects due to lithium, which may be observed
even at lower lithium levels. On multiple occasions others
have likewise suggested that using the term ST to describetypical side effects of therapeutic doses of drugs is illogi-
cal; furthermore, use of ST might be best reserved to
describe more severe cases (akin to poisoning versus sideeffects) [ 5–7]. As alluded to, toxicity attributable to excess
serotonin may be observed along a spectrum ranging from
common serotonergic side effects such as nausea, diar-rhoea, insomnia, nervousness, tremor, loose stools,
mydriasis, and mild anxiety, through to moderate ST with
hyperreﬂexia, diaphoresis, agitation, dysphoria, restless-ness, inducible clonus, and temperatures up to 39 /C176C, and
lastly to severe ST with sustained clonus, rigidity, and
temperatures [39/C176C[5].
Another issue that merits clariﬁcation centres around
which classes of drugs are serotonergic and thus capable ofprecipitating severe ST in certain combinations. It is useful
to consider these questions: (1) Can the drug lead to
serotonergic side effects? (2) Are serotonergic side effectsobserved in overdose? (3) If co-administered with mono-
amine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), are moderate to severe
serotonergic side effects observed? If the answer to any ofthese questions is yes, then the drug may possess relevant
serotonergic properties, namely MAOIs, serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SRIs), and presynaptic serotonin releasers (e.g.MDMA) [ 4–7]. In cases of overdose or in certain combi-
nations, these drugs can sufﬁciently elevate synaptic
serotonin and cause overt toxicity. Yet it should be notedthat altering each of these mechanisms individually will
produce only a speciﬁc maximum effect, as demonstrated
by the observation that overdoses of SRIs alone do notprecipitate severe or fatal ST, or temperature elevations
above 38.5 /C176C[4–7]. Conversely, 25 % of overdoses of
SRIs and moclobemide will result in life-threatening ST,the risk being higher with older MAOIs [ 4]. This makes
sense when considering the pharmacology of the drugs and
the physiological mechanisms that regulate 5-HT at theneuronal level [ 4,8]. SRIs will acutely elevate synaptic
5-HT by inhibiting its reuptake, but good evidencedemonstrates that there is a ceiling effect [ 6,7]. Once 5-HT
reuptake has been maximally inhibited, there is nothing
else that can raise 5-HT levels except to inhibit its break-
down vis-a `-vis adding a MAOI, making the combination
predictably toxic [ 4]. As for ondansetron, this 5-HT
3
antagonist possesses no agonist properties and thus would
not be expected to produce serotonergic effects [ 9].
The references cited in the HC report do not support the
mechanism proposed therein. One is a report of two
patients who did not have signs or symptoms that areconsistent with ST, and one of the cases involved mirt-
azapine, a drug with no clinically relevant serotonergic
properties [ 4,6,10]. The FDA’s report cites the same
speculative mechanism from Turkel et al., which was
uncritically restated by Altman et al. [ 11]. The conclusions
of the reports by HC and the WHO appear to be a mis-understanding regarding the discussion in a second report
of ST because of concomitant use of SRIs and methylene
blue (which is a potent MAOI) [ 12]. Interestingly, almost
20 years ago, Bailey investigated the concomitant use of
ondansetron to reduce nausea secondary to ﬂuvoxamine,
with no apparent side effects, and two recent reports ofondansetron augmentation of SRI therapy in patients with
obsessive compulsive disorder did not reveal serotonergic
side effects [ 13–15].
The speculation that ‘‘excess’’ serotonin would be
available to stimulate 5-HT
1areceptors is also difﬁcult to
reconcile given the distribution and function of 5-HT 1a
receptors, observations that this receptor is unlikely to playa major role in ST, and that 5-HT
1apartial agonists (e.g.
buspirone, aripiprazole) have not been shown to contribute
to severe ST [ 5,7]. In contrast, implication of the 5HT 2a
receptor is supported by beneﬁcial effects of 5-HT 2a
antagonists in the treatment of ST [ 4,7]. Furthermore, the
degree of 5-HT elevation necessary for relevant toxicity is
10–50 times the baseline level, which is hardly achievablefrom this presumed excess 5-HT that is not bound to 5-HT
3
receptors [ 6]. It should also be noted that any peripherally
released 5-HT would not cross an intact blood-brain barrierand thus could not contribute to CNS serotonergic effects,
without which ST could not be precipitated [ 8].
The communication to the public and health profes-
sionals about a proposed risk of ST from use of 5-HT
3a
blockers and serotonergic drugs may have multiple unin-tended consequences, including, but not limited to: need-less avoidance of ondansetron for patients taking SRIs,
unnecessary and potentially dangerous situations where
SRIs are abruptly discontinued, and health care profes-sionals having to spend extra time explaining this issue to
patients. At worst, it may make it difﬁcult for future
warnings from HC, the WHO, or the FDA to be takenseriously. Clinicians need to have access to reliable infor-
mation so that they know what drug combinations must4 C. H. Rojas-Fernandezalways be avoided (e.g. MAOIs and SRIs), what combi-
nations may be used safely (e.g. SRIs and trazodone or
mirtazapine), and which drugs can elevate serotonin, and
be aware of commonly used drugs which also possess SRIproperties (e.g. meperidine, tramadol, fentanyl, pentazo-
cine) or MAOI properties (e.g. linezolid) [ 4,5,7].
It is well known that case reports are the lowest level of
evidence, but this is not to say they are not useful. Indeed,
case reports have revealed many important side effects
previously unappreciated (e.g. terfenadine and torsade depointes), but their misinterpretation and misuse can be
problematic. The cases from the FDA, WHO, and HC
reports have multiple confounders and are not consistentwith recognised diagnostic criteria for ST, which greatly
diminish their utility. Indeed, in their present form, the
quality of these case reports is not sufﬁcient to make anyconclusions.
In order to avoid confusion and misdiagnosing ST, cli-
nicians need to become well informed about the concept ofST as a spectrum of toxicity ranging from mild seroto-
nergic effects such as nervousness, insomnia, and nausea to
moderate and severe life-threatening ST with hyperther-mia, sustained clonus, and severe rigidity. Clinicians also
need to know which drugs possess serotonergic properties
and are thus capable of contributing to ST. The informationis readily available in the literature. Lastly, clinicians need
to scientiﬁcally and systematically assess the evidence,
assign proper weight to evidence in a manner that is
commensurate with its quality in a balanced way, and not
assign undue weight to evidence of poor quality based onuntenable biological mechanisms.
In conclusion, almost all implicated drugs have been
reliably and reproducibly assayed with human clonedreceptor (and other) methodologies, and these properties
have been shown to be reliable predictors of their pro-
pensity to induce ST. Thus, certain drugs and drug-drugcombinations predictably induce large elevations of sero-
tonin and therefore cause ST. Ondansetron and related
compounds have been demonstrated not to possess theseproperties to a signiﬁcant degree and are not reliably
documented as causing ST. It is therefore highly doubtful
that these drugs are capable of contributing to ST, a con-clusion that can be conﬁdently predicted from their phar-
macological actions. Therefore, to justify the postulate that
they are involved in ST will require clear and convincingevidence, which we can contend does not presently exist.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which per-
mits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.References
1. Summary safety review-serotonin blocking drugs (serotonin
antagonists) Aloxi (palonosetron), Anzemet (dolasetron), Kytril(granisetron) and generics, and Zofran (ondansetron) and gener-
ics-Serotonin Syndrome. Available at: http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/
dhp-mps/medeff/advisories-avis/review-examen/serotonin-eng.php. Accessed May 29th 2014.
2. WHO pharmaceutical newsletter: ondansetron and serotonin
syndrome. 2012;3:16–21.
3. Kytrtil 5HT3 safety review. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/
downloads/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/PediatricAdvisoryCommittee/UCM342225.pdf . Accessed 29
May 2014.
4. Gillman PK. A review of serotonin toxicity data: implications for
the mechanisms of antidepressant drug action. Biol Psych.
2006;59:1046–51.
5. Gillman PK. CNS toxicity involving methylene blue: the exem-
plar for understanding and predicting drug interactions that pre-cipitate serotonin toxicity. J Psychopharmacol. 2011;25:429–36.
6. Dunkley EJC, Isbister GK, Sibbritt D, et al. The hunter serotonin
toxicity criteria: simple and accurate diagnostic decision rules forserotonin toxicity. Q J Med. 2003;96:634–42.
7. Isbister GK, Buckley NA. The pathophysiology of serotonin
toxicity in animals and humans. Implications for diagnosis and
treatment. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2005;28:205–14.
8. Frazer A, Hensler JG. Serotonin. In: Siegel GJ, Agranoff BW,
Albers RW, Fisher SK, Uhler MD, editors. Basic neurochemistry:
molecular, cellular, and medical aspects. 6th ed. Philadelphia:Lippincott-Raven; 1999. p. 264–92.
9. Gregory RE, Ettinger DS. 5-HT
3receptor antagonists for the
prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. A
comparison of their pharmacology and clinical efﬁcacy. Drugs.1998;55:173–89.
10. Turkel SB, Nadala JGB, Wincor MZ. Possible serotonin syn-
drome in association with 5-HT
3antagonist agents. Psychoso-
matics. 2001;42:258–60.
11. Altman CS, Jahangiri MF. Serotonin syndrome in the perioper-
ative period. Anesth Analg. 2010;110:526–8.
12. Stanford SC, Stanford BJ, Gillman PK. Risk of severe serotonin
toxicity following co-administration of methylene blue andserotonin reuptake inhibitors: an update on a case report of post-
operative delirium. J Psychopharmacol. 2010;24:1433–8.
13. Bailey JE, Potokar J, Coupland N, et al. The 5-HT
3antagonist
ondansetron reduces gastrointestinal side effects induced by aspeciﬁc serotonin re-uptake inhibitor in man. J Psychopharmacol.
1995;9:137–41.
14. Pallanti S, Bernardi S, Antonini S, et al. Ondansetron augmen-
tation in treatment resistant obsessive compulsive disorder. Apreliminary, single blind, prospective study. CNS Drugs.
2009;23:1047–55.
15. Soltani F, Sayyah M, Feizy F, et al. A double blind, placebo-
controlled pilot study of ondansetron for patients with obsessive
compulsive disorder. Hum Psychopharmacol Clin Exp.
2010;25:509–13.Can 5-HT 3Antagonists Really Contribute to Serotonin Toxicity? 5