DOCUMENT BESU
04296 -[B34146693 (Restricted) 2
Cancer and Coal Tar Hair Dyes: AD Unregulated Bazard to
Consumers. HRD-78-22; B-164031(2). December 6, 1977. 20 pp.
Report to Rep. John E. Moss, Chairuan, House Committee on
Interstate and Foreign Commerce: Oversight and Investigations
SubcoL'ittee; by Elmer B. Staats, Comptroller General.
Issue Area: Consumer and Worker Prctection: Identification of
Hazardous Consumer Products (909).
Contact: Human Resources Div.
Budget Function: Health: Preventiou and Control of Health
Problems (553).
Organization Concerned: Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare; Food and Drug Administration: Div. of Cosmetics
Technology; National Institutes of Health: National Cancer
Inst.; National Inst. fur Occupational Safety and Health;
Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association.
Congressional Relevance: House Committee on Interstate and
Foreign Commerce: Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee.
Authority: Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended (21
U.S.C. 301 et seq.). P.L. 86-618. 28 C.F.R. 6439. 36 C.F.R.
16902. Toilet Goods Association v. Finch (419 F.2d 21
(1969).
About 33 million women use hair dyes to temporarily or
permanently change their hair color. Most dyes marketed for use
by women are known as coal tar hair dyes because initially coal
tar was the only commercially practical source of material
needed to synthesize the colors used in them. Most coal tar hair
dyes contain colors derived from Petroleum rather than coal tar.
Because a color chemically identical to the petroleum-derived
color could be derived from coal tar, the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) classifies petroleum-derived colors as coal
tar colors and regulates hair dyes containing them accordingly.
Coal tar hair dyes whose labeling contains a prescribed
statutory warning concerning possible skin irritation and
blindness are exempt from Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
provisions concerning adulteration, bat they are not exempt from
misbranding provisions of the act. Findings/Ccnclusions:
Exemptions in the act do not permit FDA to regulate coal tar
hair dye products effectively; they bar the agency from banning
or restricting the use of cancer-causing coal tar hair dyes.
Although coal tar hair dyes are subject to FDA labeling
requirements, the agency has not used this authority to require
a cancer warning cn labels of dyes containing known human or
animal carcinogens. Colors known to cause or suspected of
causing cancer reportedly are being used in all three types of
ccal tar hair dyes. Data indicate that the cancer-causing coal
tar hair colors may be absorbed through the skin and scalp.
Colors that may be used in some temporary and semipermanent hair
dyes are derived from benzidine, a known carcinogen; they may be
a significant cancer risk because the colors may break down to
benzidine in the human body. Nine color additives banned for usa
in cosmetics other than coal tar hair dyes are listed in the
Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary as available for use in coal tar
hair dyes. Reccmmendations: The Secretary of Health, Education,
and Welfare should direct the FDA Commissioner to evaluate
safety data on coal tar hair dye ingredients and require, where
applicable, a cancer or other appropriate warning on product
labels. The Congress should permit FDA to better regulate coal
tar hair dyes by repealing exempticns in section 601(a) and
601 (e) of the Food, Drug, and Cossetiz Act.. (Author/SW)
t.Accou "'t -. ; -.or ' *peetifi appr*v4
Py th Z ; -A . L
REPORT OF THE
COMPTROLLER GENER4L
OF THE UNITED STATES
Cancer And Coal Tar Hair Dyes:
An Unregulated Hazard
1"o Consumers
Some coal tar hair dyes may pose a signific, it
risk of cancer to cLnsumers because they con-
tain colors known to cause or suspected of
causing cancer in humans or animals. Colors
that may be used in some temporary and
semipermanent hair dyes are derived from ben-
zidine, a known human carcinogen, and may
break down to benzidine in the body. Other
colors suspected of causing cancer are used in
temporary, semipermanent, and permanent
coal tar hair dyes.
However, exemptions granted to coal tar hair
dyes under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cos-
metic Act prevent the Food and Drug Admin-
istration from regulating hair dyes effectively.
The exemptions bar the agency from banning
or restricting the use of coal tar hair dyes con-
taining cancer-causing colors, if their labeling
warns of possible skin irritation or blindness.
The Congress should repeal these exemptions.
HRD-3-22 DECEMBER 6, 1977
COMPTROLLER GENERAL OF THE UNITED 5TATEU
WAHINGTONo D.C. adNG
B-164031(2)
The Honorable John E. Moss, Chairman
Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations
Committee on Interstate and Foreign
Commerce
House of Representatives
Dear Mr. Chairman:
This is in response to your letter of October 19, 1977,
requesting information on coal tar derivtijve hair dyes.
The information in this report was developed as part of our
review of the Food and Drug Administration's regulation of
cosmetics and will also be included in our report to the
Congress on the results of that review.
The Food and Drug Administration is part of the Depart-
r.ent of Health, Education, and Welfare. As you requested,
we did not seek formal Department comments on the report.
However, we did discuss the report's contents with Food and
Drug Administration officials and we considered their views
in preparing the report. The Department will be afforded
an opportunity to offer written comments on our report to
the Congress on cosmetics.
As agreed with your office, no further distribution
of this report will be made before 30 days unless you publicly
announce its contents earlier.
Comptroller General
of the United States
COMPTROLLER GENERAL'S REPORT CANCER AND COAL TAR HAIR DYES: TO THE HONORABLE JOHN E. MOSS AN UNREGULATED HAZARD HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES TO CONSUMERS
D I G E S T
About 33 million women use hair dyes to temporarily or permanently change their fair color. There is increasing evidence that some colors used in coal tar hairdyes--the dyes most widely used--may carry a significant risk of cancer to users.
Cosmetics, including hair dyes, are regu- lated under the Federal Food, Drug, andCosmetic Act.
Exemptions in the act do not permit the Food and Drug Administration to regulatecoal tar hair dye products effectively;they bar the agency from banning or re- stricting the use of cancer-causing coal tar hair dyes.
The Congress should repeal these exemp-tions. If that is done, colors used in these Ayes will be subject, similar to other color additives, to premarket ap- proval by the Food and Drug Administra-tion for safety. Manufacturers willhave to prove the safety of these colors.
Although coal tar hair dyes are subjectto Food and Drug Administration labeling requirements, the agency has not usedthis autnority to require a cancer warn- ing on labels of coal tar hair dyes con-taining known human or animal carcino-gens.
The Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare should direct the Commissionerof the Food and Drug Administration to evaluate safety data on coal tar hair dye ingredients and require, where ap-plicable, a cancer or other appropriatewarning statement on product labe..s.
TIr Sheet. Upon removal, the reportcover date should be noted hereon
i HRD-78-22
Coal tar hair dyes are divided into threegroups--temporary, semipermanent, andpermanent--depending on the type of coaltar color used, the method used to applythe dye, and the permanence of the color.
--Temporary hair dyes are rinses, removableWith one shampooing.
--Semipermanent heir dyes usually are ap-plied in a Iiquid base and are left onthe hair for 20 to 40 minutes before be-ing rinsed out; they wear off afterseveral shampoos.
--Permanent hair dyes, accounting for about$3 out of every $4 spent on hair dyes,produce color only after they are oxi-dized inside the hair fiber by hydrogenperoxide or another oxidant; they arelort readiiy removed by shampooing.
Generally, a cosmetic is considered adul-terated if it contains any poisonous ordeleterious substance.
Coal tar hair dyes whose labeling containsa prescribed statutory warning concerningpossible skin irritation and blindness areexempt from these provisions. In addition,a cosmetic is considered adulterated if itcontains a color additive not approved forsafety by the Food and Drug Administrationunder the color additive provisions ofthe act. Again, however, coal tar hairdyes are exempted.
A cosmetic is considered misbranded ifits labeling is false or misleading.Coal tar hair dyes are not exempt fromthe misbranding provisions.
Colors known to cause or suspected ofcausing cancer reportedly are being usedin all three types of coal tar hair dyes.Data indicates that the cancer-causingcoal tar hair colors may be absorbedthrough the skin and scalp. (See p. 4.!
ii
Colors that may be used in some temporaryand semipermanent hair dyes are derivedfrom benzidine, a ';nown carcinogen; theymay be a significant cancer risk becausethe colors may break down to benzidine inthe human body.
Benzidine was identified as a human car-cinogen in the 1930s. Many scientistsbelieve that cancer can result from in-gestion, inhalation, or skin absorption ofbenzidine.
The Cosmetic, Toiletry, and FragranceAssociation, an industry trade group,lists eigiht coal tar colors derived frormbenzidine in the second edition of itsCosmetic Ingredient Dictionary. Hairdye manufacturers voluntarily reported tothe Food and Drug Administration the useof these dyes in 26 coal tar hair dyeproducts. Because many cosmetic manu-facturers do not report their productformulations to the Food and Drug Admin-istration, the total number of products
containi'ng the benzidine-derived colorshas not been determined.
Ni:-e color additives banned for use incos;..etics other than coal tar hair
dyes are listed in the Cosmetic Ingre-dient Dictionary as available for use
in coal tar hair dyes.
Colors of this type normally are used
in temporary hair dyes. Hair dye manu-facturers voluntarily reported the useof these colors in 21 hair dye products.Four of the 9 colors--known as FD&CGreen No. 2, FD&C Red No. 2, FD&C VioletNo. 1, and FD&C Red No. 1--have beenfound to cause cancer in animals.
Eleven other colors identified Ln ani-mal tests as suspected carcinogens arelisted in the Cosmetic Ingredient Dic-tionary as available for use in coaltar hair dyes.
Tear heet
iii
GAO could not readily identify individual
products that contain the 11 colors. Gen-
erally, such colors would be used in tempo-
rary or semipermanent hair dyes.
Screening tests and animal-feeding studies
provide evidence that some widely used per-
manent hair dye ingredients may be carcino-
genic or mutagenic.
University of California researchers tested
169 marketed permanent hair dyes using a
sensitive and simple bacterial screening
test and found that 150 were mutagenic and
possibly carcinogenic. They found also
that 9 of 16 ingredients used in permanent
hair dyes were mutagenic
The bacterial test is believed to offer
strong evidence of carcinogenicity but,
according to the Food and Drug Administra-
tion, does not alone provide sufficient
evidence to conclude that a substance is
harmfu'. to humans.
Animal-feeding studies are being conducted
on a number of per.inent hair dye ingre-
dients for the National Cancer Institute.
Although analysis of the studies has not
been completed, the Institute advised the
Food and Drug Administration on October 18,
1977, that two of the ingredients--toluene-
2,4-diamine and 2,4-diaminoanisole sulfate--
were carcinogenic in animals.
Hair dye manufacturers have reported to
the Food and Drug Administration the use
of toluene-2,4-diamine in 7 hair dyes and
the use of 2,4-diaminoanisole or its sul-
fate salt in 407 hair dyes.
The Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Asso-
ciation has questioned the appropriateness
of screening tests and feeding studies for
determining the safety of hair dye products.
It cites five skin-painting studies in
which a hair dye was applied to the skin
iv
of the test animal with no adverse effects
tu demonstrate the safety of toluene-2,4-
diamine and 2,4-diaminoanisole.
Although skin-painting studies mole closely
approximate the actual conditions of hair
dye use, some researchers have questioned
the rdequacy of the studies performed.
As requested by the Subcommittee, GAO did
not obtain written comments from the Food
and Drug Administration. However, GA) has
considered the views of the Food and Drug
Administration in preparing this report.
v
Contents
DIGEST i
CHAPTER
1 INTRODUCTION 1
Types of coal tar hair dyes 1
Regulation of hair dyes 2
Scope of review 3
2 SOME COAL TAR HAIR DYES MAY POSE CANCER
RISK TO CONSUMERS 4
Skin absorption 4Banned colors used in hair dyes 6
Benzidine-derived azo colors
Other suspected carcinogens in
temporary and semipermanent
hair dyes 9
Possible carcinogenicity of
permanent hair dyes 10
Epidemiological studies 14
3 NEED TO REPEAL HAIR DYE EXEMPTIONS 16
Coal tar hair dye exemptions 16
Exemptions hinder effective
regulation 17
Conclusions 19
Recommendation to the Secretary,
HEW 20
Recommendation to the Congress 20
ABBREVIATIONS
CTFA Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association
EDF Environmental Defense Fund
FDA Food and Drug Administration
FD&C Act Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended
HEW Department of Health, Education, and welfare
NCI National Cancer Institute
NIOSH National Institute of Occupational Safety and
Health
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
According to a representative of the Cosmetic, Toiletry,and Fragrance Association (CTFA), an industry trade associa-tion, a&¢ut 33 m: lion women use hair dyes to temporarilyor permanently ci snge their hair color. Most dyes marketedfor use by women are known as coal tar hair dyes because ini-tially coal tar was the only commercially practical sourceof material needed to synthesize the colors used in them.The re-ainder of the women's hair dye market is livided be-tween f.utallic dyes, which are advertised to gradually covergray hair, and vegetable dies, such as henna, which are na-tural dyes. Although some men use coal tar hair dyes, themosc popular dyes marketed for men are metallic dyes. Esti-mates on the numbe: of men who use hair dyes were not readilyavailable.
The Deputy Directo- of the Food and Drug Administration's(FDA's) Division of Cos...etics Technology told us that mostcoal tar hair dyes contain colors derived from petroleumrather than coal tar. Because a color chemically identical
to the petroleum-derived color could be derived from coaltar, FDA classifies petroleum-derived colors as coal tarcolors and regulates hair dyes contain-nJ them accordingly.Throughout this report we refer to all hair dyes containingpetroleum-derived and coal-tar-derived colors as coal tarhair dyes.
TYPES OF COAL TAR HAIR DYES
Coal tar lair dyes are divided into three groups--temporary, semipermanent, and permanent--depending )r. thetype of coal tar color used, the method used to apply thedye, and the permanence of the color.
Temporary hair dyves are rinses which add highlightsand brightness to natural color, improve shades of grayhair, and blend unevenly colored hair. The first rinseswere introduced ia 1922 and were 2atterned after a similarproduct used to color curtains and .ther textiles. Com-mercial products generally contain a mixture of severalcolors to obtain a given shade. Temporary dyes are usuallyapplied to the base of the hair and are combed through tothe tip. The dyes are deposited on the surface of thehair fiber. Because they do not generally penetrate the hair,
they are completely removable with one shampooing.
Semipermanent hair dyes penetrate the hair but wear off
after several shampoos. They are often used to blend streaked
hair, to improve the coloring of white or gray hair, or to
add highlights to naturally blond hair. Semipermanent dyes
are usually applied in a liquid base which is left on the
hair for 20 to 40 minutes before being rinsed out. Because
no chemical reaction takes place during application, semi-
permanent dyes do not significantly affect the structure and
the color of hair as do permanent hair dyes. Like temporary
hair dyes, semipermanent dyes generally contain a blend of
several colors to obtain the desired shade.
Permanent, or oxidation, hair dyes account for about S3
out of every $4 spent on hair dyes. Such dyes work through
a series of chemical reactions. The coal tar ingredients
in permanent hair dyes are mostly colorless "intermediates"
which produce color only after they are oxidized inside the
hair fiber by hydrogen peroxide o' another oxidant 1/. Per-
manent hair dyes produce fast colors that are not readily
removed by shampooing. Subsequent dyeing, perhaps monthly,
is required to color new hair growth and restore the color
of preriously dyed hair.
REGULATION OF HAIR DYES
Cosmetics, including hair dyes, are regulated under the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended (FD&C Act)
(21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.). Generally, cosmetics are considered
adulterated if Ftey contain any poisonous or deleterious sub-
stance and are considered misbranded if their labeling is
false or misleading. However, coal tar hair dyes that con-
form to statutory labeling requirements are exempt from the
adulteration provisions of the act.
Problems in regulating coal tar hair dyes under exist-
ing legislation art discussed in chapter 3.
1/The primary intermediates, such as para-phenylenediam.ne
and para-aminophenol, are oxidized by hydrogen peroxide
or another oxidant. The resulting products react with
a coupler, such as 2,4-diaminoanisole, resorcinol, meta-
aminophenol, and 1,5-dihydroxynaphthalene, or with another
unoxidized "para" dye to give the desired shade.
2
SCOPE OF REVIEW
We reviewed legislation, regulations, and practices
relating to FDA's regulation of cosmetics, including coal
tar hair dyes; examined FDA's records on coal tar hair
dyes; and reviewed reports of scientific studies on the
safety of coal tar hair dyes. We also interviewed offi-
cials from FDA and the Department of Health, Education,
and Welfare's (HEW's) National Cancer Institute.
3
CHAPTER 2
SOME COAL TAR HAIR DYES MAY POSE
CANCER RISK TO CONSUMERS
There is increasing evidence that some coal tar hair
dyes may pose a significant risk of cancer to users because
known or suspected cancer-causing colors in these dyes may
be absorbed through the skin and scalp. Specifically:
--Temporary hair dyes may contain coal tar colors shown
to cause cancer in laboratory animals and banned by
FDA for use in other cosmetic products.
--Temporary and semipermanent hair dyes may contain azo
colors 1/ derived from benzidine, a known human car-
cinogen. Such colors contain benzidine as a con-
taminant, and some of the colors may breakdown in the
body and release benzidine.
--Other coal tar colors available for use in temporary
or semipermanent hair dyes have reportedly caused
cancer in laboratory animals.
--Evidence from screening tests or animal studies indi-
cate that several coal tar colors used in permanent
hair dyes, including toluene-2,4-diamine and
2,4-diaminoanisole 2/ may cause cancer.
Existing epidemiological studies provide limited and conflict-
ing evidence about the incidence of cancer among coal tar hair
dye users.
SKIN ABSORPTION
Several studies have demonstrated that coal tar hair dye
ingredients are absorbed through the skin and scalp.
l/Azo colors contain an "azo" group--two connected nitrogen
atoms, each of which is usually linked to a carbon atom.
2/2,4-diaminoanisole is commonly referred to as 4-methoxy-
m-phenylenediamine on hair dye labels.
4
In a study published in 1968 1/ three permanent hairdye ingredients--p-phenylenediamine, m-phenylenediamine,
and toluene-2,5-diamine--were applied to the skin of dogsin gels and fluids, such as those used in hair dyes. Theamount of dye absorbed was calculated from the concentra-tions found in the blood or the urine. About 1 percent ofthe p-phenylenediamine applied was absorbed in 3 hours. Theamount absorbed increased to about 7 percent if the gel wascovered with aluminum foil immediately after application.Absorption decreased to about 0.1 percent if the dye wasmixed with hydrogen peroxide before application. About3 and 4 percent, respectively, were absorbed after applyingtoluene-2,5-diamine and m--phenylenediamine.
A second study 2/ demonstrated the absorption oftoluene-2,5-diamine through human skin. The hair of fivepersons was dyed with a dye composed of toluene-2,5-diamine,resorcinol, and hydrogen peroxide. About 0.3 percent ofthe toluene-2,5-diamine was absorbed.
In a 1975 study report 3/, University of Californiaresearchers noted that many aromatic amines and diamines,such as benzidine, are absorbed through human skin. Theyestimated that women could absorb as much as 1 percent ofthe hair dye chemicals applied to the scalp.
FDA has received several reports of consumers experienc-
ing brown or discolored urine following use of hair dyes.Although we identified several reports stating that thecolors in semipermanent hair dyes are absorbed, we could notfind any studies identifying the extent to which they areabsorbed.
1/Kiese, M., Rachor, M., and Rauscher, E., "The Absorptionof Some Phenylenediamines Through the Skin of Dogs,"Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, vol. 12, pp. 495-507,1968.
2/Kiese, M., and Rauscher, E., "The Absorption ofp-Toluenediamine [toluene-2,5-diamine] Through Human Skinin Hair Dyeing," Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology,
vol. 13, pp. 325-331, 1968.
3/Ames, B., Kammen, H.O., and Yamasaki, E., "Hair Dyes AreMutagenic: Identification of a Variety of Mutagenic In-gredients," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciencesof the United States of America, vol. 72, no. 6.,
pp. 2423-2427, June 1975.
5
BANNED COLORS USED IN HAIR DYES
Only color additives permanently or provisionally listedby FDA as safe can be legally used in food, drugs, or cosme-tics other than coal tar hair dyes. Coal tar hair dyes areexempt from the color additive provisions of the FD&C Actand, therefore, coal tar color additives banned from use infood, drugs, or other cosmetics may continue 'o be used incoal tar hair dyes. (See ch. 3.)
Nine color additives banned for use in cosmetics arelisted in the second edition of the CTFA Cosmetic IngredientDictionary 1/ as available for use in coal tar hair dyes.According to FDA officials, such colors would generally beused in temporary hair dyes. We found evidence that four ofthe nine colors--FD&C Green No. 2, FD&C Red No. 2, FD&CViolet No. 1, and FD&C Red No. 1--cause cancer in laboratoryanimals. The dictionary refers to these colors as AcidGreen 5, Acid Red 27, Acid Violet 49, and HC Red No. 6,respectively. The remaining five colors (and their CTFAreferences) e: External D&C Red No. 11 (Acid Red 1),External D&C Red No. 13 (Acid Red 73), External D&C RedNo. 8 (Acid Red 88), External D&C Yellow No. 3 (AcidYellow 11), and External D&C Blue No. 1 (Basic Blue 9).We did not identify the toxic effects associated with thesecolors.
From data submitted by cosmetic manufacturers underFDA's voluntary program for filing cosmetic product ingredientstatements 2/, we identified four hair dyes containing FD&CRed No. 2, Tour containing FD&C Red No. 1, and thirteen con-taining External D&C Blue No. 1. Because of the limitedparticipation in tne voluntary program, the total number ofproducts containing the nine colors could not be determined.
1/The dictionary was prepared by CTFA based on data suppliedby the cosmetic industry on the ingredients being used orpromoted for use in cosmetic products. The second editionwas issued in 1977.
2/FDA lacks authority to require cosmetic manufacturers tosubmit data on the ingredients used in their products.
The voluntary program was established in 1972, but par-ticipation has been limited.
6
BENZIDINE-DERIZVED AZO COLORS
Among the coal tar colors that may be used in temporary
and semipermanent hair dyes are several azo colors derived
from benzidine. According to the Environmental Protection
Agency, benzidine-derived azo colors may contain up to
20 parts per million of benzidine. More significant, how-
ever, are data indicating that some of the benzidine-derived
azo colors may reconvert to benzidine in the body.
Benzidine was identified as a human carcinogen in the
1930s when factory workers exposed to benzidine developed an
increased incidence of bladder cancer. Many scientists be-
lieve that cancer can result from ingestion, inhalation or
skin absorption of benzidine. Tn animal studies benzidine
caused liver tumors in mice, rats, and hamsters and bladder
cancer in dogs.
In a study report published in July 1975 1/, two re-
searchers from the New York University Medical Center re-
ported on the metabolic reduction of benzidine-derived azo
colors in the rhesus monkey. Monkeys were fed by stomach
tube a single dose of benzidine or a benzidine-derived azo
color disolved in dimethyl sulfoxide. Four benzidine-derived
azo colors were included in the study. Control urine was
collecteO from each monkey before the test was begun.
The researchers analyzed urine collected from the monkeys
over a 72-hour period and found benzidine and a benzidine
metabolite (monoacetyl benzidine) in extracts of urine from
both the monkeys fed benzidine and those fed benzidine-derived
azo colors. They found that the metabolic reduction of the
colors to benzidine was nearly total.
The researchers stated that the results of their work
support the implication of an earlier study (1973) that an
increased incidence of bladder cancer found in Japanese silk
kimono painters resulted from benzidine metabolically derived
frcm ingested azo colors. The earlier study had demonstrated
the reduction of benzidine-derived azo colors to benzidine in
the presence of certain bacteria.
1/Rinde, E., and Troll, W.; "Metabolic Reduction of Benzidine
Azo Dyes to Benzidine in the Rhesus Monkey," Journal of the
National Cancer Institute, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 181-182,
July 1975.
7
HEW's National Institute of Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSH) began a study in 1977 to determine the degree
of occupational risk to workers in the textile-dyeing and
leather-tanning industries exposed to benzidine-derived
colors. N1OSH notes that most dyestuffs are of a chemical
class which offers the potential for rapid skin and lung
absorption but that it is not known if t;&, metabolites re-
sulting from such occupational exposure differ from those
reported in the New York University study.
We could not locate any studies on the extent to whichbenzidine-derived azo colors are absorbed TArough the skin.
The CTFA Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary lists eightbenzidine-derived azo colors as available for use in coal
tar hair dyes. From data submitted to FDA by cosmetic manu-
facturers under its voluntary program for filing cosmetic
product ingredient statements, we identified, as shown in
the following table, 26 hair dye products that contained
benzidine-derived azo colors.
Benzidine-derived Number of hair dye
azo color products containing color
Direct Black 38 7
Direct Black 131 4
Direct Blue 6 1
Direct Brown 1 2
Direct Brown 1:2 2
Direct Brown 2 6
Direct b;own 31 4
Direct Brown 154
26
All of the identified oroducts were temporary rinses.
FDA officials told us, however, that benzidine-derived colorsmay also be used in semipermanent hair dyes. Because of the
limited participation in the voluntary program, the total
number of products containing the eight benzidine-derived azocolors could not be determined.
Two of the eight colors were included in the New York
University study, and one of them--Direct Black 38--also
reportedly was used by the Japanese kimono painters who
developed an increased incidence of cancer.
e
The university researchers concluded that
"It is not our intent to imply that all azo
dyes are biologicaly [sic] reduced to car-
cinogens, but those derived from carcinogenic
aromatic amines should receive particular
attention."
The CTFA dictionary lists other azo colors derived from
toluene-2,4-diamine, toluene-2,4-diamine sulfate, and
o-tolidine, each of which is a known or a suspected animal
carcinogen.
OTHER SUSPECTED CARCINOGENS IN TEMPORARY
AND SEMIPERMANENT HAIR DYES
Eleven other colors liEted as suspected carcinogens in
the 1976 NIOSH Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Sub-
stances were listed in the CTFA Cosmetic Ingredient Dic-
tionary as available for use in coal tar hair dyes. The
NIOSH registry lists the studies upon which the list is
based. Neither we nor NIOSH, however, have reviewed the
adequacy of the studies or the appropriateness of the
studies as a basis for determining the safety of the colors
for use in hair dyes.
The table below lists the 11 colors, the animal species
in which the study was made, and the route by which the color
was administered to the animal.
Route of
Color Test animal administration
Acid Blue 9 Rat Subcutaneous
Rat Parenteral
Acid Blue 9 Rat Subcutaneous
ammonium salt Rat Parenteral
Acid Blue 74 Rat Subcutaneous
Acid Red 18 Rat Oral
Acid Red 87 Rat Subcutaneous
Acid Yellow 73
sodium salt Rat Subcutaneous
Basic Orange 2 Mouse Oral
Basic Violet 10 Rat Subcutaneous
Disperse Yellow 3 a/Not identified Not identified
Pigment Red 53 a/Not identified Not identified
Pigment Red 53:1 a/Not identified Not identified
a/Reviewed by the World Health Organization's International
Agency for Research on Cancer. Available data were in-
definite with respect to carcinogenicity.
9
Although the CTFA dictionary indicated that these colorsare available for use in coal tar hair dyes, we were not readily able to identify individual products that containthe 11 colors.
POSSIBLE CARCINOGENICITY
OF PERMANENT HAIR DYES
Screening tests and animal-feeding studies Provide addi-tional evidence that some widely used permanent hair dye in-gredients may be carcinogenic or mutagenic. CTFA has ques-tioned the appropriateness of such studies for determiningthe safety of hair dye products and has cited certain animal-skin-painting studies to support the safety of these products.However, some scientists have questioned the adequacy of the studies cited by CTFA to establish the safety o'f coal tarhair dyes.
We reviewed some of the more significant studies, whichare briefly discussed below.
Screening tests
University of California researchers have developed avery sensitive and simple bacterial screening test for detect-ing chemical mutagens. The test is also believed to offerstrong evidence of possible carcinogenicity. The researchersreported that 85 percent of the chemicals found carcinogenicin animal studies were detected as mutagens in the bacterialtest. By contrast, less than 10 percent of the chemicals classified as noncarcinogenic in animal studies showed muta-genic potential in the bacterial tests.
The researchers subjected 169 marketed permanent hairdyes to the bacterial test. The dyes -'re tested both beforeand after mixing with hydrogen peroxide. Of the 169 dyestested, 150 (89 percent) were found to be mutagenic. Mostof the dyes retained their mutagenic activity after mixingwith hydrogen peroxide. The researchers also tested 25 semi-permanent type hair dyes and found mot to be mutagenic.
In addition, the researchers obtained from industry rep- resentatives 18 chemicals used in permanent hair dyes andtested them for mutagenic properties. Nine of the 18 showed
10
various degrees of mutagenicity 1/. Oxidation by hydrogenperoxide caused three of the chemicals to become stronglymutagenic.
According to an official from FDA's Division of Cosme-tics Technology, although screening tests offer strong indi-cations of possible carcinogenicity and mutagenicity, theyalone do not provide sufficient evidence to conclude that a substance is harmful to humans. The official stated thatsuch tests need corroboration by tests on animals.
National Cancer Institute studies
The National Cancer Institute (NCI) has initiated animalstudies on the carcinogenicity of 16 coal tar hair dye in-gredients. The studies, which were being performed by con-tractors, involve feeding the dye ingredients to rats andmice or applying the dye ingredient to the skin of rabbitsand mice.
As :f October 1.977 NCI had not completed the analysisof any of the studies. According to an NCI official, thecompletion of NCI's analysis of many of the studies has beendelayed by higher priority work involving pesticides and in- dustrial solvents. NCI's Associate Ditector for Carcino-genesis Testing Program said, however, that because of thestructural similarity of the coal tar colors being testedto known carcinogens, he expects many of them to be foundcarcinogenic. He said that analysis probably would nGo becompleted before the spring of 1978.
On September 2, 1977, the FDA Commissioner wrote to theNCI Director requesting that priority be given to completionof the evaluations of 2,4-diaminoanisole, toluene-2,4-diamine,and any other ingredients which show positive effects. Theletter s-ated:
l/The nine ingredients were: 2,4-diaminoanisole, 4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine, 2-nitro-p-phenylenediamine,2,5-diaminoanisole, 2-amino-5-nitrophenol, m-phenylene-diamine, o-phenylenediamine, 2-amino-4-nitrophenol, andtoluene-2,5-diamine.
11
"Possible positive results with respect totwo of the compounds studied, in particular, 2,4-diaminoanisole (2,4 DAA) and toluene-2,4-diamine (2,4 TDA) 1/ have attracted our atten-tion. In addition, there is evidence thatcompounds such as these do penetrate intactskin.
"In light of this and the extensive use ofhair dyes * * * the need to confirm the con-clusions suggested by preliminary reviews inan orderly scientific manner is obvious."
By letter dated October 18, 1977, NCI's AssociateDirector for Carcinogenesis Testing Program advised the FDA Commissioner that NCI had found both 2,4-diaminoanisole and toluene-2,4-diamine carcinogenic in animals. The AssociateDirector gave FDA a draft of a technical report on 2,4-diaminoanisole and advised FDA that results of the other study would be submitted to the "Journal of the NationalCancer Institute" for publication.
By letter dated October 21, 1977, the Acting Director of FDA's Bureau of Foods notified NCI that FDA was beginning an immediate evaluation of the draft technical report on 2,4-diaminoanisole.
On October 17, 1977, the Environmental Defense Fund, Inc. (EDF), a private nonprofit national consumer organization, petitioned FDA to require all hair dye products containing 2,4-diaminoanisole or 2,4-diaminoanisole sulfate to bear a cancer warning label. EDF stated that its evaluation of the data on 2,4-diaminoanisole comniled, but not yet released by NCI, showed the dye to be carcinogenic in both rats and mice following oral ingestion. EDF noted that the dye caused a statistically significant increase in certain types of tumors in male and female rats and mice.
2,4-diaminoanisole is a basic component of most Derma-nent hair dyes. We identified, from data submitted by manu- facturers to FrA, 407 hair dye products containing 2,4-diaminoanJsole or 2,4-diaminoanisole sulfate.
I/Most cosmetic manufacturers stopped using toluene- 2,4-diamine in hair dyes after it was found to causecancer in laboratory animals. However, data submittedto FDA under its voluntary program for filing cosmetic product ingredient statements indicates that it is stillused in at least seven permanent hair dye products.
12
Skin-painting studies
Skin-painting stLdies involve applying a chemical or a
chemical mixture to the qkin of the test animal. Because
topical application more closely approximates the actual
conditions of hair dye use and permits testing the actual
mixture of compounds produced during oxidation, CTFA believes
that only skin-painting studies can offer meaningful results
on hair dye carcinogenicity.
CTFA noted that 2,4-diaminoanisole and toluene-2,4-diamine
had been included in five skin-painting studies in which no
problems had been found. While some researchers recognize
the usefulness of skin-painting studies; they have questioned
the adequacy of the studies performed. Two of these studies
are discussed below.
Study 1 1/ involved the twice weekly application of
toluene-2,5-dlamine, either alone in a vehicle (a carboxy-
methylcellulose gel) or in a mixture with two other hair dye
ingredients (resorcinol and 2,4-diaminoanisole) to the shaved
dorsal skin of Sprague-Dawley rats for 2 years. Two control
groups were used; one group was treated with the vehicle only
and the other group remained untreated. No positive control
group was used (i.e., no group received a known carcinogen).
All rats surviving the 2-year application period were observed
for another 6 months.
The researchers reported:
--There was no evidence that the hair dye ingredients
caused any adverse effects.
--There was no difference between the control and
treated rats with respect to lifespan or the type
and the incidence of tumors.
--There were no tumors or other skin reactions at the
site of application.
--Histopathological studies of the liver, kidney, and
lungs provided no evidence of degenerative change or
functional disturbance.
1/Kinkel, H. J., and Holzmann, S., "Study of Long-term
Percutaneous Toxicity and Carcinogenicity of Hair Dyes
(Oxidizing Dyes) in Rats," Food Cosmetic Toxicology,
vol. 11, pp. 641-648, Pergamon Press, 1973.
13
However, University of California researchers questionedthe usefulness of the study in evaluating the safety of hair dyes, because of the small number of animals and low dosagesused in the study. They noted that experiment could not detect a chemical that increased tht *ience of canter inthe population by 5 percent.
Study 2 1/ involved applying one of three different hairdye formulations 2/ to the skin of mice. Each formulation,and a control formulation without a dye intermediate, wasadministered, after n'xing with hydrogen peroxide, to two groups of mice--one weekly and one every 2 weeks foL18 months. A positive control group and an untreated con-trol group were also used.
The researchers reported that no evidence of toxicityor carcinogenicity had been noted. They noted that one in-gr{.ient used in the tests, toluene-2,4-diamine, had pre-viously been shown to cause liver cancer when fed to rats.
The University of California researchers, however, be-lieved that this study was also inadequate for evaluatingsafety for humans. They noted that, compared to the Dre-vious study, smaller doses had been used, the dyeingsoccurred weekly or every 2 weeks rather than twice a week,and the animals had been sacrificed after only 18 months.
EPIDEMIOLOGICAL STUDIES
Epidemiology is a science that deals with the incidence, distribution, and control of disease in a given population.Epidemiological studies compare the incidence of a disease,such as bladder cancer, in a population exposed to a parti-cular chemical to the incidence of the disease in an un-exposed population in order to identify causes for thedisease. The two populations should be closely matchedaccording to such factors as age, sex, and smoking habits.
1/Burnett, C., Lanman, B., Giovacchini, R., Wolcott, G.,Scala, R., and Keplinger, M., "Long-Term Toxicity Studieson Oxidation Hair Dyes," Food Cosmetic Toxicology, vol. 13,pp. 353-357, Pergamon Press, 1975.
2/Each formulation contained oleic acid, isopropanol, sodiumsulphite, ammonia, toluene-2.5-diamine sulphate,p-phenylenediamine, resorcinul, and deionized water. In addition, each formulation contained one of the following:toluene-2,4-diamine base, 2,4-diaminoanisolc sulphate, orm-phenylenediamine base.
14
Although extensive epidemiological studies have not been
performed for users of coal tar hair dyes, two studies on
breast cancer patients have been performed with conflicting
results. However, deficiencies have been noted in both
studies.
In one study 1/ a New lork physician compared the use
of coal tar hair dyes _..:ong his women breast cancer patients
to use of the dyes by women of the same age who did not have
breast cancer. The study showed that 87 of 100 breast cancer
patients had been longtime ;over 5 years) users of coal tar
hair dyes whereas only 26 percent of the women without breast
cancer were longtime users. The women ''are apparently matched
by age, but not by other factors which could affect the in-
cidence of cancer, such as smoking habits.
In the second study 2/ 191 women with breast cancer and
561 women without breast cancer were matched according to
age, marital status, and social class. Althouoh data on
factors known to affect the incidence of breast cancer was
obtained from the women, the women were not matched according
to those factors. The study showed no relationship between
breast cancer and use of hair dyes.
According to the October ].7, 1977, EDF petition to FDA,
the second study is inadequate because of the short followup
p _lod. EDF maintains that the latent period fr development
of cancer after exposure to hair dye use will probably be
over 15 years, but too few women in the study had used hair
dyes for more than 14 or 15 years before cancer diagnosis to
make the data useful.
l/Shafer, N., and Shafer, R. W., "Potential of Carcinogenic
Effects of Hair Dyes,' New York State Journal of Medicine,
March 1976, pp. 394-396.
2/Kinlen, L. J., Harris, R., Garrod, A., and Rodriquez, K.,
"Use of Hair Dyes by Patients with Brecst Cancer: A Case
Control Study," British Medical Journal, 1977, vol. 2,
pp. 366--368.
15
CHAPTER 3
NEED TO REPEAL HAIR DYE EXEMPTIONS
Although coal tar hair dyes expose consumers to poten-
tially serious hazards, FDA cannot effectively regulate them
because it lacks adequate legislative authority. The FD&C
Act requires cosmetics to be properly labeled and to be un-
adulterated. However, coal tar hair dyes whose labeling con-
tains a prescribed statutory warning concerning possible skin
irritation and blindness are exempt from the adulteration pro-
visions of the act. Because the labeling of most such dyes
bears the statutory warning, they are generally exempt from
FDA regulation under the adulteration provisions even if they
pose hazards, such as cancer, not covered by the statutory
warning.
COAL TAR HAIR DYE EXEMPTIONS
Section 601(a) of the act states that a cosmetic shall
be deemed to be adulterated if it bears or contains any
poisonous or deleterious substance that may render it in-
jurious to users under normal use. It further states, how-
ever, that:
"* * * this provision shall not apply to coal-
tar hair dye, the label of which bears the
following legend conspicuously displayed there-
on: 'Caution--This product contains ingre-
dients which may cause skin irritation on cer-
tain individuals and a preliminary test accord-
ing to accompanying directions should first be
made. This product must not be used for dyeing
the eyelashes or eyebrows; to do so may cause
blindness.', and the labeling of which bears
adequate directions for such preliminary test-
ing.1"
According to the November 1974 issue of the FDA Consumer,
an agency periodical, the coal tar hair dye exemption was
granted because industry persuasively argued that while
the dyes could not meet safety standards of the FD&C Act,
they should nonetheless be sold to meet popular demand.
Since July 12, 1960, the Color Additive Amendments to
the FD&C Act (Public Law t6-618) hare required the estab-
lishment of regulations listing color additives that are
safe for use in food, drugs, and cosmetics. Under these
16
amendments, FDA must approve a color additive for safetybefore its use in cosmetics is permitted. However, coaltar hair dyes were granted an exemption from the coloradditive provisions of the FD&C Act. Under section 601(e),a cosmetic is considered adulterated:
"If it is not a hair dye and it is, or itbears or contains, a color additive which isunsafe within the meaning of section 706(a)."
The U.S. Court of Appeals, Second Circuit, ruled inthe 1969 case of Toilet Goods Association v. Finch (419 F.2d 21 (1969)) that the-above exemption-aoes not apply tocoloring ingredients in hair dyes not derived from coaltar, such as the metallic and vegetable dyes. The courtnoted that the legislative history of the Color AdditiveAmendments contained no indication that the Congress in-tended to broaden the 601(a) exemption.
Under section 602 a cosmetic is considered misbrandedif its labeling is false or misleading in any particular.Coal tar hair dyes are not exempt from the misbranding pro-visions of the act.
EXEMPTIONS HINDER EFFECTIVE REGULATION
Many coal tar hair dye products contain ingredients thathave been shown to cause cancer in humans or animals. Ordi-narily FDA could ban the use of such ingredients in a cosme-tic product under the adulteration provisions of the act, ifthe substance may cause cancer under the conditions of useof the cosmetic. Because of the exemption, however, FDA can-not ban the use of a cancer-causing coal tar hair dye evenif the evidence suggests that the dye is a human carcinogen,such as a hair dye containing a benzidine-derived azo color.
In recognition of this problem, FDA in 1963 issued reg-ulations defining the conditions under which the exemptionapplied. The regulation excluded from the exemption anycoal tar hair dyes which posed a hazard that was differentfrom those covered by the statutory warning (28 F.R. 6439,June 22, 1963). According to the regulation,
"If the poisonous or deleterious substancein the 'hair dye' is one to which the cau-tion is inapplicable and for which patch-testing provides no safeguard, the exemp-tion does not apply * * I
-7
A patch test is a test on the forearm, on the bend of the
elbow, or behind the ear to detect allergic sensitivity.
However, in the 1969 case the U.S. Court of Appeals
upheld a district court ruling (278 F. Supp. 786) invalidat-
ing that portion of the regulation. The court of appeals
found that
"The Government's argument should indeed be
appealing to a legisla':or--what good is the
warning to make a patch test if the test will
not disclose the danger? But a court must
take the statute as it is, and Congress wrote
with great specificity. Whether it relied
solely on the patch test warning because it
was unaware in 1938 that coal-tar dyes might
have damaging effects not detectable by such
a test, as the Government asserts but the
industry denies, OL because it thought such
instances so rare as not to warrant indenta-
tion of the exemption, the language is too
clear for us to read it as meaning something
different from what it so plainly says, at
least in the absence of persuasive legisla-
tive history." (419 F. 2d 21, 29 (1969))
Thus the court ruled that even if a coal tar hair dye
were found to cause cancer or some other adverse effect
which would not be detected by a patch test, the dye could
not be removed from the market under the adulteration pro-
visions of the FD&C Act if the products' labeling bore the
statutory warning. In 1971 FDA revised the regulation to
delete the objectionable statement (36 F.R. 16902, Aug. 25,
1971).
In the opinion of an FDA attorney, FDA could probably
require under the misbranding provisions of the act that an
additional warning be placed on the labeling of coal tar
hair dyes posing hazards under conditions of use, such as
cancer not covered by the statutory warnings.
However, because section 601(e) exempts coal tar hair
dyes from the color additives provisions of the act, FDA
cannot require the manufacturers of these hair dyes to prove
the safety of their products under the color additive re-
quirements, and, therefore, FDA has the burden of proof for
any additional label warnings it may require. By contrast,
FDA can require the manufacturers of colors used in metallic
and vegetable hair dyes to prove the safety of their colors
18
because the law does not similarily exempt these hair dyeproducts from the color additive requirements.
In its October 17, 1977, petition to FDA, EDF asked theagency to require the following warning on labels of coaltar hair dyes containing 2,4-diaminoanisole.
"This product contains the chemical 2,4 DAA[2,4-diaminoanisole], which can enter yourbloodstream through your scalp and has beenshown to cause cancer in animals."
FDA is considering this matter. As of October 31, 1977, FDAhad not responded to the petition or taken action to requirecancer warning labels on other coal tar hair dyes containingknown animal carcinogens, such as toluene-2,4-diamine andFD&C Red No. 2.
CONCLUSIONS
Many coal tar hair dyes contain known or suspected car-cinogen; that pose a potential hazard to the consumer becausethey may be absorbed through the skin and scalp. However,the exemptions in the FD&C Act do not permit FDA to effec-tively regulate coal tar hair dye products in that they barFDA from banning or restricting the use of coal tar hair dyesthat may cause cancer under the conditions of use.
Although coal tar hair dyes are subject to FDA labelingrequirements, the agency has not used this authority to re-quire a cancer warning on labels of coal tar hair dyes con-taining known human or animal carcinogens. The issuance ofsuch regulations is made difficult by the fact that the burdenof proof for their need rests with FDA, rather than the manu-facturers. If the coal tar hair dye exemptions were repealed,the color ingredients used in these dyes would be subject,similar to other color additives, to premarket approval byFDA for safety and manufacturers would have to prove thesafety of the colors.
In February 1974 testimony before the Subcommittee onHealth, Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare, FDAsupported the elimination of the exemptLins. FDA testifiedthat:
"coal tar hair d-es should not receive privilegedtreatment but should be subject to the same regu-lation and safety appraisal as other cosmetics."
19
Therefore, to strengthen regulation of coal tar hairdyes and to provide a greater measure of protection to users,
the exemptions should be repealed.
RECOMMENDATION TO THE SECRETARY, HEW
We recommend that the Secretary, HEW, direct the FDACommissioner to evaluate safety data on coal tar hair dyeingredients and require, where applicable, a cancer or otherappropriate warning on product labels.
RECOMMENDATION TO THE CONGRESS
To permit FDA to better regulate coal tar hair dyes,we recommend that the Congress repeal exemptions in sec-tions 601(a) and 601(e) of the FD&C Act concerning these
dyes.
(10859) 2020
