Serotonin Syndrome
Jacqueline Volpi-Abadie, MD,* Adam M. Kaye, PharmD, FASCP, FCPhA,/C160
Alan David Kaye, MD, PhD/C224
*Department of Anesthesiology, Ochsner Clinic Foundation, New Orleans, LA
/C160Thomas J. Long School of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, CA
/C224Departments of Anesthesiology and Pharmacology, Louisiana State University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA
ABSTRACT
Background: Serotonin syndrome is a potentially life-threaten-
ing syndrome that is precipitated by the use of serotonergic
drugs and overactivation of both the peripheral and centralpostsynaptic 5HT-1A and, most notably, 5HT-2A receptors.
This syndrome consists of a combination of mental status
changes, neuromuscular hyperactivity, and autonomic hyper-activity. Serotonin syndrome can occur via the therapeutic useof serotonergic drugs alone, an intentional overdose of
serotonergic drugs, or classically, as a result of a complex
drug interaction between two serotonergic drugs that work bydifferent mechanisms. A multitude of drug combinations can
result in serotonin syndrome.
Methods: This review describes the presentation and
management of serotonin syndrome and discusses the drugs
and interactions that can precipitate this syndrome with the
goal of making physicians more alert and aware of thispotentially fatal yet preventable syndrome.
Conclusion: Many commonly used medications have proven to
be the culprits of serotonin syndrome. Proper education and
awareness about serotoni n syndrome will improve the
accuracy of diagnosis and promote the institution of the
appropriate treatment that may prevent significant morbidity
and mortality.INTRODUCTION
The actual incidence of serotonin syndrome is
unknown. The number of actual cases is likely much
greater than the actual reported cases. Serotoninsyndrome is often not diagnosed secondary to mild
symptoms that are attributed to being a general side
effect of treatment, unawareness of the syndrome,
varying diagnostic criteria, or misdiagnosis.
1,2The
number of reported cases of serotonin syndrome hasincreased, probably secondary to the widespread use
of these drugs and to the increasing awareness of this
syndrome.
1,2Serotonin syndrome has been docu-
mented in all age groups.2
PRESENTATION
The presentation of serotonin syndrome is ex-
tremely variable, ranging from mild symptoms to a
life-threatening syndrome. Many reports prefer to call
this serotonin toxicity rather than syndrome due to itswide range of symptoms and toxicity.
3Symptoms
usually begin within 24 hours of an increased dose of
a serotonergic agent, the addition of another seroto-nergic agent to a drug regimen, or overdosing. Most
patients will seek help at a hospital within 6 hours;
however, patients with mild symptoms may have a
more subacute or chronic presentation, as in the case
by Houlihan.
4
Patients will present with a triad of symptoms that
range in severity (Table 1). In mild cases, thepredominating features are mild hypertension and
tachycardia, mydriasis, diaphoresis, shivering, tremor,
myoclonus, and hyperreflexia. Patients with a mildsyndrome are usually afebrile. Patients with a moder-
ate syndrome usually have the above symptoms plus
hyperthermia (40 8C), hyperactive bowel sounds,
horizontal ocular clonus, mild agitation, hypervigi-
lance, and pressured speech. In severe cases,patients have all of the above symptoms plus
hyperthermia greater than 41.1 8C, dramatic swings
in pulse rate and blood pressure, delirium, and
muscle rigidity. Severe cases may result in complica-
tions, such as seizures, rhabdomyolysis, myoglobin-uria, metabolic acidosis, renal failure, acuteAddress correspondence to
Alan David Kaye, MD, PhDProfessor and ChairmanDepartment of AnesthesiologyLouisiana State University School of Medicine1542 Tulane Ave., Room 656New Orleans, LA 70112Tel: (504) 568-2319
Fax: (504) 568-2317
Email: akaye@lsuhsc.edu
Keywords: Drug toxicity, serotonin syndromeThe authors have no financial or proprietary interest in the subject
matter of this article .
Volume 13, Number 4, Winter 2013 533The Ochsner Journal 13:533–540, 2013
/C211Academic Division of Ochsner Clinic Foundationrespiratory distress syndr ome, respiratory failure,
diffuse intravascular clotting, coma, and death.1,2
The symptoms of hyperreflexia, rigidity, and clonustend to be more prominent in the lower extremities.
1,2
Fluoxetine and its metabolite norfluoxetine have
longer half-lives (1 week and 2.5 weeks, respectively)
than other selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors(SSRIs) and can therefore precipitate this syndrome
even if discontinued for up to 6 weeks before the
patients begin taking another serotonergic agent.These drugs, along with irreversible monoamine
oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), can cause symptoms to
persist for days to weeks even with treatment.
1,2
DIAGNOSIS
Serotonin syndrome is a diagnosis of exclusion.
No single diagnostic test can confirm this syn-drome.
2,4The diagnostic gold standard for serotonin
syndrome is diagnosis by a medical toxicologist.3In a
clinical setting, however, the suspicion of serotoninsyndrome and diagnosis must occur rapidly so
treatment can prevent the morbidity and mortality
associated with this condition. Therefore, a diagnosisof serotonin syndrome is entirely clinical and is based
on the history and physical examination along withhistory of the patient’s use of a serotonergic drug.
Important components of the history include prescrip-
tion drug use, over-the-counter medication anddietary supplement use, illicit substance use, any
recent changes in dosing, or the addition of new
drugs to a drug regimen. The onset and description of
symptoms and the presence of any comorbidities are
of utmost importance. Certain comorbidities, such as
depression and chronic pain, may alert the clinician to
the use of drugs that can precipitate serotoninsyndrome. Also, a higher incidence of serotonin
syndrome has been reported in patients with end-
stage renal disease who are on selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and hemodialysis. These
patients are prone to developing serotonin toxicity,
suggesting that this increased toxicity could be
related to a decrease in renal functioning.
5An integral
part of the physical examination for diagnosing
serotonin syndrome is the neurological examination.6
Several diagnostic criteria have been proposed for
serotonin syndrome. The most recent diagnostic
criteria are the Hunter Serotonin Toxicity Criteria
(HSTC) that have replaced the older Sternbach
Criteria in an attempt to simplify the diagnosis. When
compared to the gold standard of diagnosis by a
medical toxicologist, the HSTC are more sensitive
(84% versus 75%) and specific (97% versus 96%) thanthe Sternbach criteria. The HSTC include the use of a
serotonergic agent plus 1 of the 5 following criteria:
spontaneous clonus, inducible clonus plus agitation
or diaphoresis, ocular clonus plus agitation or
diaphoresis, tremor and hyperreflexia, hypertonia
and a temperature above 38 8C plus ocular or
inducible clonus.
3Clonus and hyperreflexia are most
important for the diagnosis; however, severe muscle
rigidity may mask these symptoms. Prominent fea-
tures of life-threatening cases include hyperthermia
(>38.5 8C), peripheral hypertonicity, and truncal rigid-
ity because of the high risk of progression to
respiratory failure.3Some nonspecific laboratory
abnormalities may be seen in serotonin syndrome:leukocytosis, low bicarbonate level, elevated creati-
nine level, and elevated transaminases. Serum
serotonin concentrations do not correlate with the
severity of this syndrome.
1
The many differential diagnoses to consider when
diagnosing serotonin syndrome include neuroleptic
malignant syndrome (NMS), malignant hyperthermia,
anticholinergic toxicity, serotonergic discontinuation
syndrome, sympathomimetic drug intoxication, men-
ingitis, encephalitis, heat stroke, and central hyper-thermia. Some diagnoses may be distinguished from
serotonin syndrome by the clinical features, medica-
tion usage, and time course. The distinguishingTable 1. Symptomatology Triad Associated With Serotonin
Syndrome
Symptom Cluster Symptomatology
Altered Mental Status Agitation
AnxietyDisorientationRestlessnessExcitement
Neuromuscular Abnormalities Tremors
ClonusHyperreflexia
Muscle rigidity
Bilateral Babinski signsAkisthesia
Autonomic Hyperactivity Hypertension
TachycardiaTachypneaHyperthermiaMydriasis
Diaphoresis
D r ym u c o u sm e m b r a n e sFlushed skinShiveringVomitingDiarrheaHyperactive bowel soundsArrhythmiasSerotonin Syndrome
534 The Ochsner Journalfeatures of NMS, malignant hyperthermia, and anti-
cholinergic toxicity are listed in Table 2.
MECHANISM
Serotonin syndrome and its spectrum of symp-
toms are a product of the overactivation of both the
central and peripheral serotonin receptors as a resultof high levels of serotonin. Serotonin (5-hydroxytryp-tamine [5-HT]) is formed from the decarboxylationand hydroxylation of tryptophan, which is then storedin vesicles and released into the synaptic cleft when
stimulated. 5-HT is metabolized by monoamine
oxidase-A (MAO-A) into 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid.Serotonin can bind to at least 7 families of 5-HTreceptors.
2,7No single receptor is responsible for the
development of serotonin syndrome; however, sev-
eral studies provide evidence that the 5HT-2A
receptors are the most important receptors in-volved.
2,8
Serotonin can act both peripherally and centrally.
Peripheral serotonin is produced primarily in the
enterochromaffin cells of the gastrointestinal (GI)
tract. It functions to stimulate vasoconstriction, uterinecontraction, bronchoconstr iction, GI motility, and
platelet aggregation. Central serotonin is present inthe midline raphe nuclei of the brainstem from themidbrain to the medulla. It functions to inhibit
excitatory neurotransmission and to modulate wake-
fulness, attention, affective behavior (anxiety anddepression), sexual behavior, appetite, thermoregu-lation, motor tone, migraine, emesis, nociception, andaggression.
2,9In several animal studies, high levels of noradren-
aline seen during the course of serotonin syndrome
may also have contributed to the symptoms.8,10N-
methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-receptor antagonists,
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and dopamine
may also play a role in serotonin syndrome, but theirimpact is still unclear.
10
The drugs that have been reported to cause
serotonin syndrome and the mechanism of each arelisted in Table 3. The mechanisms are as follows:
inhibition of serotonin upt ake, decreased serotonin
metabolism, increased serotonin synthesis, in-
creased serotonin release, and activation of seroto-
nergic receptors. Another mechanism involves theinhibition of certain cytochrome P450 (CYP450)
enzymes by the SSRIs themselves, including
CYP2D6 and CYP3A4.
11,12This inhibition results in
the accumulation of certain serotonergic drugs
(venlafaxine, methadone, t ramadol, oxycodone, ris-
peridone, dextromethorpha n, and phentermine) that
are usually metabolized b y these enzymes, creating
an exacerbation loop in wh ich the SSRI inhibits the
metabolism of a certain drug , which in turn increases
serotonergic activity. Several studies discuss the
importance of this mechanism in the development ofserotonin syndrome with the concomitant use of an
SSRI with tramadol.
13,14Many drugs, in addition to
SSRIs, can inhibit these enzymes, resulting in the
accumulation of serotonergic drugs that are being
used simultaneously. Ciprofloxacin has been report-ed to cause serotonin syndrome via its CYP3A4
inhibition.
15A case report of serotonin syndromeTable 2. Differentiating Serotonin S yndrome Among Common Presentations
Disorder Causative Agent Onset/Resolution Symptoms
Serotonin Syndrome Postexposure to serotonin
agonistsDevelops within 24 hours;
resolves within 24 hours
with treatmentAltered mental status, muscle
rigidity (especially in the
lower extremities),hyperreflexia, increasedbowel sounds, diaphoresis
Neuroleptic Malignant
SyndromePostexposure to dopamine
antagonistsDevelops over a period of days
to weeks; resolves inapproximately 9 days withtreatmentNeuromuscular hypoactivity
manifesting as rigidity andbradyreflexia
Malignant Hyperthermia Postexposure to inhalational
anesthetics or depolarizingmuscle relaxants(succinylcholine)Develops within minutes or
within 24 hours; resolveswithin 24 to 48 hours withtreatmentRising end tidal carbon dioxide,
mottled skin with areas offlushing and cyanosis,rigidity and hyporeflexia
Anticholinergic Toxicity Postexposure to anticholinergic
agentsDevelops within 24 hours;
resolves within hours todays with treatmentUrinary retention, decreased
bowel sounds, hot and dryerythematous skin withnormal muscle tone and
reflexesVolpi-Abadie, J
Volume 13, Number 4, Winter 2013 535caused by the concomitant use of citalopram and
fluconazole suggested that the inhibition of
CYP2C19 by fluconazole resulted in the accumula-tion of its substrate citalopram.
16These studies
show the importance of understanding CYP450interactions in the development of serotonin syn-
drome. For an extensive list of the CYP enzymes and
the drugs that are inhibitors, inducers, or substratesfor each, refer to the CYP450 drug interactions
document.
17Table 3. Mechanisms of Serotonin Synd rome and the Drugs Associated with Each
Mechanism Associated Drugs
Inhibit Serotonin Uptake Amph etamines/weight loss drugs: phentermine
Antidepressants: bupropion, nefazodone, trazodone
Antiemetics: granisetron, ondansetron
Antihistamines: chlorpheniramine
Certain opiates: levomethorphan, levorphanol, meperidine, methadone, pentazocine, pethidine,
tapentadol, tramadol
Drugs of abuse: cocaine, MDMA ( ‘‘Ecstasy ’’)
Herbal supplements: St. John’s wort ( Hypericum perforatum )
Over-the-counter cold remedies: dextromethorphan
SNRIs: desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, venlafaxine
SSRIs: citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine , fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline
TCAs: amitriptyline, amoxapine, clomipramine, desipramine, doxepin, imipramine, maprotiline,
nortriptyline, protriptyline, trimipramine
Inhibit Serotonin
MetabolismAnxiolytics: buspirone
Herbal supplements: St. John’s wort ( Hypericum perforatum )
MAOIs: furazolidone, isocarboxazid, linezolid, methy lene blue, phenelzine, selegiline, Syrian rue,
tranylcypromine
Triptans: almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan, zolmitriptan
Increase Serotonin
SynthesisAmphetamines/weight loss drugs: phentermine
Dietary supplements: L-tryptophan
Drugs of abuse: cocaine
Increase Serotonin
ReleaseAntidepressants: mirtazapine
Amphetamines/weight loss drugs: phentermine
Certain opiates: meperidine, oxycodone, tramadol
Drugs of abuse: MDMA ( ‘‘Ecstasy ’’)
Over-the-counter cold remedies: dextromethorphan
Parkinson disease treatment/amino acid: L-dopa
Activate Serotonin
ReceptorsAnxiolytics: buspirone
Antidepressants: mirtazapine, trazodone
Antimigraines: dihydroergotamine, triptans
Certain opiates: fentanyl, meperidine
Drugs of abuse: LSD
Mood stabilizers: lithium
Prokinetic agents: metoclopramide
Inhibit CYP450
Microsomal OxidasesCYP2D6
Inhibitors: fluoxetine, sertraline
Substrates: dextromethorphan, oxycodone, phentermine, risperidone, tramadol
CYP3A4
Inhibitors: ciprofloxacin, ritonavir
Substrates: methadone, oxycodone, venlafaxine
CYP2C19
Inhibitors: fluconazole
Substrates: citalopram
LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; MAOI, monoamine oxidase inhibitor; MDMA, methylenedioxymethamphetamine; SNRI, serotonin-norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitor; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; TCA, tricyclic antidepressant.Serotonin Syndrome
536 The Ochsner JournalThe reported drug interactions that have caused
serotonin syndrome continue to increase and includemany different combinations of serotonergic drugs.Some of the reported drug combinations are listed inTable 4. The most well-known combination is an SSRIwith an MAOI. However, the combination of any 2serotonergic drugs can possibly precipitate thissyndrome and therefore should be used sparinglyor with great caution. Life-threatening cases tend tooccur with the use of an irreversible MAOI or withcombinations of serotonergic drugs rather than with
just the use of an SSRI alone.
2,3,18,19
Stanford et al claim that combining an SSRI with a
serotonin-releasing agent actually reduces the risk ofserotonin syndrome rather than increases it.
18The
proposed mechanism is via the impaired reuptakeand impaired retrotransport, which is caused byreuptake inhibitors. The combination of impairedreuptake and impaired retrotransport results in highlevels of serotonin in the synapse without a subse-quent uptake of serotonin into the cells to cause aneffect.
18This theory is supported by a review by Silins
et al of the use of MDMA and other serotonergicdrugs.
20In contrast, the combination of an SSRI with
an MAOI or a serotonin releaser with an MAOI doesresult in serotonin syndrome.
18
A critical value of serotonin appears to be
necessary for the development of serotonin syn-drome.
3,4A case reported by Houlihan showed the
development of serotonin syndrome when tramadol
was added to a venlafaxine and mirtazapine regi-men.
4This case report supports the idea that the
development of serotonin syndrome is concentrationdependent. Different patients present with serotoninsyndrome at varying drug dosages and combina-tions, suggesting that the critical value is likelydifferent for each individual and that individualvariability probably plays a role in the developmentof serotonin syndrome. One example of individualvariability includes possible genetic differences in theSERT gene, a serotonin transporter. An animal studyby Fox and colleagues showed that SERT-deficientmice exhibit increased susceptibility to serotoninsyndrome-like behavior when given serotonergicdrugs.
21Other proposed mechanisms of individual
variability include polymorphisms of CYP2D6 or of the
5HT-2A and 5HT-3B receptors.18
MANAGEMENT
The keys to management are discontinuing all
serotonergic agents, providing supportive care viastabilizing vital signs, giving oxygen to keep oxygensaturation greater than 93%, administering intrave-
nous fluids, providing continuous cardiac monitoring,
sedating with benzodiazepines, and possibly admin-istering serotonin antagonists. With treatment, sero-Table 4. Reported Drug Combinations Causing Serotonin
Syndrome
Drug Drug Combinations
MAOIs MAOI alone
M A O I sw i t hS S R I so rS N R I so rT C A so r
opiates
Methylene blue with paroxetine or
clomipramine
Phenelzine with meperidineTranylcypromine and imipramine
SSRIs SSRI alone
S S R I sw i t hM A O I so rS N R I so rT C A so r
opiates or triptans
Fluoxetine with carbamazepine or
phentermine or fentanyl
SNRIs SNRIs with MAOIs or TCAs or opiates
or triptans
Venlafaxine alone
Venlafaxine with lithium or calcineurin
inhibitors
Venlafaxine with mirtazapine and tramadolVenlafaxine with amitriptyline and
meperidine
Venlafaxine with mirtazapine or
tranylcypromine
Venlafaxine with methadone and
fluoxetine
Venlafaxine with methadone and
sertraline
Venlafaxine with tramadol and trazodone
and quetiapine
Other
AntidepressantsBuspirone with SSRIs
Mirtazapine aloneMirtazapine with SSRIs
Trazodone with amitriptyline and lithium
Opiates Opiates with MAOIs or SSRIs or SNRIs
or triptans
Tramadol aloneTramadol with mirtazapine and
olanzapine
Over-the-Counter
Cold RemediesDextromethorphan with SSRIs or
amitriptyline or chlorpheniramine
Dextromethorphan with risperidone and
amitriptyline
Atypical
AntipsychoticsOlanzapine with lithium and citalopram
Risperidone with fluoxetine or paroxetine
Antibiotics Ciprofloxacin with venlafaxine and
methadone
Fluconazole with citalopramLinezolid with SSRIs or tapentadol
Other L-tryptophan with SSRIs
MAOI, monoamine oxidase inhibitor; SNRI, serotonin-norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitor; SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; TCA,
tricyclic antidepressant.Volpi-Abadie, J
Volume 13, Number 4, Winter 2013 537tonin syndrome usually resolves within 24 hours.
Treatment for mild cases includes discontinuation ofthe serotonergic agent, support, sedation with ben-zodiazepines, and observation for at least 6 hours.Moderate cases can be treated as above with theaddition of a serotonin antagonist and admission tothe hospital for cardiac monitoring and observation. Insevere, life-threatening cases, the patient should betreated as above with the addition of sedation,
paralysis, and intubation/ventilation in the intensive
care unit.
1,2Table 5 provides an overview of man-
agement based on symptom severity.
The management of mild hypertension and
tachycardia includes benzodiazepines. Diazepam, aGABA-mimetic, has been studied the most and hasbeen shown to blunt the hyperadrenergic symptoms
of serotonin syndrome.
2,9,10Therefore, diazepam not
only works to sedate the patient, but it can alsocorrect mild hypertension and tachycardia andreduce fever.
10If a patient exhibits severe hyperten-
sion and tachycardia, short-acting esmolol or nitro-prusside should be used. Long-acting agents such aspropranolol should not be used because theseagents can cause hypotension and can masktachycardia. Masking tachycardia is undesirablebecause tachycardia can be used to follow treatmentresponse and patient improvement.
2,3Additionally,
propranolol is a 5HT-1A receptor antagonist, whichdid not help resolve serotonin syndrome in an animalstudy.
8If a patient presents with hypotension, which
can commonly occur with the concomitant use ofpropranolol and MAOIs, the preferred treatment is alow dose of direct-acting sympathomimetics, includ-
ing norepinephrine, epinephrine, and phenylephrine.
2
If a patient still remains agitated after the use of
benzodiazepines and stabilization of vital signs,serotonin antagonists can be administered; 5HT-2Areceptor antagonists seem to be the most effective.Animal studies have shown that because of their 5HT-
2A receptor antagonism, both cyproheptadine andchlorpromazine in high doses can be used to preventhyperthermia and lethality in serotonin syndrome.Cyproheptadine is the more potent 5HT-2A receptorantagonist and therefore may be more effective thanchlorpromazine.
8Several case reports have shown
that cyproheptadine provides symptomatic relief inmild to moderate cases of serotonin syndrome, but its
efficacy in severe cases has yet to be studied. Also,
cyproheptadine does not shorten the time course ofserotonin syndrome.
22,23The recommended dose of
cyproheptadine is an initial dose of 12 mg, with theaddition of 2 mg every 2 hours if symptoms persist. Amaintenance dose of 8 mg should be used every 6hours once the patient is stabilized.
1,24Chlorproma-
zine can cause severe orthostatic hypotension andtherefore should not be used in patients who arealready hypotensive.
2If a patient needs to be
restrained, chemical restraint is preferred over phys-ical restraint that can cause muscle contractions andlactic acidosis and worsen hyperthermia.
2
Minimizing excess muscle activity and cooling
measures can be used to treat hyperthermia. Antipy-retics are not useful for the treatment of hyperthermiain serotonin syndrome because the high temperatureis secondary to increased muscle activity and not dueto a change in the hypothalamic temperature setpoint.
2,9For temperatures greater than 41.1 8C, the
patient should be sedated, paralyzed with a non-depolarizing agent such as vecuronium, and intubat-ed. Succinylcholine should not be used because ofthe risk of hyperkalemia and possible worsening of
rhabdomyolysis.
1
Olanzapine and risperidone, atypical antipsychot-
ics, have been paradoxically reported to both inducea serotonin syndrome and to treat this syndrome.
9A
case report by Haslett and Kumar noted the devel-Table 5. Management of Serotonin Syndrome
Symptoms Management
Mild Mild hypertension, tachycardia,
mydriasis, diaphoresis, shivering, tremor,myoclonus, hyperreflexiaDiscontinue the offending agent/agents
Support via stabilizing vital signs, cooling measuresMild agitation, fever, hypertension, and t achycardia: benzodiazepines (diazepam)
Observe for at least 6 hours
Moderate Above plus temperature of at
least 40 8C, hyperactive bowel sounds,
ocular clonus, agitation, hypervigilance,pressured speechAll of the above
Severe agitation and hyperthermia: 5 HT-antagonist (cyproheptadine)
Admission to hospital for cardiac monitoring and observation
Severe Above plus temperature greater
than 41.1 8C, dramatic swings in pulse
rate and blood pressure, delirium,muscle rigidityAll of the above
Severe hypertension/tachycardia: esmolol or nitroprussideSedation and paralysis with a nondepolari zing agent and intubation/ventilation
Admission to the intensive care unitSerotonin Syndrome
538 The Ochsner Journalopment of serotonin syndrome after olanzapine was
added to a drug regimen of lithium and citalopram.
The mechanism is thought to be 5HT-2A and 5HT-3A
receptor antagonism by these atypical antipsychotics,
resulting in serotonin accumulation and cumulative
activation of 5HT-1A receptors. This mechanism is
also thought to be behind the serotonin syndrome
caused by mirtazapine and fentanyl.25,26On the other
hand, olanzapine and risperidone have been reported
to treat serotonin syndrome by way of their 5HT-2A
receptor antagonism.27,28
Dantrolene, used as treatment for malignant
hyperthermia, has not proven to be efficacious in
the treatment of serotonin syndrome in animal
models.8Bromocriptine, a dopamine agonist used
to treat neuroleptic malignant syndrome, may exac-
erbate serotonin syndrome by increasing serotonin
levels.2Neither of these agents plays a role in the
treatment of serotonin syndrome.
CONCLUSION
The prognosis of serotonin syndrome is favorable if
the patient is treated; therefore, physicians must be
astute and aware of the possibility of this life-
threatening syndrome. If the diagnosis is unclear,physicians should discontinue any serotonergic
agents and start supportive care. There is no way to
predict who will develop serotonin syndrome. The best
way to prevent this syndrome is to avoid multidrug
regimens and to discontinue any serotonergic agent
before starting another. Furthermore, since new drug
combinations that cause serotonin syndrome are
continuously being discovered and serotonin syn-
drome occurs in each individual at different drug
dosages and combinations, it is advisable that if 2
serotonergic drugs are used together, they be used
with caution. If a patient is experiencing a mild form of
serotonin syndrome but requires the medication, it is
acceptable to assess the risks and benefits of the
treatment and to decide whether the patient should
remain on the drug. Patients with mild cases must be
monitored closely for any worsening of symptoms and
should be educated on the signs and symptoms of
serotonin syndrome. Because of the widespread use
of serotonergic drugs, clinicians must maintain a high
clinical suspicion for serotonin syndrome; early recog-
nition and treatment of serotonin syndrome can
prevent significant morbidity and mortality.
REFERENCES
1. Boyer EW, Traub SJ, Grayzel J. Serotonin syndrome. In:
UpToDate . Waltham, MA: UpToDate; 2010. Accessed 28
September 2011.
2. Boyer EW, Shannon M. The serotonin syndrome. N Engl J Med .
2005 Mar 17;352(11):1112-1120. Erratum in: N Engl J Med .2 0 0 7
Jun 7;356(23):2437. N Engl J Med . 2009 Oct 22;361(17):1714.3. Dunkley EJ, Isbister GK, Sibbritt D, Dawson AH, Whyte IM. The
Hunter Serotonin Toxicity Criteria: simple and accurate diagnosticdecision rules for serotonin toxicity. QJM . 2003 Sep;96(9):635-642.
4. Houlihan DJ. Serotonin syndrome resulting from coadministration
of tramadol, venlafaxine, and mirtazapine. Ann Pharmacother .
2004 Mar;38(3):411-413. Epub 2004 Jan 23.
5. Chander WP, Singh N, Mukhiya GK. Serotonin syndrome in
maintenance haemodialysis patients following sertraline treatmentfor depression. J Indian Med Assoc . 2011 Jan;109(1):36-37.
6. Arora B, Kannikeswaran N. The serotonin syndrome - the need for
physician’s awareness. Int J Emerg Med . 2010 Aug 20;3(4):
373-377.
7. Morgan GE, Mikhail MS, Murray MJ, eds. Clinical
Anesthesiology .4
thed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2006.
8. Nisijima K, Yoshino T, Yui K, Katoh S. Potent serotonin (5-HT)(2A)
receptor antagonists completely prevent the development of
hyperthermia in an animal model of the 5-HT syndrome. Brain Res .
2001 Jan 26;890(1):23-31.
9. Dvir Y, Smallwood P. Serotonin syndrome: a complex but easily
avoidable condition. Gen Hosp Psychiatry . 2008 May-Jun;30(3):
284-287.
10. Nisijima K, Shioda K, Yoshino T, Takano K, Kato S. Diazepam and
chlormethiazole attenuate the development of hyperthermia in ananimal model of the serotonin syndrome. Neurochem Int . 2003
Jul;43(2):155-164.
11. Hardman JG, Limbird LE, Molinoff PB, Ruddon RW, Gilman AG,
eds. Goodman and Gilman’s -The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics .9
thed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 1996.
12. Mitchell PB. Drug interactions of clinical significance with selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Drug Saf . 1997 Dec;17(6):390-406.
13. Lange-Asschenfeldt C, Weigmann H, Hiemke C, Mann K.
Serotonin syndrome as a result of fluoxetine in a patient with
tramadol abuse: plasma level-correlated symptomatology. J Clin
Psychopharmacol . 2002 Aug;22(4):440-441.
14. Mason BJ, Blackburn KH. Possible serotonin syndrome
associated with tramadol and sertraline coadministration. Ann
Pharmacother . 1997 Feb;31(2):175-177.
15. Lee J, Franz L, Goforth HW. Serotonin syndrome in a chronic-pain
patient receiving concurrent methadone, ciprofloxacin, andvenlafaxine. Psychosomatics . 2009 Nov-Dec;50(6):638-639.
16. Levin TT, Cortes-Ladino A, Weiss M, Palomba ML. Life-
threatening serotonin toxicity due to a citalopram-fluconazoledrug interaction: case reports and discussion. Gen Hosp
Psychiatry . 2008 Jul-Aug;30(4):372-377.
17. Cytochrome P450 drug interactions. Pharmacist’s
Letter/Prescriber’s Letter . 2006;22(2): 220233. (Full update
October 2009).
18. Stanford SC, Stanford BJ, Gillman PK. Risk of severe serotonin
toxicity following co-administration of methylene blue and
serotonin reuptake inhibitors: an update on a case report of post-operative delirium. J Psychopharmacol . 2010 Oct;24(10):1433-
1438. Epub 2009 May 7.
19. Isbister GK, Bowe SJ, Dawson A, Whyte IM. Relative toxicity of
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in overdose. J
Toxicol Clin Toxicol . 2004;42(3):277-285.
20. Silins E, Copeland J, Dillon P. Qualitative review of serotonin
syndrome, ecstasy (MDMA) and the use of other serotonergicsubstances: hierarchy of risk. Aust N Z J Psychiatry . 2007 Aug;
41(8):649-655.Volpi-Abadie, J
Volume 13, Number 4, Winter 2013 53921. Fox MA, Jensen CL, Gallagher PS, Murphy DL. Receptor
mediation of exaggerated responses to serotonin-enhancingdrugs in serotonin transporter (SERT)-deficient mice.Neuropharmacology . 2007 Oct;53(5):643-656. Epub 2007 Jul
27.
22. Graudins A, Stearman A, Chan B. Treatment of the serotonin
syndrome with cyproheptadine. J Emerg Med . 1998 Jul-Aug;
16(4):615-619.
23. McDaniel WW. Serotonin syndrome: early management with
cyproheptadine. Ann Pharmacother . 2001 Jul-Aug;35(7-8):870-
873.
24. Ables AZ, Nagubilli R. Prevention, recognition, and management
of serotonin syndrome. Am Fam Physician . 2010 May 1;81(9):
1139-1142.25. Haslett CD, Kumar S. Can olanzapine be implicated in causing
serotonin syndrome? Psychiatry Clin Neurosci . 2002 Oct;56(5):
533-535.
26. Hamilton S, Malone K. Serotonin syndrome during treatment with
paroxetine and risperidone. J Clin Psychopharmacol . 2000 Feb;
20(1):103-105.
27. Boddy R, Ali R, Dowsett R. Use of sublingual olanzapine in
serotonin syndrome [Abstract]. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol . 2004;
42(5):725.
28. Nisijima K, Yoshino T, Ishiguro T. Risperidone counteracts
lethality in an animal model of the serotonin syndrome.
Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 2000 May;150(1):9-14.
This article meets the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education and the American Board of
Medical Specialties Maintenance of Certification competencies for Patient Care and Medical Knowledge.Serotonin Syndrome
540 The Ochsner Journal