COPYRIGHT  © 2002 BY THE JOURNAL  OF BONE AND  JOINT  SURGERY , INCORPORATED
Current Concepts Review
The Role of Growth Factors 
in the Repair of Bone
BIOLOGY  AND CLINICAL  APPLICATIONS
BY JAY R. L IEBERMAN , MD, A ARON  DALUISKI , MD, AND THOMAS  A. E INHORN , MD
Investigation performed at the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California at Los Angeles Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, California, and the Department of Orthopaedic Surg ery, Boston University Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts
➤Growth factors (bone morphogenetic protein, transforming growth factor-beta, fibroblast growth factor, platelet-
derived growth factor, and insulin-like growth factor) are prot eins secreted by cells that act on the appropriate tar-
get cell or cells to carry out a specific action.
➤Because growth factors are expressed during different phas es of fracture-healing, it has been thought that they
may serve as potential therapeutic agents to enhance bone repair.
➤The selection of an appropriate carrier or delivery system fo r a particular growth factor is essential in order to in-
duce a specific biologic effect.
➤There are a number of potential clinical applications for growth factors in the enhancement of bone repair,
including acceleration of fracture-healing, treatment of  established nonunions, enhancement of primary spinal
fusion or treatment of established pseuda rthrosis of the spine, and as o ne element of a comprehensive tissue-
engineering strategy that could include gene therapy to treat large bone-loss problems.
Growth factors are proteins that serve as signaling agents for
cells. They function as part of a vast cellular communicationsnetwork that influences such critical functions as cell division,matrix synthesis, and tissue differentiation. The results of ex-perimental studies have established that growth factors play
an important role in bone and cartilage formation, fracture-
healing, and the repair of other musculoskeletal tissues. Re-cently, with the advent of recombinant proteins, there has beenconsiderable interest in the use of growth factors as therapeutic
agents in the treatment of skeletal injuries. As growth factorsbecome available as therapeutic ag ents, it is essential that or-
thopaedic surgeons understand their biological characteristics
and clinical potential. The purpose of this review is to define
the mechanisms of action, functi ons, and potential clinical ap-
plications of a variety of growth  factors that may be used clini-
cally to treat problems associated with the repair of bone.
Growth Factors: General Concepts
Growth factors are proteins secreted by cells that act on the
appropriate target cell or cells to carry out a specific action.Three types of action are possible: (1) autocrine,  in which the
growth factor influences the cell of its origin or other cellsidentical in phenotype to that cell (e.g., a growth factor pro-
duced by an osteoblast influenc es the activity of another os-teoblast), (2) paracrine,  in which the growth factor influences
an adjacent or neighboring cell that is different in phenotypefrom its cell of origin (e.g., a growth factor produced by an os-teoblast stimulates differentiation of an undifferentiated cell),and (3) endocrine,  in which the growth factor influences a cell
that is different in phenotype from its cell of origin and
located at a remote anatomical site (e.g., a growth factor pro-duced by neural tissue in the central nervous system stimu-lates osteoblast activity). Thus, a growth factor may haveeffects on multiple cell types and may induce an array of cellu-lar functions in a variety of tissues
1,2.
Once a growth factor binds to a target cell receptor, it in-
duces an intracellular signal tran sduction system that ultimately
reaches the nucleus and produces a biological response. Thebinding of a growth factor to it s receptor is known as a ligand-
receptor interaction. These interactions are very specific andcan range from simple, with a sp ecific growth factor (ligand)
binding to a single cellular receptor, to complex, with one or
more ligands binding to one or more receptors in order to pro-
duce a ligand-receptor effect. Moreover, there is a redundancyin this biological system such that several forms of the samegrowth factor may bind to a single receptor or different growthfactor receptors may be activated by a single ligand
2,3.
Once the ligand-receptor interaction is established, the
 THE JOURNAL  OF BONE  & J OINT  SURGERY  · JBJS .ORG
VOLUME  84-A · N UMBER  6 · J UNE  2002THE ROLE  OF GROWTH  FACTORS  
IN THE  REPAIR  OF BONE
receptor is activated by means of a change in its conformation.
Receptors have both extracellular domains that bind to theligand and intracellular domains that bind to and activate the
signal transduction system. Part of this signal transduction
system involves a so-called transcription factor, an intracellu-
lar protein that is activated as part of the signaling pathwaysinitiated by the intracellular domain of a receptor. The acti-vated transcription factor travels to the nucleus, binds to thenuclear DNA, and induces the expr ession of a new gene or set
of genes (Fig. 1)
4,5. It is the expression of these new genes by a
cell that ultimately changes the characteristics of that cell. This
sequence of events is similar to that which occurs with otheragents such as steroid hormones, which bind to intracellularreceptors and induce different ty pes of intracellular signaling
pathways
3,4.
The type of activation as well as the specific transcription
factor varies with the target cell, the growth factor-receptor
combination, and the biological competency of the cell. For
example, with growth factors in the transforming growth factor-
beta (TGF- β) superfamily, signaling occurs through the activa-
tion of a transmembrane receptor complex formed by type-Iand II serine/threonine kinase receptors
2,3,5. This then leads to
the so-called downstream activation of a group of transcriptionfactors or intracellular signal ing effectors called SMAD pro-
teins. SMADs are a class of intracellular proteins that are in-
volved in TGF- β signaling. The term SMAD  was created by
merging the name of the Caenorhabditis elegans  gene, sma,
and the Drosophila gene, MAD. There are currently eightknown members of this class of proteins
5,6.
Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) receptor binding
and intracellular signal transduction follow the pathway out-
lined for TGF- β, as BMPs are members of the TGF- β super-
family. BMPs initially bind to the transmembrane type-IIreceptor with subsequent phosphorylation and activation ofthe type-I receptor. Two BMP type-I receptors (BMPR-1A and2B) and one BMP type-II receptor have been identified. How-ever, in contrast to the binding of TGF- β, the BMP type-I re-
ceptor activates different SMADs within the cell, thus leading
to a different cellular response
5,7,8.
The biological activity of other growth factors is regu-
lated by different receptor pathways. Fibroblast growth factor(FGF) and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) transducesignals to the cytoplasm via receptors that have tyrosine kinaseactivity. The major intracellular signaling pathways for these
two growth factors have some overlap and include the Ras ki-
nase cascades
2 (T able I).
Although the mechanisms for signal transduction by
growth factors and their receptors have been delineated, thereis a limited understanding of the ways in which these growthfactors interact to regulate the repair of bone. There is general
agreement that there must be so-called cross-talk between the
various signaling pathways, but which cells and which growthfactors are critical to this process remain to be determined. Abetter understanding of receptor activity and function willc l e a r l y  b e  n e c e s s a r y  i n  o r d e r  t o  o p t i m i z e  t h e  c l i n i c a l  u s e  o fthese molecules
2-9.Growth Factors and Skeletal Repair: 
Preclinical StudiesA number of growth factors have been shown to be expressedduring different phases of experimental fracture-healing. On
the basis of these findings, it is thought that these growth fac-
tors may serve as potential ther apeutic agents to enhance the
repair of bone. Among these growth factors are TGF- β, BMP ,
FGF, PDGF, and insulin-like growth factor (IGF).
Transforming Growth Factor-Beta (TGF-
β)
TGF- β belongs to a family of related proteins called the TGF- β
superfamily. This family of proteins includes the five isoformsof TGF- β (TGF- β1 through TGF- β5), the BMPs, growth dif-
ferentiation factors (GDFs), activins, inhibins, and Mülleriansubstance
10-13. TGF- β influences a broad range of cellular activ-
ities, including growth, differentiation, and extracellular ma-trix synthesis.
TGF-β is found in many tissues, but it is particularly en-
riched in bone, platelets, and cartilage. It is presumed to be re-leased by platelets after a clot is formed at the time of fracture
14.
It has been hypothesized that the release of TGF- β1 is associated
with proliferation of periosteal tissue because there is positiveimmunostaining for TGF- β1 in the early fracture-healing
period. However, the most intense staining occurs during carti-
lage cell proliferation an d endochondral ossification
11,15-17. Both
chondrocytes15-17 and osteoblasts14 are enriched in receptors for
TGF-β, supporting the hypothesis that this family of growth
Fig. 1
Diagram demonstrating the mechanis m by which growth factors influ-
ence cell activity. The ligand binds to the extracellula r domain of the 
receptor, and the intracellular doma in of the receptor activates the 
signal-transduction sy stem. A transcription fa ctor, an intracellular 
protein, is activated as part of th is process. The transcription factor 
migrates to the nucleus, binds to the nuclear DNA, and induces the 
expression of a new gene or set of genes.
 THE JOURNAL  OF BONE  & J OINT  SURGERY  · JBJS .ORG
VOLUME  84-A · N UMBER  6 · J UNE  2002THE ROLE  OF GROWTH  FACTORS  
IN THE  REPAIR  OF BONE
factors affects the bone-healing process at all stages.
The role of TGF- β in the repair of bone has been studied
in experimental models involving subperiosteal injections inthe femur
17 and calvaria18, critical-sized defects19-21, and bone in-
growth into prosthetic devices22. Joyce et al.17, using a subperi-
osteal injection model in the ra t, demonstrated that injections
of TGF- β1 could stimulate periosteal cells to undergo endo-
chondral ossification. Lind et al.19 analyzed the influence of con-
tinuous infusion of TGF- β, delivered by means of a mini-pump,
on plated unilateral mid-diaphyseal fractures of the tibia inthirty rabbits. The fractures were treated with either 1 or 10 µgof TGF- β per day for six weeks. The control group received in-
jections of the delivery vehicle without growth factor. Bone-
mineral content, the amount of callus formation, and bending
strength were evaluated. There were no differences among thethree groups with respect to bone-mineral content or corticalthickness. There was a significant increase in callus formation in
both experimental groups compared with the control group(p = 0.01). Mechanical testing with use of three-point bending
demonstrated a significant increase in normal bending strength
only when the group treated with 1 µg of TGF- β was compared
with the control group (p = 0.03).
Nielsen et al.
20 evaluated the efficacy of two different
doses of TGF- β (4 or 40 ng) injected every other day for forty
days in a rat tibial fracture model. Mechanical testing showeda significant increase in ultimate load to failure (a measure of
strength) in the group that had received the 40-ng dose com-
pared with the group that had received the 4-ng dose and thec o n t r o l  g r o u p  ( w h i c h  h a d  r e c e i v e d  n o  g r o w t h  f a c t o r )  ( p  <0.01). However, there were no differences with respect to stiff-ness or energy to failure between either of the two experimen-tal groups and the control group.Critchlow et al.
21 evaluated the effect of exogenous TGF-
β2 on the healing of twenty-five rabbit tibial fractures under
both stable and unstable mechan ical conditions. In one group,
the tibiae were fractured and then treated with a dynamiccompression plate to achieve a stable mechanical system. Inthe other group, a 0.5-mm gap was produced between the
ends of the fractured tibiae and the bones were fixed with a
plastic plate to achieve an unstable mechanical system. Theanimals in both groups were treated with either 60 or 600 ngof TGF- β2. No mechanical testing was performed. In the ani-
mals with a stable mechanical construct that were treated with600 ng of TGF- β2, there was abundant callus formation but
no increase in bone content in the calluses. The 60-ng dose
had a negligible effect on frac ture-healing. In contrast, ani-
mals with an unstable mechanical construct had minimalbone and cartilage formation after treatment with either 60 or600 ng of TGF- β2. These findings demonstrate that appropri-
ate surgical management is requ ired for healing and is essen-
tial in order for TGF- β2 to enhance skeletal repair.
It is difficult to draw conclusions regarding the efficacy
of TGF- β on the basis of these studies of experimental frac-
ture-healing because different isoforms and doses of growthfactor were used and different animal models were employed.Although the results of these studies confirm the hypothesisthat TGF- β enhances cellular proliferation, the osteoinductive
potential of TGF- β seems limited. The positive results in the
studies by Lind et al.
19 and Nielsen et al.20 seem to be attribut-
able to the high doses of TGF- β employed. The single injec-
tion regimen used in the study by Critchlow et al.21 induced no
increase in bone content, suggesting that the ability of TGF- β
to enhance bone repair may require frequent dosing or veryhigh doses of the protein. Both  of these requirements may notTABLE I Growth Factors
Growth Factor Source Receptor Class Function
Transforming growth factor 
beta (TGF- β)Platelets, bone extracellular 
matrix, cartilage matrixSerine threonine sulfate Pleiotropic growth factor stimulates undifferentiated mesenchymal cell proliferation
Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) Osteoprogenitor cells, osteoblasts, bone extra-
cellular matrixSerine threonine sulfate Promotes differentiation of 
mesenchymal cells into chon-
drocytes and osteoblasts, 
promotes differentiation of osteoprogenitors into osteo-blasts, influences skeletal pattern formation
Fibroblast growth factors (FGF) Macrophages, mesenchymal cells, chondrocytes, osteoblasts Tyrosine kinase Mitogenic for mesenchymal cells, chondrocytes, and osteoblasts
Insulin-like growth factors (IGF) Bone matrix, osteoblasts, chondrocytes Tyrosine kinase Promotes proliferation and differentiation  of osteopro-
genitor cells
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) Platelets, osteoblasts Tyrosine kinase Mitogen for mesenchymalcells and osteoblasts; macrophage chemotaxis
 THE JOURNAL  OF BONE  & J OINT  SURGERY  · JBJS .ORG
VOLUME  84-A · N UMBER  6 · J UNE  2002THE ROLE  OF GROWTH  FACTORS  
IN THE  REPAIR  OF BONE
be feasible in the clinical setting. Finally, since TGF- β en-
hances cellular proliferation among a variety of cell types,there is some concern that it could lead to unforeseen side ef-fects. Therefore, TGF- β seems to have limited potential as an
agent to enhance bone repair in the clinical setting.
Bone Morphogenetic Protein
The BMPs are members of the TGF- β superfamily, and thir-
teen individual molecules have been identified at this time
6.
Presently, BMP-2, 4, and 7 are known to play a critical role in
bone-healing by means of their ability to stimulate differen-
tiation of mesenchymal cells to  an osteochondroblastic lin-
eage. BMP-2, 4, and 7 use the same serine/threonine kinasereceptor complex to initiate cell-signaling
6.
The BMPs also play a critical role in cell growth and
bone formation6. Mice deficient in BMP-2, 4, and 7 die either
early during embryonic development or soon after birth. Mice
deficient in BMP-2 have developmental abnormalities of the
skull, hindlimb, and kidney6,23-25. Mice deficient in BMP-5 have
short-ear deformities, and BMP-7 deficiency has been associ-ated with hindlimb polydactyly and renal agenesis
26-29.
The concept that there is a substance in bone that can
induce new-bone formation was recognized by Marshall R.Urist in 1965 when he observed that a new ossicle had formed
after the implantation of demineralized bone matrix in a mus-
cle pouch in the rat
30. He termed this phenomenon the bone-
induction principle  and later identified a protein responsible
for this effect, which took on the name bone  morphogenetic
protein.  More than twenty years later, in 1988, W ozney et al.31
identified the genetic sequence of bone morphogenetic pro-
tein, which led to the identification of its various isoforms.
With this genetic information, it is now possible to producevarious BMPs with use of recombinant gene technology.These recombinant proteins will most likely form the basis fortherapeutic applications involv ing growth factors in the im-
mediate future.
A number of preclinical studies have assessed the efficacy
of recombinant human BMPs (rhBMPs) in the healing of criti-
cal-sized bone defects and the acceleration of fracture-healing.Cook et al.
32 evaluated the effect of rhBMP-7 (also known as re-
combinant human osteogenic protein-1 or rhOP-1) on thehealing of ulnar and tibial segmental bone defects in a study oftwenty-eight African green monkeys. The ulnar defects, whichwere 2.0 cm long, were treated with 1000 µg of rhOP-1 in 400
mg of bovine bone-collagen carrier. Control ulnar defects were
treated with autogenous bone graft and bovine collagen carrieror with bovine collagen carrier alone. The tibial defects, which
were also 2.0 cm long, were treated with 250, 500, 1000, or2000 µg  of rhOP-1 in 400 mg of collagen carrier. Control tibial
defects were treated with autogenous bone graft and bovine
c ollagen carrier or with bovine c ollagen carrier alone. In tw o
animals, the tibial defect was left untreated. The animals werekilled at twenty weeks postoperatively. Healing of the defectswas evaluated radiographically, histologically, and biomechani-cally. Radiographic evaluation re vealed that five of the six ulnae
and four of the five tibiae that had been treated with rhOP-1healed by six to eight weeks. None of the six ulnae that had
been treated with autogenous bone  graft healed, but five of the
six tibiae that had been treate d with autogenous bone graft
healed. None of the defects that had been treated with carrier
alone or that had been left untreated demonstrated any signs of
healing. Histological evaluation of defects that had beentreated with rhOP-1 revealed the presence of new cortices,composed of both woven and lamellar bone, and normal-
appearing marrow elements. Mechanical testing of the ulnaeand tibiae that had been treated with rhOP-1 demonstrated an
average torsional strength to failure of 92% and 69% of that of
the contralateral, intact ulnae and tibiae, respectively. In con-
trast, the average torsional strength to failure of the tibiae thathad been treated with autogeno us bone graft was only 23% of
that of the contralateral, intact tibiae. None of the ulnae thathad been treated with autogenous bone demonstrated suffi-cient healing to undergo mechanical testing. These findings are
consistent with those of another study in which Cook et al.
evaluated the efficacy of rhOP-1 in the healing of critical-sizeddefects in a canine model
33.
Recombinant human BMP-2 has also demonstrated ef-
ficacy in the healing of critical-sized defects in rat34, rabbit35,
sheep36, and dog37 models. Sciadini and Johnson37 evaluated
the efficacy of rhBMP-2, delivered in a collagen sponge, in the
healing of a critical-sized radial defect that was stabilized with
an external fixator in a dog model. Twenty-seven dogs under-went bilateral radial osteotomy with the creation of a 2.5-cmdiaphyseal defect. All dogs were treated with either autoge-nous bone graft or a collagen implant containing 0, 150, 600,or 2400 µg of rhBMP-2. The dogs were killed at twelve or
twenty-four weeks after the operative procedure, and a com-
plete radiographic, histological, and biomechanical analysiswas performed. All defects that had been treated with eitherautogenous bone graft or with the various doses of rhBMP-2showed union radiographically and histologically. None of theeight defects that had been treated with a collagen carrieralone healed. Of concern is that a dose-dependent occurrence
of cyst-like bone voids was also noted. The biomechanical per-
formance of the defects that had been treated with all threedoses of rhBMP-2 was comparable with that of the defects thathad been treated with autogeno us bone graft and was signifi-
cantly better than that of th e defects that had been treated
with the placebo (p < 0.0005). However, the biomechanicalperformance of the defects that had been treated with the low-
est dose of rhBMP (150 µg) was superior to that of the defects
that had been treated with the higher doses, and this findingwas attributed to the lack of cyst-like voids. The specific mech-anism by which these voids developed could not be deter-mined, but the data suggest that the dose of rhBMP-2 proteinmay have to be adjusted for different clinical applications.
Bostrom and Camacho
38 evaluated the influence of rh-
BMP-2 on the healing of fresh fractures in a rabbit ulnar os-teotomy model. Twenty ulnar fractures were treated with 200mg of rhBMP-2, delivered in a type-I collagen sponge and ap-
plied as an onlay graft. Limbs that were treated with carrieralone or that were left untreated served as controls. Radio-
 THE JOURNAL  OF BONE  & J OINT  SURGERY  · JBJS .ORG
VOLUME  84-A · N UMBER  6 · J UNE  2002THE ROLE  OF GROWTH  FACTORS  
IN THE  REPAIR  OF BONE
graphic evaluation and biomechanical testing were done at
two, three, four, and six weeks after the operative procedure.BMP-2 accelerated the healing at the osteotomy site as as-sessed both radiographically and biomechanically. Between
three and four weeks after the procedure, the limbs that had
been treated with BMP-2 showed increased stiffness andstrength compared with the untreated, intact ulnae. The un-treated  and collagen-carrier groups attained comparable val-
ues at four and six weeks after the procedure.
There has also been consider able interest in the use of
an osteoinductive agent such as  BMP to enhance active spinal
fusion in order to avoid the operative morbidity associatedwith the harvesting of autogenous bone graft. The potentialefficacy of rhBMP in the treatment of intertransverse processand posterior segmental spinal fu sion has been evaluated in a
variety of animal models. In those studies, rhBMP-2 was usedin association with a variety of carriers, including collagen
39,
polylactic acid40, and copolymers (polylactic acid-polyglycolic
acid)41. All of those investigations demonstrated successful
fusion of the spine and, in mo st instances, the fusion mass at
sites that had been treated with rhBMP-2 was greater thanthat at sites that had been treated with autogenous bone.However, the presence of voids in the fusion mass was notedin two studies in which either an open-cell polylactic acid
polymer (OPLA) or a polylactic-polyglycolic acid carrier was
used
40,41. These voids did not impair the mechanical integrity
of the fusion mass as demonstrated by biomechanical testing,but further study of the potential influence of the proteindose and a specific carrier on the formation of these voids isnecessary.
Recombinant bone morphogenetic proteins have also
been used in association with metallic cages to induce lumbarand cervical spinal fusions. Boden et al.
42 reported successful
laparoscopic anterior spinal arthrodesis in five adult rhesusmonkeys that had been treated with rhBMP-2 in a titaniuminterbody threaded cage. Two different doses of rhBMP-2(0.75 and 1.5 mg/mL) were im planted in a collagen sponge
and placed in the cage. A solid fusion of the lumbar spine was
achieved in association with both doses of the recombinantprotein. In contrast, a solid fusion was not achieved in two an-imals that had been treated with a collagen sponge only.
Although the results of these preclinical studies have been
pr omising, the r elati v ely high doses of rhBMP r equir ed t o in-duce adequate bone formation suggest that large amounts of
recombinant protein may be required to produce a clinically
important effect. This raises serious concerns regarding safetyand cost
6,38. Moreover, in order to exert their biological activ-
ity, the recombinant BMPs must be delivered via carriers. Thecarriers that have been tested most frequently for rhBMP in-clude collagen matrix
33,34,36-38, demineralized bone matrix33,39,
and synthetic polymers36. It is unclear if these carriers are the
best vehicles for presenting these molecules to receptors or re-sponding cells. Development of more effective ways of expos-ing responding cells and tiss ues to bone morphogenetic
proteins will likely be needed in order to maximize the clinical
efficacy of these factors.Fibroblast Growth Factors
The fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are a family of ninestructurally related polypeptides that are characterized bytheir affinity for the glycosaminoglycan heparin-binding sites
on cells and are known to play a critical role in angiogenesis
and mesenchymal cell mitogenesis
43-45. The most abundant
FGFs in normal adult tissue are acidic fibroblast growth factor(FGF-1 or α-FGF) and basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF-2
or β-FGF). Both FGF-1 and FGF-2 promote growth and dif-
ferentiation of a variety of cells, including epithelial cells, my-
ocytes, osteoblasts, and chondrocytes. The mitogenic effects of
FGF-1 have been associated with chondrocyte proliferation
46,47,
while FGF-2 is expressed by os teoblasts and is generally more
potent than FGF-148.
The FGF family of peptides transduces signals via a group
of four receptors that contain distinct membrane-spanning ty-
rosine kinases49,50. Mutations in these FGF receptors have been
associated with abnormalities in endochondral ossification and
intramembranous ossification. For example, mutations in fi-broblast growth factor receptor-3 (FGFR-3) have been linked toseveral skeletal dysplasias, including achondroplasia, thanato-phoric dysplasia (lethal neonatal dysplasia), and hypochondro-plasia (a mild form of achondroplasia). These three dysplasiasare the results of dominant missense mutations of the FGFR-3
gene. Achondroplasia is caused by a single amino acid change
(arginine to glycine) in the transmembrane portion of the cell-surface receptor
51,52.
Both FGF-1 and FGF-2 activity have been identified dur-
ing the early stages of fracture-healing. Since these factors areassociated with angiogenesis and chondrocyte and osteoblast
activation, there has been interest in their ability to enhance
skeletal repair
53. Kato et al.54 evaluated the effect of a single local
injection of recombinant human fibroblast growth factor-2(rhFGF-2) on the healing of segm ental tibial defects in rabbits.
A 3-mm bone defect was stabilized with an external fixator, and
various doses (0, 50, 100, 200, and 400 µg)  of rhFGF-2 were in-
jected. Healing was assessed with plain radiographs, histological
analysis, and an evaluation of bone-mineral content with use of
dual energy x-ray absorptiometry. A dose-dependent effect onhealing, bone volume, and the mineral content of new bone wasnoted, with significant effects at concentrations of ≥100 µg (p <
0.01). Treatment with 100 µg of FGF-2 increased the volumeand bone-mineral content by 95% and 36%, respectively, com-pared with controls. Kato et al. concluded that a single injection
of FGF-2 could enhance bone formation.
Nakamura et al.
55 assessed the effect of rhFGF-2 on the
healing of tibial fractures in forty-one beagle dogs. A transverseosteotomy was created, and the tibia was stabilized with an in-tramedullary nail. Either 200 µg  of rhFGF-2 or vehicle alone
was injected into the fracture site. The animals were killed at
two, four, eight, sixteen, and thirty-two weeks after the fracture,
and the fracture sites were assessed with regard to callus forma-tion, morphological characteristics, and strength. By two weeksafter the fracture, the rhFGF-2 group demonstrated an increasein the number of periosteal mesenchymal cells as well as in-creased differentiation of those cells into chondrocytes and os-
 THE JOURNAL  OF BONE  & J OINT  SURGERY  · JBJS .ORG
VOLUME  84-A · N UMBER  6 · J UNE  2002THE ROLE  OF GROWTH  FACTORS  
IN THE  REPAIR  OF BONE
teoblasts. In addition, intramembranous ossification was more
pronounced in the rhFGF-2 group. The rhFGF-2 group had anincrease in the area of  callus formation at four weeks and an in-
crease in bone-mineral content at eight weeks. A maximal in-
crease in the osteoclast index (the number of osteoclasts divided
by the callus perimeter) was noted in the rhFGF-2 group at fourweeks, while similar findings were noted in the control group ateight and sixteen weeks. In the rhFGF-2 group, reduction in cal-lus volume began at eight weeks and fracture strength showedrecovery at sixteen weeks. In co ntrast, callus volume in the con-
trol group did not change significantly from eight to sixteen
weeks and fracture strength was low at sixteen weeks. Maxi-mum load, bending stress, and energy absorption were signifi-cantly greater in the rhFGF-2 group than in the control group atboth sixteen (p < 0.05) and thirty-two weeks (p < 0.05), eventhough fracture-healing had occurred in both groups. These re-sults suggest that rhFGF-2 accelerates bone repair and also stim-
ulates remodeling of the callus, a process that restores the
biomechanical properties to the bone.
The ability of rhFGF-2 to acce lerate fracture-healing in a
higher species was confirmed in a nonhuman primate fracturemodel
56. In that study, rhFGF-2 and hyaluronic acid were com-
bined into a viscous gel formul ation that was percutaneously
injected into a 1-mm non-critical-sized osteotomy defect in the
fibulae of baboons. An osteotomy in the contralateral fibula was
left untreated to serve as a negative control. Intact fibulae froman additional group of necropsy animals served as positive con-trols. The osteotomy sites were treated with three different dosesof rhFGF-2. The sites that had been treated with rhFGF-2 had alarger callus, greater bone volume, and increased osteoblastic
activity. There were significant differences between energy to
failure (p ≤ 0.01) and load at failure (p ≤ 0.05) between the
treated and untreated osteotomy sites. No differences in tor-sional stiffness were observed when treated animals were com-pared with untreated controls. A dose response was not found,which suggests that a threshold amount of rhFGF-2 in this for-mulation will enhance the bone-repair process but a higher
dose will not improve healing. The results of these studies
54-56
suggest that FGF may have the mo st potential as an adjunctive
agent to enhance clinical skeletal repair.
Growth Hormone and 
Insulin-Like Growth FactorsGrowth hormone and insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) play
critical roles in skeletal development. Growth hormone is cur-
rently used clinically to treat patients with short stature
57. In ad-
dition, because of its systemic effe cts there is interest in the use
of growth hormone to treat osteoporosis and to enhance frac-ture-healing. Growth hormone participates in the regulation ofskeletal growth
9,58. It is released by the anterior lobe of the pitu-
itary gland in response to stimulation by growth hormone-
releasing hormone (GHRH), a hormone secreted by the hypo-thalamus. It then travels throug h the circulation to the growth
plate and the liver, where target cells are stimulated to releaseIGF
57,58. As both growth hormone and IGF are actively involved
in skeletal development, their role in the repair and remodelingof the adult skeleton have become a topic of interest. Two IGFs
have been identified: IGF-1 and IGF-2. Although IGF-2 is themost abundant growth factor in bone, IGF-1 has been found tobe more potent and has been localized in healing fractures in
rats and humans
59,60. Therefore, studies evaluating the role of
IGFs in fracture-healing have concentrated on IGF-1.
A number of studies have been performed in different
animal models with use of different doses and methods of ad-ministration to assess the influences of growth hormone andIGF on skeletal repair. The results have varied, and therefore
it is difficult to determine the potential role of either growth
hormone or IGF in the enhancement of fracture-healing. Baket al.
60 assessed the effect of four doses of biosynthetic human
growth hormone (0.08, 0.4, 2.0,  and 10.0 mg/kg/day) on frac-
ture-healing in ninety Wistar rats. Animals received either no
injection or twice-daily injectio ns of growth hormone or sa-
line solution (control group) beginning seven days before the
fracture and continuing until the animals were killed at forty
days after the fracture. Biomechanical testing demonstratedincreased ultimate load to failure, stiffness, and energy ab-sorption in association with the 2.0 and 10.0-mg doses ofgrowth hormone. An increase in the ultimate stress to failurewas only seen in associat ion with the 10.0-mg dose.
Carpenter et al.
61, in a unilateral tibial osteotomy model in
rabbits, found that intramuscula r injections of human growth
hormone did not have a significant effect on normal fracture-healing. The osteotomy sites in twenty-seven rabbits werestabilized with an external fixator, and each animal received aninjection of either recombinant human growth hormone (150µg/kg) or saline solution five times per week. The rabbits were
killed at four, six, and eight weeks after the operation, and the
tibiae were evaluated with a four-point bending test. In addi-tion, the serum levels of IGF-1 were serially evaluated to deter-mine the systemic response to the intramuscular injection ofhuman growth hormone. There were no significant differencesbetween the experimental and cont rol groups with regard to the
weekly radiographic findings. In addition, although the rabbits
treated with growth hormone had higher serum levels of IGF-1
than the untreated controls did, there was no relationship be-tween the serum level of IGF-1 and the results of the biome-chanical tests.
The role of IGF-1 in stimulating intramembranous bone
formation was studied in a calvarial defect model in rats
62. Ex-
perimental animals were subjected to continuous systemic ad-
ministration of IGF-1 for fourteen days via a subcutaneous
osmotic pump, whereas control animals were treated with sa-line solution alone. The calvarial defects that had been treatedwith 2 mg of IGF-1 for two weeks healed via intramembranousossification. The results of that  study suggest that IGF-1 may
have a role in enhancing bone formation in defects that heal via
intramembranous ossification. However, the role of IGF-1 as an
agent to enhance fracture-healing or spinal fusion requires fur-ther study.
Platelet-Derived Growth Factor (PDGF)
PDGF is secreted by platelets during the early phases of frac-
 THE JOURNAL  OF BONE  & J OINT  SURGERY  · JBJS .ORG
VOLUME  84-A · N UMBER  6 · J UNE  2002THE ROLE  OF GROWTH  FACTORS  
IN THE  REPAIR  OF BONE
ture-healing and has been identified at fracture sites in both
mice9 and humans63. In vitro studies have demonstrated PDGF
to be mitogenic for osteoblasts64. However, the role of PDGF in
fracture-healing and bone repair has not been clearly defined.
Nash et al.65 evaluated the efficacy of PDGF in the heal-
ing of unilateral tibial osteotomies in seven rabbits. Each os-teotomy site was treated with either 80 µg of PDGF in acollagen sponge or with a collagen sponge alone. The animalswere killed after twenty-eight days. Radiographic analysis attwo and four weeks demonstrated an increase in callus density
and volume in the animals that had been treated with PDGF
compared with the controls. Histological analysis demon-strated a more advanced state of osteogenic differentiationboth endosteally and periosteally  in the animals that had been
treated with PDGF than in the controls. A three-point bend-ing test revealed no differences in strength between the tibiaethat had been treated with PDGF and the intact, contralateral
tibiae. Although the histological findings suggested that PDGF
has a beneficial effect on fracture-healing, only a small num-ber of animals were analyzed and the mechanical testing datawere equivocal. Moreover, the small size of the study does notsupport robust statistical criteria. At the present time, thetherapeutic role of PDGF in fracture-healing remains unclear.
Carriers and Delivery Systems 
for Growth FactorsThe ability to deliver a molecule so that it will induce a specificbiologic effect is critical to th e success of growth factor ther-
apy. The success of the delivery system may depend on the an-atomic location where the treatment is needed, the vitality of
the soft-tissue envelope, and the mechanical strain environ-
ment pr o vided b y the fixation or r ec onstructi v e syst em. Thekinetics of release of the growth factor from its delivery systemmay vary depending on the chemistry of the factor or the de-livery system and the influence of the host environment. Forthese reasons, certain conditions must be considered when se-lecting an appropriate carrier or delivery system: (1) the abil-
ity of the system to deliver the growth factor at the appropriate
time and in the proper dose, (2) the presence of a substratumthat will enhance cell recruitment and attachment and willpotentiate chemotaxis, (3) the presence of a void space to al-low for cell migration and to promote angiogenesis, and (4)the ability of the delivery system to biodegrade without gener-ating an immune or inflammato ry response and without pro-
ducing toxic waste products that would inhibit the repair
process
66.
A number of carrier and delivery systems, including
type-I collagen34,35, synthetic polymers36, and hyaluronic acid
gels53,56,  h a v e  b e e n  u s e d  t o  d e l i v e r  r e c o m b i n a n t  p r o t e i n s  i n
experimental and clinical models. A variety of so-called
bone-graft substitutes, including demineralized bone matrix,
calcium phosphate-containing preparations (such as hydroxy-apatite, coralline hydroxyapatite, and α-BSM [ETEX, Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts]), and Bioglass
67-69, are also potential
carriers for recombinant proteins.
In clinical trials in humans, type-I collagen has been usedas a carrier for BMP , in conjunction with metal cages, to induce
fusion in the spine70. This protein has been considered an attrac-
tive carrier because of its fibrilla r structure and the fact that it is
the most abundant protein in th e extracellular matrix of bone.
It also promotes mineral deposition and can bind noncollage-
nous matrix proteins that also initiate mineralization6. In addi-
tion, collagen has already been cleared for marketing by theUnited States Food and Drug Administration for several clinicalapplications, suggesting that it has a favorable safety profile anda proven efficacy in specific applications. While there are some
concerns regarding the use of allo geneic collagen with respect to
its potential to induce an immune response, abundant data sug-gest that this risk is low
32,33,37.
Although collagen has been used successfully as a carrier
for BMP in a variety of animal models, large doses of BMPhave been required to produce an osteogenic effect in clinicaltrials of spine fusion
70 and periodontal applications71,72 in hu-
mans. This has raised the concern that collagen interferes with
the pharmacokinetics of the re lease of BMP and in some way
limits the resultant osteogenic response. The pharmacoki-netic profile of rhBMP-2 was evaluated with use of an assay inwhich the protein was implanted in a muscle pouch with useof a variety of carrier systems (including a type-I collagensponge, tricalcium phosphate, hydroxyapatite, and demineral-
ized bone matrix)
73,74. The typical pharmacokinetic profile of
BMP-2 release consisted of an initial burst effect with a half-life of less than ten minutes. This effect was carrier-dependent.
A carrier-dependent secondary re lease with a half-life of be-
tween one and ten days was then  noted. The collagen sponge
lost 30% of the recombinant prot ein in the initial burst phase,
followed by continuous release with a half-life of three to five
days. This pharmacokinetic profile paralleled the degradationof the collagen sponge. In contrast, mineral-based deliverysystems showed the same initial burst release profile but in the
secondary phase there was diminished release because a sub-stantial fraction of the protein was bound irreversibly to themineral particles
73,74.
Demineralized bone matrix preparations are particu-
larly attractive as potential ca rriers for growth factors because
they are osteoconductive and may have some osteoinductivepotential as well. T o our knowledge, these preparations havenot been tested in combination with recombinant proteins inhumans. In addition, Johnson et al.
75 demonstrated that puri-
fied BMP and demineralized bone enhance bone formation at
nonunion sites in humans.
Polymers have also received much attention as potential
delivery vehicles. Both polylactic acid (PLA) and polyglycolicacid (PGA), for example, are used  as suture materials and, be-
cause of their biocompatibility profile and ability to bind pro-tein, it is natural to consider using them as scaffolds to deliver
peptide molecules. However, further investigation of the deg-
r a d a t i o n  p r o f i l e s  o f  v a r i o u s  p o l y m e r s  i s  n e c e s s a r y  t o  e n s u r ethat they degrade in a manner that does not stimulate an in-flammatory response. In addition, it will be necessary to en-hance the bonding of these materials to either host bone orsoft tissue
76,77. Strategies will need to be developed to create a
 THE JOURNAL  OF BONE  & J OINT  SURGERY  · JBJS .ORG
VOLUME  84-A · N UMBER  6 · J UNE  2002THE ROLE  OF GROWTH  FACTORS  
IN THE  REPAIR  OF BONE
biomechanically stable construct between these carriers and
the host bone and/or surrounding soft tissue.
Retention of the recombinant protein at the implanta-
tion site for a sufficient period to promote progenitor cell mi-
gration and cell proliferatio n has been shown to enhance
osteoinductive activity. The oste oinductive potential of ther-
moreversible biomaterials containing BMP-2 that can be in-ject ed int o an anat omic sit e is currently under investigation.
These polymers are in a liquid phase at room temperature and
then harden at physiologic temperatures in the body
78.
Bioglass68,69 and calcium phosphate-based materials such
as hydroxyapatite77,79-82, coralline hydroxyapatite83-87, and trical-
cium phosphate85,88-90 h a v e  b e e n  s h o w n  t o  b e  b i o c o m p a t i b l e
and to provide osteoconductive scaffolds that potentiallycould be combined with growth factors to enhance bone re-pair
67,68,91-93. The disadvantages of these materials include poor
handling characteristics and co ncerns about overall bioresorb-
ability and limited potential fo r remodeling and an unclear
understanding of their effects on bone strength91. Recently,
there has been substantial interest in α-BSM as a carrier for
recombinant proteins. This poorly crystalline calcium phos-phate apatite has several potentia l advantages as a carrier: (1)
its crystalline structure simulates the mineral phase of boneand enhances remodeling into host bone, (2) it can be hy-
drated in saline solution to form a past e with ex c ellent han-
dling characteristics, and (3) since the paste hardens in thebody via an endothermic reaction, degradation of proteins orantibiotics incorporated into the cement should not occur
67.
Studies are currently in progress to investigate the utility of α-
BSM as a clinically effective carrier for BMPs.
Recently, hyaluronic acid has been used as a carrier for
mesenchymal stem cells and as a delivery vehicle for FGF-2
53,56,94. A normal constituent of the extracellular matrix of ar-
ticular cartilage and soft connec tive tissues, hyaluronic acid
has also been shown to facilita te fetal development by enhanc-
ing cell migration and tissue mo rphogenesis. It has been sug-
gested that growth factor composites with hyaluronic acid and
derivatives of this molecule will  support cell growth in a vari-
ety of clinical applications95. Solchaga et al.94 tested the ability
of a hyaluronic acid-based carrier to bind rabbit mesenchymalprogenitor cells and enhance osteogenic differentiation in anin vivo assay. Culture-expanded bone-marrow-derived mes-enchymal progenitor cells were placed on either a porous cal-cium phosphate ceramic carrier vehicle or two different
hyaluronic acid sponges with different pore sizes and degrada-
tion profiles. The composites were then implanted subcutane-ously into nude mice. Standard light and scanning electronmicroscopy were used to determine the ability of the implantsto bind and retain mesenchyma l progenitor cells and to sup-
port chondrogenesis and osteogenesis. In general, the hyalu-
ronic acid sponges were superior to the calcium phosphate
ceramic carrier with respect to the numbers of cells loaded perunit volume of the implant. The hyaluronic acid sponges,which had a longer time to degr adation, were also superior to
the ceramic with respect to the amount of cartilage and bonethat formed in their pores.As noted above, a hyaluronic acid-based gel was used as a
carrier for FGF-2 in a nonhuman primate fracture model
56. A
single direct injection of the FGF-2 hyaluronic acid formulationenhanced local fracture-healing. Histological analysis revealed
that osteotomy sites that had been treated with this growth fac-
tor composite had enhanced periosteal reaction, vascularity,and cellularity when compared with the untreated controls.There was no evidence of an inflammatory response to the hy-aluronic acid gel. However, as no control group received just thehyaluronic acid gel, it is difficult to determine the specific role of
the growth factor in enhancing fracture-healing.
While it is likely that there is no ideal carrier or delivery
system for all growth factors or bi ological therapies, it is still
unclear whether any of the currently known carriers have beentruly optimized for clinical applications. This field of study,which is as important as the study of the growth factor mole-cules, cells, and genes themselves, will require much more
emphasis as the field of biologic intervention in clinical thera-
peutics progresses.
Gene Therapy as a Method of Growth Factor Delivery
Although several recombinant proteins may soon be available astherapeutic growth factors for sp ecific clinical applications,
there is concern that a single dose of exogenous protein will not
induce an adequate biologic response in patients, particularly in
situations in which the viability of the host bone and surround-
ing soft tissues is compromised. T o address this potential con-cern, a better strategy for protein delivery may be gene therapy.Gene therapy involves the transfer of genetic information tocells. When a gene is properly tr ansferred to a target cell, the cell
synthesizes the protein encoded by the gene
96. Therefore, with
gene therapy, the genetic message is delivered to a particularcell, which then synthesizes the protein. In general, the durationof protein synthesis after gene therapy depends on the tech-niques used to deliver the gene to the cell. Both short-term and
long-term expression are possible. Chronic diseases, such as os-teoporosis or rheumatoid arthritis, for example, would proba-
bly require long-term expression. However, the treatment of
most bone-repair problems may only require short-term pro-tein production
97.
Several gene therapy options are currently under inves-
tigation. First, gene therapy can be applied either regionally or
systemically . Second, the gene can be introduced directly to aspecific anatomic site with use of an in vivo technique or it can
be introduced via an ex vivo approach in which cells are har-
vested from the patient, the DNA is transferred to these cellsin tissue culture, and the genetically modified cells are thenadministered back to the patient
97.
An important aspect of gene therapy is the application of
appropriate vectors for genes. Vectors are agents that enhance
the entry and expression of DNA in a target cell. They may be
of viral or nonviral origin. Viruses are efficient vectors becausethe delivery and expression of DNA is a critical aspect of theirnormal life cycle. When a virus is used as a vector, essentialportions of its genome must be deleted to render it replication-
deficient and to create space in its genome for the insertion of
 THE JOURNAL  OF BONE  & J OINT  SURGERY  · JBJS .ORG
VOLUME  84-A · N UMBER  6 · J UNE  2002THE ROLE  OF GROWTH  FACTORS  
IN THE  REPAIR  OF BONE
the therapeutic DNA. Insertion of therapeutic DNA in ex-
change for a portion of the viral genome, which would
otherwise confer upon the virus the ability to replicate, is
accomplished by a process known as homologous recombina-
tion.  The process that involves the transfer of functional genetic
information from the recombinant vector (virus) into the tar-get cell is known as transduction.  This is accomplished when
the virus that contains the therapeutic DNA binds to the cell,usually via a receptor-mediated process, and then enters thatcell. The DNA then enters the nucleus of the cell, where it may
become integrated into the host genome or may remain extra-
chromosomal. It is then possible  for the transduced cell to pro-
duce and secrete the growth factor encoded by the DNA
98-100.
A major concern related to the use of viral vectors is the
subsequent recombination of th e defective virus with viruses
in the host cell, resulting in the generation of replication-competent viruses with the ability to multiply in the patient.
In addition, cells infected with certain viruses (e.g., adenovi-
ruses) produce not only the tr ansgene product but also other
viral proteins. These viral proteins may elicit an immune re-sponse in the host, which can li mit the duration of protein ex-
pression by the transduced cells
95-97. Both viral and nonviral
vectors have been used to heal critical-sized defects and to in-duce fusion in the spine in both rabbits and rats (Fig. 2)
66,101-105.
Clinical Applications
There is a great deal of interest in the development of clinicalapplications for growth factors in the enhancement of bonerepair, including (1) acceleration of fracture-healing (particu-larly in patients who are at high risk for nonunion), (2) treat-
ment of established nonunions, (3) enhancement of primary
spinal fusion, (4) treatment of established pseudarthrosis ofthe spine, and (5) as one comp onent of a comprehensive tis-
sue-engineering strategy that could include gene therapy totreat large bone-loss problems.
Fracture-Healing
Approximately 5% to 10% of fractures sustained in the United
States are associated with delayed healing or nonunion
106. Im-
paired fracture-healing is associated with a number of risk fac-tors, including poor blood su pply, associated soft-tissue
injury, extensive bone loss, instab ility, infection, poor general
medical condition, and smoking.  Traditionally, problems re-
lated to fracture-healing have been treated with operative in-
tervention, which often involves the use of an autogenous
bone graft. However, bone graft-harvesting procedures are as-sociated with a morbidity rate of 10% to 30%, and only lim-ited amounts of autogenous bone are available
107. Therefore,
alternative strategies designed to enhance the healing of acutefractures and to improve the treatment of delayed unions and
nonunions are required. Three biologically based strategies
have shown promise as new technologies to enhance fracturerepair: use of exogenous growth factors, mesenchymal stemcell therapy, and gene therapy.
Current evidence suggests that among the factors that
have been investigated to date, BMPs appear to have the mostosteoinductive potential. Clinical trials have been performed to
assess the efficacy of recombin ant proteins in the treatment of
fibular defects
108 and tibial nonunions109 as well as for spinal
arthrodesis70 in humans.  A prospective, randomized, double-
blind study was performed to asse ss the efficacy of using OP-1
(BMP-7), delivered in a type-I collagen carrier, for the treat-
ment of a critical-sized (appro ximately 15-mm) fibular defect
in twenty-four patients who were undergoing high tibialosteotomy
108. The fibular defects were treated with either 2.5
mg of recombinant OP-1 and a type-I collagen carrier, dem-
ineralized bone matrix alone, or type-I collagen alone. Five of
the six patients treated with  OP-1 demonstrated new bone
from six weeks onward. Bridging of the defect was noted in fiveof these six patients at ten weeks. Four of the six patientstreated with demineralized bone matrix had bridging of thedefect at ten weeks. None of the defects treated with collagenalone healed.
The efficacy of recombinant OP-1 was also assessed in a
prospective, randomized, partially blinded clinical trial in-volving 122 patients with 124 tibial nonunions
109. Treatment
consisted of intramedullary nail  fixation and implantation of
either recombinant rhOP-1 in a type-I collagen carrier or au-togenous iliac bone graft. Nine months following the opera-tive procedure (the primary end point of the study), 81%
(fifty-one) of the sixty-three nonunions that had been treated
with rhOP-1 and 85% (fifty-two) of the sixty-one nonunionsthat had been treated with autograft were judged to have beentreated successfully according to clinical criteria (p = 0.524).In that study, a clinical success was defined as full weight-bearing with less-than-severe pain at the fracture site. At nine
months, radiographic analysis revealed that 75% of the non-
unions that had been treated with rhOP-1 and 84% of thosethat had been treated with autograft had united (p = 0.218).Therefore, there was no significant difference with respect toeither clinical or radiographic outcome between the patientswho had been treated with recombinant rhOP-1 and thosewho had been treated with autograft (Fig. 3). The Food and
Drug Administration recently granted a Humanitarian  De-
vice Exemption for the use of the OP-1 device to treat recalci-trant nonunions of long bones (nonunions that have failed torespond to other treatment modalities).
The available preclinical data on the efficacy of TGF- β,
IGF, and PDGF in the treatment of nonunion or delayedunion are insufficient to make predictions regarding the fu-
ture clinical utility of these fa ctors. These factors may have po-
tential if used in combination with each other or with othergrowth factors, but the regulatory and licensing issues inher-ent in the development of combination therapies may be com-plex. PDGF is currently available for the enhancement ofnonosseous wound-healing
110. Its efficacy in this application
may provide insights into its potential application for the
treatment of skeletal wounds and defects.
Spinal Fusion
Spinal fusion is one of the most commonly performed opera-tions in orthopaedic surgery, with more than 983,000 such pro-
 THE JOURNAL  OF BONE  & J OINT  SURGERY  · JBJS .ORG
VOLUME  84-A · N UMBER  6 · J UNE  2002THE ROLE  OF GROWTH  FACTORS  
IN THE  REPAIR  OF BONE
cedures performed each year111. Approximately 33% (327,000)
of these procedures involve bone-grafting. However, while au-togenous bone-grafting is genera lly a successful method for en-
hancing spinal fusion, nonunion rates of 5% to 35% have beenreported
39,41,70. A number of factors, including the mechanical
instability of the spine and its fixation, the quality of the bone
and bone mass, the health of th e surrounding soft tissue, thetype of bone graft used, and the concurrent use of medications
and drugs such as nicotine, affe ct bone-graft incorporation and
the success of spinal fusion.
A pilot study in humans demonstrated that recombi-
nant human BMP-2 can be used to induce spinal fusion70. In a
multicenter randomized trial, fourteen patients underwent a
single-level anterior interbody fusion of the fifth lumbar and
Fig. 2
Radiographs, made two months postoperativel y, demonstrating differences in the healin g of critical-sized femoral defects in rat s that had been 
treated with (A) BMP-2-producing bone-ma rrow cells created via adenoviral gene transfer, (B) 20 µg of rhBMP-2, (C) β-galactosidase-producing bone-
marrow cells (cells infected with an adenovi rus containing lacZ gene), (D) noninfected rat-bone-marro w cells, or (E) guanidine- extracted demineral-
ized bone matrix alone. Dense tr abecular bone formed with in the defects that h ad been treated with the BM P-2-producing cells, a nd the bone re-
modeled to form a new cortex. The defects t hat had been treated with rh BMP-2 healed but were filled wi th lace-like trabecular b one. Minimal bone 
repair was noted in the other th ree groups. (Reprinted from: Lieberman JR, Dalu iski A, Stevenson S, Wu L, McAllister P , Lee YP , Kabo JM, Finerman 
GAM, Berk AJ, Witte ON. The effe ct of regional gene therapy wi th bone morphogenetic protein-2-pr oducing bone-marrow cells on th e repair of seg-
mental femoral defects in rats. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1999:81:905-17.)
Fig. 3
Radiographs of a thirty-f our-year-old man who was 
treated with osteogenic prot ein 1 (OP-1) after having 
sustained a closed comminuted  tibial fracture in a 
motor-vehicle accident. Pr ior treatment had included 
intramedullary rod fixation , insertion of fresh bone 
autograft, a fibulectomy, a nd external electrical stimu-
lation. The clinical and ra diographic results were con-
sidered successful at bot h nine and twenty-four 
months after treatment with  an intramedullary rod 
and OP-1. A, Immediate postoper ative radiograph. 
B,Radiograph made nine months after treatment 
with OP-1. C, Radiograph made twenty-four months 
after treatment with OP-1. (Reprinted from: Fried-
laender GE, Perry CR, Cole JD, Cook SD, Cierny G, 
Muschler GF, Zych GA, Calh oun JH, LaForte AJ, Yin S. 
Osteogenic protein-1 [bone morphogenetic protein-7] 
in the treatment of tibial  nonunions. A prospective, 
randomized clinical trial co mparing rhOP-1 with fresh 
bone autograft. J Bone Jo int Surg Am. 2001;83-A 
Suppl 1[Pt 2]: S151-8).
 THE JOURNAL  OF BONE  & J OINT  SURGERY  · JBJS .ORG
VOLUME  84-A · N UMBER  6 · J UNE  2002THE ROLE  OF GROWTH  FACTORS  
IN THE  REPAIR  OF BONE
first sacral vertebrae with use of  a tapered titanium fusion cage.
Eleven patients were treated with a cage filled with 10 mg of rh-
BMP-2 in a collagen carrier, and three control patients weretreated with a cage filled with autogenous bone graft. Six
months after the procedure, all eleven patients who had been
treated with recombinant protein and two of the three patientswho had been treated with autogenous graft had evidence offusion on plain radiographs and computed tomographic scans.No neurologic, vascular, or systemic complications were re-ported. Although the data appear promising, more patients
will need to be studied in order to confirm the efficacy and
safety of this method. In addition, the administration of a largedose (10 mg) of recombinant BMP may be costly, again sug-gesting that a collagen carrier may not be the most efficientmethod for BMP delivery. The role of other growth factors inenhancing spinal fusion requires further analysis.
The results of both preclinical and human studies sug-
gest that growth factors may have an important role in spinal
fusion procedures. The ability to deliver growth factors eitheras a protein or via gene therap y may lead to the development
of less invasive operative techni ques, such as laparoscopic spi-
nal fusion. Such a development carries the potential for reduc-ing operative morbidity, shortening time to wound-healing,and diminishing costs.
There has been some frustration associated with the
amount of time that it has taken for growth factors used in thetreatment of bone repair problems to become available to sur-geons and their patients. Although  OP-1 is now available on a
restricted basis and approval for the use of rhBMP to enhancespinal fusion appears imminent, the regulatory approval pro-
cess remains arduous. While all efforts to ensure product
safety for this young and otherwise healthy group of patientsare of paramount importance, the efficacy of growth factors inthe enhancement of bone repair is not easy to demonstrate.The process of normal fracture-healing is already biologicallyoptimized, and it is often difficult to simulate the human bio-logical environment in an animal. Growth factors may be de-
graded more quickly in humans than in animals, the biology
of the receptor-ligand interactions may differ, and the phar-macokinetics of the activity of growth factors may be less fa-vorable in humans. Finally, although there are many settingsin which orthopaedic surgeons might want to use a growth
factor to enhance skeletal heal ing, the assessment of healing in
a scientifically sound and quantitative way is difficult. For ex-ample, valid imaging techniques have not yet been developed
to determine if certain types of fractures are healed, to dem-
onstrate the extent of the bone repair that occurs after bone-grafting of osteolytic lesions associated with revision totaljoint arthroplasty, or to determ ine if fusion actually occurs
when a metallic cage has been placed in the spine.
The clinical application of growth factors has the poten-
tial to greatly improve the treatment of conditions requiring
bone repair. The development of appropriate delivery systemsshould enable surgeons to initiate successful tissue-engineeringstrategies and to develop minimally invasive surgical tech-n i q u e s  t h a t  c a n  r e d u c e  b o t h  m o r b i d i t y  a n d  c o s t s .  C a r e f u l l ydesigned clinical trials will be  needed to test the efficacy of
these strategies. Enhancing our understanding of the critical
interplay between growth factor biology and the properties of
the host environment will guide the applications of geneticengineering in orthopaedic treatments.
References
1.Trippel SB, Coutts RD, Einhorn TA, Mundy GR, Rosenfeld RG. Instructional 
Course Lecture, American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. Growth fac-tors as therapeutic agents. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1996;78:1272-86.
2.Barnes GL, Kostenuik PJ, Gerstenfeld LC, Einhorn TA. Growth factor regula-
tion of fracture repair. J Bone Miner Res. 1999;14:1805-15.
3.Massague J. TGFbeta signaling: receptors, transducers, and Mad proteins. 
Cell. 1996;85:947-50.
4.Heldin CH, Miyazono K, ten Dijke P . TGF-beta signalling from cell membrane 
to nucleus through SMAD proteins. Nature. 1997;390:465-71.
5.Kawabata M, Imamura T, Miyazono K. Signal transduction by bone morpho-
genetic proteins. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 1998;9:49-61.
6.Schmitt JM, Hwang K, Winn SR, Hollinger JO. Bone morphogenetic proteins: 
an update on basic biology and clinical relevance. J Orthop Res. 1999;17:
269-78.
7.Liu F, Ventura F, Doody J, Massague J. Human type II receptor for bone mor-phogenic proteins (BMPs): extension of th e two-kinase receptor model to the 
BMPs. Mol Cell Biol. 1995;15:3479-86.
8.Onishi T, Ishidou Y, Nagamine T, Yone K, Imamura T, Kato M, Sampath TK, 
ten Dijke P , Sakou T. Distinct and overlapping patterns of localization of 
bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) fam ily members and a BMP type II 
receptor during fracture healing in rats. Bone. 1998;22:605-12.
9.Trippel SB. Growth factors as therapeutic agents. Instr Course Lect. 1997;
46:473-6.
10.Linkhart TA, Mohan S, Baylink DJ. Growth factors for bone growth and repair: 
IGF, TGF beta and BMP . Bone. 1996;19 (1 Suppl):1S-12S.
11.Rosier RN, O’Keefe RJ, Hicks DG. The potential role of transforming growth 
factor beta in fracture healing. Clin Orthop. 1998;355 Suppl:S294-300.
12.Massague J, Wotton D. Transcriptional control by the TGF-beta/Smad signal-
ing system. EMBO J. 2000;19:1745-54.
13.Liu F, Hata A, Baker JC, Doody J, Carcamo J, Harland RM, Massague J. A Jay R. Lieberman, MD
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, UCLA Medical Center, CHS 76-134, 10833 Le Conte Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90077
Aaron Daluiski, MD
Desert Orthopaedic Center, 3150 North T enaya Way, Suite 405, Las Vegas, 
NV 89128
Thomas A. Einhorn, MD
Doctors Office Building, Suite 808, Boston University School of Medi-cine, 720 Harrison Avenue, Boston, MA 02118-2393
In support of their research or prepar ation of this manuscript, one or more 
of the authors received grants or outs ide funding from National Institutes 
of Health. In addition, one or more of the authors received payments or other benefits or a commitment or agreement to provide such benefits from a commercial entity (Genetics Institute, Stryker Biotech, Orquest, 
Musculoskeletal Transplant Foundati on). Also, a commercial entity 
(Genetics Institute, Stryker Biotech, Musculoskeletal Transplant Founda-tion) paid or directed, or agreed to pay or direct, benefits to a research fund, foundation, educational institution, or other charitable or nonprofit organization with which the author s are affiliated or associated.
 THE JOURNAL  OF BONE  & J OINT  SURGERY  · JBJS .ORG
VOLUME  84-A · N UMBER  6 · J UNE  2002THE ROLE  OF GROWTH  FACTORS  
IN THE  REPAIR  OF BONE
human Mad protein acting as a BMP- regulated transcriptional activator. 
Nature. 1996;381:620-3.
14.Robey PG, Young MF, Flanders KC, Roche NS, Kondaiah P , Reddi AH, 
Termine JD, Sporn MB, Roberts AB. Osteoblasts synthesize and respond 
to transforming growth factor-typ e beta (TGF-beta) in vitro. J Cell Biol. 1987;
105:457-63.
15.Bourque WT, Gross M, Hall BK. Expression of four growth factors during frac-
ture repair. Int J Dev Biol. 1993;37:573-9.
16.Bolander ME. Regulation of fracture repair by growth factors. Proc Soc Exp 
Biol Med. 1992;200:165-70.
17.Joyce ME, Jingushi S, Bolander ME. Transforming growth factor-beta in the 
regulation of fracture repair. Orthop Clin North Am. 1990;21:199-209.
18.Noda M, Camilliere JJ. In vivo stimulation of bone  formation by transforming 
growth factor-beta. Endocrinology. 1989;124:2991-4.
19.Lind M, Schumacker B, Soballe K,  Keller J, Melsen F, Bunger C. Transform-
ing growth factor-beta enhances fr acture healing in rabbit tibiae. Acta Orthop 
Scand. 1993;64:553-6.
20.Nielsen HM, Andreassen TT, Ledet T, Oxlund H. Local injection of TGF-beta 
increases the strength of tibial fractures in the rat. Acta Orthop Scand. 
1994;65:37-41.
21.Critchlow MA, Bland YS, Ashhurst DE. The effect of exogenous transforming 
growth factor-beta 2 on healin g fractures in the rabbit. Bone. 1995;16:521-7.
22.Sumner DR, Turner TM, Purchio AF, Gombotz WR, Urban RM, Galante JO. 
Enhancement of bone ingrowth by tr ansforming growth factor-beta. J Bone 
Joint Surg Am. 1995;77:1135-47.
23.Kaplan FS, Tabas JA, Zasloff MA. Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva: a 
clue from the fly? Calcif Tissue Int. 1990;47:117-25.
24.Shafritz AB, Shore EM, Gannon FH, Zasl off MA, Taub R, Muenke M, Kaplan 
FS. Overexpression of an osteogenic mo rphogen in fibrodysplasia ossificans 
progressiva. N Engl J Med. 1996;335:555-61.
25.Tabas JA, Hahn GV, Cohen RB, Seaunez HN, Modi WS, Wozney JM, Zasloff 
M, Kaplan FS. Chromosomal assignment of the human gene for bone mor-
phogenetic protein 4. Clin Orthop. 1993;293:310-6.
26.Dudley AT, Lyons KM, Robertson EJ. A requirement for bone morphogenetic 
protein-7 during development of the mammalian kidney and eye. Genes Dev. 
1995;9:2795-807.
27.Luo G, Hofmann C, Bronckers AL, S ohocki M, Bradley A, Karsenty G. BMP-7 
is an inducer of nephroge nesis, and is also require d for eye development and 
skeletal patterning. Genes Dev. 1995;9:2808-20.
28.Higinbotham KG, Karavanova ID, Diwan BA, Perantoni AO. Deficient expres-
sion of mRNA for the putative inductive  factor bone morphogenetic protein-7 
in chemically initiated rat nephroblastomas. Mol Carcinog. 1998;23:53-61.
29.Kingsley DM, Bland AE, Grubber JM, Mar ker PC, Russell LB, Copeland NG, 
Jenkins NA. The mouse short ear skeletal mo rphogenesis locus is associ-
ated with defects in a bone morphoge netic member of the TGF beta super-
family. Cell. 1992;71:399-410.
30.Urist MR. Bone: formation by autoinduction. Science. 1965;150:893-9.
31.Wozney JM, Rosen V, Celeste AJ, Mi tsock LM, Whitters MJ, Kriz RW, 
Hewick RM, Wang EA. Novel regulators of bone formation: molecular clones 
and activities. Science. 1988;242:1528-34.
32.Cook SD, Wolfe MW, Salkeld SL, Rueger DC. Effect of recombinant human 
osteogenic protein-1 on healing of segmental defects in non-human pri-
mates. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1995;77:734-50.
33.Cook SD, Baffes GC, Wolfe MW, Sampath TK, Rueger DC. Recombinant hu-
man bone morphogenetic protein-7 induc es healing in a canine long-bone 
segmental defect model. Clin Orthop. 1994;301:302-12.
34.Yasko AW, Lane JM, Fellinger EJ, Rosen V, Wozney JM, Wang EA. The heal-
ing of segmental bone defects, induced by recombinant human bone morpho-
genetic protein (rhBMP-2). A radiogr aphic, histological, and biomechanical 
study in rats. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1992;74:659-70.
35.Bostrom M, Lane JM, Tomin E, Browne M, Berberian W, Turek T, Smith J, 
Wozney J, Schildhauer T. Use of bone morphogenetic protein-2 in the rabbit 
ulnar nonunion model. Clin Orthop. 1996;327:272-82.
36.Gerhart TN, Kirker-Head CA, Kriz MJ, Ho ltrop ME, Hennig GE, Hipp J, Schel-
ling SH, Wang E. Healing segmental femoral def ects in sheep using recom-
binant human bone morphogenetic protein. Clin Orthop. 1993;293:317-26.
37.Sciadini MF, Johnson KD. Evaluation of recombinant human bone morphoge-
netic protein-2 as a bone-graft substi tute in a canine segmental defect 
model. J Orthop Res. 2000;18:289-302.38.Bostrom MP , Camacho NP . Potential role of bone morphogenetic proteins in 
fracture healing. Clin Orthop. 1998;355 Suppl:S274-82.
39.Schimandle JH, Boden SD, Hutton WC. Experimental spinal fusion with re-
combinant human bone mo rphogenetic protein-2. Spine. 1995;20:1326-37.
40.Sandhu HS, Kanim LE, Kabo JM, Toth JM, Zeegan EN, Liu D, Seeger LL, 
Dawson EG. Evaluation of rhBMP-2 with an OPLA carrier in a canine postero-
lateral (transverse process) spinal fusion model. Spine. 1995;20:2669-82.
41.Muschler GF, Hyodo A, Manning T, Kambic H, Easley K. Evaluation of hu-
man bone morphogenetic protein 2 in  a canine spinal fusion model. Clin 
Orthop. 1994;308:229-40.
42.Boden SD, Martin GJ Jr, Horton WC, Truss TL, Sandhu HS. Laparoscopic an-
terior spinal arthrodesis with rhBMP-2 in a titanium interbody threaded cage. 
J Spinal Disord. 1998;11:95-101.
43.Lind M. Growth factor stimulation of bone healing. Effects on osteoblasts, os-
teomies, and implants fixation. Acta Orthop Scand Suppl. 1998;283:2-37.
44.Wang JS. Basic fibroblast growth factor fo r stimulation of bone formation 
in osteoinductive or conductive implants. Acta Orthop Scand Suppl. 1996;
269:1-33.
45.Friesel RE, Maciag T. Molecular mechanisms of angiogenesis: fibroblast 
growth factor signal transduction. FASEB J. 1995;9:919-25.
46.Rodan SB, Wesolowski G, Thomas K, Rodan GA. Growth stimulation of rat 
calvaria osteoblastic cells by acidic fibroblast growth factor. Endocrinology. 
1987;121:1917-23.
47.Jingushi S, Heydemann A, Kana  SK, Macey LR, Bolander ME. Acidic fibroblast 
growth factor (aFGF) injection stimulates  cartilage enlargement  and inhibits car-
tilage gene expression in rat fracture healing. J Orthop Res. 1990;8:364-71.
48.Canalis E, Centrella M, McCarthy T. Effects of basic fibroblast growth factor 
on bone formation in vitro. J Clin Invest. 1988;81:1572-7.
49.Dionne CA, Jaye M, Schlessinger J. Structural diversity and binding of FGF re-
ceptors. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1991;638:161-6.
50.Xu X, Weinstein M, Li C, Deng C. Fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs) 
and their roles in limb development. Cell Tissue Res. 1999;296:33-43.
51.Deng C, Wynshaw-Boris A, Zhou F, Kuo A, Leder P . Fibroblast growth factor 
receptor 3 is a negative regulator of bone growth. Cell. 1996;84:911-21.
52.Dietz F, Muschler GF.  Update on the genetic basis of disorders with ortho-
paedic manifestations. In: Buckwalter JA, Einhorn TA, Simon S, editors. Or-
thopaedic basic science . Rosemont, IL: American Academy of Orthopaedic 
Surgeons, 2000. p 114. 
53.Radomsky ML, Thompson AY, Spiro RC, Poser JW. Potential role of fibro-
blast growth factor in enhanc ement of fracture healing. Clin Orthop. 1998;
355 Suppl:S283-93.
54.Kato T, Kawaguchi H, Ha nada K, Aoyama L, Hiyama Y, Nakamura T, Ku-
zutani K, Tamura M, Kurokawa T, Nakamura K. Single local injection of re-
combinant fibroblast growth factor-2  stimulates healing of segmental bone 
defects in rabbits. J Orthop Res. 1998;16:654-9.
55.Nakamura T, Hara Y, Tagawa M, Tamu ra M, Yuge T, Fukuda H, Nigi H. Re-
combinant human basic fibroblast growth  factor accelerates fracture healing 
by enhancing callus remodeling in ex perimental dog ti bial fracture. J Bone 
Miner Res. 1998;13:942-9.
56.Radomsky ML, Aufdemorte TB, Swain LD, Fox WC, Spiro RC, Poser JW. 
Novel formulation of fibroblast growth fa ctor-2 in a hyaluronan gel accelerates 
fracture healing in nonhuman primates. J Orthop Res. 1999;17:607-14.
57.Trippel SB, Rosenfeld RG. Growth factor treatment of disorders of skeletal 
growth. Instr Course Lect. 1997;46:477-82.
58.Trippel SB. Potential role of insulinlike grow th factors in fracture healing. Clin 
Orthop. 1998;355 Suppl:S301-13.
59.Andrew JG, Hoyland J, Freemont AJ, Marsh D. Insulinlike growth factor gene 
expression in human fracture callus. Calcif Tissue Int. 1993;53:97-102.
60.Bak B, Jorgensen PH, Andreassen TT. Dose response of growth hormone on 
fracture healing in the rat. Acta Orthop Scand. 1990;61:54-7.
61.Carpenter JE, Hipp JA, Gerhart TN, Rudman CG, Hayes WC, Trippel SB. Fail-
ure of growth hormone to alter the biom echanics of fracture-healing in a rab-
bit model. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1992;74:359-67.
62.Thaller SR, Dart A, Tesluk H. The effects of insulin-like growth factor-1 on 
critical-size calvarial defects in Sprague-Dawley rats. Ann Plast Surg. 1993;
31:429-33.
63.Andrew JG, Hoyland JA, Freemont AJ, Marsh DR. Platelet-derived growth fac-
tor expression in normally healing human fractures. Bone. 1995;16:455-60.
 THE JOURNAL  OF BONE  & J OINT  SURGERY  · JBJS .ORG
VOLUME  84-A · N UMBER  6 · J UNE  2002THE ROLE  OF GROWTH  FACTORS  
IN THE  REPAIR  OF BONE
64.Canalis E, McCarthy TL, Centrella M. Effects of platelet-derived growth factor 
on bone formation in vitro. J Cell Physiol. 1989;140:530-7.
65.Nash TJ, Howlett CR, Martin C, St eele J, Johnson KA, Hicklin DJ. Effect of 
platelet-derived growth factor on  tibial osteotomies in rabbits. Bone. 1994;
5:203-8.
66.Lieberman JR, Daluiski A, Stevenson S,  Wu L, McAllister P , Lee YP , Kabo 
JM, Finerman GA, Berk AJ, Witte ON. The effect of regional gene therapy 
with bone morphogenetic protein-2- producing bone-marrow cells on the 
repair of segmental femoral defects in rats. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1999;
81:905-17.
67.Tay BK, Patel VV, Bradford DS. Calcium sulfate- and calcium phosphate-
based bone substitutes. Mimicry of the mineral phase of bone. Orthop Clin 
North Am. 1999;30:615-23.
68.Wheeler DL, Stokes KE, Park HM, Hollinger JO. Evaluation of particulate 
Bioglass in a rabbit radius ostectomy model. J Biomed Mater Res. 1997;
35:249-54.
69.Ladd AL, Pliam NB. Use of bone-graft substitutes in  distal radius fractures. 
J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 1999;7:279-90.
70.Boden SD, Zdeblick TA, Sandhu HS, Heim SE. The use of rhBMP-2 in inter-
body fusion cages. Definitive evidence of osteoinduction in humans: a prelim-
inary report. Spine. 2000;25:376-81.
71.Boyne PJ, Marx RE, Nevins M, Triplett G, Lazaro E, Lilly LC, Alder M, Num-
mikoski P . A feasibility study evaluating rhBMP-2/absorbable collagen 
sponge for maxillary si nus floor augmentation. Int J Periodontics Restorative 
Dent. 1997;17:11-25.
72.Howell TH, Fiorellini J, Jones A, Alder M,  Nummikoski P , Lazaro M, Lilly L, 
Cochran D. A feasibility study evaluatin g rhBMP-2/absorbable collagen 
sponge device for local alveolar ri dge preservation or augmentation. Int J 
Periodontics Re storative Dent. 1997;17:124-39.
73.Uludag H, D’Augusta D, Palmer R, Timony G, Wozney J. Characterization of 
rhBMP-2 pharmacokinetics implanted with biomaterial carriers in the rat ec-
topic model. J Biomed Mater Res. 1999;46:193-202.
74.Winn SR, Uludag H, Hollinger JO. Carrier systems for bone morphogenetic 
proteins. Clin Orthop. 1999;367 Suppl:S95-106.
75.Johnson EE, Urist MR, Finerman GA. Resistant nonunions and partial or 
complete segmental defects of long  bones. Treatment with implants of a 
composite of human bone morphogenetic  protein (BMP) and autolyzed, 
antigen-extracted, allogeneic (AAA) bone. Clin Orthop. 1992;277:229-37.
76.Hollinger JO, Leong K. Poly(alpha-hydroxy acids): carriers for bone morpho-
genetic proteins. Biomaterials. 1996;17:187-94.
77.Behravesh E, Yasko AW, Engel PS, Mikos AG. Synthetic biodegradable poly-
mers for orthopaedic applications. Clin Orthop. 1999;367 Suppl:S118-29.
78.Uludag H, Gao T, Porter TJ, Friess W, Wozney JM. Delivery systems for 
BMPs: factors contributing to protei n retention at an application site. J Bone 
Joint Surg Am. 2001;83 Suppl 1:S128-35.
79.Holmes RE, Bucholz RW, Mooney V. Porous hydroxyapatite as a bone-graft 
substitute in metaphyseal defects. A histometric study. J Bone Joint Surg 
Am. 1986;68:904-11.
80.Sempuku T, Ohgushi H, Okumura M, Tamai S. Osteogenic potential of alloge-
neic rat marrow cells in porous hydroxya patite ceramics: a histological study. 
J Orthop Res. 1996;14:907-13.
81.Bruder SP , Kraus KH, Go ldberg VM, Kadiyala S. The effect of implants loaded 
with autologous mesenchymal stem ce lls on the healing of canine segmental 
bone defects. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1998;80:985-96.
82.Kon E, Muraglia A, Corsi A, Bianco P ,  Marcacci M, Martin L, Boyde A, Rus-
pantini I, Chistolini P , Rocca M, Giardino R, Cancedda R, Quarto R. Autolo-
gous bone marrow stromal cells load ed onto porous hydroxyapatite ceramic 
accelerate bone repair in critical -size defects of sheep long bones. J Biomed 
Mater Res. 2000;49:328-37.
83.Bay BK, Martin RB, Sharkey NA, Chapman MW. Repair of large cortical de-
fects with block coralline hydroxyapatite. Bone. 1993;14:225-30.
84.Gao T, Lindholm TS, Ma rttinen A, Urist MR. Composites of bone morphoge-
netic protein (BMP) and type IV collagen, coral-derived coral hydroxyapatite, 
and tricalcium phosphate ceramics. Int Orthop. 1996;20:321-5.
85.Gao TJ, Tuominen TK, Lindholm TS, Kommonen B, Lindholm TC. Morphological 
and biomechanical difference in healing in segmental tibial defects implanted 
with Biocoral or tricalcium phosphate cylinders. Biomaterials. 1997;18:219-23.
86.Sciadini MF, Dawson JM, Johnson KD. Evaluation of bovine-derived bone 
protein with a natural coral carrier as  a bone-graft substitute in a canine 
segmental defect model. J Orthop Res. 1997;15:844-57.87.Wolfe SW, Pike L, Slade JF 3rd, Katz LD. Augmentation of distal radius 
fracture fixation with coralline hy droxyapatite bone graft substitute. J Hand 
Surg [Am]. 1999;24:816-27.
88.Ohura K, Hamanishi C, Tanaka S, Matsuda N. Healing of segmental bone 
defects in rats induced by a beta-TC P-MCPM cement combined with rhBMP-
2. J Biomed Mater Res. 1999;44:168-75.
89.Ongpipattanakul B, Nguyen T, Zio ncheck TF, Wong R, Osaka G, DeGuz-
man L, Lee WP , Beck LS. Development of tricalcium phosphate/amylopec-
tin paste combined with recombinan t human transforming growth factor 
beta 1 as a bone defect filler. J Biomed Mater Res. 1997;36:295-305.
90.Johnson KD, Frierson KE, Keller TS, Cook C, Scheinberg R, Zerwekh J, 
Meyers L, Sciadini MF. Porous ceramics as bone graft substitutes in long 
bone defects: a biomechanical, histol ogical, and radiographic analysis. J 
Orthop Res. 1996;14:351-69.
91.Cornell CN. Osteoconductive materi als and their role as  substitutes for 
autogenous bone grafts. Orthop Clin North Am. 1999;30:591-8.
92.Shors EC. Coralline bone graft substitutes. Orthop Clin North Am. 1999;
30:599-613.
93.Ripamonti U, Ma S, Reddi AH. The critical role of geometry of porous 
hydroxyapatite delivery system in in duction of bone by osteogenin, a bone 
morphogenetic protein. Matrix. 1992;12:202-12.
94.Solchaga LA, Dennis JE, Goldberg VM, Caplan AI. Hyaluronic acid-based 
polymers as cell carriers for tissue- engineered repair of bo ne and cartilage. 
JO r t h o p  R e s .  1999;17:205-13.
95.Sasaki T, Watanabe C. Stimulation of osteoinduc tion in bone wound heal-
ing by high-molecular hyaluronic acid. Bone. 1995;16:9-15.
96.Evans CH, Robbins PD. Possible orthopaedic applicat ions of gene therapy. 
JB o n e  J o i n t  S u r g  A m .  1995;77:1103-14.
97.Scaduto AA, Lieberman JR. Gene therapy for osteoinduction. Orthop Clin 
North Am. 1999;30:625-33.
98.Crystal RG. Transfer of genes to humans: early lessons and obstacles to 
success. Science. 1995;270:404-10.
99.Anderson WF. Human gene therapy. Nature. 1998;392(6679 Suppl):25-30.
100. Kay MA, Glorioso JC, Naldini L. Viral vectors for gene therapy: the art of turn-
ing infectious agents into vehicles of therapeutics. Nat Med. 2001;7:33-40.
101. Baltzer AW, Lattermann C, Whalen JD , Wooley P, Weiss K, Grimm M, 
Ghivizzani SC, Robbins PD, Evans CH. Genetic enhancement of fracture re-
pair: healing of an experimental segment al defect by adenoviral transfer of 
the BMP-2 gene. Gene Ther. 2000;7:734-9.
102. Fang J, Zhu YY, Smiley E, Bonadio J, Rouleau JP , Goldstein SA, McCauley 
LK, Davidson BL, Roessler BJ. Stimulation of new bone formation by direct 
transfer of osteogenic plasmid genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996;93:
5753-8.
103. Bonadio J, Smiley E, Patil P , Goldstein S. Localized, direct plasmid gene 
delivery in vivo: prolonged therapy resu lts in reproducible tissue regenera-
tion. Nat Med. 1999;5:753-9.
104. Boden SD, Titus L, Hair G, Liu Y, Viggeswarapu M, Nanes MS, Baranowski 
C. Lumbar spine fusion by local gene th erapy with a cDNA encoding a novel 
osteoinductive protein (LMP-1). Spine. 1998;23:2486-92.
105. Viggeswarapu M, Boden SD, Liu Y, Hair  GA, Louis-Ugbo J, Murakami H, 
Kim HS, Mayr MT, Hutton WC, Titus L. Adenoviral delivery of LIM mineral-
ization protein-1 induces new-bone fo rmation in vitro and in vivo. J Bone 
Joint Surg Am. 2001;83:364-76.
106. Praemer A, Furner S, Rice DP . Musculoskeletal conditions in the 
United States . Park Ridge, IL: American Academy of Orthopaedic 
Surgeons; 1992.
107. Younger EM, Chapman MW. Morbidity at bone graft donor sites. J Orthop 
Trauma. 1989;3:192-5.
108. Geesink RG, Hoefnagels NH, Bulstra SK. Osteogenic activity of OP-1 bone 
morphogenetic protein (BMP-7) in a human fibular defect. J Bone Joint Surg 
Br. 1999;81:710-8.
109. Friedlaender GE, Perry CR, Cole JD, Cook SD, Cierny G, Muschler GF, Zych 
GA, Calhoun JH, LaForte AJ, Yin S. Osteogenic protein-1 (bone morpho-
genetic protein-7) in the tr eatment of tibial nonunions. J Bone Joint Surg 
Am. 2001;83 Suppl 1:S151-8.
110. Robson MC. The role of growth factors in  the healing of chronic wounds. 
Wound Rep Reg. 1997;5:12-7.
111. Deutsche Banc. Alex Brown. Estimates and Company Information, Febru-
ary 2001. 