848 CANADIAN  JOURNAL  OF ANESTHESIA
CAN J ANESTH 54: 10    www.cja-jca.or g    October, 2007A 71-yr-old female patient presented for 
endovascular repair of a descending thoracic aortic aneurysm. She had undergone a per -
vious sternotomy for repair of an aortic arch 
aneurysm. The preoperative computed tomography scan demonstrated a large false aneurysm (5.0 × 6.6 cm) distal to the left subclavian artery and extending caudally to the celiac artery. Following induction of anesthesia under routine monitoring, a transesopha-geal echocardiography (TEE) standard examination was performed.
1 The false aneurysm was identified and 
its size was determined. Further TEE measurements were obtained to assist stent graft deployment.848
CAN J ANESTH 54: 10    www.cja-jca.or g    October, 2007Images in Anesthesia
Transesophageal echocardiographic diagnosis of a 
failed balloon catheter during endovascular  
stenting of a descending thoracic aneurysm
CAN J ANESTH 2007 / 54: 10 / pp 848 −849
FIGURE 1  Intraoperative transesophageal image of the balloon catheter partially inflated in the descending thoracic aortic 
aneurysm. IMAGES  IN ANESTHESIA   8 49
CAN J ANESTH 54: 10    www.cja-jca.or g    October, 2007Femoral artery access facilitated the deployment 
of a stent graft distal to the left subclavian artery. A 
second graft overlapping the distal end of the first was required to cover the entire length of the false aneurysm. Intraoperative TEE could detect primary endoleaks at the proximal and distal ends of the grafts. A Cook Coda balloon (Cook Inc., Bloomington, IN, USA) 40 mm was inflated within the two stent grafts to achieve complete stent expansion and minimize pri-mary endoleaks.
2 Transesophageal echocardiography 
images of the balloon catheter revealed incomplete expansion of the balloon during the inflation period (Figure 1). The balloon catheter was replaced, and full expansion of the balloon was achieved (Figure 2). The postoperative course was uneventful. 
Ashraf Fayad 
MD FASE FCARCSI
University of Ottawa, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, 
CanadaE-mail: afayad@ottawahospital.on.caAccepted for publication July 4, 2007.References
 1 Anonymous. Practice guidelines for perioperative 
transesophageal echocardiography. A report by the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists and the Society 
of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists Task Force on 
Transesophageal Echocardiography. Anesthesiology 
1996: 84: 986–1006.
 2 Fattori R, Caldarera I, Rapezzi C, et al. Primary 
endoleakage in endovascular treatment of the thoracic 
aorta: importance of intraoperative transesophageal 
echocardiography. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2000; 120: 490–5.
FIGURE 2  Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiographic image of the balloon catheter fully expanded within the 
descending thoracic aorta stent.