-6/%6/*7&34*5:
1
0

#
P
Y











-
V
O
E
















Modeling and Identification of a Nuclear Reactor
Olsson, Gustaf
1975
Document Version: 
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link to publication
Citation for published version (APA): 
Olsson, G. (1975). Modeling and Identification of a Nuclear Reactor . (Technical Reports TFRT-7075). 
Department of Automatic Control, Lund Institute of Technology (LTH).
Total number of authors: 
1
General rights
Unless other specific re-use rights are stated the following general rights apply:
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors
and/or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the
legal requirements associated with these rights.
 • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study
or research.
 • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
 • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal
Read more about Creative commons licenses: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove
access to the work immediately and investigate your claim.aÇ{ç*?0T5
MODELING
NUC LEARAND IDENTIFICATION OF A
REACTOR
a
G.OLSSON
Report 7504 (C) Februori 1975
Lund lnstitute of Technotogy
Deportment of Automotic Controli
Chapter
MODELT\iG A,ND TDENîTFTCATTON OF A NUCLEAR REACTOR.
Gustaf O1sson
Department of Automatic Control
Lund Institute of Technology
3-22007 Lund, Sweden
ï TNTRODUCTTON
II.DESCRTPTTON OF THE NUCLEAR REACTOR
A. Plant Description
B. ReactÍvity Feed.backs
C. Step Responses
TIT.EXPERTMENTS
A. Summary of the Experj-ments
B. Internal Controllers
C. Experi-mental Design Considerations
D. fnstruments and Actuators
rv.TDENTIFICATTON METHODS
A. Multiple-Input-Single-Output Structure
B. Multivariable Structures
C. A Vector Difference Equation Approach
D. Recursive Parameter EstimatÍon
E. Model Verification
F. CompuÈational AspectsLl-
v.}IULTIPLE.TNPUT STNGLE-OUTPUT MODELS
A. Nuclear Power
B. Primary Pressure
C. Secondary and Tertiary pressures
D. The Problem of Negative Real Discrete poles
vI.\IECTOR DTFFERENCE EQUATTONS
A. Correlation Analysis
B. MaxÍmum Likelihood. (ML) Identifications
C. Simulatíons
VIT. A STATE MODEL
A. Derivation of a Model Structure
B. Parameter Identification
VTIT. RECURSIVE TDENTTFTCATTON
A. Influence of Subcooling power
B. Parameter Tracking
ACKNOWTEDGE¡,IENTS
REFERENCES
The purpose of this paper i-s to find linear sLochas-
tic models of different structures f,or a nuclear reactor.
The models will be used for control. The results are based
on experÍments performed on the Halden Boiling i,u'ater Reac-
tor (HBWR), Norway, in cooperation with the OECD Halden Reac-
tor Project. The plant is consiclered a multÍvariabre sys-l" l_ l_
tem. Spatial effects are neglected. Three inputs have
been used in the experiments. Problems relating to expe-
rimental desj-gn, data preparation, choice of mod.eI struc-
ture, identification methods, comÞutations and model ve-
rifj-cations are considered.. The dynamics of the reactor
i-s briefly described, and the identification results are
compared to theoretical or empirical experier:ces. Maxj,mum
likelihood technique is used. predominantly for parameter
estimati-on.1
ïTNTRODUCTTON
Some representative results from modeling and iden-
tificatj-on experj-ments on the Halden Boiling Water Reac-
tor, (HeWn), Nonvay, are presented in this paper. Linear
ínput-output models as r.¡eIl as time invariant and. time va-
ri-able linear state models have been used as model struc-
tures. Some of the results are presented previously in
tf 31 , while others are ne\^r.
The purpose of the paper is to describe the diffe-
rent phases of id.entification and modeling of a complex
dynami-cal system. Dífferent identification method.s have
been used to demonstrate the applicability of identifica-
tion technique as a tool to explore the dynamics of a nu-
clear reactor.
.¡{ nuclear reactor is an example of a very conplex
dynamical system and offers some special features. There
j-s a wide span of time constants in the system. The neut-
ron kineLics is very fast, and the dominating kinetics
time constant j-s about 0.1 second. The typical time con-
stants for actuators and instru¡nent dynamics vary betv¡een
fractions of a second and about one second. The fuel e1e-
ment heat dynamics are of Lhe order of a few seconds. The
heat transfer in moderator and coolant channels as well
as the hydraulics is of the order of sorne seconds rip to2
some minute. The heat transfer through the heat removal
circuits wi-II take one to several ¡ninutes. Xenon oscilla-
tions have a time period of the order of days. On an even
longer time scale there are the burn out phenomena due to
fuel consumption.
Several nonlinear phenomena are important in a nu-
clear reactor. The dynamics of the coolant channels are
very complex. The relation beÈween boiling boundary, void
contents and reactivity j-s generally highly nonlinear and
very difficult to model. The heat exchanger dynami-cs and.
steam generation are also significantly nonlj-near.
Many phenomena are spatially dependent. Power d.istri-
bution oscillations due to xenon are not negligible in a
large reactor. The spatial variations of void content and
temperature j-n the coolant channels -arê essential, dynani-
ca1 phenomena. The neutron d.istribution is not homogeneous
since the fuel elements are burnt out at different rates
in different parts of the core.
A model used for controller d.esign cannot include
all the mentioned phenomena in detail. A large number of
compromizes must be made j-n order to make the model not
too large and sti11 accurate. The purpose of this paper
has primarily been to find linear models for steady state
control. The nuclear power and the primary pressure then
are the most important outputs to be controlled. This li-3
mits the i-nteresting span of time constants to be smaller
than sonte minutes. The results of the investigation show
that the dynamics of the reactor generally can be described
by quite low order models. It r.vil1 be demonstrated that
identification is a useful tool to find simpler descrip-
tions of such a cornplex process.
Modelj-ng and identifj-cation problems for nucl-ear
power reactors have been considered extensively. The l'laxi-
mum Likelihood (ML) method is compared rvj-th other methods
for a reactivity-nuclear power modet by Gustavsson t4l.
Sage et, aI I5l use a least sguares approach to iden-
tify parameters in a reactor ¡node1. Ciechanorvicz et a1 t6l
use spectral analysis to i,lentify parameters in a sirnple
linear model. Recursive identification or parameter track-
ing has been reported by different authors. Habegger et a1
t7l apply Extended Kalman techniques to track pararneters
in a nuclear system. Moore et al t8l use a combination of
least squares and IrlL approach to get an adaptive control-
scheme of a model of a pressuri-zed v¡ater reactor.
The dynamics of the Halden reactor has been studied
extensively before. single input experiments have been
performed, e.g. step response analysis by Brcu\{ers [9],
freguency analysis by Tosi et a1 [10], pseudo random
reactivity perturbati-on experiments b]' fishman tlIl and4
noise experiments by Eurola t121. Bj/r1o et eI t13l have
re¡nrted alinear multivariahle model of the HBWR. The
vessel pressure dynamics and core dynamics have been
studied with recursive least sguares techniques by Roggen-
bauer t14 l.
Four different approaches tothe model building tech-
report: niques are investigated j-n thj-s
o
oo
omultiple-input - single-output models with no á priori
assumption about physical behaviour,
multivari-able (vector difference) model-s without phy-
sj-cal á. priori knowledge,
estimatÍon of parameters j-n linear time invariant
state models wj-th known structure and á priori noise
structure assumptions,
estj-mation of time variable parameters in linear sto-
chastic state models.
It is natural that a model wj-th no á priori assump-
tion about the physics does not demand physical insight
into the process, at least not to get parameter values. In
general there is no physical interpretatj-on of the para-
meters, and it is therefore sometimes difficult to verify
the models in more general terms. On the other hand, such
a model can Eive a good insight into the required con-5
plexity of a more structured model. The validity of the
model is limited to the same operational conditions for
the plant as those during the identification experiment.
As a nuclear reactor is a multivariable system, the
second approach is an atte¡npt to take the couplings of
the system j-nto consideration without too many å priori
assumptj-ons. Compromises about the noise have to be made.
The approach gi-ves a better idea of the couplings in the
system, and it is then easier to derive reasonable struc-
tures for more advanced models.
A state model with some of the parameters unknorcn
naturally requires more insight into the process. fn such
a model the parameters have physical interpretations. If
the assumptions on the structure are perfect, the rnodel
accuracy can be high. On the other h_and, if the assuÌìp-
tions are imperfect, the model can be more inaccurate
than an input-output model without á priori assumptions.
The identification would then be constrained into too few
degrees of freedom, eiLher because of too few free para-
meters or of a wrong á priori structure.
In order to be valid for varying operating condi-
tions the plant model should be nonlinear. AlternatJ-ve1y
it has here been assurned a time varying linear state mo-
deI. Some of the variable parameters then have been tracked6
by recursive identification techniques.
The paper is organized as follows. In section TI,
the reactor plant is described and. its dynamics are stu-
died. qualj-t.atively. A summary of the experinents selected.
is mad.e in sectj-on III. Experimental design is also consi-
deredr âs well as instrumentation and actuator characte-
rístics. The identification methods used are briefllz pre-
sented in section IV. Maximum likelihood id.entification
technique has been applied predominantly. The multiple-
i"nput - single-output mod.els are d.iscussed i-n sectj_on V.
Although accurate mod.els were found, the linearity of the
models is a limitation, and it is doubtful if they are va-
lid in'a large operational range. Improvements of the ac-
curacy \Â/ere obtained by introducing other couplings by a
vector dj-fference equatJ-on approach in section VI. In chap-
ter vrr a linear state vector moceL structure is preser:ted..
Parameters of thi-s structure are id.entified. The recursive
paranreter tracking is finally described briefly in section
VTTI.7
ÏÏ. DESCRTPTION OF THE NUCLEAR RE.ACTOR..
A short description of the reactor is gitren to pro-
vide a physical background. fn the first paragraph the
different parÈs of the plant are briefly descri_bed. In pa-
ragraph B the most important dynamical reactivity feeobacks
are considered. Finally it is discussed how changes in the
three actual inputs propagate through the system
A. Plant Descriotion.
The reactor plant has been d.escribed elser,.'here in
great detailr e.9. in Jamne et al tfSl and several other
reports from the Halden Reactor project, e.g. tg 131.
For easy reference some main features of the plant are
descri-bed here.
A simplified sketch of the plant rvith its heat re-
moval circuits is shown in Fig. 1. The HBWR. is a natural
circulation, boiling heavy water reactor. It can be ope-
rated at power levels up to 25 Mi,.¡ and at 24OoC.
1 . Core and Prirnary Circuit.
fn the primary circuit heavy water is
a closed loop. This circuit consists of the
sel, steam transformers ancl a subcooler A.circulated in
reactor \¡es-
The latter onesI
are heat exchangers for t'he steam and rqater circulation
loops respectively.
The core consists of enriched uranium fuel moderated
by heavy v¿at!)r. There are 100 fuel assemblies in the core
arranged in a hexagonal pattern each element being 88 cm
in length. The core diameter j-s 16? cm and is surrounded
by a radial reflector with a thickness 51 cm. The bottom
reflector i-s 38 cm thick.
The fuel elements in the core have shrouds into r,¡hich
heavy rvater from the moderator enters through the holes in
the bot.tom section. The shrouds create a defined flov¡ pat-
tern, and can separate the upstreaning mixture of steam
and water from the d.ownstreaming water betv¡een the elements.
The lower part of the core is not boiling while the ucper
part is. The water in the system is close to the saturation
temperature.
The mixture of steam and water leaves the shrouds
-through hoLes at the top and separation of water and stea¡o
takes p1ace. The steam passes fron the reactor vessel
through the primary sid.e of a heat exchanger called the
steam transformer. As the steam is condensed i-t is pu¡nped
together with water fronr the bulk of the noderator through
the primary siCe of the s'"ibcooler A fFigs . 1, 2) . The water9
is cooled a few degrees below the saturation temperature
and. then reci-rculated into the vessel.
The reactivity is controlled by 30 absorbtj-on roi.s
which can be :.nserted into ti:e core.
2. Subcoolinq Circuit.
The mass flow of subcooled water is controlled by a
valve 11á (VA 770). As the subcooled water enters the moCe-
I
rator it mainly affects the moderator temperature. The main
purpose of the subcooling circuit is to suppress boiJ-ing of
the moderator. To a lower extent it conÈrols the reactivity
of the core.
îhe water loop is to some extent símilar to the coo-
lant flow circulation system in a light water BWR, even if
there are major differences. In the HBI{R this system is not
primarily designed for control purposes, and thus the flow
and also the reactivity feedback are much smaller than in a
1i9ht rvater B!{R. The void reactivity feedback is about 20
pcm/z void (1 pcm = 10-5) in the HBI{R compared to about 125
pcm/? void j-n a BWR.
Because of the limited control authorÍty of the valve
o1 it. co:rtrol the nuclear pov¿er in
as compared to a light rn¡ater
tire absorbtion rods.cannot alone
a wide rangethe HBÌ{R
over
be complenented byBWR. It nust10
3. Secondarv andTertiary Circuj-ts.
The secondary circuit is closed and fil1ed r+ith light
water (seeFi-gs. I, 2).'I{ater coming frorn the steam d.rum is
circulated through the secondary sid.e of the steam trans-
former and back to the steam drum. The secondary circuj-t
also includes a steam flow from the steam drum t,o the pri--
mary side of a steam generator where it is condensed.
The cond.ensed r¿sater returns via the hot ¡¡e1l to the
subcooler B, where primarily feedwater is preheated. The
water is further heated up in the subcooler A before it
returns to the steam drum. This steam drum mainly serves
as a separator for steam and water.
The tertiary circuit is an open loop circuit of Iight.
water. The water is heated up to form steam j-n the seconda-
ry side of the steam generator. The steam can be used by
consumers through a valve .2 (VB 282). The plant has no
turbiner but u, shourd normally be the turbine controller.
The steam can be recirculated via the feedwater tank and
the subcooler B to the stea¡n generator.11
B. Reactivitv Feedbacks
The essential part of the dynamics has to do rvi-th the
reactivity feedbacks. For the discussion we refer to Fig.
3. The net reactivity determines the nucl-ear power whj-ch
is produced in the core. This net reactivity is a sum of
several feedback effects. The nucl ear power is created
through the fissj-on, which can be descri-bed by the kinetic
eguations, j-ncluding delayed neutrons. This power gene-
rates heat which is transferred through the fuel elements.
A change in fuel temperature causes a negative reactivity
feedback. The heat frux transfers heat vi-a the fuel e1e-
ments and the moderator into the coolant. The mod.erator
dynamics describes the temperature and void distribution
in the moderator. rt is related to the steam pressure, and
\^7ateï and steam velocities.
rt shourd be remarked that there are some important
differences between light water and heavy water boiling
reactors. Tn Hro systems almost alr the mode:iator is boir-
ing. fn DrO systems the boiling takes place only in a
fraction of the moderator space, because the moderator-to-
fuel ratio is relatively large. Therefore moders of light
water boiling reactors, which are descrj-bed in the Ìitera-
ture, such as Fleck tro], differ from the HBI^IR in basic as-
sumptions.T2
The heat flux consists of several components. Except
the nuclear power it j-s determi-ned b1' gañìrna and. neutron
heating as well as the subcooling pol'rer. The coolant chan-
nel dynamics (the void and temperature distributions in
the coolant channels) is primarily determined by the heat
f1ux, but also by the vessel pressure, the steam and water
velocitj-es as well as the channer inlet temperature. This
one in turn depends on the noderator temperature. Natural-
ly those phenomena are spatially d.ependent. Therefore it
should be emphasizeð., that not only lþs total heat flux
but also the spati-al distributions of void contents, water
velocities and neutron flux distribution will certainly in-
fruence the total power. rf the mo'del should include al-1
those phenomena, however, it would be too complex for con-
trol purposes. Therefore the variables are weighted over
the space, and some crucial assumptions, especial-ly about
the hydraulics, have to be made. BeCauËê of this, it is
also in some cases difficult to give a physical explana-
tion of certain parameters, as they in essence are combi-
nations of several microscopj-c coefficients. The reactivi-
ty feedbacks from temperatures and void contents are cru-
cial for the total plant behavj-our. The physical explana-
tion for reactivity couplings can be studied. in standard
textbooks, like Glasstone-Ed.lund [17], King [18], I"leghreb-
lian-Holmes [19], weaver t201.l_J
Another 5-mportant reactivity feed.back has to do with
fj-ssion products with extremely high neutron absorbtion,
such as xenon. Transients due to xenon can aÞpear j-n two
ways. one type of xenon transients appears at h5-gh neutron
flux levels and is enforced due to power changes. Thj-s va-
ries the average concentration of xenon, and consequentry
the neutron level. As all the experiments have been per-
formed at almost constant power, no such power transients
are actual
The other type of xenon feedback occurs in reactors
with large geometri-cal dimensions. There the xenon con-
centration can oscillate spatially between di fferent parts
of the core, thus creat.Íng hot spots of power, rvhile the
average power is constant. such phenomena have been ana-
lyzed by several authorsr e.9. T{iberg t21l and. olsson 1,221
and will not be considered here becäusé of tv¡o reasons.
First, the oscillations are too slow to be of interesÈ
herer âs the primary purpose Ís to keep nuclear power and
primary pressure constant. second, the Hal-den reactor has
small geometrical dimensj-ons so that the spatial oscilla-
tlons are too much damped to be of any interest.
The essential disturbances tothe system consist of
absorbtion rods or changes reactivity perturbations from the14
in the steam consunption.
quite comprehensive descriptj-on of the details of
the HBI{R dynamics can be found in Vollmer et al t23l and
Euro1a L241.
C. SteResonses.
For the following discussion it is useful to har¡e
an over\¡j-ew of the major physical phenonena of the p1ant.
The purpose is to provide this by qualitative discussion
of step responses and the major physical phenornena that
are involved.. The results are based on both theoretical
considerations and. practical- experj-ences.
1. Subcooling Valve u1'
Assume that the valve 11 (VA 770) is closed steprvise.
As only small changes are discussed linear relations ere
assumed. The downcomer subcooled flov¡ F6 (see Figs. 2, 4)
decreases rapidly as the valve closes. The water tempera-
ture T100 just before the subcooler is not affected, but
the subcoored water flow temperature TB is decreased v¡ith
a few seconds t:-rne constant (Fig. 4).
The heat flow delivered to the
tbe subcoolJ-ng power Q. This poh:er
gy balances over the heat exchanqersubcooler A is called
is calculated from ener-
(subcooler A) and is a15
functi-on of the product of the temperature change of T8
and the flow change of F6.
It is possible to empirically relate the subcooling
power j-n a simple fashion, to F6, TB and u,, r âs can be vi-
zualized. by Fig. 4. As the flow F6 is closely related to
the valve openì-ng u, r the subcooling poh?er change can be
written
6Q(s)
r¿here s is Lhe Laplace operator.
The subcooling povrer can also empirically be written as a
function of T8:
6Q(t) = or6(TB) + s2d (r8)
dr
where o1 > 0, sz
The effect of closing the valve is thus, that more
heat energy is returned to the core. The bubble formation
in the moderator is amplified, and this phenomenon direct-
ly causes a negatlrre reactivity feedba.ck. Because of this
the nuclear power d.ecreases quite rapidl-ya.,o(rB(s)) +.2 a e[urts))16
fn a longer time scale several- secondary effects take
place, which is illustrated by the step response in Fig. 5,
As the nuclea-r po\der d.ecreases, the vessel pressure and the
temperatures also decrease. other reactivity feedbacks no!¡
are beginning to act and the nuclear power is slorvly re-
turned t.o a more positj-ve value.
The vessel pressure naturally is coupled through the
steam transformer to the secondary and the tertiary cir-
cuits. Those pressures therefore slottly follow the pres*
sure decrease in the vessel. the steam production in the
primary circuit is, however, influenced to a lesser deg-
ree.
When u. is
inlet f1ol F41closed. only a
(rig. 2 ) canslight decrease of
be observed. Thethe steam
same is Lrue
for the flow F28 in the secondary circuj-t,
2. Consumers Stearn Valve u2'
À sudden íncrease of the valve ooening u, (W 282) for
the tertiary steam flow directly increases the tertiary
steam flow F21 (see Figs. 6 and 2) . Consequently the ter-
tiary pressure {P62} will be decreased witl: a dominating
time constant of about one minute.
The ternperature T55 is strongly coupled to the pres-LI
sure variations and i-t follows the pressure P62 c1oseI1z.
Also the flow F16 is increased., but delayed a ferv seconCs
after the flov¿ F21. The feedwater temperatures T60 and T61
are quite unaffected by u".
When the heat flow through the secondary side of the
steam generator is d.ecreased also the secondary press.ure
P6I will decrease (Fig. 6). The temperature T18 is close-
ly coupled to the pressure and follows P61 quite we1l.
The hot well temperature T57 and. the secondary water tem-
perature T81 are relatively constant despi-te changes ín u,
The flows F27 and. F28 are varying quite noticeably.
The dynamics is, however, significantly influenced. by an
internal cont::olIer. The hot well level is kept constanl
in all the experiments by a valve controlling the flow F28,
The flows F27 and F28 increase when the valve u., is opened-
The pressure drop in the tertiary and secondary cir-
cuits is propagated to t-he primary circuit with a 2-3 mi-
nutesr time delay, and thus the vessel pressure P13 is de-
creased (l'Íg. 6). A pressure drop in the core will cause
the void to increase in the first moment, and the boiling
boundary will fa1l. The reactivity feedback from void there-
fore has the effect to decrease the nuclear power in the
first moment. When the power decreases, however, the steam
wrproduction also decreases, thus creatj-ng a smaller void
content and a higher boiling boundary agaÍn. This causes
the nucl-ear power to increase. As indicated by the expe-
rimental step response in Fig. 7 the nuclear poh,'er shorcs
a non minimum phase behaviour.
The cont:or power from u, is significantly larger than
that of u, r a fact which is illustrated by the step respon-
ses in Figs. 5 and 7. on the other hand, the valve u, can
change the nuclear power much more rapid.ly than the valve
ù2, so they complement each other dynamically. rn a light
water BT{R, as mentioned before, there is not such a great
difference in control authority betrveen u1 and ur.18
From an ídentification point of view the
certaÍnly the best input for studies of the
ßcircuit dynamj-cs. The valve 11 naturally has
influence on the subcooling circuit.l'alve ul-s2
heat remor¡al
the strongest
3Control Rod Reactivitv u2.
By inserting or withdrarving the absorbtion rods the
nuclear power can be rapidly and significantly changed..
This dynamics is very rapid and is governed mainly by the
delayed neutrons. If the rods are properly positioned.r so
that the reactivity change per step is large enough, the
rods can control the nuclear Ðo'.{er verv r^¡ell. ït should
be observed, however, that also the flux distribution ge-19
nerally is affected by the rods. Ploreover, wearing out
problems should be considered, which means that the rods
should not be used. for frequent control movements.
The nuclear power transfers heat to the fuel elenents
quite rapidl¡r with a time constant of the order 5-10 se-
conds. The tenperatures of the moderator and coolant increase
more slowIy. The pressure changes are quite slol, of the
order half a minute for the vessel pressure to about a fev¡
minutes for the Èertiary pressure.
TIT. E>GERTMENTS.
In this section v¡e will consider experimental design
problems, such as choice of input signals and measurements.
The selected experj-ments are summarized and the data hand-
ling problems are mentioned. Tn all the experiments the in-
put disturbances were generated in the IBlf 1800 cornputer,
connected to the plant. All measurements were also registered
using the computer.20
l\. Su¡nmary of theExoeriments
ïn table 1 the main
tions are sho',vn for theof the operaling condi-
experirnents.features
selected
Summary ofTABLE 1
the identification experiments
Expu,' (3)
vA770u, (3)
v8282u, (steps)
RodsNuclear
power (l"IW)Subcooling
power (l.Îtf )
1
2
3
4
5
6
7*.7*.2.5
+3
+3
*,2
*2.53 (1: ,15,17)
3 (13,17,19)
3 (13,17,19)
2 (20 ,21)
1(20)
2 (20 ,21)o?
9 .95
10
10
10
8,0
10.01. 3s
I .8s
1 .95
1 .95
2.O
1.1
1 .95*1 .35
The valve amplitud.es are defined in * openinq. The re_
activity is defined. in "steps,,¡ rrhere one stec reactivity
is defi-ned as the reactivity correspond.ing to the rnovenent
of the rod step motors one step. rt corresponcs to 7-10 pcm
reactivity, dependj-ng on the position of the rods. The fi-
gures in brackets undcr ui in t.able 1 define the rod num_
bers, The rods are noved in paraIlel one step up anC do-¡,n.Most
i,.e. 6000
than 20002t
of the experiments contain more than
seconds. For identification purposes
samples have been used at the time.3000 saniÞ1es,
not more
For safe':y reasons it was sometimes necessary to move
some control- :od manually in order to keep the nuclear power
and vessel pressure within permitted. limits.
B. fnternal Controllers.
It was important to study the plant in open loop ope-
ration, and therefore some controllers were removedr prima-
rily the nuclear power controller, which keeps the nuclear
power within desj-red limits by adjusting the absorbtion
rods
The primary (vessel) pressure is controlled by a PID
controller acting on the valve u, (Ve 282) ' For safety rea-
sons 1t was not allowed. to remove this control in the first
experiment series, here represented by experiment 1. As
this control loop has a ti¡ne constant of more than one mi-
nute, the fast time constants stil1 could be determined.
When more experiences had been gained, it was alIowed. to
remove also the pressure controller, experiments 2-7.
Other loca1 controllers were acting ASbefore, i.e.22
control of the hot well level and steam gienerator level
as well as return flow to the feeCwater tank. These con-
trollers, however, do not influence the determination of
the overall dynamics.
C. Experimental Design Consideratj-ons.
In the design of input signals and operating levels
a large number of conditions have to be considered.. A ge-
neral survey of such problems have been described in Gus-
tavsson t251.
In order to gain a good signal-to-noise ratio a large
input amplitude is desj-red. Through preliminary experiments
j-t was foundr that three rods moved one step in parallel
could disturb the nuclear power about 0.5 l"1l{ from the ope-
rating level of about 10 MW. The upper limit of the changes
in u,, , v2 and u3 were determined by nonlinear effects.
One experiment was done in order to cover a wider range
of operational conditions, expt. 7. The subcoolingi power \.¡as
changed along a desired ramp. lhe parameters of a time vari-
able model then were identified recursively (see VITI).
Tlre major time
They will determine
input signals. The.constants were discussed in I and
the desired frequency cont.ent of
upper limit of the frequency \çasïf.
the
deter-23
mined by practical reasonsr ês the computer sampling time
was fixed to 2 seconds. By experience we also know, that
in one identification experiment it is difficult to accu-
rately determine time constants spanning more than about
2 decades, i"e. here from some second to a few minutes.
In all the reported experiments pseudo random binary
sequences (PRBS) have been applied as inputs as it was de-
sj,rable to get persistently exciting signals. In the case
of several ínputs, the signals have been chosen so as to
be independent. As the pressure control was in action in
expt. 1, the inpul signal was chosen to excite time con-
stants essentially smaller than one minute. Tn experiments
2-7 the sequence v¡as chosen with longer pulses in order to
get better estj-mation of the long time constants.
There are different rules of Èhumb in the literature
how to choose a sui'Lable PRBS sequence, and those rules can
give quite different results, as dernonstrated here. Briggs
et aI 1261 have made a d.etailed analysis of the pRBS se-
quence. According to their rules the period time of the se-
quence should be at least 5 times the longest time constant
T* of the process. Another rule of thumb says, that the
longest pulse of the seguence should be at least 3*T*. Then
the process is allorr'ed to reach a new steady state during
the pulse, and the estirnalion of the gain and J-argest time
constant will be improved. The PRBS sequence for expt. 124
lras chosen with the shortest pulse length of 2 seconds, a
period time of gg1 samples (almost 2000 seconds) and a
longest pulse length of only 1 I seconds. I{ith the cited
rules applied to this sequence it limits the longest time
constant either to 400 seconds or to 6 seconCs, a signi-
ficant difference. Thus it is found. that the PRBS sequence
can be too fast for the 1ow frequencies. Thj-s fact has been
obserrzed also e.g. by Gustavsson t25l and Cumming [27J,
t281.
For the second PRBS sequence the period time is stil1
about 2000 seconds but the longest pulse is 196 seconds.
Àccordj-ng to the referred. rules the longest time constanl
then could be 60-400 seconds. The shortest pulse was cho-
sen 12 seconds, but stíl1 the sampling time is 2 seconds.
It is shown in section V, that the sampling tiroe and, not
only the input, seguence is importa"t ior the accuraclz of
the long time constants.
D. Instruments and Actuators.
The variables recorded during tne experi¡nents are i¡-
dicated in Fig. 2. The meaning of the letters are
Ppressure
steam or water flow
temperature
nuclear powerF
T
c25
The HBirrR instrumentation is described in detail else-
where, see 1,291. Here only the main features are summarized.
The pressures are registered as dj-fferential pressures in
the three circuits (P1 3 , P61 , P62) with conventional DP
celLs with a range of about *0.3 bar.
The flows are generally measured rn'ith venturj- meters
plus differential pressure cel1s. The temperatures are mea-
sured by thermocouples. The nucLear power is measured by
an ion chamber C10.
The pressure ce11s and flow meters in the primary cir-
cuit have time constants around one second. The tempera-
tures, however, are registered much fasterr at about 0.1 se-
cond. The instrumentation does not generally cause any prob-
1em, as the important dynamics generally are much slov¿er. The
actuator time constants are not negligible. To move a valve
through its whole range takes about 6 seconds. A tlpical tirce
delay for the valve t1 j-n the experiments hzas therefore about 1
second. For the valve u2 the corresponding delay was about
half a second
The instrument noise of
clear channel are well known
e.g. t9 12J. For
-is about *0.03 ¡,II{.the pressure meters and the nu-
from previous experirnents, see
the nuclear pohrer the measurement noise
The standard deviation for thedifferen-
determined. tial pressure meters has also been experimentally26
Typical values are 0.5.10-4 units. The pressure unit is
expressed as pressure variation Civided by total pressure.
During the experiments the total rrarj-atj-on of e.g. the
-) vessel pressure was about *0.5.10 units. This means,
that the noj-se to signal ratj-o was about 12.
The A/D converter has 11 bít resolution, and, conver-
sion errors must be considered. For the nuclear power mea-
surements the total pohrer is rneasured and. converted.. As
the power variations are most about 53 of the total power
the conversion errors are not negligible, especially for
long input pulses, when the variations of the signal are
smaIl. The eror is estimated to be about 5.10-3 lruto. The
quantization errors must also be consiCered for the pres-
sure meters, see V.D.
During the experiments 35 variables !ùere recorded,
some of them only for checking up purposes. The d.ata were
logged on the IBlf 1800 computer and r,,¡ere measured with z
seconds sampling -i-nterval by a 100 Hz relay multiplexer.
Because of the multiplexer the measurements couId. be up
to 0.3 seconds separated in tj-me for the same sampli-ng j-n-
terval. The sample and hold circuit arso introduced a time
constant, about 0.35 sec.2i
IV. IDENTIFICÄTION i'TETHODS.
For the preliminary anal1'sis of the experimental da-
ta and. for the first model approaches simple methods were
used to find rough estimates of the input-output relation-
ships. Step response analysis and correlation analysis
were used to verify preliminary models and to design new
experiments. For the parameter estimation the l'laximum Like-
lihoocr method has been used except for the recursive esti-
matj-on, where an Extend.ed Kalman filter is applied.
In this section the methods are su¡rmarized. For detailed
descript,j-ons a large number of papers are available, see
e.g. .A,ström-Eykhoff [30], Eykhoff [31], and ]lehraet aI t321.
A. !).[ultiple-fnput-Single-Output (]lISO) Structure.
The plant dynamics is represented by the canonical forr,r,
introduced by Âström et al t33l
-1 -1 (1 + a1q -i- anq-n) y (r) (bilq +
4 ¿¡q)
-tp=li=1
+ cnq-n) e (t) u, (t) +. ¡,(1 + "19+
ït
Li=1-4*i tq ') u, (t)or
_1ex (e ')y (t) + rc*(q 1)e{t)(1)28
\?here q is the shif t operator and p the nunlcer of inputs.
A*, B* and C* are d.efj-ned as corresponding polynomials in
_'lq '. It is trivj-al to extend the model to j-nclude both
time delays and direct input terms, correspond.ing to a co-
effici-ent br. in (1 ) . Moreover initial conditions can be
estimated.
Tf e (t,) is assumed to be a seguence of independent
gaussian random variables the paranneters êi, bi, cj_ and
À can be determined usi-ng the method of Maximum Likeli-
hood (I{L). The method is d.escribed in detail elsewhere,
e.g. [30 33], and only some remarks will be made here.
The likelihood function L(ê;I) for the unknown para-
meters
e'(ut a2 cpnb t' b11
:--"rr)(2t
(3)is given by
ln L (9; À)1
N2
2114I7NZnÀ*const.I
P-Ei=1¿
where the resid.uals e (t) are d.efined by
[ô* (q-1 ) ]e (t)-1
¡Â*1n-1)v(r) e1 tq=t ) u, (t) land Â*,
Bf andl-
riance29
and C* are esti¡nates of the polynoraíals
N j-s the number of samples and ),2 is the
of the residuals.
=?Nv (0)
the numberBTaÀ*
^^tt= i
(s)n*
The maxim:,zation problem reduces to the problem of mi-
nimi zLng the -l-oss function
2(4) e(t)
with respect to the unknown parameters. tr{hen the estimate
e is calculated the parameter À can be solved. from the mi-
nimum value of the loss functionN
I
L='1v=+
;2
rn t¡gl it is shown that the estimates are consÍstent,
asymptotically normal and efficj-ent under quite mird con-
ditions. The parameter À can be i-nterpreted. as the standard
deviation of the one step prediction error. The technj_que
gives not only the estimates but also their standard devi-
ations from the Cramér-Rao inequality.
As
orderof parameters j-n the model or the system
á priori a sta.tistical test. can J:e done is not given30
in order to find the proper model. The loss function should.
not decrease si-gnificantly if the right ord.er has been
reached and more parameters are added.. rt is shown in t33l
that the quantity
vn
F2tr't2 i Dr )D,
-l(6)
n2n
1
asymptotically has
ber of parametersan F-dj.stri-bution, whereri j-s the num-
loss functions. and Vrr. the correspondi_ng
The residuals should
time and in relationalso be tested for independence in
to the inputs.
An alternative test function d.ue to Akaike t34l has
arso been used besides the F test. An rnformation crite-
rion Ís defined,1lfN-Vnz
vn2
J= Il+ ¿nlr2lN-k(7)
where N is the number of samples, k the number of parame-
ters u.rrd. ¡,2 the measurement noise covariance. Typically J
às a functíon of k has a minimum for the right number of
parameters.
The ML identlfication method has been
in a large nurnber of applications. Surveysextensively useC
are given in [25],31
[30] and Í321.
'8. Multivariable Structures.
The ML m.:thod. has been generalized to the multivari-
able case. rt, is desirable to estimate a paräneter vector
0 of a linear continuous mod.el
dx=Axdt+Budt+dv (8)
dy=Cxdt+Dud.t+de (e)
The model is written in discrete time and. in innova-
tions form in ord.er to simplify the noise estimation, ac-
cording to .Âström t35l or Mehra [36],
x (t+1) = qx (t ) + Iu (t¡ + Xe (t)
(10 )
wherey(t) = Cx(t) + Du(t) + e(t)
ô=eA (0)
rA(g)sdsB (e)
ana x (t) denotes the conCitional mean of x (t) , given pre-
vious measurement values y(t-1 ), y(t-2),e{iIj32
The noise e (t) is no\,r a sequence of independ.ent gaus-
sian random vector variables. The likelihood. function (3)
is generalized to the form
Zn L(g,R)T-1t(t) R¿ (-.-),Nln:--l)Lt=1
-lt"detR+const
where R is the covariance of e (t) and is assumed to be
constant. The loss function ("f. (4)J is
V=detT¿(t)e(r)
1Ni*:(11)
(12¡
(13)Eaton t37l has shown that the loss function can be
minimized independently of R. As soon as the rninimum of
V is for¡.nd. an estimate of R can be achieved,
i = *.Ïr, (.) ,t (.)
which is a generalization of (5).
several strong theorems have also been stated about
the multivariable caser e.g. see Âströra et a] [30], t'Iehra
[36], woo [38], caines [39], Ljung [40] and. ]Íehra et al
t411.33
C. A Vector Difference Eguation Aoproach.
rn order to finc alternative models for the reactor
also a vector difference approach rvas tried. simplifying
assumptions of the noise are rnade in order to identifl, Lhe
vector difference equation row by row. The noise assunptions
are only adequate if there are weak couplings between the
outputs considered.
The structure of the system is generalized from (1) to
[r + a18-1 Ao-1lv (tl
+
e(r) = [r + c1ø-1 ++
{rr * o1n-' +-1+Cq"l *n- r
+ Arrg-n]v (tl
ì+ B-q "lu(t) Ir: -)[r + cre-1 + ... + crre-n]e{t) (14 )
(1s ¡where the capital letters assign constant matrices, while
Y ¡ u and e are vectors. rt i-s clear that, there is nc one-
to-one correspondence between (1a¡ and (I0). The likeli-
hood function is sti1l (11) where the residuals are defined
by
rf
["rn 1+34
ff it is desired to identify the mod.e1 row by
then the loss function has to be written as a sum
functions. This is possible if R is diagonal,
R = d.iag(À2
n2Iro9¡,
ofn
) (16 )
1
and each matrix C, is diagonal as rvelI. The assumption
means, that every output of the model is disturbed by a
separate noise source, independent of other noise sour-
ces. With such assumptions all the parameters of A' Bj-
and C, are identifiable.
The parameter estimates are not unbiased, consistent
or with minimum vari-ance as for the single output case.
St.ill these multivariable models night ind.icate interest-
ing couplings which will be shown in section \rf;
D. Recursive Parameter Ëstimation.
If the unknown parameters ê in the system (9 10)
are time variable there is no computationally simple op-
timal method. to track the parameters recursively. A large
number of suboptimal methods therefore have been proposed,
and. the Extended Kalman filter is one of the si-rnplest ones
to fÍnd the parameters. The unknown parameter vector is
estimated as part of an extended. state vector. The algo-35
rithm used. here is described in detail in Olsson-Holst
t421, rçhere a literature survey of the application of
suboptimal filters has been done as l¡ell.
The parameter vector ê is assumed to be constant
but driven by independent noisê wr
e(r+1 ) = 0(r) + w(r) (17 )
The artificial noise covari-ance d.etermines how fast
the parameter can be tracked. In the use of Extend.ed
Kalman filter there is no simple way to choose the value
of cov(w). Tt has to be found by trial and, error, and de-
pends on the system noise as r..¡e11 as the variability of
the parameters. It may, however, be found. off-line using
the lll, method 132J, t41l and then kept fixed j_n the Ex-
tend.ed Kalman filter.
The sample covariance matrix of the residuals
o (t) = y (t) cx (t lt-1 ) - Du (r) (18)
can be used as a test quantity to judge the quality of
the results. the resid.uals should be a sequence of zero
mean independent stochastj-c variables.36
E. $odel Verification.
Generally the problem of verifying a model is stiIl
an art. Many different types of tests have to be performed
in order to check the model behaviour. Here only the open
loop behaviour of different models has been compared. It
should, however, be emphasized that the final test of a
model should be performed in closed loop. Then t.he real-
process should be controlled by a control-ler based on the
achieved model. The model has also to be tested if it is
really predictive. Then a model achj-eved from one experi-
ment should be compared with the real output from another
experiment.
Even if the parameters of trvo models are close to each
other, their step responses might be quite differer:t. If
two models have similar Bode d.iag.rams they could reveal
quite different time behaviour. Even if the residuals are
zeto mean and white it does not mean that a better model,
cannot be found. These examples indicate, that the moCel
verification is most important and also difficult.
As the IfL method is based heavily on the residual pro-
perties, the residua.l.s should primarily be t.ested for in-
dependence and normality and independence to the j_nputs.
The loss function changes are testeC. against the F-37
test quantity (6) in the IvIISO case complemented with the
Akai-ke test (7). The model error, defined. as the d.iffe-
rence between the real output and the output of the d.e-
terministic part of the mode1, is computed.
The standard deviation of the parameters has been
checked. If the model order is too high, then the Fisher
Information matrix becomes singular, which means that cor-
responding parameter estimates are linearly correlated and
the parameter covarj-ances wil1 be very high. -
The discrete models have often been transformed to
continuous models in order to compare time constants and.
zeroes with physical knowledge. Bode plots have been ca1-
culated and simulations have been performed.
Single-input-single-output models then have been writ-
ten in the transfer function form
t2
I1lt1
Ti=Íki
T.s + 1l_,.jI
i+lsl
%j1
L
+ 2es +1l)c (s)k
0+ (1e)(+1
where n1 * nZ is the order of the system.Some
given in38
F. Computat.ional Ã.spects.
practical considerations on the computations e.re
this paragraph.
1 . Data Analysis.
Before the measurement d.ata is used for parameter es-
tirnation, several stages of prelimj-nary data analysis are
execuLed. The variables are plotted in order to detect out-
1iers, trends and abnormal behaviour. The relation betr.¡een
inputs and outputs can be inspected and the signal to
noise ratios could be visualized. l1ean values are subtrac-
ted and trend corrections are made in some cases. cross
correlation analysis has also been performed in order to
verify relations between the different variables.
The data preparatíon and analysis part of the identi-
fication work should not be underestimated. Data must, be
in suitable form, programs must be slream-Ij.ned and be
supplied with adequate inputs and outputs.
2. Identification Prograrns.
Most of tire data analysis and identifications have
. been performed on the Univac 1 1 08 cornputer at the Lund,
university Data center. The program package for IrlTSo iden-
tification was wrj-tten by Gustavsson t431. The ML identi-
fication program for multivariai¡le systenis has been writ-39
ten by Källström, see [44]. The Extended Kalman prograln
is described in OIsson-Holst 1421.
In data analysis, parameter estimation or mod.el veri-
fication the control engineer must often check intermediate
results before he can proceed. to the next step of the mo-
deling phase. It is therefore virtually impossible and not
even desirable to automate all the different partial deci-
sions and create one general model building program.
\.
The need for interactive prograrns rras realized a long
tj-me ago at the Department of Automatic Control at Lund.
Instj-tute of Technology, and such a prograrn system IDPAC
has now been constructed to solve I'IISO identification and
data analysj-s problems on an ínteractive basis, see Gus-
tavsson 1251, [4S]. Hov¡ever, most of the identÍfications
discussed in the present paper were performed before the
interactive progran was compleÈed.40
V. MULTIPLE-TNPUT-STNGLE-OUTPUT I{ODELS.
In this section rve will consi-d.er models for four im-
portant variables of the p1ant, ví2. the nuclear power
and the primary (vessel), second.ary and terti-ary pressures,
called C10 , P1 3 , P61 and P6 2 respectively in Fig. 2 .
Correlation analysis between the actual inputs and out-
puts has been applied in order to get a more substantial
informatj-on about the couplings in the plant, than was pre-
sented. in section II. The actual cross correl-ations are
drav,¡n in table 2. Some correlations are quite clear (e.g,
v2 + P62) while some others are obscure (u3 * P61). The t"rÏ,
identification gave, however, a signifi.cant relation in the
Iat.ter cese.
TABLE 2
Quaritatj-ve correlations between the examined inputs and
outputs (max. time lag 10 min.).
Output
InputNuclear
pov/er C10Vessel-
pressure
Pl3Secondarv
rlressure
P61Tertiary
pressure
P62
ul
(vA770 )
u2
(vB2B2 )
t3
(rods )4T
The j-nteraction between the actual inputs and. ou-uputs
could be qualitatively understood if Fig. 2 is considered..
The influence of the d.ifferent inputs \,,'ere discussed in IT.C.
The valve ur (VA 770) has a linited control authority but in-I
fluences the nuclear power significantly. The influence on
the pressures is, hor¡'ever, quite smalI. It is natural that
a disturbance from u,, is successively damped out from the
subcooling circuit, to the core and further to the seconda-
ry and tertiary heat removal circuits. the vaIv" u2 (Ve 282)
has a much higher control authority than u, and therefore
the relatíon to all the actual outputs are quite clear. Na-
turally the valve has the fastest and greatest resr:ollse in
the tertiary circuit but the response is damped i nto the
secondary and primarlz circuits. In an analog way it is un-
derstood, that the rod (u3) influence on the nuclear power
is significant while the influence on the primâryr seconda-
ry and tertiary pressures is getting successively smaLler.
A. Nuclear Porver.
In II.B it was demonstrated that the nuclear po\A¡er re:
sponse on reactivity disturbances is very fast. Compared.
to the sampling time of 2 seconds it is prompt, which cor-
responds to a direct term bO in the model (1 ) . The valves
will disturb the nucLear power through the reactivity feed.-
backs and consequently the dominating tine constants for
these loops will be longer.A'+z
1. Reactivity fnpu ).
In preliminary experime¡rts, see [1], it was found,
that the reactivity input nuclear power output loop
could be descrj-bed by third or fourth order dynamics. The
time constants j-n experiment 1 rvere found to be 0 .7 , 8.9
and about 500 seconds respectively. Typically the input
PRBS sequence was very fast (see rrr.c) and the sl-ors time
constant has consequently been determined poorly.
Now, \{e consider experi_ments Z and 3 where the rod re-
activity input is used. fn expt. 2 there is only this in-
putr but in expt. 3 the valve u2 is also perturbed ind^e-
pendently. Now, if the system is linear, the superposi-
tion principle should be valid. As the experinentar con-
ditj-ons are essentially the same for experiments 2 and 3
the moder parameters should be similar. Tabre 3 shoivs the
parameters for model (1) with corres-ponding standard devi-
ations from the cramér-Rao inequality. The results show
that at least the ai and b, parameters are close to each
other with the differences well within one standard devi_-
ation. The ci parameters, however, show a larger d.iscrepan-
cy. This is quite reasonabre, as different modes have been
excited in the two experiments.
rt is noticed that the c2 coefficients are quite sma1l
in both cases. A model rvith only c, = 0, however, should
have no clear ph)'sical interpretation. rf instead c, is43
TABLE 3
rd.entification results relating the nuclear power to the
steam valve (ur) and. to reactivity (ur).
Þ'perinent 2 3 2 3
"1 "1
a2
a3rÞ2000
4 .662*..A41
.71 3*.045
-.044* .01 6
.236+.009
.221*.929
-.853r.024
.402*.025N=1 900
-1.626*.078
.683t .082
-.044x .017
")u2 (*10-)
-.151*.057
.1 34r .098
-.098r.060
.233r .01 0
.232*.026
-.837*.034
.386r.045-.726* .047
-.049r.043
-.063r . 031-.579r .084
.025* .034
-.054+ .025
-1c2
c^3
bt
b-1 I.253*1 0.282*10
2
b3
bo
bPoles .981; .607¡
.o74.966; .58't
.078
u, (*10) u, (*10)
b1
b2
neglected no better model could be obtaj-ned.
Now consider the continuous transfer functions corre-
sponding to the parameters in table 3. Their coefficients
(see eqn. (19)J , are listed in table 4. The term kO cor-
responds to the prompt j-nput bO in model (1). No standard
deviations are derived from the results in table 3.44
TABLE 4
Continuous transfer functions of nuclear po\der.
ExP.
ïnput2
u33
t33
o2
T1 (sec. )
l2 (sec, )
T¡ (sec. )
kO,t 1 0
k1*10
k2*1 o
k3*100.8
4.A
104
0.24
0.76
-0.23
0.0960.23
0. 78
-0.29
0.350
-0.021
0.088
-0.950.8
??
59
There is found a very fast time constant of 0.8 seconds.
It is clearly significant d.espite the sampling interval
of 2 seconds. It can be explained by the actuator d.yna-
mícs. Due to the sampling theorem it is still possible to
detect the fast tj-me constant. similar experiences are re-
ported by Gustavsson t251.
The next time constant is determined. to 3.7 or 4 se-
conds. The fuel dynamics shourd have a time constant of
about 8-10 seconds and the result from expt. 1 seeins to45
be reasonable. There are, of course, other dynamical ef-
fects added to the computed ti¡ne constant, such as pres-
sure and flow variations, whj-ch explain the smaller value.
The longest time constant is deterr,iined quj-te poorly, espe-
cially in expt. 1. rt comes from the heat removal circuit
dynamics and it should be of the order one or two minutes.
As remarked before the poor accuracy j_s partly due to
the input sequence. The longest pulse of 1 96 seconds is
apparently not long enough, see IfI.C. The short sam¡:ling
interval is also important. The actual discrete pole is
situated close to the unit circle, see tabre 3. Therefore
a small numerical error in the computations can create a
si-gnificant change of the time constant. For example, if
the pole 0.981 is changed *0.001 the corresponding time
constant would be moved from 1 04 to 1 1 0 or 99 seconds re-
spectively.
ì.,¡ow consider the coef ficients ki of table 4, which in-
dicate how the different modes are amplified.. Fj-rst com-
pare the rod influence on different modes. The reactivity
input is most significant in the fast modes. Thus both ko
and k, are significant and quite similar in the two expe-I
riments. Especially k, is rnuch larger in expt. 3. This
might indicate, that the low frequencies have been more
excited in expt. 3 due to the extra input from ur. Irre al-
so notice the negative sign of kr. Tt shows a clear nega-
tive reactivity feed.back from the fuel temperature.46
2'. Steam Valve Inutu
Table 3 shows c1ear1y, that the b, parameters corre-
spondj-ng to u, (vs 282) are less accurate than those cor-
responding to u, (rod.s). This is natural, as the nuclear
power is perturbed more by the rods than by the valv. 12.
An attempt was maCe to get better mod.el accuracy by
introducing different time delays for u2, but no improve-
ment was obtained. The time constants are, of course, the
sarne as for the rod i-nput in expt. 3, but the mod.e ampli-
fi-cations are different. Table 4 shows that the low fre-
quenci-es are more amplified. by u, than the high ones. The
relative infruence of u, and. u, is also shown by table 4.
The rod input u, dominates in the fast modes (kt and k2),
while the valve dominates in the low frequency range (k3).
The statÍc amplification from the valve u2 to the nuclear
povrer should be positive (see If .C). fn tables 3 and 4 it.
is negati-ve, and the model has no non-minimum phase beha-
viour. Expt. 5 gives similar results. The explanaticn for
this discrepancy has to do with the sanpling time, experi-
ment length and input sequence. previous step responses
showed a slow non-minimum phase response (Fig. 7) . It takes
about two minutes for the step response Èo get positive af-
ter the negative undershoot. This behavi-our is too slow to
be detected in the experiments. Therefore the nodel has a
negative numerator (k: in table 4) for the slow time con-
stant. observe, however, that the signs of k, and k, are47
reasonable in accordance v¡ith t.he discussion of fI.C.
The standard d.eviation I of the one step ¡rred.iction
error in table 3 is 0.025 and 0.028 ¡î{ respectively,
which is close to the instrument noise level, see III.D.
A section of expt. 3 has been plotted in Fig. 8. The
plots can demonstrate scme features of the j-dentification
method. The nuclear power has a negative trend. between 56
and 62 minutes. At about t - 62 it suddenly increases
again. The model, however, does not fo11ow the slow trend
and the positive change. The residuals 6 are large at time
62. The reason is, that an absorbtion rod was moved manual-
}y during the experiment to keep the power within permitted
Iimits. This i-nput couId, of course, have been added to the
other inputs. ft was not included here in order to show,
how the ML method can detect abnormal behaviour durirrg an
experíment.
3. Subcooli-ng Valve Input (uI1
In expt. 5 the valves 11 and. u, were moved 5-ndepend.ent-
ly of each other and a corresponding model of the nuclear
power was obtained. This roodel is also of third order. In
contrast to previous models there are complex po1es. The
continuous transfer function is written in one real and. one
complex nrode, according to (19). The coefficients are shown
in table 5.Input u1 vz
T1 (sec. )
,1
oo
e-0.58
k31 .62
1
3OQ *1
The complex poles are lightly damped. The period time
is about 28 seconds. Similar oscillations have been ob-
served. earlier when the subcooling valve has been moved,
see Bjfir1o et al t461. A significant-amplification of t.he
nuclear power was achieved when the valve was exciting the
system at a period of about 25 seconds.
The fast tÍme constants which were excited by the ab-
sorbtj-on rod. have not been detected here bl' the valves. A
slow time constant of 68 seconds is found and is not too
far away from what was obtaj-ned in expt. 3, where valve u,
was also perturbed.48
TÄ3LE 5
Continuous transfer function
nuclear povrer, exÐt 5of the
68
0.1 I
0.23
0.27
-1 03
5.2
ind.icates that the system is
there are two zeroes in the*10
x10
The negative value of "1
non minimum phase. Actuallyright half plane of
nuclear power.49
the transfer function from u, to the
B. Primary Pressure.
Primary pressure input-out,put models have been stu-
died. in a similar way to those for the nuclear povJer. The
steam valve u, is the dominating input, and. generally the
pressure dynamics is much slower than the nuclear po\.ver
dynamics, as the pressure has to be influenced through
the heat flux (see Fig. 3). Most of the id.entified. ¡nod.els
are of order three or four. fn rrost cases the fourth order
models have large parameter covariances, even if the loss
function is acceptable, indicating that the third. order mo-
dels may be adequate.
1Reactivity fn1).tu
The influence from u, is much less than for the nuclear
power. From experiments 1 and 2 the mod.els obtained were
quite poor, though third order models were accepted when
parameter accuracy, loss function, and residual tests were
considered. The parameters of expt. 2 are shor,¡n in table 6
and its continuous transform (19) Ín table 7.
The fast time constant related to the actuator dynamics
is still statistically significant. A combj-nation of actua-
tor dynamj-cs and. the fuel dynamics rnight explain the 2 se-50
cond. time constant. The longest time constant is again re-
lated to tkre heat removal circuit dynamics.
T.Þ3LE 6
!1ode1s from different experiments relating prirnary (vessel)
press:re to the different input signals. .
Exp. 2
1 0003
19004
1 0005
1 000 N
t1-2.304*.006
1 .665* .01 1
-.361 *.006
u3 (*104
.497 * .01 7
-.490r.017
0
-1 .176*.029
.41 7 *. .0 47
-.081 *.029
-Á,.663*10
.997 i .909 i
.398-2 .077 *. .007
1 .349* .A12
-.269*.006
Au2 (*1 0 ')-2.7 21 *.031
1.414*.058
-.291* .027
u2 ¡*t o4)-2 .155* . 01 7
1.478*.C31
-.321r.C15
..1 (*1 05
-.1 59*.080
-.0?5t .1 40
.390È.083
Å.u2 (*1 ')
.*r-.oru
- .229* .01 7
0
-.751È.036
.405*.037
-.031 * .033
-Ã.753* 1 0
.987i.7C8;
.459az
a3
bt
b2
b3
b
1
b2
b
"13
c2
ca
I-.060* .01 4
- .221r .025
.079* .01 6
u3 (*1 o4 )
,453r.025
-.1E1*.045
:.1 B0* . 025
-. 89 3x .027
.395r.036
-.024* .027
.A.7 24*10-.252*.01 0
13 (*104
.O92*.055
.467*.098
-.498*.057
-.790*.047
.328*.058
.032*.046
-^-7 49*10
.984i.736¡
.401.983i.7Q5i
.387Poles51
T.ABLE 7
Continuous transfer functions relating prirnary pressure to
: . the d.j-f ferent inputs.
Exp.
Input3 4 5 2
u^Jt2o3.'2 o3 u1t2
T1 sec 2.2
T2 sec 20
T3 sec 6652.1
5.8
1192.2
6.5
1232.6
5.8
157
kt
k2
k3.10-0.64
8.0
39-0.13
4.1
-71-1 .6
3.2
29-0.87
8.5
-1 06-2.5
4.8
220.45
-1 .3
8.6-1 .4
7.7
-11 4.10
.104
4
4
2. Steam Valve Tnput (u.).z-
DÍfferent results from experiments 3, 4 and 5 will now
be compared. In all the fcurth order mod.els a negatS-ve disc-
rete pole was found. As such a model has no continuous cor-
responding model it is difficult to make any physical i¡:ter-
prelations. Therefore the third order moCels are d.iscussed,
The problem with negatJ-ve discrete poles is considered fur-
ther in paragraph E. fn all models the parameter "3 is poor-
ly determined and may be set to zero
There is a long time constant corresponding to a pole
very close to the unit circle in the discrete model. As l¡e-
fore, this causes a poor accuracy of the J-ong time constant,
and the static amplification j-s also inaccurate. The fo1-52
lowÍng points should be noted:
(i) The ai parameters in the three experirnents
close to each other.arequite
(ii) Consi-der the b, parameters corresponding to u2 in
table 6. Experiments 3 and 4 are compared. In expt. 4 bt
and b, were removed in order to get better parameter co-
variances. No signif icant change of the loss function r.¡as
observed. Correspond.ing parameter b1 ir experiment 5 could.
also have been eliminated. Now look at the b, parameters
for the reactivity input ur. In expt. 4, bt is much smaller
than in experiments 2 and 3. There is no obvious explana-
tÍon available. The elimination of b, and b, in expt. 4 for
the input u, changed the actual parameter a little amount.
Probably the dj-fference between the experiments has to do
with the fact, that differenL rods were used in expt. 4
than in previous experiments.
(Íii) The parameter standard deviation depend.s asymptoti-
cally on rÑ, where N is the number of samples. The results
in experiments 3 and 4 can be compared, and the parameter
covariances roughly follow such a law.
(iv) The
representtj-me constants of about 2 and 6 seconds probably
conbinations of actuator dynamics and fuel dynarnics.53
(v) Fig. 9 shows a plot of the prinary pressure related
to the steam valve and reactivity inputs in experiment 3.
The mod.el i-s based on data from 40 to 72 mi-n. and the si-
mulation of the model is made for the time after 72 min.
Observe, that the model error makes a posj-tive jurnp at
about t = 85" The reason is, that a control rod was moved
manually. As the manual change is not included in the si-
mulation a model error results. At the same time there is
a large value in the residuals ¿ which can be observed es
a pulse in the plot.
(vi) The model error varies s1owly with a peri-od of seve-
ral minutes. This indicates that there are slow time ccn-
stants which are not accurately found. in the model. In
closed loop, however, such slow variations can be taken
care of easily by the controller.
3. Subcool-in Val'¡e fnutu
The subcooling valve (u,, ) has been used as an input
in expt. 5, and the model is shown in the tables 6 and 7 . Thg
time constants were di scussed in previous section. In or-
der to compare the influence from the different vaives u1
and u, the coeffj-cients k, from experiments 4 and 5 are
compared in table 7. The following ooints should be noted:
(i) Even though the static
curacy in the identj.ficationamplification has a poor
it is clear fronr expt. 5,ac-54
that the steam valve amplification is al¡out 1 0 times 1ar-
ger and of different sign than that of the subcooling va1ve.
A better determinatj-on of the statj-c amplification must be
mad.e with larger sampli-ng intervals and longer input pulses.
The reason to use a longer salrpling inlerva1 is, that the
poles then art: not situated so close to the unit circle. Nu-
merical i-naccuracies do noÈ become so critical.
(ii) The oscillations which could be observed in the nu-
clear power as a result of subcooling valve perturbations
are not observed in the primary pressure.
(iii) The standard deviation À of the prediction error (see
table 6) varies from 0.66'10-4 to 0.25*10-4" rt is consi-
dered satisfactory compared to the instrumentation noise
level, di-scussed in chapter ffÏ.D.
C. Secondary and Tertiarv pressur
In the introduction of section V it was emphasized
that the influence of the steam valve u, is strong for the
secondary and tertiary cj-rcuits. Especially the correlation
to the tertiary pressure is very good. on the other hand.
the influences from the reactir¡ity or the subcooling valve
changes are poor or negligible.55
1Reactivi ïnutu
Because of the poor correlation only a f,irst ord.er
significant mcdel was found for the secondary pressure. À
time delay of 6 seconds was estimated (cf. table 2). No
relation at a-''1 between u, and the tertiary pressure was
found by the ìlL identifications
2. Steam Valve Int(u.) .
fn table I the identification results are shown. con-
sÍd.er the first column, where the secondary pressure is re-
lated to the steam valve and. the reactivity. when the pre-
sent model is compared with a second order model, a high
test quantity (6) j-s achieved (F = 124). Therefore the third
order model is accepted over the second order model. The
table shows that the b, esti-mates corresponding to reacti-
vity input are much more inaccurate than those for the
steam valve input.
The continuous model
table 9. The longest time
other two can be compared
primary pressure, table 7.
time constant 0.66 seconds
(1)J was tried out, and a
achieved. However,
were found.(19) time constants are shown in
constant is not very precise. The
to corresponding results for the
fnstead of accepting the fast
a direct input term [bO + 0 in
significantly better result was
only models with negative discrete poles56
TABLE 8
Models from different experiments relating
he.at removal círcuit pressures to .d,i.f f.erent inputs "
Output
Ð<p.Sec. press.
ÅSec. press.
..3Tert. press.
'3Tert. press.
" "'3
t1
bI
va2
t3-1.87'l*.023
.918*.A44
-.040*.023
-.'115*.005
-.087*.01 2
.173*.009
u, (*100)
-.170*.131
.388*.252
-. f 83*.1 35
-1.323+.043
.575r.082
-.076*.054
-?.194.10 '
.986;.843;
.048-1.898r.015
,938r.031
-.038*.017
u, {*104)
.574*.168
u, (*10)
-.109*.004
-.075*.01 0
.163*.006
-1.256*.021
.450*.028
-.023*. 023
-ã.188. 10 '
.989;.865;,
.044-1 .559 *.412
.568*.01 1
-.1 29 *.003
.120*.003
-.385*.073
-.030*.047
-t.479.10'
2.171
.979; .580-1.534r.003
.543*.003
-¡ 039 *.0003
-.077*.0006
.'103r.0004
.434r.028
.089*.026
.174.10
.2873
.977i.556-Ju, (*10) ur(*100) u,(*100)
b0
b2
b3
b1
b2
b3
"1
c2
ca
l,
Poles57
TABLE
Continuous transfer functions relating secondary and ter-
tiarl' pressures to the different inputs
Ouþut
Ð<pt.Sec. press.
4S,ec. press.
5Terb.. Þress.
"'3ært. press.
'3
T2t1
3(sec)
(sec)
(sec)0.7
11.7
138
o.24
-1.02
-12.6
u, (*103)
-0.023
-0.1 31
1.790.6
13.8
178
?u, (x10")
0.22
-1.21
-1 3.63.7
126
-0.27
-1.373.4
98
-0.039
-0.25
-1 .15T
u, (*103) u, {*104) u, (*104)
ko
k1
k2
k3
kt
k2
k3u, {,tl O6)
0.001 s
-31.6
430
For the tertiary pressure it is natural to expect the
fastest time constant to be even smaller. In fact, this
time constant is too small to be estinated with the actual
sampling time and a second order model is found with the
shortest time constant 3.7 second.s (tables I and g , third
columns). A cl-oser exarnination of Fig. 6 will also reveal58
one long and one shorÈ time constant for the tertiary Fres-
sure. By adding a d.irect j-nput term bO an exceptional- im-
provement of the loss function is found' corresponding to
an F test quantity of 8124 (column 4 in tables 8 and. 9). A1-
so the parameter accuracy is improved. A significant improve-
ment of the loss function can be achieved for third. order mo-
dels, but negati-ve discrete poles or pole zero cancella-
tion appears. The time constants for the tertiary pressure
are smaller than for the secondary pressure, which is natu-
ral (see table 9).
fig. 10 shows a plot of the secondary pressure in expt.
3, related to steam valve and reactivity. The model is based
on an observation record from 40 72 min. in the experinrent
and is used t.o predict from 80 to 94 min. The residuals have
a distinct spike at about 84 min. and the model error makes
a posi-tive change. The reason is the' satne as for the prima-
ry pressure, Fig. 9. The tertiary pressure from expt, 3 is
plotted in Fig. 11. It is based on 1900 data and simulated
on the same data set. The plot shows the same part of the ex-
periment. as !.ig. 8. The manual movement of a rod is revealed
also here by the model- error change at about 62 min.
3. Subcooli-ng Valve Input (u)_1
The correlation between u., and the second.ary and terti-
ary pressures is poor, wh5-ch has been discussed before. A
significant l,IL rnodel was, horvever, found for the secondary59
pressure, and. the parameters are shol,rn in tables 8 and 9
column 2.
The stand.ard d.eviation of the one step predict.j_on er-
ror j-s larger'th.r, f,or the primary pressure (cf . tables 6
and 8) but is sti11 considered satisfactory with respect
to the instrumentati-on noise.
D. The Problem of Neqative Real Discrete poles.
In several models, especially those of high order
(third or fourth) negative real poles of the discrete mo-
del have appeared. since these models have no continuous
analog they cannot be given physi-cal interpretations.
St.ill they may be useful for time discrete regulators.
The following reasons may be given for negative discrete
poles: _
(i) The negative pole may reflect that the order is too
high. Generally there is a correspondíng zero close to
the pole in the C* or j-n the B* polynomial, but not al-
vrays in both. cancellation may be possible. rn the reac-
tor models cancellation between the A* and c* have been
the most corlìmon case. The noj-se thus can be represented
by a lower order transfer function, a fact which has been
observed. in many practical situations by e,g. Bohlin L47]"
Söderström t48l has also analyzed cancellation probJ_ens.60
(ii) Quantization error may cause negative discrete poles
as pointed out by .Â.ström t¿gl. por the secondary pressure
and to a lesser extent for the primary pressure, negative
poles \.\7ere quite co¡lmon. The quantization error of the 11
bit. converter for the pressures is at least 0.8*10-4 nor-
malized units. The standard deviation of the one step pre-
dictor error is 0.7*10-4 for the primary and 1.9*10-4 for
the secondary pressure. Thus the quantizatj-on error cannot
be neglected in comparison with the residuals. As the nu-
clear po\¡¡er one step prediction errors have been about
0.025 1"1!l in comparison with the quantj-zation error 0.005
Mw (see rrr.D) this quantization error is not so serious,
even though only the total power j-s measured.
(j-ii) For the secondary pressure models of second order
two mini-ma of the loss functi-on appeared in expts. 3 and
4. The models have about the same Loss function. rn one
model there is one negative real po1e, in the other both
the poles are positive real. This probrem of non-unique-
ness of the I'IL estimates has been analyzed by söderström
tso]. similar results can also be found for the nuclear
power related to the reactivity inpuL61
VI. VECTOR DIFFERENCE EQUATIONS.
In preceeding MISO models the couplings between the
outputs or state variables of the plant have been neglec-
ted. In ord.er to take the couplings between the inputs and
outputs into account the vector d.ifference approach, de-
scribed in fV.C, was tried. out. The results then are com-
pared with the MISO rnodels.
From a computational point of view this approach is
also a MISO identificationr âs one row at a time of the
vector difference equation is.identified. Then the other
outputs are used as auxiliary variables. Apart from the
noise approxi-matj-on there is also another error source as
the different "inputs" are not ind.ependent of each other.
This will also be discussed.
A. Correlation Analysis.
In table 2 the correlation between the "real" inputs
and the actual outputs j-s shown. Here also other pai_rs of
inputs and outputs have been stud.ied to find out. the sig-
nificant causality relations. The input has been whitened.
and corresponding impulse response has been estimated using
Fast Fourier Transform technique. Generally 2000 data points
!{ere used.62
TÀBLE 1 O
Qualitative correlations between some. se.lected variables.
Pt3 P61 P62
Nuclear power C1 0
Vessel pressure P1 3
Secondary pressure P61
Tertiary pressure P620
+ ++
++
The correlation results are shown i-n table 10. The
signs indicate a positive or negative correlation betrceen
the variables. Two si-gns .means a clear cross correlation,
one sign a 1ow signal to noise ratio, a question mark a
poor correlation while a zero means insignificant corre-
lation.
B. I'faximum Likelihood (ML) Tdentifi-cati-ons.
Some specific results from expt. 3
cussed in order to demonstrate the model
r.¡hen couplings are taken into account.wil-I now be dis-
characteristics
Table 3 shows, that the best possible model with nu-
clear power (C1O) as function of u, and u, is charactel'ized
by 13 parameters (pIus 3 initial conditions), i.e. 16 para-
meters which give. À = 0.0282. If the vessel pressure (p13)
is added to the mod,el, it can be i¡.rproved signi.ficantly. A63
second order model now with three inputs corresponds
to 13 parameters and. À = 0.0282. Significant improvements
of the loss function i-s obtai-ned for a third. order model
(19 paranieters) with. À = 0.0277 (F = 6). Without the pri-
mary pressure as an auxiliary input no improvement is found
when the numh,er of parameters is increased to more than 13.
The correlation analysis indicated that the secondary and
tertiary pressures are not coupled to the nuclear power.
It is verified by the ML identificationr âS no improvement
is obt,ained by add.ing those variables as auxiliary inputs.
The plot of the model output in Fig. 12 shorvs an in-
teresting behaviour compared. to the previous model output,
Fig. 8. The new model can follow the d.rÍft of the nuclear
power between 56 and 62 minutes much better. During this
time the input u, j-s negative most of the time, and. conse-
quently the pressures are forced to rise, which j_n turn
decreases the nuclear power. Thus the drift of the nuclear
power is noticed through the vessel pressure p13, and, the
model error change at t N 62 is consequently not so d.is-
tinct. Even if the loss function is significantly smaller
for the new model, the residuals in the two models look si-
milar to each other. In principle there is only a slight.
scali-ng of the residuals, The autocovariance does not change
much.
The irnproveinent is enphasized also for the vessel64
pressure. The smallest loss functj-on for the vessel pres-
sure related to u, and u, in expt. 3 v¡as obtained for or-
der four and 20 parameters (cf. table 6). It corresponCs
to l. = 0.714*10-4. ïf the nuclear power and secondary pres-
sure are added, a third order model wi-th 21 parameters gives
I = 0.633*10-'1. A comparison between those models corre-
sponds to an il test quantity (6) of 270 (1000 data). Ir is
quite reasonable, that the vessel pressure moder can be sig-
nificantly irnproved by including other process variables.
The gains from both the rods and the steam valve to the
vessel pressure are quite sma11. According to Fig. 3 a re-
activity change is first noticed in the nuclear power be-
fore it propa.gates to the vessel pressure. Therefore the
knowledge of the nuclear power together with the reactivi-
ty input significantly increases the inforn'ration about the
vessel pressure. Likewise, a change in the steam flow varve
causes pressure changes in the heat removal circuits which
propagate towards the reactor vesse,l . of similar reasons as
above, the knowlecae of not only the steam valve j-nput but
also the secondary pressure "input" gives a better determi-'
nation of the vessel pressure.
The tertiary pressure will also be discussed. The IvIL
identification gave significant mod.els with both the stea¡n
valve u, and. the secondary pressure as inputs. Accord.ing
to table I (col. 4) the best model with only u, as input has 9 pa-
rameters (including Ínitial conditions) and | = 0.174*10-3.
ìq"'r65
If the nuclear power and secondary pressure are added, a
third order model with 21 parameters gives. À = 0.633*10-4.
A comparison l:etween those models correspond.s to an F test
quantity (7) of 270 (1OOO data). It is quite reasonable,
that the vesscrl pressure model can be significantly improved
by including other process variables. The gains fronr both
the rod.s and the steam valve to the vessel pressure are
quite small. According to Fig. 3 a reactivity change is
first noticed in the nuclear power before it propagates
to the vessel pressure. Therefore the knorvledge of the nu-
clear power together wj-th reacLivity input significantly
increases the information about the vessel pressure. Like-
wise, a change j-n the steam flow valr¡e causes pressure
changes in the heat removal circuits which propagate to-
wards the reactor vessel. Of similar reasons as above,
the knowledge of not only the steam valve input but also
the secondary pressure "input" gives a better determina-
tion of the vessel pressure.
The tertiary pressure will also be discussed. The
ML identification gave signifj-cant models with both the
steam valve u, and the secondary pressure as inputs. Ac-
cord.ing to table 10 the best model with only u, as input
has 9 parameters (including initial cond.itions) and À =
-?= 0.174*10 With P61 added tCI the model a second order
mod.el with 12. parameters is accepted. as the best one rvith
I - 0.156*10-3, correspcnCing to an F test quantity (6) of66
155. No correlatj-on was found earlier betvreen u., r u3 and
the tertiary pressure. The primary and secondary pressures
are then lj-nks fro¡n the core dynamics to the tertiary pres-
sure P62. The correlation analysis showed that P62 should.
be related al.;;o to the vessel pressure, buÈ the M.L j-Centi-
fications dit not reveal such a relationship. The reason
is, that the primary and secondary pressures are strongly
correlated, so al-1 causality relations from primary to ter-
tiary pressures can be explained by the secondary pressure
alone.
Now compare the plots in Figs. 11 and 13. The mod.eI
error is signifi-cantly reduced. As for the nuclear power,
the residual amplitudes are d.ecreased but the two real-j-za-
tions and^ their covariances are quite similar.
C. Simulations.
The whole vector difference equation (VDE) with the
two inputs u2 and u, arrd. the four outputs can now be writ-
ten in the form (14), The model contains three A, mat.rices,
four B, matrices and three C, matrj-ces. The deterministic
part of the mod.el contains 47 parameters, 28 in the A, mat-
rices and 19 in the B, matrj-ces. The diagonal C, mairices
contain 10 parameters.
The different a.ssumptions of the noise (see III.C)67
and the inputs are tested by simulation of the VDE. Ì.Il:en
each row of the VDE was si¡nulated. separatelyr âs in Figs.
12 and 13, then all the auxiliary variables had their ob-
served values. ?trl:en the whole VDE is simulated, then only
the true inputs 12, u3 have their observed values given.
It j-s natural, that the output error then is larger. Be-
cause of the new relations found, the model error is, how-
ever, stil1 smaller than for the Ì'ITSO models¡ âs in Figs.
8 11. In Figs . 14 and 15 the nuclear pol{er and the ter-
tíary pressure are plotted from the VDE simulation made
for inputs from expt. 3. Figs. 14 and 15 should be com-
pared to the Figs. 8, 12 and 11, 13 respecti-vely.
It is demonstrated that the VDE mod.e1 output error
j-s (in mean square) between the results of MISO identifi-
cation and row-by-row VDE identification. Observe, however,
that slow variations occur quite obvj-ously aJ-so here.
VTT. A STATE }IODEL.
From a control point of view it is interesting to
get an accurate and sti1l reasonably sma11 model of the
plant. An attempt is made to formulate a state rnodel in
order to achieve better physical interpretation of the mo-
deI parameters. In this section a nodel is id.entified. from
expt. 4 using only two inputs u2 and ur. ?r struciure of68
the plant model is derived first and the essential
mations are accounted for. then the id.entification
are presented and discussed
A. Derivation of a lîodel Structure.
In section II the qualitative behaviour of the plant
was discussed., and by identification some of the most es-
sential relations were confirmed. Iiere an attempt j-s made
to quant.ify the assumptions of physical couplings betv¡een
the different process variables. The goal is to find a li-
near state variable description.
It is assumed, that the varj-ations are sma1l¡ so
that the nonlinear effects are negligible. The state va-
:¡iables are defined as devÍations from stationary values,
1. KinetÍcs.
The neutron leve1 n* j-s proportional to the nuclear
power C10. If one group of d.elayed neutrons is assuned
the neutron d.ensity equation isapproxi-
results
(20 )dn*õk+n* ßÀcdr
where n* i-s the neutron
delayed neutrons, g thedensity, c the concentration of
delayed neutron fraction, I aL69
weighted average value of the d.ecay consta¡rts of the pre-
cursors of the six groups of delayed. neutrons, { the neut-
ron generatÍon time and. ôk = keff-1 ng reactivity. The last
term is discussed in paragraph 6.
The one group description of delayed neutrons is
dcÀc (21) =ßt*
Ldr
As the neutron kinetics is very fast compared. to
other phenomena in the plant a prornpt ju¡np approximation
is made, i.e. d.n*/dt is put to zero. This makes the nu-
clear pov¡er an algebraic equation of the other state va-
riables, according to (20) .
2. Fuel Temperature Dynamics.
The heat content of the fuel elements is represented
by the average fuel temperature gf" As it. is influenced. by
heat transfer through the fission and is decreased by the
coolant, the following dynami-cs
d0fT (22]/
dt.gf+ Y1n
is assumed, where ì-, are constants and T, is an averag.e
time constant for the fuel elements determined by their
total heat capacity. rt is inÍtia11y assumed to be g se-* T2o. f70
conds.
ted by
ent T2The coolant temPerature 9" wi-1l
an average water tenPerature ê*
is found to be close to zero.1={-av }ra rêñrêcên-
and. the coeffici-
3. Coolant andÌ'{oderator DvnarrLi cs .
The hydraulics, coolant and moderator dynamics are
probably the most complex features of the plant. Here se-
veral crucial approximations are made. All the water con-
tent in the core is represented by an average water tem-
perature êw, which then (together with fuel temperature)
represents the heat flux in the core. The voj-d content is
strongly related to both heat flux and vessel pressure'
and therefore it is here i-nvolved in those state variables.
The vessel pressure p1 gives, of courser ro infor-
mation about the void distribution along the coolant chan-
nels. The reactivity feedback from void, depends not only
on the average void but also on the spatial distribution
of the void. Moreover the boiling boundary is not taken
into account, and it is a critical variable.
It has been demonstrated in section TI that the sub-
cooled flow temperature (AT8) is related to both the v¡ater
temperature 0* and to the reactivity. This dynamics has
not been i-ncluded in the present state modelr âs tle valve
11 \^¡as not moved in the selected experiment. The teinpera-
ture changes therefore were not si.qnificant.7L
The structure of the water ternperature equation can
now be formulated. Because of the large v¡ater mass the
heat capacity is large, and correspor.uron time constant
is of the ord.er minutes. rnitially it i.s assuned to be
1 00 seconds.
The heat flux.whi-ch can change tl¡e water temperature
can be represented. by the three states, fuel temperature,
subcooled water temperature and the heat transfer through
the steam transformer. part of the heat is also due to the
fact that all the fission power j-s not captured in the fuel,
but in the moderator. The coupling to the subcooled water
has been neglected. The heat flux through the steam trans-
former is for the moment reÞresented by the term q,,. Then
the water equation is formulated as
d
w+ T:gt + Y491g
w
Q3')d.r
4Vessel Pressure Dvnamics.
According to the assumptions abeut the coolant the
pressure must reflect many different f,eatures. Thj-s means,
that the equation parameters are combi.nations of many phy-
sicar phenomena anc it. is tberefore very difficult to make
any theoretical derivation of their numerical r'alues.g T
!ì7
The vessel pressure is certainly related to the heat72
flux from the fuel elements and the water temperature. To
a very smal1 extent it 5.s related. to the subcooled tenpe-
rature. No identifj-cation has veri-fied. any significant re-
lation. In any case tl¡e influence from the subcooled tem-
perature is neglected in the present experiment.
The vessel pressure also depends on the steam removal
through the steam transformer to the secondary circuit. ff
this energy flux is represented as before by q1 the pres-
sure equation structure is
dp1
. a ÊY.ldtrr* y60f * y70, + Tgel tad I
5. Heat Removal Circuit Dynamics.
The dynamical coupling between the reactor core and
the steam circuits is through the vessel pressure and the
primary steam flow. As remarked before there is also a
weak coupling to the water circuits through the subcooler
A. The subcooling temperature and flow then can represent
the essential variables for this coupling.
The heat transfer in the steam transformers and in
the subcoolers now is considered. The functi-onal difference
between the steara transformers and the subcoolers is, thaÈ
tbe latter ones hat'e one phase flow (water) both irr the pri:nary73
and in the second.ary ci-rcuits. rn order to simplify the mo-
del as much as possible only the steam phase is considered..
rt is known, that the water is only slightly subcooled in
the circuits. varj-ations j-n the subcooling are considered.
as stochasÈic disturbances to the pressures.
The mass and energy balance equations for the heat.
exchangers have been formulated earlier by Eurola 124J.
As the steam is close to saturation it is reasonable as
remarked in sectíon II - that the temperature variations
are assumed proportional to the pressure variations. There-
fore the pressure is used to represent the enthalpy.
The primary steam flow variations (F41 ) are not neg-
Iigibler ês soon as the steam valve v2 has been moved
Identifications have shown that it is also significantly
refated to the primary pressure and to some extent to the
nuclear power. Therefore $¡e assume here that the enthalpy
on the primary side of the steam transformer is described
only by the vessel pressure. In section II.C it is ind.i-
cated that the temperáture variations on the second.ary
side are small. Therefore the secondary side enthalpy is
also represented just by the pressure. The consequence of
these arguments is, that the energy term q, in eqs, (23)
and (24) can be replaced by the secondary pressure p2. I^iith
sÍmilar argunrents the tertiary circuit d.ynamics is d,escribed,
by only one state variable, the tertiary pressure p3.74
The secondary pressure dynamics is conseguently as-
sumed. to be
( 2s)
where glZ and g* are the heat fluxes from the primary to
secondary and. from second.ary to tertiary circuits respec-
tively. The heat fluxes are assumed to be related to ti:e
pressures in the following vray:
912 = u1P1 u2Pz
9Z: = u3P2 u4P3
where v¿ìre consta:rts. This results inl-dPz,ZT=Q1Z'9ZZ
d.t'
dP"
* = Tgpt * T1 oPz * Y1t P3clt(26 )
Q7lFor the tertiary system v¡e have
dPg.¡ 
=- = 82¡ - 9g
ot,
where q, is the heat removed from the tertiary system.
We assurne75
93=t5P3+u6u2
The state equati-on then J-s
(28 )
6. Reactivity Feedbacks.
The reactivity term ôk in eq. (20 ) defines the coup-
ling between the kinetic equations and the rest of the
pIant. The feedback effects have been ind.icated in Fig. 3.
The void. content has been representêd by vessel pressure
and by water temperature. As the steam removal influences
the void content we also include the secondary pressure
arnong the reactivity feed.backs. f t is assumed that a li-
near relati-on holds ,dP.
Ë = rlzPz * T1 3p3 + r14u2
ôk = o3 + ì--159f + T169* + T1Zp1 * ylgpZ (2el
where 13 represents the net reactivity from the rods. The
feedback from the subcooled water is neglected..76
7. Summary
To summarj-ze the structurei tbe state vector of
the linear model is defined as
*1 delayed neutrons c (21)
x2 fuel temperature êf þZ)
x3 water temperature g* (23 )
x4 vessel pressure p1 Q4)
*5 secondary pressure p2 |.26)
xt tertiary pressurê Þ. (28 )' 'J
d*=Ax+Bu
dr.¡
The input vector has only the two Ínputs steam valve
and reactivity.
the mod.e1 is d.escribed by
(30)
A_o ^12 t13 u14 
"15
az1 a2z 423 u24 a2s
o t32 "33 t34 t35
o u42 t43 u44 t45
000"54"55
0000"650
0
0
0
ã*56
t66blz
bzz
þ=0
0
0
0
0
b0
0
0
0(3r)
6177
The underlined elements wi-lI be discussed. in section
VIIT.
The three pressures p1 - p3 are measured, but the nu-
clear power h.rs not been used. as an output. The general
form of the n'lclear power related to the other state va-
riables j-s derj-ved from (20) and (2g) but the parameters
are unknown. fn order to limit the complexity of unknown
parameters the nuclear power aeasurements therefore are
not used
The output equation then j-s
vCx
where
c
The
ted. First00010
00001
000000
0
1(32)
B. Parameter Ïdentification.
identlfication of the state model is now presen-
the noise is discussed.78
1Noise Description.
In III.D the instrument noise is considered and i.s
found to be quite smalI. Thus the major contrj-bution to
the residuals are due to process noise and moder errors.
There are many noise sollrces in the plant, a fact
rvhich is demonstrated by the }frso identifications. The
boiling is a large noise source term, which affects x4.
Temperature variations in coolant, subcooled water affect
x3. The saturation temperature is changed. due to heat frux
variations. varying degrees of subcoorj-ng in the water
phase ín the heat removal circuj-ts wirl disturb the pres-
sures x5 and xu. Also the flow variations in the cÍrcuits
create disturbances
The process noise terms also can represent mod.eling
errors to some extent
2. Identification Results.
The stochastic structure of the system is d.escribed
by eqs. (8) (9). From expt. 4 a sequence of 800 samples
have been used..
In the
were assumed.
in the A and
sponding tofirst approach the matrices K and. D of (10)
to be zero. I^Iith I parameters assumed. unknown
B matrices a minimum point was found corre-79
tr (R)0.123 10-3
(see (13) ) . This corresponds to standard devi-ations of
-) the predj-ction errors 0.50*10 - (vessel pressure),
-) -)0.74*10' (secondary pressure) and 0.66*10 ' (tertiary
pressure). These errors are very large compared. to pre-
vious Mrso results (0.7*1 a-4, 0.19*10-3, 0.17*10-3 re-
spectively). Moreover, the residuals were not accepted
to be white noise.
It l_s
First only
tried , k41,c1ear, that process noise must be included.
three non-zero elements of the K matrix v¡ere
kSZ and k.r.
In order to limit the computations not more than
15 parameters at a time were assumed to be unknown in the
A, B and K matrices. V{ith K included a significant j-m-
provement was obtained. The loss function decreased. no-
ticeably. The standard deviations of the prediction er-
rors for the three pressures were 0.88*10-3, 0.96*10-3
-tand 0.15*10 - respectively. Those values are stiIl too
large compared to the MISO results.
It is demonstrateC thatit is not tri-viaI to find
form. Several improvements a correct structure in state
can be made¡ and. work is inprogress to improve the nod.elBO
structure. It is clear, that the number of parameters in
the A and. B natrj-ces (31 ) can be j-ncreased.. In the VDE
approach not less than 34 significant parameters were
found in the deterministic part of the model relating two
inputs to the three selected output pressures. In the
state equation identj-fication the number of degrees of
freedom (equal to the nunrber of parameters to be identi-
fied) for fitting the observed data has been reduced. fn
A and B (31) there are only 25 parameters" Clearly the
number of states should be Íncrea.sed. The assumptions
about the core d.ynamics have to be more elaborate. One
varÍable describing the void content and two different
states for the coolant and moderator temperature would
be a significant improvement. Moreover, previous identi-
fications showed, that the primary steam flow probably
should be considered a separate state variable. It is
also clear, that one state for each heat removal circuit
is too little. The present state mod.el has no time con-
stant smaller than 6 seconds, and the results in v.c. cle-
arly demonstrated that fast modes are important. Thus ad-
ditional states are needed to describe the secondary and
tertiary pressures better.
It is difficuit to find good. initial values of the
K matrix, as they do not have any intuitive physical in-
terpretatj-on. Tt i:c navbe easier to guess parameters in
the process noise covariance matrix, and then transform
to K by using a Riccati equation t441.81
The computational work is b1' no means trivial. The
likelihood function is ¡rinimized numerically. The gradi-
ents are computed numerically using fini-ue differences,
and a Fletcher-Powell algorithm is used for minimi-zation.
Manual interaction has to be done to a large extent d.ur-
ing the minimj-zation. The intermediate results have to
be judged if they are reasonable. Otherwise it is easy
to get unreasonable computational tj-mes, depending on
too slow convergence, wrong step lengths etc.
Fig. 16 the first part of expt. 4 is plotted.
The best model hitherto is compared to the real output
values.
VTII. RECURSTVE TDEI{TIFTCATTON.
In expt. 7 the operating 1eveI is changed signifi-
cantly by means of the subcooling. A time variable linear
model could describe this phenomenon. Here an Extended
Kalman filter has been applied in order to recursively
track the varying parameters.82
.4,. Influence of Subcooling Power.
The general nature of the subcooling effects were
discussed in sectj-on II.A and C. The quantitative influ-
ence of varying subcooling power has been studied by com-
paring experiments 6 (table 1) and 4. Tt was found, that
not all the parameters in the A matrix (31 ) changedr êx-
cept mainly the underlined ones.
Genera}ly a lower subcooling power means a lesser
degree of stability. Mainly the reactivity feedback coef-
ficÍents (Fig. 3) will be affected. As they are hidden j-n
the system equation coefficients a couple of examples are
g5-ven here.
Às soon as the subcooling power decreases there j-s
a higher probability for boiling j-n the moderator. The
total void content increases. The sensS-tivity to pressure
changes will then -rlse and. the vessel pressure influence
on reactivÍty will gro$¡. with a prompt jump approximation
this means that x1 and x, are primarily i-nfluenced, i.e.
the parameters u,l' and arn (31). Às an example u14 = - 0.24
from expt 4 with 1.95 Mhr subcooling, and a14 = - 0.64 at
expt 6 with 1.1 tvl?ù subcooling.
In experiment
nually from 1.95 to7 the subcooling povrer was
1.4 M{ during 15 minutes,changed ma-
rvhile u2and.83
u3 !ì¡ere d.isturbeC (table 1) . The subcooling power is shown
in Fig. 17 (upper fig.). It r¡¡as not included in the model
but considered as an external distiubance source. The ini-
tial condition for expt. 7 is the same as the operating
l-evel- of expt. 4. Therefore the model described in vrr.B
j-s used as the starting model for Lhe recursir¡e paraneter
estimation.
B. Parameter Tracking"
The observed variables from expt. 7 were put into an
Extended Ka1man filter (see IV.D) and the six time-varying
parameters were tracked. There is no \^ray to find optimal
-estimates of time-variable parameters in a multivariable
system. It j-s known, that the Extended Kalman fj-lter most
often gives unreliable confidence limits on the parameter
estimates. Several compensations for lfri= have been pro-
posed. 1,42J. Here, hovrever, the main interest has been to
test the simplest possible filter to track the parameters.
The sj-x unknown parameters were described as eq.
(12¡ with an artificial noise v¡. rnitialry the covariance
matrix of w was chosen diagonal, and only trial and error
methods were used to find sui-table values. rt r^¡as found
that the diagonal elements of cov(w) should lie between
10-6 and 1a-7, i.e. somer,r'haJ'- smaller than the process
noise covariance elements. This is reasonable, as the84
para:neters afe assumed to vary slowly
state variables. With too sma11 values
trackS-ng was too j_nsens j-tive.cornpared tothe
the of cov (w)
rn Fig. 17 an example is shown. six parameters were
estimated simultaneously and a14r discussed above, is d.is-
played. The parameter is approaching -0.4 which seems to
be a plausible resultr âS the subccoling reaches 1,4 .iu!rl.
rt i-s natural to try to minimize the number of time
varíable parameters, as the computing time grows very fast
with the size of the extended state vector. Attempts with
only two time-variabre parameters were not successful, but
three parameters could be reasonably accurate.
The computing tÍme for the Extended. Kalman filter
may be a severe constraint on an on-line computer. Here
the extended state vector consists of 12 states v¡hich means
a considerable computational burd.en. Probably even more
state variables should be included. in order to improve the
modeI. Therefore it j-s crucial to simplify the carculations
as much as possible and a tailor made filter has to be de-
fined.8s
ACKNOI4ILEDGE}IENTS.
This work has been partially supported by the sv¡edish
Board for Technical Development. The research has been per-
fornred in cooperation wiÈh the OECD Halden Reactor project.
The author is especially indepted to Dr. R. Grumbach, ì.1r. H.
Roggenbauer and I1r. R. Karlsson (nov¡ with Atomenergi AB, Sweden)
with the Halden Reactor project for their participation and.
interest: The permission of the project to publish the results
is also gratefully acknowledged.
The team work at the Department of Aut.omatic Control has
been most va1uable. Professor K.J. Âström has contributed wi-th
constructi-ve criticism, new id.eas and never failing encouraging
support. Dr. r. Gustavsson has throughout the work shared his
knowledge of identification and has been of invaluable help.
Mr. C. KäIlström wrote Èhe state model identification prograrì.
Mr. J. Holst has cooperated with the author on subopt.imal fil-
tering problems. Dr. B. Wittenmark has contributed with valuable
comments and corrections when read.ì-ng the manuscript. Mrs. G.
Chrj-stensen has typed the manuscript, and }liss B.¡f. Carlsson has
prepared the figurest1l
ï.2J
t3l
t4l
lsl
t6lB6
REFERENCES.
G. olsson: l{aximum Likelihood rd.entification of some
Loops of the Hald.en Boiling I{ater Reactor, Report
7207, Department of Automatic Control, Lund Insti-
tute of Technology, Lund., 1972.
H. Roggenbauer, I^f. Seifritz, and G. Olsson: Identi-
fícation and Adjoint problems of process Computer
Control, Enlarcred Ha1den Prorarnme Group Meeting
Loen, Norway, 1972.
G. Olsson: Modeling and. Id.entificatÍon of Nuclear
Power Reactor Dynamics from Multivariable Experi-
ments,Proc. 3rd IFACSylnp.on Identificati-on and
stem Parameter EstirnatÍon , the Hague, the ìTether-
lands, L973.
I. Gustavsson: Comparison of Different Methods for
rdentification of Linear Models for Tndustrial pro-
cesses,AutomaticaI1972, VoI. 8, pp. 127-t42.
A.P. Sage and G.trt. Masters:
deling of Nuclear Reactors,
L967, NS-14, pp. 279-285.Id,entification and lto-
IEEE Trans. Nuc1.Sci. ,
w. ciechanowi-cz and s. Bogumil: on the on-l-ine sta-
tistical rdentification of Nuclear power Reactor Ðv-
namics, Nucl. Sci.Engr., 1968, Vol. 31, pp. 474-483.
L-J. Habegger and R.E. Bailey: Þtinímum variance Esti-
mation of Paraneters and states in Nuclear power sys-[7]87
tems,
1969.Proc. 4th IFAC Congress, Warsaw, paper !2.2,
R.L. Moore and F. Schweppe: trlodel Identifj-cation
for Adaptive Control of Nuclear power plants, Lq-to-
matica, 1973, Vol. 9, pp. 309-318
A. Brouu,ers: Step Perturbation Experiments with the
HBI^IR. second Fuel charge, oEcD Halden Reactor project,
HPR-51, 1964.
v. îosi and F. Âkerhielm: sinusoidal Reacti-vity per-
turbation Experiments with the HBWR second Fuer charge,
OECD Halden Reactor project, I{pR-49, 1964.
Y- Fishman: Pseudorandom Reactivity perturbation Ex-
periments with the HBWR second Fuel charge, oEcD Hal-
den Reactor Project, HpR-50, 1964.
T. Euro1a: Noise Experiments with the HBITIR Second
Fuel Charge, OECD ltalden Reactor project, HpR-53,
tg64.
T.J. Bjlrlo et a1: Digital plant Control of the Hal-
den B'trIR by a Concept Based on $lodern Control Theory,
Nucl. Sci. Engr., L970, VoI. 39¡ Ftr. 231-240.
t14l H. Roggenbauer: Real-Time Nucrear power plant parame-
ter rdentification wi-th a process computer, proc.
3rd IFAC Symp. on Tdentifica tionand Systern Para:reterl - -- ' l
'l r ^
- ,:ì¡.r--
l8l
tel
t 10l
t 111
l 12l
Ir¡l
Estimation the Hague, the NetherlanCs, 1973.88
tfSl E. Jamne and J.G. Siverts: Description of the tíBI,iR
Plant, OECD Halden Reactor project, HpR-95, 1967 -
t16l J.À. Fleck, Jr.:
I{ater Reactors,
11, pp. 114-130.The Dynamic Behaviour of Boiling
J. Nuc1. Energy, Part A, 1960, Vo1.
t17l S. Glasstone and M.C. Edlund: The Elements of lîu-
clear Reactor Theory, Van Nost.rand, Princeton, N.J.,
L952.
t18l c.D.c. King
York, 1964.: l{uclear Power Systems Macltlillan, New
[19] R.V. Meghreblian and Ð.K. Holmes: Reactor Ànalysis,
Elsevier, New York, 1968.
t21l D. Wíberg:Optimal Control of Nuclear Reactor Sys-
tems, Advances in Control Svstems(C. Leond.es, Ed.),McGraw-Hill, New York, 1960.
t20] L.E. Weaver: Reactor Dvnamics
Lzz)
Izs 1
1,241and Control, .Arnerican
Vol. 5, Academic Press, N.y . r rL967 .
G. Olsson: Simplified Models of Xenon Spatial Oscil-
lations, Atomkernenergie, 197A, Vo1. 16, No. 2, pp.
91-98.
H- vollmer and A.J.I^I. Anderson: Development of a Dy-
namic }lode1 for Heavlr l{ater Boiling Reactors and
rts Application to the HBhB., oEcD Halden Reactor pro-
ject, HPR-54, 1964.
T. Eurola: Dynamic l,îod.el of the HBI{R Heat Removal
circui-ts, oEcD HaLden Reactor project, HpR-62, 1964.89
125) r. Gustavsson: survey of Applications of rdentj_fica-
tion in che¡nical and physical processes, Automatica ,
1975, vo1.11r pp.1-1 A
'1.267P.A.N. Briggs, K.R. God.frey, and p.H. Hammond: Esti-
mation of Process Dynamic characteristics by correra-
tion Methods Using pseudo Rand.om Signals, proc. Ist
ïFAC Sr¡mp.Identification in Automatic Control Sys-
tems, Prague, 1967.
l27l r.c. cumming: Frequency of rnput signal in rdentifi-
cation, Proc. 2nd. IFAC Symp. Identification andPro-
cess Parameter Estimation , Prague | 1970.
t28l r.c. cumming: on-line rdentification for the computer
Control of a Cold Rolling Mill,Automatica , L972, Vo1.
l2e)8, pp. 531-541.
F. Pettersen: Description of System Har¿ware for the
Main Process Computer InstallatÍon at the HB,Þ]R, OECD
Halden Reactor Project, HpR-123, 1971.
t30l K.J. Âström and p.
Survey, AutomaticaEykhoff: System Identification, a
, L97!, VoI. 7, pp. 123-L62.
t31l P. Eykhoff: Eystem Identifica , Wi1ey, !974.
I32l R.K. Mehra and J.S. T\zler: Case Stud.ies in Aircraft
Parameter Identification, proc. 3rd IFAC Son
Identification and-Çystem Far
Hague, the Netherland.s, 1923.ameter Ðstirnation, thet33l K.J. Âström and T. Bohlin: Numerical Tdentification
of Linear Dynamic Systems from Normal Operating Re-90
IFAC Svrnp. Theorvon Self-Adaptive Control
(p.H. Hammond, ed.), Tedd.ington, Eng1., p1e-
num Pres;s r N. Y. , 19 6 5 .cords,
Systems
[34 ] H. Akaike:
Ann. Inst.Statistical Predictor
Statist. Irfath., ]-97o rIdentification,
Vol. 22, No. 2, pp.
243-2L7.
t35 I K.J. Âström:
demic Press,Introduction to Stochastic Control, Aca-
N.Y. , 1970.
t36 I R.K. Mehra: Identification of Stochastic
tems Usj-ng Kalman Filter Representation,
L97I, Vol. 9, No. 1r pp. 28-31.Lj-near Sys-
AIAA Journal î
t37l J. Eaton: rdentification for control purposes, IEEE
Wínter Meetinq, It.Y. L967.
t38l K.T. tfoo: Identification of Noisy
on Ïdentification and Systems,
Process Parameter Estimation, Prague, 1970.MaxÍmum Likelihood
Proc. 2nd IFAC Svmir.
P.E. Caines: The Parameter Estimation of State Vari-
able Mode1s of Multivariable T,inear Systems, Contr,ol
systems centre Report No. 146, The univ. of lulanchester,
Inst. of Sci. and Techn., April, 1971.
L- Ljung: on consistency for prediction Error rdenti-
fication Methods, Report 74as, Dept. of Àutomatic con-
trol, Lund..Inst. of Technology, Lund, !974.[3e]
t 40l91
t41l R.K. Mehra and P.s. Krishnaprasad: A uni-fied Approach
to the Structural Estimation of Distributed Lass and
Stochastj-c Differential Equations, Third NBER. Confe-
rence on Stochastic Control and Economic Systens
1.421
[¿¡]
t44l
t¿sl
t 46llilashington D. C. , May, 197 4 .
G. Olsson and. J. Holst: A Conparati-ve Study of Subop-
timal Filters for Parameter Estimation, Report 7324,
Dept. of Automatic Control, Lund Inst. of Techn.,
Lund, 1973.
ï. Gustavsson: parametric rdentification of lr1ultiple
Input, Single Output Linear Dynamj-cal Systems, Report
6907, Dept. of Automatic Control, Lund Inst. of Techn. ¡
Lund, 1969.
K.J. .Âström and. C. Källström: Application of System
rdentification Techniques to the Determination of ship
Dynamics, Proc. 3rd IFAC S¡¡mp. on Tdentification and
Svstem Pararneter Estimation , the Hague, the Netherland.s,
1973.
r. Gustavsson, s. selander and J. I{ieslander: ïDpAC user,s
Guide, Report 7331, Dept. of Automatic Control, Lund.
Inst. of Techn., l,und, L973.
T.J- Bjlrlo et aI: Apprication of Mod.ern control Theo-
ry for Regulation of the Nuclear power and. the Reactor
vesser Pressure of the HBWR, oEcÐ Harden Reactor pro-
ject, HPR-131, Halden, !97J-.92
lall T. Bohlin: On the }laximum Likelihood. lrlethod. of Iden-
tification, IEM J. Res. and Dev.¿ 1970, Vol. 14, pp.
t48l
Í4e1
Is0]41-51.
T. Söd.erström: Test of Common Factors of Ïd.entified
Models. Application to the Generalized Least Squares
Method, Report 7328, Dept. of Auto¡ratic Control, Lund
Inst. of Techn., Lund,1973.
K.J. Âström, private communication, 1975.
T. Söderström: On the UnÍqueness of lîaximum Likeli-
hood Identification, Automatica , L975, Vol. 11r Fp.
193-197._vÂLvE__Ur(vB 282)
STEAM OUTtgl
FEÊO WATCfr
ÍANKc3lrrRoL R0
- -- ---l''--
NEACTIVITY
(u3)
f5 UB COOL gR5
Flg. L. Slmpllfled flow sheet of the HBWR p1ant.
Reprlntecl by courtesy of the llalden Reactor project.(.
(
&-BSlEAM
GEN.
.tt-/\SlEA M
ORUM
-!rSlEAM
IRA NS F.
( vA 770t-
SUBCOOLEO
wÂrER FtowPt
- ñ-Ë ¡elo-q-
esSEVFWl1I
)sT8
I
IR!3
üVIIVE u2
-(vB 282) l SrSaU oUTLET
rôa-
51
'VAWE ul
(v^ 770)
PRIMANY SECONDÂRY TERTIARY
varlables registered for the iclentif icatlons.
Reprlnted by courtesy of the Halden Reactgr project.f(t
5CAFETO WÂTER
l"E0Ê¡rpj
I. TTMPERAIURES
P . PT'ES5UNES
F'FL0w5
C:NEUTRON FTUX
Flg. 2{
Sorbtion 9eff nucleor eot
Pig- 3. Reactivity feedbacks in the reactor dynanics.pres -
>u¡ g
stec I
¡1¡3¡i: r:
}J\.¡ \kikticrf ission hect
trcnsfef uet
etemenispower f lux
fue[treQc
steomproduc-
tion u1temp.
voidsteqm
f tow
æ2hydrou-
ticscoolont
e3
&,4
a5mcder-
ator
a65SUBCOOLING VALVE u(Y")
SUBCOOLING FLOW F6
SUBCOOLING TEMP. TB CC)
SUBCOOLING POWER (MW)
NUCLE,AR POWER (MW)
3t+ 525
4
4
10.2
3
I
2 0 710
Fig. 4. Typical responses to changes in ur.Tlrne (min)B
10
9.6
I
3
2VALVE VA, 770 (%)
NUCLEAR POWER (MW)
I
3
2.PRIMARY PRESSURE (d ifference, bor) P13
SECONDARY PRESSURE (differenc e, bor) P61
ÏERTIARY PRESSURE (difference, bor) PG2
0 1 2 J 4
Time (min)
, FÍg. 5. Typical- responses to a step change in ur.3.
5TERTIARY PRESSURE çxtOz)STEAM VALVE (
2otlo
2.50
.00
-2.50
5.00
.00
-5,00
2,OO
.o0
-2. 00
2.00
.ooSECONDARY PRESSURE ( XlO)
PRTMARY PRESSURE (*i02 )2
810l+ 6 14 16
Tinie (min)-2.00
Fig. 6. Typical responses to changes in ur.1231VALVE VB 282 (%)
NUCLEAR POWER (MW)
Fig. 7. Nuclear power response to step change in ur.o
I
5
Time (mÌn)!/ | br-1r-¡
2.5
0
-2
2
-2
10.50ROD (STEPS) t¡
NUCLEAR PO\,VER (MW)
MODEL ERROR (1"1W)
RESIDUA.LS
50 52 5/. 56 58 60 62 64
. Time trnin )
F:¡-$. B. Mode-1. of the nrr.cl.ûF.r FcwÉ_ì;.. (br:ok_er, Line) rel_ated
to u'r' airrì. uu. îhe oÌ:s.--rvcci v¿lì,or aïe .rom a part'
cif cxpt 3.10.0
9.
0.5
0
- 0.5
o.2
0
-0.2ì
II
-1--Jr\
ü1,^J
lr
,.'ï,ç$hll.''ií i{ill^.1-\1,,4il¡*\UïI
þ.'it[,ì,,å*'ii 'i;;r{"n$,,,i','{#'¿
2.5
-z
2
a0
0ROD (STEPS) ug
PRIMARY PRESSURE (xl02)
MODEL ERROR (x102)
RESTDUALS (*102)
BO 82B/' BS BB90 92 942
-2
.5
:5
2
Fig. 9. ¡4ode1 of the priaiarlr pressu-re (brcken U:re) rel_ated t" "iimg (nTn)U- afd' U^. lPhe ci--.sor¡zad rr:r'ì:r¡c ¡rn €,.-^* ^ *^r{ ^€ ---r2.5
-z
2
-¿
1ROD (STEPS) u
SECONDARY PRESSURE (*102
$4ODEL ERROR (*i02 ))
-1
RESIDUALS (*102¡
;f ;,l.l'
'itiotiliiìriffi.i
Itì,
0I84 B BB 294Fig.10. t'lodel of the secorida::v pressure {þroken 1lnel (min)0
relaLed. to o2 anC t!.. Tl"le obsel-ved va-l-ties ere
€rnm : h=r+ ^ç ^r,âå :tL.,
2
-20
5
-5
1STEAM VALVEu2 (oio¡
2TERTIARY PRESSURE (xi0)
MODEL ËRROR (x1&t
RESIDLJALS ( 
"102)Ï
0
0
1
0.2
0
-0.2-50 52 5/- 56 58 60 62
Time lmìn)Fig,'J-I. Mod.el of the tertiar]' pressu::e (broken line)s4
related to u2. The observei. values are frorir a pa=t
of expt 3.10.5NUCLEAR POWER(Mw)
MODEL ERROR (N4w)10.
9.s
0.5
0
-0.5
4.2
0RËSIDUALS
50 52 5/. 56- 0.2
58 6062 64
Time (min)
F'ig.12. llo<leI of the nuclear power (broken line) related.
to .tZ, u3 and. the primary pressure. The observed
val_ues are fro¡a parÈ of expt 3.5
-5
0.2s
-0.25
0.1
-0J{utttuu¡0TERTIARY PRESSURE (*lo2)
MODEL ERROR ( *1oZ)
0
RESIDUALS (X1O)2
0
50 5254 56 58 6062 64
Time (min)
rig- 13. Mod.el of the tertiary pressure (broken line)
reLated to u2 and the secondary pressure.
The observed. values are from a part of expt 3.05
-5STEAM VALVE u(T")
ROD u(STEPS)
PRIMARY PRESSURE
SECONDARV PRESSURE
TERT¡ARY PRËSSURE1
0
1
-2
.02
.oa
-.o2
.02
.oa
.42
.05
.t0
6 L 2 12 1tr
Time (¡nini-.CIs
0 B 10t0.sNUCLEAR POWER ( MW)
MODEL ERROR(MW)
rig' 14' Nuclear po\^¡er output from the vDr simuration.A part of expt 3 j-s shown.
TERTIARY PIìESSURE (olo2)
MODEL ERROR ( *io2 )10.0
9.5
0.5t
0
-0.
5
-5
10
0
150 52 s456 58 60 62
ïme (minl
!'ig' 15' Tertiary pressure output from the vDE sirnur-atj-on.A part of expt 3 j.s shown
1¡6/.
--* Ft;,-o2
-o.Â
2.0
!-Subcooiing power (ì'{W} \'',
.""ì3t,5 .üT ¡;i
Tinr* irnin)
Estimation of -'i.me-varying paraneters v¡ith the
Extencled Kalman filter in expt 7. Among the
six estinatecl parameters *14 is shor.¡n, The sub
eool5"ng is changed mar¡uell./.Fig.L7"