   BIOPOLYMER 
NANOCOMPOSITES    WILEY SERIES ON POLYMER ENGINEERING 
AND TECHNOLOGY
Richard F. Grossman and Domasius Nwabunma, Series Editors
Polyolefin Blends / Edited by Domasius Nwabunma and Thein Kyu
Polyolefin Composites / Edited by Domasius Nwabunma and Thein Kyu
Handbook of Vinyl Formulating, Second Edition / Edited by 
Richard F. Grossman
Total Quality Process Control for Injection Molding, Second Edition / 
M. Joseph Gordon, Jr.
Microcellular Injection Molding / Jingyi Xu
Poly(lactic acid): Synthesis, Structures, Properties, Processing, and 
Applications / Edited by Rafael Auras, Loong-Tak Lim, Susan E. M. Selke,
and Hideto Tsuji
Hyperbranched Polymers: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications / Edited by
Deyue Yan, Chao Gao, and Holger Frey
Advanced Thermoforming: Methods, Machines and Materials, Applications
and Automation / Sven Engelmann
Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications / 
Edited by Alan Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan   BIOPOLYMER 
NANOCOMPOSITES
PROCESSING, PROPERTIES, AND APPLICATIONS 
 Edited By 
  Alain   Dufresne   
  Grenoble Institute of Technology (Grenoble INP)    The International School of Paper    Print Media, and Biomaterials (Pagora)    Saint Martin d’Hères Cedex, France  
  
Sabu   Thomas  
  School of Chemical Sciences  
  Mahatma Gandhi University    Kottayam, Kerala, India  
  Laly A.   Pothan  
  Department of Chemistry  
  Bishop Moore College    Mavelikara, Kerala, India                Copyright © 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved 
 Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey 
 Published simultaneously in Canada 
 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in 
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at  www.copyright.com . Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at  http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions . 
 Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best 
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁ  cally disclaim any implied 
warranties of merchantability or ﬁ  tness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created 
or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁ  t or any 
other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages. 
 For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please 
contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002. 
 Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in 
print may not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at  www.wiley.com .  
  Library of Congress Cataloging-In-Publication Data:  
 Biopolymer nanocomposites : processing, properties, and applications / edited by Alain 
Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, Laly A. Pothan.        pages cm        Includes index.     ISBN 978-1-118-21835-8 (hardback)     1.   Biopolymers.   2.   Nanocomposites (Materials)   I.   Dufresne, Alain, 1962– editor of compilation.   II.   Thomas, Sabu, editor of compilation.   III.   Pothan, Laly A, editor of compilation.     TP248.65.P62B5457 2013     572–dc23   2013002843 
 Printed in the United States of America  10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1   vCONTENTS
Foreword vii
Contributors ix
 1. Bionanocomposites: State of the Art, Challenges, and Opportunities 1
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan
 2. Preparation of Chitin Nanoﬁ  bers and Their Composites 11
Shinsuke Ifuku, Zameer Shervani, and Hiroyuki Saimoto
 3. Chemical Modiﬁ  cation of Chitosan and Its Biomedical Application 33
Deepa Thomas and Sabu Thomas
 4. Biomimetic Lessons for Processing Chitin-Based Composites 53
Otto C. Wilson, Jr. and Tiffany Omokanwaye
 5. Morphological and Thermal Investigations of Chitin-Based 
Nanocomposites 83
Ming Zeng, Liyuan Lu, and Qingyu Xu
 6. Mechanical Properties of Chitin-Based Nanocomposites 111
Merin Sara Thomas, Laly A. Pothan, and Sabu Thomas
 7. Preparation and Applications of Chitin Nanoﬁ  bers/Nanowhiskers 131
Jun-Ichi Kadokawa
 8. Preparation of Starch Nanoparticles 153
Déborah Le Corre and Alain Dufresne
 9. Chemical Modiﬁ  cation of Starch Nanoparticles 181
Jin Huang, Qing Huang, Peter R. Chang, and Jiahui Yu
10. Starch-Based Bionanocomposite: Processing Techniques 203
Rekha Rose Koshy, Laly A. Pothan, and Sabu Thomas
11. Morphological and Thermal Investigations of 
Starch-Based Nanocomposites 227
Peter R. Chang, Jin Huang, Qing Huang, and Debbie P . Anderson
12. Mechanical Properties of Starch-Based Nanocomposites 261
Hélène Angellier-Coussy and Alain Dufresnevi  CONTENTS
13. Applications of Starch Nanoparticles and Starch-Based 
Bionanocomposites 293
Siji K. Mary, Laly A. Pothan, and Sabu Thomas
14. Preparation of Nanoﬁ  brillated Cellulose and Cellulose Whiskers 309
David Plackett and Marco Iotti
15. Bacterial Cellulose 339
Eliane Trovatti
16. Chemical Modiﬁ  cation of Nanocelluloses 367
Youssef Habibi
17. Cellulose-Based Nanocomposites: Processing Techniques 391
Robert A. Shanks
18. Morphological and Thermal Investigations of Cellulosic 
Bionanocomposites 411
Anayancy Osorio-Madrazo and Marie-Pierre Laborie
19. Mechanical Properties of Cellulose-Based Bionanocomposites 437
B. Deepa, Saumya S. Pillai, Laly A. Pothan, and Sabu Thomas
20. Review of Nanocellulosic Products and Their Applications 461
Joe Aspler, Jean Bouchard, Wadood Hamad, Richard Berry, Stephanie Beck, 
François Drolet, and Xuejun Zou
21. Spectroscopic Characterization of Renewable Nanoparticles 
and Their Composites 509
Mirta I. Aranguren, Mirna A. Mosiewicki, and Norma E. Marcovich
22. Barrier Properties of Renewable Nanomaterials 541
Vikas Mittal
23. Biocomposites and Nanocomposites Containing Lignin 565
Cornelia Vasile and Georgeta Cazacu
24. Preparation, Processing and Applications of Protein Nanoﬁ  bers 599
Megan Garvey, Madhusudan Vasudevamurthy, Shiva P . Rao, 
Heath Ecroyd, Juliet A. Gerrard, and John A. Carver
25. Protein-Based Nanocomposites for Food Packaging 613
Hélène Angellier-Coussy, Pascale Chalier, Emmanuelle Gastaldi, Valérie Guillard, Carole Guillaume, Nathalie Gontard,and Stéphane Peyron
Index 655   It is important to minimize the environmental impact of materials production 
by decreasing the environmental footprint at every stage of their life cycle. Therefore, composites where the matrix and reinforcing phase are based on renewable resources have been the subject of extensive research. These efforts have generated environmental friendly applications for many uses such as for automotive, packaging, and household products to name some. 
 Cellulose is the most abundant biomass on the earth and its use in the 
preparation of biobased nanomaterials has gained a growing interest during the last ten years. This interest can be illustrated by how the number of scien-tiﬁ c publications on the cellulose nanomaterial research has grown very rapidly 
and reached more the 600 scientiﬁ  c publications during 2011. The research 
topics have been extraction of cellulose nanoﬁ  bers and nanocrystals from dif-
ferent raw material sources, their chemical modiﬁ  cation, characterization of 
their properties, their use as additive or reinforcement in different polymers, composite preparation, as well as their ability to self-assemble. 
 Nanocelluloses, both ﬁ  bers and crystals, have been shown to have promising 
and interesting properties, and the abundance of cellulosic waste residues has encouraged their utilization as a main raw material source. Cellulose nanoﬁ  -
bers have high mechanical properties, which combined with their enormous surface area, low density, biocompatibility, biodegradability, and renewability make them interesting starting materials for many different uses, especially when combined with biobased polymers. Since bionanocomposites are a rela-tively new research area, it is necessary to further develop processing methods to make these nanomaterials available on a large scale, so that new applica-tions based on them can be developed. 
 Information about this emerging research ﬁ  eld could also prove to be a 
catalyst and motivator not only for industries but also to a large number of students and young scientists. A matrix of tools that could aid such work could be developed through research enterprise. The book  Biopolymer Nanocom-
posites: Processing, Properties, and Applications   by Alain Dufresne, Sabu 
Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan, as the authors themselves have pointed out elsewhere, “is an attempt to introduce various biopolymers and bionanocom-posites to a student of materials science. Going beyond mere introduction, the book delves deep into the characteristics of various biopolymers and bionano-composites and discusses the nuances of their preparation with a view to    FOREWORD    
viiviii  FOREWORD
helping researchers ﬁ  nd out newer and novel application s.” Students, research-
ers, and industrialists in the ﬁ  eld of biocomposites will be greatly beneﬁ  tted 
by this book since its chapters are authored by an impressive array of promi-nent current researchers in this ﬁ  eld. Sincere attempts like this at promoting 
the use of green materials for sustainable growth of humanity should be lauded indeed. 
    K  ristiina   O ksman   
  Luleå University of Technology    
           Debbie P . Anderson  ,   Bioproducts and Bioprocesses National Science 
Program, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Saskatoon, SK, Canada  
   Hélène Angellier-Coussy  ,   UnitéMixte de RechercheIngénierie des Agropoly-
mères et Technologies Emergentes, INRA/ENSA.M/UMII/CIRAD, Uni-versité Montpellier II, Montpellier Cedex, France  
   Mirta I. Aranguren  ,   INTEMA-CONICET, Facultad de Ingeniería-Universi-
dad Nacional de Mar del Plata, Mar del Plata, Argentina  
   Joe Aspler  ,   FPInnovations, Pointe Claire, QC, Canada   
   Stephanie Beck  ,   FPInnovations, Pointe Claire, QC, Canada   
   Richard Berry  ,   FPInnovations, Pointe Claire, QC, Canada   
   Jean Bouchard  ,   FPInnovations, Pointe Claire, QC, Canada   
   John A. Carver  ,   School of Chemistry and Physics, The University of Adelaide, 
Adelaide, SA, Australia; Research School of Chemistry, Australian National University, ACT, Australia  
   Georgeta Cazacu  ,   PetruPoni” Institute of Macromolecular Chemistry, Physi-
cal Chemistry of Polymers Department, Ghica Voda Alley, Iasi, Romania  
   Pascale Chalier  ,   Unité Mixte de Recherche Ingénierie des Agropolymères 
et Technologies Emergentes, INRA/ENSA.M/UMII/CIRAD, Université Montpellier II, Montpellier Cedex, France  
   Peter R. Chang  ,   Bioproducts and Bioprocesses National Science Program, 
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Saskatoon, SK, Canada; Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of Saskatchewan, Sas-katoon, SK, Canada  
   B. Deepa   ,    Department of Chemistry, Bishop Moore College, Mavelikara, 
Kerala, India; Department of Chemistry, C.M.S. College, Kottayam, Kerala, India  
   François Drolet  ,   FPInnovations, Pointe Claire, QC, Canada   
   Alain Dufresne  ,   Grenoble Institute of Technology (Grenoble INP), The Inter-
national School of Paper, Print Media, and Biomaterials (Pagora), Saint Martin d’Hères Cedex, France     CONTRIBUTORS    
ixx  CONTRIBUTORS
   Heath Ecroyd  ,   School of Biological Sciences, University of Wollongong, NSW, 
Australia  
   Megan Garvey  ,   Institute of Molecular Biotechnology, RWTH Aachen Uni-
versity, Aachen, Germany  
   Emmanuelle Gastaldi  ,   Unité Mixte de Recherche Ingénierie des Agropoly-
mères et Technologies Emergentes, INRA/ENSA.M/UMII/CIRAD, Uni-versité Montpellier II, Montpellier Cedex, France  
   Juliet A. Gerrard  ,   Biomolecular Interaction Centre, University of Canterbury, 
Christchurch, New Zealand; School of Biological Sciences, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand; MacDiarmid Institute, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand  
   Nathalie Gontard  ,   Unité Mixte de Recherche Ingénierie des Agropolymères 
et Technologies Emergentes, INRA/ENSA.M/UMII/CIRAD, Université Montpellier II, Montpellier Cedex, France  
   Valérie Guillard  ,   Unité Mixte de Recherche Ingénierie des Agropolymères et 
Technologies Emergentes, INRA/ENSA.M/UMII/CIRAD, Université Montpellier II, Montpellier Cedex, France  
   Carole Guillaume  ,   Unité Mixte de Recherche Ingénierie des Agropolymères 
et Technologies Emergentes, INRA/ENSA.M/UMII/CIRAD, Université Montpellier II, Montpellier Cedex, France  
   Youssef Habibi  ,   Center of Innovation and Research in Materials and Poly-
mers, University of Mons, Belgium  
   Wadood Hamad  ,   FPInnovations, Pointe Claire, QC, Canada  
   Jin Huang  ,   College of Chemical Engineering, Wuhan University of Technol-
ogy, Wuhan, China; and State Key Laboratory of Pulp and Paper Engineer-ing, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China  
   Qing Huang  ,   College of Chemical Engineering, Wuhan University of Technol-
ogy, Wuhan, China  
   Shinsuke Ifuku  ,   Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Graduate 
School of Engineering, Tottori University, Koyama-cho Minami, Tottori, Japan  
   Marco Iotti  ,   Research Scientist, Paper and Fibre Research Institute, Trond-
heim, Norway  
   Jun-Ichi Kadokawa  ,   Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Kagoshima 
University, Korimoto, Kagoshima, Japan  
   Rekha Rose Koshy  ,   Department of Chemistry, Bishop Moore College, Mave-
likara, Kerala, India  
   Marie-Pierre Laborie  ,   Institute of Forest Utilization and Work Sciences, 
Albert-Ludwigs University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, and   Freiburg CONTRIBUTORS   xi
Materials Research Centre—FMF, Albert-Ludwigs University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany  
   Déborah Le Corre  ,   University of Canterbury, New Zealand  
   Liyuan Lu  ,   Engineering Research Center of Nano-Geomaterials of Ministry 
of Education, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China  
   Norma E. Marcovich  ,   INTEMA-CONICET, Facultad de Ingeniería-Univer-
sidad Nacional de Mar del Plata, Mar del Plata, Argentina  
   Siji K. Mary  ,   Bishop Moore College, Mavelikara, Kerala, India  
   Vikas Mittal  ,   Chemical Engineering Department, The Petroleum Institute, 
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates  
   Mirna A. Mosiewicki  ,   INTEMA-CONICET, Facultad de Ingeniería-Univer-
sidad Nacional de Mar del Plata, Mar del Plata, Argentina  
   Tiffany Omokanwaye  ,   Catholic University of America, BONE/CRAB Lab, 
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington, DC  
   Anayancy Osorio-Madrazo  ,   Institute of Forest Utilization and Work Sciences, 
Albert-Ludwigs University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, and Freiburg Materials Research Centre—FMF, Albert-Ludwigs University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany  
   Stéphane Peyron  ,   Unité Mixte de Recherche Ingénierie des Agropolymères 
et Technologies Emergentes, INRA/ENSA.M/UMII/CIRAD, Université Montpellier II, Montpellier Cedex, France  
   Saumya S. Pillai  ,   Department of Chemistry, Bishop Moore College, Mave-
likara, Kerala, India  
   David Plackett  ,   Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Tech-
nical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark  
   Laly A. Pothan  ,   Department of Chemistry, Bishop Moore College, Mave-
likara, Kerala, India  
   Shiva P . Rao  ,   New Zealand Institute of Plant and Food Research, Christ-
church, New Zealand; Biomolecular Interaction Centre, University of Can-terbury, Christchurch, New Zealand  
   Hiroyuki Saimoto  ,   Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Graduate 
School of Engineering, Tottori University, Koyama-cho Minami, Tottori, Japan  
   Robert A. Shanks  ,   School of Applied Sciences, RMIT University, Melbourne, 
Vic., Australia  
   Zameer Shervani  ,   Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Graduate 
School of Engineering, Tottori University, Koyama-cho Minami, Tottori, Japan  xii  CONTRIBUTORS
   Deepa Thomas  ,   Department of Chemistry, Bishop Moore College, Mavelik-
kara, Kerala India  
   Merin Sara Thomas  ,   Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, M.G. Uni-
versity, Kottayam, Kerala, India  
   Sabu Thomas  ,   Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, M.G. University, 
Kottayam, Kerala, India 
  Eliane Trovatti  ,   CICECO and Department of Chemistry, University of Aveiro, 
Aveiro, Portugal  
   Cornelia Vasile  ,   PetruPoni” Institute of Macromolecular Chemistry, Physical 
Chemistry of Polymers Department, Ghica Voda Alley, Iasi, Romania  
   Madhusudan Vasudevamurthy  ,   New Zealand Institute of Plant and Food 
Research, Christchurch, New Zealand; Biomolecular Interaction Centre, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand  
   Otto C. Wilson, Jr.  ,   Catholic University of America, BONE/CRAB Lab, 
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington, DC  
   Qingyu Xu  ,   Hubei Research Institute of Chemistry, Wuhan, China, and Haiso 
Technology Co., Ltd, Wuhan, China  
   Jiahui Yu  ,   Institute of Biofunctional Materials and Devices, East China 
Normal University, Shanghai, China  
   Ming Zeng  ,   Engineering Research Center of Nano-Geomaterials of Ministry 
of Education,China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China, and State Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China  
   Xuejun Zou  ,   FPInnovations, Pointe Claire, QC, Canada   
    1Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 1
Bionanocomposites: State of the Art, 
Challenges, and Opportunities
ALAIN DUFRESNE , SABU THOMAS , and LALY A. POTHAN
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Researchers are currently developing and modifying biobased materials that 
have various applications in different fields. Ecological concerns are the main 
reasons behind this renewed interest in natural and compostable materials. 
Tailoring new products with the perspective of sustainable development is a 
philosophy that is applied to more and more materials now. The importance 
gained by natural polymers recently should be viewed from this perspective. 
Compared with their synthetic counterparts, natural polymers are renewable, 
biocompatible, and biodegradable. Production of nanocomposites from natural 
polymers, such as starch, chitin, and cellulose, and specific research in this field 
aimed at increasing the properties of the products and developing newer tech -
niques are the order of the day. Polysaccharide polymers that are abundant in 
nature are increasingly being used for the preparation of nanocomposites.
Biopolymers are polymers that are biodegradable. They are designed to 
degrade through the action of living organisms. They are the best alternatives 
to traditional nonbiodegradable polymers whose recycling is unpractical or 
not economical. The input materials for the production of such biodegradable 
polymers may be either renewable (based on agricultural plant or animal 
products) or synthetic. Biopolymers from renewable resources are more 
important than others for obvious reasons [1]. Biopolymers are said to be  
from renewable sources because they are made from materials that can be 
grown each year, indefinitely. Plant-based biopolymers usually come from 
agricultural nonfood crops. Therefore, the use of biopolymers would create a 2  BIONANOcOMPOSITES: STATE OF THE ART, cHALLENgES, AND OPPORTUNITIES
sustainable industry. In contrast, the feedstock of synthetic polymers derived 
from petrochemicals will eventually run out. Biopolymers have also been 
reported to be close to carbon-neutral. When a biodegradable material (neat 
polymer, blended product, or composite) is obtained completely from renew -
able resources, we may call it a green polymeric material.
Nature provides an impressive array of polymers that are generally biode -
gradable and that have the potential to replace many current polymers, as 
biodegradation is part of the natural biogeochemical cycle. Natural polymers, 
such as proteins, starch, and cellulose, are examples of such polymers. Polymer 
nanocomposites represent a new alternative to conventional polymers. Polymer 
nanocomposites are materials in which nanoscopic inorganic or organic par -
ticles, typically 10–1000 Å in at least one dimension, are dispersed in an organic 
polymer matrix in order to improve the properties of the polymer dramatically. 
Owing to the nanometer length scale, which minimizes scattering of light, 
nanocomposites are usually transparent and exhibit properties that are mark -
edly improved over those of pure polymers or their traditional composites. 
They have increased modulus and strength, outstanding barrier properties, 
improved solvency, heat resistance, and generally lower flammability, and they 
do not have detrimental effects on ductility.
1.2 NANOCRYSTALLINE CELLULOSE
The hierarchical structure and semicrystalline nature of polysaccharides (cel -
lulose, starch, and chitin) allow nanoparticles to be extracted from naturally 
occurring polymers. Native cellulose and chitin fibers are composed of smaller 
and mechanically stronger long thin filaments, called microfibrils, consisting of 
alternating crystalline and noncrystalline domains. Multiple mechanical shear -
ing actions can be used to release these microfibrils individually.
The extraction of crystalline cellulosic regions, in the form of nanowhiskers, 
can be accomplished by a simple process based on acid hydrolysis. Samir et al. 
have described cellulose whiskers as nanofibers that have been grown under 
controlled conditions that lead to the formation of high purity single crystals 
[2]. Many different terms have been used in the literature to designate these 
rod-like nanoparticles. They are mainly referred to as whiskers or cellulose 
nanocrystals. A recent review from Habibi et al. gives a clear overview of such 
cellulosic nanomaterials [3].
Nanocrystalline cellulose (NCC) derived from acid hydrolysis of native 
cellulose possesses different morphologies depending on the origin and hydro -
lysis conditions. NCCs are rigid rod-like crystals with a diameter in the range 
of 10–20 nm and lengths of a few hundred nanometers (Figure 1.1). Acid treat -
ment (acid hydrolysis) is the main process used to produce NCC, which are 
smaller building blocks released from the original cellulose fibers. Native cel -
lulose consists of amorphous and crystalline regions. The amorphous regions 
have lower density than the crystalline regions. Therefore, when cellulose NANOcRYSTALLINE cELLULOSE   3
fibers are subjected to harsh acid treatment, the amorphous regions break up, 
releasing the individual crystallites. The properties of NCC depend on various 
factors, such as cellulose sources, reaction time and temperature, and types of 
acid used for hydrolysis.
Polysaccharide nanoparticles are obtained as aqueous suspensions, and 
most investigations have focused on hydrosoluble (or at least hydrodispers -
ible) or latex-form polymers. However, these nanocrystals can also be dis -
persed in nonaqueous media using surfactants or chemical grafting. The 
hydroxyl groups present on the surface of the nanocrystals make extensive 
chemical modification possible. Even though this improves the adhesion of 
nanocrystals with nonpolar polymer matrices, it has been reported that this 
strategy has a negative impact on the mechanical performance of the compos -
ites. This unusual behavior is ascribed to the reinforcing phenomenon of poly -
saccharide nanocrystals resulting from the formation of a percolating network 
due to hydrogen bonding forces.
As a result of its distinctive properties, NCC has become an important class 
of renewable nanomaterials, which has many useful applications, the most Figure 1.1  NCCs are rigid rod-like crystals with diameter in the range of 10–20 nm 
and lengths of a few hundred nanometers Reproduced with the permission from Refer -
ence [5].
(a) (b)
(d)
(e)(c)4  BIONANOcOMPOSITES: STATE OF THE ART, cHALLENgES, AND OPPORTUNITIES
important of which is the reinforcement of polymeric matrices in nanocom -
posite materials. Favier et al. were the first to report the use of NCC as rein -
forcing fillers in poly(styrene co-butyl acrylate) (poly(S- co-BuA))-based 
nanocomposites [4]. Since then, numerous nanocomposite materials have been 
developed by incorporating NCC into a wide range of polymeric matrices. 
Owing to their abundance, high strength and stiffness, low weight, and biode -
gradability, nanoscale polysaccharide materials can be used widely for the 
preparation of bionanocomposites. In fact, a broad range of applications of 
these nanoparticles exists. Many studies show its potential, though most focus 
on their mechanical properties and their liquid crystal self-ordering properties. 
The homogeneous dispersion of cellulosic nanoparticles in a polymer matrix 
is challenging. In addition, there are many safety concerns about nanomateri -
als, as their size allows them to penetrate into cells of humans and to remain 
in the system. However, finding newer applications for nanocellulose will have 
a very positive impact on organic waste management. To date, there is no 
consensus about categorizing nanocellulosic materials as new materials.
NCC is an environmentally friendly material that could serve as a valuable 
renewable resource for rejuvenating the beleaguered forest industry. New and 
emerging industrial extraction processes need to be optimized to achieve more 
efficient operations, and this will require active research participation from the 
academic and industrial sectors. The application of nanotechnology in devel -
oping NCC from the forest industry to more valuable products is required 
because the availability of materials based on NCC is still limited. Increasing 
attention is devoted to producing NCC in larger quantities and to exploring 
various modification processes that enhance the properties of NCC, making it 
attractive for use in a wide range of industrial sectors [5]. As the second most 
abundant biopolymer after cellulose, chitin is mainly synthesized via a biosyn -
thetic process by an enormous number of living organisms such as shrimp, 
crab, tortoise, and insects and can also be synthesized by a nonbiosynthetic 
pathway through chitinase-catalyzed polymerization of a chitobiose oxazoline 
derivative [6, 7].
Chitosan, as the most important derivative of chitin, can be prepared by 
deacetylation of chitin. Chitin and chitosan have many excellent properties 
including biocompatibility, biodegradability, nontoxicity, and absorption, and 
thus they can be widely used in a variety of areas such as biomedical applica -
tions, agriculture, water treatment, and cosmetics. Chitin has been known to 
form microfibrillar arrangements in living organisms. These fibrils with diam -
eters from 2.5 to 25 nm, depending on their biological origins, are usually 
embedded in a protein matrix [8]. Therefore, they intrinsically have the poten -
tial to be converted to crystalline nanoparticles and nanofibers and to find 
application in nanocomposite fields. The structure of chitin is very analogous 
to cellulose. Chitin and cellulose are both supporting materials for living 
bodies and are found in living plants or animals with sizes increasing from 
simple molecules and highly crystalline fibrils on the nanometer level to com -
posites on the micrometer level upward [9]. Therefore, they intrinsically have NANOcRYSTALLINE cELLULOSE   5
the potential to be converted to crystalline nanoparticles and nanofibers and 
to find application in nanocomposite fields. Chitin has been known to form 
microfibrillar arrangements in living organisms [10, 11].
Chitin whiskers (CHW) can be prepared from chitins isolated from chitin-
containing living organisms by a method similar to the preparation of cellulose 
whisker through hydrolysis in a strong acid aqueous medium. On the basis of 
preparation of cellulose crystallite suspension, Marchessault et al. [11] for the 
first time reported a route for preparing suspension of chitin crystallite par -
ticles in 1959. In this method, purified chitin was first treated within 2.5 N 
hydrochloric acid (HCl) solutions under reflux for 1 hour; the excess acid was 
decanted; and then distilled water was added to obtain the suspension. Acid-
hydrolyzed chitin was found to be spontaneously dispersed into rod-like par -
ticles that could be concentrated to a liquid crystalline phase and self-assemble 
to a cholesteric liquid crystalline phase above a certain concentration [12].
CHWs are attracting attention from both the academic field and industry 
since it is a renewable and biodegradable nanoparticle. CHWs have numerous 
advantages over conventional inorganic particles such as low density, nontoxic -
ity, biodegradability, biocompatibility, easy surface modification, and function -
alization. Figure 1.2 shows the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and 
atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of CHWs obtained by the 2,2,6,6-tetra -
methylpiperidine-1-oxyl radical (TEMPO) mediated oxidation method. CHWs, 
with or without modification, are hoped to have extensive application in many 
areas such as reinforcing nanocomposites, the food and cosmetics industries, 
drug delivery, and tissue engineering. However, recent studies have focused 
mainly on the preparation and nanocomposite application of CHWs, and less 
attention has been paid to other application areas. It is hoped that in the future, 
more attention will be focused on developing novel applications of CHWs. Even 
for the CHW-reinforced nanocomposites there will still be much valuable work 
to be done, for example, developing new simple and effective processing 
methods so as to commercialize high performance polymer/CHWs composites, 
producing polymer nanocomposites filled with individual CHWs that would 
create higher reinforcing efficiency than the conventional CHW due to the high 
aspect ratio of individual CHWs. Thus, there are abundant opportunities com -
bined with challenges in CHW-related scientific and industrial fields [13].
Starch is the second most studied organic material for producing nanocrys -
tals. Starch nanocrystals are the nanoscale biofillers derived from native starch 
granules and are a suitable candidate for the preparation of semicrystalline 
polymers for preparing renewable and potentially biodegradable nanoparti -
cles. As a natural biopolymer, starch is abundant, renewable, inexpensive, 
biodegradable, environmentally friendly, and easy to chemically modify, 
making it one of the most attractive and promising bioresource materials. 
Several techniques for preparing starch nanoparticles (SNP) have been devel -
oped over the years and render different kinds of SNP , which are described in 
this book. Acid hydrolysis and precipitation methods are the two main methods 
employed for the preparation of SNPs. Starch nanocrystals obtained by acid 6  BIONANOcOMPOSITES: STATE OF THE ART, cHALLENgES, AND OPPORTUNITIES
hydrolysis of starch have been used as fillers in natural and synthetic polymeric 
matrices and appear to be an interesting reinforcing agent. Figure 1.3 shows 
the TEM image of starch nanocrystals [14]. Nanoreinforced starch-based 
nanocomposites generally exhibit enhanced mechanical and thermal proper -
ties when nanofillers are well dispersed, while the nature of the matrix and/or 
nanofiller contributes to its biological properties.
Nanocellulose produced by the bacterium Gluconacetobacter xylinus  (bac -
terial cellulose, BC), is an another emerging biomaterial with great potential 
as a biological implant, wound and burn dressing material, and scaffold for 
tissue regeneration. This BC is quite different from plant celluloses and is 
defined by high purity (free of hemicelluloses, lignin, and alien functionalities Figure 1.2  TEM (a) and AFM (b) images of a dilute suspension of chitin whiskers 
and TEM images of individual chitin whiskers obtained by the TEMPO method (c) 
and surface cationization (d). Reproduced with permissions from Reference [9].
(a) (b)
(d) (c)NANOcRYSTALLINE cELLULOSE   7
such as carbonyl or carboxyl groups) and a high degree of polymerization (up 
to 8000) [15]. BC has remarkable mechanical properties despite the fact that 
it contains up to 99% water. The water-holding ability is the most probable 
reason why BC implants do not elicit any foreign body reaction. Fibrosis, 
capsule formation, or giant cells were not detected around the implants, and 
connective tissue was well integrated with the BNC structures. Moreover, the 
nanostructure and morphological similarities with collagen make BC attrac -
tive for cell immobilization, cell migration, and the production of extracellular 
matrices [16, 17]. Figure 1.4 shows BNC fleeces formed by different Glucona -
cetobacter  strains and their network structure.
The advanced natural fiber-reinforced polymer composite contributes to 
enhancing the development of bionanocomposites with regard to performance 
and sustainability. In the future, these biocomposites will see increased use in 
optical, biological, and engineering applications. But there are still a number 
of problems that have to be solved before biocomposites become fully com -
petitive with synthetic fiber composites. These include extreme sensitivity to 
moisture and temperature, expensive recycling processes, high variability in 
properties, nonlinear mechanical behavior, poor long-term performance, and 
low impact strength. As of now, the methods for extracting nanocrystals of 
these various biomaterials are expensive, and more economical methods will 
have to be sorted out in future.
The poor interfacial adhesion between natural fibers and polymeric matrix 
is the key issue that dictates the overall performance of the composites. Inter -
action of two or more different materials with each other depends on the 
nature and strengths of the intermolecular forces of the components involved. 
The mechanical performance of composites is dependent on the degree of Figure 1.3  TEM observations of starch nanocrystals: longitudinal view and planar 
view. Reproduced with permission from Reference [14]. Copyright 2003 American 
Chemical Society.
8  BIONANOcOMPOSITES: STATE OF THE ART, cHALLENgES, AND OPPORTUNITIES
dispersion of the fibers in the matrix polymer and the nature and intensity of 
fiber–polymer adhesion interactions. Therefore, the selection of appropriate 
matrices and filler with good interfacial interaction is of great importance. The 
irreversible aggregation of the nanofiller (hornification) in the matrix, which 
prevents its redispersion in the matrix, is another hurdle to be overcome. This 
irreversible aggregation results in a material with ivory-like properties that 
can neither be used in rheological applications nor be dispersed for composite 
applications. Therefore, it is necessary to continue research in this area to 
obtain a better understanding of the adhesion interactions including mechani -
cal interlocking, interpenetrating networks, and covalent linkages on a funda -
mental level to improve interfacial properties with thermoplastics, thermosets, 
and biopolymers.
This book is an attempt to introduce various biopolymers and bionanocom -
posites to students of material sciences. Going beyond a mere introduction, Figure 1.4  Fleeces of bacterial nanocellulose produced by two different Gluconace -
tobacter  strains and their network structure. Reproduced with permissions from Refer -
ence [17].
REFERENcES   9
the book delves deep into the characteristics of various biopolymers and 
bionanocomposites and discusses the nuances of their preparation with a view 
to helping researchers discover newer and novel applications. Chapter 2, for 
instance, describes the preparation of chitin nanofibers and their composites 
and discusses the basics, such as isolation of chitin nanofibersfrom different 
sources. Chapter 3 discusses chemical modification of chitosan and its biomedi -
cal application. While biometric lessons for processing chitin-based composites 
are provided in Chapter 4, Chapter 5 deals with morphological and thermal 
investigations of chitin-based nanocomposites. Mechanical properties of 
chitin-based nanocomposites are discussed in Chapter 6, and preparation and 
applications of chitin nanofibers/nanowhiskers is the topic of Chapter 7. Thus, 
Chapters 2 to 7 are allotted to chitin and related topics.
Various aspects of starch-based composites, such as preparation of SNPs 
(Chapter 8), chemical modification of SNPs (Chapter 9), processing techniques 
of starch-based bionanocomposites (Chapter 10), morphological and thermal 
investigations of starch-based nanocomposites (Chapter 11), mechanical prop -
erties of starch-based nanocomposites (Chapter 12), and applications of SNPs 
and starch-based bionanocomposites (Chapter 13), are the subject matter of 
Chapters 8 to 13.
Preparation of nanofibrillated cellulose and cellulose whiskers are dealt 
with in Chapter 14. Chapter 15 is exclusively set apart for BC. It examines 
the details of production of microorganisms, production of BC, production of 
BC from food and agro-forestry residues, and the structure of BC. Chemical 
modification of nanocelluloses is discussed in Chapter 16, and processing 
techniques of cellulose-based nanocomposites are dealt with in Chapter 17. 
Chapter 18 is on morphological and thermal investigations of cellulosic bion -
anocomposites, and Chapter 19 discusses mechanical properties of cellulose-
based bionanocomposites. A review of nanocellulosic products and their 
applications is provided in Chapter 20. In Chapter 21 spectroscopic charac -
terization of renewable nanoparticles and their composites are dealt with. 
Chapter 22 deals with barrier properties of renewable nanomaterials. Chapter 
23 is set apart for biocomposites and nanocomposites containing lignin. While 
Chapter 24 deals with preparation, processing, and applications of protein 
nanofibers, Chapter 25 deals with protein-based nanocomposites for food 
packaging. Thus, this book is a sincere attempt at promoting the use of green 
materials for sustainable growth of humanity.
REFERENCES
 [1] Kaplan, D.L., ed. (1998) Biopolymers from Renewable Resources; Macromolecular 
Systems—Materials Approach . Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
 [2] Samir, M.A.S.A., Alloin, F., and Dufresne, A. (2005) Review of recent research 
into cellulosic whiskers, their properties and their application in nanocomposite 
field. Biomacromolecules , 6, 612–626.10  BIONANOcOMPOSITES: STATE OF THE ART, cHALLENgES, AND OPPORTUNITIES
 [3] Habibi, Y., Lucia, L.A., and Rojas, O.J. (2010) Cellulose Nanocrystals: Chemistry, 
self assembly, and applications. Chemical Reviews , 110(6), 3479–3500.
 [4] Favier, V., Chanzy, H., and Cavaille, J.Y. (1995) Polymer nanocomposites rein -
forced by cellulose whiskers. Macromolecules , 28, 6365–6367.
 [5] Peng, B.L., Dhar, N., Liu, H.L., and Tam, K.C. (2011) Chemistry and applications 
of nanocrystalline cellulose and its derivatives: A nanotechnology perspective. 
Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering , 89(5), 1191–1206.
 [6] Kobayashi, S., Kiyosada, T., and Shoda, S.I. (1996) Synthesis of artificial chitin: 
Irreversible catalytic behavior of a glycosyl hydrolase through a transition state 
analogue substrate. Journal of American Chemical Society , 118, 13113–13114.
 [7] Kadokawa, J. (2011) Precision polysaccharide synthesis catalyzed by enzymes. 
Chemical Reviews , 111, 4308–4345.
 [8] Revol, J.F., Marchessault, R.H. (1993) In vitro  chiral nematic ordering of chitin 
crystallites. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules , 15, 329–335.
 [9] Fan, Y., Saito, T., and Isogai, A. (2008) Preparation of chitin nanofibers from squid 
pen β-chitin by simple mechanical treatment under acid conditions. Biomacromol -
ecules , 9, 1919–1923.
[10] Carlstrom, D. (1957) The crystal structure of α-chitin (poly- n-acetyl-d-glucosamine). 
The Journal of Biophysical and Biochemical Cytology , 3, 669–683.
[11] Marchessault, R.H., Morehead, F.F., and Walter, N.M. (1959) Liquid crystal systems 
from fibrillar polysaccharides. Nature , 184, 632–633.
[12] Li, J., Revol, J.F., Naranjo, E., and Marchessault, R.H. (1996) Effect of electrostatic 
interaction on phase separation behaviour of chitin crystallite suspensions. Inter -
national Journal of Biological Macromolecules , 18, 177–187.
[13] Zeng, J.B., He, Y.S., Li, S.L., and Wang, Y.Z. (2012) Chitin whiskers: An overview. 
Biomacromolecules , 13, 1–11.
[14] Putaux, J.L., Molina-Boisseau, S., Momaur, T., and Dufresne, A. (2003) Platelet 
nanocrystals resulting from the disruption of waxy maize starch granules by acid 
hydrolysis. Biomacromolecules , 4(5), 1198–1202.
[15] Kramer, F., Klemm, D., Schumann, D., Heßler, N., Wesarg, F., Fried, W., and Stader -
mann, D. (2006) Nanocellulose polymer composites as innovative pool for (Bio) 
material development. Macromolecular Symposia , 244, 136–148.
[16] Gatenholm, P ., Klemm, D. (2010) Bacterial nanocellulose as a renewable material 
for biomedical applications. MRS Bulletin , 35, 208–213.
[17] Klemm, D., Kramer, F., Moritz, S., Lindstrom, T., Ankerfors, M., Gray, D., and 
Dorris, A. (2011) Nanocelluloses: A new family of nature-based materials. Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed.,  50, 5438–5466.11Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 2
Preparation of Chitin Nanofibers and 
Their Composites
SHINSUKE IFUKU , ZAMEER SHERVANI , and HIROYUKI SAIMOTO
2.1 INTRODUCTION
Biodegradable chitin nanofibers (CNFs) have attracted the attention of 
researchers worldwide in recent years, as they constitute an important part of 
the rapidly growing field of nanotechnology, which deals with nanometer-sized 
(1–100 nm) composites. Bionanofibers have superiority over their synthetic 
counterparts because of their biocompatible nature. They have applications in 
the medical, cosmetics, pharmaceutical, and chemical industries. If doped with 
inorganic metals, the hybrid organic–inorganic composites can have vast appli -
cations in electronics, electrical, and optical fields, and, most important, in 
much needed renewable energy production. Nanofibers (NFs) have a large 
surface-to-mass ratio, making them promising candidates for advanced mate -
rial devices. A number of methods are employed to spin NFs. Electrospinning 
is one of the methods that use electrical charge to draw nanoscale fibers from 
polymer liquid solutions. As synthetic NFs are environmentally toxic, natural 
NFs are preferred products over synthetic fibers. Natural NFs are known to 
exist in nature in various forms: collagen fibrils, silk fibroin, double helical 
deoxyribonucleic acid, and so on. Apart from natural chitin NFs, there are 
cellulose microfibrills, which are more abundant natural NFs.
Abe et al. [1] achieved efficient extraction of wood cellulose NFs, which 
existed in a cell wall, of a uniform width of 15 nm, using a simple mechanical 
treatment. Wood powder of size <60 mesh from the Radiata pine tree was 
used. First, organic solvent extraction was conducted to remove wax and other 
small organic components. The larger complex lignin moiety was separated by 12  PREPARATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS ANd THEIR COMPOSITES
acidified sodium chlorite solution. A number of extraction cycles were used 
until the product turned white. Hemicellulose was leached by the treatment 
of 6 wt% potassium hydroxide. Cellulose thus obtained as α-cellulose consti -
tuted 85% of whole cellulose. Finally, 1 wt% slurry of cellulose was passed 
through a grinder at a speed of 1500 rpm. Field emission scanning electron 
microscopy (FE-SEM) measurement confirmed the formation of 15 nm width 
cellulose NFs.
All cellulose composites of consisting fibers and matrix were studied [2, 3] 
for structural, mechanical, and thermal properties. The elastic modulus, in the 
direction parallel to the polymer molecule chain axis, was found to be 138 GPa 
for the crystalline regions. This value is comparable to that of high perfor -
mance synthetic fibers. The tensile strength of cellulose is 17.8 GPa, which is 
seven times higher than that of steel. The linear thermal expansion coefficient 
is about 10−7/K. Due to their high elastic modulus and tensile strength and low 
thermal expansion, fibers are promising candidates as reinforcement agent for 
a number of composites.
Chitin is the second most abundant biopolymer after cellulose that occurs 
in nature [4]. Its annual production worldwide is 1010 to 1011 tons, mostly 
produced from external skeletons of shellfish, crabs, shrimp, insects, mush -
rooms, and algae. The fibrous material of cellular walls of mushrooms and 
algae and external skeletons in shellfish and insects are composed of chitin. 
Chitin content is in the range of 8–33%, which is disposed of as industrial 
waste in shellfish canning industries. Chitin and chitin compounds find appli -
cation in various fields, including cosmetics and chemical industries, engaging 
researchers from around the world. Chitin and their hybrid inorganic com -
posites are also expected to have applications in electrical, electronics, and 
optical devices. Natural chitin is highly crystalline (mostly α-chitin), though 
the distribution among α- and - β-chitin depends on the source. Among the 
applications discovered so far, chitin serves as an effective reinforcement for 
the preparation of composites; there are reports in the literature on chitin 
whisker-reinforced nanocomposites [4]. The chitin structure comprises the 
repeating units along the N-acetylglucosamine structure. It has two hydroxyl 
and an acetamide groups per unit [5], which make the molecule reactive for 
a number of applications. A dominant feature of arthropod exoskeletons is 
that they are well organized, arranged in different structural levels. Consider -
ing molecular levels, there are long chain polysaccharide chitin fibrils with 
dimensions of 3 nm in width and 300 nm in length. The fibrils are wrapped in 
proteins and aggregated into bundles of fibers of about 60 nm in diameter. 
Step-by-step breakup of these assemblies has been shown by Chen et al. [6], 
who have described the structural and mechanical properties of crab exoskel -
eton in detail. Chitin whiskers were prepared from crab shells by using chemi -
cal treatment followed by mechanical treatment [4]. The proteins were 
removed with 5% KOH; NaClO 2 and a small amount of sodium acetate buffer 
were used as bleaching agents. The residual proteins were again removed by 
using 5% KOH.ISOlATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS FROM dIFFERENT SOURCES   13
The purified chitin sample was hydrolyzed with 3 N HCl followed by cen -
trifuging the hydrolyzed suspension. The centrifugated suspension was dia -
lyzed overnight in distilled water until the pH of the preparation reached 4. 
The dispersion was sonicated for 5 minutes, and prepared whiskers were finally 
stored at 6°C. There are other methods as well to extract CNFs from natural 
materials, such as ultrasonic methods [7] and electrospinning [8]. However, 
NFs obtained by these methods are different from the high quality CNFs in 
terms of width, aspect ratio, crystallinity, chemical structure, and narrow size 
distribution. Researchers have extracted NFs by 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-
1-oxy radical (TEMPO)-mediated oxidation of natural cellulose, followed by 
ultrasonic treatment. This method was then tested for isolating α-chitin from 
crab shells, but the average nanocrystal length was considerably low [9], and 
instead of chitin, the derivatives of chitin were also obtained. Fan et al. [10] 
obtained CNFs of 3–4 nm size from less chitin content biomass squid pen by 
ultrasonication treatment under acidic conditions; however, the crystallinity of 
the NFs from the source was relatively low. In addition to the method [1] of 
isolating CNFs from a cellulose source, one can isolate CNFs from a number 
of sources. In this chapter we describe isolation and characterization of natural 
CNFs from different sources and the composite preparations from these NFs. 
Most of the work described in this chapter has been conducted by our group, 
but we also describe and compare research carried out in other laboratories.
2.2 ISOLATION OF CHITIN NANOFIBERS FROM  
DIFFERENT SOURCES
2.2.1 Processing of Chitin Nanofibers from Crab Shells
Extraction of CNFs from crab shells was conducted following a series of chemi -
cal treatments followed by mechanical grinding. Low cost commercial dried 
crab shell flakes of the species Paralithodes camtschaticus , commonly known 
as “red king crab,” were used as raw material. These crabs are in abundance 
and used as fertilizers for crops. Crab shells were milled to powder and purified 
according to the established procedure. Chemical treatment was as follows. 
Powdered crab shell flakes were treated with 2 N HCl for 2 days at room tem -
perature to remove the mineral salts, then the suspension was filtered and 
washed thoroughly with distilled water. Afterward, the mixture was refluxed 
in 2 N NaOH for 2 days to remove the various proteins. The NaOH-treated 
solution was mixed with ethanol to extract pigments and lipids. The purified 
chitin was then removed by filtration and rinsed with water. The processed 
chitin cake was kept wet, which helped fibrillation by mechanical treatment. It 
was established that all types of proteins and minerals such as CaCO 3 can be 
removed by NaOH and HCl treatment stages. The chitin content in crab shells 
was 12.1 wt% after purification. Various authors [4, 11, 12] established these 
individual steps separately, which helped us to extract chitin from complicated 14  PREPARATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS ANd THEIR COMPOSITES
and tightly bonded fibril bundles. The different steps adopted for separation 
are based on reports in the literature. The purified wet chitin from dry crab 
shells obtained via the above process was dispersed in distilled water at 1 wt% 
content, and hereafter called slurry of chitin. The slurry was passed through a 
grinder (MKCA6-3, Masuko Sangyo Co., Kawaguchi, Japan) under a neutral 
pH condition. The grinding stones were cleaned and adjusted carefully. In 
reality, the presence of the chitin suspension between the grinder stones does 
not allow direct contact between the stones; thus, they remain safe during 
operation. After passing through the grinder the uneven slurry suspension of 
chitin changed to a highly viscous homogeneous suspension of CNFs, which 
remained wet and stable indefinitely if stored in a tightly closed container.
2.2.1.1  Structure  of Chitin  Matrix  after  Chemical  Treatment  before 
Grinding  Sheets of chemically isolated chitin were prepared without 
mechanical grinding. FE-SEM of the sheet was recorded after coating with a 
2-nm layer of platinum by an ion sputter coating apparatus. Figure 2.1 shows 
the SEM image of pre-ground chitin. The image is of the crab shell surface 
after removal of the calcium carbonate mineral phase. From the SEM image 
of endocuticle, it is apparent that the cuticle takes up about 90% of the volume 
of the crab exoskeleton. One can observe that the chitin was made up of regu -
larly structured chitin fiber networks strongly stacked into flat ribbon struc -
tured networks composed of bundles of CNFs.
2.2.1.2  Nanofibrillation  of Chitin  by Grinding  and Effect  of pH  Chemi -
cally treated slurry (1 wt%) described in Section 2.2.1 was passed for one cycle 
through a grinder under two pH of slurry 7 and 3. At neutral pH, the widths 
of the fibers were more widely distributed in the range of 10–100 nm (Fig. 2.2a). 
The bundles of embedded chitin–protein fibers were fibrillated successfully by 
Figure 2.1  FE-SEM image of crab shell surface after the removal of matrix.
ISOlATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS FROM dIFFERENT SOURCES   15
grinding of wet chitin. It was easy to remove protein from water-soaked chitin 
to isolate chitin fibrils. Fan et al. [9] reported a preparation method of CNFs 
from wet squid pen β-chitin at pH 3–4. At low pH in acidic conditions, cation -
ization of C2 amino groups in β-chitin occurred, which maintained a more 
dispersed and stable phase due to electrostatic repulsions. Similar electrostatic 
phenomena on cationization of amino groups was applied in purified α-chitin 
produced from crab shells by our research group [5] in acidic conditions 
(pH = 3) to produce very fine fibrils in the narrow range of 10–20 nm (Fig. 
2.2b,c). The low pH was adjusted by the addition of acetic acid followed by 
grinding process. It is noteworthy that the chitin slurry of 1 wt% became a 
highly viscous gel phase after one cycle of grinding treatment due to the large 
surface area of NFs. In FE-SEM images, the unbroken high aspect ratio of 
homogeneously dispersed chitin nanocomposite was noticed in widely scanned 
areas. The physical appearance of the composite was a highly viscous gel phase, 
which is an indication [1] that fibrillation was successfully achieved and facili -
tated in acidic medium. Thus, CNFs (10–20 nm) were successfully isolated from 
crab shells in our laboratory [5], similar to the process applied to isolate cel -
lulose NFs from wood cell wall [1].
2.2.2 Chitin Nanofibers from Prawn Shells
We successfully isolated α-chitin NFs from crab shells with a uniform width 
of 10–20 nm and a very high aspect ratio, as described in Section 2.2.1. From 
crab shells thin fibers were prepared in acidic conditions of pH 3, which cation -
ized amino groups of chitin before grinding the slurry. However, acidic pools 
and extra acetic acid (AcOH) in the CNF preparation is a matter of great 
concern when it comes to application of NF composites in pharmaceutical, 
cosmetic, biomedical, electric, electronics, and optical devices, as well as other Figure 2.2  SEM pictures of chitin nanofibers (CNFs) obtained from crab shell after 
one cycle of grinding at two pH values of slurry: (a) pH = 7; (b) and (c) pH = 3. The 
scale is (a) and (b) 400 nm, (c) 200 nm.
(a) (b) (c)16  PREPARATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS ANd THEIR COMPOSITES
applications. The above products are very sensitive to acid content, which as 
a contaminant can be toxic. Moreover, removal of acid from NFs is difficult, 
making these products expensive. Therefore, preparation of CNFs in normal 
conditions of neutral pH is preferable when used for the above products.
The following describes the extraction of CNFs from prawn shells con -
ducted under neutral conditions without addition of any acid. Fresh shells of 
the species Penaeus monodon , commonly known as “black tiger prawn,” was 
used to prepare CNFs. This prawn is cultivated worldwide and its shell is typi -
cally thrown away as waste. Using NaOH and HCl aqueous solutions, proteins 
and minerals were removed, leaving the chitin and pigments in the shell [11]. 
The pigment from the sample was then removed with ethanol extraction. The 
yield of dry chitin from the wet prawn shells was approximately 16.7%. The 
degree of deacetylation (DDA) of the samples determined by elemental anal -
ysis was 7%. The SEM micrograph of the black tiger prawn shell surface after 
removal of the matrix components (without grinding treatment) is shown in 
Figure 2.3. The exocuticle, which is the main part of the prawn shell, is shown 
in the SEM picture. The prawn shell is still intact after removal of the matrix 
by chemical treatment; it is very important that uniform CNFs with an elabo -
rate interwoven design are clearly visible.
The chemically treated 1 wt% chitin suspension was crushed by a domestic 
blender followed by passing through a grinder for fibrillation without addition 
of acid. The chitin slurry thus obtained was viscous after a single grinding 
treatment, similar to the CNFs from the crab shells. The resultant fibrous slurry 
was examined by FE-SEM (Fig. 2.4). In the crab shell preparation, the width 
of the fibers was widely distributed in the range of 10–100 nm by grinder treat -
Figure 2.3  FE-SEM image of the surface of the black tiger prawn after removal of 
matrix components.
ISOlATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS FROM dIFFERENT SOURCES   17
ment under neutral conditions. In the prawn shell preparation, we obtained a 
uniform shape of CNFs using the same extraction treatment. The CNFs were 
uniform (Fig. 2.4a), as observed by scanning over a wide area. The width of 
the NFs was approximately 10–20 nm (Fig. 2.4b), similar to that obtained in 
crab shells in acidic condition [5]. Hence, using prawns as the source, thin, 
homogeneous, uniformly distributed, well separated, and large aspect ratio 
CNFs were successfully prepared in neutral medium with much superiority 
over acidic crab shell preparations.
A possible explanation for this observation is as follows. The outermost 
skeleton (exoskeleton) of prawn or crab shells is made up of two parts, the 
exocuticle and the endocuticle. The exocuticle has a very fine interwoven 
plywood-type structure; endocuticle is rather more coarse and has thick fibers 
in the form shown in Figure 2.1. About 90% of the crab shell is made up of 
these thicker endocuticular fibers [6]. Thus, a low pH of 3 is used to obtain 
nanofibrils in the crab shell. On the other hand, the exoskeleton of Natantia  
prawn, including black tiger prawn, is made up of mostly semitransparent soft 
shell of fine (Fig. 2.3) exocuticle [13–15]; thus, their fibrillation occurs at neutral 
pH and is easier than crab shell. The preparation for CNFs from prawn shells 
in neutral pH can also be applied to other species of prawn. Figure 2.5 shows 
SEM images of the CNFs prepared from Marsupenaeus japonicus  (Japanese 
tiger prawn) and Pandaluseous  (Alaskan pink shrimp). These prawn also exist 
in abundance as a food source. These CNFs were prepared by the same 
method described for prawn in general in neutral pH. Figure 2.5 shows the 
uniform width of NFs in the range of 10–20 nm, as from black tiger prawn 
described previously. These results suggest that CNFs can be obtained from 
other prawn species having a very fine exocuticle structure by nanofibrillation 
under neutral pH conditions. Since many materials are sensitive to acid chemi -
cals, this study will expand the application of CNFs.
2.2.3 Facile Preparation of Chitin Nanofibers from Dry Chitin
The isolation method of α-CNFs from crab and shrimp shells conducted by 
our group [5] is described in Section 2.2.1. CNFs with homogeneous thickness Figure 2.4  FE-SEM recording of CNFs from black tiger prawn shell after one pass 
through the grinder.
(a) (b)18  PREPARATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS ANd THEIR COMPOSITES
of 10–20 nm and a high aspect ratio were produced. Until now we have dis -
cussed the chemical and mechanical treatment of wet CNFs where hydrogen 
bonding between NFs was relatively weak compared with dried chitin or cel -
lulose fibers; in the latter there is strong hydrogen bonding, which makes 
fibrillation difficult. Therefore, chitin and cellulose must be kept wet after 
removal of the matrix to facilitate the process of nanofibrillation [1, 5, 16–18]. 
However, this requirement is a disadvantage in commercial production of NFs. 
From the viewpoint of industrial production, the preparation of NFs from dry 
chitin or cellulose dry powder has an advantage since it is easier to store, 
preserve, and transport than wet materials. Thus, for industrial production of 
NFs, priority should be given to developing NFs from powdered chitin. As 
described above in Section 2.2.1, treatment under acidic conditions is neces -
sary [10] to fibrillate the chitin strongly embedded in the matrix, as shown in 
Figure 2.1. Amino groups of chitin are cationized by the addition of acid, which 
facilitates the fibrillation of chitin into NFs due to electrostatic repulsion. 
Similarly, if the electrostatic repulsion among the cationized amino groups can 
break the strong hydrogen bonds in chitin bundles of dry chitin, fibrillation of 
dry chitin can be achieved. The method has been tested by Ifuku et al. [19] in 
our laboratory by successfully fibrillating strongly embedded CFs in crab 
shells. The method was then applied to fibrillate commercial dry chitin powder 
(from Nacalai Tesque, Kyoto, Japan). In Figure 2.6a, we can see that commer -
cially available dry chitin powder from crab shells is also composed of NFs. 
Figure 2.6b,c shows FE-SEM micrographs of chitin fibers after one pass 
through the grinder with and without acetic acid. We can see that the chitin 
powder was not fibrillated (Fig. 2.6b) at all because of the strong interfibrillar 
hydrogen bonding. While the powder was completely fibrillated (Fig. 2.6c) into 
uniform NFs (10–20 nm width) by grinder treatment at pH 3, the degree of Figure 2.5  FE-SEM images of chitin nanofibers (a) from Japanese tiger prawn shell 
and (b) from Alaskan pink shrimp shell.
(a) (b)CHARACTERIZATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS ObTAINEd   19
substitution of amino groups was just 3.9% and the slurry obtained was a gel 
phase. Such fine NFs of chitin were obtained because of electrostatic repulsion 
resulting from the cationic charge on the chitin fiber surface that overcame 
the interfiber hydrogen bonding. The preparation of CNFs from commercially 
pre-purified dry chitin powder is advantageous for laboratory study and com -
mercial production of CNFs, as CNFs can be made available in a few hours 
by following the established method of grinding in acidic conditions rather 
than by purifying crab shells for removal of proteins, minerals, lipids, and pig -
ments, which may take about a week as described earlier.
2.3 CHARACTERIZATION OF CHITIN NANOFIBERS OBTAINED 
FROM CRAB, PRAWN, AND DRY CHITIN POWDER
The degree of N-acetylation of CNFs obtained from the crab shell was 95% 
as worked out from C and N elemental analysis, rendering a DDA of only 5% Figure 2.6  FE-SEM images of (a) commercially available dry chitin powder, (b) chitin 
fibers after one pass through the grinder without acetic acid, and (c) passing through 
grinder with acetic acid. The length of the scale bar in (a) is 1000 nm and (b) and (c) 
300 nm, respectively.
(a)
(c)(b)20  PREPARATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS ANd THEIR COMPOSITES
even after several chemical and mechanical grinding treatments. Fourier trans -
form infrared (FT-IR) spectra of three samples—commercially available pure 
chitin, newly prepared CNFs from crab shell, and unpurified dried crab shell 
flakes—were recorded, as shown in Figure 2.7. The spectra of unpurified dried 
crab shell flakes were different from the other two chitins due to the matrix 
component presence in the shells. The spectral features of purified CNFs was 
in good agreement with the spectrum of commercial pure α-chitin [5, 19]. It 
may be assumed that the current chemical processing has removed the matrix, 
proteins, and minerals by the series of chemical processing steps. The protein 
band at 1420/cm completely disappeared in prepared CNFs. The OH stretch -
ing band at 3482/cm, NH stretching band at 3270/cm, amide I bands at 1661 
and 1622/cm, and amide II band at 1559/cm of the CNFs are characteristics of 
pure α-chitin [4]. Figure 2.8 shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrum of 
commercially available pure α-chitin, newly prepared CNFs from crab shell, 
and dried crab shell flakes from red king crabs. The band at 29.6°, characteristic 
of calcium carbonate, disappeared completely from the spectrum of 
CNFs,confirming that the chemical treatment of crab shells has completely 
washed away minerals from processed CNFs. The four diffraction bands of 
9.5°, 19.5°, 20.9°, and 23.4° correspond to planes 020, 110, 120, and 130, respec -
tively. The bands are characteristic of α-chitin crystal and correspond to the 
pattern of commercial α-chitin [20]. Thus, X-ray investigation proved that even Figure 2.7  FT-IR spectra of (a) commercially available chitin powder, (b) prepared 
CNFs, and (c) crab shell flakes.
PREPARATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS FROM EdIblE MUSHROOMS   21
after difficult chemical and mechanical treatment of crab shells, the resultant 
purified CNFs maintained the α-chitin crystalline structure. The application of 
FT-IR and XRD techniques of analysis of newly prepared CNFs from a 
number of sources has justified the success of this method.
2.4 PREPARATION OF CHITIN NANOFIBERS FROM  
EDIBLE MUSHROOMS
CNFs were isolated [21] from the cell walls of mushrooms by a number of 
chemical treatments to remove glucans, minerals, and proteins associated 
with mushrooms followed by grinding treatment in acidic conditions. NF 
widths ranged from 20 to 28 nm, depending on the type of mushroom used. 
The goal of extraction of CNFs from edible mushrooms was to produce a 
novel functional food ingredient. The detailed extraction method and final 
SEM images of extracted NFs and methods employed to characterize them 
are described below. The mushroom species Pleuotuseryngii  (king trumpet 
mushroom), Agaricus bisporus  (common mushroom), Lentinula edodes  (shii -
take), Grifola frondosa  (maitake), and Hypsizygus marmoreus  (buna-shimeji), 
commonly used as human food, were used in this study. The purification was 
carried out by a series of chemical treatments to remove associated com -
pounds (proteins, pigments, glucans, and minerals) according to the proce -Figure 2.8  XRD profiles of (a) commercially available chitin powder, (b) chitin nano -
fibers, and (c) crab shell flakes.
22  PREPARATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS ANd THEIR COMPOSITES
dure describe in the literature [21, 22]. In brief, sodium hydroxide was used 
to dissolve, hydrolyze, and remove proteins and alkali-soluble glucans. Hydro -
chloric acid was used to remove minerals. At this stage partial neutral sac -
charides and acid-soluble protein compounds were also removed. The 
extraction step with sodium chlorite and acetic acid removed pigments from 
the sample. At the final stage, the sample was treated with sodium hydroxide 
again to eliminate and remove the residual glucans, including trace amounts 
of proteins. After chemical treatment, if the extracted mass is allowed to dry, 
it causes strong hydrogen bonding between CNFs when all matrix substances 
are washed away, making it difficult to fibrillate chitin to NFs [1]. Thus, the 
sample was kept wet after removal of the matrix for preparation of CNFs. 
The purified sample with 1 wt% content of chitin was passed through a 
grinder for nanofibrillation in acetic acid medium at pH 3. After grinder 
treatment, the chitin slurry thus obtained formed a gel after a single grinder 
treatment, suggesting nano-fibrillation was accomplished, because of its high 
dispersion property in water and high surface-to-volume ratio of nanofiber. 
Figure 2.9 shows SEM images of CNFs from five mushrooms after removal 
of matrix components and one pass though the grinder. The isolated chitins 
are well fibrillated and uniform. The width of the fibers was in the range of 
20–28 nm depending on the species of mushroom. The appearance of the 
fibers was similar to that of CNFs prepared from crab and prawn shells. Since 
damaged fibers are not observed after chemical and mechanical treatments, 
aspect ratios of the NFs are good. The width of fibers varied slightly accord -
ing to the type of mushrooms used. It is expected that preparation of CNFs 
from crab and prawn shells and vegetable source mushrooms will be appli -
cable to other cell wall or skeleton-containing vegetable or animal sources. 
The yield of CNF contents in mushrooms was not as high as in crab or prawn 
shells; it was in the range of 1.3–3.5 wt% depending on the species of mush -
rooms. The details of elemental analysis and species-wise composition of ele -
ments and NFs have been described by Ifuku et al. [21]. FT-IR and XRD 
spectrometry were employed to characterize the CNFs from mushrooms. 
FT-IR spectra of commercially available chitin derived from crab shell and 
CNFs from five types of mushroom were compared for analysis. The major 
bands of the spectra of CNFs are in agreement with commercial chitin. The 
characteristic bands of chitin molecule, O–H stretching band at 3450/m, N–H 
stretching band at 3270/cm, amide I band at 1660 and 1620/cm, and amide II 
band at 1560/cm, were noticed from CNFs, indicating that the α-chitin was 
isolated from mushrooms successfully. Similarly, XRD of commercially avail -
able chitin and the CNFs prepared from five types of mushrooms were com -
pared. The four diffraction bands of CNFs were observed at 9.4°, 19.3°, 20.6°, 
and 22.5°, corresponding to 020, 110, 120, and 130 planes, respectively. These 
are typical crystal patterns of α-chitin. Thus, CNFs extracted from mush -
rooms maintained α-chitin crystalline structures after removal of matrix sub -
stances, and the grinding treatment.PREPARATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS FROM EdIblE MUSHROOMS   23
Figure 2.9  FE-SEM images of CNFs prepared from (a) Pleuotus eryngii , (b) Agaricus 
bisporus , (c) Lentinula edodes , (d) Grifola frondosa , and (e) Hypsizygus marmoreus . 
The scale bars are 200 nm.
(a) (b)
(d) (c)NONE NONE LEI LEI 2.0 kV 2.0 kV WD 6.6 mm WD 6.8 mm X30,000 X30,000 100 nm 100 nm
NONE LEI 2.0 kV WD 6.7 mm X30,000 100 nm NONE LEI 2.0 kV WD 7 .1 mm X30,000 100 nm
NONE LEI 2.0 kV WD 7 .0 mm X30,000 100 nm(e)24  PREPARATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS ANd THEIR COMPOSITES
2.5 PREPARATION OF CHITIN NANOFIBER NANOCOMPOSITES
CNFs are composed of an antiparallel extended crystalline structure; thus, they 
have excellent mechanical properties: high Young’s modulus and fracture 
strength and low thermal expansion [23, 24]. Their minutely small size and good 
physical properties make them strong candidates for reinforcement agents or 
reinforced materials for making high performance nanocomposites.
CNFs composed of two different types of acrylic resins were prepared and 
their properties, including transparency, Young’s modulus, mechanical strength, 
and thermal expansion, were characterized. The aim was to use CNFs as 
advanced nanocomposite materials. One such material, a CNF–acrylic resin 
composite transparent sheet, was prepared by the following method: 0.1 wt% 
of fibrillated CNFs was dispersed in water. The suspension was vacuum filtered 
using a polytetrafluoroethylene membrane filter to produce a CNF sheet. The 
CNF sheet was dried by hot pressing, and cut into 3 × 4 cm dimensions. The 
sheet was 45 μm thick and weighed 40 mg. The sheet was impregnated by 
acrylic resins poly(propylene glycol) diacrylate (A-600) and tricyclodecanedi -
methanoldimethacrylate (DCP). The molecular structures of resins are shown 
in Figure 2.10. The resin-impregnated sheets were polymerized using ultraviolet 
(UV) curing equipment. Finally, the impregnated CNF composite film obtained 
was 60 μm thick, and the fiber content was 40 wt%. Both prepared nanocom -
posite films were optically transparent (Fig. 2.11) despite the high (40 wt%) 
fiber content due to the fiber size of 10–20 nm.
Figure 2.12 shows the regular light transmittance spectra of nanocomposites 
reinforced with CNFs and other neat components. Transmittance of DCP 
nanocomposites is higher than that of A-600. The higher transparency of the 
DCP composite is due to the refractive index of the DCP (1.5), which is higher 
and closer to neat CNFs (1.56) compared with that of the (1.46) resin. The 
transmittance of CNFs at 800/cm increased from opaque (0%) to 80–85% on 
reinforcing with A-600 and DCP resins, respectively. The mechanical and 
thermal properties of resin-reinforced chitin NFs were more suitable for appli -
cation purposes. Young’s modulus (GPa) of resins increased from 0.02 to 2.03 
Figure 2.10  Chemical structures of resins A-600 and DCP .
PREPARATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbER NANOCOMPOSITES   25
for A-600 and from 2.3 to 5.34 for DCP by reinforcing the resins with CNFs, 
respectively. The fracture stress (MPa) increased from 4 to 41 for A-600 and 
from 11 to 56 for DCP . Fracture strain (%) decreased from 16.5 to 9.0 for 
A-600 but increased from 0.6 to 1.2 for DCP resins. Coefficient of thermal 
expansion (CTE; ppm/K) decreased in composites compared with neat resins: 
from 184 to 19 in the case of A-600 and from 100 to 24 for DCP .Figure 2.11  Transparent thin (60 μm) DCP film reinforced with CNFs. See color insert.
Figure 2.12  Light transmittance spectra of nanocomposites and other neat 
components.
26  PREPARATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS ANd THEIR COMPOSITES
2.6 ACETYLATION OF CHITIN NANOFIBERS
2.6.1 Study of Degree of Substitution
Green nanomaterial CNFs prepared by our group were developed to have 
wider scope and application; this was possible by chemical modification of the 
CNF surface. Introducing hydrophobic functional groups into polar moieties 
of fibers is expected to improve the fiber dispersion as well as the adhesion 
properties with hydrophobic matrices. Acetylation is considered to be a simple 
chemical modification. It is a popular and inexpensive approach to change the 
surface property [25]. Until Ifuku et al. modified the CNF surface with an 
acetyl group, there was no report in the literature of chemical modification of 
CNFs. Until then the effect of the reaction behavior of highly crystalline CNFs 
and the relationship between the acetylation degree of substitution (DS) and 
the various properties of the NFs remained unclear. Ifuku et al. modified CNFs 
by acetylation and prepared their nanocomposites, and then characterized 
them. The method of acetylation has been described in Reference [26]. The 
acetyl DS ranged from 0.99 to 2.96 in a reaction time of 50 minutes. This is the 
highest degree of substitution of acetyl groups in CNFs. The high reaction rate 
was due to the very high surface area of fibers. FT-IR spectra (Fig. 2.13) of 
acetylated CNFs for DS of 0.99, 1.81, and 2.96 were recorded. As the DS of 
Figure 2.13  FT-IR spectra of acetylated CNFs of (a) DS 0.99, (b) DS 1.81, and (c) DS 
2.96.
ACETYlATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS   27
Figure 2.14  XRD spectra of acetylated CNFs at (a) DS 0.99, (b) DS 1.81, and (c) DS 
2.96.
acetyl groups increased, two major bands at 1231 and 1748/cm increased, cor -
responding to the C–O and C=O stretching vibration modes of the acetyl 
group. Simultaneously, the O–H stretching band at 3972/cm decreased with 
increasing DS and almost disappeared at a DS value of 2.96, indicating that a 
complete substitution of acetyl groups in the CNFs had occurred.
XRD profiles of a series of acetylated CNFs are shown in Figure 2.14. In 
original CNFs (DS 0.99), the four diffraction peaks of CNFs observed at 9.5, 
19.4, 20.9, and 23.4° are charateristic of 020, 110, 120, and 130 planes, respec -
tively. The spectra show typical antiparallel crystal pattern of α-chitin. The 
α-chitin diffraction pattern completely disappeared at DS 2.96, and the sample 
showed a well-defined uniform pattern of di- O-acetylated chitin (chitin diac -
etate) at 2 θ = 7.4 and 17.7°. While the XRD pattern of α-chitin still remained 
at DS 1.81, here about 50% of OH groups were substituted.
2.6.2 SEM Images of Substituted Chitin Nanofibers
FE-SEM images of acetylated CNFs of three DS NFs are shown in Figure 2.15. 
The images remained unchanged even in DS 2.96 preparation, which indicates 
that chitin diacetate is insoluble in the reaction mixture acetic anhydride. In 
all of the images of CNF sheets, individual isolated NFs existed; however, as 28  PREPARATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS ANd THEIR COMPOSITES
the DS increased, the thickness of the NFs also increased. The average thick -
ness of NFs with DS 0.99, 1.81, and 2.96 were 21.6, 28.9, and 32.1 nm, respec -
tively. The thickness of substituted NFs increased as a result of the attachment 
of bulky acetyl groups to CNFs.
2.6.3 Acetylated Chitin Nanofiber Composites
Acetylated CNFs were reinforced with acrylic resin DCP . The method of rein -
forcement has been cited elsewhere [26]. The final reinforced sheet has a 
thickness of 150 μm and chitin content of 25 wt%. Acetylated nanocomposites 
have high transparencies in all acetyl DS from 0.99 to 2.96. At the transmit -
tance measuring wavelength of 700 nm, the DS 0.99 sheet had a transparency 
of 77%. As the acetyl DS increased, the transmittance decreased. At 2.96 DS, 
the transmittance was 73%. This decrease can likely be attributed to the 
change in the refractive index of the NFs. A reinforced CNF composite can 
have promising applications as it is an optically functional composite. It is 
hygroscopic, unlike neat CNFs, which are hydroscopic. Absorption of moisture 
in CNFs can deform the composite in humid conditions. Acetylation seems to 
reduce the moisture content of the nanocomposite. The moisture content of 
the original sample with DS 0.99 was 4.0 wt%, which is higher than the 0.33% 
of hygroscopic acrylic resin filler. The moisture absorption of the nanocom -
posite with DS 1.30 decreased to 2.2% due to the introduction of hydrophobic 
acetyl groups to the hydroxyl moiety of chitin molecules. Acetylation of the 
NFs improved the compatibility with the acrylic resin, and improvement of Figure 2.15  FE-SEM pictures of acetylated CNFs samples of three DS values: (a) DS 
0.99, (b) DS 1.81, and (c) DS 2.96. Scale 200 nm.
(a) (b) (c)CONClUSION   29
miscibility at the resin–chitin interface thus decreased water adsorption onto 
reinforced NFs. With further acetylation, the moisture content did not change 
much; the change was only in the range of 2.0–2.5%. This suggests that most 
hydroxyl groups on the CNF surface were acetylated in the first minute of the 
acetylation reaction. The CTE of reinforced resin DCP by CNFs was also 
studied. DCP resin has a CTE of 64/ppmK; on reinforcement by chitin, the 
CTE of the CNF/DCP composite decreased to 23/ppmK. The CNFs with a low 
thermal expansion of 92/ppm K reduced the CTE of the DCP by reinforce -
ment with a fiber content of 25 wt%. On the other hand, the CTE of CNF 
samples and their composites increased proportionally and gradually with 
increases in the acetyl DS. This increase due to the acetylation reduces the 
degree of crystallinity of CNFs, which increases the CTE of CNFs and the 
nanocomposites.
2.7 CONCLUSION
Homogeneous CNFs of 10–20 nm width were prepared from dried crab shell 
by combination of chemical treatment and mechanical grinding. The grinding 
treatment was in wet state; removal of matrix from wood and crab shell to 
isolate CNFs were similar. CNFs were also prepared from dried chitin. Grind -
ing in acidic conditions is important for fibrillation of dried chitin. In acidic 
conditions, calibrated addition of acetic acid cationized amino groups of chitin 
and broke the strong intermolecular hydrogen bonding due to development of 
charge followed by electrostatic repulsion. The method of preparation of NFs 
from dry chitin powder has advantage for commercial production, and raw dry 
chitin is easy to store, transport, and supply. Using dry chitin powder, we have 
successfully prepared stable and homogeneous CNFs with a high surface-to-
volume ratio. CNFs were prepared from a variety of prawn shells without addi -
tion of any acid. Prawn shell has a finer structure than crab shell; thus, CNFs 
were isolated more easily. Two different types of transparent acrylic resin sheets 
reinforced with CNFs were also prepared. Due to nanosized chitin fibers, the 
prepared composites were highly transparent and flexible and had low thermal 
expansion, high Young’s modulus, and high tensile strength. The study of prepa -
ration of CNF-reinforced resins has expanded the application of CNFs; chitin 
raw materials until now were thrown away as industrial waste. Moreover, chitin 
is a green, environmentally benign biocomposite. Chemical modification of 
CNFs was also done for making the hydrophilic chitin surface hydrophobic to 
disperse it in more hydrophobic solvents. Stepwise acetylation of CNFs was 
carried out successfully, adjusting the DS value at different reaction times. 
Thinner (60–150 μm) transparent films were obtained by reinforcement of 
CNFs. Reinforcement of CNFs by resins or reinforced resins by CNFs improved 
physical properties such as Young’s modulus, fracture stress and strain, CTE 
and flexibility, transparency, and hygroscopicity. Favorably modified properties 30  PREPARATION OF CHITIN NANOFIbERS ANd THEIR COMPOSITES
show that neat CNFs or blended fibers have vast applications in the future as 
advanced biologically benign nanocomposites.
REFERENCES
 [1] Abe, K., Iwamoto, S., and Yano, H. (2007) Obtaining cellulose nanofibers with a 
uniform width of 15 nm from wood. Biomacromolecules , 8, 3276–3278.
 [2] Nishino, T., Takano, K., and Nakamae, K. (1995) Elastic-modulus of the crystalline 
regions of cellulose polymorphs. J. Polym. Sci.[B] , 33, 1647–1651.
 [3] Nishino, T., Matsuda, I., and Hirano, K. (2004) All cellulose composite. Macromol -
ecules , 37, 7683–7687.
 [4] Gopalan, N.K., Dufresne, A. (2003) Crab shell chitin whisker reinforced natural 
rubber nanocomposites. 1. Processing and swelling behavior. Biomacromolecules , 
4, 657–665.
 [5] Ifuku, S., Nogi, M., Abe, K., Yoshioka, M., Morimoto, M., Saimoto, H., and Yano, 
H. (2009) Preparation of chitin nanofibers with a uniform width as α-chitin from 
crabshells. Biomacromolecules , 10, 1584–1588.
 [6] Chen, P .-Y., Lin, A.Y.-M., McKittrick, J., and Meyers, M.A. (2008) Structure and -
mechanical properties of crab exoskeletons. Acta Biomater. , 4, 587–596.
 [7] Zhao, H., Feng, X., and Gao, H. (2007) Ultrasonic technique for extracting nano -
fibers from nature materials. Appl. Phys. Lett. , 90, 073112.
 [8] Min, B.M., Lee, S.W., Lim, J.N., You, Y., Lee, T.S., Kang, P .H., and Park, W.H. (2004) 
Chitin and chitosan nanofibers: Electrospinning of chitin and deacetylation of 
chitinnanofibers. Polymer , 45, 7137–7142.
 [9] Fan, Y., Saito, T., and Isogai, A. (2008) Chitin nanocrystals prepared by TEMPO 
mediated oxidation of α-chitin. Biomacromolecules , 9, 192–198.
[10] Fan, Y., Saito, T., and Isogai, A. (2008) Preparation of chitin nanofibers from squid 
pen β-chitin by simple mechanical treatment under acid conditions. Biomacromol -
ecules , 9, 1919–1923.
[11] Shimahara, K., Takiguchi, Y. (1998) Preparation of crustacean chitin. In: Methods 
in enzymology , Vol. 161, eds. W.A. Wood, S.T. Kellogg. Academia Press, pp. 
417–423.
[12] BeMiller, J.N., Whistler, R.L. (1962) Alkaline degradation of amino sugars. J. Org. 
Chem. , 27, 1161–1164.
[13] Yano, I. (1972) A historical study on the exocuticle with respect to its calcification 
and associated epidermal cells in a shore crab. Bull. Jpn. Soc. Sci. Fish. , 38, 
733–739.
[14] Yano, I. (1975) An electron microscope study on the calcification of the exoskel -
eton in a shore crab. Bull. Jpn. Soc. Sci. Fish. , 41, 1079–1082.
[15] Yano, I. (1977) Structures of exoskeletons of prawn and crab shells. Kagaku to 
Seibutsu , 15, 328–336.
[16] Fan, Y., Saito, T., and Isogai, A. (2009) TEMPO-mediated oxidation of β-chitin to 
prepare individual nanofibrils. Carbohydr. Poly. , 77, 832–838.REFERENCES   31
[17] Iwamoto, S., Abe, K., and Yano, H. (2008) The effect of hemicelluloses on wood 
pulpnanofibrillation and nanofiber network characteristics. Biomacromoles , 9, 
1022–1026.
[18] Saito, T., Nishiyama, Y., Putaux, J.-L., Vignon, M., and Isogai, A. (2006) Homoge -
neoussuspensions of individualized microfibrils from TEMPO-catalyzed oxidation 
ofnative cellulose. Biomacromolecules , 7, 1687–1691.
[19] Ifuku, S., Nogi, M., Yoshioka, M., Morimoto, M., Yano, H., and Saimoto, H. (2010) 
Fibrillation of dried chitin into 10–20 nm nanofibers by a simple grinding method 
under acidic conditions. Carbohydr. Polym. , 81, 134–139.
[20] Minke, R., Blackwell, J. (1978) The structure of α-chitin. J. Mol. Biol. , 120, 
167–181.
[21] Ifuku, S., Nomura, R., Morimoto, M., and Saimoto, H. (2011) Fabrication of chitin 
nanofibers with a width of 20 nm from mushrooms. Materials , 4, 1417–1425.
[22] Ivshina, T.N., Artamonova, S.D., Ivshin, V.P ., and Sharnina, F.F. (2009) Isolation of 
the chitin-glucan complex from the fruiting bodies of mycothallus. Appl. Biochem. 
Microbiol. , 45, 313–318.
[23] Vincent, J., Wegst, U. (2004) Design and mechanical properties of insect cuticle. 
Arthropod Struct. Dev. , 33, 187–199.
[24] Wada, M., Saito, Y. (2001) Lateral thermal expansion of chitin crystals. J. Polym. 
Sci. [B] , 39, 168–174.
[25] Ifuku, S., Nogi, M., Abe, K., Handa, K., Nakatsubo, F., and Yano, H. (2007) Surface 
modification of bacterial cellulose nanofibers for property enhancement of opti -
cally transparent composites: Dependence on acetyl-group DS. Biomacromole -
cules , 8, 1973–1978.
[26] Ifuku, S., Morooka, S., Morimoto, M., and Saimoto, H. (2010) Acetylation of chitin 
nanofibers and their transparentnanocompositefilms. Biomacromolecules , 11, 
1326–1330.33Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.  CHAPTER 3 
   Chemical Modiﬁ  cation of Chitosan and 
Its Biomedical Application  
    DEEPA     THOMAS     and     SABU     THOMAS        
   3.1     INTRODUCTION 
 Chitin is the second most abundant natural polymer in the world after cellu-
lose. It is the only pseudo-natural cationic biopolymer that has good proper-ties, including biodegradability, biocompatibility, nontoxicity, and antibacterial activity, which makes it an interesting novel functional material  [1] . Chitosan is composed primarily of glucosamine and  N -acetylglucosamine residues with 
a 1,4- β -linkage. Chitosan offers remarkable biological properties, which have 
paved the way for its application in the pharmaceutical and biomedical ﬁ  elds, 
such as biomedicine, membranes, drug delivery systems, and hydrogels, and as a scaffold for tissue engineering. The presence of -NH 
2  groups in chitosan is 
the reason it exhibits much greater potential than chitin for use in different applications. Nevertheless, the properties of chitosan, such as its poor solubility in water or in organic solvents, can limit its utilization for a speciﬁ  c application. 
The solubilization of chitosan occurs by protonation of the -NH 
2  functional 
group on the C-2 position of the D-glucosamine repeating unit, whereby the polysaccharide is converted to a polyelectrolyte in acidic media. An elegant way to improve or to impart new properties to chitosan is the chemical modi-ﬁ cation of the chain, generally by grafting of functional groups, without modi-
ﬁ cation of the initial skeleton in order to preserve the original properties. The 
functionalization is carried out on the primary amine group, generally by quaternization, or on the hydroxyl group.  34  CHEMICAL MODIFICATION OF CHITOSAN AND ITS BIOMEDICAL APPLICATION
  3.2     STRUCTURE OF CHITOSAN 
 Chitin and chitosan are heteropolymers. Chitosan is the  N -deacetylated deriv-
ative of chitin and can be obtained by deacetylation of chitin, which is pro-
duced from shells of crustaceans and insects and from other sources. The 
degree of  N -acetylation can be deﬁ  ned as the ratio of 2-acetamido-2-deoxy-
D-glucopyranose to 2-amino-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranose structural units  [2] . 
This ratio has a striking effect on the solubility and solution properties of chitin 
and chitosan. In chitin, the degree of acetylation is typically 0.90, while in 
chitosan the degree of acetylation is less than 0.35. To determine this ratio, 
attempts have been made with many analytical tools, which include infrared 
(IR) spectroscopy, pyrolysis gas chromatography, and ultraviolet (UV) spec-
troscopy. Chitosan is a polycationic polymer that has one amino group and 
two hydroxyl groups in the repeating glucosidic residue. The carbohydrate 
backbone is very similar to that of cellulose, which consists of  β -1, 4-linked 
D-glucosamine with a variable degree of  N -acetylation, except that the acetyl 
amino group replaces the hydroxyl group on the C2 position. Thus, chitosan 
is a copolymer consisting of  N -acetyl-2-amino-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranose and 
2-amino-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranose, where the two types of repeating units are 
linked by (1 → 4)- β -glycosidic bonds. After reﬁ  nement, chitosan has a rigid 
crystalline structure through inter- and intramolecular hydrogen bonding. The 
repeating units of chitosan, cellulose, and chitin are shown in Figure  3.1  and 
Figure  3.2   [3] . The active primary amino groups on the molecule being reactive 
provide sites for a variety of side group attachment employing mild reaction 
conditions (Fig.  3.3 ). The attached side groups on chitosan provide versatile 
materials with speciﬁ  c functionality, alter biological properties, or modify 
physical properties  [4] . Because of chitosan ’ s biological and chemical proper-
ties, it has the ability to bind to particular materials including cholesterols, fats, 
proteins, metal ions, and even tumor cells. This allows chitosan to be used as 
a chelating agent in various applications. The facile derivatization makes chi-
tosan an ideal candidate for biofabrication. In addition, the characteristic 
features of chitosan, such as being cationic, haemostatic, and insoluble at high 
pH, can be reversed by sulfating the amine, which makes the molecule anionic 
and water-soluble, with the introduction of anticoagulant properties. 
  Figure 3.1          Structure of chitosan. HOH 2C
O
OHO
NHAc
nCHEMICAL MODIFICATIONS OF CHITOSAN   35
      3.3     CHEMICAL MODIFICATIONS OF CHITOSAN 
 In spite of the potential applications of chitin and chitosan, it is necessary to 
establish efﬁ  cient and appropriate modiﬁ  cations to explore fully the high 
potential of these biomacromolecules. Chemical modiﬁ  cations of chitin are 
generally difﬁ  cult owing to the lack of solubility, and the reactions under het-
erogeneous conditions are accompanied by various problems such as the poor 
extent of reactions, difﬁ  culty in selective substitution, structural ambiguity of 
the products, and partial degradation due to severe reaction conditions. There-
fore, with regard to developing advanced functions, much attention had been 
paid to modiﬁ  cation of chitosan rather than chitin. The advantage of chitosan 
over other polysaccharides (such as cellulose, starch, and galactomannans) is 
that its chemical structure allows easier modiﬁ  cations at the C2 position. Spe-
ciﬁ c groups can be introduced to produce novel polymers for selected applica-
tions. The practical use of chitosan has been largely limited to its unmodiﬁ  ed 
forms, and thus modiﬁ  ed chitosans are required for use in a wide range of 
biomedical applications including interaction and intracellular delivery of 
genetic materials. In order to improve or impart new properties to chitosan,   Figure 3.2          Repeating unit of cellulose and chitin. HOH 2CHOH 2C
OO
HOHOOO
nnOHNH2
  Figure 3.3          Schematic illustration of chitosan ’ s versatility. At low pH (less than about 
6), chitosan ’ s amine groups are protonated, conferring polycationic behavior to chito-
san. At a higher pH (above about 6.5), chitosan ’ s amines are deprotonated and reactive 
 [4] . O
HOHOHOH 2CHOH 2C
OOO
NH3 + 1NH2
nn36  CHEMICAL MODIFICATION OF CHITOSAN AND ITS BIOMEDICAL APPLICATION
chemical modiﬁ  cation of the chitosan chains, generally either by grafting of 
small molecules or polymer chains onto the chitosan backbone or by quater-nization of the amino groups, has been investigated  [5] . Chitosan chains possess three attractive reactive sites for chemical modiﬁ  cation: two hydroxyl groups 
(primary or secondary) and one primary amine. The site of modiﬁ  cation is 
dictated by the desired application of the ﬁ  nal chitosan derivative  [6] . In many 
reactions, the nonbonding pair of electrons on the primary amino groups of chitosan units performs the role of acceptor protons. Thus, the primary amino group becomes cationically charged. These nonbonding pairs of electrons on the primary amino group also make chitosan a potent nucleophile, reacting readily with most aldehydes to form imines  [7] . Although the majority of reac-tions involving chitosan involve the primary amino group, it is possible to modify selectively the hydroxyl groups. This can be accomplished by protect-ing the amine group through the formation of the polysaccharide formate or acetate and subsequent reaction of the salt with an electrophile. The hydroxyl group pendant at C6 is more reactive than that at C3 and therefore is deriva-tized preferentially  [8] . Chitin and chitosan have been modiﬁ  ed via a variety 
of chemical modiﬁ  cations such as nitration, phosphorylation, sulphation, xan-
thation, acylation, hydroxyalkylation, Schiff ’ s base formation and alkylation, and graft copolymerization  [9] . 
  3.3.1     Chitosan-Grafted Copolymers 
 Graft copolymerization is expected to be one of the most promising approaches 
to develop novel chitin/chitosan-based materials with improved properties. In recent years, a number of initiator systems such as  ammonium per sulfate  ( APS ),  potassium per sulfate  ( PPS ),  ceric ammonium nitrate  ( CAN ),  thiocar-bonationpotassium bromate  ( TCPB ),  potassium diperiodatocuprate  (III) ( PDC ),  2,2-azobisisobutyronitrile  ( AIBN ), and  ferrous ammonium sulfate  ( FAS ) have been developed to initiate grafting copolymerization  [10, 11] . Graft copolymerization can also be initiated by  γ -irradiation and enzymes. The 
grafting parameters such as grafting percentage and grafting efﬁ  ciency are 
greatly inﬂ  uenced by several parameters such as the type and concentration 
of initiator, monomer concentration, reaction temperature, and time. The properties of the resulting graft copolymers are widely controlled by the char-acteristics of the side chains, including molecular structure, length, and number. Many researchers have studied the effects of these variables on the grafting parameters and the properties of the resultant grafted chitosan  [10, 11] . 
  3.3.1.1     Grafting Initiated by Free Radicals     Graft copolymerization of 
vinyl monomers onto chitosan using free radical initiation has attracted the interest of many scientists in the last two decades. For example, Sun et al. pre-pared carboxymethyl chitosan-grafted  methacrylic acid  ( MAA ) by using APS as an initiator in aqueous solution  [12] . The effects of APS, MAA, reaction temperature, and time on graft copolymerization were analyzed by determining CHEMICAL MODIFICATIONS OF CHITOSAN   37
the grafting percentage and grafting efﬁ  ciency. After grafting, the chitosan 
derivatives had much improved water solubility. Similarly, Xie et al. prepared 
hydroxypropyl chitosan-grafted MAA by using APS as an initiator (Fig.  3.4 ), 
obtaining a derivative that also had good solubility in water  [13] . 
    3.3.1.2      Grafting Using Radiation     Recently, there has been great interest 
in graft natural polymers using the radiation method. Grafting of polystyrene 
onto chitin and chitosan using  60 Co  γ -irradiation at room temperature was 
investigated  [14] . Researchers analyzed the effect of adsorbed dose, solvent, 
and oxygen and found that the grafting yield increases with an increase in the 
adsorbed dose. Singh and Roy investigated the radiation grafting of chitosan 
with   N ,  N _-dimethylaminoethylmethacrylate  ( DMAEMA )  [15]  and found 
that parameters such as solvent composition, monomer concentration, radia-
tion dose rate, and total dose/time affect the rate of grafting and homopoly-
merization. They also found that a desired level of grafting of DMAEMA onto 
chitosan ﬁ  lms was achieved by appropriate selection of these grafting condi-
tions. Yu et al. reported the graft copolymerizationof butyl acrylate onto chi-
tosan by using  γ -irradiation  [16] . They found that the grafting percentage 
increases with increase in the monomer concentration and total dose. Singh 
et al. grafted poly(acrylonitrile) onto chitosan using the microwave irradiation 
technique under homogeneous conditions. They studied the effect of monomer 
and chitosan concentration, microwave power, and exposure time on the graft-
copolymerization and found that grafting increases with an increase in the 
monomer concentration  [17] .  
  3.3.1.3     Enzymatic Grafting     There are several potential advantages of 
using enzymes in polymer synthesis and modiﬁ  cation  [18] . With respect to 
health and safety, enzymes offer the potential of eliminating the hazards asso-
ciated with reactive reagents. A potential environmental beneﬁ  t from using   Figure 3.4          Graft copolymerization of MAA on hydroxypropyl chitosan  [13] . HOOOHCH3
OO
NH2
nCH3
CH3
COOHmCOOHAPSCH
NH CH 3CO
O
O
nOHCH338  CHEMICAL MODIFICATION OF CHITOSAN AND ITS BIOMEDICAL APPLICATION
enzymes is that their selectivity may be exploited to eliminate the need for 
waste full protection and deprotection steps. Finally, enzymes speciﬁ  city may 
offer the potential for precisely modifying macromolecular structure to better control polymer function  [19] . For instance, enzymatic modiﬁ  cation can yield 
chitosan derivatives with unique pH-sensitive water solubility and adhesive properties.  
  3.3.1.4     Cationic Graft Polymerization     In the late 1990s, Yoshikawa et al. 
showed that grafting reactions onto chitosan can also be performed by using living cationic polymerization  [20] . The viscosity of the resulting polymer was found to increase with the increasing percentage of grafting. This grafted polymer was also found to be soluble in water.   
  3.3.2     Cyclodextrin-Linked Chitosan 
 The cyclic oligosaccharides, namely  α -,  β -,  γ -  cyclodextrins  ( CD ), are important 
because of their ability to encapsulate hydrophobic molecules in their toroidal hydrophobic cavity, whose selectivity depends on the number of glucose units (respectively 6, 7, 8 D-glucose units). CD- linked chitosan is interesting from the viewpoint of pharmaceutics, including drug delivery, cosmetics, and analyti-cal chemistry. Although functionalization at the 6-position of OH in CD is relatively easy, the secondary 2 or 3 position is shown to be the more important site of CD in binding studies. Sakairi prepared  α -CD-linked chitosan (Fig.  3.5 ) 
using 2-O-formylmethyl- β -CD by reductive N-alkylation. Tosylated  β -CD is 
also useful for linking chitosan at the 2-position of CD, as reported by Chen et al.  [24] . CD-linked chitosan could also be prepared via the intermediate of its monochlorotriazinyl derivative  [25] . This compound was used for decon-tamination of water containing textile dyes. An insoluble cross-linked chitosan bearing  β -CD was prepared using N-succinyl chitosan and aminated- β -CD via 
amide bond formation  [26] . The  β -CD linked chitosan using 1,6-hexamethylene 
diisocyanate as a spacer was prepared by Sreenivasan  [27] . This material showed interaction with cholesterol and was useful as an adsorbent matrix. 
    3.3.3     Crown Ether Bound Chitosan 
 Crown ethers have molecular structures that cause them to exhibit complexing 
selectivity for metal ions. Crown ether bound chitosan not only had good adsorption capacities for noble metal ions Pd 
2 +  , Au 3 +  , and Ag  +  , but also had 
high selectivity for adsorption of Pd 2 +  , in the presence of Cu 2 +   and Hg 2 +  . Cross-
linked crown ether bound chitosan was also reported  [28] . These cross-linked derivatives have space net structures with embedded crown ethers, and each mesh has a certain spacevolume. When the original chitosan was reacted with4,4 ′ -dibromobenzo-18-crown-6-crown ether, the cross-linked product 
between 6-OH and NH 
2  was obtained (Fig.  3.6 ). However, this product included 
heterogeneous cross-linked structures between 6-OH and 6-OH, or NH 2  and CHEMICAL MODIFICATIONS OF CHITOSAN   39
  Figure 3.5          Cyclodextrin-linked chitosan  [21–23] . HO
HO
ii) NaCNBH 2
HO
HOChitosanHOOH
OCHO
i)
O
OOOH
HOHO
O
O ON
NNCl
OO
NN
NNHNH
or 6-OHOOβ-CD2-OH
β-CD23α-CD2-OH
O
S
OCH3
OHO
O
NH
16
17
18
  Figure 3.6          Crown ether bound chitosans  [22, 28] . NaBH 4
20 19OH
O
O
NH
H2CHO
O
OOOO
OO O
OOHCHO
OOHC
O
nn
nnnO
ChitosanO
OOO
NOH
NH 2,  while  benzylidene protected chitosan  ( CTB ) produced homogeneous 
cross-linked structures between 6-OH and 6-OH (Fig.  3.7 ). 
     3.3.4     Thiol-Containing Chitosan 
 Thiol-containing chitosan, also called thiolated chitosan, is obtained 
through the reaction between chitosan and thiolactic acid. In this reaction, 40  CHEMICAL MODIFICATION OF CHITOSAN AND ITS BIOMEDICAL APPLICATION
1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide (EDC) can be used to graft 
these two materials  [29] . EDC is a water-soluble carbodiimide that is typically 
employed in the 4.0–6.0 pH range. It is a zero-length cross-linking agent that 
has been widely used to couple carboxylic acid groups to primary amines. 
Thiolactic acid is covalently attached to the primary amino group of chitosan 
under the formation of amide bonds. The carboxylic acid moieties of thiolactic 
acid are activated by EDC, forming a O-acylurea derivative as an intermediate 
product that reacts with the primary amino groups of chitosan.  
  3.3.5     Carbohydrate Branched Chitosans 
 Carbohydrates can be grafted on the chitosan backbone at the C2 position by 
reductive alkylation. For that purpose, disaccharides (cellobiose, lactose, etc.) 
having a reducing end group are introduced, in the presence of a reductant, 
on chitosan in the open chain form  [30] . Synthesis of galactosylated chitosan 
is shown in Figure  3.8 . Carbohydrates can also be introduced without ring 
opening on the C6 position  [1] . These derivatives are important as they are 
recognized by the corresponding speciﬁ  c lectins and thus could be used for 
drug targeting.   Figure 3.7          Cross-linked type of crown ether bound chitosan  [22, 28] . Chitosan
ChitosanCHO
HOOH
OH
HOOH
NHOO
O
O
O
O OO
OOO 21O
OO
O
OOOCTB
CHNHOO
O
O
O
HON
CHn
n
22ON
CH
H2NCTB
n
Br Br O O
OOOCHEMICAL MODIFICATIONS OF CHITOSAN   41
    3.3.6     Carboxymethylated Chitosans 
  Carboxymethylated chitosan s ( CMC s) are some of the most extensively 
explored derivatives of chitosan  [32] . The carboxylation, which can be carried 
out by exploiting amino and/or hydroxyl groups (N-, O-, or N, O-CMC), 
extends the water solubility of chitosan to basic pH values and provides the 
polymer with amphotheric characteristics.  
  3.3.7     Alkylated Chitosans 
 Alkylated chitosans are very important as amphiphilic polymers based on 
polysaccharides. Using the reductive amination, a series of amphiphilic deriva-
tives was produced with different chain lengths. This technique was also used 
to introduce n-lauryl chains. Alkylated chitosans with good solubility in acidic 
conditions (pH  <  6) have a number of interesting properties such as low 
surface activity and high viscosity due to hydrophobic interchain interactions. 
Alkyl chitosans are compatible with neutral andcationic surfactants; cationic 
surfactant adsorbed on the alkyl chain grafted on chitosan promotes its solu-
bilization  [33] . Grafting of hydrophobic alkyl chains onto chitosan is the most 
straightforward method to impart amphiphilic properties to chitosan. For this 
purpose, alkyl aldehydes or alkyl ketones were selectively grafted onto the   Figure 3.8          Synthesis of galactosylated chitosan  [22, 31] . OHOH
OHOHOH
OH
OHHO HOHOCOOH
6
7Lactobionic acid
EDC, NHS, room temp., 72 h
OHOH
NH2n−x OH OHOH
OH OHNH xO
OO
O
OO
OHO
HO
HO HOHOO
OO
O
NH2 n+42  CHEMICAL MODIFICATION OF CHITOSAN AND ITS BIOMEDICAL APPLICATION
primary amino groups of chitosan with formation of the corresponding Schiff 
base  [34] . A reduction step mediated by sodium/potassium borohydride 
(NaBH 4 /KBH 4 ) or sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH 3 CN) converted the 
imine group into the more stable amine with formation of the corresponding 
alkylchitosan derivatives (Fig.  3.9 ). 
    3.3.8     Quaternized Chitosan Derivatives 
 Chemical modiﬁ  cation increased the solubility of chitosan in water  [35] , 
keeping chitosan soluble over a wide pH range. In addition, the cationic char-
acter can be controlled and kept pH independent, which is desirable for 
improving the stability of ionic complexes. The reaction of chitosan with 
methyliodide under basic conditions is the most straightforward route for 
quatenizing chitosan  [36] . With excess methyl iodide and sodium hydroxide, 
the amino group of chitosan was directly trimethylated, and the cationized 
chitosan was soluble in water in a wide pH range. Ammonium groups were 
introduced as side chains by the reaction with quaternized epoxides such as 
glycidyltrimethylammonium chloride. The product is an analogue of cation-
ized cellulose, which is a common polycation component of shampoos. On 
mixing solutions of chitosan and polyanions, polyelectrolyte complexes pre-
cipitate. The resulting chitosan-based polyelectrolyte complexes are attracting 
increasing interest as biomedical materials; they may be useful for the repair 
of damaged blood vessels, gene delivery, and anticoagulation and procoagula-
tion. Among all the quaternized chitosans described in the literature,  N,N,N-
trimethyl chitosan chloride  ( TMC ) is the most widely used in gene therapy 
applications. The quaternization maintained and improved the muco-adhesive   Figure 3.9          Grafting of alkyl chain by reductive amination  [34] . HO HOWater/MeOH
CH3 +C H 2
NH2
HONHH m
OOO O
OO
O
H2C
666
NaBH 4m
mHCNOH OH
OHCHEMICAL MODIFICATIONS OF CHITOSAN   43
properties of chitosan, depending on the quaternization degree, which makes 
this chitosan derivative an ideal candidate for gene delivery  [37] . To enhance the delivery properties of TMC, Verheul et al. developed a synthetic route for the preparation of thiol-bearing TMC that has enhanced delivery properties  [38, 39] . Indeed, the presence of thiol increased the muco-adhesion of chitosan derivatives by formation of a disulﬁ  de bond with mucin proteins of the cell 
membrane. Toh et al. grafted succinic acid onto chitosan, improving the water solubility of chitosan  [40] .  
  3.3.9     Chitosan Hydrogels 
 Hydrogels are three-dimensional (3D) networks that swell in water and 
aqueous solutions. Consequently, they are soft, pliable, wet materials with a wide range of potential biomedical applications. They play a crucial role in current strategies to remedy malfunctions in and injuries to living systems. The high water content of hydrogels renders them compatible with most living tissue and their viscoelastic nature minimizes damage to the surrounding tissue when implanted in the host. In addition, their mechanical properties parallel those of soft tissue, making them particularly appealing with the host tissues, assisting and improving the healing process, and mimicking functional and morphological characteristics of organ tissue. By its hydrophilic nature, chitosan can be applied as a starting material for the elaboration of biodegrad-able and biocompatible hydrogels. Chitosan readily forms hydrogels that have been used in a number of genes and drug delivery applications. Chitosan hydrogels can be divided into two classes: physical and chemical. Chemical hydrogels are formed by irreversible covalent links, whereas physical hydro-gels are formed by various reversible links. For various reasons, physically cross-linked hydrogels have attracted increasing attention as bioactive com-pounds. Physically cross-linked chitosan hydrogels have been synthesized by grafting  lactic acid  ( LA ) and  glycolic acid  ( GA )  [41] . Chitosan derivatives were then used for the synthesis of improved chitosan-based hydrogels. Thus, chitosan-g-polyethyleneglycol (PEG) graft copolymer, synthesized by nucleo-philic attack of the primary amine of chitosan onto chloride-terminated PEG, was able to form a stable physical hydrogel  [42] . Chemical chitosan-based hydrogel was successfully prepared by Michael addition of a thiol-terminated six-armed star-shaped PEG onto acrylate-bearing chitosan  [43] . The residual amino groups of chitosan are ionized in acidic buffers, which contributes to the electrostatic repulsion between adjacent ionized residual NH 
2  groups of 
chitosan, leading to chain expansion, and consequently increases the water uptake of the gel. The hydrophobic side chains aggregate and physical cross-linking is formed. The crystallinity of original chitosan decreases by grafting lactic acid (LA) and glycolic acid (GA). PEG–chitosan hydrogels may have potential for application in the biomedical ﬁ  eld. Thermo- and pH-sensitive 
semi-interpenetrating networks (IPN) polyampholyte hydrogels have been prepared by using carboxymethyl chitosan and poly (N-isopropylacrylamide) 44  CHEMICAL MODIFICATION OF CHITOSAN AND ITS BIOMEDICAL APPLICATION
with N,N ′ -methylenebis (acryl amide) as a cross-linking agent  [44] . The results 
indicate that the semi-IPN hydrogels are pH and temperature responsive and have good reversibility. By increasing the carboxymethyl chitosan content in the hydrogel, the release rate is increased. These semi-IPN hydrogels can be used in pH–temperature oral drug delivery systems. A full-IPN hydro-gel with temperature response has been prepared from chitosan and N-isopropylacrylamide in the presence of a suitable cross-linker and an initiator  [45] . Chitosan–cellulose hydrogel beads have been synthesized using ethylene glycol diglycidyl ether as a cross-linker for Cu adsorption from aqueous solu-tions  [46] . The physical properties, including ﬂ  exibility, of cross-linked chitosan 
hydrogels can be improved by blending chitosan with pre-gelatinized starch. The presence of starch in the system increased the water absorption of the hydrogel when compared to the system without starch.   
  3.4     BIOMEDICAL APPLICATIONS OF CHITOSAN DERIVATIVES 
  3.4.1     Tissue Engineering 
 Tissue engineering is a highly interdisciplinary ﬁ  eld that combines the prin-
ciples and methods of life sciences and engineering to utilize structural and functional relationships in normal and pathological tissue to develop biologi-cal substitutes for restoring, maintaining, or improving biofunction. Chitosan and its derivatives are suitable for tissue engineering applications because of their porous structure, gel-forming properties, ease of chemical modiﬁ  cation, 
biodegradability, biocompatibility, antibacterial activity, and high afﬁ  nity to  in 
vivo  macromolecules. It is one of the most important biomaterials in tissue 
engineering and shows very good physicochemical and biological properties. Various types of chitosan derivatives have been used in skin, bone cartilage, liver, nerve, and blood vessel. Chitosan has been extensively used in bone tissue engineering since it was shown to promote cell growth and mineral-rich matrix deposition by osteoblasts cells in culture. The biocompatibility of chi-tosan minimizes additional local inﬂ  ammation, and it can be molded into 
porous structures to allow osteoconduction  [4] . Chitosan/glycerophosphate has also been complemented with hydroxyethyl cellulose  [47]  for cartilage reconstruction or for improving the myocardial performance in infarcted heart. For bone regeneration, the chitosan/polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) blend was supplemented with  hydroxyapatite  ( HA ), which signiﬁ  cantly enhanced the gel 
strength. Hu et al. prepared a chitosan–HA multilayer nanocomposite with high strength and bending modulus, rendering the material suitable for pos-sible application for internal ﬁ  xation of long bone fractures  [48] . Park et al. 
 [49]  designed an injectable cell delivery chitosan–Pluronic hydrogel for articu-lar cartilage regeneration and bone regeneration  [50] . Chitosan ’ s functional groups allow it to interact with many materials, thus it can be used in conjunc-tion with materials such as hydroxyapatite or other calcium-based minerals to BIOMEDICAL APPLICATIONS OF CHITOSAN DERIVATIVES   45
form composites that have multiple applications in the orthopedic and peri-
odontal industries. These calcium–chitosan composites can be used as a coating in conjunction with joint prostheses. As the chitosan is degraded, new bone can be deposited adjacent to the prosthesis to stabilize the implant within the bone. An additional use for chitosan in orthopedics includes a direct replace-ment of bone or hard tissue. It is also a natural bioadhesive used to improve bone cement, which is used to secure implants as well as to ﬁ  ll bone cavities 
 [51] . Chitosan is also used as an adjuvant with bone cements to increase their injectability while keeping the chemicophysical properties suitable for surgical use with respect to setting time and mechanical properties  [4] . Chitosan is also used to modify the surface properties of prosthetic materials for the attach-ment of osteoblasts  [52] . Li et al.  [53]  reported the possibility of making ﬁ  lms 
of mPEG-g-chitosan by preparing a composite ﬁ  lm with suitable hollow and 
high capacity of water adsorption, which could have potential application in wound healing and tissue engineering. Chitosan was chosen as a scaffolding material in articular cartilage engineering due to its structural similarity to various glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) found in articular cartilage. An alginate–chitosan hybrid based on polymer ﬁ  bers showed increased tensile strength, 
implying a possible use in developing a 3D load-bearing scaffold for cartilage regeneration. The chitosan surface modiﬁ  ed with fructose induced the forma-
tion of cellular aggregates and enhanced liver-speciﬁ  c metabolic activities and 
cell density to a satisfactory level  [4] .  
  3.4.2     Wound Healing 
 In wound healing, an ideal dressing should protect the wound from bacterial 
infection and promote healing. It must be capable of absorbing the exuded liquid from the wounded area and should permit water evaporation at a certain rate and allow no microbial transport. Because of its hydrogel-forming proper-ties chitosan has been considered to be advantageous as a wound dressing because it produces less scarring. Its hemostatic properties also make chitosan a good candidate for wound dressing. Typically, there are four forms in which chitosan provides antimicrobial effects to wound dressing materials: ﬁ  ber, 
membrane, sponge, and hydrogel. Chitosan derivatives remarkably accelerate the healing of various types of wounds  [54] . The improvement in the healing process is caused by the hydrolytic activity of lysozyme and  N -acetyl- β -D-
glucosaminidase, which makes available  N -acetylglucosamine, a common 
amino sugar in human and animal bodies. The released hydrolysis products are incorporated into glycoproteins or enter in different metabolic pathways. It causes macrophage and ﬁ  broplast activation, enhances the hyaluronic acid 
synthesis, and its deposition in regenerated connective tissue, as well as inﬂ  u-
ences on collagen deposition into extracellular matrix during the rebuilding of the valid tissues. The effectiveness of these actions is increased, when low molecular weight chitosan, isolated from fungi, is applied. Hydrogels are applied to the burns and wound dressings in the form of ﬁ  lms, bandages, cotton-46  CHEMICAL MODIFICATION OF CHITOSAN AND ITS BIOMEDICAL APPLICATION
like materials, and nonwoven napkins. These dressings have good hygroscopic-
ity, show a high bacteriostatic effect, and are completely biodegradable in the human body. A signiﬁ  cant advantage also consists in the fact that repeated 
dressings are usually not needed  [55] . CMC prevent against pathogen infec-tions of the wound tissues of animal and human bodies  [4] . Chitosan-containing  polyurethane  ( PU )/ poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) , that is,  poly(NIPAAm) , thermosensitive membranes have very low cytotoxicity, support the growth of 3T3 ﬁ  broblasts, and are antibacterial. Therefore, these materials may be beneﬁ  -
cial for wound dressing  [3] . A chitosan hydrogel scaffold impregnated with  β -FGF-loaded microspheres were developed by Park et al.; it accelerates 
wound closure in the treatment of chronic ulcers  [56] . Chitosan was comple-mented with PVA for wound healing  [54] . The chitosan/PVA wound dressing was more swellable, ﬂ  exible, and elastic because of its cross-linking interaction 
with PVA. The hydrogel signiﬁ  cantly improved the wound healing effect com-
pared with a gauze control and the conventional product.  
  3.4.3     Drug Delivery 
 Chitosan has been effectively used in drug delivery as a hydrogel system, drug 
conjugate, biodegradable release system, and PEC for many components. Chitosan-based systems are used for the delivery of proteins/peptides, growth factors, anti-inﬂ  ammatory drugs, antibiotics, as well as, in gene therapy and 
bioimaging applications  [4] . N-succinyl chitosan/alginate hydrogelbeads are suitable polymeric carrier for controlled drug delivery in the intestinal tract.  Chitosan solution  ( C )   β -glycerophosphate  ( GP ) hydrogel is thermosensitive 
and has been used for sustained release of paclitaxel at tumor resection sites in order to prevent local tumor recurrence. The  in vitro   release proﬁ  les have 
shown controlled delivery over 1 month. (2-Hydroxypropyl-3-butoxy) propyl into succinyl–chitosan is an amphiphilic derivative of chitosan and may be used for controlled release of hydrophobic drugs. n-Lauryl-carboxymethyl chitosan is another amphiphilic polymer. It forms micelles that solubilize taxol, making it more effective therapeutically, and it is found to be safe in terms of membrane toxicity. This type of derivative is generally useful as a carrier for hydrophobic cancer drugs  [57] . N-carboxymethyl chitosan impreg-nated with ﬂ  urbiprofen and timolol maleate using the  supercritical solvent 
impregnation  ( SSI ) is used as ophthalmic drug release systems. These N-chitosan-derivative-based ophthalmic drug delivery systems can be easily and efﬁ  ciently used for patients. Recently, water-soluble N-(c-bromopropanoyl 
amino acid)–chitosan derivatives have been synthesized. Compared with the parent unmodiﬁ  ed chitosan, the four peptide–chitosans have higher thermo-
sensitivity, porosity, and water-holding capacity, and these effects increase with the hydrophilicity of the peptide ligands. These new peptide– chitosans possess physicochemical properties that make them useful for drug delivery systems.  Carboxymethyl chitosan  ( CM-Ch ) nanoparticles have been prepared by geli-CONCLUSION   47
ﬁ cation with calcium ions. These particles have been used as colloidal carriers 
for the delivery of  doxorubicin  ( DOX ), a commonly used cationic anticancer drug  [3] .  N-phthaloylchitosan  ( PLC ) is a typical aryl-modiﬁ  ed chitosan devel-
oped to improve the solubility of poorly soluble drugs such as camptothecin, retinoicacid, and prednisone acetate  [32] . A chitosan-based hydrogel with  131I-norcholesterol  ( 131I-NC ) was tested in a breast cancer xenograft mouse model by Azab et al. This hydrogel, cross-linked with glutaraldehyde, reduced the progression of the tumor and prevented 69% of tumor recurrence and metastatic spreading. Most important, there was little or no systemic distribu-tion of the radioisotope after hydrogel implantation  [58] . Insulin-loaded chi-tosan nanoparticles have a good loading capacity (65–80%) and a fast release of insulin  [59] . Chitosan hydrogels coupled with bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-7 have shown the ability to enhance lesion repair  [60] . 
 In addition to the above applications, chitosan has a wide range of applica-
tion in the medical ﬁ  eld such as ophthalmology, gene therapy, and bioimaging. 
Chitosan has replaced the synthetic polymer in ophthalmological application. Chitosan possesses all the characteristics required for an ideal contact lens: optical clarity, mechanical stability, sufﬁ  cient optical correction, gas permeabil-
ity partially toward oxygen, wettability, and immunological compatibility. The antimicrobial and wound healing properties of chitosan, along with excellent ﬁ lm-forming capability, make it suitable for development of ocular bandage 
lens. Chitosan membranes have been proposed as an artiﬁ  cial kidney mem-
brane because of their suitable permeability and high tensile strength. Chito-san and its derivatives have been used for gene transfection for N-alkylated chitosan. Quaternized chitosan can be used for the same purpose  [1] . A photo-cross-linkable chitosan to which both azide and lactosemoieties were intro-duced (Az-CH-LA) was prepared as a biological adhesive for soft tissues and its effectiveness was compared with that of ﬁ  brin glue. Because of their bio-
compatible properties such as good blood compatibility and cell growth efﬁ  -
ciency, grafted chitosan materials have potential use in cardiovascular applications  [61] .   
  3.5     CONCLUSION 
 Chitosan is a nature-based polymer, obtained by alkaline deacetylation of 
chitin, which presents excellent biological properties such as biodegradability and immunological, antibacterial, and wound healing activity. Recently, there has been a growing interest in the chemical modiﬁ  cation of chitosan in order 
to improve its solubility and widen its applications. The main chemical modi-ﬁ cations of chitosan that have been proposed in the literature are reviewed in 
this chapter. Moreover, these chemical modiﬁ  cations lead to a wide range of 
derivatives with a broad range of applications. Recent and relevant examples of the distinct applications, with particular emphasis on tissue engineering, 48  CHEMICAL MODIFICATION OF CHITOSAN AND ITS BIOMEDICAL APPLICATION
drug delivery, and wound healing, are presented. Chitosan ’ s versatility is a 
great challenge to the scientiﬁ  c community and to industry. The efﬁ  cient uti-
lization of marine biomass resource not only augurs in converting wastes from marine food-processing industries into useful products, but it has also become an environmental priority. It is anticipated that more speciﬁ  c applications of 
chitosan will be realized in the near future.  
  REFERENCES 
      [1]      Rinaudo ,  M.    (  2006 )  Chitin and chitosan: Properties and applications .  Progress in 
Polymer Science  ,  31 ,  603 .  
      [2]      Zeng ,  J.B.   ,    He ,  Y.S.   ,    Li ,  S.L.   , and    Wang ,  Y.Z.    (  2012 )  Chitin whiskers: An overv iew . 
 Biomacromolecules  ,  13 ,  1 – 11 .  
      [3]      Hengameh ,  H.   ,    Mehdi ,  B.    (  2009 )  Applications of biopolymers I: Chitosan .  Monatsh 
Chemistry  ,  140 ,  1403 – 1420 .  
      [4]      Dash ,  M.   ,    Chiellini ,  F.   ,    Ottenbrite ,  R.M.   , and    Chiellini ,  E.    (  2011 )  Chitosan—A 
versatile semi-synthetic polymer in biomedical applications .  Progress in Polymer 
Science  ,  36 ,  981 – 1014 .  
      [5]      Li ,  J.   ,    Ming ,  K.   ,    Xiao ,  J.C.   ,    Jing ,  J.L.   ,    Wei ,  F.L.   , and    Xi ,  G.C.    (   2011 )  A facile method 
for preparing biodegradable chitosan derivatives with low grafting degree of poly lactic acid .  International Journal of Biological Macromolecules  ,  49 ,  1016 – 1102 .  
      [6]      Mark ,  E.F.   ,    Anthony ,  A.   ,    Mark ,  E.   , and    Van ,  D.    (  2007 )  Smart biomaterials design  
for tissue engineering andregenerative medicine .  Biomaterials  ,  28 ,  5068 – 5073 .  
      [7]      Kurita ,  K.   ,    Ishiguro ,  M.   , and    Kitajima ,  T.    (  1988 )  Studies on chitin: Introduction of 
long alkylidene groups and their inﬂ  uence on the properties .  International Journal 
of Biological Macromolecules  ,  10 ,  124 – 125 .  
      [8]      Tharanathan ,  R.N.   ,    Farooqahmed ,  S.K.    (  2003 )  Chitin: the undisputed biomolecule 
of great potential .  Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition  ,  43 ,  61 – 87 .  
      [9]      Jalal ZohuriaanMehr ,  M.    (  2005 )  Advances in chitin and chitosan modiﬁ  cation 
through graft copolymerization: A comprehensive review .  Iranian Polymer Journal  , 
 14 ,  235 – 265 .  
   [10]      Manoj ,  P .   ,    Nayak ,  P .L.    (  2012 )  Graft copolymerization of methyl acrylate on chito-
san: Initiated by ceric ammonium nitrate as initiator-characterisation and antimi-crobial activity .  Advances in Applied Science Research  ,  3 ,  1646 – 1654 .  
   [11]      Kim ,  S.Y.   ,    Cho ,  S.M.   ,    Lee ,  Y.M.   , and    Kim ,  S.J.    (  2000 )  Thermo and pH responsive 
of graft copolymer and blend based on chitosan and N-isopropylacrylamide .  Journal of Applied Polymer Science  ,  78 ,  1381 – 1391 .  
   [12]      Sun ,  T.   ,    Xu ,  P .   ,    Liu ,  Q.   ,    Xue ,  J.   , and    Xie ,  W.    (  2003 )  Graft polymerizatio n of meth-
acrylic acid onto carboxymethyl chitosan .  European Polymers Journal  ,  39 , 
 189 – 192 .  
   [13]      Wang ,  Y.   ,    Xi ,  G.C.   ,    Hui ,  Y.L.   ,    Hui ,  Y.Z.   , and    Zhang ,  J.    (  2007 )  Effects of  molecular 
structural parameters of carboxymethyl chitosan on the growth of ﬁ  broblasts  in 
vitro   .   Journal of Applied Polymer Science  ,  50 ,  3136 – 3142 .  
   [14]      Pengfei ,  L.   ,    Maolin ,  Z.   , and    Jilan ,  W.    (  2001 )  Study of radiation induced grafting of 
styrene onto chitin and chitosan .  Radiation Physics and Chemistry  ,  61 ,  149 – 153 .  REFERENCES   49
   [15]      Singh ,  D.K.   ,    Roy ,  A.R.    (  1997 )  Graft copolymerization of 2-hydroxyethylmethacrylate 
onto chitosan ﬁ  lms and their blood compatibility .  Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science  ,  66 ,  869 – 877 .  
   [16]      Yu ,  L.L.   ,    He ,  Y.   ,    Bin ,  L.   , and    Yue ,  F.    (  2003 )  Study of radiation induced graft co po-
lymerization of butyl acrylate onto chitosan in acetic acid aqueous solution .  Journal of Applied Polymer Science  ,  90 ,  2855 – 2860 .  
   [17]      Singh ,  V .   ,    Tripathi ,  D.N.   ,    Tiwari ,  A.   , and    Sanghi ,  R.    (  2005 )  Studies on K2S2O8/
ascorbic acid initiated synthesis of Ipomoeadasysperma seed gum-g-poly (acrylo-nitrile): A potential industrial gum .  Journal of Applied Polymer Science  ,  95 , 
 820 – 825 .  
   [18]      Kaplan ,  D.L.   ,    Dordick ,  J.S.   ,    Gross ,  R.A.   , and    Swift ,  G.    (  1998 )  Enzymes in polymer  
science: An introduction .  Proceedings of ACS Symposium Series  ,  684 ,  2 – 16 .  
   [19]      Kumar ,  G.   ,    Smith ,  P .J.   , and    Payne ,  G.F.    (  1999 )  Enzymatic modiﬁ  cation of the 
synthetic polymer polyhydroxystyrene .  Biotechnology and Bioengineering  ,  63 , 
 154 – 165 .  
   [20]      Yoshikawa ,  S.   ,    Takayama ,  T.   , and    Tsubokawa ,  N.    (  1998 )  Graft copolymerization of 
hydroxyethyl methacrylate onto chitosan .  Journal of Applied Polymer Science  ,  68 , 
 1883 – 1889 .  
   [21]      Hamodrakas ,  S.J.   ,    Jones ,  C. W.   , and    Kafatos ,  F.C.    (  1982 )  Secondary structure predic-
tions for silkmoth chorion proteins .  Biochimica et Biophysica Acta  ,  700 ,  42 – 51 .  
   [22]      Sashiwa ,  H.   ,    Aiba ,  S.    (  2004 )  Chemically modiﬁ  ed chitin and chitosan as biomateri-
als .  Progress in Polymer Science  ,  29 ,  887 – 908 .  
   [23]      Nishi ,  N.   ,    Ebina ,  A.   ,    Nishimura ,  S.   ,    Tsutsumi ,  O.   ,    Hasegawa ,  A.   , and    Tokur a  ,   S .     
(  1986 )  Macrophage attraction with multiporous beads prepared from practically deacetylated chitin .  International Journal of Biological Macromolecules  ,  20 , 
 8311 – 8317 .  
   [24]      Chen ,  S.   ,    Wang ,  Y.    (  2001 )  Study of  α -cyclodextrin grafting with chitosan and slow 
release of its inclusion complex with radioactive iodine .  Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science  ,  82 ,  2414 – 2421 .  
   [25]      Martlet ,  B.   ,    Devassin ,  M.   ,    Crini ,  G.   ,    Weltrowski ,  M.   ,    Bourdonneau ,  M.   , and    Morcel-
let ,  M.    (  2001 )  Preparation and sorption properties of  α -cyclodextrin linked chito-
san derivatives .  Journal of Polymer Science  ,  39 ,  169 – 176 .  
   [26]      Aoki ,  N.   ,    Nishikawa ,  M.   , and    Hattori ,  K.    (  2003 )  Synthesis of chitosan derivatives 
bearing cyclodextrin and adsorption of p-nonylphenyl and bisphenol .  Carbohy-
drate Polymer  ,  52 ,  219 – 223 .  
   [27]      Sreenivasan ,  K.    (  1998 )  Synthesis and preliminary studies on a  β -cyclodextrin-
coupled chitosan as a novel adsorbent matrix .  Journal of Applied Polymer Science
 , 
 69 ,  1051 – 1055 .  
   [28]      Wan ,  L.   ,    Wang ,  Y.   , and    Qian ,  S.    (  2002 )  Study on the adsorption property of novel 
crown ether cross linked chitosan for metal ions .  Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science  ,  84 ,  29 – 34 .  
   [29]      Jayakumar ,  R.   ,    Reis ,  R.L.   , and    Mano ,  J.F.    (  2007 )  Synthesis and characterization of 
pH sensitive thiol containing chitosan beads for controlled drug delivery applica-tions .  Drug Delivery  ,  14 ,  9 – 17 .  
   [30]      Hall ,  L.D.   ,    Yalpani ,  M.D.    (  1980 )  Formation of branched-chain, soluble polysac-
charides from chitosan .  Journal of the Chemical Society, Chemical Communica-
tions  ,  38 ,  1153 – 1154 .  50  CHEMICAL MODIFICATION OF CHITOSAN AND ITS BIOMEDICAL APPLICATION
   [31]      Rudall ,  K.M.    (  1969 )  Chitin and its association with other molecules .  Journal of 
Polymer Science  ,  28 ,  83 – 102 .  
   [32]      Ye ,  W.   ,    Xi Guang ,  C.   ,    Ying Hui ,  L.   ,    Hui Yun ,  Z.   , and    Jing ,  Z.    (  2007 )  Effe cts of 
molecular structural parameters of carboxymethyl chitosan on the growth of ﬁ broblasts  in vitro   .   Journal of Applied Polymer Science  ,  106 ,  3136 – 3142 .  
   [33]      Desbrieres ,  J.   ,    Rinaudo ,  M.   ,    Babak ,  V .   , and    Vikhoreva ,  V .    (  1997 )  Surface activity  
of water soluble amphiphilic chitin derivatives .  Polymer Bulletin  ,  39 ,  209 – 215 .  
   [34]      Raphael ,  R.   ,    Heloıse ,  R.   ,    Annedes ,  R.   ,    Nicolas ,  D.   ,    Christine ,  J.   , and    Ver onique ,  P .    
(  2011 )  Chitosan and chitosan derivatives in drug delivery and tissue engineering .  Advances in Polymer Science  ,  244 ,  19 – 44 .  
   [35]      Verheul ,  R.J.   ,    Amidi ,  M.    (  2008 )  Synthesis, characterization and  in vitro   biological-
properties of O-methyl free N, N, N-trimethylated chitosan .  Biomaterials  ,  29 , 
 3642 – 3649 .  
   [36]      Sieval ,  A.B.   ,    Thanou ,  M.    (  1998 )  Preparation and NMR characterization of highly 
substituted N-trimethyl chitosan chloride .  Carbohydrate Polymer  ,  36 ,  157 – 165 .  
   [37]      Mourya ,  V .K.   ,    Inamdar ,  N.N.    (  2008 )  Chitosan-modiﬁ  cations and applications: 
Opportunities .  Reactive and Functional Polymes  ,  68 ,  1013 – 1051 .  
   [38]      Verheul ,  R.J. ,  vander       Wal ,  S.    (  2010 )  Tailorable thiolated trimethyl chitosans for 
covalently stabilized nanoparticles .  Biomacromolecules  ,  11 ,  1965 – 1971 .  
   [39]      Varkouhi ,  A.K.   ,    Verheul ,  R.J.    (  2010 )  Gene silencing activity of siRNA polyplexes 
based on thiolated N, N, N-trimethylated chitosan .  Bioconjugate Chemistry  ,  21 , 
 2339 – 2346 .  
   [40]      Toh ,  E.K.W.   ,    Chen ,  H.Y.    (  2011 )  Succinated chitosan as a gene carrier for improved 
chitosan solubility and gene transfection .  Nanomedicine  ,  7 ,  174 – 183 .  
   [41]      Qu ,  X.   ,    Wirsen ,  A.   , and    Albertsson ,  A.C.    (  2000 )  Synthesis, characterization and 
swelling of a chemically cross-linked PVA hydrogel .  Polymer  ,  41 ,  4589 .  
   [42]      Bhattarai ,  N.   ,    Ramay ,  H.R.    (  2005 )  PEG-grafted chitosan as an injectable thermo-
sensitive hydrogel for sustained protein release .  International Journal of Nano-
medicine  ,  103 ,  609 – 624 .  
   [43]      Kim ,  M.S.   ,    Choi ,  Y.J.    (  2007 )  Synthesis and characterization of  in situ   chitosan-
based hydrogel via grafting of carboxyethyl acrylate .  Journal of Biomedical Mate-
rials Research. Part A  ,  83 ,  674 – 682 .  
   [44]      Guo ,  B.L.   ,    Gao ,  Q.Y.    (  2007 )  Preparation and properties of a pH/temperature-
responsive carboxymethyl chitosan/poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)semi-IPN hydro-gel for oral delivery of drugs .  Carbohydrate  ,  342 ,  2416 .  
   [45]      Wang ,  M.   ,    Fang ,  Y.   , and    Hu ,  D.    (  2001 )  Preparation and properties of chitosan-poly 
( N -isopropylacrylamide) full-IPN hydrogels .  Reactive and Functional Polymers  , 
 48 ,  215 .  
   [46]      Li ,  N.   ,    Bai ,  R.    (  2005 )  Copper adsorption on chitosan–cellulose hydrogel beads: 
Behaviors and mechanisms .  Separation and Puriﬁ  cation Technology  ,  42 ,  237 .  
   [47]      Yan ,  J.H.   ,    Yang ,  L.    (  2010 )  Biocompatibility evaluation of chitosan-based injectable 
hydrogels for the culturing mice mesenchymal stem cells  in vitro   .   Journal of Bio-
materials Applications  ,  24 ,  625 – 637 .  
   [48]      Hu ,  Q.   ,    Li ,  B.   ,    Wang ,  M.   , and    Shen ,  J.    (  2004 )  Preparation and characterization of  
biodegradable chitosan/hydroxyapatite nanocomposite rods via  in situ   hybridiza-REFERENCES   51
tion: A potential material as internal ﬁ  xation of bone fracture .  Biomaterials  ,  25 , 
 779 – 785 .  
   [49]      Park ,  K.M.   ,    Lee ,  S.Y.    (  2009 )  Thermosensitive chitosan-pluronic hydrogel as an 
injectable cell delivery carrier for cartilage regeneration .  Acta Biomaterialia  ,  5 , 
 1956 – 1965 .  
   [50]      Tang ,  Y.   ,    Du ,  Y.    (  2009 )  A thermosensitive chitosan/poly(vinyl alcohol) hydrogel 
containing hydroxyapatite for protein delivery .  Journal of Biomedical Materials 
Research. Part A  ,  91 ,  953 – 963 .  
   [51]      Duck ,  W.L.   ,    Hosun ,  L.    (  2009 )  Advances in chitosan material and its hybrid deriva-
tives: A review .  The Open Biomaterials Journal  ,  1 ,  10 – 20 .  
   [52]      Lee ,  B.H.   ,    Lee ,  Y.M.   ,    Sohn ,  Y.S.   , and    Song ,  S.C.    (  2002 )  A thermosensitivepoly(org
anophosphazene) gel .  Macromolecules  ,  35 ,  3876 – 9229 .  
   [53]      Li ,  X.   ,    Kong ,  X.   ,    Shi ,  S.   ,    Gu ,  Y.   ,    Yang ,  L.   ,    Guo ,  G.   ,    Luo ,  F.   ,    Zhao ,  X.   ,    Wei ,  Y.Q.   , and 
   Qian ,  Z.Y.    (  2009 )  Biodegradable MPEG-g-chitosan and methoxypoly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly([epsilon]-caprolactone) composite ﬁ  lms: Part 1. Preparation and 
characterization .  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  79 ,  429 – 436 .  
   [54]      Sung ,  J.H.   ,    Hwang ,  M.R.    (  2010 )  Gel characterisation and  in vivo   evaluation of 
minocycline loaded wound dressing with enhanced wound healing using polyvinyl alcohol and chitosan .  International Journal of Pharmaceutics  ,  392 ,  232 – 240 .  
   [55]      Jozef ,  S.   ,    Nadia ,  A.    (  2003 )  Production, properties, and some new applications of 
chitin and its derivatives .  Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition  ,  43 , 
 145 – 171 .  
   [56]      Park ,  C.J.   ,    Clark ,  S.G.   ,    Lichtensteiger ,  C.A.   ,    Jamison ,  R.D.   , and    Johnson ,  A.J.    (  2009 ) 
 Accelerated wound closure of pressure ulcers in aged mice by chitosan scaffolds with and without  β FGF .  Acta Biomaterialia  ,  5 ,  1926 – 1936 .  
   [57]      Liu ,  W.   ,    Sun ,  S.J.   ,    Zhang ,  X.   , and    DeYao ,  K.    (  2003 )  Self-aggregation behaviour of  
alkylated chitosan and its effect on the release of a hydrophobic drug .  Journal of 
Biomaterials Science, Polymer Edition  ,  14 ,  851 – 859 .  
   [58]      Azab ,  A.K.   ,    Kleinstern ,  J.   ,    Doviner ,  V .   ,    Orkin ,  B.   ,    Srebnik ,  M.   ,    Nissan ,  A.   , and 
   Rubinstein ,  A.    (  2007 )  Prevention of tumor recurrence and distant metastasis for-mation in a breast cancer mouse model by biodegradable implant of 131I norcho-lesterol .  Journal of Controlled Release  ,  123 ,  116 – 122 .  
   [59]      Grenha ,  A.   ,    Seijo ,  B.   , and    Remunan ,  L.C.    (  2005 )  Microencapsulated chitosan 
nanoparticles for lung protein delivery .  European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sci-
ences  ,  25 ,  427 – 437 .  
   [60]      Mattioli ,  B.M.   ,    Gigante ,  A.   ,    Muzzarelli ,  R.A.   ,    Politano ,  R.   ,    De Benedittis ,  A.   ,    Spec-
chia ,  N.   ,    Buffa ,  A.   ,    Biagini ,  G.   , and    Greco ,  F.    (  1999 )  N,N-dicarboxymethyl chitosan as delivery agent for bone morphogenetic protein in the repair of articular carti-lage .  Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing  ,  3 ,  7130 – 7134 .  
   [61]      Alves ,  N.M.   ,    Mano ,  J.F.    (  2008 )  Chitosan derivatives obtained by chemical modiﬁ  ca-
tions for biomedical and environmental applications .  International Journal of Bio-
logical Macromolecules  ,  43 ,  401 – 414 .   
 53Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 4
Biomimetic Lessons for Processing 
Chitin-Based Composites
OTTO C. WILSON, JR.  and TIFFANY OMOKANWAYE
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Nanocomposites are the most exciting class of materials in nature because 
atomic and molecular interactions at interfaces are utilized to achieve extraor -
dinary properties [1, 2]. A unique level of promise is offered by naturally 
derived nanocomposites for the synthesis of advanced materials. This arises 
because there are a number of novel strategies that are employed in the syn -
thesis of natural nanocomposites that could greatly enhance our ability to 
fabricate advanced nanocomposites with unique microstructures that exhibit 
exceptional properties. Bone tissue and arthropod integument are two of the 
most widely known and exciting natural nanocomposites from which we can 
learn many lessons. Bone is a nanocomposite that consists of a collagen fiber 
and extracellular matrix network with hydroxyapatite as the reinforcing phase, 
while arthropod integument is a chitin–protein nanocomposite matrix with 
calcium carbonate as the reinforcing phase. These two natural hard tissue 
nanocomposites have been the subject of a number of fascinating studies that 
have been directed at elucidating the intricate structures and mechanisms that 
account for their unique structural and biological properties [3–13].
Advances in nanocomposite processing technologies rely on discerning the 
fundamental relationships among nanoscale dimensions, nanoscale microar -
chitecture, and physical properties. There are a great number of challenges in 
processing optimized nanocomposites. Bioinspired insights can provide great 
strategies for addressing and improving nanocomposite processing concerns 
such as particle size and phase distribution, interfacial bonding, and other 54  BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN-BASEd COMPOSITES
relevant parameters that can be used to tailor properties. Gaining more pro -
cessing capabilities to tailor microstructures at the nanoscale level will enable 
the synthesis of a wider range of multifunctional nanocomposites with 
enhanced properties [14–20]. Current advances in nanotechnology have made 
it possible to understand, create, characterize, and use material structures, 
devices, and systems with new properties derived from their nanostructure [21, 
22]. For example, recent achievements in electrospinning have enabled the 
production of ultrafine, solid, and continuous polymer fibers with diameters 
as small as a few nanometers, and good structural integrity [23]. Compared 
with natural polymers, synthetic polymer nanofibers pose more challenges 
with regard to processibility, biocompatibility, and biodegradability. Hence, 
there is increased activity in producing nanocomposites from natural poly -
mers, namely chitin and cellulose. These abundant, natural, polysaccharide 
polymers serve as promising candidates for the preparation of nanocomposites 
by introducing additional functionalities such as biodegradability, biocompat -
ibility, and renewability [24].
The aim of this chapter is to provide an overview of chitin nanocomposites. 
The basics of chitin physicochemical characteristics will be presented first as 
an introduction to the unique characteristics of chitin that make it desirable 
for nanocomposite processing. Next, the focus will shift to natural chitin-based 
bionanocomposites such as crab shell integument, nacre, and jumbo squid 
beaks to gain biomimetic insights that can be useful in developing advanced 
processing strategies for chitin nanocomposite synthesis. Topics covered will 
include chitin biosynthesis, chitin–protein nanocomposites, biomineralization, 
liquid crystal (LC) order parameters, and multilevel hierarchical structure 
development. The final section will focus on practical applications of bioinspi -
ration that are currently being used for synthesizing chitin nanocomposites. 
Various types of chitin nanocomposites will be considered, including chitin 
matrix nanocomposites, chitin dispersed as a reinforcing phase (whiskers, 
fibers, particulates), chitin chitosan copolymer-based nanocomposites, and 
chitosan-based composites. Chitosan nanocomposites are included due to the 
interrelationship between chitin and its deacetylated relative chitosan [25]. 
Chitin and chitosan can be interchanged by varying the degree of acetylation, 
and this makes some aspects of processing easier because of the greater ease 
in solubilizing chitosan. Various types of chitin nanocomposites will be covered, 
including chitin/organic phase, chitin/ceramic (bomineralized Ca phases), and 
chitin/metal (Ag, Au, etc.) based nanocomposites. A number of techniques 
have been reported that use chitosan as a reducing agent in synthesizing pre -
cious metal nanoparticles or utilize chitosan as a matrix to nucleate silver 
nanoparticles within chitosan films [26–29].
4.2 PHYSICOCHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF CHITIN
Chitin possesses a number of physical and chemical properties that make it a 
very attractive component for nanocomposite processing. Chitin is highly crys -PhYSICOChEMICAL PROPERTIES OF ChITIN   55
talline, biodegradable, and biocompatible; it plays a role in mechanical support, 
is highly insoluble, birefringent, and possesses antimicrobial characteristics as 
diagrammed in Figure 4.1 [30, 31]. Chitin is very abundant in nature and its 
simple yet robust chemistry lends itself to a variety of modifications that 
enhance the processing and the ultimate properties that can be exhibited by 
nanocomposites. One of chitin’s most appealing characteristics relates to its 
ability to form multilevel hierarchical structural units that are reminiscent of 
molecular-level building blocks. This feature adds various levels of scalability 
that can be integrated into the chitin nanocomposite design. Chitin can serve 
as a discrete reinforcing phase, or as a “continuous” matrix phase for dispers -
ing secondary phase(s). Chitin may also act as a true matrix (in partnership 
with associated proteins) by directing the nucleation and growth of secondary 
phases that are polymeric, ceramic, or metallic in nature [5, 9, 11, 13, 26–29].
Chitin was first isolated from mushrooms in 1811 by the French scientist 
Henri Braconnot [32]. The same compound was found in the cuticles of insects 
in 1823 by Odier. The name chitin derives from the ancient Greek word 
“chiton,” which means a coat of mail or body armor [33, 34]. Chitin is the 
second most abundant natural polymer on earth while cellulose is the most 
abundant. Chitin is found in arthropod exoskeleton (crustacean and insect) 
and in the cell wall of fungi [30]. Chitin also plays an important role in the 
hierarchical control of biomineralization processes used by mollusks and crus -
taceans [4, 9, 11, 13].
Chitin is a linear polymer consisting of β-1,4-linked N-acetylglucosamine 
and has high crystallinity and poor reactivity because of highly ordered hydro -
gen bonding between chains. This hydrogen bonding makes chitin a rigid 
material exhibiting poor solubility, swelling behavior, and processing charac -
teristics. The basic units are joined together by glycosidic bonds. The glycosidic 
link joins the number 1 carbon of an N-acetylglucosamine to the number four 
carbon of the adjacent N-acetylglucosamine. One of the structural features 
distinguishing polysaccharides from proteins is the great variation possible in Figure 4.1  Chitin fiber schematic diagram depicting the hierarchical structure and 
properties of chitin fibers (modified from Jones and Bartlett, Nutrition resources: 
chemistry review: carbohydrates; http://www.nutrition.jbpub.com/resources/chemistry  
review9.cfm).Rene wableBiocompatib le
Biodegradab le
Highl y insoluble Nont oxic
CrystallineLow immunogenici tyBirefringent
Multifunctional
Liquid cr ystal
Antibact erial56  BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN-BASEd COMPOSITES
the configuration of the glycosidic bond between adjacent sugar residues. β-1-
4-linked residues tend to form extended ribbon-like structures and a range of 
unique molecular shapes may be generated. A unique facet of polysaccharide 
structure lies in the uniform and repeating shapes and surfaces, which are 
synthesized via cellular processes [35].
4.2.1 Chitin Hierarchical Structure
Chitin has been known to form a variety of microfibrillar arrangements in 
living organisms, and the chitin characteristics vary based on the origin and 
method of biosynthesis [36]. These fibrils are usually embedded in a protein 
matrix and have diameters that are typically reported to range from 2.5 to 
2.8 nm. However, measurements as low as 2 nm have been reported for arthro -
pod cuticles [37]. Crustacean cuticles possess chitin microfibrils with some of 
the largest dimensions in the range of 25 nm [38]. Even larger dimensions of 
50 nm in width have been reported for chitin crystallites obtained from vesti -
mentiferan tubes [39]. Arthropod exoskeletons are complex, multifunctional 
nanophase composites that are hierarchically structured. The linear chitin 
chains align antiparallel and form α-chitin crystals at the molecular level. 
Several α-chitin crystals with associated proteins form nanofibrils about 
2–5 nm in diameter and 300 nm in length. A bundle of chitin–protein nanofi -
brils then form chitin–protein fibers of about 50–100 nm in diameter. These 
chitin–protein fibers align together, forming planar layers that stack up heli -
coidally. Chitin fibers align in a parallel fashion within individual layers. Each 
successive underlying layer has a 3–5 degree shift in the angle of the parallel 
in plane chitin–protein fibers. This repetitive pattern is the origin of the heli -
coid stacking sequence, which is called the twisted plywood or Bouligand 
structure [40]. The basic hierarchical sequence for chitin fabrication proceeds 
along the pathway from a molecular unit to a chain of molecules to microfibril 
to fibril aggregates to fibrous bundle to twisted plywood structure.
4.2.2 Chitin Crystallinity
Three polymorphic forms of chitin ( α-, β-, and γ-chitins) have been distin -
guished based on differences in packing and the polarities of adjacent chains 
in successive sheets, which influence crystal structure as shown in Figure 4.2. 
α-Chitin is the most abundant form found in nature and is arranged in an 
antiparallel configuration. β-Chitin is organized in a parallel configuration. The 
antiparallel configuration of α-chitin gives a highly ordered crystalline struc -
ture with strong hydrogen bonding between chitin chains, which leads to the 
rigid and insoluble properties [9]. α-Chitin types vary in terms of the length 
of their N-acetylglucosamine chains, degree of crystallinity, and presence and 
identity of integrated proteins. As a consequence, the consistency of the chitin -
ous layers in organisms like arthropods differs considerably [30]. A chitinous 
exoskeleton is diagnostic of the crustaceans. It is secreted by a single layer of PhYSICOChEMICAL PROPERTIES OF ChITIN   57
cells within the epidermis and gains its stiffness and structural complexity by 
being folded and curved in many complex ways [41, 42].
4.2.3 Liquid Crystal Behavior of Chitin
Chitin is a polymeric LC consisting of a linear chain of N-acetyl-glucosamine 
repeating units. Chemical entities (-H, -OH, and -CH 2OH) are attached to the 
central part of the monomer and these functional groups participate in reac -
tions. The linear chain adopts a helical structure and gains structural rigidity 
and the capacity to produce LC phases. The functional groups on the polysac -
charide backbone play vital roles in the distinctive qualities that are exhibited 
by chitin-based nanocomposites and give rise to its wide range of applications 
[43].
The inherent symmetry and order exhibited by biological materials such as 
chitin, collagen, cellulose, and other fibrous composites suggests the strong 
presence of liquid crystalline ordering phenomena [5, 40, 42, 44]. After study -
ing fibrous structures such as the cuticles of crabs, Bouligand [40] found that 
several fibrous biological materials exhibited similar characteristic features 
such as (1) fibrils arranged in highly organized geometric patterns (twisted 
plywood model), (2) solids with elongated molecules showing strong anisotro -
pic behaviors, (3) fluid phases between well-defined temperatures, and (4) the 
ability to form LC phases in solutions. These factors led Bouligand to postulate 
that the secretions of fibrous structures pass through a brief transient liquid 
phase. This provides an intriguing mechanism for the morphogenesis of certain 
fibrous nanocomposite materials based on unique LC to solid phase transfor -
mations. Neville also suggested that biological fibrous composites may develop 
via self-assembly using a liquid crystalline intermediate phase [44, 45]. This 
idea was further corroborated by the work of Giraud-Guille [46–48]. While 
there are some similarities, notable differences exist between biological fibrous 
composites and LCs. The fibrous component consists of small parallel bundles 
of molecular entities, while LCs consist of individual molecular chains. Another Figure 4.2  Diagram showing the direction of the polymer chains in the three crystal -
lographic forms of chitin: (a) α-chitin, (b) β-chitin, (c) γ-chitin (modified from Wain -
wright et al., Mechanical Design in Organisms , Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1982).

α-chitin β-chitin γ-chitin(a) (b) (c)58  BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN-BASEd COMPOSITES
difference is that biological composites that have reached structural maturity 
exist in a solid state, while LCs exist in a state with properties intermediate 
between those of a solid and liquid.
4.2.4 Chitin and Proteins
The intimate association between chitin and proteins has been the subject of 
a number of comprehensive studies that focus on ascertaining the nature of 
the molecular interactions [37, 49–57]. Much of the knowledge of the proper -
ties and structure of chitin has been derived from studies on “purified” chitin. 
Removal of the associated protein, for example, with alkali, increases the 
degree of orientation of the chitin chains, as shown by X-ray diffraction pat -
terns, and the attraction between them is such that they aggregate to give a 
continuous sheet of chitin. Consequently, the results of studies on “purified” 
chitins may have to be modified when considering chitin as it actually occurs 
in cuticles in close association with proteins and other components [49].
Chitin always occurs associated with proteins [50] and no sample of purified 
chitin has been found to be free of amino acids [49]. A few models have been 
developed that attempt to describe the chitin–protein complex. Blackwell and 
Wieh [51] have developed a model for the chitin–protein complex based on 
observations of the ovipositors of the ichneumon flies Megarhyssa lunator  and 
Megarhyssa atrata . This widely adopted model enlists a sheath of protein sub -
units that are arranged in a helical pattern with six protein subunits per turn 
around the chitin core. Not all cuticular proteins are directly bound to chitin. 
Some proteins help form the protein matrix in which the chitin–protein 
complex is embedded. The chitin–protein complexes are ordered structures 
[49, 51]. More elaborate modeling and experimental work is needed to uncover 
the most accurate description of the true nature of the chitin–protein complex 
interactions within cuticular systems of arthropods, mollusks, and other species. 
It is also evident from the overall data that each species has its own charac -
teristic protein binding matrix. Apparently there is no simple relation between 
chitin content and the amount of chemically bound protein in the chitin–
protein complex [58].
4.3 BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FROM NATURAL CHITIN 
NANOCOMPOSITES
There are many lessons to learn from the various ways in which living organisms 
synthesize chitin and use it to form elaborate chitin-based nanostructures [59]. 
In this section, a simplified description of how chitin is synthesized is presented 
along with an introduction to a few of the many chitin-based nanocomposites 
in nature including nacre, crab shell, and jumbo squid beak. The biosynthesis 
and degradation of chitin is a stepwise procedure governed by enzymatic activ -
ity. The established pathways include the synthesis of precursor and catalytic BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FROM NATuRAL ChITIN NANOCOMPOSITES   59
units, biotransformations (including phosphorylation, amination, and acetyla -
tion reactions), polymerization reactions, hydrolysis, and fibrilogenesis. Chitin 
has components formed in the intracellular and in the extracellular space during 
the synthesis process. Its synthesis pathway involves changes in the cytoplasmic 
matrix, the rough endoplasmic reticulum, processing in the Golgi apparatus, 
and transport through vesicles culminating in exocytosis into an assembly zone. 
In the assembly zone, chitin molecules form fibrous, hierarchical structures. 
These extracellular fibrous molecules are synthesized in a precursor form 
(N-acetylglucosamine-6-phosphate and uridine diphosphate (UDP)-N-acetyl-
glucosamine). Furthermore, the resulting chitin tissue formation process follows 
a common developmental course in which the major organic constituent chitin 
is synthesized, extruded from the cell, and then self-assembled in the extracel -
lular space before mineralization begins. For this reason, cuticles are good 
examples of “organic matrix-mediated” mineralization processes in compari -
son to mineralized collagen composites [40, 42, 48, 60].
4.3.1 Chitin Synthesis in Mollusk and Crustacean Hard Tissue
Nacre is a chitin-based bionanocomposite that is made up of mineral (arago -
nite) and a polysaccharide–protein complex organic phase composed of chitin 
and glycoprotein-based components (glycoproteins, silk fibroin, and other pro -
teins) that are intimately mixed. Cartwright and Checa [61] highlighted the 
dynamics of nacre self-assembly in terms of a genetically controlled process. 
This process proceeds down a pathway with steps including cellular synthesis 
of organic building blocks (chitin protein nanocomposite) and multilevel self-
assembly and biomineralization processes. The key steps in nacre biosynthesis 
involve the cellular template-directed synthesis of the chitin building blocks, 
the release of the units to the extrapallial space, and the self-assembly of the 
building blocks into a successively more complex series of structures that 
contribute to the hierarchical characteristics of chitin-based structures [62, 63].
Chitin synthesis is directly governed by an enzyme called chitin synthase. A 
cascade of cytoplasmic biotransformations of sugar precursors takes place to 
provide a source of substrate molecules for the functional catalytic units. Chitin 
synthesis in the epithelial cell begins with the glycosylation of a protein acceptor 
to form a primer molecule for chitin synthase or chitin–UDP–acetylglucosami -
nyltransferase [64]. Catalytic units synthesized at the endoplasmic reticulum 
compartment are packaged in clusters that involve the Golgi apparatus. The 
assembled multiunits are translocated and integrated into the plasma mem -
brane at the apical compartments of epidermal cells. Trehalose, glucose, or the 
polysaccharide glycogen, which circulates in the hemolymph, could be the start -
ing points for the chain of bioconversions that include major steps such as 
phosphorylation, amination, and acetylation. This metabolic pathway culmi -
nates in the formation of UDP–GlcNAc, the ultimate substrate of chitin syn -
thase. Transformation of fructose-6-phosphate to glucosamine-6-phosphate by 
glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate aminotransferase can be considered as the 60  BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN-BASEd COMPOSITES
first turning point on the pathway to chitin synthesis. Next, there is molecular 
organization of the chitin synthase units in the cell membrane, and a coordi -
nated process that involves the translocation of chitin polymers across this 
barrier into the extracellular space where chemical modification of the noncrys -
tallized chitin occurs [65]. The synthesis of chitin occurs either in the intracel -
lular region or at the interphase with the extracellular medium.
The modified chitin associates with other molecules like protein. The last 
step in chitin biotransformation involves the formation of microfibrils at the 
cell surface, following the coagulation of adjacent developing chitin chains  
via extensive hydrogen bonding. Chitin polymerization and crystallization  
are coupled as consecutive processes. The resulting chitin–protein structure 
matures through formation of secondary covalent bonds among its compo -
nents, creating chitin fibers [30].
The biosynthesis of the crustacean cuticle or exoskeleton involves the syn -
thesis and assembly of component lipids, carbohydrates, and proteins by the 
epithelial cell layer, which lies just underneath the cuticle. Studies carried out 
by Horst [53] support the conclusion that crustacean chitin is secreted as a 
glycoprotein complex and that concurrent protein synthesis is required for 
chitin deposition to continue. LC mobility may account for changes in orienta -
tion of the chitin microfibrils and, thus, for the helicoid appearance. The cyclic 
phenomenon of molting in crustaceans involves a concerted and coordinated 
flow of hormonally controlled biochemical events governed by enzymatic 
activity. One such major event is the degradation of the endocuticular chitin, 
followed by the subsequent recycling of the amino sugar monomers into newly 
formed polymer units [65]. In biologically processed chitin, glycoprotein 
surface modification results in amphiphilic character, which influences LC 
ordering that occurs in natural chitin nanocomposites [62].
4.3.2 Jumbo Squid Beak
The jumbo squid ( Dosidicus gigas ) beak is one of the hardest known organic 
composites with hardness values around 1 GPa. The hardness and modulus 
decrease as you move away from the beak tip toward the soft tissue adjacent 
to the beak in a functionally graded fashion. The beak is a unique material 
because its design integrates local macromolecular compositional variation 
with large mechanical property gradients to withstand the stresses that are 
generated at the tip during predation. These stresses are gracefully translated 
to the underlying compliant tissue of the muscular buccal mass, which controls 
the movement of the two opposing parts of the squid beak. The structure of 
this chitin–protein nanocomposite consists of lamellar layers of chitin fibers, 
which are oriented perpendicular to the external beak surface and in the direc -
tion of the beak tip. There are a number of mechanisms that have been attrib -
uted to the extraordinary mechanical properties of jumbo squid beak including 
control of hydration, cross-link chemistry and density via catechol chemistry, 
and functional grading [66–69]. This microstructure arrangement makes the BIOINSPIREd LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN NANOCOMPOSITES   61
squid beak exceptionally hard and tough, with the fracture toughness attrib -
uted to laminated structure with weak interfaces. This feature is similar to the 
laminated microstructure in nacre, except that mineral bridges are not present. 
The fracture toughness values for dry and wet jumbo squid beak are 3.2 +/− 1.5 
and 3.5 +/− 1.1 MPa m0.5, respectively. Materials usually exhibit a tradeoff 
between hardness and toughness due to contrasting microstructural features. 
However, the hardness of the jumbo squid beak is well above the hardest 
engineering polymers while its fracture toughness is comparable to the tough -
est engineering polymers. Antler is the only known organic biological material 
that exhibits higher toughness values [70].
4.4 BIOINSPIRED LESSONS FOR PROCESSING CHITIN 
NANOCOMPOSITES
The examples of naturally derived chitin nanocomposites illustrate in an intro -
ductory fashion the great magnitude of design ideas that are available for 
adaptation to processing chitin nanocomposites. The use of nanoscale 
(<100 nm) dimensions offers the opportunity to optimize and create novel 
material properties [71]. With the common thread of nanoscale dimensionality, 
nature offers an excellent guide and resource for the design and construction 
of synthetic nanocomposites with markedly better properties. Biomimetics 
uses the lessons learned from biology to form the basis for novel materials. It 
involves investigation of both structure and physical functions of biological 
composites of interest with the goal of designing and synthesizing new and 
improved materials [72]. Unquestionably, natural materials such as chitin have 
exquisite properties that cannot be found in synthetic materials. Biological 
systems produce these extraordinary materials around room temperature in 
aqueous environments. The benefits of adapting biomimetic and bioinspired 
processing concepts for designing and manufacturing chitin nanocomposites 
encompass microstructural and economic issues. These issues include impart -
ing the ability to achieve controlled hierarchical ordering and phase distribu -
tion at lower temperatures and reduced processing times. Gaining a 
fundamental understanding of the underlying principles that control these 
features in natural chitin nanocomposites will result in advances in nanocom -
posite processing capabilities. Table 4.1 provides a list of biomimetic design 
features that are exhibited in biologically derived chitin nanocomposites and 
may be useful in materials design and synthesis.
4.4.1 Chitin Nanocomposite Processing
The old saying, “One person’s trash is another person’s treasure,” is very 
appropriate in regard to crab-, shrimp-, and lobster shell-based waste products. 
An accumulation of large quantities of discards from processing of crustaceans 
has become a major concern in the seafood processing industry. Out of the 62  BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN-BASEd COMPOSITES
different species of crustaceans, shrimp and crab shell wastes are the most 
easily accessible and have been widely used for the isolation of chitin [34].  
In industrial processing, chitin is extracted from crustaceans by acid treatment 
to remove calcium carbonate mineral phase. Alkaline extraction is used  
to degrade and solubilize proteins. A depigmentation step is often added to 
remove leftover pigments to obtain a colorless product. Owing to differences 
in the ultrastructure of the initial materials, these treatments can be adapted 
to each chitin source. The resulting chitin needs to be assessed in terms of 
purity since residual protein and pigment can cause problems for further uti -
lization. There are a number of techniques that can be utilized to characterize 
the chemical and physical properties of chitin such as electron microscopy, 
X-ray diffraction (wide angle and small angle), spectroscopic techniques, 
mechanical properties, and a host of other techniques as described in the lit -
erature [37, 57, 73–79]. There are several different forms of chitin that can be 
produced at the nanoscale level. These forms include nanocrystals, whiskers, 
and fibers.
4.4.1.1  Chitin  Crystals  and  Whiskers  Whiskers or crystalline micro- or 
nanofibrils have received a great deal of interest in the nanocomposite research 
community due to their high aspect ratio and highly crystalline nature [80]. 
These whiskers were used as reinforcing fillers in both synthetic and natural 
polymeric matrices. Aqueous suspensions of chitin crystals can be prepared by 
acid hydrolysis of raw chitin. Chitin nanofibril-based nanocomposites have 
been prepared for wound healing applications. Muzzarelli et al. [81] prepared TABLE 4.1  Key Bioinspired/Biomimetic Lessons to Learn from Chitin 
Nanocomposites
 1. Multilevel, hierarchical architectural design and control
 2. Liquid crystal ordering phenomena coupled with liquid to solid phase 
transformation
 3. Phase transformations (liquid crystal to solid state) and self-assembly 
phenomena utilized to develop dynamic microstructure features
 4. Control over organic phase crystalline polymorphs
 5. Genetically controlled algorithm for chitin synthesis
 6. Cell-directed synthesis of chitin structural building blocks
 7. Surface modification via protein and functional group presentation used to 
enhance interactions
 8. Tailored interfacial chemistry for optimized interfacial bonding, liquid crystal, 
and colloid interactions
 9. Optimized chitin–protein distribution and interactions
10. Controlled distribution of inorganic phases
11. Variation in water content to control hydration/dehydration state
12. Cross-link density
13. Chitin bulk chemistry (degree of acetylation)BIOINSPIREd LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN NANOCOMPOSITES   63
chitin nanofibril–chitosan glycolate composites for wound healing. Watthana -
phanit et al. [82] prepared alginate–chitin whisker nanocomposites for bio -
medical applications. Chitin whiskers were used to achieve two main objectives: 
(1) to improve the mechanical properties of the nanocomposites and (2) to 
enhance wound healing. The enzymatic hydrolysis of chitin whiskers by lyso -
some releases chitin oligomers, which can play a role in wound healing. The 
whiskers were prepared by acid hydrolysis of shrimp shell chitin and to syn -
thesize a chitin–alginate nanocomposite via the wet spinning process. Incor -
poration of a low amount of the whiskers in the nanocomposite fibers improved 
both the mechanical and the thermal properties of the fibers, possibly as a 
result of specific interactions, such as hydrogen bonding and electrostatic 
interactions, between the alginate molecules and the homogeneously dispersed 
chitin whiskers.
Chitin whiskers have been successfully prepared from crab shells, squid pen, 
and tubes of Riftia pachyptila  tube worms by Junkasem et al. [76]. Regardless 
of the chitin sources, the commonly used hydrolytic condition to arrive at 
chitin whiskers is 3 N HCl at the boil for 90 minutes under vigorous stirring. 
Junkasem et al. fabricated α-chitin whisker-reinforced poly(vinyl alcohol) 
(PVA) nanocomposite nanofibres by electrospinning. The as-prepared α-chitin 
whiskers consisted of slender rods having a broad distribution in both length 
and width. The average length and width of these whiskers were about 549 
and 31 nm, respectively, with an average aspect ratio of approximately 18. The 
α-chitin whiskers were prepared from α-chitin flakes from shrimp shells by 
acid hydrolysis. The incorporation of chitin whiskers within the as-spun nano -
composite fiber mats increased Young’s modulus by about 4–8 times over that 
of the neat as-spun PVA fiber mat.
Wongpanit et al. [83] improved the dimensional stability of silk fibroin 
sponge by incorporating chitin whiskers as nanofillers using a freeze-drying 
technique. Their chitin whiskers exhibited an average length and width of 427 
and 43 nm, respectively. The dispersion of chitin whiskers embedded in the silk 
fibroin matrix was found to be homogeneous. The presence of chitin whiskers 
embedded into silk fibroin sponge not only improved its dimensional stability 
but also enhanced its compression strength. Mouse fibroblast (L929) cells were 
seeded onto the surface of these sponges to investigate the biocompatibility. 
The positive test results indicated that silk fibroin sponges both with and 
without chitin whiskers were cytocompatible. Moreover, when compared to 
the neat silk fibroin sponge, the incorporation of chitin whiskers into the silk 
fibroin matrix was found to promote cell spreading.
Nanocomposites were synthesized from a colloidal suspension of high 
aspect ratio α-chitin whiskers interspersed in a poly(caprolactone) (PCL) 
matrix. The chitin whiskers, prepared by acid hydrolysis of Riftia  tubes, con -
sisted of slender parallel-piped rods with an aspect ratio close to 120. A pro -
cedure was optimized to prepare a latex of PCL. After mixing and stirring the 
two aqueous suspensions, solid films were obtained by either freeze-drying and 
hot-pressing or casting and evaporating the preparations [84].64  BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN-BASEd COMPOSITES
It is often difficult to achieve a homogeneous dispersion of chitin whickers 
within a polymeric matrix. One way of processing polysaccharide-based nano -
composites is to transform them into a co-continuous material through long 
chain surface chemical modification. This involves the surface chemical modi -
fication of the nanoparticles based on the use of grafting agents bearing a 
reactive end group and a long hydrocarbon tail. Due to the hierarchical struc -
ture and semicrystalline nature of chitin and related polysaccharides, nanopar -
ticles can be extracted from these naturally occurring polymers. Native 
cellulose and chitin fibers are made up of smaller and mechanically stronger 
long thin filaments, called microfibers, consisting of alternating crystalline and 
noncrystalline domains. Multiple mechanical shearing actions can be used to 
release individual microfibrils. Longitudinal cutting of these microfibrils can 
be performed by submitting the biomass to a strong acid hydrolysis treatment, 
which promotes dissolution of amorphous domains. The ensuing nanoparticles 
occur as rod-like nanocrystals or whiskers. Polysaccharide nanocrystals possess 
a reactive surface covered with hydroxyl groups, providing the possibility of 
extensive chemical modification [24].
Nair and Dufresne [85–87] chemically modified the surface of chitin whis -
kers to investigate the effect of surface modification on the properties of chitin 
whisker reinforced natural rubber (NR) matrix nanocomposites. The various 
chemical treatments were shown to improve the adhesion between the filler 
and the matrix. However, the mechanical performances of the composites 
strongly decreased after the chemical modification. This loss of performance, 
more pronounced for the isocyanate treatments, could be due to the partial 
or total destruction of the three-dimensional network of chitin whiskers 
assumed to be present in the unmodified composites.
Yánez et al. [88] studied the preparation and physical properties of com -
posites, employing chitin as organic fillers to produce new biomaterials with 
controlled biodegradability and chemical functionalities. Composites of PCL–
chitin were prepared by melt mixing. Aqueous and organic suspensions of 
chitin whiskers were prepared from shrimps shell waste. Blends of PCL–chitin 
whiskers were prepared by solvent casting. Nanocomposites represent the 
preferred way to produce a substantial improvement in the mechanical prop -
erties of a polymer matrix as compared to conventional composites because 
of the use of very low filler contents with great impact on mechanical 
properties.
4.4.1.2  Fibers  Nanofibers provide a connection between the nanoscale 
world and the macroscale world because the diameters can be in the nanome -
ter range and the lengths can be measured in meters [23]. Chitin fiber-based 
filaments have a relatively long history and can be processed by wet spinning 
chitin in nondegrading solvent systems [58]. The chitin fibers are nonallergenic, 
deodorizing, antibacterial, and moisture controlling [89]. Recent studies have 
demonstrated that nanofibers can be produced from a wide range of polymers. 
The unique characteristics and the functionalities of the polymers themselves BIOINSPIREd LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN NANOCOMPOSITES   65
impart nanofibers with many desirable properties for advanced applications. 
However, the processability, biocompatibility, and biodegradability of the 
obtained composites are limited compared to those of natural polymers. Chitin 
nanofibers offer outstanding potential as reinforcement in the fabrication of 
transparent flexible composites. These polymer nanofibers, which are derived 
from completely sustainable and renewable natural, chitin materials, are 
expected to create new opportunities for the application of transparent sub -
strates in future electronic devices such as flexible displays and solar cells [22]. 
Other new products include barrier fabrics, microaerodynamic accelerators 
based on permeable nanofiber mats, nanofiber-based filters, biosensors, and 
protective clothing [23].
The incorporation of chitin nanofibers contributes to the significant 
improvement of the thermal expansion and mechanical properties of the neat 
acrylic resin. The properties of high light transmittance and low thermal 
expansion make chitin nanocomposites promising candidates for the substrate 
in a continuous roll-to-roll process in the manufacturing of various optoelec -
tronic devices such as flat panel displays. Ifuku et al. acetylated chitin nano -
fibers to develop transparent acrylic resin nanocomposite films [90]. Chitin 
nanofiber-reinforced plastics have high transparency. Acetylation reduced the 
moisture absorption of the chitin nanocomposite due to the introduction of 
hydrophobic acetyl groups. This application of hydrophobic chitin nanofibers 
with a uniform structure and a very high surface-to-volume ratio has promise 
for novel green nanomaterials. Shams et al. prepared chitin nanofibers from 
crab shells and developed a chitin plastic composite that exhibited a lower 
coefficient of thermal expansion and higher transparency comparable to that 
of cellulose plastic composites [22]. The thermal characteristics of chitin–
poly(e-caprolactone) copolymer nanocomposites have also been measured 
[91].
4.4.1.3  Chitin  Derivatives  There are a number of synthetic procedures 
that are described in the literature to chemically modify chitin [92]. A few 
examples include di-butyryl chitin [93, 94], carboxymethyl chitin, hydroxyalkyl 
chitin, fluorinated chitin, mercaptochitin, tosyl chitin, iodochitin, triphenylsilyl 
chitin, 6-oxychitin [95, 96], and 6-deoxychitin. While there are a few liquids 
that allow chitin to be derivatized such as imidazolinium-based ionic liquids 
[97], the most widely utilized and significant derivative of chitin is chitosan [89, 
92]. The deacetylation of chitin under alkaline conditions yields chitosan. In 
most cases, the reaction of deacetylating chitin cannot reach completion even 
under harsh treatment in an alkaline solution. Depending on the method used, 
the degree of deacetylation usually ranges from 50% to 95% [98–103]. The 
degree of N-acetylation is defined as the average number of N-acetyl-D-
glucosamine units per 100 monomers expressed as a percentage. When this 
average number is less than 50%, chitin becomes soluble in aqueous acidic 
solutions (pH < 6.0) and is then called chitosan. Thus, chitosan is a collective 
name for a group of fully and partially deacetylated chitins.66  BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN-BASEd COMPOSITES
Chitosan has been the most researched version of the chitin biopolymer 
because of its ready solubility in dilute acids. This solubility renders chitosan 
more accessible for utilization and chemical reactions [104]. Some of the salts 
of chitosan that are water soluble include formate, acetate, lactate, malate, 
citrate, tartarate, glyoxylate, pyruvate, glycolate, malonate, and ascorbate [92]. 
Chitosan can also be derivatized to exhibit amphiphilic characteristics [105, 
106]. Chitosan has also been used in conjunction with cellulose whiskers and 
nanowhiskers to make nanocomposites [107, 108].
One of the more interesting implications of the interchangeable relation -
ship between chitin and chitosan is that it is possible to make chitin-based 
nanocomposites with a high degree of dispersion in which chitin plays the  
role of both matrix and reinforcing phase. Nanocomposites that exhibit 
molecular-level dispersion of the reinforcing phase in the matrix, tailored 
interfacial bonding, and aqueous processing routes are typically most desir -
able. Molecular-level dispersion can most easily be accomplished when the 
matrix phase can be processed in a low viscosity liquid form for dispersing  
the reinforcing phase. When nonaqueous solvents are needed to dissolve the 
chitin-based matrix, the surface of the reinforcing phase may need to be modi -
fied to enhance the degree of dispersion. The surface modification treatment 
depends on the solvent and characteristics of the reinforcing phase. Esterifica -
tion is one of the more versatile surface modification methods for imparting 
colloid stability in various nonaqueous solvents [109–111]. Muzzarelli et al. 
[112–114] have reported on novel ways to make chitin nanofibrils [112] and 
nanochitins and nanochitosans [113, 114] which have optimized surface areas 
and porosities. These chitin forms can be used to add an additional level of 
process control in synthesizing chitin-based nanocomposites with enhanced 
levels of mixing between the phases.
4.4.2 Chitin Nanocomposites in Biomedical Engineering
If chitin is put in the body, it is immediately hydrolyzed and metabolized by 
the action of hydrolases that exist in body fluids [115]. Chitin has low toxicity 
and is inert in the gastrointestinal tract of mammals. It is biodegradable owing 
to the presence of chitinases, which are widely distributed in nature and found 
in bacteria, fungi and plants, and in the digestive systems of many animals. 
Chitin oligomers have been claimed as anticancer drugs and as active in con -
trolling the photosynthesis of maize and soybeans [89]. Chitin has been used 
in cosmetics, water purification, as separation material, and as food additive. 
Attempts have been made to use chitin for various biomedical applications 
such as wound dressings and as scaffolds in tissue engineering due to their 
wound healing, antibacterial and anti-inflammatory properties [115, 116]. 
Other biomedical applications include dental restoration, drug delivery 
systems based on nanotubes, and structural elements in artificial organs, mul -
tifunctional membranes, biomedical structures, protective shields in specialty BIOINSPIREd LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN NANOCOMPOSITES   67
fabrics, filter media for submicron particles in the separation industry, com -
posite reinforcement, and structures for nanoelectronic machines [23].
4.4.2.1  Antimicrobial  The antimicrobial properties of chitin expand its 
degree of utility. The exact mechanism of the antimicrobial action of chitin 
and its derivatives is still unknown, but different mechanisms have been pro -
posed. Interaction between positively charged chitin or derivative molecules 
and negatively charged microbial cell membranes may cause leakage of protein 
and other intracellular constituents [23]. The fungicidal and bactericidal action 
of chitin appears to be mediated by electrostatic forces between protonated 
-NH 2 groups and negative cell surface residues. The number of protonated 
-NH 2 groups present increases with increased degree of deacetylation and this 
factor influences the antimicrobial activity of chitosan [32]. In addition to 
being antimicrobial, chitin resists chemical attack in biological fluids. The 
chemical inertness of chitin in the presence of biological fluids was highlighted 
in a study that showed chitin sutures resisted chemical attack in bile, urine, 
and pancreatic juice [117].
4.4.2.2  The  Influence  of Chitin-Based  Nanocomposites  in Tissue 
Engineering  Tissue engineering holds the promise of developing replace -
ment tissues and organs on demand to improve the quality of life of people 
who suffer from conditions related to organ failure. Tissue engineering is a 
rapidly developing interdisciplinary field that utilizes aspects of cell and tissue 
biology and physiology, materials science and engineering, and physics to 
develop scaffolds that exhibit the requisite porosity, surface and bulk chemis -
try, surface texture, and architecture that can support the attachment and 
development of cells into fully functioning tissues and organs [118–124]. There 
are a host of polymers that have been used for the development of tissue 
engineering scaffolds, and it is surprising to note that chitin-based scaffolds 
have a relatively long history. In fact, a case can be made that chitin nanocom -
posites are the oldest tissue engineering scaffolds based on the Mayan practice 
of using nacre to replace missing teeth [125]. Westbroek and Marin reported 
that an archaeological dig in the 1930s uncovered a cache of Mayan skulls that 
had nacre implants in the jawbone that could not be easily removed. Further 
inspection including X-ray analysis revealed that the nacre had integrated into 
the jawbone. Studies by Lopez et al. in the 1990s demonstrated that nacre 
possessed the ability to induce osteoblasts to generate new bone in osteoblast 
cell cultures in vitro  [126, 127] and in human patients with periodontal defects 
in vivo  [125, 128]. Later research on the mechanism for the osteoinductive 
properties of nacre revealed that nacre contained water-soluble matrix pro -
teins that stimulate osteoblast activity and even promote the differentiation 
of nonbone cells to the osteogenic line [129]. At least one of the nacre matrix 
proteins, Perlustrin, has been found to share a number of similarities with 
human insulin-like growth factors [125].68  BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN-BASEd COMPOSITES
There has been a number of chitin-based tissue engineering scaffolds that 
show much promise for addressing some of the questions involved in develop -
ing fully functioning tissues. Chitin composite scaffolds containing nanosilica 
were prepared using chitin hydrogel and their bioactivity, swelling ability, and 
cytotoxicity were analyzed in vitro . These scaffolds were found to be bioactive 
in simulated body fluid (SBF) and biocompatible when tested with MG 63 cell 
line. These results suggest that chitin/nanosilica composite scaffolds can be 
useful for bone tissue engineering applications [116].
β-Chitin scaffolds were prepared by mixing β-chitin in saturated calcium 
chloride alcoholic solutions and using dialysis and lyophilization to produce 
the scaffolds. It seems that the β-chitin scaffolds are useful in the tissue 
engineering field. Chitin possesses not only the excellent wound healing, anti -
bacterial, and anti-inflammatory abilities, but also the bioactive functions  
of enzyme immobilization on the amino groups. These properties were benefi -
cial to the biomedical applications of chitin-containing tissue engineering scaf -
folds [115].
Biological familiarity is a major attraction for the use of natural polymers 
in processing nanocomposites. It is important to utilize polymers with collagen-
like characteristics. Chitin is a unique polysaccharide that shares a remarkable 
number of structural and chemical similarities with collagen [5]. Chitosan and 
chitin have been used in a number of biomedical applications including skin 
grafting templates, hemostatic agents, drug and DNA delivery vehicles, and as 
a wound healing material. There have been great advances in our understand -
ing of the underlying processes related to the storage, transfer, and propaga -
tion of genetic information via DNA and RNA. Developments in the field of 
biotechnology and genetic engineering have been phenomenal, and chitin-
based nanocomposites have played a key role in the development of vectors 
for transporting DNA across the cell membrane and into the nucleus for 
delivery of instructions for protein synthesis [130–133]. The cationic character 
of chitin has been used in developing hemostatic dressings to stop blood flow 
from wounds, and a number of studies have focused on how chitosan functions 
to enhance wound healing [104, 134–137].
Chitosan has demonstrated promise as a scaffold component due to its 
ability to support specific aspects of cell function such as extracellular matrix 
protein production in human osteoblast and chondrocyte cell cultures [136]. 
Chemical functional groups can be grafted onto the surface of chitosan to 
influence bioactivity. Muzzarelli et al. [138] determined that methylpyrrol -
idone chitosan exhibited osteoconductive properties as evidenced by new 
bone formation in a rat tibia model. Fructose-modified chitosan scaffolds and 
galactosylated chitosan have been used to study hepatocytes cell adhesion in 
culture [139, 140]. Chitosan has also been mixed with other polymers such as 
PAA [141] and lecithin [142] to form nanocomposites. Chitosan and chitosan–
hydroxyapatite composites have been developed to fabricate bone filling 
pastes, which can be used in the treatment of periodontal bony defects [89, 
143, 144].BIOINSPIREd LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN NANOCOMPOSITES   69
Chitosan nanocomposites have been used in a number of novel ways in 
tissue engineering. The use of chitin/chitosan-based nanocomposites as scaf -
folds is well known and developed [122, 145–157]. This idea follows from direct 
analogy to chitin’s role in natural tissues. A novel approach for synthesizing 
chitin-based nanocomposites involves the synthesis of complex coacervate 
mixtures in which cationic chitosan gels can electrostatically interact with 
anionic gels. Interaction between chitosan gel and alginate gel is a popular 
example of this complex coacervation process and this system is being used 
to encapsulate living and viable cells [158–160]. This opens up many exciting 
possibilities in tissue engineering because now it is possible not only to address 
issues related to scaffold structure, but the chitosan chemistry can also be 
enhanced to integrate pharmaceutical agents, growth factors, viable cells, and 
genes for directing cell function.
Additional research on chitosan-based complex coacervates was performed 
by Espinoza et al. [161], who prepared gum Arabic–chitosan-based complex 
coacervates. In these polyelectrolyte complexes, chitosan serves as a cationic 
phase to coacervate with anionic polymeric phases such as gum Arabic. This 
complex coacervate composition has been developed into a bioactive nano -
composite scaffold by cross-linking the dried complex coacervate with a base 
[162]. The addition of hydroxyapatite to the gum Arabic–chitosan system 
improves the bioactivity of films and three dimensional porous scaffolds as 
assessed by promising in vitro  [162] and in vivo  (R. Silva et al., unpublished 
results) results using a rat subcutaneous implantation model.
There are a number of additional efforts to utilize chitin-based nanocom -
posites in both natural and synthetic forms. Wilson et al. conducted in vitro  
and in vivo  studies on whole and demineralized crab shell integument from 
Callinectes sapides  [163]. They found that the subcutaneous implantation of 
both whole crab shell and demineralized crab shell in the abdominal region 
of 28-day-old Sprague Dawley rats influenced the formation of mineralized 
collagen bundles in the abdominal implant region. The mineralized collagen 
bundles were observed after 1 week for the demineralized crab shell, while 
mineralized collagen bundles were seen after 4 weeks for whole crab shell.
4.4.3 Inorganic Chitin-Based Nanocomposites
Biomimetic inspiration from natural chitin composites has been carried over 
into studies of biomineralization phenomena using chitosan and chitin [164, 
165] to form nanocomposites with silica, clays, silver, and calcium carbonate-
based nacre-like structures. Chitin and chitosan exhibit unique macromolecu -
lar conformations and liquid crystalline behaviors [5, 7, 73, 116, 166], which 
may be used to influence biomineralization in conjunction with soluble polymer 
molecules [167]. Chitosan has been used as a template to synthesize meso- or 
macroporous silica-based nanocomposites [166] while self-assembly processes 
have been used to make chitin–silica nanocomposites [168]. Chitosan-based 
clay nanocomposites have been synthesized using montmorillonite clay [169] 70  BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN-BASEd COMPOSITES
and organoclay-based bionanocomposites for removal of heavy metals in 
waste water treatment [170]. Methods for the synthesis of chitin–bentonite-
based polyurethane bionanocomposites have been reported for potential 
applications in medical sutures [171, 172]. Silver possesses unique antimicro -
bial characteristics and tissue healing potential that when coupled with chitin 
and or chitosan may yield extremely useful nanocomposites for tissue healing 
and antimicrobial effects. Chitosan–silver nanocomposites have been prepared 
where the chitosan plays a dual role. Chitosan serves as a green, environmen -
tally benign reducing agent, and also serves as the matrix [26–29].
The development of layered nanomaterials with structures reminiscent of 
nacre has provided concrete demonstrations of the versatility of using biomi -
metic design and synthesis principles [173, 174]. A number of researchers have 
utilized novel freeze processing techniques, which allow the attainment of 
porous layered structures that can be backfilled with polymers to attain nacre-
like materials [175–177]. The mechanical properties of these materials have 
been phenomenal with toughness values approaching 35 MPa m0.5. These 
results indicate the great promise of adopting bioinspired approaches that 
allow the development of structures reminiscent of biologically derived chitin-
based nanocomposites.
4.5 CONCLUSIONS
The wide variety of chitin-based nanocomposites in nature provides a rich 
palette for designing novel nanocomposites that utilize the unique characteris -
tics of chitin. The bioactivity and adaptable chemistry of chitin makes it very 
suitable for a many biomedical applications including drug, gene, and viable cell 
delivery systems, tissue engineering scaffolds, bone pastes, wound healing ban -
dages, and antimicrobial coatings. Its effectiveness in these areas can be enhanced 
by integrating inorganic phases such as calcium carbonate to emulate natural 
mineralized chitin-based tissues and hydroxyapatite to mimic bone tissue. Other 
inorganic phases including silica, silver nanoparticles, and even magnetic 
nanoparticles have been integrated into chitin-based nanocomposites to develop 
targeted material’s properties. As we learn more from structural, chemical, and 
biological insights from natural chitin-based nanocomposites such as nacre, crab 
shell, and jumbo squid beak, we will gain more biomimetic-based design con -
cepts to advance our capabilities in fully utilizing chitin in the next generation 
of functionally advanced bioinspired chitin-based nanocomposites.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the  
National Science Foundation (NSF CAREER Award—DMR Biomaterials 
[DMR-0645675]).REFERENCES   71
REFERENCES
 [1] Varadan, V., Pillai, A.S., Mukherji, D., Dwivedi, M., and Chen, L. (2010) Nanosci -
ence and Nanotechnology in Engineering . Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific Pub -
lishing Co. Pte. Ltd.
 [2] Twarowski, T.E. (2007) Introduction to Nanocomposite Materials: Properties, Pro -
cessing, Characterization . Lancaster: DEStech Publication, Inc.
 [3] Roer, R.D., Dillaman, R. (1984) The structure and calcification of the crustacean 
cuticle. Am. Zool. , 24, 893–909.
 [4] Bonucci, E. (1992) Calcification in Biological Systems . Boca Raton: CRC Press.
 [5] Giraud-Guille, M.M. (1994) Liquid crystalline order of biopolymers in cuticles 
and bones. Microsc. Res. Tech. , 27(5), 420–428.
 [6] Giraud-Guille, M.M. (1996) Twisted liquid crystalline supramolecular arrange -
ments in morphogenesis. Int. Rev. Cytol. , 166, 59–101.
 [7] Giraud Guille, M.M., Mosser, G., Helary, C., and Eglin, D. (2005) Bone matrix 
like assemblies of collagen: From liquid crystals to gels and biomimetic materials. 
Micron , 36, 602–608.
 [8] Meyers, M.A., Lin, A.Y., Seki, Y., Chen, P .-Y.K., and Bodde, S. (2006) Structural 
biological composites: An overview. J. Oper. Manage. , 58(7), 35–41.
 [9] Meyers, M.A., Chen, P .-Y., Lin, A.Y.-M., and Seki, Y. (2008) Biological materials: 
Structure and mechanical properties. Prog. Mater. Sci. , 53, 1–206.
 [10] Chen, P .-Y., Lin, A.Y.M., Lin, Y.-S., Seki, Y., Stokes, A., Peyras, J., et al. (2008) 
Structure and mechanical properties of selected biological materials. J. Mech. 
Behav. Biomed. Mater. , I, 208–226.
 [11] Chen, P .-Y., Lin, A.Y.-M., McKittrick, J., and Meyers, M.A. (2008) Structure and 
mechanical properties of crab exoskeletons. Acta Biomater. , 4, 587–596.
 [12] Hing, K.A. (2004) Bone repair in the twenty-first century: Biology, chemistry or 
engineering? Philos. Transact. A. Math Phys Eng. Sci. , 362, 2821–2850.
 [13] Raabe, D., Sachs, C., and Romano, P . (2005) The crustacean exoskeleton as an 
example of a structurally and mechanically graded biological nanocomposite 
material. Acta Mater. , 53, 4281–4292.
 [14] Whitesides, G.M., Grzybowski, B. (2002) Self-assembly at all scales. Science , 295, 
2418–2421.
 [15] Gao, H., Ji, B., Jager, I.L., Arzt, E., and Fratzl, P . (2003) Materials become insensi -
tive to flaws at nanoscale: Lessons from nature. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. , 
100(10), 5597–6000.
 [16] Currey, J.D. (2005) Hierarchies in biomineral structures. Science , 309, 253–254.
 [17] Fratzl, P . (2007) Biomimetic materials research: What can we really learn from 
nature’s structural materials? J. R. Soc. Interface , 4, 637–642.
 [18] Vo-Dinh, T. (2007) Nanotechnology in Biology and Medicine: Methods, Devices, 
and Applications . Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
 [19] Wiwanitkit, V. (2008) Advanced Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology . New 
York: Nova Science Publishers, Inc.
 [20] Reisner, D.E. (2009) Bionanotechnology: Global Prospects . Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press.72  BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN-BASEd COMPOSITES
 [21] Stroscio, M., Dutta, M. (2004) Biological Nanostructures and Applications of 
Nanostructures in Biology: Electrical, Mechanical, & Optical Properties . New 
York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
 [22] Shams, M.I., Ifuku, S., Nogi, M., Oku, T., and Yano, H. (2011) Fabrication of opti -
cally transparent chitin nanocomposites. Appl. Phys. A Mater. Sci. Process. , 102, 
325–331.
 [23] Venugopal, J., Ramakrishna, S. (2005) Applications of polymer nanofibers in 
biomedicine and biotechnology. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. , 125, 147–157.
 [24] Dufresne, A. (2010) Processing of polymer nanocomposites reinforced with poly -
saccharide nanocrystals. Molecules , 15, 4111–4128.
 [25] Phongying, S., Aiba, S., and Chirachanchai, S. (2007) Direct chitosan nanoscaffold 
formation via chitin whiskers. Polymer , 48, 393–400.
 [26] Huang, H., Yuan, Q., and Yang, X. (2004) Preparation and characterization of 
metal–chitosan nanocomposites. Colloid Surf. B , 39, 31–37.
 [27] Huang, H., Yang, X. (2004) Synthesis of polysaccharide-stabilized gold and silver 
nanoparticles: A green method. Carbohydr Res. , 339, 2627–2631.
 [28] Sun, C., Qu, R., Chen, H., Ji, C., Wang, C., Sun, Y., and Wang, B. (2008) Degrada -
tion behavior of chitosan chains in the “green” synthesis gold nanoparticles. 
Carbohydr. Res. , 343, 2595–2599.
 [29] Wei, D., Qian, W. (2008) Facile synthesis of Ag and Au nanoparticles utilizing as 
a mediator agent. Colloid Surf. B , 62, 136–142.
 [30] Jolles, P ., Muzzarelli, R. (1999) Chitin and Chitinases . Boston: Birkhauser Verlag.
 [31] Tsai, G.-J., Su, W.-H., Chen, H.-C., and Pan, C.-L. (2002) Antimicrobial activity 
of shrimp chitin and chitosan from different treatments and applications of fish 
preservation. Fish. Sci. , 68, 170–177.
 [32] Muzzarelli, R.A.A., Boudrant, J., Meyer, D., Manno, N., DeMarchis, M., and 
Paoletti, M.G. (2012) A tribute to Henri Braconnot, precursor of the carbohy -
drate polymers science, on the chitin bicentennial. Carbohydr. Poly. , 87, 
995–1012.
 [33] Stephen, A.M. (1995) Food Polysaccharides and Their Applications . New York: 
Marcel Dekker.
 [34] Shahidi, F., Arachchi, J.K., and Jeon, Y.-J. (1999) Food applications of chitin and 
chitosan. Trends Food Sci. Technol. , 10, 37–51.
 [35] Smith, C.A., Wood, E.J. (1991) Biological Molecules: Molecular and Cell Bio -
chemistry . New York: Chapman & Hall.
 [36] Brine, C.J., Austin, P .R. (1981) Chitin variability with species and method of 
preparation. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. B. , 69B, 283–286.
 [37] Giraud Guille, M.M., Chanzy, H., and Vuomt, R. (1990) Chitin crystals in arthro -
pod cuticles revealed by diffraction contrast transmission electron microscopy. J. 
Struct. Biol. , 103, 232–240.
 [38] Kumar, M.N. (2000) A review of chitin and chitosan applications. React. Funct. 
Polym. , 46, 1–27.
 [39] Gaill, F., Chanzy, H., and Vuong, R. (1989) Proceedings of the 1989 French Society 
for Electron Microscopy conference. Biol Cell. , 66, 8a.REFERENCES   73
 [40] Bouligand, Y. (1972) Twisted fibrous arrangements in biological materials and 
cholesteric mesophases. Tissue Cell , 4, 189–217.
 [41] Vincent, J.F. (2002) Arthropod cuticle: A natural composite shell system. Compos. 
A, 33, 1311–1315.
 [42] Bouligand, Y. (2008) Liquid crystals and biological morphogenesis: Ancient and 
new questions. C. R. Chimie , 11, 281–296.
 [43] Kurita, K. (2006) Chitin and chitosan: Functional biopolymers from marine crus -
taceans. Mar. Biotechnol. , 8, 203–226.
 [44] Neville, A.C., Berg, C.W. (1971) Cuticle ultrastructure of a Jurassic crustacean 
(Eryma stricklandi). Paleontology , 14, part 2, 201–205.
 [45] Neville, A.C. (1993) Biology of Fibrous Composites: Development Beyond the 
Cell Membrane . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
 [46] Giraud-Guille, M.-M. (1992) Liquid crystallinity in condensed type I collagen 
solutions: A clue to the packing of collagen in extracellular matrices. J. Mol. Biol. , 
224, 861–873.
 [47] Giraud-Guille, M.-M., Besseau, L. (1998) Banded patterns in liquid crystalline 
phases of type I collagen: Relationship with crimp morphology in connective 
tissue architecture. Connect. Tissue Res. , 37(3), 183–193.
 [48] Belamie, E., Mosser, G., Gobeaux, F., and Giraud-Guille, M.M. (2006) Possible 
transient liquid crystal phase during the laying out of connective tissues: α-chitin 
and collagen as models. J. Phys. Condens. Matter , 18, S115–S129.
 [49] Wright, J.E., Arthur, R. (1987) Chitin and Benzoylphenyl Ureas . Boston: W. Junk.
 [50] Trim, A.R. (1941) Studies in the chemistry of the insect cuticle I. Some general 
observations on certain arthropod cuticles with special reference to the charac -
terization of the proteins. Biochem. J. , 35, 1088–1098.
 [51] Blackwell, J., Weih, M.A. (1980) Structure of chitin-protein complexes: Oviposi -
tor of the ichneumon fly megarhyssa. J Mol. Biol. , 137, 49–60.
 [52] Hunt, S., Nixon, M. (1981) A comparative study of protein composition in the 
chitin protein complexes of the beak, pen, sucker disc, radula, and oesophogeal 
cuticle of cephalopods. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. , 68B, 535–546.
 [53] Horst, M.N. (1989) Association between chitin synthesis and protein synthesis in 
the shrimp penaeus vannamei. J. Crustacean Biol. , 9(2), 257–265.
 [54] Coblentz, F.E., Shafer, T.H., and Roer, R.D. (1998) Cuticular proteins from the 
blue crab alter in vitro  calcium carbonate mineralization. Comp. Biochem. 
Physiol. B. , 121B , 349–360.
 [55] Suetake, T., Tsuda, S., Kawabata, S., Miura, K., Iwanaga, S., Hikichi, K., et al. 
(2000) Chitin-binding proteins in invertebrates and plants comprise a common 
chitin-binding structural motif. J. Biol. Chem. , 275(24), 17929–17932.
 [56] Iconomidou, V.A., Willis, J.H., and Hamodrakas, S.J. (2005) Unique features of 
the structural model of “hard” cuticle proteins: Implications for chitin–protein 
interactions and cross-linking in cuticle. Insect Biochem. Mol. Biol. , 35, 553–560.
 [57] Diaz-Rojas, E.I., Arguelles-Monal, W., Higuera-Ciapara, I., Hernandez, J., Lizardi-
Mendoza, J., and Goycoolea, F.M. (2006) Determination of chitin and protein 
contents during the isolation of chitin from shrimp waste. Macromol. Biosci. , 6, 
340–347.74  BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN-BASEd COMPOSITES
 [58] Austin, P .R., Brine, C.J., Castle, J.E., and Zikakis, J.P . (1981) Chitin: New facets of 
research. Science , 212, 749–753.
 [59] Muzzarelli, R.A.A. (2012) Chitin nanostructures in living organisms. In: Chitin: 
Formation and Diagenesis , Vol. 34, ed. N.S. Gupta. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 
1–34.
 [60] Cui, F., Li, Y., and Ge, J. (2007) Self-assembly of mineralized collagen composites. 
Mater. Sci. Eng. , 57, 1–27.
 [61] Cartwright, J.H.E., Checa, A.G. (2007) The dynamics of nacre self-assembly. J. R. 
Soc. Interface , 4, 491–504.
 [62] Meyers, M.A., Lim, C.T., Li, A., Hairul Nizam, B.R., Tan, E.P .S., Seki, Y., and 
McKittrick, J. (2009) The role of organic inter-tile layer in abalone nacre. Mater. 
Sci. Eng. C , 29(2009), 2398–2410.
 [63] Meyers, M.A., Yu, A., Lin, M., Chen, P .Y., and Muyco, J. (2008) Mechanical 
strength of abalone nacre: Role of the soft organic layer. J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. 
Mater. , 1, 76–85.
 [64] Palli, S.R., Retnakaran, A. (1999) Molecular and biochemical aspects of chitin 
synthesis inhibition. In: Chitin and Chitinases , eds. P . Jolles, R. Muzzarelli. Boston: 
Birkhauser Verlag.
 [65] Cohen, E. (1993) Chitin synthesis and degradation as targets for pesticide action. 
Arch. Insect Biochem. Physiol. , 22, 245–261.
 [66] Miserez, A., Li, Y., Waite, J.H., and Zok, F. (2007) Jumbo squid beaks: Inspiration 
for design of robust organic composites. Acta Biomater. , 3, 139–149.
 [67] Miserez, A., Schneberk, T., Sun, C.J., Zok, F.W., and Waite, J.H. (2008) The transi -
tion from stiff to compliant materials in squid beaks. Science , 319, 1816–1819.
 [68] Miserez, A., Rubin, D.J., and Waite, J.H. (2010) Cross-linking chemistry of squid 
beak. J. Biol. Chem. , 285, 38115–38124.
 [69] Moses, D.N., Pontin, M.G., Waite, J.H., and Zok, F.W. (2008) Effects of hydration 
on mechanical properties of a highly sclerotized tissue. Biophys. J. , 94, 
3266–3272.
 [70] Broomell, C.C., Khan, R.K., Moses, D.N., Miserez, A., Pontin, M.G., Stucky, G.D., 
Zok, F.W., and Waite, J.H. (2007) Review: Mineral minimization in natures alter -
native teeth. J. R. Soc. Interface , 4, 19–31.
 [71] Koch, C.C. (2002) Nanostructured Materials: Processing, Properties, and Applica -
tions. Norwich: Noyes Publications.
 [72] Sarikaya, M. (1994) An introduction to biomimetics: A structural viewpoint. 
Microsc. Res. Tech. , 27, 360–375.
 [73] Ratto, J., Hatakeyama, T., and Blumstein, R. (1995) Diffrential scanning calorim -
etry investigation of phase transitions in water/chitosan systems. Polymer , 36(15), 
2915–2919.
 [74] Cardenas, G., Cabrera, G., Taboada, E., and Miranda, S.P . (2004) Chitin charac -
terization by SEM, FTIR, XRD, and 13C cross polarization mass angle spinning 
NMR. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 93(4), 1876–1885.
 [75] Oduor-Odote, P .M., Struszczyk, M.H., and Peter, M.G. (2005) Characterization 
of chitosan from blowfly larvae and some crustacean species from Kenyan marine 
waters prepared under different conditions. West. Indian Ocean J. Mar. Sci , 4, 
99–107.REFERENCES   75
 [76] Junkasem, J., Rujiravanit, R., and Supaphol, P . (2006) Fabrication of alpha-chitin 
whisker reinforced poly(vinyl alcohol) nanocomposites nanofibers by electros -
pinning. Nanotechnology , 17, 4519.
 [77] Wanchoo, R.K., Thakur, A., and Sweta, A. (2008) Viscometric and rheological 
behaviour of chitosan-hydrophilic polymer blends. Chem. Biochem. Eng. Q. , 
22(1), 15–24.
 [78] Yen, M.-T., Yang, J.-H.Y., and Mau, J.-L. (2009) Physicochemical characterization 
of chitin and chitosan from crab shells. Carbohydr. Poly. , 75, 15–21.
 [79] Kumirska, J., Czerwicka, M., Kaczy ński, Z., Bychowska, A., Brzozowski, K., 
Thöming, J., and Stepnowski, P . (2010) Application of spectroscopic methods for 
structural analysis of chitin and chitosan. Marine Drugs , 8, 1567–1636.
 [80] Zeng, J.B., He, Y.S., Li, S.L., and Wang, Y.Z. (2012) Chitin whiskers: An overview. 
Biomacromolecules , 13(1), 1–11.
 [81] Muzzarelli, R.A.A., Morganti, P ., Morganti, G., Palombo, P ., Palombo, M., Biagini, 
G., Belmonte, M.M., Giantomassi, F., Orlandi, F., and Muzzarelli, C. (2007) Chitin 
nanofibrils/chitosan glycolate composites as wound medicaments. Carbohydr. 
Poly. , 70(3), 274–284.
 [82] Watthanaphanit, A., Supaphol, P ., Tamura, H., Tokura, S., and Rujiravanit, R. 
(2008) Fabrication, structure, and properties of chitin whisker-reinforced alginate 
nanocomposite fibers. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 110, 890–899.
 [83] Wongpanit, P ., Sanchavanakit, N., Pavasant, P ., Bunaprasert, T., Tabata, Y., and 
Rujiravanit, R. (2007) Preparation and characterization of chitin whisker-
reinforced silk fibroin nanocomposite sponges. Eur. Polym. J. , 43, 4123–4135.
 [84] Morin, A., Dufresne, A. (2002) Nanocomposites of chitin whiskers from riftia 
tubes and poly(caprolactone). Macromolecules , 35, 2190–2199.
 [85] Nair, K.G., Dufresne, A. (2003) Crab shell chitin whisker reinforced natural 
rubber nanocomposites. 1. Processing and swelling behavior. Biomacromolecules , 
4(3), 657–665.
 [86] Nair, K.G., Dufresne, A. (2003) Crab shell chitin whisker reinforced natural 
rubber nanocomposites. 2. Mechanical behavior. Biomacromolecules , 4(3), 
666–674.
 [87] Nair, K.G., Dufresne, A. (2003) Crab shell chitin whiskers reinforced natural 
rubber nanocomposites. 3. Effect of chemical modification of chitin whiskers. 
Biomacromolecules , 4, 1835–1842.
 [88] Yánez, J., Castillo, V., Matos, M., Rosales, C., Arnal, M.L., and Müller, A.J. (2005) 
Polycaprolactone composites and nanocomposites containing chitin or chitosan. 
E-polymer . Available at http://www.e-polymers.org/journal/PAT2005ePolymers/
page/Posters/Section%20B/Rosales_Carmen.pro.240652613.proceeding  
budapest3.pdf.
 [89] Rinaudo, M. (2006) Chitin and chitosan: Properties and applications. Prog. Polym. 
Sci., 31, 603–632.
 [90] Ifuku, S., Morooka, S., Morimoto, M., and Saimoto, H. (2010) Acetylation of 
chitin nanofibers and their transparent nanocomposite films. Biomacromolecules , 
11, 1326–1330.
 [91] Jayakumar, R., Tamura, H. (2008) Synthesis, characterization and thermal prop -
erties of chitin-g-poly(e-caprolactone) copolymers by using chitin gel. Int. J. Biol. 
Macromol. , 43, 32–36.76  BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN-BASEd COMPOSITES
 [92] Mourya, V.K., Inamdar, N.N. (2008) Chitosan-modifications and applications: 
Opportunities galore. React. Funct. Polym. , 68, 1013–1051.
 [93] Muzzarelli, C., Francescangeli, O., Tosi, G., and Muzzarelli, R.A.A. (2004) Sus -
ceptibility of dibutyryl chitin and regenerated chitin fibres to deacylation and 
depolymerization by lipases. Carbohydr. Poly. , 56, 137–145.
 [94] Muzzarelli, R.A.A., Guerrieri, M., Goteri, G., Muzzarelli, C., Armeni, T., Ghiselli, 
R., and Cornelissen, M. (2005) Biocompatibility of dibutyryl chitin, and use in 
wound dressings together with 5-methylpyrrolidinone chitosan. Biomaterials , 
26(29), 5844–5854.
 [95] Muzzarelli, R.A.A., Biagini, G., DeBenedittis, A., Mengucci, P ., Majni, G., and 
Tosi, G. (2001) Chitosan-oxychitin coatings for prosthetic materials. Carbohydr. 
Poly. , 45, 35–41.
 [96] Genta, I., Perugini, P ., Modena, T., Pavanetto, F., Castelli, F., Muzzarelli, R.A.A., 
Muzzarelli, C., and Conti, B. (2003) Myconazole-loaded 6-oxychitin-chitosan 
microcapsules. Carbohydr. Poly. , 52, 11–18.
 [97] Muzzarelli, R.A.A. (2011) Biomedical exploitation of chitin and chitosan via 
mechano-chemical disassembly, electrospinning, dissolution in imidazolium ionic 
liquids, and supercritical drying. Marine Drugs , 9(9), 1510–1533.
 [98] Muzzarelli, R.A. (1973) Natural Chelating Polymers . London: Pergamon Press.
 [99] Muzzarelli, R.A. (1977) Chitin . London: Pergamon Press.
[100] Goosen, M.F. (1997) Application of Chitin and Chitosan . Boca Raton: CRC Press.
[101] Venugopal, V. (2011) Marine Polysaccharides: Food Applications . Boca Raton: 
CRC Press.
[102] Casas, J., Simpson, S.J. (2010) Advances in Insect Physiology: Insect Integument 
and Colour . London: Academic Press.
[103] Dai, T., Tanaka, M., Huang, Y.Y., and Hamblin, M.R. (2011) Chitosan prepara -
tions for wounds and burns: Antimicrobial and wound-healing effects. Epert Rev. 
Anti. Infect.Ther. , 9(7), 857–879.
[104] Khor, E., Lim, L.Y. (2003) Implantable applications of chitin and chitosan. Bio-
materials , 24, 2339–2349.
[105] Aranaz, I., Harris, R., and Heras, A. (2010) Chitosan amphiphilic derivatives. 
Chemistry and applications. Curr. Org. Chem. , 14, 308–333.
[106] Desbrieres, J., Babak, V.G. (2008) Interfacial properties of amphiphilic systems 
on the basis of natural polymers-chitin deratives. Russ. J. Gen. Chem. , 78(11), 
2230–2238.
[107] de Mesquita, J.P ., Donnici, C.L., and Pereira, F.V. (2010) Biobased nanocompos -
ites from layer-by-layer assembly of cellulose nanowhiskers with chitosan. Bio-
macromolecules , 11(2), 473–480.
[108] Li, Q., Zhou, J.P ., and Zhang, L.N. (2009) Structure and properties of the nano -
composite films of chitosan reinforced with cellulose whiskers. J. Polym. Sci. [B] , 
47(11), 1069–1077.
[109] Ballard, C.C., Broge, E.C., Iler, R.K., St. John, D.S., and McWhorter, J.R. (1961) 
Esterification of the surface of amorphous silica. J. Phys. Chem. , 65, 20–25.
[110] Van Helden, A.K., Jansen, J.W., and Vrij, A. (1981) Preparation and characteriza -
tion of monodisperse silica dispersions in non-aqueous solvents. J Colloid Inter -
face Sci. , 81, 354–368.REFERENCES   77
[111] Borum Nicholas, L., Wilson Jr., O.C. (2003) Surface modification of hydroxyapa -
tite. Part 1. Dodecyl alcohol. Biomaterials , 24, 3671–3679.
[112] Muzzarelli, R.A.A., Muzzarelli, C. (2005) Chitin nanofibrils. In: Chitin and Chi -
tosan, Opportunities and Challenges , ed. P .M. Dutta. Contai, India: SSM Interna -
tional Publ.
[113] Muzzarelli, R.A.A. (2011) New techniques for optimization of surface area and 
porosity in nanochitins and nanochitosans. In: Advances in Polymer Science: 
Chitosan for Biomaterials , Vol. 2, eds. R. Jayakumar, A. Prabaharan, and R.A.A. 
Muzzarelli. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 167–186.
[114] Muzzarelli, R.A.A. (2011) Nanochitins and nanochitosans, paving the way to 
eco-friendly and energy-saving exploitation of marine resources. In: Comprehen -
sive Polymer Science: Vol 10. Polymers for Sustainable Environment and Energy , 
eds. J. McGrath, R. Hoefer. Heidelberg: Springer.
[115] Maeda, Y., Jayakumar, R., Nagahama, H., Furuike, T., and Tamura, H. (2008) 
Synthesis, characterization and bioactivity studies of novel Beta-chitin scaffolds 
for tissue-engineering applications. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. , 42, 463–467.
[116] Madhumathi, K., Sudheesh Kumar, P .T., Kavya, K.C., Furuike, T., Tamura, H., 
Nair, S.V., et al. (2009) Novel chitin/nanosilica composite scaffolds for bone tissue 
engineering applications. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. , 45, 289–292.
[117] Dutta, P .K., Ravikumar, M., and Joydeep, D. (2002) Chitin and chitosan for ver -
satile applications. J. Mcromol. Sci. C-Polym. Rev. , C42(3), 307–354.
[118] Jones, J.R., Lee, P .D., and Hench, L.L. (2006) Hierarchical porous materials for 
tissue engineering. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A. , 364, 263–281.
[119] Van Blitterswijk, C. (2007) Tissue Engineering . Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[120] Atala, A., Lanza, R., Thomson, J.A., and Nerem, R.M. (2008) Principles of Regen -
erative Medicine . Boston: Academic Press.
[121] Enderle, J., Blanchard, S., and Bronzino, J. (2005) Introduction to Biomedical 
Engineering , 2nd ed. Amsterdam: Elsevier Academic Press.
[122] Leong, K.F., Cheah, C.M., and Chua, C.K. (2003) Solid freeform fabrication of 
three-dimensional scaffolds for engineering replacement tissues and organs. Bio-
materials , 24(13), 2363–2378.
[123] Ratner, B.D. (2001) Replacing and renewing: Synthetic materials, biomimetics, 
and tissue engineering in implant dentistry. J. Dent. Educ. , 65(12), 1340–1347.
[124] Ratner, B.D., Hoffman, A.S., Schoen, F.J., and Lemons, J.E. (1996) Biomaterials 
Science: An Introduction to Materials in Medicine . San Diego: Academic Press.
[125] WestBroek, P ., Marin, F. (1998) A marriage of bone and nacre. Nature , 392, 
861–862.
[126] Lopez, E., Vidal, B., Berland, S., Camprasse, S., Camprasse, G., and Silve, C. (1992) 
Demonstration of the capacity of nacre to induce bone formation by human 
osteoblasts maintained in vitro. Tissue Cell , 24(5), 667–679.
[127] Silve, C., Lopez, E., Vidal, B., Smith, D.C., Camprasse, S., Camprasse, G., and 
Couly, G. (1992) Nacre initiates biomineralization by human osteoblasts main -
tained in vitro. Calcif. Tissue Int. , 51(5), 363–369.
[128] Atlan, G., Balmain, N., Berland, S., Vidal, B., and Lopez, E. (1997) Reconstruction 
of human maxillary defects with nacre powder: Histological evidence for bone 
regeneration. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris/Life Sci. , 320, 253–258.78  BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN-BASEd COMPOSITES
[129] Mouries, L.P ., Almeida, M.J., Milet, C., Berland, S., and Lopez, E. (2002) Bioactiv -
ity of nacre water soluble matrix from the bivalve mollusk Pinctada maxima  in 
three mammalian cell types: Fibroblasts, bone marrow stromal cells and osteo -
blasts. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. B Biochem Mol. Biol. , 132(1), 217–229.
[130] Erbacher, P ., Zou, S., Bettinger, T., Steffan, A.M., and Remy, J.S. (1998) Chitosan-
based vector/DNA complexes for gene delivery: Biophysical characteristics and 
transfection ability. Pharm. Res. , 15(9), 1332–1339.
[131] Mao, H.Q., Roy, K., Troung-Le, V.L., Janes, K.A., Lin, K.Y., Wang, Y., August, J.T., 
and Leong, K.W. (2001) Chitosan-DNA nanoparticles as gene carriers: Synthesis, 
characterization and transfection efficiency. J. Control. Release , 70(3), 399–421.
[132] de Campos, A.M., Sanchez, A., and Alonso, M.J. (2001) Chitosan nanoparticles: 
A new vehicle for the improvement of the delivery of drugs to the ocular surface. 
Application to cyclosporin A. Int. J. Pharm. , 224(1–2), 159–168.
[133] Kim, T.H., Jiang, H.L., Jere, D., Park, I.K., Cho, M.H., Nah, J.W., Choi, Y.J., 
Akaike, T., and Cho, C.S. (2007) Chemical modification of chitosan as a gene 
carrier in vitro and in vivo. Prog. Polym. Sci. , 32, 726–753.
[134] Muzzarelli, R.A., Mattioli-Belmonte, M., Pugnaloni, A., and Biagini, G. (1999) 
Biochemistry, histology and clinical uses of chitins and chitosans in wound 
healing. EXS, 87, 251–264.
[135] Kojima, K., Okamoto, Y., Kojima, K., Miyatake, K., Fujise, H., Shigemasa, Y., et al. 
(2004) Effects of chitin and chitosan on collagen synthesis in wound healing. J. Vet. 
Med. Sci , 66, 1595–1598.
[136] Lahiji, A., Sohrabi, A., Hungerford, D., and Frondoza, C. (2000) Chitosan sup -
ports the expression of extracellular matrix protein in human osteoblasts and 
chondrocytes. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. , 5, 586–595.
[137] Tanodekaewa, S., Prasitsilpa, M., Swasdison, S., Thavornyutikarna, B., Pothsreea, 
T., and Pateepasen, R. (2004) Preparation of acrylic grafted chitin for wound 
dressing application. Biomaterials , 25, 1453–1460.
[138] Muzzarelli, R.A., Zucchini, C., Ilari, P ., Pugnaloni, A., Mattioli Belmonte, M., 
Biagini, G., and Castaldini, C. (1993) Osteoconductive properties of methylpyr -
rolidinone chitosan in an animal model. Biomaterials , 14(12), 925–929.
[139] Li, J., Pan, J., Zhang, L., and Yu, Y. (2003) Culture of hepatocytes on fructose 
modified chitosan scaffolds. Biomaterials , 24(13), 2317–2322.
[140] Park, I.K., Yang, Y., Jeong, H.J., Bom, H.S., Harada, I., Akaike, T., Kim, S.I., and 
Cho, C.S. (2003) Galactosylated chitosan as a synthetic extracellular matrix for 
hepatocytes attachment. Biomaterials , 24(13), 2331–2337.
[141] Hu, Y., Jiang, X., Ding, Y., Ge, H., Yuan, Y., and Yang, C. (2002) Synthesis  
and characterization of chitosan-poly(acrylic acid) nanoparticles. Biomaterials , 
23(15), 3193–3201.
[142] Magdassi, S., Bach, U., and Mumcuoglu, K.Y. (1997) Formation of positively 
charged microcapsules based on chitosan-lecithin interactions. J. Microencapsul. , 
14(2), 189–195.
[143] Ito, M. (1991) In vitro  properties of a chitosan-bonded hydroxyapatite bone-
filling paste. Biomaterials , 12(1), 41–45.REFERENCES   79
[144] Ito, M., Yamagishi, T., Yagasaki, H., and Kafrawy, A.H. (1996) In vitro properties 
of a chitosan-bonded bone filling paste: Studies on solubility of calcium phos -
phate compounds. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. , 32(1), 95–98.
[145] Ito, M., Hidaka, Y., Nakajima, M., Yagasaki, H., and Kafrawy, A.H. (1999) Effect 
of hydroxyapatite content on physical properties and connective tissue reaction 
to a chitosan-hydroxyapatite composite membrane. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. , 45(3), 
204–208.
[146] Yamaguchi, I., Tokuchi, K., Fukuzaki, H., Koyama, Y., Takakuda, K., Monma, H., 
and Tanaka, J. (2001) Preparation and microstructure analysis of chitosan/
hydroxyapatite nanocomposites. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. , 55(1), 20–27.
[147] Zhao, F., Yin, Y., Lu, W.W., Leong, J.C., Zhang, W., Zhang, J., Zhang, M., and Yao, 
K. (2002) Preparation and histological evaluation of biomimetic three-dimensional 
hydroxyapatite/chitosan-gelatin network composite scaffolds. Biomaterials , 
23(15), 3227–3323.
[148] Tachaboonyakiat, W., Serizawa, T., and Akashi, M. (2002) Inorganic-organic 
polymer hybrid scaffold for tissue engineering II: Partial enzymatic degradation 
of hydroxyapatite-chitosan hybrid. J. Biomater. Sci. Polym. Ed. , 13(9), 
1021–1032.
[149] Zhang, Y., Ni, M., Zhang, M., and Ratner, B. (2003) Calcium phosphate-chitosan 
composite scaffolds for bone tissue engineering. Tissue Eng. , 9(2), 337–345.
[150] Tuzlakoglu, K., Alves, C.M., Mano, J.F., and Reis, R.L. (2004) Production and 
characterization of chitosan fibers and 3-D fiber mesh scaffolds for tissue engi -
neering applications. Macromol. Biosci. , 4, 811–819.
[151] Yamaguchi, I., Itoh, S., Suzuki, M., Sakane, M., Osaka, A., and Tanaka, J. (2003) 
The chitosan prepared from crab tendon I: The characterization and the mechani -
cal properties. Biomaterials , 24, 2031–2036.
[152] Yamaguchi, I., Itoh, S., Suzuki, M., Sakane, M., Osaka, A., and Tanaka, J. (2003) 
The chitosan prepared from crab tendons II: The chitosan/apatite composites and 
their application to nerve regeneration. Biomaterials , 24, 3285–3292.
[153] Li, Z., Ramay, H., Hauch, K., Xiao, D., and Zhang, M. (2005) Chitosan-aliginate 
hybrid scaffolds for bone tissue engineering. Biomaterials , 25, 1059–1067.
[154] Ge, Z., Baguenard, S., Lim, L.Y., Wee, A., and Khor, E. (2004) Hydroxyapatite-
chitosan materials as potential tissue engineered bone substitutes. Biomaterials , 
25(6), 1049–1058.
[155] Hu, Q., Li, B., Wang, M., and Shen, J. (2004) Preparation and characterization of 
biodegradable chitosan/hydroxyapatite nanocomposite rods via in situ  hybridiza -
tion: A potential material as internal fixation of bone fracture. Biomaterial , 25(5), 
779–785.
[156] Khanna, R., Katti, K.S., and Katti, D.R. (2011) Bone nodules on chitosan–
polygalacturonic acid–hydroxyapatite nanocomposite films mimic hierarchy of 
natural bone. Acta Biomater. , 7, 1173–1183.
[157] Ma, P .X., Elisseeff, J. (2006) Scaffolding in Tissue Engineering . Boca Raton: Taylor 
& Francis.
[158] Wan, A.C.A., Yim, E.K.F., Liao, I.C., Visage, C.L., and Leong, K.W. (2004) Encap -
sulation of biologics in self-assembled fibers as biostructural units for tissue 
engineering. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A , 71A(4), 586–595.80  BIOMIMETIC LESSONS FOR PROCESSINg ChITIN-BASEd COMPOSITES
[159] Baruch, L., Machluf, M. (2006) Alginate–chitosan complex coacervation for cell 
encapsulation: Effect on mechanical properties and on long-term viability. Bio-
polymers , 82(6), 570–579.
[160] Wu, M.Y., Chen, N., Liu, L.K., Yuan, H., Li, Q., and Chen, S.H. (2009) Chitosan/
alginate multilayer scaffold encapsulating bone marrow stromal cells in situ  on 
titanium. J. Bioact. Compat. Polym. , 24, 301–315.
[161] Espinosa, H., Baez, J., Cruz, F., and Vernon, E. (2007) Gum Arabic–chitosan 
complex coacervation. Biomacromolecules , 8, 1313–1318.
[162] Silva, R.A., Mehl, P ., and Wilson Jr., O.C. (2010). Gum Arabic modified chitosan 
composite biopolymer scaffolds for bone tissue engineering. IFMBE Proceedings 
32, 26th Southern Biomedical Engineering Conference (SBEC 2010)  (Edited by 
Herold, K., Bentley, W.E., and Vossoughi, J.).
[163] Wilson Jr., O.C., Gugssa, A., Mehl, P ., and Anderson, W. (2012) An initial assess -
ment of the biocompatibility of crab shell for bone tissue engineering. Mater. Sci. 
Eng. C , 32, 78–82.
[164] Muzzarelli, C., Muzzarelli, R.A. (2002) Natural and artificial chitosan-inorganic 
composites. J Inorg. Biochem. , 92(2), 89–94.
[165] Falini, G., Fermani, S. (2004) Chitin mineralization. Tiss Eng. , 10(1/2), 1–6.
[166] Pedroni, V., Schulz, P .C., Gschaider de Ferreira, M.E., and Morini, M.A. (2000) 
A chitosan-templated monolithic siliceous mesoporous-macroporous material. 
Colloid Polym. Sci. , 278, 964–971.
[167] Wilson Jr., O.C. (2002) Soluble polymers in bioceramic systems. In: Polymers in 
Particulate Systems: Properties and Applications , Surfactant Science Series, Vol. 
104, eds. V.A. Hackley, P . Somasundaran, and J.A. Lewis. New York: Marcel 
Dekker, Inc, pp. 325–360.
[168] Alonso, B., Belamie, E. (2010) Chitin–silica nanocomposites by self-assembly. 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. , 49, 8201–8204.
[169] Paluszkiewicz, C., Stodolak, E., Hasik, M., and Blazewicz, M. (2011) FT-IR study 
of montmorillonite-chitosan nanocomposite materials Spectrochim. Acta A. Mol. 
Biomol. Spec. , 79(4 SP ISS), 784–788.
[170] Pandey, S., Mishra, S.B. (2011) Organic-inorganic hybrid of chitosan/organoclay 
bionanocomposites for hexavalent chromium uptake. J. Colloid Interface Sci. , 
361(2), 509–520.
[171] Zuber, M., Zia, K.M., Mahboob, S., Hassan, M., and Bhatti, I.A. (2010) Synthesis 
of chitin-bentonite clay based polyurethane bio-nanocomposites. Int. J. Biol. 
Macromol. , 47(2), 196–200.
[172] Zia, K.M., Zuber, M., Barikani, M., Hussain, R., Jamil, T., and Anjum, S. (2011) 
Cytotoxicity and mechanical behavior of chitin-bentonite clay based polyure -
thane bionanocomposites. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. , 49(5), 1131–1136.
[173] Sellinger, A., Weiss, P .M., Nguyen, A., Lu, Y., Assink, R.A., Gong, W., and Brinker, 
C.J. (1998) Continuous self assembly of organic-inorganic nanocomposite coat -
ings that mimic nacre. Nature , 394, 256–260.
[174] Tang, Z., Kotov, N.A., Magonov, S., and Ozturk, B. (2003) Naostructured artificial 
nacre. Nat Mater , 2(6), 413–418.REFERENCES   81
[175] Luz, G.M., João, F., and Mano, J.F. (2009) Biomimetic design of materials and 
biomaterials inspired by the structure of nacre. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A. , 
367(1893), 1587–1605.
[176] Deville, S., Saiz, E., Nalla, R.K., and Tomsia, A.P . (2006) Freezing as a path to 
build complex composites. Science , 311(5760), 515–518.
[177] Wegst, U.G.K., Schecter, M., Donius, A.E., and Hunger, P .M. (2010) Biomaterials 
by freeze casting. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A. , 368(1917), 2099–2121.83Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 5
Morphological and Thermal 
Investigations of Chitin-Based 
Nanocomposites
MING ZENG , LIYUAN LU , and QINGYU XU
5.1 MORPHOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS OF CHITIN-BASED 
NANOCOMPOSITES
The techniques of light and electron microscopy have been well described in 
the literature. Therefore, optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, 
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and atomic force microscopy are 
briefly reviewed in the following subsections since they are the most com -
monly employed techniques. We concentrate on their applications in the field 
of chitin-based nanocomposites.
5.1.1 Optical Microscopy
Optical microscopy (OM) is used to examine the texture of chitin-based nano -
composites. Two common techniques are used: (1) polarized-light microscopy, 
in which advantage is taken of the ability of crystalline material to rotate the 
plane of polarized-light, and (2) phase-contrast microscopy, which allows 
observations of structural features involving differences in refractive index 
rather than absorption of light as in the former case.
OM is a powerful technique for monitoring the formation and microstruc -
ture of nanocomposites. The dispersion of nanosized fillers within chitin or 
chitosan has been characterized by OM [1]. Usually, OM determines the 
nature of the nanocomposites and provides additional information that is 
helpful in the interpretation of the X-ray diffraction results [2].84  MorphoLoGIcAL ANd ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs
OM could also provide complementary evidence of grafting reactions. OM 
observation reveals that chitosan-grafted carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were uni -
formly dispersed in the chitosan matrix with a size of the dark area less than 
100 μm, whereas the ungrafted CNTs aggregated into a dark area size much 
larger than 100 μm [3].
To further examine the dispersion and/or distribution of chitosan whiskers 
within the individual nanocomposite fibers, OM could be applied with the aid 
of a staining method. The dye molecules would selectively adsorb onto the 
whisker surfaces, owing to the positively charged nature of the whiskers [4]. 
Figure 5.1 illustrates photographic and corresponding OM images of neat 
alginate yarns, neat chitosan yarns, and nanocomposite yarns containing 0.6% 
w/w of the whiskers, after they had been immersed in an aqueous solution of 
the dye for 12 hours. Closer examination of the OM image of the nanocom -
posite fibers revealed that not all parts of the fibers were stained positive for 
the dye, indicating that parts of the incorporated chitosan whiskers existed as 
aggregated entities.
5.1.2 Scanning Electron Microscopy and Transmittance  
Electron Microscopy
Resolution of smaller objects can be achieved by scanning electron micros -
copy (SEM) and TEM. Electron microscopy has been a powerful tool in the 
study of the morphology of crystalline polymers and the dispersion level of Figure 5.1  Representative photographic (top panel) and corresponding optical micro -
scopic (bottom panel; magnification 200 ×) images of (a) neat alginate yarns, (b) alginate 
nanocomposite yarns containing 0.6% w/w of chitosan whiskers, and (c) neat chitosan 
yarns, after they had been stained with 0.01% w/v Amido Black 10B (Wako Pure 
Chemical Industries, Japan) aqueous solution for 12 hours [4]. See color insert.
MorphoLoGIcAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs   85
filler and fibers. Furthermore, the adverse applications of the chitin-based 
nanocomposites have been examined by SEM and TEM.
Nanosized chitin particles, fibers, whiskers, and chemically modified whis -
kers have been reported as reinforcing elements in matrices such as styrene 
and butyl acrylate copolymers, poly(caprolactone) (PCL), chitosan, starch, and 
natural rubber (NR) [5–7]. SEM and TEM are used to observe the morphol -
ogy relative to the compatibility between the components.
The SEM images (Fig. 5.2a) of NR reinforced with 10 wt% unmodified 
chitin whiskers show that the chitin whiskers appear as white dots and are 
distributed uniformly throughout the NR matrix [8]. This uniform distribution 
of chitin whiskers was assumed to be due to the formation of a rigid chitin–
chitin network.
After whiskers are chemically modified with phenyl isocyanate (PI) and 
alkenyl succinic anhydride (ASA), nanocomposite films were obtained using 
a toluene NR solution in which the whiskers were dispersed [9]. In Figure 
5.2b,c, the nonuniform dispersion of chitin whiskers is clear, and aggregated 
chitin whiskers can be observed for chemically modified whisker-based nano -
composites. Because the PI and ASA are reactive, the electrostatic interactions 
between chitin whiskers were made negligible, thereby causing the complete 
destruction of colloidal stability of the whiskers in toluene, which ultimately 
leads to the aggregation of chitin whiskers in the NR matrix.
The nanosized filler of glass, metal and metal oxides, clay and modified clay, 
nanotubes, and modified nanotubes has been reported to reinforce the chitin 
or chitosan matrix [10, 11]. SEM and TEM are powerful methods for monitor -
ing the formation and micro- and nanostructure of nanocomposites. The dis -
persion level of nanosized fillers within chitin or chitosan has been characterized 
by SEM and TEM [12].
Nanocomposite films comprising nanometer-sized metal oxide, semiconduc -
tor, and magnetic particles dispersed in polymer matrices have received 
increased attention due to their broad range of exceptional properties, namely 
for process imaging, as biosensors, in disease diagnosis, and so on [12–25]. Chitin 
and chitosan are good dispersants for a variety of different nanoparticles, 
including those of platinum, gold, and silver, as well as iron oxide [26–32].
The SEM and TEM results showed that the hexagonal and spherical mono -
dispersed α-Fe 2O3 nanoparticles were encapsulated into the spherical 
dumbbell-shaped chitosan (CH)- α-Fe 2O3 nanocomposite film with a mean 
diameter of ∼87 and ∼110 nm, respectively (Fig. 5.3a,a ′) [33]. The TEM image 
of CH- α-Fe 2O3 nanocomposite film is shown in Figure 5.3b. The structure of 
CH-coated magnetite α-Fe 2O3 nanoparticles was looser, leading to a larger 
size; the average diameter of such a structure was 110 nm. This revealed  
that the coating process that results in the agglomeration and the change in 
size of the particles is due to the cross-linking among the different nanopar -
ticles with CH.
Clays such as montmorillonite (MMT), rectorite, silica, magnetite,  
attapulgite, and bentonite have been used to fabricate chitin or chitosan-based 86  MorphoLoGIcAL ANd ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs
nanocomposites. The incorporation of these mineral powders not only can 
reduce production cost, but also can improve the mechanical and thermal 
properties of the corresponding composites [34, 35]. The microscopic morphol -
ogy of the inner intercalated or exfoliated structure of clay or modified clays 
has been examined using SEM and TEM [36, 37].Figure 5.2  Scanning electron micrographs of the cryofractured surfaces of 10 wt% 
(a) unmodified, (b) ASA-modified, and (c) PI-modified chitin whisker-filled NR films 
[9].
(a)
5 µm
5 µm
5 µm(b)
(c)MorphoLoGIcAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs   87
Figure 5.3  TEM micrograph and (selected area electron diffraction in the inset) 
pattern of α-Fe 2O3 nanoparticles (a and a ′) and CH- α-Fe 2O3 nanocomposite film (b) 
[33].
(a) (a')
(b)
Recently, layered silicates, including MMT and rectorite (REC), were used 
to improve the properties of quaternized chitosan. Quaternized carboxymethyl 
chitosan (QCMC), consisting of β-(1,4)-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranosyl 
and β-(1,4)-2-amino-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranosyl units, is a novel, promising 
amphoteric polymer. It is obtained by introducing a carboxymethyl group and 
quaternary ammonium salt on chitosan. The nanocomposites showed better 
antibacterial activity, drug-controlled abilities, gene transfection efficacy, and 
thermal stability, among others, in comparison with chitosan or quaternized 
chitosan.
REC was dispersed in quaternized chitosan–N-(2-hydroxyl) propyl-3-tri -
methyl ammonium chitosan chloride (HTCC) and QCMC, and coded as HR 
and QR, respectively [38]. TEM results (Fig. 5.4) revealed that REC was well 
dispersed in the polymer matrix and obtained the largest interlayer distance 88  MorphoLoGIcAL ANd ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs
when the mass ratio of QCMC to REC was 2 : 1. TEM images exhibited the 
typical morphology of the layered materials.
Among the nanostructured filler materials, CNTs are attractive due to their 
excellent properties. It is well known that CNTs possess extraordinarily high 
aspect ratios, thermal and electro-activities, unique atomic structures, and 
remarkably good mechanical properties, and have potential in reinforced 
polymer composites [39]. SEM and TEM are used to study the morphology 
and homogeneity of the CNTs or multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) 
dispersed in the chitin or chitosan matrix [40–45].
The SEM images in Figure 5.5 show the pristine MWCNTs, pure chitosan 
(CS), and MWCNT-CS nanocomposite [46]. The pure MWCNTs were  Figure 5.4  TEM micrographs of HR3 nanocomposite (a,b) and QR3 nanocomposite 
(c, d) [38].
(a)
(c)(b)
(d)MorphoLoGIcAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs   89
cylindrical, with an average diameter of 200 nm, and were tangled together, 
while pure chitosan samples had no common structure. Figure 5.5c shows the 
MWCNT–CS nanocomposite where the MWCNTs were embedded and well 
dispersed within the chitosan matrix.
In fact, the agglomeration of CNTs limits their application because this 
behavior could lead to many nanoscale and/or microscale defects, which  
would diminish the mechanical performance and physical properties of the Figure 5.5  SEM images for pure MWCNTs (a), pure chitosan (b), and the MWCNTs–
CS nanocomposite (c) [46].
(a)
(b)
(c)90  MorphoLoGIcAL ANd ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs
composites. There are some useful and effective ways of preparing well-
dispersed CNTs in the chitin matrix: (1) chemical modification to attach a 
functional group on the surface of the CNT, (2) using ultrasonication for dis -
persing CNTs, and (3) using a surfactant for a well-dispersed CNT solution 
[46].
Recently, the chitosan ternary nanocomposites with two-dimensional (2D) 
clay platelets and one-dimensional (1D) CNTs have been successfully pre -
pared by a simple solution-intercalation/mixing method in acid media [47]. To 
see directly the dispersion of clay and CNTs in chitosan matrix, the TEM 
image of chitosan nanocomposite with 2 wt% clay and 1 wt% CNTs is shown 
in Figure 5.6. Figure 5.6a shows an exfoliated structure of clay platelets, which 
Figure 5.6  TEM images of chitosan/2% clay-1% CNT composite: (a) at low magnifi -
cation and (b) at high magnification [47].
(a)
(b)MorphoLoGIcAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs   91
are randomly distributed in the chitosan matrix, and meanwhile CNTs are 
observed to be well dispersed in chitosan. In Figure 5.6b, some CNTs, indicated 
by white arrows, are located around the clay platelets and form a kind of 
clay–CNT network, which could result in strong interaction between chitosan 
chains and the fillers.
Chitosan–hydroxyapatite (HA) nanocomposites show good biocompatibil -
ity and favorable bonding ability with surrounding host tissues. The approaches 
currently used to obtain CS-HA composite materials are based on mechanical 
mixing, co-precipitation, in situ  hybridization, and an alternate soaking process 
[48–54]. With all of these methods, there is a common disadvantage that inor -
ganic particles cannot be distributed within the organic matrices at the 
nanolevel.
Much research has focused on the effect of the interface between the HA 
and CS matrix on the resultant morphology and structure. Biomorphic miner -
alization synthesis and biological template synthesis are possible approaches 
for obtaining the fine biological nanostructure [45–57]. A mild hydrothermal 
reaction achieved the biomorphic mineralization synthesis of chitosan–HA 
nanocomposite from crab shell [55]. In this reaction, calcium carbonate crystals 
in the crab shell were converted into HA crystals; at the same time, the crab 
shell’s chitin is partially deacetylated into chitosan. The fine nanocomposite 
structure of the crab shell was almost exactly reproduced (shown in Fig. 5.7).
In addition, chitin or chitosan-based nanocomposites have been widely used 
as matrices in drug release systems and as vehicles in the treatment of waste 
waters [58–67]. The chitin-based drug nanoparticle carrier was subjected to 
examination by SEM before and after drug release [64]. A comparison of the 
micrographs suggests detachment of the drug doxorubicin hydrochloride 
(DOX), clay, and chitosan during drug release, with a consequent increase in 
the size of pores. The pore size increased from 1.1 ± 0.1 μm before drug release 
(Fig. 5.8) to 2.3 ± 0.2 μm after drug release (Fig. 5.9).
Other chitin-based nanocomposites include the blend fibers and mem -
branes [4, 65–71]. The SEM images were taken to analyze any morphological 
changes in the fibrous and membrane structures.
Submicron fibers of the composite of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), chitosan 
oligosaccharide [COS, (1 →4)2-amino-2-deoxy- β-D-glucose], and MMT clay 
were prepared using electrospinning with aqueous solutions [70]. TEM obser -
vation reveals the formation of the composite nanofibers and the distribution 
of the MMT nanoparticles in the nanofiber matrix. It can be clearly observed 
that each silicate platelet forms a dark line in the nanofiber compared with 
the pure PVA nanofiber (Fig. 5.10a). The TEM images in Figure 5.10b–d indi -
cate the nanosized MMT in the nanofibers electrospun from the solution 
containing 5 wt% MMT. The size of the dark line is about 1–3 nm in width 
and 100–200 nm in length, indicating the good dispersion and exfoliation of 
MMT layers in the nanofibers.
Moreover, typical morphology observed by field emission scanning electron 
microscopy (FE-SEM) for the electrospun chitosan-PVA nanofibrous  92  MorphoLoGIcAL ANd ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs
Figure 5.7  SEM images of CS-HA: the outer surfaces’ structures (a); the inner sur -
faces’ structures (b); the circular ball-like aggregations (c); and the breaking faces of 
inner layers (d) [55].
(a) (b)
(c)Acc.V Spot Magn
5.00 kV 4.04000x SE 4.7 1
5.00 kV 4.010000x SE 4.71 15.00 kV 3.02000x SE 5.7 120 µm 2 µm
2 µm
2 µm
1×2×
3×
5 µm 50 µm2 µm
Det WD Exp
Acc.V Spot Magn Det WD
5.00 kV 3.01000x SE 6.0Acc.V Spot Magn Det WD Exp ExpAcc.V Spot Magn Det WD Exp
(d)
membrane is an almost homogenous network with fiber diameter distribution 
of between 150 and 300 nm [72]. To remove PVA from the blended nanofi -
brous membrane, the original nanofibrous membrane was treated with 0.5 M 
NaOH aqueous solution for 4 hours. It was found that the fiber diameter was 
decreased from 150–300 nm to 80–150 nm. This treatment consequently 
resulted in over 50 wt% weight loss, which was nearly identical to the PVA 
content in the original chitosan-PVA nanofibrous membrane.
At present, graphene has attracted increasing attention worldwide, owing 
to its structure, single atomic monolayer of sp2-bonded carbon atoms, and 
unique properties. Graphene oxide (GO) is a precursor of graphene-based 
nanocomposites with similar one-atom thickness but with a large number of 
hydrophilic oxygenated functional groups including hydroxyl (-OH), epoxy 
(-C–O–C-), carbonyl (-C=O), and carboxyl (-COOH) groups. These groups 
make GO sheets hydrophilic and dramatically improve their miscibility with 
polymer matrix [73, 74]. Biopolymer nanocomposites were prepared from CS 
as the matrix and GO as reinforcing nanofillers by a simple self-assembly. A 
uniform distribution and fine dispersion for GO in the CS matrix are shown 
in the SEM images in Figure 5.11 [74].MorphoLoGIcAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs   93
5.1.3 Atomic Force Microscopy
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) has been applied to determine the structure 
of chitin-based nanocomposites and to provide three-dimensional morphol -
ogy. Because of its high spatial and vertical resolution, AFM is considered to 
be a powerful tool for imaging the topography of the surfaces.
The nanosized filler dispersion within chitin or chitosan has been character -
ized by AFM in the study of the nanostructure of composites [13, 38, 75, 76]. 
AFM is also used to characterize the compatibility of chitin- or chitosan 
whisker-incorporated blended films or blended fibers [5, 74].
The morphology of fractured and polished surfaces of chitin-based nano -
composites can be studied by AFM in “Tapping Mode.” In tapping mode, the 
AFM tip oscillates at a frequency close to its resonance and the tip is allowed 
to make contact with the sample for only a short duration in each oscillation 
cycle. During oscillation of the tip over the sample surface, the sample–tip Figure 5.8  Scanning electron micrographs of DOX-loaded chitosan–clay particles 
before drug release. (a) Low magnification; (b) high magnification [64].
(a)
(b)94  MorphoLoGIcAL ANd ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs
interaction may alter the amplitude, resonance frequency, and phase angle of 
the oscillating cantilever. Detection of phase angle changes of the cantilever 
probe during scanning provides an image, called a phase image. Phase angle 
change is associated with energy dissipation during sample–tip interaction. 
Several parameters, such as topography of the sample, sample–tip interactions, 
deformation of sample–tip contact area, and experimental conditions, can 
cause energy dissipation. The phase image is very useful for compositional 
mapping of surfaces and interfaces of polymeric materials and generally pro -
vides better contrast than the topographic images.
AFM images in tapping mode illustrate fractured and polished surfaces of 
nanocomposites of chitosan–HA in a 50 : 50 ratio (ChiHAP50), polygalact -
uronic acid–HA in 50 : 50 ratio (PgAHAP50), and chitosan–HA–polygalact -
uronic acid (ChiPgAHAP50) [77]. In Figure 5.12, it is clear that the building 
blocks of ChiPgAHAP50 are chitosan-rich and polygalacturonic-rich domains. 
These chitosan-rich and polygalacturonic-rich domains appear to have differ -Figure 5.9  Scanning electron micrographs of DOX-loaded chitosan–clay particles 
after drug release at pH 5.3 and 37°C. (a) Low magnification; (b) high magnification 
[64].
(a)
(b)MorphoLoGIcAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs   95
ent morphologies in ChiHAP50 and PgAHAP50, respectively. Chitosan-rich 
domains and polygalacturonic-rich domains consist of smaller globular shaped 
particles. The AFM phase images of polished samples suggest that these globu -
lar shaped particles have HA particles embedded in the biopolymer matrix, 
implying the multilevel organization in HA–biopolymer composites.
In addition to the morphological analysis methods mentioned above, confo -
cal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) [21] and analytical electron microscopy 
(AEM) [78] have been applied to examine the structure and applications of 
chitin-based nanocomposites.Figure 5.10  TEM images of PVA-COS-MMT nanofiber mats that were electrospun 
with various PVA/COS mass ratios: (a) pure PVA, (b) PVA/COS = 6/4, (c) PVA/
COS=8/2, (d) PVA/COS = 10/0 (MMT = 5 wt%, voltage = 15 kV, tip to collector dis -
tance = 15 cm) [70].
(a)
(c) (d)(b)96  MorphoLoGIcAL ANd ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs
5.2 THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS OF CHITIN-BASED 
NANOCOMPOSITES
The main thermal techniques applied for chitin-based nanocomposite mea -
surements include differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), thermogravimet -
ric analysis (TGA), thermomechanical analysis (TMA), and dynamic 
mechanical analysis (DMA). The application possibilities of these methods in 
the field of chitin-based nanocomposites are so diverse that only a brief review 
can be given here.Figure 5.11  SEM film-surface images (a–c) and fracture-surface images (d–g) of CS 
and CS-GO nanocomposites. Image (g) is the magnification of (f) [74].
(a)
(b)
(c) (f)
(g)(e)(d) CS
CS/GO 0.3 wt%
CS/GO 1 wt%
20 kV x10,000 20 kV20 kV x2,00020 kV x10,000
x10,00020 kV x10,000
1 µm1 µm 1 µm20 kV x10,000 20 kV x10,000 1 µm 1 µm
10 µm1 µm 09 30 SEI13 30 SEI
13 30 SEI10 30 SEI09 30 SEI 10  30 SEI
CS/GO 1 wt%CS/GO 0.3 wt%CSThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs   97
5.2.1 Differential Scanning Calorimetry
DSC can be used to investigate thermal events such as physical transitions 
(the glass transition, crystallization, melting, and vaporization of volatile com -
pounds) and chemical reactions. Thermal properties such as heat capacity, glass 
transition temperature (Tg), melting temperature (Tm), and thermal stability 
can be determined. The information obtained characterizes the chitin-based 
nanocomposites with regard to their thermal behavior, composition, compat -
ibility, and process method.
DSC was used to measure Tg values and to investigate the compatibility of 
natural chitosan nanofibers and polyacrylamide (PAM) in dry gels [7]. The Tg 
of PAM in the composite gel was higher than that of pure PAM due to the 
interaction between PAM and chitosan, which limited the chain movement of 
PAM in the composite.
DSC was also used to study the influence of the fabricating method on the 
thermal properties of chitin whisker-based nanocomposites. Nanocomposites 
were prepared from PCL as the matrix and chitin microcrystals, or whiskers, 
as the reinforcing phase [79]. Nanocomposite films were obtained either by 
casting and evaporating or by freeze-drying and hot-pressing the mixture. For 
all the chitin whisker–PCL composites, both Tg and Tm seem to be almost 
independent of the whisker concentration. The crystallinity of semicrystalline 
PCL polymers is strongly dependent on the thermal history of the sample. A 
significant reinforcing effect was observed at T > Tg of the matrix. This effect 
can be described in this temperature range by a “hybrid” percolation model, 
equivalent to a mean-field model, considering only the nonpercolating fraction 
of microcrystals.
Normally, DSC results indicated that heat treatment causes a reduction of 
intramolecular hydrogen bonding of chitosan and also may induce thermal 
depolymerization of chitosan, resulting in a decrease in viscosity of chitosan 
dispersions after heat treatment. Surprisingly, incorporation of nanosized mag -
nesium aluminum silicate (MAS) caused an increase in the decomposition Figure 5.12  Atomic force microscope images in tapping mode illustrating multilevel 
structure in ChiHAP50, PgAHAP50, and ChiPgAHAP50 nanocomposites. Images are 
illustrative of the multilevel structure and are not to scale [77]. See color insert.
98  MorphoLoGIcAL ANd ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs
temperature of chitosan in composite films prepared using heated dispersions 
[80]. This suggests that the interaction of chitosan with MAS by flocculation 
in the composite dispersion and the intercalation of chitosan into the MAS 
layers could possibly protect the chitosan molecules from thermal depolymer -
ization when treated by heating.
The influence of addition of chitin or chitosan whiskers on the crystallinity 
of polymer matrix was investigated by DSC. The DSC profiles of all the com -
posites exhibited endothermic peaks due to the melting point of PVA being 
shifted to a lower temperature accompanied by broadening when the content 
of chitin in the composites increased [81]. The crystallinities of PVA were 
decreased in the composites with increasing chitin content. Therefore, chitin 
and PVA might be partially miscible at the interfacial area between the two 
polymers in the composites by the formation of hydrogen bonding. On the 
contrary, an increase in nanoclay content definitely improved the crystalline 
pattern of the synthesized chitin-based polyurethane bionanocomposite 
samples [82].
The thermal stability and thermal decomposition behavior of chitin-based 
nanocomposites were also studied by DSC. Figure 5.13 shows the DSC ther -
mograms of the methanol-treated chitin whisker–silk fibroin sponges at dif -
ferent C : S ratios, and the freeze-dried chitin whiskers within the temperature 
range of 50–450°C. The decomposition temperature of neat silk fibroin 
appeared to be at the broader endothermic peak of 287°C and at the sharper 
endothermic peak of 304°C. The presence of the whiskers at the C : S ratio of 
1 : 8 (Fig. 5.13b) induced the lowering of the sharp peak of the decomposition 
temperature from 304°C to 298°C with the change in thermal transition from 
a rough to a smooth curve, but the wide endothermic peak of the decomposi -
tion temperature (288°C) was still similar. The further increase in the amount 
of chitin whiskers (Fig. 5.13c,d) resulted in the absence of the sharp endother -
mic peak of the decomposition temperature. Analogous to the C : S ratio of 
1 : 8, the broad endothermic peak of the decomposition temperature (287°C) 
was still unchanged. By careful consideration of the thermograms present in 
Figure 5.13c,d, there was a new exothermal curve, which could not be observed 
in the thermograms of both neat silk fibroin and chitin whiskers, due to the 
shift of the baselines in the range of 385–415°C. It should be noted that the 
decomposition of the chitin whiskers caused the curve shifting (exothermic) 
of the baseline in the temperature range of 260–410°C (Fig. 5.13e).
Compared with the neat silk fibroin and chitin whiskers, the noticeable 
improvement in the thermal decomposition behavior of the nanocomposites 
might imply that interfacial interactions (mainly hydrogen bonding) form 
between polar groups present in the chemical structures of silk fibroin and 
chitin whiskers in the nanocomposite sponges [6]. These interactions restricted 
the mobility of silk fibroin chains and also reduced inter- and intramolecular 
interactions between silk fibroin chains. In addition, a short single crystal fiber, 
that is, chitin whisker, is a highly crystalline material so its volume is still 
unchanged after methanol treatment. Hence, the incorporation of dimension-ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs   99
stable fillers into the matrix resulted in a reduction in the percentage shrinkage 
of the sponges, which also decreased with an increasing amount of stable filler.
5.2.2 Dynamic Thermal Mechanical Analysis
In dynamic thermal mechanical analysis (DMA), a mechanical modulus is 
determined as a function of temperature, frequency, and amplitude. The impor -
tant properties of storage moduli, loss factor, Tg, and, especially, the influence 
of fillers and reinforcing effect on the modulus and Tg can be investigated by 
DMA. Since the mechanical modulus depends on the molecular conditions, Figure 5.13  DSC thermograms of the methanol-treated silk fibroin sponge (a), the 
methanol-treated chitin whisker–silk fibroin sponges having different C/S ratios, 1/8 
(b), 2/8 (c), 4/8 (d), and the freeze-dried chitin whisker (e) [6].(a)
304
287
288
288Endo
Heat flow (mW)298
412
287 409(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
0 50 1 00150200250
Temperatur e (°C)300 350400 450500100  MorphoLoGIcAL ANd ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs
information can be gained about the cross-linking and compatibility of polymer 
blends and additives. The Tg is often measured by DSC, but the DMA tech -
nique is more sensitive and yields more precise data.
The influence of chitin whisker effect on the modulus and Tg of nanocom -
posites could be studied by DMA [83]. Figure 5.14 shows the plot of log( E′/
Pa) (storage tensile modulus, Fig. 5.14a) and tan δ (loss angle tangent, Fig. 
5.14b) at 1 Hz as a function of temperature for both unfilled and filled unvul -
Figure 5.14  (a) Logarithm of the storage tensile modulus E ′ and (b) loss angle tangent 
tan α versus temperature at 1 Hz for chitin whisker–unvulcanized NR composites 
obtained by evaporation: NRev ( ), NCH2ev ( ), NCH5ev ( ), NCH10ev ( ), 
NCH15ev ( ), and NCH20ev ( ) [83].(a)
(b)10
9
8
7
6
5
–150
–80 –70 –60 –50 –40 –30 –20tan δ–100 –50 0
Temperatur e (°C)
Temperatur e (°C)50 100 1 50 200 250
1 .2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0log (E'/P a)ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs   101
canized NR films prepared by evaporation. Increasing the amount of chitin 
whiskers from 0 wt% to 20 wt% (coded as NRev, NCH2ev, NCH5ev, NCH10ev, 
NCH15ev, and NCH20ev) successively increases the values of E ′, and the 
highest modulus is observed for the composite containing 20 wt% whiskers. 
This sort of enhancement in modulus even below the Tg is good evidence for 
the strong reinforcing tendency of chitin whiskers in the NR matrix. A sharp 
modulus drop appears for all samples around −60°C, that is, in the glass–rubber 
transition zone. This relaxation process involves cooperative motions of long 
chain sequences. Above Tg the modulus becomes roughly constant over a wide 
temperature region, called the rubbery plateau region (rubbery modulus), 
except in the case of unfilled NR and low filler content composites. For chitin 
whisker-filled NR, a significant increase in rubbery modulus is observed with 
increasing chitin content. For instance, the relaxed modulus at Tg + 150°C of 
a film containing only 2 wt% (around 1.34 vol%) of chitin is seven times higher 
than that of the unfilled matrix. For the 20 wt% chitin whisker-filled compos -
ites, the rubbery modulus is more than 350 times higher than that of the 
unfilled matrix. In addition to this high reinforcing effect, for filler contents 
higher than 5 wt%, a significant improvement in the thermal stability of the 
composite is also noticed up to 220–230°C. Normally, chitin starts to degrade 
at this temperature. The cause of both the high reinforcing effect and the 
improvement of the thermal stability of these materials can be attributed to 
the formation of a rigid network of cellulose whiskers within the polymer 
matrix, formed as a result of hydrogen bonding.
However, the chemically modified whiskers opposed the reverse influence 
on the NR-based nanocomposites [9]. The increase in the filler/matrix interac -
tions results in a decrease in the chitin–chitin interactions responsible for the 
high mechanical characteristics of the unmodified whisker-filled NR film. 
Above Tg, the modulus of all chemically modified whisker-based composites 
was found to be much lower than that of the unmodified one and more similar 
to that of the unfilled matrix.
DMA also reveals the intensity of the tan δ peak relative to the crystalline 
type of the matrix. The intensity of the tan δ peak decreased as the crystallinity 
of the chitin-based polyurethane bionanocomposite samples increased [82]. 
Therefore, it can be concluded that an increase in nanoclay content definitely 
improves the crystalline pattern of the synthesized chitin-based polyurethane 
bionanocomposite samples.
DMA is a technique that is also helpful for estimating the increase in stiff -
ness of the composites caused by the addition of nanosized filler. In the region 
corresponding to the maximum loss factor (tan δ), the decrease in storage 
modulus was usually rapid. The loss factor is sensitive to molecular motion and 
its peak represents the Tg. Nanocomposites based on the novel chitin nanopar -
ticles (CNP) and glycerol plasticized potato starch (GPS) were detected by 
DMA [84]. When CNP was introduced, the storage modulus of GPS–CNP 
composites increased. In GPS–CNP composites, both the upper transition and 
the lower transition shifted to higher temperatures, which indicated that both 102  MorphoLoGIcAL ANd ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs
the starch-rich and starch-poor phases interacted well with CNP . Serving as 
junctions, CNP improved the intermolecular interaction of GPS in the starch-
rich phase, bringing adjacent chains of starch close, restraining chain mobility, 
and reducing the free volume, thereby raising the Tg of composites as the CNP 
content increased.
5.2.3 Thermogravimetric Analysis
In TGA, the change in mass of a sample is measured as a function of tempera -
ture or time under an inert atmosphere (nitrogen) or an oxidative atmosphere 
(air). TGA is used to quantitatively determine the main constitutes of the 
chitin-based nanocomposites. The moisture and other volatile compounds, 
polymer content through pyrolysis or combustion, fillers or reinforcing fibers, 
and ash as decomposition and combustion residues were measured respective 
to the intermolecular interactions of composites.
TGA measurements are often displayed as the first derivative of the TGA 
curve, the so-called DTG curve. Steps due to loss of mass in the TGA curve 
then appear as peaks in the DTG curves. The DTG curve corresponds to the 
rate of change of sample mass.
The influence of nanosized fillers on the thermal behavior of chitin or chi -
tosan has been studied by TGA. The thermal stability of chitosan is usually 
improved by incorporation of the nanoparticles. The improved thermal stabil -
ity is a common advantage of inorganic fillers [15, 60, 61, 85].
However, slight or reverse changes also occurred when certain inorganic 
fillers were added into the chitin or chitosan matrix [86]. The intercalation by 
polymers is usually preferred to that by cationic surfactants due to a decrease 
in thermal stability of the organoclays that have a surfactant [37].
The combination of 2D clay platelets and 1D CNTs has a significantly syn -
ergistic effect on the thermal properties of chitosan [47]. The large improve -
ment in thermal stability of chitosan may arise from three causes: (1) good 
heat barrier properties of CNTs and clay for the polymer matrix during forma -
tion of chars; (2) formation of a carbonaceous layer on the polymer surface at 
lower temperatures, which could hinder the flux of degradation product and 
heat flowing into underlying materials; and (3) a greatly jammed and conju -
gated 3D clay–CNT network, or strong interaction between chitosan and 
nanofillers, which could also restrict the polymer motion during heating.
Recently, the effects of ultrasonification method and chitin whisker content 
on the thermal stability were measured by TGA [87]. Two series of nanocom -
posite films were prepared from waterborne poly(ester-urethane) and chitin 
whisker with and without ultrasound treatment, coded as CW/WPU and 
CHW/WPU, respectively. Thermal degradation patterns of the films are shown 
in Figure 5.15 and Figure 5.16. Data related to the temperature corresponding 
to the weight losses of the initial weights are summarized in Table 5.1. Chitin 
whiskers exhibited two degradation peaks at about 260°C and 350°C. The CW/
WPU and CHW/WPU films exhibited much higher thermal stability than that ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs   103
Figure 5.15  Thermogravimetric analyses of WPU, CW, 5%CW/WPU, 10%CW/WPU, 
and 30%CW/WPU [87].100
80
60
4020
0WPU
Temperatur e/°CCW
5%CW/WPU
100 200Weight loss/%
300 400 500 60010%CW/WPU
30%CW/WPU
Figure 5.16  Thermogravimetric analyses of WPU, CW, 5%CHW/WPU, and 20%CHW/
WPU [87].100
80
60
40
20
0WPU
CW
5%CHW/WPU
20%CHW/WPU
100 200
Temperatur e/°C300 400 500 600Weight loss/%
of the pure WPU film and chitin whisker. The hydrogen-bonded chitin whisker 
network induced a thermal stabilization of the composite up to 250°C, which 
is higher than the temperature of 200°C at which chitin whisker starts to 
decompose, indicating the reinforcing effect of nanometer-sized chitin whis -
kers in the WPU matrix. Moreover, the film 5%CW/WPU appeared as having 104  MorphoLoGIcAL ANd ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs
a higher thermal stability along the wide temperature range, compared with 
the film 5%CHW/WPU without the ultrasound treatment. The above results 
suggest that more effective reinforcement and stronger interactions between 
WPU and CW occurred with the ultrasound treatment.
5.2.4 Thermomechanical Analysis
TMA measures the dimensional changes of a sample as it is heated. The linear 
coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) was calculated from the measurement 
curve.
TMA is used to determine important properties and temperature effects 
by measuring the dimensions of a sample as a function of temperature. It is 
noted that chitin nanofiber-reinforced acrylic resin films exhibited consider -
ably low thermal expansion [88]. By adding 40 wt% of chitin nanofibers, the 
CTE of the acrylic resin dropped to 15.6 ppm/K, approximately 1/14 of its 
original value, a value comparable to the CTE of cellulose nanocomposites. 
The fact that the CTE of the chitin crystal in the axial direction is probably 
close to zero and the axial Young’s modulus of chitin is around 80 GPa, in 
combination with the inplane random nanofiber orientation distribution, 
apparently leads to the very low CTE of the corresponding composites.
To further interpret the thermal measurement results of chitin-based nano -
composites, more information is needed. In addition to the thermal analysis 
methods already mentioned, this can be obtained by combining two or more 
suitable techniques. Techniques often used include simultaneous differential 
thermal analysis (DTA), simultaneous DSC, and various methods for online 
gas analysis (mass spectrometry and infrared spectroscopy).
REFERENCES
 [1] Huang, H., Yuan, Q., and Yang, X. (2004) Preparation and characterization of metal–
chitosan nanocomposites. Colloids and Surfaces. B, Biointerfaces , 39, 31–37.TABLE 5.1  Thermogravimetric Analyses Data of the Samples: Temperatures (°C) 
According to the Weight Loss (%) [87]
Weight 
Loss/% WPU CW5% CW/
WPU5% CHW/
WPU10% CW/
WPU20% CHW/
WPU30% CW/
WPU
5 245 208 256 252 257 256 264
10 273 249 284 280 286 277 293
20 325 286 330 321 329 322 333
30 355 304 359 351 358 353 353
50 388 324 392 390 391 385 380
80 430 479 442 429 434 429 503rEfErENcEs   105
 [2] Zuber, M., Mahmood Zia, K., Mahboob, S., Hassan, M., and Ahmad Bhatti, I. 
(2010) Synthesis of chitin–bentonite clay based polyurethane bio-nanocomposites. 
International Journal of Biological Macromolecules , 47, 196–200.
 [3] Shieh, Y., Yang, Y.-F. (2006) Significant improvements in mechanical property and 
water stability of chitosan by carbon nanotubes. European Polymer Journal , 42, 
3162–3170.
 [4] Watthanaphanit, A., Supaphol, P ., Tamura, H., Tokura, S., and Rujiravanit, R. 
(2010) Wet-spun alginate/chitosan whiskers nanocomposite fibers: Preparation, 
characterization and release characteristic of the whiskers. Carbohydrate Poly -
mers, 79, 738–746.
 [5] Lu, Y., Weng, L., and Zhang, L. (2004) Morphology and properties of soy protein 
isolate thermoplastics reinforced with chitin whiskers. Biomacromolecules , 5, 
1046–1051.
 [6] Wongpanit, P ., Sanchavanakit, N., Pavasant, P ., Bunaprasert, T., Tabata, Y., and 
Rujiravanit, R. (2007) Preparation and characterization of chitin whisker-
reinforced silk fibroin nanocomposite sponges. European Polymer Journal , 43, 
4123–4135.
 [7] Zhou, C., Wu, Q. (2011) A novel polyacrylamide nanocomposite hydrogel rein -
forced with natural chitosan nanofibers. Colloids and Surfaces. B, Biointerfaces , 84, 
155–162.
 [8] Gopalan Nair, K., Dufresne, A. (2003) Crab shell chitin whisker reinforced natural 
rubber nanocomposites. 1. Processing and swelling behavior. Biomacromolecules , 
4, 657–665.
 [9] Gopalan Nair, K., Dufresne, A., Gandini, A., and Naceur Belgacem, M. (2003) 
Crab shell chitin whiskers reinforced natural rubber nanocomposites. 3. Effect of 
chemical modification of chitin whiskers. Biomacromolecules , 4, 1835–1842.
[10] Sowmya, S., Sudheesh Kumar, P .T., Chennazhi, K.P ., Nair, S.V., Tamura, H., and 
Jayakumar, R. (2011) Biocompatible β-chitin Hydrogel/nanobioactive glass 
ceramic nanocomposite scaffolds for periodontal bone regeneration. Trends in 
Biomaterials and Artificial Organs , 25, 1–11.
[11] Madhumathi, K., Sudheesh Kumar, P .T., Binulal, N.S., Nair, S.V., Tamura, H., and 
Jayakumar, R. (2009) Development of novel chitin/nano bioactive glass ceramic 
nanocomposite scaffolds for tissue engineering applications. Carbohydrate Poly -
mers, 78, 926–931.
[12] Chen, J., Loo, L.S., and Wang, K. (2011) Enhanced mechanical properties of novel 
chitosan nanocomposite fibers. Carbohydrate Polymers , 86, 1151–1156.
[13] Rana, V.K., Pandey, A.K., Singh, R.P ., Kumar, B., Mishra, S., and Ha, C.-S. (2010) 
Enhancement of thermal stability and phase relaxation behavior of chitosan dis -
solved in aqueous l-lactic acid: Using “silver nanoparticles” as nano filler. Macro -
molecular Research , 18, 713–720.
[14] Madhumathi, K., Sudheesh Kumar, P .T., Abhilash, S., Sreeja, V., Tamura, H., 
Manzoor, K., Nair, S.V., and Jayakumar, R. (2010) Development of novel chitin/
nanosilver composite scaffolds for wound dressing applications. Journal of Materi -
als Science: Materials in Medicine , 21, 807–813.
[15] Krishna Rao, K.S.V., Ramasubba Reddy, P ., Lee, Y.-I., and Kim, C. (2010) Synthesis 
and characterization of chitosan-PEG-Ag nanocomposites for antimicrobial 
application. Carbohydrate Polymers , 7, 28–38.106  MorphoLoGIcAL ANd ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs
[16] Tripathi, S., Mehrotra, G.K., and Dutta, P .K. (2011) Chitosan–silver oxide nano -
composite film: Preparation and antimicrobial activity. Bulletin of Materials 
Science , 34, 29–35.
[17] Chen, J.-Y., Zhou, P .-J., Li, J.-L., and Wang, Y. (2008) Studies on the photocatalytic 
performance of cuprous oxide/chitosan nanocomposites activated by visible light. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 72, 128–132.
[18] Malhotra, B.D., Kaushik, A. (2009) Metal oxide–chitosan based nanocomposite 
for cholesterol biosensor. Thin Solid Films , 518, 614–620.
[19] Yang, D., Li, J., Jiang, Z., Lu, L., and Chen, X. (2009) Chitosan/TiO 2 nanocomposite 
pervaporation membranes for ethanol dehydration. Chemical Engineering Science , 
64, 3130–3137.
[20] Jayakumar, R., Ramachandran, R., Sudheesh Kumar, P .T., Divyarani, V.V., Sriniva -
san, S., Chennazhi, K.P ., Tamurab, H., and Nair, S.V. (2011) Fabrication of chitin–
chitosan/nano ZrO 2 composite scaffolds for tissue engineering applications. 
International Journal of Biological Macromolecules , 49, 274–280.
[21] Sanpui, P ., Murugadoss, A., Durga Prasad, P .V., Ghosh, S.S., and Chattopadhyay, 
A. (2008) The antibacterial properties of a novel chitosan–Ag-nanoparticle com -
posite. International Journal of Food Microbiology , 124, 142–146.
[22] Namdeo, M., Bajpai, S.K. (2008) Chitosan–magnetite nanocomposites (CMNs) as 
magnetic carrier particles for removal of Fe(III) from aqueous solutions. Colloids 
and Surfaces. A, Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects , 320, 161–168.
[23] Jayakumar, R., Roshini, R., Divya Rani, V.V., Chennazhi, K.P ., Tamura, H., and 
Nair, S.V. (2011) Fabrication of chitin-chitosan/nano TiO 2-composite scaffolds for 
tissue engineering applications. International Journal of Biological Macromole -
cules , 48, 336–344.
[24] Sudheesh Kumar, P .T., Abhilash, S., Manzoor, K., Nair, S.V., Tamura, H., and Jaya -
kumar, R. (2010) Preparation and characterization of novel β-Chitin/nano silver 
composite scaffolds for wound dressing applications. Carbohydrate Polymers , 80, 
761–767.
[25] Madhumathi, K., Sudhessh Kumar, P .T., Abhilash, S., Nair, S.V., Tamura, H., 
Manzoor, K., Nair, S.V., and Jayakumar, R. (2010) Development of novel chitin/
nanosilver composite scaffolds for wound dressing applications. Journal of Materi -
als Science: Materials in Medicine , 21, 807–813.
[26] Chen, Y., Wang, J. (2011) Preparation and characterization of magnetic chitosan 
nanoparticles and its application for Cu(II) removal. Chemical Engineering 
Journal , 168, 286–292.
[27] Huang, H., Yuan, Q., and Yang, X. (2005) Morphology study of gold–chitosan 
nanocomposites. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science , 282, 26–31.
[28] Xu, Q., Mao, C., Liu, N.-N., Zhu, J.-J., and Sheng, J. (2006) Direct electrochemistry 
of horseradish peroxidase based on biocompatible carboxymethyl chitosan–gold 
nanoparticle nanocomposite. Biosensors and Bioelectronics , 22, 768–773.
[29] Li, B., Jia, D., Zhou, Y., Hu, Q., and Cai, W. (2006) In situ  hybridization to chitosan/
magnetite nanocomposite induced by the magnetic field. Journal of Magnetism 
and Magnetic Materials , 306, 223–227.
[30] Cao, S., Mishra, R., Pilla, S., Tripathi, S., Pandey, M.K., Shah, G., Mishra, A.K., 
Prabaharan, M., Mishra, S.B., Jin, X., Pandey, R.R., Wu, W., Pandey, A.C., and rEfErENcEs   107
Tiwari, A. (2010) Novel chitosan/gold-MPA nanocomposite for sequence-specific 
oligonucleotide detection. Carbohydrate Polymers , 82, 189–194.
[31] Esumi, K., Takei, N., and Yoshimura, T. (2003) Antioxidant-potentiality of gold/
chitosan nanocomposites. Colloids and Surfaces. B, Biointerfaces , 32, 117–123.
[32] Yang, K.-H., Liu, Y.-C., Yu, C.-C., and Chen, B.-C. (2011) Fabrication of chitosan/
silver nanocomposites based on electrochemical methods for removing formalde -
hyde in air. Materials Chemistry and Physics , 126, 993–997.
[33] Singh, J., Srivastava, M., Dutta, J., and Dutta, P .K. (2011) Preparation and proper -
ties of hybrid monodispersed magnetic α-Fe 2O3 based chitosan nanocomposite 
film for industrial and biomedical applications. International Journal of Biological 
Macromolecules , 48, 170–176.
[34] Witoon, T., Chareonpanich, M., and Limtrakul, J. (2009) Effect of acidity on the 
formation of silica–chitosan hybrid materials and thermal conductive property. 
Journal of Sol-Gel Science and Technology , 51, 146–152.
[35] Tan, W., Zhang, Y., Szeto, Y., and Liao, L. (2008) A novel method to prepare 
chitosan/montmorillonite nanocomposites in the presence of hydroxy-aluminum 
oligomeric cations. Composites Science and Technology , 68, 2917–2921.
[36] Wang, S.F., Shen, L., Tong, Y.J., Chen, L., Phang, I.Y., Lim, P .Q., and Liu, T.X. (2005) 
Biopolymer chitosan/montmorillonite nanocomposites: Preparation and charac -
terization. Polymer Degradation and Stability , 90, 123–131.
[37] Zhang, K., Xu, J., Wang, K.Y., Cheng, L., Wang, J., and Liu, B. (2009) Preparation 
and characterization of chitosan nanocomposites with vermiculite of different 
modification. Polymer Degradation and Stability , 94, 2121–2127.
[38] Wang, X., Liu, B., Ren, J., Liu, C., Wang, X., Wu, J., and Sun, R. (2010) Preparation 
and characterization of new quaternized carboxymethyl chitosan/rectorite nano -
composite. Composites Science and Technology , 70, 1161–1167.
[39] Sun, F., Cha, H.-R., Bae, K., Hong, S., Kim, J.-M., Kim, S.H., Lee, J., and Lee, D. 
(2011) Mechanical properties of multilayered chitosan/CNT nanocomposite films. 
Materials Science and Engineering A , 528, 6636–6641.
[40] Qiu, J.-D., Xie, H.-Y., and Liang, R.-P . (2008) Preparation of porous chito -
san = carbon nanotubes film modified electrode for biosensor application. Micro -
chim Acta , 162, 57–64.
[41] Tiwari, A. (2009) A novel nanocomposite matrix based on silylated chitosan and 
multiwall carban nanotubes for the immobilization of urease. Journal Inorganic 
and Organometallic Polymers , 19, 361–366.
[42] Liu, Y.-L., Chen, W.-H., and Chang, Y.-H. (2009) Preparation and properties of 
chitosan/carbon nanotube nanocomposites using poly(styrene sulfonic acid)-mod -
ified CNTs. Carbohydrate Polymers , 76, 232–238.
[43] Yang, H., Yuan, R., Chai, Y., and Zhuo, Y. (2011) Electrochemically deposited 
nanocomposite of chitosan and carbon nanotubes for detection of human chori -
onic gonadotrophin. Colloids and Surfaces. B, Biointerfaces , 82, 463–469.
[44] Tiwari, A., Dhakate, S.R. (2009) Chitosan–SiO 2–multiwall carbon nanotubes nano -
composite: A novel matrix for the immobilization of creatine amidinohydrolase. 
International Journal of Biological Macromolecules , 44, 408–412.
[45] Salam, M.A., Makki, M.S.I., and Abdelaal, M.Y.A. (2011) Preparation and char -
acterization of multi-walled carbon nanotubes/chitosan nanocomposite and its 108  MorphoLoGIcAL ANd ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs
application for the removal of heavy metals from aqueous solution. Journal of 
Alloys and Compounds , 509, 2582–2587.
[46] Wu, T., Pan, Y., Bao, H., and Li, L. (2011) Preparation and properties of chitosan 
nanocomposite films reinforced by poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-
poly(styrenesulfonate) treated carbon nanotubes. Materials Chemistry and Physics , 
129, 932–938.
[47] Tang, C., Chen, N., Zhang, Q., Wang, K., Fu, Q., and Zhang, X. (2009) Preparation 
and properties of chitosan nanocomposites with nanofillers of different dimen -
sions. Polymer Degradation and Stability , 94, 124–131.
[48] Shen, X., Tong, H., Jiang, T., Zhu, Z., Wan, P ., and Hu, J. (2007) Homogeneous 
chitosan/carbonate apatite/citric acid nanocomposites prepared through a novel 
in situ  precipitation method. Composites Science and Technology , 67, 2238–2245.
[49] Cai, X., Tong, H., Shen, X., Chen, W., Yan, J., and Hu, J. (2009) Preparation and 
characterization of homogeneous chitosan–polylactic acid/hydroxyapatite nano -
composite for bone tissue engineering and evaluation of its mechanical properties. 
Acta Biomaterialia , 5, 2693–2703.
[50] Hu, Q., Li, B., Wang, M., and Shen, J. (2004) Preparation and characterization of 
biodegradable chitosan/hydroxyapatite nanocomposite rods via in situ  hybridiza -
tion: A potential material as internal fixation of bone fracture. Biomaterials , 25, 
779–785.
[51] Liji Sobhana, S.S., Sundaraseelan, J., Sekar, S., Sastry, T.P ., and Mandal, A.B. (2009) 
Gelatin–chitosan composite capped gold nanoparticles: A matrix for the growth 
of hydroxyapatite. J Nanopart Res , 11, 333–340.
[52] Pang, X., Zhitomirsky, I. (2008) Electrodeposition of hydroxyapatite–silver–chito -
san nanocomposite coatings. Surface & Coatings Technology , 202, 3815–3821.
[53] Sudheesh Kumar, P .T., Sowmya, S., Vinoth, K.L., Tamura, H., Nair, S.V., and Jaya -
kumar, R. (2011) Synthesis, characterization and cytocompatibility studies of α-
chitin hydrogel/nano hydroxyapatite composite scaffolds. International Journal of 
Biological Macromolecules , 49, 20–31.
[54] Sudheesh Kumar, P .T., Sowmya, S., Vinoth, K.L., Tamura, H., Nair, S.V., and Jaya -
kumar, R. (2011) β-Chitin hydrogel/nano hydroxyapatite composite scaffolds for 
tissue engineering applications. Carbohydrate Polymers , 85, 584–591.
[55] Ge, H., Zhao, B., Lai, Y., Hu, X., Zhang, D., and Hu, K. (2010) From crabshell  
to chitosan-hydroxyapatite composite material via a biomorphic mineralization 
synthesis method. Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Medicine , 21, 
1781–1787.
[56] Jiang, L., Li, Y., and Xiong, C. (2009) Preparation and biological properties of a 
novel composite scaffold of nano-hydroxyapatite/chitosan/carboxymethyl cellu -
lose for bone tissue engineering. Journal of Biomedical Science , 16, 65–75.
[57] Zhang, Y., Venugopal, J.R., El-Turki, A., Ramakrishna, S., Su, B., and Lim, C.T. 
(2008) Electrospun biomimetic nanocomposite nanofibers of hydroxyapatite/
chitosan for bone tissue engineering. Biomaterials , 29, 4314–4322.
[58] Wan Ngah, W.S., Md Ariff, N.F., and Megat Hanafiah, M.A.K. (2010) Preparation, 
characterization, and environmental application of crosslinked chitosan-coated 
bentonite for tartrazine adsorption from aqueous solutions. Water, Air, and Soil 
Pollution , 206, 225–236.rEfErENcEs   109
[59] Wang, X., Du, Y., Luo, J., Lin, B., and Kennedy, J.F. (2007) Chitosan/organic recto -
rite nanocomposite films: Structure, characteristic and drug delivery behaviour. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 69, 41–49.
[60] Wang, X., Du, Y., Yang, J., Wang, X., Shi, X., and Hu, Y. (2006) Preparation, char -
acterization and antimicrobial activity of chitosan/layered silicate nanocomposites. 
Polymer , 47, 6738–6744.
[61] El-Sherif, H., El-Masry, M. (2011) Superabsorbent nanocomposite hydrogels 
based on intercalation of chitosan into activated bentonite. Polymer Bulletin , 66, 
721–734.
[62] Khunawattanakul, W., Puttipipatkhachorn, S., Rades, T., and Pongjanyakul, T. 
(2011) Novel chitosan −magnesium aluminum silicate nanocomposite film coatings 
for modified-release tablets. International Journal of Pharmaceutics , 407, 
132–141.
[63] Liu, T.-Y., Chen, S.-Y., Li, J.-H., and Liu, D.-M. (2006) Study on drug release 
behaviour of CDHA/chitosan nanocomposites—Effect of CDHA nanoparticles. 
Journal of Controlled Release , 112, 88–95.
[64] Yuan, Q., Shah, J., Hein, S., and Misra, R.D.K. (2010) Controlled and extended 
drug release behavior of chitosan-based nanoparticle carrier. Acta Biomaterialia , 
6, 1140–1148.
[65] Tang, Y., Zhao, Y., Li, Y., and Du, Y. (2010) A thermosensitive chitosan/poly(vinyl 
alcohol) hydrogel containing nanoparticles for drug delivery. Polymer Bulletin , 64, 
791–804.
[66] Zhang, F.-Y., Zhou, Y.-M., Sun, Y., Chen, J., Ye, X., and Huang, J. (2010) Prepara -
tion and characterization of Chitosan/Konjac glucomannan/CdS nanocomposite 
film with low infrared emissivity. Materials Research Bulletin , 45, 859–862.
[67] Niamsa, N., Srisuwan, Y., Baimark, Y., Phinyocheep, P ., and Kittipoom, S. (2009) 
Preparation of nanocomposite chitosan/silk fibroin blend films containing nano -
pore structures. Carbohydrate Polymers , 78, 60–65.
[68] Nayak, P .L., Sahoo, D. (2011) Chitosan-alginate composites blended with cloisite 
30B as a novel drug delivery system for anticancer drug paclitaxel. International 
Journal of Plastics Technology , 15, 68–81.
[69] Paipitak, K., Pornpra, T., Mongkontalang, P ., Techitdheera, W., and Pecharapa, W. 
(2011) Characterization of PVA-chitosan nanofibers prepared by electrospinning. 
Procedia Engineering , 8, 101–105.
[70] Park, J.H., Lee, H.W., Chae, D.K., Oh, W., Yun, J.D., Deng, Y., and Yeum, J.H.  
(2009) Electrospinning and characterization of poly(vinyl alcohol)/chitosan 
oligosaccharide/clay nanocomposite nanofibers in aqueous solutions. Colloid and 
Polymer Science , 287, 943–950.
[71] Shalumon, K.T., Binulal, N.S., Selvamurugan, N., Nair, S.V., Menon, D., Furuike, 
T., Tamura, H., and Jayakumar, R. (2009) Electrospinning of carboxymethyl chitin/
poly(vinyl alcohol) nanofibrous scaffolds for tissue engineering applications. Car-
bohydrate Polymers , 77, 863–869.
[72] Huang, X.-J., Ge, D., and Xu, Z.-K. (2007) Preparation and characterization of 
stable chitosan nanofibrous membrane for lipase immobilization. European 
Polymer Journal , 43, 3710–3718.
[73] Han, D., Yan, L., Chen, W., and Li, W. (2011) Preparation of chitosan/graphene 
oxide composite film with enhanced mechanical strength in the wet state. Carbo -
hydrate Polymers , 83, 653–658.110  MorphoLoGIcAL ANd ThErMAL INvEsTIGATIoNs of chITIN-BAsEd NANocoMposITEs
[74] Yang, X., Tu, Y., Li, L., Shang, S., and Tao, X. (2010) Well-dispersed chitosan/
graphene oxide nanocomposites. Applied Materials and Interfaces , 6, 1707–1713.
[75] Wang, S., Tan, Y., Zhao, D., and Liu, G. (2008) Amperometric tyrosinase biosensor 
based on Fe 3O4 nanoparticles–chitosan nanocomposite. Biosensors and Bioelec -
tronics , 23, 1781–1787.
[76] Hsu, S., Chang, Y.-B., Tsai, C.-L., Fu, K.-Y., Wang, S.-H., and Tseng, H.-J. (2011) 
Characterization and biocompatibility of chitosan nanocomposites. Colloids and 
Surfaces. B, Biointerfaces , 85, 198–206.
[77] Verma, D., Katti, K.S., Katti, D.R., and Mohanty, B. (2008) Mechanical response 
and multilevel structure of biomimetic hydroxyapatite/polygalacturonic/chitosan 
nanocomposites. Materials Science and Engineering C , 28, 399–405.
[78] Twu, Y.-K., Chen, Y.-W., and Shih, C.-M. (2008) Preparation of silver nanoparticles 
using chitosan suspensions. Powder Technology , 185, 251–257.
[79] Morin, A., Dufresne, A. (2002) Nanocomposites of chitin whiskers from Riftia  
tubes and poly(caprolactone). Macromolecules , 35, 2190–2199.
[80] Khunawattanakul, W., Puttipipatkhachorn, S., Rades, T., and Pongjanyakul, T. 
(2010) Chitosan–magnesium aluminum silicate nanocomposite films: Physico -
chemical characterization and drug permeability. International Journal of Pharma -
ceutics , 393, 219–229.
[81] Kadokawa, J., Takegawa, A., Mine, S., and Prasad, K. (2011) Preparation of chitin 
nanowhiskers using an ionic liquid and their composite materials with poly(vinyl 
alcohol). Carbohydrate Polymers , 84, 1408–1412.
[82] Mahmood Zia, K., Zuber, M., Barikani, M., Jabbar, A., and Kaleem Khosa, M. 
(2010) XRD pattern of chitin based polyurethane bio-nanocomposites. Carbohy -
drate Polymers , 80, 539–543.
[83] Gopalan Nair, K., Dufresne, A. (2003) Crab shell chitin whisker reinforced natural 
rubber nanocomposites. 2. Mechanical behavior. Biomacromolecules , 4, 666–674.
[84] Chang, P .R., Jian, R., Yu, J., and Ma, X. (2010) Starch-based composites reinforced 
with novel chitin nanoparticles. Carbohydrate Polymers , 80, 420–425.
[85] Chang, P .R., Jian, R., Yu, J., and Ma, X. (2010) Fabrication and characterisation  
of chitosan nanoparticles/plasticised-starch composites. Food Chemistry , 120, 
736–740.
[86] Sriupayo, J., Supaphol, P ., Blackwell, J., and Rujiravanit, R. (2005) Preparation and 
characterization of α-chitin whisker-reinforced chitosan nanocomposite films with 
or without heat treatment. Carbohydrate Polymers , 62, 130–136.
[87] Zeng, M., Gao, H., Wu, Y., Fan, L., and Li, A. (2010) Preparation and characteriza -
tion of nanocomposite films from chitin whisker and waterborne poly(ester-
urethane) with or without ultra-sonification treatment. Journal of Macromolecular 
Science Part A , 47, 867–876.
[88] Shams, M.I., Ifuku, S., Nogi, M., Oku, T., and Yano, H. (2011) Fabrication of opti -
cally transparent chitin nanocomposites. Applied Physics A , 102, 325–331.111Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 6
Mechanical Properties of Chitin-Based 
Nanocomposites
MERIN SARA THOMAS , LALY A. POTHAN, and SABU THOMAS
6.1 INTRODUCTION
Nature is gifted with several biomaterials that could be obtained from animals 
and plants. Chitin is one of such abundant biomacromolecules occurring 
mainly in the exoskeletons of shellfish and insects and are extracted at a rate 
of 1010 to 1011 tons per year [1]. Although native chitin is a semicrystalline 
biopolymer with microfibrillar morphology and excellent material properties, 
most of the biomass is thrown away as industrial waste (shrimp and crab 
shells) without effective utilization. Thus, it is important to make efficient use 
of this biomass resource as a green and environmentally friendly material [2].
Chitin occurs in nature as ordered crystalline microfibrils, forming struc -
tural components in animals, algae, and fungi in which chitin acts as a sup -
portive and protective component (Fig. 6.1). In animals, chitin occurs essentially 
in crustacean, mollusks, and insects, where it is the main constituent of their 
exoskeleton, associated with organic substances, mainly proteins, and impreg -
nated with inorganic substances, such as calcium salts.
Chitin is a copolymer of N-acetylglucosamine and N-glucosamine units 
randomly or block distributed throughout the biopolymer chain, depending 
on the processing method used to derive the biopolymer (Fig. 6.2). When the 
number of N-acetylglucosamine units is higher than 50%, the biopolymer is 
termed chitin. Conversely, when the number of N-glucosamine units is higher, 
the term chitosan is used. Chitosan (CS) has been the better researched 
version of the biopolymer because of its ready solubility in dilute acids [3].112  MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN-BASEd NANOcOMPOSITES
Chitin and CS possess unique properties such as biocompatibility, biode -
gradability, antibacterial properties, and nontoxicity. Thus, they have been 
extensively investigated for several decades for filtration, food packaging film, 
artificial skin, bone substitutes, water engineering, and so on [4]. However, 
regardless of the numerous advantages and exceptional properties of CS, its 
mechanical properties are not good enough to satisfy a wide range of applica -
tions. The formation of organic–inorganic hybrids through incorporation of Figure 6.1  Source and hierarchial crustaceans cuticle showing the ordered structural 
chitin. Reproduced and reprinted with permission from Reference [3].
epicuticle
70 mm~1 mm
~10 µm
~3 nm
~100 nm~200 nm
~10 Aexocuticle
endocuticle
Figure 6.2  Schematic representation of the chitin and chitosan depicting the copoly -
mer character of biopolymers.HOCH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH3CH3
xyO
O
CO
O
O OO
O
OOH
OH
OH OH
OHNH
NH
NH
R = HR = NH2R
RMEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN/cHITOSAN NANOcOMPOSITES   113
fillers is an effective approach for improving the physical and mechanical 
properties of CS. Hence, for reinforcing CS, several reinforcing agents such as 
hydroxyapatite [5–8], clay [9–11], carbon nanotubes [12–16], and graphene 
oxide [17, 18] have been used.
6.2 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF CHITIN/CHITOSAN 
NANOCOMPOSITES
6.2.1 Chitosan–Hydroxyapatite Nanocomposites
Hydroxyapatite [Ca 10(PO 4)6(OH) 2] (HAp) is one of the most stable forms of 
calcium phosphate. It occurs in bones as a major component (60–65%), pos -
sesses various useful properties such as biocompatibility, bioactivity, and 
osteoconductivity, and is nontoxic, noninflammatory, and nonimmunogenic. 
The mechanical properties of HAp can be improved by forming a composite 
of polymer layer on its surface. In recent years, considerable attention has 
been given to CS–HAp composite materials and their applications in the field 
of bone tissue engineering due to their minimal foreign body reactions, anti -
bacterial nature, biocompatibility, biodegradability, and the ability to be 
molded into various geometries and forms such as porous structures, suitable 
for cell ingrowth, and osteoconduction. The composite of CS including HAp 
is very popular because of their biodegradability and biocompatibility in 
nature [19].The mechanical properties of the CS-HAp composites play a sig -
nificant role in bone tissue engineering [20]. The intermolecular hydrogen 
bond and chelate interaction between the CS and HAp contribute to good 
mechanical properties. There is a possible interaction between the NH 2 group 
and primary and secondary –OH group of CS with Ca2 + (metal coordination 
interaction) of HAp (Fig. 6.3). This interaction might be responsible for the 
Figure 6.3  Chemical interaction between chitosan –HAp.CH2OHCH2OH
CH2OH CH2OHHH
H
H
HH
HH
H
H
HH
H
HHNH2 NH2
NH2NH2Ca(II) Ca(II) HApO
OO
HO
HOHO
HOO
O
OO
O
O
O114  MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN-BASEd NANOcOMPOSITES
higher mechanical strength of the composite scaffolds as compared to CS and 
HAp alone. Compressive strength has been a widely used parameter to 
measure the mechanical strength of porous scaffolds [19, 20].
Li et al. [5] compared the compressive strengths of different composite 
ratios of CS/HAp and found the maximum compressive strength to be 
119.86 MPa (30 : 70 CS/HAp ratio). Increasing the HAp ratio leads to an 
increase in the compressive strength. The incorporation of CS into the HAp 
matrix via blending methods would result in the decrease of mechanical prop -
erties of the composite material due to the weaker interfacial bonding between 
CS and the HAp matrix, and as a result the compressive strength decreases 
to 47.8 MPa [21, 22]. The molecular weight of CS also contributes significantly 
to the mechanical properties of the composite material. In general, high molec -
ular weight CS scaffolds have a higher compression modulus than medium 
molecular weight CS. The compression moduli of high molecular weight CS 
and CS/nanoHAp (nHAp) (1%) nanocomposite three-dimensional scaffold 
were found to be 6.0 ± 0.3 kPa and 9.2 ± 0.2 kPa, respectively [22]. The bending 
strength and modulus of the composites were 86 MPa and 3.4 GPa, respec -
tively. Due to these good mechanical properties, CS/nHAp composite can be 
used as a potential scaffold material for bone regeneration.
The mechanical properties of CS composite scaffold also depend on the 
temperature and they increase with an increase in the temperature. A possible 
justification to this may be that with an increase in the temperature, the inter -
facial bonding between CS and HAp increases [23]. The water content of the 
scaffold may also have a major role to play in mechanical strength. In an 
interesting study, it was found that the nHAp/CS/carboxymethyl cellulose 
(40/30/30% w/v) has the highest mechanical property of 40 MPa in dry and 
12 MPa in wet state [24].
Cai et al. [6] synthesized homogeneous nanocomposites composed of HAp 
and CS in the presence of polylactic acid. The mechanical properties of the 
composites were evaluated by measuring their compressive strength and 
elastic modulus. Significant improvements in the elastic modulus and compres -
sive strength were achieved by incorporating polylactic acid and CS biopoly -
mer together with HAp. The CS–PLA/HAp composites may even match the 
properties of natural bones and therefore may be suitable for surgical 
applications.
Young’s modulus and ultimate tensile strength (UTS) of formaldehyde-
treated CS/HAp nanocomposite film containing 66 wt% (47 vol%) HAp reach 
up to 17.3 GPa and 222 MPa, respectively, which are significantly higher than 
those of pure CS [7].
Pradal et al. [8] prepared hydrophobic modification of CS/HAp composites 
(by grafting n-alkyl acids on CS), and characterized for their tensile properties 
under wet conditions. The tensile properties of the grafted composite films 
were significantly improved relative to nongrafted films, and a modulus of 
393 ± 68 MPa and a UTS of 18.7 ± 1.5 MPa were reached for composite films 
grafted for 1 day. This study provides a simple method to improve the wet 
tensile properties of CS/HAp composite films, making them more suitable for MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN/cHITOSAN NANOcOMPOSITES   115
biomedical applications. One way to improve the mechanical properties of CS/
HAp biocomposites under wet conditions is to reduce the swelling of these 
nanocomposites, perhaps through hydrophobic modification of CS.
In the case of CS/HAp composites, the improvement in mechanical proper -
ties is due to metal coordination interaction. The addition of HAp can reduce 
the water absorption, which postponed the retention of mechanical properties 
of CS/HAp composite under moisture conditions.
6.2.2 Chitosan–Clay Nanocomposites
In recent years, it has been observed that the addition of just a small quantity 
of nanosized layered silicates greatly improved the properties of virgin poly -
mers without affecting their processability. Layered silicate clays have been 
found to be effective in reinforcing fillers for polymers due to their lamellar 
structure and high surface area of about 750 m2/g. Figure 6.4 shows the different 
Figure 6.4  Illustration of different types of composite that can arise from the interac -
tion between layered silicates and polymers. (a) Phase-separated composite (micro -
composite). (b) Intercalated composite (nanocomposite). (c) Exfoliated composite 
(nanocomposite). Reproduced and reprinted with permission from Reference [25].Layeved silcat e
(a) Phase separat ed
(micr ocomposite)Exfoliat ed
(nanocomposit e)Intercalat ed
(nanocomposite)(b) (c)Polymer116  MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN-BASEd NANOcOMPOSITES
types of composites that can arise from the interaction between layered silicates 
and polymers.
Chitosan can interact with nanoclays via hydrogen bonding and/or electro -
static attraction interactions due to the presence of both amino and hydroxyl 
groups [26, 27]. As a result, one can blend CS with nanoclays in aqueous solu -
tions for well-dispersed CS/clay nanocomposites. Several efforts have been 
made to prepare CS/nanoclay composites with improved mechanical and 
thermal properties [28–31]. Increased interfacial compatibility via hydrogen 
bonding and/or electrostatic attraction between CS and clays is responsible 
for the enhanced performance of the nanocomposites [32, 33].
Polymer–clay nanocomposites have become a subject of intensive research 
because of their ability for nanoscale dispersion, which brings significant 
improvement in mechanical and physical properties compared with microscale 
polymer composites. The complete dispersion of clay nanolayers in a polymer 
optimizes the number of available reinforcing elements that carry an applied 
load and deflect the evolving cracks. The coupling between the large surface 
area of the clay and the polymer matrix facilitates the stress transfer to the 
reinforcing phase, allowing for the improvement of the tensile stress and 
toughness.
Abdollahi et al. [11] incorporated montmorillonite (MMT) nanoclay and 
rosemary essential oil (REO) into CS film. The tensile strength (TS) of chito -
san film increased significantly by incorporating MMT into chitosan up to 3 
wt%, but adding more MMT could not improve it. This improvement in the 
TS of nanocomposite in a low amount of MMT may be attributed to the 
uniform dispersion of MMT in the CS matrix and a strong interaction between 
CS and MMT. The decrease in TS at a high concentration of MMT may be 
caused by the aggregation of MMT particles with high surface energies [34].
Zia et al. [10] studied the mechanical behavior of chitin–bentonite clay-
based polyurethane bionanocomposites. The UTS of chitin-based polyure -
thane bionanocomposites increased with increasing Delite HPS® (Laviosa 
Chemica Mineraria, Italy) bentonite clay content. The prepared bionanocom -
posites show a plateau behavior of up to 4% bentonite nanoclay content 
(PUBNC4), yielding a constant UTS of approximately 35 MPa. However, 
there is tremendous decrease in the tensile strength using 8% nanoclay con -
tents (PUBNC5). This behavior may be due to the incompatibility of the 
higher contents of nanoclay. It can clearly be observed that there is a linear 
reduction of elongation at break with increasing Delite HPSbentonite clay 
contents. This could be attributed to the larger aggregations of Delite HPS 
bentonite clay contents, as well as the formation of more aggregated centers 
with increased Delite HPS bentonite clay contents. These increased aggre -
gated centers would probably act as additional stress centers leading to 
increased chances of failure with increased Delite HPS bentonite clay con -
tents. The higher values in elongation at break could be attributed to the 
surface characteristics of the lower Delite HPS bentonite clay particles, which 
cause a better dispersion of these particles in the matrix, ultimately strengthen -MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN/cHITOSAN NANOcOMPOSITES   117
ing the interfacial interactions between the dispersed phase and the matrix 
phase.
Lavorgna et al. [9] studied the combined effect of both clay and glycerol 
plasticizer on the properties of CS films (Fig. 6.5). Dynamic mechanical analy -
sis (DMA), tensile, and nanoindentation tests show that, as far as the effect of 
clay loading is concerned, the mechanical properties of nanocomposite films 
without glycerol are not significantly affected by the presence of sodium–
montmorillonite (Na–MMT) stacks. On the contrary, for nanocomposites con -
taining glycerol, the mechanical properties are improved as clay loading 
increases. This is due to the combined effect of clays and plasticizer. Glycerol 
modifies the hydrogen-bonding network within the material and allows for 
better interaction between the filler and the matrix, thus facilitating the stress 
transfer to the reinforcement phase and improving its mechanical properties.
The effects of sodium montmorillonite (Na–MMT) and organoclaymont -
morillonite (ODA-MMT) on mechanical and thermal properties and surface 
morphology of poly(caprolactone) (PCL)/CS composites were studied by 
Abdolmohammadi et al. [35]. The tensile modulus increased by adding 
ODA-MMT and Na–MMT into the composite. Elongation at break decreases 
for both micro- and nanocomposites. The TS increases by loading up to 3wt% 
of ODA-MMT, and then decreases with the increase of the clay content, the 
effect of good dispersion of organoclay into the matrix and intercalation of 
organoclay particles by PCL/CS at a low filler content. However, increasing 
Na–MMT into the composite gradually decreases the TS.
Chitosan/halloysite nanotubes (HNT) bionanocomposites were prepared 
[36] by Liu et al. The tensile properties of CS were enhanced significantly by Figure 6.5  DMA curves including storage modulus (a) and tan δ (b) as a function of 
temperature for chitosan and its nanocomposites. ( ) CS, () CS/3MMT and ( )
CS/10MMT, ( ) CS/GLY, ( ) CS/3MMT/GLY and ( ) CS/10MMT/GLY. Reproduced 
and reprinted with permission from Reference [9].(a) (b)
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
40 50 100 1 50 200 250 80
Temperatur e (°C) Temperatur e (°C)120 1 60 200 2401000Storage Modulus (M Pa)
tan δ
100118  MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN-BASEd NANOcOMPOSITES
HNTs. The storage modulus and glass transition temperature of CS/HNTs 
films were also increased significantly with HNTs.
6.2.3 Chitosan–Carbon Nanotube Nanocomposites
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are long cylinders of covalently bonded carbon 
atoms that possess extraordinary electronic and mechanical properties. CNTs 
exhibit excellent mechanical properties with Young’s modulus as high as 
1.2 TPa and TS of 50–200 GPa. The combination of these exceptional 
mechanical properties, along with the nanometer size, low density, high aspect 
ratio, and high surface area, makes CNTs an ideal candidate for reinforce -
ment in composite materials. Generally, there are two types of CNTs: single-
walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and multiwalled carbon nanotubes 
(MWCNTs). However, the difficulty in separating SWCNTs from bundles 
into individual nanotubes is a big challenge to the use of SWCNT in real 
applications. CNT-reinforced nanocomposites can be considered as a kind of 
particulate composites with filler dimensions on the nanometer scale and 
high aspect ratios. Unlike the microscopic particulate composites, the mechan -
ical properties of nanocomposites depend strongly on the dispersion state of 
nanofillers, apart from the properties of fillers and matrix material. In addi -
tion to dispersion, there are other major requirements for effective reinforce -
ment of CNTs in composites [11]: they include a high aspect ratio and 
alignment and interfacial interactions between CNTs and the polymer matrix. 
The aspect ratio must be sufficiently large to maximize the load transfer 
between the CNTs and matrix material and thus to achieve enhanced 
mechanical properties.
Raw CNTs are mainly hydrophobic and poorly miscible with water. Acid-
treated CNTs contain many defects and hydrophilic groups, such as –OH and 
–COOH, which help improve the solubility of CNTs in water. Chitosan pos -
sesses three kinds of functional groups, namely. amino, primary, and secondary 
hydroxyl groups in a glucosamine unit, and the functionalized CNTs contain 
carboxylic and hydroxyl groups. There is great possibility that strong hydrogen 
bonds may form between CS and the CNTs (Fig. 6.6). Compatibility and strong 
interaction between MWCNTs fillers and the matrix greatly enhances the 
dispersion as well as the interfacial adhesion, thus significantly increasing the 
mechanical properties of the matrix [12]. Covalent functionalization of CS and 
CNT improves the interaction between CS with CNTs, reduces the damage of 
CNTs, and increases their mechanical properties.
Incorporation of super strong light weight CNT structures into the CS 
matrix offers a novel approach to the design of high performance composite 
materials with superior mechanical properties. However, the atomically smooth 
graphene surface of nanotubes can provide only limited load transfer from the 
matrix to nanotubes across the nanotube–polymer interface because of weak 
van der Waals interfacial bonding through covalent grafting of CNTs to the 
CS to form the CNT–CS nanocomposites [13].MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN/cHITOSAN NANOcOMPOSITES   119
Wang et al. [12] reported homogeneous dispersion of CNTs in matrix. When 
0.8% of CNTs was introduced in the CS matrix, the mechanical properties, 
including the tensile modulus and strength of the nanocomposite, were greatly 
improved by about 93–99%. A small addition of CNTs significantly improves 
the tensile properties of the CS matrix, and the mechanical properties increase 
with the increase of CNT loading (0.4 wt% of CNTs filler), whereas the tensile 
modulus and strength of the nanocomposite increases dramatically by about 
78–94%. Due to the aggregation of CNTs within the CS matrix at higher con -
centrations of CNTs, the tensile modulus only increases slightly, while the TS 
remains stable.
In another study, the tenacity of neat CS fiber was recorded as 96 MPa, 
whereas that of CS reinforced with purified but nonfunctionalized single-walled 
carbon nanotubes (p-SWCNTs) increased from 132 MPa for 0.01 wt% SWCNT Figure 6.6  Chemical interactions between chitosan and CNT.
120  MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN-BASEd NANOcOMPOSITES
addition to 180 MPa for 0.4 wt% SWCNT addition. Even at a very low SWCNT 
concentration (0.01 wt%), a significant increase in tenacity was observed, but 
at higher concentrations the increase in tenacity was not proportional. On the 
other hand, on incorporation of functionalized carbon nanotubes (f-CNTs), the 
tenacity increased from 136 MPa on addition of 0.01 wt% SWCNT to 226 MPa 
on addition of 0.4 wt% SWCNT. This continuous improvement in tenacity (even 
at higher SWCNT concentrations) may be ascribed to better dispersion as well 
as interaction of functionalized nanotubes in CS [14]. This might be due to the 
strong chemical interaction of the COOH group of f-CNTs with the amine 
group of CS matrix [15].
Fan et al. [16] used unzipped multiwalled carbon nanotube oxides 
(UMCNOs) as mechanical reinforcement materials for CS. With the increase 
of the available interface areas of MWNTs after unzipping, the UMCNOs are 
more efficient for enhancing the mechanical property of the CS matrix than 
the pristine MWCNTs. With the addition of only 0.2 wt% UMCNOs into the 
CS matrix, the TS and Young’s modulus rise from 69.3 to 142.7 MPa, 2.6 to 
6.9 Gpa, respectively. The relatively small amount of UMCNOs results in a 
significant improvement of mechanical properties in the UMCNOs/CS nano -
composite film (Fig. 6.7).
He et al. [37] fabricated composites composed of CS and MWCNTs by 
milling and ultrasonication dispersion methods. A comparative study of these 
two composite films were done. From dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA), 
the storage modulus (E ′) of the composites was always higher than that of 
pure CS and, especially within the temperature range of 35°C–100°C, the 
composites display an E ′ value, which was almost twice higher than that for 
pure CS. This implies that the stiffness of CS was improved significantly with 
the addition of MWCNTs. In comparison with the film prepared by milling, 
the film prepared by the ultrasonic method had a higher storage modulus  
in the lower temperature range, but the value become lower once the tem -
perature was beyond ∼100°C as the E ′ dropped precipitously. It should be 
noted that the upturn in the E ′ for all samples when the temperature was 
beyond about 180°C is due to the onset of degradation (Fig. 6.8).
Ong et al. reported green nanocomposite membranes consisting of poly(3-
hydroxybutyrate) (PHB)–functionalized MWCNTs into a CS matrix. The 
presence of PHB–MWCNTs greatly enhances the TS of the CS matrix by 
41.8% and increases Young’s modulus by 24.1%. However, a decrease in the 
flexibility of these membranes was observed. These superior mechanical prop -
erties of the PHB–MWCNT/CS nanocomposite membrane can be attributed 
to the good dispersion of the PHB-MWCNT in the CS matrix and their strong 
compatibility with the CS matrix. Additionally, the bulk alignment of the 
PHB–MWCNTs plays a role in enhancing the mechanical properties of the 
nanocomposite membrane. The addition of 0.1 wt% bulk-aligned PHB–
MWCNTs to the CS matrix significantly enhances the TS of the PHB–MWCNT/
CS nanocomposite membrane [38].
Wu et al. [39] prepared CS nanocomposite films reinforced by poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT)–poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS)-treated MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN/cHITOSAN NANOcOMPOSITES   121
Figure 6.7  Averaged results for the ultimate tensile strength for the baseline CS and 
nanocomposites with various nanofiller weight fractions; (b) Percent elongation at 
failure for the baseline CS and nanocomposites with various nanofiller weight fractions; 
(c) Absolute value in Young’s modulus of the CS and nanocomposites with various 
nanofiller weight fractions; (d) Percentage changes of the Young’s modulus of the CS 
and nanocomposites with various nanofiller weight fractions. Reproduced and reprinted 
with permission from Reference [16].0.1 wt%UMCNOs/CS UMCNOs/CS
MWNTs/CSMWNTs/CS8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0Young's modulus (Gpa)CSUMCNOs/CS(a)
(c)(b)
(d)8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0MWNTs/CS
CSUMCNOs/CS
MWNTs/CS
CSElong ation (%)Stress (Mpa)200
180
160
140
120
100
8060
40
20
0
0
0.1 wt% 0.2 wt% 0.3 wt% 0.5 wt%1 wt%0
0.1 wt% 0.2 wt% 0.3 wt% 0.5 wt%1 wt%
200
150
100
50
0Increase of Young's modulus %
0.2 wt% 0.3 wt% 0.5 wt%1 wt%0.1 wt% 0.2 wt% 0.3 wt% 0.5 wt%1 wt%0
carbon nanotubes. The addition of MWCNTs significantly improved the 
mechanical properties of CS. When compared with the neat CS, the mechanical 
properties, such as TS and modulus, of the nanocomposites were greatly 
improved by about 61% and 34%, respectively, with incorporation of only 
0.5 wt% of MWCNTs. The reinforcement caused by PEDOT–PSS/MWCNTs 
was higher than that by pristine MWCNTs at lower contents of MWCNTs. 
The hardness of the nanocomposite with 0.5 wt% MWCNTs increased by 
about 31%, as compared with those of neat CS (Fig. 6.9).
Shieh et al. [14] reported the improvement in the mechanical properties of 
CS by incorporating CS-grafted carbon nanotubes (CNTs-g-CS). Significant 
improvement in the storage modulus. The storage modulus was significantly 122  MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN-BASEd NANOcOMPOSITES
Figure 6.9  Tensile strength and elongation at break and (b) tensile modulus for chi -
tosan nanocomposites as a function of MWCNT content. Reproduced and reprinted 
with permission from Reference [39].(b)120
110
100
90
8070
6050
4080
70
60
50
4030
2010
04.6
4.4
4.24.0
3.8
3.6
3.4
3.2
3.0
2.8Tensile str ength (MP a)(a)
MWCNT cont ent (wt%) MWCNT cont ent (wt%)0.0Tensile modulus (GP a)
Elong ation at Br eak (%)
PEDO T -PSS/MWCNT/chit osan PEDO T -PSS/MWCNT/chit osan
MWCNT/chit osan MWCNT/chit osan
0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6Figure 6.8  Storage modulus (E ′) and tan δ curves of (a) pure chitosan, (b) chitosan/1% 
MWCNTs composite prepared by ultrasonication, and (c) chitosan/1%MWCNT  
scomposite prepared by milling. Reproduced and reprinted with permission from [37].a0.4
0.3
0.20.1
0.0Storage modulus (M Pa)8000
6000
4000
2000
0b
c
35 85 135 1 85 235
Tan delt a
Temperatur e (°C)
up by 134% from 6.4 GPa for the pure CS to 15 GPa for the CS nanocomposite 
containing 40 wt% CNTs-g-CS (Fig. 6.10).
6.2.4 Chitosan–Graphene Oxide Nanocomposites
Graphene is an attractive new type of carbon material with a honeycomb and 
one-atom-thick structure. Interest in graphene is largely attributed to its excel -
lent mechanical and physicochemical properties [40]. Recent studies have 
indicated that graphene oxide (GO), the oxidized form of graphene, proves to MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN/cHITOSAN NANOcOMPOSITES   123
be a promising material for adsorbing dyes and supporting catalysts due to its 
extraordinary mechanical strength and relatively large specific area [41–43].
One of the major advantages with GO is that it is hydrophilic with a very 
high negative charge density arising from the oxygen-containing functional 
groups. In solution phase, GO exists as a single layer. GO can act as weak acid 
cation exchange resin because of the ionizable carboxyl groups, which allow 
ion exchange with metal cations or positively charged organic molecules [42]. 
The intrinsic van der Waals interactions between layers of graphene easily 
results in agglomeration, which leads to insolubility. The occurrence of such 
agglomerations inevitably lowers the reinforcement effectiveness of nanofill -
ers because the maximal load transfer and lowest filler loading can only be 
attained when the nanofillers are dispersed on the molecular scale in the 
polymer matrix. If the nanofillers in the polymer matrix could be dispersed on 
a molecular scale and interacted with the matrix by chemical bonding or strong 
intermolecular forces, significant improvements in the mechanical properties 
of the material or unexpected new properties might be achieved. These chemi -
cal functionalizations have been found to be a feasible and effective way for 
improving the dispersion of graphene materials and interfacial bonding 
between the graphene and the matrix [43, 44] (Fig. 6.11).
Yang et al. studied the mechanical properties of well-dispersed CS–GO 
nanocomposites. Compared with the pure CS, the TS, and Young’s modulus of 
the graphene-based materials are significantly improved by about 122% and 
64%, respectively, with incorporation of 1 wt% GO. At the same time, the 
elongation at the break point increases remarkably [17]. In another study, the 
mechanical properties of composite films were tested by nanoindentation 
method. With the addition of a small amount of graphene in CS (0.1–0.3 wt%), 
the elastic modulus of CS increased over ∼200%.Figure 6.10  Storage moduli of the CS/CNTs-g-CS nanocomposites as a function of 
temperature Reproduced and reprinted with permission from Reference [14].20
15
10
5
0
Temperatur e (°C)−100 −50 0 5 0 1 00 150 200CS/CNTs-g-CS 1 00/0
CS/CNTs-g-CS 80/20
CS/CNTs-g-CS 70/30
CS/CNTs-g-CS 60/40
CS/CNTs-g-CS 50/50Storage modulus (GP a)124  MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN-BASEd NANOcOMPOSITES
Pan et al. [45] presented green fabrication of CS films reinforced with paral -
lel aligned graphene oxide. The nanocomposite films containing 1 wt% GO 
sheets are strong and ductile. Young’s modulus, TS, and elongation at break 
are found to increase by 51% and 93% and 41%, respectively, which are much 
higher than those of neat CS films. Homogeneous dispersion of GO sheets in 
the CS matrix and strong interfacial adhesion between them significantly 
enhanced the mechanical properties of nanocomposites.
6.2.5 Chitin/Chitosan as Nanofiller in PolymerNanocomposites
Junkasem et al. [46] fabricated α-chitin whisker (ChW)-reinforced poly(vinyl 
alcohol) (PVA) nanocompositenanofibers by electrospinning. The TS of the 
as-spun PVA/chitin whisker nanocomposite fiber mats increased from that of 
the neat as-spun fiber mat (i.e., 4.3 ± 0.7 MPa) with initial addition of the chitin 
whiskers to reach a maximum value (i.e., 5.7 ± 0.6 MPa) at the chitin whisker 
to PVA ratio of about 5.1% and decreased with further increasing the whisker 
content. The presence of ChWs within the as-spun nanocompositefiber mats 
increased Young’s modulus by about 4–8 times over that of the neat as-spun 
fiber mat [46].
ChW-reinforced nanocomposites films were prepared by Sriupayo et al. 
[47]. The TS of α-ChW-reinforced CS films increased from that of the pure CS 
film with initial increase in the whisker content to reach a maximum value at 
the whisker content of 2.96 wt% and decreased gradually with further increase 
in the whisker content, while the percentage of elongation at break decreased 
from that of the pure CS with initial increase in the whisker content, and 
leveled off when the whisker content was greater than or equal to 2.96 wt% 
(Fig. 6.12). The increase in the TS of the nanocomposite films with increasing 
α-ChW content could be due to the interaction between CS molecules and Figure 6.11  (a) Scheme for possible microstructure present in GO/chitosan nanocom -
posites; (b) formation of hydrogen bonds between GO sheets and chitosan chains. 
Reproduced and reprinted with permission from Reference [45].
(a) (b)MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN/cHITOSAN NANOcOMPOSITES   125
α-ChWs via hydrogen bonding. Such interaction, however, caused the nano -
composite films to be more rigid as the whisker content increased and, as a 
result, the percentage of elongation at break decreased [47].
A similar behavior was observed for soy protein isolate films reinforced 
with α-ChWs from crab shells, in which the TS of the films initially increased 
with increasing whisker content, and leveled off when the whisker content was 
about 20 wt% or greater, while the percentage of elongation at break decreased 
steadily with increasing whisker content [48].
Uddin et al. [49] presented the outstanding reinforcing effect of highly 
oriented ChWs in PVA. Compared with neat PVA, significant improvements 
in TS, initial modulus, and toughness were observed for the composite fibers 
(Fig. 6.13). The highest TS (1.88 GPa) and toughness (68 J/g) were obtained 
for the PVA–ChW 5% composites. It implies that the 5% ChWs loading is the 
optimum loading in the context of TS and toughness. Young’s modulus 
increased almost proportionally with the ChW content. PVA–ChW 30% fiber 
showed a Young’s modulus of 50 GPa, much higher than that of neat PVA, 
28 GPa.
The dynamic mechanical properties of these composites have been strongly 
depend on the filler orientation Figure 6.14a,b show, respectively the storage 
modulus (E ′), and the E ′ values at glassy ( −100°C) and rubbery (100°C) 
regions of neat PVA and composite fibers. The significant enhancement of E ′ 
in both glassy and rubbery regions were observed after incorporating ChWs. 
For PVA–ChW 30% fiber, the E ′ at −100°C(116 GPa) was 38% higher than 
that of neat PVA (84 GPa). For the same composite, the E ′ at 100°C (27 GPa) 
was 125% higher than that of neat PVA fiber (12 GPa).
CS nanoparticles/plasticized-starch composites were fabricated by Chang 
et al. [50]. With increasing CS content, the TS of the composites increased, but 
the elongation at break decreased (Fig. 6.14). When the CS content varied Figure 6.12  (a) Tensile strength and (b) percentage of elongation at break of pure 
chitosan and α-chitin whisker-reinforced chitosan films as a function of whisker content. 
Reproduced and reprinted with permission from Reference [47].(a)
Whiskers cont ent (wt%) Whisk ers cont ent (wt%)Elong ation at br eak (%)
00.74 1.482.96 7.0414.822.2 29.6 0 0.7 4 1.48 2.96 7 .04 1 4.8 22.2 29.6Tensile strenth (Mpa)120
100
80
60
40
20
012
10
8
6
42
0(b)126  MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN-BASEd NANOcOMPOSITES
from 0 to 6 wt%, the TS increased from 2.84 to 10.80 MPa, while the elonga -
tion at break decreased from 59.3% to 22.7%. This may be ascribed to the 
interfacial interaction between chitosan nanoparticles (CN) and the glycerol 
plasticized starch (GPS) matrix because of the similar polysaccharide struc -
tures of CS and starch. CN could serve as a junction, which improved the TS, 
but decreased the flexibility of starch molecules. When more CS (8 wt%) was Figure 6.14  (a) Storage modulus (E ′), and (b) E ′ at −100°C (left) and 100°C (right) 
of the neat PVA and PVA–ChW fibers. Reproduced and reprinted with permission 
from Reference [49].
Figure 6.13  Representative stress–strain curves of neat PVA and PVA–ChW fibers. 
Reproduced and reprinted with permission from Reference [49].02.0
1 .6
1 .2
0.8
0.4
0.0Stress (GP a)
2
Strain (% )ChW 30%ChW 20%ChW 15%ChW 10%ChW 5%
ChW 3%
Neat PV A
4 6 8 1 0REfERENcES   127
added to the matrix, the TS of the composites decreased to 8.9 MPa, which 
may be ascribed to the agglomeration of CS.
The storage modulus of GPS-CS composites increased with the introduc -
tion of CS particles. This improvement was likely due to the interaction 
between the CS filler and the GPS matrix. In GPS-CS composites, the glass 
transition shifted to a higher temperature, indicating that the GPS matrix 
could form composites with CS. Functioning like a junction, CS improved the 
intermolecular interaction of GPS in the GPS matrix, bringing adjacent chains 
of starch closer, and reducing the free volume, thereby raising the Tg of com -
posites as the CS content increased.
6.3 CONCLUSION
There has been an increased interest in developing new strategies of obtaining 
composite materials with desired properties for various applications. 
Chitin and CS can be used as a natural polymer matrix as well as a nanofiller 
for the fabrication of bionanocomposites because of their natural origin, bio -
compatibility, biodegradability, and bioactivity. These features make it a suit -
able candidate for the fabrication of new generation of biomaterials. Regardless 
of these numerous advantages and exceptional properties of CS, its mechanical 
properties are not good enough to satisfy a wide range of applications. In order 
to improve the mechanical properties of composites, reinforcing processes 
might be employed. The mechanical properties of the composite depend not 
only on the nature of filler but also on the interaction between matrix and 
filler, temperature, and filler content.
REFERENCES
 [1] Nair, K.G., Dufresne, A. (2003) Crab shell chitin whisker reinforced natural rubber 
nanocomposites. 1. processing and swelling behavior. Biomacromolecules , 4, 
657–665.
 [2] Ifuku, S., Nogi, M., Abe, K., Yoshioka, M., Morimoto, M., Saimoto, H., and Yano, 
H. (2009) Preparation of chitin nanofibers with a uniform width as α-chitin from 
crab shells. Biomacromolecules , 10, 1584–1588.
 [3] Raabe, D., Sachs, C., and Romano, P . (2005) The crustacean exoskeleton as an 
example of a structurally and mechanically graded biological nanocomposite 
material. Acta Mater. , 53, 4281–4292.
 [4] Kumar, M.N.V.R. (2000) A review of chitin and chitosan applications. React. Func. 
Polym. , 46, 1–27.
 [5] Li, Z., Yubao, L., Aiping, Y., Xuelin, P ., Xuejiang, W., and Xiang, Z. (2005) Prepara -
tion and in vitro  investigation of chitosan/nano-hydroxyapatite composite used as 
bone substitute materials. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. , 16, 213–219.
 [6] Cai, X., Tong, H., Shen, X., Chen, W., Yan, J., and Hu, J. (2009) Preparation  
and characterization of homogeneous chitosan–polylactic acid/hydroxyapatite 128  MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN-BASEd NANOcOMPOSITES
nanocomposite for bone tissue engineering and evaluation of its mechanical prop -
erties. Acta Biomater. , 5, 2693–2703.
 [7] Kithva, P ., Grndahl, L., Martin, D., and Trau, M. (2010) Biomimetic synthesis and 
tensile properties of nanostructured high volume fraction hydroxyapatite and 
chitosan biocomposite films. J. Mater. Chem. , 20, 381–389.
 [8] Pradal, C., Kithva, P ., Martin, D., Traub, M., and Grøndahl, L. (2011) Improvement 
of the wet tensile properties of nanostructured hydroxyapatite and chitosan bio -
composite films through hydrophobic modification. J. Mater. Chem. , 21, 
2330–2337.
 [9] Lavorgna, M., Piscitelli, F., Mangiacapra, P ., and Buonocore, G.G. (2010) Study of 
the combined effect of both clay and glycerol plasticizer on the properties of 
chitosan films. Carbohydr. Polym. , 82, 291–298.
[10] Zia, K.M., Zuber, M., Barikani, M., Hussain, R., Jamil, T., and Anjum, S. (2011) 
Cytotoxicity and mechanical behavior of chitin–bentonite clay based polyure -
thane bio-nanocomposites. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. , 49, 1131–1136.
[11] Abdollahi, M., Rezaei, M., and Farzi, G. (2012) A novel active bionanocomposite 
film incorporating rosemary essential oil and nanoclay into chitosan. J. Food Eng. , 
111, 343–350.
[12] Wang, S.F., Shen, L., Zhang, W.D., and Tong, Y.J. (2005) Preparation and mechani -
cal properties of chitosan/carbon nanotubes composites. Biomacromolecules , 6, 
3067–3072.
[13] Carson, L., Kelly-Brown, C., Stewart, M., Oki, A., Regisford, G., and Luo, Z. (2009) 
Bakhmutov VI. Synthesis and characterization of chitosan–carbon nanotube com -
posites. Mater. Lett. , 63, 617–620.
[14] Shieh, Y.T., Yang, Y.F. (2006) Significant improvements in mechanical property and 
water stability of chitosan by carbon nanotubes. Eur. Polym. J. , 42, 3162–3170.
[15] Ozarkar, S., Jassal, M., and Agrawal, A. (2008) pH and electrical actuation of single 
walled carbon nanotube/chitosan composite fibers. Smart Mater. Struct. , 17, 055016.
[16] Fan, J., Shi, Z., Ge, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, J., and Yin, J. (2012) Mechanical reinforce -
ment of chitosan using unzipped multiwalled carbon nanotube oxides. Polymer , 
53, 657–664.
[17] Yang, X., Tu, Y., Li, L., Shang, S., and Tao, X. (2010) Well-dispersed chi. Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces , 2, 1707–1713.
[18] Du, X., Yu, Z.Z., Dasari, A., Ma, J., Mo, M., Meng, Y., and Mai, Y.W. (2008) New 
method to prepare graphite nanocomposites. Chem. Mater. , 20, 2066–2068.
[19] Venkatesan, J., Kim, S.-K. (2010) Chitosan composites for bone tissue engineering—
An overview. Mar. Drugs , 8, 2252–2266.
[20] Kikuchi, M., Ikoma, T., Itoh, S., Matsumoto, H., Koyama, Y., Takakuda, K., Shi -
nomiya, K., and Tanaka, J. (2004) Biomimetic synthesis of bone like nanocompos -
ites using the self-organization mechanism of hydroxyapatite and collagen. 
Compos. Sci. Technol. , 64, 819–825.
[21] Li, B., Hu, Q., Qian, X., Fang, Z., and Shen, J. (2002) Bioabsorbable chitosan/
hydroxyapatite composite rod for internal fixation of bone fracture prepared by 
in situ  precipitation. Acta Polym. Sin. , 828–833.
[22] Thein-Han, W., Misra, R. (2009) Biomimetic chitosan–nanohydroxyapatite com -
posite scaffolds for bone tissue engineering. Acta Biomater. , 5, 1182–1197.REfERENcES   129
[23] Yamaguchi, I., Tokuchi, K., Fukuzaki, H., Koyama, Y., Takakuda, K., Monma, H., 
and Tanaka, J. (2001) Preparation and microstructure analysis of chitosan/
hydroxyapatite nanocomposites. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. , 55, 20–27.
[24] Liuyun, J., Yubao, L., and Chengdong, X. (2009) A novel composite membrane of 
chitosan-carboxymethyl cellulose polyelectrolyte complex membrane filled with 
nano-hydroxyapatite I. Preparation and properties. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. , 20, 
1645–1652.
[25] Alexandre, M., Dubois, P . (2000) Polymer-layered silicate nanocomposites: Prepa -
ration, properties and uses of a new class of materials. Mater. Sci. Eng. , 28, 1–63.
[26] Wang, X., Tang, Y., Li, Y., Zhu, Z., and Du, Y. (2010) The rheological behaviour 
and drug-delivery property of chitosan/rectoritenanocomposites. J. Biomater. Sci. 
Polym. Ed. , 21, 171–184.
[27] Darder, M., Colilla, M., and Ruiz-Hitzky, E. (2005) Chitosan–clay nanocomposites: 
Application as electrochemical sensors. Appl. Clay Sci. , 28, 199–208.
[28] Katti, K.S., Katti, D.R., and Dash, R. (2008) Synthesis and characterization of a 
novel chitosan/montmorillonite/hydroxyapatite nanocomposite for bone tissue 
engineering. Biomed. Mater. , 3, 034122.
[29] Chang, M.Y., Juang, R.S. (2004) Adsorption of tannic acid, humic acid, and dyes 
from water using the composite of chitosan and activated clay. J. Colloid Interface 
Sci., 278, 18–25.
[30] Wang, X., Du, Y., and Luo, J. (2008) Biopolymer/montmorillonitenanocomposite: 
Preparation, drug-controlled release property and cytotoxicity. Nanotechnology , 
19, 065707.
[31] Wang, X., Du, Y., Luo, J., Yang, J., Wang, W., and Kennedy, J.F. (2009) A novel 
biopolymer/rectoritenanocomposite with antimicrobial activity. Carbohydr. 
Polym. , 77, 449–456.
[32] Wang, S.F., Shen, L., Tong, Y.J., Chen, L., Phang, I.Y., Lim, P .Q., and Liu, T.X. (2005) 
Biopolymer chitosan/montmorillonitenanocomposites: Preparation and charac -
terization. Polym. Degrad. Stab. , 90, 123–131.
[33] Monvisade, P ., Siriphannon, P . (2009) Chitosan intercalated montmorillonite: Prep -
aration, characterization and cationic dye adsorption. Appl. Clay Sci. , 42, 
427–431.
[34] Xu, Y., Ren, X., and Hanna, M. (2006) Chitosan/clay nanocomposite film prepara -
tion and characterization. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 99, 1684–1691.
[35] Abdolmohammadi, S., Yunus, W.M.Z.W., Rahman, M.Z.A.B., and Ibrahim,  
N.A. (2011) Effect of organoclay on mechanical and thermal properties  
of polycaprolactone/chitosan/montmorillonitenanocomposites. J. Reinf. Plast. 
Compos. , 30, 1045–1054.
[36] Liu, M., Zhang, Y., Wu, C., Xiong, S., and Zhou, C. (2012) Chitosan/halloysite 
nanotubes bionanocomposites: Structure, mechanical properties and biocompat -
ibility. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. , 51, 566–575.
[37] He, L., Yao, L., Yang, D., Cheng, Q., Sun, J., Song, R., and Hao, Y. (2011) Prepara -
tion and characterization of chitosan-blended multiwalled carbon nanotubes.  
J. Macromol. Sci. B Phys. , 50, 2454–2463.
[38] Ong, Y.T., Ahmad, A.L., Sharif Zein, S.H., Sudesh, K., and Tan, S.H. (2011) Poly(3-
dydroxybutyrate)-functionalised multi-walled carbon nanotubes/chitosan green 130  MEcHANIcAL PROPERTIES Of cHITIN-BASEd NANOcOMPOSITES
nanocomposite membranes and their application in pervaporation. Sep. Purif. 
Technol. , 76, 419–427.
[39] Wu, T., Pan, Y., Bao, H., and Li, L. (2011) Preparation and properties of chitosan 
nanocomposite films reinforced by poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-
poly(styrenesulfonate) treated carbon nanotubes. Mater. Chem. Phys. , 129, 
932–938.
[40] Rao, C.N.R., Sood, A.K., Subrahmanyam, K.S., and Govindaraj, A.A. (2009) Gra -
phene: The new two dimensional nanomaterial. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. , 48, 
7752.
[41] Ramesha, G.K., Vijaya Kumara, A., Muralidhara, H.B., and Sampath, S. (2011) 
Graphene and graphene oxide as effective adsorbents toward anionic and cationic 
dyes. J. Colloid Interface Sci. , 361, 270–277.
[42] Fan, L., Luo, C., Sun, M., Li, X., Lu, F., and Qiu, H. (2012) Preparation of novel 
magnetic chitosan/graphene oxide composite as effective adsorbents toward 
methylene blue. Bioresour. Technol. , 114, 703–706.
[43] Verdejo, R., Barroso-Bujans, F., Rodriguez-Perez, M.A., Sajab, J.A., and Lopez-
Manchado, M.A. (2008) Functionalized graphene sheet filled silicone foam nano -
composites. J. Mater. Chem. , 18, 2221–2226.
[44] Yang, Y., Wang, J., Zhang, J., Liu, J., Yang, X., and Zhao, H. (2009) Exfoliated 
graphite oxide decorated by PDMAEMA chains and polymer particles. Langmuir , 
25, 11808–11814.
[45] Pan, Y., Wu, T., Bao, H., and Li, L. (2011) Green fabrication of chitosan films 
reinforced with parallel aligned graphene oxide. Carbohydr. Polym. , 83, 1908–
1915.
[46] Junkasem, J., Rujiravanit, R., and Supaphol, P . (2006) Fabrication of α-chitin 
whisker-reinforced poly(vinyl alcohol) nanocompositenanofibres by electrospin -
ning. Nanotechnology , 17, 4519–4528.
[47] Sriupayo, J., Supaphol, P ., Blackwell, J., and Rujiravanit, R. (2005) Preparation and 
characterization of α-chitin whisker-reinforced chitosan nanocomposite films with 
or without heat treatment. Carbohydr. Polym. , 62, 130–136.
[48] Lu, Y., Weng, L., and Zhang, L. (2004) Morphology and properties of soy protein 
isolate thermoplastics reinforced with chitin whiskers. Biomacromolecules , 5, 
1046–1051.
[49] Uddin, A.J., Fujie, M., Sembo, S., and Gotoh, Y. (2012) Outstanding reinforcing 
effect of highly oriented chitin whiskers in PVA nanocomposites. Carbohydr. 
Polym. , 87, 799–805.
[50] Chang, P .R., Jian, R., Yu, J., and Ma, X. (2010) Fabrication and characterisation of 
chitosan nanoparticles/plasticised-starch composites. Food Chem. , 120, 736–740.131Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 7
Preparation and Applications of Chitin 
Nanofibers/Nanowhiskers
JUN-ICHI KADOKAWA
7.1 INTRODUCTION
Natural polysaccharides provide two important roles in nature: as an  
energy source and as a structural material [1]. Cellulose and chitin are two 
representative structural polysaccharides, which are considered to be the most 
important biomass resources. Chitin is an aminopolysaccharide consisting of 
a chain of β-(1→4)-linked 2-acetamido-2-deoxyl- d-glucopyranose ( N-acetyl-
d-glucosamine) residues (Fig. 7.1) [2–4]. Despite its huge production in nature 
and easy accessibility, chitin remains an unutilized biomass resource primarily 
because of its intractable bulk structure and insolubility in water and common 
organic solvents; thus, only limited attention has been paid to chitin, principally 
to its biological properties. Because chitin is the second most abundant biologi -
cal macromolecule after cellulose, there is major interest in its conversion into 
various useful materials after proper dissolution in suitable solvents. Chitin 
occurs mainly in the exoskeletons of crustacean shells, such as crab and shrimp 
shells. Native chitin in crustacean shells is arranged as microfibrils embedded 
in a protein matrix (Fig. 7.2) [5, 6]. The microfibril consists of nanofibers 
2–5 nm in diameter. Moreover, three types of crystalline forms, that is, α-, β-, 
and γ-chitins, are known (Fig. 7.1). The most abundant form is α-chitin (e.g., 
from crab and shrimp shells), where the polymeric chains are aligned in an 
antiparallel fashion. This arrangement is favorable for the formation of strong 
intermolecular hydrogen bonding, leading to the most stable form of the three 
types of crystalline structures. In β-chitin (e.g., from squid pen), the polymeric 132  PrePArAtION AND APPlICAtIONs Of CHItIN NANOfIbers/NANOWHIsKers
chains are packed in a parallel arrangement, resulting in weaker intermolecu -
lar forces. Accordingly, β-chitin is considered to be less stable than α-chitin.
Preparation of nanoscaled polymeric assemblies such as nanofibers and 
nanowhiskers is one of the most useful methods to practically utilize polymeric 
materials as observed in the case of cellulose [7, 8]. Furthermore, cellulose 
nanowhiskers were used as reinforcing fillers for natural polymeric matrices 
[9]. Efficient methods have also been developed for the preparation of chitin 
nanofibers and nanowhiskers (nanocrystals). There are two major processes 
to produce the chitin nanofibers or nanowhiskers from the chitin source: one 
is disentanglement of chitin microfibrils and the other is regeneration from 
the chitin solution in appropriate solvents. As examples of the first technique, 
acid hydrolysis and 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl radical (TEMPO)-Figure 7.1  Chemical and crystalline structures of chitin.HO
HO HOOH OH
OH
NHA c NHA c NHAcO
HOOO
O
n
Reducing ter minus
Antiparallel arrangement Parallel arrangementAc = C
OCH 3
β-chitinα-chitinOOH
Figure 7.2  Presence of native chitin in crustacean shells. See color insert.Crystalline chitin nanof ibril
Protein la yerChitin-pr otein f iber
2 ~ 5 nm50 ~ 300 nmCHItIN NANOWHIsKers by ACID HyDrOlysIs   133
mediated oxidation were previously reported. On the other hand, selected 
conditions for the regeneration of the chitin solutions simply gave chitin 
nanofibers/nanowhiskers. Electrospinning technique was also employed in the 
formation of chitin nanofibers from chitin solutions. This chapter deals with 
the above four methods as efficient processes for the preparation of chitin 
nanofibers/nanowhiskers. The applications of the resulting nanoscaled chitin 
assemblies to the practical composite materials are also discussed. Besides 
these methods, a simple grinding technique was also developed for the prepa -
ration of chitin nanofibers from chitin microfibrils [10, 11]. The series on this 
study is covered in Chapter 2 of this book.
7.2 CHITIN NANOWHISKERS BY ACID HYDROLYSIS
Formation of some nanoscaled chitin assemblies (crystallites) by acidic treat -
ment was reported by Revol and Marchessault in 1993 (Fig. 7.3) [12]. Micro -
filler fragments of crab and shrimp chitin were prepared by hydrolysis in 
3 mol/L HCl aqueous solution at its boiling point. After removal of the acid 
by centrifugal washing and dialysis, ultrasonication converted the residual 
product into a colloidal suspension stabilized by –NH3+ charges. The positive 
charge arose from protonation of the few amino groups that were already 
present in a chitin sample, as well as those that might have been formed by 
additional deacetylation during the acid hydrolysis. In water, the protonated 
amino groups and their counterions formed an electrical double layer around 
the crystallites, which prevented flocculation to yield a stable colloidal suspen -
sion. The transmission electron micrograph (TEM) image of a dispersion  
of chitin crystallites after 90 minutes of acid hydrolysis showed the rod-like 
Figure 7.3  Typical procedure for preparation of chitin nanocrystallites by acid 
hydrolysis.Chitin
Chitin nanocr ystallit es
Colloidal suspension3 mol/L HCl at boil f or 1 h
Centrifugation, dialy sis, ultrasonication134  PrePArAtION AND APPlICAtIONs Of CHItIN NANOfIbers/NANOWHIsKers
particles ranging from 50 to more than 300 nm in length (Fig. 7.4). The electron 
diffraction pattern from the dispersion showed an α-chitin crystalline struc -
ture. Thus, the acid hydrolysis treatment has not changed the original crystal -
line structure. Furthermore, when dewatered to a critical concentration, 
spontaneous formation of a two-phase equilibrium system occurred. The upper 
phase was isotropic and the lower phase was anisotropic. The latter displayed 
a chiral nematic order and dried to a solid film, which mimicked the helical 
organization characteristic of the chitin microfibrils in the cuticle of 
arthropods.
Figure 7.5a illustrates a rod with a noncircular cross section. The effective 
electric double layer thickness, which was of the same order as the crystallite 
lateral size, was expected to retain the original geometry. Thus, any helical Figure 7.4  Transmission electron micrograph of a dispersion of chitin crystallites after 
90 minutes of acid hydrolysis. The micrograph was obtained by diffraction contrast in 
the bright field mode and under low dose conditions. Underfocusing was about 3 μm. 
(Inset) Electron diffraction pattern from such a preparation. It corresponds to the 
α-chitin crystal structure (reprinted with permission from Reference [12]. Copyright 
1993 Elsevier).
CHItIN NANOWHIsKers by ACID HyDrOlysIs   135
geometry of the rod was still present in the effective electrical double layer, 
as shown in Figure 7.5b. As soon as a nematic prealignment of the rods was 
reached, when the space between them was small enough, there was contact 
and interaction between the electrical double layers of adjacent asymmetric 
rods. If the twist along the crystallites always had the same handedness, the 
chiral interaction generated a helicoidal organization of opposite handedness. 
Figure 7.5c shows such a chiral ordering between four rods.
The effect of electrostatic interaction on phase separation behavior of chitin 
crystallite suspensions was investigated [13]. Optical and electron microscopies 
were used to observe the dynamics of the phase separation in aqueous chitin 
suspensions prepared by HCl hydrolysis of crab chitin. Freeze-fracture trans -
mission electron microscopy revealed that chitin crystallites were partially 
aggregated in the suspension and had an average length of 200 nm and an 
average width of 8 nm. They showed a positive surface charge of ∼0.5 e/nm2 
when they were fully protonated. The zeta potential measurements, which were Figure 7.5  (a) Cross-sectional view of a crystallite and its electrical double layer. The 
effective envelope represents the distance from the crystallite surface at which there 
is impenetrability between adjacent rods in colloidal suspension. Adjacent rods will 
approach each other beyond this distance when the suspension is concentrated. (b) A 
twist in the rigid rod generates a twist in the effective ionic envelope since the original 
noncylindrical geometry of the rod is still present in the envelope. (c) Chiral nematic 
interaction between four crystallites in close contact. The scale is smaller than in (a) 
and (b) (reprinted with permission from Reference [12]. Copyright 1993 Elsevier).IONS
EFFECTIVE
IONIC ENVEL OPE
(a) (b) (c)CRYSTALLITE136  PrePArAtION AND APPlICAtIONs Of CHItIN NANOfIbers/NANOWHIsKers
made in relatively dilute conditions, showed the screening effect due to the 
double layer compression when the acid and salt concentrations were increased. 
The phase diagrams, however, which were obtained with concentrated liquid 
crystalline suspensions, did not show significant change with added NaCl. This 
was attributed to the contribution of the chitin crystallites themselves to the 
ionic strength.
The effect of degree of deacetylation (DD) of chitin on the properties of 
chitin crystallites was also studied [14]. Chitin samples with different DD were 
first prepared by alkaline hydrolysis through control reaction time. It was found 
that the treatment using a constant strength of alkali reduced the crystallinity 
of the sample, but the crystalline structure of α-chitin was retained. The weight 
loss of the partially saponified and neutralized samples after HCl hydrolysis 
increased linearly with the DD. The crystallinity of the samples was found to 
increase after acid hydrolysis. The increase of surface charge density resulting 
from the increased surface amino groups was found to affect the boundary 
concentration for the formation of the anisotropic phase. However, the observed 
change of boundary concentration with surface charge was opposite to that 
predicted by theories. This was attributed to the contribution of the charged 
crystallites to the ionic strength. The suspensions of crystallites prepared from 
the chitin samples treated with alkali for 6–7 hours did not phase-separate due 
to high viscosity. Furthermore, chiral nematic structures were not observed for 
the suspensions of crystallites beyond 4 hours’ treatments.
Rheologically, suspensions of chitin crystallites were found to behave as 
other molecular liquid crystalline polymers (LCPs) [15]. The average hydro -
dynamic diameter of the crystallites in the suspension at pH 4 was determined 
to be approximately 80 nm using dynamic light scattering. Conductimetric and 
pH titration results showed that the pKa of the crystallites was 6.3, which was 
the same as that reported for chitosan. In combination with phase diagrams, 
flow properties of isotropic, biphasic, and anisotropic chitin suspensions were 
investigated. For isotropic suspensions, consequently, a classical shear thinning 
behavior of rod-like particles was observed. In the case of biphasic suspen -
sions, on the other hand, a two-regime curve was observed where tactoids first 
oriented, deformed, and then broke up under a shearing force. Furthermore, 
similar to other LCPs, a three-regime flow curve was found for the anisotropic 
suspensions. The viscosity–concentration curve showed a maximum at the 
phase separation concentration, and the maximum was less distinct with a 
decrease of the ionic strength. Moreover, secondary electroviscous effects due 
to strong particle–particle interactions influenced the viscosity of the suspen -
sions at higher concentrations.
The shrimp shell chitin has been subjected to extensive treatments of mul -
tiple acid hydrolysis processes and subsequent mechanical disruption to yield 
nanocrystals [16]. The produced chitin nanocrystals were characterized in 
terms of crystalline properties and the specific surface area of the chitin 
nanoparticles. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) data indicated an increase in 
chitin crystallinity after hydrolysis, as less-ordered chitin domains were CHItIN NANOWHIsKers by ACID HyDrOlysIs   137
digested. Dye absorption with Congo red was used to measure the specific 
surface area of the particles, indicating values near 350 m2/g. This value 
was supported with calculations derived from X-ray crystallite size 
measurements.
Chitin nanowhisker colloidal suspensions, which were produced based on 
the aforementioned chitin crystallites, have been used as the reinforcing phase 
in nanocomposites with some polymeric materials. For example, chitin whisker-
reinforced thermoplastic nanocomposites were prepared [17]. A latex (average 
diameter of the particle around 150 nm) obtained by the copolymerization of 
styrene (34% [w/w]) and butyl acrylate (64% [w/w]) and containing 1% acrylic 
acid and 1% acrylamide was used as the thermoplastic component. The col -
loidal chitin fragments dispersion was mixed with the latex with various 
amounts in order to obtain nanocomposite films with a good level of disper -
sion and with a weight fraction of chitin ranging from 0 wt% to 20 wt%. After 
stirring, the air in the suspension was removed by vacuum prior to casting in 
a Teflon mold. Homogeneous and bubble-free 1-mm-thick films were obtained 
by storing the casting at 35°C, allowing water evaporation and polymer par -
ticle coalescence. It was observed from the differential scanning calorimetry 
(DSC) measurements that the glass transition temperature ( Tg) of the matrix 
was not modified upon chitin whiskers addition. When reinforced by a low 
weight fraction (lower than 10 wt%) of chitin whiskers, the polymer films did 
not show any significant improvement in mechanical properties over the whole 
temperature range. For higher percentages of chitin whiskers, the composite 
glassy shear modules increased to up to ∼2 GPa for the 20 wt% filled 
material.
It was shown in the above study that chitin could be used as an environ -
mentally friendly particulate filler, and it was useful for the processing of stiff 
small-size wares. Therefore, other chitin whisker-reinforced polymer nano -
composites have been prepared. For example, nanocomposite materials from 
a colloidal suspension of high aspect ratio β-chitin whiskers as the reinforcing 
phase and poly( ε-caprolactone) as the matrix were obtained [18]. A latex 
of poly( ε-caprolactone) using a copolymer of poly(ethylene oxide) and 
poly(propylene oxide) as the surfactant was used. After mixing and stirring 
the two aqueous suspensions, solid films were obtained by either freeze-drying 
and hot-pressing or casting and evaporating the preparations. A significant 
reinforcing effect was observed at T > Tg of the matrix. This effect was described 
in this temperature range by a “hybrid” percolation model, equivalent to a 
mean-field mode, considering only the nonpercolating fraction of microcrys -
tals. The relatively weak interactions between chitin whiskers resulted in a 
partially formed microcrystals network within the rubbery matrix. At a higher 
temperature ( T > melting temperature ( Tm)) and above 5 wt% whiskers, the 
network was restored, resulting in the stabilization of the mechanical proper -
ties over a large temperature range.
α-Chitin whisker-reinforced poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) nanocomposite 
films were prepared by solution casting technique [19]. Incorporation of chitin 138  PrePArAtION AND APPlICAtIONs Of CHItIN NANOfIbers/NANOWHIsKers
whiskers helped to improve the thermal stability of the resulting nanocompos -
ite films, but it did not have any effect on the crystallinity of the PVA matrix. 
The tensile strength of the nanocomposite films initially increased with increas -
ing whisker content and leveled off when the whisker content was greater than 
or equal to 2.96 wt%. On the contrary, the percentage of elongation at break 
only decreased monotonically with increasing whisker content. Both the pres -
ence of chitin whiskers and heat treatment decreased the affinity to water of 
the nanocomposite films, as reflected by the observed decrease in both the 
percentage of weight loss and the percentage degree of swelling of the films 
with either increase in the whisker content or the heat treatment duration. The 
reduction in the affinity to water caused the PVA/chitin whisker nanocompos -
ite films to be more stable when used in aqueous environments.
Other nanocomposite materials were obtained from a colloidal suspension 
of chitin whiskers as the reinforcing phase and latex of both unvulcanized and 
prevulcanized natural rubber as the matrix [20]. The composites were obtained 
according to the processes similar to those using poly( ε-caprolactone) as the 
matrix. The processing and swelling behaviors of composite films were evalu -
ated. Consequently, the whiskers formed a rigid network assumed to be  
governed by a percolation mechanism in the evaporated samples only. Com -
paratively, better resistance of evaporated samples than hot-pressed ones 
against swelling in an organic solvent medium was good evidence for the 
existence of a rigid chitin network. The values of diffusion coefficient, bound 
rubber content, and relative weight loss also supported the presence of a three-
dimensional chitin whisker network within the evaporated samples. The 
mechanical behavior of the resulting nanocomposite films was also analyzed 
[21]. Dynamic mechanical analysis revealed the presence of a small percentage 
of crystallinity in unvulcanized natural rubber prepared by the evaporation 
method, whereas no such evidence of crystallinity was detected either in vul -
canized rubber prepared by evaporation or in unvulcanzied natural rubber 
prepared by hot-pressing. Successive tensile test experiments helped to under -
stand the existence of a three-dimensional chitin network formed as a result 
of hydrogen bonding within the evaporated samples. A clear decrease in 
modulus values of the evaporated samples up to first three or four cycles of 
the cyclic test indicated the progressive damaging of the chitin network, which 
was initially present in the samples. All the results revealed that the main 
factor that governed the mechanical behavior of the chitin whisker-reinforced 
natural rubber nanocomposites was the processing technique.
Chemical modification of chitin whiskers was performed to investigate the 
effect of the incorporation of the modified whiskers into a natural rubber 
matrix on the properties of the ensuing nanocomposite [22]. The surface of 
chitin whiskers, prepared by acid hydrolysis of chitin from crab shells, was 
chemically modified using different coupling agents, namely phenyl isocyanate, 
alkenyl succinic anhydride, and 3-isopropenyl- α,α′-diemthylbenzyl isocyanate 
(Fig. 7.6). Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy, TEM, and contact 
angle measurements were performed to prove the occurrence of the surface CHItIN NANOWHIsKers by ACID HyDrOlysIs   139
modification without any major morphological changes associated with the 
various treatments applied. Stable suspensions of the chemically modified 
chitin whiskers were obtained in toluene. Nanocomposites were prepared 
using a toluene natural rubber solution in which the whiskers were dispersed. 
After removal of the solvents, the resulting solid films were characterized by 
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), swelling experiments, and mechanical 
analysis, in both the linear and nonlinear ranges. All the results led to the 
conclusion that the various chemical treatments improved the adhesion 
between the filler and the matrix. However, the mechanical performances of 
the composites strongly decreased after the chemical modification. This loss 
of performance, more pronounced for the isocyanate treatments, was due to 
the partial or total destruction of the three-dimensional network of chitin 
whiskers assumed to be present in the unmodified composites.
Environmentally friendly thermoplastic nanocomposites were successfully 
developed using a colloidal suspension of chitin as a filler to reinforce soy 
protein isolate (SPI) plastics [23]. A suspension of chitin whiskers having an 
average length of about 500 ± 50 nm and a diameter of around 50 ± 10 nm 
was used as a reinforcing agent for glycerol plasticized SPI to obtain nano -
composites by hot-pressing. Nanocomposites with lower whisker content 
exhibited a relatively uniform dispersion in the SPI matrix than those with 
higher chitin content. Compared with a glycerol plasticized SPI sheet, the 
chitin-filled SPI composites increased in Young’s modulus and tensile strength 
from 26 to 158 MPa and 3.3 to 8.4 MPa with increasing chitin content from 
0 wt% to 20 wt%. As the chitin whiskers increased in the SPI matrix, the 
composites showed greater water resistance. The improvement in all of the 
properties of these novel SPI/chitin whisker composites was ascribed to three-
dimensional networks of intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions 
between filler and filler and between filler and matrix.Figure 7.6  Chemical modification of chitin whiskers by isocyanate or succinic 
anhydride.OOOO
OOO OOO
OOOOO
O
OO
OOR–NCO
RR
RNHAc
NHAc
NHAcNH
NHAcNHAcNHAc
nn
nHO
HOHO
HO
HO
HOOHOH
OHOHOH140  PrePArAtION AND APPlICAtIONs Of CHItIN NANOfIbers/NANOWHIsKers
Chitosan in a nanoscaffold structure was successfully prepared via the 
one-pot deacetylation of chitin whisker (Fig. 7.7) [24]. The structural analysis 
by the 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurement confirmed that 
the alkaline treatment changed chitin whisker to chitosan nanoscaffold with 
as high as 98% DD. The SEM and TEM images confirmed that the short fiber 
of chitin whiskers developed to form a network in nanoscale of chitosan or 
chitosan nanoscaffold. The increase in viscosity of chitosan nanoscaffold as 
compared to that of the chitin whiskers suggested that the scaffold network 
performed as a polymer bulk in the solution. The increase in surface area, pore 
volume, and pore size as studied by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller gas adsorp -
tion informed the development of porous structure in chitosan. Furthermore, 
the good dispersion of nanoscaffold in the solution was easily controlled by 
the solvent polarity and salt concentration.
7.3 CHITIN NANOFIBERS/NANOCRYSTALS BY TEMPO-MEDIATED 
OXIDATION
Highly crystalline cellulose nanofibers dispersed in water have been efficiently 
provided by TEMPO-mediated oxidation of native celluloses and the follow -
ing mild mechanical treatment [25–27]. For example, the cellulose nanofibers 
obtained from wood cellulose had a high density of carboxylate groups at C6 
positions of glucose residues on surface and were typically 3–4 nm in width 
and a few micrometers in length. The carboxylate content in the TEMPO-
oxidized native celluloses was a key factor in the preparation of individualized 
cellulose nanofibers.
Therefore, TEMPO-mediated oxidation of α-chitin in water at pH 10 under 
specific conditions and subsequent ultrasonic treatment were performed to 
prepare chitin nanowhiskers (nanocrystals) dispersed in water [28]. The outline 
of the reaction is shown in Figure 7.8. Since general α-chitins originating from 
crab and shrimp shells had high crystallinity like native celluloses, it might be 
possible to convert into chitin nanocrystals by formation of the C6 carboxylate 
groups selectively on the surface of the chitin crystallites by TEMPO-mediated 
oxidation. The formation of C6 carboxylate groups in chitin was controlled 
depending on the amount of NaClO added in the TEMPO-mediated oxidation 
of α-chitin. Particularly, when 5.0 mmol of NaClO per gram of chitin was used, 
the weight percentage of the water-insoluble fraction in the TEMPO-oxidized 
chitin remained at as high as 90%, and the carboxylate content reached 
0.48 mmol/g. Besides, no N-deacetylation occurred on the TEMPO-oxidized Figure 7.7  Preparation of chitosan scaffold from chitin flake via chitin whiskers.HO
OOOO
OOOO
OHOH
OHOH3 mol/L HCl
Chitin whisk ers
Chitosan nanoscaf fold40 % NaOH
HOHO
HONHA c
NHA cNH 2
NH 2 n n
Chitin f lakeCHItIN NANOfIbers/NANOCrystAls by teMPO-MeDIAteD OxIDAtION   141
chitins, irrespective of the amount of NaClO added in the oxidation. Moreover, 
the crystal structure and high crystallinity of the original α-chitin were main -
tained during TEMPO-mediated oxidation, showing that the C6 carboxylate 
groups were present only on the chitin crystallite surfaces. When the TEMPO-
oxidized chitin was subjected to ultrasonic treatment in water, mostly individu -
alized chitin nanocrystals were obtained, and the dispersion was translucent. 
The average nanocrystal length and width were 340 and 8 nm, respectively.
TEMPO-mediated oxidation was applied to β-chitins, originating from tube -
worm and squid pen, to prepare chitin nanofibers [29]. In the case of squid pen 
β-chitin, although the water-insoluble fractions were obtained from the 
TEMPO-oxidized products by controlling the NaClO addition level, the oxi -
dized products were not converted to individual nanofibers by disintegration 
in water. On the other hand, when tubeworm β-chitin was oxidized by the 
TEMPO-mediated system with 2.5–10 mmol NaClO per gram of chitin, the 
water-insoluble fractions with carboxylate contents of 0.18–0.25 mmol/g were 
obtained in the yields of more than 70%. The analytical data revealed that 
crystallinities, crystal sizes, and DD values of the produced nanofibers were 
similar to those of the original chitin. Furthermore, homogeneous, highly 
viscous, and translucent gels were obtained by disintegration of the water-
insoluble TEMPO-oxidized β-chitin in water. The gels consisted of nanofibers 
20–50 nm in width and several micrometers in length. When the TEM images 
of the dispersion of the water-insoluble fraction of TEMPO-oxidized tube -
worm β-chitin prepared with 10 mmol NaClO per gram of chitin were mea -
sured after drying (Fig. 7.9), long TEMPO-oxidized tubeworm β-chitin 
nanofibrils with widths ranging from 20 to 50 nm and lengths of more than 
several micrometers were clearly observed. Thus, the tubeworm β-chitin fibrils 
were mostly converted to highly crystalline and individual nanofibrils dispersed Figure 7.8  TEMPO-mediated oxidation of chitin.COOH
O
N–OH
N–O.
TEMPO
NaBr NaClONaCl NaBrO
N=OOOOCOONa
HO HO
HO
CH2OH
HONHAc NHAc
NHAc
NHAcNaOH
CHO
O
OO
ChitinOn'' n''
n'
n142  PrePArAtION AND APPlICAtIONs Of CHItIN NANOfIbers/NANOWHIsKers
in water by the TEMPO-mediated oxidation and the following mechanical 
disintegration. The fibril had a twisted part, indicating that each fibril had a flat 
and ribbon-like morphology 20–50 nm in width and ca. 15 nm in thickness. 
Furthermore, an edge of the nanofibrils probably formed by scission during 
disintegration in water. Because each individual nanofibril had a clear electron 
diffraction spots at any locations (an inset figure in Fig. 7.9), one TEMPO-
oxidized tubeworm β-chitin nanofibril did not consist of multiple elementary 
fibrils but formed a perfect crystallite.Figure 7.9  Transmission electron microphotographs and electron diffraction diagram 
of nanofibrils of TEMPO-oxidized tubeworm β-chitin prepared with 10 mmol NaClO 
per gram of chitin. White arrows show twisted and cut parts of the fibrils (reprinted 
with permission from Reference [29]. Copyright 2009 Elsevier).
CHItIN NANOfIbers/NANOWHIsKers by regeNerAtION frOM CHItIN sOlUtIONs   143
7.4 CHITIN NANOFIBERS/NANOWHISKERS BY REGENERATION 
FROM CHITIN SOLUTIONS
Self-assembled chitin nanofibers were prepared by regeneration from the 
solutions of chitin (Fig. 7.10) [30]. Hexafluoro-2-propanol (HFIP) and 
LiCl/ N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMAc), well-known solvents for chitin, were 
used [4]. The self-assembly process was initiated through either solvent evap -
oration for the HFIP system or addition of water for the LiCl/DMAc system. 
Self-assembly of chitin in HFIP was remarkably simple; that is, slowly drying 
solutions of appropriate concentrations led to long (10–100 μm) nanofibers 
with a small diameter (2.8 ± 0.7 nm). For the low volatility of LiCl/DMAc, 
on the other hand, simple drying was not a practical approach. However, 
fibers were easily precipitated out upon addition of ample amounts of water. 
Figure 7.10  Preparation of chitin nanofibers by regeneration from the solutions of 
chitin.OOO O
nHO
HO
Chitin
3 nm Nanof ibers 10 nm Nanof ibers 3 nm Nanof ibers 10 nm Nanof ibersNHA cNHA c
OH
HFIP LiCl/DMA c
H2O DryOH144  PrePArAtION AND APPlICAtIONs Of CHItIN NANOfIbers/NANOWHIsKers
Nanofibers prepared in this fashion had generally a larger diameter 
(10.2 ± 2.9 nm) than those prepared from HFIP . Both types of nanofibers 
had similar lengths. Furthermore, the nanofibers showed an α-chitin structure 
and retain the high crystallinity. Deacetylation was not observed and the mild 
conditions employed to produce the nanofibers were unlikely to cause 
depolymerization.
An ionic liquid was also used as the solvent for the preparation of chitin 
nanowhiskers by the regeneration method [31]. Ionic liquids, low-melting 
point salts that form liquids at temperatures below a boiling point of water, 
have been found to be a good solvent for cellulose [32–34]. However, only a 
few examples have been reported on dissolution of chitin with ionic liquids 
[35, 36]. 1-Allyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide (AMIMBr) is one of such ionic 
liquids that dissolves chitin (5% w/w), and further, it forms gel-like materials 
with chitin at higher concentrations (7–12% w/w) [37]. Moreover, it has been 
confirmed that degradation and decrease in the molecular weight of chitin do 
not frequently occur during the procedures for dissolution and gelation. On 
the basis of these findings, the preparation of chitin nanowhiskers using 
AMIMBr was reported. First, chitin (10% w/w) from crab shells was swollen 
with AMIMBr by soaking the mixture at room temperature, followed by 
heating at 100°C to form the chitin gel with AMIMBr. Then the gel was soaked 
in methanol for regeneration of chitin, followed by ultrasonication to produce 
a chitin dispersion (Fig. 7.11). The SEM image of the spin-coated sample from 
the dispersion showed the formation of the chitin nanowhiskers ranging from 
20 to 60 nm in width and several hundred nanometers in length (Fig. 7.12a). 
When the dispersion was filtered, the residue formed a film. The SEM image 
of the resulting film showed the morphology of highly condensed nanowhis -
kers (Fig. 7.12b). Such condensed structure of the nanowhiskers probably 
contributed to formability of the film. The XRD pattern of the nanowhiskers 
showed the diffraction pattern corresponding to an α-chitin crystalline struc -Figure 7.11  Procedures for preparation of chitin dispersion and film.
HO
HO
OHOH
O
O
ChitinOBrN N
rt, 24 hAMIMBr
Filtration
Chitin
disper sionSonication Soaking in
methanol, 24 hSoxhlet
extraction
Chitin film100 °C , 48 h10% w/w Chitin
gel with AMIMBr ONHA c
NHA cnCHItIN NANOfIbers by eleCtrOsPINNINg   145
Figure 7.12  SEM images of (a) chitin dispersion, (b) chitin nanowhisker film, and (c) 
composite film of chitin nanowhiskers with PVA.
ture. These data indicated that the crystalline structure of α-chitin was recon -
structed by the above regeneration process during the formation of 
nanowhiskers.
As one of the possible applications of the present chitin nanowhiskers 
obtained using AMIMBr, the whiskers were compatibilized with PVA to give 
chitin nanowhisker/PVA composite materials. First, 10% w/w chitin gel with 
AMIMBr was prepared according to the aforementioned procedure and solu -
tions of the desired amounts of PVA in hot water were added to the gel. Then, 
the same regeneration and filtration procedures as aforementioned resulted 
in the chitin nanowhiskers/PVA composite films. The SEM image of the com -
posite showed that the nanowhisker-like morphology was maintained and 
PVA components probably filled in spaces between the nanowhiskers (Fig. 
7.12c). This result indicated relative immiscibility of chitin and PVA in the 
composite. Indeed, the DSC profiles of all the composites exhibited endother -
mic peaks due to a melting point of PVA, suggesting that PVA in the compos -
ites had some crystallinity. However, the melting points of PVA were shifted 
to lower temperatures, accompanied by broadening when the contents of 
chitin in the composites increased. From the DSC results, therefore, it was 
supposed that chitin and PVA might be partially miscible at the interfacial 
area between the two polymers in the composites by the formation of hydro -
gen bonding between them or by the presence of a little amount of AMIMBr. 
Furthermore, the tensile testing of the composite films indicated the enhance -
ment of the mechanical properties with increasing the ratios of PVA to chitin.
7.5 CHITIN NANOFIBERS BY ELECTROSPINNING
An electrospinning method was used to fabricate chitin nanofibous matrix [38, 
39]. Chitin was first depolymerized by gamma irradiation to improve its solu -
bility [40]. The electrospinning of chitin was then performed with HFIP as a 
spinning solvent. The SEM images of nanofibers electrospun from the chitin 
solutions with different concentrations or viscosities ranging from 1% to 6% 146  PrePArAtION AND APPlICAtIONs Of CHItIN NANOfIbers/NANOWHIsKers
by weight are shown in Figure 7.13. At the concentration of up to 3% by 
weight, large irregular beads or beaded fibers were generated by electrospin -
ning. The continuous nanofibers were obtained at the concentration of more 
than 4% by weight. Therefore, it was considered that extensive chain entangle -
ments were necessary to produce the continuous fibers of chitin by electrospin -
ning. However, at 6 wt% concentration, the continuous and uniform 
electrospinning was inhibited because chitin solution had a very high viscosity 
(5310 cP) at that concentration. The resultant fibrous structure containing 
irregular, but small, beads was observed again. Although as-spun chitin nano -
fibers had the broad fiber diameter distribution, most of the fiber diameters 
were less than 100 nm. From the image analysis, they had an average diameter 
of 110 nm. For deacetylation, the as-spun chitin nanofiber matrix was chemi -
cally treated with a 40% aqueous NaOH solution at 60°C or 100°C. By the 
deacetylation for 120 minutes at 100°C or for 1 day at 60°C, the chitin matrix 
was transformed into a chitosan matrix with DD ∼85% without dimensional 
change.
Chitin nanofibrous matrix produced by electrospinnin, was introduced for 
potential use in wound dressings or as scaffolding for tissue engineering [41]. 
The chitin nanofibers were approximately two orders of magnitude smaller 
than chitin microfibers, and thus the former degraded faster than the latter. 
Morphological changes during in vitro  and in vivo  degradation were investi -
gated with SEM. In the cytocompatibility assessment, the chitin nanofibers 
were found to promote cell attachment and spreading of normal human kera -
tinocytes and fibroblasts compared with the chitin microfibers. This was prob -Figure 7.13  SEM images of chitin nanofibers electrospun at different concentrations 
(reprinted with permission from Reference [40]. Copyright 2004 Elsevier).
CHItIN NANOfIbers by eleCtrOsPINNINg   147
ably a result of the high surface area available for cell attachment due to chitin 
nanofibers’ three-dimensional features and high surface area-to-volume ratios, 
which were favorable parameters for cell attachment, growth, and prolifera -
tion. Additionally, chitin nanofibers coated with type I collagen were found to 
promote cellular response in all the cells tested.
To mimic the natural extracellular matrix (ECM), chitin/silk fibroin blend 
nanofibrous scaffolds were obtained by electrospinning with the average fiber 
diameter being in the range of 340–920 nm, whereas electrospinning of pure 
silk fibroin produced an average fiber diameter of 1260 nm [42]. Electrospin -
ning of chitin/silk fibroin blend solutions produced blend nanofibers with 
phase-separated structure because chitin and silk fibroin were immiscible in 
the as-spun nanofibrous structure. From water vapor after-treatment, it was 
found that silk fibroin in the blend nanofibers could be dimensionally stabi -
lized by the solvent-induced crystallization. The hydrophilicity of the blend 
nanofibrous matrices was improved by blending with more hydrophilic chitin. 
The cell attachment and spreading of normal human epidermal keratinocytes 
and fibroblasts onto the blend nanofibrous matrices were also evaluated. 
However, no such a tendency in cellular attachment and spreading depending 
on the blend composition or hydrophilicity, except the one that contained  
75% chitin and 25% silk fibroin in normal human epidermal fibroblasts, was 
observed.
Electrospinning of poly(glycolic acid) (PGA)/chitin solutions in HFIP was 
investigated to fabricate biodegradable and biomimetic nanostructured scaf -
fold for tissue engineering [43]. The morphology of the electrospun PGA/
chitin blend nanofibers was investigated with a field emission scanning elec -
tron microscope. The blend fibers had an average diameter of around 140 nm, 
and their diameters had a distribution in the range of 50–350 nm. The blend 
nanofibers had phase-separated structure because PGA and chitin were 
immiscible in the as-spun nanofibrous structure. From in vitro  degradation 
results, it was found that PGA in the blend nanofibers was degraded faster 
than pure PGA nanofibers. This accelerating effect might be attributed to the 
hydrophilicity of chitin. The cell attachment and spreading onto the blend 
nanofibrous scaffolds showed relatively promising results for the normal 
human fibroblasts tested. The PGA/chitin blend matrix, particularly the one 
that contained 25% PGA and 75% chitin with bovin serum albumin coating, 
could be a good candidate for tissue engineering scaffolds because it had  
both biomimetic three-dimensional structure, resembling the collagen–
glycosaminoglycans composite structure in the ECM, and an excellent cell 
attachment and spreading for normal human fibroblasts.
Chitin whisker-reinforced nanocomposite nanofibers were also fabricated 
by electrospinning a mixture between an aqueous solution of PVA and a sus -
pension of α-chitin whiskers, which were prepared by the acid hydrolysis 
method from chitin flakes from shells of Penaeus merguiensis  shrimps [44]. 
Electrospinning of the PVA/chitin whisker mixtures was straightforward and 
the average diameter of the as-spun nanocomposite nanofibers ranged between 148  PrePArAtION AND APPlICAtIONs Of CHItIN NANOfIbers/NANOWHIsKers
185 and 218 nm, regardless of the whisker content. Incorporation of the chitin 
whiskers within the as-spun nanocomposite nanofibers was confirmed by the 
IR spectroscopic and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) measurements. The 
tensile strength of the as-spun PVA/chitin whisker nanocomposite mats 
increased from that of the neat as-spun fiber mat (i.e., 4.3 ± 0.7 MPa) with 
initial addition of the chitin whiskers to reach a maximum value (i.e., 
5.7 ± 0.6 MPa) at the chitin whisker to PVA ratio of about 5.1%, and decreased 
with further increasing the whisker content. Furthermore, the presence of 
chitin whiskers within the as-spun nanocomposite fiber mats increased Young’s 
modulus by about 4–8 times over that of the neat as-spun fiber mat.
7.6 OTHER METHODS FOR CHITIN NANOFIBERS
A simple and versatile approach for extracting bionanofibers from various 
natural materials using the ultrasonic technique has been attempted [45]. By 
this technique, chitin nanofibers that had uniform diameters were obtained 
The authors claimed that this methodology might be valuable to providing a 
convenient, versatile, and environmentally benign fabrication method for pro -
ducing bionanofibers at an industrial scale.
The procedure for preparing individualized chitin nanofibers of 3–4 nm in 
cross-sectional width and at least a few micrometers in length from squid pen 
β-chitin was successfully established by simple mechanical treatment in water 
at pH 3–4 without any chemical modification [46]. Transparent and highly 
viscous dispersions of squid pen β-chitin nanofibers in water were obtained by 
this method. No N-deacetylation occurred on the chitin molecules during the 
procedure. Moreover, the original crystal structure of β-chitin was maintained, 
although crystallinity index decreased from 0.51 to 0.37 as a result of the 
nanofiber conversion. Cationization of the C2 amino groups present on the 
crystallite surfaces of the squid pen β-chitin under acidic conditions was neces -
sary to prepare the nanofibers.
Mostly individualized α-chitin nanowhiskers were also obtained in yields 
of 85–90% by partial deacetylation with 33% NaOH at 90°C for 2–4 hours 
and subsequent disintegration in water at pH 3–4 [47]. Transparent and highly 
viscous liquids were obtained by the disintegration procedure of the partially 
deacetylated chitins. The degrees of N-acetylation of the products were 0.74–
0.70, which corresponded to C2-NH 2 contents of 1.34–1.56 mmol/g. XRD 
analysis showed that the crystallinity and crystal size of the original α-chitin 
were mostly maintained after the NaOH treatment. This result indicated that 
partial deacetylation took place selectively on the α-chitin crystallite surfaces. 
The TEM measurement revealed that the resulting liquids consisted mostly of 
individual nanowhiskers with average width and length of 6.2 ± 1.1 nm and 
250 ± 140 nm, respectively. Some α-chitin nanofibers more than 500 nm in 
length were also detected in the TEM images. Because conversion to nanow -
hiskers was achieved in water at pH 3–4, protonation of the C2-NH 2 groups refereNCes   149
in the partially deacetylated chitins to provide cationic charges in high density 
on the crystalline fibril surfaces, associated with partial mechanical scission of 
the fibrils during the disintegration, was considered to be the key driving force 
for the individualization of α-chitin fibrils.
REFERENCES
 [1] Schuerch, C. (1986) Polysaccharides. In: Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and 
Engineering , Vol. 13, 2nd ed, eds. H.F. Mark, N. Bilkales, and C.G. Overberger. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, pp. 87–162.
 [2] Rinaudo, M. (2006) Chitin and chitosan: Properties and applications. Progress in 
Polymer Science , 31, 603–632.
 [3] Kurita, K. (2006) Chitin and chitosan: Functional biopolymers from marine crus -
taceans. Marine Biotechnology (New York, N.Y.) , 8, 203–226.
 [4] Pillai, C.K.S., Paul, W., and Sharma, C.P . (2009) Chitin and chitosan polymers: 
Chemistry, solubility and fiber formation. Progress in Polymer Science , 34, 
641–678.
 [5] Raabe, D., Romano, P ., Sachs, C., Fabritius, H., Al-Sawalmih, A., Yi, S.B., Servos, 
G., and Hartwig, H.G. (2006) Microstructure and crystallographic texture of the 
chitin-protein network in the biological composite material of the exoskeleton of 
the lobster Homarus americanus . Materials Science and Engineering A-Structural 
Materials Properties Microstructure and Processing , 421, 143–153.
 [6] Chen, P .Y., Lin, A.Y.M., McKittrick, J., and Meyers, M.A. (2008) Structure and 
mechanical properties of crab exoskeletons. Acta Biomaterialia , 4, 587–596.
 [7] Abe, K., Iwamoto, S., and Yano, H. (2007) Obtaining cellulose nanofibers with a 
uniform width of 15 nm from wood. Biomacromolecules , 8, 3276–2378.
 [8] Fukuzumi, H., Saito, T., Iwata, T., Kumamoto, Y., and Isogai, A. (2009) Transparent 
and high gas barrier films of cellulose nanofibers prepared by tempo-mediated 
oxidation. Biomacromolecules , 10, 162–165.
 [9] Anglès, M.N., Dufresne, A. (2000) Plasticized starch/tunicin whiskers nanocom -
posites. 1. Structural analysis. Macromolecules , 33, 8344–8353.
[10] Ifuku, S., Nogi, M., Abe, K., Yoshioka, M., Morimoto, M., Saimoto, H., and Yano, 
H. (2009) Preparation of chitin nanofibers with a uniform width as alpha-chitin 
from crab shells. Biomacromolecules , 10, 1584–1588.
[11] Ifuku, S., Nogi, M., Yoshioka, M., Morimoto, M., Yano, H., and Saimoto, H. (2010) 
Fibrillation of dried chitin into 10–20 nm nanofibers by a simple grinding method 
under acidic conditions. Carbohydrate Polymers , 81, 134–139.
[12] Revol, J.F., Marchessault, R.H. (1993) In-vitro chiral nematic ordering of chitin 
crystallites. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules , 15, 329–335.
[13] Li, J., Revol, J.F., Naranjo, E., and Marchessault, R.H. (1996) Effect of electrostatic 
interaction on phase separation of chitin crystallite suspensions. International 
Journal of Biological Macromolecules , 18, 177–187.
[14] Li, J., Revol, J.F., and Marchessault, R.H. (1997) Effect of degree of deacetylation 
of chitin on the properties of chitin crystallites. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 
65, 373–380.150  PrePArAtION AND APPlICAtIONs Of CHItIN NANOfIbers/NANOWHIsKers
[15] Li, J., Revol, J.F., and Marchessault, R.H. (1996) Rheological properties of aqueous 
suspensions of chitin crystallites. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science , 183, 
365–373.
[16] Goodrich, J.D., Winter, W.T. (2007) α-Chitin nanocrystals prepared from shrimp 
shells and their specific surface area measurement. Biomacromolecules , 8, 
252–257.
[17] Paillet, M., Dufresne, A. (2001) Chitin whisker reinforced thermoplastic nanocom -
posites. Macromolecules , 34, 6527–6530.
[18] Morin, A., Dufresne, A. (2002) Nanocomposites of chitin whiskers from Riftia  
tubes and poly(caprolactone). Macromolecules , 35, 2190–2199.
[19] Sriupayo, J., Supaphol, P ., Blackwell, J., and Rujiravanit R. (2005) Preparation and 
characterization of α-chitin whisker-reinforced poly(vinyl alcohol) nanocompos -
ite films with or without heat treatment. Polymer , 46, 5637–5644.
[20] Gopalan Nair, K., Dufresne, A. (2003) Crab shell chitin whisker reinforced natural 
rubber nanocomposites. 1. Processing and swelling behavior. Biomacromolecules , 
4, 657–665.
[21] Gopalan Nair, K., Dufresne, A. (2003) Crab shell chitin whisker reinforced natural 
rubber nanocomposites. 2. Mechanical behavior. Biomacromolecules , 4, 666–674.
[22] Gopalan Nair, K., Dufresne, A. (2003) Crab shell chitin whisker reinforced natural 
rubber nanocomposites. 3. Effect of chemical modification of chitin whiskers. 
Biomacromolecules , 4, 1835–1842.
[23] Lu, Y., Weng, L., and Zhang, L. (2004) Morphology and properties of soy protein 
isolate thermoplastics reinforced with chitin whiskers. Biomacromolecules , 5, 
1046–1051.
[24] Phongying, S., Aiba, S. (2007) Chirachanchai S. Direct chitosan nanoscaffold for -
mation via chitin whiskers. Polymer , 48, 393–400.
[25] Saito, T., Isogai, A. (2004) TEMPO-mediated oxidation of native cellulose. The 
effect of oxidation conditions on chemical and crystal structures of the water 
insoluble fractions. Biomacromolecules , 5, 1983–1989.
[26] Saito, T., Kimura, S., Nishiyama, Y., and Isogai, A. (2007) Cellulose nanofibers 
prepared by TEMPO-mediated oxidation of native cellulose. Biomacromolecules , 
8, 2485–2491.
[27] Saito, T., Nishiyama, Y., Putaux, J.L., Vignon, M., and Isogai, A. (2006) Homoge -
neous suspensions of individualized microfibrils from TEMPO-catalyzed oxida -
tion of native cellulose. Biomacromolecules , 7, 1687–1691.
[28] Fan, Y., Saito, T., and Isogai, A. (2008) Chitin nanocrystals prepared by TEMPO-
mediated oxidation of α-chitin. Biomacromolecules , 9, 192–198.
[29] Fan, Y., Saito, T., and Isogai, A. (2009) TEMPO-mediated oxidation of β-chitin to 
prepare individual nanofibers. Carbohydrate Polymers , 77, 832–838.
[30] Zhong, C., Cooper, A., Kapetanovic, A., Fang, Z., Zhang, M., and Rolandi, M. 
(2010) A facile bottom-up route to self-assembled biogenic nanofibers. Soft Matter , 
6, 5298–5301.
[31] Kadokawa, J., Takegawa, A., Mine, S., and Prasad, K. (2011) Preparation of chitin 
nanowhiskers using an ionic liquid and their composite materials with poly(viny 
alcohol). Carbohydrate Polymers , 84, 1408–1412.refereNCes   151
[32] Feng, L., Chen, Z.I. (2008) Research progress on dissolution and functional modi -
fication of cellulose in ionic liquids. Journal of Molecular Liquids , 142, 1–3.
[33] Pinkert, A., Marsh, K.N., Pang, S., and Staiger, M.P . (2009) Ionic liquids and their 
interaction with cellulose. Chemical Reviews , 109, 6712–6828.
[34] Zakrzewska, M.E., Bogel-Lukasik, E., and Bogel-Lukasik, R. (2010) Solubility of 
carbohydrates in ionic liquids. Energy and Fuels , 24, 737–745.
[35] Wu, Y., Sasaki, T., Irie, S., and Sakurai, K. (2008) A novel biomass-ionic liquid 
platform for the utilization of native chitin. Polymer , 49, 2321–2327.
[36] Qin, Y., Lu, X., Sun, N., and Rogers, R.D. (2010) Dissolution or extraction of 
crustacean shells using ionic liquids to obtain high molecular weight purified chitin 
and direct production of chitin films and fibers. Green Chemistry , 12, 968–971.
[37] Prasad, K., Murakami, M., Kaneko, Y., Takada, A., Nakamura, Y., and Kadokawa, 
J. (2009) Weak gel of chitin with an ionic liquid, 1-allyl-3-methylimidazolium 
bromide. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules , 45, 221–225.
[38] Schiffman, J.D., Stulga, L.A., and Schauer, C.L. (2009) Chitin and chitosan: Trans -
formations due to the electrospinning process. Polymer Engineering and Science , 
49, 1918–1928.
[39] Jayakumar, R., Prabaharan, M., Nair, S.V., and Tamura, H. (2010) Novel chitin and 
chitosan nanofibers in biomedical applications. Biotechnology Advances , 28, 
142–150.
[40] Min, B.M., Lee, S.W., Lim, J.N., You, Y., Lee, T.S., Kang, P .H., and Park, W.H. (2004) 
Chitin and chitosan nanofibers: Electrospinning of chitin and deacetylation of 
chitin nanofibers. Polymer , 45, 7137–7142.
[41] Noha, H.K., Lee, S.W., Kim, J.M., Oh, J.E., Kim, K.H., Chung, C.P ., Choi, S.C., Park, 
W.H., and Min, B.M. (2006) Electrospinning of chitin nanofibers: Degradation 
behavior and cellular response to normal human keratinocytes and fibroblasts. 
Biomaterials , 27, 3934–3944.
[42] Park, K.E., Jung, S.Y., Lee, S.J., Min, B.M., and Park, W.H. (2006) Biomimetic 
nanofibrous scaffolds: Preparation and characterization of chitin/silk fibroin blend 
nanofibers. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules , 38, 165–173.
[43] Park, K.E., Kang, H.K., Lee, S.J., Min, B.M., and Park, W.H. (2006) Biomimetic 
nanofibrous scaffolds: Preparation and characterization of PGA/chitin blend 
nanofibers. Biomacromolecules , 7, 635–643.
[44] Junkasem, J., Rujiravanit, R., and Supaphol, P . (2006) Fabrication of α-chitin 
whisker-reinforced poly(vinyl alcohol) nanocomposite nanofibers by electrospin -
ning. Nanotechnology , 7, 4519–4528.
[45] Zhao, H.P ., Feng, X.Q., and Gao, H. (2007) Ultrasonic for extracting nanofibers 
from nature materials. Applied Physics Letters , 90, 73112–73113.
[46] Fan, Y., Saito, T., and Isogai, A. (2008) Preparation of chitin nanofibers from squid 
pen β-chitin by simple mechanical treatment under acid conditions. Biomacromol -
ecules , 9, 1919–1923.
[47] Fan, Y., Saito, T., and Isogai, A. (2010) Individual chitin nano-whiskers prepared 
from partially deacetylated α-chitin by fibril surface cationization. Carbohydrate 
Polymers , 79, 1046–1051.153Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 8
Preparation of Starch Nanoparticles
DÉBORAH LE CORRE  and ALAIN DUFRESNE
8.1 INTRODUCTION
Engineered nanoscaled materials are used globally in numerous industrial 
applications and the list of proposed commercial applications continues to 
grow [1]. Indeed, these nanomaterials exhibit outstandingly enhanced proper -
ties even when used at very low content. Moreover, fossil depletion and 
growing environmental concerns have led to the development of bio-based 
materials.
Thanks to their semicrystallinity, polysaccharides offer the opportunity to 
prepare bio-based nanoparticles. Indeed, since pioneer work on polymer nano -
composites reinforced with nanoclay, at Toyota in the early 1990s, work on 
nanocrystalline cellulose (NCC) has exponentially increased as reviewed 
recently [2]. It was soon followed by investigations on chitin [3–5] and starch 
nanocrystals (SNCs) as described in Section 8.4.1.
Starch is an abundant, renewable, biodegradable polymer produced in 
nature. It is found in many plants roots, stalks, crop seeds, and staple crops 
such as rice, corn, wheat, tapioca, and potato [6], as a source of storage energy. 
Worldwide the main sources of starch are maize (82%), wheat (8%), potatoes 
(5%), and cassava (5%) from which tapioca starch is derived [7]. Starch is 
either used as extracted from the plant and is called “native starch,” or it 
undergoes one or more chemical modifications to reach specific properties and 
is called “modified starch.” The preparation of SNC is based on native starches.
8.2 STARCH
After its extraction from plants, starch occurs as a white flour-like powder, 
consisting of microscopic granules with diameters ranging from 2 to 100 μm, 154  PREPARAtION OF StARCH NANOPARtICLES
depending on the botanic origin. It is insoluble in cold water. The basic formula 
of this polymer is (C 6H10O5)n and the glucose monomer is called α-D-
glycopyranose (or α-D-glycose) when in cycle.
8.2.1 Content
Starch’s composition was first determined by studying the residue of its total 
acid hydrolysis. It consists mainly of two families of glucosidic macromolecules, 
presented in Figure 8.1: (1) a mostly linear one called amylose, consisting of 
glucose units linked by (1-4) α-D-glycoside bonds, and slightly branched by 
(1-6) α-linkages; and (2) a highly branched one called amylopectin, consisting 
of relatively short branches of α-D-(1-4)-glycopyranose that are interlinked 
by α-D-(1-6)-glycosidic linkages approximately every 22 glucose units [8].
In most common types of starch the weight percentages of amylopectin 
ranges between 72% and 82%, and the amylose content ranges from 18% to 
28%. However, some mutant types of starch have a very high amylose content 
(up to 70% and more for amylomaize) and some have a very low amylose 
content (0–2% for waxy maize).
Minor components of starch granules are of three types: (1) cell-wall frag -
ments, (2) surface components, and (3) internal components. The main con -
stituents of surface components are proteins, enzymes, amino acid, and nucleic 
acid, whereas internal components are composed mainly of lipids. Thus, minor 
components of starch are often described as proteins, lipids, and minerals [9, 
10]. The proportion of these components depends on the botanical origin of 
starch (species and varieties). Starch contains several different minerals in 
small amounts, but the most important mineral is phosphorus [9].
8.2.2 Structure
Starch structure has been under investigation for years. Because of its com -
plexity, a universally accepted model has been lacking [9]. However, these last Figure 8.1  Chemical structure of amylose and amylopectin.OH
OH
OHOHOHOH
OH
OH
OHOHOH
OH
OHOH
OH
OHOHOH
OH
OHOH
OO
O
OOOO
O
OO
O
mO
O
OOOO
OHO
HOHOHO HO
HOHO
HO
HO
HOHO
nn
HO
Amylose AmylopectinHOStARCH   155
decades a predominant model seems to have emerged. It consists in a multi -
scale structure as presented in Figure 8.2. The granule (a, 2–100 μm) consists 
in alternating amorphous and semicrystalline growth rings (b, 120–400 nm 
[14]), rendering an onion-like structure when observed under a scanning elec -
tron microscope. These growth rings consist respectively of small and larger 
blocklets (d, 10–100 nm) made of alternating crystalline and amorphous lamel -
lae (c, 9 nm [11]) containing (g) amylopectin, and (h) amylose chains (0.1–1 nm).
On the surface of starch granules, pores can be observed as seen in Figure 
8.2a. They are believed to be channels going through the growth rings to the 
center of the granule (called hilum). Observed under a microscope and polar -
ized light, starch shows birefringence. The refracted “Maltese cross” corre -
sponding to the crystalline region is characteristic of a radial orientation of 
the macromolecules [9]. Indeed, starch granules consist of concentric alternat -
ing amorphous and semicrystalline growth rings growing by apposition from 
the hilum. The shape and particle size of granules, as well as the number and 
thickness of the growth rings, is strongly dependent on botanic origin.Figure 8.2  Starch multiscale structure. (a) Starch granules from normal maize (30 μm); 
(b) amorphous and semicrystalline growth rings (120–500 nm); (c) amorphous and 
crystalline lamellae (9 nm): magnified details of the semicrystalline growth ring; (d) 
blocklets (20–50 nm): constituting unit of the growth rings; (e) amylopectin double 
helices forming the crystalline lamellae of the blocklets; (f) nanocrystals: other repre -
sentation of the crystalline lamellae called SNC when separated by acid hydrolysis; (g) 
amylopectin’s molecular structure; (h) amylose’s molecular structure (0.1–1 nm). 
Reproduced with permissions from Gallant et al. [11], Copyright 1997 Elsevier; Donald 
et al. [12], Copyright Science and Technology Facilities Council 1997; and Tang et al. 
[13], Copyright 2006 Elsevier.
156  PREPARAtION OF StARCH NANOPARtICLES
Although the blocklet concept is not commonly mentioned in the literature, 
it was heavily supported and brought back to discussion by Gallant et al. [11] 
They suggested that both semicrystalline and amorphous growth rings are 
subdivided into respectively large (ca. 100 nm) and small (25 nm) spherical 
blocklets. Depending on the botanic origin of starch, authors report different 
blocklet sizes. Long axial diameters are 10–30 nm for maize starches [15], 
20–50 nm for potato starches [16], and 25–100 nm for wheat starches [17].
Given that these blocklets have an average size of 100 nm in diameter, they 
are proposed to contain 280 amylopectin side chain clusters [18]. Schemati -
cally, the semicrystalline growth rings consist of a stack of repeated crystalline 
and amorphous lamellae (Fig. 8.2c). The thickness of the combined layers is 
9 nm regardless of the botanic origin [11].
The crystalline lamellae are believed to be created by the interwining of 
amylopectin side chains with a linear length above 10 glucose units to form 
double helices [19]. These double helices are packed together to form the 
crystallites. The amorphous regions correspond to branching points of amylo -
pectin. Gallant et al. [11] calculated that assuming that an amylopectin side 
chain cluster is 10 nm, a small blocklet (20–50 nm) is composed of about 2 to 
5 side chain clusters. Tang et al. [13] illustrated this model as shown in Figure 
8.2d, making amylopectin the backbone of the blocklet structure.
Amylose molecules are thought to occur in the granule as individual mol -
ecules, randomly interspersed among amylopectin molecules and in close 
proximity with one another, in both the crystalline and the amorphous regions 
[19]. Depending on the botanic origin of starch, amylose is preferably found 
in the amorphous region [20] (e.g., wheat starch), interspersed among amylo -
pectin clusters in both the amorphous and the crystalline regions (e.g., normal 
maize starch), in bundles between amylopectin clusters [20], or co-crystallized 
with amylopectin (e.g., potato starch) [20].
8.2.3 Crystalline Type
Native starches usually contain between 15% and 45% of crystalline material. 
Depending on their X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern, starches are categorized 
in three crystalline types called A, B, and C. Imberty et al. [21, 22] proposed a 
model for the double helices packing configuration to explain the difference 
between A and B types starches. A-type structures are closely packed with 
water molecules between each double helical structure, whereas B-types are 
more open and water molecules are located in the central cavity formed by 
six double helices as shown in Figure 8.3.
It was later envisaged that branching patterns of the different types of 
starch may also differ [23]. It was recently confirmed [24] that the branching 
density inside each cluster and the distance between two α(1-6) linkages are 
determining factors for the development of crystallinity in starch granules. 
Clusters with numerous short chains and short linkage distance produce 
densely packed structures, which crystallize into the A allomorphic type. StARCH NANOPARtICLES   157
Figure 8.3  Double helices packing configuration according to crystalline type.A-type
Doub le helices Water moleculesB-type
Longer chains and distances lead to a B-type. C-type starch pattern has been 
considered to be a mixture of both A- and B-types since its XRD pattern can 
be resolved as a combination of the previous two. It has been suggested by 
Bogracheva et al. [25] that C-type starch granules contain both types of poly -
morph: the B-type at the center of the granule and the A-type at the 
surrounding.
8.3 STARCH NANOPARTICLES
8.3.1 Preparation
Starch nanoparticles (SNP) can schematically be divided into two kinds: (1) 
those exploiting the semicrystalline property of starch, such as SNC; and (2) 
those exploiting the gelatinizing/melting property of starch referred to as 
regenerated or colloidal SNP . They can further be categorized by their produc -
tion process as presented in Figure 8.4. SNC (discussed later) are mainly 
prepared by hydrolysis, while SNP are prepared by “regeneration” (chemical 
treatment or solubilization/precipitation) or mechanical treatment.
In recent studies, new chemical processes have been tried out to produce 
regenerated SNP . Ma et al. [32] and Tan et al. [31] prepared SNP by (1) pre -
cipitation of amorphous starch and cross-linking, while (2) Kim and Lim [30] 
combined complex formation and enzymatic hydrolysis to yield V-type nano -
crystals (i.e., complexed with lipids). Only one attempt to prepare mechani -
cally treated SNP by microfluidization, most likely to mimic treatments 
performed on cellulose to obtain microfibrillated cellulose (MFC), was 
reported by Liu et al. [35].
Most recently, studies have been focusing on combining mechanical and 
chemical treatments to yield SNP . Bloembergen et al. [33, 36] and Song et al. 
[34] prepared SNP by reactive extrusion (REx) (the cross-linking chemical 158  PREPARAtION OF StARCH NANOPARtICLES
Figure 8.4  Different ways of producing crystalline and amorphous starch nanopar -
ticles: hydrolysis leads to nanocrystals, whereas regeneration and mechanical treatment 
lead to both amorphous and crystalline particles [26]. (1) References to SNC produc -
tion by acid hydrolysis : (a) TEM micrograph of SNC from Garcia et al. [27] and (b) 
TEM micrograph of SNC from Putaux et al. [28]. (2) Intent to produce SNC by enzy -
matic hydrolysis  as reported by Kim et al. [29]. It is believed that the process leads to 
blocklets rather than nanoparticles. (3) Kim and Lim [30] reported the preparation of 
nanocrystals by complex formation  between amylose and n-butanol. Enzymatic hydro -
lysis is used to selectively keep crystalline particles. (c) TEM micrograph of SNC after 
co-crytallization and enzymatic hydrolysis. (4) Tan et al. [31] and (5) Ma et al. [32] 
report the production of starch nanoparticles by precipitation  of gelatinized starch in 
nonsolvent followed by cross-linking reaction: (e) starch nanoparticles from Tan et al. 
[31], (d) precipitated starch nanoparticles before cross-linking from Ma et al. [32], and 
(f) citric acid cross-linked starch nanoparticles from Ma et al. [32]. (6) Bloembergen et 
al. [33] and (7) Song et al. [34] report the production of starch nanoparticles by reactive 
extrusion  (REx) of plasticized starch with a cross-linker. (g) SEM picture of extruded 
starch particles at 85°C with 2% glyoxal at 200 rpm (water and glycerol as plasticizers). 
(8) Starch nanoparticles prepared by mini-emulsion cross-linking  as reported by Shi et 
al. and (h) the corresponding reflects TEM micrograph. (9) By analogy with microfibril -
lated cellulose (MFC), Liu et al. [35] intended to produce starch nanoparticles by flu-
idization/homogenization . It leads to crystalline microparticles turning into amorphous 
nanoparticles with an increasing number of run. (i) TEM micrograph of starch nanocol -
loid from Liu et al. [35]. Photos reproduced with permission from References [27, 28, 
31], Copyright 2003, 2008, 2009 American Chemical Society; Reference [27], Copyright 
2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA; Reference [30], Copyright 2008 Elsevier; 
Reference [35], Copyright 2009 Elsevier; Reference [34], Copyright 2011 Elsevier.
STARCH
Hydrolysis (d)
(c)
(a),(b)
(e),(f),(g),(h) (i)Co-crystallization3Cross-linking4,5
Acidic1
Y = 15%
T = 5 da ysY = 5-6%
T = 6-9 hY = 1%
T = 6 da ys Y = 15%
T = hour sY = 1 00%
T = hour sY = N.A (high)
T~1-2 hY = N.A (high)
T~6 h
Enzymatic2
15-40 nm 500 nm28-51 nm
50-100 nm100 nm150-400 nm
5-20 nm
Crystalline Amor phousPrecipitation
Emulsion Microfluidiz er8,9Extrusion6,7Regener ation
Nanocry stalline par ticlesRegener ated Nanopar ticlesNanocolloidsMechanical tr eatmentsStARCH NANOPARtICLES   159
reaction takes place in the extruder) and Shi et al. [37] by a “mini-emulsion 
cross-linking” technique where the water-in-oil ( w/o) mini-emulsion is obtained 
through high pressure homogenization and subsequently cross-linked.
In more details, Ma et al. [32] prepared SNP by precipitating a starch solu -
tion with ethanol as the precipitant. Native starch was mixed with water and 
completely gelatinized (90°C, 1 hour). Then ethanol was added dropwise to 
the solution at room temperature and stirred for 50 minutes. The suspension 
was then centrifuged with ethanol to remove water and the settled material 
was dried at 50°C to remove ethanol. The resulting nanoparticles were used 
to prepare a bionanocomposite.
Kim and Lim [30] studied alternative ways to obtain SNP . They proposed 
a method of preparing nanoscale starch particles by complex formation with 
other components. Experiments were conducted with n-butanol. Starch was 
dissolved in an aqueous dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) solution heated for 1 
hour and stirred for 24 hours. The aliquot was passed through a polytetrafluo -
roethylene (PTFE) membrane filter with 10 μm pore size into the bottom 
compartment filled with n-butanol (6 days at 70°C). Maximum starch precipi -
tation after 72 hours was 6.78% of the initial amount. Complex formation 
involved mainly amylose rather than amylopectin. The precipitate (starch–
butanol complex) was collected by centrifugation and washed three times in 
n-butanol. However, the complex contained a large portion of amorphous 
matrix, so that its selective removal by enzymatic hydrolysis was needed. Since 
most of the starch was hydrolyzed (85–90%), the resulting yield of the nanopar -
ticles was extremely low. SNP display spherical or oval shapes with diameters 
in the range of 10–20 nm.
SNP prepared by REx as reported by Bloembergen et al. [38] are patented 
and produced by Ecosynthetix as commercial product Eco-sphereTM (dis -
cussed later). However, their SNP formation mechanism during REx was not 
reported. Thus, Song et al. [34], based on Giezen et al. [39] ’s anterior patent 
(2000), investigated the influence of extrusion conditions (such as temperature, 
screw speed, torque, the content proportion of starch and water) and cross-
linker addition on particle size. Roughly, native starch granules are premixed 
with plasticizers (typically water and/or glycerol) and fed into an extruder. A 
cross-linker (typically glyoxal) is added in a downstream hopper of the 
extruder. The extrusion is conducted under a given temperature to allow for 
starch melting and cross-linking (initiation and curing) reaction. It was found 
that the addition of glyoxal during extrusion led to a higher torque and 
reduced particle size (from 300 nm to 160 nm). In this condition, an increase 
in reaction temperature and/or screw speed (i.e., strain) also strongly contrib -
uted to reducing particle size and even size distribution (for temperature). As 
expected, resulting nanoparticles were almost amorphous due to extrusion, 
and suspension viscosity was much lower than for gelatinized starch.
The most innovative approach is that of Shi et al. [37], referred to as 
“miniemulsion cross-linking.” It combines techniques of w/o emulsion cross-
linking (starch and cross-linker are the aqueous phase; and cyclohexane and 160  PREPARAtION OF StARCH NANOPARtICLES
surfactant are the oil phase) with a subsequent mini-emulsion. Mini-emulsion 
can typically be obtained chemically by creating chemical potential through 
the use of surfactants, or mechanically by emulsifiers, sonicators, or, as in this 
study, high pressure homogenization (1 to 5 passes). The cross-linking reaction, 
obtained at low temperatures using sodium trimetaphosphate (STMP), takes 
place during the stable phase of mini-emulsion. The sphere-like nanoparticles 
are precipitated using acetic acid and centrifugation. The influence of process 
parameters ( w/o ratio, cross-linker concentration, homogenization pressure, 
and number of cycles) on particle size is also investigated. It was found that 
there was an optimal surfactant concentration in the oil phase, which was at 
about 6% (w/v), and in this concentration the particle size was the lowest (a 
minimum value). Also, it was found that pressure and number of cycles had 
the least influence on particle size, whereas an increase in water/oil and starch/
STMP ratios remarkably increased particle size. Prepared SNP could be 
swelled in water (like those prepared by Rex) and were stable for several days 
at body temperature, allowing applications as drug carrier.
Liu et al. [35] applied the method of producing MFC to the production of 
starch colloids. A 5% slurry of high amylose corn starch was run through a 
Microfluidizer for several passes (up to 30). The particles size of samples 
obtained from more than 10 passes was below 100 nm, and the starch slurry 
changed from sol into gel. The gel-like suspension remained stable for more 
than a month when diluted to a concentration of 0.5 wt%. The thermal stability 
was not affected, and since no chemical or thermal degradation occurred 
during the treatment, the reported yield was almost 100%. However, the 
resultant starch colloids were obtained from breaking down both amorphous 
and crystalline domains, rendering an amorphous diffraction pattern after 10 
passes.
8.3.2 Patented Starch Nanoparticles
To the best of our knowledge, there are no commercial SNC available on the 
market. In fact, only two patents—in Chinese and by the same authors—
dealing with SNC have been found. They both deal with the preparation of 
polyurethanes from starch nanocrystal-grafted polyesters [40, 41]. All other 
patents and commercial products deal with regenerated SNP (presented  
Fig. 8.4).
Most popular commercial products are the Mater-BiTM products (a wide 
family of grades) from Novamont and Eco-Sphere from Ecosynthetix.
An application of Novamont SNP as fillers was developed in collaboration 
with Goodyear and the product is called BioTRED. It is a biotire in which 
Mater-Bi is used to replace part of the lampblack and silica, which are usually 
contained in the tire mixture [42]. Instead of adding nanoscaled materials to 
the tire, the biopolymer itself was nanosized and used as a bionanofiller.
Eco-Sphere is a starch-based biolatex substitute for oil-based latexes provid -
ing adhesive applications such as paper coating and tissue complexing, or even StARCH NANOCRyStALS   161
as a replacement of polyvinyl acetate [42]. Starch granules are extruded and 
cross-linked simultaneously by REx. The process converts starch into a thermo -
plastic melt that is transformed into an agglomerate of dry cross-linked nanopar -
ticles. The product is commercialized dried and has to be re-dispersed to form 
the latex [43]. WO Patent “Process for producing biopolymer nanoparticles” 
[39], written in English, describes the REx process used by EcoSynthetix.
Four other patents dealing with SNP have been identified. Two are Korean 
and from the same authors, Lim and Kim [29, 44]. The first one claims starch/
alcohol complex nanoparticles as in the article of Kim and Lim [30] and the 
second, enzymatically hydrolyzed nanoparticles as reported in the article of 
Kim and Lim [29], and both are represented in Figure 8.3. The last two patents 
are in Chinese and relate to the production of SNP for water treatment and 
medical application, respectively. The first one describes cross-linked SNP 
grafted with lignin quaternary ammonium salt to be used as antichlor [45]. The 
second claims polylysine-SNP with cationic starch as a core and polylysine as 
a shell [46].
8.4 STARCH NANOCRYSTALS
First of all, it is important to clarify the terms commonly used. Starch crystal -
lite, starch nanocrystal, microcrystalline starch, and sometimes hydrolyzed 
starch all refer to the crystalline part of starch obtained by hydrolysis but at 
different extents (from the most to the least). It has to be distinguished from 
SNP which can be amorphous.
8.4.1 General Description
First interest in SNC has been studied by analogy with cellulose nanocrystals 
(whiskers) to be used as reinforcing fillers in a matrix. In 1996, Dufresne et al. 
[47] reported the preparation of what was called “microcrystalline starch” at 
the time and which they described as agglomerated particles of a few tens of 
nanometers in diameters. The procedure consisted in hydrolyzing starch 
(5 wt%) in a 2.2N HCl suspension for 15 days. It was shown that classical 
models for polymers containing spherical particles could not explain the rein -
forcing effect of microcrystals. Further studies on the morphology of these 
microcrystals were conducted by Dufresne and Cavaillé [48] in light of aggre -
gate formation and percolation concept. In 2003, Putaux et al. [28] revealed 
the morphology of SNC. Shapes and lateral dimensions were derived from 
observation of individual platelets in planar view: a marked 60–65°acute angles 
for parallelepiped blocks with a length of 20–40 nm and a width of 15–30 nm. 
However, more recent publications report bigger SNC (40–70 nm for potato 
SNC [49]; 30–80 nm [50] and 60–150 nm [51, 52] for pea SNC; and 50 nm [53] 
and 70–100 nm [54] for waxy SNC), with round edges [55] and found as grape-
like aggregates of 1–5 μm. The heterogeneity in particle size could be explained 162  PREPARAtION OF StARCH NANOPARtICLES
not only by the differences in starch types but also by the difficulty of obtain -
ing well-defined pictures of nonaggregated nanocrystals. Contrary to cellulose 
nanocrystals, SNC are not almost 100% crystalline but are rather 45–50% 
crystalline with variations depending on the botanic origin as recently pre -
sented by Le Corre et al. [56].
8.4.2 Acid Hydrolysis Kinetics
Acid hydrolysis has been used for a long time to modify starch and its proper -
ties. Nageli [57] reported the obtaining of a low molecular weight acid resistant 
fraction (known as Nageli amylodextrin) after the hydrolysis of potato starch, 
at room temperature during 30 days in a 15% H 2SO 4 suspension. Lintner [58] 
also gave his name to a hydrolysis process consisting in a 7.5% (w/v) HCl 
suspension of potato starch at 30–40°C to produce a high molecular weight 
starch suspension called “lintnerized starch.” Most recent publications use 
either one of these two acidic conditions. In the industry, starch slurry is treated 
with dilute HCl or H 2SO 4 at 25–55°C for various periods of time, to produce 
“acid-thinned” starch used as sizing agents, in gum candies production, in 
paper and paper board production. Nowadays, most existing acid modifica -
tions aim at producing “soluble” starch or glucose syrup for biotechnologies 
with production of polylactic acid (PLA) or biofuels, for example. Only few 
studies have reported the use of acid hydrolysis to produce microcrystalline 
starch and SNC.
Despite differences in hydrolysis mechanisms, both enzymatic and acidic 
hydrolysis studies showed evidence of concentric “soft” layers which are more 
readily hydrolyzed. Although the origin and structure of the soft layer led to 
several debates in the 1960s, it was later accepted that it is always the less 
organized structure that degrades first [59] (corresponding to amylose), leaving 
more resistant amylopectin-based crystallites.
Hydrolysis has been described at different scales. At an atomic scale, it was 
found that α-1,6 bonds (found in amylopectin) are more resistant to hydrolysis 
than α-1,4 bonds [60]. The activation energy for hydrolyzing an α-1,6 (deter -
mined for an isomaltose) is 33 kcal/mol, whereas that of α-1,4 is 30 kcal/mol 
[61].
When observed at the microscopic scale, with an optical or scanning elec -
tron microscope, acid hydrolysis is decomposed in three steps [62]: (1) erosion 
of the surface, (2) collapse of the granule’s wall due to radial diffusion of the 
acid, and (3) fragmentation of the growth rings. Indeed between the second 
and third step, hollow shells suggest that the outer layer is more acid resistant. 
Angellier [62] suggested that the acid diffuses from the surface of the granule 
to the hilum (center of the granule) through pores. This is in agreement with 
French’s conclusions [14] assessing that the hilum is less acid resistant than the 
outer shell, and that the hydrolysis starts from the center of the granule.
At the macroscopic scale, techniques for following the extent of hydrolysis 
are numerous. The most common one consists in following the total solubilized StARCH NANOCRyStALS   163
carbohydrates content [63]. It is sometimes expressed as a percentage of initial 
starch [64] or analyzed as molecular weight fractions [65]. To produce acid-
thinned starch, Wang et al. [66] evaluated the extent of hydrolysis with viscos -
ity of the resulting slurry, measured by Brabender Viscograph-E. For the 
preparation of SNC, Angellier et al. [7] followed the dry weight of nonsolubi -
lized particles as a percentage of initial dry starch.
Figure 8.5 shows the hydrolysis kinetics for different starches from different 
research groups.
For all starches a two-stage hydrolysis profile can be evidenced: (1) an initial 
fast hydrolysis step, presumably due to the hydrolysis of the amorphous regions 
of starch granules, and (2) a second slower step, presumably due to the hydro -
lysis of the crystalline regions [64, 69]. Some authors distinguish three steps of 
hydrolysis: a rapid one, a slow one, and a very slow one [62], presumably cor -
responding to the hydrolysis of amorphous layers, semicrystalline layers, and 
crystalline ones, respectively. There are two common hypotheses to account 
for the slower hydrolysis rate of the crystalline domain. The first one is that 
the dense packing of starch in the crystalline regions does not readily allow 
the penetration of H 3O+ [63]. The second one is that the hydrolysis of the 
glucosidic bonds requires a change in conformation from chair to half-chair 
[14].Figure 8.5  Hydrolysis kinetic of different starches. High amylose (65%) from Li et al. 
[63] (dotted line ....); waxy maize ( ) from Angellier et al. [67] (plain line); waxy maize, 
normal maize, amylomaize V, amylomaize VII, oat, and rice starch from Jayakody and 
Hoover [64] (dash line----); wrinkled pea, mung bean, lentil, and corn from Robin et 
al. [68] (dot filled line 
 ).100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0 5 10 15
Time (day s)
High Amylose (65%) Waxy Maiz e Normal Maiz e
Rice Star ch
CornWaxy Maiz e
Oat
LentilAmylomaiz e VII
Mung BeanAmylomaiz e V
Wrinkled Pea20 25 30Extent of hy drolysis (%)164  PREPARAtION OF StARCH NANOPARtICLES
The obvious factors influencing hydrolysis kinetic are: time, acid type, acid 
concentration, and temperature. The influence of acid and starch type has been 
studied extensively by Singh and Ali [65, 70–72]. They showed, through differ -
ent characterization techniques (alkali fluidity number, number average 
molecular weight, intrinsic viscosity), that for the same equal normality, HCl 
and HNO 3 gave the highest thinning effect followed respectively by H 2SO 4 
and H 3PO 4. Angellier et al. [7] also obtained a lower yield of hydrolysis with 
H2SO 4 than with HCl for the production of nanocrystals but showed that final 
suspensions were more stable with H 2SO 4 due to the presence of sulfate 
groups at the surface. The difference in the rate and yield of hydrolysis among 
starch types was attributed to the difference in granule sizes and number of 
pores on the granule surface [71]. However, Biliaderis and Grant [69] thought 
that the granular organization had probably more influence. Jayakody and 
Hoover [64] studied further the susceptibility of different cereal starches to 
hydrolysis. They concluded that (1) the first stage of hydrolysis (amorphous 
regions) is influenced by the granule size, pores on the surface, amylose content, 
and the amount of lipid-complexed amylose chains, and (2) the second step of 
hydrolysis (crystalline region) is influenced by the amylopectin content, mode 
of distribution of α(1-6) branches between the amorphous and the crystalline 
regions, and degree of packing of the double helices within the crystallites (i.e., 
the parameters also influencing crystallinity). Wang et al. [66] observed as 
expected that the rate of hydrolysis increased when increasing the concentra -
tion of acid while the temperature was kept at 50°C.
Angellier et al. [7] studied the influence of hydrolysis parameters on SNC 
preparation using a surface response methodology. They concluded that both 
the acid concentration and temperature should not be too high. Since then 
hydrolysis conditions have not changed much among researchers.
8.4.3 Preparation Protocol
Only a limited number of articles concerning SNC preparation have been 
published during the past decade. They are listed in Table 8.1, when nanocrys -
tals were produced for characterization, and in Table 8.2, when nanocrystals 
were produced for use in composite applications.
Most of them report the use of acid hydrolysis and even though a variety 
of starch sources has been used, they all refer to the same two processes:
• Dufresne et al.’s process using HCl as previously discussed [47]
• Angellier et al.’s optimized preparation process using H 2SO 4 [7]. A given 
amount of starch granules (14.69 wt%/acid) was mixed with a given 
volume of 3.16M H 2O2 in an Erlenmeyer and stirred constantly at 100 rpm 
while maintained at 40°C. After 5 days, the suspension was washed by 
successive centrifugations with distilled water until neutrality using Cen -
trifuge SIGMA 6K15, for 10 minutes at 10,000 rpm. The suspension was 
then submitted to a mechanical treatment with homogenizer Ultra Turrax TABLE 8.1  Preparation Conditions of SNC and Their Characterization (Features [28, 47], Optimization [7], Kinetic [63], Molecular 
Structure [73])
Starch Type C% Acid Type Concentration Duration (days) T (°C) Year Ref.
Potato 5.0% HCl 2.2 N 15 35 1996 [47]
Waxy maize 5.0% HCl 2.2 N 15 36 2003 [28]
Waxy maize 14.1% H2SO 4 2.87 M 7 40 2004 [7]
Waxy maize 14.7% H2SO 4 3.16M 5 40 2004, 2009 
and 2011[7, 73, 74]
Waxy maize n.a. HCl Mild 42 2005 [75]
Hi-maize/Hylon VII 10.0% HCl 2.2 N 8 40 2007 [63]
Rhizoma Dioscorea 12.5% HCl 2.2 N 16/32/40 35 2008 [76]
High amylose corn Enzymatic hydrolysis 2008 [29]
High amylose corn Complex formation + enzymatic hydrolysis 2009 [30]
Pea starch 14.7% H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 2011 [77]
Adapted from Reference [26].
n.a., not available.
165TABLE 8.2  Use of SNC in Composites and the Measured Properties
Starch Acid Duration Temperature
MatrixMeasured Properties
Year Ref. Type C% Type Concentration (days) °CX 
Ray FT-IR DMA DSC DMA Tensile WU WVP
PS 5.0 HCl 2.2 N 15 30 Poly(S-co-BuA) * 1998 [48]
WM 5.0 HCl /
H2SO 435/40 Poly(S-co-BuA) * 2005 [67]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Grafted SNC * * 2005 [78]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Natural rubber * * 2005 [79]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Natural rubber * 2005 [80]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Grafted SNC * * 2006 [81]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Natural rubber * 2006 [82]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 TPS (glycerol) * * 2006 [83]
WM 5.0 HCl 2.2 N 15 35 Pullulan 
(sorbitol)* * * * * 2007 [84]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 TPS (sorbitol) * * * * 2007 [85]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Grafted SNC * * 2007 [86]
NM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Grafted SNC * * 2007 [87]
PS 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16M 5 40 Waterborne 
polyurethane 
(WPU)* 2008 [49]
Pea 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 PCL-grafted SNC 
PLA matrix* * * * * 2008 [88]
Pea 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 PCL-grafted SNC 
WPU matrix* * * * * 2008 [89]
PS 5.0 HCl 2.2 N 15 30 PC-grafted SNC * * * 2008 [90]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Cassava and 
waxy with 
glycerol* * * * * 2009, 
2010[27, 
91]
Pea 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Soy protein 
isolate (SPI)* * * * * 2009 [52]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Isociyanate 
cross-linked 
SNC PPG-
based PU* TGA 2010 [92]
Pea 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Cyclodextrin-
based hydrogel* * 2010 [93]
Pea 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Sodium alginate 
(SA)* * * 2011 [94]
Pea 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 PBS/SA * * * * * * 2011 [95]
* * * [94]
Adapted from Reference [26].
PS, potato; WM, waxy maize; NM, normal maize; PU, polyurethane; TPS, thermoplastic starch; PBS/SA, poly(butylene succinate)/sodium alginate.TABLE 8.2  Use of SNC in Composites and the Measured Properties
Starch Acid Duration Temperature
MatrixMeasured Properties
Year Ref. Type C% Type Concentration (days) °CX 
Ray FT-IR DMA DSC DMA Tensile WU WVP
PS 5.0 HCl 2.2 N 15 30 Poly(S-co-BuA) * 1998 [48]
WM 5.0 HCl /
H2SO 435/40 Poly(S-co-BuA) * 2005 [67]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Grafted SNC * * 2005 [78]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Natural rubber * * 2005 [79]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Natural rubber * 2005 [80]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Grafted SNC * * 2006 [81]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Natural rubber * 2006 [82]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 TPS (glycerol) * * 2006 [83]
WM 5.0 HCl 2.2 N 15 35 Pullulan 
(sorbitol)* * * * * 2007 [84]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 TPS (sorbitol) * * * * 2007 [85]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Grafted SNC * * 2007 [86]
NM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Grafted SNC * * 2007 [87]
PS 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16M 5 40 Waterborne 
polyurethane 
(WPU)* 2008 [49]
Pea 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 PCL-grafted SNC 
PLA matrix* * * * * 2008 [88]
Pea 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 PCL-grafted SNC 
WPU matrix* * * * * 2008 [89]
PS 5.0 HCl 2.2 N 15 30 PC-grafted SNC * * * 2008 [90]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Cassava and 
waxy with 
glycerol* * * * * 2009, 
2010[27, 
91]
Pea 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Soy protein 
isolate (SPI)* * * * * 2009 [52]
WM 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Isociyanate 
cross-linked 
SNC PPG-
based PU* TGA 2010 [92]
Pea 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Cyclodextrin-
based hydrogel* * 2010 [93]
Pea 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 Sodium alginate 
(SA)* * * 2011 [94]
Pea 14.7 H2SO 4 3.16 M 5 40 PBS/SA * * * * * * 2011 [95]
* * * [94]
Adapted from Reference [26].
PS, potato; WM, waxy maize; NM, normal maize; PU, polyurethane; TPS, thermoplastic starch; PBS/SA, poly(butylene succinate)/sodium alginate.168  PREPARAtION OF StARCH NANOPARtICLES
for 2 minutes at 13,000 rpm to disperse aggregates and obtain a “stable” 
suspension. To avoid bacterial development during storage, a few drops of 
chloroform were added to the suspension that was kept in a 4°C cell.
Using the above preparation conditions, LeCorre et al. [96] also evidenced 
two stages when studying the kinetics of SNC preparation. In an attempt to 
classify SNC using differential centrifugation, they revealed that SNC were 
already found in the suspension after only 24 hours of hydrolysis, and that at 
any time during the 5 days, both micro- and nanoparticles could be found in 
suspension. This led to the very recent development of a continuous extraction 
technique using ceramic membrane filtration to extract SNC as soon as they 
“released” [97]. Extracted SNC were more crystalline, more homogeneous in 
size and smaller. Named “second-generation” SNC, such nanocrystals are very 
promising for industrial applications because their preparation process strongly 
limit yield and heterogeneity issues.
To our knowledge, no work on a purely enzymatic hydrolysis method for 
producing SNC has been developed. However, an attempt has been reported 
by Kim and Lim [29] rendering 500-nm particles believed to be starch 
blocklets.
Most recently, LeCorre et al. [98] investigated the use of enzymes as a pre -
treatment for starch granules before acid hydrolysis to reduce preparation 
time. Using enzymatic pretreatment, duration was reduced by three times by 
creating microporous starch having preferential acid diffusion pathways. 
However, at the current stage of development, yield was also reduced.
All previous observations could not have been done without the develop -
ment and adaptation of a number of characterization techniques to SNC.
8.4.4 Starch Nanocrystal Characterization
8.4.4.1  Morphology  Although first interest in SNC dates back to 1996, 
first visual characterization was revealed in 2003 by Putaux et al. [28]. They 
revealed the morphology of “nanocrystals resulting from the disruption of 
waxy maize starch granules by acid hydrolysis.” After 6 weeks of hydrolysis, 
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) observations showed a longitudinal 
view of lamellar fragments consisting of stack of elongated elements, with a 
width of 5–7 nm, and a planar view of individualized platelet after hydrolysis. 
In this technique, the contrast of the sample is enhanced by negative staining 
with uranyl acetate. First, a dilute SNC suspension deposited onto a previously 
treated (by 30 seconds electric discharge to increase surface tension and allow 
for better deposition) copper carbon-coated microscopy grid. After a minute, 
the liquid in excess is blotted with filter paper and the staining solution is 
deposited on top. After another minute, the excess liquid is again blotted with 
filter paper and the grid is set aside to dry out. As observed materials (SNC) 
are lighter than the staining agent, SNC are revealed as white elements on a StARCH NANOCRyStALS   169
dark field. This technique is still the most commonly used [50, 54, 73, 74, 87, 
88, 91, 93, 99–101].
Around the same time, another characterization technique was based on 
laser granulometry measurements. Angellier et al. [7] reported the use of a 
Malvern Mastersizer (measuring particles from 0.05 to 900 μm) to determine 
optimal preparation conditions for SNC. More recently, dynamic light scatter -
ing was used for particle size measurements using a Malvern Zetasizer (with 
maximum size ranging from 0.3 nm to 10 microns). However, results from this 
granulometry technique can easily be disturbed sedimentation, aggregation, 
or ill-defined shapes.
More recently, the development and accessibility of new techniques has led 
to further characterization of SNC. For example, recent studies [98, 102] report 
the use of atomic force microscopy (AFM), a high resolution scanning probe. 
This measurement technique requires little preparation and provides quick 
analysis. A drop of diluted SNC suspension (0.01%) is simply deposited onto 
a mica substrate (split with adhesive tape) and dried for a few minutes. Then 
the measurement is performed in both the tapping and the conductive mode 
(C-AFM).
Another increasingly popular microscopy characterization of SNC is con -
ducted with a field electron gun scanning electron microscope (FEGSEM) [27, 
91, 96, 97, 102, 103]. Indeed, this kind of scanning electron microscope (SEM) 
allows high resolution (0.8 nm) images in both the reflection mode (topogra -
phy information) and the transmission mode (as in TEM). Samples are simply 
prepared by depositing 2.5 μL of diluted (0.01–0.001%) and sonicated SNC 
suspension on a previously treated (as previously described) TEM grid. A thin 
Au–Pd conductive coating (about 1 nm) is deposited on top of the sample to 
reduce charge effect. In order to obtain the best possible resolution, the sec -
ondary electron imaging mode with the In-lens detector is preferred (reflective 
mode). However, some samples are better detected in the transmission mode 
using the scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) detector. The 
average dimensions of SNC can then be determined using digital image 
analyses.
8.4.4.2  Crystallinity  As for other crystals, the crystallinity of SNCs can be 
verified using XRD. They display the same types of diffraction patterns as 
native starches. Indeed, SNC correspond to the crystallites of starch granules 
(as described in Fig. 8.2). Thus, they are made of closely packed amylopectin 
side chains. As such, depending on the packing configuration of the crystallites, 
they can display A-type or B-type diffraction patterns or even a combination 
of the two if the two types of crystallites are present.
Also, X-ray diffractograms of SNC are usually better defined than that of 
the native starch. The “amorphous background” of the diffractogram is 
reduced. This is a proof that SNC are more crystalline than their native coun -
terparts and that some amorphous starch has indeed been hydrolyzed [98, 102].170  PREPARAtION OF StARCH NANOPARtICLES
Most recent studies use XRD as a mean to verify that SNC have not lost 
their crystallinity subsequent to a treatment. In most cases, the treatment is a 
chemical grafting intended to improve SNC thermal stability, compatibility 
with matrices and reinforcing effect [78, 81, 86–90, 92, 93, 95], and, recently, 
hydrophobicity for water treatment purposes [104]. Others used XRD to evi -
dence the presence of SNC in polymeric matrices [84, 91, 100].
8.4.4.3  Thermal  Properties  Studies on the thermal behavior of SNC are 
scarce in the literature. To our knowledge, only two studies [62, 81] deal with 
the thermal behavior of freeze-dried waxy maize SNC. They both involve the 
use of differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). Angellier [62] reported the 
existence of two endothermal peaks in excess water with a broad temperature 
range and the disappearance of the first peak in the dry state. In excess water, 
the peaks were located at 80°C and 178°C for 83.78% water content, and at 
109°C and 158°C for 50.66% water content. In the dry state, the maximum 
peak was located at 130°C and 139°C. Thielemans et al. [81] presented a DSC 
thermogram for waxy maize SNC in dry conditions for comparison and evi -
dencing of grafting. The thermogram for freeze-dried SNC also showed two 
endothermic peaks. The first maximum peak was located around 150°C and 
the second one, around 200°C. More recently, a study [103] compared the 
thermal properties of SNC prepared from different starch sources and pro -
posed a mechanism to explain observations.
In all cases [62, 81, 103], with freeze-dried SNC, about 5 to 10 mg of powder 
is conditioned at 0% relative humidity and placed in a hermetically closed 
DSC sealed pan. The samples are then tested in the range of −100°C to 350°C 
at a heating rate of 10°C/min under nitrogen atmosphere. When tested in water 
[103], deionized water is added to the freeze-dried SNC to reach the targeted 
water content.
8.4.5 Starch Nanocrystals from Different Starch Sources
Cellulose nanocrystals, discussed in more detail in other chapters, are called 
whiskers because of their shape. They exhibit very different sizes and proper -
ties when they are prepared from different sources. Thus, two recent studies 
[102, 103] compared five different kinds of starches used to prepare SNC and 
characterized them to assess potential differences.
In the first study [102], SNC are compared in terms of size, shape, crystal -
linity, and viscosity. Parameters that had the most influence were amylose 
content and crystalline type of native starches. They reflected mainly on the 
morphology of SNC and somewhat on their size. Starch botanic origin showed 
only a moderate influence on size distribution, thickness, and viscosity, due to 
differences in amylose distribution and blocklet sizes among starches. The 
study shows that, depending on the application, some criteria can be found for 
selecting one type of native starch over another. For example, some SNC show COmPARISON OF RSNP AND SNC   171
Figure 8.6  Starch nanocrystals from (a) high amylose SNC and (b) wheat SNC.
rather square platelet-like morphology while others are other disk-like, as 
presented in Figure 8.6.
The second study [103] completes the previous with the analysis of the 
thermal properties of the same five types of SNC. In both hydrous and anhy -
drous conditions, SNC exhibited a two-phase melting transition at temperatures 
corresponding to the melting of perfect crystallites, before depolymerization. 
The study showed that the amylose content of the native starch has little influ -
ence on the final thermal properties of SNC. On the contrary, differences 
between starches observed in the native state are somewhat compensated when 
in SNC. However, it seems that, in excess water, B-type crystallites (with longer 
chain lengths) are more stable and that, in dry conditions, maize SNC showed 
least homogeneous crystallites. Finally, it was concluded that SNC can be used 
in wet processes at temperatures lower than 80–100°C, and in dry processes at 
temperatures below 150–200°C.
Thus, it seems that SNC can be prepared from different starch sources 
without rendering substantial differences in morphological, rheological, and 
thermal properties contrary to cellulose nanocrystals. Yet some moderate dif -
ferences among SNC are observed, giving leads for potential discrimination 
among sources for a given application.
Information that is often sought for not only compares elements within one 
type of nanoparticles but also relates to differences between the different 
types of nanoparticles such as regenerated SNPs (rSNPs) and SNCs.
8.5 COMPARISON OF RSNP AND SNC 
As described in previous sections, both types of nanoparticles present interest -
ing and unique properties compared to native starch. Main differences in 
structural and processing properties of native, regenerated, and nanocrystal -
line starches are shown in Table 8.3.
As represented in Figure 8.4, the most obvious discriminating property 
among SNP is crystallinity. As previously described, native starches are  172  PREPARAtION OF StARCH NANOPARtICLES
semicrystalline polymers with an average crystallinity index of 40% and that 
can present different crystalline types (A, B, or C). SNC are prepared by 
elimination of the amorphous parts of native starch. Thus, SNC present higher 
crystallinity than their native counterparts and the same crystalline type. On 
the contrary, rSNP are prepared from gelatinized or melted starch, that is, from 
amorphous starch. Thus, rSNP present the crystalline properties of, at most, a 
retrograded (i.e., V-type crystallinity before cross-linking) or extruded starch 
(crystalline index of 2–4% [107]), or of fully amorphous starch.
Reported particles sizes also differ. rSNP tend to be a few hundreds of 
nanometers and thus slightly bigger than SNC, which are often less than 
100 nm. This difference is mainly due to the preparation processes. SNC pre -
pared using H 2SO 4 present sulfate (–SO 3−) groups at their surface, which favors 
individual SNC and stabilizes the suspension. rSNP with sizes smaller than 
100 nm are difficult to obtain as precipitated, emulsified, or extruded SNP tend 
to aggregate before cross-linking, thus rendering bigger particles.
Starch density can vary greatly depending on authors, starch sources, and 
even within a given starch granule. For instance, Perry et al. [106] reported 
large differences between density of crystalline lamella of waxy maize and 
potato starch (1.2 and 1.1, respectively) and their amorphous growth rings (0.7 
and 0.5, respectively). Therefore, it is suspected but not reported that SNC 
have higher density than native starch. Density of rSNP is also scarcely 
reported. Only Bloembergen et al. [38] postulated that their rSNP biolatex has 
a virtual density (as coated) that approaches 1.0, similar to that of carboxylated 
styrene butadiene (SB) latex, due to the creation of a nanocellular “foam-like” 
structure upon drying.
Data concerning viscosity are also scarce. Bloemberg et al. compared the 
viscosity of rSNP biolatex at 9 wt% and cooked starch at 3 wt%. They were TABLE 8.3  Comparison of Some Properties of Native, Nanocrystalline (SNC) and 
Regenerated Starches Nanoparticules (rSNP)
Type of Starch Native Nanocrystalline Regenerated
Crystallinity Semicrystalline Crystalline Amorphous
 Index % 40 >40 <40 (much lower)
 Type A,B, and C A, B, and C None or V-type
Size 20–25 μm <100 nm 100–500 nm
Density (g/cm3) Ref. (1.1) [105] Higher (1.2) [106] Lower (1a)
Thermal stability Ref.
 Tm 120–150°C [103] 150–250°C [103]
 Degradation 300°C [103]a251°C [103] 285°C–294°C [32]
313–327°C [32]
Viscosity (Pa·s at 
100 s−1)0.1 at 3% [33] 0.001–0.1 [102] 0.01 at 9% [34]
aH2SO 4 hydrolysis (as opposed to HCl).CONCLUSIONS AND PROSPECtS   173
0.1 Pa· and 0.01 Pa·s at 100 s−1, respectively, achieving a decrease in viscosity 
of one decade for similar solid contents. Bras et al. [108] compared the suspen -
sion viscosity of 5 wt% SNC suspensions prepared from different native starch 
sources and reported viscosity of 0.001 to 0.1 Pa·s at 100 s−1, thus offering a 
wider range of viscosity depending on application.
Current applications for SNC and rSNP are mainly focused on nanocom -
posites or paper coating, showing the importance of the thermal stability of 
these nanoparticles. rSNP are based on melted starch; thus, their melting tem -
perature is not studied nor reported. However, Ma et al. [32] reported the 
degradation temperature of citric acid (CA) cross-linked rSNP to be lower 
(285°C and 294°C for pea and rice starch rSNP , respectively) than that of 
native starches (313°C and 327°C, respectively). This was ascribed to the ester 
bonds from the substitution (due to cross-linking) that break at lower tem -
peratures of degradation. The same observations were reported for SNC by 
LeCorre et al. [103]. The lower thermal stability of SNC (251°C) compared 
with native starches (about 300°C) was ascribed to the presence of sulfonic 
acid groups at the surface of SNC [62], which thermally decompose between 
200°C and 300°C [109]. In that respect, rSNP and SNC are comparable.
Final deference between rSNP and SNC is linked to their morphology. rSNP 
are sphere-like nanoparticles and the reported dimension corresponds to the 
sphere’s diameter. SNC are platelet-like nanoparticles with thickness of 
5–10 nm and the reported dimension corresponds to the diameter that a disk-
like nanoparticles would have. This particularity leads to SNC being preferred 
for barrier applications, although a comparative assessment of barrier proper -
ties brought by SNC and rSNP has never been performed. Some authors have 
measured the water vapor barrier of a 30% glycerol plasticized peach starch 
nanocomposite filled with CA modified pea rSNP [32]. They are in the same 
magnitude as those reported for a 50% glycerol plasticized cassava starch 
nanocomposite filled with normal maize SNC [27]. Also, it has been shown 
that SNC can reduce the oxygen permeability of natural rubber nanocompos -
ite. No such measurements were performed on rSNP .
Current available properties and performances do not allow for a proper 
comparison of rSNP and SNC. Current research is focus on preparation pro -
cesses and the feasibility of preparing SNP with dimensions below 100 nm. 
Thus available characterizations focus on structural properties or specific 
properties linked to targeted application. rSNP are mainly considered for 
mechanical reinforcement or as latex/adhesive replacement, whereas SNC are 
developed and optimized for barrier applications.
8.6 CONCLUSIONS AND PROSPECTS
Starch is a suitable semicrystalline polymer for preparing renewable and 
potentially biodegradable nanoparticles. Thus, several techniques for prepar -
ing SNP have been developed over the years and render different types of 174  PREPARAtION OF StARCH NANOPARtICLES
SNP . On the one hand, when performing a hydrolysis (of the amorphous parts 
of starch), nanocrystalline particles (SNC) are prepared. On the other hand, 
when implementing a precipitation, a chemico-mechanical or a mechanical 
treatment, regenerated nanoparticles (rSNP), or nanocolloidal SNP , based on 
amorphous starch are prepared.
SNC combine several advantages. They are renewable, biodegradable [74], 
nanoscaled, crystalline, and present platelet-like morphology favorable for 
seeking barrier properties. Also, contrary to cellulose whiskers, little differ -
ences are found between SNC from different sources, allowing many raw 
materials to be considered as sources [102]. However, they are currently only 
produced in small amounts (250 mL), in five days and in water-based suspen -
sion. Very recent study proposes new preparation process that could lead to a 
“second generation” of SNC with more homogeneous size distribution and 
thus possibly enhanced reinforcing and barrier properties.
rSNP , on the contrary, can easily be produced at industrial scale, can present 
a neutral carbon footprint [38] (no study on rSNP biodegradability was found), 
and are sometimes nanoscaled (depending on authors). However, they are not 
crystalline, and they do not present a sphere-like morphology, which is the 
least favorable for barrier properties.
Both types of nanoparticles present increased thermal stability compared 
to native starch (but lower degradation temperature) and a positive reinforc -
ing effect in nanocomposite applications. For further comparison and possible 
discrimination, SNC should be tested as a binder replacement and rSNP as a 
nanocomposite material; and both preparation processes should be compared 
from an environmental point of view, that is, using comparable methods (life 
cycle analysis, carbon neutrality, or biodegradability).
REFERENCES
 [1] Geraci, C.L. (2011) 2011 TAPPI Intl Conference on Nano for Renewable Materi -
als, Washington, USA 2011.
 [2] Habibi, Y., Lucia, L., and Rojas, O. (2010) Cellulose nanocrystals: Chemistry, self-
assembly, and applications. Chemical Reviews , 110, 3479–5000.
 [3] Paillet, M., Dufresne, A. (2001) Chitin whisker reinforced thermoplastic nano -
composites. Macromolecules , 34, 6527–6530.
 [4] Gopalan Nair, K., Dufresne, A. (2003) Crab shell chitin whisker reinforced 
natural rubber nanocomposites. 2. Mechanical behavior. Biomacromolecules , 4, 
666–674.
 [5] Morin, A., Dufresne, A. (2002) Nanocomposites of chitin whiskers from riftia 
tubes and poly(caprolactone). Macromolecules , 35, 2190–2199.
 [6] Whistler, R.L., Paschall, E.F. (1965) Starch: Chemistry and Technology . New York: 
Elsevier.
 [7] Angellier, H., Choisnard, L., Molina-Boisseau, S., Ozil, P ., and Dufresne, A. (2004) 
Optimization of the preparation of aqueous suspensions of waxy maize starch REFERENCES   175
nanocrystals using a response surface methodology. Biomacromolecules , 5, 
1545–1551.
 [8] Dufresne, A. (2007) Polymer nanocomposites from biological sources. In: Bio-
polymers Technology , ed. A.C. Bertolini. Sao Paulo: Cultura Academica.
 [9] Buléon, A., Colonna, P ., Planchot, V., and Ball, S. (1998) Starch granules: Structure 
and biosynthesis. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules , 23, 
85–112.
 [10] Hizukuri, S. (1996) Starch: Analytical aspects. In: Carbohydrates in Food , ed. A.-
C. Eliasson. New York: Marcel Dekker, pp. 347–429.
 [11] Gallant, D.J., Bouchet, B., and Baldwin, P .M. (1997) Microscopy of starch: Evidence 
of a new level of granule organization. Carbohydrate Polymers , 32, 177–191.
 [12] Donald, A., Jenkins, P ., and Waigh, T. (1997) Council for the Central Laboratory 
of the Research Councils 1997, p. 54.
 [13] Tang, H., Mitsunaga, T., and Kawamura, Y. (2006) Molecular arrangement in 
blocklets and starch granule architecture. Carbohydrate Polymers , 63, 555–560.
 [14] French, D. (1984) Starch: Chemistry and technology. In: Starch: Chemistry and 
Technology , eds. R.L. Whistler, J.N. BeMiller, and E.F. Paschall. New York: Aca -
demic, pp. 183–247.
 [15] Baker, A.A., Miles, M.J., and Helbert, W. (2001) Internal structure of the starch 
granule revealed by AFM. Carbohydrate Research , 330, 249–256.
 [16] Szymonska, J., Krok, F. (2003) Potato starch granule nanostructure studied by 
high resolution non-contact AFM. International Journal of Biological Macromol -
ecules , 33, 1–7.
 [17] Perez, S., Baldwin, P .M., and Gallant, D.J. (2009) Structural features of starch 
granules I. In: Starch: Chemistry and Technology , 3rd ed, eds. J. BeMiller, R. 
Whistler. New York: Elsevier, p. 176.
 [18] Vandeputte, G.E., Delcour, J.A. (2004) From sucrose to starch granule to starch 
physical behaviour: A focus on rice starch. Carbohydrate Polymers , 58, 245–266.
 [19] Oates, C.G. (1997) Towards an understanding of starch granule structure and 
hydrolysis. Trends in Food Science and Technology , 8, 375–382.
 [20] Blanshard, J.M.V. (1987) Starch granule structure and function: A physicochemi -
cal approach. In: Starch: Properties and Potentials , ed. T. Galliard. London, UK: 
Society of Chemical Industry, pp. 16–54.
 [21] Imberty, A., Chanzy, H., Perez, S., Buleon, A., and Tran, V. (1987) New three-
dimensional structure for A-type starch. Macromolecules , 20, 2634–2636.
 [22] Imberty, A., Perez, S. (1988) A revisit to the three-dimensional structure of 
B-type starch. Biopolymers , 27, 1205–1221.
 [23] Jane, J.-l., Wong, K.-s., and McPherson, A.E. (1997) Branch-structure difference 
in starches of A- and B-type X-ray patterns revealed by their Naegeli dextrins. 
Carbohydrate Research , 300, 219–227.
 [24] Gérard, C., Planchot, V., Colonna, P ., and Bertoft, E. (2000) Relationship between 
branching density and crystalline structure of A- and B-type maize mutant 
starches. Carbohydrate Research , 326, 130–144.
 [25] Bogracheva, T.Y., Morris, V.J., Ring, S.G., and Hedley, C.L. (1998) The granular 
structure of C-type pea starch and its role in gelatinization. Biopolymers , 45, 
323–332.176  PREPARAtION OF StARCH NANOPARtICLES
 [26] Le Corre, D., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2010) Starch nanoparticles: A review. 
Biomacromolecules , 11, 1139–1153.
 [27] García, N.L., Ribba, L., Dufresne, A., Aranguren, M.I., and Goyanes, S. (2009) 
Physico-mechanical properties of biodegradable starch nanocomposites. Macro -
molecular Materials and Engineering , 294, 169–177.
 [28] Putaux, J.L., Molina-Boisseau, S., Momaur, T., and Dufresne, A. (2003) Platelet 
nanocrystals resulting from the disruption of waxy maize starch granules by acid 
hydrolysis. Biomacromolecules , 4, 1198–1202.
 [29] Kim, J.-Y., Park, D.-J., and Lim, S.-T. (2008) Fragmentation of waxy rice starch 
granules by enzymatic hydrolysis. Cereal Chemistry , 85, 182–187.
 [30] Kim, J.-Y., Lim, S.-T. (2009) Preparation of nano-sized starch particles by complex 
formation with n-butanol. Carbohydrate Polymers , 76(1), 110–116.
 [31] Tan, Y., Xu, K., Li, L., Liu, C., et al. (2009) Fabrication of size-controlled starch-
based nanospheres by nanoprecipitation. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces , 1, 
956–959.
 [32] Ma, X., Jian, R., Chang, P .R., and Yu, J. (2008) Fabrication and characterization 
of citric acid-modified starch nanoparticles/plasticized-starch composites. Bio-
macromolecules , 9, 3314–3320.
 [33] Bloembergen, S., Lee, D.I. (2010) TAPPI PaperCon , TAPPI, Atlanta GA 2010, p. 
18.
 [34] Song, D., Thio, Y.S., and Deng, Y. (2011) Starch nanoparticle formation via reac -
tive extrusion and related mechanism study. Carbohydrate Polymers , 85(1), 
208–214.
 [35] Liu, D., Wu, Q., Chen, H., and Chang, P .R. (2009) Transitional properties of starch 
colloid with particle size reduction from micro- to nanometer. Journal of Colloid 
and Interface Science , 339, 117–124.
 [36] Bloembergen, S., Kappen, F., and Beelen, B. (2002) Environmentally friendly 
biopolymer adhesives and applications based thereon, p. 18.
 [37] Shi, A.-m., Li, D., Wang, L.-j., Li, B.-z., and Adhikari, B.-z. (2011) Preparation of 
starch-based nanoparticles through high-pressure homogenization and miniemul -
sion cross-linking: Influence of various process parameters on particle size and 
stability. Carbohydrate Polymers , 83(4), 1604–1610.
 [38] Bloembergen, S., Mc Lennan, I., Lee, D.I., and Van Leeuwen, J. (2008) Paper 
binder performance with biobased nanoparticles. TAPPI Journal —paper 360 , 
3(9), 46–48.
 [39] Giezen, F.E., Jongboom, R.O.J., Feil, H., Gotlieb, K.F., and Boersma, A. (2000) 
Process for producing biopolymer nanoparticles, p. 17.
 [40] Huang, J., Chen, G., Dufresne, A., Wei, M., and Cui, G. (2007) Method for prepar -
ing starch nano-crystal-modified aqueous polyurethane. In: Shuomingshu, F. Z. 
S. G. (Ed.), China 2007.
 [41] Huang, J., Yi, F., Zhang, R., Xia, W., and Wei, M. ( 2008) Preparation of polyure -
thanes from polysaccharide nanocrystals-grafted polyesters. China 2008.
 [42] Novamont. Mater Bi’s application as additives. http://www.novamont.com/
default.asp?id =514 (accessed March 2011).
 [43] Ecosynthetix. Ecosphere. http://www.ecosynthetix.com/ecosphere.html (accessed 
June 2009).
 [44] Lim, S.T., Kim, J.Y. (2009) Crystalline nanoscale starch-alcohols complex, and 
method for manufacturing starch nanoparticles with this complex. In: Kongbo, REFERENCES   177
R. K. K. T. (Ed.), Repub. Korean Kongkae Taeho Kongbo, Republic of Korea 
2009.
 [45] Ma, B., Zhu, X. (2009) Method for preparing polysaccharide nanoparticles as 
antichlor used in industrial water purification. In: Shuomingshu, F. Z. S. G. (Ed.), 
Farming Zhuanli Shenqing Gongkai Shuomingshu, China 2009.
 [46] Liu, X., Xiao, S., Liu, B., Liu, J., and Tang, D. (2003) Polylysine/starch nanopar -
ticles, its preparation and application as gene carrier. In: Shuomingshu, F. Z. S. G. 
(Ed.), Farming Zhuanli Shenqing Gongkai Shuomingshu, China 2003.
 [47] Dufresne, A., Cavaille, J.-Y., and Helbert, W. (1996) New nanocomposite materi -
als: Microcrystalline starch reinforced thermoplastic. Macromolecules , 29, 
7624–7626.
 [48] Dufresne, A., Cavaillé, J.-Y. (1998) Clustering and percolation effects in micro -
crystalline starch-reinforced thermoplastic. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: 
Polymer Physics , 36, 2211–2224.
 [49] Chen, G., Wei, M., Chen, J., Huang, J., et al. (2008) Simultaneous reinforcing and 
toughening: New nanocomposites of waterborne polyurethane filled with low 
loading level of starch nanocrystals. Polymer , 49, 1860–1870.
 [50] Chen, Y., Cao, X., Chang, P .R., and Huneault, M.A. (2008) Comparative study on 
the films of poly(vinyl alcohol)/pea starch nanocrystals and poly(vinyl alcohol)/
native pea starch. Carbohydrate Polymers , 73, 8–17.
 [51] Yu, J., Ai, F., Dufresne, A., Gao, S., et al. (2008) Structure and mechanical proper -
ties of poly(lactic acid) filled with (starch nanocrystal)-graft-poly( ε-caprolactone). 
Macromolecular Materials and Engineering , 293, 763–770.
 [52] Zheng, H., Ai, F., Chang, P .R., Huang, J., and Dufresne, A. (2009) Structure and 
properties of starch nanocrystal-reinforced soy protein plastics. Polymer Com -
posites , 30, 474–480.
 [53] García, N.L., Famá, L., Dufresne, A., Aranguren, M., and Goyanes, S. (2009) A 
comparison between the physico-chemical properties of tuber and cereal starches. 
Food Research International , 42, 976–982.
 [54] Namazi, H., Dadkhah, A. (2010) Convenient method for preparation of hydro -
phobically modified starch nanocrystals with using fatty acids. Carbohydrate 
Polymers , 79, 731–737.
 [55] Wang, Y., Zhang, L. (2008) High-strength waterborne polyurethane reinforced 
with waxy maize starch nanocrystals. Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnol -
ogy, 8, 5831–5838.
 [56] Le Corre, D., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2009) Starch nanoparticles for eco-effi -
cient packaging: influence of botanic origin. In: Jimenez, A. (Ed.), 2nd I nterna -
tional Conference on Biodegradable Polymers and Sustainable Composites 
(BIOPOL 2009) , Alicante, Spain 2009.
 [57] Nägeli, W. (1874) Beiträge zur näheren Kenntnifs der Stärkegruppe. Justus 
Liebigs Annalen der Chemie , 173, 218–227.
 [58] Lintner, C.J. (1886) Studien über Diastase. Journal fur Praktische Chemie , 34, 
378–394.
 [59] Gallant, D.J. (1974) Contribution à l’étude de la structure et de l’ultrastructure 
du grain d’amidon. University of Paris VI, Paris, France 1974.
 [60] Wolfrom, M.L., Thompson, A., and Timberlake, C.E. (1963) Comparative hydro -
lysis rates of the reducing disaccharides of D-glucopyranose. Cereal Chemistry , 
40, 82–86.178  PREPARAtION OF StARCH NANOPARtICLES
 [61] Bemiller, J.N. (1967) Acid-catalized hydrolysis of glucosides. 5. Hydrolysis of 
polysaccharides. In: Advanced Carbohydrate Chemistry , pp. 85–108.
 [62] Angellier, H. (2005) Material Sciences , Grenoble, France: University Joseph 
Fourier.
 [63] Li, W., Corke, H., and Beta, T. (2007) Kinetics of hydrolysis and changes in 
amylose content during preparation of microcrystalline starch from high-amylose 
maize starches. Carbohydrate Polymers , 69, 398–405.
 [64] Jayakody, L., Hoover, R. (2002) The effect of lintnerization on cereal starch 
granules. Food Research International , 35, 665–680.
 [65] Singh, V., Ali, S.Z. (1987) Comparative acid modification of various starches. 
Starch/Stärke , 39, 402–405.
 [66] Wang, Y.-J., Truong, V.-D., and Wang, L. (2003) Structures and rheological proper -
ties of corn starch as affected by acid hydrolysis. Carbohydrate Polymers , 52, 
327–333.
 [67] Angellier, H., Putaux, J.-L., Molina-Boisseau, S., Dupeyre, D., and Dufresne, A. 
(2005) Starch nanocrystal fillers in an acrylic polymer matrix. Macromolecular 
Symposia , 221, 95–104.
 [68] Robin, J.P ., Mercier, C., Charbonniere, R., and Guilbot, A. (1974) Gel filtration 
and enzymatic studies of insoluble residues from prolonged acid treatment of 
potato starch. Cereal Chemistry , 51, 389–406.
 [69] Biliaderis, C.G., Grant, D.R., and Vose, J.R. (1981) Structural characterization of 
legume starches I. Studies on amylose, amylopectin, and beta-limit dextrins. 
Cereal Chemistry , 58, 496–502.
 [70] Singh, V., Ali, S.Z., and Divakar, S. (1993) 13C CP/MAS NMR spectroscopy of 
native and acid modified starches. Starch/Staerke , 45, 59–62.
 [71] Singh, V., Ali, S.Z. (2000) Acid degradation of starch. The effect of acid and starch 
type. Carbohydrate Polymers , 41, 191–195.
 [72] Singh, V., Ali, S.Z. (2008) Properties of starches modified by different acids. 
International Journal of Food Properties , 11, 495–507.
 [73] Angellier-Coussy, H., Putaux, J.-L., Molina-Boisseau, S., Dufresne, A., et al. (2009) 
The molecular structure of waxy maize starch nanocrystals. Carbohydrate 
Research , 344, 1558–1566.
 [74] Kümmerer, K., Menz, J., Schubert, T., and Thielemans, W. (2011) Biodegradability 
of organic nanoparticles in the aqueous environment. Chemosphere , 82, 
1387–1392.
 [75] Putaux, J.-L. (2005) Morphology and structure of crystalline polysaccharides: 
Some recent studies. Macromolecular Symposia , 229, 66–71.
 [76] Wang, S., Yu, J., Jin, F., and Yu, J. (2008) The new insight on ultrastructure of 
C-type starch granules revealed by acid hydrolysis. International Journal of Bio -
logical Macromolecules , 43, 216–220.
 [77] Le Corre, D., Gallur, M., Bras, J., Ancejo, S., and Dufresne, A. (2011) 2011 TAPPI 
Intl Conference on Nano for Renewable Materials , Washington, USA 2011.
 [78] Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., Belgacem, M.N., and Dufresne, A. (2005) 
Surface chemical modification of waxy maize starch nanocrystals. Langmuir , 21, 
2425–2433.REFERENCES   179
 [79] Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., Lebrun, L., and Dufresne, A. (2005) Process -
ing and structural properties of waxy maize starch nanocrystals reinforced 
natural rubber. Macromolecules , 38, 3783–3792.
 [80] Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., and Dufresne, A. (2005) Mechanical proper -
ties of waxy maize starch nanocrystal reinforced natural rubber. Macromolecules , 
38, 9161–9170.
 [81] Thielemans, W., Belgacem, M.N., and Dufresne, A. (2006) Starch nanocrystals 
with large chain surface modifications. Langmuir , 22, 4804–4810.
 [82] Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., and Dufresne, A. (2006) Waxy maize starch 
nanocrystals as filler in natural rubber. Macromolecular Symposia , 233, 
132–136.
 [83] Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., Dole, P ., and Dufresne, A. (2006) Thermoplas -
tic starch-waxy maize starch nanocrystals nanocomposites. Biomacromolecules , 
7, 531–539.
 [84] Kristo, E., Biliaderis, C.G. (2007) Physical properties of starch nanocrystal-
reinforced pullulan films. Carbohydrate Polymers , 68, 146–158.
 [85] Viguié, J., Molina-Boisseau, S., and Dufresne, A. (2007) Processing and charac -
terization of waxy maize starch films plasticized by sorbitol and reinforced with 
starch nanocrystals. Macromolecular Bioscience , 7, 1206–1216.
 [86] Labet, M., Thielemans, W., and Dufresne, A. (2007) Polymer grafting onto starch 
nanocrystals. Biomacromolecules , 8, 2916–2927.
 [87] Song, S., Wang, C., Pan, Z., and Wang, X. (2008) Preparation and characterization 
of amphiphilic starch nanocrystals. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 107, 
418–422.
 [88] Yu, J., Ai, F., Dufresne, A., Gao, S., et al. (2008) Structure and mechanical proper -
ties of poly(lactic acid) filled with (starch nanocrystal)-graft-poly(e-caprolactone). 
Macromolecular Materials and Engineering , 293, 763–770.
 [89] Chang, P .R., Ai, F., Chen, Y., Dufresne, A., and Huang, J. (2009) Effects of starch 
nanocrystal-graft-polycaprolactone on mechanical properties of waterborne 
polyurethane-based nanocomposites. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 111, 
619–627.
 [90] Namazi, H., Dadkhah, A. (2008) Surface modification of starch nanocrystals 
through ring-opening polymerization of Î μ-caprolactone and investigation of 
their microstructures. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 110, 2405–2412.
 [91] García, N.L., Ribba, L., Dufresne, A., Aranguren, M., and Goyanes, S. (2011) 
Effect of glycerol on the morphology of nanocomposites made from thermoplas -
tic starch and starch nanocrystals. Carbohydrate Polymers , 84, 203–210.
 [92] Valodkar, M., Thakore, S. (2011) Isocyanate crosslinked reactive starch nanopar -
ticles for thermo-responsive conducting applications. Carbohydrate Research , 
345, 2354–2360.
 [93] Zhang, X., Huang, J., Chang, P .R., Li, J., et al. (2010) Structure and properties of 
polysaccharide nanocrystal-doped supramolecular hydrogels based on Cyclodex -
trin inclusion. Polymer , 51, 4398–4407.
 [94] Lin, N., Huang, J., Chang, P .R., Feng, L., and Yu, J. (2011) Effect of polysaccharide 
nanocrystals on structure, properties, and drug release kinetics of alginate-based 
microspheres. Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces , 85(2), 270–279.180  PREPARAtION OF StARCH NANOPARtICLES
 [95] Lin, N., Yu, J., Chang, P .R., Li, J., and Huang, J. (2011) Poly(butylene succinate)-
based biocomposites filled with polysaccharide nanocrystals: Structure and prop -
erties. Polymer Composites , 32, 472–482.
 [96] LeCorre, D., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2011) Evidence of micro- and nanoscaled 
particles during starch nanocrystals preparation and their isolation. Biomacro -
molecules , 12, 3039–3046.
 [97] LeCorre, D., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2011) Ceramic membrane filtration for 
isolating starch nanocrystals. Carbohydrate Polymers , 86, 1565–1572.
 [98] LeCorre, D., Vahanian, E., Dufresne, A., and Bras, J. (2012) Enzymatic pre-
treatment for preparing starch nanocrystals. Biomacromolecules , 13, 132–137. 
Submitted.
 [99] Wang, Y., Tian, H., and Zhang, L. (2009) Role of starch nanocrystals and cellulose 
whiskers in synergistic reinforcement of waterborne polyurethane. Carbohydrate 
Polymers , 80, 665–671.
[100] Zheng, H., Ai, F., Chang, P .R., Huang, J., and Dufresne, A. (2009) Structure and 
properties of starch nanocrystal-reinforced soy protein plastics. Polymer Com -
posites , 30, 474–480.
[101] Xu, Y., Ding, W., Liu, J., Li, Y., et al. (2010) Preparation and characterization of 
organic-soluble acetylated starch nanocrystals. Carbohydrate Polymers , 80, 
1078–1084.
[102] LeCorre, D., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2011) Influence of botanic origin and 
amylose content on the morphology of starch nanocrystals. Journal of Nanopar -
ticle Research , 13(12), 7193–7208.
[103] LeCorre, D., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2012) Influence of native starch’s proper -
ties on starch nanocrystals thermal properties. Carbohydrate Polymers , 87(1), 
658–666.
[104] Alila, S., Aloulou, F., Thielemans, W., and Boufi, S. (2011) Sorption potential of 
modified nanocrystals for the removal of aromatic organic pollutant from 
aqueous solution. Industrial Crops and Products , 33, 350–357.
[105] Cheetham, N.W.H., Tao, L. (1998) Variation in crystalline type with amylose 
content in maize starch granules: An X-ray powder diffraction study. Carbohy -
drate Polymers , 36, 277–284.
[106] Perry, P .A., Donald, A.M. (2000) SANS study of the distribution of water within 
starch granules. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules , 28, 31–39.
[107] Farhat, I.A., Mitchell, J.R., Blanshard, J.M.V., and Derbyshire, W. (1996) A pulsed 
1H NMR study of the hydration properties of extruded maize-sucrose mixtures. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 30, 219–227.
[108] Bras, J., Senechal, T., Le Corre, D., Martin, C., and Dufresne, A. (2011) Cellulose 
and starch nanocrystals: Influence of the source on rheological, mechanical and 
barrier properties. American Chemical Society, pp. CELL-25.
[109] Jiang, D.D., Yao, Q., McKinney, M.A., and Wilkie, C.A. (1999) TGA/FTIR studies 
on the thermal degradation of some polymeric sulfonic and phosphonic acids 
and their sodium salts. Polymer Degradation and Stability , 63, 423–434.181Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 9
Chemical Modification of Starch 
Nanoparticles
JIN HUANG , QING HUANG , PETER R. CHANG , and JIAHUI YU
9.1 INTRODUCTION
Starch is an abundant, inexpensive, naturally renewable, and biodegradable 
polysaccharide found in the roots, stalks, and seeds of staple crops such as rice, 
corn, wheat, tapioca, and potato [1–4]. Biosynthesized as semicrystalline gran -
ules containing densely packed polysaccharides and a small amount of water 
[5], starch is a mixture of two main components: amylose, a linear or slightly 
branched (1 →4)-α-D-glucan; and amylopectin, a highly branched macromol -
ecule consisting of (1 →4)-α-D-glucan short chains linked through α-(1→6) 
linkages [5–7]. It has been reported [5, 8] that the starch granule consists of 
alternating crystalline and amorphous zones that lead to a concentric domain 
structure. The crystalline regions are arranged as thin lamellar domains, per -
pendicular to the radial axis, in a kind of “decentralized onion” structure. The 
amorphous region (starch molecules in a single chain state) and ordered 
region (starch molecules in a double helix conformation) components [9] are 
arranged alternately to form a growth ring structure that encircles the point 
of initiation of the granule, called the hilum [5]. Starch has been widely used 
in many industrial applications [10, 11] because of its attractive properties such 
as biodegradability and biocompatibility, as well as its universality, low cost, 
versatility, and functional attributes.
With the development of biodegradable materials, polysaccharides (espe -
cially nanocrystals/nanoparticles) have attracted more and more interest. As 
a typical biodegradable natural polymer, starch is a good candidate for produc -
tion of nanoparticles because it has a partly crystalline structure that confers 182  CHEmICAl modIfICATIoN of STARCH NANoPARTIClES
interesting properties. Many interesting and detailed reviews [3, 12–14] and 
articles [15–17] on the preparation and application of starch nanoparticles 
(StNP) have been published. StNP have many potential applications in various 
products such as food, medicine [18], binders [19], implant materials [20], and 
plastics [21–23]. The most common application is the addition of StNP to a 
matrix (such as starch or protein) as reinforcement in the preparation of 
degradable bionanocomposites [24–28].
StNP are formed through the application of alkali, acid and/or enzymes 
which open and disperse the starch structure, and allow the formation of 
hydrogen bonds [29]. As shown in Figure 9.1, nanosized starch particles 
reported in the literature can be subdivided into several categories including: 
(1) starch nanocrystals extracted from natural resources by hydrolysis (acidic 
[3, 24, 28, 30, 31] or enzymatic [4, 32–34]) or obtained by co-crystallization 
during the regeneration process; (2) StNP obtained by regeneration–
precipitation [7, 27, 35, 36] or by extrusion [37], where cross-linking can con -
tribute to the stability of the nanoparticle structure [29, 38, 39]; (3) nanocolloids 
formed by microfluidization [40, 41]; and (4) nanomicelles that are self-
assembled from chemically modified starch [42–44]. Acid hydrolysis is the 
typical method used for generating starch nanocrystals. Practical application 
of an acidic method is difficult due to its low yield, long treatment period, and 
use of concentrated acid [37], and hence recent development has turned atten -
tion to using enzymes [45] such as α-amylase for the pretreatment to enhance 
the efficiency of preparation. Meanwhile, both high pressure homogenization 
and extrusion are simple, environmentally friendly mechanical methods that 
can also be used to efficiently prepare nanoparticles. It should be noted that 
nanoparticles prepared using different methods have different properties, 
crystallinity, and shape. In addition, starch particles may also vary in degree of Figure 9.1  Different methods for preparation of starch nanoparticles.Starch
Hydrolysis Regener ationMechanical
treatmentChemical
Modif ication
Acidic Enzymatic Co-crystallization Precipitation
with or without
Cross-linkingExtrusion
with or withou t
Cross-linkingMicrofluidiz er Self-assemb ly
Nanocr ystals
Crystalline Amor phous Well-def ined struct ureNanopa rticles N anocolloid s N anomicelle sCHEmICAl modIfICATIoN of STARCH NANoCRYSTAlS PERTAINING   183
substitution (DS) after chemical modification. Nanosized (100–400 nm), 
smooth, hexagonal, flaked carboxymethyl starches (CMS) with a DS of 1.15 
have been synthesized by reacting starch with sodium hydroxide under ultra -
sonic irradiation [46].
The addition of StNP to degradable bionanocomposites may considerably 
enhance the mechanical properties of the nanocomposites; however, compat -
ibility between the starch nanofillers and the matrix is a bottleneck in fully 
utilizing the unique functions of the nanofiller. Over the past decades, surface 
chemical modification has been largely used on ceramic fillers [47, 48], talc [49, 
50], montmorillonite [51, 52], and polysaccharide fibers [53–58] in order to 
achieve maximum interaction and adhesion between the filler and the matrix 
[59]. Because StNP possess reactive surfaces covered with hydroxyl groups, 
chemical modification of the surface is possible in order to obtain specific 
functions, increase compatibility between the matrix and nanoparticles, and 
hence expand the application of StNP . Chemical modification of nanosized 
starch particles also expands the types of polymers that can possibly be used 
as matrices [5, 12, 59]. In this chapter, general methods for chemical modifica -
tion of StNP will be outlined and discussed in detail. General chemical reac -
tions for modification of starch are shown in Figure 9.2.
9.2 CHEMICAL MODIFICATION OF STARCH NANOCRYSTALS 
PERTAINING TO HYDROLYSIS AND REGENERATION–  
CO-CRYSTALLIZATION
Starch nanocrystals obtained by hydrolysis and regeneration–co-crystallization 
have surface hydroxyl groups that give them a polar surface; however,  Figure 9.2  General chemical reactions for modification of starch.Starch-OHConjug ating small
molecules ont o star ch
Graft polymer ization
from star chEsterification
Etherification
Silylation
Phosphor y lation
Oxidation
Radical-initia ted graf ting
(after pr emodif ication)
Ring-opening pol ymer ization
(such as lact ones)184  CHEmICAl modIfICATIoN of STARCH NANoPARTIClES
polysaccharide nanoparticles with polar surfaces have poor dispersibility and 
poor compatibility with nonpolar solvents or resins [28]. Also, it is difficult to 
reduce the surface energy of starch nanocrystals to improve their level of dis -
persion in a polymer matrix. Chemical modification of starch nanocrystals is an 
effective method for solving these problems because it alters the surface char -
acteristics of the starch nanocrystals. Functional modification of starch nano -
crystals may induce strong interfacial adhesion, which facilitates the transfer of 
stress and plays a reinforcing role for nanocrystals [5]. There are several strate -
gies for chemical modification of starch nanocrystals including modification by 
chemical reaction with small molecules and grafting polymer chains onto the 
surface of starch nanocrystals using a “graft onto” or a “graft from” strategy. It 
is worth mentioning that the integrity of the starch nanocrystal’s crystalline 
structure must be preserved, or have a low degree of destruction, regardless of 
the type of modification strategy used.
9.2.1 Conjugation of Small Molecules onto the Surface of  
Starch Nanocrystals
Many methods have been explored for the modification of starch nanocrystals 
by chemical reaction with small molecules in order to obtain nanoparticles 
with differences in morphology, size, solubility, polarity, surface properties, and 
thermal properties. So far, oxidative modification and ester or ether formation 
by substitution of hydroxyl groups in starch have been developed industrially 
[59]. It has been reported that modification by small molecules improved adhe -
sion between the filler and the matrix, offering a good level of dispersion of 
the starch nanocrystals in the host matrix and a good interface between 
polymer and filler, both of which play fundamental roles in obtaining good 
mechanical properties in nanocomposites.
Esterification with organic acid is a typical method for production of ther -
moplastic and hydrophobic StNP . Esterification of starch nanocrystals occurs 
via small (–OH) and isocyanate groups (–NCO), and was used in the first 
attempt at modification of starch nanocrystals. Starch nanocrystals prepared 
by acid hydrolysis of starch granules have been chemically modified on  
the surface using isocyanates such as phenyl isocyanate (PI) [59] and 
1,4-hexamethylene diisocyanate (HMDI) [38] in organic solvents such as 
toluene. The platelet-like starch nanocrystals become pseudospherical after 
modification with HMDI. Compared with the unmodified counterpart, the size 
of the modified nanocrystals is controllable, depending on the concentration 
of diisocyanate [38]. The PI-modified starch nanocrystals dispersed well in 
methylene chloride solution, suggesting a lower polar nature of the surface-
modified nanocrystal. The contact angle measurement data showed that 
surface chemical modification with isocyanate functions weakened the polarity 
of the original starch nanocrystals, thereby allowing the use of nonpolar poly -
mers as matrices for composite materials [59].CHEmICAl modIfICATIoN of STARCH NANoCRYSTAlS PERTAINING   185
Acetylated starch nanocrystals, which exhibited much improved solubility 
in common organic solvents and a significantly increased hydrophobic perfor -
mance, were prepared with different DS by Xu et al. [1] using acetic anhydride, 
and by Angellier [59] using alkenyl succinic anhydride (ASA). The crystalline 
structure of these acetylated starch nanocrystals changed from A-style crystal -
linity to V-style crystallinity. Figure 9.3 shows the transmission electron micro -
graphs of the unmodified and modified nanocrystals (DS = 2.45). The 
unmodified nanocrystals (Fig. 9.3a) were found to aggregate due to hydrogen 
bond interactions via the surface hydroxyl groups, while the modified nanopar -
ticles (Fig. 9.3b) were more individualized and had increased in size [1].
9.2.2 Polymer Grafting onto the Surface of Starch Nanocrystals
Although modification of starch nanocrystals by chemical reaction with small 
molecules can improve interaction between the nanofiller and the polymer 
matrix (which may, to some degree, enhance the mechanical performance of 
the nanocomposites), the partial or total destruction of the nanocomposite’s 
three-dimensional networks would lead to a sharp decrease in the mechanical 
performance of the nanocomposites.When a polymer was grafted onto the 
surface of starch nanocrystals, a near-perfect transfer of stress between the 
matrix and the filler could be achieved. A polymer matrix phase may also form 
directly at the nanocrystal surface, which may improve the interplay between 
the modified nanofillers and the matrix, thanks to the entanglement and inter -
action of covalently linked grafted chains on the surface of starch nanocrystals Figure 9.3  Transmission electron micrographs of (a) unmodified and (b) DS = 2.45 
acetylated starch nanocrystals. Reprinted with permission from Reference [1].
(a) (b)
200 nm 1 /uni03BCm186  CHEmICAl modIfICATIoN of STARCH NANoPARTIClES
with the polymer matrix. A co-continuous structure forms as the grafted chains 
and matrix continue to twist tightly together. Figure 9.4 shows the schematic 
illustration of grafting polymer chains onto a starch nanocrystal based on the 
“graft onto” and “graft from” strategies.
9.2.2.1  “Graft Onto” Strategy for Polymer Conjugation As a reason -
able approach to chemical modification based on the strategy of “grafting 
onto” polymer chains, graft copolymerization has been used extensively in the 
modification of starch nanocrystals. This method has received a lot of attention Figure 9.4  Schematic illustration of two strategies used for grafting polymer chains 
onto a starch nanocrystal. 2,4-toluene diisocyanate (2,4-TDI) is used as an example of 
a coupling agent for premodification in the “graft onto” strategy; in the “graft from” 
strategy, ring-opening polymerization (ROP) uses poly( ε-caprolactone) as an example 
[55–57] and the free radical polymerization (FRP) uses polystyrene (PS) [58].)Long Chain Graf ting
“Graf t ont o” “Graf t from”
OH
OHNCO
NCO
NCONCO
NCOStarch nanocr ystal
Starch nanocr ystal
Starch nanocr ystal
Starch nanocr ystalH
N COO O
O
HN CO
OOr
O OOr(I)
(II)
(III)
ε -capr olact one or
styrene monomerCHEmICAl modIfICATIoN of STARCH NANoCRYSTAlS PERTAINING   187
for reinforcement of nanocomposites, and also for utilization in applications 
in the medical field [20, 21, 26, 54, 55, 60]. Various polymers, such as poly(ethylene 
glycol) methyl ether (PEGME) [20], poly(propylene glycol) monobutyl ether 
(PPGBE) [55], poly(tetrahydrofuran) (PTHF) [55], poly(caprolactone) (PCL) 
[55], and aliphatic chloride [20, 30], have been reported to graft onto the 
surface of starch nanocrystals using different coupling agents.
2,4-Toluene diisocyanate (2,4-TDI) was used as coupling agent in grafting 
reactions based on the “graft onto” strategy. The synthetic routes used may 
vary with the different number of end groups in the grafted polymers, which 
possess one or two reactive hydroxyl groups, but the routes are similar. When 
the grafted polymers have only one end-hydroxyl group, such as PEGME or 
PPGBE, they are grafted onto the surface of the starch nanocrystals with a 
two-step process that first functionalizes the polymer with an isocyanate from 
2,4-TDI, and then reacts the second isocyanate in the 2,4-TDI with the surface 
hydroxyl groups of the starch nanocrystals to graft the polymer chains. When 
there are two end-hydroxyl groups on the polymer chains, such as on PTHF 
and PCL, a capping reaction using PI for one hydroxyl group occurs first, and 
then the remaining synthesis procedures are the same as for polymers with 
only one end-hydroxyl group. The morphologies and sizes of modified starch 
nanocrystals can be regulated and controlled as they are closely related to the 
relative molecular weights and lengths of the polymer chains. It has been 
confirmed [20] that grafted polymers efficiently covered the entire surface of 
the StNP without affecting the starch crystalline structure. Individualization 
of the modified starch nanocrystals was affected because of reduced hydrogen 
bonding and polar interactions between the individual particles [5, 20]. Mono -
crystalline StNP have also been reported to have been successfully grafted 
with polytetrahydrofuran, polycaprolactone, and poly(ethylene glycol) mono -
butyl ether chains using 2,4-TDI as the linking agent. These results show that 
the grafting efficiency of this method was greatly affected by the category and 
length of the polymer chain. For example, the grafting probability decreased 
with an increase in polymer chain length [28].
Reaction between the hydroxyl group and the acid chloride group (–COCl) 
is another method of modification in which starch nanocrystals are grafted 
with polymer chains, such as stearoyl chloride [20], octanoyl, nonanoyl, and 
decanoyl chloride [30]. The starch nanocrystals grafted by stearate polymers 
dispersed as individual nanoparticles more easily than its native counterpart 
and formed a crystalline brush-like structure from the starch surface outward, 
which could be attributed to the high level of surface grafting efficiency and 
to the covalently linked stearates that crystallize at the starch nanocrystal 
surface. The polarity of the starch–stearate surface disappeared because of 
efficient coverage of the surface by the stearate aliphatic chain ends [20]. When 
the octanoyl, nonanoyl, and decanoyl polymers were grafted, the polarity of 
the starch nanocrystals decreased and dispersion in organic solvent improved 
[30]. Grafting to alkyl polymer chains also improved the thermal properties 
because of the protective crystalline layer formed by the oxygen-poor stearate 188  CHEmICAl modIfICATIoN of STARCH NANoPARTIClES
surface, which was attested to by an increase of more than 100°C in the deg -
radation temperature of the stearoyl chloride grafted StNP [20]. Similar con -
clusions were reached by Namazi and Dadkhah [30].
It is obvious that the “graft onto” strategy can effectively change charac -
teristics of starch nanocrystals such as morphology, size, polarity, surface prop -
erties, and thermal properties, while maintaining crystalline integrity. There are 
still some shortcomings, such as low controllability and grafting efficiency, as 
well as difficulty in grafting long chain polymers that limit the modification of 
StNP; as a result, a new method based on the “graft from” strategy has been 
developed.
9.2.2.2 “Graft From” Strategy for Polymer Growth Besides the previ -
ously mentioned weaknesses of the “graft onto” strategy, the isocyanates, such 
as 2,4-TDI and methylenediphenyldiisocyanate (MDI), used as chain extend -
ers in this method are considered environmentally hazardous materials [61]. 
To solve these problems, a novel “graft from” strategy has been proposed in 
which polymerization of monomers and chain propagation of polymers are 
induced, and ultimately the polymer chains are coupled with the starch nano -
crystals [5]. Various polymers have been grafted from the surface of starch 
nanocrystals based on the “graft from” strategy, together with ring-opening 
polymerization (ROP) for poly( ε-caprolactone) (PCL) [61–63] and free radical 
polymerization (FRP) for polystyrene (PS) [64].
The PCL polymer chains prepared through ROP of the caprolactone 
monomer were grafted onto the surface of starch nanocrystals by acid hydro -
lysis via bulk polymerization [61]. Results showed that the crystalline structure 
and morphology of the starch nanocrystals were maintained during chemical 
modification, and the decomposition temperature range of the modified nano -
crystals was broader than that of unmodified starch nanocrystals [61]. Chang 
et al. [62]. and Yu et al. [63]. also modified starch nanocrystals with PCL chains 
under different conditions of microwave-assisted ROP . They found that after 
microwave-assisted chemical modification, most of the modified nanocrystals 
had a platelet-like structure of less than 100 nm, suggesting that the process of 
grafting PCL chains facilitates the dispersion of nanocrystals [5].
The FRP method has also been used to modify starch nanocrystals with 
polymers. An amphiphilic starch nanocrystal copolymer was prepared by 
grafting styrene chains onto the surface of the starch nanocrystals using acid 
hydrolysis based on the “graft from” strategy [64]. The modified starch nano -
crystals transformed into amphiphilic nanoparticles, exhibiting a size of around 
80–100 nm and a spherical morphology. In this case, polymerization of styrene 
induced by the free radical on the starch backbone occurred as potassium 
persulfate was used as the radical initiator. A micelle containing a growing 
free radical chain of polystyrene was then adsorbed onto the starch surface 
and attached to an oxy radical at the surface. The amphiphilic starch nanocrys -
tals dispersed well in both polar and nonpolar solvents because of the different 
conformations of the hydrophobic polystyrene side chains and the hydrophilic 
starch backbone in polar or nonpolar solvents [64].CHEmICAl modIfICATIoN   189
As reported in the literature, a higher grafting density can be realized with 
the “graft from” strategy, and the properties of starch nanocrystals can be 
partially controlled by altering the length and type of the grafted polymer 
chains. The grafted chains will also improve compatibility between the nano -
crystals and matrix, and enhance the mechanical properties of nanocomposites 
[5].
9.3 CHEMICAL MODIFICATION OF STARCH NANOPARTICLES, 
NANOMICELLES, AND NANOCOLLOIDS
Apart from starch nanocrystals, many other types of nanosized starch, such as 
nanoparticles, nanomicelles, and nanocolloids, can be prepared using different 
methods and techniques. Amorphous StNP can be prepared by regeneration–
precipitation of starch molecules or by way of extrusion. Chemical modifica -
tion of amorphous StNP may be carried out before or after the cross-linking 
of StNP . Starch nanomicelles can be obtained through assembly of chemically 
modified starch molecules. Microfluidization can be used to prepare starch 
nanocolloids.
9.3.1 Nanoparticle Formation from Chemically Modified Starch
Modified starches derived from many methods including redox reaction [65], 
esterification [66], and even grafting of hydrophobic long chain fatty acids such 
as oleic acid and stearic acid [18] have been used for the preparation of StNP .
Highly active dialdehyde groups were first introduced into starch using 
NaIO 4 as the oxidizer, and then POCl 3 was used as a cross-linking agent to 
prepare dialdehyde StNP (DASNP) in a water-in-oil ( w/o) microemulsion [65]. 
The dialdehyde groups on the StNP made reactions with hydrazine, acid, 
amine, imine, and so on possible, and as a result, DASNP have great potential 
for use in the medical field. The obtained DASNP also showed good thermal 
stability and low biological toxicity. Moreover, the obtained DASNP exhibited 
superior chemical combinative and physical adsorptive capabilities with drugs 
such as doxorubicin (DOX) [65].
Allyl and ester groups have also been introduced into starch to make acety -
lated allylic starch (AAS), which was prepared by first etherizing using allyl 
chloride and then etherifying using acetic anhydride. The uniform starch-based 
nanospheres obtained through nanoprecipitation of AAS had a core-shell 
structure with hydrophobic ester groups in the core and derivable allyl groups 
in the nanosphere shell [66]. Based on this, a type of thermoresponsive poly(N-
isopropylacrylamide) hydrogel, with an extremely high mechanical strength 
and a remarkably rapid response rate, was prepared using the obtained bio -
degradable starch-based nanospheres as cross-linkers [66].
In order to broaden the application of nanoparticles in medical fields, starch 
was grafted with long chain fatty acids, such as oleic acid and stearic acid, to 190  CHEmICAl modIfICATIoN of STARCH NANoPARTIClES
decrease hydrophilicity, and then made into nanoparticles and subsequently 
cross-linked with sodium tripolyphosphate for stabilization. The grafted starch 
showed higher swelling power at neutral pH compared with native starch, 
which is useful in drug delivery applications. Fatty acid-grafted StNP were 
found to be good vehicles for controlled oral drug delivery [18].
Modified StNP may also exhibit special functions, including the contribu -
tion of nutrition [27]. StNP prepared by regeneration–precipitation using 
ethanol as the precipitant were modified using citric acid (CA), which is rec -
ognized as nutritionally harmless as compared to other substances used for 
starch derivatization. The CA-modified starch nanocrystals (CASN) were then 
used as a reinforcing agent in a glycerol plasticized pea starch (GPS) matrix. 
Substitution of CA groups on starch chains formed a highly cross-linked 
starch, thus limiting the starch chain mobility. At a high temperature, native 
starch displays mainly thermoplastic behavior because water and glycerol 
physically break up the starch granules and disrupt intermolecular and intra -
molecular hydrogen bonds. At the same temperature, CASN did not gelatinize. 
The reason for the better thermal stability of CASN than that of starch gran -
ules and unmodified starch nanocrystals was that the ester bonds in the cross-
linked CASN sterically hindered the hydrogen bond interaction. As a result, 
CASN could not be destroyed by the processing of CASN/GPS composites 
even at a high temperature. Moreover, the storage modulus, tensile strength, 
glass transition temperature, and water vapor barrier properties of these 
CASN/GPS nanocomposites were all improved as compared with pure GPS 
[27].
9.3.2 Nanomicelle Assembly from Chemically Modified Starch
Nanoparticle self-assembly is a common and efficient way to create nanomi -
celles with well-defined structure and outstanding properties [33, 42–44]. Most 
StNP are modified with functional groups or long chain polymers before 
self-assembly.
A micelle with unique characteristics, including nanosize, core-shell archi -
tecture, good thermodynamic stability under physiological conditions, and so 
on, was self-assembled from amphiphilic starch piperinic ester, which was 
synthesized by coupling a carboxyl group of piperic acid with a hydroxyl group 
on the starch backbone [44]. The self-assembled nanoparticles were prepared 
using dialysis solvent displacement in a dimethyl sulfoxide/water (DMSO/
H2O) system. The hydrophilic shell of the micelles consisted of water-soluble 
starch chains and the hydrophobic core consisted of piperic ester moieties. This 
core-shell structure has excellent properties that make the obtained StNP 
micelles useful for industrial, pharmaceutical, and biomedical applications 
[44]. Similarly, AAS can self-assemble in water to form core-shell nanospheres. 
The starch-based nanosphere composite hydrogels (SNH), with starch-based 
nanospheres as cross-linkers, can sustain a strength of 10.34 MPa, which is 60 
times more than that sustained by the normal hydrogel (NH) [43].CHEmICAl modIfICATIoN   191
It has been reported that hydrophobized polysaccharides cannot self-
assemble into vesicles unless there is a hydrophilic spacer molecule between 
the lipid and the polysaccharide backbone [42]. Besheer et al. hydrophobically 
modified hydroxyethyl starch (HES) by reacting starch with ethylene oxide in 
an alkaline medium, in which fatty acids of varying chain lengths and molar 
substitution (MS fatty acid ) were used. Nanosized polymeric micelles and vesicles 
were then prepared by adding a tetrahydrofuran (THF) solution of modified 
HES into water and subsequently evaporating the THF. The results showed 
that only HES modified with lauric acid and with low MS fatty acid  formed stable 
nanodispersions, while the others formed a precipitate. Dynamic light scatter -
ing (DLS) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) showed the forma -
tion of micelles and vesicles with z-average sizes of between 20 and 30 nm for 
the micelles and 250 to 350 nm for the vesicles, which is promising for the 
potential application of modified HES vesicles in the areas of drug/protein 
encapsulation and drug delivery [42].
9.3.3 Chemical Modification of Cross-Linked Starch Nanoparticles
It is advantageous to prepare chemically modified StNP using nanosized cross -
linked starch as the precursor. Needless to say, various techniques have been 
developed for the preparation of cross-linked StNP precursors. Emulsion 
crosslinking techniques, especially w/o emulsions with well-defined and simple 
preparation steps under mild processing conditions [29], are effective methods 
for the modification of StNP . Shi et al. [29] explored a convenient new synthetic 
route using high pressure homogenization combined with a w/o mini-emulsion 
cross-linking technique to prepare sodium trimetaphosphate (STMP) cross-
linked StNP . Some literature focuses on the chemical modification of cross-
linked StNP [67, 68].
StNP were prepared with w/o microemulsions in which starch was hydro -
lyzed in a boiling water bath until the solution was clear. POCl 3 was used as 
the cross-linking agent [67]. Poly-L-lysine (PLL) was linked to the surface of 
StNP to prepare a novel nonvirus nanoparticle gene carrier with a nucleus-
shell structure, which had stronger adherence to cells and lower cell toxicity, 
presenting prospects as a gene carrier [67]. Folate modified with NH 2-
terminated poly(ethylene glycol) (FA-PEG) was conjugated to the surface of 
StNP prepared by w/o microemulsions. The obtained folate-conjugated StNP 
(FA-PEG/StNP) can carry and sustained-release the anticancer drug DOX. 
Consequently, the FA-PEG-conjugated StNP may be quite valuable as tar -
geted carriers of anticancer drugs [68].
9.3.4 Chemical Modification of Starch Nanocolloids
Starch colloids can be prepared using high pressure homogenization to dis -
perse starch particles in water and reduce their size from micrometer to nano -
meter [40]. The structure and thermal stability of starch colloids were 192  CHEmICAl modIfICATIoN of STARCH NANoPARTIClES
unchanged, due to the unchanging nature of starch itself. Viscosity of the col -
loids increased with an increased number of homogenization passes, accom -
panied by a decreased particle size, narrower particle size distribution (PSD), 
and an increased absolute zeta potential, indicative of the formation of a sus -
pension or stable gel composed of nanoparticles. PSD and particle size were 
key factors influencing the properties of the colloid systems. Properties of 
viscosity were greatly altered between 10 and 12 passes, suggesting a critical 
sol–gel transition [40]. The chemical modification of nanocolloids deserves 
wider and further study as the literature on this is scarce.
9.4 ROLE OF CHEMICAL MODIFICATION IN THE APPLICATION OF 
STARCH NANOPARTICLES
StNP have great potential to reinforce and install special functions in polymer 
matrices to achieve high performance in the resulting composites. Nonetheless, 
the distribution of the StNP nanofillers in the polymer matrix, as well as func -
tional development based on chemical modification of StNP , dictate the ulti -
mate performance of the composites. Special attention has therefore been paid 
to preserve and protect the unique/excellent properties, such as well-dispersed 
small particles, large surface areas, and biodegradability, of StNP in environ -
mentally friendly nanocomposites.
9.4.1 Compatibilization at the Filler–Matrix Interface  
in Nanocomposites
Distribution of StNP in the matrix has been proven to have a significant effect 
on the enhancement of the nanocomposite’s mechanical properties. The addi -
tion of starch nanocrystals may also induce a decrease in permeability to both 
water vapor and oxygen and an increase in the tortuosity of the diffusion path, 
ultimately affecting the barrier properties of the nanocomposites [60]. It has 
been reported that in some matrices StNP dispersed well, leading to good 
properties in the nanocomposites. For example, starch nanocrystal filler was 
introduced as the reinforcing phase in a natural rubber latex matrix [21, 60, 
69]. Good mechanical properties resulted because the starch nanocrystals 
were evenly distributed within the natural rubber matrix, and the crystalline 
structure of the nanocomposites was not destroyed during preparation, as 
verified by wide-angle X-ray diffraction analysis [21, 60]. A similar conclusion 
has been reached in research on soy protein isolate (SPI)-based nanocompos -
ites enhanced by pea starch nanocrystals [25]. In addition, the platelet-like 
starch nanocrystals have been used as reinforcing nanofillers for biomaterials. 
For example, starch nanocrystals were incorporated into alginate microsphere 
drug carriers [70] and supramolecular hydrogels based on cyclodextrin/
polymer inclusion [71]. The results showed that the starch nanocrystals not RolE of CHEmICAl modIfICATIoN   193
only reinforced the materials, but also produced more predominant sustained-
release profiles.
Interactions between the starch nanofillers and the polymer matrix also 
make a great difference. It is interesting to note that in toluene swelling of the 
natural rubber nanocomposites decreased with the introduction of starch 
nanocrystals, while in water the swelling increased. The decreasing swelling in 
toluene was attributed to favorable interactions between the natural rubber 
matrix and starch nanofillers and to the formation of a three-dimensional 
starch nanocrystal network through hydrogen linkages [60]. On the other 
hand, the formation of a continuous polar network of starch nanocrystals in a 
natural rubber matrix seemed to favor the swelling in water [60].Waxy maize 
starch-based nanocomposites, with waxy maize starch nanocrystals as reinforc -
ing agents, showed good miscibility and strong interfacial adhesion between 
the starch nanocrystal filler and the starch matrix. The clear increase in the 
mechanical properties of the nanocomposite was attributed to the similarity 
of the chemical structures of the matrix and nanofiller [26]. Moreover, 
poly(butylene succinate) (PBS)-based nanocomposites incorporated with 
platelet-like starch nanocrystal at a loading level of 5 wt% showed simultane -
ous enhancement of strength and elongation compared with neat PBS because 
of nucleation of the nanocrystals, formation of a percolating network, and 
interaction between the filler and the matrix [72].
Although the use of starch nanocrystals as filler in some polymeric matrices 
has lead to a desired reinforcing effect [1, 22, 28, 73], the relatively poor com -
patibility between the starch nanofillers and the matrix has been reported to 
restrict the development of nanocomposites using StNP as filler. In the studies 
of polyvinyl alcohol (PVOH) based nanocomposites using pea starch nano -
crystals as a reinforcing filler [74, 75], the tensile strength and elongation at 
break of PVOH-based nanocomposites filled with starch nanocrystals 
decreased rapidly with increasing starch content (up to 40 wt%). This property 
deterioration was attributed to the relatively poor compatibility between 
starch and PVOH [74, 75]. As a result, surface modification may become a 
necessary and effective way to improve compatibility at the nanofiller /matrix 
interface in nanocomposites.
When modified by small molecules (such as acetic anhydride, ASA, and 
isocyanate), StNP may show different polarity or solubility. This may lead to 
good dispersion of the fillers in the polymer matrix, and hence change the 
original filler–filler and filler–matrix interactions. Consequently, the micro -
structure of such nanocomposites would appear quite different from their 
unmodified StNP-filled counterparts. In particular, the covalent linkage 
between the filler and the matrix in the near-perfect stress transfer at the 
interface will result in excellent mechanical properties of the nanocomposites. 
However, it should be noted that although some chemical modifications, such 
as ASA or PI, of starch nanocrystals improve the adhesion between the filler 
and the matrix, they also partially or totally destroy the nanocomposite’s 194  CHEmICAl modIfICATIoN of STARCH NANoPARTIClES
three-dimensional network, leading to a strong decrease in the mechanical 
performance of the nanocomposites [21, 60]. These results were also proven 
in the study of natural rubber nanocomposites reinforced with chemically 
modified crab shell chitin nanowhiskers [5, 76]. Moreover, when starch  
nanocrystals were modified with ASA or PI, the swelling rate of natural 
rubber/modified starch nanocrystals was systematically higher than that of 
natural rubber/unmodified nanocrystals. This could be ascribed to lower 
interactions between modified nanocrystals, higher interactions between the 
filler and the matrix, and a higher affinity between modified nanocrystals and 
toluene [60].
Polymer chains were grafted onto the StNP to study compatibilization at 
the filler–matrix interface in nanocomposites. The polymer chains on the 
surface of the StNP entangled and interacted with the polymer matrix to form 
a co-continuous structure, resulting in the close proximity between nanofillers 
and matrix. Interfacial interaction among the starch nanocrystals, grafted 
polymer chains, and the polymer matrix is also a crucial factor affecting the 
structure and properties of composites [62, 63]. Polystyrene was essentially 
grafted onto the surface of starch nanocrystals by Song et al. [64]. X-ray dif -
fraction (XRD) patterns confirmed that the crystalline structure of the starch 
nanocrystal was not changed after grafting, and the grafted starch nanocrystals 
showed excellent amphiphilic characteristics, such as good dispersion both in 
polar and in nonpolar solvents, attributed to the different conformations of 
the hydrophobic polystyrene side chains and the hydrophilic starch backbone 
when in polar or nonpolar solvent [64].
9.4.2 Function Development Based on Chemical Modification of 
Starch Nanoparticles
Chemical modification of StNP can not only improve the compatibility of 
nanoparticles in the polymer matrix to enhance the mechanical properties of 
the nanocomposites, but can also develop various unique functions that may 
broaden the application for nanocomposites.
As reported, chemically modified StNP can be used as cross-linkers in many 
nanocomposites. For example, HMDI-modified StNP were used as cross-
linkers in the synthesis of poly(propylene glycol) (PPG)-based polyurethanes. 
Compared with polyurethane cross-linked with unhydrolyzed waxy starch, the 
highly cross-linked and filled nanocomposites showed higher conductivity at 
all temperatures. The considerable effect of temperature on conductivity indi -
cates that the nanocomposites cross-linked with HMDI-modified StNP prob -
ably exhibit thermoresponsive electrical conductivity behavior [38]. AAS 
nanospheres have also been used as a cross-linker, polymerized with acryl -
amide to produce hydrogels with high mechanical strength [43].
Chemically modified StNP are widely used in the pharmaceutical sector, 
especially in drug delivery systems [29, 67, 68, 70, 71, 77, 78]. Modified StNP 
show extraordinary characteristics such as amphiphilicity [64], controllable CoNClUSIoNS ANd PRoSPECTS   195
size [68], and targeted modification [68], which help to encapsulate and deliver 
hydrophilic drugs to targeted spots, minimize the undesired release of the drug 
(initial burst), improve the efficacy of drug delivery, prolong the residence time 
of drugs, and reduce drug-related side effects [29]. Xiao et al. [68] prepared 
StNP conjugated with folate modified with NH 2-terminated poly(ethylene 
glycol) (FA-PEG) to form a tumor-targeted drug delivery vector. Long chain 
chemical modification on the surface of StNP can be used to make binding 
sites for active agents in drug delivery systems or for toxins in purification and 
treatment systems [20, 28, 79]. As mentioned previously, a nucleus-shell PLL–
StNP can be used as a nonvirus nanoparticle gene carrier because of the many 
advantages of PLL–StNP , including its ability to accept a large DNA load, high 
transfection efficiency, low cell toxicity, and biodegradability [67]. The fatty 
acid-grafted StNP was also found to be a good vehicle for controlled oral drug 
delivery [18]. Modified starch nanospheres have also been reported to have 
the ability to convert poorly soluble, poorly absorbed drugs into better deliver -
able drugs that are site specific, and to protect the drugs from various body 
fluids (enzyme action), which can degrade them during targeting [77]. The 
pH-sensitive nanogels based on starch are also used for drug release [80].
Chemically modified StNP have also been used in many other areas. 
Stearate-modified starch nanoplatelets can be employed as adsorbents for the 
removal of a wide range of dissolved aromatic compounds from water [81], 
and PLL–StNP , which was reported to have stronger water-absorbing and 
water-retaining properties, will hopefully be applied to water-saving agricul -
tural production [67].
9.5 CONCLUSIONS AND PROSPECTS
StNP can be chemically modified in many ways by various small molecules, 
monomers, or polymers, which may offer the nanoparticles some outstanding 
characteristics to broaden their areas of application. The small molecules used 
to modify StNP provide special functional groups to help the nanoparticles 
distribute better in the polymer matrix or to interact more closely with the 
polymer matrix. The monomers and polymers grafted onto the surface of the 
StNP by the “graft onto” or “graft from” methods usually twist tightly together 
with the polymer matrix forming a co-continuous structure, and as a result 
achieve a near-perfect stress transfer between the matrix and modified 
nanoparticles. A polymer matrix phase may also form directly at the nanopar -
ticle surface, which may improve the interplay between the modified nanofill -
ers and the matrix, thanks to strong covalent linkages.
Besides enhancing the mechanical properties of the nanoparticles, chemical 
modification of StNP also promotes functional development. With chemical 
modification, nanomaterials with modified StNP can potentially be used  
in medicine as excellent vehicles in drug delivery systems. Modification of  
the StNP also makes it possible to use them as cross-linkers, adsorbents, and 196  CHEmICAl modIfICATIoN of STARCH NANoPARTIClES
water-retaining agents, which broadens the application of StNP into the areas 
of sewage disposal and agriculture.
The majority of literature discusses the preparation of StNP by acid hydro -
lysis. Literature concerning other methods used for the preparation of StNP 
is scarce, which may be a potential field to be developed. StNP , as one kind of 
polysaccharide that is environmentally friendly, nontoxic, abundant in 
resources, low in price, and biodegradable, should be applied more broadly in 
medical areas and at the same time expanded into other areas, such as packing 
material, chemicals, and environmental remediation, to meet or exceed regula -
tory requirements, society’s expectations, and consumer demands in terms of 
sustainability. Glycerol plasticized starch-based nanocomposites with CASN 
are reported to have potential applications in medicine, agriculture, drug 
release, and in packaging for use as edible films, food packaging, and one-off 
packaging [27]. Novel processing technology should be sought in order to 
accelerate the application of starch nanocrystals in nanomaterials. StNP can 
be introduced into the biomaterials field, where, similar to cellulose nanocrys -
tals [82], they have potential for use in bioimaging applications with fluores -
cent labeling modifications. Moreover, StNP , nanospheres, and nanogels have 
potential for use as building blocks for the nanoscale construction of sensors, 
tissues, mechanical devices, and so on [32].
Chemical modifications can change filler–filler and filler–matrix interac -
tions and hence affect the compatibility of the StNP and polymer matrices, 
and even form new microstructures in nanocomposites. Meanwhile, chemically 
modified StNP still contribute to unique functions. These positive factors may 
facilitate the extension of starch utilization in the fields of high performance 
and functional materials. As a result, chemical modification of StNP is worthy 
of extended and more in-depth research. First of all, the design of a modified 
molecular structure for StNP is essential; it is key for achieving an optimal 
compatibilization effect, realizing controlled assembly, and exploring func -
tional applications. Second, efficient synthesis methods are crucial for the 
realization of the intended structures. In this case, modest reaction conditions 
(mimicking those of living biological systems) that are suitable for preserva -
tion of the original structure of starch nanocrystals, as well as capable of 
resulting in sufficient polymerization on the surface of StNP need to be estab -
lished. On the whole, in-depth basic research on the chemical modification of 
StNP promises many valuable applied products, and a mass of high perfor -
mance, high value-added biomaterials, packing materials, and environmental 
remediation materials is expected.
REFERENCES
 [1] Xu, Y., Ding, W.Q., Liu, J., Li, Y., Kennedy, J.F., Gu, Q., and Shao, S.X. (2010) 
Preparation and characterization of organic-soluble acetylated starch nanocrys -
tals. Carbohydrate Polymers , 80(4), 1078–1084.REfERENCES   197
 [2] Pérez, S., Bertoft, E. (2010) The molecular structures of starch components and 
their contribution to the architecture of starch granules: A comprehensive review. 
Starch/Stärke , 62(8), 389–420.
 [3] Buléon, A., Colonna, P ., Planchot, V., and Ball, S. (1998) Starch granules: Structure 
and biosynthesis. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules , 23(2), 
85–112.
 [4] Preiss, J. (2009) Biochemistry and molecular biology of starch biosynthesis. In: 
Starch: Chemistry and Technology , 3rd edn, eds. J.N. BeMiller, R.L. Whistler. New 
York: Academic Press, pp. 83–147.
 [5] Lin, N., Huang, J., Chang, P .R., Anderson, D.P ., and Yu, J.H. (2011) Preparation, 
modification, and application of starch nanocrystals in nanomaterials: A review. 
Journal of Nanomaterials , 2011, doi:10.1155/2011/573687.
 [6] Paris, M., Bizot, H., Emery, J., Buzaré, J.Y., and Buléon, A. (1999) Crystallinity and 
structuring role of water in native and recrystallized starches by 13C CP-MAS 
NMR spectroscopy. 1: Spectral decomposition. Carbohydrate Polymers , 39(4), 
327–339.
 [7] Angellier, H., Choisnard, L., Molina-Boisseau, S., Ozil, P ., and Dufresne, A. (2004) 
Optimization of the preparation of aqueous suspensions of waxy maize starch 
nanocrystals using a response surface methodology. Biomacromolecules , 5(4), 
1545–1551.
 [8] Avérous, L., Halley, P .J. (2009) Biocomposites based on plasticized starch. Biofuels, 
Bioproducts, and Biorefining , 3(3), 329–343.
 [9] Gidley, M.J., Bociek, S.M. (1985) Molecular organization in starches: A carbon 13 
CP/MAS NMR study. Journal of the American Chemical Society , 107(24), 
7040–7044.
[10] Jobling, S. (2004) Improving starch for food and industrial applications. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology , 7(2), 210–218.
[11] Song, D., Zhao, Y., Dong, C., and Deng, Y. (2009) Surface modification of cellulose 
fibers by starch grafting with crosslinkers. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 
113(5), 3019–3026.
[12] Le Corre, D., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2010) Starch nanoparticles: A review. 
Biomacromolecules , 11(5), 1139–1153.
[13] Oates, C.G. (1997) Towards an understanding of starch granule structure and 
hydrolysis. Trends in Food Science and Technology , 8(11), 375–382.
[14] Vandeputte, G.E., Delcour, J.A. (2004) From sucrose to starch granule to starch 
physical behaviour: A focus on rice starch. Carbohydrate Polymers , 58(3), 
245–266.
[15] Gallant, D.J., Bouchet, B., and Baldwin, P .M. (1997) Microscopy of starch: Evi -
dence of a new level of granule organization. Carbohydrate Polymers , 32(3–4), 
177–191.
[16] Hizukuri, S. (1986) Polymodal distribution of the chain lengths of amylopectins, 
and its significance. Carbohydrate Research , 147(2), 342–347.
[17] Jenkins, P .J., Donald, A.M. (1995) The influence of amylose on starch granule 
structure. International Journal of Biological Macromolecules , 17(6), 315–321.
[18] Simi, C.K., Abraham, T.E. (2007) Hydrophobic grafted and cross-linked starch 
nanoparticles for drug delivery. Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering , 30(3), 
173–180.198  CHEmICAl modIfICATIoN of STARCH NANoPARTIClES
[19] Bloembergen, S., Kappen, F., and Beelen, B., inventors (2005) EcosynthetixInc, 
assignee. US Patent 6,921,430 B2, 2005 Jul 26.
[20] Thielemans, W., Belgacem, M.N., and Dufresne, A. (2006) Starch nanocrystals with 
large chain surface modifications. Langmuir , 22(10), 4804–4810.
[21] Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., and Dufresne, A. (2005) Mechanical properties 
of waxy maize starch nanocrystal reinforced natural rubber. Macromolecules , 
38(22), 9161–9170.
[22] Angellier, H., Putaux, J.L., Molina-Boisseau, S., Dupeyre, D., and Dufresne, A. 
(2005) Starch nanocrystal fillers in an acrylic polymer matrix. Macromolecular 
Symposia , 221(1), 95–104.
[23] Kristo, E., Biliaderis, C.G. (2007) Physical properties of starch nanocrystal-
reinforced pullulan films. Carbohydrate Polymers , 68(1), 146–158.
[24] García, N.L., Ribba, L., Dufresne, A., Aranguren, M., and Goyanes, S. (2011) Effect 
of glycerol on the morphology of nanocomposites made from thermoplastic starch 
and starch nanocrystals. Carbohydrate Polymers , 84(1), 203–210.
[25] Zheng, H., Ai, F., Chang, P .R., Huang, J., and Dufresne, A. (2009) Structure and 
properties ofstarch nanocrystal-reinforced soy protein plastics. Polymer Compos -
ites, 30(4), 474–480.
[26] Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., Dole, P ., and Dufresne, A. (2006) Thermoplastic 
starch-waxy maize starch nanocrystals nanocomposites. Biomacromolecules , 7(2), 
531–539.
[27] Ma, X.F., Jian, R.J., Chang, P .R., and Yu, J.G. (2008) Fabrication and characteriza -
tion of citric acid-modified starch nanoparticles/plasticized-starch composites. 
Biomacromolecules , 9(11), 3314–3320.
[28] Dufresne, A. (2008) Polysaccharide nanocrystal reinforced nanocomposites. Cana -
dian Journal of Chemistry , 86(6), 484–494.
[29] Shi, A.M., Li, D., Wang, L.J., Li, B.Z., and Adhikari, B. (2011) Preparation of starch-
based nanoparticles through high-pressure homogenization and miniemulsion 
cross-linking: Influence of various process parameters on particle size and stability. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 83(4), 1604–1610.
[30] Namazi, H., Dadkhah, A. (2010) Convenient method for preparation of hydro -
phobically modified starch nanocrystals with using fatty acids. Carbohydrate Poly -
mers, 79(3), 731–737.
[31] Putaux, J.L., Molina-Boisseau, S., Momaur, T., and Dufresne, A. (2003) Platelet 
nanocrystals resulting from the disruption of waxy maize starch granules by acid 
hydrolysis. Biomacromolecules , 4(5), 1198–1202.
[32] Chakraborty, S., Sahoo, B., Teraoka, I., Miller, L.M., and Gross, R.A. (2005) 
Enzyme-catalyzed regioselective modification of SNP . Macromolecules , 38, 61(1.
[33] Cai, L.M., Shi, Y.C., Rong, L.X., and Hsiao, B.S. (2010) Debranching and crystal -
lization of waxy maize starch in relation to enzyme digestibility. Carbohydrate 
Polymers , 81(2), 385–393.
[34] An, H.J., Liang, H.B., Liu, Z.D., Yang, H.S., Liu, Q.D., and Wang, H.B. (2011) Nano-
structures of debranched potato starch obtained by isoamylolysis. Journal of Food 
Science , 76(1), N11–N14.
[35] Kim, J.Y., Lim, S.T. (2009) Preparation of nano-sized starch particles by complex 
formation with n-butanol. Carbohydrate Polymers , 76(1), 110–116.REfERENCES   199
[36] Chin, S.K., Pang, S.C., and Tay, S.H. (2011) Size controlled synthesis of starch 
nanoparticles by a simple nanoprecipitationmethod. Carbohydrate Polymers , 
86(4), 1817–1819.
[37] Song, D., Thio, Y.S., and Deng, Y. (2011) Starch nanoparticle formation via reactive 
extrusion and related mechanism study. Carbohydrate Polymers , 85(1), 208–214.
[38] Valodkar, M., Thakore, S. (2010) Isocyanate crosslinked reactive starch nanopar -
ticles for thermo-responsive conducting applications. Carbohydrate Research , 
345(16), 2354–2360.
[39] Azizi Samir, M.A.S., Alloin, F., and Dufresne, A. (2005) Review of recent research 
into cellulosic whiskers, their properties and their application in nanocomposite 
field. Biomacromolecules , 6(2), 612–626.
[40] Liu, D., Wu, Q., Chen, H., and Chang, P .R. (2009) Transitional properties of starch 
colloid with particle size reduction from micro- to nanometer. Journal of Colloid 
and Interface Science , 339(1), 117–124.
[41] Siqueira, G., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2009) Cellulose whiskers versus microfi -
brils: Influence of the nature of the nanoparticle and its surface functionalization 
on the thermal and mechanical properties of nanocomposites. Biomacromolecules , 
10(2), 425–432.
[42] Besheer, A., Hause, G., Kressler, J., and Mäder, K. (2007) Hydrophobically modi -
fied hydroxyethyl starch: Synthesis, characterization, and aqueous self-assembly 
into nano-sized polymeric micelles and vesicles. Biomacromolecules , 8(2), 
359–367.
[43] Tan, Y., Wang, P ., Xu, K., Li, W., An, H., Li, L., Liu, C., and Dong, L. (2009) Design -
ing starch-based nanospheres to make hydrogels with high mechanical strength. 
Macromolecular Materials and Engineering , 294(12), 855–859.
[44] Han, J., Borjihan, G., Bai, R., Chen, X., and Jing, X. (2008) Synthesis and charac -
terization of starch piperinic ester and its self-assembly of nanospheres. Journal 
of Applied Polymer Science , 108(1), 523–528.
[45] LeCorre, D., Vahanian, E., Dufresne, A., and Bras, J. (2012) Enzymatic pretreat -
ment for preparing starch nanocrystals. Biomacromolecules , 13(1), 132–137.
[46] Gao, W., Lin, X., Lin, X., Ding, J., Huang, X., and Wu, H. (2011) Preparation of 
nano-sized flake carboxymethyl cassava starch under ultrasonic irradiation. Car-
bohydrate Polymers , 84(4), 1413–1418.
[47] Qiu, W., Mai, K., and Zeng, H. (1999) Effect of macromolecular coupling agent 
on the property of PP/GF composites. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 71(10), 
1537–1542.
[48] Vaz, C.M., Reis, R.L., and Cunha, A.M. (2002) Use of coupling agents to enhance 
the interfacial interactions in starch-EVOH/hydroxylapatite composites. Bioma -
terials , 23(2), 629–635.
[49] Velasco, J.I., De Saja, J.A., and Martinez, A.B. (1996) Crystallization behavior of 
polypropylene filled with surface-modified talc. Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science , 61(1), 125–132.
[50] Krysztafkiewicz, A., Domka, L. (1997) Surface-modified microporoustalcs as 
fillers of polymers and pigments. Journal of Materials Chemistry , 7, 1655–1659.
[51] Chisholm, B.J., Moore, R.B., Barber, G., Khouri, F., Hempstead, A., Larsen, M., 
Olson, E., Kelley, J., Balch, G., and Caraher, J. (2002) Nanocomposites derived 200  CHEmICAl modIfICATIoN of STARCH NANoPARTIClES
from sulfonatedpoly(butylene terephthalate). Macromolecules , 35(14), 5508–
5516.
[52] Kim, J.T., Lee, D.Y., Oh, T.S., and Lee, D.H. (2003) Characteristics of nitrile-
butadiene rubber layered silicate nanocomposites with silane coupling agent. 
Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 89(10), 2633–2640.
[53] Zini, E., Scandola, M., and Gatenholm, P . (2003) Heterogeneous acylation of flax 
fibers: Reaction kinetics and surface properties. Biomacromolecules , 4(3), 
821–827.
[54] Fabbri, P ., Champon, G., Castellano, M., Belgacem, M.N., and Gandini, A. (2004) 
Reactions of cellulose and wood superficial hydroxy groups with organometallic 
compounds. Polymer International , 53(1), 7–11.
[55] Labet, M., Thielemans, W., and Dufresne, A. (2007) Polymer grafting onto starch 
nanocrystals. Biomacromolecules , 8(9), 2916–2927.
[56] Belgacem, M.N., Gandini, A. (2009) Natural fibre-surface modification and char -
acterisation. In: Cellulose Fibre Reinforced Polymer Composites , eds. T. Sabu, L. 
Pothan. Philadelphia: Old City Publishing, pp. 14–46. Chapter 2.
[57] Gandini, A., Belgacem, M.N. (2011) Physical and chemical methods of fiber sur -
facemodification. In: Interface Engineering in Natural Fibre Composites for 
Maximum Performance , ed. E. Zafeiropoulos. Cambridge, UK: Woodhead Pub -
lishing Ltd, pp. 3–42. Chapter 1.
[58] Belgacem, M.N., Gandini, A. (2005) The surface modification of cellulose fibres 
for use as reinforcingelements in composite materials. Composite Interface , 12(1), 
41–75.
[59] Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., Belgacem, M.N., and Dufresne, A. (2005) 
Surface chemical modification of waxy maize starch nanocrystals. Langmuir , 
21(6), 2425–2433.
[60] Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., Lebrun, L., and Dufresne, A. (2005) Processing 
and structural properties of waxy maize starch nanocrystals reinforced natural 
rubber. Macromolecules , 38(9), 3783–3792.
[61] Namazi, H., Dadkhah, A. (2008) Surface modification of starch nanocrystals 
through ring-opening polymerization of ε-caprolactone and investigation of their 
microstructures. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 110(4), 2405–2412.
[62] Chang, P .R., Ai, F., Chen, Y., Dufresne, A., and Huang, J. (2009) Effects of starch 
nanocrystal-graft-polycaprolactone on mechanical properties of waterborne 
polyurethane-based nanocomposites. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 111(2), 
619–627.
[63] Yu, J., Ai, F., Dufresne, A., Gao, S., Huang, J., and Chang, P .R. (2008) Structure  
and mechanical properties of poly(lactic acid) filled with (starch nanocrystal)-
graft-poly( ε-caprolactone). Macromolecular Materials and Engineering , 293(9), 
763–770.
[64] Song, S., Wang, C., Pan, Z., and Wang, X. (2008) Preparation and characterization 
of amphiphilic starch nanocrystals. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 107(1), 
418–422.
[65] Yu, D., Xiao, S., Tong, C., Chen, L., and Liu, X. (2007) Dialdehyde SNP: Prepara -
tion and application in drug carrier. Chinese Science Bulletin , 52(21), 2913–2918.REfERENCES   201
[66] Tan, Y., Xu, K., Wang, P ., Li, W., Sun, S., and Dong, L. (2010) High mechanical 
strength and rapid response rate of poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) hydrogel cross -
linked by starch-based nanospheres. Soft Matter , 6, 1467–1471.
[67] Xiao, S., Liu, X., Tong, C., Liu, J., Tang, D., and Zhao, L. (2005) Studies of poly-L-
lysine-starch nanoparticle preparation and its application as gene carrier. Science 
in China. Series B, Chemistry , 48(2), 162–166.
[68] Xiao, S., Tong, C., Liu, X., Yu, D., Liu, Q., Xue, C., Tang, D., and Zhao, L. (2006) 
Preparation of folate-conjugated SNP and its application to tumor-targeted drug 
delivery vector. Chinese Science Bulletin , 51(14), 1693–1697.
[69] Valodkar, M., Thakore, S. (2011) Organically modified nanosized starch derivatives 
as excellent reinforcing agents for bionanocomposites. Carbohydrate Polymers , 
86(3), 1244–1251.
[70] Lin, N., Huang, J., Chang, P .R., Feng, L.D., and Yu, J.H. (2011) Effect of polysac -
charide nanocrystals on structure, properties, and drug release kinetics of alginate-
based microspheres. Colloids and Surfaces. B, Biointerfaces , 85, 270–279.
[71] Zhang, X.L., Huang, J., Chang, P .R., Li, J.L., Chen, Y.M., Wang, D.X., Yu, J.H., and 
Chen, J.H. (2010) Structure and properties of polysaccharide nanocrystal-doped 
supramolecular hydrogels based on cyclodextrin inclusion. Polymer , 51(19), 
4398–4407.
[72] Lin, N., Yu, J., Chang, P .R., Li, J., and Huang, J. (2011) Poly(butylene succinate)-
based biocomposites filled with polysaccharide nanocrystals: Structure and prop -
erties. Polymer Composites , 32(3), 472–482.
[73] Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., and Dufresne, A. (2006) Waxy maize starch 
nanocrystals as filler in natural rubber. Macromolecular Symposia , 233(1), 
132–136.
[74] Chen, Y., Cao, X., Chang, P .R., and Huneault, M.A. (2008) Comparative study on 
the films of poly(vinyl alcohol)/pea starch nanocrystals and poly(vinyl alcohol)/
native pea starch. Carbohydrate Polymers , 73(1), 8–17.
[75] Tang, X., Alavi, S. (2011) Recent advances in starch, polyvinyl alcohol based 
polymer blends, nanocomposites and their biodegradability. Carbohydrate Poly -
mers, 85(1), 7–16.
[76] Nair, K.G., Dufresne, A., Gandini, A., and Belgacem, M.N. (2003) Crab shell chitin 
whiskers reinforced natural rubber nanocomposites. 3. Effect of chemical modifi -
cation of chitin whiskers. Biomacromolecules , 4(6), 1835–1842.
[77] Singh, A., Garg, G., and Sharma, P .K. (2010) Nanospheres: A novel approach for 
targeted drug delivery system. International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 
Review and Research , 5(3), 84–88. (Article-015).
[78] Saboktakin, M.R., Tabatabaie, R.M., Maharramov, A., and Ramazanov, M.A. 
(2011) Synthesis and in vitro  evaluation of carboxymethyl starch-chitosan nanopar -
ticles as drug delivery system to the colon. International Journal of Biological 
Macromolecules , 48(3), 381–385.
[79] Dufresne, A. (2010) Processing of polymer nanocomposites reinforced with poly -
saccharide nanocrystals. Molecules (Basel, Switzerland) , 15(6), 4111–4128.
[80] Saboktakin, M.R., Maharramov, A., and Ramazanov, M.A. (2009) pH-sensitive 
starch hydrogels via free radical graft copolymerization, synthesis and properties. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 77(3), 634–638.202  CHEmICAl modIfICATIoN of STARCH NANoPARTIClES
[81] Alila, S., Aloulou, F., Thielemans, W., and Boufi, S. (2011) Sorption potential of 
modified nanocrystals for the removal of aromatic organic pollutant from aqueous 
solution. Industrial Crops and Products , 33, 350–357.
[82] Dong, S., Roman, M. (2007) Fluorescently labeled cellulose nanocrystals for bio -
imaging applications. Journal of the American Chemical Society , 129(45), 
13810–13811.203Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 10
Starch-Based Bionanocomposite: 
Processing Techniques
REKHA ROSE KOSHY , LALY A. POTHAN , and SABU THOMAS
10.1 INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the development of biodegradable materials from renewable 
resources with excellent mechanical and barrier properties has been an impor -
tant research challenge for the plastics industry [1, 2]. Petroleum-based poly -
mers are widely used in different fields due to their low density and high 
mechanical and physical properties. But petroleum is a fossil fuel that is esti -
mated to last for another 50–60 years at the current rate of consumption. In 
addition, there are significant environmental concerns caused by the use of 
nondegradable petroleum-based polymers and composites. Most of the resins 
made from petroleum are nondegradable and in the composite form they are 
nonrecyclable. With double digit growth in the use of these materials in the 
past few years, their disposal has become a critical issue [3].
Therefore, extensive efforts are being made to develop biodegradable  
composites using renewable resources in an attempt to replace the nonbiode -
gradable synthetic polymers used for composites [4]. A number of biodegrad -
able materials have been investigated for use as plastics. Some are naturally 
occurring polymeric materials (e.g., starches, proteins, cellulose, gums) [5]; 
some are produced by polymerizing organic molecules to form polymers (e.g., 
polyurethanes by polyols obtained from vegetable oils, polylactic acid by 
lactide monomer from 100% renewable resources like corn, sugar, and other 
starch-rich products) [6, 7]; and others are manufactured from petrochemicals 
(e.g., poly(butylene succinate)—PBS, biodegradable aliphatic polyesters—
BAPs, poly(e-caprolactone)—PCL, and poly(vinyl alcohol)—PVA) [8]. The 204  STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTE: PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES
processing properties, properties in finished products, and biodegradability of 
these different materials vary widely [9]; however, several commonly occurring 
factors that limit their industrial application have been identified. First, in 
some instances, their mechanical properties are relatively poor compared with 
many petroleum-based plastics due to the inherent lower stiffness and strength. 
Second, many are relatively sensitive to water, with some materials dissolving 
rapidly, or exhibiting a substantial decrease in mechanical properties when 
they absorb water, especially in moist environments [10]. Third, the present 
low level of production and high cost restrict them from a wide range of appli -
cations. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop biodegradable plastics 
made from renewable resources to reduce the quantity of plastic wastes [6], 
but with properties comparable to petroleum-based plastics. An attractive 
option is nanocomposite materials based on materials of biological origin that 
are biodegradable materials, called bionanocomposites. They include bionano -
composites based on polysaccharides such as cellulose and starch [11–21], and 
bionanocomposites based on proteins such as dairy protein, soybean protein, 
and gelatin [22–24]. The use of these materials serves a number of important 
functions, such as extending the food shelf life, enhancing food quality because 
they can serve not only as barriers to moisture, water vapor, gases, and solutes, 
but also serve as carriers of some active substances, such as antioxidants and 
antimicrobials [25–27].
In the family of renewable source-based polymeric materials, starch is an 
inexpensive and abundant natural resource [1]. Starch has been considered as 
an attractive biodegradable filler because of its low cost, low density, nonabra -
sive nature, and biodegradability [28]. It is the second most abundant biomass 
material in nature. It is found in plant roots, stalks, crop seeds, and staple crops 
such as rice, corn, wheat, tapioca, and potato. The starch industry extracts and 
refines starches by wet grinding, sieving, and drying. Starch is either used as 
extracted from the plant and is called “native starch” or it undergoes one or 
more chemical modifications to reach specific properties and is called “modi -
fied starch” [29].
10.2 MICROSTRUCTURES OF STARCH
Chemically, starch is a polymeric carbohydrate consisting of anhydroglucose 
units linked together primarily through ά-d-(1→4) glucosidic bonds. Starch is 
a heterogeneous material containing two microstructures: linear (amylose) 
and branched (amylopectin).
Amylose is essentially a linear structure of ά-1,4 linked glucose units, and 
amylopectin is a highly branched structure of short ά-1,4 chains linked by ά-1,6 
bonds. Depending on its source and the processing conditions employed 
during its extraction, the molecular weight of amylose is about 106, which is 
10 times higher than conventional synthetic polymers.MicROSTRUcTURES Of STARcH   205
Amylopectin, on the other hand, is a branched polymer and its molecular 
weight is much greater than amylose. The high molecular weight and branched 
structure of amylopectin reduce the mobility of the polymer chains, and inter -
fere with any tendency for them to become oriented closely enough to permit 
significant levels of hydrogen bonding. Between the linear amylose and short-
branched amylopectin, a long-branched structure has been detected, such as 
in tapioca starch. Physically, most native starches are semicrystalline, having a 
crystallinity of about 20–45% [2]. Amylose and the branching points of amy -
lopectin form amorphous regions. The short-branched chains in the amylopec -
tin are the main crystalline component in granular starch. The ratio of amylose/
amylopectin depends on the source and age of the starch, and it can also be 
controlled by the extraction process employed. Starch granules also contain 
small amounts of lipids and proteins. Figure 10.1 shows the microstructure of 
starch.
Figure 10.1  Starch multiscale structure: (a) starch granules from normal maize 
(30 μm), (b) amorphous and semicrystalline growth rings (120–500 nm), (c) amorphous 
and crystalline lamellae (9 nm), magnified details of the semicrystalline growth ring, (d) 
blocklets (20–50 nm) constituting a unit of the growth rings, (e) amylopectin double 
helices forming the crystalline lamellae of the blocklets, (f) nanocrystals: other repre -
sentation of the crystalline lamellae called starch nanocrystals when separated by acid 
hydrolysis, (g) amylopectin’s molecular structure, and (h) amylose’s molecular struc -
ture (0.1–1 nm). Reprinted with permission from Reference [29]. Copy right 2010 
American Chemical Society. See color insert.
206  STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTE: PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES
10.3 STARCH-BASED BIONANOCOMPOSITE
Starch-based biodegradable polymers have great commercial potential for 
bioplastic, but some of the properties such as brittleness, low heat distortion 
temperature, high gas permeability, and low melt viscosity for further process -
ing restrict their use in a wide range of applications. Therefore, modification 
of the biodegradable polymers through innovative technology is a challenge 
for material scientists [30]. Adding nano-reinforcement to pristine polymers 
for preparing nanocomposite has already proven to be an effective way to 
improve these properties concurrently [31]. Thus, green nanocomposites are 
being considered as the next-generation materials. A number of researchers 
have presented work in the field of starch-based bionanocomposites, which 
can be obtained by filling a thermoplastic starch (TPS) matrix with nanofillers 
such as layer silicates, carbon nanotubes, carbon black, cellulose, and starch 
nanocrystals. Montmorillonite (MMT) [32, 33] and kaolinite [34] are the usual 
layer silicates used in starch-based bionanocomposites. Cellulose nanocrystals 
or whiskers have been used to reinforce starchy material [31, 35, 36]. Starch 
can also be used as a filler to produce reinforced plastics [37, 38]. Usually, a 
small amount of starch (6–30%) is compounded with synthetic polymer, 
increasing the biodegradability of the product.
10.3.1 Starch Silicate Nanocomposites
One of the most promising nanocomposites is formed from organic polymer 
and inorganic clay minerals consisting of layered silicates. This type of polymer 
nanocomposites are a class of reinforced polymers containing small quantities 
(1–5 wt%) of nanometric-sized clay particles. Smectite-type clays, such as 
hectorite, synthetic mica, and MMTare employed as fillers to enhance the 
properties of the composites. The functional properties of the nanocomposites 
are improved markedly compared with those of the unfilled polymer or con -
ventional composites. These improvements include high moduli [39], increased 
tensile strength (TS) [40], and thermal stability [34], as well as decreased gas 
permeability, flammability, and water absorbance, and increased biodegrad -
ability. Generally, polymer/layered silicate composites are divided into three 
main types: tactoid, intercalated, and exfoliated nanocomposites. In a tactoid, 
the polymer is unable to intercalate between the silicate sheets and the proper -
ties of the composites stay in the same range as the traditional microcompos -
ites. Intercalated nanocomposites occur when a small amount of polymer 
moves into the gallery spacing between the silicate platelets. When the silicate 
layers are completely and uniformly dispersed in a continuous polymer matrix, 
an exfoliated or delaminated structure is formed [1]. The intercalated and 
exfoliated nanocomposites currently are of primary interest because their 
properties are significantly improved, even at low clay concentrations. Figure 
10.2 represents three main types of composites based on layered silicate 
materials.STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTE   207
10.3.2 Starch Cellulose Nanocomposites
Starch reinforced by cellulose is a typical example of natural polymer nano -
composites. These materials have the advantages of being renewable, biode -
gradable, abundantly available, and inexpensive, and as such they have attracted 
great attention in the last two decades. The performance improvements of the 
starch cellulose nanocomposites may be ascribed to the chemical similarities 
between starch and cellulose and the hydrogen bonding interactions existing 
in filler/matrix [41]. The reinforcing potential of wheat straw nanofibers 
obtained from agro-residues in a starch-based thermoplastic polymer was 
investigated by Alemdar and Sain, and it was found that the TS and modulus 
of the nanocomposite films increased linearly with the increase in nanofiber 
content. The TS of the nanocomposite film with 10% nanofibers loading (TPS-
10% nanofiber [NF]) showed a 73% increase compared with the pure TPS. 
Also significant increase in the modulus with respect to the unfilled TPS was 
obtained as a function of the nanofiber content [42]. Enhanced properties were 
obtained by using various natural cellulosic fibers, such as sisal, cotton, bamboo, 
jute, straw, kenaf, and wood [43]. Mathew and Dufresne [44] prepared plasti -
cized starch (PS)/tunicin whiskers nanocomposites, in which the cellulose 
whiskers consisted of slender parallelepiped rods with a high aspect ratio. 
Microfibrillated cellulose(MFC) nanofiber is combined with an almost viscous 
polysaccharide matrix in the form of a 50/50 amylopectin–glycerol blend [45]. 
Waxy maize starch nanocrystals obtained by hydrolysis of native granules are Figure 10.2  Illustration of different types of composite that can arise from the interac -
tion between layered silicates and polymers. Reprinted with permission from Refer -
ence [29]. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.
208  STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTE: PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES
also used as the reinforcing filler in a thermoplastic waxy maize starch matrix 
plasticized with glycerol [37].
10.3.3 Starch Synthetic Polymer-Based Nanocomposite
Starch is usually added as filler in biodegradable polymers such as aliphatic 
polyesters, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), and other biopolymers. The commonly 
used polyesters are poly( β-hydroxyalkanoates) (PHA), obtained by microbial 
synthesis, and polylactide (PLA) or poly( ε-caprolactone) (PCL), derived from 
chemical polymerization. The goal of blending completely degradable polyes -
ter with low cost starch is to improve its cost competitiveness while maintain -
ing other properties at an acceptable level [46].
The main challenge in fabrication of these polymer nanocomposites for 
structural applications is obtaining a uniform dispersion of nanoparticles in 
the polymer matrix. Good dispersion for nanoparticles in polymer composite 
materials is extremely difficult to achieve because nanoparticles tend to aggre -
gate during fabrication. The degree to which nanoparticles can be homoge -
neously dispersed in the polymer matrix significantly influences the thermal, 
mechanical, and optoelectronic properties of the material. Researchers have 
used several techniques for dispersing nanoparticles including: (1) mechanical 
agitation, such as ball milling or magnetic stirring, (2) ultrasonic vibration, (3) 
shear mixing, (4) noncontact mixing, and (5) using the dispersing agent. The 
curing process is another important factor in improving the mechanical, 
thermal, electrical, and optical properties. In polymer composite fabrication, 
the curing (polymerization) step is a crucial and time-consuming process. The 
epoxy-based thermoset polymers are generally cured using conventional 
heating. Several alternate curing methods have been tested for epoxy resin 
processing and they include ultraviolet (UV) rays, gamma rays, electron beam, 
and microwave heating [47].
10.4 CONVENTIONAL NANOCOMPOSITES MANUFACTURING 
TECHNIQUES
Two principal factors cause the properties of nanomaterials to differ signifi -
cantly from other materials: increased relative surface area and quantum 
effects [48]. Some nanocomposites may show properties predominated by the 
interfacial interactions and others may exhibit quantum effects associated with 
nanodimensional structures [49]. The choice of fabrication method is very 
important for manufacturing nano-phased structural polymer composite 
materials. Some of the widely used methods for manufacturing conventional 
composite parts are wet lay-up, pultrusion, resin transfer molding (RTM), 
vacuum-assisted resin transfer molding (VARTM), autoclave processing, resin 
film infusion (RFI), prepreg method, filament winding, and fiber placement 
technology, among other methods [50]. Wet lay-up is a simple method com -PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES Of STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTES   209
pared with other composite manufacturing methods. It allows the resin to be 
applied only in the mold, but the mechanical properties of the product are 
poor due to voids and the final product is nonuniform. Pultrusion is a low-cost 
continuous process with a high production rate. But near the die assembly, the 
prepreg or materials accumulate and can create a jam. But the fibers in pul -
truded material are generally well aligned [51]; it helps to reduce fiber mis -
alignment in the composite through optimization of manufacturing process 
variables, such as pull-speed, preformer temperature, and nanoparticle align -
ment and/or dispersion. The RTM is a closed mold operation. In this process, 
resin flow and fiber wet-out are critical issues; resin flows in the plane as well 
as in the transverse directions of the preform. Fiber wet-out depends on the 
fiber architecture and permeability of the perform. The VARTM is an adapta -
tion of the RTM which is a widely used single-sided tooling process in which 
open molds can be used to make the parts using vacuum [50]. This process has 
certain advantages: (1) it requires a relatively low cost for high volume produc -
tion; (2) very large and complex parts are possible with improved surface 
finish, higher fiber volume fraction than hand lay-up; and (3) as it is a closed 
system, it reduces environmental concerns more than hand lay-up processes.
Autoclave processing is a promising technique to process and manufacture 
different complex shapes of high quality composite structures [50]. It has the 
ability to process both thermoset and thermoplastic composites with uniform 
thickness and minimum porosity. Resin film infusion (RFI) is similar to RTM 
where a thin film or sheet of solid resin is laid into the mold and preform is 
laid on top of the resin film under heat and pressure. Resin-impregnated uni -
directional or woven fabric (partially cured) is used in the prepreg method 
with vacuum bagging and autoclave processing. In filament winding, resin-
impregnated fibers are wrapped over a mandrel at the same or different 
winding angles to form a part. Complicated cylindrical parts, pressure vessels, 
fuel and water tanks for storage and transportation, and pipes can be manu -
factured by this method. The viscosity-related problems of the resin systems 
can be eliminated in this technique [52].
10.5 PROCESSING TECHNIQUES OF STARCH-BASED 
BIONANOCOMPOSITES
The preparative methods are divided into three main groups according to the 
starting materials and processing techniques: (1) solution casting method, (2) 
melt intercalation method, and (3) in situ  polymerization [53, 54].
10.5.1 Solution Casting Method
In the solution casting method, polymer solution is heated with layered nano -
fillers to form nanocomposites. This technique is mostly used in water-soluble 
polymers to produce intercalated nanocomposites. The main factors that help 210  STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTE: PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES
in the formation of nanocomposites are temperature and swelling of nanofill -
ers. Temperature increases the movement of polymer chains, which results in 
the intercalated nanostructures [55].
10.5.1.1  Preparation  of Glycerol  Plasticized  Pea  Starch/Nano-ZnO 
Composites  Chang et al. [56] prepared glycerol plasticized pea starch 
(GPS) zinc oxide bionanocomposite using the solution cast method. Nano-
ZnO particles were dispersed in a solution of distilled water (100 mL) and 
glycerol (1.5 g) and ultrasonicated for 1 hour before addition of 5 g pea starch. 
Nano-ZnO was produced by the following method. 1.5 g of soluble starch was 
added to 250 mL distilled water. The mixture was heated at 90°C for approxi -
mately 10 minutes with constant stirring for the complete dissolution of soluble 
starch. The solution was then cooled to room temperature. Zinc nitrate hexa -
hydrate, 7.44 g (0.025 mol), was added to the solution and then 250 mL of 
sodium hydroxide solution (0.2 mol/L) was added dropwise with constant stir -
ring. The transparent solution became milky white with no precipitation. The 
reaction continued for 2 hours after addition of NaOH. The solution was then 
centrifuged at 8000 rpm for 20 minutes, and the settled nano-ZnO was washed 
three times using distilled water to remove the salt and the excess soluble 
starch. The nano-ZnO was dried at 80°C for 3 hours to complete conversion 
of the remaining ZnOH to ZnO. The nano-ZnO filler loading level (0 wt%, 
0.5 wt%, 1 wt%, 2 wt%, 3 wt%, or 4 wt%) was based on the amount of pea 
starch. The mixture was heated at 90°C for 0.5 hour with constant stirring in 
order to plasticize the pea starch. To obtain the GPS/nano-ZnO composite 
films, the mixture was cast into a dish and placed in an air-circulating oven at 
50°C until dry (about 6–8 hours). Fourier transform infrared  (FT-IR) spec -
troscopy, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), and transmission electron 
microscopy (TEM) showed that in GPS/nano-ZnO nanocomposites, loading 
a low level of nano-ZnO particles improved the pasting viscosity, storage 
modulus, and glass transition temperature (Tg). When the nano-ZnO content 
varied from 0 wt% to 4 wt%, the tensile yield strength and Young’s modulus 
increased from 3.94 to 10.80 MPa and from 49.80 to 137 MPa, respectively.The 
water vapor permeability (WVP) decreased from 4.76 × 10−10 to 2.18 × 10−10/
gm/s/Pa. The improvement in these properties may be attributed to the inter -
action between the nano-ZnO filler and GPS matrix.
10.5.1.2  Preparation  of Starch/Poly(Vinyl  Alcohol)/Sodium  Montmoril -
lonite  Nanocomposite  Samer S. Ali et al. [32] prepared starch/poly(vinyl 
alcohol)/sodium MMTnanocomposite films by the film casting method. A  
solution was prepared by mixing four parts (by weight) starch/poly(vinyl  
alcohol) (PVOH)/Na +MMT/glycerol with 96 parts of water and then heating 
this mixture at 95°C for 30 minutes with constant stirring. Glycerol was used 
as a plasticizer at a concentration of 30% (polymer basis) in all experiments. 
The heated solution was cooled to 55°C, and equal amounts (60 g) were poured 
in 150 mm–15 mm petri dishes. The water was allowed to evaporate by drying PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES Of STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTES   211
for 24–36 hours at room temperature, and the resulting films were peeled off 
and stored in airtight bags at room temperature for further tests. TS and elon -
gation at break (E%) of the films ranged from 11.60 to 22.35 MPa and 28.93–
211.40%, respectively, while WVP ranged from 0.718 to 1.4303 mm/kPa h m2. In 
general, an increase in Na +MMT content (0–20%) enhanced TS and decreased 
E% and WVP . Use of higher molecular weight PVOH increased both TS and 
E% and also decreased WVP . Mechanical properties were negatively affected, 
but water vapor barrier properties improved with increasing starch content 
(0–80%). X-ray diffraction (XRD) and TEM showed that an increase in the 
Na+MMT level from 5% to 20% led to a steady decrease in Tg. This was found 
because interactions between starch and PVOH were strongest, followed by 
polymer/clay interactions. The schematic presentation of preferred interactions 
between different components is shown in Figure 10.3.
10.5.1.3  Preparation  of Starch/Flax  Cellulose  Nanocomposites 
X. Cao et al. [41] prepared starch-based nanocomposites reinforced with flax 
cellulose nanocrystals(FCN) by casting solution process. Starch, glycerol, cel -
lulose nanocrystallites suspension, and distilled water were mixed together in 
order to obtain nanocomposite films with a homogeneous dispersion. The 
glycerol content was fixed at 36 wt% based on the dry starch matrix. Then this 
mixture was charged into a bottom flask equipped with a stirrer and heated 
at 100°C for 30 minutes for the starch to be gelatinized. After cooling down 
to about 70°C, the resulting paste was degassed under vacuum to remove the 
remaining air and cast in a square polystyrene petri dish, followed by drying Figure 10.3  Schematic presentation of preferred interactions between different com -
ponents. Reprinted with permission from Reference [32]. Copyright 2010 American 
Chemical Society.
212  STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTE: PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES
in a vent oven at 50°C. The effects of FCNs loading on the morphology, 
thermal behavior, mechanical properties, and water sensitivity of the films 
were investigated by means of wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WAXRD), dif -
ferential scanning calorimetry (DSC), tensile testing, and water absorption 
testing. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) photographs of the failure sur -
faces clearly demonstrated a homogeneous dispersion of FCNs within the PS 
matrix and strong interfacial adherence between matrix and fillers, which led 
to an increase of Tg ascribed to the starch molecular chains in the starch-rich 
phase. In particular, these nanocomposite films exhibited a significant increase 
in TS and Young’s modulus from 3.9 to 11.9 MPa and from 31.9 to 498.2 MPa, 
respectively, with increasing FCNs content from 0 wt% to 30 wt%. No large 
aggregates were formed and a homogeneous distribution of the FCNs in the 
PS matrix were observed in all nanocomposites films, implying good adhesion 
between the fillers and the matrix. This is attributed to the good compatibility 
resulting from the chemical similarities between starch and cellulose and the 
hydrogen bonding interactions existing in the interface between fillers and 
matrix. Such an even and uniform distribution of the fillers in the matrix could 
play an important role in improving the mechanical performance of the result -
ing nanocomposite film.The atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of a dilute 
suspension of FCNs shows that the suspension contains flax cellulose frag -
ments consisting of both individual and aggregated nanocrystals. These frag -
ments display slender rods and have a broad distribution in size, which have 
lengths (L) ranging from 100 to 500 nm and diameters (D) ranging from 10 to 
30 nm.
10.5.1.4  Preparation  of Green  Composites  Reinforced  with  Hemp 
Nanocrystals  in Plasticized  Starch  Cao et al. [12] prepared nanocompos -
ite films from a mixed suspension of hemp cellulose nanocrystals (HCNs) and 
TPS, or PS, by the casting and evaporating method. Starch, glycerol, CN sus -
pension, and distilled water were mixed together to obtain a nanocomposite 
solution with a homogeneous dispersion. The glycerol content was fixed at 36 
wt% on the basis of the dry starch matrix. Then, this mixture was charged into 
a bottom flask equipped with a stirrer and heated at 100°C for 30 minutes for 
the starch to be gelatinized. After it was cooled to about 708°C, the resulting 
paste was degassed in vacuo  to remove the remaining air and cast in a poly -
styrene square petri dish; this was followed by drying in a vent oven at 50°C. 
By changing the content of HCNs over the range 5 wt%, 10 wt%, 15 wt%, 20 
wt%, 25 wt%, and 30 wt%, they prepared a series of PS/HCN nanocomposites 
films with a thickness of about 0.3 mm and coded them as PS/HCN-5, PS/
HCN-10, PS/HCN-15, PS/HCN-20, PS/HCN-25, and PS/HCN 30, respectively, 
in which the HCN content was expressed on a water-free PS matrix. As a 
control measure, a pure PS film without the addition of HCNs was obtained 
with the same fabrication process. Before the various characterizations, the 
resulting films were kept in a conditioning desiccator at 43% relative humidity 
(RH) for 1 week at room temperature to ensure the equilibration of the water PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES Of STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTES   213
content in the films. The field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-
SEM) image of a dilute suspension of the HCNs is shown in Figure 10.4. The 
HCNs were very clearly identified from the background, although they were 
not dispersed individually because of the strong interactions among the nano -
crystals themselves. An examination of the fractured surfaces after the tensile 
testing of the PS/HCN nanocomposites was also carried out with FE-SEM. A 
homogeneous distribution of the HCNs in the PS matrix was observed in all 
of the nanocomposites, which implied that the strong interactions among 
HCNs themselves were partly destroyed and a new strong adhesion between 
fillers and matrix was formed. Improved compatibility between HCNs and 
starch was ascribed to the chemical similarities in starch and cellulose, 
nanometer-scale size effect from the HCNs, and hydrogen bonding interac -
tions between the fillers and matrix. This homogenous dispersion resulted in 
an increase in the Tg, the TS, and Young’s modulus, from 3.9 to 11.5 MPa and 
from 31.9 to 823.9 MPa, respectively, and decrease in the water sensitivity of 
the final composite material.
10.5.1.5  Preparation  of Thermoplastic  Starch  Nanocomposites  Rein -
forced  with  Cellulose  Nanofibers  Extracted  from  Wheat  Straw  TPS 
nanocomposites reinforced with cellulose nanofibers (CNFs) extracted from 
wheat straw was prepared by Kaushik et al. [30] using the solution cast method. 
CNFs were dispersed in distilled water and sonicated for almost 3 hours. Maize 
starch was added with 30% glycerol and shear mixed for 10 minutes by using 
a Fluko FA25 homogenizer. Dispersed CNFs were added to the starch and Figure 10.4  FE-SEM image of the HCNs dried on gold-coated wafers. Reprinted with 
permission from Reference [12]. Copyright Wiley Publications.
214  STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTE: PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES
glycerol mixer, and further shear mixed for 20 minutes. The starch + glyc-
erol + CNFs mixture was continuously stirred using a mechanical stirrer and 
heated at 75 ± 3°C. After the solution became viscous, it was poured onto 
levelled Borosil glass petri dishes and kept at around 37°C for 2 days until it 
was completely dry. Solution cast films of TPS cellulose nanocomposites were 
made with 5%, 10%, and 15% nanofibers (as per dry weight of nanocompos -
ites). The nanocomposites films were analyzed in terms of SEM, WAXRD, 
TGA, DSC, and mechanical and barrier properties. WAXRD profile for TPS/
cellulose nanocomposites showed that the crystalline nature of native starch 
disappeared during processing. But the increase in the cellulose nanofibril 
content resulted in the preservation of the crystallinity of starch nanocrystals 
during processing method. The results of TGA and DSC experiments indi -
cated an interaction between the fiber and the plasticizer, causing the reduc -
tion in onset of degradation temperatures and a reduction in water sorption 
compared with the pure matrix. Mechanical properties including dynamic 
mechanical analysis (DMA) and tensile modulus showed marked improve -
ment with addition of CNF. Figure 10.5 shows SEM pictures of starch cellulose 
nanocomposites with 10% cellulose nanofibrils.
10.5.2 Melt Intercalation Technique
Recently, the melt intercalation technique has become the standard for the 
preparation of polymer layered silicate (PLS)–nanocomposites [1]. This 
process involves annealing a mixture of the polymer and layered nanofiller 
Figure 10.5  SEM images of starch cellulose nanofibril nanocomposites with 10% cel -
lulose nanofibrils composite. Reprinted with permission from Reference [30]. Copy -
right Elsevier.
PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES Of STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTES   215
above the softening point of the polymer, statically or under shear. While 
annealing, the polymer chains diffuse from the bulk polymer melt into the 
galleries between the nanofiller layers. The filler platelets are sheared during 
compounding and kneading in a compounder and thus are well mixed with 
the polymer phase.A range of nanocomposites with structures from interca -
lated to exfoliate can be obtained, depending on the degree of penetration of 
the polymer chains into the nanofiller galleries [57].
Direct melt intercalation has many advantages over solution intercalation. 
During polymer intercalation from solution, a relatively large number of 
solvent molecules have to be desorbed from the host to accommodate the 
incoming polymer chains. The desorbed solvent molecules gain one transla -
tional degree of freedom, and the resulting entropic gain compensates for the 
decrease in conformational entropy of the confined polymer chains. Also, 
direct melt intercalation is highly specific for the polymer, leading to new 
hybrids that were previously inaccessible. In addition, the absence of a solvent 
makes direct melt intercalation an environmentally sound and an economi -
cally favorable method for industries from a waste perspective [6]. Extrusion 
has been commonly used in the preparation of polymer nanocomposite 
through melt intercalation processes [58].
10.5.2.1  Preparation  of Thermoplastic  Starch/Clay  Hybrids  Biode -
gradable TPS/clay hybrids were prepared by Park et al. [59] by melt intercala -
tion. Three organically modified MMT with different ammonium cations and 
one unmodified Na + MMT (Cloisite Na +; Southern Clay Products, Austin, TX) 
were used. TPS and clays were dried under vacuum at 80°C for at least 24 hours 
before use. TPS was mixed with clays in a Haake Rheocoder 600 roller mixer 
for 20 minutes. The contents of clays were fixed at 5 wt%. The rotor speed was 
50 rpm and the temperature was set at 110°C. The mixed product was injection 
molded using a Mini-MAX molder to obtain dog bone-shaped specimens for 
characterization and property measurements. The blends after preparation 
were placed in tightly sealed polyethylene bags to prevent moisture absorption. 
From the XRD patterns and TEM observations, it is clearly established that the 
nanostructure of polymer/clay hybrids depends on the compatibility and inter -
action among the polymer, the silicate layers, and the nature of surfactant used 
for the modification of silicate layers. Due to the strong polar interactions 
between a small amount of the polar hydroxyl group of water in the TPS chain 
and the silicate layer of the pristine MMT, the polymer chains were intercalated 
into the silicate layers of pristine MMT and formed an intercalated TPS/MMT 
nanocomposite. It was found that Cloisite Na + had the best dispersion in the 
TPS matrix. The TPS/Cloisite Na + hybrid showed an intercalation of TPS in the 
silicate layer due to the matching of the surface polarity and interactions of the 
Cloisite Na + and the TPS, which gives higher TS and better barrier properties 
to water vapor than the other TPS/organoclay hybrids as well as the pristine 
TPS. It was found that the dynamic mechanical properties of the TPS/clay 
hybrids were also affected by the polar interactions.216  STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTE: PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES
10.5.2.2  Preparation  of Thermoplastic  Starch–Clay  Nanocompos -
ites  Chen et al. [16] prepared nanocomposites of TPS–clay with four types 
of clay by melt processing . The clay chosen were natural sodium MMT, natural 
hectorite, hectorite modified with 2 methyl, 2 hydrogenated tallow quaternary 
ammonium chloride, and kaolinite. TPS was prepared by melt processing of 
starch and glycerol at a ratio of 10 : 3 by mass. To prepare the TPS–clay com -
posites, pre-weighed amounts of clay were gradually added to the polymer 
melt on the twin roll mill. To ensure lateral mixing, the mixture was stripped 
from the rolls and re-fed at least five times, which took approximately 15 
minutes. It was found that in all composites the presence of clay increased 
both Young’s and shear moduli, and the MMTand unmodified hectorite pro -
vided a significantly larger increase than kaolinite, which formed conventional 
composites with TPS. TEM showed that the untreated hectorite nanocompos -
ites were partially exfoliated while the TPS-treated hectorite composites were 
conventional. Figure 10.6 shows TEM micrographs of (a) treated hectorite and 
(b) TPS-treated hectorite composites containing 3 wt% clay platelets.
10.5.2.3  Preparation  of Thermoplastic  Starch/Zein  Blends  Corradini 
et al. [60] prepared blends of starch and zein plasticized with glycerol by 
melting processing in an intensive batch mixer connected to a torque rheom -
eter at 160°C. TPS blends with zein were prepared with starch/zein w.w−1 ratios 
Figure 10.6  (a) TEM micrographs of treated hectorite. (b) TEM micrographs of TPS-
treated hectorite composites containing 3 wt% clay platelets. Reprinted with permis -
sion from Reference [16]. Copyright Elsevier.
(a) (b)PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES Of STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTES   217
of 100/0, 80/20, 50/50, 20/80, and 0/100. The content of glycerol was 22% by 
weight of the total weight of polymers (starch and zein), on a dry basis. Starch, 
zein, and glycerol were weighed separately, pre-mixed in a beaker and the 
resulting mixtures were then processed at 160°C in a Haake Rheomix 600 
batch mixer connected to a torque rheometer, with the rotors operating at 
50 rpm. The mixing time used for all preparations was 6 minutes, since higher 
mixing times lead to starch degradation. The materials thus obtained were 
pressed for 5 minutes at 160°C with a force of 0.2 MPa, to produce 
150 × 120 × 2.5 mm molded sheets. These sheets were conditioned for 4 weeks 
at 22 ± 3°C at a relative humidity (RH) of 52 ± 2%, prior to characterization. 
Glycerol losses were negligible, since the processing temperature was kept 
under the glycerol boiling point and no exudation was observed during pro -
cessing. The sheet was characterized by SEM, DSC, WAXRD, and water 
absorption experiments. The blends were immiscible, showing two distinct 
phases of starch and zein. The SEM of the blends also shows interfacial voids, 
indicating poor adhesion between starch and zein phases. The water uptake at 
equilibrium and its diffusion coefficient were determined. The water uptake 
at equilibrium decreased with increasing zein content. The diffusion coefficient 
fell sharply on addition of 20% zein and remained constant as zein content 
was increased. No appreciable effect of zein on starch crystallization was 
observed by X ray diffraction. The use of zein in TPS compositions causes a 
decrease in the water sensitivity of these materials and lowers its melt viscosity 
during processing making zein a suitable and very promising component in 
TPS compositions.
10.5.2.4  Preparation  of Starch  Based  Biodegradable  Poly(Butylene 
Adipate-Co-Terephthalate)  Nanocomposites  Mohanty and Nayak [61] 
prepared Starch based biodegradable poly(butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) 
(PBAT) and organically modified nanoclays using melt intercalation technique. 
Two different organically modified nanoclays Cloisite C20 A and Cloisite C30B 
at various wt% have been used for fabrication of nanocomposites. Starch was 
gelatinized to prepare TPS for increasing the compatibility with the PBAT 
matrix. Subsequently, films of PBAT/TPS blends at various TPS content (10 
wt%, 20 wt%,30 wt%,40 wt%) and PBAT/TPS organoclay biodegradable blend 
nanocomposites at different wt% of nanoclays were prepared using the solvent 
casting method. The interfacial region between the biodegradable polymer 
matrix and organoclay were also modified with grafting of maleic anhydride 
with PBAT chains during melt blending. This was done through a two-stage 
reactive extrusion process using free radical initiator inorder to provide the 
reactive functional group to chemically react with the hydroxyl group of starch 
as well as nanoclays. Mechanical test revealed an increase in tensile modulus 
and elongation at break with the incorporation of 30wt% TPS and C30B nano -
clay to the tune of 44.45% and 776.9% as compared with the PBAT matrix. The 
morphology of PBAT/TPS 30%/C30B3% biodegradable blend nanocompos -
ites studied using WAXRD and SEM indicated that intercalation occurred 218  STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTE: PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES
along with an improved dispersion of TPS within PBAT with the inclusion of 
C30B. Figure 10.7 shows the SEM micrograph of PBAT/TPS nanocomposite.
10.5.2.5  Preparation  of Thermoplastic  Corn  Starch  Reinforced  with 
Cotton  Cellulose  Nanofibers  Teixeira et al. [62] prepared thermoplastic 
corn starch reinforced with cotton cellulose nanofibers by conventional extru -
sion process. For the preparation of nanocomposites, the dry cotton cellulose 
nanofibers (CCN) was first redispersed in water using a sonificator for 5 
minutes, and it was composed of finely dispersed nanofibers in distinct con -
centrations 0.5 wt%, 1.5 wt%, 2.5 wt%, 3.5 wt%, and 5 wt% (dry starch basis). 
The resulting suspension was added to the system starch, glycerol, stearic acid, 
and citric acid. The resulting mixture was manually homogenized, and the 
nanocomposites were processed in a twin-screw extruder through the use of 
a temperature profile between 140°C and 160°C. The films were obtained by 
hot pressing process at 160°C, under a force of 10 metric tons and for 5 minutes 
after a prefusion of 5 minutes. Scanning transmission electron microscopy 
(STEM) observations showed some degree of agglomeration, especially for 
nanocomposites with CCN content of 2.5 wt% and above. XRD patterns 
recorded a small decrease of crystallinity. The crystallinity reduction was 
attributed to the decrease in the rearrangement resistance of the starch chains 
due to the transcrystallization of amylopectin in the nanofiber surface. This is 
a consequence of the coating of cellulose nanofibers by glycerol plasticizer. Figure 10.7  SEM micrograph of PBAT/TPS nanocomposite. Reprinted with permis -
sion from Reference [61]. Copyright Taylor & Francis.
PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES Of STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTES   219
This phenomenon hinders the stress transfer in the filler–matrix interface, 
compromising the reinforcement effect of the nanocellulose filler. It was also 
found that in comparison with neat TPS, both elastic modulus and TSwere 
improved to up to 48.5% and 150%, respectively, for the composition with 5 
wt% CCN, indicating a synergistic effect of the nanofibers on the TPS matrix. 
Figure 10.8 shows FE-SEM of thermoplastic corn starch and cotton cellulose 
nanofiber.
10.5.3 In Situ Intercalative Polymerization
In this method, the nanofiller is swollen within the liquid monomer or a 
monomer solution so the polymer formation can occur between the interca -
lated sheets. Polymerization can be initiated either by heat or radiation, by the 
diffusion of a suitable initiator, or by an organic initiator or catalyst fixed 
through cation exchange inside the interlayer before the swelling step [1]. At 
first this approach was successfully applied in manufacturing of nylon–MMT 
nanocomposite, and later it was extended to other thermoplastics [63]. 
Messermith and Giannelis [64] have modified MMT by bis(2-hydroxyethyl) 
methyl hydrogenated tallow alkyl ammonium cation, and they found the modi -
fied clay dispersed readily in diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A (DGEBA) by 
using this process. One obvious advantage of in situ  polymerization is the 
tethering effect, which enables the nanoclay’s surface organic chemical, such 
as 12-aminododecanoic acid (ADA), to link with nylon-6 polymer chains 
during polymerization. Polyethylene/layered silicate nanocomposites have 
also been prepared by in situ  intercalative polymerization of ethylene using Figure 10.8  Micrograph of FE-SEM for thermoplastic corn starch and cotton cellu -
lose nanofiber composite. Reprinted with permission from Reference [62]. Copyright 
John Wiley and Sons.
220  STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTE: PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES
the so-called polymerization filling technique [65]. In this case the polymer -
izing catalyst is fixed on the clay surface and the polymerization is carried out 
using the modified clay as the catalyst. Pristine MMT and hectorite were first 
treated with trimethyl aluminum-depleted methyl aluminoxane, before being 
contacted by a Ti-based constrained geometry catalyst. The nanocomposite 
was formed by addition and polymerization of ethylene. In the absence of a 
chain transfer agent, ultra-high molecular weight (HME) polyethylene was 
produced. The tensile properties of the nanocomposite was poor and essen -
tially independent of the nature and content of the silicate. Upon hydrogen 
addition, the molecular weight of polyethylene was decreased with corre -
sponding increase in mechanical properties. The formation of exfoliated nano -
composite was confirmed XRD and TEM.
10.5.3.1  Preparation  of Starch/Nanosilicate  Layer/Polycaprolactone 
Composites  Namazi and Mosadegh [66] prepared starch-g-polycaprolac -
tone (PCL) nanocomposites with graft polymerization through in situ  ring 
opening polymerization of ε-caprolactone in the presence of starch, Sn(Oct) 2 
(Tin(II) 2-ethyl hexanoate) as an initiator/catalyst and silicate layers.The sili -
cates used were MMT and kaolin. In fact, the related composites were pre -
pared in solution method, bulk polymerization, and in situ  polymerization 
methods with introducing the mineral clay. Starch–MMT/PCL and starch–
kaolin/PCL nanocomposites were prepared by bulk polymerization technique 
(Fig. 10.9). The starch–MMT composite (5 wt%) (starch–kaolin composite) 
was powdered and dried. Three grams of composite was added to a flask con -
taining caprolactone monomer (3 g), then 0.4 wt% Sn(Oct) 2 (initiator) was 
added to the flask with continuous stirring. Polymerization was performed at 
100°C for 20 hours under nitrogen atmosphere. Polymerization was stopped 
by fast cooling at room temperature.
Starch-g-PCL nanocomposite was prepared through in situ  polymerization 
method as follows.
The 5 wt% organoclay Cloisite 15A (C15A) was swelled and dispersed in 
3 g ε-caprolactone for 18 hours under nitrogen atmosphere, then 3 g starch was 
Figure 10.9  Preparation route of starch/MMT/PCL nanocomposite. Reprinted with 
permission from Reference [66]. Copyright Springer.
Swelling
H2O
Na+-MMT
Polycaprolactone
StarchStarch
100  °CCaprolactone
monomer
Sn(oct) 2cONcLUSiON   221
added and left for 2.5 hours with continuous stirring, then 0.4 wt% Sn(Oct) 2 
was introduced via a conditioned syringe at 100°C temperature and left for 20 
hours. Polymerization was stopped by fast cooling at room temperature. Figure 
10.10 shows the method of preparation for starch/C15A/PCL nanocomposite. 
The effect of kind of clay on d-spacing of silicate layers was investigated and 
the obtained nanocomposites were analyzed using XRD. The obtained com -
pounds were characterized by FT-IR. The XRD results showed that the bio -
polymer starch with hydrophilic property is compatible with MMT. The basal 
peak in MMT (2 θ = 7.13, d-spacing = 12.38 Å) broadened and shifted to a low 
angle in starch/MMT samples, which is an indication of intercalation/exfoliation 
state. SEM images showed the change in morphology of granules of starch in 
composite samples. Granules were destroyed due to gelatinization affected by 
water, temperature, and polymerization reaction on the surface of starch. From 
DSC thermograms of the nanocomposite, it was possible to see that the melting 
(Tm) of crystalline increased, except the starch/MMT sample. Decrease in Tm 
with addition of MMT, around 125°C, was attributed to the reduced crystalline 
size and presence of crystal imperfections due to compatibility of the MMT 
with starch, which suppressed the crystallization where the silicate platelet 
prevented reorganization of the amylase chains. Furthermore, the presence of 
grafted and blended PCL in starch/MMT/PCL, starch/kaolin/PCL, and starch/
C15A/PCL samples caused the shifting of the endothermic peak to higher 
temperatures.
10.6 CONCLUSION
Various literature surveys show that nanocomposites with superior properties 
have been successfully made from starch matrix blends in the presence of 
nanoparticles through different processing techniques. Nanoparticles could be 
finely dispersed into polymer matrix materials if good processing conditions 
are employed and the addition of nanoparticles at a lower level (less than 5% Figure 10.10  Preparation route of starch/C15A/PCL nanocomposite. Reprinted with 
permission from Reference [66]. Copyright Springer.
222  STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTE: PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES
wt) could significantly improve the mechanical, physical, and thermal proper -
ties of nanocomposites, such as TS, Young’s modulus, elongation, and water 
resistance. Starch-based nanocomposites are gaining interest due to their char -
acteristics, biodegradability in soil and water, and low cost. There are many 
opportunities for starch-based nanocomposite and therefore extensive 
research is being performed all over the world with regard to the preparation 
and determining applications for starch-based nanocomposites.
REFERENCES
 [1] Zhao, R., Torley, P ., and Halley, P . (2008) Emerging biodegradable materials: 
Starch- and protein-based bio-nanocomposites. Journal of Materials Science , 43, 
3058–3071.
 [2] Ahmed, J., Tiwari, B.K., Imam, S.H., and Rao, M.A., eds. (2012) Starch-Based 
Polymeric Materials and Nanocomposites: Chemistry, Processing, and Applica -
tions. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
 [3] Huang, X., Netravali, A. (2009) Biodegradable green composites made using 
bamboo micro/nano-fibrils and chemically modified soy protein resin. Composites 
Science and Technology , 69, 1009–1015.
 [4] Reddy, N., Yang, Y. (2011) Completely biodegradable soyprotein–jute biocompos -
ites developed using water without any chemicals as plasticizer. Industrial Crops 
and Products. , 33, 35–41.
 [5] Savadekar, N.R., Mhaske, S.T. (2012) Synthesis of nano cellulose fibers and effect 
on thermoplastics starch based films. Carbohydrate Polymers , 89, 146–151.
 [6] Shen, L., Worrell, E., and Patel, M. (2010) Present and future development in 
plastics from biomass. Biofuels, Bioproducts and Biorefining , 4, 25–40.
 [7] Mallapragada, S.K., Narasimhan, B. (2006) Handbook of Biodegradable Polymeric 
Materials and Applications , Vol. 1–6. New York: American Chemical Society.
 [8] Ray, S.S., Bousmina, M. (2005) Biodegradable polymers and their layered silicate 
nanocomposites: In greening the 21st century materials world. Progress in Materi -
als Science , 50, 962.
 [9] Visakh, P .M., Mathew, A.P ., Oksman, K., and Thomas, S. (2012) Starch based bion -
anocomposites. Processing and properties. In: Polysaccharide Building Blocks: A 
Sustainable Approach to the Development of Renewable Biomaterials , 1st ed, eds. 
Y. Habibi, L.A. Lucia. NewJersy: Wiley
[10] Debeaufort, F., Quezada-Gallo, J.A. (2010) Edible films and coatings: Tomorrow’s 
packagings: A review. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition , 38, 
299–313.
[11] Siró, I., Plackett, D. (2010) Microfibrillated cellulose and new nanocomposite 
materials: A review. Cellulose (London, England) , 17, 459–494.
[12] Cao, X., Chen, Y., Chang, P .R., Stumborg, M., and Huneault, M.A. (2008) Green 
composites reinforced with hemp nanocrystals in plasticized starch. Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science , 109, 3804–3810.
[13] Woehl, M.A., Canestraro, C.D., Mikowski, A., Sierakowski, M.R., Ramos, L.P ., and 
Wypych, F. (2010) Bionanocomposites of thermoplastic starch reinforced with REfERENcES   223
bacterial cellulose nanofibres: Effect of enzymatic treatment on mechanical prop -
erties. Carbohydrate Polymers , 80, 866–873.
[14] Thomas, S., Paul, S.A., Pothan, L.A., and Deepa, B. (2011) Natural fibres. structure, 
properties and applications. In: Cellulose Fibers: Bio- and Nano-Polymer Compos -
ites, eds. S. Kalia, B.S. Keith, and I. Kaur. New York: Springer, pp. 3–37.
[15] Spence, K., Habibi, Y., and Dufresne, A. (2011) Nanocellulose-based composites. 
In: Cellulose Fibers: Bio- and Nano-Polymer Composites , eds. S. Kalia, B.S. Keith, 
and I. Kaur. New York: Springer, pp. 180–187.
[16] Chen, B., Evans, J.R.G. (2005) Thermoplastic starch–clay nanocomposites and 
their characteristics. Carbohydrate Polymers , 61, 455–463.
[17] Goffin, A.L., Raquez, J.M., Duquesne, E., Siqueira, G., Habibi, Y., Dufresne, A., 
and Dubois, P .H. (2011) Poly( ε-caprolactone) based nanocomposites reinforced 
by surface-grafted cellulose nanowhiskers via extrusion processing: Morphology, 
rheology, and thermo-mechanical properties. Polymers , 52, 1532–1538.
[18] Deepa, B., Abraham, E., Cherian, B.M., and Pothan, L.A. (2011) Structure, mor -
phology and thermal characteristics of banana nano fibers obtained by steam 
explosion. Bioresource Technology , 102, 1988–1997.
[19] Samir, S.A., Alloin, F., and Dufresne, A. (2005) Review of recent research into 
cellulosic whiskers, their properties and their application in nanocomposite field. 
Biomacromolecules , 6, 612–626.
[20] Siqueira, G., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2010) Cellulosic bionanocomposites: A 
review of preparation, properties and applications. Polymers , 2, 728–765.
[21] Liu, H., Xiea, F., Yua, L., Chena, L., and Li, L. (2009) Thermal processing of starch-
based polymers. Progress in Polymer Science , 34, 1348–1368.
[22] Kumar, P ., Sandeep, K.P ., Alavi, S., Truong, V.D., and Gorga, R.E. (2010) Effect of 
type and content of modified montmorillonite on the structure and properties of 
bio-nanocomposite films based on soy protein isolate and montmorillonite. 
Journal of Food Science , 75, 46–56.
[23] Dean, K., Yu, L., and Smith, R., eds. (2005) Biodegradable Polymers for Industrial 
Application . Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
[24] Kumar, P ., Sandeep, K.P ., Alavi, S., and Truong, V.D. (2011) A review of experi -
mental and modeling techniques to determine properties of biopolymer-based 
nanocomposites. Journal of Food Science , 76, 2–14.
[25] Rhim, J.W., Ng, P .K.W. (2007) Natural biopolymer-based nanocomposite films for 
packaging applications. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition , 47, 
411–433.
[26] Mensitieri, G., Maio, E.D., Buonocore, G.G., Nedi, I., Oliviero, M., Sansone, L., and 
Iannace, S. (2011) Processing and shelf life issues of selected food packaging 
materials and structures from renewable resources. Trends in Food Science & 
Technology , 22, 72–80.
[27] Nussinovitch, A. (2009) Biopolymer films and composite coatings. In: Modern 
Biopolymer Science , 1st ed, eds. S. Kasapis, I.T. Norton, and J.B. Ubbink. London: 
Elsevier, pp. 295–300.
[28] De Azeredo, H.M.C. (2009) Nanocomposites for food packaging applications. 
Food Research International (Ottawa, Ont.) , 42, 1240–1253.224  STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTE: PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES
[29] Corre, D.L., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2010) Starch nanoparticles: A review. Bio-
macromolecules , 11, 1139–1153.
[30] Kaushik, A., Singh, M., and Verma, G. (2010) Green nanocomposites based on 
thermoplastic starch and steam exploded cellulose nanofibrils from wheat straw. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 82, 337–345.
[31] Ray, S.S., Okamoto, M. (2003) Polymer/layered silicate nanocomposites: A review 
from preparation to processing. Progress in Polymer Science , 28, 1539–1641.
[32] Ali, S., Tang, X., Alavi, S., and Faubion, F. (2011) Structure and physical properties 
of starch/poly vinyl alcohol/sodium montmorillonite nanocomposite films. Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 59, 12384–12395.
[33] Ma, X., Yu, J., and Wang, N. (2007) Production of thermoplastic starch/MMT-
sorbitol nanocomposites by dual-melt extrusion processing. Macromolecular 
Materials and Engineering , 292, 723–728.
[34] Arora, A., Padua, G.W. (2010) Review: Nanocomposites in food packaging. Journal 
of Food Science , 75, 43–49.
[35] Dufresne, A., Dupeyre, D., and Vignon, M.R. (2000) Cellulose microfibrils from 
potato tuber cells: Processing and characterization of starch–cellulose microfibril 
composites. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 76, 2080–2092.
[36] Ma, X., Chang, P .R., and Yu, J. (2008) Properties of biodegradable thermoplastic 
pea starch/carboxymethyl cellulose and pea starch/microcrystalline cellulose com -
posites. Carbohydrate Polymers , 72, 369–375.
[37] Angellier, H., Boisseau, S.M., and Dufresne, A. (2006) Waxy maize starch nano -
crystals as filler in natural rubber. Macromolecular Symposia , 233, 132–136.
[38] Dufresne, A., Cavaillé, J.Y., and Helbert, W. (1996) New nanocomposite materials: 
Microcrystalline starch reinforced thermoplastic. Macromolecules , 29, 7624–
7626.
[39] Lim, Y.T., Park, O. (2000) Rheological evidence for the microstructure of interca -
lated polymer/layered silicate nanocomposites. Macromolecular Rapid Commu -
nications , 21, 231–235.
[40] Ren, P ., Shen, T., and Wang, F. (2009) Study on biodegradable starch/OMMT 
nanocomposites for packaging applications. Journal of Polymers and the Environ -
ment, 203–207.
[41] Cao, X., Chen, Y., Chang, P .R., Muir, A.D., and Falk, G. (2008) Starch-based nano -
composites reinforced with flax cellulose nanocrystals. eXPRESS Polymer Letters , 
2, 502–510.
[42] Alemdar, A., Sain, M. (2008) Biocomposites from wheat straw nanofibers: Mor -
phology, thermal and mechanical properties. Composites Science and Technology , 
68, 557–565.
[43] Kamel, S. (2007) Nanotechnology and its applications in lignocellulosic compos -
ites, a mini review. eXPRESS Polymer Letters , 1, 546–575.
[44] Mathew, A.P ., Dufresne, A. (2008) Morphological investigation of nanocomposites 
from sorbitol plasticized starch and tunicin whiskers. Biomacromolecules , 3, 
609–617.
[45] Svagan, A.J., Samir, A.S.A., and Berglund, L.A. (2007) Biomimetic polysaccharide 
nanocomposites of high cellulose content and high toughness. Biomacromolecules , 
8, 2556–2563.REfERENcES   225
[46] Lu, D.R., Xiao, C.M., and Xue, S.J. (2009) Starch-based completely biodegradable 
polymer materials. eXPRESS Polymer Letters , 3, 366–375.
[47] Bogdal, D., Penczek, P ., Pielichowski, J., and Prociak, A. (2003) Synthesis and 
characterization of epoxy resins prepared under microwave irradiation. Advances 
in Polymer Science , 163, 193–263.
[48] Hussain, F., Hojjati, M. (2006) Polymer-matrix nanocomposites, processing, manu -
facturing, and application: An overview. Journal of Composite Materials , 40, 6–8.
[49] Christopher, O.O., Lerner, M. (2006) Nanocomposites and intercalation com -
pounds. In  Encyclopedia of Physical Science and Technology , Vol. 10. San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press (reproduced in part with permission from Elsevier).
[50] Mazumder, S.K. (2002) Composites Manufacturing, Materials, Product and Process 
Engineering . Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
[51] Roy, S., Hussain, F., Lu, H., and Narasimhan, K. Characterization and Modeling 
of Strength Enhancement Mechanism in Polymer Clay Nanocomposites. 6th 
AIAA Conference on Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials . 2005 April 
18–21; Texas.
[52] Mahfuz, H., Baseer, M.A., and Zeelani, S. (2005) Fabrication, characterization and 
mechanical properties of nano phased carbon prepeg laminates. SAMPE Journal , 
41, 2–3.
[53] Chen, B., Evans, J.R.G., Greenwell, H.C., Boulet, P ., Coveney, P .V., Bowden, A.A., 
and Whiting, A. (2008) A critical appraisal of polymer-clay nanocomposites. 
Chemical Society Reviews , 37, 568–594.
[54] Oriakhi, C. (1998) Nano sandwiches. Chemistry in Britain , 34, 59–62.
[55] Ali, S.S. Fundamental interactions and physical properties of starch, poly vinyl 
alcohol and montmorillonite clay based nanocomposites prepared using solution 
mixing and melt extrusion.[Dissertation] Department of Grain Science and Indus -
try; 2010. Available from K-State Research Exchange.
[56] Ma, X., Chang, P .R., Yang, J., and Yu, J. (2009) Preparation and properties of glyc -
erol plasticized-pea starch/zinc oxide-starch bionanocomposites. Carbohydrate 
Polymers , 75, 472–478.
[57] Mittal, V. (2011) Nanocomposites with Biodegradable Polymers . Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University press.
[58] Bhattacharya, S.N., Kamal, M.R., and Gupta, R.K., eds. (2008) Polymer Nanocom -
posite: Theory and Practice . Munich Germany: Hanser.
[59] Park, H.M., Li, X., Jin, C.Z., Park, C.Y., Cho, W.J., and Ha, C.S. (2002) Preparation 
and properties of biodegradable thermoplastic starch/clay hybrids. Macromolecu -
lar Materials and Engineering , 287, 553–558.
[60] Corradini, E., Carvalho, A.J.F., Curvelo, A.A.S., Agnelli, J.A.M., and Mattoso, 
L.H.C. (2007) Preparation and characterization of thermoplastic starch/zein 
blends. Materials Research  10, 227–231.
[61] Mohanty, S., Nayak, S.K. (2009) Starch based biodegradable PBAT nanocompos -
ites. International Journal of Plastics Technology , 13, 163–185.
[62] Teixeira, E.M., Lotti, C., Corre, A., Teodoro, K.B.R., Marconcini, J.M.M., and 
Mattoso, L.H.C. (2011) Thermoplastic corn starch reinforced with cotton cellulose 
nanofibers. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 120, 2428–2433.226  STARcH-BASEd BiONANOcOMPOSiTE: PROcESSiNg TEcHNiqUES
[63] Kozima, Y., Usuki, A., Kawasumi, M., Okada, A., Fukushima, Y., Kurauchi, T., and 
Kamigaito, O.J. (1993) Mechanical properties of nylon-6 clay hybrid. Journal of 
Material Research , 8, 1185–1189.
[64] Yu, Z., Yang, M., Zhang, Q., Zhao, C., and Mai, Y.W. (2003) Dispersion and distri -
bution of organically modified montmorillonite in nylon-66 matrix. Journal of 
Polymer Science. Part B: Polymer Physics , 41, 1234–1243.
[65] Alexandre, M., Dubois, P ., Sun, T., Jarces, J.M., and Jerome, R. (2002) Polyethylene 
layered silicate nanocomposite prepared by polymerization filling technique. Syn -
thesis and mechanical properties. Polymer , 43, 2123–2132.
[66] Namazi, H., Mosadegh, M. (2011) Preparation and properties of starch/nanosilicate 
layer/polycaprolactone composites. Journal of Polymers and the Environment , 19, 
980–987.227Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 11
Morphological and Thermal 
Investigations of Starch-Based 
Nanocomposites
PETER R. CHANG , JIN HUANG , QING HUANG , and DEBBIE P. ANDERSON
11.1 INTRODUCTION
As a natural biopolymer, starch is abundant, renewable, inexpensive, biode -
gradable, environmentally friendly, and easy to chemically modify, making it 
one of the most attractive and promising bioresource materials [1, 2]. Unfor -
tunately, contemporary research indicates that unsatisfactory reinforcement 
by starch [3–8] and undesirable properties (brittleness, low heat distortion 
temperature, high gas permeability, high viscosity, and poor melt properties) 
restrict its use in a wide range of applications [9–12]. Over the past few 
decades, the possibility of adding nano-reinforcement to pristine polymers as 
load bearing constituents has been explored and has produced encouraging 
results [13–16]. Starch-based nanocomposites are now considered to be next-
generation “green” materials. There are plenty of studies reporting on the 
preparation of starch-based nanocomposites using layered silicates [17–23], 
carbon nanoparticles [24–32], polysaccharide nanocrystals [33–42], and other 
nanofillers such as SiO 2 [43–45], TiO 2 [46], hydroxyapatite (HAp) [47], ZnO 
[48], CdS, Ag and Ag 2S, α-zirconium phosphate ( α-ZrP) [49], and layered 
double hydroxide [50]. The properties of the resulting starch-based nanocom -
posites vary with the different sizes, shapes, and surface chemistries of the 
nanofillers used. Nano-reinforced starch-based nanocomposites generally 
exhibit enhanced mechanical and thermal properties when nanofillers are well 228  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
dispersed, while the nature of the matrix and/or nanofiller contributes to its 
biological properties [51, 52].
Furthermore, starch-based nanocomposites made with different nanofillers 
may exhibit various beneficial properties. Starch nanocomposite with gra -
phene oxide (GO), for example, could effectively protect against ultraviolet 
(UV) light, leading to its application as a UV-shielding packing material [27]. 
Glycerol plasticized starch/multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) nano -
composite exhibits electrical conductivity and promises a wide variety of 
potential applications, such as antistatic plastics, biosensors, artificial muscles, 
corrosion protection, electronic shielding, environmentally sensitive mem -
branes, and solar materials [53]. Silica has been introduced into soluble potato 
starch using a sol–gel synthesis method. The resulting nanocomposite exhibits 
an excellent ability to bind cadmium from aqueous solution, leading to poten -
tial use in water remediation. It also shows luminescence in the UV-Vis region 
and could therefore have possible applications as sensors and optical data 
storage devices [44].
The technologies used to manufacture starch-based nanocomposites are 
broadly classified into three main categories [13, 54–58]: solution intercalation, 
in situ  intercalative polymerization, and melt intercalation. Solution intercala -
tion is based on a solvent system in which soluble biopolymer chains interca -
late and replace the solvent molecules that were used to swell the nanofiller. 
In in situ  intercalative polymerization, the nanofillers are swollen within a 
liquid monomer or a monomer solution so that polymer formation occurs 
between the intercalated sheets. In melt intercalation processing, the polymer 
chains diffuse between aggregated nanofillers to produce a nanostructured 
system. Compared with solution intercalation, melt intercalation has many 
advantages, including the absence of organic solvents and compatibility with 
extrusion and injection molding techniques, which help to make this the stan -
dard method [56, 57].
The so-called nano-effect forms when nanoparticles with a high specific 
surface area and surface energy physically interact with the polymer matrix, 
causing the same additive amount of well-distributed nanoparticles to have a 
higher contact area with the matrix. This leads to a series of effects including 
altered crystal structure and order in the crystalline regions of the polymer 
matrix, changes in organization of the multiphase structure, disruption and/or 
formation of intermolecular bonds, and relaxation of the polymer chain due 
to steric hindrance of the rigid nanoparticles. Although the high surface energy 
of nanoparticles makes them extremely reactive, most systems undergo severe 
aggregation [51]; thus, research on the distribution of nanofillers and their 
interactions with the matrix is significant.
This chapter details morphologies and thermal behaviors of starch-based 
nanocomposites, as well as their application. The preparation methods, crystal -
line structures, and reinforcement mechanisms of various nanofillers in starch-
based nanocomposites are recognized and discussed; and the prospects and 
outlook for application in nanomaterials and biomaterials are presented.MORPHOLOGIES Of STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES   229
11.2 MORPHOLOGIES OF STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES
11.2.1 Factors Affecting Nanofiller Distribution
Distribution of the nanofiller in the matrix has a great effect on interactions 
between the nanofiller and matrix, as well as on the mechanical properties of 
the nanocomposites, as shown in the literature [26, 59]. Dispersibility of nano -
fillers depends on factors such as shape, size, concentration in the starch matrix, 
functional groups on the nanofiller surface, and the mechanism of interactions 
between nanofiller and matrix. As a result, the dispersibility of different nano -
fillers needs to be discussed in detail.
11.2.1.1  Layered  Silicates  Layered silicates are a family in which clays 
with varying structures, textures, and morphologies can be found. Layered sili -
cates present three levels of organization depending on the scale of observa -
tion: (1) the layer, (2) the primary particle, and (3) the aggregate [60]. The most 
intensive research has been focused on using layered silicates as the reinforc -
ing phase due to their availability and versatility [13, 61]. Researchers concen -
trate particularly on montmorillonite (MMT) since its homogeneous dispersion 
in nanosheets of a continuous polymer matrix may greatly improve the proper -
ties of polymers. Meanwhile, besides improving the intrinsic properties of a 
polymer, specific new properties, which cannot normally be derived from a 
component in the composites, may also be installed as a contribution of homo -
geneously dispersed MMT nanosheets in a continuous polymer matrix [62–69]. 
In previous studies, nanoclays (natural and chemically modified) have been 
incorporated into plasticized starches such as wheat [70], potato [71], corn [72], 
and waxy [73] and high amylose maize [74], with the nanoclay content varying 
from 0 wt% to 10 wt% [56]. Plasticizers such as glycerol [75], sorbitol [76], 
citric acid [77], urea [78], formamide [79], N-(2-hydroxyethyl) formamide [80], 
and ethanolamine [81] are widely used in the preparation of starch/clay 
nanocomposites.
The structure of layered silicates blended with polymers has been exten -
sively discussed [61, 82–88]. Vaia et al. [83] proposed that the intercalated 
chains adopt a more disordered, liquid-like structure as the chain length or 
the interlayer packing density decreases. This was subsequently confirmed by 
Hackett et al. using molecular dynamic simulations [84]. With the increase in 
chain length, the interlayer structure appears to evolve in a stepwise fashion, 
from a disordered to a more ordered monolayer and then “jumping” to a 
disordered pseudo-bilayer [87, 88]. Intercalation occurs when a small amount 
of polymer moves into the gallery spacing between the clay platelets. Exfolia -
tion occurs when silicate layers are substantially expanded and are no longer 
parallel [87] (seen in Fig. 11.1).
The structure of the nanoclay will have a major effect on its dispersibility. 
It is generally believed that the best performance is achieved with exfoliated 
structures [86] in a well-dispersed nanocomposite consisting of exfoliated 230  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
platelets distributed homogeneously throughout the polymer matrix forms. 
This has been attested to by Liu et al. [89].
Surface modification of the nanofiller can significantly influence its degree 
of dispersion [87, 90, 91]. MMT/cassava starch composite films were prepared 
by Kampeerapappun et al. [92] using the casting method. In the starch film 
containing pristine MMT, populations of large aggregates were common, 
whereas particles of a much smaller size were found scattered in the starch 
film containing chitosan-treated MMT. Typically there is no attractive force 
between starch and MMT resulting in poor distribution of MMT particles in 
the starch matrix. These results show that the chitosan, acting as a compatibil -
izing agent due to its hydrophilicity and its hydrogen bonding with the starch 
matrix, promoted both disaggregation of the MMT and a more homogeneous 
dispersion in the starch matrix [92].
Various characteristics of starch, such as the amount of amylose leached 
from the granule, the shape and swelling of granules, entanglement in the 
matrix of amylose and amylopectin molecules, and interactions between com -
ponents [93], are reported to impact the dispersion of clay. For high amylose 
starches, a high degree of chain–chain interaction allows the formation of 
highly entangled networks [94], which may not favor dispersion and exfolia -
tion of the clay silicate layers. Conversely, in waxy starches only the short outer Figure 11.1  Scheme of different types of composite arising from the interaction of 
layered silicates and polymers: (a) phase separated microcomposite, (b) intercalated 
nanocomposite, and (c) exfoliated nanocomposite.
MORPHOLOGIES Of STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES   231
chains participate in the formation of weak entangled structures [93], which 
may favor diffusion of these structures within the silicate galleries and, there -
fore, formation of partially exfoliated structures. The fact that branched poly -
mers are more able to intercalate into the clay galleries than linear polymers 
[95, 96] is explained by the self-consistent field theory [58]. The effect of plas -
ticizer loading level on the interlayer space of MMT in starch/MMT nanocom -
posites was investigated by Liu et al. [97]. The presence of plasticizer improved 
expansion of the MMT d-spacing in starch-based nanocomposites, with 15% 
glycerol resulting in the largest d-spacing. The interaction between plasticizer/
plasticizer and plasticizer/starch seemed to resume its dominance when the 
plasticizer loading level was increased [97].
Mondragón et al. [58] used three types of maize starch with different 
amounts of amylose and amylopectin to prepare plasticized starch (PS)/MMT 
nanocomposite films. Waxy maize starch/MMT nanocomposites (WMNC), 
normal starch/MMT nanocomposites (NMNC), and high amylose maize 
starch/MMT nanocomposites (HAMNC) were prepared using the casting 
technique. WMNC could not be observed with the transmission electron 
microscope (TEM) because those embedded films could not be sectioned. 
However, at a relatively low filler content (2.0 wt%), NMNC and HAMNC 
presented mostly well-dispersed exfoliated structures in the TEM images. At 
a higher content (5.0 wt%) intercalated structures and poorly dispersed MMT 
aggregates were clearly visible. Dispersion of MMT in the PS matrices was 
corroborated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns. According to XRD, disper -
sion of silicates in WMNC was not affected by increasing the MMT content; 
however, the small characteristic MMT diffraction peak in NMNC and 
HAMNC with 2.0 wt% MMT content increased, and the full-width-at-half-
maximum decreased on further addition of MMT (5.0 wt%), indicating mainly 
intercalated structures [98]. These results indicate that dispersion of the sili -
cates was affected by the type of starch and the MMT content.
In order to produce starch-based nanocomposites with better properties or 
special characteristics, many other polymers may be co-blended with starch, 
for example, starch/poly(lactic acid) (PLA) [99], starch/poly(caprolactone) 
(PCL) [100], and starch/poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) [101, 102]. While the nano -
clays tend to stay in the thermoplastic starch (TPS), additional materials may 
affect the size of the TPS phase rather than the distribution of the nanoclay. 
This phenomenon was studied in detail by Arroyo et al. [103]. TPS and PLA 
or maleic anhydride grafted polylactic acid (PLAg) were compounded with 
natural MMT using a twin-screw extrusion process. In all the TPS/PLAg blends 
studied, large clay aggregates appeared with a few MMT stacks (formed by 
three or fewer clay layers) surrounding them, indicating that the PLAg did 
not have a significant effect on MMT dispersion. To verify this assumption, 
additional experiments were carried out where MMT was introduced into the 
PLA phase before mixing with TPS rather than in the starch–water suspension. 
Based on the images from atomic force microscopy (AFM) and TEM, it was 
concluded that MMT had migrated from the PLA phase to the TPS/PLA (or 232  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
PLAg) interface or had crossed the interface into the TPS phase due to the 
strong affinity between natural MMT and the hydrophilic TPS phase [103].
11.2.1.2  Carbon  Nanoparticles  Carbon nanoparticles are considered 
to be ideal fillers for reinforcing polymer matrices to achieve high performance 
and special functions. Various carbon nanoparticles, such as carbon nanotubes 
(both single- and multiwalled [SWCNT and MWCNT, respectively]) [24–26, 
29], graphite (including colloidal and crystalline graphite [CGR and GR, 
respectively]) [25, 104], and fullerene C60 [25], have been used as nanofillers. 
There are also many derivatives of carbon nanoparticles, for example, GO  
[27], used as nanofillers that have achieved excellent properties. It is well 
known that effective utilization of nanofillers in composite applications, 
without destroying the original organization of the polymer matrix, depends 
strongly on the ability to homogeneously disperse the nanofiller throughout 
the matrix [26].
Many factors may affect the dispersibility of carbon nanoparticles. The 
nonreactive surface of carbon nanoparticles makes them unable to disperse 
well in nanocomposites because of a lack of adhesion between the carbon 
nanoparticles and the matrix. In the past decade, much effort has been made 
to improve dispersibility of carbon nanoparticles including the use of surfac -
tants [53], oxidation [27], and chemical functionalization of the carbon nanopar -
ticle’s surface [26]. Introducing carboxylic, carbonyl, and hydroxyl groups to 
MWCNTs by refluxing with nitric acid or mixed acids can greatly enhance 
their interaction with the matrix. The distribution of carbon nanoparticles is 
also closely correlated with the shape and size of the added carbon nanopar -
ticles, the concentration of carbon nanoparticles in the starch matrix, and the 
interaction between carbon nanoparticles and the matrix.
Oxidation is a good method for enhancing the distribution of graphite. GO 
is hydrophilic and forms strong physical interactions with the polymer due to 
its various oxygenated groups, including hydroxyls, epoxides, carbonyls, and 
carboxyls. GO sheets can also be intercalated or exfoliated by small molecules 
or polymers [105, 106]. Li et al. [27] prepared glycerol plasticized pea starch/
graphene oxide (GPS/GO) nanocomposite films with different GO loading 
levels using a solution casting method. The TEM and AFM images shown in 
Figure 11.2 suggest that compatibility between GO and starch was good and 
that the GO filler was dispersed uniformly in the starch matrix. This uniform 
dispersion could be attributed to plenty of oxygen functional groups on the 
GO surface, which easily formed strong hydrogen bonds with the starch mol -
ecules. However, when the GO loading level was 5.0 wt%, blisters and depres -
sions could be observed on the surface of the GPS/GO nanocomposite film 
(Fig. 11.2d), resulting in a higher roughness ( Ra = 14.009 nm, Rq = 17.926 nm). 
This difference in microstructure was presumably due to poor dispersion and 
aggregation of GO at high loading levels [27].
The influence of the concentration of carbon nanoparticles on distribu-
tion was also discussed by Cao et al. [26] when MWCNTs were used as a MORPHOLOGIES Of STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES   233
reinforcing filler to improve the performance of PS. The PS/MWCNT nano -
composites were successfully prepared using a simple method of solution 
casting and evaporation. As seen in the SEM images in Figure 11.3, no obvious 
large aggregates of MWCNTs were present on the fracture surfaces when  
the MWCNT content was lower than 1.0 wt%, suggesting that MWCNTs  
were homogenously dispersed in the PS matrix. At higher MWCNT levels (2.0 
wt% and 3.0 wt%), large aggregates of MWCNTs were easily observed at the 
same magnification. This phenomenon attests to the fact that the MWCNT 
concentration makes a big difference, which is in accordance with previous 
conclusions.
The shape of carbon nanoparticles and the interaction between nanofiller 
and matrix also significantly influence the distribution of nanofiller in the Figure 11.2  TEM image of graphene oxide (GO) powder (a); AFM images of glycerol 
plasticized pea starch (GPS) (b), and the GPS/GO nanocomposite films containing 3.0 
wt% (c), and 5.0 wt% (d) GO. Reprinted with permission from Reference [27]. See 
color insert.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)100 nm123
123
123X 1.000 um/div
Z 90.000 nm/div
Rms (Rg)
Ra
Rmax10.500 nm
8.068 nm
81.306 nm
X 1.000 um/div
Z 45.000 nm/div
Rms (Rg)
Ra
Rmax10.082 nm
7.330 nm
104.61 nmX 1 .000 um/div
Z 100.000 nm/div
Rms (Rg)
Ra
Rmax17.926 nm
14.009 nm
138.60 nm234  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
matrix [25]. Lii et al. [25] reported on SWCNTs that were blended into an 
aqueous potato amylose (PA) solution to form a suspension, which was then 
allowed to separate into a homogenous suspension of nanotubes with the 
larger SWCNT bundles precipitated on the bottom of the container. CGR and 
GR were similarly wetted in PA solution, whereas fullerene C60 remained 
nonwetted. Differences in the affinity of these four forms of carbon nanopar -
ticles (CGR, GR, fullerene C60, and SWCNTs) to PA strongly suggests that 
PA–GR(CGR) and PA–SWCNTs interactions may be specific and require 
multipoint interactions between the surface of a carbon species and PA. In 
this case, it is not possible for the spherical structure and the relatively small 
size of zero-dimensional fullerene nanoparticles to form multipoint interac -
tions between filler and matrix.
11.2.1.3  Polysaccharide  Nanocrystals  Nanocrystals from natural poly -
saccharides, such as cellulose nanocrystals [2, 33, 35, 107–112], starch nanocrys -
tals [40–42, 113–115], and chitin nanocrystals (CNC) [116–118], are potential 
reinforcements where the nanosized fillers impart enhanced mechanical and Figure 11.3  SEM images of failure surfaces of plasticized starch (PS) film (a) and PS/
MWCNT nanocomposite films containing 0.2 wt% (b), 1.0 wt% (c), 2.0 wt% (d), and 
3.0 wt% (e) MWCNT. Reprinted with permission from Reference [26].
MORPHOLOGIES Of STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES   235
barrier properties. The main advantages of these natural nanofillers are their 
renewable nature, availability, high specific strength, nonabrasive nature (that 
allows easier processing even at high loading levels), biodegradability, and 
their relatively reactive surfaces, which can be modified accordingly [119–121]. 
It has been reported [121] that the outstanding reinforcement effects of these 
natural nanofillers in nanocomposites are defined mainly by the nature of the 
polymer–particle interface [122, 123] and/or the strength of filler–filler interac -
tions leading to the establishment of a particle percolating network [124–126]. 
The interface is related to the distribution of the nanofiller, so it is therefore 
very important to pay attention to the dispersibility of nanofiller in the matrix.
Cellulose nanocrystals can be extracted from plant sources, such as cotton, 
flax, hemp, jute, sisal, and wood fibers, through mechanical separation or chem -
ical and/or enzymatic fiber pre-treatments [127]. Compared with inorganic 
reinforcing fillers, cellulose nanocrystals display outstanding advantages due 
to their high surface area, high strength, unique morphology, low weight, and 
biodegradability, as well as their good mechanical response to stress [59, 127]. 
In order to prevent cellulose nanocrystals from aggregating, and to improve 
dispersion and compatibility in the matrix material, modification of the cel -
lulose nanocrystal surface is required [59]. Some methods of cellulose nano -
crystal surface modification include graft polymerization, silylation, and the 
use of surfactants. Dispersion in organic solvent without modification has also 
been reported. Chen et al. [38] explored the use of both pea hull fiber (PHF) 
and PHF-derived cellulose nanocrystals (PHFCN) (isolated from PHF by acid 
hydrolysis) as filler in pea starch (PSt)-based biocomposite films. The original 
PHF exhibited an irregular shape and various sizes, while the PHFCN were 
needle- or rod-like with one or two sharpened ends. As shown in scanning 
electron microscope (SEM) photographs (Fig. 11.4), the cross sections of the 
PSt/PHFCN nanocomposites were much smoother and more compact than 
the corresponding PSt/PHF films, although both were rougher than that of the 
PSt film. The obvious morphological differences between the PSt/PHF and 
PSt/PHFCN films were due to the differences in structure and performance 
Figure 11.4  SEM photographs of cross sections of pea starch (PSt) (a), PSt/PHF 
biocomposite films containing 10 wt% of pea hull fiber (PHF) (b), and PSt/PHFNW 
nanocomposite film containing 10 wt% of PHF derived nanowhiskers (PHFNW) (c). 
Reprinted with permission from Reference [38].
(a) (b) (c)
1 .0 µm 1.0 µm 1.0 µm236  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
between PHF and PHFCN. Compared with PHF, PHFCN had a higher aspect 
ratio and smaller size. It also dispersed more homogenously within the PSt 
matrix, resulting in more chances to interact with PSt, and thus forming stron -
ger interactions and adhesions to the PSt and filler interfaces [38].
There are also many kinds of starch nanocrystals that can be used as rein -
forcements in the starch matrix. It has been reported that the distribution of 
starch nanocrystal in the matrix is related not only to the shape, size, and 
concentration of the nanofiller, but also to the structure of the starch matrix. 
García et al. [42] used the same waxy maize starch to prepare starch nanocrys -
tals and glycerol plasticized and unplasticized matrices for nanocomposites. 
Figure 11.5 shows micrographs of the cryofractured surfaces of the glycerol 
Figure 11.5  SEM photographs of fractured surfaces of (a) glycerol plasticized com -
posite film, and (b) unplasticized composite film containing 2.5 wt% starch nanocrys -
tals. Reprinted with permission from Reference [42].
MORPHOLOGIES Of STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES   237
plasticized and unplasticized composite films containing 2.5 wt% starch nano -
crystals. The unplasticized sample displayed a rather smooth homogeneous 
surface associated with a brittle fracture, while an obviously rougher, nano -
metric fibrillar structure was observed on the plasticized sample. The high 
glycerol content probably increased phase separation and was responsible for 
higher interaction between the glycerol and starch nanocrystals, which was in 
accordance with the literature [128].
Chitin is also a biopolymer that is abundant in nature. Under hydrolytic 
conditions of boiling HCl and vigorous stirring, CNC of slender parallelepiped 
rods have been successfully prepared from different sources of chitin such as 
crab shells, squid pens, and Riftia pachyptila  tubeworms. By treating chitin with 
consecutive acid hydrolysis and mechanical ultrasonication treatments, Chang 
et al. [120] prepared unique CNC of about 50–100 nm that exhibited lower 
crystallinity than conventional CNC. All-natural nanocomposites were pre -
pared by combining glycerol plasticized potato starch (GPSt) with CNC using 
casting and evaporation. SEM showed that at low concentrations (2 wt%) 
most CNC were dispersed uniformly in the GPSt matrix without obvious 
aggregation, which is ascribed to strong interactions between the similar poly -
saccharide structures of the CNC and potato starch in the GPSt matrix. 
However, conglomeration of CNC was obvious at a high filler content (5 wt%) 
[120]. Again, this fact indicates that the nanofiller content plays a very signifi -
cant role in the dispersibility of the nanofiller.
11.2.1.4  Other  Nanofillers  There are plenty of studies to indicate that 
various nanoparticles added into the starch matrix can achieve outstanding 
properties. Many types of nanofillers (SiO 2 [43–45], TiO 2 [46], HAp [47], ZnO 
[48], CdS, Ag and Ag 2S, α-zirconium phosphate ( α-ZrP) [49], and layered 
double hydroxide [50], etc.) are added to the starch matrix for their excellent 
properties such as small size, large specific surface area, high surface energy, 
unsaturated chemical bonds, and surface hydroxyl groups.
Nanosilicon dioxide used as nanofiller in the starch matrix may achieve 
excellent performance if it is well distributed. Tang et al. [43, 45] prepared 
starch/poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)/nanosilicon dioxide (nano-SiO 2) biodegrad -
able blend films, with various nano-SiO 2 concentrations, using a solution 
casting method and a coating method. SEM analysis predicted that there was 
good miscibility between the nano-SiO 2 and starch/PVA in the blends when 
the nano-SiO 2 content was 3 wt%, while at higher levels (5 wt%) aggregated 
particles appeared. This fact indicates that the concentration of nanofiller in 
the matrix is highly significant for its distribution. Nano-ZnO particles at a 
relatively low concentration (1 wt%) were also distributed evenly in the glyc -
erol plasticized pea starch (GPS) matrix. At a higher content (3 wt%), a few 
agglomerates of nano-ZnO were observed [48]. An experiment carried out by 
Wu et al. [49], in which glycerol plasticized pea starch/ α-ZrP (GPS/ZrP) nano -
composite films with different α-ZrP loading levels were prepared using a 
casting and solvent evaporation method, attests to this conclusion. When the 238  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
α-ZrP content in the nanocomposite films was relatively low, even with pro -
gressive increases in the content, α-ZrP dispersed uniformly in the starch 
matrix during fabrication. The fracture surfaces of the GPS/ZrP films with a 
relatively high α-ZrP content became rougher, indicating a certain degree of 
phase separation between starch and α-ZrP , resulting from poor dispersion 
and aggregation of α-ZrP nanoparticles [49].
11.2.2 Fracture Morphologies
Fracture morphologies reflect information (such as nanofiller distribution, 
interface structure, and interaction between nanofiller and matrix) that is 
closely correlated to the structures of the nanofiller and its surface. Research 
into the effects of nanofiller structure, as well as that of its surface characteristics, 
will contribute to the regulation of interface structure and improved interfacial 
miscibility, and hence help to enhance the properties of nanocomposites.
11.2.2.1  Effects  of Nanofiller  Structure  Nanofillers with different struc -
tures (spherical, layered, tubular, rod, tridimensional network structure, etc.) 
added to the starch matrix result in different effects that induce different 
fracture morphologies.
Nanocomposites filled with layered fillers, which are obtained almost exclu -
sively by intercalation of the polymer inside the galleries of layered host 
crystals, always result in unique interface structures. There is a wide variety of 
both synthetic and natural crystalline fillers that are able, under specific condi -
tions, to intercalate a polymer. Table 11.1 [13, 50, 60–103, 129–136] presents a 
nonexhaustive list of possible layered host crystals [88]. Interaction between 
the layered structure and the starch matrix has been discussed previously and 
TABLE 11.1  Example of Layered Nanofillers Susceptible to Formation of an 
Intercalated Structure in a Polymer Matrix
Chemical Nature Examples
Layered silicates and their 
modified productsMontmorillonite (MMT), Cloisite 25a, kaolinite, 
mica, saponite, fluoromica, fluorohectorite, 
vermiculite, hectorite, magadiite, chitosan-
treated MMT [13, 50, 60–103]
Carbon-based 
nanomaterialsGraphite [29], graphite oxide [130, 131]
Metal-based nanomaterials Metal chalcogenides, such as (PbS)  1.18(TiS 2)2 [132] 
and MoS 2 [133]; metal phosphates, such as 
Zr(HPO 4) [134]; layered double hydroxides [47], 
such as Mg 6Al2(OH) 16CO 3·nH 2O [135], and 
Zn 6Al2(OH) 16CO 3·nH 2O [136]MORPHOLOGIES Of STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES   239
is shown in Figure 11.1. In intercalated nanocomposites, the original layered 
structure was virtually unchanged except for an increase in the interlayer 
distance ( d-spacing) as the polymer chains penetrated the interlayers. In exfo -
liated nanocomposites the layered structure was totally destroyed, meaning 
the layers were delaminated and separated from one another [137]. Plasticizers 
used in extrusion and hot-pressing of starch compete with starch molecules to 
enter into the interlayer of the nanofiller [21]. Because of their smaller size, 
the addition of plasticizers such as glycerol may inhibit intercalation and exfo -
liation of the layered nanofillers in the starch matrix [137] in spite of increasing 
interlayer space [97]. Exfoliated layered particles, such as clays, mica, or graph -
ite has been used to provide very effective reinforcement of polymers at 
loading levels much lower than required in the case of solid particles, such as 
carbon black and silica [138]. Other properties including increased solvent 
resistance and reduced permeability and flammability can also be substantially 
improved [139]. Chung et al. [137] prepared starch-clay nanocomposites by 
adding a dilute clay dispersion to a starch solution followed by coprecipitation 
in ethanol. Usually, it is difficult to obtain either an intercalated or exfoliated 
structure in systems of starch-clay nanocomposites because the starch, as a 
neutral polymer, lacks the driving force required to replace sodium ions in the 
interlayer through ion exchange, and high molecular weight inhibits its pen -
etration into interlayers. After precipitation in ethanol, however, TEM obser -
vation showed the clay layers were exfoliated and hence trapped by starch 
molecules. XRD patterns further verified that glycerol added after mixing 
starch and clay, did not penetrate into the clay galleries to expand the inter -
layer space. A homogeneous and smooth fracture morphology similar to the 
fracture surface of unfilled starch film was observed by SEM on the starch-
based nanocomposite film filled with 5 wt% MMT. This indicated that the 
starch granules were completely disrupted and the exfoliated clay was uni -
formly dispersed in the polymer matrix. Good dispersion of layered clay filler 
in nanocomposites was achieved by mixing in dilute aqueous solutions and 
subsequent plasticization to prevent interference from plasticizer penetrating 
into the clay interlayer [137].
Some nanofillers exhibit a network structure that may play a significant role 
in improving the mechanical properties of nanocomposites. Nano-SiO 2 is an 
amorphous powder that has a tridimensional net molecular structure. It devi -
ates from a stable silicon–oxygen structure because of a lack of oxygen on its 
surface [43, 45]. When added to the matrix, nano-SiO 2 forms an interpenetrat -
ing network structure with the starch hybrid materials, such as the starch/PVA 
blend, by combining the stiff structure of nano-SiO 2 with the flexible structure 
of starch [43, 45]. This may greatly enhance the mechanical properties of the 
nanocomposites. It has also been reported [140] that bacterial cellulose (BC) 
is characterized by an ultrafine network structure. Wan et al. [141] incorpo -
rated BC nanofibers into starch plasticized with glycerol via a solution impreg -
nation method. The typical tensile fracture surface of BC/starch nanocomposites 
is displayed in Figure 11.6. The BC/starch nanocomposites have a layered 240  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
structure, which is similar to the morphology of the microfibrillated cellulose–
melamine formaldehyde composites as reported [142]. This layered structure 
is characteristic of the BC network as the difference in the cellulose network 
structure is usually observed between the upper surface layer (exposed to air) 
and the lower layer (exposed to culture medium during cultivation) [140]. It 
is worth noting that, as seen in the BC nanofiber ends in Figure 11.6, the length 
of nanofiber pulled out of the nanocomposites at the fracture is quite modest, 
indicating good fiber–matrix bonding [141]. This may be attributed to the 
formation of a unique network structure.
Nanocomposite films of flax cellulose nanocrystals (FCNs) and PS were 
obtained using the casting method as reported by Cao et al. [34]. Field emis -
sion SEM (FE-SEM) of the fractured films revealed no large aggregates and 
a homogeneous distribution of the FCNs in the PS matrix in all nanocomposite 
films. This is an indication of good adhesion between filler and matrix, and is 
attributed to the good compatibility resulting from both the chemical similari -
ties between starch and cellulose, and the hydrogen bond interactions at the 
filler–matrix interface [34]. The similar structures of the nanofiller and matrix 
favor the development of enhanced properties in nanocomposites. This conclu -
sion was confirmed in GPSt nanocomposites that used CNC as the nanofiller 
[120], where, because of the strong interaction between the similar polysac -
charide structures of CNC and potato starch, most of the CNC dispersed 
uniformly in the GPSt matrix without obvious aggregation.
The loading level of nanofillers distributed in the amorphous area of the 
starch matrix may also make an obvious difference in the fracture surfaces. Figure 11.6  Scanning electron micrograph of the tensile fracture surface of bacterial 
cellulose (BC)/starch nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from Reference [141].
MORPHOLOGIES Of STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES   241
When very small quantities of MWCNTs (0.027 wt% and 0.055 wt%) were 
introduced into the tapioca starch matrix, a well-developed vein pattern was 
observed in the cryogenic fracture surfaces of the starch-based nanocompos -
ites, which was similar to the image in Figure 11.3c. This suggests that the 
residual amorphous matrix determined the deformation behavior of the mate -
rial, and the space between veins was found to become thinner and denser 
with increased filler content [143].
11.2.2.2  Effects  of Nanofiller  Surface  Structure  It is well known that 
interfacial interaction is crucial for improving polymer properties, and, as  
a result, the nanofiller surface structure plays an important role in producing 
nanocomposites with excellent properties. Many types of nanofiller stand  
out from other materials because of their surface structures. Nano-SiO 2, 
for example, is widely used because of its surface hydroxyl groups and unsatu -
rated chemical bonds, its large specific surface area, and its high surface energy 
[43, 45].
There are many cases in which nanofillers are treated with acids or modified 
by other materials containing the needed functional groups in order to obtain 
the required surface structure. Graphene and carbon nanotubes are treated 
with NaNO 3 and H 2SO 4 to make hydrophilic GO with oxygen functional 
groups such as hydroxyls, epoxides, carbonyls, and carboxyls [25, 27]. MMT 
has been modified by plasticizer [144] or organic reagents such as tetraalkyl -
ammonium cation [145], methyl tallow bis-2-hydroxyethyl ammonium cation 
[146], and/or N-(2-hydroxyethyl) formamide [80] to improve its compatibility 
with the starch matrix. Polysaccharide nanocrystals prepared conventionally 
using the H 2SO 4 method always have sulfate groups on their surfaces. Cellu -
lose nanocrystals can be further modified by chemical reactions of cationiza -
tion, esterification, silylation, polymer grafting, and so on, which may introduce 
stable negative or positive electrostatic charges onto the surface of cellulose 
nanocrystals. This will allow for better dispersion and/or tune the surface 
energy characteristics of cellulose nanocrystals to improve compatibility, espe -
cially when used in conjunction with nonpolar or hydrophobic matrices in 
nanocomposites [108]. Starch nanocrystals were reported to have been modi -
fied by isocyanate groups (–NCO) as well as long chain polymers based on 
the “graft onto” and “graft from” strategies [114].
Yu et al. [51] reported on the preparation of a nanocomposite by casting 
using ZnO nanoparticles stabilized by carboxymethylcellulose sodium (CMC) 
as filler in a glycerol plasticized pea starch (GPS) matrix. Using SEM, the 
author found that agglomerations of ZnO-CMC appeared in the GPS/
ZnO-CMC composites with higher ZnO-CMC content. In addition, the sur -
faces of the ZnO-CMC particles appeared to be covered by GPS, which was 
attributed to a strong interaction between the hydrophilic surface of the CMC 
in the ZnO-CMC filler and the GPS matrix [51].
As previously mentioned [26], when nanocomposites failed, most of the 
MWCNTs broke rather than pull out wholly from the matrix. The ends of the 242  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
broken MWCNTs can be seen in SEM images of the failure surfaces of PS/
MWCNT nanocomposite films with relatively high MWCNT contents (2.0 and 
3.0 wt%), especially at the highest magnification (Fig. 11.3). This phenomenon 
indicates a strong interfacial adhesion between the MWCNTs and the PS 
matrix. Besides influencing the structure of MWCNTs, it has been proven that 
acid treatment incorporated polar groups with the MWCNTs, improved the 
hydrophilicity of MWCNTs, and reduced agglomerations [147]. These factors 
contribute greatly to the enhanced hydrogen bonding interactions between 
acid-treated MWCNTs and PS; they increase the compatibility between 
MWCNTs and PS, and result in improved mechanical performance of the PS/
MWCNT nanocomposite films [26].
11.2.3 Crystalline Structure of the Starch Matrix
11.2.3.1  Factors  Affecting  Crystalline  Structure  The crystallization of 
a polymer directly affects its processability and performance in the resultant 
materials. Crystallization behavior, including nuclear crystallization and retro -
gradation, is common in starch-based materials. It has also been attested [148] 
that, to a certain extent, the type of starch impacts the crystalline structure. 
For example, in high amylose starch the fractional association of amylopectin 
and amylose was significantly reduced, allowing only amylose–amylose inter -
action in the presence of water. There is much literature that focuses on the 
mechanisms of crystalline structure.
It has been reported that the type of nanofiller used has an effect on the 
crystalline behavior of the starch matrix. Huang et al. [149] prepared MMT-
reinforced thermoplastic starch composites (MTPSC) with MMT and glycerol 
plasticized thermoplastic starch (GTPS) using a melt extrusion method. Crys -
tallization of natural corn starch is of the A-type. In the process of making 
GTPS, most of the crystallization of the original starch was destroyed due to 
mechanical and thermal effects, and a small amount of VH crystallization was 
present [150], as seen in Figure 11.7A. Figure 11.7 shows the XRD patterns of 
MTPSC containing different concentrations of MMT stored at relative humid -
ity (RH) = 50% for 60 days, and MTPSC containing 20 wt% MMT stored at 
RH = 50% for 0, 30, 60, and 90 days. As shown in Figure 11.7A, an obvious 
VH-type crystallization peak and an A-type crystallization peak from the origi -
nal starch were present after the GTPS had been stored at RH = 50% for 60 
days. No obvious crystallization peak appeared in the MTPSC containing 
MMT under the same conditions. In Figure 11.7B, no obvious crystallization 
peak appears in the XRD patterns, which indicates that the introduction of 
MMT restrained the formation of hydrogen bonds between the starch mole -
cules, and inhibited the crystallization of GTPS [149].
When organo-modified MMT clay was added into the starch matrix, the 
situation was exactly the opposite. Chaudhary prepared a nanocomposite with 
high amylose starch and the organo-modified MMT clay, Cloisite 25a (C25a) 
[151]. The starch matrix developed nuclear crystallization when the C25a clay MORPHOLOGIES Of STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES   243
particles acted as a nucleating agent for crystallization of the matrix. The linear 
growth rate and overall crystallization rate were not significantly influenced 
by the presence of clay. A unique mechanism that explains the higher crystal -
lization rate, along with the morphology and developed internal structure, is 
that a sandwich structure in which each silicate layer was strongly covered by 
polymer crystals made the system very rigid [13].
Matrix crystallinity was also affected by the concentration of the nanofiller 
added. In the starch-based nanocomposites filled with C25a prepared by 
Chaudhary [151] as described above, it was found that some degree of 
intercalation/exfoliation appeared gradually with the addition of clay, shown 
as diffraction peaks shifting to lower 2 θ values in the XRD patterns. The pres -
ence of water in the system allows starch nanocomposites greater ability to 
achieve exfoliation than their polyolefin counterparts at higher clay loading 
levels. This was corroborated by SEM in which the starch nanoclay system 
showed significant compatibility. After the total crystallinity decreased slightly 
when the clay content was lowest (i.e., 1.5 wt%), it increased as the clay 
content increased to greater than 2.5 wt%. On the other hand, the rigid amor -
phous fraction increased continuously with increasing clay content. The 
changes in total crystallinity and the rigid amorphous phase synergistically 
contributed to enhanced resistance to initial deformation [151].
11.2.3.2  Effects  of Retrogradation  Retrogradation or recrystallization 
of amylose in the starch polymer is a significant limitation for starch-based Figure 11.7  X-ray diffraction patterns of (A) starch-based nanocomposites stored at 
RH=50% for 60 days containing: 10 wt% MMT (b), 20 wt% MMT (c) and 30 wt% 
MMT (d), as well as glycerol plasticized thermoplastic starch (GTPS) (a) for compari -
son; and (B) the starch-based nanocomposites containing 20 wt% MMT stored at 
RH=50% for 0 day (a), 30 days (b), 60 days (c), and 90 days (d). Reprinted with per -
mission from Reference [149].RH=50% RH=50%
d
c
b
ad
c
b
a
AVH(a) (b)
10 15 20 25 30 10 15 20 25 30
Diffraction angle 2θDiffraction angle 2θ244  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
nanocomposites, leading to increased brittleness and loss of mechanical 
strength [42, 148, 149, 152]. The crystalline structure resulting from spontane -
ous retrogradation of starch molecules after melting or gelatinization has often 
been detected in food and thermoplastic materials [153]. Smits et al. [154] 
found that retrogradation occurred in water plasticized starch, and Ma and Yu 
[155] found that glycerol plasticized starch presented an increased crystallinity 
after storing at RH = 0% and at RH = 50% for 25 days. Alkyl ammonium salt 
modifier in hectorite may inhibit the occurrence of recrystallization. Calvert 
[156] attributed the problem of cracking to evaporation of the plasticizer, and 
Ma and Yu [155] recently reported that starch plasticized with urea did not 
present a problem with retrogradation [19].
Based on the above facts, it has been concluded that retrogradation of PS 
is greatly dependent on the additive’s ability to form hydrogen bonds with 
starch molecules. The stronger the hydrogen bond between the starch and 
additive, the more difficult it is for starch to recrystallize during the storage 
period [19, 26, 149]. As a result, the water content, type of starch [157], type 
of plasticizer [19, 42, 149], and the type and content of the nanofiller used [158] 
may greatly impact the crystalline structure.
MWCNTs were added at different concentrations to PS to investigate the 
effect of nanofillers on retrogradation using DSC [26]. It was observed that the 
heat of fusion ( ΔHm) decreased as more MWCNTs were incorporated. This 
demonstrated that the carboxylic, carbonyl, and hydroxyl groups on acid-
treated MWCNTs formed relatively strong hydrogen bonds between the PS 
and MWCNTs, which suppressed starch retrogradation. Furthermore, there was 
no shoulder peak on the melt endotherm on any of the differential scanning 
calorimetry (DSC) curves, indicating that there was no new crystallinity. This 
was also supported by wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WAXRD) where no addi -
tional peaks were detected, unlike the extra peak at 2 θ = 21.15° in glycerol 
PS-based nanocomposites filled with tunicin whiskers (a kind of cellulose nano -
crystal) as reported by Anglès and Dufresne [107]. This extra peak probably 
resulted from accumulation of plasticizers at the starch–nanofiller interface and 
from formation of a glycerol–starch V structure. It can be concluded that incor -
poration of MWCNTs did not have a significant effect on the crystalline struc -
ture of the PS matrix, although retrogradation was apparently reduced [26].
Ma et al. [158] prepared composites based on TPS and winceyette fiber with 
various weight ratios using urea and formamide as plasticizer. They investi -
gated the crystalline characteristics after storage at 50% RH for two months. 
As reported [159, 160], the addition of nanofiller improved the crystallinity of 
the starch matrix in systems with glycerol as plasticizer; however, when the 
fiber content level was below 20 wt% the TPS matrix, plasticized with a 
mixture of urea and formamide, did not show the obvious crystallinity peaks 
assigned to starch. This suggests that retrogradation of starch was inhibited by 
the fiber at a lower loading level. On the other hand, when TPS was filled with 
greater than 20 wt% fiber, the small crystallinity peaks assigned to starch could 
be identified, indicating that the inhibition to starch retrogradation was absent THERMAL BEHAVIOR Of STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES   245
[158]. Thus, it can be concluded that retrogradation of the starch matrix can 
be effectively inhibited by using given plasticizers and/or controlling the nano -
filler content. This information may be used to solve the problems caused by 
starch retrogradation, that is, brittleness and loss of mechanical strength, and 
to contribute to the development and application of starch-based materials.
11.3 THERMAL BEHAVIOR OF STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES
The main components of thermal behavior of starch-based nanocomposites 
include glass transition and thermal decomposition. Glass transition is often 
characterized by dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA), dynamic mechanical 
thermal analysis (DMTA), and DSC, with which the glass transition tempera -
ture (Tg) can be determined. Thermal decomposition is determined using 
thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and derivative thermogravimetric analysis 
(DTG).
11.3.1 Glass Transition of Plasticized Starch-Based Nanocomposites
11.3.1.1  Shift  of Glass  Transition  Temperature  The Tg is the critical 
temperature at which a material changes its behavior from “glassy” (hard and 
brittle) to “rubbery” (elastic and flexible). Thermal behavior was studied by 
Cao et al. [26], who analyzed the Tg of MWCNT-enforced starch nanocom -
posites. The DSC curves showed that by incorporating 0–3 wt% MWCNT filler 
into a PS matrix, the Tg for the starch-rich phase shifted from 16.5°C to 25.3°C. 
The dependence of Tg on the MWCNT content may be attributed to the 
occurrence of intermolecular interactions between the starch and the 
MWCNTs, which reduce the flexibility of the starch molecular chains in contact 
with the MWCNT surface [26].
DMTA was used to investigate the change in Tg when CNC was introduced 
into a GPSt matrix [120]. Figure 11.8 shows the curves for loss factor (tan delta) 
as a function of temperature for GPSt/CNC composites. The curve for GPSt 
revealed two thermal transitions that correspond to the two separate phases in 
GPSt [161]. The upper transition (19.6°C) assigned to a starch-rich phase is 
regarded as the Tg of GPSt; the lower transition ( −57.2°C) was due to a starch-
poor phase. In the GPSt/CNC composites, both the upper and lower transitions 
shifted to higher temperatures, which indicated that both the starch-rich and 
starch-poor phases interacted well with CNC. CNC improved the intermolecu -
lar interaction of GPSt in the starch-rich phase by bringing adjacent chains of 
starch closer, restraining chain mobility, and reducing the free volume [162], 
thereby raising the Tg of nanocomposites as the CNC content increased. It was 
noted that a double peak appeared at 31.6°C and 46.4°C in GPSt/CNC com -
posites with a CNC content of 5 wt% in which CNC aggregation was obvious 
when observed by SEM. Aggregation of CNC resulted in an uneven fractured 
surface of the GPSt matrix and dispersion of the CNC-filler phase. The higher 246  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
transition temperature (46.4°C) may have been due to a CNC-rich phase, while 
the lower transition (31.6°C) to a CNC-poor phase [120].
11.3.1.2  Factors  Affecting  Glass  Transition  It can be concluded that 
with the addition of nanofillers, the Tg of starch-based nanocomposites tends 
to shift to a higher temperature as compared to the neat matrix [26, 60, 120] 
because interactions between the nanofiller and the starch matrix can hinder 
polymer chain mobility. Since Tg is closely correlated to the mobility of the 
polymer, the factors that restrict polymer mobility may affect the glass 
transition—the greater the resistance, the higher Tg. This trend is likely related 
to the dispersion state of the nanofiller, which can restrict the movement of 
starch chains. Another possible explanation is linked to the structure of the 
nanofiller. Xu et al. [163] attributed the increase in Tg to the formation of an 
intercalated structure. Surface structures such as hydrogen bonds established 
between the -OH groups of the nanofiller and those of the starch chains may 
reduce the starch chain mobility and affect the glass transition.
11.3.2 Thermal Decomposition Behavior of Starch-Based 
Nanocomposites
The thermal decomposition temperature is the temperature at the maximum 
rate of mass loss, that is, the peak temperature shown in DTG curves. The Figure 11.8  Dependence of Tan delta upon temperature for glycerol plasticized 
potato starch (GPSt)-based nanocomposites with different chitin nanoparticle (CNP) 
contents. Reprinted with permission from Reference [120].0.30
0.24
0.18
0.12
0.06
0.00
0.24
0.200.16
0.12
0.080.04
0.20
0.16
0.12
0.08
0.04Tan delt a(c) 5 wt% CNP
(b) 2 wt% CNP
(a) 0% CNP–80 –60 –40 –20 0 2 0 40 60
–80 –60 –40 –20 0 2 0 40 60
–80 –60 –40 –20 0 2 0 40 60
Temperatur e (°C)THERMAL BEHAVIOR Of STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES   247
decomposition temperature of soluble starch was 310.1°C, but changed with 
the addition of nanofiller. It was reported [164] that carboxylated multiwalled 
carbon nanotubes (CMWNTs) could increase the thermal stability of the TPS 
matrix. TGA curves (seen in Fig. 11.9) were recorded over the temperature 
range of 25 to 450°C to evaluate the thermal stability of TPS and TPS/CMWNT 
nanocomposites. According to the TGA curves, the first weight-loss stage of 
TPS and TPS/CMWNT nanocomposites, ascribed mainly to water evapora -
tion, occurred at about 100°C; the second stage of weight loss was the decom -
position of starch and the removal of glycerol [165]. The third stage, over a 
range of 260–315°C, showed that the rate of weight loss gradually decreased 
with an increase in CMWNT content. Compared with TPS, the CMWNTs were 
more stable, and the weight loss due to the decomposition of free carboxyl 
groups on the surface of CMWNTs was only 2 wt%. The effect of CMWNTs 
on the thermal stability of the nanocomposites may be explained by a barrier 
function of the CMWNTs that hindered diffusion of the degradation products 
from the bulk of the polymer to the gas phase [166]. Additionally, carboxyl 
groups on the surface of CMWNTs may improve interfacial interactions 
between CMWNTs and the TPS matrix, and therefore increase the activation 
energy of degradation [164].
Generally, the incorporation of clay into the polymer matrix was found to 
enhance thermal stability by acting as an insulator and a barrier to the mass 
transport of volatile products generated during decomposition [149]. Com -
pared with organic materials, inorganic materials had better thermal stability Figure 11.9  Thermogravimetric curves for thermoplastic starch (TPS), carboxylate 
multiwalled carbon nanotubes (CMWNTs), and TPS/CMWNT nanocomposites con -
taining 1 wt% and 2 wt% CMWNTs. Reprinted with permission from Reference [164].100
80
60
40
20
0
0 5 0 1 00 150200 250 300 350 400 45090
85
80
7570
65
60Weight loss (%)
260 2 70 280 2 90 300 3 10
Temperatur e (°C)TPS
TPS containing
1 wt% CMWNT s
2 wt% CMWNT sTPS containing
CMWNT s248  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
and thermal resistant properties; therefore, the introduction of inorganic par -
ticles should improve the thermal stability of organic polymer materials, as 
reported by Huang et al. [149].
As regards the starch nanocrystals-filled nanocomposites, a wide peak 
around 113°C in the DTG curves that was associated with the maximum rate 
of water loss in the neat starch film disappeared in the nanocomposites. This 
result was attributed to the presence of hydrogen bonding between glycerol 
and starch nanocrystals in the composite, and to the reduced phase separation 
observed by SEM. Moreover, in the first step of decomposition the nanocrystal 
filled starch-based composite film showed higher water content than the neat 
starch matrix. This indicated an increased availability of hydroxyl groups ready 
for the formation of hydrogen bonds with the absorbed water [115].
11.4 CONCLUSIONS AND PROSPECTS
Starch-based nanocomposites are environmentally friendly materials based on 
renewable agricultural resources that show great promise for potential appli -
cations as high performance biodegradable materials. In this chapter, mor -
phologies and thermal behavior of starch-based nanocomposites are discussed 
to provide insight into the internal structure of these nanocomposites. All the 
properties and thermal behaviors have a close correlation with the structure 
of the starch-based nanocomposites, especially the structure of the interface 
between the starch matrix and the nanofiller. It is essential to establish the 
complex structure–property relationships in various nanocomposites, and to 
design the optimal structure based on these relationships to obtain nanocom -
posites with excellent properties. Various properties of nanofillers, including 
shape, size, concentration in the starch matrix, functional groups on the nano -
filler surface, and the mechanisms of interactions between the nanofiller and 
the matrix, must be altered to obtain the desired nanocomposite properties.
From this chapter, we can conclude that external performance is closely 
tied to the internal structure. The distribution of nanofiller can be regulated 
by choosing different kinds of nanofillers with the desired characteristics 
(shape, size), changing the amount of filler added to the starch matrix, and by 
chemical modification. Fracture morphology vividly reflects the interaction 
between the nanofiller and the starch matrix, which is affected by the structure 
of both. The crystalline structure may be influenced by nuclear crystallization 
and retrogradation. Retrogradation can be controlled to some extent, as it is 
dependent on the abilities of the additives to form hydrogen bonds with starch 
molecules. The thermal decomposition behavior may be affected by many 
factors including nanofiller structure, concentration of the nanofiller in the 
nanocomposite, the type of starch, and the methods used for preparation of 
the nanocomposites. Tg of the starch-based nanocomposites tends to be higher 
with the addition of nanofiller because interactions between the nanofiller and 
starch matrix restrict the mobility of the starch chain.REfERENCES   249
Starch-based nanocomposites are a valid answer for production of low cost, 
highly competitive, environmentally friendly materials if the parameters and 
their interactions identified above are optimized. Through a concerted effort 
by academia, industry, government, and consumers, starch-based nanocompos -
ites with outstanding performance can be successfully developed and com -
mercialized for a wide range of applications, such as packaging, agricultural 
devices, or biomedical applications.
REFERENCES
 [1] Mohanty, A.K., Misra, M., and Hinrichsen, G. (2000) Biofibres, biodegradable 
polymers and biocomposites: An overview. Macromolecular Materials and Engi -
neering , 276/277 (1), 1–24.
 [2] Mathew, A.P ., Dufresne, A. (2002) Morphological investigation of nanocompos -
ites from sorbitol plasticized starch and tunicin whiskers. Biomacromolecules , 
3(3), 609–617.
 [3] Buchanan, R.A., Weislogel, O.E., Russell, C.R., and Rist, C.E. (1968) Starch in 
rubber. Zinc starch xanthate in latex masterbatching. IEC Product Research and 
Development , 7(2), 155–158.
 [4] Buchanan, R.A., Kwolek, W.F., Katz, H.C., and Russell, C.R. (1971) Starch in 
rubber. Influence of starch type and concomitant variables in reinforcement of 
styrene-butadiene rubbers. Starch/Stärke , 23(10), 350–359.
 [5] Buchanan, R.A., Katz, H.C., Russell, C.R., and Rist, C.E. (1971) Starch in rubber. 
Powered elastomers from starch-encased latex particles. Rubber Journal , 153(10), 
28–35.
 [6] Buchanan, R.A. (1974) Starch xanthide styrene-butadiene rubbers. Effect of 
prolonged water immersion. Starch/Stärke , 26(5), 165–172.
 [7] Buchanan, R.A., Doane, W.M., Russel, C.R., and Kwolek, W.F. (1975) Starch 
xanthide reinforced styrene-butadiene rubber: Compounding to reduce water 
sensitivity. Journal of Elastomers and Plastics , 7(2), 95–113.
 [8] Abbott, T.P ., Doane, W.M., and Russell, C.R. (1973) Starch xanthide-encased 
rubbers. Rubber Age , 105(8), 43–49.
 [9] Cao, X.D., Chen, Y., Chang, P .R., Stumborg, M., and Huneault, M.A. (2008) Green 
composites reinforced with hemp nanocrystals in plasticized starch. Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science , 109(6), 3804–3810.
 [10] Bhattacharya, M. (1998) Stress relaxation of starch/synthetic polymer blends. 
Journal of Materials Science , 33(16), 4131–4139.
 [11] Shogren, R. (1997) Water vapor permeability of biodegradable polymers. Journal 
of Environmental Polymer Degradation , 5(2), 91–95.
 [12] Majdzadeh-Ardakani, K., Nazari, B. (2010) Improving the mechanical properties 
of thermoplastic starch/poly(vinyl alcohol)/clay nanocomposites. Composites 
Science and Technology , 70(10), 1557–1563.
 [13] Ray, S.S., Okamoto, M. (2003) Polymer/layered silicate nanocomposites:  
A review from preparation to processing. Progress in Polymer Science , 28(11), 
1539–1641.250  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
 [14] Sain, M.M., Kokta, B.V., and Imbert, C. (1994) Structure-property relationships 
of wood fiber-filled polypropylene composites. Polymer-Plastics Technology and 
Engineering , 33(1), 89–104.
 [15] Gassan, J., Bledzki, A.K. (1997) The influence of fiber-surface treatment on the 
mechanical properties of jute-polypropylene composites. Composites Part A: 
Applied Science and Manufacturing , 28(12), 1001–1005.
 [16] Hornsby, P .R., Hinrichsen, E., and Tarverdi, K. (1997) Preparation and properties 
of polypropylene composites reinforced with wheat and flax straw fibres: Part II 
analysis of composite microstructure and mechanical properties. Journal of Mate -
rials Science , 32(4), 1009–1015.
 [17] Kvien, I., Sugiyama, J., Votrubec, M., and Oksman, K. (2007) Characterization of 
starch based nanocomposites. Journal of Materials Science , 42(19), 8163–8171.
 [18] Liao, H.T., Wu, C.S. (2005) Synthesis and characterization of polyethylene-octene 
elastomer/clay/biodegradable starch nanocomposites. Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science , 97(1), 397–404.
 [19] Chen, B., Evans, J.R.G. (2005) Thermoplastic starch-clay nanocomposites and 
their characteristics. Carbohydrate Polymers , 61(4), 455–463.
 [20] Chen, M., Chen, B., and Evans, J.R.G. (2005) Novel thermoplastic starch-clay 
nanocomposite foams. Nanotechnology , 16(10), 2334–2337.
 [21] Pandey, J.K., Singh, R.P . (2005) Green nanocomposites from renewable resources: 
Effect of plasticizer on the structure and material properties of clay-filled starch. 
Starch/Stärke , 57(1), 8–15.
 [22] Namazi, H., Mosadegh, M., and Dadkhah, A. (2009) New intercalated layer sili -
cate nanocomposites based on synthesized starch-g-PCL prepared via solution 
intercalation and in situ  polymerization methods: As a comparative study. Car-
bohydrate Polymers , 75(4), 665–669.
 [23] Wilhelm, H.M., Sierakowski, M.R., Souza, G.P ., and Wypych, F. (2003) Starch 
films reinforced with mineral clay. Carbohydrate Polymers , 52(2), 101–110.
 [24] Chang, P .R., Zheng, P .W., Liu, B.X., Anderson, D.P ., Yu, J.G., and Ma, X.F. (2011) 
Characterization of magnetic soluble starch-functionalized carbon nanotubes 
and its application for the adsorption of the dyes. Journal of Hazardous Materials , 
186(2–3), 2144–2150.
 [25] Lii, C.Y., Stobinski, L., Tomasik, P ., and Liao, C.D. (2003) Single-walled carbon 
nanotube–potato amylose complex. Carbohydrate Polymers , 51(1), 93–98.
 [26] Cao, X.D., Chen, Y., Chang, P .R., and Huneault, M.A. (2007) Preparation and 
properties of plasticized starch/multiwalled carbon nanotubes composites. 
Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 106(2), 1431–1437.
 [27] Li, R., Liu, C.H., and Ma, J. (2011) Studies on the properties of graphene oxide-
reinforced starch biocomposites. Carbohydrate Polymers , 84(1), 631–637.
 [28] Qi, Q., Wu, Y.P ., Tian, M., Liang, G.H., Zhang, L.Q., and Ma, J. (2006) Modification 
of starch for high performance elastomer. Polymer , 47(11), 3896–3903.
 [29] Zhao, Y.C., Yang, X.L., Zhan, L., Ou, S.J., and Tian, J.N. (2011) High electrocata -
lytic activity of PtRu nanoparticles supported on starch-functionalized multi-
walled carbon nanotubes for ethanol oxidation. Journal of Materials Chemistry , 
21(12), 4257–4263.REfERENCES   251
 [30] Andrews, R., Weisenberger, M.C. (2004) Carbon nanotube polymer composites. 
Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science , 8(1), 31–37.
 [31] Matsui, H., Karuppuchamy, S., Yamaguchi, J., and Yoshihara, M. (2007) Electronic 
behavior of calcined materials obtained from SnO 2 hydrosol/starch composite 
materials. Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry , 189(2–3), 
280–285.
 [32] Bai, J. (2003) Evidence of the reinforcement role of chemical vapour deposition 
multi-walled carbon nanotubes in a polymer matrix. Carbon , 41(6), 1325–1328.
 [33] Mathew, A.P ., Thielemans, W., and Dufresne, A. (2008) Mechanical properties of 
nanocomposites from sorbitol plasticized starch and tunicin whiskers. Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science , 109(6), 4065–4074.
 [34] Cao, X., Chen, Y., Chang, P .R., Muir, A.D., and Falk, G. (2008) Starch-based 
nanocomposites reinforced with flax cellulose nanocrystals. eXPRESS Polymer 
Letters , 2(7), 502–510.
 [35] Anglès, M.N., Dufresne, A. (2001) Plasticized starch/tunicin whiskers nanocom -
posite materials. 2. Mechanical behavior. Macromolecules , 34(9), 2921–2931.
 [36] Chen, Y., Liu, C.H., Chang, P .R., Cao, X.D., and Anderson, D.P . (2009) Bionano -
composites based on pea starch and cellulose nanowhiskers hydrolyzed from pea 
hull fibre: Effect of hydrolysis time. Carbohydrate Polymers , 76(4), 607–615.
 [37] Alemdar, A., Sain, M. (2008) Biocomposites from wheat straw nanofibers: Mor -
phology, thermal and mechanical properties. Composites Science and Technology , 
68(2), 557–565.
 [38] Chen, Y., Liu, C.H., Chang, P .R., Anderson, D.P ., and Huneault, M.A. (2009) Pea 
starch-based composite films with pea hull fibers and pea hull fiber-derived 
nanowhiskers. Polymer Engineering and Science , 49(2), 369–378.
 [39] Eichhorn, S.J. (2011) Cellulose nanowhiskers: Promising materials for advanced 
applications. Soft Matter , 7, 303–315.
 [40] Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., Dole, P ., and Dufresne, A. (2006) Thermoplas -
tic starch-waxy maize starch nanocrystals nanocomposites. Biomacromolecules , 
7(2), 531–539.
 [41] Viguié, J., Molina-Boisseau, S., and Dufresne, A. (2007) Processing and charac -
terization of waxy maize starch films plasticized by sorbitol and reinforced with 
starch nanocrystals. Macromolecular Bioscience , 7(11), 1206–1216.
 [42] García, N.L., Ribba, L., Dufresne, A., Aranguren, M., and Goyanes, S. (2011) 
Effect of glycerol on the morphology of nanocomposites made from thermoplas -
tic starch and starch nanocrystals. Carbohydrate Polymers , 84(1), 203–210.
 [43] Tang, H.L., Xiong, H.G., Tang, S.W., and Zou, P . (2009) A starch-based biodegrad -
able film modified by nano silicon dioxide. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 
113(1), 34–40.
 [44] Singh, V., Singh, S.K., Pandey, S., and Kumar, P . (2011) Sol-gel synthesis and 
characterization of adsorbent and photoluminescent nanocomposites of starch 
and silica. Journal of Non-Crystalline Solids , 357(1), 194–201.
 [45] Xiong, H.G., Tang, S.W., Tang, H.L., and Zou, P . (2008) The structure and proper -
ties of a starch-based biodegradable film. Carbohydrate Polymers , 71(2), 
263–268.252  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
 [46] Yun, Y.H., Hwang, K.J., Wee, Y.J., and Yoon, S.D. (2011) Synthesis, physical prop -
erties, and characterization of starch-based blend films by adding nano-sized 
TiO 2/poly(methyl metacrylate-co-acrylamide). Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science , 120(3), 1850–1858.
 [47] Sadjadi, M.S., Meskinfam, M., Sadeghi, B., Jazdarreh, H., and Zare, K. (2010) In 
situ biomimetic synthesis, characterization and in vitro investigation of bone-like 
nanohydroxyapatite in starch matrix. Materials Chemistry and Physics , 124(1), 
217–222.
 [48] Ma, X.F., Chang, P .R., Yang, J.W., and Yu, J.G. (2009) Preparation and properties 
of glycerol plasticized-pea starch/zinc oxide-starch bionanocomposites. Carbohy -
drate Polymers , 75(3), 472–478.
 [49] Wu, H.X., Liu, C.H., Chen, J.G., Chang, P .R., Chen, Y., and Anderson, D.P . (2009) 
Structure and properties of starch/ α-zirconium phosphate nanocomposite films. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 77(2), 358–364.
 [50] Wilhelm, H.M., Sierakowski, M.R., Souza, G.P ., and Wypych, F. (2003) The influ -
ence of layered compounds on the properties of starch/layered compound com -
posites. Polymer International , 52(6), 1035–1044.
 [51] Yu, J.G., Yang, J.W., Liu, B.X., and Ma, X.F. (2009) Preparation and characteriza -
tion of glycerol plasticized-pea starch/ZnO-carboxymethylcellulose sodium 
nanocomposites. Bioresource Technology , 100(11), 2832–2841.
 [52] Kaushik, A., Singh, M., and Verma, G. (2010) Green nanocomposites based on 
thermoplastic starch and steam exploded cellulose nanofibrils from wheat straw. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 82(2), 337–345.
 [53] Ma, X.F., Yu, J.G., and Wang, N. (2008) Glycerol plasticized-starch/multiwall 
carbon nanotube composites for electroactive polymers. Composites Science and 
Technology , 68, 268–273.
 [54] Giannelis, E.P . (1996) Polymer layered silicate nanocomposites. Advanced Mate -
rials, 8(1), 29–35.
 [55] Ray, S.S., Bousmina, M. (2005) Biodegradable polymers and their layered silicate 
nanocomposites: In greening the 21st century materials world. Progress in Mate -
rials Science , 50(8), 962–1079.
 [56] Xie, F.W., Halley, P .J., and Avérous, L. (2011) Bio-nanocomposites based on 
starch. In: Nanocomposites with Biodegradable Polymers: Synthesis, Properties 
and Future Perspectives , ed. V. Mittal. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 
234–253.
 [57] Zhao, R.X., Torley, P ., and Halley, P .J. (2008) Emerging biodegradable materials: 
Starch- and protein-based bio-nanocomposites. Journal of Materials Science , 
43(9), 3058–3071.
 [58] Mondragón, M., Mancilla, J.E., and Rodríguez-González, F.J. (2008) Nanocom -
posites from plasticized high-amylopectin, normal and high-amylose maize 
starches. Polymer Engineering and Science , 48(7), 1261–1267.
 [59] Habibi, Y., Goffin, A.L., Schiltz, N., Duquesne, E., Dubois, P ., and Dufresne, A. 
(2008) Bionanocomposites based on poly( ε-caprolactone)-grafted cellulose 
nanocrystals by ring-opening polymerization. Journal of Materials Chemistry , 
18(41), 5002–5010.REfERENCES   253
 [60] Chivrac, F., Pollet, E., and Avérous, L. (2009) Progress in nano-biocomposites 
based on polysaccharides and nanoclays. Materials Science and Engineering R: 
Reports , 67(1), 1–17.
 [61] Chivrac, F., Gueguen, O., Pollet, E., Ahzi, S., Makradi, A., and Avérous, L. (2008) 
Micromechanical modeling and characterization of the effective properties in 
starch-based nano-biocomposites. Acta Biomaterialia , 4(6), 1707–1714.
 [62] Lu, Y.F., Yang, Y., Sellinger, A., Lu, M.C., Huang, J.M., Fan, H.Y., Haddad, R., 
Lopez, G., Burns, A.R., Sasaki, D.Y., Shelnutt, J., and Brinker, C.J. (2001) Self-
assembly of mesoscopically ordered chromatic polydiacetylene/silica nanocom -
posites. Nature , 410, 913–917.
 [63] Merkel, T.C., Freeman, B.D., Spontak, R.J., He, Z., Pinnau, I., Meakin, P ., and  
Hill, A.J. (2002) Ultrapermeable, reverse-selective nanocomposite membranes. 
Science , 296(5567), 519–522.
 [64] Gross, R.A., Kalra, B. (2002) Biodegradable polymers for the environment. 
Science , 297(5582), 803–807.
 [65] Usuki, A., Hasegawa, N., Kadoura, H., and Okamoto, T. (2001) Three-dimensional 
observation of structure and morphology in nylon-6/clay nanocomposite. Nano 
Letters , 1(5), 271–272.
 [66] Isik, I., Yilmazer, U., and Bayram, G. (2003) Impact modified epoxy/montmorillonite 
nanocomposites: Synthesis and characterization. Polymer , 44(20), 6371–6377.
 [67] Lee, K.M., Han, C.D. (2003) Effect of hydrogen bonding on the rheology of 
polycarbonate/organoclay nanocomposites. Polymer , 44(16), 4573–4588.
 [68] Koerner, H., Jacobs, J.D., Tomlin, D.W., Busbee, J.D., and Vaia, R.A. (2004) Tuning 
polymer nanocomposite morphology: AC electric field manipulation of epoxy-
montmorillonite (clay) suspensions. Advanced Materials , 16(4), 297–302.
 [69] Huang, M.F., Yu, J.G., Ma, X.F., and Jin, P . (2005) High performance biodegrad -
able thermoplastic starch-EMMT nanoplastics. Polymer , 46(9), 3157–3162.
 [70] Majdzadeh-Ardakani, K., Navarchian, A.H., and Sadeghi, F. (2010) Optimization 
of mechanical properties of thermoplastic starch/clay nanocomposites. Carbohy -
drate Polymers , 79(3), 547–554.
 [71] Avella, M., De Vliger, J.J., Errico, M.E., Fischer, S., Vacca, P ., and Volpe, M.G. 
(2005) Biodegradable starch/clay nanocomposite films for food packaging appli -
cations. Food Chemistry , 93(3), 467–474.
 [72] Zhang, Q.X., Yu, Z.Z., Xie, X.L., Naito, K., and Kagawa, Y. (2007) Preparation 
and crystalline morphology of biodegradable starch/clay nanocomposites. 
Polymer , 48(24), 7193–7200.
 [73] Chiou, B.S., Yee, E., Glenn, G.M., and Orts, W.J. (2005) Rheology of starch-clay 
nanocomposites. Carbohydrate Polymers , 59(4), 467–475.
 [74] Dean, K., Yu, L., and Wu, D.Y. (2007) Preparation and characterization of melt-
extruded thermoplastic starch/clay nanocomposites. Composites Science and 
Technology , 67(3–4), 413–421.
 [75] Wang, X., Zhang, X., Liu, H., and Wang, N. (2009) Impact of pre-processing of 
montmorillonite on the properties of melt-extruded thermoplastic starch/
montmorillonite nanocomposites. Starch/Stärke , 61(9), 489–494.
 [76] Chivrac, F., Pollet, E., Dole, P ., and Avérous, L. (2010) Starch-based nano-
biocomposites: Plasticizer impact on the montmorillonite exfoliation process. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 79(4), 941–947.254  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
 [77] Wang, N., Zhang, X., Han, N., and Bai, S. (2009) Effect of citric acid and process -
ing on the performance of thermoplastic starch/montmorillonite nanocompos -
ites. Carbohydrate Polymers , 76(1), 68–73.
 [78] Huang, M., Yu, J. (2006) Structure and properties of thermoplastic corn starch/
montmorillonite biodegradable composites. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 
99(1), 170–176.
 [79] Tang, X., Alavi, S., and Herald, T.J. (2008) Effects of plasticizers on the structure 
and properties of starch/clay nanocomposites films. Carbohydrate Polymers , 
74(3), 552–558.
 [80] Dai, H.G., Chang, P .R., Geng, F.Y., Yu, J.G., and Ma, X.F. (2009) Preparation and 
properties of thermoplastic starch/montmorillonite nanocomposite using N-(2-
hydroxyethyl) formamide as a new additive. Journal of Polymers and the Envi -
ronment , 17(4), 225–232.
 [81] Zeppa, C., Gouanvé, F., and Espuche, E. (2009) Effect of a plasticizer on the 
structure of biodegradable starch/clay nanocomposites: Thermal, water-sorption, 
and oxygen-barrier properties. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 112(4), 
2044–2056.
 [82] Lagaly, G. (1986) Interaction of alkylamines with different types of layered com -
pounds. Solid State Ionics , 22(1), 43–51.
 [83] Vaia, R.A., Teukolsky, R.K., and Giannelis, E.P . (1994) Interlayer structure and 
molecular environment of alkylammonium layered silicates. Chemistry of Materi -
als, 6(7), 1017–1022.
 [84] Hackett, E., Manias, E., and Giannelis, E.P . (1998) Molecular dynamics simula -
tions of organically modified layered silicates. Journal of Chemical Physics , 
108(17), 7410–7415.
 [85] Vaia, R.A., Giannelis, E.P . (1997) Polymer melt intercalation in organically modi -
fied layered silicates: Model predictions and experiment. Macromolecules , 30(25), 
8000–8009.
 [86] Pollet, E., Delcourt, C., Alexandre, M., and Dubois, P . (2004) Organic-inorganic 
nanohybrids obtained by sequential copolymerization of ε-caprolactone and L, 
L-lactide from activated clay surface. Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics , 
205(16), 2235–2244.
 [87] McGlashan, S.A., Halley, P .J. (2003) Preparation and characterisation of biode -
gradable starch-based nanocomposite materials. Polymer International , 52(11), 
1767–1773.
 [88] Alexandre, M., Dubois, P . (2000) Polymer-layered silicate nanocomposites: Prepa -
ration, properties and uses of a new class of materials. Materials Science and 
Engineering, R: Reports , 28(1–2), 1–63.
 [89] Liu, H.H., Chaudhary, D., Yusa, S., and Tadé, M.O. (2011) Preparation and char -
acterization of sorbitol modified nanoclay with high amylose bionanocomposites. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 85(1), 97–104.
 [90] Dennis, H.R., Hunter, D.L., Chang, D., Kim, S., White, J.L., Cho, J.W., and Paul, 
D.R. (2001) Effect of melt processing conditions on the extent of exfoliation in 
organoclay-based nanocomposites. Polymer , 42(23), 9513–9522.
 [91] Messersmith, P .B., Giannelis, E.P . (1995) Synthesis and barrier properties of 
poly( ε-caprolactone)-layered silicate nanocomposites. Journal of Polymer Science 
Part A: Polymer Chemistry , 33(7), 1047–1057.REfERENCES   255
 [92] Kampeerapappun, P ., Aht-ong, D., Pentrakoon, D., and Srikulkit, K. (2007) Prep -
aration of cassava starch/montmorillonite composite film. Carbohydrate Poly -
mers, 67(2), 155–163.
 [93] Van Soest, J.J.G., DeWit, D., and Vliegenthart, J.F.G. (1996) Mechanical proper -
ties of thermoplastic waxy maize starch. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 
61(11), 1927–1937.
 [94] Van Soest, J.J.G., Borger, D.B. (1997) Structure and properties of compression-
molded thermoplastic starch materials from normal and high-amylose maize 
starches. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 64(4), 631–644.
 [95] Singh, C., Balazs, A.C. (2000) Effect of polymer architecture on the miscibility 
of polymer/clay mixtures. Polymer International , 49(5), 469–471.
 [96] Robello, D.R., Yamaguchi, N., Blanton, T., and Barnes, C. (2004) Spontaneous 
formation of an exfoliated polystyrene-clay nanocomposite using a star-shaped 
polymer. Journal of the American Chemical Society , 126(26), 8118–8119.
 [97] Liu, H.H., Chaudhary, D., Yusa, S., and Tadé, M.O. (2011) Glycerol/starch/Na+-
montmorillonite nanocomposites: A XRD, FTIR, DSC and 1H NMR study. Car-
bohydrate Polymers , 83(4), 1591–1597.
 [98] Wu, Y.P ., Ma, Y., Wang, Y.Q., and Zhang, L.Q. (2004) Effects of characteristics of 
rubber, mixing and vulcanization on the structure and properties of rubber/clay 
nanocomposites by melt blending. Macromolecular Materials and Engineering , 
289(10), 890–894.
 [99] Lee, S.Y., Hanna, M.A. (2009) Tapioca starch-poly(lactic acid)-Cloisite 30B nano -
composite foams. Polymer Composites , 30(5), 665–672.
[100] Pérez, C.J., Alvarez, V.A., and Vázquez, A. (2008) Creep behaviour of layered 
silicate/starch-polycaprolactone blends nanocomposites. Materials Science and 
Engineering: A , 480(1–2), 259–265.
[101] Dean, K.M., Do, M.D., Petinakis, E., and Yu, L. (2008) Key interaction in biode -
gradable thermoplastic starch/poly(vinyl alcohol)/montmorillonite micro- and 
nanocomposites. Composites Science and Technology , 68(6), 1453–1462.
[102] Spiridon, I., Popescu, M.C., Bodârl ău, R., and Vasile, C. (2008) Enzymatic degra -
dation of some nanocomposites of poly(vinyl alcohol) with starch. Polymer Deg -
radation and Stability , 93(10), 1884–1890.
[103] Arroyo, O.H., Huneault, M.A., Favis, B.D., and Bureau, M.N. (2010) Processing 
and properties of PLA/thermoplastic starch/montmorillonite nanocomposites. 
Polymer Composites , 31(1), 114–127.
[104] Jiang, L., Shen, X.P ., Wu, J.L., and Shen, K.C. (2010) Preparation and character -
ization of graphene/poly(vinyl alcohol) nanocomposites. Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science , 118(1), 275–279.
[105] Liu, P .G., Gong, K.C., Xiao, P ., and Xiao, M. (2000) Preparation and characteriza -
tion of poly(vinyl acetate)-intercalated graphite oxide composite. Journal of 
Materials Chemistry , 10, 933–935.
[106] Matsuo, Y., Tahara, K., and Sugie, Y. (1997) Structure and thermal properties of 
poly (ethylene oxide)-intercalated graphite oxide. Carbon , 35(1), 113–120.
[107] Anglès, M.N., Dufresne, A. (2000) Plasticized starch/tunicin whiskers nanocom -
posites: 1. Structural analysis. Macromolecules , 33(22), 8344–8353.
[108] Habibi, Y., Lucia, L.A., and Rojas, O.J. (2010) Cellulose nanocrystals: Chemistry, 
self-assembly, and applications. Chemical Reviews , 110(6), 3479–3500.256  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
[109] Chang, P .R., Jian, R., Zheng, P ., Yu, J., and Ma, X. (2010) Preparation and proper -
ties of glycerol plasticized-starch (GPS)/cellulose nanoparticle (CN) composites. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 79(2), 301–305.
[110] Teixeira, E.D.M., Lotti, C., Corrêa, A.C., Teodoro, K.B.R., Marconcini, J.M., and 
Mattoso, L.H.C. (2011) Thermoplastic corn starch reinforced with cotton cellu -
lose nanofibers. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 120(4), 2428–2433.
[111] Wang, Y.X., Chang, C.Y., and Zhang, L.N. (2010) Effects of freezing/thawing 
cycles and cellulose nanowhiskers on structure and properties of biocompatible 
starch/PVA sponges. Macromolecular Materials and Engineering , 295(2), 
137–145.
[112] Teixeira, E.D.M., Pasquini, D., Curvelo, A.A.S., Corradini, E., Belgacem, M.N., 
and Dufresne, A. (2009) Cassava bagasse cellulose nanofibrils reinforced ther -
moplastic cassava starch. Carbohydrate Polymers , 78(3), 422–431.
[113] Le Corre, D., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2010) Starch nanoparticles: A review. 
Biomacromolecules , 11(5), 1139–1153.
[114] Lin, N., Huang, J., Chang, P .R., Anderson, D.P ., and Yu, J.H. (2011) Preparation, 
modification, and application of starch nanocrystals in nanomaterials: A review. 
Journal of Nanomaterials . Article ID 573687, 13 pages.
[115] García, N.L., Ribba, L., Dufresne, A., Aranguren, M.I., and Goyanes, S. (2009) 
Physico-mechanical properties of biodegradable starch nanocomposites. Macro -
molecular Materials and Engineering , 294(3), 169–177.
[116] Nair, K.G., Dufresne, A., Gandini, A., and Belgacem, M.N. (2003) Crab shell 
chitin whiskers reinforced natural rubber nanocomposites. 3. Effect of chemical 
modification of chitin whiskers. Biomacromolecules , 4(6), 1835–1842.
[117] Zeng, J.B., He, Y.S., Li, S.L., and Wang, Y.Z. (2012) Chitin whiskers: An overview. 
Biomacromolecules , 13(1), 1–11.
[118] Wang, J., Wang, Z.B., Li, J., Wang, B.J., Liu, J., Chen, P ., Miao, M.H., and Gu, Q. 
(2012) Chitin nanocrystals grafted with poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyval -
erate) and their effects on thermal behavior of PHBV. Carbohydrate Polymers , 
87(1), 784–789.
[119] Dufresne, A. (2008) Polysaccharide nanocrystal reinforced nanocomposites. 
Canadian Journal of Chemistry , 86(6), 484–494.
[120] Chang, P .R., Jian, R.J., Yu, J.G., and Ma, X.F. (2010) Starch-based composites 
reinforced with novel chitin nanoparticles. Carbohydrate Polymers , 80(2), 
420–425.
[121] Kristo, E., Biliaderis, C.G. (2007) Physical properties of starch nanocrystal-
reinforced pullulan films. Carbohydrate Polymers , 68(1), 146–158.
[122] Dionne, P .J., Ozisik, R., and Picu, C.R. (2005) Structure and dynamics of polyeth -
ylene nanocomposites. Macromolecules , 38(22), 9351–9358.
[123] Smith, J.S., Bedrov, D., and Smith, G.D. (2003) A molecular dynamics simulation 
study of nanoparticle interactions in a model polymer-nanoparticle composite. 
Composites Science and Technology , 63(11), 1599–1605.
[124] Dubief, D., Samain, E., and Dufresne, A. (1999) Polysaccharide microcrystals 
reinforced amorphous poly( β-hydroxyoctanoate) nanocomposite materials. 
Macromolecules , 32(18), 5765–5771.REfERENCES   257
[125] Dufresne, A., Cavaillé, J.Y. (1998) Clustering and percolation effects in micro -
crystalline starch-reinforced thermoplastic. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: 
Polymer Physics , 36(12), 2211–2224.
[126] Morin, A., Dufresne, A. (2002) Nanocomposites of chitin whiskers from Riftia  
tubes and poly(caprolactone). Macromolecules , 35(6), 2190–2199.
[127] Siró, I., Plackett, D. (2010) Microfibrillated cellulose and new nanocomposite 
materials: A review. Cellulose , 17(3), 459–494.
[128] Angellier-Coussy, H., Putaux, J.L., Molina-Boisseau, S., Dufresne, A., Bertoft, E., 
and Perez, S. (2009) The molecular structure of waxy maize starch nanocrystals. 
Carbohydrate Research , 344(12), 1558–1566.
[129] Shioyama, H. (1997) Polymerization of isoprene and styrene in the interlayer 
spacing of graphite. Carbon , 35(10–11), 1664–1665.
[130] Matsuo, Y., Tahara, K., and Sugie, Y. (1996) Synthesis of poly(ethylene oxide)-
intercalated graphite oxide. Carbon , 34(5), 672–674.
[131] Wang, G.X., Wang, B., Park, J., Yang, J., Shen, X.P ., and Yao, J.N. (2009) Synthesis 
of enhanced hydrophilic and hydrophobic graphene oxide nanosheets by a sol -
vothermal method. Carbon , 47(1), 68–72.
[132] Hernan, L., Morales, J., and Santos, J. (1998) Synthesis and characterization of 
poly(ethylene oxide) nanocomposites of misfit layer chacogenides. Journal of 
Solid State Chemistry , 141(2), 323–329.
[133] Harris, D.J., Bonagamba, T.J., and Schmidt-Rohr, K. (1999) Conformation of 
poly(ethylene oxide) intercalated in clay and MoS 2 studied by two-dimensional 
double-quantum NMR. Macromolecules , 32(20), 6718–6724.
[134] Ding, Y., Jones, D.J., Maireles-Torres, P ., and Roziere, J. (1995) Two-dimensional 
nanocomposites: Alternating inorganic-organic polymer layers in zirconium 
phosphate. Chemistry of Materials , 7(3), 562–571.
[135] Wilson Jr., O.C., Olorunyolemi, T., Jaworski, A., Borum, L., Young, D., Siriwat, 
A., Dickens, E., Oriakhi, C., and Lerner, M. (1999) Surface and interfacial proper -
ties of polymer-intercalated layered double hydroxide nanocomposites. Applied 
Clay Science , 15(1–2), 265–279.
[136] Oriakhi, C.O., Farr, I.V., and Lerner, M.M. (1997) Thermal characterization of 
poly(styrene sulfonate)/layered double hydroxide nanocomposites. Clays and 
Clay Minerals , 45(2), 194–202.
[137] Chung, Y.L., Ansari, S., Estevez, L., Hayrapetyan, S., Giannelis, E.P ., and Lai, H.M. 
(2010) Preparation and properties of biodegradable starch-clay nanocomposites. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 79(2), 391–396.
[138] Vu, Y.T., Mark, J.E., Pham, L.H., and Engelhardt, M. (2001) Clay nanolayer rein -
forcement of cis-1,4-polyisoprene and epoxidized natural rubber. Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science , 82(6), 1391–1403.
[139] Mark, J.E. (2006) Some novel polymeric nanocomposites. Accounts of Chemical 
Research , 39(12), 881–888.
[140] Klemm, D., Schumann, D., Udhardt, U., and Marsch, S. (2001) Bacterial synthe -
sized cellulose-artificial blood vessels for microsurgery. Progress in Polymer 
Science , 26(9), 1561–1603.
[141] Wan, Y.Z., Luo, H.L., He, F., Liang, H., Huang, Y., and Li, X.L. (2009) Mechanical, 
moisture absorption, and biodegradation behaviours of bacterial cellulose  258  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
fibre-reinforced starch biocomposites. Composites Science and Technology , 69(7–
8), 1212–1217.
[142] Henriksson, M., Berglund, L.A. (2007) Structure and properties of cellulose 
nanocomposites films containing melamine formaldehyde. Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science , 106(4), 2817–2824.
[143] Famá, L.M., Pettarin, V., Goyanes, S.N., and Bernal, C.R. (2011) Starch/multi-
walled carbon nanotubes composites with improved mechanical properties. Car-
bohydrate Polymers , 83(3), 1226–1231.
[144] Cyras, V.P ., Manfredi, L.B., Ton-That, M.T., and Vazquez, A. (2008) Physical and 
mechanical properties of thermoplastic starch/montmorillonite nanocomposites 
films. Carbohydrate Polymers , 73(1), 55–63.
[145] Doh, J.G., Cho, I. (1998) Synthesis and properties of polystyrene-organoammonium 
montmorillonite hybrid. Polymer Bulletin , 41(5), 511–518.
[146] Park, H.M., Lee, W.K., Park, C.Y., Cho, W.J., and Ha, C.S. (2003) Environmentally 
friendly polymer hybrids. Part I: Mechanical, thermal, and barrier properties of 
thermoplastic starch/clay nanocomposites. Journal of Materials Science , 38(5), 
909–915.
[147] Ratnayake, W.S., Hoover, R., and Warkentin, T. (2002) Pea starch: Composition, 
structure and properties—A review. Starch/Stärke , 54(6), 217–234.
[148] Van Soest, J.J.G., Knooren, N. (1997) Influence of glycerol and water content on 
the structure and properties of extruded starch plastic sheets during aging. 
Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 64(7), 1411–1422.
[149] Huang, M.F., Yu, J.G., and Ma, X.F. (2004) Studies on the properties of 
montmorillonite-reinforced thermoplastic starch composites. Polymer , 45(20), 
7017–7023.
[150] Van Soest, J.J.G., Hulleman, S.H.D., De Wit, D., and Vliegenthart, J.F.G. (1996) 
Crystallinity in starch bioplastics. Industrial Crops and Products , 5(1), 11–22.
[151] Chaudhary, D.S. (2008) Understanding amylose crystallinity in starch-clay  
nanocomposites. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics , 46(10), 
979–987.
[152] Imberty, A., Chanzy, H., Pérez, S.J., Belèon, A., and Tran, V. (1988) The double-
helical nature of the crystalline part of A-starch. Journal of Molecular Biology , 
201(2), 365–378.
[153] Souza Rosa, R.C.R., Andrade, C.T. (2004) Effect of chitin addition on injection-
molded thermoplastic corn starch. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 92(4), 
2706–2713.
[154] Smits, A.L.M., Ruhnau, F.C., Vliegenthart, J.F.G., and Van Soest, J.J.G. (1998) 
Ageing of starch based systems as observed with FT-IR and solid state NMR 
spectroscopy. Starch/Stärke , 50(11–12), 478–483.
[155] Ma, X.F., Yu, J.G. (2004) The plasticizers containing amide groups for thermo -
plastic starch. Carbohydrate Polymers , 57(2), 197–203.
[156] Calvert, P . (1997) Biopolymers: The structure of starch. Nature , 389(6649), 
338–339.
[157] García, N.L., Famá, L., Dufresne, A., Aranguren, M., and Goyanes, S. (2009) A 
comparison between the physico-chemical properties of tuber and cereal starches. 
Food Research International , 42(8), 976–982.REfERENCES   259
[158] Ma, X.F., Yu, J.G., and Kennedy, J.F. (2005) Studies on the properties of natural 
fibers-reinforced thermoplastic starch composites. Carbohydrate Polymers , 62(1), 
19–24.
[159] Liu, D.G., Zhong, T.H., Chang, P .R., Li, K.F., and Wu, Q.L. (2010) Starch compos -
ites reinforced by bamboo cellulosic crystals. Bioresource Technology , 101(7), 
2529–2536.
[160] Amash, A., Zugenmaier, P . (2000) Morphology and properties of isotropic and 
oriented samples of cellulose fibre-polypropylene composites. Polymer , 41(4), 
1589–1596.
[161] Ma, X.F., Chang, P .R., Yu, J.G., and Stumborg, M. (2009) Properties of biodegrad -
able citric acid-modified granular starch/thermoplastic pea starch composites. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 75(1), 1–8.
[162] Yu, J.G., Wang, N., and Ma, X.F. (2008) Fabrication and characterization of 
poly(lactic acid)/acetyl tributyl citrate/carbon black as conductive polymer com -
posites. Biomacromolecules , 9(3), 1050–1057.
[163] Xu, Y., Zhou, J., and Hanna, M.A. (2005) Melt-intercalated starch acetate nano -
composite foams as affected by type of organoclay. Cereal Chemistry , 82(1), 
105–110.
[164] Liu, Z.J., Zhao, L., Chen, M.N., and Yu, J.G. (2011) Effect of carboxylate multi-
walled carbon nanotubes on the performance of thermoplastic starch nanocom -
posites. Carbohydrate Polymers , 83(2), 447–451.
[165] Wang, N., Yu, J.G., Chang, P .R., and Ma, X.F. (2008) Influence of formamide and 
water on the properties of thermoplastic starch/poly(lactic acid) blends. Carbo -
hydrate Polymers , 71(1), 109–118.
[166] Chatterjee, A., Deopura, B.L. (2006) Thermal stability of polypropylene/carbon 
nanofiber composite. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 100(5), 3574–3578.261Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.  CHAPTER 12 
   Mechanical Properties of 
Starch-Based Nanocomposites  
    HÉLÈNE     ANGELLIER-COUSSY     and     ALAIN     DUFRESNE        
   12.1     INTRODUCTION 
 Starch is a natural, renewable, biodegradable polymer produced by many 
plants as a source of storage energy. It is the second most abundant biomass material in nature. The starch industry extracts and reﬁ  nes starches by wet 
grinding, sieving, and drying. Starch is used as extracted from the plant and is called “native starch,” or it undergoes one or more chemical modiﬁ  cations to 
reach speciﬁ  c properties and is then called “modiﬁ  ed starch.” Worldwide the 
main sources of starch are maize, wheat, potatoes, and cassava, from which tapioca starch is derived. In 2000, the world starch market was estimated to be 48.5 million tons, including native and modiﬁ  ed starches. The value of the 
output is worth  € 15 billion per year, which explains why industrialists and 
researchers are seeking new properties and high value applications. 
 Among naturally biodegradable polymers using renewable resources, starch 
is probably the most promising material. It is a versatile biopolymer with huge potential for use in the nonfood industries due to its high availability at low prices and nondependence on fossil sources. The ﬁ  rst generation of starch-
based materials consisted of the physical incorporation of starch granules or derivatives as functional additives to, and ﬁ  llers for, synthetic polymers during 
processing. However, the mechanical properties of ensuing materials are gen-erally reduced by incorporation of starch due to its immiscibility with most synthetic polymers at the molecular level. Starch is not truly thermoplastic but can be converted into a continuous polymeric entangled phase by mixing with enough water or nonaqueous plasticizer (generally polyols, such as glycerol). 262  MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES 
The resulting material, corresponding to the second generation of starch-based 
materials, can be manufactured using technology already developed for the production of synthetic plastics, thus representing a minor investment. However, the hydrophilic nature of thermoplastic starches makes them sus-ceptible to moisture attack and resultant changes in dimensional stability and mechanical properties. In addition, retrogradation and crystallization of the mobile starch chains lead to an undesired change in thermomechanical prop-erties. Thermoplastic starch can be used as matrix and its properties can be tailored by adding different ﬁ  llers, including nanosized particles. Nanoparticles 
allow not only enhancing mechanical properties but also physical properties such as permeability or ﬁ  re retardancy. Their properties depend on the nature 
and effectiveness of interactions at the interfacial region, that is, on both the surface area and the dispersion of the particles. 
 The semicrystalline nature of starch can be exploited to extract nanocrystals 
as for cellulose or chitin, by a selective hydrolysis process. Contrarily to cel-lulose or chitin needle-like nanocrystals, starch nanocrystals occur as platelet-like nanoparticles. They can be used as nanoscale ﬁ  ller in a polymeric matrix. 
 This chapter reports the mechanical properties of starch-based nanocom-
posite materials, considering that the starchy material can be used either as the continuous polymeric phase (matrix), or the nanodispersed phase (ﬁ  ller), 
or both. The ﬁ  rst part of the chapter will discuss the reinforcing effect of the 
different ﬁ  llers used to improve the mechanical properties of thermoplastic 
starch, that is, inorganic clays, carbon nanotubes, and polysaccharide-based (cellulose, starch) nanoparticles. The second section will be devoted to the reinforcing effect of starch nanocrystals, as well as the mechanisms proposed to explain it.  
  12.2     STARCH AS MATRIX IN NANOCOMPOSITES 
 Starch is one of the most studied natural and renewable polymers with many 
promising applications in biodegradable packaging. During the last decade, starch-based nanocomposites with the addition of low quantities of inorganic or organic ﬁ  llers have given rise to signiﬁ  cant improvements in physical, 
mechanical, and barrier properties. This section will focus on the mechanical properties of starch-based nanocomposites considering starch as matrix. It will discuss some examples of starch nanocomposites reinforced with inorganic clays or carbon nanotubes, and polysaccharide-based (cellulose, starch) ﬁ  llers, 
and attempt to give a critical comparison of the different reinforcements. 
  12.2.1     Mechanical Properties of Starch-Based Materials 
  12.2.1.1     Botanical Origin: Amylose/Amylopectin Ratio     The botanical 
origin, especially the amylose/amylopectin ratio, is known to inﬂ  uence the 
mechanical properties of starch. The idea generally spread is that amylose-rich STARCH AS MATRIX IN NANOCOMPOSITES   263
materials display higher strength and lower strain at break than amylopectin-
rich materials  [1] . However, this afﬁ  rmation should be nuanced due to some 
opposite results described in the literature. For example, Myllärinen et al.  [2]  showed that above 20 wt% glycerol the strain at break was more important for amylose-rich ﬁ  lms. In fact, two behaviors can be reported according to the 
plasticizer content  [1, 2] . (1) For low plasticizer contents, an increase in the amylose/amylopectin ratio would improve both the strength and the strain at break because of the linear structure of amylose chains. (2) For high plasticizer contents, an increase in the amylose content results in a mechanical reinforce-ment (the strength increases and the strain decreases). This last tendency is related to fast amylose crystallization in comparison with slower amylopectin retrogradation. In any case, it can be concluded that the amylose/amylopectin ratio is not a determining parameter for the improvement of ultimate mechan-ical properties  [3] .  
  12.2.1.2     Plasticization     Starch is most often plasticized with water and 
polyols such as glycerol. For example, a glycerol content of 25% allows decreasing the glass transition temperature of potato starch-based materials stored at 57% relative humidty (RH) from 285°C to  − 10°C  [4, 5] . Depending 
on the plasticizer content, two mechanical behaviors are evidenced whatever the starch origin. For a low plasticizer content, mechanical properties present similarities to the antiplasticization effect generally observed in synthetic poly-mers; that is, both the stress and strain at break decrease when the plasticizer concentration increases to up to 12 wt%  [5] . This phenomenon would corre-spond to a local macromolecular motion limitation due to strong interactions between starch chains and plasticizer resulting in a reinforcing hydrogen network  [5–7] . For higher amounts of plasticizer, mechanical properties are controlled by the glass transition, which involves the molecular motions. The classical plasticization effect is characterized by an increase in the strain at break and a decrease in both the strength and Young ’ s modulus  [5, 8] . Plasti-cizers (water and glycerol) play the role of internal lubricants, preventing the rigidiﬁ  cation of noncrystallized macromolecular starch chains at ambient tem-
perature  [5] . The plasticization effect is the phenomenon that governs the mechanical properties of unaged systems. Currently, all formulations of ther-moplastic starch materials require the use of very large amounts of plasticizer (roughly 20 wt%) to avoid antiplasticization events. As a result, starch-based materials have globally poor mechanical properties due to the relaxation of the polymer network in the presence of plasticizer. 
 In the case of plasticized starch/glycerol systems, dynamic mechanical anal-
ysis (DMA) highlights the presence of two relaxation phenomena associated with a two-step storage modulus drop. It is characterized by two peaks on loss modulus and tan  δ  curves, around  − 40°C and 40°C (25 wt% of glycerol and 15 
wt% of water)  [5] , revealing the heterogeneity of the system and a phase sepa-ration. The ﬁ  rst peak is associated with the relaxation of glycerol-rich domains, 
and the second one with starch-rich domains  [9–11] .  264  MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES 
  12.2.1.3     Aging     Physical aging, that is, retrogradation, induces structural 
changes without chemical modiﬁ  cation. This phenomenon is slow because it 
generally occurs at temperatures below the glass transition temperture of starch-based materials (T 
g ) for which the chain mobility is reduced. It only 
occurs at room temperature for plasticized systems displaying a T g  below room 
temperature. Starch-based materials in the rubbery state are the site of recrys-tallization, which takes place in two steps: (1) a fast recrystallization step during ﬁ  lm processing where gelatinized starch recrystallizes according to the 
B-type, and (2) a slow recrystallization upon ﬁ  lm storage. Mechanical proper-
ties of starch-based materials are directly affected by physical aging  [12–14] . It inevitably leads to higher strength and Young ’ s modulus  [12]  and lower strain at break  [13, 15]  whatever the starch origin. Crystallites play the role of physical cross-linking bonds, resulting in stress concentration and thus making more brittle the material  [16] . Therefore, the mechanical properties of starch-based materials are very sensitive to the ambient conditions and moisture content, which are difﬁ  cult to control.   
  12.2.2     Fillers 
 Fillers can be classiﬁ  ed into three major categories according to their particle 
size and shape (Fig.  12.1 ). (i)  Isodimensional particles   have the same size in all 
directions and their aspect ratio is usually close to unity (examples include spherical silica, carbon black, and fullerenes). This type of particles has not yet been used as ﬁ  llers in a starch matrix, probably due to their moderate reinforc-
ing effect. (ii)  Elongated particl  es consist of ﬁ  brils with diameters ranging 
between 1 and 100 nm and lengths of several hundred of nanometers. They included cellulose and chitin nanoﬁ  brils and carbon nanotubes. These nano-
composites are known to present better mechanical properties due to the higher particle aspect ratio. (iii) The third category is composed of  layered 
particles   such as layered silicates, but also starch nanocrystals. They are char-
acterized by one dimension, often the thickness, ranging from several ang-stroms to several nanometers. The most common ﬁ  llers used as reinforcing   Figure 12.1          Schematic representation of the three categories of ﬁ  llers. 
STARCH AS MATRIX IN NANOCOMPOSITES   265
agents in a starch matrix are layered silicates and carbon nanotubes, which are 
both inorganic ﬁ  llers, and polysaccharide-based (cellulose, chitin, starch) nano-
crystals, which are organic ﬁ  llers. 
   12.2.2.1     Inorganic Fillers    
  Clays     Clays, also called layered silicates, are constituted of colloidal frag-
ments of primary silicates made up of tetrahedral and octahedral sheets of small cations, such as aluminum or magnesium coordinated by oxygen atoms. One important feature of clays is that the space between layers contains hydrated cations such as Na 
 +   or K  +   that can undergo exchange reaction with 
organic as well as inorganic cation. Smectites are among the most used layered silicates for the preparation of nanocomposites. They belong to the phyllosili-cate family and display a perfect crystalline structure consisting of two-dimensional layers where a central octahedral sheet of alumina or magnesia is linked with two external silica tetrahedrons  [17] . The layer thickness is around 1 nm and the lateral dimensions of these layers vary from 30 nm to several micrometers  [17] . Smectites include natural clays such as montmoril-lonite (MMT), hectorite, and kaolinite. The limiting aspect of the use of such nanoﬁ  llers is the difﬁ  culty to correctly disperse them within a polymeric matrix 
due to their preferred face-to-face stacking in agglomerated tactoïds. Cation exchange reactions in clays are very important to impart functionality and compatibility with polymers. Different types of nanocomposites from poly-mers and clays can be obtained depending on the dispersion state of clays: a conventional microcomposite structure, an intercalated nanocomposite struc-ture, or an exfoliated nanocomposite structure (Fig.  12.2 ). The achievement of a well-dispersed nanocomposite structure is required to improve mechanical properties of the polymer matrix. 
    Carbon Nanotubes     Carbon nanotubes are molecular-scale tubes formed by 
rolled-up graphene sheets with outstanding mechanical and electrical proper-ties. There are two main types of nanotubes available today.  Single-walled carbon nanotubes  ( SWCNT ) consist of a single sheet of graphene rolled seam-lessly to form a cylinder with diameters of the order of 1 nm and lengths of up to centimeters (Fig.  12.3 a,b). Due to their high ﬂ  exibility and high surface 
energy, SWNTs tend to aggregate into large bundles, which are extremely dif-ﬁ cult to separate, thus restricting the use of SWNTs for real applications  [18] . 
SWCNTs have not yet been used as reinforcing ﬁ  llers in a starch matrix.  Mul-
tiwalled carbon nanotubes  ( MWCNT ) consist of an array of such cylinders formed concentrically and separated by 0.36 nm, similar to the basal plane separation in graphite. MWCNTs can have outer diameters of about 30 nm and lengths of 1–100 micrometers  [18]  (Fig.  12.3 c,d). They display high moduli (1 TPa) along their length direction, as well as high bending moduli  [19] . The effective utilization of MWCNTs in composite applications depends strongly on the ability to disperse them homogeneously within the polymer matrix 266  MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES 
  Figure 12.3          (a) Conceptual diagram (adapted from Reilly  [79] ) and (b) scanning 
electron microscopy picture of SWCNTs  [80] ; (c) conceptual diagram (adapted from 
Reference  [79] ) and (d) TEM picture  [80]  of MWCNTs. 
(b)
(d)
2-30 nm0.36 nm(c)1-2 nm0.2-5 μm (a)
300 nm
100 nm  Figure 12.2          Different kinds of nanocomposites from polymer and layered silicates, 
depending on the dispersion state of particles. +Layered silicates Polymer 
(i) Microcomposite structure (ii) Intercalated 
nanocomposite structure (iii) Exfoliated 
nanocomposite structure STARCH AS MATRIX IN NANOCOMPOSITES   267
without destroying their integrity  [19] . To improve their dispersibility, their 
surface can be chemically functionalized to optimize the interfacial interaction between carbon nanotubes and the polymeric matrix. To solve this problem, both covalent and noncovalent functional modiﬁ  cations have been widely 
studied  [18] . 
     12.2.2.2      Organic Fillers     Polysaccharides (cellulose, chitin, starch) are 
among the most promising sources for the production of nanoparticles with various different morphologies and geometrical characteristics providing a wide range of nanoparticle properties. As layered silicates, polysaccharides offer signiﬁ  cant potential for surface modiﬁ  cation using well-established car-
bohydrate chemistry, allowing researchers to tailor the surface functionality of the nanoparticles. 
  Cellulose Nanocrystals     Aqueous suspensions of cellulose nanocrystals can 
be prepared by acid hydrolysis of native substrates. The object of this treat-ment is to dissolve away regions of low lateral order so that the water-insoluble, highly crystalline residue may be converted into a stable suspension. The resulting nanocrystals occur as rod-like particles or whiskers, whose dimen-sions depend on the nature of the substrate and preparation conditions. They are typically a few hundred nanometers long and in the order of few nanome-ters in diameter  [20]  (Table  12.1 ). The aspect ratio of these whiskers is deﬁ  ned 
as the ratio of the length to the diameter. 
    Starch Nanocrystals     Starch can also be used as a source for the production 
of nanocrystals. Starch nanocrystals are obtained from mild acid hydrolysis of native starch granules using hydrochloric or sulfuric acid. The use of sulfuric acid leads to more stable aqueous suspensions due to resulting negatively charged surfaces  [21] . Starch nanocrystals correspond to the highly crystalline 
 TABLE 12.1       Geometrical Characteristics of Rod-Like Cellulose Nanoﬁ  bers: 
Length (L) and Diameter (D) 
Source of Cellulose L (nm) D/W (nm) Ref.
Potato pulp  > 1000 2–4  [63, 64] 
Tunicate 500–2000 10  [7, 66] 
Cottonseed linter 170–490 40–60  [69] Cotton 100–300 5–10 Data from Reference 
 [81]  used in Reference  [65] 
Wheat straw  > 1000 30–40  [70, 71] 
Hemp Not estimated 20–40  [59] 
Pea hull 240–400 7–12  [72] Cassava bagasse 360–1700 2–11  [68] 268  MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES 
water-insoluble lamellae of the native starch granules. Three main botanical 
origins were used for that purpose: waxy maize  [21–30] , pea  [31–35] , and potato  [36, 37] . Starch nanocrystals generally appear as aggregates of paral-lelepiped platelets exhibiting 60–65° acute angles. The botanical origin of starch, namely the crystallinity type and the relative proportion of amylose and amylopectin, determines the structure and the morphology of starch nano-crystals. The conditions of acid hydrolysis also affect the yield and the ﬁ  nal 
dimensions of starch nanocrystals. The dimensions of starch nanocrystals have been characterized by image analysis of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) pictures, with a length ranging from 20 to 150 nm, width from 10 to 30 nm, and thickness from 5 to 10 nm, depending on the botanical origin  [38] .It has been recently reported that at any time, both microscaled and nanoscaled particles can be found and coexist in suspensions  [39] . Cross-ﬂ  ow ﬁ  ltration was 
proved to be an efﬁ  cient continuous operation for separating the nanoparticles 
from the bulk suspension  [40] . 
 Starch nanocrystals, as cellulose whiskers, possess a highly reactive surface 
covered with hydroxyl groups, which provides the possibility of modiﬁ  cation 
via a chemical reaction strategy. The purpose of the chemical modiﬁ  cation is 
to contribute to speciﬁ  c functions and to expand the applications of starch 
nanocrystals. There are three strategies for chemical modiﬁ  cation of starch 
nanocrystals: modiﬁ  cation by chemical reaction with small molecules, grafting 
of polymer chains using coupling agents (i.e., the “grafting onto” strategy), and grafting of polymer chains by polymerization of a monomer (also called the “grafting from” strategy)  [38] . The effect of surface chemical modiﬁ  cation on 
mechanical properties of starch nanocrystals reinforced nanocomposites will be discussed in Section 12.3.2.    
  12.2.3     Mechanical Properties of Nanocomposites Based on Starch 
and Inorganic Reinforcements 
 Clays are the inorganic nanoparticles the most largely used as reinforcing ﬁ  ller 
in starch-based matrices with ﬁ  rst papers published in 2002 and already more 
than tens publications. To reach exfoliation of layered silicates, different nano-ﬁ llers (natural or organically modiﬁ  ed), and processing routes (thermome-
chanical process or casting) were developed. Most studies are devoted to the introduction of unmodiﬁ  ed clays, especially MMT  [41–52] , and to a less extent, 
of hectorite  [11, 44, 53] , laponite  [47] , or kaolinite  [44, 53] . Thanks to the hydro-philic nature of both starch and unmodiﬁ  ed clays, this type of nanoﬁ  ller was 
expected to give an enhanced nanodispersion state. However, at best, only an intercalated nanocomposite structure with the presence of aggregates was obtained, as shown by  X-ray diffraction  ( XRD ) and TEM analyses  [42, 44–46, 48–50, 52] . It was demonstrated that the processing conditions and the plasti-cizer content strongly affect the dispersion state of layered silicates and should be thus optimized for each starch/clay couple  [45, 54] . Furthermore, it was shown that the hydrophilic plasticizer (often glycerol) could disturb the clay STARCH AS MATRIX IN NANOCOMPOSITES   269
exfoliation process due to hydrogen bonds established between plasticizer and 
clay platelets  [43, 53] . Park et al.  [41, 42]  were the ﬁ  rst to report the reinforcing 
effect of unmodiﬁ  ed MMT in a potato starch/glycerol-based matrix, as demon-
strated by DMA and tensile tests. They noted an increase of the storage modulus for ﬁ ller contents higher than 2.5 wt% over the entire temperature span, with 
a more pronounced reinforcing effect at higher temperatures where the molec-ular relaxation of the starch-rich phase occurs. At the same time, a shift of the relaxation temperature for both glycerol-rich and starch-rich phases toward higher temperatures (from  − 64°C to  − 53°C/ − 32°C and from 7°C to 12°C/20°C 
for systems ﬁ  lled with 5 wt% or 10 wt% of unmodiﬁ  ed MMT) was noted, indi-
cating that MMT strongly inﬂ  uences the chain mobility of the starch chains  [41, 
42] . These results were further conﬁ  rmed for starch/glycerol-based materials 
reinforced with hectorite or kaolinite  [53] , potato starch/sorbitol-based materi-als reinforced with unmodiﬁ  ed laponite  [47] , and wheat starch/glycerol-based 
ﬁ lms ﬁ  lled with unmodiﬁ  ed MMT  [51] . The reinforcing effect of unmodiﬁ  ed 
clays was ascribed to several parameters including the creation of an interca-lated (not exfoliated) nanocomposite structure, as demonstrated by X-ray dif-fraction (XRD) and TEM analysis, the creation of a three-dimensional network of interconnected silicate layers, strengthening the material through mechanical percolation  [42, 47] , the ﬁ  lm contraction resulting from the loss of moisture 
during the heating process  [11] , and also the increase of crystallinity of the clay ﬁ ller itself  [11] . Kvien et al.  [47]  also concluded that the plasticizer was not 
present in the starch/reinforcements interfacial zone. This was conﬁ  rmed by 
Chivrac et al.  [51] , who reported that TEM and DMA clearly demonstrated that clay platelets were preferentially located in the domains rich in polysaccharide chains as a result of phase separation. Tensile tests conﬁ  rmed the reinforcing 
effect of unmodiﬁ  ed clays (Table  12.2 ). It was unanimously observed that with 
the increasing of clay content up to a certain value (15–20 wt%), the stress at break and Young ’ s modulus of composites are improved, while the strain at break decreases, whatever the type of clay and the botanical origin of starch  [43, 48–50, 52] . This was ascribed to hydrogen bonds between unmodiﬁ  ed 
natural clays and starch  [43] . Tang et al.  [49]  showed that the reinforcing effect of a given nanoparticle was rather similar whatever the botanical origin of the starch matrix considered, that is, corn, wheat, or potato. 
  It is worth noting that the reinforcing effect of layered silicates was rather 
moderate and sometimes inexistent due to a low dispersion level of nanopar-ticles within the starch-based matrix. To promote the clay exfoliation process, some work has been thus devoted to the surface modiﬁ  cation of layered sili-
cates. Already in the earliest study, it was demonstrated that the introduction of clays organically modiﬁ  ed with hydrophobic alkylammoniums led to the 
formation of conventional microcomposites due to the lack of compatibility between both components, as evidenced by X-ray analysis, resulting in very poor mechanical properties, even lower than the neat matrix  [41, 44, 45] . Among the hydrophobic alkylammoniums studied, we can report either dimethyl benzyl hydrogenated-tallow  [55]  or dimethyl dehydrogenated tallow ammoni- TABLE 12.2       Relative Tensile Test Characteristics (Nominal Young ’ s Modulus, E R ; Nominal Stress at Break,  σ  b,R ; Nominal Strain at 
Break,  ε  b,R ) for Starch-Layered Silicates Nanocomposites 
Starch Matrix RH (%) Layered SilicatesFiller Content 
(wt%) E R  σ  b,R  ε  b,R Year Ref.
Potato starch/20 wt% 
water  +  30 wt% 
glycerol43 Na-MMT (Cloisite Na  +  ) 5 – 1.27 1.21 2002  [41] 
OMMT (Cloisite 30B) 5 – 1.07 0.95
OMMT (Cloisite 6A) 5 – 0.82 0.74OMMT (Cloisite 10A) 5 – 0.96 0.81
Corn starch/25 wt% 
glycerol39 Na-MMT (Cloisite Na 
 +  ) 5 – 1.3 0.75 2004  [43] 
30 5.4 5.0 0.2
Corn starch/20 wt% 
glycerol5 Na-MMT 5 1.04 – 0.6 2005  [45] 
Cassava starch/17 
wt% glycerol50 Na-MMT 5 1.06 1.04 0.88 2007  [48] 
10 1.06 1.04 0.7015 1.06 0.71 0.33
OMMT (chitosan-20 
wt%)5 1.31 1.83 0.53
10 1.42 2 0.5315 1.09 0.83 0.40
270Wheat starch/23 wt% 
water  +  23 wt% 
glycerol57 Na-MMT (Dellite L VF) 3 1.09 – – 2008  [58] 
6 1.15 – –
OMMT (cationic starch) 3 1.25 – –
6 1.45 – –
Corn starch/19 wt% 
water  +  15 wt% 
glycerol50 Na-MMT 3 – 1.17 1.20 2008  [49] 
6 – 1.30 0.849 – 1.65 0.92
Wheat starch/19 wt% 
water  +  15 wt% 
glycerol50 Na-MMT 9 – 1.51 0.83
Potato starch/19 wt% 
water  +  15 wt% 
glycerol50 Na-MMT 9 – 1.52 1.10
Potato starch/30 wt% 
glycerol90 Na-MMT (Cloisite Na 
 +  ) 2 1 0.94 0.88 2008  [50] 
3 5.05 0.97 0.60
5 6.56 1.57 0.75
Potato starch/37.5 
wt% glycerol3 wt% of 
water contentNa-MMT 1 1.16 1.09 0.88 2009  [52] 
3 1.75 1.41 0.736 2.55 1.90 0.37
  Na-MMT, unmodiﬁ  ed montmorillonite; OMMT, organically modiﬁ  ed MMT.  
271272  MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES 
ums  [44] . In the case of more hydrophilic surfactants, that is, alkylammoniums 
containing hydroxyl groups such as Cloisite 30B, the dispersion state was better due to hydrogen bonds established between starch and clay surfactant, leading to higher mechanical properties, but still lower than those obtained for unmodi-ﬁ ed clays  [41, 42, 56] . Recently, authors have focused their attention on the use 
of compatibilizers as MMT organo-modiﬁ  er to enhance the MMT platelets 
exfoliation  [57] , including chitosan  [48]  and cationic starch  [58] .TEM and XRD analyses conﬁ  rmed the achievement of a well-exfoliated structure, ascribed to 
the preferential interactions established between the hydroxyl groups of the polysaccharide chains. It results in an enhanced reinforcing effect of clays as compared to unmodiﬁ  ed clays (Table  12.2 ). 
 We can conclude that the dispersion state of layered silicates, which is 
strongly affected by the clay surface polarity and the clay/starch interactions, and of course the ﬁ  ller content are the two key parameters governing the 
mechanical properties of starch/clay nanocomposites. On the one hand, all studies clearly demonstrated that the achievement of a well-exfoliated nano-composite structure is desirable to signiﬁ  cantly improve the mechanical prop-
erties. On the other hand, signiﬁ  cant improvement in mechanical properties is 
generally observed only for ﬁ  ller contents higher than 3–5 wt%  [50] . 
 Cao et al.  [19]  ﬁ  rst attempted to use multiwalled carbon nanotubes 
(MWCNT) as a reinforcing ﬁ  ller in a pea starch-based matrix. To improve the 
hydrophilicity of MWCNTs and thus the compatibility between MWCNTs and starch, carboxylic acid groups were introduced onto the tips and defect sites of carbon nanotube surfaces by reﬂ  uxing in a mixture of concentrated acid 
(sulfuric and nitric).Whatever the ﬁ  ller content (up to 3 wt% in the study), 
tensile properties of nanocomposites were better than the neat matrix. For a ﬁ ller content of 3 wt%, a signiﬁ  cant improvement of a factor of 1.65 was noted 
for the tensile strength (from 2.85 to 4.73 MPa) and of a factor 1.89 for Young ’ s modulus (from 20.74 to 39.18 MPa). It is worth noting that the increase in strength did not occur at the expense of the elongation at break (Table  12.3 ). At the same time, the T 
g  value ascribed to the starch-rich phase increased with 
an increase in MWCNT content (from 16.5°C to 25.3°C for 3 wt%), indicating a good adhesion between MWCNTs and the starch matrix, as conﬁ  rmed by 
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) observations. The improvement of mechanical properties was explained by the establishment of hydrogen bonds between MWCNTs and starch chains  [59] . In a similar study, that is, corn thermoplastic starch reinforced with mixed acid treated MWCNTs, the improvement of the tensile strength was only noted for MWCNTs contents up to 1.5 wt% (from 4.5 to 7.7 MPa). This was attributed to the hydrogen bonding interactions between MWCNTS and starch chains, as already reported by Cao et al.  [59] . Then, the decrease in the tensile strength reported for ﬁ  ller 
content above 1.5 wt%, which corresponds to the electrical percolation thresh-old, was ascribed to the deterioration of the plasticization and the destruction of the continuity of the matrix  [60] . However, contrarily to Cao et al.  [59] , a decrease in elongation at break was observed whatever the ﬁ  ller content  TABLE 12.3       Relative Tensile Test Characteristics (Nominal Young ’ s Modulus, E R ; Nominal Stress at Break,  σ  b,R ; Nominal Strain at 
Break,  ε  b,R ) for Starch–Carbon Nanotubes Nanocomposites 
Starch Matrix RH (%) Carbon NanotubesFiller Content 
(wt%) E R  σ  b,R  ε  b,R Year Ref.
Pea starch/36 wt% 
glycerol43 Mixed acid-treated 
MWCNT0.1 1.16 1.06 1 2007  [59] 
0.5 1.19 1.24 1.251 1.34 1.43 1.412 1.51 1.50 1.283 1.89 1.65 1.08
Corn starch/23 
wt% glycerol50 Nitric acid  +  sodium 
dodecylsulfate-treated MWCNT0.95 1.08 1.14 0.79 2008  [61] 
1.9 1.22 1.27 0.82
2.85 1.31 1.41 0.71
3.8 1.38 1.45 0.634.75 1.42 1.65 0.57
Corn starch/23 
wt% glycerol50 Mixed acid-treated 
MWCNT0.5 – 1.28 0.94 2011  [60] 
1 – 1.57 0.86
1.5 – 1.71 0.722 – 1.6 0.623 – 1.3 0.51
Tapioca starch/35 
wt% of glycerol57 MWCNT wrapped with 
starch–iodine complex0.027 1.44 1.27 1.02 2011  [62] 
0.055 1.68 1.36 1.12
273274  MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES 
  Figure 12.4          TEM micrograph of corn plasticized starch ﬁ  lled with 2.85 wt% MWCNTs 
 [61] . 
(Table  12.3 )  [60] . This difference in behavior may be explained by the differ-
ence in botanical origin of the starch matrix. In addition to a nitric acid treat-ment of MWCNTs, Ma et al.  [61]  used sodium dodecylsulfate as surfactant to prepare corn starch/MWCNT composites. They only found a more modest increase in Young ’ s modulus and tensile strength together with a slight decrease in elongation at break (Table  12.3 ), in spite of a rather good ﬁ  ller dispersion 
state and interfacial adhesion between the two components, which were high-lighted by TEM and SEM observations (Fig.  12.4 ). This can be explained by the huge outer diameter and smooth surface of MWCNTs that may cause the compatibility between both components of the composites to deteriorate  [60] . Very recently, Fama et al.  [62]  proposed a noncovalent functionalization to improve the compatibility between MWCNTs and starch. The treatment con-sists of wrapping MWCNTs with a starch–iodine complex, containing the same starch as the matrix, tapioca in the present case  [62] . They suggested that iodine induces an initial preorganization of amylose into a helical conforma-tion that makes its hydrophobic cavity accessible to carbon nanotubes. This treatment was highly effective to obtain very well-dispersed nanotubes and strong adhesion between the phases. It seems to be a very promising route to enhance mechanical properties of thermoplastic starch since very small amounts of MWCNTs, only 0.055 wt%, allow improving Young ’ s modulus by a factor of 1.68, the tensile strength by a factor of 1.36, and the elongation at break by a factor of 1.12 (Table  12.3 ). 
     12.2.4     Mechanical Properties of Nanocomposites Based on Starch 
and Organic Reinforcements 
 Dufresne and Vignon  [63]  were the ﬁ  rst to report the reinforcing effect of 
cellulose microﬁ  brils, which were obtained from potato tuber cells, in a glyc-STARCH AS MATRIX IN NANOCOMPOSITES   275
erol plasticized potato starch-based matrix (Table  12.4 ). Above T g , a great 
increase in the storage modulus (more than 2 decades) and in the thermal stability was observed even with a ﬁ  ller content of as low as 5 wt%. With 
increasing ﬁ  ller content, no marked evolution of the rubbery modulus was 
noted, but the terminal zone occurred at higher temperatures  [63] . The rein-forcing effect of such cellulose microﬁ  brils was further conﬁ  rmed via tensile 
tests by the same authors  [64]  and also later by Orts et al.  [65]  for cotton-derived microﬁ  brils (Table  12.4 ). 
  Dufresne et al.  [64]  ﬁ  rst highlighted that mechanical properties of highly 
plasticized materials were strongly dependent on relative humidity conditions. The high dependence of mechanical properties of starch/cellulose-based nano-composite materials on plasticizer and moisture content was greater than glycerol  [7]  and sorbitol  [66]  plasticized waxy maize starch reinforced with tunicin whiskers. 
 In the case of glycerol plasticized systems, Anglès and Dufresne  [7]  reported 
that the reinforcing effect of tunicin whiskers was very low as compared to experimental data obtained for other matrices such as poly(S- co -BuA)  [67] . 
The reinforcing effect of cellulose whiskers is generally ascribed to the pres-ence of strong interactions between whiskers such as hydrogen bonds, which lead to the formation of a rigid network governed by the percolation thresh-old, besides the geometry and stiffness of the whiskers  [20, 67] . Thus, it was deduced that plasticizers (glycerol and water) probably hindered the forma-tion of such hydrogen-bonded cellulose network within the starch-based matrix due to an accumulation of plasticizer in the cellulose/amylopectin interfacial zone  [7, 9] . This phenomenon was also reported for glycerol/sorbitol plasticized cassava starch/cassava bagasse cellulose nanoﬁ  bers systems  [68]  
(Table  12.4 ). However, the reinforcing effect of tunicin whiskers in sorbitol plasticized waxy maize starch was higher than in corresponding glycerol plasticized systems (Table  12.4 ) due to the absence of transcrystallization of sorbitol at the cellulose/amylopectin interface, as proved by DSC and WAXS studies  [66] . Thus, sorbitol seems to be more adequate to be used as plasticizer. 
 The relatively low reinforcing effect of tunicin whiskers observed by Anglès 
and Dufresne  [7]  disagreed with previous experimental data reported for glycerol plasticized systems reinforced with cellulose microﬁ  brils  [63, 64] . This 
was explained by the difference in ﬂ  exibility between the two kinds of ﬁ  llers 
 [7] . Cellulose whiskers are stiff and straight well-deﬁ  ned objects, whereas cel-
lulose microﬁ  brils are ﬂ  exible and hairy ﬁ  bers. Therefore, in composites ﬁ  lled 
with cellulose microﬁ  brils, the reinforcing effect occurs most probably from 
both the formation of the hydrogen-bonded cellulose network and from a tangling effect. In composites ﬁ  lled with cellulose whiskers, only the former 
phenomenon is likely occurring. 
 The low reinforcing effect of cellulose whiskers in glycerol plasticized 
systems was not unanimously reported. For example, in the case of glycerol plasticized wheat starch/cottonseed linter whiskers  [69] , potato starch  [70]  or 276
 TABLE 12.4       Relative Rubbery Storage Tensile Modulus (E ’  R ) and Relative Tensile Test Characteristics (Nominal Young ’ s Modulus, 
E; Nominal Stress at Break,  σ  ,R ; Nominal Strain at Break,  ε  b,R ) for Starch–Cellulose Whiskers Nanocomposites 
Starch Matrix Cellulose Origin RH (%)Filler Content 
(wt%) E ’  R E R  σ  b,R  ε  b,R Year Ref.
Potato starch/30 wt% 
glycerolPotato pulp 0 5 125 – – – 1998  [63] 
10 150 – – –
Potato starch/30 wt% 
glycerolPotato pulp 58 7.5 – 18 – – 2000  [64] 
15 – 25 – –23 – 40 – –31 – 50 – –39 – 60 – –
Waxy maize starch/33 
wt% glycerolTunicate 58 3.2 0.3 1.5 8 1.6 2001  [7] 
6.2 0.6 1.5 8 1.3
16.7 1 2.5 8 1.2
25 4.5 6 12 1
Waxy maize starch/33 
wt% sorbitolTunicate 58 5 1 1.2 1.8 1 2008  [66] 
10 2.5 3.6 4 1
15 2.5 5.3 4.3 1
25 3.5 7.2 10.3 1Wheat starch/42 wt% 
glycerolCottonseed linter 50 2.5 2.2 1.6 1.2 0.9 2005  [69] 
5 3 2.5 1.7 0.85
10 5.2 4.3 2.1 0.815 7.2 5.8 2.5 0.720 10 8.3 2.6 0.6530 15 10 3.1 0.45
Wheat starch Cotton (from 
Whatman ﬁ  lter 
paper)50 2.1 – 3.6 – 1.4 2005  [65] 
5 – 6.7 – 3.1
10.3 – 9 – 3.3
Modiﬁ  ed potato 
starchWheat straw 50 2 1.55 1.4 1.2 – 2008  [70] 
5 1.8 1.75 1.35 –
10 2.75 2.45 1.75 –
Pea starch/36 wt% 
glycerolHemp 43 5 – 1.1 1.15 0.85 2008  [59] 
10 – 3.5 1.55 0.7515 – 5.3 1.75 0.4520 – 7.6 1.9 0.330 – 25.8 2.95 0.1
Pea starch/30 wt% 
glycerolPea hull 43 10 – – 1.95 2.1 2009  [72] 
Cassava starch/30 
wt% glycerolCassava bagasse 53 5 1.1 1.4 1.4 2.6 2009  [68] 
10 2.1 1.5 1.6 2.620 2.1 1.6 1.4 1.8
Maize starch/30 wt% 
glycerolWheat straw 75 5 1.05 1.4 1.1 – 2010  [71] 
10 2.1 2.3 1.2 –
15 3.4 2.95 1.4 –
277278  MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES 
maize starch  [71] /wheat straw nanoﬁ  bers, or pea starch/hemp nanoﬁ  bers  [59]  
nanocomposite materials, Young ’ s modulus, the tensile strength, and the storage modulus at the rubbery state were signiﬁ  cantly improved with increas-
ing ﬁ  ller content (Table  12.4 ). These results indicated an efﬁ  cient stress trans-
fer from matrix to ﬁ  ller  [70] , which was attributed to strong interfacial 
interactions between the cellulose crystallite surface and the starch matrix  [59, 69] , and also to the formation of a rigid network of nanoﬁ  bers connected by 
hydrogen bonds  [71] . The shift of T 
g  to higher temperatures (about 30–40°C 
higher in the case of glycerol plasticized potato starch/wheat straw nanoﬁ  bers 
systems  [70] ) conﬁ  rmed this hypothesis  [70, 71] . For some systems, the elonga-
tion at break decreased at the same time  [59, 69] . However, the reinforcing effect of cellulose whiskers is not necessarily accompanied by a decrease in the elongation at break, as observed for different glycerol plasticized systems  [65, 66, 71, 72]  (Table  12.4 ). 
 The reinforcing effect of starch nanocrystals will be discussed in the next 
section.   
  12.3     STARCH AS FILLER IN NANOCOMPOSITES 
 As reported by Le Corre et al.  [73] , starch nanocrystals were ﬁ  rst used as 
reinforcements in elastomer-based matrices such as poly(styrene-co-butyl acrylate)  [21, 36]  and natural rubber (NR)  [22, 23, 25, 29] . Increasing number of investigations related to starch nanocrystals was noted in recent literature (Fig.  12.5 ). Since 2006, most work has been oriented toward the use of bio-based polymers such as waterborne polyurethane (WPU)  [34, 37] , starch  [26, 27, 74, 75] , pullulan  [28] ,  poly(lactic acid  ( PLA )  [31] ,  poly(vinyl alcohol)  ( PVA )  [32] ,  poly(caprolactone)  ( PCL )  [30] ,  poly(butylene succinate)  ( PBS )  [35] , and  soy protein isolate  ( SPI )  [33] . The reinforcing effect of starch nanocrystals has been evaluated both in the linear range using DMA and in the nonlinear range through tensile tests. This section discusses the reinforcing effect of starch nanocrystals and the inﬂ  uence of surface modiﬁ  cation on this reinforcing 
effect, as well as the mechanisms proposed to explain it. 
   12.3.1     Reinforcing Effect of Starch Nanocrystals 
 Dufresne and Cavaillé  [36]  were the ﬁ  rst to report the reinforcing effect of 
starch nanocrystals in an elastomer-based matrix, especially in the rubbery state as demonstrated by DMA experiments. For instance, the relaxed modulus at the rubbery plateau of a poly(styrene-co-butyl acrylate)-based ﬁ  lm contain-
ing 30 wt% of potato starch nanocrystals was 100 times higher than that of the matrix (Table  12.5 )  [36] . In the case of an NR matrix, Angellier et al.  [22]  reported an increase in the relaxed storage modulus of 10%, 75%, and 200% for 10 wt%, 20 wt%, and 30 wt% of waxy maize starch nanocrystals, respec-tively. In both cases, no increase of the main relaxation temperature associated STARCH AS FILLER IN NANOCOMPOSITES   279
  Figure 12.5          Evolution of the number of articles dealing with SNC (updated Septem-
ber 1, 2011). 1010000113338
61213
1122222347101321273952
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Year of PublicationArticles per year (no cumulation)
Cumulation since 1996
with T g  was observed, which was an indication of poor adhesion between the 
ﬁ ller and the elastomer-based matrix  [22, 36] . Most authors further conﬁ  rmed 
the reinforcing effect of starch nanocrystals for other types of matrices, such 
as thermoplastic starch  [26, 27, 74] , pullulan  [28]  and SPI  [33] . In the case of 
thermoplastic starch either plasticized with glycerol  [26]  or sorbitol  [27] , the 
increase in ﬁ  ller content led to a shift of the main relaxation process toward 
higher temperatures (from 3°C for the unﬁ  lled matrix plasticized with 25 wt% 
of glycerol to 39.8°C for the same material ﬁ  lled with 15 wt% starch nanocrys-
tals) due to a reduction in the mobility of amylopectin chains  [26] . This dem-
onstrates the presence of interactions between the ﬁ  ller and the matrix due to 
hydrogen bonding forces. Relaxation temperature increases with increasing 
ﬁ ller content, which was attributed to ﬁ  ller/matrix interactions, was also evident 
in pullulan  [28]  and waterbone polyurethane matrices  [37] . However, in the 
case of WPU matrix, no reinforcing effect of starch nanocrystals was evidenced 
by DMA experiments  [37] . 
  The reinforcing effect of starch nanocrystals was also evidenced by tensile 
tests in the nonlinear range. Relative values of Young ’ s modulus, strength (or 
stress at break), and strain at break reported by different authors are listed in  TABLE 12.5       Relative Rubbery Storage Tensile Modulus (E ’  R ) and Relative Tensile Test Characteristics (Nominal Young ’ s Modulus, 
E; Nominal Stress at Break,  σ  ,R ; Nominal Strain at Break,  ε  b,R ) for Starch Nanocrystal-Filled Nanocomposites 
MatrixStarch 
Origin RH (%)Filler Content 
(wt%) E ’  R E R  σ  b,R  ε  b,R Year Ref.
Poly(styrene-co-butyl 
acrylate)Potato 
starch0 5 2 – – – 1998  [36] 
10 4 – – –20 22 – – –
30 100 – – –
40 400 – – –60 1000 – – –
Poly(styrene-co-butyl 
acrylate)Waxy 
maize0 10 2 – – – 2005  [21] 
30 5 – – –
50 100 – – –
Natural rubber Waxy 
maize0 2 – 1.5 1.2 0.95 2005  [22] 
5 2 2.5 1.9 0.91
10 10 7.5 3.0 0.9015 – 19.2 3.1 0.8120 75 40.8 3.9 0.7625 – 52.8 3.2 0.6730 200 119.7 2.4 0.49
Thermoplastic waxy maize 
starch/25 wt% of glycerolWaxy 
maize43 2 – 4.8 3.3 0.41 2006  [26] 
5 1.7 7.3 3.6 0.32
10 4.7 7.5 4.2 0.1915 7.2 22 9.8 0.07
Thermoplastic waxy maize 
starch/25 wt% of sorbitolWaxy 
maize43 5 1.5 2.1 2.6 0.90 2007  [27] 
10 2.0 2.2 3.8 0.92
15 2.5 2.7 4.2 0.65
280Pullulan/30 wt% of sorbitol Waxy 
maize53 3 2 2.3 1.5 0.58 2007  [28] 
6 – 2.5 1.7 0.50
15 9 7 2.6 0.2720 – 8.6 2.9 0.2140 – 15.5 5.1 0.06
Waterbone polyurethane Potato 
starch– 1 1 1.1 2.4 1.4 2008  [37] 
2 0.93 1.1 2.5 1.74 0.2 1.1 3 1.45 0.2 1.9 4.7 1.28 1.1 1.7 3.4 1.1
Poly(vinyl alcohol) Pea 43 5 – – 1.1 1.04 2008  [32] 
10 – – 1.1 1.0315 – – 0.9 120 – – 0.8 0.930 – – 0.7 0.840 – – 0.6 0.75
Thermoplastic cassava 
starch/33 wt% of glycerolWaxy 
maize43 2.5 3.9 – – –  [74] 
Soy protein isolate/30 
wt%glycerolPea 0 1 2.4 1.4 0.35 2009  [33] 
2 2.9 1.5 0.34 – 2.5 1.3 0.28 2.3 1.25 0.4
12 – 2 1 0.2516 1.9 0.9 0.07
Poly(butylene succinate) Pea 0 5 – 1.02 1.03 1.2 2011  [35] 
10 – 1.12 0.85 1.115 – 1.15 0.55 0.620 – 1.2 0.46 0.3
281282  MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES 
Table  12.5  for comparison. For most authors, the introduction of starch nano-
crystals resulted in the increase of both the relaxed storage modulus and the stress at break, with a decrease in the strain at break  [22, 26–28, 33] . In the case of NR, considering the ultimate properties, a good compromise between the increase in the strength and the decrease of the elongation at break seemed to be reached for a ﬁ  ller content around 20 wt%  [22] . The tensile 
modulus increased nearly exponentially with ﬁ  ller content, from 0.64 MPa for 
the neat matrix up to 77.8 MPa for nanocomposite ﬁ  lms ﬁ  lled with 30 wt%. 
These values are lower than the storage tensile modulus values reported from DMA experiments (respectively 1.28 and 257 MPa) at room temperature. Given that in DMA the adhesion between the ﬁ  ller and the matrix is less 
involved than in tensile tests because of weaker stresses applied, this result therefore conﬁ  rms a lack of intimate adhesion between both components of 
the composite structure  [22] . For thermoplastic starch, the particularly drastic decrease in the strain at break may be explained at least partially by the ﬁ  ller/
matrix interactions, which were evidenced by DMA tests  [26–28] . In the case of a protein-based matrix, a ﬁ  ller content of 2 wt% seemed to be the optimal 
content, with the highest strength and Young ’ s modulus  [33] . With increasing ﬁ ller content, the strength and Young ’ s modulus gradually decreased, but 
almost all nanocomposites maintained higher resistance and rigidity than the neat matrix (Table  12.5 ). At the same time, the addition of pea starch nano-crystals caused the decrease of the elongation at break. The reinforcement for low-starch nanocrystal loading levels was most likely attributed to the uniform distribution of starch nanocrystals as a stress-concentrated point in the SPI matrix. However, with an increase of starch nanocrystals content, the starch nanocrystals easily self-aggregated as large domains, which decreased the effective active starch nanocrystal surface for interacting with the SPI matrix  [33] . The reinforcing effect of pea starch nanocrystals in a WPU matrix was quite singular  [37]  and might be explained by the range of studied ﬁ  ller con-
tents (up to 8 wt% only). Compared with the neat WPU matrix, all nanocom-posites showed a simultaneous enhancement in strength, Young ’ s modulus, and elongation at break. However, a decrease in elongation at break was noted for ﬁ  ller contents higher than 2 wt%, whereas a decrease in Young ’ s 
modulus and strength was noted for ﬁ  ller contents higher than 5 wt%. This 
was also attributed to the uniform dispersion of starch nanocrystals in nanoscale as well as to interfacial interactions between starch nanocrystals and the WPU matrix. With an increase in the loading level, XRD analysis conﬁ rmed that the self-aggregation of starch nanocrystals leads to a break in 
the original structure and interactions, and even causes severe microphase separation between pea starch nanocrystals and WPU matrix  [37] . A little but signiﬁ  cant simultaneous enhancement of the strength, toughness, and rigidity 
was also observed for PBS ﬁ  lled with pea starch nanocrystal loadings of up to 
5 wt%  [35] . For ﬁ  ller contents higher than 5 wt%, only Young ’ s modulus was 
improved (Table  12.5 ). As already mentioned for SPI and WPU matrices, the incorporation of large amounts of nanoﬁ  ller (above the percolation threshold) STARCH AS FILLER IN NANOCOMPOSITES   283
may lead to self-aggregation and separation between starch nanocrystal nano-
phase and PBS matrix, decreasing the effective active nanoﬁ  ller surface avail-
able for interaction with the PBS molecules  [35] . Finally, Chen et al.  [32]  attempted to compare the reinforcing effect of pea starch nanocrystals and native pea granules in a PVA matrix. Even if the reinforcing effect of starch nanocrystals was clearly better than the one of the native granules, it remained very poor since only a very little improvement of strength and strain at break (10% at best) was noted for ﬁ  ller contents lower than 10 wt%. This was 
explained by the poor compatibility of both components  [32] . 
 Globally, waxy maize starch nanocrystals showed a better reinforcing effect 
than pea starch nanocrystals, probably due to the higher size aspect ratio of the former (Table  12.5 ). Furthermore, the reinforcing effect of waxy maize starch nanocrystals is more signiﬁ  cant in thermoplastic starch than in NR due 
to stronger interactions between the ﬁ  ller and the amylopectin chains. It is also 
possible that the reinforcing effect of starch nanocrystals in thermoplastic may be favored by an eventual crystallization at the ﬁ  ller/matrix interface  [26] .  
  12.3.2     Effect of Starch Nanocrystal Surface Chemical Modiﬁ  cation 
 The ﬁ  rst attempt to chemically modify the surface of starch nanocrystals con-
sisted in grafting small molecules using the hydroxyl groups from the nanopar-ticle surface to broaden the number of possible compatible polymeric matrices. Indeed, the chemical modiﬁ  cation can be used for transforming the polar 
hydroxyl group sitting at the surface of starch nanocrystals in moieties capable of enhancing interactions with nonpolar polymers. The two mechanisms chosen were esteriﬁ  cation with the anhydride function of  alkenyl succinic anhydride  
( ASA ) and the formation of urethane using an isocyanate such as  phenyliso-cyanate  ( PI )  [24] . Modiﬁ  ed starch nanocrystals were introduced in a NR 
matrix using a casting/evaporation technique involving toluene as the liquid phase. Their reinforcing effect was compared to the one reported for unmodi-ﬁ ed nanoparticles ﬁ  lled systems  [22] . DMA experiments demonstrated that 
the reinforcing effect of chemically modiﬁ  ed starch nanocrystals in the rubbery 
state of the NR matrix was considerably reduced, as well as the thermal stabil-ity of the materials. Tensile tests conﬁ  rmed that the reinforcing effect of starch 
nanocrystals displayed through the tensile modulus was much lower for modi-ﬁ ed nanoparticles than for unmodiﬁ  ed ones. The ultimate properties (strength 
and strain at break) were also signiﬁ  cantly affected. This was ascribed to hin-
dered interactions between chemically modiﬁ  ed particles resulting from their 
coating with the grafting agent  [22] . 
 Although modiﬁ  cation by chemical reaction of small molecules on starch 
nanocrystals improved the adhesion between the ﬁ  ller and the matrix, it was 
demonstrated that it resulted in a sharp decrease in mechanical performance owing to the partial or total destruction of the three-dimensional network in the nanocomposites  [22, 23] . In this context, the strategy of “grafting onto” polymer chains was then applied to starch nanocrystals with various polymers 284  MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES 
such as  poly(ethylene glycol) monobuthyl ether  ( PEGME )  [76] ,  poly(propylene 
glyceol) monobutyl ether  ( PPGBE )  [77] ,  poly(tetrahydrofuran)  ( PTHF )  [77] , polycaprolactone (PCL)  [30, 77]  and styrene  [78] . However, there are still shortcomings such as low controllability and grafting efﬁ  ciency, as well as dif-
ﬁ culty in grafting long-chain polymers  [35] . To our knowledge, only the work 
of Habibi and Dufresne  [30]  has been yet published concerning the incorpora-tion of such chemically modiﬁ  ed starch nanocrystals within a polymer matrix, 
PCL in that case, with the objective of modulating mechanical properties of the resulting nanocomposite materials. They demonstrated that nanocom-posite materials processed from modiﬁ  ed nanoparticles display both a high 
modulus and stress at break as well as an improved ductility as compared to unmodiﬁ  ed nanocrystals-based composites, due to an intimate adhesion 
between the ﬁ  ller and the polymeric matrix and a better dispersion of the ﬁ  ller 
within the matrix  [30] . 
 The “grafting from” strategy has been recently proposed. By this method, 
the polymerization of monomers and chain propagation of polymers are induced, and ultimately the polymer chains are coupled with the starch nano-crystals. In the study of Yu et al.  [31] , poly( ε -caprolactone) was grafted onto 
the surface of pea starch nanocrystals via microwave-assisted ring-opening polymerization based on “grafting from” strategy, and the resultant nanopar-ticles were used as ﬁ  ller in poly(lactic acid) (PLA) as matrix. Authors reported 
that the process of grafting PCL chains destroyed the starch nanocrystals aggregates and, hence, produced nano-objects with a relatively uniform size. It resulted in a simultaneous enhancement in strength (from about 42 to 58 MPa) and elongation at break (from about 10% to 135%) together with a decrease in Young modulus (from about 2000 to 1500 MPa) for a ﬁ  ller 
content of 5 wt%. However, when the loading level was higher ( ≥ 10 wt%) 
ultimate properties were also dramatically decreased. This was attributed to the introduction of the PCL component, which provided ﬂ  exibility to the 
nanocomposites, as well as the formation of an interfacial layer, which facili-tated the stress transfer to rigid starch nanocrystals  [31] . In continuation, PCL-grafted pea starch nanocrystals were incorporated into a WPU matrix  [34] . Authors also noted that the lowest loading level of 5 wt% resulted in a maximum tensile strength (from about 31 to 40 MPa), but contrarily to PLA, the elongation at break remainedstable up to a ﬁ  ller content of 25 wt% while 
Young modulus increased strongly, with a maximum value for a ﬁ  ller content 
of 20 wt% (increase from about 1 up to 220 MPa for a ﬁ  ller content of 20 
wt%)  [34] . This enhancement was attributed to the uniform dispersion of grafted starch nanocrystals because of their nanoscale size, the increased entanglements mediated with grafted PCL chains, and the reinforcing func-tion of rigid starch nanocrystals. With an increase of the ﬁ  ller content, the 
rubbery PCL component increased, inducing the self-aggregation of starch nanocrystals as crystalline domains, which impeded improvement in tensile strength and elongation at break, but signiﬁ  cantly enhanced Young modulus 
 [34] .  CONCLUSION   285
  12.3.3     Reinforcing Mechanisms 
 The reinforcing effect of starch nanocrystals is generally ascribed to the forma-
tion of a hydrogen bonded percolating ﬁ  ller network above a given starch 
content corresponding to the percolation threshold. This percolation phenom-enon was evidenced in the case of NR reinforced with waxy maize starch nano-crystals from swelling experiments (toluene and water uptake) for which changing behavior was reported above a certain ﬁ  ller concentration  [23] . In that 
case, the percolation threshold was estimated at 10 wt%  [22] . The percolation mechanism has been veriﬁ  ed by successive tensile experiments, which consisted 
of stretching the material to a given elongation, releasing the force, stretching again to a higher elongation, and repeating the process until the break of the material  [20, 23] . It was shown that for the unﬁ  lled NR matrix, the tensile 
modulus continuously increased during successive cycles due to the strain-induced crystallization of NR, whereas for highly ﬁ  lled nanocomposite materi-
als the tensile modulus decreased during the ﬁ  ve ﬁ  rst cycles  [23] . This was 
ascribed to the progressive disruption of the continuous starch nanocrystals network. The establishment of a percolating network was further conﬁ  rmed by 
the same authors. They showed that any deterioration of these ﬁ  ller–ﬁ  ller inter-
actions, for example induced by the surface chemical modiﬁ  cation of starch 
nanocrystals, results in a dramatic decrease of the mechanical performances of the ensuing composites  [22, 23] . 
 Recently, new highlights have been given concerning the reinforcing mech-
anisms of starch nanocrystals in the NR matrix  [29] . The presence of both Mullins and Payne effects was demonstrated, even for low ﬁ  ller contents, sug-
gesting that the strain dependence of the viscoelastic properties of ﬁ  ller non-
vulcanized NR could not be only related to the development of ﬁ  ller–ﬁ  ller 
interactions  [29] . Two phenomenological models were used to predict the Payne effect and thus discriminate the possible origins of the nonlinear visco-elastic behavior: (1) the Kraus model considering that ﬁ  ller–ﬁ  ller interactions 
are preponderant, and (2) the Maier and Göritz model, which is based on matrix–ﬁ  ller interactions  [29] . The use of the Kraus model lied with the con-
ﬁ rmation of the formation of a percolating network for ﬁ  ller contents higher 
than 6.7 vol% (10 wt%)  [29] . However, the Kraus model was unable to predict the dissipative properties of the different nanocomposites. The use of the Maier and Goritz model allowed demonstrating that nonlinear viscoelastic properties were governed by phenomena of adsorption and desorption of NR chains on the ﬁ  ller surface, even if the formation of a percolating network for 
ﬁ ller contents  > 6.7 vol % (10 wt%) was evidenced  [29] .   
  12.4     CONCLUSION 
 This chapter highlighted the promising use of starch as raw material for the 
production of biodegradable nanocomposite materials, either as matrix or as 286  MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES 
reinforcement in the form of nanocrystals. The development of nanocomposite 
structures by the introduction of either inorganic, such as layered silicates or carbon nanotubes, or organic nanoﬁ  llers, such as cellulose or starch nanocrys-
tals, within starch matrices allowed obtaining materials with enhanced mechan-ical properties. It is worth noting that the comparison of the reinforcing effect of the different ﬁ  llers is quite difﬁ  cult because of botanical sources of starch, 
types and contents of plasticizer, storage conditions, and processing methods, which differ according to the studies. However, some general tendencies can be given. Globally, organic ﬁ  llers have a better reinforcing effect than inor-
ganic ﬁ  llers. This may be ascribed to the natural afﬁ  nity between polysaccha-
ride nanocrystals and starch matrices, allowing the establishment of hydrogen bonds between both components and a good dispersion of ﬁ  llers within the 
matrix. In the case of inorganic ﬁ  llers, some additional efforts including surface 
chemical modiﬁ  cation should be carried out to improve their dispersion within 
the matrix and the adhesion between both components. Starch nanocrystals also appear as promising candidates for improving mechanical properties of polymer matrices in light of their platelet-like shape. The possibility of surface chemical modiﬁ  cation of starch nanocrystals to improve the afﬁ  nity between 
the ﬁ  ller and the polymer matrix opens large windows of applications. In con-
clusion, effectiveness of interactions at the interfacial region between the reinforcements and the polymer matrix continues to be a challenge to expand the use and commercialization of biodegradable nanocomposites based on starch.  
  REFERENCES 
      [1]      Hulleman ,  S.H.   ,    Janssen ,  F.H.P .   , and    Feil ,  H.    (  1998 )  The role of water during plas-
ticization of native starches .  Polymer  ,  39 ( 10 ),  2043 – 2048 .  
      [2]      Myllärinen ,  P .   ,    Partanen ,  R.   ,    Seppälä ,  J.   , and    Forssell ,  P .    (  2002 )  Effect of gl ycerol 
on behaviour of amylose and amylopectin ﬁ  lms .  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  50 ( 4 ), 
 355 – 361 .  
      [3]      Follain ,  N.   ,    Joly ,  C.   ,    Dole ,  P .   , and    Bliard ,  C.    (  2005 )  Mechanical properties of  starch-
based materials. I. Short review and complementary experimental analysis .  Journal 
of Applied Polymer Science  ,  97 ,  1783 – 1794 .  
      [4]      Lourdin ,  D.   ,    Coignard ,  L.   ,    Bizot ,  H.   , and    Colonna ,  P .    (  1997 )  Inﬂ  uence of equilib-
rium relative humidity and plasticizer concentration on the water content and glass transition of starch materials .  Polymer  ,  38 ( 21 ),  5401 – 5406 .  
      [5]      Lourdin ,  D.   ,    Bizot ,  H.   , and    Colonna ,  P .    (  1997 )  Antiplastization in starch-glycerol 
ﬁ lms?   Journal of Applied Polymer Science  ,  63 ( 8 ),  1047 – 1053 .  
      [6]      Benczédi ,  D.   ,    Tomka ,  I.   , and    Escher ,  F.    (  1998 )  Thermodynamics of amorphous 
starch-water systems. 1. Volume ﬂ  uctuations .  Macromolecules  ,  31 ( 9 ),  3055 – 3061 .  
      [7]      Anglès ,  M.N.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2001 )  Plasticized starch/tunicin whiskers nanocom-
positematerilas. 2. Mechanical behavior .  Macromolecules  ,  34 ,  2921 – 2931 .  
      [8]      Poutanen ,  K.   ,    Forssell ,  P .    (  1996 )  Modiﬁ  cation of starch properties with plasticizers . 
 TRIP  ,  4 ( 4 ),  128 – 131 .  EFERENCES   287
      [9]      Anglès ,  M.N.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2000 )  Plasticized starch/tunicin whiskers nanocom-
posites. 1. Structural analysis .  Macromolecules  ,  33 ( 22 ),  8344 – 8353 .  
   [10]      Stading ,  M.   ,    Rindlav-Westling ,  A.   , and    Gatenholm ,  P .    (  2001 )  Humidity-induced 
transitions in amylose and amylopectin ﬁ  lms .  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  45 ( 3 ), 
 209 – 217 .  
   [11]      Wilhelm ,  H.M.   ,    Sierakowski ,  M.R.   ,    Souza ,  G.   , and    Wypych ,  F.    (  2003 )  Starch ﬁ  lms 
reinforced with mineral clay .  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  52 ( 2 ),  101 – 110 .  
   [12]      Van Soest ,  J.J.G.   ,    Hulleman ,  S.H.D.   ,    De Wit ,  D.   , and    Vliegenthart ,  J.F.G.    (  1996 ) 
 Changes in the mechanical properties of thermoplastic potato starch in relation with changes in B-type crystallinity .  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  29 ( 3 ),  225 – 232 .  
   [13]      Van Soest ,  J.J.G.   ,    De Wit ,  D.   , and    Vliegenthart ,  J.F.G.    (  1996 )  Mechanical properties 
of thermoplastic waxy maize starch .  Journal of Applied Polymer Science  ,  61 ( 11 ), 
 1927 – 1937 .  
   [14]      Kuutti ,  L.   ,    Peltonen ,  J.   ,    Myllärinen ,  P .   ,    Teleman ,  O.   , and    Forssell ,  P .    (  19 97 )  AFM in 
studies of thermoplastic starches during ageing .  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  37 ( 1 ), 
 7 – 12 .  
   [15]      Forssell ,  P .M.   ,    Hulleman ,  S.H.D.   ,    Myllaärinen ,  P .J.   ,    Moates ,  G.K.   , and    Parker ,  R .    
(  1999 )  Ageing of rubbery thermoplastic barley and oat starches .  Carbohydrate 
Polymers  ,  39 ( 1 ),  43 – 51 .  
   [16]      Van Soest ,  J.J.G.   ,    Knooren ,  N.    (  1997 )  Inﬂ  uence of glycerol and water content on 
the structure and properties of extruded starch plastic sheets .  Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science  ,  64 ( 7 ),  1411 – 1422 .  
   [17]      Alexandre ,  M.   ,    Dubois ,  P .    (  2000 )  Polymer/layered silicate nanocomposites. Prepa-
ration, properties and uses of a new class of materials .  Materials Science and 
Engineering  ,  28 ,  1 – 63 .  
   [18]      Coleman ,  J.N.   ,    Khan ,  U.   ,    Blau ,  W.J.   , and    Gun ’ ko ,  Y.K.    (  2006 )  Small but strong: A 
review of the mechanical properties of carbon nanotube-polymer composites .  Carbon  ,  44 ,  1624 – 1652 .  
   [19]      Cao ,  X.   ,    Chen ,  Y.   ,    Chang ,  P .R.   , and    Huneault ,  M.A.    (  2007 )  Preparation and proper-
ties of plasticized starch/multiwalled carbon nanotubes composites .  Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science  ,  106 ,  1431 – 1437 .  
   [20]      Dufresne ,  A.    (  2008 )  Polysaccharide nanocrystal reinforced nanocomposites .  Cana-
dian Journal of Chemistry  ,  86 ( 6 ),  484 – 494 .  
   [21]      Angellier ,  H.   ,    Putaux ,  J.L.   ,    Molina-Boisseau ,  S.   ,    Dupeyre ,  D.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    
(  2005 )  Starch nanocrystal ﬁ  llers in an acrylic polymer matrix .  Macromolecular 
Symposia  ,  221 ,  95 – 104 .  
   [22]      Angellier ,  H.   ,    Molina-Boisseau ,  S.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2005 )  Mechanical properties 
of waxy maize starch nanocrystals reinforced natural rubber .  Macromolecules  ,  38
 , 
 9161 – 9170 .  
   [23]      Angellier ,  H.   ,    Molina-Boisseau ,  S.   ,    Lebrun ,  L.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2005 )  Processin g 
and structural properties of waxy maize starch nanocrystals reinforced natural rubber .  Macromolecules  ,  38 ( 9 ),  3783 – 3792 .  
   [24]      Angellier ,  H.   ,    Molina-Boisseau ,  S.   ,    Belgacem ,  M.N.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2005 ) 
 Surface chemical modiﬁ  cation of waxy maize starch nanocrystals .  Langmuir  ,  21 , 
 2425 – 2433 .  
   [25]      Angellier ,  H.   ,    Molina-Boisseau ,  S.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2006 )  Waxy maize starch 
nanocrystals as ﬁ  ller in natural rubber .  Macromolecular Symposia  ,  233 ,  132 – 136 .  288  MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES 
   [26]      Angellier ,  H.   ,    Molina-Boisseau ,  S.   ,    Dole ,  P .   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2006 )  Thermoplast ic 
starch-waxy maize starch nanocrystals nanocomposites .  Biomacromolecules  ,  7 , 
 531 – 539 .  
   [27]      Viguié ,  J.   ,    Molina-Boisseau ,  S.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2007 )  Processing and character-
ization of waxy maize starch ﬁ  lms plasticized by sorbitol and reinforced with 
starch nanocrystals .  Macromolecular Bioscience  ,  7 ,  1206 – 1216 .  
   [28]      Kristo ,  E.   ,    Biliaderis ,  C.G.    (  2007 )  Physical properties of starch nanocrystal-
reinforced pullulan ﬁ  lms .  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  68 ,  146 – 158 .  
   [29]      Mélé ,  P .   ,    Angellier-Coussy ,  H.   ,    Molina-Boisseau ,  S.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2011 )  Rein -
forcing mechanisms of starch nanocrystals in a non-vulcanized natural rubber matrix .  Biomacromolecules  ,  12 ,  1487 – 1493 .  
   [30]      Habibi ,  Y.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2008 )  Highly ﬁ  lled bionancomposites from functional-
ized polysaccharide nanocrystals .  Biomacromolecules  ,  9 ,  1974 – 1980 .  
   [31]      Yu ,  J.   ,    Ai ,  F.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.   ,    Gao ,  S.   ,    Huang ,  J.   , and    Chang ,  P .R.    (  2008 )  Structure and 
mechanical properties of poly(lactic acid) ﬁ  lled with (starch nanocrystal)-graft-
poly( ε -caprolactone) .  Macromolecular Materials and Engineering  ,  293 ,  763 – 770 .  
   [32]      Chen ,  Y.   ,    Cao ,  X.   ,    Chang ,  P .R.   , and    Huneault ,  M.A.    (  2008 )  Comparative study on 
the ﬁ  lms of poly(vinyl alcohol)/pea starch nanocrystals and poly(vinyl alcohol)/
native pea starch .  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  73 ,  8 – 17 .  
   [33]      Zheng ,  H.   ,    Ai ,  F.   ,    Chang ,  P .R.   ,    Huang ,  J.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2009 )  Struct ure and 
properties of starch nanocrystal-reinforced soy protein plastics .  Polymer Compos-
ites ,  30 ( 4 ),  474 – 480 .  
   [34]      Chang ,  P .R.   ,    Ai ,  F.   ,    Chen ,  Y.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.   , and    Huang ,  J.    (  2009 )  Effects  of starch 
nanocrystal-graft-polycaprolactone on mechanical properties of waterbone polyurethane-based nanocomposites .  Journal of Applied Polymer Science  ,  111 , 
 619 – 627 .  
   [35]      Lin ,  N.   ,    Yu ,  J.   ,    Chang ,  P .R.   ,    Li ,  J.   , and    Huang ,  J.    (  2011 )  Poly(butylene succinate)-
based biocomposites ﬁ  lled with polysaccharide nanocrystals: Structure and prop-
erties .  Polymer composites  ,  32 ( 3 ),  472 – 482 .  
   [36]      Dufresne ,  A.   ,    Cavaillé ,  J.-Y.    (  1998 )  Clustering and percolation effects in micro-
crystalline starch-reinforced thermoplastic .  Journal of Polymer Science Part B: 
Polymer Physics  ,  36 ,  2211 – 2224 .  
   [37]      Chen ,  G.   ,    Wei ,  M.   ,    Chen ,  J.   ,    Huang ,  J.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.   , and    Chang ,  P .R.    (  2008 )  Simul-
taneous reinforcing and toughening: New nanocomposites of waterbone polyure-thane ﬁ  lled with low loading level of starch nanocrystals .  Polymer  ,  49 , 
 1860 – 1870 .  
   [38]      Lin ,  N.   ,    Huang ,  J.   ,    Chang ,  P .R.   ,    Anderson ,  D.P .   , and    Yu ,  J.    (  2011 )  Prepar ation, 
modiﬁ  cation and application of starch nanocrystals in nanomaterials: A review . 
 Journal of Nanomaterials.   doi: 10.1155/2011/573687.  
   [39]      LeCorre ,  D.   ,    Bras ,  J.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2011 )  Evidence of micro and nano-scaled 
particles during starch nanocrystals production and their isolation .  Biomacromol-
ecules  ,  12 ,  3039 – 3046 .  
   [40]      LeCorre ,  D.   ,    Bras ,  J.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2011 )  Ceramic membrane ﬁ  ltration for 
isolating starch nanocrystals .  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  86 ,  1565 – 1572 .  
   [41]      Park ,  H.M.   ,    Li ,  X.   ,    Jin ,  C.Z.   ,    Park ,  C.Y.   ,    Cho ,  W.J.   , and    Ha ,  C.S.    (  2002 )  Preparation 
and properties of biodegradable thermoplastic starch/clay hydrids .  Macromolecu-
lar Materials and Engineering  ,  287 ( 8 ),  553 – 558 .  EFERENCES   289
   [42]      Park ,  H.M.   ,    Lee ,  W.K.   ,    Park ,  C.Y.   ,    Cho ,  W.J.   , and    Ha ,  C.S.    (  2003 )  Environ mentally 
friendly polymer hybrids. Part I. Mechanical, thermal, and barrier properties of thermoplastic starch/clay nanocomposites .  Journal of Materials Science  ,  38 , 
 909 – 915 .  
   [43]      Huang ,  M.F.   ,    Yu ,  J.G.   , and    Ma ,  X.F.    (  2004 )  Studies on the properties of 
montmorillonite-reinforced thermoplastic starch composites .  Polymer  ,  45 , 
 7017 – 7023 .  
   [44]      Chen ,  B.   ,    Evans ,  J.R.G.    (  2005 )  Thermoplastic starch-clay nanocomposites and their 
characteristics .  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  61 ,  455 – 463 .  
   [45]      Pandey ,  J.K.   ,    Singh ,  R.P .    (  2005 )  Green nanocomposites from renewable resources: 
Effect of plasticizer on the structure and material properties of clay-ﬁ  lled starch . 
 Starch/Stärke  ,  57 ( 1 ),  8 – 15 .  
   [46]      Bagdi ,  K.   ,    Müller ,  P .   , and    Pukanszky ,  B.    (  2006 )  Thermoplastic starch/layered sili-
cate composites: Structure, interaction, properties .  Composite Interfaces  ,  13 ( 1 ), 
 1 – 17 .  
   [47]      Kvien ,  I.   ,    Sugiyama ,  J.   ,    Votrubec ,  M.   , and    Oksman ,  K.    (  2007 )  Characterization of 
starch based nanocomposites .  Journal of Materials Science  ,  42 ,  8163 – 8171 .  
   [48]      Kampeerapappun ,  P .   ,    Aht-ong ,  D.   ,    Pentrakoon ,  D.   , and    Srikulkit ,  K.    (  2007 )  Prepa-
ration of cassava starch/montmorillonite composite ﬁ  lm .  Carbohydrate Polymers  , 
 67 ,  155 – 163 .  
   [49]      Tang ,  X.   ,    Alavi ,  S.   , and    Herald ,  T.J.    (  2008 )  Barrier and mechanical properties of 
starch-clay nanocomposite ﬁ  lms .  Cereal Chemistry  ,  85 ( 3 ),  433 – 439 .  
   [50]      Cyras ,  V .P .   ,    Manfredi ,  L.B.   ,    Ton-That ,  M.T.   , and    Vasquez ,  A.    (  2008 )  Physical and 
mechanical properties of thermoplastic starch/montmorillonitenanocomposite ﬁ lms .  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  73 ,  55 – 63 .  
   [51]      Chivrac ,  F.   ,    Angellier-Coussy ,  H.   ,    Guillard ,  V .   ,    Pollet ,  E.   , and    Averous ,  L.    (  2010 ) 
 How does water diffuse in starch/montmorillonite nano-biocomposite materials?   Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  82 ,  128 – 135 .  
   [52]      Maksimov ,  R.D.   ,    Lagzdins ,  A.   ,    Lilichenko ,  N.   , and    Plume ,  E.    (  2009 )  Mechanical 
properties and water vapour permeability of starch/montmorillonite nanocom-posites .  Polymer Engineering and Science  ,  49 ( 12 ),  2421 – 2429 .  
   [53]      Wilhelm ,  H.M.   ,    Sierakowski ,  M.R.   ,    Souza ,  G.P .   , and    Wypych ,  F.    (  2003 )  The inﬂ  u-
ence of layered compounds on the properties of starch/layered compound com-posites .  Polymer International  ,  52 ( 6 ),  1035 – 1044 .  
   [54]      Dean ,  K.   ,    Yu ,  L.   , and    Wu ,  D.W.    (  2007 )  Preparation and characterization of melt-
extruded thermoplastic starch/clay nanocomposites .  Composites Science and Tech-
nology  ,  67 ,  413 – 421 .  
   [55]      Ren ,  P .   ,    Shen ,  T.   ,    Wang ,  F.   ,    Wang ,  X.   , and    Zhang ,  Z.    (  2009 )  Study on biod egradable 
starch/OMMT nanocomposites for packaging applications .  Journal of Polymers 
and the Environment  ,  17 ,  203 – 207 .  
   [56]      Majdzadeh-Ardakani ,  K.   ,    Navarchian ,  A.H.   , and    Sadeghi ,  F.    (  2010 )  Optimization 
of mechanical properties of thermoplastic starch/clay nanocomposites .  Carbohy-
drate Polymers  ,  79 ,  547 – 554 .  
   [57]      Chivrac ,  F.   ,    Pollet ,  E.   , and    Avérous ,  L.    (  2009 )  Progress in nano-biocomposites 
based on polysaccharides and nanoclays .  Materials Science and Engineering R  ,  67 , 
 1 – 17 .  290  MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF STARCH-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES 
   [58]      Chivrac ,  F.   ,    Gueguen ,  O.   ,    Pollet ,  E.   ,    Ahzi ,  S.   ,    Makradi ,  A.   , and    Averous ,   L.    (  2008 ) 
 Micromechanical modelling and characterization of the effective properties in starch-based nano-biocomposites .  Acta Biomaterialia  ,  4 ,  1707 – 1714 .  
   [59]      Cao ,  X.   ,    Chen ,  Y.   ,    Chang ,  P .R.   ,    Stumborg ,  M.   , and    Huneault ,  M.A.    (  2008 )  G reen 
composites reinforced with hemp nanocrystals in plasticized starch .  Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science  ,  109 ,  3804 – 3810 .  
   [60]      Liu ,  Z.   ,    Zhao ,  L.   ,    Chen ,  M.   , and    Yu ,  J.    (  2011 )  Effect of carboxylate multi-walled  
carbon nanotubes on the performance of thermoplastic starch nanocomposites .  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  83 ,  447 – 451 .  
   [61]      Ma ,  X.   ,    Yu ,  J.   , and    wang ,  N.    (  2008 )  Glycerol plasticized-starch/multiwall carbon 
nanotube composites for electroactive polymers .  Composites Science and Technol-
ogy ,  68 ,  268 – 273 .  
   [62]      Fama ,  L.M.   ,    Pettarin ,  V .   ,    Goyanes ,  S.N.   , and    Bernal ,  C.R.    (  2011 )  Starch/multi-
walled carbon nanotubes composites with improved mechanical properties .  Car-
bohydrate Polymers  ,  83 ,  1226 – 1231 .  
   [63]      Dufresne ,  A.   ,    Vignon ,  M.    (  1998 )  Improvement of starch ﬁ  lm performances using 
cellulose microﬁ  brils .  Macromolecules  ,  31 ( 8 ),  2693 – 2696 .  
   [64]      Dufresne ,  A.   ,    Dupeyre ,  D.   , and    Vignon ,  M.R.    (  2000 )  Cellulose microﬁ  brils from 
potato tuber cells: Processing and characterization of starch-cellulose microﬁ  bril 
composites .  Journal of Applied Polymer Science  ,  76 ,  2080 – 2092 .  
   [65]      Orts ,  W.J.   ,    Shey ,  J.   ,    Imam ,  S.H.   ,    Glenn ,  G.M.   ,    Guttman ,  M.E.   , and    Revol ,  J.F.    (  2005 ) 
 Application of cellulose microﬁ  brils in polymer nanocomposites .  Journal of Poly-
mers and the Environment  ,  13 ( 4 ),  301 – 306 .  
   [66]      Mathew ,  A.P .   ,    Thielemans ,  W.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2008 )  Mechanical properties of 
nanocomposites from sorbitol and tunicin whiskers .  Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science  ,  109 ,  4065 – 4074 .  
   [67]      Favier ,  V .   ,    Canova ,  G.R.   ,    Cavaillé ,  J.Y.   ,    Chanzy ,  H.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.   , and    Ga uthier ,  C.    
(  1995 )  Nanocomposite materials from latex and cellulose whiskers .  Polymers for 
Advanced Technologies  ,  6 ( 5 ),  351 – 355 .  
   [68]      Teixeira ,  E.   ,    Pasquini ,  D.   ,    Curvelo ,  A.A.S.   ,    Corradini ,  E.   ,    Belgacem ,  M.N.   , a nd 
   Dufresne ,  A.    (  2009 )  Cassava bagasse cellulose nanoﬁ  brils reinforced thermoplas-
tic cassava starch .  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  78 ,  422 – 431 .  
   [69]      Lu ,  Y.S.   ,    Weng ,  L.H.   , and    Cao ,  X.D.    (  2005 )  Biocomposites of plasticized starch 
reinforced with cellulose crystallites from cottonseed linter .  Macromolecular Bio-
science  ,  5 ,  1101 – 1107 .  
   [70]      Alemdar ,  A.   ,    Sain ,  M.    (  2008 )  Biocomposites from wheat straw nanoﬁ  bers: Mor-
phology, thermal and mechanical properties .  Composites Science and Technology  , 
 68
 ,  557 – 565 .  
   [71]      Kaushik ,  A.   ,    Singh ,  M.   , and    Verma ,  G.    (  2010 )  Green nanocomposites based on 
thermoplastic starch and steam exploded cellulose nanoﬁ  brils from wheat straw . 
 Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  82 ,  337 – 345 .  
   [72]      Chen ,  Y.   ,    Liu ,  C.   ,    Chang ,  P .R.   ,    Cao ,  X.   , and    Anderson ,  D.P .    (  2009 )  Bionan ocom-
posites based on pea starch and cellulose nanowhiskers hydrolyzed from pea hull ﬁ bre: Effect of hydrolysis time .  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  76 ,  607 – 615 .  
   [73]      Le Corre ,  D.   ,    Bras ,  J.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2010 )  Starch nanoparticles: A review . 
 Biomacromolecules  ,  11 ,  1139 – 1153 .  EFERENCES   291
   [74]      Garcia ,  N.L.   ,    Ribba ,  L.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.   ,    Aranguren ,  M.   , and    Goyanes ,  S.    (  2009  ) 
 Physico-mechanicalproperties of biodegradable starch nanocomposites .  Macro-
molecular Materials and Engineering  ,  294 ,  169 – 177 .  
   [75]      Garcia ,  N.L.   ,    Ribba ,  L.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.   ,    Aranguren ,  M.   , and    Goyanes ,  S.    (  2011  )  Effect 
of glycerol on the morphology of nanocomposites made from thermoplastic starch and starch nanocrystals .  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  84 ,  203 – 210 .  
   [76]      Thielemans ,  W.   ,    Belgacem ,  M.N.   , and    Dusfresne ,  A.    (  2006 )  Starch nanocrystals 
with large chain surface modiﬁ  cations .  Langmuir  ,  22 ( 10 ),  4804 – 4810 .  
   [77]      Labet ,  M.   ,    Thielemans ,  W.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2007 )  Polymer grafting onto starch 
nanocrystals .  Biomacromolecules  ,  8 ( 9 ),  2916 – 2927 .  
   [78]      Song ,  S.   ,    Wang ,  C.   ,    Pan ,  Z.   , and    Wang ,  X.    (  2008 )  Preparation and characterization  
of amphiphilic starch nanocrystals .  Journal of Applied Polymer Science  ,  107 , 
 418 – 422 .  
   [79]      Reilly ,  R.M.    (  2007 )  Carbon nanotubes: Potential beneﬁ  ts and risks of nanotechnol-
ogy in nuclear medicine .  Journal of Nuclear Medicine  ,  48 ( 7 ),  1039 – 1042 .  
   [80]      Harris ,  P .J.F.    (  2004 )  Carbon nanotube composites .  International Materials Reviews  , 
 49 ( 1 ),  31 – 43 .  
   [81]      Ebeling ,  T.   ,    Paillet ,  M.   ,    Borsali ,  R.   ,    Diat ,  O.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.   ,    Cavaillé ,  J.Y.   , and 
   Chanzy ,  H.    (  1999 )  Shear-induced orientation phenomena in suspensions of cel-lulose microcrystals, revealed by small angle X-ray scattering .  Langmuir  ,  15 ( 19 ), 
 6123 – 6126 .   
 293Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 13
Applications of Starch Nanoparticles 
and Starch-Based Bionanocomposites
SIJI K. MARY , LALY A. POTHAN , and SABU THOMAS
13.1 INTRODUCTION
Nanoscience and nanotechnology have already been applied in various fields, 
such as computer electronics, communication, energy production, medicine, 
and food processing and packaging. The nanoscale devices are often manufac -
tured with the view of imitating the nanodevices found in nature, which include 
proteins, DNA, membranes, and other natural biomolecules. In today’s world, 
food materials are often considered not only a source of nutrients but also as 
having to contribute to the health of consumers [1, 2].
Synthetic polymeric materials have been widely used in all areas of human 
activity. The disposal of a high volume of plastics, which take a long time to 
decompose, poses a huge environmental problem. With increased environmen -
tal awareness in society, there is growing recognition of the need to reduce the 
quantity of plastic materials discarded. Therefore, intense research has been 
carried out in the areas of engineering and biological sciences to develop 
polymeric materials that are easily disposable but not environmentally harmful, 
particularly for use in the packaging industry. Starches are considered one of 
the most promising available natural polymer candidates for the development 
of biodegradable materials [3].
Natural resources such as starch, cellulose, and chitin are used as both  
the polymer matrix and the nanoscale reinforcement agent. Most of the 
nanoparticles used traditionally belong to the group of colloids. Owing to the 294  APPLIcATIONS  Of STARcH NANOPARTI cLeS ANd STARcH-BASed B IONANO cOMPOSIT eS
higher surface area of nanoparticles per mass unit, they are expected to be 
more biologically active than larger sized particles of the same chemical com -
position [4].
Starch is probably the most promising for use as a biodegradable polymer 
using renewable resources. A versatile biopolymer, it has great potential, low 
price, and abundant availability, not dependent on fossil sources, for use in the 
nonfood industries. The most commercially important sources of starch are 
corn, wheat, rice, potatoes, tapioca, and peas. Starch has received considerable 
attention during the past three decades as a biodegradable thermoplastic 
polymer or as biodegradable particulate filler. Although it is not truly thermo -
plastic, but by mixing with sufficient water or nonaqueous plasticizer (gener -
ally polyols, such as glycerol), it can be converted into a continuous polymeric 
entangled phase. The resulting material can be manufactured using technology 
already developed for the production of synthetic plastic [5]. Great progress 
has been achieved in the development of biodegradable products based on 
polysaccharides such as cellulose, chitin, and starch, which are widely available 
in nature and constitute an important class of biopolymers. Among them, 
starch is a renewable carbohydrate polymer procurable at low cost from a 
great variety of crops. Native starch commonly exists in a granular structure, 
which can be processed into plasticized starch materials [6]. The starch indus -
try extracts and refines starches by wet grinding, sieving, and drying. Starch is 
used as extracted from the plant and is called “native starch,” or it undergoes 
one or more chemical modifications to reach specific properties and is called 
“modified starch.”
Nanofillers have strong reinforcing effects in polymers. However, for 
decades, studies have been conducted with nonrenewable inorganic fillers  
and a petroleum-based matrix. Increasing environmental concerns have led  
to developing new flexible barrier biobased packaging and investigating the 
potential uses of renewable resources for such an application. However, the 
usage of these materials has been limited by their poor performance, such as 
brittleness and poor gas and moisture barrier. Polysaccharides are good can -
didates for renewable nanofillers because they have partly crystalline struc -
tures conferring interesting properties [7].
The predominant model for starch is a concentric semicrystalline multiscale 
structure that allows the production of new nanoelements: (1) starch nano -
crystals resulting from the disruption of amorphous domains from semicrystal -
line granules by acid hydrolysis and (2) starch nanoparticles produced from 
gelatinized starch. Recent studies have shown that starch nanoparticles could 
be used as fillers to improve mechanical and barrier properties of biocompos -
ites. Their use for industrial packaging, with the ongoing search for innovative 
solutions for efficient and sustainable systems, is being investigated. Therefore, 
recently, starch nanoparticles have been the focus of an exponentially increas -
ing number of works devoted to developing biocomposites by blending starch 
nanoparticles with different biopolymeric matrices [7].APPLIcATIONS Of STARcH NANOPARTIcLe   295
13.2 APPLICATIONS OF STARCH NANOPARTICLE
A large number of organic and inorganic materials and lignocellulosic fibers 
have been tested as potential sources of nanoparticles and nanofibers to be 
used as nanofillers. These materials have the advantage of being renewable, 
which means they have a much smaller environmental impact than their syn -
thetic equivalents. The field of reinforced polymer materials with polysaccha -
ride nanofillers has seen rapid advances and gained considerable interest in 
the last decade owing to the renewable character, high mechanical properties, 
low density, and diversity of the sources [8]. Starch nanoparticles are receiving 
attention due to the abundant availability of starch and its low cost, renew -
ability, biocompatibility, biodegradability, and nontoxicity. Starch nanocrystals 
obtained by acid hydrolysis of starch have been used as fillers in natural and 
synthetic polymeric matrices and as reinforcing agents [8]. Nanoparticles 
(fillers) enhance not only mechanical properties, but also physical properties, 
such as permeability or fire retardancy. Their properties depend on the nature 
and effectiveness of interactions at the interfacial region, that is, on both the 
surface area and the dispersion of the particles [7]. The choice of the matrix 
depends on several parameters such as the application, the compatibility 
between components, the process, and the cost. Starch is the second most 
studied organic material for producing nanocrystals. Among the components 
of bionanocomposites, the nanometer-sized biofillers from biomass show 
unique advantages over traditional inorganic nanoparticles by virtue of their 
biodegradability and biocompatibility.
13.2.1 Starch Nanofillers Used in Natural Polymer Matrices
Carbon black (manufactured by burning oil or natural gas in controlled condi -
tions) is the most important reinforcing agent used in the rubber industry. The 
attempt to replace carbon black in rubber compounds with other reinforcing 
agents has been the main focus of researchers in the past decade. This is 
because carbon black causes pollution and gives a black color to the rubber. 
Kaolin and silica were commonly used as reinforcing agents, but their reinforc -
ing properties are lower than those obtained with carbon black. Due to the 
ability of the clay silicate layers to disperse into polymer rubber matrices, a 
variety of clays have been used to obtain unusual nanocomposites. Clay miner -
als such as montmorillonite and organoclays seem to be a potential substitute 
to carbon black. Recently, Novamont (Novara, Italy), working in partnership 
with Goodyear Tire and Rubber, has developed tires using nanoparticles 
derived from cornstarch, partially replacing the conventional carbon black and 
silica used in making tires [8]. Both native starch and starch nanoparticles are 
found to induce excellent reinforcement in natural rubber. The main hurdle 
for the use of starch as a reinforcing phase is its hydrophilicity. Hence, there 296  APPLIcATIONS  Of STARcH NANOPARTI cLeS ANd STARcH-BASed B IONANO cOMPOSIT eS
is a growing interest in organically modified derivatives of polysaccharides  
for different applications. Starch nanocrystals obtained by acid hydrolysis  
of potato and waxy maize starch granules have been used as a filler in a 
ynthetic polymeric matrix and appear to be an interesting reinforcing agent. 
Nanocomposite materials were obtained using a latex of natural rubber as the 
matrix and an aqueous suspension of waxy maize starch nanocrystals as the 
reinforcing phase. Starch nanocrystals were obtained after sulfuric acid hydro -
lysis of waxy maize starch granules. They consisted of crystalline platelets 
6–8 nm thick, 40–60 nm long, and 15–30 nm wide. After mixing of the latex 
and the starch nanocrystals, the resulting aqueous suspension was cast and 
evaporated [9].
Chang et al. prepared bionanocomposites of citric acid modified starch 
nanoparticle (CASN)–glycerol plasticized pea starch (GPS) by using CASN 
as the filler and GPS as the matrix. They synthesized CASN by cross-linking 
starch in starch nanoparticles with citric acid (CA). Most of CASN ranged in 
size from about 50 to 100 nm. CASN was in the amorphous phase, which could 
not be gelatinized in hot water even at a high temperature (95°C), because of 
the cross-linking. The nanocomposites were prepared using CASN as the filler 
in the GPS matrix by the casting process. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) 
revealed that CASN was dispersed evenly in the GPS matrix. The introduction 
of CASN could improve the storage modulus and the glass transition tempera -
ture of CASN/GPS composites. The work is finally focused on processing and 
characterization of CASN/GPS nanocomposites in terms of the morphology, 
mechanical properties, dynamic mechanical thermal analysis, and water vapor 
permeability. CASN was dispersed evenly in the GPS matrix and remained at 
their original size of CASN without obvious aggregation. As the filler of the 
GPS matrix, CASN had an obvious reinforcement effect on the tensile strength 
and Young’s modulus, which was attributed to the strong interaction because 
of chemical similarities between CASN and pea starch in the GPS matrix. The 
introduction of CASN could improve the storage modulus and the glass transi -
tion temperature of the composites and water vapor barrier in comparison 
with pure GPS. These starch (starch derivatives/GPS) nanocomposites will 
have potential application in the medical, agriculture, drug release, and pack -
aging fields, such as edible films, food packaging, and one-off packaging. In 
addition, CASN could be also used as the filler for the matrix of other natural 
polysaccharides (agar, alginate, and chitin) [6].
In the processing of starch nanoparticles (SN), native granular corn starch 
(Fig. 13.1a) was gelatinized in water and formed a starch paste. The prepara -
tion of SN in water by dropwise addition of ethanol resulted in the nanopar -
ticles (Fig. 13.1b). Most of SN ranged in size from 50 to 300 nm. It was known 
that the stability of the nanoparticle suspensions was an important prerequi -
site for preparing these novel nanoparticles. The interaction of hydrogen 
bonds between SN and starch paste plays an important role in the stability of 
the precipitated SN in the suspension. The reaction of SN and CA seemed to 
decrease the aggregation of SN and large particles of SN were reduced, as APPLIcATIONS Of STARcH NANOPARTIcLe   297
shown in Figure 13.1c. Most of CASN ranged in size from about 50 to 100 nm. 
As shown in Figure 13.1d,e, no residual granular structure of pea starch was 
observed in the continuous GPS phase. At high temperature, water and glyc -
erol are known to physically break up the granules of pea starch and disrupt 
intermolecular and starch intramolecular hydrogen bonds and make the native 
starch plastic. CASN was dispersed well in the GPS matrix and remained at 
their original size without obvious aggregation, which was attributed to the 
strong interaction because of chemical similarities between CASN and pea 
starch in the GPS matrix (Fig. 13.1f) [6].
13.2.2 Starch Nanofillers Used in Synthetic Polymer Matrix
Chen et al. studied the effects of low levels of starch nanocrystals in modifying 
waterborne polyurethane (WPU). WPU is regarded as a nontoxic, nonflam -
mable, and biodegradable material. Environmentally friendly WPU can be Figure 13.1  SEM micrograph of corn starch ( ×500, a), SN ( ×10,000, b), CASN ( ×20,000, 
c), pea starch ( ×500, d) powders, the fragile fractured surface of CASN/GPS composites 
containing 0 wt% CASN ( ×4000, e), and 3 wt% CASN ( ×4000, f). Reprinted with per -
mission from Reference [6]. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)298  APPLIcATIONS  Of STARcH NANOPARTI cLeS ANd STARcH-BASed B IONANO cOMPOSIT eS
applied to leather and textile finishing, floor coverings, adhesives, pressure-
sensitive adhesives, and so on. Starch, soy protein, and lignin have been incor -
porated into WPU for the purposes of reducing cost, improving biodegradability, 
and enhancing mechanical performance. Synergistic reinforcement of WPU 
by both starch nanocrystals and cellulose whiskers is one interesting and inno -
vative approach [10, 11].
1,4-Hexamethylene diisocyanate (HMDI)-cross-linked insoluble starch 
nanoparticles are used for the synthesis of nanocomposites. The platelet-like 
starch nanocrystals become pseudospherical after modification with HMDI, 
and the size increases or decreases depending on diisocyanate concentration 
compared with the ungrafted particles, as revealed by transmission electron 
microscopy (TEM) results. Because iisocyanates are highly reactive com -
pounds, reactions take place easily under mild ambient conditions. Among 
various isocyanates, HMDI has a flexible structure with an aliphatic chain of 
six methylene groups. The high degree of cross-linking and effective filling by 
the nanoparticles facilitates electrical conductivity. When compared with the 
hydrophobic performance of the unmodified starch nanocrystals, that of cross-
linked starch nanocrystals significantly increased. X-ray diffraction reveals 
that the crystalline structure of modified starch nanocrystals was preserved. 
The resulting hydrophobic starch nanoparticles are versatile precursors to the 
development of nanocomposites (Fig. 13.2).
Figure 13.2  An illustration of formation of (a) HMDI-modified starch nanoparticles 
and (b) photoplethysmography-HMDI-modified starch nanoparticles polyurethane 
nanocomposite. For simplicity only 3 –OH groups are shown to have reacted. Reprinted 
with permission from Reference [12].(a) (b)
SNP+THFCH 3
CH 2 HO CH O
O
OO OO
OO
n
+
OCNOCN
NOCNOC
(CH 2)6(CH 2)6C
C
C=OCN
N NH
H H
HPrepolymer
OHOH
OHOHHO
HOStarch
nanopar ticles HMDI,
Nitrogen atin
HMDI modif ied
SNP in THF
DBTDL
HMDI modif ied
SNPNCross-linked
Polyur ethaneAPPLIcATIONS Of STARcH-BASed cOMPOSITeS   299
Figure 13.3 shows TEM images of nanocrystals before (Fig. 13.3a) and after 
modification (Fig. 13.3b) [12].
13.3 APPLICATIONS OF STARCH-BASED COMPOSITES
Bionanocomposites are materials with a biological origin that are biodegrad -
able. These materials serve a number of important functions, such as extending 
food shelf life and enhancing food quality, because they not only are barriers 
to moisture, water vapor, gases, and solutes, but also are carriers of some active 
substances, such as antioxidants and antimicrobials.
In recent years the development of biodegradable materials from renew -
able resources with excellent mechanical and barrier properties has been an 
important research challenge for the plastics industry. The main types of plas -
tics that are currently used in all applications are derived from nonrenewable 
petroleum resources, and result in nonbiodegradable plastic materials. Thus, 
the volume of plastics discarded annually creates a substantial waste disposal 
issue, and alternative methods to reduce the quantity of persistent plastic 
wastes are required. One approach is to make materials from biodegradable 
materials that can be disposed of through composting or feedstock recycling. Figure 13.3  TEM images of (a) starch nanocrystals and (b, c) HMDI-modified starch 
nanoparticles. Particle size distribution of HMDI-modified starch nanoparticles (inset 
of b). Reprinted with permission from Reference [12].
(a) (b)
(c)500 nm
100 nm
714.3 nm120
100
80
604020
0Intensity
34.8 39.8 46.3 51 .1 56.464.9
Diamet er mn300  APPLIcATIONS  Of STARcH NANOPARTI cLeS ANd STARcH-BASed B IONANO cOMPOSIT eS
A number of biodegradable materials have been investigated for use as plas -
tics [13]. Bionanocomposites are mixtures of polymers with nanosized inor -
ganic or organic fillers with particular size, geometry, and surface chemistry 
properties. The polymers used are normally hydrocolloids, such as proteins, 
starches, pectins, and other polysaccharides. Various inorganic nanoparticles 
have been recognized as possible additives to enhance the polymer perfor -
mance. Nanofillers include solid layered clays, synthetic polymer nanofibers, 
cellulose nanowhiskers, and carbon nanotubes. Up to now only layered inor -
ganic solids such as layered silicate have attracted the attention of the packag -
ing industry.
13.3.1 In Food Industry
Nanotechnology has potential applications in all aspects of the food industry, 
including storage, quality monitoring, food processing, and food packaging. 
Nanotechnology applications in the food industry range from intelligent pack -
aging to creation of on-demand interactive food that allows consumers to 
modify food, depending on tastes and nutritional needs.
Packaging plays a variety of important roles in the food industry. The major 
role of packaging is to protect food from spoilage by microbial contamination, 
physical damage, or biochemical reactions. Packaging also provides ease in 
handling, storage efficiency, attractiveness, and product information for food. 
The ideal food packaging material serves all of these purposes and is also 
cost-efficient. Different types of materials, including plastics, cardboard, and 
metal, are used for food packaging depending on specific needs. The use of 
plastics in food packaging, including films, is common and increasing because 
of low cost and functional advantages over other materials [14–16]. Although 
plastics are one of the cheapest sources available for food packaging, their 
reliance on petroleum and their long-term impact on the environment have 
spurred research in recent years on alternative packaging based on renewable 
and biodegradable materials. Starch is one such inexpensive, abundantly avail -
able, and renewable material that can be used for making biodegradable 
packaging films. Bionanocomposites are hybrid nanostructured materials with 
improved mechanical, thermal, and gas barrier properties. The use of bionano -
composites for food packaging not only protects the food and increases its 
shelf life but can also be considered a more environmentally friendly solution 
because it reduces the requirement to use plastics as packaging materials (Fig. 
13.4). Most of the traditional packaging materials are made from nondegrad -
able materials, which increase environmental pollution [17, 18].
To improve the properties of starch-based films, researchers have blended 
starch with other polymers such as polyhydroxyalkanoates, poly(lactic acid) 
(PLA), and poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVOH) [17, 18]. An innovative approach to 
improve the mechanical and barrier properties of polymer films is to produce 
nanocomposites by adding nanoscale particles. Nanocomposites of starch, 
PVOH, and sodium montmorillonite (Na+MMT) were produced by solution APPLIcATIONS Of STARcH-BASed cOMPOSITeS   301
mixing and cast into films. Clay minerals are a diverse class of layered silicates 
that have been used for producing nanocomposites with polymers. Starch is 
compatible with Na+MMT due to the interaction between its polar hydroxyl 
groups and the Na+ ions of nanoclay. This results in well-intercalated or exfoli -
ated nanocomposites, which help in improving the mechanical and barrier 
properties of starch films. PVOH is also highly compatible with Na+MMT, and 
films made from these nanocomposites exhibit better mechanical and barrier 
properties than films from PVOH alone [19–22].
Starch and its derivatives are important natural polymers that could be 
further improved through nanotechnology approaches. After extrusion, the 
starch is typically converted to a thermoplastic material with low mechanical 
resistance and poor protection against oxygen and moisture. Park et al. pre -
pared hybrids of thermoplastic starch (TPS) with nanoclay and investigated 
the resulting properties. They found that the strong interaction between the 
TPS and the nanoclay improved tensile strength and lowered water vapor 
permeability compared with native TPS matrix [22–25].
Cassava starch has been extensively used to produce biodegradable films, 
and these carbohydrates are promising materials in this regard. Films devel -
oped from starch are described as isotropic, odorless, tasteless, colorless, non -
toxic, and biologically degradable [26, 27]. The association of cassava starch Figure 13.4  Toast packaged with a biodegradable film based on cassava starch for -
mulated with glycerol, sucrose, and inverted sugar as plasticizers. Reprinted with per -
mission from Reference [27]. See color insert.
302  APPLIcATIONS  Of STARcH NANOPARTI cLeS ANd STARcH-BASed B IONANO cOMPOSIT eS
with plasticizers as glycerol, sucrose, and inverted sugar can promote altera -
tions in the films, justifying the study of these additives to develop a potential 
and ecological alternative to the synthetic packaging of several food products. 
Tadini et al. studied the influence of glycerol and nanoclay particles on tensile 
strength and percent elongation at break, barrier properties (water vapor 
permeability and oxygen permeability coefficient), and glass transition tem -
perature of biodegradable films based on cassava starch. The results establish 
that films based on plasticized cassava starch reinforced with clay nanoparti -
cles can be considered as an interesting biodegradable alternative packaging 
material [27].
As a natural biopolymer, besides its biodegradable character, starch would 
be a promising alternative for the development of new food packaging materi -
als because of its attractive combination of availability and price [27].
13.3.2 Biomedical Applications
Studies with biodegradable starch-based polymers have recently demonstrated 
that these materials have a range of properties that make them suitable for 
use in several biomedical applications, ranging from bone plates and screws 
to drug delivery carriers and tissue engineering scaffolds [28]. The develop -
ment of new processing technique and the reinforcement with various fillers 
results in materials with mechanical properties matching those of bone. The 
performance of a medical device is controlled by two sets of characteristics, 
those that determine the ability of a device to perform the appropriate and 
specific function and those that determine the compatibility of the material 
within the body: biofunctionality and biocompatibility. As such, the approach 
in the assessment of material biocompatibility encompasses the evaluation of 
the effects of physiological environments on materials and the materials’ 
effects on the environment. Marques et al. [28] studied the biocompatibility 
of starch-based polymers. The biocompatibility of two different blends of corn 
starch, starch/ethylene vinyl alcohol (SEVA-C) and starch/cellulose acetate 
(SCA), and their respective composites with hydroxyapatite (HA) was assessed 
by cytotoxicity and cell adhesion tests. Both types of starch-based polymers 
exhibit a cytocompatibility that might allow for their use as biomaterials. 
SEVA-C blends were found to be the less cytotoxic for the tested cell line, 
although cells adhere better to SCA surface. The cytotoxicity test also revealed 
that SCA and SEVA-C composites have a similar response to the one obtained 
for SCA polymer [28–30].
Biocompatible and biodegradable drug delivery systems can preferably be 
made of naturally occurring polymers such as chitosan, gelatin, polysaccha -
rides, and silk fibroin. The major limitation of current anticancer drugs is their 
toxicity and lack of specificity [31]. In an attempt to overcome these problems, 
endocytosable carriers such as microsphere, liposomes, and nanoparticles have 
been suggested to make the treatment more effective. Chemotherapy with APPLIcATIONS Of STARcH-BASed cOMPOSITeS   303
cisplatin is associated with various secondary effects, such as anemia, nausea, 
vomiting, neurotoxicity, and nephrotoxicity. Due to these side effects, alterna -
tive methods of administering cisplatin are needed. Starch has been selected 
as the raw material to prepare the drug carrier because of its biocompatibility, 
biodegradability, and inert nature. Bajpai et al. [31] synthesized and character -
ized cisplatin containing iron oxide-impregnated starch nanoparticles as a 
possible and potential drug carrier for magnetically mediated targeted drug 
delivery (see Fig. 13.5a,b). Figure 13.5a illustrates the binding of cisplatin 
molecules to the iron oxide-impregnated starch nanoparticles, whereas Figure 
13.5b visualizes its possible applications in targeting infected cells by applying 
external magnetic field to enable the release of the drug from the drug-loaded 
nanoparticles.
Iron oxide-impregnated starch nanoparticles were prepared by the emul -
sion cross-linking method, which effectively delivers the antitumor drug  Figure 13.5  Schematic presentation of (a) binding of cisplatin drug molecules to the 
iron oxide-impregnated starch nanoparticles and (b) possible targeting of cells by 
released drug due to applied magnetic field. Reprinted with permission from Reference 
[31].(a)
(b)NH 3
NH 3
NH 3 NH3
NH3NH
3
NH
3NH 3
NH 3 NH 3Pt PtCl
ClAquation OH
OH
PtPtPtOH
OH OHOHComplex ation
(CDDP)OO O
O
Magnetic NP -CDDPMagnetic nanopar ticle
Magnetic 
fieldDrug
Ironoxide impr egnat ed
Starch NP
Magnet304  APPLIcATIONS  Of STARcH NANOPARTI cLeS ANd STARcH-BASed B IONANO cOMPOSIT eS
cisplatin in the presence and absence of magnetic field via a diffusion-controlled 
pathway. The structural characterization of prepared nanoparticles by Fourier 
transform infrared (FT-IR) spectral analysis confirms the presence of func -
tional groups of starch, iron oxide-impregnated starch nanoparticles, cisplatin-
loaded nanoparticles, and pure drug. The influence of factors such as chemical 
composition of nanoparticles, pH, temperature of the release media, and 
applied magnetic field was investigated for the release profiles of the drug. The 
prepared nanoparticles could provide a possible pathway for targeted and 
controlled delivery of anticancer drugs, minimizing side effects and achieving 
higher efficacy [31–33].
13.3.3 Agricultural Applications
The world consumption of plastic materials in agriculture amounts yearly to 
6.5 million tons, used to improve crop cultivation and protect agricultural 
products after harvesting, in the form of greenhouses, tunnels, mulch, silage 
films, and bale wraps. Therefore, there is a huge amount of plastics discarded 
into the environment, buried in the soil, or burnt by farmers, releasing harmful 
substances with the associated negative consequences to the environment. A 
solution to this problem can be the introduction in agriculture of biodegrad -
able films, which can be disposed directly into the soil or into a composting 
system at the end of their lifetime. When biodegradable raw materials are 
mixed with some nanograde additives such as TiO 2, layered silicate, and MMT, 
bionanocomposites or films result in many advantages:
• biodegradation in the soil due to the action of microorganisms such as 
bacteria, fungi, and algae
• degradation by sunlight and water
• carriers for pesticide resistance
• controlled release of active substances, such as insecticides
• controlled degradation, such as biopolymer/TiO 2 nanofilms
• enhanced durability and optical properties, such as ultraviolet, visible, 
infrared
• annually renewable resources.
Up to now, degradable or biodegradable materials have been extensively 
tested in field trials in different countries and for different crops. Successful 
results have been obtained such as in maize, melon, strawberries, and cotton 
mulch film applications. The use of biodegradable materials in agriculture can 
promote sustainable and environmentally friendly cultivation, reducing the 
contamination of the soil, enhancing the protection of the landscape in rural 
areas against pollution, and increasing the use of renewable nonoil raw materi -
als such as starch. At the end of their lifetimes, these biodegradable materials 
can be safely buried in the soil for final composting [13].RefeReNceS   305
13.4 CONCLUSION
Nanocomposites and nanoparticles from starch are a new generation of poly -
mers emerging into every aspect of our lives. They show great promise for 
potential applications as high performance biodegradable materials, which are 
entirely new types of materials based on plants, animals, and other natural 
products. Starch-based bionanocomposites have various applications in fields 
such as the food, biomedical, and agricultural industries. We believe that the 
next generation of packaging materials will be to fit the requirements of pre -
serving fruits, vegetables, beverages, wines, chocolate, and other foods. By 
adding appropriate nanoparticles, it will be possible to produce packages with 
stronger mechanical, barrier, and thermal performance. Regarding food safety, 
nanostructured materials will prevent the invasion of bacteria and microorgan -
isms. Embedded nanosensors in the packaging will alert the consumer if a food 
has gone bad. Biofunctionality and biocompatibility of biodegradable starch-
based polymers have recently demonstrated that these materials have a range 
of properties that make them suitable for use in biomedical applications as well. 
In agriculture, the use of biodegradable materials can promote sustainable and 
environmentally friendly cultivation and reduce the contamination of the soil 
and pollution of landscape in rural areas. For renewable polymer-based bion -
anocomposites to meet a wide range of applications, bionanocomposite formu -
lation must be further researched and modified so that mechanical and other 
properties can be easily manipulated, depending on the end-users’ require -
ments. In all, natural polymer-based film materials originating in controlled 
bionanocomposites pave the way to a much broader range of applications and 
open a new dimension for plastics and composites in the future.
REFERENCES
 [1] Sanguansri, P ., Augustin, M.A. (2006) Nanoscale materials development—A food 
industry perspective. Trends in Food Science & Technology , 17, 547–556.
 [2] Fendler, J.H., Korean, J.H. (2001) Colloid chemical approach to nanotechnology. 
Journal of Chemical Engineering , 18, 1–13.
 [3] Ramírez, M.G.L., Satyanarayana, K.G., Iwakiri, S., Muniz, G.B., Tanobe, V., and 
Sahagun, T.S.F. (2011) Study of the properties of biocomposites. Part I. Cassava 
starch-green coir fibers from Brazil. Carbohydrate Polymers , 86, 1712–1722.
 [4] German, J.B., Smilowitz, J.T., and Zivkovic, A.M. (2006) Lipoproteins: When size 
really matters. Current Opinion in Colloid & Interface Science , 11, 171–183.
 [5] Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., Dole, P ., and Dufresne, A. (2006) Thermoplastic 
starch-waxy maize starch nanocrystals nanocomposites. Biomacromolecules , 7, 
531–539.
 [6] Xiaofei, M., Jian, R., Chang, P .R., and Yu, J. (2008) Fabrication and characteriza -
tion of citric acid- modified starch nanoparticles/plasticized-starch composites. 
Biomacromolecules. , 9, 3314–3320.306  APPLIcATIONS  Of STARcH NANOPARTI cLeS ANd STARcH-BASed B IONANO cOMPOSIT eS
 [7] Corre, D.L., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2010) Starch nanoparticles: A review. Bio-
macromolecules , 11, 1139–1153.
 [8] Valodkar, M., Thakore, S. (2011) Organically modified nanosized starch derivatives 
as excellent reinforcing agents for bionanocomposites. Carbohydrate Polymers , 86, 
1244–1251.
 [9] Angellier, H., Molina-Boisseau, S., Lebrun, L., and Dufresne, A. (2011) Processing 
and structural properties of waxy maize starch nanocrystals reinforced natural 
rubber. Biomacromolecules , 38, 3783–3792.
[10] Zou, J., Zhang, F., Huang, J., Chang, P .R., Su, Z., and Yu, J. (2011) Effects of starch 
nanocrystals on structure and properties of waterborne polyurethane-based com -
posites. Carbohydrate Polymers , 85, 824–831.
[11] Wicks, Z.W., Wicks, D.A., and Rosthauser, J.W. (2002) Two package waterbor -
neurethane systems. Progress in Organic Coatings , 44, 161–183.
[12] Valodkar, M., Thakore, S. (2010) Isocyanate crosslinked reactive starch nanopar -
ticles for thermo-responsive conducting applications. Carbohydrate Research , 345, 
2354–2360.
[13] Zhao, R., Torley, P ., and Halley, P .J. (2008) Emerging biodegradable materials: 
Starch- and protein-based bio- nanocomposites. Journal of Materials Science , 43, 
3058–3071.
[14] Marsh, K., Bugusu, B. (2007) Food packaging: Roles, materials, and environmental 
issues. Journal of Food Science , 72, R39–R55.
[15] Robertson, G.L. (2006) Food Packaging: Principles and Practice , 2nd ed. BocaRa -
ton, FL: CRC Press.
[16] Nielsen, L.E., Landel, R.F. (1994) Mechanical Properties of Polymers and Com -
posites , 2nd ed. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.
[17] Yang, S., Huang, C. (2008) Plasma treatment for enhancing mechanical and thermal 
properties of biodegradablePVA/starch blends. Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science , 109, 2452–2459.
[18] Ramaraj, B. (2007) Crosslinked poly(vinyl alcohol) and starch composite films: 
Study of their physicomechanical, thermal, and swelling properties. Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science , 103, 1127–1132.
[19] Tang, X., Alavi, S., and Herald, T. (2008) Barrier and mechanical properties of 
starch-clay nanocomposite films. Journal of Cereal Chemistry , 85, 433–439.
[20] Dean, K., Yu, L., and Wu, D.Y. (2007) Preparation and characterization of melt-
extruded thermoplastic starch/clay nanocomposites. Composites Science and Tech -
nology , 67, 413–421.
[21] Ali, S.S., Tang, X., Alavi, S., and Faubion, J. (2011) Structure and physical properties 
of starch/poly vinyl alcohol/sodium montmorillonite nanocomposite films. Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 59, 12384–12395.
[22] Sozer, N., Kokin, J.L. (2009) Nanotechnology and its applications in the food 
sector. Trends in Biotechnology , 27, 82–89.
[23] Chen, B., Evans, J.R.G. (2005) Thermoplastic starch-clay nanocomposites and their 
characteristics. Carbohydrate Polymers , 61, 455–463.
[24] De Carvalho, A.J.F., Curvelo, A.A.S., and Agnelli, J.A.M. (2001) A first insight on 
composites of thermoplastic starch and kaolin. Carbohydrate Polymers , 45, 
189–194.RefeReNceS   307
[25] McGlashan, S.A., Halley, P .J. (2003) Preparation and characterization of biode -
gradable starch-based nanocomposite materials. Polymer International , 52, 
1767–1773.
[26] Flores, S., Fama, L., Rojas, A.M., Goyanes, S., and Gerschenson, L. (2007) Physical 
properties of tapioca-starch edible films: Influence of filmmaking and potassium -
sorbate. Food Research International , 40, 257–265.
[27] Souza, A.C., Benze, R., Ferrão, E.S., Ditchfield, C., Coelho, A.C.V., and Tadini, C.C. 
(2012) Cassava starch biodegradable films: Influence of glycerol and clay nanopar -
ticles content on tensile and barrier properties and glass transition temperature. 
Food Science and Technology , 46, 110–117.
[28] Marquesa, A.P ., Reis, R.L., and Hunt, J.A. (2002) The biocompatibility of novel 
starch-based polymers and composites: In vitro  studies. Biomaterials , 23, 
1471–1478.
[29] Weinheim (1992) Medical, Dental Materials, J Mater Sci Technol—A Comprehen -
sive Treatment . New York, Basel, Cambridge: VCH.
[30] Williams, D.F. (1986) On the biocompatibility of high technology materials. Materi -
als Research Society Symposia Proceedings , 55, 117–125.
[31] Likhitkar, S., Bajpai, A.K. (2012) Magnetically controlled release of cisplatin from 
superparamagnetic starch nanoparticles. Carbohydrate Polymers , 87, 300–308.
[32] Bertholon, I., Hommel, H., Labarre, D., and Vauthier, C. (2006) Properties of 
polysaccharides grafted on nanoparticles investigated by EPR. Langmuir , 22, 
5485–5490.
[33] Sangeetha, S., Harish, G.L., and Samanta, M.K. (2010) Chitosan-based nano -
spheres as drug delivery system for cytarabine. International Journal of Pharma -
ceutical and Biological Sciences , 2, 61–64.309Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 14
Preparation of Nanofibrillated 
Cellulose and Cellulose Whiskers
DAVID PLACKETT  and MARCO IOTTI
14.1 INTRODUCTION
14.1.1 Cellulose
As the main structural component in the cell walls of all plants, cellulose is a 
fibrous, tough, water-insoluble substance and is widely considered to be the 
most abundant bioderived polymer on the planet. From an industrial perspec -
tive, cellulose has of course been the mainstay of the wood products and pulp 
and paper industries for the best part of the past 100 years. Estimates indicate 
that between 1010 and 1011 tons of cellulose are produced each year on Earth, 
but of this amount only about 6 × 109 tons are used annually by industry to 
generate pulp, paper, textiles, chemicals, and other materials [1]. In addition 
to its role in the plant kingdom, cellulose is produced by algae and fungi but, 
as far as is known, in only one animal species, the marine tunicates [2]. In 
plants, cellulose can occur in the stem, leaves, or fruit, depending on the species.
Cellulose is a linear homopolysaccharide of β-1,4-linked anhydro-D-
glucose units with a degree of polymerization (DP) of approximately 10,000 
but with a value of 15,000 reported for native cellulose in cotton. The chemical 
structure of cellulose is shown in Figure 14.1 and consists of cellobiose dimer 
units as the repeating segment. The defining feature of the cellulose structure 
is the availability of three hydroxyl groups per anhydroglucose unit. In  
particular, these groups participate in extensive hydrogen bonding, which con -
tributes to the multiscale nature of cellulose (Fig. 14.2), its crystalline and 
amorphous structure, and its highly cohesive nature [3].310  PREPARATIO n Of nAnOfIbRILLATED  CELLuLOsE AnD CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs
Figure 14.1  The cellobiose repeating unit of cellulose.O
HOHOCH2OH
CH2OHOHOHO
O O
n
Figure 14.2  The multiscale nature of cellulose as illustrated for cotton (sourced from 
Reference [3]).
100 µm
Cellulose nanof ibers
Cellulose micr ofibers
L
S2
S1
P
C
Cell w alls of cot tonCH2OH
CH2OH CH2OHCH2OH
O
O
OOOOO
OOOH OHOH OH
H
HH HH
H H
H HH
HH
n=30,000n
Cellulose exists as six different polymorphs that can be interconverted:  
cellulose I, II, III 1 and III 11, IV 1, and IV 11 [4–7] (Fig. 14.3). Cellulose I, the 
native form found in nature, occurs in two allomorphs, I α and I β. Proof of the 
polymorphy of cellulose comes from nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy, and diffraction studies [8, 9]. Cellulose II 
is the most stable crystalline form and arises after recrystallization or mercer -
ization with sodium hydroxide. Cellulose II has antiparallel packing of the 
polymer chains, whereas the chains are packed in parallel fashion in cellulose InTRODuCTIOn   311
I. Cellulose III I and III II are obtained in a reversible process by liquid ammonia 
treatment of celluloses I and II, respectively, followed by evaporation of excess 
ammonia, but certain amines can also be used for this process. Cellulose poly -
morphs IV 1 and IV 11 are derived by heating celluloses III I and III II, respec -
tively, up to 206°C in glycerol [10, 11]. For the purposes of this chapter, native 
cellulose I can be considered the key source of nanocellulose.
14.1.2 Nanocellulose
14.1.2.1  Background  The microfibrils of cellulose formed during biosyn -
thesis are 2–20 nm in diameter, depending on the source, and can be several 
micrometers in length. Each microfibril consists of crystalline domains inter -
spersed with disordered amorphous regions [12]. Materials that fall into the 
general category of nanocelluloses are obtained either by mechanical treat -
ments to obtain nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) or by acid hydrolysis to 
remove the amorphous segments and leave highly crystalline cellulose whis -
kers, otherwise known as cellulose nanocrystals, nanorods, or nanowhiskers 
[13–15]. A third type of nanocellulose is bacterial cellulose, composed of cel -
lulose nanofibers secreted extracellularly by certain bacteria. These bacteria 
are usually strains of Gluconacetobacter , and, for example, Gluconacetobacter 
xylinus  secretes cellulose nanofibers having widths of ∼3.5 nm [16]. The unique 
nanofibrillar structure of bacterial cellulose confers excellent physical and 
mechanical properties such as high porosity, high elastic modulus, and high 
crystallinity [17–19].
As discussed elsewhere in this book, and as has been previously reviewed 
[15, 20], nanocellulose has long been recognized for its potential in a wide 
variety of applications including paper and paperboard, composites, hygiene Figure 14.3  Cellulose polymorphs.Regeneration
Mercerization
Cellulose I Cellulose II
NH3 (l) NH3 (l)
–NH3 (g) –NH3 (g)
Cellulose III I Cellulose III II
Cellulose IV I Cellulose IV IIheat heat312  PREPARATIO n Of nAnOfIbRILLATED  CELLuLOsE AnD CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs
and absorbent products, food additives, emulsifiers and dispersants, oil recov -
ery, and cosmetic, medical, and pharmaceutical uses. This chapter deals specifi -
cally with the preparation and characterization of NFC or cellulose whiskers 
and the current state of their commercial development. The post-treatment of 
nanocellulose for specific applications and a review of these applications are 
topics that are covered elsewhere in this book.
14.1.2.2  Nanofibrillated  Cellulose  NFC, otherwise referred to as micro -
fibrillated cellulose (MFC), was first prepared by Turbak and colleagues at the 
ITT Rayonier laboratories in the United States in the late 1970s. In this earliest 
work, a Gaulin-type milk homogenizer was used to process wood pulp at high 
temperatures and pressures into a gel-like material, which was obtained after 
ejection from the homogenizer against a hard surface. The Gaulin homoge -
nizer was first demonstrated at a dairy exhibition in Paris in 1900 and the 
equivalent is now manufactured, on the basis of more than 100 years’ know-
how, by SPX Corporation in Germany and the United States. The first publica -
tions on the preparation of MFC were those of Turbak and coworkers at ITT 
Rayonier in the early 1980s, when the term microfibrillated cellulose first came 
into use [21–23].
NFC, as it is now described, is composed of expanded high-volume cellulose, 
moderately degraded and greatly expanded in surface area, obtained by a 
homogenization process. NFC consists of aggregates of cellulose microfibrils 
and has fibril diameters in the range of 20–60 nm. Since cellulose microfibrils 
are 2–10 nm in diameter and are several tens of micrometers in length, the 
individual elements of which NFC is comprised consist of between 10 and 50 
microfibrils. NFC exhibits gel-like properties in water with pseudoplastic and 
thixotropic properties and can be cast into transparent films [24] (Fig. 14.4).
14.1.2.3  Cellulose  Whiskers  Cellulose whiskers are obtained by acid 
hydrolysis of various forms of cellulose. The first report outlining the prepara -
tion of such cellulosic material was published by Rånby and Ribi [25]. These 
initial investigations, involving sulfuric acid treatments, were inspired by the 
work of Nickerson and Habrle, who noted that exposure of cellulose to boiling 
acidic solutions resulted in cellulose degradation, but only up to a certain limit 
[26]. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studies showed that the col -
loidal suspensions after acidic treatment of cellulose could be dried to produce 
aggregates of needle-shaped particles. Further analysis using electron diffrac -
tion showed that these particles had the same crystalline structure as the 
original fibers. At the same time, Battista developed the hydrochloric acid-
assisted degradation of cellulose fibers from high-quality wood pulps, followed 
by sonication treatment, which led eventually to the production and commer -
cialization of microcrystalline cellulose (MCC) [27]. According to the United 
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), MCC is defined as  
purified, partially depolymerized cellulose prepared by treating α-cellulose, 
obtained as a pulp from fibrous plant material, with mineral acids. The degree PREPARATIOn Of nAnOfIbRILLATED CELLuLOsE   313
of polymerization is typically less than 400 and not more than 10% of the 
material has a particle size of less than 5 μm.
14.2 PREPARATION OF NANOFIBRILLATED CELLULOSE
14.2.1 Mechanical Treatments
The Gaulin homogenizer first used to generate NFC gels by Turbak and 
coworkers is still in use today to manufacture various forms of NFC. In this 
process, cellulose slurries are pumped at high pressure and fed through a 
spring-loaded valve assembly. The valve opens and closes in rapid succession 
and the fibers are thereby subjected to large changes in pressure with high 
shearing forces. This procedure results in a high degree of cellulose fiber 
fibrillation.
An alternative to the Gaulin homogenizer is the microfluidizer, in which 
wood pulp for example is passed through z-shaped channels of 200–400 μm 
diameter at high pressure (e.g., ∼2000 bar) (Fig. 14.5). The resulting shear rate 
is very high and produces very thin cellulose nanofibers. The microfluidizing 
process has become popular because of the greater uniformity of the fibril Figure 14.4  NFC film and 0.4% consistency NFC gel produced at the Paper and Fiber 
Research Institute (PFI), Trondheim, Norway, being handled by Kristin Syverud (left) 
and Ingebjorg Leirset (right). The photograph was taken by Oddbjørn Svarlien and 
kindly supplied by Kristin Syverud. See color insert.
314  PREPARATIO n Of nAnOfIbRILLATED  CELLuLOsE AnD CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs
dimensions, but the use of different-sized chambers has remained necessary 
in order to obtain the required degree of fibrillation. Unfortunately, without 
further modification, such processes have typically required 10 or even as 
many as 30 passes of the raw fibers through the microfluidizer with excessively 
high energy consumption, reaching values as high as 30,000 kWh/ton or more 
[28, 29]. As noted in the next section, considerable progress has been made by 
adopting cellulose pretreatments, which have significantly reduced the energy 
required for NFC production.
Grinding processes have also been used to produce NFC and Masuko 
Sangyo Co., Ltd. (Kawaguchi City, Japan) was the first company to build grind -
ing equipment specifically for NFC production. The principle of the grinding 
process is the breakdown of the plant cell wall structure by shearing forces as 
the wood pulp passes between a static grindstone and a rotating grindstone 
revolving at ∼1500 rpm. Iwamoto et al. fibrillated pulp from radiata pine ( Pinus 
radiata ) fibers and noted changes in morphology as a function of the number 
of passes [30]. Five passes through the grinder was found to be optimum since 
no changes in fibril morphology were noted with more passes and a mixture 
of micro- and nanosized fibers was generated when fewer passes were used. Figure 14.5  A microfluidizer used for production of nanofibrillated cellulose at 
Innventia AB, Stockholm, with a schematic (right) of the pulp flow in high shear 
through the homogenizer chamber containing 100- to 400-micron-wide channels. Pho -
tograph and schematic were kindly supplied by Mikael Ankerfors, Innventia AB.
PREPARATIOn Of nAnOfIbRILLATED CELLuLOsE   315
The same researchers noted that the grinding process resulted in a decrease 
in fibril length, which would be undesirable for some applications. Unfortu -
nately, as noted by a number of authors, the physical nature of NFC gels with 
intertwined fibrils makes accurate measurement of fibril length a significant 
challenge.
Uetani and Yano recently used a new approach to manufacture NFC, 
involving use of a Waring blender [31]. Wood fiber suspensions at concentra -
tions varying from 0.1 wt% to 1.5 wt% were processed at speeds ranging from 
5,000 to 37,000 rpm, but the resulting gels were not very homogeneous and 
not all fibers were converted to NFC. However, the gels produced after blend -
ing for 30 minutes showed the same degree of fibrillation with less damage 
than those obtained after one pass in a grinder at 1500 rpm.
A further approach to NFC production involves cryocrushing by applying 
high shear forces to pulp that has been exposed to liquid nitrogen [32]. The 
principle of cryocrushing is based on the formation of ice crystals within the 
plant cells, which, when exposed to mechanical crushing, cut the cell walls and 
release wall fragments [33]. Alemdar and Sain used cryocrushing to obtain 
NFC from wheat straw and soy hulls, and, in this case, fibrils had diameters of 
30–40 nm and lengths of several micrometers [34]. Similarly, flax, hemp, and 
rutabaga fibers were cryocrushed to fibrils of 5–80 nm diameter and soybean 
stock was converted to NFC with fibril diameters of 50–100 nm [33, 35, 36].
As indicated in Table 14.1, reports of energy consumption for production 
of NFC by homogenization have been as high as 70,000 kWh/ton. This factor 
has been significant in terms of delaying the development and uptake of NFC 
TABLE 14.1  Approximate Energy Requirements for NFC Production from 
Various Studies as Reported in References [24, 38]
Equipment Pretreatment Raw MaterialEnergy Requirement 
(KWh/tonne)
Homogenizer None Bleached kraft pulp 12,000–70,000
Homogenizer None Bleached sulfite pulp 27,000
Homogenizer Carboxymethylation 
(Degree of 
substitution 
(DS) = 0.1)Bleached kraft/
sulfite pulp500
Homogenizer Enzymatic/refining Bleached sulfite pulp 1,500
Homogenizer Valley beater Bleached/
unbleached 
hardwood pulp21,900
Microgrinding None Bleached/
unbleached 
hardwood pulp1,550
Microfluidizer Valley beater Bleached/
unbleached 
hardwood pulp2,290316  PREPARATIO n Of nAnOfIbRILLATED  CELLuLOsE AnD CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs
technology. In a recent study, Zimmerman et al. reported that a microfluidizer 
required 8.5 kWh (manufacturer’s data) at a processing pressure of 1500 bar 
[37]. Since 10 L of cellulose pulp at 1–2 wt% needed about 15 minutes to pass 
once through the microfluidizer, the most important parameter was deemed 
to be the number of passes. Spence et al. examined a number of properties of 
NFC from bleached and unbleached hardwood pulp samples and the energy 
consumption during production as a function of the manufacturing process 
[38]. These researchers discovered that microfluidization with refining pre -
treatment or micro-grinding processes used less energy than homogenization 
and also produced cast NFC films with better physical, optical, and water 
interaction properties.
The need to develop NFC processes involving much less energy consumption 
is naturally of considerable interest. As a result, alternative processing methods 
(e.g., extrusion) have been studied. Similarly, production of NFC through use of 
the Cavitron® (Cavitron v. Hagen & Funke GmbH, Sprockhövel, Germany) has 
been investigated by the Paper Technical Center (PTS) in Germany as part of 
the EU SUNPAP project (http://sunpap.vtt.fi), and the GEA Niro Soavi Ariete 
NS3075H developed by the French Technical Center of Paper (CTP) has been 
proposed. However, few results from these new methods have been reported so 
far. Another strategy that has attracted some attention is the fractionation of 
partially ground Pinus radiata  NFC, as reported by Abe et al. [39]. In this 
approach, wood powder sieved to pass through a 60-mesh screen was sequen -
tially extracted with solvents to remove lignin and hemicelluloses and finally a 
1 wt% slurry was passed through a Masuko grinder. The output consisted of 
cellulose nanofiber suspensions with uniform nanofiber widths of 15 nm.
14.2.2 Pretreatments
A number of methods have been suggested for pretreatment of plant or wood 
fibers with the objective of reducing energy consumption in NFC production. 
Generally, the methods involve one of three different principles: (1) interfering 
with hydrogen bonding between fibrils, (2) adding electrostatic charges, or (3) 
decreasing the DP or amorphous linkages between fibrils.
The use of combined refining and enzymatic pretreatments for NFC produc -
tion has proven effective as a means of reducing energy consumption. Research -
ers have produced high aspect ratio NFC with good nanofibril diameter 
uniformity through a combination of enzymatic hydrolysis with mechanical 
shearing and high pressure homogenization [40–42]. Pääkkö et al. used an 
endoglucanase to treat fibers after refining and before passage of the pulp 
through a microfluidizer [40]. Enzymatic hydrolysis has the advantage that it is 
selective toward the amorphous segments in cellulose, thereby making mechan -
ical disintegration easier. From a practical perspective, an important benefit of 
enzymatic pretreatment is reduced frequency of channel blocking in the micro -
fluidizer. In another study, Henriksson et al. used a C-type endoglucanase, 
carried out mechanical treatments using a Gaulin homogenizer, and compared 
the resulting NFC with that produced by other hydrolytic pretreatments or no PREPARATIOn Of nAnOfIbRILLATED CELLuLOsE   317
treatment of the incoming pulp [42]. In addition to facilitating wood pulp fiber 
disintegration through enhanced swelling in water, this enzymatic approach 
resulted in shorter fiber length and increased the amount of fine material rela -
tive to an acid hydrolysis pretreatment. Engström et al. undertook further 
investigations on enzymatic pretreatment and the effect on cellulose fiber reac -
tivity [43]. This research and other investigations led the way to a scaled-up 
process at Innventia AB in Stockholm, which was announced by press release 
in 2011 and is discussed further at the end of this chapter. Recent work by 
Siqueira et al. analyzed the impact of enzymatic treatment on the final proper -
ties of NFC and the effect on the mechanical properties of NFC–rubber com -
posite materials [44, 45]. In the first of these studies, the authors noted that 
enzymatic pretreatment allowed production of a wide variety of cellulose 
nanoparticles and that it was essential to report material output in terms of the 
pretreatment that was used [44]. In later work, it was shown how enzymatic 
pretreatment of sisal fibers could be used to adjust the properties of composites 
based on natural rubber as a model matrix [45].
The use of (2,2,6,6 tetramethyl piperidin-1-yl)oxyl (TEMPO)-mediated oxi -
dation as a method for fiber pretreatment has been widely reported. This 
procedure allows carboxylate and aldehyde groups to be introduced into solid 
native cellulose under mild aqueous conditions. Furthermore, compared with 
repeated high pressure homogenization, TEMPO-mediated oxidation signifi -
cantly decreases the required energy consumption. The principle behind 
TEMPO oxidation is the addition of NaOCl to aqueous cellulose suspensions 
in the presence of catalytic quantities of TEMPO and NaBr at pH 10–11 and 
room temperature. The process is shown schematically in Figure 14.6. The 
outcome is the selective conversion of C6 primary hydroxyl groups on cellulose 
to aldehyde and then carboxylate groups. As a consequence, the presence of 
ionized carboxylate groups on the fibril surfaces leads to repulsive forces, which 
cause improved separation. In general, increase in concentration of NaOCl 
leads to higher levels of carboxylation, but also to a requirement for longer 
oxidation times.
Application of TEMPO oxidation to nanocellulose production was primar -
ily developed by Isogai and coworkers and has been used to process various 
different forms of cellulosic biomass [46–48]. Oxidation efficiencies vary from 
62% to 96%, depending on the type of starting plant material. An alternative 
approach to TEMPO oxidation involves the use of NaOCl in combination with 
NaO 2Cl instead of NaBr at pH 5–7 [49–51]. In contrast to the first method, in 
which some residual aldehyde groups are present on the cellulose nanofibrils 
after pretreatment, the combined TEMPO/NaOCl/NaO 2Cl method at pH 5–7 
leaves no residual aldehyde groups. However, the carboxylate content is lower 
in this case and the optimum reaction time and temperature are increased. A 
discussion of the difference between the two approaches to TEMPO oxidation 
is included in a recent review article [52]. A representative process for produc -
ing TEMPO-oxidized cellulose is shown schematically in Figure 14.7.
Isogai et al. investigated a TEMPO electro-mediated oxidation, using either 
TEMPO at pH 10 or 4-acetamido TEMPO at pH 6.8 in buffer solution [50]. 318  PREPARATIO n Of nAnOfIbRILLATED  CELLuLOsE AnD CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs
Figure 14.7  Representative process for preparation of TEMPO-oxidized cellulose by 
the TEMPO/NaBr/NaOCl system at pH 10 (sourced from Reference [52]).Bleached sof twood or hardwood Kraf t pulp, 1 g
Water, 1 00 mL
TEMPO , 0.0125 g
NaBr , 0.125 g
Cellulose f iber/w ater disper sion at pH 10 and r oom t emp.
Recycling aq. NaCIO solution
0.4 M NaOH addition to keep pH 10
Stirring the disper sion at pH 10
until no mor e NaOH consumption is obser ved
TEMPO
NaCI
NaBrFiltrate Filtration with
water
Desalting TEMPO-o xidized cellulose f iberFigure 14.6  Schematic of TEMPO oxidation of cellulose (adapted from Reference [52]).
ChARACTERIzATIOn Of nAnOfIbRILLATED CELLuLOsE   319
Although requiring longer oxidation times, the electro-mediated reaction pro -
vided a yield from softwood kraft pulp in excess of 80% while retaining the 
characteristics of conventional TEMPO-oxidized NFC. TEMPO oxidation 
does, however, suffer from the high cost of the chemical as well as the contin -
ued need for optimized techniques for TEMPO recovery.
Following TEMPO oxidation, the resulting suspensions are usually sub -
jected to mechanical treatment by blending or by the use of an Ultra Turrax 
(IKA, Wilmington, NC) mixer. Centrifugation is normally used to separate the 
incompletely fibrillated NFC. As also reported, blending can be replaced by 
sonication as a means of isolating TEMPO-oxidized pulp, and the length of 
sonication time can have a significant influence on nanofibril dimensions [53, 
54]. Sonication has often been used in combination with mechanical treat -
ments to enhance NFC production.
Pretreatment of fibers through carboxymethylation is also an established 
method for NFC production. In this case, as with TEMPO oxidation, the for -
mation of carboxylate groups on the surface of the NFC introduces repulsive 
charges, which assists in the process of nanofibril separation [55–58]. Treatment 
using sodium salts ensures that the incoming wood pulp swells as much as 
possible. Swollen pulps have reduced fiber cell wall cohesion and therefore 
should be easier to delaminate. This provides a demonstrated benefit in terms 
of energy consumption as indicated in Table 14.1.
14.3 CHARACTERIZATION OF NANOFIBRILLATED CELLULOSE
14.3.1 Morphology and Dimensions
The characterization techniques used in studies on NFC production have 
included field emission gun-scanning electron microscopy (FEG-SEM), TEM, 
and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Use of these methods has allowed cel -
lulose nanofibril dimensions to be determined as summarized in Table 14.2 [1, 
7, 59, 60]. Typically, homogenization provides nanofibrils that are 10–40 nm in 
width and several micrometers in length. Aulin et al. applied the AFM method 
to measure the dimensions of carboxymethylated NFC produced using a 
microfluidizer [61]. In this case, nanofibril widths were 10–15 nm and 10–30 nm 
for pretreated and non-pretreated NFC, respectively. Pääkkö et al. applied 
TABLE 14.2  Dimensions of Nanofibrillated Cellulose from Various Studies 
(Sourced from References [1, 7, 59, 60])
Cellulose Type Diameter (nm) Length (nm) Aspect Ratio
Nanofibrillated cellulose 10–40 >10,000 >1,000
Cellulose whiskers 2–20 100–600 10–100
Bacterial cellulose 5–6 1,000–9,000 160–1,800
Microcrystalline cellulose >1,000 >1,000 ∼1320  PREPARATIO n Of nAnOfIbRILLATED  CELLuLOsE AnD CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs
enzymatic pretreatment to bleached softwood sulfite pulp and produced NFC 
with widths in the range of 20–30 nm as measured by AFM. These findings 
were consistent with widths determined by cross-polarization magic-angle 
spinning (CP-MAS) 13C NMR spectroscopy, and TEM [40]. Using the NMR 
method, lateral fibril dimensions and lateral fibril aggregate dimensions can 
be determined in cellulose I samples. For this purpose, the C4 region of the 
NMR spectrum is subjected to spectral fitting as has been described previously 
[62, 63]. Grinding is reported to generate NFC elements that are 20–50 nm in 
width and over 1 μm in length [30]. As mentioned previously, Abe et al. pro -
duced NFC with a uniform width of 15 nm by means of grinding [39]. In a 
recent study, Uetani and Yano processed wood pulp with a blender to obtain 
NFC with a uniform diameter of 15–20 nm [31]. However, TEMPO oxidation 
followed by the same mechanical treatment and a centrifugation step to 
remove larger NFC or fibers still present in the suspension resulted in nano -
fibrils with diameters as low as 3–5 nm [46, 53].
The morphology and dimensions of NFC show variations according to pre -
treatment, mechanical treatment, and raw material source. The incoming fibers 
naturally vary in respect to length, microfibril angle, amount of noncellulosic 
residues (e.g., lignin, hemicelluloses), and quality (e.g., as indicated by fiber 
defects) according to source and to whether the biomass is a primary stream or 
a waste stream. As noted by Alemdar and Sain, NFC from wheat straw and soy 
hulls had diameters of 10–80 nm and 20–120 nm, respectively, and lengths of 
several micrometers [34]. Other researchers processed a variety of agricultural 
residues and obtained a wide range of NFC diameters according to the particu -
lar raw material [44, 45, 64–66]. The picture is also complicated by variations 
within a particular crop as well as variations in terms of processing method. 
General conclusions about NFC processing can therefore be hard to draw.
An interesting aspect is the influence of lignin on NFC properties. This ques -
tion has been studied by Spence et al., who discovered that unbleached soft -
wood pulp with lignin content of ∼9% gave a mean NFC width of 30.8 nm, while 
pulp with a lignin content of ∼14% produced an NFC width of 34.4 nm [67]. 
Hemicelluloses also limit the association between cellulose nanofibers and 
hence can influence NFC diameter distribution [58]. As reported by Iwamoto 
et al., never-dried and once-dried pulps from Sitka spruce ( Picea sitchensis  
Carr.) with different amounts of hemicelluloses were fibrillated using a grinding 
treatment. The degree of fibrillation was evaluated by SEM observation of the 
fibrillated pulps and light transmittance measurements of fibrillated pulp/
acrylic resin composites. With a one-pass grinding treatment, the once-dried 
pulp with higher hemicellulose content was fibrillated into 10- to 20-nm-wide 
fibers as easily as the never-dried pulps, while the once-dried pulp with lower 
hemicellulose content was not fibrillated into uniform nanosized fibers. These 
findings confirm that hemicelluloses can inhibit the coalescence of microfibrils 
during drying and facilitate the nanofibrillation of once-dried pulp [58].
Of the various methods used to visualize NFC, it is recognized that 
FEG-SEM may overestimate the dimensions of cellulose nanofibrils due to ChARACTERIzATIOn Of nAnOfIbRILLATED CELLuLOsE   321
the need to coat material surfaces with a conductive metal layer. With this in 
mind, Chinga-Carrasco and Syverud developed a new method that avoids the 
need for metal coating [68]. This new approach allows the cellulose nanofibril 
structure to be observed at high magnification ( >50,000 ×) by applying a low 
acceleration voltage ( <1 kV) and short working distance ( <1 mm). Despite 
these advances, estimation of the length of NFC nanofibrils generally remains 
an approximation. However, in a recent notable development, Fukuzumi et al. 
applied an analysis of the storage and loss moduli of TEMPO-oxidized NFC 
and used the theory of linear viscoelasticity to obtain a calculated mean length 
of TEMPO-oxidized NFC of 2.2 μm [69].
14.3.2 Physical Properties of Nanofibrillated Cellulose
14.3.2.1  Degree  of Polymerization  and Strength  Determination of the 
degree of polymerization (DP) of NFC has generally been carried out using 
a viscosity method and a cupriethylene diamine solution according to ISO 
Standard 5351 [70]. In this method, average DP is calculated using the Mark–
Houwink equation, which relates intrinsic viscosity to molecular weight. Con -
version of fibers to NFC is accompanied by a reduction in DP as revealed for 
example by the work of Zimmerman et al., in which case the value of 2249 for 
the initial pulp decreased to 825 in the resulting NFC [37]. Since DP and NFC 
film strength are correlated, the DP value might be useful in assessing the 
likely performance of NFC as a polymer reinforcing material, especially since 
techniques for measuring the strength properties of individual NFC elements 
are still to be optimized. Various estimates of the strength and modulus of 
cellulose nanofibers have, however, been made. For example, Yano and Naka -
hara [71] stated that the strength of cellulose microfibrils could be estimated 
to be at least 2 GPa based on the tensile strength of 1.7 GPa obtained for kraft 
pulp, for which 70–80% of the cellulose microfibrils are thought to be aligned 
in the fiber direction [72]. This estimate may be contrasted with the elastic 
modulus of a perfect crystal of native cellulose, which was previously calcu -
lated to be in the range of 130–250 GPa [73, 74]. This large variation may  
be related to the different sources of cellulose and consequent variations  
in crystal structure or to the use of different measuring systems. Recently, 
Iwamoto et al. used an AFM cantilever and three-point bending to determine 
an elastic modulus of 145 GPa for a single TEMPO-oxidized tunicate cellulose 
nanofiber [75]. It is worth noting that such values are comparable to those 
reported for high-strength synthetic aramid fibers [76].
14.3.2.2  Crystallinity  As outlined in a recent review, X-ray diffraction in 
combination with either peak area or peak intensity measurements can be 
used to determine the crystallinity of cellulose [77]. Typically, the crystallinity 
index is calculated as a ratio of diffraction from the crystalline part to the 
diffraction from the whole sample. The crystallinity of NFC obtained from a 
variety of different raw materials has been reported in the literature. For 322  PREPARATIO n Of nAnOfIbRILLATED  CELLuLOsE AnD CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs
example, Heux et al. found relatively low values of 30–40% for sugar beet 
pulp [78]. This contrasts with results obtained by Agoda-Tandjawa et al., who 
calculated the degree of crystallinity of NFC from beet pulp to be 13% and 
11%, respectively, before and after mechanical treatment [79]. Other research -
ers determined NFC crystallinity to be as high as 90% when using sisal or 
Luffa cylindrica  [44, 66]. Alemdar and Sain estimated the crystallinity of NFC 
from wheat straw and soy hulls to be 78% and 70%, respectively [34]. The 
crystallinity of NFC produced by grinding has been found to decrease as a 
function of the number of passes through the grinder [30], and this finding 
could be related to shear rate, since an initial crystallinity decrease of 5% 
during a 5-minute blending process compares with a decrease of about 10% 
as a result of one pass through a grinder. Overall, blender treatment may do 
less fiber damage than grinding. Homogenization may also do less damage 
to the cellulose crystalline structure than the grinding process. Saito and 
Isogai determined that crystallinity and crystallite size of cellulose I in the 
original native cellulose were unchanged by a TEMPO oxidation process and 
concluded that the majority of carboxylate and aldehyde groups are only 
present on the cellulose crystal surfaces and/or in amorphous disordered 
regions [47].
14.3.2.3  Surface  Chemistry  Conductometric titration has been used to 
determine the carboxylate and aldehyde group contents in TEMPO-oxidized 
NFC [80]. For example, using this approach, the combined carboxylate and 
aldehyde contents on cotton linters corresponded to roughly one C6-oxidized 
glucose unit per seven glucose units. In contrast, when using ramie or spruce 
as a starting material, the figure is one C6-oxidized glucose unit per five 
glucose units. Conductometric titration has also been applied to determine 
carboxymethylated NFC ( ∼515 μeq/g) [81]. These conductometric titrations 
were based on a previously reported method [82].
14.4 PREPARATION OF CELLULOSE WHISKERS
14.4.1 Acid Hydrolysis
The preparation of cellulose whiskers or cellulose nanocrystals by acid hydro -
lysis is now an established laboratory process and has been applied to a wide 
variety of raw materials [83]. The various sources of biomass investigated for 
cellulose whisker production have included banana [84], sugar cane bagasse 
[85], mulberry [86], sugar beet pulp [87], wood [88], and cotton [89] among 
others (e.g., hemp, ramie, sisal, wheat straw) [12]. The typical appearance of 
cellulose whiskers when viewed using TEM is illustrated for the case of tuni -
cate whiskers in Figure 14.8. In addition to these various types of biomass, 
there have also been studies aimed at using microcrystalline cellulose (MCC) PREPARATIOn Of CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs   323
as a convenient and pure starting material. Bondeson et al. in particular devel -
oped a rapid, high-yield optimized process to obtain a stable aqueous colloidal 
suspension of cellulose whiskers from MCC, assisted by the use of response 
surface methodology [90]. Cellulose whiskers measuring 200–400 nm in length 
were obtained by using 63.5 wt% sulfuric treatment of MCC over a period of 
2 hours and with a yield of 30%.
New strategies and approaches to manufacturing cellulose whiskers con -
tinue to be in focus. If hydrolysis is carried out using hydrochloric acid instead 
of sulfuric acid, it seems that the cellulose whisker dispersion is limited and 
there is a tendency toward flocculation, which is not desirable for most end-
applications [91]. The use of NFC as a starting material for cellulose whiskers 
has been discussed [87] and, more recently, Siqueira et al. applied enzymatic 
hydrolysis to obtain different types of cellulose nanoparticles. In this case, the 
new development was the use of cellulase enzymes for preparation of cellulose 
whiskers [44]. This enzymatic approach was motivated by the potential to 
obtain improvements in cellulose whisker size reproducibility, aspect ratio, and 
cost of preparation. Starting with a bleached sisal pulp, various combinations 
of mechanical shearing through a microfluidizer and enzymatic hydrolysis 
were studied. The mechanical shearing process alone resulted in a nonhomo -
geneous material with NFC diameters in the range of tens to hundreds of 
nanometers. Subsequently, hydrolysis of NFC with 55 wt% sulfuric acid at 
55°C over 30 minutes produced a material with morphology intermediate Figure 14.8  TEM image of cellulose whiskers isolated from tunicates (white scale 
bar = 1 micron). Image source: Jeff Capadona, Case Western Reserve University, Cleve -
land, OH.
324  PREPARATIO n Of nAnOfIbRILLATED  CELLuLOsE AnD CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs
between NFC and cellulose whiskers. At higher temperatures, more homoge -
neous cellulose whisker dispersions were obtained. Based on comparison with 
an earlier study [92] it appears that that using NFC as a starting material 
instead of cellulosic microfibers results in whiskers with similar morphology 
but may provide an advantage by allowing use of less concentrated sulfuric 
acid. However, the objective of the reported study was not to optimize the 
process but rather to confirm the influence of hydrolysis temperature on cel -
lulose whisker production. Filson et al. applied an endoglucanase treatment 
to extract cellulose whiskers from recycled pulp [93]. The highest yields were 
obtained by treatment with 84 EGU of endoglucanase per 200 mg of recycled 
pulp at 50°C for 60 minutes of either microwave or conventional heating, with 
the former giving a higher yield.
Another recent development has been an increasing interest in cellulose 
whisker production as a specific output from biorefining processes [94–97]. 
Chirat et al. [94] provide an outline as to how cellulose whiskers may be pro -
duced from mixed softwood kraft pulp and also point out that the exact physi -
cal dimensions of the whiskers depend on factors such as source, hydrolysis 
conditions, and ionic strength. In their review, Duran et al. [95] discuss the 
general aspects of nanotechnology in the forest products industry, the synthe -
sis of cellulose whiskers (referred to as nanocrystals) by various means, and 
applications of cellulose whiskers. In discussing cellulose whiskers as a 
co-product in bioethanol production, Duran et al. mention the work of a con -
sortium at North Dakota State University in which an economic analysis of 
cellulose whisker production was made as a component in ethanol production 
from wheat straw. Using an ASPEN Plus-based process model (http://www.  
aspentech.com/core/aspen-plus.cfm), the production cost of ethanol including 
by-product credit was estimated at $0.41 per liter. When production of cellu -
lose whiskers was added to the base model, the cost of producing the whiskers 
from wheat straw was estimated to be $1.25 per kg. This led to the conclusion 
that cellulose whisker production could enhance the economic feasibility of 
ethanol production from wheat straw [98]. In the report by Oksman et al. [96], 
residue from bioethanol production was examined as a low-cost source of raw 
material for cellulose whisker production. Bioresidue from a wood bioethanol 
pilot plant was used as a starting material and, after dewaxing, bleaching, and 
cleaning, cellulose whiskers were produced by mechanical treatments, includ -
ing ultrasonication or high pressure homogenization, as well as chemical 
hydrolysis. Whiskers isolated using ultrasonication or high pressure homogeni -
zation had better thermal stability than whiskers isolated by acid hydrolysis. 
Although described as a “lignin residue,” this material had a surprisingly high 
content of separable cellulose in crystalline form ( ∼48%). Zhu et al. used com -
mercial cellulase enzymes to fractionate amorphous cellulose from bleached 
kraft eucalyptus pulp and to generate crystalline cellulose which was suitable 
for mechanical homogenization [97]. Based on these reports, it seems likely 
that there will be many future investigations into nanocellulose as an added-
value output from biorefining.ChARACTERIzATIOn Of CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs   325
14.5 CHARACTERIZATION OF CELLULOSE WHISKERS
14.5.1 Morphology
Although similar in size to NFC, cellulose whiskers show much lower flexibil -
ity, as they do not contain amorphous regions. Nanocrystalline cellulose (NCC) 
crystals produced by acid hydrolysis may show different geometries, depend -
ing on their biological source [99–101]. The dimensions of cellulose whiskers 
also vary significantly depending upon the hydrolysis conditions. In general, 
cellulose whiskers are 5–70 nm in width and between 100 nm and several 
micrometers in length. These variations are partly due to differences in starting 
material and also to the diffusion-controlled nature of the acid hydrolysis 
treatment, which is in turn influenced by degree of cellulose crystallinity. Acid 
hydrolysis, often in combination with ultrasonication, can be followed up by 
separation techniques, such as differential centrifugation or ultracentrifuga -
tion, which may be used to obtain suspensions with more uniform cellulose 
whisker dimensions. A Finnish research group has found a relationship between 
pulp drying procedure before acid hydrolysis and cellulose whisker dimen -
sions [102]. The recent study by Elazzouzi-Hafraoui et al. measured the dimen -
sions of cellulose whiskers produced from cotton, MCC, and tunicate sources 
[99]. Using a range of techniques, these researchers found that tunicin gave 
the lowest dispersity in terms of lateral size, but the highest in respect to length. 
The authors rationalized this finding on the basis of a relatively low degree of 
lateral association of cellulose elementary fibrils or crystallites from tunicin, 
when compared with whiskers derived from plant materials. The lower length 
polydispersity in cellulose whiskers from plant materials was attributed to the 
presence of periodic domains susceptible to acid hydrolysis, resulting in a nar -
rower distribution of extracted crystallite lengths.
The morphology of cellulose whiskers has usually been studied by means 
of TEM, SEM, FEG-SEM, or AFM, but scattering techniques such as small-
angle neutron scattering or dynamic light scattering have also proven useful. 
A recent report has also highlighted the possibility of using cryo-TEM to 
examine cellulose whiskers without the agglomeration effect, which is preva -
lent when using other methods [99].
14.5.2 Physical Properties of Cellulose Whiskers
The Young’s modulus of cellulose whiskers was estimated by Sakurada et al. 
at 130 GPa [73], but a value as high as 250 GPa has also been reported [74]. 
The latter value is close to the modulus of the perfect crystal of native cellu -
lose. The strength properties of cellulose whiskers have seldom been reported 
on an experimental basis; however, Azizi Samir et al. reported the strength of 
cellulose whiskers to be 10 GPa [1]. Mechanical property data for cellulose 
whiskers are presented in Table 14.3 along with data calculated or estimated 
for the pure native cellulose crystal [70, 72, 103–109].326  PREPARATIO n Of nAnOfIbRILLATED  CELLuLOsE AnD CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs
Cellulose whiskers obtained through the use of sulfuric acid have negatively 
charged sulfate groups on the fibril surfaces and are therefore easy to disperse 
in aqueous solvents due to electrostatic repulsion. A weaker charge distribu -
tion and therefore poorer dispersibility arises when hydrochloric acid is used 
as the hydrolysis medium. Recent developments have enabled cationic surface 
charges to be generated on cellulose nanowhiskers, albeit by an additional 
reaction with epoxypropyltrimethylammonium chloride, and not as a result of 
hydrolysis [110].
Marchessault and coworkers showed that rod-like cellulose crystallites 
could form birefringent and liquid crystal-like gels, reminiscent of spherulitic 
structures in polymers [111]. This liquid crystal gel formation occurs when 
cellulose whisker concentrations reach a high enough level to form a chiral 
nematic phase.
In the introduction to their paper on TEMPO-mediated oxidation of cel -
lulose whiskers, Habibi et al. discussed the degree of cellulose polymerization 
expected after acid hydrolysis procedures [112]. After a rapid decrease in DP 
as a result of acid treatment, values reach a so-called level-off DP (LODP) 
that may remain constant during extended hydrolysis. The value of the LODP 
depends on the starting raw material, with values ranging from 250 for hydro -
lyzed cotton [27] to 140–200 for bleached wood pulp [113] and up to 600 for 
the highly crystalline Valonia  cellulose [114].
14.6 COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT OF NANOCELLULOSES
14.6.1 Nanofibrillated Cellulose
This section summarizes the current commercial status of NFC and NCC. The 
development of this sector is proceeding rapidly and the companies and other 
organizations involved must be considered only in light of the current situation 
at the time of writing. Since nanocelluloses are in an early stage of commer -
cialization, it is not easy to gather data, which in some cases are sensitive for TABLE 14.3  Reported Mechanical Properties of Cellulose Whiskers and the Pure 
Native Cellulose Crystal from References [70, 72, 103–109]
Material Technique Modulus (GPa)
Tunicate whiskers AFM bending stiffness 150 ± 28.8
Acid-hydrolyzed whiskers Raman spectroscopy 50–100
Tunicate whiskers Raman spectroscopy 143
Pure cellulose crystal Theoretical estimates 100–160
Flax fibers Inelastic X-ray scattering 220
Pure cellulose crystal X-ray diffraction of plant fiber bundles 138COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMEnT Of nAnOCELLuLOsEs   327
the companies involved. In any case, the authors believe that a comprehensive 
study of the actual commercial situation of nanocelluloses is not presently 
available in the literature and so the summary presented here is considered 
necessary and potentially valuable, albeit that the commercialization of nano -
cellulose may evolve quite quickly in the coming years and the story will need 
to be updated.
As mentioned earlier, the manufacture of NFC was pioneered by Turbak 
and others in the United States in the late 1970s/early 1980s [21, 23]. The 
forcing of suspensions of wood-based cellulose fibers through a mechanical 
device, such as a high pressure homogenizer, was then shown to produce NFC. 
The major impediments for commercial success at this early stage were both 
economical and technical in nature. The very high energy consumption involved 
in the production of NFC as a result of the requirement for multiple-pass 
homogenization, together with the tendency of the homogenizers to become 
clogged, were found to be expensive economic and technical drawbacks.
In the early stages, interest in NFC was principally, if not totally, concen -
trated in the academic world. Discoveries in the following years were funda -
mental to creating an industrial interest in the field. In those years, it was 
discovered that it was easier to produce NFC from primary-wall materials 
(e.g., parenchyma cells from sugar beet and citrus fruits) than secondary-wall 
materials (e.g., wood), as the stabilization of these suspensions by glucuronic 
and galacturonic acid residues made them easier to delaminate [13, 115, 116]. 
As outlined earlier in this chapter, there has been a focus on energy-efficient 
production methods, whereby fibers are pretreated mechanically, chemically, 
and/or enzymatically by various methods before homogenization in order to 
decrease the total energy consumption. These various investigations have led 
to innovations in NFC manufacturing which are reflected in the patent litera -
ture. Just since the year 2000, this literature contains diverse concepts includ -
ing, for example, a manufacturing process based on mechanical, chemical, or 
enzymatic means as well as a pigment in the dispersion [117], a similar process 
but incorporating mono-, di-, or oligosaccharides aimed at production of NFC 
as a shear-thinning additive [118], a method and a unit for producing a porous 
web from NFC suspension on a wire or wire mesh [119], the manufacturing 
of NFC pulps for use in paper products and composites [120], the use of an 
extruder to generate NFC with or without various additives [121], a process 
in which a pulp is first enzymatically treated, followed by mechanical treat -
ment and then a repeat of this sequence to generate NFC in a more energy-
efficient way [122], a method for producing NFC in which a cellulosic 
suspension and a solvent are pumped through an orifice and thereby subjected 
to a pressure drop [123], and the use of a hemicellulose-containing pulp sub -
jected to refining and low-dosage enzymatic treatment followed by homogeni -
zation [41].
NFC has been particularly studied and developed in Europe and, especially 
in the north of the continent, the pulp and paper industry has identified NFC 
as an opportunity to add value and to stimulate this industrial sector. For many 328  PREPARATIO n Of nAnOfIbRILLATED  CELLuLOsE AnD CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs
years, different organizations have been developing parallel competences  
and industrial processes that would allow rapid industrialization of NFC. In 
Sweden, the interests of Innventia AB in collaboration with KTH, the Royal 
Institute of Technology in Stockholm, and Chalmers University in Göteborg 
have focused more on chemical pulp, while in Norway, where mechanical 
pulping of wood is preferred, this type of process was selected by the Paper 
and Fiber Research Institute (PFI) and its research partner NTNU (the  
Norwegian University of Science and Technology). PFI and Innventia AB, part 
of the same group, presently claim a total NFC production capacity greater 
than 100 kg/day. Both these companies use homogenization techniques to 
produce NFC; however, production may differ in terms of the specific pulp 
pretreatments.
In Finland, another Nordic country with an important forestry sector, Stora 
Enso has made significant investment and in 2011 started up an NFC plant in 
the town of Imatra, in the east of the country. This investment in NFC technol -
ogy, including the Imatra pre-commercial plant, is estimated to have cost 
approximately 10 million Euros. In November 2011, UPM, a Finnish-based 
company announced that it had started up pre-commercial production of 
fibrillar cellulose in Ottaniemi, which can be either micro- or nanoscale, and 
is currently developing new fibrillar cellulose applications in conjunction with 
VTT and Aalto University.
Another example of the interest in NFC in northern Europe is investment 
by the Norwegian company Borregaard AS as part of its approach to biorefin -
ing. In 2010, this company opened a plant with a capacity of 50–100 tonnes/
year for production of Power Fiber, its commercial name for NFC, and had 
plans to install a manufacturing plant of 2000 tonnes/year in 2012–2013.
Still in Europe, Rettenmeier (Germany) and Cellucomp (Scotland) are 
producing and commercializing fibrillar cellulose. The interests of Rettenmeier 
seem more focused on using NFC as a binder, while Cellucomp is notable for 
having developed a process to obtain NFC from root vegetables.
There is also interest in NFC production and commercialization outside of 
Europe, as for example illustrated by the Japanese corporation Daicel Co., 
Ltd, which sells NFC under the trade name Celish K1. In Canada, GreenCore 
Composites Inc. is using NFC in combination with thermoplastics in its com -
mercial resin.
14.6.2 Cellulose Whiskers
While Europe has been focusing more on NFC production, on the other side 
of the Atlantic, American and Canadian researchers have tended to concen -
trate more on cellulose whisker production, generally referred to industrially 
as NCC. Since the process for generating NCC is quite different from that for 
NFC, the size of the required plant and the corresponding investment are also 
different.suMMARy   329
Canada has taken the lead in the production of NCC. On January 26, 2012, 
CelluForce officially inaugurated the world’s first NCC demonstration plant 
at the Domtar pulp and paper mill site in Windsor, Québec. CelluForce is  
now ramping up its production of NCC and had a production target of 1000 kg 
(1 metric ton) per day in 2012. The company is trying to integrate NCC into 
the manufacturing process for various products and, with this objective, col -
laboration agreements are in effect between CelluForce and 15 companies 
based in Canada, the United States, Europe, and Asia. These companies rep -
resent four main industrial sectors: paints and coatings, films and barriers, 
textiles, and composites. In order to realize this project, the Canadian and 
Québec governments made significant contributions to the financing of the 
$36 million plant, with $23.2 million coming from Natural Resources Canada 
(Pulp and Paper Green Transformation Program and Transformative Tech -
nologies Program) and $10.2 million from Québec’s Natural Resources and 
Wildlife Department. CelluForce is a joint venture between FP Innovations 
and Domtar. ArboraNano is a Canadian research network that has been 
working in partnership with CelluForce to develop NCC applications.
14.7 SUMMARY
This chapter has provided an overview of past research efforts directed toward 
the production of nanocellulose with a particular focus on NFC and cellulose 
whiskers. Until quite recently, this research was very largely carried out on a 
small scale in various universities and institutes, typically by generating 1–2 kg 
batches of nanocellulose at a time, with low dry matter content. However, the 
situation has now changed and, as also outlined here, pilot-scale industrial 
facilities are coming on stream. These commercial developments will alter the 
picture significantly in terms of technology uptake since potential users will 
now be able to receive nanocellulose suspensions in quantities of tens or hun -
dreds of kilograms rather than the smaller batches available heretofore. 
Although not covered as a topic within this chapter, at least two significant 
technical challenges still remain before NFC or cellulose whiskers can be fully 
adopted into a range of commercial applications. First, through hydrogen 
bonding, both forms of nanocellulose have a strong tendency to agglomerate 
during drying and consequently the key nanoscale characteristics are lost. 
Improved processes for drying nanocellulose that could alleviate this difficulty 
are a continuing subject of investigation. A successful drying process would 
allow nanocellulose to be transported in the dry or semidry state with very 
significant cost benefits. Second, chemical modification of nanocellulose is 
required in order to allow its effective blending with thermoplastics for new 
nanocomposite materials. This topic has been widely explored but, as yet, there 
are no processes that have been optimized in the context of rapid commercial 
adoption. It is therefore very likely that solutions to these two key challenges 330  PREPARATIO n Of nAnOfIbRILLATED  CELLuLOsE AnD CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs
and the associated technology transfer will continue to stimulate new research 
and development in the coming years.
14.8 FURTHER READING
The references in this chapter hopefully include many of the key publications 
related to NFC or cellulose whisker production. This not an easy task given 
that publications relating to nanocellulose are now appearing at an estimated 
rate of several per day, which will likely increase further in the coming months 
and years. Considering articles included in the list of references that could be 
included in further reading, one might particularly suggest the article by 
Klemm et al. from 2009 [14], which provides a very interesting discussion 
regarding bacterial cellulose and its uses, particularly in medicine. Concerning 
the challenge of drying nanocellulose formulations, it is interesting to note that 
a research group at EMPA in Zurich, Switzerland, has just announced a new 
method for drying nanocellulose, which also allows its effective redispersion 
on the nanoscale back into aqueous suspension. This development builds on 
earlier research undertaken by Eyholzer and others [124]. Other reports [125, 
126] on processes for drying nanocellulose also make useful further reading. 
Addressing the other key challenge in terms of nanocellulose use, there is a 
vast and expanding literature addressing chemical modification of nanocel -
lulose for specific applications, ranging from reinforcement of thermoplastics 
for bulk uses such as food packaging through to higher value end products in 
medicine and drug delivery, which is best accessed through state-of-the-art 
online searching.
REFERENCES
 [1] Azizi Samir, M.A.S., Alloin, F., and Dufresne, A. (2005) Review of recent research 
into cellulosic whiskers, their properties and their application in nanocomposite 
field. Biomacromolecules , 6, 612–626.
 [2] Kimura, S., Itoh, T. (2007) Biogenesis and function of cellulose in the tunicates. 
In: Cellulose: Molecular and Structural Biology , eds. R.M. Brown Jr., I.M. Saxena. 
New York: Springer, pp. 217–236, Chapter 13.
 [3] Zhou, W., Shao, Z.P ., Ran, R., Jin, W.Q., and Xu, N.P . (2008) Functional nano-
composite oxides synthesized by environmental-friendly auto-combustion within 
a micro-bioreactor. Materials Research Bulletin , 43, 2248–2259.
 [4] Marchessault, R.H., Sarko, A. (1967) X-ray structure of polysaccharides. In: 
Advanced Carbohydrate Chemistry , Vol. 22, ed. M.L. Wolfrom. New York: Aca -
demic Press, pp. 421–482.
 [5] Walton, A.G., Blackwell, J. (1973) The polysaccharides. In: Biopolymers , Vol. 22, 
eds. A.G. Walton, J. Blackwell. New York: Academic Press, p. 468.
 [6] Marchssault, R.H., Sundararajan, P .R. (1983) Cellulose. In: Polysaccharides , ed. 
G. Aspinall. New York: Academic Press, p. 11.REfEREnCEs   331
 [7] O’Sullivan, A.C. (1997) Cellulose: The structure slowly unravels. Cellulose , 4, 
173–207.
 [8] Blackwell, J., Marchessault, R.H. (1971) Infrared spectroscopy of cellulose. In: 
Cellulose and Cellulose Derivatives , eds. N. Bikales, L.E. Segal. New York: 
Wiley-Interscience.
 [9] Blackwell, J. (1982) The macromolecular organization of cellulose and chitin. In: 
Cellulose and Other Natural Polymer Systems , ed. R.M. Brown Jr. New York: 
Plenum Press.
 [10] Hess, K., Kissig, H. (1941) Zur Kenntnis der Hochtemperatur-Modifikation der 
Cellulose (Cellulose IV). Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie B , 49, 235–239.
 [11] Gardiner, E.S., Sarko, A. (1985) Packing analysis of carbohydrates and polysac -
charides. 16. The crystal structures of celluloses IVI and IVII. Canadian Journal 
of Chemistry , 63, 173–180.
 [12] Habibi, Y., Lucia, L.A., and Rojas, A.J. (2010) Cellulose nanocrystals: Chemistry, 
self-assembly and applications. Chemical Reviews , 110, 3479–3500.
 [13] Klemm, D., Schumann, D., Kramer, F., Hessler, N., Hornung, M., Schmauder, H.-
P ., and Marsch, S. (2006) Nanocelluloses as innovative polymers in research and 
application. In: Advances in Polymer Science (Polysaccharides II) , ed. D. Klemm. 
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 205, 49–96.
 [14] Klemm, D., Schumann, D., Kramer, F., Hessler, N., Koth, D., and Sultanova, B. 
(2009) Nanocellulose materials—Different cellulose, different functionality. 
Macromolecular Symposia , 280, 60–71.
 [15] Siró, I., Plackett, D. (2010) Microfibrillated cellulose and new nanocomposite 
materials: A review. Cellulose , 17, 459–494.
 [16] Kose, R., Mitani, I., Kasai, W., and Kondo, T. (2011) “Nanocellulose” as a single 
nanofiber prepared from pellicle secreted by Gluconacetobacter xylinus  using 
aqueous counter collision. Biomacromolecules , 12, 716–720.
 [17] Guhados, G., Wan, W., and Hutter, J.L. (2005) Measurement of the elastic modulus 
of single cellulose fibers using atomic force microscopy. Langmuir , 21, 6642–
6646.
 [18] Saheb, D.N., Jog, J.P . (1999) Natural fiber polymer composites: A review. Advances 
in Polymer Technology , 18, 351–363.
 [19] Cjaza, W., Romanovicz, D., and Brown, R.M. (2004) Structural investigations of 
microbial cellulose produced in stationary and agitated culture. Cellulose , 11, 
403–411.
 [20] Spence, K., Habibi, Y., and Dufresne, A. (2011) Nanocellulose-based composites. 
In: Cellulose Fibers: Bio- and Nano-Polymer Composites , eds. S. Kalia, B.S. Kaith, 
and I. Kaur. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pp. 179–214, Chapter 7.
 [21] Herrick, F.W., Casebier, R.L., Hamilton, J.K., and Sandberg, K.R. (1983) Micro -
fibrillated cellulose: Morphology and accessibility. Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science: Applied Polymer Symposia , 37, 797–813.
 [22] Turbak, A.F., Snyder, F.W., and Sandberg, K.R. (1983) Microfibrillated cellulose, 
a new cellulose product: Properties, uses and commercial potential. Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science: Applied Polymer Symposia , 37, 815–827.
 [23] Turbak, A.F., Snyder, F.W., (1985) Microfibrillated cellulose and process for pro -
ducing it. Patent CH 648071 (A5).332  PREPARATIO n Of nAnOfIbRILLATED  CELLuLOsE AnD CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs
 [24] Klemm, D., Kramer, F., Moritz, S., Lindström, T., Ankerfors, M., Gray, D., and 
Dorris, A. (2011) Nanocelluloses: A new family of nature-based materials. Ange -
wandte Chemie International Edition , 50, 5438–5466.
 [25] Rånby, B.G., Ribi, E. (1950) Über den feinbau des zellulose. Experientia , 6, 
12–14.
 [26] Nickerson, R.F., Habrle, J.A. (1947) Cellulose intercrystalline structure—  
Study by hydrolytic methods. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry , 39, 
1507–1512.
 [27] Battista, O.A. (1950) Hydrolysis and crystallization of cellulose. Industrial and 
Engineering Chemistry , 42, 502–507.
 [28] Nakagaito, A.N., Yano, H. (2004) The effect of morphological changes from pulp 
fiber towards nano-scale fibrillated cellulose on the mechanical properties of 
high-strength plant fiber based composites. Applied Physics A: Materials Science 
and Processing , 78, 547–552.
 [29] Lindström, T. (2007) Towards new perspectives in paper chemistry. Das Papier 
IPW, 10, 32–36.
 [30] Iwamoto, S., Nakagaito, A.N., and Yano, H. (2007) Nano-fibrillation of pulp fibers 
for the processing of transparent nanocomposites. Applied Physics A: Materials 
Science and Processing , 89, 461–466.
 [31] Uetani, K., Yano, H. (2011) Nanofibrillation of wood pulp using a high-speed 
blender. Biomacromolecules , 12, 348–353.
 [32] Chakraborty, A., Sain, M., and Kortschot, M. (2005) Cellulose microfibrils: A 
novel method of preparation using high shear refining and cryocrushing. Holz -
forschung , 59, 102–107.
 [33] Wang, B., Sain, M. (2007) Dispersion of soybean stock-based nanofiber in a plastic 
matrix. Polymer International , 56, 538–546.
 [34] Alemdar, A., Sain, M. (2008) Isolation and characterization of nanofibers from 
agricultural residues—Wheat straw and soy hulls. Bioresource Technology , 99, 
1664–1671.
 [35] Bhatnagar, A., Sain, M. (2005) Processing of cellulose nanofiber-reinforced com -
posites. Journal of Reinforced Plastics and Composites , 24, 1259–1268.
 [36] Wang, B., Sain, M. (2007) Isolation of nanofibers from soybean source and their 
reinforcing capability on synthetic polymers. Composites Science and Technology , 
67, 2521–2527.
 [37] Zimmerman, T., Bordeanu, N., and Strub, E. (2010) Properties of nanofibrillated 
cellulose from different raw materials and its reinforcement potential. Carbohy -
drate Polymers , 79, 1086–1093.
 [38] Spence, K.L., Venditti, R.A., Rojas, O.J., Habibi, Y., and Pawlak, J.J. (2011)  
A comparative study of energy consumption and physical properties of microfi -
brillated cellulose produced by different processing methods. Cellulose , 18, 
1097–1111.
 [39] Abe, K., Iwamoto, S., and Yano, H. (2007) Obtaining cellulose nanofibers with a 
uniform width of 15nm from wood. Biomacromolecules , 8, 3276–3278.
 [40] Pääkkö, M., Ankerfors, M., Kosonen, H., Nykänen, A., Ahola, S., Österberg, M., 
Ruokolainen, J., Laine, J., Larsson, P .T., Ikkala, O., and Lindström, T. (2007) 
Enzymatic hydrolysis combined with mechanical shearing and high-pressure REfEREnCEs   333
homogenization for nanoscale cellulose fibrils and strong gels. Biomacromole -
cules, 8, 1934–1941.
 [41] Lindström, T., Ankerfors, M., and Henriksson, G. (2007) Method for the manu -
facturing of microfibrillated cellulose. WO 2007091942.
 [42] Henriksson, M., Henriksson, G., Berglund, L.A., and Lindström, T. (2007) An 
environmentally friendly method for enzyme-assisted preparation of microfibril -
lated cellulose (MFC) nanofibers. European Polymer Journal , 43, 3434–3441.
 [43] Engström, A.-C., Ek. M., and Henriksson, G. (2006) Improved accessibility and 
reactivity of dissolving pulp for the viscose process: Pretreatment with mono -
component endoglucanase. Biomacromolecules , 7, 2017–2031.
 [44] Siqueira, G., Tapin-Lingua, S., Bras, J., da Silva Perez, D., and Dufresne, A. (2010) 
Morphological investigation of nanoparticles obtained from combined mechanical 
shearing, and enzymatic and acid hydrolysis of sisal fibers. Cellulose , 17, 1147–1158.
 [45] Siqueira, G., Tapin-Lingua, S., Bras, J., da Silva Perez, D., and Dufresne, A. (2011) 
Mechanical properties of natural rubber nanocomposites reinforced with cellu -
losic nanoparticles obtained from combined mechanical shearing, and enzymatic 
and acid hydrolysis of sisal fibers. Cellulose , 18, 57–65.
 [46] Saito, T., Nishiyama, Y., Putaux, J.-L., Vignon, M., and Isogai, A. (2006) Homoge -
neous suspensions of individualized microfibrils for TEMPO-catalyzed oxidation 
of native celluloses. Biomacromolecules , 7, 1687–1691.
 [47] Saito, T., Isogai, A. (2007) Preparation of cellulose single microfibrils by TEMPO-
mediated oxidation of native cellulose. Cellulose Communications (Japan) , 14, 
62–66.
 [48] Saito, T., Kimura, T., Nishiyama, Y., and Isogai, A. (2007) Cellulose nanofibers 
prepared by TEMPO-mediated oxidation of native cellulose. Biomacromole -
cules, 8, 2485–2491.
 [49] Hirota, M., Tamura, N., Saito, T., Isogai, A. (2010) Water dispersion of cellulose 
II nanocrystals prepared by TEMPO-mediated oxidation of mercerized cellulose 
at pH 4.8. Cellulose , 17, 279–288.
 [50] Isogai, T., Saito, T., and Isogai, A. (2011) Wood cellulose nanofibrils prepared by 
TEMPO electro-mediated oxidation. Cellulose , 18, 421–431.
 [51] Saito, T., Hirota, M., Tamura, N., Kimura, S., Fukuzumi, H., Heux, L., and Isogai, 
A. (2009) Individualization of nano-sized plant cellulose fibrils by direct surface 
carboxylation using TEMPO catalyst under neutral conditions. Biomacromole -
cules, 10, 1992–1996.
 [52] Isogai, A., Saito, T., and Fukuzumi, H. (2011) TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofi -
bers. Nanoscale , 3, 71–85.
 [53] Eichhorn, S.J., Dufresne, A., Aranguren, M., Marcovich, N.E., Capadona, J.R., 
Rowan, S.J., Weder, C., Thielemans, W., Roman, M., Renneckar, S., Gindl, W., 
Veigel, S., Keckes, J., Yano, H., Abe, K., Nogi, M., Nakagaito, A.N., Mangalam, A., 
Simonsen, J., Benight, A.S., Bismarck, A., Berglund, L.A., and Peijs, T. (2010) 
Review: Current international research into cellulose nanofibres and nanocom -
posites. Journal of Materials Science , 45, 1–33.
 [54] Johnson, R.K., Zink-Sharp, A. (2008) A new bio-based nanocomposite: Fibril -
lated TEMPO-oxidized celluloses in hydroxypropylcellulose matrix. Cellulose , 
16, 227–238.
 [55] Walecka, J.A. (1956) An investigation of low degree of substitution carboxymeth -
ylcelluloses. Tappi , 39, 458–463.334  PREPARATIO n Of nAnOfIbRILLATED  CELLuLOsE AnD CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs
 [56] Wågberg, L., Winter, L., Ödberg, L., and Lindström, T. (1987) On the charge 
stoichiometry upon adsorption of a cationic polyelectrolyte on cellulosic materi -
als. Colloids and Surfaces , 27, 163–173.
 [57] Carlsson, G., Kolseth, P ., and Lindström, T. (1983) Polyelectrolyte swelling behav -
ior of chlorite delignified spruce wood fibers. Wood Science and Technology , 17, 
69–73.
 [58] Iwamoto, S., Abe, K., and Yano, H. (2008) The effect of hemicelluloses on wood 
pulp nanofibrillation and nanofiber network characteristics. Biomacromolecules , 
9, 1022–1026.
 [59] Tanem, B.S., Kvien, I., van Helvoort, A.T.J., and Oksman, K. (2006) Morphology 
of cellulose and its nanocomposites. In: Cellulose Nanocomposites: Processing, 
Characterization, and Properties , eds. K. Oksman, M. Sain. Washington, DC: 
American Chemical Society, 938, 48–62.
 [60] Hubbe, M.A., Rojas, O.J., Lucia, L.A., and Sain, M. (2008) Cellulosic nanocom -
posites: A review. BioResources , 3, 929–980.
 [61] Aulin, C., Ahola, S., Josefsson, P ., Nishino, T., Hirose, Y., Österberg, M., and 
Wågberg, L. (2009) Nanoscale cellulose films with different crystallinities and 
mesostructures—Their surface properties and interaction with water. Langmuir , 
25, 7675–7685.
 [62] Larsson, P ., Wickholm, K., and Iversen, T. (1997) A CP/MAS 13C NMR inves-
tigation of molecular ordering in celluloses. Carbohydrate Research , 302, 
19–25.
 [63] Wickholm, K., Larsson, P ., and Iversen, T. (1998) Assignment of non-crystalline 
forms in cellulose I by CP/MAS 13C NMR spectroscopy. Carbohydrate Research , 
312, 123–129.
 [64] Dufresne, A., Cavaillé, J.-Y., and Vignon, M.R. (1997) Mechanical behavior of 
sheets prepared from sugar beet cellulose microfibrils. Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science , 64, 1185–1194.
 [65] Leitner, J., Hinderstoisser, B., Wastyn, M., Keckes, J., and Gindl, W. (2007) Sugar 
beet cellulose nanofibril-reinforced composites. Cellulose , 14, 419–425.
 [66] Siqueira, G., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2010) Luffa cylindrica as a lignocellulosic 
source of fiber, microfibrillated cellulose and cellulose nanocrystals. Bio-
Resources , 5, 727–740.
 [67] Spence, K.L., Venditti, R.A., Rojas, O.J., Habibi, Y., and Pawlak, J.J. (2010) The 
effect of chemical composition on microfibrillar cellulose films from wood pulps: 
Mechanical processing and physical properties. Cellulose , 17, 835–848.
 [68] Chinga-Carrasco, G., Syverud, K. (2010) Computer-assisted quantification of  
the multi-scale structure of films made of nanofibrillated cellulose. Journal of 
Nanoparticle Research , 12, 841–851.
 [69] Fukuzumi, H., Saito, T., Iwata, T., Kumamoto, Y., and Isogai, A. (2009) Transparent 
and high gas barrier films of cellulose nanofibers prepared by TEMPO-mediated 
oxidation. Biomacromolecules , 10, 162–165.
 [70] ISO Standard 5351 (2010) Pulps—Determination of limiting viscosity number in 
cupri-ethylenediamine solution. International Organization for Standardization, 
Geneva, Switzerland.REfEREnCEs   335
 [71] Yano, H., Nakahara, S. (2004) Bio-composites produced from plant microfiber 
bundles with a nanometer unit web-like network. Journal of Materials Science , 
39, 1635–1638.
 [72] Page, D.H., El-Hosseiny, F. (1983) Mechanical properties of single wood pulp 
fibres. Part VI. Fibril angle and the shape of the stress-strain curve. Journal of 
Pulp and Paper Science , 9, 99–100.
 [73] Sakurada, I., Nukushina, Y., and Ito, T. (1962) Experimental determination of the 
elastic modulus of crystalline regions in oriented polymers. Journal of Polymer 
Science , 57, 651–660.
 [74] Zimmerman, T., Pöhler, E., and Geiger, T. (2004) Cellulose fibrils for polymer 
reinforcement. Advanced Engineering Materials , 6, 754–761.
 [75] Iwamoto, S., Kai, W., Isogai, A., and Iwata, T. (2009) Elastic modulus of single 
cellulose microfibrils from tunicate measured by atomic force microscopy. Bio-
macromolecules , 10, 2571–2576.
 [76] Sperling, L.H. (1984) Introduction to Physical Polymer Science . New York: John 
Wiley & Sons Inc.
 [77] Park, S., Baker, J.O., Himmel, M.E., Parilla, P .A., and Johnson, D.K. (2010) Cel -
lulose crystallinity index: Measurement techniques and their impact on interpret -
ing cellulase performance. Biotechnology for Biofuels , 3, 10.
 [78] Heux, L., Dinand, E., and Vignon, M.R. (1999) Structural aspects in ultrathin 
cellulose microfibrils followed by 13C CP-MAS NMR. Carbohydrate Polymers , 
40, 115–124.
 [79] Agoda-Tandjawa, G., Durand, S., Berot, C., Blassel, C., Gaillard, C., Garnier, C. 
and Doublier, J.-L. (2010) Rheological characterization of microfibrillated cel -
lulose suspensions after freezing. Carbohydrate Polymers , 80, 677–686.
 [80] Saito, T., Isogai, A. (2004) TEMPO-mediated oxidation of native cellulose. The 
effect of oxidation conditions on chemical and crystal structures of the water-
insoluble fractions. Biomacromolecules , 5, 1983–1989.
 [81] Wågberg, L., Decher, G., Norgren, M., Lindstrom, T., Ankerfors, M., and Axnäs, 
K. (2008) The build-up of polyelectrolyte multilayers of microfibrillated cellulose 
and cationic polyelectrolytes. Langmuir , 24, 784–795.
 [82] Katz, K., Beatson, R.P ., and Scallan, A.M. (1984) The determination of strong 
and weak acidic groups in sulphite pulps. Svensk Papperstidning , 87, R48–R53.
 [83] Eichhorn, S.J. (2010) Cellulose nanowhiskers: Promising materials for advanced 
applications. Soft Matter , 7, 303–315.
 [84] Bolio-Lopez, G., Valadez-Gonzalez, A., Veleva, L., and Andreeva, A. (2011) Cel -
lulose whiskers from agro-industrial banana wastes: Isolation and characteriza -
tion. Revista Mexicana de Ingeniería Química , 2, 291–299.
 [85] De Morais Teixeira, E., Bondancia, T.J., Teodoro, K.B.R., Correa, A.C., Marcon -
cini, J.M., and Mattoso, L.H.C. (2010) Sugarcane bagasse whiskers: Extraction 
and characterizations. Industrial Crops and Products , 33, 63–66.
 [86] Li, R., Cai, Y., Yao, J., Fei, J., Li, Y., and Feng, J. (2009) Cellulose whiskers extracted 
from mulberry: A novel biomass production. Carbohydrate Polymers , 76, 
94–99.
 [87] Azizi Samir, M.A.S., Alloin, F., Paillet, M., and Dufresne, A. (2004) Tangling  
effect in fibrillated cellulose reinforced nanocomposites. Macromolecules , 37, 
4313–4316.336  PREPARATIO n Of nAnOfIbRILLATED  CELLuLOsE AnD CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs
 [88] Beck-Candenedo, S., Roman, M., and Gray, D. (2005) Effect of conditions on the 
properties behavior of wood cellulose nanocrystals suspensions. Biomacromol -
ecules , 6, 1048–1054.
 [89] Weder, C., Capadona, J.R., Shanmuganathan, K., and Rowan, S.J. (2010) Bio-
inspired mechanically adaptive nanocomposites. Polymer Preprints (American 
Chemical Society, Division of Polymer Chemistry) , 51, 269–270.
 [90] Bondeson, D., Mathew, A., and Oksman, K. (2006) Optimization of the isolation 
of nanocrystals from microcrystalline cellulose by acid hydrolysis. Cellulose , 13, 
171–180.
 [91] Araki, J., Wada, M., Kuga, S., and Okano, T. (1998) Flow properties of microcrys -
talline cellulose suspension prepared by acid treatment of native cellulose. Col-
loids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects , 142, 75–82.
 [92] Siqueira, G., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2009) Cellulose whiskers versus microfi -
brils: Influence of the nature of the nanoparticle and its surface functionalization 
on the thermal and mechanical properties of nanocomposites. Biomacromole -
cules, 10, 425–432.
 [93] Filson, P .B., Dawson-Andoh, B., and Schwegler-Berry, D. (2009) Enzymatic-
mediated production of cellulose nanocrystals from recycled pulp. Green Chem -
istry, 11, 1808–1814.
 [94] Chirat, C., Lachenal, D., and Dufresne, A. (2010) Biorefinery in a Kraft pulp mill. 
From bioethanol to cellulose nanocrystals. Cellulose Chemistry and Technology , 
44, 59–64.
 [95] Duran, N., Lemes, A.P ., Duran, M., Freer, J., and Baeza, J. (2011) A minireview 
of cellulose nanocrystals and its potential integration as co-product in bioethanol 
production. Journal of the Chilean Chemical Society , 56, 672–677.
 [96] Oksman, K., Etang, J.A., Mathew, A.P ., and Jonoobi, M. (2011) Cellulose nanow -
hiskers separated from a bioresidue from wood bioethanol production. Biomass 
and Bioenergy , 35, 146–152.
 [97] Zhu, J.Y., Sabo, R., and Luo, X. (2011) Integrated production of nano-fibrillated 
cellulose and cellulosic biofuel (ethanol) by enzymatic fractionation of wood 
fibers. Green Chemistry , 13, 1339–1344.
 [98] Leistritz, F.L., Senechal, D.M., Stower, M.D., McDonald, W.F., Safron, C.M., and 
Hodur, N.M. (2006) Preliminary feasibility analysis for an integrated biomaterials 
and ethanol biorefinery using wheat straw feedstock. Agribusiness and Applied 
Economic report No. 590. http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/handle/23500 (accessed 
March 18, 2012).
 [99] Elazzouzi-Hafraoui, S., Nishiyama, Y., Putaux, J.-L., Heux, L., Dubreuil, F., and 
Rochas, C. (2008) The shape and size distribution of crystalline nanoparticles 
prepared by acid hydrolysis of native cellulose. Biomacromolecules , 9, 57–65.
[100] Itoh, T., Brown, R.M. (1988) Development of cellulose synthesizing complexes 
in Boergesenia  and Valonia . Protoplasma , 144, 160–169.
[101] Brown, R.M., Willison, J.H., and Richardson, C.L. (1976) Cellulose biosynthesis 
in Acetobacter xylinum : Visualization of the site of synthesis and direct measure -
ment of the in vivo  process. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America , 73, 4565–4569.REfEREnCEs   337
[102] Kontturi, E., Vuorinen, T. (2009) Indirect evidence of supramolecular changes 
within cellulose microfibrils of chemical pulp fibers upon drying. Cellulose , 16, 
65–74.
[103] Rusli, R., Eichhorn, S.J. (2008) Determination of the stiffness of cellulose nanow -
hiskers and the fiber-matrix interface in a nanocomposite using Raman spectros -
copy. Applied Physics Letters , 93, 033111.
[104] Šturcová, A., Davies, G.R., and Eichhorn, S.J. (2005) Elastic modulus and stress 
transfer properties of tunicate cellulose whiskers. Biomacromolecules , 6, 
1055–1061.
[105] Tashiro, K., Kobayashi, M. (1991) Theoretical evaluation of three-dimensional 
elastic constants of native and regenerated celluloses: Role of hydrogen bonds. 
Polymer , 32, 1516–1526.
[106] Eichhorn, S.J., Davies, G.R. (2006) Modelling the crystal deformation of native 
and regenerated cellulose. Cellulose , 13, 291–307.
[107] Bergenstråhle, M., Berglund, L.A., and Mazeau, K. (2007) Thermal response in 
crystalline I β cellulose: A molecular dynamics study. Journal of Physical Chem -
istry Part B , 111, 9138–9145.
[108] Nishino, T., Takano, K., and Nakamae, K. (1995) Elastic modulus of the crystalline 
regions of cellulose polymorphs. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer 
Physics , 33, 1647–1651.
[109] Diddens, I., Murphy, B., Krisch, M., and Muller, M. (2008) Ansiotropic elastic 
properties of cellulose measured using inelastic X-ray scattering. Macromole -
cules, 41, 9755–9759.
[110] Hasani, M., Cranston, E.D., Westman, G., and Gray, D.G. (2008) Cationic surface 
functionalization of cellulose nanocrystals. Soft Matter , 4, 2238–2244.
[111] Marchessault, R.H., Morehead, F.F., and Walter, N.M. (1959) Liquid crystal 
systems from fibrillar polysaccharides. Nature , 184, 632–633.
[112] Habibi, Y., Chanzy, H., and Vignon, M.R. (2006) TEMPO-mediated surface oxi -
dation of cellulose whiskers. Cellulose , 13, 679–687.
[113] Battista, O.A., Coppick, S., Howsmon, J.A., Morehead, F.F., and Sisson, W.A. 
(1956) Level-off degree of polymerization. Relation to polyphase structure of 
cellulose fibers. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry , 48, 333–335.
[114] Kai, A. (1976) The fine structure of Valonia  microfibril. Gel permeation chro -
matographic studies of Valonia  cellulose. Sen-I Gakkaishi , 32, T326–T334.
[115] Dinand, E., Chanzy, H., and Vignon, M.R. (1996) Parenchymal cell cellulose from 
sugar beet pulp. Preparation and properties. Cellulose , 3, 183–188.
[116] Dinand, E., Vignon, M.R. (2001) Isolation and NMR characterisation of a 
(4-O-methyl-d-glucurono)-D-xylan from sugar beet pulp. Carbohydrate Research , 
330, 285–288.
[117] Heiskanen, I., Backfolk, K. (2011) A composition comprising microfibrillated 
cellulose and a process for the production of a composition. WO 2011141877.
[118] Heiskanen, I., Backfolk, K. (2011) A composition comprising microfibrillated 
cellulose and a process for production of a composition. WO 2011141876.338  PREPARATIO n Of nAnOfIbRILLATED  CELLuLOsE AnD CELLuLOsE WhIsKERs
[119] Kajanto, I. (2011) A method and a system for making a fibre-containing product. 
WO 2011080386.
[120] Nuopponen, M., Paeivaelaeinen, T., Laukkanen, A., and Paltakari, J. (2011) 
Method for manufacturing nanofibrillated cellulose pulp and use of the pulp in 
paper manufacturing or in nanofibrillated cellulose composites. WO 2011064441.
[121] Heiskanen, I., Harlin, A., Backfolk, K., and Laitinen, R. (2011) Process for  
production of microfibrillated cellulose in an extruder and microfibrillated  
cellulose produced according to the process. WO 2011051882.
[122] Heiskanen, I., Backfolk, K., Vehvilaeinen, M., Kamppuri, T., and Nousiainen, P . 
(2011) Process for producing microfibrillated cellulose. WO 2011004301.
[123] Wichmann, J.-U., Haugen, O. (2010) Method for producing microfibrillated cel -
lulose. EP 2196579.
[124] Eyholzer, C., Bordeanu, N., Lopez-Suevos, F., Rentsch, D., Zimmermann, T., and 
Oksman, K. (2010) Preparation and characterization of water-redispersible nano -
fibrillated cellulose in powder form. Cellulose , 17, 19–30.
[125] Peng, Y., Gardner, D.J., and Han, Y. (2012) Drying cellulose nanofibrils: In search 
of a suitable method. Cellulose , 19, 91–102.
[126] Voronova, M.I., Zakharov, A.G., Kuznetsov, O.Y., and Surov, O.V. (2012) The 
effect of drying technique for nanocellulose dispersions on properties of dried 
materials. Materials Letters , 68, 164–167.339Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 15
Bacterial Cellulose
ELIANE TROVATTI
15.1 INTRODUCTION
Bacterial cellulose (BC) is a fascinating polysaccharide produced by bacteria 
in the form of a swollen gel-like membrane with the function of a protective 
structure. In nature, the BC membrane is secreted over the microorganism 
colony and acts as a protective layer against detrimental environmental condi -
tions, playing multiple functions in its growth and survival. The BC membrane 
is able to prevent drying of natural substrates such as rotting fruit, retaining 
moisture close to the bacterial cells. Its low transparency to ultraviolet (UV) 
light provides protection against the damaging effects of the sun’s radiation. 
BC can also prevent the colonization of the natural substrate by competitors 
organisms such as molds and other bacteria [1].
BC was described for the first time in 1886 by Brown [2]. In his work, Brown 
reported the discovery of the new exopolysaccharide and the strategies for 
isolation of the producing microorganism and identification of the polysac -
charide. This discovery started from a study about microorganisms for vinegar 
fermentation, Bacterium aceti , when Brown found a new and peculiar acetic 
“ferment” known as the “vinegar plant” or “mother,” which secreted a pelicule 
on the surface of the liquid media. The “ferment” differed greatly in appear -
ance from any other form of B. aceti  he had noticed, probably due to the fact 
that it was a distinct organism. To ascertain this hypothesis, and also to enable 
the studies of the chemical properties of the pelicule, he isolated a pure culture 
of the producing microorganism. When this new microorganism was cultivated 
in appropriate culture media, a jelly-like translucent membrane was formed 
on the surface of the liquid. The membrane rapidly increased until the whole 
surface was covered. After several sets of chemical tests, the membrane was 340  BAcTERIAL  cELLuLOsE
identified as cellulose. Regarding its ability to forming cellulose, the “vinegar 
plant” was denominated Bacterium xylinum  (from Greek xýlinalína , literally 
“linen from wood”). Nowadays BC is widely consumed in several parts of the 
world as a healthy diet food ( nata de coco ).
Although it was first described in 1886, BC has attracted more attention in 
recent decades, and the increasing interest in this material is due to to its 
unique properties and applications.
15.2 PRODUCING MICROORGANISMS
Cellulose is synthesized by several living organisms, from prokaryotes to 
animals. Among the prokaryotes, BC is synthesized by bacteria belonging to 
the genus Gluconacetobacter , Rhizobium , Agrobacterium , Escherichia  [3, 4], 
Enterobacter  [5], and Salmonella  [6], among others. The Agrobacterium  is a 
plant pathogenic infectious microorganism that uses cellulose to attach its cells 
to the plant hosts cells [7, 8]. Similarly to Agrobacterium , the role of cellulose 
in Rhizobium  species in the plant–microorganism attachment process, associ -
ated with atmospheric nitrogen fixing, is perhaps one of the most important 
symbiotic relationships of the biosphere [8, 9].
Eukaryotic organisms such fungi, amoebae, and trees produce cellulose as 
part of the basic structure of their cell walls. Trees and cotton plants are the 
main sources of cellulose for industrial purposes. Animals able to produce 
cellulose are the tunicates [10]. The cellulose from Valoniaventricosa , a green 
algae, is one of the most perfect crystalline forms of cellulose in nature [11]. 
However, the swollen cellulose in membranous form is synthesized only by 
bacteria and, in abundance, by bacteria belonging to the Gluconacetobacter  
genera.
The Gluconacetobacter  genus belongs to the Acetobacteriaceae family. This 
family has undergone many taxonomic changes with respect to their genus 
status. Thus, the Gluconacetobacter  genus was described for the first time in 
1997 [12], and several new species were described in the last years within this 
genera [13]. The microorganisms belonging to the Gluconacetobacter  genus 
are Gram negative, aerobic, nonpathogenic to humans and animals, rod-
shaped, and occurring singly or, many times, in pairs. The optimum tempera -
ture for growth is around 30°C and the pH ranges from 3.5 to 6.0. In nature, 
Gluconacetobacter  species are found in vinegar, tea fungus, sugarcane, mealy 
bug, flowers, and fruits in decomposition [1, 13].
There are several species within the Gluconacetobacter  genus differentiated 
by phenotypic characteristics, mainly based on the consumption of substrate 
and metabolites. The production of cellulose can be observed in some strains 
such G. europaeus , G. intermedius , G. oboediens  [13], G. nataicola  [14], G. sac -
chari  [15], and G. xylinus  [13]. New cellulose-producing microorganisms have 
been isolated and described from food sources and wastes, in an attempt to 
obtain highly productive strains for industrial applications of BC [13, 15–18].PROducINg MIcROORgANIsMs   341
15.2.1 Isolation of Producing Microorganisms and Cellulose 
Identification
The isolation of the cellulose-producing strains begins with the search for a 
microorganism source. It is easily identified by the accumulation of cellulose on 
the substrate, such as in Kombucha tea [16], where a dense cellulose membrane 
can be found on the surface of the liquid. The second step is based on a simple 
microbiological approach for bacteria isolation, which starts with the inocula -
tion of a sample of the microorganisms in a liquid culture media. After an 
adequate period of time for the microorganisms to grow, the liquid culture 
medium is diluted and spread on solid media in petri dish. A usual culture 
medium that can be used for this purpose was described by Hestrin and 
Schramm (HS), composed (in g/L) by 20.0 glucose, 5.0 peptone, 5.0 yeast extract, 
1.15 citric acid, 2.7 phosphate disodium [19], and 20.0 agar–agar. Each isolated 
colony from solid media should be inoculated in assay tubes containing liquid 
culture media for BC production (HS). If a membrane of cellulose appears on 
the surface of the liquid, after an adequate period (5–10 days), the test confirms 
the cellulose production. The study of the morphology of the colony helps the 
identification of the cellulose-producing bacteria. Cellulose-producing colonies 
are circular, around 1 mm in diameter, transparent, and slightly yellow with a 
regular border after 3 days of incubation. Some species of cellulose-producing 
bacteria have colonies with a gelatinous aspect, as shown in Figure 15.1. The 
morphology of the colony also shows the presence of nonproducing cells, which 
is common in agitated culture.
The identification of cellulose can be performed by chemical or spectro -
photometric techniques, after purification. The chemical method for cellulose 
identification involves hydrolysis via chemical or enzymatic reaction, generat -
ing glucose monomers, which can be detected by chromatographic methods. 
In addition, practical methods such as Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR), 
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), and X-ray diffractometry (XRD) are 
used for cellulose identification.
Figure 15.1  Morphological characteristic of the colonies of bacteria able to synthesize 
cellulose.
342  BAcTERIAL  cELLuLOsE
In nature, cellulose-producing microorganisms are in symbiosis with other 
microorganisms, mostly yeasts, which are able to survive at low pH environ -
ments, typical of the Acetobacter  family. For both industrial and research 
purposes, the strain should be pure, assuring no competition for nutrient 
sources and for reproducibility of the results.
15.2.2 Production of Bacterial Cellulose
BC is produced under adequate pH, temperature, oxygen rate, and nutrient 
sources. Changes in these parameters can affect the growth of the microorgan -
isms and, consequently, the product formation and its properties. Concerning 
its form, BC can be obtained as a continuous membrane or in pellets (Fig. 
15.2), according to the process used during the production phase, which can 
be static or agitated, respectively. Beyond the ideal pH and temperature, 
microorganisms also need adequate sources of nutrients such as carbon, nitro -
gen, oxygen, and mineral salts. Some properties of cellulose are dependent on 
the type of process and conditions used during the synthesis.
15.3 STATIC AND AGITATED CULTURES
The shape and structure of BC directs its application to several specific and 
highly technological fields. The industrial production of BC under shaking 
cultivation could be advantageous for some industrial purposes, since the 
production of pellets of cellulose avoids milling and saves energy. This is an 
economical alternative for BC production when compared with the high cost 
of conventional static cultivation, which is often not applicable to large-scale 
production [20]. However, some applications of BC are dependent of its mem -
branous form. Then, the choice of the production process should be in agree -
ment with the application of cellulose.Figure 15.2  Bacterial cellulose membrane produced in static condition on the surface 
of culture media (a) and BC pellets produced under agitation (b).
(a) (b)sTATIc ANd AgITATEd cuLTuREs   343
15.3.1 Shaking Cultivation
Perfect spheres, irregular granules, stellate, and fibrous cellulose forms can be 
obtained by tuning the parameters of cultivation in the agitated process, such 
as the speed of agitation, oxygen transfer rate, the initial number of viable 
cells, pH, temperature, shear stress, volume, and design of the reactor.
Several attempts to improve the yield via the aerated and agitated cultiva -
tion method focus on the design of specific reactors for BC production [20]. 
High agitation is required to provide a high oxygen transfer rate for the culture 
broth [21, 22]. In this way, several reactor types have been tested in an attempt 
to promote low shear and high oxygen transfer rates aiming to improve yield 
and reduce the noncellulose-producing mutants in shaking culture [22, 23].
BC produced via shaking culture exhibits some differences in the degree 
of polymerization and crystallinity, and Young’s modulus is lower than that 
produced under static conditions [20]. The development of reactors for large-
scale production of BC pellets is economically advantageous if large amounts 
of cellulose fibers are required for hydrolysis, as in the textile industry.
15.3.2 Static Process
The cellulose produced under static process results in a continuous membrane 
that assumes the shape of the container. It presents different properties com -
pared with the cellulose produced via the shaking process. The cellulose mem -
brane is synthesized in nature only by bacteria, mainly by those belonging to 
the Gluconacetobacter  genus.
The static process for BC synthesis is normally performed in polypropylene 
trays where the bacterial strain is inoculated and incubated under ideal condi -
tions until the desired thickness is reached. In the static process, the yield of 
cellulose is dependent on the ratio between the surface area and the volume 
of the container and is unaffected by the depth of the culture media [24, 25]. 
For instance, the concentration of BC produced in a 250-mL Erlenmeyer flask 
containing 50 mL of HS culture media after 96 hours under static cultivation 
at 30°C is around 2.7 g/L [15]. The production of BC in membranous form is 
advantageous compared with the pellet form regarding application and puri -
fication. The membrane synthesized by different species of microorganisms 
presents slight differences, mainly in terms of mechanical strength and water 
holding capacity.
Besides static and agitated cultivation, it is also possible to produce BC by 
a new and efficient semicontinuous process. It combines the advantages of 
static cultivation and continuous harvesting under steady-state cultivation. The 
cellulose is obtained in membranous form and retains the same properties of 
cellulose obtained from static cultivation [26]. The semicontinuous process 
seems to be the best way to scale up the BC production.
BC production, however, has not reached a significant scale for widespread 
application. This is probably due to the fact that BC has not received enough 344  BAcTERIAL  cELLuLOsE
attention from the market as a unique material for many fields of application. 
The development of highly technological products based on BC could be cost-
effective to attract sponsors and could be the way to optimize and scale up 
production.
15.4 CARBON AND NITROGEN SOURCES
The growth of the microorganism and cellulose production depends on the 
optimal combination of nutrient sources, including carbon, nitrogen, and mineral 
salts, for each specific strain. Large amounts of BC are produced from substrates 
such as glucose, fructose, mannitol, sucrose, and glycerol [19, 27, 28] by several 
cellulose-producing strains. The main nitrogen sources for these cellulose-
producing microorganisms are peptone, yeast extract [19], and (NH 4)2SO 4 [29, 
30]. The mass of BC produced from the different culture media is related to  
the limitations of the substrate over the metabolic pathway of cellulose biosyn -
thesis [27].
In general, the structure and morphological characteristics of BC are not 
drastically affected by the nutrient source. Some slight changes can be observed 
when BC is obtained using glycerol as substrate, particularly in the degree of 
crystallinity and water holding capacity. When glycerol is used as a substrate 
in shaking flask cultivation, the BC pellets present a denser and reticulated 
structure than those from the glucose medium [28]. This is probably due to 
the differences in crystallinity and average degree of polymerization [31]. 
However, X-ray diffractometry indicates the preservation of the same planar 
spacing in the crystalline regions [28].
15.5 PRODUCTION OF BACTERIAL CELLULOSE FROM FOOD AND 
AGRO-FORESTRY RESIDUES
Some abundant by-products and residues from the food and agro-forestry 
industries can be used as raw material for BC production, providing all the 
essential nutrients for the microorganisms. BC can be attained from potato 
waste water [32], grape juice, orange juice [33], Konjac powder [34], molasses 
[35], and other sources. Besides the high yield of cellulose produced from these 
raw materials, some properties such as the water content, thermal and mechan -
ical properties, and the degree of crystallinity are highly conserved compared 
with the cellulose produced using the HS culture media [36]. The production 
of BC from media composed of waste, residues, or by-products can decrease 
costs and contribute to the environment. However, a closer analysis should be 
carried out concerning the composition of the residues and the possible con -
taminants affecting the BC, mainly, if it is applicable in biomedical fields. 
Several culture media prepared from dark residues have a dark or brown PuRIfIcATION   345
color, which requires additional steps of washing during the purification 
process. The excess of alkali washing can damage the surface of the membrane 
with loss of mass due to hydrolysis of cellulose fibers.
The conditions for production and purification of BC are of fundamental 
importance in the preparation of composite materials, as all the steps affect 
the quality of the final product.
15.6 PURIFICATION
Bacterial cellulose purification is highly advantageous compared with cellu -
lose from plants. BC is produced as a high pure form of cellulose, is more 
environmentally friendly, and demands less energetic methods than cellulose 
from plants for purification.
Cellulose is a fibrous, tough, water-insoluble substance, which is found as  
a protective structure in plants, particularly in stalks, stems, trunks, and all 
woody portions [37]. In plants, fungi, and algae, cellulose is produced as part 
of the matrix of the cell wall. During cellulose extraction from plants, other 
elements that compose its basic structure, mainly lignin and hemicelluloses, 
are extracted with it. The industrial application of cellulose requires the sepa -
ration of these compounds, performed through hard chemical and physical 
treatments that, many times, increases the costs of the purification process [3].
BC is produced as a highly swollen gel structure, embedded in the culture 
medium. The producing microorganisms are free in the media or attached to 
the surface of the cellulose fibers. Purification of this kind of cellulose is based 
on killing the microorganisms and removal of cell wastes and residues of the 
liquid culture media from the cellulose matrix.
Purification of BC constitutes a critical step for the quality of the cellulose 
and its derivatives. Purification can be performed by multiple washing with 
hot sodium hydroxide solution, followed by washing with water until pH neu -
tralization [30]. Alternative treatments can be performed with hypochlorite, 
hydrochloric acid, chlorexedin, or a combination of chemical compounds 
(NaOH and hypochlorite) [30]. A suitable washing process should be chosen 
in agreement with the desired application of the cellulose. The contaminants 
usually found in BC (membranes or pellets) are bacteria, salts, and residual 
culture media. These contaminants change some properties of BC, such as the 
mechanical and thermal behavior. These residues can also influence the BC 
dry mass. The weighing of them with the BC leads to errors in determining 
the mass of the product, taking into account that they represent a relatively 
high mass in the dry membrane.
Sterilization with water vapor is a useful process for finishing the purifica -
tion process of hydrated BC membranes for biomedical applications. Steriliza -
tion of dried BC membranes is usually performed through gamma irradiation. 
Both methods are efficient and do not change significantly the structure and 
properties of the material.346  BAcTERIAL  cELLuLOsE
15.7 STRUCTURE OF BACTERIAL CELLULOSE
Cellulose is a long linear polymeric chain composed of D-glucose monomers 
connected by β-1,4 glucosidic bonds [8]. The molecular formula of cellulose 
produced by microorganisms is identical to cellulose derived from plants and 
other organisms.
The biosynthesis of cellulose by Gluconacetobacter  bacteria is a complex 
process that involves the polymerization of glucose monomers and the cellu -
lose secretion to the external environment.
The metabolic pathway for BC biosynthesis starts with the conversion of  
a substrate, usually a carbon source such as glucose, to uridinediphosphate 
glucose (UDP-glucose) [8], the cellulose precursor. UDP–glucose is the sub -
strate for the enzyme cellulose synthase. UDP–glucose undergoes the catalytic 
action of the cellulose synthase, resulting in the formation of β-1,4 bonds 
between the glucose monomers [8, 38]. The enzymatic complex cellulose syn -
thase is associated with pores on the surface of the outer membrane of the 
bacterial cell, where the polymerization takes place [39]. After polymerization, 
the cellulose is secreted by the pores. Each pore extrudes about 16 cellulose 
chains, or elementary fibrils (width of 1.5 nm), into the culture medium. The 
elementary fibrils aggregate to each other, possibly through hydrogen bonding, 
to form a tridimensional network with other elementary fibrils, promoting the 
formation of microfibrils [39]. The aggregation of microfibrils produces a 
ribbon assembly with a width of 40–60 nm [40–42] (Fig. 15.3).
The ribbon end curves over itself due to the viscosity of the medium. Com -
bined with the bacteria displacement, such movement wraps the ribbon and 
creates fibers that are dragged by the bacteria through the culture media. The 
cross-passing of bacteria produces the entanglement of such fibers creating 
Figure 15.3  Schematic representation of formation of cellulose nanofiber on the side 
view of the bacteria. Reproduced with the permission from Reference [42].self-assemb ly
sub-elementat y fibril
1 .5 nmmicrofibril
3.5-4 nmnanof iber
40-60 nm
TC sub unit
TC
UDP -glucose
glucose Acetobact er xylinumsTRucTuRE Of BAcTERIAL cELLuLOsE   347
the cellulose fibers. It is possible to observe the extrusion of the cellulose fibrils 
during the synthesis by bacteria [41].
The biosynthesis and the polymerization process confer to BC a nano- and 
microfibrillar tridimensional network structure. The BC structure is respon -
sible for some properties such as high mechanical strength, high water content, 
high degree of crystallinity, and high purity [39, 43]. Besides these properties, 
the nano- and microfibrillar structure endows the wet BC membrane with a 
highly swollen gel aspect.
The BC membrane is formed on the surface of the culture media during 
the self-assembly of the cellulose molecules [39]. The wet membrane is com -
posed of 0.5–1% wt in mass of pure cellulose and 99% wt or more in mass of 
water.
The nanofibrillar structure of BC under optical microscopy shows a semi -
transparent film characterized by great homogeneity with weakly marked 
fibrils distributed throughout the structure [44] (Fig. 15.4).
The structural characteristics of BC, related to their chemical groups, crys -
talline index, and morphological aspects, are well resolved by scanning elec -
tron microscopy (SEM), FT-IR, and XRD.
The tridimensional nano- and microfibrillar ultrastructure of BC and its 
details such as fiber width can be observed on the surface of a freeze-dried 
BC sample by SEM [27] (Fig. 15.5). The surface morphology of the oven-dried 
BC results in a collapsed network of nano- and microfibrils.
Infrared spectroscopy helps to clarify the cellulose chemical structure [45]. 
Cellulose absorbs the infrared radiation at specific energies, which are char -
acteristic of their chemical groups (Fig. 15.6). Also, FT-IR is one of the most 
powerful tools to study hydrogen bonds and helps to identify [37] the intra -
molecular and intermolecular hydrogen bonds of cellulose and cellulose deriv -
atives [45]. The FT-IR spectrum of BC reveals the typical profile, similar to 
plant cellulose. The absorption bands around 3300/cm are associated with the 
vibrations of the OH group [46]. The bands at 2890/cm are attributed to C–H 
Figure 15.4  Morphological structure of bacterial cellulose at optical microscopy.
348  BAcTERIAL  cELLuLOsE
stretching. The bands at 1060 [47] and 1100/cm are associated with the vibra -
tion of C–O–C groups, typically reported for this material [48], and the bands 
at 1157/cm are due to the C–O antisymmetric bridge stretching. The band at 
1642/cm originates from the H–O–H bending of the absorbed water [49, 50].
From the FT-IR spectra profile it is possible to infer the crystallinity degree 
of cellulose. The bands at 4000–2995/cm, 2900/cm, 1430/cm, 1375/cm, and 900/
cm are especially sensitive to cellulose molecular order. The shape of these Figure 15.5  Scanning electron microscopy of freeze-dried bacterial cellulose.
Figure 15.6  FT-IR spectrum of bacterial cellulose.4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000
Wavelength (cm–1)sTRucTuRE Of BAcTERIAL cELLuLOsE   349
bands is related to the order or disorder in the polysaccharide phase morphol -
ogy and can be related to the amount of crystalline versus amorphous fractions 
in cellulose. Sharpening of the characteristic cellulose bands suggests an 
increase in the crystallinity degree, and broadening of these bands suggests its 
decrease [51]. In spite of being a simple method, FT-IR only gives relative 
values, once the bands presents the contribution of both crystalline and amor -
phous phases [52].
Regarding the crystalline structure of cellulose, the allomorph cellulose I is 
the most abundant in nature, including BC. However, derivatives with differ -
ent crystalline structures named cellulose II, III, and IV have been identified 
by XRD and solid-state 13C NMR [37, 52]. The cellulose I is composed of two 
allomorphs, cellulose 1 α and cellulose 1 β, in different ratios for different cel -
lulosic substrates [53].
Among several ways to determine the degree of crystallinity of cellulose 
(FT-IR, XRD, and NMR), the most useful is X-ray diffractometry.
In general, XRD of cellulose reveals four crystalline peaks at 2 θ (14.4°, 
16.7°, 22.6°, and 34.1°) diffraction angles, separated at 101, 10 ī, 002, and 040 
diffraction planes, for BC [15, 54] and other celluloses [55]. XRD spectra indi -
cate that BC presents the typical crystalline profile of cellulose І (Fig. 15.7). 
The XRD peak height method [56] for crystallinity index determination is easy 
and rapid. This method is proposed for empirical determination of relative 
crystallinity of cellulose samples. However, the results gives an overestimation 
of the crystalinity index [52].
The most accurate method to obtain the crystallinity index of samples with 
high crystallinity degree (such as BC) is the XRD deconvolution method. It 
is based on the separation of the amorphous and crystalline contributions to 
the diffraction spectrum, requiring suitable software for peak deconvolution 
Figure 15.7  X-ray diffractogram of bacterial cellulose.101101002 040
0 1 0 20 30 40 50 6 0 70
2θ350  BAcTERIAL  cELLuLOsE
and curve-fitting. The total area corresponds to the area of the crystalline 
peaks added to the band of amorphous area [52].
The molecular structure of cellulose allows its interaction with chemically 
compatible substances through hydrogen bonds. The long chain of cellulose 
and its high degree of crystallinity are important to obtain composites or to 
use the cellulose as a matrix for composite materials.
15.8 PROPERTIES OF BACTERIAL CELLULOSE
The most important properties of BC are their mechanical strength, water 
content, high degree of crystallinity, and high purity [39].
The high water content of BC in the native state is a result of the synthesis, 
polymerization, and extrusion by bacteria. During cellulose synthesis, a ribbon-
like cellulose assembly is formed, extruded in parallel to the long axis of  
the cell and twisted in a right-handed manner due to the movement of  
the microorganism in the liquid environment [57]. The microfibrils of cellulose 
are arranged in a tridimensional network of nanofibers, which allows water 
retention within the high hydrophilic thin porous structure. The wet or dry  
BC structure has a large number of pores, suitable for a wide range of 
applications.
The insolubility of cellulose in water and common organic solvents and its 
resistance to chemical and enzymatic hydrolysis are conferred by the confor -
mation of the cellulose molecules and their supramolecular organization, in 
which the glucan chains are stabilized by hydrogen bonds inter- and intrachain 
[6, 58]. In addition, the linear chains of cellulose and the strong cohesion 
between the macromolecules are responsible for the high mechanical strength 
of BC [59].
The mechanical behavior of a single fiber of BC reveals a Young’s modulus 
ranging from 78 GPa, when determined by atomic force microscopy (AFM) 
[60] to 114 GPa [61], when determined by Raman spectroscopy. The BC fibers 
behave mechanically as a homogeneous material, showing no dependence on 
their diameter [60]. Dried BC membranes present a Young’s modulus of 
around 9.7 GPa, stress at break around 240 MPa, and strain at break around 
2.6% [61]. Rheological measurements of BC fibers exhibit a reversible stress 
softening due to the buckling of fibers, destruction of its physical cross-links, 
and rearrangement of the network with formation of new cross-links. Also, the 
storage and loss modulus decrease with stress after a certain stress level is 
reached, in a reversible way [62].
The low biodegradability of cellulose in animal tissues is related to the 
absence of enzymes to cleave the β 1-4 linkages, limiting its degradation in 
vivo. However, cellulose can be degraded in vivo  as a result of the susceptibil -
ity to physical transformation of higher ordered structures and tissue response 
[63, 64]. A systematic investigation about the biocompatibility of BC in sub -
cutaneous implants in rats shows no macroscopic signs of inflammation such PROPERTIEs Of BAcTERIAL cELLuLOsE   351
as redness, edema, or exudates, no histological signs of chronic inflammation, 
and no foreign body reaction. The high biocompatibility was complemented 
by the formation of new blood vessels around and growing into the BC 
implants [64].
The crystallinity degree of BC is around 80%, according to the culture 
conditions such as the media composition and the production process (static 
or agitated) [15, 35]. This parameter is in accord with the properties of the 
BC-based composites [65]. The ultrasonic processing in mild conditions is 
effective in changing the microfibrillar structure of BC, increasing its degree 
of crystallinity [66].
The cellulose produced by bacteria is excreted in a highly pure form, requir -
ing a simple purification process to remove cells and residual culture media 
inside the membrane. Different from cellulose from plant, algae, and fungus, 
in which the purification is a complex process evolving several steps [67], the 
relatively ease, low cost, and efficient purification of BC has attracted the 
attention of industry in recent years [68]. The high purity of BC contributes 
to its high biocompatibility, increasing the interest in this material for biomedi -
cal and biological applications.
The thermal degradation profile of BC shows a single mass loss step with 
a maximum at 365°C (Fig. 15.8). The thermal character of BC can change the 
thermal stability of its derivative materials, changing both initial and maximum 
degradation temperatures. This behavior is dependent on the dispersion and 
compatibility between the compounds [69].
The properties of BC are essential in the field of cellulose-based composites, 
generating materials with improved properties such as increased mechanical 
strength and thermal stability; in addition, the transparency of the composite 
is not affected by low amounts of fibers.
Figure 15.8  Thermogravimetric and differential curves for BC.1 .0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0m/mi
0 1 00 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
Temperatur e (°C)365°C352  BAcTERIAL  cELLuLOsE
15.9 APPLICATIONS
15.9.1 Food Industry
BC is a rich source of food fibers. The growing market of food based on BC 
is represented by the increasing number of patents relating to it and its deriva -
tives in the food industry [70]. The application of BC as a diet food is tradition -
ally found in the Asian culture, as desserts made in the home or in small 
factories. The sweetened membrane is consumed directly, known as nata de 
coco. The fermented liquid containing green tea, sugar, and microbial metabo -
lites, mainly acetic acid, is a traditional beverage used as a drink in several 
parts of the world, known as Kombucha tea. Kombucha tea can be prepared 
with 6 g/L of green tea and sucrose (100 g/L), followed by inoculation with a 
starter culture. The starter culture is a portion of tea originated from a previ -
ous Kombucha culture, containing the cellulose-producing microorganisms. 
The tea stays at 25°C during an ideal period of time, around 2 weeks. The 
microorganisms grow, acidify the liquid, and synthesize the cellulose on the 
interface air–liquid. After removal of the membrane, the acidified and sweet -
ened liquid is used as a drink.
15.9.2 Bacterial Cellulose Composites
Interest in BC as a component (membrane or fiber) of composites is growing. 
The nanosized fibers are able to change the properties of the matrix, and, if 
the membranes are used as matrix, they are susceptible to changing their 
properties through the incorporation of other components to generate the 
composite [43].
Membrane modification can be made in situ  if the modifying agent is 
introduced into the culture medium and the composite material is formed 
during the fiber assembly [43]. In situ  modification sometimes generates more 
homogenous composites with improved properties, although it is not the best 
way for composite preparation. The compounds introduced in the culture 
media during the cellulose synthesis can disturb the growth of the microorgan -
isms and decrease the cellulose synthesis, compromising the reproducibility  
of the method. Moreover, the modifying agent can be leached during the 
purification.
A traditional and efficient approach to prepare BC composites is post-
modification , loading the BC membrane (swollen or dried) with the modifying 
agent [43]. Removal of part of the water from BC allows the material to absorb 
the same volume of other solution. If the volume and concentration are known, 
the composition of the product can be determined. BC-based composites have 
application in biomedical and highly technological fields, usually as functional 
materials.
15.9.2.1  Biomedical  Applications  BC has found application as wound 
dressing membranes and temporary skin substitutes for burns and chronic APPLIcATIONs   353
wounds. The topical application of BC membranes is highly effective, improv -
ing the healing process of wounds [25, 71] and promoting the re-epithelization 
process in human skin [72–77]. BC can be used as a blood vessel substitutes 
[78], tubes for vascular grafts [79], substitutes for the dura mater membrane 
[80], facial masks for beauty [81], and in dental applications [82], among  
others.
Natural polymers and their derived materials are widely used in biomedical 
applications because of their similarities to the extracellular matrix and  
inherent cellular interaction. The ideal biomaterial for biomedical and cosmet -
ics should be nontoxic, biocompatible, biodegradable, bioresorbable to support 
the reconstruction of new tissue without inflammation [83] and promote  
tissue development, besides having adequate mechanical and physical proper -
ties [84].
The biocomposite technology is used to improve the properties of natural-
based materials. The selection of appropriate starting materials (biopolymers 
and fillers) leads to the development of new versatile biomaterials with the 
required properties for a wide range of specific applications. Polymeric materi -
als used for this purpose include synthetic polymers (poly(ethylene oxide) 
(PEO)) that mimic natural substances, naturally occurring macromolecules, 
and chemically modified natural polymers (proteins and polypeptides, polysac -
charides such as starch, cellulose, dextran, inulin, and chitin) [85]. Among other 
polysaccharides, BC has received increasing interest for cosmetic and biomedi -
cal applications [86–88].
Films, fibers, and bulk products of natural polymers such starch, chitin, 
chitosan, carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), and poly(hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) 
can be reinforced with BC fibers, resulting in highly biocompatible materials 
with improved mechanical properties, compared with the polymeric matrix 
only. These composites have found use in wound healing, tissue engineering, 
food packaging, food coating, and cosmetics purposes. Among the biomedical 
applications, BC has been studied as a support for tissue engineering for bone 
and cartilage repair.
In general, some properties are desirable for scaffold materials for tissue 
engineering of cartilage and bone, such as appropriate porosity to support  
cell ingrowth, effective mass transport, and mechanical properties. BC is a 
material that meets the requirements for tissue engineering of cartilage, mainly 
due to its high strength in the wet state, as well as its in situ  moldability and 
biocompatibility. BC scaffolds support chondrocyte proliferation at levels of 
approximately 50% of the native tissue substrate, collagen type II. Also, the 
chondrocytes maintain their differentiated form when growing on this mate -
rial, which supports cell ingrowth [89].
Materials such as BC–hydroxyapatite nanocomposites are prepared by 
surface modification and biomineralization, allowing the formation of calcium-
deficient hydroxyapatite crystals on the surface of the BC scaffolds, used for 
application in bone repair. The porous structure of the biocomposite enhances 
cell infiltration and leads to the integration of the scaffold into the surrounding 354  BAcTERIAL  cELLuLOsE
tissue, promoting cell adherence and differentiation, an important feature for 
bone healing applications [90]. Nanocomposites of BC–hydroxyapatite pro -
duced by introducing the mineral phase into the culture medium during the 
formation of cellulose fibrils in presence of CMC showed a differentiated 
morphology, such as large pores, in addition to high biocompatibility and bio -
activity, indicating the potential of the nanocomposite material for biomedical 
applications [91]. BC–hydroxyapatite membranes accelerate the bone repair 
when tested in vivo  [92].
BC–starch nanocomposites can be produced through the synthesis of cel -
lulose nanofibers in the presence of partially gelatinized starch granules, pre -
serving the structural properties of BC, without significant changes in its 
mechanical behavior [93]. Also, biodegradable nanocomposites of starch rein -
forced with low amounts of BC shows increased modulus and tensile strength 
[94]. The nanocomposites have found potential application in biomedical and 
food packaging industries.
BC-alginate sponge composites can be used as mucosal flaps in oral tissue 
regeneration to cover surgical wounds. The composite is prepared blending a 
gel-like solution of alginate with BC slurry cross-linked by an aqueous solution 
of CaCl 2. The mixture is freeze-dried to form the BC–alginate porous sponge. 
The composite is a nonadherent hydrogel dressing that prevents bacterial 
invasion, minimizes wound dehydration, and provides drainage for wound 
exudates. The composite presents high mechanical strength and stability in 
both water and phosphate buffer solution [82].
Composite materials based on BC and chitosan prepared by in situ  modifica -
tion through the incorporation of chitosan to the culture media before the BC 
synthesis by microorganisms results in a composite material with glucosamine 
and N-acetylglucosamine units incorporated into the cellulose chain. The com -
posite presents good mechanical properties, moisture retention, antimicrobial 
activity, and biodegradation in in vitro  conditions [95]. Copolymers of cellulose 
with N-acetylglucosamine are obtained by direct incorporation of glucosamine 
and N-acetylglucosamine into exopolymers during the biological synthesis by 
Gluconacetobacter xylinus . These materials are susceptible to lysozyme hydro -
lysis, overcoming the limitations with respect to the biodegradability of 
cellulose-based biomaterials in the body [96]. BC–chitosan composites pre -
pared by immersing BC membranes into chitosan solution and freeze-drying 
show high biocompatibility. The composites are suitable for cell attachment, 
suggesting its use for wound dressing and tissue engineering [97]. The incorpo -
ration of BC fibers into chitosan results in transparent films with improved 
mechanical properties, showing the reinforcement effect of BC on the poly -
meric matrix [98].
Biocomposites based on BC and collagen type I prepared in situ  combine 
the positive effect of collagen in chronic wound healing with the physical 
properties of BC, decreasing the effect of destructive proteases and proinflam -
matory cytokines in wounds [99].APPLIcATIONs   355
15.9.2.2  Application  of Bacterial  Cellulose  to Highly  Technological 
Products  A conventional and large volume of cellulose is in demand by the 
papermaking and textile industries. In the papermaking industry, BC can be 
used as an additive to improve paper texture and resistance [100], added 
directly to the pulp mass as a surface coating, improving the quality of printing 
paper. BC fibers are used as fillers in soft wood sheets. The composite shows 
better tensile index, burst index, and stiffness, with a decrease in porosity and 
water absorption [101].
In the textile industry BC is an alternative to plant cellulose, maintaining 
the properties of the product. However, there is little interest in the develop -
ment of this area due to the high costs of BC production and need to change 
the design of the production plant. Nevertheless, several processes and prod -
ucts for textile are protected by patents [102, 103]. For instance, high strength 
viscose fiber with low shrink rate and excellent elasticity used for high quality 
clothing fabric and industrial textiles is obtained by mixing BC with viscose 
fibers. A blended fiber composed of BC dissolved in ionic liquid and natural 
polysaccharide is used in the medical and textile fields [103].
BC is an important substrate for transparent and electrically conductive 
films for use in optoelectronic areas, including organic light emitting devices 
(LEDs) [104], thin-film transistors [105], liquid crystal displays [106], and 
others [107].
BC can be used as transparent conducting films to produce flexible opto -
electronic devices. The flexible, transparent, and electrically conducting films 
are based on nanofibrous polymeric membranes and single-walled carbon 
nanotubes. The nanocomposites are prepared using a simple adsorption method 
in which the hydrated BC membrane is used as template for depositing uni -
formly dispersed single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) or MWCTs [108]. 
The SWCNT-adsorbed BC membranes in the dry state are immersed into a 
transparent polymer solution of silk fibroin, generating transparent and con -
ductive films. The polymer solution fills the spaces between the BC nanofibrils, 
significantly reducing the Rayleigh scattering caused by BC micropores. The 
electrical conductivity is conferred by carbon nanotubes. The flexibility is due 
to the mechanical strength of BC combined with the malleability of silk fibroin 
[107].
Flexible and electrically conductive polyaniline–BC nanocomposite mem -
branes are synthesized in situ  by oxidative polymerization of aniline using BC 
as matrix. The conductive particles, uniformly deposited on the surface of  
the BC, form a continuous nanosheath. The nanocomposites synergistically 
combine the electronic characteristics of polyaniline with the mechanical 
properties of the BC matrix, resulting in highly flexible composites with good 
mechanical properties and improved thermal stability. This material could be 
applied in sensors, flexible electrodes, and flexible displays [109].
BC membranes are useful to attain electroactive biopolymer actuators for 
biomedical applications. The composite is prepared by immersing dried BC 356  BAcTERIAL  cELLuLOsE
membranes in an aqueous solution of lithium chloride. After surface modifica -
tion by treatment with lithium chloride, a very thin gold electrode is deposited 
on both sides of the fabricated membrane. The electroactive actuator presents 
electrically driven bending deformation under fully hydrated conditions and 
can be electrically activated in water. These results show the potential of BC 
as an electroactive biopolymer in wet environments, for example, in implant -
able biomedical devices [110].
Regenerated BC-multiwalled carbon nanotube composite fibers can be 
prepared by dissolving BC in DMAc-LiCl, followed by the introduction of the 
MWCTs in the system. Composite fibers are prepared by wet spinning of the 
mixture. The spinning solutions are extruded through a spinneret into a coagu -
lating bath. The fibers are washed with distilled water, separated by centrifuga -
tion, and dried. The composite fibers may be a precursor for the production 
of cellulose-based carbon fibers and have found application in medical, 
mechanical, and electrical materials [111].
Bionanocomposites composed of BC and small amount of poly(vinyl 
alcohol) (PVA) result in optical transparent nanocomposite films with excel -
lent mechanical properties. The composite preparation can be attained in situ , 
through the direct addition of PVA into the Acetobacterxylinum  medium or 
by impregnation of BC membranes with PVA solution [112].
Transparent nanocomposites based on BC and acrylic resin can be obtained 
by acetylation of BC. The replacement of the hydroxyl groups of cellulose by 
the hydrophilic acetyl group significantly reduces the hygroscopicity of BC–
acrylate nanocomposites, maintaining its optical transparency and thermal 
stability [113, 114].
The immersion of BC membranes into acrylic or epoxy polymer matrices 
results in a remarkable reinforcement of the resin substrate, generating com -
posites with high mechanical strength, low thermal expansion coefficients, and 
high transparency [115, 116].The reinforcement of acrylic resin is also possible 
through addition of BC fibers to the unmodified polymeric matrix [69].
Nanocomposites based on BC and poly(lactic acid) (PLA) can be prepared 
by adding the BC nanofibers in the PLA matrix [54] or immersing the BC 
membrane into the PLA solution [117]. The composites retain the transparency 
of the pure PLA film due to the nanofibrillar structure of the BC, when the 
cellulose content is low. The tensile strength and Young’s modulus of the com -
posites are highly increased compared with PLA. These composites can be 
considered for biomedical applications and food packaging, because of their 
transparency, mechanical properties, biodegradability, and biocompatibility.
The porous network structure of BC is used as a support structure to syn -
thesize magnetically responsive composites. The precipitation of magnetic Ni 
nanoparticles within the membrane involves the immersion of BC into the 
solution of NiCl 2 followed by addition of the reductor agent solution, NaBH 4, 
in an aqueous environment, at room temperature. The Ni nanoparticles range 
from 10 to 60 nm and confer to the composites the coexistence of both super -
paramagnetic and ferromagnetic behavior. The BC does not undergo any REfERENcEs   357
change and retains its crystal structure, even after chemical reduction reaction. 
The composites have found application in magnetic printing and as magnetic 
tissue scaffolds [118].
15.10 CONCLUSIONS
Properties of BC such as biocompatibility make possible its application in 
biological and biomedical fields, where it can be used as single material or as 
a component of biocomposites. BC membranes in their native state have been 
applied, currently, in the biomedical field. A wide range of BC-based compos -
ite materials has been developed, but these are just starting to gain the atten -
tion of industries for technological applications. BC fibers have been used as 
a reinforcement agent for natural or synthetic polymers, generating materials 
with improved mechanical properties. Thanks to the natural degradation of 
cellulose, the association of BC with synthetic polymers helps to decrease their 
environmental impact.
Efforts have been made to develop new BC-based materials for sustainable 
and economical application in the industry. Studies about improvement of BC 
yield by microorganisms are of fundamental importance to reduce production 
costs, as well as to optimize its use and applicability for the global economy. 
However, its production is currently limited to the laboratory scale and a few 
industries in the world, with low amounts of BC. Therefore, an increase in 
production volume will depend on the interest of companies with the potential 
to optimize and develop the industrial process for BC production at competi -
tive costs.
REFERENCES
 [1] Williams, W.S., Cannon, R.E. (1989) Alternative environmental-roles for cellu -
lose produced by acetobacter-xylinum. Applied and Environmental Microbiol -
ogy, 55(10), 2448–2452.
 [2] Brown, J.A. (1886) On an acetic ferment which forms cellulose. Journal of the 
Chemical Society, Transactions , 49, 432–439.
 [3] Dahman, Y., Sani, A. (2010) Improvements in the production of bacterial synthe -
sized biocellulose nanofibres using different culture methods. Journal of Chemi -
cal Technology and Biotechnology , 85(2), 151–164.
 [4] Deinema, M.H., Zevenhui, L.P . (1971) Formation of cellulose fibrils by Gram-
negative bacteria and their role in bacterial flocculation. Archiv Fur Mikrobiolo -
gie, 78(1), 42–57.
 [5] Ago, M., Yamane, C., Hattoti, M., Ono, H., and Okajima, K. (2006) Characteriza -
tion of morphology and physical strength for bacterial cellulose produced by an 
Enterobacter sp. Sen-I Gakkaishi , 62(11), 258–262.
 [6] Romling, U. (2002) Molecular biology of cellulose production in bacteria. 
Research in Microbiology , 153(4), 205–212.358  BAcTERIAL  cELLuLOsE
 [7] Matthysse, A.G., Thomas, D.L., and White, A.R. (1995) Mechanism of cellulose 
synthesis in agrobacterium-tumefaciens. Journal of Bacteriology , 177(4), 1076–
1081.
 [8] Ross, P ., Mayer, R., and Benziman, M. (1991) Cellulose biosynthesis and function 
in bacteria. Microbiological Reviews , 55(1), 35–58.
 [9] Napoli, C., Dazzo, F., and Hubbell, D. (1975) Production of cellulose microfibrils 
by rhizobium. Applied Microbiology , 30(1), 123–131.
 [10] Iwata, T., Iwamoto, S., Kai, W.H., and Isogai, A. (2009) Elastic modulus of single 
cellulose microfibrils from tunicate measured by atomic force microscopy. Bio-
macromolecules , 10(9), 2571–2576.
 [11] Brown, R.M. (2004) Cellulose structure and biosynthesis: What is in store for the 
21st century? Journal of Polymer Science Part A: Polymer Chemistry , 42(3), 
487–495.
 [12] Yamada, Y., Hoshino, K., and Ishikawa, T. (1997) Taxonomic studies of acetic acid 
bacteria and allied organisms. 11. The phylogeny of acetic acid bacteria based on 
the partial sequences of 16S ribosomal RNA: The elevation of the subgenus 
Gluconoacetobacter  to the generic level. Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Bio -
chemistry , 61(8), 1244–1251.
 [13] Brenner, D.J., Krieg, N.R., and Staley, J.T. (2005) Bergey’s Manual of Systematic 
Bacteriology—The Proteobacteria , Vol. 2, 2nd ed. New York: Springer.
 [14] Lisdiyanti, P ., Navarro, R.R., Uchimura, T., and Komagata, K. (2006) Reclassifica -
tion of Gluconacetobacter  hansenii  strains and proposals of Gluconacetobacter 
saccharivorans  sp. nov. and Gluconacetobacter nataicola  sp. nov. (vol 56, pg 2101, 
2006). International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology , 56, 
2723–2723.
 [15] Trovatti, E., Serafim, L.S., Freire, C.S.R., Silvestre, A.J.D., and Neto, C.P . (2011) 
Gluconacetobacter sacchari : An efficient bacterial cellulose cell-factory. Carbo -
hydrate Polymers , 86(3), 1417–1420.
 [16] Dykes, G.A., Nguyen, V.T., Flanagan, B., and Gidley, M.J. (2008) Characterization 
of cellulose production by a Gluconacetobacter xylinus  strain from Kombucha. 
Current Microbiology , 57(5), 449–453.
 [17] Ryu, H.W., Kim, S.Y., Kim, J.N., Wee, Y.J., and Park, D.H. (2006) Production of 
bacterial cellulose by Gluconacetobacter  sp RKY5 isolated from persimmon 
vinegar. Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology , 131(1–3), 705–715.
 [18] Andelib, Y.A., Nuran, D.A. (2009) In Isolation of Cellulose Producing Bacteria 
from Wastes of Vinegar Fermentation. Proceedings of the World Congress on 
Engineering and Computer Science , San Francisco, USA, 2009, W., Ed. WCECS 
2009: San Francisco, USA.
 [19] Hestrin, S., Schramm, M. (1954) Synthesis of cellulose by Acetobacter xylinum . 
2. Preparation of freeze-dried cells capable of polymerizing glucose to cellulose. 
Biochemical Journal , 58(2), 345–352.
 [20] Chao, Y.P ., Ishida, T., Sugano, Y., and Shoda, M. (2000) Bacterial cellulose produc -
tion by Acetobacter xylinum  in a 50-L internal-loop airlift reactor. Biotechnology 
and Bioengineering , 68(3), 345–352.
 [21] Kouda, T., Yano, H., and Yoshinaga, F. (1997) Effect of agitator configuration on 
bacterial cellulose productivity in aerated and agitated culture. Journal of Fer -
mentation and Bioengineering , 83(4), 371–376.REfERENcEs   359
 [22] Shoda, M., Chao, Y.P ., Ishida, T., and Sugano, Y. (2000) Bacterial cellulose produc -
tion by Acetobacter xylinum  in a 50-L internal-loop airlift reactor. Biotechnology 
and Bioengineering , 68(3), 345–352.
 [23] Kim, S.J., Song, H.J., Li, H.X., Seo, J.H., and Kim, M.J. (2009) Pilot-scale produc -
tion of bacterial cellulose by a spherical type bubble column bioreactor using 
saccharified food wastes. Korean Journal of Chemical Engineering , 26(1), 
141–146.
 [24] Masaoka, S., Ohe, T., and Sakota, N. (1993) Production of cellulose from glucose 
by Acetobacter xylinum . Journal of Fermentation and Bioengineering , 75(1), 
18–22.
 [25] Jonas, R., Farah, L.F. (1998) Production and application of microbial cellulose. 
Polymer Degradation and Stability , 59(1–3), 101–106.
 [26] Kralisch, D., Hessler, N., Klemm, D., Erdmann, R., and Schmidt, W. (2010) White 
biotechnology for cellulose manufacturing-The HoLiR concept. Biotechnology 
and Bioengineering , 105(4), 740–747.
 [27] Mikkelsen, D., Flanagan, B.M., Dykes, G.A., and Gidley, M.J. (2009) Influence of 
different carbon sources on bacterial cellulose production by Gluconacetobacter 
xylinus  strain ATCC 53524. Journal of Applied Microbiology , 107(2), 576–583.
 [28] Son, H.J., Jung, H.I., Jeong, J.H., Lee, O.M., Park, G.T., Kim, K.K., Park, H.C., 
Lee, S.M., and Kim, Y.G. (2010) Influence of glycerol on production and structural-
physical properties of cellulose from Acetobacter  sp V6 cultured in shake flasks. 
Bioresource Technology , 101(10), 3602–3608.
 [29] Jagannath, A., Kalaiselvan, A., Manjunatha, S.S., Raju, P .S., and Bawa, A.S. (2008) 
The effect of pH, sucrose and ammonium sulphate concentrations on the produc -
tion of bacterial cellulose (Nata-de-coco) by Acetobacter xylinum . World Journal 
of Microbiology & Biotechnology , 24(11), 2593–2599.
 [30] Shoda, M., Bae, S., and Sugano, Y. (2004) Improvement of bacterial cellulose 
production by addition of agar in a jar fermentor. Journal of Bioscience and 
Bioengineering , 97(1), 33–38.
 [31] Watanabe, K., Tabuchi, M., Morinaga, Y., and Yoshinaga, F. (1998) Structural 
features and properties of bacterial cellulose produced in agitated culture. Cel-
lulose , 5(3), 187–200.
 [32] Thompson, D.N., Hamilton, M.A. (2001) Production of bacterial cellulose from 
alternate feedstocks. Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology , 91–3, 503–513.
 [33] Nakamura, Y., Kurosumi, A., Sasaki, C., and Yamashita, Y. (2009) Utilization of 
various fruit juices as carbon source for production of bacterial cellulose by 
Acetobacter xylinum  NBRC 13693. Carbohydrate Polymers , 76(2), 333–335.
 [34] Hong, F., Qiu, K.Y. (2008) An alternative carbon source from konjac powder for 
enhancing production of bacterial cellulose in static cultures by a model strain 
Acetobacter aceti  subsp xylinus  ATCC 23770. Carbohydrate Polymers , 72(3), 
545–549.
 [35] Son, H.J., Jung, H.I., Lee, O.M., Jeong, J.H., Jeon, Y.D., Park, K.H., Kim, H.S., and 
An, W.G. (2010) Production and characterization of cellulose by Acetobacter  sp 
V6 using a cost-effective molasses-corn steep liquor medium. Applied Biochem -
istry and Biotechnology , 162(2), 486–497.
 [36] Carreira, P ., Mendes, J.A.S., Trovatti, E., Serafim, L.S., Freire, C.S.R., Silvestre, 
A.J.D., and Neto, C.P . (2011) Utilization of residues from agro-forest industries 360  BAcTERIAL  cELLuLOsE
in the production of high value bacterial cellulose. Bioresource Technology , 102, 
7354–7360.
 [37] OSullivan, A.C. (1997) Cellulose: The structure slowly unravels. Cellulose , 4(3), 
173–207.
 [38] Saxena, I.M., Lin, F.C., and Brown, R.M. (1990) Cloning and sequencing of the 
cellulose synthase catalytic subunit gene of Acetobacter  xylinum . Plant Molecular 
Biology , 15(5), 673–683.
 [39] Klemm, D., Heublein, B., Fink, H.P ., and Bohn, A. (2005) Cellulose: Fascinating 
biopolymer and sustainable raw material. Angewandte Chemie-International 
Edition , 44(22), 3358–3393.
 [40] Brown, R.M. (1982) Cellulose and Other Natural Polymer Systems: Biogenesis, 
Structure, and Degradation . New York: Plenum Press.
 [41] Hirai, A., Tsuji, M., and Horii, F. (2002) TEM study of band-like cellulose assem -
blies produced by Acetobacter xylinum  at 4 degrees C. Cellulose , 9(2), 105–113.
 [42] Kondo, T., Tomita, Y. (2009) Influential factors to enhance the moving rate of 
Acetobacter xylinum  due to its nanofiber secretion on oriented templates. Car-
bohydrate Polymers , 77, 754–759.
 [43] Klemm, D., Schumann, D., Kramer, F., Hessler, N., Hornung, M., Schmauder, H.P ., 
and Marsch, S. (2006) Nanocelluloses as innovative polymers in research and 
application. Polysaccharides II , 205, 49–96.
 [44] Surma-Slusarska, B., Presler, S., and Danielewicz, D. (2008) Characteristics of 
bacterial cellulose obtained from Acetobacter xylinum  culture for application in 
papermaking. Fibres & Textiles in Eastern Europe , 16(4), 108–111.
 [45] Shirk, H.G., Greathouse, G.A. (1952) Infrared spectra of bacterial cellulose. 
Analytical Chemistry , 24(11), 1774–1775.
 [46] Sugiyama, J., Persson, J., and Chanzy, H. (1991) Combined infrared and electron-
diffraction study of the polymorphism of native celluloses. Macromolecules , 
24(9), 2461–2466.
 [47] Chen, S.Y., Li, X., Hu, W.L., Shi, S.K., Shen, W., Zhang, X., and Wang, H.P . (2009) 
In situ  synthesis of CdS nanoparticles on bacterial cellulose nanofibers. Carbo -
hydrate Polymers , 76(4), 509–512.
 [48] El-Saied, H., El-Diwany, A.I., Basta, A.H., Atwa, N.A., and El-Ghwas, D.E. (2008) 
Production and characterization of economical bacterial cellulose. Bioresources , 
3(4), 1196–1217.
 [49] Kasapis, S., Wong, S.S., and Tan, Y.M. (2009) Bacterial and plant cellulose modi -
fication using ultrasound irradiation. Carbohydrate Polymers , 77(2), 280–287.
 [50] Anicuta, S.-G., Dobre, L., Stroescu, M., and Jipa, I. (2010) Fourier Transform 
Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy for characterization of antimicrobial films contain -
ing chitosan. Analele Universit ăŃii din Oradea Fascicula: Ecotoxicologie, Zoo -
tehnie si Tehnologii de Industrie Alimentar ă, 1234–1240.
 [51] Martínez-Sanz, M., Lopez-Rubio, A., and Lagaron, J.M. (2011) Optimization of 
the nanofabrication by acid hydrolysis of bacterial cellulose nanowhiskers. Car-
bohydrate Polymers , 85, 228–236.
 [52] Johnson, D.K., Park, S., Baker, J.O., Himmel, M.E., and Parilla, P .A. (2010) Cel -
lulose crystallinity index: Measurement techniques and their impact on interpret -
ing cellulase performance. Biotechnology for Biofuels , 3, 1–10.REfERENcEs   361
 [53] Salmen, L., Akerholm, M., and Hinterstoisser, B. (2004) Characterization of the 
crystalline structure of cellulose using static and dynamic FT-IR spectroscopy. 
Carbohydrate Research , 339(3), 569–578.
 [54] Tome, L.C., Pinto, R.J.B., Trovatti, E., Freire, C.S.R., Silvestre, A.J.D., Neto, C.P ., 
and Gandini, A. (2011) Transparent bionanocomposites with improved proper -
ties prepared from acetylated bacterial cellulose and poly(lactic acid) through a 
simple approach. Green Chemistry , 13(2), 419–427.
 [55] He, J.X., Cui, S.Z., and Wang, S.Y. (2008) Preparation and crystalline analysis of 
high-grade bamboo dissolving pulp for cellulose acetate. Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science , 107(2), 1029–1038.
 [56] Segal, L., Creely, J.J., Martin, A.E.J., and Conrad, C.M. (1959) An empirical 
method for estimating the degree of crystallinity of native cellulose using the 
X-ray diffractometer. Textile Research Journal , 29(10), 786–794.
 [57] Hirai, A., Tsuji, M., and Horii, F. (1998) Helical sense of ribbon assemblies and 
splayed microfibrils of bacterial cellulose. Sen-I Gakkaishi , 54(10), 506–510.
 [58] Koolman, J., Roehm, K.H. (2005) Color Atlas of Biochemistry , 2nd ed. Stuttgart, 
Germany: Thieme.
 [59] Klemm, D., Philipp, B., Heinze, T., Heinze, U., and Wagenknecht, W. (1998) Com -
prehensive Cellulose Chemistry. Fundamentals and Analytical Methods , Vol. l. 
Weinheim, New York, Chichester, Brisbane, Singapore, Toronto: Wiley-VCH 
Verlag GmbH.
 [60] Guhados, G., Wan, W.K., and Hutter, J.L. (2005) Measurement of the elastic 
modulus of single bacterial cellulose fibers using atomic force microscopy. Lang -
muir, 21(14), 6642–6646.
 [61] Hsieh, Y.C., Yano, H., Nogi, M., and Eichhorn, S.J. (2008) An estimation of the 
Young’s modulus of bacterial cellulose filaments. Cellulose , 15(4), 507–513.
 [62] Torres, F.G., Troncoso, O.P ., Lopez, D., Grande, C., and Gomez, C.M. (2009) 
Reversible stress softening and stress recovery of cellulose networks. Soft Matter , 
5(21), 4185–4190.
 [63] Miyamoto, T., Takahashi, S., Ito, H., Inagaki, H., and Noishiki, Y. (1989) Tissue 
biocompatibility of cellulose and its derivatives. Journal of Biomedical Materials 
Research , 23(1), 125–133.
 [64] Risberg, B., Helenius, G., Backdahl, H., Bodin, A., Nannmark, U., and Gatenholm, 
P . (2006) In vivo  biocompatibility of bacterial cellulose. Journal of Biomedical 
Materials Research. Part A , 76A(2), 431–438.
 [65] Mazeau, K., Heux, L. (2003) Molecular dynamics simulations of bulk native 
crystalline and amorphous structures of cellulose. Journal of Physical Chemistry 
B, 107(10), 2394–2403.
 [66] Tischer, P .C.S.F., Sierakowski, M.R., Westfahl, H., and Tischer, C.A. (2010) Nano -
structural reorganization of bacterial cellulose by ultrasonic treatment. Biomac -
romolecules , 11(5), 1217–1224.
 [67] Delmer, D.P ., Amor, Y. (1995) Cellulose biosynthesis. Plant Cell , 7(7), 987–1000.
 [68] Delmer, D.P . (1987) Cellulose biosynthesis. Annual Review of Plant Physiology 
and Plant Molecular Biology , 38, 259–290.
 [69] Trovatti, E., Oliveira, L., Freire, C.S.R., Silvestre, A.J.D., Neto, C.P ., Pinto, J.J.C.C., 
and Gandini, A. (2010) Novel bacterial cellulose-acrylic resin nanocomposites. 
Composites Science and Technology , 70(7), 1148–1153.362  BAcTERIAL  cELLuLOsE
 [70] Tecson-Mendoza, E.M. (2007) Development of functional foods in the Philip -
pines. Food Science and Technology Research , 13(3), 179–186.
 [71] Fontana, J.D., Desouza, A.M., Fontana, C.K., Torriani, I.L., Moreschi, J.C., Gal -
lotti, B.J., Desouza, S.J., Narcisco, G.P ., Bichara, J.A., and Farah, L.F.X. (1990) 
Acetobacter cellulose pellicle as a temporary skin substitute. Applied Biochem -
istry and Biotechnology , 24–5, 253–264.
 [72] Phisalaphong, M., Sanchavanakit, N., Sangrungraungroj, W., Kaomongkolgit, R., 
Banaprasert, T., and Pavasant, P . (2006) Growth of human keratinocytes and 
fibroblasts on bacterial cellulose film. Biotechnology Progress , 22(4), 
1194–1199.
 [73] Solway, D.R. (2010) Microbial cellulose wound dressing in the treatment of skin 
tears in the frail elderly (vol 22, pg 17, 2010). Wounds: A Compendium of Clinical 
Research and Practice , 22(2), A10–A10.
 [74] Levinson, D.J., Solway, D.R., and Consalter, M. (2010) Microbial cellulose wound 
dressing in the treatment of skin tears in the frail elderly. Wounds: A Compen -
dium of Clinical Research and Practice , 22(1), 17–19.
 [75] Serafica, G., Mormino, R., Oster, G.A., Lentz, K.E., and Koehler, K.P . (2008) 
Microbial cellulose wound dressing for treating chronic wounds.
 [76] Czaja, W., Krystynowicz, A., Bielecki, S., and Brown, R.M. (2006) Microbial 
cellulose—The natural power to heal wounds. Biomaterials , 27(2), 145–151.
 [77] Brown, R.M., Czaja, W.K., Young, D.J., and Kawecki, M. (2007) The future pros -
pects of microbial cellulose in biomedical applications. Biomacromolecules , 8(1), 
1–12.
 [78] Klemm, D., Schumann, D., Udhardt, U., and Marsch, S. (2001) Bacterial synthe -
sized cellulose—Artificial blood vessels for microsurgery. Progress in Polymer 
Science , 26(9), 1561–1603.
 [79] Gatenholm, P ., Backdahl, H., and Risberg, B. (2011) Observations on bacterial 
cellulose tube formation for application as vascular graft. Materials Science & 
Engineering C-Materials for Biological Applications , 31(1), 14–21.
 [80] Mello, L.R., Feltrin, L.T., Neto, P .T.F., and Ferraz, F.A.P . (1997) Duraplasty with 
biosynthetic cellulose: An experimental study. Journal of Neurosurgery , 86(1), 
143–150.
 [81] Amnuaikit, T., Chusuit, T., Raknam, P ., and Boonme, P . (2011) Effects of a cel -
lulose mask synthesized by a bacterium on facial skin characteristics and user 
satisfaction. Medical Devices: Evidence and Research , 4, 77–81.
 [82] Phisalaphong, M., Chiaoprakobkij, N., Sanchavanakit, N., Subbalekha, K., and 
Pavasant, P . (2011) Characterization and biocompatibility of bacterial cellulose/
alginate composite sponges with human keratinocytes and gingival fibroblasts. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 85(3), 548–553.
 [83] Risbud, M. (2001) Tissue engineering: Implications in the treatment of organ and 
tissue defects. Biogerontology , 2(2), 117–125.
 [84] Fu, X.B., Huang, S. (2010) Naturally derived materials-based cell and drug deliv -
ery systems in skin regeneration. Journal of Controlled Release , 142(2), 
149–159.
 [85] Ottenbrite, R.M., Fadeeva, N. (1994) Polymer systems for biomedical applica -
tions. An overview. In: Polymeric Drugs and Drug Administration , ACS Sympo -
sium Series, ed. R.M. Ottenbrite. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society.REfERENcEs   363
 [86] Lina, F., Yue, Z., Jin, Z., and Guang, Y. (2011) Bacterial cellulose for skin repair 
materials. In: Biomedical Engineering—Frontiers and Challenges , ed. R. Fazel-
Rezai. Rijeka: InTech.
 [87] Yu, L., Dean, K., and Li, L. (2006) Polymer blends and composites from renew -
able resources. Progress in Polymer Science , 31(6), 576–602.
 [88] Belgacem, M.N., Gandini, A. (2008) Monomers, Polymers and Composites from 
Renewable Resources . Amsterdam: Elsevier.
 [89] Svensson, A., Nicklasson, E., Harrah, T., Panilaitis, B., Kaplan, D.L., Brittberg, M., 
and Gatenholm, P . (2005) Bacterial cellulose as a potential scaffold for tissue 
engineering of cartilage. Biomaterials , 26(4), 419–431.
 [90] Zimmermann, K.A., LeBlanc, J.M., Sheets, K.T., Fox, R.W., and Gatenholm, P . 
(2011) Biomimetic design of a bacterial cellulose/hydroxyapatite nanocomposite 
for bone healing applications. Materials Science & Engineering C-Materials for 
Biological Applications , 31(1), 43–49.
 [91] Grande, C.J., Torres, F.G., Gomez, C.M., and Bano, M.C. (2009) Nanocomposites 
of bacterial cellulose/hydroxyapatite for biomedical applications. Acta Biomate -
rialia , 5(5), 1605–1615.
 [92] Saska, S., Barud, H.S., Gaspar, A.M.M., Marchetto, R., Ribeiro, S.J.L., and Mes -
saddeq, Y. (2011) Bacterial cellulose hydroxyapatite nanocomposites for bone 
regeneration. International Journal of Biomaterials , Article ID 175362.
 [93] Grande, C.J., Torres, F.G., Gomez, C.M., Troncoso, O.P ., Canet-Ferrer, J., and 
Martinez-Pastor, J. (2009) Development of self-assembled bacterial cellulose-
starch nanocomposites. Materials Science & Engineering C-Biomimetic and 
Supramolecular Systems , 29(4), 1098–1104.
 [94] Martins, I.M.G., Magina, S.P ., Oliveira, L., Freire, C.S.R., Silvestre, A.J.D., Neto, 
C.P ., and Gandini, A. (2009) New biocomposites based on thermoplastic starch 
and bacterial cellulose. Composites Science and Technology , 69(13), 2163–2168.
 [95] Ciechanska, D. (2004) Multifunctional bacterial cellulose/chitosan composite 
materials for medical applications. Fibres & Textiles in Eastern Europe , 12(4), 
69–72.
 [96] Kaplan, D.L., Lee, J.W., Deng, F., Yeomans, W.G., Allen, A.L., and Gross, R.A. 
(2001) Direct incorporation of glucosamine and N-acetylglucosamine into exo -
polymers by Gluconacetobacter xylinus  (=Acetobacter  xylinum ) ATCC 10245: 
Production of chitosan-cellulose and chitin-cellulose exopolymers. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology , 67(9), 3970–3975.
 [97] Kim, J., Cai, Z.J., Lee, H.S., Choi, G.S., Lee, D.H., and Jo, C. (2011) Preparation 
and characterization of a bacterial cellulose/chitosan composite for potential 
biomedical application. Journal of Polymer Research , 18(4), 739–744.
 [98] Freire, C.S.R., Fernandes, S.C.M., Oliveira, L., Silvestre, A.J.D., Neto, C.P ., Gandini, 
A., and Desbrieres, J. (2009) Novel transparent nanocomposite films based on 
chitosan and bacterial cellulose. Green Chem. , 11(12), 2023–2029.
 [99] Wiegand, C., Elsner, P ., Hipler, U.C., and Klemm, D. (2006) Protease and ROS 
activities influenced by a composite of bacterial cellulose and collagen type I in 
vitro. Cellulose , 13(6), 689–696.
[100] Pascoal Neto, C., Da Rocha Freire Barros, C.S., De Matos Fernandes, S.C., 
Domingues Silvestre, A.J., and Gandini, A. (2011) Aqueous coating compositions 
for use in surface treatment of cellulosic substrates.364  BAcTERIAL  cELLuLOsE
[101] Gao, W.-H., Chen, K.-F., Yang, R.-D., Yang, F., and Han, W.-J. (2011) Properties 
of bacterial cellulose and its influence on the physical properties of the paper. 
Bioresources , 6(1), 144–153.
[102] Zhu, P ., Zang, Z., Wang, L., and Wei, P . (2010) High strength viscose fiber used 
for e.g. high quality clothes fabric, is obtained by mixture bacterial cellulose with 
viscose fiber spinning solution and has preset amount of bacterial cellulose.
[103] Zhu, P ., Chu, Q., Zang, Z., and Wei, P . (2011) Blend fiber used in medical and 
textile fields, comprises bacterial cellulose and balanced natural polysaccharide.
[104] Cremona, M., Legnani, C., Vilani, C., Calil, V.L., Barud, H.S., Quirino, W.G., 
Achete, C.A., and Ribeiro, S.J.L. (2008) Bacterial cellulose membrane as flexible 
substrate for organic light emitting devices. Thin Solid Films , 517(3), 1016–
1020.
[105] Hwang, S.-M., Chen, H.-K., and Hwang, B.-J. (2009) Bacterial cellulose film and 
carbon nanotubes-like thin film structures developed from bacterial cellulose.
[106] Pei, C.H., Wang, Y., Luo, Q.P ., and Peng, B.H. (2008) A novel thermotropic liquid 
crystalline—Benzoylated bacterial cellulose. Carbohydrate Polymers , 74(4), 
875–879.
[107] Jin, H.J., Kim, Y., Kim, H.S., Bak, H., Yun, Y.S., and Cho, S.Y. (2009) Transparent 
conducting films based on nanofibrous polymeric membranes and single-walled 
carbon nanotubes. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 114(5), 2864–2872.
[108] In, H.J., Jung, R., Kim, H.S., Kim, Y., Kwon, S.M., and Lee, H.S. (2008) Electrically 
conductive transparent papers using multiwalled carbon nanotubes. Journal of 
Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics , 46(12), 1235–1242.
[109] Chen, S.Y., Hu, W.L., Yang, Z.H., Liu, L.T., and Wang, H.P . (2011) Flexible electri -
cally conductive nanocomposite membrane based on bacterial cellulose and 
polyaniline. Journal of Physical Chemistry B , 115(26), 8453–8457.
[110] Oh, I.K., Jeon, J.H., Kee, C.D., and Kim, S.J. (2010) Bacterial cellulose actuator 
with electrically driven bending deformation in hydrated condition. Sensors and 
Actuators. B, Chemical , 146(1), 307–313.
[111] Jin, H.J., Chen, P ., Kim, H.S., Kwon, S.M., and Yun, Y.S. (2009) Regenerated bacte -
rial cellulose/multi-walled carbon nanotubes composite fibers prepared by wet-
spinning. Current Applied Physics , 9(2), E96–E99.
[112] Peijs, T., Gea, S., Bilotti, E., Reynolds, C.T., and Soykeabkeaw, N. (2010) Bacterial 
cellulose-poly(vinyl alcohol) nanocomposites prepared by an in-situ process. 
Materials Letters , 64(8), 901–904.
[113] Nogi, M., Abe, K., Handa, K., Nakatsubo, F., Ifuku, S., and Yano, H. (2006) Prop -
erty enhancement of optically transparent bionanofiber composites by acetyla -
tion. Applied Physics Letters , 89(23), 233123/1–233123/3.
[114] Ifuku, S., Nogi, M., Abe, K., Handa, K., Nakatsubo, F., and Yano, H. (2007) Surface 
modification of bacterial cellulose nanofibers for property enhancement of opti -
cally transparent composites: Dependence on acetyl-group DS. Biomacromole -
cules , 8(6), 1973–1978.
[115] Yano, H., Sugiyama, J., Nakagaito, A.N., Nogi, M., Matsuura, T., Hikita, M., and 
Handa, K. (2005) Optically transparent composites reinforced with networks of 
bacterial nanofibers. Advanced Materials , 17(2), 153–155.REfERENcEs   365
[116] Nogi, M., Yano, H. (2008) Transparent nanocomposites based on cellulose pro -
duced by bacteria offer potential innovation in the electronics device industry. 
Advanced Materials , 20(10), 1849–1852.
[117] Jin, H.J., Kim, Y., Jung, R., and Kim, H.S. (2009) Transparent nanocomposites 
prepared by incorporating microbial nanofibrils into poly(L-lactic acid). Current 
Applied Physics , 9, S69–S71.
[118] Vitta, S., Drillon, M., and Derory, A. (2010) Magnetically responsive bacterial 
cellulose: Synthesis and magnetic studies. Journal of Applied Physics , 108(5), 
539051–539057.367Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 16
Chemical Modification of 
Nanocelluloses
YOUSSEF HABIBI
16.1 INTRODUCTION
Cellulose constitutes the most abundant renewable polymer resource pro -
duced on earth. As fibers it has been used for thousands of years, and it is 
generally well known that it has been exploited as a raw chemical material to 
access various derivatives for nearly 150 years. What has not been known until 
relatively recently is that when cellulose fibers are subjected to mechanical 
shearing or acid hydrolysis, the fibers yield to elongated fibrillar or defect-free 
rod-like crystalline particles having at least one dimension in the nanoscale 
range. The focus on “nanotechnology” involving these cellulosic substrates has 
generated a tremendous level of attention that does not appear to be diminish -
ing. These biopolymeric assemblies warrant such attention not only because 
of their unsurpassed quintessential physical and chemical properties, as will 
become evident in this chapter, but also because of their inherent renewability, 
sustainability and abundance, in addition to their intrinsic properties such as 
lightweight, nanoscale dimension, and unique morphology. Several reviews 
have been published recently attesting to the importance of these emerging 
renewable building blocks for nanomaterials [1–4].
With the presence of a large number of hydroxyl groups within their struc -
ture, these building blocks provide a unique platform for significant surface 
modification using various chemistries. The purpose of this chapter is to sum -
marize, after a brief introduction and definition of nanocellulose substrates, 
several key advances in the chemical modification routes for the functionaliza -
tion of nanocelluloses.368  CHEmICAl mOdIFICA tIOn OF nAnOCEllUlOSES
16.2 NANOCELLULOSE SUBSTRATES
Cellulose is widely distributed in the biosphere, principally in higher plants, but 
also in several marine animals (e.g., tunicates) and to a lesser degree in algae, 
fungi, bacteria, and invertebrates. In general, cellulose is a fibrous, mechanically 
tough, water-insoluble biomaterial, which plays an essential role in maintaining 
the structure of plant cell walls while providing the key internal load resistance 
to facilitate uninterrupted transport mechanisms within a plant organism [5]. 
Regardless of its origin, cellulose may be typically characterized as a semicrys -
talline high molecular weight homopolymer of β-1,4 linked anhydroglucose 
(Fig. 16.1) [6]. In plant cell walls, the exquisite architectural arrangement of 
cellulose microfibrils results from the combined action of biopolymerization, 
spinning, and crystallization. All these events are orchestrated by specific enzy -
matic terminal complexes (TCs) that adopt a rosette configuration behaving as 
precise biological spinnerets that are credited with synthesizing up to 36 glucan 
chains simultaneously and in close proximity to each another. The architectural 
precision of the complex itself provides a template for the growing of glucan 
chains to co-crystallize to microfibrils that adopt a linear and rigid conformation 
in lieu of an amorphous array of â-glucans. On one hand, the polymer chains 
are assembled through van der Waals forces and both intra- and intermolecular 
hydrogen bonds in a hierarchical order to form elementary nanofibrils having 
a cross-dimensional thickness of 2–5 nm, which in turn aggregates laterally to 
larger macrofibers [7].
On the other hand, if the TCs are not perturbed, they can generate an 
interminable number of microfibrils having only a limited number of defects 
or amorphous regions [8, 9]. These regions are distributed on segments of the 
elementary fibril, which are distorted by internal strain in the fiber to undergo 
tilt and twist [10].
According to these morphological features, cellulose fibers can be dissoci -
ated transversally at the amorphous regions present along their axis by con -
trolled acid hydrolysis. The acid primarily degrades the less ordered, and thus 
more accessible regions along the fibrils, to finally leave intact nanometric and 
highly crystalline defect-free rod-like fragments [3], referred hereafter as cel -
lulose nanocrystals (CNs). The geometrical dimensions for CNs depend on the 
origin of cellulose fibers, but the width is generally few nanometers and the 
length ranges from tenths of nanometers to several micrometers.Figure 16.1  Chemical structure of cellulose.O
HO OOH
OOH
O
OH12345
45321 O
HO OOH
OOH
O
OH12345
45321
HO HO O
OH OHCHEmICAl mOdIFICAtIOnS   369
Through a mechanical shearing process, involving sometimes pretreatment 
steps, aiming to beak the hydrogen bonds network, cellulose fibers can be 
laterally disintegrated into their substructural nanoscale units, nanofibrils 
called nanofibrillated cellulose (NFCs ) [11]. This latter biomaterial can be also 
biosynthesized through microorganisms and is well known as bacterial cellu -
lose (BC). In fact, besides being a dominant component of cell walls in plants, 
cellulose is also secreted extracellularly as synthesized cellulose fibers by 
several bacterial species [2]. BC is produced by bacteria such as Acetobacter  
species Gluconacetobacter xylinus  by cultivation in aqueous culture media 
containing carbon and nitrogen sources during a period of days up to 2 weeks. 
The resulting cellulosic network structure is in the form of a pellicle made up 
of a random assembly of ribbon-shaped fibrils, less than 100 nm wide, com -
posed of a bundle of much finer microfibrils, 2 to 4 nm in diameter. These 
bundles are relatively straight, continuous, and dimensionally uniform.
Nanocellulose designation refers commonly to all these types of nanometric 
cellulosic substrates including CNs, NFCs, and BC (Fig. 16.2).
16.3 CHEMICAL MODIFICATIONS
Taking advantage of the large number of hydroxyl groups at the surface of 
nanocellulose substrates, different chemical modifications have been attempted, 
including esterification, etherification, oxidation, silylation, amidation, and 
polymer grafting. Noncovalent surface modification, including the use of 
adsorbing surfactants and coupling agents, has been also studied. All chemical 
functionalization have been mainly conducted (1) to tune the surface charac -
teristics of nanocelluloses to promote their dispersion in nonpolar organic 
media and/or to improve their compatibility with hydrophobic matrices in 
nanocomposites; (2) to introduce stable negative or positive charges on the 
surface of nanocellulose, mainly CNs, to obtain better electrostatic repulsion-
induced dispersion, especially when exploring their self-assembly properties.
The main challenge for the chemical functionalization of the different nano -
cellulose substrates is to conduct it in such a way that it only changes their 
surface while preserving their original morphology, avoiding any polymorphic 
conversion, and maintaining the integrity of their native crystalline structure.
16.3.1 Noncovalent Surface Chemical Modifications
Noncovalent surface modifications of nanocelluloses are typically made via 
adsorption of surfactants. This approach has been introduced by Heux and 
coworkers [12, 13], who used surfactants consisting of the mono- and di-esters 
of phosphoric acid having alkylphenols tails to modify CNs. The surfactant-
coated CNs dispersed very well in nonpolar solvents [13]. Detailed analyses 
carried out by small angle neutron scattering (SANS) revealed that the surfac -
tant molecules formed a thin layer of about 15 Å at the surface of the CNs [14]. 370  CHEmICAl mOdIFICA tIOn OF nAnOCEllUlOSES
Figure 16.2  From top to bottom: Examples of transmission electron microscopy 
images of CNs (reproduced from Reference [77] with permission of The Royal Society 
of Chemistry [RSC] on behalf of the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 
[CNRS] and the RSC), NFC (reprinted with permission from Reference [28]. Copy -
right 2007 American Chemical Society), and BC (reused from Reference [95] with kind 
permission from Springer Science and Business Media).
CHEmICAl mOdIFICAtIOnS   371
When these surfactant-coated CNs were incorporated into isotactic polypro -
pylene, they showed very good compatibility and acted as remarkable nucleat -
ing agents inducing the formation of the rare β-crystalline of isotactic 
polypropylene form in addition to the regular crystalline α-form [15]. An 
anionic surfactant was also used by Bondeson and Oksman [16] to enhance the 
dispersion of CNs in poly(lactic acid) (PLA). Other authors, Kim et al. [17] and 
Rojas et al. [18], reported the use of nonionic surfactants to disperse CNs in 
polystyrene-based composite fibers. Zhou et al. [19] recently reported a  
new and elegant way of noncovalent CN surface modification based on the 
adsorption of saccharide-based amphiphilic block copolymers. By mimicking 
the natural lignin–carbohydrate copolymers, they adsorbed xyloglucan 
oligosaccharide-poly(ethylene glycol)-polystyrene triblock copolymer onto the 
surface of CNs. The resulting CNs showed excellent dispersion abilities in non -
polar solvents. Another biomimetic approach involving an environmentally 
friendly synthetic pathway was developed for the production of a high-strength 
composite material consisting of self-assembled and nanostructured BC coated 
with hydroxyethylcellulose (HEC). This composite, having analogous hierarchi -
cal organization of wood or tendon, was simply generated by growing BC 
nanofibers in the presence of HEC [20]. Prior to this study, Brown and Laborie 
[21] used the same bioengineering strategy to elaborate polyethylene oxide  
(PEO)/BC composites. Films made of oxidized NFCs were modified by adsorp -
tion of cationic surfactant cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) [22]. The 
interaction between the NCFs and surfactant were strong enough that the sur -
factant cannot be removed after thorough rinsing with water.
16.3.2 TEMPO-Mediated Oxidation
(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl)-mediated (or TEMPO-mediated) oxi -
dation of CNs has been used to convert the hydroxymethyl groups present  
on their surface to their carboxylic form. This oxidation reaction, which is  
highly discriminative of primary hydroxyl groups, is also “green” and simple  
to implement. It involves the application of a stable nitroxyl radical, the 
2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO), in the presence of NaBr and 
NaOCl (see Fig. 16.3, top). The use of this technique has been the subject of a 
number of reports since it was first introduced by de Nooy et al. [23], who were 
the first to show that only the hydroxymethyl groups of polysaccharides were 
oxidized, while the secondary hydroxyls remained unaffected. In fact, TEMPO-
mediated oxidation of CNs involves a topologically confined reaction sequence, 
and as a consequence of the twofold screw axis of the cellulose chain, only half 
of the accessible hydroxymethyl groups is available to react, whereas the other 
half is buried within the crystalline particle (Fig. 16.3, bottom).
TEMPO-mediated oxidation of CNs, obtained from HCl acid hydrolysis of 
cellulose fibers, was first reported by Araki et al. [24] as an intermediate step 
to promote the grafting of polymeric chains. These authors demonstrated that 
after TEMPO-mediated oxidation, the CNs maintained their initial morpho -
logical integrity and formed a homogenous suspension when dispersed in 372  CHEmICAl mOdIFICA tIOn OF nAnOCEllUlOSES
Figure 16.3  Scheme of TEMPO-mediated oxidation mechanism of the hydroxy -
methyl groups of cellulose (top reaction scheme) and cross-sectional representation of 
cellulose crystal indicating the occurrence of surface TEMPO-mediated oxidation of 
available hydroxyl groups (bottom surface crystal figures).NaClNaOCl NaBr
NaOBr
NaClNaOCl NaBr
NaOBrN
OOO
NO
N
OHOH
OH
OH
OHN
OH+
N
O+
N
O
OO*
*CH2OH
COONa
CH2 CH2 CH2 CH2OH OH OH OH
/O
DE
QPQPCO-Na+O-Na+O-Na+O-Na+
C C C
CH2
OHCH2
OHCH2
OHCH2
OH
DEO O O O
7(032PH GLDWHG
2[LGDWLRQ
,QDFFHVVLEOHJOXFRVHXQLWDWFRUHFU\VWD O,QDFFHVVLEOHJOXFRVHXQLWDWVXUIDFHFU\VWD O$FFHVVLEOHJOXFRVHXQLWDWVXU IDFHFU\VWDOCH2
OHCH2
OHCH2
OHCH2
OH
water. The basis for these latter observations was the presence of the newly 
installed carboxyl groups that imparted negative charges at the CN surface 
and thus induced electrostatic stabilization. Similar observations were reported 
by Montanari et al. [25], who also showed that during excessive TEMPO-
mediated oxidation a decrease of the crystal size occurred resulting from the 
partial delamination of cellulose chains that are extant on the surface.CHEmICAl mOdIFICAtIOnS   373
Habibi et al. [26] performed TEMPO-mediated oxidation of CNs obtained 
from HCl hydrolysis of cellulose fibers from tunicate and showed that TEMPO-
mediated oxidation did not compromise the morphological integrity of CNs 
or their native crystallinity. Based on the supramolecular structure, morphol -
ogy, and crystallographic parameters of the CN, these authors demonstrated 
that various degrees of oxidation can be predicted and achieved by using 
specific amounts of the primary oxidizing agent, that is, NaOCl (see Fig. 16.3 
bottom).
When dispersed in water, TEMPO-oxidized or carboxylated CNs suspen -
sions display birefringence patterns and do not flocculate or sediment owing 
to the polyanionic character imparted by the negative charges on the CN 
surfaces (see Fig. 16.4).
TEMPO-mediated oxidation represents a cost-effective chemical pretreat -
ment facilitating the production of NFCs before the mechanical shearing. The 
oxidation of cellulosic fibers creates carboxyl groups on their surface and 
within the individual microfibril. The created negative charges promote the 
individualization of the fibers. Therefore, the TEMPO-oxidized cellulose fibers 
can be easily converted, utilizing mechanical shearing, to transparent and 
Figure 16.4  Aqueous 0.53% (w/v) suspensions of cellulose nanocrystals observed 
between crossed polarizers after production by HCl-catalyzed hydrolysis (left), and 
after their oxidation via TEMPO-mediated reactions (right) (taken from Reference 
[26]). See color insert.
374  CHEmICAl mOdIFICA tIOn OF nAnOCEllUlOSES
Figure 16.5  Transmission electron micrograph of the TEMPO-mediated oxidized 
cellulose nanofibrils, and the corresponding highly viscous and transparent dispersion 
at 0.3% (reprinted with permission from Reference [27]. Copyright 2009 American 
Chemical Society).
highly viscous dispersions in water, consisting of highly crystalline individual 
nanofibers [27–30]. It was shown that the optimal conditions for the processing 
were attained at pH 10, generating cellulose nanofibers 3–4 nm in width and 
a few microns in length (Fig. 16.5).
16.3.3 Cationization
Positive charges can also be easily introduced on the surface of CNs; for example, 
weak or strong ammonium-containing groups, such as epoxypropyltrimethyl -
ammonium chloride (EPTMAC) can be grafted onto the CN surfaces [31]. Such 
surface cationization proceeds via a nucleophilic addition of the alkali-activated 
cellulose hydroxyl groups to the epoxy moiety of EPTMAC and leads to stable 
aqueous suspensions of CNs with unexpected thixotropic gelling properties. 
Shear birefringence was observed, but no liquid crystalline chiral nematic phase 
separation was detected for these cationic CNs, most likely owing to the high 
viscosity of the suspension. Similar reaction was performed recently on cellulose 
fibers before their mechanical shearing in order to produce at low energy con -
sumption NFCs [32, 33]. Indeed, cellulose pulp was cationized in an etherifica -
tion reaction with EPTMAC or chlorocholine chloride and consequently 
mechanically disintegrated to yield trimethylammonium-modified NFCs.CHEmICAl mOdIFICAtIOnS   375
16.3.4 Esterification
Homogeneous and heterogeneous acetylation of model CNs extracted from 
Valonia  and tunicate has been studied by Sassi and Chanzy [34] by using acetic 
anhydride in acetic acid. Their ultrastructural study, carried out by transmis -
sion electron microscopy (TEM) imaging and X-ray diffraction, showed that 
the reaction proceedes by a reduction of the diameters of the crystals, while 
only a limited reduction in CN lengths was observed. It has been suggested 
that the reaction involved a nonswelling mechanism that affected only the 
cellulose chains localized at the crystal surface. In the case of homogeneous 
acetylation, the partially acetylated molecules immediately partitioned into 
the acetylating medium as soon as they were sufficiently soluble; while in 
heterogeneous conditions the cellulose acetate remained insoluble and sur -
rounded the crystalline core of unreacted cellulose chains. BC nanofibers  
were surface acetylated using acetic anhydride and sulfuric acid as catalyst, 
with the aim of modifying their surface properties in order to enhance their 
compatibility with polylactide (PLA) [35]. The nanofibers underwent no struc -
tural and/or morphological changes under the applied reaction conditions. At 
only 6% acetylated BC loading, the obtained bionanocomposites showed con -
siderable improvement in thermal and mechanical properties, as evidenced by 
the significant increase in both elastic and Young’s moduli, and in the tensile 
strength. These nanocomposites also showed low hygroscopicity and consider -
able transparency features reported.
The simultaneous occurrence of cellulose hydrolysis and acetylation of 
hydroxyl groups has been also reported. Fischer esterification of hydroxyl 
groups simultaneously with the hydrolysis of amorphous cellulose chains has 
been introduced as a viable one-pot reaction methodology that allows isola -
tion of acetylated CNs in a single-step process (Fig. 16.6) [36, 37].
An environmentally friendly CN surface acetylation route was recently 
developed by Yuan et al. [38] involving low reagent consumption and a simple-
to-apply procedure. The method used alkyenyl succinic anhydride aqueous 
emulsions as a template. The emulsions were simply mixed with CN suspen -
sions and freeze-dried, and the resulting solid was heated to 105°C. The 
obtained derivative conferred to the acylated CNs a highly hydrophobic char -
acter because they were easily dispersible in solvents with widely different 
polarities as measured by the respective dielectric constant, ε; for example, 
they were not only dispersible in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) having a very 
high ε of 46.45, but also in 1,4-dioxane, which has a quite low ε of 2.21. Berlioz 
et al. [39] have reported recently a new and highly efficient solvent-free syn -
thetic method for almost complete surface esterification of BC and CNs 
extracted from tunicate, leading to highly substituted nanocellulose esters. The 
reaction of fatty acids such as palmitoyl chloride was carried out on nanocel -
lulose substrates freeze-dried or dried via a gas-phase process. It has been 
shown by SEM and X-ray diffraction analyses that the esterification pro -
ceeded from the surface of the substrate to the crystal core. Under moderate 376  CHEmICAl mOdIFICA tIOn OF nAnOCEllUlOSES
conditions, the surface was fully reacted, whereas the original morphology was 
maintained, and the core of the crystal remained unmodified.
Esterification of CNs by reacting organic fatty acid chlorides, having differ -
ent lengths of the aliphatic chain (C 12 up to C 18), has also been reported with 
a grafting density high enough such that the fatty acids with a backbone of 18 
carbons were able to crystallize on the surface CNs [40]. A straightforward 
method for the surface acetylation of cellulose nanowhiskers by transesterifi -
cation of vinyl acetate and using potassium carbonate as catalyst was proposed 
by Çetin et al. [41]. Under moderate conditions, only the surface of the  
nanowhiskers was modified, while their dimensions and crystallinity remained 
unchanged. With increasing reaction time, diffusion mechanisms controlled 
the rate, leading to nanowhiskers with higher levels of acetylation, smaller 
dimensions, and lower crystallinity.
BC nanofibrils were also subjected to acetylation with organic acids having 
different chain lengths such as acetic, hexanoic, and dodecanoic acids [42, 43]. 
The hydrophobic nature of these modified BC was enhanced and showed a 
good compatibility when incorporated in polylactide nanocomposites.
16.3.5 Silylation
Cellulose whiskers resulting from the acid hydrolysis of tunicate have been 
partially silylated by a series of alkyldimethylchlorosilanes, with the carbon Figure 16.6  Reaction scheme illustrating the one-pot cellulose hydrolysis and esteri -
fication of hydroxyl groups. (reprinted with permission from Reference [36]. Copyright 
2008 American Chemical Society).OH OH
OHOHOHOHOHOHOHOHOH OH OH OHOHOH OHOH
OHOHOHOHOHOHOHOHOH OH OH OHOHOH OH OH OH OHOH OHOHOH
OHOHOHOHOHOHOHOH
Acid Dissociation and
Cellulose Hy drolysis:Fischer Esterification of Hy droxyls:
HCI H+ + CI–O
CH 3C
CH 3CH+O
O
O O O O OH OH OH
O
OO O O OH OH OHOOH + Cell–OH
Cell + H2O CH3
H3C O H3C O H3C O H3CCO CH3
CO CH3
CO CH3
O CH3O CH3O CH3O CH3C
O O O O OH OH OHC C C CC C C C
O
OO O O OH OH OH
H3C O H3C O H3C O H3CC C C CHOH 2C
HOH 2C
HOH 2C
HOH 2CHOH 2CHOH 2CR1
R1R2
R2R2
HO
HOHOHOO
O
OOOOOO
OH
OH
R1
HOHO
HOO
OO
OHOHOHOHOHOH
H
H+
H++
Slow H2O
+ +CHEmICAl mOdIFICAtIOnS   377
backbone of the alkyl moieties ranging from a short carbon length of isopro -
pyl to longer lengths represented by n-butyl, n-octyl, and n-dodecyl [44].  
It has been demonstrated that with a degree of substitution (DS) between 
0.6–1, the whiskers became readily dispersible in solvents of low polarity (such 
as tetrahydrofuran [THF]), leading to stable suspensions with birefringent 
behavior, while their morphological integrity was preserved. However, at high 
silylation (DS greater than 1), the chains in the core of the crystals became 
silylated, resulting in the disintegration of the crystal and consequently the 
loss of original morphology.
A mild silylation protocol was applied to surface silylate dispersed NFCs 
extracted from parenchymal cell cellulose. These silylated NFCs, with isopro -
pyl dimethylchlorosilane, maintained the same morphological features as 
those of the underivatized samples and were dispersible into a nonpolar 
solvent to yield stable suspensions that did not flocculate. The rheological 
properties of their suspension in methyl oleate showed a marked shear-
thinning effect. Thus, by silylation, the NFCs have acquired an inherent flexibil -
ity with the result that their suspensions present the rheological behavior of 
polymer solutions [45].
Andresen et al. [46] have reported the successful surface silylation of  
NFCs with chlorodimethyl isopropylsilane. At moderated DS (between 0.6 
and 1), hydrophibized silylated NCFs kept their morphological integrity  
and were able to stabilize water-in-oil emulsions [47]. NFCs were also grafted 
with a quaternary ammonium silane derivative (e.g., octadecyldimethyl(3-
trimethoxysilylpropyl)ammonium chloride) through a simple adsorption-
curing process. Films prepared from these hydrophibized NFCs showed 
substantial nonleaching-type antibacterial capacity [48].
Surface-trimethyl silylation of CNs extracted from bacterial cellulose and 
their resulting cellulose acetate butyrate [49] or polysiloxane [50] based nano -
composites were also investigated. CNs functionalized by partial silylation 
through coupling with n-dodecyldimethylchlorosilane showed a very good 
dispersion in poly(L-lactide) and acted as nucleating agents and hence acceler -
ate the crystallization rate of PLLA [51]. Similarly, the coupling of either CNs 
or NFCs with the 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane enhanced their compatibility 
with PLA, improving significantly the mechanical performances of the final 
nanocomposites [52]. CNs were straightforwardly, after their extraction, coupled 
with functional trialkoxysilanes bearing various organic moieties (alkyl, amino 
and methacryloxy) [53]. The reaction was conducted efficiently in aqueous 
medium and at room temperature. After freeze-drying, the resulting silylated 
CNs were successfully incorporated into PLA by melt extrusion without any 
alterations of their nanostructure after melt processing. The thermomechanical 
properties of the resulting bionanocomposites were shown to be enhanced 
when silylated CNs were used as nanofillers.
Silylation was also attempted in order to tune the wetting properties towards 
nonpolar liquids of preformed NFC-based aerogels. Indeed, perfluorodecyltri -
chlorosilane was grafted by chemical vapor deposition method [54].378  CHEmICAl mOdIFICA tIOn OF nAnOCEllUlOSES
Silylation was also exploited as intermediate step for further functionaliza -
tion. Aminosilanes were first grafted onto CNs and serve as reactive sites to 
covalently attach fluorescent moieties [55]. More recently, ene- or thiol-
functionalized silanes were also covalently grafted on NFC-based films and 
consequently clicked with appropriate moieties through thiol-ene click chem -
istry [56].
16.3.6 Urethanization
Urethanization proceeds by reacting an isocayante with hydroxyl groups avail -
able at the surface of nanocelluloses to create a urethane linkage. Coupling 
CNs and NFCs with N-octadecyl isocyanate, via a bulk reaction in toluene, has 
also been reported to enhance their dispersion in organic medium and compat -
ibility with polycaprolactone, which significantly improved the stiffness and 
ductility of the nanocomposites [57, 58]. Isocyanate-rich CNs were prepared 
by coupling CNs with 1,6-hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI) by means of in 
situ polymerization. These isocyanate-rich CNs were incorporated onto seg -
mented thermoplastic polyurethane elastomers by casting evaporation tech -
nique. Modified CNs were effectively dispersed in the polyurethane matrix 
and interacted with matrix hard phase, promoting physical association  
with hard segments, enhancing stiffness, and dimensional stability [59]. 
Isocyanate-mediated coupling was also utilized to promote the grafting of 
isocyanate-functionalized polymers. Likewise, thiol-based isocyanate (isothio -
cyanate) were grafted on the surface of CNs to attach pH-sensitive dyes [60].
16.3.7 Amidation
Most of amidation-based couplings were realized on carboxylic groups of pre-
oxidized nanocellulose substrates. The covalent attachment of amine deriva -
tives on the surface of nanocelluloses was achieved via a carbodiimide-mediated 
amidation reaction without the alteration of their native morphological or 
crystalline properties. Various amine derivatives such as 4-amino-TEMPO 
[61], benzylamine, hexylamine, dodecylamine, and Jeffamine [62] were grafted 
on CNs or NFCs, respectively. All these amidated nanocelluloses provided a 
very good dispersion in nonpolar solvents, attesting to the increase of their 
hydrophobic character after the modification. This reaction was also exploited 
to graft amine-terminated polymers as will be described later.
16.3.8 Clicking
“Clicking” approach on CNs was first introduced by Filpponen and Argyro -
poulos [63], who attempted to link together CNs. Two sets of CNs bearing an 
azide derivative for one set and an alkyne derivative for the other set were 
prepared through amidation of TEMPO-mediated oxidized CNs. Subsequently, CHEmICAl mOdIFICAtIOnS   379
the Cu(I)-catalyzed Huisgen 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition-mediated click reac -
tion, between the azide and the alkyne surface-activated CNs, was employed, 
bringing together the nanocrystalline materials in a unique regularly packed 
arrangement. A similar procedure was followed by Sadeghifar et al. [64]. 
Recently, Feese et al. [65] also employed Cu(I)-catalyzed Huisgen–Meldal–
Sharpless 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition reaction to surface immobilize cationic 
porphyrin. CNs–porphyrin showed excellent efficiency toward the photody -
namic inactivation of Mycobacterium smegmatis  and Staphylococcus aureus , 
albeit only slight activity against Escherichia coli . Similarly, an imidazolium 
salt was grafted to CNs using Cu(I)-catalysed azide-alkyne cycloaddition [66]. 
The authors demonstrated the feasibility of exchanging the bromide anion to 
bistriflimide and an anionic dye. This approach may provide the opportunity 
to easily access a wide variety of ion exchange systems or catalysts using CNs 
as a support medium.
CNs were converted into ratiometric pH-sensing nanosized particles by 
dual fluorescent labeling in a three-step chemical procedure involving thiol-
ene-mediated click reaction [60]. In this procedure, an amine group was intro -
duced via esterification followed by a thiol-ene click reaction. This amine 
group consequently served as a reactive site to attach succinimidyl ester dyes 
that are pH-sensitive. Tingaut et al. [56] have developed a chemical strategy 
following different routes implicating thiol-ene click reaction to chemically 
modify NFC-based films (Fig. 16.7). A thiol-functionalized silane was first 
grafted on the surface of NFC films and then ene-terminated molecules were 
photochemically clicked or vice versa. The route comprising the clicking of 
ene-activated NFC films with the silane–thiol was greatly faster. In a different 
route, the silane–thiol and ene-terminated molecules were first clicked together 
and then grafted through silylation usng a sol–gel process to the surface of 
NFC films.
16.3.9 Polymer Grafting
Polymer grafting, on the surface of nanocelluloses, has been carried out by 
using two main strategies, namely “grafting onto” or “grafting from.” The graft -
ing onto approach involves attachment onto hydroxyl groups at the nanocel -
lulose surface of presynthesized and eventually functionalized polymer chains 
by using a coupling agent. In the “grafting from” approach, the polymer chains 
are formed by in situ  surface-initiated polymerization eventually with immo -
bilized initiators on the substrate.
16.3.9.1  Grafting  Onto  The “grafting onto” approach was used by Ljung -
berg et al. [67] to graft maleated polypropylene (PPgMA) onto the surface of 
tunicate extracted CNs. The resulting grafted nanocrystals showed very good 
compatibility and high adhesion when dispersed in atactic polypropylene. 
Araki et al. [24] and Vignon et al. [68] studied the grafting of amine-terminated 
polymers on the surface of TEMPO-mediated oxidized CNs by using a peptide 380  CHEmICAl mOdIFICA tIOn OF nAnOCEllUlOSES
coupling process catalyzed by carbodiimide derivatives in water. The same 
approach was implemented by Mangalam et al. [69], who grafted DNA  
oligomers and on the surface of CNs. Harrisson et al. [70] and Azzam et al. 
[71] used dimethylformamide (DMF) rather than water as reaction medium 
to graft amine-terminated poly(styrene) or poly(tert-butyl acrylate) and Jef -Figure 16.7  Schematic illustration of NFC-based films surface functionalization using 
click chemistry. (a) Synthesis of ene- and thiol-functionalized films with alkoxysilane 
molecules, and their subsequent “click” coupling reactions with thiol- (Route 1) and 
ene- (Route 2) molecules, respectively. (b) Synthesis of a functional alkoxysilane mol -
ecule using thiol-ene “click” chemistry, and its subsequent coupling reaction with a 
cellulose film through a sol–gel process (Route 3) (reproduced from Reference [56] 
with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry). See color insert.= Thiol = Alkene = Functional gr oup
(a)
(b)hv
Click“”
Click“””Route 1
Route 2
Route 3Ene-functionaliz ed
cellulose f ilm
MFC-OH
in
EtOH/H2OOR
ORRO Si
OR
ORRO Si
OR
ORRO SiOR
ORRO Sior +1) Hy drolysis &
     condensation
2) Filtration
3) Dr yingFunctionaliz ed cellulose surf aces
through thiol-ene  clic k “  chemistr y
Thiol-functionaliz ed
cellulose f ilmhv
Click“”hv
+ +OHOHOHOHOHOH
Cellulose filmSol-Gel
EtOH/H2OCHEmICAl mOdIFICAtIOnS   381
famine copolymers, respectively. Epoxy-terminated poly(ethylene oxide) was 
successfully grafted onto CNs through a nucleophilic addition of the alkali-
activated cellulose hydroxyl groups to the epoxy moieties resulting in ether 
linkage. PEO-grafted CNs formed a stable colloidal suspension in water that 
remained well dispersed, and a chiral nematic phase was observed upon con -
centration of these aqueous suspension [72]. Similarly, presynthesized epoxy-
terminated copolymer of PLA and glycidyl methacrylate was grafted on the 
surface of BC nanofibers in an attempt to reduce their hydrophilicity before 
their incorporation in PLA [73].
The grafting of poly(caprolactone) (PCL) having different molecular weights 
on the surface of CNs has been achieved by using isocyanate-mediated coupling 
[74]. These authors reported reaching a grafting density that was high enough 
that the grafted PCL-chains were able to crystallize at the surface of CNs. 
Similar efforts were made by Cao et al. [75], who reported on the isocyanate-
catalyzed grafting of presynthesized waterborne polyurethane polymers via a 
one-pot process. Such crystallization provoked co-crystallizations of the free 
chains of the respective polymer matrices during CN-based nanocomposite 
processing. Furthermore, this co-crystallization phenomenon induced the for -
mation of a co-continuous phase between the matrix and filler, which signifi -
cantly enhanced the interfacial adhesion and consequently contributed to a 
highly improved mechanical strength of the resulting nanocomposites. A similar 
approach was followed by Pei et al. [76] to prepare polyurethane/CNs nano -
composites with ultrahigh tensile strength and stain-to-failure with strongly 
improved modulus.
16.3.9.2  Grafting  From  The grafting “from approach” applied to CNs was 
first reported by Habibi et al. [77], who grafted PCL on the surface of CNs 
via ring-opening polymerization (ROP) by using stannous octoate (Sn(Oct) 2) 
as grafting and polymerization agent. Also, the interfacial grafting of PCL as 
well as PLA from the surface of CNs was studied and the resulting hydrids 
were incorporated in the respective matrix [78, 79]. Enhanced mechanical 
properties and better thermal stability were obtained originating from 
co-crystallization and entanglement between bounded chains and those from 
the matrix. Lönnberg et al. [80, 81] used the same approach to graft PCL on 
the surface of NFCs, and they were able to process films made with PCL-
grafted NFC together with PCL films in bilayer laminates using hot press. 
Through peeling tests, they evidenced the occurrence of physical entanglement 
between PCL chains grafted at the NFC surface and the unbounded ones 
from the matrix. This entanglement depends strongly on the length of grafted 
PCL chains [82]. Likewise, Chen et al. [83] and Lin et al. [84] conducted similar 
grafting reactions under microwave irradiation to enhance the grafting effi -
ciency. In situ  polymerization of furfuryl alcohol from the surface of cellulose 
whiskers was studied by Pranger and Tannenbaum [85]. In this case, the polym -
erization was catalyzed by sulfonic acid residues present at the surface of CNs. 
At elevated temperatures, the sulfonic acid groups were de-esterified and 382  CHEmICAl mOdIFICA tIOn OF nAnOCEllUlOSES
consequently released into the medium to catalyze in situ  the polymerization. 
Yi et al. [86] and Morandi et al. [87] propagated polystyrene brushes via atom 
transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) on the surface of CNs with ethyl 
2-bromoisobutyrate as the initiator agent. Similarly, other vinyl monomers, 
mainly acrylic monomers such as N-isopropylacrylamide [88] and acrylic acid 
[89], were also polymerized from the surface of CNs to produce thermo-
responsive and pH-sensitive substrates, respectively. An amphotropic polymer 
bearing azo moieties, poly(6-[4-(4-methoxyphenylazo)phenoxy] hexyl meth -
acrylate) (PMMAZO), was successfully attached and grown from the surface 
of CNs following the same strategy [90]. PMMAZO-grafted CNs exhibited 
both types of liquid crystal formation, thermotropic, and lyotropic as they 
showed smectic-to-nematic transition at 95°C and nematic-to-isotropic transi -
tion at 135°C, and exhibited analogous lyotropic liquid-crystalline phase 
behavior above 135°C. It also showed a lyotropic nematic phase in chloro -
benzene above a concentration of 5.1 wt%. Grafting of polyaniline from CNs 
was achieved by in situ  polymerization of aniline onto CNs, in hydrochloric 
acid aqueous solution, via an oxidative polymerization by using ammonium 
peroxydisulfate as the initiator [91]. Cast films of these polyaniline-grafted 
CNs showed conductivity close to the conducting polymer. They have been 
also incorporated in memory-shaped polyurethane showing a stepwise change 
in thermal, rheological, and electrical properties in the range of 4–10 wt% 
CNs, while maintaining the shape-responsiveness of the nanocomposites [92]. 
Likewise NFCs were grafted in aqueous solution using a redox initiated free 
radical polymerization with different (meth)acrylate monomers but using 
Cerium ammonium nitrate as initiator. The reaction proceeds first by the 
oxidation of 1,2-glycol groups generating free radicals on the cellulose back -
bone followed by the grafting of vinylic monomers. The nanostructure of the 
NFCs was preserved during the synthesis, whereas the density of the grafted 
polymers varied from a thin coating to a continuous matrix completely envel -
oping the fibrils enhancing their hydrophobic character [93]. This strategy was 
first used by Stenstad et al. [94] to graft glycidyl methacrylate on the surface 
of NFCs.
16.4 CONCLUSIONS
Over the last decade, nanocelluloses, including cellulose NCs or nanowhiskers, 
NFCs, and BC, have become fascinating building blocks for the design of new 
biomaterials. They can be used as they are in different applications involving 
hydrophilic media, which restrict their uses. However, chemical modifications 
are essential, sometime unavoidable, to adapt their interfacial properties in 
various applications or to adjust their hydrophilic–hydrophobic balance. As 
nanocelluloses offer an excellent platform for chemical modification regarding 
their regularity and the presence of a large number of hydroxyl groups at their 
surface, various chemistries have been developed, aiming to surface-modify REFEREnCES   383
them to confer to them the desired property, extending therefore their uses to 
highly sophisticated applications.
REFERENCES
 [1] Eichhorn, S., Dufresne, A., Aranguren, M., Marcovich, N., Capadona, J., Rowan, 
S., Weder, C., Thielemans, W., Roman, M., Renneckar, S., Gindl, W., Veigel, S., 
Keckes, J., Yano, H., Abe, K., Nogi, M., Nakagaito, A., Mangalam, A., Simonsen, 
J., Benight, A., Bismarck, A., Berglund, L., and Peijs, T. (2010) Review: Current 
international research into cellulose nanofibres and nanocomposites. Journal of 
Materials Science , 45, 1–33.
 [2] Gatenholm, P ., Klemm, D. (2010) Bacterial nanocellulose as a renewable material 
for biomedical applications. MRS Bulletin , 35, 208–213.
 [3] Habibi, Y., Lucia, L.A., and Rojas, O.J. (2010) Cellulose nanocrystals: Chemistry, 
self-assembly, and applications. Chemical Reviews , 110, 3479–3500.
 [4] Siró, I., Plackett, D. (2010) Microfibrillated cellulose and new nanocomposite 
materials: A review. Cellulose , 17, 459–494.
 [5] Fengel, D., Wegener, G. (1983) Wood, Chemistry, Ultrastucture, Reactions . New 
York: Walter de Gruyter.
 [6] French, A.D., Bertoniere, N.R., Brown, R.M., Chanzy, H., Gray, D., Hattori, K., and 
Glasser, W. (2004) Cellulose. In: Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technol -
ogy, 5th ed, ed. A. Seidel. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, pp. 360–394.
 [7] Somerville, C. (2006) Cellulose synthesis in higher plants. Annual Review of Cell 
and Developmental Biology , 22, 53–78.
 [8] Brown, R.M. (1996) The biosynthesis of cellulose. Journal of Macromolecular 
Science, Part A , 33, 1345–1373.
 [9] Brown, R.M. (2004) Cellulose structure and biosynthesis: What is in store for the 
21st century? Journal of Polymer Science Part A: Polymer Chemistry , 42, 
487–495.
[10] Rowland, S.P ., Roberts, E.J. (1972) The nature of accessible surfaces in the micro -
structure of cotton cellulose. Journal of Polymer Science Part A-1: Polymer Chem -
istry, 10, 2447–2461.
[11] Spence, K., Habibi, Y., and Dufresne, A. (2011) Nanocellulose-based composites. 
In: Cellulose Fibers: Bio- and Nano-Polymer Composites , eds. S. Kalia, B.S. Kaith, 
and I. Kaur. Berlin: Springer, pp. 179–213.
[12] Heux, L., Bonini, C. (2000) Microfibrillated and/or microcrystalline dispersion, in 
particular of cellulose, in an organic solvent.
[13] Heux, L., Chauve, G., and Bonini, C. (2000) Nonflocculating and chiral-nematic 
self-ordering of cellulose microcrystals suspensions in nonpolar solvents. Lang -
muir, 16, 8210–8212.
[14] Bonini, C., Heux, L., Cavaillé, J.-Y., Lindner, P ., Dewhurst, C., and Terech, P . (2002) 
Rodlike cellulose whiskers coated with surfactant: A small-angle neutron scatter -
ing characterization. Langmuir , 18, 3311–3314.
[15] Ljungberg, N., Cavaillé, J.Y., and Heux, L. (2006) Nanocomposites of isotactic 
polypropylene reinforced with rod-like cellulose whiskers. Polymer , 47, 
6285–6292.384  CHEmICAl mOdIFICA tIOn OF nAnOCEllUlOSES
[16] Bondeson, D., Oksman, K. (2007) Dispersion and characteristics of surfactant 
modified cellulose whiskers nanocomposites. Composite Interfaces , 14, 617–630.
[17] Kim, J., Montero, G., Habibi, Y., Hinestroza, J.P ., Genzer, J., Argyropoulos, D.S., 
and Rojas, O.J. (2009) Dispersion of cellulose crystallites by nonionic surfactants 
in a hydrophobic polymer matrix. Polymer Engineering and Science , 49, 
2054–2061.
[18] Rojas, O.J., Montero, G.A., and Habibi, Y. (2009) Electrospun nanocomposites 
from polystyrene loaded with cellulose nanowhiskers. Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science , 113, 927–935.
[19] Zhou, Q., Brumer, H., and Teeri, T.T. (2009) Self-organization of cellulose nano -
crystals adsorbed with xyloglucan oligosaccharide-poly(ethylene glycol)-polysty -
rene triblock copolymer. Macromolecules , 42, 5430–5432.
[20] Zhou, Q., Malm, E., Nilsson, H., Larsson, P .T., Iversen, T., Berglund, L.A., and 
Bulone, V. (2009) Nanostructured biocomposites based on bacterial cellulosic 
nanofibers compartmentalized by a soft hydroxyethylcellulose matrix coating. Soft 
Matter , 5, 4124–4130.
[21] Brown, E.E., Laborie, M.-P .G. (2007) Bioengineering bacterial cellulose/
poly(ethylene oxide) nanocomposites. Biomacromolecules , 8, 3074–3081.
[22] Syverud, K., Xhanari, K., Chinga-Carrasco, G., Yu, Y., and Stenius, P . (2011) Films 
made of cellulose nanofibrils: Surface modification by adsorption of a cationic 
surfactant and characterization by computer-assisted electron microscopy. Journal 
of Nanoparticle Research , 13, 773–782.
[23] de Nooy, A.E.J., Besemer, A.C., and van Bekkum, H. (1994) Highly selective 
tempo mediated oxidation of primary alcohol groups in polysaccharides. Recueil 
des Travaux Chimiques des Pays-Bas , 113, 165–166.
[24] Araki, J., Wada, M., and Kuga, S. (2000) Steric stabilization of a cellulose micro -
crystal suspension by poly(ethylene glycol) grafting. Langmuir , 17, 21–27.
[25] Montanari, S., Rountani, M., Heux, L., and Vignon, M.R. (2005) Topochemistry of 
carboxylated cellulose nanocrystals resulting from TEMPO-mediated oxidation. 
Macromolecules , 38, 1665–1671.
[26] Habibi, Y., Chanzy, H., and Vignon, M. (2006) TEMPO-mediated surface oxidation 
of cellulose whiskers. Cellulose , 13, 679–687.
[27] Saito, T., Hirota, M., Tamura, N., Kimura, S., Fukuzumi, H., Heux, L., and Isogai, 
A. (2009) Individualization of nano-sized plant cellulose fibrils by direct surface 
carboxylation using TEMPO catalyst under neutral conditions. Biomacromole -
cules, 10, 1992–1996.
[28] Saito, T., Kimura, S., Nishiyama, Y., and Isogai, A. (2007) Cellulose nanofibers 
prepared by TEMPO-mediated oxidation of native cellulose. Biomacromolecules , 
8, 2485–2491.
[29] Saito, T., Nishiyama, Y., Putaux, J.-L., Vignon, M., and Isogai, A. (2006) Homoge -
neous suspensions of individualized microfibrils from TEMPO-catalyzed oxida -
tion of native cellulose. Biomacromolecules , 7, 1687–1691.
[30] Saito, T., Okita, Y., Nge, T.T., Sugiyama, J., and Isogai, A. (2006) TEMPO-mediated 
oxidation of native cellulose: Microscopic analysis of fibrous fractions in the oxi -
dized products. Carbohydrate Polymers , 65, 435–440.REFEREnCES   385
[31] Hasani, M., Cranston, E.D., Westman, G., and Gray, D.G. (2008) Cationic surface 
functionalization of cellulose nanocrystals. Soft Matter , 4, 2238–2244.
[32] Ho, T., Zimmermann, T., Hauert, R., and Caseri, W. (2011) Preparation and char -
acterization of cationic nanofibrillated cellulose from etherification and high-
shear disintegration processes. Cellulose , 18, 1391–1406.
[33] Olszewska, A., Eronen, P ., Johansson, L.-S., Malho, J.-M., Ankerfors, M., Lind -
ström, T., Ruokolainen, J., Laine, J., and Österberg, M. (2011) The behaviour of 
cationic nanofibrillar cellulose in aqueous media. Cellulose , 18, 1213–1226.
[34] Sassi, J.-F., Chanzy, H. (1995) Ultrastructural aspects of the acetylation of cellulose. 
Cellulose , 2, 111–127.
[35] Tome, L.C., Pinto, R.J.B., Trovatti, E., Freire, C.S.R., Silvestre, A.J.D., Neto, C.P ., 
and Gandini, A. (2011) Transparent bionanocomposites with improved properties 
prepared from acetylated bacterial cellulose and poly(lactic acid) through a simple 
approach. Green Chemistry , 13, 419–427.
[36] Braun, B., Dorgan, J.R. (2008) Single-step method for the isolation and surface 
functionalization of cellulosic nanowhiskers. Biomacromolecules , 10, 334–341.
[37] Sobkowicz, M.J., Braun, B., and Dorgan, J.R. (2009) Decorating in green: Surface 
esterification of carbon and cellulosic nanoparticles. Green Chemistry , 11, 
680–682.
[38] Yuan, H., Nishiyama, Y., Wada, M., and Kuga, S. (2006) Surface acylation of cel -
lulose whiskers by drying aqueous emulsion. Biomacromolecules , 7, 696–700.
[39] Berlioz, S., Molina-Boisseau, S., Nishiyama, Y., and Heux, L. (2009) Gas-phase 
surface esterification of cellulose microfibrils and whiskers. Biomacromolecules , 
10, 2144–2151.
[40] de Menezes, A.J., Siqueira, G., Curvelo, A.A.S., and Dufresne, A. (2009) Extrusion 
and characterization of functionalized cellulose whiskers reinforced polyethylene 
nanocomposites. Polymer , 50, 4552–4563.
[41] Çetin, N.S., Tingaut, P ., Oezmen, N., Henry, N., Harper, D., Dadmun, M., and Sebe, 
G. (2009) Acetylation of cellulose nanowhiskers with vinyl acetate under moder -
ate conditions. Macromolecular Bioscience , 9, 997–1003.
[42] Lee, K.-Y., Blaker, J.J., and Bismarck, A. (2009) Surface functionalisation of bacte -
rial cellulose as the route to produce green polylactide nanocomposites with 
improved properties. Composites Science and Technology , 69, 2724–2733.
[43] Lee, K.-Y., Quero, F., Blaker, J., Hill, C., Eichhorn, S., and Bismarck, A. (2011) 
Surface only modification of bacterial cellulose nanofibres with organic acids. 
Cellulose , 18, 595–605.
[44] Goussé, C., Chanzy, H., Excoffier, G., Soubeyrand, L., and Fleury, E. (2002) Stable 
suspensions of partially silylated cellulose whiskers dispersed in organic solvents. 
Polymer , 43, 2645–2651.
[45] Goussé, C., Chanzy, H., Cerrada, M.L., and Fleury, E. (2004) Surface silylation  
of cellulose microfibrils: Preparation and rheological properties. Polymer , 45, 
1569–1575.
[46] Andresen, M., Johansson, L.-S., Tanem, B.S., and Stenius, P . (2006) Properties and 
characterization of hydrophobized microfibrillated cellulose. Cellulose , 13, 
665–677.386  CHEmICAl mOdIFICA tIOn OF nAnOCEllUlOSES
[47] Andresen, M., Stenius, P . (2007) Water-in-oil emulsions stabilized by hydrophobi -
zed microfibrillated cellulose. Journal of Dispersion Science and Technology , 28, 
837–844.
[48] Andresen, M., Stenstad, P ., Møretrø, T., Langsrud, S., Syverud, K., Johansson, L.-S., 
and Stenius, P . (2007) Nonleaching antimicrobial films prepared from surface-
modified microfibrillated cellulose. Biomacromolecules , 8, 2149–2155.
[49] Grunert, M., Winter, W.T. (2002) Nanocomposites of cellulose acetate butyrate 
reinforced with cellulose nanocrystals. Journal of Polymers and the Environment , 
10, 27–30.
[50] Grunert, M., Winter, W.T. (2000) Progress in the development of cellulose rein -
forced nanocomposites. Polymeric Materials Science and Engineering , 82, 
232–233.
[51] Pei, A., Zhou, Q., and Berglund, L.A. (2010) Functionalized cellulose nanocrystals 
as biobased nucleation agents in poly(L-lactide) (PLLA)—Crystallization and 
mechanical property effects. Composites Science and Technology , 70, 815–821.
[52] Frone, A.N., Berlioz, S., Chailan, J.F., Panaitescu, D.M., and Donescu, D. (2011) 
Cellulose fiber-reinforced polylactic acid. Polymer Composites , 32, 976–985.
[53] Raquez, J.M., Murena, Y., Goffin, A.L., Habibi, Y., Ruelle, B., DeBuyl, F., and 
Dubois, P . (2012) Surface-modification of cellulose nanowhiskers and their use as 
nanoreinforcers into polylactide: A sustainably-integrated approach. Composites 
Science and Technology.
[54] Aulin, C., Netrval, J., Wagberg, L., and Lindstrom, T. (2010) Aerogels from nano -
fibrillated cellulose with tunable oleophobicity. Soft Matter , 6, 3298–3305.
[55] Yang, Q., Pan, X. (2010) A facile approach for fabricating fluorescent cellulose. 
Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 117, 3639–3644.
[56] Tingaut, P ., Hauert, R., and Zimmermann, T. (2011) Highly efficient and straight -
forward functionalization of cellulose films with thiol-ene click chemistry. Journal 
of Materials Chemistry , 21, 16066–16076.
[57] Siqueira, G., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2009) Cellulose whiskers versus microfi -
brils: Influence of the nature of the nanoparticle and its surface functionalization 
on the thermal and mechanical properties of nanocomposites. Biomacromolecules , 
10, 425–432.
[58] Siqueira, G., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2010) New process of chemical grafting of 
cellulose nanoparticles with a long chain isocyanate. Langmuir , 26, 402–411.
[59] Rueda, L., Fernández d’Arlas, B., Zhou, Q., Berglund, L.A., Corcuera, M.A., Mon -
dragon, I., and Eceiza, A. (2011) Isocyanate-rich cellulose nanocrystals and their 
selective insertion in elastomeric polyurethane. Composites Science and Technol -
ogy, 71, 1953–1960.
[60] Nielsen, L.J., Eyley, S., Thielemans, W., and Aylott, J.W. (2010) Dual fluorescent 
labelling of cellulose nanocrystals for pH sensing. Chemical Communications , 46, 
8929–8931.
[61] Follain, N., Marais, M.-F., Montanari, S., and Vignon, M.R. (2010) Coupling onto 
surface carboxylated cellulose nanocrystals. Polymer , 51, 5332–5344.
[62] Lasseuguette, E. (2008) Grafting onto microfibrils of native cellulose. Cellulose , 
15, 571–580.REFEREnCES   387
[63] Filpponen, I., Argyropoulos, D.S. (2010) Regular linking of cellulose nanocrystals 
via click chemistry: Synthesis and formation of cellulose nanoplatelet gels. Bio-
macromolecules , 11, 1060–1066.
[64] Sadeghifar, H., Filpponen, I., Clarke, S., Brougham, D., and Argyropoulos, D. 
(2011) Production of cellulose nanocrystals using hydrobromic acid and click 
reactions on their surface. Journal of Materials Science , 46, 7344–7355.
[65] Feese, E., Sadeghifar, H., Gracz, H.S., Argyropoulos, D.S., and Ghiladi, R.A. (2011) 
Photobactericidal porphyrin-cellulose nanocrystals: Synthesis, characterization, 
and antimicrobial properties. Biomacromolecules , 12, 3528–3539.
[66] Eyley, S., Thielemans, W. (2011) Imidazolium grafted cellulose nanocrystals for ion 
exchange applications. Chemical Communications , 47, 4177–4179.
[67] Ljungberg, N., Bonini, C., Bortolussi, F., Boisson, C., Heux, L., and Cavaillé, J.-Y.  
(2005) New nanocomposite materials reinforced with cellulose whiskers in atactic 
polypropylene: effect of surface and dispersion characteristics. Biomacromole -
cules, 6, 2732–2739.
[68] Vignon, M., Montanari, S., and Habibi, Y. (2004) Crystalline polysaccharide deriva -
tives, their production and their applications.
[69] Mangalam, A.P ., Simonsen, J., and Benight, A.S. (2009) Cellulose/DNA hybrid 
nanomaterials. Biomacromolecules , 10, 497–504.
[70] Harrisson, S., Drisko, G.L., Malmstrom, E., Hult, A., and Wooley, K.L. (2011) 
Hybrid rigid/soft and biologic/synthetic materials: Polymers grafted onto cellulose 
microcrystals. Biomacromolecules , 12, 1214–1223.
[71] Azzam, F., Heux, L., Putaux, J.-L., and Jean, B. (2010) Preparation by grafting onto, 
characterization, and properties of thermally responsive polymer-decorated cel -
lulose nanocrystals. Biomacromolecules , 11, 3652–3659.
[72] Kloser, E., Gray, D.G. (2010) Surface grafting of cellulose nanocrystals with 
poly(ethylene oxide) in aqueous media. Langmuir , 26, 13450–13456.
[73] Li, Z.Q., Zhou, X.D., and Pei, C.H. (2010) Synthesis of PLA-co-PGMA copolymer 
and its application in the surface modification of bacterial cellulose. International 
Journal of Polymeric Materials , 59, 725–737.
[74] Habibi, Y., Dufresne, A. (2008) Highly filled bionanocomposites from functional -
ized polysaccharide nanocrystals. Biomacromolecules , 9, 1974–1980.
[75] Cao, X., Habibi, Y., and Lucia, L.A. (2009) One-pot polymerization, surface graft -
ing, and processing of waterborne polyurethane-cellulose nanocrystal nanocom -
posites. Journal of Materials Chemistry , 19, 7137–7145.
[76] Pei, A., Malho, J.-M., Ruokolainen, J., Zhou, Q., and Berglund, L.A. (2011) Strong 
nanocomposite reinforcement effects in polyurethane elastomer with low volume 
fraction of cellulose nanocrystals. Macromolecules , 44, 4422–4427.
[77] Habibi, Y., Goffin, A.-L., Schiltz, N., Duquesne, E., Dubois, P ., and Dufresne, A. 
(2008) Bionanocomposites based on poly((-caprolactone)-grafted cellulose nano -
crystals by ring-opening polymerization. Journal of Materials Chemistry , 18, 
5002–5010.
[78] Goffin, A.-L., Raquez, J.-M., Duquesne, E., Siqueira, G., Habibi, Y., Dufresne, A., 
and Dubois, P . (2011) From interfacial ring-opening polymerization to melt pro -
cessing of cellulose nanowhisker-filled polylactide-based nanocomposites. Bio-
macromolecules , 12, 2456–2465.388  CHEmICAl mOdIFICA tIOn OF nAnOCEllUlOSES
[79] Goffin, A.L., Raquez, J.M., Duquesne, E., Siqueira, G., Habibi, Y., Dufresne, A., 
and Dubois, P . (2011) Poly((-caprolactone) based nanocomposites reinforced by 
surface-grafted cellulose nanowhiskers via extrusion processing: Morphology, rhe -
ology, and thermo-mechanical properties. Polymer , 52, 1532–1538.
[80] Lönnberg, H., Fogelström, L., Azizi Samir, M.A.S., Berglund, L., Malmström, E., 
and Hult, A. (2008) Surface grafting of microfibrillated cellulose with poly( ε-
caprolactone)—Synthesis and characterization. European Polymer Journal , 44, 
2991–2997.
[81] Lönnberg, H., Larsson, K., Lindström, T., Hult, A., and Malmström, E. (2011) 
Synthesis of polycaprolactone-grafted microfibrillated cellulose for use in novel 
bionanocomposites-influence of the graft length on the mechanical properties. 
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces , 3, 1426–1433.
[82] Lönnberg, H., Fogelström, L., Zhou, Q., Hult, A., Berglund, L., and Malmström, 
E. (2011) Investigation of the graft length impact on the interfacial toughness in 
a cellulose/poly( ε-caprolactone) bilayer laminate. Composites Science and Tech -
nology , 71, 9–12.
[83] Chen, G., Dufresne, A., Huang, J., and Chang, P .R. (2009) A novel thermoformable 
bionanocomposite based on cellulose nanocrystal-graft-poly(epsilon-
caprolactone). Macromolecular Materials and Engineering , 294, 59–67.
[84] Lin, N., Chen, G., Huang, J., Dufresne, A., and Chang, P .R. (2009) Effects of 
polymer-grafted natural nanocrystals on the structure and mechanical properties 
of poly(lactic acid): A case of cellulose whisker-graft-polycaprolactone. Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science , 113, 3417–3425.
[85] Pranger, L., Tannenbaum, R. (2008) Biobased nanocomposites prepared by in situ  
polymerization of furfuryl alcohol with cellulose whiskers or montmorillonite clay. 
Macromolecules , 41, 8682–8687.
[86] Yi, J., Xu, Q., Zhang, X., and Zhang, H. (2008) Chiral-nematic self-ordering of 
rodlike cellulose nanocrystals grafted with poly(styrene) in both thermotropic and 
lyotropic states. Polymer , 49, 4406–4412.
[87] Morandi, G., Heath, L., and Thielemans, W. (2009) Cellulose nanocrystals grafted 
with polystyrene chains through surface-initiated atom transfer radical polymer -
ization (SI-ATRP). Langmuir , 25, 8280–8286.
[88] Zoppe, J.O., Habibi, Y., Rojas, O.J., Venditti, R.A., Johansson, L.-S., Efimenko, K., 
Osterberg, M., and Laine, J. (2010) Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) brushes grafted 
from cellulose nanocrystals via surface-initiated single-electron transfer living 
radical polymerization. Biomacromolecules , 11, 2683–2691.
[89] Majoinen, J., Walther, A., McKee, J.R., Kontturi, E., Aseyev, V., Malho, J.M., 
Ruokolainen, J., and Ikkala, O. (2011) Polyelectrolyte brushes grafted from cel -
lulose nanocrystals using Cu-mediated surface-initiated controlled radical polym -
erization. Biomacromolecules , 12, 2997–3006.
[90] Xu, Q., Yi, J., Zhang, X., and Zhang, H. (2008) A novel amphotropic polymer based 
on cellulose nanocrystals grafted with azo polymers. European Polymer Journal , 
44, 2830–2837.
[91] Mattoso, L.H.C., Medeiros, E.S., Baker, D.A., Avloni, J., Wood, D.F., and Orts, W.J. 
(2009) Electrically conductive nanocomposites made from cellulose nanofibrils 
and polyaniline. Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology , 9, 2917–2922.REFEREnCES   389
[92] Auad, M.L., Richardson, T., Orts, W.J., Medeiros, E.S., Mattoso, L.H.C., Mosiewicki, 
M.A., Marcovich, N.E., and Aranguren, M.I. (2011) Polyaniline-modified cellulose 
nanofibrils as reinforcement of a smart polyurethane. Polymer International , 60, 
743–750.
[93] Littunen, K., Hippi, U., Johansson, L.-S., Österberg, M., Tammelin, T., Laine, J., and 
Seppälä, J. (2011) Free radical graft copolymerization of nanofibrillated cellulose 
with acrylic monomers. Carbohydrate Polymers , 84, 1039–1047.
[94] Stenstad, P ., Andresen, M., Tanem, B.R., and Stenius, P . (2008) Chemical surface 
modifications of microfibrillated cellulose. Cellulose , 15, 35–45.
[95] Nakagaito, A.N., Iwamoto, S., and Yano, H. (2005) Bacterial cellulose: The ultimate 
nano-scalar cellulose morphology for the production of high-strength composites. 
Applied Physics A: Materials Science & Processing , 80, 93–97.391Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 17
Cellulose-Based Nanocomposites: 
Processing Techniques
ROBERT A. SHANKS
17.1 INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this chapter is to review cellulose-based nanocomposites 
where the nano-phase component can be cellulose nanofibers or cellulose 
nanocrystals. The matrix phase can be comprised of cellulose, a cellulose 
derivative, or more typically a synthetic or bioderived polymer. The matrix 
phase can be thermoplastic or thermoset. An alternative is where the nanopar -
ticles are not derived from cellulose, while a second dispersed phase or a 
matrix phase is constituted of cellulose. The cellulose can be derived from 
many sources with the choice being related to the locality where the compos -
ites will be made. This chapter concentrates on processing techniques for the 
cellulose. Details of specific polymers and composites are discussed in other 
chapters.
Cellulose is an abundant natural and renewable resource with high perfor -
mance structural properties that is available in many forms, often in the pres -
ence of other natural materials of varying composition. Cellulose is the 
structural material of all plants. Commercial grades of cellulose are derived 
from trees, bast fibers, bamboo, and agricultural by-products. Cellulose has 
been consolidated into wood, including lignin flours to provide new materials 
from renewable resources with the same chemical structures within [1]. Wood, 
bamboo, and some other products are used directly in buildings, furniture, and 
transport, with little treatment other than heating and drying to increase 
dimensional stability. Other cellulose products, such as those from flax, hemp, 392  CEllul OSE-BASEd NANOCO mpOSiTES: pROCESS iNg TECHN iquES
sisal, kenaf, jute, and waste crop fibers, require separation and purification of 
fibers to form paper, textiles, and many other cellulose and derivative products. 
Natural fibers have received much attention because of their relatively low 
density, and nonabrasive, nontoxic, and biodegradable nature [2]. Natural 
fibers are available in many forms with comparable material properties and 
high molding flexibility. They are environmentally friendly, making them sub -
stitute for reinforcing fillers such as mica, calcium carbonate, and glass. Bio -
composites can be designed to make high performance commodity applications. 
Some examples are electroactive papers, fuel cell membranes, controlled drug 
release mechanisms, and biosensors [3].
Cellulose fibers can also be employed for the preparation of hybrid com -
posites along with another polymer and a second complementary mineral filler 
reinforcement. A hybrid composite of polyurethane, cellulose, or synthetic 
polymer fibers and fly-ash was prepared as a sandwich of interconnecting ribs 
between two planar surfaces. The composite panels were of relatively low 
density suitable for walls, floors, ceilings, and roofs [4].
Separation and purification of cellulose require removal of unwanted mate -
rials from cellulose. An initial step may be retting where other materials are 
degraded by microorganisms faster than cellulose fibres. Plant structures can 
be disrupted by physical threshing, decortication, or steam explosion to release 
cellulose fibers from accompanying materials. Solvent extraction is a further 
step to remove waxes with acetone or related organic solvent. Lignin is a 
phenolic polymer that can be regarded as an adhesive matrix for cellulose 
fibers. In other plant materials, pectins and hemicellulose are found. These 
latter polysaccharides contain glucuronic acid and related carboxylic acids 
from other monosaccharides. Lignin, pectins, and hemicellulose are extracted 
with varying concentrations of (10 to 20%·w/v) sodium hydroxide solution.
Pectins can be removed from cellulose fibers by enzyme bioscouring with 
pectate lyase. Enzyme treatment occurs under mild conditions, 55°C and 
pH = 8.5 in a pH-buffered water dispersion. A longer treatment time improved 
the removal of low methoxy pectin. No crystalline transformation of the cel -
lulose was observed. The surface was observed to become smoother, with 
increased BET surface area and increased pore size [5].
During extraction with sodium hydroxide, cellulose is not dissolved; however 
it is swollen, allowing the crystal structure of cellulose to change from type I 
to type II. This means that crystal type I or native cellulose, where the cellulose 
chains are parallel and aligned in the state that they were biosynthesized, is a 
metastable form. Cellulose type II or textile cellulose, where the cellulose 
chains are antiparallel with tighter packing, is a thermodynamically more 
stable state. The process of conversion of native to textile cellulose using 
sodium hydroxide solution is called mercerization.
Cellulose cannot be melted for processing. Heat will volatilize the moisture 
content and cause the structure to become brittle or friable. The equilibrium 
moisture content depends upon humidity, typically in a range between 8% w/w 
and 12%·w/w. Water molecules are part of the crystal structure. Processing of iNTROduCTiON   393
cellulose requires dissolution, and there are few suitable solvents. Traditionally 
dissolving cellulose requires complexation or derivatization.
The first method for dissolving cellulose was via tetra-ammonia copper(II) 
((Cu(NH 3)4)2+) complexation in water to form a deep blue viscous solution. 
The complex is not stoichiometric, although there are optimum ratios of 
copper(II), ammonium, cellulose, and pH. The complex is dissociated in acid 
solution to regenerate the cellulose. This regeneration can be performed via 
extruding a thin stream of complex into dilute sulfuric acid to form regener -
ated cellulose fibers, viscose, or rayon. The second method is to form a sodium 
xanthate derivative by reaction with sodium hydroxide and carbon disulfide. 
The derivative is water-soluble and the cellulose solution can be purified by 
filtration before extruding into a dilute sulfuric acid regeneration bath to form 
regenerated cellulose fiber, the same as with the cuprammonium method. The 
xanthate method is the preferred method, although there are now more effec -
tive solvents for cellulose and production of regenerated cellulose fibers.
17.1.1 Cellulose Structure and Properties
Cellulose consists of 1,4-anhydroglucopyranose repeat units (Fig. 17.1). The 
sequence of cyclic polyhydroxy repeat units is remarkable in that all of the 
hydroxyl groups are equatorial with respect to the six-membered ring. The link 
from carbons 1 to 4 via an acetal group is also equatorial; that is, the acetal 
group is in the beta configuration. These structural features confer regularity 
on the cellulose chain, allowing close packing between chains in the form of 
crystallinity (Fig. 17.2). Regularity, close packing, and crystallinity confer high 
modulus and strength.
The pendant equatorial hydroxyl groups are important for further stiffening 
and strengthening of the cellulose chains internally by forming hydrogen 
bonds along the axis of the chain between adjacent glucose units. These  
intramolecular hydrogen bonds prevent rotation of the chain about the 1–4 
acetal links. Rotation is prevented by the pyranose ring structures. The com -
bination of ring structures and intramolecular hydrogen bonding makes cel -
lulose molecules completely rigid. Other hydroxyl groups form intermolecular 
hydrogen bonds between adjacent chains, ensuring the integrity of the crystal 
structure. The intermolecular hydrogen bonds assist and stabilize the crystal -
line structure.Figure 17.1  A representative segment of cellulose structure.
394  CEllul OSE-BASEd NANOCO mpOSiTES: pROCESS iNg TECHN iquES
Chemical properties of cellulose are defined by the hydroxyl and acetal 
groups. Acetal groups are resistant to alkali though hydrolyzed by acid. Thus, 
cellulose is hydrolyzed by acid and hydrolysis occurs faster in amorphous or 
less ordered crystalline regions. In the more regular crystalline region, hydro -
lysis is slow due to inhibited permeation of acid. The three hydroxyl groups 
on each repeat unit are more acidic than typical alcohol groups, though less 
acidic than phenolic hydroxyl groups. If cellulose is treated with an alkali such 
as sodium hydroxide or a base such as sodium carbonate, then some of the 
hydroxyl groups are dissociated into alkoxide anions within the examples 
given a sodium cation. Formation of alkoxide anions is important for many 
reactions of cellulose, such as where the alkoxides act as nucleophiles for 
acetylation, carboxymethylation, hydroxylpropylation, reaction with caprolac -
tone, and coupling with reactive dyes via chlorotriazine or vinylsulfone cou -
pling groups on the dye.
Alkoxide formation with sodium hydroxide disrupts hydrogen bonding and 
hence the crystal structure. This is the basis of mercerization where hydrogen 
bond disruption creates swelling and the crystal structure transforms from 
type I, native cellulose, to type II, textile cellulose. After the crystal transfor -
mation, the swelling is removed by washing and neutralization and the fibers 
remain in the type II crystalline form. Mercerization occurs because type I 
crystals are less thermodynamically stable than type II crystals. Initial forma -
tion of type I crystals is due to the mechanism of formation of cellulose and 
immediate clustering into crystals. Swelling can be performed using acid, 
although there is competition from random scission due to hydrolysis of acetal 
links.
17.1.2 Cellulose Solubility
Cellulose molecules are bound together by hydrogen bonds and molecular 
geometry gives tight packing and rigid molecules. All of these factors are 
responsible for cellulose being mainly insoluble. Cellulose can dissolve when 
it can form a complex that disrupts internal hydrogen bonding. A soluble 
complex is formed with tetra-ammonia copper(II) hydroxide as discussed 
previously. Highly polar liquids can dissolve cellulose since they compete Figure 17.2  Rigid cellulose chain segments stack together in crystals.
iNTROduCTiON   395
favorably for the hydrogen bonds. Such a solvent is N-methylmorpholine-N-
oxide (NMMO) (Fig. 17.3). NMMO solutions of cellulose are used to prepare 
regenerated microfibers such as designated by the trade names Lyocell and 
Tencel. The fibers are regenerated by extruding cellulose–NMMO solution 
into water where the cellulose is precipitated. NMMO has a high boiling tem -
perature, and it can be recovered from the regeneration water bath. Lyocell 
fiber is more uniform and have a smaller diameter than the traditional Rayon.
Lyocell staple fibers and filaments are suitable for composite reinforcement 
because they are superior to other cellulose fibers, such as compared with flax, 
due to purity and perfection [6]. Further enhancement of Lyocell type fibers 
can be made by inclusion of multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) into 
the fibers. MWCNT can contribute higher mechanical performance for appli -
cation of the fibers and composites, and electrical conductivity, with draw ratio 
being a determinant of properties [7].
NMMO has been used to prepare cellulose nanoparticles from a solution 
of cellulose via addition of a nonsolvent (water) under rapid mixing so that 
the cellulose was coagulated into nanoparticles. Hollow cellulose nanoparti -
cles were produced by the same method by self-encapsulation in a poly(acrylic 
acid) hydrogel layer. Inorganic particles were included, and they functioned 
as templates for core-shell inorganic–cellulose nanoparticles [8].
NMMO contains an internal salt structure on the N-oxide function. By 
analogy with NMMO, cellulose is soluble in other strongly complexing liquids 
such as ionic liquids, an example being imidazolium chloride. Ionic liquids are 
strongly interacting and compete well with intermolecular hydrogen bonding 
to separate and dissolve cellulose. Dilution with water decreases solvation of 
cellulose that precipitates in the more stable type I crystalline polymorph. 
Cellulose solutions are used to determine cellulose molar mass by dilute solu -
tion viscometry using a Uhbelodhe suspended-level viscometer.
Cellulose solutions in ionic liquids are used for characterization using 
typical solution-based physical methods, which help determine their interac -
tions [9].
1-butyl-3-Methylimidazolium chloride (Fig. 17.4) was used to prepare  
concentrated solutions of cellulose and amylose, and dynamic rheological 
measurements were used to detect molar mass between entanglements. Figure 17.3  N-methylmorpholine-N-oxide structure.
396  CEllul OSE-BASEd NANOCO mpOSiTES: pROCESS iNg TECHN iquES
Extrapolation to zero solvent was used to calculate molar mass between 
entanglements in the quasi-melt state, and the results were found to be con -
sistent with values of polysaccharides in a random coil conformation such as 
agarose and gellan. The molar mass between entanglements for amylose was 
found to be larger due to the helical conformation of its chains [10].
The solution state of cellulose in various solvents including NMMO and 
ionic liquids with varying anions was characterized using rheology. Zero-shear 
viscosities, storage and loss moduli, time–temperature master curves, and 
complex viscosities were measured using comparable molar ratios between 
cellulose and solvent. Anisotropic properties of concentrated cellulose solu -
tions were characterized using polarized light microscopy and rheology with 
variation of solvent, concentration, and temperature [11].
Ionic liquid (1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate, Fig. 17.4) was used to 
swell poplar wood to permeate enzymes and catalysts deep into the wood 
structure for improved pretreatments and accelerated cellulose hydrolysis. 
Silver and gold nanoparticles were added as probes to detect their depth 
penetration into the wood, and they remained in the wood after contracting 
the ionic liquid-swollen wood with water [12].
Corn husk cellulose was dissolved in 1-allyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride 
and 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate (Fig. 17.4) to form solutions that 
were used to cast cellulose films that were found to contain cellulose type II 
crystals. The films exhibited high tensile modulus and strength, and the ionic 
liquids were able to be recycled [13].
Cellulose has been described previously in this chapter as being swollen by 
sodium hydroxide solution. Due to internal hydrogen bonding being strong, 
cellulose can exhibit an upper critical solution temperature. This means that 
cellulose is likely to be more soluble in sodium hydroxide solutions at low 
temperatures. Upon heating, the internal hydrogen bonds are more thermally 
stable than complexes or salt formation and swelling with sodium hydroxide 
solution. Dilute solutions of cellulose in sodium hydroxide solution are formed Figure 17.4  Structure of ionic liquids (a) 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate, (b) 
1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride, (c) 1-allyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride, and 
(d) 1-benzyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride.
iNTROduCTiON   397
by cyclic freeze–thawing of the mixture where the thaw temperature is kept 
below about 10°C. Cellulose can be precipitated from the solution by heating 
or neutralizing.
The proposition that cellulose in sodium hydroxide has a lower critical 
solution temperature comes from the extensive internal hydrogen bonding 
supported by regularity of cellulose. Heating disrupts these cellulose interac -
tions less than random interactions, hydrogen bonding, and salt formation with 
sodium hydroxide. At low temperatures these sodium hydroxide-initiated 
interactions can predominate and affect a low level of solubility. Such observa -
tions are consistent with lower critical solution temperatures of other hydrogen-
bonded polymers in polar media. Cellulose solubility is enhanced through 
more strongly interacting solvents such as ionic liquids. NMMO is essentially 
an ionic liquid, though a zwitterionic liquid due to its N-oxide functionality 
compared with those having a separate complex organic cation and an anion 
such as halogen.
A problem with cellulose fibers is that they contain moisture that varies 
with humidity, temperature, and equilibration time in the presence or absence 
of water. The water content and its variation is a limitation for the application 
of cellulose composites. Completely dry cellulose fibers are brittle, and they 
will regain moisture. A solution is to replace the moisture with other hydro -
philic molecules or grafted polymer. Dry cellulose was saturated with acrylo -
nitrile with a thermal initiator, and then the acrylonitrile was polymerized. The 
resulting polyacrylonitrile grafted cellulose was extracted to remove surface-
adsorbed polyacrylonitrile. The grafted fibers were then used to prepare com -
posites. The mechanical properties performed by a single fiber test method 
were strongly influenced by the cellulose structure, lateral index of crystallin -
ity, and fraction of grafting [14]. Similar interstitial polymerization was per -
formed using butyl acrylate, 2-ethylhexyl acrylate and methyl methacrylate to 
replace the water in flax cellulose fibers. Properties of composites formed from 
the treated fibers confirmed that adhesion between matrix and fibers was 
enhanced by the interstitial polymerization. The composites were subjected to 
moist environmental conditions to test for development of mold and fungi, 
and the acetone-washed polymerization-treated flax composites were resistant 
to these growths [15].
Cellulose was used as a template for layer-by-layer deposition of titania–
poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) with nanometer precision. The cellulose was 
extracted with sodium hydroxide–urea, resulting in hierarchical porous titania–
PVA composite sheets that replicated the morphology of the template cellu -
lose, flexibility, and solvent swelling characteristics. Removal of the titania with 
acid left a hierarchical PVA sheet. The method allows the design and produc -
tion of biomimetic hybrid materials [16].
Natural polymers such as cellulose, starch, and proteins are not a special 
category of polymers; they have the same structure–property relationships as 
their synthetic polymer relatives after their functionality and stereochemistry 
have been considered. While no new theories are necessary, cellulose is unique 398  CEllul OSE-BASEd NANOCO mpOSiTES: pROCESS iNg TECHN iquES
in its structural complexity, regularity, intra-, and intermolecular hydrogen 
bonding. The cellulose structure resists solution formation in all but the most 
strongly interacting solvents. Powerful, crude tools are needed to overcome 
the delicate intricacies of nature. Figure 17.5 shows a hierarchical view of cel -
lulose structures from the molecule to complex multicomponent crystalline 
fibrous compositions.
17.1.3 Electrospun Cellulose Fibers
Cellulose fibers with diameters in the nanometer range are prepared by elec -
trospinning. The solvents that are suitable for cellulose solutions are ionic and 
can be used to form filaments under a voltage differential between capillary 
and target screen or roller. About 300 V DC is typical to accelerate a cellulose 
solution and cause a narrow diameter on the target. The mesh of nanofibers 
formed on the target can be used for composite formation by impregnating 
with a compatible matrix polymer preferably as a solution, chain extendable, 
or cross-linkable prepolymer.
The small diameter and orienting directional flow of the solution as  
it accelerates to the target produce highly regular fibers with high mechanical Figure 17.5  Hierarchical structures of cellulose from molecule to superstructures.Molecular cellulose
Xn = 800– 1 0,000, r igid lateral hydrogen bonds
solub le complex es and with hy drogen bonding
Cellulose nanocr ystals
hydrogen bonded la yers
type I nativ e, II te xtile (r egenerat ed)
Cellulose nanof ibers
highl y crystalline , from selectiv e hydrolysis
purified by dialy sis due to nanosize
Cellulose f ibers
microscale with high aspect ratio
natural or r egenerat ed
include noncellulosic components
Nativ e cellulose f ibers
fiber bundles , type I
contain : lignin, pectin,
hemicellulose , waxes
bast, seed, leaf , skin,
fruit, stalk, woodRegenera ted
cellulose f ibers
pure cellulose , type II
solution wet spinning
Viscose , Rayon, Ly ocell
Tencel, ModaliNTROduCTiON   399
performance. The electrospinning process produces a dense packed  
nonwoven mat that creates high in-plane modulus and strength in composites 
produced from it. Cellulose can be dissolved and electrospun from two  
solvent systems: lithium chloride (LiCl)–N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMA) and 
N-methylmorpholine-N-oxide (NMMO)–water. Nonwoven mats of nanodi -
ameter cellulose fibers (250–750 nm) have been obtained. The cellulose fibers 
vary from amorphous to semicrystalline, depending on solvent and conditions 
[17]. Electrospun cellulose fiber mats have sufficiently dense packing to be 
considered for direct application as filters and membranes without a matrix 
phase. A matrix phase is preferred if the intended application requires mechan -
ical properties.
Cellulose nonwoven fibers were electrospun from cellulose in an ionic 
liquid, 1-butyl-3-methylinmidazolium chloride (Fig. 17.4) in a constant tem -
perature chamber to prevent solidification of the ionic liquid. The fibers had 
diameters in the range of 500–800 nm [18]. Cellulose nanofibers have been 
electrospun from solution in pure ionic liquid or a binary mixture of ionic 
liquids at ambient temperatures. Electrospinning of 8%·w/w cellulose in 
1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate (Fig. 17.4) produced electrospun fibers 
with average diameters of 470 nm while binary mixtures of 1-ethyl-3-
methylimidazolium acetate and 1-decyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride resulted 
in average diameters of 120 nm. The electrospinning was carried out with 
direct coagulation of the fibers in a water bath from which the ionic solvent 
could be recovered [19].
Oriented cellulose nanofibers were prepared by electrospinning on a rotat -
ing cylinder collector. An optically transparent (88–92% transmission) epoxy 
resin composite reinforced with the electrospun cellulose nanofiber mats was 
prepared by solution impregnation with 5–30%·w/w fibers. Wetting, impregna -
tion, and strong interfacial adhesion were obtained. Modulus and strength 
increased significantly, and storage modulus increased at temperatures above 
the glass transition temperature [20].
17.1.4 Microcrystalline Cellulose
Microcrystalline cellulose (MCC) is formed by partial hydrolysis of native 
cellulose materials such as cotton. Cellulose is suspended in sulfuric acid for 
about an hour for hydrolysis to occur, then the remaining highly crystalline 
cellulose is separated by filtration or centrifugation. MCC dispersion requires 
high shear because of its tendency to flocculate, which is the basis of its thixo -
tropic behavior. Suspensions for MCC are thixotropic and useful in many 
food- and solution-based products. The ability of MCC to flocculate and absorb 
or complex with other polar components within a composite suggests its use 
as a third phase or interphase in composites containing other cellulose fillers 
or matrix. MCC is not expected to be a reinforcing phase in the same way as 
are cellulose fibers; however, it can contribute via its binding characteristics.400  CEllul OSE-BASEd NANOCO mpOSiTES: pROCESS iNg TECHN iquES
Ball milling has been used to decrease the size of cellulose fibers and increase 
surface area as measured by a BET gas absorption technique. During ball 
milling, fiber bundles were disrupted and the crystallinity of the cellulose was 
reduced. An increase in solvent polarity, solvent–fiber ratio, agitation speed, and 
drying rate resulted in the rearrangement of ball-milled cellulose crystalline 
structures to a greater extent with increase in BET surface area [21].
Cellulose fibers were obtained by partial acid hydrolysis of MCC or 
mechanical disintegration of regenerated wood fibers. The fibers were surface 
treated with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APS) for compatibilization with 
poly(lactic acid) (PLA). Cellulose–PLA composites were prepared by melt 
compounding, and enhanced modulus and relaxation phenomena were found, 
particularly with the cellulose derived from MCC due to the higher aspect 
ratio of these fibers and crystallization changes in the PLA [22].
Composites of MCC and cellulose nanofiber were prepared in polypropyl -
ene (PP). Single batch mixing was compared with multiple batch mixing to 
evaluate processing contribution to dispersion of the cellulose. Thermogravim -
etry (TGA) was used to measure dispersion according to the distribution of 
results for PP and cellulose contents, which also translated into variability of 
mechanical properties [23].
17.1.5 Bacterial Cellulose
Ultrathin cellulose fibers are produced by bacteria. These natural nanofibers 
have highly ordered crystalline structures that are suitable for composites and 
water suspension gelation. Bacterial cellulose application is limited by it being 
only available in small quantities. A high structural perfection contributes 
enhanced modulus and strength compared with typical micrometer diameter 
cellulose fibers. Bacterial cellulose has unique properties due to its highly 
ordered structure, and it can be used as a substrate for composites or can be 
chemically functionalized [24].
Magnetic membranes were formed from bacterial cellulose using NMMO 
as solvent and combining the solution with ferrites. Thin sections of bacterial 
cellulose showed the magnetic particles located along cellulose microfibrils 
that were assumed to be sites for their nucleation [25]. Cellulose nanocrystals 
from bacterial cellulose were prepared and surface-modified using trimethyl -
silylation, then used to reinforce cross-linked poly(dimethylsiloxane) [26].
Bacterial cellulose sheets impregnated with phenol–formaldehyde resin 
were used to produce high modulus and strength composites by compression 
molding. The high modulus was a result of uniform, continuous, and aligned 
nanoscalar network of cellulosic fibers oriented in-plane by compression of 
bacterial cellulose pellicles [27].
Bacterial cellulose–silica hybrids were prepared from bacterial cellulose 
membranes and tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) under neutral pH conditions  
at ambient temperature. Macroscopically homogeneous membranes were 
obtained containing silica spheres. The silica spheres were readily recovered iNTROduCTiON   401
after removing the cellulose. The new hybrids were thermally stable and dis -
played emission under ultraviolet (UV) excitation due to oxygen-related 
defects at the silica surface and the emission color was dependent on excitation 
wavelength [28]. PVA was reinforced with bacterial cellulose by forming  
composites in a coagulating bath and cross-linking the material with formal -
dehyde. The resulting nanocomposite hydrogels exhibited enhanced mechani -
cal strength, thermal resistance, and limiting swelling ratio [29].
17.1.6 Nanocellulose Formation
Cellulose nanofibers and nanocrystals are formed by selective degradation. 
Acid hydrolysis continued to about 50% mass loss leaving nanoparticles at 
first nanofibers, then nanocrystals. Suspensions of nanocellulose are transpar -
ent because the nanoparticles are too small to scatter light. The particles are 
too small to be filtered; however, they can be separated from the soluble 
hydrolysis products by dialysis to form a suspension of nanocellulose in water. 
Gels can be formed by freeze-drying nanocellulose suspensions.
Dissolved, emulsified, or dispersed polymer can be combined with nanocel -
lulose to form composites after removal of the water. The nanocellulose par -
ticles are stabilized by polymer adsorption. Due to the large surface area to 
volume ratio of the cellulose, considerable reinforcement is found at relatively 
low concentrations, such as about 1–5%·v/v.
Cellulose nanofibers or whiskers, prepared from tunicate fibers, have  
been used to form aerogels formed through freeze-drying suspensions of  
the fibers in water. An ultralow density layered superstructure was formed 
from templating the ice crystal morphology, although the neat aerogels were 
fragile. Inorganic–organic hybrid aerogels were formed comprising montmo -
rillonite and cellulose nanofibers. These aerogels exhibited compressive 
strengths that were higher than predicted by additivity calculation. The cause 
of this synergy was enhanced formation of three-dimensional network struc -
tures during freeze-drying [30].
Microfibrillated cellulose (MFC) is a web-like cluster of cellulose fibrils 
with diameters in the range of 10–100 nm. MFC was dispersed in an acetone 
solution of CA to give an all-cellulose nanocomposite that was improved if 
the MFC were treated with APS. MFC doubled the tensile modulus of CA 
and tensile strength was similarly enhanced [31].
Acid hydrolyzed cellulose suspensions in water were found to form biphasic 
structure within a narrow concentration range where the upper and lower 
phases were isotropic and anisotropic (chiral nematic). Polarizing optical 
microscopy revealed that the chiral nematic pitch of the anisotropic phase 
decreased with increasing concentration, which was caused by a decrease in 
the electrostatic double layer thickness of the individual nanofibers, due to 
increased intermolecular interaction. Chiral nematic textures were observed 
using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). SEM was suitable for study of 
nanofiber orientation within the liquid crystalline phase [32].402  CEllul OSE-BASEd NANOCO mpOSiTES: pROCESS iNg TECHN iquES
17.2 CELLULOSE NANOCOMPOSITES
Cellulose derivatives are more readily dissolved or processed than cellulose 
and therefore suited for nanocomposite preparation with available nanopar -
ticles, platelets, and fibers. Cellulose acetate (CA), cellulose acetate–butyrate 
(CAB), plasticized with triethyl citrate have been extruded into nanocompos -
ites with modified layered clay. The cellulose–clay interface was enhanced 
when maleic anhydride-grafted CAB was used, and CA or CAB was pre-
plasticized before clay addition [33]. Exfoliation of the clay was confirmed and 
improved when maleic anhydride-grafted CAB was used as compatibilizer and 
mechanical properties were enhanced in the clay nanocomposites [34].
17.2.1 Thermoplastic Composites
The main thermoplastic used with cellulose fibers is PP . Several methods are 
used to disperse cellulose in PP , depending on the form of the cellulose. Par -
ticulate cellulose from wood flour to nanocellulose can be dispersed in melted 
PP by extrusion or batch mixing. The cellulose–PP dispersions are then formed 
by injection molding, thermoforming, or further extrusion.
Long fiber forms of cellulose require different techniques to maintain the 
cellulose structure. Long cellulose fibers such as those from cotton, flax, hemp, 
kenaf, and other plant materials can be first formed into felted (nonwoven or 
needle punched) or woven mats. The mats must be impregnated with PP prior 
to formation of a composite under heat and pressure. One method is to scatter 
PP powder into a cellulose mat under vibration, so as to mix the PP powder 
with the fiber mesh. The PP is melted and a composite formed by passing the 
material through heated rollers. Another method is to intersperse or weave 
PP fibers into the cellulose fibers. The combined fiber mat is heated under 
pressure to melt and diffuse the PP while consolidating the composite. Melting 
and consolidation is a maximum at the surfaces, which are critical to mechani -
cal performance. At temperatures above 200°C cellulose degrades, so at this 
temperature, a time of about 1–4 minutes is suitable at moderate pressure to 
enable flow of the PP between fibers.
MAPP has been used to prepare composites with MCC where the MCC 
was pretreated with stearic acid, silicone oil, or alkyltitanate coupling agent to 
decrease the hydrophobicity of the MCC surface and facilitate processing, 
allowing MCC to show improved dispersion. Tensile mechanical properties 
increased with MCC content, PP creep was reduced, and storage and loss 
moduli as well as glass transition temperature were increased in the compos -
ites [35].
The methods described are suitable for other thermoplastics for which  
the melting and molding temperatures of the thermoplastic are preferably  
less than 200°C. The limiting conditions for composite formation depend on 
the time, temperature, and pressure combination chosen and usually an 
optimum will be found. At higher temperatures cellulose dehydrates, with loss CEllulOSE NANOCOmpOSiTES   403
of physically and chemically bonded water. Chemical dehydration products 
give yellowing and further darkening of the cellulose fibers.
Cellulose microfibrils possess unique properties compared with existing 
fibers: high strength, formability, and geometrical complexity at very small 
scale, low density, and abrasive resistance, biomedical compatibility, and pos -
sibility of recycling. Cellulose microfibrils has been combined with PP in 
conjunction with a silane coupling agent to form composites with enhanced 
compatibility and mechanical properties [36].
Bacterial poly(hydroxybutyrate-co-hydroxyvalerate) (PHBV) was rein -
forced with cellulose nanowhiskers (CNW) using solvent-casting. CNW were 
prepared from microcrystalline cellulose using sulfuric acid hydrolysis. Tensile 
modulus and strength of PHBV were enhanced and molecular mobility was 
constrained by the CNW in the vicinity of the CNW surfaces due to strong 
interactions between the components [37].
17.2.2 Thermosetting Composites
Cellulose nanoparticles can be dispersed in epoxy resins, unsaturated polyes -
ters, and vinyl ester resins. Laboratory-scale dispersions can be made using 
ultrasonication, while high shear impellor dispersers are suitable, though less 
efficient, at various batch sizes. A persistent problem is entrapment of air 
bubbles, so some form of degassing is required before the gel time is reached. 
Cyclic application of vacuum is suitable for degassing. Alternatively centrifug -
ing separates bubbles on a laboratory scale. Generally, thermal cure during 
dispersion must be prevented by dispersion in the main phase only such as an 
epoxy resin without the hardener. This is readily achieved if only a small pro -
portion of curing agent is to be added so the dispersion is uniform and not too 
viscous for further additions. Unsaturated polyester and vinyl ester resins 
require a small addition of initiator so the volume of resin available for cel -
lulose dispersion is large. If the initiator has a high temperature for radical 
formation, then it could be added in one step along with the filler.
There is potential for epoxy to react with the slightly acidic hydroxyl groups 
on cellulose and form a strong interface. Some hydroxyl sited radicals may 
form and create bonds with the radical initiated resins, such as occurs more 
specifically with ceric ion-initiated grafting of vinyl monomers onto cellulose. 
MFC as a reinforcement for phenol–formaldehyde resin provided high 
modulus and strength due in part to the formation of nano-order scale inter -
connected fibrils with high surface area in a web-like network structure. MFC 
with its extremely high strength formed composites with outstanding mechani -
cal properties [38].
17.2.3 Cellulose Derviative–Cellulose Composites
The matrix can be CA, CAB, methylcellulose, or other soluble cellulose  
derivative so that a solution can be formed in which to disperse cellulose 404  CEllul OSE-BASEd NANOCO mpOSiTES: pROCESS iNg TECHN iquES
nanoparticles. After evaporation of solvent, the composites were consolidated 
using a heat press to remove voids and relax the structure. CAB was used to 
form hemp fiber composites plasticized with tributyl citrate, where the volume 
fraction of hemp was 0.4. Prior to composite formation, the hemp fibers were 
purified with pectate lyase enzyme and the composites after this treatment 
were superior to those from untreated or alkali treated hemp. Shorter fibers 
gave the most enhanced properties unexpectedly due to more efficient wetting 
and better consolidation [39].
17.2.4 All-Cellulose Composites
All-cellulose composites are those in which the matrix is cellulose and the 
dispersed reinforcing phase is cellulose fibers. The matrix cellulose must be 
dissolved to enable dispersal of the nanoparticles of cellulose since cellulose 
cannot be melted. All-cellulose composites were prepared from hemp fibers 
purified by acetone extraction and sodium hydroxide treatment that were 
impregnated with a solution of hemp cellulose in NMMO to which sufficient 
water had been added to prevent further cellulose dissolution. The composite 
was formed by coagulation of the cellulose solution in ethanol–water, removal 
of NMMO by washing with ethano–water, followed by drying and hot pressing 
to consolidate the structure. Morphology of the fibers was modified during the 
processing. The mechanical properties of the composites depended on size, 
surface area, crystallinity, and the structural swelling of the fibers [40]. In these 
composites the cellulose matrix provided adhesion, as do lignin, pectin, and 
hemicelluloses in plant fibers.
All-cellulose composites have been prepared based on ramie fibers impreg -
nated with a cellulose solution in sodium hydroxide and urea in water. Good 
compatibility was observed between the fibers and matrix as expected from 
their same chemical structures. The properties of the cellulose matrix were 
enhanced by the presence of the independently crystallized cellulose in the 
fibers [41]. DMAC has been used as a solvent for partially dissolving MCC 
that formed gels after precipitation. During dissolution the MCC fibers were 
progressively separated into thinner crystals that finally remained in the com -
posite with the dissolved cellulose forming the matrix. Mechanical properties 
and morphology of the all-cellulose composites were controlled by rate of 
precipitation, initial cellulose concentration, dissolution time, and precipita -
tion conditions. Preparation conditions limiting defects produced the highest 
tensile modulus and strength [42].
Lyocell and high modulus and strength cellulose fibers were used to prepare 
all-cellulose composites by a selective dissolution method that depended  
on immersion time in the solvent. The all-cellulose composites demonstrated 
a suitable route to form biocomposites with mechanical and thermal proper -
ties that can be varied depending on selection of fibers and preparation param -
eters [43].CONCluSiON   405
17.3 FUTURE DIRECTIONS FOR CELLULOSE-BASED MATERIALS
Cellulose has been used as reinforcement and matrix in many materials due 
to its broad range of properties that provide strength, rigidity, and toughness; 
in addition it can be shaped, cut, fastened, and it is durable. Cellulose has a 
multiscale morphology from large timber structures, fiber bundles, fibers, 
nanofibers, nanocrystals to individual molecules. Many composites have incor -
porated wood flour and cellulose fibers from wood, bast fibers, and waste 
agricultural materials. Recent developments are moving to smaller scales 
because increased knowledge of nanomaterials has shown the high perfor -
mance and efficiency that can be gained from materials with small size, huge 
surface area, and defect-free morphology. There is a distinction between crys -
tals growing within a matrix material and a separate nanocrystalline phase 
added as a filler. Cellulose nanocrystals added and dispersed in a matrix have 
more perfect structure and molecular orientation. This is because they have 
survived preparation by selective acid hydrolysis of larger cellulose structures. 
This preparation from cellulose fibers ensures orientation. Similarly, cellulose 
nanocrystals are from the most perfect structures within plant fibers and wood.
The current trend towards materials from renewable resources demon -
strates the high performance of cellulose fibers. Purification of native  
fibers has been practiced in the textile industry. Enzymic methods begin with 
retting and move to specific enzymes such as pectinase. Newer methods of 
purification and regeneration are based on recyclable efficient solvents such 
as NMMO and ionic liquids. The methods are now applied to preparation of 
all-cellulose composites. Hybrid composites are formed from cellulose fibers 
and inorganic-based nanoparticles, where long fibers can be used in high 
volume fraction with the nanoparticles, providing another level of reinforce -
ment with their high surface area and physical network formation. This trend 
culminates in the nano-phase consisting of cellulose nanostructures or the 
nano-phase providing the total reinforcement. The low percolation threshold 
of nanoparticles, particularly nanofibers, enhances the properties compared 
with individually dispersed particles.
17.4 CONCLUSION
Cellulose is the most abundant polymer evolved for structural plant compo -
nents in semicrystalline morphologies often present in biocomposites and 
fibers. Application of cellulose in modified and semisynthetic materials has been 
commercialized and new materials are continuously being developed because 
of high performance and availability from renewable natural resources. Exten -
sion to nanocomposites is biomimetic because natural cellulose materials are 
constructed from the nanoscale. At the nanoscale, morphologies approach per -
fection and the interface is much larger for stress transfer. Cellulose nanofibers 406  CEllul OSE-BASEd NANOCO mpOSiTES: pROCESS iNg TECHN iquES
and nanocrystals have been formed by partial degradation of larger cellulose 
entities. Combining cellulose fibers with other nanofillers has been used to form 
hybrid nanocomposites. Cellulose has been included in the disperse phase, 
matrix phase, or both phases. Cellulose nanocomposites exhibit exceptional 
mechanical properties with relatively low density; they are biodegradable and 
can replace many synthetic polymer composites and natural materials that have 
not been designed for specific purposes.
ABBREVIATIONS
APS 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane
BET Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (gas absorption surface area 
measurement)
CA cellulose acetate
CAB cellulose acetate–butyrate
CNT carbon nanotubes
CNW cellulose nanowhiskers
DMAC N,N-dimethylacetamide
MAPP maleic anhydride-grafted polypropylene
MCC microcrystalline cellulose
MFC microfibrillated cellulose
MWCNT multiwalled carbon nanotubes
NMMO N-methylmorpholine-N-oxide
PHBV poly(hydroxybutyrate-co-hydroxyvalerate)
PLA poly(lactic acid)
PP polypropylene
PVA poly(vinyl alcohol)
TEOS tetraethoxysilane
TGA thermogravimetry
REFERENCES
 [1] Cipriani, G., Salvini, A., Baglioni, P ., and Bucciarelli, E. (2010) Cellulose as a 
renewable resource for the synthesis of wood consolidants. Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science , 118, 2939–2950.
 [2] Kalia, S., Kaith, B.S., and Kaur, I. (2009) Pretreatments of natural fibers and their 
application as reinforcing material in polymer composites: A review. Polymer 
Engineering and Science , 49, 1253–1272.
 [3] Pandey, J.K., Ahn, S.H., Lee, C.S., Mohanty, A.K., and Misra, M. (2010) Recent 
advances in the application of natural fiber based composites. Macromolecular 
Materials and Engineering , 295, 975–989.
 [4] Fraval, H.R., Emens, G.W. (2001) Manufacture of prefabricated structural building 
panels using high strength lightweight fiber ash composite. PCT Int. Appl.  (50 pp.). 
WO: 0181267 (Aerock, Inc., USA).REfERENCES   407
 [5] Ouajai, S., Shanks, R.A. (2005) Morphology and structure of hemp fibre after 
bioscouring. Macromolecular Bioscience , 5, 124–134.
 [6] Mieck, K.P ., Lutzkendorf, R., Reussmann, T., Nechwatal, A., and Eilers, M. (2001) 
Lyocell fibers—State of development in view of their application in composites. 
Gummi, Fasern, Kunststoffe , 54, 800–805.
 [7] Lu, J., Zhang, H., Jian, Y., Shao, H., and Hu, X. (2012) Properties and structure of 
MWNTs/cellulose composite fibers prepared by Lyocell process. Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science , 123, 956–961.
 [8] Nelson, K., Deng, Y. (2007) Encapsulation of inorganic particles with nanostruc -
tured cellulose. Macromolecular Materials and Engineering , 292, 1158–1163.
 [9] Zakrzewska, M.E., Bogelaukasik, E., and Bogelaukasik, R. (2010) Solubility of 
carbohydrates in ionic liquids. Energy & Fuels , 24, 737–745.
[10] Horinaka, J.-I., Yasuda, R., and Takigawa, T. (2011) Entanglement properties of 
cellulose and amylose in an ionic liquid. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: 
Polymer Physics , 49, 961–965.
[11] Kosan, B., Schwikal, K., and Meister, F. (2010) Solution states of cellulose in 
selected direct dissolution agents. Cellulose , 17, 495–506.
[12] Lucas, M., Macdonald, B.A., Wagner, G.L., Joyce, S.A., and Rector, K.D. (2010) 
Ionic liquid pretreatment of poplar wood at room temperature: Swelling and 
incorporation of nanoparticles. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces , 2, 
2198–2205.
[13] Cao, Y., Li, H., Zhang, Y., Zhang, J., and He, J. (2009) Structure and properties of 
novel regenerated cellulose films prepared from cornhusk cellulose in room tem -
perature ionic liquids. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 116, 547–554.
[14] Ouajai, S., Hodzic, A., and Shanks, R.A. (2004) Morphological and grafting modi -
fication of natural cellulose fibers. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 94, 
2456–2465.
[15] Shanks, R.A., Hodzic, A., and Ridderhof, D. (2006) Composites of poly(lactic acid) 
with flax fibers modified by interstitial polymerization. Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science , 99, 2305–2313.
[16] Gu, Y., Huang, J. (2009) Fabrication of natural cellulose substance derived hierar -
chical polymeric materials. Journal of Materials Chemistry , 19, 3764–3770.
[17] Kima, C.W., Kima, D.S., Kanga, S.Y., Marquezb, M., and Joo, Y.L. (2006) Structural 
studies of electrospun cellulose nanofibers. Polymer , 47, 5097–5107.
[18] Quan, S.L., Kang, S.G., and Chin, I.J. (2010) Characterization of cellulose fibers 
electrospun using ionic liquid. Cellulose , 17, 223–230.
[19] Freire, M.G., Teles, A.R.R., Ferreira, R.A.S., Carlos, L.D., Lopes-da-Silva, J.A., 
João, A.P ., and Coutinho, J.A.P . (2011) Electrospun nanosized cellulose fibers 
using ionic liquids at room temperature. Green Chemistry , 13, 3173–3183.
[20] Liao, H., Wu, Y., Wu, M., Zhan, X., and Liu, H. (2010) Aligned electrospun cellulose 
fibers reinforced epoxy resin composite films with high visible light transmittance. 
Cellulose , 19, 111–119.
[21] Ouajai, S., Shanks, R.A. (2006) Solvent and enzyme induced recrystallization of 
mechanically degraded hemp cellulose. Cellulose , 13, 31–44.
[22] Frone, A.N., Berlioz, S., Chailan, J.F., Panaitescu, D.M., and Donescu, D. (2011) 
Cellulose fiber-reinforced polylactic acid. Polymer Composites , 32, 976–985.408  CEllul OSE-BASEd NANOCO mpOSiTES: pROCESS iNg TECHN iquES
[23] Yang, H.-S., Gardner, D., and Nader, J. (2011) Dispersion evaluation of microcrys -
talline cellulose/cellulose nanofibril-filled polypropylene composites using ther -
mogravimetric analysis. Journal of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry , 103, 
1007–1015.
[24] Chen, P ., Cho, S.Y., and Jin, H.J. (2010) Modification and applications of bacterial 
celluloses in polymer science. Macromolecular Research , 18, 309–320.
[25] Sourty, E., Ryan, D.H., and Marchessault, R.H. (1998) Characterization of mag -
netic membranes based on bacterial and man-made cellulose. Cellulose , 5, 5–17.
[26] Grunert, M., Winter, W.T. (2000) Progress in the development of cellulose rein -
forced nanocomposites. Polymeric Materials Science and Engineering , 82, 232.
[27] Nakagaito, A.N., Iwamoto, S., and Yano, H. (2005) Bacterial cellulose: The ultimate 
nano-scalar cellulose morphology for the production of high-strength composites. 
Applied Physics A: Materials Science and Processing , 80, 93–97.
[28] Barud, H.S., Assunção, R.M.N., Martines, M.A.U., Dexpert-Ghys, J., Marques, 
R.F.C., Messaddeq, Y., and Ribeiro, S.J.L. (2008) Bacterial cellulose–silica organic–
inorganic hybrids. Journal of Sol-Gel Science and Technology , 46, 363–367.
[29] Yang, L., Zhang, H.Y., Yang, O., and Lu, D.N. (2012) Bacterial cellulose–poly(vinyl 
alcohol) nanocomposite hydrogels prepared by chemical crosslinking. Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science , 126, E245–E251.
[30] Gawryla, M.D., Berg, O.V.D., Weder, C., and Schiraldi, D.A. (2009) Clay aerogel/
cellulose whisker nanocomposites: A nanoscale wattle and daub. Journal of Mate -
rials Chemistry , 19, 2118–2124.
[31] Lu, J., Drzal, L.T. (2010) Microfibrillated cellulose/cellulose acetate composites: 
Effect of surface treatment. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics , 
48, 153–161.
[32] Miller, A.F., Donald, A.M. (2003) Imaging of anisotropic cellulose suspensions 
using environmental scanning electron microscopy. Biomacromolecules , 4, 
510–517.
[33] Park, H.M., Mohanty, A.K., Drzal, L.T., Lee, E., Mielewski, D.F., and Misra, M. 
(2006) Effect of sequential mixing and compounding conditions on cellulose 
acetate/layered silicate nanocomposites. Journal of Polymers and the Environ -
ment , 14, 27–35.
[34] Park, H.M., Liang, X.M., Mohanty, A.K., Misra, M., and Drzal, L.T. (2004) Effect 
of compatibilizer on nanostructure of the biodegradable cellulose acetate/
organoclay nanocomposites. Macromolecules , 37, 9076–9082.
[35] Spoljaric, S., Genovese, A., and Shanks, R.A. (2009) Polypropylene-microcrystalline 
cellulose composites with enhanced compatibility and properties. Composites Part 
A: Applied Science and Manufacturing , 40, 791–799.
[36] Panaitescu, D.M., Donescu, D., Bercu, C., Vuluga, D.M., Iorga, M., and Ghiurea, 
M. (2007) Polymer composites with cellulose microfibrils. Polymer Engineering & 
Science , 47, 1228–1234.
[37] Ten, E., Turtle, J., Bahr, D., Jiang, L., and Wolcott, M. (2010) Thermal and mechani -
cal properties of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate)/cellulose nanow -
hiskers composites. Polymer , 51, 2652–2660.
[38] Nakagaito, A.N., Yano, H. (2005) Novel high-strength biocomposites based on 
microfibrillated cellulose having nano-order-unit web-like network structure. 
Applied Physics A: Materials Science and Processing , 80, 155–159.REfERENCES   409
[39] Ouajai, S., Shanks, R.A. (2009) Biocomposites of cellulose acetate butyrate with 
modified hemp cellulose fibres. Macromolecular Materials and Engineering , 294, 
213–221.
[40] Ouajai, S., Shanks, R.A. (2009) Preparation, structure and mechanical properties 
of all-hemp cellulose biocomposites. Composites Science and Technology , 69, 
2119–2126.
[41] Yang, Q., Lue, A., and Zhang, L. (2010) Reinforcement of ramie fibers on regener -
ated cellulose films. Composites Science and Technology , 70, 2319–2324.
[42] Duchemin, B.J.C., Newman, R.H., and Staiger, M.P . (2009) Structure-property 
relationship of all-cellulose composites. Composites Science and Technology , 69, 
1225–1230.
[43] Soykeabkaew, N., Nishino, T., and Peijs, T. (2009) All-cellulose composites of 
regenerated cellulose fibres by surface selective dissolution. Composites Part A: 
Applied Science and Manufacturing , 40, 321–328.411Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 18   
Morphological and Thermal 
Investigations of Cellulosic 
Bionanocomposites
ANAYANCY OSORIO-MADRAZO  and MARIE-PIERRE LABORIE
18.1 INTRODUCTION
The natural renewability, material properties, and biodegradability of cellulose 
nanofibers (CNFs) have made these materials an alternative of choice for 
manufacturing environmentally friendly composites. Following the reports of 
Favier et al. [1, 2] on the reinforcement potential of CNFs almost 20 years ago, 
research activities and discoveries in this field of research have intensified, 
shown by the number of recent review articles [3–16].
CNFs of various dimensions and morphologies can be obtained from plant 
[17], algal [18–20], bacterial [21, 22], and animal sources [23]. During cellulose 
biosynthesis, glucan chains arrange in a parallel fashion and their interaction 
leads to the formation of a semi-crystalline structure comprising cellulose I 
allomorph, which assembles into cellulose microfibrils [24–30]. Microfibril 
lengths can reach tens of microns. Beside the crystalline regions, native cel -
lulose contains amorphous domains, which give the opportunity to process 
native cellulose materials into CNFs. While the terminology on CNFs is still 
in the course of being normalized, one generally defines two types of families 
as cellulose nanowhiskers (CNWs) or microfibrillated cellulose (MFC). CNWs 
or cellulose nanocrystals (CNC) are obtained by acid hydrolysis of the amor -
phous fraction of cellulose [31]. The liberated rod-like monocrystals present 
high stiffness (114–140 GPa) and high strength [32–36]. Both origin and hydro -
lysis conditions govern the final dimensions of CNWs [17]. Alternatively, MFC 
or nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) results from “peeling” off native cellulose 412  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
microfibrils into an entangled and hairy network of nanofibers presenting a 
broad range of sizes (Fig. 18.1b) [5, 37, 38]. The delamination of the microfibril 
bundles results from the action of mechanical energy by means of high pres -
sure homogenizer, microfluidizer, cryo-crushing, refining, or ultrasonication, 
often in combination with a chemical or biological modification [5, 37, 38]. 
CNFs can also be biosynthesized in the form of continuous ribbons by micro -
organisms and are generally termed bacterial or microbial cellulose [14, 21]. 
Spinning cellulose solutions is another synthetic method to produce continu -
ous single nanofibers. These latter two types of CNFs are not considered in 
this review, which focuses on bionanocomposites reinforced by MFC and 
CNWs.
In relation to their high surface area, high aspect ratio, and high crystallinity, 
MFC and CNWs improve the mechanical and barrier properties of polymer 
matrices [3, 4], thanks to the formation of a percolating network (for CNWs) 
and to an inherent entangled network morphology (for MFC) [39]. In other 
words, CNFs are very efficient fillers to control the properties of polymer 
matrices. As for filled polymers, it is well established that the thermal proper -
ties of polymers, namely glass rubber transition temperature (T g), melting 
temperature (T m), equilibrium viscoelastic properties, and thermal stability, are 
sensitive to the addition of fillers [40]. The magnitude of filler effect is a func -
tion of the interfacial interactions and compatibility between polymer matrix 
and filler [41]. CNW and MFC fillers are no exception and the literature 
abounds on this topic, although at a first glance general trends are not evident. 
This is no surprise if one considers the expected large specific surface area of 
CNFs, estimated as 10–100 times larger than that of native wood fiber [42], 
and the large resulting interfacial contact with a polymer matrix. Besides, these 
thermal properties have a strong practical significance for the macroscopic Figure 18.1  TEM images of (a) negatively stained Cladophora  sp. cellulose whiskers 
(reprinted with permission from Osorio-Madrazo et al. [20]. Copyright 2012 American 
Chemical Society); (b) microfibrillated cellulose (MFC) from Opuntia-ficus indica  
(reprinted with permission from Malainine et al. [105]. Copyright 2005 Elsevier Ltd.).
(a) (b)
1 /uni03BCm
1 /uni03BCmTHEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS   413
performance of nanocomposites, in particular for the mechanical, barrier, and 
biodegradation properties [43–47]. For example, in a polymer matrix, a higher 
crystallinity index, which might be brought about by the presence of fibers, 
will influence mechanical and barrier properties [43, 48, 49]. Additionally, in 
composites the main thermal transitions of a polymer matrix reflect the mor -
phologies of both the matrix and the matrix/filler interphase [40, 50]. Indeed, 
the relaxation behavior of a polymer matrix as well as the kinetics and ther -
modynamics of phase formation and transitions are all influenced by the scale 
of miscibility between the polymer matrix and the reinforcement. In the case 
of nanosized reinforcements such as CNWs and MFC, significant effects might 
be expected, providing a molecular lens to the interfacial adhesion and to the 
phase miscibility in such nanocomposites [50–54]. Therefore, aside from the 
practical significance of thermal properties, their diagnostic capability for 
assessing filler/matrix miscibility, scale of interactions, and microstructure at 
different length scales is particularly interesting.
This chapter highlights the impact of CNFs on the thermal properties of 
polymers and provides insight into the composite morphologies down to the 
molecular scale. With a particular focus on semicrystalline biodegradable poly -
mers, this review attempts to decipher the role of CNF surface attributes, 
shape, and loading amounts on morphological and thermal properties. Thus, 
this chapter first briefly reviews the theoretical framework of polymer transi -
tions and crystallization kinetics for semicrystalline polymers. Then, morphol -
ogy and thermal behavior (other than thermal stability) of specific cellulose/
biopolymer matrix materials are discussed.
18.2 THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS ON THE TRANSITIONS AND 
THE CRYSTALLIZATION KINETICS OF THERMOPLASTIC POLYMERS
Semicrystalline polymers, with their amorphous and crystallizable fractions, 
experience several thermal transitions; some of these are characteristic of only 
one fraction and others are influenced by both. The amorphous polymer frac -
tion is characterized by a main chain segmental motion, denoted β (or α) 
relaxation with its characteristic glass-rubber transition temperature, T g, which 
appears much broader in semicrystalline polymers than in amorphous poly -
mers, due to the constraining effects of the crystals. On the other hand, sub -
glass processes, which involve small motional volumes, sense the structure 
within only 1–2 nm and are generally not affected by the crystals. In addition 
to these relaxations, melting and crystallization are associated with the crystal -
lizable fraction and the characteristic temperatures, T m and T c, respectively. In 
polymer blends these thermal transitions are of prime importance as they 
dictate the physical state and thermomechanical behavior of the blend for a 
given thermal energy. In addition, they directly relate to the scale of miscibil -
ity [40, 41, 51–53]. Blends that are miscible at the 10–20 nm scale exhibit one 414  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
single T g, intermediate to those of the parent polymers [50]. In these systems, 
the T g dispersion is also often broadened toward low frequency. Alternatively, 
phase separation with domain sizes greater than ca. 20 nm is reflected by the 
detection of the individual T g of the parent polymers. Similar morphological 
manifestations are expected in composites reinforced with rigid fillers. That 
is, when a rigid filler is intimately dispersed within a polymer matrix, T g gener -
ally increases and broadens in relation to the intensity of filler/matrix inter -
facial interactions [40]. Thus, good mixing of stiff fillers into a polymer matrix 
constrains the main chain motions of the polymer matrix and increases 
motional heterogeneity due to concentration fluctuations and strength of 
attractive interactions. Alternatively, composites where fillers agglomerate or 
develop little interfacial adhesion with the polymer matrix leave segmental 
relaxations and local motions unchanged [40].
In the crystallizable fraction, polymer blend miscibility will also affect the 
resulting crystalline morphology and the kinetics of the formation of this 
phase. Indeed, for a semicrystalline polymer, the interactions with another 
miscible polymer can significantly disturb the crystallization process and the 
resulting morphology [41]. For example, blends, which are miscible in the melt, 
experience a reduction in the equilibrium melting temperature, T m°, indicative 
of lower crystal perfection and favorable energy of mixing. Indeed, equilib -
rium melting point directly relates to the Flory–Huggins interaction parameter 
χ12 [54]. When specific intermolecular interactions between two polymers are 
in action, they hinder chain mobility in the melt and T c decreases as a result 
[55]. For semicrystalline polymer composites, the situation is that of a crystal -
lization process taking place in the presence of a solidified dispersed phase; 
that is, heterogeneous nucleation dominates over homogeneous nucleation 
and the matrix consequently crystallizes more rapidly [56]. Such behavior has 
indeed often been observed in polymers filled with natural fibers, where tran -
scrystalline layers (TCL) and higher crystallinity indices reflect the fiber nucle -
ating effect [57, 58]. Common empirical models to describe crystallization 
comprise the Avrami bulk crystallization kinetics [59–61] and the Lauritzen–
Hoffman secondary nucleation kinetics [62]. The former is based on the time 
(t) evolution of volumetric crystallinity Xc:
 ln[ ln( ())] ln ln[ ] − − = + X t k n t c  (18.1)
where Xc(t) ranges from 0 to 1, n is the Avrami exponent, which depends on 
both the nucleation mechanism and density and therefore portrays the crystal 
shape, and k is the crystallization rate constant. In practice, the Avrami model 
of bulk crystallization, which only applies up to the point of crystallite impinge -
ment and thickening (generally, for Xc(t) < 0.5), does not differentiate between 
nucleation and lamellar growth rates, although these independently contribute 
to bulk crystallization rate. On the other hand, the Lauritzen–Hoffman sec -
ondary nucleation theory considers two contributions to the linear lamellar 
growth rate ( G) with a mobility component related to the activation energy THERMAL BEHAVIOR AND MORPHOLOGY   415
for chain reptation U* and the temperature at which all flow and reptation 
ceases T∞, and with a nucleation term where Kg stands for the nucleation 
constant growth rate and f is a constant [62]:
 ln ln( )*
G GU
R T TK
T Tf= −−−
∞0
Cg
C∆ (18.2)
To evaluate both morphology and scale of miscibility in polymer blends and 
composites, thermal analysis and microscopy are well suited. The former helps 
monitor thermal transitions and thus the dimension of motional domains, 
which hinges on the scale of miscibility. The latter allows direct visualization 
of phase morphology and crystallites. These tools have therefore been most 
widely used for the thermal and morphological characterization of CNF-
reinforced composites.
18.3 THERMAL BEHAVIOR AND MORPHOLOGY OF 
CRYSTALLIZABLE BIOPOLYMERS MODIFIED WITH CELLULOSE 
NANOFIBERS
18.3.1 Polyhydroxyalkanoate/Cellulose Nanocomposites
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) are biodegradable polyesters produced by bac -
teria as intracellular storage material. Their high mechanical properties explain 
the large interest in this family of polymers as a possible biodegradable alter -
native to polyolefins. Some of the first attempts at reinforcing polymers with 
CNFs have therefore focused on PHA/CNF nanocomposite systems. Dufresne 
et al. [46] solvent cast elastomeric medium-chain-length polyhydroxyalkano -
ates (Mcl-PHA) latex with CNWs with a view to assessing crystalline morphol -
ogy and the occurrence of transcrystallization [46]. In this work, the Mcl-PHA 
and the corresponding composites were prepared in both amorphous and 
semicrystalline morphologies. As expected, for the neat polymers (i.e., without 
CNW), the storage modulus (E ′) drop at T g was significantly higher in the 
amorphous PHA than in the semicrystalline system, where crystalline regions 
acted as physical cross-links (Fig. 18.2). Whiskers increased the storage modulus 
of the PHA significantly, especially in the rubbery region and more so for the 
amorphous system than for the semicrystalline analogue. While the matrix T g 
was not affected by CNW addition, damping was overall reduced, reflecting 
the reduced polymer mobility in the presence of whiskers. Interestingly, in the 
semicrystalline nanocomposites, E ′ dropped irremediably with the breakup of 
the crystalline regions at T m, whereas the CNW-induced-stabilization was still 
apparent for the amorphous polymers [46]. It is nowadays well established 
that thermal stabilization arises from the formation of a percolation network 
of CNWs [2, 63], and this is especially noticeable in low modulus rubbery 
polymers. In glassy or rigid polymers, a simple filler additive effect is expected 416  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
Figure 18.2  Dynamic thermomechanical analysis of amorphous (filled symbols) and 
semicrystalline (open symbols) CNW/PHA composites filled with 0 ( ), 1 wt% 
(), 3 wt% ( ), and 6 wt% ( ) of cellulose nanowhiskers (reprinted with per -
mission from Dufresne et al. [46]. Copyright 1999 American Chemical Society).10
9
8
7
6
5log (E’/P a)
150 200 250 300 350
Temperatur e (K)
based on the Halpin and Kardos model [64]. In this work, the authors made 
the proposition that the large modulus drop at T m reflected the close associa -
tion between whiskers and crystalline polymer regions [46]; that is, it was 
proposed that the cellulose percolation network formed within a transcrystal -
line layer.
Recently Wolcott et al. revisited the morphology of solvent cast PHA/  
CNW nanocomposites using the copolymer poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-  
hydroxyvalerate) (PHBV) [65–68]. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) 
heating scans revealed that freshly casted PHBV matrix and nanocomposites 
(1–5 wt% CNW) were fully crystallized, exhibiting only a double melting point 
ascribed to melting and recrystallization (Fig. 18.3b) [65]. After erasing the 
thermal history of the samples, T g and T c were additionally detected (Fig. 
18.3a). In this case, T g was not affected by CNW addition. When CNWs were 
modified with polyethylene glycol for compatibilization, the T g of the matrix 
was also unchanged, thus evidencing phase-separated morphologies [66]. In 
contrast, for the solvent cast composites, T c was found to decrease with increas -
ing CNWs, suggesting that CNWs have a nucleating effect on PHBV.
Polarized optical microscopy (POM) of neat matrix and nanocomposites 
confirmed CNW nucleating effect with the presence of smaller and more 
numerous spherulites (Fig. 18.4). Others confirmed the nucleating effect of 
CNWs on PHBV and showed expedited crystallization kinetics with up to 10 
wt% loading with Avrami kinetics [69]. A subsequent study of the same system 
clearly identified the dual effect of CNWs for PHBV, as heterogeneous nucle -THERMAL BEHAVIOR AND MORPHOLOGY   417
Figure 18.3  DSC thermograms of neat PHBV and CNW/PHBV nanocomposites from 
the second (a) and first (b) heating scans. 1) corresponds to neat PHBV, 2)–6) corre -
sponds to 1 wt%, 2 wt%, 3 wt%,4 wt%, and 5 wt% CNW/PHBV nanocomposites, respec -
tively (reprinted with permission from Ten et al. [65]. Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd.)(a)
(b)TgCold
crystalization MeltingExoExo6
5
4
3
2
1
6
5
4
3
2
1Tm1 Tm2
Tm1 Tm2–20 0 20 40 60 80 1 00120 1 40160 1 80200
Temperatur e (°C)
–20 0 20 40 60 80 1 00120 1 40160 1 80200
Temperatur e (°C)Melting
ating agents on the one hand and as confinement agents on the other hand 
[68]. As a result, an increase or a decrease of crystallization rate could be 
observed, depending on loading and crystallization temperature. In these 
recent studies [65, 68, 69], the original proposal for epitaxial growth of Dufresne 
et al. [46] appears to be corroborated.
18.3.2 Poly (Lactic Acid)/Cellulose Nanocomposites
Because it can be prepared from agricultural products, PLA has become very 
popular in the manufacture of cellulose bionanocomposites [70–87]. PLA is a 
biodegradable and compostable polymer, produced from ring-opening polym -
erization of lactide, which due to its chirality, can result in a semicrystalline 
form, poly(L-lactide) (PLLA), or a mostly amorphous form, poly(D-lactide) 418  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
Figure 18.4  POM micrographs of isothermal crystallization of neat PHBV and CNW/
PHBV nanocomposites at 30°C for different crystallization times (a, c, e: 5 minutes; b, 
d, f: 20 minutes). (a, b) Neat PHBV; (c, d) 1 wt% CNW/PHBV nanocomposite; (e, f) 5 
wt% CNW/PHBV nanocomposite. Scale bar: 20 μm (reprinted with permission from 
Ten et al. [65]. Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd.).
(PDLA). One of the inherent limitations of these polymers, aside from rela -
tively low impact properties, is the slow crystallization rate and resulting low 
degree of crystallinity, especially when the D–L lactide is incorporated in the 
polymer chain. Thus, many studies have attempted to improve PLA properties 
with addition of fillers including CNFs [80–87]. Okubo et al. [75] prepared 
PLA/MFC nanocomposites in low filler content (1–2%) by combining three-THERMAL BEHAVIOR AND MORPHOLOGY   419
roll mill and solution casting processing. DSC analyses of neat PLA and 
nanocomposites indicated that for solvent cast composites with such low MFC 
content, the fillers had no discernible effect on polymer crystallization and 
morphology. With higher cellulose loading, however, a prominent effect on 
PLA crystallization and morphology has been repeatedly observed [70]. 
Indeed Suryanegara et al. [70] prepared PLA/MFC nanocomposites with 
nanofiber loadings ranging from 3 wt% to 20 wt% using a two-step procedure 
based on solution-casting, MFC kneading by a twin rotary roller mixer, and 
hot-pressing. The freshly hot-pressed samples were either quenched in liquid 
nitrogen into fully amorphous materials or additionally annealed at 100°C into 
highly crystalline composites. For the amorphous PLA and the corresponding 
composites, T g, cold crystallization temperature (T cc) and T m were observed in 
the first DSC heating scan, as well as a melt crystallization point (T mc) upon 
cooling (Fig. 18.5). The 10 wt% MFC composite showed a higher melt tem -
perature (102.5°C) than the neat PLA (95.6°C) and much higher crystallinity 
after cooling (39.4%) compared with 17.3% for the neat PLA. This indicated 
that PLA crystallization started sooner in the presence of MFC and developed 
to a greater extent. While T g was not detected with DSC in the most crystalline 
composites, the dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) traces suggested a 
slightly increased T g in relation to the MFC loading, in agreement with other 
reports for PDLA. Thus, in highly filled nanocomposites MFC can facilitate 
and augment PLA crystallization, that is, serve as a nucleating agent in addi -
tion to rigidifying the amorphous phase, a possible consequence of the higher 
crystallinity index of the composites. Better thermal and mechanical proper -
ties result from these morphologies, in particular above the matrix T g, where 
a significant thermal stabilization effect of MFC occurs for well-dispersed 
composites [81–83].Figure 18.5  DSC thermogram of (a) neat PLA and (b) 10 wt% MFC/PLA nanocom -
posite (reprinted with permission from Suryanegara et al. [70]. Copyright 2009 Elsevier 
Ltd.).(a) (b)
Tcc
Tcc (93.4°C)Tcc (91.5°C)Tmc (95.6°C)Tmc (102.5°C)
Tg Tg
TmTmExotherm up
Exotherm up
0 40 80 1 20 160 200
Temper ature (°C)0 40 80 1 20 160 200
Temper ature (°C)420  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
Partially annealed and crystallized PLA/MFC composites with 10 wt% 
loadings resulted in higher crystallinity (43%) and better mechanical proper -
ties at high temperatures when compared to the amorphous analogues [71]. 
The apparently contrasting effect of CNF suggests that as for PHA, fiber 
loading and possibly other factors play a large role in the composite morphol -
ogy and thermal properties. In fact, surface chemistry and dispersion of CNFs 
should also impact the thermal and morphological properties of nanocompos -
ites. With this hypothesis, several authors have attempted to compatibilize 
CNFs with PLA through surface grafting or adsorption [72, 85, 86]. For 
example, Pei et al. [72] solution cast a series of PLLA composites filled with 
1 wt% and 2 wt% neat or silylated cellulose CNWs. Improved whiskers disper -
sion in PLLA was observed for the silylated whiskers. For all samples, T m was 
unchanged by whisker additions, a result consistent with previous reports with 
similarly low CNF loadings. The degree of crystallinity increased marginally 
with the addition of neat CNWs (up to 16.4%) compared with neat PLLA (at 
14.3%), but very significantly (up to 30%) with that of silylated CNWs [72]. 
Enhanced crystallization for silylated CNW/PLLA nanocomposites was also 
evident from cooling scans. Thus, even at low loading, well-dispersed and 
compatibilized whiskers caused a strong nucleating effect. The DSC traces 
presented in this work also suggest that silylated CNWs significantly increased 
PLLA T g. Isothermal crystallization studies with DSC and POM confirmed the 
better dispersion and more dramatic impact on crystallization of the silylated 
CNWs (Fig. 18.6). Nucleus density and nucleation rate were generally enhanced 
by whisker addition but more so with the silylated whiskers, presumably as a 
result of better dispersion and higher surface area available for heterogeneous 
nucleation.
Isothermal crystallization and Avrami parameters, namely bulk crystalliza -
tion rate constant, k, and exponent, n, corroborated these observations. K 
increased most significantly with the addition of silylated whiskers [72]. Also, 
n value increased from ca. 3 for neat PLLA to 3–3.5 with neat CNW addition 
and 3.8–4.9 with silylated-CNW addition. The shift from homogenous nucle -
ation associated with three-dimensional crystal growth in neat PLA to hetero -
geneous nucleation and epitaxial crystallization was thus more marked with 
the well-dispersed silylated CNWs. In another recent study, acetylating CNWs 
allowed uniform CNW dispersion in PLA and strong interfacial adhesion [88]. 
The major role of the interfacial area and filler/matrix compatibility in thermal 
and mechanical properties was further confirmed in this study [88]. The positive 
impact of compatibilization and interfacial adhesion between CNF and PLA 
for the thermal properties is corroborated by the work of Tingaut et al. on 
acetylated MFC [86]; that is, acetylation induced better MFC dispersion in the 
matrix, causing an increase in T g in some cases, while a slight T g depression was 
observed for neat MFC. Other attempts to disperse CNF in the PLA matrix 
have consisted of using polymeric compatibilizer, such as poly(vinyl alcohol) 
(PVA) [80]. However, CNWs apparently concentrated in the PVA phase, which 
separated from the PLA phase. This micrometer-scale phase-separated mor -THERMAL BEHAVIOR AND MORPHOLOGY   421
phology resulted in little improvement of the thermal properties. Low molecu -
lar weight compounds, such as tert-butanol, have also been used as surfactant 
to compatibilize matrix and fiber phases [85]. Tert-butanol adsorption on 
CNWs was very effective at compatibilizing the nanofillers with PLA. A spec -
tacular increase in T g (+20°C) for the compatibilized component was observed 
from DMTA, although the thermal stabilization of the modulus was rather 
moderate. Perhaps the chemical treatment of the whiskers or the low whisker 
loading (5 wt. %) did not allow creating a percolating network. Recently, lactide 
ring-opening polymerization was initiated from the surface of whiskers and 
allowed preparing PLA nanocomposites with excellent properties via good 
interfacial adhesion and formation of a percolation network [78].
To summarize, the thermal properties of CNF-filled PLA depend on com -
position and on microstructure, as well as on filler/matrix compatibility. To be 
sure, CNF loading, and surface and interfacial chemistries play an important 
role in the morphology and resulting properties of the nanocomposites. CNFs 
are, in general, nucleating agents for PLAs, and this effect is enhanced by a Figure 18.6  Polarized optical microscopy images of PLLA, 1 wt% CNW/PLLA 
(PLLA-CNC-1 in this figure), and 1 wt% SCNW/PLLA (PLLA-SCNC-1 in this figure) 
acquired on the 0, 5th, and 10th minute at 125°C after quenched from melt at 210°C. 
Scale bar: 200 μm (reprinted with permission from Pei et al. [72]. Copyright 2010 Else -
vier Ltd.) See color insert.
422  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
good dispersion, that is, a large surface area available for nucleation. These 
results are consistent with the knowledge that natural fibers are, in general, 
nucleating agents for thermoplastic polymers, including PLAs [89], and can 
induce transcrystallization, although it was never directly observed for nano -
composites using cellulose. It is interesting to note that interfacial compatibil -
ity with the matrix fine-tunes the magnitude of the particles’ impact. That 
compatibility plays an important role in composite properties confirms that 
these materials can be alike to polymer blends, where Gibbs free energy of 
mixing is a driving factor of morphology and thermal properties. From the 
practical sense, the addition of CNFs in slow crystallizing polymers such as 
PLA is a good avenue for tailoring both processing and thermomechanical 
properties.
18.3.3 Polycaprolactone/Cellulose Nanocomposites
Polycaprolactone is a semicrystalline polymer with T g and T m around −50° and 
−60°C, respectively. It is also of significant interest for the development of 
bionanocomposites due to its biodegradability and biocompatibility. In a series 
of papers on such nanocomposites, Siqueira et al. highlighted the differences 
between CNW- and MFC-based nanocomposites [42, 90, 91]. PCL was filled 
with various CNF amounts (3%, 6%, 9%, and 12% of CNWs and MFC), both 
unmodified and grafted with C18 chains in degree of substitution ranging from 
0.07 to 0.09. The tensile properties of the bionanocomposites showed different 
trends with the different fillers. Addition of the modified CNWs and to a 
greater extent the modified MFC in PCL enhanced Young’s modulus, while 
strength and strain at break were reduced [91]. For all nanocomposites, that 
is, based on modified and unmodified CNWs as well as modified MFC, T g 
significantly increased and surprisingly more so with the unmodified whiskers. 
The crystallinity index and T c also increased, indicating facilitated crystalliza -
tion and resulting in stiffer materials. A thorough examination of nanocom -
posites with 9 wt% of C18 modified nanofibers helped shed further light on 
the competing effects of surface chemistry, surface area, and chain mobility on 
morphology and thermal properties. For isothermally crystallized composites, 
broadening and splitting of the melt endotherm was observed in a DSC heating 
scan (Fig. 18.7) and tentatively assigned to the coexistence of bulk spherulites 
and of a TCL with lower crystal perfection at the filler surface as suggested in 
other systems [92]. Together with the higher crystallinity, lower crystallization 
activation energy especially with the modified CNWs, a depression equilib -
rium melting point of ca. 10°C was measured; this was again ascribed to the 
nucleating effect of the CNF and to a favorable interaction between the two 
components.
As for PLA composites, PCL composites with high filler loadings experi -
enced faster crystallization (Fig. 18.8); Avrami rate constant increased by two 
orders of magnitude, resembling the effect previously observed in PCL filled 
with carbon nanotubes [93] and nanoclay [94].THERMAL BEHAVIOR AND MORPHOLOGY   423
Figure 18.7  Representative melting endotherms for PCL and PCL-based nanocom -
posites reinforced with 12 wt% modified CNWs and MFC crystallized at T c = 46°C 
(reprinted with permission from Siqueira et al. [90]. Copyright 2011 Elsevier Ltd.)
Heat Flo w
55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90
Temperatur e (°C)63.463.7
65.2PCL
PCL-CNW
PCL-MFC
Figure 18.8  Relative crystallinity as a function of time for pure PCL and PCL-nano -
composites reinforced with 12 wt% of modified sisal CNWs or modified sisal MFC 
crystallized at T c = 46°C. Experimental data points are compared with the Avrami 
model (reprinted with permission from Siqueira et al. [90]. Copyright 2011 Elsevier 
Ltd.).
424  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
Based on the Lauritzen–Hoffman secondary nucleation, nucleation param -
eter and lamellar growth rate were found to decrease with the incorporation 
of modified CNFs, confirming facilitated nucleation and lower chain mobility. 
It was proposed that the confinement effect of CNF decreases the overall 
mobility of the PCL chains in nanocomposites, hindering chain diffusion to 
the crystallization front [95]. In fact, earlier studies by Lönnberg et al. demon -
strated that when PCL is grafted onto MFC, the anchored PCL chains take 
longer to crystallize due to hindered mobility [96, 97]. Along these lines, earlier 
literature suggested that entanglements in MFC could help maintain the cohe -
sion of the cellulose network, offering a more rigid local environment than 
CNWs [39].
In another study, Lee et al. [98] mixed MFC with PCL and/or polypropylene 
(PP) to yield hybrid composites with varied compositions. Good dispersion of 
the MFC in the polymers was achieved by first kneading MFC with PCL at a 
relatively low melting temperature (90°C) and further kneading the freeze-
dried PCL/MFC composite with PP at 180°C. Addition of maleic anhydride-
grafted PP (MAPP) contributed to improving the distribution of MFC/PCL 
in PP . As before, the addition of MFC to the PCL matrix induced a slight 
increase in T c, that is, the crystallization started earlier. On the other hand, 
MFC reduced crystallinity, leaving the T m rather unchanged. The authors con -
cluded that the reduced crystallinity in both PP and PCL phases might arise 
from the restricted molecular mobility of the polymer chains again. It is to be 
noted in this case that a complex morphology likely developed with ternary 
polymer blends compounded with a filler.
18.3.4 Poly(Ethylene Oxide)/Cellulose Nanocomposites
Poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), a semicrystalline hydrosoluble polyether with T g 
and T m found approximately at −60°C and 70°C, respectively, has been assessed 
for the development of cellulose nanocomposites in particular for batteries 
and biomedical applications. Dufresne’s group first reported on the thermal 
and morphological properties of PEO/CNF in a series of publications [39, 47, 
99, 100]. Confounding effects were reported for such nanocomposites filled 
with up to 0–30 wt% [47]. As observed in many systems, the modulus of the 
semicrystalline PEO/CNW nanocomposites was thermally stabilized by a 
CNW percolation network (Fig. 18.9), especially above the polymer T g and T m, 
which were apparently not affected by CNWs, except for loadings higher than 
10%, where T m started to decrease. In the dynamic mechanical analysis of the 
composites, the main effect of the whiskers was observed at higher tempera -
tures, that is, above the T m. While the storage modulus E ′ of the neat PEO 
dropped irremediably during the melting, the addition of whiskers thermally 
stabilized the material above the T m in an appreciable manner and already for 
CNW concentrations as low as 3 wt%.
In contrast to other polymer systems, however, T c and degree of crystallinity 
were found to decrease. This behavior was ascribed to an “antinucleating” THERMAL BEHAVIOR AND MORPHOLOGY   425
effect, whereby the well-known miscibility between cellulose and PEO was 
proposed to restrict polymer chain mobility [101, 102]. On the other hand, 
POM supported, as for many other polymer systems, a nucleating effect with 
the occurrence of smaller and more numerous spherulites in composites com -
pared with the neat PEO (Fig. 18.10). CNWs were proposed to interfere with 
spherulite growth, thus being ejected into the interspherulitic space. However, 
the spherulitic growth rate, as measured from the POM images, revealed no 
effect of CNWs on growth rate. The apparently diverging results on CNF effect 
on semicrystalline polymers highlight the complexity of the morphology of 
these multiphase systems.
When the same system was supplemented with lithium imide salt, no par -
ticular effect on the thermal properties was observed [99]. On the other hand, 
tetra(ethylene) glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME) demonstrated a strong 
plasticizing effect, significantly depressing T g [100]. The thermomechanical 
behavior of the salt-free composites was similar to the composite polyelectro -
lyte containing lithium salt. As for the unplasticized PEO, the addition of 
whiskers to the TEGDME/PEO material induced an outstanding increase in 
the storage modulus in the rubbery state [47]. Here again, the mechanical 
stability of the composites above the melting point of the matrix (50°C) indi -
cated the establishment of a percolating whiskers network within the matrix. 
A complex phase-separated nanocomposite with a plasticizer rich and a plas -
ticizer poor domain was proposed to explain the thermomechanical data.Figure 18.9  Dynamic thermomechanical analysis of POE-based composites filled 
with 0 ( ), 3 (), 6 (x), and 10 wt% ( ) of CNWs (reprinted with permission from 
Azizi Samir et al. [47]. Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ltd.).1,E+1 0
1,E+09
1,E+08
1,E+07
1,E+061,E+05Tensile St orage Modulus , E (P a)
–120 –70 –20 30 80 130
Temperatur e (°C)426  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
18.4 CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
The survey of a few biopolymer/CNF systems illustrates the diversity and 
complexity of morphologies and thermal properties in these composite systems. 
In general, a few trends can be delineated:
• Thermal stabilization occurs especially in low modulus matrices as, for 
example, in the case of amorphous polymers in their rubbery state and 
above T m for semicrystalline polymers. This is due to the rigid nature of a 
hydrogen-bonded network of CNFs, whether it arises from CNWs or 
MFC. Higher thermal stabilization of flexible and hairy microfibrils is 
apparently observed and ascribed to a tangling effect in such nanofiber 
network morphologies [39]. In some semicrystalline matrices, the thermal Figure 18.10  POM micrographs obtained after isothermal crystallization for 100 
seconds at 53.6°C for a POE-based film with (a) 0 and (b) 10 wt% cellulose nanowhis -
kers (reprinted with permission from Azizi Samir et al. [47]. Copyright 2004 Elsevier 
Ltd.). See color insert.
CONCLuSIONS AND DISCuSSION   427
stabilization disappears suddenly at the matrix T m, suggesting that the 
CNF network is imbedded within the matrix crystalline regions through 
transcrystallization. Depending on the state of the polymer and on the 
competition between interfacial and interfiber interactions, thermal stabi -
lization might be described either with a simple mean field theory as the 
Halpin–Kardos model [64] or with the percolation network model [2, 63].
• Addition of CNFs dramatically alters the formation of crystalline struc -
tures in polymers. While many researchers refer to the heterogeneous 
nucleating effect of CNFs with the development of a TCL, there is only 
one demonstration of the ability of cellulose I CNWs to generate such 
TCL. Gray [92] imaged a TCL of isotactic PP on a cellulose I CNW film 
and revealed that the TCL developed much sooner than bulk spherulites 
resulting in true interfacial crystallization (Fig. 18.11).
However, such crystalline superstructures arising from interfacial crys -
tallization have only been inferred in CNF nanocomposites based on 
thermal properties. When one compares with the general morphology of 
nanocomposites, for example, prepared with carbon nanotubes or clay, 
there is an abundance of literature that demonstrates that such nanofillers 
give rise to unique morphologies [103]. Aside from TCL, shish–kebab, 
shish–calabash are common superstructures resulting from interfacial crys -
tallization in nanocomposites. These have not been observed to date with 
CNF-reinforced polymers and might also be of particular significance for 
the properties of cellulose nanocomposites. Indeed, interfacial crystalliza -
tion is now established as a major contribution to nanocomposite perfor -Figure 18.11  Crystallization of polypropylene against cellulose nanocrystal film. i-PP 
initially melt at 220°C. PLM images after 5 minutes (left) and after 20 minutes (right) 
at 136°C. The right image at higher magnification shows in detail the edge of the CNWs 
film in contact with i-PP melt. Scale bars: 200 μm (reprinted with permission from Gray 
[92]. Copyright 2007 Springer Science +Business Media B.V.) See color insert.
Iso-PP melt
Iso-PP sphe rulites
T ransc rystalline la yer
Cellulose nanocr ystal film428  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
mance [103]. Further studies on the nanoscale morphology of such 
nanocomposites are therefore necessary to better understand the funda -
mental role of CNFs on interfacial crystallization.
• In general, CNFs are reported to expedite crystallization and foster crys -
tallinity, but the opposite situation is also sometimes observed. A trend 
seems to emerge from the body of literature that low loading of CNFs and 
good interfacial compatibility enhance crystallization while high loadings 
of CNFs might hinder crystallization [68, 90]. It is interesting to note that 
while comparable results in composites with microsized cellulose fibers 
are observed [89], the magnitude of the effects are different since very 
large proportions of microsized fillers (25 wt%) have been required to 
observe such nucleating effects; in contrast in well-dispersed nanocompos -
ites, 1–2% CNW content suffices to dramatically enhance crystallization. 
This difference highlights the impact of surface area on polymer crystal -
lization. Whiskers have been proposed to have approximately a 10-fold 
larger surface area (533 m2/g) than MFC (51 m2/g), which in turn is assessed 
to have a much larger surface area than the native wood fiber (2–10 m2/g) 
[42]. It is therefore no surprise when one considers the whole body of 
literature that whiskers, which have a higher expected surface area than 
MFC and wood fibers, have a more significant effect at the smallest load -
ings, followed by MFC and then by larger cellulose fibers. Such behavior 
would be consistent with general observations in other nanocomposites. 
For example, in montmorillonite nanocomposites, the nucleating power of 
nanoparticle dominates at low loadings and facilitate crystallization, while 
confinement and hindrance in polymer chain mobility appear to dominate 
at high loadings, thus hampering crystallization [104].
The studies reviewed above further highlight the fact that surface area alone 
does not dictate the thermal properties and impact on matrix morphology. 
Interfacial adhesion and dispersion on the nanometer scale are most critical. 
In fact, the system can be similar to polymer blend systems whereby the free 
energy of mixing dictates the scale of miscibility, in essence governing both 
morphology and the resulting material performance. For nanocomposites it is 
also debated whether the nanoparticles tailor the formation of crystalline 
morphology or whether it is the polymer that segregates the nanoparticles in 
order to pursue crystallization in a minimally perturbed form [104]. To be sure, 
the field of cellulosic bionanocomposites will keep benefiting from studies and 
investigations relying on the principles of polymer physics, as there still is much 
to be revealed on the morphology development of these new material systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Prof. Wolfgang Glasser for helpful suggestions 
on the manuscript as well as Mrs. Jia Mao and Mr. Michel Brioude for support.REfERENCES   429
REFERENCES
 [1] Favier, V., Canova, G.R., Cavaillé, J.Y., Chanzy, H., Dufresne, A., and Gauthier, 
C. (1995) Nanocomposite materials from latex and cellulose whiskers. Polymers 
for Advanced Technologies , 6, 351–355.
 [2] Favier, V., Chanzy, H., and Cavaillé, J.Y. (1995) Polymer nanocomposites rein -
forced by cellulose whiskers. Macromolecules , 28, 6365–6367.
 [3] Cao, X., Habibi, Y., Magalhães, W., Rojas, O.J., and Lucia, L.A. (2011) Cellulose 
nanocrystals-based nanocomposites: Fruits of a novel biomass research and 
teaching platform. Current Science , 100, 11762–1176.
 [4] Azizi Samir, M.A.S., Alloin, F., and Dufresne, A. (2005) Review of recent research 
into cellulosic whiskers, their properties and their application in nanocomposite 
field. Biomacromolecules , 6, 612–626.
 [5] Siró, I., Plackett, D. (2010) Microfibrillated cellulose and new nanocomposite 
materials: A review. Cellulose , 17, 459–494.
 [6] Eichhorn, S., Dufresne, A., Aranguren, M., Marcovich, N., Capadona, J., Rowan, 
S., Weder, C., Thielemans, W., Roman, M., Renneckar, S., Gindl, W., Veigel, S., 
Keckes, J., Yano, H., Abe, K., Nogi, M., Nakagaito, A., Mangalam, A., Simonsen, 
J., Benight, A., Bismarck, A., Berglund, L., and Peijs, T. (2010) Review: Current 
international research into cellulose nanofibres and nanocomposites. Journal of 
Materials Science , 45, 1–33.
 [7] Dufresne, A. (2008) Polysaccharide nano crystal reinforced nanocomposites. 
Canadian Journal of Chemistry , 86, 484–494.
 [8] Abdul Khalil, H.P .S., Bhat, A.H., and Ireana Yusra, A.F. (2012) Green composites 
from sustainable cellulose nanofibrils: A review. Carbohydrate Polymers , 87, 
963–979.
 [9] Hubbe, M.A., Rojas, O.J., Lucia, L.A., and Sain, M. (2008) Cellulosic nanocom -
posites: A review. Bioresources , 3, 929–980.
 [10] Habibi, Y., Lucia, L.A. (2012) Nanocelluloses: Emerging building blocks for 
renewable materials. In: Polysaccharide Building Blocks . Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., pp. 105–125.
 [11] Pandey, J.K., Kumar, A.P ., Misra, M., Mohanty, A.K., Drzal, L.T., and Palsingh, R. 
(2005) Recent advances in biodegradable nanocomposites. Journal of Nanosci -
ence and Nanotechnology , 5, 497–526.
 [12] de Souza Lima, M.M., Borsali, R. (2004) Rodlike cellulose microcrystals: Struc -
ture, properties, and applications. Macromolecular Rapid Communications , 25, 
771–787.
 [13] Siqueira, G., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2010) Cellulosic bionanocomposites: A 
review of preparation, properties and applications. Polymers , 2, 728–765.
 [14] Klemm, D., Kramer, F., Moritz, S., Lindström, T., Ankerfors, M., Gray, D., and 
Dorris, A. (2011) Nanocelluloses: A new family of nature-based materials. Ange -
wandte Chemie International Edition , 50, 5438–5466.
 [15] Moon, R.J., Martini, A., Nairn, J., Simonsen, J., and Youngblood, J. (2011) Cel -
lulose nanomaterials review: Structure, properties and nanocomposites. Chemical 
Society Reviews , 40, 3941–3994.430  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
 [16] Lin, N., Huang, J., and Dufresne, A. (2012) Preparation, properties and applica -
tions of polysaccharide nanocrystals in advanced functional nanomaterials: A 
review. Nanoscale , 4, 3274–3294.
 [17] Elazzouzi-Hafraoui, S., Nishiyama, Y., Putaux, J.-L., Heux, L., Dubreuil, F., and 
Rochas, C. (2007) The shape and size distribution of crystalline nanoparticles 
prepared by acid hydrolysis of native cellulose. Biomacromolecules , 9, 57–65.
 [18] Sugiyama, J., Vuong, R., and Chanzy, H. (1991) Electron diffraction study on the 
two crystalline phases occurring in native cellulose from an algal cell wall. Mac-
romolecules , 24, 4168–4175.
 [19] Nishiyama, Y., Shigenori, K., Masahisa, W., and Takeshi, O. (1997) Cellulose 
microcrystal film of high uniaxial orientation. Macromolecules , 30, 6395–6397.
 [20] Osorio-Madrazo, A., Eder, M., Rueggeberg, M., Pandey, J.K., Harrington, M.J., 
Nishiyama, Y., Putaux, J.-L., Rochas, C., and Burgert, I. (2012) Reorientation of 
cellulose nanowhiskers in agarose hydrogels under tensile loading. Biomacro -
molecules , 13, 850–856.
 [21] White, A.R., Brown, R.M. (1981) Enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose: Visual char -
acterization of the process. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America , 78, 1047–1051.
 [22] Brown, E.E., Laborie, M.-P .G. (2007) Bioengineering bacterial cellulose/
poly(ethylene oxide) nanocomposites. Biomacromolecules , 8, 3074–3081.
 [23] Angles, M.N., Dufresne, A. (2000) Plasticized starch/tunicin whiskers nanocom -
posites. 1. Structural analysis. Macromolecules , 33, 8344–8353.
 [24] Delmer, D.P . (1999) Cellulose biosynthesis: Exciting times for a difficult field of 
study. Annual Review of Plant physiology and Plant Molecular Biology , 50, 
245–276.
 [25] Reiter, W.-D. (2002) Biosynthesis and properties of the plant cell wall. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology , 5, 536–542.
 [26] Chanzy, H. (1990) Aspects of cellulose structure. In: Cellulose Sources and 
Exploitation , eds. J.F. Kennedy, G.O. Philips, and P .A. Williams. New York: Ellis 
Horwoood Ltd.
 [27] Marchessault, R.H. (1989) Cellulose and wood-chemistry and technology. In: 
Proceedings of the Tenth Cellulose Conference , ed. C. Schuerch. New York: Wiley.
 [28] Sarko, A., Muggli, R. (1974) Packing analysis of carbohydrates and polysaccha -
rides. III. Valonia  cellulose and cellulose II. Macromoloecules , 7, 486–494.
 [29] Gardner, K.H., Blackwell, J. (1974) The structure of native cellulose. Biopoly -
mers, 13, 1975–2001.
 [30] Nishiyama, Y., Langan, P ., and Chanzy, H. (2002) Crystal structure and hydrogen-
bonding system in cellulose I β from synchrotron X-ray and neutron fiber diffrac -
tion. Journal of the American Chemical Society , 124, 9074–9082.
 [31] Rånby, B.G. (1952) Physicochemical investigations on animal cellulose (tunicin). 
Arkiv for Kemi , 4, 241–248.
 [32] Hepworth, D.G., Bruce, D.M. (2000) A method of calculating the mechanical 
properties of nanoscopic plant cell wall components from tissue properties. 
Journal of Materials Science , 35, 5861–5865.
 [33] Hsieh, Y.C., Yano, H., Nogi, M., and Eichhorn, S. (2008) An estimation of the 
Young’s modulus of bacterial cellulose filaments. Cellulose , 15, 507–513.REfERENCES   431
 [34] Sakurada, I., Nukushina, Y., and Ito, T. (1962) Experimental determination of the 
elastic modulus of crystalline regions in oriented polymers. Journal of Polymer 
Science , 57, 651–660.
 [35] Šturcová, A., Davies, G.R., and Eichhorn, S.J. (2005) Elastic modulus and stress-
transfer properties of tunicate cellulose whiskers. Biomacromolecules , 6, 
1055–1061.
 [36] Nishino, T., Takano, K., and Nakamae, K. (1995) Elastic modulus of the crystalline 
regions of cellulose polymorphs. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer 
Physics , 33, 1647–1651.
 [37] Spence, K., Venditti, R., Rojas, O., Habibi, Y., and Pawlak, J. (2011) A comparative 
study of energy consumption and physical properties of microfibrillated cellulose 
produced by different processing methods. Cellulose , 18, 1097–1111.
 [38] Pääkkö, M., Ankerfors, M., Kosonen, H., Nykänen, A., Ahola, S., Österberg, M., 
Ruokolainen, J., Laine, J., Larsson, P .T., Ikkala, O., and Lindström, T. (2007) 
Enzymatic hydrolysis combined with mechanical shearing and high-pressure 
homogenization for nanoscale cellulose fibrils and strong gels. Biomacromole -
cules , 8, 1934–1941.
 [39] Azizi Samir, M.A.S., Alloin, F., Paillet, M., and Dufresne, A. (2004) Tangling effect 
in fibrillated cellulose reinforced nanocomposites. Macromolecules , 37, 4313–
4316.
 [40] Ferry, J.D. (1980) Viscoelastic Properties of Polymers . New York: John Wiley & 
Sons.
 [41] Utracki, L.A. (2003) Polymer Blends Handbook . Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
 [42] Siqueira, G., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2009) New process of chemical grafting 
of cellulose nanoparticles with a long chain isocyanate. Langmuir , 26, 402–411.
 [43] Ludueña, L., Vázquez, A., and Alvarez, V. (2012) Effect of lignocellulosic filler 
type and content on the behavior of polycaprolactone based eco-composites for 
packaging applications. Carbohydrate Polymers , 87, 411–421.
 [44] Alvarez, V.A., Ruseckaite, R.A., and Vázquez, A. (2006) Degradation of sisal 
fibre/Mater Bi-Y biocomposites buried in soil. Polymer Degradation and Stabil -
ity, 91, 3156–3162.
 [45] Kowalczyk, M., Piorkowska, E., Kulpinski, P ., and Pracella, M. (2011) Mechanical 
and thermal properties of PLA composites with cellulose nanofibers and stan -
dard size fibers. Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing , 42, 
1509–1514.
 [46] Dufresne, A., Kellerhals, M.B., and Witholt, B. (1999) Transcrystallization in Mcl-
PHAs/cellulose whiskers composites. Macromolecules , 32, 7396–7401.
 [47] Azizi Samir, M.A.S., Alloin, F., Sanchez, J.-Y., and Dufresne, A. (2004) Cellulose 
nanocrystals reinforced poly(oxyethylene). Polymer , 45, 4149–4157.
 [48] Sanchez-Garcia, M.D., Gimenez, E., and Lagaron, J.M. (2008) Morphology and 
barrier properties of solvent cast composites of thermoplastic biopolymers and 
purified cellulose fibers. Carbohydrate Polymers , 71, 235–244.
 [49] Lavoine, N., Desloges, I., Dufresne, A., and Bras, J. (2012) Microfibrillated 
cellulose—Its barrier properties and applications in cellulosic materials: A review. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 90, 735–764.
 [50] Gedde, U.W. (1995) Polymer Physics . London, UK: Chapman & Hall.432  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
 [51] Nielsen, L.E. (1967) Mechanical properties of particulate-filled systems. Journal 
of Composite Materials , 1, 100–119.
 [52] Nielsen, L.E. (1969) Dynamic mechanical properties of filled polymers. Applied 
Polymer Symposium , 12, 249–265.
 [53] Nielsen, L.E., Landel, R.F. (1994) Mechanical Properties of Polymers and Com -
posites , 2nd ed. New York: Marcel Dekker, p. 50.
 [54] Flory, P .J. (1953) Principles of Polymer Chemistry . New York: Cornell University 
Press.
 [55] Lo, C.T., Seifert, S., Thiyagarajan, P ., and Narasimhan, B. (2004) Phase behavior 
of semicrystalline polymer blends. Polymer , 45, 3671–3679.
 [56] Nadkarni, V.M., Jog, J.P . (1991) Crystallization behavior in polymer blends. In: Two-
Phase Polymer Systems , ed. L.A. Utracki. Munich–New York: Hanser Publishers.
 [57] Quan, H., Li, Z.-M., Yang, M.-B., and Huang, R. (2005) On transcrystallinity in 
semi-crystalline polymer composites. Composites Science and Technology , 65, 
999–1021.
 [58] Jenckel, K., Teege, E., and Hinrichs, W. (1952). Kolloid-Z , 129, 19–24.
 [59] Avrami, M. (1939) Kinetics of phase change. I general theory. The Journal of 
Chemical Physics , 7, 1103–1112.
 [60] Avrami, M. (1940) Kinetics of phase change. II transformation-time relations for 
random distribution of nuclei. Journal of Chemical Physics , 8, 212–224.
 [61] Avrami, M. (1941) Granulation, phase change, and microstructure kinetics of 
phase change. III. Journal of Chemical Physics , 9, 177–184.
 [62] Hoffman, J.D., Davis, G.T., and Lauritzen, J.I. (1976) The rate of crystallization 
of linear polymers with chain folding. In: Treatise on Solid State Chemistry , ed. 
N.B. Hannay. New York: Plenum Press, pp. 497–614.
 [63] Takayanagi, M., Uemura, S., and Minami, S. (1964) Application of equivalent 
model method to dynamic rheo-optical properties of crystalline polymer. Journal 
of Polymer Science Part C: Polymer Symposia , 5, 113–122.
 [64] Halpin, J.C., Kardos, J.L. (1972) Moduli of crystalline polymers employing com -
posite theory. Journal of Applied Physics , 43, 2235–2241.
 [65] Ten, E., Turtle, J., Bahr, D., Jiang, L., and Wolcott, M. (2010) Thermal and mechan -
ical properties of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate)/cellulose 
nanowhiskers composites. Polymer , 51, 2652–2660.
 [66] Long, J., Morelius, E., Jinwen, Z., Wolcott, M., and Holbery, J. (2008) Study of the 
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate)/cellulose nanowhisker compos -
ites prepared by solution casting and melt processing. Journal of Composite 
Materials , 42, 2629–2645.
 [67] Ten, E., Bahr, D.F., Li, B., Jiang, L., and Wolcott, M.P . (2012) Effects of cellulose 
nanowhiskers on mechanical, dielectric, and rheological properties of poly(3-
hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate)/cellulose nanowhisker composites. 
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research , 51, 2941–2951.
 [68] Ten, E., Bahr, D.F., Jiang, L., and Wolcott, M.P . (2012) Crystallization kinetics of 
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate)/cellulose nanowhiskers compos -
ites. Carbohydrate Polymers , 90, 541–550.
 [69] Yu, H.-Y., Qin, Z.-Y., and Zhou, Z. (2011) Cellulose nanocrystals as green fillers 
to improve crystallization and hydrophilic property of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-REfERENCES   433
co-3-hydroxyvalerate). Progress in Natural Science: Materials International , 21, 
478–484.
 [70] Suryanegara, L., Nakagaito, A.N., and Yano, H. (2009) The effect of crystallization 
of PLA on the thermal and mechanical properties of microfibrillated cellulose-
reinforced PLA composites. Composites Science and Technology , 69, 
1187–1192.
 [71] Suryanegara, L., Nakagaito, A., and Yano, H. (2010) Thermo-mechanical proper -
ties of microfibrillated cellulose-reinforced partially crystallized PLA composites. 
Cellulose , 17, 771–778.
 [72] Pei, A., Zhou, Q., and Berglund, L.A. (2010) Functionalized cellulose nanocrys -
tals as biobased nucleation agents in poly(l-lactide) (PLLA)—Crystallization 
and mechanical property effects. Composites Science and Technology , 70, 
815–821.
 [73] Fukuzumi, H., Saito, T., Iwata, T., Kumamoto, Y., and Isogai, A. (2008) Transparent 
and high gas barrier films of cellulose nanofibers prepared by TEMPO-mediated 
oxidation. Biomacromolecules , 10, 162–165.
 [74] Okubo, K., Fujii, T., and Yamashita, N. (2005) Improvement of interfacial adhe -
sion in bamboo polymer composite enhanced with micro-fibrillated cellulose. 
JSME International Journal Series A Solid Mechanics and Material Engineering , 
48, 199–204.
 [75] Okubo, K., Fujii, T., and Thostenson, E.T. (2009) Multi-scale hybrid biocomposite: 
Processing and mechanical characterization of bamboo fiber reinforced PLA 
with microfibrillated cellulose. Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufac -
turing , 40, 469–475.
 [76] Chakraborty, A., Sain, M., Kortschot, M., and Cutler, S. (2007) Dispersion of 
wood microfibers in a matrix of thermoplastic starch and starchpolylactic acid 
blend. Journal of Biobased Materials and Bioenergy , 1, 71–77.
 [77] Wang, B., Sain, M. (2007) The effect of chemically coated nanofiber reinforce -
ment on biopolymer based nanocomposites. Bioresources , 2, 371–388.
 [78] Braun, B., Dorgan, J.R., and Hollingsworth, L.O. (2012) Supra-molecular EcoBi -
oNanocomposites based on polylactide and cellulosic nanowhiskers: Synthesis 
and properties. Biomacromolecules , 13, 1991–2218.
 [79] Goffin, A.-L., Raquez, J.-M., Duquesne, E., Siqueira, G., Habibi, Y., Dufresne, A., 
and Dubois, P . (2011) From interfacial ring-opening polymerization to melt pro -
cessing of cellulose nanowhisker-filled polylactide-based nanocomposites. Bio-
macromolecules , 12, 2456–2465.
 [80] Bondeson, D., Oksman, K. (2007) Polylactic acid/cellulose whisker nanocompos -
ites modified by polyvinyl alcohol. Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manu -
facturing , 38, 2486–2492.
 [81] Iwatake, A., Nogi, M., and Yano, H. (2008) Cellulose nanofiber-reinforced poly -
lactic acid. Composites Science and Technology , 68, 2103–2106.
 [82] Jonoobi, M., Harun, J., Mathew, A.P ., and Oksman, K. (2010) Mechanical proper -
ties of cellulose nanofiber (CNF) reinforced polylactic acid (PLA) prepared by 
twin screw extrusion. Composites Science and Technology , 70, 1742–1747.
 [83] Nakagaito, A.N., Fujimura, A., Sakai, T., Hama, Y., and Yano, H. (2009)  
Production of microfibrillated cellulose (MFC)-reinforced polylactic acid (PLA) 434  MORPHOLOGICAL AND THERMAL INVESTIGATIONS
nanocomposites from sheets obtained by a papermaking-like process. Compos -
ites Science and Technology , 69, 1293–1297.
 [84] Oksman, K., Mathew, A.P ., Bondeson, D., and Kvien, I. (2006) Manufacturing 
process of cellulose whiskers/polylactic acid nanocomposites. Composites Science 
and Technology , 66, 2776–2784.
 [85] Petersson, L., Kvien, I., and Oksman, K. (2007) Structure and thermal properties 
of poly(lactic acid)/cellulose whiskers nanocomposite materials. Composites 
Science and Technology , 67, 2535–2544.
 [86] Tingaut, P ., Zimmermann, T., and Lopez-Suevos, F. (2009) Synthesis and charac -
terization of bionanocomposites with tunable properties from poly(lactic acid) 
and acetylated microfibrillated cellulose. Biomacromolecules , 11, 454–464.
 [87] Luiz de Paula, E., Mano, V., and Pereira, F.V. (2011) Influence of cellulose nanow -
hiskers on the hydrolytic degradation behavior of poly(d,l-lactide). Polymer Deg -
radation and Stability , 96, 1631–1638.
 [88] Lin, N., Huang, J., Chang, P .R., Feng, J., and Yu, J. (2011) Surface acetylation of 
cellulose nanocrystal and its reinforcing function in poly(lactic acid). Carbohy -
drate Polymers , 83, 1834–1842.
 [89] Mathew, A.P ., Oksman, K., and Sain, M. (2006) The effect of morphology and 
chemical characteristics of cellulose reinforcements on the crystallinity of poly -
lactic acid. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 101, 300–310.
 [90] Siqueira, G., Fraschini, C., Bras, J., Dufresne, A., Prud’homme, R., and Laborie, 
M.-P . (2011) Impact of the nature and shape of cellulosic nanoparticles on the 
isothermal crystallization kinetics of poly( ε-caprolactone). European Polymer 
Journal , 47, 2216–2227.
 [91] Siqueira, G., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2008) Cellulose whiskers versus microfi -
brils: Influence of the nature of the nanoparticle and its surface functionalization 
on the thermal and mechanical properties of nanocomposites. Biomacromole -
cules , 10, 425–432.
 [92] Gray, D. (2008) Transcrystallization of polypropylene at cellulose nanocrystal 
surfaces. Cellulose , 15, 297–301.
 [93] Chen, E.-C., Wu, T.-M. (2007) Isothermal crystallization kinetics and thermal 
behavior of poly( ε-caprolactone)/multi-walled carbon nanotube composites. 
Polymer Degradation and Stability , 92, 1009–1015.
 [94] Ludueña, L.N., Vazquez, A., and Alvarez, V.A. (2008) Crystallization of 
polycaprolactone–clay nanocomposites. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 109, 
3148–3156.
 [95] Ho, R.-M., Chiang, Y.-W., Lin, C.-C., and Huang, B.-H. (2005) Crystallization and 
melting behavior of poly( ε-caprolactone) under physical confinement. Macro -
molecules , 38, 4769–4779.
 [96] Lönnberg, H., Zhou, Q., Brumer, H., Teeri, T.T., Malmström, E., and Hult, A. 
(2006) Grafting of cellulose fibers with poly( ε-caprolactone) and poly(l-lactic 
acid) via ring-opening polymerization. Biomacromolecules , 7, 2178–2185.
 [97] Lönnberg, H., Fogelström, L., Berglund, L., Malmström, E., and Hult, A. (2008) 
Surface grafting of microfibrillated cellulose with poly( ε-caprolactone)—Synthe -
sis and characterization. European Polymer Journal , 44, 2991–2997.REfERENCES   435
 [98] Lee, S.-H., Teramoto, Y., and Endo, T. (2011) Cellulose nanofiber-reinforced 
polycaprolactone/polypropylene hybrid nanocomposite. Composites Part A: 
Applied Science and Manufacturing , 42, 151–156.
 [99] Azizi Samir, M.A.S., Alloin, F., Gorecki, W., Sanchez, J.-Y., and Dufresne, A. 
(2004) Nanocomposite polymer electrolytes based on poly(oxyethylene) and 
cellulose nanocrystals. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B , 108, 10845–10852.
[100] Azizi Samir, M.A.S., Mateos, A.M., Alloin, F., Sanchez, J.-Y., and Dufresne, A. 
(2004) Plasticized nanocomposite polymer electrolytes based on poly(oxyethylene) 
and cellulose whiskers. Electrochimica Acta , 49, 4667–4677.
[101] Guo, Y.Q., Liang, X.H. (1999) The miscibility of cellulose-polyethylene glycol 
blends. Journal of Macromolecular Science, Part B. Physics , 38, 439.
[102] Nishio, Y., Hirose, N., and Takahashi, T. (1989) Thermal analysis of cellulose/
poly(ethylene oxide) blends. Polymer Journal , 21, 347–351.
[103] Ning, N., Fu, S., Zhang, W., Chen, F., Wang, K., Deng, H., Zhang, Q., and Fu, Q. 
(2011) Realizing the enhancement of interfacial interaction in semicrystalline 
polymer/filler composites via interfacial crystallization. Progress in Polymer 
Science.
[104] Khan, J., Harton, S.E., Akcora, P ., Benicewicz, B.C., and Kumar, S.K. (2009) 
Polymer crystallization in nanocomposites: Spatial reorganization of nanoparti -
cles. Macromolecules , 42, 5741–5744.
[105] Malainine, M.E., Mahrouz, M., and Dufresne, A. (2005) Thermoplastic nanocom -
posites based on cellulose microfibrils from Opuntia ficus-indica  parenchyma 
cell. Composites Science and Technology , 65, 1520–1526.437Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 19   
Mechanical Properties of  
Cellulose-Based Bionanocomposites
B. DEEPA , SAUMYA S. PILLAI , LALY A. POTHAN , and SABU THOMAS
19.1 INTRODUCTION
The most recent trends in natural fiber composites comprise the introduction 
of cellulose nanofibers (CNFs) for biopolymeric composite materials. Biocom -
posites based on cellulose nanoparticles are interesting for many branches of 
industry. The increasing number of publications during the recent years includ -
ing reviews [1–14] and books [15–19] reflect the growing importance of these 
new biocomposites. Cellulose nanoparticles (CNs), generally known as nano -
cellulose, have garnered interest from the scientific community because of 
their biodegradability, sustainability, easy availability, and related characteris -
tics such as a very large surface-to-volume ratio and outstanding mechanical, 
electrical, and thermal properties. CNs also have a high aspect ratio, low 
density (1.6 g/cm3), high elastic modulus ( ∼140 GPa), and a reactive surface of 
–OH side groups that facilitates grafting chemical species to achieve different 
surface properties (surface functionalization). Surface functionalization allows 
the tailoring of particle surface chemistry to facilitate self-assembly, controlled 
dispersion within a wide range of matrix polymers, and control of both the 
particle–particle and particle–matrix bond strength. These unique characteris -
tics, along with the remarkable suitability for surface functionalization, make 
nanocellulose an ideal candidate for improving the mechanical properties of 
the host material.
The incorporation of only a small amount of nanofibers to base polymers 
confers improved properties that make them usable in automotive, construc -
tion, packaging, display, water treatment, and medical applications [20–25]. 
Properties that have been shown to improve substantially are mechanical 438  MEcHANI cAL PrOPErTIES Of cELLULOSE -BASED  BIONANO cOMPOSITES 
properties (e.g., tensile strength, elastic modulus, and dimensional stability), 
thermomechanical properties, and permeability (e.g., gases, water, and hydro -
carbons). In addition, the thermal stability and heat distortion temperature, 
flame retardancy and smoke emissions, chemical resistance, surface appear -
ance, physical weight, and electrical conductivity of the composites are found 
to improve.
Materials based on CNFs show interesting characteristics. For instance, 
nanopaper made from wood CNFs shows high resistance to fracture and can 
have a modulus of 13.2 GPa, a tensile strength above 200 MPa, and a strain 
to failure of 10% [26], much superior to microstructured paper and paper -
board materials. Tailored cellulose nanocomposites with nanostructured 
matrix distribution can even show a tensile strength above 300 MPa [27] for 
the in-plane random fibril orientation case. Nanofibers can also be used in high 
porosity cellulose aerogels and foams, in optically transparent biocomposites, 
as oxygen barriers, to reinforce the cell walls of polymer foams, and as tem -
plates for magnetic nanoparticle hybrids [28–34].
Some CN composites produced to date are transparent, have tensile 
strengths greater than cast iron, and have very low coefficients of thermal 
expansion (CTE). For example, Okahisa et al. [35] fabricated an organic light-
emitting diode (OLED) on flexible, low CTE, and optically transparent wood–
cellulose nanocomposites. Nanocomposites were prepared using matrices with 
different Young’s moduli. With the same fiber content, the nanocomposites 
using lower Young’s modulus matrix resin exhibited lower CTE values than 
those using higher Young’s modulus matrix resins. This led to the development 
of nanocomposites with a very low CTE while having high flexibility and 
ductile properties, which opens up many possibilities for the application of 
OLEDs in flexible, transparent displays. Recently, a cellulose-based nanocom -
posite material has been investigated as a flexible humidity and temperature 
sensor [36].
Nanocellulose-reinforced biocomposites could soon provide advanced per -
formance, durability, value, service life, and utility while at the same time being 
a fully sustainable technology. Potential applications include, but are not 
limited to, barrier films, antimicrobial films, transparent films, flexible displays, 
reinforcing fillers for polymers, biomedical implants, pharmaceuticals, drug 
delivery, fibers and textiles, templates for electronic components, separation 
membranes, batteries, supercapacitors, and electroactive polymerss. This 
chapter reviews some recent studies devoted to the mechanical properties of 
CNF-reinforced biopolymer composites.
19.2 MECHANICAL PERFORMANCE OF BIONANOCOMPOSITES
It is important to be knowledgeable of certain mechanical properties of  
nanocomposites to be able to exploit their potential. Among these properties 
are the tensile, flexural, impact, dynamic mechanical, and creep properties. MEcHANIcAL PErfOrMANcE Of BIONANOcOMPOSITES   439
Three main parameters were reported to affect the mechanical properties of 
materials: (1) the morphology and dimensions of the nanoparticles, (2) the 
processing method, and (3) the microstructure of the matrix and matrix/filler 
interactions.
For cellulose nanocrystals occurring as rod-like nanoparticles, the geometri -
cal aspect ratio, defined as the length-to-diameter (L/d), is a major factor that 
controls the mechanical properties of nanocomposites and determines the 
percolation threshold value.This factor is linked to the source of cellulose and 
whiskers and also its preparation conditions. Fillers with a high aspect ratio 
give the best reinforcing effect.It was reported that the highest modulus 
increase in the rubbery state of the poly(Sco-BuA) matrix and thermal stabil -
ity were obtained with tunicin whiskers (L/d ∼67) in comparison with bacterial 
(L/d ∼60) orAvicel whiskers (L/d ∼10) [37, 38]. de Rodriguez and coworkers 
[39] studied sisal nanowhiskers with a high aspect ratio as filler in the nano -
composites with polyvinyl acetate (PVAc) as the matrix. They found that the 
high aspect ratio could ensure percolation, resulting in mechanical improve -
ments and thermal stability at lower fiber loadings. The flexibility and tangling 
possibility of the nanofibers also plays an important role [40–42]. It was 
reported that entangled microfibrillated cellulose (MFC) induces a higher 
reinforcing effect than straight whiskers, whereas the elongation at break was 
lower.
The processing method conditions present the possibility of the formation 
of a continuous whiskers network and determine the final properties of the 
nanocomposite material. Slow processes such as casting/evaporation were 
reported to give the highest mechanical performance materials compared  
with freeze-drying/molding and freeze-drying/extruding/molding techniques. 
During slow water evaporation, because of Brownian motions in the suspen -
sion or solution (whose viscosity remains low, up to the end of the process 
when the latex particle or polymer concentration becomes very high), the 
rearrangement of the nanoparticles is possible. They have significant time to 
interact and connect to form a continuous network, which is the basis of their 
reinforcing effect. The resulting structure is completely relaxed and direct 
contacts between nanoparticles are then created. Conversely, during the 
freeze-drying/hot-pressing process, the nanoparticle arrangement in the sus -
pension is first frozen, and then, during the hot-pressing stage, because of the 
polymer melt viscosity, the particle rearrangements are strongly limited.
The microstructure of the matrix and the resulting competition between 
matrix/filler and filler/filler interactions also affect the mechanical behavior of 
cellulose nanocrystals reinforced nanocomposites. Classical composite science 
tends to favor matrix/filler interactions as a fundamental condition for optimal 
performance. But, for cellulose whisker-based composite materials, the oppo -
site trend is generally observed when the material is processed via casting/
evaporation method. This unusual behavior is ascribed to the originality of the 
reinforcing phenomenon of cellulosic nanoparticles resulting from the forma -
tion of a hydrogen-bonded percolating network. However, when using another 440  MEcHANI cAL PrOPErTIES Of cELLULOSE -BASED  BIONANO cOMPOSITES 
processing route than casting/evaporation in aqueous medium, the dispersion 
of the hydrophilic filler in the polymeric matrix is also involved and improved 
filler/matrix interactions generally lead to higher mechanical properties [43]. 
In nonpercolating systems, for instance for materials processed from freeze-
dried cellulose nanocrystals, strong matrix/filler interactions enhance the rein -
forcing effect of the filler [44].
19.2.1 Tensile Properties
The tensile properties are among the most widely tested properties of natural 
fiber reinforced composites. The fiber strength can be an important factor 
regarding the selection of a specific natural fiber for a specific application. A 
tensile test reflects the average property through the thickness, whereas a 
flexural test is strongly influenced by the properties of the specimen closest to 
the top and bottom surfaces. The stresses in a tensile test are uniform through -
out the specimen cross section, whereas the stresses in flexure vary from zero 
in the middle to maximum in the top and bottom surfaces. Recent studies that 
focus on the influence of cellulose nanofibres on the mechanical properties of 
biopolymer composites are discussed below.
Sehaqui et al. [34] recentlyinvestigated the strength-enhancing potential of 
CNFs in cellulose fiberboard type of biocomposites. Wood cellulose biocom -
posites with fiber network structures at both micro- and nanoscale were suc -
cessfully processed by filtering and drying of a fibrous water suspension. The 
presence of nanofibers increased the tensile strength and work to fracture of 
the composite considerably. The strength increased from 98 MPa (wood fiber 
reference) to 160 MPa (10% NFC, 90% wood fibers by weight), and the work 
to fracture was more than doubled (from 1.7 to 4.4 MJ/m3). The reason for 
this strong improvement is the presence of fiber network structures at two 
length scales (micro and nano). The uniaxial stress–strain curves in tension are 
presented in Figure 19.1.
Kaushik et al. [45] examined the mechanical properties of bionanocompos -
ites using CNFs from wheat straw and plasticized maize starch. The resulting 
nanocomposite showed the highest tensile modulus (about 220 MPa) at 15% 
fiber content and the highest yield strength (about 6.5 MPa) at that same fiber 
content.
Lu et al. [46] investigated the mechanical properties of the ramie cellulose 
nanocrystallites (RN)-reinforced plasticized starch biocomposites. Different 
fractions of RN (0–40 wt%) were used to form composites with the glycerol 
plasticized starch. Tensile strength and Young’s modulus of the plasticized  
starch/RN composites,conditioned at 50% relative humidity, increased from 
2.8 to 6.9 MPa and from 56 to 480 MPa, respectively, as RN content increased 
from 0 % to 40 wt%, but the elongation at break decreased from 94.2% to 
13.6%. Results revealed that there are synergistic interactions between fillers 
and between filler and plasticized starch matrix, and these play a key role in 
reinforcing the composites.MEcHANIcAL PErfOrMANcE Of BIONANOcOMPOSITES   441
Alemdar et al. [47] prepared nanocomposites from wheat straw nanofibers 
and thermoplastic starch (TPS) from modified potato starch by the solution-
casting method. The tensile strength and modulus were significantly enhanced 
in the nanocomposite films, which could be explained by the uniform disper -
sion of nanofibers in the polymer matrix. The modulus of the TPS increased 
from 111 to 271 MPa with maximum (10 wt%) nanofiber filling.
In another interesting study, novel biomimetic nanocomposite foams were 
prepared by Svagan et al. [32] based on cellulose nanofibrils (10–70 wt%) in 
an amylopectin matrix and the use of a lyophilization process. Compared with 
unreinforced amylopectin foam, a significant improvement in modulus and 
yield strength was observed. This improvement is due to improved mechanical 
properties of the nanofibril reinforced foam cell wall and the microcellular 
structure.
Azeredo et al. [48] studied the tensile properties of novel nanocomposites 
using CNFs in different concentrations (up to 36 g/100 g) as nano-reinforcement 
in mango puree-based edible films for packaging applications. The study 
revealed that CNF increased tensile strength from 4.06 to 8.09 MPa, and 
Young’s modulus from 19.85 to 322.05 MPa, especially at higher concentra -
tions, which suggest the formation of a fibrillar network within the matrix.
In a study by Iwatake et al. [49] cellulose nanofibres was premixed with 
poly(lactic acid) (PLA) using acetone and the mixture was kneaded after the 
removal of the solvent to attain dispersion. As a consequence of uniform dis -
tribution the Young’s modulus and tensile strength of PLA increased by 40% 
and 25%, respectively, without a reduction of yield strain at a fiber content of 
10 wt%. Suryanegara et al. [50] applied the same method but then exchanged 
acetone for dichloromethane and showed that crystallization of PLA increases Figure 19.1  Tensile stress–strain curves of the wood fiber/NFC composites. 100% 
NFC refers to the nanopaper sample. Reprinted with permission from Reference [34].250
200
150
100
50
0Stress (MPa)
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Strain (% )100%
10%
7%5%
2%0%442  MEcHANI cAL PrOPErTIES Of cELLULOSE -BASED  BIONANO cOMPOSITES 
the strength and Young’s modulus of the developed nanocomposites without 
significant reduction in the strain at break. These authors also noticed that 
CNFs can act as a nucleating agent for the crystallization of PLA.
PLA and cellulose fibrils nanocomposites have been developed by Qu  
et al. [51]. Bleached wood pulp was used as the fiber and commercial-grade 
PLA as the matrix. Polyethylene glycol (PEG) was added to the matrix as a 
compatibilizer to improve the interfacial bonding between the matrix and the 
fiber. The composites were obtained by solvent-casting methods from N, N, 
Dimethylacetamide (DMAC). After addition of cellulose nanofibrils to the 
PLA matrix, the composite has tensile strength of 30 MPa with 2.5% elonga -
tion, which is lower than that of pure PLA. Addition of PEG to the blend of 
PLA and cellulose nanofibrils resulted in a significant improvement in tensile 
strength and percent elongation of the composites. The tensile strength and 
the elongation (of PLA + PEG + nanofibrils) increased by 28.2% and 25%, 
respectively, compared with pure PLA, and increased by 56.7% and 60% 
compared with the PLA/cellulose nanofibrils.
Bondeson and Oksman [52] used commercial PLA as the matrix with cel -
lulose whiskers treated with anionic surfactant (5 wt%), 10 wt%), and 20 wt%) 
as reinforcement. The compounded materials were extruded in three steps 
with pelletizing between the first and the second steps. Extruded nanocom -
posites were compression molded and characterized. The tensile strength and 
elongation at break decreased for this composite compared with PLA. This 
lack of improvement in the mechanical properties of the composite was attrib -
uted to poor adhesion between the fiber and the matrix, which is directly 
related to the nature of the fiber and the type of mechanical treatment given.
Cao et al. [53] have reported nanocomposite materials reinforced with flax 
cellulose nanocrystals in waterborne polyurethane. The films showed a signifi -
cant increase in Young’s modulus and tensile strength from 0.51 to 344 MPa 
and 4.27 to 14.96 MPa, respectively, with increasing filler content from 0 wt% 
to 30 wt%, with better dispersion.
A new route to enhance the wet properties of chitosan-acetic-acid-salt films 
by adding cellulose nanofibers at 5 wt% loading has been reported by Nor -
dqvist et al. [54]. Results revealed that the addition of cellulose nanofibres to 
weak wet chitosan matrix increased the wet strength from 12% to 25% of the 
dry strength and the wet modulus increased from 0.4% to 3% of the dry 
modulus.
Tensile properties of nanocellulose-reinforced poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) 
nanocomposites has been reported by Cho et al. [55]. The tensile modulus and 
strength of the nanocomposites were improved with an increase in the nano -
cellulose content, but decreased at the nanocellulose content of 7 wt%. The 
highest modulus and strength occurred at the 5 wt% nanocellulose content, 
which showed 60% and 28% increase in its reinforcement, respectively. Figure 
19.2 and Figure 19.3 show the tensile strength and tensile modulus of PVA 
nanocomposite as the function of the nanocellulose content, respectively.MEcHANIcAL PErfOrMANcE Of BIONANOcOMPOSITES   443
Figure 19.2  Tensile strength of PVA nanocomposites as the function of the nanocel -
lulose content. Reprinted with permission from Reference [55].100
80
6040
20
0Tensile str ength (MP a)
0 1 3 5 7
Nanocellulose cont ent (wt%)
Figure 19.3  Tensile modulus of PVA nanocomposite as the function of the nanocel -
lulose content. Reprinted with permission from Reference [55].5
4
32
1
0Tensile modulus (GP a)
0 1 3 5 7
Nanocellulose cont ent (wt%)
Leitner et al. [56] prepared PVA nanocomposites with a range of nanocel -
lulose contents (0–90 wt%). At a cellulose content of 50 wt%, the modulus of 
elasticity of PVOH increased by a factor of 20 and tensile strength increased 
by a factor of 3.5. Both parameters increased further at cellulose contents of 
70 wt% and 90 wt%, respectively. It was also reported that tensile strength 
increased linearly as a function of filler content, which suggests that cellulose 
content was the major determinant of strength in these composites.444  MEcHANI cAL PrOPErTIES Of cELLULOSE -BASED  BIONANO cOMPOSITES 
Figure 19.4  Transparent TOCN-93/PS and TOCN-310/PS nanocomposite films. 
Reprinted with permission from Reference [60]. See color insert.
A blend containing 10% CNFs obtained from various sources, such as flax 
bast fibers, hemp fibers, kraft pulp, or rutabaga and 90% PVA was used for 
making nanofiber-reinforced composite material by a solution-casting proce -
dure [57].Both tensile strength and Young’s modulus were improved com -
pared to neat PVOH film, with a pronounced four- to fivefold increase in 
Young’s modulus observed. Similarly, Wang and Sain [58] reported that 
soybean stock-based nanofiber-reinforced PVOH films (up to 10% nanofiber 
content) demonstrated a twofold increase in tensile strength when compared 
with films without filler. With a higher loading of MFC, the relative enhance -
ment of mechanical properties was even more remarkable. Bruce et al. [59] 
reported approximately five times higher tensile strength for PVOH contain -
ing 50 wt% MFC when compared to the neat polymer. Such improvement in 
mechanical properties can be explained by strong interfacial bonding between 
the CNFs and PVOH.
Fujisawa et al. [60] investigated the outstanding nanoreinforcement effect 
of 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO)-oxidized cellulose nanofi -
brils (TOCNs) in a polystyrene (PS) matrix. TOCN/PS nanocomposite films 
containing 0–10 wt% TOCN with free carboxyl groups (TOCN-COOH) were 
prepared successfully using TOCN-93 and TOCN-310 of different aspect 
ratios. Figure 19.4 shows the transparent TOCN-93/PS and TOCN-310/PS 
nanocomposite films. Results revealed that TOCNs provide a superior rein -
forcement effect even at low addition levels as a result of the unique charac -
teristics of TOCNs such as high aspect ratio, high crystallinity, and 
nanodispersibility in the PS matrix. Both the tensile strength and elastic 
modulus were increased by TOCN addition (Fig. 19.5). The TOCN-310/PS 
nanocomposite films had a tendency to display a higher tensile strength and MEcHANIcAL PErfOrMANcE Of BIONANOcOMPOSITES   445
Figure 19.5  Stress −strain curves of (a) TOCN-93/PS and (b) TOCN-310/PS nanocom -
posite. Reprinted with permission from Reference [60].40
30
20
10
00 1 2 3 4 5
Strain (% )Stress (MP a)
4030
20
10
00 1 2 3 4 5
Strain (% )Stress (MP a)TOCH-cont ent
TOCH-cont ent10.0%
5.0%
1.0%
1.5%
0%
10.0%
5.0%
1.0%
1.5%
0%(a)
(b)
elastic modulus than those of the TOCN-93/PS films, and the nanocomposite 
film containing 10 wt% TOCN-310 exhibited a 91% higher elastic modulus 
and 18% higher tensile strength than the neat PS, whereas the elongation at 
break decreased to 31% lower than that of the PS.
Self-standing films with sufficient light transparency and flexibility were 
prepared from softwood and hardwood TOCN/water dispersions have been 
reported by Fukuzumi et al. [61]. The tensile strengths and elastic moduli of 
the films were 200–300 MPa and 6–7 GPa, respectively, which were higher than 
those of cellophane films (Fig. 19.6). Both the tensile strength and elastic 
modulus of a PVA film were remarkably improved by 20% TOCN addition. 
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) observation of TOCN films showed that the 
film surface consists of randomly assembled nanofibers (Fig. 19.7). Results 
confirmed that distribution control of individualized TOCN to obtain more 
homogeneous distribution in a composite is important to achieve the effect of 
high aspect ratio TOCNs on the mechanical properties.
Trovatti et al. [62] prepared novel bionanocomposite films with improved 
thermal and mechanical properties by casting water-based suspensions of  
pullulan and nanofibrillated cellulose. The effect of the addition of glycerol,  
as a plasticizer, on the properties of the materials was also evaluated.  
Results revealed that the developed bionanocomposites exhibit considerable 446  MEcHANI cAL PrOPErTIES Of cELLULOSE -BASED  BIONANO cOMPOSITES 
Figure 19.6  Tensile strength and elastic modulus of TOCN film, 20% TOCN/PVA 
composite film, and others. Reprinted with permission from Reference [61].350
300
250200
150
100
50
0Tensile str ength
Elastic modulusTensile str ength,  MPa
Elastic modulus,  GPa
Paper PVA filmPVA film with
20% TOCNCellophane TOCN film7
6543
2
10
Figure 19.7  AFM image of the surface of a nanofiber film prepared from TEMPO-
oxidizedsoftwood cellulose. Reprinted with permission from Reference [61].
improvements in mechanical properties (increments of up to 5500% and 
8000% in Young’s modulus and tensile strength, respectively, for films plasti -
cized with glycerol)when compared to the unfilled pullulan films.
Biobased green composites with high performance were prepared from 
PLA and microcrystalline cellulose (MCC) fibers grafted with L-lactic acid 
oligomers (g-MC) have been reported by Xiao et al. [63]. The improved com -
patibility between g-MC and PLA caused by grafting results in more enhanced MEcHANIcAL PErfOrMANcE Of BIONANOcOMPOSITES   447
mechanical properties than pure PLA, with a high tensile strength of 70 MPa 
and a higher elongation at breakage. The stress/strain properties of the com -
posites are shown in Figure 19.8. The examples cited above revealed that the 
application of nanocellulosic fillers improves polymer mechanical properties 
such as tensile strength and modulus in a more efficient manner than is 
achieved in conventional micro- or macrocomposite materials.
19.2.2 Flexural and Impact Properties
The flexural stiffness is a criterion of measuring deformability. The flexural 
stiffness of a structure is based on two essential properties: the first is the 
elastic modulus (stress per unit strain) of the material that composes it, and 
the second is the moment of inertia, a function of the cross-sectional 
geometry.
Impact strength is the ability of a material to resist fracture under stress 
applied at high speed. The impact strength of the composite depends on dif -
ferent grades of the fibers in use and is inversely proportional to its adhesion 
mechanism to the matrix. At impact the fiber is accompanied by three primary 
mechanisms, namely debonding, pull out, and fracture. It may be assumed that 
the strain energy that is released by fiber debonding and fracture is propor -
tional to the fiber length and diameter. It may thus be concluded better fiber/
matrix adhesion results in its worst impact strength. The following section 
highlights some recent studies on the flexural and impact properties of nano -
cellulosic fillers as a reinforcing material in bionanocomposite production.
Takagi and Asano [64] investigated the effect of processing conditions on the 
mechanical properties and internal microstructures of composites consisting of Figure 19.8  Typical stress–train curves of the pure PLA, the MC/PLA composite, and 
the g-MC/PLA composites. Reprinted with permission from Reference [63].80
70
60504030
20
10
0Stress (MP a)
Strain (% )0 1 2 3 4MC/PLA
(30%)g-MC/PLA (50%)
PLAg-MC/PLA (30%)
g-MC/PLA (1 0%)448  MEcHANI cAL PrOPErTIES Of cELLULOSE -BASED  BIONANO cOMPOSITES 
a dispersion-type biodegradable resin made from esterified starch and CNFs. 
All samples with nanofiber loading of 70 wt% were prepared by hot-pressing 
at 140°C and pressures of 10–50 MPa. It was found that the density of the com -
posites increased with increased molding pressure. Density was used as an 
indicator for the mechanical strength of the composites. Similar densities were 
measured for vacuum-treated and extra-stirred samples, the latter showing 
significantly higher flexural strength, which was explained by difference between 
their internal microstructure and fiber dispersion.
A high-strength elastomeric nanocomposite has successfully been prepared 
by dispersing MC in a polyurethane matrix [65].The resulting nanocomposites 
show increased strain-to-failure in addition to increased stiffness and strength 
compared with the unfilled polyurethane. The optimal composite contained 5 
wt% cellulose. The average true strength for this composition was 257 MPa, 
compared with 39 MPa for the neat polyurethane, which showed the highest 
strain-to-failure. The improvements of stiffness, strength, as well as strain-to-
failure are believed to be due to good interaction, by both covalent and hydro -
gen bonds, between the polyurethane and the cellulose nanofibrils.
Huang and Netravali investigated the flexural properties of biodegradable 
and environment friendly green composites based on micro/nanosized bamboo 
fibrils. Results revealed that these composites possessing moderate strength 
and stiffness [66]. Recently novel aerogels (or aerocellulose) based on all-
cellulose composites were prepared by partially dissolving MCC in an 8 wt% 
LiCl/DMAc solution [67]. Cellulose gels were precipitated and then processed 
by freeze-drying to maintain the openness of the structure. The density of 
aerocellulose increased with the initial cellulose concentration and ranged 
from 116 to 350 kg/m3. Aerocellulose with relatively high mechanical proper -
ties were successfully produced. The flexural strength and modulus of the 
aerocellulose was measured up to 8.1 and 280 MPa, respectively. Generally, 
the specific flexural strength and stiffness increase with the content of highly 
crystalline cellulose.
In order to achieve improved mechanical properties in polymer nanocom -
posites, good filler–matrix interaction is essential. A challenge associated with 
using nanocellulose in composites is the lack of compatibility with hydropho -
bic polymers and various chemical modification methods such as esterification, 
cationization, carboxylation, silylation, and polymer grafting have been 
explored in order to address this hurdle (Fig. 19.9) [68–73]. Most of these 
focused on the improvement of its dispersability and compatibility in different 
solvents or matrices that are suitable in the production of nanocomposites. For 
instance, Nakahara et al. [74] suggested an interesting method to overcome 
the problem of nanocellulose–hydrophobic polymer incompatibility. These 
authors simultaneously cut conifer kraft pulp fibers and PLA fibers into 1-mm 
length and dispersed them in water. The mixture was then treated in a refiner 
and a homogenizer to achieve the desired nanoscale structure, followed by 
filtering, pulverizing, and finally injection molding. The resulting test piece 
showed a flexural modulus of 5.5 GPa and a bending strength of 60 MPa.MEcHANIcAL PErfOrMANcE Of BIONANOcOMPOSITES   449
In another study, Nakahara [75] grafted nanocellulose with either PVOH 
or PLA, followed by dewatering and kneading with PLA. The resulting materi -
als were then compression molded. The product possessed flexural modulus 
of 5.1–5.7 GPa, flexural strength of 100–105 MPa, and an impact strength of 
∼26 J/m. Hashiba [76] succeeded in fabricating a thermoplastic resin composite 
by mixing an aqueous dispersion of nanocellulose with PLA resin in an agita -
tor. The mixture was then pulverized and injection molded to give a test piece 
with high flexural strength and modulus (110 MPa and 4 GPa, respectively).
19.2.3 Thermomechanical Properties
Thermal degradation of cellulose materials or the reduction in mechanical 
properties at elevated temperatures is one of the major issues that limit nano -
cellulose applications. The onset of thermal degradation of CNs typically 
occurs at ∼200–300°C and provides an upper limit to the application and pro -
cessing temperatures appropriate for nanocellulose-based products. However, 
if CNs have been chemically modified (e.g., sulfate esters introduced during Figure 19.9  Schematic diagram illustrating the various types of chemical modifica -
tions on NCC surface. Reprinted with permission from Reference [73].O CH3
CH3OHa C
CO
O O
OOO
OO
O
O O OOO
OO O
OO OOOOOO
OO
O OO
OH
OHOH
OHHO
OH HO
OH
OHHO
OH HO OHOH
HOHOHOHO
Br
–200mm10–20mm
C2H2N+1
H3C NHOOC
HN NHCS
Si450  MEcHANI cAL PrOPErTIES Of cELLULOSE -BASED  BIONANO cOMPOSITES 
hydrolysis by H 2SO 4 or carboxylation via TEMPO-based oxidation) the onset 
temperature of thermal degradation will likely change. For example, for NFC 
neat and modified films, Fukuzumi et al. [61] showed that the onset of thermal 
degradation, as measured by thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) of modified 
films made from TEMPO-oxidized NFCs were ∼100°C lower than those of 
neat NFC films ( ∼300°C).
19.2.3.1  Dynamic  Mechanical  Thermal  Analysis  It has been the most 
reported technique for evaluating the response of the mechanical properties 
of cellulose nanostructures and composites to temperature. Dynamic mechani -
cal thermal analysis (DMTA) has been used to characterize changes in the 
loss and storage moduli (E ′), and the internal friction factor as a function of 
increasing temperature, typically within the range of 100 to ∼200°C. The inter -
nal friction factor (loss modulus divided by storage modulus), assesses the 
damping of the material, while the storage moduli assesses the stiffness of the 
material. DMTA has been used to test nanocellulose-reinforced polymer 
matrix composites neat CN films [50, 77] and modified/composite CN films 
[78]. Recent studies on the thermal stability of CN-reinforced polymer matrix 
composites, neat CN films, and modified/composite CN films are briefly sum -
marized below.
Fujisawa et al. [60] investigated the storage modulus of TOCN/PS nano -
composite films was characterized by DMA analysis (Fig. 19.10). DMA showed 
that the storage modulus of the TOCN/PS films increased significantly with 
TOCN content above the glass transition temperature of PS by the formation 
of an interfibrillar network structure of TOCNs in the PS matrix, based on 
percolation theory. The modulus of nanocomposite films maintained high 
values of up to ∼230°C, whereas the neat PS fractured at ∼150°C. The dimen -
sional stability of PS subjected to temperature was enhanced significantly 
owing to the TOCN −matrix or TOCN −TOCN interactions. Compared with 
other fillers such as carbon nanotubes, TOCNs provide a superior reinforce -
ment effect even at low addition levels.
The DMTA analysis of novel bionanocomposites using CNFs as reinforce -
ment in PLA using acetone have been reported [49]. Results showed that the 
storage modulus of the composites was kept constant above the glass transi -
tion temperature of the matrix polymer. In another study, Suryanegara et al. 
[50] applied the same method but then exchanged acetone for dichlorometh -
ane and showed that the resulting nanocomposites had improved storage 
modulus when compared to neat PLA.
Sehaqui et al. [34] studied the dynamic thermal mechanical properties of 
the wood fiber/NFC composites. Three materials were studied, namely the 
reference biocomposite (0% NFC), the 5% NFC composite, and the 100% 
NFC nanopaper. The level of the E ′ data at room temperature is similar to the 
static tensile moduli. Results revealed that cellulose nanocomposites can be 
very stiff under conditions of low mobility and exhibited high modulus values 
at low temperatures. Moduli are also well preserved until temperatures as high MEcHANIcAL PErfOrMANcE Of BIONANOcOMPOSITES   451
as 200°C. The 5% NFC composite has higher E ′ than the 0% NFC composite 
and lower E ′ than NFC nanopaper.Tan δ curves show that all biocomposites 
have three different relaxations. Data for storage modulus E ′ and tan δ are 
presented in Figure 19.11.
Xiao et al. [63] investigated the temperature dependence of the dynamic 
mechanical properties of the composite films with 10 wt% and 30 wt% MC 
fibers grafted with L-lactic acid oligomers (g-MC). It has been found that the 
storage modulus (E ′) decreases sharply at glass transition temperature (Tg). 
Both PLA and the g-MC/PLA composites show an increase in E ′ at ∼100°C. 
This is probably due to the crystallization of PLA that occurs in that tempera -
ture range. The presence of PLA crystals in g-MC/PLA composites and PLA Figure 19.10  Storage moduli of (a) TOCN-93/PS and (b) TOCN-310/PS nanocompos -
ite films. Reprinted with permission from Reference [60].10.0%1010
109
108
107
106
105
104Eı (Pa)
50 100 1 50 200
Temperatur e (°C)
1010
109
108
107
106
105
104Eı (Pa)
50 100 1 50 200
Temperatur e (°C)TOCH cont ent
5.0%
2.5%
1.0%
0.5%
0%
TOCH cont ent
10.0%
5.0%2.5%
1.0%
0.5%
0%(a)
(b)452  MEcHANI cAL PrOPErTIES Of cELLULOSE -BASED  BIONANO cOMPOSITES 
raises their moduli. Figure 19.12a shows the storage modulus (E ′) of the 
samples as a function of temperature. From Figure 19.12a, the crystallization 
temperature (Tc) of the g-MC/PLA composites are in the range of 90–100°C, 
while the Tc of PLA is in the range of 105–110°C. The loss factor (tan δ), which 
characterizes the length of mobile chain segments, changes inversely with E ′ 
as temperature changes (Fig. 19.12b). As the Tg occurs, the mobility of the 
PLA chains in the composites increases, as reflected by the rapid increase of 
tan δ at 50–60°C and then it slightly decreases at ∼100°C.
Cho et al. [55] investigated the thermomechanical properties of nanocellulose-
reinforced PVA nanocomposites by DMA analysis. The DMA result shows a 
significant increase of the storage modulus (E ′) of about 74% at the 3 wt% 
nanocellulose loading level compared to that of the neat PVA film at 25°C 
(Fig. 19.13). Figure 19.14 shows the tan δ of the nanocomposites reinforced 
with various amounts of the nanocellulose as a function of temperature. As 
the nanocellulose content increased, the maximum tan δ slightly increased at 
1 wt% level and then decreased up to the 5 wt% content followed by a 
decrease at the 7 wt% content. This result confirmed that that a low tensile 
strength results in a decreased E ′, which subsequently increases the tan δ.
Dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) of nanocomposites from wheat straw 
nanofibers and TPS from modified potato starch has been reported. Results 
revealed that the Tg of the nanocomposites was shifted to higher temperatures 
with respect to the pure TPS [47]. Lu et al. [79] observed no further improve -
ment of mechanical properties when MFC was applied above 10 wt%. In their 
study, MFC suspension was added at 1 wt%, 5 wt%, 10 wt%, and 15 wt% 
loadings to the PVOH matrix. A steady increase in film modulus and strength 
was observed until a plateau was reached at 10 wt% MFC. DMA showed an Figure 19.11  Storage modulus E ′ (a) and tan δ (b) as a function of temperature for 
the 0% NFC, 5% NFC, and 100% NFC materials. Reprinted with permission from 
Reference [34].25
20
15
10
5
0Storage Modulus (G Pa)
–100 0 1 00 200 300100%
5%
0%
Temperatur e (°C)–100 0 1 00 200 300
Temperatur e (°C)(a) (b)
Tan (8)0.045
0.04
0.025
0.03
0.025100%
0%
5%MEcHANIcAL PErfOrMANcE Of BIONANOcOMPOSITES   453
increase of storage tensile modulus in the glassy state with increasing MFC 
content. The thermal stability of the PVOH composite films was slightly 
increased with the addition of MFC.
Many studies on tensile, flexural, impact, and thermomechanical properties 
highlighted in this chapter gave an insight into the effect of processing condi -
tions, chemical modification, and types of matrices used for composites on the 
mechanical performance of cellulose bionanocomposites. Tensile, flexural, and Figure 19.12  Dynamic mechanical properties of the pure PLA and the g-MC/PLA 
composites with different g-MC contents. (a)Temperature dependence of E ′; (b) Tem -
perature dependence of tan δ. Reprinted with permission from Reference [63].
(a) (b)
5.00E+009
4.00E+009
3.00E+009
2.00E+009
1.00E+009
0.00E+000E’ (Pa)
–50 0 5 0 1 00 150
Temp (°C)–50 0 50 1 00 150
Temp (°C)g-MC/PLA (1 0%)
g-MC/PLA (1 0%)g-MC/PLA (30%)
g-MC/PLA (30%) PLAPLA
Increase of E’
Tan δ2.8
2.42.0
1 .01 .0
0.80.40.0
Figure 19.13  Storage tensile modulus E ′ versus the temperature (°C) for nanocellu -
lose-reinforced PVA nanocomposites. Reprinted with permission from Reference [55].
454  MEcHANI cAL PrOPErTIES Of cELLULOSE -BASED  BIONANO cOMPOSITES 
impact properties are the most commonly investigated mechanical properties 
of cellulose nanofiber-reinforced biocomposites. Impact strength is one of the 
undesirable weak points of these materials in terms of mechanical perfor -
mance. Besides these tensile, flexural and impact properties, dynamic mechani -
cal behavior is also investigated. Interfacial adhesion between natural fibers 
and matrix will remain the key issue in terms of overall performance, since it 
dictates the final properties of the composites. Improved fiber matrix adhesion 
and thereby improved mechanical properties to the desired level can be 
accomplished by engineering a superior processing condition, in preparing the 
biocomposites, by altering the polymer architecture of the matrix or by the 
surface treatment of the fiber.
19.3 CONCLUSION
Nanocellulose is a promising renewable biomaterial that can be used as a 
reinforcing component in high performance bionanocomposites. The combina -
tion of biodegradable nanocellulose and biodegradable, renewable polymers 
is particularly attractive from an environmental point of view. It is shown that 
nanocellulose has a distinct advantage for preparing nanocomposites with 
outstanding thermal and mechanical properties. Recent studies on tensile, 
flexural, impact, and thermomechanical properties highlighted in this chapter 
gave an insight into the many potential applications of nanocellulosic fillers 
as a reinforcing material for bionanocomposite production. In order to achieve 
improved mechanical properties in polymer nanocomposites, good filler–Figure 19.14  Tan δ as the function of the temperature (°C) for nanocellulose-rein -
forced PVA nanocomposites. Reprinted with permission from Reference [55].
rEfErENcES   455
matrix interaction is essential because it dictates the overall performance of 
the composites. Consequently, more research targeting novel, environmentally 
friendly methods of modification, as well as an understanding of the mecha -
nism of reactions occurring at the CNF–polymer matrix interface, is now 
required.
REFERENCES
 [1] Eichhorn, S.J. (2011) Cellulose nanowhiskers: Promising materials for advanced 
applications. Soft Matter , 7(2), 303–315.
 [2] Eichhorn, S.J., Dufresne, A., Aranguren, M., Marcovich, N.E., Capadona, J.R., 
Rowan, S.J., Weder, C., Thielemans, W., Roman, M., Renneckar, S., Gindl, W., 
Veigel, S., Keckes, J., Yano, H., Abe, K., Nogi, M., Nakagaito, A.N., Mangalam, A., 
Simonsen, J., Benight, A.S., Bismarck, A., Berglund, L.A., and Peijs, T. (2010) 
Review: Current international research into cellulose nanofibers and nanocom -
posites. Journal of Material Science , 45(1), 1–33.
 [3] Habibi, Y., Lucia, L.A., and Rojas, O.J. (2010) Cellulose nanocrystals: Chemistry, 
self-assembly, and applications. Chemical Reviews , 110(6), 3479–3500.
 [4] Sunday, A.O., Lawal, G.I., Sambo, B.A., and Emmanuel, A.I. (2012) Review of 
green polymer nanocomposites. Journal of Minerals and Materials Characteriza -
tion and Engineering , 11(4), 385–416.
 [5] Abdul Khalil, H.P .S., Bhat, A.H., and IreanaYusra, A.F. (2012) Green composites 
from sustainable cellulose nanofibrils: A review. Carbohydrate Polymers , 87(2), 
963–979.
 [6] Siro, I., Plackett, D. (2010) Microfibrillated cellulose and new nanocomposite 
materials: A review. Cellulose , 17(3), 459–494.
 [7] Faruk, O., Bledzki, A.K., Fink, H.P ., and Sain, M. (2012) Biocomposites reinforced 
with natural fibers: 2000-2010. Progress in Polymer Science , 37(11), 1552–1596. 
 [8] Satyanarayana, K.G., Arizaga, G.G.C., and Wypych, F. (2009) Biodegradable com -
posites based on lignocellulosic fibers—An overview. Progress in Polymer Science , 
34(9), 982–1021.
 [9] Venkateshwaran, N., Elayaperumal, A. (2010) Banana fiber reinforced poly-mer 
composites—A review. Journal of Reinforced Plastics and Composites , 29(15), 
2387–2396.
[10] John, M.J., Thomas, S. (2008) Review-biofibres and biocomposites. Carbohydrate 
Polymers , 71(3), 343–364.
[11] Moon, R.J., Martini, A., Nairn, J., Simonsen, J., and Youngblood, J. (2011) Cellulose 
nanomaterials review: Structure, properties and nanocomposites. Chemical Society 
Review , 40(7), 3941–3994.
[12] Ioelowich, M. (2008) Cellulose as a nanostructured polymer: A short review. Bio-
resources , 3(4), 1403–1418.
[13] Siqueira, G., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2010) Cellulosic bionanocomposites: A 
review of preparation, properties and applications. Polymer , 2(4), 728–765.456  MEcHANI cAL PrOPErTIES Of cELLULOSE -BASED  BIONANO cOMPOSITES 
[14] Isogai, A., Saito, T., and Fukuzumi, H. (2011) TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofi -
bers. Nanoscale , 3, 71–85.
[15] Pickering, K. (2008) Properties and Performance of Natural-Fibre Composites . 
Cambridge, UK: Woodhead Publishing.
[16] Thomas, S., Pothan, L.A., eds. (2009) Natural Fibre Reinforced Polymer Compos -
ites: From Macro to Nanoscale . Philadelphia: Old City Publishing.
[17] Staiger, M.P ., Tucker, N. (2008) Natural-fibre composites in structural applications. 
In: Properties and Performance of Natural-Fibre Composites , ed. K. Pickering. 
Cambridge, UK: Woodhead Publishing, pp. 269–300.
[18] Mohanty, A.K., Misra, M., and Drzal, L.T., eds. (2005) Natural Fibers, Biopolymers, 
and Biocomposites . Boca Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis Group.
[19] Kalia, S., Kaith, B.S., and Kaur, I., eds. (2011) Cellulose Fibers: Bio- and Nano-
Polymer Composites. Green Chemistry and Technology . Heidelberg Dordrecht, 
London, New York: Springer.
[20] Ummartyotin, S., Juntaro, J., Sain, M., and Manuspiya, H. (2012) Development of 
transparent bacterial cellulose nanocomposite film as substrate for flexible organic 
light emitting diode (OLED) display. Industrial Crops and Products , 35(1), 
92–97.
[21] Berglund, L.A., Peijs, T. (2010) Cellulose biocomposites–From bulk moldings to 
nanostuctured systems. MRS Bulletin , 35, 201–207.
[22] Ly, B., Thielemans, W., Chaussy, D., and Belgacem, M.N. (2008) Surface function -
alization of cellulose fibers and their incorporation in renewable polymeric matri -
ces. Composite Science and Technology , 68, 3193–3201.
[23] Mangalam, A.P ., Simonsen, J., and Benight, A.S. (2009) Cellulose/DNA hybrid 
nanomaterials. Biomacromolecules , 10, 497–504.
[24] Mattoso, L.H.C., Medeiros, E.S., Baker, D.A., Avloni, J., Wood, D.F., and Orts, W.J. 
(2009) Electrically conductive nanocomposites made from cellulose nanofibrils 
and polyaniline. Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology , 9, 2917–2922.
[25] Hongyang, M., Hsiao, B.S., and Chu, B. (2012) Ultrafine cellulose nanofibers as 
efficient adsorbents for removal of UO2 2+ in water. ACS Macro Letters , 1, 
213–216.
[26] Henriksson, M., Berglund, L.A., Isaksson, P ., Lindstrom, T., and Nishino, T. (2008) 
Cellulose nanopaper structures of high toughness. Biomacromolecules , 9, 
1579–1585.
[27] Zhou, Q., Malm, E., Nilsson, H., Larsson, P .T., Iversen, T., Berglund, L.A., and 
Bulone, V. (2009) Nanostructured biocomposites based on bacterial cellulosic 
nanofibers compartmentalized by a soft hydroxyethylcellulose matrix coating. Soft 
Matter , 5, 4124–4130.
[28] Paakko, M., Vapaavuori, J., Silvennoinen, R., Kosonen, H., Ankerfors, M., Lind -
strom, T., Berglund, L.A., and Ikkala, O. (2008) Long and entangled native cel -
lulose I nanofibers allow flexible aerogels and hierarchically porous templates for 
functionalities. Soft Matter , 4, 2492–2499.
[29] Sehaqui, H., Salajkova, M., Zhou, Q., and Berglund, L.A. (2010) Mechanical per -
formance tailoring of tough ultra-high porosity foams prepared from cellulose I 
nanofiber suspensions. Soft Matter , 6, 1824–1832.rEfErENcES   457
[30] Yano, H., Sugiyama, J., Nakagaito, A.N., Nogi, M., Matsuura, T., and Hikita, M. 
(2005) Optically transparent composites reinforced with networks of bacterial 
nanofibers. Advanced Materials , 17, 153–155.
[31] Nogi, M., Iwamoto, S., Nakagaito, A.N., and Yano, H. (2009) Optically transparent 
nanofibre paper. Advanced Materials , 21, 1595–1598.
[32] Svagan, A.J., Samir, M.A.S.A., and Berglund, L.A. (2008) Biomimetic foams of 
high mechanical performance based on nanostructured cell walls reinforced by 
native cellulose nanofibers. Advanced Materials , 20, 1263–1269.
[33] Olsson, R.T., Samir, M.A.S.A., Salazar-Alvarez, G., Belova, L., Ström, V., Berglund, 
L.A., Ikkala, O., Nogués, J., and Gedde, U.W. (2010) Making flexible magnetic 
aerogels and stiff magnetic nanopaper using cellulose nanofibers as templates. 
Nature Nanotechnology , 5, 584–588.
[34] Sehaqui, H., Allais, M., Zhou, Q., and Berglund, L.A. (2011) Wood cellulose bio -
composites with fibrous structures at micro- and nanoscale. Composites Science 
and Technology , 71, 382–387.
[35] Okahisa, Y., Yoshida, A., Miyaguchi, S., and Yano, H. (2009) Optically transparent 
wood–cellulose nanocomposite as a base substrate for flexible organic light-
emitting diode displays. Composit Science and Technology , 69, 1958–1961.
[36] Mahadeva, S.K., Yun, S., and Kim, J. (2011) Flexible humidity and temperature 
sensor based cellulose-polypyrrolenanocomposite. Sensors and Actuators. A Phys -
ical, 165, 194–199.
[37] Samir, M.A.S.A., Alloin, F., and Dufresne, A. (2005) Review of recent research 
into cellulosic whiskers, their properties and their application in nanocomposite 
field. Biomacromolecules , 6, 612–626.
[38] Dufresne, A. (2006) Comparing the mechanical properties of high performance 
polymer nanocomposites from biological sources. Journal of Nanoscienceand 
Nanotechnology , 6, 322–330.
[39] de Rodriguez, N.L.G., Thielemans, W., and Dufresne, A. (2006) Sisal cellulose 
whiskers reinforced polyvinyl acetate nanocomposites. Cellulose , 13, 261–270.
[40] Samir, M.A.S.A., Alloin, F., Paillet, M., and Dufresne, A. (2004) Tangling effect in 
fibrillated cellulose reinforced nanocomposites. Macromolecules , 37, 4313–4316.
[41] Bendahou, A., Habibi, Y., Kaddami, H., and Dufresne, A. (2009) Physico-chemical 
characterization of palm from Phoenix dactylifera-L, preparation of cellulose 
whiskers and natural rubber-based nanocomposites. Journal of Biobased Materials 
and Bioenergy , 81–90.
[42] Siqueira, G., Bras, J., and Dufresne, A. (2009) Cellulose whiskers versus microfi -
brils: Influence of the nature of the nanoparticle and its surface functionalization 
on the thermal and mechanical properties of nanocomposites. Biomacromolecules , 
10, 425–432.
[43] deMenezes, J.A., Siqueira, G., Curvelo, A.A.S., and Dufresne, A. (2009) Extrusion 
and characterization of functionalized cellulose whiskers reinforced polyethylene 
nanocomposites. Polymer , 50, 4552–4563.
[44] Ljungberg, N., Bonini, C., Bortolussi, F., Boisson, C., and Heux, L. (2005) New 
nanocomposite materials reinforced with cellulose whiskers in atactic polypropyl -
ene: Effect of surface and dispersion characteristics. Biomacromolecules , 6, 
2732–2739.458  MEcHANI cAL PrOPErTIES Of cELLULOSE -BASED  BIONANO cOMPOSITES 
[45] Kaushik, A., Singh, M., and Verma, G. (2010) Green nanocomposites based on 
thermoplastic starch and steam exploded cellulose nanofibrils from wheat straw. 
Carbohydrate Polymers , 82, 337–345.
[46] Lu, Y., Weng, L., and Cao, X. (2006) Morphological, thermal and mechanical 
properties of ramie crystallites–reinforced plasticized starch biocomposites. Car-
bohydrate Polymers , 63, 198–204.
[47] Alemdar, A., Sain, M. (2008) Biocomposites from wheat straw nanofibers: Mor -
phology, thermal and mechanical properties. Composite Science and Technology , 
68, 557–565.
[48] Azeredo, H.M.C., Mattoso, L.H.C., Wood, D., Williams, T.G., Avena-Bustillos, R.J., 
and Mchugh, T.H. (2009) Nanocomposite edible films from mango puree rein -
forced with cellulose nanofibers. Journal of Food Science , 74, 31–35.
[49] Iwatake, A., Nogi, M., and Yano, H. (2008) Cellulose nanofiber-reinforced poly -
lactic acid. Composite Science and Technology , 68, 2103–2106.
[50] Suryanegara, L., Nakagaito, A.N., and Yano, H. (2009) The effect of crystallization 
of PLA on the thermal and mechanical properties of microfibrillated cellulose-
reinforced PLA composites. Composite Science and Technology , 69, 1187–1192.
[51] Qu, P ., Gao, Y., Wu, G., and Zhang, L. (2010) Nanocomposites of poly (lactic acid) 
reinforced with cellulose nanofibrils. BioResources , 5, 1811–1823.
[52] Bondeson, D., Oksman, K. (2007) Dispersion and characteristics of surfactant 
modified cellulose whiskers nanocomposites. Composite Interface , 14, 617–630.
[53] Cao, X., Dong, H., and Li, C.M. (2007) New nanocomposite materials reinforced 
with flax cellulose nanocrystals in waterborne polyurethane. Biomacromolecules , 
8, 899–904.
[54] Nordqvist, D., Idermark, J., and Hedenqvist, M.S. (2007) Enhancement of the wet 
properties of transparent chitosan-acetic-acidsalt films using microfibrillated cel -
lulose. Biomacromolecules , 8, 2398–2403.
[55] Cho, M.J., Park, B.D. (2011) Tensile and thermal properties of nanocellulose-
reinforced poly (vinyl alcohol) nanocomposites. Journal of Industrial and Engi -
neering Chemistry , 17, 36–40.
[56] Leitner, J., Hinterstoisser, B., Wastyn, M., Keckes, O., and Gindl, W. (2007) Sugar 
beet cellulose nanofibril-reinforced composites. Cellulose , 14, 419–425.
[57] Bhatnagar, A., Sain, M. (2005) Processing of cellulose nanofiber-reinforced com -
posites. Journal of Reinforced Plastics and Composites , 24, 1259–1268.
[58] Wang, B., Sain, M. (2007) Dispersion of soybean stock-based nanofiber in a plastic 
matrix. Polymer International , 56, 538–546.
[59] Bruce, D.M., Hobson, R.N., Farrent, J.W., and Hepworth, D.G. (2005) High-
performance composites from low-cost plant primary cell walls. Composite Part 
A-Applied Science and Manufacturing , 36, 1486–1493.
[60] Fujisawa, S., Ikeuchi, T., Takeuchi, M., Saito, T., and Isogai, A. (2012) Superior 
reinforcement effect of TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanofibrils in polystyrene 
matrix: Optical, thermal, and mechanical studies. Biomacromolecules , 13(7), 
2188–2194.
[61] Fukuzumi, H., Saito, T., Wata, T., Kumamoto, Y., and Isogai, A. (2009) Transparent 
and high gas barrier films of cellulose nanofibers prepared by TEMPO-mediated 
oxidation. Biomacromolecules , 10, 162–165.rEfErENcES   459
[62] Trovatti, E., Fernandes, S.C.M., Rubatat, L., da Silva, D.P ., Freire, C.S.R., Silvestre, 
A.J.D., and Neto, C.S. (2012) Pullulan-nanofibrillated cellulose composite films 
with improved thermal and mechanical properties. Composite Science and Tech -
nology , 72(13), 1556–1561.
[63] Xiao, L., Mai, Y., He, F., Yu, L., Zhang, L., Tang, H., and Yang, G. (2012) Bio-based 
green composites with high performance from poly(lactic acid) and surface-
modified microcrystalline cellulose. Journal of Material Chemistry , 22, 
15732–15739.
[64] Takagi, H., Asano, A. (2008) Effects of processing conditions on flexural properties 
of cellulose nanofiber reinforced “green” composites. Composite Part A-Applied 
Science and Manufacturing , 39, 685–689.
[65] Wu, Q., Henriksson, M., Liu, X., and Berglund, L.A. (2007) A high strength nano -
composite based on microcrystalline cellulose and polyurethane. Biomacromole -
cules , 8(12), 3687–3692.
[66] Huang, X., Netravali, A. (2009) Biodegradable green composites made using 
bamboo micro/nanofibrils and chemically modified soy protein resin. Composie 
Science and Technology , 69, 1009–1015.
[67] Duchemin, B. (2008) Structure, property and processing relationships of all-
cellulose composites. PhD thesis: Mechanical Engineering University of Canter -
bury Christchurch, New Zealand.
[68] Gouss ′e, C., Chanzy, H., Excoffier, G., Soubeyrand, L., and Fleury, E. (2002) Stable 
suspensions of partially silylated cellulose whiskers dispersed in organic solvents. 
Polymer , 43, 2645–2651.
[69] Habibi, Y., Chanzy, H., and Vignon, M. (2006) TEMPO-mediated surface oxidation 
of cellulose whiskers. Cellulose , 13, 679–687.
[70] Hasani, M., Cranston, E.D., Westman, G., and Gray, D.G. (2008) Cationic surface 
functionalisation of cellulose nanocrystals. Soft Matter , 4, 2238–2244.
[71] Morandi, G., Heath, L., and Thielemans, W. (2009) Cellulose nanocrystals grafted 
with polystyrene chains through surface-initiated atom transfer radical polymeri -
sation (SI-ATRP). Langmuir , 25, 8280–8286.
[72] Braun, B., Dorgan, J.R. (2009) Single-step method for the isolation and surface 
functionalisation of cellulosic nanowhiskers. Biomacromolecules , 10, 334–341.
[73] Peng, B.L., Dhar, N., Liu, H.L., and Tam, K.C. (2011) Chemistry and applications 
of nanocrystallinecellulose and its derivatives: A nanotechnology perspective. 
Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering , 89(5), 1191–1206.
[74] Nakahara, S., Saito, E., and Asada, T. (2008) Manufacture of microfibrillated 
cellulose-polymer composites with high mechanical strength, aqueous dispersions 
therefore, and manufacture of moldings comprising them. Jpn Kokai Tokkyo 
Koho; 2007-82938:10.
[75] Nakahara, S. (2008) Resin composite materials containing surface- treated micro -
fibrillated cellulose (MFC) reinforcement, their manufacture, and their articles. 
Jpn Kokai Tokkyo Koho; 2007-17153:10.
[76] Hashiba, M. (2009) Thermoplastic resin compositions containing cellulose  
nanofibers with good bending properties. PCT Int Appl.; 2008-JP58502; 2007-  
195163:24.460  MEcHANI cAL PrOPErTIES Of cELLULOSE -BASED  BIONANO cOMPOSITES 
[77] Svagan, A.J., Samir, M.A.S.A., and Berglund, L.A. (2007) Biomimetic polysac -
charide nanocomposites of high cellulose content and high toughness. Biomacro -
molecules , 8, 2556–2563.
[78] Henriksson, M., Berglund, L.A. (2007) Structure and properties of cellulose nano -
composite films containing melamine formaldehyde. Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science , 106, 2817–2824.
[79] Lu, J., Wang, T., and Drzal, L.T. (2008) Preparation and properties of microfibril -
lated cellulose polyvinyl alcohol composite materials. Compos Part A-Appled 
Science and Manufacturing , 39, 738–746.461Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 20   
Review of Nanocellulosic Products 
and Their Applications
JOE ASPLER , JEAN BOUCHARD , WADOOD HAMAD , RICHARD BERRY , 
STEPHANIE BECK , FRANÇOIS DROLET , and XUEJUN ZOU
20.1 INTRODUCTION
20.1.1 Background and Scope of This Review
The growing demand for green and sustainable products made from natural 
and renewable raw materials has created a worldwide interest in the develop -
ment of high performance, high value nanocellulosics. Like many other nano -
materials, nanocellulosic products have unique properties, with the potential 
to develop new products or significantly enhance the performance of existing 
products. One important difference from many other nanomaterials is that 
nanocellulosic products are made from natural raw materials that have the 
potential to be harvested in a sustainable manner.
Hundreds of papers and patents on micro- and nanocellulosic products 
have been published in the last 10 years alone. Table 20.1 defines the basic 
terms and products discussed in this review. It must be noted that there is 
considerable overlap in technical and commercial definitions. Many of the 
names are arbitrary distinctions. Discussions (and sales literature) for many 
products—even those considered to be proprietary—overlap with each other 
in terms of their properties and projected end-uses.
As noted in Table 20.1, “micro” cellulosic products are distinguished by 
particle sizes in the scale of many microns, and “nano” cellulosic products  
are distinguished by particle sizes in the scale of nanometers. Some products 
may be nanoscale in one or two dimensions only, so their classification is still TABLE 20.1  Competing Micro- and Nanocellulosic Products. See Also Appendix A
Product PreparationTypical Size 
RangeTypical 
Aspect RatioDegree of 
PolymerizationCommercial Status and Market 
Size
Powdered 
celluloseMechanical milling 
of high purity 
cellulose fibers, 
with or without 
sodium 
hypochlorite and 
caustic soda20–50 μm in 
diameter
Up to 400 μm 
in lengthUp to 20 Up to 1400 Long established
Microcrystalline 
cellulose (MCC)Mild acid hydrolysis 
of cellulose fibers50–300 μm ∼1–3 150–350 Long established
50,000 tpy
Microfibrillated 
cellulose 
(MFC); 
cellulose fibers 
with 
nanofibrillation 
(CFN)MCC or fibers with 
high-pressure 
homogenization, 
possibly aided by 
chemical or 
enzymatic 
treatment10–100 nm 
wide, 
1–100 μm 
longUp to 100 Up to 1000 Recently commercialized
Nanofibrillated 
cellulose (NFC)Enzymatic or 
chemical 
treatment of 
MCC or fibers; 
with 
homogenization4–30 nm wide; 
70 nm–5 μm 
longUp to 100 Up to 900 Innventia (Sweden): Pilot plant 
inaugurated February 2011 
∼100 kg/day [51] 
Tokyo University with Kao 
Corporation and Nippon 
Paper (scale unknown)
Nanocrystalline 
cellulose (NCC) 
(cellulose 
whiskers)Strong acid 
hydrolysis with 
homogenization3–5 nm wide 
elementary 
fibril level 
up to 
200 nm long∼20 Up to 300 CelluForce (FPInnovations—
Domtar) 3 kg/day—
operational 1 tonne/day 
demonstration plant: in 
operation January 2012
462INTRODUCTION   463
somewhat open to debate. Furthermore, the term fibrillation itself causes 
problems of terminology. The entire process of pulp development, from the 
original native wood fibers, is one of progressive fibrillation, as shown in the 
illustrations to this chapter. Perhaps only the cellulose whiskers or nanocrys -
talline cellulose (NCC) particles are the only nonfibrillated materials—but 
only because these elementary rods have had all visibly fibrillar material 
removed by a combination of intensive chemical and physical action.
Several important technical reviews have also recently been published. A 
key review by Eichhorn et al. summarized the technical contributions from 
many different groups working in the field [1]. Hubbe et al. [2] covered nano -
composite systems, with particular emphasis on surface derivatization of cel -
lulosic material to make it more compatible with dispersing media such as 
polymers. The most recent reviews cover the production and structure of the 
different forms of micro- and nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC), as well as their 
abilities to act as reinforcing agents [3–5]. In the most recent review, Peng  
et al. [6] described a comprehensive range of surface-modified NCC products, 
along with the potential of NCC to be used as a reinforcing filler or support 
for different products.
Yano [7] has summarized efforts in Japan. This review covered the work of 
several research groups, including universities (Kyoto, Tokyo), paper manufac -
turers (Oji, Nippon Paper), chemical companies, and others. The areas of 
research in Japan include microfibrillated cellulose (MFC), NFC, and NCC. 
Products under investigation include nanocellulose/polymer composites, bio -
films, and packaging barrier layers. Another review co-authored by three of 
the key institutions carrying out research in the field (McGill University, 
Innventia, and the University of Jena) [8] summarized three basic forms of 
micro- and nanocellulose: MFC, NCC, and bacterial nanocellulose.
These reviews certainly provide a comprehensive summary of recent 
research findings in micro- and nanocellulosic materials. However, the focus 
has been mainly on producing various new materials and exploring their 
potential applications, and less on highlighting their differences in properties 
and assessing their real potential for commercial applications. The purpose of 
this review is not to repeat the wealth of recent technical material, but rather 
to compare and contrast the range of micro- and nanocellulosic products in 
terms of the broad continuum of properties, their current and projected 
markets, the extent to which new products may compete with each other, the 
extent to which a new product may replace an existing product, and the extent 
to which new cellulosic derivatives will create new product lines. This review 
is intended to provide background information for industry and governments 
to develop R&D strategies and make business decisions and as guidance for 
researchers in focusing their research efforts.
The future in expanding and maximizing forest resource value is illustrated 
schematically in Figure 20.1 [9]. The left side of the image shows the traditional 
“re-engineering for value” of the forest industry. By further disassembly of the 
wood into micro, nano, and fundamental chemical components as we move to 464  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
the right of the image, we expand the applications and increase the potential 
value creation for the forest industry.
20.1.2 Brief Description of Nanocellulosic Products and How They 
Compare with Microcellulosic Products
Attempts are being made through the International Organization for Stan -
dardization (ISO) to regularize the situation [10], but these discussions are still 
in a very early stage. A recent article co-authored by the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology in the United States was also devoted to the tech -
niques required for the metrology of nanoparticles [11]. This article noted the 
potential health hazards of carbon nanotubes (CNT) compared with the rela -
tively benign nature of NCC.
In addition to significant differences in physical properties, the values for 
the degree of polymerization (DP) of the different forms of cellulose cover a 
very wide range (Table 20.1). DP depends on the source material (hardwood, 
softwood, cotton, etc.) and the degree or intensity of chemical and mechanical 
treatment. In general, a more severe chemical treatment yields a lower DP . A 
product with a higher aspect ratio will also tend to have a higher DP .
It is also important to note that production of various micro- and nanocel -
lulosic products on the gram scale in a research environment is straightforward, Figure 20.1  Expanding value by expanding the range of products from the forest 
industry.
INTRODUCTION   465
using conventional wet chemistry combined with readily available dispersion 
and homogenization equipment. Many of these research products are far from 
commercial production. Appendix A gives a more detailed summary of world -
wide research, development, and production of nanocellulosics.
Micro- and nanocellulosic products are distinguished by the following:
1. They are nearly pure cellulose, from tree fiber, plant, or bacterial sources, 
sometimes with surface derivatization.
2. They are prepared by a variety of treatments, from purely mechanical 
breakdown of high purity cellulose fibers to a combination of mechanical 
treatment with either chemical or enzymatic assistance.
3. They are distinguished in terms of particle size, shape, structure, and 
surface properties.
4. There exists a continuum of structure and size, from the still-recognizable 
fibrous structure of powdered and microcrystalline cellulose (MCC) to 
the fibrillar structure of MFC and NFC to the nanoscale, rod-like, ele -
mentary cellulose particles of NCC
Powdered cellulose and MCC have been in commercial use for many 
decades. Other products, such as MFC, are newly arrived commercial products 
still looking for markets. These markets might be as new products, or as sub -
stitutes for existing products. The newest products, such as NFC and NCC, are 
still under intensive development and are only beginning to look for com -
mercial outlets. The increasing interest in nanocellulosic products and the large 
amount of funding provided by governments around the world are accelerat -
ing the development of these products.
The continuum of particle size and shape also extends to product properties. 
In some cases, the newer product may be in a position to replace an older 
product, but only if there is an advantage in price and/or performance. At the 
same time, newer products possess properties that can be used to create novel 
end-uses.
20.1.3 Summary of Patents in the Field
Figure 20.2a shows the results of a patent search using terms including nano -
fibrillated cellulose, nanocrystalline cellulose, and related terms, from 1997 to 
early December 2011. There has been a dramatic increase in the number of 
patents since 2008, reflecting the rapidly growing interest in nanocellulosic 
materials.
The numbers are somewhat different from those shown in an earlier review 
covering the period to mid-2009 [4]. The difference may have been due to 
different search criteria or due to the evolution of, for example, patent applica -
tions to final patents. No attempt was made to find patents on MCC, since this 466  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
Figure 20.2  (a) Number of patents/patent applications, 1997–December 2011. (b) 
Patents by country of origin 1997–December 2011.
(a)
(b)
is a much older field, with hundreds of patents. Figure 20.2b breaks the patents 
down by country of origin (not country of filing).
Many patents are deliberately vague as to whether the product in question 
is a true nanomaterial. Given the nature of patent writing, it is typical for the 
patents to give the broadest possible size range of the product, from the true 
nanoparticle scale of 4–5 nm in cross section, up to hundreds of nanometers. 
As an example, US Patent Application 2010/0162926 [12] describes a cement 
board produced using NCC. Yet the text of the patent describes their so-called 
NCC as a product with a fiber width from 50 nm to 5 μm. These product 
dimensions are more in line with those of MFC.
Figure 20.3 shows a breakdown of the patent list by approximate end-use. 
Some patents are very clear as to their intended end-use. Other patents are 
deliberately vague, while patents without specific end-uses are listed as “prepa -
ration” patents. Two key areas targeted for applications are polymer compos -
ites and medical and cosmetic material, representing two extremes: high MICRO- AND NANOCELLULOSIC PRODUCTS TODAY   467
volume but low value products, and low volume but high value products. In 
the former case, small amounts of nanocellulosic products may be added as a 
reinforcement additive and in the latter case, nanocellulosic products are used 
as a major component.
20.2 MICRO- AND NANOCELLULOSIC PRODUCTS TODAY
Production of micro- and nanocellulosic products begins with high purity cel -
lulose fibers. These include cotton and high purity bleached kraft and sulfite 
pulps.
Figure 20.4 [13] summarizes the aspect ratio versus the fiber diameter for 
key micro- and nanocellulosic products. The implications for this will be dis -
cussed in detail throughout this review. Of particularly note are the position 
of NCC and the related TEMPO-oxidized cellulose nanocrystals (TOCN) as 
very small cross-section, high aspect ratio materials.
Figure 20.5 shows relative scales of the products from the tree to the single 
fiber level to the micro level to the nano level, ending with the glucose polymer 
chains. Depending on the source, cellulose fibers typically have dimensions of 
approximately 50–100 μm in width and 2 mm in length. The cellulose fiber is 
composed of amorphous (disordered) zones and crystalline zones.
Figure 20.6 shows schematically how different nanocellulosic products can 
be produced from wood pulp. In particular, we note that a range of chemical 
treatments combined with mechanical treatments can be used to produce MFC, 
NFC, and NCC. Figure 20.7 shows the “ultimate” in cellulose nanostructure [14]. Figure 20.3  Number of patents by end-use, 1997–December 2011.
30
25
20
15
10
5
0Adhesiv
esNo. of pat ents
Barr
ier la
yersDriling mu
dFiltering mediaFoams
, disper
santsFoodMedical or cosmeticMethods of pr
eparationPaper str
ength or composi
tePaper surf
ace tr
eatmentPol
ymer composit
esSpecialt
y filmsSuper absorber
s468  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
Figure 20.4  Aspect ratio versus diameter for key “micro” and “nano” products. TOCN, 
TEMPO-oxidized nanofibers; NCC; nanocrystalline cellulose; CNT, carbon nanotubes 
[9] (modified from Reference [13]). Reprinted with permission of the author.
Figure 20.5  Cellulose structure, from the single fiber level to the fibril, microfibril, 
nanofibril, and cellulose polymer chains.
MICRO- AND NANOCELLULOSIC PRODUCTS TODAY   469
Figure 20.6  Manufacturing different nanocellulosic products from wood pulps. The 
yield is based on the dried pulp weight.
Figure 20.7  NCC needles from cotton, approximately 5 nm in diameter and 150–
200 nm in length [14]. Reprinted with permission.
These are NCC needles, the forerunner of the product from the FPInnovations 
pilot plant. In addition, there is also smaller scale production of NCC (in gram 
quantities) at different universities, as shown in Appendix A.
20.2.1 Powdered Cellulose and Microcrystalline Cellulose
Powdered cellulose was the first “micro” cellulose product. As the name 
implies, the material is produced by mechanically grinding high purity cellu -
lose fibers. The fibers may also be chemically treated as well (sodium hypo -
chlorite plus sodium hydroxide), to assist in depolymerization of the cellulose. 470  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
Figure 20.8  Commercial microcrystalline cellulose [16]. Reprinted with permission.
Typically, powdered cellulose particles are in the region from 60 to 400 μm in 
length (depending on the grade), while preserving the typical fiber diameter 
of 30–50 μm. Powdered cellulose is still used as a binder and texturizer for 
food products and cosmetics, but has been significantly supplanted by MCC 
and other cellulose derivatives.
MCC has been known since the late 1800s. Also called hydrocellulose, MCC 
is produced by the controlled acid hydrolysis of high purity cellulose fibers. 
The acid hydrolysis dissolves much of the amorphous portion of the cellulose, 
but maintains the crystalline areas relatively untouched (e.g., [15]). This pro -
vides one distinguishing feature of MCC: the product retains the approximate 
appearance of the original cellulose fibers, if partially disintegrated, as seen in 
Figure 20.8 [16]. The reason is that the relatively low acid concentration and 
relatively low duration of the hydrolysis reaction (2.5N HCl, 15 minutes, at 
105°C) only partially degrades the amorphous zones of the cellulose fibers.
MCC has been used in commercial and consumer products for more than 
50 years. MCC has been specifically approved for use in food and other prod -
ucts by regulatory bodies such as the Food and Drug Administration (United 
States) and the European Community, and is subject to health standards by 
the World Health Organization (WHO) and United Nations Food and Agri -
cultural Organization (FAO; e.g., [17]).
Commercial prices of these materials depend very much on factors such as 
quantity, degree of development, purity, source country, and particular state of 
the economy. As one example, the price of pharmaceutical-grade MCC is much 
higher than the price of MCC used as an industrial thickener or viscosity 
modifier.MICRO- AND NANOCELLULOSIC PRODUCTS TODAY   471
The average particle size of commercial MCC is between 50 and 350 μm. 
Some manufacturers offer a range of particle sizes, depending on the end-use 
(e.g. [18]). Since MCC particles are (very approximately) spherical, the aspect 
ratio of MCC is very low, typically 1–3. Common uses for MCC include:
• Pharmaceutical excipient—the term for nonmedicinal ingredients such as 
binders and bulking agents. In particular, MCC is considered to be far 
superior to powdered cellulose for this end-use [19].
• Cosmetics and other skin care products: binder and texturizer.
• Food additive: emulsifying agent, thickener/rheology modifier, and fat 
replacement agent.
• Edible coatings (e.g., sausage casings).
MCC provides an excellent example of how one cellulose derivative with 
improved properties replaced another cellulose derivative. Powdered cellulose 
was initially used as a thickener and viscosity modifier in food products. Due 
to poor “mouthfeel” of powdered cellulose (a gritty or other undesirable 
texture, in the terminology of the food industry), the finer MCC is considered 
to be a superior food additive.
Although a mature commercial product, the development and improve -
ment of MCC is still ongoing. Changes that have been made in recent years, 
or that are under development and consideration, include:
• A shift from the original use of high purity cotton linters as the raw mate -
rial for MCC to fully bleached kraft pulp [20].
• The use of other materials (including agricultural waste) as the raw mate -
rial, including bagasse, corn [21], cotton [21], sisal [22], and bacterial 
cellulose.
• The use of MCC as the raw material for the preparation of micro- and 
nanocellulose.
• The use of enzymes or conditions of milder acidity to produce MCC [21].
20.2.2 Microfibrillated Cellulose and Related Products
The next step downward in size was the development of a material known by 
a variety of names, particularly MFC [23, 24]. This material was originally 
produced by additional mechanical action (especially high pressure homogeni -
zation) on MCC. The high shear of mechanical homogenization (helped by 
pre-cutting pulp sheets to lower the average fiber length) separates the cel -
lulose fiber wall into its constituent microfibrils. Chemical treatment reduces 
the energy costs, while lowering the average DP . An example of MFC is given 
in Figure 20.9 [25], showing the micron-scale length, the sub-micron fiber 
width, and the fibrillar substructure.472  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
In an early, key paper [26], a variety of cellulosic and noncellulosic fibers 
were subjected to a “super-grinding” technique, designed to break the fiber 
into longitudinal nanofibers. Cellulose source materials included wood pulp, 
cotton, and cellulosic material from the exterior mantle of the tunicate marine 
organism or “sea squirt.” The material was on the scale of 20–90 nm in diam -
eter, and formed strong, translucent films. The authors described these various 
products as “microfibrillated material,” although this definition is open to 
question. In particular, other workers with tunicate-derived nanocellulose 
have pointed out that the tunicate-derived material comprises true cellulose 
whiskers or NCC [27].
Just as MCC partially replaced the coarser powdered cellulose as a food 
additive, MCC in its turn is considered to be too coarse for some purposes. A 
patent issued in 2000 discussed an “ultrafine microcrystalline cellulose” [28] 
with sub-micron particle size, which was considered to be an advantage in food 
products. This is effectively an MFC product. The degree of microfibrillation 
and corresponding increase in specific surface area means that MFC disper -
sions form stable gels at low concentrations [24].
In a patent issued in 2001, Matsuda et al. [29] described a “supermicrofibril -
lated cellulose” (SMFC). Their SMFC was defined as having an average fiber 
length of between 50 and 100 μm. The production technique appeared to 
involve further mechanical treatment of the original MCC. Claims included 
the production of dyed cellulosic particles, for the production either of colored 
paper or of colored coating pigments.
Even more recent work has suggested that MFC (in the 30–150 μm range) 
can be used as a strengthening agent in paper [30]. One can assume that the Figure 20.9  Freeze-dried microfibrillated cellulose. From reference [25]. Reprinted 
with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
MICRO- AND NANOCELLULOSIC PRODUCTS TODAY   473
high specific surface area of the MFC allows it to play the same role as well-
fibrillated pulp fines, only much more efficiently. It is likely that the very high 
specific surface area of MFC combined with its hydroxyl-rich surface gives it 
a much higher bonding potential than conventional pulp fibers or fines. NCC 
is not an effective paper strength additive due to its small particle size and 
resulting difficulty in retention within the fiber network structure. As noted 
below, there is also interest in using NFC for this purpose.
20.2.2.1  Commercial Microfibrillated Cellulose Products J. Retten -
maier & Söhne, a long-established supplier of MCC and other high purity 
cellulosic products, has introduced “cellulose fibers with nanofibrillation” 
(CFNF). In reality, this is another MFC product [31]. This is sold under the 
trade name Arbocel NFC B 1011. Fiber thickness is estimated to be 1–5 μm, 
and fiber length is between 200 and 300 μm. The product is supplied as a 23% 
solids gel/dispersion in water. It has been noted that the dried material is dif -
ficult to redisperse in water. The preparation technique is proprietary, but 
appears to be a further mechanical treatment of MCC. So far the recom -
mended end-uses of this material are extensions of existing MCC end-uses. 
However, as noted in Appendix A, Rettenmaier is also part of the European 
Community program, SUNPAP (Scaling Up Nano Particles in Modern 
Papermaking).
Borregaard ChemCell of Norway introduced “Power Fiber.” From their 
published literature and illustrations, this is another MFC product [32]. Initial 
marketing information suggests that this manufacturer is targeting the food 
additive sector, likely as a replacement for MCC. As shown in Appendix A, 
through industrial partners, Borregaard may also expand its horizons to 
include areas such as polymer reinforcement, adhesives, and paper strength 
development. Borregaard is collaborating with SCA of Sweden on the com -
mercialization of MFC products. In this light, a related patent from SCA 
Hygiene Products AB describes the use of MFC as an absorbent material in 
personal hygiene products [33].
Daicel, a long-established supplier of MCC and other cellulosic products in 
Japan, has introduced a version of NFC, under the trade name Celish [34]. This 
product is also provided in a range of average length, diameter, and aspect 
ratio. This appears to be a true nanofibrillated product. The average fiber thick -
ness is between 0.01 and 0.10 μm, and the average length is about 2 μm or 
more. The product is supplied as a paste of up to 35% solids. As with the 
Arbocel nanofibrillated product, there can be difficulties in redispersing the 
dried product, although this problem is surmountable [35, 36]. As shown in 
Appendix A, Daicel is also cooperating with the Kyoto University in develop -
ing other nanocellulosic products.
In Daicel’s process, fibers are separated by a refiner, followed by a high 
pressure homogenizer. Chemical or enzymatic assistance in the process is 
likely, but not stated. The manufacturer’s schematic diagram shows a typical 
production path, from fiber to microfibrillation to nanofibrillation [34].474  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
The viscosity of Daicel’s Celish is similar to that of other cellulosic gums 
used as viscosity modifiers, with greater viscosity stability as a function of 
temperature. This viscosity stability is used as a marketing point. The pro -
ducer’s marketing also advertises the material as a substitute for MCC (rheol -
ogy control and humectant). A recent report [37] described the ability of one 
form of the Celish product to act as a reinforcing agent in an esterified starch-
based plastic film.
In May 2011, StoraEnso announced the start of production of a “pre-
commercial” MFC plant, scheduled to begin operation at the end of 2011 [38]. 
UPM of Finland recently announced the start of pilot-scale production of 
“fibril cellulose” [39]. According to information supplied by UPM, this is a 
form of MFC, and is intended for use as a reinforcing material, for paper, 
coatings, varnishes, and other products [40, 41].
20.2.2.2 Microfibrillated Cellulose Derivatization With its hydroxyl-rich 
surface of pure cellulose, MFC is also amenable to surface derivatization and 
graft copolymerization (e.g., [42]). Examples include reaction with hydropho -
bic AKD, extreme hydrophobic silylation with reactive alkyl chlorosilanes [43], 
and reaction with various cellulose ethers, and vinyl and acrylic monomers 
(e.g. [44],). In general, these various surface treatments and polymer additions 
have the goal of improving the dispersibility of the nanofibers in different 
polar and nonpolar media (e.g., [45]).
Zhang et al. described [46] what they called “spherical cellulosic nanopar -
ticles,” “nanospheres,” or “nanoballs.” From their synthetic procedure, from 
the roughly spherical shape of their product, and particle size (diameter 
ranging from 60 nm to 570 nm), it appears that this is another form of MFC. 
In a companion work [47], the same group showed that cellulose whiskers (i.e., 
NCC) were effective as reinforcement of latex films, while nanoballs and 
hardwood kraft fibers were not. The most likely explanation is the higher 
aspect ratio and higher specific surface area of the true cellulose whiskers, 
compared with the larger and coarser nanoballs or kraft fibers.
Zimmermann et al. [48] compared MFC prepared by mechanical disintegra -
tion with MFC prepared by chemically assisted separation. Their mechanically 
derived MFC had diameters in the range of 20–100 nm and lengths of up to 
several tens of microns. Using pretreatment with sulfuric acid before mechani -
cal separation, they prepared microfibrils that were much reduced in size, with 
average diameters of 50 nm and lengths still in the order of a few microns.
They noted a critical distinction: agglomerated  microfibrils are detrimental 
to reinforcement performance, while networked  microfibrils are very desirable. 
With this in mind, they claimed that their microfibrils prepared without  acid 
pretreatment are better reinforcing agents. It should be noted that the scale 
of their product is still much larger than that of NCC. The modulus of elasticity 
of their pure MFC films was about 5–6 GPa, which is not far from that of wood 
itself (typically 8–10 GPa). They also prepared films of hydroxypropylcellulose MICRO- AND NANOCELLULOSIC PRODUCTS TODAY   475
(HPC) and of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) with their MFC, and found improved 
mechanical properties.
As further evidence of their hypothesis, in an accompanying paper [49], the 
same group used transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images to show 
that at a high fibril content, although their fibrils are well dispersed, they form 
a mesh-like network, rather than the conventional thinking of aligned rods 
(Fig. 20.10).
The group of López-Suevos et al. [50] further explored different forms of 
MFC as reinforcement aids in poly(vinyl acetate) adhesives. They used 
mechanically treated MFC, chemically treated MFC, and MFC that was sub -
jected to chemical treatment followed by mechanical treatment. Their refer -
ence material was their original hardwood kraft pulp. In most cases, the MFC 
provided greatly improved physical properties, in the order: combined 
chemical/mechanical MFC > mechanical treatment only > chemical treatment 
only > original kraft fibers. The advantage of the chemical/mechanical MFC 
was ascribed to the formation of the most extensive network. However, the 
authors noted that their work is not complete and that excessively hydrophilic 
MFC in an adhesive may cause problems in the presence of high moisture or 
humidity.
20.2.3 Nanofibrillated Cellulose
In the downward progression in size starting with MCC and then MFC, NFC 
is next. This material has been of particular interest to many research groups, 
particularly Innventia, Sweden. Innventia [51] recently announced the inau -
guration of a pilot plant for producing NFC and MFC at a scale of about Figure 20.10  Left: TEM micrograph—Transverse section of HPC film with a fibril 
content of 20%, showing network of microfibrillated material. Right: Model of micro -
fibrillar network. From Reference [49], reproduced with permission. Copyright Wiley-
VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.
476  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
100 kg/day. As shown below, while the FPInnovations NCC product and the 
Innventia NFC/MFC products each possess unique areas of potential end-use, 
there is also an area of overlap where competition may be inevitable.
Innventia has also taken the approach of providing a range of MFC and 
NFC micro- and nanofibrillated products, with particle sizes that are smaller 
than the present commercial MCC products, yet much larger than NCC. Pub -
lications from Innventia have shown that their MFC may be as important as 
their NFC.
The Innventia approach started with purely mechanical homogenization, as 
developed at ITT in the 1980s (e.g., [24]). This approach used an excessive 
amount of energy (27,000 kWh/tonne), later [52] shown to be close to the 
theoretical value for separation of cellulose into its components by mechanical 
means alone. Further development reduced the energy requirement to 
2000 kWh/tonne, by means of enzymatic pretreatment.
The Swiss research organization EMPA (a branch of ETH, the Federal 
Institute of Technology in Switzerland) has taken a similar approach, promot -
ing research and development of MFC/NFC products [53]. Some of their work 
has already been referred to [48, 49]. They have affiliations with universities 
in Germany and in Sweden. Their stated areas of application are quite broad, 
including superabsorbers, biomedical applications, polymer reinforcement 
agents, and adhesive components. According to their web site, they are not yet 
at the scale of kg/day production.
Researchers at PFI, Norway, produce NFC and MFC on the laboratory 
scale. They showed that small amounts of NFC can counter the strength losses 
encountered in highly filled supercalendered mechanical printing grades, par -
ticularly with the addition of both clay filler and NFC reinforcement additive 
to the surface layers [54]. They are also interested in the use of MFC as a 
barrier layer [55]; an area of active research for NFC and NCC as well.
As noted above, there is interest in using micro- and nanocellulosic prod -
ucts to enhance paper strength, especially for paper with very a high mineral 
filler content (e.g., [30]). Several patents have been issued in this area (e.g., 
[56]). TEMPO-oxidized NFC is particularly effective [57], presumably due to 
the improved hydrogen bonding imparted by the oxidation process.
20.2.4 Nanocrystalline Cellulose—FPInnovations Approach
As discussed in the Introduction and as shown in Figure 20.5 and Figure 20.7, 
NCC makes up the elementary structural unit of cellulose fibers. Unlike the 
larger MCC, MFC, and NFC particles, NCC particles can no longer be referred 
to as “fibrillated.”
Although first described more than 50 years ago [58], the properties of NCC 
were only seriously examined by Paprican (now FPInnovations) researchers 
at the McGill University Pulp and Paper Centre in the mid-1990s (e.g., [14]). 
In particular, they explored the ability of NCC to form ordered dispersions, 
similar in form to cholesteric liquid crystals [59]. The iridescent colors of the MICRO- AND NANOCELLULOSIC PRODUCTS TODAY   477
liquid crystalline state are maintained in the dried NCC films. These colors are 
controllable through, for example, ionic strength or intensity of the sonication 
pretreatment of the casting solution [60].
From a laboratory curiosity on the gram level, FPInnovations developed an 
in-house pilot plant capable of producing NCC on the kilogram scale, a 
requirement for serious industrial development. In July 2010, FPInnovations 
and Domtar Inc. announced [61] the construction of a 1 tonne per day dem -
onstration plant to manufacture different forms of NCC, in Windsor, Quebec, 
operational in January 2012 under the name CelluForce [62].
NCC particles are about 4–7 nm in cross section, while typical mean particle 
length is about 110 nm from bleached kraft pulp and 150 nm from cotton fibers. 
The yield, average particle length, and the particle length distribution also 
depend on the hydrolysis conditions. Typically, NCC is produced by treating 
cellulose fibers with concentrated (64%) sulfuric acid, at 45°C for about 1 hour, 
followed by ultrasonication or mechanical homogenization. Concentrated 
hydrochloric acid can also be used but produces uncharged and unstable dis -
persions that do not lead to the organization of a chiral nematic structure in 
suspension, and does not produce the interesting color effects for which NCC 
is now famous. As noted previously, NCC consists of true crystalline “whis -
kers,” with minimal amounts of residual amorphous material, which is removed 
by the severe acid hydrolysis.
Yet another possible end-use for NCC was shown in a recent patent from 
FPInnovations [63]. In this patent, NCC was used as the cross-linking/reinforc -
ing agent in hydrogels, produced by copolymerization with hydrophilic 
monomers.
In common with MFC, NCC, and other forms of cellulose, NCC is also 
amenable to modification of its surface properties by reaction with other 
materials. For example, due to the hydrophilic surface of NCC, it will disperse 
with difficulty in both hydrophobic liquids and hydrophobic solid matrices. 
However, NCC can be reacted with hydrophobic monomers, yielding a surface 
that is hydrophobic. A hydrophobic NCC surface maintains the reinforcing 
ability of the NCC whiskers, yet is compatible with hydrophobic/nonpolar 
liquids and solids (e.g., [64]).
As noted in Table 20.2, NCC may also be a useful additive to reinforce 
textile fibers. This was shown in recent work co-authored by North Carolina 
State University and the Helsinki University of Technology [65] in which NCC 
was used as an effective additive to strengthen fibers of PVA.
Just as other forms of nanocellulose can act as adhesives (e.g., [50]), NCC 
has also been shown [66] to be an adhesive for paper and wood. Both the acid 
form and the monovalent cationic form (e.g., sodium NCC) have been shown 
to be effective.
20.2.4.1  Nanocrystalline Cellulose as a Pharmaceutical Excipient 
As noted in the Introduction, cellulose products such as MCC have a long 
history as pharmaceutical excipients (i.e., the nonmedicinal ingredients of a TABLE 20.2  NCC versus MFC/NFC
Performance/Applications MFC/NFC NCC Notes
Strength properties (film) Tough Strong, but brittle 
(flexibility can be 
enhanced with 
plasticizing 
polymer)Pure NFC film may have a higher flexibility
Optical effects/UV 
protection (film)No Yes NCC is unique. Iridescence can be 
controlled [60]
Transparency (film) Yes Yes
Redispersibility (powder or 
film)Yes (with chemical 
modification)Yes As described in Reference [35].
Water resistance (film) Probable Yes (by controlling 
ions or by surface 
derivatization)As described in Reference [35].
Rheology (suspension) Strongly pseudo-plastic (shear 
thinning); function of 
manufacturing conditionsCan be prepared as 
a strongly shear 
thinning dispersionNCC rheology can be easily controlled
Formation of gel Yes Yes (usually around 
10% solids, but 
adjustable)NCC, with a higher surface area, may have 
an advantage
Use as pharmaceutical 
excipientProbable Probable Report on NCC as an excipient [67]
Use in skin care/cosmetics Probable Probable No research has been reported
Use as absorbent/super 
absorbent productsProbable Probable No research has been reported
Use in aerogels/nanofoams Yes Yes NCC, with a higher surface area and smaller 
particle size in all dimensions, may have 
an advantage
Use for polymer 
reinforcement (synthetics)Yes Yes Higher aspect ratio of NFC may be 
advantageous, but NCC has a high 
inherent strength; dispersibility and 
compatibility are common issues to be 
addressed
Use for polymer 
reinforcement 
(biopolymers such as 
PLA)Yes Yes Same as above
Rubber reinforcement Yes Uncertain—will 
depend on 
dispersion 
conditionsLow-end applications (if the amount is 
large)
Use as catalyst carrier or 
carrier for producing 
other nanomaterialsUnknown Yes Higher specific surface area of NCC is a 
clear advantage.
Use for reinforcing 
individual textile fibersProbably not due to greater 
particle lengthYes Small size and high specific surface area of 
NCC should help
Paper strength additive Moderate (MFC product) No, as it is difficult 
to retainLow-end application
Lint reduction/surface 
strength agentYes Yes Low-end application
Paper coating additive/
binder replacementYes Yes NCC has an advantage with its smaller size
Paper coating pigment 
replacementYes Probably not Low-end application as most coating 
pigments are inexpensive
Support for dye or colorant Yes (scale appropriate to 
papermaking)Yes (scale 
appropriate to ink 
pigments and 
other coatings)No research has been reported
478TABLE 20.2  NCC versus MFC/NFC
Performance/Applications MFC/NFC NCC Notes
Strength properties (film) Tough Strong, but brittle 
(flexibility can be 
enhanced with 
plasticizing 
polymer)Pure NFC film may have a higher flexibility
Optical effects/UV 
protection (film)No Yes NCC is unique. Iridescence can be 
controlled [60]
Transparency (film) Yes Yes
Redispersibility (powder or 
film)Yes (with chemical 
modification)Yes As described in Reference [35].
Water resistance (film) Probable Yes (by controlling 
ions or by surface 
derivatization)As described in Reference [35].
Rheology (suspension) Strongly pseudo-plastic (shear 
thinning); function of 
manufacturing conditionsCan be prepared as 
a strongly shear 
thinning dispersionNCC rheology can be easily controlled
Formation of gel Yes Yes (usually around 
10% solids, but 
adjustable)NCC, with a higher surface area, may have 
an advantage
Use as pharmaceutical 
excipientProbable Probable Report on NCC as an excipient [67]
Use in skin care/cosmetics Probable Probable No research has been reported
Use as absorbent/super 
absorbent productsProbable Probable No research has been reported
Use in aerogels/nanofoams Yes Yes NCC, with a higher surface area and smaller 
particle size in all dimensions, may have 
an advantage
Use for polymer 
reinforcement (synthetics)Yes Yes Higher aspect ratio of NFC may be 
advantageous, but NCC has a high 
inherent strength; dispersibility and 
compatibility are common issues to be 
addressed
Use for polymer 
reinforcement 
(biopolymers such as 
PLA)Yes Yes Same as above
Rubber reinforcement Yes Uncertain—will 
depend on 
dispersion 
conditionsLow-end applications (if the amount is 
large)
Use as catalyst carrier or 
carrier for producing 
other nanomaterialsUnknown Yes Higher specific surface area of NCC is a 
clear advantage.
Use for reinforcing 
individual textile fibersProbably not due to greater 
particle lengthYes Small size and high specific surface area of 
NCC should help
Paper strength additive Moderate (MFC product) No, as it is difficult 
to retainLow-end application
Lint reduction/surface 
strength agentYes Yes Low-end application
Paper coating additive/
binder replacementYes Yes NCC has an advantage with its smaller size
Paper coating pigment 
replacementYes Probably not Low-end application as most coating 
pigments are inexpensive
Support for dye or colorant Yes (scale appropriate to 
papermaking)Yes (scale 
appropriate to ink 
pigments and 
other coatings)No research has been reported
(Continued )
479Performance/Applications MFC/NFC NCC Notes
Improve water absorption 
and ink holdout during 
printingYes Yes Demonstrated in lab studies
Food packaging/barrier 
layersProbable Probable
Decorative films/consumer 
products/security signNo Yes Iridescence of NCC film is a clear 
advantage
Printed sensors Unknown Yes Research projects have been proposed by 
universities
Compatible with varnishes Yes Yes NCC has been shown to improve properties 
of wood varnishes [78]
Compatible (blending) with 
water-based printing inks 
and printing varnishesYes Yes
Compatible as printing 
substrate with water-
based printing inks and 
printing varnishesYes Yes Improved print quality with both aqueous 
ink jet and water-based flexo
Compatible with solvent-
based printing inksProbable (with surface 
derivatization)Probable (with 
surface 
derivatization)TABLE 20.2 (Continued )
480MICRO- AND NANOCELLULOSIC PRODUCTS TODAY   481
pharmaceutical product). In general, MCC serves as no more than a useful but 
inert filler and binder. Work co-authored by FPInnovations [67] showed that 
NCC has important additional advantages over MCC. Its highly charged 
surface and much greater specific surface area make it capable of absorbing 
drugs and then releasing them in a controlled manner over a period of time.
20.2.4.2 TEMPO Oxidation Several research groups have published work 
on the use of the TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl) radical as a 
selective catalytic oxidizing agent in the presence of sodium chlorite. This 
provides an alternative route to forming NCC by decreasing the amount of 
mechanical energy needed. TEMPO oxidation converts the primary alcohol 
groups in cellulose (at the C6 position) to aldehydes and then to carboxylic 
acid groups. Combined with mechanical action, this produces what has been 
termed TOCN.
Surface derivatization (e.g., hydrophobization by alkyl ketene dimer) can 
readily be done on the TEMPO-oxidized surfaces with their high carboxyl 
content. Even if TOCNs possess negative charges like sulfated NCC, they do 
not form highly ordered chiral nematic structures in suspension because of 
their excessive length. On the other hand, the surface of TEMPO-oxidized 
nanofibrils has a very high concentration of hydroxyl (-OH) and carboxyl 
(-COOH) groups, which provide an advantage in terms of forming hydrogen 
bonds with polar polymers [68].
TEMPO-oxidized fibers also require less mechanical energy than other 
forms of chemical pretreatment [69]. Films from TEMPO-oxidized material 
combine high transparency with high tensile strength, flexibility, toughness 
[70], and low gas transmission rates [71].
One possible benefit of the (relatively) mild treatment by TEMPO was 
shown in a recent paper in which the authors produced what we may call “sub” 
nanoscale cellulose particles [72]. By a combination of TEMPO oxidation and 
ultrasonication, the authors were able to “peel back” cellulose whiskers (about 
4 nm cross section) into sub-fibrils or “molecular sheets” of about 1 nm average 
thickness and a length of up to 500 nm.
20.2.5 Other Canadian Sources of Nanocrystalline Cellulose
As noted in Appendix A, in addition to FPInnovations, at least two other 
groups in Canada are interested in producing NCC on a large scale. These 
include a joint venture including the Alberta Government, the University of 
Alberta, and Alberta-Pacific Forest Industries [73, 74]. In the latest develop -
ment of the Alberta initiative, a pilot plant to produce up to 100 kg/week from 
wood pulp as well as from agricultural residues such as wheat straw has 
recently been announced [75].
Bio Vision Technology of Nova Scotia [76] works in cooperation with the 
National Research Council of Canada—Biotechnology Research Institute 
[77]. Although their major focus is on biorefinery, they are also working on 482  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
the production of NCC and can supply an NRC-developed “carboxylated 
NCC”—without providing details of the production path or of the final product 
properties. Although it is the stated goal of Bio Vision to go into full scale 
production of NCC (as part of an overall biorefinery plan), no production 
facilities have been announced as yet.
20.3 THE BUSINESS CASE FOR NANOCRYSTALLINE CELLULOSE 
AND OTHER NANOCELLULOSIC MATERIALS
The market value for a potential end-use must always be considered. As shown 
in this report and elsewhere, NCC and other nanocellulosic products can suc -
cessfully provide many technical benefits. The challenge is to assess the poten -
tial for value creation and to develop business cases and markets. For 
nanocellulosics to succeed in a given product, one or more of the following 
criteria must be met:
1. To simply replace another additive, with no improvement in product 
performance, a nanocellulosic material must provide a cost advantage: 
for example, replacing a larger amount of an expensive additive with a 
smaller amount of nanocellulosic material.
2. A nanocellulosic material may provide a clear environmental advantage, 
for example, replacing an additive being phased out for health or envi -
ronmental issues. A simple statement that NCC is “green” or “a renew -
able product” may not suffice if this also results in a higher cost.
3. Improved product performance must be quantifiable. A significant 
improvement in performance may well justify a higher cost. This is not 
an absolute, if the existing product is in a mature market and current 
performance is “good enough.”
4. An entirely new product, either something unavailable in the past or 
something that could only be produced with much more complex tech -
nology, is also an advantage, again if it meets the needs of a potential 
customer. The special optical properties of NCC provide a good example 
here.
As also shown in this review and elsewhere, NCC can be produced in dif -
ferent forms, including:
• High versus low yield.
• Production via sulfuric acid, hydrochloric acid, or TEMPO oxidation, each 
with its own particular surface properties.
• Post-production derivatization to provide properties such as compatibility 
with hydrophobic materials and nonpolar media.COMPARISON   483
The guidelines regarding market value also apply to the different forms of 
NCC and other nanocellulosics. Since any modification of nanocellulosic mate -
rials will increase the cost, we may expect that the first commercial application 
of the NCC products will not involve special treatment or derivatization. As 
shown below, even nonderivatized NCC products are not all equal in their 
ability to disperse in pure water.
20.4 COMPARISON: NANOCRYSTALLINE CELLULOSE VERSUS 
MICROFIBRILLATED CELLULOSE AND NANOFIBRILLATED 
CELLULOSE
It is useful to compare NCC products with MFC/NFC products. Many of these 
product areas are summarized in Table 20.2, which includes technical 
advantages/disadvantages as they are currently understood.
The ability of NCC to improve the properties of industrial coatings such as 
wood varnishes has already been shown by the Wood Products Division of 
FPInnovations [78]. In this work, adhesion, scratch resistance, and impact 
resistance were all improved by the addition of between 1% and 3% of NCC. 
A recent patent from Finland made similar claims for the use of NFC in paints 
and varnishes [79].
A number of publications from Innventia and elsewhere have shown some 
applications of MFC/NCC. The next sections summarize these published 
results. It should be noted that most of these studies were driven by technical 
potential and possibilities created by nanocellulosic materials, not by market 
demand and value creation.
20.4.1 Tough Nanostructure Film
Henriksson et al. [80] produced a “nanopaper” from a microfibrillated cellu -
lose. Their product showed a very high tensile strength and deformation to 
failure. A relatively large particle was preferred, due to the greater probability 
of entanglements. These films are virtually transparent. On the one hand, the 
films of the Innventia product lack the unique color and iridescent properties 
of NCC films. On the other hand, with suitable additives, NCC can also produce 
transparent films, without color effects [81].
VTT, Finland, also recently reported on the preparation of films of NFC on 
a pilot plant/semicommercial scale [82].
20.4.2 Lint Reduction Additive
Ankerfors et al. [83, 84] demonstrated that MFC is an effective surface additive 
to reduce offset linting. A surface treatment of 1 g/m2 of starch was effective, 
while a 1 g/m2 coating of MFC was somewhat more effective. However, a 484  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
mixture containing 0.5 g/m2 of each was most effective of all. The authors also 
noted that a thin film of MFC at the sheet surface created a weak boundary layer 
within  the sheet, which could cause cohesive failure beneath the sheet surface.
Surface treatment provides a good example of the limits of nanocellulosics. 
In general, nanocellulosic products may serve as an effective lint reduction aid 
in publication papers. However, for many producers of publication grades of 
paper, the capital cost of any kind of surface addition is prohibitive. For those 
who do have the necessary equipment, other much less expensive materials 
such as starch are already in use, and provide satisfactory performance.
20.4.3 Nanofoams
There has been a considerable amount of interest in using MFC/NFC in the 
production of foam products based on renewable resources. Much of this work 
has been done at Innventia, in association with KTH (Royal Institute of Tech -
nology, Stockholm). Svagan et al. [85] showed that particles of the size of native 
cellulose fibers are foam breakers, not foam stabilizers, in particular if the 
particles are thicker than the desired foam wall. This group produced starch 
foams from amylopectin, with cellulose microfibrils (4–10 nm in cross section) 
as a reinforcing agent (Fig. 20.11). Another critical point is a homogenous 
dispersion of the reinforcing nanofibers. In related work, they made foams 
from starch and MFC [86], with a typical diameter of 30 nm and several 
micrometers in length.
Other research at KTH and Innventia has also addressed the issue of MFC 
and NFC as foam stabilizers (e.g., [87, 88]). A recent report [89] showed 
aerogel foams with densities as low as 0.078 g/cm3 and specific surface areas 
Figure 20.11  Cross section of reinforced nanofibril–starch foam. Scale bar ∼600 μm. 
From Reference [85], reproduced with permission. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA.
COMPARISON   485
as high as 605 m2/g, using an NCC material. The production path for their 
nanofoam product used only water, ethanol, and supercritical CO 2. Given its 
high surface area and much smaller particle size, NCC could likely have the 
advantage over NFC in the production of nanofoams. The Oregon State Uni -
versity College of Forestry similarly prepared aerogels using TEMPO-oxidized 
NCC [90]. Lapidot of the Hebrew University and Melodea, Israel [91, 92], 
achieved achieved NCC aerogel foam densities as low as 0.025 g/cm3, using 
materials that included paper machine scrap.
Eriksen [93] showed a simple and useful schematic of the size range of 
MCF/NCF material. He rated nanomaterials in size order from the coarsest 
(up to 150 μm)—paper strength enhancement; food additives; paper surface 
modification; polymer reinforcement; film formation; barrier formation—to 
the finest (true nanoscale particles), for emulsion stabilization.
Researchers at the University of Maine have used multiple approaches to 
prepare NFC, followed by examination of its potential for a variety of end-
uses. This work is sponsored (at least in part) by the US federal and the Maine 
state governments [94].
As described in Reference [95], Saddiqui started with bleached softwood 
pulp, and used cellulase enzymatic treatment combined with homogenization 
in a commercial disintegrator. High consistency homogenization was a critical 
factor in reducing energy consumption (Fig. 20.12). Enzymatic pretreatment 
was particularly seen as an aid to processing. The work in Maine showed that 
enzymatic pretreatment gave a more uniform product, with lower energy 
consumption. MgCl 2 pretreatment was much less expensive in chemical costs, 
but at a higher energy cost.
Hamada and Bousfield [96] used both enzymatic pretreatment and pretreat -
ment with MgCl 2 to prepare different types of NFC. After coating papers with 
NFC, they printed with water-based flexographic inks, and with water-based ink 
Figure 20.12  Energy cost for laboratory-scale production of NFC. The energy costs 
are particularly dependent on the consistency [95]. Reprinted with permission.Ener gy Cost
Number of passesConsist ency = 0.02%
Consist ency = 0.2%
Consist ency = 2%
0120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1$/kg
2 3 4 5 6486  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
jet inks (both dye-based and pigmented). The visual quality of pigmented inks 
was greatly improved, perhaps by the formation of a hydrophilic, physical 
barrier layer. However, it is important to note that a coating layer of as little as 
1 g/m2 means the use of about 20 kg of NFC per tonne based on a 100 g/m2 paper 
is clearly not cost-effective at current prices.
In a related study, Hamada et al. [97] combined prepared heavier coatings 
in which NFC acted either as coating pigment (preponderance of NFC in the 
coating), or as coating binder (preponderance of clay blended with a small 
amount of NFC). NFC as binder in a clay coating did greatly improve the ink 
holdout, but there was no advantage of the NFC over much less expensive 
PVA binders.
In work related to the University of Maine approach, StoraEnso recently 
reported a paper coating based on traditional coating pigments such as clay, 
with MFC as the binder [98]. The patent also allowed for the possibility of 
using other cellulose-based materials such as carboxymethylcellulose as addi -
tional binders.
20.4.4 Nanocellulose Barrier Layers
The ability of a film to form a barrier is critical in the packaging industry. The 
most important properties are the oxygen transmission rate (OTR) and the 
water vapor transmission rate (WVTR). Common, hydrophobic polyolefin 
Figure 20.13  Oxygen and water vapor permeability of various materials [99].  
Reprinted with permission. Copyright J. Wiley & Sons. 10000
1000
100
10
1
0.1
0.01PVDC
0.000 1 0.01 1
Water vapor per meabilit y * 10–11 g/(m s Pa)Oxygen per meabilit y
(cm3 µm)/(m2 day kPa)
100 1 0000PVC PETPLAPS
Cellophane
ChitosanWhey pr otein
Amylopectin
Amylose
nanocellulosePPHDPEBees waxLDPE
Acetyl-galact oglucomannanCOMPARISON   487
films such as polypropylene and polyethylene have a low WVTR but a high 
OTR. Conversely, many cellulosic films, including cellophane (regenerated 
cellulose) and NCC, have a low OTR but have a very high WVTR.
Figure 20.13 shows the barrier properties (OTR vs. WVTR) for many mate -
rials including cellophane and nanocellulose [99]. Many researchers have 
carried out equivalent measurements on many films, including different forms 
of nanocellulose. Such data may not be interchangeable, due to different mea -
suring conditions including temperature, relative humidity, and film thickness 
(e.g., [100]).
The low OTR of nanocellulose films is due to the low porosity of the well-
packed and ordered material. However, the inherent sensitivity of cellulosic 
materials to water vapor yields a high WVTR (via moisture diffusion through 
cellulose). The technical challenge is to address this fundamental problem, 
possibly by making the NCC particles hydrophobic, or by combining NCC 
with other polymer films that have a low WVTR, but a high OTR. This could 
yield a product with the desired properties of both low OTR and low WVTR.
Aulin et al. [101] prepared pure MFC films, and found OTR values similar 
to those measured for NCC at FPInnovations. Various workers (e.g., [3]) have 
measured barrier properties of various polymers with and without NCC, MFC, 
or NFC as reinforcement additive. In addition to the improved strength prop -
erties, the reinforcing material generally provided significant improvements in 
barrier properties.
In the work from the University of Tokyo [71], poly(lactic acid) (PLA) films 
showed very large improvements in oxygen barrier properties when coated 
with TEMPO-oxidized material, with dimensions of approximately 3–4 nm 
cross section and lengths in the microns range. The same authors suggested 
that hydrophobized NCC could reduce the WVTR, but did not actually publish 
any data. Similarly, Sanchez-Garcia and Lagaron [102] showed that as little as 
1% of “cellulose nanowhiskers” (NCC) blended into PLA not only improved 
strength properties, but also reduced both oxygen and water vapor transmis -
sion. The group had previously shown [103] that 5% of a nanoclay product 
blended into PLA showed a much smaller reduction in water vapor and 
oxygen transmission through PLA.
Modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) refers to the practice of storing 
produce under conditions of reduced oxygen and/or elevated carbon dioxide 
levels as a means of prolonging shelf life during storage and transportation 
(e.g., [104]). Syverud and Stenius [105] showed that pure films of NFC of at 
least 35 g/m2 basis weight “fulfilled the requirements for oxygen transmission 
rate in modified atmosphere packaging.”
To conclude, NCC and other forms of nanocellulose show promise as 
barrier-forming materials, particularly for oxygen. However, using cellulosics 
to form a barrier to water vapor is a challenge. Among various nanocellulosic 
materials, the published literature is too scanty to prove the advantage of one 
product over another. The following work would be required to show which 
nanocellulosic product (if any) has the advantage:488  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
1. Measurement of oxygen and water vapor transmission through MFC, 
NFC, and NCC films under identical conditions of film thickness, tem -
perature, and relative humidity.
2. Since cellulosic films have a good record in forming oxygen barriers, and 
synthetic polymer films have a good record in forming barriers against 
water vapor transmission, it is possible that the ideal barrier film may be 
a composite, a laminate, or a coating of nanocellulose onto another 
polymer. It would then be highly desirable to measure oxygen and water 
vapor transmission through thin layers of MFC, NFC, and NCC coated 
onto representative commercial polymers, again under identical condi -
tions of measurement.
3. Measurement of OTR and WVTR through films of hydrophobized NCC. 
This would define whether a hydrophobized NCC alone could serve as 
a barrier layer for both water vapor and oxygen.
20.5 OTHER COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS FOR 
NANOCRYSTALLINE CELLULOSE AND NANOFRIBRILLATED 
CELLULOSE
20.5.1 Problems in Redispersing Nanocellulose
Any additive meant to enhance performance or add functionality must dis -
tribute itself uniformly, without coagulating or forming agglomerations. That 
is, a uniform distribution is essential, either in the aqueous media that may be 
the starting point in the manufacturing process, or in a final solid matrix. It 
has repeatedly been reported that it can be difficult to redisperse dry micro- 
and nanocellulosic products in water [106]. This had led to problems such as 
undesired agglomeration of suspensions in aqueous media or solid products.
As one example, so-called water-based commercial products such as ink, 
paints, and varnishes are a complex mixture of water, co-solvents, and other 
water-soluble or water-dispersible components. Experience has shown that 
while NCC may disperse in pure water, the same material may have problems 
in dispersing in the presence of all of the ingredients within a “water-based” 
commercial product.
Agglomeration in solid media such as polymers is likely the cause of rein -
forcement failure here as well. Presumably, the poor redispersibility is due to 
the very strong hydrogen bonding between particles, which is maximized in 
the bone-dry product. This is a form of the well-known “hornification” process 
whereby aged and dried cellulose fibers and papers rewet only with difficulty 
[107]. Several possible solutions have been proposed.
Eyholzer et al. [108] proposed carboxymethylation of NFC to low levels of 
substitution–not sufficient to make the NFC lose its structure and become 
water-soluble, but enough to disrupt the hydrogen bonding so that the dry 
NFC will redisperse. However, this approach would increase the NFC produc -OTHER COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS   489
tion cost. Nonuniform carboxymethylation may also produce zones that are 
still poorly dispersible.
Beck et al. [35, 36] showed the acid-form NCC can be made spontaneously 
water-dispersible in two ways, as shown in Figure 20.14. One procedure is to 
prevent excessive hydrogen bonding by simply not letting the material become 
extremely dry (keeping moisture content >4%). Another procedure is to 
convert the acid form –HSO 4 to a form with a large counterion (e.g., -SO 4− 
Na+), which presumably also prevents excessive hydrogen bonding and 
agglomeration. The advantage of these procedures is that they are relatively 
inexpensive and simple to implement in an online process.
20.5.2 Nanocrystalline Cellulose as a Rheology-Modifying Agent
Just as the longer established MCC and its derivatives have been used for 
many years as rheology modifiers in, for example, food products and cosmetics, 
NCC may be able to serve the same purpose. Boluk and Zhao [109] described 
the use of NCC as a thickening or rheology-modifying agent in aircraft de-icing 
fluids.
20.5.3 Polymer Reinforcement Additives
As shown in Figure 20.3 (for patents) and elsewhere in this review (for research 
papers), the single largest body of work on cellulosic fibers, microfibrils, and 
nanofibrils has been as polymer reinforcement. We have already discussed Figure 20.14  Dispersibility of NCC under different drying conditions and with differ -
ent counterions [35].Pilot Plant
H-NCC Na-NCCNaOH (aq)
cation ex change r esin
> 4% moistur e> 0%
moistur e
> 0%
moistur eAD
@ r.t.
AD
@ r.t.AD
@ 105°CAD
@ r.t./105°C
AD
FD
SDFD
SD
or 105°C
brieflyfully
disper sible
NCC par ticles
non-disper sible
aggregatesfor long
periods
> 4% moistur e490  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
several instances in which micro- and NFC have been used as a polymer rein -
forcement material.
In this section, we will address the competing pros and cons for different 
types of micro- and nanocellulosic material as reinforcement additives. Work 
has been done in many potential products, including films and structures, 
rubber, and even dried food. The requirements for reinforcing agents (sum -
marizing a considerable amount of work) include:
• Compatibility between the reinforcing fiber and the suspending polymeric 
medium, necessary for chemical wetting (maximum adhesion between the 
components).
• A high aspect ratio, although too high an aspect ratio can be detrimental 
to good dispersion.
• Dispersion of the reinforcing fibers (related to the chemical wetting, to 
avoid agglomeration).
• The ability to form a three-dimensional lattice or percolation network, or 
the ability to form large-scale entanglements.
• In many cases, reinforcing fillers already exist, with satisfactory perfor -
mance at an acceptable price. For nanocellulosics to succeed under such 
conditions, they must provide either a distinct technical advantage or a 
distinct environmental advantage.
There has also been some debate in the literature about the appropriate 
particle size. There are instances where a particle is physically too large, for 
example, for thin film or foam reinforcement. At the same time, given the 
ability of MFC, NCC, and related material to form extended three-dimensional 
networks, cases where one product has an advantage over another may really 
be questions of compatibility, especially dispersion versus agglomeration.
In relatively early work, the original commercial powdered cellulose was 
shown to be an effective reinforcement for extrusion- and injection-molded 
starch derivatives [110]. The reinforcing material was powdered cellulose, with 
dimensions of 20 × 60 μm (Arbocel B600), 20 × 300 μm (Arbocel BC 200), and 
20 × 900 μm (Arbocel B400). The longer fiber material was considered to be 
better for this purpose.
The group of Nakagaito and Yano has published several articles on the 
subject (e.g., [111]). A critical conclusion by this group includes the fact that 
the degree of fibrillation that we normally associate with well-refined pulp 
fibers is not sufficient to provide adequate polymer reinforcement. It requires 
fibrillation at the micro or nano scale to achieve this desired effect.
Another critical paper used cellulose whiskers (effectively NCC) [112] with 
an aspect ratio of about 100, derived from the tunicate organism. These were 
blended with a styrene–butyl acrylate resin under different conditions, provid -
ing significant improvements in modulus and tensile strength.OTHER COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS   491
The current literature demonstrates that the surface chemistry of the nano -
fibers is critical to dispersibility (e.g., polar vs. nonpolar polymer). This affects 
the wetting between the reinforcing fibers and the surrounding polymeric 
matrix. Another critical factor is the tendency of the reinforcing fibers to self-
agglomerate rather than disperse in the polymeric matrix. This is also a func -
tion partially of the suspending medium and partially of the surface chemical 
treatment of the reinforcing fibers. The degree of fibrillation may also be criti -
cal, depending on the optimum amount of three-dimensional entanglement 
that may be required.
Kim et al. [113] showed at least one possible solution to the problem of 
compatibility between polar nanocellulose and nonpolar supporting media 
(including the problem of nanocellulose aggregation). They used a commercial 
surfactant to disperse NFC (particle size 10–20 nm × 200–500 nm) in a poly -
styrene film. They also noted that their improvement in mechanical properties 
were relatively modest, given the inherent strength of pure polystyrene films.
As part of a detailed patent on the fabrication of polymer composites for 
use in, for example, dialysis membranes, Jovanovic et al. [114] presented their 
solution to the problem of dispersing NCC in a polymer matrix. Starting with 
NCC in aqueous dispersion, they used the well-known procedure of solvent 
exchange to prepare NCC dispersions in organic solvents. The solvent-
dispersed NCC was then polymerized in situ  with the appropriate monomeric 
material, to produce the filled composite polymer. A similar product was also 
reported by Li et al. [115], without the solvent exchange of the NCC out of 
the original aqueous dispersion.
20.5.3.1  Reinforcement of Dried Food One interesting application of 
nanocellulose is in the strength reinforcement of dried food, a form of polymer 
reinforcement [116]. In this study, the authors used a commercial “cellulose 
with nanofibrillation” to improve the physical properties of a dried fruit 
product. Their product was approximately 7 nm cross section × 83 nm length. 
This is similar to a true NCC. Addition of 10% by weight of this product to 
dried fruit provided a significant strength increase and also a modest water 
vapor barrier improvement.
This particular end-use raises a critical point, since the regulations of the 
European Parliament governing MCC in food products state that the particle 
size cannot be less than 5 μm [117]. Whether modifying this regulation would 
be a minor technical detail or a major political issue is, of course, a question 
for those dealing with regulators. In general, there is considerable concern 
about the use of nanoscale material in consumer products, particularly food 
products [118, 119].
20.5.3.2 Rubber Reinforcement Additives Bendahou et al. [120] evalu -
ated “cellulose whiskers” (effectively NCC) and MFC as reinforcing agents in 
natural rubber. The authors claimed that the MFC was a superior reinforcing 492  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
agent to the NCC whiskers. They suggested that this was due to the greater 
ease of forming entanglements for the MFC. This conclusion may not be 
correct, considering the following discussion on the importance of particle 
dispersion.
In recent work at the University of Oregon, Bai [121] showed that MCC, 
especially MCC that has been surface modified to be more hydrophobic, can 
replace up to 25% of the silica used as filler for rubber tires with no serious 
effects on mechanical properties. The same study claimed that NCC is not an 
effective reinforcing additive. However, it was acknowledged that the problem 
may have been due to the poor dispersibility of freeze-dried NCC and that 
dispersing NCC in the aqueous latex mixture before cross-linking and harden -
ing might have been more effective.
The potential for cellulosic materials to substitute for even a fraction of the 
silica used in rubber reinforcement requires a reality check. At present, prod -
ucts such as precipitated silica and fumed silica already provide adequate 
performance as rubber reinforcing fillers, at a lower price. Clearly, MCC, NFC, 
NCC, and related cellulose derivatives costing several times more will not 
substitute for the currently used silica fillers in rubber. However, NCC and 
NFC may be competitive with the higher priced nanosilica products. Carbon 
black, also widely used to reinforce rubber, is even lower in price than silica.
20.5.3.3 Polyurethane Reinforcement Additive Polyurethane is an 
important industrial polymer, particularly as an elastomer (synthetic rubber). 
Polyurethane has an advantage in dispersing cellulosic materials, due to its 
polar surface. Wu et al. [122] polymerized polyurethane in situ  with MFC 
(prepared by chemical pretreatment of commercial MCC). They noted that 
about 5% of cellulosic material as reinforcement additive was optimal for 
improving tensile properties (high tensile strength and high strain to failure). 
They also noted that untreated MCC without microfibrillation is not suitable 
as polymer reinforcement. This provides evidence that the surface chemistry 
of the reinforcing material may be as important as its structure. Both the 
nanofibrils and the polymer molecules become strongly oriented in the loading 
direction, providing extra stiffening. Finally, they noted that the strength of the 
network is due not only to strong hydrogen bonds, but due to the creation of 
even stronger chemical bonds between the cellulose microfibrils and the poly -
urethane molecules. This may be analogous to the formation of chemical bonds 
between carboxyl groups on fatty acids (found for example in printing ink 
vehicles) and the hydroxyl groups on the cellulose backbone.
A recent thesis took polyurethane reinforcement from the MFC scale to 
the NCC scale [123]. This work also showed that NCC is an effective reinforc -
ing agent for polyurethane, either by polymerization with the pre-polymers in 
situ, or by blending with the finished polymer.
It is difficult to compare the properties of the MFC-reinforced polyurethane 
in reference [122] to those of the NCC-reinforced polyurethane in reference 
[123]. There are uncontrolled differences such as variations in the source, OTHER COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS   493
molecular weight, and structure of the oligomers used in the initial polyure -
thane preparation. The MFC work used much higher concentrations of MFC—
up to 10% by weight. The NCC work only went as high as 2% by weight of 
NCC. With that in mind, comparing the two sets of data showed that the 
Young’s modulus of the two filled products was similar, but the NCC-filled 
product had both a lower tensile strength and a lower % stretch to failure.
20.5.3.4 Poly(Lactic) Acid PLA is of interest to major suppliers of 
polymer films and polymer products as a green product. However, PLA is too 
brittle and possesses insufficient heat resistance to substitute for more common 
synthetic polymers. Different groups have used both MFC and NCC to rein -
force PLA films.
The group at Kyoto University has shown that MFCcan be used to reinforce 
PLA [124, 125]. Their MFC is typically in the range of 20–50 nm in diameter 
by several micrometers in length. At an MFC content of 10%, Young’s modulus 
and tensile strength of PLA samples were significantly increased, without 
reducing the yield strength. By comparison, unrefined kraft pulp had a detri -
mental effect on mechanical properties while refined kraft pulp resulted in 
only marginal improvements. In another work [126] the same group blended 
PLA and NFC fibers in a handsheet machine. The resulting “sheets” were then 
compression moulded at high temperature and pressure into the final compos -
ite material.
Comparing the work of filled PLA done by the Kyoto group using  
MFC and by FPInnovations using NCC provides an important conclusion. 
Both MFC and NCC are effective reinforcing agents for PLA. However, the 
data show that using MFC to improve the strength of PLA requires ten times 
more material compared with the 2–3% of NCC needed to gain the same 
benefit.
20.5.4 Nanocrystalline Cellulose versus Inorganic Fillers
NCC has to compete with nanoinorganic fillers such as nanoclay, nanosilica, 
and nanoalumina. Nanoinorganics have been the subject of ongoing research 
for at least 20 years [127]. However, NCC has the advantages (at least) of being 
a nontoxic and more green material.
The ultimate goal of all nanoscale fillers is the same: to improve mechanical 
properties by reinforcing a polymer network (including coatings). Nanoclays 
are less costly than NCC. On the other hand, nanosilicas and nanoaluminas 
range in price from roughly equal to the price of NCC to several times higher, 
depending on the grade.
So far, little work direct comparison has been done between the properties 
of polymers filled with NCC and polymers filled with nanoinorganic materials. 
As already shown [102, 103] the group of Sanchez-Garcia demonstrated that 
NCC is superior at reducing the rate of water vapor and oxygen transmission 
through films of PLA compared with a nanoclay product.494  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
As already noted [78], the Wood Products Division of FPInnovations has 
shown that NCC can improve the properties of industrial varnishes for wood 
products. The same group had previously [128, 129] examined nanosilica and 
nanoalumina as varnish additives. In all cases, the degree of dispersion of the 
nanomaterial is critical to the end-use, giving NCC an advantage at least in 
aqueous varnishes. In general we may say that NCC is at least competitive 
with nanosilica and nanoalumina, and for at least some measured properties, 
NCC is superior.
Several groups have looked at the combination of NCC with nanoinorganic 
fillers. Yano et al. [130] prepared a composite material into which silica 
nanoparticles were “mingled” with bacterial cellulose microfibrils. The modulus 
and strength of this composite were increased significantly compared with the 
cellulose film itself.
Shopsowitz et al. [131] suspended organosilicon compounds such as tetra -
methoxy silane Si(OCH 3)4 in aqueous NCC, generating the chiral nematic 
organization that leads to iridescent colors that we now associate with NCC 
films. After high temperature pyrolysis of the organic material, the silica films 
have retained the chiral nematic footprint and the associated specific wave -
length light reflection of the original NCC. This new silica structure is meso -
porous because of the empty spaces left from NCC calcination. This suggests 
a means by which NCC can help create new products in combination with 
silica and other inorganic compounds. In a more recent paper, they have been 
able to load these open structures with silver nanoparticles [132].
Although not at the moment an end-use issue, the yield of NCC from the 
cellulose fibers can be as low as 50%. Therefore, there is also considerable 
opportunity to recover valuable chemical by-products. Jemaa et al. [133] dem -
onstrated that monomeric and oligomeric sugars can be isolated from the NCC 
waste stream. These have the potential to add considerable value to any nano -
cellulose production process. In the same way, it is a matter of both economic 
and environmental concern that the sulphuric acid used in the preparation of 
NCC be recycled for reuse [133], or for the production of additional by-products 
[134].
20.5.5 Printed Electronics
For the last 10 years, there has been considerable interest in the use of conven -
tional printing (offset, flexography, ink jet, and rotogravure) to fully print elec -
tronic products (e.g., organic light emitting diodes, solar power panels, RFID 
circuits, and more), at a very low cost. Paper and other cellulose derivatives have 
themselves been considered as substrates [135]. Because of problems in obtain -
ing absolute fidelity of printed features—even more stringent than the require -
ments for very high quality color imaging—most researchers have been 
concentrating on plastic films such as poly(ethylene terephalate) (PET).
Most high quality plastic films have the smoothness and low porosity 
required to print very finely detailed electronic circuit components. However, CONCLUDINg REMARKS   495
these films have high coefficients of thermal expansion. This is absolutely unac -
ceptable for feature placement in printed electronics. Recent work [136, 137] 
has shown that conventional polymer films either laminated or filled with NFC 
have an extremely low coefficient of thermal expansion. Films made from 
TEMPO-prepared nanofiber also showed very low coefficients of thermal 
expansion [71]. Composite sheets made from NFC and mineral filler such as 
kaolin clay or precipitated calcium carbonate gave very smooth surfaces, with 
properties (including dimensional changes with relative humidity) similar to 
those of a reference PET sheet [138]. New opportunities for plastic films 
designed for printed electronics may result from the combination of nanocel -
lulose with synthetic plastic films.
Richardson [123] prepared conductive NCC by polymerizing aniline in  
the presence of NCC, creating a graft copolymer or at least a uniform coating 
of polyaniline on the NCC surface. This may have applications in printed 
electronics.
In a similar vein, Lee et al. showed that a “cellulose nanofiber sheet,” likely 
a sheet of NFC, could be used as a separator material in a lithium ion battery, 
particularly due to its superior thermal stability [139].
Another potential use of NCC and related materials could be in providing 
a “template” for semiconducting materials. Padalkar et al. [140] precipitated 
materials such as cadmium sulphide onto “cellulose nanocrystals,” particles 
either of NCC or of somewhat larger cellulose nanofibrils. However, no 
end-use properties were reported.
In summary, the recent research activities have identified many interesting 
and even exciting potential applications for nanocellulose products. This has 
helped attract significant interests from various end-users and funding from 
governments. However, a strong value proposition and business case must be 
defined, market size estimated, and partners/end-used recruited to develop 
real application opportunities and accelerate the commercialization.
20.6 CONCLUDING REMARKS
There has been an increasing interest in developing micro- and nanocellulosic 
products, leading to very extensive R&D efforts around the globe to develop 
and demonstrate manufacturing technologies for these products. At the same 
time, a large and growing body of information on potential end-uses of nano -
cellulose has been accumulated. This includes the NCC products now under 
advanced development at FPInnovations and CelluForce, Canada, as well as 
the MFC/NFC products of other organizations, such as Innventia, Sweden, and 
UPM and StoraEnso in Finland.
Although the field is still in its early development stages, it is clear that there 
is some overlap in properties from MCC (largest) to MFC, NFC, and NCC. 
There is also a certain continuum in size, at least in the fibrillated material 496  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
such as MCC, MFC, and NFC. In some potential product areas, NCC has a 
clear technical advantage. In other areas, the data are not as clear, and further 
work is required.
Many potential applications for nanocellulosic materials have been identi -
fied and demonstrated in the lab. However, for each case, the challenge is to 
demonstrate a value proposition and to develop a strong business case. The 
involvement and partnership with the end-users are critical to bringing these 
new nanomaterials into the market.
APPENDIX A
This Appendix summarizes worldwide research, development, and production 
in the area of nanocellulose. It is worth noting that some players are involved 
in more than one research consortium. For example, Innventia (Sweden) has 
its own NFC program, and also coordinates the European Community’s Sus -
tainComp program. VTT (Finland) is involved in the Finnish Centre for Nano 
Cellulosics, and also coordinates the European Community’s SUNPAP 
(Scaling Up Nano Particles in Modern Papermaking) program. Similarly, 
FPInnovations (Canada) has its own NCC program in addition to a strong 
involvement in the Canadian ArboraNano program sponsored by the Govern -
ment of Canada and the Government of Quebec and the FPInnovations/
Domtar CelluForce joint venture .
In addition to systematic (often government funded) programs, there is also 
a considerable amount of small-scale, university-level research. Many such 
small-scale cases are presented within the body of this review. Commercial 
products and efforts are shown in Table 20.A.1. Governmental and other 
research groups are shown in Table 20.A.2.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from Natural Resources 
Canada under the Transformative Technology Program. We would like to 
thank Drs. Raman Nayar and Pierre LePoutre for valuable comments made 
during the review of this report.
TABLE 20.A.1  Commercial Products
Organization Product Commercial
Daicel MFC Yes
J. Rettenmaier & Söhne Inc. MFC Yes
Borregaard Biorefinery MFC Yes497TABLE 20.A.2  Industrial, University, and Government Research and Development
Organization Products Production Capabilities Application Being Developed
FPInnovations, Canada, in 
partnership with Domtar 
(CelluForce)
Also in partnership with 
ArboraNano (Governments 
of Canada and of Quebec)Nanocrystalline cellulose 
(NCC)1 kg/day pilot plant (batch)
3 kg/day (continuous) pilot plant
1 tonne per day demonstration 
plant Official opening in January 
2012 (CelluForce)Paints and coatings
Films and barriers
Textiles
Polymer composites (including 
biopolymers)
Excipients
Cosmetics
Innventia, Sweden, in 
partnership withKTH, 
Stockholm and Aalto 
University, Helsinki
Many Scandinavian and 
European producersMFC and NFC 100 kg/day pilot plant in operation, 
February 2011 [51]Polymer reinforcement
Paper bulk and surface strength
Coatings
Superhydrophobic materials
Nanofoams
Superabsorbers
Borregaard Biorefinery, Norway, 
partnered with SCA, Sweden
Reichhold ChemicalsMFC and NFC 100–200 kg/day pilot plant under 
constructionPaper strength and printability 
improvement
Adhesives and polymer 
composites
Finnish Centre for Nano 
Cellulosics, Finland, in 
partnership with Aalto 
University, VTT, UPMMFC and NFC Details unknown Paper and board strength and 
reinforcement
Industrial coatings
Foams, composites
Adhesives
Superabsorbers
Films
PFI, Norway NFC and MFC Details unknown Composite materials, paper 
strength, barrier properties
(Continued )498
Organization Products Production Capabilities Application Being Developed
EMPA, Switzerland MFC and NFC Small Superabsorbers, biomedical, 
polymer reinforcement and 
composites, adhesives
US Dept of Agriculture and US 
Forest Products Laboratory
Virginia Tech;
Purdue University;
University of Tennessee;
Georgia Tech;
Cornell University;
Auburn UniversityNFC and NCC (including 
TEMPO oxidation)Support to US universities Preparation and 
characterization of materials
Composites
Alberta Innovates and NINT, 
Canada, in partnership with 
AlpacNCC Plan for 100 kg/week pilot plant 
announced in July 2011
INP-Pagora (Grenoble), France NCC Lab scale (grams) Composites
CERMAV, (Grenoble) France NCC Lab scale (grams) Fundamental
Electromagnetic alignment
SustainComp,
European Community Project, 
Coordinated by Innventia, 
SwedenMFC/NFC Unknown
SunPap,
European Community effort, 
coordinated by VTT, Finland
Partnered with Stora Enso, 
Ahsltrom, UPM, RettenmaierNFC Commercial material supplied by 
RettenmaierPapermaking implications
Kyoto University, University of 
Tokyo, Oji Paper, Nippon 
Paper, and others—JapanBacterial nanocellulose, 
MFC
TEMPO-oxidized NCC 
in a variety of end-uses 
including 
biocompositesLab scale (grams)
Commercial MFC supplied by 
Daicel and othersComposite materials (including 
biopolymer blends)
Optical/thermal properties of 
clear films
University of Maine, with Maine 
state government and US 
federal governmentsNFC (enzymatic, 
chemical, or 
mechanical)Laboratory—pilot plant scale Paper surface treatment
Polymer reinforcement
Paper coating additive
University of Oregon MCC and NCC Laboratory scale production Polymer reinforcement, 
including rubber
NCC aerogels
Barrier layers
Bio Vision Technology, Canada; 
in partnership with the 
National Research Council of 
Canada—Biotechnology 
Research InstituteNCC; part of the overall, 
stated strategy of Bio 
Vision for a cellulose-
based biorefinery to 
produce other 
chemicals plus energy 
from cellulosePilot production is claimed to start 
soon, but no details have been 
providedFocus on production; 
application to be explored by 
partners
UPM, Finland “Fibril Cellulose” 
described as a range of 
products from MFC to 
NFCPilot production started in 
November 2011; scale not givenFocus on papermaking, 
concrete additive, and paints/
varnishes.
StoraEnso, Finland MFC “pre-commercial 
plant”Production claimed to begin at the 
end of 2011; scale not givenFocus on papermaking, 
reinforcing material, and 
barrier layers
Melodea, Israel NCC derived from waste 
cellulosic materialScale not given NCC-based nanofoams (e.g., 
[91])TABLE 20.2 (Continued )Organization Products Production Capabilities Application Being Developed
EMPA, Switzerland MFC and NFC Small Superabsorbers, biomedical, 
polymer reinforcement and 
composites, adhesives
US Dept of Agriculture and US 
Forest Products Laboratory
Virginia Tech;
Purdue University;
University of Tennessee;
Georgia Tech;
Cornell University;
Auburn UniversityNFC and NCC (including 
TEMPO oxidation)Support to US universities Preparation and 
characterization of materials
Composites
Alberta Innovates and NINT, 
Canada, in partnership with 
AlpacNCC Plan for 100 kg/week pilot plant 
announced in July 2011
INP-Pagora (Grenoble), France NCC Lab scale (grams) Composites
CERMAV, (Grenoble) France NCC Lab scale (grams) Fundamental
Electromagnetic alignment
SustainComp,
European Community Project, 
Coordinated by Innventia, 
SwedenMFC/NFC Unknown
SunPap,
European Community effort, 
coordinated by VTT, Finland
Partnered with Stora Enso, 
Ahsltrom, UPM, RettenmaierNFC Commercial material supplied by 
RettenmaierPapermaking implications
Kyoto University, University of 
Tokyo, Oji Paper, Nippon 
Paper, and others—JapanBacterial nanocellulose, 
MFC
TEMPO-oxidized NCC 
in a variety of end-uses 
including 
biocompositesLab scale (grams)
Commercial MFC supplied by 
Daicel and othersComposite materials (including 
biopolymer blends)
Optical/thermal properties of 
clear films
University of Maine, with Maine 
state government and US 
federal governmentsNFC (enzymatic, 
chemical, or 
mechanical)Laboratory—pilot plant scale Paper surface treatment
Polymer reinforcement
Paper coating additive
University of Oregon MCC and NCC Laboratory scale production Polymer reinforcement, 
including rubber
NCC aerogels
Barrier layers
Bio Vision Technology, Canada; 
in partnership with the 
National Research Council of 
Canada—Biotechnology 
Research InstituteNCC; part of the overall, 
stated strategy of Bio 
Vision for a cellulose-
based biorefinery to 
produce other 
chemicals plus energy 
from cellulosePilot production is claimed to start 
soon, but no details have been 
providedFocus on production; 
application to be explored by 
partners
UPM, Finland “Fibril Cellulose” 
described as a range of 
products from MFC to 
NFCPilot production started in 
November 2011; scale not givenFocus on papermaking, 
concrete additive, and paints/
varnishes.
StoraEnso, Finland MFC “pre-commercial 
plant”Production claimed to begin at the 
end of 2011; scale not givenFocus on papermaking, 
reinforcing material, and 
barrier layers
Melodea, Israel NCC derived from waste 
cellulosic materialScale not given NCC-based nanofoams (e.g., 
[91])
499500  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
REFERENCES
 [1] Eichhorn, S., et al. (2010) Review: Current international research into cellulose 
nanofibres and nanocomposites. J. Mater. Sci. , 45, 1.
 [2] Hubbe, M.A., Rojas, O.J., Lucia, L.A., and Sain, M. (2008) Cellulosic nanocom -
posites: A review. BioResources , 4, 929.
 [3] Dufresne, A. (2008) Polysaccharide nanocrystal reinforced nanocomposites. Can. 
J. Chem. , 86, 484.
 [4] Siró, I., Plackett, D. (2010) Microfibrillated cellulose and new nanocomposite 
materials: A review. Cellulose , 17, 459.
 [5] Habibi, Y., Lucia, L.A., and Rojas, O.J. (2010) Cellulose nanocrystals: Chemistry, 
self-assembly, and applications. Chem. Rev. , 110, 3479.
 [6] Peng, B.L., Dhar, N., Liu, H.L., and Tam, K.C. (2011) Chemistry and applications 
of nanocrystalline cellulose and its derivatives: A nanotechnology perspective. 
Can. J. Chem. Eng. , 89, 1191.
 [7] Yano, H. (2011) Current situation of nanocellulose in Japan, The 2011 Tappi 
International Conference on Nanotechnology for Renewable Resources, Wash -
ington, DC, June 2011, Tappi Press, Atlanta.
 [8] Klemm, D., Kramer, F., Moritz, S., Lindström, T., Ankerfors, M., Gray, D.G., and 
Dorris, A. (2011) Nanocelluloses: A new family of nature-based materials. Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. , 50, 5438.
 [9] Hamel, J. (2011) Presented at the 97th Annual Meeting of PAPTAC, Montreal.
 [10] Sneck, A. (2011) New approach to classification of cellulosic fibrils and suitable 
methods for their characterization, The 2011 Tappi International Conference on 
Nanotechnology for Renewable Resources, Washington, DC, June 2011, Tappi 
Press, Atlanta.
 [11] Postek, M.T., et al. (2011) Development of the metrology and imaging of cellu -
lose nanocrystals. Meas. Sci. Technol. , 22, 024005.
 [12] Thomson, S.L., O’Callaghan, D.J., Westland, J.A., and Su, B. (2010) Method of 
making a fiber cement board with improved properties and the product, US 
Patent Application 2010/0162926, July 1, 2010, assigned to Weyerhaeuser Co.
 [13] Isogai, A. (2009) Individualization of nano-sized plant cellulose fibrils achieved 
by direct surface carboxylation using TEMPO catalyst, The 2009 TAPPI Nano -
technology Conference, Edmonton, Alberta, June 24–26, 2009.
 [14] Dong, X., Revol, J.-F., and Gray, D.G. (1998) Effect of microcrystallite prepara -
tion on the formation of colloid crystals of cellulose. Cellulose , 5, 19.
 [15] Battista, O.A. (1966) Method of preparing stable aqueous dispersion-forming 
cellulosic aggregates, Assigned to FMC Corp., U.S. Patent 3,251,824, May 17, 
1966.
 [16] http://www.nbent.com/products.htm (accessed April 2, 2013).
 [17] FAO/WHO Food Standards (2012) Microcrystalline cellulose (Cellulose Gel), 
http://www.codexalimentarius.net/ (accessed April 1, 2013).
 [18] Pharmacopeial specifications, http://www.nbent.com/pharmacopial.htm (accessed 
April 2, 2013).REFERENCES   501
 [19] Dukic-Ott, A., Thommes, M., Remon, J.-P ., Kleinebudde, P ., and Vervaet, C. 
(2009) Production of pellets via extrusion–spheronisation without the incorpora -
tion of microcrystalline cellulose: A critical review. Eur. J. Pharmaceut. Biophar -
maceut. , 71, 38.
 [20] Laka, M., Chernyavskaya, S. (2007) Obtaining microcrystalline cellulose from 
softwood and hardwood pulp. Bioresources , 2(3), 583.
 [21] Agblevor, F., Ibrahim, M., and El-Zawawy, W. (2007) Coupled acid and enzyme 
mediated production of microcrystalline cellulose from corn cob and cotton gin 
waster. Cellulose , 14, 247.
 [22] Moran, J., Alvarez, V., Cyras, V., and Vazquez, A. (2008) Extraction of cellulose 
and preparation of nanocellulose from sisal fibres. Cellulose , 15, 149.
 [23] Turbak, A., Snyder, F., and Sandberg, K. (1982) Food products containing micro -
fibrillated cellulose, Assigned to ITT, US Patent 4,341,807, July 27, 1982.
 [24] Turbak, A., Snyder, F., and Sandbertg, K. (1983) Microfibrillated cellulose, a new 
cellulose product: Properties, uses, and commercial potential. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 
37, 815.
 [25] Henriksson, M., Berglund, L.A. (2007) Structure and properties of cellulose 
nanocomposite films containing melamine formaldehyde. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 
106, 2817.
 [26] Taniguchi, T., Okamura, J. (1998) New films produced by microfibrillated natural 
fibers. Polym. Int. , 47, 291.
 [27] Said, M.A.S.A., Alloin, F., Sanchez, J.-Y., El Kissi, N., and Dufresne, A. (2004) 
Preparation of cellulose whiskers reinforced nanocomposites from an organic 
medium suspension. Macromolecules , 37, 1386.
 [28] Venables, A., Buliga, G., Dell, S., and Colliopoulos, J. (2000) Ultra-fine microcrys -
talline cellulose compositions and processes, Assigned to FMC Corp., US Patent 
6,037,380, March 14, 2000.
 [29] Matsuda, Y., Hirose, M., and Ueno, K. (2001) Super microfibrillated cellulose, 
process for producing the same, and coated paper and tinted paper using the 
same, Assigned to Tokoshu Paper Co., US Patent 6,183,596, February 6, 2001.
 [30] Eriksen, Ø., Syverud, K., and Gregersen, Ø. (2008) The use of microfibrillated 
cellulose produced from kraft pulp as strength enhancer in TMP paper. Nord. 
Pulp. Paper Res. J. , 23, 299.
 [31] J. Rettenmaier & Söhne GmbH, http://www.jrs.de (accessed July 15, 2010).
 [32] New fibre product from borregaard, http://www.orkla.com (accessed August 30, 
2010).
 [33] Theliander, H., Wernersson, F., Hanson, C., Gustafson, I., and Falk, T. (2011) 
Absorbent article comprising a composite material, WIPO Patent Application 
WO/2011/090425, Assigned to SCA Hygiene Products AB, July 28, 2011.
 [34] Daicel Chemical Industries, Ltd. http://www.daicel.com/en/research/activity.html 
(accessed April 1, 2013).
 [35] Beck, S., Bouchard, J., and Berry, R. (2012) Dispersibility in water of dried nano -
crystalline cellulose, Biomacromolecules , 13, 1486.
 [36] Beck, S., Bouchard, J., and Berry, R. (2010) A method to control the dispersibility 
and barrier properties of dried nanocrystalline cellulose in solutions of different 502  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
pH and ionic strength, US Patent Application 2010/0148118 Assigned to FPIn -
novations, June 17, 2010.
 [37] Takagi, H., Asano, A. (2007) Characterization of “Green” composites reinforced 
by cellulose nanofibers. Key Eng. Mater. , 334–335 , 389.
 [38] http://www.storaenso.com/media-centre/press-releases/2011/05/Pages/stora-
enso-makes-a-groundbreaking.aspx (accessed December 29, 2011).
 [39] UPM starts pre-commercial production of fibril cellulose, http://www.paperage.  
com/2011news/11_15_2011upm_fibril_cellulose.html (accessed December 20, 
2011).
 [40] Kapanen, A., Vartiainen, J., Lappalainen, T., Korhonen, P ., and Vikman, M. (2011) 
Toxicity and characteristics of microfibrillated cellulose in kinetic luminescent 
bacteria test environment, VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland.
 [41] UPM Viewpoint: UPM has started pre-commercial production of fibril cellulose, 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v =UyOO4J7eQao (accessed December 21, 
2011).
 [42] Stenstad, P ., Andresen, M., Tanem, B., and Stenius, P . (2008) Chemical surface 
modifications of microfibrillated cellulose. Cellulose , 15, 35.
 [43] Andresen, M., Johansson, L.S., Tanem, B.J., and Stenius, P . (2006) Properties and 
characterization of hydrophobized microfibrillated cellulose. Cellulose , 13, 665.
 [44] Lönnberg, H., Fogelström, L., Said, M.A., Berglund, L., Malström, E., and  
Hult, A. (2008) Surface grafting of microfibrillated cellulose with poly( ε-
caprolactone)—Synthesis and characterization. Eur. Polym. J. , 44, 2991.
 [45] Bergenstråhle, M., Mazeau, K., and Berglund, L.A. (2008) Molecular modeling 
of interfaces between cellulose crystals and surrounding molecules: Effects of 
caprolactone surface grafting. Eur. Polym. J. , 44, 3662.
 [46] Zhang, J., Elder, T.J., Pu, Y., and Ragauskas, A.J. (2007) Facile synthesis of spheri -
cal cellulose nanoparticles. Carbohydr. Polym. , 69, 607.
 [47] Pu, Y., Zhang, J., Elder, T., Deng, Y., Gtenholm, P ., and Ragauskas, A.J. (2007) 
Investigation into nanocellulosics vs. acacia reinforced acrylic films. Compos. Part 
B: Eng. , 38, 360.
 [48] Zimmermann, T., Pöhler, E., and Geiger, T. (2004) Cellulose fibrils for polymer 
reinforcement. Adv. Eng. Mater. , 6, 754.
 [49] Zimmermann, T., Pöhler, E., and Schwaller, P . (2005) Mechanical and morpho -
logical properties of cellulose film reinforced nanocomposites. Adv. Eng. Mater. , 
7, 1156.
 [50] López-Suevos, F., Eyholzer, E., Bordeanu, N., and Richter, K. (2010) DMA analy -
sis and wood bonding of PVAc latex reinforced with cellulose nanofibrils. Cel-
lulose , 17, 387.
 [51] Nanocellulose—for the first time on a large scale, http://www.innventia.com/en/
About-us/News1/Press-Release-Nanocellulose—for-the-first-time-on-a-large-
scale/ (accessed April 1, 2013).
 [52] Chakraborty, A., Sain, M., Kortschot, M., and Ghosh, S. (2007) Modelling energy 
consumption for the generation of microfibres from bleached kraft pulp fibres 
in a PFI mill. Bioresources , 2, 210.
 [53] Cellulose nanocomposites, http://www.empa.ch/plugin/template/empa/*/39597 
(accessed November 18, 2010).REFERENCES   503
 [54] Mörseburg, K., Chinga-Carrasco, G. (2009) Assessing the combined benefits of 
clay and nanofibrillated cellulose in layered TMP-based sheets. Cellulose , 16, 795.
 [55] Hult, E.L., Iotti, M., and Lenes, M. (2010) Efficient approach to high barrier 
packaging using microfibrillar cellulose and shellac. Cellulose , 17, 575.
 [56] Hentze, H.-P ., Sievanen, J., Kettle, J., Kulachenko, A., Korpela, A., Ketoja, J., 
Hellen, E., Hjelt, T., Hiltunen, J., Turunen, E., and Sneck, A. (2010) Method of 
manufacturing paper and products obtained by the method. Assigned to UPM-
Kymmene Corp and Stora Emnso OYJ, World Intellectual Property Organiza -
tion, WO 2010/142846, December 16, 2010.
 [57] Henriksson, M., Berglund, L., Bulone, V., and Zhou, Q. (2010) Method of produc -
ing and the use of microfibrillated paper, World Intellectual Property Organiza -
tion WO 2010/134868, Assigned to Swetree Technologies AB, November 25, 2010.
 [58] Marchessault, R.H., Morehead, F.F., and Walter, N.M. (1959) Liquid crystalline 
systems from fibrillar polysaccharides. Nature , 184, 632.
 [59] Revol, J.-F., Godbout, D.L., and Gray, D.G. (1997) Solidified liquid crystal of cel -
lulose with optically variable properties, US Patent 5629055, Assigned to Pulp 
and Paper Research Institute of Canada, May 13, 1997.
 [60] Beck, S., Bouchard, J., and Berry, R. (2011) A new method to control iridescence 
colour in solid films of nanocrystalline cellulose. Biomacromolecules , 12, 
167–172.
 [61] CelluForce starts operations in Windsor, Quebec, http://foresttalk.com/index.
php/2011/12/12/celluforce-starts-operations-in-windsor-quebec/ (accessed April 
1, 2013).
 [62] http://www.celluforce.com (accessed June 6, 2011).
 [63] Su, S., Hamad, W.Y. (2011) Nanocomposite hydrogel and method for preparing 
it, for industrial and medical applications, US Patent Application 2011/0182990, 
Assigned to FPInnovations, July 28, 2011.
 [64] Hamad, W.Y., Su, S. (2011) Thermoplastic nanocomposite material based on 
nanocrystalline cellulose (NCC), US Patent Application 20110201755, Assigned 
to FPInnovations, August 18, 2011.
 [65] Peresin, M.S., Habibi, Y., Zoppe, J.O., Pawlak, J.J., and Rojas, O.J. (2010) Nanofi -
ber composites of poly vinyl alcohol and cellulose nanocrystals: Manufacture and 
characterization. Biomacromolecules , 11, 674.
 [66] Jiang, Z.-H., Berry, R., Bouchard, J., and Audet, A. (2011) Adhesion with nano -
crystalline cellulose, US Patent Application 20110293932, assigned to FPInnova -
tions, December 1, 2011.
 [67] Jackson, J.K., Letchford, K.L., Wasserman, B.J., Ye, L., Hamad, W.Y., and Burt, 
H.M. (2011) The use of nanocrystalline cellulose for the binding and controlled 
release of drugs. Int. J. Nanomedicine , 6, 321.
 [68] Li, Z., Renneckar, S., and Barone, J.R. (2010) Nanocomposites prepared by in 
situ enzymatic polymerization of phenol with TEMPO-oxidized nanocellulose. 
Cellulose , 17, 57.
 [69] Ahola, S. (2008) Properties and interfacial behaviour of cellulose nanofibrils, PhD 
Thesis, Helsinki University of Technology.
 [70] Saito, T., Hirota, M., Tamura, N., Kimura, S., Fukuzumi, H., Heux, L., and Isogai, 
A. (1992) Individualization of nano-sized plant cellulose fibrils by direct surface 504  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
carboxylation using TEMPO catalyst under neutral conditions. Biomacromole -
cules , 10, 2009.
 [71] Fukuzumi, H., Saito, T., Iwata, T., Kumamoto, Y., and Isogai, A. (2009) Transparent 
and high gas barrier films of cellulose nanofibers prepared by TEMPO-mediated 
oxidation. Biomacromolecules , 10, 162.
 [72] Li, Q., Rennecakr, S. (2009) Molecularly thin nanoparticles from cellulose—
Isolation of sub-microfibrillar structures. Cellulose , 16, 1025.
 [73] Alberta nanotechnology strategy, http://www.albertatechfutures.ca/LinkClick.  
aspx?fileticket =m3PeyCuAOMY%3D&tabid =150 (accessed March 15, 2011).
 [74] Tetreau, J.P . (2010) Impact of nanotechnology in Alberta: NCC, October 30, 2010, 
http://www.thecis.ca/cms3/userfiles/Image/NCC%20CaseStudy%20V11%20
30Oct2010.pdf (accessed March 15, 2011).
 [75] New nano material developed from wood and straw pulp is stronger than steel, 
http://foresttalk.com/index.php/2011/07/06/new-nano-material-developed-from-
wood-and-straw-pulp-is-stronger-than-steel/ (accessed August 12, 2011).
 [76] BioVision Technology Inc. http://www.biovisiontechnology.com/ (accessed April 
2, 2013).
 [77] Nano-polymer could reduce carbon footprint, National Research Council of 
Canada, http://www.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/eng/news/nrc/2011/02/01/nano-biovision.html 
(accessed March 1, 2011).
 [78] Landry, V., Blanchet, P . (2009) Nanocomposites coatings for wood industries, 2009 
TAPPI International Conference on Nanotechnology for the Forest Products 
Industry, Edmonton, Alberta, Tappi Press, Atlanta.
 [79] Jämsä, S., Kataja, K., Takala, S., Putkisto, K., Vastamäki, P ., and Dyhr, H. (2011) 
Method for manufacturing paint or varnish, WIPO Patent Application 
WO/2011/124759, Assigned to VTT, Finland, October 13, 2011.
 [80] Henriksson, M., Berglund, L.A., Isaksson, P ., Lindström, T., and Nishino, T. (2008) 
Cellulose nanopaper structures of high toughness. Biopolymers , 9, 1579.
 [81] Zou, X., Tan, X., and Berry, R. (2010) Flexible, iridescent NCC film, and method 
for preparation, Assigned to FPInnovations, US Patent, PCT/CA2010/000638, 
November 4, 2010.
 [82] http://www.vtt.fi/news/2012/20120223_birch_fibril_pulp.jsp (accessed April 2, 
2013).
 [83] Ankerfors, M., Hoc, M., Lindström, T., and Song, H. (2010) Reduction of the 
linting and dusting tendency by using microfibrillated cellulose coatings, 2010 
TAPPI International Conference on Nanotechnology for the Forest Products 
Industry, Espoo, Finland, Tappi Press, Atlanta.
 [84] Ankerfors, M., Lindstrom, T., Song, H., and Hoc, M. (2011) Composition for 
coating of printing paper, US Patent Application 2011/0081554, Assigned to 
Innventia AB, April 7, 2011.
 [85] Svagan, A.J., Samir, M.A.S., and Berglund, L.A. (2008) Biomimetic foams of high 
mechanical performance based on nanostructured cell walls reinforced by native 
cellulose microfibrils. Adv. Mater. , 20, 1263.REFERENCES   505
 [86] Svagan, A.J., Jensen, P ., Berglund, L.A., Furó, I., and Dvinskikh, S.V. (2010) 
Towards tailored hierarchical structures in starch-based cellulose nano-
composties prepared by freeze drying. J. Mater. Chem. , 20, 6646.
 [87] Aulin, C. (2009) Novel oil resistant cellulosic materials, PhD Thesis, Royal Insti -
tute of Technology, Stockholm.
 [88] Svagan, A. (2008) Bio-inspired cellulose nanocomposites and foams based on 
starch matrix, PhD Thesis, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm.
 [89] Heath, L., Thielemans, W. (2010) Cellulose nanowhisker aerogels. Green Chem. , 
12, 1448.
 [90] Kelley, J., Taylor, M., Mekap, D., Simonsen, J., and Arey, B. (2009) Cellulose 
nanocrystal aerogels, The 2009 TAPPI Nanotechnology Conference, Edmonton, 
Alberta, June 24–26, 2009.
 [91] Lapidot, S. (2011) Nano crystalline cellulose composite foam from renewable 
resources, 2011 Tappi International Conference on Nanotechnology for Renew -
able Resources, Washington, DC, Tappi Press, Atlanta.
 [92] http://www.melodea.eu (accessed December 31, 2011).
 [93] Eriksen, Ø., Gregersen, Ø.W., and Syverud, K. (2007) Characterization of nano -
fibrillar cellulose (NFC), COST Action E54. Characterisation of the fine structure 
and properties of papermaking fibres using new technologies. Programme and 
extended abstracts of the opening seminar, Riga, Latvia, 25–27 Apr. 2007, 15–18.
 [94] Micro- and nanocellulose fiber filled engineering thermoplastic composites,  
US Department of Agriculture, http://www.reeis.usda.gov/web/crisprojectpages  
/0211928-micro-and-nanocellulose-fiber-filled-engineering-thermoplastic-  
composites.html (accessed April 2, 2013).
 [95] Siddiqui, N. (2008) Characterization of mechanically and enzymatically produced 
cellulose nanofibers from wood pulp, M.Sc. Thesis, University of Maine, Orono.
 [96] Hamada, H., Bousfield, D.W., (2010) Nano-fibrillated cellulose as a coating agent 
to improve print quality on synthetic fiber sheet, 11th TAPPI Advanced Coating 
Fundamentals Symposium, Munich, October 2010.
 [97] Hamada, H., Beckvermit, J., and Bousfield, D.W. (2010) Nanofibrillated cellulose 
with fine clay as a coating agent to improve print quality, Paper presented at 
Papercon 2010, Tappi Press Atlanta.
 [98] Heiskanen, I., Backfolk, K. (2011) A composition comprising microfibrillated 
cellulose and a process for the production of a composition, WIPO Patent Appli -
cation WO/2011/141876, November 17, 2011, Assigned to StoraEnso Oyj.
 [99] Aulin, C., Lindström, T. (2011) Biopolymer coatings for paper and paperboard. 
In: Biopolymers—New Materials for Sustainable Films and Coatings , ed. D. 
Plackett. Chichester, UK: J. Wiley & Sons.
[100] Jenkins, S. (2009) The future of functional and barrier coatings for paper and 
board, Report published by PIRA International Ltd., . 23.
[101] Aulin, C., Mikael Gällstedt, M., and Lindström, T. (2010) Oxygen and oil barrier 
properties of microfibrillated cellulose films and coatings. Cellulose , 17, 559.
[102] Sanchez-Garcia, M.D., Lagaron, J.M. (2010) On the use of plant cellulose nanow -
hiskers to enhance the barrier propertie of poly lactic acid. Cellulose , 17, 987.
[103] Sanchez-Garcia, M.D., Gimenez, E., and Lagaron, J.M. (2007) Novel PET nano -
composites of interest in food packaging applications and comparative barrier 
performance with biopolyester nanocomposites. J. Plastic Film Sheet. , 23, 133.506  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
[104] Mir, N., Beaudry, R.M. (2004) Modified atmosphere packaging. In: The Com -
mercial Storage of Fruits, Vegetables, and Florist and Nursery Stocks , Agricultural 
Handbook 66. Washington, DC US Department of Agriculture.
[105] Syverud, K., Stenius, P . (2009) Strength and barrier properties of MFC films. Cel-
lulose , 16, 75.
[106] Viet, D., Beck-Candanedo, S., and Gray, D.G. (2007) Dispersion of cellulose 
nanocrystals in polar organic solvents. Cellulose , 17, 109.
[107] Klungness, J.H., Caulfield, D.F. (1982) Mechanisms affecting fiber bonding during 
drying and aging of pulps. TAPPI , 65(12), 94.
[108] Eyholzer, C., Bordeanu, N., Lopez-Suevos, F., Rentsch, D., Zimmermann, T., and 
Oksman, K. (2010) Preparation and characterization of water-dispersible nano -
fibrillated cellulose in powder form. Cellulose , 17, 19.
[109] Boluk, Y., Zhao, L. (2010) Aircraft anti-icing fluids formulated with nanocrystal -
line cellulose, US Patent Application 2010/0327215, Assigned to Alberta Research 
Council, December 30, 2010.
[110] Avérous, L., Fringant, C., and Moro, L. (2001) Starch-based biodegradable mate -
rials suitable for thermoforming packaging. Starch/Stärke , 53, 368.
[111] Nakagaito, A.N., Yano, H. (2005) Novel high-strength biocomposites based on 
microfibrillated cellulose having nano-order-unit web-like network structure. 
Appl. Phys. A , 80, 155.
[112] Hajji, P ., Cavaillé, J.Y., Favier, V., Gauthier, C., and Vigier, G. (1996) Tensile 
behaviour of nanocomposites from latex and cellulose whiskers. Polym Compos. , 
17, 612.
[113] Kim, J., Montero, G., Habibi, Y., Hinestroza, J., Genzer, J., Argyropoulos, D., and 
Rojas, O. (2009) Dispersion of cellulose crystalline by non-ionic surfactants in a 
hydrophobic polymer matrix. Polym. Eng. Sci. , 49, 2054.
[114] Jovanovic, G., Atre, S.V., Paul, B.K., Simonsen, J., Remcho, V.T., and Chang, C.-H. 
(2011) Microfluidic devices, particularly filtration devices comprising polymeric 
membranes, and method for their manufacture and use, US Patent Application 
20110253629, Assigned to the State University of Oregon, October 20, 2011.
[115] Li, S., Gao, Y., Bai, H., Zhang, L., Qu, P ., and Bai, L. (2011) Preparation and 
characteristics of polysulfone dialysis membranes modified with nanocrystalline 
cellulose. BioResources , 6, 1670.
[116] Azeredo, H.M.C., Mattoso, L.H.C., Wood, D., Williams, T.G., Avena-Bustillos, R.J., 
and Mchugh, T. (2009) Nanocomposite edible films from mango puree reinforced 
with cellulose nanofiber. J. Food Sci. , 74, N31.
[117] Health impact of nanotechnologies in food production; Commission Directive 
96/77/EC. of the European Parliament and of the council of 2 December 1996 
laying down specific purity criteria on food additives other than colours and 
sweeteners. Official Journal of the European Union L 339, 30.12.1996, . 1.
[118] Grobe, A., Renn, O., and Jaeger, A., (2012) Risk governance of nanotechnology 
applications in food and cosmetics, International Risk Governance Council, 
http://www.nanowerk.com/nanotechnology/reports/reportpdf/report125.pdf 
(accessed April 2, 2013).
[119] Bouwmeester, H., Dekkers, S., Noordam, M., Hagens, H., Bulder, A., de Heer, C., 
ten Voorde, S., Wijnhoven, S., and Sips, A. (2007) Health impact of nanotechnolo -
gies in food production, RIKILT—Institute of Food Safety, Wageningen Univer -REFERENCES   507
sity and Research Centre; RIVM—National Institute for Public Health & the 
Environment, the Netherlands, http://edepot.wur.nl/120669 (accessed September 
10, 2010).
[120] Bendahou, A., Kaddami, H., and Dufresne, A. (2010) Investigation on the effect 
of cellulosic nanoparticles’ morphology on the properties of natural rubber-
based nanocomposites. Eur. Polym. J. , 46, 209.
[121] Bai, W. (2009) New application of crystalline cellulose in rubber composites, PhD 
Thesis, Oregon State University, November 2009.
[122] Wu, Q., Henriksson, M., Liu, X., and Berglund, L.A. (2007) A high strength 
nanocomposite based on microcrystalline cellulose and polyurethane. Biomac -
romolecules , 8, 3687.
[123] Richardson, T.B. (2009) Nanoreinforced shape memory polyurethane, PhD 
Thesis, Auburn University, Auburn AL, December 2009.
[124] Iwatake, A., Nogi, M., and Yano, H. (2008) Cellulose nanofibre-reinforced poly -
lactic acid. Compos. Sci. Technol. , 68, 2103.
[125] Suryanegara, L., Nakagaito, A.N., and Yano, H. (2009) The effect of crystallization 
of PLA on the thermal and mechanical properties of microfibrillated cellulose-
reinforced PLA composites. Compos. Sci. Technol. , 69, 1187.
[126] Nakagaito, A.N., Fujimura, A., Sakai, T., Hama, Y., and Yano, H. (2009) Produc -
tion of microfibrillated cellulose (MFC) reinforced polylactic acid (PLA) nano -
composites from sheets obtained by a papermaking-like process. Compos. Sci. 
Technol. , 69, 1293.
[127] Hamad, W. (2006) On the development and applications of cellulosic nanofibril -
lar and nanocrystalline materials. Can. J. Chem. Eng. , 84, 513.
[128] Landry, V., Blanchet, P ., and Riedl, B. (2010) Mechanical and optical properties 
of clay-based nanocomposite coatings for wood flooring. Prog. Org. Coat. , 67, 
381.
[129] Sow, S., Riedl, B., and Blanchet, P . (2010) UV-waterborne polyurethane-acrylate 
nanocomposite coatings containing alumina and silica nanoparticles for wood: 
Mechanical, optical, and thermal properties assessment. J. Coat. Technol. Res. , 4.
[130] Yano, S., Maeda, H., Nakajima, M., Hagiwara, T., and Sawaguchi, T. (2008) Prepa -
ration and mechanical properties of bacterial cellulose nanocomposites loaded 
with silica nanoparticles. Cellulose , 15, 111.
[131] Shopsowitz, K., Qi, H., Hamad, W., and MacLachlan, M. (2010) Free-standing 
mesoporous silica films with tunable chiral nematic structures. Nature , 468, 422.
[132] Qi, H., Shopsowitz, K.E., Hamad, W.Y., and MacLachlan, M.J. (2011) Chiral 
nematic assemblies of silver nanoparticles in mesoporous silica thin films. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. , 133, 3728.
[133] Jemaa, N., Paleologou, M., and Zhang, X. (2011) Fractionation of a waste liquor 
stream from nanocrystalline cellulose production, Assigned to FPInnovations, 
World Intellectual Property Organization Application WO 2011/017797, Pub -
lished February 17, 2011.
[134] Hashhaikey, R., Hu, T.H., and Berry, R. (2010) Crystalline sulphated cellulose II 
and its production from sulphuric acid hydrolysis of cellulose, US Patent Applica -
tion 2010/0286387, November 11, 2010, Assigned to FPInnovations.
[135] Aspler, J.S. (2004) Paper: The other flexible substrate, IDTechEx Printed Elec -
tronics Conference, New Orleans, December 2004.508  REvIEW OF NANOCELLULOSIC  PRODUCTS  AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
[136] Nogi, M., Iwamoto, S., Nakagaito, A., and Yano, H. (2009) Optically transparent 
nanofiber paper. Adv. Mater. , 21, 1595.
[137] Nogi, M., Yano, H. (1849) Transparent nanocomposites based on cellulose pro -
duced by bacteria offer innovation in the electronics device industry. Adv. Mater. , 
20, 2008.
[138] Sievanen, J., Torvinen, K., Hjelt, T., and Hellen, E. (2011) A new type of filler-
nanocellulose composite substrate for printed electronics applications, The 2011 
Tappi International Conference on Nanotechnology for Renewable Resources, 
Washington, DC, June 2011, Tappi Press, Atlanta.
[139] Lee, J.-H., Chun, S.-J., Lee, S.-Y., Doh, G.-H., and Jung, C. (2010) Cellulose nano -
fiber sheet as separator for Li ion battery, The 15th International Meeting on 
Lithium Batteries—IMLB 2010, Montreal.
[140] Padalkar, S., Capadona, J.R., Rowan, S.J., Weder, C., Moon, R.J., and Stanciu, L.A. 
(2011) Self-assembly and alignment of semiconductor nanoparticles on cellulose 
nanocrystals. J. Mater. Sci. , 46, 5672.509Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.  CHAPTER 21            
   Spectroscopic Characterization of 
Renewable Nanoparticles and Their Composites  
    MIRTA I.     ARANGUREN    ,     MIRNA A.     MOSIEWICKI    , and     NORMA E.     MARCOVICH        
   The three most abundant renewable polysaccharides in nature share rather 
similar building blocks, but they exhibit quite different properties because the existing differences in molecular structure lead to different arrangements and supramolecular structures. Their morphologies in nature are that of ﬁ  bers in 
the case of cellulose and chitin and of granules in the case of starch, all of them showing crystalline and amorphous phases  [1] . Furthermore, different treat-ments have been developed taking advantage of the large concentration of hydroxyl groups present in polysaccharides, an approach that can be applied for bulk and surface modiﬁ  cations  [1] . In particular, surface modiﬁ  cation is 
performed to improve interfacial compatibility and dispersion if the intended use of the nanoparticles is polymer reinforcement, or to achieve speciﬁ  c inter-
actions with other material components if functional properties are required. 
 Spectroscopic techniques, such as Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) and 
Raman spectroscopies,  nuclear magnetic resonance  ( NMR ),  X-ray photoelec-tron spectroscopy  ( XPS ), and X-ray diffraction allow investigation of the chemical composition of the original materials as well as the modiﬁ  cations 
introduced to tailor speciﬁ  c properties. Additionally, they can also supply 
information with respect to the degree and type of crystallinity in the particles, X-ray spectroscopy being the most frequently used technique for this purpose. Usually, characterization by FT-IR spectroscopy is most frequently reported. Although Raman spectroscopy is less used, it does not suffer interference from water as does infrared spectroscopy, which is particularly useful for the analy-sis of hygroscopic natural ﬁ  bers. The combination of both techniques offers 510  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
complementary information on the chemical nature of the particles and their 
composites  [2] .  
  21.1     CELLULOSE NANOPARTICLES 
 Cellulose, the main building component of plant biomass, is the most abundant 
biopolymer on the planet, its production estimated at about 180 billion tons per year  [3, 4] . Cellulose is a linear polysaccharide of (1 → 4)-linked  β -D-
glucopyranose units  [3, 4] , insoluble in water, and most organic solvents, and as it appears in nature, it has low chemical reactivity. 
 Cellulose nanoﬁ  bers have excellent mechanical properties (high speciﬁ  c 
strength and modulus), large speciﬁ  c surface area, low coefﬁ  cient of thermal 
expansion, high aspect ratio, environmental beneﬁ  ts, and low cost  [5–10] . 
Several methods for extracting cellulose ﬁ  bers from vegetable sources have 
been reported including mechanical, biological, and chemical approaches. Among the mechanical methods, cryo-crushing  [11, 12] , grinding  [13, 14] , and high pressure homogenizing  [15, 16]  can be mentioned. As an example of biological methods, enzyme-assisted hydrolysis has been reported by several authors  [17–19] . However, the most widely used method to obtain nanoﬁ  bers 
from different cellulose sources is the chemical treatment involving acid hydrolysis  [20–22] . 
 Besides plant cellulose, there are other sources of this material, such as 
bacterial cellulose, which is a representative example of a microbial extracel-lular polymer. One of its most important characteristics is its high chemical purity, contrary to plant cellulose that appears usually combined with wax, pectin, hemicelluloses, and lignin  [23, 24] . Ribbon-like ﬁ  bers from bacterial 
cellulose are considerably ﬁ  ner than plant cellulose ﬁ  bers and form a dense 
reticulated structure stabilized by extensive hydrogen bonding. It also presents a high degree of polymerization and crystallinity, which is the reason for its very high Young ’ s modulus  [25, 26] . 
 Independently of the source, cellulose has been treated to individualize 
crystals using several different methods. Probably, the most frequently reported method is the acidic treatment of cellulose sources  [27–30] , but other treat-ments or combination of them have been proposed: alkali treatment followed by sulfuric acid hydrolysis of branch-barks of mulberry  [31] , a combination of mechanical and high-ultrasonic treatments for poplar wood  [10] , hydrochloric acid hydrolysis of cotton ﬁ  bers, followed by microbial attack with cellulolytic 
fungus  Trichoderma reesei    [32] .  
  21.2     PLANT CELLULOSE 
  21.2.1      FT-IR  Characterization 
 Figure  21.1  shows the FT-IR spectra of original mulberry barks, pretreated 
mulberry barks, cellulose ﬁ  bers obtained by alkali treatment, and cellulose PLANT CELLULOSE   511
whiskers obtained from sulfuric acid hydrolysis. The peak centered at 1736 cm  − 1  
in the spectrum of original mulberry barks (Fig.  21.1 a) is attributed to the 
acetyl and uronic ester groups of hemicellulose or the ester linkage of the 
carboxylic group of ferulic, and p-coumaric acids of lignin and/or hemicellu-
lose  [33, 34] . It decreased in the spectrum of pretreated barks (Fig.  21.1 b) and 
ﬁ nally disappeared in the spectra of cellulose ﬁ  bers obtained at 130°C by alkali 
treatment (Fig.  21.1 c) and cellulose whiskers obtained after sulfuric acid 
hydrolysis (Fig.  21.1 d), due to the removal of hemicellulose and lignin during 
the chemical extraction. The spectrum of the whiskers presents typical bands 
of cellulose including the band assigned to the vibrations of the H – O – H of 
the absorbed water at 1640 cm  − 1  associated with the bending vibrations of the 
hydrogen bonding of cellulose  [29, 31, 35] . The spectra of the nanoﬁ  bers also 
present a band in the range of 3000–4000 cm  − 1  (not shown) due to the stretch-
ing vibrations of –OH groups  [29, 35] . The peaks at 1061 and 897 cm  − 1  are 
associated with the C – O stretching and  β  linkage in cellulose  [30–35] . No dif-
ference was found between the spectra of cellulose whiskers and that of cel-
lulose ﬁ  bers, indicating that the molecular structure was preserved during 
hydrolysis. 
    21.2.2      Wide-Angle X-ray Diffraction  Characterization 
 Many studies have reported on the WAXD of different cellulose sources and 
cellulose nanoﬁ  bers extracted by different methods  [10, 30, 31, 36] . As an   Figure 21.1          FT-IR spectra of (a) original mulberry barks, (b) pretreated barks with 
the NaOH solution, (c) cellulose ﬁ  bers obtained at 130°C by alkali treatment of pre-
treated mulberry barks, and (d) cellulose whiskers.  From Reference  [31] .  
Transmittance (a.u.)
17361512
1640
2000 1600 1200
Wavenumber (cm–1)800 40012461061897(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)512  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
example, Figure  21.2  shows the X-ray patterns obtained using monochromatic 
CuKa radiation ( λ   =  1.54 Å) of mulberry barks, pretreated barks, cellulose 
ﬁ bers obtained by alkali treatment, and whiskers obtained by sulfuric acid 
hydrolysis. All the samples showed a typical of cellulose I pattern with well-
deﬁ ned peaks at 2 θ   =  23° and 16°  [10, 36, 37] . The peaks became sharper with 
the treatment steps, from the original bark, to cellulose ﬁ  bers and ﬁ  nally, to 
the whiskers, indicating an increase of crystallinity related to the removal of 
hemicellulose and lignin. Several authors have shown that although the men-
tioned peaks change in intensity, they remain during treatments, denoting that 
the crystal structure of cellulose is not changed during chemical and ultrasonic 
treatments  [10, 29] . 
  The percentage of crystallinity of the samples during the process to obtain 
cellulose nanoﬁ  bers depends of several variables, such as raw cellulose source, 
type, and conditions of the treatment. Li et al.  [31]  observed a gradual increase 
of crystallinity from 46.9% for the original mulberry bark, to 58.8%, 63.7%, and 
73.4% for the pretreated bark, cellulose ﬁ  bers (obtained by alkali treatment), 
and cellulose whiskers, respectively. As another example, Marcovich et al.  [30]  
found that hydrolysis of microcrystalline cellulose increased the percentage 
of crystallinity from 56% to 67%. In addition, Oksman et al.  [36]  reported 
that the crystallinity of a bioresidue from bioethanol production was 14.5%, 
and it increased to 73%, 77%, and 75% after sonication, homogenization, and   Figure 21.2          X-ray diffraction patterns of (a) original mulberry barks, (b) pre-treated 
barks with the NaOH solution, (c) cellulose ﬁ  bers obtained at 130°C by alkali treatment 
of pretreated mulberry barks, and (d) cellulose whiskers.  From Reference  [31] .  
Intensity (a.U.)
10 20 30
2θ (°)40 50(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)BACTERIAL CELLULOSE   513
hydrolysis, respectively. Crystallinity values in the range of 70–80% have also 
been reported for nanocrystals isolated by acid hydrolysis of different cellulose 
sources  [38] .   
  21.3     BACTERIAL CELLULOSE 
 Bacterial cellulose has already been identiﬁ  ed as an useful material for bio-
medical applications because of the thin ﬁ  bers obtained, its high purity, bio-
compatibility, high water holding capacity, great elasticity and high wet strength, 
and conformability  [23, 26] . 
 The effects of acid hydrolysis time, further neutralization, and dialysis on 
the properties of bacterial cellulose nanowhiskers have been reported by 
Martínez-Sanz and coworkers  [39] . On the other hand, to improve rehydration 
of bacterial cellulose after drying (a problem caused by its high crystallinity), 
Huang and coworkers  [26]  added hydroxypropylmethyl cellulose into a fer-
mentation culture medium, interfering with the formation of the bacterial 
cellulose and achieving  in situ   modiﬁ  cation. 
  21.3.1      FT-IR  Characterization 
 The spectra of the native bacterial cellulose and the nanowhiskers obtained 
after 2 hours and 48 hours of acid hydrolysis are shown in Figure  21.3 . No 
signiﬁ  cant differences were found between the chemical structures of plant 
and bacterial cellulose  [26, 39, 40] . However, a shoulder appeared at 1720 cm  − 1  
  Figure 21.3          FT-IR spectra of  bacterial cellulose  ( BC ) and the  obtained nanowhiskers  
( BCNW ) after 2 hours and 48 hours of sulfuric acid hydrolysis.  From Reference  [39] .  
Absorbance1
0
–1
–2
–3BC
BCNW 2 h
BCNW 48 h
3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000
Wavenumber (cm–1)514  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
in the 48 hours spectrum, ascribed to carbonyl groups, and related to the incipi-
ent thermo-oxidative degradation of cellulose  [39, 41] . 
    21.3.2      XRD  Characterization 
 The X-ray patterns obtained using monochromatic CuK α  radiation, corre-
sponding to untreated bacterial cellulose and the obtained nanowhiskers (Fig. 
 21.4 ), show two high intensity diffraction peaks at 14.5° and 22.5° and a smaller 
one at 16°  [26, 39] , corresponding to cellulose I crystals  [29, 42, 43] . After 2 
hours of acid hydrolysis (a typical time for treating plant cellulose) the inten-
sity of the peaks is not signiﬁ  cantly modiﬁ  ed, indicating that that acid hydro-
lysis of bacterial cellulose may be slower than that for cotton or wood because 
of its higher crystallinity  [39, 44] . On the other hand, the crystallinity appre-
ciably increases to 90.31% after 48 hours and an additional 9% in the following 
5 days, indicating that long hydrolysis times are required to produce a signiﬁ  -
cant increase in the crystallinity of bacterial cellulose  [39] . 
  Other authors have also reported on the spectroscopic characterization 
of surface modiﬁ  ed cellulose nanocrystals. For example, Yi et al.  [45]  
grafted  poly(styrene)  ( PS ) onto the nanocrystals by  atom transfer radical 
polymerization  ( ATRP ). Esteriﬁ  cation of the cellulose was carried out with 
2-bromoisobutyryl-bromide to initiate the polymerization of PS in the follow-
ing steps. After the esteriﬁ  cation step, a new characteristic peak appeared at 
1732 cm  − 1 , and following the PS grafting, all the typical peaks of the polymer 
were observed: the aromatic C – H stretching at 3059 and 3025 cm  − 1 , the C = C 
stretching bands for the aromatic ring at 1601, 1493, and 1452 cm  − 1 , the out-
of-plane C–H bending of the aromatic ring at 756 cm  − 1  and the strong defor-  Figure 21.4          X-ray diffraction patterns of native bacterial cellulose (BC) and the 
obtained nanowhiskers (BCNW) after 2 hours and 48 hours of sulfuric acid hydrolysis. 
 From Reference  [39] .  
Intensity1200
1000
800
600
400
200
05 1 0 1 52 53 54 5 20 30 40BC
BCNW 2 h
BCNW 48 h
2θSPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION OF CELLULOSE NANOCOMPOSITES   515
mation vibration of the –CH– group of the monosubstituted benzene ring in 
PS at 696 cm  − 1 , all of them conﬁ  rming the success of grafting.   
  21.4     SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION OF CELLULOSE 
NANOCOMPOSITES 
 The interest in micro- and nanocellulose ﬁ  bers as reinforcing materials for 
polymer composites has been growing together with the trend of producing eco-friendly materials  [3, 6, 46] . Cellulose nanocrystals from several sources such as tunicin, cotton, tunicate, algae, bacteria, ramie, and wood have been extensively investigated for the preparation of high performance composite materials made from natural and synthetic polymers  [47–49] . Pereda et al.  [50]  used FT-IR spectroscopy in the characterization of ﬁ  lms based on glycerol 
plasticized sodium caseinate with cellulose nanoﬁ  bers obtained by acid hydro-
lysis of microcrystalline cellulose. The incorporation 3 wt% nanocellulose produced only a small increase of the peaks at 1040, 1110, and 1640 cm 
 − 1  in 
comparison to the spectrum of the sodium caseinate ﬁ  lm, the three of them 
related to the absorptions of cellulose  [35] . In the composite ﬁ  lms, the band 
at 1640 cm  − 1  is due to the amide I vibrations of proteins  [51] , with the added 
contribution of adsorbed water in amorphous cellulose  [35, 52] . 
 Goetz et al.  [53]  studied the cross-linking of cellulose whiskers (obtained 
by acid hydrolysis of microcrystalline cellulose) with poly(methyl vinyl ether-co-maleic acid) and poly(ethylene glycol), PEG. FT-IR spectroscopy allowed conﬁ rming that cross-linking between the hydroxyl groups on the cellulose 
and the terminal hydroxyl groups of PEG took place via co-esteriﬁ  cation with 
the acid. 
 ATR–FT-IR spectra of a polycaprolactone-based waterborne polyurethane 
(WPU) and its composite made with ﬂ  ax cellulose nanocrystals (obtained by 
acid hydrolysis) are shown in Figure  21.5   [47] . The spectrum of the unrein-forced ﬁ  lm presents a strong absorption peak centered at around 3363 cm 
 − 1 , 
assigned to the NH stretching vibration affected by the hydrogen bonding between NH and carbonyl groups, which increased the cohesion between the hard and soft segments; otherwise the free NH stretching vibration should appear at around 3420 cm 
 − 1 . Simultaneously, only a single prominent peak 
band centered at 1722 cm  − 1 , assigned to the stretching vibration of both ure-
thane and ester carbonyl, was observed, conﬁ  rming the existence of the inte-
grated phase between hard and soft segments in the matrix. This peak shifts to 1731 cm 
 − 1  with the addition of cellulose nanocrystals, suggesting that its 
incorporation disturbs the hydrogen bonding between NH and CO, and favors microphase separation due to the strong interaction between cellulose nano-crystals and matrix molecules. A relative increase of the band located at 3200–3500 cm 
 − 1  with increasing cellulose nanocrystals content is also observed, 
while a shoulder appears at around 3300 cm  − 1 , which was attributed to the OH 
stretching in the cellulose nanocrystals. 516  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
  The same authors studied the X-ray patterns (CuK α  source) of nanocom-
posites as a function of the ﬂ  ax cellulose nanocrystrals content (Fig.  21.6 ). 
Although poly(caprolactone) (PCL) is a semicrystalline thermoplastic polymer 
 [47, 54] , only a broad diffraction hump at 2 θ   =  19° is observed, indicating that 
the ﬁ  lm is amorphous. This was explained because the low molecular weight 
of the PCL does not allow chain folding  [55, 56] . Additionally, diffraction peaks 
appear that increase with the cellulose nanocrystals content. At 20 wt%, three   Figure 21.5          ATR–FT-IR spectra of waterborne polyurethane and its composites with 
ﬂ ax cellulose nanocrystals. From  Reference  [47] .  30 wt%
3335
3339
3343
3363 1724
1722
4000 3600 3200 2800 2400 2000 1600
Wavenumber (cm–1)1200 800WPU17293300
1731
20 wt%
10 wt%TransparenceSPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION OF CELLULOSE NANOCOMPOSITES   517
well-deﬁ  ned peaks at 2 θ   =  14.7°, 16.5°, and 22.7° related to the crystalline 
nanoparticles are observed. The absence of any additional peak or peak shift 
indicates that the amorphous nature of matrix and the crystal structure of 
nanoﬁ  bers are unaffected. 
  Auad et al.  [57]  studied the effect of adding cellulose nanocrystals to a 
semicrystalline shape memory polyurethane, ﬁ  nding a shift to higher angles in 
the X-ray diffraction peak of the soft segment crystalline phase. This effect   Figure 21.6          WAXD patterns of the waterborne polyurethane and its composites with 
ﬂ ax cellulose nanocrystals.  From Reference  [47] .  5 1 01 52 02 53 03 54 00 wt%5 wt%10 wt%15 wt%20 wt%25 wt%30 wt%100 wt%
2θ (°)518  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
was associated with improvement in soft and hard phase separation and the 
consequent formation of more perfect crystals promoted by the cellulose addition. 
 On the other hand, Stevanic et al.  [58]  found that the XRD patterns of 
arabinoxylan ﬁ  lms with 5 wt% and 15 wt% of bacterial cellulose were just a 
combination of the results found for the individual patterns, with no apparent new diffractions or shifts that could indicate interactions between the components.  
  21.5     CHITIN AND CHITOSAN NANOPARTICLES 
 Chitin is a naturally abundant mucopolysaccharide, and the major structural 
component in the exoskeleton of arthropods and cell walls of fungi and yeast  [59] . It is a white, hard, inelastic, nitrogenous polysaccharide and the major source of surface pollution in coastal areas. Its molecular structure is similar to cellulose with the hydroxyl at position C-2 replaced by an acetamido group. Because chitin is not readily dissolved in common solvents, it is often con-verted to its partially deacetylated derivative, chitosan  [59–63] . Chitosan is often identiﬁ  ed by its incomplete  degree of deacetylation  ( DD ), a percentual 
measure of the free amine groups along the chitosan backbone  [59, 64] . Due to their nontoxicity, biocompatibility, low immunogenicity, biodegradability, and antimicrobial activity  [60] , both chitin and chitosan have present and potential interest in food, cosmetics, biomedical, and pharmaceutical applica-tions  [62] . 
 The transformation of chitin and chitosan from ﬂ  akes or powder to the 
nano scale, adding potential for novel applications, has been the focus of several publications. For example, Nair and Dufresne  [65]  obtained chitin whiskers by acid hydrolysis of chitin from crab shells, and used them as rein-forcing material for natural rubber. Chemical modiﬁ  cation of chitosan to 
obtain nanoparticles  [66]  and electrospinning to obtain nanoﬁ  bers  [67, 68]  
have also been reported.  
  21.6     SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION OF CHITIN 
NANOPARTICLES 
 Depending on its source, chitin can appear as  α  and  β  crystalline allomorphs 
 [62] , which can be differentiated by infrared and solid-state NMR spectrosco-pies together with X-ray diffraction.  α -Chitin is by far the most abundant 
allomorph; it occurs in fungal and yeast cell walls, crab tendons and shells, and shrimp, krill, and lobster shells, as well as insect cuticle. Thus, the following discussion will be focused on this crystalline form. 
 The most common method to obtain chitin whiskers is the acid hydrolysis 
of a protein-free chitin source, followed by dialysis of the residues in distilled SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION OF CHITIN NANOPARTICLES   519
water until neutralization, and lyophilization  [65, 69–76] . This procedure 
dissolves regions of low lateral order, and the insoluble, highly crystalline residue is then converted to a stable suspension by mechanical shearing  [65, 76] . Most of the reported works used concentrated HCl solutions and rela-tively high temperature ( ~ 80 to 105°C), but sometimes more than one hydro-lysis step was used in the preparation  [70, 77] , or different drying procedures were used  [78] . More recently, other preparation techniques have been reported: Fan et al.  [79]  prepared chitin nanocrystals dispersed in water by 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl radical (TEMPO)-mediated oxidation of  α -chitin, followed by ultrasonic treatment, while Chang et al.  [77]  alternated 
hydrolysis procedures with mechanical sonication/disruption steps. However, in the last case, the obtained chitin nanoparticles exhibited lower crystallinity than that of conventional chitin whiskers or native chitin. 
  21.6.1      FT-IR  Characterization 
 The FT-IR spectrum of chitin in Figure  21.7 a shows all of the typical bands: 
3430 and 3258 cm 
 − 1  (NH and OH stretching, respectively)  [77, 80] , 1659, 
1625 cm  − 1  (amide I, CO stretching), 1563 cm  − 1  (amide II, NH deformation in 
the CONH plane), 1418 cm  − 1  (CH deformation), 1375 cm  − 1  (C – CH 3  amide 
stretching), 1314 cm  − 1  (amide III and  > CH2 wagging), 1155 cm  − 1  (COC bridge 
stretching), 1073 cm  − 1  (COC stretching in ring), 1029 cm  − 1  (CO stretching), 
896 cm  − 1  (b linkage), and 692 and 598 cm  − 1   [65, 71, 78] . Compared with the 
FT-IR spectrum of raw chitin (Fig.  21.7 a), the one corresponding to chitin whiskers (Fig.  21.7 b) shows sharper peaks in the –OH and amide regions. The 
  Figure 21.7          FT-IR spectra of (a) chitin from shrimp shells (in ﬂ  ake form) and (b) 
chitin whiskers.  From Reference  [70] .  
520  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
sharpening of the bands implies that chitin whiskers are more crystalline than 
original chitin  [70, 71, 78] , but also that the hydrolysis reaction may have changed the structure of chitin  [77, 80]  and the hydrogen-bonding interaction in chitin whiskers. 
    21.6.2      WAXD  Characterization 
 The crystalline structure of  α -chitin has been reported by many researchers 
 [62, 81] . Figure  21.8  presents the XRD patterns of the original chitin (a) and chitin whiskers (b). The chitin structure contains extended polymer chains with anti-parallel arrangement and strong intermolecular hydrogen bonding  [81, 82] . The XRD patterns of the stronger crystalline peaks have been indexed as 9.0 to 9.6° ([020] plane) and 19.1 to 19.7° ([110] plane), while the weaker ones have been reported at about 20–21°, 23°, and 26°  [69, 77, 79, 81, 83–85] . The broad signal centered at 2 θ  ~ 19° shown in Figure  21.8 a is attributed to the 
N-glucosamine sequences (deacetylated unit blocks). Similarly, the intensity of the broad signal centered at 2 θ  ~ 9° is due to N-acetyl-D-glucosamine 
sequences (acetylated unit blocks)  [81, 86] . Figure  21.8 b shows the WAXD pattern of chitin whiskers obtained by acid hydrolysis  [70, 71] , but the observed behavior can be extended to chitin nanoﬁ  bers obtained by other procedures 
(i.e., TEMPO oxidation performed by Fan et al.  [79] ): the  α -chitin structure is 
maintained, although the peak intensity due to the [020] plane clearly decreases as a result of the modiﬁ  cation. Moreover, the intensity of the weaker peaks 
  Figure 21.8          WAXD patterns of (a) chitin from shrimp shells (in ﬂ  ake form) and (b) 
chitin whiskers.  From Reference  [70] .  
CHITOSAN NANOPARTICLES   521
increases slightly. Chang et al.  [77] , who used consecutive cycles of acidic 
hydrolysis and mechanical ultrasonication/ disruption, indicated that chitin nanoparticles of about 50–100 nm, rather than chitin whiskers, were obtained because amorphous and crystalline regions were attacked with this technique, and thus the crystallinity of these nanoparticles was lower than that of native chitin. 
     21.7     CHITOSAN NANOPARTICLES 
 Due to the inherent solubility of the chitosan, insoluble nanoparticles are 
usually synthesized by ionic gelation of chitosan with sodium  tri-polyphosphate  ( TPP )  [87–90] , although other techniques have been reported. For example, chitosan nanoparticles with diameters less than 100 nm and cross-linked with glutaraldehyde have been prepared in a surfactant-mediated (sodium bis(ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate)/n-hexane reverse micellar system by Banerjee et al.  [91] . Conversely, Watthanaphanit et al.  [76]  prepared chitosan whiskers by deacetylation of chitin ones, and Osorio-Madrazo et al.  [92]  obtained chi-tosan crystalline particles by solid-state acid hydrolysis from a highly deacety-lated semicrystalline chitosan. 
  21.7.1      FT-IR  Characterization 
 FT-IR spectra of chitosan and chitosan nanoparticles are shown in Figure  21.9 . 
The strong band in the range of 3400–3200 cm 
 − 1  corresponds to the combined 
peaks of the NH 2  and OH group stretching vibration in chitosan  [87, 90, 91] , 
with contribution from asymmetric and symmetric N – H stretching in primary amines at 3500 and 3400 cm 
 − 1   [91] . In TPP cross-linked nanoparticles, a broad-
ening and simultaneous shift of the band from 3424–3434 cm  − 1  to 3400 cm  − 1  is 
noticed  [87, 93] , indicating increased hydrogen bonding. However, other authors  [90]  found the opposite behavior, that is, narrowing of the hydrogen bonding-related peak in the spectra of the nanoparticle complexes, and attrib-uted it to the more open structure resulting from cross-linking with TPP , as compared to the compact bulk structure of chitosan. Moreover, for chitosan nanoparticles the peak at 1640–1650 cm 
 − 1  disappeared and a new sharp peak 
at 1630–1635 cm  − 1 , which corresponds to stretching vibrations of C = N bond, 
was detected  [87, 90, 91] . When the cross-linkage was carried out using glutar-aldehyde  [91] , this peak appeared as a strong band, indicating the formation of a Schiff ’ s base as a result of the reaction between the carbonyl group of the aldehyde and the amine group of chitosan chains. 
  However, assignment is not easy because in the same region the peak 
corresponding to the NH 
2  scissoring vibration (1640–1650 cm  − 1 ) of the 
primary amines in chitosan chains appears. Additionally, the amine-bending peak in raw chitosan at 1602 cm 
 − 1  shifted to 1534 cm  − 1  in the nanoparticles 
 [87] , due to the linkage between the TPP and the ammonium group of chitosan 522  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
nanoparticles  [90] . A new peak at 1218 cm  − 1  due to P = O stretching was also 
identiﬁ  ed in the FT-IR spectrum of the cross-linked chitosan nanoparticles 
 [90] .  
  21.7.2      XRD  Characterization 
 The XRD patterns of chitosan (DD  =  of 82%) and chitosan nanoparticles 
cross-linked with TPP as determined by Wazed Ali et al.  [90]  are presented in Figure  21.10 . There is a strong peak in the diffractogram of chitosan at 2 θ   =  21.8°, indicating its high crystallinity  [90] . On the other hand, the diffrac-
togram of the nanoparticles is characteristic of an amorphous structure. They are formed by a dense network structure of polymer chains cross-linked through TPP counterions  [94]  leading to a disarray in the chain alignment, which is revealed in the XRD pattern. Additionally, Osorio-Madrazo et al.  [92]  observed two main peaks in the WAXD patterns of fully deacetylated chitosan   Figure 21.9          FT-IR of chitosan nanoparticles (1) and chitosan (2).  From Reference 
 [87] .  
NANOCOMPOSITES   523
samples, located at 2 θ   =  10.80° for the [020] planes of the hydrated crystalline 
structure and around 20° for the contribution of two peaks at 20.16 and 21.80°, 
related to the reﬂ  ections of the [200] and [220] planes of the hydrated poly-
morph, in agreement with the spectrum of the hydrated chitosan. 
     21.8     NANOCOMPOSITES 
 As in the case of cellulose, the use of chitin and chitosan whiskers as reinforc-
ing nanoﬁ  llers in a polymer matrix is appealing because of their high aspect 
ratios and highly crystalline nature  [95, 96] . Chitin whiskers have been used 
as reinforcement of both synthetic  [95, 96]  and natural polymers  [69, 72, 74] . 
As an example, Sriupayo et al.  [69]  prepared and characterized  α -chitin 
whisker-reinforced  poly(vinyl alcohol)  ( PVA ) nanocomposite ﬁ  lms by 
solution-casting technique. The  α -chitin whiskers were prepared by acid 
hydrolysis of  α -chitin from shrimp shells. Figure  21.11  illustrates the FT-IR 
spectra for pure PVA, as-prepared  α -chitin whiskers, and resulting reinforced 
PVA ﬁ  lms having whisker contents from 0.74 wt% to 29.6 wt.%. The absorp-
tion peaks at 1440 cm  − 1  (CH 2  bending) and 858 cm  − 1  (CH 2  rocking) character-
istic to PVA were obvious in the spectra of pure and reinforced PVA ﬁ  lms, 
while the characteristic amide I peak at 1655 cm  − 1  (–CONH–) was evidenced 
in the spectra of as-prepared  α -chitin whiskers and reinforced PVA ﬁ  lms  [97] . 
It is obvious that the relative intensity of these characteristic peaks increased 
with increasing content of the corresponding component and that no addi-
tional peaks appeared in the spectra.   Figure 21.10          XRD patterns of (a) chitosan and (b) chitosan nanoparticles. Cu K α  
radiation.  From Reference  [90] .  1500
1000
500
0Bulk Chitosan
(a)
Chitosan
Nanoparticles
(b)Counts
10 20 30 40
2θ524  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
  Figure 21.11          FT-IR spectra of pure PVA, as-prepared  α -chitin whiskers, and  α -chitin 
whisker-reinforced PVA ﬁ  lms having different whisker contents ranging from 0.74 wt% 
to 29.6 wt%.  From Reference  [69] .  
  In the same way, the WAXD patterns of the  α -chitin whisker-reinforced 
PVA ﬁ  lms resembled those of the pure components (see patterns (b)–(f) in 
Fig.  21.12 ), with the strong scattering peaks of  α -chitin whiskers (i.e., at about 
9 and 19°) increasing with the whisker content. Notice that the WAXD pattern for pure PVA ﬁ  lm (i.e., pattern (a)) shows a single broad scattering peak cen-
tered at about 19°, suggesting that the ﬁ  lm was essentially amorphous, in 
agreement with an earlier result for a ﬁ  lm cast from a solution of PVA in 
formic acid  [83] . 
    21.9     STARCH 
 Starch is a renewable and largely available biodegradable polymer that is 
produced by plants as a means for storing energy. It is composed by two types of molecules, amylose (linear) and amylopectin (branched). In its native form, it has a semicrystalline complex hierarchichal structure from which different types of nanoparticles have been obtained. 
 Several routes have been used during the last years for that purpose, leading 
to two main groups of particles: nanocrystals obtained by acidic or enzymatic hydrolysis of starch and crystalline or amorphous/crystalline nanoparticles obtained from regeneration/ precipitation of starch  [98] . Moreover, starch nanocrystals (StN) exhibit a platelet-like structure, similar to that of exfoliated layered silicates  [99] , usually forming clusters, whose separation and dispersion STARCH   525
can be improved by chemical surface modiﬁ  cation. On the other hand, pre-
cipitated particles can have different shapes, depending on the preparation 
method. In general, the reported efforts in producing nanocrystals were aimed 
at their use as ﬁ  llers in polymeric matrices to improve mechanical and/or 
barrier properties in the ﬁ  nal composite materials, while nanoparticles were 
mostly aimed at the transport and delivery of drugs and chemicals. 
 Usually, the characterization studies of the particles included infrared spec-
troscopy (FT-IR) as an initial approach to this goal. In native starch (Fig. 
 21.13 a) the peaks at 1157, 1080, ca. 1000, and 927 cm  − 1  are due to CO bond 
stretching. In particular, the bands at 1080 and ca. 1000 cm  − 1  are assigned to 
the anhydroglucose ring O – C stretching. The peak at 1645 cm  − 1  is due to water 
bound to the starch and the strong and broad band centered at 3390 cm  − 1  is 
due to the absorption of the OH stretching. 
  Characterization by XRD, also frequently used, shows that StN or native 
starch patterns correspond to the A-type crystalline allomorph. Thus, if a 
CuK α  source is used, the spectrum of the A-allomorph shows weak peaks at 
2 θ   =  20.05° and 11.5° ( d -spacing  =  8.7 Å and 7.6 Å, respectively), a strong signal 
at 15.3° (5.7 Å), a double strong peak at 17.2° (5.2 Å) and 18.0° (4.9 Å), and 
a strong peak at 23.5° (3.9 Å). In processed starch, B-type crystals that cor-
respond to a more open arrangement of starch molecular helices appear (as   Figure 21.12          WAXD patterns of (a) pure PVA and  α -chitin whisker-reinforced PVA 
ﬁ lms having different whisker contents of (b) 2.96 wt%, (c) 7.40 wt%, (d) 14.8 wt%, 
(e) 22.2 wt%, and (f) 29.6 wt%, respectively, and (g) as-prepared chitin whiskers.  From 
Reference  [69] .  
(g)
(f)
(e)
(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)
51 0 1 5
2θ20 25 30526  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
compared with the closed packing in A-crystals), with intense peaks at 5.6 and 
17.1° ( d -spacing  =  15.7 and 5.2 Å, respectively)  [101, 102] .  
  21.10     CHARACTERIZATION OF MODIFIED STARCH 
NANOPARTICLES 
  21.10.1     Spectroscopic Characterization of Esteriﬁ  ed Starch 
Nanoparticles 
 Two of the most frequent modiﬁ  cations using the OH starch functional groups 
are esteriﬁ  cation  [11, 100, 103]  and isocyanate-mediated reactions  [104–106] . 
Scheme  21.1  illustrates these chemical routes. 
  A good example of characterization of esteriﬁ  cation treatments is the work 
of Namazi and Dadkhah  [100] , who modiﬁ  ed StN with different alkyd acid   Figure 21.13          FT-IR spectrum of (a) unmodiﬁ  ed starch nanocrystals, (b) decanoyl 
starch nanoparticles, (c) nonanoyl starch nanoparticles, and (d) octanoyl starch 
nanoparticles.  From Reference  [100] .  4000 3500
Wavenumber (cm–1)1740 cm–1(a)
(b)
(c)Transmitance
(d)
3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500CHARACTERIZATION OF MODIFIED STARCH NANOPARTICLES   527
chlorides. FT-IR transmission spectra of the different nanoparticles are shown 
in Figure  21.13 . Corn starch and nanocrystals have similar spectra, while the 
spectra of the esteriﬁ  ed crystals showed the characteristic peak of the ester 
groups at 1738 cm  − 1 . Another feature is the red shift of the 1017 cm  − 1  peak to 
1026 cm  − 1 , which is the result of the ester bonds sterically hindering/weakening 
the hydrogen bond interaction of the oxygen in C – O – C groups of the glucose 
ring with the hydrogen of the starch hydroxyl groups. Similar observations 
were reported by Thielemans et al.  [106] , who modiﬁ  ed StN with stearic acid, 
by Ma et al.  [107] , who studied the esteriﬁ  cation of regenerated/precipitated 
corn starch nanoparticles with citric acid, and by Simi and Abraham  [108] , who 
prepared oleic and stearic esteriﬁ  ed precipitated nanoparticles from cassava 
starch. In this last case, further cross-linking was performed to improve the 
stability of the nanoparticles under drug delivery conditions. 
 XRD spectra (Fig.  21.14 ) were obtained for the same materials using CuK α  
radiation  [100] . The waxy corn starch shows A-type crystals, while the X-ray 
patterns of the modiﬁ  ed nanocrystals show only two amorphous broad peaks 
in the ranges of 9°–15° and 16°–24°. However, calorimetry studies showed that 
the original crystallinity of starch was not affected, although the attached fatty   Scheme 21.1           Reaction scheme for the grafting of (a) stearates and (b) PEGME to 
the starch nanocrystal surface.  From Reference  [106] .  (a)
(b)Starch
Starch
StarchOHNCO
NCO NCOnNH
n+CH3  +  (CH 3CH2)3NHCI
H3C H3CT = 60 °C
T = 70 °CTriethyl
amine
Dibutyl tin
dilaureate16O
OO
OO
OOH+ + (CH 3CH2)3N H3CCl
16O
StarchOH
NCOn
nN
N
NH
H
H+H3C
T = 70 °C
Dibutyl tin
dilaureateOO
O
O
O
OOOCH3528  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
acids did not crystallize. Similar ﬁ  ndings on the inability of X-ray to detect 
starch crystal phases in treated nanocrystals have also been reported by other 
authors  [105, 106] , and it was attributed to the coating/shielding of the nano-
crystals by the grafted layer of the fatty acid. 
  On the other hand, citric acid-modiﬁ  ed regenerated nanoparticles  [107]  
showed V-type crystallinity, corresponding to an inclusion complex formed by 
an amylose helix that includes other substances in its interior, such as the 
plasticizer (2 θ   =  13 and 21.5°, using CuK α ). As in the other cases, XRD did 
not show crystal patterns for the modiﬁ  ed nanoparticles. 
 PCL has been frequently used in esteriﬁ  cation reactions because it is known 
to be biocompatible, and thus the biodegradabilty and biocompatibility of 
starch is not affected. This modiﬁ  cation introduces long tails on the surface of 
the crystals helping to individualize the crystals, improving the dispersion in 
nonpolar matrices and leading to a stronger interfacial adhesion by producing 
entanglements with bulk polymer chains. 
 Yu et al.  [103]  grafted poly( ε -caprolactone) onto the surface of StN obtained 
by acid hydrolysis using ring-opening polymerization assisted by microwave 
irradiation. Transmission FT-IR of the powders revealed the expected appear-
ance of a high and sharp peak at 1728 cm  − 1  in the spectrum of the modiﬁ  ed   Figure 21.14          X-ray diffraction patterns of (a) unmodiﬁ  ed starch nanocrystals and (b) 
octanoyl starch nanoparticles, (c) nonanoyl starch nanoparticles, and (d) decanoyl 
starch nanoparticles.  From Reference  [100] .  
Intensity
(a)(b)(c)(d)
21 0 2 0 3 0
2θ (°)40 50CHARACTERIZATION OF MODIFIED STARCH NANOPARTICLES   529
crystals (ester carbonyl group) and a distinct peak at 2866 cm  − 1  (methylene 
groups of the grafted PCL). On the other hand, the X-ray crystalline pattern 
of the grafted nanocrystals was essentially due to the crystalline ordering of 
the PCL attached chains (2 θ   =  21.2°, 21.8° and 23.5°), completely obscuring 
the expected diffraction signals for the StN (2 θ   =  15.3°, 17.2°, and 23.3°). 
 Stearate modiﬁ  ed StN prepared by Thielemans et al.  [106]  have also led to 
high coverages and crystallinity of the attached chains. In that case, the X-ray 
showed signals corresponding to the crystals or stearate at 5.76° ( d   =  1.53 nm), 
9.6° (0.92 nm), 1.44° (0.66 nm), 21.56° (0.41 nm), and 23.64° (0.38 nm). The 
ﬁ rst three spacings are similar to those for stearate crystals, while the latter 
two correspond to the [110] and [020] reﬂ  ections in the orthorhombic subcell 
structure of parafﬁ  n crystals. Considering the high level of grafting in the 
esteriﬁ  ed crystals, the authors proposed a brush-like structure extending from 
the nanoparticle surface outward, as it was also proposed by Habibi and 
Dufresne  [104]  for PCL-modiﬁ  ed StN. 
 Chakraborty et al.  [11]  modiﬁ  ed regenerated/precipitated starch nanopar-
ticles by enzymatic esteriﬁ  cations after dispersing them in a reverse micelle 
media. The acyl donors were vinyl esters of fatty acids of different lengths, 
maleic anhydride, and  ε -caprolactone. In this study, the characterization of the 
nanoparticles included the analysis of the  1 H NMR and  13 C-DEPT-135 NMR 
spectra of the original and modiﬁ  ed starch (Fig.  21.15 ). The results indicated 
  Figure 21.15          Expanded region of DEPT-135 (75 MHz, DMSO-d 6 ) spectra that shows 
the carbon signals for the sugar units of (a) native starch nanoparticles and (b) vinyl 
stearate-modiﬁ  ed starch nanoparticles with DS  =  0.8. From Reference  [11] . 5´2´5´5˝5˝
4´
46´
3´1 2
36
OOOO O
O
OO
O
OOOO
CC H 2CH3(CH 2)14CH3OOO O
OOHOH
OHOH
OH
OHOHOH
OHHOHOHO
HOHOHO
5(a)
(b)
74 72 70 68 66 64 623´32
2´
6´6, 6˝6˝ 6˝
5˝
6˝5, 5˝530  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
that the enzymatic catalysis allowed selective substitution in C6 (carbon 
attached to the primary hydroxyl groups of the glucose residues), while the 
 1 H NMR results allowed calculating the degree of substitution from the ratio 
of the integrated areas corresponding to the protons of carbon C1 (at 5.27 ppm) 
and that of the CH 2  of stearate (at 1.53 ppm). Besheer et al.  [110]  presented 
an interesting spectroscopic study of nanovesicles from a commercial  hydroxy-
ethyl starch  ( HES ) modiﬁ  ed with fatty acids (lauric, palmitic, and stearic). 
 Figure  21.16  shows the  1 H NMR spectrum of the HES modiﬁ  ed with lauric 
acid. While the assignment of the peaks corresponding to the attached fatty 
acid chains was relatively simple: a triplet at 0.85 ppm (methyl group at the 
end of the chain), a sharp peak at 1.23 ppm (methylene groups), and broad 
peaks at 2.29 and 1.5 ppm (methylene groups close to ester bonds), the assign-
ment of the peaks for HES was more difﬁ  cult because of the overlap of dif-
ferent peaks. The peaks between 4.4 and 5.7 ppm were assigned to the protons 
bound to C1 and those in the hydroxyl groups of the glucose ring and the 
modiﬁ  er moiety on HES.   Figure 21.16           1 H NMR spectrum of HES 200-L8.7. Inset shows the structure of HES 
laurate and peak assignment.  From Reference  [110] .  Water
e
eb
c da
0 1 2 3
Chemical shift (ppm)4 5 6 7eee
O
OO
O
O
O
dcbaO
nOH
HOCH2OH CH2OH
OHDMSOCHARACTERIZATION OF MODIFIED STARCH NANOPARTICLES   531
  The grafting of the HES was also conﬁ  rmed by Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 
 21.17 ). The peak at 2852 cm  − 1  (sym. stretch of CH 2  groups of the attached alkyl 
chains) appears in the spectrum of the lauric acid and as a shoulder in that of 
the fatty acid modiﬁ  ed HES. Additionally, Raman spectroscopy can also give 
information on the conformational states of the compounds; for example, the 
signals corresponding to the CH stretching in the 2800–3000 cm  − 1  differ 
depending on the crystalline or noncrystalline state of the fatty acids. The 
spectra were obtained from solubilized material (before solvent precipitation 
of the nanoparticles). The comparison between experimental and calculated 
simulated spectra (from weighed addition of the HES and lauric acid spectra) 
allowed concluding that the fatty acid does not crystallize when grafted to the 
starch, as it had also been reported for alkydic acid chloride modiﬁ  cations 
 [100] .   Figure 21.17          Raman spectra in the range from 2500 to 3400 cm  − 1  for (a) lauric acid 
measured at 23°C, (b) lauric acid at 55°C, (c) HES 450, (d) HES 450-L9.4, (e) HES 
450-L23.3, and (f) HES 450-P12.6. The arrow at 2852 cm  − 1  is due to the symmetric CH 2  
stretching of the alkyl chains of the fatty acid.  From Reference  [110] .  0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
2600 2800
Wavenumber (cm–1)Raman intensity
3000 3200 3400(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f)532  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
    21.10.2     Spectroscopic Characterization of Starch Nanoparticles 
Modiﬁ  ed through Urethane Linkages 
 Other frequent approach is to graft polymer chains through the formation of 
surface urethane bonds. Habibi and Dufresne  [104]  modiﬁ  ed StN obtained by 
acid hydrolysis, by isocyanate-mediated reaction to graft PLC of different molecular weights. Wide-angle X-ray spectra of powdery dry samples were obtained using a Cu K α  source. The unmodifed crystals show the typical peaks 
of the A-type allomorph, as already discussed, but in this case the same peaks also appear in the patterns of the PLC-modiﬁ  ed nanocrystals, indicating that 
its crystalline form is not changed by the modiﬁ  cation. Additionally, a new 
peak at 21.3° is assigned to the crystalline structure of PLC induced by the nanocrystals, as it has already been found in the case of PCL grafted to nano-crystals by esteriﬁ  cation  [103] . Labet et al.  [105]  treated StN with 
 poly(tetrahydrofuran) ,  PTHF , PCL, and poly(propylene glycol) monobutyl-ether (PPGBE), using (TDI) isocyanate-mediated grafting. The grafting efﬁ  -
ciency decreased with the length of the attached chain. The FT-IR transmission spectra of the modiﬁ  ed nanoparticles showed the band around 1700–1750 cm 
 − 1  
corresponding to the urethane absorption in the grafted StN, and in the same region the ester absorption corresponding to PCL. Only surface OH groups participate in the grafting reaction, but bulk, as well as surface, OH contributes to the 3400 cm 
 − 1  absorption and so there was essentially no change in the band 
intensity due to the reaction. The X-ray pattern of the modiﬁ  ed nanocrystals 
showed A-type crystallinity but less deﬁ  ned peaks because of the polymer 
layer covering the surface, similarly to other results in long chain grafted nanoparticles  [100, 107] . 
 Thielemans et al.  [106]  grafted  poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether  ( PEGME ) 
through isocyanate co-reaction onto StN. Considering the high absorbance of urethane bonds and the small peak appearing in the transmission FT-IR spec-trum at 1721 cm 
 − 1 , the coverage was considered limited to a small fraction of 
the available hydroxyl groups. The low coverage was also conﬁ  rmed by X-ray 
spectroscopy since there was little crystalline contribution of the attached chains. In this particular example, the nanocrystal characterization was com-pleted using XPS with a Mg K α  X-ray source, and locating the C1s signal at 
285.0 kV . Figure  21.18  shows the spectra of the unmodiﬁ  ed and modiﬁ  ed StN, 
which were used to calculate the surface composition of the samples. The ratio of O/C determined for the unmodiﬁ  ed particles was much lower than expected 
from the starch chemical structure (theoretical O/C  =  0.83; experimental 
O/C  =  0.56), in agreement with other works  [109, 111] , and was attributed to 
hydrocarbon impurities. In spite of the low coverage, the N1 signal and the analysis of the decomposition of the C1 signal conﬁ  rmed the PEGME-TDI 
reaction (N/C  =  0 and 0.06 for the unmodiﬁ  ed and modiﬁ  ed nanocrystals, 
respectively). Signals due to residual tin catalyst could also be observed in the XPS of the modiﬁ  ed StN (spectrum c). NANOCOMPOSITIES FROM STARCH NANOPARTICLES   533
     21.11     NANOCOMPOSITIES FROM STARCH NANOPARTICLES 
 Starch nanoparticles have been incorporated into polymer matrices, generally, 
biopolymers, with the aim of improving mechanical properties, vapor barrier 
properties, or both. The effect of this addition is to reinforce the polymer 
matrix much in the same way as it occurs with inorganic nanoﬁ  llers, with the 
additional advantages already discussed. For example, García et al. used ATR–
FT-IR and X-ray spectroscopies to characterize starch–starch nanocomposite 
ﬁ lms  [112, 113] , obtained by adding 2.5 wt% nanocrystals in two different 
glycerol plasticized matrices, cassava and waxy starches. The spectra did not 
differ much, except for the relative intensity of the absorption peaks at 995 
and 1022 cm  − 1 . These bands are sensitive to hydrogen bonding and, speciﬁ  cally, 
the intensity of the 1022 cm  − 1  band increases with decreasing crystallinity  [114, 
115] . 
 The addition of nanocrystals interferes with the matrix crystallinity, reduc-
ing the local order since in both cases there was a small increase of the 
1022 cm  − 1  band. The lower crystallinity of the composite ﬁ  lms was conﬁ  rmed 
by X-ray spectroscopy (Cu K α  radiation). In both ﬁ  lms the peaks correspond-
ing to the B-type of starch (matrix) appeared, although with reduced intensity 
in the composite ﬁ  lms. Since the concentration of nanocrystals was low (2.5 
wt.%), very small peaks corresponding to the A-crystals from waxy maize 
nanoparticles appear in the composite X-ray pattern, in agreement with the 
angles reported by Angellier et. al  [116]  for similar waxy maize StN. 
 Chang et al.  [99]  obtained nanocrystals by acid hydrolysis of pea starch 
and grafted PCL on their surface using ring-opening polymerization under 
microwave irradiation, achieving high levels of modiﬁ  cation on platelet-like   Figure 21.18          General XPS spectra of (a) unmodiﬁ  ed and (b) stearate- and (c) 
PEGME-modiﬁ  ed starch nanocrystal surfaces with signal assignments.  From Reference 
 [106] .  O1s
(c)
(b)Counts
(a)
700 600 500
Binding Energy (ev)400 300 200 100Sn3d5/2
Sn3d5/2N1s C1s534  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
starch nanocrystals that did not exceed 100 nm  [103] . These crystals were 
incorporated in WPU prepared from PCL and TDI by mixing the polymers 
with an acetone suspension of the nanoparticles, to obtain composite ﬁ  lms 
(5–30 wt%) by casting. X-ray spectroscopy showed that the intensity of the 
crystalline peaks of the grafted PCL was even higher than in the neat PCL 
pattern displayed for comparison. The unreinforced ﬁ  lms did not show crystal-
line peaks and the incorporation of 5 wt% of grafted nanocrystals did not 
change the X-ray pattern. However, as the concentration was further increased, 
the peaks of PCL crystals appeared and their intensity increased with the 
concentration, probably due to the aggregation of the nanoparticles that form 
crystalline domains. 
 The 1600–1800 cm  − 1  FT-IR region was carefully analyzed and modeled, and 
the conclusion was that the hydrogen bonding in the WPU matrix was partly 
destroyed by the addition of the StN. As more crystals were incorporated, the 
C = O contribution corresponding to the crystalline domain increased and the 
absorption of the amorphous region decreased. This is in agreement with 
X-ray spectroscopic results that showed high intensity PCL peaks in the com-
posite ﬁ  lms containing large concentrations of the nanocrystals. 
 Yu et al.  [103]  incorporated PCL-grafted StN to poly (lactic acid) (PLA). 
Figure  21.19  shows the ATR/FT-IR spectra obtained for the composite ﬁ  lms 
with different nanocrystals concentration, as well as the spectra of the unﬁ  lled 
PLA ﬁ  lms and the modiﬁ  ed crystals. As the nanocrystals concentration increased 
  Figure 21.19          ATR–FT-IR spectra of the PLA/StN-g-PCL nanocomposite and PLA-F 
ﬁ lms, as well as the StN-g-PCL powder.  From Reference  [103] .  1720.9
2945.5
StN-g-PCL
PLA/StN-g-PCL(30)
PLA/StN-g-PCL(25)
PLA/StN-g-PCL(20)
PLA/StN-g-PCL(15)
PLA/StN-g-PCL(10)
PLA/StN-g-PCL(5)
PLA-F1417 .2
1755.0
4000 3500 3000 25001800
Wavenumber (cm–1) 1500 1200 9001292.21238.8CONCLUDING REMARKS   535
in the composite ﬁ  lms, there was a large increase in the relative intensity of the 
1720 cm  − 1  (C = O absorption in the crystalline phase of grafted PCL) and reduc-
tion of the of the 1750 cm  − 1  absorption of the PLA matrix, suggesting aggrega-
tion of the crystals at high concentrations (further conﬁ  rmed by SEM) that form 
large crystalline regions for the PCL. XRD was also used to verify the above 
statements (Fig.  21.20 ); the unﬁ  lled ﬁ  lm is mostly amorphous, while the StN 
showed strong peaks due to the crystalline arrangement of the grafted PCL. 
The incorporation of the StN to the PLA produces the appearance of different 
diffraction peaks, which were suggested to be due to the new crystalline forms 
of interfacial layers of PCL and PLA. However, as the concentration is further 
increased, a small diffraction peak appears at 21.2°, in the same location as the 
diffraction of PCL in the grafted nanocrystals. The concentration range is coin-
cident with the appearance of aggregates observed by scanning electron micros-
copy (SEM), also in agreement with the FT-IR observations. 
     21.12     CONCLUDING REMARKS 
 The various examples presented along this Chapter on the use of spectrosco-
pies applied to renewable nanoparticles and derived nanocomposites are not   Figure 21.20          XRD patterns of the PLA/StN- g -PCL nanocomposite and PLA-F ﬁ  lms, 
as well as the StN- g -PCL and StN powders.  From Reference  [103] .  StN-g-PCL
StNPLA/StN- g-PCL(30)
PLA/StN- g-PCL(15)
PLA/StN- g-PCL(5)
PLA-F21 .2°
21 .8°
23.5°
16.6°
10 20 30
2θ (°)40 50536  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
meant to be an exhaustive review of the subject, but just to give a glimpse into 
the different approaches to characterize materials and identify bulk and surface modiﬁ  cations. FT-IR and X-ray spectroscopies are by far the more 
used of the different techniques, because of the easiness of use, the amount of information returned and also the long tradition in analytical chemistry. The fact that water does not interfere with Raman absorption is an advantageous characteristic to be explored when working with natural nanoparticles, which are well known for being very hygroscopic in nature.  
  REFERENCES 
      [1]      Gandini ,  A.    (  2008 )  Macromolecules  ,  41 ,  9491 .  
      [2]      Mosiewicki ,  M.A.   ,    Marcovich ,  N.E.   , and    Aranguren ,  M.I.    (  2011 )  Characterization 
of ﬁ ber surface treatments in natural ﬁ  ber composites by infrared and Raman 
spectroscopy . In:  Interface Engineering of Natural Fibre Composites for Maximum 
Performance  , ed.   N.E.   Zafeiropoulos  .  Sawston, Cambridge, UK :  Woodhead Pub-
lishing Limited , pp.  117 – 145 .  
      [3]      Hubbe ,  M.   ,    Rojas ,  O.J.   ,    Lucia ,  L.A.   , and    Sain ,  M.    (  2008 )  BioResources  ,  3 ,  929 .  
      [4]      Roman ,  M.    (  2009 )  Model cellulosic surfaces: History and recent advances . In: 
 Model Cellulosic Surfaces  , ed. M. Roman, ACS Symposium Series, vol. 1019, ed. 
M. Roman. Washington, DC.  
      [5]      Azizi Samir ,  M.A.S.   ,    Alloin ,  F.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2005 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  6 , 
 612 .  
      [6]      Eichhorn ,  S.J.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.   ,    Aranguren ,  M.I.   ,    Marcovich ,  N.E.   ,    Capadona ,  J.R.    ,  
   Rowan ,  S.J.   ,    Weder ,  C.   ,    Thielemans ,  W.   ,    Roman ,  M.   ,    Renneckar ,  S.   ,    Gindl ,  W.   ,    Veigel ,  S.   ,    Keckes ,  J.   ,    Yano ,  H.   ,    Abe ,  K.   ,    Nogi ,  M.   ,    Nakagaito ,  A.N.   ,    Mangal am ,  A.   , 
   Simonsen ,  J.   ,    Benight ,  A.S.   ,    Bismarck ,  A.   ,    Berglund ,  L.A.   , and    Peijs ,  T.    (  2010 )  Journal of Materials Science  ,  45 ,  1 .  
      [7]      Siró ,  I.   ,    Plackett ,  D.    (  2010 )  Cellulose  ,  17 ,  459 .  
      [8]      Nishino ,  T.   ,    Matsuda ,  I.   , and    Hirao ,  K.    (  2004 )  Macromolecules  ,  37 ,  7683 .  
      [9]      Orts ,  W.J.   ,    Shey ,  J.   ,    Imam ,  S.H.   ,    Glenn ,  G.M.   ,    Guttman ,  M.E.   , and    Revol ,  J.-F.    
(  2005 )  Journal of Polymers and the Environment  ,  13 ,  301 .  
      [10]      Chen ,  W.   ,    Yua ,  H.   ,    Liua ,  Y.   ,    Chen ,  P .   ,    Zhang ,  M.   , and    Hai ,  Y.    (  2 011 )  Carbohydrate 
Polymers  ,  83 ,  1804 .  
      [11]      Chakraborty ,  S.   ,    Sahoo ,  B.   ,    Teraoka ,  I.   ,    Miller ,  L.M.   , and    Gross ,  R.A.    (  2005 )  Mac-
romolecules  ,  38 ,  61 .  
      [12]      Chakraborty ,  A.   ,    Sain ,  M.   , and    Kortschot ,  M.    (  2006 )  Holzforschung  ,  60 ,  53 .  
      [13]      Abe ,  K.   ,    Iwamoto ,  S.   , and    Yano ,  H.    (  2007 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  8 ,  3276 .  
      [14]      Abe ,  K.   ,    Yano ,  H.    (  2010 )  Cellulose  ,  17 ,  271 .  
      [15]      Nakagaito ,  A.N.   ,    Yano ,  H.    (  2004 )  Applied Physics A: Materials Science and Pro-
cessing  ,  78 ,  547 .  
      [16]      Nakagaito ,  A.N.   ,    Yano ,  H.    (  2005 )  Applied Physics A: Materials Science and Pro-
cessing  ,  80 ,  155 .  
      [17]      Hayashi ,  N.   ,    Kondo ,  T.   , and    Ishihara ,  M.    (  2005 )  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  61
 ( 2 ), 
 191 .  REFERENCES   537
      [18]      Henriksson ,  M.   ,    Henriksson ,  G.   ,    Berglund ,  L.A.   , and    Lindström ,  T.    (  2007 )  Euro-
pean Polymer Journal  ,  43 ( 8 ),  3434 .  
      [19]      Pääkkö ,  M.   ,    Ankerfors ,  M.   ,    Kosonen ,  H.   ,    Nykänen ,  A.   ,    Ahola ,  S.   ,    Österbe rg ,  M.   , 
   Ruokolainen ,  J.   ,    Laine ,  J.   ,    Larsson ,  P .T.   ,    Ikkala ,  O.   , and    Lindström ,  T.    (  2007 )  Bio-
macromolecules  ,  8 ( 6 ),  1934 .  
      [20]      Elazzouzi-Hafraoui ,  S.   ,    Nishiyama ,  Y.   ,    Putaux ,  J.-L.   ,    Heux ,  L.   ,    Dubreuil ,  F.   , and 
   Rochas ,  C.    (  2008 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  9 ,  57 .  
      [21]      Liu ,  H.   ,    Liu ,  D.   ,    Yao ,  F.   , and    Wu ,  Q.    (  2010 )  Bioresource Technology  ,  101 ( 14 ),  5685 .  
      [22]      Dong ,  X.M.   ,    Recol ,  J.F.   , and    Gray ,  D.G.    (  1998 )  Cellulose  ,  5 ,  19 .  
      [23]      Czaja ,  W.   ,    Krystynowicza ,  A.   ,    Bieleckia ,  S.   , and    Brown ,  R.M.   Jr.    (  2006 )  Biomateri-
als ,  27 ,  145 .  
      [24]      Lee ,  K.Y.   ,    Blaker ,  J.J.   , and    Bismarck ,  A.    (  2009 )  Composites Science and Technol-
ogy ,  69 ,  2724 .  
      [25]      Watanabe ,  K.   ,    Tabuchi ,  M.   ,    Morinaga ,  Y.   , and    Yoshinaga ,  F.    (  1998 )  Cellulose  ,  5 , 
 187 .  
      [26]      Huang ,  H.-C.   ,    Chen ,  L.-C.   ,    Lin ,  S.-B.   , and    Chen ,  H.-H.    (  2011 )  Carbohydrate 
Polymers  ,  83 ,  979 .  
      [27]      Lima ,  M.M.D.   ,    Borsali ,  R.    (  2004 )  Macromolecular Rapid Communications  ,  25 , 
 771 .  
      [28]      Karaaslan ,  M.A.   ,    Tshabalala ,  M.A.   ,    Yelle ,  D.J.   , and    Buschle-Diller ,  G.    (  2011 ) 
 Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  86 ,  192 .  
      [29]      Chen ,  Y.   ,    Liu ,  C.   ,    Chang ,  P .R.   ,    Cao ,  X.   , and    Anderson ,  D.P .    (  2009 )  Carbohydrate 
Polymers  ,  76 ,  607 .  
      [30]      Marcovich ,  N.E.   ,    Auad ,  M.L.   ,    Bellesi ,  N.E.   ,    Nutt ,  S.R.   , and    Aranguren ,  M.I.    (  2006 ) 
 Journal of Materials Research  ,  21 ,  870 .  
      [31]      Li ,  R.   ,    Fei ,  J.   ,    Cai ,  Y.   ,    Li ,  Y.   ,    Feng ,  J.   , and    Yao ,  J.    (  2009 )  Carbohydrate Polymers  , 
 76 ,  94 .  
      [32]      Satyamurthy ,  P .   ,    Jain ,  P .   ,    Balasubramanya ,  R.H.   , and    Vigneshwaran ,  N.    (  2011 ) 
 Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  83 ,  122 .  
      [33]      Sain ,  M.   ,    Panthapulakkal ,  S.    (  2006 )  Industrial Crops and Products  ,  23 ,  1 .  
      [34]      Sun ,  X.F.   ,    Xu ,  F.   ,    Sun ,  R.C.   ,    Fowler ,  P .   , and    Baird ,  M.S.    (  2005 )  Carbohydrate 
Research  ,  340 ,  97 .  
      [35]      Marcovich ,  N.E.   ,    Reboredo ,  M.M.   , and    Aranguren ,  M.I.    (  1996 )  Composite Inter-
faces  ,  4 ,  119 .  
      [36]      Oksman ,  K.   ,    Etang ,  J.A.   ,    Mathew ,  A.P .   , and    Jonoobi ,  M.    (  2011 )  Biomass and 
Bioenergy  ,  35 ,  146 .  
      [37]      Klemm ,  D.   ,    Heublein ,  B.   ,    Fink ,  H.P .   , and    Bohn ,  A.    (  2005 )  Angewandte Chemie 
International Edition  ,  44 ,  3358 .  
      [38]      Filson ,  P .B.   ,    Dawson-Andoh ,  B.E.    (  2009 )  Bioresource Technology  ,  100 ,  2259 .  
      [39]      Martínez-Sanz ,  M.   ,    Lopez-Rubio ,  A.   , and    Lagaron ,  J.M.    (  2011 )  Carbohydrate 
Polymers  ,  85 ,  228 .  
      [40]      Maréchal ,  Y.   ,    Chanzy ,  H.    (  2000 )  Journal of Molecular Structure  ,  523 ,  183 .  
      [41]      Kim ,  U.J.   ,    Kuga ,  S.   ,    Wada ,  M.   ,    Okano ,  T.   , and    Kondo ,  T.    (  2000 )  Biomacromole-
cules  ,  1 ,  488 .  
      [42]      Oh ,  S.Y.   ,    Yoo ,  D.I.   ,    Shin ,  Y.   , and    Seo ,  G.    (  2005 )  Carbohydrate Research  ,  340 ,  417 .  538  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
      [43]      Uhlin ,  K.I.   ,    Atalla ,  R.H.   , and    Thompson ,  N.S.    (  1995 )  Cellulose  ,  2 ,  129 .  
      [44]      Yun ,  Y.S.   ,    Cho ,  S.Y.   , and    Jin ,  H.J.    (  2010 )  Molecular Crystals and Liquid Crystals  , 
 519 ,  141 .  
      [45]      Yi ,  J.   ,    Xu ,  Q.   ,    Zhang ,  X.   , and    Zhang ,  H.    (  2008 )  Polymer  ,  49 ,  4406 .  
      [46]      Qiao ,  R.   ,    Brinson ,  L.C.    (  2009 )  Composites Science and Technology  ,  69 ,  491 .  
      [47]      Cao ,  X.   ,    Dong ,  H.   , and    Li ,  C.M.    (  2007 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  8 ,  899 .  
      [48]      Mathew ,  A.P .   ,    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2002 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  3 ,  609 .  
      [49]      Terech ,  P .   ,    Chazeau ,  L.   , and    Cavaille ,  J.Y.    (  1999 )  Macromolecules  ,  32 ,  1872 .  
      [50]      Pereda ,  M.   ,    Amica ,  G.   ,    Rácz ,  I.   , and    Marcovich ,  N.E.    (  2011 )  Journal of Food 
Engineering  ,  103 ,  76 .  
      [51]      Pereda ,  M.   ,    Aranguren ,  M.I.   , and    Marcovich ,  N.E.    (  2008 )  Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science  ,  107 ( 2 ),  1080 .  
      [52]      Jayaramudu ,  J.   ,    Jeevan ,  D.   ,    Reddy ,  P .   ,    Guduril ,  B.R.   , and    Varada ,  A.    (  20 09 )  Fibers 
and Polymers  ,  10 ,  338 .  
      [53]      Goetz ,  L.   ,    Mathew ,  A.   ,    Oksman ,  K.   ,    Gatenholm ,  P .   , and    Ragauskas ,  A.J.    (  2 009 ) 
 Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  75 ,  85 .  
      [54]      Sarasam ,  A.R.   ,    Krishnaswamy ,  R.K.   , and    Madihally ,  V .    (  2006 )  Biomacromole-
cules  ,  7 ,  1131 .  
      [55]      Ping ,  P .   ,    Wang ,  W.   ,    Chen ,  X.   , and    Jing ,  X.    (  2005 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  6 ,  587 .  
      [56]      Heijkants ,  R.G.J.C. ,  van       Calck ,  R.V . ,  van       Tienen ,  T.G. ,  de       Groot ,  J.H.   ,    B uma ,  P .   , 
   Pennings ,  A.J.   ,    Veth ,  R.P .H.   , and    Schouten ,  A.J.    (  2005 )  Biomaterials  ,  26 ,  4219 .  
      [57]      Auad ,  M.L.   ,    Contos ,  V .S.   ,    Nutt ,  S.   ,    Aranguren ,  M.I.   , and    Marcovich ,  N.E.    (   2008 ) 
 Polymer International  ,  57 ,  651 – 659 .  
      [58]      Stevanic ,  J.S.   ,    Joly ,  C.   ,    Mikkonen ,  K.S.   ,    Pirkkalainen ,  K.   ,    Serimaa ,  R.   ,    Rémond , 
 C.   ,    Toriz ,  G.   ,    Gatenholm ,  P .   ,    Tenkanen ,  M.   , and    Salmén ,  L.    (  2011 )  Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science  ,  122 ,  1030 .  
      [59]      Jayakumar ,  R.   ,    Prabaharan ,  M.   ,    Nair ,  S.V .   , and    Tamura ,  H.    (  2010 )  Biotechnology 
Advances  ,  28 ,  142 .  
      [60]      Jayakumar ,  R.   ,    Menon ,  D.   ,    Manzoor ,  K.   ,    Nair ,  S.V .   , and    Tamura ,  H.    (  2010 )  Car-
bohydrate Polymers  ,  82 ,  227 .  
      [61]      Kurita ,  K.    (  2001 )  Progress in Polymer Science  ,  269 ,  1921 .  
      [62]      Rinaudo ,  M.    (  2006 )  Progress in Polymer Science  ,  31 ,  603 .  
      [63]      Pillai ,  C.K.S.   ,    Paul ,  W.   , and    Sharma ,  C.P .    (  2009 )  Progress in Polymer Science  ,  34 , 
 641 .  
      [64]      Majeti ,  N.V .   ,    Kumar ,  R.    (  2000 )  Reactive and Functional Polymers  ,  46 ,  1 .  
      [65]      Nair ,  K.G.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2003 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  4 ,  657 .  
      [66]      Balthasar ,  S.   ,    Michaelis ,  K.   ,    Dinauer ,  N.   ,    Briesen ,  H.V .   ,    Kreuter ,  J.   , and     Langer , 
 K.    (  2005 )  Biomaterials  ,  26 ,  2723 .  
      [67]      Min ,  B.-M.   ,    Leeb ,  S.W.   ,    Limb ,  J.N.   ,    Youb ,  Y.   ,    Leeb ,  T.S.   ,    Kangc ,  P .H.    , and    Park , 
 W.H.    (  2004 )  Polymers  ,  45 ,  7137 .  
      [68]      Chen ,  Z.   ,    Mo ,  X.   ,    He ,  C.   , and    Wang ,  H.    (  2008 )  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  72 ,  410 .  
      [69]      Sriupayo ,  J.   ,    Supaphol ,  P .   ,    Blackwell ,  J.   , and    Rujiravanit ,  R.    (  2005 )  Polymer  ,  46 , 
 5637 .  REFERENCES   539
      [70]      Lertwattanaseri ,  T.   ,    Ichikawa ,  N.   ,    Mizoguchi ,  T.   ,    Tanaka ,  Y.   , and    Chirachanchai  , 
 S.    (  2009 )  Carbohydrate Research  ,  344 ,  331 .  
      [71]      Phongying ,  S.   ,    Aiba ,  S.   , and    Chirachanchai ,  S.    (  2007 )  Polymer  ,  48 ,  393 .  
      [72]      Lu ,  Y.   ,    Weng ,  L.   , and    Zhang ,  L.    (  2004 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  5 ,  1046 .  
      [73]      Tzoumaki ,  M.V .   ,    Moschakis ,  T.   , and    Biliaderis ,  C.G.    (  2010 )  Biomacromolecules  , 
 11 ,  175 .  
      [74]      Mathew ,  A.P .   ,    Laborie ,  M.P .G.   , and    Oksman ,  K.    (  2009 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  10 , 
 1627 .  
      [75]      Angulakshmi ,  N.   ,    Prem Kumar ,  T.   ,    Thomas ,  S.   , and    Manuel Stephan ,  A.    (  2010 ) 
 Electrochimica Acta  ,  55 ,  1401 .  
      [76]      Watthanaphanit ,  A.   ,    Supaphol ,  P .   ,    Tamura ,  H.   ,    Tokura ,  S.   , and    Rujiravanit ,  R.     
(  2010 )  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  79 ,  738 .  
      [77]      Chang ,  P .R.   ,    Jian ,  R.   ,    Yu ,  J.   , and    Ma ,  X.    (  2010 )  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  80 ,  420 .  
      [78]      Muzzarelli ,  R.A.A.   ,    Morganti ,  P .   ,    Morganti ,  G.   ,    Palombo ,  P .   ,    Palambo ,  M.   ,    Biagini , 
 G.   ,    Belmonte ,  M.M.   ,    Giantomassi ,  F.   ,    Orlandi ,  F.   , and    Muzzarelli ,  C.    (  2007 )  Car-
bohydrate Polymers  ,  70 ,  274 .  
      [79]      Fan ,  Y.   ,    Saito ,  T.   , and    Isogai ,  A.    (  2008 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  9 ,  192 .  
      [80]      Hu ,  X.W.   ,    Du ,  Y.M.   ,    Tang ,  Y.F.   ,    Wang ,  Q.   ,    Feng ,  T.   ,    Yang ,  J.   , and    Kennedy ,  J.F.    
(  2007 )  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  70 ,  451 .  
      [81]      Zia ,  K.M.   ,    Zuber ,  M.   ,    Barikani ,  M.   ,    Jabbar ,  A.   , and    Khosa ,  M.K.    (  2010 )  Carbo-
hydrate Polymers  ,  80 ,  539 .  
      [82]      Wada ,  M.   ,    Saito ,  Y.    (  2001 )  Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics  , 
 39 ,  168 .  
      [83]      Cho ,  Y.W.   ,    Jang ,  J.   ,    Park ,  C.R.   , and    Ko ,  S.W.    (  2000 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  1 ,  609 .  
      [84]      Al-Sagheer ,  F.A.   ,    Al-Sughayer ,  M.A.   ,    Muslim ,  S.   , and    Elsabee ,  M.Z.    (  2009 )  Car-
bohydrate Polymers  ,  77 ,  410 .  
      [85]      Li ,  X.   ,    Li ,  X.   ,    Ke ,  B.   ,    Shi ,  X.   , and    Du ,  Y.    (  2011 )  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  85 ,  747 .  
      [86]      Jayakumar ,  R.   ,    Tamura ,  T.    (  2008 )  International Journal of Biological Macromol-
ecules  ,  43 ,  32 .  
      [87]      Xu ,  Y.   ,    Du ,  Y.    (  2003 )  International Journal of Pharmaceutics  ,  250 ,  215 .  
      [88]      Kim ,  B.G.   ,    Kang ,  I.J.    (  2008 )  Ultramicroscopy  ,  108 ,  1168 .  
      [89]      Chang ,  P .R.   ,    Jian ,  R.   ,    Yu ,  J.   , and    Ma ,  X.    (  2010 )  Food Chemistry  ,  120 ,  736 .  
      [90]      Wazed Ali ,  S.   ,    Rajendran ,  S.   , and    Joshi ,  M.    (  2011 )  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  83 ,  438 .  
      [91]      Banerjee ,  T.   ,    Mitra ,  S.   ,    Singh ,  A.K.   ,    Sharma ,  R.K.   , and    Maitra ,  A.    (  2002  )  Interna-
tional Journal of Pharmaceutics  ,  243 ,  93 .  
      [92]      Osorio-Madrazo ,  A.   ,    David ,  L.   ,    Trombotto ,  S.   ,    Lucas ,  J.M.   ,    Peniche-Covas ,  C.   , and 
   Domard ,  A.    (  2010 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  11 ,  1376 .  
      [93]      Wu ,  Y.   ,    Yang ,  W.   ,    Wang ,  C.   ,    Hu ,  J.   , and    Fu ,  S.    (  2005 )  International Journal of 
Pharmaceutics  ,  295 ,  235 .  
      [94]      Tang ,  E.S.K.   ,    Huang ,  M.   , and    Lim ,  L.Y.    (  2003 )  International Journal of Pharma-
ceutics  ,  265 ,  103 .  
      [95]      Morin ,  A.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2002 )  Macromolecules  ,  35 ,  2190 .  
      [96]      Paillet ,  M.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2001 )  Macromolecules  ,  34 ,  6527 .  540  SPECTROSCOPIC CHARACTERIZATION
      [97]      Janvikul ,  W.   ,    Thawornyutikarn ,  B.    (  2003 )  Journal of Applied Polymer Science  ,  90 , 
 4016 .  
      [98]      Le Corre ,  D.   ,    Bras ,  J.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2010 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  11 ,  1139 .  
      [99]      Chang ,  P .R.   ,    Ai ,  F.   ,    Chen ,  Y.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.   , and    Huang ,  J.    (  2009 )  Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science  ,  111 ,  619 .  
   [100]      Namazi ,  H.   ,    Dadkhah ,  A.    (  2010 )  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  79 ,  731 .  
   [101]      Imberty ,  A.   ,    Perez ,  S.    (  1988 )  Biopolymers  ,  27 ,  1205 .  
   [102]      Imberty ,  A.   ,    Chanzy ,  H.   ,    Perez ,  S.   ,    Buléon ,  A.   , and    Tran ,  V .    (  1987 )  Macromolecules  , 
 20 ,  2636 .  
   [103]      Yu ,  J.   ,    Ai ,  F.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.   ,    Gao ,  S.   ,    Huang ,  J.   , and    Chang ,  P .R.    (  2008 )  Macromo-
lecular Materials and Engineering  ,  293 ,  763 .  
   [104]      Habibi ,  Y.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2008 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  9 ,  1974 .  
   [105]      Labet ,  M.   ,    Thielemans ,  W.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2007 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  8 ,  2916 .  
   [106]      Thielemans ,  W.   ,    Belgacem ,  M.N.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2006 )  Langmuir  ,  22 ,  4804 .  
   [107]      Ma ,  X.   ,    Jian ,  R.   ,    Chang ,  P .R.   , and    Yu ,  J.    (  2008 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  9 ,  3314 .  
   [108]      Simi ,  C.K.   ,    Abraham ,  E.    (  2007 )  Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering  ,  30 ,  173 .  
   [109]      Varma ,  A.J.    (  1984 )  Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  4 ,  473 – 480 .  
   [110]      Besheer ,  A.   ,    Hause ,  G.   ,    Kressler ,  J.   , and    Mäder ,  K.    (  2007 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  8 , 
 359 .  
   [111]      Angellier ,  H.   ,    Molina-Boisseau ,  S.   ,    Belgacem ,  M.N.   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2005 ) 
 Langmuir: The ACS Journal of Surfaces and Colloids  ,  21 ,  2425 – 2433 .  
   [112]      García ,  N.L.   ,    Ribba ,  L.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.   ,    Aranguren ,  M.I.   , and    Goyanes ,  S.    (  2 009 ) 
 Macromolecular Materials and Engineering  ,  294 ,  169 .  
   [113]      García ,  N.L.   ,    Ribba ,  L.   ,    Dufresne ,  A.   ,    Aranguren ,  M.I.   , and    Goyanes ,  S.    (  2 011 ) 
 Carbohydrate Polymers  ,  84 ,  203 .  
   [114]      Vicentini ,  N.M.   ,    Dupuy ,  N.   ,    Leitzelman ,  M.   ,    Cereda ,  M.P .   , and    Sobral ,  P .J.A.    (  2005 ) 
 Spectroscopy Letters  ,  38 ,  749 .  
   [115]      van   Soest ,  J.J.G.   ,    Tournois ,  H. ,  de       Wit ,  D.   , and    Vliegenthart ,  J.F.G.    (  1995 )  Carbo-
hydrate Research  ,  279 ,  201 .  
   [116]      Angellier ,  H.   ,    Molina-Boisseau ,  H.S.   ,    Dole ,  P .   , and    Dufresne ,  A.    (  2006 )  Biomac-
romolecules  ,  7 ,  531 .   
 541Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.  CHAPTER 22 
   Barrier Properties of Renewable 
Nanomaterials  
    VIKAS     MITTAL      
   22.1     INTRODUCTION TO RENEWABLE MATERIALS AND 
BIONANOCOMPOSITES 
 Biopolymers (biobased and biodegradable) have become polymer matrices of 
interest in the recent years due to the concern of decreasing fossil resources, which are by far the biggest source of the monomers from which the majority of the polymers are generated. Also, increasing consciousness toward the use of more environmentally friendly materials and allied legislation have shifted the focus from the conventional nonbiodegradable polymers to “green” or biopolymers. The conventionally used polymers such as polypropylene, poly-styrene, polyethylene, poly(methyl methacrylates), and so on are nonbiode-gradable and their recycling or reuse is very challenging, thus contributing to piles of nonbiodegradable wastes all over the world. Similar is the fate of the composites generated from these polymers. As most of the biodegradable polymers ﬁ  nd their origin in other alternate renewable sources, their use in 
the polymer composites technology is attractive; however, their use as an alternative to commercial nonbiodegradable polymers has emerged both as a goal and as a challenge. As already mentioned, the incorporation of layered silicate ﬁ  llers caused signiﬁ  cant enhancements in the properties of commercial 
nonbiodegradable polymers; however, it is important to develop this technol-ogy also for biodegradable polymers in order to generate high value materials from them. Thus, the potential to replace conventional polymers, especially thermoplastics, can be improved. Although it is important to study ways in 542  BARRIER PROPERTIES OF RENEWABLE NANOMATERIALS
which the incorporation of the clay ﬁ  llers in the biopolymer matrices can bring 
about the required improvements in performance and properties, the effect of clay on the biodegradability of the polymer in the composite also need to be studied. 
 A large number of biodegradable polymers exist and can be classiﬁ  ed on 
the basis of their properties, origin, or synthesis methodology. Averous et al.  [1]  suggested the classiﬁ  cation of biodegradable polymers depending on the 
synthesis as shown in Figure  22.1 . According to this classiﬁ  cation, the biode-
gradable polymers are classiﬁ  ed into four categories:
   
    polymers from agro-resources 
      polymers from microorganisms 
      polymers chemically synthesized using biobased monomers 
      polymers with monomers obtained from fossil resources.   
  The ﬁ  rst three categories are biobased polymers, whereas the polymers in 
the last category are biodegradable, but have not biobased sources. 
 A number of research studies using the polymer systems mentioned in 
Figure  22.1  for the synthesis of clay-based nanocomposites have been reported in recent years. 
 The nanocomposites, by the virtue of the interactions between the organic 
and inorganic components, can have different morphologies as depicted in Figure  22.2   [2] . In the intercalated morphology, the clay layers are still ordered. However, the exfoliated or delaminated morphology provides the maximum beneﬁ  t as the ﬁ  ller is completely delaminated and the platelet order is lost. 
This morphology has the maximum interfacial contacts with the polymer and thus the polymer properties like mechanical performance, barrier properties, biodegradability, and so on are signiﬁ  cantly affected. 
  The nanocomposites have also been prepared by different synthetic routes 
 [3, 4] .  In situ   polymerization is based on the swelling of the clay in the monomer 
followed by the polymerization of monomer in the presence of clay, thus trap-ping the delaminated clay in the polymer structure. Melt intercalations is the method where the preformed high molecular weight can be directly used for the synthesis of the polymer nanocomposite. In this case, the polymer is melted at high temperature, and the ﬁ  ller is slowly added to this melt under shearing 
in the compounder. The ﬁ  ller platelets get sheared during compounding and 
kneading in the compounder and thus get well mixed with the polymer phase. Another method for the synthesis of the polymer nanocomposites is solvent intercalation. In this case, the polymer is dissolved in the same solvent in which the clay is also dispersed. Evaporation of the solvent leads to entrapment of the polymer chains in between the ﬁ  ller platelets. One can also synthesize 
thermoset polymer nanocomposites by this route. The prepolymer is dissolved in the solvent in which the ﬁ  ller is dispersed. The cross-linking is then initiated 
by the addition of cross-linker. The simultaneous evaporation of solvent and   Figure 22.1          Classiﬁ  cation of biodegradable polymers.  Reproduced from Reference  [1]  with permission from Elsevier.  Biodegradable polymers
Biomass products
From agro-ressources
→ Agro-polymers
PolysaccharidesPolyHydroxy-Alkanoates
(PHA)
Poly(hydroxybutyrate)
(PHB)
Poly(hydroxybutyrate co-valerate)
(PHBV)Animals
Casein
Whey
Colalagen/Gelatine
Plant:
Zein
Soya
Gluten Others:
Pectins
Chitosan/Chitin
Gums,...Ligno-cellulosic products:
Wood
Straws,...Starches:
Wheat
Potatoes
Maize,...Polyeaprolactones
(PCL)
Polyestoramidos
(PEA)
Allphatle-eo-polyestors
(e.g. PBSA)
Aromatio co-polyesters
(e.g. PBAT)Polylactides
Poly(lactic acid)
(PLA)Proteins, LipidsFrom microorganisms
(obtained by extraction)From biotechnology
(conventionnal synthesis
from blo-derived monomers)From petrochemical products
(conventionnal synthesis
from synthetic monomers)
543544  BARRIER PROPERTIES OF RENEWABLE NANOMATERIALS
cross-linking of the polymer matrix leads to delaminated ﬁ  ller in the polymer 
matrix.  
  22.2     INTRODUCTION TO BARRIER PROPERTIES 
  22.2.1     Theory of Permeation 
 When a gas or vapor permeates through a polymer membrane, several pro-
cesses are involved: the gas is sorbed at the entering face, dissolving there, with 
equilibrium rapidly being established between the two phases. The dissolved 
penetrant molecules then diffuse through the membrane, via a random walk 
hopping mechanism, desorbing at the exit face. The mechanism of permeation 
then involves both solution and diffusion  [5] . The driving force behind the 
transport process that involves sorption, diffusion, and permeation is the con-
centration difference between the two phases  [6, 7] . The transport process 
slowly tries to equalize the concentration difference or the chemical potential 
of the penetrant in the phases separated by the membrane. This process can   Figure 22.2          Representation of various morphologies of the polymer clay nanocom-
posites.  Reproduced from Reference  [2]  with permission from Elsevier.  1 nmL
~1 nm
Exchangeable cationsTetrahedral
TetrahedralBasal spacing
Al, Fe, Mg, Li
OH
O
Li, Na, Rb, Ca
The structure of 2:1 layered silicates Form factors of dispersed
layered silicateLLSdLS
xLS
Intercalated Intercalated-and-flocculated ExfoliatedOctahedral One layered silicate Platelet
L: 100–200 nm in case of MMTINTRODUCTION TO BARRIER PROPERTIES   545
be described in terms of Fick ’ s ﬁ  rst law of diffusion, according to which the 
ﬂ ux  J , in the direction of ﬂ  ow is proportional to the concentration gradient 
(  δ c/ δ x ) and can be given as
    JDc c
d=−()12    (22.1)  
where  d  is the membrane thickness and  D  is the diffusion coefﬁ  cient. The 
penetrant distribution between the penetrant and the polymer phase is 
described by the Nernst distribution law.
    cK C=     (22.2)  
where  c  is the sorbed concentration;  C , the ambient penetrant concentration 
in contact with the polymer surface; and  K  depends on temperature and  c . In 
the case of transport of gases and vapors, pressure  p  is used instead of surface 
concentration. According to Henry ’ s law
    cS p=     (22.3)  
where  S  is the solubility coefﬁ  cient. The combination of equations gives the 
well-known permeation equation
    JDS p p
d=−()12    (22.4)  
where  p  1  and  p  2  are the ambient pressures on two sides of a ﬁ  lm of thickness 
 d . The product  DS  is called the permeability coefﬁ  cient  P , so that
    PD S=  .   (22.5)   
 In terms of permeability, the ﬂ  ux Equation  (22.4)  can be written as
    JPp p
d=−()12 .   (22.6)   
 In dynamic measurements, ﬁ  rst the sample is conditioned ( c  1   =   c  2 ). Then the 
concentration is step changed ( c  1   ≠   c  2 ), keeping  c  1  and  c  2  at a constant value. 
If we time-integrate the amount of gas passing the membrane, we observe that 
after a certain time the integrated curve, which describes the amount of gas 
per unit time, becomes linear with time. Extending the linear part of the curve 
(constant ﬂ  ow) and intercepting the time axis, one gets the time-lag value ( t L  ) 
 [8] . Mathematically,  t L   is given as:
    td
DL=⋅2
6 .   (22.7)   546  BARRIER PROPERTIES OF RENEWABLE NANOMATERIALS
 Hence, the diffusion coefﬁ  cient can be determined from the experimentally 
determined time-lag and a known thickness of the sample foil. For mineral 
polymer composites diffusion takes place only in the polymer phase (the dif-
fusion through the mineral is orders of magnitude smaller). Measuring  D  and 
 S  may be error-prone, resulting in comparatively high values. Normally, the 
permeability coefﬁ  cient is measured directly as a material property. In general 
the transmission rate  r T   is determined, which is a measure for the volume of 
gas passing through a membrane of known area per unit time. With the thick-
ness  d  of the sample and the pressure  p , one obtains the permeability coefﬁ  -
cient  P , which is independent from the sample geometry, pressure, and time:
    Prd
pT=⋅=() ⋅()
() ⋅quantity of permeant film thickness
area time (() ⋅()pressure .   (22.8)   
 The permeability coefﬁ  cient  P  is reported with a variety of different 
units in the literature. The most commonly used unit to present  P  is 
[cm 3 · μ m/m 2 ·day·mmHg]. It can be converted to the SI unit [cm 3 ·cm/cm 2 ·s·Pa] 
by multiplying with 8.68  ×  10  − 16 .  
  22.2.2     Permeation through Heterogeneous Media 
  22.2.2.1     Laminates     To calculate the diffusion coefﬁ  cients through the 
laminates, it was reported that the neighboring parts of a composite medium 
may be considered to be in series or parallel  [9] . A laminate composed of  n  
sheets of thicknesses  l  1 ,  l  2   . . .   l n   and diffusion coefﬁ  cients  D  1 ,  D  2   . . .   D n   placed 
in series has an effective diffusion coefﬁ  cient  D , given by
    l
Dl
Dl
Dl
Dn
n1
12
2++ +=…     (22.9)  
where  l  is the total thickness of the laminate. The effective diffusion coefﬁ  cient 
for a composite consisting of  n  sheets in parallel is given by
    lD lD lD l D nn 11 22++ + =…  .   (22.10)   
 Both expressions are based on the assumption that the ﬂ  ow is unidirec-
tional. If it is not, the relationships are approximations.  
  22.2.2.2      Materials with Plate-Like Inclusions     The permeation of 
gases through mineral-ﬁ  lled polymers was ﬁ  rst dealt with in the model by 
Nielsen  [10] . The reduction in permeability in the composites by using the 
ﬁ llers of different geometrical dimensions is predicted in the model. The 
theory is based on the increase of the pathway of a gas molecule through a 
composite, caused by the ﬁ  ller. However, the model does not take into account 
Brownian motion and assumes impermeability of the ﬁ  ller for the gas as well BARRIER PROPERTIES OF BIONANOCOMPOSITES   547
as perfect alignment of the mineral inclusions. The ratio of the permeability 
coefﬁ  cient of the composite  P c   to one of the polymer matrix  P m  , is given by:
    P
Pc
mm=φ
τ    (22.11)  
where  φ   m   is the polymer volume fraction and  τ  is the increase of the pathway 
length of the diffusing particle, which is given by
    τ=′d
d    (22.12)   
 where  d  ′  describes the path length of the diffusing particle and  d  is the thick-
ness of the membrane. With perfect alignment and a rectangular shape of the 
ﬁ ller,  d  ′  can be described with
    ′=+⋅⋅⋅ dd dL
Wf2φ    (22.13)  
where  L  is the length of the inclusion and  W , its width.  φ   f   describes the ﬁ  ller 
volume fraction. Combining Equation  (22.12)  and Equation  (22.13) ,  τ  can be 
written as
    τφ=+⋅⋅ 12L
Wf    (22.14)  
where  L / W  equals the aspect ratio  α  of the ﬁ  ller. Using this and Equation 
 (22.14)  in Equation  (22.11)  we obtain an expression for the decrease of the 
permeability, depending on the ﬁ  ller volume fraction and the aspect ratio
    P
Pc
mm
f=
+⋅φ
αφ12. 
   (22.15)   
 With  φ   m     =   1  −   φ   f   and  x    =    α · φ   f  , Equation  (22.15)  can be transformed into the 
following equation:
    P
P xxc
mf
f =−
+≈
+()1
121
12φφ for small     (22.16)      
  22.3     BARRIER PROPERTIES OF BIONANOCOMPOSITES 
 Thellen et al.  [11]  reported the synthesis and gas barrier properties of polylac-
tic acid (PLA) nanocomposites as shown in Figure  22.3 . The pure polymer as 
well as composites was processed using different screw speeds and feed rates. 548  BARRIER PROPERTIES OF RENEWABLE NANOMATERIALS
Both oxygen and water vapor transmission through the nanocomposites ﬁ  lms 
was observed to decrease as compared to pure polymer. In both cases, a 
maximum reduction of 50% was achieved. Another important observation was 
the impact of processing conditions on the barrier performance of the materi-
als. The oxygen and water vapor permeation through the nanocomposite ﬁ  lms 
was observed to be independent of the processing conditions, whereas the pure 
PLA polymer was observed to be sensitive to such changes. 
  Koh et al.  [12]  reported PLA/layered silicate nanocomposite membranes 
prepared by solution casting method for the application of dehumidiﬁ  cation 
and gas separation. X-ray diffraction patterns of the nanocomposites showed 
the shifting of the diffraction peaks associated with the ﬁ  ller platelets to lower 
angles, thus conﬁ  rming the polymer intercalation in ﬁ  ller interlayers and for-
mation of intercalated nanostructures. As shown in Figure  22.4 , the gas per-
meation through the nanocomposites decreased as compared to the pure 
polymer as a function of ﬁ  ller content. However, it was observed that a plateau   Figure 22.3          (a) Oxygen and (b) water vapor transmission through the pure PLA and 
PLA nanocomposite ﬁ  lms generated by different processing conditions involving screw 
speed and feed rate.  Reproduced from Reference  [11]  with permission from Elsevier.  (a)
(b) 600
500
400
300
200
100
01200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Neat
#1Oxygen Permeation Rate
(cc-mil/m2-day)Water Permeation Rate
(g-mil/m2-day)Nano
#1Neat
#2Nano
#2Neat
#3Nano
#3Neat
#4Nano
#4
Neat
#1Nano
#1Neat
#2Nano
#2Neat
#3Nano
#3Neat
#4Nano
#4BARRIER PROPERTIES OF BIONANOCOMPOSITES   549
  Figure 22.4          Gas permeation properties of the neat PLA as well as PLA nanocom-
posites as a function of different ﬁ  llers and ﬁ  ller content: (a) CO 2 , (b) O 2 ,   and (c) N 2 . 
 Reproduced from Reference  [12]  with permission from Elsevier.  PLA-Closite15A
PLA-Closite20A
PLA-Closite30B
PLA-Closite15A
PLA-Closite20A
PLA-Closite30B0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Clay contents (wt%)
0.0
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.060.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Clay contents (wt%)
PLA-Closite15A
PLA-Closite20A
PLA-Closite30B
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Clay contents (wt%)(a)
CO 2 permeability [Barrer]
(b)
(c)
O2 permeability [Barrer] N2 permeability [Barrer]2.6
2.4
2.2
2.0
1. 8
1. 6
1. 4
1. 2
0.48
0.46
0.44
0.42
0.40
0.38
0.36
0.34
0.32550  BARRIER PROPERTIES OF RENEWABLE NANOMATERIALS
was reached at a certain weight percent of the ﬁ  ller, beyond which the perme-
ation properties were not affected. Three different types of ﬁ  ller modiﬁ  cations 
were used to synthesize the nanocomposites. Cloisite 15A and 20A consisted of long alkyl chains as surface modifying molecules, whereas in Cloisite 30B, polar OH groups were also present in the chemical structure of the modifying molecules. When comparing the gas permeabilities of nanocomposites with different kinds of organoclay, the barrier performance of nanocomposites into which Closite30B ﬁ  llers were incorporated was outstanding for all of the per-
meant gases. The authors also concluded from the microstructure analysis that the PLA/clay composite matrix was intercalated in the case of Closite15A, intercalated or exfoliated in the case of Closite20A, and exfoliated in the case of Closite30B, which resulted in the improved barrier resistance of the Cloisite30B nanocomposites. Figure  22.5   [12]  also shows the gas permeability of the nanocomposites as a function of the kinetic diameters of the gas mol-ecules. The authors reported that the gas permeabilities of the same composite material increased according to the order of the kinetic diameter of permeant gas molecules, (N 
2  [3.64 A°]  >  O 2  [3.46 A°]  >  CO 2  [3.3 A°]). The least decrease 
of permeability for CO 2  was thus due to the smallest kinetic diameter and the 
largest molecular weight. The mechanical as well as thermal properties of the PLA nanocomposites were also reported to be enhanced on the incorporation of the organically modiﬁ  ed clays (OMCs). 
   Ray et al.  [13]  reported the oxygen permeation properties of PLA nano-
composites. With 4 wt%, 5 wt%, and 7 wt% of the ﬁ  ller, the oxygen permeation 
through the polymer matrix was observed to decrease to 88%, 85%, and 81%, respectively. Chang et al.  [14]  also reported the oxygen permeation properties of the PLA nanocomposites. The authors synthesized the nanocomposites with three different types of organically modiﬁ  ed montmorillonites (MMTs). Melt 
compounding approach was used for the nanocomposite generation. The oxygen permeation through the nanocomposite ﬁ  lms decreased as a function 
of ﬁ ller content. The oxygen permeation through the composites was reduced 
to half as compared to the pure polymer, when the ﬁ  ller content was 10 wt%; 
however, the permeation values were not normalized according to the thick-ness of the ﬁ  lms. The permeation values through the nanocomposites were 
observed to be unaffected by the different types of organically modiﬁ  ed ﬁ llers 
used in the study. Values of 327, 330, and 340 cm 
3 /m 2 ·day were observed for 10 
wt% ﬁ  ller nanocomposites using ﬁ  llers C16MMT, DTA-MMT, and C25AMMT 
(C16: hexadecyl, DTA: dodecyltrimethyl, whereas C25A is the commercial product) as compared to a value of 777 cm 
3 /m 2 ·day for the pure PLA polymer. 
The decrease in the oxygen permeation was also observed to reach a plateau value around 6 wt% as the extent of further decrease in oxygen permeation when the ﬁ  ller content was increased to 10 wt% was not signiﬁ  cant. 
 Blends of chitosan and clay  micro/nanoparticles  ( MNC ) were prepared by 
dispersion of the clay particles in the polymer matrix and the ﬁ  lms obtained 
were characterized in terms of water solubility, water vapor, oxygen, and carbon dioxide permeability by Casariego et al.  [15] . The water solubility was BARRIER PROPERTIES OF BIONANOCOMPOSITES   551
  Figure 22.5          Gas permeability as a function of the kinetic diameters of gas molecules: 
(a) PLA/Closite15A, (b) PLA/Closite20A, and (c) PLA/Closite130B. Reproduced from 
Reference  [12]  with permission from Elsevier. (a)Permeability [Barrer]
(b)
(c)
CO 2 O2PLA
PLA-Closite30B 0.1 wt%
PLA-Closite30B 0.2 wt%
PLA-Closite30B 0.4 wt%
PLA-Closite30B 0.8 wt%
3.25 3.30 3.35 3.40 3.45 3.50 3.55 3.60 3.65
The kinetic diameter of gas molecules (Å)N2CO 2 O2PLA
PLA-Closite20A 0.1 wt%
PLA-Closite20A 0.2 wt%
PLA-Closite20A 0.4 wt%
PLA-Closite20A 0.8 wt%
3.25 3.30 3.35 3.40 3.45 3.50 3.55 3.60 3.65
The kinetic diameter of gas molecules (Å)N2CO 2 O2PLA
PLA-Closite15A 0.1 wt%
PLA-Closite15A 0.2 wt%
PLA-Closite15A 0.4 wt%
PLA-Closite15A 0.8 wt%
3.25 3.30 3.35 3.40 3.45 3.50 3.55 3.60 3.65
The kinetic diameter of gas molecules (Å)N2Permeability [Barrer]2.5
2.0
1. 5
1. 0
0.5
0.0
2.5
2.0
1. 5
1. 0
0.5
0.0Permeability [Barrer]2.5
2.0
1. 5
1. 0
0.5
0.0552  BARRIER PROPERTIES OF RENEWABLE NANOMATERIALS
observed to decrease as the clay concentration increased keeping chitosan 
concentration constant. Figure  22.6  shows the barrier performance of the nanocomposites as a function of chitosan and MNC particles concentration. The water vapor barrier property of the ﬁ  lms was observed to improve by 
incorporation of MNC in the ﬁ  lm matrix. The highest values of water vapor 
permeation were obtained for those ﬁ  lms with the lowest concentration of 
chitosan. Thus, both chitosan and clay concentrations affected the water vapor permeation through the nanocomposites. Casariego et al. report that the water vapor permeation decreased signiﬁ  cantly by 9–32%, depending on the chito-
san and clay concentrations. 
  The oxygen permeation through the nanocomposites decreased as a func-
tion of increased chitosan concentration. Chitosan and MNC particles did not signiﬁ  cantly inﬂ  uence the CO 
2  permeation. 
 Sanchez-Garcia et al.  [16]  presented the properties of nano-biocomposites 
of solvent cast  polyhydroxybutyrate-co-valerate  ( PHBV ) and  polycaprolac-tone  ( PCL ) containing carbon nanoﬁ  ber or carbon nanotubes as a function of 
ﬁ ller content. A reduction in water uptake of 45% was reported by the authors 
in the PCL with 1 wt% carbon nanotube content as compared with the pure polymer. At 3 wt% nanotube content, the reduction in water uptake reached up to 50%; however, it decreased on further increasing the content of nano-tubes. For the PCL polymer with carbon nanoﬁ  bers, the same behavior as with 
carbon nanotubes was observed. For the PHBV system, a reduction in the water uptake of 23% for the ﬁ  lm of PHBV with 1 wt% CNT compared with 
the unﬁ  lled material; however, the water uptake increased on further increas-
ing the nanotube content. For the PHBV with carbon nanoﬁ  bers, a reduction 
of 49% was observed in the ﬁ  lm of PHBV at 1 wt% content. Table  22.1  also 
shows the oxygen permeability of the PCL, PHBV , and their nanocomposites with carbon nanotubes and carbon nanoﬁ  bers measured at 80% relative 
humidity (RH). 
  For PCL system, reductions of oxygen permeability of 52%, 38%, 8%, and 
10%, as compared to pure polymer for the ﬁ  lms with 1%, 3%, 5%, and 10% 
of carbon nanotubes, was observed (Fig.  22.7 A). Increasing carbon nanotubes contents deteriorated the reduction in the oxygen barrier owing to agglomera-tion. In the case of carbon nanoﬁ  bers, ﬁ  lms of PCL with 1%, 3%, 5%, and 10 
wt% of ﬁ  ller showed reduction in the oxygen permeability of 26%, 29%, 25%, 
and 25%, respectively. For PHBV system, reductions in oxygen permeability of 14%, 5%, 21%, and 58% for the ﬁ  lms of PHBV with 1%, 3%, 5%, and 10 
wt% of carbon nanoﬁ  bers were observed (Fig.  22.7 B). 
  Alves et al.  [17]  reported the the enhancement of the barrier to water vapor 
and gases (CO 
2  and O 2 ) of a polymeric matrix composed by  κ -carrageenan 
and pectin (66.7%  κ -carrageenan) with the inclusion of mica ﬂ  akes. Figure  22.8  
shows the water vapor permeability (WVP) through the composites as a func-tion of mica content as well as RH differences to which the two sides of the ﬁ lms were subjected. The water vapor permeation was observed to decrease 
as a function of mica content. Interesting differences were also observed at BARRIER PROPERTIES OF BIONANOCOMPOSITES   553
  Figure 22.6          Barrier properties (water vapor, O 2 , and CO 2 ) as a function of chitosan and 
MNC particles ’  concentration on chitosan/MNC particles ’  ﬁ  lms produced with 1.0% 
(v/v) lactic acid.  Reproduced from reference  [15]  with permission from Elsevier.  MNC particles 0% (w/w chitosan)
MNC particles 1% (w/w chitosan)
MNC particles 3% (w/w chitosan)
bWVP (Kg m–1 s–1 Pa–1)
O2P (cm3 m–1 day–1 atm–1)3.50E–12
3.00E–12
2.50E–12
2.00E–12
1 .50E–12
1 .00E–12
5.00E–13
0.00E+00
0.016
0.014
0.012
0.01
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0O2P (cm3 m–1 dia–1 atm–1)35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0bb bbc
a a
1 1 .5 2
Chitosan % (w/v)a
MNC particles 0% (w/w chitosan)
MNC particles 1% (w/w chitosan)
MNC particles 3% (w/w chitosan) c
bc
abaabcc
1 1 .5 2
Chitosan % (w/v)a a
MNC particles 0% (w/w chitosan)
MNC particles 1% (w/w chitosan)
MNC particles 3% (w/w chitosan)
aaa
aaaa
1 1 .5 2
Chitosan % (w/v)aa554  BARRIER PROPERTIES OF RENEWABLE NANOMATERIALS
 TABLE 22.1       Oxygen Permeability for PCL, PHBV and Their Nanocomposites. 
Reproduced from Reference  [16]  with Permission from Elsevier 
PO 2  (m 3  m/s m 2  Pa) 
at 80%RHPO 2  (m 3  m/s m 2  Pa) 
at 80%RH
PCL 7.06e  − 18 PHBV 1.78e  − 18 
PCL  +  1%CNT 3.39e  − 18 PHBV  +  1%CNT 0.67e  − 18 
PCL  +  3%CNT 4.41e  − 18 
PCL  +  5%CNT 6.51e  − 18 PHBV  +  5%CNT 1.61e  − 18 
PCL  +  10%CNT 6.36e  − 18 PHBV  +  10%CNT 1.18e  − 18 
PCL  +  1%CNT 5.23e  − 18 PHBV  +  1%CNF 1.53e  − 18 
PCL  +  3%CNT 5.03e  − 18 PHBV  +  3%CNF 1.70e  − 18 
PCL  +  5%CNT 5.27e  − 18 PHBV  +  5%CNF 1.40e  − 18 
PCL  +  10%CNT 5.33e  − 18 PHBV  +  10%CNF 0.75e  − 18 
Literature value 
 24 PCL1.9e  − 18    a   Literature value 
 25 PHB5.10e  − 18    b   
     a   At 0%RH (solvent casting). 
    b   At 75%RH (commercial biobased materials). 
 CNF, carbon nanoﬁ  ber.  
different RH environments. The WVP was observed to be higher when the 
driving force of 75.4–60.5 (%RH) was applied. The authors opined that the observed effect was related to the hydrophilic character of the ﬁ  lms material. 
The water entering the ﬁ  lms acted as a diffusion species as well as a plasticizer, 
thus loosening the polymeric matrix and enhancing transmission. On the other hand, in the case of 100–10.8 (%RH) driving force, high water concentration gradient through the ﬁ  lm thickness was suggested to limit the plasticizing 
effect, thus allowing the polymeric matrix to maintain its tightly packed network structure. 
  Figure  22.9   [17]  illustrates the carbon dioxide and oxygen permeability as 
a function of mica content. The permeation values obtained for carbon dioxide and oxygen were observed to be four and six orders of magnitude lower than that of water vapor, respectively. A reduction of 73% for the nanocomposite ﬁ lm as compared with the pure polymer in the carbon dioxide permeability 
was observed for a mica content of 10%. However, the permeability was observed to increase on increasing the mica content further to 20%. Even though the polymeric matrix itself was a good barrier to oxygen, the barrier properties were further enhanced with the inclusion of mica ﬂ  akes. The authors 
observed a decrease of the permeability of about 27% for a mica content of 10%, after which it rose again. Thus, 10 wt% of the ﬁ  ller was observed to be 
an optimum value. 
  Park et al.  [18]  reported the WVP through the thermoplastic starch nano-
composites generated by incorporating different types of clays. The perme-ation was observed to be reduced by half as compared to pure polymer on BARRIER PROPERTIES OF BIONANOCOMPOSITES   555
addition of 5 wt% of the ﬁ  ller, especially Cloisite Na. Figure  22.10  also shows 
the permeability of the nanocomposites as a function of time. The nanocom-
posite with Cloisite sodium had the least decrease in the WVP ,which was 
attributed to the better dispersion of this ﬁ  ller in the polymer matrix. Other 
ﬁ llers, which were organically modiﬁ  ed by polar and nonpolar surface modi-
ﬁ cations, were worse in performance than Cloisite sodium;  however, still 
reduced the increase in permeation over time as compared to pure polymer.   Figure 22.7          (a) Oxygen permeability through neat PCL polymer and nano-
biocomposites with 1 wt%, 3 wt%, 5 wt%, and 10 wt% of the carbon nanotubes and 
carbon nanoﬁ  bers measured at 80%RH; and (b) oxygen permeability through neat 
PHBV polymer and nano-biocomposites with 1 wt%, 3 wt%, 5 wt%, and 10 wt% of 
the carbon nanotubes and carbon nanoﬁ  bers.  Reproduced from reference  [16]  with 
permission from Elsevier.  
Oxygen Permeability (m3m/sm2Pa)7e–18
6e–18
5e–18
4e–18
3e–180(a)
(b)2468PCL+wt.-%carbon nanotubes
PCL+wt.-%carbon nanofibers
10Oxygen Permeability (m3m/sm2Pa)2e–18
2e–18
2e–18
1e–18
1e–18
8e–18
8e–19
6e–19
% Content02468 1 0PHBV+w.t-%CNT
PHBV+w.t-%CNF% Content556  BARRIER PROPERTIES OF RENEWABLE NANOMATERIALS
  Park et al.  [19]  also reported the synthesis of cellulose acetate nanocom-
posites using triethyl citrate as plasticizer and Cloisite 30B as ﬁ  ller. Different 
amounts of plasticizer as well as organoclays were used to synthesize the nanocomposites. Figure  22.11  shows the WVP of the different nanocomposites in comparison with the pure polymer. The permeability was observed to sig-niﬁ cantly decrease as a function of volume fraction of the ﬁ  ller. The ﬁ  ller 
platelets were observed to have an aspect ratio near to 150 at lower ﬁ  ller 
volume fractions, whereas the aspect ratio was observed to decrease to nearly 100 at higher ﬁ  ller volume contents owing to incomplete exfoliation. The 
polymer as well as nanocomposites containing higher amounts of plasticizer swas also observed to have a higher WVP than the systems with a lower plas-ticizer content. Reduction of the rigidity of the polymer matrix on incorpora-tion of large amounts of plasticizers was opined to be the reason for enhanced WVP through the materials.   Figure 22.8          Water vapor permeability through the composites as a function of mica 
content and relative humidity. P/P 0  represents the normalized WVP values.  Reproduced 
from reference  [17]  with permission from Elsevier.  
BARRIER PROPERTIES OF BIONANOCOMPOSITES   557
  Gorrasi et al.  [20]  reported studies on PCL/MMT composites, where the 
correlation between morphology and vapor barrier properties were presented. Different PCL/clay nanocomposites were synthesized by melt blending or catalyzed ring-opening polymerization of caprolactone. Microcomposites were obtained by direct melt blending of PCL and pristine MMT. Exfoliated nano-composites were obtained by  in situ   ring-opening polymerization of CL with 
an  OMC  by using dibutyltin dimethoxide as an initiator/catalyst. Intercalated nanocomposites were formed either by melt blending with organically modi-ﬁ ed layered silicate (OMLS) or  in situ   polymerization within pristine MMT. 
Figure  22.12  shows water vapor diffusivity through these PCL nanocomposites as a function of clay content. The exfoliated nanocomposites were observed to have the least diffusivity, which was further reduced by increasing the amount of organic ﬁ  ller. 
  Kumar et al.  [21]  reported bionanocomposite ﬁ  lms based on  soy protein 
isolate  ( SPI ) and MMT prepared using melt extrusion. Table  22.2  demonstrates the WVP of SPI–MMT ﬁ  lms with 0%, 5%, 10%, and 15% MMT contents   Figure 22.9          Carbon dioxide permeability (ﬁ  lled symbols) and oxygen permeability 
(open symbols), as a function of mica content. P/P 0  represents the normalized values. 
 Reproduced from Reference  [17]  with permission from Elsevier.  
558  BARRIER PROPERTIES OF RENEWABLE NANOMATERIALS
  Figure 22.10          Water vapor permeability of thermoplastic starch/clay nanocomposites 
using different types of clays.  Reprinted from Reference  [18]  with permission from 
Wiley.  a: TPS
b: TPS/Closiste Na+
c: TPS/Closiste 30B
d: TPS/Closiste 10A
e: TPS/Closiste 6AWater vapor permeability (g/m2)
0a
d
c
e
b
51 0 1 5
Time (hour)20 25400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
  Figure 22.11          Water vapor relative permeability curve of the  cellulose acetate  
( CA )/ triethyl citrate  ( TEC ) hybrid composites with different TEC plasticizer and 
organoclay contents: (c) CA/TEC (80/20 wt%), (d) CA/TEC (70/30 wt%), (e) CA/TEC 
(70/40 wt%) experimental relative permeability value of nanocomposites with clay 
contents 0–10 wt%. Curves (a) and (b) represent the theoretical predictions at different 
aspect ratios of the ﬁ  ller platelets.  Reprinted from Reference  [19]  with permission from 
ACS.  
Relative Permeability (P c/Po)
0.00 0.01
Volum fraction of organoclay ( φ)0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.061. 0
0.8
0.6
0.4α=150a
a: Aspect ration = 150, theroretical P/P +
b: Aspect ration = 100, theroretical P/P +
c: Experimental, TEC 20 wt% hybrids
d: Experimental, TEC 30 wt% hybrids
e: Experimental, TEC 40 wt% hybridse
d
cExperimental
valueb: α=100BARRIER PROPERTIES OF BIONANOCOMPOSITES   559
  Figure 22.12          Water vapor diffusivity through the PCL nanocomposites as a function 
of clay content. M represents PCL microcomposite, E signiﬁ  es PCL exfoliated nano-
composites, and the I denotes 3 wt% PCL intercalated nanocomposites.  Reproduced 
from reference  [20]  with permission from Elsevier.  1 .E–06
1 .E–07
1 .E–08
1 .E–09
1 .E–10M
1%Log Do (Do in cm/s2)
3% 5%
%MMT -Na+
%MMT
-Na+
%MMT
-(OH) 210% 1% 3% 5%
%MMT -(OH) 210%IE
 TABLE 22.2       Comparison of Water Vapor Permeability (WVP) of Soy Protein 
Isolate (SPI) Montmorillonite Films with Other Biopolymer, Bionanocomposite, and 
Plastic Films. Reproduced from Reference  [21]  with Permission from Elsevier 
Films WVP (g-mm/(m 2 -h-kPa))
SPI 3.80  ±  0.11
SPI-5% MMT 2.96  ±  0.10
SPI-10% MMT 2.49  ±  0.08
SPI-15% MMT 2.17  ±  0.06
Soy protein 1.62–6.42
Whey protein 1.58–12.12
Chitosan 4.72
Chitosan-5% MMT 3.52
Starch 1.61
Starch-6% MMT 1.06
Cellophane 0.05–0.25
 Polylactic acid  ( PLA ) 0.06
 Polyvinyl alcohol  ( PVOH ) 3.15
 Low density polyethylene  ( LOPE ) 0.001
 Polypropylene  ( PP ) 0.02–0.04
Polyvinylidene chloride (PVDC) 0.01560  BARRIER PROPERTIES OF RENEWABLE NANOMATERIALS
compared with other biopolymers, bionanocomposites, and plastic ﬁ  lms. Films 
containing MMT were observed to have signiﬁ  cantly lower WVP as compared 
to that of pure SPI ﬁ  lm. Five percent MMT inclusion was observed to reduce 
the permeability by 22.1%. Also, Kumar et al. reported that the WVP was reduced by 42.9% as the MMT content increased from 0% to 15%. 
  Kristo et al.  [22]  reported nanocomposite materials prepared using sorbitol-
plasticized pullulan as the amorphous matrix and an aqueous suspension of starch nanocrystals as the reinforcing phase. Figure  22.13  shows the kinetics of water absorption and water uptake at equilibrium as well as the water dif-fusion coefﬁ  cient values versus starch nanocrystal content, during conditioning 
at 94% RH of composites. The matrix was ﬁ  lled with different starch nano-
crystal concentrations (ranging from 0% to 40%, w/w). The water uptake of samples showed a two-stage water absorption pattern. At lower times ( t   <  50 
hours), the absorption kinetics was fast, followed by a slower absorption process, and ﬁ  nally achieved a plateau. The water uptake for a given time was 
lower as the starch nanoparticle content was higher. The unﬁ  lled sample 
showed the highest degree of hydration. The water uptake values at equilib-rium were observed to range between 69.7% and 50.6% (w/w) for unﬁ  lled 
samples and nanocomposites ﬁ  lled with 40% (w/w) starch nanocrystals, 
respectively. 
    22.4     FACTORS AFFECTING BARRIER PERFORMANCE 
 As observed in the examples showed in the previous section, the barrier per-
formance of the biopolymers is affected by a number of factors. First of all, it cannot be always assumed that the enhancement in the mechanical perfor-mance would lead to automatic improvement in barrier performance. The interfacial interaction between the ﬁ  ller and the polymer is the most important 
factor affecting the barrier performance. In the absence of positive interac-tions, the resulting phase mismatch at the interface can actually lead to enhancement of permeation rather than decreasing it  [23] . The interactions can be improved by the addition of certain compatibilizers, but their impact on polymer symmetry, crystallinity, rigidity, and so on needs to be taken into account. Different surface modiﬁ  cations on the ﬁ  ller surface also perform dif-
ferently owing to similar reasons of better surface polarity matching of the polymer with surface modiﬁ  cation molecules in some cases than the others. 
The amount of the ﬁ  ller also has a signiﬁ  cant impact on the barrier perfor-
mance. In the case of exfoliated nanocomposites with good interfacial match-ing between the organic and inorganic phases, remarkable performance can be achieved at very low ﬁ  ller contents. The barrier properties also tend to reach 
a plateau value after a certain level of ﬁ  ller content is reached. The aspect ratio 
of the ﬁ  ller particles is also observed to generally decrease on enhancing the 
ﬁ ller content owing to the increased interfacial contacts between the ﬁ  ller 
platelets. The barrier performance of the bionanocomposites is also affected FACTORS AFFECTING BARRIER PERFORMANCE   561
  Figure 22.13          (a) Kinetics of water absorption and (b) water uptake at equilibrium as 
well as the water diffusion coefﬁ  cient values versus starch nanocrystal content, during 
conditioning at 94% RH of composites ﬁ  lled with different starch nanocrystal concen-
trations (ranging from 0% to 40%, w/w).  Reproduced from Reference  [22]  with permis-
sion from Elsevier.  
WU (%)80
60
40
20
040
30
20
10
000(a)
3
6
10
15
20
30
40
05 0 1 0 0
Time (hour)150 200 2502468WU at equilibrium (%)70
65
60
55
50(b)
01 0 2 0 3 02.4
2.2
2.0
1. 8
1. 6
1. 4
40
D × 1010 cm2s–1
Starch content (% w/w)562  BARRIER PROPERTIES OF RENEWABLE NANOMATERIALS
by the processing conditions as well as humidity. The polymers also behave 
differently from different permeant gases owing to their speciﬁ  c interactions 
with these gases. For example, gases like oxygen do not interact with polymers, whereas water vapors are known to form hydrogen bonds with polymer chains.  
  22.5     CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES 
 Increasing interest in the use of biopolymers for a number of applications 
brings additional challenges. Bionanocomposites lead to improved perfor-mance of biopolymers at very low ﬁ  ller contents. Generally, such materials are 
developed for enhancement of mechanical performance, and the improvement in mechanical properties is considered to automatically enhance other proper-ties. However, owing to the complex nature of the sorption and diffusion phenomena through biopolymers, it is important to study the barrier proper-ties separately. A number of biopolymers such as PLA, PCL, PHBV , and cel-lulose acetate have been reported in the literature to achieve reductions in the oxygen, water vapor, and carbon dioxide permeation by incorporation of ﬁ  llers 
such as clay, nanoﬁ  bers, and nanotubes. A number of factors including inter-
facial interactions, amount of ﬁ  ller, modiﬁ  cation present on the surface of ﬁ  ller 
particles, humidity, processing conditions, and so on affect the barrier perfor-mance of the bionanocomposites.  
  REFERENCES 
      [1]      Averous ,  L.   ,    Boquillon ,  N.    (  2004 )  Carbohydr. Polym.  ,  56 ,  111 .  
      [2]      Ray ,  S.S.   ,    Yamada ,  K.   ,    Okamoto ,  M.   ,    Fujimoto ,  Y.   ,    Ogami ,  A.   , and    Ueda ,  K.    (  2003 ) 
 Polymer  ,  44 ,  6633 .  
      [3]      Alexandre ,  M.   ,    Dubois ,  P .    (  2000 )  Mater. Sci. Eng. R: Rep.  ,  28 ,  1 .  
      [4]      Pavlidoua ,  S.   ,    Papaspyrides ,  C.D.    (  2008 )  Prog. Polym. Sci.  ,  33 ,  1119 .  
      [5]      Vieth ,  W.R.    (  1991 )  Diffusion in and through Polymers: Principles and Applications  . 
 Munich :  Hanser Publishers .  
      [6]      Cheremisinoff ,  N.P .    (  1989 )  Handbook of Polymer Science and Technology  .  New 
York :  Dekker .  
      [7]      George ,  S.C.   ,    Thomas ,  S.    (  2001 )  Prog. Polym. Sci.  ,  26 ,  985 .  
      [8]      Elias ,  H.G.    (  1992 )  Technologie Rohstoffe, Industrielle Synthesen, Polymere, 
Anwendungen  .  Basel :  Hthig & Wepf .  
      [9]      Crank ,  J.    (  1998 )  The Mathematics of Diffusion  .  Oxford :  Clarendon Press .  
   [10]      Nielsen ,  L.E.    (  1967 )  J. Macrromol. Sci.  ,  A1 ,  929 .  
   [11]      Thellen ,  C.   ,    Orroth ,  C.   ,    Froio ,  D.   ,    Ziegler ,  D.   ,    Lucciarini ,  J.   ,    Farrell ,   R.   , et al. (  2005 ) 
 Polymer  ,  46 ,  11716 .  
   [12]      Koh ,  H.C.   ,    Park ,  J.S.   ,    Jeong ,  M.A.   ,    Hwang ,  H.Y.   ,    Hong ,  Y.T.   ,    Ha ,  S.Y.   , and    Nam , 
 S.Y.    (  2008 )  Desalination  ,  233 ,  201 .  REFERENCES   563
   [13]      Ray ,  S.S.   ,    Yamada ,  K.   ,    Okamoto ,  M.   , and    Ueda ,  K.    (  2003 )  Polymer  ,  44 ,  857 .  
   [14]      Chang ,  J.-H.   ,    Uk    –    An ,  Y.   , and    Sur ,  G.S.    (  2003 )  J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Phys.  ,  41 ,  94 .  
   [15]      Casariego ,  A.   ,    Souza ,  B.W.S.   ,    Cerqueira ,  M.A.   ,    Teixeira ,  J.A.   ,    Cruz ,  L.   ,    D iaz ,  R.   , 
and    Vicente ,  A.A.    (  2009 )  Food Hydrocoll.  ,  23 ,  1895 .  
   [16]      Sanchez-Garcia ,  M.D.   ,    Lagaron ,  J.M.   , and    Hoa ,  S.V .    (  2010 )  Compos. Sci. Tech.  ,  70 , 
 1095 .  
   [17]      Alves ,  V .D.   ,    Costa ,  N.   , and    Coelhoso ,  I.M.    (  2010 )  Carbohydrate Polym.  ,  79 ,  269 .  
   [18]      Park ,  H.M.   ,    Lee ,  X.   ,    Jin ,  C.Z.   ,    Park ,  C.Y.   ,    Cho ,  W.J.   , and    Ha ,  C.S.    (   2002 )  Macromol. 
Mater. Eng.  ,  287 ,  553 .  
   [19]      Park ,  H.M.   ,    Mohanty ,  A.   ,    Misra ,  M.   , and    Drzal ,  L.T.    (  2004 )  Biomacromolecules  ,  5 , 
 2281 .  
   [20]      Gorrasi ,  G.   ,    Tortora ,  M.   ,    Vittoria ,  V .   ,    Pollet ,  E.   ,    Lepoittenvin ,  B.   , and    Alexandre , 
 M.    (  2003 )  Polymer  ,  44 ,  2271 .  
   [21]      Kumar ,  P .   ,    Sandeep ,  K.P .   ,    Alavi ,  S.   ,    Truong ,  V .D.   , and    Gorga ,  R.E.    (  2010 )  J. Food 
Eng.  ,  100 ,  480 .  
   [22]      Kristo ,  E.   ,    Biliaderis ,  C.G.    (  2007 )  Carbohydrate Polym.  ,  68 ,  146 .  
   [23]      Osman ,  M.A.   ,    Mittal ,  V .   ,    Morbidelli ,  M.   , and    Suter ,  U.W.    (  2004 )  Macromolecules  , 
 37 ,  7250 .   
 565Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 23
Biocomposites and Nanocomposites 
Containing Lignin
CORNELIA VASILE  and GEORGETA CAZACU
23.1 INTRODUCTION
In the scientific world, “bionanocomposite” has become a common term to 
designate those polymeric materials involving a biopolymer, produced from 
plants or microorganisms or by other biological processes, reinforced with 
inorganic/organic fillers showing at least one dimension on the nanometer 
scale [1]. Nanometer-sized fillers derived from plants show unique advantages 
over traditional inorganic nanoparticles by virtue of their biodegradability and 
biocompatibility. Currently, biomass-based nanofillers include cellulose, chitin, 
and starch nanowhiskers, and others derived from biomass, such as poly(lactic 
acid). Because of the particular structure of lignin and its main role in various 
systems as filler, these systems are considered as composites, although lignin 
is an organic component. In most cases, lignin contains an important amount 
of particles at the nanoscale level [2, 3].
Using strategies inspired by nature, different research teams have devel -
oped biopolymer-based nanocomposites that display both the well-known 
properties of nanocomposites derived from synthetic polymers (improved 
mechanical and gas barrier properties and higher thermal stability) and the 
remarkable features of either the biological or inorganic moieties, such as 
biocompatibility, biodegradability, and, in some cases, functional properties. 
These new materials have possible applications in biomedicine, agriculture, 
and the food and building industries, helping reduce the amount of waste 
products and lessen environmental pollution.566  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
23.2 LIGNINS AND THEIR USE IN COMPOSITES
Lignocellulosic biomass offers a variety of potentially valuable by-products 
and their use in new eco-friendly composites is a quite challenging task. Lignin 
is one of the most abundant organic substances on earth and thus is the most 
promising feedstock for generation of the high value products with potential 
applications as components of polymer composites [4].
Lignin is primarily a structural material adding strength and rigidity to cell 
walls and constitutes between 15% and 40% of the dry matter of woody plants. 
Lignin in the scientific literature is known as “insoluble plant polymer” with 
an aromatic and highly cross-linked structure. From the chemical point of view, 
lignin can be defined as a very reactive macromolecular compound, because 
of its functional groups such as aromatic rings, phenolic and aliphatic alcohol 
groups, and methoxy groups that are possible sites for chemical modification 
and/or reaction. Lignin composition depends on its origin, the developmental 
stage of the plant, and environmental factors. Some properties are summarized 
in Table 23.1 for two main types of lignin [5].
Lignin is a fascinating molecule due to its diversity in both chemical  
composition and structure at a low or high level of order and degree of  
TABLE 23.1  Main Characteristics of the Lignin from Wood [5]
Softwood lignin Hardwood lignin
Lignin content is ∼28%
Lignin dissociates faster in solution
Lignin self-associates greater in solution
Harder to break down lignocellulosic 
biomass
Coniferyl alcohol primarily ( ∼80%)
Guaiacyl (coniferyl alcohol derived) 
G-lignin
Gymnosperms
Molecular mass is larger than hardwood 
lignin
Branching is higher
Cross-links are greater
C–C bonds are greater
5′ linkages more common
-OCH 3 content is ∼20%
β-O-4 ether bonds are lower
β-β and β-5 bonds are higher
Deconstruction is harder
Lignin is condensedLignin content is ∼20%
Lignin dissociates slower in solution
Lignin self-associates less in solution
Easier to breakdown lignocellulosic 
biomass
Coniferyl ( ∼56%) and sinapyl ( ∼40%) 
alcohols 
Guaiacyl-syringyl (G-S) lignin; syringyl is 
sinapyl alcohol derived lignin
Angiosperms, dicotyledons
Molecular mass is lower than softwood 
lignin
Branching is lower; lignin is more linear
Cross-links are fewer
C–C bonds are fewer
5′ linkages less common
-OCH 3 content is ∼14%
β-O-4 ether bonds are higher
β-β and β-5 bonds are fewer
Deconstruction is easierOBTAINING LIGNIN NANOpARTICLES   567
polymerization; thus, there may be no two identical lignin macromolecules 
with the same primary sequence of phenyl units.
The complexity of lignin macromolecules and their association with poly -
saccharides have made it impossible to isolate lignin and purify it from plant 
cell walls in a pure form since the various pulping techniques used cause sub -
stantial alterations to lignin structure. Only the ball milled wood lignin (MWL), 
isolated from finely powdered wood by the action of neutral solvents, is con -
sidered to be the closest to in vivo  lignin. Lignins isolated from wood by clas -
sical delignification procedures are called “technical lignins” to distinguish 
them from in vivo  native lignin. Technical lignins have undergone extensive 
depolymerization and chemical changes. Depending on the type of pulping, 
the lignins vary in molecular weight, functional groups, degree of condensa -
tion, types of intermonomer linkages, and the type and ratio of monomer units. 
Pronounced noncovalent attractive interactions also exist between individual 
molecular lignin species, resulting in enormous associated complexes [6, 7]. 
These supramacromolecular complexes are responsible for the cohesive nature 
of lignin-based materials [8]. Organosolv lignins differ significantly from other 
technical lignins. Structurally, organosolv lignins (OSL) have a higher relative 
amount of phenolic hydroxyl groups, a more oxidized structure (Hibbert’s 
ketones), possess low glass transition temperatures T g’s, and are easier to 
thermally process than kraft lignins (KRL). As a result, OSL have advantages 
over other industrial lignins for composite-material applications.
Commercially, lignin plays a vital role in pulp and paper manufacturing as 
part of chemical recovery process. Lignin is primarily burnt as a fuel for 
energy; however, as a part of the biorefinery concept, value-added utilization 
of lignin is critical [9]. Among them, isolated lignin is industrially manufac -
tured as an organic waste stream in the pulp and paper industry and in biomass 
conversion processes for biofuel production. Properties of lignin depend on 
their origin and extraction procedures [10–14].
23.3 OBTAINING LIGNIN NANOPARTICLES
Due to their accessibility and environmental compatibility, obtaining natural 
polymer nanoparticles constitutes a major concern for many research teams.
Self-assembly, self-organization, and aggregation give rise to a complex, 
three-dimensional network of lignin that displays randomly branched topology 
and fractal properties [5]. Also, lignins self-associate as well as interact with 
carbohydrates and proteins to form supramolecular structures, contributing to 
the difficulties in isolating “pure lignin.” The supermolecular self-assembly of 
lignin at the nanoscale was studied in vitro  dehydrogenative polymers (DHPs) 
synthesis of lignin model compounds by electronic microscopy.
Information on the synthesis of lignin-based nanoparticles is relatively 
limited and covered by patents [15]. Rojas [16] obtained either carbon nano -
fibers or lignin nanofibers by the electrospinning method (Fig. 23.1a) or by 
acetylation (Fig. 23.1b).568  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
Popa et al. [17] obtained lignin nanoparticles from lignins in annual plants 
(wheat straw and Sarkanda grass) and commercial products (Protobind 1000, 
2000, 3000), offered by Granit Recherche Developement SA (Lausanne, Swit -
zerland), by hydroxymetylation (in the presence of formaldehyde and ammo -
nium hydroxide), or by epoxydation (by reaction with epichlorohydrine) 
reactions. Under suitable synthesis conditions, nanoparticles have been 
obtained. The size distribution curves of grass lignin show a unimodal curve, 
while nanoparticles obtained from Protobind lignin are characterized by 
bimodal distribution and larger nanoparticles. The nanoparticle distribution 
domain for wheat straw lignin is between 50 and 500 nm, while Protobind 
samples, between 100 and 800 nm. It has been demonstrated that lignin com -
plexes with copper could be used as biocides. Lignin nanoparticles have been 
also evidenced in alkaline solutions [18].
23.4 PREPARATION OF COMPOSITES AND BLENDS
Usually, the lignins used in preparation of blends or composites were produced 
industrially and obtained as a purified commercial polymer. Blends of various 
polymer/lignin ratios were then prepared by mechanical mixing followed by 
thermal extrusion using an mixing extruder with a single- or twin-screw con -
figuration, rotation speed of 200–250 rpm, and a take-up speed of 100 m/min. 
Extrusion temperatures varied depending on the composite/blend composi -
tion, varying from 145 or 210 to 247°C.
To increase the interfacial bonding, sometimes modification of either ther -
moplastics by reactive extrusion [19, 20] or lignin (epoxidation, alkylation, etc.) 
is applied [21, 22]. Most compounding processes require the addition of com -
patibilizers, which circumvent incompatibility problems relating to poor inter -Figure 23.1  Possibilities of obtaining lignin-based nanofibers (adapted from Refer -
ence [16]). See color insert.
(a) (b)BIOBASEd NANOCOmpOSITES CONTAINING LIGNIN   569
facial adhesion between the filler and the polymer. The addition of maleic 
anhydride-modified polymers (e.g., maleic anhydride-grafted polymers) rep -
resents a prominent method for compatibilizing fillers and polymers. During 
compounding, the maleic anhydride-functionalized polymer reacts with the 
hydroxyl groups of the filler to form graft copolymers.
Lignin can be used as the main matrix in a new class of engineering materials 
based only on renewable resources. For example, the Arboform® (developed 
at the Fraunhofer Institute for Chemical Technology, Pfinztal, Germany) com -
posites consist of isolated lignin, natural fibers, and natural additives that are 
elaborated through conventional thermoplastic processes such as injection 
molding [23]. The obtained composites have wood-like mechanical behavior 
and some properties in the range of those of polyamides. For certain practical 
applications (i.e., for the building industry), the thermal stability and fire resis -
tance of these Arboform composites are key properties that need to be improved. 
The preparation of polymer–silicate clay nanocomposites has addressed these 
fireproofing issues. The nanoscale dispersion of clay layers forms a passive 
barrier, which hinders the out-diffusion of volatile decomposition products 
from thermal cracking [24]. Depending on the compatibility level between clay 
and organic polymer, the system exhibits an intercalated or exfoliated structure. 
The intercalated structure corresponds to insertion of the polymeric matrix 
between the layers of the clay, but these latter still exhibit spatial relationships 
with each other. In the exfoliated (or delaminated) structure, the layers are 
independently separated; they have no relationship with each other and are 
homogeneously distributed at nanoscale in the matrix. Both sepiolite and 
organically modified montmorillonite (Org-MMT) have been processed with 
lignin and natural fibers by shear mixing in a twin-screw extruder.
23.5 BIOBASED NANOCOMPOSITES CONTAINING LIGNIN
Biobased nanocomposites containing lignin were prepared from OSL/
organoclay mixtures by mechanical mixing and subsequent melt intercalation 
[25]. Two Org-MMT organoclays with different ammonium cations (Cloisite 
30B and Cloisite 20A, Southern Clay Co., Austin TX) were used. The Alcell™ 
lignin (organosolv lignin obtained by alcohol pulping, implemented by Repap 
Enterprises, Canada) and varying amounts of organoclay (1–10 wt%) mechan -
ically mixed were then thermally extruded at 130°C and 150°C depending on 
the hybrid composition. Due to the chemical differences, the two organoclays 
will be dispersed differently within the polymer matrix, leading to different 
composite properties.
The effect of organoclays on the mechanical and thermal properties of  
the nanocomposites was studied. Thermal analysis revealed an increase in T g 
for the nanocomposites as compared with the original OSL. The highest T g 
for the Alcell/organoclay mixtures occurs under the most severe conditions 
tested (ball-milling for 30 minutes at 600 rpm). In general, thermal extrusion 570  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
of the lignin/organoclay mixtures led to a slight increase in T g, the result of 
lignin condensation reactions rather than increased interaction with the 
organoclay.
The addition of organoclay to Alcell lignin improved its thermal process -
ability; the increased organoclay content leads to decrease of the spinnability 
temperatures of the lignin/organoclay composite fibers. The Alcell/Cloisite 
20A melt spinning temperatures were slightly higher than those of the cor -
responding Alcell/Cloisite 30B mixtures. For both organoclays, lignin interca -
lation into the silicate layers was observed using X-ray diffraction (XRD). The 
XRD pattern of lignin does not show any peaks due to its amorphous state. 
Cloisite 20A and Closite 30B, however, exhibit a single peak at 2 θ = 3.9° and 
2θ = 5.0°, respectively. For all of the Alcell/Cloisite 20A mixtures (Fig. 23.2), a 
new peak appears at 2 θ = 2.4°, corresponding to an increase in the d-spacing 
from ∼2.4 to ∼3.7 nm.
Similarly, Alcell/Cloisite 30B mixtures present a new peak at the lower 2 θ 
corresponding to an increase in the d-spacing of the clay platelets from ∼1.9 
to ∼3.2 nm. These observations indicate significant intercalation of Alcell into 
the galleries of the silicate layers of the organoclays.
The intercalated hybrids exhibited a substantial increase in tensile strength 
of lignin/organoclay composite fibers in comparison with the original Alcell 
lignin. Thus, incorporating just 5 wt% of Cloisite 20A led to a 54% increase 
in tensile strength, while the same amount of Cloisite 30B enhanced the tensile 
strength by more than 70%.
A new type of nanocomposite based on silicate clays, lignin, and natural 
fibers has been obtained by shear mixing in a twin-screw extruder. Lignin Figure 23.2  XRD patterns of Cloisite 20A and Alcell/Cloisite 20A hybrids with clay 
contents of 1 wt%, 5 wt%, and 10 wt% (adapted from Reference [25]).Closite 20A cont ent (wt%)
10%
5%
1%
100%
1 .5 Intensit y [arbitr ay units]
2.5 3.5 4.5 5.5
2θ (°)6.5 7 .5 8.5 9.5BIOBASEd NANOCOmpOSITES CONTAINING LIGNIN   571
isolated from straw and grass crops by a soda pulping process and two types 
of nanoclays (nonmodified Pangel S9 sepiolite (TOLSA T Group) and Org-
MMT) have been chosen for processing with lignin and natural fibers. The 
counterions of MMT have been exchanged with octadecyl ammonium cations. 
The morphological aspect of the obtained nanocomposites has been con -
trolled by transmission electronic microscopy (TEM). For sepiolite-based 
nanocomposites, individual needles have been observed, while Org-MMT-
based nanocomposites have exhibited partial delamination of silicate layers 
into intercalated and exfoliated nanostructures. Intercalated structures with 
higher interfoliar distance ( ∼20–50 nm) than at 2% loading are observed 
together with individual exfoliated layers. Despite the higher Org-MMT con -
centration, the number of submicro aggregates has not increased. These obser -
vations indicate that presence of organophilic ammonium leads to a good 
compatibility of MMT layers with lignin and natural fibers. It is also notewor -
thy that the amphiphilic character of lignin has contributed to enhancing this 
compatibility. Moreover, the applied shear rate during the process was suffi -
cient to obtain a relatively good delamination of MMT. The mechanical energy 
provided by the shear mixing has allowed the van der Waals interactions to 
be overcome between the MMT layers, leading to intercalated or exfoliated 
nanostructures. The properties of the specimens have been studied by thermo -
gravimetry (TGA), dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA), and flexural tests. 
Incorporation of 2% or 5% w/w of sepiolite does not influence the mechanical 
and thermal behavior compared with the reference lignin/natural fiber com -
posite, while Org-MMT-based nanocomposites show improved properties [26].
As shown in Table 23.2, the incorporation of nanoclays does not dramati -
cally modify the mechanical properties of the sample [26].
It is generally accepted that incorporation of nanoclays in nonreinforced 
matrices increases stiffness and enhances ultimate stress. The improved 
mechanical properties are explained by the interfacial interactions between 
the matrix and nanofillers, which strengthen the nanohybrids [27].
TABLE 23.2  Results from Three-Points Bending Test and Dynamic Mechanical 
Analysis Conducted on Lignin/Natural Fibers Composite and Silicate Clay 
Nanocomposites at Various Loadings (2% and 5% w/w) [26]
Nanoclay (w/w 
loading)Flexural 
Modulus 
(GPa)Ultimate 
Stress (MPa) 
(std dev.)Ultimate 
Strain (%) 
(std dev.)Tg(max. of 
tanoδ) (oC)
None (ref.) 5.3 35 0.71 114
Sepiolite (2%) 5.3 36 0.71 114
Sepiolite (5%) 5.2 36 0.72 120
Org-MMT (2%) 5.7 37 0.71 115
Org-MMT (5%) 5.8 37 0.68 124572  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
In the case of lignin/natural fiber composites, the influence of nanofillers is 
not so marked probably because the reference composite, which is reinforced 
with natural fibers, is already very stiff. Nevertheless, one can notice a slight 
increase in the flexural modulus after incorporation of Org-MMT. At 2% 
loading, the increase of modulus is about 7.5%, while for 5% Org-MMT-based 
nanocomposites, the flexural modulus increases about 9.4%. However, 
sepiolite-based nanocomposites do not show any significant variation of 
modulus and ultimate properties. These results may show evidence of anchor -
ing between lignin chains and the organic surfactant (octadecyl ammonium) 
present in interlayer spaces of MMT. According to this anchoring, a better 
stress transfer from the matrix to inorganic MMT layer is expected compared 
with unmodified sepiolite needles. Enhanced stress transfer is accompanied by 
an increase in stiffness (i.e., flexural modulus) for Org-MMT nanocomposites. 
Thus, the MMT layers have developed good interactions with the lignin matrix 
and form passive protective barriers. Accordingly, dispersion of Org-MMT 
could be an interesting and eco-friendly approach to improve the fire resis -
tance of these three-dimensional designed materials elaborated from renew -
able resources. The T g increases ∼6°C in the presence of 5% sepiolite and 
∼10°C for the 5% Org-MMT-based nanocomposite. Thermogravimetric data 
suggest that exfoliated or intercalated layered aluminosilicates act as a protec -
tive barrier against degradation of organic components.
23.6 LIGNIN IN THERMOPLASTIC COMPOSITES
Traditionally, a small amount of lignin, less than 2% of that produced, has been 
used as low cost filler or dispersants, adhesives, and surfactants. Recently, 
thermoplastics with high lignin content have been produced by alkylated  
KRL or blending KRL with synthetic polymers [8, 28, 29]. These new lignin-
based materials possess mechanical properties comparable to polystyrene. 
Although 100% KRL and alkylated KRL films and fibers are quite brittle, 
they can be effectively plasticized by blending with suitable polyesters and 
polyethers [8, 28].
Because of its functionality, lignin is able to interact with many polymers, 
inducing relevant changes in their wettability, fire resistance, and mechanical 
properties. However, the complexity of the possible chemical interactions 
between lignin and polymers (in particular, natural polymers) remains an 
important challenge. In particular, several authors [4, 30, 31] investigated the 
effect of lignin–natural polymer interactions on the functional and mechanical 
properties of natural polymers. Lignin is extremely promising in its ability to 
facilitate the biodegradation of polyolefins [32–41]. In these studies, the 
variation/improvement of the characteristic is strongly dependent on the 
chemical functional groups of both lignin (alkaline lignin and lignosulfonate, 
epoxy modified lignin) and natural polymers (soy protein, starch, and others).
Commercially, lignin is obtained as a by-product of paper manufacturing. 
Some industrial processes produce standard well-defined lignins. As a result, LIGNIN IN ThERmOpLASTIC COmpOSITES   573
lignin is utilized as a stabilizer (antioxidant) for plastics and rubber as well as in 
the formulation of dispersants, adhesives, and surfactants [42]. However, only a 
small amount of this amorphous polyphenolic macromolecule is used in tailored 
material applications. Many studies of lignin-filled thermoplastics including 
polyethylene [43], polypropylene (PP) [43–45], polystyrene [43, 46], polyethyl -
ene oxide (PO) [43], polyvinyl chloride [47, 48], polyethyleneterephthalate [49], 
polylactic acid [50, 51], polycaprolactone (PCL) [52], soy protein and other bio -
degradable polymers [3], and many others [53, 54] have already been reported.
Due to its phenolpropanoidic structure similar to that of hindered phenols, 
lignin can act as stabilizer [55] or initiator of PO degradation [56, 57]. Incor -
poration of lignin in the PO matrix influences the polymer’s useful properties 
and biodegradation characteristics. Usually, the addition of lignin deteriorates 
the mechanical properties of plastics due to the poor miscibility.
Studies regarding the benefits of lignin incorporation into polyolefin blends 
have led to contradictory results. Gonzales-Sánchez and Espósito Alvarez [58] 
found that the incorporation of KRL (10–55 wt%) into polypropylene was 
accompanied by an increase in tensile modulus with lignin content and a 
decrease in maximum tensile strength, indicating poor adhesion between the 
nonpolar structure of  PP and more polar structure of lignin and a poor disper -
sion into the matrix. However, Tudorachi et al. [32, 59] observed a reduction 
in physicomechanical properties with an increase in lignin content in the 
polymer matrix. Kharade and Kale [43] have incorporated up to 30 wt% dry 
lignin powder in low-density polyethylene (LDPE), high-density polyethylene 
(HDPE), and PP , and they observed that the tensile strength and elongation 
at break values decreased with lignin content for all three polymer blends, 
indicating poor compatibility or interaction between lignin and the matrix 
polymer. However, incorporation of lignin into a binary polyolefin mixture (70 
polypropylene (PP)/30 polyethylene (PE)) in amounts of 2.5–40% (w/w) gave 
polymer blends with good thermal, physico-mechanical, and surface properties 
[35]. Levon et al. [60] have observed the thermal stabilizing effect of lignosul -
fonate when the blending with low-density polyethylene (LDPE) was carried 
out at temperatures over 190°C. Blending kraft lignin (10–60 wt%) with iso -
tactic PP yielded a material with reduced tensile and flexural strength and 
improved moduli [61]. Canetti et al. [62] investigated the influence of lignin 
on the thermal degradation of isotactic polypropylene. An increase in the 
thermal degradation temperature of the blends was observed as a function of 
lignin content, in both oxidative and nonoxidative conditions. Also, the increase 
was pronounced for the experiments carried out in air atmospheres, where the 
interactions between the PP and lignin led to the formation of a protective 
surface able to reduce the oxygen diffusion toward the polymer bulk. Grego -
rová et al. [63] determined the Vicat softening temperature (VST) for the 
evaluation of the polypropylene and recycled polypropylene (rccPP) oxidative 
stability. It was shown that the incorporation of lignin in polyolefin matrices 
improves the heat resistance of PP and rccPP plaques.
Compatibility between PO and lignin can be improved by introduction  
of reactive functional groups in each or in only one blending compound.  574  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
Thus, Casenave et al. [64] developed a new technique to improve the interfacial 
adhesion by establishing the chemical bonds between the matrix and the additive 
and to ensure a better dispersion and adhesion to the synthetic matrix. In their 
method, ethylene or propylene monomers are first grafted by a catalytic reaction 
on the lignin surface, and then mixed with the polyethylene matrix. Incorporation 
of grafted lignin (L-g-PE) or ungrafted lignin (L) produced a decrease in mechan -
ical properties with increasing lignin content. Young’s modulus for PE/L-g-PE 
remains constant and close to that of pure PE. Scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM) revealed the different morphologies of the broken sections of PE/L-g-PE 
blends, showing either the particles that were extracted from the other half of the 
samples, but with enhanced roughness of the surface of spheres, or broken par -
ticles, indicating a better lignin-grafted/matrix adhesion.
Another way to improve the compatibility between lignin and polyolefins 
is to use a compatibilizing agent such as ethylene-vinyl acetate copolymer 
(EVA), ethylene-proylene rubber grafted with maleic anhydride (EP-MA) 
[65], or glycidylmethacrylate-grafted-polypropylene (PP-g-GMA) [61, 66]. 
Alkylating lignin with bromododecane improves compatibility with polypro -
pylene and enables up to 70 wt% lignin to be incorporated into a thermally 
stable composite [67].
Pascu et al. [68, 69] showed that by a combination of the chemical procedures 
of component modification (e.g., epoxidation of lignin) with physical treatment 
of surfaces (e.g., photooxidation, plasma, electron beam treatment, UV-irradiation), 
bio/environmental disintegrable polyolefin materials can be obtained.
Other effects of lignin incorporation in PO are improvements in conductiv -
ity, hydrophilicity, biodegradability, and printability [70]. In some cases, lignin 
behaves as an antifungal [47] or nucleating agent [49] or improves the antioxi -
dant [45] properties of the end-products.
The lignin in the concentration 1–2 wt% possessed the ability to act as a 
processing stabilizer and as an antioxidant during thermo-oxidative aging of 
polypropylene films [71]. The effects of polymer–polymer interactions, specifi -
cally hydrogen bonding, on lignin-based thermoplastics were studied in a 
series of lignin/synthetic polymer blends prepared by melt extrusion [28]. 
Thermal analysis revealed miscible blend behavior in the lignin blends con -
taining poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET), 
whereas the polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and PP lignin blends appeared immis -
cible. The glass transition T g of the lignin/PEO and lignin/PET blends showed 
a negative deviation from a linear mixing rule, indicative of specific intermo -
lecular interactions. Diffuse reflectance Fourier transform–infrared spectros -
copy (DRFT-IR) analysis revealed the formation of a strong intermolecular 
hydrogen bond between lignin and PEO, but not with PET.
23.6.1 Poly(Ethylene Oxide)/Organosolv Lignin
Blends of PEO with OSL (Alcell) were prepared by thermal blending. Excel -
lent fiber spinning with good thermal properties were achieved [72]. Alkoxyl LIGNIN IN ThERmOpLASTIC COmpOSITES   575
chains at the C α and C γ positions of the Alcell lignin side chain structure act 
as internal plasticizers and enhance the thermal mobility of the lignin. The 
addition of a small amount of Alcell lignin to PEO resulted in an increase in 
the PEO crystalline domain size (Table 23.3).
However, both PEO crystallinity and crystalline domain size decreased  
with lignin incorporation beyond 25 wt%. A negative polymer–polymer inter -
action energy density was observed, indicating weak specific intermolecular 
interactions.
Calculation of the fitting parameters k and q from the Gordon–Taylor and 
Kwei equations revealed the presence of the strong intermolecular interac -
tions between blend components. FT-IR analysis confirmed the formation of 
strong hydrogen bonding system between Alcell lignin and PEO, being an 
important factor in the formation of miscible lignin-based polymer blends. 
Phenolic hydroxyl groups form stronger hydrogen bonds with the ether oxygen 
in poly(ethylene oxide) than with aliphatic hydroxyl groups. Moreover, the 
hydrogen bonds formed between lignin and poly(ethylene oxide) are signifi -
cantly stronger than those within the lignin macromolecule itself. Kadla and 
Kubo [73] have shown that by incorporating 5% poly(ethylene oxide) into 
hardwood KRL it can be spun in continuous fibers, which exhibited a nearly 
10% increase in tensile strength and Young’s modulus.
23.6.2 Polycaprolactone/Lignin
Melt grafting of maleic anhydride (MA) onto PCL was the key to PCL- g-MA 
compatibilizers, which enhanced the mechanical properties of reinforced PCL 
compounds based on wood flour (WF) and lignin [74]. The grafting of MA TABLE 23.3  DSC Results of the AlcellTM Lignin/PEO Blend Fibers [72]
Weight Fraction 
(w/w)
Tg (oC)ΔCp 
(J/g/C) Tm (oC) ΔH (J/g)Weight Fraction 
in Amorphous 
Phase (w/w)
Lignin PEO Lignin PEO
1.00 0.00 80 0.69 X 0 1.00 0.00
0.95 0.05 76 0.74 X 0 0.95 0.05
0.87 0.13 49 0.72 X 0 0.87 0.13
0.75 0.25 25 0.74 X 0 0.75 0.25
0.62 0.38 −3 0.73 X 0 0.62 0.38
0.50 0.50 −22 0.82 53a6ax x
0.40 0.60 −37 0.24 53 68ax x
0.35 0.65 −2 0.36 56 75 0.60 0.40
0.25 0.75 −4 0.30 60 111 0.4 0.36
0.10 0.90 −31 0.28 63 150 0.49 0.51
0.00 1.00 −50 0.12 67 168 0.00 1.00
aThere was some difficulty in the determination of these values by DSC because of the 
recrystallization peak.576  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
onto PCL was achieved in high yields with a twin-screw extrusion process. Low 
concentrations of MA and appropriate MA/initiator ratios afforded PCL-
g-MA. A low MA content of PCL- g-MA (1.44 wt%) and a small PCL- g-MA 
addition (2.5 wt%) were sufficient to achieve attractive property combinations. 
More than 70 wt% lignin was added without mechanical properties being 
impaired. Compositions containing 40 wt% lignin showed elongation at break 
exceeding 500%. The compatibilized compounds, up to a lignin content of  
40 wt%, gave a slightly improved Izod impact strength. This is exceptional for 
such a high filler content. According to TEM analysis, very effective lignin 
dispersion was achieved within the PCL matrix. No biodegradation took place 
after 2 weeks of natural soil burial. This was likely to be associated with the 
phenolic nature of lignin, which prevents attacks by microorganisms and acid 
formation. Biodegradation studies revealed that lignin addition enhanced the 
biostability of PCL compounds. In conclusion, lignin can be used as a weak 
and nontoxic biostabilizer to enhance the product lifetime of PCL compounds 
in outdoor applications.
23.6.3 Furfuryl Alcohol/Lignin
Guigo et al. [75] presented a new polyfurfuryl alcohol (PFA)/lignin blend with 
thermomechanical performance. Furfuryl alcohol (FA) and lignin are, respec -
tively, monomeric and polymeric precursors issued from biomass feedstock. 
The morphologies of the combined PFA/lignin systems present a monophasic 
structure. The DMA results are in good agreement with SEM observations, 
showing presence of a unique relaxation peak. TGA reveals that the PFA/PL 
thermo-oxidative degradation occurs at higher temperatures compared with 
the natural (PL) component system, together with a lower rate of decomposi -
tion. This underlines a good interpenetration of lignin within the furanic 
matrix.
23.6.4 Protein/Lignin Bionanocomposites
It is well known that polysaccharides and proteins are biodegradable and/or 
compostable under specific environmental conditions. Compared with oil-
based polymers, they are inferior in terms of processing and functional and 
structural performance. The processing problems are mainly due to reduced 
plastic flow properties and poor reproducibility, and control over the molecu -
lar architecture and spatial conformation of natural macromolecules is diffi -
cult. Production of plastics from plant materials at an industrial scale has the 
effect of increasing food prices. One alternative is the use of biological feed -
stocks that are the by-product of the food and agricultural industries, such as 
corn zein, wheat gluten, feather keratin, egg albumin, and lactalbumin [76]. 
Zein is found in corn endosperm, which has been commercially available since 
1938 for its film-forming ability and its unique hydrophobicity, which is due to 
its high content of nonpolar amino acids. Zein shows high density and brittle LIGNIN IN ThERmOpLASTIC COmpOSITES   577
behavior, with a high modulus and stress to break and a low strain to break. 
It can be plasticized by using small polar molecules such as water, glycerol, 
and ethylene glycol, which reduce the protein–protein hydrogen bonding 
interactions and increase the free volume and molecular mobility.
Soy protein isolate (SPI)/hydroxypropyl alkaline lignin (HPL), content 
lower than 6 wt% composites have been prepared by mixing in aqueous solu -
tion containing a small amount of glutaraldehyde as compatibilizer, and then 
compression molding to obtain plastic sheets. The HPL domain in SPI/HPL 
composites is about 50 nm, indicating a high interfacial activity. The glass 
transition temperature of the SPI/HPL sheets increased from 62.5°C to 70.4°C 
with an increase of HPL content from 0 wt% to 6 wt%. The tensile strength 
of the SPI/HPL nanocomposite sheets with 6 wt% HPL and 3.3 wt% glutar -
aldehyde was enhanced from 8.4 to 23.1 MPa compared with that of the SPI 
sheets, because of the SPI reinforcement effect [3].
The effect of alkaline lignin (AL) and sodium lignosulfonate (LSS) (Fig. 
23.3) on the structure of thermoplastic zein (TPZ) was investigated [77] by 
means of XRD and Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy and cor -
related with physical properties. At low AL concentration, the strong hydrogen 
bondings between the functional groups of AL and the amino acids in zein 
induced a destructuring of inter- and intramolecular interactions in α-helix, 
β-sheet, and β-turn secondary structures. This destructuring allowed for an 
extensive protein conformational modification that, in turn, resulted in a 
strong improvement of the physical properties of the bionanocomposite. By 
programming weak forces such as hydrogen bondings, hydrophobic interac -
tions, and ionic interactions, biopolymers may achieve mechanical properties 
similar to those of synthetic polymers. Bionanocomposites maize zein (TPZ)/
various kinds of lignin have been prepared by melt mixing in presence of 
ethylene glycol by Oliviero et al. [77].
The lignin content influenced, in different ways, the arrangements of sec -
ondary structure of zein in TPZ. At lower concentrations (especially 1 wt%) 
of lignins, specific functional groups are able to create strong hydrogen bonding 
with the polar group of amino acids in the zein protein, thereby inducing new 
arrangements of the whole secondary structure (Fig. 23.4), which affect 
mechanical properties (Table 23.4) mainly in the glass transition region. In Figure 23.3  (a) Alkali lignin (AL) and (b) sodium lignosulfonate (LSS) and Kraft 
lignin.(a)OHOH
OHOCH 3 or H H3COOH (or lignin)HO
O
OSONa
OH OHMeO MeOLignin LigninLignin
Kraft ligninLignin LigninSH (or CH 3)(b)578  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
particular, at low lignin (AL and LSS) content, samples presented a remark -
able decrease of the T g toward lower temperatures because of the reduction 
of hydrogen bonding in the secondary structure of the zein through the inser -
tion of the lignin (see Fig. 23.4).
The presence of LSS did not reduce the water sensitivity of TPZ because 
the sulfonic acid groups of LSS are hydrophilic. Conversely, the introduction 
of hydrophobic AL efficiently restricted the water uptake, especially at an AL 
content of 1 wt%. At this AL concentration between the hydroxyl groups of 
zein and OH and/or SH groups of AL, a significant decrease in the concentra -
tion of hydrophilic amino acids residues in zein resulted in reduced sorption 
sites for water molecules [78, 81]. The value of tensile strength increased with  
AL content, and a significant improvement was observed, in particular, at low 
AL content (1 wt%) from 1.79 MPa for neat TPZ to 4.53 MPa for the TPZ/1AL 
bionanocomposite. However, a further increase of AL content resulted in a 
slight decrease of the tensile strength. A significant reduction in the percentage 
elongation at break values was observed only when the content of AL was 1 
wt%. This variation can be attributed to the optimal interaction between lignin TABLE 23.4  X-Ray d-Spacings and Glass Transition Temperatures for Neat TPZ 
and TPZ-Based Nanocomposites [77]
TPZ-Base Composites Do (+) di (+) Tg (oC)
TPZ 4.6 8.3 46.1
TPZ—1AL 3.9 11.3 42.2
TPZ—3AL 4.6 10.0 37.8
TPZ—10AL 4.5 8.6 45.6
TPZ—1LSS 4.6 9.2 40.1
TPZ—3LSS 4.6 9.3 39.5
TPZ—10LSS 4.6 8.2 44.0
Figure 23.4  Proposed mechanism of interaction between lignin and α-helix structure 
of zein. (adapted from Reference [77]).
LIGNIN IN ThERmOpLASTIC COmpOSITES   579
and protein molecules, in particular, to the formation of the strong hydrogen 
bonding between the amino acids of the zein (-C=O, -OH, -NH) and the func -
tional groups (-OH and, mainly, -SH) of AL. At 10 wt%, the AL can be simply 
considered as a reinforcing filler for TPZ. As the AL content increased, phase 
separation occurred in the bionanocomposite because protein–protein inter -
actions were again favored with respect to lignin–protein interactions. An 
improvement of the mechanical properties of TPZ/LSS nanocomposites was 
observed only for LSS content from 5 to 10 wt%. Compared with LSS, AL 
exhibited a greater reinforcement effect on TPZ, mainly due to the presence 
of SH groups, capable of forming stronger hydrogen bonding rather than simple 
protein–protein interactions. The PEG in which the lignin has been dispersed 
reduced the degree of self-association between lignin molecules and favored 
a good mixing and interaction of AL with zein molecules [79].
Comparison of the mechanical properties of TPZ/AL nanocomposites and 
those of other zein/ MMT nanocomposites, prepared by solvent casting by 
Luecha et al. [80], film blowing of a resin obtained by the precipitation of zein 
from an aqueous ethanol solution, and melt mixing methods, clearly shows the 
high efficiency of AL with respect to MMT, even at a very low lignin content 
(1 wt%).
Huang et al. [30, 81] investigated the effect of AL and lignosulfonate on 
properties of soy protein plastics and observed only a 50% increase in tensile 
strength with the addition of 30 wt% lignin. They concluded that the observed 
behavior might have been due to inadequate mixing of lignin with protein and 
suggested improvement of the affinity of the two phases by using methylene 
diphenyl diisocyanate as a compatibilizer or by using a chemically modified 
lignin [82].
By modifying the hierarchical structure of zein with the use of a highly 
interactive additive such as lignin, it is possible to achieve a supramolecular 
design of the protein and obtain bionanonocomposites characterized by 
enhanced mechanical performance and specific functional properties (from 
hydrophilic to hydrophobic behavior) suitable for specific applications (from 
biomedical uses to food packaging).
23.6.5 Lignin/Starch Composites
The use of lignin as filler in starch films has several goals: the utilization of 
industrial lignins, the improvement of the starch matrix hydrophobicity, and 
to learn more aabout starch–lignin interactions. Baumberger et al. [31, 83, 84] 
found that the composition and molecular weight of various fractions of lignin 
influence the compatibility and properties of starch–lignin films. Films pre -
pared by thermal molding or by cast from wheat starch and lignosulfonate in 
the presence of glycerol show the modified mechanical properties with respect 
to standard plasticized starch films. Thus, ultimate stress decreases and elonga -
tion at break increases independently of the lignosulfonate content, while the 
dynamic mechanical thermal behavior is as a function of lignin content [84].580  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
Pine KRL heterogeneity was shown to play an important role in the behav -
ior of starch–lignin composites. By sequential extraction with organic solvents, 
three fractions with different carbohydrate contents and molecular size distri -
butions have been obtained. A minor portion of the low molecular weight 
fractions of KRL seems to be primarily involved in plasticization or compati -
bilization phenomena [83].
Vengal and Srikumar [85] have explored the possibility of preparation of 
novel lignin-based biomaterials. The polymeric films obtained by blending 
lignin with starch or gelatin at various proportions and with starch–gelatin 
mixture and a plasticizer (glycerol) presented mechanical properties compa -
rable to normal films. The water absorption tests indicated that the starch–
lignin and gelatin–lignin films are highly hydrophilic. The swelling degree of 
films increases with the increase in lignin content and pH.
Other starch-based blends that contain lignin or lignin derivatives were 
reported by Ghosh et al. [86]. They blended in various ratios lignin or its ester 
(lignin butyrate, LB) with a starch–caprolactone copolymer (SCL) by solvent 
casting or melt-processing procedure.
Presence of L or LB had a significant effect on crystallinity and melting 
temperatures of the PCL component, revealing polymer–polymer interactions 
between SCL and lignin. Unmodified lignin causes an increase in the crystal -
linity degree of PCL during the melt process, while LB has a more pronounced 
effect during solvent casting processing. These results suggest that high T g of 
nonmodified lignin plays a role as a nucleating agent for PCL, enhancing 
crystallization and melting, and low T g of lignin esters (LB) shows a significant 
compatibility with PCL, reducing crystallization and fusion. Addition of lignin 
or LB up to a concentration of 10–20% by weight improves the mechanical 
properties of SCL.
Starch (S) and lignin (LI) have been used as biodegradation inductors, 
increasing the biodegradation rate of PVA/protein hydrolysate in activated 
sludge while preserving or improving the technical and usage properties of 
blends [87]. To prepare the blends, a plasticizer (glycerol) has been used, allow -
ing good processing. Glycerol produced a PVA breakdown greater with the 
increase in lag phase. Combining LI and S distinctly accelerated the degrada -
tion of a blend, although the final biodegradation percentage is lower. The 
PVA/G PH S blend presents a breakdown time lower than that of pure PVA, 
and the films produced have the convenient mechanical properties.
23.6.6 Lignin–Rubber Composites
Unmodified and modified lignins (15, 30, 45, and 60 phr) were used in rubber 
formulations with the specific aim of reducing rolling resistance. It was found 
that lignin shows significant reinforcing behavior with increased values of 
mechanical properties (modulus, elongation at break, and tensile strength). In 
addition, it caused a reduction in the cure time of rubber compounds that was 
attributed to the participation of lignin in the cross-linking reaction via the LIGNIN IN ThERmOSETS   581
reactive functional groups and sulfur present in its structures [88]. The use of 
lignin derivatives influenced the physical and mechanical properties of lignin-
filled styrene butadiene rubber (SBR) (i.e., lignosulfonate decreased the cure 
time and acted as secondary accelerator, while methylated lignin and thiolignin 
increased the crosslink density) [89]. The addition of lignin in carbon black filled 
natural rubber exerts a stabilizing effect comparable to that of commercial 
antioxidants used in the rubber industry [90]. Besides their use as filler, lignins 
in the form of low to higher molecular weight, meltable, or soluble products can 
be specially tailored for plastics and rubber compounding [91]. Natural rubber  
(NR) was mixed with curatives and other compounding ingredients, on an open 
two-roll mill of 170 mm diameter and 300 mm working distance. The incorpora -
tion of either soda lignin or thiolignin into NR mixes results in increasing the 
maximum torque of the composites obtained. The great increase in maximum 
torque in the case of thiolignin can be attributed to the sulfur present in thi -
olignin. Also, the incorporation of either soda lignin or thiolignin into NR mixes 
results in shorter cure times with higher rate indices. NR/soda lignin and NR–
thiolignin composites possessed lower tensile strengths and slightly fewer 
elongations at break than the blank (NR) vulcanizate. The NR–thiolignin com -
posite possessed the best thermal stability, and the optimum thiolignin loading 
was found to be 20 phr [92]. Incorporation of either soda lignin or thiolignin 
into NR improves the dielectric properties.
23.7 LIGNIN IN THERMOSETS
Besides polyurethanes and polyesters, phenolic and epoxy resins are the most 
prominent applications of technical lignins in thermosetting materials [93–95].
Vegetable oils from soybean, flax, and palm are some of the most versatile 
renewable substrates and can be converted into fuels, polymers, and specialty 
products [96, 97]. Epoxidation of the unsaturated bonds along the fatty acid 
chains of the seed oils produces intermediary derivatives used then for poly -
mers, coatings, adhesives, and similar industrial products [98].
The use of the vegetable oil esters for new products was recently reported 
[99–101]. Holser [102] investigated the preparation of epoxidized methyl 
esters by transesterification of epoxidized soybean oils during mild reaction 
conditions with preservation of the epoxide function. Epoxidized methyl 
esters can be readily converted into surfactants, fuel additives, and other 
industrial products. Although the vegetable oil-based epoxy resins have a 
positive effect on the environmental, it is difficult them to applied in industrial 
fields where epoxy resins are generally used in combination with curing 
agents, because they have no aromatic rings in their backbone structures and 
have no performance mechanical properties. Wool [103, 104] investigated pos -
sibility of incorporation of unmodified/modified KRL (ethoxylated and male -
ated KRL) in different vegetable oil-based resins (epoxidized soybean oil, 
acrylated epoxidized soybean oil, hydroxylated soybean oil, soybean oil 582  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
monoglyceride) and obtained polymer networks whose properties are influ -
enced by the lignin content.
Addition of butyrated KRL to an unsaturated thermosetting resin, consist -
ing of a mixture of acrylated epoxidized soybean oil and styrene, improved 
the adhesion of the resin to the reinforcing flax fibers [105]. The flexural 
strength increased by 40% for a 5 wt% butyrated lignin addition.
Many researchers have made an effort to use lignin in the production of 
epoxy resin, due to its aromatic structure, expecting the performance proper -
ties of the lignin-based epoxy resin to be equivalent to those of conventional 
epoxy resins [106–108].
Thus, Nonaka [109] prepared lignin–epoxy resin by mixing the alkaline 
solution of KRL and water-soluble epoxy compounds (polyethylene glycol 
diglycidyl ether) and curing agents. The cured resins had a compatibility to 
form a kind of interpenetrating polymer network (IPN). Simionescu et al. [110] 
obtained a liquid lignin–epoxy resin by treatment of calcium lignosulfonate 
with epichlorohydrin in alkaline aqueous medium.
By simply blending the KRL powder (up to 20% lignin) with the liquid epoxy 
prepolymer and hardener, an adhesive system has been obtained. For 5–20% 
lignin content, epoxy resin–lignin blends showed a single T g, but two T g’s for 
blends with a higher content of lignin [111]. The significant improvement in the 
adhesion of the lignin–epoxy resin blends (L-ER) to an aluminum substrate 
could be explained by an interaction on the one hand between lignin–polyamine 
hardener and on the other hand between lignin–epoxy prepolymer [112, 113].
The studies on the epoxy resin–lignin blends derived from lignin types 
showed that those blends containing hardwood lignin (TomliniteTM, Tembec, 
Canada; EucalinTM, Borreggard-Lignotech Group; or steam explosion lignin) 
impart a better adhesion than those having softwood lignin (Indulin AT, West -
vaco) [114]; this can be explained by the differences in chemical structural and 
molecular weight of lignins.
Functionalization of lignin by hydroxyalkylation or phenolation, followed 
by reaction with epichlorohydrin, allowed epoxy-functional lignins to be 
obtained, which may be cured with diamines or anhydrides [95, 115, 116].
Tomita et al. [117] described a new L-ER adhesive in which lignin was 
modified by ozonization. Hofman and Glasser [118, 119] prepared lignin–
epoxy resins from hydroxyalkyl lignin derivatives with varying degrees of 
alkoxylation. It was shown that these lignin-based epoxy resins can be cross-
linked with aromatic diamine ( m-phenylene diamine [ m-PDA]) to form strong 
thermosets whose properties depend on lignin content and polyether chain 
length and which have T g’s ranging from 0°C to 100°C. Ito and Shiraishi [120] 
treated KRL with bisphenol A and then with epichlorohydrine in the presence 
of a catalyst, which yields a waterproof adhesive with improved glueability. 
The increase in degree of lignin phenolation led to an increase in T g and the 
storage modulus in the rubbery plateau region of the cured films, developing 
a better three-dimensional structure.
Simionescu et al. [21, 121–123] reported synthesis of lignin epoxy resins by 
coupling reactions with simple (phenol, β-naphthol, bisphenol) and macromo -LIGNIN IN ThERmOSETS   583
lecular (novolak) phenols of lignosulfonate (ammonium, calcium, iron, and 
chromium lignosulfonate) followed by reaction with epichlorohydrine in alka -
line medium. Incorporation of phenolated lignin–epoxy compounds in epoxy 
resin matrix led to uniform and homogeneous polymer network having a glass 
transition temperature of 52°C. Simionescu et al. [22] showed that significant 
lignin loads ( <50% w/w) could be incorporated into the epoxy resin while 
maintaining good mechanical and electrical properties (volume and surface 
resistivity, dielectric constant, loss in dielectric tangent angle, and dielectric 
rigidity) and high impact toughness (Charpy impact strength) compared with 
the lignin-free phenol epoxy resins. Also, including some fillers (lead soap, alum 
earth, aluminum trioxide, talc, chalk, sand, silica, glass fibers), plasticizer (poly -
ester C 6, dibutylphthalate), and pigments (iron oxide, titanium oxide) in lignin–
epoxy blends in a proportion of 10–40 wt% permits epoxy-modified lignin–epoxy 
composite materials to be obtained without affecting cross-linking reactions 
and properties [22, 124]. A significant improvement in the adhesive strength 
and weatherability of epoxy was observed by the introduction of organosilanes 
(2 wt% epoxyalkylsilane) into lignin–epoxy blends (10% lignin) [60].
In 2001, Kosbar et al. [125] published the results of research carried out at 
IBM on incorporation of lignin–epoxy resin for fabrication of printed circuit 
boards. The method of fabrication of a cross-linked polymer composition 
formed from lignin ( ∼50 wt%), an epoxy resin cross-linking agent (diglycidyl 
ether benzylamine, epoxy novolac or epoxy cresol novolac), and an initiator 
have been described by Afzali-Ardakani et al. [126]. The materials obtained had 
physical and electrical properties similar to those of common laminate resins.
A process for making lignin–epoxide resins from lignin separated from the 
waste cooking liquor from a paper pulping process comprising the steps of 
lignin isolation with a chemical reaction to produce unsaturated end groups 
on the lignin molecule that are epoxidized to produce the resin has been pat -
ented by Holsopple et al. [127]. Lenox Resources Limited developed technol -
ogy that makes an epoxy resin from lignin through the selective addition of 
epoxide groups to the lignin molecule without the use of epichlorohydrin. The 
production of Lenox® (Lenox Resources, Port Huron, MI) lignin–epoxy resins 
for molded composites to industrial scale achieved ∼350 kL/annum (prior to 
liquidation of the company in 2000).
Methylation and phenolation are the two most studied modification 
approaches aimed at introducing reactive functional groups to lignin mole -
cules. Modified lignin from these two methods could partially replace phenol 
in PF resin synthesis. Other methods including reduction, oxidation, and 
hydrolysis improve the reactivity of lignin as well as producing phenolic com -
pounds from lignin [128].
The phenolation of lignin may take place in the presence of both catalysts 
(HCl, H 2SO 4, or BF 3) [114] and alkaline hydroxide at elevated temperatures, 
obtaining the soluble and fusible phenol-modified lignin resin, which, by  
treatment with formaldehyde, is transformed into thermoreactive resins. 
However, chemical heterogeneity and polydispersity limited the application 
of lignin in phenol formaldehyde resin production. This can be countered in 584  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
several ways: biochemical modification of the lignin [129, 130] for increasing 
its reactivity, the addition of filler agents (starch) to reduce the level of con -
densation [131], and the use of OSL, which can be effective phenol diluents 
in phenol-based resin systems [132–134].
KRL, acid hydrolysis, organosolv, steam-explosion lignins, and lignosulfo -
nates as lignin components, and phenol, cresol, resorcinol, or bisphenol as 
phenol have been used for manufacturing lignin–phenolic resins and obtaining 
adhesives with satisfactory strength properties. Lignin–polyphenolic resins are 
predominantly used for production of weather-resistant wood products, such as 
plywood, particleboard, fiberboard, flake board, and strand board. Generally, 
these board products are manufactured using lignocellulosic materials (wood 
veneer, random geometric configuration wood chips, or wood fibers) as an 
adhesive.
The pyrolytic lignin was smoothly incorporated into phenol–formaldehyde 
resins at 30%, 40%, and 50% phenol replacement levels, and the resultant 
resins were evaluated as oriented stand board core-level binder. The lignin 
was effective for up to about 40% replacement of phenol in synthesizing wood 
adhesive-type resins [135].
Thielemans et al. [136] reported an exploratory work regarding the use of 
lignin as fillers and comonomers in thermosetting unsaturated polyesters and 
vinyl esters. The different lignins (pine kraft, hardwood, ethoxylated, and 
maleinated) were incorporated in different resin systems (acrylated epoxidized 
soybean oil, hydroxylated soybean oil, soy oil monoglyceride, and a commercial 
vinyl ester). An increase in the glass transition temperature and a decrease in 
modulus at 20°C was observed. This was explained by the plasticizing effect of 
lignin. Lignin modified by adding double bond functionality was introduced in 
resins by reaction with maleic anhydride and epoxidized soybean oil. This 
modification improved the solubility of lignin in styrene-containing resins, as 
well as the chemical incorporation of lignin in the resin. Moreover, lignin was 
used to treat the surfaces of natural hemp fibers to cover surface defects in the 
natural fibers and to increase the bonding strength between the resin and fiber.
A degradative potential lignin–polyurethane blend was synthesized  
from poly(ester-urethane) elastomers containing lactate segments and lignin 
[137]. After treatment with fungal peroxidase (E.C. 1.11.1.7.) and laccase (ben -
zenediol : oxygen oxidoreductase, EC 1.10.3.2.) isolated from Aspergillus  sp., it 
was observed that polyurethane degradation was strongly influenced by lignin 
addition and enzyme type, being accompanied by significant changes in the 
thermomechanical behavior.
23.8 LIGNIN AND OTHER POLYMER BLENDS
Various lignin-containing composites are summarized in Table 23.5.
Ghosh et al. [86] blended in melt and solution OSL and its ester (lignin butyr -
ate (LB)) with polyhydroxy-alkanoate, such as poly-3-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) TABLE 23.5  Various Kinds of Lignin-Containing Biocomposites and Bionanocomposites
System Preparation Properties Reference
PE/lignin bio-based 
hybrid materialsEthylene vinyl alcohol  
copolymer—compatibilizerTGA, DSC, SEM, mechanical properties—compatible 
blends[149]
PET/lignin Single-screw extruder Lignin particles acting as nucleating agent in the 
composite increased the crystallization rate. Lignin 
presence produced a noticeable enhancement of PET 
crystallinity and crystal dimensions.[49]
Polysiloxane–lignin 
compositesCross-linking Polydimethylsiloxane- α,ω-diol (PDMS) as polymeric 
matrix, silica aerogel as reinforcing filler, and the 
lignin powder, as bulking filler[150]
PHB/Lignin Poly (3-hydroxybutyrate)/soda lignins 
(having distinct chemical group 
functionalities) were produced 
through the delignification of 
sugarcane fiber (i.e., bagasse) and 
subsequent sequential solvent 
fractionation.Good compatibility for a content up to 30% lignin [151]
Polypropylene/ lignin 
compositesPre-graft (alkylation) of lignin Alkylate lignin has better compatibility with PP (10 
wt% is the optimum content of alkylated lignin). 
Lignin played a role of heterogeneous nucleation 
when the PP crystallization. After 50 days’ biological 
degradation, the maximum weight loss rate of 
composites was up to 9.61% (70 wt% content of 
alkylate lignin)[71, 152]
HDPE/lignin from 
bioethanol 
production (straw 
and stalks)By extruded pellet fabrication and 
thermoform process.With increase of the lignin content from 55% to 75%, 
the static flexural strength of the resulting blends was 
hardly influenced, but the tensile strength decreased 
42%.[153]
(Continued )
585System Preparation Properties Reference
Cellulose (85–34 wt%/
Starch (10–62 
wt%)/lignin (1–5 
wt%)From an ionic liquid (IL), 1-allyl-3-
methylimidazolium chloride 
(AmimCl) by coagulating in a 
nonsolvent conditionExcellent mechanical properties in dry and wet states 
owing to the mutual property supplement of different 
components. Good thermal stability and high gas 
barrier capacity and a CO2 : O2 permeability ratio 
close to 1.[139]
Chitosan/lignin Solution casting technique Lignin well dispersed in chitosan when the content of 
lignin is below 20 wt% due to the strong interfacial 
interaction by hydrogen bonding. Storage modulus, 
thermal degradation temperature, and glass transition 
temperature of chitosan have been largely improved 
by adding lignin. Fully degradable composites[154]
PVC/lignin Lignin was treated with a polyacrylate, 
poly(ethyl acrylate-co-acrylic acid)Polyacrylate improved the adhesion between lignin 
particles and PVC matrix. The tensile and impact 
strengths of the composites are improved.[155]
PVC/wood-flour/lignin Lignin was aminated by Mannich 
reaction
The composites were prepared by melt 
compoundingThe lignin amine treatment improved the mechanical 
performance.
Interfacial interactions of wood with PVC matrix are 
strengthened.[156]
Different types of  
lignins/poly(vinyl 
chloride)
compositesMelt compounding Lignin influences the processability of the blends and 
mechanical properties and weathering.
Interactions between lignin and PVC depend of types 
of lignin.[157]
PVA/kraft lignin or 
modified kraft 
ligninSolution casting from dimethyl 
sulfoxide (DMSO)15–25% lignin content; PVA/lignin films present high 
resistance to photochemical attack and thermal 
stability in comparison with PVA films[158, 159]
PVA/lignin Thermal extrusion PVA/lignin blend is immiscible in the bulk. The results 
indicate the formation of specific intermolecular 
interaction between components[29]
Lignin/wool 50% shoddy wool; 25% viscose; 25% 
ligninOil sorbents; optimal composition 90 wt% wool/10 wt% 
lignin[160]TABLE 23.5 (Continued )
586LIGNIN ANd OThER pOLymER BLENdS   587
and poly-3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate (PHBV). The presence of 
lignin, in proportion of 10–20%, inhibits or retards crystallization PHB at any 
cooling rate. Glass transition temperature T g values of the PHB phase shifted 
toward the glass transition of L or LB, indicating a polymer–polymer interaction 
between blend components. Incorporation of LB in the PHBV led to some 
interaction and an important reduction of crystallinity in the samples. Generally, 
the presence of lignin improved tensile strength and elongation at break.
Blends containing poly(hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) and L-ER have been pre -
pared on a Brabender plastograph [138]. The L-ER content in the binary 
blends was 10 wt%, 15 wt%, 20 wt%, and 35 wt%. The epoxy groups of L-ER 
interact either with the end groups of the PHB or with diaminodiphenylmeth -
ane (a cross-linking agent), achieving a satisfactory homogeneity of the blends. 
Some blends with good properties are totally degradable after 45 days.
New biocomposites containing starch, cellulose, and lignin were prepared 
from ionic liquid (IL) by coagulating in nonsolvent conditions [139]. Results 
showed that the content of cellulose, lignin, and starch had a significant influ -
ence on the mechanical properties of composite films. The results obtained 
showed that the composite films presented good thermal stability, high gas 
barrier capacity, and a CO 2 : O2 permeability ratio close to 1.
Another family of thermoplastic polysaccharides such as starch/cellulose-
2,5-acetate were produced by reactive processing technology that grafted 
cyclic lactones simultaneously onto polysaccharide, hydroxyfunctional plasti -
cizer, and hydroxyfunctional fillers [140]. Organosolv lignin, cellulose, starch, 
and chitin were added to effect reinforcement of the polymer matrix. Compat -
ibility between oligolactone-modified cellulose acetate and fillers was improved 
when fillers were added during the reactive extrusion process.
A series of blends composed of cellulose or hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC) 
and an unmodified OSL or ethylated lignin (E tL) have been prepared by 
solvent casting or by injection molding procedure [141, 142]. Ghosh et al. [143] 
reported a certain degree of compatibility between modified cellulose and 
modified lignin due to the presence of secondary interactions between the two 
components. When mixing of hydroxypropyl cellulose and OSL was carried 
out in the melt followed by extrusion, partially miscible blends displaying a 
mesomorphic type behavior were obtained [142]. The lignin component rein -
forced the amorphous cellulose derivative matrix, forming an oriented crystal 
mesophase structure, which behaves as a nanocomposite structure.
In the case of a blend formed from ethyl cellulose (EC) and lignin, addition 
of L (up to 40%) led to the appearance of two separate phases with creation 
of a liquid crystal mesophase [143].
To increase the phase compatibility between lignin and cellulose (deriva -
tives), block copolymers were synthesized containing covalent bonds between 
lignin and cellulose ester segments [144, 145]. Lignin–thermoplastic cellulose 
derivative copolymer exhibited phase distinctions with the individual block 
having molecular weights as low as 103 Da [146]. Differential scanning calo -
rimetry (DSC) data revealed that lignin–cellulose propionate (CP) block 588  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
copolymer was unable to improve lignin–cellulose (derivatives) blend compat -
ibility. Results show that lignin favors the formation of an amorphous or liquid 
crystalline mesophase structure through establishing a strong interactive asso -
ciation between lignin and the polysaccharide component.
The addition of lignin reduced the dynamic elastic modulus of cellulose 
ester solutions, but the modulus of the cellulose solutions (in DMAc/LiCl) is 
increased at all shear frequencies. This is explained by the formation of second -
ary interactions of lignin with cellulose in the DMAc/LiCl solvent system 
[146]. However, when cellulose ester–cellulose acetate butyrate (CAB)/L mix -
tures were spun into continous fibers from DMAc solution, both fiber tensile 
strength and modulus increased significantly. This increase was explained by 
the positive effect of lignin (even at small amounts of lignin, i.e., 4%) on the 
molecular order of the cellulose derivatives in solution and in solid state.
A lignin–polymer complex of lignosulfonate from softwood delignification 
and sawdust was tested as soil conditioner with good results [147]. Such a 
composite also exhibits the ability to repel moisture and water [148].
23.9 CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
The past 30-year history of lignin-containing polymeric materials has been 
characterized by changing perceptions of macromolecular lignin structure. The 
first formulations originated in the view of lignins as a three-dimensionally 
branched network of polymers. Whether incorporated covalently or noncova -
lently into polymeric materials, lignin preparations were, with few exceptions, 
limited to maximum contents of 30–45% (w/w). However, once the significance 
of noncovalent interactions between the constituent molecular components 
had been recognized, it was possible to generate promising polymeric materials 
composed exclusively of ethylated and methylated KRL, and other equally 
simple lignin derivatives. Plasticization of these materials can be achieved in a 
predictable way by blending with miscible low-T g polymers. The field of lignin 
bionanocomposites is still developing. The future of novel bionanocomposites 
with improved properties and multifunctionality can be envisaged as an emerg -
ing, open field of research, with plenty of possibilities because of the great 
abundance and diversity of biopolymers in nature, as well as the advantage of 
their synergistic combination with inorganic nanosized solids. On the other 
hand, biocompatibility is a critical property for the application of these biohy -
brids in food packaging or tissue engineering in regenerative medicine.
REFERENCES
 [1] Darder, M., Aranda, P ., and Ruiz-Hitzky, E. (2007) Bionanocomposites: A new 
concept of ecological, bioinspired, and functional hybrid materials. Adv. Mater. , 
19, 1309–1319.REfERENCES   589
 [2] Shulga, G., Skudra, S., Shakels, V., Belkova, L., Cazacu, G., Vasile, C., and Nita, L. 
(2011) Lignin separated from the hydrolyzate of hydrothermal treatment of 
birch wood and its surface properties. Cell. Chem. Technol. , 46(5–6), 307–318.
 [3] Chen, P ., Zhang, L.N., Peng, S.P ., and Liao, B. (2006) Effects of nanoscale hydroxy -
propyl lignin on properties of soy protein plastics. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 101, 
334–341.
 [4] Doherty, W.O.S., Mousavioun, P .C., and Fellows, M. (2010) Value adding to cel -
lulosic ethanol: Lignin polymers. Ind. Crops Prod. , 33, 259–276.
 [5] Achyuthan, K.E., Achyuthan, A.M., Adams, P .D., Dirk, S.M., Harper, J.C., 
Simmons, B.A., and Singh, A.K. (2010) Supramolecular self-assembled chaos: 
Polyphenolic lignin’s barrier to cost-effective lignocellulosic biofuels. Molecules , 
15, 8641–8688.
 [6] Sarkanen, S., Teller, D.C., Stevens, C.R., and McCarthy, J.L. (1984) Associative 
interactions between kraft lignin components. Macromolecules , 17, 2588–2597.
 [7] Sarkanen, S., Teller, D.C., Hall, J., and McCarthy, J.L. (1981) Associative effects 
among organosolv lignin components. Macromolecules , 14, 426–434.
 [8] Li, Y., Mlynar, J., and Sarkanen, S. (1997) The first 85% kraft lignin-based ther -
moplastics. J. Polym. Sci. B , 35, 1899–1910.
 [9] Pye, E.K. (2006) Industrial lignin production and applications. In: Biorefineries-
Industrial Processes and Product , Vol. 2, eds. B. Kamm, P .R. Gruber, and M. Kamm. 
Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, pp. 165–200.
 [10] Vasile, C., Popescu, M.C., Stoleriu, A., and Gosselink, R. (2006) Thermal charac -
terization of lignins. In: New Trends in Natural and Synthetic Polymers , eds. C. 
Vasile, G.E. Zaikov. New York: Nova Science, pp. 135–165.
 [11] Brebu, M., Vasile, C. (2010) Thermal degradation of lignin—A review. Cell. Chem. 
Technol. , 44(9), 353–363.
 [12] Popescu, C.M., Vasile, C., Popescu, M.C., Singurel, G.H., Popa, V.I., and Munte -
anu, B.S. (2006) Analytical methods for lignin characterization. II. Spectroscopi -
cal studies. Cell. Chem. Technol. , 40(8), 597–622.
 [13] Vasile, C., Gosselink, R., Quintus, P ., Koukios, E.G., Koullas, D.P ., Avgerinos, E., 
and Abacherli, A. (2006) Analytical methods for lignin characterization. I. Ther -
mogravimetry. Cell. Chem. Technol. , 40(6), 421–429.
 [14] Koullas, D.P ., Koukios, E.G., Avgerinos, E., Abaecherli, A., Gosselink, R., Vasile, 
C., Lehnen, R., Saake, B., and Suren, J. (2006) Analytical methods for lignin 
characterization, Differential scanning calorimetry. Cell. Chem. Technol. , 40(9–
10), 719–725.
 [15] Schilling, P . (1993) US Patent no. 5,192,361, March 9.
 [16] Rojas, O. (2008) Nanotechnology in lignocellulosic applications. Americas  
Innovation Forum, March 30–April 1, 2008, Punta del Este, FIA/AIF 2008, 
Uruguay Available at: http://www.anii.org.uy/FIA_AIF2008/ponencias/ponencias/  
ROJASFIA2008_Uruguay.pdf.
 [17] Popa, V.I., C ăpraru, A.M., Grama, S., and M ăluţan, T. (2011) Nanoparticles based 
on modified lignins with biocide properties. Cell. Chem. Technol. , 45(3–4), 
221–226.
 [18] Cazacu, G., Vasile, C., Popescu, M.C., and Darie, R.N. (2010) Lignin characteriza -
tion for its use in complex polymeric systems. FP7 NAPOLYNET “Setting up 
Research-intensive Clusters Across the EU on Characterization of Polymer 590  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
Nanostructures” and COST ACTION FA0904 “Eco-sustainable Food Packaging 
based on Polymer Nanomaterials, Polymer Nanomaterials for Food Packaging, 
Characterization Needs, Safety and Environmental Issues,” September 1–2, 2010, 
London, United Kingdom.
 [19] Misra, M., Vivekanandhan, S., Mohanty, A., and Sahoo, S. (2010). Lignin. Recent 
development and new opportunities. CIPET-TIMES , A CIPET Inhouse Publica -
tion, January–April 2010, 8–14; http://www.cipet.gov.in/pdfs/CIPET_TIMES_jan-
april-2010.pdf (accessed 2011).
 [20] Darie, R., Vasile, C., and Kozlowski, M. (2011) Compatibilization of Complex 
Polymeric Systems, Reactive Compatibilization-cum-Impact Modification Applied 
to Virgin Polymer and Waste . Saarbrucken, Germany: LAP Lambert Academic 
Publishing. ISBN 978-3-8443-1225-6.
 [21] Simionescu, C.I., Turt, C.I., Bucova, S.A., Macoveanu, M.M., Cazacu, G., and 
Vasile, C. (1994) Sinteza, caracterizarea fizico-chimic( si spectrala a unor rasini 
lignin epoxidice. Buletinul Acad. St. a Republicii Moldova. Stiinte Biologice si 
Chimice , 3(270), 62–73.
 [22] Simionescu, C.I., Macoveanu, M.M., Cazacu, G., Vasile, C., and Stoleriu, A. (1993) 
Lignin-epoxy composites. Compos. Sci. Technol. , 48, 317–323.
 [23] Nägele, H., Pfitzer, J., Näegele, E., Inone, E.R., Eisenreich, N., Eckl, W., and 
Eyerer, P . (2002) Arboform: a thermoplastic, processable material from lignin 
and natural fibers. In: Chemical Modification, Properties, and Usage of Lignin , ed. 
T.Q. Hu. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum, pp. 101–120.
 [24] Leszczynska, A., Njuguna, J., Pielichowski, K., and Banerjee, J.R. (2007) Polymer/
montmorillonite nanocomposites with improved thermal properties: Part I. 
Factors influencing thermal stability and mechanisms of thermal stability 
improvement. Thermochim. Acta , 453(2), 75–96.
 [25] Sevastyanova, O., Qin, W., and Kadla, J.F. (2010) Effect of nanofillers as reinforce -
ment agents for lignin composite fibers. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 117(5), 2877–2881.
 [26] Guigo, N., Vincent, L., Mija, A., Nägele, H., and Sbirrazzuoli, N. (2009) Innovative 
green nanocomposites based on silicate clays/lignin/natural fibres. Compos. Sci. 
Technol. , 69(11–12), 1979–1984.
 [27] Okada, A., Usuki, A. (2006) Twenty years of polymer–clay nanocomposites. Mac-
romol. Mater. Eng. , 291(12), 1449–1476.
 [28] Kadla, J.F., Kubo, S. (2004) Lignin-based polymer blends: Analysis of intermo -
lecular interactions in lignin-synthetic polymer blends. Compos. Part A Appl. Sci. 
Manuf. , 35, 395–400.
 [29] Kubo, S., Kadla, J.F. (2003) The formation of strong intermolecular interactions 
in immiscible blends of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) and lignin. Biomacromole -
cules , 4, 561–567.
 [30] Huang, J., Zhang, L., and Chen, P . (2003) Effects of lignin as a filler on properties 
of soy protein plastics. II. Alkaline lignin. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 88, 3291–3297.
 [31] Baumberger, S., Lapierre, C., Monties, B., and Valle, G.D. (1998) Use of kraft 
lignin as filler for starch films. Polym. Degrad. Stab. , 59, 273–277.
 [32] Tudorachi, N., Cascaval, C.N., and Rusu, M. (2000) Biodegradable polymer blends 
based on polyethylene and natural polymers. Degradation in soil. J. Polym. Eng. , 
20(4), 287–304.REfERENCES   591
 [33] Vasile, C., Iwanczuk, A., Frackowiak, S., Cazacu, G., Constantinescu, G., and 
Kozlowski, M. (2006) Modified lignin/polyethylene blends. Cell. Chem. Technol. , 
40(5), 345–351.
 [34] Cazacu, G., Mihaies, M., Pascu, M.C., Profire, L., Kowarski, A.I., and Vasile, C. 
(2004) Polyolefins /lignosulfonate blends. IX. Functionalized polyolefins/lignin 
blends. Macromol. Mater. Eng. Sci. , 289, 880–889.
 [35] Cazacu, G., Pascu, M.C., Profire, L., Kowarski, A.I., and Vasile, C. (2004) Lignin 
role in a complex polyolefin blend. Ind. Crops Prod. , 20(204), 205–221.
 [36] Vasile, C. (2002) Role of polymer degradation processes in environmental pollu -
tion and protection. Polymery (Poland) , XLVII (7/8), 517–522.
 [37] Cazacu, G., Pascu, M.C., Profire, L., and Vasile, C. (2002) Environmental friendly 
polymer materials I. Polyolefins-lignin based materials. Environ. Protect. Ecol. , 
3(1), 242–248.
 [38] Macoveanu, M.M., Constantin, L., Manoliu, A.L., Pascu, M.C., Profire, L., Cazacu, 
G., and Vasile, C. (2001) Polyolefins/lignosulfonates blends. IV. Bio-and environ -
mental degradation testing of polyolefins/lignosulfonates blends. Cell. Chem. 
Technol. , 35(1–2), 197–203.
 [39] Macoveanu, M.M., Georgescu-Buruntea, N., Pascu, M.C., Casariu, M., Ioanid, A., 
Vidrascu, P ., and Vasile, C. (2001) Polyolefins/lignosulfonates blends. V. Bio and 
environmental degradation. Cell. Chem. Technol. , 35, 3–4, 263–273.
 [40] Pascu, M.C., Macoveanu, M.M., Ioanid, A., and Vasile, C. (2001) Polyolefins/lig -
nosulfonates blends VI. Bio and environmental behaviour of photo-oxidized 
blends. Cell. Chem. Technol. , 35(5–6), 513–522.
 [41] Vasile, C., Downey, M., Wong, B., Macoveanu, M.M., Pascu, M.C., Choi, J.H., Sung, 
C., and Baker, W. (1998) Polyolefins/lignosulfonates blends. II. Isotactic polypro -
pylene/epoxi-modified lignin. Cell. Chem. Technol. , 32(1–2), 61–88.
 [42] Bozell, J.J., Holladay, J.E., Johnson, D., and White, J.F. (2007). Top value added 
chemicals from biomass. Vol. II: Results of screening for potential candidates 
from biorefinery. Available at http://wwwl.pnl.gov/main/publications/external/
technical_reports/PNNL-16983.pdf (accessed 2011).
 [43] Kharade, A.Y., Kale, D.D. (1999) Lignin-filled polyolefins. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 
72(10), 1321–1326.
 [44] Pouteau, C., Baumberger, S., Cathala, B., and Dole, P . (2004) Lignin-polymer 
blends: Evaluation of compatibility by image analysis. C. R. Biol. , 327(9–10), 
935–943.
 [45] Pouteau, C., Dole, P ., Cathala, B., Averous, L., and Boquillon, N. (2003) Antioxi -
dant properties of lignin in polypropylene. Polym. Degrad. Stabil. , 81(1), 9–18.
 [46] de Oliveira, W., Glasser, W.G. (1994) Multiphase materials with lignin. XIV. Star-
like copolymers with styrene. J. Wood Chem. Technol. , 14(1), 119–126.
 [47] El-Aghoury, A., Vasudeva, R., Banu, D., Elektorowicz, M., and Feldman, D. 
(2006) Contribution to the study of fungal attack on some plasticized vinyl for -
mulations. J. Polym. Environ. , 14(2), 135–147.
 [48] Feldman, D., Banu, D., Lora, J., and El-Raghi, S. (1996) Rigid poly(vinyl chlo -
ride)–organosolv lignin blends for applications in building. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 
61(12), 2119–2128.
 [49] Canetti, M., Bertini, F. (2007) Supermolecular structure and thermal properties 
of poly(ethylene terephthalate)/lignin composites. Compos. Sci. Technol. , 67(15–
16), 3151–3157.592  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
 [50] Graupner, N. (2008) Application of lignin as natural adhesion promoter in cotton 
fibre-reinforced poly(lactic acid) (PLA) composites. J. Mater. Sci. , 43(15), 
5222–5229.
 [51] Li, J.C., He, Y., and Yoshio, I. (2003) Thermal and mechanical properties of bio -
degradable blends of poly(L-lactic acid) and lignin. Polym. Int. , 52(6), 949–955.
 [52] Hansjorg, N., Hinnerk, S., Rudiger, L., and Rolf, M. (2001) Reactive extrusion of 
polycaprolactone compounds containing wood flour and lignin. J. Appl. Polym. 
Sci., 81(8), 1972–1984.
 [53] Kelley, S.S., Glasser, W.G., and Ward, T.C. (1989) Multiphase materials with lignin: 
9. Effect of lignin content on interpenetrating polymer network properties. 
Polymer , 30(12), 2265–2268.
 [54] Chen, Y.R., Sarkanen, S. (2006) From the macromolecular behavior of lignin 
components to the mechanical properties of lignin-based plastics. Cell. Chem. 
Technol. , 40(3–4), 149–163.
 [55] Vasile, C., Macoveanu, M.M., Cazacu, G., and Popa, V.I. (1998) 5th Mediterranean 
School on Science and Technology of Advanced Polymer-Based Materials, eds. 
E. Martuscelli, P . Musto, and G. Ragosta. October 4–9, 1997, Capri, Italy, UNESCO 
OFFICE, 185–209.
 [56] Košiková, B., Damianova, V., and Kacurocova, M.J. (1993) Sulfur-free as compos -
ites of polypropylene films. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 47, 1065–1073.
 [57] Košiková, B., Miklesova, K., and Damianova, V. (1993) Characteristics of free 
radicals in composite lignin/polypropylene films studied by the EPR method. 
Eur. Polym. J. , 29, 1495–1497.
 [58] Gonzales-Sánchez, C., Expósito Alvarez, L.A. (1999) Micromechanics of lignin/
polypropylene composites suitable for industrial applications. Angew. Makromol. 
Chem. , 272, 65–70.
 [59] Tudorachi, N., Rusu, M., Cascaval, N.C., Constantin, L., and Rugina, V. (2000) 
Biodegradable polymeric materials. I. Polyethylene–natural polymer blends. Cell. 
Chem. Technol. , 34, 101–111.
 [60] Levon, K., Huhtala, J., Malm B., and Lindberg, J.J. (1987). Improvement of 
thermal stabilization of polyethylene with lignosulfonate. Polymer , 28(5), 
745–750.
 [61] Toriz, G., Denes, F., and Young, R.A. (2002). Lignin-polypropylene composites: 
Part 1: Composites from unmodified lignin and polypropylene. Polym Compos -
ites, 23(5), 806–813.
 [62] Canetti, M., Bertini, F., De Chirico, A., and Audiso, G. (2006) Thermal degrada -
tion behaviour of isotactic polypropylene blended with lignin. Polym. Degrad. 
Stab., 91, 494–498.
 [63] Gregorová, A., Cibulková, Z., Košiková, B., and Šimon, P . (2005) Stabilization 
effect of lignin in polypropylene and recycled polypropylene. Polym. Degrad. 
Stab., 89, 553–558.
 [64] Casenave, S., Aït-Kadfi, A., and Riedl, B. (1996) Mechanical behaviour of highly 
filled lignin/polyethylene composites made by catalytic grafting. Can. J. Chem. 
Eng., 74(2), 308–315.
 [65] Darie, R., Cazacu, G., Vasile, C., and Kozlowski, M. (2007) Blends with polypro -
pylene matrix and lignin additive, Italic 4—Science & Technology of Biomass: 
Advances and Challenges, May 8–10, 2007, Rome, Italy.REfERENCES   593
 [66] Simionescu, C.I., Macoveanu, M.M., Vasile, C., Ciobanu, F.L., and Cazacu, G. 
(1995) Lignin containing blends and composites. In: High Tchnology Composites 
in Modern Applications , eds. S.A. Paipetas, A.G. Youtsos. Greece: University of 
Patras, pp. 222–232.
 [67] Zhong, M., Dai, H., Yao, H., Dai, D., Zhou, Y., Yang, J., and Chen, F. (2011) Strong, 
flexible high-lignin polypropylene blends. Society of Plastics Engineers (SPE). 
Plast. Res. , 24.06.2011, DOi: 10.2417/spepro.003642.
 [68] Pascu, M.C., Macoveanu, M.M., Vasile, C., Ioanid, A., and Oghina, R.C. (2000) 
Polyolefins/lignosulfonates blends. III. Photo-oxidation of isotactic polypropyl -
ene/epoxidized lignosulfonate blends. Cell. Chem. Technol. , 34, 399–420.
 [69] Pascu, M., Vasile, C., Popa, G., Mihaila, I., and Pohoata, V. (2002) Modification of 
polymer blends properties by plasma/electron beam treatment.I. Plasma diagno -
sis and bulk properties of plasma treated blends. Intern. J. Polym. Mater. , 51(½), 
181–192.
 [70] Košiková, B., Demianova, V., and Kacurakova, M. (1993) Lignin biopolymers in 
the composite polypropylene films. In: Cellulosics Chemical, Biochemical Mate -
rial Aspects , eds. J. Kennedy, G.O. Phillips, and D.A. Williams. New York: Ellis 
Horwood, pp. 537–542.
 [71] Košiková, B., Lábaj, J. (2009) Lignin-stimulated protection of polypropylene films 
and DNA in cells of mice against oxidation damage. BioResources , 4(2), 
805–815.
 [72] Kubo, S., Kadla, J.F. (2004) Poly(ethylene oxide)/organosolv lignin blends: Rela -
tionship between thermal properties, chemical structure and blend behavior. 
Macromolecules , 37, 6904–6911.
 [73] Kadla, J.F., Kubo, S. (2003) Miscibility and hydrogen bonding in blends of 
poly(ethylene oxide) and kraft lignin. Macromolecules , 36, 7803–7811.
 [74] Nitz, H., Semke, H., Landers, R., and Mülhaupt, R. (2001) Reactive extrusion of 
polycaprolactone compounds containing wood flour and lignin. J. Appl. Polym. 
Sci., 81(8), 1972–1984.
 [75] Guigo, N., Mija, A., Vincent, L., and Sbirrazzuoli, N. (2010) Eco-friendly compos -
ite resins based on renewable biomass resources: Polyfurfuryl alcohol/lignin ther -
mosets. Eur. Polym. J. , 46(5), 1016–1023.
 [76] Athamneh, A.I., Griffin, M., Whaley, M., and Barone, J.R. (2008) Conformational 
changes and molecular mobility in plasticized proteins. Biomacromolecules , 9, 
3181–3187.
 [77] Oliviero, M., Verdolotti, L., Di Maio, E., Aurilia, M., and Iannace, S. (2011) Effect 
of supramolecular structures on thermoplastic zein-lignin bionanocomposites.  
J. Agric. Food Chem. , 59(18), 10062–10070.
 [78] Huang, J., Zhang, L., and Chen, P . (2003) Effects of lignin as a filler on properties 
of soy protein plastics. II. Alkaline lignin. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 88, 3291–3297.
 [79] Oliviero, M., Verdolotti, L., Nedi, I., Docimo, F., Di Maio, E., and Iannance, S. 
(2012) Effect of two kinds of lignins, alkaline lignin and sodium lignossulfonate, 
on the foamibility of thermoplastic zein-based biocomposites. J. Cellular Plastics , 
48(6), 516–525.
 [80] Luecha, J., Sozer, N., and Kokini, J.L. (2010) Synthesis and properties of corn 
zein/montmorillonite nanocomposite films. J. Mater. Sci. , 45, 3529–3537.
 [81] Huang, J., Zhang, L., and Chen, F. (2003) Effects of lignin as a filler on properties 
of soy protein plastics. I. Lignosulfonate. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 88, 3284–3290.594  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
 [82] Wei, M., Fan, L., Huang, J., and Chen, Y. (2006) Role of star-like hydroxylpropyl 
lignin in soy-protein plastics. Macromol. Mater. Eng. , 291, 524–530.
 [83] Baumberger, S., Lapierre, C., and Monties, B. (1998) Utilization of pine kraft 
lignin in starch composites: Impact of structural heterogeneity. J. Agric. Food 
Chem. , 46, 2234–2240.
 [84] Ming, S., Baumberger, S., Lapierre, C., Monties, B., Lourdin, D., and Colonna, P . 
(1997) Preparation and properties of thermally moulded and cast lignosulfo -
nates-starch blends. Ind. Crops Prod. , 6, 253–258.
 [85] Vengal, J.C., Srikumar, M. (2005) Processing and study of novel lignin-starch and 
lignin-gelatin biodegradable polymeric films. Trends Biomater. Artif. Organs , 
18(2), 237–241.
 [86] Ghosh, I., Jain, R.K., and Glasser, W.G. (2000) Blends of biodegradable thermo -
plastics with lignin esters. In: Lignin: Historical, Biological, and Materials Perspec -
tives, ACS Symp. Ser. 742, eds. W.G. Glasser, R.A. Northey, T.P . Schultz, 
Washington, DC: American Chemical Society, pp. 331–350.
 [87] Julinova, M., Kupec, J., Alexy, P ., Hoffmann, J., Sedlarık, V., Vojtek, T., Chromca -
kova, J., and Bugaj, P . (2010) Lignin and starch as potential inductors for biodeg -
radation of films based on poly(vinyl alcohol) and protein hydrolysate. Polym. 
Degrad. Stab. , 95, 225–233.
 [88] Bahl, K. (2011) Lignin based rubber composites towards production of 
energy efficient compounds for tire industry . American Chem. Soc. Rubber 
Division, October 12, 2011. http://rubber.confex.com/rubber/180/webprogram/
Paper11314.html.
 [89] Botros, S.H., Eid, M.A.M., and Nageeb, Z.A. (2005) Thermal stability and dielec -
tric relaxation of NR/soda lignin and NR/thiolignin composites. Egypt. J. Solids , 
28(1), 67–83.
 [90] Gregorova, A., Kosikova, B., and Moravcik, R. (2006). Stabilization effect of 
lignin in natural rubber. Polym. Degrad. Stab. , 91(2), 229–233.
 [91] Nitz, H., Semke, H., Mülhaupt, R., and Abächerli, A. (2001) Lignin-tailor made 
use as non-toxic biostabiliser. Kunstst-Plast. Eur. , 11, 40–42.
 [92] Botros, S.H., Eid, M.A.M., and Nageeb, Z.A. (2006) Thermal stability and dielec -
tric relaxation of natural rubber/soda lignin and natural rubber/thiolignin com -
posites. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 99(5), 2504–2511.
 [93] El Mansouri, N.E., Yuan, Q., and Huang, F. (2011) Characterization of alkaline 
lignins for use in penol-formaldehyde and epoxy resins. BioResources , 6(3), 
2647–2662.
 [94] Simionescu, C. I, Rusan, V., Macoveanu, M.M., Cazacu, G., Lipsa, R., Vasile, C., 
and Stoleriu, A. (1993) Lignin-epoxy composites. In: Microphenomena in 
Advanced Composites , eds. H.S. Wagner, G. Marom, and B. Haris. Elsevier Appl. 
Sci., pp. 317–323.
 [95] Simionescu, C.I., Vasile, C., Macoveanu, M.M., Cazacu, G., and Ioanid, A. (1994) 
Behaviour by burial in soil of epoxy resins, lignin-epoxy resins and their mixtures. 
Cell. Chem. Technol. , 28, 517–539.
 [96] Gervasio, G.C. (1996) Fatty acids and derivatives from coconut oil. In Bailey’s 
Industrial Oil & Fat Products , Vol. 3, ed. Y.H. Hui. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
pp. 33–83.REfERENCES   595
 [97] Khot, S.N., Lascala, J.J., Can, E., Morye, S.S., Williams, G.I., Palmese, G.R., Kuse -
foglu, S.H., and Wool, R.P . (2001) Development and application of triglyceride-
based polymers and composites. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 82, 703–723.
 [98] Harry-O’kuru, R.E., Holser, R.A., Abbott, T.P ., and Weisleder, D. (2002) Synthe -
sis and characteristics of polyhydroxy triglycerides from milkweed oil. Ind. Crops 
Prod. , 15, 51–58.
 [99] Doll, K.M., Erhan, S.Z. (2005) Synthesis of carbonated fatty methyl ester using 
supercritical carbon dioxide. J. Agric. Food Chem. , 53, 9608–9614.
[100] Moser, B.R., Erhan, S.Z. (2006) Synthesis and evaluation of a series of hydroxy 
ethers derived from isopropyl oleate. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. , 83, 959–963.
[101] Kurth, T.L., Sharma, B.K., Doll, K.M., and Erhan, S.Z. (2007) Adsorption behav -
ior of epoxidized fatty esters via boundary lubrication coefficient of friction 
measurements. Chem. Eng. Comm. , 194, 1065–1077.
[102] Holser, R.A. (2008) Transesterificarea of epoxidized soybean oil to prepared 
epoxy methyl esters. Ind. Crops Prod. , 27, 130–132.
[103] Wool, R.P . (2005) Lignin polymers and composites. In Bio-based Polymers and 
Composites , eds. R.P . Wool, X.S. Sun. London: Elsevier Academic Press, pp. 
551–558.
[104] Thielemans, W., Wool, R.P . (2005) Kraft lignin as fiber treatment for natural fiber-
reinforced composites. Polym. Compos. , 26(5), 695–705.
[105] Thielemans, W., Wool, R.P . (2004) Butyrated kraft lignin as compatibilizing agent 
for natural fiber reinforced thermoset composites. Compos. Part A , 35, 327–338.
[106] Lee, H.J., Tomita, B., and Hosoya, S. (1991) Development of ozonized kraft lignin/
epoxy resin adhesives. Wood Ind. , 46, 412–417.
[107] Hirose, S., Hatakeyama, T., and Hatakeyama, H. (2005) Glass transition and 
thermal decomposition of epoxy resins from the carboxylic acid system consist -
ing of ester-carboxylic acid derivatives of alcoholysis lignin and ethylene glycol 
with various decarboxylic acids. Thermochim. Acta. , 431, 76–80.
[108] Ismail, T.N.M.T., Hassan, H.A., Hirose, S., Taguchi, Y., Hatakeyama, T., and 
Hatakeyama, H. (2010) Synthesis and thermal properties of ester-type crosslinked 
epoxy resins derived from lignosulfonate and glycerol. Polym. Int. , 59, 181–186.
[109] Nonaka, Y., Tomita, B., and Hatano, Y. (1997) Synthesis of lignin/epoxy resins in 
aqueous systems and their properties. Holzforschung , 51, 183–187.
[110] Simionescu, C.I., Cazacu, G., and Macoveanu, M.M. (1987) Lignin-epoxy resins. 
II. Physical and chemical characterization. Cell. Chem. Technol. , 21(5), 525.
[111] Feldman, D., Khoury, M.J. (1988) Epoxy-lignin polyblends. Part II. Adhesive 
behavior and weathering. J. Adhes. Sci. Technol. , 2(2), 107–116.
[112] Feldman, D., Banu, D. (1988) Kinetic data on the curing of an epoxy polymer in 
the presence of lignin. J. Polym Sci. Part A. Polym Chem. , 26(4), 973–983.
[113] McCarthy, J.L., Islam, A. (2000) Lignin chemistry, technology, and utilization. A 
brief history. In: Lignin: Historical, Biological and Materials Perspectives , ACS 
Symposium Series 742, eds. W.G. Glasser, R.A. Northey, and T.P . Schultz. Wash -
ington, DC: American Chemical Society, pp. 2–99.
[114] Shiraishi, N. (1989) Recent progress in wood dissolution and adhesives from kraft 
lignin. In: Lignin, Properties and Materials , ACS Symposium Series 397, eds. W.G. 
Glasser, S. Sarkanen. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society, pp. 488–495.
[115] Gargulak, J.D., Lebo, S.E. (2000) Commercial use of lignin-based materials. In: 
Lignin: Historical, Biological and Materials Perspectives , ACS Symposium Series 596  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
742, eds. W.G. Glasser, R.A. Northey, and T.P . Schultz. Washington, DC: American 
Chemical Society, pp. 304–312.
[116] Feldman, D., Banu, D., Luchian, C., and Wang, J. (1991) Epoxy-lignin blends: 
Correlation between polymer interaction and curing temperature. J. Appl. Polym. 
Sci., 42(5), 1307–1318.
[117] Tomita, B., Kurozumi, K., Takemura, A., and Hosoya, S. (1989) Ozonized lignin-
epoxy resins. In: Lignin, Properties and Materials , ACS Symp. Ser. 397, eds. W.G. 
Glasser, S. Sarkanen. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society, pp. 496–505.
[118] Hofmann, K., Glasser, W.G. (1993) Engineering plastics from lignin. 21. Synthesis 
and properties of epoxidized lignin-poly(propylene oxide) copolymers. J. Wood 
Chem. Technol. , 13(1), 73–95.
[119] Hofmann, K., Glasser, W.G. (1993) Engineering plastics from lignin. 22. Cure of 
lignin based epoxy resins. J. Adhesion , 40(2), 229–241.
[120] Ito, H., Shiraishi, N. (1987) Epoxy resin adhesives from thiolignin. Mokuzai Gak -
kaishi , 33(5), 393–399.
[121] Simionescu, C.I., Rusan, V., Macoveanu, M.M., Cazacu, G., Lipsa, R., Stoleriu, A., 
and Ioanid, A. (1991) Crosslinked lignin-epoxy resins. IV. Cell. Chem. Technol. , 
25, 5–6, 355–368.
[122] Simionescu, C.I., Rusan, V., Turta, C.I., Bobcova, S.A., Macoveanu, M.M.,  
Cazacu, G., and Stoleriu, A. (1993) Synthesis and characterization of some iron-
lignosulfonate based lignin-epoxy resins. Cell. Chem. Technol. , 27(6), 627–644.
[123] Simionescu, C.I., Rusan, V., Cazacu, G., Macoveanu, M.M., Lipsa, R., and Stoica, 
G. (1990) Lignin-epoxy resins. III. Physical and chemical characterization of solid 
products. Cell. Chem. Technol. , 24(3), 397–405.
[124] Vasile, C., Macoveanu, M.M., Popa, V.I., Pascu, M.C., and Cazacu, G. (1998) 
Lignin and environment. Roum. Che. Quart. Rev. , 6(2), 85–111.
[125] Kosbar, L.L., Gelorme, J., Japp, R.M., and Fotorny, W.T. (2001) Introducing bio -
based materials into the electronics industry. J. Ind. Ecol. , 4, 93–98.
[126] Afzali-Ardakan, A., Gelorme, J.D., and Kosbar, L.C. (2002) Methods of fabricat -
ing cross-linked biobased materials and structures fabricated therewith, US 
Patent 6,339,116.
[127] Holsopple, D.B., Kurlpe, W.W., Kurlpe, W.M., and Kurlpe, K.R. (1981) Method of 
making epoxide-lignin resins, US Patent 4,265,809.
[128] Hu, L., Pan, H., Zhou, Y., and Zhang, M. (2011) Methods to improve lignin’s 
reactivity as a phenol substitute and as replacement for other phenolic com -
pounds: A brief review. BioResources , 6(3), 3515–3525.
[129] Popp, J.L., Kirk, T.K., and Dordick, J.S. (1991) Enzymic modification of lignin for 
use as a phenolic resin. Enzyme Microb. Technol. , 13, 964–968.
[130] Doering, G.A. (1993) Lignin modified phenol-formaldehyde resins, US Patent 
5,202,403.
[131] Peng, W., Riedl, B. (1994) The chemorheology of phenol–formaldehyde thermo -
set resin and mixtures of the resin with lignin fillers. Polymer , 35, 1280–1286.
[132] Sellers, T., Lora, J.H., and Okuma, M. (1994) Organosolv-lignin-modified pheno -
lics as strandboard binder I. Organosolv lignin and modified phenolic resin. 
Mokuzai Gakkaishi , 40, 1079–1084.
[133] Sellers, T., Kim, M.G., Miller, G.D., Haupt, R.A., and Strichlande, R.C. (1994) 
Comparison of strandboards made with phenol–formaldehyde resin and modi -
fied with TVA acid hydrolysis lignin. Forest Prod. J. , 44, 63–68.REfERENCES   597
[134] Cetin, N.S., Ozman, N. (2002) Use of organosolv lignin in phenol–formaldehyde 
resins for particleboard production I. Organosolv lignin modified resins. Int. J. , 
22, 477–480.
[135] Sukhbaatar, B., Steele, P .H., and Kim, M.G. (2009) Use of lignin separated from 
bio-oil in oriented strand board binder phenol-formaldehyde resins. BioRe -
sources , 4(2), 789–804.
[136] Thielemans, W., Can, E., Morye, S.S., and Wool, R.P . (2002) Novel applications of 
lignin in composite materials. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 83(2), 323–331.
[137] Ignat, L., Ignat, M., Stoica, E., Ciobanu, C., and Popa, V.I. (2011) Lignin blends 
with polyurethane-containing lactate segments. Properties and enzymatic degra -
dation effects. Cell. Chem. Technol. , 45(3–4), 233–243.
[138] Pascu, M.C., Vasile, C., Agafitei, G.E., Gazacu, G., and Stoleriu, A. (2010) Compat -
ibility and degradability of the polyalkanoates/epoxy modified lignin blends. In: 
Monomers, Oligomers, Polymers, Composites and Nanocomposites Research: 
Synthesis, Properties and Applications , eds. R.A. Pethrick, P . Petkov, A. Zlatarov, 
G.E. Zaikov, S.K. Rakovski. Nova Science, pp. 265–282.
[139] Wu, R.L., Wang, X.L., Li, H.Z., and Wang, Y.Z. (2009) Green composite films 
prepared from cellulose, starch and lignin in room-temperature ionic liquid. 
Biores. Technol. , 100(9), 2569–2574.
[140] Warth, H., Mülhaupt, R., and Schätzle, J. (1997) Thermoplastic cellulose acetate 
and cellulose acetate compounds prepared by reactive processing. J. Appl. Polym. 
Sci., 64(2), 231–242.
[141] Glasser, W.G., Rials, T.G., Kelly, S.S., and Dave, V. (1998) Studies of the molecular 
interaction between cellulose and lignin as a model for the hierarchical structure 
of wood. In: Cellulose Derivatives. Modification, Characterisation and Nanostruc -
ture, ACS Symposium, Series 688, eds. T.J. Heinze, W.G. Glasser. Washington, DC.: 
American Chemical Society, pp. 265–282.
[142] Rials, T.G., Glasser, W.G. (1989) Multiphase materials with lignin. IV. Blends of 
hydroxylpropyl cellulose with lignin. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 37, 2399–2415.
[143] Ghosh, I., Jain, R.K., and Glasser, W.G. (1999) Multiphase materials with lignin. 
XV. Blends of cellulose acetate butyrate with lignin esters. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 
74, 448–457.
[144] Oliveira, W.D., Glasser, W.G. (1994) Multiphase materials with lignin. 13. Block 
copolymers with cellulose propionate. Polymer , 35(9), 1977–1985.
[145] Oliveira, W.D., Glasser, W.G. (1994) Multiphase materials with lignin. 11. Starlike 
copolymers with caprolactone. Macromolecules , 27(1), 5–11.
[146] Dave, V., Glasser, W.G. (1997) Cellulose-based fibres from liquid crystalline solu -
tions. 5. Processing and morphology of CAB blends with lignin. Polymer , 38, 
2121–2126.
[147] Shulga, G., Betkers, T., Shakels, V., Neiberte, B., Verovkins, A., Brovkina, J., 
Belous, O., Ambrazaintene, D., and Žukauskaite, A. (2007) Effect of the modifica -
tion of lignocellulosic materials with a lignin-polymer complex on their mulching 
properties. BioResources , 2(4), 572–582.
[148] Li, J., Li, S., Wang, H., Yang, Y., and Guo, G. (2011) Preparation of a lignin-based 
composite and its properties. BioResources , 6(2), 1532–1542.
[149] Samal, S.K., Fernandes, E.G., Corti, A., and Chiellini, E. (2009) Hybrid polymeric 
composites based on polyethylene and lignin. Intern. J. Mater. Prod. Technol. , 
36(1–4), 62–72.598  BIOCO mpOSITES  ANd NANOCO mpOSITES  CONTAINING  LIGNIN
[150] Stiubianu, G., Cazacu, M., Cristea, M., and Vlad, A. (2009) Polysiloxane-lignin 
composites. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 113(4), 2313–2321.
[151] Mousavioun, P ., Doherty, W.O.S., George, G., and Halley, P . (2009) Thermal 
behaviour of PHB/lignin composites, 11th Pacific Polymer Conference, Dec. 6–11, 
2009, Cairns, Australia. Available at https://leishman.conferenceservices.net/
resources/266/1604/pdf/PPC2009_0794.pdf.
[152] Li, D.X. (2010) Preparation and Property of Biodegradable Polypropylene/Lignin 
Composites . Posted on March 30, 2011, by China Papers, http://mt.china-
papers.com/?p =205818.
[153] Liu, T., Wang, Q.W., and Zhao, H. (2011) Physical properties of waste lignin/
HDPE composites. Adv. Mater. Res. , 221, 60–65.
[154] Chen, L., Tang, C., Ning, N., Wang, C., Fu, Q., and Zhang, Q. (2009) Preparation 
and properties of chitosan/lignin composite films. Chin. J. Polym. Sci. , 27(5), 
739–774.
[155] Liu, F., Xu, K., Chen, M., and Cao, D. (2011) The roles of polyacrylate in poly(vinyl 
chloride)/lignin composites. Polym. Compos. , 32(9), 1399–1407.
[156] Yue, X., Chen, F., and Zhou, X. (2011) Improved interfacial bonding of PVC/
wood-flour composites by lignin amine modification. BioResources , 6(2), 
2022–2034.
[157] Feldman, D., Banu, D.J. (1997) Contribution to the study of rigid PVC polyblends 
with different lignins. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. , 66, 1731–1744.
[158] Stival Bittencourt, P .R., dos Santos, G.L., Gómez Pineda, E.A., and Winkler 
Hechenleitner, A.A. (2005) Studies on the thermal stability and film irradiation 
effect of poly(vinyl alcohol)/kraft lignin blends. J. Thermal Anal. Calorim. , 79, 
371–374.
[159] Fernandes, D.M., Winkler Hechenleitner, A.A., Job, A.E., Radovanocic, E., and 
Gómez Pineda, E.A. (2006) Thermal and photochemical stability of poly(vinyl 
alcohol)/modified lignin blends. Polym. Degrad. Stab. , 91, 1192–1201.
[160] Nenkova, S. (2007) Study of sorption properties of lignin-derived fibrous com -
posites for the remediation of oil polluted receiving waters. BioResources , 2(3), 
408–418.599Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.  CHAPTER 24 
   Preparation, Processing and 
Applications of Protein Nanoﬁ  bers  
    MEGAN     GARVEY    ,     MADHUSUDAN     VASUDEVAMURTHY    ,     SHIVA P.     RAO    , 
    HEATH     ECROYD    ,     JULIET A.     GERRARD    , and     JOHN A.     CARVER      
   24.1     INTRODUCTION 
 Protein nanoﬁ  bers are formed as a result of ordered protein misfolding 
wherein the native structure of a protein rearranges itself, by adopting an intermediately folded conformer, into highly ordered  β -sheet containing nano-
ﬁ brillar structures  [1] . The nanoﬁ  brillar structure is proposed to be accessible 
to all proteins, under appropriate conditions, and is formed by many proteins  in vitro    [2] .  In vivo  , these nanoﬁ  bers are frequently associated with cellular 
damage in the tissues within which they are formed. Their cytotoxicity arises from the formation of toxic precursors and the deposition of large conglomer-ates composed primarily of nanoﬁ  bers (known as amyloid ﬁ  brils) arranged 
into amyloid plaques  [3] . In addition, biologically active nanoﬁ  ber species 
(known as “functional amyloid” or amyloidin) exist in nature, with varied and speciﬁ  c biological functions. For example, curlin protein amyloid in  Esche-
richia coli   assists in surface binding  [4] ; Pmel 17 protein amyloid in melano-
somes in humans (and other species) provides surfaces that enable small molecule conversion into melanin  [5] ; and fungal hydrophobins form into  β -scaffolds, which are critical to the formation of arial and other fungal struc-
tures  [6] . 
 The formation, characteristics, and effects of protein nanoﬁ  bers are of 
intense research interest, due to their roles in a wide range of disease states associated with protein misfolding and aggregation (e.g., Alzheimer ’ s, Parkin-son ’ s and Huntington ’ s diseases) and their possible nanotechnological uses 600  PREPARATION, PROCESSING AND APPLICATIONS OF PROTEIN NANOFIBERS
 [7–10] . The latter topic is the focus of this chapter, which explores the produc-
tion, characterization, and applications of protein nanoﬁ  ber structures formed 
from a variety of peptides and proteins.  
  24.2     PROTEIN NANOFIBERS: STRUCTURE, FORMATION, AND 
APPLICATIONS 
  24.2.1     Protein Nanoﬁ  ber Characteristics 
 Protein nanoﬁ  bers all contain similar structural characteristics, regardless of 
which native peptide or protein they are derived from Reference  [11] . They are typically long, ﬁ  lament-like structures which are unbranched, 6 to 12 nm 
in diameter (larger for more complex multiﬁ  bril structures) and may extend 
up to micrometers in length (Fig.  24.1 ). They are resistant to proteolysis, have high kinetic and thermodynamic stability, and feature a characteristic “cross- β -sheet” ﬁ  bril core (more below)  [12–14] . Protein nanoﬁ  ber structure has been 
investigated using a wide variety of techniques including dye binding (e.g., thioﬂ  avin T [ThT]), microscopy (e.g., transmission electron, cryo electron, or 
atomic force), X-ray ﬁ  ber diffraction and various spectroscopic techniques 
 [15] . A battery of techniques is used because each provides complementary structural information. Detailed, atomic resolution information about nanoﬁ  -
ber structure has been obtained only on small nanoﬁ  ber-forming peptides 
using solid state nuclear magnetic resonance and X-ray crystallographic tech-niques, with the ﬁ  ndings being extrapolated to the structures of protein-
containing amyloid nanoﬁ  bers  [2] . 
  The intrinsic cross- β -sheet structure of all protein nanoﬁ  bers has two major 
features, that is,  β -strands and  β -sheet ﬁ  laments, which are independent of the 
protein incorporated into the nanoﬁ  ber (Fig.  24.1 )  [16] . The  β -strands, which 
lie perpendicular to the ﬁ  bril axis, are formed by the polypeptide backbone 
folding upon itself at a distance of 4.7 to 4.8 Å. The  β -sheet ﬁ  laments run 
parallel to the ﬁ  bril axis and are composed of interwoven  β -strands 8 to 10 Å 
  Figure 24.1          Cross- β  sheet structural core of an insulin protein nanoﬁ  ber, modeled 
from cryo-electron microscopic analysis  [16] . The four protoﬁ  laments, individually 
containing aligned  β -strands that form  β -sheets, interact together to form a complete 
nanoﬁ  ber. 
PROTEIN NANOFIBERS: STRUCTURE, FORMATION, AND APPLICATIONS   601
apart (a distance that is dependent upon the number of protoﬁ  laments)  [2, 14, 
17] . Each nanoﬁ  ber generally contains between four and six protoﬁ  laments, 
which are wound together to form the complete ﬁ  bril assembly  [14, 16, 18] . 
The intertwining of these ﬁ  laments causes a twisted appearance of the ﬁ  bril 
when seen by  transmission electron microscopy  ( TEM ). Some regions of the polypeptide chain, particularly in larger proteins, are not incorporated into the  β -strands. They may arise from ﬂ  exible loops and turns (e.g., from unstructured 
regions of the protein), which remain tightly associated with the ﬁ  brillar 
assemblies and are resistant to proteolysis. Such regions are deemed part of the ﬁ brillar core  [19] . Other regions of the native protein may remain unassoci-
ated with the ﬁ  bril structure, being external to the  β -strands and  β -sheets and 
thus can be proteolytically degraded  [20] . One example of this is the short, ﬂ exible C-terminal extension of  α B-crystallin, a small heat-shock protein, 
which retains its mobility even when the protein is incorporated into a ﬁ  brillar 
structure and is therefore external to the ﬁ  bril core  [21] . 
 The length of the native protein chain, or of those sections of native protein 
not incorporated into the ﬁ  brillar core, plays a role in the stiffness of the 
nanoﬁ  ber produced  [8, 12] . Knowles et al.  [12]  established that while the 
majority of protein nanoﬁ  bers have a single relatively rigid structure, some 
exhibit greater ﬂ  exibility. The latter ﬂ  exible (curly) protein nanoﬁ  ber struc-
tures appear to be stabilized by different types of intermolecular interactions compared with the more commonly observed rigid (straight) nanoﬁ  bers. These 
differences suggest that the curly structures are a late-stage protoﬁ  brillar 
structure, rather than complete nanoﬁ  bers. Further support for this hypothesis 
is provided by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy in which structural differences are observed between straight and curly ﬁ  brils of  β 2-microglobulin, 
prepared under different nanoﬁ  ber-forming conditions  [22] . The different 
morphological properties of protein nanoﬁ  bers, while of uncertain disease 
relevance, may have a signiﬁ  cant role to play in the nanobiotechnological 
potential of these species  [8] . In this context, morphology may be controlled by chemically derivitizing the starting protein  [23]  or by carefully adjusting the manner in which the ﬁ  brils are prepared from crude sources  [24] .  
  24.2.2     Protein Nanoﬁ  ber Formation 
 Formation of protein nanoﬁ  bers often involves a signiﬁ  cant rearrangement of 
native protein structure. For this to occur in a well-structured globular protein, the polypeptide chain must undergo structural destabilization, which may be triggered  in vivo   or  in vitro   by physiological stress factors such as altered pH, 
increased temperature, breakage of disulﬁ  de linkages, or by alterations such 
as truncation, destabilizing mutations, or post-translational modiﬁ  cations  [3] . 
Irrespective of the cause, the destabilization leads to the partial unfolding of the protein or, in the case of unstructured or natively unfolded proteins, partial folding of the protein, followed by the production of stable intermediately folded species. These species interact in an ordered manner, in contrast to 602  PREPARATION, PROCESSING AND APPLICATIONS OF PROTEIN NANOFIBERS
amorphous aggregation, leading to the stacking of the polypeptide backbone 
of the proteins into  β -sheet structures  [1] . Even in cases where the protein is 
unstructured, the formation of a stable intermediate structure is still thought to be a prerequisite for the formation of nanoﬁ  bers  [25] . This stable intermedi-
ate forms the basis of the nanoﬁ  ber nucleus, or seed ﬁ  bril. Nanoﬁ  ber formation 
 in vitro   can be instigated or increased (both in rate and in total yield) by the 
addition of protein nanoﬁ  ber seeds from the same, or a highly homologous 
protein  [26–29] .  
  24.2.3     Nanobiotechnological Potential of Protein Nanoﬁ  bers 
 Potentially, protein nanoﬁ  bers could have great use in nanobiotechnology 
because of the following desirable characteristics: (1) their ability to self assemble, (2) their similarity in size to currently used nanoﬁ  bers (such as 
carbon nanotubes), (3) their ability to adopt a variety of morphological forms, and (4) their ability to host attached functional molecules  [8, 30, 31] . Due to the difﬁ  culties in manipulating nanometer-sized products, self assembly is a 
highly desirable trait in nanotechnology. There are frequently physical con-straints on our ability to efﬁ  ciently produce nanostructures from larger start-
ing materials  [32] . An alternative assembly system is the self-association of small molecules, such as proteins. Identifying mechanisms to induce proteins to self-assemble into ordered structures will potentially allow for large-scale production of desirable base-nanomaterials (e.g., nanotubes or nanoﬁ  bers). 
Some examples of where these could be used include in drug delivery systems, as protein scaffolds and in electronic devices  [33] . 
 The self-assembling characteristic of amyloid and amyloid-like nanoﬁ  bers 
has an additional beneﬁ  t from a nanotechnological point of view: it affords 
the potential to form different morphological forms  [34] . Amyloid-like nano-ﬁ bers have been observed to occur in a range of alternative structures, includ-
ing the classic straight nanoﬁ  bers, twisted nanoﬁ  bers, linear assemblies (such 
as ribbon structures), curled nanoﬁ  bers, ring structures, and spherulites  [8]  
(Fig.  24.2 ). In some cases, multiple structures may be produced from the same protein, simply by changing the solution conditions, such as by altering the pH  [22]  or the addition of modifying substances, for example, lipids  [35] . In other cases, it has been observed that a range of ﬁ  brillar structures may occur in the 
same sample  [16] . The proposal that a nanoﬁ  ber structure is a conformation 
accessible to many (arguably all) proteins and peptides  [19, 36]  has led to the development of a range of peptides designed speciﬁ  cally for their ability to 
form nanoﬁ  bers, and thus be of potential use as bionanostructures  [18, 32, 
37–39] . The production of reliable, robust, and reproducible structures remains one of the challenges in the ﬁ  eld of bionanomaterials, and is an area in which 
designed or speciﬁ  cally selected peptides holds much promise  [34] . Progress 
has also been recently made in controlling the length of protein nanoﬁ  bers, 
for example, for application in nanoelectronics and biosensing  [40] . PREPARATION AND PROCESSING OF PROTEIN NANOFIBERS   603
  Research into the use of functionalized protein nanoﬁ  bers is based, in part, 
on the widespread presence in nature of amyloidin, amyloid-like nanoﬁ  bers 
with native functionality  [5] . It has also been established that it is possible to 
incorporate folded and functional domains within designed protein nanoﬁ  ber 
structures  [8, 41] . Designed peptides have been used to create nanoﬁ  bers 
which incorporate functional ﬂ  uorophores, enzymes or ligand binders  [7, 30, 
31, 42] , showing that speciﬁ  c functionalization of the end-product is possible 
when using amyloid-like nanoﬁ  bers. Further, conversion into the nanoﬁ  ber 
structure increases the stability and longevity of some functional elements  [42, 
43] . Together with being able to self assemble into a variety of morphological 
species, the ability to functionalize amyloid-like nanoﬁ  bers greatly enhances 
their potential use as protein nanomaterials.   
  24.3     PREPARATION AND PROCESSING OF PROTEIN NANOFIBERS 
  24.3.1     Protein Nanoﬁ  bers Formed from Lens Crystallin Proteins 
 As discussed previously, protein nanoﬁ  ber formation from full length, well-
ordered proteins requires the destabilization of the native structure. The lens   Figure 24.2          Morphological variation of protein nanoﬁ  bers, including straight (a); 
twisted or intertwined (b, c); linear assemblies (d); curly or loop (e, f); and spherulite 
assemblies (g). Structures are composed of insulin (a, b, c, d)  [16] —scale bars: 50 nm; 
 α B-crystallin (e, f)  [21] —scale bars: 500 nm; and insulin (g)  [47] —scale bar is 50  μ m. 
(a) (b) (c) (d) 500 A (e)
(f)
(g)604  PREPARATION, PROCESSING AND APPLICATIONS OF PROTEIN NANOFIBERS
contains a very high concentration of crystallin proteins arranged in a well-
ordered manner to ensure lens transparency and the correct refraction of light. 
Crystallin proteins contain a high proportion of native  β -sheet structure  [44] ; 
however, an intermediately folded structure is required for ordered aggrega-
tion to produce crystallin protein nanoﬁ  bers. As described in Healy et al.  [45] , 
a mixture of ﬁ  sh crystallin proteins (i.e., containing  α -,  β - and  γ -crystallins), 
upon destabilization with  triﬂ  uoroethanol  ( TFE ) and incubation at elevated 
temperatures, forms protein nanoﬁ  bers. Altering the incubation temperature 
produces variations in the supramolecular structure of the nanoﬁ  bers (Fig. 
 24.3 ). 
  Fish crystallin proteins can be readily extracted from the lenses of ﬁ  sh eyes. 
Once the eye has been extracted from the ﬁ  sh head, a scalpel is used to care-
fully slit the membrane of the eye and the lens is extracted by placing a small 
amount of force on the opposite side of the eye. Homogenize each lens in 
approximately 3 mL of homogenizing buffer, containing 20 mM Tris, 1 mM 
 Ethylene-diamine-tetraacetic acid  ( EDTA ) at pH 2. The lenses are homoge-
nized at very low speed for 5 minutes, using a homogenizer or blender with 
an external speed controller (which is able to run at 2000 rpm or less). The 
mixture is ﬁ  ltered through a sieve to remove the hard (central) core of the ﬁ  sh 
lenses. Homogenization is continued, still at very low speed ( ∼ 1000 rpm), for 
a further 5 minutes. The homogenate is centrifuged at 13,000  g  for 30 minutes 
at room temperature. The supernatant contains the soluble crystallin proteins, 
while the pellet is discarded. The supernatant (ﬁ  sh lens homogenate) can be 
used immediately for nanoﬁ  ber formation or frozen with liquid nitrogen and 
stored at  − 20°C. 
 Nanoﬁ  ber formation from ﬁ  sh crystallins is achieved by the addition of 10% 
v/v TFE to the ﬁ  sh lens homogenate. It is most effective when the homogenate 
is diluted to attain a ﬁ  nal crystallin protein concentration of 10 mg/mL. For 
the production of nanoﬁ  bers with different morphologies, the sample can be   Figure 24.3          Fish crystallin nanoﬁ  bers formed at 60°C (a) and 90°C (b), as assessed by 
transmission electron microscopy  [45] . Scale bars are 1  μ m. 
(a) (b)PREPARATION AND PROCESSING OF PROTEIN NANOFIBERS   605
divided, providing one sample (frozen with liquid nitrogen) as a control and 
two which can be incubated at 60°C and 90°C for 24 hours to attain protein 
nanoﬁ  bers. These samples can then be frozen to halt further nanoﬁ  ber forma-
tion and assessed for their characteristics (Fig.  24.3 ). The sample incubated at 
60°C should contain high numbers of individual nanoﬁ  ber structures, approxi-
mately 10 to 20 nm in width and 0.5 to 1.0  μ m in length. In the sample of 
nanoﬁ  bers formed at 90°C, these smaller nanoﬁ  bers will intertwine to form 
large nanoﬁ  ber-bundles, up to 500 nm wide and 10  μ m in length.  
  24.3.2     Protein Nanoﬁ  bers Formed from Insulin 
 The nanoﬁ  bril formation of insulin is well characterized; it forms nanoﬁ  bers 
of various morphologies under a range of solution conditions  [46] . Addition-
ally, higher order structures, now known as spherulites, are formed under 
certain solution conditions  [47, 48] . Both chains of the insulin monomer can 
participate in nanoﬁ  ber formation  [46, 49]  and a model of the insulin ﬁ  bril 
structure (Fig.  24.1 ), derived from cryo electron microscopy, implies that both 
chains are incorporated into the nanoﬁ  ber  [16] . Separation of the insulin 
chains or alteration of their structures by other means, such as chemical modi-
ﬁ cations or enzymatic digestion, lead to signiﬁ  cant differences in the morphol-
ogy of the nanoﬁ  bers formed  [23, 49] . 
 Bovine pancreatic insulin in the presence or absence of the protease 
 α -chymotrypsin at neutral pH can rapidly form protein nanoﬁ  bers with multiple 
morphological characteristics (Fig.  24.4 )  [23] . A solution of 5.7 mg/mL insulin 
in 25 mM HCl, 100 mM NaCl, pH 8 is divided into three: one is frozen to act 
as a non-aggregated control. To one of the remaining insulin solutions, 
 α -chymotrypsin is added at a 1 : 50 enzyme/insulin w/w ratio. The pure insulin 
and the insulin–chymotrypsin mixtures are both incubated at 60°C for 3 hours. 
They are then removed from the heat and frozen to halt further nanoﬁ  ber for-
mation. The samples are assessed for nanoﬁ  ber characteristics and their mor-
phological differences are compared. Insulin alone at pH 8 produces long 
straight ﬁ  brils with clearly visible twists (Fig.  24.4 a) caused by the intertwining   Figure 24.4          Insulin nanoﬁ  bers formed in the absence (a) and presence (b, c) of chy-
motrypsin, as assessed by transmission electron microscopy  [23] . Scale bars are 250 nm. 
(a) (b) (c)606  PREPARATION, PROCESSING AND APPLICATIONS OF PROTEIN NANOFIBERS
of protoﬁ  laments (Fig.  24.2 b). After incubation with chymotrypsin, there is a 
change in morphology of the nanostructures, with a combination of long thin curvy nanoﬁ  bers (Fig.  24.4 b) and bundles of short straight nanoﬁ  bers observed 
(Fig.  24.4 c). 
    24.3.3     Characterization of Protein Nanoﬁ  bers 
  Thioﬂ  avin T  ( ThT ) is a ﬂ  uorescent molecule that is frequently used to assess 
or monitor ﬁ  bril formation. ThT can bind to both native and nanoﬁ  brillar  β -
sheet structures; however, even in cases of native proteins that contain a large amount of  β -sheet (such as crystallin proteins), signiﬁ  cant differences in ThT 
ﬂ uorescence are observed after nanoﬁ  ber formation. To examine whether 
nanoﬁ  bers have been formed, ThT ﬂ  uorescence spectra of the initial and ﬁ  nal 
samples are acquired  [50] . The samples arising from nanoﬁ  ber formation 
should be completely thawed and then prepared (in duplicate) at 0.5 mg/mL protein, 20  μ M ThT, and 50 mM glycine–sodium hydroxide, pH 9. The samples 
are incubated for exactly 10 minutes at room temperature and their ﬂ  uores-
cence spectrum is acquired using a ﬂ  uorescence spectrophotometer, exciting 
at a wavelength of 440 nm and acquiring the emission spectrum at  ∼ 482 nm. 
In comparing the ﬂ  uorescence spectrum before and after nanoﬁ  ber formation, 
a signiﬁ  cant increase in ﬂ  uorescence will be observed when nanoﬁ  bers are 
present (Fig.  24.5 ). 
  Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is a technique used to image at 
the nanoscale (nanometers to microns). It is based on the scattering of elec-trons and utilizes a high voltage electron source to image-coated surfaces. 
  Figure 24.5          T h T  ﬂ  uorescence intensity at 490 nm for bovine crystallin proteins after 
18 hours of incubation at pH 2 and 60°C. Error bars show standard deviation of three replicates  [24] . 
APPLICATIONS OF PROTEIN NANOFIBERS   607
Contrast and hence enhanced resolution can be gained by the addition of a 
negative stain, such as uranyl acetate. TEM is commonly used for investigating the length and width features of protein nanoﬁ  bers, in some cases even reveal-
ing aspects of their protoﬁ  brillar structure  [16] . Following the method of Thorn 
et al.  [50] , TEM grids can be prepared by the addition of dilute nanoﬁ  ber solu-
tions ( ∼ 0.5 mg/mL) onto formvar and carbon-coated copper or nickel electron 
microscopy grids. After rinsing with water, the nanoﬁ  bers are negatively 
stained using uranyl acetate *
    (2% w/v) and any excess stain is removed with 
ﬁ lter paper. Samples can be magniﬁ  ed 20,000 to 125,000 times, using an excita-
tion voltage of 80 to 120 kV , depending on the recommendations for the transmission electron microscope used. Variations will be apparent in the nanoﬁ  ber morphologies and in the formation of macrostructures (Fig.  24.3  and 
Fig.  24.4 ).   
  24.4     APPLICATIONS OF PROTEIN NANOFIBERS 
  24.4.1     Protein Nanoﬁ  bers as Nanoscaffolds for Enzyme 
Immobilization 
 The ability to functionalize protein nanoﬁ  bers, by enzyme immobilization, 
makes them one of the most attractive nanomaterials for various applications that utilize enzymatic activity. Glucose oxidase, an enzyme well known for potential biosensor applications, has been successfully immobilized on insulin ﬁ brils and retains activity upon attachment  [30] . The resulting functionalized 
enzyme scaffold has been incorporated into a model  poly(vinyl alcohol)  ( PVOH ) ﬁ  lm to create a new bionanomaterial. The functionalized ﬁ  lm inhibits 
the growth of  E. coli  , proving its antibacterial effectiveness  [30] . The potential 
application of protein nanoﬁ  bers in bioremediation and chemical detoxiﬁ  ca-
tion has also been shown recently by successfully immobilizing the enzyme organophosphate hydrolase on insulin protein nanoﬁ  bers  [31] .  
  24.4.2     Protein Nanoﬁ  bers to Form Nanowires and Nanogaps 
 Protein nanoﬁ  bers, because of their almost unequalled aspect ratio (i.e., their 
ratio of diameter to length), have great potential in the ﬁ  eld of templated one-
dimensional objects such as conducting nanowires  [40] . Insulin protein nanoﬁ  -
bers can be coated with the highly conducting polymer alkoxysulfonate Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), or PEDOT, through molecular self-assembly. The resulting networks of conducting nanowires are electrically and electro-chemically active  [51] . A recent study also explored whether ﬁ  sh lens crystallin 
protein nanoﬁ  bers (see Section 24.3) could be used as a template for the growth 
 *     Uranyl acetate is toxic. The material safety data sheet (MSDS) protocols should be read care-
fully for appropriate usage and disposal guidelines. 608  PREPARATION, PROCESSING AND APPLICATIONS OF PROTEIN NANOFIBERS
of gold nanowires using electroless plating  [45] . When the underlying carbon 
surface was exchanged for silicon, radically different observations were made 
wherein gold seeds appeared to have a greater afﬁ  nity for silicon than 
for carbon. On silicon surfaces, nanogaps (small spaces of nanoscaled size) were 
observed repeatedly across the surface (Fig.  24.6 ). Such dramatically different 
nanostructures show promise in the fabrication of variety of nanodevices, either 
utilizing the nanowire potential of these nanoﬁ  bers, or using them to produce 
nanogaps for applications in biosensing and similar ﬁ  elds. 
    24.4.3     Composite Materials Containing Protein Nanoﬁ  bers 
 The use of protein nanoﬁ  bers as novel bionanomaterials is one of the most 
promising of all potential applications. Welland and coworkers have recently 
reported a new approach to making multifunctional biomaterials, by exploiting 
the self-assembling properties of insulin nanoﬁ  bers by combining insulin nano-
ﬁ bers with a silicone elastomer  [52] . The resultant protein nanoﬁ  ber composite 
was twice as stiff as a carbon nanotube elastomeric composite of the same 
ﬁ lling ratio, with the elastic modulus of the protein nanoﬁ  ber composite being 
equivalent to that of the carbon nanotube composite. Protein nanoﬁ  bers can 
also impart useful changes to mechanical and morphological properties of 
polymeric materials. For example, when insulin nanoﬁ  bers were combined with 
PVOH at a ﬁ  lling level of 0.6 wt%, the nanoﬁ  ber-reinforced PVOH was 15% 
stiffer than a PVOH control containing unﬁ  brillized insulin  [53] .   
  24.5     CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PROSPECTS 
 The practical use of protein nanoﬁ  bers in bionanotechnology is gaining in 
popularity, primarily due to their qualities such as self-assembly and their   Figure 24.6          Scanning electron micrographs of nanowires and nanogaps. (a) A gold 
nanowire prepared by electroless plating of ﬁ  sh lens crystallin nanoﬁ  bers, on a carbon 
surface. Scale bar is 10  μ m. (b) Thin gold layer with nanogaps corresponding to crystal-
lin nanoﬁ  bers, on a silicon surface  [45] . Scale bar is 1  μ m. 
(a) (b)REFERENCES   609
ability to be readily functionalized. Currently, these aspects are signiﬁ  cant 
stumbling blocks to other nanotechnological approaches. It is now apparent that inexpensive and bulk-scale methods of protein nanoﬁ  ber production are 
feasible. Thus, it is foreseeable that a greater role for proteins will develop as an emergent source for future materials, standing at the interface of biology and nanotechnology.  
  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 The authors thank Dr. Clement L. Roux, University of Canterbury, for the 
scanning electron micrographs of nanowires and nanogaps.  
   
  REFERENCES 
      [1]      Uversky ,  V .N.   ,    Fink ,  A.L.    (  2004 )  Conformational constraints for amyloid ﬁ  brilla-
tion: The importance of being unfolded .  Biochimica et Biophysica Acta  ,  1698  , 
 131 – 153 .  
      [2]      Chiti ,  F.   ,    Dobson ,  C.M.    (  2006 )  Protein misfolding, functional amyloid and human 
disease .  Annual Reviews of Biochemistry  ,  75 ,  333 – 366 .  
      [3]      Dobson ,  C.M.    (  2006 )  Protein aggregation and its consequences for human disease . 
 Protein & Peptide Letters  ,  13 ,  219 – 227 .  
      [4]      Chapman ,  M.R.   ,    Robinson ,  L.S.   ,    Pinkner ,  J.S.   ,    Roth ,  R.   ,    Heuser ,  J.   ,    Hamm ar ,  M.   , 
   Normark ,  S.   , and    Hultgren ,  S.J.    (  2002 )  Role of  Escherichia coli   curlin operons in 
directing amyloid ﬁ  ber formation .  Science  ,  295 ,  851 – 855 .  
      [5]      Fowler ,  D.M.   ,    Koulov ,  A.V .   ,    Alory-Jost ,  C.   ,    Marks ,  M.S.   ,    Balch ,  W.E.   , and    Kelly ,  J.W.    
(  2006 )  Functional amyloid formation within mammalian tissue .  PLoS Biology  , 
 4 ,  e6 .  
      [6]      Kwan ,  A.H.   ,    Wineﬁ  eld ,  R.D.   ,    Sunde ,  M.   ,    Matthews ,  J.M.   ,    Haverkamp ,  R.G.   ,    Tem-
pleton ,  M.D.   , and    Mackay ,  J.P .    (  2006 )  Structural basis for rodlet assembly in fungal hydrophobins .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America  ,  103 ,  3621 – 3626 .  
      [7]      Cherny ,  I.   ,    Gazit ,  E.    (  2008 )  Amyloids: Not only pathological agents but 
also ordered nanomaterials .  Angewandte Chemie International Edition  ,  47 , 
 4062 – 4069 .  
      [8]      Gras ,  S.L.    (  2007 )  Amyloid ﬁ  brils: From disease to design. New biomaterial applica-
tions for self-assembling cross- β  ﬁ brils .  Australian Journal of Chemistry  ,  60 , 
 333 – 342 .  
      [9]      Hamley ,  I.W.    (  2007 )  Peptide ﬁ  brillization .  Angewandte Chemie International 
Edition  ,  46 ,  8128 – 8147 .  
   [10]      Waterhouse ,  S.H.   ,    Gerrard ,  J.A.    (  2004 )  Amyloid ﬁ  brils in bionanotechnology .  Aus-
tralian Journal of Chemistry  ,  57 ,  519 – 523 .  
   [11]      Hoang ,  T.X.   ,    Marsella ,  L.   ,    Trovato ,  A.   ,    Seno ,  F.   ,    Banavar ,  J.R.   , and    Marit an ,  A.    
(  2006 )  Common attributes of native-state structures of proteins, disordered 610  PREPARATION, PROCESSING AND APPLICATIONS OF PROTEIN NANOFIBERS
proteins and amyloid .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America  ,  103 ,  6883 – 6888 .  
   [12]      Knowles ,  T.P .   ,    Fitzpatrick ,  A.W.   ,    Meehan ,  S.   ,    Mott ,  H.R.   ,    Vendruscolo ,  M.   ,    Dobson , 
 C.M.   , and    Welland ,  M.E.    (  2007 )  Role of intermolecular forces in deﬁ  ning material 
properties of protein nanoﬁ  brils .  Science  ,  318 ,  1900 – 1903 .  
   [13]      Carulla ,  N.   ,    Caddy ,  G.L.   ,    Hall ,  D.R.   ,    Zurdo ,  J.   ,    Gairi ,  M.   ,    Feliz ,  M.   ,    Giralt ,  E.   ,    Rob-
inson ,  C.V .   , and    Dobson ,  C.M.    (  2005 )  Molecular recycling within amyloid ﬁ  brils . 
 Nature  ,  436 ,  554 – 558 .  
   [14]      Serpell ,  L.C.   ,    Sunde ,  M.   ,    Benson ,  M.D.   ,    Tennent ,  G.A.   ,    Pepys ,  M.B.   , and    Fr aser , 
 P .E.    (  2000 )  The protoﬁ  lament substructure of amyloid ﬁ  brils .  Journal of Molecular 
Biology  ,  300 ,  1033 – 1039 .  
   [15]      Nielsen ,  L.   ,    Khurana ,  R.   ,    Coats ,  A.   ,    Frokjaer ,  S.   ,    Brange ,  J.   ,    Vyas ,  S.   ,    Uversky ,  V .N.   , 
and    Fink ,  A.L.    (  2001 )  Effect of environmental factors on the kinetics of insulin ﬁ bril formation: Elucidation of the molecular mechanism .  Biochemistry  ,  40 , 
 6036 – 6046 .  
   [16]      Jimenez ,  J.L.   ,    Nettleton ,  E.J.   ,    Bouchard ,  M.   ,    Robinson ,  C.V .   ,    Dobson ,  C.M.   , a nd 
   Saibil ,  H.R.    (  2002 )  The protoﬁ  lament structure of insulin amyloid ﬁ  brils .  Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  ,  99 , 
 9196 – 9201 .  
   [17]      Sunde ,  M.   ,    Serpell ,  L.C.   ,    Bartlam ,  M.   ,    Fraser ,  P .E.   ,    Pepys ,  M.B.   , and    Blak e ,  C.C.    
(  1997 )  Common core structure of amyloid ﬁ  brils by synchrotron X-ray diffraction . 
 Journal of Molecular Biology  ,  273 ,  729 – 739 .  
   [18]      Lashuel ,  H.A.   ,    Labrenz ,  S.R.   ,    Woo ,  L.   ,    Serpell ,  L.C.   , and    Kelly ,  J.W.    (  2000  )  Proto-
ﬁ laments, ﬁ  laments, ribbons and ﬁ  brils from peptidomimetic self-assembly: Impli-
cations for amyloid ﬁ  bril formation and materials science .  Journal of the American 
Chemical Society  ,  122 ,  5262 – 5277 .  
   [19]      Fändrich ,  M.   ,    Dobson ,  C.M.    (  2002 )  The behaviour of polyamino acids reveals an 
inverse side chain effect in amyloid structure formation .  EMBO Journal  ,  21 , 
 5682 – 5690 .  
   [20]      Zurdo ,  J.   ,    Guijarro ,  J.I.   , and    Dobson ,  C.M.    (  2001 )  Preparation and characterization 
of puriﬁ  ed amyloid ﬁ  brils .  Journal of the American Chemical Society  ,  123 , 
 8141 – 8142 .  
   [21]      Meehan ,  S.   ,    Knowles ,  T.P .   ,    Baldwin ,  A.J.   ,    Smith ,  J.F.   ,    Squires ,  A.M.   ,    Clem ents ,  P .   , 
   Treweek ,  T.M.   ,    Ecroyd ,  H.   ,    Tartaglia ,  G.G.   ,    Vendruscolo ,  M.   ,    MacPhee ,  C.E.   ,    Dobson ,  C.M.   , and    Carver ,  J.A.    (  2007 )  Characterisation of amyloid ﬁ  bril formation 
by small heat-shock chaperone proteins human  α A-,  α
 B- and R120G  α B-
crystallins .  Journal of Molecular Biology  ,  372 ,  470 – 484 .  
   [22]      Jahn ,  T.R.   ,    Tennent ,  G.A.   , and    Radford ,  S.E.    (  2008 )  A common  β -sheet architec-
ture underlies  in vitro   and  in vivo    β 2-microglobulin amyloid ﬁ  brils .  Journal of 
Biological Chemistry  ,  283 ,  17279 – 17286 .  
   [23]      Rao ,  S.P .   ,    Meade ,  S.J.   ,    Joyce ,  N.I.   ,    Healy ,  J.P .   ,    Sutton ,  K.H.   ,    Larsen ,  N.G.   , and 
   Gerrard ,  J.A.    (  2011 )  Amyloid ﬁ  bril formation from crude protein mixtures .  Bio-
technology Progress  ,  27 ,  1768 – 1776 .  
   [24]      Garvey ,  M.   ,    Gras ,  S.L.   ,    Meade ,  S.J.   ,    Carver ,  J.A.   , and    Gerrard ,  J.A.    (  2009 )  Protein 
nanoﬁ  bres of deﬁ  ned morphology prepared from mixtures of crude crystallins . 
 International Journal of Nanotechnology  ,  6 ,  258 – 273 .  REFERENCES   611
   [25]      Ecroyd ,  H.   ,    Carver ,  J.A.    (  2008 )  Unraveling the mysteries of protein folding and 
misfolding .  IUBMB Life  ,  60 ,  769 – 774 .  
   [26]      Gsponer ,  J.   ,    Vendruscolo ,  M.    (  2006 )  Theoretical approaches to protein aggrega-
tion .  Protein & Peptide Letters  ,  13 ,  287 – 293 .  
   [27]      Lundmark ,  K.   ,    Westermark ,  G.T.   ,    Olsén ,  A.   , and    Westermark ,  P .    (  2005 )  Protein 
ﬁ brils in nature can enhance amyloid protein A amyloidosis in mice: Cross-seeding 
as a disease mechanism .  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America  ,  102 ,  6098 – 6102 .  
   [28]      Ohhashi ,  Y.   ,    Kihara ,  M.   ,    Naiki ,  H.   , and    Goto ,  Y.    (  2005 )  Ultrasonication-induced 
amyloid ﬁ  bril formation of  β 2-microglobulin .  Journal of Biological Chemistry  ,  280 , 
 32843 – 32848 .  
   [29]      O ’ nuallain ,  B.   ,    Williams ,  A.D.   ,    Westermark ,  P .   , and    Wetzel ,  R.    (  2004 )  Seeding 
speciﬁ  city in amyloid growth induced by heterologous ﬁ  brils .  Journal of Biological 
Chemistry  ,  279 ,  17490 – 17499 .  
   [30]      Pilkington ,  S.M.   ,    Roberts ,  S.J.   ,    Meade ,  S.J.   , and    Gerrard ,  J.A.    (  2010 )  Amyloid ﬁ  brils 
as a nanoscafold for enzyme immobilization .  Biotechnology Progress  ,  26 ,  93 – 100 .  
   [31]      Raynes ,  J.K.   ,    Pearce ,  G.F.   ,    Meade ,  S.J.   , and    Gerrard ,  J.A.    (  2011 )  Immobilization of 
organophosphate hydrolase on an amyloid ﬁ  bril nanoscaffold: Towards bioreme-
diation and chemical detoxiﬁ  cation .  Biotechnology Progress  ,  27 ,  360 – 367 .  
   [32]      Hamada ,  D.   ,    Yanagihara ,  I.   , and    Tsumoto ,  K.    (  2004 )  Engineering amyloidogenicity 
towards the development of nanoﬁ  brillar materials .  Trends in Biotechnology  ,  22 , 
 93 – 97 .  
   [33]      Rajagopal ,  K.   ,    Schneider ,  J.P .    (  2004 )  Self-assembling peptides and proteins 
for nanotechnological applications .  Current Opinion in Structural Biology  ,  14 , 
 480 – 486 .  
   [34]      Zhang ,  S.    (  2003 )  Fabrication of novel biomaterials through molecular self-assembly . 
 Nature Biotechnology  ,  21 ,  1171 – 1178 .  
   [35]      Grifﬁ  n ,  M.D.   ,    Mok ,  M.L.   ,    Wilson ,  L.M.   ,    Pham ,  C.L.   ,    Waddington ,  L.J.   ,    Perugini , 
 M.A.   , and    Howlett ,  G.J.    (  2008 )  Phospholipid interaction induces molecular-level polymorphism in apolipoprotein C-II amyloid ﬁ  brils via alternative assembly 
pathways .  Journal of Molecular Biology  ,  375 ,  240 – 256 .  
   [36]      Fändrich ,  M.   ,    Fletcher ,  M.A.   , and    Dobson ,  C.M.    (  2001 )  Amyloid ﬁ  brils from 
muscle myoglobin .  Nature  ,  410 ,  165 – 166 .  
   [37]      Baldwin ,  A.J.   ,    Bader ,  R.   ,    Christodoulou ,  J.   ,    MacPhee ,  C.E.   ,    Dobson ,  C.M.   , and  
   Barker ,  P .D.    (  2006 )  Cytochrome display on amyloid ﬁ  brils .  Journal of the American 
Chemical Society  ,  128 ,  2162 – 2163 .  
   [38]      Deechongkit ,  S.   ,    Powers ,  E.T.   ,    You ,  S.L.   , and    Kelly ,  J.W.    (  2005 )  Controlling the 
morphology of cross  β -sheet assemblies by rational design .  Journal of the Ameri-
can Chemical Society  ,  127 ,  8562 – 8570 .  
   [39]      Fezoui ,  Y.   ,    Hartley ,  D.M.   ,    Walsh ,  D.M.   ,    Selkoe ,  D.J.   ,    Osterhout ,  J.J.   , and    Teplow , 
 D.B.    (  2000 )  A  de novo   designed helix-turn-helix peptide forms nontoxic amyloid 
ﬁ brils .  Nature Structural Biology  ,  7 ,  1095 – 1099 .  
   [40]      Domigan ,  L.J.   ,    Healy ,  J.P .   ,    Meade ,  S.J.   ,    Blaikie ,  R.B.   , and    Gerrard ,  J.A.    (  2012 ) 
 Controlling the dimensions of amyloid ﬁ  brils: Towards homogenous components 
for bionanotechnology .  Biopolymers  ,  97 ,  123 – 133 .  612  PREPARATION, PROCESSING AND APPLICATIONS OF PROTEIN NANOFIBERS
   [41]      Sackewitz ,  M.   ,    Von Einem ,  S.   ,    Hause ,  G.   ,    Wunderlich ,  M.   ,    Schmid ,  F.X.   , and 
   Schwarz ,  E.    (  2008 )  A folded and functional protein domain in an amyloid-like ﬁ bril .  Protein Science  ,  17 ,  1044 – 1054 .  
   [42]      Gras ,  S.L.   ,    Tickler ,  A.K.   ,    Squires ,  A.M.   ,    Devlin ,  G.L.   ,    Horton ,  M.A.   ,    Dobs on ,  C.M.   , 
and    MacPhee ,  C.E.    (  2008 )  Functionalised amyloid ﬁ  brils for roles in cell adhesion . 
 Biomaterials  ,  60 ,  333 – 342 .  
   [43]      Yu ,  L.   ,    Banerjee ,  I.A.   ,    Gao ,  X.   ,    Nuraje ,  N.   , and    Matsui ,  H.    (  2005 )  Fabric ation and 
application of enzyme-incorporated peptide nanotubes .  Bioconjugate Chemistry  , 
 16 ,  1484 – 1487 .  
   [44]      Bloemendal ,  H.   ,    De Jong ,  W.   ,    Jaenicke ,  R.   ,    Lubsen ,  N.H.   ,    Slingsby ,  C.   , and    Tardieu , 
 A.    (  2004 )  Ageing and vision: Structure, stability and function of lens crystallins .  Progress in Biophysical and Molecular Biology  ,  86 ,  407 – 485 .  
   [45]      Healy ,  J.   ,    Wong ,  K.   ,    Sawyer ,  E.B.   ,    Roux ,  C.   ,    Domigan ,  L.   ,    Gras ,  S.L.   ,     Sunde ,  M.   , 
   Larsen ,  N.G.   ,    Gerrard ,  J.A.   , and    Vasudevamurthy ,  M.    (  2012 )  Polymorphism and higher order structures of protein nanoﬁ  bres from crude mixtures of ﬁ  sh lens 
crystallins: Towards useful materials .  Biopolymers  ,  97 ,  595 – 606 .  
   [46]      Hong ,  D.-P .   ,    Ahmad ,  A.   , and    Fink ,  A.L.    (  2006 )  Fibrillation of human insulin A and 
B chains .  Biochemistry  ,  45 ,  9342 – 9353 .  
   [47]      Krebs ,  M.R.   ,    MacPhee ,  C.E.   ,    Miller ,  A.F.   ,    Dunlop ,  I.E.   ,    Dobson ,  C.M.   , and    Donald , 
 A.M.    (  2004 )  The formation of spherulites by amyloid ﬁ  brils of bovine insulin . 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  , 
 101 ,  14420 – 14424 .  
   [48]      Waugh ,  D.F.    (  1946 )  A ﬁ  brils modiﬁ  cation of insulin. I. The heat precipitate of 
insulin .  Journal of the American Chemical Society  ,  68 ,  247 – 250 .  
   [49]      Devlin ,  G.L.   ,    Knowles ,  T.P .J.   ,    Squires ,  A.   ,    McCammon ,  M.G.   ,    Gras ,  S.L.   ,    Ni lsson , 
 M.R.   ,    Robinson ,  C.V .   ,    Dobson ,  C.M.   , and    MacPhee ,  C.E.    (  2006 )  The component polypeptide chains of bovine insulin nucleate or inhibit aggregation of the parent protein in a conformation-dependent manner .  Journal of Molecular Biology  ,  360 , 
 407 – 509 .  
   [50]      Thorn ,  D.C.   ,    Meehan ,  S.   ,    Sunde ,  M.   ,    Rekas ,  A.   ,    Gras ,  S.L.   ,    MacPhee ,  C.E.    ,    Dobson , 
 C.M.   ,    Wilson ,  M.R.   , and    Carver ,  J.A.    (  2005 )  Amyloid ﬁ  bril formation by bovine 
milk  κ -casein and its inhibition by the molecular chaperones  α s- and  β -casein . 
 Biochemistry  ,  44 ,  17027 – 17036 .  
   [51]      Hamedi ,  M.   ,    Herland ,  A.   ,    Karlsson ,  R.H.   , and    Inganas ,  O.    (  2008 )  Electrochemical 
devices made from conducting nanowire networks self-assembled from amyloid ﬁ brils and alkoxysulfonate PEDOT .  Nano Letters  ,  8 ,  1736 – 1740 .  
   [52]      Oppenheim ,  T.   ,    Knowles ,  T.   ,    Lacour ,  S.P .   , and    Welland ,  M.E.    (  2010 )  Fabrication 
and characterization of protein ﬁ  bril-elastomer composites .  Acta Biomaterialia  ,  
6 , 
 1337 – 1341 .  
   [53]      Rao ,  S.P .   ,    Meade ,  S.J.   ,    Healy ,  J.P .   ,    Sutton ,  K.H.   ,    Larsen ,  N.G.   ,    Staiger ,   M.P .   , and 
   Gerrard ,  J.A.    (  2012 )  Amyloid ﬁ  brils as functionalizable components of nanocom-
posite materials .  Biotechnology Progress  ,  28 ( 1 ),  248 – 256 .   
 613Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.CHAPTER 25
Protein-Based Nanocomposites for 
Food Packaging
HÉLÈNE ANGELLIER-COUSSY , PASCALE CHALIER , EMMANUELLE 
GASTALDI , VALÉRIE GUILLARD , CAROLE GUILLAUME , NATHALIE GONTARD , 
and STÉPHANE PEYRON
25.1 INTRODUCTION
Over the last decade, the development of new sustainable, recyclable, renew -
able, and/or biodegradable packaging materials constitutes one of the major 
driving forces to increase the overall presence of eco-friendly packaging solu -
tions across the food chain. In parallel, as a response to consumer trends 
toward lightly preserved, fresh, tasty, and convenient packaged food products, 
growing attention has also been given to new food packaging technologies, 
such as active* packaging [1], which have been recently introduced in Food 
Contact Materials regulation (1935/2004 framework regulation and related 
directive). Thus, modern concepts of food packaging are expected to combine 
renewable materials with the latest innovative technologies, such as nanotech -
nologies [2, 3].
Among renewable sources, proteins are agricultural products that have long 
and empirically been used as raw materials in a wide range of nonfood appli -
cations [4]. In contrary to most other biosourced polymers, proteins are het -
eropolymers constituted of different amino acids, which offer a large spectrum 
of chemical functionalities and, thus, various polymer network structures. 
* Active packaging deliberately incorporates active components intended to release or to absorb 
substances into, onto, or from the packaged food or the environment surrounding the food with 
their conditions of use. They act on different reactions of degradation of food or as vector of 
compounds of interest.614  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING
Many proteins stemming from either animal (casein, whey proteins, gelatin, 
collagen, egg white, keratin, and fish myofibrillar proteins) or vegetable (soy 
proteins, wheat gluten, corn zein, and pea protein isolates) sources display 
good film-forming properties and can be used for the production of amor -
phous films or coatings. In addition to their large availability, full biodegrad -
ability, and non-ecotoxicity, protein-based materials have interesting barrier 
and release properties for food packaging applications.
A downside to their sustainable and extensive use is their intrinsic reactivity 
and thus lower inertia when compared with most conventional petrochemical-
based plastics. They are known to be sensitive to microbial spoilage and also 
to water due to the hydrophilic nature of many amino acids constituting their 
primary structure and to the substantial amount of hydrophilic plasticizer 
required to impart thermo-processability and film flexibility. As a consequence, 
their mechanical properties and water vapor barrier properties in high mois -
ture conditions are poor compared with synthetic films such as low-density 
polyethylene.
Efforts to develop eco-friendly packaging for food, such as protein-based 
materials, tend to be oriented toward the replacement of petrochemical plas -
tics with materials displaying similar high inertial and barrier characteristics. 
However, it is important to understand that packaging properties, and espe -
cially barrier properties, need to be tailored to food requirements and shelf 
life [5]. As largely described in the literature, one route to significantly modu -
lating the functional properties of packaging materials consists in developing 
nanocomposite structures by incorporating fillers at a nanometric scale within 
the polymer matrix. Fillers are nanoparticles, that is, particles with at least  
one dimension between 1 and 100 nm, and those properties depend on their 
nature (inorganic or organic), reactivity, and morphology (dimensions, aspect 
ratio). This strategy has begun to be explored in the field of protein-based 
materials for gelatin less than 10 years ago (first publications in 2002) with the 
introduction of layered silicates in the formulation. The development of 
protein-based nanocomposites has been devoted to almost all proteins previ -
ously mentioned with the intention of mainly modulating mechanical and 
barrier properties. The use of protein-based nanocomposites has also been 
investigated for the controlled release of active agents, for example, for anti -
microbial applications [2].
This chapter focuses on the ability of protein-based materials for preserving 
food quality and safety. The first part of the chapter is devoted to presenting 
the structure of proteins and the possible processing routes to preparing 
protein-based nanocomposites. Then, the two next sections of the chapter 
focus on how the incorporation of nanofillers can modulate mechanical and 
barrier properties of protein-based materials. After that, some examples of the 
use of protein-based nanocomposites as controlled delivery systems for active 
packaging are given. Finally, the chapter ends with food safety aspects by 
presenting the possibility of considering protein-based nanocomposites as 
food contact materials.PREPARATION Of PROTEIN-BASED NANOCOMPOSITE MATERIALS   615
25.2 PREPARATION OF PROTEIN-BASED NANOCOMPOSITE 
MATERIALS
25.2.1 Structure of Proteins
Proteins are heteropolymers constituted of 20 different amino acids and char -
acterized by different levels of structure that permit various interactions and 
bindings, differing in position, type, and energy. The functionalities of protein-
based materials depend mainly on the composition of the amino acids consti -
tuting their primary sequence and more precisely on the chemical reactivity 
of the amino acids lateral groups, that is, polar or hydrophobic, ionized or not, 
acid or basic, aromatic or aliphatic (Table 25.1). According to the chemical 
specificity of the amino acids constituting proteins, different types of interac -
tions could be established leading to intra- and inter-polypeptidic chain link -
ages. Among them, the most representative are noncovalent bonds since they 
are considered as critical in stabilizing the protein three-dimensional structure 
that can be described at four levels, that is, from primary structure to second -
ary, tertiary, and quaternary structure (Fig. 25.1).The primary structure cor -
responds to the chemical composition, that is, the sequence of a chain of amino 
acids. At this level, the amino acids that make up the protein are linked 
together by covalent bonds. The secondary structure of proteins corresponds 
to the spatial arrangement of the polypeptide chains, which results from the 
establishment of periodic hydrogen bonding involving carbonyl and amine 
groups (CO–NH) and leads to either α-helices or β-sheets structures. The 
tertiary structure of proteins results from many interactions (hydrogen, hydro -
phobic, electrostatic, covalent, and so on) between amino acids belonging to 
the same polypeptide chain but being not neighbors. Finally, the quaternary 
structure results from generally noncovalent interactions between polypeptide 
chains. This latter structure is on the base of the functional properties of the 
final protein-based materials.
Amino acids are generally classified in groups depending on their ability to 
establish interactions via either hydrogen bonds (involving nonionized polar 
amino acids, 8–40 kJ/mol), ionic interactions (implying ionized polar amino 
acids, 42–84 kJ/mol), hydrophobic interactions (between apolar amino acids, 
4–12 kJ/mol), or covalent linkages (amino acids involved in disulfide bonds, 
330–380 kJ/mol) (Table 25.1). Although the noncovalent bonds are weak 
chemical forces ranging from 4 to 30 kJ/mol [6], they impart stability to the 
structures generated by their collective action. Van der Waals forces (involving 
both polar and apolar nonionised amino acids, 0.4–4 kJ/mol) are also impli -
cated, but their effect on protein structure is minor. In addition to noncovalent 
interactions, covalent disulfide bonds formed by oxidation of two thiol groups 
also play an important role in the stability of the proteins containing cysteine 
residues.
The functional properties of the final materials will depend on the respec -
tive contribution of these different kinds of interactions that are closely related TABLE 25.1  Biochemical Characteristics of the Main Proteins Used to Prepare Protein-Based Nanocomposites
ProteinsAmino Acida Ratios Subunits
Ionized 
PolarNonionized 
Polar ApolarCysteine 
Involved in 
Disulfide Bonds NameRate 
(%)Molecular 
Weight (kDa)
Gelatin [102, 
103]29.1 27.6 43.3 0 3–200
Whey proteins 
[104, 105]28.5 25 42.5 4 α-Lactalbumin 60 14
β-Lactoglobulin 20 18
Soy proteins 
[106]47 16.7 35 1.3 Glycinin 40 350
β-Conglycinine 35 185
Wheat gluten 
[107]18 41 38.3 2.7 Gliadin 45 30–80
Glutenin 45 200–2000
Corn zein [107] 15 38 45 2 Zein 80 23–27
aIonized polar :Glu, Asp, Lys, Arg, His; Nonionized polar: Gly, Asn, Gln, Ser, Thr, Tyr; Apolar : Ala, Val, Leu, Ileu, Pro, Phe, Met, Trp.
616Figure 25.1  Different levels of protein structure.Prim arystructure 
Sequence of a chain of amino acids Secondary structur e Tertiary  structure 
Interactions between amino acids belonging 
to the sa me polypepde chain Quaternary structure 
 Interactions between di fferen t
polypeptide chai ns  
Assembled su bunits α/uni2010helix β/uni2010sheet s 
H3N+– 
/uni2010COO/uni2010Leu 
Lys 
Asp
Cys NH 2 
 H COOH  
R Aminoaci d  
Hydr ogen 
bond Hydr ophobi c 
interaction  
Disulf id bo nd 
Ionic bo nd C
617618  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING
to the characteristics of the protein raw material but that can also be modu -
lated by the conditions used to process and store the protein-based materials. 
Furthermore, this heterogeneous structure offers many opportunities for 
cross-linking or chemical grafting.
25.2.2 Main Proteins Used as Matrices
Most studies devoted to the development of protein-based nanocomposites 
involve the use of either gelatin, whey proteins, soy protein isolates (SPI), corn 
zein, or wheat gluten as protein matrices.
25.2.2.1  Gelatin  Gelatin is a protein resulting from partial thermal or 
chemical hydrolysis of collagen polypeptide chains stemming from animal 
skin, bones, and cartilages. For commercial production of gelatin, two pro -
cesses are mainly used differing by the pH conditions; type A gelatin involves 
an acid extraction whereas type B gelatin is obtained by an alkaline lime fol -
lowed by a solubilization at near neutral pH at 60–90°C [7]. Gelatin was one 
of the first food proteins to be used as raw material not only for food applica -
tions but also in the pharmaceutical and photographic film industries due to 
large availability, low production cost (between 1 and 5 €/kg depending on 
the animal origin and the targeted application, food or nonfood uses), and 
excellent film forming ability. Gelatin has been successfully used to form films 
by casting that are transparent, flexible, water-resistant, and impermeable to 
oxygen [8]. Although gelatin can be used as a valuable biopolymer in tissue 
engineering, its poor mechanical properties, especially in the wet state, and its 
high water sensitivity, revealed by a high water swelling, restrict its application 
as a structural biomaterial such as osteosynthetic devices.
25.2.2.2  Whey  Proteins  Together with caseins, whey proteins are the 
second category of proteins contained in milk. Milk has a protein content of 
about 33 g/L,whey proteins representing 20% of the total. Whey proteins are 
by-products of the cheese or casein manufacturing that remain in milk serum 
after pH/rennet-induced casein coagulation. Increased production of whey 
because of expanding cheese manufacture has led to identification of new uses 
for whey proteins. This also implies that whey proteins are available at lower 
price than caseins. Film-forming properties of milk proteins have been indi -
rectly demonstrated by films formed on processing equipment surfaces and at 
air–water interfaces during heating of nonfat milk [8]. Whey proteins have 
been used to produce transparent, flexible, colorless, and odorless edible films 
and coatings displaying excellent oxygen aroma and oil barrier properties at 
low relative humidity (RH), but poor moisture barrier properties as related 
to their high hydrophilicity and water solubility.
25.2.2.3  Soy  Protein  Isolates  Soybean meal, also known as soybean oil 
cake, is a flour obtained by grinding the solid residue of soybean oil produc -
tion. Protein meal can further be concentrated for the production of commer -PREPARATION Of PROTEIN-BASED NANOCOMPOSITE MATERIALS   619
cially available soy protein concentrates and isolates. Because SPI are a highly 
refined class of soybean proteins that contains more than 90% protein and 18 
different amino acids, they have become the favorite choice of researchers. 
The film-forming properties of soy proteins have been traditionally used in 
Asia to obtain edible films by collecting the lipo-proteic skin formed after 
boiling soya milk [8]. SPI-based films alone possess poor flexibility. Therefore, 
plasticizers are usually used to overcome their brittleness, leading unavoidably 
to a significant decrease in their tensile strength and barrier properties [9].
25.2.2.4  Corn  Zein  Zein is the major corn protein fraction (prolamin frac -
tion) commercially produced from corn gluten meal, a by-product of corn wet-
milling processing. Corn gluten meal contains about 55–60% proteins and is 
available at relatively low price; 600–700 dollar/metric ton depending on the 
grade (food or not). Zein-based materials can be formed by different processes 
including casting and thermoplastic processing. Due to its low content in polar 
amino acids and high level in apolar amino acids, zein-based films are not water 
soluble and exhibit remarkable grease-resistance properties [8]. However, corn 
zein-based materials, although less water sensitive than other biopolymers still 
show high water vapor permeability and low tensile strength when compared 
with commodity polymers.
25.2.2.5  Wheat  Gluten  Wheat gluten has been widely investigated as a 
protein source because it is annually renewable and readily available at a 
reasonable cost (1.3 €/kg). Wheat gluten proteins consist of monomeric glia -
dins with a molecular weight ranging from 15,000 to 85,000 and a mixture of 
glutenin polymers with a molecular weight between about 80,000 to several 
million (Table 25.1). Wheat gluten proteins can undergo disulfide interchange 
upon heating, which leads to the formation of a covalent three-dimensional 
macromolecular network. With respect to its unique viscoelastic and film-
forming properties, wheat gluten is an interesting raw material that can be 
used as a food packaging material. Wheat gluten based-films present an attrac -
tive combination of strength and flexibility [10, 11], a high gas (oxygen and 
carbon dioxide) permeability in dry condition and a significant gas perm selec -
tivity at high RH [12–14], and good grease [14] and aroma barrier properties 
[15], which are key functional properties for food quality preservation. They 
also are translucent [10] and can be heat sealed [16]. A downside to the use 
of wheat gluten-based materials is their per se reactivity and thus lower inertia 
than most conventional petrochemical-based plastics. As mentioned above for 
other protein-based films, wheat gluten-based films are sensitive toward water 
due to the hydrophilic nature of many amino acids constituting the protein 
chains and to the need for adding hydrophilic plasticizer.
25.2.3 Main Nanoparticles Used as Fillers in Protein-Based Matrices
The most common fillers used as reinforcing agents in protein-based  
matrices are by far layered silicates, and, in a less extend carbon nanotubes, 620  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING
polysaccharide (cellulose, chitin, starch) nanocrystals, silica, and TiO 2 nanopar -
ticles. These different fillers can be classified into different categories depend -
ing on their nature, inorganic or organic, but also on their particle size and 
shape. Indeed, we can typically distinguish three major categories based on 
the dimensional characteristics of the fillers.
25.2.3.1  Isodimensional  Particles  They have the same size in all direc -
tions and their aspect ratio is usually close to unity. Examples include spherical 
silica, TiO 2 nanoparticles, carbon black, and fullerenes. Up to now, only silica 
and TiO 2 nanoparticles have been used as fillers in protein-based matrices.
Silica  In the field of nanocomposite materials, silica (SiO 2) is mainly used as 
colloidal suspensions of amorphous spherical nanoparticles whose properties 
and structure depend directly on their synthesis process. Three different struc -
tures can be distinguished: (1) elementary nanoparticles with a diameter 
ranging from 10 to 40 nm, (2) indivisible aggregates constituted of elementary 
nanoparticles with a size ranging from 50 to 500 nm, and (3) agglomerates of 
important size (0.2–30 μm) corresponding to the association of aggregates that 
can be fractionated. The aggregate size is tailored by the pH or the ionic force 
of the suspension. The surface of silica nanoparticles, which are naturally 
hydrophilic, can easily be chemically modified to bring new functionalities or 
improve their compatibility with a hydrophobic polymer matrix. For the 
moment, colloidal suspensions of silica nanoparticles have only been tested as 
fillers in a soy protein-based matrix [17].
TiO 2 Nanoparticles  Titanium dioxide, TiO 2, occurs in nature in the form of 
well-known minerals that are rutile, anatase, and brookite. It is the most widely 
used white pigment because of its unique physical and chemical properties 
such as high refractive index, brightness, opacity, and excellent optical trans -
mittance in the visible. In the food packaging area, the main purpose of TiO 2 
incorporation is the reduction of ultraviolet (UV) damage of foodstuff in 
transparent packaging. Its surface irradiation is used as scratchproof coating 
and its antimicrobial properties are also extensively investigated. Regarding 
their photocatalytic effects, the incorporation of TiO 2 nanoparticles was 
recently prospected as catalyst for the biodegradation of organic packaging 
materials. TiO 2 nanoparticles have already been used as fillers in whey protein-
based matrices [18, 19].
25.2.3.2  Elongated  Particles  They consist of fibrils with diameter ranging 
between 1 and 100 nm and length of several hundred of nanometers. They 
include carbon nanotubes, which are inorganic fillers, as well as cellulose and 
chitin nanofibrils, which are organic fillers.
Carbon Nanotubes  Carbon nanotubes are molecular-scale tubes formed by 
rolled-up graphene sheets. We can distinguish two kinds of nanotubes depend -PREPARATION Of PROTEIN-BASED NANOCOMPOSITE MATERIALS   621
ing on their structure: (1) single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT), which 
consist of a single sheet of graphene rolled seamlessly to form a cylinder with 
diameter of the order of 1 nm and length of up to several centimeters, and (2) 
multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT), which consist of an array of such 
cylinders formed concentrically and separated by 0.36 nm, similar to the basal 
plane separation in graphite. MWCNTs can have outer diameters of about 
30 nm, and lengths of 1–100 μm [20]. Up to now, SWCNTs have not been used 
as reinforcing fillers in protein-based matrices owing to the difficulty to be 
dispersed within a polymer matrix. Indeed, such carbon nanotubes tend to 
aggregate into large bundles due to their high flexibility and surface energy 
[20]. Even if MWCNTs are more rigid, their effective utilization as fillers 
strongly depends on their ability to be homogeneously distributed and dis -
persed within the polymer matrix without destroying their integrity. To improve 
their dispersibility, their surface can be chemically functionalized to optimize 
the interfacial interaction between carbon nanotubes and the polymer matrix 
[20]. Up to now, the reinforcing effect of MWCNTs has only been evaluated 
in gelatin [21] and SPI [22] matrices.
Cellulose and Chitin Nanocrystals  Polysaccharides are among the most 
promising organic and renewable sources for the production of nanoparticles 
with various different morphologies and geometrical characteristics providing 
a wide range of nanoparticle properties. Aqueous suspensions of cellulose or 
chitin nanocrystals can be prepared by acid hydrolysis of native substrates. The 
object of this treatment is to dissolve away regions of low lateral order so that 
the water-insoluble, highly crystalline residue may be converted into a stable 
suspension. The resulting nanocrystals occur as rod-like particles or whiskers, 
whose dimensions depend on the nature of the substrate. They are typically a 
few hundred nanometers long and in the order of a few nanometers in diam -
eter [23]. The aspect ratio of these whiskers is defined as the ratio of the length 
to the diameter. Their surface can be modified using well-established carbo -
hydrate chemistry to offer new functionalities.
25.2.3.3  Layered  Particles  This third category comprises fillers character -
ized by one dimension, often the thickness, ranging from several angstroms to 
several nanometers. It includes layered silicates and starch nanocrystals.
Layered Silicates  Smectites, and in particular montmorillonites (MMT), are 
the layered silicates most largely used to modulate the properties of protein-
based materials. They belong to the phyllosilicate family and display a perfect 
crystalline structure consisting of two-dimensional layers where a central octa -
hedral sheet of alumina or magnesia is linked with two external silica tetrahe -
drons [24]. The layer thickness is around 1 nm and the lateral dimensions of 
these layers vary from 30 nm to several micrometers [24]. The limiting aspect 
of the use of such nanofillers is the difficulty to correctly disperse them within 
a polymeric matrix due to their tendency to form agglomerated tactoïds. 622  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING
Indeed, the achievement of a well-exfoliated nanocomposite structure, rather 
than a conventional microcomposite structure or even an intercalated nano -
composite structure, is required to significantly modulate mechanical and 
barrier properties of protein-based materials. One important feature of clays 
is that the space between layers contains hydrated cations such as Na+ or K+ 
that can undergo exchange reaction with organic cations such as alkylammo -
niums. Thus, organically modified layered silicates can be purposely prepared 
to impart functionality and compatibility with polymers.
Starch Nanocrystals  Similarly to cellulose and chitin whiskers, starch nano -
crystals are obtained from mild acid hydrolysis of native starch granules and 
correspond to the highly crystalline water-insoluble lamellae of the native 
starch granules. Up to now, only pea starch nanocrystals have been tested as 
reinforcing agents in a SPI-based matrix [25]. Starch nanocrystals are charac -
terized by a length ranging from 60 to 150 nm, a width ranging from 15 to 
30 nm, and an estimated thickness of about 5–7 nm [26]. Starch nanocrystals, 
as cellulose and chitin whiskers, possess a highly reactive surface covered with 
hydroxyl groups, which provides the possibility of chemical modification in 
order to create new specific functions and thus expand their applications.
25.2.4 Processing Protein-Based Nanocomposite Materials
Proteins are required to unfold and realign before a new three-dimensional 
network can be formed, and then stabilized by new inter- and intramolecular 
interactions. The formation of a macromolecular network from proteins 
requires three steps: first the rupture of low-energy intermolecular bonds that 
stabilize polymer chains in the native state, secondly, the arrangement and the 
orientation of polymer chains (shaping), and finally the formation of a three-
dimensional network stabilized by new interactions and bonds after the agent 
that breaks intermolecular bonds is removed [8]. Due to the high glass transi -
tion temperature of proteins (above their temperature of degradation), their 
formulation often requires the addition of plasticizers to allow their thermo-
processability and impart material flexibility. Besides water molecules, which 
could be considered as natural plasticizers of many proteins, the most usual 
plasticizers are polyols (glycerol, sorbitol), mono, di-, and oligosaccharides, and 
fatty acids. Whatever the type of nanoparticle used to prepare protein-based 
nanocomposites, two processing methods can be considered (Fig. 25.2).
25.2.4.1  Wet  Process,  That  is, Dispersion  of Nanoparticles  from 
Solution  The wet process, commonly called casting, is based on the disper -
sion or solubilization of proteins in a solvent (water, ethanol, and occasionally 
acetone). This process is suitable for all proteins. Depending on the amino acid 
sequence, dispersing proteins in solution may also involve the addition of 
disruptive agents, pH adjustment by the addition of acids or bases, and/or ionic 
strength control by electrolyte addition [8]. In aqueous medium, proteins PREPARATION Of PROTEIN-BASED NANOCOMPOSITE MATERIALS   623
generally adopt a conformation in which the polar amino acids are located at 
the interface with the solvent, whereas the hydrophobic parts of the polypep -
tide chains tend to avoid solvent contact by moving within the structure.
In case of layered silicates, the challenge is to intercalate protein chains 
within the galleries [24]. For this purpose, clay nanoparticles are first exfoliated 
into single layers using a solvent in which the proteins are easy to disperse. 
Proteins then adsorb onto the delaminated surfaces of clay and when the 
solvent is evaporated, the sheets reassemble, sandwiching proteins. To facilitate 
introduction of proteins into clay galleries, it is possible to modify the pH value 
of the film-forming solution to positively increase the protein net charge in 
favor of electrostatic interactions established with the negatively charged clay 
surfaces.
So far, the dispersion of nanoparticles in solution was largely preferred for 
making protein-based nanocomposites for several reasons, including the non-
necessity to use plasticizers, the easiness of processing, and the possibility to 
achieve well-dispersed nanocomposite structures. In some cases, solution 
intercalation followed by solvent evaporation (often by freeze-drying) is only 
considered as a preliminary step leading to good nanoparticle dispersion, and 
the resulting dried powders being then shaped using a dry process (Fig. 25.2). 
It is generally the case for polysaccharide (cellulose, chitin, starch) nanofillers, 
which are available in the form of aqueous colloidal suspensions [25, 27, 28].Figure 25.2  Schematic representation of the two main and derivated technological 
processes used to prepare protein-based nanocomposite materials.WET PROCESS 
(disper sion from so lution) DRY PROCESS  
(melt mixing ) 
Proteins Nanoparticles  
Protein film -
forming solutionNano particles
dispersion  
Prot ein/nanoparticle film-
formin g soluti on Dispersion conditions - Use of suitab le 
solvents and di sruptive agen ts 
Mixing condition s 
Cast ing and drying  conditions  Proces sing (melting, shearing )  
and shaping condit ions 
Protei n-based na nocomposite mate rials Proteins  Nanoparticles 624  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING
25.2.4.2  Dry Process,  That  is, Dispersion  at the Melt  State  Dry pro -
cesses, including extrusion and thermomolding, are thermomechanical pro -
cesses based on the thermoplastic properties of proteins. Nanoparticles are 
mixed with the protein matrix in the molten state under heating and shearing 
(Fig. 25.2). Thus, such processes require the formation of a homogeneous 
protein melt, implying processing temperatures above the protein softening 
point. For this purpose, chemical additives, such as sodium sulfite, sodium 
dodecyl sulfate, and urea, which are known to disrupt covalent and noncova -
lent bonds, are often used as processing aids in combination with plasticizers. 
Although most proteins are suitable for the extrusion process, to date, only 
wheat gluten and SPI have led to nanocomposite materials by using a dry 
process.
In case of layered silicates, when their surface is sufficiently compatible with 
the protein, polypeptide chains can crawl into the galleries and lead to either 
an intercalated or exfoliated nanocomposite structure. According to Vaia and 
Giannelis [29], an interplay of entropic and energetic factors determines the 
outcome of polymer intercalation. Exfoliation or complete layer separation 
depends on the establishment of very favorable interactions between polymer 
and clay surfaces to overcome the entropy loss associated with polymer con -
finement and penetration between the clay layers. The kinetics of intercalation 
of the polymer chains between the clay layers also depend on the polymer 
mobility that is related with the temperature difference between the process -
ing temperature and the polymer glass temperature [30].
Although still of limited use to prepare protein-based nanocomposites, the 
polymer melt intercalation is considered as a more efficient and environmen -
tally benign alternative than the polymer intercalation from solution since it 
requires no solvent. Moreover, dry processes are all available at the industrial 
scale and commonly used forindustrial plastic processing.
25.3 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF PROTEIN-BASED 
NANOCOMPOSITE MATERIALS
As mentioned previoulsy, all protein-based films are sensitive to water due to 
the hydrophilic nature of many amino acids constituting the protein chains 
and to the substantial amount of hydrophilic plasticizers required to impart 
thermo-processability and film flexibility. As a consequence, in high moisture 
conditions, their mechanical properties are poor as compared to synthetic films 
such as low-density polyethylene. Maintaining physical film integrity is essen -
tial to guaranteeing the barrier properties of food packaging and the handling 
of the packages. Mechanical properties are thus essential requirements for 
food protection and commercialization.
Layered silicates are the most largely used reinforcing nanoparticles in 
protein-based matrices, with first papers published in 2002 for gelatin. Most 
studies are devoted to the introduction of unmodified clays, especially mont -MECHANICAL PROPERTIES Of PROTEIN-BASED NANOCOMPOSITE MATERIALS   625
morillonite (MMT) [10, 31–40]. Thanks to the hydrophilic nature of both 
proteins and unmodified clays, this type of nanofiller was expected to give an 
enhanced nanodipersion state, that is, intercalated or partially exfoliated 
nanocomposite structures, resulting in the improvement of mechanical 
properties.
Zheng et al. [31] were the first to report the reinforcing effect of unmodified 
MMT in a gelatin-based matrix, which was revealed by an improvement in 
Young’s modulus and the tensile strength (Table 25.2). The significant enhance -
ment of both Young’s modulus and the tensile strength of gelatin-based mate -
rials by a factor of about 2 without sacrificing toughness was further confirmed 
by many authors for low clay particles contents (about 5 wt%) and was 
ascribed to the nanodispersion of clays within the matrix [32, 33, 41] (Table 
25.2). The reinforcing effect of layered silicates was also reported for corn zein 
[34], and overall for soy proteins [42–44] and wheat gluten [10, 35] -based 
matrices (Table 25.2). All studies demonstrated that the introduction of 
unmodified MMT nanoparticles in such matrices resulted in significant 
improvements in the tensile strength and Young’s modulus with a simultane -
ous decrease in the elongation at break due to increased interfacial interac -
tions (Table 25.2). To our knowledge, only one article has been recently 
published on the incorporation of layered silicates to improve the mechanical 
properties of corn zein-based films [34]. Authors reported that the improve -
ment of the mechanical properties of zein-based films (Table 25.2), which was 
ascribed to the achievement of partially exfoliated structures, did not evolve 
linearly with the MMT content, indicating that there was a critical MMT per -
centage (i.e., 5 wt%) where the dispersion during processing was better. An 
optimal filler content of around 5 wt% was also required to achieve the great -
est improvement of mechanical properties of wheat gluten-based nanocom -
posites, probably due to the possibility of layered silicates to form a 
three-dimensional network [35]. In the case of soy proteins-based nanocom -
posites, whatever the MMT type and loading (from 5 to 15 wt%), highly 
exfoliated and intercalated structures were successfully prepared either via a 
solution intercalation process in a neutral aqueous media without any special 
aid [42–44] or via melt extrusion [39, 40]. According to Chen and Zhang [43], 
the high affinity between soy proteins and the MMT layers was due to two 
kinds of interactions: hydrogen bonding between the −NH and Si–O groups 
and electrostatic interactions between the positive charge-rich domains of soy 
protein and the negatively charged MMT layers as evidenced by zeta-potential 
measurements and Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) analysis. However, 
structures and properties were shown to strongly depend on the filler content 
used. An increase in the filler content up to 12 wt% led to a significant increase 
in both Young’s modulus and the tensile strength (Table 25.2). It is accompa -
nied by a drop in the deformation at break due to the restricted segmental 
motion of soy proteins and the establishment of favorable interactions between 
the clay sheets and the protein chains. For filler contents as high as 12–16 wt%, 
all the mechanical properties deteriorated, due to some agglomeration of TABLE 25.2  Mechanical Properties of Protein/Clay-Based Nanocomposites: Young’s Modulus (E), Tensile Strength (TS), and 
Deformation at Break ( ε)
Matrix Sample E (MPa) TS (MPa) ε (%) Ref.
Gelatin Bovine skin gelatin (type B) (25 wt% glycerol) 900 49.3 – [29]
−5 wt% Na + MMT 1600 78.9 –
−17 wt% Na + MMT 2000 89.1 –
Gelatin (type 4) (no plasticizer) 3300 88.9 9.6 [32]a
−5 wt% Cloisite Na + 5900 97.4 3
−10 wt% Cloisite Na + 8300 110.8 0.9
Bloom fish gelatin (20 wt% glycerol) – 30.3 ± 2.4 48 ± 4 [33]a
−5 wt% Cloisite Na + – 40.9 ± 5.3 38 ± 3
Porcine skin gelatin (type A) 2100 ± 200 – 3.3 [41]
−5 wt% sepiolite 3300 ± 100 – 2.5
Whey 
proteinsWhey (33 wt% glycerol) 172 ± 14 3.4 ± 0.6 51 ± 13 [37]a
−5 wt% Cloisite Na + 109 ± 18 3.0 ± 0.3 42 ± 8
−5 wt% Cloisite C30B 162 ± 38 3.3 ± 0.1 52 ± 5
−5 wt% Cloisite 20A 115 ± 13 1.5 ± 0.3 29 ± 9
Soy protein 
isolates 
(SPI)SPI (glycerol) – 7.4 68 [42]
−10 wt% Na+ MMT – 5.7 16
−10 wt% OMMT – 9.4 54
−10 wt% bentonite – 9.7 58
SPI (30 wt% glycerol) 180 8.7 88 [43]b
−4 wt% Na+ MMT 260 10.3 63
−12 wt% Na+ MMT 420 14 15
−20 wt% Na+ MMT 587 14.5 6
SPI (30 wt% glycerol) 180 6.8 108 [44]b
−4 wt% rectorite 360 9 57
−12 wt% rectorite 560 12.8 12
−20 wt% rectorite 580 9.4 7
SPI (15 wt% glycerol) – 2.3 ± 0.5 11.8 ± 0.4 [49]c
−5 wt% Na + MMT – 6.3 ± 0.9 65 ± 5
−10 wt% Na + MMT – 12.6 ± 0.6 24 ± 5
−15 wt% Na + MMT – 15.6 ± 1.7 18 ± 3
SPI (15 wt% glycerol) – 2.3 ± 0.5 11.8 ± 0.4 [40]c
−5 wt% Cloisite 30B – 15.1 ± 0.9 82 ± 3
−10 wt% Cloisite 30B – 16.2 ± 0.8 104 ± 5
−15 wt% Cloisite 30B – 18.6 ± 0.3 55 ± 3
Corn zein Zein ×1 ×1 ×1 [34]d,g
−3 wt% OMMT ×1.2 ×1.5 ×0.4
−5 wt% OMMT ×1.6 ×2.4 ×0.3
−10 wt% OMMT ×2.9 ×1.5 ×0.1
Wheat gluten WG (10 wt% glycerol) 3.7 1.9 58 [35]e
−2.5 wt% Na+ MMT 5.6 2.4 55
−5 wt% Na+ MMT 10.6 4.7 16
−7.5 wt% Na+ MMT 11.4 3.6 15
WG (T = 80°C; 37.2 wt% glycerol) 1.1 0.31 33 [10]f
−2 wt% Na + MMT 1.7 0.32 30
−5 wt% Na + MMT 6.4 0.66 23
WG (12 wt% water + 15 wt% glycerol) 65.4 5.8 106 [47]a
−3 wt% C30B 91.8 9 78
Mechanical properties evaluated at 
a50%RH; 
b0%RH; 
c65%RH; 
d 3%RH; 
e70%RH; 
 f75%RH. Such details were not specified for other data.
gIn the study of Luecha et al. [34], only relative mechanical properties are available.
626627TABLE 25.2  Mechanical Properties of Protein/Clay-Based Nanocomposites: Young’s Modulus (E), Tensile Strength (TS), and 
Deformation at Break ( ε)
Matrix Sample E (MPa) TS (MPa) ε (%) Ref.
Gelatin Bovine skin gelatin (type B) (25 wt% glycerol) 900 49.3 – [29]
−5 wt% Na + MMT 1600 78.9 –
−17 wt% Na + MMT 2000 89.1 –
Gelatin (type 4) (no plasticizer) 3300 88.9 9.6 [32]a
−5 wt% Cloisite Na + 5900 97.4 3
−10 wt% Cloisite Na + 8300 110.8 0.9
Bloom fish gelatin (20 wt% glycerol) – 30.3 ± 2.4 48 ± 4 [33]a
−5 wt% Cloisite Na + – 40.9 ± 5.3 38 ± 3
Porcine skin gelatin (type A) 2100 ± 200 – 3.3 [41]
−5 wt% sepiolite 3300 ± 100 – 2.5
Whey 
proteinsWhey (33 wt% glycerol) 172 ± 14 3.4 ± 0.6 51 ± 13 [37]a
−5 wt% Cloisite Na + 109 ± 18 3.0 ± 0.3 42 ± 8
−5 wt% Cloisite C30B 162 ± 38 3.3 ± 0.1 52 ± 5
−5 wt% Cloisite 20A 115 ± 13 1.5 ± 0.3 29 ± 9
Soy protein 
isolates 
(SPI)SPI (glycerol) – 7.4 68 [42]
−10 wt% Na+ MMT – 5.7 16
−10 wt% OMMT – 9.4 54
−10 wt% bentonite – 9.7 58
SPI (30 wt% glycerol) 180 8.7 88 [43]b
−4 wt% Na+ MMT 260 10.3 63
−12 wt% Na+ MMT 420 14 15
−20 wt% Na+ MMT 587 14.5 6
SPI (30 wt% glycerol) 180 6.8 108 [44]b
−4 wt% rectorite 360 9 57
−12 wt% rectorite 560 12.8 12
−20 wt% rectorite 580 9.4 7
SPI (15 wt% glycerol) – 2.3 ± 0.5 11.8 ± 0.4 [49]c
−5 wt% Na + MMT – 6.3 ± 0.9 65 ± 5
−10 wt% Na + MMT – 12.6 ± 0.6 24 ± 5
−15 wt% Na + MMT – 15.6 ± 1.7 18 ± 3
SPI (15 wt% glycerol) – 2.3 ± 0.5 11.8 ± 0.4 [40]c
−5 wt% Cloisite 30B – 15.1 ± 0.9 82 ± 3
−10 wt% Cloisite 30B – 16.2 ± 0.8 104 ± 5
−15 wt% Cloisite 30B – 18.6 ± 0.3 55 ± 3
Corn zein Zein ×1 ×1 ×1 [34]d,g
−3 wt% OMMT ×1.2 ×1.5 ×0.4
−5 wt% OMMT ×1.6 ×2.4 ×0.3
−10 wt% OMMT ×2.9 ×1.5 ×0.1
Wheat gluten WG (10 wt% glycerol) 3.7 1.9 58 [35]e
−2.5 wt% Na+ MMT 5.6 2.4 55
−5 wt% Na+ MMT 10.6 4.7 16
−7.5 wt% Na+ MMT 11.4 3.6 15
WG (T = 80°C; 37.2 wt% glycerol) 1.1 0.31 33 [10]f
−2 wt% Na + MMT 1.7 0.32 30
−5 wt% Na + MMT 6.4 0.66 23
WG (12 wt% water + 15 wt% glycerol) 65.4 5.8 106 [47]a
−3 wt% C30B 91.8 9 78
Mechanical properties evaluated at 
a50%RH; 
b0%RH; 
c65%RH; 
d 3%RH; 
e70%RH; 
 f75%RH. Such details were not specified for other data.
gIn the study of Luecha et al. [34], only relative mechanical properties are available.628  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING
MMT that occurred in the soy protein matrix as a phase separation phenom -
enon [43, 44].
Since mechanical properties of nanocomposite materials are directly related 
to their structure and, in this respect, to the state of dispersion (intercalation/
exfoliation) of layered silicates [45], the reinforcing effect of layered silicates 
is sometimes poor, and even absent. The level of exfoliation is known to highly 
depend on the nature of the MMT [24, 45]. Some authors attempted to use 
organically modified nanoclays, but it often resulted in a negative effect on 
mechanical properties [34, 36–38, 46, 47]. In the case of wheat gluten reinforced 
with organically modified MMT, it was shown that the quaternary alky ammo -
nium could act as a plasticizer, which might play a negative role in achieving 
higher strength enhancement in the nanocomposites [47].
Even if well-dispersed nanocomposite structures were obtained for gelatin, 
corn zein, soy proteins, and wheat gluten-based materials, it is worth noting 
that it was not the case for whey protein-based nanocomposites. Data from 
Sothornvit et al. [37, 38] and Hedenqvist et al. [36] all reported a bad disper -
sion of clays within the whey-based matrices, leading to the absence of a 
reinforcing effect of layered silicates. In Sothornvit et al. studies, different 
types of MMT were tested: an unmodified clay (Cloisite Na+) and two organi -
cally modified MMT (Cloisite 30B and Cloisite 20A) with a clay loading of 5 
wt% [37] or up to 20 wt% [38]. The fact that mechanical properties (tensile 
strength and elongation at break) of nanocomposites were either unchanged 
(Cloisite Na+ and Cloisite 30B) or decreased (Cloisite 20A) as compared to 
the neat matrix (Table 25.2) suggested that a microcomposite rather than a 
nanocomposite structure was achieved [37]. In the work reported by Heden -
qvist et al. [36] the MMT used were previously intercalated with poly(vinylidene 
pyrrolidone), which is water soluble and acts as surfactant by easily adsorbing 
onto the unmodified MMT surface. Authors also noted the absence of a sig -
nificant increase in relaxed rubber modulus in the nanocomposites due to an 
incomplete exfoliation of nanoparticles, as confirmed by transmission electron 
microscopy (TEM) analysis.
Other fillers such as chitin or cellulose whiskers and starch nanocrystals, 
silica, and carbon nanotubes were tentatively used to improve mechanical 
properties of SPI-based materials (Table 25.3). Polysaccharide-based fillers 
display a similar reinforcing effect than unmodified MMT. Indeed, the introduc -
tion of increasing contents (up to 20 wt%) of either chitin [27] or cellulose 
whiskers [28] led to a strengthening of SPI-based materials, characterized by a 
significant increase in both Young’s modulus and the tensile strength, together 
with a decrease in the elongation at break (Table 25.3). For example, for SPI/
chitin whiskers nanocomposites, increasing chitin content from 0 wt% to 20 
wt% led to an increase in the tensile strength and Young’s modulus from 3.3 to 
8.4 MPa and from 26 to 158 MPa, respectively, whereas the elongation at break 
of the filled composites decreased from 205% to 29%.This reinforcing effect 
was ascribed to the establishment of hydrogen bonding interactions between 
the whiskers and the SPI matrix, which restricted the motion of soy proteins. TABLE 25.3  Mechanical Properties of Protein/(TiO 2, Silica, Carbon Nanotubes, or Polysaccharide Nanofillers)-Based 
Nanocomposites: Young’s Modulus (E), Tensile Strength (TS) and Deformation at Break ( ε)
System Sample E (MPa) TS (MPa) ε (%) Ref.
Protein/TiO 2 Whey (33 wt% glycerol) – 6 95 [21]a
−0.1 wt% TiO 2 – 10 95
−0.25 wt% TiO 2 – 10.2 98
−0.5 wt% TiO 2 – 9.2 96
−1 wt% TiO 2 – 8.4 75
−2 wt% TiO 2 – 6.9 27
Whey (50 wt% glycerol) 31 ± 3 1.7 ± 0.1 55 ± 1 [18]b
−0.5 wt% TiO 2 66 ± 3 2.4 ± 0.1 54 ± 1
−1 wt% TiO 2 63 ± 2 2.2 ± 3.1 40 ± 1
−2 wt% TiO 2 44 ± 3 1.9 ± 0.2 15 ± 1
−4 wt% TiO 2 39 ± 4 1.8 ± 0.1 12 ± 1
Protein/silica SPI (30 wt% glycerol) 174 6.8 108 [17]c
−4 wt% SiO 2 310 11.3 133
−8 wt% SiO 2 195 7.9 175
−12 wt% SiO 2 295 9.9 59
−16 wt% SiO 2 275 9.6 37
−20 wt% SiO 2 240 9.3 27
−24 wt% SiO 2 115 9.2 11
Protein/carbon 
nanotubesSPI (30 wt% glycerol) 88 6.9 171 [22]d
−0.25 wt% MWCNT 261 11.6 193
−0.5 wt% MWCNT 252 10.7 153
−0.75 wt% MWCNT 248 9.1 148
−1 wt% MWCNT 101 6.2 158
−2 wt% MWCNT 118 7.8 160
−3 wt% MWCNT 177 9.8 165
(Continued )
629System Sample E (MPa) TS (MPa) ε (%) Ref.
Protein/chitin 
or cellulose 
whiskersSPI (30 wt% glycerol) 26 3.3 205 [27]d
−5 wt% chitin whiskers 32 3.9 134
−10 wt% chitin whiskers 34 5 86
−15 wt% chitin whiskers 45 5.7 82
−20 wt% chitin whiskers 158 8.4 29
−30 wt% chitin whiskers 106 6.3 25
SPI (30 wt% glycerol) 44 5.8 188 [28]d
−5 wt% cellulose whiskers 51 6.3 133
−10 wt% cellulose whiskers 62 6.9 115
−15 wt% cellulose whiskers 74 7.6 95
−20 wt% cellulose whiskers 90 8.1 61
−30 wt% cellulose whiskers 133 8.1 36
Protein/starch 
nanocrystalsSPI (30 wt% glycerol) 108 6.8 171 [25]c
−1 wt% starch nanocrystals 259 9.5 60
−2 wt% starch nanocrystals 313 10.2 51
−4 wt% starch nanocrystals 270 8.8 34
−8 wt% starch nanocrystals 248 8.5 68
−16 wt% starch nanocrystals 205 6.1 12
Mechanical properties evaluated at 
a56%RH; 
b50%RH; 
c35%RH and 
d43%RH.TABLE 25.3 (Continued )
630MECHANICAL PROPERTIES Of PROTEIN-BASED NANOCOMPOSITE MATERIALS   631
Composites containing more than 20 wt% chitin or cellulose whiskers exhibited 
a decrease in all mechanical properties, due to a phase separation phenomenon, 
as supported by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) pictures [27, 28]. Starch 
nanocrystals displayed a similar reinforcing effect, but with an optimal filler 
content around 2 wt% [25]. Indeed, nanocomposites containing 2 wt% of starch 
nanocrystals showed the highest strength and rigidity, which was enhanced by 
approximately 50% and 200%, respectively, in contrast to the neat matrix 
(Table 25.3), due to hydrogen interactions between both components. With an 
increase in filler content, the increasing number and size of starch nanocrystals 
domains lowered the effective active filler surface for interacting with protein 
chains and destroyed the ordered structure in the SPI matrix [25]. This caused 
a gradual decrease of the tensile strength and Young’s modulus.
The reinforcing effect of silica was characterized by an increase in all 
mechanical properties with increasing filler content, with maximum values of 
rigidity and strength for 4 wt% of silica and a maximum value of elongation 
at break for 8 wt% of silica [17] (Table 25.3). The reinforcing effect of silica 
was ascribed to the competition between three kinds of interactions: original 
interactions in the SPI matrix, interfacial interactions between silica and the 
SPI matrix, and the self-aggregated affinity among silica nanoparticles [17]. 
The improvement of mechanical properties was mainly attributed to homoge -
neous dispersion of nanoclusters as well as to strong interfacial interactions. 
In the case of high filler contents, silica nanoparticles self-aggregated as great 
domains, leading to a microphase separation.
The particularity of the reinforcement with carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) 
is the use of very low filler contents as compared to other fillers (10 times 
lower). The incorporation of very low MWCNT contents (0.25 wt%) in a SPI 
matrix led to a simultaneous reinforcing and toughening with maximum 
strength, Young’s modulus, and elongation at break values (Table 25.3) [22]. 
Thereafter, the tensile strength, strain at break, and Young’s modulus decreased 
with increasing MWCNT content up to 1 wt%. Then, with a continuous 
increase in MWCNT content, all mechanical properties demonstrated increas -
ing tendency once more. In case of the SPI/MWCNT nanocomposites, the SPI 
chains can wrap carbon nanotubes or penetrate into the internal channels of 
MWCNT if the internal diameter is large enough [22]. Although a high 
MWCNT loading did not favor enhancement of mechanical properties, a 
number of aggregated MWCNT bundles can also reinforce and toughen the 
material to some extent. On addition, the restriction of SPI motion caused by 
relatively rigid MWCNTs and their aggregates can be associated with three 
kinds of structures: the wrapping of SPI chains on MWCNTs, the spatial hin -
drance of MWCNT aggregates, and the penetration of SPI chains into MWCNT 
channels.
Finally, works of Zhou et al. [28] and Li et al. [29] showed that the incor -
poration of low amounts ( <0.5 wt%) of TiO 2 nanoparticles in whey-based 
materials led to a significant increase (factor of about 2) of Young’s modulus 
and the tensile strength, without affecting too much the strain at break, as 632  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING
already reported for silica reinforcement (Table 25.3). The addition of more 
than 1 wt% of TiO 2 nanoparticles induced a drastic drop in all mechanical 
properties, resulting from an inhomogeneous distribution of TiO 2 in the whey-
based matrix, the increase in size, and crystallization degree of TiO 2 agglomer -
ates and the discontinuity of the film network microstructure, mainly due to 
the low affinity between the hydrophobic TiO 2 particles and the hydrophilic 
matrix [18, 19].
To conclude, the affinity between proteins and fillers appears to be a key 
parameter governing the state of dispersion of the fillers. For example, the use 
of unmodified MMT, which are naturally hydrophilic and, thus, compatible with 
proteins, seems to be more appropriate than organically modified MMT to 
improve mechanical properties of protein-based materials. Furthermore, for 
many systems, reinforcement seems to be more effective at low filler loadings, 
which suggests that specific filler–protein interactions and filler dispersion play 
a significant role in obtaining structurally highly efficient nanocomposites. In 
the case of layered silicates, the optimal amount seems to be around 5 wt% [34, 
35, 41], whereas it seems to be about 2 wt% for starch nanocrystals [25], between 
4 wt%  and 8 wt% for silica [17], and 0.5 wt% for TiO 2 nanoparticles [18, 19].
25.4 BARRIER PROPERTIES OF PROTEIN-BASED 
NANOCOMPOSITE MATERIALS
25.4.1 Defining Barrier Properties of Protein-Based Materials from 
Food Requirements
In addition to cost, environmental, and marketing aspects, as well as protection 
against mechanical damage, the main role of packaging is to preserve food 
quality and safety. Shelf life of food is related to degradation reactions occur -
ring at different levels: physical–chemical and microbial reactions for nonliv -
ing products but also physiological reactions for living products. The quality  
is first of all dependent of the initial quality of raw materials. Then degradation 
reactions will occur during the processing of the food and of course during  
its storage and distribution. During these last steps, cold storage (chill  
chain) is known to slow down food degradation reactions, but the control of 
mass transfers between the food, the packaging, and the atmosphere is also 
crucial [48].
Food packaging has to control the transfer of the main gases (oxygen, 
carbon dioxide, ethylene, etc.) and vapors (moisture, aroma compounds,  
etc.) involved in food degradation. Moisture barrier property is an essential 
basic requirement when packing many foods, whether dry or moist, to preserve 
the texture (crispiness, softness, firmness, etc.) and control microbial develop -
ment of spoilage and pathogen species. Packaging plays also a crucial role  
for protecting food from oxygen, which is the key element of many degrada -
tion reactions occurring in food, that is, oxidations. Oxygen acts as the main BARRIER PROPERTIES Of PROTEIN-BASED NANOCOMPOSITE MATERIALS   633
factor of organoleptic and nutritional quality degradation of food through the 
oxidation of vitamins, aroma compounds, pigments, or lipidic compounds. 
Oxygen is also involved in microbial development and respiration rate of fresh 
living products such as fresh fruits and vegetables or fermented cheeses. 
Carbon dioxide needs to be preserved for many carbonated drinks. This gas 
is involved in the inhibition of respiration rate of living produces (but may be 
detrimental to some CO 2-sensitive commodities) and is also used as bacterio -
static agent. Aroma compounds barrier properties are also key elements for 
preserving flavor and taste of many foods such as coffee. Other mass transfer 
properties such as ethylene (for ripening of fresh fruits and vegetables) or 
ammoniac (for maturation of cheeses) transfer properties also need to be 
taken into account.
As regard food requirements, we can distinguish nonrespiring and  
respiring products. They require completely different O 2/CO 2 and water vapor 
barrier properties (Fig. 25.3). For example, a whole mushroom, which is a respir -
ing product with a very short shelf life, needs O 2 and CO 2 permeabilities ranging 
from respectively (1000–5000) × 10−18 mol/(m.s.Pa) to (5000–10,000) × 10−18 mol/
(m·s·Pa).* On the contrary, pasteurized orange juice, which is an O 2-sensitive 
nonrespiring product with a long shelf life, requires an O 2 permeability lower 
than 1 × 10−17 mol/(m·s·Pa) for ascorbic acid being preserved, at least, at half 
its initial concentration after 6 months of storage [49, 50]. Thus, it is obvious 
that protein-based films, because of their relatively high O 2 and CO 2 permeabili -
ties, are definitively dedicated to the packing of respiring products such as fresh 
fruits and vegetables. Moreover, their high water sensitivity and biodegrad -
ability make them unsuitable for the packing of intermediate and long shelf-life 
products and for water-sensitive products. For instance, crispy dry biscuits 
require a water vapor permeability lower than that of low-density polyethylene 
(0.05 ×10−12 mol/(m·s·Pa) [51]) for preserving their texture during at least 4–6 
months of storage, whereas the water vapor permeability of wheat gluten-based 
films is 100-fold greater, around 5 × 10−12 mol/(m·s·Pa) [52].
The particular interest of protein-based films compared with usual plastic 
films is thus their gas permeability and selectivity (CO 2 versus O 2), which are 
sensitive to temperature but more particularly to RH [13]. For instance, wheat 
gluten-based films exhibit a large range of selectivity values (3 to 28) as a func -
tion of moisture content, contrary to the selectivity of most synthetic films, which 
usually varies between 4 and 6 [13]. The high selectivity value of wheat gluten-
based films (28°C at 24°C and 100%RH) and, moreover, a high ethylene perme -
ability [53] could be very interesting for the preservation of fresh or minimally 
processed fruits and vegetables under modified atmosphere (Fig. 25.4).
* O2 and CO 2 permeabilities were predicted by the web application http://www.tailorpack.org for 
a mass of 250 g of mushrooms packed in a pouch of 50 microns of thickness with a total volume 
of 1.0 L and 676 cm2 of total surface area. Respiratory parameters and sugar catabolism of mush -
room ( Agaricus bisporus  Lange) are from Varoquaux et al. [90] .634  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING BARRIER PROPERTIES Of PROTEIN-BASED NANOCOMPOSITE MATERIALS   635
Figure 25.3  O2 permeability (amol = 10−18 mol) (A) and CO 2/O2 selectivity (B) for a 
selection of commercial bioplastics, common synthetic materials, and polysacharide- 
and protein-based materials: suitability for food packaging applications (adapted from 
(a) Reference [91]; (b) Reference [92]; (c) Reference [12]; (d) Reference [35]; (e) Ref -
erence [93]; (f) Reference [94]; (g) Reference [95]; (h) Reference [96]; (i) Reference 
[97]; (j) Reference [98]; (k) Reference [99]; (l) Reference [100]; (m) Reference [101]).
(a)
(b)634  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING BARRIER PROPERTIES Of PROTEIN-BASED NANOCOMPOSITE MATERIALS   635
25.4.2 Modulating Barrier Properties of Protein-Based Materials by 
Nanofillers Incorporation
As mentioned just above, the particular interest of protein-based films as food 
packaging materials is their high gas permeability and selectivity (CO 2 versus 
O2) especially at high humidity and temperature. These characteristics are very 
interesting for the packing of respiring products such as fresh fruits and veg -
etables. However, their high water sensitivity requires to associate the protein Figure 25.4  Evolution of O 2 permeability (a) and ethylene (b) permeability of a wheat 
gluten film as a function of temperature and relative humidity (adapted from Refer -
ences [13] and [53]).3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0O2 permeability (am ol/m/s/P a) Ethylene permeability (amol/m/s/Pa)0
28
57
85
45.052.95
17.88
32.81(a)
(b)Relative humidity (%) Temperatur e (°C)
14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
00
28
57
85
45.052.95
17.88
32.81
Relative humidity (%) Temperatur e (°C)636  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING
layer to a mechanical and water barrier support or to decrease the water sen -
sitivity of the protein matrix itself. This could be achieved by using thermal 
treatment, cross-linking treatment or addition in the neat matrix of imperme -
able nanoparticles inducing a more tortuous pathway for the permeant. The 
addition of nanoparticles is the main strategy used to modulate gas barrier 
properties of protein-based materials, and especially to improve them in order 
to extend the number of targeted food packaging applications to O 2-sensitive 
products.
Layered silicates have been tentatively used as filler to modulate O 2 and 
CO 2 barrier properties. The addition of unmodified MMT into wheat gluten 
had no effect on the permeability of the films toward gases (O 2 and CO 2) over 
the range of studied MMT contents (up to 10 wt%) (Table 25.4) [35]. The fact 
the permeability toward O 2 and CO 2 remained constant meant that no change 
in diffusivity or in solubility was induced by the presence of nanoclays [35]. 
Authors concluded that the tortuosity induced by the dispersion of MMT 
layers within the wheat gluten matrix had no effect on gas barrier properties, 
probably due to the small size of molecules [35]. In case of gelatin-based 
nanocomposites, the permeability toward O 2 was significantly reduced, but 
very slightly (reduction ranging from only 20% [19] up to a factor of 2 [33] 
for filler contents of 5 wt%) (Table 25.4).
Layered silicates were also incorporated in protein-based matrices with the 
objective to reduce their water sensitivity. Indeed, because of their hydrophilic 
nature, protein-based materials (either from gelatin, whey, wheat gluten, corn 
zein or SPI) display a poor water resistance, which is revealed by an important 
swelling when they are immersed in liquid water and a high water sorption in 
high moisture conditions. Their water vapor permeability (WVP) is also very 
high as compared to synthetic films such as low-density polyethylene (about 
100 times higher). Decreasing water sensitivity and especially water vapor 
permeability of protein-based materials is thus one of the main critical issues 
in the development of protein-based materials for extending potential food 
packaging applications. Whatever the nature of the matrix, water vapor per -
meability and water uptakes (either liquid or vapor) were significantly reduced 
with the introduction of about 5 wt% of unmodified MMT, but at best by a 
factor of 2–2.5 (Table 25.4). The improvement of water vapor barrier proper -
ties is generally ascribed to the impermeable nature of MMT layers distrib -
uted in the polymer matrix, thus increasing the effective diffusion pathway 
[34, 39, 54]. However, since O 2 and CO 2 permeabilities of wheat gluten-based 
materials were not affected by the introduction of unmodified MMT, the 
reduction in WVP was more likely ascribed to a change in solubility rather 
than to a change in diffusivity [35]. The decrease in WVP with increasing 
MMT loading may be related to the establishment of hydrophilic interactions 
between proteins and nanoclays, which resulted in a lower availability of the 
hydrophilic sites for water vapor [35]. This assumption was further confirmed 
by Chevillard et al. [55] . It appears that an optimal low amount of MMT is 
often necessary to achieve the greatest improvement of WVP: 5 wt% in case TABLE 25.4  Water Vapor Permeability (WVP), Liquid Water Uptake (WU), Water Vapor Uptake Measured at 98%RH (WVU), and 
Permeability Toward Oxygen (PO 2) of Protein-Based Nanocomposites
System SampleWVP (mol/
(m·s·Pa) WU (%)WVU 
(%)PO2 (mol/
(m·s·Pa)) Ref.
Protein/clay Bovine skin gelatin (type B) 
(25 wt% glycerol)– 778 – – [21]
−5 wt% Na + MMT – 599 – –
−17 wt% Na + MMT – 376 – –
Bloom fish gelatin (20 wt% 
glycerol)17.3 × 10−12– – 2.08 × 10−18[33]a
−5 wt% Cloisite Na + 7.6 × 10−12– – 9.8 × 10−19
Bovine hide gelatin (type B) 13.7 × 10−12– – 6.87 × 10−17[54]b
−5 wt% Na + MMT 7.7 × 10−12– – 5.58 × 10−17
SPI (glycerol) 17 × 10−11– – – [42]
−10 wt% Na+ MMT 20 × 10−11– – –
−10 wt% OMMT 16 × 10−11– – –
−10 wt% bentonite 8.4 × 10−11– – –
SPI (15 wt% glycerol) 5.85 ± 0.17 × 10−11– – – [39]c
−5 wt% Na + MMT 4.56 ± 0.15 × 10−11– – –
−10 wt% Na + MMT 3.85 ± 0.12 × 10−11– – –
−15 wt% Na + MMT 3.34 ± 0.09 × 10−11– – –
WG (10 wt% glycerol) 14.6 ± 0.63 × 10−12Disruption of the film (−)f1.10 ± 0.09 × 10−15[35]d
−2.5 wt% Na+ MMT 14.3 ± 0.40 × 10−12151 ± 5 109 ± 8 1.12 ± 0.07 × 10−15
−5 wt% Na+ MMT 6.59 ± 0.14 × 10−12113 ± 16 105 ± 6 1.20 ± 0.02 × 10−15
−7.5 wt% Na+ MMT 7.22 ± 0.28 × 10−1292 ± 4 94 ± 9 1.22 ± 0.04 × 10−15
−10 wt% Na+ MMT 6.32 ± 0.04 × 10−1282 ± 3 91 ± 2 1.28 ± 0.06 × 10−15
Corn zein 7.44 ± 1.02 × 10−12– – – [34]e
−1 wt% OMMT 4.61 ± 0.52 × 10−12– – –
−3 wt% OMMT 2.93 ± 1.02 × 10−12– – –
−5 wt% OMMT 6.55 ± 1.03 × 10−12– – –
−10 wt% OMMT 9.51 ± 0.55 × 10−12– – –
(Continued )
637System SampleWVP (mol/
(m·s·Pa) WU (%)WVU 
(%)PO2 (mol/
(m·s·Pa)) Ref.
Protein/
polysaccharide 
nanofillersSPI (30 wt% glycerol) – – 39.5 – [27]
−5 wt% chitin whiskers – – 35 –
−10 wt% chitin whiskers – – 33 –
−15 wt% chitin whiskers – – 31.5 –
−30 wt% chitin whiskers – – 23 –
SPI (30 wt% glycerol) – – 36 – [28]
−5 wt% cellulose whiskers – – 32 –
−10 wt% cellulose whiskers – – 31.5 –
−15 wt% cellulose whiskers – – 30 –
−30 wt% cellulose whiskers – – 26 –
SPI (30 wt% glycerol) – – 29 – [25]
−3 wt% starch nanocrystals – – 29 –
−8 wt% starch nanocrystals – – 31 –
−16 wt% starch nanocrystals – – 32 –
Protein/carbon 
nanotubesSPI (30 wt% glycerol) – – 35 – [22]
−0.75 wt% MWCNT – – 30 –
−3 wt% MWCNT – – 30 –
aPO2 measured at 50%RH.
bWVP measured between 0% and 65%RH and P O2 at 65%RH.
cWVP between 65% and 100%RH.
dWVP measured between 0% and 100%RH.
eWVP measured between 0% and 100%RH.
fNo correct value was obtained for WG (10 wt% glycerol) in Reference [35] because films were very sticky.TABLE 25.4 (Continued )
638BARRIER PROPERTIES Of PROTEIN-BASED NANOCOMPOSITE MATERIALS   639
of wheat gluten-based nanocomposites [35] and 3 wt% in case of corn zein-
based nanocomposites [34]. This could be explained by the formation of a 
percolating nanoclays network within the matrix [35], and/or also, in case of 
higher amounts of nanoclays, to a competition between the positive effect of 
impermeable nanoclays and the negative effect of an only partially exfoliated 
nanocomposite structure obtained in that case [34].
In case of soy protein-based materials, other fillers such as chitin [27] or 
cellulose whiskers [28], starch nanocrystals [25], and carbon nanotubes [22] 
have been tentatively used to reduce the water sensitivity of the matrix (Table 
25.4). Globally, the effect of polysaccharide (chitin, cellulose or starch) nano -
fillers on the water sensitivity of soy protein-based materials was very low as 
compared to the effect of layered silicates [25, 27, 28]. Indeed, considering a 
conventional filler content of 5 wt%, a reduction of only 10% was noted when 
incorporating chitin [27] or cellulose [28] whiskers (Table 25.4). In case of 
starch nanocrystals, their effect was even negative since all nanocomposite 
materials displayed slightly higher values of water vapor uptake than the 
unfilled matrix (Table 25.4) [25]. This poor effect was ascribed to the hydro -
philic character of such nanofillers, which was sometimes more pronounced 
than those of the protein matrix, as it was the case for the soy protein/starch 
nanocrystals system [25]. However, it is worth noting that a significant decrease 
in the water vapor uptake can be observed for very high amounts of chitin 
[27] or cellulose [28] whiskers (reduction by factors of up to 1.7 and only 1.4 
for a chitin or cellulose whisker content of 30 wt%, respectively) (Table 25.4). 
This reduction was ascribed to the formation of a rigid cellulose or chitin 
network resulting from the three-dimensional hydrogen bonding between 
chitin or cellulose fillers during the film formation [25, 28]. In case of systems 
reinforced with carbon nanotubes, all nanocomposites showed a lower water 
vapor uptake than the unfilled matrix (Table 25.4). This effect, even very low, 
was attributed to the restriction of the protein chain motion due to the incor -
poration of relatively rigid fillers [22].
Even if layered silicates are the best candidates for improving barrier prop -
erties of protein-based films, it is worth noting that an overall gain in barrier 
properties of 50% maximum can be reached, which is not sufficient to extend 
the use of protein-based materials to O 2- or water-sensitive products. This poor 
effect could be explained by the low size aspect ratio (length to width) of the 
nanofiller after material processing. Indeed, even if the initial nanoclay exhib -
its a high size aspect ratio (e.g., >100), this ratio may be completely different 
when characterized in situ  in the nanocomposite material because of the pres -
ence of stacks of several layers, even for a well-exfoliated structure. For 
instance, a mean size aspect ratio of 20–25 is usually obtained in nanocompos -
ite materials [56]. By using this value in the mathematical model of Bharadwaj 
[57], which models the effect of ribbon-like nanoparticles addition on the dif -
fusivity of a permeant (Eq. 25.1), prediction indicates that the permeant dif -
fusivity could be decreased at the most by a factor of 2 (in case of a maximum 
10.8 vol% of MMT particles) (Fig. 25.5).640  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING
 D
DScomposite
matrix=
+
+1
122
31
2αφ
.
 (25.1)*
With the aim of substituting petrochemical plastics with protein-based  
materials, similar barrier properties need to be achieved. Taking an example:  
the water vapor permeability of wheat gluten-based materials for a 0–100%RH 
difference ranges from 5 × 10−12 mol/m/s/Pa to 6.2 × 10−11 mol/m/s/Pa 
depending on the film preparation process [52, 58], whereas it equals to 
0.05 × 10−12 mol/m/s/Pa in the case of low-density polyethylene [59]. This 
means that, water permeability of wheat gluten-based films should be reduced 
by a factor of 10 to 100 if large applications in the food packaging sector  
are targeted. Based on (Eq. 25.1), it can already be concluded that such a 
reduction factor is not feasible with the type of nanofillers usually employed 
* where ᾱ is the mean aspect ratio of each particle or tactoïd), ϕ the volume fraction of particles
and S, an order parameter defined as: S= −1
23 12cosθ
Where θ represents the angle between the direction of preferred orientation and the surface of 
the film. The orientation parameter S ranges from a value of −0.5 for a system where the long axis 
of the filler is oriented parallel to the flux direction (no tortuosity), to a value of 1, where it is 
oriented perpendicular to the flux direction (maximum tortuosity), a value of 0 representing 
random orientation.Figure 25.5  Prediction of the diffusivity in nanocomposite materials calculated from 
the diffusivity in the neat matrix and from the volume fraction, aspect ratio, and ori -
entation of the nanoparticles added in the matrix. Simulations were carried out by using 
the Bharadwaj equation [57].00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
0Dnanocomposite /Dneat matrix 
Volume fraction α=1
α=10
α=22
α=100
α=1000
0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 CONTROLLED DELIVERY SYSTEMS fOR ACTIVE PACkAGING   641
(e.g., nanoclays such as MMT) and within the processable filler content range. 
This leads to the conclusion that future research must focus on the use of 
nanoparticles displaying higher aspect ratio values (greater than 100 when 
dispersed within the polymer matrix) in order to sufficiently improve barrier 
properties of protein-based materials.
25.5 CONTROLLED DELIVERY SYSTEMS FOR ACTIVE PACKAGING
As mentioned above, active packaging deliberately incorporates active com -
ponents intended to release or to absorb substances into, onto or from the 
packaged food or the environment surrounding the food in their conditions 
of use. The main objectives are to prevent or, at least, delay microbial growth 
(antimicrobial packaging) and to reduce or delay oxidation of nutritional 
compounds (antioxidant packaging), both by reducing the dose of additives 
used in food items and in order to extend food shelf life. Antimicrobial or 
antioxidant effect of packaging materials could be achieved either by [6]:
• direct contact with food surfaces, using nonmigratory molecules or con -
trolled diffusion systems for solute compounds,
• or by indirect contact, using controlled release systems for volatile com -
pounds that create active modified atmosphere in the headspace of 
packaging.
Many preservatives, such as bacteriocins, organic acids, various plant 
extracts, volatiles from essential oils and silver ions, have been incorporated 
in packaging materials to bring antimicrobial property [58–64] or, to a minor 
extent, antioxidant capacity [65–69]. Due to their film forming ability and 
unique properties as vehicles of active agents in controlled delivery systems 
of solute or volatile compounds, biomolecules such as polysaccharides and 
proteins from animal (whey proteins) or vegetal origin (soy proteins, corn zein, 
and wheat gluten) might be used as polymer matrices to produce packaging 
materials with antimicrobial or antioxidant properties [70–72]. If proteins are 
already used in pharmaceutical applications for drug delivery, mainly in the 
form of capsules [73, 74],they are less studied for packaging purposes.
The efficiency of a controlled delivery system depends on the concentration 
of the active agent on the food surface (solute compounds) or in the surround -
ing atmosphere (volatile compounds). Therefore, the antimicrobial or antioxi -
dant capacity of the active agent must be proved and the efficient dose 
determined, it must be retained at a sufficient amount when nonused and 
delivered in conditions of use (packed food), that is, in response to a stimulus 
as change in relative humidity, pH, temperature, and so on. The ability of 
protein-based materials to modify their transfer properties as a function of 
moisture and temperature seemed worthy of investigation for developing 642  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING
controlled delivery materials triggered by moisture and temperature variation. 
This is mainly due to a modification in the network structure and polymeric 
chain mobility when increasing relative humidity and/or temperature, corre -
sponding to a change from a glassy to a viscoelastic state. As a consequence, 
diffusivity of the active agent is greatly affected. As an example, effective dif -
fusivity of carvacrol included in soy protein-coated paper varied from 
1.71 × 10−16 to 138 × 10−16 m2/s at 30°C when increasing RH from 60% to 
100%RH and from 7.50 × 10−16 to 138 × 10−16 m2/s at 100% RH when passing 
from 5°C to 30°C [75]. The development of protein-based nanocomposites 
could be of great interest for modulating the active agent diffusion/release due 
to structural modifications in the polymeric network when properly exfoliated. 
However, nanoparticles may interact with the active agent, leading to a change 
in viscosity of the blend that could make the processability of the packaging 
material difficult, as well as modify the morphology of the final network acting 
on the retention capacity and diffusivity of the active agent. When increasing 
MMT content in wheat gluten [35] or fish gelatin [33] solutions, the viscosity 
of the blend dramatically increased at low shear rates for nanoparticle loadings 
higher than 5 wt%. It was consistent with previous results obtained at the 
molten state, where a higher amount of plasticizer was needed to reduce the 
increase in both the torque and the temperature during mixing of wheat gluten 
and MMT [10]. However, the viscosity of such a preparation was restored 
when introducing a volatile active agent as carvacrol; this was a consequence 
of both a plasticizing effect of the aroma compound but also to the formation 
of clay aggregates within the polymeric network when nanoparticles content 
was higher than 5% [76]. Then it was possible to obtain active wheat gluten-
based materials as casted and self-supported films [76] or coated onto paper 
support [77]. Up to now these authors are the only ones who proposed and 
developed an antimicrobial delivery system based on a protein matrix contain -
ing an active agent and reinforced by nanoparticles. In self-supported active 
films, the aggregated structures were able to entrap carvacrol molecules, 
leading to a better retention of the active agent: 76.4% of retention without 
MMT and 90.3% of retention when MMT content exceeded 5 wt% [76]. 
Similar results were obtained when this active solution was coated onto paper 
support: 77.5 % of retention without MMT and 90.7% of retention when MMT 
content exceeded 5 wt% [77]. During storage, the carvacrol release from wheat 
gluten coated paper was controlled by relative humidity (from 40% to 
100%RH) and MMT content (from 0 to 7 wt%). The presence of high amount 
of MMT ( ≥5 wt%) accentuated the RH-induced effect as demonstrated by the 
high diffusivity values found in the presence of 5 wt% MMT at 100%RH (Fig. 
25.6). However, the presence of well-dispersed nanofillers such as MMT is 
known to extend the diffusion pathway in the material and, consequently, to 
decrease the apparent diffusivity by a “tortuosity” effect [78]. The unexpected 
effect of MMT in this study was explained by the formation of an aggregated 
structure in the presence of carvacrol and 5 wt% MMT specifically. This type 
of structure could create both a better carvacrol retention during the process -SAfETY ASPECTS Of PROTEIN-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES   643
ing step of the coated paper and a preferential pathway for carvacrol diffusion. 
Such behavior appeared particularly suitable for an antimicrobial food pack -
aging system and the antimicrobial efficiency of this system was assessed 
toward Escherichia coli  and Botrytis cinerea .
Nanoparticles have also been used in protein-based nanocomposites for 
their intrinsic antimicrobial properties: TiO 2 added in whey proteins isolate 
films [18] and organic modified clays introduced in whey proteins [37, 38]. The 
antimicrobial properties of TiO 2 is due to its photocacatalytic activity, and it acts 
by direct contact, whereas for modified clays, the bacterial effect is induced by 
both electrostatic adsorption onto the bacterial cell (direct contact) and the 
release of the quaternary ammonium group introduced in the silicate layer, 
which disrupts the bacterial cell [79, 80]. While the impact of TiO 2 nanoparticle 
incorporation on water barrier and tensile properties has been demonstrated, 
the antimicrobial effect has not yet been studied. In contrast, for whey protein 
isolate/Cloisite 30B films, a bacteriostatic effect against Listeria monocytogenes  
was clearly evidenced. Compared with TiO 2, clay minerals seem more adaptable 
to being introduced in protein-based materials due to their nontoxic and envi -
ronmentally friendly characteristics. Moreover, indirect contact appeared more 
attractive since potential migration of nanoparticles could be limited.
25.6 SAFETY ASPECTS OF PROTEIN-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES 
USED AS FOOD CONTACT MATERIALS
Like any other food packaging material, protein-based materials lie within  
the scope European food contact material (FCM) legislation as well as  Figure 25.6  Apparent diffusivity values of carvacrol in the wheat gluten coated paper 
as a function of the % of MMT (adapted from Chalier et al. [75]).
644  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING
conventional material. This requires that they must prove compliance with 
the general requirements laid down by the regulation EC 1935/2004 [81] and 
meet the inertia  criteria specified therein. Regulation 1935/2004 includes 
several provisions requested by every FCM: (1) FCM shall not transfer their 
components into the food in quantities that could endanger human health; 
(2) FCM shall not change the composition of the food in an unacceptable 
way; and (3) FCM shall not cause deterioration in the taste, odor, or texture 
of the food. The first requirement only deals with migration (contamination 
of food by packaging components) and food safety, and the other two are 
related not only to migration but also to food quality (e.g., sorption of aroma 
compounds).
In addition to this general framework, the community regulation estab -
lishes 17 groups of materials and articles that are covered by specific mea -
sures, but no specific directive is still available for biopolymer-based or 
bionanocomposite materials. By default and according to the expected type 
of usage of finished packaging, such material could be considered as plastic 
material and be submitted to the same compliance tests. However, the proce -
dure of migration test recommended for plastics appears specially designed 
for water-resistant materials since it consists of putting a sample of packaging 
in contact with the food product or with food simulating liquids (FSL) at 
defined conditions of time and temperature [82]. The requirement of inertia 
for the material becomes an overall migration limit (OML) defined as the 
total mass released by the packaging material during a migration test (60 mg/
kg of food for plastic material according to the Regulation EU No. 10/2011, 
Article 12 [82]). Furthermore, the directive establishes a specific migration 
limit (SML) for all approved substances (monomers and additives) referenced 
in a positive list  in respect of toxicological data. It must be pointed out that 
such an approach does not take into account the loss of barrier and mechani -
cal properties nor even the possible degradation of material under humid 
conditions. In the case of water-sensitive materials such as protein-based 
materials, migration values tend to be particularly high, preventing their use 
in contact with high water activity foodstuffs. Because protein-based materials 
are exclusively composed of substances authorized as food additives, they are 
not submitted to any SML. However, when used as a packaging film demon -
strating a high migration level of protein material or edible coating, protein-
based material must be additionally considered with respect to their allergenic 
potential and should be legitimately covered by the amending European 
Directive 2000/13/EC [83], which relates to the labeling of the ingredients 
present in foodstuffs. The directive recognize cereals containing gluten, soy -
beans, milk, and products thereof as belonging to common food allergens and 
are referred to as ingredients subject to labeling rules, giving appropriate 
information to consumers suffering from food allergy. This issue is especially 
important for gluten-based materials considering the risk-related to gluten 
intolerance (the so-called celiac disease).SAfETY ASPECTS Of PROTEIN-BASED NANOCOMPOSITES   645
The incorporation of nanoparticles to protein-based materials only added 
further complexity in terms of safety concerns. To date, there is no mention of 
engineered nanomaterial (ENM) in European legislation related to FCM, 
except in the Regulation EC 450/2009 [84] (articles 5.2 10), which relates to 
active and intelligent material, stating that ENM must be separated from the 
food by a functional barrier, which should completely prevent potential migra -
tion into the food product. Little is known about the risk that could be linked 
to the use of ENM in FCM, and a recent scientific opinion of the European 
Food Safety Authority (EFSA) highlights that a suitable risk assessment 
approach should take into account the “specific properties of the ENM in addi -
tion to those common to the equivalent non-nanoforms (dissolved or mac -
roscale) substances” [85]. It is important to note that the toxicity of ENM 
depends on a large number of factors including their structure, surface area, 
particle number, charge, chemistry, size and size distribution, state of aggrega -
tion, shape, and elemental composition [86]. Therefore, a sound approach to 
determine ENM migration levels and assess their toxicity should provide infor -
mation on those parameters (at least size distribution, state of aggregation, and 
elemental composition). Such a performance is still hardly achieved with the 
analytical methods currently available to characterize ENM in the environ -
ment and food [87]. Until now very few studies have been conducted about the 
release of nanoparticle and their subsequent effect on foodstuff. From a purely 
theoretical approach, the migration of ENM from common packaging materi -
als is assumed to be negligible given the slow rate of transfer due to the large 
size of ENM [88]. Such a statement cannot be extended to protein-based mate -
rials. A recent study was conducted about the release of nanoclays from wheat-
gluten-based material where aluminum and silicon were distinctly used as 
tracers of MMT particles [89]. The detected migration level of these two ele -
ments was below the limit recommended by EFSA but the respective amounts 
of released aluminum and silicon did not match their initial proportion in the 
MMT. The fact that uneven quantities of aluminum and silicon were found sug -
gests that MMT would be released not intact but after chemical modification -
sThis question is of high importance since toxicity of nanoparticles is allegedly 
related to their high specific surface more than to their constituting elements. 
Beyond the safety issues related to the exposure of consumer via migration of 
the nanoparticles themselves, the nanoparticles are known to influence to some 
extent the stability of protein material in an aqueous medium what conse -
quently could modulate the OML values. In this way, Tunc et al. [35] showed 
that an increasing amount of MMT decreases the water uptake of wheat gluten 
films. The improved water sensitivity would explain the fact that MMT addition 
decreases the amount of protein migration in water and in the 15% ethanol 
FSL [89]. On the basis of this unique investigation, it is difficult to establish a 
general rule applicable to all other protein-based materials and as for any new 
technology that is coming into the stage of application, a sound evaluation and 
a risk–benefit analysis needs to be carried out.646  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING
25.7 CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES
General trends in the food packaging field leads to the development of more 
and more diverse and complex packaging materials and systems. Polymer 
nanotechnology provides huge opportunities impacting across all sectors of 
the global polymer markets. Nanocomposites offer a wide range of opportu -
nity for active and biodegradable food packaging development. However, 
tackling food packaging issues, and especially through the development of 
nanotechnology- and agropolymer-based materials, demands a multidisci -
plinary and integrated approach involving a large panel of scientific compe -
tences. Research in the field of food packaging is still too disperse because it 
is driven by disconnected scientific objectives and developments in the fields 
of materials, chemistry, or food science. Beyond the pursuance and deepening 
of knowledge about the objectives and activities that are mentioned in this 
paper, it is essential to set up new approaches and related tools, allowing a 
rational integrated approach to relationships between material structure and 
properties, especially mass transfer. The other essential step is to combine this 
knowledge with the knowledge of targeted food degradation reactions with 
the help of modeling/prediction tools. The main expected result is the develop -
ment of strategies (reverse engineering) for designing valuable food packaging 
materials applicable in a sustainable, safe, and competitive context.
REFERENCES
 [1] Danielli, D., Gontard, N., Spyropoulos, D., Zondervan Van den beuken, E., and 
Tobback, P . (2008) Active and intelligent food packaging: Legal aspects and 
safety concerns. Trends in Food Science & Technology , 19, 99–108.
 [2] Guillaume, C., Chalier, P ., and Gontard, N. (2008) Modified atmosphere packag -
ing using environmentally compatible and active food packaging materials. In: 
Environmentally Compatible Food Packaging , ed. E. Chiellini. Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC press.
 [3] Gontard, N., Angellier-Coussy, H., Chalier, P ., Gastaldi, E., Guillard, V., Guil -
laume, C., and Peyron, S. (2010) Food packaging applications of biopolymer-
based films. In: Films and Coatings from Renewable Resources—An Applications 
Perspective , ed. D. Placket. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
 [4] Angellier-Coussy, H., Guillard, V., Guillaume, C., and Gontard, N. (2010) Wheat 
gluten-based materials for food packaging. In: Multifunctional and Nanorein -
forced Polymers for Food Packaging , ed. J.M. Lagaron. Cambridge, UK: Wood -
head Publishing Limited.
 [5] Gontard, N., Guillaume, C. (2009) Packaging and the shelf life of fruits and veg -
etables. In: Food Packaging and Shelf Life: A Practical Guide , ed. G.L. Robertson. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC press.
 [6] Garrett, R.H., Grisham, C.M. (1996) Part I: Molecular components of cells. In: 
Biochemistry , 3rd ed, ed. T. Brooks/Cole. Belmont CA: Harcourt Brace, Custom 
Publishers, pp. 1–375.REfERENCES   647
 [7] Arvanitoyannis, I. (2002) Formation and properties of collagen and gelatin films 
and coatings. In: Protein Based Films and Coatings , ed. A. Gennadios. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 275–304.
 [8] Cuq, B., Gontard, N., and Guilbert, S. (1998) Proteins as agricultural polymers 
for packaging production. Cereal Chemistry , 75(1), 1–9.
 [9] Wang, S., Sue, H.J., and Jane, J. (1996) Effects of polyhydric alcohols on the 
mechanical properties of soy protein plastics. Journal of Macromolecular Science-
Part A , 33(5), 557–569.
 [10] Angellier-Coussy, H., Torres-Giner, S., Morel, M.H., Gontard, N., and Gastaldi, 
E. (2008) Functional properties of thermoformed wheat gluten/montmorillonite 
materials with respect to formulation and processing conditions. Journal of 
Applied Polymer Science , 107(1), 487–496.
 [11] Cuq, B., Boutrot, F., Redl, A., and Lullien-Pellerin, V. (2000) Study of the tem -
perature effect on the formation of wheat gluten network: Influence on mechani -
cal properties and protein solubility. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 
48, 2954–2959.
 [12] Gontard, N., Thibault, R., Cuq, B., and Guilbert, S. (1996) Influence of relative 
humidity and film composition on oxygen and carbon dioxide permeabilities of 
edible films. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 44, 1064–1069.
 [13] Mujica Paz, H., Gontard, N. (1997) Oxygen and carbon dioxide permeability of 
wheat gluten film: Effect of relative humidity and temperature. Journal of Agri -
cultural and Food Chemistry , 45, 4101–4105.
 [14] Guillaume, C., Pinte, J., Gontard, N., and Gastaldi, E. (2010) Wheat gluten-coated 
papers for bio-based food packaging: Structure, surface and transfer properties. 
Food Research International , 43(5), 1395–1401.
 [15] Chalier, P ., Peyches-Bach, A., Gastaldi, E., and Gontard, N. (2007) Effect of 
concentration and relative humidity on the transfer of alkan-2-ones through 
paper coated with wheat gluten. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 55, 
867–875.
 [16] Cho, S.W., Ullsten, H., Gallstedt, M., and Hedenqvist, M.S. (2007) Heat-sealing 
properties of compression-molded wheat gluten films. Journal of Biobased Mate -
rials and Bioenergy , 1, 56–63.
 [17] Ai, F., Zheng, H., Wei, M., and Huang, J. (2007) Soy protein plastics reinforced 
and toughened by SiO 2 nanoparticles. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 105, 
1597–1604.
 [18] Zhou, J.J., Wang, S.Y., and Gunasekaran, S. (2009) Preparation and characteriza -
tion of wheyprotein film incorporated with TiO 2 nanoparticles. Journal of Food 
Science , 74(7), 50–56.
 [19] Li, Y., Jiang, Y., Liu, F., Ren, F., Zhao, G., and Leng, X. (2011) Fabrication and 
characterization of TiO 2/whey protein isolate nanocomposite film. Food Hydro -
colloids , 25, 1098–1104.
 [20] Coleman, J.N., Khan, U., Blau, W.J., and Gun’ko, Y.K. (2007) Small but strong: A 
review of the mechanical properties of carbon nanotube-polymer composites. 
Carbon , 44, 1624–1652.
 [21] Li, P ., Zheng, J.P ., Ma, Y.L., and Yao, K.D. (2003) Gelatin/montmorillonites hybrid 
nanocomposite. II. Swelling behaviour. Journal of Applied Polymer Science , 88, 
322–326.648  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING
 [22] Zheng, H., Ai, F., Wei, M.W., Huang, J., and Chang, P .R. (2007) Thermoplastic soy 
protein nanocomposites reinforced by carbon nanotubes. Macromolecular Mate -
rials and Engineering , 292, 780–788.
 [23] Dufresne, A. (2008) Polysaccharide nanocrystal reinforced nanocomposites. 
Canadian Journal of Chemistry , 86(6), 484–494.
 [24] Alexandre, M., Dubois, P . (2000) Polymer-layered silicate nanocomposites: Prepa -
ration, properties and uses of a new class of materials. Material Science and 
Engineering: R: Reports , 28, 1–63.
 [25] Zheng, H., Ai, F., Chang, P .R., Huang, J., and Dufresne, A. (2009) Structure and 
properties of starch nanocrystal-reinforced soy protein plastics. Polymer Com -
posites , 30(4), 474–480.
 [26] Lin, N., Huang, J., Chang, P .R., Anderson, D.P ., and Yu, J. (2011) Preparation, 
modification and application of starch nanocrystals in nanomaterials: A review. 
Journal of Nanomaterials . doi: 10.1155/2011/573687.
 [27] Lu, Y., Weng, L., and Zhang, L. (2004) Morphology and properties of soy protein 
isolate thermoplastics reinforced with chitin whiskers. Biomacromolecules , 5, 
1046–1051.
 [28] Wang, Y., Cao, X., and Zhang, L. (2006) Effects of cellulose whiskers on proper -
ties of soy protein thermoplastics. Macromolecular Bioscience , 6, 524–531.
 [29] Vaia, R.A., Giannelis, E.P . (1997) Lattice model of polymer melt intercalation in 
organically-modified layered silicates. Macromolecules , 30, 7990–7999.
 [30] Vaia, R.A., Jandt, K.D., Kramer, E.J., and Giannelis, E.P . (1995) Kinetics of 
polymer melt intercalation. Macromolecules , 28, 8080–8085.
 [31] Zheng, J.P ., Li, P ., Ma, Y.L., and Yao, K.D. (2002) Gelatin/montmorillonites hybrid 
nanocomposite. I. Preparation and properties. Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science , 86, 1189–1194.
 [32] Rao, Y.Q. (2007) Gelatin-clay nanocomposites of improved properties. Polymer , 
48, 5369–5375.
 [33] Bae, H.J., Park, H.J., Hong, S.I., Byun, Y.J., Darby, D.O., Kimmel, R.M., and 
Whiteside, W.S. (2009) Effect of clay content, homogenization RPM, pH,  
and ultrasonication on mechanical and barrier properties of fish gelatin/
montmorillonitenanocomposite films. LWT-Food Science and Technology , 42(6), 
1179–1186.
 [34] Luecha, J., Sozer, N., and Kokini, J.L. (2010) Synthesis and properties of corn 
zein/montmorillonites nanocomposite films. Journal of Materials Science , 45(13), 
3529–3537.
 [35] Tunc, S., Angellier, H., Cahyana, Y., Chalier, P ., Gontard, N., and Gastaldi, E. 
(2007) Functional properties of wheat gluten/montmorillonitenanocomposite 
films processed by casting. Journal of Membrane Science , 289(1–2), 159–168.
 [36] Hedenqvist, M.S., Backman, A., Gällstedt, M., Boyd, R.H., and Gedde, U.W. 
(2006) Morphology and diffusion properties of whey/montmorillonite nanocom -
posites. Composites Science and Technology , 66(13), 2350–2359.
 [37] Sothornvit, R., Rhim, J.W., and Hong, S.I. (2009) Effect of nano-clay type on the 
physical and antimicrobial properties of whey protein isolate/clay composite 
films. Journal of Food Engineering , 91(3), 468–473.REfERENCES   649
 [38] Sothornvit, R., Hong, S.I., An, D.J., and Rhim, J.W. (2010) Effect of clay content 
on the physical and antimicrobial properties of whey protein isolate/organo-clay 
composite films. LWT-Food Science and Technology , 43(2), 279–284.
 [39] Kumar, P ., Sandeep, K.P ., Alavi, S., Truong, V.D., and Gorga, R.E. (2010) Prepara -
tion and characterization of bio-nanocomposite films based on soy protein isolate 
and montmorillonites using melt extrusion. Journal of Food Engineering , 100, 
480–489.
 [40] Kumar, P ., Sandeep, K.P ., Alavi, S., Truong, V.D., and Gorga, R.E. (2010) Effect 
of type and content of modified montmorillonite on the structure and properties 
of bio-nanocomposite films based on soy protein isolate and montmorillonite. 
Journal of Food Science , 75(5), 46–56.
 [41] Fernandes, F.M., Ruiz, A.I., Darder, M., Aranda, P ., and Ruiz-Hitzky, E. (2009) 
Gelatin-clay bio-nanocomposites: Structural and functional properties as 
advanced materials. Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology , 9, 221–229.
 [42] Rhim, J.W., Lee, J.H., and Kwak, H.S. (2005) Mechanical and water barrier prop -
erties of soy protein and clay mineral composite films. Food Science and Biotech -
nology , 14(1), 112–116.
 [43] Chen, P ., Zhang, L. (2006) Interaction and properties of highly exfoliated soy 
protein/montmorillonite nanocomposites. Biomacromolecules , 7, 1700–1706.
 [44] Yu, J., Cui, G., Wei, M., and Huang, J. (2007) Facile exfoliation of rectoritenano -
platelets in soy protein matrix and reinforced bionanocomposites thereof. Journal 
of Applied Polymer Science , 104, 3367–3377.
 [45] Ray, S.S., Bousmina, M. (2005) Biodegradable polymers and their layered silicate 
nanocomposites: In greening the 21st century materials world. Progress in Mate -
rials Science , 50, 962–1079.
 [46] Olabarrieta, I., Gällstedt, M., Ispizua, I., Sarasua, J.R., Hedenqvist, M.S. (2006) 
Properties of aged montmorillonite-wheat gluten composite films. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 54, 1283–1288.
 [47] Zhang, X., Do, M.D., Dean, K., Hoobin, P ., and Burgar, I.M. (2007) Wheat  
gluten-based natural polymer nanoparticle composites. Biomacromolecules , 8, 
345–353.
 [48] Arvanitoyannis, I.S. (1999) Totally and partially biodegradable polymer blends 
based on natural synthetic macromolecules: Preparation, physical properties,  
and potential as food packaging materials. Journal of Macromolecular Science, 
Reviews in Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics , C39(2), 205–271.
 [49] Berlinet, C., Brat, P ., Brillouet, J.M., and Ducruet, V. (2006) Ascorbic acid, aroma 
compounds and browning of orange juices related to PET packaging materials 
and pH. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture , 86(13), 2206–2212.
 [50] Berlinet, C., Brat, P ., and Ducruet, V. (2008) Quality of orange juice in barrier 
packaging material. Packaging Technology and Science , 21(5), 279–286.
 [51] Myers, A.W., Meyer, J.A., Rogers, C.E., Stannet, V., and Szwarc, M. (1961) Studies 
in the gas and vapor permeability of plastic films and coated papers. Tappi 
Journal , 45, 58–67.
 [52] Gontard, N., Guilbert, S., and Cuq, J.L. (1993) Water and glycerol as plasticizers 
affect mechanical and water vapor barrier properties of an edbile wheat gluten 
film. Journal of Food Science , 58, 206–211.650  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING
 [53] Mujica Paz, H., Guillard, V., Reynes, M., and Gontard, N. (2005) Ethylene perme -
ability of wheat gluten film as a function of temperature and relative humidity. 
Journal of Membrane Science , 256(1–2), 108–115.
 [54] Martucci, J.F., Ruseckaite, R.A. (2010) Biodegradable three-layer film derived 
from bovine gelatin. Journal of Food Engineering , 99, 377–383.
 [55] Chevillard, A., Angellier-Coussy, H., Cuq, B., Cesar, G., Guillard, V., Gontard, N., 
and Gastaldi, E. (2011) How the biodegradability of wheat gluten based agro -
materials can be modulated by adding nanoclays. Polymer Degradation and 
Stability , 96(12), 2008–2097.
 [56] Picard, E., Gerard, J.F., and Espuche, E. (2008) Water transport properties of 
polyamide 6 based nanocomposites prepared by melt blending: On the impor -
tance of the clay dispersion state on the water transport properties at high water 
activity. Journal of Membrane Science , 313(1–2), 284–295.
 [57] Bharadwaj, R.K. (2001) Modeling the barrier properties of polymer-layered sili -
cate nanocomposites. Macromolecules , 34(26), 9189–9192.
 [58] Pommet, M., Redl, A., Morel, M.H., and Guilbert, S. (2003) Study of wheat gluten 
plasticization with fatty acids. Polymer , 44, 115–122.
 [59] Plastics Design Library Staff (1995) Permeability and Other Film Properties of 
Plastics and Elastomers , PDL Handbook Series. Norwich, NY: Plastics Design 
Library (PLD).
 [60] Coma, V., Sebti, I., Pardon, P ., Deschamps, A., and Pichavant, F.H. (2001) Anti -
microbial edible packaging based on cellulosic ethers, fatty acids, and nisin incor -
poration to inhibit Listeria innocua  and Staphylococcus aureus . Journal of Food 
Protection , 64(4), 470–475.
 [61] Appendini, P ., Hotchkiss, J.H. (2002) Review of antimicrobials food packaging. 
Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies , 3, 113–126.
 [62] Quintavalla, S., Vicini, L. (2002) Antimicrobial food packaging in meat industry. 
Meat Science , 62(3), 373–380.
 [63] Lee, C.H., Park, H.J., and Lee, D.S. (2004) Influence of antimicrobial packaging 
on kinetics of spoilage microbial growth in milk and orange juice. Journal of Food 
Engineering , 65(4), 527–531.
 [64] Pranoto, Y., Rakshit, S.K., and Salokhe, V.M. (2005) Enhancing antimicrobial 
activity of chitosan films by incorporating garlic oil, potassium sorbate and nisin. 
Lwt-Food Science and Technology , 38(8), 859–865.
 [65] Bentayeb, K., Rubio, C., Batlle, R., and Nerin, C. (2007) Direct determination of 
carnosic acid in a new active packaging based on natural extract of rosemary. 
Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry , 389(6), 1989–1996.
 [66] Soto-Cantu, C.D., Graciano-Verdugo, A.Z., Peralta, E., Islas-Rubio, A.R., 
Gonzalez-Cordova, A., Gonzalez-Leon, A., and Soto-Valdez, H. (2008) Release 
of butylatedhydroxytoluene from an active film packaging to Asadero cheese 
and its effect on oxidation and odor stability. Journal of Dairy Science , 91(1), 
11–19.
 [67] Gemili, S., Yemenicioglu, A., and Altinkaya, S.A. (2010) Development of antioxi -
dant food packaging materials with controlled release properties. Journal of Food 
Engineering , 96(3), 325–332.REfERENCES   651
 [68] Lopez de Dicastillo, C., Nerin, C., Alfaro, P ., Catala, R., Gavara, R., and Hernandez-
Munoz, P . (2011) Development of new antioxidant active packaging films based 
on ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer (EVOH) and green tea extract. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 59(14), 7832–7840.
 [69] Manzanarez-Lopez, F., Soto-Valdez, H., Auras, R., and Peralta, E. (2011) Release 
of alpha-Tocopherol from poly(lactic acid) films, and its effect on the oxidative 
stability of soybean oil. Journal of Food Engineering , 104(4), 508–517.
 [70] Cha, D.S., Chinnan, M.S. (2004) Biopolymer-based antimicrobial packaging: A 
review. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition , 44(4), 223–237.
 [71] Spizzirri, U.G., Parisi, O.I., Iemma, F., Cirillo, G., Puoci, F., Curcio, M., and Picci, 
N. (2010) Antioxidant-polysaccharide conjugates for food application by eco-
friendly grafting procedure. Carbohydrate Polymers , 79(2), 333–340.
 [72] Kuorwel, K., Cran, M.J., Sonneveld, K., Miltz, J., and Bigger, S.W. (2011) Antimi -
crobial activity of biodegradable polysaccharide and protein-based films contain -
ing active agents. Journal of Food Science , 76(3), 90–102.
 [73] Yeo, Y., Park, K.N. (2004) Control of encapsulation efficiency and initial burst in 
polymeric microparticle systems. Archives of Pharmacal Research , 27(1), 1–12.
 [74] Livney, Y.D. (2010) Milk proteins as vehicles for bioactives. Current Opinion in 
Colloid and Interface Science , 15(1–2), 73–83.
 [75] Chalier, P ., Ben Arfa, A., Guillard, V., and Gontard, N. (2009) Moisture and tem -
perature triggered release of a volatile active agent from soy protein coated 
paper: Effect of glass transition phenomena on carvacrol diffusion coefficient. 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 57(2), 658–665.
 [76] Mascheroni, E., Chalier, P ., Gontard, N., and Gastaldi, E. (2010) Designing of a 
wheat gluten/montmorillonite based system as carvacrol carrier: Rheological and 
structural properties. Food Hydrocolloids , 24(4), 406–413.
 [77] Mascheroni, E., Guillard, V., Gastaldi, E., Gontard, N., and Chalier, P . (2011) 
Anti-microbial effectiveness of relative humidity-controlled carvacrol release 
from wheat gluten/montmorillonite coated papers. Food Control , 22(10), 
1582–1591.
 [78] Choudalakis, G., Gotsis, A.D. (2009) Permeability of polymer/clay nanocompos -
ites: A review. European Polymer Journal , 45(4), 967–984.
 [79] Hong, S.I., Rhim, J.W. (2008) Antimicrobial activity of organically modified nano-
clays. Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology , 8(11), 5818–5824.
 [80] Wu, T., Xie, A.G., Tan, S.Z., and Cai, X. (2011) Antimicrobial effects of quaternary 
phosphonium salt intercalated clay minerals on Escherichia coli  and Staphylo -
cocci aureus . Colloids and Surfaces B-Biointerfaces , 86(1), 232–236.
 [81] European Commission (2004) EC Framework Regulation No 1935/2004 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 27 October 2004 on materials and 
articles intended to come into contact with food.
 [82] European Commission (2011) EC Commission Regulation No. 10/2011 of 14 
January 2011, on plastic materials and articles intended to come into contact with 
food.
 [83] European Commission (2000) EC Directive 2000/13/EC of 20 March 2000 on 
the labelling of foodstuffs includes general provisions on the labelling of food -
stuffs to be delivered to the consumer.652  PROTEIN -BASED  NANOCOMPOSITES  fOR fOOD  PACkAGING
 [84] European Commission (2009) EC Commission Regulation No 450/2009 of 29 
May 2009 on active and intelligent materials and articles intended to come into 
contact with food.
 [85] European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) (2011) Scientific opinion on guidance 
on the risk assessment of the application of nanoscience and nanotechnologies 
in the food and feed. The EFSA Journal , 9(5), 1–36.
 [86] Oberdörster, G., Maynard, A., Donaldson, K., Castranova, V., Fitzpatrick, J., 
Ausman, K., Carter, J., Karn, B., Kreyling, W., Lai, D., Olin, S., Monteiro-Riviere, 
N., Warheit, D., and Yang, H. (2005) Principles for characterizing the potential 
human health effects from exposure to nanomaterials: Elements of a screening 
strategy. Particle and Fibre Toxicology , 2(8), 1–35.
 [87] Tiede, K., Boxall, A.B.A., Tear, S.P ., Lewis, J., David, H., and Hassello, M. (2008) 
Detection and characterization of engineered nanoparticles in food and the 
environment. Food Additives and Contaminants , 25, 795–821.
 [88] Simon, P ., Chaudry, Q., and Bakos, D. (2008) Migration of engineered nanopar -
ticles from polymer packaging to food—A physicochemical view. Journal of Food 
and Nutrition Research , 47, 105–113.
 [89] Mauricio-Iglesias, M., Peyron, S., Guillard, V., and Gontard, N. (2010) Wheat 
gluten nanocomposite films as food-contact materials: Migration tests and impact 
of a novel food stabilization technology (high pressure). Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science , 116(5), 2526–2535.
 [90] Varoquaux, P ., Gouble, B., Barron, C., and Yildiz, F. (1999) Respiratory parame -
ters and sugar catabolism of mushroom ( Agaricus bisporus  Lange). Postharvest 
Biology and Technology , 16(1), 51–61.
 [91] Mannheim, C.H., Soffer, T. (1996) Permeability of different wax coatings and 
their effect on citrus fruit quality. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 
44(3), 919–923.
 [92] Guilbert, S., Cuq, B. (1998) Les films etenrobages comestibles. In: L’emballage 
des denréesalimentaires de grandeconsommation , eds. G. Bureau, J.L. et Multon. 
Paris: Lavoisier, Tec et Doc, pp. 471–530.
 [93] Gennadios, A., Weller, C.L., and Testin, R.F. (1993) Temperature effect on oxygen 
permeability of edible protein-based films. Journal of Food Science , 58(1), 
212–214.
 [94] Butler, B.L., Vergano, P .J., Testin, R.F., Bunn, J.M., and Wiles, J.L. (1996) Mechani -
cal and barrier properties of edible chitosan films as affected by composition and 
storage. Journal of Food Science , 61(5), 953–961.
 [95] Lieberman, E.R., Gilbert, S.G. (1973) Gas permeation of collagen films as affected 
by cross-linkage, moisture, and plasticizer content. Journal of Polymer Science, 
Symposium , 41, 33–43.
 [96] Product information, Ecoflex® F Blend C1200 Biodegradable polyester for com -
postable film (2011) http://www.bioplastics.basf.com/pdf/Product_information_
Ecoflex_F_Blend_A1200V1-3.pdf (accessed March 2013).
 [97] Sanchez-Garcia, M.D., Gimenez, E., and Lagaron, J.M. (2008) Morphology and 
barrier properties of solvent cast composites of thermoplastic biopolymers and 
purified cellulose fibers. Carbohydrate Polymers , 71(2), 235–244.
 [98] Product information, Ecovio® L BX 8180, Biodegradable polyester for com -
postable film with 80% of renewable resources (2009) http://www.plasticsportal.  REfERENCES   653
net/wa/plasticsEU ∼en_GB/function/conversions:/publish/common/upload/bio -
degradable_plastics/Ecovio_L_BX_8180.pdf (accessed March 2013).
 [99] Aydt, T.P ., Waller, C.L., and Testin, R.F. (1991) Mechanical and barrier properties 
of edible corn and wheat protein films. Transactions of the ASAE , 34(1), 
207–211.
[100] Park, H.J., Testin, R.F., Chinnan, M.S., and Park, J.W., eds. (2001) Active biopoly -
mer films and coatings for food and biotechnological uses. Pre-Congress Short 
Course of IUFoST. Korea University, Seoul, Korea. p. 250.
[101] Kato, Y., Kaminaga, J., Matsuo, R., and Isogai, A. (2005) Oxygen permeability 
and biodegradability of polyuronic acids prepared from polysaccharides by 
TEMPO-mediated oxidation. Journal of Polymers and the Environment , 13(3), 
261–265.
[102] Rose, P .I. (1987) Gelatin. In: Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Engineering , 
Vol. 7, eds. H.F. Mark, N.M. Bilakes, C.G. Overberger, and G. Menges. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, pp. 488–513.
[103] FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations) (1981) Amino 
acid content of foods and biological data on proteins. http://www.fao.org/
DOCREP/005/.../AC854T00.htm (accessed March 2013).
[104] Braunitzer, G., Chen, R., Schrank, B., and Stangl, A. (1972) Automatische 
sequenzanalyse eines protein ((-lactoglobulin AB). Hoppe-Seyler’s Z Physiology 
and Chemistry , 353, 832–834.
[105] Vanaman, T.C., Brew, K., and Hill, R.L. (1970) The disulfide bonds of bovine 
(-lactalbumin. Journal of Biological Chemistry , 245, 4583–4590.
[106] Boldwell, C.E., Hopkins, D.T. (1985) Soy protein products: characteristics, nutri -
tional aspects, and utililization. In: New Protein Foods , Vol. 2, eds. A.M. Altschul, 
H.L. Wilcke. Orlando, FL: Academic Press, p. 152.
[107] Solsuski, F.W., Imafidon, G.I. (1990) Amino acid composition and nitrogen-to-
protein conversion factors for animal and plant foods. Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Chemistry , 38, 1351–1356.655   INDEX    
Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.   Acetic acid, chitin nanoﬁ  ber 
processing,    15–17  
  Acetylated allylic starch (AAS), starch 
nanoparticle formation,    189–190  
 Acetylation: 
  chitin nanoﬁ  bers,    26–29  
  degree of substitution,    26–27   nanocomposite structures,    28–29   substituted compound 
images,    27–28    
  chitosan structure,    34–35    
  Acid chloride group reactions, starch 
nanocrystal polymer conjugation,    187–188  
 Acid hydrolysis: 
  cellulose whiskers,    322–324   chitin nanowhisker preparation,    
133–140  
 starch nanoparticles: 
  chemical modiﬁ  cation,    182–183  
 nanocrystal kinetics,    162–164   starch content,    154     
  Acidic pools, chitin nanoﬁ  ber 
processing,    15–17  
 Acrylic resins poly(propylene glycol) 
diacrylate (A-600), chitin nanoﬁ  ber 
nanocomposites,    24–25  
 Active packaging, protein-based 
nanocomposites: 
  controlled delivery systems,    
641–643  
 current trends in,    613–614      Aerogels, cellulose nanocomposites, 
ﬂ exural and impact properties,   
 448–449  
 Agglomerated microﬁ  brils, 
microﬁ  brillated cellulose 
derivatization,    474–475  
 Aging, starch nanocomposites,    264   Agitated cultures, bacterial cellulose 
production,    342–344  
 Agricultural applications: 
  bacterial cellulose,    344–345   starch nanoparticles,    304    
  Alcell lignin: 
  bionanocomposites,    570–572   poly(ethylene oxide)/Alcell lignin 
nanocomposites,    574–581    
  Alkali lignin, protein/lignin 
bionanocomposites,    577–579  
 Alkaline extraction, chitin 
nanocomposites,    62–64  
 Alkenyl succinic anhydride (ASA): 
  chitin nanocomposites,    85–93   ﬁ ller-matrix interface 
compatibilization, starch nanoparticles,    193–194  
 starch nanoparticle chemical 
modiﬁ  cation,    185, 283–284    
  Alkoxide formation, cellulose 
nanocomposites,    394  
 Alkylated chitosans,    41–42   All-cellulose composites,    404   1-Allyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide 
(AMIMBr), chitin nanoﬁ  ber 
regeneration,    144–145  656  INDEX
 Amidation, cellulose nanocomposites,   
 378  
 Amino acids, protein-based 
nanocomposites,    615, 617  
  wet processing,    622–623    
  Ammonium per sulfate (APS), graft 
copolymerization, chitosan,    36–37  
 Amphiphilicity, starch nanoparticle 
chemical modiﬁ  cation,    194–195  
 Amyloid/amyloid-like nanoﬁ  bers, 
characterization,    602–603  
 Amylopectin: 
  spectroscopic analysis,    524–526   starch-based nanocomposites,    204–205  
  amylose/amylopectin ratio,    262–263   starch content,    154     
  Amylose: 
  spectroscopic analysis,    524–526   starch-based nanocomposites,    204–205  
  layered silicate nanoﬁ  llers,    230–232  
 retrogradation,    243–245    
  starch content,    154, 156  
  amylose/amylopectin ratio,    262–263     
  Angellier preparation process, starch 
nanocrystals,    164–168  
 Antimicrobial chitin nanocomposites,    67  
  protein-based nanocomposites, active 
packaging design,    641–643    
  Antioxidant capacity, protein-based 
nanocomposites, active packaging design,    641–643  
 Aspect ratios: 
  bionanocomposites,    439–440   micro and nanocellulosic 
products,    467–469  
 plate-like inclusion material 
permeation,    546–547    
  ASPEN Plus-based process model, 
cellulose whiskers acid hydrolysis,    324  
 Atomic force microscopy (AFM): 
  chitin nanocomposite analysis,    93–97   nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose,    319–321  
 starch nanocomposites, 
nanoﬁ  llers,    231–232  
 starch nanocrystal morphology,    169    
  Atom transfer radical polymerization 
(ATRP):   bacterial cellulose, XRD 
characterization,    514–515  
 cellulose nanocomposites,    382   cellulose nanowhiskers, FT-IR 
characterization,    515–518  
 starch nanoparticles, FT-IR analysis,    
533–535    
  Autoclave processing, starch-based 
nanocomposites,    208–209  
 Avrami exponent: 
  poly(lactic acid) nanocomposites,   
 420–422  
 thermoplastic polymers,    414–415     
  Bacterial cellulose (BC),    6–8     
  applications,    352–357  
  biomedicine,    353–354   composites,    352–353   food industry,    352   industrial technologies,    355–357    
  basic properties,    339–340   carbon and nitrogen sources,    344   food and agro-industry residue 
sources,    344–345  
 fracture morphology,    239–242   FT-IR characterization,    513–514   mechanical properties,    350–351   microorganism production,    
340–342  
 processing techniques,    400–401   puriﬁ  cation,    345  
 static and agitated cultures,    342–344   structure,    346–350   X-ray diffraction analysis,    514–515    
  Bamboo ﬁ  bers, cellulose 
nanocomposites, ﬂ  exural and 
impact properties,    448–449  
 Barrier properties: 
  bionanocomposites,    547–560   heterogeneous media permeation: 
  laminates,    546   plate-like inclusions,    546–547    
  nanocellulose composites,    486–488   performance evaluation,    560–562   permeation theory,    544–546   protein-based nanocomposites,   
 632–641  
 renewable nanomaterials, research 
background,    541–544    INDEX   657
   β -Strands, insulin protein nanoﬁ  ber,    
600–602  
 Biodegradable materials: 
  agricultural applications,    304   applications,    299–304   bacterial cellulose,    350–351   biomedical applications,    302–304   biopolymers,    1–2   polymer nanocomposites,    541–544   starch-based nanocomposites: 
  basic properties,    206–208   cellulose nanocomposites,    207–208   manufacturing techniques,    208–209   melt intercalation technique,    
214–219  
  thermoplastic corn starch-
reinforced cotton cellulose nanoﬁ  bers,    218–219  
 thermoplastic starch/clay 
hybrids,    215–218    
  research background,    203–205    in situ   intercalative 
polymerization,    219–221  
  nanosilicate layer/
polycaprolactone composites,    220–221    
  solution casting,    209–214  
  ﬂ ax cellulose nanocomposites,   
 211–212  
 glycerol plasticized pea starch/
nano-ZnO composites,    210  
 green hemp nanocrystal 
reinforced composites,    212–213  
 starch/poly(vinyl alcohol)/sodium 
montmorillonite,    210–211  
 wheat cellulose nanoﬁ  bers,    213–214    
  synthetic polymer-based 
nanocomposites,    208     
  Biomedical applications: 
  bacterial cellulose,    352–354   chitin nanocomposites,    66–69   chitosan,    44–47  
  drug delivery,    46–47   tissue engineering,    44–45   wound healing,    45–46    
  starch nanocomposites,    302–304    
  Biomimetic processes, chitin 
nanocomposites,    58–66  
  crystals and whiskers,    62–64   derivatives,    65–66  
 ﬁ bers,    64–65    
  Biomineralization, chitin-based 
nanocomposites,    69–70  
 Bionanocomposites: 
  applications,    299–304   barrier properties,    547–560  
  performance factors,    560–562    
  biopolymers, current research,    1–2   current research issues,    1–2   lignin compounds,    565–567, 569–572  
  protein/lignin nanocomposites,   
 576–579    
  mechanical properties,    437–455  
  bionanocomposite performance,    
438–454  
 dynamic mechanical thermal 
analysis,    450–454  
 ﬂ exural/impact properties,    447–449  
 tensile strength,    440–447   thermomechanical properties,    
449–454    
  protein nanoﬁ  bers,    602–603    
  Bioreﬁ  ning process, cellulose whiskers 
acid hydrolysis,    324  
 BioTRED patented starch 
nanoparticle,    160–161  
 Blocklet model, starch structure,    156   Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-7, 
chitosan drug delivery systems,    47  
 Botanical origin: 
  organic ﬁ  llers,    267–268  
 starch nanocomposite 
mechanics,    262–263    
  n-Butanol, starch nanoparticle 
preparation,    159–161  
 1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride, 
cellulose nanocomposite solubility,    395–398    
  Calcium-chitosan composites, tissue 
engineering,    44–45  
  Canada, nanocrystalline cellulose 
development in,    481–482  
 Carbohydrates, chitosan 
branching,    40–41  
 Carbon black, natural polymer 
matrices,    295–297  658  INDEX
 Carbon-carbon double bonds, bacterial 
cellulose, XRD characterization,    514–515  
 Carbon dioxide permeability: 
  bionanocomposite barrier 
properties,    556–560  
 protein-based nanocomposites, barrier 
properties,    632–641    
  Carbon-hydrogen stretching, bacterial 
cellulose, XRD characterization,    514–515  
 Carbon nanoparticles, starch 
nanocomposite nanoﬁ  llers,    232–234  
 Carbon nanotubes (CNTs): 
  chitin nanocomposites, SEM/TEM 
analysis,    88–93  
 chitosan-carbon nanotube 
nanocomposites,    118–122  
 protein nanocomposites: 
  elongated particles,    620–621   health hazards,    464–465   inorganic ﬁ  llers,    265–267  
 mechanical properties,    628–632   optical microscopy analysis,    84   starch nanocomposite 
nanoﬁ  llers,    232–234  
 thermogravimetric analysis,    102–104     
  Carbon sources, bacterial cellulose,    344   Carboxylate groups: 
  cellulose nanocomposites, tensile 
strength,    444–447  
 TEMPO-mediated chitin 
nanoﬁ  bers,    13, 140–142    
  Carboxymethylated chitosans (CMCs): 
  drug delivery systems,    46–47   structure and properties,    41–42   wound healing applications,    46    
  Carboxymethylcellulose sodium, 
nanoﬁ  ller surface structure,    
241–242  
 Carboxymethyl starches (CMS), 
chemical modiﬁ  cation,    183  
 Cassava starch, food industry 
applications,    301–302  
 Casting.  See  Solution casting 
(intercalation) 
 Cationic graft polymerization, 
chitosan,    38   Cationization, cellulose 
nanocomposites,    374  
 Cellulose acetate (CA),    402–403   Cellulose acetate-butyrate 
(CAB),    402–403  
 Cellulose ﬁ  bers with nanoﬁ  brillation 
(CFNF),    473–475  
 Cellulose nanocomposites: 
  all-cellulose composites,    404   bacterial cellulose,    400–401   basic properties,    411–412   clicking modiﬁ  cation 
technique,    378–379  
 cotton cellulose nanoﬁ  bers,    218–219  
 derivative composites,    403–404   electrospun ﬁ  bers,    398–399  
 esteriﬁ  cation,    375–376  
 fracture morphology,    239–242   future research issues,    405–406   mechanical properties,    437–455  
  bionanocomposite performance,    
438–454  
 dynamic mechanical thermal 
analysis,    450–454  
 ﬂ exural/impact properties,    447–449  
 tensile strength,    440–447   thermomechanical 
properties,    449–454    
  microcrystalline cellulose,    399–400   nanocrystals: 
  morphology,    235–237   protein nanocomposites,    621    
  nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose: 
  commercial development,    326–328   crystallinity,    321–322   degree of polymerization and 
strength,    321  
 morphology and 
dimensions,    319–321  
 surface chemistry,    322    
  noncovalent surface 
modiﬁ  cation,    369–371  
 organic ﬁ  llers,    267–268  
 polymer grafting,    379–382   processing techniques,    391–406   reinforcement properties,    274–278, 
275–278  
 solubility,    394–398   spectroscopic analysis,    510, 515–518  INDEX   659
 starch-based nanocomposites,    
207–208  
 starch/ﬂ  ax cellulose nanocomposites,    
211–212  
 starch nanocrystals,    161, 170–171   structural properties,    309–311, 367, 
393–394  
 substrates,    368–369   TEMPO oxidation,    371–374   thermal behavior and 
morphology,    415–426  
  future research issues,    426–428   polycaprolactone/cellulose 
nanocomposites,    422–424  
 poly(ethylene oxide)/cellulose 
nanocomposites,    424–426  
 polyhydroxyalkanoate/cellulose 
nanocomposites,    415–417  
 poly(lactic acid)/cellulose 
nanocomposites,    417–422    
  thermoplastic composites,    402–403  
  transition and crystallization 
kinetics,    412–414    
  thermosetting composites,    403   urethanization,    378   wheat straw cellulose-reinforced 
nanoﬁ  bers, thermoplastic starch 
nanocomposites,    213–214    
  Cellulose nanoﬁ  bers (CNFs).  See  
Cellulose nanocomposites 
 Cellulose nanowhiskers: 
  acid hydrolysis,    322–324   barrier layers,    487–488   basic properties,    411–413   commercial development,    328–329   morphological analysis,    325   physical properties,    325–326   poly(caprolactone), thermal and 
morphological analysis,    422–424  
 polymer reinforcement additives,    
490–493  
 proteins and: 
  barrier property modulation,    
637–641  
 mechanical properties,    628–632    
  rubber reinforcement 
additives,    491–492  
 silylation,    376–378   spectroscopic characterization,    
515–518  
 structure and properties,    312–313   thermal and mechanical 
analysis,    416–417    
  Cell-wall fragments, starch content,    154   Centrifugation, nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose 
treatment,    319  
 Chain-chain interactions, starch-based 
nanocomposites, layered silicate nanoﬁ  llers,    230–232  
 Charpy impact strength, thermoset 
nanocomposites,    583–584  
 Chitin nanocomposites: 
  antimicrobial compounds,    67   biomedical engineering,    66–69   biomimetic processes,    58–66  
  crystals and whiskers,    62–64   derivatives,    65–66   ﬁ bers,    64–65    
  crystallinity,    56–57  
  protein-based materials,    621    
  glass transition temperature 
(Tg),    245–246  
 inorganic nanocomposites,    69–70   jumbo squid beak,    60–61   liquid crystal behavior,    57–58   mechanical properties,    111–127  
  chitin/chitosan nanoﬁ  llers, polymer 
nanocomposites,    124–127  
 chitosan-carbon nanotubes,    118–122   chitosan-clay,    115–118   chitosan-graphene oxide,    122–124   chitosan-hydroxyapatite,    113–115    
  mollusk and crustacean hard 
tissue,    59–60  
 morphological analysis,    83–96  
  atomic force microscopy,    93–97   optical microscopy,    83–84   scanning electron microscopy and 
transmittance electron microscopy,    84–93    
  physicochemical properties,    54–58   polysaccharide starch 
nanocrystals,    237  
 proteins and,    58  
  barrier property 
modulation,    637–641  
 mechanical properties,    628–632    660  INDEX
  spectroscopic analysis,    518–521  
  FT-IR characterization,    519–520   wide-angle x-ray diffraction 
characterization,    520–521    
  structure,    12–13  
  hierarchical structure,    56–57    
  thermal analysis,    97–105  
  differential scanning 
calorimetry,    97–99  
 dynamic thermal mechanical 
analysis,    99–102  
 thermogravimetric analysis,    102–104   thermomechanical analysis,    104    
  tissue engineering,    67–69    
  Chitin nanoﬁ  bers (CNFs): 
  acetylation,    26–29  
  degree of substitution,    26–27   nanocomposite structures,    28–29   substituted compound 
images,    27–28    
  chemical characterization,    19–21   current research,    11–13   electrospinning,    145–148   extraction process,    12–13   miscellaneous processing 
techniques,    148–149  
 nanocomposite preparation,    24–25   processing: 
  crab shell source,    13–15   dry chitin preparation,    17–19   mushroom sources,    21–23   prawn shells,    15–17    
  regeneration from solutions,    142–145   structure and properties,    131–133   TEMPO-mediated oxidation,    
140–142    
  Chitin/silk nanoﬁ  bers, 
electrospinning,    147–148  
 Chitin whiskers (CHW),    5  
  biomimetic processing,    63–64   electrospinning,    147–148   optical microscopy analysis,    83–84   preparation, acid hydrolysis,    133–140   SEM/TEM analysis,    85–93   structure and properties,    131–133   thermal analysis: 
  differential scanning 
calorimetry,    98–99   dynamic mechanical 
analysis,    100–102    
  thermogravimetric analysis,    102–104    
  Chitosan: 
  abundance and distribution,    33   biomedical applications,    44–47, 68–69  
  drug delivery,    46–47   tissue engineering,    44–45   wound healing,    45–46    
  biomimetic processing,    65–66   bionanocomposite barrier 
properties,    550–552  
 chemical modiﬁ  cation,    35–44  
  alkylated chitosans,    41–42   carbohydrate branched 
chitosan,    40–41  
 carboxymethylated chitosans,    41   crown ether chitosan binding,    
38–40  
 cyclodextrin-linked chitosan,    38–39   grafted copolymers,    36–38   hydrogels,    43–44   quaternized derivatives,    42–43   thiolated chitosan,    39–40    
  mechanical properties,    113–127  
  chitin/chitosan nanoﬁ  ller, polymer 
nanocomposites,    124–127  
 chitosan-carbon nanotube 
nanocomposites,    118–122  
 chitosan-clay 
nanocomposites,    115–118  
 chitosan-graphene oxide 
nanocomposites,    122–124  
 chitosan-halloysite 
nanotubes,    117–118  
 chitosan-hydroxyapatite 
nanocomposites,    113–115    
  SEM/TEM analysis,    87–93   spectroscopic analysis,    518, 521–523  
  FT-IR characterization,    521–522   XRD characterization,    522–523    
  structure and properties,    4–5, 34–35   thermal analysis, differential scanning 
calorimetry,    98–99    
  Chitosan-acetic acid-salt ﬁ  lms, cellulose 
nanocomposites, tensile strength,    442–447  
 Chymotrypsin, insulin protein nanoﬁ  ber 
formation,    604–606  Chitin nanocomposites ( cont’d )INDEX   661
 Citric acid (CA): 
  starch nanoﬁ  llers: 
  esteriﬁ  cation,    528–531  
 natural polymer matrices,    296–297    
  starch nanoparticle 
formation,    189–190    
  Clay materials: 
  bionanocomposite barrier 
properties,    548–550  
 chitin nanocomposites: 
  chemical properties,    69–70   SEM/TEM analysis,    85–93   thermogravimetric analysis,    102–104    
  chitosan-clay 
nanocomposites,    115–118  
 inorganic ﬁ  llers,    265–267  
  reinforcement compounds,    268–274    
  lignin additives,    568–569  
  bionanocomposites,    569–572    
  protein-based 
nanocomposites,    625–632  
 starch nanocomposites: 
  food industry applications,    300–302   layered silicate nanoﬁ  llers,    229–232    
  thermoplastic starch/clay 
hybrids,    215–216    
  Clicking technique, cellulose 
nanocomposites,    378–379  
 Cloisite 15A (C15A): 
  bionanocomposite barrier 
properties,    550  
 starch nanosilicate layer/PCL 
composites,    220–221    
  Cloisite 20A (C20A): 
  bionanocomposite barrier 
properties,    550  
 lignin-based 
bionanocomposites,    569–572  
 protein-based nanocomposites, 
mechanical properties,    628–632    
  Cloisite 25A (C25A), matrix 
structure,    242–245  
 Cloisite 30B (C30B): 
  bionanocomposite barrier 
properties,    550  
 lignin-based 
bionanocomposites,    570–572  
 protein-based nanocomposites, 
mechanical properties,    628–632      Cloisite sodium: 
  bionanocomposite barrier 
properties,    555–560  
 protein-based nanocomposites, 
mechanical properties,    628–632    
  Coacervate compounds, chitin 
nanocomposites,    69  
 Coefﬁ  cient of thermal expansion (CTE): 
  cellulose nanoﬁ  bers,    438–439  
 chitin nanocomposites,    104    
  Colloidal suspensions: 
  chitin nanowhisker acid 
hydrolysis,    137–140  
 starch nanocolloids, chemical 
modiﬁ  cation,    191–192    
  Commercial development: 
  lignin-based thermoplastic 
composites,    572–573  
 microﬁ  brillated cellulose,    473–475  
 nanocelluloses,    326–329  
  worldwide production,    496–499     
  Compressive strength measurements, 
chitosan-hydroxyapatite nanocomposites,    114–115  
 Confocal laser scanning microscopy, 
chitin nanocomposites,    95–97  
 Controllable size, starch nanoparticle 
chemical modiﬁ  cation,    
194–195  
 Controlled delivery systems, protein-
based nanocomposites, active packaging design,    641–643  
 Copolymer characterization, chitin 
nanoparticles,    111–113  
 Corn starch: 
  biomedical applications,    302–304   layered silicate nanoﬁ  llers, starch 
nanocomposites,    231–232  
 natural polymer matrices,    296–297    
  Corn zein.  See  Zein blends 
 Cotton cellulose nanoﬁ  bers (CCN), 
biomaterials,    218–219  
 Crabshells.  
See  Crustacean hard tissue 
 Cross-linked starch nanoparticles: 
  biomedical applications,    303–304   chemical modiﬁ  cation,    191  
 extrusion,    182–183    662  INDEX
  Cross-polarization magic-angle spinning 
(CP-MAS) analysis, nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose,   
 320–321  
 Cross- β  sheet structure, insulin protein 
nanoﬁ  ber,    600–602  
 Crown ethers, chitosan binding,    38–40   Crustacean hard tissue: 
  chitin nanoﬁ  ber processing,    13–15  
 chitin nanowhisker acid 
hydrolysis,    136–137  
 chitin synthesis,    59–60   FT-IR analysis,    519–520    
  Cryocrushing, nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose 
treatment,    315–316  
 Crystalline structure: 
  bacterial cellulose,    346–350   chitin,    56–57  
  biomimetic processing,    63–64    
  chitin nanowhisker acid hydrolysis,   
 134–135  
 nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose,    321–322  
 proteins, nanoﬁ  ber preparation and 
processing,    603–605  
 starch lamellae,    156   starch matrix,    242–245   starch nanocrystals,    169–170   thermoplastic polymers,    413–415    
  Cuticular proteins, chitin 
nanocomposites,    58  
 Cyclodextrins, chitosan linkage,    38–39    
  Decomposition, starch nanocomposites, 
thermal analysis,    246–248  
  Degree of deacetylation (DDA),    16–17  
  chitin nanoﬁ  ber processing,    148–149  
 chitin nanoparticles, spectroscopic 
analysis,    518–519  
 chitin nanowhiskers,    136    
  Degree of polymerization (DP): 
  cellulose nanocomposites,    309–311   cellulose whiskers,    326   nanocellulose  vs.  microcellulose 
products,    464–465  
 nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose,    321    
  Degree of substitution (DS): 
  cellulose whisker silylation,    377–378   chitin nanoﬁ  ber acetylation,    26–27  
 starch nanocrystal chemical 
modiﬁ  cation,    182–183      Density, starch nanocrystals,    172–173  
 Derivative cellulose composites,    
403–404  
  microﬁ  brillated cellulose 
derivatization,    474–475    
  Derivative chitin nanocomposites, 
biomimetic processing,    65–66  
 Derivative thermogravimetric analysis 
(DTG), starch nanocomposites,    246–248  
 Dialdehyde groups, starch nanoparticle 
formation,    189–190  
 Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC): 
  chitin nanocomposites,    97–99   poly(ethylene oxide)/Alcell lignin 
nanocomposites,    574–581  
 starch nanocrystals,    170    
  Diffusivity: 
  barrier permeation,    544–546   laminate permeation,    546   protein-based nanocomposites, barrier 
properties,    638–641    
  Diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A 
(DGEBA), starch-based nanocomposites,  in situ   
intercalative polymerization,    219–221  
 Dimensional analysis, nanoﬁ  brillated 
cellulose,    319–321  
 Dimethylacetamide (DMAC), cellulose 
nanocomposites, tensile strength,    442–447  
  N, N  -Dimethylaminoethylmethacrylate 
(DMAEMA), radiation graft copolymerization, chitosan,    37  
 Dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO): 
  cellulose nanocomposite 
esteriﬁ  cation,    375–376  
 starch nanoparticle 
preparation,    159–161    
  Dispersibility: 
  nanocellulose, redispersion 
problems,    488–489  
 protein-based nanocomposites,    
622–623  
 starch nanocomposites: 
  carbon nanoparticles,    232–234   layered silicate nanoﬁ  llers,    
229–232  
 reinforcements,    269–274     INDEX   663
  DNA delivery vehicles, chitin 
nanocomposites,    68–69  
 Double helices packing conﬁ  guration, 
starch crystallinity,    156–157  
 Doxorubicin: 
  chitosan drug delivery systems,    47   starch nanoparticle formation,    
189–190    
  Dried food reinforcement, nanocellulose 
composites,    491  
 Drug delivery systems: 
  chitin nanocomposites,    68–69   chitosan compounds,    46–47   starch nanoparticle chemical 
modiﬁ  cation,    194–195    
  Dry chitin: 
  chemical characterization,    19–21   processing technology,    17–19    
  Dry processing, protein-based 
nanocomposites,    624  
 DTG curve, thermogravimetric analysis, 
chitin nanocomposites,    102–104  
 Dual ﬂ  uorescent labeling, cellulose 
nanocomposites,    379  
 Dynamic mechanical thermal analysis 
(DMTA): 
  cellulose nanocomposites,    450–454   chitin/chitosan nanoﬁ  llers,    125–126  
 chitin nanocomposites,    99–102   chitosan-carbon nanotube 
composites,    120–122  
 chitosan-clay nanocomposites,   
 117–118  
 lignin-based bionanocomposites,    
571–572  
 polyhydroxyalkanoate/cellulose 
nanocomposites (PHA/CNF),    415–417  
 starch nanocomposites: 
  ﬁ ller materials,    282–285  
 glass transition temperature (Tg),    
245–246  
 inorganic reinforcements,    269–274   plasticization,    263      
  Eco-Sphere biolatex, patented starch 
nanoparticles,    160–161  
  Elastic modulus, chitosan-hydroxyapatite 
nanocomposites,    114–115   Elastomeric nanocomposites, ﬂ  exural 
and impact properties,    448–449  
 Electrical double layer, chitin 
nanowhisker acid hydrolysis,    134–135  
 Electrospinning: 
  cellulose nanocomposites,    398–399   chitin nanoﬁ  ber processing,    
145–148    
  Electrostatic interaction: 
  chitin nanowhiskers,    135–136   nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose 
processing,    316–319    
  Elongated particles: 
  matrix ﬁ  llers,    264–268  
 protein nanocomposites,    620–621    
  EMPA, nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose 
development,    476  
 Endocuticle structure, chitin nanoﬁ  ber 
processing,    17  
 Endoglucoanase, nanoﬁ  brillated 
cellulose processing,    316–319  
 Energy consumption, nanoﬁ  brillated 
cellulose processing,    315–316  
 Engineered nanomaterials (ENM), 
protein nanocomposites, safety issues,    645–646  
 Enzymatic grafting: 
  chitosan copolymerization,    37–38   insulin protein nanoﬁ  ber 
formation,    604–606    
  Enzymatic hydrolysis: 
  nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose 
processing,    316–319  
 starch nanocrystals,    162–164    
  Enzyme immobilization, protein 
nanoscaffolds,    607  
 Epoxypropyltrimethyl-ammonium 
chloride (EPTMAC), cellulose nanocomposite cationization,    374  
 Epoxy resins, thermoset 
nanocomposites,    582–584  
 Esteriﬁ  cation: 
  cellulose nanocomposites,    375–376   starch nanoparticles,    184–185  
  spectroscopic analysis,    526–531     
  1-Ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)
carbodiimide (EDC), thiolated chitosan,    38–40  664  INDEX
 Ethylene-diamine-tetraacetic acid 
(EDTA), lens crystallin nanoﬁ  ber preparation and 
processing,    604–605  
 Ethylene-propylene/maleic anhydride 
(EP-MA), lignin-based thermoplastic composites,    574–581  
 Ethylene-vinyl acetate (EVA) 
copolymer, lignin-based thermoplastic composites,    574–581  
 Eukaryotic organisms, bacterial cellulose 
production,    340–341  
 Exfoliated composites, chitosan-clay 
nanocomposites,    115–118  
 Exocuticle structure, chitin nanoﬁ  ber 
processing,    17  
 Extracellular matrix (ECM), chitin 
nanoﬁ  ber electrospinning,    
147–148    
  Fiber-reinforced polymer composites, 
current research issues,    7–8  
  Fiber wet-out, starch-based 
nanocomposites, resin transfer molding,    208–209  
 Fick ’ s ﬁ  rst law of diffusion, barrier 
permeation,    544–546  
 Field electron gun scanning electron 
microscope (FEGSEM): 
  nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose,    319–321  
 starch nanocrystal morphology,    169    
  Filler materials: 
  bionanocomposite matrix/ﬁ  ller 
interactions,    439–440  
 cellulose nanocomposites, ﬂ  exural and 
impact properties,    448–449  
 chitin nanocomposites, SEM/TEM 
analysis,    85–93  
 inorganic ﬁ  llers,    265–267  
  nanocrystalline cellulose  vs.,     493–494    
  organic ﬁ  llers,    267–268  
 plate-like inclusion materials, 
permeation,    546–547  
 protein nanoparticles,    619–622  
  barrier property 
modulation,    635–641  
 mechanical properties,    628–632      starch nanoparticles: 
  matrix interface compatibilization,   
 192–194, 264–268  
 mechanical properties,    278–285     
  Fischer esteriﬁ  cation, cellulose 
nanocomposites,    375–376  
 Flax nanocomposites: 
  fracture morphology,    240–242   starch/ﬂ  ax cellulose 
nanocomposites,    211–212    
  Flexural properties, cellulose 
nanocomposites,    447–449  
 Flory-Huggins interaction parameter, 
thermoplastic polymers,    414–415  
 Foam biomimetic nanocomposites: 
  nanofoams,    484–486   tensile strength,    441–447    
  Food contact materials (FCMs), protein-
based nanocomposites, safety issues,    643–646  
 Food industry: 
  bacterial cellulose: 
  applications,    352   production from,    344–345    
  nanocellulose reinforcement, dried 
food products,    491  
 packaging, protein-based 
nanocomposites: 
  barrier properties,    632–641   controlled delivery systems, active 
packaging,    641–643  
 ﬁ ller materials,    619–622  
 matrix properties,    618–619   mechanical properties,    624–632   processing,    622–624   research background,    613–614   safety aspects,    643–646   structural properties,    615–618    
  starch nanocomposite 
applications,    300–302    
  Food simulating liquids (FSL), protein 
nanocomposites,    644–646  
 Fourier transform-infrared (FT-IR) 
spectroscopy: 
  bacterial cellulose,    346–350, 
513–514  
 cellulose nanowhiskers,    515–518   chitin nanoparticles,    519–520  INDEX   665
 chitin nanowhiskers,    523–524  
 chitosan nanoparticles,    521–522   insulin protein nanoﬁ  ber, cross- β  sheet 
structure,    601  
 plant cellulose characterization,    
510–511  
 polymer nanocomposites,    515–518   starch nanoparticles,    525–526, 
533–535  
  esteriﬁ  catoin,    526––531     
  Fracture morphologies: 
  cellulose nanoﬁ  bers,    438–439  
 starch nanocomposites,    238–242    
  Free radicals: 
  graft copolymerization, chitosan,   
 36–37  
 starch nanocrystal polymer 
conjugation,    188–189    
  Freeze-dried microﬁ  brillated cellulose, 
development of,    471–475  
 Furfuryl alcohol, lignin-based 
thermoplastic composites,    576    
  Galactosylated chitosan,    40–41  
  Gas permeation: 
  bionanocomposite barrier 
properties,    548–550  
 protein-based nanocomposites, food 
packaging,    632–641    
  Gaulin homogenizer, nanoﬁ  brillated 
cellulose treatment,    313–319  
 Gelatin, protein-based 
nanocomposites,    618  
 Gene carriers, starch nanoparticle 
chemical modiﬁ  cation,    195  
 Glass transition temperature (Tg): 
  chitin nanocomposites,    97–102   chitin nanowhisker acid 
hydrolysis,    137  
 lignin,    567  
  bionanocomposites,    569–572   protein/lignin bionanocomposites,   
 577–579    
  starch nanocomposites,    245–246   thermoplastic polymers,    413–415    
   Gluconacetobacter   genus: 
  bacterial cellulose production,    
340–341, 345–346  
 nanocellulose substrates,    369      Glucose oxidase, protein 
nanoscaffolds,    607  
 Glucosidic macromolecules, starch 
content,    154  
 Glycerol plasticized pea starch (GPS): 
  chitin/chitosan nanoﬁ  llers,    126–127  
 chitin nanoparticles, dynamic 
mechanical analysis,    101–102  
 fracture morphology,    240–242   glass transition temperature 
(Tg),    245–246  
 nanoﬁ  ller surface structure,    241–242  
 reinforcement properties,    274–278   starch nanoparticle formation,    
189–190  
  nano-zinc oxide composites,    210   natural polymer matrices,    296–297     
  Glycerol plasticized thermoplastic starch 
(GTPS), matrix structure,    242–245  
 Glycerol systems, starch nanocomposite 
plasticization,    263  
 Glycolic acid (GA), chitosan hydrogels,   
 43–44  
 Glycosaminoglycans, chitosan scaffolds,   
 44–45  
 Graft copolymerization, chitosan,    
36–38  
  hydrogels,    43–44    
  “Graft from” strategy: 
  nanocellulose polymer 
grafting,    381–382  
 starch nanocrystal polymer 
conjugation,    188–189  
 starch nanoparticle chemical 
modiﬁ  cation,    284    
  “Graft onto” strategy: 
  nanocellulose polymer grafting,    
379–381  
 starch nanocrystal polymer 
conjugation,    186–188    
  Graphene oxide: 
  chitosan-graphene oxide 
nanocomposites,    122–124  
 starch nanocomposites,    228  
  carbon nanoparticles,    232–234     
  Green composites: 
  cellulose nanocomposites, tensile 
strength,    446–447  666  INDEX
 hemp-reinforced nanocrystals, 
plasticized starch,    212–213  
 starch nanocomposites as,    227–228    
  Grinding processes, nanoﬁ  brillated 
cellulose treatment,    314–316    
  Halloysite nanotubes (HNT), chitosan 
nanocomposites,    117–118  
  Hemp cellulose nanocrystals (HCN), 
green composite reinforcement,    212–213  
 Hestrin and Schramm (HS) process, 
bacterial cellulose,    341–342  
 Heterogeneous media, permeation: 
  laminates,    546   plate-like inclusions,    546–547    
  Hexaﬂ  uoro-2-propanol (HFIP): 
  chitin nanoﬁ  ber 
electrospinning,    145–148  
 chitin nanoﬁ  ber regeneration,    
142–145    
  1,4-Hexamethylene diisocyanate 
(HMDI): 
  cellulose nanocomposite 
urethanization,    378  
 starch nanoparticle chemical 
modiﬁ  cation,    184–185  
  functional development,    
194–195    
  synthetic polymer matrices,    
298–299    
  High amylose maize starch/MMT 
nanocomposites (HAMNC),    231–232  
 Hilum, starch structure,    155–156   Horniﬁ  cation process, current research 
issues,    8  
 Hydrochloric acid: 
  cellulose nanocomposites, TEMPO 
oxidation,    373–374  
 cellulose whiskers acid 
hydrolysis,    323–324    
  Hydrogels: 
  chitosan,    43–44  
  drug delivery systems,    46–47   wound healing,    45–46    
  starch-based nanosphere 
composites,    190–191      Hydrogen bonding: 
  cellulose nanocomposite 
solubility,    394–398  
 chitin nanoﬁ  ber processing,    18–19  
 nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose 
processing,    316–319  
 plant cellulose,    510–511   starch nanocrystal reinforcement 
mechanisms,    285    
  Hydrolysis kinetics, starch 
nanocrystals,    162–164  
  chemical modiﬁ  cation,    183–189    
  Hydroxyapatite (HA): 
  bacterial cellulose 
nanocomposites,    352–354  
 chitosan-based nanocomposites: 
  atomic force microscopic 
analysis,    94–97  
 mechanical properties,    113–115   SEM/TEM analysis,    91–93   tissue engineering,    44–45    
  starch nanocomposites, biomedical 
applications,    302–304    
  Hydroxyethylcellulose (HEC), cellulose 
nanocomposites surface modiﬁ  cation,    371  
 Hydroxyethyl starch: 
  esteriﬁ  cation,    530–531  
 nanomicelle formation,    190–191    
  Hydroxyl group reactions, starch 
nanocrystal polymer conjugation,    187–188  
 Hydroxypropyl alkaline lignin (HPL), 
protein/lignin bionanocomposites,    577–579  
 Hydroxypropylcellulose (HPC), 
microﬁ  brillated cellulose 
derivatization,    474–475    
  Impact strength:    
  cellulose nanocomposites,    447–449   thermoset nanocomposites,    
583–584    
  Industrial technology, bacterial cellulose 
applications,    355–357  
 Initiator systems, graft copolymerization, 
chitosan,    36–38  
 Innventia, nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose 
development,    475–476  Green composites ( cont’d )INDEX   667
 Inorganic compounds: 
  chitin-based nanocomposites,    69–70   ﬁ ller materials,    265–267  
  nanocrystalline cellulose  vs.,     
493–494    
  starch nanocomposite reinforcements,    
268–274    
   In situ   intercalative polymerization: 
  bacterial cellulose,    352   bionanocomposite barrier 
properties,    556–560  
 cellulose nanocomposites,    381–382   starch-based nanocomposites,    
219–221  
  nanosilicate layer/polycaprolactone 
composites,    220–221  
 technology,    228     
  Insulin protein nanoﬁ  ber: 
  cross- β  sheet structure,    600–602  
 formation,    604–606    
  Intercalated composites: 
  chitosan-clay 
nanocomposites,    115–118  
 nanoﬁ  ller structure, fracture 
morphologies,    238–242    
  Internal components,    154   International Organization for 
Standarization (ISO), nanocellulosic/microcellulosic product comparisons,    464–465  
 Interpenetrating networks (IPNs), 
chitosan hydrogels,    43–44  
  In vitro   destablilization, protein 
nanoﬁ  ber formation,    
601–602  
  In vivo   destablilization, protein 
nanoﬁ  ber formation,    601–602  
  In vivo   lignin, characteristics,    567  
 Ionic liquids: 
  cellulose nanocomposite 
solubility,    395–398  
 chitin nanoﬁ  ber regeneration,    
144–145    
  Iron oxide starch nanoparticles, 
biomedical applications,    303–304  
 Isocyanate, chitin nanowhisker acid 
hydrolysis,    138–139   Isodimensional particles: 
  matrix ﬁ  llers,    264–268  
 protein nanocomposites,    620    
  Isolation process, bacterial cellulose 
production,    341–342  
 Isothermal crystallization, poly(lactic 
acid) nanocomposites,    420–422    
  Jumbo squid beak, chitin 
nanocomposites,    60–61   
  Kraft lignins (KRL),    567     
  starch-lignin nanocomposites,    579–580   thermoplastic composites,    572–581   thermoset nanocomposites,    582–584    
  Kraus model, starch nanocrystal 
reinforcement mechanisms,    285    
  Lactic acid (LA):    
  cellulose nanocomposite oligomers 
(g-MC): 
  dynamic mechanical thermal 
analysis,    450–454  
 stress-strain curves,    441–447    
  chitosan hydrogels,    43–44    
  Laminates, permeation through,    546   Lauritzen-Hoffman secondary nucleation 
theory, thermoplastic polymers,    414–415  
 Layered silicates.  See also   Silicates 
  matrix ﬁ  llers,    264–268  
 protein-based nanocomposites: 
  basic properties,    621–622   dry processing,    624   wet processing,    622–623    
  protein nanocomposites,    621–622  
  barrier property 
modulation,    636–641  
 mechanical properties,    624–632    
  starch-based nanocomposites,    229–232    
  Length-to-diameter (L/d), 
bionanocomposites,    439–440  
 Lens crystallin proteins, nanoﬁ  ber 
preparation and 
processing,    603–605  
 Level-off degree of polymerization 
(LODP), cellulose whiskers,    326  668  INDEX
 Lignin compounds: 
  bionanocomposites,    569–572  
  research background,    565    
  composite/blend preparation,    568–569   future research issues,    588   nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose,    320–321  
 nanoparticle processing,    567–568   polymer nanocomposites,    584–588   structure and properties,    566–567   thermoplastic composites,    572–581  
  furfuryl alcohol/lignin,    576   lignin/rubber composites,    580–581   lignin/starch composites,    579–580   polycaprolactone/lignin,    575–576   poly(ethylene oxide)/organosolv 
lignin,    574–575  
 protein/lignin bionanocomposites,    
576–579    
  thermoset composites,    581–584    
  Lintnerized starch nanocrystals,    162–164   Lint reduction additives, microﬁ  brillated 
cellulose,    483–484  
 Liquid crystal polymers: 
  chitin nanocomposites,    57   chitin nanowhiskers,    136–137    
  Lithium chloride/ N,N -dimethylacetamide 
(LiCl/DMAc): 
  bacterial cellulose,    356   cellulose nanocomposites,    399   chitin nanoﬁ  ber regeneration,    142–145  
 lignin sources,    587–588    
  Loss modulus, cellulose nanocomposites, 
dynamic mechanical thermal analysis,    450–454    
  Magnesium aluminum silicate (MAS), 
chitin nanocomposites, DSC analysis,    97–99  
  Maier and Göritz model, starch 
nanocrystal reinforcement mechanisms,    285  
 Maize.  See  Corn starch 
 Maleic anhydride: 
  lignin-based thermoplastic composites, 
polycaprolactone/lignin,    575–576  
 thermoplastic cellulose composites, 
grafted polypropylene (MAPP),    402–403      Maltese cross, starch structure,    155–156  
 Mater-Bi, BioTRED patented starch 
nanoparticle,    160–161  
 Matrix structure: 
  bionanocomposite matrix/ﬁ  ller 
interactions,    439–440  
 cellulose nanocomposites, ﬂ  exural and 
impact properties,    448–449  
 chitin nanoﬁ  bers,    5–9  
  crab shell chitin matrix, chemical 
treatment,    14    
  crystalline morphology,    242–245   ﬁ ller-matrix interface 
compatibilization, starch nanoparticles,    192–194  
 lignin-based thermoplastic 
composites,    574–581  
 polysaccharide starch 
nanocrystals,    236–237  
 protein-based nanocomposites,    
619–619  
 starch nanocomposites: 
  mechanical properties,    262–278  
  aging,    264   amylose/amylopectin ratio,    
262–263  
 ﬁ llers,    264–268  
 inorganic reinforcements,   
 268–274  
 organic reinforcements,    274–278   plasticization,    263    
  natural polymer matrices,    295–297   synthetic polymer matrices,    297–299     
  Mechanical properties: 
  bacterial cellulose,    350–351   cellulose nanocomposites,    437–455  
  bionanocomposite 
performance,    438–454  
 dynamic mechanical thermal 
analysis,    450–454  
 ﬂ exural/impact properties,    447–449  
 tensile strength,    440–447   thermomechanical 
properties,    449–454    
  cellulose whiskers,    325–326   chitin/chitosan 
nanocomposites,    111–127  
  chitosan-carbon nanotubes,    118–122   chitosan-clay,    115–118  INDEX   669
 chitosan-graphene oxide,    122–124  
 chitosan-hydroxyapatite,    113–115   nanoﬁ  llers, polymer 
nanocomposites,    124–127    
  chitin nanoﬁ  ber nanocomposites,    
24–25  
 chitin nanowhisker acid hydrolysis,    
138–140  
 nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose,    313–316  
 protein-based nanocomposites,    
624–632  
 starch nanocomposites,    261–286  
  chemical modiﬁ  cation,    194–195  
 ﬁ ller properties,    278–286  
  nanocrystal reinforcement 
effects,    278–283  
 nanocrystal surface, chemical 
modiﬁ  cation,    283–284  
 reinforcing mechanisms,    285    
  matrix properties,    262–278  
  aging,    264   amylose/amylopectin 
ratio,    262–263  
 ﬁ llers,    264–268  
 inorganic 
reinforcements,    268–274  
 organic reinforcements,    274–278   plasticization,    263      
  Melting temperature (Tm): 
  chitin nanocomposites, DSC 
analysis,    97–99  
 chitin nanowhisker acid 
hydrolysis,    137  
 thermoplastic polymers,    413–415    
  Melt intercalation technique: 
  protein-based nanocomposites,    624   starch-based nanocomposites,    214–219  
  technology,    228   thermoplastic corn starch-reinforced 
cotton cellulose nanoﬁ  bers,    218–219  
 thermoplastic starch/clay 
hybrids,    215–218     
  Methacrylic acid (MAA), graft 
copolymerization, chitosan,    36–37  
 Methylenediphenyldiisocyanate (MDI), 
starch nanocrystal polymer conjugation,    188–189   Microcrystalline cellulose (MCC): 
  cellulose nanocomposites: 
  ﬂ exural and impact 
properties,    448–449  
 tensile strength,    446–447    
  cellulose whiskers,    312–313  
  acid hydrolysis,    322–324    
  competing nanocellulosic products, 
overview,    461–462  
 dried food reinforcement,    491   limitations of,    472   polyurethane reinforcement 
additives,    492–493  
 powdered cellulose and,    469–471   processing techniques,    399–400   rheology modiﬁ  cation,    489  
 thermoplastic cellulose 
composites,    402–403    
  Microemulsion cross-linking, starch 
nanoparticle preparation,    159–161  
 Microﬁ  brillated cellulose (MFC): 
  applications,    471–475  
  commercial products,    473–474   derivatization,    474–475   lint reduction additives,    483–484   nanofoams,    484–486   poly(lactic) acid reinforcement,    493   polymer reinforcement additives,    
489–493  
 polyurethane reinforcement 
additives,    492–493  
 rubber reinforcement additives,   
 491–492    
  basic properties,    411–413   commercial products,    473–475   derivatization,    474–475   development of,    471–475   nanocrystalline/nanoﬁ  brillated 
cellulose comparisons,    478–480, 483–488  
 nanoﬁ  brillation,    312  
 poly(caprolactone), thermal and 
morphological analysis,    422–424  
 poly(lactic acid) 
nanocomposites,    418–422  
 polymer reinforcement 
additives,    489–493  670  INDEX
 processing techniques,    401  
 research overview,    461–464   starch-based nanocomposites,    207–208   starch nanoparticle 
preparation,    157–161  
 thermosetting composites,    403    
  Microﬂ  uidization: 
  nanocolloid preparation,    182–183   nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose 
treatment,    313–316    
  Microorganisms, bacterial cellulose 
production,    340–341  
 Milled wood lignin (MWL), 
characteristics,    567  
 Mini-emulsion, starch nanoparticle 
preparation,    160  
 Modiﬁ  ed atmosphere packaging 
(MAPA), nanocellulose barrier layers,    487–488  
 Modiﬁ  ed starch nanocomposites: 
  deﬁ ned,    261  
 spectroscopic characterization,    
526–533  
  esteriﬁ  cation,    526–531  
 urethane linkages,    532–533     
  Mollusk, chitin synthesis,    59–60   Montmorillonite (MMT): 
  bionanocomposite barrier properties,   
 550–552  
 chitin nanocomposites, SEM/TEM 
analysis,    86–93  
 chitosan-clay nanocomposites,   
 116–118  
 lignin-based bionanocomposites,   
 571–572  
 protein-based materials: 
  active packaging, controlled delivery 
systems,    642–643  
 barrier property modulation,    
636–641  
 layered silicates,    621–622   mechanical properties,    625–632   safety issues,    645–646    
  starch-based nanocomposites,  in situ   
intercalative polymerization,    219–221  
 starch nanocomposites: 
  inorganic reinforcements,    268–274   layered silicate nanoﬁ  llers,    229–232  
 nanoﬁ  ller surface structure,    
241–242    
  starch nanosilicate layer/PCL 
composites,    220–221  
 starch/poly(vinyl alcohol)/sodium 
montmorillonite nanocomposite,    210–211    
  Montmorillonite-reinforced 
thermoplastic starch composites (MTPSC), matrix structure,    242–245  
 Morphological analysis: 
  bacterial cellulose,    341–342, 346–350   cellulose nanocomposites,    415–426  
  future research issues,    426–428   polycaprolactone/cellulose 
nanocomposites,    422–424  
 poly(ethylene oxide)/cellulose 
nanocomposites,    424–426  
 polyhydroxyalkanoate/cellulose 
nanocomposites,    415–417  
 poly(lactic acid)/cellulose 
nanocomposites,    417–422    
  cellulose whiskers,    325   chitin nanocomposites,    83–96  
  atomic force microscopy,    93–97   optical microscopy,    83–84   scanning electron microscopy and 
transmittance electron microscopy,    84–93    
  nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose,    319–321  
 regenerated starch nanoparticles  vs.  
starch nanocrystals,    173  
 starch nanocomposites,    229–245  
  fracture morphologies,    238–242   matrix crystallinity,    242–243   nanoﬁ  ller distribution,    229–238  
  carbon nanoparticles,    232–234   layered silicates,    229–232   miscellaneous nanoﬁ  llers,   
 237–238  
 polysaccharide nanocrystals,    
234–237    
  retrogradation effects,    243–245     
  Multiscale starch model,    154–156  
  applications,    294–295   cellulose nanocomposites,    309–311   starch-based nanocomposites,    204–205    Microﬁ  brillated cellulose (MFC) ( cont’d )INDEX   671
  Multiwalled carbon nanotubes 
(MWCNTs): 
  bacterial cellulose,    356   cellulose nanocomposite solubility,    
395–398  
 chitin nanocomposites, SEM/TEM 
analysis,    88–93  
 chitosan nanocomposites,    118–122   inorganic ﬁ  llers,    265–267  
 nanoﬁ  ller surface structure,    241–242  
 protein-based nanocomposites: 
  elongated particles,    621   reinforcement properties,    631–632    
  starch nanocomposites,    228  
  carbon nanoparticles,    232–234   glass transition temperature (Tg),   
 245–246  
 reinforcement ﬁ  llers,    272–274  
 retrogradation,    244–245   thermal decomposition,    246–248     
  Mushrooms: 
  bacterial cellulose production,    
340–341  
 chitin nanoﬁ  ber preparation from,    
21–23  
 chitosan extraction, wound healing 
applications,    45–46     
  Nacre, self-assembly process,    59–60  
  Nageli amylodextrin, starch nanocrystal 
acid hydrolysis,    162–164  
 Nanocellulose: 
  applications: 
  barrier layers,    486–488   commercial applications,    482–483   current products,    467–481   dried food reinforcement,    491   poly(lactic) acid reinforcement,    493   polyurethane reinforcement 
additives,    492–493  
 powdered cellulose,    469–471   research background,    461–464   rubber reinforcement 
additives,    491–492    
  chemical modiﬁ  cation,    367–383  
  amidation,    378   cationization,    374   clicking,    378–379   esteriﬁ  cation,    375–376   noncovalent surface modiﬁ  cation,    
369–371  
 polymer grafting,    379–382   silylation,    376–378   TEMPO-mediated oxidation,   
 371–374  
 urethanization,    378    
  commercial development, worldwide 
production,    496–499  
 competing microcellulosic products, 
overview,    461–462  
 formation mechanisms,    401   mechanical properties,    437–455  
  bionanocomposite performance,    
438–454  
 dynamic mechanical thermal 
analysis,    450–454  
 ﬂ exural/impact properties,    447–449  
 tensile strength,    440–447   thermomechanical 
properties,    449–454    
  microcellulosic product 
comparisons,    464–465  
 patents summary,    465–467   redispersement problems,    488–489   structure and properties,    311–312   substrates,    368–369    
  Nanocomposites: 
  chitin nanoﬁ  ber preparations,    24–25  
  acetylation,    28–29    
  lignin-based compounds and 
blends,    568–569  
 protein nanoﬁ  bers,    606  
 spectroscopic characterization,    
509–536, 523–524    
  Nanocrystalline cellulose (NCC): 
  barrier layer packaging,    487–488   Canadian sources,    481–482   cellulose whisker morphology,    325   commercial development,    482–483, 
488–495  
 dried food reinforcements,    491   early processing techniques,    153   FPInnovations approach,    476–481   inorganic ﬁ  llers  vs.,     493–494  
 microﬁ  brillated/nanoﬁ  brillated 
cellulose comparisons,    478–480, 483–488  
 needles from cotton,    468–469  672  INDEX
 pharmaceutical excipients,    477–481  
 poly(lactic) acid reinforcement,    493   polymer reinforcement additives,   
 489–493  
 polyurethane reinforcement 
additives,    492–493  
 printed electronics,    494–495   redispersion problems,    488–489   research overview,    461–464   rheology-modifying agents,    489   rubber reinforcement 
additives,    491–492  
 spectroscopic characterization,   
 515–518  
 structure and properties,    2–9   TEMPO oxidation,    481   tough nanostructure ﬁ  lm,    483    
  Nano-effect, starch-based 
nanocomposites,    228  
 Nanoﬁ  bers (NFs): 
  biomimetic chitin processing,    64–65   structure and properties,    11–12    
  Nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose (NFC): 
  amidation,    378   applications,    475–476  
  commercial applications,    488–495   nanofoams,    484–486   polymer reinforcement 
additives,    489–493  
 printed electronics,    494–495   tough nanostructure ﬁ  lm,    483    
  basic properties,    411–413   cationization,    374   clicking modiﬁ  cation 
technique,    378–379  
 commercial development,    326–328, 
473, 475–476  
 microﬁ  brillated/nanocrystalline 
cellulose comparisons,    478–480, 483–488  
 morphology and dimensions,    319–321   polymer grafting,    379–382   polymer reinforcement 
additives,    489–493  
 printed electronics,    494–495   redispersion problems,    488–489   research overview,    461–464   silylation,    377–378   structure and properties,    311–312  
 substrates,    369   TEMPO oxidation,    373–374    
  Nanoﬁ  brillation: 
  chitin nanoﬁ  ber, pH effect,    14–15  
 future research issues,    329–330   nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose: 
  commercial development,    326–328   crystallinity,    321–322   degree of polymerization and 
strength,    321  
 mechanical treatments,    313–316   morphology and dimensions,    
319–321  
 nanocellulose,    311–313   pretreatments,    316–319   structure and properties,    309–311   surface chemistry,    322     
  Nanoﬁ  llers: 
  applications,    294–295  
  natural polymer matrices,    295–297    
  chitin/chitosan nanoﬁ  ller, polymer 
nanocomposites,    124–127  
 chitin nanowhisker acid 
hydrolysis,    137–140  
 fracture morphologies,    238–242   starch nanocomposites: 
  distribution factors,    229–238  
  carbon nanoparticles,    232–234   layered silicates,    229–232   miscellaneous 
nanoﬁ  llers,    237–238  
 polysaccharide 
nanocrystals,    234–237    
  glass transition temperature 
(Tg),    245–246  
 miscellaneous compounds,    237–238   properties,    228   synthetic polymer matrices,    297–299     
  Nanofoams,    484–486   Nanogaps, protein nanoﬁ  bers,    607–608  
 Nanomicelle assembly, chemically 
modiﬁ  ed starch 
nanoparticles,    190–191  
 Nanoscaffolds, protein nanoﬁ  bers,    607  
 Nanosilicon dioxide, starch 
nanocomposites,    237–238  
 Nanowhiskers, structure and 
properties,    2–3  Nanocrystalline cellulose (NCC) ( cont’d )INDEX   673
 Nanowires, protein nanoﬁ  bers,    607–608  
 Native starch, deﬁ  ned,    261  
 Natural polymer matrices, starch 
nanocomposites,    295–297  
 Natural rubber (NR) matrix 
nanocomposites: 
  biomimetic chitin processing,    64   chitin nanowhisker acid 
hydrolysis,    138–140  
 dynamic thermal mechanical 
analysis,    99–102  
 ﬁ ller-matrix interface 
compatibilization, starch nanoparticles,    193–194  
 SEM/TEM analysis,    85–93   starch nanocrystal reinforcement 
mechanisms,    285    
  Nernst distribution law, barrier 
permeation,    545–546  
 Networked microﬁ  brils, microﬁ  brillated 
cellulose derivatization,    474–475  
 Nitrogen sources, bacterial cellulose,    
344  
 N-methylmorpholine-N-oxide (NMMO) 
solutions, cellulose nanocomposite solubility,    395–398  
 Noncovalent surface modiﬁ  cation, 
nanocellulose,    369–371  
 Normal starch/MMT nanocomposites 
(NMNC),    231–232  
 Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR): 
  cellulose nanocomposites,    310–311   starch nanoparticles, esteriﬁ  cation,    
528–531     
  Ophthalmic drug release, chitosan drug 
delivery systems,    46–47  
  Optical microscopy (OM): 
  bacterial cellulose,    346–350   chitin nanocomposites,    83–84    
  Organically modiﬁ  ed layered silicate 
(MLS), bionanocomposite barrier properties,    556–560  
 Organic light-emitting diode (OLED), 
cellulose nanoﬁ  bers,    438–439  
 Organic materials: 
  ﬁ llers,    267–268   nancomposite reinforcements,    
274–278    
  Organoclaymontmorillonite (ODA-
MMT), chitosan-clay nanocomposites,    117–118  
 Organosolv lignins (OSL): 
  bionanocomposites,    569–572   characteristics,    567   thermoplastic composites, 
poly(ethylene oxide)/organosolv,    574–581    
  Overall migration limit (OML), protein 
nanocomposites, safety issues,    644–646  
 Oxidation, starch nanocomposites, 
carbon nanoparticles,    232–234  
 Oxygen permeability: 
  bionanocomposite barrier 
properties,    553–560  
 protein-based nanocomposites, barrier 
properties,    632–641    
  Oxygen transmission rate (OTR), 
nanocellulose barrier layers,    486–488    
  Packaging technology:    
  protein-based nanocomposites, barrier 
properties,    632–641  
 starch nanocomposite 
applications,    300–302    
  Papermaking technology, bacterial 
cellulose applications,    355–357  
 Particle size distribution, starch 
nanocolloids, chemical modiﬁ  cation,    191–192  
 Patent summary, nanocellulosic 
products,    465–467  
 Pea hull ﬁ  ber (PHF) cellulose 
nanocrystals, morphological analysis,    235–237  
 Pea starch (PSt) biocomposite ﬁ  lms, 
morphological analysis,    235–237  
 Permeation theory, barrier properties,    
544–546  
 Pharmaceutical excipients, 
nanocrystalline cellulose,    477, 481  674  INDEX
 Phase-separated composites, 
chitosan-clay nanocomposites,    115–118  
 Phenyl isocyanate (PI): 
  chitin whiskers,    85   ﬁ ller-matrix interface 
compatibilization, starch nanoparticles,    193–194  
 starch nanoparticle chemical 
modiﬁ  cation,    184–185, 
283–284    
  Plant cellulose: 
  FT-IR characterization,    510–511   wide-angle x-ray diffraction,    511–513    
  Plasticized starch nanocomposites: 
  cellulose nanocomposites,    207–208   chitin/chitosan nanoﬁ  llers,    125–127  
 glass transition temperature 
(Tg),    245–246  
 hemp-reinforced green 
composite,    212–213  
 layered silicate nanoﬁ  llers,    231–232  
 matrix structure,    263   ramie cellulose nanocrystallites, tensile 
strength,    440–447  
 reinforcement properties,    275–278    
  Plate-like inclusion materials, 
permeation,    546–547  
 Polarized optical microscopy (POM), 
cellulose nanocomposites,    416–417  
 Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) 
(PEDOT)-poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS): 
  chitosan-carbon nanotube 
composites,    120–122  
 protein nanowire/nanogap 
formation,    607–608    
  Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB), 
chitosan-carbon nanotube composites,    120–122  
 Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-
hydroxyvalerate) (PHBV), thermal and mechanical analysis,    416–417  
 Poly(6-[4-(4-methoxyphenylazo)
phenoxy] hexyl methacrylate) (PMMAZO), cellulose nanocomposites,    382   Polyacrylamide (PAM), chitin 
nanocomposites, DSC analysis,    97–99  
 Poly(butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) 
(PBAT) nanocomposites, biodegradable materials,    217–218  
 Poly(butylene succinate) (PBS), 
ﬁ ller-matrix interface 
compatibilization, starch nanoparticles,    193–194  
 Poly(caprolactone) (PCL): 
  biomimetic chitin processing,    63–64   bionanocomposite barrier 
properties,    552–560  
 cellulose nanocomposites: 
  polymer grafting,    381–382   thermal and morphological 
analysis,    422–424    
  chitin nanocomposites, DSC 
analysis,    97–99  
 chitin nanowhisker acid 
hydrolysis,    138–140  
 chitosan-clay nanocomposites,    
117–118  
 lignin-based thermoplastic 
composites,    575–581  
 starch nanocomposites,    231–232  
  esteriﬁ  cation,    528–531  
 spectroscopic analysis,    533–535    
  starch nanocrystal polymer 
conjugation,    187–188  
 starch nanoparticle chemical 
modiﬁ  cation,    284  
 starch nanosilicate layer/PCL 
composites,    220–221  
 waterborne polyurethane, ATR-FT-IR 
characterization,    515–518    
  Polyethylene, lignin-based thermoplastic 
composites,    573–581  
 Polyethyleneglycol (PEG): 
  cellulose nanocomposites, tensile 
strength,    442–447  
 chitosan hydrogels,    43–44   polymer nanocomposites,    515–518    
  Poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether 
(PEGME): 
  modiﬁ  ed starch nanoparticles, 
urethane linkages,    532–533  INDEX   675
 starch nanocrystal polymer 
conjugation,    187–188    
  Poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO): 
  lignin-based thermoplastic 
composites,    574–581  
  Organosolv lignin,    574–581    
  nanocellulose nanocomposites,    
424–426    
  Poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET), 
lignin-based thermoplastic composites,    574–581  
 Poly(glycolic acid) (PGA), chitin 
electrospinning,    147–148  
 Polyhydroxyalkanoate/cellulose 
nanocomposites (PHA/CNF), thermal and morphological analysis,    415–417  
 Polyhydroxybutyrate-co-valerate
(PHBV), bionanocomposite barrier properties,    552–560  
 Poly(lactic acid) (PLA): 
  bacterial cellulose 
nanocomposites,    356  
 barrier properties,    547–550   cellulose nanocomposites,    371  
  barrier layers,    487–488   esteriﬁ  cation,    375–376  
 reinforcement additives,    493   silylation,    377–378   tensile strength,    441–447   thermal and morphological 
analysis,    417–422    
  starch nanocomposites,    231–232  
  food industry applications,    
300–302  
 spectroscopic analysis,    533–535    
  starch nanoparticle chemical 
modiﬁ  cation,    284    
  Polymer chains: 
  bacterial cellulose,    346–350   cellulose nanocomposites,    
393–394  
  poly(lactic acid),    417–422    
  chitin compounds,    56–57   ﬁ ller-matrix interface 
compatibilization, starch nanoparticles,    194  
 micro and nanocellulosic product 
comparisons,    467–469      Polymer grafting: 
  nanocelluloses,    379–382   starch nanocrystals,    185–189  
  “graft from” strategy,    188–189   “graft onto” strategy,    186–188     
  Polymerization ﬁ  lling technique, 
starch-based nanocomposites,  in situ   intercalative 
polymerization,    219–221  
 Polymer nanocomposites: 
  bacterial cellulose,    352–354   barrier properties,    541–544   biodegradable polymer 
classiﬁ  cation,    542–544  
 chitin/chitosan nanoﬁ  llers,    124–125  
 clay nanocomposites,    116–118   fracture morphologies, nanoﬁ  ller 
structure,    238–242  
 layered silicate, melt intercalation 
technique,    214–219  
 lignin sources,    567–568, 585–588   reinforcement additives,    489–493   spectroscopic characterization,    
515–518  
 starch nanocomposites: 
  layered silicate nanoﬁ  llers,    229–232  
 natural polymer matrices,    295–297   synthetic polymer matrices,    297–299    
  starch synthetic structure,    208   thermoplastic polymers, transitions 
and crystallization kinetics,    413–415    
  Polyoleﬁ  ns, lignin-based thermoplastic 
composites,    572–581  
 Polypropylene: 
  lignin-based thermoplastic 
composites,    573–581  
 nanocellulose polymer 
grafting,    379–381  
 thermoplastic cellulose 
composites,    402–403    
  Poly(propylene glycol) monobutyl ether 
(PPGBE), starch nanocrystal polymer conjugation,    187–188  
 Polysaccharide nanoparticles: 
  cellulose/chitin nanocomposites,    621   organic ﬁ  llers,    267–268  
 protein nanocomposites, mechanical 
properties,    628–632  676  INDEX
 starch nanocomposites, nanocrystal 
morphology,    234–237  
 structure and properties,    3–4    
  Polystyrene: 
  bacterial cellulose, XRD 
characterization,    514–515  
 cellulose nanocomposites: 
  dynamic mechanical thermal 
analysis,    450–454  
 tensile strength,    444–447     
  Polytetraﬂ  uoroethylene (PTFE) ﬁ  lter, 
starch nanoparticle preparation,    159–161  
 Poly(tetrahydrofuran) (PTHF): 
  starch nanocrystal polymer 
conjugation,    187–188  
 starch nanoparticle chemical 
modiﬁ  cation,    284    
  Polyurethanes: 
  patented starch nanoparticles,    
160–161  
 reinforcement additives,    492–493   starch nanoparticle chemical 
modiﬁ  cation,    194–195    
  Poly(vinyl acetate) adhesives, 
microﬁ  brillated cellulose,    
475  
 Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA): 
  bacterial cellulose 
nanocomposites,    356  
 biomimetic chitin processing,    63–64   cellulose nanocomposites: 
  dynamic mechanical thermal 
analysis,    452–454  
 tensile strength,    442–447    
  chitin/chitosan nanoﬁ  llers,    124–127  
 chitin nanoﬁ  bers: 
  electrospinning,    147–148   regeneration,    145    
  chitin nanowhisker acid 
hydrolysis,    137–140  
 chitosan nanocomposites: 
  biomedical applications,    44, 46   SEM/TEM analysis,    91–93    
  ﬁ ller-matrix interface 
compatibilization, starch nanoparticles,    193–194  
 FT-IR analysis,    523–524   lignin-based thermoplastic 
composites,    574–581  
 microﬁ  brillated cellulose, 
derivatization,    475  
 nanosilicon dioxide 
nanoﬁ  llers,    237–238  
 protein nanoscaffolds, enzyme 
immobilization,    607  
 starch nanocomposites, food industry 
applications,    300–302  
 starch/poly(vinyl alcohol)/sodium 
montmorillonite nanocomposite,    210–211    
  Potato amylose (PA) solution, starch 
nanocomposites, carbon nanoparticles,    234  
 Potato starch compounds, reinforcement 
properties,    274–278  
 Powdered cellulose, development 
of,    469–471  
 “Power Fiber,”    473–475   Prawn shells.  See also   Crustacean hard 
tissue 
  chitin nanoﬁ  ber processing,    15–17    
  Precipitation, starch 
nanoparticles,    182–183  
 Pretreatment technology, nanoﬁ  brillated 
cellulose processing,    316–319  
 Printed electronics, nanocellulose 
composites,    494–495  
 Proteins: 
  biochemical characteristics,    615–616   chitin nanocomposites,    58   food packaging nanocomposites: 
  barrier properties,    632–641   controlled delivery systems, active 
packaging,    641–643  
 ﬁ ller materials,    619–622  
 matrix properties,    618–619   mechanical properties,    624–632   processing,    622–624   research background,    613–614   safety aspects,    643–646   structural properties,    615–618    
  lignin-based thermoplastic 
composites,    576  
 nanoﬁ  ber formation,    599–602  
  biotechnological 
applications,    602–603  Polysaccharide nanoparticles ( cont’d )INDEX   677
 composite materials,    608  
 enzyme immobilization 
nanoscaffolds,    607  
 future research issues,    608–609   insulin nanoﬁ  bers,    605–606  
 lens crystallin proteins,    603–605   nanowires and nanogaps,    
607–608  
 spectroscopic 
characterization,    606–607    
  structural properties,    615, 617    
  Pullulan, cellulose nanocomposites, 
tensile strength,    445–447  
 Pultrusion, starch-based 
nanocomposites,    208–209  
 Puriﬁ  cation, bacterial cellulose,    345    
  Quaternization, chitosan 
derivatives,    42–43   
  Radiation, graft copolymerization, 
chitosan,    37  
  Ramie cellulose nanocrystallites (RN), 
plasticized starch nanocomposites, tensile strength,    440–447  
 Reactive extrusion (REx), starch 
nanoparticle preparation,    157–161  
 Rectorite, chitin nanocomposites, SEM/
TEM analysis,    86–93  
 Redispersion problems, 
nanocellulose,    488–489  
 Regeneration from solution: 
  self-assembled chitin 
nanoﬁ  bers,    142–145  
  starch nanocrystals  vs.,     171–173    
  starch nanocrystals, co-crystallization 
and chemical modiﬁ  cation,    183–189  
 starch nanoparticles,    182–183    
  Reinforcement compounds: 
  organic materials,    274–278   polymer reinforcement 
additives,    489–493  
 protein-based 
nanocomposites,    631–632  
 starch nanocomposites,    268–274  
  ﬁ ller materials,    278–285       Relative humidity (RH): 
  bionanocomposite barrier 
properties,    553–554  
 protein-based nanocomposites, barrier 
properties,    632–641    
  Renewable nanomaterials, barrier 
properties,    541–544  
 Resin ﬁ  lm infusion (RFI), starch-based 
nanocomposites,    208–209  
 Resin transfer molding (RTM), starch-
based nanocomposites,    208–209  
 Respiratory properties, protein-based 
nanocomposites, food packaging,    633–641  
 Retrogradation, starch 
crystallinity,    243–245  
 Rheology modiﬁ  cation, nanocrystalline 
cellulose,    489  
 Ring-opening polymerization (ROP), 
starch nanocrystal polymer conjugation,    188–189  
 Rosemary essential oil, chitosan-clay 
nanocomposites,    116–118  
 Rubber: 
  lignin-rubber composites,    580–581   nanocellulose composites, reinforcement 
additives,    491–492     
  Safety issues, protein-based 
nanocomposites,    643–646  
  Sarkanda grass, lignin 
nanocomposites,    568  
 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM): 
  bacterial cellulose,    346–350   chitin nanocomposites,    84–93   microﬁ  brillated cellulose,    401  
 starch nanocomposites: 
  carbon nanoparticles,    233–234   MWCNT reinforcement 
ﬁ llers,    272–274     
  Scanning transmission electron 
microscopy (STEM), starch nanocrystal morphology,    169  
 “Second-generation” starch 
nanocrystals,    168  
 Self-assembled nanocomposites: 
  chitin nanoﬁ  bers, regeneration from 
solutions,    142–145  
 protein nanoﬁ  bers,    602–603    678  INDEX
  Semicontinuous processing, bacterial 
cellulose production,    343–344  
 Shaking cultivation, bacterial cellulose 
production,    343  
 Shrimp shells.  See  Crustacean hard tissue 
 Silicates.  See also   Layered silicates 
  chitin nanocomposites, SEM/TEM 
analysis,    86–93  
 chitosan-clay nanocomposites,    
115–118  
 inorganic ﬁ  llers,    265–267  
 polymer layered silicate 
nanocomposites: 
  barrier properties,    548–550, 556–560   melt intercalation technique,    
214–219    
  protein nanocomposites: 
  isodimensional particles,    620   mechanical properties,    628–632    
  starch-based nanocomposites,    
206–207, 228  
  inorganic reinforcements,    268–274   layered silicate nanoﬁ  llers,    229–232     
  Silicon dioxide nanoﬁ  ller, fracture 
morphology,    239–242  
 Silk ﬁ  broin, thermal analysis, differential 
scanning calorimetry,    98–99  
 Silylation, cellulose 
nanocomposites,    376–378  
 Simulated body ﬂ  uid (SBF), chitin 
nanocomposites,    68  
 Single-walled carbon nanotubes 
(SWCNTs): 
  elongated particles,    621   inorganic ﬁ  llers,    265–267  
 mechanical properties,    118–122   starch nanocomposites, carbon 
nanoparticles,    232–234    
  Small angle neutron scattering (SANS), 
nanocellulose noncovalent surface modiﬁ  cation,    369–371  
 Small molecule conjugation, starch 
nanocrystals,    184–189  
 Smectite clays: 
  inorganic ﬁ  llers,    265–267  
 starch-based nanocomposites,    206    
  Sodium hydroxide, cellulose 
nanocomposite solubility,    397–398   Sodium lignosulfonate (LSS), protein/
lignin bionanocomposites,    577–579  
 Sodium montmorillonite: 
  chitosan-clay nanocomposites,    
117–118  
 food industry applications,    300–302   starch/poly(vinyl alcohol)/
sodium montmorillonite nanocomposite,    210–211    
  Sodium trimetaphosphate (STMP): 
  cross-linked starch nanoparticles,    191   starch nanoparticle preparation,    160    
  Sol-gel synthesis, starch-based 
nanocomposites,    228  
 Solubility, cellulose 
nanocomposites,    394–398  
 Solution-based regeneration, chitin 
nanoﬁ  bers,    142–145  
 Solution casting (intercalation): 
  chitin nanowhisker acid 
hydrolysis,    137–138  
 protein-based 
nanocomposites,    622–623  
 starch-based nanocomposites,    
209–214  
  ﬂ ax cellulose nanocomposites,    
211–212  
 glycerol plasticized pea starch/
nano-ZnO composites,    210  
 green hemp nanocrystal reinforced 
composites,    212–213  
 starch/poly(vinyl alcohol)/sodium 
montmorillonite,    210–211  
 technology,    228   wheat cellulose nanoﬁ  bers,    213–214     
  Soy protein isolates (SPIs): 
  barrier properties,    557–560   chitin nanowhisker acid 
hydrolysis,    139–140  
 ﬁ ller-matrix interface 
compatibilization, starch nanoparticles,    192–194  
 protein-based nanocomposites,    
618–619  
  barrier property modulation,    
637–641  
 dry processing,    624   mechanical properties,    628–632    INDEX   679
  protein/lignin bionanocomposites,    
577–579    
  Speciﬁ  c migration limit (SML), protein 
nanocomposites, safety issues,    644–646  
 Spectroscopic analysis: 
  bacterial cellulose,    513–515   cellulose nanocomposites,    510, 
515–518  
 chitin nanoparticles,    518–521   chitosan nanoparticles,    521–523   modiﬁ  ed starch nanocomposites,    
526–533  
  esteriﬁ  cation,    526–531  
 urethane linkages,    532–533    
  nanocomposites,    509–536, 523–524   plant cellulose,    510–513   starch nanocomposites,    524–526   starch nanoparticles,    533–535    
  Squid pen  β -chitin: 
  mechanical processing,    148–149   TEMPO-mediated nanoﬁ  bers,    
141–142    
  Stannous octoate (Sn(Oct) 
2 ), cellulose 
nanocomposites,    381–382  
 Starch/cellulose acetate (SCA), 
biomedical applications,    302–304  
 Starch/ethylene vinyl alcohol (SEVA-C), 
biomedical applications,    302–304  
 Starch nanocolloids, chemical 
modiﬁ  cation,    191–192  
 Starch nanocomposites: 
  applications,    299–304  
  agricultural applications,    304   biomedical applications,    302–304   food industry,    300–302    
  bacterial cellulose,    354   basic properties,    206–208   cellulose nanocomposites,    207–208   as ﬁ ller,    278–285  
 future research issues,    248–249   lignin-based composites,    579–580   manufacturing techniques,    208–209   mechanical properties,    261–286  
  ﬁ ller properties,    278–286  
  nanocrystal reinforcement 
effects,    278–283   nanocrystal surface, chemical 
modiﬁ  cation,    283–284  
 reinforcing mechanisms,    285    
  matrix properties,    262–278  
  aging,    264   amylose/amylopectin ratio,    
262–263  
 ﬁ llers,    264–268  
 inorganic reinforcements,   
 268–274  
 organic reinforcements,    274–278   plasticization,    263     
  melt intercalation technique,    214–219  
  thermoplastic corn starch-reinforced 
cotton cellulose nanoﬁ  bers,    
218–219  
 thermoplastic starch/clay hybrids,    
215–218    
  morphological analysis,    229–245  
  fracture morphologies,    238–242   matrix crystallinity,    242–243   nanoﬁ  ller distribution,    229–238  
  carbon nanoparticles,    232–234   layered silicates,    229–232   miscellaneous nanoﬁ  llers,   
 237–238  
 polysaccharide nanocrystals,    
234–237    
  retrogradation effects,    243–245    
  research background,    203–205    in situ   intercalative polymerization,    
219–221  
  nanosilicate layer/polycaprolactone 
composites,    220–221    
  solution casting,    209–214  
  ﬂ ax cellulose nanocomposites,    
211–212  
 glycerol plasticized pea starch/
nano-ZnO composites,    210  
 green hemp nanocrystal reinforced 
composites,    212–213  
 starch/poly(vinyl alcohol)/sodium 
montmorillonite,    210–211  
 wheat cellulose nanoﬁ  bers,    213–214    
  spectroscopic analysis,    524–526   structural properties,    227–228   synthetic polymer-based 
nanocomposites,    208  
 thermal behavior,    245–248  680  INDEX
  decomposition,    246–248  
 glass transition temperature,    
245–246     
  Starch nanocrystals,    161–171  
  acid hydrolysis kinetics,    162–164   chemical modiﬁ  cation,    183–189  
  mechanical effects,    283–284   polymer grafting,    185–189    
  as ﬁ ller,    278–285  
 morphology,    168–169   organic ﬁ  llers,    267–268  
 preparation protocol,    164–168   protein-based nanocomposites,    622   protein nanocomposites, mechanical 
properties,    628–632  
 regenerated starch nanoparticles 
and,    171–173  
 small molecule conjugation,    184–189   spectroscopic analysis,    524–526   starch sources,    170–171    
  Starch nanoparticles (SNP): 
  applications,    293–299  
  natural polymer matrices,    295–297   research background,    293–295   synthetic polymer matrices,    
297–299    
  chemical modiﬁ  cation,    181–196  
  applications,    192–195   cross-linked SNP ,    191   future research issues,    195–196   nanomicelle assembly,    190–191   starch derivatives,    189–190    
  composition,    154   crystalline type,    156–157   current research issues,    5–9   multiscale structure,    154–156   patented nanoparticles,    160–161   preparation techniques,    153, 157–161, 
157–174, 181–183  
 regeneration, starch nanocrystals 
 vs.,     171–173  
 spectroscopic analysis,    533–535   structure and properties,    153–157    
  Starch/poly(vinyl alcohol)/
sodium montmorillonite nanocomposite,    210–211  
 Static cultures, bacterial cellulose 
production,    342–344   Stearate-modiﬁ  ed starch nanocrystals, 
esteriﬁ  cation,    529–531  
 Storage modulus: 
  cellulose nanocomposites, dynamic 
mechanical thermal analysis,    450–454  
 chitin/chitosan nanoﬁ  llers,    124–127  
 chitosan-carbon nanotube composites,    
121–122    
  Strain to failure, cellulose nanoﬁ  bers,    
438–439  
 Strength testing, nanoﬁ  brillated 
cellulose,    321  
 Styrene butadiene rubber (SBR), 
lignin-rubber composites,    581  
 Substrates, nanocellulose,    368–369   Succinic acid hydride, chitin nanowhisker 
acid hydrolysis,    138–139  
 Sulfuric acid, cellulose whiskers acid 
hydrolysis,    323–324  
 Supercritical solvent impregnation (SSI), 
chitosan drug delivery systems,    46–47  
 Supermicroﬁ  brillated cellulose (SMFC), 
development of,    472–475  
 Surface chemistry: 
  barrier performance,    560–562   nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose,    322  
 nanoﬁ  ller fracture morphology,   
 241–242  
 starch content,    154   starch nanocomposites, layered silicate 
nanoﬁ  llers,    230–232    
  Synthetic polymer matrices, starch 
nanoﬁ  llers,    297–299    
  Targeted modiﬁ  cation, starch 
nanoparticles,    194–195  
  “Technical lignin s,”    567  
 Tensile strength (TS): 
  cellulose nanocomposites,    440–447   cellulose whiskers,    325–326   chitin nanocomposites,    99–102   chitosan-carbon nanotube composites,    
120–122  
 chitosan-clay 
nanocomposites,    116–118  
 chitosan-graphene oxide 
nanocomposites,    123–124  Starch nanocomposites ( cont’d )INDEX   681
 nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose,    321  
 protein-based nanocomposites,   
 625–632  
 starch-based nanocomposites: 
  cellulose nanocomposites,    207–208   ﬁ ller materials,    279–285  
 reinforcements,    268–274     
  Terminal complexes (TCs), nanocellulose 
substrates,    368–369  
 Tetraethoxysillane (TEOS), bacterial 
cellulose processing,    400–401  
 Tetra(ethylene) glycol dimethyl ether 
(TEGDME), nanocellulose nanocomposites,    425–426  
 Tetraﬂ  uoroethanol (TFE), lens crystallin 
nanoﬁ  ber preparation and 
processing,    604–605  
 Tetrahydrofuran (THF) solution, 
nanomicelle formation,    190–191  
 Tetra-methoxy silane, nanocrystalline 
cellulose ﬁ  llers,    494  
 2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxy 
radical (TEMPO) oxidation: 
  cellulose nanocomposites: 
  dynamic mechanical thermal 
analysis,    450–454  
 tensile strength,    444–447    
  chitin nanoﬁ  bers,    13, 140–142  
  spectroscopic analysis,    518–519    
  micro and nanocellulosic product 
comparisons,    467–469  
 nanocellulose modiﬁ  cation,    371–374  
 nanocrystalline cellulose,    481   nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose 
treatment,    317–319    
  Textile industry, bacterial cellulose 
applications,    355–357  
 Thermal analysis: 
  bacterial cellulose,    351   cellulose nanoﬁ  bers,    415–426  
  future research issues,    426–428   mechanical properties,    449–454   polycaprolactone/cellulose 
nanocomposites,    422–424  
 poly(ethylene oxide)/cellulose 
nanocomposites,    424–426  
 polyhydroxyalkanoate/cellulose 
nanocomposites,    415–417   poly(lactic acid)/cellulose 
nanocomposites,    417–422    
  chitin nanocomposites,    97–105  
  differential scanning calorimetry,    
97–99  
 dynamic thermal mechanical 
analysis,    99–102  
 thermogravimetric analysis,    102–104   thermomechanical analysis,    104    
  starch nanocomposites,    245–248  
  decomposition,    246–248   glass transition temperature,    
245–246    
  starch nanocrystals,    170    
  Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA): 
  bacterial cellulose,    351   cellulose nanoﬁ  bers, mechanical 
properties,    450–454  
 chitin nanocomposites,    102–104   lignin-based bionanocomposites,    
571–572    
  Thermomechanical analysis (TMA), 
chitin nanocomposites,    104  
 Thermoplastic composites: 
  cellulose nanocomposites,    402–403   lignin compounds,    572–581  
  furfuryl alcohol/lignin,    576   lignin/rubber composites,    580–581   lignin/starch composites,    579–580   polycaprolactone/lignin,    575–576   poly(ethylene oxide)/organosolv 
lignin,    574–575  
 protein/lignin bionanocomposites,   
 576–579    
  protein-based nanocomposites, dry 
processing,    624  
 thermoplastic starch (TPS) 
nanocomposites: 
  dynamic mechanical thermal 
analysis,    452–454  
 ﬁ ller materials,    279–285  
 food industry applications,    301–302   glass transition temperature 
shift,    245–247  
 matrix structure,    242–245   nanoclay ﬁ  llers,    231–232  
 poly(butylene adipate-co-
terephthalate) (PBAT) nanocomposites,    217–218  682  INDEX
 retrogradation,    244–245  
 starch/clay hybrids,    215–216   starch/zein blends,    216–217   tensile strength,    441–447   wheat straw cellulose-reinforced 
nanoﬁ  bers,    213–214     
  Thermoset composites: 
  cellulose composites,    403   lignin compounds,    581–584    
  Thickness properties, chitin nanoﬁ  ber 
acetylation,    27–28  
 Thio-containing chitosan, structure and 
properties,    39–40  
 Thioﬂ  avin T (ThT), protein nanoﬁ  ber 
characterization,    606–607  
 Three-dimensional networks, chitosan 
hydrogels,    43–44  
 Three-points bending test, lignin-based 
bionanocomposites,    571–572  
 Time-lag value, permeation 
theory,    545–546  
 Tire biopolymers: 
  patented starch 
nanoparticles,    160–161  
 starch nanoﬁ  llers, natural polymer 
matrices,    295–297    
  Tissue engineering: 
  bacterial cellulose,    352–354   chitin nanocomposites,    67–68   chitosan compounds,    44–45    
  Titanium dioxide nanoparticles, protein 
nanocomposites,    620  
  active packaging, controlled delivery 
systems,    643  
 mechanical properties,    628–632    
  Titanium-poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), 
cellulose nanocomposite solubility,    397–398  
 2,4-Toluene diisocyanate (2,4-TDI), 
starch nanocrystal polymer conjugation,    186–188  
 Tough nanostructure ﬁ  lm, 
nanocrystalline cellulose,    483  
 Transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM): 
  cellulose whiskers,    312–313, 322–324   chitin nanocomposites,    84–93   chitin nanoﬁ  ber processing,    148–149   chitin nanowhisker acid 
hydrolysis,    133–134  
 insulin protein nanoﬁ  ber,    
600–602  
 nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose,    319–321  
 protein nanoﬁ  ber 
characterization,    606–607  
 starch nanocomposites: 
  MWCNT reinforcement 
ﬁ llers,    272–274  
 nanoﬁ  llers,    230–232    
  starch nanocrystal 
morphology,    168–169    
  Transport process, barrier 
permeation,    544–546  
 Tricyclodecanedimethanoldimethacrylate 
(DCP),    24–25  
 N,N,N-Trimethyl chitosan 
chloride,    42–43  
 Tri-polyphosphate (TPP), chitosan 
nanoparticles,    521–522  
 Tubeworm  β -chitin, TEMPO-mediated 
nanoﬁ  bers,    141–142  
 Tumor-targeted delivery systems: 
  starch nanoparticle chemical 
modiﬁ  cation,    195  
 starch nanoparticles,    303–304    
  Tunicin whiskers: 
  acid hydrolysis,    322–324   reinforcement properties,    
275–278     
  Ultimate tensile strength (UTS):    
  chitosan-clay 
nanocomposites,    116–118  
 chitosan-hydroxyapatite 
nanocomposites,    114–115    
  Ultrasonic techniques, chitin nanoﬁ  ber 
processing,    148–149  
 Ultra Turrax centrifugation, 
nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose 
treatment,    319  
 Ultraviolet-shielding materials: 
  bacterial cellulose,    339–340   starch nanocomposites,    228   titanium dioxide nanoparticles,    620    
  Unzipped multiwalled carbon nanotube 
oxides (UMCNOs), chitosan nanocomposites,    120–122  Thermoplastic composites (
cont’d )INDEX   683
 Urethanization: 
  cellulose nanocomposites,    378   modiﬁ  ed starch nanocomposites, 
spectroscopic analysis,    532–533    
  Uridinediphosphate glucose (UDP-
glucose), bacterial cellulose,    346–350    
  Vacuum-assisted resin transfer molding 
(VARTM), starch-based nanocomposites,    208–209  
  van der Waals interactions, chitosan-
graphene oxide nanocomposites,    123–124  
 Vicat softening temperature, lignin-based 
thermoplastic composites,    573–581    
  Waring blender, nanoﬁ  brillated cellulose 
treatment,    315–316  
  Water absorption kinetics: 
  barrier performance,    560–562   protein-based materials, barrier 
property modulation,    636–641    
  Waterborne polyurethane (WPU): 
  ATR-FT-IR characterization,    515–518   chitin whiskers, thermogravimetric 
analysis,    102–104  
 starch nanocomposite ﬁ  ller,    278–285  
  spectroscopic analysis,    533–535    
  starch nanoﬁ  llers,    297–299    
  Water vapor permeability (WVP): 
  bionanocomposite barrier 
properties,    552–560  
 protein-based materials, barrier 
property modulation,    636–641    
  Water vapor transmission rate (WVTR), 
nanocellulose barrier layers,    486–488  
 Waxy maize starch/MMT 
nanocomposites (WMNC),    231–232  
 Wet lay-up processing: 
  protein-based 
nanocomposites,    622–623  
 starch-based nanocomposites,    208–209    
  Wheat gluten, protein-based 
nanocomposites,    619–620  
  dry processing,    624      Wheat straw nanoﬁ  bers: 
  cellulose nanocomposites, dynamic 
mechanical thermal analysis,    452–454  
 cellulose-reinforced nanoﬁ  bers, 
thermoplastic starch nanocomposites,    213–214  
 cellulose whiskers acid hydrolysis,    
324  
 lignin sources,    568   starch-based nanocomposites, cellulose 
nanocomposites,    207–208  
 tensile strength,    441–447    
  Whey proteins, nanocomposites: 
  basic properties,    618   mechanical properties,    628–632    
  Wide-angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD): 
  chitin nanoparticles,    520–521   chitin nanowhiskers,    523–524   plant cellulose,    511–513   starch nanocomposite 
retrogradation,    244–245    
   w/o  emulsion crosslinking, starch 
nanoparticle preparation,    159–161  
 Wood cellulose nanoﬁ  bers: 
  dynamic mechanical thermal 
analysis,    450–454  
 lignin characteristics,    565–567   micro and nanocellulosic product 
comparisons,    467–469  
 structure and properties,    11–12    
  Wound healing, chitosan 
compounds,    45–46    
  X-ray diffraction (XRD):    
  bacterial cellulose,    346–350, 
514–515  
 chitin nanoﬁ  ber processing,    148–149  
 chitin nanowhisker acid 
hydrolysis,    136–137  
 chitosan nanoparticles,    522–523   protein/lignin 
bionanocomposites,    577–579  
 starch crystallinity,    156–157  
  matrix structure,    242–245    
  starch nanocrystals,    169–170   starch nanoparticles,    525–526, 533–535  
  estriﬁ  catoin,    526–531      684  INDEX
  Young ’ s modulus:    
  bacterial cellulose,    350–351   cellulose nanocomposites,    441–447   cellulose whiskers,    325–326   chitin nanoﬁ  ber 
nanocomposites,    24–25  
 chitosan-carbon nanotube 
nanocomposites,    118–122  
 chitosan-graphene oxide 
nanocomposites,    123–124  
 chitosan-hydroxyapatite 
nanocomposites,    114–115  
 protein-based 
nanocomposites,    625–632   starch-based nanocomposites: 
  ﬁ ller materials,    279–285  
 reinforcements,    268–274      
  Zein blends:    
  protein-based nanocomposites,    619   protein/lignin 
bionanocomposites,    576–579  
 thermoplastic starch/zein 
blends,    216–217    
  Zinc oxide particles: 
  nanoﬁ  ller surface structure,    
241–242  
 starch nanoparticle formation,    210      Biopolymer Nanocomposites: Processing, Properties, and Applications , First Edition. Edited by 
Alain Dufresne, Sabu Thomas, and Laly A. Pothan.© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Figure 2.11 Transparent thin (60 μm) DCP ﬁ  lm reinforced with CNFs.  
Figure 5.1 Representative photographic (top panel) and corresponding optical micro-
scopic (bottom panel; magniﬁ  cation 200 ×) images of (a) neat alginate yarns, (b) alginate 
nanocomposite yarns containing 0.6% w/w of chitosan whiskers, and (c) neat chitosan yarns, after they had been stained with 0.01% w/v Amido Black 10B aqueous solution for 12 hours [4].Figure 5.12 Atomic force microscope images in tapping mode illustrating multilevel 
structure in ChiHAP50, PgAHAP50, and ChiPgAHAP50 nanocomposites. Images are illustrative of the multilevel structure and are not to scale [77]. 
Crystalline chitin nanofibril
Protein layerChitin-protein fiber
2 ~ 5 nm50 ~ 300 nm⎨⎩⎧
Figure 7.2 Presence of native chitin in crustacean shells. 
Figure 10.1 Starch multiscale structure: (a) starch granules from normal maize 
(30 μm), (b) amorphous and semicrystalline growth rings (120–500 nm), (c) amorphous 
and crystalline lamellae (9 nm), magniﬁ  ed details of the semicrystalline growth ring, 
(d) blocklets (20–50 nm) constituting a unit of the growth rings, (e) amylopectin double helices forming the crystalline lamellae of the blocklets, (f) nanocrystals: other repre-sentation of the crystalline lamellae called starch nanocrystals when separated by acid hydrolysis, (g) amylopectin’s molecular structure, and (h) amylose’s molecular struc-ture (0.1–1 nm). Reprinted with permission from Reference [29]. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)100 nm123
123
123X 1 .000 um/div
Z 90.000 nm/div
Rms (Rg)
Ra
Rmax10.500 nm
8.068 nm
81 .306 nm
X 1 .000 um/div
Z 45.000 nm/div
Rms (Rg)
Ra
Rmax10.082 nm
7 .330 nm
104.61 nmX 1 .000 um/div
Z 100.000 nm/div
Rms (Rg)
Ra
Rmax17 .926 nm
14.009 nm
138.60 nm
Figure 11.2 TEM image of graphene oxide (GO) powder (a); AFM images of glycerol 
plasticized pea starch (GPS) (b), and the GPS/GO nanocomposite ﬁ  lms containing 3.0 
wt% (c), and 5.0 wt% (d) GO. Reprinted with permission from Reference [27].
Figure 13.4 Toast packaged with a biodegradable ﬁ  lm based on cassava starch for-
mulated with glycerol, sucrose, and inverted sugar as plasticizers. Reprinted with per-mission from Reference [27]. Figure 14.4 NFC ﬁ  lm and 0.4% consistency NFC gel produced at the Paper and Fiber 
Research Institute (PFI), Trondheim, Norway, being handled by Kristin Syverud (left) and Ingebjorg Leirset (right), respectively. The photograph was taken by Oddbjørn Svarlien and kindly supplied by Kristin Syverud. 
Figure 16.4 Aqueous 0.53% (w/v) suspensions of cellulose nanocrystals observed 
between crossed polarizers after production by HCl-catalyzed hydrolysis (left), and after their oxidation via TEMPO-mediated reactions (right) (taken from Reference [26]). = Thiol = Alkene = Functional group
(a)
(b)hv
Click“”
Click“””Route 1
Route 2
Route 3Ene-functionalized
cellulose film
MFC-OH
in
EtOH/H2OOR
ORRO Si
OR
ORRO Si
OR
ORRO SiOR
ORRO Sior +1) Hydrolysis &
     condensation
2) Filtration
3) DryingFunctionalized cellulose surfaces
through thiol-ene  click “  chemistry
Thiol-functionalized
cellulose filmhv
Click“”hv
+ +OHOHOHOHOHOH
Cellulose filmSol-Gel
EtOH/H2O
Figure 16.7 Schematic illustration of NFC-based ﬁ  lms surface functionalization using 
click chemistry. (a) Synthesis of ene- and thiol-functionalized ﬁ  lms with alkoxysilane 
molecules, and their subsequent “click” coupling reactions with thiol- (Route 1) and ene- (Route 2) molecules, respectively. (b) Synthesis of a functional alkoxysilane mol-ecule using thiol-ene “click” chemistry, and its subsequent coupling reaction with a cellulose ﬁ  lm through a sol–gel process (Route 3) (reproduced from Reference [56] 
with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry). Figure 18.6 Polarized optical microscopy images of PLLA, 1 wt% CNW/PLLA 
(PLLA-CNC-1 in this ﬁ  gure), and 1 wt% SCNW/PLLA (PLLA-SCNC-1 in this ﬁ  gure) 
acquired on the 0, 5th, and 10th minute at 125 °C after quenched from melt at 210 °C. 
Scale bar: 200 µm (reprinted with permission from Pei et al. [72]. Copyright 2010 Else-vier Ltd.) Figure 18.10 POM micrographs obtained after isothermal crystallization for 100 
seconds at 53.6 °C for a POE-based ﬁ  lm with (a) 0 and (b) 10 wt% cellulose nanowhis-
kers (reprinted with permission from Azizi Samir et al. [47]. Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ltd.).
Iso-PP melt
Iso-PP spherulites
Transcrystalline layer
Cellulose nanocrystal film
Figure 18.11 Crystallization of polypropylene against cellulose nanocrystal ﬁ  lm. i-PP 
initially melt at 220 °C. PLM images after 5 minutes (left) and after 20 minutes (right) 
at 136°C. The right image at higher magniﬁ  cation shows in detail the edge of the CNWs 
ﬁ lm in contact with i-PP melt. Scale bars: 200 µm (reprinted with permission from Gray 
[92]. Copyright 2007 Springer Science+Business Media B.V .) Figure 19.4 Transparent TOCN-93/PS and TOCN-310/PS nanocomposite ﬁ  lms. 
Reprinted with permission from Reference [60].
Figure 23.1  Possibilities of obtaining lignin-based nanoﬁ  bers (adapted from Refer-
ence [16]). 
(a) (b)