 
 
International Journal of Pharmacy and Biological Sciences -IJPBSTM (2020) 10 (3): 62-68 
Online  ISSN: 2230 -7605 , Print ISSN: 2321 -3272  
Research Article | Biological Sciences | OA Journal  | MCI Approved  | Index Copernicus  
 
 
 
 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.21276/ijpbs.2020.10.3. 8                                                Rajeshri Ghorpade  and Shreyasha Bhosale*  
                                                                                          www.ijpbs.com   or www.ijpbsonline.com  
62 Degradation and Decolourization of Textile 
Grade  Dyes by Prominent Isolates Obtained 
from  Textile Effluent Sample  
  
Rajeshri Ghorpade  and  Shreyasha Bhosale*  
Department of Microbiology,  Rayat Shikshan Sanstha ’s Karmaveer Bhaurao Patil 
College, Vashi, Navi Mumbai [Maharashtra, India] . 
 
            Received: 20 Mar 20 20 / Accepted : 18 Apr 2020  / Published online: 01 Jul 2 020 
             *Corresponding Author Email:  rajeshri.ghorpade@yahoo.com  
 
Abstract  
Textile industries are responsible for one of the major environmental pollution problems in 
the world, because they release undesirable dye effluents. Textile wastewater contains dyes 
mixed with various contaminants at a variety of ranges. Therefore, envir onmental legislation 
commonly obligates textile factories to treat these effluents before discharge into the 
receiving watercourses. The present study was an attempt to examine the Decolorization 
ability of Prominent isolates obtained from the Industrial E ffluent Sample ( Kocuria rhizophil a 
and Bacillus cereus ) for two different commercial Textile Grade Dyes that are ‘Perssian blue’ 
and ‘Reactive orange 13’. The primary parametric study was done and results were recorded. 
The isolates showed significant deco lorization of both the dyes was identified by bacterial 
morphology, biochemical tests and also with of Automated Microbial Identification System 
(VITEK 2) instrument. Various physico -chemical parameters with respect to incubation 
condition, pH, different c arbon, nitrogen and mineral sources were studied for both the dyes 
for dye decolorization. The effect of different carbon sources, nitrogen sources, pH and 
temperature on decolorization was studied to find out optimum conditions required for the 
decoloriza tion of respective dyes. The test was also carried out using Textile Effluent Water 
Sample to check the efficiency of both the isolates on Degradation and Decolorization of dyes 
treatment. These Prominent isolates can be use in treatment of Textile Effluen t. 
Keywords  
VITEK 2, Reactive orange 13, Perssian blue, Decolourization, Industrial effluent, Dyes.  
**** * 
 
INTRODUCTION  
Textile industries positively affect the economic 
development worldwide. China is the most 
important exporter of all types of textiles, followed 
by the European Union, India and then the USA. 
However, one of the problems associated with textile 
factories i s the unacceptable effluent, especially 
dyes, which are difficult to degrade. Synthetic dyes 
are extensively used in textile dyeing, paper printing, 
colour photography, pharmaceutical, food, cosmetic, and other industries. Major classes of synthetic dyes 
include azo, anthraquinone, and triarylmethane 
dyes. Among these, azo dyes represent the largest 
and most versatile class of synthetic dyes. Color 
present in effluent affect photosynthetic activity in 
aquatic life due to reduced light penetration and may 
also be toxic to some aquatic organisms due to the 
presence of metals, chlorides (U. Aftab, et al. 2011).  
Particularly reactive dyes usually have a synthetic 
origin and complex aromatic molecular structures,         
 
International Journal of Pharmacy and Biological Sciences                                             Rajeshri Ghorpade  and Shreyasha Bhosale*  
                                                                                                                           www.ijpbs.com   or www.ijpbsonline.com  
ISSN: 2230 -7605 (Online); ISSN: 2321 -3272 (Print)  
Int J Pharm Biol Sci.  
 
63 which make them stable and difficult to biodegrade . 
Reactive dyes differ from all other dye classes in that 
they bind to textile fibers, such as cellulose and 
cotton, through covalent bonds.  
Reactive dyes are typically azo -based chromophores 
combined with various types of reactive groups, 
which show diffe rent reactivity. The recalcitrance of 
azo dyes has been attributed to the presence of 
sulfonate groups and azo bonds, two features 
generally considered as xenobiotic (M. P. Shah, et al. 
2013). Several physicochemical methods are used to 
treat textile efflu ents to achieve degradation and 
decolorization. These include filtration, coagulation, 
carbon activated and chemical flocculation. These 
methods are effective but they are expensive and 
involve the formation of a concentrated sludge that 
creates a secondar y disposal problem.  
Microbial degradation and decolorization is an 
environmentally friendly and a cost competitive 
alternative to chemical decomposition process. The 
success of a biological process for color removal from 
textile effluent mainly depends on the utilization of 
microorganisms that effectively decolorize synthetic 
dyes of different chemical structures. Many bacteria, 
actinomycetes, yeast and molds are able to remove 
dyes by adsorption from the effluent (K. Shinde, et al 
2015).  
At present, a numb er of studies have focused on 
microorganisms, which are able to decolorize and 
biodegrade these dyes. Several combined anaerobic 
and aerobic microbial treatments have been 
suggested to enhance the degradation of azo dyes. 
The present study deals with the i solation of azo dyes 
degrading bacterium from a dye contaminated 
environment, its ability to degrade reactive dyes into 
non-toxic product and optimization of temperature, 
pH, carbon and nitrogen sources for maximum dyes 
degradation and decolorization. So, this microbial 
degradation and decolorization is necessary to 
degrade and decolorize the harmful textile grade 
dyes from environment to reduce the pollution and 
as well as help to reduce the formation of sludge 
during the degradation of dyes.  
 
MATERIAL AND  METHODS  
Sampling  
The textile effluent sample were collected from 
sewage water, Ulhasnagar. Standard procedures 
were followed during sampling. The physical 
characteristics of the effluent sample like pH, 
temperature, colour, and odour were checked then 
accordingly the results were recorded. The pH was 
determined by using pH strip and temperature with 
laboratory thermometer. The sample were transported to laboratory at 4°C as in accordance 
with the standard methods.  
Dyes and Culture Media  
Reactive Orange 13,  Perssian Blue, peptone, sodium 
chloride, meat extract, yeast extract and agar 
powder were obtained from Hi -Media laboratory, 
India. All chemicals were of highest purity and 
analytical grade.  
Isolation of Bacteria from Industrial Effluent  
Isolation were ca rried out by inoculating 1 ml of 
industrial effluent in sterile Luria Bertani (LB) broth 
and then incubated at Room temperature on shaker 
condition for 24 -48 hours. Luria Bertani agar medium 
was used for the isolation of bacteria from the dye 
effluent. The  loop full of sample were taken from 
enrichment medium after incubation and then 
inoculated on freshly prepared sterile LB medium 
plates. Then the plates were incubated at Room 
Temperature for 24 hrs. After completing incubation 
period isolated colonies we re observed on plates and 
then these colonies were selected, brought to pure 
culture and preserved on slants for further studies.  
Screening of Dye Decolorizing Isolates  
Morphologically distinct bacterial isolates were 
tested for their ability to degrade th e textile dyes. 
The isolated bacterial strains were screened out by 
incubating them on Nutrient Broth medium 
containing 100 mcg total stock concentration of 
Reactive Orange 13 and Perssian Blue dyes. This 
study was performed by using Tube Method. The 
diffe rent concentration of both dyes was prepared 
and isolates were inoculated in medium containing 
dyes separately. The nutrient broth medium 
incubated at Room Temperature for 24 hrs. After the 
incubation, tubes were observed for bacterial 
growth. The last tub e in which growth observed were 
considered as Minimum Inhibitory Concentration 
(MIC) for the particular isolates. The range of MIC 
concentration is 10 -100 mcg/ml with interval of 
10mcg/ml. The screened culture was transfer to agar 
slant and store 4°C for f urther study.  
Identification of selected isolates  
The selected isolates were examined for their 
morphological properties, such as size, shape, cell 
arrangement and staining properties. The isolates 
were identified up to species using Automated 
Microbial Id entification System (VITEK 2) instrument.  
Optimization of Physico -Chemical parameters  
Parameter optimization was performed using 
different parameters like pH, Temperature, Carbon 
and Nitrogen source.  Minimal Salt Medium (MSM) 
were used for this study. The medium contains all 
different salts which enhance the enzymatic reaction 
that takes place during decolorization. For study, the 
media were prepared with different pH values  4.0,         
 
International Journal of Pharmacy and Biological Sciences                                             Rajeshri Ghorpade  and Shreyasha Bhosale*  
                                                                                                                           www.ijpbs.com   or www.ijpbsonline.com  
ISSN: 2230 -7605 (Online); ISSN: 2321 -3272 (Print)  
Int J Pharm Biol Sci.  
 
64 5.4, 7.4, 9.0, different temperature values such as 
240C, 370C, 550C, differen t organic Carbon sources 
like Glucose, Galactose, Lactose, Sucrose, Starch, 
Glycogen, different organic and inorganic Nitrogen 
Sources  Peptone, Tryptone, Yeast extract, Sodium 
nitrate, Sodium nitrite, Potassium nitrate, Potassium 
nitrite. Respective flasks  were inoculated with 
specific volume of dyes and culture at shaker and as 
well as static conditions for 24, 48, and 72 hrs. The 
aliquot was removed at specific time interval and 
centrifuged at 7000 rpm at 40C for 10 min. Then the 
Optical Density was measu red on colorimeter at 530 
nm. 
 
RESULT AND DISCUSSION  
The present study was aimed to isolate the bacterial 
strains from industrial dye effluents and find out 
their dye degrading capacity. Industrial effluent is 
not stable and it varies often in a wide range  
depending upon the process practiced. Asian 
countries are experiencing severe environmental 
problems due to rapid industrialization. This 
phenomenon is very common where the polluting 
industries like textile dyeing, leather tanning, paper 
and pulp process ing, sugar manufacturing etc. thrive 
as clusters. Among these the Textile industries are 
large industrial consumers of waters as well as 
producers of wastewater. The effluent discharged by 
this industry leads to serious pollution of 
groundwater and soils a nd ultimately affects the 
livelihood of the poor (Jiunkins.,1982). Traditional 
waste water treatments require enormous cost and continuous supply of chemicals because of which the 
process become more tedious and uneconomical and 
causes further environmenta l damages. 
Microbiological treatments were easier, cheaper and 
an effective alternative source for hazardous textile 
dyes removal from aquatic ecosystem. Effluent 
sample is a rich source of microbial populations 
which are able to grow in presence of dyes. Two 
potential isolates were obtained which are Kocuria 
rhizophila  and Bacillus cereus  against both the dyes 
Reactive orange 13 & Perssian blue. Bacterial strains 
were isolated by Luria Bertani medium and purified 
by sub culturing on nutrient broth medium. The 
bacterial isolates were screened for the 
decolorization and MIC determination of dye by Tube 
method (Growth appearance) and results are 
tabulated in Table 1 and 2. The morphological and 
cultural characteristics of screened bacterial isolates 
are shown in Table 3.  
Out of two morphologically distinct bacterial isolates 
the Kocuria rhizophila  were effectively decolorized 
the Reactive orange 13 dye at alkaline pH 9 (Figure 1) 
and Perssian blue dye with starch as a carbon and 
peptone as a nitrogen source (Figure 2 and 3). 
Whereas the other bacterial isolate Bacillus cereus 
were effectively decol orized the Reactive orange 13 
dye using yeast extract as a nitrogen source (Figure 
4) and Perssian blue dye at 370c temperature and 
also using sucrose as a carbon source (Figure 5 and 
6). The screened culture was transfer to agar slant 
and store 4°C for fu rther study.
 
 
Table 1: MIC of Kocuria rhizophila  and Bacillus cereus  against Perssian blue dye were found to be 20mcg/ml.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sr. No.  Concentration of dye (mcg/ml)  Growth  
1 10 +ve 
2 20 -ve 
3 30 -ve 
4 40 -ve 
5 50 -ve 
6 60 -ve 
7 70 -ve 
8 80 -ve 
9 90 -ve 
10 100 -ve 
Positive (+ve) control  - +ve 
Negative ( -ve) control  - -ve         
 
International Journal of Pharmacy and Biological Sciences                                             Rajeshri Ghorpade  and Shreyasha Bhosale*  
                                                                                                                           www.ijpbs.com   or www.ijpbsonline.com  
ISSN: 2230 -7605 (Online); ISSN: 2321 -3272 (Print)  
Int J Pharm Biol Sci.  
 
65 Table 2: MIC of Kocuria rhizophila  and Bacillus cereus  against Reactive orange 13 dye were found to be 
100mcg/ml and 30 mcg/ml respectively.  
Sr. No.  Concentration of dye (mcg/ml)  Growth  
Kocuria rhizophila  Growth  
Bacillus cereus  
1 10 +ve +ve  
2 20 +ve +ve 
3 30 +ve -ve 
4 40 +ve -ve 
5 50 +ve -ve 
6 60 +ve -ve 
7 70 +ve -ve 
8 80 +ve -ve 
9 90 +ve -ve 
10 100 -ve -ve 
Positive (+ve) control  - +ve +ve 
Negative ( -ve) control  - -ve -ve 
 
 
Table 3: Morphological and cultural characteristics of screened bacterial isolates.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure No 1: Effect of pH on decolorization of Reactive orange 13 dye by Kocuria rhizophila  
 Characteristics  Kocuria rhizophila  Bacillus cereus  
Size Pinpoint  2 mm  
Shape  Circular  Circular  
Color  Colourless  Colourless  
Margin  Entire  Entire  
Elevation  Low convex  Convex  
Opacity  Transparent  Opaque  
Consistency  Smooth  Smooth  
Gram’s nature  Gram positive  Gram positive  
Morphology  Cocci single  Bacilli (single/ chains)  
020406080100120
4 5.4 7.4 9% decolourization
pH valuepH v/s decolourization
Static
Shaker        
 
International Journal of Pharmacy and Biological Sciences                                             Rajeshri Ghorpade  and Shreyasha Bhosale*  
                                                                                                                           www.ijpbs.com   or www.ijpbsonline.com  
ISSN: 2230 -7605 (Online); ISSN: 2321 -3272 (Print)  
Int J Pharm Biol Sci.  
 
66  
Figure No 2: Effect of Carbon source on decolorization of Perssian blue dye by Kocuria rhizophila  
 
 
Figure No 3: Effect of Nitrogen source on decolorization of Perssian blue dye by Kocuria rhizophila  
 
 
Figure No 4: Effect of Nitrogen source on decolorization of Reactive orange 13 dye by Bacillus cereus  0102030405060708090100% decolourization
Carbon sourceCarbon v/s decolourization
Static
Shaker
0102030405060708090100% decolurization
Nitrogen sourceNitrogen v/s decolourization
Static
Shaker
020406080100120 % decolurization
Nitrogen sourceNitrogen v/s decolourization
Static
Shaker        
 
International Journal of Pharmacy and Biological Sciences                                             Rajeshri Ghorpade  and Shreyasha Bhosale*  
                                                                                                                           www.ijpbs.com   or www.ijpbsonline.com  
ISSN: 2230 -7605 (Online); ISSN: 2321 -3272 (Print)  
Int J Pharm Biol Sci.  
 
67  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure No 5: Effect of Temperature on decolorization of Perssian blue dye by Bacillus cereus  
 
 
Figure No 6: Effect of Carbon source on decolorization of Perssian  blue dye by B acillus cereus  
 
CONCLUSION  
Due to industrial effluent from textile and other dye 
stuff using industries to neighboring water bodies 
and waste water systems facing health concerns. 
Most of the dyes are carcinogenic in nature. The 
ability of the microbes to carry out dye 
decolorizatio n has received much attention. 
Traditional waste water treatments require 
enormous cost and continuous supply of chemicals 
because of which the process become more tedious 
and uneconomical and causes further environmental 
damages.  
Microbiological treatment s were easier, cheaper and 
an effective alternative source for hazardous textile 
dyes removal from aquatic ecosystem. Effluent 
sample is a rich source of microbial populations 
which are able to grow in presence of dyes. This 
research work mainly represents  the isolation and 
identification of bacteria able to degrade and 
decolurize widely used industrial dyes. In this study an attempt was made to isolate and identify the dye 
degrading and decolourising abilities of organisms.  
The data obtained from such anal ysis can be useful 
in treating textile effluent and that treated effluent 
can be reused for industrial work or can be discarded 
in natural aquatic ecosystem without causing any 
pollution or damage. The two potential isolates were 
obtained for both the dyes  (Reactive orange 13 & 
Perssian blue) that are Kocuria rhizophila  and Bacillus 
cereus . The present study reveals that the both 
isolated bacterial strains have decolorizing capacity 
which can destroy the recalcitrant nature of the dye 
and made them easily b iodegradable.  
 
REFERENCES  
1. Jiunkins R (1982) Pretreatment of textile waste water, 
Proceedings of 37th Industrial waste Conference. 
Purdue University, Lafayette, USA.  
2. Keshav Shinde, Rajeshri Ghorpade, Deepak Thakare 
“Bacterial Decolourization of Textile Grad e Coravat 
Red Dye by Rhizobium Mayense ” International Journal 020406080100% decolourization
Carbon sourceCarbon v/s decolourization
Static
Shaker020406080100120
24 37 55% decolourization
Temperature value (0C)Temperature v/s decolourization
Static
Shaker        
 
International Journal of Pharmacy and Biological Sciences                                             Rajeshri Ghorpade  and Shreyasha Bhosale*  
                                                                                                                           www.ijpbs.com   or www.ijpbsonline.com  
ISSN: 2230 -7605 (Online); ISSN: 2321 -3272 (Print)  
Int J Pharm Biol Sci.  
 
68 of Research Studies in Biosciences (IJRSB) Volume 3, 
Issue 5, May 2015  
3. A. Tripathi, S.K. Srivastava “Ecofriendly Treatment of 
Azo Dyes: Biodecolorization using Bacterial Strains” 
International J ournal of Bioscience, Biochemistry and 
Bioinformatics, Vol. 1, No. 1, May 2011  
4. Aamr Alalewi, Cuiling Jiang “Bacterial Influence on 
Textile Wastewater Decolorization”  
5. Anamika Pokharia, Sarabjeet Singh Ahluwalia 
“Decolorization  of Xenobiotic Azo Dye - Black WNN by 
Immobilized Paenibacillus alvei MTCC 10625”   
6. Babita Rani, Vivek Kumar, Jagvijay Singh, Sandeep 
Bisht, Priyanku Teotia, Shivesh Sharma, Ritu Kela 
“Bioremediation of dyes by fungi isolated from contaminated dye effluent s ites for bio -usability” 
Brazilian Journal of Microbiology:2014  
7. Blanca E. Barraga, Carlos Costa,  M. Carmen Ma´rquez, 
“Biodegradation of azo dyes by bacteria inoculated on 
solid media” Environmental Systems Engineering 
Department, National School of Biologic al Sciences, 
National Politechnic Institute: Ayala ,11340  
8. Baljinder Kaur, Balvir Kumar, Neena Garg, and 
Navneet Kaur “Statistical Optimization of Conditions 
for Decolorization of Synthetic Dyes by Cordyceps 
militaris MTCC 3936  
9. Elias Abadulla, “Decolorization and Detoxification of 
Textile Dyes with a Laccase from Trametes hirsuta” 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, Aug. 2000
 
 