Biochemical Engineering Journal 97 (2015) 92–100
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biochemical Engineering Journal
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/bej
Production of polyhydroxyalkanoates from dephenolised and
fermented olive mill wastewaters by employing a pure culture ofCupriavidus necator
Gonzalo Agustín Martineza, Lorenzo Bertina,∗, Alberto Scomaa,1, Stefano Rebecchia,
Gerhart Brauneggb, Fabio Favaa
aDepartment of Civil, Chemical, Environmental and Materials Engineering (DICAM), University of Bologna, via Terracini, 28, I-40131 Bologna, Italy
bInstitute of Biotechnology & Biochemical Engineering, Technological University of Graz, A-8010 Graz, Austria
article info
Article history:
Received 22 September 2014Received in revised form 5 February 2015Accepted 11 February 2015Available online 12 February 2015
Keywords:PolyhydroxyalkanoatesWaste treatmentCupriavidus necatorAnaerobic processesBiotransformationSubstrate inhibitionabstract
The feasibility of producing polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) by feeding a pure culture of Cupriavidus neca-
tor with a pre-treated olive mill wastewater (OMW) was demonstrated at 500 mL shaken ﬂask scale. The
OMW was previously dephenolised and then fermented to produce an efﬂuent rich in volatile fatty acids(VFAs). The latter stream (OMW
Acid ) was then employed as the carbon source for PHAs production.
Firstly, pre-grown cells were fed with different dilutions of OMW Acid , namely: 25, 50, 75 and 100%
(v/v). Signiﬁcant inhibitory effects were observed when OMW Acid concentration was 75 and 100%.
Thereafter, experiments with laboratory prepared solutions, simulating the OMW Acid , allowed to demon-
strate that polyphenols signiﬁcantly contributed to the observed inhibition. Furthermore, The copolymerpoly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) (poly(HB-co-HV)), containing 11% of hydroxyvalerate,was accumulated up to 55% of the cells dry weight when two consecutive accumulation batch processeswere carried out with 25% of OMW
Acid and without adding any exogenous carbon source.
The obtained results are promising in the perspective of continuing the production study at a bench-top
bioreactor scale and thereafter analysing the possibility of developing a biotechnological PHAs productionprocess as a part of an integrated OMW valorization process.
© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are well known aliphatic
polyesters naturally produced by many microorganisms [1,2] . Dif-
ferent materials with new properties can be obtained by combiningdifferent PHAs monomers, including bioplastics with similar oreven better physicochemical and mechanical properties than thoseexerted by their petrochemical-based homologues polyoleﬁns. Asan example, a polymer with a lower oxygen permeability, whichcan be exploited to enhance the material features of food packag-ing, can be obtained [3–6] . Besides, PHAs can be produced from
∗Corresponding author. Tel.: +39 51 20 90317; fax: +39 51 20 90322.
E-mail addresses: gonzalo.martinez3@unibo.it (G. Agustín Martinez),
lorenzo.bertin@unibo.it (L. Bertin), alberto.scoma@ugent.be (A. Scoma),
stefano.rebecchi3@unibo.it (S. Rebecchi), g.braunegg@tugraz.at (G. Braunegg),
fabio.fava@unibo.it (F. Fava).
1Permanent address: LabMet – Laboratory of Microbial Ecology and Technology,
Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University; Coupure Links 653, B-9000Gent, Belgium.renewable resources, therefore representing one of the most
promising biopolymers for replacing the petrochemical-basedplastomers, elastomers, latexes or even high-performance poly-mers [7].
Nevertheless, nowadays, PHAs industrial production is carried
out from expensive carbon sources, resulting in a hardly econom-ically competitive product with respect to that of petrol-basedpolymers. The production costs are mainly associated to those ofcarbon source procurement and downstream process (recoveryand puriﬁcation), representing both 30% (approximately) of theﬁnal product cost [8]. Thus, new alternatives and strategies are
being studied in order to lower PHAs production costs. To thisaim, the application of alternative inexpensive carbon sources, usu-ally represented by agro-industrial wastes [9], was widely studied.
Fried oil [10] , efﬂuents from the palm mill [11] , molasses [12] ,
cheese whey [13] , olive mill wastewater (OMW) [14] and biodiesel
waste glycerol [13,15] , among others, were tested with pure or
mixed cultures. Pure cultures (wild type or genetically modiﬁed)allow getting higher productivities and PHAs content. Conversely,the employment of mixed cultures has the economic advantage
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2015.02.015
1369-703X/© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.G. Agustín Martinez et al. / Biochemical Engineering Journal 97 (2015) 92–100 93
that they do not need to work under sterile conditions, since the
microbial selection of PHAs producer strains can be carried outunder selective pressure by repeated feast and famine processes[16] .
On the other hand, most of the mentioned alternative substrates
have moderate to low carbon source concentration (around 80 g L
−1
and 10–40 g L−1, respectively), this leading to a low PHAs produc-
tivity potential [17] , which hence negatively affects process costs.
Pure cells allow high cell densities and PHAs contents, which con-versely contribute moderating downstream costs. Furthermore, theemployment of a single bacterial strain allows the obtainment of awell-deﬁned single type of polymer, while a mixture of polymerswould be obtained from microbial consortia.
The present work was dedicated to evaluate the possibility of
producing PHAs by employing a pure culture and an inexpen-sive substrate. In particular, Cupriavidus necator (formerly Ralstonia
eutropha ) was chosen as the biocatalyst since it is a well-known and
robust PHAs producer strain capable of high accumulation poten-tial. OMW was selected as the alternative carbon source because it isan abundant biowaste mostly produced within the Mediterraneanregion. Particularly, the experimental wastewater was producedin Italy, where about 1 Mm
3of OMWs are generated per year.
OMW is a typical efﬂuent of the olive oil industry, which appliesthe conventional three phases extraction procedure. Compared tothe biowaste obtained from the two phase extraction one (mainlygenerated in Spain and conventionally called “alperujo”), whichincludes the solid fraction from processed olives, OMW is a muchmore homogeneous and liquid efﬂuent. It is considered an envi-ronmental harmful waste because of its typical acidity (pH 3–6),high organic content (40–200 g COD L
−1), occurrence of polyphe-
nolic compounds (1–20 g L−1), and seasonality [18] . Polyphenols
are known to exert antimicrobial activity; on the other hand, theyare natural antioxidants, which could be exploited in several indus-trial ﬁelds [19] . All this considered, the development of integrated
OMW valorization processes would allow combining its treatmentto the obtainment of added value products (e.g., polyphenols, PHAsand biogas).
In this work, the experimental OMW was previously depheno-
lised, in order to couple the recovery of added value molecules toa detoxiﬁcation of the efﬂuent. Then, it was digested under acido-genic condition to obtain a volatile fatty acids (VFAs)-rich stream(OMW
Acid ), which was used as the carbon source for PHAs accu-
mulation. More in details, the main aims of the present work were:(a) to verify the possibility of producing PHAs, by using a pre-grown culture of C. necator, from OMW
Acid ; (b) to determine what
type of polymer can be produced from OMW Acid ; (c) to study the
occurrence of inhibitory effects due to OMW Acid concentration and
determine the potential inhibitors by employing laboratory pre-pared OMW simulating solutions; and (d) to verify the possibilityof increasing PHAs content by applying consecutive accumulationbatch processes, with the perspective of developing a cell-recyclingstrategy for achieving a high cell density. All experiments werecarried out in 500 mL shaken ﬂasks.
To the very best of our knowledge, this work represents the ﬁrst
attempt to produce PHAs within a pure culture of C. necator by
employing digested OMW as alternative carbon source.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Chemicals and olive mill wastewater
The standard volatile fatty acids (VFAs) mixture (Supelco),
poly(3-hydroxybutyric acid-co-3-hydroxyvaleric acid) (Poly(HB-co-HV)) (12 mol% PHV; natural origin), salts (BioReagent) for themineral medium, single VFAs and fructose (BioReagent) wereTable 1
OMW Acid main features.
COD (g COD L−1) 31.4 ±0.5
Total VFAs (g L−1) 11.43 ±0.6
Total polyphenols (g L−1)a1.20±0.20
pH 6.5 ±0.1
N-NH 4(mg L−1)6 0 ±1
Proteins (g L−1) 1.56 ±0.12
Lipids (g L−1) 3.24 ±0.34
aExpressed as gallic acid equivalents.
purchased from Sigma–Aldrich. The OMW was kindly supplied by
the “Sant’Agata d’Oneglia” Italian olive mill, which is located in theLiguria northern region, and it had a COD of about 55 g L
−1, partially
due to polyphenolic compounds (about 2.55 g L−1). It underwent a
pre-treatment procedure, which consisted in a solid phase extrac-tion (SPE), which was carried out by using a non-polar resin(Amberlite XAD16, Sigma–Aldrich) as the adsorbent and ethanol(96% grade, Sigma–Aldrich) as the desorption solvent [19] . The
SPE procedure enabled an extended removal of the polyphenolicfraction; however, a signiﬁcant amount of total polyphenols stilloccurred ( Table 1 ). The dephenolised wastewater was processed
under anaerobic acidogenic conditions in order to obtain an efﬂuentrich in VFAs (OMW
Acid ), which was employed as the carbon source
for the biological accumulation of PHAs. The anaerobic acidogenicdigestion of the OMW was carried out in a 2.5 L packed bed biore-actor, whose conﬁguration was reported elsewhere [20] . In brief,
it was an up-ﬂow glass column, which was packed with ceramicmaterial and was operating under continuous mode at 35
◦C with a
hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 7 days. The main features of theOMW
Acid are shown in Table 1 ; it contained different short chain
VFAs, mainly (g L−1): acetic (7.22 ±0.16), propionic (1.25 ±0.05),
butyric (1.75 ±0.03), valeric (0.22 ±0.04) and caproic (0.35 ±0.01)
acids.
2.2. Bacterial strain, inoculum and culture media
C. necator DSMZ 545 (DSMZ, Germany) was used as the PHA
producer strain. Pre-culture was started from agar plates and pre-grown within 24 h in 500 mL Erlenmeyer ﬂask containing 150 mL ofLuria Bertani (LB) medium without any extra carbon source [21] ;
incubation conditions were 30
◦C and 150 rpm. The experiments
were performed according to a dual-phase strategy (as reported inSection 2.3). Therefore, the same medium was always employed
in the ﬁrst process step dedicated to cell growth (balanced growthphase), while different culture media were utilised in the secondprocess steps dedicated to PHAs production (accumulation phase),depending on speciﬁc experimental aims. All these accumulationmedia exerted a NH
4limitation, which did not allow cell growth
(essential nutrient limitation). At the same time, this limitationtriggered the biopolymer accumulation.
In particular, the growth medium consisted of a slightly mod-
iﬁed E2 mineral medium [22] and it was employed for the cell
growth phase. It contained 1.5 instead of 1.1 g L
−1of NH 4HPO 4.
Fructose (5 g L−1) was added as the sole carbon source. Two types
of ammonia free-media were employed for the subsequent PHAsaccumulation phase: they included (a) the actual OMW
Acid ,o r
(b) laboratory prepared solutions, which simulated OMW Acid by
containing target chemicals occurring in the actual acidogenicefﬂuent (SimOMW
Acid ). The former media were prepared by ﬁl-
tering the OMW Acid with Whatman N11 (11 /H9262m) ﬁlters, adding E2
salts (except for NH 4HPO 4) by respecting their concentration in the
E2 medium, and autoclaving the amended OMW Acid using special
Beckman ﬂasks, which allowed to perform a subsequent centrifu-gation (8000 RPM, 4
◦C and 25 min) under sterile conditions; ﬁnally,
when necessary, it was diluted with a sterilised distilled waterDownload	English	Version:
https://daneshyari.com/en/article/2970
Download	Persian	Version:
https://daneshyari.com/article/2970
Daneshyari.com