        
Safety Assessment of Talc  as Used in Cosmetics  
 
 
 
       
   
Status:    Final  Report  
Release Date:   April 12 , 201 3 
Panel Meeting Date:  March 18 -19, 2013 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
The 201 3 Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel members are: Chairman, Wilma F. Bergfeld, M.D., F.A.C.P.; Donald V. 
Belsito, M.D.; Ronald A. Hill, Ph.D.; Curtis D. Klaassen, Ph.D.; Daniel C. Liebler, Ph.D.; James G. Marks, Jr., M.D., Ronald 
C. Shank, Ph.D.; Thomas J. Slaga, Ph.D.; and Paul W. Snyder, D.V.M., Ph.D.  The CIR Director is F. Alan Andersen, Ph.D.  This report was prepared by Monice M. Fiume, S enior Scientific Analyst/Writer , and Ivan Boyer, Ph.D., Senior Toxicologist . 
 
 
 
Cosmetic Ingredient Review  
1101 17th Street, NW, Suite 412 ♢  Washington, DC 20036- 4702 ♢ ph 202.331.0651 ♢  fax 202.331.0088 ♢  
cirinfo@cir -safety.org
  
   1 
 ABSTRACT  
The CIR Expert Panel assessed the safety of talc for use in cosmetics and concluded that it is safe in the present practices 
of use and concentration; talc is reported to be used at up to 100% in cosmetics .  Talc should not be applied to the skin 
when the ep idermal barrier is missing or significantly disrupted .  Industry specifications state that cosmetic -grade talc 
must contain no detectable fibrous, asbestos minerals.  The refore,  the large amount of avai lable animal and clinical data 
the Panel relied on in assessing the safety of talc only included those studies on talc that did not contain asbestos .  The 
Discussion of this safety assessment addressed a number of points that were deliberated.  
INTRODUCTION  
This assessment presents  information  relevant to  the safety of talc  as used in cosmetic formulations .  Reported functions of 
talc in cosmetics include abrasive, absorbent, anticaking agent, bulking agent, opacifying agent, skin protectant, and slip 
modifier.1   
In 1976,  specifications for cosmetic talc requiring that no detectable fibrous, asbestos mineral be present, were developed .2  
Therefore, this report will only address the safety of talc  that does not contain asbestos .  Because the specification was 
developed in 1976, that year was used in determining what data are more likely relevant to the safety of cosmetic talc ;  
therefore some studies performed prior to 1976 may not be relevant to talc as currently used in cosmetics , and they might not 
be included in this assessment . 
The following are conclusions from various workshops and review articles on talc.  There have been a number of other 
published review papers on talc that are not cited here.  The relevant primary references cited in the reviews were obtained 
and are included  in this safety assessment.  Reviews and responses specific to the National Toxicology Program ( NTP ) study 
are included in the section on Carcin ogenicity.  The non -cosmetic issue of the prohibition of the use of talc in medical 
examination gloves3 will not be addressed in this safety assessment.  
• In 1978, the Public Citizen Health Research Group contacted the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) with a letter 
stating their concern that talc is possibly carcin ogenic and that the FDA should eliminate the use of talc in drugs and 
cosmetics even if the results are not conclusive.4  The FDA responded that it was studying talc and believed that any risk 
from talc was related to contamination by asbestos.5 
• In 1983, the  FDA received a citizen’s petition requesting that cosmetic talc be labeled with an asbestos warning 
statement, information on asbestos particle size, and the proportion of talc impurities in the product.6  The FDA denied 
this request, stating that “there is no ba sis at this time for the agency to conclude that this is a health hazard attributable 
to asbestos in cosmetic talc.  Without evidence of such a hazard, the agency concludes there is no need to require a warning label on cosmetic talc.”  
•  In 1992, the Enviro nmental Protection Agency (EPA) issued a “Health Assessment Document for Talc.”
7  The review 
concluded that talc is not carcinogenic following inhalation exposure or intraper itoneal (i.p.), intrapleural, or intrabursal 
admini stration to rats, hamsters, and mice.  However, these studies were not con sidered fully adequate to evaluate the 
carcinogenic potenti al of talc.  The review noted that evidence from two studies suggests that talc may be an effective 
co-carcinogen when administered intratracheally with benzo [a]pyrene (B[a]P ) to hamsters .8,9  The Cosmetic Ingredient 
Review ( CIR)  Expert Panel determined that the results of these studies were not relevant to the cosmetic use of talc and 
that the study was not well -designed to study talc .  
• In 1993, the NTP issued a r eport, “Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of Talc (CAS No. 14807- 96-6) in F344/N rats 
and B6C3F 1 Mice (Inhalation Studies),” that concluded there was some evi dence of car cinogenic activity  in male 
F344/rats, clear evidence of carcinogenic activity in female F344/N rats, and no evidence of carcinogenic activity  in 
male or female B6C3F 1 mice exposed to aerosols of 6 or 18 mg/m3 non-asbesti form cosmetic -grade talc in a lifetime 
study.10  (This study and responses to the report will be de scribed in detail later in this report).  
• In 1994, a public workshop titled “Talc: Consumer Uses and Health Perspectives” was organized under joint spon sorship 
of the FDA, the Cosmetics, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association (CTFA, now known as the Personal Care Products 
Council  [the Council] ), and the International Society of Regulatory Toxicol ogy and Pharmacology (ISRTP).11,12  The 
purpose of the workshop was to provide a forum for an updated discussion of the origins, manufacture, character ization, 
toxicology, and epide miology of talc and related products.  The principal focus was the then- latest toxicological and 
epidemiological studies as they re lated to the safe uses of talc in cos metic products.  The characteristics of cosmetic -
grade talc, the h istory of talc use, and quality -control measures for talc were dis cussed, as was an appraisal of the NTP 
inhalation study on talc.  The regulatory his tory of talc was also reviewed.  The workshop con cluded that the NTP 
bioassay results could not be cons idered a relevant predictor of human risk, and in regard to pro posed association of talc 
exposure and ovarian cancer, the workshop Panel found that the epidemiological data were conflicting and remain 
equivocal.   
   2 
 • In 1994, the Cancer Prevention Coalition (CPC) submitted a citizen petition to the FDA seeking labeling on all cosmetic 
talc products.13  The requested labeling was a warning that talcum powder causes cancer in laboratory animals; frequent 
talc application in the female genital area increases the risk of ovarian cancer.  This petition was denied.14 
• In 2000, talc was nominated for review in the NTP 10th Report on Carcinogens because the NTP bioassay re ported clear 
evidence of carcinogenic activity of talc (non -asbestiform) based on increased incidences of alveolar/bron chiolar ade no-
mas and carcinomas of the lung in female rats and because published epidemiology studies suggest ed that talc exposure 
was associated with lung cancer in pottery workers and ovarian neoplasms in wom en. (65 FR 17891)15  How ever the 
NTP deferred consideration of listing talc (cosmetic and occupational exposure; both asbestiform and non -asbestiform) 
as a carcinogen because of con sider able confusion over the mineral nature and consequences of exposure to talc (70 FR 
60548) ,16 and in 2005, t alc was withdrawn from review.17 
• In 2008, the C PC again submitted a petition to FDA seeking labeling on all cosmetic talc prod ucts.14  The requested 
labeling was a warning that f requent application of talcum powder in the female genital area substantially increases the 
risk of ovarian cancer .  It does not appear that FDA has responded to this petition.  
• In 2010, the International  Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) Working Group published that there is limited evi-
dence in experimental animals for the carcinogenicity of talc not containing asbestos or asbestiform fibers.18  The Work-
ing Group re viewed stud ies in which talc s of different grades were  tested for carcinogenicity in mice by inhala tion ex po-
sure or intra thoracic, i.p., or subcutaneous (s.c.) injection ; in rats by inhalation exposure or intrathoracic or i.p. injection, 
oral admini stration, or intra pleural or ovarian implantation; and in hamsters by inhalation exposure or intratracheal 
injection.  
For humans, the determination  of the IARC working group was that perineal use of talc -based body powder is pos sibly 
carcinogenic to humans (Group 2B) , and that inhaled talc not containing asbestos or asbestiform fibers is not clas sifiable 
as to its carcinogenicity (Group 3) .18  In evaluating the carcinogenicity of talc in humans, the Working Group reviewed 
cohort studies of talc miners and millers, cohort and case- controlled studies examining the associa tion of cosmetic talc 
use and the risk of ovarian can cer in humans, and the animal data and evidence regarding the poten tial mechanisms 
through which talc might cause cancer in humans.  The Working Group found there is inade quate evidence in humans 
for the carcin ogenicity of inhaled  talc not containing asbestos or asbestiform fibers and there is limited evidence  in 
humans for the carcin ogenicity of perineal use of talc -based body powder.  
Many occupational exposure studies are available that describe the effects reported in talc work ers.  Although the occupa -
tional exposure to talc is not at all similar to the cosmetic exposure to talc, these reports are summarized in this safety assess -
ment to  provide a total overview of available information.   Occupati onal studies in which talc was known to contain asbestos 
are not included .  
MINERALOGY AND CHEMISTRY  
Definition  and Structure  
The term talc has two meanings:  1) as a mineral, the talc corresponding to the chemical formula for hydrous mag nesium 
silicate, and 2) commercially, as a product that can be used industrially, in pharmaceuticals, and in cos metics.19  The mineral  
talc has the formula Mg 3Si4O10(OH) 220 and a theoretical chemical composition , expressed as oxides , of 31.7% by weight 
(wt) magnesium oxide (MgO), 63. 5% silicon dioxide (SiO 2), and 4.8 % water  (H2O).21  As a cosmetic ingredient, t alc (CAS 
No. 14807- 96-6) is defined as a powdered native hydrous magnesium silicate , some times containing a small portion of 
aluminum silicate .1 
Talc belongs to the  silicate subclass phyllosilicates 22 and is a sheet silicate.  T he structural unit consists of three sheets, i.e., 
octahedrally-coordinated mag nesium hydrox ide groups (brucite layer) sandwiched  between two layers of tetrahedrally -linked 
silica layers .23,24  The apical oxygen atom positions of the tetrahedral layers are shared with one of the oxygen atom positions 
of the octa hedral layer.25  The com posite sheets repeat every 9.4  angstroms  (Å).  Stacks of the triple -sheet crystalline units  are 
held together by van der Waals forces.26   (Figure 1 .27) 
Small amounts of aluminum and iron(III) can substitute for silicon in tetrahedral sites.21  Trace amounts of nickel and small 
to moderate amounts of iron(II), iron(III), aluminum, and/or manganese can substitute for magnesium in octahedral sites.  Such substitutions are bound within the crystal lattice and therefore do not exert any biological action.  The replacement of hydroxyl groups by fluorine may also occur.   
The relationship between talc and asbestos is commonly misunderstood.
26  The presumption that asbestos and talc are com -
monly associated, or co -mined, is incorrect.   Talc and asbestos (or even asbestiform  mate rials; asbestiform refers to a 
crystallization product of a min eral in which the crystals are thin, hair -like fibers with enhanced strength, flexibility, and 
durability28) form under dif ferent geological conditions  and are separated  into adjacent, but disparate , strata.   Accord ingly, by  
   3 
 utilizing proper mining methodologies , asbestos contamination is avoided.   Moreover , the absence of asbestos in talc is 
routinely confi rmed in ore samples  through a battery of analytical techniques.     
Physica l and Chemical Properties  
The min eral talc has a predominantly plate -like structur e, with adjacent layers very weakly bonded by Van der Waals 
forces.21  This allows talc to be easily sheared along the plane,  giving it its natural slippery feel as well as its softness.  Talc is 
the softest mineral , with a hardness of 1 Mohs ( scale of 1 to 10) . 
The physical form of talc rock is related to the source and ge ological conditions that exist during formation of the de posit.21  
The platelet s ize of talc deter mines its lamellarity, which, in turn, is related to the genesis of talc deposits.  Highly lamellar 
talc (informally classified as macro crystalline talc) has large individual platelets, wher eas microcrystalline talc has small , 
randomly oriented platelets.  The size of an individual talc platelet can vary from 1 µm to over 100 µm, depending on the 
formation of the deposit.29   
The particle size of talc powder depends on the p rocess used to make the powder.21  Typical cosmetic talcs have average 
particle sizes ranging between 4 and 15 μm when measured by sedimentation methods , with  only minor fractions consisting 
of particles considered respirable.  Another source recites that the “fineness” of talc used, characterized as 200 mesh, 325 mesh, or 4 00 mesh (i.e., particle size distribution that allows 95 -99% of the product to pass through a 200- , 325- , or 400-
mesh , respectively [74, 44, or 37 µm, respectively], when wet ted-out with alcohol and dispersed in water)  depends on the use 
in cosmet ics.
26  For example, 200- mesh talc is preferred for body powders, while 400- mesh talc might be used for pressed 
powders.  The cosmetic ingredient specifications for talc state that in a screen test, 100% passes t hrough 100- mesh, 98% 
minimum passes through- 200 mesh, and finer gra des are as specified by the buy er.30 
Physical and chemical properties of talc are summarized  in Table 1.  
Analytical Methods  
According to CTFA  test method J  4-1, the absence of asbestiform amphibole minerals in cosmetic talc is determined using 
the generally accepted method of x -ray diffracti on and optical microscopy with dispersion- staining.31  Other methods for the 
detection of fibrous amphibole, such as transmission electron microscop y (TEM) with selected area diffraction and electron 
microprobe, were considered but were not adopted by the cosmetics industry trade association when  the testing methods were 
first published  because of the drawbacks associated with those methods, i.e., the amount of the material examined is small; 
the expertise required; and the expense of the equipment .  However, electron microscopy, including TEM and scanning 
electron microscopy, are now routinely used as supplemental and complementary methods of x -ray di ffraction and optical 
microscopy.32  Infrared spectroscopy , which permits  detection at a 0 .1% w/w minimum detection level,  also can be used  to 
identify asbestos is talc .21   
Free crystalline silica (quartz) in talc can be detected using differential thermal analysis, which permits detection at a 0. 5 – 
1.0% w/w minimum detectable level  (CTFA test method J 5 -1),33 or by x- ray diffraction  (CTFA test method J 6 -1).34   
In early studies, the analytical methods used to identify the asbestos in talc were not performed and/or interpreted correctly.  
Misidentification of asbestos in talc can result from misinterpreta tion of the data obtained when performing an analytical 
procedure.35 
Constituents /Impurities  
Associated minerals found i n commercial talc products vary from deposit to deposit depending on the conditions of forma -
tion of the deposit.21  The most com mon minerals associated with talc are chlorite, magnesite, dolomite, calcite, mica, quartz, 
and fluorapatite.  Amphiboles and serpentine are associated with certain  specific talc deposits. These deposits are rare and 
historically were used for low -grade industrial applications due to the impurities present.  
In 1976, the CTFA issued purity standards for talc.12  Cosmetic talc consists of a mini mum of 90% hydrated magnesium 
silicate, with remainder con sisting of natural ly associated minerals such as calcite, chlorite, d olomite, kaolin, and magne site; 
it contains no detectable fi brous, asbestos min erals.30  Additional specifications for cosmetic talc include:  6.0% max. acid -
soluble sub stances; 6.0% max. loss on ignition; 3 ppm max. arsenic (as As); 20 ppm lead (as Pb);  0.1% max. water -soluble 
substances; no detectable fibrous amphibole (asbestiform tremolite, etc. ); free crys talline silica (quartz) as specified by the 
buyer ; in a screen test, 100% through 100 mesh, 98% through 200 mesh, and finer grades as specified by the buyer . 
As a color additive for drugs, talc sometimes contains a small proportion of aluminum silicate  (21CFR73.1550).   It is re-
quired to meet the specifications for talc listed in the Unite d States Pharmacopeia (USP), and  it also must contain not more 
than 20 ppm lead (as Pb) and not more than 3  ppm arsenic (as As).   The following are the acceptance criteria for USP -grade 
talc:  17.0 -19.5% magnesium; not more than  0.1% water -soluble substances with neutral pH; no more than 0.25% ir on; not 
more than 10 ppm lead; no t more than 0.9% calcium; no t more than 2.0% aluminum; and a demonstration of an absence of 
asbes tos.20   Talc intended for topical appli cation is to have a total aerobic microbial count of not more than 100 cfu/g and a  
   4 
 total combined molds and yeasts count of not more than 50 cfu/g ; talc intended for oral administration is to have a total 
aerobic microbial count of no more than 1000 cfu/g and a total com bined molds and yeasts count of not more than 100 cfu/g .  
The acceptance criteria for f ood-grade talc are not more than 3 mg/kg ar senic and no t more than 5 mg/kg lead, and the talc  
must be derived from deposits that are not associated with asbestos.36 
Batches of cosmetic talc have been analyzed for asbestos and/or asbestiform minerals  throughout the years .  Analyses per -
formed in the 1970s  that indicated asbestos might be present in talc37-40 may have used methodology that was  unreliable or 
inaccurate.   In the most recent study , which was completed  by the FDA in 2012, nine cosmetic talc suppliers were asked for 
samples of their talc; four complied with the re quest.41  The FDA also selected 34 talc- containing retail products.   As re -
quest ed by the FDA, a contract laborat ory ana lyzed the raw material and retail products using polarized light microscopy and 
transmission electron mi croscopy, find ing no asbestos fibers or structures in any of the samples .  The FDA stated  that the  
results were limited, how ever, because o f the limited response by the suppliers and by the number of products tested.  
Separate correspondence received by the CIR from the talc industry, address ed the issue of the limited response noted above 
from the supplier s of talc.32  Representatives of the talc industry stated that although not all suppliers of talc (including 
distributors) contacted by the FDA participated, the  study can be considered representative of the US cosmetic talc market as 
the majority of US cosmetic products were represented . 
Sample certificates of analysis were made available from the talc industry.42,43  One certificate demonstrate d that the absence 
of asbestos was determined using  CTFA J  4-1 and USP test methods,42 and the other stated that the talc products produced 
by this compan y do not contain detectable regulated asbestiform minerals.43 
Production 
Talc is obtained from naturally occurring rock ore .30  Talc commonly forms by hydrothermal alteration of rocks rich in mag -
nesium and iron (ultrama fic rocks) and by low -grade thermal meta morphism of siliceous dolomites.25  Soapstone refers to 
impure, massive talc rock;19 pure talc was once called steatite.44  Talc is typically mined in open -pit operations,26 and c osmet-
ic talcs are mined in Italy, France, Norway, India, Spain, China, Egypt, Japan, and the United States.45 
Crude talc ore can be sorted (beneficiated) to improve purity of commercial products by either dry or wet processing .26  In 
either case, the talc ore is crushed and ground to a fineness suitable for specific end -uses.  A dilute talc/slurry water is con -
ditione d for flotation by the addition of a frothing agent (often a low molecular  weight  alcohol), and the slurry is then proc -
essed through a series of cells through which air is pumped.  This processing causes bubbles to form, and as the bubbles rise  
to the su rface, the talc particles attach to the bubbles due to their organophilic nature; the non -talc impurities are hydro philic 
and do not tend to attach to the bubbles.  The float (or froth) is then collected.  The process is re peated until the desired puri ty 
levels are obtained.  The talc particles can be further processed by magnetic separation or acid wash ing to remove iron -bear-
ing min erals, soluble salts, and metals.  The talc is then filtered, washed, and dried.  Cosmetic talc is typically sterilized by 
heat treatment .21 
USE  
Cosmetic  
Talc is reported to have the following functions in cosmetics:  abrasive, absorbent, anticaking agent, bulking agent, opacify -
ing agent, skin protectant, and slip modifier.1  The FDA collects information from manufactur ers on the use of individual 
ingredients in cosmetics as a function of cosmetic product category in its Volun tary Cosmetic Registration Program (VCRP).  
VCRP dat a obtained from the FDA in 201346 and data received in response to a survey of the maximum reported use concen -
tration by category conducted by the Council in 200947 indicate that talc is used in 3469 cosmetic formulations  at concentra-
tions up to 100% ; it is used in almost every category of cos metic product.   In 2012, the Council completed a survey to assess 
the frequency and use concentration of talc in spray products ; the highest reported con centration used in spray products was 
35% in a makeup base (aerosol) .48  Frequency and concentration of  use data are provided in Table 2. 
Products containing talc may be applied to baby skin, used in products that could be incidentally ingested, or used near the 
eye area or mucous membranes.  Additionally, talc is used in cosmetic sprays and powders; for example, talc is reported to be 
used in face powders at 100%, baby powders at 99%,47 aerosol make -up bases at up to 35%, and in aerosol deodorants at up 
to 30% .48  (Talc is not used in extremely high concentrations in spray or aerosol products because talc clogs the nozzle.49)  
These products could possibly be inhaled.  In practice, 95 to 99% of the drop lets/par ticles released from cosmetic sprays have 
aerodynamic equiv alent diameters >10 µm.50-53  There fore, most droplets/par ticles incidentally inhaled from cosmetic sprays 
would be deposited in the naso pharyngea l and bronchial regions and would not be respirable (i.e., they would not enter the 
lungs) to any appreciable amount.50,52  There is some evidence indi cating that deo dorant spray products can release substan -
tially larger fractions of particulates having aero dynamic equivalent di ameters in the range considered to be respirable.50  
However, the informa tion is not sufficient to deter mine whether signifi cantly greater lung exposures result from the use of 
deodorant sprays, com pared to other cosmetic sprays.   
   5 
 The particle size of talc raw material varies widely by product type and by manu facturer but has “no practical significance 
with regard to human exposure since encap sulation by the other ingredients in the product matrices ” (such as a lipstick or 
deodorant stick) “renders the talc con stituents es sentially nonrespir able”.26  Semi -solid matrix for mulations (typically pressed 
powders such as blushe s, eye shadows, pressed finishing powders, and base powders) incorporate binder systems.  Fine talc 
with a larger than average particle size (200 -mesh) is often preferred for use in blushes, eye shadows, and finishing powders.  
Loose -talc-based formulations , such as loose finishing makeup powders, baby powders, body powders, and foot powders, do 
not include a binder system.  The major ity of cosmetic talcs in loose -matrix powders contain talc particles that  are of a larger 
diameter than those used in other cos metic applications; for loose powders,  a 200- mesh is normally used , and i n these loose 
powders, substantial agglomeration occurs due to electrostatic and crystall ine charges on the talc powders.  
While some  researchers state that the inclusion of a fragrance oil may act as a minimal binder system causing further agglom -
eration ,26 another researcher found that there was no evidence that the presence of perfume in adult or baby dusting powders 
containing Italian  00000 grade  talc or Chinese talc influenced the level of respirable talc dust.54 
In the European Union, the use of talc in powdery products intended to be used for children under 3 is restricted by the re -
quire ment of l abeling that warns to keep powder away from children’s nose and mouth.   In Canada, t he inner and outer label 
of preparations in powder form intended for infants and children shall carry cautionary statements to the effect: "Keep out o f 
reach of children", "Keep powder away from child's face to avoid inhalation which can caus e breathing prob lems."55 
Non-Cosmetic  
Sterile talc is approved as a sclerosing agent .56  Sterile talc powder is indicated for administering intrapleurally via chest -tube 
to decrease the recurrence of malignant pleural effusions in symp tomatic patients .  Talc is not allowed for use on the surface 
of medical gloves.57 
Talc is used as a color additive in drugs and is exempt from certification ; it may be safely used in amounts consistent with 
good manufacturing practice to color drugs (21CFR73.1550).   In foods, talc is used as an anticaking agent, coating agent, 
lubricating and release agent, surface- finishing agent, and texturizing agent.36  Talc is a generally recog nized as safe (GRAS) 
substance migrating from cotton and cotton fabrics used in dry food packaging (21CFR182.70) and as a substance migr ating 
to food from paper and paperboard products (21CFR182.90).  It is approved as an indirect food additive  as a color ant (21CFR  
176.170; 21CFR178.3297).  The World Health Organization allocated talc (as magnesium  silicate) an accept able daily intake 
(ADI) of “not specified.”58   
FDA determined that d ata are inadequate to establish general recognition of the safety of talc as an active ingredient (astrin -
gent) in over -the-counter (OTC) drug products (21CFR310.545(e)(18 )(ii)).  
Talc is used as a dusting powder, alone or with starch or boric acid, for medicinal and  toilet preparations.59  It is used as an 
excipient and filler for pills and tablets, for dusting tablet molds, and for cl arifying liquids by filtration.  Talc is also us ed as a 
pigmen t in paints, varnishes, rubber; as filler for paper, rubber, soap; in fireproof and cold- water paints for wood, metal and 
stone; for lubricating molds and machinery; as glove and shoe powder; and as an electric and heat insulator.   Talc is us ed in 
the leather industry, in the roofing and ceramic tile indus try, as a carrier for insecticides  and herbi cides ,60 and it is used in 
plastics.27  
TOXICOKINETICS  
Inhalation  
Non-Human  
To determine the deposition, distribution, and clearance of talc, 44 female Syrian golden hamsters received a single 2 -h nose -
only exposure  to a neutron- activated talc aerosol and sub -groups of 4 animals were then killed at 11 different inter vals from 
15 min to 132 days after exposure .61  The talc tested was a commercial baby powder.  (Chem ical characterization data were 
not provided).  Nine unexposed control animals were used; four were killed on the day the test animals were exposed and fi ve 
were killed on the final day of the study.  The aer osol ex posure system had 7 tiers of exposure ports, and the talc aerosol was 
passed through a cyclone elutriator to remove particles that were larger than ~10 µm in diameter; the activity median aero dy-
namic diameter was 6. 4-6.9 µm.  The mean aerosol con centration was 40 and 75 µg/l at the 15- 30 and 60- 90 min sampling 
periods, respectively.  In the presentation of the results, the γ -ray counts from the con trols were expressed as µg talc equiv a-
lent, and the γ -ray counts of the exposed animals were not corrected for control values.  
Variations among animals killed at the same time were attributed to variations in aerosol concentration at different tiers.  The 
mean pulmonary talc content in the lungs of test animals at various time intervals was 33.08 (15 min after expo sure) , 24.08 
(100 min) , 42.70 (4 h) , 18.75 (21 h) , 21.30  (2 days) , 21.03  (after 4 days) , 13.85 (after 8 days) , and 8.95µg  (after 18 days) ; the 
mean for the day 0 control animals was 1.78 µg.  The biological half -life of the talc deposited in the lungs was 7 -10 days.  At 
the time of termination of the final group, i.e. 132 days, there was no statistically significant difference in the talc burd en of 
the lungs of test (3.70 µg) and control (2.30 µg) animals.  The amount of talc in the liver, kidneys, and lungs was also dete r- 
   6 
 mined; the only statistically significant differences compared to controls in any of these organs were found in the liver; th ere 
was a decrease at 4 h compared to day 0 controls, an increase at day 36 compared to both day 0 and day 132 controls, and an 
increase on day 68 compared to day 132 controls.  Analysis of the data using the Krus kal-Wallis test showed that there were 
no significant differences among the mean talc burden values for the liver, kidneys , and ovaries, including the control values, 
and t hat there was no significant trend, indicating there was no translocation of talc to these tissues .  As noted, no trans loca-
tion from the respiratory tract to other tissues was found in this study, and the clearance of t alc from the lungs was complete 
within 4 months after exposure . 
Oral  
Non-Human  
Six female Syrian golden hamsters (outbred Ela:ENG strain) were dosed by gavage with 1 ml neutron -activated talc sus pend -
ed in physiolog ical saline containing 0.6% (w/w) 1% methyl cellulose (concentration not specified ), and the animals were 
killed 24 h after dos ing.62  The talc used was a commercial baby powder.  (Chemical character ization data and particle size 
were not pro vided).  Four ham sters were dosed similarly with a non -irradiated talc solution .  The neutron -activated talc was 
exposed to an integrated neu tron flux of 7 x 1016 n/cm2 30 days prior to dosing.   The skinned carcass, gastrointestinal (GI) 
tract, lungs, liver, kidneys, and excreta were analyzed for 60Co and 46Sc by γ -ray spectrometry, and th e γ-ray counts were 
compared with those of four ham sters that were not dosed with talc.  
The γ -ray counts of the tissue and excreta of the dose d animals were equivalent to a total of 2.94 mg talc.  Based on γ -ray 
counts, 74.5% of the neutron- activated talc was recovered in the feces and 23.5% was recovered in the GI  tract, while 1.91% 
was recovered in the skinned carcass, 0.09% in the urine, 0.04% in the kidneys, and  0.02% in the liver.  The amount f ound in 
the urine of the hamsters given irradiated talc was statistically significantly increased compared to  the controls.  No talc was 
recov ered in the lungs . 
The absorption, distribution, and excretion of orally administered talc was determined in mice , rats, and guinea pigs.63  
(Chemical character ization data were not provide d).  With all species, [3H]talc was admin istered as  a suspension in aqueous 
(aq.) glycerol jelly solution (10 mg/ml; 1 µCi/ml).  F our LACA female  mice  were given a single oral dose of 40 mg/kg bw 
[3H]talc.  Two mice were killed at 6 h and two at 24 h af ter dosing.   In the mice  killed 6 h after dosing, 95 and 96% of the 
radio activity was recovered in the large intestines and  feces, 9  and 7 % was recov ered in the small intestines and stomach, and 
0.7 and 0 % in the urine  of each mouse . In the two mice killed 24 h after dosing, 99 and 101% of the radioactivity was recov -
ered in the large intestines and feces, 4 and 6% was recovered in the small intestines and stomach, and 1.3 and 1.5% in the 
urine  of each mouse .  Less than 0.005% of the radioactivity was found in the carcass of any of the mice.  
Three male Wistar albino rats were given a single oral dose and three rats were given six daily oral doses  by gavage of 50 
mg/kg bw [3H]talc.  After the last dose, u rine and feces were collected ev ery 24 h for 4 days and on day 10; the  rats were then 
killed.  Within 24 h after administration  of the single dose, approximately 75% of the radioacti vity was re covered in the feces 
and only 1% was recovered in the urine.   After 96 h, a total of 95.8% of  the dose was excreted in the feces and 1.7% in the 
urine , with a total excretion of 97.5% of the dose .  No radioactivity was recovered in the liver or kidneys 10 days after a 
single dose of talc.  On day 10 in the rats given six daily doses of [3H]talc, there was no radioactivity found in the feces or 
livers, and there was a trace of radio activity (<0.02%) in the kidneys of these rats.  
Three female Dunkin Hartley guinea pigs were administered a single oral dose of 25 mg/kg  bw [3H]talc, and urine and feces 
were collected as described above; all animals were killed on day 10.   Talc was excreted more slowly in the guinea pig than 
in the rat.  Within 24 h after dosing, 31% of the radioactivity was recovered in the feces, and 0.2% was recovered in the uri ne.  
At 24 -48 h and 48- 72 h after dosing, 39% and 19% of the radioactivity, respec tively, was recovered in the feces, with <0.01% 
of the dose being recovered in the urine at each of these time periods.  Within 96 h of dosing, a total of 94.4% of the radioac-
tivity was recovered in the feces and 0.2% was recovered in the urine, with a total of 94.6% of the dose being excreted over 
96 h. 
Intrapleural  
Non-Human  
Wistar rats were used to determine the systemic distribution of talc following intrapleural administr ation.64  Groups of 20 rats 
(sex not specified) were administered 10 or 20 mg talc in 1 ml of saline as a slurry into the pleural cavity .  (Chem ical char ac-
terization data were not provided).  Ten animals of each group were killed 24 h after instilla tion, and the remaining 10 ani-
mals were killed 48 h after instillation.  The lungs, chest wall, liver, kidneys, spleen, heart, and brain of each animal were  re-
moved for examination.   There were no gross lesions in  the examined tissues.  Microscopic ex amination revealed that the 
chest wall had the most common lesions, and these lesions were represented by an early pneu moconiosis characterized by 
stellate interstitial collections of dust -laden macrophages containing pale yellow par ticles associ ated with inflammatory infil -
trate of lymphocytes with mild fibro blastic proliferation.   Polarized light used to locate bire fringent particles  revealed “large 
numbers of irreg ular, strong ly birefringence platy, acicular, and “Maltese Cross” crystals that varied  in length from 5.7 –  70 
µm” in the chest wall.   The dep osition index of talc crystals w as greater in the chest wall and the lungs after admin istration of  
   7 
 10 mg (3.90 in the chest and 3.18 in the lungs) than 20 mg talc (3.58 in the chest and 2.50 in the lungs); this differ ence was 
statistically sig nificant.  (It is not stated whether these values were from the 24 h group, 48 h group, or an average of the two).  
Pneu moconiosis reac tions were not observed in the other organs;  however talc crystals were present insi de of the micro ves-
sels.  The researchers suggest ed talc was absorbed rapidly through the pleura, reaching the systemic circulation with deposi -
tion in other organs within 24 h after administra tion, and that the distribution was not dose -related.  
TOXICOLOGICAL S TUDIES  
Single Dose Toxicity  
Oral  
The LD 50 of talc in rats was determined to be 920 mg/kg  bw.65  Ten male rats were dosed by gavage with 5000 mg/kg bw 
talc sus pend ed in 0.85% salin e; all 10 rats died within 24 h.  Groups of 5 rats were then intubated with 50, 100, 500, 100 0, 
2000, or 3000 mg/kg bw talc in saline.  All five animals dosed with 3000 mg/kg  bw, four dosed with 2000 mg/kg  bw, three 
with 1000 mg/kg  bw, and one with 500 mg/kg bw talc died.  (Chemical character ization data were not provided).  
In another single -dose study in rats, the LD 50 was >5000 mg/kg  bw.65  All the animals survived  dosing with 5000 mg/kg bw 
talc in 0.85% saline.   
The oral LD 50 of 18.3% talc in saline was >5000 mg/kg  bw.65 A single oral dose of 5000 mg/kg bw of talc prepared as an 
18.3% (w/v) suspension in saline was administered to 10 mal e rats.  All animals survived, and there were no signs of toxicity.  
Inhalation  
Eight mice were placed in a box with baby powder that was circulated with compressed air.66  (Details regarding the compo -
sition of the baby powder, the amount of baby powder, or the size of the box w ere not provided).  Two mice were removed 
from the box at 30- min intervals , i.e. after 30, 60, 90, or  120 min.  The mice removed after 30 and 60 min recovered com -
plete ly; symptoms that were observed were not specified .  The mice removed after 90 min died in 5 -6 h; the mice removed at 
120 min died immediately upon removal .  The mice that died were necropsied, and the mucous membrane of the airway was 
found covered with baby powder.  Micro scopically, hemor rhage, edema, and desquamation of bronchial epit helium admixed 
with baby powder were observed.  
Intrabursal  
Groups of 10 anesthetized female Sprague -Dawley rats (10 -15 wks of age) were given a single bilateral intrabursal injection 
of 100 µl of 100 mg/ml talc in phosphate -buffered saline (PBS)  into the bursa around the ovaries , and groups of 3 age -
matched, sham -operated, and sham -treated rats were used as con trols.67  Asbestos -free Italian 00000 talc, composed of platy 
crystals ran ging in size from 0.3- 14 µm, was used.   The animals were killed 1, 3, 6, 12, or 18 mos after dosing.   There was no 
effect on the pro duction of physio logical concentrations of steroid hormones.  Gross examination was made for all animals, 
and m icroscopic exam ination was per formed 12 mos after dosing.   One or both ovaries of rats dosed with talc were cystic in 
appear ance at all time periods ; no gross changes were seen in the  ovaries of the control animals; the cystic structures were not 
derived from the ovaries but were due to distention of the bursal sac.  Focal areas of papillary change were seen in the surface 
epithelium of four injected ovaries, but not in any of the controls.   There was no correlation between the presence of foreign 
body granulom as and the presence of the papillary changes.   No evidence of cel lular lesions or of mitotic activity was seen in 
the non- papillary areas of the surface epithelium of injected ovaries, and neo plasia was  not observed.  Foreign body granulo -
mas, without surrounding inflammation, were seen in the cortical area of five of the injected ovaries , with similar lesions in 
the supracapsular fat in the connective tissue matrix of the capsule.  Talc was observed in the granulomas.  
Intraperitoneal  
The induction of f ibrosis following an i.p. injection of 50 mg/kg bw non -fibrous talc in physiological saline was eval uated in 
six male and six female Wistar rats.68  A granulomatous reaction in which foreign -body giant cells con taining refractile mate-
rials was observed in the rats at 1 mo after dosing; this lesion was still observed at 3 mos, but there was no fibrosis.  
Groups of five female Wistar rats were used to evaluate the toxicity of talc following a single i.p. injection of 0.02, 0.1, or 0.5 
g in 5 ml normal saline.69  Although t he talc  was described as irregular crystalline plates, it was also stated  that it could vary  
from all plates to all fibers.  The talc was composed of 49- 56% silicon dioxide, 20- 22% magnesium oxide, 6 -8% calcium 
oxide; the particle size ranged  from 10 -120 µm, with a mode of 20 µm.  The control group was administered saline only.  The 
animals were killed 7 days after dosing.  There were no adhesions in the control group, but adhesions were observed, mainly 
in the upper abdomen, of the test animals; three animals of the 0.5 g group had mild/inter mediate adhesions and four animals 
in the 0.5 g group had four intermediate adhesions.  Talc particles could be seen in the adhesions.  The pari etal peritoneal 
mesothelium was examined microscopically using the Hautchen technique, and clusters of foci of inflam matory cells were 
observed scattered on  the surface of the peritoneum.  Again, talc particles were seen in the center of each focus of in flamma-
tory cells.  Powder deposits adherent to the viscera or omentum without adhesions were reported in three animals dosed with 
0.02 g talc and in all a nimals dosed with 0.1 or 0.5 g talc; ascites did not occur in any of these animals.   
   8 
 Cellular Effects  
Cellular effects in various systems are described in Table 3 .  There were no remarkable results found in studies examining the 
cellular effect of talc, suc h as cytotoxicity assays, assays examining the effect of talc on cell viability, or studies on the induc -
tion of apoptosis (among others).68,70-77 
Repeated Dose Toxicity  
Repeated dose animal toxicity studies are sum marized in Table 4 .  Dermal application of talc to shaved  rabbit skin for 6 wks 
resulted in dryness of the skin and skin erosion.78  Oral ad ministration to rats for 5  days produced minimal toxicity ;65 no tox i-
cologically significant effects were noted in a 5 -mos study in which rats were fed a diet containing 100 mg/day Italian talc.79  
In inhalation studies, exposure of mice and rats for 4 w ks (25 µm particle size) resulted in macrophages in the alveolar space, 
with more found in the mice than the rats.10,80  In rats exposed for 3, 6, or 12 mos, minimal to slight fibrosis resulted.79  In 
hamsters, exposure by inhalation to baby powder ( 95% talc; 4.9 -6.0 µM) for 30 days did not result in clin ical toxicity, and no 
trends were observed.81  Intrapleural administration of talc (25 µm) to rats did not result in meso theliomas; granulomas at the 
injection  site were common.79  Infections occurred, but no neoplastic or perineal changes, when talc was instilled intra vagi-
nally or perineally in rats.82  Upon intravenous  (i.v.) injection of talc (<5 µm) once weekly for 3 wks  in guinea pigs , talc was 
found in the lungs and the liver throughout the study.83 
Ocular Irritation  
Two unpublished ocular irritation studies were briefly summarized in the IUCLID dataset on talc.84  Talc was not irritating to 
the eyes of rabbits in one study and was slightly irritating to the eyes of rabbits in the other study.  No details were prov ided.  
A case study was reported in which a woman presented with a foreign body sens ation and inflammation of the con junctiva of 
both eyes.85  Following a biopsy and electron microscopy and electron diffraction analysis of the sample, a diag nosis of 
foreign body granuloma secondary to talc was made.  It was postulated that the talc originated from surgical gloves used 
during  a surgery performed decades earlier.  
Granuloma Formation in the Skin  
Application of talc on wounds  can give rise to scab formation, possible infection, and foreign body granulo mas in the der -
mis.86  In one case study, talc powder applied to post-varicella lesions resulted in granulomas.  In another case study, hun -
dreds of granulomas of the skin developed in a patient that had open, draining furuncles and who had liberal ly applied talc 
daily.87 
Occupational Exposure  
Talc has a threshold limit value (TLV) (respirable fraction) of 2 mg/m3 as a 10- h time-weighted average (TWA).88  The 
National Institute for Occupational Safety  and Health  (NIOSH) states the immediately -dangerous -to-life-or-health (IDLH) 
concentration is 1000 mg/m3.  The Occupation al Health and Safety Admin istration (OHSA) mineral dust limit for talc is 20 
millions of particles per cubic foot (mppcf) of air, if containing less than 1% quartz; if ≥1% quartz is present, then the quartz 
limit is used (250/(%SiO 2 + 5) mppcf) ( 29CFR1910.1000 T able Z-3). 
Human pulmonary effects of chronic occupational inhalation of talc include  diffuse interstitial fibrosis and progres sive mas -
sive fibrosis (often called complicated pneumoconiosis).89  Depending on the composition and contaminants of talc, three 
forms of ta lc-related pulmonary effects have been described:  pure talco sis, produced by exposure to talc that is free of silica 
and as bestiform minerals; talco -asbestosis, produced by the inhalation of talc with asbesti form fibers; and talco -silicosis, pro -
duced by exposure to talc associated with silica and other non -asbestiform fibers .90  A fourth talc -related disease, stem ming 
from i.v. administration of talc, is not related to oc cupa tional exposure, but instead is usually associated  with abuse of oral 
medications.  Each form has a distinctly dif ferent radiographic appearance.  The radiographic abnor malities associated with 
pure talcosis consist of small nodules that are usually seen in the lower pul monary fields.  Reticulations may occur, but this is 
less common.  P ure talcosis results in pul monary function test results that are consistent with restrictive pulmonary disease.  
Effects of Occupational Exposure 
Studies examining the pulmonary effects of occupational exposure to talc by talc miners and millers and by workers in indus-
tries that use talc are summarized in Table 5.   Statistically significantly elevated standardized mortality ratios (SMRs) for sili-
cosis and silico -tuberculosis were ob served in an early study of talc miners and millers in the Italian Piedmont re gion.91 The 
miners were employed for at least one year and the millers for at least two years in their respective occupations.  Talc in this 
region report edly contained no fibrous mat erial, except for tremolite micro -inclusions.  This study also found statistically sig -
nificantly  reduced SMRs for malignant neoplasms, including lung, bronchial and trache al cancers. Updates of this study re-
ported simi lar results, including statistically significant increases in mortality, which were attributable primarily to non -
malig nant respir atory diseases among the miners, no increases in SMRs for cancer, including lung cancer, and no meso theli-
oma cases.92,93    
   9 
 A cohort study of talc miners and millers employed for at least one year found no statistically significant SMRs for all caus es, 
all cancers, or diseases of the circulatory system or respiratory tract.94  These workers were exposed to talc and mag nesite 
containing trace amounts of quartz, tremolite, and anthophylite.  There were no lung cancer or mesothelioma cases even 
among the workers in the highest exposure category.  
The results of several other epidemiological studies were likely confounded by the presence of up to 3% silica or 6% actin o-
lite in the talc, exposures to high concentrations of silica with or without exposures to  fibrous talc or tremol ite, or con current 
exposures to radon daughters .95-101 
A meta -analysis of studies of miners and millers who worked with non- asbestiform talc reported summary SMRs for lung 
cancer of 0.92 (95% confidence interval ( CI): 0.67- 1.25) for millers in five countries exposed to high levels of talc without 
exposure to other occupational carcinogens, and 1.2 (95% CI: 0.86- 1.63) for miners in 3 countries exposed to high levels of 
talc as well as to silica or radon and radon daughters.28  The corresponding SMRs for death from all caus es were 0.95 for the 
millers and 1.10 for the miners.  
Studies examining radiological, lung -function , and clinical (e.g., wheezing, coughing, bronchitis) parameters in talc miners 
and millers and rubber workers found some statistically significant decreases  in lung function .96,102-106   
Respirable Particles During Use  
Studies on e xposure during  use of cosmetic talc are summarized in Table 6 .54,60,107  Many of the researchers noted that there 
was a wide vari ation in talcing times and methods, often by the same volunteer during different applications.   Reported talc -
ing times ranged fro m 17 sec to 31 sec.  
Case Reports  
A 70 -yr old non- smoking female was determined to have intense endobronchitis and airway stricture following inhala tion of 
large amounts of cosmetic talc.108  The subject frequently poured a “small p ile of talcum powder” into her hand and applied it 
to her face.  Bron choscopy showed diffuse, severe endobronchitis that extended throughout both main stem bronchi.  Chest 
radiography and computed tomography ( CT) imaging showed complete collapse of the right upper and middle lobes of the 
lung; the right lung was normal with the exception of scattered areas  of mild bronchial wall thickening, bronchial  plugging, 
and a few non -specific nodules .  Bronchial biopsies showed edema, chronic inflammation, and fibrosis , and  there were con -
fluent foreign -body g ranulomata that contained birefringent  crystalline material.  Spectral analysis con firmed the crystals 
were the same composition as the talc used by the subject.  
A case of chronic pulmonary granulomatous reaction was r eported in a woman who applied “non -powdering talc” to her face 
for 20 yrs ,  followed by use of t alcum powder 2 -3 times a day during a 10- yr period, usually in an unventilated room.109  The 
subject had smoked for 20 yrs.  The amount of powder used per year was described as two boxes, but the amount per box was 
not stated.   Chest x -rays showed f ine diffuse opacities, and anterolateral thoracotomy showed a diffuse nodular con sistency.  
A heavy intra -alveolar and interstitial granulomatous inflammation was found at biopsy , and numerous birefringent particles 
were found inside the giant cells .  The foreign body material contained in the granulomas was  characteristic of talc.  After 2 
yrs follow -up, a biopsy of an enlarged lymph node showed granulomatous inflammation.  It was the opinion of the inves tiga-
tors that this was a case of not true tal c pneumoconiosis, but chronic sarcoidosis and coincidental talc deposition in the lung.  
Pulmonary talcosis was reported in several cases of misuse of talcum powder in which the subjects dusted their en tire body 
with large amounts of powder at least once a day,110,111, including one in which an individual also dusted the bed sheets every 
day,112 and in a case in which the powder was purposefully inhaled.113  A woman that excessively used talc for herself and 
her children died from rapidly  progressive disease and pulmonary hypertension.  C ases of accidental inhalation of large 
amounts of talc  by in fants and children have been reported, and consequences have ranged from complete recovery to 
death.66,114-118  Specifics of these cases are not included because the results are not from normal, i ntended use  of the product .  
Also not included in this safety assessment are reports of adverse effects due to injection of talc with i.v. drug abuse.  
REPRODUCTIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL TOXICITY  
Oral  
Orally administered talc was not a developmental  toxicant in  mice, rats, hamsters,119 or rabbits . 120 Chemical character ization 
of the talc was not provided in any of these studies.  
Groups of 20- 22 gravid albino CD -1 mice and groups of 20- 24 gravid Wistar rats were dosed by gavage with 0, 16, 74, 350, 
or 1600 mg/kg  bw talc as an anh ydrous corn oil suspension on days 6 -15 of gestation.119  Aspirin was used as a posit ive con-
trol in both species .  The mice were killed on day 17 and the rats on day 20 of gestation and the number of implantation sites, 
resorptions sites, and live and dead fetuses,  and the live pup body weights were recorded.   In both mice and rats, the a dmin i-
stration of up to 1600 mg/kg bw talc in corn oil had no effect on reproduct ive or developmental parameters and had no effect 
on maternal or fetal survival.   
   10 
 In hamsters, groups of 20 -23 gravid female golden hamsters were dosed by gavage with 0, 12, 56, 260, or 1200 mg/kg bw 
talc as an anhydrous corn oil suspension on days 6- 10 of gestation.119.  The animals were killed on day 14 of ges tation and 
examined as described previously.  The adm inistration of up to 1200 mg/kg bw talc in corn oil had no repro ductive or devel -
opmental effects and had no effect on maternal or fetal survival . 
Groups of 12- 15 gravid Dutch -belted female rabbits were dosed orally with 9, 42, 195, or 900 mg/kg bw talc in corn oil on 
days 6 -18 of gestation.120  Eight gravid negative controls were give n only vehicle and 9 gravid positive controls were dosed 
with 2.5 mg/kg  bw of 6-aminonicotinamide on day 9 of ges tation.  The dams wer e killed on day 29 of gestation.  A total of 
1/8, 4/15, 2/12, 5/15, and 2/13 dams of the negative control, 9, 42, 195, a nd 900 mg/kg bw dose groups, respectively, died or 
aborted be fore day 29 of gestation, and the number of live litters for these groups was 6/7, 10/11, 8/10, 10/10, and 7/11, 
respectively.  The researchers concluded  that administration of up to 900 mg/kg  bw talc on days 6- 18 of gestation  “had no 
discernible effect on nidation or on maternal or fetal survival.”   The re search ers also stated the number of abnormalities  did 
not differ between test and control animals.  
In a dominant -lethal study, groups of 10 male rats were dosed by gavage with a single dose or once daily for 5 days with 30, 
300, 3000, or 5000 mg/kg bw talc.65  Saline w as used as the negative control  and 0.1 µg/ml triethyl melamine (i.p.) was  the 
positive control.  (The results of the reproductive portion o f the study are presented here; the genotoxicity results are pre -
sented in that section of the safety assessment).  Each treated rat was mated with two previously unmated fe males, and 2 wks  
after mating, the female rats were killed and the effects on fertility and preim plantation loss  were determined.  In the single -
dose study, significant dose -related  decreases  in average corpora lutea and preim plantation los ses were reported in the test 
groups at wks 4 and 5.  In the repeated dose study, signi ficant increases in average implan tations and corpora lutea were re-
ported in the test group s at wk 6, as were significant dif ferences in the proportions of females with 1+ or 2+ dead impla nts.  
However, the results observed at the highest dose did not vary significantly from the negative control, and no dose -response 
or time -trend patterns were indicated.  
GENOTOXICITY  
In Vitro  
Talc was not genotoxic in a n unscheduled DNA synthesis (UDS) ass ay or a sister chromatid exchange ( SCE) assay  in rat 
pleural mesothelial cells  (RPMC).  121,122  Three samples of Euro pean talc (French, Italian, and Spanish talc) were tes ted.  The 
samples, which contained 90- 95% talc with chlorite and dolo mite, were asbestos -free; the mean particle size of the samples 
ranged from 2.6 µm (Spanish and French talc) to 4.0 µm (Italian talc).  In the UDS assay, the cells were treated with 0, 1 0, 
20, or 50 µg/cm2 of each sample of talc for 24 h .  A negative ref erence particle control, anatase,  and two positive controls 
reference particles, Rhodesian chrysotile and crocidolite were used; mean particle sizes of the three talc samples were 0.7 , 
3.2, and 3.1 µm, respectively.  The particles were dispersed in culture medium at a concentration of 560 µg/ml by soni cation.  
None of the talc samples enhanced UDS.  The negative and positive particles yielded the expected results.   
In the SCE assay,  RPMC were treated with 0, 2, 5, 10, and 15 µg/cm2 of each  talc sample for 48 h .  Two negative ref erence 
particle controls, anatase and attapulgite, and the two positive controls reference particles  named previously were used, as 
were the chemical contr ols mitomycin C in water and K 2CrO 4 in culture medium.  Talc did not cause a statistically 
significant increase in SCEs and was not clastogenic.  The negative particle controls and chemical controls gave expected 
results; chrysotile and crocidolite statist ically significantly increased SCEs in 2/4 and 3/8 experiments, respectively.  
In Vitro/In Vivo  
Talc was not genotoxic in a host -mediated assay or cytogenetic assay.  (Chemical character ization data were not pro vided in 
either assay).  In the host -mediated assay, male ICR mice served as the host and groups of 10 animals were dosed by gavage 
with a single dose or once daily for  5 days with 30, 300, 3000, or 5000 mg/kg bw talc.65  Salmonella typhimurium  TA1530 
and G46 and Saccharomyces cerevisiae D3 were the indicator organisms.  Saline was the neg ative control and 100 mg/kg bw 
dimeth yl nitrosamine and intramuscular administra tion of 350 mg/kg  bw ethyl met hane sulfon ate were  the positive control s.  
For com parison, a microdrop of solution, 0.01- 0.25 ml , of talc was eval uated in an  Ames test  using S. typhimurium  TA1530 
and G46 and S.  cerevisiae D3.  Talc caused no significant increase in mutant or recom binant frequencies in the host -mediated 
assay, and it was not mutagenic in the Ames test . 
Groups of 15 male albino rats were given a single dose by gavage and groups of 5 rats were dosed once daily for 5 days with 
30, 300, 3000 , or 5000 mg/kg bw talc in the cytogenetics assay .65  Saline was used as the negative control and 0.3 mg/kg bw 
triethyl melamine  (i.p.) was the positive con trol.  The concentrations used during the in vitro aspect of the study we re 2, 20, 
and 200 µg/ml in human embryonic lung culture ( WI-38) cells.  Talc produced no sig nificant aberrations during the in vivo 
or in vitro phase and was not genotoxic.   
   11 
 In Vivo  
Talc was not genotoxic in a rat dominant lethal assay.65  (Chemical character ization data were not provided).  Groups of 10 
male r ats were dosed by gavage with a single dose or once daily for 5 days with 30, 300, 3000, or 5000 mg/kg bw talc.  
Saline was used as the negative control and 0.1 µg/ml triethyl melamine  (i.p.) was the positive control.  There were no dose-
response or time -trend patterns; talc did not induce dominant lethal mutations in this assay.  
CARCINOGENICITY  
In 2010, the IARC Working Group published the monograph stating that there is limited evi dence in experimental animals for 
the car cinogenicity of talc not containing asbestos or asbestiform fibers.18  The Working Group re viewed stud ies in which 
talc of different grades was tested for car cinogenicity in mice by inhala tion exposure or intra thoracic, i.p., or subcutaneous 
(s.c.) injection, in rats by inhalation ex posure or intrathoracic or i.p. injection, oral admini stration, or intra pleural or ovarian 
implantation, and in ham sters by inhala tion exposure or intratracheal injection.  
For humans, the evaluation of the IARC working group was that perineal use of talc -based body powder is pos sibly car cino-
genic to humans (Group 2B) , and that inhaled talc not containing asbestos or asbestiform fibers is not clas sifiable as to its 
carcinogenicity (Group 3) .18  In evaluating the carcinogenicity of talc in humans, the Working Group review ed cohort studies 
of talc miners and millers, cohort and case- controlled studies examining the associa tion of cosmetic talc use and the risk of 
ovarian can cer in humans, and the animal data and evidence regarding the poten tial mechanisms through which t alc might 
cause cancer in hu mans.  The Working Group found there is inade quate evidence  in humans for the carcin ogenicity of in -
haled talc not con taining asbestos or asbestiform fibers and there is limited evidence  in humans for the carcin ogenicity of 
perineal use of talc- based body powder.  
The references cited by the IARC in their review were obtained by the CIR and are cited  as appropriate in this safety 
assessment.  
Inhalation  
Exposure of hamsters  to talc via inhalation did not produce ca rcinogenic effects.81  Groups of 50 male and 50 female Syri an 
golden hamsters were exposed for 30 or 150 min/day, 5 days/wk, to 27.4 ± 3.4 µg/l mean total aerosol concent ration com -
mercial baby powde r (95% w/w platy talc with trace  quantities of carbonates and plat y chlorite and rutile) until natural death , 
or, for a maximum of 300 days.  A group of 25 male and 25 female hamsters  served as the control group.  A single tie r expo-
sure was used.  There was n o statistically significant difference in survival time among groups, but there was a signifi cant 
difference between males and females within all groups.  No clinical signs of toxicity to talc were observed.  The type, inci-
dence, and severity of lesions indicated no trend toward a dose- response and no statistically significant differences between 
exposed and control groups.  The incidence of focal alveolar cell hyperplasia (25% in treated groups; 10% in controls) ap -
peared to be affected by treatment, but a two -way weighted analysis showed no significant association.  
A bioassay using mice and rats was performed by the NTP to determine the carcinogenic potential of non- asbesti form , 
cosmetic -grade talc following e xposure  by inhalation .10  There was no evi dence of carcinogenic activity in male or fe male 
B6C3F 1 mice, some  evidence of carcinogenic activity in male F344/rats, and clear evidence of carcinogenic activity in 
female F344/N rats.  The talc used was asbestos -free and virtually silica -free micro talc; scanning electron microprobe analy -
sis of one lot of talc indicated that 1/1466 particles examined was silica, 136/1466 particles tremolite, and 1241/1466 par ti-
cles were talc.  More than 75% of  the particles were in the 1.0 –  3.0 µm range.   This study is discussed in greater detail 
below.  
A 2-yr study was performed in mice; g roups of 50 male and 50 female B6C3F 1 mice (7 wks old) were exposed to target con -
centrations of 0, 6, or 18 mg/m3 talc for 6 h/day, 5 days/wk, for 103-104 wks.   The  concentrations were selected based on the 
results of a 4 -wk inhalation study in B6C3F 1 mice; that study is presented  in Table 4 .  These exposure con centrations pro vid-
ed a dose equivalent of 0, 2, or 6 mg/kg  bw/day for male mice, respectively, and 0, 1.3, or 3.9 mg/kg  bw/day for fe male mice, 
respectively.   The MMAD was 3.3 ± 1.9 µm in the 6 mg/m3 chamber and 3.6 ± 2.0 µm in the 18 mg/m3 cham ber.  Groups of 
40 male and 40 female mice were similarly exposed and killed at 6, 12, and 18 mos for interim microscopic eval uations.  
Some prob lems were experienced in maintaining control of the chamber concentrations, and there was a 12 -wk peri od begin-
ning at wk 70 during which the chamber concentrations were substantially lower than the target concentrations.  Mean body 
weights  were similar for test and control animals, and there were no clinical finding s attributable to talc exposure.  
 Compared to the 6 mos value, the lung talc burden (normalized to con trol lung wt) was statistically sig nificantly increased at 
24 mos in 6 mg/m3 males, at 12 and 24 mos in 18 mg/m3 males, at 18 and 24 mos in 6 mg/m3 females, and at 12, 18, and 24 
mos in 18 mg/m3 females.  When lung talc burdens were normalized to exposure con centration, a statisti cally sig nificant dif -
ference was observed between the 6 and 18 mg/m3 males at 12 and 24 mos but not at 6 and 18 mos.  The mouse lung talc bur -
dens are provided in Table 7 .  
   12 
 Changes in enzymatic activities in broncho alveolar lavage fluid were noted mostly in the 18 mg/m3 males and fe males; 
measured enzymatic activity was increased in the high -dose animals at 18 and 24 mos.  A statistically significant in crease in 
β-glucuronidase activity was seen at   12 mos in the high dose animals, and at 24 mos, the activity was increased in all test 
groups.  Lavage fluid polymorpho nuclear cells were statistically significantly increased in males and females of the  18 mg/m3 
group at all times except at 12 mos; statistically signi ficant increases were observed in some 6  mg/m3 interim groups .  The 
population of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid macrophages was significantly decreased in the female test groups at 24 mos.  
The phago cytic activity of the macrophages recovered from the lav age fluid at 12, 18, and  24 mos was statistically signifi -
cantly decreased by exposure to 18 mg/m3 talc.  At 24 mos, there was no e ffect on the viability of the  macrophages.   Lung 
tissue colla gen and proteinase activity w ere significantly increased in exposed male and female mice .  At 24 mos, col lagen 
and lung fluid collagenous peptides were statistically significantly increased in the 18 mg/m3 group , and most proteinase 
activity was increased as well.  
Chronic active inflam mation without alveolar epithelium hyperplasia, squamous metaplasia, or interstitial fibrosis was re port-
ed in exposed mice.  An accumulation of macrophages was observed in the lungs, and talc -containing macro phages were 
found in the bronchial lymph node s.  The incidence of pul monary neo plasms was similar for test and control animals.   In the 
upper respiratory tract, cytoplasmic eosinophilic drop lets in the nasal mucosal epithelium  occurred and were  concentration -
depend ent.  There was no evidence of  carcinogenic activity  in male or female B6C3F1 mice exposed to talc.  
A lifetime  study was performed in rats; g roups of 50 male and 50 female F344/N rats (6 -7 wks old) were exposed to the same 
dosing regimen and target con centrations of talc as mice until mortality reached 80% in any exposure group, i.e., males were 
exposed for 113 wks and females for 122 wks.   (The concentrations selected were based on the results of a 4 -wk inhalation 
study in F344/N rats; that study is described in Table 4 ).  The MMAD was 2.7 ± 1.9 µm in the 6 mg/m3 chamber and 3.2 ± 
1.9 µm in the 18 mg/m3 chamber.  As with the mice, there was difficulty  in maintaining the cham ber concentrations for the 
rats; there was a 7 -wk period beginning at wk 11 during which time the concentratio n for the 18 mg/m3 group varied from 
30-40 mg/m3 and there was a 12 -wk period beginning  at wk 70 during which the chamber concentrations were sub stantially 
lower than the target concentrations  for both groups .  Groups of 22 male and 22 fe male rats we re exposed similarly and killed 
at 6, 1 1, 18, and 24 mos for interim evaluations.  Survival was similar for test and control animals.  Body weights of the low 
dose an imals were similar to controls and final body weights of the high dose animals were slightly ( 14%) lower than con -
trols.   Compared to controls, the a bsolute and relative lung weights in high dose males  were statistically signif icantly in-
creased at 6, 11, and 18 mos  and at study term ination, in high- dose females at 11, 18, and 24 mos and at study termi nation, 
and in low dose females at 18 -mos and study termination.  
  A concentration -related impairment of respiratory function was observed in exposed male and female rats, and the severity 
increased with increasing duration of exposure.  In the 6 and 18 mg/m3 males and in the 6 mg/m3 females,  the lung talc 
burden (normalized to control lung wt) was statistically significantly increased at 11, 18, and 24 mos compared to the 6 mos 
value .  In the 18 mg/m3 females, the 18 and 24 mos values were st atistically significantly increased compared to the 6 mos 
values.   When lung talc burdens were normalized to exposure con centration, a statistically significant difference was 
observed between  the 6 and 18 mg/m3 males at 6 and 11 mos but not at 18 and 24 mos.   At 24 mos, the lung talc burden (nor -
malized to exposure concentration) was higher in the 6 mg/m3 males than in the 18 mg/m3 males.  In the females, the only 
statistically significantly dif ference between the low and high dose groups was at 6 mos .  The interim rat lung talc burdens 
are provided in Table 8 . 
Pulmonary function was impaired (i.e., restricted) in a concentration -related manner, increasing in severity with exposure 
duration.  After 24 mos of exposure, c hanges in enzymatic activities in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid were noted  compared to 
controls ; statistically significant increases in β -glucuronidase were seen in all test animals.  Also, lavage fluid polymorpho -
nuclear cells were statistically significantly increased and macrophage cells were statistically significantly decreased in all 
test animals; a statistically significant increase in lymph ocyte cell population s was reported in all test group females.   The 
viability and phag ocytic activity of the macropha ges recovered from the lavage fluid were not affected by exposure to tal c.  
Lung tissue col lagen and proteinase activity was significantly increased in exposed male and female rats.    
Granulomatous inflammation occurred in most test animals, and severity  increased with duration and concentration.  Hyper -
plasia of the alveolar epithelium and focal interstitial fibrosis was statistically significantly increased at study termina tion; 
squamous meta plasia of the alveolar epithelium and squamous cysts were si gnificantly increased in the 18 mg/m3 females 
only.  Talc -containing macrophages were report ed in the peribronchial lymphoid tissue of the lung and in the bronchial and 
media stinal lymph nodes.  In the full study, t he incidences of pul monary neoplasm s in male rats of the test group were sim ilar 
to controls.  How ever, in female rats of the 18 mg/m3 group , the incidences of alveolar/bronchiolar adenoma, car cinoma, and 
adenoma/car cinoma (combined) were statistically significantly greater than co ntrols ; one squamous cell carcinoma was re-
ported in this group .  In the upper respiratory tract, hyperplasia of the res piratory epithelium of the nasal mucosa was ob -
served in male test animals and accumulation of cytoplasmic eosinophilic drop lets in  the nasal mucosal epithelium w as ob-
served in males and female test animals; the incidence of these lesions was concentration -depend ent.  Benign, malignant, or 
complex (combined) adrenal medulla pheochromocytomas occurred with a significant positive tr end in male and female rats,  
   13 
 and the incidences in the 18 mg/m3 group were statistically sig nificantly increased compared to controls.  The incidence of 
adrenal medulla hyperplasia was statistically significantly decreased in ex posed males, but not exposed females, com pared to 
controls.  It was concluded that there was some  evidence of car cinogenic activity  of talc in male F344/rats based on an in -
creased incidence of benign or malignant pheochromocytomas of the adrenal gland and clear evi dence of carcinogenic acti vi-
ty of talc in female F344/N rats  based on increased incidences of alveolar/bronchiolar adenomas and carcinomas of the lung 
and benign or malignant pheochromocytomas of the adrenal gland .   
Responses to /Reviews of  the NTP Inhalation  Bioassay  
• One member of the NTP Board of Scientific Counselors, Technical Reports Review Subcommittee, voted against the 
NTP conclusions on the carcinogenic potential of non -fibrous talc in rats.123  This board member as serted that talc -
induced lung tumors occurred only in the group of animals that experienced the most chronic toxicity  and inflammation, 
and that the lung toxicity data were presented as an empirical observation rather than related to the risk assessment 
implications  of the bioassay.  Additionally, it was the opinion of the board member that the evaluation of the pheo-
chrom ocytomas was inade quate because the spontaneous incidence of this tumor in rats was not sufficiently addressed  
and that the incidence of pheo chromocytomas were not treatment -related . 
• At a talc workshop that was co -sponsored by the FDA, CTFA, and ISRTP, a unanimous consensus was reached re gard-
ing the NTP talc bioassay.11  It was the opinion of the Panel at the work shop that “because of the extreme doses and the 
unrealistic particle sizes of the talc that was used, because of the nega tive results in mice and male rats, because of the 
lack of tumor excess at the low doses, and because of the clear bio chem ical and cyto logical markers of ex cessive toxicity 
in the female rats, the positive talc bioassay results in female F344/N rats were the likely experimental arti facts and 
nons pecific generic response of a dust overload of the lungs and not a reflection of a direct activity of talc.  Given the 
gross differences of rodent and human lungs, the lung clearance capabilities of humans, and the pos sible conditions of 
customary huma n exposures, the NTP bioassay results in F344/N female rats cannot be considered as rel evant predictors 
of human risk. ” 
• A critical appraisal of the NTP study discussed test concentration selec tion and the effe ct of lung particle over load.124  
The appraisal noted  that a 4 -wk study, rather than a subchronic study, was used to  determi ne the test conce ntrations used 
in the bioassay; additionally, only two test concentrations were used and exposure at these con centrations impaired lung 
clearance in the 4 -wk study.  The appraisal cited a recommendation that, instead, the long -term bioa ssay should be per -
formed using three concentrations and that only the highest concentration tested should show inter ference with lung de -
fense mechanisms; the two lower concentrations should not interfere with clearance and particle accum ulation.  It was 
the opinion of this appraisal that lung particle clearance in both rats and mice was impaired, re sulting in altered accumu -
lation kinetics, with long -term exposure at concentrations of 6 and 18 mg/m3.  The refore, the maximum tol erated dose 
(MTD)  was exceeded at both exposure concentrations, and because the MTD was exceeded, “ classi fication of such parti-
cles with respect  to human pulmonary carcinogenicity should be considered carefully ”.  Finally, the appraisal stated that 
the NTP conclusion of  clear  carcinogenicity in female rats should be qualified by a statement indi cating that the lung 
tumors that occurred were mostly likely produced secondary to particle overload and related chronic toxicity.  
• The human exposure to respirable talc particles  during normal product  use (values obtained from studies by Russell et al. 
(1979)107 and/or Aylott (1979)54) was compared to the exposure of rats and mice in the NTP study.26  According to these 
researchers, based upon the determinations reported in the literature, h uman exposure to respirable talc particles during 
normal product use is approximately 2000 –  20,000 time s lower than that used for rats and mice in the NTP study . 
• The International Life Sciences Institute (ISLI) convened the Workshop on Relevance of the Rat Lung Response to Par -
ticle Overl oad for Human Risk Assessment.125  The workshop addressed studies reporting lung tumors in rats resulting 
from chronic inhalation of poorly soluble, nonfibrous particles (PSPs) that are of low acute toxicity and not directly gen -
otoxic, including non- asbestiform talc.  The workshop noted that PSP -induced tumors in rats are asso ciated with the fol-
lowing sequence of responses:  particle accumulation, chronic active inflammation, epithelial cell hyper plasia, and meta -
plasia; the chronic active inflammation is associated with the emergence of neoplastic cells.   It was stated that, although 
for direct -acting mutagens the rat appears to be a good qualitative predictor of the human lung can cer, for PSPs it ap -
pears to be more sensiti ve than humans and other rodent species at doses and exposure intervals that result in particle 
overload in the rat lung.  However, because it is not known whether hig h lung burdens of PSPs ca n lead to lung cancer in 
humans via mech anisms similar to those  in rats, “it was the consensus view of the workshop that there are insufficient 
data at present to conclude that the PSP -induced  tumor response in the rat model is not relevant for human hazard identi -
fication.  In other words, in the absence of mechanist ic data to the contrary, it must be assumed that the rat model of 
tumor igenicity can identify potential carcinogenic hazards to humans. ” 
• Another comment paper discussed the use of  micronized talc in the NTP study, which resulted in a significantly reduced 
particle size compared to cosmetic talc, i.e., 2.7 -3.2 µm instead of 6.0- 6.9 µm.126  The comment er stat ed that the use of 
micronized talc significantly affected the broncho pulmonary deposition and clearance char acter istics of the inhaled aer o- 
   14 
 sol; the micro nized talc particles were deposited deeper in the lun g where clearance depended on alveo lar macro phages, 
whereas cosmetic talc parti cles would have deposited in the ciliated portion of the respiratory tract.  The com ment er also 
remarked on the difficulty in controlling aerosol concentrations and that t he 7-wk period in which the rats were exposed 
to twice the intended aerosol concentration most likely aggravated an existing overload condition.   
Parenteral  
Intrapleural  
Talc did not induce pleural tumors in rats following intrapleural injection .121  A group of 35 Sprague -Dawley rats were given 
an intrapleural injection of 20 mg talc (mean size 2.6 ± 2.3 µm; no other chemical char acter istics provided) and control 
groups were given an intrapleur al injection of saline (40 rats) or no in jection (38 rats).  T he ani mals were killed when mor i-
bund.  No pleural tumors were observed in the test or control group.  As a comparison, the re search ers examined the effect of 
Canadian chrysotile (90% of t he fibers were <8 µm in length) in 39 rats and found that 25.6% of the rats developed meso the-
lioma.  
Intratracheal  
Groups of 24 male and 24 female Syrian golden hamsters were dosed weekly with intratracheal instillations of 0 or 3 mg talc 
in 0.2 ml salin e for 18 wks.8  The chemical composition of talc was 61 -63% silicon dioxide, 32- 34% magnesium dioxide, and 
0.85- 1.06% other dusts; the particle size distribution was 93% <25 µ, 86% <16 µ, 54% < 10 µ, 26% <5 µ, and 2% <1  µ.  An 
untreated control  group was also included .  The ani mals were allowed to live until natural death or until killed when mori-
bund.  Animals given talc had a shorter life span (46 wks ) when compared to the saline controls (5 5 wks) .  The talc -treated 
animals showed signs of minor respiratory dis orders during treatment , and at necropsy, microscopic examination revealed 
pulmonary congestion and interstitial fibrosis, but no detectable dust deposits, granulomas, or mesothelial proliferations .  
There were three tumor -bearing animals; no tumors were in the respiratory tract, although three benign lung lesions (muco -
epidermoid lesions) were reported.  Two forestomach papillomas, 1 thyroid adenoma, and 1 adrenal adenoma were also 
found.  
In a lifetime  study, groups of 48 Syrian golden hamsters were dosed once weekly with intratracheal instillations of 3 mg talc.9  
The talc was defined as USP -grade and con tained 64 -66% SiO 2, 34-36% MgO 2, and <1% other dusts.  Dust -laden macro -
phages and an accumulation of interstitial cells were observed in the talc -treated animals.  A proliferation of fibrillar materi al, 
primarily elastic fibers, and multi nucleated giant cells with  foreign material were observed in the alveolar and inter stitial 
spaces, and occasional accumulation of proteinaceous exudate was seen in the alveoli.  No increase in collagen fibers or granulomas was observed.  The severity of premalig nant lesions was eval uated in the tracheobronchial and alveolar zone of 
the animals.  No dysplasia was observed with talc in either zone.  Slight meta plasia and moderate epithelial de struc tion were 
observed in the tracheobron chial zone.  M oderate hyper plasia was ob served in the alve olar zone.  The number of lesions 
induced by talc was not given.  
Both intratracheal studies also examined the effects of administering 3 mg talc + 3 mg B[a]P in 0.2 ml saline to hamsters for 
the 18 wk period
8  or for a lifetime.9  Although the researchers reported that results of the study indicated that talc + B[a] P 
had a co -carcinogenic effect, the Expert Pa nel noted that appropriate controls were not used.  
Intraperitoneal  
Forty 6 -wk old Swiss albino mice were given an i.p. injection of 20 mg of UV -sterilized commercial talc (composi tion not 
stated) in 1 ml saline, and the animals were observed until there were obvious signs of a tumor or spontaneous death.127  
Fifty -five control animals were injected with 1 ml physiological saline.  Animals that died before 9 mos elapsed were not 
included.  Twenty- four treated mice were included in the results.  Three (12.5%) developed mesothelioma; no lymphomas 
were reported.   Forty -six of the control animals were included in the results; three meso thelioma and one lymphoma 
developed (8.7% total tumors).  
Forty Wistar rats were given weekly i.p. injections of 25 mg talc suspended in 2 ml saline weekly for 4 wks, and the animals were allowed to live until natural death.
128  It is stated that the talc was composed of magnesium silicate, but no other compo -
nents are given; the particle size was not  known.  Eighty control animals were injected with saline only.  Few tumors devel -
oped in the test animals; the tumor rate was 2.5%.  The t ime to first tumor was 587 days.  No tumors were reported in the 
control animals.  
Ovarian Cancer Risk  
Particulate Mig ration in the Genital Tract  
Migration of particles through the female genital tract has been examined as a possible explanation of  the pres ence of talc in 
the ovaries.  However, at the “Talc: Consumer Uses and Health Perspectives” workshop, it was stated that “avail able histo -
logic and physiologic studies provide no basis to conclude that talc can migrate to the ovaries from the perineal region.”11  
Because of the discussion on whether or not translocation is a viable theory in general, several  studies on the t ransport of  
   15 
 particulate matter other than talc are briefly sum marized below ; mixed results were found .  Studies specifically relating to 
talc migration then follow.  
Non-Human  
No translocation of bone black from the vagina to the oviducts was found in monkeys .129  Cynomolgus monkeys were re -
strained so that their pelvis was elevated, and 0.3 ml of a suspension of 4% bone black in 30% dextran was placed in the vag -
inal posterior for nix of four monkeys and 0.3 ml of a sus pension of 4%  bone black in physiolog ical saline containing car box-
ymethyl cel lulose (CMC) was placed in the vaginal pos terior fornix of one monkey.  Ten units of oxytocin were admini stered 
by intramuscular ( i.m.) injection at the same time.  The mon keys w ere released after 20 min.  One h after deposition of the 
bone black, two monkeys that received suspensions in dextran and the one that received the saline with CMC suspension 
were anesthetized and the reproductive tract of each ani mal was re moved; the o viducts were flushed.  The remaining two 
monkeys were processed in the same manner 72 h after deposition.  The test samples, the solu tions without bone black (nega -
tive controls), and samples with a suspension of bone black (positive control) were filtered with Millipore membrane filters 
(0.45 µm).  Particles resembling bone black were found on filters used for  oviduct flushing solutions as well as the solution 
blanks; the numbers ranged from very few to occa sional on all filters and no distinct differ ences in numbers or shape of these 
particles were apparent.  The new filter blank that was examined immediately upon re moval was the only sample on which 
no bone black particles were found.  The researchers stated that these results suggest that t here was no translocation of bone 
black from the vagina to the oviducts.  
Twenty -six New Zealand white rabbits were used to examine whether starch particles migrate from the vagina to the peri to-
neal cavity.130  Anesthetized rabbits were divided into an untreated control group, a group given 50 mg of a glove lubri cant 
powder intravaginally, and a group given 50 mg of the lubricant powder and Chlamydia trachomatis  (an inclusion form er).  
Ovulation was then induced in all groups .  After 1 -4, 17, and 25 days, the rabbits were anesthetized and the peritoneal cavity 
was rinsed; the lavage fluids were analyzed for starch particles.  Small numbers of starch particles were found on all slides .  
Retrograde migration was found after 3 da ys.  T he number of small particles between the treated and control groups  was not 
statistically significantly different.  Large starch particles were statistically more numerous in the two test groups compared to the controls.  
Human  
Sterile c arbon particles were suspended in 30% dextran and 3 -4 ml of the suspension was deposited into the posterior fornix 
of three women placed in the lithotomy position (i.e., head tilted downward at a 15° angle for horizontal) that were under go-
ing abdominal s urgery; 1 ml (10 U) of oxytocin given simultaneously via i.m. injection.
131  During surgery, 20 -34 min after 
deposition of the particles, the Fallopian tubes were sutured 1 cm lateral to the uterus, excised, and then flushed wit h saline.  
Carbon particles were found in the rinsate from two of the three subjects.  In a study using India ink, it was found that Ind ia 
ink (0.2 ml) that was injected into  the uterine cavity 15 min –  24 h prior to ab domi nal surgery was trans ferred to  the Fal lopian 
tubes in 27/50 women in the prolif erative phase and in 23/35 women in the secretory phase of the menstrual cycle.132  Injec -
tion of ink into the cervical canal often resulted in immediate back flow into the vagina; the ink reached the Fallopian tubes in 
17/56 women.  How ever,  when the ink was placed into the vagina, the ink was trans ferred to the Fallopian tubes in only 1/18 
women in the proliferative phase in 12 -24 h.  The ink was found to pass from the vagina to the uterus in 2/37 women; one of 
these woman where the ink was  trans ferred had a lacerated cervix.  (In this study, some of the women had re ceived an i.m. 
injec tion of 2 units of oxytocin at the same time the ink was admin istered, but it did not appear to affect the results, and the 
women were placed in the Tre ndelenburg position after the abdomen had been opened.)   
In a study using a radio nuclide procedure, the migration of a particu late radio active tracer from the vagina to the peritoneal 
cavity and ovaries was deter mined in 24 women scheduled to unde rgo gynecological sur gery.133  The day prior to sur gery, the 
women were placed in a supine posi tion, and less than 3 ml of 10- 15 mCi [99mTc]-labeled human albumin micro spheres 
(HAM)  with a size range of 30 -50 µm  were de posited in the posterior fornix.  Each subject re mained in a supine position for 
24 h.  The radionuclide mate rial remained in place for 21 women, and in 16 of these women, “suf ficiently high radioactivity 
levels” were determined as evi dence of mi gration to the uterus o r the Fallopian tubes and ovaries.  In 14 of the 21 subjects, 
radioactivity was measured in ad nexa sep arately from the uterus.  Nine of the 14 subjects had “marked” radio activity in the 
tubes and ovaries; the five sub jects that did not had severe tubal occlusions.  Another group of researchers stated that this 
finding may be misleading because only one radioactive label was used.129 
The migration of starch particles from powdered gloves was examined in groups of female subjects that were under going 
abdominal surgery.134  A gro up of 17 females was examined with powdered gloves 1 day prior to surgery and a group of 12 
females was examined with powdered gloves 4 days prior to surgery.  Corresponding control groups of 15 and 14 females, respectively, were examined with powder -free gloves.  Peritoneal fluid was collected during sur gery.  The number of starch 
particles found in patients examined with powered gloves 1 day prior to surgery was sta tistically significantly increased for 
both small and large particles at all locations  of the genital tract and for large particles in the peritoneal fluid.  No particles 
were found in two subjects examined with powdered gloves and a few particles were found in three subjects examined with 
powder -free gloves 1 day prior to surgery.  In subj ects examined with powdered gloves 4 days prior to surgery, there were  
   16 
 statistically significantly more small and large starch particles in the cervix and uterus, but not in t he Fallopian tubes or 
peritoneal fluid, compared to subjects examined with powder -free gloves.  
A catheter was used to apply 1 -2 ml of 10 ± 2 MBq- TC-99m-labeled macroaggregates of human serum albumin, 5- 20 Hm in 
size, into the posterior vaginal fornix of 1000 women with primary or secondary infertility in the follicular phase of t he men -
strual cycle; 15 women were examined during the early to mid -luteal phase.135  The women were in a supine position, and 
hysterosalpingo scintigraphy (HSS) scans (a method to evaluate the trans port function of uterus and F allopian tubes ) were ob -
tained im mediately and at various intervals for 4 h after application.  Labeled particles were detected in the uterus at the time 
of the first H SS scan of every woman examined; women in both the follicular and lute al phase were examined.  In women in 
the follicular phase, radioactivity entered the Fallopian tubes on both in 15% of the subjects and on one side in 64% of the 
subjects; significant radioactivity entered the pelvis of 6% of the subjects.  Radio activity was not found to migrate to the Fal-
lopian tubes of the re main ing women that were in the follicular phase or in any of the women examined during the luteal 
phase.  
Talc Migration in the Genital Tract  
Non-Human  
Particles of talc were iden tified in the ovaries of rats that received intrauterine i nstillation(s) of talc .136  In a pilot study, one 
group of four female ex -breeder Sprague- Dawley rats received one intrauterine instillation of 100 mg/ml talc in 250 µl PBS; 
these rats were killed 5 days after dosing.  A second group of four rats received intrauterine instillations of the talc suspension on days 0, 6, and 15; two ani mals were killed on day 20. (Spec tral analysis reported a 3:1 ratio of silicon to magnesium; it is 
not stated whether the talc was non -fibrous).  The remaining two animals were dosed again on days 22 and 30, and killed on 
day 49.  The ovaries of each animal were a nalyzed by an ashing pro cedure .   
Two group s of 12 female ex -breeder Sprague- Dawley rats were then dosed intravaginally with 250 µl of the same talc sus -
pension or PBS only, and two animals per group were killed 24 h, 48 h, or 4 days after dosing.  Thei r ovaries were removed 
and analyzed as above.   Particles of talc were found in the ovaries of the two rats of the talc group that were killed after  4 
days, but not in those killed at 24 or 48 h or in the PBS -treated animals.  
Radioactivity was not found i n the ovaries of rabbits dosed intravaginally with talc .
63  Three female Large White rabbits 
received a single intravaginal instillation of 0.5 ml of [3H]talc administered as  a sus pension in aq. glycerol jelly solution (10 
mg/ml; 1 µCi/ml) and three were given six daily doses of the talc sus pension.  (Chem ical char acter ization data were not pro -
vided).  In the single -dose rabbits, urine was col lected every 24 h for 3 days; the ani mals were then killed, the urogenital tract 
was dissected out, and the total radioactivity was determined in the urine, ovaries, Fal lopian/ uterine tubes and cervix, the 
bladder, and the vagina.  In the urogenital tract 72 h after dosing, radioactivity (0.004% of the dose) was only detected at the 
site of administration.  (The limit of detection was 0.25 µg).  Total recovery was not quantitated.  
In the multiple -dose group, the rabbits were killed 72 h after the final dose; radioactivity was determined as de scribed for the 
single -dose animals.  In the urogenital tract at 72 h after the final dose, 0.035% of the radioactivity was found at the site of 
administration and 0.006% was found associated with the cervix and Fallopian/uterine tubes.  No radioactivity was found in 
the ovaries.  
Talc was not found to translocate from the vaginas of female cynomolgus moneys to the ovaries .129  A pilot study was first 
performed with two female cynomolgus monkeys.  Talc samples were exposed to a calculated neutron fluency of 1.2 x 1017 
n/cm2, and 125 mg neutron- activated talc suspended in 0.3 ml deionized water containing 1% CMC was placed into the vagi-
nal posterior for nix of each monkey.  (Deposition was similar to that of bone black, described previously).  Three days after 
talc depo sition, the animals were anesthetized and peritoneal lavage was performed; when the peritoneal cavi ty was opened 
to collect the fluid, the lavage was repeated through the abdominal incision.  Peritoneal lavage was also performed on a con -
trol animal.  Rad ionuclide activity was determined with 46Sc, 59Fe, and 60Co.  There  was no meas urable translocation of acti-
vated talc from the site of deposition to the uterine cavity, oviducts, ovaries, or peritoneal cavity.  (The vagina and the cervix 
were analyzed  together).  It ap peared that detectable amounts of 60Co were found in a portion of the oviducts of each test 
animal, but this was not supported by 46Sc or 59Fe data.  Approximately 0.3 and 2.3 mg talc were found in the vaginas of the 
two test monkeys 3 d ays after instil lation. 
In the definitive study, six monkeys were dosed with a neutron- activated purified blend of cosmetic talc for 30 con secutive 
work days.137  The animals were restrained and dosed as defined in the pilot study; additionally , 10 units of oxytocin were 
administered by i.m. injection once weekly.  46Sc, 59Fe, 60Co, and 61Cr were used as tracers.  The peritoneal lavage was per -
formed as above 2 days after the last talc deposition.  Measurable quantities of talc were observed in the vagina + cervix 
sample, and the quantities ranged from 0.006 –  117 mg talc.  (The researchers theorized that the wide variations were most 
likely due to different menstrual cycle phases).  No measurable levels of talc (> ~0.5 µg) were present in the sa mples from 
the peritoneal lavage fluid, ovaries, oviducts, or body of the uterus.   
   17 
 Human  
Talc particles were found in approximately 75% (10 of 13) of the ovarian tumors and 50% (12 of 21) of the cervical tumors 
during an extraction -replication technique use d to examine tissue from patients with ovarian or cervical can cer.138  (The 
technique involved replicating embedded tissue using a polyvinyl alcohol solution, tape stripping the repli cated tissue, and 
using a AEI -6B electron microscope to examine the replicas.)  The parti cles found in the ovarian tumors were located deep 
within the tumor tissue and were not universally dispersed; some of the particles were 1000 Å, but most ranged from  1000 Å 
to 2 µ.  The particles found in the cervical tumor tissue were generally larg er than those in the ovarian tumors; some crystals 
were as large as 5 µ.  Addi tionally, many particles of talc were found concentrated in the deeper layers of a primar y 
carcinoma of the endometrium; how ever, talc was not found in a secondary tumor in the ovary of the same patient.  Talc 
particles were also found in 5 of 12 normal ovarian tissue samples removed from patients with breast cancer.  (Chemical 
character ization data were not provided for the talc that was found; the re search ers note d that no asbestos fibers were found 
in any of the tissues studied.)  
In 100 consecutive cases of women operated on for pelvic disease at Johns Hopkins Hospital, a total of 175 normal ovaries 
were removed and examined for particulate matter.139  Seventy- two cases were classified as having laminated calci fication s 
referred to as psammoma bodies.  Six examples of crystalline foreign bodies were found and examined by scanning electron microscopy; com puter-assisted microscopic x -ray analysis was used to determine the ele mental composition of the foreign 
bodies in  four cases.  The particles were composed primarily of magnesium and silicon; the research ers stated that in indus tri-
al North America, the most common compounds containing magnesium and silicate are talc and asbestos.  Nine per cent (9%) 
of the patients appeared to have magnesium silicate granulomas in their normal ovaries, and an additional 9% contained very similar histologic entities.  
The ovaries of 24 women with benign ovarian neoplasms who were undergoing surgery at Columbia Presbyterian Medical 
Center between 1992 and 1993 were examined for the presence of talc using bot h light and electron micros copy .
140  Twelve 
wom en reported talc application directly to the perineum or underwear and 12 w omen were age- matched con trols.  The mean 
number of lifetime exposures for women reporting talc use was 14,820, with a range of 4784 –  39,312 lifetime exposures.  
The ovaries of tw o stillborn fetuses were analyzed as negative controls; no talc was found in these ovaries.  Sec tions of nor -
mal ovary from the 12 women who reported the talc use were analyzed.  A linear re lationship between ovarian talc particle 
burden and exposure w as not found.  Neither light nor electron microscopy values cor related with perineal talc usage.  Elec-
tron microscopy counts were 0 for about half of the subjects exposed to talc as well as half of the controls; talc was observ ed 
with light microscopy i n all subjects exposed to talc and 11/12 of the controls.  There was a negative cor relation between the 
values obtained by light microscopy and electron microscopy.  The mean elec tron microscopic par ticle count was higher in 
those exposed to talc and  the mean light microscopic particle count was higher in the women that did not report talc use.  In 
one subject for which both ovaries were analyzed, both talc counts varied great ly between the right and left sides (0 vs. 
1,669,000 particles/g wet tissue  wt by electron microscopy and 556 vs. 6 parti cles by light microscopy, respective ly).  Asbes -
tos was detected in the ovaries of four talc -exposed subjects and five of the control subjects.  
The pelvic lymph nodes of a woman with stage III ovarian papill ary serous carcinoma, with metastatic serous car cinoma in 
two of six right external iliac and obturator nodes, were examined using polarized light microscopy and scanning electron 
microscopy and x -ray spectroscopy.141  The subject applied talc daily for 30 yrs to the perineum, and also applied it to u nder-
wear and sanitary napkins.  She had three term deliveries followed by a tubal ligation and she did not smoke, use oral contra-ceptives, or, with the exception of 6 mos of progesterone therapy, use post menopausal hormone therapy.  Birefringence was  
seen using polarized light; three of four nodes that did not contain metastases displayed polarizing material.  Examina tion of 
lymph nodes by combined scanning electron microscopy and x -ray spectroscopy re vealed plate- like particulates in the 5 -10 
µm ra nge within the lymph nodes; the energy dispersive x- ray spectroscopy showed a magnesium and silicate signature that 
was compatible with talc.  Nodes from 12 other patients were examined; this case was strongest for birefringence.  (Electron 
microscopy or x -ray spectroscopy had not been performed).  
Epidemiological Studies  
Numerous epidemiological studies have been performed examining the risk of ovarian cancer following talc expo sure.142-174  
These studies are summarized in Table 9.  There is a large amount of information presented in these studies, and a variety of  
parameters were examined.  Table 10 is a summary of the relative risk for ovarian cancer presented in case- control studies; 
this table only includes those studies that indicated “ever” use of talc in the perineal area, independent of the manner of 
use.143-146,148,149,152-155,157,159,161- 163,165-167,170,173,174 
Analysis of Ovarian Cancer Risk  in the Epidemiological Studies  
Concerns about cosmetic talc are based on reports s uggesting that talc may migrate from the perineum to the ovaries and 
epidemiological studies suggesting  a weak but fairly consistent association between perineal dusting and ovarian cancers.12   
The possibility that using cosmetic talc powder can cause ovarian cancer was suggested when talc particles were found  in or 
on human ovarian tissues.131-133,138,175, 176   The translocation of talc particles from the perineum to the ovaries  would  require   
   18 
 that these particles pass from the perineum through the vagina and cervical canal, move across the uterus and against the cili-
ary motion of the F allopian tubes , cross the peritoneal space between the fimbriae and ovaries, escape phagocytosis  in the 
peritoneal space, and attach to the surface of the ovaries to accumulate in the ovaries.177,178 
However , there is evidence that talc particles  found in ovaries is attributable to sample contamina tion, rather than to particle 
trans location.12,179  This view is supported by studies finding  talc in 100% of women with no known talc exposure, for ex am-
ple, as well as in 85% of women reporting frequent perineal talc applications .140   
Further, many translocation studies have been criticized for using particles with only a single radionuclide,133 because the 
radio label leaches from such particles, leading to the untenable assumption that the leached radioactive marker represents 
translocated particles.12,61,137,179-185  In a study conducted to help address this issue, 46Sc, 60Co, 59Fe and 51Cr served as tracers 
in 125 mg neutron -activated talc deposited intravaginally 30 times over 45 days to ensure exposure through at least one men -
strual cycle in cynomol gus monkeys.12,137,179,182  The tracers were n ot detect ed in the uterus, Fallopian tubes, ovaries, or 
perito neal lavage fluid 2 days after the 30th talc application.  
The migration of many different types of materials  from the vagina through the cervix has been demonstrated in patients in a 
supine o r in the Trendelenburg position or with a lacerated or a dilated cervix.  In addition, retrograde menstrual flow is a 
well-known phenomenon that could help explain the movement of particles to the ovaries in some cases.  However, t he find -
ings of at least one study132 has been interpreted as demo nstrating the  formidable barrier that the cervix presents to the trans -
location of particles from the vagina to the ovaries.182,186  
Many women may have been exposed to talc in infancy.140  Infants are typically placed in a supine position and their legs 
separated during diapering, which could facilitate the passage of talc into the vagina.  This may help explain the ubiquitous 
presence of talc in ovarian tissue.  However, it has not been determined whether the hymen blocks exposure to the infant 
genital tract, or otherwise to what extent, if any, talc can en ter the genital tract during diapering.22 
Several epidemiological studies suggested that medical procedures th at would be expected to prevent the trans location of talc 
to the ovaries, such as tubal ligation or  hysterectomy, reduce the relative risk s estimate d for talc use .148,154,172,187  However, in 
one of these studies, women who were exposed to talc for one to nine years before tubal ligation or hysterectomy appeared to 
have an increased risk of ovarian cancer, but not women who had talc exposure for ten or more years befor e their surgery.172  
Other studies found no difference in relative risk between women who had tubal ligation or hysterectomy and women who 
did not have these procedures .143,173  One study reported inverse exposure -effect  trends with duration of talc exposure after 
adjusting for tubal ligation.165  Thus, the literature provides no clear, convincing support for the hypothesis that procedures 
that would preclude the passage of talc particles from the perineum to the ovaries reduce the risk of ovarian cancer.  
The use of talc -dusted condoms or diaphragms, which would clearly result in exposure close to the cervical opening, was not 
associated with an increased relative risk  estimate for ovarian cancer.146,148,167  A meta -analysis found no association between 
talc-dusted diaphragm use and ovarian cancer risk.  Overall, these studies do not support the hypothesis that talc can migrate 
from the perineum or the vagina to the ovaries.  
Numerous case -control studies have reported small increases in relative risk estimates of all ovarian cancers combined in 
women using cosmetic talc products, compared to women wi th minimal or no exposure , including population- based and 
hospital -based case- control studies  (Tables 9 and 10; Chart 1).  Other investigations found no statis tically-significant in crease 
in risk estimates for ovarian cancer (all subtypes combined), including many case -control studies and one prospective cohort 
study.151  Presumably the subjects in all of these studies used products that contained cosmetic grade talc, but infor mation on 
fibrous content is generally lacking.  
Some studies found statistically -significant associations between talc use and invasive cancer143,148,151 while another study  
reported an association only between talc use and tumors of low malignant potential.154  Some studies found no statistically -
significant associations with all subtypes of ovarian cancer co nsidered together, but reported statistically -significant associ a-
tions only with specif ic subtypes of ovarian cancer or endometr ioid tumors .145,148,151,154  
Among the epidemiological investigations reporting statistically -significant association s, the relative risk estimat es ranged 
between 1.0 and 2.0 and were barely statistically significant (Tables 9 and 10; Chart 1).  For such low estimates, epi demi o-
logical methods generally cannot distinguish causality from even minor confounding risk factors or biases.188-191  Age, race, 
low parity , infertility,  and a family history of ovarian, endometrial or breast cancer are among the most likely risk factors in 
the etiology of epithelial ovarian cancer.12,192  Others have suggested that the effects of cancer treatment , smoking , and con-
suming coffee regularly could explain the small increases in the relative risk estimates reported for ovarian cancer in women 
using cosmet ic talc products perineally .172,193,194  Many physiological, sociological, and exposure factors have been linked to 
ovarian cancer, a number of them with a stronger association than the hygienic use of cosmetic talc, but causality has not been established for any of them.
182  The etiology of the majority of ovarian cancer cases is still unknown .  
   19 
 Prospective cohort studies do not suffer from recall bias because the exposures are recorded before the cancers were diag -
nosed.  The single cohor t study available found no statis tically -significantly association between perineal talc use and all 
ovarian cancer subtypes combined, but did report such an association with invasive serous ovarian cancer  (RR=1.4; 95% CI: 
1.02- 1.91)151  The odds ratios for serous ovarian cancer  were also elevated i n several case -control studies .143,148,154,173 All of 
the odds ratio estimates reported in these studies were less than 1.7.  
Talc exposure probably varies over time as women age and their reasons for deciding to use talc change.  Talc use might be 
sporadic, seasonal , or change with circumstances (e.g., sexual activity and parity).  However, no studies have characterized 
either the feminine hygiene habits involving the use of cosmetic talc products in the general population or the latency of pur -
ported talc -induced ovarian cancer to enable resolving these issues.190  Moreover, the  epidemiological studies used ques tion-
naires that did not focus specifically on the subjects’ use of talc or talcum powders , as distinct from non -talc powders or 
sprays of known (e.g., corn -starch based ) or unknown compositions.177  It is not clear that all of the subjects understood the 
distinction between talc or talcum powders and talc -free powders when answering the questions.    These factors contribute 
substantially to the un certainties associated with the risk estimates  of the prospective study, and well as the case -control 
studies . 
An early meta -analysis found a statistically -significant adjusted pooled odds ratio  of 1.27 (95% CI: 1.09- 1.48) for ovarian 
cancer in women who ever used talc in the perineal or abdominal region compared to women who never used tal c195  How -
ever, the authors cautioned that this result does not provide the basis for inferring causality because many of the studies had 
substantial design limitations.   
A more recent meta -analysis yielded a statistically -significant over all summary relative risk of 1.33 (95% CI: 1.16–
1.45).194,196  However, a sensitivity analyses revealed clear differences in out come based on study design.  Population -based 
case- control studies yielded a statistically -signif icant increase in the risk of ovarian cancer for hygienic use of talc, but hospi -
tal-based case– control studies showed no statistically significant difference.  There were no d ifferences in the frequency of 
talc use in the respective control groups.  The authors suggested that the difference in outcomes may be attributable to a bias, 
such as a “treatment effect” among the cases  (i.e., side effects from treatments for ovarian cancer may make talc use more 
likely in the patients  than in the controls) .   
A still more recent meta -analysis reported a statistically -significant overall summary relative risk of 1.35 (95% CI: 1.26 –
1.46).194,197  However, a statistical test for  data heterogeneity indicated  substantial inconsistencies among the pooled studies 
and an invalid pooled summary relative risk estimate.  Thus, the outcome provided no support for a causal association 
between perineal talc use and ovarian cancer.188,198 
Most of the epidemiolog ical studies found no trend of increasing ovarian cancer risk with increasing exposure duration or 
frequency or cumulative exposure, despite a fivefold difference between the lowest and the highest exposure groups  (Table 
10).199   Several of these studies report ed an apparent inverse trend .142,143,148,151,196,200  In one study, s uggestions of an expo -
sure-effect  relationship were obtained only after excluding exposures during pregnancy, during oral contraceptive use, and 
after sterilization.148  Overall, however, the results of the epidemi ological studies are not con sistent with known mechanisms 
of carcinogenesis, which would be expected to yield positive ex posure -effect trends .  The inverse trends, in particular, are not 
compatible with a causal relationship between perineal talc exposure and ovarian cancer.193,196 
No plausible biological mechanism has been identified to explain how exposure to talc containing no asbestos or other asbes -
tiform fibers could cause ovarian cancer.   If perineal talc use can cause ovarian cancer  in a dose -dependent manner , then 
there should be also be associations between such talc use and both cervical and uterine cancer, where talc exposure would be expected to be greater than ovarian exposure.   No such associations have been reported.  
Thirty or more years ago, cosmetic talc was thought  to contain  substantial amounts of asbestos fibers,
23,201 which would 
clearly represent a carcinogenic risk.  How ever, FDA  and IARC found that this cont ention could not be substantiat ed.18,38,201-
204  Further, stringent quality criteria have b een in place for cosmetic talc since 1976.205  Meeting these criteria requires the 
elimination of detectable asbestos an d other asbestiform fibers .  Thus, the increased ovarian cancer risks associated with 
cosmetic talc use re ported in some of the more recent epidemiological studies have generally not been att ributed to 
contamination with asbestiform fibers . 
However, the potential carcinogenicity of talc has been attributed by some authors to the chemical similarity of talc to asbestos.  Both substances are magnesium silicates, but they share no other characteristics in common.
12,22,205  The aspect 
ratio of the fibrils is generally considered to be critical for the carcinogenicity of asbestos.  In co ntrast, talc consists of three -
layer silica -brucite -silica sheets stacked together to form small platy packets with highly insoluble, hydrophobic surfaces.  
Cosmetic talc does not contain fibrils.   
Alternatively, some researchers have suggested that talc i n the ovaries could cause cancer, indirectly, through a talc -induced 
inflamma tory response, analogous to the action of asbestos fibers in the lungs.206  How ever, pelvic inflamma tory diseases,  
   20 
 such as endometriosis, peritonitis, and tubo -ovarian abscess formation, have not been found to be asso ciated with increased 
risks of ovarian cancer.  In addition, anti -inflammatory drug use did not reduce ovarian cancer risk estimates in several 
studies.161,207 
Most r ecently, one group proposed that elevated expression of anti -MUC1 antibodies induced by perineal talc in the peri to-
neal lymph nodes might explain the reported associations between talc exposure and ovarian cancer.149  However, the ap pli-
cation of talc powder to other parts of the body appears to induce anti -MUC1 antibody expression as well, and elevated anti -
MUC1 antibody levels generally have not been associated with increased risks of ovarian cancer.  Thus, this proposal re-
mains highly speculative.  
Talc is commonly used clinically as the active agent for pleurodesis.  This procedure involves introducing a t alc slurry direct -
ly into the pleural space to induce fibrogenesis.  No increase in the incidences of lung or pleural cancers has been found in  
multiple clinical studies involving hundreds of patients followed  for decades after pleurodesis.193,208,209   
The results of the se clinical  studies  are consistent with epidemio logical investigations reporting no statis tically significant in -
crease in mortality from lung cancer or mesothelioma in workers occupationally exposed to “pure” talc.91,94,96  As stated by 
one author, “the likelihood that talc could selectively induce ovarian cancer and not lung cancer at exposure concentrations 
orders of magni tude lower than that experienced in occupational settings, argue against its tox icity.”22  Others have noted the 
absence of reports suggesting that talc inhalation is associated with either lung cancers or mesothe lioma in con sumers12.   
Accordingly, animal cancer bioassays using rodents exposed to high concentrations of talc in air indicate that talc is not a pri -
mary carcinogen.   The NTP life -time inhalation carcinogenesis bioassay found no ovarian l esions  in female mice or rats, and 
no malig nant respiratory -tract lesions  in male rats or male or female mice.10  Further, the lung cancers  found in female rats 
can be plausibly attributed to chronic pul monary particle overload, rather than to the possible carcinogenicity of talc.124,210  
The use of micronized talc in the NTP study  probably  contributed to the pulmonary  overloading.   This  interpretation is 
supported by the results of an earlier lifetime inhalation study in hamsters.  The animals were exposed to a talc baby powder  
aerosol at rates that exceeded those measured in infant -dusting simulations (mg -h/m3) by 30 to 1,700 fold.12,81  The exposures 
had no effect on the t ype, inci dence or degree of histopathological findings in the lungs or other tissues examined, or on body 
weight, survival, or any other parameter evaluated, compared with the sham -exposed controls.  
Further, the i njection of talc into ovar ian bursa of ra ts in one study  (100 µl/ovary of 100 mg 0.4- 14 µm platy talc crystals/ml 
buffered saline) induced no cancers67   
In summary, c ritical issues that call into question the validity of the statistically -significant associations reported in some of 
the epi demiological studies include:  
• Absence of persuasive evidence that talc can migrate from the perineum to the ovaries ; 
• Lack of consistent statistically -significant positive associations across studies ; 
• Uniformly small relative risk estimates in studies reporting positive associations ; 
• Failure to rule out plausible alternative explanations of the statistically -significant results, including biases, 
confounding risk factors, and  exposure misclassi fications;  
• Absence of statistically -significant associations between ovarian cancer and using talc- dusted diaphragms or 
condoms ; 
• Overall lack of positive exposure -effect relationships ; 
• Inverse trends for both duration of use and frequency of use in some studies ; 
• Absence of a plausible biologic mechanism ; 
• Lack of credible, defensible evidence of carcinogenicity from the results of epidemiological studies of occupational exposures and animal bioassays . 
IRRITATION AND SENSI TIZATION  
Sensitization  
Non-Human  
Talc was not a sensitizer in female Hartley  guinea pigs .211  Female Hartley guinea pigs (num ber not stated) received an intra-
dermal injection of 10 mg sterile talc in an  emul sion of 0.5 ml sterile saline and 0.5 ml Freund’s complete adjuvant; six 
guinea pigs were dosed in the same manner with 10 mg starch glove pow der.  (Chemical char acter ization data were not pro -
vided ; the talc was British Pharmacopeia -grade).  El even  control animals were injected with the emul sion only.   Skin tests 
were then performed at various intervals by challenging all animals with sus pensions starch glove powder in one ear and talc 
in the other.  Slight cu taneous thickening was observed in all control animals 24 h after challenge with both suspensions , and 
the responses were sim ilar to both talc and the starch.  The response to challenge with talc in the talc test group was similar to  
   21 
 that seen in the con trols.  Animals in the  starch group had a statistically significantly greater response to the starch challenge 
compared to controls . 
SUMMARY  
Talc is a sheet silicate that belongs to the silicate subclass phyllosilicates.  In its purest form , it is a mineral that corresponds 
to the chemical formula for hydrous magn esium silicate; commercial ly, it contains varying amounts of other  minerals 
natural ly found in the ore.  Only talc containing no detectable fibrous, asbestos minerals  is used in cos metics, and cosmetic 
talc must con sist of a mini mum of 90% hydrated magnesium silicate, with the remainder con sisting of natural ly associated 
minerals such as calcite, chlorite, d olomite, kaolin, and magnesite.  
In 2013,  FDA VCRP data indicated that talc was used in 3469 cosmetic formulations and , according to con centration of use 
data received in response to a Council survey, talc is used at up to 100% in cosmetic formulations.  Talc is used in almost 
every category of cos metic product, and it is used in products that may be applied  to baby skin, products that could be inci -
dentally ingested, products used near the eye area or mucous membranes, and in products that are sprayed.  The parti cle size 
of talc raw material varies widely by product type and by manu facturer, although t ypical cosmetic talcs are reported to have 
average particle sizes ranging between 4 and 15 µm when measured by sedimentation method . 
Talc has many commercial uses and it has pharmaceutical use.  It is used as a color additive in drugs and is exempt from cer -
tification.  Sterile talc is approved as a sclerosing agent.  Talc is not allowed for use on the surface of medical gloves.  It  is 
used in the production of foods, and it is approved as an indirect food additive as a color.  
Syrian golden hamsters r eceived  a single 2 -h nose -only exposure to talc tested as a commercial baby powder  (chem ical char -
acteristics unknown) , with a median aerodynamic diameter of 6.4 -6.9 µm.  The biological half -life of the talc deposited in th e 
lungs was 7 -10 days.  N o translocation from the respiratory tract to other tissues was found in this study, and the clear ance 
of talc from the lungs was complete within 4 months after exposure .  Following oral administration of [3H]talc to mice, rats, 
and guinea pigs, most of the radio activity was excreted in the feces.   Wistar rats were used to determine the systemic dis tribu -
tion of talc following intrapleural admin istration; the study suggested that talc is absorbed very rapidly through the pleura, 
reach ing the systemic ci rculation with deposi tion in other organs within 24 h of admin istration, and that the distribu tion is not 
dose-related.  
The acute oral LD 50 of rats was 920 mg/kg  bw in one study and >5000 mg/kg  bw in another.   In a study in which mice were 
placed in a box with circulated baby powder, the mice removed after 30 or 60 min recovered completely and the mice re -
moved after 90 or 120 min died; the chemical composition, amount of powder, and size of the box were not specified .  In rats 
dosed with a single bila teral injection of 100 mg/ml talc into the ovarian bursa  and killed 1 -18 mos after dosing, one or both 
ovaries of rats dosed with talc were cystic in appearance at all time periods; the cystic struc tures were attributed to distention 
of the bursal sac.   Foreign body granulomas, without surrounding inflammation, were seen in the cortical area of five of the 
injected ovaries, and talc was observed in the granulomas.  In rats, a granulomatous reaction in which foreign -body giant 
cells con taining refracti le materials was observed without fibrosis at 1 mo and at 3  mos after a single i.p. injection of 50 
mg/kg  bw non-fibrous talc. In rats dosed with a single i.p. injection of  0.02, 0.1, or 0.5 g talc in 5 ml normal saline, clusters of 
foci of inflammatory ce lls were observed scattered on the surface of the peritoneum and talc particles were seen in the center 
of each focus.  
There were no remarkable results found in studies examining the cellular effect of talc, such as cytotoxicity assays, assays examining the effect of talc on cell viability, or studies on the induction of apoptosis (among others).  
Dermal application of talc to shave d rabbit skin for 6 wks resulted in dryness  of the skin and skin erosion.  Oral ad ministra-
tion to rats for 5  days produced m inimal toxicity.  In inhalation studies, exposure of mice and rats for 4 wks (25 µm particle 
size) resulted in macrophages in the alveolar space, with more found in the mice than the rats.  In rats exposed for 3, 6, or  12 
mos, minimal to slight fibrosis re sulted.  In hamsters, exposure to baby powder ( 95% talc; 4.9 -6.0 µM) did not result in clin i-
cal toxicity, and no trends were observed.  Intrapleural administration of talc (25 µm) to rats did not result in meso theliomas; 
granulomas at the injection si te were common.  Infections occurred, but no neoplastic or perineal changes, when talc was in -
stilled intravaginally or perineally in rats.  Upon i.v. injection of talc (<5 µm) once weekly for 3 wks, talc was found in t he 
lungs and the liver throughout the  study.  
Talc is non - or slightly irritating to rabbit eyes.  In a female subject that presented with a foreign body sensation and inflam -
mation of the con junctiva of both eyes, a diagnosis of foreign body granuloma secondary to talc was made.  
Application  of talc to wounded skin can give rise to scab formation, possible infection, and foreign body granulo mas in the 
dermis.  
Talc has a TLV (respirable fraction) of 2 mg/m
3 as a TWA .  Human pulmonary effects of talc include diffuse inter stitial fi-
brosis and progressive massive fibrosis (often called complicated pneumoconiosis ).  In occupa tional exposure studies, s tatis- 
   22 
 tically significantly elevated SMRs for silicosis and silico -tuberculosis were ob served in an early study of talc miners and 
millers in the Italian Piedmont region  exposed to talc that co ntained no fibrous material  except for tremolite micro -inclu sions; 
SMRs were statistically significantly reduced for malignant neoplasms, including lung, bronchial and tracheal cancers.  A 
follow -up of t his group found statistically significant increases in mortality, which were attributed primarily to non -malig nant 
respiratory diseases among the miners.  A cohort study of talc miners and millers exposed to talc and magnesite con taining 
trace amounts o f quartz, tremolite, and anthophylite  found no statistically significant SMRs for all causes, all can cers, or 
diseases of the circulatory system or respiratory tract.  The results of several other epidemiological studies were likely co n-
founded by the p resence of up to 3% silica or 6% actinolite in the talc, exposures to high con centrations of silica with or 
without exposures to fibrous talc (tremolite), or con current exposures to radon daughters.  A meta -analysis of studies of min -
ers and millers who worked with non -asbestiform talc reported summary SMRs for lung cancer of 0.92 (95% CI: 0.67- 1.25) 
for millers in five countries exposed to high levels of talc without exposure to other occupational carcinogens, and 1.2 (95%  
CI: 0.86- 1.63) for miners i n 3 countries exposed to high levels of talc as well as to silica or radon and radon daughters.  Stud-
ies examining radiological, lung -function and clinical parameters in talc miners and millers and rubber workers foun d some 
statistically significant chang es. 
In exposure -during -cosmetic use studies, the researchers noted that there was a wide vari ation in talcing times and methods, 
often by the same volunteer during different applications.  Reported talcing times ranged from 17 sec to 31 sec.  Endobron -
chitis and airway stricture was reported in one case in which a subject applied large amounts of talc pow der to her face.  In 
another case, a chronic pulmonary granulomatous reaction was reported in a subject who applied “non -powdering talc” to her 
face fo r 20 yrs , followed by use of talcum powder 2 -3 times a day for a 10-yr period.  
Talc administered orally as a suspension in corn oil was not a developmental  toxicant in mice (16 -1600 mg/kg bw on days 6 -
15 of gestation), rats (16- 1600 mg/kg bw on days 6 -15 of gestation), hamsters (12- 1200 mg/kg bw on days 6 -10 of gestation), 
or rabbits ( 9-900 mg/kg  bw on days 6 -18 of gestation ).  No dose response or time -trend pattern was observed in rats that 
received a single oral dose or once daily dose for 5 days of 30- 5000 mg/kg  bw talc. 
In vitro, t alc was not genotoxic in an UDS  assay  (10, 20, or 50 µg/cm2) or a SCE  assay (2, 5, 10, and 15 µg/cm2) in rat pleural 
mesothelial cells.   Talc was not genotoxic in a host -mediated assay in  mice dosed by gavage wit h a single dose or once daily 
for 5 days with 30, 300, 3000, or 5000 mg/kg bw talc or cytogenetic assay in rats dosed by gavage once daily for 5 days with 
30, 300, 3000 , or 5000 mg/kg bw talc. Talc was also not genotoxic in a dominant lethal assay in whic h rats were dosed by 
gavage with a single dose or once daily for 5 days with 30, 300, 3000, or 5000 mg/kg  bw talc. 
In a lifetime inhalation study, a carcinogenic effect was not observed upon exposure of hamsters to a commercial baby pow -
der con taining 95% platy talc for 30 or 150 min/day, 5 days/wk.  A bioassay using mice and rats was performed by the NTP 
to deter mine the carcinogenic potential of non -asbesti form, cosmetic -grade micro -talc following exposure by inhalation, and 
it was concluded the re was no evi dence of carcinogenic activity in male or female B6C3F1 mice, some  evidence of carcin o-
genic activity  in male F344/rats, and clear evidence of carcinogenic activity in female F344/N rats. The mice were exposed to 
6 mg/m3 (MMAD 3.3 ± 1.9 µm) or 18 mg/m3 (MMAD 3.6  ± 2.0 µm) talc for 6 h/day, 5 days/wk, for 103- 104 wks.  The rats 
were exposed to 6 mg/m3 (MMAD 2.7 ± 1.9 µm) or 18 mg/m3 (MMAD 3. 2 ± 1.9 µm) talc for 6 h/day, 5 days/wk,  for 113 
wks (males) or 122 wks (females).  Concerns have been raised about this study, including concerns  that micronized talc 
having a significantly smaller particle size distribution than cosmetic talc  was used , aerosol concentrations were not properly 
controlled, proper procedures for dose selection were not followed resulting  in the MTD being exceeded at both con centra-
tions tested, and particle overload in  the lungs  was most likely the cause of the adverse effects reported . 
Talc did not induce pleural tumors in rats following intrapleural injection of  20 mg talc (mean size 2.6 ± 2.3 µm).  Few tu -
mors developed in rats given weekly i.p. injections of 25 mg talc suspended in 2 ml saline weekly for 4 wks.  In mice given 
an i.p. injection of 20 mg of UV -sterilized commercial talc in 1 ml saline, 12.5% of t he animals developed  mesotheli oma.   
The researchers also examined the effects of administering 3 mg talc + 3 mg B[a]P in 0.2 ml saline to hamsters in both 
studies, concluding that talc + B[a]P had a co -carcinogenic effect; however the Expert Panel noted t hat appropriate controls 
were not used.  
Results of studies examining particulate migration in the genital tract have been mixed.  In one study using mon keys, 
there was no translocation of bone black from the vagina to the oviducts .  However in a human study, researchers con cluded 
that there was evidence of mi gration of carbon particles  to the uterus or the Fallopian tubes and ovaries , although other  re-
search ers stated that this finding is  misleading because only one radio active label was used.  In  a study in rabbits, the number 
of large starch particles in peritoneal cavity rinsate was greater in test groups that were exposed intravag inally to glove 
lubricant  (i.e., starch) than in controls.   In human subjects, it appeared that starch particles mig rated to the cervix and uterus . 
In studies specific to talc migration, mixed results have also been reported.  In rats, talc was found in the ovaries of rats dosed 
intrauterinally with talc; in rats exposed with a single intravaginal dose, talc was foun d in the ovaries 4 days after dosing, but 
not 24 or 48 h after dosing.   Talc was not found in the ovaries of rabbits given six daily intravaginal doses, and there was no  
   23 
 translocation of talc from the vaginas of monkeys to the ovaries, oviducts, or the bod y of the uterus.   In humans, talc particles 
were found in 10/13 ovarian tumors and 12/21 cervical tumors; the particles found in the ovarian tumors were generally 
small er than those in the cervical tumors, i.e., 1000 Å to 2 µ m versus up to 5 µ m, respectively.   In women with benign 
ovarian neo plasms, half of whom  applied talc to the perineum or underwear, there was no linear relationship between ovarian 
talc powder burden and  exposure.  Electron micros copy counts were 0 for about half of the subj ects exposed to talc as well as 
half of the controls; talc was observed with light mi croscopy in all subjects exposed to t alc and 11/12 of the controls.  
Numerous epidemiological studies have been performed examining the risk of ovarian cancer following t alc expo sure.  
Among the epidemiological investigations reporting statistically -significant associations, the relative risk estimates ranged 
between 1.0 and 2.0 and were barely statistically significant .  Many phys iological, sociological, and exposure f actors have 
been linked to ovarian cancer, a number of them with a stronger assoc iation than that of hygienic use of cosmetic talc, but 
causality has not been established for any of them .  Most of the epidemiological studies found no trend of increasing ovarian 
cancer risk with increasing exposure duration or frequency or cumulative exposure, despite a five -fold difference be tween the 
lowest and the highest exposure groups.   Several of these studies report ed an apparent inverse trend.   The re sults of several 
epidemiological studies suggested that medical procedures expected to prevent the trans location of talc to the ovaries, such as 
tubal ligation or hysterectomy, reduce the relative risk estimates associated with talc use.  Other studies found no  difference 
in relative risk between women who had tubal ligation or hysterectomy and women who did not have these procedures.  One 
study reported inverse exposure -effect trends with duration of talc exposure after adjusting for tubal ligation.  The use of talc -
dusted condoms or diaphragms (including diaphragms known to have been stored in talc powder) , which would clearly result 
in exposure close to the cervical opening, was not associated with an increased estimate of relative risk of ovarian cancer . 
Talc was not a sensitizer  in female Hartley guinea pigs.  
DISCUSSION  
The safety of t alc has been the subject of much debate through the years, partly because the relationship between talc and 
asbestos is commonly misunderstood.  Often i n early studies , some of the analytical methods used to identify asbestos in talc 
were not performed and/or interpreted correctly , leading to incorrect conclusions that high levels of asbestos were present in 
talc.  In 1976, the CTFA issued stringent purity standards fo r talc  used in cosmetics, including specifications that talc must 
contain no de tectable fibro us, asbestos mineral ; generally -accepted methods for the determination of asbestiform am phibole 
minerals in cos metic talc were also identified by the CTFA.   Therefore, the CIR Expert Panel evaluated the safety of only talc 
that does not contain detectable fibrous, asbestos minerals . 
During its deliberations, the Panel discussed a 2012 FDA study, in which talc samples and talc -containing products  were 
analyzed  for the presence of asbestos.  Of the nine companies contacted, four supplied data to the FDA.  N o asbestos  was 
detected  in any of the talc samples or the talc -containing products.  The Panel requested clarification of the analytical 
methods used to confi rm lack of significant asbestiform amphibole content.  In response to this request, the Panel was 
advised that talc is certified to be asbestos -free, and their mines are monitored for asbestos  concentrations .  The Panel 
received documentation from industry  of the analytical methods used to confirm the purity of talc, particularly with respect to 
contamination by asbestos, quartz and other inorganics.  The analysis protocol, which is standardized in CFTA Method J4 -1 
employs x -ray diffraction and polarizing light microscopy to detect asbestos fibers at levels below 0.05%.  
As evidenced in this safety assessment, numerous studies have been performed to investigate  whether or not a causative 
relationship exists  between the cosmetic use of talc in the perineal area and ovarian cancer.  The Panel reviewed these studies 
thoroughly, and determined that they do not support a causal link.  The Panel stated that causation would depend on the  
migration of talc f rom the perineum to the ovaries .  There is no conclusive expl anation for the presence of talc in the ovaries  
reported in some studies.  However, t he Panel agreed that there is no known physiological mechanism  by which talc  can 
plausibly migrate from the perineum to the ovaries .  Further, t he Panel noted that if typical perineal application s of talc 
increased the risk of  ovarian cancer, then it would be expected to increase the risks of uterine and, especially,  cervical cancer 
as well; the absence of reports of associations between perineal talc use and either ut erine or cervical cancer indicates  that 
perineal talc application does not cause ovarian cancer.  A dditional support for this conclusion comes from , for example, 
studies demonstrating that the use of talc -dusted condoms or diaphragms, which would clearly r esult in exposure close to the 
cervical opening, was generally not associated with increased relative risk  estimate s for ovarian cancer . 
Studies have also examined  whether the inhalation of  cosmetic -grade  talc is associated with respiratory tract cancers.  Al-
though an inhalation study performed by the NTP using non-asbesti form, cosmetic -grade talc concluded that  there was some 
evidence of carcin ogenic activity in male rats and clear evidence in female rats, the Panel stated that these results were 
attributable to an artifactual effect caused by particle overload in the lungs of the rats.  T he talc that was used in this study, 
i.e., micronized talc  at high, saturating concentrations , had particle size  distribution s much smaller than those of  cosmetic -
grade talc.  The Panel concluded that the use  of talc at concentrations up to 35% in spray products, as reported for aerosol 
make -up bases, or even at 100% in pow ders, as reported for face powders, would not overwhelm pulmonary clearance  
   24 
 mechani sms and would , therefore , not cause pulmonary  overload  or adverse respiratory effects attributable to cosmetic talc  
use. 
One group of researchers looked at the effect of intratracheal administration of talc plus B[a]P in hamsters, concluding that  
talc may be co -carcinogenic when administered with B[a]P.  The Expert Panel  noted the potential for co -carcinogenicity, but  
determined that the results of these studies  were not attributable to a  specific effect of talc, appropriate controls were not 
used, including control  animals  exposed to B[a]P alone  and, thus, the results were not relev ant for assessing the safety o f the 
cosmetic use of talc.    
Finally, the Panel warned  that talc should not to be used on skin whe re the epidermal barrier is removed  or on skin that has 
greater than  1st degree burns .  Case reports were available in which  granulomas form ed if talc was applied to skin when the 
epidermal barrier was absent . 
CONCLUSION  
The CIR Expert Panel concluded that talc is  safe in the present practices of use and concentration described in this safety 
assessment.  
 
 
   
   25 
 FIGURES  
 
 
 
Figure 1.   Schematic structure of talc27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLES  
 
Table 1.  Physical and chemical properties    
Property  Description  Reference  
physical appearance  essentially white, odorless, fine powder  
ranges from snow -white to black, including greenish -gray and shades of green, pink, and red  
white, apple -green, gray powder; pearly or greasy luster  30 
44 
212 
Mohs ’ hardness  1 
1-1.5 (may be harder when impure)  213 
25,212 
crystal system  triclinic  25 
morphology  perfect (001) cleavage  25 
melting point  900-1000°C  
1500°C  214 
29 
pH 8.8-9.5 
7.7±0.5  19 
45 
density  2.7 g/cm3 215 
surface area  <20 m2/g (B.E.T. method)  216 
solubility  insoluble in water, cold acids, or in alkalies; soluble in hot concentrated phosphoric acid  217 
brightness (GE)  75-95 19 
optical properties  
   nx 
   nz  
1.539 -1.550  
1.589 -1.600  218 
indices of refraction  α = 1.539 – 1.550  
β = 1.589 – 1.594  
γ = 1.589 – 1.600  18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   26 
 Table 2. Frequency and concentration of use –complete table in FDA format  and summary information by exposure type   
 Number of Uses46 Maximum Concentration of Use  (%) 47 
Totals * 3469  0.0005 -100 
Duration of U se   
Leave -On 3287  0.002 -100 
Rinse -Off 163 0.0005 -70 
Diluted for (Bath) Use 19 0.001 -88 
   
Presented in complete FDA VCRP  format    
Baby Shampoos  NR 7 
Baby Lotions, Oils, Powders, Creams  9 99 
Bath Oils, Tablets, and Salts  18 1-88  
Bubble Baths  NR 0.4-2  
Bath Capsules  1 NR 
Other Bath Preparations  NR 0.001  
Eyebrow Pencil  47 0.01-79 
Eyeliner  122 0.1-90 
Eye Shadow  1292  20-100 
Eye Lotion  13 2 
Mascara  83 1-50 
Other Eye Makeup Preparations  65 2-6 
Perfumes    2 2 
Fragrance Powders (Dusting and Talcum)  115 15-99 
 Sachets  3 9 
Other Fragrance Preparations  10 3-9 
Hair Conditioner  1 0.4 
Rinses  NR 0.05 
Shampoos  NR 0.04 
Tonics, Dressings, and Other Hair Grooming Aids  2 10 
Other Hair Preparations  2 NR 
Hair Dyes and  Colors  NR 0.4-13 
Other Hair Coloring Preparations  2 6 
Blushers  331 48-94 
Face Powders  552 20-100 
Foundations  211 12-76 (not spray)48 
1-6 (aerosol  spray ) 
Leg and Body Pain ts 3 2 (aerosol  spray )48 
Lipstick  55 3-74 
Makeup Bases  44 36 (not spray )48 
35 (aerosol  spray ) 
Rouges 12 NR 
Makeup Fixatives  11 10 
Other Makeup Preparations  105 0.8-85 
Basecoats and Undercoats  5 1-7 
Cuticle Softeners  1 0.004 -18 
Nail Creams and Lotions  NR 2 
Nail Polish and Enamel  7 0.002 -11 
Other Manicuring Preparations  1 35 
Dentifrices  1 NR 
Other Oral Hygiene Products  NR 11 
Bath Soaps and Detergents  55 0.001 -70 
Deodorant (Underarm)  18 6-85 (not spray)48 
1-30 (aerosol spray)  
Other Personal Cleanlin ess Products  30 0.03-20 
Aftershave Lotion  1 14 
Men’s Talcum  4 96 
Shaving Cream  1 NR 
Shaving Soap (cakes, sticks, etc)  NR 0.04 
Other Shaving Preparations  2 NR 
Cleansing  37 0.0005 -0.005  
Depilatories  4 NR 
Face and Neck Creams, Lotions, and Powders (excl. shaving)  36 40 (not spray)48 
0.4 (spray)  
Body and Hand Creams, Lotions, and Powders (excl. shaving)  22 96 (not spray)48 
0.3 (spray)  
Foot Powders and Sprays  10 0.9-97 
Moisturizing Creams, Lotions, and Powders  54 3-5 
Night Creams, Lotions, and Powders  7 3 
Paste Masks (Mud Packs)  28 0.2-18 
Skin Fresheners  2 0.002 -0.2 
Other Skin Care Preparations  26 0.03-20 
Suntan Gels, Creams, and Liquids  2 15-41 
Indoor Tanning Preparations  4 74  
   27 
 Table 2. Frequency and concentration of use –complete table in FDA format  and summary information by exposure type   
 Number of Uses46 Maximum Concentration of Use  (%) 47 
Other Suntan Preparations  NR 3 
   
Summary Information – by Exposure Type    
Eye Area  1622  0.01-100 
Incidental Ingestion  56 3-74 
Incidental Inhalation – Spray  31a 0.3-35%b 48  
Incidental Inhalation - Powder  680 2-100 
Dermal Contact  3309  0.0005 -100 
Deodorants (Underarm)  18 2-75 
Hair – Non-Coloring  5 0.04-10 
Hair –Coloring  2 0.4-13 
 Nail 13 0.002 -35 
Mucous Membrane  160 0.001 -88 
Baby Products  9 7-99 
 
*The sum of all exposure types may not equal the sum of total uses.  
aIt is not know n whether or not the product is a spray.  
b In 2012, a s urvey was completed to assess the use of talc in spray products in which companies were asked whether or not they used talc in spray products, 
and if so, what is the maximum use concentrate of talc in the spray product and in products that are not sprays in the same F DA product category  
 
 
   
   28 
 Table 3. Cellular Effects      
Talc/Composition  Particle Size  Test System  Procedure  Results  Reference  
talc, non -fibrous  not specified  peritoneal and 
alveolar macrophages  cytotoxicity assay  low cytotoxicity  
- cytotoxicity of talc and other dusts was compared to induction of fi brosis 
following i.p. injection in Wistar rats; there was a good correlation be tween 
cytotoxicity of dust to macrophages in vitro and fibrogenicity in vivo  68 
talc; cosmetic grade (5 
samples)  
1 sample with 30 -35% 
chlorite  
1 sample with 1 -3% 
amphiboles  4 cosmetic -grade sam ples: 
80-91.5% of the respirable 
dust (1.94 -7.36% of the 
sample) was <7.5 µm;  
micronized cosmetic talc: 
93.5% of the res pirable 
dust (19.46% of the sam -
ple) was <7.5 µm ; 
chlor ite and amphiboles 
samples: 3.62 and 9.76% 
respirable dust, respect tive-
ly unstimulated mouse 
peritoneal macro -
phages  cytotoxicity of the 7 talc sa mples was deter -
mined and compared to that of a standard quartz sample and a non -fibrogenic dust 
(magnetite)  - all 7 talc samples were cytotoxic to macrophages, but far less so that the 
quartz sample; quartz content of each talc (which ranges from <0.2 –  0.7%) 
did not seem to affect cytotoxicity  
- the activity of each of talc sample was similar to that of the others and not 
related to particle -size distribution  
- the talc samples induced a statistically significantly greater release of 
LDH compared to magnetite, and they caused a slightly, but significantly greater release of lysosomal β -glucuronidase than of LDH from the 
macrophages  72 
talc, Italian 00000  ≤10 µm  rabbit lung fibr oblasts  ingestion of talc particles by fibroblasts was 
determined  - talc was taken up by fibroblasts, and the talc particles were observed in 
the cells  73 
talc, Italian  not provided  V79-4 Chinese ham -
ster lung cells;  
human alveolar Type 
II lung cells (A549)  cytotoxicity was determined  - 50 µg/ml was not cytotoxic to V79 -4 cells  
- talc inhibited the growth of A549 cells, the inhibitory concentrations and 
extent of the inhibition were not reported  71 
talc; composition not 
provided, but assumed 
to be cosmetic grade not provided  OSE2a;  
GC1a   effect of talc on cell viability; cell cultures 
were incubated with 0 -500 µg/ml talc for 24 
– 120 h  - OSE2a cells: cell viability was statistically significantly increased with 5 
µg/ml talc at 24 h and statistically significantly de creased at 200 µg/ml 
after 72 h and at 500 µg/ml after 24 and 72 h  
- GC1a  cells: viability was statistically sig nificantly increased at 5, 20, and 
100 µg/ml talc after 72 h and was  statistically significantly de creased at 
500 µg/ml after 24 h  70 
as above   OSE2a ; 
GC1a  neoplastic transformation assay  - OSE2a cells: compared to untreated controls, a statistically significant 
increase in the number of transformed colonies was seen at 5 and 20 µg/ml, but a statistically significant decrease in transformed cells was seen at 100 
µg/ml  
- GC1 a cells: 5, 20, and 100 µg/ml talc caused a statistically significant 
increase in transformed colonies   
as above   OSE2a ; 
GC1a ; 
human PMN  ability to induce ROS  - OSE2a and GC1a cells: initial concentration -dependent decrease in ROS 
generation (at 24 h);  ROS generation then increased in both cell lines, and 
the increase was statistically significant at 20 µg/ml at 72 and 120 h and at 
50 µg/ml at 120 h in the OSE2a cells and at 0.5, 20, and 20 µg/ml at 72 and 
120 h and at 5 and 100 µg/ml at 120 h compared to the 24 h value  
- PMN : a concentration -dependent increase in the induction of ROS, and 
the increase was statistica lly significant at 0.5, 5, 20, and 50 µg/ml at 24 h 
and at 100 and 500 µg/ml at 24 and 72 h; the maximum ROS generation in 
PMN  was seen at 500 µg/ml talc at 24 h, and the increase was 4 -fold 
compared to untreated controls    
   29 
 Table 3. Cellular Effects      
Talc/Composition  Particle Size  Test System  Procedure  Results  Reference  
talc, composition not 
provided  2 µm PMC;  
LAC  (A549)  cells were expose d to 25, 50, and 75 µg/ml 
talc suspended in endo toxin -free normal 
saline for 24, 48,and 72 h to determine the 
ability to induce apoptosis  - talc induced apoptosis of LAC  in a concentration - and time -dependent 
manner, but talc did not induce apoptosis of PMCs  74 
talc in endotoxin -free 
water  (assumed to be 
pharmaceutical -grade)  2.1 µm  PMC confluent PMC s were exposed to 2 -64 
µg/cm2 sterilized talc for 24 h  - PMC viability decreased with increasing talc concentrations; viability 
with 64 µg/cm2 was 75%  
- all concentrations of talc significantly stimulated the release of IL -8 and 
MCP -1over that of unstimulated cells  
- talc significantly increased chemotactic activity for neutrophils and 
monocytes  compared to unstimulated cells ; the addition of excess IL -8 or 
MCP -1 antibody decreased chemotaxis , but it did not return entirely to the 
level of unstimulated cells  
- talc induced C -X-C and C -C chemokine expression; the transcriptional 
response of IL -8 and MCP -1 expression was enhanced  
- talc induced  intercellular adhesion molecule -1 (ICAM -1) expression on 
PMC  75 
as above    confluent PMC were exposed to 4 µg/cm2 
sterilized tal c for 1 -72 h; controls were 
exposed to 4 µg/cm2 glass microspheres  - talc stimulated production of IL -8 and MCP -1 to  a greater degree than 
did glass beads   
talc in endotoxin -free 
0.89% normal saline  
(4.0 mg/ml)  (assumed 
to be phar maceutical-
grade)  2.1 µm PMC;  
MMC  confluent cells were exposed to 0 -24 µg/cm2 
sterilized talc in serum -free medium for 72 
h; controls were exposed to 4 µg/cm2 glass 
microspheres ; viability was determined  - PMC viability was 93% with 24 µg/cm2 talc 
- MMC viability decreased with increasing concentration of talc; with 24 
µg/cm2 talc, viability ranged from 62 -84% depending on the cell line  76 
as above    confluent cells were exposed to 0 -24 µg/cm2 
talc in serum -free media  for 24 h ; apoptosis 
was determined TUNEL  - PMC did  not show significant  apoptosis with  varying concentration s 
- talc induced apoptosis in MMC in a concentration -dependent  manner ; 
significance was noted at 6 µg/cm2, and then plateaued   
as above    PMC/MMC confluent cells were exposed to 
4 µg/cm2 talc for 24 -72 h; 6 µg/cm2 glass 
microspheres were used as controls ; 
TUNEL and DNA electrophoresis was 
performed  - apoptosis of PMC cells by talc did not increase with time   
- talc induced apoptosis in MMC in a time -dependent manner; the increase 
over time was statistically significant compared to controls  
- a typical DNA ladder indicative of apoptosis was seen with MMC but not 
PMC   
talc, non -fibrous; 
mean surface area – 
16.03 m2/g 1.1 µm  LP9;  
IOSE  effect on cell viability  was determined   
LP9 cells: changes in gene expression were  
measured with 15 and 75 µ m/cm2 at 8 h and 
15 µm/cm2 at 24 h  
IOSE cells: changes in gene expression 
were measured with 75 µ m/cm2 at 8 and 24 
h - non-toxic to IOSE cells at up to 75 µm2/cm2 and to LP9 cells at ≤163 
µm2/cm2; toxicity seen with ≥243 µm2/cm2 
- LP9 cells: low conc. of talc increased expression of 1 gene at 8 h and no 
changes at 24 h, while elevated expression levels of 30 genes were seen at 
8 h with high conc.  
- IOSE: no signifi cant mRNA changes  77 
 
Abbreviations : GC1a = normal ovarian granulosa cells; IL -8 = interleukin -8; IOSE = human ovarian epi thelial cells; LAC = lung adenocarcinoma cell line; LDH = lactate dehydrogenase; LP9 = human mesothelial 
LP9/TERT- 1 cells; MCP -1 = monocyte chemo tactic protein -1; MMC = human malignant mesothelioma cells; OSE2a = normal ovarian epitheli al cells; PMC = human pleural meso thelial cells; PMN = 
polymorphonuclear neutrophils;  ROS = reactive oxidative species; TUNEL = terminal deoxy nucleotidyl transferase -mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end labeling  
  
   30 
 Table 4. Repeated Dose Toxicity Studies        
Talc/Composition  Particle Size  Dose /Conc  Animals ; #/grp  Dose D uration  Procedure  Results  Reference  
DERM AL 
commercial talcum 
powder; composition not 
provided  not provided  
 amount applied was 
not specified  domestic rabbits  
5M/5F (test grp)  
4M/4F (controls)  1x/day  
6wks  - the powder was sprinkled on the shaved skin 
of the dorsal surface of the body trunk, and then spread evenly over the site  
- it does not state that the site was wrapped  
- blood chemistry values were measured at the 
termination of dosing  - all animals developed skin dryness  
- signs of skin erosion were observed  
- no clinical signs were observed  
- compared to control values:  
- alanine transaminase, aspartate transaminase, 
glutamyl transferase, amy lase, and potassium ion 
values were statistically sig nificantly decreased  
- cholesterol, high density lipoproteins, triglycerides, 
bilirubin, and glucose values were statistically sig ni-
ficantly increased  78 
ORAL  
talc; composition not 
provided  not provided  29.6% in saline  
5000 mg/kg bw/day 5 rats  5 days  no additional details  minimal signs of toxicity were observed  65 
Italian talc, 00000 grade ; 
92% talc (by wt), 3% 
chlor ite, 1% carbonate 
minerals; 0.5 -1% quartz  25 µm (mean 
particle size); 
upper size, 70 
µm 100 mg/day in feed  Wistar rats  
16M/16F (talc and chrysotile ) 
8M/8F (controls)  101 days over 
5 mos  super -fine chrysot ile asbestos (SFA chrys o-
tile)-fed and untreated controls were used ; 2 
animals/group were killed 3 mos after dos ing, 
all other animals lived until natural death  - talc: mean survival (from start of feeding), 614 
days; 1 leiomyosarcoma of the stomach, 2 sarcomas 
of the uterus  
- chrysotile: mean survival, 619 days ; 1 possible leio -
myosarcoma of the stomach, 1  sarcoma of the uterus, 
1 lymphosarcoma  
- controls: mean survival, 641 days ; 1 adrenal 
adenoma  79 
INHALATION  
asbestos -free talc; 19.2 -
19.4% Mg  MMAD, 2.7 ± 
0.1 µm; 79% of 
the talc by mass 
had an 
aerodynamic 
diameter <5 µm  
 target: 0, 2, 6, or 18 
mg/m3 
actual: 0, 2.2, 5.7, or 
20.4 mg/m3 B6C3F 1 mice  
10M/10F  4 wks  
6 h/day  
5 days/wk  - multi -tiered inhalation chambers were used; 
animals were killed 24 h after the last ex po-
sure; lung burdens were measured in half of 
the ani mals and the other half were u sed for 
micro scopic examination 
- this study was used to determine the expo -
sure concentrations for a 2 -yr NTP bioassay  - lung burden averaged 0, 100, 290, and 1020 µg 
talc/g lung  for control, low, mid, and high dose, 
respectively ; lung burdens normalized for lung wt 
and exposure conc: n/a, 46, 51, and 50 µg talc/g 
lung/mg/m3, respectively  
- no exposure -related  abnormalities were seen at nec -
ropsy; microscopic ally, the only expo sure-related 
lesion was a modest, diffuse in crease in free macro -
phages within the alveolar space; the macrophages, 
which were focally ag gregated, contained talc 
particles  10,80  
   31 
 Table 4. Repeated Dose Toxicity Studies        
Talc/Composition  Particle Size  Dose /Conc  Animals ; #/grp  Dose D uration  Procedure  Results  Reference  
asbestos -free talc; 19.2 -
19.4% Mg  MMAD, 3. 3 ± 
0.1µm; 79% of 
the talc by mass 
had an 
aerodynamic 
diameter <5 µm  target: 0, 2, 6, or 18 
mg/m3 
actual: 0, 2.3, 4.3, or 
17 mg/m3 F344/Crl rats  
10M/10F  4 wks  
6 h/day  
5 days/wk  as above  
- this study was used to determine the 
exposure concentrations for a lifetime NTP study  - lung burden averaged 3, 70, 170, and 720 µg talc/g 
lung for control, low, mid, and high dose, 
respectively; lung burdens normalized for lung wt 
and exposure conc: n/a, 30, 39, and 42 µg talc/g 
lung/mg/m3, respectively; normalized low dose value 
was statistically significantly greater than mid and high dose values  
- the increase in talc lung burden with exposure 
concentrations may be attributable to overwhelming 
the capacity of the respiratory tract to clear particles 
at 6 and 18 mg/m3 exposures  
- no exposure -related abnormalities were seen at 
necropsy; microscopically, the only exposure -related 
lesion was a modes t, diffuse increase in free macro -
phages within the alveolar space; fewer macrophages 
were seen in the exposed rats than in the exposed mice; the diffusely scattered macrophages contained 
talc particles  10,80 
Italian talc, 00000 grade; 
92% talc (by wt), 3% chlor ite, 1% carbonate 
minerals; 0.5 -1% quartz  25 µm (mean 
particle size); 
upper size, 70 
µm 10.8 mg/m3 (mean)  
approximately 40% respirable  Wistar rats  
 7.5 h/day  
5 days/wk  animals (6/cage) were exposed to talc dust; 
SFA chrys otile controls were treated similarly 
at each time frame; untreated controls were 
used; some animals were killed 10 days or 1 
yr after final exposure, and the remain der 
lived until natural death  mean fibrosis scoring scale: 1 – nil; 2 – minimal; 4 – 
slight; 6 –  moderate; 8 - severe (for use below)  79 
  cumulative 3 mos 
dose=4100 mg/m3h 24M/24F  3 mos  8 animals were killed 10 days and 8 were 
killed 1 yr after exposure  - mean fibrosis score 10 days/1 yr after talc exposure: 
2.2/2.4; chrysotile: 2.8/2.2; controls: 1.8/1.6  
- over 50% of the animals were alive at 28 mos   
  cumulative 6 mos 
dose=8200 mg/m3h 12M/12F  6 mos  6 animals were killed 10 days after and 4 talc 
and chrysotile animals and 3 control animals 
were killed 1 yr after exposure - mean fibrosis score 10 days/1 yr  after exposure  
- talc:  2.7 /3.4; chrysotile: 3.0/3.2; controls: 1.9/1.5  
- most test animals died by 28  mos; there were no 
lung tumors in the talc or control group and 1 
adenomatosis in the chrysotile group   
  cumulative 12 mos 
dose=16,400 mg/m3h 12M/12F  12 mos  6 animals were killed 10 days after exposure 
and 4 talc and chrysotile animals and 3 control 
animals were killed 1 yr after exposure  - mean fibrosis score 10 days/1 yr after exposure  
- talc: 3.4/4.6 ; chrysotile: 3.2/4.2 ; controls: 1.3/1.9  
- most test animals died by 28  mos;  in the lungs, 1 
adenoma was found in the talc group; 3 adenomas, 2 
adenomatosis, and 1 adenocarcinoma was found in 
the chrysotile group; there were no lung tumors in the 
controls   
commercial (talc) baby 
powder; 95% (w/w) platy 
talc with trace quantities 
of carbonates 
(magnesium and 
dolomite) and platy 
chlorite and rutile  MMAD, 4.9 µm  
 37.1±7.4 µg/l 
(MTAC ) 
respirable fraction:  
9.8± 2.4 µg/l  
cumulative dose:  
3 min : 14.6 mg·h/m3 
30 min: 146 mg·h/m3 
150 min: 732 mg·h/m3 Syrian golden 
hamsters, 
50M/50F ; 
controls, 
25M/25F  30 days  
3, 30, or 150 min/day 
5 days/wk  single tier exposure; animals lived until 
natural death  - no statistically significant difference in survival 
time among groups, but there was a significant 
difference btwn males and females  within grps ; no 
clinical signs of toxicity to talc  
- the type, incidence, and severity of lesions indi cated 
no trend toward a dose -response and no statistically 
significant differences  between ex posed and control 
groups  81  
   32 
 Table 4. Repeated Dose Toxicity Studies        
Talc/Composition  Particle Size  Dose /Conc  Animals ; #/grp  Dose D uration  Procedure  Results  Reference  
talc; “technical” or 
“pharma ceutical” grade  not provided  30-383 mg/m3 rats; number not 
provided  9 mos; 6 h/day, 
6 days/wk  details  were not provided  None of the animals died as a specific con sequence 
of exposure . 84 
INTRAPLEURAL  
Italian talc, 00000 grade; 
92% talc (by wt), 3% 
chlor ite, 1% carbonate 
minerals; 0.5 -1% quartz  25 µm (mean 
particle size); 
upper size, 70 
µm 20 mg in 
physiological saline; 
50 mg/ml  Wistar rats  
24 M/24 F  until natural 
death  injection into the right pleural cavity; saline 
and SFA chrys otile controls were used  - talc: mean survival, 655 days;  no meso theliomas; 
injection -site gran ulomas were com mon; small 
pulmonary ade noma in one rat, but no other lesions 
in the lung  
- saline: mean survival, 691 days; no meso theliomas  
- chrysotile: mean survival, 598 days; 18 meso theli-
omas  79 
INTRAVAGINAL AND PERINEAL  
talc; composition not 
provided  not provided  100 mg in 0.5 ml 
saline  Sprague -Dawley 
rats; 7 F  daily for 3 mos  talc was administered perineally (in aerosol 
form) or intravaginally; controls were 
untreated or given intravaginal 
administration of  saline  
baseline cervico vaginal smears were 
obtained at study initiation; a ll animals were 
killed at study termination  - all animals in both test groups developed infection:  
 intravaginal test group:  5 had vulvovaginitis, 6 had 
endometritis, 4 had pelvic infection, and 3 had ovary 
infections (7 ovaries)  
perineal group: all had vulvovaginitis , 4 had en do-
metritis, 5 had pelvic  infection, 4 had ovar ian 
infection (8  ovaries), 2 developed sal pingitis and 
tubal inclusion  
saline controls: 1 had endometritis  
untreated controls: 2 had vulvovaginitis and 
endometritis with infection in  both ovaries, and 1 of 
these animals developed salpingitis  
- no neoplastic change was found  82 
INTRATRACHEAL  
talc dust from a mill in 
Vermont; <1% quartz; no 
fibrous material  MMAD, 7.5 µm; 
percentage mass 
<5 µm was 26%  0.15 ml/100 g bw of 
the dust in 0.9% NaCl containing 13.3 µg/ml 
rabbit sur face active 
material  
 
0, 0.15, 0.75, or 3.75 
mg/100 g bw  hamsters, 6  single exposure  the suspension was instilled intr atracheally  
- dose-response study ; results 1 day after 
exposure  
-biochemical and cellular indicators of injury 
in BAL were measured  - no significant effect on macrophage numbers  
- PMN numbers were elevated  
- lactate dehydrogenase, peroxidase and albumin 
levels increased in a dose -dependent manner  219 
  3.75 mg talc/100 g bw  hamsters , 4 
(exposure) or 3 
(controls)   - time course experiment ; measurements made 
1, 4, 7,and 14 -days after treatment  in broncho -
alveolar lavage fluid  - PMN values approached control levels at 4 -14 days 
post-exposure  
- peroxidase values approached control values by day 
7 post -exposure  
- albumin levels decreased rapidly after exposure  
- chronic toxic effects on macrophages were 
observed    
   33 
 Table 4. Repeated Dose Toxicity Studies        
Talc/Composition  Particle Size  Dose /Conc  Animals ; #/grp  Dose D uration  Procedure  Results  Reference  
INTRAVENOUS  
approx. 61% SiO 2, 32% 
MgO, 1% Al 2O3 <5 µm  25 mg in 0.5 ml physi -
ological saline  male guinea 
pigs, 24 test 
animals  
8 controls  3 doses; given 
on days 0, 7, and 15  i.v. injection into the thigh vein in the hind 
leg; 2 test animals and 1 control were killed at 
8 different intervals (from 1 -150 days) after 
the last dose  - 8 animals died immediately after the 2nd and 3rd 
doses  
- gross observations: no significant abnormal ities in 
the liver; moderate enlargement of the ab dominal 
lymph nodes at study termination; varying degrees of congestion in the lungs  developing early and 
persisting throughout  - some particles lodged in the alveolar capil laries of 
the lung ; by day 15, many small focal areas of 
macrophages and lymphocytes de veloped near the 
alveolar capillaries, and an in creased density of talc 
particles was seen  
- talc parti cles were observed in the lungs and  in the 
liver throughout the study, and in the ab dominal 
lymph nodes at day 30+; n o talc was seen in the 
tracheobronchial lymph nodes, but a moderate degree 
of lymphopoiesis was ob served at various times  83 
 
Abbreviations : BAL = bronchoalveolar lavage fluid; conc = concentration; grp = group; MMAD = mass median aerodynamic diameter ; PMN = polymorphonuclear neutrophils  
    
   34 
 Table 5. Pulmonary effects of occupational exposure      
Talc Composition  and 
Particle Size  (if given)  Study Population  and Location  Timeframe  examined  Procedure/Parameters Measured /Limitations  Findings  Reference  
Mining and Milling  
- some chlor ite and quartz; 
very minor to trace 
amounts of magnesite and 
dolomite; no amphibole  or 
chrysotile miner als were 
detected  - 1346 millers, 438 miners, and 
an equal number of age -matched 
controls from the town of Alba  
(>1 yr in job)  
- mine location:  Italy - 
Germanasca and Chisone Valley (Piedmont)  
 employees that began 
work btwn 1921 -1950  
– followed until 1974 historic prospective study  
- cumulative exposure for each worker was estimated 
from the results of successive determinations of air dust content from 1948+ (until retirement or June 30, 1974)  
 
- Exposure Levels by distribution of total number of 
inhaled particles (cumulative exposure for  each worker 
was estimated from the results of successive determina -
tions of air dust content and quantified by calculating an 
appropriate value of the total amount of inhaled particles 
during the employment period)  
 
Miners  
level 1: 566 –  1699 mppcf/yr  (n=405) 
level 2:  1700 –  5665 mppcf/yr  (n=423)  
level 3: 5666 – 12,750 mppcf/yr  (n=518)  
 
Millers  
level 1: 25 -  41 mppcf/yr  (n=163)  
level 2: 142 -  424 mppcf/yr  (n=144)  
level 3: 425 -  906 mppcf/yr  (n=131)  
 
Limitation  
- possible lack of comparability of the occupational and 
control groups for comparing mortality  
- smoking status was not known  - by observed vs. e xpect ed comparison, the observed 
overall mortality of miners and millers was signifi-
cantly lower than expected  
- there was no relationship found be tween the ratio of 
observed to expected deaths and the interval between 
first exposure and death  
- among different exposure classes, the ratio did not 
increase with increasing exposure  91 
   for miners:  
- respiratory disease (all except TB)  (SMR = 1.38) , 
silicosis  (SMR = 2.01) , and silico -TB (SMR = 1.58)  
were statistically significantly greater than 
expected  
-break -out by exposure showed increasing ratios with 
increased exposure for these diseases  
- break -out by interval between first exposure and 
death showed increasing ratios with increasing 
latency -yrs for respiratory diseases (all except TB); it 
was noted that for silicosis with or without TB, the 
ratios were unchanged over time because of the 
absence of pneumconiosis in controls, but the number 
of observed cases showed a constant increase with 
latency  
- researchers noted that the trends in dose and latency  
and the different incidences of silicosis suggests that 
the inducing factor was silica, not talc  
-incidence of malignant neoplasms:  
 - all malignant neoplasms (SMR = 0.77 ), of the lungs, 
bronchus and trachea  (SMR = 0.46) , and of other 
sites (SMR = 0.58 ) were statistically significantly  
lower than expected  
- break -out by interval between first exposure and 
death for all malignant neoplasms and lung cancer showed a decrease with increasing latency  
- an increasing trend was observed for cancer of the  
larynx  
- CV disease was statistically significantly  lower than 
expected  (SMR = 0.75)   
    for millers:  
- CV disease was statistically significantly  lower than 
expected  (SMR = 0.78)  
- there were no consistent trends observed for any 
cause of death  
- break -out by interval between first exposure and 
death indicated that the ratio of all tumors increased 
with increasing latency, but the number of observed 
deaths was still less than expected    
   35 
 Table 5. Pulmonary effects of occupational exposure      
Talc Composition  and 
Particle Size  (if given)  Study Population  and Location  Timeframe  examined  Procedure/Parameters Measured /Limitations  Findings  Reference  
- composition as above  
- dust counts represent ed 
particle sizes of 0.5 – 5.0 
µm - 1260 miners and 418 millers in 
above  study  
 as above  - because of the concern stated above, i.e. the possible 
lack of comparability of the occupational and control 
groups for comparing mortality, expected death rates 
were recalculated using the death rates of the Italian male 
population as the standard death rate  
- the mortality patterns for 1946 -1974 were examined 
using the rates relevant to 1951 for the first 5 yrs  Miners  
- the observed cause of death for “all causes”  (SMR 
= 1.25);  non-malignant respiratory diseases  (SMR 
= 3.29) (primarily pneumo conio sis), and TB (SMR 
= 1.98) were statistically significantly increased  
- there were 58 cases of pneumoconiosis and 13 cases 
of TB -associated with pneumoconiosis  
- an increasing trend with increas ing exposure was ob -
served for pneumoconiosis and TB  
- at the highest exposure level, ~20% of total deaths 
were due to pneumoconiosis, with or without TB  
- the researchers stated that the high frequency of 
pneumoconiosis i n miners was attributable to the h igh 
content of free silica in the air dust, which was as high 
as 18% in drilling operations  93 
    Millers  
- the observed cause of death for “all causes” was  
statistically significantly increased  (SMR = 1.2 ) 
- the observed cause of death was increased but NS for 
non-malignant respiratory diseases (SMR = 1.5) and 
TB (SMR = 2.0 ) 
- there were only 3 cases of pneumoconiosis and 1 
case of TB -associated with pneumoconiosis  
- there was no consistent trend with increased e xpo-
sure level   
- non-asbestiform talc  - 1795 males ; 1244 miners and 
551 millers  (>1 yr employment)  
- mine  location: Val Chisone, 
Turin Italy  1946 - 1995  update of study described above  
- total mortality and selected cause of death; those with a 
significant increase are given (shown as SMR  (95% CI))  
- no information was provided on smoking status  Miners  
all causes:  1.3 (1.2  – 1.4) 
oral cavity cancers:  6.1 (3.9 – 9.1) 
respiratory tract diseases: 3.1  (2.5 – 3.7) 
digestive tract diseases: 1.4 (1.0 –  1.8) 
cirrhosis:  1.8 (1.3 – 2.5) 
- SMR for lung cancer was not significantly 
increased; 1.1 (0.7 –  1.5) 92 
    Millers  
oral cavity cancers: 3.3 (1.3 –  6.9) 
- SMR for lung cancers was 0.7 (0.3 –  1.2)  
   - mortality by duration of exposure was examined  - for all miners and millers, no trend in risk with 
exposure was observed for any of the causes of death  
- when miners only were examined, a n increasing 
trend in risk with increasing exposure was observed for non -neoplastic respiratory disease 
(i.e., silicosis); <10 yrs exposure, the SMR was 2.8 (1.7-4.6); 10 -20 yrs exposure, 2.8 (1.7 - 4.2); >20 yrs 
exposure, 3.2 (2.5 –  4.1)  
   - mortality by time since first exposure (latency) w as 
examined  for all miners and millers, a direct trend was 
observed only for  non-neoplastic respiratory 
disease ; at <20 yrs latency, SMR was 1.5 (0.7 -2.6); 
20-30 yrs, 2 .4 (1.5  -3.4); > 30 yrs, 2 .4, 1.9- 3.0)   
   36 
 Table 5. Pulmonary effects of occupational exposure      
Talc Composition  and 
Particle Size  (if given)  Study Population  and Location  Timeframe  examined  Procedure/Parameters Measured /Limitations  Findings  Reference  
- non-asbestiform talc  
- trace amounts of quartz, 
tremolite, and anthophyl -
lite 
- fibers had been detected 
near the detection limit for 
optical microscopy  - 94 miners (>1 yr employment)  
- 295 millers (>2 yr employment)  
-mine located in  Norway; the 
mean value for  radon daughter 
exposure was 3.5 pCi/l at the 
worksite  1935 – 1972 (millers)  
1944 – 1972 (miners)  - levels of dust exposure were not registered during the 
actual period; samples collected from 1980 -1982 
demonstrated great variability between job category and 
workplace:  
mine: 0.94 – 97.35 mg/m3 
mill: 1.4 – 54.1 mg/m3 
 
Limitations  
- numbers were too small for further conclusions on 
cause -specific mortality or to form inferences on par ti-
cular cancer types  - for combined miners/millers, SMRs were <1 for all 
causes, all malignant neoplasms, and diseases of the 
respiratory system  
     - for miners only, obs > exp for number of 
malignant neoplasms  
- for combined miners/millers, cancer incidences at all 
sites, lung, prostate, and intestine, SIRs were <1; SIRs 
for incidences of kidney, stomach, and bladder 
cancers were 1.2% (95% CI, 0.1 -  3.4), 1.1 (95% CI, 
0.41-2.15), and 2.1 (95% CI, 0.8 -4.3) 
     - for miners only, obs > exp for cancer incidence at 
all sites, stomach, lung, prostate, and other sites  
     - for millers only, obs > exp for cancer incidence of 
the bladder  94 
- no asbestos in samples  
- free silica levels were 
<0.25% for nearly all bulk talc samples  
- free silica detectable on ly 
in occasional air samples  
- talc shards and ribbons 
were seen in talc bulk and airborne dust samples  
- significant quantities of 
magnesite, chlorite, and 
dolomite  
- traces of calcite, bio tite, 
ankerite, phlogopite  - 225 millers, 163 miners (all 
males; 47 w ere included in both 
groups) (>1 yr employment)  
- Vermont mines (radon daughter 
levels ranged from trace quan ti-
ties to 0.12 working levels; single 
measurements up to 1.0 working 
levels have been measured)  1940 – 1975  - U.S. mortality rates were used; data from 1940 – 1967 
were obtained and deaths after 1967 were extrapolated  
- however, because Vermont rates (1949 -1975) for non -
malignant respiratory diseases  and respiratory cancer 
deaths are greater than U.S. rates, comparisons were 
made for these caus es of deaths with those  expected  
using  Vermont rates; c ause- specific  expected  deaths  for 
the study  population were  obtained by applying death 
rates, calculated from yearly  tallies  of deaths  and census  
data, to the person -yrs of observation of the  cohort 
members  
 
Limitations  
- selection bias from radiographic monitoring of talc 
workers; the bias is most likely small 
- no data on smoking habits were available  - there were 90 talc -worker deaths observed and 77.32 
expected (NS)  
- for all talc workers, the observed number of deaths 
for total non -malig nant respiratory disease which was 
specific for ONMRD ,excluding influenza and 
pneumonia were sta tistically sig nificantly increased  
- 9 of the 11 workers with ONM DR had radiographic 
reading consistent with pneumoconiosis  
- the possibility of an interactive effect between 
cigarette smoking and talc exposure was discussed  
 
Miners  
- deaths due to respiratory malignant neoplasms 
were statistically significantly increased  
- this increase was also found using  Vermont data  97 
   Millers  
- deaths due to total non- malignant respiratory dis -
eases and ONMRD ( 7 observed/0.89 expected  U.S.) 
were statistically significantly increased  
- this increase was also found using Vermont data  
 
- the researchers stated that because excess lung 
cancer mortality was observed for miner and not millers suggests that additional etiologic agents, alone 
or in combination with talc dust, affects miners   
- milled product is a talc -
chlorite mixture  
- contains 0-3% quartz  - 1070 male workers at a milling 
site in the French Pyrenees (>1 yr 
employment)  
- local (1968+) and national 
mortality rates were used for 
comparison  1945 -1994  - a nested case -control study protocol was used  
- two case control studies were set up for each cohort:  a 
lung-cancer study and a study of non -malignant 
respiratory disease  
- occupational histories and sm oking information was 
collected by an external interviewer  - the SMR for all causes of death (1968+) was 0.93  
- the SMR for non -malignant respiratory diseases was 
0.27 
- the incidence of  pneumoconiosis was 0  
- the SMR  (obs/exp)  for all cancers was 0.73, f or 
stomach cancer was 0.40 (0.38 -2.75), and for lung 
cancer was 1.06 (0.43 -2.19)  98  
   37 
 Table 5. Pulmonary effects of occupational exposure      
Talc Composition  and 
Particle Size  (if given)  Study Population  and Location  Timeframe  examined  Procedure/Parameters Measured /Limitations  Findings  Reference  
- milled product is talc -
chlorite or talc -dolomite  
- contains 0.5 -4% quartz  - 542 male workers from three 
mines and their respective mills 
in the Styrian Alps (>1 yr em -
ployment  
- mortality rates of Styria were 
used for comparison  1972 -1995  - work histories were abstracted from company records; 
smoking history was obtained from a variety of sources  - the SMR for all causes of death was 0.75  
- the SMR for non -malignant respiratory diseases was 
1.06 
- the SMR for pneumoconiosis was 5.56 (95% CI; 
1.12 – 16.2); 3 cases were observed  
- the SMR for all cancers was 1.02, for stomach 
cancer was 1.18 (0.38 -2.75), and for lung cancer was 
1.23 (0.76 -1.89)  98 
 - cohort: 40 cases; 39 French and 
1 Austrian  
- 44 controls; 41 French and 3 
Austrian   Nested case -control study for respiratory disease  Cumulative exposure  to talc  (y·mg/m3): 
<100; OR = 0.22  
100-400; OR = 1.00  
400-800; OR = 1.97  
≥800; OR = 2.53  
 
- mortality increased with exposure  
 
all cases: OR = 1.08 (1.02 -  1.16)  
pneumoconiosis: OR = 1.17 (0.99 – 1.38)  
COPD: OR = 1.02 (0.86 –  1.2)  
 - cohort: 30 cases; 23 French and 
7 Austrian  
- 88 controls: 67 French; 21 
controls   Nested case control study for lung cancer  Cumulative exposure  to talc  (y·mg/m3): 
<100; OR = 0.86  
100-400; OR = 1.07  
400-800; OR = 0.60  
≥800; OR = 0.73  
 
- a relationship between mortality and exposure was 
not observed   
- did not contain tremo lite; 
only am phibole min eral 
was non -asbestiform 
actinolite (one bed at ≤6%); ≤42% car bonate 
minerals, 0.2 -1.6% quartz  - workers (number not specified) 
from a  company in Russia that 
mined, ground, and processed 
talc; total number of cases not 
stated (>3 yrs at plant)  
- the “other population” were 
matched non -cancer/non -worker 
deaths from the same town  
(number not specified)  1949 – 1975  - estimated the death rat e by relating the number of 
deaths from cancer of cases to the number of man -yrs of 
work for all employees during the same period  
- the calculated death rates were compared with the 
analogous death rate for the controls  - RR of death from tumors of all sit es was 5.1 (p < 
0.001) for males and 6.4 (p<0.001) for females  
- RR of death from lung cancer  was 4.5 (p<0.02) 
for males  and 9.3 (NS) for females  
- for lung cancer of male workers compared to con -
trols, the death rate of those <59 yrs old was 2x 
greater, of those 60 -69 yrs old was 6.51x greater, and 
of those 70+ yrs old was 40.02x greater  
- RR of death from gastric cancer  was 3.7 (p<0.02) 
for males and 6.3 (p<0.05) for females  95  
   38 
 Table 5. Pulmonary effects of occupational exposure      
Talc Composition  and 
Particle Size  (if given)  Study Population  and Location  Timeframe  examined  Procedure/Parameters Measured /Limitations  Findings  Reference  
- minimal amounts of crys-
talline silica and asbes ti-
form minerals  
- contained chlorites and 
carbonates  - 7 miners/millers  
- 8 adult age -matched by decade 
male controls  
- Vermont mines  4-27 yrs of exposure 
(timeframe not stated)  - lifetime exposure to talc range s from 12 – 5930 mppcf  
- pulmonary tissue from deceased talc workers was 
examined and compared to pulmonary tissue of controls  - lungs of 4 workers exposed for 4 -19 yrs exhibited 
focal and diffuse fibrosis with accumulations of talc, but chest x -rays were negative for  
pneumoconiosis  
- lungs of 3 workers exposed for 19, 26, and 27 yrs 
had areas of diffuse confluent fibrosis and talc  
- 2 workers exposed for 27 yrs had positive chest x -
rays; the chest x -ray was not available for the re main -
ing worker  
- extensive pulmonary fibrosis was found in the pa -
tient exposed for 27 yrs (5930 mppcf); large amounts 
of silicon and aluminum were found in the lungs  
- the severity of lesions and the concentrations of 
magnesium and silicon in the lungs compared top 
controls increas ed with duration of exposure  
- circumscribed granulomas were not observed  99 
- talc was essentially free 
from silica and asbestos  
- geometric mean exposure 
was 1.8 mg/m3 respirable 
dust - 116 miners and millers over the 
age of 25 in 3 Vermont plants  
- avg. y rs. employed was 8.5  1975 -1976  - exposure levels were >3.0 mg/m3 respirable dust  
- a medical history, including questions pertinent to the 
respiratory system, and smoking history were obtained  
- pulmonary function tests we re performed  
- an appropriate control group was not available; 
observed values were compared to predicted values from 
a stan dard pop.  
 
-chest x -rays were taken in 100 of the subjects  
 
Limitations  
- the follow -up interval is short and the overall range of 
exposures within the study may be too narrow to detect 
exposure -related effects in the small study pop.  
- effects on pulmonary function in non -smokers was not 
associated with lifetime or current talc ex posure after a 
relative ly short avg. yrs. Employed; longer follow -up 
would be needed before concluding there is no effect of 
talc on non -smokers at this exposure level  - observed/predicted FEV 1 (FEV%) and MMEF 
(MMEF%) were significantly reduced  
- yrs of em ployment and talc -yrs (i.e., lifetime dust 
exposure) were significantly associated with de -
creased FEV 1/FVC and MMEF%, but not with FVC% 
or FEV%  
- a 43.3% prevalence of any chest x -ray abnormality 
was observed; with a third being diffuse parenchymal 
opacit ies or pleural abnormalities  
- 12 subjects had small round opacities and 9 had 
small irregular opacities; there was a statistically sig -
nificant association with talc -yrs 104 
- contained talc, chlorite, 
and a small quantity of dolomite  
- 0.5-3% free silica (<1% 
particle size distribution <10 µ)  
- does not contain asbestos  - 176 millers from Luzenac, 
France (cross -sectional study)  
 1978  
 - cross -sectional study  - 46 workers (27%) had pneumoconiosis  
   - 36 of the cases were slight  
   - 10 of the cases had higher profusion or large 
opacities  
- intensity and duration of dust exposure were linked 
to radiologic signs of pneumoconiosis  96  
   39 
 Table 5. Pulmonary effects of occupational exposure      
Talc Composition  and 
Particle Size  (if given)  Study Population  and Location  Timeframe  examined  Procedure/Parameters Measured /Limitations  Findings  Reference  
 - dust exposed workers  
- local and national pop. were  
used as controls  1945 -1981  - retrospective study, completed by a prospective study 
until 1988  - difference  in life expectancy of dust -exposed work -
ers compared to the local and national pop. was NS  
- differences in mortality due to cancer, including lung 
and digestive system cancers,, were NS  
- in a cohort or workers deceased between 1970 -1981 
compared to 97 age-matched controls, the mortality 
ratio for chronic respiratory diseases was 2.4; a fol -
low-up in 1998 confirmed these results   
 - 39 pneumoconiotic workers; 6 
had profusion equal to 2 or 3  
- 39 matched for smoking and 
age non -dust exposed controls   - respiratory function was compared  - VC, TLC, and single breath TCO were statistically 
significant decreased in pneumoconiotic subjects com -
pared to controls   
 - 8 hospitalized pneumoconiotic 
workers   - a bronchoalveolar lavage was performed  -hypercellularity was observed, with a significant 
increase in neutrophilic and eosinophilic PMN 
leukocytes  
- numerous talc particles were found in all lavage 
fluids, including uncoated plate -like particles (0.5 –  40 
µm) and atypical ferruginous bodies)  
  
3 mines  
- MT: free silica content 
was below t he limit of 
detec tion (<0.8%) ; no 
fibers; NC: 1.5%  free sili -
ca; acicular particles  (as -
pect ratios 5 -100:1 and 
some diameters <0.1 µm); 
TX: 2.2% free silica; trem -
olite and antigorite fibers 
(0.5-3 µm in length)  
- geometric mean concen -
trations of res pirable dust 
in samples (mg/ m3) for 
miners and millers was 
0.66 and 1.1 (MT), 0.45 
and 1.56 (TX), 0.14 and 
0.26 (NC)  - 177 talc workers from MT, 71 
from TX, 51 from NC  
- since there were no differences 
among regions by age, smoking, 
or exposure groups, the popula -
tions were combined  
- were compared to 1140 blue 
collar workers (males and females from NC in electronics, synthetic textiles, bakeries, and 
bottling plants)  avg. from 3 plants: 5.5 
(TX), 6.6 (MT) , and 
10.1 (NC) yrs (time -
frame not stated)  - cumulative exposure (mg/m3 x yrs) was 1.21 for MT, 
2.64 for TX, and 0.28 for NC  
- all workers completed  a respiratory question naire 
- chest x -rays were taken and sputum was collected  
 
Limitations  
- workers examined were only those currently working  
- length of the working history was a relatively short time 
for the development of occupationally- related symptoms  
- estimating past exposure was a problem  prevalence of dyspnea  
- 6% in non -smokers, 10% in ex -smok ers, 3% in 
smokers; 5% total (prevalence was increased with age; 
no demonstrated association with cumulative 
exposure)  
 
prevalence of pleural thickening  
- 0% in non -smokers; 4% in ex -smokers; 9% in 
smokers; 5% total (tendency to increase with age; no 
demo nstrated association with cumulative exposure)  
 - cumulative exposure was not significant for any of 
the lung function tests  
 
parameters examined and compared to blue -collar 
controls  
- cough: 20.3% of test v. 16.7% controls  
- phlegm: 20.3% of test v. 17.3%  of controls  
- dyspnea: 5.8% of test v. 7.5% of controls  
- bilateral pleural thickening: 6.3% of test v. 0.4% of 
controls  
 
mean percent predicted pulmonary function compared 
to 292 controls  
FEV 1: 99.7  
FVC: 101.0  
peak flow: 97.9  
FEF 50: 94.1  
FEF 75: 84.5  103  
   40 
 Table 5. Pulmonary effects of occupational exposure      
Talc Composition  and 
Particle Size  (if given)  Study Population  and Location  Timeframe  examined  Procedure/Parameters Measured /Limitations  Findings  Reference  
- non-asbestiform talc -
chlorite mixture  - 398 subjects from talc facil ities 
in the Styrian alps, Austria , and 
in the French Pyrenees, France 
- >5 yrs continuous employment 
btwn 1989 -2001 1988 -2003  - in the French mill, overall exposure decreased from a 
geometric mean exposure of 1.95 mg/m3 (GSD3.9) in 
1986 to 0.80 mg/m3 (GSD 4.3) in 2003; the high GSDs 
are due to different exposures based on job  
- in the Austrian mill, the 1988 -1995 geomet ric mean 
exposure was 0.75 mg/m3 (GSD 3.67); in 1996, it was 
0.30 mg/m3 (GSD 3.25)  
 
- lung function parameters  were measured, with the 
following confounders: pack -yrs; apparatus used to 
determined respiratory function; gender; gender -specific 
age and heigh t; medical histories  
- regression coefficients (95% CI) are presented  
 
 
Limitations  
- the symptoms questionnaire was only used a mean of 
two times  at the French site and less at the Austrian site 
- the mean duration of follow -up was <5 yrs  Total cumulative exposure per 10 yrs mg/m3 
FEV 1 (ml):  - 6.58 ( -13.81 to 0.65)  
FVC (ml):  -7.71 ( -15.45 to 0.03)  
FEV 1/FVC (%):  0.000 ( -0.090 to 0.090)  
 Cumulative exposure at inclusion per 10 yrs mg/m
3 
FEV 1 (ml):  - 7.26 ( -14.65 to 0.13)  
FVC (ml):   -8.47 ( -16.38 to -0.57)  
FEV 1/FVC (%):  - 0.004 ( -0.096 to 0.087)  
 Cumulative exposure since inclusion per 10 yrs mg/m
3 
FEV 1 (ml):  7.75 ( -25.49 to 40.99)  
FVC (ml):   10.24 ( -28.22 to 48.70)  
FEV 1/FVC (%):  0.105 ( -0.364 to 0.574)  
 106 
   - prevalence of self -declared respiratory symptoms, 
including the following confounders : pack -yrs of 
cigarettes for chronic bronchitis and usual cough and/or 
phlegm and age for dyspnea  
- ORs (95% CI) are presented  
 Total cumulative exposure per 10 yrs mg/m3 
chronic bronchitis :  1.014 (0.963 -1.068)  
usual cough or phlegm:   1.021 (0.993. -1.050)  
dysp nea: 1.040 (0.997 -1.087)  
 
Cumulative exposure at inclusion per 10 yrs mg/m3 
chronic bronchitis:  1.032 (0.985 -1.081)  
usual cough or phlegm:  1.014 (0.983 -1.046)  
dyspn ea:  1.031 (0.985 -1.080)  
 
Cumulative exposure since inclusion per 10 yrs mg/m3 
chronic bronchitis:  0.473 (0.193 -1.158)  
usual cough or phlegm:  1.250 (0.986 -1.584)  
dyspnea:  1.405 (0.870 -2.257)   
   radiograph results were examined  
- ORs (95% CI) are presented  
- profusion:  u sing the Standard X -rays, the profusion 
(concentration) of small opacities is classified on a 4 -
point major category scale (0, 1, 2, or 3), with each major 
category divided into three, giving 12 ordered subcat e-
gories of increas ing profusion; c ategory 0 refers to the 
absence of small opacity and category 3 represents the 
most profus e Initial cumulative exposure per 10 yrs mg/m3 
profusion ≥ 0/1: 1.056 (1.031 -1.085)  
profusion ≥1/0: 1.060 (1.028 -1.095)  
pleural abnormalities: 1.036 (0.960 -1.119)  
 Cumulative exposure since inclusion per 10 yrs mg/m
3  
profusion ≥ 0/1:  0.917 (0.838 -1.004)  
profusion ≥1/0: 0.858 (1.028 -1.095)  
pleural abnormalities: 1.145 (0.980 -1.336)    
   41 
 Table 5. Pulmonary effects of occupational exposure      
Talc Composition  and 
Particle Size  (if given)  Study Population  and Location  Timeframe  examined  Procedure/Parameters Measured /Limitations  Findings  Reference  
the talc ore contained 
chlor ite, aluminum, some 
dolomite (<3%), some 
quartz (<3%), and traces of 
calcite, apatite, pyrite, and 
mica  
- amphiboles were not 
detected  - 166 millers (158 M/8 F) from a 
talc-producing factory  in  SW 
France  
 workers employed 
1989 -1990 - geometric mean exposure at the time of the study was 
1.87 mg/m3 (GSD, 2.5 mg/m3) 
 
- each subject was given a standardized questionnaire 
and question ed about smoking and occupational history 
during their annual medical check -up 
- a chest radiograph that had been taken between 1982 -
1987 was reviewed  
- 139 subjects  had a second radiograph in 1992  
 
- the prevalence of self-reported symptoms (as %) 
according to cumulative exposure were determined  
 
Limitations  
- less than optimal quality of the spirometric tests that led 
to the exclusion of 30 subjects  <20 y mg/m3 (n=46)  
chronic bronchitis:  0%  
chronic cough or phlegm:  8.7%  
dyspnea:  4.4%  
wheeze:  4.4%  
 
20-50 y mg/m3 (n=25) 
chronic bronchitis:  4 % 
chronic cough or phlegm:  20 % 
dyspnea:  8 % 
wheeze:  4 % 
 50-150 y mg/m
3 (n=54 ) 
chronic bronchitis:  13%  
chronic cough or phlegm:  35.7%  
dyspnea:  17%  
wheeze:  3.7%  
 >150  y mg/m
3 (n=4 1) 
chronic bronchitis:  2%  
chronic cough or phlegm:  14.6%  
dyspnea:  14.6%  
wheeze:  0%  105 
   
 - standardized func tional variables according to 
cumulative exposure were determined  <20 y mg/m3 (as mean (SD)) ( n=36) 
FVC:  1.33 (1.28)  
FEV:  1.22 (1.21)  
FEV/FVC:  0.25 (0.70)  
MMEF:  0.66 (1.58)  
 
20-50 y mg/m3 (n=20) 
FVC:  0.82 (1.04)  
FEV:  0.77 (1.22)  
FEV/FVC:  0.27 (0.79)  
MMEF:  0.36 (1.41)  
 
50-150 y mg/m3 (n=44) 
FVC:  1.10 (1.07)  
FEV:  0.74 (1.17)  
FEV/FVC:  - 0.04 (0.80)  
MMEF:  - 0.19 (1.15)  
 >150  y mg/m
3 (as mean (SD)) ( n=36) 
FVC:  0.65 (1.03)  
FEV:  0.50 (1.06)  
FEV/FVC:  0.24 (0.75)  
MMEF:  -0.06 (1.12)    
   42 
 Table 5. Pulmonary effects of occupational exposure      
Talc Composition  and 
Particle Size  (if given)  Study Population  and Location  Timeframe  examined  Procedure/Parameters Measured /Limitations  Findings  Reference  
   - radiological opacities at the first radiograph  
- given in terms of cumulative exposure to talc  any opacity including 0/1  
coefficient:  0.33  
OR (95% CI):   1.39 (1.06 -1.84)  
 
any opacity excluding 0/1  
coefficient:  0.97  
OR:  2.65 (1.25 -5.64)  
 
- 4 pleural abnormalities were reported at the first 
reading  
- the prevalence of small opacities was higher in the 
second radiograph, with 11 new opacities compatible 
with pne umoconiosis (1/0 or above)   
Plant Workers  
Rubber Workers  
non-fibrous talc; <2 
fibers/cc  
- <1% free silica 
- avg dust concentrations 
ranged from 0.47 – 3.55 
mg/m3, with most jobs 
exposed to <1 mg/m3 - 80 talc workers (15.9 yrs avg. 
length of employment) and 189 
non-exposed rubber workers 
(13.4 yrs avg. length of employ -
ment)  
(average talc exposure, i.e. “dust 
yrs”, was 9 yrs)  
- plant location not specified  1972 -1974  - subjects were asked about medical, occupational, 
smoking, and respiratory hi stories  
- pulmonary function tests were performed  
- exposure to talc was evaluated by respirable mass 
samp ling 
- 28 workers were studied for acute change in FEV 1.0 and 
FVC for one shift  
- pulmonary function changes related to talc exposure 
were measured i n white workers >24 yrs old  
-chest x -rays were taken in most exposed workers  - there were no significant differences between ex -
posed and non -exposed workers in age, smoking, or 
socio economic or ethnic factors  
- statistically significant increases in coug h for 3 mos 
and phlegm for 3 mos (chronic bron chitis symptoms) 
and wheezing most days and nights (an obstructive respiratory disease symptom) were observed in ex -
posed workers; none of the workers had dyspnea  
- talc ha d no acute effect on ventilatory c apacity  
- talc workers had lower (NS) FVC standardized flow 
rates and a lower ratio of FEV
1.0 to FVC; the flow 
rate/FVC at 12.5% FVC was statistically significantly 
decreased in exposed workers  
-for workers  of  >10 yrs, residual FEV 1.0 was statis ti-
cally significantly decreased in exposed workers  
- none of the chest x -rays were definitely consistent 
with classical talc pneumoconiosis  102  
   43 
 Table 5. Pulmonary effects of occupational exposure      
Talc Composition  and 
Particle Size  (if given)  Study Population  and Location  Timeframe  examined  Procedure/Parameters Measured /Limitations  Findings  Reference  
Pottery Plant Workers  
non-fibrous talc  - white men from 3 ceramic 
plumbing fixture plants (>1 yr 
employment)   employed during 
1939 -1966 - workers were exposed to both silica and talc  
- mortality from 1940 -1980 was  examined  
 
Limitations  
- information on smoking patterns was not available  - with high sil ica/non -fibrous talc exposure, there was 
a statistically significant increase in SMR for lung cancer (SMR=2.54) and non -malignant disease 
mortality  (SMR=2.20)  
- with high silica/no talc exposure, the increase was 
only seen for non -malignant respiratory disease 
(SMR=2.64)  
 
- with non -fibrous talc, SMRs for lung cancer were 
statistically significant increased with 5 -14 and 15+ 
yrs duration of exposure and -14 and 15+ yr s since 
first talc exposure  
- SMRs for non -malignant respiratory diseases were 
statistically significant increased with <5, but not 5 -14 
or 15+ yrs duration of exposure and with 5 -14, but no t 
>15, yrs since first talc exposure  
 
- the researchers postulated  that non -fibrous talc 
was related to excess lung cancer, and that it was 
possible that silica might act as a co -factor or 
promoting agent  100,101 
 Abbreviations:  CI = confidence interval; CV = cardiovascular; exp = expected; FEF = forced expiratory flow; FEV = forced expiratory volume; FV C = forced vital capacity; GI = gastrointestinal; GSD – geometric 
standard deviation; MMEF = maximum mid -expiratory flow; NS = n on-statistically significant; obs = observed; ONMRD = other non -malignant respiratory disease; OR = odds ratio; PMN = polymorpho nuclear  cells; 
pop. = population; RR = relative ri sk; SD = standard deviation; SIR = standardized incidence ratio; S MR = standardized mortality ratio; TB = tuberculosis; TCO = transfer factor for carbon monoxide; VC = vital capacity  
 
Bolded text  was used to highlight statistically significant increases  
Italicized text was used to highlight statistically significant decreases  
   
   44 
 Table 6.  Exposure During Cosmetic Talc Use       
Study Population  Test Article  Measurement Device  Study Conditions  Procedure  Respirable Amount  Other Results  Reference  
infant  exposure  
simulation; number 
not given commercial talcum 
powder  (composition 
not defined)  gravimetric dust sampler  simulated  - powder was dusted into a shallow tray from a 
height of  7 -13 cm  
- the air inlets of the sampler were placed 
where the baby’s no se would be, as well as 40 
cm above the tray ( representing mother’s 
exposure) ; the dust concentration was similar 
for the mother and the infant  0.10 mg/min/m3 10 s dusting period: total median 
dust concentration -  0.243 mppcf  
65 s settling period:  median dust 
concentration -  0.124 mppcf  
median exposure/application: 0.1752 mppcf -min 
median weekly exposure (5 appli -
cations/day):  0.102 mppcf -h 60 
48 infants  commercial talcum 
powder  (composition 
not defined)  10 mm nylon cyclone  actual  -mothers diapered infants, applying powder in 
their usual method  
-the cyclone inlet was held next to the baby’s  
head, approx.  4” above the change mat  
- procedure was repeated 3x in suc cession and 
the mean of the 3 runs was used; was performed over two  4 -day periods  
 0.19 ± 0.084 mg/m3 avg. use/exposure:  0.88 g  
exposure time: 0.52 min  
TWA: 0.095 ± 0.039 mg·min/m3 107 
adults, 23 males and 
21 females  commercial talcum 
powder  (composition 
not defined)  10 mm nylon cyclone  actual  - subjects applied powder in their usual manner 
in an anteroom  
- a headband with an attached 10 -mm cyclone 
positioned at the level of the nose was worn  
- performed over two  4 -day periods  
 2.03 ± 1.49 mg/m3 avg. use/exposure: 8.84 g  
exposure time: 1.23 min  
TWA: 1.727 mg ·min/m3  
infant simulation; 4 
subjects  baby powder with:  
- Chinese talc 
- Italian 00000  grade 
talc 
(cosmetic talcs; both 
perfumed and 
unperfumed ; Chinese 
and Italian perfumed 
talc contained 0.045 
and 0.2% perfume, 
respectively ) 
 for respirable dust: cyclone 
elutri ator/filter head system 
with 25 -mm diameter filter; 
allowed  samp ling of all 
particles <1 µm, 50% of 5 -
µm par ticles, and no 7 -µm 
particles  
for total dust: cyclone removed and open filter 
holder with a 37 mm filter  simulated  - in a 3.7 x 2.8 m room, adult subjects used a 
doll to simulate powdering during diape ring 
- the sample collection unit was on a table next 
to the doll’s head  
-the “doll’s nose” was approx. 15 -30 cm from 
the sampling point  
- sampling time was 5 min  
-2 trials at 1 h intervals  Chinese, perfumed:  
<0.1-0.9 mg/m3 
     unperfumed:  
 <0.1-0.9 mg/m3 
Italian, perfumed:  
<0.1-0.3 mg/m3 
     unperfumed:  
<0.1-0.5 mg/m3 - there were no major differences 
among concentrations of respirable 
dust 
- mean concentration of respirable 
talc (for Chinese and Italian per -
fumed and unperfumed talcs) –  0.21 
mg/m3 
- respirable talc accumulated during 
4 samplings : 0.005 -0.3 mg/m3 
- no evidence that perfume affected 
amount of respirable talc  
- mean talcing time: 19 -21 s 54 
4 female subjects  loose face powder:  
- Chinese talc  
- Italian 00000 grade 
talc 
- Italian micronized -
grade talc  
(cosmetic talcs; all unperfumed)  
 as above  actual  - in a 2 x 1 m room, subjects applied powder in 
their normal manner (a small window was open 
during application)  
- the application puff was only dipped once in 
the powder  
- the subject’s nose was approx.. 15 cm from 
the samplin g point  
- sampling time was 5 min  
- 2 trials at1 - h intervals  Chinese:  
<0.1-1.1 mg/m3 
Italian:  
<0.1-0.8 mg/m3 
Italian, micronized:  
<0.3-1.7 mg/m3 with the exception of micro nized 
talc, there were no major differences among concentrations of respirable 
dust 
- mean concentration of respirable 
talc (for Chinese and Italian perfumed and unperfumed talcs) –  
0.48 mg/m
3 
- respirable talc accumulated during 
4 samplings : 0.1-0.4 mg/m3 
- no evidence that perfume affected 
amount of respirable talc  
- mean talcing tim e:  17 -19 s   
   45 
 Table 6.  Exposure During Cosmetic Talc Use       
Study Population  Test Article  Measurement Device  Study Conditions  Procedure  Respirable Amount  Other Results  Reference  
4 female subjects  adult dusting powder:  
- Chinese talc  
- Italian 00000 grade 
talc 
(both perfumed and 
unperfumed)  
- Italian micronized -
grade talc, 
unperfumed  
(cosmetic talc)  as above  actual  - in a 2.3x 2 m room, subjects applied powder 
in their normal manner  
- the subject’s nose was approx.. 30 -90 cm 
from the sampling point  
- one experiment with unperfumed Italian talc 
was performed at >90% humidity  
- sampling time was 5 min  
- particle size analysis was performed for un -
perfumed Italian 00000 and micronized talc  
- 2 trials at 1 h intervals  Chinese, perfumed:  
0.3-2.6 mg/m3 
     unperfumed:  
0.5-1.8 mg/m3 
Italian, perfumed:  
0.4-1.7 mg/m3 
     unperfumed:  
0.5-2.6 mg/m3 
      high humidity:  
0.2-0.8 mg/m3 
Italian, micronized:  
0.6-3.3 mg/m3 -with the exception of micro nized 
talc, there were no major differences among concentrations of respirable 
dust 
- mean concentration of respirable 
talc (for Chinese and Italian perfumed and unperfumed talcs) –  
1.13 mg/m
3 
- mean concentrations of micronized 
talc were 1.9 mg/m3 
- respirable talc accumulated during 
4 samplings : 0.3-2.5 mg/m3 
- total talc with cyclone removed: 
Italian 00000 unperfumed, 2.7 -4.8 
mg/m3; Italian micronized, 0.2 -1.5 
mg/m3 
- total talc with cyclone removed: 
Italian 00000 unperfumed, 2.7 -4.8 
mg/m3; Italian micronized, 0.2 -1.5 
mg/m3 
- total talc with open filter: Italian 
00000 unperfumed, 8 -27 mg/m3; 
Italian micronized, 10 -17 mg/m3 
- detectable background levels of 
respirable talc were fou nd on ly with 
micronized talc (0.6 -1.6 mg/ m3) and 
Italian talc (<0.1 -1.0 mg/m3) at high 
humidity  
- no evidence that perfume affected 
amount of respirable talc  
- particle size analysis demonstrated 
that most particles were between 1 
and 8 µm  
- mean talcing  time:  27 -31 s  
adult consumers and 
miners  consumer – cosmetic 
talc; miner –  talc dust  not stated  actual  comparison between adult consumer ’s 1 min 
daily exposure and a miner’s 8 h daily exposure   -consumers: weekly exposure re sult-
ing from use lasting 10 s, with 65 s 
settling time, would be 0.102 mppcf -h of talc dust/wk  
-miners:  assuming a max. daily ex -
posure of 20 mppcf talc dust, 
weekly exposure would be 890 
mppcf -h 
-exposure of miners about 8000 x 
greater than that of consumer s 
(calculations were not provided)  60 
  
   46 
  
Table 7 . Lung Talc Burden in Mice  10  
 Male  Female  
Evaluation  6 mg/m3 18 mg/m3 6 mg/m3 18 mg/m3 
Normalized to Control Lung Weight  (mg talc/g control lung ) 
6 mos  0.415 0.114  (2) 1.41 ± 0.29  (4) 0.524 ± 0.056  (4) 1.35 ± 0.24  (4) 
12 mos  1.084 ± 0.130  (4) 9.00 ± 1.45 * (4) 0.707 ± 0.170  (4) 6.17 ± 1.39 * (4) 
18 mos  0.426 ± 0.040  (2) 8.36 (n=1; no std. dev. calc.)  1.387 ± 0.178 ** (4) 7.83 ± 1.36 * (3) 
24 mos  2.973 ± 0.762 * (8) 19.73 ± 4.03 ** (6) 2.667 ± 0.720 ** (6) 20.05 ± 0.98 ** (5) 
Normalized to Exposure Concentration  (mg talc/g control lung per mg talc/m3) 
6 mos  0.069 ± 0.019  (2) 0.078 ± 0.016  (4) 0.087 ± 0.009  (4) 0.075 ± 0.013  (4) 
12 mos  0.181 ± 0.022  (4) 0.500 ± 0.081# (4) 0.118 ± 0.028  (4) 0.343 ± 0.077# (4) 
18 mos  0.071 ± 0.007  (2) 0.464 ( n=1; no std. dev. calc.) 0.231 ± 0.030  (4) 0.435 ± 0.075  (3) 
24 mos  0.496 ± 0.127  (8) 1.096 ± 0.224# (6) 0.445 ± 0.120  (6) 1.114 ± 0.055# (5) 
 
(n) number of animals examined for lung talc burden  
* significantly different (p≤0.05) from 6 mos group  
** significantly  different (p≤0.0 1) from 6 mos group  
#  significantly  different (p≤0.05) from 6 mg/m3 group  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 8 . Lung Talc Burden in Rats  10  
 Male  Female  
Interim Evaluation  6 mg/m3 18 mg/m3 6 mg/m3 18 mg/m3 
Normalized to Control Lung Weight (mg talc/g control lung)  
6 mos  2.63 ± 0.24  (3) 10.83 ± 0.23  (3) 2.43 ± 0.19  (3) 8.34 ± 0.12  (3) 
11 mos 4.38 ± 0.59 * (3)  20.96 ± 2.04 * (3)  4.71 ± 0.26 * (3)  14.16 ± 3.36  (3) 
18 mos  7.31 ± 0.71 ** (3)  27.57 ± 0.91 * (3)  7.66 ± 0.34 ** (2)  24.33 ± 0.63 * (3) 
24 mos  10.45 ± 1.26 ** (6)  24.15 ± 3.41 * (9)  9.10 ± 0.88 ** (2)  29.40 ± 2.40 ** (3)  
Normalized to Exposure Concentration (mg talc/g control lung per mg talc/m3) 
6 mos  0.439  ± 0.040  (3) 0.602 ± 0.013# (3) 0.406 ± 0.032  (3) 0.464 ± 0.007# (3) 
11 mos 0.731 ± 0.098  (3) 1.165 ± 0.113# (3) 0.785 ± 0.043  (3) 0.787 ± 0.187  (3) 
18 mos  1.22 ± 0.12  (3) 1.53 ± 0.05  (3) 1.28 ± 0.06  (2) 1.35 ± ± 0.04  (3) 
24 mos  1.74 ± 0.21  (6) 1.34 ± 0.19  (9) 1.52 ± 0.15  (2) 1.63 ± 0.13  (3) 
 
(n) number  of animals examined for lung talc burden  
* significantly different (p≤0.05) from 6 mos group  
** significantly different (p≤0.01) from 6 mos group  
#  significantly different (p≤0.05) from 6 mg/m3 group  
  
   47 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
OVARIAN CANCER  
PERSONAL USE  
PROSPECTIVE STUDY  
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 307 registered nurses in 11 
states with epithelial ovarian 
cancer  (out of 31,789 subjects 
of 121,700 total pop. that 
reported using talc) (Nurses’ 
Health Study)  1982 - 1996  - subjects answered questionnaires every 2 yrs from 
1976 -1996, subjects were questioned about talc use in  
1982 
- risk was age -adjusted and multivariate for age, 
parity, OC use, BMI, tubal ligation history, smoking status, and PMH use  
- women who did not r espond  to the questions on talc 
use in 1982 and who reported a diagnosis of cancer 
before 1982 were excluded  
 
Limitations  
- question of talc use was ever/never only; did not 
determine the age at which use began or the duration  
  - this also may have contri buted to a higher preva -
lence of use compared to other studies  
- were unable to assess the potential effect of talc use 
prior to first pregnancy  
- follow -up period may have been inadequate if 
latency is >15 yrs  
- question about  tubal ligation was asked as a 
component of contraceptive use, so not all women 
may have responded  Ever/never perineal use of talc  
58.3%of cases never used perineal talc  
- 41.7% of cases ever had perineal use of talc (age)  
                                                             (multivariate)  
 
Frequency of perineal talc use  
- 60.6%of cases never used talc on perineum  
- 14% of cases used talc on perineum <1x/wk (age)  
                                                             (multivariate)  
- 9.8% of c ases used talc on perineum 1 -6 x/wk (age)  
                                                                 (multivariate)  
- 15.6% of cases used talc on perineum daily (age)  
                                                             (multivariate)  
 
Talc u se on sanitary napkins  
- 78.8%of cases never used talc on sanitary napkins  
- 11.7% of cases used talc on sanitary napkins (age)  
                                                              (multivariate)  
 
Talc use perineally and/or on sanitary napkins   
- 58.3%of cases did not use talc perineally or on sanitary napkins  
-  33.6% of cases talc on perineum or sanitary napkins (age)  
                                                                          (multivariate)  
- 8.1% of cases talc on perineum and sanitary napkins (age)  
                                                                          (multivariate)  RR 
1.0 
1.05 (0.84 -1.32)  
1.09 (0.86 -1.0) 
 
 
1.0 
1.1 (0.79 -1.53)  
1.14 (0.81 -1.59)  
0.95 (0.65 -1.4) 
0.99 (0.67 -1.46)  
1.09 (0.79 -1.49)  
1.12 (0.82 -1.55) 
  
1.0 
0.89 (0.62 -1.29)  
0.89 (0.61 -1.28)  
 
 
1.0 
1.11 (0.87 -1.41)  
1.15 (0.9 -1.46)  
0.89 (0.58 -1.35)  
0.9 (0.59 -1.37)  151 
   - the tumors were stratified by histological subtype  
- risk was adjusted for age or for age, parity, OC use, 
and tubal ligation, and sometimes for BMI 
(multivariate)  All serous cancers (185 total)  
- 54.6% never used talc perineally  
- 45.4% ever used talc perineally (age)  
                                                  (multivariate)  
Serous invasive cancers (160 total)  
- 52.5 % never used use talc perineally  
- 47.5% ever used talc perineally (age)  
                                                  (multivariate)  
Endometroid  cancers (42 total)  
- 61.9% never used use talc perineally  
- 38.1% ever used talc perineally (age)  
                                                  (multivariate)  
Mucinous  cancers (50 total)  
- 60% never used use talc perineally  
- 40% ever used talc perineally (age)  
                                                  (multivariate)  RR 
1.0 
1.23 (0.02 – 1.64) 
1.26 (0.94 – 1.69)  
 
1.0 
1.33 (0.98 – 1.82)  
1.40 (1.02 – 1.91)  
 
1.0 
0.91 (0.49 – 1.69)  
0.91 (0.49 – 1.87)  
 
1.0 
0.98 (0.56 – 1.73)  
0.93 (0.53 – 1.66)    
   48 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
HOSPITAL -BASED CASES/HOSPITAL -BASED CONTROLS  
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 135 women in the Wash ing-
ton, D.C. area with epithelial 
ovarian cancer (hospital -based)  
- 171 hospital controls  1974 -1977  - subjects were asked questions about reproductive 
and sexual history, medical history, drug use, other exposures, and talc use  
 
Limitation  
- a potential bias is that talc exposure was not a major 
focus of the study during questioning  
 Ever/never talc use  
- 45.9% of cases and 35.7% of controls had no exposure to talc  
- 49.7% of cases and 58.5% of controls had exposure to talc  
 
Use with diaphragm  
- 18.5% of cases and 24% of controls reported diaphragm use 
with talc  
- 10.4% of cases and 6.4% of controls reported diaphragm use 
with no talc  
 
Areas of application of talc  
- 57% of cases and 49.1% of controls reported no body talc use  
- 40% of cases and 45.6% of controls reported some body talc use  
- 27.4% of cases and 33.3% of controls reported all -over use of 
talc 
 - 5.2% of cases and 1.8% of controls reported genital use of talc  RR 
1 
0.7 (0.4 -  1.1) 
 
 
0.8 (0.4 -  1.4) 
 
1.6 (0.7 -3.7) 
  
 
1.0 
0.8 (0.5 -  1.2) 
0.7 (0.4 -  1.2) 
 
2.5 (0.7 -  10.0)  155 
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 235 females in London and 
Oxford, England with epithelial 
ovarian can cer (from 15 hos pi-
tals) 
- 451 age -matched hospital con -
trols Oct 1978 – 
Feb 1983 - subjects were asked about talc  reproductive and 
sexual history, contraceptive use, breastfeeding, talc usage, hysterectomy, HRT  
- all risk estimates were adjusted for age and social 
class; some were adjusted for parity  Frequency of talc usage  
never:  37.3% of cases; 39.5% of controls  
rarely: 2.6% of cases; 3.5% of controls  
monthly: 3.0% of cases; 5.3% of controls  
weekly: 24.3% of cases; 17% of controls  
 
daily: 30.2% of cases; 30.8% of controls  
- no consistent trend of increase risk with increasing frequency of 
talc (χ2 (trend) = 3.80; p  = 0.05)  RR 
1.0 
0.9 (0.3 -2.4) 
0.7 (0.3 -1.8) 
2.0 (0.3 -3.4; 
p=0.07)  
1.3 (0.8 -1.9) 142 
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 77 patient at Johns Hopkins 
Hospital in Baltimore, MD with 
epithelial ovar ian cancer  
- 46 age -race matched hospital 
controls  1981 -1985  - subjects questioned about presence and length of 
genital fiber and respiratory fiber exposure (in this study, fiber exposure was defined as exposure to 
asbestos, talc, and fiberglass), reproductive factors, 
estrogen use, family history of cance r, and contra cep-
tive use; information on previous abdominal and 
gynecological operations was ascertained  
- potential confounders: obesity, socioeconomic 
status, religion, reproductive status, live births >2, OC use; confounders added dependent on effect on OR  Areas of application of talc  
- 88% of cases and 87% of controls reported genital fiber use  
- 28.9% of cases and 18.6% of controls reported genital bath talc 
exposure  
- 61.8% of cases and 55.8% of controls reported application of 
bath talc to body (risk adjusted for # of live births) - 50.7% of cases and 54.5% of controls reported cosmetic face 
powder use (risk adjusted years of education)  
 
Use of talc on sanitary napkins or on diaphragm  
- 61.8% of cases and 55.8% of controls reported talc use on 
sanitary napkins (risk adjusted for highest wt 1 yr prior to 
diagnosis)  
- 18.9% of cases and 11.4% of controls reported powder on 
diaphragm (risk adjusted for # of live births and yrs of education)  OR 
1.0 (0.2 -4.0) 
1.7 (0.7 -  3.9) 
 
1.6 (0.6 –  2.7) 
 
1.1 (0.4 –  2.7) 
 
 
 
4.8 (1.3 –  17.8)  
  
3.0 (0.8 –  10.8)  167  
   49 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 499 patients at Roswell Park  
Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, 
with epithelial ovarian cancer  
- 755 age -at-diagnosis matched 
hospital controls  
- numbers were adjusted based 
on answers to ques tionnaires 
(i.e., if the sub ject did not 
respond to talc use or recall the 
duration of use)  Oct 1982 – 
Oct 1995 - information on parity, menstrual history, use of ex -
ogenous hor mones, contraceptive history, talc use , 
and per sonal hygiene was obtained and subjects were 
questioned about medical, social, family, dietary, and 
occupa tional histories  
- risk was adjusted for OC use, smoking history, fam i-
ly his tory of epithelial ovarian cancer, age at menar -
che, menopausal status, income, education, geo graph -
ic location, history of tubal ligation and/or hyster ec-
tomy  
Limitations  
- ascertainment and recall bias likely  
- subjects were asked whether condoms or dia phragms 
were used for contraception, but did not a sk about 
frequency or duration or diaphragm storage in talc  Areas of application of talc  
- 52.2% of cases and 55.1% of controls never used talc  
- 34.0% of cases and 32.2% of controls reported talc use in the 
genital or thigh area  
- 2.8% of cases and 2.9% o f controls reported talc use on sanitary 
napkins  
- 11.0% of cases and 9.8% of controls reported talc use in genital 
or thigh area and on sanitary napkins  
 
Duration of talc use  
- 56% of cases and 58.4% of controls had no talc use  
- 9.1% of cases and 9.3% of  controls used talc for 1 -9 yrs  
- 11.4% of cases and 7.6% of controls used talc for 10 -19 yrs  
23.5% of cases and 24.6% of controls used talc for ≥20 yrs  OR 
1.0 
1.0 (0.8 -  1.3) 
 
0.9 (0.4 –  2.0) 
 
1.1 (0.7 –  1.7) 
  
 
1.0 
0.9 (0.6 –  1.5) 
1.4 (0.9 –  2.2) 
0.9 (0.6 – 1.2) 173 
HOSPITAL -BASED CASES/POPULATION -BASED CONTROLS  
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 215 white females in the 
Great er Boston area with epi -
thelial ovarian can cer (from 12 
hospitals)  
- 215 matched pop. controls  Nov 1978 – 
Sept 1981 - exposure to talc by way of contraceptive prac tices, 
operations, or perineal hygiene was r eviewe d for each 
subject and control  
-risk was adjusted for parity and menopausal status   
- 42.8% of cases and 28.4% of controls had any per ineal expo -
sure as a dusting powder on the perineum or on sanitary napkins; 
adjusted RR was com pared to subject s with neither ex posure  
- 27.9% of cases and 22.3% of controls had used talc for dusting 
the  perineum or sanitary napkins, but not both  
- 14.9% of cases and 6% of controls had exposure through both 
dusting the perineum and sanitary napkins; RR was compa red to 
subjects with neither exposure  OR 
1.92 (1.27 -2.89; 
p<0.003)  
 
1.55 (p=0.06)  
 
3.28 (p<0.001;  
(1.68 -6.42)  146 
talc, purity and 
composition not 
specified; often 
reported as ‘baby  
powder”  - 235 white women in Bos ton 
with  epithelial ovarian cancer 
(from 10 hospitals)  
- 239 age - and residence -
matched pop. controls  July 1984 - 
Sept 1987 - subjects were asked questions about demographic 
and occupational, medical and reproductive, and dietary histories, cigarette smoking, and hygienic 
practices, including use of douches, type of sanitary 
protection, and perineal exposure to talc  
- use of talc on areas other than the perineum were 
considered non -exposed  
- risk was adjusted for parity, ed ucation, marital 
status, religion, use of san itary napkins, douching, 
age, and wt  Ever/never perineal use of talc  
- 51.5% of cases and 60.7% of controls reported no genital talc 
application  
- 48.5% of cases and 39.3% of controls reported perineal talc 
exposure  
 
Use on sanitary napkins, underwear,  and/or diaphragm  
- 3.8% of cases and 5.0% of controls reported talc use on sanitary 
napkins and/or underwear  
- 8.5% of cases and 8.8% of controls reported exposure with 
diaphragm use or from their partner in co mbination with sanitary 
napkins and/or underwear  
- 36.2% of cases and 25.5% of controls reported exposure by 
dusting powder to the perineum in combination with sanitary 
napkins and/or underwear  OR 
1.0 
 
1.5 (1.0 –  2.1) 
  
 
1.1 (0.4 –  2.8) 
 
1.2 (0.6 –  2.4) 
 
 
1.7 (1.1 –  2.7) 154 
    Frequency of talc application  
- 13.6% of cases and 11.7% of controls reported <5 appl/mo  
-10.2% of cases and 10.5% of controls reported 5 -29 appl/mo  
- 24.7% of cases and 16.7% of controls reported ≥30 appl/mo   
1.5 (0.8 –  2.7) 
1.2 (0.6 –  2.2) 
1.8 (1.1 –  3.0)   
   50 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
    Duration of use of talc  
-6.0% of cases and 6.3% of controls reported <10 yrs talc use  
-20.9% of cases and 16.3% of controls reported 10 -29 yrs talc use  
- 21.7% of cases and 16.3% of controls reported ≥30 yrs talc use   
1.2 (0.5 –  2.6) 
1.6 (1.0 –  2.7) 
1.6 (1.0 –  2.7)  
    Number of lifetime applications  
- 8.1% of cases and 7.9% of controls reported <1000 lifetime 
applications  
- 24.3% of cases and 19.2% of controls reported 1000 -10,000 
lifetime applications  
- 16.2% of cases and 12.1% of controls reported >10,000 lifetime 
applications   
1.3 (0.7 –  2.7) 
 
1.5 (0.9 –  2.4) 
 
1.8 (1.0 –  3.0)  
    
 Age at first use of talc  
- 28.1% of cases and 20.9% of controls were  <20 yrs old  
-11.5% of cases and 10.9% of controls were 20 -25 yrs old  
- 8.9% of cases and 7.5% of controls were >25 yrs old   
1.7 (1.1 –  2.7) 
1.2 (0.6 –  2.2) 
1.6 (0.8 –  3.2)  
    Years since last talc use  
- 20.4% of cases and 11.3% of controls used talc within the last 6 
mos 
-15.3% of cases and 16.3% of controls last used talc 6 mos -10 yrs 
ago 
- 12.8% of cases and 11.7% of controls last used talc 10 or more 
yrs ago   
2.3 (1.3 –  4.0) 
 
1.1 (0.7 –  1.9) 
 
1.4 (0.8 –  2.6)  
   -era of use was examined; restricted to women that 
were older than 10 yrs in 1960 
- same adjustments listed previously were made Era of talc use  
- 12.3% of cases and 12.6% of controls used talc after 1960 
- 31.9% of cases and 23.9% of controls used talc before 1960   
1.1 (0.6 –  2.1) 
1.7 (1.1 –  2.7)  
   -brand of powder used was examined; if more than 
one brand was used, the brand used most frequently 
and for the longest time was counted  
- same adjustments listed previously were made Brand/type of talc used  
- 38.7% of cases and 30.1% of controls used brand or generic  
baby powder  
- 6.8% of cases and 7.2% of controls used deodorizing or other 
scented powders   
1.6 (1.1 –  2.5) 
 
1.2 (0.6 –  2.5)  
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 767 women from the De laware 
Valley area of PA, NJ, and DE 
with epithelial ovarian cancer 
(from 39 hospitals)  
- 1367 age - and geography -
matched pop. controls  1994 -1998  - subjects were asked questions about sexual, men -
strual, obstetric, and breast -feeding histories, history 
of medical condition that may be related to pelvic in -
flammation, OC use, tubal ligation, hys terectomy, 
ovarian operations, and talc exposure  
- risk was adjusted for age, parity, race, familial his -
tory of ovarian cancer, OC use, tubal ligation, hys ter-
ectomy, and breast -feeding  
 
Limitations  
- low participation rate among cases and controls  
- potential recall bias  Risk based on area of talc application  
- 45.5% of cases and 53.3% of controls did not use talc  
- 21% of cases and 16% of controls applied ta lc to the gen i-
tal/rectal area 
- 10% of cases and 6.9% of controls applied talc to sanitary 
napkins  
- 9% of cases and 7.3% of controls applied talc to underwear  
- 1.3% of cases and 2.4% of controls applied talc to dia phragm/ 
cervical cap  
- 7.3% of cases  and 9.2% of controls reported talc exposure via a 
male partner  
- 43.7% of cases and 37.5% of controls applied talc to feet  
 OR 
1.0 
1.5 (1.1 -2.0) 
 
1.6 (1.1 -2.3) 
 
1.7 (1.2 -2.4) 
0.6 (0.3 -1.2) 
 
1.0 (0.7 -1.4) 
 
1.4 (1.1 -1.6) 
 165  
   51 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
    Risk based on length of application to genital/rectal area/ feet  
- 52.3% of cases and 59.9% of controls reported no use  
- 2.2% of cases and 1.2% of controls reported talc use of <1 yr  
- 10% of cases and 7.4% of controls reported talc use of 1 -4 yrs 
- 5.2% of cases and 4.3% of controls reported talc use of 5 -9 yrs  
- 30.4% of cases and 27.1% of controls reported talc use of <1 yr   
1.0 
2.0 (1.0 -4.0) 
1.6 (1.1 -2.3) 
1.2 (0.8 -1.9) 
1.2 (1.0 -1.5)  
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 170 French -Canadian women 
in Montreal with primary ovari-
an carcinomas or borderline 
tumors (from 2 hospitals);  
- 111 of the cases were spor -
adic; 58 cases were familial  
- 170 age - and ethnic group -
matched pop. controls  1995 -1996  - subjects were asked questio ns about reproductive 
factors; familial history of cancer; medical history, 
including use of hormone replacement therapy, use of 
OCs, tubal ligation, and hysterectomy; smoking, 
alcohol, and education; perineal talc use 
- study was comparing the risk factor s between 
familial and sporadic ovarian cancer  - 10.6% of cases and 4.7% of controls reported perineal use of 
talc 
- 9.91% of the sporadic cases and 12.1% of the familial cases 
reported perineal use of talc p= 0.064  
 
p= 0.79 (spor adic 
v. familial)  152 
 - 153/170 of the cases and 
152/170 controls from above  
- 101 of the cases were spor ad-
ic, 51 of the cases were familial   - multivariate analysis was performed with 153 cases 
and 152 controls   
- perineal use of talc by cases vs. controls  
 
- perineal talc use by sporadic cases  
 
- perineal talc use by familial cases  RR 
2.49 (0.94 -6.58; 
P=0.066)  
2.45 (0.85 -7.07; 
P=0.098)  
3.25 ( 0.83-12.4; 
P=0.084)   
HOSPITAL -BASED CASES/HOSPITAL - and POPULATION -BASED CONTROLS  
talcum powder; 
purity and com po-
sition not specified  - 188 women from northern 
Califor nia with primary epi the-
lial cancer (from 7 hospitals) 
- 280 matched hospital controls 
- 259 matched pop. controls  Jan 1983 – 
Dec 1985 - the researchers stated that RR associated with talc 
use, tubal ligation, and hysterectomy were similar 
when cases were compared to both control groups; 
therefore the control groups were combined 
- risk was adjusted for parity  
 
Limitations  
- failure to interview all eligible ovarian cancer pa-
tients and a completely random sample of controls  
- cofounding by differential talc use among women 
with characteristics predictive of ovarian cancer 
(unlikely ) 
- random error in reported talc use  Type of talc exposure  
- 40% of cases and 43% of controls reported no talc use  
- 12% of cases and 10% of controls reported talc exposure on the 
perineum only  
- 3% of cases and 5% of controls reported talc exposure on san i-
tary pads only  
- 5% of cases and 4% of controls reported talc exposure with 
diaphragm use only  
- 36% of cases and 31% of controls reported talc exposure by two 
of the three use types  
- 1% of cases and 2% of controls reported talc exposure by all 
three use types  OR 
1.0 
1.45 (0.81 -2.6) 
 
0.62 (0.21 -1.80)  
 
1.60 (0.63 -3.58)  
 
1.36 (0.91 -2.04)  
 
0.35 (0.04 -2.94)  172 
   - risk was also examined based on duration of use of 
talcum powder; talc use after tubal ligation or 
hysterectomy was excluded  
- risk was adjusted for parity  Duration of talc use  
- 55% of cases and 59% of controls did not report yrs of talc use  
- 18% of cases and 13% of controls reported talc exposure of 1 -9 
yrs 
- 27% of cases and 27% of controls reported talc exposure of 10+ 
yrs 
- 23% of cases and 19% of controls reported 20+ talc appli ca-
tions/mo  
-overall trend for 30 uses/mo   
1.0 
1.60 (1.00 -2.57;  
p=0.05)  
1.11 (0.82 -1.96;  
p=0.61)  
1.45 (0.94 -2.22)  
 
1.30 (0.88 -1.92)    
   52 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
POPULATION -BASED CASES/POPULATION -BASED CONTROLS  
talc (as baby pow -
der) 
deodorizing pow -
ders that contain 
other substances in 
addition to talc  - 116 white women of western 
Wash ington state with bor der-
line ovarian tumors (from the 
Seattle -Puget Sound Cancer 
Surveillance System)  
- 158 white age - and residence -
matched controls  1980 -1985  - subjects were asked questions about reproductive 
and sexual history, medical history, and perineal 
exposure to talc  
- risk was adjusted for age, par ity, and use of oral 
contraceptives  
 
Limitations  
- only 30% of potentially eligible cases and controls 
participated  Types of exposure to talc  
- 57.8% of cases and 59.5 % of controls reported no perineal 
exposure to powder  
- 42.2% of cases and 40.5% of controls reported any perineal 
exposure to powder  
- 6.9% of cases and 13.3% of controls reported powder exposure 
by diaphragm storage only 
- 9.5% of cases and 17.1% of controls reported powder exposure 
by diaphragm storage or by other methods  
- 20.7% of ca ses and 19.0% of controls reported powder 
exposure following bathing only  
- 29.3% of cases and 23.4% of controls reported powder 
exposure following bathing or by other methods  
- 6.0% of cases and 2.5% of controls reported powder exposure 
by use on sanitary  napkins only  
- 12.1% of cases and 6.3% of controls reported powder ex posure 
by use on sanitary napkins or by other methods  
- 6.0% of cases and 23.4% of controls reported after bathing and 
on sanitary napkins  RR 
1 
 
1.1 (0.7 -2.1) 
 
0.5 (0.2 -1.4) 
 
0.5 (0.2 -1.3) 
 
1.2 (0.6 -2.6) 
 
1.3 (0.8 -2.7) 
 
2.2 (0.8 -19.8)  
 
1.9 (0.9 -6.9) 
 
2.2 (0.8 -18.8)  153 
   - 
 Type of powder used ( i.e., baby, deodorizing, or cornstarch)  
- 15.5% of cases and 19.6% of controls reported baby powder 
only 
- 19.0% of cases and 21.5% of controls reported baby powder 
only or combined use  
- 11.2% of cases and 12.0% of controls reported talc, unspecified 
(no combin ed use)  
- 3.4% of cases and 4.4% of controls reported cornstarch only  
- 8.6% of cases and 2.5% of controls reported deodorizing 
powder only  
- 12.1% of cases and 4.4% of controls reported deodorizing 
powder only or combined use   
0.8 (0.4 -1.9) 
 
0.9 (0.5 -2.0) 
 
1.0 (0.4 -2.4) 
 
0.8 (0.2 -3.8) 
3.5 (1.2 -28.7)  
 
2.8 (1.1 -11.7)   
    Route of talc exposure and type of powder used  
- any powder use after bathing  
    - 8.6% of cases and 3.8% of controls reported any use of 
deodorizing powder  
     -20.7% of cases and 20.3% of controls reported no use of 
deodorizing powder  
- any powder use on sanitary napkins  
     - 6.9% of cases and 2.5 % of controls reported any use of 
deodorizing powder  
       - 5.2% of cases and 3.8% of controls reported no use of 
deodorizing powder   
 
3.1 (0.8 -10.9)  
 
1.1 (0.5 -2.4) 
  
2.6 (0.9 -22.4)  
 
1.5 (0.4 -6.5)   
   53 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
talc-containing 
dusting powder; 
purity and com po-
sition not specified  - 112 females in Beijing, China 
with epithelial ovarian can cer 
(from Beijing Cancer Registry)  
- 224 age -matched community 
controls  1984 -1986  - subjects were asked questions about menstrual, 
obstetric, marital, medical, and familial histories  
- risk was adjusted for education and parity  
-risk with occupational exposure was also determined  
 
Limitations  
- some ovarian cancer patients may not have been 
ascer tained for the study  
- high rate of loss due to deaths could reflect on 
survival and on risk - exclusion of controls with current health problems  Types of talc exposure  
- 93.8% of cases and 97.8% of controls reported no use of dust -
ing pow der 
- 6.3% of cases and 2.2% of controls reported dusting powder use 
on the lower abdomen and perineum  
- number of cases and controls exposed occupationally to talc 
(occupation was not specified)  RR 
1.0 
 
3.9 (0.9 -10.6)  
 
0.9 (0.3 -2.9) 144 
5 categories of 
powder:  talcum, 
cornstarch, baby, 
deodorant, and 
scented body/bath  - 313 white women in western 
WA (pop. -based) with epithelial 
ovarian cancer  
- 422 white age - and geography -
matched pop. controls  Jan 1986 – 
Dec 1988 - subjects were questio ned about genital powder ex po-
sure, demographic characteristics, reproductive, medical, and smoking histories, and birth control 
methods  
- risk was adjusted for age ; further adjustment for 
education, income, marital status, BMI, OC use, or 
parity did not alter the estimated RRs  
 
Limitations  
- a sizeable number of eligible women, particularly 
those with ovarian cancer, did not participate  
- difficult to ascertain whether perineal powder appli -
cation correctly estimates actual exposure to particles  
- direct  comparison with other studies is limited be -
cause of differences in definitions, groupings, and 
analysis  of genital powder use  
- insufficient information to address influence of 
condom use on risk   Ever/never genital use of talc  
- 49.2% of cases and 60. 7% of controls reported no lifetime 
genital powder application  
- 50.8% of cases and 39.3% of controls reported any lifetime 
genital powder application  OR 
1.0 
 
1.5 (1.1 -  2.0) 145 
    Exclusive use of powder  
- 17.6% of cases and 11.4% of controls reported perineal dusting 
only 
- 7.0% of cases and 8.3% of controls reported diaphragm storage 
in powder only  
- 3.8% of cases and 2.4% of controls reported powder on sanitary 
napkins only  
- 5.8% of cases and 6.6% of controls reported genital deodorant 
spray only   
1.8 (1.2 –  2.9) 
 
0.8 (0.4 –  1.4) 
 
1.5 (0.6 –  3.6) 
 
1.5 (0.8 –  3.0)  
   - risk was adjusted for age and other methods of 
genital powder application  Any perineal dusting and CLE (days)  
- 30.4% of cases and 20.6% of controls reported any dusting  
- 6.4% of cases and 5.2% of controls reported ≤2000 days CLE  
- 7.7% of c ases and 6.2% of controls reported 2001 -5000 CLE  
- 6.7% of cases and 5.2% of controls reported 5001 -10,000 CLE  
- 8.9%of cases and 4.0% of controls reported >10,000  CLE  
1.8 (0.9 –  3.5) 
1.6 (0.9 –  2.9) 
1.2 (0.6 –  2.4) 
1.8 (0.9 –  3.4)   
   54 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
   - risk was adjusted for age and other methods of 
genital powder application  Any diaphragm storage in powder CLE (mos)  
- 14.7% of cases and 12.1% of controls reported diaphragm 
storage in powder  
- 7.7% of cases and 6.2% of controls reported ≤60 mos CLE  
- 4.8% of cases and 4.7% of controls reported >60 mos CLE   
1.0 (0.6 –  1.6) 
 
1.1 (0.6 –  1.9) 
0.8 (0.4 - 1.7)  
   - risk was adjusted for age and other methods of 
genital powder application (none/any)  Any powder on sanitary napkins and CLE (mos) and applications  
- 12.1% of cases and 9.5% of controls reported any powder on 
sanitary napkins  
- 8.0% of cases and 5.0% of controls reported ≤120 mos CLE  
- 3.8% of cases and 4.5% of controls reported >120 mos CLE  
- 7.3% of cases and 4.5% of controls reported ≤1000 lifetime 
applications  
- 4.5% of cases and 5.0% of controls reported >1000 lifetime 
applications   
0.9 (0.5 –  1.5) 
 
1.3 (0.7 –  2.4) 
0.5 (0.2 –  1.1) 
1.3 (0.7 –  2.5) 
 
0.6 (0.3 –  1.2)  
   - risk was adjusted for age and other methods of 
genital powder application  Any genital deodorant spray and CLE (mos) and applications  
- 12.8% of cases and 9.5% of controls reported any genital 
deodorant spray  
- 7.7% of cases and 7.4% of controls reported ≤12 mos CLE  
- 4.8% of cases and 2.1% of controls reported >12 mos CLE  
 
- 9.3% of cases and 8.1% of controls reported ≤500 lifetime 
applications  
- 3.2% of cases and 1.4% of controls reported >500 lifetime 
applications   
1.9 (1.1 –  3.1) 
 
1.5 (0.9 – 2.8) 
2.7 (1.1 –  6.6; 
p < 0.05)  
1.7 (1.0 –  2.9) 
 
2.6 (0.9 –  7.6; 
p < 0.05)   
   - risk was adjusted for age  Exclusive use by powder type  
- 5.1% of cases and 3.8% of controls used talcum powder only  
- 9.9% of cases and 8.5% of controls used baby powder only  
- 1.6% of cases and 2.6% of controls used cornstarch only 
- 2.9% of cases and 2.4% of controls used deodorizing powder 
only 
- 8.6% of cases and 5.9% of controls used bath/body powder only   
1.2 (0.6 –  2.5) 
1.4 (0.8 –  2.4) 
0.9 (0.3 –  2.9) 
1.0 (0.4 – 2.6) 
 
1.6 (0.9 –  3.0)  
   - risk was adjusted for age and use of other types of 
powders  (yes/no)  Use of any powder type  
-10.5% of cases and 5.5% of controls reported any talcum 
powder  
-16.6% of cases and 14.5% of controls reported any baby powder  
-2.6% of cases and 3.8% of controls reported any cornstarch 
-7.7% of cases and 5.7% of controls reported any deodorizing 
powder  
-16.6% of cases and 10.2% of controls reported any bath/body 
powder   
1.6 (0.9 –  2.8) 
 
1.1 (0.7 –  1.8) 
0.8 (0.3 –  2.0) 
1.1 (0.6 –  2.0) 
 
1.5 (0.9 –  2.4)   
   55 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
   - the tumors were stratified by histological subtype  
- risk was adjusted for age   
Controls (422 total)  
60.7% never used powder  perineally  
39.3% ever used powder perineally  
 
All serous tumors  (131 total)  
- 45.8% never used powder perineally  
- 54.2% ever used powder perineally  
 
Serous tumors  (43 total)  
- 67.4 % never used use powder perineally  
- 32.6% ever used powder perineally  
 
Endometroid tumors  (36 total)  
- 52.8% never used use powder perineally  
- 47.2% ever used powder perineally  
                                                   
Other tumors  ( 103 total) ; (17 clear cell; 3 undiff erentiated ; 83 
unclassified adenocarcinomas or unspecified carcinomas)  
- 44.7% never used powder perineally  
- 55.3% ever used powder perineally  RR 
1.0 
 
 
 
1.7 (1.1 –  2.5) 
  
 
0.7 (0.4 –  1.4) 
 
 
 
1.2 (0.6 –  2.3) 
 
 
 
 
1.8 (1.1 –  2.8) 
  
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 189 women in Greater Athens 
with  epithelial ovarian tumors (2 hospitals)  
- 200 hospital visitor controls  June 1989 - 
Mar 1991 - the women were asked about smoking; alcohol and 
coffee consumption; reproductive history; frequency of use of analge sics, tranquilizers, or hypnotics ; talc in 
the perineal region; hair dyes  
- multiple regression  adjusted for age, yrs of school -
ing, body wt prior to onset, age at menarche, parity, 
menopausal status, age at first birth and at menopause, 
smoking, coffee drinking, alcohol consumption, hair dyeing, talc application, use of analgesics, and 
tranquilizers/hypnotics, and for mutual confou nders  
 
Limitations  
- moderate study size 
- possibility of selection bias  
- possibility of information bias   
- 3.1% of cases and 3.5% of controls reported talc application in 
the perineum  
- a crude RR, age -adjusted RR, and multiple regression RR were 
determined  OR 
0.90 (crude; 0.30 -
2.74)  
0.86 (age -adjust ed;  
0.27-2.68)  
1.05 (multiple 
regression; 0.28 -
3.98)  170 
talc, purity and 
composition not 
specified, and 
cornstarch  - 450 women from Toronto and 
Ontario, Canada with epithelial 
ovarian cancer (pop.- based)  
- 564 age -matched pop. -based 
controls  Nov 1989 – 
Oct 1992 - subjects were questioned about medical and repro -
ductive histories, menstrual characteristics, pregnancies, hormone and contraceptive use, and talc 
(and cornstarch) us age, type, and exposure  
- risk was adjusted for age, OC use, parity, breast -
feeding, tubal ligation, hysterectomy, and family history of ovarian or breast cancer Powder type exposures  
- 44%of cases and 35.6% of controls reported any talc exposure  
- 0.44% of cases and 0.85% of controls reported any corn starch 
exposure  
- 0.89%of cases and 1.24% of controls reported cornstarch/talc 
exposure  
- 11.3% of cases and 8.7% of controls reported talc exposure via 
sanitary napkins  
38.2% of cases and 10.5% of controls  reported talc exposure after 
bathing  OR 
1.42 (1.08 – 1.86)  
0.31 (0.06 – 1.66)  
 
0.68 (0.18 – 2.33)  
 
1.26 (0.81 – 1.96)  
 
1.31 (1.0 – 1.73)  143  
   56 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
   - risk was adjusted as above  Frequency (per mo) of after -bath talc use  
- mean uses/mo after -bath talc was 14.6 for cases and 17.2 for 
controls  
- 16.9% of cases and 10.5% of controls reported <10 uses/mo 
after-bath talc  
- 12.8% of cases and 11.3% of controls reported 10 -25 uses/mo 
after-bath talc  
- 9.1% of cases and 10.6% of controls reported >25 uses/mo 
after-bath talc   
0.89 (0.74 – 1.07)  
 
1.84 (1.24 – 2.73)  
 
1.13 (0.74 – 1.72)  
 
0.95 (0.61 – 1.49)   
   - it was assumed the regular after -bath talc use 
commenced at age 20  
- risk was adjusted as above  Duration of after -bath talc  use 
- mean yrs after -bath talc use was 32.9 yrs for cases and 35.4 yrs 
for controls  
- 13.3% of cases and 9.2% of controls reported <30 yrs after -bath 
talc use  
- 15.8% of cases and 11.9% of controls reported 30 -40 yrs after-
bath talc use  
- 9.1% of cases and 11.3% of controls reported >40 yrs after -bath 
talc use   
1.09 (0.98 – 1.21)  
 
1.7 (1.09 -  2.64) 
 
1.44 (0.96 – 2.15)  
 
0.87 (0.54 – 1.38)   
   - risk was adjusted as above  After -bath talc use pre/post 1970  
- case mean was 26.4 yrs and control mean was 24.9 yrs after-
bath talc use before 1970  
- case mean was 6.5 yrs and control mean was 10.4 yrs after -bath 
talc use after 1970   
1.09 (0.98 – 1.22)  
 
1.1 (0.89 – 1.35)   
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 200 women in Israel with pri -
mary invasive (164) or bor der-
line (36) epi thelial ovarian can -
cer (Israel Cancer Registry)  
- 408 geography -matched pop. 
controls  Jan 1990 – 
Sept 1993 - subjects were asked questions about obstetric and 
gynecologic history, including infertility and treat-
ment, smoking, education, and talc usage  
 
Limitations  
- no access to medical records to verify information 
- possibility of recall bias  
- possibility that results were confounded by a speci fic 
cause of infertility  - 89.0% of cases and 94.4% of controls reported  never -seldom 
use of talc 
- 10.5% of cases and 5.6% of controls reported moderate -a 
lot use of talc (P= 0.04)  
 not given  169 
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 824 women in Queensland, 
New South Wales, and Victoria, 
Australia with epithelial ovarian 
cancer (gynecological -oncology 
registries)  
- 860 age - and geography -
matched pop. controls  Aug 1990 – 
Dec 1993 - subjects were asked questions about education and 
ethnicity, and obstetric, marital, occupational, med i-
cal, and familial histories, childhood mumps h istory, 
and use of talc  
- risk was adjusted for parity  
 
Limitations  
- potential selection bias   
- 56.7% of cases and 52.0% of controls used talc around the 
abdomen/perineum  OR 
1.27 (1.04 -1.54)  166  
   57 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
talc, baby powder, 
deodorizing pow -
ders; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 563 women in eastern MA and 
NH with epi thelial ovarian can -
cer (pop. -based)  
- 523 age-matched pop. controls  
- (Phase I of the New England 
Case Control [NECC] study)  May 1992 – 
March 1997  - subjects were asked questions about demographics, 
reproductive and menstrual history, medical history, 
personal habits, and whether talc -, baby -, or deodoriz-
ing powders were dusted or sprayed reg ularly and age 
at 1st use, type of powder, applica tions/mo, and total 
yrs of use  
-risk was adjusted for age, study center, tubal ligation, 
BMI, parity, OC use, and family history  of breast/ 
ovarian cancer  
 
Limitations  
- possible recall bias  
- potential bias from confounding  Exposure to talc  
- 55.4% of cases and 63.9% of controls reported no personal use 
of talc  
- 17.6% of cases and 18.0% of controls reported use of talc in 
non-genital areas  
- 12.6% of cases and 9.8% of controls reported exposure through 
dusting of the perineum  
- 3.6% of cases and 2.3% of controls reported exposure through 
dusting sanitary napkins  
- 1.4% of cases and 1.2% of controls reported exposure through 
dusting underwear  
- 9.4% of cases and 5.0% of controls reported multiple uses in the 
genital area OR 
1.0 
 
1.08 (0.77 –1.50)  
 
1.45 (0.97 -2.18)  
 
1.45 (0.68 -3.09)  
 
1.21 (0.40 -3.64)  
 
2.15 (1.30 -3.57)  148 
   - risk adjusted as above  Ever/never genital talc use  
- 73% of cases and 81.8% of controls reported no genital talc use  
- 27.0% of cases and 18.2% of controls reported any genital use   
1.0 
1.60 (1.18 -2.15)   
   -risk was adjusted for age, study center, tubal ligation, 
and use of other powders  Type of powder used  
- 26.4% of cases and 17.6% of controls reported use of talc  
- 0.2% of cases and 0.6% of controls reported use of corn starch   
1.69 (1.26 -2.27)  
0.31 (0.03 -3.01)   
   - subjects with no personal use were asked about use 
by husband  
- risk was adjusted as above  No personal use/use of talc by husband  
- 87.6% of cases and 92% of controls reported no husband talc 
use  
- 12.4% of cases and 8.0% of controls reported husbands did use 
talc 1 
.0 
 
1.52 (0.92 -2.52)   
   -risk was adjusted for age, study center, tubal ligation, 
BMI, parity, OC use, and family history  of breast/ 
ovarian cancer  Frequency of use per month for total of all uses in the genital area  
- 11.5% of cases and 5.4% of controls reported ≤30 uses/mo  
- 10.6% of cases and 9.8% of controls reported 30 -39 uses/mo  
- 9.8% of cases and 2.9% of controls reported 40+ uses/mo  2.21 (1.37 -3.56)  
1.17 (0.78 -1.76)  
1.57 (0.80 -3.10)   
   - risk was adjusted as above  Duration of talc use  
-9.9% of cases and 5.9% of controls reported <20 yrs talc use  
-5.8% of cases and 5.0% of controls reported 20 -30 yrs talc use  
- 10.6% of cases and 7.1% of controls reported ≥30 yrs talc use  
- p-value for linear trend, excluding n on-genital exposure  
- p-value for linear trend, including non -genital exposure   
1.86 (1.16 -3.00)  
1.33 (0.76 -2.30)  
1.44 (0.91 -2.26)  
p = 0.477 
p = 0.062  
   - same adjustments listed previously were made  Total applications  
- 9.2% of cases and 5.2% of controls applied talc <3000 x 
- 6.5% of cases and 5.4% of controls applied talc 3000 – 10,000 x  
- 6.5% of cases and 3.8% of controls applied talc >10,000 x  
- p-value for linear trend, excluding non -genital exposure  
- p-value for linear trend, including non-genital exposure   
1.84 (1.12 -3.30)  
1.43 (0.84 -2.41)  
1.43 (0.92 -2.22)  
0.164  
0.472    
   58 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
   - same adjustments listed previously were made  Age at first use of talc  
- 17.4% of cases and 12.8% of controls were <20 yrs old  
-6.5% of cases and 3.4% of controls were 20 -25 yrs old  
- 2.3% of cases and 1.7% of controls were >25 yrs old  
- p-value for linear trend including non -exposed subjects   
1.46 (1.03 -2.07)  
1.87 (1.03 -3.39)  
1.54 (0.64 -3.72)  
p=0.504   
   - the tumors were stratified by histological subtype  
- risk was adjusted for age, BMI, primary relevance 
with breast or ovarian cancer, parity, OC use, tubal 
ligation, and study center   
Controls (523 total)  
- 81.8% never used talc perineally  
- 18.2% ever used talc perineally  
 
Serous borderline tumors  (86 total)  
- 73.3% never used talc perineally  
- 26.7% ever used talc perineally  
 
Serous invasive tumors  (229 total)  
- 68.6 % never used use talc perineally  
- 31.4% ever used talc perineally  
 
Mucinous tumors (83 total)  
- 80.7% never used talc perineally  
- 19.3% ever us ed talc perineally  
 
Endometroid/clear cell tumors  (130 total)  
- 76.2% never used use talc perineally  
- 23.8% ever used talc perineally  
                                                   
Undifferentiated tumors  ( 35 total)  
- 71.4% never used use talc perine ally 
- 28.6% ever used talc perineally  OR 
1.0 
 
 
 
1.38 (0.82 – 2.31)  
  
 
1.70 (1.22 – 2.39)  
   
0.79 (0.44 – 1.40)  
  
 
1.04 (0.67 – 1.61)  
 
 
 
1.44 (0.67 – 3.08)   
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 668 women in eastern MA and 
NH with invasive ovarian can -
cer (pop. -based)  
- 721 age -matched pop. controls  
- (Phase 2 of the NECC)  July 1998 – 
July 2003  - risk for ovarian cancer with talc use was determined  
-risk was adjusted for age, study center, parity, non -
White race, and Jewish religion  
 
Limitations  
- exposure information was collected by self -report, 
introducing the possibility of misclassification  
- inability to directly compare anti- MUC1 antibody 
levels in cases and controls to calculate an OR  Talc use  
- 47.8% of cases and 47.6% of controls reported no talc use  
- 32.0% of cases and 28.2% of controls reported genital use of 
talc 
- 20.2% of cases and 24.1% of controls reported body use of talc 
only OR 
1.0 
1.16 (0.90 – 1.49; 
P=0.25)  
0.87 (0.66 -  1.15; 
P=0.33)  149  
   59 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  -210 women with ovarian 
cancer  
- 600 birth -, DNA type -,and 
menopausal status -matched 
controls  
(these are subjects included in 
the Nurses’ Health Study that 
provided blood or buccal 
samples)  1989 -2004  - examined whether an association between genital 
talc exposure and ovarian cancer ris k is modified by 
variants of the NAT2  and GSTM1  genes and the 
GSTT1  gene 
- subjects were asked about application of talcum, 
baby or deo dorizing powder to the perineal area or 
sanitary napkins  
- risk with regular talc use and frequency of genital 
talc use was determined  
-risk was adjusted for the matching factors, duration 
of oral contraceptive use, parity, tubal ligation, BMI, 
and duration of PMH use  
 
Limitations  
- inability to detect interactions with certain com bi-
nations of genes and for specific histologic subtypes  
- loss of some detail due to the use of common expo -
sure and covariate definitions (particularly for the 
NECC)  total epithelial cancer (210 cases; 600 controls)  
- 40% of cases and 39% of controls reported any history of 
genital talc us e 
- 70.8% of cases and 76% of controls reported no regular genital 
talc use (1x/wk or more)  
- 29.2% of cases and 24% of controls reported regular genital talc 
use 
 
Frequency of genital talc use  
- 61.5% of cases and 64.6% of controls reported no frequency of 
genital talc use  
- 9.2% of cases and 11.4% of control reported use <1 x/wk  
- 11.3% of cases and 11.2% of controls reported use 1 -6 x/wk  
- 18% of cases and 13% of controls reported daily genital talc use  
 
- Ptrend for frequency of genital talc use  OR 
p= 0.79 
 
1.0 
 
1.24 (0.83 – 1.83; 
p = 0.15)  
 
 
1.0 
 
0.98 (0.54 – 1.79)  
1.01 (0.57 – 1.79)  
1.44 (0.88 – 2.37; 
p = 0.08)  
0.18 150 
    serous invasive ovarian cancer (93 cases; 263 controls)  
- 68.2% of cases and 73.8% of controls reported no regular 
genital talc use  
- 31.8% of cases and 26.3% of controls reported regular genital 
talc use  
 
Frequency of genital talc use  
- 61.4% of cases and 62.9% of controls reported no frequency of 
genital talc use  
- 6.8% of cases and 10.8% of control reported use <1 x/wk  
- 13.6% of c ases and 10.4% of controls reported use 1 -6 x/wk  
- 18.2% of cases and 15.8% of controls reported daily use  
- Ptrend for frequency of genital talc use   
1.0 
 
1.48 (0.82 -2.68)  
  
 
1.0 
 
0.79 (0.29 -2.11)  
1.64 (0.71 -3.79)  
1.34(0.65 -2.76)  
 0.29  
 - 1175 women from MA and 
NH with epithelial ovarian 
cancer  
- 1202 age - and state -matched 
pop. controls  
- (pooled data from subjects in 
Phase I and Phase 2 of the NECC that provided a blood 
specimen)  
 May 1992 – 
July 2003  - subjects were asked about use of  talcum, baby or 
deodorizing powder, type of use of the powder, fre -
quency of use, number of years of use, brand used  
-risk was adjusted for the matching factors, duration 
of OC use, parity, tubal ligation, BMI, and duration of 
PMH use  
- risk with regular  talc use and frequency of genital 
talc use was determined  
- risk was adjusted for age, study center, duration of 
OC use, parity, tubal ligation, BMI, duration of PMH use total epithelial cancer (1175 cases; 1202 controls)  
- 29% of cases and 24% of control s reported any history of 
genital talc use  
- 73.2% of cases and 79.7% of controls reported no regular 
genital talc use (1x/wk or more)  
- 26.8% of cases and 20.3% of controls reported regular genital 
talc use  
 
Frequency of genital talc use  
- 70.9% of cases and 76.3% of controls reported no frequency of 
genital talc use  
- 2.3% of cases and 3.4% of control reported use <1 x/wk  
- 10.5% of cases and 8.0% of controls reported use 1 -6 x/wk  
- 16.3% of cases and 12.3% of controls reported daily genital talc 
use 
 
- Ptrend for frequency of genital talc use   
p = 0.003 
 
1.0 
 
1.40 (1.15 – 1.70; 
p < 0.001)  
  
1.0 
 
0.72 (0.43 – 1.19)  
1.33 (1.00 – 1.79)  
1.41 (1.10 – 1.79; 
p = 0.006)  
 
0.002    
   60 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
    serous invasive ovarian cancer (450 cases; 1202 controls)  
- 69.0% of cases and 79.7% of controls reported no regular 
genital talc use  
- 31.0% of cases and 20.3% of controls reported genital talc use  
 
- 66.6% of cases and 76.3% of controls reported no frequency of 
genital talc use  
- 2.4% of cases and 3.4% of con trol reported use <1 x/wk  
- 12.5% of cases and 8.0% of controls reported use 1 -6 x/wk  
- 18.5% of cases and 12.3% of controls reported daily use  
 
- Ptrend for frequency of genital talc use   
1.0 
 
1.62 (1.26 -2.09)  
 
1.0 
 
0.65 (0.32 -1.33)  
1.56 (1.08 -2.26)  
1.61 (1.18 -2.20)  
 
 < 0.001   
 - pooled analysis of the NECC 
study (Phase 1 and Phase 2 
combined) and the 210 cases 
and 600 controls from the 
Nurses’ Health Study (presented 
above)   - the researchers analyzed the inter actions between 
talc use and genes in detoxification pathways  total epithelial cancer  
- no regular genital talc use (1x/wk or more)  
- any reported regular genital talc use  
 
Frequency of genital talc use  
- no frequency of genital talc use  
- reported use <1 x/wk  
- reported use 1 -6 x/wk  
- reported daily genital talc use  
 
- Ptrend for frequency of genital talc use   
1.0 
1.36 (1.13 – 1.63)  
  
1.0 
0.82 (0.55 – 1.20)  
1.26 (0.97 – 1.63)  
1.41 (1.14 – 1.76)  
 
<0.001   
    serous invasive ovarian cancer  
- reported no regular genital talc use  
- reported any genital talc use  
 
- no frequency of genital talc use  
- 2 reported use <1 x/wk  
- reported use 1 -6 x/wk  
- reported daily use  
 
- Ptrend for frequency of genital talc use  
 
- there was no clear evidence of an interaction with GSTM1  alone 
or NAT2   
1.0 
1.60 (1.26 – 2.02)  
 
1.0 
0.70 (0.39 – 1.24)  
1.12 – 2.21)  
1.56 (1.17 – 2.08)  
 
<0.001    
   61 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  “average risk” women from the 
3 phases without hysterectomy 
or family history of cancer 
- 1098 women with invasive 
ovarian can cer (pop. -based)  
- 1363 age -matched pop. 
controls that were >40 yrs old  
 
(includes women from NECC 
phases 1 and 2, and the  
897 Phase 3 cases and 857 
Phase3 controls)  1992 -2008 
(all 3 phases)  
 
(Phase 3: 
2003 -2008)  - Phase 1148 and Phase 2149 described previously  
 
- reviewed relative risk for “average risk” women 
(excluded women at high risk for breast or ovarian 
cancer)  
 
Limitations  
- use of case -control data to develop the scoring sys -
tem because of:  
     - potential for recall bia s 
     - potential for selection bias  
     - the calculation of only RR and not absolute risk  Long -term use of talc  
- 84.9% of cases and 88.8% of controls reported no long- term 
(10+ yr) talc use  
- 15.1% of cases and 11.2% of controls reported long -term tal c 
use OR 
1.0 
 
1.42 (1.12 – 1.81; 
P = 0.004)  171 
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 609 women from Los Angeles 
county w ith ovarian cancer 
(pop. based)  
- 688 race/ethnicity - and age -
matched controls  1998 -2002  - subjects were asked questions about medical, gyn e-
cological, reproductive, and lifestyle histories, family 
history of breast or ovarian cancer, OC use; tubal liga -
tion or hysterectomy; use of NSAIDs, and talc use  
- risk was adjusted for race, age, education, tubal li ga-
tion, cancer history, menopausal status, OC use, parity  Use of talc  
- 60% of cases and 68.2% of controls never used talc  
- 40% of cases and 31.8% of  controls ever used talc 
- 18.5% of case and 15% of control talc users used talc in non -
perineal area 
- 21.5% of case and 16.9% of control talc users used talc in 
perineal area RR 
1.0 
1.48 (1.15 – 1.91)  
1.43 (1.03 – 1.98)  
 
1.53 (1.13 – 2.09)  174 
    Frequency and duration of talc use  
- 5.8% of cases and 4.5% of controls used talc for ≤20 yrs and 
≤10x/mo  
- 3.8% of cases and 4.4% of controls used talc for ≤20 yrs and 
>10 - ≤30x/mo  
- 3.5% of cases and 3.1% of controls used talc for ≤20 yrs and 
≥30x/mo  
- 7.4% of cases and 7.1% of controls used talc for >20 yrs and 
≤10x/mo  
- 8.4% of cases and 6.3% of controls used talc for >20 yrs and 
>10 - ≤30x/mo  
- 11.1% of cases and 6.5% of controls used talc for≥20 yrs and 
≥30x/mo   
1.36 (0.79 – 2.32)  
 
1.16 (0.63 – 2.12)  
 
1.23 (0.63 – 2.41)  
 
1.27 (0.80 – 2.01)  
 
1.57 (0.99 – 2.50)  
 
2.08 (1.34 – 3.23)   
    Total number of talc uses  
- 8.1% of cases and 7.6% of controls used talc ≤5200 x  
- 7.6% of cases and 6.8% of controls used talc >5200 - ≤15,600 x 
- 10.4% of cases and 8.9% of controls used talc >15,600 - 
≤52,000 x  
- 13.9% of cases and 8.6% of controls used talc >52,000 x   
1.2 (0.77 – 1.88)  
1.38 (0.87 – 2.20)  
1.34 (0.89 – 2.02)  
 
1.99 (1.34 – 2.96)    
   62 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
   - examined risk based on total number of talc uses 
before/after 1975  Before 1975  
- 4.0% of cases and 5.1% of controls used talc ≤5200 x  
- 4.8% of cases and 4.2% of controls used talc >5200 - ≤15,600 x 
- 8.1% of cases and 6.5% of controls used talc >15,600 - ≤52,000 
x 
- 13.6% of cases and 8.4% of controls used talc >52,000 x  
 
After 1975  
- 4.1% of cases and 2.5% of controls used talc ≤5200 x  
- 2.8% of cases and 2.6% of controls used talc >5200 - ≤15,600 x 
- 2.6% of cases and 2.5% o f controls used talc >15,600  
0.84 (0.47 – 1.51)  
1.41 (0.79 – 2.53)  
1.45 (0.91 – 2.31)  
 
1.93 (1.29 – 2.88)  
 
 
1.95 (0.98 – 3.89)  
1.17 (0.56 – 2.48)  
0.98 (0.45 – 2.13)   
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 83 African -American and 550 
white women from 48 counties of NC with epithelial ovarian 
cancer  
- 134 African -American and 
533 white age -, race/ethnicity -, 
and geographical region -
matched controls  1999 -2008  - examined risk factors in African -American vs. white 
women, including use of talc  
-risk was adjusted for age  
 
Limitations  
- relatively small sample size of African -American 
women  
- modest sample size precluded conducting analyses 
within subgroups  
- participation bias  African -American women  
- 54.2% of cases and 56.0%of controls reported no tal c use  
- 45.8% of cases and 44.0% of controls reported any talc use  
 
White women  
- 59.6% of cases and 61.0%of controls reported no talc use  
- 40.4% of cases and 39.0% of controls reported any talc use  OR 
1.0 
1.19 (0.68 – 2.09)  
 
 
1.0 
1.04 (0.82 – 1.33)  163 
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 256 women from 22 central 
CA counties with epithelial 
ovarian cancer (pop. -based)  
- 1122 age - and ethnicity - 
matched controls  2000 -2001  - subjects were asked questions on menstrual, re pro-
ductive, gyn ecological, surgical, and family cancer 
histories, use of exogenous hormones  
- examined risk with talc use based on frequency, 
duration, and cumulative use and timing of use  
- numbers were adjusted based on available data 
- risk was adjusted for age, race/ethnicity, OC use, 
and breastfeeding  
 
Limitations  
- relatively small sample size  
- low response fraction  
- possible recall bias  
- inability to exclude use during non -ovulatory periods 
or and post -tubal ligation or hysterectomy 
- inability to differentiate among formulations used  Ever/never use of talc  
- 57.4% of cases and 62.9% of controls never used talc  
- 42.6% of cas es and 37.1% of controls ever used talc  
 
Frequency of use  
- 13.4% of cases and 12.5% of controls used talc rarely to several 
times/mo  
- 12.4% of cases and 13.2%of controls used talc 1 -3x/wk  
- 16.5% of cases and 11.1% of controls used talc 4 -7x/wk  
- Ptrend OR 
1.0 
1.37 (1.02 – 1.85)  
  
1.34 (0.87 – 2.08)  
 
1.16 (0.74 – 1.81)  
1.74 (1.14 – 2.64)  
 0.015  162 
   Duration of use  
- 7.4% of cases and 9.2% of controls used talc for ≤3 yrs  
- 13.2% of cases and 9.1% of controls used talc for 4 -12 yrs  
- 11.9% of cases and 9.4% of controls used talc for 13 -30 yrs  
- 8.6% of cases and 8.1% of controls used talc for >30 yrs  
- Ptrend  
1.01 (0.58 – 1.76)  
1.86 (1.16 – 2.98)  
1.45 (0.90 – 2.32)  
1.22 (0.72 – 2.08)  
0.045   
    Cumulative use (frequency x duration)  
- 7.4% of cases and 8.8% of controls were in the 1st quartile 
(lowest exposure)  
- 11.5% of cases and 8.8% of controls were in 2nd quartile  
- 14.0% of cases and 9.9% of controls were in 3rd quartile  
- 8.2% of cases and 8.1%of controls were in 4th quartile (highest 
exposure)  
- Ptrend  
1.03 (0.59 – 1.80)  
 
1.81 (1.10 – 2.97)  
1.74 (1.11 – 2.73) 
1.06 (0.62 – 1.83)  
 
0.051    
   63 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
    Year of first use  
- 21.5% of cases and 19.4% of controls before /during 1975  
- 19.4% of cases and 15.0% of controls after 1975  
1.22 (0.84 – 1.77)  
1.92 (1.27 – 2.91)   
    Age at first use  
- 12.4% of cases and 16.0% of controls were <20 yrs old  
- 10.7% of  cases and 5.8% of controls were 20 -24 yrs old  
- 17.8% of cases and 12.6% of controls were ≥25 yrs old   
0.95 (0.61 – 1.48)  
2.41 (1.43 – 4.09)  
1.80 (1.19 – 2.73)   
    First use before or after first birth  
- 18.8% of cases and 23.8% of controls prior to first birth  
- 22.0% of cases and 10.6% of controls after first birth   
0.98 (0.64 – 1.48)  
2.51 (1.63 – 3.87)   
    Yrs since last use  
- 13.2% of cases and 12.5%of controls are current users  
- 11.2% of cases and 5.8% of controls used talc 1 -2 yrs ago  
- 8.3% of cases and 7.8% of controls used talc 3 -20 yrs ago 
- 8.3%of cases and 8.3% of controls used talc >20 yrs ago   
1.27 (0.81 – 1.98)  
2.40 (1.43 – 4.05)  
1.57 (0.90 – 2.73)  
1.13 (0.66 – 1.94)   
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 1576 women from Australia 
with epithelial ovarian cancer  
- 1509 age - and state -of-resi-
dence -matched pop. controls  Jan 2002 – 
Sept 2005 - subjects were asked questions about medical and 
surgical and family cancer histories, lifestyle habits, 
reproductive factors, hysterec tomy/tubal ligation, and 
talc use  
- risk was adjusted for age, education, parity, and OC 
use  
 
Limitations  
- low response rate for controls, which could result in 
selection bias  
- medical histories were self -reported   
- 54% of cases and 57% of controls reported never using talc in 
the perineal region  
- 46% of cases and 43% of controls reported ever using talc in the 
perineal region  
 
Duration of use (with no ligation/hysterectomy)  
- 13% of cases and 13% of controls reported 0 -10 yrs talc use  
- 14% of case s and 15% of controls reported >10 -25 yrs talc use  
- 19% of cases and 16% of controls reported >25 yrs talc use  
- Ptrend OR 
1.0 
 
1.17 (1.01 – 1.36)  
  
 
1.13 (0.90 – 1.41)  
1.08 (0.87 – 1.34)  
1.29 (1.04 – 1.58)  
 0.021  161 
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 230 women with serous ovar i-
an tumors and 133 women with benign mucinous tumors in 
Australia  
- 752 pop. controls  2002 - 2005  - examined the association between use of talc and the 
risk of benign mucinous  and serous ovarian tumors - 
- risk was adjusted for age, state of residence, educa-
tion, parity, hormonal contraceptive use, hysterec-
tomy, and  smoking status  
- OR for each factor examined is presented in the 
order mucinous, serous, combined  
- 56% of mucinous cases, 55% of serous cases, and 56% of 
controls reported no talc use in the perineal region  
- 44% of mucinous cases, 45% of serous cases, and 44% of 
controls reported talc use in the perineal region  
 
Amount of talc used in the perineal region  
- 11% of mucinous cases, 6% of serous cases, and 10% of con -
trols reported minimal talc use in the perineal region  OR 
1.0 
 
1.19 (0.80 – 1.76)  
1.04 (0.75 – 1.43)  
1.10 (0.84 – 1.45)  
 
1.02 (0.53 – 1.98)  
0.70 (0.37 – 1.30)  
0.85 (0.52 – 1.38)  157 
    - 14% of mucinous cases, 9% of serous cases, and 11% of con -
trols reported moderate talc use in the perineal region  1.57 (0.87 – 2.84)  
0.85 (0.49 – 1.48)  
1.05 (0.68  – 1.64)   
    - 18% of mucinous cases, 27% of serous cases, and 21% of con -
trols reported substantial talc use in the perineal region  0.98 (0.58 – 1.66)  
1.21 (0.82 – 1.79)  
1.16 (0.83 – 1.62)    
   64 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
    Ptrend for: 
mucinous tumors  
serous tumors  
combined   
0.9 
0.2 
0.3  
dusting powder, 
many contain talc  - 812 women from 13 counties 
in western WA  state with 
epithelial ovarian cancer (pop. -
based)  
- 1313 age -matched pop. 
controls  Jan 2002 – 
Dec 2005 - subjects were asked questions about  lifestyle, 
medical, reproductive, and contraceptive histories, use 
of contraceptive and menopausal hormone 
preparations, and genital powder exposure  
- risk was adjusted for age, year of diagnosis, resi -
dence, parity, and hormonal contraception  
- subjects were asked to report the types of  
powder(s) used after bathing, including talcum, baby,  
cornstarch, deodorant, body/bath, and other or 
unknown   
- 86.2% of cases and 88.5% of control reported never using 
powder after bathing  
- 13.8% of cases and 11.5% of co ntrols reported use of powder 
after bathing  
- 93.2% of cases and 91.7% of controls did not use powder on 
sanitary napkins  
- 6.8% of cases and 8.3% of controls used powder on sanitary 
napkins  
- 77.7% of cases and 72.6% of controls (that were diaphragm 
users ) did not use powder on diaphragms  
- 22.3% of cases and 27.4% of controls (that were diaphragm 
users) used powder on diaphragms  
- 89.6% of cases and 90.5% of controls did not use vaginal 
deodorant spray  
- 10.4% of cases and 9.5% of controls used vaginal de odorant 
spray  OR 
1.0 
 
1.27 (0.97 – 1.66)  
 
1.0 
 
0.82 (0.58 – 1.16)  
 
1.0 
 
0.72 (0.48 – 1.10)  
 
1.0 
 
1.15 (0.85 – 1.56)  168 
   - risk was evaluated based on duration, frequency, and 
timing of use  
- risk was adjusted as above  - 86.2% of cases and 88.5% of controls never used powder  
 
Duration of use  
- 4.1% of cases and 2.9% of controls used powder  for 1 -9.9 yrs  
- 3.6% of cases and 2.7% of controls used powder for 10 -19.9 yrs  
- 3.7% of cases and 3.0% of controls used powder for 20 -34.9 yrs  
- 2.3% of cases and 2.9% of controls used powder 35+ yrs  1.0 
 
 
1.39 (0.85 – 2.28)  
1.46 (0.87 – 2.45)  
1.28 (0.78 – 2.10)  
0.91 (0.51 – 1.62)   
    Lifetime number of applications  
- 3.2% of cases and 2.7% of controls reported 1 -1599 
applications of powder  
- 5.6% of cases and 2.8% of controls reported 1600 -4799 
applications of powder  
- 2.5% of cases and 3.0% of controls reported 4800 -9999 
applications of powder  
- 2.2% of cases and 2.8% of controls reported 10,000+ 
applications of powder   
1.21 (0.71 – 2.06)  
 
2.08 (1.32 – 3.27)  
 
0.87 (0.50 – 1.53)  
 
0.87 (0.48 – 1.57)   
    Age at  first use  
- 1.5% of cases and 2.1% of controls were <15 yrs old  
- 3.3% of cases and 2.7% of controls were 15 -20 yrs old  
- 3.9% of cases and 3.3% of controls were 20 -30 yrs old  
- 5.1%  of cases and 3.4% of controls were 30+ yrs old   
0.74 (0.37 – 1.50)  
1.20 (0.71 – 2.03)  
1.25 (0.77 – 2.03)  
1.69 (1.08 – 2.64)    
   65 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
    Time since  first use  
- 5.2% of cases and 3.1% of controls reported ≤25 yrs  
- 4.7% of cases and 3.1% of controls reported 25 -38 yrs  
- 2.0% of cases and 2.6% of controls reported 38 -45 yrs  
- 2.0% of cases and 2.7% of controls reported 45+ yrs   
1.77 (1.12 – 2.78)  
1.46 (0.91 – 2.32)  
0.87 (0.47 – 1.61)  
0.82 (0.44 – 1.52)   
    Age at  last use  
- 3.1% of cases and 2.5% of controls  were <35 yrs old  
- 4.3% of cases and 3.0% of controls were 35 -50 yrs old  
- 3.1% of cases and 2.7% of controls were 50 -60 yrs old  
- 3.2% of cases and 3.3% of controls were 60+ yrs old   
1.14 (0.66 – 1.97)  
1.42 (0.88 – 2.31)  
1.25 (0.73 – 2.13)  
1.21 (0.72 – 2.05)   
    Time since  last use  
- 6.4% of cases and 5.3% of controls are current users  
- 3.2% of cases and 2.0% of controls reported ≤12 yrs  
- 1.7% of cases and 2.16% of controls reported 13 -23 yrs  
- 2.3% of cases and 2.1% of controls reported 24+ yrs   
1.30 (0.89 – 1.91)  
1.74 (0.98 – 3.10)  
0.85 (0.44 – 1.66)  
1.13 (0.61 – 2.08)   
    Calendar year of first use  
- 2.3% of cases and 3.0% of controls reported ≤1959  
- 3.0% of cases and 2.9% of controls reported 1960 -1969 
- 3.2% of cases and 2.9% of controls reported 1970 -1979 
- 5.3% of cases and 2.7% of controls reported 1980+   
0.86 (0.48 – 1.53)  
1.10 (0.65 – 1.89)  
1.12 (0.66 – 1.89)  
2.03 (1.28 – 3.24)   
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 902 women from Western PA, 
Eastern OH, and Western NY in 
the HOPE study with pri mary 
epithelial ovarian, perito neal, or 
Fallopian tube cancer  
- 1802 age group - and geog ra-
phy-matched controls  2003 - 2008  - subjects were asked about reproductive, gynecologi -
cal, and medical histories, lifestyle, family me dical 
history, whether they ever sought medical attention 
for fertility issues, use of fertility drugs  
- risk was adjusted for race, education, geographical 
site, BMI, family breast and ovarian cancer history, 
tubal ligation, OC use, number of live births , breast -
feeding, age at menarche, menopausal status, perineal 
talc use, and HRT use  
 
Limitation  
- inability to identify infertile women that never 
sought medical attention  
- reliance on self -reported fertility drug use  Ever/never use of talc  
- 72.4% of ca ses and 79.1% of controls reported never using talc 
in the perineal region  
- 27.6% of cases and 20.9% of controls reported ever using talc 
in the perineal region  OR 
1.0 
 
1.40 (1.16 – 1.69)  159 
EFFECT OF TUBAL LIGATION OR HYSTERECTOMY ON RISK  
HOSPITAL -BASED CASES/HOSPITAL -BASED CONTROLS  
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 211/499 patients at Roswell 
Park  Cancer Institute with epi-thelial ovarian cancer had tubal 
ligation or hysterectomy  
- 261/755 age at diagnosis -
matched hospital controls had tubal ligation or hysterectomy Oct 1982 – 
Oct 1995 - described previously  
  
- 48.2% of cases and 42% of controls used  talc and did not have 
tubal ligation or hysterectomy - 47.4% of cases and 49.8% of controls used talc and had tubal 
ligation  
- 52% of cas es and 60% of controls used talc and had a 
hysterectomy  OR 
1.2 (0.8 –  1.6) 
 
0.8 (0.5 –  1.2) 
 
0.9 (0.4 –  2.2) 173  
   66 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
 - 135 cases had undergone tubal 
ligation or hysterectomy within 
5 yrs of the diagnosis    - risk excluding these cases  0.9 (0.4 – 2.2)  
HOSPITAL -BASED CASES/HOSPITAL - and POPULATION -BASED CONTROLS  
talcum powder; 
purity and com po-
sition  not specified  - 188 women from northern 
Califor nia with primary epi the-
lial cancer (from 7 hospitals) 
- 280 matched hospital controls 
- 259 matched pop. controls  Jan 1983 – 
Dec 1985 - described previously  
  
- 48% of cases and 54% of controls did not u se talc 
- 52% of cases and 46% of controls used talc  
 
- 37% of cases and 34% of controls did not use talc and had no 
ligation or hysterectomy  
- 38% of cases and 28% of controls used talc and had no ligation 
or hysterectomy  
- 11% of cases and 20% of control s did not use talc and had 
ligation or hysterectomy  OR 
1.0 
1.37 (0.97 -1.96)  
 
1.0 
 
1.33 (0.58 -2.01)  
 
0.50 (0.29 – 0.88; 
p<0.01)  172 
POPULATION -BASED CASES/POPULATION -BASED CONTROLS  
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 450 women in the Boston area 
with epi thelial ovarian can cer 
- 454 pop. matched controls  
(study group combined from 
ref146 and ref154 Nov 1978 –
Sept 1987 - described previously   
- 86.6% of cases and 87.7% of controls had no ligation or 
hysterectomy were talc users  
- 13.4% of cases and 12.3% of controls had tubal ligation or 
hysterectomy and were talc users  
- 90.0% of cases and 84% of controls had no ligation or 
hysterectomy were non -talc users  
- 10% of cases and 16% of controls had tubal ligation or 
hysterectomy and were non -talc users  OR 
1 
 
1.1 (0.6 -2.1) 
 
1 
 
0.6 (0.4 -1.0; 
P=0.04 ) 147 
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 307 registered nurses in 11 
states with epithelial ovarian 
(Nurses’ Health Study; 
described previously)  1982 - 1996  -described previously   
- risk of ever talc users that had tubal ligation compared to never 
talc users  
- risk for ever talc use when excluding those with history of tubal 
ligation or hysterectomy  RR 
0.97 (0.71 -1.32)  
 
1.15 (0.89 -1.49)  151 
talc, purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 450 women from Toronto and 
Ontario, Canada with epithelial 
ovarian cancer (pop. -based)  
- 564 age -matched pop. -based 
controls  Nov 1989 – 
Oct 1992 - study was described previously  
- risk with yrs of after- bath talc use and tubal liga -
tion/hy sterectomy was examined  
- risk was adjusted as described previously   
 case mean was 28.4 yrs and control mean was 26.9 yrs of after -
bath talc use before ligation/hysterectomy  
- case mean was 4.5 yrs and control mean was 8.5 yrs of after -
bath talc use after  ligation/hysterectomy  OR 
1.11 (0.99 – 1.24)  
 
1.03 (0.82 – 1.29)  143 
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 256 women from 22 central 
CA counties with epithelial 
ovarian cancer (pop. -based)  
- 1122 age - and ethnicity - 
matched controls  2000 -2001  - study was described previously  
- risk of talc use and hysterectomy  or tubal ligation 
was examined  
- risk was adjusted as described previously  Tubal Ligation  
- 57.4% of cases and 65.8% of controls did not have tubal liga -
tion and never used talc 
- 42.6% of cases and 34.2% of controls did not have tubal liga -
tion and ever used talc  
- 56.9% of cases and 54.9% of controls did have tubal liga tion 
and never used talc  
- 43.1% of cases and 45.1% of controls did have tubal liga tion 
and ever used talc  OR 
1.0 
 
1.54 (1.10 – 2.16)  
 
1.0 
0.88 (0.46 – 1.68)  162  
   67 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
    Hysterectomy  
- 59.5% of cases and 63.7% of controls did not have a hyster ec-
tomy and never used talc  
- 40.5% of cases and 36.3% of controls did not a hyster ectomy 
and ever used talc 
- 50.0%% of cases and 58.8% of controls did have a hyster ec-
tomy and never used talc  
- 50.0% of cases and 41.2% of controls did have a hyster ectomy 
and ever used talc   
1.0 
 
1.33 (0.95 – 1.87)  
 
1.0 
 
1.79 (0.91 – 3.52)   
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 1576 women from Australia 
with epithelial ovarian cancer  
- 1509 age - and state of resi -
dence -matched pop. controls  Jan 2002 – 
Sept 2005 - study was described previously  
- risk was examined with number of years talc use 
post-hysterectomy or tubal ligation   
- 88% cases and 88% controls reported no talc use post -surgery  
- 3.3% of cases and 3 .3% of controls reported 0 -10 yrs talc use  
- 5.5% of cases and 5.7 % of controls reported >10 -25 yrs talc use  
- 3.1% of cases and 3 .0% of controls reported >25 yrs talc use  
- trend  OR 
1.0 
1.08 (0.71 – 1.62)  
1.14 (0.82 – 1.57)  
1.00 (0.64 – 1.51)  
P = 0.61  161 
OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE AND RISK  
talc used as a coat -
ing agent for 
paper;  purity and 
composition not 
specified; workers 
may also have 
been exposed to 
asbestos and/or 
other dusts  - 46 female pulp and paper 
work ers from 10 mills in Nor-
way with epithelial ovarian 
cancer  
- 179 age -matched con trols 
identified by incidence density sampling  1953 – 1999  
(mostly from 
1980+)  -risk estimates specific to mill, work depart ment, 
agent, and time period  
- indicators of occupational exposure included dura -
tion of employment, time since 1st exposure to dia gno-
sis, and year of 1st exposure  
- subjects were asked about occupational history, pos -
sible household asbestos exposure, fertility pattern, 
age at menarche and menopause, OC use, family 
cancer history, and other personal factors  
 
Limitations  
- there were many missing values for the question on 
hygienic talc use   
- 50% of cases and 52% of controls reported never being exposed 
to talc  
- 50% of cases and 48% of controls reported ever being exposed 
to talc  OR 
1.0 
 
1.10 (0.56 – 2.18)  160 
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 275 women in the Wash ing-
ton, D.C. area with epithelial 
ovarian cancer (hospital -based)  
- 316 hospital age- and race -
matched controls  1978 -1981  - RR of ovarian cancer was determined according to 
length of occupational exposure to talc  within various 
occupations  
- exposure =  # of yrs in the job assigned probabilities 
of definite, probable, and possible expo sure 
- risk was adjusted for employment, race, age, parity, 
and gynecologic surgery  
 
Limitation  
- no information was available on individual ex posure 
characteristics, leading to the assumption that it was 
homogenous within job title   
- 95.7% of cases and  90.2% of controls were not exposed  
- 1.8% of cases and 3.5% of controls were exposed for <5 yrs  
- 0.7% of cases and 2.5% of controls were exposed for 5 -9 yrs  
- 1.8% of cases and 3.8% of controls were exposed for 10+ yrs  RR 
1.0 
0.5 (0.1 –  1.4) 
0.3 (0.1 –  1.4) 
0.5 (0.2 –  1.5) 156  
   68 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
ENDOMETRIAL CANCER  
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 599 of 66,028 women from the 
Nurses’ Health Study with 
invasive en dometrial 
adenocarcinoma  1982 -2004  - described previously  
- risk was assessed among all women  
- risk was adjusted for age, parity age at last birth, 
menarche, and menopause, OC and PMH use, BMI, smoking, diabetes, menopausal status, and family 
history of uterine cancer  
 
Limitations  
- single assessment of talc use (ever/never)  
- did not assess duration of talc use  Use of talc  
- 55.8% of cases reported never using talc perineally  
- 44.2% of cases reported ever using talc perineally  
- 66.3% of cases reported no regular perineal use of talc (1+/w k) 
- 33.7% of cases reported regular perineal use of talc  IRR 
1.0 
1.13 (0.96 – 1.33)  
1.0 
1.17 (0.99 – 1.40)  158 
   - risk assessed in premenopausal women (70 cases 
[11.7% of all women] were premenopausal)  
- risk was adjusted for age, parity, age at last birth, 
age at menarche, OC use, BMI, smoking, diabetes, and family history of uterine cancer  Talc use in premenopausal women  
- 67.1% of cases reported never using talc perineally  
- 32.9% of cases reported ever using talc perineally  
- 75.7% of cases reported no regular perineal use of talc (1+/wk)  
- 24.3% of cases reported regular perineal use of talc  
1.0 
0.69 (0.40 – 1.19)  
1.0 
0.77 (0.42 – 1.39)   
   - risk was assessed among post -menopausal women 
(529 cases [88.3% of all women] were post -meno -
pausal)  
- risk estimate was multivariate (as for all women) or 
adjusted by age  Talc use in post -menopausal women  
- 54.3% of cases reported never using talc perineally  
- 45.7% of cases reported ever using talc perineally  
- 65% of cases reported no regular perineal use of talc (1+/wk)  
- 35% of cases reported regular perineal use of talc Multivariate  
1.0 
1.21 (1.02 – 1.44)  
1.0 
1.24 (1.03 – 1.48)   
     
as above  Age-Adjusted  
1.0 
1.38 (1.16 – 1.64)  
1.0 
1.40 ((1.17 – 1.68)   
   - risk in post -menopausal women based on frequency 
of use and application to sanitary napkins  
-risk was adjusted multivariate (as above) or by age  Frequency of Use  
10.8% of cases reported perineal use of talc <1x/wk  
16.4% of cases reported perineal use of talc 1 -6x/wk  
18.5% of cases reported daily use of talc  Multivariate  
1.09 (0.81 – 1.45)  
1.28 (1.00 – 1.63)  
1.24 (0.98 – 1.56)   
     
as above  Age-Adjusted  
1.22 (0.91 – 1.62)  
1.40 (1.10 – 1.79)  
1.49 (1.18 – 1.87)   
    Sanitary napkin talc use  
- 85.7% of cases never used talc on sanitary napkins  
- 14.3% of controls used talc on sanitary napkins  Multivariate  
1.0 
0.98 (0.75 – 1.27)   
     
as above  Age-Adjusted  
1.0 
1.04 (0.80 – 1.35)    
   69 
 Table 9 . Epidemiological  Studies Evaluating Talc Exposure and Ovarian and Endometrial Cancer Risk     
Talc/Composition  Population/  
Geographical Area  Study/  
Diagnosis Yrs  Study Description  and Limitations  Findings  OR or RR  
(95% C.I.)  Reference  
talc; purity and 
composition not 
specified  - 1399 women in Australia with 
primary endometrial cancer 
(pop. based)  
- 740 controls  July 2005 - 
Dec 2007 - subjects were asked about medical, hormonal, and 
reproductive histories, other potential risk factors, and 
talc use  
- risk was adjusted for age, age at menarche, parity, 
pregnancies, OC use, hormone replacement therapy, BMI, and smoking status  
 
Limitation  
- non-participation, in that those who did not partici -
pate ma y have more advanced disease  
- non-differential misclassification of talc use  
- residual confounding may have distorted the results  Use of talc  
- 40.7% of cases and 41.5% of controls never used talc  
- 59.3% of cases and 58.5% of controls ever perineal tal c use  
- 71.9% of cases and 70.4% of controls reported ever upper body 
use 
 
Frequency of any perineal talc use  
- 5.1% of cases and 7.1% of controls reported infrequent use  
-9.1% of cases and 8.5% of controls reported use a few times/mo  
- 11% of cases and 7. 1% of controls reported use a few times/wk  
- 33.3% of cases and 35% of controls reported daily use  
- Ptrend (including non -talc users)  OR 
1.0 
0.88 (0.68 – 1.14)  
0.9 (0.71 – 1.14)  
  
 
0.68 (0.40 – 1.15)  
0.88 (0.56 - 1.41)  
1.32 (0.82 – 1.11)  
0.82 (0.61 – 1.14)  
0.44 164 
    Duration of any perineal talc use  
- 19% of cases and 16% of controls reported 1 -20 yrs use  
- 15.6% of cases and 11.2% of controls reported 21 -40 yrs use  
- 18.2% of cases and 18.8% of controls reported 41 -60 yrs use  
- 5% of cases and 11.2% of controls reported 61 -80 yrs use  
- Ptrend (including non -talc users)   
1.21 (0.84 – 1.75)  
1.1 (0.73 – 1.65)  
0.82 (0.57 – 1.17)  
0.25 (0.15 – 0.43)  
 <0.001   
    Frequency of any upper body talc use  
- 4.4% of cases and 6.6% of controls reported infrequent use  
- 6.9% of cases and 9.1% of controls reported use a few times/mo  
- 15.4% of cases and 10.1% of controls reported use a few 
times/wk  
- 45.1% of cases and 44.3% of controls reported daily use  
- trend (including non -talc users)   
0.57 (0.35 – 0.93)  
0.58 (0.38 – 0.89)  
1.45 (1.01 – 2.09)  
 
0.9 (0.70 – 1.16)   
    Duration of any upper body talc use  
- 20.7% of cases and 19.4% of controls reported 1 -20 yrs use  
- 16.9% of cases and 12.8% of controls reported 21 -40 yrs use  
- 23.6% of cases and 22.6% of controls reported 41 -60 yrs use  
- 9.3% of cases and 14% of controls re  
ported 61 -80 yrs use  
-Ptrend (including non -talc users)   
1.16 (0.85 – 1.58)  
1.12 (0.79 – 1.59)  
0.86 (0.64 – 1.17)  
0.41 (0.28 – 0.61)  
 
0.001   
   - risk was evaluated using a “composite” variable that 
multiplied frequency of talc use by years of use to 
assess lifetime exposure  
-resulting values were categorized as low (<5 yrs); 
moderate (5 -20 yrs); high (20 -40 yrs); very high use 
(40+ yrs)  Perineal talc use  
- 16.6% of cases and 15.6% of controls had low lifetime use  
- 12% of cases and 11.4% of controls had moderate lifetime use 
- 11.2% of cases and 8.6% of controls had high lifetime use  
-17.2% of cases and 20.9% of controls had very high lifetime use  
- Ptrend (including non -talc users)   
0.95 (0.65 – 1.37)  
1.0 (0.66 – 1.54)  
1.01 (0.64 – 1.60)  
0.67 (0.47 – 0.96)  
0.07  
    Upper body talc use  
- 13.5% of cases and 17% of controls had low lifetime use  
- 14.7% of cases and 13% of controls had moderate lifetime use  
- 16.5% of cases and 12.6% of controls had high lifetime use  
-25.8% of cases and 25.9% of controls had very high lifetime use  
- Ptrend (including non -talc users)   
0.72 (0.52 – 1.01)  
1.25 (0.87 – 1.78)  
1.07 (0.75 – 1.52)  
0.8 (0.59 – 1.07)  
0.49   
   70 
  
Abbreviations:  BMI = body mass index; C.I. = confidence interval ; CLE = cumulative lifetime exposure; HOPE = Hormone and Ovarian Cancer Prediction; HRT = hormone replacement therapy ; IRR = incidence rate 
ratios; NECC – New England Case Control; NSAID = non -steroidal anti- inflammatory drug; OC = oral contraceptive; OR = odds ratio; PMH = postmenopausal hormone; pop. = population; RR = relative risk  
 
Bolded text  was used to highlight statistically significant increases  
Italicized text was used to highlight statistically significant decreases  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 10.  Summary of case -control studies evaluating ovarian cancer risk for “ever” use of talc in the perineal area  
# Case subject  # Control subjects  Study Years  P/H cases  OR or RR  95% C.I.  Reference  
HOSPITAL -BASED CASES  
135 171 1974 -1977  H 0.7 0.4 – 1.1 155 
215 215 1978 -1981  H 1.92 1.27 – 2.89 146 
77 46 1981 -1985  H 1.7 0.7 - 3.9 167 
499 755 1982 -1995  H 1.0 0.8 – 1.3 173 
235 239 1984 -1987  H 1.5 1.0 – 2.1 154 
189 200 1989 -1991  H 1.05 0.28 – 3.98 170 
767 1367  1994 -1998  H 1.5 1.1 – 2.0 165 
153 101 1995 -1996  H 2.49 0.94 – 6.58 152 
POPULATION -BASED CASES  
116 158 1980 -1985  P 1.1 0.7 – 2.1 153 
112 224 1984 -1986  P 3.9 0.9 – 10.6 144 
313 422 1986 -1988  P 1.5 1.1 – 2.0 145 
450 564 1989 -1992  P 1.42 1.08 – 1.86 143 
824 860 1990 -1993  P 1.27 1.04 – 1.54 166 
563 523 1992 -1997  P 1.60 1.18 – 2.15 148 
668 721 1998 -2003  P 1.16 0.90 – 1.49 149 
609 688 1998 -2002  P 1.48 1.15 – 1.91 174 
83 134 1998 -2008  P 1.19 0.68 – 2.09 163 
550 553 1998 -2008  P 1.04 0.82 – 1.33 163 
256 1122  2000 -2001  P 1.37 1.02 – 1.85 162 
1576  1509  2002 -2005  P 1.17 1.01 – 1.36 161 
363 752 2002 -2005  P 1.10 0.84 – 1.45 157 
902 1802  2003 -2008  P 1.40 1.16 – 1.69 159 
 
  
   71 
 CHARTS  
 
Chart  1.  Odds ratio and confidence intervals in case -control studies evaluating ovarian cancer risk for “ever” use of talc in the perineal area  
 
 
 
References143-146,148,149,152- 155,157,159,161-163,165- 167,170,173,174  01234567891011Hospital-Based CasesHartge et al. 1983Cramer et al. 1982Rosenblatt et al. 1992Wong etal. 1999Harlow et al. 1992Tzonou et al. 1993Ness et al. 2000Godard et al. 1998Population-Based CasesHarlow and Weiss, 1989Chen et al 1992Cook et al. 1997Chang and Risch 1997Purdie et al, 1995Cramer et al. 1999Cramer et al. 2005Wu et al. 2009Moorman et al. 2009Moorman et al. 2009Mills et al. 2004Merritt et al. 2008Jordan et al. 2007Kurta et al. 2012OR 
   72 
 REFERENCES  
 
References  
 
 1.  Gottschalck TE and Breslawec HP. International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary and Handbook. 14  ed. Washington, DC: 
Personal Care Products Council, 2012.  
 2.  Nikitakis JM  and McEwen GN Jr (eds). CTFA Compendium of Cosmetic Ingredient Composition:  Specifications. Washington, 
DC: CTFA (now known as the Personal Care Products Council), 1990.  
 3.  Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff.  Medic al Glove Guidance 
Manual. http://www.fda.gov/d ownloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/ucm073
359.pdf?utm_campaign=Google2&utm_source=fdaSearch&utm_medium=website&utm_term=talc&utm_content=11 . 
Date Accessed 5 -10-2012.  
 4.  Wolfe SM and Gordon B. Letter from Public Citizen Health Research Group to the Food and Drug Administration with concern 
fo the use of talc in drugs and cosmetics. 8 -4-1978.  
 5.  Food and Drug Administration. Response from the FDA to Dr. Wolfe and Mr.Gordon regarding their letter of concern of the use 
of talc in drugs and cosmetics. 1 -11-1979.  
 6.  Food and Drug Administration. Response from Hthe FDA to Mr. Douillet regarding his petition requesting that cosmetic talbe be  
labeled with an asbesto warning.  Re:  Docket No. 83P -0404. 1986.  
 7.  Environment al Protection Agency (EPA). Health Assessment Document for Talc. Washington, DC, Office of Research and 
Development. 1992.  Report No. EPA 600/8-91/217.  
 8.  Stenbäck F and Rowland J. Role of talc and benzo(a)pyrene in respiratory tumor formation. An expe rimental study. Scandinavian 
journal of respiratory diseases .  1978;59(3):130-140.  
 9.  Stenbäck F, Wasenius V -M, and Rowland J. Alveolar and interstitial changes in silicate -associated lung tumors in Syrian 
hamster. Cancer Res Monogr .  1986;2:199- 213.  
 10.  National Toxicology Program (NTP). Toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of talc (CAS No. 14807-96 -6) in F344/N rats and 
B6C3F 1 mice.  (Inhalation studies). 1993.  Report No. NTP TR 421; NIH Publication No. 93- 3152.  
 11.  Carr CJ (Rapporteur). Talc: Consumer Uses and Health Perspectives. Proceedings of a workshop. Bethesda, Maryland, January 
31-February 1, 1994. Regulatory toxicology and pharmacology : RTP .  1995;21(2):211-215.  
 12.  Wehner AP. Is cosmetic talc "safe"? Com ments on Toxicology .  1998;6(5):337-366.  
 13.  Cashen JA, Epstein SS, and Deutsch ME. Citizen Petition Seeking Carcinogenic Labeling on All Cosmetic Talc 
Products. http://www.preven tcancer.com/press/petitions/nov17_94.htm . Date Accessed 5 -7-2012.  
 14.  Epstein SS. Petition seeking a cancer warning on cosmetic talc 
products. http://www.preve ntcancer.com/publications/pdf/FINAL_CitPetTalcOvCa_may138.pdf . Date Accessed 5 -7-
2012.  
 15.   National Toxicology Program; Call for Public Comments on 9 Substances Proposed for Listing in or Delisting from the Report 
on Carcinogens, Tenth Edition. Federal  Register .  4-5-2000;65(66):17889 -17891.  
 16.   National Toxicology Program (NTP); Report on Carcinogens; Status of Nominations to the 12th Report on Carcinogens (RoC); 
Request for Comments and Nominations of Scientific Experts. Federal Register .  10-18-2005;70(200):60548- 60554.  
 17.  National Toxicology Program (NTP). Report on carcinogens. Talc (cosmetic & occupational 
esposure). http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/inde x.cfm?objectid=03CA6E02- FBD5 -5C52- 9699F9DD00863ED7 . Date Accessed 
5-21-2012.  
 18.  World Health Organization (WHO) International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). Talc Not Containing Asbestiform 
Fibres.  In: IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans .  Vol. 93. Lyon, France: 
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC); 2010:277-413.   
   73 
  19.  Harvey AM. Talc. Lewis PA. In: Pigment Handbook: Properties and Economics .  Vol. 1. 2 ed.  1988:219 -225. 
 20.  United States Pharmacopei al (USP) Convention. 
Talc. http://www.usp.org/sites/default/files/usp_pdf/EN/USPNF/revisions/m80360talc.pdf .  USP Revision Bulletin. 
Date Accessed 4 -3-2012.  
 21.  Industrial Minerals Association -North America (IMA -NA) and EUROTALC. RE:  Scientific Literature Review:  Talc as Used in 
Cosmetics. 10 -19-2012.  
 22.  Muscat JE and Huncharek MS. Perineal talc use and ovarian cancer:  a critical review. European Journal of Cancer Prevention .  
2008;17:139-146.  
 23.  Rohl AN, Langer AM, Selikoff IJ, Tordini A, and Klimentidis R. Consumer talcums and powders: Mineral and chemical 
characterization. Journal of Toxicology and Evironmental Health.  1976;2:255- 284.  
 24.  Grexa RW and Parmentier CJ. Cosmetic talc properties and specifications. Cosmetics & Toiletries .  1979;94:29 -33.  
 25.  Ross M. A definition for talc. Levadie B. In: Definitions for Asbestos and Other Health -Related Silicates, ASTM STP 834 . ASTM 
STP 834 ed. P hiladelphia: American Society for Testing and Materials; 1984:193 -197.  
 26.  Zazenski R, Ashton WH, Briggs D, Chudkowski M, Kelse JW, MacEachern L, McCarthy EF, Nordhauser MA, Roddy MT, 
Teetsel NM, Wells AB, and Gettings SD. Talc:  Occurrence, characterization, and consumer applications. Regulatory 
Toxicology and Pharmacology .  1995;21:218 -229.  
 27.  Industrial Minerals Association - Europe (IMA -Europe). Fact Sheet on Talc. http://www.ima -
europe.eu/fileadmin/downloads/publications/factsheets/Talc_An- WEB -2011.pdf . Brussels, Belgium. Date Accessed 4 -
10-2012.  
 28.  Wild P. Lu ng cancer risk and talc not containing asbestiform fibres: a review of the epidemiological evidence. Occup Environ 
Med.  2006;63:4 -9.  
 29.  EUROTALC. Physico -chemical properties of talc. http://www.eurotalc.eu/physico -chemical.html .  Brussels, Belgium. Brussels, 
Belgium. Date Accessed 4 -10-2012.  
 30.  Nikitakis JM and McEwen GN Jr (eds). CTFA Compendium of Cosmetic Ingredient Composition:  Specifications. Washington, 
DC: CTFA (now known as the P ersonal Care Products Council), 1989.  
 31.  Nikitakis JM and McEwen GN Jr (eds). CTFA Method J 4 -1.  Asbestiform amphibole minerals in cosmetic talc.  In: Cosmetic 
Ingredient Test Methods . Washington, DC: Cosmetic, Toiletery and Fragrance Association (now known as the Personal 
Care Products Council); 1990:  
 32.  IMA -NA and EUROTALC. Re: Safety Assesment for Talc as Used in Cosmetics: Tentative Report for Public Comments. 2 -18-
2013.  
 33.  Nikitakis JM and McEwen GN Jr (eds). CTFA Method J 5 -1.  Free crystal line silica (quartz) in talc.  (DTA method). 
Washington, DC: Cosmetic, Toiletery and Fragrance Association; 1990:  
 34.  Nikitakis JM and McEwen GN Jr (eds). CTFA Method J 6 -1.  Free crystalline silica (quartz) in talc.  (X -ray diffraction method). 
Washingt on, DC: Cosmetic, Toilertry and Fragrance Association (now known as the Personal Care Products Council); 
1990:  
 35.  Krause JB and Ashton WH. Misidentification of asbestos in talc.  Proceedings of the Workshop on Asbestos: Definitions and 
measurement metho ds held at NBS: Gaithersburg, MD. 1978.  
 36.   Food Chemicals Codex. 8 ed. Rockville, MD: United States Pharmacopeia (USP), 2012.  
 37.  Caneer WT. Meeting with Bowling Green State University geological staff. 6 -8-1973.  
 38.  Weissler A. 7 -31-1973. Summary and comments on Prof. Lewin's analytical results for asbestos in talc.   
 39.  Lewin SZ. Determination of asbestos contents of commercial talcum powders. 1973.   
   74 
  40.  Taylor LL. Request for quantitative analysis of risk from potential exposure to asbestos from cosmetic talc use.  FDA memo. 11 -
15-1984.  
 41.  Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Talc in Cosmetics. N:\CIR\New N Drive \Production \Talc\Talc Preliminary Data \FDA - 
X\Selected Cosmetic Ingredients  Talc in Cosmetics.ht m. Date Accessed 4 -4-2012.  
 42.  Anonymous. 3-3 -2013. Sample Certificate of Analysis. 1 pages.  
 43.  Barretts Minerals Inc. 3 -3-2013. Certificate of Analysis. 1 pages.  
 44.  Piniazkiewic RJ, McCarthy EF, and Genco NA. Talc. Carr DD. In: Industrial Miner als and Rocks . 6 ed. Littleton, CO: Society 
of Mining, Metallurgy, and Exploration; 1994:1049-1069.  
 45.  Schlossman ML. Cosmetic Powders. Chapter: 11. Schlossman ML. In: The Chemistry and Manufacture of Cosmetics .  Vol. II. 
Formulating. 4 ed. Carol Stream , IL: Allured Publishing Corporation; 2009:411-419.  
 46.  Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Frequency of use of cosmetic ingredients.  FDA Database.  2013.  
 47.  Personal Care Products Council. 1 -21-2010. Updated Concentration of Use Talc. 4 pages.  
 48.  Personal Care Products Council. 8 -2-2012. Concentration of use by FDA Product Category: Talc Use in Spray Products. 2 pages.  
 49.  Personal Care Products Council. 10 -15-2012. Comments on the Scientific Literature Review on Talc. 4 pages.  
 50.  Bremmer HJ, Prud'homme de Lodder LCH, and Engelen JGM. Cosmetics Fact Sheet: To assess the risks for the consumer; 
Updated version for ConsExpo 4. 2006.  Report No. RIVM 320104001/2006. pp. 1- 77. 
 51.  Johnsen MA. The influence of particle size. Spray Technology a nd Marketing.  2004;November:24-27.  
 52.  Rothe H, Fautz R, Gerber E, Neumann L, Rettinger K, Schuh W, and Gronewold C. Special aspects of cosmetic spray safety 
evaluations:  Principles on inhalation risk assessment. Toxicol Lett .  2011;205(2):97-104.  
 53.  Rothe H. Special Aspects of Cosmetic Spray Evalulation. 9 -26-2011.  
 54.  Aylott RI, Byrne GA, Middleton JD, and Roberts ME. Normal use levels of respirable cosmetic talc: preliminary study. 
International Journal of Cosmetic Science .  1979;1(3):177-18 6.  
 55.  Health Canada. Cosmetic Ingredient Hotlist - March 2011. http://www.hc -sc.gc.ca/cps -spc/cosmet -person/indust/hot -list-
critique/hotl ist-liste -eng.php#T . Date Accessed 9 -9-2012.  
 56.  Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Priority NDA and BLA approvals in 
2003. http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/DrugandBiologi
cApprovalReports/Priorit yNDAandBLAApprovals/ucm051244.htm?utm_campaign=Google2&utm_source=fdaSearch
&utm_medium=website&utm_term=talc&utm_content=16 .  Food and Drug Administration. Date Accessed 5-10- 2012.  
 57.  Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Guuidance for Industry and FDA S taff.  Medical Glove Guidance 
Manual. http://w ww.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/ucm073
359.pdf?utm_campaign=Google2&utm_source=fdaSearch&utm_medium=website&utm_term=talc&utm_content=11 . 
Date Accessed 5 -10-2012.  
 58.  Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Foo d Additives (JEFCA). Evaluation of certain food additives and contaminants.  
Thirtieth report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives. WHO Technical Report Series 
751. http://whqlibdoc.who.int/trs/WHO_TRS_751.pdf . Geneva. Date Accessed 3 -23-2012.  
 59.  The Merck Index. The Merck Index. 14  ed. Merck,Sharp & Dohme Corporation, 2012.  
 60.  Hildick -Smith GY. The biology of talc. British Journal of Industrial Medicine .  1976;33(217):229.  
 61.  Wehner AP, Wilderson CL, Cannon WC, Buschbom RL, and Tanner TM. Pulmonary deposition, translocation and clearance of 
inhaled neutron-activated talc in hamsters. Fd Cosmet Toxicol .  1977;15:213-224.  
 62.  Wehner AP, Tanner TM, and Buschbom RL. Abs orption of ingested talc by hamsters. Fd Cosmet Toxicol .  1977;15:453-455.   
   75 
  63.  Phillips JC, YOung PJ, Hardy K, and Gangolli SC. Studies on the absorption and disposition of 3H-labelled talc in the rat, mouse, 
guinea -pig and rabbit. Fd Cosmet Toxicol .  1978;16:161-163.  
 64.  Werebe EC, Pazetti R, Milanez de Campos JR, Fernandez PP, Capelozzi VL, Jatene FB, and Vargas FS. Systemic distribution of 
talc after intrapleural administration in rats. Chest .  1999;115:190-193.  
 65.  Litton Bionetics, Inc. Mu tagenic evaluation of compound FDA 71- 43, talc. 12 -9-1974.  Report No. FDABF -GRAS -302.  
 66.  Motomatsu K, Adachi H, and Uno T. Two infant deaths after inhaling baby powder. Chest .  1979;75:448-450.  
 67.  Hamilton TC, Fox H, Buckley CH, Henderson WJ, and Griffiths K. Effect of talc on the rat ovary. Br J Exp Pathol .  
1984;65:101-106.  
 68.  Styles JA and Tabershaw IR. Comparison between in vitro toxicity of polymer and mineral dusts and their fibrinogenicity. Ann 
Occup Hyg .  1973;16:241- 250.  
 69.  Kang N, Griffin D, and Ellis H. The pathological effects of glove and condom dusting powders. Journal of Applied Toxicology .  
1992;12(6):443- 449.  
 70.  Buz'Zard AR and Lau BHS. Pycnogenol® reduces talc-induced neoplastic transformation in human ovarian ce ll cultures. 
Phytother Res .  2007;21:579-586.  
 71.  Chamberlain M and Brown RC. The cytotoxic effects of asbestos and other mineral dust in tissue culture cell lines. Br J Exp 
Pathol .  1978;58:183 -189.  
 72.  Davies R, Skidmore JW, Griffiths DM, and Moncr ieff CB. Cytotoxicity of talc for macrophages in vitro . Fd Cosmet Toxicol .  
1983;21(2):201- 207.  
 73.  Henderson WJ, Blundell G, Richards R, Hext PM, Volcani BE, and Griffiths K. Ingestion of talc particles by cultured lung 
fibroblasts. Environmental research .  1975;9:173- 178.  
 74.  Lee P, Sun L, Lim CK, Aw SE, and Colt HG. Selective apoptosis of lung cancer cells with talc. European Respiratory Journal .  
2010;35(2):450- 452.  
 75.  Nasreen N, Hartman DL, Mohammed KA, and Antony VB. Talc-induced expression of C -C and C -X-C chemokines and 
intercellular adhesin molecule-1 in mesothelial cells. Am J Respir Crit Care Med .  1998;158:971- 978.  
 76.  Nasreen N, Mohammed KA, Dowling PA, Ward MJ, Galffy G, and Antony VB. Talc induces apoptosis in human malignant 
meso thelioma cells in vitro . Am J Respir Crit Care Med .  2000;161:595 -600.  
 77.  Shukla A, MacPherson MB, Hillegass J, Ramos -Nino ME, Alexeeva V, Vacek PM, Bond JP, Pass HI, Steele C, and Mossman 
BT. Alterations in gene expression in human mesothelial cells c orrelate with mineral pathogenicity. Am J Respir Cell 
Mol Biol .  2009;41:114-123.  
 78.  Wadaan MAM. Effects of repeated exposure to talcum powder on rabbit skin. Indian J Appl Pure Biol .  2009;24(1):111-115.  
 79.  Wagner JC, Berry G, Cooke TJ, Hill RJ, P ooley FD, and Skidmore JW. Animal experiments with talc. Inhaled particles .  1975;4 
Pt 2:647 -654.  
 80.  Pickrell JA, Snipes MB, Benson JM, Hanson RL, Jones RK, Carpenter RL, Thompson JJ, Hobbs CH, and Brown SC. Talc 
deposition and effects after 20 days of  repeated inhalation exposure of rats and mice to talc. Environmental research .  
1989;49(2):233- 245.  
 81.  Wehner AP, Zwicker GM, Cannon WC, Watson CR, and Carlton WW. Inhalation of talc baby powder by hamsters. Fd Cosmet 
Toxicol .  1977;15:121 -129.  
 82.  Keskin N, Teksen YA, Ongun EG, Özay, and Saygih H. Does long -term talc exposure have a carcinogenic effect on the female 
genital system of rats?  An experimental pilot study. Arch Gynecol Obstet .  2009;280(6):925-931.  
 83.  Dogra RKS, Iyer PKR, Shanker R, and Zaidi SH. Effect of talc injected intravenously in guinea pigs. Toxicology .  1977;7:197 -
206.   
   76 
  84.  European Commission. IUCLID Dataset.  Substance ID: 14807-96-6 (Talc). http://esis.jrc.ec.europa.eu/doc/existing -
chemicals/IUCLID/data_sheets/14807966.pdf . Date Accessed 3 -26-2012.  
 85.  Lyon F and Taylor RH. Conjunctival granuloma caused by surgical talc. J AAPOS .  2007;11(4):402 -403.  
 86.  Lázaro C, R eichelt C, Lázaro, and Carapeto FJ. Foreign body post -varicella granulomas due to talc. JEADV .  2006;20:75- 78.  
 87.  Tye MJ, Hashimoto K, and Fox F. Talc granulomas of the skin. J Am Med Assoc .  1966;198(13):1370-1372.  
 88.  National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). International Chemical Safety Card.  Talc (silcia and fibre 
free). http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/ipcsneng/neng0329.html . Date Accessed  3-23-2012.  
 89.  Green FHY. Pulmonary responses to inhaled poorly soluble particulate in the human. Inhalation Toxicology .  2000;12(1-2):59-
95.  
 90.  Feigin DS. Misconceptins regarding the pathogenicity of silica and silicates. J Thorac Imag.  1989;4(1):68-80.  
 91.  Rubino GF, Scansetti G, Piolatto G, and Romano C. Mortality studies of talc miners and millers. Journal of Occupational 
Medicine.  1976;18:186 -196.  
 92.  Coggiola M, Bosio D, Pira E, Piolatto PG, La Vecchia C, Negri E, Michelazzi M, and Bacaloni A. An update of a mortality study 
of talc miners and millers in Italy. Am J Ind Med .  2003;44:63-69.  
 93.  Rubino GF, Scansetti G, and Piolatto G. Mortality and morbidity amont talc miners and millers in Italy. Dement JM and Lemen 
R. In:  Dusts and Disease . Park Forest South, IL: Pathotox; 1979:357-363.  
 94.  Wergeland E, Andersen A, and Baerheim A. Morbidity and mortality in talc -exposed workers. Am.J.Ind.Med.  1990;17(4):505-
513.  
 95.  Katsnelson BA and Molronosova KA. Non-fibrous miner al dusts and malignant tumors: An epidemiological study of mortality. J 
Occup Med .  1979;21(1):15-20.  
 96.  Leophonte P and Didier A. French talc pneumonoconiosis. Bignon J. In: Health Effects of Phyllosoilicates . Berlin Heidelberg: 
Springer -Verlag; 1990: 203-209.  
 97.  Selevan SG, Dement JM, Wagoner JK, and Froines JR. Mortality patterns among miners and millers of non-asbestiform talc:  
Preliminary report. J Environ Pathol Toxicol .  1979;2:273- 284.  
 98.  Wild P, Leodolter K, Refregier M, Schmidt H, Zidek  T, and Haidinger G. A cohort mortality and nested case -control study of 
French and Austrian talc workers. Occup Environ Med.  2002;59:98 -105.  
 99.  Vallyathan NV and Craighead JE. Pulmonary pathology in workers exposed to nonasbestiform talc. Hum Pathol .  1981;12(1):28-
35.  
 100.  Thomas TL and Stewart PA. Mortality from lung cancer and respiratory disease among pottery workers exposed to silica and 
talc. Am.J.Epidemiol.   1987;125(1):35-43.  
 101.  Thomas TL. Lung cancer mortality among pottery workers in the United States. IARC Sci Pub .  1990;97:75- 81.  
 102.  Fine LJ, Peters JM, Burgess WA, and Berardinis LJ. Studies of respiratory morbidity in rubber workers.  Part IV.  Respiratory  
morbidity in talc workers. Arch Environ Health .  1976;31:195-200.  
 103.  Gamble J, Greife A, and Hancock J. An epidemiologica-industrial hygiene study of talc workers. Ann Occup Hyg .  1982;26(1 -
4):841- 859.  
 104.  Wegman DH, Peters JM, Boundy MG, and Smith TJ. Evaluation of repiratory effects in miners and millers exposed to talc free 
of asbestos and silica. British Journal of Industrial Medicine .  1982;39(233):238.  
 105.  Wild P, Réfrégier M, Auburtin G, Carton B, and Moulin J -J. Survey of the respiratory heatlh of the workers of a talc producing 
factory. Occup Environ Med.  1995;52:470-477.   
   77 
  106.  Wild P, Leodolter K, Réfrégier M, Schmidt H, and Bourgkard E. Effects of talc dust on repiratory health:  results of a 
longitudinal survey of 378 French and Austrian talc workers. Occup Environ Med.  2008;65:261 -267.  
 107.  Russell RS, Merz RD, Sherman WT, and Sivertson JN. The determination of respirable particles in talcum powder. Fd Cosmet 
Toxicol .  1979;17:117 -122.  
 108.  Ong TH and Takano A. Severe endobronchitis and airway stricture caused by inhalation of cosmetic tal c. Chest .  
2012;142(2):511-513.  
 109.  Tukiainen P, Nickels J, Taskinen E, and Nyberg M. Pulmonary granulomatous reaction: ralc pneumoconiosis or chronic 
sarcoidosis? British Journal of Industrial Medicine .  1984;41:84 -87.  
 110.  Wells IP, Dubbins PA, an d Whimster WF. Pulmonary disease caused by the inhalation of cosmetic talcum powder. British 
Journal of Radiology .  1979;52:586- 588.  
 111.  van Huisstede A, Noordhoek HV, Ote -Holler I, Looijen -Salamon M, and Rudolphus A. Talcosis due to abundant use of cosmetic 
talcum powder. Eur Respir Rev .  2010;116:165- 168.  
 112.  Nam K and Gracey DR. Pulmonary talcosis from cosmetic talcum powder. JAMA .  1972;221(5):492 -493.  
 113.  Goldbach PD, Mohsenifar Z, Abraham JL, Young WI, and Merrill WD. Talcum powder pneumoc oniosis. The Western Journal 
of Medicine .  1982;136(5):439- 442.  
 114.  Cruthirds TP, Cole FH, and Paul RN. Pulmonary talcosis as a result of massive aspiration of babypowder. Southern Medical 
Journal .  1977;70(5):626-628.  
 115.  Matina F, Collura M, Magg io MC, Vitulo P, Lo Piparo C, and Corsello G. Inhaled surfactant in the treatment of accidental talc 
powder inhalation: a new case report. Italian journal of pediatrics .  2011;37:47- 49.  
 116.  Pairaudeau PW, Wilson RG, Hall MA, and Milne M. Inhalation of baby powder:  an unappreciated hazard. BMJ .  1991;302(May 
18):12001201.  
 117.  Pfenninger J and D'Apuzzo V. Powder aspiratoinin children. Arch Dis Child .  1977;52(2):157- 159.  
 118.  Reyes de la Rocha S and Brown, M. A. Normal pulmonary function after baby powder inhalation causing adult respiratory 
distress syndrome. Pediatric emergency care.  1989;5(1):43- 48.  
 119.  Food and Drug Research Labs., Inc. Teratologic evaluation of FDA 71-43 (talc).  (Testing done in mice, rats, and hamsters). 1 -8-
1973.  
 120.  Food and Drug Research Labs., Inc. Teratologic evaluation of FDA 71-43 (talc). 7 -31-1973.  Report No. NTIS PB -223 828.  
 121.  Endo -Capron S, Fleury -Feith J, Nebut M, De Neef R, and  Jaurand MC. Some in vivo and in vitro studies carried out with talc 
samples. NATO ASI Series, Series G.  1990;21(Health Related Effects of Phyllosilicates):369 -375.  
 122.  Endo -Capron S, Renier A, Janson X, Kheuang L, and Jaurand MC. in vitro  response of  rat pleural mesothelial cells to talc 
samples in genotoxicity assays (sister chromatid exchanges and DNA repair). Toxic in Vitro .  1993;7(1):7- 14.  
 123.  Goodman JI. An analysis of the National Toxicology Program's (NTP) technical report (NTP TR 421) on the toxicology and 
carcinogenesis studes of talc. Regulatory toxicology and pharmacology : RTP .  1995;21:244 -249.  
 124.  Oberdörster G. The NTP talc inhalation study:  A critical appraisal focused on lung particle overload. Regulatory toxicology and 
pharm acology : RTP .  1995;21:241233 -241.  
 125.  Olin SS. The relevance of the rat lung response to particle overload for human risk assessment: a workshop consensus report. 
ILSI risk science institute workshop participants. Inhalation Toxicology .  2000;12(1 -2):1-17.  
 126.  Wehner AP. Cosmetic talc should not be listed as a carcinogen:  Caomment on the NTP's deliberations to list talc as a carcino gen. 
Regul Toxicol Pharmacol .  2002;36:40- 50.  
 127.  Özesmi M, Patiroglu TE, Hillerdal G, and Özesmi C. Peritoneal mesothelioma and malignant lymphoma in mice cause by fibrous 
zeolite. Brithish Journal of Industrial Medicine .  1985;42:746 -749.   
   78 
  128.  Pott F, Huth F, and Friedrichs KH. Tumorigenic effect of fibrous dusts in experimental animals. Environmental Health 
Perspectives .  1974;9:313- 315.  
 129.  Wehner AP, Hall AS, Weller RE, Lepel EA, and Schirmer RE. Do particles translocate from the vagina to the oviducts and 
beyond?`. Fd Chem Toxicol .  1985;23(3):367-372.  
 130.  Edelstam GAB, Sjösten ACE, and Ellis H. Retrograde migration of starch in the genital tract of rabbits. Inflammation .  
1997;21(5):489- 499.  
 131.  Egli GE and Newton M. The transport of carbon particles in the human female reproductive tract. Fertil.Steril.   1961;12(2):151-
155.  
 132.  de Boer CH. Transport of particulate matter through the human female genital tract. J Reprod Fert .  1972;28:295 -297.  
 133.  Venter PF and Iturralde M. Migration of a particulate radioactive tracer from the vagina to the peri toneal cavity and ovaries. S Afr 
Med J .  1979;55:917 -919.  
 134.  Sjösten ACE, Ellis H, and Edelstam GAB. Retrograde migration of glove powder in the human female genital tract. Human 
Reproduction.  2004;19(4):991-995.  
 135.  Zervomanolakis I, Ott HW, Had ziomerovic D, Mattle V, Seeber BE, Virgolini I, Heute D, Kissler S, Leyendecker G, and Wildt 
L. Physiology of upward transport in the human female genital tract. Ann NY Acad Sci .  2007;1101:1-20.  
 136.  Henderson WJ, Hamilton TC, Baylis MC, Pierrepoint CG , and Griffiths K. The demonstration of the migration of talc from the 
vagina and posterior uterus to the ovary in the rat. Environmental research .  1986;40:247 -250.  
 137.  Wehner AP and Weller RE. On talc translocation from the vagina to the oviducts and  beyond. Fd Chem Toxicol .  
1986;24(4):329- 338.  
 138.  Henderson WJ, Joslin CAF, Turnbull AC, and Griffiths K. Talc and carcinoma of the ovary and cervix. J Obstet Gynaecol Br 
Commonw .  1971;78:266 -272.  
 139.  Mostafa SAM, Bargeron CB, Flower RW, Rosenshe in NB, Parmley TH, and Woodruff JD. Foreign body granulomas in normal 
ovaries. Obstet Gynecol .  1985;66(5):701- 702.  
 140.  Heller DS, Westhoff C, Gordon RE, and Katz M. The relationship between perineal cosmetic talc usage and ovarian talc particle 
burden. Am J Obstet Gynecol .  1996;174:1507 -1510.  
 141.  Cramer DW, Welch WR, Berkowitz RS, and Godleski JJ. Presence of talc in pelvic lymph nodes of a woman with ovarian cancer 
and long -term genital exposure to cosmetic talc. Obstet Gynecol .  2007;110(2 Pt 2) :498-501.  
 142.  Booth M, Beral V, and Smith P. Risk factors for ovarian cancer: a case-control study. Br J Cancer .  1989;60:592-598.  
 143.  Chang S and Risch HA. Perineal talc exposure and risk of ovarian carcinoma. Cancer .  1997;79:2396-2401.  
 144.  Chen Y, Wu P -C, Lang J -H, Ge W -J, Hartge P, and Brinton LA. Risk factors for epithelial ovarian cancer in Beijing, China. Int J 
Epidemiol .  1992;21(1):23- 29.  
 145.  Cook LS, Kamb ML, and Weiss NS. Perineal powder exposure and the risk of ovarian cancer. A m J Epidemiol .  
1997;145(5):459-465.  
 146.  Cramer DW, Welch WR, Scully RE, and Wojciechowski CA. Ovarian cancer and talc.  A case- control study. Cancer .  
1982;50:372-376.  
 147.  Cramer DW and Xu H. Epidemiologic evidence for uterine growth factors in the pathogenesis of ovarian cancer. Ann Epidemiol .  
1995;5:310- 314.  
 148.  Cramer DW, Liberman RF, Titus -Ernstoff L, Welch WR, and Greenberg ER. Genital talc exposure and risk of ovarian cancer. Int 
J Cancer .  1999;81:351-356.   
   79 
  149.  Cramer DW, Titus -Ernst off L, McKolanis JR, Welch WR, Vitois AF, Berkowitz RS, and Finn OJ. Conditions associated with 
antibodies against the tumor -associated antigen MUC1 and their relationship to risk for ovarian cancer. Cancer 
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev .  2005;14(5):1125- 1131.   
 150.  Gates MA, Tworoger SS, Terry KL, Titus -Ernstoff L, Rosner B, De Vivo I, Cramer DW, and Hankinson SE. Talc use, variants of 
the GSTM1, GSTT1,  and NAT2  genes, and risk of epithelial ovarian cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev .  
2008;17(9):2436-2444.  
 151.  Gertig DM, Hunter DJ, Cramer DW, Colditz GA, Speizer FE, Willett WC, and Hankinson SE. Prospective study of talc use and 
ovarian cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst .  2000;92(3):249- 252.  
 152.  Godard B, Foulkes WD, Provencher D, Brunet J -S, Tonin PN, Mes -Masson A -M, Narod SA, and Ghadirian P. Risk factors for 
familial and sproradic ovarian cancer among French Canadians: A case-control study. Am J Obstet Gynecol .  
1998;179:403- 410.  
 153.  Harlow  BL and Weiss NS. A case -control study of borderline ovarian tumors: The influence of perineal exposure to talc. Am J 
Epidemiol .  1989;130(2):390- 394.  
 154.  Harlow BL, Cramer DW, Bell DA, and Welch WR. Perineal exposure to talc and ovarian cancer risk. O bstet Gynecol .  
1992;80:19- 26.  
 155.  Hartge P, Hoover R, Lesher LP, and McGowan L. Talc and ovarian cancer. JAMA .  10-14-1983;250(14):1844.  
 156.  Hartge P and Stewart P. Occupational and ovarian cancer: A case-control study in the Washington, DC, metropolitan area, 1978 -
1981. J Occup Med .  1994;36(8):924 -927.  
 157.  Jordan SJ, Green AC, Whiteman DC, and Webb PM. Risk factors for benign serous and mucinous epithelial ovarian tumors. 
Obstet Gynecol .  2007;109(3):647-654.  
 158.  Karageorgi S, Gates MA, Hankinson SE, and De Vivo I. Perineal use of talcum powder and endometrial cancer risk. Cancer 
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev .  2010;19(5):1269- 1275.  
 159.  Kurta ML, Moysich KB, Weissfeld JL, Youk AO, Bunker CH, Edwards RP, Modugno F, Ness RB, and Diergaarde B.  Use of 
fertility drugs and risk of ovarian cancer:  Results from a US -based case-control study. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers 
Prev. 6 -15-2012.  cebp.aacrjournals.orgDate Accessed 6 -24-2012  
 160.  Langseth H and Kjærheim K. Ovarian cancer and occupational ex posure among pulp and paper employees in Norway. Scand J 
Work Environ Health.  2004;30(5):356-361.  
 161.  Merritt MA, Green AC, Nagle CM, Webb PM, Australian Cancer Study (Ovarian Cancer), and Australian Ovarian Cancer Study 
Group. Talcum powder, chronic pelvic inflammation and NSAIDs in relation to risk of epithelial ovarian cancer. Int J 
Cancer .  2008;122:170- 176.  
 162.  Mills PK, Riordan DG, Cress RD, and Young HA. Perineal talc exposure and epithelial ovarian cancer risk in the Central Valley  
of Calif ornia. Int J Cancer .  2004;112:458 -464.  
 163.  Moorman OG, Palmieri RT, Akushevich L, Berchuck A, and Schildkraut JM. Ovarian cancer risk factors in African -American 
and white women. Am J Epidemiol .  2009;170:598-606.  
 164.  Neill AS, Nagle CM., Spurdle AB, and Webb PM. Use of talcum powder and endometrial cancer risk. Cancer Causes Control .  
2012;23(3):513- 519.  
 165.  Ness RB, Grisso JA, Cottreau C, Klapper J, Vergona R, Wheeler JE, Morgan M, and Schlesselman JJ. Factors related to 
inflammation of the o varian epithelium and risk of ovarian cancer. Epidemiology .  2000;11:111-117.  
 166.  Purdie D, Green A, Bain C, Siskind V, Ward B, Hacker N, Quinn M, Wright G, Russell P, and Susil B. Reproductive and other 
factors ans risk of epithelial ovarian cancer: A n Australian case- control study. Int J Cancer .  1995;62:678 -684.  
 167.  Rosenblatt KA, Szklo M, and Rosenshein NB. Mineral fiber exposure and the development of ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol .  
1992;45:20- 25.  
 168.  Rosenblatt KA, Weiss NS, Cushing -Haugen  KL, Wicklund KG, and Rossing MA. Genital powder exposure and the risk of 
epithelial ovarian cancer. Cancer Causes Control .  2011;22:737-742.   
   80 
  169.  Shushan A, Paltiel O, Iscovich J, Elchalal U, Peretz T, and Schenker JG. Human menopausal gonadotropin and  the risk of 
epithelial ovarian cancer. Fertil.Steril.   1996;65(1):13- 18.  
 170.  Tzonou A, Polychronopoulou A, Hsieh C -C, Rebelakos A, Karakatsani A, and Trichopoulos D. Hair dyes, analgesics, 
tranquilizers and perineal talc application as risk factors of  ovarian cancer. Int J Cancer .  1993;55:408 -410.  
 171.  Vitonis AF, Titus -Ernstoff L, and Cramer DW. Assessing ovarian cancer risk when considering elective oophorectomy at the 
time of hysterectomy. Obstet Gynecol .  2011;117(5):1042- 1050.  
 172.  Whittemore AS, Wu ML, Paffenbarger RS Jr, Sarles DL, Kampert JB, Grosser S, Jung DL, Ballon S, and Hendrickson M. 
Personal and enviromental characteristics related to epithelial ovarian cancer. Am J Epidemiol .  1988;128(6):1228-
1240.  
 173.  Wong C, Hempli ng RE, Piver S, Natarajan N, and Mettlin CJ. Perineal talc exposure and subsequent epithelial ovarian cancer: A 
case-control study. Obstet Gynecol .  1999;93:372 -376.  
 174.  Wu AH, Pearce CL, Tseng C -C, Templeman C, and Pike MC. Markers of inflammation and risl of ovarian cancer in Los Angeles 
County. Int J Cancer .  2009;124:1409- 1415.  
 175.  Henderson WJ, Melville -Jones C, Wilson DW, and Griffiths K. Oxygen incineration and electron microscope x -ray 
microanalysis of mineral particles in biological tissues. J.Histochem.Cytochem.   1978;26(12):1087- 1093.  
 176.  Henderson WJ, Hamilton TC, and Griffiths K. Talc in normal and malignant ovarian tissue. Lancet .  3-3-1979;1(8114):499.  
 177.  Kelly WG. 10 -19-2012. Initial comments on CIR draft Scientific Literature Review for "Talc as Used in Cosmetics" (posted by 
CIR Aug. 22, 2012).   
 178.  Carr CJ. Talc: Consumer uses and health perspectives. Regulatory toxicology and pharmacology :  RTP.  1995;21:211- 215.  
 179.  Wehner AP, Hall AS, Weller RE, Lepel EA, and Schirmer RE. Do particles translocate from the vagina to the oviducts and 
beyond? Fd Chem Toxicol .  1985;23(3):367- 372.  
 180.  Wehner AP and Wilkerson CL. Determination of pulmonary deposition, translocation and clearance using neutron activation 
techniques. Z.Erkr.Atmungsorgane.   1981;157(3):238- 246.  
 181.  Wehner AP, Wilerson CL, and Stevens DL. Lung clearance of neutron-activated Mount St. Helens volcanic ash in the rat. 
Envir onmental research .  1984;35(1):211-217.  
 182.  Wehner AP. Cosmetic talc should not be listed as a carcinogen:  Comment on the NTP's deliberations to list talc as a carcinog en. 
Regulatory toxicology and pharmacology : RTP .  2002;36:40 -50.  
 183.  Wehner AP , Wilkerson CL, Mahaffey JA, and Milliman EM. Fate of inhaled fly ash in hamsters. Environmental research .  
1980;22(2):485- 498.  
 184.  Wilkerson CL, Wehner AP, and Rancitelli LA. Leaching of radionuclides from neutronactivated talc in serum and in dilute 
hydrochloric acid. Food Cosmet.Toxicol.   1977;15(6):589- 593.  
 185.  Bolles TF, Kobiatowicz DO, Evans RL, Grotenhuis IM, and Nora JC. 99mTC-Labeled albumin (human) microspheres.  
Procedings of the Symposium on New Developments in Radiopharmaceuticals and L abeled Compounds (March 26-
30). 1973.  
 186.  Wehner AP. Talc: An overview. Comments on Toxicology .  1998;6(5 (Special Issue: Talc)):309 -311.  
 187.  Hankinson SE, Hunter DJ, Colditz GA, Willett WC, Stampfer MJ, Rosner B, Hennekens CH, and Speizer FE. Tuba l ligation, 
hysterectomy, and risk of ovarian cancer. A prospective study. JAMA .  12-15-1993;270(23):2813- 2818.  
 188.  Shapiro S. Bias in the evaluation of low -magnitude associations: an empirical perspective. Am J Epidemiol .  2000;151(10):939-
945.  
 189.  Taubes G. Epidemiology faces its limits. Science.  1995;269(5221):164 -169.   
   81 
  190.  Muscat JE and Barish M. Epidemiology of talc exposure: A critical assessment. Comments on Toxicology .  1998;6(5 (Special 
Issue: Talc)):327 -335.  
 191.  Rothman K. Causal i nference in epidemiology. Chapter: 2.  In: Modern Epidemiology . Boston: Little Brown and Co.; 1986:7-21.  
 192.  Tortolero -Luna G, Mitchell MF, and Rhodes -Morris HE. Epidemiology and screening of ovarian cancer. 
Obstet.Gynecol.Clin.North Am.   1994;21(1):1-2 3.  
 193.  Huncharek M, Muscat J, Onitilo A, and Kupelnick B. Use of cosmetic talc on contraceptive diaphragms and risk of ovarian 
cancer: a meta-analysis of nine observational studies. Eur J Cancer Prev.   2007;16(5):422 -429.  
 194.  Huncharek M and Muscat  J. Perineal talc use and ovarian cancer risk: a case study of scientific standards in environmental 
epidemiology. Eur.J.Cancer Prev.   2011;20(6):501- 507.  
 195.  Gross, A. J. and Berg, P. H. A meta -analytical approach examining the potential relationship between talc exposure and ovarian 
cancer. J Expo.Anal.Environ Epidemiol.   1995;5(2):181-195.  
 196.  Huncharek M, Geschwind JF, and Kupelnick B. Perineal applicati on of cosmetic talc and risk of invasive epithelial ovarian 
cancer: a meta-analysis of 11,933 subjects from sixteen observational studies. Anticancer Res.   2003;23(2C):1955-
1960.  
 197.  Langseth H, Hankinson SE, Siemiatycki J, and Weiderpass E. Perineal u se of talc and risk of ovarian cancer. 
J.Epidemiol.Community Health.   2008;62(4):358- 360.  
 198.  Greenland S. Quantitative methods in the review of epidemiologic literature. Epidemiol Rev .  1987;9:1- 30.  
 199.  Muscat JE and Wynder EL. Re: "Perineal powder exposure and the risk of ovarian cancer". Am.J.Epidemiol.  11-1-
1997;146(9):786.  
 200.  Maclure M. Demonstration of deductive meta- analysis: ethanol intake and risk of myocardial infarction. Epidemiol.Rev.   
1993;15(2):328- 351.  
 201.  Cralley LJ, Key MM, Groth DH, Lainhart WS, and Ligo RM. Fibrous and mineral content of cosmetic talcum products. 
Am.Ind.Hyg.Assoc J.  1968;29(4):350 -354.  
 202.  Krause JB. Mineralogical characterization of cosmetic talc products. J.Toxicol.Environ.Health .  1977;2(5):1223-1226.  
 203.  Langer AM and Nolan RP. 4- 11-1989. Distinguishing asbestiforma tremolite from non-asbestiform tremolite.   
 204.  Speil S. 8 -11-1971. Memo for file: FDA meeting - Asbestos in cosmetic talcs.   
 205.  Zazenski RJ. The commercial significance of talc. Comments on Toxicology .  1998;6(5 (Special Issue: Talc)):313-326.  
 206.  Ness RB and Cottreau C. Possible role of ovarian epithelial inflammation in ovarian cancer. J.Natl.Cancer Inst.   9-1-
1999;91(17):1459 -1467.  
 207.  Bonovas S, Filioussi K, and Sitaras NM. Do nonsteroidal anti -inflammatory drugs affect the risk of developing ovarian cancer? A 
meta-analysis. Br.J.Clin.Pharmacol.  2005;60(2):194-203.  
 208.  Chappell AG, Johnson A, and Charles J. A survey  of the long -term effects of talc and kaolin pleurodesis. British Journal of 
Diseases of the Chest .  1979;73:285- 288.  
 209.  Weissberg D and Kaufman M. The use of talc for pleurodesis in the treatment of resistant empyema. Ann.Thorac.Surg.   
1986;41(2):143- 145.  
 210.  Morrow PE, Haseman JK, Hobbs CH, Driscoll KE, Vu V, and Oberdorster G. The maximum tolerated dose for inhalation 
bioassays: toxicity vs overload. Fundam Appl.Toxicol.   1996;29(2):155 -167.  
 211.  Grant JBF, Davies JD, Jones JV, Espiner HJ, an d Eltringham WK. The immunogenicity of starch glove powder and talc. Br J 
Surg .  1976;63:864-866.  
 212.   Hawley's Condensed Chemical Dictionary. 15 ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 2007.   
   82 
  213.   Kirk-Othmer Concise Encyclopedia of Chemical Techno logy. 4  ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 1999.  
 214.  National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). International Chemical Safety Card.  Talc (silcia and fibre 
free). http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/ipcsneng/neng0329.html . Date Accessed 3 -23-2012.  
 215.  National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). International Chemical Safety Card.  Talc (silcia and fibre 
free). http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/ipcsneng/neng0329.html . Date Accessed 3 -23-2012.  
 216.  Hamer DH, Rolle FR, and Schelz JP. Characterization of talc and associated minerals. American Industrial Hygiene  Association .  
1976;May:296- 304.  
 217.   The Merck Index. 14  ed. Merck,Sharp & Dohme Corporation, 2012.  
 218.  Rohl AN and Langer AM. Identification and quantification of asbestos in talc. Environmental Health Perspectives .  1974;9:95-
109.  
 219.  Beck BD , Feldman HA, Brain JD, Smith TJ, Hallock M, and Gerson B. The pulmonary toxicity of talc and granite dust as 
estimated from an in vivo hamster bioassay. Toxicol Appl.Pharmacol .  1987;87(2):222-234.  
 
 