 
Page 3 Newsletter  - issue 1 – March 08  
The term cardiomyopathy  was first used over forty years ago, to describe 
myocardial disorders that are not caused by haemodynamic disturbances 
such as valve disease and hypertension, or by multi -system diseases. Heart 
muscle disorders with an identifiable aetiology were initially termed specific 
heart muscle diseases, but were later renamed specific cardiomyopathies. 
Remarkably, this nomenclature has survived to the present day with only 
minor changes. Recently, expert committees of the AHA and the ESC 
Working Group on Myocardial and Pericardial Dise ases have proposed 
updates of the cardiomyopathy classification system [1,2]. The motivation of 
both groups was to resolve outstanding ambiguities in the existing 
classification and to incorporate knowledge derived from advances in 
molecular genetics. Both  proposals continue to define cardiomyopathies 
according to the morphology and physiology of the ventricles and emphasize  
the importance of genetic disease as a cause of cardiomyopathy. The major 
differences relate to the handling of primary and secondary disease and the 
classification of ion channel disorders  
 
The AHA classification  
 
Cardiomyopathies have always been divided into primary and secondary 
forms. The definition of primary has, however, been somewhat ambiguous, 
interpreted by many to mean idiopa thic and others as disease confined to the 
heart (i.e. not the consequence of a systemic disorder). The new AHA 
proposal maintains this taxonomy, defining primary cardiomyopathies as 
diseases solely or predominantly confined to heart muscle and secondary 
cardiomyopathies as cardiac disorders with “pathological myocardial 
involvement” as part of generalized  systemic disorders”. The first major 
departure from the existing convention is the sub -classification of primary 
cardiomyopathies into genetic, mixed (ge netic and non -genetic) and acquired 
forms. The second, and much more controversial change, is the redefinition 
of ion channelopathies as primary, genetic cardiomyopathies.  
 
The ESC Classification  
 
The ESC working group’s proposal abandons the distinction b etween primary 
and secondary altogether. The existing morphologic sub -types of 
cardiomyopathy (hypertrophic, dilated, restrictive, etc.) are retained with 
some modifications, but they are separated into familial (or genetic) and 
non-familial (or non -geneti c) sub -types. These are then further subdivided 
into known genetic causes, idiopathic and acquired diseases  as appropriate. 
The principle aim of this simplification of the old classification was the 
encouragement of a shift from the existing exclusion -based  diagnostic 
paradigm towards a more logical and thorough search for diagnostic 
markers.  
 
 Summary  
 
A clinical classification 
should be simple and 
relevant to everyday 
medical practice. The 
ESC working group’s 
classification achieves 
this goal, and by 
highlighting the 
importance of familial 
disease, will resu lt in 
more accurate 
diagnoses and better 
outcomes for patients.  
 The paper of the month: The Classification Concept of the ESC 
Working Group of Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases  
 
-  By Dr Perry Elliott, The He art Hospital, University College 
London, United Kingdom  
 
-  
 
 
. 
  
Page 4 Newsletter  - issue 1 – March 08  
 
Comparison of the AHA and E SC systems  
 
Both the ESC and AHA panels recognized  that the current classification 
system has some important limitations. They also have a common purpose 
in seeking to assist diagnostic and therapeutic decision -making. The AHA 
and ESC systems use similar m orphological and physiological criteria to 
describe sub -types of cardiomyopathy and both sub -classify disease into 
genetic and non -genetic forms. Of the differences between the two 
systems, perhaps the least important is the primary versus secondary 
issue.  The ESC working group’s view was that this distinction has always 
been arbitrary and that abandonment of the terminology results in a 
simpler and more consistent approach to classification of heart muscle 
disease. The classification of ion channellopathie s as cardiomyopathies by 
the AHA panel is quite another matter. The ESC working group’s view is 
that it is inappropriate to reclassify a whole group of diseases that have 
little or no clinically detectable effect on cardiac morphology and 
haemodynamics. Th e AHA panel’s decision to do so is predicated on the 
idea that mutations in ion channel genes result in changes in protein 
structure within cardiomyocytes and therefore can be regarded as 
disorders of heart structure. They also cite reports of dilated 
cardiomyopathy caused by mutations in the sodium channel gene. The 
problem for the ESC working group is that the majority of cardiologists use 
the term ion channelopathies as shorthand for a group of syndromes 
defined entirely  by specific electrocardiographic criteria, often excluding 
patients that have evidence for structural heart disease. For this reason, 
the ESC working group felt that it is premature to create a whole new class 
of arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathies. If it transpires that mutations in ion 
channel genes are an important cause of structural heart disease, the new 
ESC classification is flexible enough to acknowledge them as one of the 
many causes of existing cardiomyopathy subtypes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 References  
 
1. Maron BJ, Towbin JA, Thiene G, Antzelevitch C, Corrado D, Arnett D, Moss AJ, Seidman CE, Y oung 
JB; American Heart Association; Council on Clinical Cardiology, Heart Failure and Transplantation 
Committee; Quality of Care and Outcomes Research and Functional Genomics and Translational 
Biology Interdisciplinary Working Groups; Council on Epidemiol ogy and Prevention. Contemporary 
definitions and classification of the cardiomyopathies: an American Heart Association Scientific 
Statement from the Council on Clinical Cardiology, Heart Failure and Transplantation Committee; 
Quality of Care and Outcomes R esearch and Functional Genomics and Translational Biology 
Interdisciplinary Working Groups; and Council on Epidemiology and Prevention. Circulation. 
2006;113:1807 -16. 
 
2. Elliott P, Andersson B, Arbustini E, Bilinska Z, Cecchi F, Charron P, Dubourg O, Kühl U,  Maisch B, 
McKenna WJ, Monserrat L, Pankuweit S, Rapezzi C, Seferovic P, Tavazzi L, Keren A. Classification of 
the cardiomyopathies: a position statement from the european society of cardiology working group 
on myocardial and pericardial diseases. Eur Hear t J. 2008;29(2):270 -6.  
 
 
 