* Corresponding author.
1944-3994/1944-3986 © 2019 Desalination Publications. All rights reserved.Desalination and Water Treatment  
www.deswater.com
doi: 10.5004/dwt.2019.24613172 (2019) 395–416
December
A critical review on recent developments in the low-cost adsorption of dyes from wastewater
P . Senthil Kumara,*, G. Janet Joshibaa, Carolin C. Feminaa, P . Varshinia, S. Priyadharshinia, 
M.S. Arun Karthicka, R. Jothiranib
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, SSN College of Engineering, Chennai 603 110, India, Tel. +919884823425;  
email: senthilchem8582@gmail.com (P . Senthil Kumar), Tel. +9790818301; email: janujosh21@gmail.com (G. Janet Joshiba),  
Tel. +919003196798; email: feminacarolin@gmail.com (C.C. Femina), Tel. +917338707931; email: varshupaddy@gmail.com (P . Varshini),  
Tel. +9600624112; email: pspriya2411@gmail.com (S. Priyadharshini), Tel. +9884107060; email: msarunkarthik@gmail.com (M.S. Arun Karthick)  
bDepartment of Chemistry, Adhiparasakthi Engineering College, Melmaruvathur 603 319, India, Tel. +919444342541;  
email: jothirani.rk@gmail.com
Received 15 February 2019; Accepted 24 June 2019
abstract
Water is one of the most important components in the environment. This is essential for all forms 
of life and leisurely plays a vital role in the world economy. The discharge of large amount of dye 
wastewater from different industries such as textile, leather, pulp, rubber pharmaceuticals, food processing, electroplating cosmetics, plastic, paper industries, etc. to the aquatic system constitutes 
the major hazards to the living environment. Hence, the rapid removal of these dyes from waste-
water before their discharge is an important necessity of day to day life as well as for environmental safety. Several traditional treatment methods were available for the removal of dyes from water/
wastewater such as chemical coagulation, filtration, flocculation, ozonation, oxidation, photocatalytic 
degradation, ion exchange, biodegradation, electrolysis and adsorption. Among all these treatment methods, adsorption process using activated carbon is one of the most important, effective and reli-
able method for the removal of dyes from aquatic system. However, the widespread application of 
activated carbon is restricted because of its high cost. Therefore, the attention has moved to select the low-cost and efficient adsorbents which are alternative to the existing activated carbon. Some of 
the natural materials, agricultural wastes, industrial wastes and biosorbents have been reported as 
an effective low-cost adsorbent for the removal of dyes from aquatic system by many researchers. The current review paper explains the detailed survey on the dye removal methods, and scope for 
the improvement can be done on the removal of dyes from industrial wastewater.
Keywords: Dyes; Methods; Removal; Adsorption; Wastewater; Toxicity
1. Introduction
Water is an essential component for living environment. 
Water pollution by various toxic pollutants has become 
one of the most important serious issues worldwide. The rapid growth of industrialization, anthropogenic activities, unplanned urbanization, unskilled utilization of natural water resources and tremendous increase in population lead to release of several toxic contaminants in to the environment [1–4]. In addition, on a total of 75% of underground water only 3% of water is found to be pure, in which only 1% is available for drinking and domestic purposes [5]. The provi-sion for the pure water which is basically utilized for domes -
tic and survival purposes is shrinking. This may be due to the P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416 396
fresh water pollution. The water and soil resources are getting 
contaminated due to the release of several noxious com-pounds such as industrial effluents, chemicals, agricultural runoff, domestic wastes and municipal waste. The waste-water not only decreases the available fresh water resources but also increases the probability of millions of waterborne disorders [6,7]. The important sources of water pollution include industrial chemicals, fertilizers, pesticides, radioac-tive wastes, solid waste, oil sludges and commercial waste. Apart from the anthropogenic sources some of the natural sources also cause water pollution but most of the frequent water pollution was caused by human activities [8]. Some of the organic compounds available are solvents, pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls, dioxins and dyes [9]. Among the different pollutants generated from the different indus-trial applications, dye is considered to be one of the most hazardous pollutants due to their environmental impacts especially for their toxicity to the living organisms. Dyes are mainly discharged from the different industries such as textile, dye production, paper, food, printing, cosmetic, plas-tic and leather [10–16]. The release of these pollutants into the hydrosphere provides a significant threat to the living environment due to their visibility even at very low concen-trations, reduces the sunlight penetration and their toxicity, potential mutagenecity and carcinogenicity [17–23].
1.1. Industrial dye materials
The dyes are coloured organic materials which are uti-
lized by several industries such as textile, leather, paper, 
plastic, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, food, etc. and applied for hair, fur, oil refinery products and grease [7,24–26]. Commonly, the dyes utilized in the garments manufacturing sectors are acidic, basic, reactive, specific, azo, vat, caustic, disperse and sulphur dyes [27]. The derivatives of the azo dyes are the major class of dyes used in the industrial appli-cations [28]. Generally, the dyes can be classified into three categories: (i) cationic, (ii) anionic and (iii) non-ionic dyes. The anionic dyes are of direct, acidic and reactive dyes [29].
The cationic dyes posesess several chemical structures 
based on their substituted aromatic groups and they are mostly applied in silk, wool, acrylic and nylon dyeing [30]. These dyes are mainly dependent on the positive ion. They are also known as basic dyes which are generally zinc chlo-ride or hypochloride complexes [31]. They are positively charged, water soluble and provide coloured cations in the aqueous solution. The cationic groups were seen in different types of dyes including azo, anthraquinone, methane, di- and tri-arylcarbenium, phthalocyanine, several polycarbocy-clic and solvent dyes. The anthraquinone dyes are weak and 
expensive. In addition, they have great properties, strong 
and low cost. Generally, the cationic dyes are visible and have 
brilliance and intensity of colours [29]. These cationic dyes are considered as harmful colourants causing serious health hazards such as cancer, genetic disorder, skin irritation and 
dermatitis [32].
The anionic dyes are mostly dependent on the negative 
ion [31]. These dyes belong to different types which show 
distinctive difference in their structure but they possess common feature such as ionic groups and water solubilizing 
properties. These dyes also include direct, reactive and acidic dyes [33]. The reactive groups of the reactive dyes interact 
with the wool and cotton and form strong covalent bonding with them. The release of reactive dyes into the ecosystem is not advisable because of their low degree of fixation due to the hydrolysis of reactive groups in water [34]. The acid dyes are applied with wool, silk, acrylic, polypropylene and polyamide fibres. They have good water soluble property. In addition, these are harmful to the humans because of the toxic organic sulphonic acids [35].
1.2. Hazards of industrial dye materials
The industrial dyes are considered hazardous to the 
environment because many dyes are toxic to living organisms 
either directly or through their absorption and reflection of 
sunlight entering the water which interferes with the growth 
of aquatic animals. These dyes not only provide harmful 
effects to the living environment but also damage the qual-ity of the fresh water sources. The acidic, basic, reactive, azo, diazo, disperse, anthraquinone based and metal complex based dyes are used in the textile industries [36]. The higher intake of these dyes causes vomiting, shock, heart disorders, Heinz body formation, cyanosis, jaundice, quadriplegia and tissue necrosis in humans [37]. The availability of pigments in the aquatic system also leads to water coluring, oxygen reduction, thereby damaging plants and animals [38]. The most widely used basic or cationic dye is Malachite Green (MG), which was widely used as medical disinfectant, bio-cide and colouring agent to wool, silk, leather, jute, paper, cotton and acrylic materials. MG dye causes carcinogenic, mutagenic and teratogenic effects to mammalian cell. This provides potential harmful effects on kidneys, livers, gills, intestines and gonads in organisms [39–42]. Another most important basic dye is Methylene Blue (MB), which was widely used as a colouring agent for wool, cotton and silk. This MB dye is also utilized as a staining agent for making certain body fluids and tissues earlier to view during sur -
gery and diagnostic assessments. This MB dye can also be utilized for the medical treatment of methaemoglobinemia and cyanide poisoning. In spite of several useful applica-tions, this MB dye has a number of negative effects to the living environment which includes irritation of mouth, throat, oesophagus and stomach with symptoms of nausea, abdominal discomfort, vomiting and diarrhoea [22,43–45]. The skin contact to this MB dye can cause mechanical irri-tation which results in redness and itching. The Metanil Yellow dye is a tumour causing compound leading to cancer [46] and also cause enzymatic disorder in the human beings [47]. This dye generally does not provide mutagenic effect but it is capable of latering the gene expression [48]. During 
oral intake, this dye causes toxic methaemoglobinaemia [49] 
and cyanosis [50] in human beings and the skin contact 
causes allergic dermatitis [51]. The oral consumption of dyes in animal creates testicular lesions [52].
The removal of these toxic dyes from wastewater becomes 
globally essential activity because even a small concentration 
of pigment in water is noxious and highly conspicuous. 
As the elimination of these toxic dyes from aqueous solution is considered an environmental challenge, the government legislation needs the industrial wastewater to be treated, 
therefore there is a constant requirement to have an effective 397 P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416
process that can potentially remove toxic dyes. Due to the 
increased consciousness provided to the significance of 
effluent treatment plant, the research scientists are insisted 
to formulate potential, eco-friendly and low-cost technol-
ogies which are capable of eliminating toxic contaminants present in the wastewater and also to defend the populace 
from dreadful health disorders. This is the reason why it 
is essential to remove pigments and colourants from the 
aqueous solution. A variety of treatment technologies such 
as coagulation, filtration, oxidation, advanced oxidation process, electrochemical, biological treatment, ion exchange 
and adsorption have been employed for the removal of 
dyes from wastewater.
2. Dye removal methods
Dyes are one of the most vital classes of organic mac-
romoleclues. These dyes occupy an important place in our 
survival and are utilized in different industrial sectors that include textile, plastics, paints, leather, drugs, waxes, greases, cosmetics, optics, dye-sensitized solar cells, sensors, fur, hair, etc. The source, colour, molecular structure and colour index are some of the properties based on which the dyes are classified. Basically, they are distinguished depending on the chromophores available in these chemicals. In ear -
lier days, the selection of dyes and its applications are not given a higher impact based on its effect on the environment because the industries failed to calculate the chemical com -
position of the dyes used in it. In 1980s, people started to pro-vide much attention to the dye waste because of their health concern which is mainly based on aesthetic condition. Over this decade, more details on the deleterious consequences of dyes applications have been reviewed. In addition, the dye utilizing industries, government and other environmental organizations have enunciated certain permissible limits for the discharge of toxic colourants into the aqueous system and they take effective measures for the treatment of industrial dyes in the wastewater. In the beginning, the wastewater treatment was performed using some physical treatments including equalization and sedimentation to maintain the pH, total suspended solids and total dissolved solids of the discharged dye wastewater [53,54].
After that the secondary wastewater treatments such as 
filter beds were applied for the degradation of dye waste-water. In recent times, the introduction of the activated sludge processes was applied in the dye effluent treatment. Generally, the industrial effluent treatment includes prelim-inary, primary, secondary and tertiary treatment technologies. The various treatment technologies involved in the elimina-tion of toxic dyes are depicted in Table 1. The preliminary treatment includes screening and gravity settling cham-
ber to remove the large size and settleable solids from the 
wastewater, respectively. The primary treatment includes 
physical or chemical treatment to remove the suspended solids from the wastewater. The secondary treatment is the biological treatment to remove the biologically degradable 
organics in the wastewater. The important biological treat-
ment techniques include attached and suspended growth 
systems. The waste sludge from the biological treatment units was further treated with the help of either by aerobic or anaerobic decompositions. The tertiary treatment is the physical–chemical treatment which includes adsorption, membrane, ion exchange, chemical oxidation and stripping. The above-mentioned methods are highly expensive than the other biological treatment methods but these methods are used in the removal of inorganic pollutants which are not removed easily by the biological methods [55]. However, these methods are generally applied in series with the bio-logical treatment but sometimes they are also used as a separate treatment process. The industrial dye wastewater is also treated in more or similar procedures but no sin-gle treatment methodologies were applied for all types of dye wastewater. Though various treatment techniques are available for dye removal, some of them are not more suit-able due to their drawbacks [56]. The different dye removal methods were shown in Fig. 1.
2.1. Chemical coagulation/flocculation
The dye wastewater treatment with chemical coagula-
tion/flocculation process is one of the effective methods to 
remove colour from the dye wastewater [57–59]. This method is a low cost, simple, reliable and low energy consuming process as compared with the other methods. This treatment process is a recognized method which effectively removes the colloidal, suspended and soluble solids through induced aggregation of both micro- and macro-particles into larger particles and followed by sedimentation. The conventional chemical coagulants used in the process include alum, ferric sulphate, ferric chloride, polyaluminium chloride, synthetic organic polymers, etc. [60–63].
Even though these types of coagulants have broad appli-
cations, they have also provided some shortcomings includ-ing relatively high costs, toxic effects to human beings and large volume of sludge production, which affects consi-derably the pH of the aquatic system [64–67]. Particularly, the alum, a common chemical coagulant which was worldwide applied in water and wastewater treatment, was reported Table 1
Overview of wastewater treatment technologies utilized in the elimination of dye
Preliminary physical treatment 
technologiesScreening
Filtration
Gravity settling chamber
Physico-chemical treatment 
technologiesCoagulation
Flocculation
AdsorptionIon exchange
Distillation
Membrane technology
Chemical treatment 
methodologiesAdvanced oxidation process
Electrochemical techniques
Photocatalytic techniquesOxidation
Fenton reagent reaction
Biological treatment 
methodologiesAnaerobic degradation
Aerobic degradationP . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416 398
to produce a large volume of sludge. These sludges react 
with natural alkalinity present in the water which leads to 
reduction in the pH [68]. In general, this process is econom-
ically viable for the removal of dyes from wastewater but 
sometimes becomes costly because of the cost of chemical coagulants. The major drawback of this treatment method 
is that the final sludge product is in large quantity as well 
as the removal of dye is pH dependent [69]. This treatment 
process is not suitable for highly soluble dyes such as reac-
tive, azo, acid and basic dyes [70]. The synthetic polymer coagulants have also been reported to provide numerous 
environmental problems to the human beings. Some of the 
derivatives of these coagulants are non-biodegradable and 
their monomers are producing neurotoxic and carcinogenic 
effects [71].
2.2. Filtration
Filtration methods such as microfiltration, ultrafiltration, 
nanofiltration and reverse osmosis are important treatment 
methods for drinking water and wastewater applications [72–78]. These treatment methods have been studied for the removal of colour from dye wastewater [79,80]. They simultaneously remove BOD and COD of the wastewater. Each and every filtration techniques is most preferable for particular types of water/wastewater treatment facilities. Generally, the microfiltration technique is not prefereed in wastewater treatment because of its large pore size [81]. The ultrafiltration and nanofiltration techniques are effec-tively utilized for the removal of dyes from different indus-trial dye wastewater. The application of these treatment techniques was limited to the textile dye wastewater treat-ment because of the frequent clogging of dye molecules over the membrane pores. The selection of the membrane type and porosity of the filter mainly depends on the composi-
tion of the wastewater and optimum temperature required 
for the process; Chen et al. [82] investigated the dye removal 
using filtration process. The results from this study showed 
that the filtration membrane has given a good antifouling capacity while treatment time. The major drawback of this 
filtration technology includes high investment cost, gener -
ation of secondary waste streams and frequent membrane 
fouling [83].
2.3. Oxidation
Oxidation method is a type of treatment method for 
the removal of dyes from wastewater by utilizing oxidizing 
agents. In general, the two types such as chemical oxidation and UV-assisted oxidation using chlorine, ozone, Fenton’s reagent, hydrogen peroxide (H
2O2) and potassium perman-
ganate (KMnO4) have been employed for the removal of 
dyes from industrial wastewater, particularly those waste-water collected from primary wastewater treatment unit, that is, sedimentation process. These treatment methods are most commonly used methods for the treatment of dye wastewater because they required only less concentration and less time to react. These methods are used to partially or completely decompose the dye molecules. But, the com-plete degradation of dye compounds to carbon dioxide and water was studied theoretically. It is important to note that the catalyst and pH plays a vital role in the oxidation process for the removal of dyes from wastewater.
Generally, chlorine is most widely used as a disinfectant 
for water treatment because of its strong oxidizing power. This can be applied in the form of calcium hypochlorite and sodium hypochlorite. It is also widely used for the reduction of colour such as pulp and textile bleaching [10]. The water 
 
Fig. 1. Dye removal methods.399 P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416
soluble dyes such as acid, reactive, direct and metal complex 
dyes are easily decolourized by hypochlorite but the water 
insoluble dyes include disperse and vat dyes are resistant 
to decolourization [10,84]. Generally, the reactive dyes need 
longer reaction time for its decolourization but the metal complexed dye wastewater remains halfway coloured even 
after the reaction time period was extended. The presence 
of amino or substituted amino groups on the naphthalene 
ring of the dye molecules is most vulnerable to chlorine and 
decolourize more easily than other dye molecules [85]. The oxidation of dye molecules can be improved by altering the 
pH of the system and also by providing the suitable catalysts. 
For example, the degradation of metal complex dyes liber -
ates heavy metals such as copper, iron, nickel and chromium. These discharged metals are said to possess catalytic effects for improving the decolourization of the dye molecules. 
The use of chlorine gas is an inexpensive treatment tech-
nique for decolourizing the dye molecules but it leads to 
provide unavoidable side reactions. These side reactions 
generate organochlorine compounds, which include toxic trihalo methane that increases the absorbable organic halogens 
concentration of the treated water. The metals liberated after 
the degradation of metal complex dyes can cause corrosion 
in metallic vessels.
Ozone was seemed to be a potential agent for decolouriz-
ing the textile dye wastewater [86–93]. The ozonation for the 
removal of colour (reactive dyes) from the dye wastewater 
can be achieved in shorter contact time and it is an effec-
tive process for the harmful compounds discharged from the conventional reactive dyes [94]. The decolourization of reac-tive dye was studied and the ozonation effectively removed 
colour and chemical oxygen demand [88,95]. However, in 
some cases the ozonation does not influence the removal of 
chemical oxygen demand significantly [94,96]. The oxidation potential of ozone was observed as 1.5 times that of chlorine [97]. This treatment does not liberate the chlorinated disin-
fection by-products which are carcinogenic. Therefore, ozone 
technology was found to have high potential because of its 
high technical feasibility. However, the wide application of ozone in water and industrial effluent treatment was lim-ited due to its high cost operation. This may be due to the 
mass transfer limitations stemming from the low solubility 
of the ozone and improper selection of the contactors with-
out consideration of the operative reaction system. Ozone is normally generated in bulk quantities by high voltage electrical discharge across a thin gap of dry air or oxygen. 
The electrical discharge process can produce in addition to 
ozone, other short-lived species such as OH radicals, OH
+ 
ion, atomic hydrogen, electrons and oxygen atomic radicals 
[98–100]. The liberation of these species mainly depends on 
the reactor configuration and the voltage used. These reac-tive species can improve the rate of oxidation if they can react with the pollutants in the fluid before they decay [97].
Hydrogen peroxide is an extremely pale blue colour 
liquid and it gets converted to colourless liquid in a dilute solution. In addition, it is slightly more viscous than water. This hydrogen peroxide has potential oxidizing properties [10]. This is a powerful bleaching agent for bleaching paper 
besides other applications. In the year 1994, nearly 50% of 
the world’s production of hydrogen peroxide was applied 
for paper and pulp bleaching [101]. This is also used for producing the peroxide enzymes, which are utilized for decolourization of dyes [102]. But this process depends on the pH and generates waste.
Fenton’s reagent, a mixture of an iron catalyst and hydro-
gen peroxide, was applied to decolourize the coloured wastewater [103–107]. This reagent is stronger than hydro-gen peroxide agent. Normally, this Fenton’s reagent is effec-tive in decolourization of both soluble and insoluble dye 
molecules. Some of the dyes including vat and disperse dyes 
are highly resistant against Fenton’s reagent. The dyes such 
as remazol brilliant blue B, indanthrene blue GCD, sirrus supra blue BBR, helizarin blue BGT and irgalan blue FGL have been studied and reported that these dyes were sig-
nificantly decolourized by Fenton’s reagent [10]. It is also 
identified that the colour is not only removed but also 
observed that the total organic carbon, chemical oxygen demand (except for reactive dyes) and toxicity have been reduced. This treatment technique also applied for high 
suspended solids concentration and is suitable for waste-
water treatment when the municipality allows the release 
of Fenton’s sludge into sewage. In the aspect of biological point of view, the quality of the sludge is not only enhanced but the removal of phosphate was also observed. The major drawbacks of this treatment technique is that it is gener -
ally effective within the narrow pH range of less than 3.5 which involves the sludge production and required longer reaction time [108]. Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), which include the generation of exceedingly responsive hydroxyl radical (HO·), have developed as outstanding water and wastewater treatment innovation for the decom-position or mineralization of a various scope of natural contaminants. A class of AOP comprises of photoactivated forms. The photoactivated responses are described by the free radical instrument started by the association of photons of a legitimate vitality level with the impetus photocatalytic oxidation). The present audit means to give a complete inves-tigation on the system of UV-TiO
2 photocatalytic oxidation 
prepare, photocatalyst material, light sources and the sorts of photoreactors [109]. The proficiency of the framework is likewise influenced by the method of TiO
2 application as 
immobilized on surface or as suspension.
2.4. Electrochemical methods
Electrochemical treatment falls under tertiary treatment 
technique which also employed for the removal of colours 
from dye wastewater [110–112]. The main advantage of 
this treatment technology is its environmental compatibil-
ity due to the fact that its main reagent, that is, electron, is a 
clean reagent. Other advantages include its flexibility, high energy efficiency, amenability of automation and safety. 
The decolourization of the dye wastewater is attained either 
by electro-oxidation with non-soluble anodes or by elec-
trocoagulation with soluble anodes [113–115]. The electro-
chemical treatment in dye removal is highly depending on the anode materials. Based on the anodic materials utilized, 
the efficiency will increase [116]. Some of the anodic materi-
als include iron, boron-doped diamond electrode, etc., with 
various operating conditions have been employed for the 
electro-degradation of dye molecules [117–119]. The removal of colour from Direct Red 80 dye wastewater using three P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416 400
different electrode materials including iron, polypyrrole 
doped with chromium and boron-doped diamond electrode. 
This treatment method is active in the removal of colour from 
soluble and insoluble dyes with the reduction of chemical 
oxygen demand. It was observed that the extent of colour and organic load removal mainly depends on the types of 
anodic materials and the applied voltage. However, the main 
disadvantages are high cost for electricity, sludge produc-
tion and pollution because of chlorinated organic and heavy 
metals due to indirect oxidation.
2.5. Advanced oxidation processes
AOPs are extremely efficient and novel treatment meth-
ods for the rapid elimination of many organic and inor -
ganic substances [120–122]. Recently, AOPs have appeared 
as potentially effective treatment techniques for converting the organic pollutants into non-toxic substances [123–126]. This process is involving in the simultaneous utilization of more than a oxidation processes because in certain cases the single oxidation system is not enough for the total decom-position of the dye molecules. These AOPs utilize strong oxi -
dizing agents such as hydroxyl radicals generated in situ which causes the series of reactions thereafter to convert the macromolecules into smaller and less harmful substances [125,126]. In most cases, the macromolecules are completely mineralized into carbon dioxide and water. The important advantage of AOPs as compared with the other treatment techniques is its easiness to handle and the generation of significantly less residues. The AOP techniques include ultraviolet (UV) photolysis, Fenton’s reagent oxidation and sonolysis. Nidheesh et al. [127] conducted a study on advanced oxidation process in which they have explained about the anodic oxidation, electro-Fenton, peroxicoag-ulation, fered Fenton, anodic Fenton, photoelectro-Fenton, sonoelectro-Fenton, bioelectro-Fenton, etc. This study men-tioned that complete oxidation of dyes is possible in the advanced oxidation process. This treatment technique has the capability of degrading the dye molecules at ambient temperature and pressure. These AOPs have an advantage over the biological wastewater treatment for waste effluents containing toxic or bioinhibitory contaminants. The dif-ferent varieties of AOPs are used in chemical oxidation processes utilizing ozone, combined ozone and hydrogen peroxide, UV enhanced oxidation such as UV/hydrogen peroxide, UV/ozone, UV/air wet air oxidation and catalytic wet air oxidation (in this case, air is used as the oxidant). 10%–20% of colour was removed while using UV alone but when it was utilized along with hydrogen peroxide nearly 90% of the colour gets removed [128].
The combination of Fenton reaction and UV is called as 
photo-Fenton reaction [129]. The combination of these two treatment technologies is available to enhance the elimination of colourants from the dye wastewater [130–135]. The photo-  
Fenton reaction is highly effective than Fenton reaction at an optimum condition [130]. Photocatalysis is another AOP for the removal of pollutants from the waste stream [136–142]. In this treatment technique, the light energy from a light source triggers an electron from the valence band of the catalyst to the conduction band with a series of chemical reaction which results in the generation of hydroxyl radicals. The generated hydroxyl radicals have higher oxidizing 
potential which can easily oxidize most of the organic com-
pounds. The different chalcogenides, that is, oxides such as 
TiO
2, CeO2, ZrO2, ZnO, etc. or sulphides such as ZnS, CdS, 
etc. have been utilized as a photocatalyst for the removal 
of different varieties of dyes including direct, reactive, vat and disperse dyes. Sonolysis is another treatment tech-
nique which utilizes the ultrasonic waves to decolourize 
and degrade the dye molecules [143–147]. The mechanism of 
sonolysis generally depends on the formation of short-lived radical species generated in violent cavitation events. The major drawbacks of AOPs are the generation of some unex-
pected by-products, complete mineralization is not possible 
and the process depends on the pH. The limitation of the pro-
cess varies depending on the types of AOPs implemented for the particular type of wastewater. For example, the important operating parameters for the removal of colour by UV/H
2O2 
were hydrogen peroxide concentration, residential time, pH, UV radiation intensity, chemical structure of dye molecules and dye bath additives. However, the AOPs have proven to be effective and outstanding treatment technologies for the removal of colour from effluents but they are quite expensive especially for small-scale industries of developing countries.
2.6. Biological methods
Biological treatment technique is the most common and 
widely adopted treatment techniques for the removal of 
col our from the dye wastewater [148–158]. A variety of spe-
cies have been employed for the decolourization and min-eralization of the different dye molecules. The biological method provides significant advantages such as compara-tively inexpensive, less operating costs and non-toxicity of the completely mineralized end products. These biological methods are classified into three categories, that is, aerobic, anaerobic, and combined effect of aerobic and anaerobic treatments.
The aerobic treatments are carried out in the presence 
of oxygen. The aerobic microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi are the two most important organisms that have been utilized for the effective treatment of dye wastewa-ter. At aerobic situations, the enzymes secreted by the bac-teria available in the wastewater breakdown the organic compounds. The identification, isolation and application of the aerobic bacteria are important steps in the biological treatment of different types of dye wastewater [158,159]. The different types of triphenylmethane dyes include mal-achite green, brilliant green, crystal violet, magenta, pararo-saniline and ethyl violet have been effectively removed by the strain Kurthia sp. [160]. However, it is important to 
note that the synthetic dyes are not uniformly vulnerable 
to decomposition by activated sludge process in a conven-
tional aerobic process. An attempt has been implemented to produce specific aerobic bacterial strains for the decolour -
ization of the specific dye structure [161]. The fungal strains 
seemed to be capable of decolourizing the azo and triphenyl-
methane dyes [158–163]. Among the different fungi strains, 
Phanerochaete chrysosporium has been studied exclusively for the past two decades because of its ability to decolourize the different varieties of dyes [158,159,164,165]. Further, the 
microorganisms including Cyathus bulleri, Rhyzopus oryzae, 401 P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416
Funalia trogii , Coriolus versicolor, Streptomyces sp., Laetiporous 
sulphureus, Trametes versicolor and other microorganisms have 
also been employed for the decolourization of dye wastewa-
ter [158,166–168]. The different operating parameters such as 
concentration of dye wastewater, initial pH and wastewater temperature affects the biological treatment of dye waste-
water. The biological treatments are compatible for certain 
dyes and most of the dyes are recalcitrant to the biological 
breakdown or non-transformable under aerobic conditions 
[158,159,169]. The anaerobic treatments are carried out in the absence of oxygen. The anaerobic treatments have been 
applied for the decolourization of the different varieties of 
synthetic dyes [158,159,170–173]. In some cases, the anaero-
bic pre-treatment step is the cheapest and alternative to the 
aerobic system [171]. The expensive aeration and problems with the bulk sludge are avoided in the anaerobic system. 
However, the major drawbacks of this treatment techniques 
are biological oxygen demand removal is inadequate, incom-
plete mineralization of dyes, incomplete nutrient removal 
and sulphates are converted into sulphides [171]. The com-bined treatment of aerobic and anaerobic was implemented 
to effectively decolourize the textile industrial wastewater. 
The important advantage of this method is to provide com-
plete mineralization which is frequently achieved due to the synergistic action of different organisms [158,174]. The reduction of azo bond was observed during the anaerobic 
conditions and the resulting colourless aromatic amines can 
be mineralized under aerobic conditions [175]. Hence, for 
the effective treatment of dye, the anaerobic decolourization followed by aerobic treatment was generally preferred [176]. Some of the major drawbacks of this biological treatment 
technologies are requirement of large land area, less flexi -
bility in design and operation, prolonged time needed for 
decolourization–fermentation processes thereby making it unable to remove the dyes from wastewater on a continuous mode [158,177–179].
2.7. Ion exchange
Ion exchange is a reversible process where an ion from 
the solution is exchanged for a similarly charged ion attached 
to the solid resin [180]. This treatment was generally adopted for softening the salt water to provide drinking water [181]. Zeolites are one of the most important ion exchange mate-rials used worldwide. This material is available naturally and also this was prepared synthetically. In 1934, Adams and Holmes found that the phenol–formaldehyde resin has cat-ion exchange properties. This gives important information regarding the preparation of different types of resins includ-ing cationic and anionic ion exchange resins. Some of the polymeric materials holds an ion exchange mechanism which include polystyrene sulphonate, polystyrene phosphonate, polystyrene amidoxime, sulphonated phenolic resin, phe-nolic resin, polystyrene-based trimethyl benzyl ammonium, epoxy-polyamine and aminopolystyrene. The batch and fixed bed column studies have been employed for the elimination of contaminants from water.
The different experimental studies have been conducted  
for the removal of dyes from wastewater using the ion excha-nge resins [182–199]. The major drawbacks of ion exchange method are incapable of handling highly concentrated wastewater, matrix gets fouled by organics, non-selective 
and highly sensitive to pH of the wastewater.
2.8. Adsorption
Adsorption is a surface phenomenon and it is the process 
for the separation of mixtures on a laboratory and industrial 
scale which can be explained as the increase in concentration of a particular component at the interface between the two phases. The adsorption process has been effectively utilized for the removal of colour from wastewater [200–235].
The term ‘adsorption’ refers to process in which a mate-
rial is concentrated over the solid surface from the liquid or gaseous surroundings. Adsorption on porous carbon was explained as early as 1550 B.C. in an ancient Egyptian papyrus and afterwards by Hippocrates and Pliny the Elder, which is importantly for medicinal applications. However, on scientific records the adsorption phenomenon was explained by Scheele in 1773 for gases exposed to carbon [200,236].
In 1785 it was continued by Lowitz for the reversible 
removal of colour and odourous compounds from water by wood charcoal. Larvitz in 1792 and Kehl in 1793 identi-fied similar behaviour with vegetable and animal charcoals, respectively. However, for the first time in 1881, Kayser has introduced the term adsorption to differentiate the surface accumulation from intermolecular penetration. In addi-tion, he explored that the adsorption process is a surface accumulation of material. Generally, it is important to dif-ferentiate the various types of adsorption process. If the attraction between the adsorbent and adsorbate is due to weak van der Waals forces, then this type of adsorption process is called as physical adsorption or physisorption. This type of adsorption process is a reversible process. Also, if the attractive forces are due to covalent bond then this type of adsorption process is called chemical adsorption or chemisorption. Because of the high bonding strength between the adsorbent and adsorbate in chemisorption process, it is very difficult to remove the adsorbed species from the solid surface. Generally, a good adsorbent should possess a porous structure. The time required to achieve the adsorption equilibrium should be as small as possible only then the dyes can be removed in lesser time.
Basically, adsorption of dyes mainly depends on the 
properties of the dyes and the surface properties of the adsor -
bent materials. Activated carbon (AC) is widely applied in the removal of dyes from wastewater. The commercial acti-vated carbon produced from the different sources includes coal, coconut shells, charcoal, lignite, wood and sawdust. The two types of AC such as H -type and L -type have been 
produced. The H -type is the positive charge upon water and 
hydrophobic nature. The L -type is a negative charge upon 
water and hydrophilic in nature [202,237,238]. The activa-tion of materials was carried out by partial oxidation for the purpose of developing pore structures in it. There are two types of activation which include physical and chemical activation.
Usually, the physical activation procedure needs high 
temperature and longer activation time as compared with the chemical activation. The AC requires a complete washing to remove the excess acids in the chemical activation method. AC can be in granular form, that is, granular activated P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416 402
carbon (GAC). The GAC can be produced from solid mate-
rials, which are used to remove the pollutants from wastewater 
because of its flexibility in continuous operation. Also there 
is no need to segregate the AC from bulk fluids. But, the slow 
intraparticle diffusion in GAC is a problem encountered in the application of the adsorption process in water treatment. 
AC can also be existing in the form of powdered activated 
carbon (PAC). Generally, PAC was added with fluids to be 
treated and then disposed off. The application of PAC pres-
ents some practical issues because of the requirement to separate the adsorbent from the fluid after usage.
PAC is also applied in the treatment of wastewater due 
to its low capital cost and less contact time, where it provides 
the large external surface area and a less diffusion resis-
tance [239]. In addition to GAC and PAC, two other forms of activated carbons (ACs) also exist which include activated 
carbon pellet and activated carbon filter (ACF). The activated 
carbon pellet was generally produced using coal as a raw 
material. In this preparation procedure, the coal was pul-
verized and this was agglomerated with suitable binder and then physically activated. These pelletized ACs are generally 
available in the sizes of 1.5, 3 and 4 mm diameter. The ACF 
was generally produced from polymeric precursor such as 
polyacrylonitrile (PAN), pitch, cellulose and polyvinylchlo-ride. The PAN-based carbon fibres predominately possess outstanding strength and modulus properties. The ACF can 
be prepared with a high modulus, albeit a lower strength 
using a pitch-based precursor. These carbon filters have been 
activated using the same procedures to produce the high sur -
face area carbons [10].
The ACs are applied not only for dye removal [240–243] 
but also for other organic and inorganic pollutants removal 
such as heavy metals [244–248], phenols [249–253], pesticides 
[205,254,255], chlorinated hydrocarbons [256], humic sub-stances [257], PCBs [258], detergents [259,260], organic com -
pounds which cause taste and odour [261–263] and many 
other chemicals and organisms [263–270].
It is important to note that the AC is an effective and 
commercially applicable material for removing different 
kinds of dyes from water/wastewater. But its application is sometimes limited because of its high cost. The ACs after 
their application in the treatment of wastewater become 
saturated with the dye molecules and are no longer capa-
ble of further removal of dyes from wastewater. There are two possibilities of this spent AC may undergo: (i) dis-posal and (ii) regeneration. The spent AC will be available 
in more toxic form which increases the cost of disposal and 
also causes further pollution problem to the environment 
if it is directly disposed into the environment. The spent 
ACs have to be regenerated for further application in the treatment of dye wastewater. Some of the regeneration 
methods such as chemical, thermal, oxidation and electro-
chemical are available but the thermal method is the most 
common one [271–279]. It is also noted that the regeneration 
of ACs provided the additional cost for the treatment. The regeneration of spent ACs may lead to loss of carbon and 
also change in its properties as compared with the virgin 
AC. This creates awareness among the research scientists 
to work towards producing low-cost alternative adsorbents 
which may replace the existing ACs for the removal of dyes from wastewater.Activated carbon (AC) has been widely used as adsor -
bent for the removal of dyes from wastewater but its high cost poses an economical problem. Hence, there is a need 
to produce cheap and easily available materials, which can 
be utilized more economically on large-scale operations. Owing to the economical problems, the research interest 
into the development of alternative adsorbents to substitute 
the costly AC has intensified in recent years. The attention 
has focussed on different natural solid materials, which are 
able to remove the dyes from wastewater at cheaper cost. Cost is an essential factor for comparison and selection of 
the suitable adsorbents. An adsorbent can be measured as 
a cheap materials if it requires the modest processing and 
available abundantly in nature. This may also be explained 
as an agricultural by-product or waste material from the industries and requires additional disposal cost. Some of 
the waste products from agricultural operations and indus-
tries, natural materials and biosorbents have been identified 
as potentially economical alternative adsorbents. Most of 
these materials have been employed for the removal of dyes from wastewater.
3. Adsorbent from agricultural wastes
Agricultural wastes are lignocellulosic compounds which 
mainly consist of cellulose, lignin and hemicelluloses [280,281]. 
Lignin is a polymeric compound that consists of aromatics and has a complex three-dimensional structure. The phenyl-propane units in the lignin compounds are bound together to produce a very complex matrix. It consists of different functional groups including hydroxyl, methoxyl and car -
bonyl. The hemiceullose in the agricultural wastes is mostly soluble in alkali and more easily hydrolyzed. Also both hemicelluloses and cellulose consist of oxygen functional groups including hydroxyl, ether and carbonyl [282]. These functional groups play an essential part in the generation of adsorbents. Previously, some of the research scientists have utilized various precursors for the synthesis of ACs including waste plastics (polyethylene terephthalate and polyvinyl chloride), industrial wastes (polymeric residues, fly ash, pitch, etc.) and other wastes (sewage sludge, tires, etc.) [283]. Generally, it is an important task to produce AC with low cost for the commercial manufacturing industries.
Recently, some of the research groups have adopted 
agricultural wastes to produce AC because they contain high carbon content, low inorganics, require mechanical strength, low levels of ash content and low cost [281–285]. These materials are available in large amounts and are one of the most abundant renewable resources in the globe. These waste materials have small or no economical impor -
tance and often provide the disposal problem. Hence, there is an important requirement to valorize these low cost materials. The transformation of these waste materials into ACs would provide the significant economic value which helps to reduce the cost for the disposal of waste and most importantly which provides a potential low-cost alternative to the existing commercial ACs. These waste materials have been effectively utilized as raw materials for the preparation of AC with high adsorption capacity, required mechanical strength and low ash content [286,287]. Adsorption process utilizes the solid material as an adsorbent for the removal 403 P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416
of different types of contaminants from wastewater. Among 
the different materials proposed as an adsorbent, AC is 
the most accepted material for the removal of pollutants 
from wastewater. AC is an amorphous material which is 
having high degree of porosity and these pores have been produced during its manufacture. The high porosity leads 
to removal of large amount of pollutants from wastewater 
[288–294]. The important factors considered for the selection 
of agricultural adsorbents are its low cost, availability and 
organic composition which provide higher affinity towards the specific dye wastewater. After utilized for wastewater 
treatment, these materials can be disposed to the environ-
ment without any complicated and expensive regeneration 
process because of their low cost.
The different types of agricultural waste materials have 
been utilized for the preparation of AC which includes corn 
straw [295], wheat straw [295], rice straw [296,297], sawdust 
[298–300], corncob [301,302], bagasse [301,303], cotton stalk 
[304], coconut husk [305], rice husks [298,306,307], tobacco 
stem [308], nut shells [309–311], soyabean oil cake [312], oil palm shell [313], oil palm fibre [314], vegetable residues [315], 
etc. Generally, there are two important steps in the synthe-
sis of AC which include (i) carbonization of the materials 
below 1,000°C at an inert atmosphere and (ii) activation of the carbonized material (physical or chemical activation).
Physical activation is a method in which the forerun-
ner is converted into AC utilizing gasses and is for the most 
part done in a two-stage handle [316]. Carbonization is the 
primary stage which involves the formation of a char (non-porous) by pyrolysis of the raw material at the temperature range of 400°C–850°C and sometimes it may be operated at 
1,000°C in the nitrogen atmosphere. Activation is the second 
stage which includes making the contact of the char with 
an oxidizing gas, for example, carbon dioxide, steam, air or their blends, in the temperature of somewhere around 600°C and 900°C, which brings about the expulsion of the more 
complicated carbon and the arrangement of an all around 
created micro-pore structure. Generally, CO
2 is the activation 
gas because it is spotless, simple to handle and it encourages 
control of the activation process on account of the moderate reaction rate at temperatures around 800°C [316]. It is ben-eficial to note that the ACs prepared by physical activation did not have acceptable qualities to be utilized as adsorbents or as filters [284].
Chemical activation is a method, in which the carbon-
ization and activation are happening simultaneously, with the precursor being blended with chemical activating agents as dehydrating agents and oxidants. This activation includes impregnation with chemicals, for example, H
3PO4, ZnCl2, 
NaOH, KOH and K2CO3 followed by heating under a nitro-
gen stream at temperatures in the scope of 450°C–900°C, contingent upon the impregnant utilized. This activation method was carried out in a single step and at lower tem-peratures. This method is available to prepare the superior porous structure in the adsorbent with the environmental concerns of using chemical agents for activation could also be produced. In addition, part of the utilized chemicals was easily recovered [285,316,317]. A two-stage process was available for the preparation of AC which includes physi-cal and chemical processes [318]. It is also identified that an additional one more treatment step is available, that is, steam pyrolysis [319–323]. This treatment can be available in two forms: (i) the raw agricultural waste is heated at mod-erate temperatures between 500°C and 700°C under a flow of pure steam and (ii) the raw agricultural waste is heated at 700°C–800°C under a flow of steam. Numerous agricul-tural wastes include bagasse, straw, nut shell, grape seeds, almond shells, coconut husk, corn stover, oat hulls, peanut cherry, stones, apricot stones and hulls have been experi-mented with this procedure [324–337].
The recent review on literature indicates that the agri-
cultural waste showed comparatively adequate removal effi ciency as compared with the commercial materials. 
Dye decolourization method is not specific and depends on many parameters. There are many agricultural adsorbents available and which can act as alternatives to the existing AC but complete replacement is not possible. Generally, the selection of agricultural wastes is based on its low cost, availability and organic composition which shows the strong affinity for some identified dye wastewater.
3.1. Adsorbent produced from lignin
Lignin is a natural polymer composed mainly of aro-
matic compounds. It is available along with hemicellulo-
ses goes about as a binding agent of cellulose strands in the structures of plants. The role of lignin is to give struc-tural quality, give fixing of water directing framework 
that connects roots with leaves, and ensure plants against 
debasement [338]. It is a macromolecule, which comprises 
of alkylphenols and has an unpredictable three-dimensional structure. Lignin is covalently connected with xylans on account of hardwoods and with galactoglucomannans in 
softwoods [339]. The essential chemical phenylpropane units 
of lignin (principally syringyl, guaiacyl and p -hydroxy 
phenol) are fortified together by an arrangement of link-
ages to frame an extremely complex matrix. It contains an assortment of functional groups, for example, hydroxyl, 
methoxyl and carbonyl, which bestow a high extremity to 
the lignin macromolecule [340–345].
Lignin, a waste material or by-product released from 
paper mills in substantial amounts is utilized as a part of its 
raw state and also altered state for evacuation of contami-
nants by researchers/scientists. A spherical sulphonic lignin 
adsorbent was produced from a bamboo pulp mill by-product. 
This adsorbent was examined for the expulsion and recu-peration of cationic dyes that include cationic turquoise GB, cationic red GTL and cationic yellow X-5GL from fluid 
arrangements [346]. Some of the research works are also 
available to explain the utilization of lignin as an effective 
adsorbent for the removal of dyes from wastewater [347–350].
3.2. Adsorbent produced from sawdust
Sawdust is a standout amongst the most engaging mate-
rials among agricultural waste materials, utilized for evac-
uating toxins, for example, colours, salts and overwhelming metals from water and wastewater [351]. The material com-prises lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose, with polyphenolic groups assuming critical part to bind colours through various systems. By and large the adsorption happens by ion exchange, complexation and hydrogen bonding. P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416 404
Different productive studies have been done on the expul-
sion of colours by sawdust [352–354]. Several researchers 
have used this saw dust in natural and its modified form 
for the removal of dyes from wastewater [355–363]. Many 
adsorption kinetics and isotherm models for the dye removal by sawdust have been reported by the researchers. Also the 
thermodynamics on the removal of dyes by the sawdust has 
been presented.
3.3. Adsorbent produced from rice husk
Rice husk is an agricultural waste which was obtained 
from the rice processing industry as a by-product. Generally, 
these industries are generating more than 100 million tonnes 
out of which 96% of the waste is being produced by the developing countries [286]. The usage of this wellspring 
of agricultural waste would take care of both a disposal 
issue and additionally access to a less expensive material 
for adsorption in water contaminations control framework [364–366]. The principle parts of rice husk are carbon and silica (15%–22% SiO
2), it can possibly be utilized as an adsor -
bent [37,367,368]. Many researchers have been using rice husk as an effective adsorbent for the removal of dyes from wastewater [366,369–378].
3.4. Adsorbent produced from waste peels
Among a few agricultural wastes that have been exper -
imented on as adsorbents for wastewater treatment, the 
“waste peels” from fruits and vegetables are of awesome sig-nificance since the vast majority of the peels are disposed of as waste and discover no application anyplace, which here and 
there posture genuine transfer issues [2]. Most of the waste 
from homes mainly consist of these peel wastes. Additionally 
these wastes were generated from the fruits and vegetable industries during the process of selecting, sorting and boiling processes. Generally, these wastes are disposed into the envi-
ronment or fed to the domesticated animals. The fruits and 
vegetable wastes and its by-products are produced in large 
quantity during the industrial operations which provide an impact over the environment and these wastes should be properly handled. Then again, they are extremely rich in 
bioactive segments that are considered to beneficially affect 
wellbeing [379]. These waste peels are natural, eco-friendly 
and monetary wellsprings of adsorbents. These wastes can be used in the expulsion of colours from wastewater.
Some of the waste peels include citrus peel waste (grape-
fruit peel waste, pomelo peel waste, orange peel waste and lemon peels), banana peel waste, cassava peel waste, jack-
fruit peel waste, pomegranate peel waste and garlic peel 
wastes have been applied for the removal of different kinds of pollutants from aqueous solution [2,380–398]. Adsorption 
influencing parameters for the removal of dyes from waste-
water have been studied by the researchers. Adsorption 
equilibrium, kinetics and thermodynamics for the removal 
of colour from wastewater have also been investigated.
3.5. Adsorbent produced from other agricultural wastes
The numerous endeavours to discover cheap and effort-
lessly accessible adsorbents to evacuate the toxic pollutants from wastewater, for example, the agricultural wastes whereas 
per their physical–chemical attributes and ease they might be great potential adsorbents [11,217]. Agricultural prepa-
rations are accessible in expansive amounts the world over. 
Because of this, the huge amounts of agricultural wastes are 
rejected. These agricultural wastes are not only utilized in the removal of toxic dye from wastewater but also employed for the removal of various organic and inorganic toxic pollutants 
from wastewater.
Lignocellulosic materials comprise of three principle basic 
parts which are lignin, cellulose and hemicelluloses. Ligno-
cellulosic materials additionally contain extractive basic segments which have small molecular size. Distinctive adsor -
bents obtained from agricultural wastes have been utilized 
for colour expulsion from wastewater and numerous inves-
tigations of colour adsorption by agricultural wastes are available. Agricultural and industrial processing units dis-card a lot of untreated waste which may contaminate the 
land, water and air, and accordingly harm the environment.
Then again, ill-advised treatment of these wastes causes 
comparable issues. Along these lines, administrative con-
trol of contaminations ought to be established to forestall or to minimize the exchange of unsafe material to different territories. Hence inside the most recent couple of years numerous thoughts have been acquainted all together with appropriately discard these wastes, for example, serious use as adsorbents for poison expulsion particularly for colour evacuation where it demonstrated high adsorption limit. These are renewable, accessible in vast sums and low cost when contrasted with different materials utilized as adsor -
bents. These wastes are superior to different adsorbents in light of the fact that the agricultural wastes are generally utilized without or with at least handling (washing, drying, crushing) and in this way lessen generation costs by utilizing a shoddy crude material and disposing of vitality expenses connected with warm treatment.
Some of the agricultural wastes derived from low cost 
and readily available resources such as grass waste, rice straw, barley straw, guava leaves, papaya seeds, plant leaf powder, banana waste, pumpkin seed palm kernel fibre, castor seed shell, pineapple stem, pumpkin seed hull, coffee husks, coco-nut husk, dehydrated peanut hull, Parthenium hysterophorus, coconut bunch waste, hazelnut shells, peanut hull, soy meal hull, yellow passion fruit waste, fruit juice residue, Luffa cylindrica  fibres, jute waste, cereal chaff, wheat straw, bagasse, 
rubber seed shell, wheat shells, apricot shell, walnut shell, almond shell, cashew nut shell, coconut shells, citric acid, cot-ton and gingelly seed shell, lentil shell, rice shell, pine saw-
dust, groundnut shell, pongam seed shell, olive stone, coir 
pith, cane pith, plum kernel, sunflower stalk, white rice husk 
ash, white ash, wood-derived biochar, pinewood, neem bark, sky fruit husk, carbon cloth, sunflower hull, wheat stem, etc. have also been successfully adopted for the removal of 
colour from wastewater [287,399–411].
4. Adsorbent from industrial wastes
Generally industrial exercises create enormous measure 
of strong waste materials as by-products. Some of the by- 
products are reused and the remaining are disposed as landfills. In this manner, the likelihood of reuse in adsorption 405 P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416
forms speak to a fascinating arrangement primarily in light 
of the fact that these industrial waste materials are accessi-
ble free of cost and cause significant disposal issue. As of 
late, various industrial wastes have been examined with or 
without treatment as adsorbents for the expulsion of poisons from wastewaters. Some of the industrial wastes include 
fertilizer industry wastes, fly ash, leather industry wastes, 
steel industry wastes, aluminium industry wastes and paper 
industry wastes [412]. Fly ash is a waste material generat-
ing from ignition operations. The primary employments of fly ash incorporate development of streets, blocks, concrete 
and so forth. The high concentration of silica and alumina 
in fly ash debris makes it decent contenders for use as a 
modest adsorbent for mass use [411,412]. The blast furnace 
slag, sludge and dust (steel industrial wastes) are the most experimented materials in the adsorption process. Red mud 
(aluminium industry waste) is a waste material framed amid 
the generation of alumina when the bauxite mineral is sub-
jected to caustic leaching [413]. The poisonous quality and 
colloidal nature of red mud particles make a genuine con-tamination peril. Numerous propositions for the red mud 
use, for example, in the preparation of red mud blocks, as 
filler in black-top street development, as iron metal, and 
as a wellspring of different minerals [412]. After pre-treat-ment, the red mud is appropriate for the removal of Congo red from aqueous solution [413]. Rather, fertilizer industry 
additionally delivers various by-products in substantial con-
centrations which make genuine transfer issues and debase 
the encompassing environment. The industrial wastes have been successfully employed for the removal of dye pollutants from wastewater [414–435]. Because of the minimal effort 
and high accessibility of these wastes, it is not vital to have 
complicated regeneration operations. This type of low-cost 
adsorption methods have been attracted by many research-
ers/scientists. Be that as it may, the majority of the times the adsorption capacities of such adsorbents are not high, 
and thus, the study and investigation of more new adsor -
bents are still under advance. Diverse innovative absorbents 
used nowadays in the elimination of dyes and other toxic 
pollutants from aqueous solutions are depicted in Table 2. The objective of the present research is to create modest and 
viable adsorbents from agricultural waste, as another option 
to the current adsorbents.
5. Conclusion and future perspectives
This review article clarifies the various methodologies 
involved in the elimination of toxic dyes. This article mainly 
concentrates on the various economically feasible treat-ment technologies available for the treatment of dyes. Various methods such as filtration, coagulation, flocculation, oxida-tion, advanced oxidation process, electrochemical methods, ion exchange, biological methods and adsorption methods have been used in the treatment of industrial dye effluents. On analyzing all the above methodologies the physico-  
chemical methods ate seemed to be somewhat effective but they are not used often due to their complexity and high cost. The chemical methods involve some more chemicals in the process and create secondary pollution which cannot be treated easily. Eventhough, the biological methods are 
Table 2
Various biosorbents used in the elimination of harmful industrial dyes and other toxic pollutants
Dyes Biosorbent Adsorption  
capacity (mg g–1)Reference
Chromium (VI) Mixed waste tea 94.34 [436]
Coffee ground 87.72
Diamine Green B Rice husk cellulose 207.15 [437]
Acid Black 24 268.88
Congo Red 580.09 
2-Picoline Almond shell and orange peels 
activated carbon166.7 [438]
288.57
Crystal violet Peanut hull waste 100.6 [439]
Methylene blue Cotton waste activated carbon 369.48 [440]
Eriochrome black T
Rhodamine B Chlorella pyrenoidosa 63.14 [441]
Methylene blue Phragmites australis 41.2 [442]
Procion red H-E7B Nigrospora biomass 188.79 [443]
Reactive blue BF-5G Malt bagasse 42.58 [444]
Sulphur blue 15 Acidithiobacillus 1,428.6 [445]
Congo red Aspergillus carbonarius 99.01 [446]
Peniciliium glabrum 101.01
Methylene blue Eucheuma spinosum 833.33 [447]
Reactive red 198 Nostoc linckia  HA 46 biomass 93.5 [448]
Amaranth dye Water hyacinth 70 [449]
BEZAKTIV Red S-Max Phoenix dactylifera  rachis 196.08 [450]P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416 406
economically feasible, this process is not preferred as it is 
time consuming and skilled labour. In midst of all the treat-
ment technologies used in the wastewater treatment, the 
adsorption process is seemed to be the efficient technique 
in the elimination of the industrial dyes. This technique is simple, feasible, effective, efficient and eco-friendly in dye 
removal. The adsorbents used in this process are prepared 
from simple sources such as saw dust, agricultural wastes, 
lignin, waste peels, activated carbon and industrial waste 
which are all easily affordable and available in nature. These adsorbents possess high adsorption capacity and it 
is easily rejuvenated using simple chemicals. More research 
works have to be carried in this sector to lower the harm-
ful effects of this textile dyes. The different surface modifi-
cation methods must be optimized to prepare the efficient adsorbent for the elimination of dyes from industrial waste-
water. Most of the researches on dye removal using low 
cost methods are dealt with batch adsorption process and 
this information must be designed for the scale up stud-
ies. The life cycle analysis of the prepared material must be evaluated to check the repeatability of the adsorbent usage 
and its disposal scenario. The regeneration procedure for 
the spent adsorbent must be properly deviced to predict the 
proper regenerating methods.
References
[1] I. Anastopoulos, G.Z. Kyzas, Agricultural peels for dye adsorp-
tion: a review of recent literature, J. Mol. Liq., 200 (2014) 381–389.
[2] A. Bhatnagar, M. Sillanpää, A. Witek-Krowiak, Agricultural waste peels as versatile biomass for water purification – a review, Chem. Eng. J., 270 (2015) 244–271.
[3] A. Ayati, M.N. Shahrak, B. Tanhaei, M. Sillanpää, Emerging adsorptive removal of azo dye by metal–organic frameworks, Chemosphere, 160 (2016) 30–44.
[4] C. Santhosh, V . Velmurugan, G. Jacob, S.K. Jeong, A.N. Grace, A. Bhatnagar, Role of nanomaterials in water treatment applica-tions: a review, Chem. Eng. J., 306 (2016) 1116–1137.
[5] H.M. Raghunath, Hydrology: Principles, Analysis, Design, New Age International Publishers, India, 2006.
[6] Water Pollution, August, National Water Awareness Campaign, Gaia Atlas of Planet Management, The Guardian, 2003.
[7] R. Sivashankar, A.B. Sathya, K. Vasantharaj, V . Sivasubramanian, Magnetic composite an environmental super adsorbent for dye sequestration – a review, Environ. Nanotechnol. Monit. Manage., 1–2 (2014) 36–49.
[8] P .A. Carneiro, G.A. Umbuzeiro, D.P . Oliveira, M.V .B. Zanoni, Assessment of water contamination caused by a mutagenic textile effluent/dyehouse effluent bearing disperse dyes, J. Hazard. Mater., 174 (2010) 694–699.
[9] S. Natarajan, H.C. Bajaj, R.J. Tayade, Recent advances based on the synergetic effect of adsorption for removal of dyes from waste water using photocatalytic process, J. Environ. Sci., 65 (2018) 201–222.
[10] V .K. Gupta, Suhas, Application of low-cost adsorbents for dye removal – a review, J. Environ. Manage., 90 (2009) 2313–2342.
[11] M. Rafatullah, O. Sulaiman, R. Hashim, A. Ahmad, Adsorption of methylene blue on low-cost sorbents: a review, J. Hazard. Mater., 177 (2010) 70–80.
[12] M. Ghaedi, S. Heidarpour, S.N. Kokhdan, Y.Z. SahFu, T. Vira-raghavan, Fungal decolorization of dye wastewaters: a review, Bioresour. Technol., 79 (2001) 251–262.
[13] K.A.G. Gusmao, L.V .A. Gurgel, T.M.S. Melo, L.F. Gil, Adsorption studies of methylene blue and gentian violet on sugarcane bagasse modified with EDTA dianhydride (EDTAD) in aqueous solutions: kinetic and equilibrium aspects, J. Environ. Manage., 118 (2013) 135–143.[14] L. Cottet, C.A.P . Almeida, N. Naidek, M.F.Viante, M.C. Lopes, N.A. Debacher, Adsorption characteristics of montmorillonite clay modified with iron oxide with respect to methylene blue in aqueous media, Appl. Clay Sci., 95 (2014) 25–31.
[15] X. Liu, J. Luo, Y. Zhu, Y. Yang, S. Yang, Removal of methylene blue from aqueous solutions by an adsorbent based on metal-organic framework and polyoxometalate, J. Alloys Comp., 648 (2015) 986–993.
[16] H. Aysan, S. Edebali, C. Ozdemir, M.C. Karakaya, N. Kara-kaya, Use of chabazite, a naturally abundant zeolite, for the investigation of the adsorption kinetics and mechanism of methylene blue dye, Microporous. Mesoporous. Mater., 235 (2016) 78–86.
[17] A. Mittal, J. Mittal, A. Malviya, D. Kaur, V .K. Gupta, Decoloration treatment of a hazardous triarylmethane dye, Light Green SF (Yellowish) by waste material adsorbents, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 342 (2010) 518–527.
[18] A.K. Verma, R.R. Dash, P . Brunia, A review on chemical coagulation/flocculation technologies for removal of colour from textile wastewaters, J. Environ. Manage., 93 (2012) 154–168.
[19] M. Auta, B.H. Hameed, Acid modified local clay beads as effective low-cost adsorbent for dynamic adsorption of methy-lene blue, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 19 (2013) 1153–1161.
[20] A.N. Kabra, R.V . Khandare, S.P . Govindwar, Development of a bioreactor for remediation of textile effluent and dye mixture: a plant–bacterial synergistic strategy, Water Res., 47 (2010) 1035–1048.
[21] M. Dastkhoon, M. Ghaedi, A. Asfaram, A. Goudarzi, S.M. Langroodi, I. Tyagi, S. Agarwal, V .K. Gupta, Ultrasound assisted adsorption of malachite green dye onto ZnS:Cu-NPAC: equilibrium isotherms and kinetic studies - response surface optimization, Sep. Purif. Technol., 156 (2015) 780–788.
[22] A. Elhalil, H. Tounsadi, R. Elmoubarki, F.Z. Mahjoubi, M. Farnane, M. Sadiq, M. Abdennouri, S. Qourzal, N. Barka, Factorial experimental design for the optimization of catalytic degradation of malachite green dye in aqueous solution by Fenton process, Water Res. Ind., 15 (2016) 41–48.
[23] D. Robati, M. Rajabi, O. Moradi, F. Najafi, I. Tyagi, S. Agarwal, V .K. Gupta, Kinetics and thermodynamics of malachite green dye adsorption from aqueous solutions on graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide, J. Mol. Liq., 214 (2016) 259–263.
[24] B. Amith, D. Sivanesan, K. Kannan, C. Tapan, Kinetics of decolorization and biotransformation of Direct Black 38 by C. hominis and P . Stutzeri’, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 74 (2007) 1145–1152.
[25] P . Monash, G. Pugazhenthi, Adsorption of crystal violet dye from aqueoussolution using mesoporous materials synthesized at room temperature, Adsorption, 15 (2009) 390–405.
[26] A.K. Samanta, P . Agarwal, Application of natural dyes on textiles, Indian J. Fibre Tex. Res., 34 (2009) 384–399.
[27] Demirbas, Agricultural based activated carbons for the removal of dyes from aqueous solutions: a review, J. Hazard. Mater., 167 (2009) 1–9.
[28] Forgacs, T. Cserhati, G. Oros, Removal of synthetic dyes from wastewaters: a review, Environ. Int., 30 (2004) 953–971.
[29] G. Mishra, M. Tripathy, A critical review of the treatment for decolorization of textile effluent, Colourage, 40 (1993) 35–38.
[30] E. Eren, B. Afsin, Investigation of a basic dye adsorption from aqueous solution onto raw and pre-treated sepiolite surfaces, Dyes Pigm., 73 (2007) 162–167.
[31] O.D. Tyagi, M.S. Yadav, M. Yadav, A Textbook of Synthetic Dyes, Vol. 67, Anmol Private Limited, India, 2002.
[32] E. Eren, Investigation of a basic dye removal from aqueous solution onto chemically modified Unye bentonite, J. Hazard. 
Mater., 166 (2009) 88–93.
[33] K. Hunger, Industrial Dyes, Chemistry, Properties, Applications, Wiley-VCH. Weinheim, Germany, 2003.
[34] A. Tabak, E. Eren, B. Afsin, B. Caglar, Determination of adsorp-tive properties of a Turkish Sepiolite for removal of Reactive Blue 15 anionic dye from aqueous solutions, J. Hazard. Mater., 16 (2009) 1087–1094.407 P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416
[35] A.A. Attia, W.E. Rashwan, S.A. Khedr, Capacity of activated 
carbon in the removal of acid dyes subsequent to its thermal treatment, Dyes Pigm., 69 (2006) 128–136.
[36] I.M. Banat, P . Nigam, D. Singh, R. Marchant, Microbial decolor -
ization oftextile-dye containing effluents: a review, Bioresour. Technol., 58 (1996) 217–227.
[37] V . Vadivelan, K.V . Kumar, Equilibrium, kinetics, mechanism, and process design for the sorption of methylene blue onto rice husk, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 286 (2005) 90–100.
[38] L. Bulgariu, L.B. Escudero, O.S. Bello, M. Iqbal, J. Nisar, K.A. Adegoke, F. Alakhras, M. Kornaros, I. Anastopoulos, The utilization of leaf-based adsorbents for dyes removal: a review, J. Mol. Liq., 276 (2019) 728–747.
[39] M. Ghaedi, F.N. Azad, K. Dashtian, S. Hajati, A. Goudarzi, M. Soylak, Central composite design and genetic algorithm applied for the optimization of ultrasonic-assisted removal of malachite green by ZnO Nanorod-loaded activated carbon, Spectrochim. Acta. Part A, 167 (2016) 157–164.
[40] M. Ghasemi, S. Mashhadi, M. Asif, I. Tyagi, S. Agarwal, V .K. Gupta, Microwave-assisted synthesis of tetraethylenepentamine func-tionalized activated carbon with high adsorption capacity for malachite green dye, J. Mol. Liq., 213 (2016) 317–325.
[41] M. Rajabi, B. Mirza, K. Mahanpoor, M. Mirjalili, F. Najafi, O. Moradi, H. Sadegh, R. Shahryari-ghoshekandi, M. Asif, I. Tyagi, S. Agarwal, V .K. Gupta, Adsorption of malachite green from aqueous solution by carboxylate group functionalized multi-walled carbon nanotubes: determination of equilibrium and kinetics parameters, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 34 (2016) 130–138.
[42] F. Zhang, X. Chen, F. Wu, Y. Ji, High adsorption capability and selectivity of ZnO nanoparticles for dye removal, Colloids Surf. A, 509 (2016) 474–483.
[43] Y. Li, Q. Du, T. Liu, X. Peng, J. Wang, J. Sun, Y. Wang, S. Wu, Z. Wang, Y. Xia, L. Xia, Comparative study of Methylene Blue dye adsorption onto activated carbon, graphene oxide, and carbon nanotubes, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 91 (2013) 361–368.
[44] U. Pal, A. Sandoval, S.I. U Madrid, G. Corro, V . Sharma, 
P . Mohanty, Mixed titanium, silicon, and aluminum oxide nano structures as novel adsorbent for removal of rhodamine 
6G and methylene blue as cationic dyes from aqueous solution, Chemosphere, 163 (2016) 142–152.
[45] H.D. Setiabudi, R. Jusoh, S.F.R.M. Suhaimi, S.F. Masrur, Adsorption of methylene blue onto oil palm (Elaes guineensis ) 
leaves: process optimization, isotherm, kinetics and thermo-dynamic studies, J. Taiwan. Inst. Chem. Eng., 63 (2016) 363–370.
[46] S. Ramachandani, M. Das, A. Joshi, S.K. Khanna, Effect of oral and parental administration of metanil yellow on some hepatic and intestinal biochemical parameters, J. Appl. Toxicol., 17 (1997) 85–91.
[47] M. Das, S. Ramchandani, R.K. Upreti, S.K. Khanna, Metanil Yellow: a biofunctional inducer of hepatic phase I and phase II xenoblastic-metabolising enzymes, Food Chem. Toxicol., 35 (1997) 835–838.
[48] S. Gupta, M. Sundarrajan, K.V .K. Rao, Tumour promotion by metanil yellow and malachite green during rat hepato-carcinogenesis is associated with dys-regulated expression of cell cycle regulatory proteins, Teratog. Carcinog. Mutagen., 1 (2003) 301–312.
[49] S.M. Sachdeva, K.V . Mani, S.K. Adval, V .P . Jalpota, K.C. Rasela, D.S. Chadha, Acquired toxic methaemoglobinaemia, J. Assoc. Physicians India, 40 (1992) 239–240.
[50] S.S. Chandro, T. Nagaraja, A food-poisoning outbreak with chemical dye, an investigation report, Med. J. Armed Forces India, 43 (1987) 291–300.
[51] B.M. Hausen, A case of allergic contact dermatitis due to metanil yellow, Contact Dermatitis, 31 (1994) 117–118.
[52] H. Tiwari, Assessment of teratogenecity and embryo toxicity of dye wastewater untreated sludge from sanganer on swiss albino mice when administered during growth period of gestation, J. Health Med. Inf., 3 (2012) 1–5.
[53] S. Sivamani, B.L. Grace, Removal of dyes from wastewater using adsorption – a review, Int. J. Biosci. Technol., 2 (2009) 47–51.[54] M.T. Yagub, T.K. Sen, S. Afroze, H.M. Ang, Dye and its removal from aqueous solution by adsorption: a review, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 209 (2014) 172–184.
[55] A.R. Warade, R.W. Gaikwad, R.S. Sapkal, V .S. Sapkal, Study of removal techniques for dyes by adsorption: a review, Int. J. Adv. Res. Innovat. Ideas Educ., 2 (2016) 3851–3868.
[56] V . Katheresan, J. Kansedo, S.Y. Lau, Efficiency of Various Recent Wastewater Dye Removal Methods: A Review, Biochem. Pharmacol., 6 (2018) 4676–4679.
[57] B.Y. Shi, G.H. Li, D.S. Wang, C.H. Feng, H.X. Tang, Removal of direct dyes by coagulation: the performance of preformed polymeric aluminum species, J. Hazard. Mater., 143 (2007) 567–574.
[58] Y. Zhou, Z. Liang, Y. Wang, Decolorization and COD removal of secondary yeast wastewater effluents by coagulation using aluminum sulphate, Desalination, 225 (2018) 301–311.
[59] N.A. Oladoja, Headway on natural polymeric coagulants in water and wastewater treatment operations, J. Water Process. Eng., 6 (2015) 174–192.
[60] A. Mishra, M. Bajpai, The flocculation performance of Tama­
rindus mucilage  in relation to removal of vat and direct dyes, 
Bioresour. Technol., 97 (2006) 1055–1059.
[61] A. Mishra, M. Bajpai, S. Pandey, Removal of dyes by bio-degradable flocculants: a lab scale investigation, Sep. Sci. Technol., 41 (2006) 583–593.
[62] Q.Y. Yue, B.Y. Gao, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Sun, S.G. Wang, R.R. Gu, Synthesis of polyamine flocculants and their potential use in treating dye wastewater, J. Hazard. Mater., 152 (2008) 221–227.
[63] X. Huang, B. Gao, Q. Yue, Y. Zhang, S. Sun, Compound bioflocculant used as a coagulation aid in synthetic dye waste-water treatment: the effect of solution pH, Sep. Purif. Technol., 154 (2015) 108–114.
[64] G. Vijayaraghavan, T. Sivakumar, A. Vimal Kumar, Application of plant based coagulants for wastewater treatment, Int. J. Adv. Eng. Res. Stud., 1 (2011) 88–92.
[65] Y. Wei, A. Ding, L. Dong, Y. Tang, F. Yu, X. Dong, Characterisation and coagulation performance of an inorganic coagulant - poly-magnesium-silicate-chloride in treatment of simulated dyeing wastewater, Colloids Surf. A, 470 (2015) 137–141.
[66] S. Jorfi, G. Barzegar, M. Ahmadi, R.D.C. Soltani, N.A.J. Hag-highifard, A. Takdastan, R. Saeedi, M. Abtahif, Enhanced coagulation-photocatalytic treatment of Acid red 73 dye and real textile wastewater using UVA/synthesized MgO nano-particles, J. Environ. Manage., 171 (2016) 111–118.
[67] H. Li, S. Liu, J. Zhao, N. Feng, Removal of reactive dyes from wastewater assisted with kaolin clay by magnesium hydroxide coagulation process, Colloids Surf. A, 494 (2016) 222–227.
[68] A. Ndabigengesere, K.S. Narasiah, Quality of water treated by coagulation using Moringa oleifera seeds, Water Res., 32 (1998) 781–791.
[69] J.W. Lee, S.P . Choi, R. Thiruvenkatachari, W.G. Shim, H. Moon, Evaluation of the performance of adsorption and coagulation processes for the maximum removal of reactive dyes, Dyes Pigm., 69 (2006) 196–203.
[70] F.I. Hai, K. Yamamoto, K. Fukushi, Hybrid treatment systems for dye wastewater, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 37 (2007) 315–377.
[71] C. Ruden, Acrylamide and cancer risk - expert risk assess-ments and the public debat, J. Food Chem. Toxicol., 42 (2007) 335–349.
[72] N. Al-Bastaki, Removal of methyl orange dye and Na
2SO4 
salt from synthetic waste water using reverse osmosis, Chem. Eng. Process. Process Intensif., 43 (2004) 1561–1567.
[73] G. Capar, L. Yilmaz, U. Yetis, Reclamation of acid dye bath wastewater: effect of pH on nanofiltration performance, J. Membr. Sci., 281 (2006) 560–569.
[74] M. Amini, M. Arami, N.M. Mahmoodi, A. Akbari, Dye remo-val from colored textile wastewater using acrylic grafted nano-membrane, Desalination, 267 (2011) 107–113.
[75] A.Y. Zahrim, N. Hilal, Treatment of highly concentrated dye solution by coagulation/flocculation-sand filtration and nano-filtration, Water Res. Ind., 3 (2013) 23–34.P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416 408
[76] Y. Zheng, G. Yao, Q. Cheng, S. Yu, M. Liu, C. Gao, Positively 
charged thin-film composite hollow fiber nanofiltration mem-brane for the removal of cationic dyes through submerged filtration, Desalination, 328 (2013) 42–50.
[77] G. Jie, Z. Kongyin, Z. Xinxin, C. Zhijiang, C. Min, C. Tian, W. Junfu, Preparation and characterization of carboxyl multi-walled carbon nanotubes/calcium alginate composite hydrogel nano-filtration membrane, Mater. Lett., 157 (2015) 112–115.
[78] J. Guo, Q. Zhang, Z. Cai, K. Zhao, Preparation and dye filtra-tion property of electrospun polyhydroxybutyrate–calcium alginate/carbon nanotubes composite nanofibrous filtration membrane, Sep. Purif. Technol., 161 (2016) 69–79.
[79] N.P . Cheremisinoff, Handbook of Water and Wastewater Treatment Technologies, Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 2002.
[80] S.A. Avlonitis, I. Poulios, D. Sotiriou, M. Pappas, K. Moutesidis, Simulated cotton dye effluents treatment and reuse by nano-filtration, Desalination, 221 (2008) 259–267.
[81] O. Marmagne, C. Coste, Color removal from textile plant effluents, Am. Dyestuff. Rep., 85 (1996) 15–20.
[82] W. Chen, J. Mo, X. Du, Z. Zhang, W. Zhang, Biomimetic dyna-mic membrane for aquatic dye removal, Water Res., 151 (2019) 243–251.
[83] W.J. Lau, A.F. Ismail, Polymeric nanofiltration membranes for textile dye wastewater treatment: preparation, performance evaluation, transport modelling, and fouling control: a review, Desalination, 245 (2009) 321–348.
[84] C.G. Namboodri, W.S. Perkins, W.K. Walsh, Decolorizing dyes with chlorine and ozone, Am. Dyest. Rep., 83 (1994) 17–22.
[85] T. Omura, Design of chlorine-fast reactive dyes: Part 4: degra-dation of amino containing azo dyes by sodium-hypochlorite, Dyes Pigm., 26 (1994) 33–50.
[86] C. Frijters, R. Vos, G. Scheffer, R. Mulder, Decolorizing and detoxifying textile wastewater, containing both soluble and insoluble dyes, in a full scale combined anaerobic/aerobic system, Water Res., 40 (2006) 1249–1257.
[87] O.S.G.P . Soares, J.J.M. Orfao, D. Portela, A. Vieira, M.F.R. Per -
eira, Ozonation of textile effluents and dye solutions under continuous operation: influence of operating parameter, J. Hazard. Mater., 137 (2006) 1664–1673.
[88] A.B. dos Santos, F.J. Cervantes, J.B. van Lier, Review paper on current technologies for decolourisation of textile wastewaters: perspectives for anaerobic biotechnology, Bioresour. Technol., 98 (2007) 2369–2385.
[89] J. Wu, H. Doan, S. Upreti, Decolorization of aqueous textile reactive dye by ozone, Chem. Eng. J., 142 (2008) 156–160.
[90] A.C. Gomes, L.R. Fernandes, R.M.S. Simoes, Oxidation rates of two textile dyes by ozone: effect of pH and competitive kinetics, Chem. Eng. J., 189–190 (2012) 175–181.
[91] J.B. Parsa, S.H. Negahdar, Treatment of wastewater containing Acid Blue 92 dye by advanced ozone-based oxidation methods, Sep. Purif. Technol., 98 (2012) 315–320.
[92] S. Sharma, J. Buddhdev, M. Patel, J.P . Ruparelia, Studies on Degradation of Reactive Red 135 Dye in Wastewater using Ozone, Procedia Eng., 51 (2013) 451–455.
[93] D. Ge, Z. Zeng, M. Arowo, H. Zou, J. Chen, L. Shao, Degradation of methyl orange by ozone in the presence of ferrous and per -
sulfate ions in a rotating packed bed, Chemosphere, 146 (2016) 413–418.
[94] M. Sundrarajan, G. Vishnu, K. Joseph, Ozonation of light-shaded exhausted reactive dye bath for reuse, Dyes Pigm., 75 (2007) 273–278.
[95] M. Senthilkumar, M. Muthukumar, Studies on the possibility of recycling reactive dye bath effluent after decolouration using ozone, Dyes Pigm., 72 (2007) 251–255.
[96] E.H. Snider, J.J. Porter, Ozone treatment of dye waste, J. Water Pollut. Control Fed., 46 (1974) 886–894.
[97] K.K. Panda, A.P . Mathews, Ozone oxidation kinetics of Reactive Blue 19 anthraquinone dye in a tubular in situ ozone generator and reactor: modeling and sensitivity analyses, Chem. Eng. J., 255 (2014) 553–567.
[98] W.F.L.M. Hoeben, E.M. van Veldhuizen, G.M.W. Kroesen, Gas phase corona discharge for oxidation of phenol in an aqueous solution, J. Phys., 32 (1999) 133–137.[99] W.T. Shin, S. Yiacoumi, C. Tsouris, S. Dai, A pulseless corona-discharge process for the oxidation of organic compounds in water, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 39 (2000) 4408–4414.
[100] N. Sano, T. Kawashima, J. Fujikawa, T. Fujimoto, T. Kitai, T. Kanki, Decomposition of organic compounds in water by direct contact of corona discharge: influence of discharge conditions, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 41 (2002) 5906–5911.
[101] R. Hage, A. Lienke, Applications of transition-metal catalysts to textile and wood-pulp bleaching, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 23 (2005) 206–222.
[102] M. Morita, R. Ito, T. Kamidate, H. Watanabe, Kinetics of peroxidase catalyzed decoloration of Orange II with hydrogen peroxide, Tex. Res. J., 66 (1996) 470–473.
[103] S. Meric, D. Kaptan, C. Tunay, Removal of color and COD from a mixture of four reactive azo dyes using Fenton oxidation process, J. Environ. Sci. Health A, 38 (2003) 2241–2250.
[104] S. Wang, A Comparative study of Fenton and Fenton-like reaction kinetics in decolourisation of wastewater, Dyes Pigm., 76 (2008) 714–720.
[105] D.H. Khandelwal, R. Ameta, Use of photo-Fenton reagent in the degradation of basic yellow 2 in aqueous medium, Res. J. Recent. Sci., 2 (2013) 39–43.
[106]  M.E. Haddad, A. Regti, M.R. Laamari, R. Mamouni, N. Saffaj, Use of Fenton reagent as advanced oxidative process for removing textile dyes from aqueous solutions, J. Mater. Environ. Sci., 5 (2014) 667–674.
[107] N.A. Youssef, S.A. Shaban, F.A. Ibrahim, A.S. Mahmoud, Degradation of methyl orange using Fenton catalytic reaction, Egypt. J. Petrol., 5 (2016) 317–321.
[108] M.M. Cheng, W.H. Ma, J. Li, Y.P . Huang, J.C. Zhao, Visible-light-assisted degradation of dye pollutants over Fe(III)-loaded resin in the presence of H
2O2 at neutral pH values, Environ. 
Sci. Technol., 38 (2004) 1569–1575.
[109] R. Thiruvenkatachari, S. Vigneswaran, I.S. Moon, A review on UV/TiO
2 photocatalytic oxidation process, Korean J. Chem. 
Eng., 25 (2008) 64–72.
[110] S.H. Lin, C.F. Peng, Treatment of textile wastewater by electrochemical method, Water Res., 28 (1994) 277–282.
[111] V .K. Gupta, R. Jain, S. Varshney, Electrochemical removal of the hazardous dye Reactofix Red 3 BFN from industrial effluents, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 312 (2007) 292–296.
[112] S. Zodi, B. Merzouk, O. Potier, F. Lapicque, J.P . Leclerc, Direct red 81 dye removal by a continuous flow electrocoagulation/flotation reactor, Sep. Purif. Technol., 108 (2007) 215–222.
[113] B. Merzouk, B. Gourich, K. Madani, C.H. Vial, A. Sekki, Removal of a disperse red dye from synthetic wastewater by chemical coagulation and continuous electrocoagulation. A comparative study, Desalination, 272 (2012) 246–253.
[114] E. Pajootan, M. Arami, N.M. Mahmood, Binary system dye removal by electrocoagulation from synthetic and real colored wastewaters, J. Taiwan. Inst. Chem. Eng., 43 (2012) 282–290.
[115] M.K. Mbacke, C. Kane, N.O. Diallo, C.M. Diop, F. Chauvet, M. Comtat, T. Tzedakis, Electrocoagulation process applied on pollutants treatment-experimental optimization and fundamental investigation of the crystal violet dye removal, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 4 (2016) 4001–4011.
[116] X. Gao, W. Li, R. Mei, C. Zhu, B. Zhou, L. Ma, Q. Wei, Effect of the B
2H6/CH4/H2 ratios on the structure and electrochemical 
properties of boron-doped diamond electrode in the electro-chemical oxidation process of azo dye, J. Electroanal. Chem., 832 (2019) 247–253.
[117] D. Dogan, H. Turkdemir, Electrochemical oxidation of textile dye indigo, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 80 (2005) 916–923.
[118] A.M. Faouzi, B. Nasr, G. Abdellatif, Electrochemical degrada-tion of anthraquinone dye Alizarin Red S by anodic oxidation on boron-doped diamond, Dyes Pigm., 73 (2007) 86–89.
[119] F.H. Oliveira, M.E. Osugi, F.M.M. Paschoal, D, Profeti, P . Olivi, M.V .B. Zanoni, Electrochemical oxidation of an acid dye by active chlorine generated using Ti/Sn(1-x)Ir O-x(2) electrodes, J. Appl. Electrochem., 37 (2007) 583–592.
[120] N. Remya, J.G. Lin, Current status of microwave application in wastewater treatment - a review, Chem. Eng. J., 166 (2011) 797–813.409 P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416
[121] L. Bilinska, M. Gmurek, S. Ledakowicz, Comparison between 
industrial and simulated textile wastewater treatment by AOPs - biodegradability, toxicity and cost assessment, Chem. Eng. J., 306 (2016) 550–559.
[122] Y. Liu, X. He, X. Duan, Y. Fu, D. Fatta-Kassinos, D.D. Dion-ysiou, Significant role of UV and carbonate radical on the degradation of oxytetracycline in UV-AOPs: kinetics and mechanism, Water Res., 95 (2016) 195–204.
[123] P . Klan, M. Vavrik, Non-catalytic remediation of aqueous solutions by microwave-assisted photolysis in the presence of H
2O2, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A, 177 (2006) 24–33.
[124] S. Hisaindee, M.A. Meetani, M.A. Rauf, Application of LC-MS to the analysis of advanced oxidation process (AOP) degradation of dye products and reaction mechanisms, Trends Anal. Chem., 49 (2013) 31–44.
[125] M. Cheng, G. Zeng, D. Huang, C. Lai, P . Xu, C. Zhang, Y. Liu, Hydroxyl radicals based advanced oxidation pro-cesses (AOPs) for remediation of soils contaminated with organic compounds: a review, Chem. Eng. J., 284 (2016)  
582–598.
[126] F. Lelario, M. Brienza, S.A. Bufo, L. Scrano, Effectiveness of different advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) on the abatement of the model compound mepanipyrim in water, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A, 321 (2016) 187–201.
[127] P .V . Nidheesh, M. Zhou, M.A. Oturan, Chemosphere An overview on the removal of synthetic dyes from water by electrochemical advanced oxidation processes, Chemosphere, 197 (2018) 210–227.
[128] M. Izadifard, G. Achari, C.H. Langford, Degradation of sulfolane using activated persulfate with UV and UV-Ozone, Water Res., 125 (2017) 325–331.
[129] G. Subramanian, G. Madras, Introducing saccharic acid as an efficient iron chelate to enhance photo-Fenton degradation of organic contaminants, Water Res., 104 (2016) 168–177.
[130] M. Muruganandham, M. Swaminathan, Decolourisation of Reactive Orange 4 by Fenton and Photo-Fenton Oxidation Technology, Dyes Pigm., 63 (2004) 315–321.
[131] V .M. Bandala, L. Montoya, M. Mata, New species and records of Crepidotus from costa rica and mexico, Fungal Divers., 32 (2008) 9–29.
[132] J. Macias-Sanchez, L. Hinojosa-Reyes, J.L. Guzman-Mar, J.M. Peralta-Hernandez, A. Hernandez-Ramírez, Performance of the photo-Fenton process in the degradation of a model azo dye mixture, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 10 (2011) 332–337.
[133] Y.J. Shih, C.H. Ho, Y.H. Huang, Photo-Fenton oxidation of azo dye Reactive Black B using an immobilized iron oxide as heterogeneous catalyst, Water Environ. Res., 85 (2013) 340–345.
[134] L.A. de Luna, T.H. da Silva, R.F. Nogueira, F. Kummrow, G.A. Umbuzeiro, Aquatic toxicity of dyes before and after photo-Fenton treatment, J. Hazard. Mater., 276 (2014) 332–338.
[135] A.G. Trovo, A.K. Hassan, M. Sillanpaa, W.Z. Tang, Degradation of Acid Blue 161 by Fenton and photo-Fenton processes, Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 13 (2016) 147–158.
[136] I. Arslan-Alaton, A review of the effects of dye-assisting chemicals on advanced oxidation of reactive dyes in wastewater, Coloration, 119 (2003) 345–353.
[137] A. Akyol, H.C. Yatmaz, M. Bayramoglu, Photocatalytic decolorization of Remazol Red RR in aqueous ZnO suspensions, Appl. Catal. B, 54 (2004) 19–24.
[138] A. Aguedach, S. Brosillon, J. Morvan, E.K. Lhadi, Photocatalytic degradation of azo-dyes reactive black 5 and reactive yellow 145 in water over a newly deposited titanium dioxide, Appl. Catal. B, 57 (138) 55–62.
[139] M.A. Behnajady, N. Modirshahla, R. Hamzavi, Kinetic study on photocatalytic degradation of C.I. Acid Yellow 23 by ZnO photocatalyst, J. Hazard. Mater., 133 (2006) 226–232.
[140] T.K. Ghorai, D. Dhak, S.K. Biswas, S. Dalai, P . Pramanik, Photocatalytic oxidation of organic dyes by nano-sized metal molybdate incorporated titanium dioxide (M
xMoxTi1-xO6) 
(M=Ni, Cu, Zn) photocatalysts, J. Mol. Catal A: Chem., 273 (2007) 224–229.[141] F. Han, V .S.R. Kambala, M. Srinivasan, D. Rajarathnam, R. Naidu, Tailored titanium dioxide photocatalysts for the degradation of organic dyes in wastewater treatment: a review, Appl. Catal. A, 359 (2009) 25–40.
[142] C.D. Raman, S. Kanmani, Textile dye degradation using nano zero valent iron: a review, J. Environ. Manage., 177 (2016) 341–355.
[143] K. Vinodgopal, J. Peller, Hydroxyl radical-mediated advanced oxidation processes for textile dyes: a comparison of the radiolytic and sonolytic degradation of the monoazo dye Acid Orange 7, Res. Chem. Intermed., 29 (2003) 307–316.
[144]  O. Martins Ad, V .M. Canalli, C.M.N. Azevedo, M. Pires, Degradation of pararosaniline (C.I. Basic Red 9 monohy-drochloride) dye by ozonation and sonolysis, Dyes Pigm., 68 (2006) 227–234.
[145] G. Ameta, P . Vaishnav, R.K. Malkani, S.C. Ameta, Sonolytic, Photocatalytic and sonophotocatalytic degradation of toluidine blue, J. Indian Council Chem., 26 (2009) 100–105.
[146] R.R. Nair, R.L. Patel, Treatment of dye wastewater by sonolysis process, Int. J. Res. Modern Eng. Emerg. Technol., 2 (2014) 1–6.
[147] S. Chakma, L. Das, V .S. Moholkar, Dye decolorization with hybrid advanced oxidation processes comprising sonolysis/Fenton-like/photo-ferrioxalate systems: a mechanistic investigation, Sep. Purif. Technol., 156 (2015) 596–607.
[148] C.I. Pearce, J. Lloyd, J.T. Guthrie, The removal of colour from textile wastewater using whole bacterial cells: a review, Dyes Pigm., 58 (2003) 179–196.
[149] S. Jeevanantham, A. Saravanan, R.V . Hemavathy, P .S. Kumar, P .R. Yaashikaa, D. Yuvaraj, Removal of toxic pollutants from water environment by phytoremediation: a survey on application and future prospects, Environ. Technol. Innovat., 13 (2019) 264–276.
[150] B.E. Barragan, C. Costa, M. Carmen Marquez, Biodegradation of azo dyes by bacteria inoculated on solid media, Dyes Pigm., 75 (2007) 73–81.
[151] E. Kalmis, N. Azbar, F. Kalyoncu, Evaluation of two wild types of Pleurotus ostreatus (MCC07 and MCC20) isolated from nature for their ability to decolorize Benazol Black ZN textile dye in comparison to some commercial types of white rot fungi: Pleurotus ostreatus, Pleurotus djamor , and Pleurotus 
citrinopileatus, Can. J. Microbiol., 54 (2008) 366–370.
[152] P . Kaushik, A. Malik, Fungal dye decolorization: recent advances and future potential, Environ. Int., 35 (2009) 127–141.
[153] Y. Qu, S. Shi, F. Ma, B. Yan, Decolorization of reactive dark blue K-R by the synergism of fungus and bacterium using response surface methodology, Bioresour. Technol., 101 (2010) 8016–8023.
[154] N. Gomi, S. Yoshida, K. Matsumoto, M. Okudomi, H. Konno, T. Hisabori, Y. Sugano, Degradation of the synthetic dye amaranth by the fungus Bjerkandera adusta Dec 1: inference of the degradation pathway from an analysis of decolorized products, Biodegradation, 22 (2011) 1239–1245.
[155] Y. Qu, X. Cao, Q. Ma, S. Shi, L. Tan, X. Li, H. Zhou, X. Zhang, J. Zhou, Aerobic decolorization and degradation of Acid Red B by a newly isolated Pichia  sp. TCL, J. Hazard. Mater., 223–224 
(2012) 31–38.
[156] C. Miranda Rde, B. Gomes Ede, N. Pereira Jr., M.A. Marin-Morales, K.M. Machado, N.B. Gusmao, Biotreatment of textile effluent in static bioreactor by Curvularia lunata URM 
6179 and Phanerochaete chrysosporium URM 6181, Bioresour. Technol., 142 (2013) 361–367.
[157] L. Tan, S. Ning, X. Zhang, S. Shi, Aerobic decolorization and degradation of azo dyes by growing cells of a newly isolated yeast Candida tropicalis  TL-F1, Bioresour. Technol., 138 (2013) 
307–313.
[158] S.K. Sen, S. Raut, P . Bandyopadhyay, S. Raut, Fungal decolouration and degradation of azo dyes: a review, Fungal Biol. Rev., 30 (2016) 112–133.
[159] H.S. Rai, M.S. Bhattacharyya, J. Singh, T.K. Bansal, P . Vats, U.C. Banerjee, Removal of dyes from the effluent of textile and dyestuff manufacturing industry: a review of emerging techniques with reference to biological treatment, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 35 (2005) 219–238.P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416 410
[160] R. Sani, U. Banerjee, Decolorization of triphenylmethane 
dyes and textile and dye-stuff effluent by Kurthia sp., Enzyme Microbial. Technol., 24 (1999) 433–437.
[161] H.G. Kulla, Aerobic bacterial degradation of azo dyes, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 12 (1981) 387–399.
[162] J.A. Bumpus, B.J. Brock, Biodegradation of crystal violet by the white rot fungus Phanerochaete chrysosporium, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 54 (1988) 1143–1150.
[163] K. Vasdev, R.C. Kuhad, R.K. Saxena, Decolorization of tri-phenylmethane dyes by a bird’s nest fungus Cyathus bulleri, Current Microbiol., 30 (1995) 269–272.
[164] Y. Fu, T. Viraraghavan, Fungal decolorization of dye waste-waters: a review, Bioresour. Technol., 79 (2001) 251–262.
[165] N.K. Pazarlioglu, R.O. Urek, F. Ergun, Biodecolourization of Direct Blue 15 by immobilized Phanerochaete chrysosporium, Process Biochem., 40 (2005) 1923–1929.
[166] F.M. Zhang, J.S. Knapp, K.N. Tapley, Decolourisation of cotton bleaching effluent with wood rotting fungus, Water Res., 33 (1999) 919–928.
[167] P . Nigam, G. Armour, I.M. Banat, D. Singh, R. Marchant, Physical removal of textile dyes from effluents and solid-state fermentation of dye-adsorbed agricultural residues, Bio-resour. Technol., 72 (2000) 219–226.
[168] Salony, S. Mishra, V .S. Bisaria, Production and characterization of laccase from Cyathus bulleri and its use in decolourization of recalcitrant textile dyes, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 71 (2006) 646–653.
[169]  U. Pagga, D. Brown, The degradation of dyestuffs: Part II. Behaviour of dyestuffs in aerobic biodegradation tests, Chemosphere, 15 (1986) 479–491.
[170] E. Razo-Flores, M. Luijten, B. Donlon, G. Lettinga, J. Field, Biodegradation of selected azo dyes under methanogenic conditions, Water Sci. Technol., 36 (1997) 65–72.
[171] W. Delee, C. O’Neill, F.R. Hawkes, H.M. Pinheiro, Anaerobic treatment of textile effluents: a review, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 73 (1998) 323–335.
[172] F.P . Zee van der, G. Lettinga, J.A. Field, Azo dye decolourisation by anaerobic sludge, Chemosphere, 44 (2001) 1169–1176.
[173] M. Jayapal, H. Jagadeesan, M. Shanmugam, J.P . Danisha, S. Murugesan, Sequential anaerobic-aerobic treatment using plant microbe integrated system for degradation of azo dyes and their aromatic amines by-products, J. Hazard. Mater., 354 (2018) 231–243.
[174] A. Stolz, Basic and applied aspects in the microbial degradation of azo dyes, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 56 (2001) 69–80.
[175] D. Brown, P . Laboureur, The degradation of dyestuffs: part I. Primary biodegradation under anaerobic conditions, Chemo-sphere, 12 (1983) 397–404.
[176] D. Brown, B. Hamburger, The degradation of dye stuffs. Part III. Investigations of their ultimate degradability, Chemosphere, 16 (1987) 1539–1553.
[177] T. Robinson, G. McMullan, R. Marchant, P . Nigam, Reme-diation of dyes in textile effluent: a critical review on current treatment technologies with a proposed alternative, Bioresour. Technol., 77 (2001) 247–255.
[178] K.G. Bhattacharyya, A. Sarma, Adsorption characteristics of the dye, Brilliant Green, on Neem leaf powder, Dyes Pigm., 57 (2003) 211–222.
[179] G. Crini, Non-conventional low-cost adsorbents for dye removal: a review, Bioresour. Technol., 97 (2006) 1061–1085.
[180] M.D. LeVan, G. Carta, C.M. Yon, In: R.H. Perry, D.W. Green, J.O. Maloney, Eds., Adsorption and Ion Exchange, 7th ed. Perry’s Chemical Engineers, Handbook McGraw-Hill, New York, 1997.
[181] D.A. Clifford, Ion Exchange and Inorganic Adsorption, In: R.D. Letterman, Ed., Water Quality and Treatment, 5th ed., 
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1999.
[182] G.P . Handreck, T.D. Smith, Adsorption of methylene blue from aqueous solution by ZSM-5-type zeolites and related silica polymorphs, J. Chem. Soc., 84 (1988) 4191–4201.
[183] S. Karcher, A. Kornmuller, M. Jekel, Screening of commercial sorbents for the removal of reactive dyes, Dyes Pigm., 51 (2001) 111–125.[184] V . Meshko, L. Markovska, M. Mincheva, A.E. Rodrigues, Adsorption of basic dyes on granular acivated carbon and natural zeolite, Water Res., 35 (2001) 3357–3366.
[185] Y. Yu, Y.Y. Zhuang, Z.H. Wang, M.Q. Qiu, Adsorption of water-soluble dyes onto modified resin, Chemosphere, 54 (2004) 425–430.
[186] B. Armagan, O. Ozdemir, M. Turan, M.S. Celik, The removal of reactive azo dyes by natural and modified zeolites, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 78 (2003) 725–732.
[187] O. Ozdemir, B. Armagan, M. Turan, M.S. Celik, Comparison of the adsorption characteristics of azo-reactive dyes on mezoporous minerals, Dyes Pigm., 62 (2004) 49–60.
[188] X. Yuan, S.P . Zhuo, W. Xing, H.Y. Cui, X.D. Dai, X.M. Liu, Z.F. Yan, Aqueous dye adsorption on ordered mesoporous carbons, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 310 (2007) 83–89.
[189] H. Nur, A.F.N.A. Manan, L.K. Wei, M.N.M. Muhid, H. Ham-dan, Simultaneous adsorption of a mixture of paraquat and dye by NaY zeolite covered with alkylsilane, J. Hazard. Mater., 117 (2005) 5–40.
[190] J. Fan, A. Li, W. Yang, L. Yang, Q. Zhang, Adsorption of water-soluble dye XBR onto styrene and acrylic ester resins, Sep. Purif. Technol., 51 (2006) 338–344.
[191] X. Zhang, A. Li, Z. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Adsorption of dyes and phenol from water on resin adsorbents: effect of adsorbate size and pore size distribution, J. Hazard. Mater., 137 (2006) 1115–1122.
[192] C.-H. Liu, J.-S. Wu, H.-C. Chiu, S.-Y. Suen, K.H. Chu, Removal of anionic reactive dyes from water using anion exchange membranes as adsorbers, Water Res., 41 (2007) 1491–1500.
[193] S. Raghu, C. Ahmed Basha, Chemical or electrochemical techniques, followed by ion exchange, for recycle of textile dye wastewater, J. Hazard. Mater., 149 (2007) 324–330.
[194] S. Wang, E. Ariyanto, Competitive adsorption of malachite green and Pb ions on natural zeolite, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 314 (2007) 25–31.
[195] P .S. Kumar, K. Ramakrishnan, R. Gayathri, Removal of nickel (II) from aqueous solutions by ceralite IR 120 cationic exchange resins, J. Eng. Sci. Technol., 5 (2010) 232–243.
[196] S.K. Alpat, O. Ozbayrak, S. Alpat, H. Akcay, The adsorption kinetics and removal of cationic dye, Toluidine Blue O, from aqueous solution with Turkish zeolite, J. Hazard. Mater., 151 (2008) 213–220.
[197] S.D. Alexandratos, Ion-exchange resins: a retrospective from industrial and engineering chemistry research, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 48 (2009) 388–398.
[198] O.B. Akpor, M. Muchie, Remediation of heavy metals in drinking water and wastewater treatment systems: processes and applications, Int. J. Phys. Sci., 5 (2010) 1807–1817.
[199] M. Wawrzkiewicz, Removal of C.I. Basic Blue 3 dye by sorption onto cation exchange resin, functionalized and non-functionalized polymeric sorbents from aqueous solutions and wastewaters, Chem. Eng. J., 217 (2013) 414–425.
[200] C.L. Mantell, Adsorption, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1951.
[201] K.G. Pavithra, P .S. Kumar, V . Jaikumar, Removal of colorants from wastewater: a review on sources and treatment strategies, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 75 (2019) 1–19.
[202] J.S. Mattson, H.B.J. Mark, Activated Carbon Surface Chemistry and Adsorption from Solution, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1971.
[203] A.I. Liapis, Fundamentals of Adsorption, Engineering Foun-dation, New York, 1987.
[204] H.M. Freeman, Standard Handbook of Hazardous Waste Treatment and Disposal, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989.
[205] M. Pirbazari, B.N. Badriyha, R.J. Miltner, GAC adsorber design for removal of chlorinated pesticide, J. Environ. Eng., 117 (1991) 80–100.
[206] F. Quignon, F. Thomas, C. Gantzer, A. Huyard, L. Schwartzbrod, Virus adsorption in a complex system: an experimentally designed study, Water Res., 32 (1998) 1222–1230.
[207] K. Imamura, E. Ikeda, T. Nagayasu, T. Sakiyama, K. Nakanishi, Adsorption behavior of methylene blue and its congeners on a stainless steel surface, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 245 (2002) 50–57.411 P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416
[208] R.C. Bansal, M. Goyal, Activated Carbon Adsorption, Taylor 
& Francis Group, Boca Raton, 2005.
[209] L.-C. Juang, C.-C. Wang, C.-K. Lee, Adsorption of basic dyes onto MCM-41, Chemosphere, 64 (2006) 1920–1928.
[210] Y. Onal, Kinetics of adsorption of dyes from aqueous solution using activated carbon prepared from waste apricot, J. Hazard. Mater., 137 (2006) 1719–1728.
[211] M.J. Iqbal, M.N. Ashiq, Adsorption of dyes from aqueous solutions on activated charcoal, J. Hazard. Mater., 139 (2007) 57–66.
[212]  G. Wang, W. Li, H. Chen, B. Li, The direct liquefaction of saw dust in tetralin, Energy Sources Part A, 29 (2007) 
1221–1231.
[213] M. Turabik, Adsorption of basic dyes from single and binary component systems onto bentonite: simultaneous analysis of Basic Red 46 and Basic Yellow 28 by first order derivative spectrophotometric analysis method, J. Hazard. Mater., 158 (2008) 52–64.
[214] W. Yang, D. Wu, R. Fu, Effect of surface chemistry on the adsorption of basic dyes on carbon aerogels, Colloids Surf. A, 312 (2008) 118–124.
[215] G. Bayramoglu, B. Altintas, M.Y. Arica, Adsorption kinetics and thermodynamic parameters of cationic dyes from aqu-eous solutions by using a new strong cation-exchange resin, Chem. Eng. J., 152 (2009) 339–346.
[216] S.D. Khattri, M.K. Singh, Removal of malachite green from dye wastewater using neem sawdust by adsorption, J. Hazard. Mater., 167 (2009) 1089–1094.
[217] A.A. Ahmad, B.H. Hameed, Fixed-bed adsorption of reactive azo dye onto granular activated carbon prepared from waste, J. Hazard. Mater., 175 (2010) 298–303.
[218] K. Nuithitikul, S. Srikhun, S. Hirunpraditkoon, Kinetics and equilibrium adsorption of Basic Green 4 dye on activated carbon derived from durian peel: effects of pyrolysis and post-treatment conditions, J. Taiwan. Inst. Chem. Eng., 41 (2010) 591–598.
[219] Y. Kismir, A.Z. Aroguz, Adsorption characteristics of the hazardous dye Brilliant Green on Saklıkent mud, Chem. Eng. J., 172 (2011) 199–206.
[220] G. Moussavi, R. Khosravi, The removal of cationic dyes from aqueous solutions by adsorption onto pistachio hull waste, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 89 (2011) 2182–2189.
[221] I.M. Ahmed, M.S. Gasser, Adsorption study of anionic reactive dye from aqueous solution to Mg–Fe–CO
3 layered 
double hydroxide (LDH), Appl. Surf. Sci., 259 (2012) 650–656.
[222] M. Paul, N. Pal, A. Bhaumik, Selective adsorption and release of cationic organic dye molecules on mesoporous borosili cates, 
Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 32 (2012) 1461–1468.
[223] L. Chen, B. Bai, Equilibrium kinetic, thermodynamic, and in situ regeneration studies about methylene blue adsorption by the raspberry-like TiO
2@yeast microspheres, Ind. Eng. Chem. 
Res., 52 (2013) 15568–15577.
[224] A.S. Elsherbiny, Adsorption kinetics and mechanism of acid dye onto montmorillonite from aqueous solutions: stopped-flow measurements, Appl. Clay. Sci., 83–84 (2013) 56–62.
[225] M. Wang, L. Wang, Synthesis and characterization of carboxy-methyl cellulose/organic montmorillonite nano composites 
and its adsorption behavior for congo red dye, Water Sci. Eng., 6 (2013) 272–282.
[226] R. Shukla, G. Madras, Facile synthesis of aluminium cobalt oxide for dye adsorption, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2 (2014) 2259–2268.
[227] B. Yahyaei, S. Azizian, Rapid adsorption of binary dye pollutants onto the nanostructured mesoporous alumina, J. Mol. Liq., 199 (2014) 88–95.
[228] R. Hazzaa, M. Hussein, Adsorption of cationic dye from aqueous solution onto activated carbon prepared from olive stones, Environ. Technol. Innovation, 4 (2015) 36–51.
[229] R. Sivashankar, A.B. Sathya, U. Krishnakumar, V . Sivasub-ramanian, Synthesis of magnetic biocomposite for efficient adsorption of azo dye from aqueous solution, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 121 (2015) 149–153.[230] S.O. Akpotu, B. Moodley, Synthesis and characterization of citric acid grafted MCM-41 and its adsorption of cationic dyes, J. Environ. Eng., 4 (2016) 4503–4513.
[231] F. Zhang, B. Ma, X. Jiang, Y. Ji, Dual function magnetic hydroxyapatite nanopowder for removal of malachite green and Congo red from aqueous solution, Powder Technol., 302 (2016) 207–214.
[232] Z. Liang, Z. Zhao, T. Sun, W. Shi, F. Cui, Enhanced adsorption of the cationic dyes in the spherical CuO/meso-silica nano composite and impact of solution chemistry, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 485 (2017) 192–200.
[233] Y. Qi, M. Yang, W. Xu, S. He, Y. Men, Natural polysaccharides-modified graphene oxide for adsorption of organic dyes from aqueous solutions, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 486 (2017) 84–96.
[234] R. Rakhshaee, Y. Noorani, Comparing three methods of simultaneous synthesis and stabilization of Fe
3O4 nano-
particles: changing physicochemical properties of products to improve kinetic and thermodynamic of dye adsorption, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 422 (2017) 128–140.
[235] C. Pelekani, V .L. Snoeyink, Competitive adsorption between atrazine and Methylene Blue on activated carbon: the impor tance of pore size distribution, Carbon, 38 (2000) 
1423–1436.
[236] C. Tien, Adsorption Calculations and Modeling, Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 1994.
[237] T. Van der Plas, The Texture and the Surface Chemistry of Carbons, in: B.G. Linsen, Ed., Physical and Chemical Aspects of Adsorbens and Catalysts, Academic Press, London, 1970.
[238] M.O. Corapcioglu, C.P . Huang, The surface acidity and charac-terization of some commercial activated carbons, Carbon, 25 (1987) 569–578.
[239] I.N. Najm, V .L. Snoeyink, B.W.J. Lykins, J.Q. Adams, Using powdered activated carbon: a critical review, Am. Water Works Assoc., 83 (1991) 65–76.
[240] F.A. Di Giano, A.S. Natter, Disperse dye-carrier interactions on activated carbon, J. Water Pollut. Control. Fed., 49 (1977) 235–244.
[241] G.M. Walker, L.R. Weatherley, Kinetics of acid dye adsorption on GAC, Water Res., 33 (1999) 1895–1899.
[242] S. Suganya, P .S. Kumar, Influence of ultrasonic waves on preparation of active carbon from coffee waste for the reclamation of effluents containing Cr(VI) ions, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 60 (2018) 418–430.
[243] Y. Al-Degs, M.A.M. Khraisheh, S.J. Allen, M.N.A. Ahmad, Sorption behaviour of cationic and anionic dyes from aqueous solution on different types of activated carbons, Sep. Sci. Technol., 36 (2001) 91–102.
[244] P .J.M. Carrott, M.M.L. Ribeiro Carrott, J.M.V . Nabais, J.P .P . Ramalho, Influence of surface ionization on the adsorption of aqueous zinc species by activated carbons, Carbon, 35 (1997) 403–410.
[245] P .J.M. Carrott, M.M.L. Ribeiro Carrott, J.M.V . Nabais, Influ-ence of surface ionization on the adsorption of aqueous mercury chlorocomplexes by activated carbons, Carbon, 36 (1998) 11–17.
[246] C. Gabaldon, P . Marzal, A. Seco, J.A. Gonzalez, Cadmium and copper removal by a granular activated carbon in laboratory column systems, Sep. Sci. Technol., 35 (2000) 1039–1053.
[247] R.W. Kuennen, R.M. Taylor, K. Van Dyke, K. Groenevelt, Removing lead from drinking water with a point-of-use GAC fixed-bed adsorber, J. Am. Water Works Assoc., 84 (1992) 91–101.
[248] A. Macias-Garcia, C. Valenzuela-Calahorro, V . Gomez-Serrano, A. Espinosa-Mansilla, Adsorption of Pb
2+ by heat-treated acid 
sulfurized activated carbon, Carbon, 31 (1993) 1249–1255.
[249] J.S. Zogorski, S.D. Faust, J.H. Haas, The kinetics of adsorption of phenols by granular activated carbon, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 55 (1976) 329–341.
[250] F. Caturla, J.M. Martin-Martinez, M. Molina-Sabio, F. Rodriguez- Reinoso, R. Torregrosa, Adsorption of substituted 
phenols on activated carbon, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 124 (1988) 528–534.P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416 412
[251] J.T. Paprowicz, Activated carbons for phenols removal from 
wastewaters, Environ. Technol., 11 (1990) 71–82.
[252] P .J.M. Carrott, P .A.M. Mourao, M.M.L. Ribeiro Carrott, E.M. Goncalves, Separating surface and solvent effects and the notion of critical adsorption energy in the adsorption of phenolic compounds by activated carbons, Langmuir, 21 (2005) 11863–11869.
[253] P .A.M. Mourao, P .J.M. Carrott, M.M.L. Ribeiro Carrott, Application of different equations to adsorption isotherms of phenolic compounds on activated carbons prepared from cork, Carbon, 44 (2006) 2422–2429.
[254] M. Pirbazari, W.J. Weber Jr., Removal of Dieldrin from water by activated carbon, J. Environ. Eng., 110 (1984) 656–669.
[255] J. Hu, T. Aizawa, Y. Ookubo, T. Morita, Y. Magara, Adsorptive characteristics of ionogenic aromatic pesticides in water on powdered activated carbon, Water Res., 32 (1988) 2593–2600.
[256] K. Urano, E. Yamamoto, M. Tonegawa, K. Fujie, Adsorption of chlorinated organic compounds on activated carbon from water, Water Res., 25 (1991) 1459–1464.
[257] M.C. Lee, J.C. Crittenden, V .L. Snoeyink, M. Ari, Design of carbon beds to remove humic substances, J. Environ. Eng., 109 (1983) 631–645.
[258] M. Pirbazari, B.N. Badriyha, S.H. Kim, R.J. Miltner, Evaluating GAC adsorbers for the removal of PCBs and Toxaphene, J. Am. Water Works Assoc., 84 (1992) 83–90.
[259] M. Bele, A. Kodre, I. Arcon, J. Grdadolnik, S. Pejovnik, J.O. Besenhard, Adsorption of cetyltrimethylammonium bro mide on carbon black from aqueous solution, Carbon, 
36 (1998) 1207–1212.
[260] A.N. Malhas, R.A. Abuknesha, R.G. Price, Removal of deter -
gents from protein extracts using activated charcoal prior to immunological analysis, J. Immunol. Methods, 264 (2002) 37–43.
[261] M.E. Flentje, D.G. Hager, Reevaluation of granular-carbon filters for taste and odor control, J. Am. Water Works Assoc., 56 (1964) 191.
[262] S. Lalezary, M. Pirbazari, M.J. McGuire, Evaluating activated carbons for removing low concentrations of taste-and odor-producing organics, J. Am. Water Works Assoc., 78 (1986) 76–82.
[263] D.M. Giusti, R.A. Conway, C.T. Lawson, Activated carbon adsorption of petrochemicals, J. Water Pollut. Control. Fed., 46 (1974) 947–965.
[264] I. Saito, The removal of Hexacyanoferrate(II) and (III) ions in dilute aqueous solution by activated carbon, Water Res., 18 (1984) 319–323.
[265] G. McKay, M.J. Bino, A.R. Altameni, The adsorption of various pollutants from aqueous solutions on to activated carbon, Water Res., 19 (1985) 491–495.
[266] M.C. Annesini, F. Gironi, M. Ruzzi, C. Tomei, Adsorption of organic compounds onto activated carbon, Water Res., 21 (1987) 567–571.
[267] E.H. Smith, Evaluation of multicomponent adsorption equi-libria for organic mixtures onto activated carbon, Water Res., 25 (1991) 125–134.
[268] P .S. Kumar, S. Ramalingam, K. Sathishkumar, Removal of methylene blue dye from aqueous solution by activated carbon prepared from cashew nut shell as a new low-cost adsorbent, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 28 (2011) 149–155.
[269] C. Donati, M. Drikas, R. Hayes, G. Newcombe, Microcystin-LR adsorption by powdered activated carbon, Water Res., 28 (1994) 1735–1742.
[270] P .J.M. Carrott, M.M.L. Ribeiro Carrott, I.P .P . Cansado, J.M.V . Nabais, Reference data for the adsorption of benzene on car bon materials, Carbon, 38 (2007) 465–474.
[271] L. Hemphill, V . Ramaiah, M. Valentine, Thermal Regeneration of Activated Carbon, 32nd Purdue Industrial Waste Confer -
ence, Purdue University, 1997, pp. 116–126.
[272] M.A. Rollar, M.T. Suidan, W.H. Goss, S.A. Vargo, Regeneration of five activated carbon with methanol, J. Environ. Eng., 108 (1982) 1361.
[273] R.J. Martin, W.J. Ng, The repeated exhaustion and regeneration of activated carbon, Water Res., 21 (1987) 961–965.[274] G. Newcombe, M. Drikas, Chemical regeneration of granular activated carbon from an operating water treatment plant, Water Res., 27 (1993) 161–165.
[275] S. Notthakum, J.C. Crittenden, D.W. Hand, D.L. Perram, M.E. Mullins, Regeneration of adsorbents using heteroge-neous advanced oxidation, J. Environ. Eng., 119 (1993) 695.
[276] R.M. Narbaitz, J. Cen, Electrochemical regeneration of gra-nular activated carbon, Water Res., 28 (1994) 1771–1778.
[277] E.J. Kilduff, C.J. King, Effect of carbon adsorbent surface properties on the uptake and solvent regeneration of phenol, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 36 (1997) 1603–1613.
[278] E.A. Taiwo, A. Adesina, Electrochemical regeneration of a native activated carbon, Chem. Biochem. Eng. Q., 19 (2005) 269–273.
[279] M.H. Zhou, L.C. Lei, Electrochemical regeneration of acti-vated carbon loaded with p-nitrophenol in a fluidized electro-chemical reactor, Electrochim. Acta, 51 (2005) 4489–4496.
[280] M.A.M. Salleh, D.K. Mahmoud, W.A.W.A. Karim, A. Idris, Cationic and anionic dye adsorption by agricultural solid wastes: a comprehensive review, Desalination, 280 (2011) 1–13.
[281] Y. Zhou, L. Zhang, Z. Cheng, Removal of organic pollutants from aqueous solution using agricultural wastes: a review, J. Mol. Liq., 212 (2015) 739–762.
[282] S. Chowdhury, R. Mishra, P . Saha, P . Kushwaha, Adsorption thermodynamics, kinetics and isosteric heat of adsorption of malachite green onto chemically modified rice husk, Desa-lination, 265 (2011) 159–168.
[283] J.M. Dias, M.C.M. Alvim-Ferraz, M.F. Almeida, J. Rivera-Utrilla, M. Sanchez-Polo, Waste materials for activated carbon preparation and its use in aqueous-phase treatment: a review, J. Environ. Manage., 85 (2007) 833–846.
[284] O. Ioannidou, A. Zabaniotou, Agricultural residues as pre-cursors for activated carbon production – a review, Renew. Sust. Energy Rev., 11 (2007) 1996–2005.
[285] F.E. Okieimen, C.O. Okiemen, R.A. Wuana, Preparation and characterization of activated carbon from rice husks, J. Chem. Soc., 32 (2007) 126–136.
[286] D. Savova, E. Apak, E. Ekinci, F. Yardim, N. Petrova, T. Budinova, M. Razvigorova, V . Minkova, Biomass conversion to carbon adsorbents and gas, Biomass Bioenergy, 21 (2001) 133–142.
[287] K.A. Adegoke, O.S. Bello, Dye sequestration using agricultural wastes as adsorbents, Water Resour. Ind., 12 (2015) 8–24.
[288] P .J.M. Carrott, M.M.L. Ribeiro Carrott, P .A.M. Mourao, R.P . Lima, Preparation of activated carbons from cork by physical activation in carbon dioxide, Adsorpt. Sci., 21 (2003) 669–681.
[289] R. Sanghi, B. Bhattacharya, Review on decolorisation of aqueous dye solutions by low cost adsorbents, Coloration Technol., 118 (2003) 256–269.
[290] N.H. Phan, S. Rio, C. Faur, L. Le Coq, P . Le Cloirec, T.H. Nguyen, Production of fibrous activated carbons from natural cellulose (jute, coconut) fibers for water treatment applica tions, Carbon, 44 (2006) 2569–2577.
[291] M.A. Lillo-Rodenas, J.P . Marco-Lozar, D. Cazorla-Amoros, A. Linares-Solano, Activated carbons prepared by pyrolysis of mixtures of carbon precursor/alkaline hydroxide, J. Analyt. Appl. Pyrolysis, 80 (2007) 166–174.
[292] M.A. Ahmad, N.K. Rahman, Equilibrium, kinetics and thermo-dynamic of Re-mazol Brilliant Orange 3R dye adsorption on coffee husk-based activated carbon, Chem. Eng. J., 170 (2011) 154–161.
[293] K.Y. Foo, B.H. Hameed, Coconut husk derived activated carbon via microwave induced activation: effects of activation agents, preparation parameters and adsorption performance, Chem. Eng. J., 184 (2012) 57–65.
[294] U. Gecgel, H. Kolancilar, Adsorption of Remazol brilliant blue R on activated carbon prepared from a pine cone, Nat. Prod. Res., 26 (2012) 659–664.
[295] M. Lanzetta, C. Di Blasi, Pyrolysis kinetics of wheat and corn straw, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 44 (1998) 181–192.413 P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416
[296] M. Ahmedna, W.E. Marshall, R.M. Rao, Production of granular 
activated carbons from select agricultural byproducts and evaluation of their physical, chemical and adsorption pro-perties, Bioresour. Technol., 71 (2000) 13–123.
[297] T. Hassanein, B. Koumanova, Evaluation of adsorption poten-tial of the agricultural waste wheat straw for Basic Yellow 21, J. Chem. Technol. Metall., 45 (2010) 407–414.
[298] P .K. Malik, Use of activated carbons prepared from sawdust and rice-husk for adsorption of acid dyes: a case study of Acid Yellow 36, Dyes Pigm., 56 (2003) 239–249.
[299] P .K. Malik, Dye removal from wastewater using activated carbon developed from sawdust: adsorption equilibrium and kinetics, J. Hazard. Mater., 113 (2004) 81–88.
[300] B.G. Prakash Kumar, L.R. Miranda, M. Velan, Adsorption of Bismark Brown dye on activated carbons prepared from rubber wood sawdust (Hevea brasiliensis) using different activation methods, J. Hazard. Mater., 126 (2005) 63–70.
[301] R.S. Juang, F.C. Wu, R.L. Tseng, Characterization and use of activated carbons prepared from bagasses for liquid-phase adsorption, Colloids Surf. B, 201 (2002) 191–199.
[302] E. Altintig, G. Arabaci, H. Altundag, Preparation and charac-terization of the antibacterial efficiency of silver loaded acti-vated carbon from corncobs, Surf. Coat. Technol., 304 (2016) 63–67.
[303] M. Valix, W.H. Cheung, G. McKay, Preparation of activated carbon using low temperature carbonisation and physical activation of high ash raw bagasse for acid dye adsorption, Chemosphere, 56 (2004) 493–501.
[304] A.E. Putun, N. Ozbay, E.P . Onal, E. Putun, Fixed-bed pyrolysis of cotton stalk for liquid and solid products, Fuel Process. Technol., 86 (2005) 1207–1219.
[305] I.A.W. Tan, A.L. Ahmad, B.H. Hameed, Adsorption of basic dye on high surface area activated carbon prepared from coconut husk: equilibrium, kinetic and thermodynamic studies, J. Hazard. Mater., 154 (2008) 337–346.
[306] Y.P . Guo, S.F. Yang, W.Y. Fu, J.R. Qi, R.Z. Li, Z.C. Wang, H.D. Xu, Adsorption of malachite green on micro- and mesoporous rice husk-based active carbon, Dyes Pigm., 56 (2003) 219–229.
[307] M.M. Mohamed, Acid dye removal: comparison of surfactant modified mesoporous FSM-16 with activated carbon derived from rice husk, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 272 (2004) 28–34.
[308] W. Li, J.H. Peng, L.B. Zhang, H.Y. Xia, N. Li, K.B. Yang, X.Y. Zhu, Investigations on carbonization processes of plain tobacco stems and H
3PO4-impregnated tobacco stems used for 
the preparation of activated carbons with H3PO4 activation, 
Ind. Crops Prod., 28 (2008) 73–80.
[309] T. Yang, A.C. Lua, Characteristics of activated carbons pre-pared from pistachio-nut shells by physical activation, J. Col loid Interface Sci., 267 (2003) 408–417.
[310] M. Ahmedna, W.E. Marshall, A.A. Husseiny, R.M. Rao, I. Goktepe, The use of nutshell carbons in drinking water filters for removal of trace metals, Water Res., 38 (2004) 1062–1068.
[311] A. Kumar, H.M. Jena, Removal of methylene blue and phenol onto prepared activated carbon from Fox nutshell by che-mical activation in batch and fixed-bed column, J. Cleaner Prod., 137 (2016) 1246–1259.
[312] T. Tay, S. Ucar, S. Karagoz, Preparation and characterization of activated carbon from waste biomass, J. Hazard. Mater., 165 (2009) 481–485.
[313] I.A.W. Tan, A.L. Ahmad, B.H. Hameed, Enhancement of basic dye adsorption uptake from aqueous solutions using chemically modified oil palm shell activated carbon, Colloids Surf. A, 318 (2008) 88–96.
[314] L.S. Tan, K. Jain, C.A. Rozaini, Adsorption of textile dye from aqueous solution on pretreated mangrove bark, an agricultural waste: equilibrium and kinetics studies, J. Appl. Sci. Environ. Sanit., 5 (2010) 283–294.
[315] A.-A. Pelaez-Cid, A.-M. Herrera-Gonzalez, M. Salazar-Villanueva, A. Bautista-Hernandez, Elimination of textile dyes using activated carbons prepared from vegetable residues and their characterization, J. Environ. Manage., 181 (2016) 269–278.[316] T. Zhang, W.P . Walawender, L.T. Fan, M. Fan, D. Daugaard, R.C. Brown, Preparation of activated carbon from forest and agricultural residues through CO
2 activation, Chem. Eng. J., 
105 (2004) 53–59.
[317] B. Royer, N.F. Cardoso, E.C. Lima, J.P . Vaghetti, N.M. Simon, T. Calvete, R.C. Veses, Applications of Brazilian pine-fruit shell in natural and carbonized forms as adsorbents to removal of methylene blue from aqueous solutions: kinetic and equilibrium study, J. Hazard. Mater., 164 (2009) 1213–1222.
[318] G.H. Oh, C.R. Park, Preparation and characteristics of rice-straw based porous carbons with high adsorption capacity, Fuel, 81 (2002) 327–336.
[319] V . Minkova, S.P . Marinov, R. Zanzi, E. Bjornbom, T. Budinova, M. Stefanova, L. Lakov, Thermochemical treatment of biomass in a flow of steam or in a mixture of steam and carbon dioxide, Fuel Process. Technol., 62 (2000) 45–52.
[320] A. Abdel-Nasser, El-Hendawy, S.E. Samra, B.S. Girgis, Adsor -
ption characteristics of activated carbons obtained from corncobs, Colloids Surf. A, 180 (2001) 209–221.
[321] V . Minkova, M. Razvigorova, E. Bjornbom, R. Zanzi, T. Budi-nova, N. Petrov, Effect of water vapour and biomass nature on the yield and quality of the pyrolysis products from biomass, Fuel Process. Technol., 70 (2001) 53–61.
[322] B.S. Girgis, S.S. Yunis, A.M. Soliman, Characteristics of activated carbon from peanut hulls in relation to conditions of preparation, Mater. Lett., 57 (2002) 164–172.
[323] M. Fan, W. Marshall, D. Daugaard, R.C. Brown, Steam activation of chars produced from oat hulls and corn stover, Bioresour. Technol., 93 (2004) 103–107.
[324]  Y.S. Al-Degs, M.I. El-Barghouthi, A.H. El-Sheikh, G.M. Wal ker, 
Effect of solution pH, ionic strength, and temperature on adsorption behavior of reactive dyes on activated carbon, Dyes Pigm., 77 (2008) 16–23.
[325] E.N. El Qada, S.J. Allen, G.M. Walker, Adsorption of basic dyes from aqueous solution onto activated carbons, Chem. Eng. J., 135 (2008) 174–184.
[326] M. Abassi, N.R. Asl, Removal of hazardous reactive blue 19 dye from aqueous solution by agricultural waste, J. Iran. Chem. Res., 2 (2009) 221–230.
[327] P .S. Kumar, S.J. Varjani, S. Suganya, Treatment of dye wastewater using an ultrasonic aided nanoparticle stacked activated carbon: kinetic and isotherm modelling, Bioresour. Technol., 250 (2018) 716–722.
[328] S.T. Ong, P .S. Keng, S.L. Lee, M.H. Leong, Y.T. Hung, Equili-brium studies for the removal of basic dye by sun flower seed 
husk (Helianthus annus), Int. J. Phys. Sci., 5 (2010) 1270–1276.
[329] T. Parvathi, T. Maruthvanan, S. Sivamani, C. Prakash, C.V . Koushik, Role of tapioca peel activated carbon (TPAC) in decolourisation of Red Brown C4R reactive dye, Indian J. Sci. Technol., 3 (2010) 290–292.
[330] C. Senthamarai, P .S. Kumar, M. Priyadharshini, P . Vijaya lakshmi, 
V .V . Kumar, P . Baskaralingam, K.V . Thiruvengadaravi, S. Sivanesan, Adsorption behavior of methylene blue dye onto surface modified Strychnos potatorum seeds, Env. Prog. Sustain. Energy, 32 (2013) 624–632.
[331] R.R.V . Hemavathy, P .S. Kumar, S. Suganya, V . Swetha, S.J. Varjani, Modelling on the removal of toxic metal ions from aquatic system by different surface modified Cassia fistula 
seeds, Bioresour. Technol., 281 (2019) 1–9.
[332] O.A. Ekpete, M. Horsfall Jr., Preparation and characterization of activated carbon derived from fluted pumpkin stem waste (Telfairia occidentalis  Hook F), Res. J. Chem. Sci., 1 (2011) 10–17.
[333] S. Patil, S. Renukdas, N. Patil, Removal of methylene blue, a basic dye from aqueous solution by ad-sorption using teak tree (Tectona grandis) bark powder, Int. J. Environ. Sci., 1 (2011) 711–725.
[334] R. Srivastava, D.C. Rupainwar, A comparative evaluation for adsorption of dye on neem bark and mango bark powder, Indian J. Chem. Technol., 18 (2011) 67–75.
[335] E. Gunasundari, P .S. Kumar, Adsorption isotherm, kinetics and thermodynamic analysis of Cu(II) ions onto the dried algal biomass (Spirulina platensis), J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 56 (2017) 129–144.P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416 414
[336] P .R. Yaashikaa, P .S. Kumar, S.J. Varjani, A. Saravanan, 
Advances in production and application of biochar from lignocellulosic feedstocks for remediation of environmental pollutants, Bioresour. Technol., (2019), doi: 10.1016/j.biortech. 2019.122030.
[337] S.K. Kansal, A. Kumari, Potential of M. oleifera for the treatment of water and wastewater, Chem. Rev., 114 (2014) 4993–5010.
[338] A. Hashem, R.A. Akasha, A. Ghith, D.A. Hussein, Adsorbent based on agri-cultural wastes for heavy metal and dye removal: a review, Energy Educ. Sci. Technol., 19 (2007) 69–86.
[339] M. Balat, Mechanisms of thermochemical biomass conversion processes, Energy Sources Part A, 30 (2010) 649–659.
[340] R.A. Young, Structure, Swelling and Bonding of Cellulose Fibers, in: Cellulose: Structure, Modification, and Hydrolysis, Wiley and Sons, New York, 1986, pp. 91–128.
[341] H.L. Hergert, E.K. Pye, Recent History of Organo Solv Pul ping, in: Tappi Notes-Solvent Pulping Symposium, 1992, 
pp, 9–26.
[342] G.I. Mantanis, R.A. Young, R.M. Rowell, Swelling of com-
pressed cellulose fiber webs in organic liquids, Cellulose, 2 (1995) 1–22.
[343] R. Garcia-Valls, T.A. Hatton, Metal ion complexation with lignin derivatives, Chem. Eng. J., 94 (2003) 99–105.
[344] D. Mohan, C.U. Pittman J., P .H. Steele, Pyrolysis of wood/biomass for bio-oil: a critical review, Energy Fuels, 20 (2006) 848–889.
[345] P .S. Kumar, R.V . Abhinaya, K.G. Lashmi, V . Arthi, R. Pavithra, V . Sathyaselvabala, S.D. Kirupha, S. Sivanesan, Adsorption of methylene blue dye from aqueous solution by agricultural waste: equilibrium, thermodynamics, kinetics, mechanism and process design, Colloid J., 73 (2011) 651–661.
[346] M.H. Liu, S.N. Hong, J.H. Huang, H.Y. Zhan, Adsorption/desorption behavior between a novel amphoteric granular lignin adsorbent and reactive red K-3B in aqueous solutions, J. Environ. Sci., 17 (2005) 212–214.
[347] M.H. Liu, J.H. Huang, Removal and recovery of cationic dyes from aqueous solutions using spherical sulfonic lignin adsorbent, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 101 (2006) 2284–2291.
[348] P .J.M. Suhas, M.M.L. Ribeiro, Lignin from natural adsorbent to activated carbon: a review, Bioresour. Technol., 98 (2007) 2301–2312.
[349] P .S. Kumar, R. Sivaranjanee, U. Vinothini, M. Raghavi, K. Rajasekar, K. Ramakrishnan, Adsorption of dye onto raw and surface modified tamarind seeds: isotherms, process design, kinetics and mechanism, Desal. Wat. Treat., 52 (2014) 2620–2633.
[350] A.B. Albadarin, M.N. Collins, M. Naushad, S. Shirazian, G. Walker, C. Mangwandi, Activated lignin-chitosan extruded blends for efficient adsorption of methylene blue, Chem. Eng. J., 307 (2017) 264–272.
[351] S.Y.H. Zhang, P . Dubey, J.L. Margrave, S.S. Shukla, The role of sawdust in the removal of unwanted materials from water, J. Hazard. Mater., 95 (2002) 137–152.
[352] Y.S. Ho, G. McKay, Kinetic models for the sorption of dye from aqueous solution by wood, Process. Saf. Environ. Prot., 76 (1998) 183–191.
[353] V .K. Garg, M. Amita, R. Kumar, R. Gupta, Basic dye (methylene blue) removal from simulated wastewater by adsorption using Indian Rosewood sawdust: a timber industry waste, Dyes Pigm., 63 (2004) 243–250.
[354] M. Ozacar, I.A. Sengil, Adsorption of metal complex dyes from aqueous solutions by pine sawdust, Bioresour. Technol., 96 (2005) 791–795.
[355] S.D. Khattri, M.K. Singh, Colour removal from synthetic dye wastewater using a bioadsorbent, Water Air Soil Pollut., 120 (2000) 283–294.
[356] V .K. Garg, R. Gupta, A. Bala-Yadav, R. Kumar, Dye removal from aqueous solution by adsorption on treated sawdust, Bioresour. Technol., 89 (2003) 121–124.
[357] F.A. Batzias, D.K. Sidiras, Dye adsorption by calcium chloride treated beech sawdust in batch and fixed-bed systems, J. Hazard. Mater., 114 (2004) 167–174.[358] S. Suganya, P .S. Kumar, A. Saravanan, P .S. Rajan, C. Ravikumar, Computation of adsorption parameters for the removal of dye from wastewater by microwave assisted sawdust: theoretical and experimental analysis, Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol., 50 (2017) 45–57.
[359] F.A. Batzias, D.K. Sidiras, Dye adsorption by prehydrolysed beech sawdust in batch and fixed-bed systems, Bioresour. Technol., 98 (2007) 1208–1217.
[360] A.E. Ofomaja, Y.S. Ho, Effect of temperatures and pH on methyl violet biosorption by Mansonia wood sawdust, Bioresour. Technol., 99 (2008) 5411–5417.
[361] V .S. Mane, P .V . Vijay Babu, Studies on the adsorption of Brilliant Green dye from aqueous solution onto low-cost NaOH treated saw dust, Desalination, 273 (2011) 321–329.
[362] L. Sun, D. Chen, S. Wan, Z. Yu, Performance, kinetics, and equilibrium of methylene blue adsorption on biochar derived from eucalyptus saw dust modified with citric, tartaric, and acetic acids, Bioresour. Technol., 198 (2015) 300–308.
[363] S. Agarwal, I. Tyagi, V .K. Gupta, N. Ghasemi, M. Shahivand, M. Ghasemi, Kinetics, equilibrium studies and thermo-dynamics of methylene blue adsorption on Ephedra strobilacea  
saw dust and modified using phosphoric acid and zinc chloride, J. Mol. Liq., 218 (2016) 208–218.
[364] P .T. Williams, N. Nugranad, Comparison of products from the pyrolysis and catalytic pyrolysis of rice husks, Energy, 25 (2000) 493–513.
[365] K. Mohanty, J.T. Naidu, B.C. Meikap, M.N. Biswas, Removal of crystal violet from wastewater by activated carbons prepared from rice husk, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 45 (2006) 5165–5171.
[366] S. Chakraborty, S. Chowdhury, P .D. Saha, Adsorption of Crystal Violet from aqueous solution onto NaOH-modified rice husk, Carbohydr. Polym., 84 (2011) 1533–1541.
[367] G. McKay, J.F. Porter, G.R. Prasad, The removal of dye colours from aqueous solutions by adsorption on low-cost materials, Water Air Soil Pollut., 114 (1999) 423–438.
[368] D. Kalderis, S. Bethanis, P . Paraskeva, E. Diamadopoulos, Production of activated carbon from bagasse and rice husk by a single-stage chemical activation method at low retention times, Bioresour. Technol., 99 (2008) 6809–6816.
[369] P .S. Kumar, K. Ramakrishnan, S.D. Kirupha, S. Sivanesan, Thermodynamic and kinetic studies of cadmium adsorption from aqueous solution onto rice husk, Braz. J. Chem. Eng., 27 (2010) 347–355.
[370] C. Ravikumar, P .S. Kumar, S.K. Subhashni, P .V . Tejaswini, V . Varshini, Microwave assisted fast pyrolysis of corn cob, corn stover, saw dust and rice straw: experimental investigation on bio-oil yield and high heating values, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 11 (2017) 19–27.
[371] Y. Safa, H.N. Bhatti, Biosorption of Direct Red-31 and Direct Orange-26 dyes by rice husk: application of factorial design analysis, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 89 (2011) 2566–2574.
[372] F. Adam, L. Muniandy, R. Thankappan, Ceria and titania incorporated silica based catalyst prepared from rice husk: adsorption and photocatalytic studies of methylene blue, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 406 (2011) 209–216.
[373] L. Lin, S.-R. Zhai, Z.-Y. Xiao, Y. Song, Q.-D. An, X.-W. Song, Dye adsorption of mesoporous activated carbons produced from NaOH-pretreated rice husks, Bioresour. Technol., 136 (2013) 437–443.
[374] M.P . Tavlieva, S.D. Genieva, V .G. Georgieva, L.T. Vlaev, Kine-tic study of brilliant green adsorption from aqueous solution onto white rice husk ash, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 409 (2013) 112–122.
[375] L. Ding, B. Zou, W. Gao, Q. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Guo, X. Wang, Y. Liu, Adsorption of Rhodamine-B from aqueous solution using treated rice husk-based activated carbon, Colloids Surf. A, 446 (2014) 1–7.
[376] L. Leng, X. Yuan, G. Zeng, J. Shao, X. Chen, Z. Wu, H. Wang, X. Peng, Surface characterization of rice husk bio-char pro-duced by liquefaction and application for cationic dye (Malachite green) adsorption, Fuel, 155 (2015) 77–85.
[377] G.M.K. Tolba, N.A.M. Barakat, A.M. Bastaweesy, E.A. Ashour, W. Abdelmoez, M.H. El-Newehy, S.S. Al-Deyab, H.Y. Kim, 415 P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416
Effective and highly recyclable nanosilica produced from the 
rice husk for effective removal of organic dyes, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 29 (2015) 134–145.
[378] A. Masoumi, K. Hemmati, M. Ghaemy, Low-cost nanoparticles sorbent from modified rice husk and a copolymer for efficient removal of Pb(II) and crystal violet from water, Chemosphere, 146 (2016) 253–262.
[379] S. Chanda, Y. Baravalia, M. Kaneria, K. Rakholiya, Fruit and Vegetable Peels – Strong Natural Source of Antimicrobics, FORMATEX, Badajoz, Spain, 2010, pp. 444–450.
[380] C. Namasivayam, N. Muniasamy, K. Gayatri, M. Rani, K. Ran -
ganathan, Removal of dyes from aqueous solutions by cel-lulosic waste orange peel, Bioresour. Technol., 57 (1996) 37–43.
[381] R. Sivaraj, C. Namasivayam, K. Kadirvelu, Orange peel as an adsorbent in the removal of acid violet 17 (acid dye) from aqueous solutions, Waste Manage., 21 (2001) 105–110.
[382] C. Namasivayam, R.T. Yamuna, J. Jayanthi, Removal of methylene blue from wastewater by adsorption on cellulosic waste, orange peel, Cellulose Chem. Technol., 37 (2003) 333–339.
[383] M. Arami, N.Y. Limaee, N.M. Mahmoodi, N.S. Tabrizi, Removal of dyes from colored textile wastewater by orange peel adsorbent: equilibrium and kinetic studies, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 288 (2005) 371–376.
[384] F.D. Ardejani, K. Badii, N.Y. Limaee, N.M. Mahmoodi, M. Arami, S.Z. Shafaei, A.R. Mirhabibi, Numerical modelling and laboratory studies on the removal of Direct Red 23 and Direct Red 80 dyes from textile effluents using orange peel, a low-cost adsorbent, Dyes Pigm., 73 (2007) 178–185.
[385] A. Khaled, A. El Nemr, A. El-Sikaily, O. Abdelwahab, Treatment of artificial textile dye effluent containing Direct Yellow 12 by orange peel carbon, Desalination, 238 (2009) 210–232.
[386] A.E. Nemr, O. Abdelwahab, A. El-Sikaily, A. Khaled, Removal of direct blue-86 from aqueous solution by new activated carbon developed from orange peel, J. Hazard. Mater., 161 (2009) 102–110.
[387] J. Liang, J. Wu, P . Li, X.Wang, B. Yang, Shaddock peel as a novel low-cost adsorbent for removal of methylene blue from dye wastewater, Desal. Wat. Treat., 39 (2012) 70–75.
[388] S.X. Hou, Adsorption properties of pomelo peels against methylene blue in dye wastewater, Adv. Mater. Res., 634–638 (2013) 178–181.
[389] M.R. Mafra, L. Igarashi-Mafra, D.R. Zuim, E.C. Vasques, M.A. Ferreira, Adsorption of remazol brilliant blue on an orange peel adsorbent, Brazil. J. Chem. Eng., 30 (2013) 657–665.
[390] GEd. Nascimento, M.M.M.B. Duarte, N.F. Campos, C.M.B.D.M. Barbosa, V .L.D. Silva, Adorption of the reactive gray BF-2R dye on orange peel: kinetics and equilibrium studies, Desal. Wat. Treat., 52 (2013) 1578–1588.
[391] M.E. Argun, D. Guclu, M. Karatas, Adsorption of Reactive Blue 114 dye by using a new adsorbent: Pomelo peel, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 20 (2014) 1079–1084.
[392] A. Asfaram, M.R. Fathi, S. Khodadoust, M. Naraki, Removal of Direct Red 12B by garlic peel as a cheap adsorbent: kinetics, thermodynamic and equilibrium isotherms study of removal, Spectrochim. Acta A. Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc., 127 (2014) 415–421.
[393] O.S. Bello, M.A. Ahmad, B. Semire, Scavenging malachite green dye from aqueous solutions using pomelo (Citrus grandis) peels: kinetic, equilibrium and thermodynamic studies, Desal. Wat. Treat., 56 (2015) 521–535.
[394] M.E. Fernandez, G.V . Nunell, P .R. Bonelli, A.L. Cukierman, Activated carbon developed from orange peels: batch and dynamic competitive adsorption of basic dyes, Ind. Crops Prod., 62 (2014) 437–445.
[395] B.O. Isiuk, M. Horsfall, A.I. Spiff, Removal of methyl red from aqueous solution by NaOH-activated cassava peels carbon in a fixed-bed column, Res. J. Appl. Sci., 9 (2014) 238–243.
[396] S.-W. Liew, S.-T. Ong, Removal of basic blue 3 dye using pomelo peel, Asian J. Chem., 26 (2014) 3808–3814.
[397] L.D. Luo, H.Y. Huang, J.H. Bi, L.L. Tan, H. Zhang, D. Zhang, Optimization of malachite green by KOH-modified grapefruit peel activated carbon: application of response surface metho-dology, Appl. Mech. Mater., 529 (2014) 611–615.
[398] R. Lafi, S. Rezma, A. Hafiane, Removal of toluidine blue from aqueous solution using orange peel waste (OPW), Desal. Wat. Treat., 56 (2015) 2754–2765.
[399] G. Annadurai, R. Juang, D. Lee, Use of cellulose-based wastes for adsorption of dyes from aqueous solutions, J. Hazard. Mater., 92 (2002) 263–274.
[400] S. Banerjee, M.G. Dastidar, Use of jute processing wastes for treatment of wastewater contaminated with dye and other organics, Bioresour. Technol., 96 (2005) 1919–1928.
[401] K.G. Bhattacharyya, A. Sharma, Kinetics and thermodynamics of methylene blue adsorption on Neem (Azadirachta indica ) 
leaf powder, Dyes Pigm., 65 (2005) 51–59.
[402] Z. Aksu, I.A. Isoglu, Use of agricultural waste sugar beet pulp for the removal of Gemazol turquoise blue-G reactive dye from aqueous solution, J. Hazard. Mater., 137 (2006) 418–430.
[403] Y. Bulut, H.A. Aydin, Kinetics and thermodynamics study of methylene blue adsorption on wheat shells, Desalination, 194 (2006) 259–267.
[404] K.V . Kumar, K. Porkodi, Mass transfer, kinetics and equili-brium studies for the biosorption of methylene blue using Paspalum notatum , J. Hazard. Mater., 146 (2007) 214–226.
[405]  M. Dogan, H. Abak, M. Alkan, Biosorption of methylene blue from aqueous solutions by hazelnut shells: equilibrium, para meters and isotherms, Water Air Soil Pollut., 192 (2008) 
141–153.
[406] N.A. Oladoja, I.O. Asia, C.O. Aboluwoye, Y.B. Oladimeji, A.O. Ashogbon, Studies on the sorption of basic dye by rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) seed shell, Turk. J. Eng. Environ. Sci., 32 (2008) 143–152.
[407] L.S. Oliveira, A.S. Franca, T.M. Alves, S.D.F. Rocha, Evaluation of untreated coffee husks as potential biosorbents for treat-ment of dye contaminated waters, J. Hazard. Mater., 155 (2008) 507–512.
[408] V . Ponnusami, S. Vikram, S.N. Srivastava, Guava (Psidium guajava) leaf powder: novel adsorbent for removal of methy-lene blue from aqueous solutions, J. Hazard. Mater., 152 (2008) 276–286.
[409] F. Batzias, D. Sidiras, E. Schroeder, C. Weber, Simulation of dye adsorption on hydrolyzed wheat straw in batch and fixed-bed systems, Chem. Eng. J., 148 (2009) 459–472.
[410] B.H. Hameed, Removal of cationic dye from aqueous solution using jackfruit peel as non-conventional low-cost adsorbent, J. Hazard. Mater., 162 (2009) 344–350.
[411] S.D. Gisi, G. Lofrano, M. Grassi, M. Notarnicola, Charac-teristics and adsorption capacities of low-cost sorbents for waste water treatment: a review, Sustain. Mater. Technol., 
9 (2016) 10–40.
[412] A. Bhatnagar, M. Sillanpaa, Utilization of agro-industrial and municipal waste materials as potential adsorbents for water treatment - a review, Chem. Eng. J., 157 (2010) 277–296.
[413] A. Bhatnagar, V .J.P . Vilar, C.M.S. Botelho, R.A.R. Boaventura, A review of the use of redmud as adsorbent for the removal of toxic pollutants from water and wastewater, Environ. Technol., 32 (2011) 231–249.
[414] V .K. Gupta, S.K. Srivastava, D. Mohan, Equilibrium uptake, sorption dynamics, process optimization, and column opera-tions for the removal and recovery of malachite green from wastewater using activated carbon and activated slag, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 36 (1997) 2207–2218.
[415] A.K. Jain, V .K. Gupta, A. Bhatnagar, M. Suhas, Utilization of industrial waste products as adsorbents for the removal of dyes, J. Hazard. Mater., 101 (2003) 31–42.
[416] P . Janos, H. Buchtova, M. Ryznarova, Sorption of dyes from aqueous solutions onto fly ash, Water Res., 37 (2003) 4938–4944.
[417] K. Okada, N. Yamamoto, Y. Kameshima, A. Yasumori, Adsorp-tion properties of activated carbon fromwaste newspaper prepared by chemical and physical activation, J. Colloid Inter -
face Sci., 262 (2003) 194–199.P . Senthil Kumar et al. / Desalination and Water Treatment 172 (2019) 395–416 416
[418] S. Wang, Y. Boyjoo, A. Choueib, Z.H. Zhu, Removal of dyes 
from aqueous solution using fly ash and red mud, Water Res., 39 (2005) 129–138.
[419] S. Wang, L. Li, H. Wu, Z.H. Zhu, Unburned carbon as a low-cost adsorbent for treatment of methylene blue-containing wastewater, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 292 (2005) 336–343.
[420] A. Tor, Y. Cengeloglu, Removal of congo red from aqueous solution by adsorption onto acid activated red mud, J. Hazard. Mater., 138 (2006) 409–415.
[421] J.X. Lin, S.L. Zhan, M.H. Fang, X.Q. Qian, H.Yang, Adsorption of basic dye from aqueous solution onto fly ash, J. Environ. Manage., 87 (2008) 193–200.
[422] W.-T. Tsai, H.-C. Hsu, T.-Y. Su, K.-Y. Lin, C.-M. Lin, Removal of basic dye (methylene blue) from wastewaters utilizing beer brewery waste, J. Hazard. Mater., 154 (2008) 73–78.
[423] Q. Wang, Z. Luan, N. Wei, J. Li, C. Liu, The color removal of dye wastewater by magnesium chloride/red mud (MRM) from aqueous solution, J. Hazard. Mater., 170 (2009) 690–698.
[424] P . Pengthamkeerati, T. Satapanajaru, N. Chatsatapattayakul, P . Chairattanamanokorn, N. Sananwai, Alkaline treatment of biomass fly ash for reactive dye removal from aqueous solution, Desalination, 261 (2010) 34–40.
[425] D. Sun, X. Zhang, Y. Wu, X. Liu, Adsorption of anionic dyes from aqueous solution on fly ash, J. Hazard. Mater., 181 (2010) 335–342.
[426] G. Atun, G. Hisarl, A.E. Kurtoglu, N. Ayar, A comparison of basic dye adsorption onto zeolitic materials synthesized from fly ash, J. Hazard. Mater., 187 (2011) 562–573.
[427] P . Hareesh, K.B. Babitha, S. Shukla, Processing fly ash stabilized hydrogen titanate nano-sheets for industrial dye-  
removal application, J. Hazard. Mater., 229–230 (2012) 177–182.
[428] S. Banerjee, G.C. Sharma, M.C. Chattopadhyaya, Y.C. Sharma, Kinetic and equilibrium modeling for the adsorptive remo-val of methylene blue from aqueous solutions on of activated fly ash (AFSH), J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2 (2014) 1870–1880.
[429] C. Jarusiripot, Removal of reactive dye by adsorption over chemical pretreatment coal based bottom ash, Procedia Chem., 9 (2014) 121–130.
[430] M. Shirzad-Siboni, S.J. Jafari, O. Giahi, I. Kim, S.M. Lee, J.K. Yang, Removal of acid blue 113 and reactive black 5 dye from aqueous solutions by activated red mud, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 20 (2014) 1432–1437.
[431] M. Visa, A.-M. Chelaru, Hydrothermally modified fly ash for heavy metals and dyes removal in advanced wastewater treatment, Appl. Surf. Sci., 303 (2014) 14–22.
[432] A. Duta, M. Visa, Simultaneous removal of two industrial dyes by adsorption and photocatalysis on a fly-ash–TiO
2 
composite, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A, 306 (2015) 21–30.
[433] V . Tharaneedhar, P .S. Kumar, A. Saravanan, C. Ravikumar, V . Jaikumar, Prediction and interpretation of adsorption parameters for the sequestration of methylene blue dye from aqueous solution using microwave assisted corncob activated carbon, Sustain. Mater. Technol., 11 (2017) 1–11.
[434] W. Hajjaji, R.C. Pullar, J.A. Labrincha, F. Rocha, Aqueous Acid Orange 7 dye removal by clay and red mud mixes, Appl. Clay. Sci., 126 (2016) 197–206.
[435] Saakshy, K. Singh, A.B. Gupta, A.K. Sharma, Fly ash as low cost adsorbent for treatment of effluent of handmade paper industry-kinetic and modelling studies for direct black dye, J. Cleaner Prod., 112 (2016) 1227–1240.[436] W. Cherdcho, S. Nithettham, J. Charoenpanich, Removal of Cr(VI) from synthetic wastewater by adsorption onto coffee ground and mixed waste tea, Chemosphere, 221 (2019) 758–767.
[437] Z. Jiang, D. Hu, Molecular mechanism of anionic dyes adsorption on cationized rice husk cellulose from agricultural wastes, J. Mol. Liq., 276 (2019)105–114.
[438] S. Hashemian, K. Salari, Z.A. Yazdi, Preparation of activated carbon from agricultural wastes (almond shell and orange peel) for adsorption of 2-pic from aqueous solution, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 20 (2014) 1892–1900.
[439] N. Tahir, H.N. Bhatti, M. Iqbal, S. Noreen, Biopolymers composites with peanut hull waste biomass and application for Crystal Violet adsorption, Int. J. Bio. Macromol., 94 (2017) 210–220.
[440] D. Tian, Z. Xu, D. Zhang, W. Chen, J. Cai, H. Deng, Z. Sun, Y. Zhou, Micro–mesoporous carbon from cotton waste acti-vated by FeCl
3/ZnCl2: preparation, optimization, characteri-
zation and adsorption of methylene blue and eriochrome black T, J. Solid State Chem., 269 (2019) 580–587.
[441] A.L. Denardin da rosa, E. Carissimi, G.L. Dotto, H. Sander, L.A. Feris, Biosorption of Rhodamine B dye from dyeing stones effluents using the green microalgae Chlorella pyrenoidosa, J. Cleaner Prod., 198 (2018) 1302–1310.
[442] R. Dallel, A. Kesraoui, M. Seffeh, Biosorption of cationic dye onto “Phragmites australis” fibers: characterization and mechanism, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 6 (2018) 7247–7256.
[443] D. tomato, F.C. Drumm, P . Grassi, J. Georgin, A.E. Gerhardt, G.L. Dotto, M.A. Mazutti, Residual biomass of Nigrospora sp, 
from process of the microbial oil extraction for the biosorption of procion red H-E7B dye, J. Water Process Eng., 31 (2019) 100818.
[444] P .T. Juchen, H.H. Piffer, M.T, Veit, G. Goncalves, S.M. Palacio, J.C. Zanette, Biosorption of reactive blue BF-5G dye by malt bagasse: kinetic and equilibrium studies, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 6 (2018) 7111–7118.
[445] T.A. Nguyen, C.C. fu, R.S. Juang, Biosorption and biode-gradation of a sulphur dye in high-strength dyeing wastewater by Acidithiobacillus thioxidans, J. Environ. Manage., 182 (2016) 
265–271.
[446] H.D. Bouras, A.R. Yeddou, N. Bouras, D. Hellel, M.D. Holtz, N. Sabaou, A. Chergui, B. Nadjemi, Biosorption of Congo red dye by Aspergillus carbonsrius M333 and Penicillium glabrum 
Pg1: kinetics, equilibrium and thermodynamic studies, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 80 (2017) 915–923.
[447] N. Mokhtar, E.A. Aziz, A. Aris, W.F.W. Ishak, N.S. Mohd Ali, Biosorption of azo-dye using marine macro alga of Euchema spinosum, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 5 (2017) 5721–5731.
[448] S. Mona, A. Kaushik, C.P . Laushik, Biosorption of reactive dye by waste biomass of Nostoc linckia , Ecol. Eng., 37 (2011) 
1589–1594.
[449] I.G. Coroniulla, L.M. Barrera, E.C. Urbina, Kinetic, isotherm abnd thermodynamic studies of amaranth dye biosorption from aqueous solution onto water hyacinth leaves, J. Environ. Manage., 152 (2015) 99–108.
[450] M. Daoud, O. Benturki, P . Girods, A. Donnot, S. Fontona, Adsorption ability of activated carbons from Phoenix dactylifera  rachis and Ziziphus jujuba stones for the removal 
of commercial dye and the treatment of dyestuff wastewater, Microchem. J., 148 (2019) 49–502.