nature MIL eStOneS  | Light microscopy   OctOber 2009 | S51595 Invention of the microscope (Milestone 1)
1858 First histological stain (Milestone 2)
1871Synthesis of fluorescein (Milestone 2)
1873Diffraction limit theory (Milestone 3)
1911First fluorescence microscopy (Milestone 4)
1929First epifluorescence microscope (Milestone 4)
1935 Phase contrast microscopy (Milestone 5)
1939Polarization microscopy (Milestone 6)
1942 Immunofluorescence (Milestone 7)
1955 Differential interference contrast (Milestone 8)
1961 Concept of confocal microscopy (Milestone 9)
1967 The dichroic mirror (Milestone 4)
1972Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (Milestone 10)
1976 FRAP (Milestone 10)
FRET (Milestone 11)
1980Calcium probes (Milestone 12)
1981 Video-enhancement differential interference contrast (Milestone 8)
TIRF microscopy (Milestone 13)
1983Deconvolution microscopy (Milestone 14)
1987Realization of confocal microscopy (Milestone 9)
1990Two-photon microscopy (Milestone 15)
1993 Light sheet microscopy (Milestone 16)
Single molecule microscopy (Milestone 17)
1994GFP (Milestone 18)
1997Fluorescent protein-based biosensors (Milestone 19)
1999Red fluorescent proteins (Milestone 20)
2000Breaking the diffraction limit: STED (Milestone 21)
2002Photoactivatable fluorescent proteins (Milestone 20)
2006Breaking the diffraction limit: PALM/STORM (Milestone 21)mILEST on ES TImELI nE
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv edLetters by William Borel, the 
Dutch envoy to the court of France, 
mentions the Dutch spectacle-maker 
Hans Jansen and his son Zacharias 
as inventors of the first compound 
microscope in 1595. Their micro -
scope had two lenses combined in 
a tube in which the magnification 
was varied by altering the distance 
between the lenses. However, the 
Jansens are not known to have pub -
lished any observations through their 
microscope; instead, the two names 
associated with the origin of micros -
copy are Robert Hooke and Antonie 
van Leeuwenhoek.
Hooke’s masterpiece, known 
widely as simply Micrographia , was 
published in 1665 and is the first 
book on microscopy by a scientist. At 
the time of Micrographia ’s publica -
tion, Robert Hooke (1638–1703) 
was a Fellow of the Royal Society 
in London, holding the position of 
Curator of Experiments. His refined 
compound microscope, described 
and illustrated in the preface to his 
book, was a forerunner of modern 
microscopes — equipped with a 
stage, a light source and three optical 
lenses. Micrographia  puts forward 
scientific theories on many subjects, 
as well as containing descriptions 
of biological and other specimens 
that are accompanied by beautiful 
drawings made by Hooke himself. 
Among these are drawings of a louse 
and a flea, the compound eye of 
a fly, seeds and plant sections. He 
observed the porous structure of cork 
and famously described the pores 
as “cells” . Although these were not 
cells in the biological meaning of the 
word, the modern term derives  
from Hooke’s usage. The book If a microscope is defined as an 
instrument that enables the visualiza -
tion of objects or structures that are 
usually invisible to the naked eye, 
then microscopes appeared at the 
end of the sixteenth century. The 
properties of concave and convex 
lenses were first described around the 
year 1000, although magnifiers in the 
form of lens-shaped crystals or glass 
may have been used much earlier. 
Spectacles were invented around 
1300 and became widely used across 
Europe. was enormously influential and 
demonstrated for the first time what 
microscopy could do for science. 
Van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723) 
was a Dutch draper with no formal 
scientific training, who became 
fascinated by the magnifying glasses 
used to count the threads in cloth. 
He learned how to grind and polish 
lenses and developed such techniques 
further. Van Leeuwenhoek made 
more than 500 simple microscopes, 
each containing a single, tiny convex 
lens that could resolve detail as 
small as 1 micrometre. He became 
extremely skilled in dissecting and 
mounting specimens and, although 
his microscopes were laborious 
to use, he was the first to describe 
sperm cells and life in droplets of 
water in the form of bacteria and 
protozoa. From 1673 onwards, he 
communicated his observations 
to the Royal Society in a series of 
letters, eventually being recognized 
for his careful observations when he 
was elected a member of the Royal 
Society in 1680. 
The introduction of multiple 
lenses increased problems with 
spherical and chromatic aberra -
tion. Van Leeuwenhoek’s simple 
instruments were, in fact, superior 
to compound microscopes such as 
those of Hooke, and many micro -
scopists continued to use single lens 
microscopes until achromatic lenses 
(corrected for chromatic aberration) 
became widely available in the early 
nineteenth  century.
Christina Karlsson Rosenthal, Associate 
Editor, Nature Cell  Biology milestone 1  
The beginning
Drawings of the instruments used by Robert 
Hooke. Image is reproduced from R. Hooke (1665). 
… and by 
the help of 
Microscopes, 
there is 
nothing so 
small as to 
escape our 
inquiry …  
Robert HookePRimARY R eFeRenCes Hooke, R. Micrographia: 
or Some Physiological Descriptions of Minute Bodies, 
Made by Magnifying Glasses with Observations and 
Inquiries Thereupon  (James Allestry, 1665) |  
Van Leeuwenhoek, A. The Selected Works of Antony 
van Leeuwenhoek Containing His Microscopical 
Discoveries in Many of the Works of Nature   
(Arno Press, 1977)
FURtHeR ReADinG Clay, R. S. & Court, T. H. The 
History of the Microscope: Compiled From Original 
Instruments and Documents, Up T o the Introduction 
of the Achromatic Microscope  (Holland Press, 1975)
s6 | oCToBER  2009    www.nature.com/milestones/light-microscopy MILESTONES
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv edprevious staining solutions had 
been too concentrated, and also 
noted that the dye was absorbed by 
specific cellular elements and could 
not be washed out. Von Gerlach 
therefore deserves credit for recog -
nizing the importance of staining 
and for carefully describing his 
staining method. 
The late 1800s and early 1900s 
marked the discovery of many 
cytological phenomena and the 
development of new stains and 
synthetic dyes. The use of silver 
staining in cytology was pioneered 
by Camillo Golgi in 1873 and made 
famous by Santiago  Ramón y Cajal’s 
detailed neuroanatomical observa -
tions. The notion that basic and 
acidic dyes are histologically distinct 
was important for the development 
of the haematoxylin and eosin 
stain (Paul Mayer, 1896), which 
became a key diagnostic stain. An 
acidic dye (eosin) and a basic dye 
(methylene blue) also form the basis 
of the Giemsa stain (Gustav Giemsa, 
1904), which is still used to diag -
nose malaria and other parasites. 
Robert Feulgen’s discovery in 1924 
that chromosomal material can be 
stained by a chemical reaction based 
on acid hydrolysis of DNA became 
a cornerstone of cytochemistry. The 
cytochemical staining of peroxidase 
activity, as reported by Graham et 
al., was subsequently developed as 
an immunohistochemical approach 
by Sternberger et al. in 1970. 
Whereas stains provide finite 
contrast by changing the light 
absorption properties of different 
cellular structures, fluorescence 
provides infinite contrast with the 
right equipment — although such 
equipment obviously did not exist 
when fluorescence was discovered, 
and is still being improved today. 
The earliest description of fluores -
cence is thought to date from the 
sixteenth century, when  Nicolás 
Monardes reported the fluorescent 
properties of wood extract from 
Lignum  nephriticum  (Athanasius … it was 
not long 
before Adolf 
von Bayer 
synthesized 
the first 
fluorescent 
dye …Robert Hooke may have been the 
first to describe the light microscopic 
appearance of a stained object, in 
the form of dyed wool and hair (see 
Milestone 1 ). And although others 
subsequently reported the use of 
staining solutions, any differential 
staining that was observed is thought 
to have been mostly accidental. 
Hartig and osborne, who independ -
ently observed the colouring of the 
cell contents in plants, are sometimes 
cited as the discoverers of staining in 
microscopy, but neither contributed 
significantly to the development of 
the technique. Hartig even casually 
mentioned the use of carmine, a dye 
derived from female scale insects, in 
an 1854 paper. 
It was Joseph von Gerlach who, 
in 1858, while experimenting  
with solutions of carmine and  
leaving a section of brain tissue in a 
dilute carmine solution overnight, 
reported good differential staining 
of the nucleus and nuclear granules 
compared with little or no staining 
of the cytoplasm and intercellular 
substance. He concluded that  Kircher described similar observa -
tions nearly a century later). John 
Herschel’s description of the fluores -
cent properties of quinine sulphate in 
1845 is considered the ‘modern’ mile -
stone for observing fluorescence and 
realizing what it was, together with 
George Stokes’s 100-page monograph  
published in 1852 that describes 
a vast collection of fluorescent 
substances, from quinine sulphate 
to oporto wine. Although David 
Brewster first used the term ‘internal 
dispersion’ to describe fluorescence 
phenomena in 1838, it was Stokes 
who coined the term ‘fluorescence’ 
to describe light emission induced 
during excitation. 
With the development of the 
synthetic dye industry, it was not 
long before Adolf von Bayer syn -
thesized the first fluorescent dye, 
fluorescein, in 1871. Paul Ehrlich 
used the fluorescent dye uranin 
(a sodium salt of fluorescein) in 
1882 to determine the pathway of 
secretion of aqueous humour in the 
eye — representing the first use of 
a fluorescent dye in animal physiol -
ogy. In 1914, not long after the first 
fluorescence microscope was devel -
oped (see Milestone  4), Stanislav 
von Provazek used fluorescent dyes 
at a microscopic level as a means to 
enhance the autofluorescence of cells 
and tissues — representing the first 
use of a fluorescent dye as a stain in 
cell biology.
Arianne Heinrichs, Chief Editor,  
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell  Biology milestone 2  
Stains and fluorescent dyes
PRimARY  ReFeRenCes Von Gerlach, J. 
Mikroskopische Studien aus dem Gebiet der 
menschlichen Morphologie  (Enke, 1858) |  
Bayer, A. Ueber eine neue Klasse von 
Farbstoffen. Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges.  4, 555–558 
(1871)
FURtHeR ReADinG Herschel, J. F . W. On a case 
of superficial colour presented by a 
homogeneous liquid internally colourless.  
Phil. Trans. R.  Soc. Lond.  135 , 143–145 (1845) | 
Stokes, G. G. On the change of refrangibility of 
light. Phil. Trans. R.  Soc. Lond. 142 , 463–562 
(1852) | Graham, R. C. Jr, Lundholm, U. & 
Karnovsky, M. J. Cytochemical demonstration of 
peroxidase activity with 3-amino-9-
ethylcarbazole. J. Histochem. Cytochem.  13,  
150–152 (1965) | Sternberger, L. A., Hardy, P . H. Jr, 
Cuculis, J. J. & Meyer, H. G. The unlabeled 
antibody enzyme method of 
immunohistochemistry: preparation and 
properties of soluble antigen-antibody complex 
(horseradish peroxidase-antihorseradish 
peroxidase) and its use in identification of 
spirochetes. J. Histochem. Cytochem.  18, 315–333 
(1970) | Clark, G. & Kasten, F . H. History of 
Staining  3rd edn (Williams & Wilkins, 1983) Fluorescein powder dropped into a solution of tap water under ultraviolet light, 
after approximately 15 seconds have elapsed. Image is reproduced with 
permission from Bricksnite and licensed under the Creative Commons 
Attribution 3.0 Unported License  
(http://creativecommons.org/licences/by/3.0/)Milestones
NAT uRE MILEST oNES | Ligh T microscopy  oCToBER  2009 | s7
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv edxyd = 2n sin aλ
 milestone  4
The fluorescence microscopeBlurred by diffraction, the image of two point 
objects (red) can just about be resolved at distance 
d. Line profile (bottom) quantifies the brightness 
along the direction of separation. Diagram 
courtesy of S. Hell, MPI Biophysical Chemistry, 
Göttingen, Germany.Without light microscopy, our 
knowledge of ‘little biology’ would be 
severely impaired. The ability to observe 
migrating cells, examine the distribution 
of organelle populations or predict 
putative protein interactions (based on 
proximity) drive modern cell-biological 
research. However, these observations 
have physical limits, governed by the 
properties of light, which consequently 
restrict our view of this cellular  world.
In light microscopy, when light passes 
through an opening it is diffracted, affecting the spatial resolution or, in 
other words, the smallest separation 
that two objects can have and still be 
discerned. When this opening is a lens, 
the diffraction pattern created by light 
passage through the illuminated circular 
aperture appears as an ‘Airy disc’, as 
described by George Airy in 1835. 
Later, the mathematical foundations 
for quantifying diffraction-limited 
microscopy were noticed by Emile Verdet 
but fully described and formalized by 
Ernst  Abbe.
In his landmark paper of 1873, Abbe 
reported that the smallest resolvable 
distance between two points using a 
conventional microscope may never 
be smaller than half the wavelength 
of the imaging light. Although no 
mathematical equations actually appear 
in the paper, Abbe stated in this and 
following papers that the resolution 
was limited by diffraction to half the 
wavelength modified by the refractive 
index of the medium and the angle of 
the cone of focused light. Based on the 
resulting equation, one can improve 
spatial resolution by using light with 
a shorter wavelength (for example, 
ultraviolet), but in biological samples, 
this is undesirable because of the 
greater potential for sample damage 
and increased light scattering within a 
tissue. Reciprocally, longer wavelengths  milestone 3  
Knowing the limit
Inspired by Ernst Abbe’s finding 
that shorter wavelength light leads 
to higher resolution, August Köhler 
constructed the first ultraviolet 
(uV) microscope at Zeiss optical 
Works in Jena, Germany, in 1904. 
The instrument used uV illumina -
tion from a cadmium arc lamp and 
allowed photographic reproduction 
of objects at twice the resolution of 
visible light microscopes. Köhler also 
noted that some objects emitted light 
of longer wavelength on illumination 
with uV , but it was the physicist 
oskar Heimstädt who, in 1911, used this observation as the basis for the 
construction of the first successful 
fluorescence microscope.
Heimstädt noted two main  
challenges: one was to concentrate 
enough uV light on the sample to 
make it fluoresce; the other was to 
capture the emitted fluorescent light 
free of any noise. To address the 
former, he used cuvettes constructed 
by Hans Moritz Lehmann to eliminate 
all but the uV light from the white 
light generated by an arc lamp; to 
address the latter, he employed 
darkfield illumination that ensured no excitation light would enter the objec -
tive lens and provided high contrast 
for the fluorescence signal. 
Although Heimstädt successfully 
imaged bacteria, he wasn’t convinced 
that fluorescence microscopy would 
have a lasting impact. He concludes 
his paper with the words: “If and to 
what degree fluorescence micro -
scopy will widen the possibilities 
of microscopic imaging only the 
future will show. ” In fact, the reliance 
on autofluorescence of the imaged 
object and the need for transmitted 
illumination and darkfield condensers 
limited the initial applications of the 
microscope. 
Both hurdles were overcome dur -
ing the next two decades, when the 
Austrian investigator Max Haitinger improve tissue penetration at the 
expense of point separation.
Abbe’s mathematical foundations of 
image formation and lens aberrations 
provided for the proper design of 
microscope lenses, accomplished 
in collaboration with Carl Zeiss and 
Otto Schott. Abbe’s quantitative 
insights greatly enhanced the quality 
of microscope optics, contributing 
enormously to improved data collection 
and an enhanced user experience 
for the microscopist. Of course, the 
success of Abbe, Zeiss and Schott in 
designing lenses also had an enormous 
impact on the eventual success of 
the microscopy manufacturer Carl 
Zeiss itself. But besides these tangible 
legacies, another long-lasting legacy 
brought about by Abbe’s work 
included the establishment of physical 
boundaries in imaging for quite some 
time. In fact, Abbe’s study influenced 
the field so greatly that very few 
attempts were made to overcome the 
diffraction limit, despite the increasing 
necessity to enhance resolution and 
to improve the visualization of cellular 
structure. Rather, other techniques 
were developed to provide these 
data, such as replacing photons 
with electrons in the development 
of electron microscopy. Only more 
recently have scientists revisited Abbe’s 
limit and successfully increased the 
resolution of light microscopy through 
a variety of innovative strategies (see 
Milestone  21).
Noah Gray, Senior Editor,  NaturePRimARY R eFeRenCe 
Abbe, E. Beiträge zur Theorie 
des Mikroskops und der 
mikroskopischen 
Wahrnehmung. Archiv für 
Mikroskopische Anatomie  9, 
413–418 (1873) 
FURtHeR ReADinG  
Airy, G. B. On the diffraction 
of an object-glass with 
circular aperture. Trans. 
Cambridge Phil. Soc.  5,  
283–291 (1835) | Airy, G. B. 
On the diffraction of an 
annular aperture. London, 
Edinburgh, and Dublin 
Philosophical Magazine  Series 
3 18, 132–133 (1841) |  
Verdet, E. Lecons d’optique 
physique  (Victor Masson et 
fils, Paris, 1869) | Rayleigh, 
Lord. On the theory of 
optical images, with special 
reference to the microscope. 
Phil. Mag.  42, 167–195 (1896)… Abbe’s 
study 
influenced the 
field so greatly 
that very few 
attempts 
were made 
to overcome 
the diffraction 
limit… 
▶Milestones
s8 | oCToBER  2009    www.nature.com/milestones/light-microscopy
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv edexcitation light from interfering 
with observation. Ellinger and Hirt 
imaged kidney and liver tissue in 
rodents injected with the fluoro -
chromes fluorescein and trypaflavin. 
Another major advance came 
almost 40 years later, with the inven -
tion of dichromatic beamsplitters, 
or dichromatic mirrors. Instead of 
absorbing certain wavelengths, as 
traditional filters did, dichromatic 
filters reflect a narrow width of 
wavelengths while transmitting all 
others, allowing illumination of the 
sample with a precise wavelength 
and ensuring that no excitation light 
is transmitted to the ocular.  
The Dutch scientist Johan 
Sebastiaan Ploem is closely associ -
ated with the development of these 
mirrors and described incident verti -
cal illumination with dichromatic 
mirrors in 1967. Fixed at a 45 ° angle 
to the incoming excitation light, 
the mirror reflects up to 95% of the 
shorter wavelength excitation light 
but transmits longer wavelength 
light. The reflected beam of excita -
tion light then enters the objective, which also functions as a condenser, 
ensuring even excitation  
of the sample. The emitted longer 
wavelength fluorescent light is  
collected by the objective, and passes 
back through the dichromatic mirror 
and a barrier filter to the eyepiece. 
Dichromatic mirrors converted the 
epi-fluorescence microscope from a 
tool that could be used only by trained 
specialists to a universal and indispen -
sable instrument for modern biology. 
Nicole Rusk, Senior Editor, 
Nature  Methodstogether with other scientists devel -
oped the technique of secondary 
fluorescence, which involved applying 
exogenous fluorescent chemicals to 
samples. Haitinger also coined the 
term ‘fluorochrome’ .
Fluorochromes were essential to 
the use of fluorescence microscopy on 
living tissue, as was the development 
of the incident light (epi)-fluorescence 
microscope. Here, the light source lies 
on the same side of the sample as the 
objective, and excitation and emission 
light pass through the objective. This 
configuration allows more efficient 
sample excitation and the imaging of 
opaque objects.  
The prototype of the epi-
fluorescence microscope was designed 
in 1929 by German pharmacologist 
Philipp Ellinger and anatomist August 
Hirt. In what they called an ‘intravital 
microscope’ the excitation light passed 
through a series of filters before the 
right wavelength hit the objective lens 
and triggered emission of fluorescent 
light in the observed tissue. A yellow 
barrier filter between the objective 
and ocular prevented most reflected 
In 1930, physicist Frits Zernike was studying 
the optics of diffraction gratings when his lab 
obtained a large concave grating. Owing to its 
size, Zernike had to position a small telescope 
6 metres from its surface to visualize the light 
patterns created by the gratings. Normally, this 
resulted in a striped pattern, the effect of seeing 
a principal spectral line of direct light and weaker 
spurious lines of diffracted light to the left and 
right caused by slight imperfections associated 
with the gratings. But when Zernike focused his 
telescope on the gratings themselves, something 
surprising happened — the striped patterns 
disappeared. Determining why this occurred 
would change how microscopists look at cells 
and earn Zernike the 1953 Nobel Prize in  Physics.
Through a series of experiments, Zernike 
came to understand that the direct light and 
the diffracted light were actually in different 
phases. When the telescope was focused on the 
gratings, the resulting image, created through 
interference, was rendered invisible because, 
unlike changes in amplitude or brightness, 
the eye cannot pick up phase differences. 
But Zernike knew that the phase differences contained information about the object of 
interest, and realized that he would need an 
adequate reference surface if he were to make 
use of it.  
Zernike then recalled the 1900 work of Lord 
Rayleigh, who described an operation to make 
shallow etchings in glass with very dilute 
hydrofluoric acid. Using this approach, Zernike 
created ‘phase strips’, in which the direct 
light hit a thin etching on a glass surface while 
the diffracted light passed through the glass. 
The result was to shift the direct light by 90o, 
making it darker than a uniform background of 
coherent light. When Zernike added a phase strip to his telescope, the striped pattern on 
the grating reappeared.
Zernike immediately saw the potential 
of translating his discovery to the world of 
microscopy, where transparent objects found in 
cells had previously been compared to gratings. 
By placing his phase strip in the focal plane of 
a microscope, similarly to the way in which he 
had used it with the telescope, Zernike was 
able to visualize otherwise transparent objects 
without the need for a stain. Zernike published 
a description of his method, which he coined 
‘phase contrast’, in 1935. 
Shortly after his discovery, Zernike excitedly 
demonstrated the method to microscope maker 
Carl Zeiss, who were less than enthusiastic about 
its potential at first glance. It took another 10 
years before companies started manufacturing 
microscopes with the ability to perform phase 
contrast, but today most high-end microscope 
systems have this capability, enabling 
researchers to see cellular structures in real time 
without the need for specialized stains or dyes.   
Nathan Blow, Technology Editor,  
Nature and Nature Methods    milestone  5
Finding phasePRimARY R eFeRenCes Heimstädt, O. Das 
Fluoreszenzmikroskop. Z. Wiss. Mikrosk.  28,  
330–337 (1911) | Ellinger, Ph. & Hirt, A. 
Mikroskopische Beobachtungen an lebenden 
Organen mit Demonstrationen 
(Intravitalmikroskopie). Arch. Exp. Pathol. Phar.  147 , 
63 (1929) | Ploem, J. S. The use of a vertical 
illuminator with interchangeable dichroic mirrors 
for fluorescence microscopy with incident light. 
Z. Wiss. Mikrosk.  68, 129–142 (1967)
FURtHeR ReADinG Brumberg, E. M. &  
Krylova, T . N. Primenenie interferentsionnykh 
delitel’nykh zerkal v fluorestsentnoi mikroskopii. 
Zh. Obshch. Biol.  14, 461–464 (1953) | Ploem, J. S. 
Die Möglichkeit der Auflichtfluoreszenzmethoden 
bei Untersuchungen von Zellen in 
Durchströmungskammern und Leightonröhren. 
Xth Symposium d. Gesellschaft f. Histochemie, 
1965. Acta Histochem . 7 (Suppl.), 339–343 (1967) 
PRimARY R eFeRenCes Zernike, F . Das 
Phasenkontrastverfahren bei der mikroskopischen 
Beobachtung. Z. technische Physik  16, 454–457 (1935) | 
Zernike, F . Phase contrast, a new method for the microscopic 
observation of transparent objects. Physica  9, 974–986 (1942)If and to 
what degree 
fluorescence 
microscopy 
will widen the 
possibilities 
of microscopic 
imaging only  
the future  
will show.
Oskar 
Heimstäd t▶
Negative phase-contrast micrograph of epithelial 
cells from the mouth. Image is reproduced, with 
permission, from L. C. Martin Nature  159 , 827–830  
© (1947) Macmillan Publishers Ltd. All rights 
reservedMilestones
NAT uRE MILEST oNES | Ligh T microscopy  oCToBER  2009 | s9
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv edThe development of fluorescence microscopy 
technologies has made live-cell imaging 
routine for the current generation of cell 
biologists. However, the ability to visualize the 
cell’s architecture was not taken for granted 
until the 1950s. Although images of cells and 
subcellular organelles had been produced 
as early as the mid-nineteenth century, they 
originated from fixed material. As a result, the 
existence of three-dimensional macromolecular 
structures within cells had remained a source of 
controversy.
The view of the cell’s internal organization 
was revolutionized in the 1940s and 1950s 
with techniques that were initially developed 
to image the mitotic spindle. Until then, the 
observed assembly of polymers into fibres was 
believed to be an artefact originating from 
fixation and staining treatments that induced 
protein coagulation and gave the spindle a 
fibrous appearance. The first evidence of fibrous 
organization in the living spindle came from 
W. J. Schmidt’s observations of developing 
sea-urchin eggs made in 1937, and reinterpreted 
in 1939, with a polarizing microscope. This 
apparatus exploits the optical anisotropy 
of transparent materials to reveal detailed 
information about the internal structure of 
samples — information that was not available 
with any other optical microscopy technique at 
the time. Schmidt reported that spindles have 
positive birefringence — a measure of optical 
anisotropy — a feature that he concluded to be caused by aligned protein units. However, 
although football-shaped spindles were 
visible in Schmidt’s pictures, his microscope 
did not provide adequate resolution to see 
discrete  fibres.
The definitive visual demonstration of the 
existence of spindle fibres in untreated living 
cells was given by Shinya Inoué more than a 
decade later. Inoué built his first polarizing 
microscope by hand in post-war Japan and 
managed to repeat Schmidt’s observations. 
However, it was only later at Princeton University 
in New Jersey, USA, that he built an improved 
polarizing microscope that could image weakly 
birefringent structures. In 1953 this led to the 
publication of the structure of the metaphase 
and anaphase spindles in oocytes of the marine 
annelid Chaetopterus pergamentaceous  and in 
Lilium longiflorum  pollen mother cells: “With the 
increased resolution and sensitivity achieved by 
the new instrument, I have been able to observe 
the detailed structure of the spindle in living 
cells and to follow its change during mitosis,” he 
wrote. Further observations led Inoué to suggest 
how microtubule dynamics generate the force 
for chromosome movement and also to deduce 
the arrangement of DNA and chromatin folding 
in living  sperm.
Schmidt’s and Inoué’s findings were the first 
demonstrations of the structural complexity 
of the cell interior and showed the great 
potential of live-cell imaging for understanding 
complex biological processes. Polarization microscopy offers certain advantages over 
fluorescence microscopy in that it is label-free 
and therefore a non-invasive mode of imaging 
that can be used, for example, to monitor 
the viability of in vitro  fertilized oocytes. 
Furthermore, the development of the ‘pol-scope’ 
in 1995 overcomes the limitation of previous 
microscopes in that the polarization contrast is 
independent of the orientation of the  sample.
Kim Baumann, Associate Editor,  
Cell Migration  Gateway
During a seminar in 1961, Albert 
Coons humbly mentioned that “the 
hour of the fluorescent antibody” 
had started. Nearly 70 years since 
Coons and colleagues published 
the first report describing the use 
of fluorescent antibodies, immun -
ofluorescence staining remains a 
cornerstone of cell biology. 
The idea to make antibodies 
visible was conceived to visualize group  A haemolytic streptococci in 
the Aschoff nodules that character -
ize rheumatic fever. Initially, Coons 
and his colleagues repeated the 
work of John Marrack, who had 
successfully modified antibodies 
with tetrazotized benzidine to pro -
duce coloured antibodies without 
disturbing their antigen-binding 
properties. These coloured antibod -
ies were too faint to be detected in dilute solutions, so Coons et al. 
turned to a fluorescent compound, 
anthracence isothiocyanate. They 
obtained brightly fluorescent anti -
bodies that could agglutinate bacte -
ria, indicating that the conjugation 
had not affected the antibodies’ 
binding properties. However, when 
they tested the fluorescence in tissue  
sections, they discovered that 
human and mouse tissues autofluo -
resce at the same wavelength as 
anthracence. 
Coons and his co-workers then 
turned to fluorescein, which was 
a known fluorophore. However, a 
form of fluorescein that could be  milestone 6
Seeing is believing: subcellular 
structures brought to life
 milestone 7
Recipe for fluorescent antibodiesFirst maturation division spindle in a living oocyte of the 
marine annelid Chaetopterus pergamentaceous  imaged with a 
polarization microscope (left) and traced the projected 
image negative (right). Image is reproduced, with permission, 
from S. Inoué  © 1953.
PRimARY ReFeRenCes Schmidt, W. J. Doppelbrechung 
der Kernspindel und Zugfasertheorie der 
Chromosomenbewegung. Chromosoma  1, 253–264 (1939) | 
Inoué, S. Polarization optical studies of the mitotic spindle. I. 
The demonstration of spindle fibers in living cells. 
Chromosoma  5, 487–500 (1953).
FURtHeR ReADinG Inoué, S. A method for measuring 
small retardations of structures in living cells. Exp. Cell Res . 2,  
513–517 (1951) | Inoué, S. & Sato, H. Arrangement of DNA in 
living sperm: a biophysical analysis. Science  136 ,  
1122–1124 (1962) | Inoué, S. & Sato, H. Deoxyribonucleic 
acid arrangement in living sperm. In Molecular Architecture 
in Cell Physiology  (eds Hayashi, T . and Szent-Gyorgi, A. G.) 
209–248 (Prentice-Hall, New Jersey, 1964) | Oldenbourg, R. & 
Mei, G. New polarized light microscope with precision 
universal compensator. J. Microsc.  180 , 140–147 (1995) | 
Inoué, S. Microtubule dynamics in cell division: exploring 
living cells with polarized light microscopy . Annu. Rev. Cell 
Dev. Biol . 24, 1–28 (2008).
▶… the basic 
idea remains 
unchanged…Milestones
s10 | oCToBER  2009    www.nature.com/milestones/light-microscopy
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv edLight detecto r
Polarizing filter
Light sour cePolarizing filterWollaston 
(Noma rski) prism
Wollaston 
(Noma rski) prismObjecti ve lens
Condensing lensSampl econjugated to protein, fluorescein-
iso-cyanate, had to be made from 
scratch. In collaboration with 
colleagues at Harvard university 
in Boston, Massachusetts, Coons 
obtained a crude preparation of 
this compound and used it to label 
an anti- Pneumococcus  strain 3 
serum. The labelling was performed 
by mixing the antiserum and 
fluorescein-iso-cyanate, dissolved 
in dioxane, in a buffer of saline and 
sodium carbonate at pH 9.0 — a 
protocol that is almost unchanged 
today. The antibodies remained 
specific for Pneumococcus  strain 3, 
and Pneumococcus  strain 2 did not 
become fluorescent when incubated 
with the antibodies. To test whether 
the antibodies could detect bacteria 
in tissues, organs of mice infected 
with Pneumococcus  strain 3 were 
harvested and stained with the fluorescent antibodies. When Coons 
and colleagues were able to see bright 
fluorescent patches in the organs of 
the infected, but not uninfected, ani -
mals, the era of immunofluorescence 
microscopy was born. 
Many improvements have 
followed, primarily in the lenses, 
microscopes and cameras that the 
field relies on, as well as through 
the introduction of fluorophores 
with different, non-overlapping 
excitation and emission spectra. 
The resolution has moved from 
the tissue to the intracellular level, 
and the technique is now used for 
subcellular localization in even the 
smallest cells. However, the basic 
idea remains unchanged, almost 
seven decades after its first  
description. 
Christiaan van Ooij, Chief Editor,  
Nature Reviews MicrobiologyThe location of the extracellular domain (green) and 
the intracellular domain (red) of the epithelial 
cell-adhesion molecule (EpCam) was revealed by 
double-label immunofluorescence. FaDu cells were 
stained with primary antibodies against the 
different parts of EpCam. The primary antibodies 
were visualized with fluorescently labelled 
secondary antibodies that specifically recognize one 
of the two primary antibodies.  Scale bar, 18.83 mm. 
Image is reproduced, with permission, from  
D. Maetzel et al. Nature Cell Biol . 11, 162–171 
© (2009) Macmillan Publishers Ltd. All rights reserved.oRiGinAl ReseARCH 
PAPeRs Coons, A. H.,  
Creech, H. J. & Jones, R. N. 
Immunological properties of 
an antibody containing a 
fluorescent group. Proc. Soc. 
Expt. Biol. Med . 47,  
200–202 (1941) | Coons, A. H.,  
Creech, H. J., Jones, R. N. & 
Berliner, E.  The demonstration 
of pneumococcal antigen in 
tissues by the use of 
fluorescent antibody. 
J. Immunol. 45, 159–170 (1942) 
FURtHeR ReADinG 
Coons, A. H. & Kaplan, M. H. 
Localization of antigen in 
tissue cells: improvements 
in a method for the 
detection of antigen by 
means of fluorescent 
antibody. J. Exp. Med.  91, 
1–13 (1950) |  
Coons, A. H. The beginnings 
of immunofluorescence. 
J. Immunol.  87, 499–503 
(1961)
 milestone  8
Contrast by interference
In the 1950s, differential-interference 
contrast (DIC) systems were 
designed as an alternative technique 
to phase contrast (see Milestone  5). 
In DIC, polarized light is separated 
into two beams, which take slightly 
different paths through a sample 
depending on its optical density. 
When the beams are recombined, 
their interference reveals interfaces 
between regions of different thick -
ness and/or refractive index and gives 
the illusion of a three-dimensional 
image. DIC allows for high-  
resolution imaging of unstained and 
living cells and organisms, and for 
‘optical sectioning’ of thick samples. 
Another advantage is that there is no ‘halo’ artefact in DIC images, unlike 
that in phase-contrast images. 
In the first DIC systems such as 
those of Smith in 1955, one of the 
Wollaston prisms that were used as 
beam splitters was located at or near 
the focal plane of the objective, where 
it was often inaccessible. The French 
physicist Georges Nomarski, who 
described the theoretical basis for 
DIC, modified the Wollaston prisms 
so that they could be physically 
located away from the focal planes, 
making the system more practical to 
use. This design was then developed 
commercially by microscopy manu -
facturer Carl Zeiss and its theory and 
potential applications were described 
by Allen, David and Nomarski 
in 1969.
The full potential of DIC was 
realized only when video cameras 
entered the stage. In 1981, two 
papers demonstrated that changing 
camera gain and offset could increase 
resolution and contrast in the image. 
of course, the video camera also 
enabled researchers to follow events The components of the basic differential interference contrast microscope set-up. 
Adapted with permission from Richard Wheeler and licensed under the GNU Free 
Documentation License (http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Commons:GNU_
Free_Documentation_License).▶The full potential of DIC 
was realized only when 
video cameras entered 
the stage.▶Milestones
NAT uRE MILEST oNES | Ligh T microscopy  oCToBER  2009 | s11
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv edConventiona lC onfocal
Detecto r
Objectiv e
Specimen
Condenser
Light sour ce milestone 9
Seeing the wood for the trees
During the 1960s, researchers worked 
to overcome a debilitating feature of 
epifluorescence microscopy — back -
ground signals. Efforts began in both 
America and Czechoslovakia to do 
away with these unwanted signals, and 
the result was the advent of confocal 
microscopy.
The resolution achievable with 
conventional microscopy can be 
negated by out-of-focus information. 
Confocal microscopy avoids this 
issue by restricting both the field of 
illumination and the light reaching the 
objective to a single point in the same 
focal plane. An image of the region 
of interest is then built up by raster 
scanning through the sample — either 
by moving the sample, or by moving a 
laser beam or pinhole disk. By exclud -
ing the out-of-focus light, the image 
contrast is increased and finer detail 
can be seen. 
The initial patent for a confocal 
microscope was granted to Marvin 
Minsky — better known for his  
pioneering work in Artificial 
Intelligence — who was working 
at Harvard university in 1961. 
Shortly thereafter, Mojmir Petrán of the Charles university in Prague, 
Czechoslovakia, began a collabora -
tion with David Egger and Robert 
Galambos at Y ale university. Back 
home, Petrán went on to build 
a pocket-size pinhole scanning 
microscope; he then returned to 
Y ale where, in 1967, he and Egger 
reported unstained images of brain 
and ganglion cells using reflected 
light. In 1981, the design of Petrán’s 
microscope was discussed in a 
theoretical analysis of conventional 
versus confocal microscopes by 
Colin Sheppard and Tony Wilson, 
who proposed a theory on how to 
combine “the resolution and depth 
discrimination improvements of 
confocal microscopy with the ease 
of operation of the conventional 
microscope” . 
Several follow-up studies made a 
key adjustment to the confocal design 
— the use of laser beams. This allowed 
faster scanning and higher resolution, 
but, most importantly, provided  
the illumination needed to obtain 
fluorescence images. Two papers pub -
lished in 1987 used such instruments 
in the first key applications of confocal In a conventional microscope (left), a large region of the specimen is illuminated by 
the light source and condenser. The detector forms an image from both the in-focus 
light (black lines) and the out-of-focus light (red and blue lines). Conversely, a 
confocal microscope (right) restricts both the illumination and the light that can 
reach the detector by introducing two pinholes, so only the in-focus light is 
detected (black lines). Adapted, with permission, from Spector D. L. &  
 Goldman, R. D. Basic Methods in Microscopy  (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory  
Press, Cold Spring Harbor, 2006).PRimARY R eFeRenCes Smith, F . H. Microscopic interferometry. Research (London) 
8, 385–395 (1955) | Nomarski, G. Microinterféromètre différentiel à ondes polarisées . 
J. Phys. Radium  16, 9S–11S (1955) | Allen, R. D., David, G. B. & Nomarski, G. The  
Zeiss-Nomarski differential interference equipment for transmitted-light microscopy. 
Z. Wiss. Mikrosk. 69, 193–221 (1969) | Allen, R. D., Allen, N. S. & Travis, J. L. Video-
enhanced contrast, differential interference contrast (AVEC-DIC) microscopy: a new 
method capable of analyzing microtubule-related motility in the reticulopodial 
network of Allogromia laticollaris . Cell Motil. Cytoskel.  1, 291–302 (1981) | Inoué, S. 
Video image processing greatly enhances contrast, quality, and speed in 
polarization-based microscopy. J. Cell Biol . 89, 346–356 (1981)
FURtHeR ReADinG Allen, R. D., Metuzals, J., Tasaki, I., Brady, S. T . &  
Gilbert, S. P . Fast axonal transport in squid giant axon. Science  218 , 1127–1129 
(1982) | Salmon, E. D. VE-DIC light microscopy and the discovery of kinesin. Trends 
Cell Biol . 5, 154–158 (1995)over time. Allen, Allen and Travis 
exemplified the possibilities of the 
technique by visualizing the dynamic 
movement of microtubules in the 
marine protist Allogromia . Inoué 
demonstrated the dramatic improve -
ment of both polarized light and DIC 
imaging by video enhancement. 
Video-enhanced DIC (VE-DIC) 
was subsequently used in numerous 
studies of dynamic behaviour within ▶
▶the cell at high resolution. For exam -
ple, the technique was used to dis -
cover the fast transport of membrane 
vesicles, some 50–100 nanometres in 
diameter, along microtubules within 
neuronal axons and, subsequently, in 
in vitro  motility assays that revealed 
the microtubule motors that pull this 
vesicle cargo (see Further Reading). 
Christina Karlsson Rosenthal, Associate 
Editor, Nature Cell  Biology
CitinG tHe milestones
The Nature Milestones in  Light Microscopy  supplement has been published using material from Nature Cell 
Biology , Nature Methods  and Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology . However, most referencing formats 
and software do not allow the inclusion of more than one journal name or volume in an article reference. 
Therefore, should you wish to cite any of the Milestones, please reference the page number (Sxx–Sxx) as a 
supplement to Nature Cell Biology . For example, Nature  Cell Biol . 11, Sxx–Sxx (2009). To cite articles from the 
Collection, please use the original citation, which can be found at the start of each article.Milestones
s12 | oCToBER  2009    www.nature.com/milestones/light-microscopy
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv edAPD
APDLaserLaser milestone 10
FCS and FRAP: illuminating cellular processes
Principle of dual-colour fluorescence 
cross-correlation spectroscopy (dcFCCS). 
Intensity fluctuations from two spectrally distinct 
species of labelled molecule (red and green) in the 
focal volume are recorded by two different 
avalanche photodiode (APD) detectors. 
Co-diffusion of molecules that are tightly linked to 
each other induces coincident fluctuations in both 
channels and, consequently, non-negative cross 
correlation. The cross-correlation amplitudes 
directly reflect on the degree of interactions. 
Image courtesy of P . Schwille, Technical University 
of Dresden, Dresden,  Germany.1990). The widespread adoption of 
FCS was initially constrained by the 
requirement for extensive calibration 
measurements and specialized equip -
ment, but FCS modules for confocal 
microscopes are now available.
Twenty-five years after the initial 
studies using FCS, the development 
of fluorescence cross-correlation 
spectroscopy (FCCS) permitted 
the measurement of intermolecular 
interactions. In 1997, Schwille et al. 
labelled oligonucleotides with two 
discrete fluorophores — red and 
green — and measured the kinetics 
of red–green complex formation 
to deduce average annealing time. 
This technique has since been used 
to measure protein–protein interac -
tions, including dynamic  
co-localization, trafficking and 
caspase-mediated cleavage.
FCS could be used to measure 
the diffusion of membrane proteins, 
but a technique called fluorescence 
recovery after photobleaching 
(FRAP) enabled researchers to  
elucidate the movement of proteins 
within and between cellular mem -
branes at micrometre-scale resolu -
tion. In 1974, Bähr and colleagues By the late 1960s, fluorescence 
imaging was routinely used in a 
number of applications. But in 
1972, the Webb laboratory put 
fluorescence microscopy to a novel 
use: measuring reaction kinetics. 
Neither ethidium bromide (EtBr) 
nor DNA fluoresces independently, 
but in complex the two emit an 
orange glow under ultraviolet light. 
By measuring the fluctuations in 
fluorescence of EtBr binding to 
DNA, Magde et al. calculated the 
thermodynamics of complex  
formation and diffusion at 
equilibrium, and derived precise 
mathematical formulae explaining 
their interdependencies.
Between 1972 and now, this 
technique, termed fluorescence 
correlation spectroscopy (FCS), has 
been applied to measure the kinetics 
of chemical and biological reactions, 
diffusion and flow. The rates of dif -
fusion and flow were measured by 
detecting the stochastic movement of 
fluorophores into and out of a focused 
laser beam. Detection techniques have 
now improved, making it possible 
to quantify the dynamics of single 
molecules (Rigler and Widengren, …the Webb 
laboratory put 
fluorescence 
microscopy to 
a novel use: 
measuring 
reaction 
kinetics.
▶microscopy to cell biology. In the first 
study, John White, William Bradshaw 
Amos and Michael Fordham, working 
at the Medical Research Council labo -
ratory in Cambridge, uK, used their 
laser scanning confocal microscope 
to compare images of various cells 
and tissues — from the endoplasmic 
reticulum of plasmacytoma cells to 
the mitotic spindles of worm embryos — produced by epifluorescence versus 
confocal techniques. The second 
study came from Gerrit van Meer and 
colleagues, working in Kai Simon’s 
laboratory at the European Molecular 
Biology Laboratory in Heidelberg, 
Germany, who used a laser scanning 
confocal microscope developed 
by Wijnaendts-van Resandt et al. 
together with fluorescent ceramide 
labels to follow the transport of newly 
synthesized sphingolipids in epithe -
lial cells. In this way, the advantages 
of confocal microscopy for analysing 
subcellular processes became clear. 
By revealing clear images in thick 
tissue samples, confocal microscopes 
obviated the need for tissue  
sectioning, and allowed tissues to be 
imaged under more physiological If I could have only one 
single apparatus in the 
lab, it would be a point 
scanner. Kees Jalink
PRimARY ReFeRenCes  Minsky, M. Microscopy Apparatus. US Patent 3,013,467 (1961) | 
Egger , M. D. & Petrán, M. New reflected-light microscope for viewing unstained brain 
and ganglion cells. Science 157 , 305–307 (1967) | Sheppard, C. J. & Wilson, T . The 
theory of the direct-view confocal microscope. J. Microsc.  124 , 107–117 (1981) | 
White, J. G., Amos, W. B. & Fordham, M. An evaluation of confocal versus conventional 
imaging of biological structures by fluorescence light microscopy. J. Cell Biol.  105 , 
41–48 (1987) | Van Meer, G., Stelzer, E. H. K., Wijnaendts-van Resandt, R. W. & Simons, 
K. Sorting of sphingolipids in epithelial (Madin–Darby canine kidney) cells. J. Cell Biol.  
105 , 1623–1635 (1987) 
FURtHeR ReADinG Petrán, M., Hadravsky, M., Egger, M. D. & Galambos, R. Tandem-
scanning reflected-light microscope. J. Opt. Soc. Am.  58, 661–664 (1968) | Brakenhoff, 
G. J., Bloem, P . & Barends, P . J. Confocal scanning light microscopy with high aperture 
lenses. J. Microsc.  117 , 219–232 (1979) | Brakenhoff, G. J. New imaging modes in 
confocal scanning light microscopy (CSLM). J. Microsc.  117 , 233–242 (1979) | Cox, I. J. 
Scanning optical fluorescence microscopy. J. Microsc.  133 , 149–154 (1984) | 
Wijnaendts-van Resandt, R. W. et al.  Optical fluo  rescence microscopy in three 
dimensions: microtomos  copy.  J. Microsc . 138 , 29–34 (1985) conditions. Together with the discov -
ery of green fluorescent protein (see 
MILEST oNE 18), this ushered in the era 
of in vivo imaging.
Alison Schuldt, Senior Editor,  
Nature Cell  Biology 
▶Milestones
NAT uRE MILEST oNES | Ligh T microscopy  oCToBER  2009 | s13
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv ed milestone  11
Time to start FRETtingon biology, and on microscopy in 
particular.
Förster’s proposal was confirmed 
experimentally in 1967 by Lubert 
Stryer and Richard Haugland, who 
demonstrated that the phenomenon 
of resonance energy transfer could 
be used as a ‘spectroscopic ruler’ to 
determine the distance between two 
chromophores. These findings paved 
the way for using FRET to observe 
interactions and conformational 
dynamics in purified proteins 
in vitro .
But Förster’s theory also led to 
another application: mapping pro -
tein distributions and interactions 
in living cells with high resolution 
using a fluorescence microscope. 
Fernandez and Berlin first showed 
in 1976 that the concept of FRET 
could be used to examine the 
dynamic distribution of receptor 
complexes on the cell surface. This 
was a substantial advance for the 
field because it facilitated the  
determination of receptor distribu -
tion with much higher spatial  
resolution than with standard 
fluorescence tagging. However, 
unlike the authors of work to come, 
Fernandez and Berlin did not show 
any microscopy images. 
FRET is uniquely suited  
to imaging protein–protein  The theory behind Förster resonance 
energy transfer (FRET) — or fluores -
cence resonance energy transfer, as 
it is also known — was first formally 
proposed in the 1940s by Theodor 
Förster, who showed that electronic 
excitation energy can be transferred 
from a donor fluorophore to an 
acceptor chromophore in close prox -
imity, with an efficiency dependent 
on the inverse of the sixth power of 
the distance separating the two. This 
relatively simple equation would turn 
out to have a considerable impact interactions in cells because for a 
change to be seen in the FRET signal 
the two fluorophores must be in very 
close proximity. The first papers 
demonstrating this application of the 
technique were published in the mid-
1990s, after fluorescence microscope 
technology had improved and the 
confocal fluorescence microscope 
had become available. In 1993, 
Brian Bacskai, Roger Tsien and their 
colleagues used FRET and confocal 
fluorescence microscopy to follow 
the fate of the catalytic and regulatory 
subunits of cyclic AMP-dependent 
protein kinase, as well as free cAMP , 
in response to stimulation of sensory 
neurons from a marine snail with 
serotonin. 
Thomas Jovin’s group soon 
followed with the pioneering of 
FRET microscopy techniques that 
improved the sensitivity and accuracy 
of FRET so as to allow quantitative 
measurements of protein interactions Förster (or fluorescence) 
resonance energy transfer 
microscopy has been used to 
address questions about the 
existence of lipid rafts. 
Image is reproduced, with 
permission, from R. Varma & 
S. Mayor © (1998) Macmillan 
Publishers Ltd. All rights 
reserved.
▶photobleached half of an erythrocyte 
plasma membrane labelled with 
fluorescein isothiocyanate  (FITC)  
and found that membrane proteins 
did not diffuse rapidly from the 
unbleached area into the bleached 
area. The robustness of FRAP , and 
its utility in a range of applications, 
permitted Axelrod et al. to measure 
intracellular membrane trafficking 
just 2 years later. Examining the 
recovery curves of photobleached 
samples allowed the authors to infer 
whether recovery was accomplished 
by lateral diffusion, flow from intra -
cellular compartments or a combina -
tion of the two. The development of 
precise mobility-rate formulae also 
permitted the comparison of diffu -
sion and flow between heterogeneous 
samples. Today, FRAP is widely 
used to study trafficking within and 
between subcellular compartments and to quantitate the binding and 
disassociation of membrane proteins 
in vivo.
In 1976, Koppel et al. undertook 
a side-by-side comparison of FCS 
and FRAP , and noted that each 
system has distinct advantages and 
disadvantages. Whereas FCS can 
provide information about single 
molecules, its potential to pho -
tobleach samples limits the length 
and scope of experiments, and the 
experimental set-up is sensitive to 
perturbation. unlike FCS, FRAP 
can detect immobile elements in cell 
membranes and can also be applied 
across populations of living cells, but 
the required photobleaching step can 
irrevocably damage delicate samples. 
Nonetheless, the development and 
refinement of these complementary 
techniques ushered in a new era 
of fluorescence microscopy and PRimARY R eFeRenCes Magde, D., Elson, E. & 
Webb, W. W. Thermodynamic fluctuations in a 
reacting system — measurement by 
fluorescence correlation spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. 
Lett.  29, 705–708 (1972) | Axelrod, D.,  
Koppel, D. E., Schlessinger, J., Elson, E. &  
Webb, W. W. Mobility measurement by analysis 
of fluorescence photobleaching recovery 
kinetics. Biophys. J.  16, 1055–1069 (1976) | 
Koppel, E., Axelrod, D., Schlessinger, J.,  
Elson, E. L. & Webb, W. W. Dynamics of 
fluorescence marker concentration as a probe of 
mobility. Biophys. J.  16, 1315–1329 (1976)
FURtHeR ReADinG Peters, R., Peters, J.,  
T ews, K. H. & Bähr, W. A microfluorimetric study of 
translational diffusion in erythrocyte membranes. 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta  367 , 282–294 (1974) |  
Rigler, R. & Widengren, J. Ultrasensitive detection 
of single molecules by fluorescence correlation 
spectroscopy. Bioscience  3, 180–183 (1990) | 
Schwille, P ., Meyer-Almes, F .-J. & Rigler, R. Dual-
color fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy 
for multicomponent diffusional analysis in 
solution. Biophys. J.  72, 1878–1886 (1997) supported additional applications of 
fluorescent probes. 
Emily J.  Chenette, Associate Editor,  
UCSD-Nature Signaling Gateway  ▶
FRET is uniquely suited 
to imaging protein–
protein interactions  
in cells…Milestones
s14 | oCToBER  2009    www.nature.com/milestones/light-microscopy
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv ed milestone 12
calcium, a messenger  
under the spotlight  
“It is scarcely necessary any longer to 
stress the importance of intracellular 
free Ca2+ as a second messenger” 
reads the opening line of Roger 
Tsien’s 1980 paper, reporting for the 
first time the synthesis of rationally 
designed fluorescent Ca2+ probes 
for intracellular use. Indeed, studies 
on calcium date back to the late 
nineteenth century, underscoring 
its significance. Reliable methods 
to measure intracellular Ca2+ 
concentrations first appeared in the 
1960s, but it was not until the 1980s 
that the rapid expansion of new 
Ca2+-measurement techniques opened 
the way to spatial and temporal 
analysis of the complex dynamics of 
Ca2+ concentrations in living  cells.
In his original paper, Tsien introduced 
a new generation of fluorescent 
polycarboxylate dyes derived from 
the selective Ca2+ chelator ethylene -
glycoltetraacetic acid (EGTA). Despite 
their ground-breaking potential, the 
prototype BAPTA and its derivative 
Quin2 had relatively limited application 
owing to restrictions imposed by their 
absorption spectrum, low selectivity 
and fluorescence intensity. However, all 
of the polycarboxylate dyes  
currently available are derived from 
this original design, the flexibility of 
which enabled the synthesis of many 
improved dyes within a few years of the 
original  report.
In 1985, Tsien and his colleagues 
introduced six new indicators, among 
which Fura-2 and Indo-1 were the most successful. Compared with Quin2, 
the new dyes showed much stronger 
fluorescence, higher wavelength shift 
on Ca2+ binding, weaker affinity for Ca2+ 
and better selectivity against other 
ions. Soon after, high-resolution digital 
imaging of single smooth muscle cells 
labelled with Fura-2 allowed Tsien, 
Fredric Fay and their co-workers to 
perform unprecedented spatiotemporal 
measurements of Ca2+ gradients in 
subcellular compartments, revealing 
the differential regulation of Ca2+ 
concentrations in the cytoplasm, 
nucleus and sarcoplasmic reticulum of 
these contracting  cells .
Critical to the widespread 
popularity of the polycarboxylate 
Ca2+ indicators was the synthesis of 
their acetoxymethyl esters, which 
are membrane permeable and allow 
non-disruptive loading and efficient 
trapping of the dyes in intact cells once 
the esterifying groups are hydrolysed 
(Tsien, 1981). One disadvantage of 
the Fura-2 family of dyes was that 
they required excitation at ultraviolet 
wavelengths, which limited their range 
of potential applications. In 1989, Tsien 
and colleagues further developed the 
visible-wavelength indicators Rhod-2, 
Fluo-2 and Fluo-3, which are among the 
most widely used non-ratiometric Ca2+ 
indicators so far, thanks in part to their 
general applicability to many cell types, 
including  neurons.
Besides their crucial role in 
dogma-changing discoveries, synthetic 
Ca2+ indicators have driven technological advances such as fast cameras and 
automated filter wheels, and their uses 
have been further expanded by the 
concomitant development of imaging 
technologies such as fluorescence 
lifetime imaging and multiphoton 
microscopy. Today, fluorescent calcium 
dyes remain key to studies that combine 
imaging with electrophysiological 
analyses.
Silvia Grisendi, Associate Editor,  
Nature Cell  BiologyCarbachol-evoked Ca2+ 
signals in human embryonic 
kidney cells recorded using 
the fluorescent indicator 
Fluo-4. Warmer colours 
denote a higher Ca2+ 
concentration. Image 
courtesy of Z. Ding and  
C. W. Taylor, University of 
Cambridge,  UK.
PRimARY ReFeRenCes T sien, R. Y . New calcium 
indicators and buffers with high selectivity 
against magnesium and protons: design, 
synthesis, and properties of prototype structures. 
Biochemistry  19, 2396–2404 (1980) | T sien, R. Y .  
A non-disruptive technique for loading calcium 
buffers and indicators into cells. Nature  290 ,  
527–528 (1981) | Grynkiewicz, G., Poenie, M. & 
Tsien, R. Y . A new generation of Ca2+ indicators 
with greatly improved fluorescence properties. 
J. Biol. Chem . 260 , 3440–3450 (1985) 
FURtHeR ReADinG Williams, D. A., Fogarty, K. E., 
T sien, R. Y . & Fay, F . S. Calcium gradients in single 
smooth muscle cells revealed by the digital 
imaging microscope using Fura-2. Nature  318 , 
558–561 (1985) | Minta, A., Kao, J. P . & T sien, R. Y . 
Fluorescent indicators for cytosolic calcium based 
on rhodamine and fluorescein chromophores. 
J. Biol. Chem . 264 , 8171–8178 (1989)… Ca2+ 
measurement 
techniques 
opened the 
way to spatial 
and temporal 
analysis …PRimARY R eFeRenCes Fernandez, S. M. & Berlin, R. D. Cell surface distribution of 
lectin receptors determined by resonance energy transfer. Nature  264 , 411–415 (1976) 
| Bacskai, B. J. et al. Spatially resolved dynamics of cAMP and protein kinase A subunits 
in Aplysia  sensory neurons. Science  260 , 222–226 (1993) | Gadella, T. W. J. Jr & Jovin, T. M. 
Oligomerization of epidermal growth factor receptors on A431 cells studied by time-
resolved fluorescence imaging microscopy. A stereochemical model for tyrosine kinase 
receptor activation. J. Cell Biol.  129 , 1543–1558 (1995) | Bastiaens, P . I. H. et al. Imaging 
the intracellular trafficking and state of the AB5 quarternary structure of cholera toxin. 
EMBO  J. 15, 4246–4253 (1996)
FURtHeR ReADinG Förster, T. Energiewanderung und Fluoreszenz. 
Naturwissenschaften  6, 166–175 (1946) | Stryer, L. & Haugland, R. P . Energy transfer: a 
spectroscopic ruler. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA  58, 719–726 (1967)  | Kenworthy, A. K. & 
Edidin, M. Distribution of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored protein at the 
apical surface of MDCK cells examined at a resolution of <100 Å using imaging 
fluorescence resonance energy transfer. J. Cell Biol.  142 , 69–84 (1998) | Varma, R. & 
Mayor, S. GPI-anchored proteins are organized in submicron domains at the cell 
surface. Nature  394 , 798–801 (1998) .in cells. In 1995, Jovin and colleagues 
introduced donor photobleaching 
and fluorescence lifetime imaging 
microscopy (FLIM), which they used 
to study epidermal-growth-factor 
receptor oligomerization on single 
cells. They introduced acceptor  
photobleaching in 1996, which they 
used to follow the subcellular locali -
zation and oligomerization state of 
the cholera toxin in cells. 
Since these landmark develop -
ments, the importance of FRET  ▶ as a microscopy technique has  
been borne out in its application to 
challenging biological questions, such 
as the existence of lipid rafts. A wide 
variety of FRET-based biosensors 
are now available for detecting small 
molecules and enzyme activities in 
cells. And the technology continues to 
evolve, as novel donor–acceptor pairs 
are developed, new methods are intro -
duced and instrumentation improves.
Allison Doerr, Associate Editor, 
Nature  MethodsMilestones
NAT uRE MILEST oNES | Ligh T microscopy  oCToBER  2009 | s15
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv ed milestone 13  
TIRF: imaging at the cellular edge
If you want to visualize what happens at a 
biological interface or on the surface of a cell, 
it is vital to eliminate the background that 
comprises all the stuff that sits beyond that first 
layer. This is exactly the approach used in total 
internal reflection fluorescence microscopy 
(TIRF). Building on studies from the late 1800s 
on the detection of scattered photons from TIR 
excitation, Daniel Axelrod built a microscope in 
which a laser beam hits, at an angle, a glass slide 
— on the other side of which the sample is placed. 
The incident angle is greater than the critical 
angle, and therefore the beam is completely reflected back into the slide. At the same time, a 
tiny part of the beam called an evanescent wave 
manages to penetrate a few hundred nanometres 
into the sample and can stimulate fluorescence 
in a biological medium that is tagged with 
chromophores. 
The evanescent wave penetrates the sample 
only for some 200 nm and its intensity decreases 
exponentially, thereby producing exquisite 
z-axis sensitivity. Restricting illumination to 
a thin section at the interface of the sample 
and the glass slide eliminates background 
fluorescence from deeper in the sample and 
allows longer imaging periods by limiting 
bleaching of chromophores that can move into 
or out of the illuminated layer during imaging. 
In 1981, Axelrod demonstrated the imaging 
capabilities of the technique by visualizing 
cellular focal adhesions on a glass  slide.
In the mid-1990s, Yanagida and colleagues 
took the thin illumination layer provided by 
TIRF to its logical consequence and performed 
single-molecule detection of biological events in 
aqueous solutions and in real time. They reported 
individual ATP turnover events by a single 
myosin molecule in 1995. This setup predated 
confocal microscopy by several years, and to a 
large extent it is much simpler and less expensive 
because it can be easily fitted on to conventional 
inverted fluorescence microscopes.
In 2000, Almers and colleagues used the high 
z-sensitivity of TIRF to image the process of exocytosis of synaptic vesicles, and visualized 
the vesicles approaching the plasma membrane 
and unloading their contents. In the same year, 
Axelrod and colleagues similarly imaged the 
fusion of post-Golgi carriers with the plasma 
membrane. These studies are also early examples 
of through-the-objective TIRF , which, through the 
use of high numerical aperture objectives, further 
simplifies the setup and sample handling. Given 
the number of important events that take place 
at the cellular membrane, including endocytosis, 
exocytosis, receptor activation and ion transport, 
having a technique that can access this layer 
has set the stage for what can be done with TIRF 
at present.
Stefano Tonzani, Associate Editor, Nature
PRimARY ReFeRenCes Axelrod, D. Cell-substrate 
contacts illuminated by total internal reflection 
fluorescence. J. Cell Biol.  89, 141–145 (1981) | Funatsu, T ., 
Harada, Y ., Tokunaga, M., Saito, K. & Y anagida, T . Imaging of 
single fluorescent molecules and individual ATP turnovers by 
single myosin molecules in aqueous solution. Nature  374 , 
555–559 (1995) | Zenisek, D., Steyer, J. A. & Almers, W. 
Transport, capture and exocytosis of single synaptic vesicles 
at active zones. Nature  406 , 849–854 (2000) | Schmoranzer, J., 
Goulian, M., Axelrod, D. & Simon, S. M. Imaging constitutive 
exocytosis with total internal reflection fluorescence 
microscopy. J. Cell Biol.  149 , 23–32 (2000) 
FURtHeR ReADinG Thompson, N. L., Burghardt, T . P . & 
Axelrod, D. Measuring surface dynamics of biomolecules by 
total internal reflection fluorescence with photobleaching 
recovery or correlation spectroscopy. Biophys. J. 33, 435–454 
(1981) | Merrifield, C. J., Feldman, M. E., Wan, L. & Almers, W. 
Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of 
single clathrin-coated pits. Nature Cell Biol.  4, 691–698 (2002)Clathrin-coated pits (red), actin stress fibres (parallel green 
lines) and local foci of actin polymerization (green dots) near 
the plasma membrane of a fibroblast. Image courtesy of 
W. Almers, Vollum Institute, Portland, Oregon, USA.
 milestone 14
Imaging without the blur
hoped to reconstruct 3D images from 
stacks of ‘optical sections’ — images 
captured at consecutive focal planes 
through a thick object. However, 
interpreting the information in any 
given focal plane was complicated by 
the presence of out-of-focus fluores -
cence from neighbouring planes. 
In 1983, Agard and Sedat brought 
deconvolution — a method to 
eliminate out-of-focus fluorescence 
or restore it to its original source 
— to the attention of cell biologists. 
Deconvolution algorithms use  The distribution and structure of 
molecules within the cell are central 
to their functions. By enabling 
high-resolution three-dimensional 
(3D) imaging of the cell’s interior, 
the application of deconvolution 
algorithms to microscopy has made a 
vital contribution to our understand -
ing of cell biology. 
By the 1980s, fluorescent probes 
for many specific cellular molecules 
were available. However, visualizing 
their distribution in relatively thick 
specimens was tricky. Researchers knowledge of the microscope’s  
optical properties to model the 
process by which imaging distorts 
the ‘real’ object to produce the raw 
image. In several rounds of iterative 
computation, estimates of the object 
are entered into the equation and a 
comparison of the calculated outcome 
to the raw image is used to improve 
the estimate, until the object’s true 
properties are determined. In this 
way, Agard and Sedat obtained 
the first high-resolution images of 
the structure and organization of ▶Milestones
s16 | oCToBER  2009    www.nature.com/milestones/light-microscopy
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv edfluorescently labelled chromatin in 
the nuclei of Drosophila  melanogaster  
salivary  glands.
Numerous deconvolution algo -
rithms exist (see Further Reading); 
however, another key advance 
was made in 1989, when Fay and 
colleagues were examining the 
molecular basis of force generation in 
smooth muscles. Basic deconvolution 
algorithms can amplify noise in the 
images, making it difficult to nar -
row the range of possible estimates 
to determine the real object. To circumvent this problem, the authors 
introduced constraints to the object 
estimates: they eliminated estimates 
in which the object was not ‘regular’ 
(or smooth) or in which fluorescence 
levels were less than zero, a physically 
impossible situation. This yielded 
high-resolution images that enabled 
the quantitative analysis of α-actinin 
distribution in smooth muscle  cells.
Initially, deconvolution was 
limited to those researchers who had 
access to the large computing facili -
ties required to perform the intensive PRimARY ReFeRenCes Agard, D. A. &  
Sedat, J. W. Three-dimensional architecture of a 
polytene nucleus. Nature  302 , 676–681 (1983) | 
Fay, F . S., Carrington, W. & Fogarty, K. E. Three-
dimensional molecular distribution in single cells 
analysed using the digital imaging microscope. 
J. Microsc. 153 , 133–149 (1989)
FURtHeR ReADinG Richardson, W. H. 
Bayesian-based iterative method of image 
restoration. J. Opt. Soc. Am. 62, 55–59 (1972) | 
Lucy, L. B. An iterative technique for the 
rectification of observed distributions.  
Astron. J. 79, 745–754 (1974) | Shepp, L. A. & 
Vardi, Y . Maximum likelihood reconstruction  
for emission tomography. IEEE Trans. Med. 
Imaging 1, 113–122 (1982) | Carrington, W. A.  
et al.  Superresolution three-dimensional  
images of fluorescence in cells with minimal 
light exposure. Science  268 , 1483–1487  
(1995)A HeLa cell in metaphase, before (left) or after (right) deconvolution. Staining shows DNA (blue), microtubules 
(white), centrosomes (green) and the centrosomal protein ASPM (red). Images courtesy of A. Ferrand,  
University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.calculations. However, as desktop 
computers became more powerful, 
cell biologists quickly realized the 
advantages of deconvolution, partic -
ularly for long-term, live-cell imaging 
in which reduced light intensities are 
important and confocal microscopy 
techniques (see  Milestone  9) are lim -
ited. The contribution of deconvolu -
tion to the visualization of organelles 
and cellular macromolecules has thus 
been central to our current under -
standing of many cellular processes.
Katherine Whalley, Senior Editor,  
Nature Reviews Neuroscience
These papers … 
demonstrated 
the high 
level of 3D 
macromolecular 
structure 
present in 
cells and the 
structural 
complexity of 
the cell interior.  
Jason Swedlow  
 mi l e s to n e  1 5 
It takes two photons to tango
to the focal volume, so fluores -
cence detection is less sensitive to 
light -scattering issues.  
Two-photon absorption is an 
old concept in quantum optics 
and was first described  by Maria 
Göppert-Mayer in her doctoral A microscopist’s dream is to be 
able to visualize phenomena 
occurring in cells deep inside 
tissues with minimum photo -
damage to the live samples. 
The achievement of this goal 
is hampered by the presence of 
out-of-focus flare, which blurs 
images obtained with conventional 
epifluorescence microscopes. 
In confocal laser scanning 
microscopy (see  MILEST oNE 9), 
out-of-focus background is 
eliminated by a pinhole, but the 
large excitation volume means 
that light scattering limits the 
extent to which this background 
can be reduced. In two-photon 
microscopy, excitation is confined dissertation in 1931. Thirty years 
later, Kaiser and Garrett observed 
the phenomenon in crystals. 
Two-photon excitation results 
from the almost simultaneous 
absorption of two photons by a 
molecule. The wavelength of the 
excitation light needs to be about 
twice that required for single-
photon excitation because photon 
energy is inversely proportional 
Maximum-intensity side projection of a 
two-photon image stack obtained in a transgenic 
mouse expressing Clomeleon, a genetically 
encoded chloride indicator, preferentially in deep 
layer 5 pyramidal cells. Data were taken with a 40x, 
NA 0.8 water immersion objective. Scale bar, 100 
mm. Image courtesy of F . Helmchen and T . Kuner, 
University of Zurich, Switzerland.… provides clear 
imaging at a ten times 
greater depth than 
a normal confocal 
microscope.
▶▶Milestones
NAT uRE MILEST oNES | Ligh T microscopy  oCToBER  2009 | s17
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv edDespite tremendous advances in light microscopy, 
visualizing large biological structures in three 
dimensions (3D) has been problematic. Images 
from thin histological sections do not convey 
enough spatial information, and sectioning 
cannot be used with live specimens. Furthermore, 
non-destructive, optical sectioning (for example, 
by confocal microscopy) offers a limited imaging 
depth for large samples, and the axial (‘z’) 
resolution is inherently much lower than the 
lateral resolution. A simple solution might 
overcome these issues: illuminating the specimen 
at a 90° angle with a light sheet. 
The idea of illuminating samples from the side 
with a light sheet was first described in 1903,  
but was not explored until Voie et al.  pioneered  
the same principle in 1993 to develop 
orthogonal-plane fluorescence optical sectioning 
(ORFOS). In this approach, the specimen is 
optically sectioned by a thin light sheet that is 
produced by a cylindrical macroscopic lens.  The 
light sheet is projected on to one plane of a 
transparent, fluorescently labelled specimen, 
perpendicularly to the detection axis. Because only 
one plane of the specimen is illuminated, no light is 
emitted from regions outside the focal plane and, 
therefore, there are no out-of-focus components in 
the image. By rotating their hamster cochlea 
specimen, Voie  et al. collected serial images at 
different angles and reconstructed a 3D 
representation of the cochlea, showing the fine 
internal structures in great detail. 
Although this method offered enormous 
potential for visualizing large specimens in detail, it 
was not developed commercially and was used only 
by a few research groups — most notably Fuchs 
et al., who in 2002 developed a light sheet system 
using a microscope lens to visualize aquatic bacteria 
in their natural setting. In 2004, however , Stelzer and 
colleagues developed a light sheet microscopy 
application with even broader appeal, which could 
be used to image both fixed and live embryos. 
T ermed selective plane illumination microscopy 
(SPIM), the technique offers 3D images at high 
resolution with impressive penetration depth of live 
embryos. Furthermore, phototoxicity over time is 
reduced because the thin sheet of light illuminates only one plane of the embryo. This helped to 
overcome a major challenge: visualizing 
embryogenesis over long periods of time. Indeed, in 
2008 Stelzer and co-workers reported an improved 
version of SPIM that could image the development 
of zebrafish embryos over 24 hours and track every 
cell nucleus, thereby obtaining a complete map of 
cell division and cell migration patterns.
With the Stelzer team now collaborating with 
microscope manufacturer Carl Zeiss to improve 
this method and develop a commercially 
available product, light sheet microscopy will no 
doubt further our understanding of biological 
processes in  3D.
Rachel David, Assistant Editor, Nature Reviews 
Molecular Cell Biology and Nature  
Reviews Microbiology milestone 16
Seeing the light, perpendicularly
Images of embryo development obtained with digital scanned 
laser light sheet fluorescence microscopy (DSLM), an improved 
version of selective plane illumination microscopy (SPIM), both of 
which were developed by the Stelzer laboratory. The digital 
embryo (left half) shows patterns of cell migration in different 
directions: dorsal migration (cyan), ventral migration (green), 
migration towards the body axis (red) or away from it (yellow), and 
migration towards the yolk (pink). Image is reproduced, with 
permission, from P . J. Keller et al . © (2008) American Association 
for the Advancement of Science.
PRimARY R eFeRenCes Voie, A.  H., Burns, D.  H. & Spelman, F .  A. 
Orthogonal-plane fluorescence optical sectioning: three-
dimensional imaging of macroscopic biological specimens. 
J. Microsc.  170 , 229–236 (1993) | Huisken, J., Swoger, J., Del Bene, F ., 
Wittbrodt, J. & Stelzer, E. H. K. Optical sectioning deep inside live 
embryos by selective plane illumination microscopy. Science  305 , 
1007–1009 (2004) 
FURtHeR ReADinG Siedentopf, H. & Zsigmondy, R. Über 
Sichtbarmachung und Grössenbestimmung ultramikroskopischer 
Teilchen, mit besonderer Anwendung auf Goldrubingläser. 
Annalen der Physik  10, 1–39 (1903) | Stelzer, E. H. K. & Lindek, S. 
Fundamental reduction of the observation volume in far-field 
light microscopy by detection orthogonal to the illumination axis: 
confocal theta microscopy. Opt.  Comm.  111 , 536–547 (1994) | 
Fuchs, E., Jaffe, J.  S., Long, R.  A. & Azam, F . Thin laser light sheet 
microscope for microbial oceanography. Opt. Express  10,  
145–154 (2002) | Keller, P . J., Schmidt, A. D., Wittbrodt, J. &  
Stelzer, E. H. K. Reconstruction of zebrafish early embryonic 
development by scanned light sheet microscopy. Science  322 , 
1065–1069 (2008) … the technique offers 3D 
images at high resolution with 
impressive penetration depth 
of live embryos.to the wavelength. In two-photon 
microscopy, a laser beam is focused 
on a sample so as to increase the 
probability of the fluorophore 
becoming excited, and the laser 
focus is scanned across a field 
of view to create an image. This 
only became feasible in 1990, when 
mode-locked lasers became available 
that could deliver photon densities 
a million times higher than those 
of conventional lasers, in ultrashort 
pulses with typical durations in the 
femtosecond range.
 Denk, Strickler and Webb 
were the first to use this method 
to image chromosomes in live 
cultured cells. But Denk et al. 
soon adapted it to image neurons 
in situ, and the full potential of the 
technique became apparent when 
Svoboda et al. used it in 1997 to 
measure sensory -stimulus-induced 
dendritic calcium dynamics in 
pyramidal neurons in intact 
rat brain. 
By confining excitation to the 
focal volume, two-photon laser 
scanning fluorescence microscopy 
allows the correct assignment of 
photons to the spatial position 
from which they originated. The 
use of long excitation wavelengths 
and the reduced sensitivity to scat -
tering associated with excitation 
confinement provides clear imag -
ing at a ten times greater depth 
than a normal confocal micro -
scope. In addition, two-photon 
excitation greatly diminishes 
photobleaching and photodamage, 
making it ideal for imaging living 
cells buried deep inside intact 
embryos or organs. 
Nathalie Le Bot, Senior Editor,  
Nature Cell  Biology
PRimARY ReFeRenCe Denk, W., Strickler, J. H. & 
Webb, W. W. Two-photon laser scanning 
fluorescence microscopy. Science 248 , 73–76 
(1990)
FURtHeR ReADinG Göppert-Mayer, M.  
Über Elementarakte mit zwei Quantensprüngen.  
Ann. Phys.  9, 273–294 (1931) | Kaiser, W. &  
Garrett, C. G. B. Two-photon excitation in  
CaF2: Eu2+. Phys. Rev. Lett.  7, 229–231 (1961) | 
Denk, W. et al.  Anatomical and functional 
imaging of neurons using 2-photon laser 
scanning microscopy. Neurosci. Methods  54,  
151–162 (1994) | Svoboda, K., Denk, W., Kleinfeld, 
D. & Tank, D. W. In vivo  dendritic calcium 
dynamics in neocortical pyramidal neurons. 
Nature  385 , 161–165 (1997)▶Milestones
s18 | oCToBER  2009    www.nature.com/milestones/light-microscopy
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv ed0 min 24 min 48 min 72 min
96 min 120 min 144 min 168 minThe potential to visualize bright 
fluorescent molecules on a dark back -
ground using fluorescence microscopy 
lit up the field by providing molecular 
specificity and image contrast unparal -
lelled by other dyes. Theory suggested 
that these properties should permit the 
detection and imaging of single mole -
cules. A first glimpse of the possibilities 
came in 1976, when Thomas Hirshfeld 
used a fluorescence microscope to 
detect single molecules bound by 
dozens of fluorophores as they passed 
through a thin layer of illumination. 
But technical limitations hindered 
progress. Although the next two dec -
ades witnessed the detection of single 
fluorophores at low temperatures, 
or while transiting a highly focused 
laser beam (see MILEST oNE 10), such 
methods were incapable of repeatedly 
imaging identified molecules in  
ambient environments.
In 1993, this situation changed 
markedly when Eric Betzig and Robert 
Chichester reported the first repetitive 
imaging of single fluorophores at room 
temperature with a new technique 
called near-field scanning optical 
microscopy (NS oM) that repeatedly 
scans an extremely small optical 
probe over a sample. This provided 
molecule-scale spatial localization and 
information on molecular orientation. 
The potential biological applications 
of single-molecule imaging captured 
the imaginations of microscopists 
and biologists alike, but because of its 
invasiveness and complexity NS oM 
proved largely unsuitable for complex 
biological samples. 
Although a number of people 
continued to try to improve NS oM — including its use  for Förster (or 
fluorescence) resonance energy trans -
fer (FRET) as a molecular ruler for 
single molecules — others turned to 
alternatives. In 1995, Toshio Y anagida 
and colleagues used an optimized 
implementation of total internal reflec -
tion fluorescence microscopy (TIRF) 
to image single myosin molecules 
labelled with one fluorophore and to 
detect the turnover of ATP labelled 
with a different fluorophore. unlike 
previous methods using immobilized 
molecules, this work showed that 
TIRF could image many molecules in 
aqueous solution for periods of several 
seconds before bleaching occurred, 
and demonstrated the suitability  
of this method for true biological 
applications. 
Although TIRF would come to 
dominate most single-molecule 
imaging applications, it was not the 
first technique to image the move -
ment of single fluorophores. This 
first was claimed by conventional 
epifluorescence microscopy (see 
MILEST oNE 4) with a highly sensi -
tive charge-coupled device (CCD) 
camera. Hansgeorg Schindler and 
his co-workers adapted the method 
of Jeff Gelles et al. for single-particle 
tracking based on Gaussian-peak 
fitting to determine the positions of 
individual fluorophore-labelled lipids 
in a membrane with an accuracy of 
about 15 nanometres and to track 
their movements over time. 
up until this point, single-molecule 
fluorescence microscopy applications 
had an almost proof-of-principle feel 
to them, and for the most part novel 
biological insights were limited. But 
in 1998, Sunney Xie and colleagues 
used the intrinsic on–off fluorescence 
switching of flavin adenine dinucle -
otide in the active site of cholesterol 
oxidase to reveal that enzyme activity 
is influenced by a form of molecular 
memory residing in conformational 
changes in the protein. This behaviour 
was completely unanticipated from 
ensemble experiments and showed 
unequivocally that single-molecule 
microscopy could shed new light on seemingly well-characterized systems. 
Similar enzymatic-turnover assays 
developed by other groups eventually 
led to the sequencing of individual 
DNA molecules.
Methods continued to be devel -
oped and refined as highlighted by a 
number of groundbreaking studies 
on ribozymes, molecular motors and 
gene expression in single living cells  
as scientists pushed the limits of  
technology and imagination.
Daniel Evanko, Editor, Nature  Methods m i l e s to n e  1 7 
single molecules in the dark
Time-lapse images of 
Escherichia coli cells showing 
single-molecule imaging of 
the expression of single 
fluorescent fusion proteins. 
The fluorescent molecules 
are photobleached in the 
intervals between each 
image. Image is reproduced, 
with permission, from J. Yu 
et al. © (2006) American 
Association for the 
Advancement of  Science.
PRimARY R eFeRenCes Betzig, E. & Chichester , R. J. 
Single molecules observed by near-field scanning 
optical microscopy. Science  262 , 1422–1425 (1993) | 
Funatsu, T ., Harada, Y ., T okunaga, M., Saito, K. & 
Y anagida, T . Imaging of single fluorescent molecules 
and individual ATP turnovers by single myosin 
molecules in aqueous solution. Nature  374 ,  
555–559 (1995) | Schmidt, T ., Schütz, G. J., 
Baumgartner , W., Gruber , H. J. & Schindler , H. 
Imaging of single molecule diffusion. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA  93, 2926–2929 (1996) | Lu, H. P .,  
Xun, L. & Xie, X. S. Single-molecule enzymatic 
dynamics. Science  282 , 1877–1882 (1998)
FURtHeR ReADinG Hirschfeld, T. Optical 
microscopic observation of single small molecules. 
Appl. Opt.  15, 2965–2966 (1976) | Gelles, J.,  
Schnapp, B. J. & Sheetz, M. P . T racking kinesin-driven 
movements with nanometre-scale precision. Nature  
331 , 450–453 (1988) | Shera, E. B., Seitzinger , N. K., 
Davis, L. M., Keller , R. A. & Soper , S. A. Detection of 
single fluorescence molecules. Chem. Phys. Lett.  
174 , 553–557 (1990) | Macklin, J. J., T rautman, J. K., 
Harris, T. D. & Brus, L. E. Imaging and time-resolved 
spectroscopy of single molecules at an interface. 
Science  272 , 255–258 (1996) | Ha, T. et al.  Probing the 
interaction between two single molecules: 
fluorescence resonance energy transfer between a 
single donor and a single acceptor. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA  93, 6264–6268 (1996) | Zhuang, X. et al.   
A single-molecule study of RNA catalysis and 
folding. Science  288, 2048–2051 (2000) | Yildiz, A. 
et al. Myosin V walks hand-over-hand: single 
fluorophore imaging with 1.5-nm localization. 
Science 300, 2061–2065 (2003) | Y u, J., Xiao, J., Ren, X., 
Lao, K. & Xie, X.S. Probing gene expression in live 
cells, one protein molecule at a time. Science  311, 
1600–1603 (2006)… Eric Betzig and 
Robert Chichester 
reported the first 
repetitive imaging of 
single fluorophores at 
room temperature …Milestones
NAT uRE MILEST oNES | Ligh T microscopy  oCToBER  2009 | s19
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv ed2.70
2.36
2.03
1.69
1.35
1.01
0.68
0.34
0.00
Ratio 460 /5450s 40s 60s 80s1 00s milestone  18
GFP: the green revolution
Cell bodies of two 
touch-receptor neurons 
from the worm 
Caenorhabditis elegans  
are labelled with green 
fluorescent protein 
expressed from the 
gene encoding 
β-tubulin. Image is 
reproduced, with 
permission, from  
M. Chalfie et al . 
© (1994) American 
Association for the 
Advancement of 
Science. In 1994, Chalfie et al.  published a report 
in Science  showing that the green 
fluorescent protein (GFP) from the 
jellyfish Aequorea victoria  could be used 
as a marker for protein localization 
and expression in living bacteria and 
worm cells, in the absence of any 
auxiliary factors from A. victoria . This 
demonstration of GFP as a tool to study 
proteins in vivo  fundamentally altered 
the nature and scope of the issues that 
could be addressed by cell biologists.
GFP was first discovered fortuitously 
in 1962 by Shimomura and colleagues 
during the purification of the 
bioluminescent protein aequorin from 
A. victoria . Subsequent purification, 
crystallization and reconstitution of 
energy transfer in vitro  from aequorin to 
GFP by Morise and colleagues in 1974 
provided insight into the fluorescent 
properties of GFP , which was shown to 
emit green light on energy transfer from 
aequorin.
Whether GFP would need aequorin 
and possibly other factors from the 
jellyfish to fluoresce in heterologous 
systems remained an open question 
for many years. In 1992, 30 years after 
its discovery, Prasher  et al.  cloned the 
gene encoding GFP , paving the way for experiments to assess its utility as an 
in vivo  tag for proteins. Two years later, 
Chalfie et al. showed that GFP could  
fluoresce when expressed in bacteria 
and worm cells. In the worm, GFP was 
expressed from the promoter of a gene 
that encoded β-tubulin. Its spatial and 
temporal expression in specific neurons 
of the worm mimicked that of the 
endogenous β-tubulin gene, thus proving 
that GFP could be a faithful marker for 
monitoring gene-expression  
patterns. Soon thereafter, Roger T sien’s 
laboratory engineered native GFP to 
become brighter, more photostable and 
excitable at a wavelength that matched 
that of conventional microscope filter 
sets, increasing its practical usability 
(as summarized in his 1998 review). The 
next breakthrough in GFP technology 
came with the development of GFP 
variants to produce blue, cyan and yellow 
fluorescent proteins (also described in 
Tsien’s review), thus enabling imaging 
experiments that could follow multiple 
tagged proteins in cells and organisms. 
Almost half a century after GFP was 
discovered, the 2008 Nobel Prize in 
Chemistry was awarded to Osamu 
Shimomura, Martin Chalfie and Roger 
Tsien “for the discovery and development of the green fluorescent protein, GFP”, 
acknowledging the seminal nature of 
this discovery.
Sowmya Swaminathan, Senior Editor, 
Nature Cell Biology
PRimARY R eFeRenCe Chalfie, M., Tu, Y ., Euskirchen. G., Ward, W. W. &  
Prasher, D. C. Green fluorescent protein as a marker for gene expression. Science  
263 , 802–805 (1994) 
FURtHeR ReADinG Shimomura, O., Johnson, F . H. & Saiga, Y .  Extraction, 
purification and properties of aequorin, a bioluminescent protein from the luminous 
hydromedusan Aequorea . J. Cell. Comp. Physiol . 59, 223–239 (1962)  | Morise, H., 
Shimomura, O., Johnson, F . H. & Winant, J. Intermolecular energy transfer in  
the bioluminescent system of Aequorea . Biochemistry  13, 2656–2662 (1974)  | Prasher , D. C., 
Eckenrode, V . K., Ward, W. W., Prendergast, F . G. & Cormier , M. J. Primary structure of the 
Aequorea victoria green-fluorescent protein. Gene  111 , 229–233 (1992) |  
Tsien, R. Y . The green fluorescent protein. Annu. Rev. Biochem.  67, 509–544 (1998)
 milestone 19  
Sensing second messengers
used FRET to engineer biosensors 
that measure changes in Ca2+  
concentrations in living cells. 
Ca2+ binds to calmodulin 
(CaM), changing its conformation 
and allowing it to bind to target 
proteins. Miyawaki et al. made 
a construct encoding blue GFP , 
CaM, the CaM-binding peptide of The discovery of green fluorescent 
protein (GFP) as a probe for 
visualizing proteins in vivo (see 
MILEST oNE 18) laid the founda -
tion for even more sophisticated 
microscopy techniques. GFP 
mutants with shifted excitation or 
emission wavelengths that emit in 
blue, cyan, green and yellow can 
serve as donors and acceptors for 
Förster (or fluorescence) resonance 
energy transfer (FRET) — energy 
transfer between two fluorophores 
that depends on their proximity and 
orientation, and allows the accep -
tor fluorophore to emit at a longer 
wavelength. In 199 7, two groups myosin light-chain kinase (M13) 
and green GFP . on binding by 
Ca2+, CaM wraps around M13, 
decreasing the distance between 
the GFP proteins and allowing 
FRET. In bacteria, the presence of 
Ca2+ was visualized as a change in 
emission on violet excitation  
from 445  nm to 510  nm, and Förster (or fluorescence) resonance energy transfer (FRET) between subunits of protein kinase A  
(PKA) tagged with green fluorescent protein is disrupted after cyclic AMP stimulation (time in 
seconds), which causes PKA subunits to dissociate.  Image is reproduced, with permission, from 
M. Zaccolo et al.  © (2000) Macmillan Publishers Ltd. All rights reserved.These 
two Ca2+ 
biosensors 
were 
the first 
genetically 
encoded 
molecular 
sensors.
▶Milestones
s20 | oCToBER  2009    www.nature.com/milestones/light-microscopy
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv edthis biosensor reported Ca2+ 
concentrations from 10–7 to 10–4 
M. Independently, and in parallel, 
Romoser et al. linked blue- and 
green-emitting GFPs through M13 
to detect Ca2+. In the absence of 
Ca2+, excitation of blue GFP causes 
the green acceptor to fluoresce 
at 505  nm as a result of FRET. 
Binding of Ca2+ and CaM to M13 
increases the inter-fluorophore 
distance, eliminates FRET and 
causes donor emission at 448  nm. 
Fluorescence responses to Ca2+ 
in cells were enhanced by co-
expressing CaM with the biosensor. 
These two Ca2+ biosensors were the 
first genetically encoded molecular 
sensors. 
In 2001, Nakai et al. developed 
a Ca2+ biosensor with a higher 
signal-to-noise ratio that used just 
one GFP protein. They positioned a 
GFP variant between M13 and CaM so that Ca2+–CaM binding induced 
a conformational change in GFP 
that increased the intensity of its 
fluorescence. Fluorescence output 
from this high-affinity Ca2+ probe 
was enhanced when Ca2+ concentra -
tions were increased in myotubes. 
Another advance was made 
in 2000 when, using a biosensor 
for cyclic AMP , Zaccolo et al. 
showed that FRET can measure 
protein–protein interactions. The 
authors linked green GFP and blue 
GFP to catalytic and regulatory 
subunits of protein kinase A (PKA), 
respectively, and co-expressed these 
constructs in cells. Excitation at 
380 nm resulted in FRET, which 
suggested that these subunits 
interacted in vivo. Physiological 
stimulation of cAMP induced a loss 
of FRET consistent with its ability 
to dissociate PKA subunits. Thus, 
this biosensor detects physiological PRimARY ReFeRenCes Miyawaki, A. et al . Fluorescent indicators for Ca2+ based on 
green fluorescent proteins and calmodulin. Nature 388 , 882–887 (1997) | Romoser, V . A. 
et al . Detection in living cells of Ca2+-dependent changes in the fluorescence emission 
of an indicator composed of two green fluorescent protein variants linked by a 
calmodulin-binding sequence. A new class of fluorescent indicators. J. Biol. Chem . 272 ,  
13270–13274 (1997) | Zaccolo, M. et al . A genetically encoded, fluorescent indicator for 
cyclic AMP in living cells. Nature Cell Biol. 2, 25–29 (2000) | Nakai, J. et al . A high signal-
to-noise Ca2+ probe composed of a single green fluorescent protein. Nature Biotechnol.  
19, 137–141 (2001)
FURtHeR ReADinG Adams, S. R. et al . Fluorescence ratio imaging of cyclic AMP in 
single cells. Nature 349 , 694–697 (1991) | Miesenböck, G. Visualizing secretion and 
synaptic transmission with pH-sensitive green fluorescent proteins. Nature 394 ,  
192–195 (1998) | Baird, G. S. Circular permutation and receptor insertion within green 
fluorescent proteins. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA  96, 11241–11246 (1999) | Ng, T. et al . 
Imaging protein kinase C α activation in cells. Science  283, 2085–2089 (1999) | Ghosh, I. 
et al . Antiparallel leucine zipper-directed protein reassembly: application to the green 
fluorescent protein. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  122 , 5658–5659 (2000)changes in cAMP level and vali -
dates FRET as a tool for studying 
protein–protein interactions. Today, 
fluorescent biosensors allow protein 
activity, protein interactions and 
small-molecule signals to be sensed 
and quantified with high spatial and 
temporal resolution. 
Katharine H.  Wrighton, Associate Editor, 
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology
 milestone 20  
Beyond gFp: Dsred and  pA-gFp
Following the isolation of green fluorescent 
protein (GFP) from the luminescent  
jellyfish Aequorea victoria  in 1962 and its 
first application as a fluorescent probe in 
1994 (see Milestone 18 ), the race was on 
to expand the colour palette of fluorescent 
proteins and to produce new probes suitable 
for studying dynamic cellular processes.
Blue, cyan and yellow fluorescent pro -
teins were quickly obtained by modifying 
GFP , but variants emitting in the orange and 
red spectra (which would allow multicolour 
imaging experiments and be less phototoxic 
than other colours owing to their longer 
excitation wavelengths) remained elusive. A 
breakthrough occurred in 1999, when Matz 
et al. proposed that the fluorescent property 
of GPF-like proteins might not necessarily 
be linked to bioluminescence and searched 
for them in non-bioluminescent Anthozoa 
species — reef corals that exhibit bright 
fluorescent colours. This led to the cloning 
of the first red fluorescent protein (known 
as DsRed, for Discosoma  sp. red). Injection 
of mRNAs encoding DsRed or a green 
variant into blastomeres of Xenopus laevis  
embryos revealed regions that were marked with individual proteins (red or green) or 
both proteins (yellow) at the tadpole stage. 
This represented the first double-labelling 
experiment.
Three years later, Patterson et al. 
generated the first photoactivatable GFP 
(PA-GFP), which turned out to be a crucial 
advance for super-resolution fluorescence 
microscopy approaches. The PA-GFP vari -
ant contains a Thr-to-His mutation that 
makes it devoid of green fluorescence until 
it is activated by violet light (390–415  nm). 
This leads to a 100-fold increase in green 
fluorescence (with an emission peak at 
504 nm), which is ideal for rapidly marking 
a selected population of molecules within 
cells and following their kinetics over time. 
Indeed, Patterson et al. demonstrated the 
value of PA-GFP by tagging a lysosomal 
membrane protein with it and showing that it moved between lysosomes in a 
microtubule-dependent  manner.
Later that year, Ando et al. cloned a 
gene encoding a bright GFP from the coral 
Trachyphylla geoffroy  and accidentally 
left an aliquot of the expressed protein on 
the bench: the next day the sample had 
turned red. The fluorescent protein, named 
Kaede (Japanese for maple leaf), changed 
to red when irradiated with ultraviolet 
(350–400  nm) or violet light. using a 
focused ultraviolet pulse, the authors 
highlighted a single neuron in red among 
many green ones expressing Kaede, thereby 
showing the protein’s potential use as an 
optical  marker.
Despite these advances, the available 
fluorescent proteins emitting in the orange 
and red regions were not optimal for  
multicolour live imaging (in terms of 
Purified fluorescent proteins are shown in fluorescence  
(from left to right, mHoneydew, mBanana, mOrange, 
tdTomato, mTangerine, mStrawberry and mCherry). 
Image is reproduced, with permission, from N. C. Shaner 
et al . © (2004) Macmillan Publishers Ltd. All rights  
reserved.…the next day the 
sample had turned red.▶
▶Milestones
NAT uRE MILEST oNES | Ligh T microscopy  oCToBER  2009 | s21
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv edFor most of the twentieth century, it 
was held that far-field light microscopy 
could not resolve objects closer than 
150–200 nanometres (see Milestone 3 ). 
This is because light diffracts as it passes 
through different media, so that the 
light emanating from a point is detected 
as emerging from a larger volume. Light 
microscopy was therefore said to be 
‘diffraction-limited’. 
Yet many cellular processes take 
place within these diffraction-limited 
distances, at length scales of tens 
to hundreds of nanometres (nm). To 
be able to visualize these processes, 
therefore, microscopy with substantially 
improved resolution was needed. 
It became necessary to ‘break’ the 
diffraction  barrier.
After early work that achieved the 
maximum theoretical resolution — 
including the standing-wave illumination 
reported by Fred Lanni and Jans T aylor 
and the two-photon 4Pi microscope 
of Stefan Hell and Ernst Stelzer — Hell 
showed, first theoretically and then 
experimentally, that a stimulated-
emission-depletion (STED) microscope 
can break the diffraction barrier. T o do 
this, the excitation focal spot is shrunk 
to a very small size by depleting the fluorophores at its rim through stimulated 
emission with a doughnut-shaped STED 
beam of red-shifted light. The tiny spot is 
then scanned over the sample to generate 
a sub-diffraction image. In the first 
experimental implementation of STED, 
which included imaging of live yeast and 
bacteria, resolution was improved both 
axially and laterally and reached about 
100 nm. The resolution has since been 
improved further, allowing the technique 
to be used to show that the synaptic 
vesicle-associated protein synaptotagmin 
remains clustered on the neuronal plasma 
membrane after exocytosis.
While STED was being demonstrated, 
Mats Gustafsson was developing an 
approach called structured illumination 
microscopy (SIM). In SIM, the excitation 
light is structured in a controlled pattern, 
which renders normally unresolvable 
information accessible after image 
processing. Although still diffraction-
limited, SIM improved lateral resolution 
by about twofold and produced clearer 
images of biological structures. The 
technique has since been extended to 
three dimensions using 3D structured 
light; moreover, it enables the diffraction 
barrier to be broken, using nonlinear 
processes. 
Finally, by exploiting the known 
ability to localize single molecules 
with nanometre precision, several 
single-molecule approaches to 
achieving sub-diffraction resolution 
were developed. The pioneers of these 
methods — Eric Betzig and Harald 
Hess for photoactivated localization 
microscopy (PALM), Xiaowei Zhuang 
for stochastic optical reconstruction 
microscopy (STORM) and Samuel 
Hess for fluorescence photoactivation 
localization microscopy (FPALM) — used 
the combination of photoactivatable 
or photoswitchable fluorophores and high-accuracy single-molecule 
localization to break the diffraction 
barrier. Although the details differ, all 
three methods are based on a single 
principle: a sparse subset of fluorophores 
is switched on at any one time, and each 
molecule is localized with high accuracy. 
These fluorophores are then switched off 
and the process is repeated with another 
subset until enough information has been 
collected to generate a sub-diffraction 
image. 
The hope for super-resolution 
microscopy is that visualizing cells at 
this unprecedented scale will yield 
unprecedented insights. Although 
the application of these methods to 
biological questions has begun, the full 
realization of their potential is still to 
come. Their extension to imaging in all 
three dimensions and within living cells — 
capabilities that are developing rapidly — 
will be a crucial part of this  process.
Natalie de Souza, Associate Editor, 
Nature  Methods milestone  21
Light microscopy at the limit
Stimulated-emission-
depletion image recorded 
from a living neuron of an 
organotypical hippocampal 
slice, showing dendritic 
spines in unprecedented 
detail. The neuron is 
expressing yellow 
fluorescent protein. Image 
courtesy of K. Willig, V . 
Nägerl, N. Urban, T . 
Bonhoeffer &  
S. W. Hell, MPI Biophysical 
Chemistry, Göttingen, 
GermanyPRimARY R eFeRenCes Klar, T. A., Jakobs, S., 
Dyba, M., Egner, A. & Hell, S. W. Fluorescence 
microscopy with diffraction resolution barrier 
broken by stimulated emission. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA  97, 8206–8210 (2000) | Betzig, E. et al . Imaging 
intracellular fluorescent proteins at nanometer 
resolution. Science  313 , 1642–1645 (2006) |  
Rust, M. J., Bates, M. & Zhuang, X. Sub-diffraction-
limit imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction 
microscopy (STORM). Nature Methods  3, 793–796 
(2006)
FURtHeR ReADinG Hell, S.  & Stelzer, E. H. K. 
Fundamental improvement of resolution with a 
4Pi-confocal fluorescence microscope using two-
photon excitation. Opt. Commun.  93,  
277–282 (1992) | Hell, S. W. & Wichmann, J. Breaking 
the diffraction resolution limit by stimulated 
emission: stimulated-emission-depletion 
fluorescence microscopy. Opt. Lett.  19, 780–782 
(1994) | Gustafsson, M. G. L. Surpassing the lateral 
resolution limit by a factor of two using structured 
illumination microscopy. J. Microsc.  198 , 82–87 
(2000) | Gordon, M. P ., Ha, T. & Selvin, P . R. Single-
molecule high-resolution imaging with 
photobleaching. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA  101 , 
6462–6465 (2004) | Willig, K. I., Rizzoli, S. O., 
Westphal, V ., Jahn, R. & Hell, S. W. STED microscopy 
reveals that synaptotagmin remains clustered after 
synaptic vesicle exocytosis. Nature 440 , 935–939 
(2006) | Hess, S. T., Girirajan, T. P . K. & Mason, M. D.  
Ultra-high resolution imaging by fluorescence 
photoactivation localization microscopy. Biophys. J.  
91, 4258–4272 (2006)brightness and photostability, for exam -
ple). However, the use of directed protein 
evolution by Shaner  et al. generated red, 
orange and yellow fluorescent proteins with 
improved properties. These proteins, which 
were named after fruits that bear colours 
similar to the emission profiles (for example, 
mStrawberry, mCherry and mBanana), are 
monomeric, tolerant to amino-terminal fusions, have faster maturation rates and 
are brighter than previously identified red-
shifted monomeric fluorescent proteins. 
The availability of fluorescent proteins in 
many colours, and the ability of some to be 
photoactivated (PA-GFP) or photoconverted 
(Kaede), has revolutionized live-cell  imaging.
Francesca Cesari, Associate Editor, Nature 
Reviews Molecular Cell BiologyPRimARY ReFeRenCes Matz, M. V . et al. Fluorescent 
proteins from nonbioluminescent Anthozoa species. Nature 
Biotechnol.  17, 969–973 (1999) | Patterson, G. H. & Lippincott-
Schwartz, J. A photoactivatable GFP for selective 
photolabeling of proteins and cells. Science  297 , 1873–1877 
(2002) | Ando, R. et al. An optical marker based on the 
UV-induced green-to-red photoconversion of a fluorescent 
protein. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA  99, 12651–12656 (2002) | 
Shaner, N. C. et al. Improved monomeric red, orange and 
yellow fluorescent proteins derived from Discosoma  sp. red 
fluorescent protein. Nature Biotechnol.  22, 1567–1572 (2004).
It became 
necessary  
to ‘break’ the 
diffraction 
barrier.▶Milestones
s22 | oCToBER  2009    www.nature.com/milestones/light-microscopy
© 2009 Macmillan P ublisher s Limit ed. All rights r eserv ed