Recreational Ecstasy/MDMA, the serotonin syndrome,
and serotonergic neurotoxicity
A.C. Parrott *
Department of Psychology, University of East London, London E15 4LZ, UK
Received 7 May 2001; received in revised form 7 September 2001; accepted 18 September 2001
Abstract
The ring-substituted amphetamine derivative 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) or ‘‘Ecstasy’’ is widely used a recreational
drug. It stimulates the release and inhibits the reuptake of serotonin (5-HT) and other neurotransmitters such as dopamine to a lesser extent.
The acute boost in monoamine activity can generate feelings of elation, emotional closeness, and sensory pleasure. In the hot and crowded
conditions of raves/dances, mild versions of the serotonin syndrome often develop, when hyperthermia, mental confusion, and hyperkinesiapredominate. Rest in a cooler environment generally reverses these problems, although they can develop into medical emergencies, whichoccasionally prove fatal. This acute serotonergic overactivity is exacerbated by the high ambient temperatures, overcrowding (aggregate
toxicity), and use of other stimulant drugs. The on-drug experience is generally followed by negative moods, with 80–90% of weekend
Ecstasy users reporting ‘midweek blues’, due probably to monoaminergic depletion. Single doses of MDMA can cause serotonergic nervedamage in laboratory animals, with repeated doses causing extensive loss of distal axon terminals. Huether’s explanatory model for this 5-HT
neurotoxicity will be briefly described. There is an increasing body of evidence for equivalent neuropsychobiological damage in humans.
Abstinent regular Ecstasy users often show: reduced cerebrospinal 5-HIAA, reduced density of 5-HT transporters, blunted response to afenfluramine challenge, memory problems, higher cognitive deficits, various psychiatric disorders, altered appetite, and loss of sexual
interest. Functional deficits may remain long after drug use has ceased and are consistent with serotonergic axonal loss in higher brain
regions. D2002 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Ecstasy; MDMA; Drug; Serotonin; Serotonin syndrome; Neurotoxicity; Memory; Cognition; Mood; Pleasure; Sex
1. Introduction
Over the past 15 years, 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphet-
amine (MDMA) or Ecstasy has become one of the most
popular of the illicit recreational drugs. Its use is stronglyassociated with the dance-club scene, with 64% of Dutchravers/clubbers reporting they had taken it the previous night(Wijngaart et al., 1999). There are, however, many concernsover its short-term and long-term effects. One of the core aimsof this paper is to overview the human literature on thepsychobiological problems and deficits reported by recre-
ational users. The other main aim is debate the role of
serotonin (5-HT) in these changes. Many of the acutebehavioural and physiological effects are consistent withthe ‘massive’ 5-HT release induced by MDMA. The func-tional disorders in drug-free regular Ecstasy/MDMA users
are also consistent with serotonergic neurotoxicity, whichwas first demonstrated in laboratory animals. One of several
possible explanatory models for how this serotonergic dam-
age might be occurring will also be briefly described.However, it should be emphasized that MDMA is neuro-chemically ‘messy’, affecting a range of transmitters inaddition to 5-HT (e.g., dopamine). Thus, many neurotrans-mitters may be contributing to the psychobiological findingsbeing described here.
2. Acute neurochemical and behavioural effects of
MDMA/Ecstasy
MDMA or Ecstasy is a ring-substituted amphetamine
derivative. It is an indirect monoaminergic agonist, stimu-lating the release and inhibiting the reuptake of 5-HT.Thus, McDowell and Kleber (1994, p. 129) noted:
0091-3057/02/$ – see front matter D2002 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0091-3057(01)00711-0* Tel.: +44-208-2234505.
E-mail address : a.c.parrott@uel.ac.uk (A.C. Parrott).www.elsevier.com/locate/pharmbiochembehPharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior 71 (2002) 837–844
‘‘MDMA’s primary mode of action is as an indirect
serotonergic agonist.’’ However, they also noted: ‘‘Inaddition it has affinities for a number of other transmitter
binding sites. MDMA is a messy drug, affecting 5-HT
and dopamine-containing neurones as well as a host ofother neurotransmitter systems.’’ Ecstasy is widely usedas a recreational drug in many westernized countries(Cohen, 1998; Saunders, 1995; Schifano et al., 1998;Solowij et al., 1992). Thirteen percent of British univer-sity students have taken it (Webb et al., 1996), as have59% of Italian disco-clubbers (Schifano, 2000), while the
age of first use has gradually declined (Schuster et al.,
1998). The popularity of MDMA/Ecstasy is due to itsvery positive effects upon mood and well-being: ‘‘All Iwanted to do was smile, I was so wide awake, and I feltin love for everything and everyone’’ ...‘‘Very intense. I
felt as if nothing could go wrong or make me unhappy’’...‘‘Touching was wonderful. Kissing was great. I kissed
someone I was in love with and almost felt as if I was
going to pass out from the intensity’’ (quotations from
American clubbers in: Cohen, 1998, pp. 80–81). Therehas been debate over whether these positive moodchanges reflect serotonergic or dopaminergic stimulation(McCann and Ricaurte, 1993; Gerra et al., 1998). Liechtiand Vollenweider (2001) investigated the effects of neuro-receptor pretreatments (citalopram, ketanserin, and halo-peridol) on the psychobiological effects of MDMA in
human volunteers. They concluded that the overall psy-
chological effects (included positive moods) were relatedto 5-HT release, whereas the stimulant/euphoric effectswere related to dopamine. MDMA has been recommen-ded for use in psychotherapy, where the surge of pleasantfeelings and emotional insights are said to be beneficial(Greer and Tolbert, 1998). However, not every Ecstasyexperience is positive, with 25% of users reporting
having had at least one adverse reaction, when unpleasant
feelings and bodily sensations predominated (Davison andParrott, 1997).
There are indications that the positive effects of MDMA
may subside with repeated use. Alexander Shulgin, theCalifornian research chemist who resynthesized MDMAduring the 1970s, is reputed to have commented that itspositive effects decline after the first seven experiences.
Peroutka et al. (1988) uncovered similar personal reports of
declining effectiveness in a survey of a hundred Americanrecreational users, whose maximum lifetime Ecstasy con-sumption was 38 occasions. During the late 1980s and early1990s, the archetypal usage pattern was of single tablets,taken at preplanned raves every few weeks. Meilman et al.(1990) reported that hardly any of their American collegeusers took it more frequently than once a month. This
pattern of self-administration allowed time for a degree of
serotonergic recovery to occur, and may have minimized thedevelopment of adverse reactions. However, in more recentyears, the typical usage pattern has intensified. During thelate 1990s, regular users often took two to three tablets peroccasion, with some needing four to six tablets to achieve
the desired level of effect (unpublished UEL data). Thefrequency of use is also greater, with most regular users now
taking it every weekend, while some take it additionally
during the week. Many users also complain that the tabletsare getting ‘‘weaker’’ (Turner and Godolphin Parrott, 1999).Taken together, this informal evidence is suggestive ofchronic pharmacodynamic tolerance, although there is apaucity of empirical data on this question.
The pharmacological constituents of ‘‘Ecstasy’’ tablets
have been investigated in a few surveys. Biochemical
analyses of Italian samples, found that they generally con-
tained MDMA (90%), or closely related ring-substitutedamphetamine derivatives, such as 3,4-methylenedioxyam-phetamine (MDA), or 3,4-methylenedioxyethylamphet-amine (MDE); furthermore, the tablets were largely freefrom impurities (Schifano et al., 1998). Surveys in Londonhave confirmed that while Ecstasy tablets generally containMDMA, they may also comprise other ring-substituted
amphetamine derivatives, but again are rarely contaminated
by impurities (King, 2000). However, a minority of‘Ecstasy’ tablets contained ketamine, sometimes combinedwith amphetamine, cocaine, or caffeine, while some tabletsmay be pharmacologically inert (King, 2000). There will bemarked differences across time and place. Uncertainty overthe chemical constituents of ‘Ecstasy’ tablets is thus animportant confounding factor for this area of research. There
are also several administration routes: oral, injection, smok-
ing, and nasal. Topp et al. (1999) noted the use of all thesemodes in their Australian survey, although 94% of usersfavored the oral route, various problems with injecting weredescribed, while smoking generally involved mixtures withcannabis. I am not aware of any published studies forEcstasy powders, although one experienced user informedme that the nasal hit was far more rapid and intense, while
their skin felt ‘hot to the touch’. Indeed, the dance club
where these powders had been sold arranged for clubemployees to circulate amongst the dancers, spraying themall with water from plastic bottles to cool them down.
The physiological effects of MDMA can indeed be very
powerful. Homeostatic control of body temperature isadversely affected due to altered hypothalamic control.Gordon et al. (1991) found that MDMA-treated laboratory
rats cooled down excessively in a cold environment, but
overheated under a high ambient temperature. The meta-bolic rate of the MDMA-treated rats was twice that for thesaline controls under the high-temperature condition. Mal-berg and Seiden (1998) found that an increase in ambienttemperature of 2 /C176C led to a marked increase in core body
temperature for the MDMA-treated rats, but not the saline-treated rats. Furthermore, the increase in core body temper-
ature led to increased serotonergic neurotoxicity (see later
sections). Around 85–90% of recreational Ecstasy usersreport an increase in body temperature, increased sweating,and dehydration (Davison and Parrott, 1997). Most dancersare aware of the dangers of overexertion and hyperthermia,
A.C. Parrott / Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior 71 (2002) 837–844 838and visit ‘chill-out’ rooms to rest and cool down. This
should help reverse the hyperthermia, but some users alsoreport feeling cold and shivering. Fluid control is also
important. Dancers need to maintain a steady fluid intake
to reverse the fluid loss from sweating while dancing.Unfortunately, excessive fluid intake can cause hyponatrae-mia — dilution of electrolytes such as sodium and potassiumin the systemic circulation. Both conditions are potentiallyfatal. So that while some Ecstasy users have died ofhyperthermia, others develop hyponatraemia, which mayprove fatal (Green et al., 1995; Henry et al., 1992). The
British teenager Leah Betts, whose tragic death was widely
publicized in the national press, died of hyponatraemia. Shehad been so concerned about hyperthermia that she drankseveral litres of water, which proved fatal; the postmortemanalysis revealed that she had taken uncontaminatedMDMA. Further acute causes of death include acute renal,hepatic, or cardiac failure, rhabdomyolysis, and dissemi-nated intravascular coagulation (Cohen, 1998). Other
physiological changes include tachycardia and increased
blood pressure. Some users perceive this as exciting, butnovice users may become concerned at their ‘racing’ heartand need reassurance. Physical reactions include trismus(jaw clenching), and bruxism (teeth grinding), which is whymany ravers/dancers chew gum.
3. The serotonin syndrome and Ecstasy/MDMA
‘‘The serotonin syndrome is caused by drug induced
excess of intrasynaptic 5-hydroxytryptamine’’ (Gillman,1999, p. 100). The symptoms include behavioural hyper-activity, mental confusion, agitation, hyperreflexia, hyper-pyrexia (fever), tachycardia, shivering, clonus, myoclonus,ocular oscillations, and tremor (Gillman, 1999; Huether et
al., 1997). The serotonin syndrome is often conceptualized
as an unusual or atypical severe adverse drug reaction.However, Gillman (1998) argued that it was neither rarenor idiosyncratic but represented a continuum of responsesfrom mild to severe. The mild serotonin syndrome (threesymptoms from above list) generally require no directmedical intervention; stronger responses (four or moresymptoms) would often necessitate medical supervision;
while severe reactions (most symptoms from list) could
prove fatal. One crucial aspect is the speed of onset andprogression, so that mild cases may become severe withinan hour or so (Gillman, 1998, 1999; Huether et al., 1997).Mild cases are best treated by rest in a cool environment,with recovery facilitated by the decline in pharmacologicalactivity over time. However, severe serotonin syndromesrequire immediate and aggressive medical intervention:
physical cooling, paralysis, and the use of 5-HT
2/5-HT 1a
blocking drugs such as cyproheptadine or chlorpromazine
in order to facilitate recovery and prevent death (Gillman,1999). The serotonin syndrome is generally caused bythe inadvertent combination of serotonergic drugs suchas monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) and selec-
tive serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). However, hun-dreds of psychoactive drugs in current use affect 5-HT,
including many over-the-counter antihistamines, such as
chlorpheniramine, and herbal remedies such as St. John’sWort (hypericum) and ginseng (Gillman, 1998, 1999).Thus, there are numerous potential sources of serotonergicdrug combinations.
Inspection of the above symptom list shows that many
Ecstasy-using clubbers can be seen to display mild signs ofthe serotonin syndrome. Hyperactivity, mental confusion,
hyperthermia, and trismus (jaw clenching) are typical on-
drug experiences for most Ecstasy users (Davison andParrott, 1997; Parrott and Lasky, 1998). These physiologicalresponses are perceived as normal drug reactions and are notgenerally seen as problematical. Indeed, without them,many clubbers might believe that they had not been soldreal MDMA. However, Ecstasy users sometimes developstronger signs of serotonergic overactivity (Cohen 1998;
Demirkiran et al., 1997; Green et al., 1995; Henry et al.,
1992). It is difficult to estimate the morbidity of these moresevere reactions, since distressed clubbers often receive helpfrom their friends, or assistance from volunteer paramedicsat the larger clubs or raves. However, many inner-cityhospitals report that the treatment of adverse drug reactionsin clubbers has become part of the usual Saturday nightroutine. This raises the question of which factors influence
the development of serotonergic overactivity. One crucial
factor is dosage, while others include: individual sensitivity,variations in drug metabolism, and tolerance. Another factoris the concomitant use of other psychoactive drugs, whichaffect 5-HT either directly or indirectly, including cocaine(Milani et al., 2000), prescribed antidepressants (MAOIsand SSRIs), herbal remedies (hypericum, ginseng), andmany others (Gillman, 1998). Alcohol, cannabis, and
tobacco/nicotine are widely consumed, while recreational
stimulants such as amphetamine and cocaine (also MDMA)boost dopamine and noradrenaline. This catecholaminergicstimulation is probably very important, both contributing togeneral arousal, and heightening the serotonergic response(Huether et al., 1997). These pharmacological factors alsointeract with environmental influences, such as overcrowd-ing, high temperature, loud music, and prolonged dancing to
make the strength of the individual psychophysiological
response quite unpredictable.
4. Immediate after-effects of MDMA: midweek blues
The days following Ecstasy are typified by a period of
poor moods, when feelings of anhedonia and lethargy
predominate. In a questionnaire survey of 469 Ecstasy users,
Curran (2000) found that 83% reported midweek lowmoods, while 80% complained of concentration difficultiesor memory problems. This confirmed the findings from theirearlier prospective study of young clubbers, when theA.C. Parrott / Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior 71 (2002) 837–844 839Ecstasy users felt comparatively better than the controls
while on-drug, but comparatively worse 4 days afterwards;indeed, some of the recovering Ecstasy users reported
clinically borderline levels of midweek depression (Curran
and Travill, 1997). In another prospective study, mood statesand cognitive performance were monitored before, during,and after a Saturday night out clubbing (Parrott and Lasky,1998). At the dance club, there were no significant mooddifferences between those who had taken Ecstasy and thosewho had not. Everyone reported having had a good time,irrespective of which drugs they had taken. Two days
afterwards, the Ecstasy users reported feeling significantly
more depressed, unpleasant, sad, abnormal, and unsociablethan the nonuser controls; 7 days later, the mood states of allgroups had returned to baseline (Parrott and Lasky, 1998).Topp et al. (1999) noted various problems during the post-Ecstasy recovery period, including energy loss, irritability,muscle aches, and trouble sleeping. These mood and otherpsychobiological problems in the days following Ecstasy
are probably due to monoaminergic depletion.
5. Repeated MDMA: neurochemical and
neuroanatomic effect
The long-term serotonergic damage caused by MDMA
was first demonstrated in laboratory animals during the
mid 1980s. When rats were treated with successive doses
of MDMA or MDA, they developed a pronounced loss of5-HT axon terminal markers, while other monoaminergicneural systems were generally spared (Ricaurte et al.,1985; Schmidt et al., 1986). Serotonergic changes havebeen shown on a variety of indices, with dose-dependentreductions in 5-HT, 5-HIAA, tryptophan hydroxylase, and5-HT uptake sites or neuronal transporters. They have
been found across a variety of animal species, and are
long-lasting. Neuroanatomic studies show that the cellbodies are spared, while the long 5-HT axonal projectionsinto the higher brain regions are markedly reduced. Theloss of distal axon terminals in the neocortex and hip-pocampus is accompanied by a proliferation of axonsmore proximal to the cell body, or ‘neuronal pruning’(Fisher et al., 1995). Temperature is a key factor, with
greater neurotoxicity under high ambient temperatures and
cooler conditions providing a degree of neuroprotection(Malberg and Seiden, 1998). Neuronal recovery occursover several months in laboratory rats, whereas monkeysand primates show only partial recovery even after anextended period (Ricaurte et al., 2000). Serotonergicneuronal damage in the laboratory is a robust phenom-enon, but the doses involved are quite high, especially for
mammals lower on the phylogenetic scale. This has raised
questions over their relevance for humans (Saunders,1995). However, when standard pharmaceutical industryformulae for interspecies scaling are applied, the dose-equivalents are within the range used by humans (Ricaurteet al., 2000). The animal literature is summarized in the
following reviews (Green et al., 1995; Hegadoren et al.,1998; Ricaurte et al., 2000).
There are numerous indications of serotonergic damage
in humans. In a PET scan study, McCann et al. (1998)documented a reduced density of 5-HT transporter sites,which correlated with the extent of past Ecstasy use;moreover, these serotonergic deficits were found across awide range of brain regions. In another neuroimaging study,Semple et al. (1999) similarly found a reduced density of5-HT transporter sites in the cerebral cortex. Significantly
lower levels of cerebrospinal 5-HIAA have also been found
in abstinent Ecstasy users (McCann et al., 1994). Theyuncovered an intriguing gender effect, with females show-ing a comparatively greater 5-HIAA reduction ( /C046%)
than males ( /C020%). Furthermore, there was a significant
reduction in female HVA levels, while males showed anonsignificant trend towards reduced HVA. This suggeststhat the regular use of Ecstasy may be perturbing dopami-
nergic neurones in humans and raises the topic of differ-
ential gender effects. McCann et al. (1994) also investigatedthe prolactin response to an
L-tryptophan challenge and
found no differences from the control group. Other studieshave, however, discovered impairments in neuroendocrineindices of serotonergic functioning. Verkes et al. (2001) alsofound a significant reduction in cortisol response to fenflur-amine in both moderate and heavy Ecstasy users; their
control group being regular ravers/clubbers who had never
taken Ecstasy. They also assessed prolactin responses tofenfluramine but found high within-group variances. Priceet al. (1987) is often cited as having found a reducedprolactin response to intravenous
L-tryptophan, but the
group difference was statistically only borderline. Gerraet al. (1998, p. 6) used a restricted inclusion policy aimedat excluding many of the heavier illicit polydrug users from
the Ecstasy group. Prolactin and cortisol responses to a
fenfluramine challenge were significantly reduced in theEcstasy users, which was interpreted as support for: ‘‘ ...the
hypothesis of a persistent 5-HT
2Creceptor downregulation
caused by long-term 5-HT hyposecretion’’ (De Souza et al.,1990). In a follow-up study of Ecstasy users who had beenabstinent for 12 months, prolactin responses remainedsignificantly reduced, whereas the cortisol responses had
recovered significantly (Gerra et al., 2000).
6. Repeated MDMA: memory and neurocognitive effects
Memory deficits on a neurocognitive test battery were
first reported in a small group of heavy Ecstasy users whohad taken it for around 5 years (Krystal et al., 1992). On
most tasks, their performance levels were as expected, but
on the Weschsler Adult Intelligence (WAIS) memory sub-scales, five of the nine participants produced scores muchlower than age-matched norms. There were, however, meth-odological limitations with this study: Many participants hadA.C. Parrott / Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior 71 (2002) 837–844 840a psychiatric history, most had an extensive illicit drug
history, they had all been administered a tryptophan chal-lenge 3 h prior to the cognitive testing, and there was no
control group. Parrott 1996; Parrott et al., 1998) found
significant memory deficits in young Ecstasy users com-pared to similarly aged controls. On most tasks, the Ecstasyusers and controls were very similar, but in immediate anddelayed word recall, both novice and regular Ecstasy usersrecalled significantly less words than the nonuser controls(Parrott et al., 1996, 1998). Verbal memory deficits wereconfirmed in a follow-up study, with both novice and regular
users (Parrott and Lasky, 1998). The important control group
of regular polydrug users who had never taken Ecstasy wasincluded by Morgan (1999). On the Rivermead BehaviouralMemory test, abstinent Ecstasy users recalled significantlyfewer prose points than both control groups, whereas thememory scores for the polydrug user and non-drug usercontrols were very similar (Morgan, 1999).
Memory and other cognitive impairments have been
demonstrated by many different research groups, using a
variety of assessment tasks and a range of methodologicaland statistical controls for potentially confounding variables.Verkes et al. (2001) found significant deficits in wordrecognition, Corsi Block span, and figure recognition inrecreational Ecstasy users compared to nonuser controls.Word recognition was also significantly worse in heavycompared to moderate Ecstasy users. Furthermore, the heavy
users showed significantly longer response times on tasks of
simple and complex reaction time, in comparison to controls.The three groups comprised regular visitors to ‘rave parties’and were broadly similar on most demographic variables.However, they differed in certain factors, including moreextensive illicit drug histories for the Ecstasy users; butanalysis of covariance showed that none of these confound-ing variables affected the significant memory deficits (Verkes
et al., 2001). Gouzoulis-Meyfrank et al. (2000) administered
a comprehensive cognitive test battery to three groups: non-drug users, moderate/regular Ecstasy users who also gen-erally took cannabis, and a cannabis control group who werematched with the Ecstasy users on past cannabis use. Therewere no performance differences between the cannabis userand nonuser control groups. On most cognitive tasks, theEcstasy users were significantly worse than the nonuser
controls. They were also significantly worse than both
cannabis user and nonuser controls on tests involving learn-ing, memory, problem solving, and strategic planning. Theonly tasks where the abstinent Ecstasy users showed noimpairment were measures of basic alertness such as simplereaction time. Finally, although the cannabis group was notcognitively impaired, the use of cannabis by the Ecstasy userswas associated with stronger cognitive deficits, which illus-
trates the importance of considering polydrug combinations.
Rodgers (2000) compared Ecstasy/cannabis users, with regu-lar cannabis users and non-drug users. In this study, both theEcstasy/cannabis users and the cannabis users showed sig-nificant impairments on some of the memory/learning tasks.However, the Ecstasy/cannabis user group was significantly
worse than the cannabis user group on two memory meas-ures: delayed recall of verbal paired associates and delayed
recall of visual paired associates. It should be noted that the
use of cannabis had been quite heavy, with an averagefrequency of 4 days/week for 10 years, whereas Ecstasyuse was comparatively light, with an average of 20 occasionsover 5 years (Rodgers, 2000).
Reneman et al. (2000) conducted a single photon emis-
sion computed tomography (SPECT) investigation of5-HT
2Areceptor density and cognitive test performance.
Five regular Ecstasy users (average lifetime consumption
218 tablets) demonstrated a significant increase in 5-HT 2A
receptor density at the occipital cortex. This was interpretedas postsynaptic receptor upregulation, following drug-induced serotonergic depletion. There was also a significantimpairment in the sole cognitive test, Rey Auditory VerbalLearning (RAVLT), where the Ecstasy users recalled anaverage of 8.1 words, compared to 12.3 for controls.
Furthermore, ‘‘In the MDMA group, but not in the controls,
mean cortical binding was highly correlated with recall(Spearman’s r= +.98, < .005)’’. Heffernan et al. (2000)
assessed self-rated prospective memory — the ability toremember to do things in the near future. Ecstasy usersreported higher error scores, which remained significantafter covarying for the use of other drugs. Although ableto describe their memory problems, they did not report
using more practical strategies to aid remembering. Fox et al.
(2001) assessed 20 users who complained of cognitive and/or psychobiological problems, which they attributed to theirpast use of Ecstasy, also a group of regular users who statedthat they not developed any Ecstasy-related problems, and acontrol group of nonusers. There were no significant differ-ences in the cognitive performance between those Ecstasyusers who complained of problems and those who did not.
Significant deficits were evident on some cognitive tasks
(e.g., spatial working memory, Tower of London planning),whereas other cognitive tasks were unimpaired. The degreeof cognitive deficit was significantly related to past Ecstasyusage in both groups. Thus, heavy Ecstasy users were themost impaired, and light users least impaired, irrespective ofwhether they complained of drug-related problems. Thissuggests that neuropsychobiological damage may occur in
some users without their conscious awareness (Fox et al.,
2001). Several studies have concluded that basic cognitivefunctions remain normal, whereas more difficult cognitivetasks are impaired (e.g., higher executive decision making,complex information processing; Morgan, 2000). The mem-ory deficits may reflect serotonergic changes in the hip-pocampus, while the higher cognitive/executive deficitsmay reflect frontal cortical damage (Morgan, 1998; Parrott,
2000, 2001; Verkes et al., 2001). However, using the Cam-
bridge Neuropsychological Test Battery (CANTAB), Foxet al. (2000) reported that cognitive deficit profiles for heavyEcstasy users, were closest to those of temporal lobeneurosurgical patients.A.C. Parrott / Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior 71 (2002) 837–844 8417. Regular use of MDMA: psychiatric and
psychobiological aspects
In a nonpharmacological review of 5-HT, Naughton et al.
(2000, p. 402) noted that: ‘‘Serotonin is involved in theregulation of mood, sleep, vigilance, memory and learning,feeding and sexual behaviour’’, also psychiatric disordersincluding depression, anxiety, impulsivity, obsessive com-pulsive disorder, and schizophrenia. Numerous case studiesof major depression, panic disorder, psychotic breakdown,aggressiveness, phobic anxiety, and various eating disorders
have been described in recreational Ecstasy users (McCann
et al., 2000; Morgan, 1998; Schifano, 2000; Turner et al.,1998). The first reports appeared in the late 1980s soon afterMDMA first became popular. In some cases, the individualhad no known psychiatric history, whereas in others apsychiatric predisposition was exacerbated by drug use(McCann et al., 1996; McGuire, 2000; Schifano et al.,1998; Schifano, 2000). An important limitation of evidence
based upon individual reactions is that they may be seen
as uncharacteristic or idiosyncratic. McCann et al. (1996,p. 108) noted that: ‘‘Individual case studies might beperceived as anecdotal and can therefore be ignored ortrivialized’’. In order to gauge how normal or atypical thesepsychiatric disorders are, systematic survey data is required.
Schifano et al., (1998) administered a battery of psychi-
atric and psychobiological assessment measures to young
attendees at a drug treatment centre. An analysis of the 150
who had taken Ecstasy uncovered the following problems indescending order of frequency: depression, psychotic dis-order, cognitive impairment, bulimia, impulse control dis-order, and panic disorder. Those with Ecstasy-relatedproblems had a higher lifetime drug usage (mean 47 tablets)than those reporting no problems (mean 3 tablets). Onelimitation of the study was that it involved attendees at a
drug clinic, who may have been atypical. Topp et al. (1999)
described a wide range of problems in a nonclinical surveyof Australian users, including depression, irritability, con-fusion, trouble sleeping, anxiety, and paranoia, althoughthey did not have control group values. In another non-clinical study, Parrott et al. (2000) assessed 50 young adultsin an Irish town where drug use was very prevalent. On thestandard psychiatric self-rating questionnaire (SCL-90),
heavy Ecstasy users reported significantly higher scores
than nonusers on the following factors: general anxiety,phobic anxiety, hostility, obsessionality, paranoid ideation,psychoticism, somatisation, altered appetite, restless sleep,and impulsiveness. One problem was that the Ecstasy usershad taken many different psychoactive drugs, so in a follow-up study we assessed a wider range of drug usage groups.
Over 760 young adults from Great Britain and Italy
were categorised into six subgroups: non-drug users, legal
drug users (alcohol and/or nicotine), cannabis users, illicitpolydrug but not Ecstasy users, light Ecstasy polydrugusers, and heavy Ecstasy polydrug users (Milani et al.,2000; Parrott et al., in press). The SCL-90 psychiatricsymptom inventory was supplemented by 30 questions
covering positive life experiences. The six groups did notdiffer on any of the four positive life factors. Whereas
on the psychiatric self-rating scales, symptom scores
increased with greater drug use, so that the illicit polydruguser groups reported the highest scores. Heavy Ecstasyusers also reported significantly higher rates of ‘‘loss ofsexual interest or pleasure’’ (14%) than the non-drug users(4%). There were, however, only slight differences be-tween those polydrug users who taken Ecstasy and thosewho had not (Parrott et al., in press). Thus, Ecstasy is only
one of many psychoactive drugs to be positively associated
with psychiatric distress. Recreational users of cocaine,amphetamine, LSD, and magic mushrooms also reportadverse psychiatric symptoms. We therefore investigatedthe influence of these other illicit drugs upon the symptomscores reported by the Ecstasy polydrug users. Asexpected, cocaine and amphetamine contributed to severalof the adverse symptom profiles. However, the worst
codrug for Ecstasy users was nicotine, which was posi-
tively associated with most of the psychiatric symptomscales. The incidence of cigarette smoking amongstEcstasy users is often very high, raising the question ofwhy their combined use is both popular yet troublesome(Parrott, 1999, 2001).
8. Serotonin syndrome and neurotoxicity: are
they related?
Huether et al. (1997, p. 771) has proposed an explan-
atory model for the relationship between the ‘massive andprolonged’ stimulation of 5-HT induced by MDMA and thedeleterious effects of repeated drug administration. Theexplanation was based upon energy metabolism within
the presynaptic terminal. Acute MDMA causes the active
carrier systems to remain at a permanently activated state,and this is exacerbated by hyperthermia. This leads toimpaired ATP cell metabolism, so that the normal metabolicprocesses of recovery and repair become overstressed andexhausted. This causes cellular damage within the presy-naptic region, and the loss of axonal terminals. A number ofother explanations have been proposed (e.g., Schmidt, 1987;
Sprague et al., 1988), with oxidative damage often con-
ceptualized as a core factor. Huether et al., (1997) incorpo-rates this as one process by which the cellular damage maybe occurring. These different explanatory models are largelybased upon animal data, where MDMA is administeredunder controlled conditions of dosage and temperature(Huether et al., 1997; Schmidt, 1987; Sprague et al.,1988). However, they also consistent with the more limited
human data (see below), reinforcing Ricaurte et al.’s (2000)
observation that Ecstasy/MDMA is a prime example of howanimal and human research are often complementary.
In humans, the massive boost in 5-HT and other mono-
amines induced by MDMA causes euphoric mood states,
A.C. Parrott / Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior 71 (2002) 837–844 842together with hyperactivity, hyperreflexia, and hyperther-
mia. Although the marked psychophysiological arousal mayfacilitate repetitive dancing, the acute serotonergic over-
activity may be crucial for causing long-term neurotoxicity.
The duration of MDMA’s stimulatory effects may last onlyby a few hours, and most recreational users probably believethat this could not cause any long-lasting damage. However,the animal models suggest that these brief acute drugexperiences will each contribute to the longer-lasting neuro-biological damage, particularly when accompanied by heatand physical exertion (Huether et al., 1997; Sprague et al.,
1988). The working hypothesis is that the long-term neuro-
psychobiological changes in humans will be a direct func-tion of the acute serotonergic overactivity. There is plenty ofempirical evidence that lifetime Ecstasy consumption isrelated to the incidence of neuropsychobiological problems,whether indicated by markers for serotonergic loss, cognit-ive/memory deficits, psychiatric symptoms, reduced sexualinterest/pleasure, and a range of other serotonergic problems
(see previous sections). However, there is very little data on
the incidence and severity of the acute drug reactions inrelation to the development of later problems. One possibil-ity is that each period of acute 5-HT overactivity contributedto the later problems. Alternatively, it might be that high-dose periods have a disproportionate effect. Finally, there isthe crucial question of neuronal recovery. Will the seroto-nergic system recover, either partially or completely, after
recreational Ecstasy use has ceased?
References
Cohen RS. The love drug: marching to the beat of ecstasy New York:
Haworth Medical Press, 1998.
Curran HV . Is MDMA (‘Ecstasy’)neurotoxic in humans? An overview of
evidence and methodological problems in research. Neuropsychobiol-
ogy 2000;42:34–41.
Curran HV , Travill RA. Mood and cognitive effects of 3,4-methylenediox-
ymethamphetamine (MDMA, ‘‘ecstasy’’): weekend ‘‘high’’ followed by
mid-week ‘‘low’’. Addiction 1997;92:821–31.
Davison D, Parrott AC. Ecstasy in recreational users: self-reported psy-
chological and physiological effects. Hum Psychopharmacol 1997;12:
91–7.
Demirkiran M, Jankovic J, Dean JM. Ecstasy intoxication: an overlap
between the serotonin syndrome and neuroleptic malignancy syndrome.Clin Neuropharmacol 1997;19:157–64.
De Souza EB, Battaglia G, Insel TL. Neurotoxic effects of MDMA on brain
serotonin neurones: evidence from neurochemical and radioligand bind-ing studies. Ann NY Acad Sci 1990;600:682–97.
Fisher CA, Hatzidimitriou G, Katz JL, Ricaurte GA. Reorganization of
ascending serotonin axon projections in animals previously exposed
to the recreational drug 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine. J Neuro-sci 1995;15:5476–85.
Fox H, Turner JJD, Parrott AC, Sahakian BJ, McLean A, Rogers R. Neuro-
psychological cognitive profiles of heavy MDMA (‘‘Ecstasy’’) users.Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2000;3:s325.
Fox H, Parrott AC, Turner JJD. Ecstasy/MDMA related cognitive deficits: a
function of dosage rather than awareness of problems. J Psychophar-
macol 2001;15:273–81.
Gerra G, Kaimovic A, Guicastro G, Maestri D, Monica C, Sartori R, Cac-cavari R, Delsignore R. Serotonergic function after 3,4-methylenediox-
ymethamphetamine. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 1998;13:1–9.
Gerra G, Kaimovic A, Ferri M, Zambelli U, Timpano M, Neri E, Marzocchi
GF, Delsignore R, Brambilla F. Long-lasting effects of 3,4-methylene-dioxymethamphetamine (Ecstasy) on serotonin system function in hu-
mans. Biol Psychiatry 2000;47:127–36.
Gillman PK. Serotonin syndrome: history and risk. Fundam Clin Pharmacol
1998;12:482–91.
Gillman PK. The serotonin syndrome and its treatment. J Psychopharmacol
1999;13:100–9.
Gordon CJ, Watkinson WP, O’Callaghan JP, Miller DB. Effects of 3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine on autonomic thermoregulatory
responses of the rat. Pharmacol, Biochem Behav 1991;38:339–44.
Gouzoulis-Meyfrank E, Daumann J, Tuchtenhagen F, Pelz S, Becker S,
Kunert HJ, Fimm B, Sass H. Impaired cognitive performance in drugfree users of recreational ecstasy (MDMA). J Neurol Neurosurg Psy-
chiatry 2000;68:719–25.
Green AR, Cross AJ, Goodwin GM. Review of the pharmacology and clin-
ical pharmacology of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMAor ecstasy). Psychopharmacology 1995;119:247–60.
Greer G, Tolbert R. A method of conducting therapeutic sessions with
MDMA. J Psychoact Drugs 1998;30:371–9.
Heffernan TM, Ling J, Scholey A. Subjective ratings of prospective mem-
ory deficits in MDMA (‘ecstasy’) users. Human Psychopharmacol
2001;16:607–12.
Hegadoren KM, Baker GB, Bourin M. 3,4-Methylenedioxy analogues of
amphetamine: defining the risks to humans. Neurosci Biobehav Rev
1998;23:539–53.
Henry JA, Jeffries KJ, Dawling S. Toxicity and deaths from 3,4-methyle-
nedioxymethamphetamine (‘‘Ecstasy’’). Lancet 1992;340:384–7.
Huether G, Zhou D, Ryuther E. Causes and consequences of the loss of
serotonergic presynapses elicited by the consumption of 3,4-methyle-
nedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, ‘‘ecstasy’’) and its congeners.J Neural Transm 1997;104:771–94.
King LA. Was it MDMA? Neuropsychobiology 2000;42:45–6.
Krystal JH, Price LH, Opsahl C, Ricaurte GA, Heninger GR. Chronic 3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) use: effects on mood andneuropsychological function? Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 1992;18:
331–41.
Liechti ME, V ollenweider FX. Which neurotransmitters mediate the effects
of MDMA in humans: a summary of mechanistic studies. Hum Psy-chopharmacol 2001;16:589–98.
Malberg JE, Seiden LS. Small changes in ambient temperature cause large
changes in 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)-inducedserotonin neurotoxicity and core body temperature in the rat. J Neurosci1998;18:5086–94.
McCann UD, Ricaurte GA. Reinforcing subjective experience of ( ± ) 3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine (‘‘ecstasy’’) may be separable fromits neurotoxic actions: clinical evidence. J Clin Psychopharmacol 1993;
13:214–7.
McCann UD, Ridenour A, Shaham Y , Ricaurte GA. Serotonin neurotoxicity
after ( ± ) 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA; ‘Ecstasy’):a controlled study in humans. Neuropsychopharmacology 1994;20:
129–38.
McCann UD, Slate SO, Ricaurte GA. Adverse reactions with 3,4-methyl-
enedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA; ‘‘Ecstasy’’). Drug Saf 1996;15:107–15.
McCann UD, Szabo Z, Scheffel U, Dannals RF, Ricaurte GA. Positron
emission tomographic evidence of toxic effect of MDMA (‘‘Ecstasy’’)on brain serotonin neurones in human beings. Lancet 1998;352:1433–7.
McCann UD, Eligulashvili V , Ricaurte GA. ( ± ) 3,4-Methylenedioxyme-
thamphetamine (‘Ecstasy’)-induced serotonin neurotoxicity: clinical
studies. Neuropsychobiology 2000;42:11–6.
McDowell DM, Kleber HD. MDMA: its history and pharmacology. Psy-
chiatr Ann 1994;24:127–30.
McGuire P. Long term psychiatric and cognitive effects of MDMA use.
Toxicol Lett 2000;112–113:153–6.A.C. Parrott / Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior 71 (2002) 837–844 843Meilman PW, Gaylor MS, Turco JH, Stone JE. Drug use amongst under-
graduates: current use and 10 year trends. Int J Addict 1990;25:1025–36.
Milani R, Turner JJD, Parrott AC. Recreational drug use and psychobio-
logical problems, collaborative UK/Italy study (2): Rome and Paduafindings. J Psychopharmacol 2000;14:a14.
Morgan MJ. Recreational use of ‘‘ecstasy’’ (MDMA) is associated with
elevated impulsivity. Neuropsychopharmacology 1998;19:252–64.
Morgan MJ. Memory deficits associated with recreational use of ‘‘ecstasy’’
(MDMA). Psychopharmacology 1999;141:30–6.
Morgan MJ. Ecstasy (MDMA): a review of its possible persistent psycho-
logical effects. Psychopharmacology 2000;152:230–48.
Naughton M, Mulrooney JB, Leonard BE. A review of the role of serotonin
receptors in psychiatric disorders. Hum Psychopharmacol 2000;15:
397–416.
Parrott AC. MDMA, mood and memory: the agnosia of the Ecstasy. Paper
presented at the BPS Psychobiology Section Annual Scientific Meeting,
September 1996. BPS Psychobiology Section Newsletter, 1996.
Parrott AC. Does cigarette smoking cause stress? Am Psychol 1999;54:
817–20.
Parrott AC. Human research on MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphet-
amine) neurotoxicity: cognitive and behavioral indices of change. Neu-
ropsychobiology 2000;42:17–24.
Parrott AC. Human neuropsychopharmacology of Ecstasy/MDMA: a re-
view of fifteen years of empirical research. Hum Psychopharmacol
2001;16:557–77.
Parrott AC, Lasky J. Ecstasy (MDMA) effects upon mood and cognition;
before, during, and after a saturday night dance. Psychopharmacology
1998;139:261–8.
Parrott AC, Lees A, Garnham NJ, Jones M, Wesnes K. Cognitive perform-
ance in recreational users of MDMA or ‘‘ecstasy’’: evidence for mem-ory deficits. J Psychopharmacol 1998;12:79–83.
Parrott AC, Sisk E, Turner J. Psychobiological problems in heavy ‘ecstasy’
(MDMA) polydrug users. Drug Alcohol Depend 2000;60:105–10.
Parrott AC, Milani R, Parmar R, Turner JJD. Recreational Ecstasy/MDMA
and other drug users from Britain and Italy: psychiatric symptoms and
psychobiological problems. Psychopharmacology (in press).
Peroutka SJ, Newman H, Harris H. Subjective effects of 3,4-methylene-
dioxymethamphetamine in recreational users. Neuropsychopharmacol-
ogy 1988;1:273–7.
Price LH, Ricaurte GA, Krystal JH, Heninger GR. Neuroendocrine and mood
responses to intravenous tryptophan in of 3,4-methylenedioxymetham-phetamine (MDMA) users. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1987;46:20–2.
Reneman L, Booij J, Schmand B, Brink W, Gunning B. Memory distur-
bances in ‘‘Ecstasy’’ users are correlated with an altered brain serotoninneurotransmission. Psychopharmacology 2000;148:322–4.
Ricaurte GA, Bryan G, Strauss L, Seiden LS, Schuster CR. Hallucinogenic
amphetamine selectively destroys brain serotonin nerve terminals. Sci-
ence 1985;229:986–8.Ricaurte GA, Yuan J, McCann UD. ( ± )3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphet-
amine (MDMA, ‘‘Ecstasy’’)-induced serotonin neurotoxicity: studies in
animals. Neuropsychobiology 2000;42:5–10.
Rodgers J. Cognitive performance amongst recreational users of ‘‘ecstasy’’.
Psychopharmacology 2000;151:19–24.
Saunders N. Ecstasy and the dance culture London: Neal’s Yard Desktop
Publishing, 1995.
Schifano F. Potential human neurotoxicity of MDMA (‘Ecstasy’’): subjec-
tive self-reports, evidence form an Italian drug addiction centre and
clinical case studies. Neuropsychobiology 2000;42:25–33.
Schifano F, Di Furia L, Forza G, Minicuci N, Bricolo R. MDMA (‘ecstasy’)
consumption in the context of polydrug abuse: a report on 150 patients.
Drug Alcohol Depend 1998;52:85–90.
Schmidt CJ, Wu L, Lovenberg W. Methylenedioxymethamphetamine: a
potentially neurotoxic amphetamine analog. Eur J Pharmacol 1986;124:175–8.
Schmidt CJ. Neurotoxicity of the psychedelic amphetamine methylenediox-
ymethamphetamine. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1987;240:1–7.
Schuster P, Lieb R, Lamertz C, Wittchen HU. Is the use of ecstasy and
hallucinogens increasing? Eur Addict Res 1998;4:75–82.
Semple DM, Ebmeier KP, Glabus MF, O’Carroll RE, Johnstone EC. Re-
duced in vivo binding to serotonin transporters in the cerebral cortex ofMDMA (‘‘Ecstasy’’) users. Br J Psychiatry 1999;175:63–9.
Solowij N, Hall W, Lee N. Recreational MDMA, use in Sydney: a profile of
ecstasy users and their experiences with the drug. Br J Addiction 1992;
87:1161–72.
Sprague JE, Everman SL, Nichols DE. An integrated hypothesis for the
serotonergic axonal loss induced by 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphet-
amine. Neurotoxicology 1988;19:427–41.
Topp L, Hando J, Dillon P, Roche A, Solowij N. Ecstasy use in Aus-
tralia: patterns of use and associated harm. Drug and Alcohol De-
pendence 1999;55:105–15.
Turner JJD, Godolphin Parrott AC. Cognitive task performance profiles of
current and former ‘‘Ecstasy’’ (MDMA) users. J Psychopharmacol1999;13:a24.
Turner JJD, Nicolas L, Parrott AC. Reduced calorie intake in the week
following weekend MDMA (ecstasy) use. J Psychopharmacol 1998;12:a43.
Verkes RJ, Gigsman HJ, Pieters MSM, Schoemaker RC, de Visser S,
Kuijpers M. Cognitive performance and serotonergic function in usersof ecstasy. Psychopharmacology 2001;153:196–202.
Webb E, Ashton CH, Kelly P, Kamali F. Alcohol and drug use in UK
university students. Lancet 1996;348:922–5.
Wijngaart van de GM, Braam R, de Bruin D, Fris M, Maalste NJM,
Verbraeck, HT. Ecstasy and the Dutch rave scene: a socio-epidemio-logical study. Journal of Drug Issues 1999;19:697–702.A.C. Parrott / Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior 71 (2002) 837–844 844