UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Recirculating Aquaculture Systems – A Review  - C R Steicke, 
V Jegatheesan, C Zeng 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)  RECIRCULATING AQUACULTURE SYSTEMS - A REVIEW 
 
C R Steicke and V Jegatheesan 
School of Engineering, James Cook Un iversity, Townsville, QLD 4811, Australia 
 
C Zeng 
School of Marine and Tropical Biology, Ja mes Cook University, Townsville, QLD 4811, 
Australia  
 
Keywords: Aquaculture, denitrification, nitrifi cation, water exchange, recirculating 
systems  
Contents 
 
1. Current State of Aqua culture and Environment 
2. Aquaculture Water Constituents 
3. Waste Water Discharge Guidelines for Aquaculture 4. Introduction to Recirculati ng Aquaculture Systems (RAS) 
5. Recirculating Aquacultur e System Applications 
6. Primary Clarification – Suspended Solids removal 7. Bacterial Processes 7.1 Nitrification 7.1.1 Nitrition 7.1.2 Nitration 7.2 Denitrification 8. Filtration Types 8.1 Trickling Filter 8.2 Rotating Biological Contactor (RBC)  
8.3 Fluidized Bed Reactor (FBR) 8.4 Submerged Filter 8.5 Floating Bead Filters (FBF) 9. Biological Filtration Efficiency 9.1 Filter Specifications 9.2 Efficiency of Nitrifying Filter  
9.3 Efficiency of Denitrifying Filter 
10. Major Factors affecting Filter Efficiency 10.1 Media and Design 10.2 Filter Backwashing 10.3 Temperature 10.4 Hydraulic and Organic Loading Rates 11. Conclusions Glossary Bibliography Biographical Sketches  
Summary 
 
Worldwide aquaculture is an expanding industr y and it is suggested that it will, in the UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Recirculating Aquaculture Systems – A Review  - C R Steicke, 
V Jegatheesan, C Zeng 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)  future becomes more and more important for the supply of seafood due to decreasing 
wild capture fisheries. It is  proposed that this increase will come from intensifying 
current production to gain a more effici ent outcome. However future aquaculture 
growth is being challenged by the govern mental push for more sustainable and 
environmentally responsible production. Recirculating aquacu lture systems are 
attempting to satisfy these challenges thr ough minimizing waste output and increasing 
the recycling of resources. This review will outline the principles and filtration 
techniques used in current recirculating a quaculture with the inclusion of bacterial 
processes for nitrificat ion and denitrification. Also examined is cu rrent research on the 
techniques utilised to remove nitrogen speci es from culture systems. This will hopefully 
assist in realizing the ultima te aims of 100% recirculating designs and zero emissions. It 
was concluded from this review that the meas ure of biological filtr ation efficiency was 
at times inaccurate and only applicable for the particular environment examined. The 
information gained from filter experiments wa s often difficult to compare to others as 
there were so many varying factors that we re not standardized, which affected the 
removal rates of the main waste constituents from recirculating aquaculture and render the direct comparison impossible.  
 
1. Current State of Aquaculture and Environment 
 
Aquaculture is currently one of the fastest growing food producing s ectors in the world. 
Current worldwide production is estimated at approximately 47 million tonnes per 
annum with an increase of 25% between  2000 and 2005. World wild  capture fisheries 
have decreased by 2% over the same peri od with total production, including both 
capture fisheries and aquaculture, remaining steady at approximately 141 million tonnes per year (Figure 1). With the world population increasing at a rate of 2% per annum and 
worldwide demand projected to  increase at least by 2% annually, there will be an 
eventual, if not already, demand shortfall in seafood production.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Current world seafood produc tion (Adapted from FAO, 2006). 
 
Taking Australia as an example, the volum e of aquaculture production has increased by 
80% over the last decade while  wild capture incr eased by only 7%. As a proportion of 
total volume differentiated by wild caught and aquaculture fisheries, aquaculture has 
increased from 10% to 16% over the last decade while overall value has increased by UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Recirculating Aquaculture Systems – A Review  - C R Steicke, 
V Jegatheesan, C Zeng 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)  13%. In 2003 –2004 aquaculture accounted for a production value of A$ 700,000,000 
and a volume of 43,000 tonnes. This steady bu t comparatively fast rise in production 
has prompted state and federal governments  of Australia to place more emphasis on 
aquaculture and encourage the sustainable an d rapid development of the industry. This 
includes primary industry development and increased awareness relating to health 
standards and environmental guidelines pertaini ng to the aquaculture industry both land 
and sea based. 
 Emphasis has been placed on the environmental issues associated with aquaculture and 
future expansion. More importantly the questio n that needs to be considered is what 
effect will long-term aquaculture have on the surrounding environment as a whole? 
Sustainable developmental practices, risi ng production costs and strict legislative 
guidelines on resource use have constantly influenced the growth of the aquaculture 
industry. This development has required the industry to ch ange from an extensive and 
semi-intensive culture to a more intensifie d and controlled producti on. This could, as 
done in the past, lead to a reduced use of resources and an increase in social and 
environmental problems. The introduction of guidelines and re gulations on waste 
discharge as a result of aquaculture opera tions has prompted the rapid increase in 
efficient and technologically innovative products th at can help maintain sustainable 
production.   
2. Aquaculture Water Constituents 
 
All waste pertaining to aquacultu re is one of the main concer ns restricting future growth 
and sustainability of the industry around the world. Wast e discharge is a volatile 
mixture of nutrients and solids that may adversely alter the surrounding ecological 
environment. The main constituents of con cern from aquaculture include pH, biological 
oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended so lids (TSS), turbidity and nitrogen and 
phosphorus species.   
 
 
Figure 2 A schematic diagram of the important constituents of waste commonly 
discharged from aquaculture. 
 
The volatility of wastewater is generally ev aluated by the distincti on between particulate 
and dissolved components (Figure 2). Within  the dissolved component there are two UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Recirculating Aquaculture Systems – A Review  - C R Steicke, 
V Jegatheesan, C Zeng 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)  types of elements that define the specific volatility of wastewater – Total Nitrogen (TN) 
and Total Phosphorus (TP). TN and TP both exist in solution in different amounts 
according to the cultured organism, feed conversion ratios and production rates.  While a 
40/60% split between the solid and dissolved  phase of TP respectively is generally 
observed, 7-32% of TN is comm only in the solid state.  
 
There are two problems caused by the discharge of aquaculture effluent. Firstly the total 
suspended solids cause an increase in the biological oxygen demand of the water and sediment. This is primarily due to the degradation of organic matter via bacterial 
processes. This ultimately leads to rapid anox ic conditions within the sediment and 
increased dissolved nutrients. In the short- term waterways receiving this nutrient rich 
input can only assimilate so much before  its biological carrying capacity is exceeded 
and the natural state of the environment is distorted. Subsequently there is a complete 
breakdown of floral and fauna l ecological structures that  lead to the long-term 
degradation of the waterway.   The second problem is caused by the dissolved nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus. The discharge of these nutrients into receiving waterways affect benthic 
fauna, macroalgal growth and diversit y, epiphyte abundance, and phytoplankton, 
zooplankton, and bacterial communities. This is often through the direct encouragement 
of eutrophication and subs equent algal growth.  
 In important marine coral reef ecosystems, su ch as the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park 
in Australia damage can be caused by:  
• Algal growth shading the corals from sunli ght that is essential for their growth.  
• Excessive phosphorus weakening the coral skeleton and making the skeleton more 
susceptible to storm damage. 
 
Algal growth depends on the availability of organic carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus in 
the marine ecosystem. However its more lik ely one of the above nutrients becomes a 
critical nutrient to trigger or limit algal bl ooms and it is unlikely that all three nutrients 
become limiting simultaneously. Therefore, in a given case normally only one nutrient 
would be critical. While phosphorus is us ually the limiting nutrient in freshwater, 
nitrogen can at times be the limiting nutri ent in seawater. Although discharging both 
nitrogen and phosphorus to oceans (and other inland water courses) will increase algal 
growth, preventing the discharge of nitr ogen rather than phosphorus will be an 
important step towards preventing the initial bloom in a ocean.  
 
3. Waste Water Discharge Guidelines for Aquaculture 
 
The issue of aquaculture wastewater discharg ing into the external environment is such 
that guidelines managing this ar e set and regulated by state au thorities. For example, the 
aquaculture industry in Austra lia guidelines are commonly grouped together with other 
related industries such as the other primary industry agri culture. Due to this the 
guidelines in Table 1 are relevant for any wa stewater that is released into receiving 
waterways in a given area. 
 UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Recirculating Aquaculture Systems – A Review  - C R Steicke, 
V Jegatheesan, C Zeng 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)  The problems arising with intensification do vary between aquaculture operations in 
temperate and tropical climates. Discharges from temperate climate operations would 
amount to less waste than for the same operatio n in a tropical climate.  This was directly 
related to the metabolism of a species in  cold and warm temperatures and the 
accompanying food conversion ratio (FCR). Based on this, a hypothetical table 
depicting effluent concentrati ons from currently utilized pr oduction methods (Table 2).  
 
 WA1 NSW2 QLD3 SA4 VIC5 
 Fresh 
and 
Saline Fresh Saline Fresh Saline Fresh Saline Fresh Saline 
pH 5-9 6.5-
8.5  6.5-9 6.5-9 6.5-9 6.5-9 6.4-
8.3  
Suspended 
Solids (mg/l)/ 
Turbidity 
(NTU) <80 <90 13 40-75 40-75 20/ 
20 10 / 10 4/ 
<30 < 75 
Biochemical 
Oxygen 
Demand (5 
day) (mg/l) <20 <20    10 10   
Ammonia 
(mg/l) <1  0.015   0.5 0.2  0.011 
Nitrate (mg/l) <10     <10 <10   
Total 
Nitrogen 
(mg/l)  0.2 0.11 <3 <3   0.9 0.12 
Total 
Phosphorus 
(mg/l) <1 <1 0.014 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 <0.04
5 0.025 
1 – Western Australia; 2 – New South Wales;  3 – Queensland; 4 – South Australia; 5 - 
Victoria 
 
Note: These guidelines are a br ief overview of water quality  legislations and do vary 
between different aquaculture operations  depending on discharg e rates and areas 
within specific states. 
 
Table 1. Water quality guidelines relevant to aq uaculture for five states within Australia. 
 
The problems arising with intensification do vary between aquaculture operations in 
temperate and tropical climates. Discharges from temperate climate operations would 
amount to less waste than for the same operatio n in a tropical climate.  This was directly 
related to the metabolism of a species in  cold and warm temperatures and the 
accompanying food conversion ratio (FCR). Based on this, a hypothetical table 
depicting effluent concentrati ons from currently utilized pr oduction methods (Table 2).  
 
Water Use Calculated Effluent 
Concentrationb System Type kg fish/year 
/(l/min)c l/kg fishd mg 
N/le mg P/lf mg TSS/lg UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Recirculating Aquaculture Systems – A Review  - C R Steicke, 
V Jegatheesan, C Zeng 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)  Cold Water Fish 
Single Pass 1.4 375,000 0.2 0.02 1.3 
Serial Reuse 6 88,000 0.7 0.08 5.7 
Partial Reuse 50 10,500 5.7 0.67 48 
Fully Recirculating 160 3,300 18 2.1 152 
            
Warm Water Fish 
Serial Reuse 16 33,000 2.4 0.8 42 
Ponds 294 1,800 44 15 780 
Recirculating through 
wetlands 145 3,600 22 7.8 390 
Fully Recirculating 5,000 105 760 27 13,000 
      
a The total constituent production is used regard less of whether it is in solid or dissolved 
form 
b Effluent concentrations calculated as: (C onstituent production, (kg constituent)/(kg feed) x 
(Feed conversion ratio, (kg feed)/(kg/fish))/(water use, (l/kg fish)) x (106 (mg 
constituent)/(kg constituent)). Feed conversion ratios are 1.0 and 2.0 for cold and warm 
water fish respectively. 
c After Chen et al. (2002).  
d Calculated assuming 365-day year. 
e N Production. For cold water fish: 0.06kg N/kg feed, assuming a 50% protein feed and 
30% N retention as fish biomass. For Warm  water fish: 0.04kg N/kg feed, assuming a 
35% protein feed and 30% N retention as fish biomass. 
f P production. For cold water fish: 0.007 kg P/kg feed, assuming a 1% P feed and 30% P 
retention as fish biomass. For warm water fish: 0.014 kg P/kg feed, assuming a 2% P 
feed and 30% P retention as fish biomass. 
 
g TSS production. For cold water fish: 0.5kg Tss/kg feed (Chen et al., 1997). For warm 
water fish: 0.7 kg TSS/kg feed  (Chen et al., 1997). 
       
Table 2. Hypothetical effluent concentrations for different types of culture systems 
assuming that no treatment takes place with in the systems and the constituents are 
uniformly distributed in the effluent. 
 
It is clear that effluent water quality from the different systems decreases as 
intensification and water recycl ing increases. This is indicative of the less water being 
utilized per kilogram of fish produced. When Table 1 is compared and analysed 
alongside Table 2 an apparent problem arises . As the culture desi gn intensifies the 
prospects of being within the discharge gui delines for any state become reduced. The 
calculated effluent concentrations in Table 2 indicate that in cold water systems partial reuse and fully recirculating operations would have difficulty complying with 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) re gulations while all warm water systems 
hypothetically exceed all state water quality guidelines. 
 However the common assumption that intensifi cation can lead to greater pollution is not 
always true for aquaculture. In fact a concen trated waste is easier and more efficient to 
treat than high volume waste. Therefore a system that can concentrate and further utilise UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Recirculating Aquaculture Systems – A Review  - C R Steicke, 
V Jegatheesan, C Zeng 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)  this waste is advantages in all regards. Recirculating Aquaculture Systems (RAS) can 
accomplish this issue possibly reducing the pr oblem of waste discharge, substantially 
increasing efficiency and economic  benefit from any byproducts.  
 
4. Introduction to Recirculat ing Aquaculture Systems (RAS) 
 
Increasing production costs and stricter environmental regulations have led to the 
production requirements of an efficient and closely managed system. RAS are 
beginning to become a popular and well-a ccepted technique for the culture and 
sustainable management of aquatic animal s. Intensifying the culture of animals 
encourages the increased production of bioma ss while reducing the amount of resources 
required. Subsequently this often leads to a greater accountability for all utilised 
resources. A professional reci rculating aquaculture operati on can frequently alleviate 
problems that have previously hindered expansion.   Traditionally designed RAS involve d the application of several filtration stages to refine 
wastewater and reuse in the same system . The most common combinations involved 
primary clarification (mechanic al), biological and sterilizat ion stages (Figure 3). The 
mechanical stage typically removes the solid  waste while the biological filtration 
removes the dissolved wastes. Sterilizatio n subsequently reduces  the bacterial and 
pathogen concentration in the entire syst em. More recently the inclusion of a 
denitrification stage has shown potential in in creasing the volume of water recycled and 
decreasing waste outputs.   
 
 
Figure 3. Schematic flow diagram indicating the different categories and stages of 
filtration commonly found in recirculating aquaculture systems. 
 
Subsequently the intensification of aqu aculture and the push for more sustainable 
production has led to more efficient designs and the utilization of  less space, energy and 
water. RAS have this advant age of being able to produc e higher yields while still UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Recirculating Aquaculture Systems – A Review  - C R Steicke, 
V Jegatheesan, C Zeng 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)  utilizing small amounts of space, being clos e to markets and minimizing wastes. In 
recent years, recirculating aquaculture sy stems have become a more realistic and 
feasible option for seafood producers in light  of current market demands and industry 
trends. Therefore the optimization of filtration designs and combinations of filter 
components is of current interest.   - - -  
 
TO ACCESS ALL THE 32 PAGES  OF THIS CHAPTER,  
Visit: http://www.eolss.net/Eolss-sampleAllChapter.aspx  
 
 
Bibiliography 
 
Aboutboul, Y., Arviv, R., and and Rijn, J., 1995. Anaerobic treatment of intensive fish culture effluents: 
volatile fatty acid mediated denitrification. Aquacu lture 133, 21-32. [Discusses denitrification of 
aquaculture effluent through high-rate anaerobic degradation of endogenous organic matter]. 
Ahmed, H.U., 1996. The effects of flux rate and so lids accumulation on small size particle accumulation 
in expandable granular bed filters. M.S. Thesis, De partment of civil and environmental engineering. 
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. [Discusses the particle removal performance of 
expandable granular filters]. 
Al-Hafedh, Y.S., Alam, A.and Alam, M.A., 2003. Perf ormance of plastic biofilter media with different 
configuration in a water recirculation system for th e culture of Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus). 
Aquacultural Engineering 29, 139-154. [Compares the performance of plastic rolls, PVC pipes and scrub 
pads as biofilter media]. 
ANZECC, G., 2000. Australian New Zealand Environment and Conservation Council Water quality 
Guide Lines. Department of Environment and Herita ge (Australia) [Provides guide lines for fresh and 
marine water quality requirements]. 
Arbiv, R.and van Rijn, J.v., 1995. Performance of a treatment system for inorganic nitrogen removal in 
intensive aquaculture systems. Aquacultural Engineering 14, 189-203. [Investigates the performance of a semi-closed mode system for carp culture]. 
Barak, Y., Cytryn, E., Gelfand, I., Krom, M.and va n Rijn, J.v., 2003. Phosphorus removal in a marine 
prototype, recirculating aquaculture system. Aquaculture 220, 313-326. [Incorporates an anoxic system 
for phosphate removal]. 
Barlow, C.G., Rodgers, L.J., Palmer, P.J. and Longhurst, C.J., 1993. Feeding habits of hatchery-reared 
barramundi Lates calcarifer (Bloch) fry. Aquaculture 109, 131-144. [Discusses the feeding behavior and 
growth rate].  
Beveridge, M.C.M., Phillips, M.J.and Macintosh, D.J., 1997. Aquaculture and the environment: the 
supply of and demand for environmental goods and services by Asian aquaculture and the implication for 
sustainability. Aquaculture Research 28, 797-807. [Dis cusses the implication of sustainability in Asian 
aquaculture]. 
Blancheton, J.P., 2000. Developm ents in recirculation systems for mediterranean fish species. 
Aquacultural Engineering 22, 17-31. [Development of a model to predict the functions of a reciculating 
system components]. 
Boley, A., Muller, W.R.and Haider, G., 2000. Biodeg radable polymers as solid substrate and biofilm 
carrier for denitrification in recirculated aquaculture systems. Aquacultural Engineering 22, 75-85. [Cost UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Recirculating Aquaculture Systems – A Review  - C R Steicke, 
V Jegatheesan, C Zeng 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)  of denitrification with different substrates]. 
Bovendeur, J., Eding, E.H.and Henken, A.M., 1987. Design and performance of a water recirculation 
system for high-density culture of the african catfish, Clarias gariepinus (Burchell 1822). Aquaculture 63, 
329-353. [Excellent discussion on the performance of a recirculating system]. 
Boyd, C.E., 2003. Guidelines for aquaculture effluent management at the farm-level. Aquaculture 226, 
101-112. [Provides guideline values of water quality pa rameters as well as best management practices].  
Chen, S., Coffin, D.E., Malone, R.F., 1997. Sludge production and management for recirculating 
aquacultural systems. J. World Aquacult. Soc. 28, 30 3– 315. [Provides information on how to manage the 
sludge produced in recirculating aquaculture systems which is essential to maintain the water quality in 
the system].  
Chen, S., Summerfelt, S.T., Losordo, T.M., Malone, R.F., 2002. Recirculating systems, effluents, and 
treatments. 
In: Tomasso, J.R. (Ed.), Aquaculture and the Environment in The United States. World Aquaculture 
Society, 
Baton Rouge, LA, pp. 119–140. [Discusses the treatment systems that could be employed to treat 
recirculating aquaculture systems]. 
Chiaki, H., Shunsake, I., Muneharu, G.and Hatate, Y., unpublished. Continuous Nitrification and 
Denitrification of Wastewater with hollow fiber bi oreactor. [Discusses simultaneous nitrification and 
denitrification in a bioreactor]. 
Chopin, T., Yarish, C., Wilkes, R., Belyea, E ., Lu, S.and Mathieson, A., 1999. Developing 
Porphyra/salmon integrated aquaculture for bioremediation and diversification of the aquaculture 
industry. Journal of Applied Phycology 11, 463-472. [Provides details on the diversification of 
aquaculture industry through integration]. 
Chopin, T., Buschmann, A.H., Halling, C., Kautsky, N., Neori, A., Kraemer, G.P., Zertuche-Gonzalez, 
J.A., Yarish, C.and Neefus, C., 2001. Seaweeds in sustainable integrated aquaculture. Journal of 
Phycology 37, 975-986. [Sustainability in the aquacu lture industry through seaweed is discussed]. 
Costa-Pierce, B.A., 2002. Ecologi cal Aquaculture: The evolution of the blue revolution. Blackwell, 
Carlton, Australia. [Ecology of aquaculture which is an important factor in the management of aquaculture industry is discussed in this article]. 
Cripps, S.J.and Kelly, L.A., 1995. Effluent treatment to meet discharge consents. Trout News, 15-24. 
[Treatment methods for aquaculture effl uents are discussed in this article]. 
Cripps, S.J.and Kelly, L.A., 1996. Reductions in  wastes from aquaculture. BLACKWELL SCIENCE. 
[Minimizing the waste generated by aquaculture is discussed]. 
Cripps, S.J.and Bergheim, A., 2000. REVIEW - Soilds management and removal for intensive land-based 
aquaculture production systems. Aquacultural Engineering 22, 33-56. [A review on solids management strategies is provided]. 
Davenport, J., Kenneth Black, Gavin Burnell, Tom Cross, Sarah Culloty, Suki Ekaratne, Bob Furness, 
Mulcahy, M.and Thetmeyer, H., 2003. Aquacultu re - The ecological issu es. Blackwell, Oxford. 
[Ecological issues associated with aquaculture are discussed in detail]. 
Davidson, J.and Summerfelt, S.T., 2005. Solids removal from a coldwater recirculating system-comparison of a swirl seperator and a radial-flow settler. Aquacultural Engi neering, 33(1), 47-61. [Details 
on maintaining low total suspended solids in recirculating salmonid culture system]. 
DeLosReyes, A.A.and Lawson , T.B., 1996. Combination of a bead filter and rotating biological contactor 
in a recirculating fish culture system . Aquacultural Engineering 15, 27-39. [
an intensive pilot scale 
recirculating system stocked with tilapia was used to evaluate the combined performance of a bead filter and 
rotating biological contactor].  
FAO, 2006. Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations - The State of World Fisheries and 
Aquaculture, 2006. Publishing Management Service Information Division, Rome. [A very useful report 
on the statistics of aquaculture]. UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Recirculating Aquaculture Systems – A Review  - C R Steicke, 
V Jegatheesan, C Zeng 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)  Folke, C.a.K., N., 1992. Aquaculture with its e nvironment: prospects for sustainability. Ocean and 
Coastal management 17, 5-24. [Sustainable aquaculture is discussed in detail]. 
Golz, W.J., 1995. Biological Treat ment in Recirculating Aquacult ure Systems. In Recirculating 
aquaculture in the classroom: a training workshop fo r agricultural science teacher s, Training workshop for 
agricultural science teachers, Louisi ana State University, Baton Rouge,  Louisiana. [Workshop material 
for the application of biological treatment  in recirculating aquaculture systems]. 
Gowen, R.J.and Bradbury, N.B., 1987. The ecological impacts of salmonid farming in coastal waters: a 
review. Oceanography and Marine Biology Annual Review 25, 563-575. [excellent review on the impact 
of salmonid farming]. 
Greiner, A.D.and Timmons, M.B., 1998. Evaluation of the nitrification rates of microbead and trickling 
filters in an intensive recirculating tilapia produc tion facility. Aquacultural Engineering 18, 189-200. 
[polystyrene spheres and polyethylene packing material were tested in trickling filters for the performance of 
nitrification].  
Grommen, R., Verhaege, M.and Verstraete, W., 2006. Removal of nitrate in aquaria by means of 
electrochemically generated hydrogen gas as electron donor for biological denitrification. Aquacultural 
Engineering 34(1), 33-39. [Hydrogen generation through electrochemical cell for denitrification]. 
Hagopian, D.S.and Riley, J.G., 1998. A closer look at the bacteriology of nitrification. Aquacultural 
Engineering 18, 223-244. [Excellent review on the microbial nitrification is provided which includes 
survival mechanisms, frailties, and intrinsic kinetics].  
Hanna, D., Gooday, P., Galeano, D.and Newton, P., 2005. Seafood outlook to 2009-10: quality not 
quantity the key for Australian producers, Australian Commodities. [Future of seafood in Australia is 
discussed]. 
Hargrove, L.L., Westerman, P.W.and Losordo, T.M., 1 996. Nitrification in thr ee-stage and single stage 
floating bead biofilters in a laboratory-scale recirc ulating aquaculture system. Aquacultural Engineering 
15, 67-80. [Nitrification in a single-stage and a three- stage biofilter are compared] 
Haug, R.T.and McCarthy, P.L., 1972. Nitrification with submerged filters. Journal of Water Pollution 
Control Federation IN: Watten, B.J.and Sibrell, P.L., 2006. Comparative performance of fixed-film 
biological filters: Application of reactor theory. Aquacultural Engineer ing 34(3), 198-213. [Compares the 
performance of plug flow, mixe d and tank-in-series reactors]. 
Hawkins, J.E., Cooper, P. F.and Seaman, M.R., 1978. Denitrification of sewage effluent by attached 
growth technique. IN: Mattock, G. (Ed.), New Processes of wastewat er treatment and recovery. Ellis 
Hardwood, Chichester, pp. 107 - 124. [Discusses denitrification by attached growth biological treatment 
system]. 
Hu, H.-Y., Fujie, K.and Urano,  K., 1994. Effect of temperature on th e reaction rate of bacteria inhabiting 
the aerobic microbial film for wast ewater treatment. Journal of Ferm entation and Bioengineering 78, 100-
104. [Temperature effect on microbial kinetics is discussed]. J e g a t h e e s a n  V ,  Z e n g  C ,  L .  S h u ,  M a n i c o m  C  a nd Steicke C., 2007. Technological Advances in 
Aquaculture Farms for Minimal Efflue nt Discharge to Oceans, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 15, 
pp. 1535-1544. [Discusses the use of trickling, sand and floating medium filters for reciculating 
aquaculture systems]. Kaiser, G.E.and Wheaten, F.W. , 1983. Nitrification filters for aquatic  culture system: state of the art. 
Journal of the World Mariculture Society 14, 302-324. [Nitrification of aquaculture effluents is 
discussed]. 
Kamstra, A., van der Heul, J.W.and Nijhof, M., 1998. Performance and optimisation of trickling filters on 
eel farms. Aquacultural Engineering 17, 175-192. [discusses the model validation 
on ammonium removal in 
a pilot-scale trickling filter].  
Kim, D.J., Miyahara, T.and Noike, T., 1997. Effect of C/N ratio on the bioregeneration of biological 
activated carbon. Water Science and T echnology 36, 239-249. [Discusses the influence of C/N ratio in the 
environment around BAC on bio-regeneration].  
Koch, G.and Siegrist, H., 1997. Denitr ification with methanol in tertia ry filtration. Water Research 31, UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Recirculating Aquaculture Systems – A Review  - C R Steicke, 
V Jegatheesan, C Zeng 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)  3029-3038. [An excellent summary on the full-scale experiment in denitrification with methanol in 
tertiary filtration at a wastewater treat ment plant is given in this article]. 
Lawson, T.B., 1995. Fundamentals of Aquacultural Engineering. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, 
Massachusetts. [An excellent text book providin g all the basics on aquacultural engineering]. 
Lee, P.G., Lea, R.N., Dohmann, E., Prebilsky, W. , Turk, P.E., Ying, H.and Whitson, J.L., 2000. 
Denitrification in aquaculture systems: an example of a fuzzy logic control problem. Aquacultural Engineering 23, 37-59. [Optimization of denitrification by fuzzy logic control is discussed]. 
Lekang, O.I., Kleppe, H., 2000 . Efficiency of nitrification in trick ling filters using different filter media. 
Aquacultural Engineering 21, 181-199. [This article comp ares the nitrification of six different filter media 
used in trickling filters]. Leonard, N., Blancheton, J.P.and Guiraud, J.P., 2000. Populations of heterotrophic bacteria in an 
experimental recirculating aquaculture system. Aquacultural Engineering 22, 109-120. [This article
 
identifies the main viable heterotrophic bacteria in a marine  fish farm with a recircula ting water system and studies 
their growth dynamics].  
Lewandoswki, Z., 1982. Temperature dependency of biological denitrification with organic materials 
addition. Water Research 16, 19-22. [Discusses the results of denitrification kinetics using methanol, 
acetone and acetic acid].  
Liltved, H.and Cripps, S.J., 1999. Removal of particle -associated bacteria by pr efiltration and ultraviolet 
irradiation. Aquaculture Research 30, 445-450. [Discusses bacterial removal by prefiltration and UV 
irradiation]. Lucas, J.S.and Southgate, P., 2003. Aquaculture: Farming Aquatic  Animals and Plants. Fishing News 
Books, Oxford. [Excellent book on aquaculture farming that details water quality requirements for 
aquaculture]. 
Malone, R.F.and Beecher, L.E., 2000. Use of floating be ad filters to recondition recirculating waters in 
warmwater aquaculture production systems. Aquacultural Engineering 22, 57-73. [Provides details on the 
establishment of appli cation categories and parameters for recirculating syst em use and gives criterion for the sizing 
of recirculating system components].  
Menasveta, P., Panritdam, T., Sihanonth, P., Powtongsook, S., Chuntapa, B. and Lee, P., 2001. Design 
and function of a closed, recirculatin g seawater system with denitrification for the culture of black tiger 
shrimp broodstock. Aquacultural Engineering 25, 35-49. [Substitution of methanol for ethanol in 
denitrification is discussed]. 
New, M.B., 2002. Farming Freshwater Prawns: A manual for the culture of the giant river prawn 
(Macrobrachium rosenbergii). Food  and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations : Fisheris 
Technical Paper 428. [A manual on the culture of river prawn]. Ng, W.J., Kho, K., Ong, S.L., Sim, T.S.and Ho, J.M., 1996. Ammonia removal from aquaculture water by 
means of fluidised technology. Aquaculture 139, 55-62. [Investigates the removal of ammonia and phosphorus in a fluidized system]. 
Nunes, A.J.P.and Parsons, G.J., 1998. Dynamics of tropical coastal aquaculture systems and the 
consequences to waste production. World Aquaculture 29, 27-37. [Discu sses tropical aquaculture systems 
and their effects on coasts].  
Otte, G.and Rosenthal, H., 1979. Management of a closed brackish water system for high-density fish 
culture by biological and ch emical water treatment. Aquaculture 18, 169-181. [Discusses the efficiency of 
combined biological treatment and ozonation for closed aquaculture systems]. 
Park, E.J., Seo, J.K., Kim, M.R ., Jung, I.H., Kim, J.Y.and Kim, S.K., 2001. Salinity acclimation of 
immobilised freshwater denitrifier. Aquacultural En gineering 24, 169-180. [Optimum hydraulic retention 
time for denitrification is obtained in this study]. Partos, J.and Richard, Y., 1984. IN: Use of fixed biomass for water and waste water treatment, 
Proceedings International Conference. Cebedeau, 23  - 25 May 1984, Leige, Belgium, pp. 163 - 186. 
[Discusses the biological treatment of wastewater]. 
Piedrahita, R.H., 2003. Reducing the potential environmental impact of tank aquaculture effluents UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Recirculating Aquaculture Systems – A Review  - C R Steicke, 
V Jegatheesan, C Zeng 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)  through intensification and recirculation. Aquaculture 226, 35-44. [Reviews the fate of constituents for a 
variety of water treatment options]. 
Polprasert, C.and Park, H.S., 1986. Effluent denitrification with anaer obic filters. Water Research 20, 
1015-1021. [This article evaluates the performance of two anaerobic filters treating a wide range of 
influent nitrate co ncentrations].   
Primavera, J.H., 1993. A critical review of shrimp p ond culture in the Philippines. Reviews of Fisheries 
Science 1, 151-201. {Review on shrimp culturing in the Philippines is given}. 
Rabah, F.K.J.and Mohamed, D.F., 2004. Nitrate removal characteristics of high performance fluidized-
bed biofilm reactors. Water Research 38, 3719-3728. [High strength nitrate removal is discussed in this article]. 
Rogers, G.L.and Klemetson, S.L., 1985. Ammonia rem oval in selected aquaculture water reuse biofilters. 
Aquacultural Engineering 4, 135-154. [Four types of biofilters for ammonia removal have been tested in 
this paper].  
Rusten, B., Eikebrokk, B., Ulgenes, Y.and Lygren, E., 2006. Design and operations of the Kaldnes 
moving bed biofilm reactors. Aquacu ltural Engineering 34(3 ), 322-331. [Discusses the fundamentals of 
moving bed biofilm reactors and the f actors influencing nitrification]. 
Sandu, S.I., Boardman, G.D., Watten,  B.J.and Brazil, B.L., 2002. Factors influencing the nitrification 
efficiency of fluidised bed filter with a plastic bead medium. Aquacultural Engineering 26, 41-59. 
[Operating parameters for nitrification have been discussed].  
Sastry, B.N., DeLosReyes Jr, A.A., Rusch, K.A.and Malone, R.F., 1999. Nitrification performance of a 
bubble-washed bead filter for combined solids rem oval and biological filtration in recirculating 
aquaculture system. Aquacultural Engineering 19, 105-117. [Discusses the performance of bubble-washed beads used in filters  on nitrification]. 
Sauthier, N., Grasmick, A.and Blancheton, J.P., 1998. Biological denitrification applied to a marine 
closed aquaculture system. Water Re search 32, 1932 - 1938. [Tests the performance of a denitrification 
column in a marine environment]. 
Schneider, O., Sereti, V., Eding, E.H.and Verreth, J.A.J., 2005. Analysis of nutrient flows in integrated 
intensive aquaculture systems. Aquacultural Engineer ing 32, 379-401. [Advantages and limitations of an 
integrated aquaculture system has been evaluated in this study]. 
Sich, H.and Van Rijn, J., 1992. Distribution of bacteria in a biofilter-equiped semi intensive fish culture 
unit. Special Publication Europ ean Aquaculture Society 17, 55-7 8. [Discussions on the microbial 
distribution in a biofilter is discussed in this study]. 
Sich, H.and Van Rijn, J., 1997. Scanning electron microscopy of biofilm formation in denitrifying, 
fluidised bed reactors. Wate r Research 31, 733-742. [
co-existence of Pseudomonas and Zoogloea in a 
denitrifying filter is discussed].  
Skjolstrup, J., Nielsen, P.H., Frier, J.O.and Mclean, E., 1998. Performance characteristics of fluidised bed 
biofilters in a novel laboratory-scale recirculation sy stem for rainbow trout: nitrification rates, oxygen 
consumption and sludge collection. Aquacultural Engineering 18, 265-276. [A fluidized bed for recirculating the aquaculture effluent has been tested in this study]. 
Soares, M.I.M., 2000. Biological Denitrification of  Groundwater. Water, Air and Soil Pollution 123, 183-
193. [Discusses the denitrification mechanism involved in treating groundwater that contains nitrate]. Steicke, C., Jegatheesan, V. and Zeng, C., 2007.  Mechanical mode floating medium filters for 
recirculating systems in aquaculture for higher solids retention and lower freshwater usage. Bioresource 
Technology 98, 3375-3383. [This article  investigates the performance of  buoyant media filtration for the 
reduction in fresh water usage].  
Suzuki, Y., Maruyama, T., Numata, H., Sato, H.an d Asakawa, M., 2003. Pe rfomance of a closed 
recirculating system with foam seperation, nitrifica tion and denitrification units for intensive culture of 
eel: towards zero emission. Aquacultural Engineering 29, 165-182. [This article demonstrates that 
intensive aquaculture of freshwater fi sh can be achieved using a closed re circulating system without effluent 
discharge].  UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Recirculating Aquaculture Systems – A Review  - C R Steicke, 
V Jegatheesan, C Zeng 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)  Tacon, A.G.J.and Forster, I.P., 2003. Aquafeeds and the environment: policy implications. Aquaculture 
226, 181-189. [Policies on aquafeeds are discussed which would help to manage an aquaculture system 
effectively]. 
Timmons, M.B.and Losordo, T.M., 1994. Aquaculture water reuse systems: engineering design and 
management. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 333 pp. [Useful technical information are given to design a 
recirculating aquaculture system]. 
Timmons, M.B., Ebeling, J.M., Wheaten, F.W., Summer felt, R.C.and Vinci, B.J., 2002. Recirculating 
Aquaculture Systems. Cayuga Aqua Ventures, New York, 770 pp. [Useful technical information are 
given to design a recirculating aquaculture system]. 
True, B., Johnson, W.and Chen, S., 2004. Reducing phosphorus discharge from flow-through aquaculture 
III: assessing high-rate filtration media for efflue nt solids and phosphorus removal. Aquacultural 
Engineering 32, 161-170. [This paper discusses the identification and character ization of mechanical 
filtration media for effective and economic filtrati on of large flow through effluents to reduce P 
discharge]. 
Tseng, K.-F.and Wu, K.-L., 2004. The ammonia removal cycle for a submerged biofilter used in a 
recirculating eel culture system. Aquacultural Engineering 31, 17-30. [ A model has been proposed to 
predict the biofilter performance in a commercial recirculating eel culture system].  
van Rijn, J.v.and Rivera, G., 1990. Aerobic and an aerobic biofiltration in an aquaculture unit-nitrite 
accumulation and a result of nitrification and denitr ification. Aquacultural Engineering 9, 217-234. 
[Accumulation of nitrite and the solutions for the prevention are discu ssed in this article]. 
Viadero Jr, R.C.and Noblet, J.A., 2002. Membrane filtr ation for removal of fine soilids from aquaculture 
process water. Aquacultural Engineering 26, 151-169. [This study assesses the technical feasibility of utilizing 
cross-flow microfiltration to remove fine particulate matter from recirculating aquaculture systems].  
Watanade, W.O., Ellis, E.P.and Feeley, M.W., 1998. Progress in controlled maturation and spawning of 
summer flounder Paralichthys dentatus broodstock. Journal of the World Aquaculture Society 29, 393 - 
404. [Discusses the controlled maturation process and spawning]. 
Wheaten, F.W., 1977. Aquacultural Engineering. John Wiley and Sons, Inc,, USA. [A book on the 
aspects of aquacultural engineering that will help in designing treatment systems for aquaculture effluents]. 
Wortman, B.and Wheaton, F., 1991 . Temperature effects on biodrum  nitrification. Aquacultural 
Engineering 10, 183-205. [This study finds a linear relationship between ammonia removal and 
temperature as well as increas e in nitrite accumulation with the increase in temperature]. 
Zhu, S.and Chen, S., 2002. The impact of temperat ure on nitrification rate in fixed film biofilters. 
Aquacultural Engineering 26, 221-237. [This study finds that 
diffusion mass transport plays an important role 
in fixed film nitrification processes but the effect of temp erature on nitrification rate due  in fixed film processes is 
greatly reduced compared with that of suspended growth processes].  
 
Biographical Sketches 
 
Christopher Steicke was born in Perth, Western Australia on the 15th of May 1981. He completed a 
Diploma of Aquaculture in 2001 and completed his B.A. Sc. in 2005. He is currently a Master of Science 
Research Student at James Cook University, Australia with a research focus on recirculating aquaculture 
systems. He has over 8 years experience in the aqua culture industry with experience in both temperate 
and tropical species and extensive and intensive system designs. Previously he has worked in the 
capacities including research technician and commercial environmental consultant. As well as being a Master of Science student Chris is currently an environmental advisor for the mining industry in 
Queensland. He has co-authored several peer reviewed articles in the forms of journals and conference 
papers focusing mainly on the aquaculture industry. 
 
Veeriah Jegatheesan  was born in Nawalapitiya, Sri Lanka on the 26
th of May 1960. He completed his 
B.Sc. (Eng.) Hons. at the University of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka (1983), M.Eng. at the Asian Institute of 
Technology Thailand (1992), and PhD at the University of Technology Sydney, Australia (1999). He is 
currently an Associate Prof essor in Environmental Engineering at the School of Engineering of James UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES - Recirculating Aquaculture Systems – A Review  - C R Steicke, 
V Jegatheesan, C Zeng 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)  Cook University, Townsville, Australia. Previously he has worked in the capacities of Senior Consultant, 
Research Associate, Measurement Engineer and Teachi ng Assistant. He has co-authored a book and more 
than 130 peer reviewed articles in the forms of journal and conference papers, book chapters and 
commercial-in-confidence reports. Currently he is an  author of one of the scirus topic pages entitled 
"Resource Recovery for a Sust ainable Future" (please visit 
http://topics.scirus.com/Resource_Rec overy_for_a_Sustain able_Future.html ). He is an editor for the 
special issue on “Present and Antic ipated Demands for Natural Resources: Scientific, Technological, 
Political, Economic and Ethical Approaches for Sustainable Management” to be published by the /Journal 
of Cleaner Production/. Associate Prof essor Jegatheesan is a member of th e editorial board of the journal, 
Bioresource Technology and member of the International Water Association, Australian Water 
Association, American Chemical Society, the Ins titution of Engineers Australia, European Desalination 
Society and the American Water Works Association. 
 
Chaoshu Zeng was born in Putain, P. R. China on the 21st of September 1964. He completed his B.Sc. 
(1984) and M.Sc. (1987) in Marine Biology at Xiamen University, China and his PhD at the University of 
Wales, Bangor, UK (1996). He is currently a senior l ecturer in Aquaculture and a program leader for the 
Tropical Crustacean Aquacu lture Research Group at the School of  Marine and Tropical Biology, James 
Cook University, Townsville, Australia. Previously, he  worked as associate lecturer and lecturer at 
Department of Oceanography, Xiamen University, China. He also spent several years in Japan worked as 
a postdoctoral fellow at Faculty of  Agriculture, Kyoto University and Seikai National Fisheries Research 
Institute, Nakasaki. Dr. Zeng has published about 60 peer -review papers in scientific journals and given 
more than 40 presentations at various international conferences. Dr. Zeng is cu rrently a member of the 
editorial board for the international journals, ‘Scien tia Marina’ and ‘Mediterranean Aquaculture Journal’. 
He also holds an Adjunct Professor position at Shanghai Ocean University, China. 
 
 