Process  Safety  and  Environmental  Protection  1  0  0  (  2  0  1  6  )  131–141
Contents  lists  available  at  ScienceDirect
Process Safety  and  Environmental  Protection
journal  h  om  ep  age:  www.elsevier.com/locate/ps  ep
Effect  of  increasing  organic  loading  rates  on  the
performance  of moving-bed bioﬁlm  reactors ﬁlled
with
 different  support  media:  Assessing  the
activity  of  suspended  and  attached  biomass
fractions
J.P.  Bassin∗,  I.N.  Dias,  S.M.S.  Cao,  E.  Senra,  Y.  Laranjeira,  M.  Dezotti
Federal  University  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  COPPE—Chemical  Engineering  Program,  PO  Box  68502,
21941-972  Rio  de  Janeiro,  Brazil
a  r  t  i  c  l  e  i  n  f  o
Article history:
Received  12  June  2015
Received  in  revised  form  13
November  2015
Accepted 8  January  2016
Available  online  14  January  2016
Keywords:COD removal
NitriﬁcationMBBRCarrier media
Organic  loading  rate
Speciﬁc nitriﬁcation  ratea  b  s  t  r  a  c  t
In this study, two  moving-bed  bioﬁlm  reactors  (MBBR 1and  MBBR 2)  ﬁlled  with  different  car-
rier  media  (Kaldnes  K1  and  Mutag  Biochip,  respectively)  were  subjected  to  increasing  organic
loading rates  for  700  days.  Regardless  of  the  carrier  used,  both  systems  could  withstand
high organic loads  up  to  3.2  kgCOD/(m3d),  condition  under  which  complete  ammonium
removal was  achieved.  However,  the  type  of  media  inﬂuenced  the  quantity  and  distribution
of attached  biomass  in  the  support,  which  in  turn  affected  the  activity  of  speciﬁc  microbial
functional groups  in  the  bioﬁlm.  As  the  chemical  oxygen  demand  (COD)  input  was  grad-
ually increased,  the  bioﬁlm  got  thicker  and  the  surface  detachment  rates  were  enhanced.
Consequently, the  amount  of  suspended  solids  has  increased  consider ably  to  levels  com-
monly found  in  hybrid  bioreactors.  Activity  batch  tests  have  shown  that  the  contribution
of the  bulk  phase  biomass  to  the  overall  nitriﬁcation  was  very  signiﬁcant,  being  more  rel-
evant as  the  bioﬁlm  sloughing  events  became  more  intense.  At  constant  organic  loading
rate, the hydraulic  retention  time  (HRT)  had  a  noticeable  impact  on  the  nitriﬁcation  pro-
cess,  as  it  directly  inﬂuenced  the  fraction  of  ammonium  oxidized  either  by  the  attached
or suspended  biomass.  Total  nitrogen  removal  amounted  up  to  86  and  73%  in  MBBR 1and
MBBR 2,  respectively.
© 2016 The  Institution  of  Chemical  Engineers.  Published  by  Elsevier  B.V.  All  rights  reserved.
1.  Introduction
In recent  years,  the  stricter  efﬂuent  quality  requirements
posed  by  environmental  regulations  around  the  world  have
pushed  the  development  of  space-  and  cost-effective  waste-
water treatment  technologies  with  high  performance.  In  this
scenario,  bioﬁlm  processes  have  increasingly  drawn  the  atten-
tion  of  environmental  engineers  and  researchers  (Henze  et  al.,
2008 ).  The  use  of  attached  instead  of  suspended  biomass
∗Corresponding  author.  Tel.:  +55  21  25628347;  fax:  +55  21  25628300.
E-mail address:  jbassin@peq.coppe.ufrj.br  (J.P.  Bassin).allows for  the  construction  of  very  compact  reactors  and  pro-
vides an  easier  separation  of  the  biosolids  from  the  treated
efﬂuent.  Moreover,  in  contrast  to  ﬂocculent  sludge  technolo-
gies, the  retention  of  biomass  in  attached  growth  processes
is  improved  and  can  be  controlled  independently  of  the  pre-
vailing hydraulic  conditions  (Lewandowski  and  Beyenal,  2014 ).
This particular feature  is  especially  beneﬁcial  for  the  estab-
lishment and development  of  slow  growing  organisms  which
frequently  suffer  from  washout  as  a  result  of  hydraulic  and
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2016.01.007
0957-5820/© 2016 The  Institution  of  Chemical  Engineers.  Published  by  Elsevier  B.V.  All  rights  reserved.132  Process  Safety  and  Environmental  Protection  1  0  0  (  2  0  1  6  )  131–141
organic  shock  loadings  (Hu  et  al.,  2011 )  and/or  insufﬁcient
solids  retention  time  (Head  and  Oleszkiewicz,  2005 ).
The moving-bed  bioﬁlm  reactor  (MBBR)  is  a  growing  bioﬁlm
technology  which  has  gained  much  attention  in  the  waste-
water  treatment  sector  in  the  last  20  years  (Barwal  and
Chaudhary, 2014 ).  It  is  based  on  the  use  of  freely  moving
plastic  carrier  elements  with  density  a  little  lighter  than  that
of  water  in  which  microorganisms  form  bioﬁlms  (Ødegaard,
2006 ).  Given  the  advantages  shown  by  the  MBBR  process  such
as compactness,  ﬂexibility  and  high  quality  efﬂuent  produc-
tion, a rapidly growing market  for  this  technology  has  been
established worldwide.  In  this  context,  many  different  types
of  commercial  media  have  been  developed  for  speciﬁc  applica-
tions  (van  Haandel  and  van  der  Lubbe,  2012 )  and  this  bioﬁlm
process has  been  extensively  used  for  the  treatment  of  syn-
thetic (Bassin  et  al.,  2012a;  Hoang  et  al.,  2014 ),  domestic  (Bassin
et  al.,  2011;  Calderón  et  al.,  2012 )  and  industrial  wastewaters
(Bassin et  al.,  2011;  Dvoˇrák  et  al.,  2014 ).
Part  of  the  applications  of  the  MBBR  technology  is  focused
on the treatment of high organic load  waste  streams,  as  inves-
tigated
 previously  (Rusten  et  al.,  1998;  Melin  et  al.,  2005;  Aygun
et  al.,  2008;  Javid  et  al.,  2013 ).  Under  such  conditions,  the
development of  fast-growing  heterotrophs  which  outcompete
nitrifying  bacteria  for  oxygen  and  space  in  bioﬁlm  systems
is favoured (Figueroa  and  Silverstein,  1992 ),  whereas  nitri-
ﬁcation
 functionality  may  be  hindered.  Thus,  investigating
how nitriﬁcation  behaves  in  MBBR  systems  subjected  to  high
COD input is  important  to  predict  their  overall  treatment  per-
formance.  Furthermore,  as  the  carrier  material  employed  in
MBBR processes has  been  reported  to  inﬂuence  the  attach-
ment and  distribution  characteristics  of  the  bioﬁlm  (Chu  et  al.,
2014 ),  it  is  interesting  to  understand  how  the  type  of  sup-
port media will  affect  the  activity  of  nitriﬁers  in  situations
where  overgrowth  of  heterotrophs  takes  place.  Such  informa-
tion  may  potentially  be  used  in  the  selection  of  suitable  bioﬁlm
carriers for  MBBRs  treating  high  loaded  wastewaters.  So  far,
studies addressing the impact of the  carrier  material  on  the
operation
 of  MBBR  have  been  restricted  to  low  to  medium
organic  load  applications  (Chu  and  Wang,  2011a,b;  Chu  et  al.,
2014 ).
MBBR systems  are  often  characterized  by  low  suspended
solids  content  (Barwal  and  Chaudhary,  2014 ).  Hence,  their
design and operation  is  usually  based  on  surface  loading  rates,
which  are  intrinsically  dependent  on  the  activity  of  the  media-
attached  biomass  (Ødegaard  et  al.,  2000 ).  On  the  other  hand,
the suspended  biomass  activity  is  usually  neglected.  However,
depending  on  the  hydraulic  and  organic  load  conditions,  the
amount of  solids  in  the  bulk  phase  arising  from  either  bioﬁlm
detachment or  growth  in  suspension  can  be  signiﬁcant  (Kwok
et al., 1998 ).  This  exchange  of  biomass  between  the  liquid  and
solid  media  phases  underlines  the  need  of  taking  into  consid-
eration  both  the  suspended  and  attached  biomass  fractions  in
the design  and  modelling  of  bioﬁlm  systems  (Boltz  et  al.,  2009;
Maˇsic  and  Eberl,  2014 ).  Recently,  Piculell  et  al.  (2014)  conducted
a comprehensive  study  addressing  the  removal  of  organic
matter in  MBBRs  subjected  to  varying  operational  conditions.
This  particular  work  provided  insightful  ﬁndings  regarding  the
heterotrophic  activity  of  free-growing  and  attached  biomass
fractions and  their  contribution  to  the  overall  COD  removal
under different hydraulic  retention  times  (Piculell  et  al.,  2014 ).
However,  information  on  the  nitrifying  activity  of  suspended
and  attached  biomass  in  MBBR  systems  subjected  to  increas-
ing organic loads  is  poorly  addressed  in  literature.  Given  that
nitriﬁcation  in  bioﬁlm  systems  is  highly  inﬂuenced  by  theorganic  matter  input  (Figueroa  and  Silverstein,  1992 ),  evalu-
ating the  activity  of  nitriﬁers  in  the  bulk  and  bioﬁlm  phases
at different  organic  loading  rates  is  important  to  understand
how  nitrifying  bacteria  respond  to  load  variations  and  predict
nitriﬁcation  performance  under  different  COD/N  ratios.
In the  light  of  this  background,  this  work  attempts  to  eval-
uate  the  impact  of  increasing  organic  loading  rates  on  COD
and nitrogen  conversions  in  two  lab-scale  MBBRs  operated  on
a  long-term  basis  (700  days).  In  order  to  observe  the  inﬂuence
of  the  support  media  on  the  overall  treatment  performance  as
well as  on  the  dynamics  of  suspended  and  adhered  biomass
throughout the  experiment, each  reactor  was  ﬁlled  with  a  par-
ticular  type of  biomass-supporting  carrier differing in  size,
structure
 and  shape.  The  distribution  of  the  bioﬁlm  grown
in the  different  media  was  characterized  by  image  analysis
whereas the  nitrifying  activity  of  the  different  biomass  frac-
tions and  their  relative  importance  to  the  overall  nitriﬁcation
process were  monitored  at  all  experimental  conditions.
2.  Material  and  methods
2.1.  Operational  conditions  of  the  MBBR  systems
The  experiments  were  conducted  in  two  lab-scale  MBBR  sys-
tems  (MBBR 1and  MBBR 2)  with  a  volume  of  1  L,  which  were
run in  a  continuous  mode  for  700  days.  Throughout  this
study,  the  reactors  were  subjected  to  six  different  experimen-
tal conditions, presented  in  Table  1.  The  volumetric  organic
loading  rate  was  gradually  increased  from  runs  1–4.  Sub-
sequently  (runs  4–6),  both  the  inﬂuent  COD  and  the  HRT
were proportionally  decreased  in  order  to  keep  the  organic
loading  rate  constant.  This  procedure  was  conducted  to  eval-
uate the  effect  of  the  HRT  on  the  dynamics  of  attached  and
suspended biomass  fractions  and  their  corresponding  nitri-
fying activities. Both  reactors  were  inoculated  with  100  mL
of activated  sludge  from  a  municipal  wastewater  treatment
plant  (CEDAE—Alegria,  Rio  de  Janeiro,  Brazil)  designed  for
COD removal  and  nitriﬁcation.  To  ensure  controlled  sub-
strate  concentrations,  laboratory  prepared  wastewater  was
used as inﬂuent for  the  MBBRs.  Sodium  acetate  (NaAc)  and
ammonium  chloride (NH 4Cl)  were  used  as  organic  carbon
and  nitrogen  source,  respectively.  The  inﬂuent  synthetic
medium (modiﬁed  from  Bassin  et  al.,  2012b )  was  prepared
with  demineralized  water  and  had  the  following  composi-
tion: 1028.4  g/L  NaAc ·3H2O  (for  inﬂuent  COD  of  400  mg/L),
382.14  mg/L  NH 4Cl  (for  inﬂuent  ammonium  of  100  mgN/L),
55.5  mg/L  KH2PO4(12  mgP/L),  53  mg/L  MgSO 4,  222.5  mg/L  NaCl,
and 589.3  mg/L  NaHCO 3.  Depending  on  the  experimental  con-
dition,  the  medium  composition  was  varied  in  order  to  obtain
the  desired  inﬂuent  COD  and  ammonium-nitrogen  concen-
trations. Alkalinity  (supplied  as  NaHCO 3)  and  phosphorus
source  (provided  as  KH2PO4)  were  also  correspondingly  dosed
according  to  the  bacterial  nutrition  requirements  in  each
experimental  stage.  A  trace  elements  solution  whose  compo-
sition was  described  previously  (Bassin  et  al.,  2012a )  was  added
in a  proportion  of  0.5  mL/L  of  medium.  The  inﬂuent  wastewa-
ter was stored  under  refrigeration  (4◦C)  at  a  pH  of  7.5–8.0  until
being  fed  to  the  reactors.  To  evaluate  the  effect  of  different
types of  support  media  on  the  treatment  process,  MBBR 1was
ﬁlled with  Kaldnes®K1  carriers  whereas  MBBR 2was  ﬁlled  with
Mutag BiochipTMmedia  (see  Fig.  S1,  Supplementary  material).
These two  carriers  present  a  speciﬁc  surface  area  for  biomass
adhesion of 500  and  3000  m2/m3,  respectively.  Further  infor-
mation  about  the  characteristics  of  the  support  materials  canProcess  Safety  and  Environmental  Protection  1  0  0  (  2  0  1  6  )  131–141  133
Table 1  –  Operational  conditions  of  the  MBBR  systems.
Run  Inﬂuent  COD
(mg/L)Inﬂuent
ammonium
(mgN/L)HRT
(h)Volumetric
 organic
loading rate
(kgCOD/(m3d))Surface
 organic
loading rate
(gCOD/(m2d))Volumetric
 nitrogen
loading rate
(kgNH 4+–N/(m3d))Surface
 organic
loading rate
(gNH 4+–N/(m2d))Time
 of
operation
(days)
1  400  100  12  0.8  3.2  0.2  0.8  112a
2  800  100  12  1.6  6.4  0.2  0.8  112
3 1200  100  12  2.4  9.6  0.2  0.8  142
4
 1600  100  12  3.2  12.8  0.2  0.8  134
5 800  100  6  3.2  12.8  0.4  1.6  100
6
 400  50  3  3.2  12.8  0.4  1.6  103
aThe ﬁrst  experimental  run  comprised  a  start-up  phase  for  bioﬁlm  development,  which  lasted  20  and  30  days  in  MBBR 1and  MBBR 2,  respectively.
be  found  in  Table  S1.  In  order  to  have  the  same  surface  area  for
bioﬁlm development  in  both  reactors,  the  ﬁlling  fraction,  i.e.,
the  amount  of  support  per  volume  of  reactor  (Vsupport /Vreactor )
was chosen  to  be  50%  and  8.3%  for  the  MBBR 1and  MBBR 2,
respectively.  Hence,  the  speciﬁc  surface  area  corresponded  to
250 m2/m3.  Taking  into  account  the  volume  of  the  reactors
(1  L),  the  total  area  available  for  establishment  of  the  bioﬁlm
was 0.25  m2.  Air  was  introduced  to  the  reactors  through  porous
diffusers, placed  at  the  bottom  of  each  tank.  The  air  ﬂow  was
kept  constant  at  around  4  L/min  in  order  to  have  the  same
hydraulic conditions  in  all  experimental  runs.  The  distribu-
tion  of  air  bubbles  allowed  to  keep  the  carriers  in  suspension
and  provided  satisfactory  oxygen  transfer  into  the  bulk  liquid.
The dissolved  oxygen  (DO)  concentration  varied  within  the
range  of  4–5  mg/L.  Ambient  temperature  was  around  22  ±  4◦C
and pH  was  maintained  between  6.8  and  7.5  by  adding  either
1 M  NaOH  or  1  M  HCl.
2.2.  Additional  experiments  for  assessment  of
nitrifying activity
In  order  to  determine  the  maximum  speciﬁc  nitrifying  activ-
ity of both  attached  and  suspended  biomass  and  estimate  the
amount of  ammonium  oxidized  by  each  biomass  fraction  in
the different  experimental  runs,  two  types  of  batch  tests  were
conducted  from  runs  2  to  6.  In  this  set  of  trials,  the  reactor
feeding was  stopped  and  a  pulse  of  a  concentrated  stock  solu-
tion  of  ammonium  chloride  was  added  in  the  beginning  of
the  test  in  order  to  achieve  initial  ammonium  concentrations
similar to  that  of  the  reactor  inﬂuent,  i.e.,  100  mgN/L.  Samples
were  collected  every  15  to  30  min  for  6  h  (360  min)  for  deter-
mination  of  the  ammonium  concentration.  The  volumetric
ammonium removal  rate  was  calculated  by  linear  regression
of ammonium  concentration  over  time  whereas  the  biomass-
speciﬁc ammonium removal  rate  was  determined  by  dividing
the  volumetric  ammonium  removal  rate  by  the  total  amount
of biomass  (i.e.,  volatile  total  solids  (VTS)  =  volatile  attached
(VAS)  +  suspended  (VSS)  solids)  in  the  corresponding  reactor.
The approach  used  to  discriminate  between  the  amount  of
ammonium  nitriﬁed  by  the  attached  and  suspended  biomass
was a  bit  different.  Given  the  fact  that  this  information  can-
not  be  assessed  under  normal  operating  conditions  as  both
attached and  suspended  solids  are  present  within  the  sys-
tems, it  was  decided  to  remove  one  of  the  biomass  fractions.
Hence, it  was  opted  to  remove  all  the  plastic  carriers  from  the
two  reactors  and  therefore  keep  only  the  suspended  biomass.
Otherwise, if  the  test  was  performed  only  with  the  supports
by
 removing  the  suspended  solids,  detachment  of  biomass
from  the  carriers  would  eventually  occur  over  the  experimentand  therefore  the  conversions  would  not  be  only  attributed
to the  bioﬁlm  but  also  to  the  bulk  phase  biomass  activity.
Similarly  to  the  previous  experiment,  the  volumetric  ammo-
nium removal  rate  obtained  with  each  type  of  biomass  fraction
was  estimated  by  linear  regression  of  the  ammonium  con-
centration over time.  The  contribution  of  suspended  biomass
to  the  overall  ammonium  removal,  expressed  in  percentage,
was estimated  by  dividing  the  volumetric  ammonium  removal
rate obtained  in  the  experiments  performed  without  carriers
by  that  obtained  with  both  attached  (bioﬁlm)  and  suspended
solids. The  remaining  amount  (calculated  by  subtracting  the
percentage  attributed  to  suspended  solids  from  100%)  was
credited  to  attached  biomass  activity.  Biomass-speciﬁc  ammo-
nium removal  rates  (here  also  referred  to  as  speciﬁc  nitrifying
activity)  obtained  with  either  attached  or  suspended  biomass
was determined  by  the  ratio  between  the  volumetric  ammo-
nium removal  rate  obtained  with  each  fraction  of  biomass  and
the corresponding amount of  solids  (either  VAS  or  VSS).
2.3.  Scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM)  analysis  of
the attached  biomass
The properties of the biomass  attached  to  the  carrier  elements
(e.g.,
 bioﬁlm  thickness)  of  both  MBBR  systems  were  evaluated
by SEM.  This  analysis  was  carried  out  during  run  4,  condi-
tion in  which  the  volumetric  organic  loading  rate  reached  the
maximum  value  (Table  1).  For  visualization  of  the  adhered
biomass, a  piece  of  the  Kaldnes  K1  (MBBR 1)  and  Mutag  Biochip
(MBBR 2)  carriers  was  cut  by  means  of  a  razor  blade.  This
procedure  was  performed  very  carefully  to  keep  the  bioﬁlm
structure  unchanged.  The  preparation  of  the  sample  (i.e.,  ﬁx-
ation,  post-ﬁxation,  dehydration,  washing  and  drying)  can  be
found elsewhere  (Bassin  et  al.,  2012a ).  The  prepared  specimen
was further  attached  to  supports  (aluminium  stubs)  with  the
aid of silver  glue  and  ﬁnally  coated  with  gold  powder  in  a
Balzers  FL-9496  metalizer  for  observation  in  a  Jeol  JSM-6340F
microscope.  The  biomass  thickness  could  then  be  determined
by the  tools  provided  by  the  microscope  software.
2.4. Analytical  measurements  and  calculation
procedures
COD,  ammonium,  total  suspended  solids  (TSS)  and  volatile
suspended solids  (VSS)  were  determined  according  to
Standard Methods  (Apha,  2005 ).  Nitrite  and  nitrate  were  mea-
sured  by  analytical  test  kits  provided  by  Hach  Co.  (Loveland,
Colorado, USA).  The  biomass  concentration  in  the  carrier
media,
 expressed  as  total  (TAS)  and  volatile  (VAS)  attached
solids,  was  measured  according  to  the  procedure  described134  Process  Safety  and  Environmental  Protection  1  0  0  (  2  0  1  6  )  131–141
previously  (Bassin  et  al.,  2012a ),  with  minor  modiﬁcations.
Three  representative  carriers  of  each  reactor  were  collected
and  placed  in  a  falcon  tube.  A  known  volume  of  a  1  N  NaOH
solution was  then  added  to  the  tubes  to  aid  the  removal
of the  attached  biomass  from  the  carrier  materials.  Subse-
quently,  the  detached  biomass  present  in  the  aqueous  solution
was quantiﬁed  following  the  same  procedure  used  to  deter-
mine  the  suspended  solids  concentration  (Apha,  2005 ).  The
amount  of  NaOH  solids  remaining  after  the  biomass  deter-
mination procedure  was  subtracted  from  the  total  amount  of
solids  in  the  sample  aliquot.  In  order  to  extrapolate  the  results
obtained in this determination  for  the entire reactor  and  there-
fore
 calculate  the  TAS  and  VAS  concentrations  (g/L),  the  total
number of  plastic  carriers  within  the  MBBRs  and  the  volume
of  the  bioreactors  were  taken  into  account.  The  sum  of  volatile
attached  (VAS)  and  suspended  solids  (VSS)  was  designated  as
total volatile  solids  (VTS).  Dissolved  oxygen  levels  were  reg-
ularly monitored  with  a  WTW  DO  meter  (model  Oxi  7310).
Temperature  and  pH  were  measured  by  means  of  a  Oakton  pH
110 meter. Total polysaccharides  (PS)  and  protein  (PT)  concen-
trations
 of  the  biomass  attached  to  the  plastic  carrier  elements
were  also  determined.  For  PS  and  PT  determination  assays,
two representative  carriers  from  each  reactor  were  placed  in
a  falcon  tube,  to  which  a  solution  of  1  N  NaOH  was  added.
The tubes were heated  during  5  min  at  90◦C  in  order  to  pro-
mote complete  cell  lysis.  Subsequently,  PS  concentration  was
measured  according  to  Dubois  et  al.  (1956)  whereas  PT  con-
centration was  determined  by  the  Bradford  assay  (Bradford,
1976 ).  Nitrogen  mass  balance  was  conducted  by  considering
the inﬂuent nitrogen  (as  ammonium)  and  the  efﬂuent  nitrogen
(as  remaining  ammonium  and  nitrite  and  nitrate  formed  by
nitriﬁcation).  The  total  amount  of  inﬂuent  ammonium  which
was found  back  as  nitrate/nitrite  in  the  bulk  liquid  was  desig-
nated  as  soluble  nitrogen  conservation  whereas  the  difference
between those two  was  referred  to  as  total  nitrogen  removal.
Nitrogen was  considered  to  account  for  about  10%  of  the  cell
dry weight  (Gerardi,  2003 ).  Given  that  bioﬁlm  development
is  a  dynamic  process  governed  by  attachment  and  detach-
ment of  biomass  to  solid  surfaces,  the  bioﬁlm  surface  speciﬁc
detachment rate  (kd)  was  calculated.  Calculations  procedures
are  shown  in  Supplementary  material.
3.  Results
3.1.  General  description  of  the  reactors  operation:  COD
removal and  nitrogen  conversions  at  different  organic
loading rates
After  inoculation  of  the  reactors  with  activated  sludge  from  a
municipal  wastewater  treatment  plant,  around  20  and  30  days
were necessary  to  achieve  constant  attached  biomass  con-
centration  in  MBBR 1and  MBBR 2,  respectively.  This  period  is
referred  to  as  start-up  phase,  during  which  the  plastic  carriers
were  being  colonized  by  the  microorganisms  at  the  initially
applied organic  loading  rate  (0.8  kgCOD/(m3d))  (Table  1).  With
the exception  of  this  transient  period,  COD  removal  was
observed to  be  higher  than  90%  in  both  reactor  systems
(Fig.  1).  Despite  the  gradual  increase  in  the  organic  loading
rate from  0.8  kgCOD/(m3d)  (run  1)  to  3.2  kgCOD/(m3d)  (run  4),
COD removal  was  observed  to  be  above  95%  in  both  MBBRs.
From runs  4–6,  period  during  which  the  organic  loading  rate
was kept  constant  at  3.2  kgCOD/(m3d)  (12.8  gCOD/(m2d))  by
proportionally decreasing  the  inﬂuent  COD  and  the  HRT,  the
performance  of  both  systems  in  terms  of  organic  matter
Fig.  1  –  Inﬂuent  (/trianglesolid)  (equal  for  both  reactors)  and  efﬂuent
COD over the  continuous  operation  of  MBBR 1(/trianglesolid)  and  MBBR 2
(/Delta1). The  grey shaded area  within  Run  1  refers  to  the  start-up
phase
 (20  and  30  days  for  MBBR 1and  MBBR 2),  period
during  which  the  bioﬁlm  was  formed  in  the  freely  moving
carriers. The varying operational  conditions  applied  over
time
 were  the  same  for  both  reactors.  From  runs  1–4,  the
organic  loading  rate  was  gradually  increased  by  increasing
the inﬂuent  COD.  Subsequently  (runs  4–6),  both  the  COD
concentration  in  the  incoming  wastewater  and  the  HRT
were proportionally reduced  to  maintain  the  COD  loading
rate
 constant  at  3.2  kgCOD/(m3d)  (or  12.8  gCOD/(m2d)).
removal  remained  stable,  as  indicated  by  the  high  COD
removal  obtained  within  this  period.
Ammonium proﬁles in the  inﬂuent  and  efﬂuent  of  MBBR 1
and MBBR 2are  shown  in  Fig.  2.  During  the  bioﬁlm  formation
period  within  run  1,  ammonium  removal  was  slightly  higher
in the reactor  ﬁlled  with  Kaldnes  K1  media  (MBBR 1)  in  com-
parison  with  that  containing  Mutag  Biochip  carriers  (MBBR 2).
Nevertheless, after  40  days  of  operation,  nearly  complete
ammonium removal  was  obtained  in  both  reactors,  regard-
less  of  the  carrier  material  used.  Despite  the  gradual  increase
in the organic  loading  rate  from  0.8  kgCOD/(m3d)  (run  1)  to
3.2  kgCOD/(m3d)  (run  4),  nitriﬁcation  performance  remained
very stable,  as  demonstrated  by  the  high  ammonium  removal
(>90%)  achieved  within  this  period.  On  the  other  hand,  the
reduction of  HRT  from  12  to  6  h  and  consequent  increase  in
Fig.  2  –  Inﬂuent  (/trianglesolid)  ammonium  (equal  for  both  reactors)
and efﬂuent  ammonium  concentrations  proﬁles  over  the
course of  the  operation  of  MBBR 1(/trianglesolid)  and  MBBR 2(/Delta1).  The
grey  shaded  area  within  run  1  refers  to  the  start-up  phase,
during which  the  bioﬁlm  was  establishing  in  the  carrier
elements. The  inﬂuent  ammonium  concentration  in  run  6
was half  of  that  applied  in  the  previous  runs.  However,  the
nitrogen loading  rate  was  kept  constant  by  reducing  the
HRT from  6  to  3  h.Process  Safety  and  Environmental  Protection  1  0  0  (  2  0  1  6  )  131–141  135
Fig. 3 –  Average fraction  of  ammonium,  nitrite  and  nitrate  found  in  the  efﬂuent  relative  to  the  total  inﬂuent  nitrogen
(entirely
 as  ammonium)  over  the  6  experimental  runs.  The  amount  of  soluble  nitrogen  which  was  not  found  back  in  the
efﬂuent (i.e.,  not  conserved  within  the  system)  was  either  used  for  biomass  growth  or  lost  to  the  atmosphere  in  the  form  of
nitrogen  gas  resulting  from  denitriﬁcation.
the  nitrogen  loading  rate  from  0.2  to  0.4  kgNH 4+–N/(m3d)  in
the transition from  run  4  to  5  was  accompanied  by  ammonium
concentration  peaks  in  the  efﬂuent  of  both  reactors,  which
reﬂected a  drop in the  ammonium  removal  (Fig.  2).  The  impact
of
 the  lower  HRT  on  nitriﬁcation  was  felt  most  in  MBBR 2,  where
it  took  60  days  to  re-establish  full  ammonium  conversion.  On
the other  hand,  only  20  days  were  necessary  to  reach  efﬂuent
ammonium  concentrations  of  about  1  mgN/L  in  MBBR 1after
the hydraulic shock loading.  Ammonium  removal  was  also
observed
 to  be  negatively  inﬂuenced  with  a  second  decrease
in  the  HRT  occurred  in  run  6,  even  though  both  the  organic
and nitrogen loading  rate  were  the  kept  the  same  as  in  the
previous  experimental  condition  (run  5).
The  nitrogen  conversions  taking  place  in  the  MBBRs  can
be better  visualized  in  Fig.  3,  where  the  percentage  each
nitrogen  compound  in  the  efﬂuent  (as  remaining  ammonium
or nitrate/nitrate  resulting  from  nitriﬁcation)  relative  to  the
inﬂuent nitrogen  (entirely  as  ammonium)  is  displayed.  Fur-
ther  information  on  the  inﬂuent  and  efﬂuent  total  nitrogen
concentrations in  each  experimental  stage  can  be  found  in
Fig. S2.
In  both  reactors,  nitrate  accounted  for  the  majority  of
the  nitrogen  in  the  output  stream  whereas  nitrite  was  only
detected in  minor  amounts  (less  than  2%).  Furthermore,  the
total  amount  of  soluble  nitrogen  found  in  the  efﬂuent  was
observed to  decrease  from  runs  1  to  4.  However,  within  the
period during  which  the  organic  loading  rate  was  kept  con-
stant (runs  4–6),  only  a  slight  variation  in  the  efﬂuent  nitrogen
was  observed  in  the  two  reactors.  In  fact,  as  the  organic  load-
ing  rate  was  gradually  increased  in  the  ﬁrst  four  experimentalconditions,  the  amount  of  nitrogen  used  for  biomass  syn-
thesis became  more  relevant.  Consequently,  less  ammonium
was available  for  nitriﬁcation  and  the  amount  of  oxidized
nitrogen (nitrate/nitrite)  generated  has  therefore  diminished,
contributing to decrease the nitrogen conservation  in  the  bulk.
Furthermore,
 by  considering  the  amount  of  soluble  nitrogen
present  in  the  efﬂuent  (as  ammonium,  nitrite  and  nitrate)
and that  expected  for  fully  aerated  nitrifying  reactors  with  no
anoxic zones  intentionally  implemented  (calculated  by  sub-
tracting the nitrogen used  for  biomass  growth  from  the  total
nitrogen
 fed),  20  to  40%  of  nitrogen  was  still  missing.  Possi-
bly,  this  amount  of  nitrogen  was  lost  to  the  atmosphere  in
the form of  nitrogen  gas  resulting  from  denitriﬁcation,  as  will
be  discussed  further  on.  Taking  into  account  the  inﬂuent  and
efﬂuent  measurements,  total  nitrogen  removal  was  observed
to vary  from  50  to  86%  in  MBBR 1and  from  35  to  73%  in  MBBR 2.
3.2.  Attached  and  suspended  biomass  fractions
The  dynamics  of  the  volatile  suspended  and  attached  biomass
over the six experimental stages  is  displayed  in  Fig.  4.  For
comparison
 with  the  amount  of  biomass  present  in  suspen-
sion,  the  sludge  adhered  to  the  carriers  was  also  expressed  in
g/L. In  MBBR 1,  the  attached  biomass  concentration  gradually
increased  from  3  gVAS/L  (run  1)  to  5.5  gVAS/L  (run  4)  as  the
organic loading  rate  was  raised.  Within  the  period  in  which
the organic load  was  kept  constant  (runs  4–6),  it  remained  rel-
atively  constant  at  around  6  gVAS/L  (Fig.  4a).  Even  though  the
media  ﬁlling  fraction  was  chosen  to  have  the  same  theoreti-
cal  surface  area  for  bioﬁlm  growth  in  both  reactors,  average
Fig. 4  –  Average  attached  (VAS)  and  suspended  (VSS)  biomass  concentrations  in  MBBR 1(a)  and  MBBR 2(b)  obtained  in  each
operational condition.  The  number  above  the  bars  indicates  the  volumetric  organic  loading  rate  applied  in  each
experimental stage.  The  same  y-axis  scale  was  used  in  (a)  and  (b)  for  better  comparison  between  the  results  of  each  system.136  Process  Safety  and  Environmental  Protection  1  0  0  (  2  0  1  6  )  131–141
Fig. 5  –  Contribution  of  the  attached  and  suspended  biomass  to  the  overall  ammonium  removal,  as  estimated  from  the
batch  tests.  (a)  MBBR 1(Kaldnes  K1)  and  (b)  MBBR 2(Mutag  Biochip).
attached  biomass  content  in  the  Mutag  Biochip  carriers  of
MBBR 2only  amounted  to  around  1.5  gVAS/L  (Fig.  3b).  Further-
more, unlike  that  observed  in  MBBR 1,  adhered  solids  in  the
supports  of  MBBR 2only  slightly  increased  as  the  organic  load-
ing rate  was  increased.  The  comparison  between  the  quantity
of  attached  biomass  per  m2of  support  for  the  two  different
media is illustrated in Fig. S3.  The  average  surface  biomass
content
 in  MBBR 1(around  18  g/m2)  was  found  to  be  approxi-
mately  2.5  times  higher  than  in  MBBR 2(around  7  g/m2).  Inert
material  (ﬁxed  solids)  in  the  bioﬁlm  of  MBBR 1and  MBBR 2only
accounted  for  about  15%  and  10%  of  the  total  attached  solids,
respectively.
It is  also  important  to  note  that,  particularly  in  the  Kaldnes
K1  carriers,  great  part  of  the  biomass  was  not  effectively
attached to  the  support,  but  entrapped  with  the  biomass
ﬁxed  to  it  (Fig.  S4).  From  the  SEM  analysis,  the  thickness  of
the  bioﬁlm  effectively  adhered  to  this  particular  media  was
observed to  be  around  1.2  mm  (Fig.  S4a).  On  the  other  hand,
the porous structure of  the  Mutag  Biochip  carrier  made  this
determination
 more  difﬁcult  to  be  accomplished  for  this  sup-
port. In  fact,  only  a  very  thin  layer  of  biomass  was  observed
in  the  surface  of  this  media,  whereas  a  considerable  amount
of solids  were  found  inside  the  pores  located  along  the  depth
of the carrier (Fig.  S4b).  Interestingly,  at  this  speciﬁc  location,
the biomass  appeared  in  the  form  of  dense  agglomerates,  not
covering  the  whole  pore  space.  Given  the  possible  inaccuracy
of the  bioﬁlm  thickness  measurements  for  this  porous  carrier,
no  absolute  value  is  reported.  Nevertheless,  by  considering  the
maximum nominal  length  of  the  carrier  (Table  S1)  and  the  fact
that biomass  was  distributed  mainly  inside  the  pores,  a  bioﬁlm
layer  lower  than  0.8–1.2  mm  can  be  expected.
As regards  to  the  volatile  suspended  solids  (VSS),  it  rep-
resented  only  a  fraction  of  10%  of  the  total  volatile  solids
(VAS +  VSS)  at  the  lowest  organic  load  (run  1)  in  both  reac-
tors  (Fig.  4).  However,  further  increase  in  the  COD  loading  rate
from  runs  1–4  was  accompanied  by  a  considerable  increase
in amount  of  bulk  phase  biomass  in  both  systems.  In  run  4,
in  which  the  organic  loading  rate  reached  the  highest  value
(3.2 kgCOD/(m3d)),  VSS  accounted  for  28%  of  the  total  amount
of  biomass  in  MBBR 1,  whereas  this  fraction  reached  up  to  48%
in  MBBR 2,  practically  equalling  the  amount  of  solids  attached
to the  media  (Fig.  4b).  At  this  particular  condition,  the  plas-
tic  carriers  of  both  reactors  exhibited  the  thickest  bioﬁlm  and
were  completely  saturated  with  biomass  (see  Fig.  S4).  With
the  decrease  of  HRT  from  runs  4–6,  the  amount  of  VSS  was
observed to  decline  as  a  result  of  biomass  washout,  although
the  organic  loading  rate  was  kept  constant  within  this  period.
The percentage  of  inert  biomass  within  the  TSS  was  around
25% and  21%  in  MBBR 1and  MBBR 2,  respectively.The  bioﬁlm  surface  speciﬁc  detachment  rate  (kd)  was  cal-
culated for  each  operational  run  and  the  results  are  shown  in
Fig. S5.  Overall,  as  the  COD  loading  rate  was  increased  from
runs  1–4,  a  pronounced  increase  was  observed  in  kd,  reﬂecting
an increase in the  amount  of  suspended  solids  which  were
sheared from  the  carriers.  kdvalue  was  kept  within  0.3  and
2.4 gVSS/(m2d)  in  MBBR 1and  0.2  to  2.4  gVSS/(m2d)  in  MBBR 2.
3.3. Polysaccharides and  protein  concentrations  in  the
bioﬁlm
Given  the  importance  of  polysaccharides  (PS)  and  proteins
(PT)  as  structuring  agents  of  the  bioﬁlm,  the  concentrations  of
these polymeric substances  in  the  attached  biomass  were  reg-
ularly determined  over  the  operation  of  the  reactors.  Following
the  trend  observed  for  the  adhered  solids,  higher  PS  and  PT
contents were  found  in  the  bioﬁlm  of  MBBR 1in  comparison
with  MBBR 2(Fig.  S6).  However,  PT/VAS  and  PS/VAS  ratios  for
both MBBRs  were  observed  to  be  very  similar  throughout  the
experimental  runs.  Furthermore,  PS/PT  ratio  remained  prac-
tically constant at around 0.4  from  runs  1–4.  As  the  HRT  was
gradually
 reduced  in  runs  5  and  6,  the  increase  of  PS  content
was  more  pronounced  than  that  of  PT.  Hence,  PS/PT  ratio  grad-
ually increased,  reaching  up  to  0.55  (MBBR 1)  and  0.6  (MBBR 2)
in  the  last  experimental  stage.  During  this  period,  the  bioﬁlm
of both  reactors  experienced  an  overproduction  of  gelatinous
polymeric substances  (see  Fig.  S7  for  more  details).
3.4.  Nitrifying  activity  tests
The batch  tests  were  initially  conducted  to  observe  the
inﬂuence  of  the  increasing  organic  loads  on  the  maximum
biomass speciﬁc  nitrifying  activity.  With  the  enhanced  het-
erotrophic  growth  resulting  from  the  gradual  increase  of
the  inﬂuent  organic  load  (runs  1–4),  the  speciﬁc  ammo-
nium removal  rate  gradually  decreased  (Fig.  S8).  Subse-
quently,  at  constant  COD  loads  (runs  4–6),  it  varied  within
the  range  of  1.2–2.3  mgNH 4–N/(gVTS  h)  (in  MBBR 1)  and
3.0–5.6  mgNH 4–N/(gVTS  h)  (in  MBBR 2).
Taking into  consideration  the  considerable  amount  of  sus-
pended solids  observed  especially  from  run  2  onwards  (Fig.  4),
batch experiments  were  conducted  with  and  without  the
carriers  to  separately  estimate  the  amount  of  ammonium  oxi-
dized either  by  the  attached  or  by  the  suspended  biomass
(details of  the  calculation  procedures  can  be  found  in  Section
2).  The  volumetric  ammonium  removal  rates  obtained  with
each type  of  biomass  is  presented  in  Table  S2.  Interestingly,
on basis of  the  activity  batch  tests  results,  it  could  be  inferred
that  the  contribution  of  the  suspended  biomass  to  the  totalProcess  Safety  and  Environmental  Protection  1  0  0  (  2  0  1  6  )  131–141  137
Fig. 6 – Speciﬁc  ammonium  oxidation rates  obtained  with
the
 attached  (bioﬁlm)  and  suspended  biomass  in  MBBR 1
and  MBBR 2from  runs  2–6.  The  data  representing  run  1  is
not  shown  since  the  activity  batch  test  was  not  conducted
for  this  particular  experimental  condition.
nitrifying  activity  was  very  pronounced  (Fig.  5).  Furthermore,
the  amount  of  ammonium  estimated  to  be  nitriﬁed  by  the  bulk
phase biomass becomes even more  signiﬁcant  as  the  organic
loading
 rate  increased  at  constant  HRT  (runs  2–4).  In  run  4,
when the  highest  concentration  of  suspended  biomass  was
observed  in  both  reactors  (Fig.  4),  the  amount  of  ammonium
removed  by  the  suspended  biomass  was  estimated  to  account
for around 85%  of  the  total  ammonium  removed  in  both  reac-
tors  (Fig.  5).  In  order  to  evaluate  how  the  relative  importance
of  the  suspended  biomass  to  the  overall  ammonium  removal
is affected  by  the  HRT,  this  parameter  was  gradually  reduced
from  12  h  (run  4)  to  6  h  (run  5)  and  subsequently  from  6  h  (run
5) to  3  h  (run  6),  while  the  organic  loading  rate  was  kept  con-
stant by  decreasing  the  inﬂuent  COD  accordingly.  As  it  can  be
seen, the fraction of the  inﬂuent  ammonium  estimated  to  be
removed
 by  the  suspended  solids  gradually  decreased  reach-
ing a  minimum  value  of  35%  (MBBR 1)  and  42%  (MBBR 2)  in  run  6.
Besides  the  important  role  played  by  the  bulk  phase  solids
in the  nitriﬁcation  process,  the  speciﬁc  nitrifying  activity  of
the suspended biomass (VSS)  was  observed  to  be  consider ably
higher than  that  of  attached  biomass  (VAS)  in  both  reactors
(Fig.  6).  The  VSS-speciﬁc  nitriﬁcation  rate  reached  up  to  20
and 11  times  higher  than  the  VAS-speciﬁc  nitriﬁcation  rate  in
MBBR 1and  MBBR 2,  respectively.  Nevertheless,  a  great  increase
in the  speciﬁc  nitrifying  activity  of  the  bioﬁlm  was  noticed
as the HRT  was  decreased  to  3  h  in  run  6.  This  result  coin-
cides  with  the  higher  fraction  of  ammonium  oxidized  by  the
attached biomass  under  this  particular  experimental  condi-
tion  (Fig.  5).  In  general,  both  the  attached  and  suspended
biomass-speciﬁc nitrifying  activities  were  observed  to  be
higher  in  MBBR 2than  in  MBBR 1,  and  tended  to  decrease  as  the
COD  load  was  increased  at  constant  HRT  (runs  2–4).  Further-
more, the  performance  of  the  reactor  ﬁlled  with  Mutag  Biochip
media  was  very  comparable  to  that  of  MBBR 1,  despite  the  lower
attached  biomass  concentrations  observed  in  this  reactor.
4. Discussion
4.1.  Effect  of  carrier  type  on  attached  biomass
accumulation and  bioﬁlm  sloughing  at  increasing  COD
loading rates
From literature  it  is  known  that  the  key  factor  for  the  design
of
 moving-bed  bioﬁlm  reactors  is  the  effective  surface  area
available  for  biomass  growth  (Ødegaard  et  al.,  2000;  Ferraiet  al.,  2010 ).  In  this  context,  once  the  speciﬁc  surface  area
is  known  for  a  given  carrier,  its  size  and  shape  are  usually
not important  for  design  purposes  (Ødegaard  et  al.,  2000 ).  In
this  study,  the  media  ﬁlling  ratio  was  chosen  in  order  to  have
the  same  theoretical  speciﬁc  area  for  bioﬁlm  growth  in  both
reactors. Due to  this  fact  and  taking  into  account  that  the
two  MBBRs  were  always  subjected  to  the  same  feeding  pat-
tern  over  time,  similar  attached  biomass  concentrations  were
expected  in  both  systems.  However,  it  was  observed  that  the
Kaldnes K1  carriers  (media  used  in  MBBR 1)  allowed  obtaining
higher attached biomass  concentrations compared  to  those
reached in  MBBR 2,  where  the  Mutag  Biochip  was  employed  as
support  media  (Fig.  4  and  Fig.  S3).  These  ﬁndings  suggest  that
the  amount  of  attached  biomass  which  can  be  achieved  in  a
MBBR system  does  not  only  depend  on  the  theoretical  bioﬁlm
surface area  shown  by  the  support  material,  but  also  on  the
carrier  conﬁguration.  The  Mutag  Biochip  carriers  present  in
MBBR 2have  a  parabolic  shape  which  is  frequently  subjected
to  shear  forces  and  attrition  due  to  intensive  contact  with  the
surrounding liquid and with other media. These  conditions
favour
 the  detachment  of  bioﬁlm  and  the  amount  of  attached
solids  tends  to  decrease.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Kaldnes  K1
media consist  of  cylindrical-shaped  carriers  which  have  a  pro-
tected  surface  area  in  its  inner  part  which  is  not  subjected
to direct collision with other  particles,  favouring  the  accumu-
lation
 of  bioﬁlm.  Furthermore,  this  media  conﬁguration  also
facilitates the  entrapment  of  biomass  in  the  bioﬁlm  matrix,
as observed in  this  study  (Fig.  S4),  while  the  Mutag  Biochip
does  not.  Consequently,  the  amount  of  attached  solids  which
can be achieved in  the  former  support  is  enhanced.  However,
it should  be  pointed  out  that  the  entrapped  biomass  portion
found  in  the  protected  zone  of  the  Kaldnes  K1  carriers  was
only loosely  bound  to  the  bioﬁlm  and  therefore  much  more
susceptible  to  detachment  than  the  solids  effectively  attached
to  the  plastic  media.  This  may  explain  the  huge  increase  in
the bioﬁlm  loss  rate  observed  in  MBBR 1as  the  applied  organic
loading rate was increased (Fig.  S5).
Another
 point  which  should  be  considered  is  that  the  sur-
face  area  of  the  carrier  provided  by  manufacturers  may  change
over  time  due  to  the  overgrowth  of  bioﬁlm  and  consequent
media clogging  (Forrest,  2014 ).  Contrary  to  the  Kaldnes  K1
media,  the  Mutag  Biochip  carrier  is  a  ﬁne  porous  chip-type
media in which  microorganisms  form  colonies  in  the  pro-
tected  pores.  Although  the  theoretical  volume-speciﬁc  surface
area  of  this  carrier  is  reported  to  be  3000  m2/m3,  it  might  be
possible that  the  effective  area  for  bioﬁlm  growth  decreases
as  biomass  attaches  to  the  media.  This  may  also  explain
the lower  attached  biomass  content  found  in  MBBR 2.  Overall,
these outcomes suggest  not  only  the  speciﬁc  area  for  bioﬁlm
attachment of  the  support  media  but  also  its  characteristics
(shape,  size  and  surface)  should  be  taken  into  account  for  the
design  and  operation  of  MBBR  systems.
MBBRs usually  present  relatively  low  amount  suspended
solids  in  the  efﬂuent,  commonly  within  the  range  of
150–250 gSS/m3(Ødegaard  et  al.,  2010 ).  Consequently,  easier
biomass-efﬂuent separation  can  be  achieved  in  such  bioﬁlm
systems  in  comparison  to  conventional  suspended  growth
reactors.  However,  the  efﬂuent  of  high  organic  loaded  MBBRs
may contain  signiﬁcant  amounts  of  biomass  in  the  bulk  phase,
as observed previously  (Melin  et  al.,  2004 ).  In  the  current
study,  it  was  observed  that  at  the  highest  surface  organic  load
applied  (around  13  gCOD/(m2d)),  the  carriers  of  both  systems
were completely  saturated  with  biomass  and  got  clogged.
As  a  result,  the  speciﬁc  surface  detachment  rates  increased,138  Process  Safety  and  Environmental  Protection  1  0  0  (  2  0  1  6  )  131–141
leading  to  a  higher  amount  of  suspended  solids.  For  instance
when  HRT  and  the  organic  loading  rate  were  set  at  12  h  and
3.2 kgCOD/(m3d)  (run  4),  respectively,  the  VSS  concentration
reached up  to  2.3  g/L  in  MBBR 1.  This  value  is  actually  within
the  normal  range  observed  in  conventional  activated  sludge
reactors  (Metcalf  and  Eddy,  2003 ).  Excessive  bioﬁlm  thickness
has  been  already  reported  to  potentially  lead  to  sloughing
events and  elevated  efﬂuent  suspended  solids  concentrations
(Downing  et al., 2013 ). Given  the  considerable  amount  of  solids
in
 suspension  resulting  from  bioﬁlm  detachment  in  the  high
loaded  MBBRs  and  taking  into  account  that  the  characteris-
tics (e.g.,  particle  size,  composition,  texture  and  morphology)
of the biomass  sloughed-off  from  MBBR  carriers  are  different
from  ﬂocculent  activated sludge (Nof  et  al.,  2013 ),  the  clarify-
ing
 unit  should  be  speciﬁcally  designed  to  meet  the  efﬂuent
quality requirements.
The  excessive  production  of  gelatinous  exopolysaccharides
by the  microorganisms  (Fig.  S7)  and  consequent  increase  of
bioﬁlm PS/PT  ratio  (Fig.  S6)  observed  in  run  6  was  an  unex-
pected  observation,  as  no  similar  event  had  been  observed  in
the  two  previous  stages  subjected  to  the  same  organic  loading
rate (runs 4 and 5).  Therefore,  it  is  speculated  that  this  ﬁnding
can
 be  interpreted  as  a  response  of  the  biomass  in  an  attempt
to  not  be  washed  out  from  system  at  the  lowest  HRT  applied.
Nevertheless, regardless  of  its  main  causes,  the  results  suggest
that  under  constant  organic  loads,  the  hydraulic  conditions
may induce changes  in  bacterial  behaviour.  It  is  relevant  to
mention that  the  particular  episode  of  exopolymers  overpro-
duction  noticed  in  this  study  may  affect  some  of  the  sludge
properties, such  as  its  settleability.  In  those  circumstances,
the  use  of  chemical  coagulants  can  be  an  option  to  improve
efﬂuent  clariﬁcation  (Ødegaard,  2006;  Ødegaard  et  al.,  2010 ).
4.2. Effect  of  increasing  organic  loading  rates  and
carrier type on organic  matter  removal,  nitriﬁcation  and
speciﬁc nitrifying  activity
The  long-term  experiment  in  which  the  two  MBBRs  were
compared  side-by-side  for  700  days  has  shown  that  both  sys-
tems could accommodate increasing  COD  loading  rates  up  to
12.8  gCOD/(m2d).  Running  a  lab-scale  MBBR  system  at  similar
surface  organic  loads,  Aygun  et  al.  (2008)  also  observed  high
organic matter  removal  efﬁciency  (close  to  95%).  Javid  et  al.
(2013)  operated  a  MBBR  process  subjected  to  surface  organic
loading rates  varying  from  2.4  to  11.6  gBOD 5/(m2d),  which  is
within  the  range  applied  in  this  study.  The  performance  of  the
reactor  was  kept  stable  even  at  the  highest  load  applied  and  a
high efﬂuent  quality  was  achieved  over  the  entire  operation.
Overall,  the  efﬁcacy  of  MBBRs  in  tolerating  increasing  organic
loads  is  well  reported  in  literature.  However,  little  research
has been  undertaken  on  the  effect  of  different  media  on  their
performance  under  high  COD  input.
In  this  study,  the  type  of  carrier  used  in  each  reactor
did  not  impact  the  overall  performance  of  the  system.  Even
though the  attached  solids  concentration  in  MBBR 2was  lower
than that  observed  in  MBBR 1,  organic  matter  and  ammonium
removal were  similar  in  both  systems  under  the  experimental
conditions  employed.  First,  one  can  consider  that  this  result
is possibly  related  to  the  biomass  distribution  pattern  over
the two  different  media,  which  present  distinct  shape,  size
and surface  characteristics.  In  MBBR 1,  the  largest  fraction  of
biomass was  located  at  the  inside  of  Kaldnes  K1  carriers  (Fig.
S4), which were  observed  to  be  completely  clogged  at  the  high-
est  organic  load.  Furthermore,  as  evidenced  by  SEM  analysis,the  thickness  of  the  bioﬁlm  adhered  to  the  supports  in  MBBR 1
was  observed  to  be  very  signiﬁcant  (about  1.2  mm).  Under  such
conditions,  the  free  passage  of  nutrients  and  oxygen  through
the attached  biomass  layer  is  restricted,  subjecting  the  inner
parts  of  the  bioﬁlm  to  substrate-  and  oxygen-limited  condi-
tions. As  reported  in  previous  studies,  the  bioﬁlm  zones  near
the  substratum  are  potentially  colonized  by  inert  biomass
(Zhang  and  Bishop,  1994 ).  This  is  especially  the  case  of  thick
microbial ﬁlms as those observed  in  the  Kaldnes  K1  media,
in which  the  amount  of  viable  biomass  may  decrease  con-
sider ably  from  the  outer  surface  to  the  bottom  of  the  bioﬁlm
(Zhang  and  Bishop,  1994 ).  On  the  other  hand,  the  biomass
attached to  the  ﬂat  disk-type  Mutag  Biochip  carriers  in  MBBR 2
was mainly distributed as  a  substantially  thin  layer  over  the
surface of both sides the carriers  or  in  the form of  agglom-
erates
 growing  inside  their  pores  (Fig.  S4).  As  the  nutrients
and  oxygen  could  reach  the  bioﬁlm  from  the  two  sides  of  the
media, the  transport  of  these  elements  through  the  attached
bacteria  was  facilitated.  Indeed,  the  fraction  of  inert  material
in the  bioﬁlm  of  MBBR 2was  observed  to  be  lower  than  that  of
MBBR 1.  Moreover,  the  speciﬁc  bioﬁlm  activity  (assessed  from
ammonium oxidation experiments) in  MBBR 2was  higher  than
in
 MBBR 1(see  Fig.  6),  compensating  for  the  lower  amount  of
solids  attached  to  the  media.  Hence,  from  a  conversion  point
of view,  the  results  suggest  that  it  is  more  important  to  max-
imize  the  active  bioﬁlm  surface  area  within  the  reactor  than
the total attached  biomass  content.
However,  apart  from  the  inﬂuence  of  the  media  type
on  attached  biomass  distribution  in  the  carrier  and  the
consequent role  played  by  the  support  on  the  bioﬁlm  con-
versions,  the  results  also  suggested  that  there  were  other
factors  affecting  the  overall  performance  of  the  MBBRs  which
should be  considered  to  explain  our  ﬁndings.  As  previously
described, both systems have shown  stable  nitriﬁcation  and
full
 ammonium  removal  even  at  most  extreme  condition  of
organic load,  although  they  presented  signiﬁcantly  different
attached  biomass  contents.  It  is  well  known  that  nitriﬁcation
is  directly  inﬂuenced  by  the  applied  organic  loading  rate,  with
high COD loads favouring the  development  of  fast-growing
heterotrophs
 (Rittmann  and  Manem,  1992 ).  As  autotrophic
nitriﬁers  compete  poorly  for  oxygen  and  nutrients,  espe-
cially in  high  loaded  attached  growth  processes,  they  tend  to
be  overgrown  by  heterotrophic  organisms  (Figueroa  and  Sil-
verstein, 1992;  Ohashi  et  al.,  1995 ).  Under  such  conditions,
nitriﬁers are  potentially  forced  deeper  into  the  bioﬁlm,  where
a greater mass  transport  resistance  is  experienced  (Rittmann
and  Manem,  1992 ).  Hence,  nitriﬁcation  in  the  bioﬁlm  may
be negatively  impacted.  As  presented  before,  at  the  high-
est  organic  load  applied  in  this  study  (3.2  kgCOD/(m3d)),  the
plastic  carriers  were  completely  saturated  with  heterotrophic
biomass and  got  clogged,  making  the  diffusion  of  oxygen  and
substrate through  the  bioﬁlm  more  difﬁcult.  Herewith,  a  harsh
environment  was  created  to  sustain  nitrifying  activity  in  the
bioﬁlm and  a  sharp  decrease  in  the  nitriﬁcation  performance
was  expected.  Nevertheless,  high  ammonium  removal  lev-
els were  sustained  in  both  MBBRs.  As  the  suspended  solids
became very  relevant  as  the  COD  load  was  gradually  increased,
reaching similar  amounts  in  both  systems  (Fig.  4),  we  sus-
pected  that  the  bulk  phase  biomass  could  have  been  directly
involved  in  the  nitrogen  conversions.
Moving-bed bioﬁlm  reactors  are  usually  operated  at  low
HRTs (Ødegaard,  2006 )  which  are  theoretically  not  sufﬁcient
to support  the  growth  of  slow  growing  nitrifying  organisms  in
suspension. Depending  on  site-speciﬁc  conditions,  nitriﬁersProcess  Safety  and  Environmental  Protection  1  0  0  (  2  0  1  6  )  131–141  139
usually  present  maximum  speciﬁc  growth  rates  ranging  from
0.25  to  0.77  d−1(Randall  et  al.,  1992 ).  Considering  the  reciprocal
of the  average  of  these  two  values  (i.e.,  0.51  d−1),  the  HRT  nec-
essary to  allow  nitriﬁers  to  grow  in  the  mixed  liquor  phase  was
calculated  to  be  around  2  days  (48  h).  In  our  study,  the  HRT  was
initially  set  at  12  h,  being  subsequently  reduced  to  6  and  3  h.
Presum ably,  under  these  conditions,  the  suspended  growth  of
nitriﬁers would be  hindered  and  nitrifying  activity  is  expected
to  occur  mainly in the bioﬁlm. However,  a  recent  work  con-
ducted
 by  Piculell  et  al.  (2014)  has  shown  that  there  was  always
some  suspended  biomass  in  MBBRs  as  a  result  of  bioﬁlm
sloughing, even  at  washout  conditions.  Furthermore,  follow-
ing the same  line  of  reasoning,  Maˇsic  and  Eberl  (2014)  have
shown  by mathematical modelling that suspended  biomass
always
 contributes  to  ammonium  removal  in  bioﬁlm  systems.
These authors  pointed  out  that  neglecting  the  contribution  of
non-attached  biomass  leads  to  quantitatively  different  results.
Earlier studies  reported  that  in  hybrid  moving-bed  bioﬁlm-
activated sludge  processes  (usually  referred  to  as  integrated
ﬁxed-ﬁlm  activated  sludge—IFAS),  the  fraction  of  ammonium
which  is  oxidized  by  the  suspended  biomass  may  account
for 10–70% of the  overall  nitriﬁcation  (Albizuri  et  al.,  2014 ).
On
 the  other  hand,  studies  reporting  the  operation  of  pure
moving-bed  reactors  often  neglect  the  activity  of  nitriﬁers  in
the bulk  phase,  assuming  that  nitriﬁcation  only  takes  place  in
the  bioﬁlm  (Piculell  et  al.,  2014 ).
In our study, we  observed  that  the  dynamics  of  suspended
and attached  biomass  fractions  was  substantially  inﬂuenced
by  the  COD  input.  The  experiment  has  started  with  two  pure
MBBR systems in  which  the  suspended  solids  accounted  for
only  4–5%  of  the  total  biomass  content.  However,  as  the
organic  loading  rate  was  increased,  the  amount  of  dispersed
biomass resulting  from  bioﬁlm  sloughing  became  very  sig-
niﬁcant, reaching up  to  26%  and  43%  of  the  total  biomass
content
 in  MBBR 1and  MBBR 2,  respectively.  Under  such  con-
ditions, the  bulk  solids  content  became  closer  to  those  found
in  hybrid  bioreactors  relying  on  both  suspended  and  attached
biomass  growth  (Bellucci  et  al.,  2013 ).  Given  this  scenario,
nitrifying activity batch tests  were  conducted  to  evaluate  the
role
 of  the  suspended  bacteria  on  the  nitriﬁcation  process.
Indeed,  the  results  have  revealed  that  the  fraction  of  ammo-
nium estimated  to  be  nitriﬁed  by  the  bulk  phase  solids  was
very  signiﬁcant,  and  increased  proportionally  to  the  applied
organic loading  rate  at  invariable  hydraulic  conditions  (i.e.,
constant HRT).  Under  high  organic  load  conditions,  bioﬁlm
detachment rates  became  more  relevant,  contributing  to  seed
the  suspension  with  nitriﬁers.  Since  the  mixed  liquor  phase  is
not affected  by  mass  transfer  limitations  to  the  same  extent  as
the  bioﬁlm,  the  suspended  biomass-speciﬁc  nitrifying  activ-
ity  was  found  to  be  much  higher  than  that  of  the  attached
biomass (Fig.  6).  Thus,  as  the  COD  loading  rate  was  raised,  the
increasing percentage  of  ammonium  oxidized  in  suspension
may  have  compensated  for  the  decreasing  nitrifying  activity
of the  bioﬁlm.  This,  in  turn,  allowed  both  MBBRs  to  achieve
stable  nitriﬁcation  even  when  subjected  to  increasing  organic
loads.
The results  also  indicated  that  at  constant  organic  load-
ing rates (e.g.,  runs  4–6),  the  HRT  directly  affected  the  amount
of  ammonium  oxidized  either  by  the  suspended  or  attached
biomass.  Similarly  to  earlier  investigations  concerning  the
operation of  MBBR  systems  (Piculell  et  al.,  2014 ),  the  amount
of solids  in  suspension  was  observed  to  decrease  as  the  HRT
was reduced.  Consequently,  the  relative  importance  of  sus-
pended biomass  to  the  biological  conversion  processes  (e.g.,nitriﬁcation)  decreased.  Furthermore,  the  signiﬁcant  washout
of bulk  solids  with  relatively  high  nitrifying  activity  adversely
affected nitriﬁcation  performance  in  the  high  loaded  MBBRs.
This  was  clearly  observed  under  the  lowest  HRT  applied  (run
6),  when  complete  nitriﬁcation  was  never  achieved  (Fig.  2),
even though  the  organic  and  nitrogen  loading  rate  were  the
same  as  those  applied  in  run  5.  This  particular  result  empha-
sizes the  importance  of  the  suspended  biomass  to  the  overall
ammonium  removal  obtained  in  both  reactors.
It  is  also  interesting  to  note  that,  as  demonstrated  by  the
batch experiments,  the  speciﬁc  nitrifying  activity  of  the  sus-
pended biomass  was quite higher  than  the  respective  bioﬁlm
activity,  while  both tended to  decrease  with the increas-
ing
 COD  load.  However,  it  should  be  remarked  that  the
attached biomass-speciﬁc  nitriﬁcation  rate  increased  at  the
lowest HRT  (run  6),  although  the  applied  volumetric  organic
loading rate  was  kept  the  same  as  in  the  two  previous  exper-
imental runs  (Fig.  6).  This  ﬁnding  is  probably  due  to  the
higher  washout  of  suspended  solids  occurred  in  this  par-
ticular condition, enabling a  greater  amount  of  ammonium
to be  nitriﬁed  by  the  attached  biomass  (Fig.  5).  In  turn,  the
VAS-speciﬁc  activity  has  raised  consider ably.  In  terms  of  sur-
face  nitriﬁcation  rates,  the  maximum  values  were  found  to
be 0.87  and  0.80  gNH 4–N/(m2d)  in  MBBR 1and  MBBR 2,  respec-
tively. Besides  reporting  slightly  higher  surface  nitriﬁcation
rates (0.9–1.2  gNH 4–N/(m2d))  in  a  hybrid  activated  sludge-
bioﬁlm  reactor  treating  municipal  wastewater,  Christensson
and Welander  (2004)  observed  that  more  than  80%  of  the
overall  nitriﬁcation  was  performed  by  the  bioﬁlm.  However,  it
should be  considered  that  their  experiments  were  conducted
in lower  COD  loading  ranges.  Operating  a  hybrid  bioreactor
containing porous  ceramic  particles  as  support  media,  Wang
and Wu (2004) ,  reported  that  both  bulk  and  attached  biomass
exhibited  fairly  similar  nitriﬁcation  activity.  Their  experiment
was, however,  conducted  on  autotrophic  conditions,  with
no  carbon  source  present  in  the  synthetic  inﬂuent  medium.
On the other hand, in  our  study,  massive  growth  of  het-
erotrophic organisms  in  both  attached  and  suspended  phases
was  observed  as  a  result  of  the  high  COD  loading  rates.  Thus,
the relative  importance  of  the  nitrifying  population  within
the  overall  bacterial  community  became  signiﬁcantly  smaller,
while the  speciﬁc  nitriﬁcation  rates  tended  to  decrease.
4.3.  The  role  of  the  media  type  on  total  nitrogen
removal
Although  the  MBBR  systems  under  study  were  continu-
ously kept  under  aeration  and  therefore  only  designed  to
accomplish  COD  removal  and  nitriﬁcation,  high  total  nitrogen
removal  was  observed  (up  to  86  and  73%  in  MBBR 1and  MBBR 2,
respectively). Partially,  this  was  due  to  the  increasing  fraction
of  the  incoming  nitrogen  assimilated  by  heterotrophic  bacte-
ria  for  cell  synthesis  as  COD  loading  rate  was  raised.  Therefore,
the  amount  of  nitrogen  available  to  be  nitriﬁed  has  decreased
and a  higher  soluble  nitrogen  loss  was  noted  (Fig.  3).  Fur-
thermore, part  of  the  inﬂuent  nitrogen  which  was  not  found
back as  oxidized  nitrogen  (nitrite  and  nitrate)  or  residual  non-
nitriﬁed  ammonium  was  possibly  removed  via  denitriﬁcation.
Even though  only  aerobic  conditions  prevailed  in  the  bulk  liq-
uid (DO  ranging  from  4  to  5  mg/L),  the  thick  biomass  layer
established in  the  carrier  media  of  MBBR 1and  MBBR 2possi-
bly resulted  in  oxygen  mass  transport  limitation  and  enabled
the establishment of  anoxic  conditions  in  the  inner  zones  of
the  bioﬁlm,  where  denitriﬁcation  could  take  place.  This  also140  Process  Safety  and  Environmental  Protection  1  0  0  (  2  0  1  6  )  131–141
may  explain  the  increasing  gap  in  the  soluble  nitrogen  bal-
ance  observed  from  runs  1–4  in  both  reactors,  period  when  the
bioﬁlm thickness  has  become  increasingly  larger.  Moreover,
although both  reactors  were  always  subjected  to  the  same
operational  conditions  over  time,  higher  nitrogen  removal  was
observed  in  the  reactor  ﬁlled  with  Kaldnes  K1  media  (MBBR 1)
(Fig.  3).  Taking  into  account  that  the  amount  of  nitrogen  used
for growth was  similar  in  both  systems,  the  higher  nitrogen
loss  observed  in MBBR 1is possibly  due  to  the  higher  thick-
ness
 of  the  bioﬁlm  grown  in  protected  surface  area  of  the
carrier,  favouring  the  development  of  anoxic  environment.  On
the other  hand,  the  ﬂat-disk  Mutag  Biochip  carriers  (media
of MBBR 2)  show  a  conformation  which  favours  the  diffusion
of  oxygen through the bioﬁlm  from  both  sides  of  the  porous
media,
 making  the  establishment  of  anoxic  conditions  and  the
occurrence of  denitriﬁcation  less  likely  to  occur.
As  reported  in  previous  studies  (Matsumoto  et  al.,  2007 ),  the
results derived  from  our  experiments  suggest  simultaneous
nitriﬁcation and  denitriﬁcation  (SND)  can  be  accomplished  in
attached-growth  reactors  kept  under  high  bulk  oxygen  con-
centration  with  no  deliberate  anoxic  phase,  provided  that  the
bioﬁlm is sufﬁciently thick. Furthermore,  the  magnitude  of
SND
 and  the  associated  nitrogen  removal  are  dependent  on
the  speciﬁc  carrier  type.  These  observations  stress  the  need
for considering  not  only  the  effective  surface  area  but  also
the  conﬁguration  of  the  media  (e.g.,  size  and  shape)  and  the
bioﬁlm characteristics (thickness  and  biomass  content)  in  the
mathematical modelling  of  moving-bed  bioﬁlm  reactors  for
better  description  of  the  biological  conversions  and  speciﬁc
microbial activities  along  with  the  prediction  of  the  efﬂuent
quality.
5.  Conclusions
High  COD  and  ammonium  removal  were  observed  in  two
MBBRs at organic  loads  up  to  3.2  kgCOD/(m3d),  regardless  of
the  support  media  used  in  each  reactor.  However,  the  type
of  carrier  directly  impacted  the  distribution  and  amount  of
attached biomass.  As  the  COD  input  was  increased  at  constant
HRT,  the  amount  of  suspended  solids  became  consider ably
higher. Batch  experiments  have  shown  that,  besides  exhibit-
ing  relatively  higher  nitrifying  activity  as  compared  to  the
bioﬁlm,  the  bulk  phase  biomass  played  an  important  role  in
the overall  nitriﬁcation  process.  At  constant  organic  loads,
nitriﬁcation  performance  was  affected  by  the  applied  HRT,
as  it  directly  inﬂuenced  the  suspended  and  attached  solids
dynamic  proﬁles  and  therefore  the  fraction  of  ammonium
oxidized  by  each  biomass  fraction.  Appreciable  total  nitrogen
removal was  achieved  indirectly  as  a  result  of  both  nitrogen
assimilation  by  heterotrophs  and  denitrifying  activity  in  the
inner (anoxic)  layer  of  the  bioﬁlm,  despite  the  maintenance  of
high bulk  oxygen  concentrations  in  both  reactors.
Acknowledgments
The  authors  would  like  to  express  their  gratitude  to  CNPq  and
CAPES  for  the  ﬁnancial  support.  A  special  thanks  to  EcoAzur
Company for  providing  the  Mutag  Biochip  carrier.
Appendix A.  Supplementary  data
Supplementary data  associated  with  this  article  can  be
found,  in  the  online  version,  at  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.psep.2016.01.007 .References
Albizuri,  J.,  Grau,  P.,  Christensson,  M.,  Larrea,  L.,  2014.  Validating
the colloid model to  optimize  the  design  and  operation  of
both moving-bed  bioﬁlm  reactor  and  integrated  ﬁxed-ﬁlm
activated sludge  systems.  Water  Sci.  Technol.  69,  1552–1557.
Apha,  2005.  Stardand  Methods  for  the  Examination  of  Water  and
Wastewater, 21st  ed.  American  Public  Health  Association,
American Water  Works  Association,  Water  Environmental
Federation, Washington,  DC.
Aygun,  A.,  Nas,  B.,  Berktay,  A.,  2008.  Inﬂuence  of  high  organic
loading rates  on  COD  removal  and  sludge  production  in
moving bed  bioﬁlm  reactor.  Environ.  Eng.  Sci.  25,  1311–1316.
Barwal,  A.,  Chaudhary,  R.,  2014.  To  study  the  performance  of
biocarriers in  moving  bed  bioﬁlm  reactor  (MBBR)  technology
and kinetics of bioﬁlm  for  retroﬁtting the  existing  aerobic
treatment systems:  a review. Rev.  Environ.  Sci.  Biotechnol.  13,
285–299.
Bassin,  J.P.,  Dezotti,  M.,  Sant’Anna  Jr.,  G.L.,  2011.  Nitriﬁcation  of
industrial and  domestic  saline  wastewaters  in  moving  bed
bioﬁlm reactor  and  sequencing  batch  reactor.  J.  Hazard.  Mater.
185, 242–248.
Bassin,  J.P.,  Kleerebezem,  R.,  Dezotti,  M.,  van  Loosdrecht,  M.C.,
2012a. Simultaneous  nitrogen  and  phosphate  removal  in
aerobic granular  sludge  reactors  operated  at  different
temperatures. Water  Res.  46,  3805–3816.
Bassin,  J.P.,  Kleerebezem,  R.,  Rosado,  A.S.,  van  Loosdrecht,  M.C.M.,
Dezotti, M.,  2012b.  Effect  of  different  operational  conditions
on bioﬁlm  development,  nitriﬁcation,  and  nitrifying  microbial
population in  moving-bed  bioﬁlm  reactors.  Environ.  Sci.
Technol. 46,  1546–1555.
Bellucci, M., Oﬁteru, I.D., Head,  I.M.,  Curtis,  T.P.,  Graham,  D.W.,
2013. Nitriﬁcation in hybrid bioreactors  treating  simulated
domestic  wastewater.  J.  Appl.  Microbiol.  115,  621–630.
Bradford,  M.M.,  1976.  Rapid  and  sensitive  method  for  the
quantitation of  microgram  quantities  of  protein  utilizing  the
principle of  protein-dye  binding.  Anal.  Biochem.  72,  248–254.
Boltz,  J.P.,  Johnson,  B.R.,  Daigger,  G.T.,  Sandino,  J.,  2009.  Modeling
integrated ﬁxed  ﬁlm  activated  sludge  (IFAS)  and  moving  bed
bioﬁlm reactor  (MBBR)  systems  I:  Mathematical  treatment
and model  development.  Water  Environ.  Res.  81,  555–575.
Calderón,  K.,  Martín-Pascual,  J.,  Poyatos,  J.M.,  Rodelas,  B.,
González-Martínez, A.,  González-López,  J.,  2012.  Comparative
analysis of  the  bacterial  diversity  in  a  lab-scale  moving  bed
bioﬁlm reactor  (MBBR)  applied  to  treat  urban  wastewater
under different  operational  conditions.  Bioresour.  Technol.
121, 119–126.
Chu,  L.,  Wang,  J.,  2011a.  Comparison  of  polyurethane  foam  and
biodegradable polymer  as  carriers  in  moving  bed  bioﬁlm
reactor for  treating  wastewater  with  a  low  C/N  ratio.
Chemosphere 83,  63–68.
Chu,  L.,  Wang,  J.,  2011b.  Nitrogen  removal  using  biodegradable
polymers as  carbon  source  and  bioﬁlm  carriers  in  a  moving
bed bioﬁlm  reactor.  Chem.  Eng.  J.  170,  220–225.
Chu, L., Wang, J.,  Quan,  F.,  Xing,  X.-H.,  Tang,  L.,  Zhang,  C.,  2014.
Modiﬁcation  of  polyurethane  foam  carriers  and  application  in
a moving  bed  bioﬁlm  reactor.  Process  Biochem.  49,  1979–1982.
Christensson,  M.,  Welander,  T.,  2004.  Treatment  of  municipal
wastewater in  a  hybrid  process  using  a  new  suspended  carrier
with large  surface  area.  Water  Sci.  Technol.  49,  207–214.
Downing,  L.S.,  Boltz,  J.P.,  Dempsey,  M.J.,  Hubbell,  S.,  Kulick,  F.,
2013. Nitriﬁcation  in  bioﬁlm  reactors.  In:  Operation  of
Nutrient Removal  Facilities.  Water  Environment  Federation
(WEF) Manual  of  Practice  No.  37.
Dubois, M., Gilles,  K.A.,  Hamilton,  J.K.,  Rebers,  P.A.,  Smith,  F.,
1956. Colorimetric  method  for  determination  of  sugars  and
related substances.  Anal.  Chem.  28,  350–356.
Dvoˇrák, L.,  Lederer,  T.,  Jirk˚u,  V.,  Masák,  J.,  Novák,  L.,  2014.
Removal of  aniline,  cyanides  and  diphenylguanidine  from
industrial wastewater  using  a  full-scale  moving  bed  bioﬁlm
reactor. Process  Biochem.  49,  102–109.
Ferrai,  M.,  Guglielmi,  G.,  Andreottola,  G.,  2010.  Modelling
respirometric tests  for  the  assessment  of  kinetic  andProcess  Safety  and  Environmental  Protection  1  0  0  (  2  0  1  6  )  131–141  141
stoichiometric parameters  on  MBBR  bioﬁlm  for  municipal
wastewater treatment.  Environ.  Modell.  Softw.  25,  626–632.
Figueroa,  L.A.,  Silverstein,  J.,  1992.  The  effect  of  particulate
organic matter  on  bioﬁlm  nitriﬁcation.  Water  Environ.  Res.  64,
728–733.
Forrest,  D.,  2014.  Tertiary  Nitrifying  Moving  Bed  Bioﬁlm  Reactor:  A
Study of  Carrier  and  Loading  Effects  on  Nitrifying  Kinetics,
Biologically Produced  Solids  and  Microbial  Community.
University of  Otawa,  Canada,  PhD  Thesis.
Gerardi,  M.H.,  2003.  The  Microbiology  of  Anaerobic  Digesters.
John Wiley  &  Sons,  New  Jersey.
Head,  M.A., Oleszkiewicz, J.A., 2005.  Nitrifying  bacteria  addition
into reactors  operating  near  washout  conditions  for
nitriﬁcation. J.  Environ.  Eng.  Sci.  4,  257–264.
Henze,  M.,  van  Loosdrecht,  M.C.M.,  Ekama,  G.A.,  Brdjanovic,  D.,
2008. Wastewater  treatment  development.  In:  Henze,  M.,  van
Loosdrecht, M.C.M.,  Ekama,  G.A.,  Brdjanovic,  D.  (Eds.),
Principles, Modelling  and  Design.  IWA  Publishing,  London.
Hoang,  V.,  Delatolla,  R.,  Abujamel,  T.,  Mottawea,  W.,  Gadbois,  A.,
Laﬂamme, E.,  Stintzi,  A.,  2014.  Nitrifying  moving  bed  bioﬁlm
reactor (MBBR)  bioﬁlm  and  bioﬁlm  response  to  long  term
exposure to  1◦C.  Water  Res.  49,  215–224.
Hu,  B.,  Wheatley,  A.,  Ishtchenko,  V.,  Huddersman,  K.,  2011.  The
effect of  shock  loads  on  SAF  bioreactors  for  sewage  treatment
works. Chem.  Eng.  J.  166,  73–80.
Javid,  A.H.,  Hassani,  A.H.,  Ghanbari,  B.,  Yaghmaeian,  K.,  2013.
Feasibility  of  utilizing  moving  bed  bioﬁlm  reactor  to  upgrade
and retroﬁt municipal wastewater  treatment  plants.  Int.  J.
Environ. Res.  7,  963–972.
Kwok, W.K.,  Picioreanu,  C.,  Ong,  S.L.,  van  Loosdrecht,  M.C.,  Ng,
W.J., Heijnen,  J.J.,  1998.  Inﬂuence  of  biomass  production  and
detachment forces  on  bioﬁlm  structures  in  a  bioﬁlm  airlift
suspension reactor.  Biotechnol.  Bioeng.  58,  400–407.
Lewandowski,  Z.,  Beyenal,  H.,  2014.  Fundamentals  of  Bioﬁlm
Research, second  ed.  CRC  Press,  Boca  Raton,  FL,  USA.
Melin,  E.,  Helness,  H.,  Kenakkala,  T.,  Ødegaard,  H.,  2004.  High-rate
wastewater treatment  based  on  moving  bed  bioﬁlm  reactor,
polymer coagulation  and  ﬂotation.  In:  Hahn,  H.H.,  Hoffmann,
E., Ødegaard,  H.  (Eds.),  Chemical  Water  and  Wastewater
Treatment VIII.  IWA  Publishing,  London.
Melin,  E.,  Leiknes,  T.,  Helness,  H.,  Rasmussen,  V.,  Ødegaard,  H.,
2005. Effect  of  organic  loading  rate  on  a  wastewater  treatment
process combining  moving  bed  bioﬁlm  and  membrane
reactors. Water  Sci.  Technol.  51,  421–430.
Maˇsic,  A.,  Eberl,  H.J.,  2014.  A  modelling  and  simulation  study  of
the role  of  suspended  microbial  populations  in  nitriﬁcation  in
a bioﬁlm  reactor.  Bull.  Math.  Biol.  76,  27–58.Matsumoto,  S.,  Terada,  A.,  Tsuneda,  S.,  2007.  Modeling  of
membrane-aerated bioﬁlm:  effects  of  C/N  ratio,  bioﬁlm
thickness and  surface  loading  of  oxygen  on  feasibility  of
simultaneous nitriﬁcation  and  denitriﬁcation.  Biochem.
Eng. J.  37,  98–107.
Metcalf  &  Eddy,  2003.  Wastewater  Engineering:  Treatment  and
Reuse, fourth  ed.  McGraw  Hill,  New  York,  NY.
Nof,  K.,  Assulin,  N.,  Galer,  Y.,  Carreón,  R.C.G.,  2013.  Improving
particles separation  after  moving  bed  bioﬁlm  reactor  (MBBR)
systems by  media  clariﬁer.  In:  Proceeding  of  the  86th  Annual
Water Environment Federation  Technical  Exhibition  and
Conference, Chicago,  IL,  USA.
Ødegaard,  H.,  2006.  Innovation  in  wastewater  treatment:  the
moving bed  bioﬁlm  process.  Water  Sci.  Technol.  53,  17–33.
Ødegaard,  H.,  Cimbritz,  M.,  Christensson,  M.,  Dahl,  C.P.,  2010.
Separation  of  biomass  from  moving  bed  bioﬁlm  reactors
(MBBRs). Proc.  Water  Environ.  Fed.  22,  212–233.
Ødegaard,  H.,  Gisvold,  B.,  Strickland,  J.,  2000.  The  inﬂuence  of
carrier size  and  shape  in  the  moving  bed  bioﬁlm  process.
Water Sci.  Technol.  41,  383–391.
Ohashi,  A.,  de  Silva,  D.G.V.,  Mobarry,  B.,  Manem,  J.A.,  Stahl,  D.A.,
Rittmann, B.E.,  1995.  Inﬂuence  of  substrate  C/N  ratio  on  the
structure of  multispecies  bioﬁlms  consisting  of  nitriﬁers  and
heterotrophs. Water  Sci.  Technol.  32,  75–84.
Piculell,  M.,  Welander,  T.,  Jönsson,  K.,  2014.  Organic  removal
activity in  bioﬁlm  and  suspended  biomass  fractions  of  MBBR
systems. Water  Sci.  Technol.  69,  55–61.
Randall, C.W., Pattarkine, V.M.,  McClintock,  S.A.,  1992.
Nitriﬁcation kinetics in single-sludge  biological  nutrient
removal activated  sludge  systems.  Water  Sci.  Technol.  25,
195–214.
Rittmann,  B.E.,  Manem,  J.A.,  1992.  Development  and
experimental evaluation  of  a  steady-state,  multispecies
bioﬁlm model.  Biotechnol.  Bioeng.  39,  914–922.
Rusten,  B.,  McCoy,  M.,  Proctor,  R.,  Siljudalen,  J.G.,  1998.  The
innovative moving  bed  bioﬁlm  reactor/solids  contact
reaeration process  for  secondary  treatment  of  municipal
wastewater. Water  Environ.  Res.  70,  1083–1089.
van  Haandel,  A.C.,  van  der  Lubbe,  J.G.M.,  2012.  Handbook  of
Biological Wastewater  Treatment.  Design  and  Optimisation  of
Activated Sludge  Systems,  second  ed.  IWA  Publishing,
London, pp.  p816.
Wang,  J.L.,  Wu,  L.B.,  2004.  Wastewater  treatment  in  a  hybrid
biological reactor  (HBR):  nitriﬁcation  characteristics.  Biomed.
Environ. Sci.  17,  373–379.
Zhang,  T.C.,  Bishop,  P.L.,  1994.  Density,  porosity  and  pore
structure of  bioﬁlms.  Water  Res.  28,  2267–2277.1 
 Supplementary Material  
 
Effect of increasing organic loading rates on the performance of moving -bed biofilm 
reactors filled with different support media: assessing the activity  of suspended and 
attached biomass fractions  
 
 
J. P. Bassin*, I. N. Dias, S. M. S. Cao, E. Senra, Y. Laranjeira, M. Dezotti  
 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, COPPE - Chemical Engineering Program, Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil  
 
 
* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Chemical Engineering Program/COPPE, Federal 
University of Rio de Jane iro, P.O. Box 68502, 21941 -972, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Tel. +55 
21 25628347, Fax +55 21 25628300, Email address: jbassin@peq.coppe.ufrj.br2 
 
 
Kaldnes K1  
 
Mutag Biochip  
 
Figure S1 : Illustration of the two different MBBR media  (with no biomass attached)  
used in this study.  
 
 
 
Table S1 : Characteristics of the support media  used in this study  (information provided 
by Kaldnes and Mutag Umwelttechnologie AG ). 
 
 
Characteristic  Carrier material  
Kaldnes K1  Mutag Biochip  
Material  High -density  
polyethylene  Virgi n polyethylene with 
additives  
Shape  Cylinder  Round/parabolic  
Nominal diameter (mm)  9.1 22 
Nominal length /thickness  (mm)  7.2 0.8 – 1.2 
Apparent density (kg/m3) 150 170 
Specific surface area (m2/m3) 500 3000  
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
 
(a) MBBR 1 
 
 
(b) MBBR 2 
 
Figure S2 : Total nitrogen concentrations in the influent ( entirely as ammonium) and in 
the effluent (as remaining  ammonium, nitrate and nitrate) of (a) MBBR 1 and (b) 
MBBR 2. Both reactors were subjected to the same influent ammonium concentration 
(black -filled bars)  over the six experimental stages.  
 
 
 
Figure S3 : Surface biomass content in MBBR 1 and MBBR 2 over the six experimental 
runs. The amount of VAS per m2 was calculated based on the total area for biofilm 
development in the reactor volume, which was chosen to be the same in both reactors 
(0.25 m2). 4 
  
 
 
Figure S4 : Illustration of the plastic carriers with attached biomass sampled in run 4, 
when the highest organic load applied was reached. Scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM) analysis was carried out to observe th e biofilm conformation in both (a) Kaldnes 
K1 and (b) Mutag Biochip media. In (a) the magnification is indicated by the biofilm 
thickness measurement, whereas in (b) it was 25x , as displayed  in the bottom part of the 
SEM image.  
 
 
 
 
Figure S 5: Average biofilm surface specific detachment rate  (kd) determined for  the six 
experimental conditions applied to each MBBR.  5 
  
 
 
 
 
(a) MBBR 1 
 
(b) MBBR 2 
Figure S6 : Total polysaccharides (PS) and protein (PT) contents of the attached 
biomass in MBBR 1 (a) and MBBR 2 (b). The results for both PS and PT are expressed in 
g/m2 of support. The ratio between PS and PT is also plotted and indicated by the 
dashed line.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 6 
 
 
Figure S7 : Illustration showing the overproduction  of gelatinous polymeric substances 
by the attached  biomass in run 6.  
 
 
 
Figure S8 : Ammonium removal rate per amount of biomass (VAS +VSS  = VTS ) from 
runs 2 to 6.  For better comparison, the y -axis range used here in the same as that 
displayed in Figure 6, where the VAS - and VSS -specific nitrifying activit ies are shown. 
The ac tivity batch test was not carried out in run 1.  
 
 
 
 7 
 Table S2:  Volumetric ammonium removal rates obtained with either attached or 
suspended biomass from runs 2 – 6. 
 
Experimental run  MBBR 1 
Volumetric ammonium 
removal rate  
(mgNH 4-N/(L.h) )a MBBR 2 
Volumetric ammonium 
removal rate  
(mgNH 4-N/(L.h))a 
Suspended 
biomass  Attached 
biomass  Suspended 
biomass  Attached 
biomass  
2 8.20 7.40 7.23 6.34 
3 12.40  3.88 11.10  3.70 
4 9.23 1.23 8.59 1.16 
5 7.30 3.12 8.58 2.44 
6 4.90 9.15 6.02 8.30 
a The c ontribution of each type of biomass (attached or suspended) to the overall  ammonium 
removal was estimated based on the volumetric ammonium removal rate obtained with  the 
corresponding biomass fraction.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 
 Calculation of biofilm surface specific  detachment rate (
dk ) 
 
Biofilm surface specific det achment rate (
dk ), expressed as


dmgVSS
2 , was calculated at 
the steady state condition of each experimental run, according to Equation (S1).  
 
biofilm totalx
dArk
_
         (S1) 
 
Where 
xr  is the total solids (T S=TAS+TSS) production rate, calcula ted according to 
Equation (S2) and expressed as 


dgTS ; and 
biofilm totalA_  is the total surface area  of the 
carrier a vailable for biofil m growth, calculated by means of Equation (S3).  
 
i effluent x X Qr 
         (S2) 
 
Where 
dL Qeffluent /  is the reactor effluent flow,
L gTSSXi /  is the concentration of 
biomass in the effluent of the corresponding  reactor at the steady state condition of each 
experimental run;  
 
)/(_ R S reactor biofilm biofilm total VV V A A 
       (S3) 
 
Where
biofilmA is the specific surface area of each carrier available for biomass deposition 
(
biofilmA = 500 m2/m3 for Kaldnes K1 (MBBR 1) and 
biofilmA = 3000 m2/m3 for Mutag 
Biochip (MBBR 2)), 
reactorV  is the volume of the reactors (0.001 m3); and 
)/(R SVV  is the 
media filling ratio of each system  (
)/(R SVV = 0.5 in MBBR 1 and
)/(R SVV = 0.083 in 
MBBR 2). The 
biofilm totalA_  was therefore 0.25 m2 for both reactors.  