1287Second RUFORUM Biennial Meeting  20 - 24  September 2010, Entebbe, Uganda
Abstract
RésuméResearch Application Summary
Nitrogen dynamics and removal by algal turf scrubber under high ammonia and
organic matter loading in a recirculating aquaculture system
 Valeta, J.S.1  & Verdegem, M.C.M.2
1University of Malawi, Bunda College, Aquaculture and Fisheries Science Department,
P. O. Box 219, Lilongwe, Malawi
2Wageningen University, Department of Animal Sciences, Wageningen Institute of Animal Sciences
(WIAS), Fish Culture and Fisheries, P.O. Box 338, 6700 AH Wageningen, The Netherlands
Corresponding author: jvaleta@bunda.unima.mw
High total ammonia nitrogen (TAN) concentrations wereintroduced to an Algal Turf Scrubber developed under loadingsof Clarius gariepinus  recirculating aquaculture system effluent
to determine its potential and dynamics of TAN removal. TANremoval rates were not affected at total suspended solidsconcentration of up to 0.04g TSS/l (P > 0.05). TAN removalrates 0.93-0.99g TAN/m²/d were recorded at loading ratesbetween 3.76 and 3.81 g TAN/m²/d. TAN removal exhibited½ order kinetics between 1.6 to 2.3mg/l TAN concentrations.TAN removal increased with TAN loading and hydraulic surfaceloading. In addition, TAN removal was higher than in fluidizedbed and trickling filters.
Key words:  Aquatic plants, Clarius gariepinus , effluent
discharge, waste water treatment
Des concentrations élevées  en azote d’ammoniaque total
(TAN) ont été introduites à un épurateur  de gazon d’alguesdéveloppé sous des chargements de Clarius gariepinus
recyclant l’effluent de système d’aquiculture pour déterminerson potentiel et dynamique de la suppression du TAN. Destaux d’élimination du TAN n’ont pas été affectés à laconcentration des solides totaux suspendus jusqu’à 0.04g TSS/l (P > 0.05). Les taux de suppression du TAN 0.93-0.99g TAN/m
2/d ont été enregistrés aux taux de chargement situés entre
3.76 et 3.81g TAN/m ² /d.  Le déplacement duTAN a montréla cinétique d’ordre de ½ entre 1.6 et 2.3mg/l des concentrationsde TAN. Le déplacement de TAN a augmenté avec lechargementde de TAN et le chargement de surfacehydraulique. En outre, le déplacement du TAN était plus hautque dans le lit fluidisé et les filtres d’écoulement.
Mots clés:  Plantes aquatiquess, Clarius gariepinus , decharge
de l’effluent, traitement des eaux uséesValeta, J.S.  & Verdegem, M.C.M.
1288Background
Literature Summary
Study DescriptionOne of the major water quality related problems reported from
aquaculture is effluent discharge with high concentrations ofnitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) (Smith, 2003). Currently, useof aquatic plants/algae, which are more environmental friendly,in waste water treatment is drawing considerable attention.Periphyton has demonstrated ability to improve water quality ina Recirculation Aquaculture System (RAS). A periphytonreactor can replace a trickling filter and a sedimentation unit ina RAS processing feed load of up to 32g/m²/day (Sereti et al.,
2005). The present study aimed at estimating potential TANremoval in an ATS grown under varying ammonia loadings.
The primary goal of biofiltration is to remove ammonia (NH
+
4-
N and NH3-N) and nitrite (NO2).  NH3-N is highly toxic un-
ionized form. Nitrate (NO3) is the least harmful form of inorganic
N (Parent and Morin, 2000). Ammonia uptake rates can bemeasured under light and dark conditions (Verdegem et al .,
2005). In waste water treatment, reported nutrient removalcapacity of periphyton either by itself (Davis et al., 1990) or in
combination with emergent floating or submerged macrophytes(Brix and Schierup, 1989; Korner et al., 2003; Toet, et al., 2003)
varied, declining with extremely increased areal loading rate,decreasing periphyton surface to water volume ratio andincreasing depth.
The study was conducted in the hatchery “De Haar Vissen” at
Wageningen University, The Netherlands. The periphyton RASconsisted of fish tank, periphyton reactor and a sump (Fig. 1).Effluent water (Q) from catfish tanks was diverted into acollector tank where it was homogenized by stirring before
Figure 1.   Schematic overview of the experimental set-up.1289Second RUFORUM Biennial Meeting  20 - 24  September 2010, Entebbe, Uganda
Resultspassing to the ATS. The ATS was illuminated by two halide
lamps.
The ATS was operated under different flow rates to change
the organic matter load to the ATS. The experiment lasted 5weeks. On the seventh day of each week, a short circuit wasintroduced in the system. The periphyton reactor wasdisconnected from the RAS, and operated in short circuitcontinuously re-using sump water, for maximum of 12 hrs undercontinuous light condition. Prior to the start the sump wasemptied. The overflow pipes from the collecting bucket to sumpand from sump to the main effluent pipe were disconnected.At the start of the circuit, the water in the sump was treatedwith dissolved Ammonium Chloride (NH
4Cl) to attain 3.11mg/
l, 5.13mg/l or 8mg NH4-N /l in the water, respectively.
The first water sample was collected at the inlet immediately
after dissolving the NH4CL into the sump whereas subsequent
samples were collected every 20-30 minutes in 10ml tubes fordaily analysis of NH
4, NO3, and NO2 using a SAN auto-analyzer
(Skalar, The Netherlands), and in 500-ml prior to the short circuitfor total suspended solids (TSS) and dry matter (DM) analysis(APHA, 1998). Dissolved (Mg/L), temperature (°C) andconductivity were also measured throughout each experiment.After each experiment, the periphyton screens were partially(50%) harvested to allow for quick development of the biofilmin the following week, and sludge was collected from theperiphyton tank. Data were analyzed in S-Plus 6.1.
TAN removal started immediately after ammonia was dissolved
into the system water. Higher zero-order removal rates wereobserved for higher ammonia loads. Van Rijn and Rivera (1990),Davis et al. (1990) and Pizarro et al. (2002), also reported that
N removal rates increased with increasing ammonia loadingrate and biomass.
Nitrite accumulated in the ATS before onset of removal which
varied with loading conditions. Nitrite accumulated due to initialsuboptimal balance between Nitrosomonas and Nitrobacter likeorganisms. When nitrification rate approached a constant rate,2- 4 hours later, NO
2-N accumulation stopped.
The general decrease in nitrate concentration with time makes
ATS superior to trickling filters with regards to nitrate removal.The decrease in nitrate with time offers a possibility to reduceValeta, J.S.  & Verdegem, M.C.M.
1290Research Application
AcknowledgementReferencesnecessity of water exchange in RAS using ATS with the goal
of reducing nitrate levels. Since removal rate is higher in youngbiofilm than in a mature one (Valeta, 2006), complete harvestingof periphyton mat would further reduce the need for waterexchange.
In conclusion, the ATS ably removed TAN at removal rates as
high as 9.49 TAN/m²/d under initial TAN concentration of 8g/m³. The maximum half-order TAN removal (0.90g/m²/d) washigher than rates recorded for most of other types of filterssuch as fluidized bed filters and trickling filters. The ATSremoved TAN to achieve minimum concentrations which aregenerally lower than thresholds for species such as Tilapia. TANremoval showed ½ order kinetics between 1.6 to 2.3mg/l TANconcentrations. Regardless of increase in weekly sludge biomassaccumulation in the ATS prior to ammonia loads, TAN removalrate increased with nutrient loading, which increased withhydraulic surface loading rate. TAN removal rates were notaffected at total suspended solids concentration of up to 0.04gTSS/l (P > 0.05). An ATS is also ideal for removal of nitratewhich reduces need for water exchange.
The application of algal turf scrubber technology in recirculating
aquaculture can only be possible after thorough understandingof the potential and dynamics of aquaculture effluent is attained.In this regard, this study has provided further insight into theapplicability of ATS in RAS which forms a basis for furtherstudies into commercial application of the ATS as at presentapplication remains at laboratory scale.
We thank the Belgian Government for granting the scholarship
to the first author and the Fisheries and Aquaculture Group ofthe Animal Science Department, University of Wageningen, TheNetherlands, for accepting to host the researcher during theMaster of Science study and, in particular, Professor JohanVerreth, for technical and administrative support, which has  ledto this publication.
APHA, 1998. Standard methods for the examination of water
and wastewater. American Public Health Association,Washington, DC.
Brix, H. and Schierup, H.H. 1989. The use of aquatic
macrophytes in water pollution control. Ambio 18:101-107.1291Second RUFORUM Biennial Meeting  20 - 24  September 2010, Entebbe, Uganda
Davis, L.S., Hoffmann, J.P. and Cook, P.W. 1990. Production
and nutrient accumulation by periphyton in wastewatertreatment facility. J. Phycol.  26:617-623.
Korner, S., Vermaat, J.E. and Veenstra, S. 2003. The capacity
of duckweed to treat wastewater: ecological considerationsfor a sound design. Journal of Environmental Quality
32:1583-1590.
Parent, S. and Morin, A. 2000. N budget as water quality
management tool in closed aquatic mesocosms. Water
Research 34(6):1846-1856.
Sereti, V., Sfetcu, L., Huizing, H., Verdegem, M.C.J., Eding, E.
and Verreth, J.A.J. 2005. The potential of a periphytonreactor to maintain the water quality in recirculatingaquaculture systems. Aquaculture and Fisheries Group,Department of Animal Sciences, Wageningen Institute ofAnimal Sciences, Wageningen University and ResearchCenter, P.O.B. 338, 6700 AH, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Smith, V .H. 2003. Eutrophication of freshwater and coastal
marine ecosystems. A global problem. Environ.Sci. &
Pollut. Res.  10(2):126-139.
Toet, S., Hersbach, L. and Verhoeven, J.T.A. 2003. Periphyton
biomass and nutrient dynamics in a treatment wetland inrelation to substratum, hydraulic retention time and nutrientremoval. Archive der Hydrobiologie-Supplement 139:361-
392.
Valeta, J.S. 2006. Purification of aquaculture effluents using
algal turf scruber technology. MSc. Thesis. Aquaculture andFisheries Group, Department of Animal Sciences,Wageningen Institute of Animal Sciences, WageningenUniversity and Research Center, The Netherlands.
Van Rijn, J. and Rivera, G. 1990. Aerobic and anaerobic
biofiltration in an aquaculture unit-Nitrite accumulation as aresult of nitrification and denitrification. Aquacult. Eng.  9:
217-234.
Verdegem, M.C.J., Eding, E.H., Sereti, V ., Munubi, R.N.,
Santacruz-Reyes and van Dam, A.A. 2005. Similaritiesbetween microbial and periphytic biofilms in aquacultureSystems. Aquaculture and Fisheries Group, Department ofAnimal Sciences, Wageningen Institute of Animal Sciences,Wageningen University and Research Center, TheNetherlands.