September 2011Plastic Debris in the 
California Marine Ecosystem
A Summary of 
Current Research, Solution Efforts and Data Gaps
This report was commissioned by the California Ocean 
Protection Council and managed by California Ocean Science 
Trust. 
Partial support for this publication was provided by the National 
Sea Grant College Program, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce, under grant 
number NA10OAR4170058, and by the California Natural 
Resources Agency.  The views expressed herein do not 
necessarily reflect the views of NOAA or any of its sub-agencies. 
The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute 
copies for governmental purposes. 
Text and design produced under contract by:
Charlotte Stevenson, M.S.
Science Communications Specialist
University of Southern California Sea Grant
University Park, Los Angeles, CA 90089-0373
Recommended citation of this report:
Plastic Debris in the California Marine Ecosystem: A Summary of 
Current Research, Solution Strategies and Data Gaps. 2011. C. 
Stevenson, University of Southern California Sea Grant. Synthetic 
Report. California Ocean Science Trust, Oakland, CA.
Photo credits:
Front and back cover image depicting marine debris on a Los Angeles 
beach courtesy of Heal the Bay.
All images used within the report were within the public domain or 
were permissioned for use in this report. None of the information within 
this report was reviewed by any of the individuals or groups providing 
images; therefore, the information in this report is not necessarily 
representative of the views of these individuals, organizations, or 
groups.
The author and OST thank Dr. Stephen Weisberg, Executive Director of the 
Southern California Coastal Water Research Project and member of the OPC 
Science Advisory Team (OPC-SAT), a multidisciplinary team of scientists, for 
providing a preliminary review of the first draft. 
Additionally, this report was peer-reviewed per OST’s standard process. For this 
report, OST identified five reviewers representing expertise in the fields of marine 
ecology, environmental engineering, water quality, and marine debris policy. The 
author provided responses to all comments, and produced a revised report draft 
based on the comments. Finally, an expert mediator conducted a final assessment 
of the content of the report as well as the responses to peer review comments. The 
author would like to thank the five reviewers and expert mediator for their detailed 
comments and thorough assessment.AcknowledgementsCalifornia Ocean Science Trust (OST) is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) public benefit 
corporation established to encourage coordinated, multi-agency, multi-institution 
approaches to translating and applying ocean science to management and policy. The 
mission of OST is to ensure that the best available science is applied to 
California policies and ocean management to successfully maintain a healthy, 
resilient, and productive ocean and coast. To achieve its mission, OST has two 
overarching organizational goals:
• Goal 1: Facilitate collaboration. Facilitate two-way connections between the world of science and that of policy 
and management by establishing and supporting multi-partner information systems and exchanges that yield 
tangible improvements in coastal and ocean management. OST serves as a bridge among science, management, 
and policy organizations, through activities such as its support of the California Ocean Protection Council (OPC) 
and coordination of science and research among the OPC, state agencies, federal agencies, academic institutions, 
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
• Goal 2: Institutionalize integration. Institutionalize the integration of best science, where necessary, into 
California coastal ocean policy and decision-making by building new organizations, programs, and processes and 
catalyzing applied research. This reflects the great need to develop, disseminate, and apply science that is 
designed to inform and improve policy and management.   For more information about OST, please visit 
www.calost.org
The University of Southern California, one of the largest private universities in the United 
States, has participated in the National Sea Grant College Program for over 30 years and 
has more than a 100-year history of marine science research in Southern California. USC’s 
facilities, research, and curricula make it the principal university in the Los Angeles region 
for ocean studies, and it has demonstrated excellence in marine research and education 
from the beginning of the 20th Century. 
The University of Southern California’s location in the middle of Los Angeles has made the Sea Grant Program at 
USC an important regional resource, concentrating on issues arising out of the necessity of managing people and 
resources in an intensely developed coastline. For this reason, in the 1980s the USC Sea Grant program adopted 
as its programmatic theme the “Urban Ocean.” The problems found in the “Urban Ocean” environment of 
Southern California are not unique to the region. In addressing the range of issues found here, USC Sea Grant will 
continue to provide information and models serving Los Angeles as well as other urban coastal regions in the U.S. 
and around the world. 
USC Sea Grant funds research on the critical issues associated with the influence of massive cities on the sea, 
promotes connections between scientists and the policy-makers who must craft solutions, and broadly distributes 
information to the electorate through public education outreach efforts. USC Sea Grant’s primary responsibility is 
to contribute to solving the problems of the Urban Ocean, while recognizing the opportunities for coastal 
commerce, recreation and improving the quality of life in coastal regions such as Southern California. For more 
information on USC Sea Grant, please visit www.usc.edu/org/seagrant/
The California Ocean Protection Council (OPC) is a cabinet-level body created in 2004 
under the California Ocean Protection Act (COPA). The mission of the OPC is to ensure 
that California maintains healthy, resilient, and productive ocean and coastal 
ecosystems for the benefit of current and future generations. The OPC’s overarching 
role is to coordinate and lead ocean management and protection in California in three 
primary ways: 1) by addressing cross-cutting ocean issues that do not fall neatly under 
the purview of one agency; 2) by developing forward-looking policy recommendations to advance new or refine 
existing laws and regulations; and 3) by coordinating across state institutions whose decisions affect coastal waters 
and the ocean environment.
Table of Contents
Scope and Purpose...............................................................................................................................v
Methods..............................................................................................................................................vi
Executive Summary.............................................................................................................................vii
Glossary...............................................................................................................................................ix
I. Characterization: What is Marine Debris?.........................................................................................1
II.  Distribution and Abundance: Where is Marine Debris Found?........................................................4
   A. Regional Patterns: North Pacific Ocean
   B. Local Patterns: California
 1. On the seafloor
 2. Floating debris
 3. On the shore  
III.  Sources and Transport: How is Marine Debris Getting into the Ocean?........................................12
   A. Debris from Ships
   B. Debris from Land-Based Sources
   C. National Municipal Waste Stream
   D. Municipal Waste in California
   E. Industrial Management and Transportation of Plastic in California
   F. Individual Waste, Littering, and Dumping
 
IV.  Impacts: Why is Marine Debris a Problem?...................................................................................19
    A. Ingestion and Entanglement     
    B. Accumulation, Transport, Toxicology, Bioavailability and the Food Chain
 1. Plastics Accumulate and Transport Pollutants
 2. Plastics Leach Pollutants
 3. Toxicology
 4. Bioavailability and Transport up the Food Chain
    C. Transport of Alien Species
    D. Impacted Habitats and Benthic Life
    E. Economic Impacts
V.  Solutions: Types, Successes and Challenges....................................................................................34
    A. Cleanup and Recovery  
 1. Organized Cleanup Efforts
 2. Energy Recovery  
    B. Reduction and Prevention
 1. Structural controls
 2. Recycling
 3. Smart Design and Extended Producer Responsibility
 4. Initiatives and Legislation
     a. National Initiatives
     b. Regional Initiatives
     c. State Legislation
     d. Local Initiatives
 5. Education
    C. Alternatives: Biodegradable and Compostable Plastic
VI.  Data Gaps....................................................................................................................................49
Conclusion.........................................................................................................................................53
Endnotes.............................................................................................................................................54
Alphabetical References.....................................................................................................................62
vProduced in a short time frame (several months), this report is a synopsis of the current state of research 
and major policies affecting plastic marine debris in California and serve as an objective informational 
tool for policy makers looking to gain a basic understanding of the current scientific and technical 
landscape of the issue of plastic marine debris.  
As an informational tool, it can aid policy makers in determining the next steps in management as well 
as the areas of research to encourage or fund. Although the scope of the report is on the science 
pertaining directly to the state of California, this is still a relatively young area of research and studies 
from other parts of the world are also included when they serve to advance the understanding of the 
distribution, sources, transport or impacts of marine debris. Data shared from the international 
community, especially in the area of toxicology, will speed up California’s understanding of this area of 
research. In addition, this report is focused on the effects of plastic debris on the marine environment 
and its organisms, but there is a growing body of research (mentioned briefly in the report) on the health 
implications for humans. Human health, however, was not part of the scope of this report.
Efforts have been made to avoid excessive scientific jargon while still providing pertinent and accurate 
details about scientific studies and solution efforts of importance. This report consolidates and 
synthesizes (when possible) the current data available on marine debris; no new research or analyses are 
presented in this report. In addition, it was not the intention of this report to evaluate, rank or advocate 
for any particular strategies or solutions for the state of California. To ensure the utmost scientific rigor, 
this report underwent extensive peer review by both scientific and policy experts in the field according 
to California Ocean Science Trust’s peer review protocol. 
Although every effort was made to cite the most current peer-reviewed research and scientifically-based 
studies (as is outlined in more detail in the Methods section), it was not within the scope of this report to 
evaluate these sources, the methods used in various studies, or the success or failure of various policies 
or programs within California. The value in this report comes from its ability to provide a basic “lay of 
the land,” in a neutral, science-based, communication-friendly format.
      
      Scope and Purpose of this Report
vi
Where Ballona Creek 
enters Santa Monica 
Bay, Los Angeles, CA. 
(Photo credit: Heal the 
Bay)Search engines (primarily Web of Science, Google Scholar and University of Southern California journal 
databases) were used to generate a list of peer-reviewed literature that addressed the topics within the 
scope of this report. All major peer-reviewed literature to date that discuss issues within the scope of this 
report was included in this study. In addition, federal and state agencies and departments like the Na-
tional Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
California Integrated Waste Management Board, California Department of Transportation, and 
CalRecycle were used as sources of information for formal reports as well as for current data and 
information. 
Non-peer-reviewed studies (sometimes called “gray literature,” which includes federal and state 
government generated reports) also are included in this report to supplement the peer-reviewed 
literature. In some cases, as in the area of marine debris surveys and monitoring, much of the available 
data in California comes from non-peer-reviewed studies. For example, the most comprehensive, 
long-term record of quantity and types of marine debris found along the California coastline is found in 
the volunteer-based Coastal Cleanup Day statistics, which provide invaluable information for 
determining trends over large distances and periods.
Every effort was made to include concrete values and statistics. Values between studies are compared 
when possible; however, the wide variety of methods and forms of data-reporting often made 
comparisions or summaries impossible. In addition, the short-term nature of this report (several months) 
made larger meta-analyses of data impossible. However, the Data Gap section starting on page 49 does 
indicate some areas of future analysis, comparision, and compilation which may be valuable to 
California.
All efforts were made to ensure that the non-peer reviewed studies had “scientifically-based” methods 
and reporting. In the interest of complete transparency, the report delineates between peer-reviewed and 
non-peer-reviewed sources in the reference section for any interested reader. 
     
      Methods
viiInternational Coastal 
Cleanup Day. (Photo 
credit: NOAA 
National Marine Debris 
Program)
As the state with the largest population in the U.S. and 75% of that population living along its 1,100-
mile coastline, it is no wonder that California has long been at the center of the discussion about the 
sources of, the impacts from, and the solutions to marine debris. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA) Marine Debris Program defines marine debris as “any persistent solid material 
that is manufactured or processed and directly or indirectly, intentionally or unintentionally, disposed of 
or abandoned into the marine environment or the Great Lakes.” Because of its extreme persistence and 
ubiquity, plastic marine debris has become the focus of most of the current scientific research and clean-
up efforts. Studies now indicate that 60-80% of marine debris comes from land-based sources, and up to 
80% of this debris is plastic.
Much of this plastic marine debris is in the form of micro-plastics created from the environmental break-
down of larger pieces of plastic or originally created as precursor resin pellets for the industrial 
production of plastic products. Scientific estimates for the degradation of plastics in the ocean are on the 
order of hundreds to thousands of years. In fact, aside from plastic which has been incinerated, some 
scientists believe it is plausible that all the plastic ever created since its invention in the late 1940s still 
exists on the planet, either buried in landfills, buried on shorelines, floating in the ocean, or on the sea-
floor.
Since its invention over 50 years ago, plastic—being durable, lightweight and cheap—has undeniably 
transformed numerous industries as well as the daily life of individuals. However, these very same 
characteristics of plastic have also made it quite a problem once it is lost into the environment. 
Especially in coastal states like California with a multibillion-tourism industry oriented around its world-
renown beaches, the negative side of plastic becomes apparent as it accumulates on shorelines, in 
coastal waters, and on the seafloor. Plastic marine debris causes substantial economic impacts to coastal 
communities, documented in the millions of dollars spent in the form of cleanups or lost in decreases in 
tourism, as well as losses to commercial 
fisheries due to derelict fishing gear. 
Addtionally, more than 260 species including 
turtles, fish, seabirds, mammals, and 
invertebrates have been reported to ingest or 
become entangled in plastic marine debris, 
often resulting in death.
Besides these obvious impacts of plastic 
marine debris, concern is also growing over 
the ability of these ubiquitous, durable 
plastic particles floating in the ocean to serve 
as concentrating and transport devices for 
environmental pollutants. The United Nations 
Environment Program has declared plastic 
marine debris and its ability to transport toxic 
substances one of the main emerging issues 
in our global environment. (Continued on next 
page)Executive Summary
viii
Los Angeles coastline. 
(Photo credit: Charlotte Stevenson, USC Sea Grant)Plastics can contain by weight up to 50% fillers, reinforcements, and additives. Public and media 
attention have focused on additives like bisphenol A (BPA) and phthalates among others, which can 
leach out of plastics at different rates depending on environmental conditions and have been shown to 
have a variety of health effects on marine organisms in the laboratory setting. Research now focuses on 
long-term effects of exposure to these pollutants, the synergistic effects of exposures to multiple kinds 
of common pollutants, the issue of whether these pollutants can be transferred up the food chain and, 
finally, the question of whether there are detectable population-level effects in marine 
communities.
Finding solutions to the issues of marine debris in a state as large as California will likely involve a multi-
faceted approach. In terms of the size of the plastics industry, shipments, and jobs, California is one the 
leading states in the country. Moreover, southern California has the largest concentration of plastic 
processors in the western U.S. Clearly, successful solutions will need careful coordination of 
information from industry, policy-makers, government agencies, scientists, and the public. California is 
viewed as a leader, particularly on environmental issues, by other states and even other countries. 
Research on plastic marine debris stands to provide another opportunity by which California can 
exercise leadership and establish an example worldwide.
The work has already begun. In 2005, the California Coastal Commission and the Algalita Marine 
Research Foundation co-sponsored the first international conference on plastic debris, called “Plastic 
Debris, Rivers to Sea,” which focused on prescribing a total of 63 recommendations for action for 
California. The California Ocean Protection Council’s 2007 resolution on marine debris came about in 
part due to these recommendations. A series of legislative bills were also proposed within the last few 
years, several of which have since been signed into law. Now with the sober reality of a limited budget 
and resources, it will be more important than ever for California to effectively reevaluate the current 
state of knowledge on plastic marine debris and find solutions which encourage partnerships and 
coordination across the state, contain the most economic incentives, and, most importantly, protect and 
restore one of California most valuable assets: its coastal marine ecosystem.Executive Summary (continued)
ixLos Angeles Beach with 
debris. (Photo credit: 
Heal the Bay)
All acronyms included in the report are available for reference in this glossary. However, in order to aid readers 
less familiar with these acronyms, each acronym is spelled-out upon its first use in each subsequent chapter as a 
reminder.
Additives —Compounds added to plastic at the time of production; include UV stabilizers, heat stabilizers, 
softeners, flame-retardants, non-stick compounds, and colorants; some well-known and often-discussed additives 
are bisphenol A and phthalates
Adsorption —the adhesion of atoms, ions or molecules to a surface; the opposite is desorption; commonly con-
fused with absorbtion in which a substance permeates another substance
AMRF —Algalita Marine Research Foundation
Anthropogenic —Effects, processes or materials derived from humans; not natural
ASTM —American Society for Testing and Materials
Benthic —On the ocean bottom
BPA—Bisphenol A, a plastic additive
CCD —Coastal Cleanup Day
CIWMB —California Integrated Waste Management Board which was eliminated on January 1, 2010 and replaced 
by the California Department of Resources, Recycling and Recovery, better known as CayRecycle
DDT — Dichlorodiphenyl trichloroethane is a well known pollutant; use of DDT was outlawed in the 
U.S. in 1972; DDE and DDD are breakdown products of DDT but still have toxicological effects
EPA—Environmental Protection Agency
IMO—International Maritime Organization, a body of the United Nations
LARWQCB —Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board
Marine Debris —Any persistent solid material that is manufactured or processed and directly or indirectly, 
intentionally or unintentionally, disposed of or abandoned into the marine environment or the Great Lakes (NOAA 
definition)
MARPOL 73/78 —International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, as modified by the Protocol 
of 1978, implemented by the IMO under the United Nations
Mesopelagic —A zone in the ocean between 200 meters and 1000 meters depth
MSW —Municipal solid waste
NOAA —National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
North Pacific Subtropical Gyre —A semi-permanent, subtropical area of high pressure, relevant to this report be-
cause marine debris tends to accumulate in this area Glossary
xNurdles —Thermoplastic pre-production resin pellets; the pre-cursor raw material to plastic products, usually 
<5 mm 
PAHs —Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
PCBs —Polychlorinated biphenyls; a large class of compounds, many of which with known toxicological effects
Phthalates —Plastic additives with toxicological effects 
Polymer —High molecular weight molecules, like plastic, consisting of up to millions of repeated linked units 
called monomers 
POPs —Persistent Organic Pollutants
SCCWRP —Southern California Coastal Water Research Project
SFRWQCB —San Francisco Regional Water Quality Control Board 
Southern California Bight —the 700 km (400 miles) of recessed coastline from Point Conception, in Santa Barbara 
County, California to Cabo Colnett, just south of Ensenada, Mexico
SWRCB —State Water Resources Control Board in California
TMDL —Total Maximum Daily Load; a regulatory term under the U.S. Clean Water Act indicating the maximum 
amount of a pollutant that a water body can have while still meeting water quality standards
UNEP —United Nations Environment Program
WCGA —West Coast Governors Agreement on Ocean Health, a collaboration established in 2006 among the 
governors of Washington, Oregon, and California to better manage ocean and coastal resources
Zooplankton —Tiny floating marine organisms near the bottom of the marine food chainGlossary (continued)
xi
Santa Monica Beach. (Photo credit: 
Charlotte Stevenson, USC Sea Grant)The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Marine Debris Program defines 
marine debris as “any persistent solid material that is manufactured or processed and directly or 
indirectly, intentionally or unintentionally, disposed of or abandoned into the marine environment or the 
Great Lakes.” In general, four main size categories are used to classify marine debris: mega-debris (>100 
mm diameter); macro-debris (20-100 mm diameter); meso-debris (5-20 mm diameter); and micro-debris 
(0.3-5 mm diameter). For reference, micro-debris ranges in size from the width of two human hairs side 
by side (0.3 mm) to the width of a grain of rice (5 mm).[1] 
The vast majority of marine debris (60-80%) is plastic,[2, 3, 4] and 
numerically most plastic debris is micro in size. Plastic micro-debris 
can be subcategorized into primary and secondary micro-plastics. 
Whereas primary micro-plastics are intentionally made to be that size 
and are either used as precursors to larger products (thermoplastic 
resin pellets or “nurdles”) or as “scrubbers” in cleaning and personal 
care products, secondary micro-plastics are the result of the 
fragmentation of larger plastic products into smaller pieces.[1]
Traditional plastics are synthetic (man-made), organic (carbon-based), 
polymers (high molecular weight molecules consisting of up to 
millions of repeated linked units called monomers) derived 
primarily from petrochemicals produced from fossil oil and 
natural gas.[5] It is estimated that approximately 4% of annual 
petroleum production is converted into plastics, and another 3-4% 
of the annual petroleum production is used to provide the energy for 
plastic manufacturing.[6] In global terms, plastic production is growing at about 9% per year, with ap-
proximately 50% of plastics created for single-use disposable applications such as packaging; only 20-
25% are created for long-term use as pipes, cable coatings and other structural materials.[6]
When exposed to environmental factors such as ultraviolet sunlight, oxidation by the air, hydrolysis by 
seawater, and physical abrasion, plastic polymers become brittle and break into increasingly smaller 
pieces.[4, 7] This “breakdown” is not the same as “degradation;” rather, the polymer simply breaks into 
smaller polymer pieces. These smaller pieces are still plastic and will not break down further on a 
human time-scale in the natural environment. I. Characterization: What is Marine Debris ?
The vast majority of marine 
debris (60-80%) is plastic, and 
numerically most plastic debris 
is micro (<5 mm) in size.
Globally, approximately 50% 
of plastics are created for 
single-use disposable 
applications such as 
packaging.
1
Thermoplastic resin pellets or “nurdles”. (Photo credit: left, public domain; right, International Pellet Watch)Using special techniques (Fourier 
transform infrared spectroscopy), 
scientists can identify microscopic pieces 
of plastic as fragments of common plastic 
product polymers such as polypropylene 
and polyethylene,[2] proving that these 
larger polymers are indeed breaking 
down (but not degrading into their 
elemental components) in the ocean. This 
is important because it provides a 
reminder that there is a significant 
amount of plastic marine debris that may 
seem to disappear to the human eye but 
is certainly still present in the marine 
environment.
The rate at which plastic breaks down into smaller pieces of plastic in seawater depends primarily on 
physical abrasion, but also on the density of the plastic (low density, buoyant plastic gets more 
exposure to sunlight and air); the temperature of the water (warmer water speeds up the breakdown); 
and the chemical structure and other chemicals added to the plastic (some additives increase the plastic 
polymer’s stability in the environment).[1] Table 1 shows the main plastic resins in the United States, and 
Figure 1 shows the resin identification codes found on consumer products. 
Table 1: Main Plastic Resins in the U.S. (Data courtesy of CIWMB, 2003 and the American Chemistry Council.)
Figure 1: Resin Identification Codes. #1 Polyethylene terephthalate (PETE or PET); #2 High Density Polyethylene (HDPE); #3 
Polyvinylchloride (PVC); #4 Low Density Polyethylene (LDPE); #5 Polypropylene (PP); #6 Polystyrene (PS or EPS); #7 Other 
(often nylon, SAN, epoxy, ABS, etc).
When exposed to environmental factors such as ultraviolet sunlight, 
oxidation by the air, hydrolysis by seawater, and physical abrasion, 
plastic polymers become brittle and break into increasingly smaller 
pieces. (Photo credits: left, AMRF; right, Drew Wheeler, AMRF)
2
HDPE PVCGroup Name Common 
AbbreviationResin ID 
CodeExamples
Polyethylene Terephthalate PET or PETE 1 soda and water bottles, lids, food containers
High Density Polyethylene HDPE 2 milk jugs, trash bags, household products
Polyvinyl chloride PVC 3 pipes, building products, medical products
Low Density Polyethylene LPDE 4 ﬁlm bags, trash bags, agricultural ﬁlm
Polypropylene PP 5 rigid food packaging, carpet backing, housewares
Polystyrene PS, EPS 6 cups, clamshells, foam packaging, CD jackets, egg crates
Others ABS, SAN, nylon, 
epoxy, etc.7 automobiles, computers, battery casingsBecause solar radiation and thermal 
oxidation are factors in the breakdown of plastic 
into smaller and smaller pieces, and both 
factors are absent in deep ocean environments, 
it is unlikely that any plastic breaks down on the 
seafloor.[8] Aside from plastic which has been 
incinerated, some scientists believe it is 
plausible that all the plastic ever created since 
its invention in the late 1940s still exists on 
the planet, either buried in landfills, buried on 
shorelines, floating in the ocean, or on the ocean 
floor. Figure 2 shows the decomposition rates of 
various materials in the ocean.
Figure 2: Decomposition rates of various materials in the ocean. Data based on Ocean Conservancy, 2010.[28]
3
Debris in Ballona Creek which drains into 
Santa Monica Bay, CA. (Photo credit: Heal the Bay)
0 
years1,000 
years
Paper Towels: 2-4 weeks
Newspapers: 6 weeks
Cotton rope: 1-5 months
Apple Cores: 2 months
Cardboard Boxes: 2 months
Plywood: 1-3 years
Wool Socks: 1-5 yearsTin Cans & Foamed Plastic Cups: 50 yearsPlastic Grocery Bags: 1-20 years
Aluminum Cans: 200 yearsOlder Plastic Beverage Holders: 400 years
Disposable Diapers & 
Plastic Bottles: 450 years
Fishing Line: 800 yearsAverage Human Life 
Expectancy
This section of the report focuses primarily on the distribution and abundance of plastic marine debris 
along the California coastline. In order to fully understand this distribution, however, it is important to be 
aware of some regional movement, migration, and accumulation patterns of plastic debris in the North 
Pacific Ocean.
A. Regional Patterns: North Pacific Ocean
Plastics accumulate adjacent to urban centers, on remote islands, in enclosed bays and seas, in high-
pressure zones (such as the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre), and in convergence fronts (such as the 
North Pacific Subtropical Convergence Zone).[1, 9] As shown in Figure 3, the North Pacific Subtropical 
Gyre is made up of four large clockwise rotating currents in the North Pacific—the North Pacific Current, 
the California Current, the North Equatorial Current, and the Kuroshio Current. The North Pacific 
Subtropical Gyre—the 7-9 million square mile area at the center of these currents—is defined by 
NOAA’s Weather Service as “a semi-permanent, subtropical area of high pressure.”[1] This area of high 
pressure moves with the seasons, as some currents are stronger than others at different times of year. II. Distribution and Abundance: 
Where is Marine Debris Found ?
Figure 3: Diagram of North Pacific Subtropical Gyre (Image courtesy of the NOAA Marine 
Debris Program. NOAA disclaimer: “This map is an oversimplification of ocean currents 
and features in the Pacific Ocean. There are numerous factors that affect the location, size, 
and strength of all of these features throughout the year, including seasonality and El Niño/
La Niña. Depicting that on a static map is very difficult.”)
4
Within this high-pressure area, smaller oceanographic features that 
behave similarly to an eddy in a river create additional areas where 
marine debris floating in the North Pacific tends to accumulate. One 
such area is located between California and the Hawaiian Islands 
(approximately 1,000 miles from each) and is often referred to, 
particularly by the media, as the “Western Pacific Garbage Patch.” It 
is important to understand, however, that this “patch” is not visible 
via plane or satellite and does not appear to be an “island” of 
debris as the name may imply. Much of the debris is in tiny meso- 
and micro-size pieces, floating just below the surface of the water.
Whether visible to the naked eye or not, research confirms that plastic does accumulate along 
convergence zones and in gyres. A study in 2003 placed 113 drifters uniformly over the entire North 
Pacific ocean, and, after 12 years, winds and waves had gathered 75% of the drifters into the North 
Pacific Gyre, visibly demonstrating the tendency of floating debris to concentrate in this area over time.
[10] However, some studies now report that a proportion of the debris may be ejected from the gyre after 
approximately three years, which is the amount of time it takes to complete one revolution in the 
convergence zone.[11] Whether this debris then sinks or reaches land again is unknown. A 2011 study 
along the southern California coast recently found that during the dry season (when run-off from land is 
low or non-existent) sampling stations the farthest from the coast had the highest level of micro-plastic 
particles, suggesting an oceanic source for this debris.[12] The study hypothesizes that the southerly 
flowing California Current, which borders the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre and “Western Pacific 
Garbage Patch,” could be transporting plastic particles to the outer coastal waters of California.[12] More 
research is needed to understand the large-scale cycling of marine debris in the North Pacific Ocean and 
if indeed there is a connection between the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre and the California coast.
Much of the debris in the “Western Pacific Garbage Patch” is in tiny 
meso- and micro-size pieces, floating just below the surface of the 
water. Top left image: Looking up at the surface of the water in the 
North-Western Pacific Subtropical Gyre or “Garbage Patch.” (Photo 
credit: Drew Wheeler, AMRF). Top right and bottom right Images: 
Water samples from the North-Western Pacific 
Subtropical Gyre. (Photo credit: AMRF)
5
More research is needed to 
understand the large-scale 
cycling of marine debris in 
the North Pacific Ocean and 
if indeed there is a connection 
between the North Pacific Gyre 
and the California coast.In 2001, the Algalita Marine Research Foundation (AMRF) in 
Long Beach and the Southern California Coastal Water Research 
Project (SCCWRP) conducted a joint survey of the abundance 
and mass of plastic in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre. On 
average, they found 5,114 g of plastic debris per square 
kilometer (or approximately 16.5 pounds per square mile) in 
the gyre.[13] Thin plastic films, polypropylene/monofilament line, 
and unidentified miscellaneous plastic bits made up 98% of the 
pieces of plastic in the gyre. One statistic that came out of this 
study which is often quoted in the media is that the mass of 
plastic in the gyre was six times that of the plankton (due mostly 
to larger pieces of plastic), even though the plankton still 
outnumbered the plastic 5:1.[13] However, it is important to 
remember (as is pointed out by the authors of this study 
themselves) that these statistics are unique to the gyre where 
plastic density is high but plankton populations are not as 
dense as they are in other more productive areas of the ocean, 
such as the nutrient-rich California coast. Nonetheless, these 
densities of plastic still register quite high and are of particular 
concern with regard to marine organisms like seabirds that feed 
regularly from the ocean surface in this area of the Pacific. 
There are current research projects, such as Project Kaisei of the 
California-based organization Ocean Voyages Institute, that are 
focusing continued research and monitoring on the size and 
characteristics of the debris within the North Pacific 
Subtropical Gyre. Project Kaisei is also working on new 
technologies for cleanup and innovative methods for public 
education.[14]
In addition to accumulating in areas of high pressure like the 
North Pacific Subtropical Gyre, marine debris tends to 
accumulate on remote islands like the Hawaiian Islands, which 
are close to the North Pacific Subtropical Convergence Zone. The annual debris accumulation in the 
Northwest Hawaiian Islands is estimated to be 57.2 tons (52 metric tones or approximately the weight of 
38 cars)[15], and the vast majority of that debris (72%) is plastic.[16]
B. Local Patterns: California 
Marine debris is found in three locations: on the shore, floating either on or in the water column, and on 
the seafloor. In California, marine debris, particularly plastic marine debris, has been detected for 
decades in all three locations, although no comprehensive assessment of the entire coast or coastal 
waters has ever been completed. Because the majority of the data collected is shoreline data, there is 
still a great deal of uncertainty as to the amount of debris in the water column and on the seafloor, as 
well as the rate at which debris travels between the shore, the water column, and the ocean floor. It is 
clear that more research is needed to understand the abundance, rate, and possible cycling of debris 
along the coastline.[17, 18] In addition, consistent methodology (transect lengths, size classes of debris, 
timing of surveys, techniques for sieving through sand) does not exist in California, nationally, or 
internationally, so it is very difficult to compare studies or to combine studies into larger meta-
analyses.[18] Marine debris tends to accumulate on remote 
islands like the Hawaiian Islands; annual 
debris accumulation in the Northwest Hawai-
ian Islands is estimated to be approximately 
57.2 tons (weight of ~38 cars), 72% of which 
is plastic. (Photo credits: top, NOAA National 
Marine Debris Program; bottom, state of 
Hawaii)
6
The NOAA Marine Debris Program is working with the University 
of Washington, Tacoma to develop statistically robust, standard 
methodologies for surveying marine debris in all types of locations 
(shoreline, water column, seafloor).[1] NOAA offered a workshop in 
March 2011 at the 5th International Marine Debris Conference to 
gather comments on the methodologies.[19] Nonetheless, the 
research which has been done shows substantial amounts of 
micro-plastic debris along the California shoreline, confirming the 
fact that marine debris is not isolated to distant parts of the Pacific 
Ocean, a fact sometimes assumed by the public with the great deal 
of media attention placed on the “Great Pacific Garbage Patch.”
1. On the Seafloor
Only 46% of manufactured plastic (by type) is buoyant,[20] which is worth noting 
because the public—being most familiar with low-density plastics like Styrofoam or 
plastic bags—often assumes that all plastic floats. Although shoreline or floating 
debris grabs the public’s attention, a large amount of plastic actually sinks and 
remains out of sight once it reaches the ocean. It is unknown how much plastic 
ultimately sinks, but some seafloor surveys have begun to shed light on this topic. In 
2010, the Census of Marine Life Program reported finding plastic in the deepest 
(abyssal) depths in the world ocean.[21] Studies in the North Sea off Europe have concluded that much of 
the plastic that has entered the ocean now resides on the seafloor.[22] In the summer of 1994, the 
Southern California Coastal Water Research Project (SCCWRP) conducted the first study of marine 
debris on the seafloor in the Southern California Bight. The 
study analyzed trawl samples taken from the ocean floor at 
113 distributed sites between Point Conception, CA and the 
California-Mexico border. Researchers found anthropogenic 
debris at 14% of the sites, with fishing gear and 
post-consumer plastic being the most abundant debris by 
volume.[23] 
More recently, benthic (bottom-dwelling) marine debris was 
assessed at 1,347 randomly selected sites along the 
continental shelf and slope of the U.S. west coast during the 
2007-2008 West Coast Groundfish Bottom Trawl Surveys. 
Anthropogenic debris was found in 35% of the samples and 
was composed mostly of plastic and metal. In shallow waters 
(55-183 m), the mean density of anthropogenic debris was 30 
items/km2, but this density increased in deeper water (550-
1280 m) to 128 items/km2.[24] 
Another study assessed California’s deep seafloor habitats (20-
365 m) for marine debris using a manned marine 
submersible.[25] Specifically, the study examined the offshore 
banks along the coast of southern California in 2002 and the 
submarine canyon and continental shelf in the Monterey Bay 
Marine Sanctuary in 2007.
The NOAA Marine Debris 
Program is working with the 
University of Washington, 
Tacoma to develop statistically 
robust, standard methodologies 
for surveying marine debris in 
all types of locations (shoreline, 
water column, seafloor).
Divers recovering marine debris from the 
seafloor. (Photo credit: National Marine Debris 
Program)
Only 46% of 
manufactured 
plastic (by 
type) is
buoyant.
7Plastic was the most common type of debris found in both central and southern California; however, 
while monofilament fishing line was the main component of the plastic debris in central California, 
there was a much greater diversity of types of plastic debris in southern California. Debris was found on 
33% of the 321 transects conducted in southern California, with “hotspots” of accumulated debris at 
43-Fathom Bank, east of San Nicolas Island, near Santa Barbara Island, and Kidney Bank. In central 
California, the study added a temporal dimension by comparing 112 transects in 2007 in the Monterey 
area to 161 transects done in the same areas in the 1990s. The average density of debris at these sites 
had increased over the last 15 years from 2 to 3.5 debris items per 100 meters of transect, although 
density had increased more substantially at some individual locations. In the 1990s and in 2007, Italian 
Ledge, southwest Soquel Canyon, and Monterey Canyon were identified as “hotspots” for accumulated 
debris, with up to 38 debris items per 100 meters.[25] Although some “hotspots” may have been identified 
in the isolated studies reported above, there is still very little known about the density of marine debris 
along California’s continental shelf, the rates of deposition from the sea surface, or the rates of loss off 
the continental shelf into deeper waters. More research is needed in all of these areas.
2. Floating Debris
Floating micro-plastic debris has been detected in southern California coastal waters for at least 25 
years. Decadal sampling (1984, 1994, and 2007) in a 200,000 square kilometer region between Los 
Angeles and San Diego detected micro-plastic particles in the water at 56-68% of sampling stations.[26] 
The maximum density of plastic detected during the study was just over 3 particles/m3. In another study 
coordinated between NOAA and the Joint Institute for Study of Atmosphere and the Ocean at 
University of Washington, four seasonal cruises were conducted from 2006 to 2007 off the southern 
California coast, during which time researchers found that the amount of plastic in surface samples 
(collected using 0.505 mm mesh nets) varied greatly by season and location. Plastic ranged from 9 to 
84% of the particles collected in the surface samples (0.004-0.190 particles/m3). Winter samples 
collected close to shore near large urban centers contained the greatest density of plastic (84% of the 
collected particles), likely due to increased anthropogenic run-off from storms. Product fragments less 
than 2.5 mm diameter were the most abundant item collected.[12] However, as discussed earlier in this 
chapter, during the dry season (when run-off from land is low or non-existent) sampling stations located 
farthest from the coast had the highest level of micro-plastic particles, suggesting an oceanic source 
(possibly the California Current flowing adjacent to the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre) for this plastic 
debris.[12]
Floating micro-plastic 
debris has been present in 
southern California coastal 
waters for at least 25 years. 
(Photo credit: Lindsey 
Hoshaw, AMRF)
8Between 2000 and 2001, SCCWRP and AMRF teamed up on several occasions to measure the density 
of plastic debris 5 mm or smaller in diameter in coastal southern California waters. This size is important 
for two reasons: it is the size which can be mistaken for food by filter-feeding marine organisms, and 
plastic less than 5 mm in diameter is not included in the regulatory trash limitations (Total Maximum 
Daily Loads or TMDLs) placed on nearby Los Angles River watersheds by the Los Angeles Regional 
Water Control Board (discussed more in Chapter V). After a storm in 2001, the density of floating plastic 
pieces offshore of the San Gabriel River in Long Beach increased on average from 3 pieces/m3 to 7.25 
pieces/m3.[27] Several months later after another storm, the density of floating plastic pieces in Santa 
Monica Bay offshore of Ballona Creek increased on average from <1 piece/m3 to 18 pieces/m3.[17] In 
both cases, the density of debris after the storm was highest at sampling stations near the river mouths, 
likely reflecting the substantial contribution of land-based run-off to the increase in density of floating 
plastic debris along shore. The researchers also found that the density of plastic debris in seafloor 
samples declined after the storm, while midwater density increased, suggesting that the turbulence 
associated with the storm was adequate for resuspension of previous sunken plastic debris over the 
continental shelf.[17] 
Notably, on the day after the storm, the density of the plastic in the water was found to be higher in 
southern California (7.25-18 pieces/m3) than even what has been recorded in the North Pacific 
Subtropical gyre (2.23 pieces/m3).[27] It should be noted, however, that the mass of plastic is still much 
greater in areas like the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre because it is a larger geographic area and 
because of the accumulation of macro-debris derived from the fishing and shipping industries. 
Nonetheless, the take-home message from a study like this (as well as the other abundance studies 
mentioned above) is that plastic marine debris is a significant local issue for California coastal waters 
and not just an issue in a distant location like the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre. 
3. On the Shore
The majority of marine debris data available for California as well as worldwide comes from shoreline 
monitoring, and most of that derives from volunteer beach-cleanup efforts. The largest cleanup and 
monitoring effort occurs on the Annual International Coastal Cleanup Day (CCD) organized by Ocean 
Conservancy at 6,000 sites worldwide using the efforts of half a million volunteers.[28] Since 1985, the 
California Coastal Commission has organized the sites, volunteers, and waste removal in the state of 
California on Coastal Cleanup Day.[29] Compared to all the countries that participate, the U.S. cleans up 
the most miles of coastline, collects the most amount of debris, and has the highest number of 
volunteers. Within the U.S., California leads the nation in volunteer effort, number of miles covered, and 
pounds of debris collected. 
Coastal Cleanup Day. (Photo credits: left, NOAA National Marine Debris Program; right, Sarah Sikich, Heal the Bay).
9In 2009, volunteers collected over 3.6 million pounds (1,632 
metric tons) of debris nationwide on CCD; over 1.6 million pounds 
(725 metric tons)—almost half of the national total—was 
collected in California alone.[30] In 2010, California still led the 
way among states with about 1.4 million pounds (636 metric tons) 
of the 4.3 million pounds (1,950 metric tons) collected 
nationally.[28] Several factors account for these totals, including 
California’s long coastline, a large and productive volunteer effort, and a large population generating 
large amounts of debris. California had 82,365 volunteers on CCD in 2010, approximately four times as 
many volunteers as the next highest state volunteer total (Georgia; 23,668 volunteers).
Each year the CCD statistics provided by Ocean Conservancy and the California Coastal Commission 
give clues as to the origin or source of the debris collected along the coastline. The 1,057,993 items of 
marine debris collected at California CCD sites (beaches, nearshore waters, and inland waterways) in 
2010 were divided by activity-type: shoreline and recreational activity (food wrappers, bags, straws, 
bottles, etc); ocean/waterway activity (buoys, crates, fishing gear, rope etc); smoking-related activity 
(cigarette butts, lighters etc); dumping activities (batteries, car parts, appliances, etc); and 
medical/personal hygiene (condoms, syringes, etc). In 2010, 54.3% of the debris was associated with 
shoreline and recreational activities, 40.4% with smoking-related activities, 3.2 % with ocean/waterway 
activities, 1.5% with dumping activities, and 0.5% with medical/personal hygiene.[28] Figure 4 shows the 
most abundant shoreline and recreational debris items collected on CCD in California over the last 20 
years.
Within the U.S., California leads 
the nation on Coastal Cleanup 
Day in volunteer effort, number 
of miles covered, and pounds of 
debris collected.
10Figure 4: Top shoreline and recreational debris items collected on Coastal Cleanup Day in California over the last twenty 
years. Although the number of items has increased over time, so has volunteer effort, making it difficult to draw 
conclusions about increased rates of debris over time from this data. (Chart based on data from the California Coastal 
Commission. Data are missing for some debris categories in some years.)0	  20000	  40000	  60000	  80000	  100000	  120000	  140000	  160000	  
1989	   1991	   1993	   1995	   1997	   1999	   2001	   2003	   2005	   2007	   2009	  Number	  of	  items	  
Year	  Food	  Wrappers/
Containers	  
Caps,	  Lids	  
Bags	  (Paper	  and	  
PlasGc)	  
Straws,	  SGrrers	  
Cups,	  Plates,	  
Forks,	  Knives,	  
Spoons	  
BoOles	  (Glass)	  
BoOles	  (PlasGc)	  Although CCD data give a general sense of the type and 
abundance of marine debris on California beaches, it is 
important to remember that these numbers are underestimations 
of the actual quantity of debris.[18] Beach surveys, especially 
volunteer-based surveys, often neglect to account for debris that 
is buried and micro-debris that is difficult or impossible to see. 
One study in 1998 assessed the thoroughness of the volunteer-
based California CCD data by surveying two of the cleanup sites 
immediately after the September 18, 1998 CCD.[31] Although 
more than 8,000 pieces of debris were collected from these two 
sites during the official cleanup, the study estimated that there 
were 67,785 pieces of debris remaining, although most pieces 
were quite small. It is likely (and understandable) that CCD 
volunteers do not find pre-production plastic pellets (<5mm) that 
require a sieve to remove from the sand. 
The same 1998 study[31] quantified the distribution and composition of marine debris at 43 coastal sites 
in Orange County, CA just prior to CCD. Researchers used randomly selected sites (both rocky shore-
line and sandy beach) and systematic transects at all sites to ensure unbiased sampling. When sand was 
available, one bucket of the sand was sifted to estimate subsurface plastic density. The study found 
approximately 106 million items weighing a total of 12 metric tons (approximately the weight of 9 cars). 
The three most common items collected accounting for 99% of the total items included pre-production 
plastic pellets, foamed plastics, and hard plastic fragments.[31] This means that although the average 
beach visitor might not perceive an abundance of marine debris with his or her naked eye, there are 
millions of pieces (and tons) of plastic debris along the Orange County shore. 
Despite the fact that the volunteer-based cleanups may miss certain types of micro-plastic debris, these 
cleanups are valuable for the large amounts of debris cleaned up at no cost to the state as well as for the 
large amounts of data generated. Beach cleanups help to document the large, measurable amounts of 
marine debris—some visible and some less so—that reach California’s waterways, coastline, and sea-
floor every year. 
Beach surveys, especially volunteer-based 
surveys, often neglect to account for debris 
that is buried and micro-debris that is 
difficult to see. (Photo credit: AMRF)
11
The vast majority (~94%) 
of debris collected on CCD 
is associated with smoking 
activities (cigarette butts, light-
ers) and with shoreline and 
recreational activities (food 
wrappers, containers, caps, 
lids, bags, straws, cups, bottles, 
etc.) (Photo credit: Heal the 
Bay).Determining the origins of marine debris is important for determining appropriate solutions. There are 
two sources of plastic in the marine environment: 1) waste lost or dumped at sea from ships, platforms 
and aquaculture facilities, and 2) waste from land-based sources. 
A. Debris from Ships
The International Maritime Organization (IMO), a body of the United Nations consisting of 152 
countries, sets international maritime safety and pollution standards. The IMO created and implements 
the 1973 International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, as modified by the 
Protocol of 1978, which is more commonly called MARPOL 73/78.[32] All ships (including cruise ships) 
flagged under countries that are signatories to MARPOL 73/78 must abide by the convention’s 
requirements. There are six requirements broken down into sections or annexes, which control pollution 
by oil, noxious liquid substances, harmful substances, sewage, garbage and plastics, and gas emissions. 
MARPOL 73/78 Annex V (dealing with garbage and plastics) was signed by the U.S in 1988, is 
implemented in the U.S. by the Act to Prevent Pollution from Ships (APPS, 33 U.S.C. §§1905-1915), and 
is regulated in U.S. waters by the U.S. Coast Guard.[32]
As of May 2011, 142 countries and states have signed onto Annex V, representing 97.4% of the gross 
tonnage of the world’s shipping fleet.[33] Under Annex V, the dumping of plastic at sea is prohibited 
everywhere; there are no allowable zones in the ocean, as there are for some other types of degradable 
and decomposable garbage. One might hypothesize that since 1988, when most countries signed 
Annex V, the input of plastic marine debris from ships to the world oceans has decreased; however, one 
also can imagine how difficult it would be to prove this. Despite these data gaps, there are still practical 
ways to help reduce ship-based marine debris. The National Research Council Committee on Shipborne 
Wastes has identified a need for better onboard and shore-side waste management systems, as well as 
a need for formal adequacy standards 
on which to judge and certify shore-
side trash reception facilities.[34] This is 
discussed in more detail in Chapter V 
of this report.III. Sources and Transport: How is Marine Debris Getting 
into the Ocean ?
As of May 2011, 142 countries and states—
representing 97.4% of the gross tonnage of 
the world’s shipping fleet—have signed onto 
MARPOL 73/78 Annex V, agreeing to prohibit 
the dumping of plastic anywhere in the ocean. 
(Photo credit: Jim Fawcett, USC Sea Grant)
12B. Debris from Land-Based Sources
Are ocean-based sources or land-based sources more responsible for plastic marine debris? Although 
this question cannot be definitively answered, many researchers are now pointing to data that indicate 
that land-based sources may be the largest. Two long-term studies found that the quantity of plastic in 
the stomach contents of fulmar seabirds in the North Sea and shearwater seabirds in the Bering Sea had 
not increased over the last 20 years; however, the composition of the plastic had changed greatly. Since 
the 1980s, the mass of plastic originating from land-based consumer products has doubled (and in some 
years tripled).[35, 36] 
A study off southern California of floating plastic particles found that the highest concentrations of 
plastic during wet weather were associated with large urban centers, implicating land-based runoff as 
the main contributor to floating plastic debris in coastal waters.[26] The data from Ocean Conservancy’s 
International Coastal Cleanup Day indicate that somewhere between 60-80% of marine debris starts out 
on land; this is determined based on the type of debris and its likely original use.[28] During one storm 
event in 1997, the Los Angeles Department of Beaches and Harbors recorded 13 metric tons 
(approximately equivalent to the weight of 9.5 automobiles) of anthropogenic debris discharged from 
Ballona Creek into Santa Monica Bay.[23] In a 1998-2000 California Department of Transportation study, 
plastic accounted for 43% of the litter sampled from storm drains,[37] a confirmation that plastic is trans-
ported to the shoreline from inland locations. 
While it is clear that debris from land-based sources is transported to the shoreline via rivers, 
stormwater channels, wind, or direct littering, the original sources of this plastic debris are more difficult 
to identify. Was this debris intentionally dumped into a watershed or gutter? Was it blown by the wind 
from a waste management or industrial facility? Did it fall from the back of a truck while being 
transported? Tracing the ultimate sources of marine debris is difficult but clearly important for 
developing targeted solutions. 
Marine debris can be transported via watersheds and storm drains to the ocean. During one storm event in 1997, the Los 
Angeles Department of Beaches and Harbors recorded 13 metric tons (approximately equivalent to the weight of 7-9 cars) 
of anthropogenic debris discharged from Ballona Creek into Santa Monica Bay. In a 1998-2000 California Department of 
Transportation study, plastic accounted for 43% of the litter sampled from storm drains. (Photo Credits: left, Heal the Bay; 
right, Ocean Conservancy).
13Municipalities manage plastic waste by recycling it, 
burning it in combustion facilities to create energy, or 
burying it in landfills. Land-based sources of 
plastic marine debris include losses to the environment 
through industrial manufacturing and transportation of 
materials; losses to the environment through municipal 
waste management practices including poorly 
managed landfills; and losses to the environment 
through individual human behavior (littering, 
dumping). Although these are three main sources of 
land-based debris, there are likely others such as 
agricultural-based plastic debris. Very little is known 
about how much marine debris can be attributed to 
“other” land-based sources, but this report discusses 
what facts and figures are known, especially for the 
state of California. Figure 5 is a simplified diagram of 
the lifecycle of plastic, how it is released into the 
environment, and how it eventually becomes marine debris.
 
Figure 5: A simplified diagram of the lifecycle of plastic in California and ways in which it becomes marine debris. It is not 
one specific source or step in the plastic lifecycle that is responsible for marine debris; it is types of behavior or improperly 
secured waste, whether intentional or intentional, that creates marine debris.
14
Los Angeles storm drain entering the ocean. 
(Photo credit: Phyllis Grifman, USC  Sea Grant)
C. National Municipal Waste Stream
Mass production of plastics for commercial use began in the 1950s,[9] and the high demand for light-
weight, durable, and cheap plastic encouraged the industry to grow exponentially over the following 
decades. In 1960, plastics made up an estimated 390,000 tons (<1%) of the municipal solid waste 
stream (MSW).[38] In 2009, plastics accounted for 29.8 million tons (~12.3%) of the national MSW.[38] 
Currently, the majority of this plastic waste (12.5 million tons or 42%) consists of disposable 
containers and packaging (e.g., bags, sacks, and wraps, other packaging, PET bottles, jars and HDPE 
natural bottles).[38]
Only 2.1 million tons (~7.1%) of the plastics in the national MSW are recovered for recycling.[38] Figure 
6 shows the rate of plastic waste generation and recovery in the U.S. from 1960 to 2009, according to 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). However, recovery of certain types of plastic containers 
is more significant; in 2009, PET bottles and jars (resin indication code or “recycling number” one), and 
high-density polyethylene natural bottles (resin indication code or “recycling number” two) were 
recovered at a rate of approximately 28%.[38]
Although global statistics are outside the scope of this report, it is important to keep in mind that the 
U.S. is no longer the only large player in the global market for plastics, with 65,000 plastic processers in 
India and China consuming nearly as much pre-production plastic resin (~50 mt/yr) as the United 
States.[39] This global, growing demand for plastic is not surprising, since economically there are no other 
materials that compete with plastic. One pound (25,000 pellets) of preproduction plastic resin pellets—
precursors to a huge variety of plastic products—costs one U.S. dollar.[4]
 
Figure 6: Generation and recovery of plastics in the United States from 1960 to 2009. 
(Image courtesy of US EPA, 2010.)
15D.  Municipal Waste in California
California is one of the leading states in the country in terms of 
the size of the plastics industry, shipments, and jobs.[40] Moreover, 
southern California has the largest concentration of plastic 
processors in the western U.S.[7] The California Integrated Waste 
Management Board (CIWMB) conducted periodic studies on the 
types and amounts of materials disposed at solid waste 
facilities throughout the state from each waste “sector”
—commercial, residential single-family, residential multi-family, 
and self-hauled. Tables 2 and 3 show the totals from the 2004 and 
2008 studies.[41] In general, the percent and weight of plastic in all 
debris sectors remained constant between 2004 and 2008, with just under 10% (or just under 4 
million tons, the approximate equivalent weight of 2.5 million automobiles) of the California waste 
stream composed of plastic. This is relatively consistent with the national statistics, in which plastic now 
comprises 12.3% by weight of the national MSW according to the U.S. EPA’s latest report.[38] Table 4 
shows a breakdown of plastic types in California’s MSW.
Table 2: Total waste and 
plastic waste in CA MSW in 
2004. Data courtesy of 
CIWMB, 2004.[173]
Table 3: Total waste and 
plastic waste in CA MSW in 
2008. Data courtesy of 
CIWMB, 2008.[41]
California is one the leading 
states in the country in terms of 
the size of the plastics industry, 
shipments, and jobs. Moreover, 
southern California has the 
largest concentration of plastic 
processors in the western U.S.
16Table 4: Type, percentage and weight of 
plastic in CA MSW in 2008. Plastic 
accounts for 9.6% (by weight) of CA MSW, 
as is shown in the totals in Tables 3 and 4. 
This figure shows the various types of 
plastic that make up that 9.6%. Data 
courtesy of CIWMB, 2008.[41]Waste Sector Millions of 
Tons of 
WasteMillions of 
Tons of 
PlasticPlastic % 
of total
Commercial waste 18.9 2.3 12.0%
Residental Single and multi family waste 12.7 1.2 9.4%
Self-hauled commercial and residential waste 8.6 0.3 3.9%
Total 40.2 3.8 9.5%
Waste Sector Millions of 
Tons of 
WasteMillions of 
Tons of 
PlasticPlastic % 
of total
Commercial Waste 19.7 2.2 11.3%
Residental Single and multi family waste 11.9 1.1 9.2%
Self-hauled commercial and residential waste 8.1 0.5 5.8%
Total 39.7 3.8 9.6%
Plastic Type Percentage 
of Total CA 
MSWEstimated 
weight 
(Millions of 
tons)
Remainder/Composite Plastic 2.8% 1.1
Durable Plastic Items 2.1% 0.8
Other Film 1.4% 0.6
Plastic Trash Bags 0.9% 0.4
PETE Containers 0.5% 0.2
Non-bag commercial/industrial packaging ﬁlm 0.5% 0.2
HDPE Containers 0.4% 0.2
MISC Plastic Containers 0.4% 0.2
Plastic Grocery/Merchandise Bags 0.3% 0.1
ﬁlm Products 0.3% 0.1
Total 9.6% 3.8Although Tables 2, 3 and 4 give the estimated weight of plastic, 
analyzing the volume of plastic in the waste stream may give a 
different perspective of the contribution of plastic to the overall 
waste stream, since even large pieces of plastic can be very light-
weight. For instance, a 2003 CIWMB report found that although 
plastic was just under 10% of the waste stream by weight , it was 
estimated to be 17.8% by volume  of the material landfilled in 
California. This ranks plastic as the second-largest category of waste 
volume (behind paper) going into California municipal landfills.[40] 
Ultimately, despite the large amounts of plastic heading to landfills, 
and with only an estimated 5% by weight overall recycling rate for 
California,[174, 175] significant amounts of plastic debris end up as 
marine debris. 
E. Industrial Management and Transportation of Plastic in California
A significant source of plastic marine debris is the industrial transportation and processing of 
pre-production plastic resin pellets and powder. In 2002, the California State Water Resources Control 
Board awarded US$ 500,000 to the Algalita Marine Research Foundation (AMRF) and the California 
Coastal Commission (CCC) to assess the amount of plastic entering the ocean from Los Angeles’s two 
largest watersheds: The Los Angeles River and the San Gabriel River. These results were reported in the 
proceedings of the “Plastic Debris, Rivers to Sea” conference in Long Beach, CA in 2005. After three 
days of sampling in the rivers, analysis and extrapolation found 2 billion micro-plastic (< 4.75 mm) 
particles weighing approximately 60 tons (the weight of 40 automobiles) flowing toward the ocean. Of 
the identifiable objects, pre-production plastic resin pellets (nurdles) accounted for 10% of the total 
number of micro-plastic fragments.[42] Due to these findings, the Society of the Plastics Industry (SPI) and 
the American Plastics Council (APC) worked with AMRF and the Los Angeles Regional Water 
Quality Control Board to revise and improve a voluntary suite of best management practices (BMPs) 
known as“Operation Clean Sweep.” In order to reduce the release of pellets to the environment, 
Operation Clean Sweep included BMPs such as: re-surfacing to prevent worker slips and falls; house-
keeping procedures like vacuuming spills; use of physical barriers like booms to catch pellets when 
spilled; automatically-closing hose valves; having an employee assigned to monitor for cleanliness; and 
properly sealing bulk railroad or truck containers. For a complete list of BMPs, see the Operation Clean 
Sweep Pellet Handling Manual.[43]
AMRF analyzed industrial discharge from eight voluntary 
thermoplastic processing centers in California, which 
included different specialties within the plastic industry: bulk 
transporters and shippers; injection molding centers; plastic 
bag manufacturing centers; and roto-molding centers. 
Transporters and shippers move the pellets from the 
manufacturers to the processors; injection molding centers 
melt the pellets with additives into product molds; plastic-
bag manufacturers also melt pellets with additives and then 
stretch the plastic into thin sheeting; and roto-molding 
centers turn pellets into powder which can then be used to 
create hollow molds.[44]
In this image a hand gives an indication of scale 
for the blue micro-plastic pellets scattered on 
the ground. (Photo credit: AMRF)
17
Although plastic was just 
under 10% (or 4 million tons) 
of the waste stream by weight 
in California, it was estimated 
to be 17.8% by volume of the 
material landfilled in California. 
This ranks plastic as the second-
largest category of waste 
volume (behind paper) going 
into California municipal 
landfills.The eight centers were analyzed before and after the implementation of many of the Operation Clean 
Sweep BMPs and the analysis found a 50% reduction (by count) in pellet discharge to the environment 
during dry weather, demonstrating the success of many of the BMPs under Operation Clean Sweep.[44] 
However, during rain events, none of the examined thermoplastic resin processing facilities were able to 
retain pellets on site since physical controls like catch basin inserts (mesh to catch debris but allow 
water through) overflowed or were removed to prevent flooding; therefore, there were no measures to 
stop the release of pellets already on the ground of the facility prior to the rain event. Rail yards were 
noted in the study as having the largest potential for pellet loss, especially during wet weather. Pellets 
were photographed flowing across the rail yard gravel to storm drains during major storm events 
during the study. Additionally, the report mentioned that further study into plastic powders and shavings 
is needed since wind blows such extremely fine particles into the environment, and numerous plastic 
powder spills were observed during the course of the study.[44]
On one hand, this analysis of eight plastic industry centers in California supports the use of the voluntary 
Clean Sweep Program; the results indicate that even partial compliance with Operation Clean Sweep 
BMPs can make a significant difference in pellet discharge to the environment. As a result, in 2007 the 
California legislature passed a bill that required all plastic manufacturers in the state to use best 
management practices to prevent pellet spillage. The State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) 
was put in charge of implementation and enforcement of this bill, as discussed in detail in Chapter 
V.[45] However, it is clear that more follow-up studies are warranted to investigate facility improvements 
over time, percentage of the plastic industry in full compliance with the state bill and Operation Clean 
Sweep, BMPs that are effective in wet weather, and the fate of plastic powders and shavings spilled in 
these industrial facilities. It is also worth noting that the creation of Operation Clean Sweep as well as 
this 2005 follow-up study are good examples of the results and information attainable when industry, 
government, and scientists work together. 
F. Individual Waste, Littering, and Dumping
Municipal and industrial processes and practices are not solely 
to blame for the loss of plastic debris to the environment. 
Littering and illegal dumping of materials by individuals is also 
a main source of debris, especially in urban runoff.[34] The top 
4 items collected during Coastal Cleanup Day in California 
over the last decade have been cigarette butts, food 
wrappers and containers, bottle caps and lids, and plastic 
bags.[29] Items like these, which are often unintentionally 
dropped or intentionally littered on the ground, make their 
way to the coastline via the storm drain system, creeks, rivers, 
or wind. These items are also very commonly used on beaches 
and shorelines, so when lost, do not have far to travel to the 
ocean. Unless one visibly sees a person littering or dumping 
debris, it is impossible to tell exactly how much plastic marine 
debris results from these types of individual behaviors. 
However, simple yet effective solutions (discussed in more 
detail in Chapter V of this report) for correcting individual 
behaviors are: greater availability of public trash and recycling 
receptacles and more public education.
Debris along the edge of Ballona Creek, which 
enters the ocean in Santa Monica Bay, CA. 
(Photo credit: Heal the Bay)
1819The large amount of time and effort put into investigating the distribution, sources, and pathways of 
plastics is due to the large (and growing) awareness of the number of biological, ecological, and 
economic impacts of plastic debris. While some of the impact studies pertain specifically to California, 
the vast majority do not. Nevertheless, many of the studies, especially laboratory-based toxicological 
studies, are informative for all managers and policy-makers considering the impacts of plastic marine 
debris in the environment. 
A. Ingestion and Entanglement
More than 260 species including turtles, fish, seabirds, mammals, and invertebrates, have been reported 
to ingest or become entangled in plastic marine debris. When abandoned or lost fishing gear (nets, 
monofilament line, traps) continues to catch marine organisms, this is often termed “ghostfishing.” 
Entanglement and ingestion results in a range of documented impacts including lacerations, drowning 
(for mammals and turtles which need to breathe air regularly), limited feeding, digestive ulcers, and 
starvation (due to digestive tracts full of non-passable plastic), limited predator avoidance, and reduced 
reproductive output.[1, 9, 46-50] The most dangerous debris items to wildlife include: bags (paper and 
plastic), balloons, caps, lids, clothing, shoes, food wrappers/containers, pull tabs, 6-pack rings, straws, 
stirrers, buoys/floats, fishing gear (traps, monofilament line, lures, light sticks, nets), plastic sheeting/
tarps, rope, strapping bands, cigarettes filters, cigarette lighters, and cigar tips.[28] IV . Impacts: Why is Marine Debris a Problem ?
More than 260 species including turtles, fish, seabirds, mammals, and invertebrates have been reported to ingest or 
become entangled in plastic marine debris. (Photo credits: seals and turtle, NOAA; albatross top-left, Cynthia Vanderlip, 
AMRF; seabirds bottom-left and bottom center, Ocean Conservancy.)
20A meta-analysis of seven databases of entanglement records 
along central California and the northwest coast of the U.S. 
found that between 2001 and 2005, there were 454 
entanglements documented, encompassing 31 bird species, 
nine marine mammal species and one leatherback turtle.[51] 
Common murres, Western gulls and California sea lions were 
the most commonly entangled species, which partially reflects 
the high abundance of these species in the study area.[51] 
Plastic monofilament fishing line was the most common 
entanglement item, although 22 Northern elephant seals and 
several other species have been recorded entangled in plastic 
rings and packing straps.[51] The study found three records of Guadalupe fur seals—listed as 
threatened under the U.S. Endangered Species Act—being entangled in fishing line and netting.[51] 
Another study over a similar time period (2001-2006) analyzed the records of five wildlife 
rehabilitation facilities in California, and found that there were 1,090 fishing gear related injuries 
(entanglement and ingestion) among brown pelicans (589), gulls (375), California sea lions (106), 
elephant seals (16), and harbor seals (4).[52] These studies do note that although this meta-analysis of 
multiple databases provides a unique overview of entanglement over a broad geographic range and time 
period, these records represent an unknown proportion of the total entangled/impacted animals that die 
at sea and are not washed ashore.[51]
Many species spend the early juvenile stages of their life cycle floating planktonically on the sea surface, 
carried along in currents of oceanographic/weather features such as ocean gyres, fronts, convergences, 
rip currents, and driftlines. Since the currents indiscriminately transport anything floating on the surface, 
these oceanographic features become gathering points not only for planktonic (“drifting”) species, but 
also for natural and anthropogenic debris like plastic. Many juveniles, like the Loggerhead sea turtle, use 
these driftlines for food and shelter, making them particularly vulnerable to plastic ingestion and 
entanglement.[53] Seabirds like the Laysan albatross use these driftlines and oceanographic features 
(gyres, fronts, convergences, rip currents) to feed their unfledged chicks, which explains why so many 
albatross (including chicks) are found with boluses of plastic blocking parts of their digestive systems.[54] 
Over 100 species of seabirds are known to ingest plastic fragments or to become entangled in them.[49]
A study from 2001-2006 analyzed 
the records of five wildlife 
rehabilitation facilities in California, 
and found that there were 1,090 
fishing gear related injuries 
(entanglement and ingestion) among 
brown pelicans (589), gulls (375), 
California sea lions (106), elephant 
seals (16), and harbor seals (4).
Many albatross seabirds (includ-
ing their chicks) are found with 
boluses of plastic blocking parts 
of their digestive systems. Over 
100 species of seabirds are known 
to ingest plastic fragments or to 
become entangled in them. (Photo 
credits: left, Cynthia Vanderlip, 
AMRF; right, Ocean Conservancy)
21Although there are many ingestion and entanglement accounts involving 
sea turtles and seabirds,[49, 53, 54] they are not the only species affected by 
floating plastic debris. A recent study analyzed the stomach contents of 
141 fish from 27 species in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre and found 
that 9.2% of the fish had ingested plastic particles.[55] Based on these 
findings, the study estimated that the plastic ingestion by mesopelagic 
(living primarily between 200-1000 meters depth) fish in the North 
Pacific is between 12,000 and 24,000 tons a year,[55] a weight equivalent 
to about 8-16,000 automobiles. Another recent study focused on the effects of ingested plastic on a fam-
ily of fish (Myctophidae) that are common throughout all the world’s oceans.[56] Of the fish sampled in 
the study, 35% had plastic in their guts, mostly in micro-sized (1-2.79 mm) fragments. The 
researchers who conducted this study hypothesized that if the fish are not able to pass the plastic from 
their guts, they may be at risk for malnutrition and the eventual starvation that has been observed in 
other species (seabirds, marine mammals). The researchers also posed the question of whether the 
inherent buoyancy of the ingested plastic could ever slow or inhibit the daily vertical migrations of 
Myctophids which feed on the surface at night and then dive to the depths during the day to avoid 
predators. Both the questions of buoyancy and malnutrition need further study.
While the myctophid study demonstrates that small fish ingest plastic, 
evidence also confirms that large fish do as well. A recent study of 
three economically and ecologically important species of catfish in an 
estuary in Brazil found that 18-33% of the catfish had ingested 
plastic.[57] The plastic fragments were predominantly pieces of mono-
filament fishing line. Further studies are needed to assess what other 
species of fish are ingesting plastic, and whether the ingestion has any 
population level effects on commercially or ecologically important 
species. 
Fishing line and other types of netting are the main source of entanglement and eventual drowning for 
marine mammals. For example, they are known to be the main threats to the endangered Hawaiian 
Monk seal.[58] Hunted to the brink of extinction in the late 19th century, the Hawaiian Monk seal 
population is estimated to be below 1200 individuals and one of the world’s most endangered animals, 
according to NOAA’s Office of Protected Resources.[59] 
Whales have also been seen entangled in huge masses of 
tangled rope, lost fishing gear, and other debris.[47] Two 
male sperm whales were recently found dead on the 
California coast with 134 different types of fishing 
netting, rope, and other plastic debris in their stomachs. 
One whale had a ruptured stomach and the other was 
emaciated; gastric impaction was suspected as the cause 
of death in both whales.[60] This ability of lost or 
abandoned fishing gear to still continue to “catch” marine 
organisms (ghostfishing) can cause significant economic 
effects when commercially important species are affected. 
Some studies have already begun to assess losses to 
commercial fisheries due to ghostfishing.[7, 61] These 
economic effects are discussed later in this chapter.
The study estimated that 
the plastic ingestion by 
mesopelagic fish in the 
North Pacific Ocean is 
between 12,000 and 
24,000 tons a year.
Two male sperm whales were 
recently found dead on the 
California coast with 134 
different types of fishing 
netting, rope, and other 
plastic debris in their 
stomachs.
This ability for lost or abandoned fishing gear to still 
continue to catch marine organisms is often called 
“ghostfishing.” (Photo credit: Ocean Conservancy)22B. Accumulation, Transport, Toxicology, Bioavailability, and the Food Chain
1. Plastics Accumulate and Transport Pollutants
It is well documented that many harmful chemicals concentrate on 
organic particles suspended in water and within marine sediments 
by adsorbing (adhering) to the particle’s surface. Recent studies 
now focus on the fact that plastic particles floating in the ocean 
also serve as concentrating and transport devices for 
environmental pollutants; some studies, in fact, indicate that 
plastics may be better concentrators than natural sediment.[62] The United Nations Environment Program 
has declared plastic marine debris and its ability to transport harmful substances one of the main 
emerging issues in our global environment.[21] The physical characteristics of the surface of plastic 
(hydrophobic, low polarity) attract many persistent organic pollutants (POPs)—polychlorinated biphenyls 
(PCBs), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and dichlorodiphenyl trichloroethane (DDTs), and 
other organichlorine pesticides—that share similar chemical properties.[4, 63] The recent studies 
summarized below support each other’s findings that micro-plastic 
pellets and fragments are serving as concentrating devices for 
pollutants, which raises toxicological concerns for marine 
organisms that commonly ingest micro-plastics. It is also important 
to note that these studies, through various experimental controls, 
were able to prove that plastic resin pellets were adsorbing the 
pollutants directly from the surrounding seawater (not the air or 
sediment).
Recently, researchers found that 50% of the polyethylene plastic fragments found in the North Pacific 
Gyre contained PCBs, 40% contained organichlorine pesticides (like DDT), and 80% contained 
PAHs.[64] Another study found that PCB and dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (DDE) concentrations 
significantly increased on virgin polypropylene plastic resin pellets over a period of just six days in 
seawater off the coast of Japan; the concentrations of PCBs and DDE were orders of magnitude higher 
than the surrounding seawater.[63] In yet another study in 2003-2004, pre-production thermoplastic resin 
pellets and post-consumer plastic fragments were collected and 
analyzed for POPs from water samples in the North Pacific Gyre, 
Hawaii, Mexico, and 22 sites near Los Angeles, California.[4] 
PAHs were detected in almost all the samples, with the highest 
concentrations found in the plastic collected near industrial and 
urban areas around Los Angeles. The only pesticide detected was 
DDT and its metabolites (break-down products, DDD and DDE), 
and the highest concentrations were recorded around industrial 
and urban areas in Los Angeles. Interestingly, this study, along 
with several others, found a correlation between the 
concentrations of pollutants and the age (brittleness, 
discoloration) of the plastic fragment or pellet.[4, 63, 65] The more 
time the pellet spends floating in the ocean, the darker the pellet 
becomes, hence the more pollutants it has accumulated. This 
may be of consequence for marine scavengers, particularly 
seabirds, which are known to be color-selective in their feeding.
Recent studies now focus on the 
fact that plastic particles floating 
in the ocean also serve as 
concentrating and transport 
devices for environmental 
toxins.
The United Nations Environment 
Program has declared plastic 
marine debris and its ability to 
transport toxic substances one of 
the main emerging issues in our 
global environment.
Some studies have found a correlation 
between the concentrations of pollutants 
and the age (brittleness, discoloration) of the 
plastic fragment or pellet. (Photo credit: 
International Pellet Watch)
23Scientists at Tokyo University recently started the International Pellet Watch.[70] Under this program, 
samples of polyethylene pellets have been collected at 30 beaches in 17 countries and analyzed for 
pollutant concentrations. PCB concentrations were highest on U.S. coasts, and DDT was highest in 
southern California (likely due to the Palos Verdes Superfund Site) and Vietnam (likely due to the 
continued usage of the pesticide for malaria control). The pellet concentrations of PCBs were also 
positively correlated with pollutant concentrations in shellfish measured by Mussel Watch,[72, 73] a NOAA 
program run in California since 1976 by the Department of Fish and Game to detect toxic substances in 
California’s estuarine and marine waters. In 2005, another study analyzed beached plastic resin 
pellets from various locations in coastal Japan and found that PCB concentrations on the pellets varied 
regionally and were mirrored by concentrations in marine mussels located in the study sites.[65] These 
studies suggest that the plastic resin pellets, like the mussels, reflect concentrations of pollutants found 
in regional seawater. Other studies have begun to focus on plastic as a transport vector for POPs to more 
remote areas like the Arctic.[74]
A Brief Background on Persistent Organic Pollutants 
Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) are synthetic (man-made), organic (carbon-based) 
compounds that were used worldwide following World War II for pest and disease control, crop 
production, and industry. They are transported great distances by wind and water, are stable in 
both terrestrial and aquatic environments, and can be transmitted and bioaccumulated up the 
food chain. In wildlife, many POPs have been linked to population declines, diseases, or 
behavioral or physical abnormalities; in humans, some POPs have been linked to reproductive, 
developmental, behavioral, neurologic, endocrine, and immunologic adverse health effects.[66] 
The United States joined 90 other countries in May 2001 to sign a United Nations treaty, known 
as the Stockholm Convention, in an effort to reduce or eliminate the production, use, and release 
of 12 main POPs now known colloquially as the “Dirty Dozen.” However, many of these 
chemicals are still used commonly in developing countries. The Dirty Dozen list includes: aldrin, 
chlordane, dichlorodiphenyl trichloroethane (DDT), dieldrin, endrin, heptachlor, 
hexachlorobenzene, mirex, toxaphene, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polychlorinated 
dibenzo-p-dioxins (dioxins), and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (furans). 
It is important to understand that some of these classes of pollutants, like PCBs, are mixtures of 
up to 209 different individual chlorinated compounds, 113 of which are known to be present in 
the environment.[67, 66] Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are another well-studied group of 
POPs, 16 of which are classified by the USEPA as “priority pollutants” that are toxic and 
bioaccumulate in aquatic organisms; seven of those are classified as probable human 
carcinogens.[68] Bisphenol A (BPA) and phthalates are also commonly discussed pollutants, 
although their “persistence” is still under debate.[62] What is not under debate is their 
pervasiveness in the global environment and the number of studies linking them to wildlife and 
human health impairments, including endocrine-disrupting activities. Even if BPA and phthalates 
do degrade under some environmental conditions, the fact that researchers have trouble 
creating phthalate-free controls in experiments is a testament to the ubiquity and durability of 
these chemicals.[69]24Perhaps most relevant to California is a recent study by the Algalita Marine Research Foundation which 
assessed the role of micro-plastics—a major component of the debris stream in the Los Angeles and San 
Gabriel watersheds[42]—in the transport of environmental pollutants from land to the California marine 
environment. The study analyzed preproduction plastic resin pellets and plastic fragments (all less than 5 
mm size) from river banks and beaches in the Los Angeles and San Gabriel river watersheds and 
compared the results to plastic resin pellets collected from storm drains at industrial sites and virgin 
plastic pellets from a plastic bag processor which had never entered the production stream. While only 
phthalates were detected in the virgin plastic pellets, all other samples contained phthalates and PAHs. A 
few samples also contained other chemicals such as chlordanes (chlorinated pesticides banned in 1988), 
and 4-chlorophenyl phenyl ether, hexachlorobenzene, and nitrosodimethylamine,[42] all monitored by 
the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry because of their documented or suspected health 
concerns.[75] For example, hexacholorobenzene has been linked to porphyria (liver disease) and 
potentially to other issues in the thyroid and nervous system; the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services and U.S. EPA have declared hexachlorobenzene a probable human carcinogen.[76] This study 
suggests that all these chemicals (other than phthalates which were present on virgin pellets) were 
adsorbed onto the pellets during threir transport through the storm drain system and/or river water. The 
implications of these results warrant mention in this report, but additional repetitive studies should be 
done to build on the results of this single study.
Although several of the above mentioned studies analyzed preproduction plastic resin pellets and 
plastic fragments from disparate areas of the ocean far from California, the studies still serve to solidify 
the understanding that plastic marine debris is acting as a concentrating and transport mechanism for 
pollutants of concern. A few studies[4, 79, 77] have looked specifically at POP concentrations on resin 
pellets and plastic fragments off the California coast and in California watersheds, confirming that this is 
an issue for California as well as the rest of the world.
2. Plastics Leach Pollutants
Plastics can contain pollutants that are added at the time of 
manufacturing. These pollutants are distinct from POPs that 
adsorb to plastics once plastics are released into the 
environment. Plastics can contain by weight up to 50% fillers, 
reinforcements, and additives;[7, 78] for example soft polyvinyl 
chloride (PVC) plastic can contain up to 40% 
phthalates.[69] Additives include plasticizers, ultraviolet 
stabilizers, heat stabilizers, softeners, flame-retardants, non-
stick compounds, and colorants. Many laboratory studies link 
two of the most common and well-known plastic additives—
bisphenol A (BPA) and phthalates—to hormone interference and endocrine disruption in wildlife as well 
as in humans.[46, 62, 79] BPA is a common additive in hard polycarbonate plastics or coatings (e.g., food 
and beverage cans and containers), CDs, DVDs, printer ink, medical equipment); phthalates, a class of 
chemicals, are used as softening additives in an array of products including clothing, toys, hoses, 
personal care products, insulation, flooring, inflatable structures, health-care products (catheters, blood 
bags), pesticides, construction materials in the form of PVC, and even in the pharmaceutical field as the 
coatings for some medications.[62, 69, 80-82] Phthalates are not chemically bound to the plastic polymer, 
which is why they leach or outgas so easily into the surrounding environment.[69] 
Plastics can contain by weight up to 
50% fillers, reinforcements, and 
additives. Many laboratory studies link 
two of the most common and well-
known plastic additives—bisphenol 
A (BPA) and phthalates—to hormone 
interference and endocrine disruption 
in wildlife as well as in humans.25Additives like BPA, phthalates, PBDEs, and 
nonylphenol can leach out of plastics at different 
rates depending on environmental 
conditions.[7, 62] For example, polycarbonate 
plastics (very hard plastic used in glass coatings, 
the automotive industry, and in older multi-use 
water bottles) leach BPA at an accelerated rate 
when exposed to the salts in seawater, especially 
at warm temperatures.[83] As plastics become 
more brittle and begin to breakdown into 
smaller pieces in the environment, more surface 
area is exposed, allowing for more leaching to 
occur. However, plastics are not the only source 
of these chemicals in the marine environment; 
for example, BPA also leaches from epoxy resins, 
millions of gallons of which are used each year 
to seal the hulls of ships to protect them from rust 
and fouling organisms like barnacles.[84] 
Although studies like the ones mentioned above 
confirm that plastics themselves do indeed leach 
chemicals as well as accumulate them from the 
environment (seawater and sediment), the rates 
and quantities being released are largely 
unknown and clearly vary due to a variety of factors such as plastic composition and environmental 
exposure. More research is needed to answer important management questions such as: which types of 
plastic leach the contaminants of greatest concern?
Endocrine Disruption 
The endocrine system is made up of glands throughout the body (e.g., the hypothalamus, pituitary, 
thyroid, pancreas, adrenals, testes, ovaries) and the hormones that are made by the glands. These 
hormones (e.g., estrogen, testosterone, growth hormone, insulin, epinephrine and many more) 
travel through the bloodstream, acting as chemical messengers, regulating many critical bodily 
functions such as metabolism, blood sugar levels, reproductive function, development, and growth. 
Mammals, fish, birds, and many other living organisms have endocrine systems. An endocrine 
disrupting chemical is one that affects the normal functioning of the endocrine system by 
mimicking the behavior of normal hormones or blocking the effects of normal hormones. Endocrine 
disruption, especially over long periods of time, can have a broad range of consequences from 
abnormal growth, to delayed or inhibited reproductive function, to cancer. Regarding endocrine 
disrupters, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) states that “there is strong evidence that 
chemical exposure has been associated with adverse developmental and reproductive effects on 
fish and wildlife in particular locations.” There are known instances of human endocrine disruption; 
however, in general, the field of human endocrine disruption caused by exposure to 
environmentally released chemicals is not well understood.[85]
BPA is a common additive in hard polycarbonate plastics or 
coatings (food and beverage cans and containers coatings, 
CDs, DVDs, printer ink, medical equipment, etc); phthalates, 
a class of chemicals, are used as softening additives in a huge 
array of products including clothing, toys, hoses, personal care 
products, insulation, flooring, inflatable structures, health-
care products (catheters, blood bags), pesticides, construction 
materials in the form of PVC, and even in the pharma-
ceutical field as the coatings for  some medications. (Photo 
credit: public domain)263. Toxicology
Although the rates of release of potentially harmful chemicals into the ocean are not well understood, 
it is well known that chemicals are present in the ocean. There is ample evidence to show that plastic 
marine debris not only accumulates (adsorbs) chemical pollutants from the surrounding seawater and 
marine sediments but also leaches chemical pollutants that were added to the plastic during 
manufacturing. The fate of chemicals such as phthalates and BPA is of great importance because of their 
wide-spread use for decades and emerging evidence of their toxicological effects on wildlife. Both have 
been used for over 100 years and are produced worldwide at rates of more than 2.7 million metric tons 
a year for phthalates[86] and more than 2.5 million metric tons a year for BPA.[87] Below is a summary of 
the organisms and negative effects linked to exposure to phthalates and BPA. Studies to date have 
focused on well-known plastic additives like phthalates and BPA, but there are large gaps in information 
for less well-known additives. Likewise, many of the organisms which have been tested are commonly 
used in laboratory settings, but there are many types of organisms that have not yet been tested. 
In rats, phthalates have been shown to cause functional, structural, 
and developmental impairments of the male reproductive 
system.[69, 82, 88, 88-91] Thus far in aquatic organisms, phthalate 
exposure in laboratory settings have been shown to have negative 
effects on marine tubeworms, marine mussels, and even some 
species of fish. Depending on the level of exposure, phthalates 
cause symptoms such as: decrease in fertilization, chromosomal 
aberrations, developmental issues, altered metabolic pathways, 
altered behavior, and even effects on community density and 
structure.[78] 
BPA was originally developed by the medical industry in 1933 to be a synthetic estrogen, but was soon 
replaced by another more effective synthetic estrogen in 1938.[69, 78] In the 1950s, a new use for BPA was 
discovered when a chemist combined BPA and phosgene to produce polycarbonate plastic.[78] Therefore, 
although originally invented as a synthetic estrogen, BPA’s primary commercial application since 1950 
has been in the plastic industry. Although the public and the media’s attention have only recently 
focused on BPA as an endocrine disrupter, forcing many manufacturers to create BPA-free water and 
baby bottles, knowing the history of BPA’s original purpose as a synthetic estrogen makes these recent 
events seem inevitable and almost surprisingly delayed. Since the 1930s, multiple studies showed the 
ability of BPA to mimic natural hormones, and, at elevated levels, to cause various adverse effects in rats, 
including altered development, reduced survival, lowered birth rate, and delayed onset of puberty.[69] 
To date, BPA has been shown to have effects on the following aquatic organisms: freshwater ramshorn 
snails, marine mussels, marine copepods, carp, and cod.[78] Depending on the level of exposure, BPA 
can cause altered juvenile development, alterations of sex steroids, superfeminization (additional sex 
organs and sex gland enlargement), increased female mortality, induced spawning in both sexes, 
damaged ovarian follicles, and alterations in the biochemistry of cell growth, embryogensis, and the 
immune system.[78] Studies of BPA and phthalates have also found a variety of effects on terrestrial 
species, especially amphibians.[78] Given the fact that many of these effects are documented in wildlife 
at environmentally relevant concentrations, researchers believe that it is probable that population level 
effects are occurring, especially for highly exposed and highly vulnerable species.[78] Population level 
effects (decrease in birth rate, increase in death rate, prevalence of disease, population decline) can 
occur when a pollutant affects enough individuals in a population.
Although originally developed 
by the medical industry in the 
1930s, BPA’s primary 
commercial application since 
1950 has been in the plastic 
industry.27Although BPA and phthalates are discussed primarily in this report, studies do exist for other plastic 
additives like polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), which are commonly used as flame-retardant 
coatings. Studies in rats show that PBDEs can cause endocrine-disrupting effects on the thyroid and 
reproductive system and neurological abnormalities (especially in rats exposed during periods of early 
brain development).[82] Since there are so many additives used in plastic, more research is needed to 
determine which additives have toxicological effects, at what concentrations, and what types of 
organisms are most vulnerable.
Plastics and Human Health
The effects on humans of plastics and the chemicals pollutants associated with them are outside of 
the scope of this report. It should be noted, however, that although humans commonly see 
themselves as quite separate from wildlife, humans, in fact, share a great deal of biochemistry with 
many organisms, including invertebrates like marine mussels and worms. This is why many of the 
same documented toxicological effects in wildlife are subsequently documented in humans; many 
effects of DDT were first noted in wildlife and only later identified in humans. However, not all 
chemicals that have toxicological effects in wildlife have effects in humans, and even the chemicals 
that have effects in wildlife and humans may not have the same effects in both groups due to 
differences in exposure and variations in the way biological systems metabolize chemicals. It 
cannot be assumed, therefore, that the toxicological effects on wildlife will have similar effects on 
humans. Proven toxicological effects on wildlife, however, can raise red flags and certainly warrant 
additional studies to ascertain if there are indeed any human health concerns. 
Since the late 1990s, studies have detected measurable levels of BPA in humans around the globe, 
including 93% of the U.S. population.[69] Many studies have indicated that food and drinks seem to 
be the main pathway of exposure for people.[67, 69, 79, 82] Some studies have focused specifically on 
the levels of phthalates in human neonates hospitalized in intensive care units who are exposed to 
phthalates in catheters, blood-bags, nasogastric and intravenous tubes.[82, 92] Some isolated and very 
recent studies have linked exposure to various endocrine-disrupting chemicals to cancer, decreased 
human sperm count, increased frequency of male reproductive abnormalities, and the 
growing trend of early onset puberty in females.[82] Further biological and epidemiological studies 
are needed to investigate the health risks of the human body burden of BPA, other endocrine-
disrupting chemicals, and other plastic additives. For more information on plastics and human 
health, see the recent review papers of Meeker et al., 2009; Koch and Calafat, 2009; and Talsness et 
al., 2009. 
For some governments, the existing data (however inconclusive) has warranted a precautionary 
approach when it comes to certain endocrine-disrupting chemicals. In 1997, the endocrine-
disrupting potential of BPA became of concern in Japan, and as a result, most food and beverage 
can manufacturing companies in Japan eliminated BPA from interior can coatings. A study of 
Japanese students conducted before and after 1997 found a significant reduction in the body 
burden of BPA in the students.[93] Due to the proven toxicological effects of BPA on wildlife, in 
September 2010 the Canadian government became the first government officially to declare BPA a 
toxin to the environment and human health by adding BPA to the list of toxic substances under the 
Canadian Environmental Protection Act.[94] Canada and the European Union banned the use of BPA 
in baby bottles beginning in 2011.[95; 96]284. Bioavailability and Transport Up the Food Chain
Studies have shown definitively that plastics in the marine environment both leach pollutants of concern 
from their internal matrix as well as accumulate pollutants from the surrounding seawater.[4, 7, 62-64 69, 83] 
Laboratory trials show that many of these pollutants have adverse health effects for a variety of 
organisms.[69, 78, 82, 88-91] The question that logically follows is whether these pollutants can be transferred 
directly from plastic to an organism? Furthermore, if pollutants are concentrating on plastic marine 
debris at concentrations higher than those found in the surrounding water and sediment, does it follow 
that marine organisms that ingest plastic are being exposed to much higher levels of pollutants than are 
present in their environment?
Many studies have documented the direct and indirect ingestion of 
plastic by a variety of species ranging from tiny filter feeding 
organisms to large marine mammals like fur seals.[97] In fact, the 
number of species known to ingest plastic is constantly increasing. 
One of the earliest studies providing evidence for plastic transport 
and offloading of pollutants to marine organisms showed a positive 
correlation between PCBs in fat tissue and ingested plastic in shear-
water seabirds.[98] However, more recent studies have focused on 
organisms that are much lower on the marine food chain. In 
laboratory trials, polychaete worms, barnacles, amphipods[2], and 
mussels[99] all ingested microscopic plastic particles when feeding. 
For these small organisms—particularly for deposit feeders that not only live in marine sediment but also 
ingest up to several times their own body weight in sediment daily—the ability for contaminated plastic 
particles to be directly ingested or transfer their contaminants to the sediment is of great concern. One 
recent study was able to tease out the cycling and adsorbtion/desorbtion rates of phenanthrene (a U.S. 
EPA priority pollutant) between seawater, marine sediment, various types of plastic fragments, and a 
common deposit feeder, the lugworm 
(Arenicola marina ).[62] Polyethylene, 
polypropylene and polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC) were all tested, and although 
polyethylene adsorbed the highest level 
of phenanthrene, all the plastic types 
adsorbed the pollutant at much higher 
concentrations than two natural 
sediments tested. The study found that 
adding very small quantities of 
polyethylene contaminated with 1 μg 
phenanthrene to the sediment resulted in 
a significant increase in the phenanthrene 
contamination of the lugworm. The study 
was also able to show the path of 
contamination from floating plastic 
sinking to the sediment and then 
desorbing some of the phenanthrene into 
the sediment. 
 Evidence of lugworm activity on a beach in Ireland. 
(Photo credit: public domain)
These results show that plastic 
can be a significant transporter 
of contaminants to marine 
sediments, and therefore, 
sediment dwelling organisms 
can be contaminated via 
directly ingesting the plastic or 
simply ingesting the sediment.29These results show that plastic can be a 
significant transporter of contaminants to 
marine sediments, and, therefore, 
sediment dwelling organisms can be 
contaminated via directly ingesting the 
plastic or simply ingesting the 
sediment.[62] This study, coupled with 
other studies showing that even globally 
common and ecologically important fish 
ingest plastic,[56] raises further questions 
and concerns about if and how far up the 
marine food chain plastic and its 
associated contaminants are 
transported.[100]
Making toxicological causal links between plastic and an organism is more easily accomplished in a 
controlled laboratory setting than it is in the natural environment. However, a research team in 
Connecticut has hypothesized that certain chemicals leached from plastic may have contributed to the 
huge die-off of American lobster in western Long Island Sound in the last decade. Researchers found 
that lobsters in the western Long Island Sound, the south shore of Massachusetts and Cape Cod Bay are 
contaminated with alkyphenols, used commonly in plastic and rubber manufacturing.[101] In a 
laboratory setting, the alkyphenols were shown to alter juvenile hormone activity,[102, 103] and these 
hormones are known to play a role in lobster reproduction, development, and molting.[104] The research 
team now hypothesizes that endocrine disrupters like alkyphenols could make lobsters more susceptible 
to shell disease,[105] a condition that has caused huge reductions in the American lobster population over 
the last decade. Shell disease is caused by a bacterium that bores into the lobster shell and causes pitting 
and ultimately huge ulcerations and holes in the shell, leaving the lobster unprotected and more 
susceptible to predation and disease. Moreover, shell disease causes more frequent molting of the 
lobster’s shell; mother lobsters have been observed to molt even when their eggs are still attached to the 
bottom of their shell, killing the offspring.[106] 
This lobster study—although not conducted in California and somewhat inconclusive—is worth 
mentioning to give a comprehensive picture of the type of toxicological impacts of plastic currently 
under investigation.A fish (rainbow runner) found with plastic in its stomach contents. 
(Photo credit: AMRF)
An American Lobster with shell 
disease. (Photo credit: University of 
Rhode Island Fisheries Center)
30C. Transport of Alien Species
One relatively new concern in the scientific community is the ability of invasive species to use floating 
plastic debris as transport devices. The U.S. EPA’s definition of an invasive species is “a plant or animal 
that is non-native (or alien) to an ecosystem, and whose introduction is likely to cause economic, 
human health, or environmental damage in that ecosystem; once established, it is extremely difficult 
to control their spread.”[107] One of the most well-known invasive species in the United States is the 
aquatic zebra mussel, which was inadvertently introduced into Lake St. Clair (at the border of Michigan 
and Canada) in 1988 and subsequently spread throughout the Great Lakes as well as other inland lakes, 
rivers, and canals. Zebra mussels have almost completely eliminated the native clam population in that 
area and drastically reduced the food source for many other species, in turn causing ecological concerns 
for many other native species. Economically, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that zebra 
mussel impacts have been in the billions of dollars as they have caused severe problems at power plants 
and municipal water supplies by clogging pipes.[108] California had its own scare in 2000 with an 
aggressive invasive species of tropical marine algae called Caulerpa taxifola  that also spread to 
southern Australia, as well as to the Mediterranean Sea. In the Mediterranean, action was not taken 
quickly enough and Caulerpa  has since become too widespread to eradicate. It has caused tremendous 
ecological and economic impacts to European fisheries and tourism.[109] California and southern 
Australia are currently spending millions of dollars attempting to eradicate this seaweed to avoid the 
same fate. Although Caulerpa  and zebra mussels were not spread by plastic marine debris, these 
infamous examples demonstrate why scientists and managers are very concerned about the spread of 
aggressive invasive species.
Invasive species have traditionally spread via direct human introduction, transportation via ships or 
naturally floating debris like wood. Some scientists believe that the large and growing presence of 
human debris, particularly durable and buoyant plastic, more than doubles the rafting opportunities for 
organisms[3, 110] by providing an ideal vector for the dispersal of organisms (bryozoans, 
barnacles, polychaete worms, hydroids, coralline algae, and mollusks) across great distances in the 
ocean.[47, 111, 112] Table 5 lists a number of documented examples of invasive species transported via 
plastic debris. 
Encrusting invertebrates such as bryzoans, barnacles, polychaete worms, hydroids, coralline algae, and mollusks that 
adhere to plastic containers may be transported over long distances. (Photo credit: Lindsey Hoshaw, AMRF)
31For example, transport by floating plastic is implicated in the European northward range extension of a 
large barnacle ( Perforatus perforatus ).[113] One study in the Mediterranean tracked algae on plastic debris 
and has implicated it as a possible vector in the spread of harmful algal blooms.[114] Considering plastic 
marine debris as a possible transport device for invasive species to the California coastline adds an 
additional level of concern (beyond ingestion/entanglement) for California natural resource managers.
D. Impacted Habitats and Benthic Life
Plastic is generally known for its buoyancy. However, only 46% of manufactured plastic (by type) is 
buoyant in seawater,[20] and even these plastics can lose their buoyancy over time by the weight of 
encrusting organisms. Eventually a large amount of plastic sinks to the ocean floor[47] although the exact 
amounts are largely unknown. In some cases, benthic analyses have been completed; for instance, 
plastics make up 80-85% of the debris items on the sea floor in Tokyo Bay[115] and up to 70% of the 
debris items in locations along the continental shelves and slopes of European Seas, including the Baltic 
Sea, the North Sea, the Celtic Sea, and the Bay of Biscay.[22] Several studies have already documented 
changes in community composition due to impacts to the seabed from being covered in sunken marine 
debris.[116, 117] Some researchers speculate that benthic debris, especially somewhat permanent debris like 
plastic, may affect gas exchange between the sediments and seawater,[118] which in turn may effect the 
type of organisms that are able to live in that environment. More research is needed in this area; research 
focused on possible changes in California’s benthic flora and fauna due to debris-smothering would be 
the most useful for the state.
E. Economic Impacts
In addition to biological and ecological effects on marine wildlife, plastic marine debris also causes 
substantial economic impacts to coastal communities. Cleaning up plastic marine debris from 
watersheds, coastlines, and the nearshore seafloor is critical to the prevention of flooding, navigational 
hazards, and public safety issues (as, for example, with medical waste), all of which can cause a 
downturn in tourism and result in lost revenues. According to the World Health Organization, a clean 
beach is one of the most important attractions for visitors.[119]Table 5: Examples of marine invaders using plastic as a raft. (Data obtained from Gregory, 2009)Rafting Material Type of organism Species Name Location Found Origin
Plastic pellets Bryozoan Membranipora 
tuberculataNew Zealand Australia
Synthetic rope Oyster Lopha cristagalli New Zealand Indo-Paciﬁc
Plastic toy boat Land plants Seeds of 8 species, 
3 exoticNew Zealand Unkonwn
Plastic fragments Bryozoan Thalamoporella 
evelinaeFlorida Brazil
Plastic crate Oysters Pinctata spp. Burmuda Venezuala
Trawl netting Sea anemone Diadumene lineata Northwest Hawaiian Islands Japan
Plastic strap Bryozoan, Sponges, 
Worms, Anemone, and 
Mussels10 species Antartica Unknown
Plastic fragments Microalage Unknown species Mediterranean Unknown
Plastic debris Barnacle Elminius modestus British Isles, Shetland Islands, 
and Northern EuropeSouthern England via 
Australasian waters32In New Jersey in 1987 and Long Island in 1988, public reports 
of syringes, vials, and plastic catheters along the coasts resulted 
in economic losses in tourism expenditure between US$ 1.3 
and US$ 5.4 billion.[120] Although California has never assessed 
the loss of tourism dollars due to marine debris on shorelines 
or in coastal waters, the National Ocean Economics Program 
calculated the value of California’s ocean-dependent 
economy—of which the majority is attributable to recreation—to be US$ 46 billion.[121] Therefore, any 
reduction in the quality of ocean and coastal recreation could have substantial impacts on the state. 
The cost of prevention  of marine debris by methods such as litter cleanup and landfilling must not be 
discounted either. The Division of Maintenance in the California Department of Transportation reports 
spending approximately US$ 41 million a year on litter removal.[122] The 2007 California Department of 
Transportation Litter Abatement Plan reported that in the 2005-2006 fiscal year, the Division of 
Maintenance spent approximately US$ 55 million on litter cleanup.[123] Los Angeles County Department 
of Public Works and the Flood Control District spend US$ 18 million per year on street sweeping, 
stormwater catch basin cleaning, and other litter-related cleanup, prevention or education programs.[124] 
Meeting the requirements under the U.S. Clean Water Act—which regulates discharges of pollutants 
(including trash) into U.S. waters—also incurs substantial costs. The Los Angeles Regional Water Quality 
Control Board issued a trash Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) for the Los Angeles River and Ballona 
Creek requiring zero measurable (>5 mm) trash in the storm drain system within 10 years. Reaching a 
zero-trash limit in the Los Angeles River requires a long-term multi-faceted plan (discussed in more 
detail in Chapter V). The cost for compliance with this TMDL so far is US$ 39 million, and the total 
projection for complete compliance in 2016 is US$ 85 million.[125] Southern California cities have spent 
to date well over US$ 1.7 billion in meeting the requirements of trash TMDLs required under the Clean 
Water Act.[126] The San Francisco Regional Water Quality Control Board estimates that it may take just 
over US$27.5 million to cover the costs of trash capture device installation required to meet the trash 
reduction targets under the regional stormwater permit issued by the Board in 2009 (discussed in more 
detail in Chapter V).[176]
According to the World Health Organization, a clean beach is one 
of the most important attractions for visitors. Debris can cause 
significant economic losses to local communities due to loss of 
tourism dollars. The left two images show a beach in Los Angeles, 
CA. (Photo credits: left, middle, Heal the Bay; right, NOAA National 
Marine Debris Program)
Southern California cities have spent 
to date well over US$ 1.7 billion in 
meeting the requirements of trash 
TMDLs required under the Clean 
Water Act.
33Even plastic that is not released to the environment but is 
delivered to landfills has significant costs to the state. In 
1999, California spent US$ 30 million to landfill an estimated 
300,000 tons of polystyrene.[127] Landfill operators in Los 
Angeles County report spending approximately US$ 25,000 a 
month per facility cleaning up single-use plastic bags that 
easily disperse due to wind.[124] 
Municipal measures to collect and contain plastic waste are 
essentially preventative measures for the release of marine 
debris to the environment; states and countries without such 
measures face staggering cleanup costs. For example, 
removing litter from South Africa’s wastewater streams is 
estimated to cost US$ 279 million per year.[128] 
The costs mentioned above related to California are clearly substantial, but they do not provide a full 
picture of costs to the state due to plastic. Further research is needed to determine the complete 
economic impacts of cleanup, prevention, infrastructure, education and other costs to the state in the 
effort to reduce plastic marine debris.
Lost or abandoned fishing gear—often termed “derelict fishing gear”—can have significant economic 
effects when commercially important species are being caught. In the Northeast Atlantic Ocean, an 
estimated US$ 250 million in lobster is lost each year from lobster being trapped and dying in derelict 
fishing gear sitting on the ocean floor.[129] NOAA spends US$ 2 million a year to remove 50-60 tons of 
derelict fishing gear and nets around the Hawaiian Islands to prevent entanglement of the endangered 
Hawaiian monk seal.[7] In the United Kingdom, 92% of fishermen report having issues with catching 
marine debris in their nets instead of their intended catch, and it is estimated that this costs the local 
fishing industry as much as US$ 17 million per year.[130] Plastic debris also causes navigational hazards 
for vessels by fouling their propellers; in 2008 in British waters, there were 286 Coast Guard rescues due 
to fouled propellers, costing US$ 2.8 million.[21] In the Asia-Pacific region, marine debris is estimated to 
cost US$ 1 billion per year in cleanups, boating repairs, and other activities.[21]
NOAA spends US$ 2 million a year to remove 50-60 tons of derelict fishing gear and nets to prevent entanglement 
of the endangered Hawaiian monk seal, of which there is estimated to be only 1,000 individuals left. In additon to 
“ghostfishing,” abandoned fishing gear causes navigational hazards for vessels by fouling their propellors. (Photo 
credit: left, AMRF; right, Ocean Conservancy)
The California Department of 
Transportation, Division of 
Maintenance reports spending 
approximately US$ 41 million a 
year on litter removal. In 1999, 
California spent US$ 30 million to 
landfill an estimated 300,000 tons 
of polystyrene. Landfill operators in 
Los Angeles County report spending 
approximately US$ 25,000 a month 
per facility cleaning up single-use 
plastic bags that easily disperse due 
to wind.
34This chapter focuses on solutions which are ongoing or developing in California, as well as major 
solutions in use in other parts of the world. It is not within the scope of this report to provide a 
comprehensive list of solutions or policy recommendations for the state. Therefore, this chapter should 
be read as informational, and although it may report on some successes or challenges facing various 
solution types, it is not an endorsement or criticism of any of these solutions or policies for the state of 
California.
A. Cleanup and Recovery
1. Organized Cleanup Efforts
Whether in watersheds, along coastlines, on the sea surface, in the water column, or on the seafloor, 
plastic marine debris can continue to harm wildlife and the marine environment until it is removed. 
Efforts like the volunteer-based International Coastal Cleanup Day (CCD)—which began in 1986 and is 
organized in California by the California Coastal Commission (CCC)—are invaluable for the 
geographical expanse that is covered and the amount of work that is done on a single day. In 2009, 
volunteers collected over 3.6 million pounds (1,636 metric tons) of debris nationwide on CCD. Over 1.6 
million pounds (727 metric tons)—almost half of the national total—was collected in California 
alone.[30] In 2010, California still led the way among states claiming just under 1.4 million pounds (636 
metric tons) of the 4.3 million pounds (1,934 metric tons) collected nationally.[28] These data are 
described in more detail in Chapter II of this report. 
2. Energy Recovery
Describing the pros and cons of the transformation of waste-to-energy are beyond the scope of this 
report. However, it is worth noting that some programs and countries have begun to create energy from 
incinerating plastic waste. Some countries like Japan, Denmark and Sweden have more advanced 
infrastructure designed to deal with incinerating large amounts of municipal solid waste, including 
plastics.[6] Without appropriate infrastructure, incineration of mixed plastic wastes can release hazardous 
chemicals such as dioxins, PCBs, and furans into the environment.[131] 
In Hawaii, the “Nets to Energy Program and Part-
nership” transports plastic fishing nets collected at 
all NOAA marine debris cleanups to the Schnitzer 
Steel Hawai’i Corporation where the nets are 
chopped into small pieces suitable for combustion. 
The pulverized nets are burned at the Honolulu’s 
H-Power facility, producing steam, which drives a 
turbine and creates usable electricity.[132] Catalyzed 
by the success of this Hawaiian program and 
partnership, the NOAA Marine Debris Program, 
the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation, and 
Covanta Energy Corporation formed a 
partnership in 2008 called the “Fishing for Energy 
Program.”[133]V . Solutions: Types, Successes and Challenges
International Coastal Cleanup Day. 
(Photo credit: Ocean Conservancy)35This partnership works with ports, cities, marinas, and 
fishermen’s cooperatives to provide, at no cost, disposal 
facilities for derelict fishing gear. The gear is then 
transported to the nearest of the 40 Covanta Energy-from-
Waste Facilities in the U.S., where, according to the part-
nership, the waste from one ton of derelict plastic fishing 
nets can generate enough electricity to power a single-
family home for 25 days. The U.S. is not the only country 
experimenting with using plastic waste to create energy. In 
South Korea, polyethylene has been tested as an 
additive to coal-burning blast furnaces.[134]  In Japan, the 
Blest Company is testing a portable desktop machine that 
can turn polypropylene, polyethylene, and polystyrene 
plastic into recycled petroleum.[135] 
B.  Reduction and Prevention 
The majority of solutions currently in practice in California and other states can be classified as methods 
of reduction and prevention of marine debris. 
1. Structural controls
Many coastal cities have begun to place debris capture devices across storm drains, urban catch basins, 
and pumping stations in order to collect marine debris. Although these physical barriers can be 
effective, routine cleaning and maintenance are required to avoid blockages and flooding. Because the 
mesh size of grates must be large enough to prevent constant blockages and flooding, these structural 
controls do not catch most micro-plastics (<5 mm diamter). Some cities have also placed debris booms 
(floating barriers) across rivers and drainage areas, using vacuum machines to collect the accumulation 
of debris against the boom. These devices, however, can break or overflow during storms. 
Many of these structural controls are established to comply with Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDLs), 
which are regulatory limits for pollution in bodies of water or waterways as established under the U.S. 
Clean Water Act. The Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board issued a trash TMDL for the Los 
Angeles River and Ballona Creek requiring zero measurable (>5 mm) trash in the storm drain system 
within ten years. Reaching a zero-trash limit in the Los Angeles River can be accomplished through 
institutional measures such as proper management of storm catch basins; trash collection; public 
outreach; enforcement; and structural measures, such as the 7,700 catch basin inserts, 14,900 catch 
basin opening screen covers, and 13 netting systems installed as of September 2008.[125]  The San 
Francisco Regional Water Quality Control Board (SFRWQCB) adopted a regional stormwater permit in 
2009 for four counties (Alameda, Contra Costa, San Mateo, Santa Clara) and three cities (Fairfield, 
Suisun City, Vallejo) which regulates discharges from these municipalities.[176] The regulations include 
trash reductions from all creeks and storm drain systems, with trash discharge reduction targets of 40% 
by 2014, 70% by 2017 and 100% (zero-trash limit) by 2022.[176] 
As discussed earlier in the report, industrial plastic manufacturers have developed a voluntary suite of 
best management practices (BMPs) called “Operation Clean Sweep,” (e.g., housekeeping procedures like 
vacuuming spills, use of physical barriers like booms to catch spilled pellets, assigning an employee to 
monitor for cleanliness) in order to reduce the amount of pre-production plastic resin pellets entering the 
storm drain system and watersheds.
Recycling bin for derelict fishing nets. 
(Photo Credit: NOAA National Marine Debris 
Program)36In California, the Algalita Marine Research Foundation (AMRF) analyzed industrial discharge from 
participating thermoplastic processing centers before and after the implementation of the new BMPs and 
found a 50% reduction (by count) in pellet discharge into the environment during normal weather.[44] In 
2007, the state passed Assembly Bill 258 which declared preproduction plastic pellets to be a threat to 
the California marine environment and required the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) to 
initiate the Preproduction Plastic Debris Program to regulate the discharge of preproduction plastic pel-
lets from all facilities in the state that manufacture, handle or transport preproduction plastic 
pellets.[177] The State and Regional Water Board staff have conducted hundreds of inspections and con-
tinue to conduct compliance inspections of preproduction plastic manufacturing, handling, and trans-
port facilities. The SWRQB plans to use these inspections to develop regulatory approaches for address-
ing those facilities in non-compliance with the law.[177] 
2. Recycling 
Nationally, 82 million tons of municipal solid waste (MSW) are 
recycled annually.[38]  According to the U.S. Enviornmental 
Protection Agency (EPA), this recycling rate reduces the potential 
for the emission of 178 million metric tons of carbon dioxide: the 
equivalent of the annual greenhouse gas emissions from almost 33 
million passenger vehicles.[38] The U.S. EPA calculates the offset car-
bon dioxide based on four ways in which the disposal of solid waste produces greenhouse gas 
emissions: 1) methane gas is produced by the anaerobic decomposition of waste in landfills; 2) the 
incineration of waste (approximately 12% of MSW per year) produces carbon dioxide as a by-product; 
3) fossil fuels are generated in the transportation of waste for disposal; and 4) fossil fuels are produced in 
the extraction and processing of raw materials to replace those disposed materials.[38] Although 
recycling appears to be a viable solution to reducing waste, actual recycling rates are low. Overall 
plastic recycling (by mass) in the U.S. and California has been stalled near 7%[38] and 5%[174, 175] 
respectively for almost 15 years. This is despite the fact that recycling rates for certain plastic items like 
beverage bottles have increased as more bottle recycling programs have been put in place.[40, 136] Even 
so, in 2005, only 17% of the more than 50 million polyethylene terephthalate (PET) plastic water bottles 
consumed in the U.S. were recycled.[7]
A worldwide study in 2006 evaluated recycling rates and policies in 14 countries (including the U.S.) 
and found that the countries with the highest recycling rates used incentives that increased source 
separation and the reuse of recycled content by companies.[137] In 2009, seven countries in the 
European Union as well as Norway and 
Switzerland recycled or reused for energy 
generation 84% of the mass of their plastic 
waste.[138] The most successful recycling program 
in California is the Beverage Container 
Recycling Program, created in 1987 by the 
California Beverage Container Recycling and 
Litter Reduction Act. In this program, a 
California Redemption Value cash incentive (5 
cents for containers less than 24 ounces, 10 cents 
for containers 24 ounces or larger) can be 
collected for returning used beverage containers 
to collection facilities. 
Beach recycling bins. (Photo credit: Sheavly Consultants)
Overall plastic recycling (by 
mass) in the U.S. and California 
has been stalled at around 7% 
and 5% respectively.37According to CalRecycle (officially known as the 
California Department of Resources, Recycling and 
Recovery) , 230 billion aluminum, glass, and 
plastic beverage containers have been recycled 
since the beginning of the program.[139] In the 
most recent “Biannual Report of Beverage 
Container Sales, Returns, Redemption, and 
Recycling Rates,” California’s rate of beverage 
container recycling was 86%. Specifically, 
recycling rates for certain types of material, 
including plastic, were: aluminum (95%); glass 
(90%); #1 PET (74%); #2 HDPE (98%); #3 PVC 
(0%); #4 LDPE (1%); #5 PP (2%); #6 PS (8%); #7 
other (12%); and bimetal (14%). Not all types of 
plastic are currently recycled successfully, but the 
rates for #1 and #2 plastics are high enough to 
indicate that with appropriate education, 
incentives, and collection facilities, higher rates of 
recycling for other types of plastics may be 
possible.
Even with improved rates of household and 
municipal recycling for all materials, there are still more issues to address with the physical processes, 
economics, infrastructure and policies regarding recycling. Using recycled materials, 
especially plastic, can be expensive and difficult from a product-quality standpoint. Post-consumer resin 
plastic can have lower quality mechanical properties due to contamination from other materials such as 
dirt, contaminants, labels and adhesives, and other plastic polymers.[140] Because washing is the most 
expensive step in the plastic recycling process,[140] the cost of recycled plastic material often exceed 
those of using virgin plastic material.[7] Economic incentives created by new legislation and policies, 
in addition to public education, may prove necessary in order to increase recycling rates in California. 
Nonetheless, California has or is in the process of developing and analyzing a number of ways (some 
legislative, some regulatory, some voluntary) in which to increase recycling in the state:
Rigid Plastic Container Program of California : Established by law and enforced by CayRecycle, the RPPC 
program requires that companies whose products are sold in California must be made of at least 25% 
post-consumer resin, be source-reduced (light-weighted) by 10%, reused or refilled at least 5 times, or 
have a recycling rate of at least 45%. However, because these options are technologically infeasible for 
certain types of containers, waivers are also available.[139]
California Trash Bag Recycled Content Act : California’s trash bag law requires plastic trash bag 
manufacturers to use a specific amount of plastic postconsumer material to produce the trash bags sold 
in California.[141]
Hospital Blue Wrap : CalRecycle is currently trying to coordinate and facilitate the recycling of sterile, 
uncontaminated hospital blue wrap (polypropylene, #5) which is used for wrapping surgical instruments 
for sterilization. Estimates from the Health Care Industry are that 20% of its waste stream is from surgical 
services, and much of this waste is actually clean blue wrap.[142]Due to the California Beverage Container Recycling Program, 
in which a California Redemption Value cash incentive can be 
collected for returning used beverage containers to collection 
facilities, recycling rates of plastic bottles are high compared 
to other plastic products. However, plastic bottles are still a 
common debris item found on California Beaches. (Photo 
credit: Heal the Bay)
38Recycled Plastic Lumber (RPL) : RPL is a wood-like product that is made from recycled plastic mixed 
with other materials and is being explored by CalRecycle (and previously by the California Integrated 
Waste Managment Board (CIWMB)) as a substitute for concrete, wood, and some metals. It is being 
proposed for use in decking, landscaping, transportation (noise barriers, sign posts, speed bumps) and 
recreational equipment such as benches, picnic tables, and playgrounds.[143]
Plasticulture : “Plasticulture” refers to the use of plastic in agriculture to extend the growing season, 
conserve water, control weeds, and maintain high quality fruit when used as mulch. It is found in the 
form of plastic film mulches, drip irrigation tape, row covers, low tunnels, high tunnels, silage bags, hay 
bale wraps, and plastic trays and pots used in transplanting.  Even though plastic has been used in 
agriculture since the origin of plastic in the late 1940s and early 1950s, there is very little known about 
the disposal and recycling practices of agricultural producers in California. However, the CIWMB 
contracted a study in 2008 to analyze the extent of use of plasticulture in the state and the impediments 
to recycling this plastic. The study found that plasticulture is quite prevalent in California, with 43% of 
the surveyed producers indicating that they use plastic in their growing practices. The study estimated 
that with 100% participation in the survey, the annual plastic disposal from the agriculture industry is 
107,749 tons per year (the approximate weight of 72,000 automobiles). Of those producers using 
plastic, a third of them indicated that they participate in some form of recycling. The study also 
determined that the main incentives to increased participation in recycling would include an on-farm 
plastic pick-up service, easily accessible collection sites, or financial incentives.[144]
The Seadoc Society’s California Lost Fishing Gear Recovery Project : California currently has no 
comprehensive statewide effort to address lost or abandoned fishing gear, much of which is plastic 
(monofilament line, nets, buoys). The only program exists through The Seadoc Society’s California Lost 
Fishing Gear Recovery Project, which started in 2005 and encourages ocean users to voluntarily report 
the presence of derelict fishing gear. The project then hires commercial divers to remove the gear. Since 
2006, the project has removed more than 45 tons of derelict fishing gear from the California coastline 
and 1,400 pounds of gear from below public fishing piers, including one million feet of plastic 
monofiliment fishing line.[145]
Efforts to expand this project more officially throughout the state have not been successful. The 
Governor vetoed the “Derelict Fishing Gear Bill” (Senate Bill 21) at the end of 2010 (and once before in 
2008) which would have required that by January 2012, 
all fishing licenses and official brochures issued in 
California have printed on them a toll-free number and 
website for the purposes of reporting lost fishing gear. 
Although awareness and perhaps reporting of derelict 
fishing gear would have increased under this bill, it 
would not have prevented the initial abandonment of 
fishing gear, and its success depends on the proper 
behavior and effort (phone call or internet log-in) of 
ocean users. A recent committee report at the National 
Academy of Sciences found that inadequate port 
facilities and high disposal costs are a major impediment 
to the proper disposal of wastes. The report finds that 
ships need to be able to discharge their waste fishing 
gear at ports and should have incentives (not fees) to do 
so.[146]Derelict fishing gear just below the surface of the 
water in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre. (Photo 
credit: Jody Lemmon, AMRF)
39As discussed in Chapter III of this report, the National Research 
Council Committee on Shipborne Wastes has identified a need 
for better onboard and shore-side waste management systems, as 
well as a need for formal adequacy standards on which to judge 
and certify shore-side trash reception facilities.[34] NOAA’s Clean 
Marinas Program encourages marina managers to adopt best 
management practices in dealing with wastes like trash, but this 
remains a voluntary program without enforcement.[147] During 
the Fifth International Marine Debris Conference in March 2011, 
NOAA and the United National Environment Program (UNEP) 
hosted a workshop to discuss best management practices for 
ships and port waste reception facility operators in relation to 
eliminating ship-based marine debris.[148] More investigation is 
warranted to determine whether incentives for boaters to bring 
debris into port, similar to the incentives for commercial and 
domestic recycling, could potentially reduce the disposal of 
derelict fishing gear off the coast of California.
3. Smart Design and Extended Producer Responsibility 
Disposable plastic packaging accounts for almost a third of plastic use in the U.S.[134] and almost 50% of 
the plastic produced globally.[6] Aesthetics, convenience, and marketing benefits can lead to over-
packaging.[6] This issue of plastic packaging is growing, as is the trend in having products themselves 
be plastic, single-use, and disposable. One solution is the conscious and smart design of products and 
packaging intended to reduce disposable plastic (by volume and weight); one method of encouraging 
better packaging design and producer responsibility, which is gaining traction in California and 
elsewhere in the world, is known as Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR). Calrecycle (and it’s 
predecessor, the CIWMB) has defined EPR as “the extension of the responsibility of producers, and all 
entities involved in the product chain, to reduce the cradle-to-cradle impacts of a product and its 
packaging; the primary responsibility lies with the producer, or brand owner, who makes design and 
marketing decisions.[149] There are many types of EPR programs, including but not limited to: those that 
involve smart design of packaging to reduce waste and encourage recycling; those that involve 
mandatory or voluntary take-back of products; and those that allow for government subsidies or tax 
credits to companies who use environmentally preferable materials. 
For example, Sony Electronics Inc. is one company that voluntarily started a national take-back and 
recycling program in 2007, allowing for the free recycling of all Sony brand electronics and drop-off 
for all other electronic brands. Sony even provided a financial discount on new TVs for those recycling 
their old TVs.[150] Caterpillar, a company specializing in engines and construction equipment, has also 
created a take-back and remanufacturing program for their products, collecting about 2 billion pounds 
of equipment per year and employing over 6,000 workers to remanufacture this material back into fully 
warranted new products.[151]
In California, several current laws fit the profile of EPR, making the product producers (not taxpayers) 
financially responsible for the recycling or disposal of used products.[152] These laws cover carpet, paint, 
mercury thermostats, pesticide containers, car air-conditioning refrigerant, and any products recalled 
due to safety concerns.[153] In 2007, the CIWMB adopted a Strategic Directive to increase producer 
responsibility and stewardship of their materials and products.NOAA’s Clean Marinas Program encourages 
marina managers to adopt best management 
practices in dealing with wastes like trash, 
but this remains a voluntary program with-
out enforcement. (Photo credit: Sheavly 
Consultants)
40In 2008, the CIWMB adopted an EPR Framework[149] that provides guidance to be used in the 
development of new EPR legislation in California. Enacted legislatively, the EPR Framework would give 
CalRecycle (the department that replaced the CIWMB in January 2010) the authority to select 
product categories for EPR programs, require producers within those categories to implement plans, 
specify the provisions within the plans (goals, fees, administration, reporting), and determine 
enforcement and penalties for non-compliance. In 2010, California Assembly Bill 2139 attemped to 
create an EPR framework but failed to garner enough votes on the House floor. However, in 2010 Maine 
became the first state in the U.S. to enact comprehensive product stewardship legislation, establishing a 
process by which the state can evaluate and establish EPR programs for products and packaging that are 
difficult to recycle.[153] Several other countries, including Canada, Germany, Ireland, United Kingdom, 
Belgium, Norway, Australia, Japan, and New Zealand, also have legislated well-developed and 
successful EPR programs.[153] 
Some companies in California have voluntarily embraced this concept of waste reduction in packaging 
without the need for legislation, and these companies are listed on CalRecycle’s website.[154] For 
example, FP International manufactures polystyrene loosefill 
(packing peanuts) from 100% waste polystyrene, and collects 
and recycles about 4 million pounds of expanded 
polystyrene a year. It is estimated that this amount of 
polystyrene would fill a 200 foot-deep landfill the length of a 
football field.[154] One company in California that now 
separates its expanded polystyrene waste and gives it to FP 
International reportedly saves US$ 80,000 a year.[154] These 
case studies demonstrate how companies are able to save 
money by reducing packaging and providing opportunities 
to recycle their waste, but further policy incentives may be 
required to encourage more plastic packaging reduction on a 
scale that matches the amount of plastic debris generated by 
the state. 
4. Initiatives and Legislation 
Marine debris is not a geographically isolated issue; it affects all coastal states and countries. Similarly, 
marine debris has complex cycling patterns in the ocean and does not adhere to jurisdictional 
boundaries. The most effective long-term solutions to marine debris will require changes in practices and 
behavior, requiring coordination across jurisdictional boundaries and between sectors (industry, 
science, business, municipal, private, environmental, etc). Below is a brief discussion of the current 
types of coordination and policy initiatives on marine debris relating to California. It was not within the 
scope of this report to evaluate the effectiveness of these initiatives, nor is it possible in many cases 
because the initiatives and legislative measures are all quite recent.
a. National Initiatives
Through an Executive Order in July 2010, President Obama issued the National Ocean Policy, the 
purpose of which is to achieve the vision of “an America whose stewardship ensures that the ocean, our 
coasts, and the Great Lakes are healthy and resilient, safe and productive, and understood and treasured 
so as to promote the well-being, prosperity, and security of present and future generations.”[155] Through 
the same Executive Order, the National Ocean Council was created to implement the National Ocean 
Policy. Polystyrene loosefill (packing peanuts) (Photo 
credit: public domain)
The National Ocean Council recently drafted outlines of nine strategic action plans to address various 
ocean and coastal issues, one of which addresses “Water Quality and Sustainable Practices on Land.”[156] 
This action plan has four main themes, one of which is to “reduce trash and marine debris in the ocean, 
coastal, and Great Lakes waters to minimize impacts on natural and human environments.”[157] Although 
the plan is generally focused on long-term goals and strategies, having a national plan aligned so well 
with regional and local initiatives could provide excellent opportunities for coordination among federal, 
state, and local agencies and organizations. In addition, NOAA’s National Marine Debris Program, 
mentioned throughout this report, is also providing leadership at the national level for research, 
initiatives, educational efforts, and partnerships focused on reducing and preventing marine debris.[1]
b. Regional Initiatives
Currently, a West Coast Marine Debris Alliance is being established under the West 
Coast Governors’ Agreement on Ocean Health, a collaboration established in 2006 
among the governors of Washington, Oregon, and California to better manage ocean 
and coastal resources. The Alliance is anticipated to be comprised of state, federal, 
local, and tribal governments, as well as NGOs and industry representatives from 
Washington, Oregon and California. Its mission will be to execute the strategy for 
addressing marine debris laid out under the Marine Debris Action Coordination 
Team Work Plan that was completed under the Governors’ Agreement in 2010.[158] 
Overall, the main goals of the work plan are to: “establish baseline estimates of 
marine debris and derelict gear off the west coast, to set reduction goals, and to 
support state and federal policies for achieving marine debris reduction goals, 
including debris prevention through expanded recycling, improved trash 
maintenance, public education, and enforcement of litter laws.”[34] This Alliance has 
the potential to be an excellent coordinating body for initiatives undertaken and 
solutions achieved at a regional level on the west coast. 
c. State Legislation
There have been a number of bills focused on the topic of marine debris within the 
last four years. In 2005, the CCC and AMRF co-sponsored the first international 
conference on plastic debris, called “Plastic Debris, Rivers to Sea,” which identified 
63 recommendations for action for California. The California Ocean Protection 
Council’s 2007 Resolution on Marine Debris[159] and 2008 Implementation 
Strategy[126] came about in part due to these recommendations. The 
implementation strategy has 16 recommendations but is focused on three main 
objectives: 1) bans on specific products more likely to become marine debris for 
which there are available substitute materials; 2) fees on products likely to become 
marine debris for which there are no available substitute materials; 3) and extended 
producer responsibility policies, aimed at making producers of plastic products 
responsible for the entire lifecycle of their products.[126]
Based partly on the resolution and implementation strategy, a series of legislative bills were also pro-
posed within the last few years, several of which have been signed into law but more of which were 
never brought to final vote in the California legislature, failed to garner enough votes to pass, or were 
ultimately vetoed by the Governor. Tables 6-9 contain a brief description of the major bills relating to 
plastic marine debris proposed within the last three legislative sessions in California, as well as those 
considered in the 2011-2012 legislative session.
41The West Coast 
Governors’ 
Agreement on Ocean 
Health is a 
collaboration 
established in 2006 
among the 
governors of 
Washington, Oregon, 
and California to 
better manage ocean 
and coastal 
resources. (Image 
credit: WCGA)
42Table 6 and 7: Major legislative bills relating to plastic marine debris in California from 2005-2008. This figure 
does not include bills relating to general landfill practices, general recycling practices, or expansion of 
composting facilities, although arguably these types of bills could significantly affect marine debris. Much of 
the information in this figure comes from the record of legislation kept by Californians Against Waste. To 
simplify this figure, the status category “Never brought to final vote,” marked by (*) includes: those bills held 
in committee, never heard in committee, placed on the inactive file, suspended, died by default at the end of 
the legislative session, gutted and amended into a completely different bill, never brought to floor vote, and 
those bills denied votes on the house or senate floor.Bill Bill Description Status
AB 2449Requires most large CA grocery stores to take back and recycle plastic grocery bags, label 
bags informing customers of the take back program, and provide reusable bags for customer 
purchase.Signed into law
AB 1940Creates a multiagency taskforce to formulate and implement a state plan addressing marine 
debris.Never made it to 
ﬁnal vote*
AB 1866Prohibits the sale, possession, or distribution of expanded polystyrene ("styrofoam") food 
containers by state facilities beginning January of 2008Failed2005-2006 California Legislative Session
Bill Bill Description Status
AB 2071Gives local governments the authority to ﬁne companies who mislabel their plastic products 
as compostable if they are not by American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) 
standards.Signed into law
AB 1879Gives the California Environmental Protection Agency greater authority to regulate toxins in 
consumer products.Signed into law
AB 1972Prohibits the use of nebulous, false claims like "biodegradable" in plastic packaging by 
requiring that environmental claims can only be made if the terms used are veriﬁed by an 
existing  American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standard speciﬁcation.Signed into law
AB 2058 
AB 2769Requires a fee be placed on single-use carryout bags distributed at large grocery stores and 
pharmaciesNever made it to 
ﬁnal vote*
SB 899Requires that, after 2011, commercial ﬁshing operations report lost ﬁshing gear to the 
Department of Fish and Game. After 2011, all commercial ﬁshing gear would be required to 
be coded with the identiﬁcation of the owner.  After 2012, the Department of Fish and Game 
would be required to establish targets for the reduction of derelict ﬁshing gear.Vetoed by Gov
AB 2505Phases out the use of PVC consumer packaging beginning 2013 and concluding 2015 due to 
its ability to leach toxins.Never made it to 
ﬁnal vote*
SB 1625Updates California's Bottle and Can Recycling Law by, among other measures, expanding the 
program to include all plastic bottles. Only about 50% of plastic bottles are currently covered 
by California's Bottle and Can Recycling Law.Never made it to 
ﬁnal vote*
AB 258Known as the "Nurdle Bill," this bill requires all plastic manufacturers in the State to use 
best management practices to prevent pellet spillage.Signed into law
AB 820 Prohibits the use of foamed polystyrene food containers in state facilities.Never made it to 
ﬁnal vote*
AB 904Requires that takeout food packaging from fast-food restaurants be made only from recyclable 
or compostable materials.Never made it to 
ﬁnal vote*
SB 898Requires the CIWMB to authorize several solutions to marine debris, including expending 
funds to abate illegal disposal sites, preventing waste going into storm drains, and assigning a 
plastics resin code to biodegradable plastics.Never made it to 
ﬁnal vote*2007-2008 California Legislative Session43Table 8 and 9: Major legislative bills relating to plastic marine debris in California from 2009 to July 2011. This 
figure does not include bills relating to general landfill practices, general recycling practices, or expansion of 
composting facilities, although arguably these types of bills could significantly affect marine debris. Much of 
the information in this figure comes from the record of legislation kept by Californians Against Waste. To 
simplify this figure, the status category “Never brought to final vote,” marked by (*) includes: those bills held 
in committee, never heard in committee, placed on the inactive file, suspended, died by default at the end of 
the legislative session, gutted and amended into a completely different bill, never brought to floor vote, and 
those bills denied votes on the house or senate floor.Bill Bill Description Status
SB 567Expands the scope of current plastic end-of-life claim labeling requirements from bags and 
food packaging to all plastic products. Restricts the labeling of plastics as "biodegradable", 
regardless of plastic type.Currently active
SB 568Prohibits food vendors from dispensing cooked food in polystyrene foam or Styrofoam 
containers.Currently active
AB 1149Extends a January 1, 2012 sunset for the Plastic Market Development program. Encourages 
existing California-based manufacturers of products and packaging to utilize recycled plastic 
in-state, reducing pollution and waste, and increase jobs and economic opportunity in 
California.Currently active2011-2012 Current California Legislative SessionBill Bill Description Status
SB 21Known as the "Derelict Fishing Gear Bill," this bill requires by January 2012 that all ﬁshing 
licenses and ofﬁcial brochures issued in California have printed on them a toll-free number 
and website for the purposes of reporting lost ﬁshing gear.Vetoed by Gov
SB 4Banned smoking at all 64 state beaches and 278 state parks, thereby reducing the amount of 
cigarette butt litter in the environment.Failed
AB 2139Known as “Take it Back," this bill would establish a producer take-back system, or Extended 
Producer Responsibility (EPR). This system would have required manufacturers to develop 
product stewardship plans for certain hazardous products such as medical sharps, pesticide 
containers, and small propane tanks.Failed 
SB 803Directs CIWMB to reduce the volume of Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) packaging by 50% 
beginning 2011.Never made it to 
ﬁnal vote*
AB 1358 Bans the use of expanded polystyrene food packaging.Never made it to 
ﬁnal vote*
AB 925 Requires bottle caps be attached to the container and be recyclable. Never made it to 
ﬁnal vote*
AB 68  
AB 87Requires that consumers pay a $0.25 fee for single-use bags distributed at large grocery 
stores, pharmacies and convenience stores. Never made it to 
ﬁnal vote*
AB 925Known as “Leash Your Lid,” this bill requires bottle manufacturers to redesign plastic beverage 
bottles with attached lids made of recyclable material, similar to aluminum can pull-tabs.Failed
AB 238Gives the CIWMB the authority to select products for inclusion in an Extended Producer 
Responsibility program.  After 2012, selected products would be required to improve waste 
collection, maximize recycling, and reduce overall the life-cycle impact of the product.Never made it to 
ﬁnal vote*
SB 1454Expands the scope of current plastic end-of-life claim labeling requirements from bags and 
food packaging to all plastic products. Prevents consumer deception by tying end-of-life 
claims to pass/fail technical standards (American Society for Testing and Materials) and 
explicitly prohibits inherently misleading and dishonest claims, like “biodegradable”.Vetoed by Gov
AB 1141Requires manufacturers of plastic bags to pay a $0.001 per-bag fee, but denies the proceeds 
of this fee to cities that have banned any single-use bag. Also requires cities that have banned 
single-use bags to provide alternative single-use bags at no cost.Never made it to 
ﬁnal vote*
AB 2138Requires food providers to use only recyclable or compostable takeout food packaging and 
bags.Never made it to 
ﬁnal vote*
AB 1998 Bans plastic bags at grocery stores, pharmacies, convenience stores, and similar stores. Failed2009-2010 California Legislative Session44d. Local Initiatives
For several years, the state Legislature has debated bills that 
would prohibit supermarkets and convenience stores from 
distributing plastic single-use bags and would regulate the 
distribution of paper bags encouraging consumers to switch to 
reusable bags. In 1977, supermarkets first began to offer single 
use plastic carryout bags, and it is now estimated that between 
500 billion and one trillion plastic bags are consumed globally 
per year.[124] In the U.S., 4.2 million tons of plastic bags, sacks, 
and wraps are disposed of annually.[178] In California (and 
nationally), despite supermarket take-back programs, less than 
5% of plastic bags are recycled[179] and 123,500 tons are land-
filled annually.[178] Los Angeles County alone reports disposing of 
45,000 tons of single-use plastic bags each year.[124] Plastic bags 
are the second-most common item collected on CCD in California and globally, as well as being one of 
the debris items most threatening to marine wildlife.[28] 
Although plastic bag legislation has not been passed at the state level, many cities and counties within 
California—Manhattan Beach, San Francisco, Long Beach Malibu, Santa Monica, Marin County, San 
Jose, Palo Alto, Oakland, Calabasas, Fairfax, Santa Clara County, and Los Angeles County—have passed 
bills enacting local bans or fees on single-use plastic bags.[160, 161] Some of these cities and counties have 
also placed small fees (often ten cents) on paper bags to encourage the use of reusable bags. Although 
not local, other countries have already moved forward with national bag bans and fees. In 2001, Taiwan 
began charging 3 cents per plastic bag and reduced consumption by 69%.[162] Starting in 2002, Ireland 
began charging 19 cents per plastic bag, which reduced consumption by 95% and raised millions of 
dollars.[162] Drainage systems in Bangladesh became clogged by plastic bags during floods in 2002, 
leading the country to ban plastic bags completely.[162]
In California, there have been many legal battles between cities and plastic bag manufacturers on the 
right of local jurisdictions to ban plastic bags without first fulfilling a full-scale environmental impact 
report. The cost of a full-scale environmental impact report along with the litigation fees involved with 
a possible law suit threatened by the Save the Plastic Bag Coalition—a group of plastic bag makers and 
distributers—sometimes adds prohibitive cost hurdles to smaller cities considering similar bans.[160] 
However, on July 15, 2011, the California Supreme Court upheld the right of small cities to ban plastic 
bags without full-scale environmental impact reports (large cities may still require full scale 
environmental review).[160] 
In addition to plastic bag bans, individual cities such as Santa Monica have passed a citywide ban 
(2007) on the use of non-recyclable plastic disposable food service containers. Non-recyclable 
plastic includes expanded polystyrene (commonly known as Styrofoam) and clear or rigid polystyrene 
(resin identification #6). In Santa Monica, the ban applies to all single-use disposable containers 
intended for serving or transporting prepared or take-out food and beverages.[163] Approximately 53 
cities and counties in California have enacted some kind of citywide ban on polystyrene food-ware.[164] 
Some are full bans on the use of polystyrene in all takeout food packaging in the jurisdiction, some are 
requirements that 50% of takeout food packaging be compostable, and some are bans on polystyrene 
use in government facilities (which is the case in the biggest jurisdictions of Los Angeles County and San 
Jose).[164] 
In the U.S., 4.2 million tons of 
plastic bags, sacks, and wraps are 
disposed of annually. In 
California (and nationally), 
despite supermarket take-back 
programs, less than 5% of plastic 
bags are recycled and 123,500 
tons are landfilled annually. Los 
Angeles County alone reports 
disposing of 45,000 tons of 
single-use plastic bags each year.   45In addition to legislation and ordinances, there are several major non-profit groups concentrating on 
marine debris. They work both locally and statewide in areas of marine debris research, monitoring, and 
education. Table 10 contains a brief but not exhaustive list of major groups working intensively in the 
area of marine debris in California.
Table 10: Major non-profit groups based in California focused on marine debris research, monitoring, education, 
and other solutions. There are many smaller groups not included in this list that perhaps support marine debris 
reduction efforts but do not include marine debris as a main organizational focus. Therefore, this list is not 
exhaustive but rather can be used as an informational start to learning about the “major players” working on the 
issue of marine debris in California.Name Description Website
Algalita 
Marine 
Research 
FoundationA non-proﬁt dedicated to the protection of the marine environment and its 
watersheds through research, education, and restoration. It does this by conducting 
research and studies on the distribution, abundance, and fate of marine plastic 
pollution and potential harmful effects of plastic in the marine environment.www .algalita.org
Californians 
Against 
WasteA non-proﬁt dedicated to conserving resources, preventing pollution, and protecting 
California’ s environment through the development, promotion, and implementation 
of waste reduction and recycling policies and programs.www .cawrecycles.org/
California 
Coastkeeper 
AllianceA nonproﬁt which, in coordination with local waterkeeper groups, works to provide 
a statewide voice for safeguarding California’ s waters, and its world-renowned coast 
and ocean. Marine debris is one of CCKA's foci, and CCKA works to reduce the 
volume of polluted storm water runoff that carries trash to waterways through broad 
initiatives that address California’ s persistent and growing problems with marine 
debris.www .cacoastkeeper .org
Clean Seas 
CoalitionThe Clean Seas Coalition is a group of environmental groups (many of which are 
listed in this table), scientists, California lawmakers, students, and community leaders 
pushing California to strengthen laws reducing trash in California’ s seas and on 
beaches.www .cleanseascoalition.org
Clean Water 
ActionA nonproﬁt with goals that include clean, safe, and affordable water and prevention 
of health threatening pollution. CWA is very active in California by supporting 
legislation that would reduce or eliminate plastic waste, such as a statewide ban on 
polystyrene take-out food containers.http://www .cleanwateraction.org/ca
Environment 
CaliforniaA nonproﬁt focused on protecting California's air , water and spaces. One focus of EC 
is marine debris and works to support statewide legislation and local ordinances to 
regulate and reduce sources of marine debris.www .environmentcalifornia.org
Heal the BayA nonproﬁt dedicated to making southern California's coastal waters and 
watersheds, including Santa Monica Bay , safe, healthy and clean. One of Heal the 
Bay's main organizational foci through science, education, and community action is 
reducing and preventing land-based marine debris; Heal the Bay organizes Coastal 
Cleanup Day for all of Los Angeles County . www .healthebay .org
Ocean 
ConservancyA nonproﬁt with a main focus on "T rash Free Seas." OC works in California (and 
around the world) not only organizing International Coastal Cleanup Day , but also 
promoting policy reform, education, and research to help reduce marine debris.www .oceanconservancy .org
Project KaiseiA project operating under Ocean Voyages Institute, a California registered nonproﬁt 
organization. The project is focused on reducing marine debris in the ocean through 
research, technology , and education; it is even investigating new technologies for 
possible future cleanups of the North P aciﬁc Gyre.www .projectkaisei.org
Save Our 
ShoresA nonproﬁt with three core initiatives, including reducing plastic marine debris, 
particularly in Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary . SOS works through clean-
up efforts, education initiatives, and advocacy in their Plastic Pollution Initiative.www .saveourshores.org
Surfrider 
FoundationA non-proﬁt environmental organization dedicated to the protection and enjoyment 
of the world's oceans, waves and beaches for all people, through conservation, 
activism, research, and education. The "Rise Above Plastics" campaign sponsors 
movie screenings, participates in tabling events, makes community presentations, 
encourages participation in Day Without a Bag and other bag giveaways, and is 
involved with local decision-makers in pursuing both a ban on single-use shopping 
bags and polystyrene takeout containers. www .surfrider .org5. Education
Education is critical to the reduction and prevention of marine debris. Without an informed and 
knowledgeable public, efforts to reduce the rates of littering and dumping and to raise the level of 
recycling will not be successful. There are many logical places and venues that can be utilized to 
maximize public education efforts, including large public events like beach cleanups, in government 
buildings, in public schools, and even directly on product labels. In June 2011, Santa Monica teamed 
up with Heal the Bay, a local nonprofit, to create 500 new trash cans for Santa Monica State Beach that 
encourage public stewardship through messages and artwork wrapped around the cans. In addition, the 
cans have a quick response code that allows smart phone users on the beach to immediately 
access weather, water quality information, and beach-cleanup tips.[165, 166] It will be interesting to find 
out if Santa Monica can quantify and ultimately attribute reductions in litter cleanup on its beaches to a 
large public education project like this.
In California, school districts dispose of approximately 763,817 tons of waste per year.[167] California law 
does not mandate that public schools have waste reduction programs, but the California Education Code 
(sections 32370-32376) does encourage school districts to establish paper-recycling programs in 
classrooms, administrative offices, and other school district buildings and to use recycled paper. The 
California Public Resources Code (sections 42620-42622) also requires that CalRecycle provide 
assistance to school districts that want help in establishing and implementing other source reduction and 
recycling programs, which could include material such as glass, aluminum, and plastic.[167] If childhood 
is indeed the best time to learn good behavior and habits, then the practice of proper plastics disposal 
and recycling in the state’s schools could provide a timely and valuable education for California’s 
children.
46In June 2011, the City of Santa Monica teamed up with Heal the Bay, a 
local nonprofit, to create 500 new trash cans for Santa Monica State Beach that 
encourage public stewardship through messages and artwork wrapped around 
the cans. In addition, the cans have a quick response code that allows smart 
phone users on the beach to immediately access weather, water quality informa-
tion, and beach-cleanup tips. (Photo credit: Heal the Bay)
47C. Alternatives: Biodegradable and Compostable Plastic
The common jingle, ‘reduce, reuse, and recycle” addresses several solutions to the 
issue of marine debris, but recently a new “r-word” has been the topic of much 
discussion in the world of plastics: redesign. Scientists are trying to redesign the 
chemistry of plastics so that they can still perform the same services but will degrade 
more quickly and ideally leave no toxic residues. In recent years, many consumers 
have become aware of some of these products in the form of “biodegradable” flatware, 
plates, bowls, and disposable beverage containers. 
The word “biodegradable” is unfortunately used quite loosely in the commercial world. According to the 
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)—the authority organization for setting standards in 
the U.S.— a “biodegradable plastic” is a plastic in which the degradation results from the action of 
naturally occurring microorganisms such as bacteria, fungi, and algae.[168] The ASTM further defines 
“compostable plastic” as a plastic that undergoes degradation by biological processes (is 
biodegradable) during composting in standard municipal or industrial aerobic composting facilities to 
yield carbon dioxide, water, inorganic compounds, and biomass in 180 days or less and leaves no 
visible, distinguishable, or toxic residue.[168] A product cannot be labeled as “compostable” in California 
unless it meets these standards. 
To achieve true biodegradability and compostability, some companies have turned to plant-based 
plastic polymers. Plants naturally produce polymers such as rubber, starch, cellophane, and rayon. 
Plastics derived from these plant-based polymers degrade more rapidly than their petroleum-based 
cousins in normal composting conditions; with hot temperatures, aeration, and in the presence of the 
right microorganisms (bacteria, fungi, insects), the polymers degrade into their basic building blocks of 
carbon dioxide and water.
Biodegradable and compostable are words that are sometimes used to refer to petroleum-based plastics 
(e.g. polyethylene, PVC, polypropylene, polystyrene) that are mixed with plant-based polymers (often 
starch). This is technically inaccurate, however, as these plastics are not fully degradable in a biological 
sense; the plant-based polymer will degrade, causing the product as a whole to disintegrate into smaller, 
petroleum-based, plastic-polymer pieces and 
residues which do not degrade any further in the 
environment.[1, 134, 169]
Although purely bio-based polymers may seem 
like the perfect substitute for petroleum-based 
polymers, there are still issues with bio-based 
plastics. Firstly, the costs of bioplastics are five to 
ten times greater than petroleum-based plastics,[7] 
creating a financial disincentive for companies to 
use them. Secondly, biodegradable plastics 
reduce the quality and impair the mechanical 
properties of some products, making them 
difficult to use. For instance, many biodegradable 
plastics cannot withstand heat. 
“Biodegradable” plastic utensils. 
(Photo credit: Wikipedia Commons)
Reduce 
Reuse 
Recycle 
REDESIGN48From an environmental perspective, there are also problems with 
bio-based plastics. Many of these bio-based plastics will not degrade easily 
in an ocean environment or in typical landfills.[169, 170, 171] In general, typical 
landfills and the ocean do not have conditions (temperatures, appropriate 
bacteria, physical mulching) that are conducive to the degradation of 
biodegradable or compostable plastic.[172] The current ASTM standard for 
biodegradation in the marine environment only requires that at least 30% of 
the mass of the sample be converted to carbon dioxide after 180 days.[169, 170, 171] 
A recent study produced by the CIWMB tested a number of common biodegradable-certified and 
compostable-certified products (e.g., UV-degradable six-pack rings, oxodegradable plastic trash bags, 
PLA (polylactide) straws, corn starch trash bags, MirelTM bags, Ecoflex bags, and Stalk Market sugarcane 
lids) and found that none of them degraded (or even disintegrated) in ocean water except for the MirelTM 
bags which demonstrated some disintegration.[169] 
Even if the perfect, completely bio-based, plastic polymer were invented—one that would biodegrade in 
all environmental conditions and leave no toxic residues—some problematic issues would still remain. 
Bio-based plastics are dependent on crop production and land availability, putting them in direct 
competition with the resources and space required for food production, and in some cases with 
production of biofuels. There is a limited amount of fertile cropland in the U.S. and elsewhere in the 
world; competing uses for this land could present global problems. One could argue that this issue 
could be avoided if food-waste was used to generate these bio-polymers, but then polymer-production 
would be dependent on the success of food waste collection services.[46] Municipal composting 
programs and facilities would need to be created in all major cites, and even then it is unknown (and 
unlikely) whether the supply of uncontaminated food waste would be adequate to meet plastic 
production needs. 
As a possible solution to the need for cropland or food-waste, a great deal of research has gone into 
bacterial fermentation processes in large industrial bioreactors to generate bio-polymers such as PLA and 
PHAs (a type of polyester) that are currently used in some packaging, coatings, compost bags, disposable 
flatware, bottles, and other consumer products. The use of fermentation to produce polymers may need 
continued research as bioreactors require careful monitoring, have size and production limits, and some 
studies indicate that production of PHA may consume more fossil-fuels than petroleum-based 
plastics.[134] 
It is apparent that many engineering, environmental, and financial concerns arise when considering the 
replacement of petroleum-based plastics with bio-plastics: an obstacle by definition but also an 
indication of a specific area of research warranting continued study.
Many of these 
bio-based plastics will 
not degrade easily in an 
ocean environment or 
in typical landfills. 49It is not within the scope of this report to rank research priorities; this should be done by an 
interdisciplinary panel and include public comment. 
There is a need for more research in all areas discussed in this report; scientists should continue to 
gather information regarding the distribution, sources, fate, and impacts of plastic marine debris. With 
limited funding, however, the state of California may find some data gaps a higher priority and more 
practical to investigate than others. Because the state has already recognized marine debris as an 
important issue, as stated in the California Ocean Protection Council’s 2007 marine debris resolution, 
it seems that future research regarding the sources, impacts, and solutions may best serve state officials 
in making future policy decisions. Here the data gaps have been divided by topic, and each topic is 
labeled as new monitoring research, new experimental research, or assessments/syntheses of data or 
research previously done.
Distribution and Abundance
Regional cycling : Due to the proximity to California of the “western pacific garbage patch” in the North 
Pacific Subtropical Gyre and research indicating that plastic debris may cycle out of the gyre after three 
years,[11] more research is needed to understand the large-scale cycling of plastic marine debris off the 
coast of California. Several research questions stand: How much of California’s plastic marine debris 
reaches the “garbage patch?” How much eventually sinks to the seafloor? Does some of it return to 
California shorelines or elsewhere? (This would require new monitoring research.)
Regional abundance and composition : Based on the results of long-term studies of plastic marine debris 
abundance and composition in other areas of the world such as the North Sea and the Bering Sea[35, 36] 
which indicate a significant change in the composition from industrial to consumer-based plastic debris 
since the 1980s, a question arises: has the composition of plastic marine debris changed in the North 
Pacific or off the coast of California? (This would require new monitoring research.)
Sources and Transport
Coastal cycling : Some studies have assessed the density of plastic marine debris on the seabed along the 
California coastline.[23, 24, 25] More research is needed on the rates of deposition of plastic debris from the 
sea surface and the potential rates of loss off the continental shelf.  A meta-analysis of all the seafloor 
distribution data could be done to determine current “hotspots” of marine debris accumulation along 
the California coastline. (This would require an assessment or synthesis of existing information as well as 
new monitoring research.)
Watershed analysis : An initial study[42] of the Los Angeles and San Gabriel Rivers in Los Angeles has 
indicated that a significant amount of debris, including micro-plastics, are transported via these 
watersheds to the shoreline. Longer-term studies and studies of other watersheds could be very helpful in 
determining the major types of plastic debris and possibly the major land-based sources of plastic 
marine debris in California: Is it primarily industrial-based plastic? Are there significant amounts of 
consumer-based plastic? What are the primary sources of the micro-plastic debris, which is more 
difficult to capture using nets, screens, and other in-flow reduction measures? (This would require new 
monitoring research.)VI. Data Gaps50Plastic pellets : In 2007, the California legislature passed a bill that required all plastic manufacturers in 
the state to use best management practices to prevent pellet spillage. The State Water Resource Control 
Board was put in charge of implementation and enforcement of this bill and have included it in their 
5-year strategic plan.[45] The State and Regional Water Board staff have conducted and continue to 
conduct compliance inspections of preproduction plastic manufacturing, handling, and transport 
facilities. What percentage of the plastic industry is in full compliance with the state bill and Operation 
Clean Sweep? What BMPs are effective in wet weather and are there any facilities using them 
successfully? (This would require an assessment or synthesis of existing information as well as new 
monitoring research.)
Plastic powders : Research into the ability of plastic powders and shavings from industrial plastic 
processing and transportation sites to enter the marine environment seems important given the Clean 
Sweep analysis,[44] which confirmed that numerous powder spills were witnessed. The wind easily blows 
these plastic powders, and no research has been done to date on the frequency, quantity, fate, or, 
perhaps most importantly, the solutions to these plastic powder spills. (This would require new 
monitoring research.)
Impacts
Economic Analysis : A complete analysis of the economic impacts of plastic debris on the state of 
California would be helpful for weighing the costs and benefits of various solutions as well as for future 
policy decisions. The OPC resolution “recognizes that ocean litter poses serious threats to the health of 
California’s coastal waters and the ocean, significantly impacts marine wildlife, requires state and 
local agencies to spend millions of dollars each year to clean beaches, rivers, and storm water, and 
poses threats to public health and welfare.” The studies on cost to date in California indicate that costs 
are substantial, measuring in the tens of millions for some cities. However, a comprehensive statewide 
picture of the costs due to plastic does not exist yet. Further research is needed to determine the 
complete economic impacts of cleanup, prevention, infrastructure, education, and other costs to the 
state in the effort to reduce and prevent plastic marine debris. This could include all types of costs such 
as: clean-up efforts (on land, underwater, in rivers, and in catch basins); disposal/landfill costs (if one 
wanted to analyze the value of more recyclable plastic or bioplastics); costs of implementing TMDLs 
and damage to boats due to entanglement; estimation of tourism losses (which has been done by New 
Jersey and New York); and any quantifiable losses to ecosystem services. California could use an expert 
panel or advisory group to determine which costs would be included in the analysis. Overall, this type 
of analysis would give the state a more realistic picture of the costs (to the state and to the individual 
taxpayer) related to marine debris; it would be a baseline to which future policies or actions (such as 
bans or fees) could be compared economically. Often, the potential costs of legislation or policy is 
compared to a baseline cost of zero dollars, which is not accurate. Whereas policy costs (to the state and 
to taxpayers) are often impediments to action, with this analysis the cost of a policy could be compared 
to a more accurate baseline cost of not having the policy. (This would require an assessment or 
synthesis of existing information, but may require some new data collection.)
Pollutant transport : More research into the types of pollutants transported by plastics debris from land 
via watersheds and storm drain systems would be helpful in understanding what chemicals are 
reaching the California shoreline. A 2005 study[77] completed an informative initial assessment from 
which to build. Knowing the major pollutants being transported via plastic marine debris could inform 
future regulations of harmful additives to plastic packaging. (This would require new monitoring 
research.)51Long-term toxicology : Toxicological analysis of long-term exposures of organisms to environmentally 
relevant concentrations of pollutants adsorbed or leached by plastic marine debris is necessary for 
determining the chronic effects of exposure to contaminated plastic marine debris. (This would require 
new experimental research.)
Mixtures and toxicology : There is need for the study of environmentally relevant mixtures of pollutants 
to which marine organisms (and humans) may be exposed as a result of marine debris. Single pollutant 
laboratory studies are important for determining the exact effects of a given chemical, but these 
traditional studies fail to consider the real-world milieu of chemicals leaching or adsorbed to plastic that 
may be entering the food chain simultaneously. (This would require new experimental research.)
Bioaccumulation : More research is needed regarding the capacity of pollutants in or adsorbed onto 
plastics to enter marine organisms and be passed up the food chain. This is of particular concern when 
considered from a seafood safety perspective. (This would require new experimental and monitoring 
research.)
Population Level Effects : Research is needed to determine if there are any population level effects of 
the noted impacts of marine debris on individual organisms. (This would require new experimental and 
monitoring research.)
Invasive Species : Are there any specific species of concern that have the potential to use plastic as a 
mode of transport to the California shoreline? (This would require an assessment or synthesis of 
existing information.)
Seafloor Impacts : The impacts of sunken plastic marine debris on benthic communities are still relatively 
unknown. A few studies indicate changes in benthic community composition and suggest changes in gas 
exchange between the water and the sediment as a result of marine debris.[116, 117, 118] There have been no 
studies to date focused on potential smothering effects of plastic marine debris in California specifically. 
(This would require new monitoring and experimental research.)
Solutions
Education : California has formal and informal educational programs on the nature of marine debris, 
proper disposal of debris, and recycling. Analyzing programs that have been the most successful could 
help state managers determine which might have the greatest impact if applied statewide. (This would 
require an assessment or synthesis of existing information.)
Structural controls : Although Los Angeles may have made considerable headway in its efforts to meet 
the zero-trash requirements of the Trash TMDL for the Los Angeles River and Ballona Creek, these 
controls and this policy do not address micro-plastic debris less than 5 mm diameter. More research is 
needed into the sources and preventative measures for land-based micro-plastic reaching the California 
shoreline. (This would require new experimental and monitoring research.)
Recycling : What are the impediments—cost, infrastructure, compliance, incentives—to raising the level 
of plastic recycling in California? For example, several pieces of legislation (which have failed) in 
California in the last six years have attempted to increase the availability of recycling receptacles to 
multi-family homes. (This would require an assessment or synthesis of existing information.)52Derelict Fishing Gear : A recent committee report at the National Academy of Sciences found that 
inadequate port facilities and high disposal costs are a major impediment to the proper disposal of 
wastes. Ships need to be able to discharge their waste fishing gear at ports and should have incentives 
(not fees) to do so.[146] Several countries such as the Republic of Korea and the countries surrounding the 
North Sea have developed such incentive programs. More investigation could be warranted to determine 
whether incentives for boaters to bring debris into port, similar to the incentives for commercial and 
domestic recycling, could potentially reduce the disposal of derelict fishing gear off the coast of 
California. (This would represent an assessment or synthesis of existing information. It may also require 
some original social science research.)
Energy Recovery : What are the pros and cons (environmental, economic) of a more advanced and 
comprehensive energy recovery program for recycled plastic in California? (This would require an 
assessment or synthesis of existing information.)
Bio-plastics : Many engineering, environmental, and financial concerns arise when considering the 
replacement of petroleum-based plastics with bio-plastics, but this is also clearly an important area of 
research warranting continued study. (This would require new experimental research.) 53Conclusion
Some scientists believe it is plausible that all the plastic ever created since its invention in the late 
1940s, aside from plastic that has been incinerated, still exists on the planet either buried in landfills, 
buried on shorelines, floating in the ocean, or on the ocean floor. Plastic has undeniably transformed 
numerous industries as well as the daily life of every individual, but its extreme environmental 
persistence and ubiquity has raised many questions about where we use plastic, when we use plastic, 
and what to do with it when we have finished using it. 
The purpose of this report is to serve as a place-marker for the current state of research and solution 
strategies for plastic marine debris in California in order to help set the stage for future discussions, 
policies, and actions. Finding solutions to the issues of marine debris in the large state of California will 
likely involve a multi-faceted approach. In terms of the size of the plastics industry, shipments, and jobs, 
California is one the leading states in the country. Moreover, southern California has the largest 
concentration of plastic processors in the western U.S. Successful solutions will need careful 
coordination of information from industry, policy-makers, government agencies, scientists, and the 
public. California is viewed as a leader, particularly on environmental issues, by other states and even 
other countries. Research on plastic marine debris stands to provide another opportunity by which 
California can exercise leadership and establish an example worldwide.
Now with the sober reality of a limited budget and resources, it will be more important than ever for 
California to effectively reevaluate the current state of knowledge on plastic marine debris and find 
solutions which encourage partnerships and coordination across the state and region, perhaps have 
economic incentives or economic advantages over the status quo, and most importantly, protect and 
restore one of California most valuable assets: its coastal marine ecosystem.
Marine debris after a rain event, Los Angeles, CA. (Photo credit: Heal the Bay)
54[1] NOAA Marine Debris Program. 7 June 2011. Web 17 June 2011. <http://marinedebris.noaa.gov/>. 
[2] Thompson, R. C.; Olsen, Y.; Mitchell, R. P.; Davis, A.; Rowland, S. J.; John, A. W. G.; McGonigle, D; Russel,l A. E. Lost at Sea: where is 
all the plastic? Science . 2004 , 304: 838.
[3] Barnes, D. K. A.; Milner, P. Drifting plastic and its consequences for sessile organisms dispersal in the Atlantic Ocean. Mar. Biol . 2005 , 
146 (4): 815-825.
[4] Rios, Lorena M.; Moore, Charles; Jones, Patrick R. Persistent organic pollutants carried by synthetic polymers in the ocean environment. 
Mar. Pollut. Bull.  2007 , 54: 1230-1237.
[5] American Chemistry Council. “Lifecycle of a Plastic Product.” Web. 3 July 2011. < http://plastics.americanchemistry.com/Life-Cycle>.
[6] Hopewell, J.; Dvorak, R.; Kosior, E. Plastics recycling: challenges and opportunities. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B . 2009 , 364: 2115-2126.
[7] Moore, C. J. Synthetic polymers in the marine environment: A rapidly increasing long-term threat. Environ. Res . 2008 , 108: 131-139.
[8] Gregory, M. R.; Andrady, A. L. 2003 . Plastics in the marine environment. In: Andrady, AlL. (Ed.), Plastics and the Environment. John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, pp. 379-401.
[9] Barnes, David K. A.; Galganai, Francois; Thompson, Richard C.; Barlaz, Morton. Accumulation and fragmentation of plastic debris in 
global environments. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B.  2009 , 364: 1985-1998.
[10] Ebbesmeyer, C. C.; Ingraham Jr.; Royer, T. C.; Grosch, C. E. Tub Toys Orbit the Pacific Subarctic Gyre. EOS. 2007 , 88 (1): 1-12.
[11] Ebbesmeyer, C. Scigliano, E. Flotsametrics and the Floating World: How One Man’s Obsession with Runaway Sneakers and Rubber 
Ducks Revolutionized Ocean Science. Smithsonian Books/Collins/HarperCollins, Washington, DC, 2009 .
[12] Doyle, Miriam J.; Watson, William; Bowlin, Noelle M.; Sheavly, Seba B. Plastic particles in coastal pelagic ecosystems of the Northeast 
Pacific ocean. Mar. Environ. Res.  2011 , 71 (1): 41-52.
[13] Moore, C. J.; S. L. Moore; M. K. Leecaster; S. B. Weisberg. A Comparison of Plastic and Plankton in the North Pacific Central Gyre. 
Mar. Pollut. Bull . 2001 , 42 (12): 1297-1300.
[14] Project Kaisei. “About Project Kaisei.” Web. 24 July 2011. <http://www.projectkaisei.org/index.aspx>.
[15] Dameron, Oliver J.; Park, Michael; Albins, Mark A.; Brainard, Russel. Marine debris accumulation in the Northwestern Hawaiian 
Islands: An examination of rates and processes. Mar. Pollut. Bull .  2007 , 54 (4): 423-433.
[16] McDermid, Karla J.; McMullen, Tracy L. Quantitative analysis of small-plastic debris on beaches in the Hawaiian archipelago. Mar. 
Pollut. Bull . 2004 , 48: 790-794.
[17] Lattin, G. L.; Moore, C. J.; Zellers,k A. F.; Moore, S. L.; Weisberg, S. B. A comparison of neustonic plastic and zooplankton at different 
depths near the southern California shore. Mar. Pollut. Bull.  2004 , 49: 291-294.
[18] Ryan, P. G.; Moore, Charles J.; van Franeker, Jan A.; Moloney, Coleen L. Monitoring the abundance of plastic debris in the marine 
environment. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B . 2009 , 364: 1999-2012.
[19] 5th International Marine Debris Conference. “Workshop on learning shoreline assessment protocols for marine debris.” March 20-25, 
2011, Honolulu, HI. Web. <http://www.5imdc.org/>.
[20] USEPA. Plastic pellets in the aquatic environment: Sources, and recommendations. United States Environmental Protection Agency 
Oceans and Coastal Protection Division Report 842-B-92-010. Washington, D.C., 1992.
[21] UNEP. UNEP Year Book 2011: Emerging Issues in Our Global Environment. United Nations Environment Program. 2011: 20-33.
[22] Galgani, F.; Leaute, J. P.; Moguedet, P.; Souplet, A.; Verin, Y.; Capentier, A.; Goraguer, H.; Latrouite, D.; Andral, B.; Cadiou, Y.; Mahe, J. 
C.; Poulard, J. C.; Nerisson, P. Litter on the Sea Floor Along European Coasts. Mar. Pol. Bull . 2000 , 40 (6): 516-527.
[23] Moore, S.L.; Allen, M. J. Distribution of anthropogenic and natural debris on the mainland shelf of the Southern California Bight. Mar. 
Pollut. Bull . 2000 , 40: 83-88.Endnotes55[24] Keller, Aimee A.; Fruh, Erica L.; Johnson, Melanie M.; Simon, Victor; McGourty, Catherine. Distribution and abundance of anthropo-
genic marine debris along the shelf and slope of the US West Coast. Mar. Pollut. Bul l. 2010 , 60 (5): 692-700. 
[25] Watters, Diana L.; Yoklavich, Mary M.; Love, Milton; Schroeder, Donna M. Assessing marine debris in deep seafloor habitats off Cali-
fornia. Bull. Mar. Sci . 2010 , 60: 131-138.
[26] Gilfillan, L.R.; Ohman, M.D.; Doyle, M.J.; Watson, W. Occurrence of Plastic Micro-Debris in the Southern California Current System. 
CalCOFI Rep., Vol 50, 2009.
[27] Moore, C. J.; Moore, S. L.; Weisberg, S. B.; Lattin, G. L.; Zellers, A. F. A comparison of neustonic plastic and zooplankton abundance 
in southern California’s coastal waters. Mar. Pollut. Bull . 2002 , 44: 1035-1038.
[28] Ocean Conservancy. Trash Travels. International Coastal Cleanup Report. 2010.
[29] CCC. California Coastal Commission Public Education Program for California Coastal Cleanup Day. Web. 23 Feb 2011. <http://www.
coastal.ca.gov/publiced/ccd/ccd.html>.
[30] Ocean Conservancy. A Rising Tide of Ocean Debris. International Coastal Cleanup Report. 2009.
[31] Moore, S. L.; Gregorio, D.; Carreon, M.; Weisberg, S. B.; Leecaster, M. K. Composition and Distribution of Beach Debris in Orange 
County, California. Mar. Pollut. Bull . 2001 , 42 (3): 241-245.
[32] Copeland, Claudia. Cruise Ship Pollution: Background, Laws and Regulations, and Key Issues. CRS Report for Congress, order code: 
RL32450. Updated 6 Feb 2008.
[33] IMO. Status of Multilateral Conventions and Instruments in Respect of which the International Maritime Organization or its Secretary 
General Performs Depositary or Other Functions. International Maritime Organization Report, 31 May 2011. Web. 30 Jun 2011. < L:\LED\
LO\MS-Depositary\STATUS OF MULTILATERAL CONVENTIONS\Status - 2011.docx>.
[34] WCGA. West Coast Governors’ Agreement on Ocean Health Marine Debris Action Work Plan. May, 2010.
[35] Franeker, J.A van.; Meijboom, A.; de jong, M.; Verdaat, H. (2010). Fulmar litter EcoQO monitoring in the Netherlands 1979-2007 in 
relation to EU Directive 200/59/EC on Port Reception Facilities. Report nr: CO32/09. IMARES Wageningen UR.
[36] Vlietstra, L.S.; Parga, J.A. Long-term changes in the type, but not amount, of ingested plastic particles in short-tailed shearwaters in the 
southereastern Bering Sea. Mar. Pollut. Bull . 2002 , 44 (9): 945-955.
[37] CaDoT. Final Report: District 7 Litter Management Pilot Study. Produced under contract by URS Greiner, Woodward, Clyde, No. 
43A0004C. 2000, California Department of Transportation No. CT-SW-RT-00-013.
[38] USEPA. Municipal Solid Waste in the United States 2009. United States Environmental Protection Agency Report: EPA530-R-10-012, 
Washington, D.C., 2010.
[39] Mehta, A. China-India Plastics Industry Summit 2007—Visit Report. Summit of Chinese and Indian Plastic Industrties, Guanzhou, 
China, May 20, 2007.
[40] CIWMB. Plastics White Paper: Optimizing Plastics Use, Recycling, and Disposal in California. California Integrated Waste Manage-
ment Board, 2003.
[41] CIWMB. Contractor’s Report to the Board: California 2008 Statewide Waste Characterization Study. Produced under contract with the 
California Integrated Waste Management Board by Cascadia Consulting Group, 2008.
[42] Moore, C. J. Lattin, G. L.; Zellers, A. F. Working our way upstream: a snapshot of landbased contributions of plastic and other trash to 
coastal waters and beaches of Southern California. In: Proceedings of the Plastic Debris Rivers to Sea Conference, Algalita Marine Research 
Foundation, Long Beach, CA, 2005b.
[43] American Chemistry Council. “Operation Clean Sweep Pellet Handling Manual.” 2010. Web. 3 July 2011. <www.opcleansweep.org>.
[44] Moore, C. J. Lattin, G. L.; Zellers, A. F. Measuring the effectiveness of voluntary plastic industry efforts: AMRF’s analysis of Opera-
tion Clean Sweep. In: Proceedings of the Plastic Debris Rivers to Sea Conference, Algalita Marine Research Foundation, Long Beach, CA, 
2005c.
[45] SWRCB. Strategic Plan Update 2008-2012. State Water Resources Control Board. Adopted 2 Sept 2008. 
[46] Thompson, Richard C.; Moore, Charles J.; vom Saal, Fredrick S.; Swan, Shanna H. Plastics, the environment and human health: current 
consensus and future trends. Phil. Trans. R. Soc.  2009 , 364: 2153-2166. 56[47] Gregory, M.R. Environmental implications of plastic debris in marine settings—entanglement, ingestion, smothering, hangers-on, 
hitch-hiking and alien invasions. Phil. Trns. R. Soc. B. 2009 , 364: 2013-2025.
[48] Laist, David W. Overview of the biological effects of lost and discarded plastic debris in the marine environment. Mar. Poll. Bull . 1987 , 
18 (6) (2): 319-326.
[49] Laist, D. W. Impacts of marine debris: entanglement of marine life in marine debris including a comprehensive list of species with 
entanglement and ingestion records. Pp. 99–139 in J. M. Coe and D. B. Rogers, eds., Marine Debris- Sources, Impacts, and Solutions. New 
York: Springer-Verlag, 1997 .
[50] Derraik, J. G. B. The pollution of the marine environment by plastic debris: a review. Mar. Poll. Bull . 2002 , 44 (9): 842-852.
[51] Moore, E.; Lyday, S.; Roletto, J. Litle, K.; Parrish, J.K.; Nevins, H.; Harvey, J.; Mortenson, J.; Greig, D.; Piazza, M.; Hermance, A.; Lee, 
D.; Adams, D.; Allen, S.; Kell, S. Entanglements of marine mammals and seabirds in central California and the north-west coast of the 
United States 2001–2005. Mar. Pollut. Bull.  2009 , 58 (7): 1045-1051.
[52] Dau, B.K.; Gilardi, K.V.K.; Gulland, F.M.; Higgins, A.; Holcomb, J.B.; St. Leger, J.; Ziccardi, M.H. Fishing gear-related injury in Califor-
nia marine wildlife. J. Mar. Wild Dis . 2009 , 45 (2): 355-362.
[53] Carr, Archie. Impacts of nondegradable marine debris on the ecology and survival outlook of sea turtles. Mar. Pol. Bull . 1987,  18 (6) 
(2): 352-356.
[54] Young, Lindsay C.; Vanderlip, Cynthia; Duffy, David C.; Afanasyev, Vsevolod; Shaffer, Scott A. Bringing Home the Trash: Do Colony-
Based Differences in Foraging Distribution Lead to Increased Plastic Ingestion in Laysan Albatrosses? PLoS One . 2009 , 4 (10): e7623.
[55] Davidson, P.; Asch, R. G. Plastic ingestion by mesopelagic fishes in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre. Mar Ecol Prog Ser.  2011 , 432: 
173-180. 
[56] Boerger, Christiana M.; Lattin, Gwendolyn L.; Moore, Shelly L.; Moore, Charles J. Plastic ingestion by planktivorous fishes in the North 
Pacific Central Gyre. Mar. Pol. Bull . 2010 , 60: 2275-2278.
[57] Possatto, Fernanda E; Barletta, Mario; Costa, Monica F.; Ivar do Sul, Juliana A.; Dantas, David V. Plastic debris ingestion by marine 
catfish: An unexpected fisheries impact. Mar. Pollut. Bull . 2011 , doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2011.01.036.
[58] Donohue, M. J.; Foley, D. G. Remote Sensing Revealing Links Among the Endangered Hawaiian Monk Seal, Marine Debris, and El 
Nino. Mar. Mamm. Sci . 2007 , 23 (2): 468-473.
[59] NOAA Fisheries Office of Protected Resources. “Hawaiian Monk Seal (Monachus schauinslandi). 30 June 2011. Web. 3 July 2011. 
<http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/species/mammals/pinnipeds/hawaiianmonkseal.htm#population>.
[60] Jacobsen, J. K.; Massey, L.; Gulland, F. Fatal Ingestion of floating net debris by two sperm whales (Physeter macrocephalus). Mar. Poll. 
Bull. 2010 , 60 (5): 765-767.
[61] Brown, James; Macfadyen, Graeme. Ghost fishing in European waters: Impacts and management responses. Mar. Pol . 2007,  31 (4): 
488-504.
[62] Teuten, Emma L. et al. Transport and release of chemicals from plastics to the environment and to wildlife. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B . 2009 , 
364: 2027-2045.
[63] Mato, Yukie; Isobe, Tomohiko; Takada, Hideshige; Kanehiro, Haruyuki; Ohtake, Chiyoko; Kaminuma, Tsuguchika. Plastic Resin Pellets 
as a Transport Mechanism for Toxic Chemicals in the Marine Environment. Environ. Sci. Technol.  2001 , 35 (2): 318-324.
[64] Rios, Lorena M.; Jones, Patrick R.; Moore, Charles; Narayan, Urja V. Quantitation of persistent organic pollutants adsorbed on plastic 
debris from the Northern Pacific Gyre’s “eastern garbage patch.” J. Environ. Monit.  2010 , 12: 2226-2236.
[65] Endo, Satoshi; Takizawa, Reiko; Okuda, Keiji; Takada, Hideshige; Chiba, Kazuhiro; Kanehiro, Haruyuki; Ogi, Haruo; Yamashita, Rei; 
Date, Takeshi. Concentration of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in beached resin pellets: Variability among individual particles and re-
gional differences. Mar. Pollut. Bull .  2005 , 50 (10): 1103-1114.
[66] USEPA. “Persistent Organic Pollutants: A Global Response.” United States Environmental Protection Agency. 12 Jan 2011. Web. 4 Feb 
2011. <http://www.epa.gov/oia/toxics/pop.html>. 
[67] Pascal, Melvin A.; Zabik, Mary E.; Zabik, Matthew J.; Hernandez, Ruben J.; Uptake of Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) from an Aque-
ous Medium by Polyethylene, Polyvinyl Chloride, and Polystyrene Films.  J. Agric. Food Chem . 2005 , 53 (1): 164-169. 57[68] Bojes Heidi K.; Pope, Peter G. Characterization of EPA’s 16 priority pollutant polycyclic  aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in tank bottom 
solids  and associated contaminated soils at oil exploration  and production sites in Texas. Reg Toxicol. Pharm . 2007 , 47: 288-295.
[69] Koch, H. M.; Calafat, Antonia M. Human body burdens of chemicals used in plastic manufacture. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B . 2009 , 364: 
2063-2078.
[70] Takada, H. “International Pellet Watch.” Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology. Web. 17 
Jun 2011. <http://www.pelletwatch.org/>.
[71] Lang, Richard C.; Laursen, Duane; Danner, Brenda. Stewardson, Nickol; Thompson, Richard C. International Pellet Watch: Global 
monitoring of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in coastal waters. 1. Initial phase data on PCBs, DDTs, and HCHs. Mar. Pollut. Bull.  
2009 , 58 (10): 1437-1446.
[72] NOAA Mussel Watch Program. “Mussel Watch Contaminant Monitoring.” 10 Mar 2011. Web. 28 June 2011. <http://ccma.nos.noaa.
gov/about/coast/nsandt/musselwatch.aspx>.
[73] NCCOS. “International Mussel Watch Study.” National Centers for Coastal Ocean Science. 17 Feb 2011. Web. 28 June 2011. <http://
ccma.nos.noaa.gov/stressors/pollution/assessments/as_intl_mw_study.aspx>.
[74] Zarfi, Christiane; Matthies, Michael. Are marine plastic particles transport vectors for organic pollutants to the Arctic? Mar. Pollut. Bull . 
2010 , 60 (10): 1810-1814.
[75] ATSDR. “Toxic Substances Portal.” Agency for Toxic Substance and Disease Registry. 3 March 2011. Web. 17 June 2011. <http://www.
atsdr.cdc.gov/substances/index.asp>.
[76] ATSDR. “Public Health Statement for Hexachlorobenzene.” Toxic Substanced Portal: Agency for Toxic Substance and Disease Registry. 
CAS# 118-74-1. September 2002.
[77] Moore, C. J. Lattin, G. L.; Zellers, A. F. A brief analysis of organic pollutants sorbed to pre and postproduction plastic particles from the 
Los Angeles and San Gabriel River Watersheds. In: Proceedings of the Plastic Debris Rivers to Sea Conference, Algalita Marine Research 
Foundation, Long Beach, CA, 2005a.
[78] Oehlmann, Jorg et al. A critical analysis of the biological impacts of plasticizers on wildlife. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B . 2009 , 364: 2047-
2062.
[79] Muncke, Jane. Exposure to endocrine disrupting compounds via the food chain: Is packaging a relevant source? Sci Tot. Envir.  2009 , 
407 (16): 4549-4559.
[80] David, R. M.; McKee, R. H.; Butala, J. H.; Barter, R. A.; Kayser, M. 2001 . Esters of aromatic mono-, di-, and tricarboxylic acids, aro-
matic diacids, and di-, tri-, or polyalcohols. In Patty’s Toxicology, vol 6 (eds E. Bingham, B. Cohrssen & C. H. Powell), pp. 635–932, 5th 
edn. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
[81] Hauser, R., Duty, S.; Godfrey-Bailey, L; Calafat, A. M. Medications as a source of human exposure to phthalates. Environ. Health Per-
spect.  2004 , 112: 751–753.
[82] Talsness, C. E.; Andrade, A. J. M.; Kuriyama, S. N.; Taylor, J. A.; vom Saal, F. S. Components of plastic: experimental studies in animals 
and relevance for human health. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B . 2009,  364: 2079–2096.
[83] Sajiki, J., Yonekubo, J. Leaching of bisphenol A (BPA) to seawater from polycarbonate plastic and its degradation by reactive oxygen 
species. Chemosphere . 2003 , 51 (1): 55-62.
[84] American Chemical Society. “Hard plastics decompose in oceans, releasing endocrine disruptor BPA.” ScienceDaily. 24 March 2010. 
Web. 1 March 2011. <http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2010/03/100323184607.htm>.
[85] USEPA. “Endocrine Disruption Screening Program (EDSP).” United States Environmental Protection Agency. 22 Apr 2010. Web. 24 Jun 
2011. <http://www.epa.gov/endo/pubs/edspoverview/whatare.htm>.
[86] Bauer, M. J.; Herrmann, R. Estimation of the environmental contamination by phthalic acid esters leaching from household wastes. Sci. 
Total Environ . 1997 , 208: 49–57.
[87] Staples, C. A.; Woodburn, K.; Caspers, N.; Hall, A. T.; Klecka, G. M. A weight of evidence approach to the aquatic hazard assessment 
of bisphenol A. Hum. Ecol. Risk Assess . 2002 , 8: 1083–1105.
[88] Foster, P. M. D. Disruption of reproductive development in male rat offspring following in utero exposure to phthalate esters. Int. J. 
Androl . 2006 , 29: 140–147.58[89] Gray, L. E.; Ostby, J.; Furr, J.; Price, M.; Veeramachaneni, D. N. R.; Parks, L. Perinatal exposure to the phthalates DEHP, BBP, and DINP, 
but not DEP, DMP, or DOTP, alters sexual differentiation of the male rat. Toxicol. Sci.  2000 , 58: 350–365.
[90] Lee, K. Y.; Shibutani, M.; Takagi, H.; Kato, N.; Takigami, S.; Uneyama, C.; Hirose, M. Diverse developmental toxicity of di-n-butyl 
phthalate in both sexes of rat offspring after maternal exposure during the period from late gestation through lactation. Toxicology , 2004 , 
203: 221–238.
[91] Tyl, R. W.; Myers, C. B.; Marr, M. C.; Fail, P. A.; Seely, J. C.; Brine, D. R.; Barter, R. A.; Butala, J. H. Reproductive toxicity evaluation of 
dietary butyl benzyl phthalate (BBP) in rats. Reprod. Toxicol . 2004 , 18: 241–264.
[92] Koch, H. M.; Preuss, R.; Angerer, J. Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP): human metabolism and internal exposure—an update and latest 
results. Int. J. Androl . 2006 , 29: 155–165.
[93] Matsumoto, A.; Kunugita, N.; Kitagawa, K.; Isse, T.; Oyama, T.; Foureman, G. L.; Morita, M.; Kawamoto, T. Bisphenol A levels in human 
urine. Environ. Health Perspect . 2003 , 111: 101–104.
[94] Canada Gazette. “Order Adding a Toxic Substance to Schedule 1 to the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999.” SOR/2010-
194 September 23, 2010. 10 Oct 2010. Web. 28 June 2011. < http://gazette.gc.ca/rp-pr/p2/2010/2010-10-13/html/sor-dors194-eng.html>.
[95] Austen, Ian. “ Canada Takes Steps to Ban Most Plastic Baby Bottles.” New York Times April 19, 2008. Web. 28 June 2011. <http://www.
nytimes.com/2008/04/19/business/worldbusiness/19plastic.html>.
[96] European Commission. “Bisphenol A: EU ban on baby bottles to enter into force tomorrow.” Press Release, May 31, 2011. Reference:  
IP/11/664. Web. 28 June 2011. <http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/11/664&format=HTML>.
[97] Eriksson, C.; Burton, H. Origins and biological accumulation of small plastic particles in fur seals from Macquire Island. Ambio.  2003 , 
32: 380-384.
[98] Ryan, P. G.; Connel, A. D.; Gardner, B. D. Plastic ingestion and PCBs in seabirds: Is there a relationship? Mar. Pollut. Bull.  1998 , 19: 
174-176.
[99] Browne, M. A.; Dissanayke, A.; Galloway, T. S.; Lowe, D. M.; Thompson, R. C. Ingested microscopic platic translocates to the circula-
tory system of the mussel, Mytilus edulis (L.). Environ. Sci. Technol . 2008 , 42: 5026-5031.
[100] Teuten, Emma L.; Rowland, Steven J.; Galloway, Tamara S.; Thompson, Richard C. Potential for Plastics to Transport Hydrophobic 
Contaminants. Environ. Sci. Technol . 2007 , 41: 7759-7764.
[101] Biggers, William J.; Laufer, Hans. Identification of Juvenile Hormone-Active Alkylphenols in the Lobster Homarus americanus and in 
Marine Sediments. Biol. Bull . 2004 , 206: 13-24.
[102] Biggers, W. J.; Laufer, H. Detection of juvenile hormone-active compounds by larvae of the marine annelid Capitella sp. I. Arch. 
Insect Biochem. Physiol. 1996 , 32: 475–484.
[103] Biggers, W. J.; Laufer, H. Chemical induction of settlement and metamorphosis of Capitella capitata sp. I. (Polychaetea) larvae by 
juvenile hormone-active compounds.  Invertebr. Reprod. Dev . 1992 , 22: 39–46.
[104] Laufer, H.; Biggers, J. W. Unifying concepts learned from methyl farnesoate for invertebrate reproduction and post-embryonic devel-
opment. Am. Zool . 2001 , 41: 442–457.
[105] Buckley, Christine. “Lobster Dieoffs Linked to Chemicals in Plastics.” UConn Today, University of Connecticut. Web. 10 Aug 2010. 
<http://today.unconn.edu/?p=18691>.
[106] Somers, Barbara. “Lobster Shell Disease Fact Sheet.” Rhode Island Sea Grant: Nov 2005. Web. 17 June 2011. <http://seagrant.gso.uri.
edu/factsheets/lobster_shell_disease.html>.
[107] USEPA. “Invasive Species.” United States Environmental Protection Agency. 20 Nov 2009. Web. 10 Mar 2011. <http://www.epa.gov/
greatlakes/invasive/>.
[108] USFWS. “Zebra Mussel: Economic Impact.” United States Fish and Wildlife Service. 31 Jan 2008. Web. 10 Mar 2011. <http://www.
glsc.usgs.gov/main.php?content=research_invasive_zebramussel&title=Invasive%20Invertebrates0&menu=research_invasive_inverte-
brates>. 
[109] Sea Grant: University of Southern California. “Caulerpa Taxifola: Case Study.” Web. 16 Mar 2011. <http://www.usc.edu/org/seagrant/
caulerpa/casestudy.html>.59[110] Barnes, D. K. A. Biodiversity: Invasions by marine life on plastic debris. Nature . 2002 , 416: 808-809.
[111] Astudillo, J.C.; Bravo, M.; Dumont, C.P.; Thiel, M. Detached aquaculture buoys in the SE Pacific: potential dispersal vehicles for as-
sociated organisms.  Aquat. Biol . 2009 , 5: 219-231.
[112] Barnes, D. K. A.; Sanderson, W. G. Latitudinal patterns in the colonization of marine debris. Proceedings of the 11th International 
Bryzoology Association Conference. 2000: 154-160.
[113] Rees, E. I. S.; Southward, A. J. Plastic flotsam as an agent for dispersal of Perforatus perfoatus (Cirripedia: Balanidae). J. Mar. Biol. 
2008 , Assoc. UK (JABA2-Biodiversity Records, published online).
[114] Masó, Mercedes; Garcés, Esther; Pagès, Francesc; Camp, Jordi. Drifting plastic debris as a potential vector for dispersing Harmful 
Algal Bloom (HAB) species. Sci. Mar.  2003 , 67 (1): 107-111.
[115] Kanehiro, H.; Tokai, T.; Matuda, K. Marine litter composition and distribution on the sea-bed of Tokyo Bay. Fish. Eng . 1995 , 31: 
195–199.
[116] Katsanevakis, S.; Verriopoulos, G.; Nicolaidou, A.; Thessalou-Legaki, M. Effect of marine litter on the benthic megafauna of coastal 
soft bottoms: a manipulative field experiment. Mar. Pollut. Bull.  2007 , 54: 771–778.
[117] Backhurst, M. K.; Cole, R. G. Subtidal benthic marine litter at Kawau Island, north-eastern New Zealand. J. Environ. Manage . 2000 , 
60: 227–237.
[118] Goldberg, E. D. Plasticizing the seafloor: an overview. Environ. Technol . 1997 , 18: 195–202.
[119] Bartram, J.; Rees, G.; Monitoring Bathing Waters: A Practical Guide to the Design and Implementation of Assessments and Monitor-
ing Programmes. 2000 , Taylor & Francis, New York.
[120] Valle-Levinson, A. and R. L. Swanson. Wind-induced scattering of medically-related and sewage-related items. Mar. Technol. Soc. J . 
1991 , 25 (2): 49-56.
[121] NOEP. California’s Ocean Economy. National Ocean Economics Program. July 2005: 24-26.
[122] CaDoT. “Don’t Trash California Campaign.” CalTrans Maintenance Program. Web. 8 July 2011. <http://www.donttrashcalifornia.
info/>.
[123] CaDoT. The California Department of Transportation Litter Abatement Plan. The California Department of Transportation Litter Abate-
ment Task Force. 1 May, 2007.
[124] Los Angeles County. “An Overview of Carryout Bags in Los Angeles.” Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors Staff Report. August 
2007.
[125] City of Los Angeles. “Los Angeles River Trash TMDL.” City of Los Angeles Stormwater Program. Web. 3 July 2011. <http://www.last-
ormwater.org/Siteorg/program/TMDLs/tmdl_lariver_trash.htm>.
[126] California Ocean Protection Council. An Implementation Strategy for the California Ocean Protection Council Resolution to Reduce 
and Prevent Ocean Litter. 20 Nov 2008.
[127] CIWMB. Use and Disposal of Polystyrene in California: A Report to the California Legislature. Publication No. 432-04-003, 2004.
[128] Brink, P. ten; Lutchman, I.; Bassi, S.; Speck, S.; Sheavly, S.; Register, K. Woolaway, C. Guidelines on the Use of Market-based Instru-
ments to Address the Problem of Marine Litter. Institute for European Environmental Policy (IEEP), Brussels, Belgium, and Sheavely Consul-
tants. Virginia Beach, USA, 2009.
[129] UNEP. Marine Litter: A global Challenge. Nairobi: United Nations Environment Program. 2009: 232 pp.
[130] Hall, K. Impacts of Marine Debris and Oil. Economic & Social Costs to Coastal Communities. Kommunenes Iternasjonale Miljoorgan-
isasjon (KIMO), 2009.
[131] Gilpin,R.; Wagel, D.; Solch, J. Production, distribution, and fate of polycholorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans, and related 
organohalogens in the environment. In Dioxins and health (eds A. Schecter & T. Gasiewicz), 2nd edn. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc, 
2003 .
[132] NOAA Marine Debris Program. “Nets to Energy Program.” 7 June 2011. Web. 17 June 2011. <http://marinedebris.noaa.gov/projects/
netstoenergy.html>.60[133] NOAA Marine Debris Program. “Fishing for Energy Program.” 7 June 2011. Web. 17 June 2011. <http://marinedebris.noaa.gov/proj-
ects/fishing4energy.html>.
[134] Mooney, Brian P. The second green revolution? Production of plant-based biodegradable plastics. Biochem. J.  2009 , 418: 219-232.
[135] Blest Company, Ltd. “Waste Plastic Oiling System.” Web. 22 March 2011. <http://www.blest.co.jp/seihin-english.html>.
[136] USEPA. Municipal Solid Waste Generation in the United States, 1999. Prepared by Franklin Associates, Ltd. for the United States 
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C., 2000.
[137] Loughlin, Daniel H.; Barlaz, Morton A. Critical Review: Policies for Strengthening Markets for Recyclables: A Worldwide Perspective. 
Environ. Sci. & Technol . 2006 , 36: 287-326.
[138] EuPC (European Plastics Converters), EPRO (European Association of Plastics Recycling and Recovery Organizations), EuPR (Euro-
pean Plastics Recyclers) and PlasticsEurope. 2009. The Compelling Facts About Plastics 2009: An analysis of European plastic productivity, 
demand and recovery for 2008.
[139] CalRecycle. “Beverage Container Recycling.” 24 January 2011. Web. 22 March 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/bevcontainer/>.
[140] CIWMB. Contractor’s Report to the Board: Postconsumer Resin Quality Assurance and Testing Protocol. Produced under contract with 
the California Integrated Waste Management Board by Chico State University, Chico Research Foundation, 2005.
[141] CalRecycle. “Recycled-Content Trash Bag Program.” 26 Jan 2011. Web. 6 July 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/buyrecycled/
trashbags/>.
[142] CalRecycle. “Hospital Blue Wrap.” CalRecycle Hospital Waste Reduction and Recycling Team. Document: IWMB-2009-004.
[143] CIWMB. “Recycled Plastic Lumber.” California Integrated Waste Management Board. 8 Nov 2010. Web. 16 Feb 2011. <http://www.
calrecycle.ca.gov/Plastics/recycled/lumber/>.
[144] CIWMB. Contractor’s Report to the Board: Postconsumer Agricultural Plastic Report. Produced under contract with the California 
Integrated Waste Management Board by Sea Hurley, California Polytechnic State University, Publication No. IWMB-2008-019, 2008.
[145] Seadoc. California Lost Fishing Gear Recovery Project. Web. 20 July 2011. <http://www.seadocsociety.org/lostfishinggear>.
[146] National Academy of Sciences. Briefing for Ocean Studies Board: Tackling Marine Debris in the 21st Century. Presented by the Com-
mittee on Effectiveness of International and National Measures to Prevent and Reduce Marine Debris and Its Impacts. October, 23, 2008.
[147] NOAA Oean and Coastal Resource Management. “Clean Marina Program.” 17 Sept 2010. Web. 22 July 2011. <http://coastalmanage-
ment.noaa.gov/marinas.html>.
[148] 5th International Marine Debris Conference. “Workshop on the importance of adequate port reception facilities (for ship generated 
waste) in reducing marine debris.” March 20-25, 2011, Honolulu, HI. Web. <http://www.5imdc.org/>.
[149] CIWMB. Overall Framework for an Extended Producer Responsibility System in California. California Integrated Waste Management 
Board Meeting, Agenda Item 12, Attachment 1. January 23, 2008. Web. 22 July 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/EPR/Framework/
Framework.pdf>.
[150] Smith, D. “National Takeback and Recycling Program.” Sony Electronics Inc. 24 June 2010. Web. 22 July 2011. <http://www.calre-
cycle.ca.gov/EPR/Framework/2008April/Presentation/Smith.pdf>.
[151] Allen, J. “Cradle-to-Cradle: Achieving the Vision Through Remanufacturing.” Caterpillar Reman Services. 24 June 2010. Web. 22 July 
2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/agendas/mtgdocs/2008/05/00023461.pdf>.
[152] CalRecycle. “About EPR and Product Stewardship at CalRecycle.” 24 June 2010. Web. 22 July 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/
EPR/About.htm>.
[153] CalRecycle. “Policy and Law: Product Stewardship and Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR).” 10 Dec 2010. Web. 22 July 2011. 
<http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/EPR/PolicyLaw/default.htm>.
[154] CalRecycle. “Reduce Waste: Packaging.” 24 January 2011. Web. 22 March 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/ReduceWaste/Pack-
aging/default.htm>.
[155] White House, President Barack Obama. National Ocean Policy. Issued as Executive Order, July 19, 2011. Web. 22 July 2011. <http://
www.whitehouse.gov/files/documents/2010stewardship-eo.pdf>.61[156] NOC. “Strategic Action Plans.” National Ocean Council. Web. 22 July 2011. <http://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/
oceans/sap>.
[157] NOC. “Water Quality and Sustainable Practices on Land Strategic Action Plan.” National Ocean Council. 2 June 2011. Web. 22 July 
2011. <http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ceq/sap_7_water_quality_full_content_outline_06-02-11_clean.pdf>.
[158] WCGA. West Coast Governors’ Agreement on Ocean Health. 15 Apr 2011. Web. 20 July 2011. <http://westcoastoceans.gov/>.
[159] California Ocean Protection Council. Resolution to Reduce and Prevent Ocean Litter. 8 Feb 2007.
[160] Dolan, M. “Plastic bag bans upheld by California Supreme Court.” The Los Angeles Times. 15 July 2011. < http://articles.latimes.
com/2011/jul/15/local/la-me-0715-plastic-bags-20110715>.
[161] Californians Against Waste. “Plastic Bags: Local Ordinances.” Web. 23 July 2011. <http://www.cawrecycles.org/issues/plastic_cam-
paign/plastic_bags/local>.
[162] Romer, J.R. The Evolution of San Francisco’s Plastic-Bag Ban. Golden Gate U. Envtl. L.J. 2007, 1 (2)(5): 439-468.
[163] City of Santa Monica. “Container Ban Frequently Asked Questions.” City Office of Sustainability and the Environment. Web. 25 April 
2011. <http://www.smgov.net/Departments/OSE/Business/Container_Ban_Frequently_Asked_Questions.aspx>.
[164] Californians Against Waste. “Polystyrene: Local Ordinances.” Web. 23 July 2011. <http://www.cawrecycles.org/issues/plastic_cam-
paign/polystyrene/local>.
[165] City of Santa Monica. “’Smart’ Beach Cans Rolled-Out for Summer Season.” City Office of Sustainability and the Environment. Web. 
8 July 2011. <http://www.smgov.net/departments/ose/>.
[166] Carpenter, Susan. “Trash cans get ‘smart’ at Santa Monica State Beach.” The Los Angeles Times. 1 June 2011. <http://latimesblogs.
latimes.com/greenspace/2011/06/smart-trash-can.html>.
[167] CalRecycle. “Schools.” 25 October 2011. Web. 22 March 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/ReduceWaste/Schools/#Help >.
[168] ASTM. “Standard Specification for Compostable Plastics.” American Society for Testing and Materials Standard No. D6400. 
[169] CIWMB. Contractor’s Report to the Board: Performance Evaluation of Environmentally Degradable Plastic Packaging and Dispos-
able Food Service Ware-Final Report. Produced under contract with the California Integrated Waste Management Board by California State 
University Chico Research Foundation. Publication No. 432-08-001, 2007.
[170] ASTM. “Standard Test Method for Determining Aerobic Biodegradation of Plastic Materials in the Marine Environment by a Defined 
Microbial Consortium or Natural Sea Water Inoculum.” American Society for Testing and Materials Standard No. D6691.
[171] ASTM. “Standard Specification for Non-Floating Biodegradable Plastics in the Marine Environment.” American Society for Testing and 
Materials Standard No. D7081.
[172] Song, J.H.; Murphy, R.J.; Narayan, R.; Davies, G.B.H. Biodegradable and compostable alternatives to conventional plastics. Phil. 
Trans. R. Soc. B . 2009 , 364 (1526): 2127-2139. 
[173] CIWMB. Contractor’s Report to the Board: California 2004 Statewide Waste Characterization Study. Produced under contract with the 
California Integrated Waste Management Board by Cascadia Consulting Group, 2004.
[174] CalRecycle. “Plastic Information and Resources.” 23 February 2010. Web. 16 August 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/Plastics/>.
[175] Fevert, Kathy, CalRecycle. Personal communication regarding recycling rates for plastic in Califonria. 26 Aug 2011.
[176] SWRCB. California Regional Water Quality Control Board San Francisco Bay Region Municipal Regional Stormwater NPDES Permit. 
State Water Resources Control Board. Order R2-2009-0074, NPDES Permit No. CAS612008, Issued October 14, 2009.
[177] SWRCB. Preproduction Plastic Debris Program. State Water Resources Control Board. 5 May 2011. Web. 1 Sept 2011. <http://www.
swrcb.ca.gov/water_issues/programs/stormwater/plasticdebris.shtml>.
[178] CalRecycle. “At-Store Recycling Program: Plastic Carryout Bags.” 6 April 2011. Web. 23 July 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/
Plastics/AtStore/default.htm>.
[179] CIWMB. Staff Report, Agenda Item 14. California Integrated Waste Management Board. June 12, 2007.62# Non-peer-reviewed (“gray”) literature
* Contains specific information on California
#5th International Marine Debris Conference. “Workshop on learning shoreline assessment protocols for marine debris.” March 20-25, 
2011, Honolulu, HI. Web. <http://www.5imdc.org/>.
#5th International Marine Debris Conference. “Workshop on the importance of adequate port reception facilities (for ship generated waste) 
in reducing marine debris.” March 20-25, 2011, Honolulu, HI. Web. <http://www.5imdc.org/>.
#Allen, J. “Cradle-to-Cradle: Achieving the Vision Through Remanufacturing.” Caterpillar Reman Services. 24 June 2010. Web. 22 July 
2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/agendas/mtgdocs/2008/05/00023461.pdf>.
#American Chemical Society. “Hard plastics decompose in oceans, releasing endocrine disruptor BPA.” ScienceDaily. 24 March 2010. 
Web. 1 March 2011. <http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2010/03/100323184607.htm>.
#American Chemistry Council. “Lifecycle of a Plastic Product.” Web. 3 July 2011. < http://plastics.americanchemistry.com/Life-Cycle>.
#American Chemistry Council. “Operation Clean Sweep Pellet Handling Manual.” 2010. Web. 3 July 2011. <www.opcleansweep.org>.
#ASTM. “Standard Specification for Compostable Plastics.” American Society for Testing and Materials Standard No. D6400. 
#ASTM. “Standard Test Method for Determining Aerobic Biodegradation of Plastic Materials in the Marine Environment by a Defined Mi-
crobial Consortium or Natural Sea Water Inoculum.” American Society for Testing and Materials Standard No. D6691. 
#ASTM. “Standard Specification for Non-Floating Biodegradable Plastics in the Marine Environment.” American Society for Testing and 
Materials Standard No. D7081. 
#ATSDR. “Toxic Substances Portal.” Agency for Toxic Substance and Disease Registry. 3 March 2011. Web. 17 June 2011. <http://www.
atsdr.cdc.gov/substances/index.asp>.
#ATSDR. “Public Health Statement for Hexachlorobenzene.” Toxic Substanced Portal: Agency for Toxic Substance and Disease Registry. 
CAS# 118-74-1. September 2002. 
#Austen, Ian. “ Canada Takes Steps to Ban Most Plastic Baby Bottles.” New York Times April 19, 2008. Web. 28 June 2011. <http://www.
nytimes.com/2008/04/19/business/worldbusiness/19plastic.html>.
Astudillo, J.C.; Bravo, M.; Dumont, C.P.; Thiel, M. Detached aquaculture buoys in the SE Pacific: potential dispersal vehicles for associated 
organisms. Aquat. Biol . 2009 , 5: 219-231.
Backhurst, M. K.; Cole, R. G. Subtidal benthic marine litter at Kawau Island, north-eastern New Zealand. J. Environ. Manage . 2000 , 60: 
227–237.
Barnes, David K. A.; Galganai, Francois; Thompson, Richard C.; Barlaz, Morton. Accumulation and fragmentation of plastic debris in global 
environments. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B . 2009,  364: 1985-1998.
Barnes, D. K. A. Biodiversity: Invasions by marine life on plastic debris. Nature . 2002 , 416: 808-809.
Barnes, D. K. A.; Milner, P. Drifting plastic and its consequences for sessile organisms dispersal in the Atlantic Ocean. Mar. Biol . 2005 , 146 
(4): 815-825.
Barnes, D. K. A.; Sanderson, W. G. Latitudinal patterns in the colonization of marine debris. Proceedings of the 11th International Bryzool-
ogy Association Conference. 2000: 154-160.
Bartram, J.; Rees, G.; Monitoring Bathing Waters: A Practical Guide to the Design and Implementation of Assessments and Monitoring Pro-
grammes. 2000 , Taylor & Francis, New York.References (Alphabetical)63Bauer, M. J.; Herrmann, R. Estimation of the environmental contamination by phthalic acid esters leaching from household wastes. Sci. 
Total Environ . 1997 , 208: 49–57.
Biggers, William J.; Laufer, Hans. Identification of Juvenile Hormone-Active Alkylphenols in the Lobster Homarus americanus and in Marine 
Sediments. Biol. Bull . 2004 , 206: 13-24. 
Biggers, W. J.; Laufer, H. Detection of juvenile hormone-active compounds by larvae of the marine annelid Capitella sp. I. Arch. Insect 
Biochem. Physiol . 1996 , 32: 475–484.
Biggers, W. J.; Laufer, H. Chemical induction of settlement and metamorphosis of Capitella capitata sp. I. (Polychaetea) larvae by juvenile 
hormone-active compounds. Invertebr. Reprod. Dev.  1992 , 22: 39–46.
#Blest Company, Ltd. “Waste Plastic Oiling System.” Web. 22 March 2011. < http://www.blest.co.jp/seihin-english.html>
Bojes Heidi K.; Pope, Peter G. Characterization of EPA’s 16 priority pollutant polycyclic  aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in tank bottom 
solids  and associated contaminated soils at oil exploration  and production sites in Texas. Reg Toxicol. Pharm . 2007 , 47: 288-295.
Boerger, Christiana M.; Lattin, Gwendolyn L.; Moore, Shelly L.; Moore, Charles J. Plastic ingestion by planktivorous fishes in the North 
Pacific Central Gyre. Mar. Pol. Bull . 2010 , 60: 2275-2278.
#Brink, P. ten; Lutchman, I.; Bassi, S.; Speck, S.; Sheavly, S.; Register, K. Woolaway, C. Guidelines on the Use of Market-based Instruments 
to Address the Problem of Marine Litter. Institute for European Environmental Policy (IEEP), Brussels, Belgium, and Sheavely Consultants. 
Virginia Beach, USA, 2009.
Brown, James; Macfadyen, Graeme. Ghost fishing in European waters: Impacts and management responses. Mar. Pol . 2007 , 31 (4): 488-
504.
Browne, M. A.; Dissanayke, A.; Galloway, T. S.; Lowe, D. M.; Thompson, R. C. Ingested microscopic platic translocates to the circulatory 
system of the mussel, Mytilus edulis (L.). Environ. Sci. Technol . 2008 , 42: 5026-5031.
#Buckley, Christine. “Lobster Dieoffs Linked to Chemicals in Plastics.” UConn Today, University of Connecticut. Web. 10 Aug 2010. <http://
today.unconn.edu/?p=18691>.
*#CaDoT. “Don’t Trash California Campaign.” CalTrans Maintenance Program. Web. 8 July 2011. <http://www.donttrashcalifornia.info/>.
*#CaDoT. The California Department of Transportation Litter Abatement Plan. The California Department of Transportation Litter Abatement 
Task Force. 1 May, 2007.
*# CaDoT. Final Report: District 7 Litter Management Pilot Study. Produced under contract by URS Greiner, Woodward, Clyde, No. 
43A0004C. 2000, California Department of Transportation No. CT-SW-RT-00-013.
*#California Ocean Protection Council. An Implementation Strategy for the California Ocean Protection Council Resolution to Reduce and 
Prevent Ocean Litter. 20 Nov 2008.
*#California Ocean Protection Council. Resolution to Reduce and Prevent Ocean Litter. 8 Feb 2007. 
*#CalRecycle. “About EPR and Product Stewardship at CalRecycle.” 24 June 2010. Web. 22 July 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/EPR/
About.htm>.
*#CalRecycle. “At-Store Recycling Program: Plastic Carryout Bags.” 6 April 2011. Web. 23 July 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/Plas-
tics/AtStore/default.htm>.
*#CalRecycle. “Beverage Container Recycling.” 24 January 2011. Web. 22 March 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/bevcontainer/>.
*#CalRecycle. “Hospital Blue Wrap.” CalRecycle Hospital Waste Reduction and Recycling Team. Document: IWMB-2009-004.
*#CalRecycle. “Plastic Information and Resources.” 23 February 2010. Web. 16 August 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/Plastics/>.
*#CalRecycle. “Policy and Law: Product Stewardship and Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR).” 10 Dec 2010. Web. 22 July 2011. 
<http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/EPR/PolicyLaw/default.htm>.
*#CalRecycle. “Recycled-Content Trash Bag Program.” 26 Jan 2011. Web. 6 July 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/buyrecycled/trash-
bags/>.64*#CalRecycle. “Reduce Waste: Packaging.” 24 January 2011. Web. 22 March 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/ReduceWaste/Packag-
ing/default.htm>.
*#CalRecycle. “Schools.” 25 October 2011. Web. 22 March 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/ReduceWaste/Schools/#Help >.
*#Californians Against Waste. “Plastic Bags: Local Ordinances.” Web. 23 July 2011. <http://www.cawrecycles.org/issues/plastic_campaign/
plastic_bags/local>.
*#Californians Against Waste. “Polystyrene: Local Ordinances.” Web. 23 July 2011. <http://www.cawrecycles.org/issues/plastic_campaign/
polystyrene/local>.
#Canada Gazette. “Order Adding a Toxic Substance to Schedule 1 to the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999.” SOR/2010-194 
September 23, 2010. 10 Oct 2010. Web. 28 June 2011. < http://gazette.gc.ca/rp-pr/p2/2010/2010-10-13/html/sor-dors194-eng.html>.
*#Carpenter, Susan. “Trash cans get ‘smart’ at Santa Monica State Beach.” The Los Angeles Times. 1 June 2011. <http://latimesblogs.latimes.
com/greenspace/2011/06/smart-trash-can.html>.
Carr, Archie. Impacts of nondegradable marine debris on the ecology and survival outlook of sea turtles. Mar. Pol. Bull . 1987 , 18 (6) (2): 
352-356.
*#CCC. California Coastal Commission Public Education Program for California Coastal Cleanup Day. Web. 23 Feb 2011. <http://www.
coastal.ca.gov/publiced/ccd/ccd.html>. 
*#City of Los Angeles. “Los Angeles River Trash TMDL.” City of Los Angeles Stormwater Program. Web. 3 July 2011. <http://www.lastorm-
water.org/Siteorg/program/TMDLs/tmdl_lariver_trash.htm>.
*#City of Santa Monica. “Container Ban Frequently Asked Questions.” City Office of Sustainability and the Environment. Web. 25 April 
2011. <http://www.smgov.net/Departments/OSE/Business/Container_Ban_Frequently_Asked_Questions.aspx>.
*#City of Santa Monica. “’Smart’ Beach Cans Rolled-Out for Summer Season.” City Office of Sustainability and the Environment. Web. 8 
July 2011. <http://www.smgov.net/departments/ose/>.
*#CIWMB. “Recycled Plastic Lumber.” California Integrated Waste Management Board. 8 Nov 2010. Web. 16 Feb 2011. <http://www.
calrecycle.ca.gov/Plastics/recycled/lumber/>.
*#CIWMB. Contractor’s Report to the Board: California 2008 Statewide Waste Characterization Study. Produced under contract with the 
California Integrated Waste Management Board by Cascadia Consulting Group, 2008.
*#CIWMB. Contractor’s Report to the Board: Postconsumer Agricultural Plastic Report. Produced under contract with the California Inte-
grated Waste Management Board by Sea Hurley, California Polytechnic State University, Publication No. IWMB-2008-019, 2008.
*#CIWMB. Overall Framework for an Extended Producer Responsibility System in California. California Integrated Waste Management 
Board Meeting, Agenda Item 12, Attachment 1. January 23, 2008. Web. 22 July 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.ca.gov/EPR/Framework/
Framework.pdf>.
*#CIWMB. Contractor’s Report to the Board: Performance Evaluation of Environmentally Degradable Plastic Packaging and Disposable 
Food Service Ware-Final Report. Produced under contract with the California Integrated Waste Management Board by California State Uni-
versity Chico Research Foundation. Publication No. 432-08-001, 2007.
*#CIWMB. Staff Report, Agenda Item 14. California Integrated Waste Management Board. June 12, 2007.
*#CIWMB. Contractor’s Report to the Board: Postconsumer Resin Quality Assurance and Testing Protocol. Produced under contract with the 
California Integrated Waste Management Board by Chico State University, Chico Research Foundation, 2005.
*#CIWMB. Use and Disposal of Polystyrene in California: A Report to the California Legislature. Publication No. 432-04-003, 2004.
*#CIWMB. Contractor’s Report to the Board: California 2004 Statewide Waste Characterization Study. Produced under contract with the 
California Integrated Waste Management Board by Cascadia Consulting Group, 2004.
*#CIWMB. Plastics White Paper: Optimizing Plastics Use, Recycling, and Disposal in California. California Integrated Waste Management 
Board, 2003.
#Copeland, Claudia. Cruise Ship Pollution: Background, Laws and Regulations, and Key Issues. CRS Report for Congress, order code: 
RL32450. Updated 6 Feb 2008.65Dameron, Oliver J.; Park, Michael; Albins, Mark A.; Brainard, Russel. Marine debris accumulation in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands: 
An examination of rates and processes. Mar. Pollut. Bull . 2007 , 54 (4): 423-433.
*Dau, B.K.; Gilardi, K.V.K.; Gulland, F.M.; Higgins, A.; Holcomb, J.B.; St. Leger, J.; Ziccardi, M.H. Fishing gear-related injury in California 
marine wildlife. J. Mar. Wild Dis . 2009 , 45 (2): 355-362. 
David, R. M.; McKee, R. H.; Butala, J. H.; Barter, R. A.; Kayser, M. 2001 . Esters of aromatic mono-, di-, and tricarboxylic acids, aromatic 
diacids, and di-, tri-, or polyalcohols. In Patty’s Toxicology, vol 6 (eds E. Bingham, B. Cohrssen & C. H. Powell), pp. 635–932, 5th edn. New 
York, NY: John Wiley & Sons. 
Davidson, P.; Asch, R. G. Plastic ingestion by mesopelagic fishes in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser.  2011 , 432: 
173-180. 
Derraik, J. G. B. The Pollution of the marine environment by plasti debris: a review. Mar. Poll. Bull . 2002 , 44 (9): 842-852.
*#DoDolan, M. “Plastic bag bans upheld by California Supreme Court.” The Los Angeles Times. 15 July 2011. < http://articles.latimes.
com/2011/jul/15/local/la-me-0715-plastic-bags-20110715>.
Donohue, M. J.; Foley, D. G. Remote Sensing Revealing Links Among the Endangered Hawaiian Monk Seal, Marine Debris, and El Nino. 
Mar. Mamm. Sci . 2007 , 23 (2): 468-473.
Doyle, Miriam J.; Watson, William; Bowlin, Noelle M.; Sheavly, Seba B. Plastic particles in coastal pelagic ecosystems of the Northeast 
Pacific ocean. Mar. Environ. Res . 2011 , 71 (1): 41-52.
Ebbesmeyer, C. Scigliano, E. Flotsametrics and the Floating World: How One Man’s Obsession with Runaway Sneakers and Rubber Ducks 
Revolutionized Ocean Science. Smithsonian Books/Collins/HarperCollins, Washington, DC, 2009 .
Ebbesmeyer, C. C.; Ingraham Jr.; Royer, T. C.; Grosch, C. E. Tub Toys Orbit the Pacific Subarctic Gyre. EOS. 2007 , 88 (1): 1-12.
Endo, Satoshi; Takizawa, Reiko; Okuda, Keiji; Takada, Hideshige; Chiba, Kazuhiro; Kanehiro, Haruyuki; Ogi, Haruo; Yamashita, Rei; Date, 
Takeshi. Concentration of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in beached resin pellets: Variability among individual particles and regional dif-
ferences. Mar. Pollut. Bull.   2005 , 50 (10): 1103-1114.
Eriksson, C.; Burton, H. Origins and biological accumulation of small plastic particles in fur seals from Macquire Island. Ambio . 2003 , 32: 
380-384.
#European Commission. “Bisphenol A: EU ban on baby bottles to enter into force tomorrow.” Press Release, May 31, 2011. Reference:  
IP/11/664. Web. 28 June 2011. <http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/11/664&format=HTML>.
#EuPC (European Plastics Converters), EPRO (European Association of Plastics Recycling and Recovery Organizations), EuPR (European 
Plastics Recyclers) and PlasticsEurope. 2009. The Compelling Facts About Plastics 2009: An analysis of European plastic productivity, de-
mand and recovery for 2008.
*#Fevert, Kathy, CalRecycle. Personal communication regarding recycling rates for plastic in Califonria. 26 Aug 2011.
#Franeker, J.A van.; Meijboom, A.; de jong, M.; Verdaat, H. (2010). Fulmar litter EcoQO monitoring in the Netherlands 1979-2007 in rela-
tion to EU Directive 200/59/EC on Port Reception Facilities. Report nr: CO32/09. IMARES Wageningen UR.
Foster, P. M. D. Disruption of reproductive development in male rat offspring following in utero exposure to phthalate esters. Int. J. Androl.  
2006 , 29: 140–147.
Galgani, F.; Leaute, J. P.; Moguedet, P.; Souplet, A.; Verin, Y.; Capentier, A.; Goraguer, H.; Latrouite, D.; Andral, B.; Cadiou, Y.; Mahe, J. C.; 
Poulard, J. C.; Nerisson, P. Litter on the Sea Floor Along European Coasts. Mar. Pol. Bull.  2000 , 40 (6): 516-527.
*#Gilfillan, L.R.; Ohman, M.D.; Doyle, M.J.; Watson, W. Occurrence of Plastic Micro-Debris in the Southern California Current System. 
CalCOFI Rep., Vol 50, 2009 .
Gilpin,R.; Wagel, D.; Solch, J. Production, distribution, and fate of polycholorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans, and related organo-
halogens in the environment. In Dioxins and health (eds A. Schecter & T. Gasiewicz), 2nd edn. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc, 2003 .
Goldberg, E. D. Plasticizing the seafloor: an overview. Environ. Technol . 1997 , 18: 195–202.
Gray, L. E.; Ostby, J.; Furr, J.; Price, M.; Veeramachaneni, D. N. R.; Parks, L. Perinatal exposure to the phthalates DEHP, BBP, and DINP, but 
not DEP, DMP, or DOTP, alters sexual differentiation of the male rat. Toxicol. Sci.  2000 , 58: 350–365.66Gregory, M. R.; Andrady, A. L. 2003 . Plastics in the marine environment. In: Andrady, AlL. (Ed.), Plastics and the Environment. John Wiley 
and Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, pp. 379-401.
Gregory, M.R. Environmental implications of plastic debris in marine settings—entanglement, ingestion, smothering, hangers-on, hitch-
hiking and alien invasions. Phil. Trns. R. Soc. B . 2009 , 364: 2013-2025.
#Hall, K. Impacts of Marine Debris and Oil. Economic & Social Costs to Coastal Communities. Kommunenes Iternasjonale Miljoorganisas-
jon (KIMO), 2009.
Hauser, R., Duty, S.; Godfrey-Bailey, L; Calafat, A. M. Medications as a source of human exposure to phthalates. Environ. Health Perspect. 
2004 , 112: 751–753.
Hopewell, J.; Dvorak, R.; Kosior, E. Plastics recycling: challenges and opportunities. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B.  2009 , 364: 2115-2126.
#IMO. Status of Multilateral Conventions and Instruments in Respect of which the International Maritime Organization or its Secretary Gen-
eral Performs Depositary or Other Functions. International Maritime Organization Report, 31 May 2011. Web. 30 Jun 2011. < L:\LED\LO\
MS-Depositary\STATUS OF MULTILATERAL CONVENTIONS\Status - 2011.docx>.
*Jacobsen, J. K.; Massey, L.; Gulland, F. Fatal Ingestion of floating net debris by two sperm whales (Physeter macrocephalus). Mar. Poll. Bull. 
2010 , 60 (5): 765-767.
Kanehiro, H.; Tokai, T.; Matuda, K. Marine litter composition and distribution on the sea-bed of Tokyo Bay. Fish. Eng . 1995 , 31: 195–199.
Katsanevakis, S.; Verriopoulos, G.; Nicolaidou, A.; Thessalou-Legaki, M. Effect of marine litter on the benthic megafauna of coastal soft bot-
toms: a manipulative field experiment. Mar. Pollut. Bull.  2007 , 54: 771–778.
*Keller, Aimee A.; Fruh, Erica L.; Johnson, Melanie M.; Simon, Victor; McGourty, Catherine. Distribution and abundance of anthropogenic 
marine debris along the shelf and slope of the US West Coast. Mar. Pollut. Bull . 2010 , 60 (5): 692-700.
Koch, H. M.; Calafat, Antonia M. Human body burdens of chemicals used in plastic manufacture. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B.  2009 , 364: 2063-
2078.
Koch, H. M.; Preuss, R.; Angerer, J. Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP): human metabolism and internal exposure—an update and latest 
results. Int. J. Androl.  2006 , 29: 155–165.
Laist, D. W. Impacts of marine debris: entanglement of marine life in marine debris including a comprehensive list of species with entangle-
ment and ingestion records. Pp. 99–139 in J. M. Coe and D. B. Rogers, eds., Marine Debris- Sources, Impacts, and Solutions. New York: 
Springer-Verlag, 1997 .
Laist, David W. Overview of the biological effects of lost and discarded plastic debris in the marine environment. Mar. Poll. Bull . 1987 , 18 
(6) (2): 319-326.
*Lang, Richard C.; Laursen, Duane; Danner, Brenda. Stewardson, Nickol; Thompson, Richard C. International Pellet Watch: Global moni-
toring of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in coastal waters. 1. Initial phase data on PCBs, DDTs, and HCHs. Mar. Pollut. Bull.  2009 , 58 
(10): 1437-1446.
*Lattin, G. L.; Moore, C. J.; Zellers, K. A. F.; Moore, S. L.; Weisberg, S. B. A comparison of neustonic plastic and zooplankton at different 
depths near the southern California shore. Mar. Pollut. Bull.  2004 , 49: 291-294.
Laufer, H.; Biggers, J. W. Unifying concepts learned from methyl farnesoate for invertebrate reproduction and post-embryonic development. 
Am. Zool . 2001 , 41: 442–457.
Lee, K. Y.; Shibutani, M.; Takagi, H.; Kato, N.; Takigami, S.; Uneyama, C.; Hirose, M. Diverse developmental toxicity of di-n-butyl phthal-
ate in both sexes of rat offspring after maternal exposure during the period from late gestation through lactation. Toxicology , 2004 , 203: 
221–238.
*#Los Angeles County. “An Overview of Carryout Bags in Los Angeles.” Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors Staff Report. August 2007.
Loughlin, Daniel H.; Barlaz, Morton A. Critical Review: Policies for Strengthening Markets for Recyclables: A Worldwide Perspective. Envi-
ron. Sci. & Technol. 2006, 36: 287-326.
Mato, Yukie; Isobe, Tomohiko; Takada, Hideshige; Kanehiro, Haruyuki; Ohtake, Chiyoko; Kaminuma, Tsuguchika. Plastic Resin Pellets as a 
Transport Mechanism for Toxic Chemicals in the Marine Environment. Environ. Sci. Technol . 2001 , 35 (2): 318-324.67Masó, Mercedes; Garcés, Esther; Pagès, Francesc; Camp, Jordi. Drifting plastic debris as a potential vector for dispersing Harmful Algal 
Bloom (HAB) species. Sci. Mar.  2003 , 67 (1): 107-111.
Matsumoto, A.; Kunugita, N.; Kitagawa, K.; Isse, T.; Oyama, T.; Foureman, G. L.; Morita, M.; Kawamoto, T. Bisphenol A levels in human 
urine. Environ. Health Perspect.  2003 , 111: 101–104.
McDermid, Karla J.; McMullen, Tracy L. Quantitative analysis of small-plastic debris on beaches in the Hawaiian archipelago. Mar. Pollut. 
Bull. 2004 , 48: 790-794.
#Mehta, A. China-India Plastics Industry Summit 2007—Visit Report. Summit of Chinese and Indian Plastic Industrties, Guanzhou, China, 
May 20, 2007.
Mooney, Brian P. The second green revolution? Production of plant-based biodegradable plastics. Biochem. J . 2009 , 418: 219-232.
*Moore, E.; Lyday, S.; Roletto, J. Litle, K.; Parrish, J.K.; Nevins, H.; Harvey, J.; Mortenson, J.; Greig, D.; Piazza, M.; Hermance, A.; Lee, D.; 
Adams, D.; Allen, S.; Kell, S. Entanglements of marine mammals and seabirds in central California and the north-west coast of the United 
States 2001–2005. Mar. Pollut. Bull . 2009 , 58 (7): 1045-1051.
Moore, C. J. Synthetic polymers in the marine environment: A rapidly increasing long-term threat. Environ. Res . 2008 , 108: 131-139.
*#Moore, C. J. Lattin, G. L.; Zellers, A. F. A brief analysis of organic pollutants sorbed to pre and postproduction plastic particles from the 
Los Angeles and San Gabriel River Watersheds. In: Proceedings of the Plastic Debris Rivers to Sea Conference, Algalita Marine Research 
Foundation, Long Beach, CA, 2005a.
*#Moore, C. J. Lattin, G. L.; Zellers, A. F. Working our way upstream: a snapshot of landbased contributions of plastic and other trash to 
coastal waters and beaches of Southern California. In: Proceedings of the Plastic Debris Rivers to Sea Conference, Algalita Marine Research 
Foundation, Long Beach, CA, 2005b.
*#Moore, C. J. Lattin, G. L.; Zellers, A. F. Measuring the effectiveness of voluntary plastic industry efforts: AMRF’s analysis of Operation 
Clean Sweep. In: Proceedings of the Plastic Debris Rivers to Sea Conference, Algalita Marine Research Foundation, Long Beach, CA, 2005c.
*Moore, C. J.; Moore, S. L.; Weisberg, S. B.; Lattin, G. L.; Zellers, A. F. A comparison of neustonic plastic and zooplankton abundance in 
southern California’s coastal waters. Mar. Pollut. Bull . 2002 , 44: 1035-1038.
*Moore, C. J.; S. L. Moore; M. K. Leecaster; S. B. Weisberg. A Comparison of Plastic and Plankton in the North Pacific Central Gyre. Mar. 
Pollut. Bull . 2001 , 42 (12): 1297-1300.
*Moore, S. L.; Gregorio, D.; Carreon, M.; Weisberg, S. B.; Leecaster, M. K. Composition and Distribution of Beach Debris in Orange 
County, California. Mar. Pollut. Bull.  2001 , 42 (3): 241-245.
*Moore, S.L.; Allen, M. J. Distribution of anthropogenic and natural debris on the mainland shelf of the Southern California Bight. Mar. Pol-
lut. Bull . 2000 , 40: 83-88.
Muncke, Jane. Exposure to endocrine disrupting compounds via the food chain: Is packaging a relevant source? Sci Tot. Envir . 2009 , 407 
(16): 4549-4559.
#National Academy of Sciences. Briefing for Ocean Studies Board: Tackling Marine Debris in the 21st Century. Presented by the Committee 
on Effectiveness of International and National Measures to Prevent and Reduce Marine Debris and Its Impacts. October, 23, 2008.
#NCCOS. “International Mussel Watch Study.” National Centers for Coastal Ocean Science. 17 Feb 2011. Web. 28 June 2011. <http://
ccma.nos.noaa.gov/stressors/pollution/assessments/as_intl_mw_study.aspx>.
#NOAA Oean and Coastal Resource Management. “Clean Marine Program.” 17 Sept 2010. Web. 22 July 2011. <http://coastalmanage-
ment.noaa.gov/marinas.html>.
#NOAA Fisheries Office of Protected Resources. “Hawaiian Monk Seal (Monachus schauinslandi). 30 June 2011. Web. 3 July 2011. <http://
www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/species/mammals/pinnipeds/hawaiianmonkseal.htm#population>.
#NOAA Marine Debris Program. 7 June 2011. Web 17 June 2011. <http://marinedebris.noaa.gov/>. 
#NOAA Marine Debris Program. “Nets to Energy Program.” 7 June 2011. Web. 17 June 2011. <http://marinedebris.noaa.gov/projects/net-
stoenergy.html>.
#NOAA Marine Debris Program. “Fishing for Energy Program.” 7 June 2011. Web. 17 June 2011. <http://marinedebris.noaa.gov/projects/
fishing4energy.html>.68#NOAA Mussel Watch Program. “Mussel Watch Contaminant Monitoring.” 10 Mar 2011. Web. 28 June 2011. <http://ccma.nos.noaa.gov/
about/coast/nsandt/musselwatch.aspx>.
#NOC. “Strategic Action Plans.” National Ocean Council. Web. 22 July 2011. <http://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/oceans/
sap>.
#NOC. “Water Quality and Sustainable Practices on Land Strategic Action Plan.” National Ocean Council. 2 June 2011. Web. 22 July 
2011. <http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ceq/sap_7_water_quality_full_content_outline_06-02-11_clean.pdf>.
*#NOEP. California’s Ocean Economy. National Ocean Economics Program. July 2005: 24-26
*#Ocean Conservancy. Trash Travels. International Coastal Cleanup Report. 2010.
*#Ocean Conservancy. A Rising Tide of Ocean Debris. International Coastal Cleanup Report. 2009.
Oehlmann, Jorg et al. A critical analysis of the biological impacts of plasticizers on wildlife. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B . 2009 , 364: 2047-2062.
Pascal, Melvin A.; Zabik, Mary E.; Zabik, Matthew J.; Hernandez, Ruben J.; Uptake of Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) from an Aqueous 
Medium by Polyethylene, Polyvinyl Chloride, and Polystyrene Films. J. Agric. Food Chem . 2005 , 53 (1): 164-169.
Possatto, Fernanda E; Barletta, Mario; Costa, Monica F.; Ivar do Sul, Juliana A.; Dantas, David V. Plastic debris ingestion by marine catfish: 
An unexpected fisheries impact. Mar. Pollut. Bull . 2011 , doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2011.01.036.
*#Project Kaisei. “About Project Kaisei.” Web. 24 July 2011. <http://www.projectkaisei.org/index.aspx>.
Rees, E. I. S.; Southward, A. J. Plastic flotsam as an agent for dispersal of Perforatus perfoatus (Cirripedia: Balanidae). J. Mar. Biol.  2008 , As-
soc. UK (JABA2-Biodiversity Records, published online).
Rios, Lorena M.; Jones, Patrick R.; Moore, Charles; Narayan, Urja V. Quantitation of persistent organic pollutants adsorbed on plastic debris 
from the Northern Pacific Gyre’s “eastern garbage patch.” J. Environ. Monit . 2010 , 12: 2226-2236.
Rios, Lorena M.; Moore, Charles; Jones, Patrick R. Persistent organic pollutants carried by synthetic polymers in the ocean environment. 
Mar. Pollut. Bull . 2007 , 54: 1230-1237.
*Romer, J.R. The Evolution of San Francisco’s Plastic-Bag Ban. Golden Gate U. Envtl. L.J.  2007 , 1 (2)(5): 439-468.
Ryan, P. G.; Moore, Charles J.; van Franeker, Jan A.; Moloney, Coleen L. Monitoring the abundance of plastic debris in the marine environ-
ment. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B . 2009 , 364: 1999-2012.
Ryan, P. G.; Connel, A. D.; Gardner, B. D. Plastic ingestion and PCBs in seabirds: Is there a relationship? Mar. Pollut. Bull.  1998 , 19: 174-
176.
Sajiki, J., Yonekubo, J. Leaching of bisphenol A (BPA) to seawater from polycarbonate plastic and its degradation by reactive oxygen species. 
Chemosphere . 2003 , 51 (1): 55-62.
*#Seadoc. California Lost Fishing Gear Recovery Project. Web. 20 July 2011. <http://www.seadocsociety.org/lostfishinggear>.
*#Sea Grant: University of Southern California. “Caulerpa Taxifola: Case Study.” Web. 16 Mar 2011. <http://www.usc.edu/org/seagrant/
caulerpa/casestudy.html>.
#Smith, D. “National Takeback and Recycling Program.” Sony Electronics Inc. 24 June 2010. Web. 22 July 2011. <http://www.calrecycle.
ca.gov/EPR/Framework/2008April/Presentation/Smith.pdf>.
#Somers, Barbara. “Lobster Shell Disease Fact Sheet.” Rhode Island Sea Grant: Nov 2005. Web. 17 June 2011. <http://seagrant.gso.uri.edu/
factsheets/lobster_shell_disease.html>.
Song, J.H.; Murphy, R.J.; Narayan, R.; Davies, G.B.H. Biodegradable and compostable alternatives to conventional plastics. Phil. Trans. R. 
Soc. B . 2009 , 364 (1526): 2127-2139.
Staples, C. A.; Woodburn, K.; Caspers, N.; Hall, A. T.; Klecka, G. M. A weight of evidence approach to the aquatic hazard assessment of 
bisphenol A. Hum. Ecol. Risk Assess . 2002 , 8: 1083–1105.
*#SWRCB. California Regional Water Quality Control Board San Francisco Bay Region Municipal Regional Stormwater NPDES Permit. 
State Water Resources Control Board. Order R2-2009-0074, NPDES Permit No. CAS612008, Issued October 14, 2009.69*#SWRCB. Preproduction Plastic Debris Program. State Water Resources Control Board. 5 May 2011. Web. 1 Sept 2011. <http://www.
swrcb.ca.gov/water_issues/programs/stormwater/plasticdebris.shtml>.
*#SWRCB. Strategic Plan Update 2008-2012. State Water Resources Control Board. Adopted 2 Sept 2008. 
#Takada, H. “International Pellet Watch.” Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology. Web. 17 
Jun 2011. <http://www.pelletwatch.org/>.
Talsness, C. E.; Andrade, A. J. M.; Kuriyama, S. N.; Taylor, J. A.; vom Saal, F. S. Components of plastic: experimental studies in animals and 
relevance for human health. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B . 2009 , 364: 2079–2096.
Teuten, Emma L. et al. Transport and release of chemicals from plastics to the environment and to wildlife. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B . 2009 , 364: 
2027-2045.
Teuten, Emma L.; Rowland, Steven J.; Galloway, Tamara S.; Thompson, Richard C. Potential for Plastics to Transport Hydrophobic Contami-
nants. Environ. Sci. Technol . 2007 , 41: 7759-7764.
Thompson, Richard C.; Moore, Charles J.; vom Saal, Fredrick S.; Swan, Shanna H. Plastics, the environment and human health: current 
consensus and future trends. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B. 2009 , 364: 2153-2166.
Thompson, R. C.; Olsen, Y.; Mitchell, R. P.; Davis, A.; Rowland, S. J.; John, A. W. G.; McGonigle, D; Russel,l A. E. Lost at Sea: where is all 
the plastic? Science . 2004 , 304: 838.
Tyl, R. W.; Myers, C. B.; Marr, M. C.; Fail, P. A.; Seely, J. C.; Brine, D. R.; Barter, R. A.; Butala, J. H. Reproductive toxicity evaluation of 
dietary butyl benzyl phthalate (BBP) in rats. Reprod. Toxicol . 2004 , 18: 241–264.
#UNEP. UNEP Year Book 2011: Emerging Issues in Our Global Environment. United Nations Environment Program. 2011: 20-33.
#UNEP. Marine Litter: A global Challenge. Nairobi: United Nations Environment Program. 2009: 232 pp.
#USEPA. “Persistent Organic Pollutants: A Global Response.” United States Environmental Protection Agency. 12 Jan 2011. Web. 4 Feb 
2011. <http://www.epa.gov/oia/toxics/pop.html>. 
#USEPA. “Endocrine Disruption Screening Program (EDSP).” United States Environmental Protection Agency. 22 Apr 2010. Web. 24 Jun 
2011. <http://www.epa.gov/endo/pubs/edspoverview/whatare.htm>. 
#USEPA. Municipal Solid Waste in the United States 2009. United States Environmental Protection Agency Report: EPA530-R-10-012, 
Washington, D.C., 2010.
#USEPA. “Invasive Species.” United States Environmental Protection Agency. 20 Nov 2009. Web. 10 Mar 2011. <http://www.epa.gov/great-
lakes/invasive/>.   
#USEPA. Municipal Solid Waste Generation in the United States, 1999. Prepared by Franklin Associates, Ltd. for the United States Environ-
mental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C., 2000.
#USEPA. Plastic pellets in the aquatic environment: Sources, and recommendations. United States Environmental Protection Agency 
Oceans and Coastal Protection Division Report 842-B-92-010. Washington, D.C., 1992.
#USFWS. “Zebra Mussel: Economic Impact.” United States Fish and Wildlife Service. 31 Jan 2008. Web. 10 Mar 2011. <http://www.glsc.
usgs.gov/main.php?content=research_invasive_zebramussel&title=Invasive%20Invertebrates0&menu=research_invasive_invertebrates>. 
Valle-Levinson, A. and R. L. Swanson. Wind-induced scattering of medically-related and sewage-related items. Mar. Technol. Soc. J . 1991 , 
25 (2): 49-56.
Vlietstra, L.S.; Parga, J.A. Long-term changes in the type, but not amount, of ingested plastic particles in short-tailed shearwaters in the 
southereastern Bering Sea. Mar. Pollut. Bull . 2002 , 44 (9): 945-955.
*Watters, Diana L.; Yoklavich, Mary M.; Love, Milton; Schroeder, Donna M. Assessing marine debris in deep seafloor habitats off California. 
Bull. Mar. Sci . 2010 , 60: 131-138.*#WCGA. West Coast Governors’ Agreement on Ocean Health. 15 Apr 2011. Web. 20 July 2011. <http://westcoastoceans.gov/>.
*#WCGA. West Coast Governors’ Agreement on Ocean Health Marine Debris Action Work Plan. May, 2010.
White House, President Barack Obama. National Ocean Policy. Issued as Executive Order, July 19, 2011. Web. 22 July 2011. <http://www.
whitehouse.gov/files/documents/2010stewardship-eo.pdf>.
Young, Lindsay C.; Vanderlip, Cynthia; Duffy, David C.; Afanasyev, Vsevolod; Shaffer, Scott A. Bringing Home the Trash: Do Colony-Based 
Differences in Foraging Distribution Lead to Increased Plastic Ingestion in Laysan Albatrosses? PLoS One . 2009 , 4 (10): e7623.
Zarfi, Christiane; Matthies, Michael. Are marine plastic particles transport vectors for organic pollutants to the Arctic? Mar. Pollut. Bull.  
2010 , 60 (10): 1810-1814.
7072
