Journal of Hazardous Materials 173 (2010) 502–509
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Hazardous Materials
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jhazmat
Removal of Pb(II) ions from aqueous solution by adsorption using bael leaves
(Aegle marmelos )
S. Chakravarty∗, Ashok Mohanty, T. Nag Sudha, A.K. Upadhyay, J. Konar, J.K. Sircar, A. Madhukar,
K.K. Gupta
Analytical Chemistry Centre, National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur 831007, Jharkhand, India
article info
Article history:
Received 5 May 2009Received in revised form 19 August 2009Accepted 24 August 2009Available online 31 August 2009
Keywords:BiosorptionAegle marmelosPb(II) ionsAqueous solutionabstract
Biosorption of Pb(II) on bael leaves ( Aegle marmelos ) was investigated for the removal of Pb(II) from
aqueous solution using different doses of adsorbent, initial pH, and contact time. The maximum Pb loadingcapacity of the bael leaves was 104 mg g
−1at 50 mg L−1initial Pb(II) concentration at pH 5.1. SEM and
FT-IR studies indicated that the adsorption of Pb(II) occurs inside the wall of the hollow tubes present inthe bael leaves and carboxylic acid, thioester and sulphonamide groups are involved in the process. Thesorption process was best described by pseudo second order kinetics. Among Freundlich and Langmuirisotherms, the latter had a better ﬁt with the experimental data. The activation energy E
aconﬁrmed that
the nature of adsorption was physisorption. Bael leaves can selectively remove Pb(II) in the presence ofother metal ions. This was demonstrated by removing Pb from the efﬂuent of exhausted batteries.
© 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Industrial efﬂuents are loaded with heavy metals which are haz-
ardous to humans and other forms of life. Their toxic nature has asevere environmental impact. This has resulted in the enforcementof stringent laws for the maximum allowable limits of their dis-charge into the open landscapes and water bodies. Lead is used as anindustrial raw material for storage battery manufacturing, printing,pigments, fuels, photography material and explosive manufactur-ing [1]. Since Pb(II) is a potent neurotoxic metal, its pollution is
of major concern. The presence of lead in drinking water, even inlow concentrations, may cause diseases such as anemia, hepatitis,nephrite syndrome, etc [2].
A number of processes exist for the removal of metal pollutants
from waste water, viz. precipitation, electroplating, ion exchangeand membrane separation. These processes have several disadvan-tages such as incomplete metal removal, high reagent and energyrequirement and generation of toxic sludge/waste products thatrequire disposal and further treatment. This led to the need todevelop an effective, low cost and environment friendly processfor wastewater treatment. Adsorption is an efﬁcient and econom-ical process used for the removal of heavy metals from industrialwastewater. A number of investigations have been carried out usingnaturally occurring waste materials for the removal of lead from
∗Corresponding author. Tel.: +91 657 2270588; fax: +91 657 2345213.
E-mail address: sanchita@nmlindia.org (S. Chakravarty).aqueous systems. Some of the naturally occurring waste materials
used for this purpose are ﬂy ash [3], phosphatic clay [4], clonop-
tilolite [5]and sea nodule [6]. Many biological materials such as
olive stones, fungus Aspergillus niger , seaweeds have also shown
potential for the removal of heavy metal [7]. Biosorption of Pb(II)
onto a cone biomass of Pinus sylvestris was studied which revealed
that the maximum adsorption of Pb onto P. sylvestris w a sa tp H
4.0[8]. In another study, ten different seaweed species were com-
pared on the basis of lead uptake at different pH conditions [7].
The study revealed that the brown seaweed, Turbinarea concoides
exhibited the maximum lead uptake of 439.4 mg/g at an optimumpH of 4.5 and temperature of 30
◦C. Brown seaweed was extensively
used for biosorption and its polysaccharide content was believedto be responsible for its excellent metal binding capacity [9].I tw a s
observed that the biological materials could accumulate heavy met-als in their walls, even though the binding sites for chelating werenot identiﬁed [10] .
The objective of the present study is to investigate the utility
of various types of locally available biomass to remove Pb(II) fromaqueous systems. Dry leaves of bael tree ( Aegle marmelos ) were
tested for the removal of Pb(II) ion from aqueous medium as theyare very cheap and easily available biomass. Bael tree is a spinytree belonging to the family Rutaceae and is abundantly found inIndia, Myanmar, Pakistan and Bangladesh. Literature reports indi-cate that the leaves of bael tree have medicinal value and areuseful for the treatment of ophthalmia, deafness, inﬂammations,cataract, diabetes, diarrhoea, dysentery, heart palpitation and asth-matic complications [11] . In the present study, leaves of the bael
0304-3894/$ – see front matter © 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2009.08.113S. Chakravarty et al. / Journal of Hazardous Materials 173 (2010) 502–509 503
tree were successfully utilized for the removal of Pb(II) ions from
aqueous solution. The loading capacity of the bael leaves was opti-mized and the selectivity of the bael leaves towards Pb(II) in thepresence of other metal cations was investigated. Attempts havebeen made to understand the factors responsible for adsorption ofPb(II) to the bael leaves. In an effort to show its practical utility, baelleaves were utilized for the removal of Pb(II) from storage batteryefﬂuents at the laboratory scale. This paper aims to examine the useof bael leaves as an adsorbent for the contaminated water bodies.
2. Experimental
2.1. Biosorbent
In the present study, bael leaves of the Indian bael tree ( Aegle
marmelos ) were used as a biosorbent for the removal of Pb from
aqueous solution. The bael tree is native to northern India butis found widely throughout the Indian peninsula and in Ceylon,Burma, Thailand, Indo-China [12] . The bael leaves were ﬁrst washed
thoroughly with deionised water. The soluble colored componentswere then removed by washing repeatedly with hot deionisedwater (70
◦C). The bael leaves were then dried at 70◦C for 24 h.
The dried bael leaves were crushed and sieved through 100 meshand stored in polythene bottles.
2.2. Instrumentation
Atomic absorption spectrometer (AAS), GBC, AVANTA equipped
with an air acetylene burner was used to determine the concen-tration of all the metal ions in the aqueous solution. The hollowcathode lamp was operated at an analytical wavelength of 283.3 nmfor Pb and the slit was 0.2 nm for all the experiments. FT-IR spectraof bael leaves samples (before and after adsorption) were obtainedusing FT-IR spectrometer, Thermo Nicolet, Nexus 870. The pro-cessed dry bael leaves in powder form (Section 2.1, about 0.1 g)
along with KBr were ground into ﬁne particles and pressed to makepellets. FT-IR spectrum of the native bael leaves was then recordedusing the pellets. For FT-IR spectrum of Pb loaded bael leaves, thenative bael leaves were adsorbed with 1000 mg L
−1Pb(II) solution
for 24 h. After adsorption, Pb(II) loaded bael leaves were ﬁltered,washed with deionised water and air dried. The FT-IR spectrumof Pb loaded bael leaves was then recorded using KBr pellets. AScanning Electron Microscope, JEOL JSM 840, was used to obtainSEM images of the bael leaves before and after Pb adsorption. Metalmapping of the native bael leaves and Pb loaded bael leaves wereperformed using the same SEM. All pH measurements were madeusing a digital pH meter.
2.3. Metal solutions
All the chemicals used were AR grade supplied by SRL, Mumbai,
India and deionised water was used for preparation of the solu-tion throughout the experiments. The stock solution of Pb(II) wasprepared by dissolving Pb(NO
3)2in deionised water. Stock solu-
tions of Mn2+,F e2+,C o2+,N i2+,C u2+,C a2+and Mg2+were prepared
by dissolving their corresponding nitrate salts in deionised water.The working solutions were prepared by appropriate dilution of thestock solutions with deionised water.
2.4. Batch adsorption studies
Batch adsorption studies were performed in 100 mL conical
ﬂasks to optimize the operating conditions for Pb(II) adsorptionby bael leaves. In a typical experiment, 0.2 g of processed powderbael leaves (Section 2.1) were added to 50 mL of 98 mg L
−1synthetic
Pb(II) solution. The natural pH of the synthetic Pb(II) solutions wasmeasured to be 5.1. This pH was maintained throughout for all the
experiments except for pH optimization studies. The mixture wasshaken for 45 min at 303 K using a mechanical shaker at 120 rpm.The phases were separated by ﬁltration and the Pb(II) concentrationin the ﬁltrate was determined by Atomic Absorption Spectropho-tometer (AAS). Adsorption parameters, viz. biosorbent dose, initialconcentration of Pb(II) and contact time were optimized by con-tinuous variation method. For pH optimization, the initial pH ofeach Pb(II) solution was adjusted to the required pH by using 0.01NHNO
3or 0.01 M NaOH. The concentration of Pb was measured using
AAS after the pH adjustment. For desorption studies, Pb(II) wasinitially adsorbed on the bael leaves at pH 5.1. The equilibrium con-centration ( C
e) of Pb in the solution was measured and the pH was
then adjusted to the range of 2.0–7.0 using 0.01 M NaOH or 0.01NHNO
3. The solution after pH adjustment was shaken for half an
hour and the equilibrium concentration after desorption ( C/prime
e)w a s
measured. The percentage of desorption was calculated as follows:
%desorption =/parenleftBigC/prime
e−Ce
Co−Ce/parenrightBig
×100
where Cois the initial Pb(II) concentration of the solution (mg L−1),
Ceis the equilibrium Pb(II) concentration (mg L−1) at a particular
pH and C/prime
eis the equilibrium Pb(II) concentration (mg L−1) at a par-
ticular pH after desorption. The kinetic studies were carried out atthree different Pb(II) concentrations of 48.2, 87.8 and 180.2 mg L
−1
at temperatures of 303, 313 and 323 K.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Removal of Pb(II) from synthetic solutions
Dry bael leaves powder was initially used to remove Pb(II) from
synthetic aqueous solutions. Different experimental parameterslike contact time, adsorbent dose, and pH were optimized to obtainmaximum Pb(II) removal using the bael leaves. For optimizationof contact time, a solution of 98 mg L
−1Pb(II) at pH 5.1 with 0.2 g
of bael leaves was used. The contact time was varied between 5and 120 min at three different temperatures of 303, 313, and 323 K(results not shown here). It was observed that during the ﬁrst20 min there was a rapid uptake of Pb, up to a maximum of 65%.The time required for attaining equilibrium was 30 min. Therefore,a contact time of 30 min was employed for all other studies. It is tobe noted that a contact time of 30 min was sufﬁcient for optimumremoval of Pb(II) when the initial Pb(II) concentration was raisedto 180.2 g L
−1.
3.1.1. Effect of adsorbent dose
Three different solutions having an initial Pb(II) concentration
of 48.2, 87.8 and 180.2 mg L−1, with pH 5.1 were used to study the
effect of the adsorbent dose on the removal of lead. The adsor-bent dose was varied in the range of 0.01–0.5 g. The result ispresented in Fig. 1 . It was observed that the removal efﬁciency
increased with increase of adsorbent dose. It reached a maximum(85% approximately) at around 0.2 g and then remained almostconstant. Therefore, the optimum bael leaves dose was taken as0.2 g and this was used for all further studies. The positive correla-tion between adsorbent dose and metal removal efﬁciency can berelated to the increasing surface area of the available binding sites[13] .
3.1.2. Effect of pH
pH is a very important parameter that affects any biosorption
process. It affects the activity of the functional groups present inthe biosorbent that are responsible for metal adsorption and alsoaffects the competition of metallic ions to get adsorbed to theDownload English Version:
https://daneshyari.com/en/article/580997
Download Persian Version:
https://daneshyari.com/article/580997
Daneshyari.com