www.wjpr.net                                   Vol 4, Issue 3, 2015.   
387 Nageswara  et al.                                                   World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
 
 
REMOVAL OF REACTIVE YELLOW 145 DYES FROM AQUEOUS 
SOLUTION USING ADSORPTION TECHNIQUE  
 
L.Nageswara Rao*, P.Rohinikumar and M.Venkateswara Rao  
 
*Caledonian College of Engineering , Sultanate of Oman . 
 R.V.R and J.C. College of Engineering (A), Guntur , A.P, India . 
 
ABSTRACT  
Experimental studie s are carried  for improving the color removal from 
the ef fluents discharged from industrial and  municipality  and other 
sources. Dyes are widely used in several industries like textile, dyeing, 
paper and pulp, tan nery, paint industries etc. In this present study, 
Activated carbon is prepared from the fire stick wood by chemical 
activation with phosphoric acid has been analyzed for the removal of 
Reactive Yellow 145 (RY) azodye from aqueous solution through 
batch ad sorption technique. The adsorption studies are undertaken in a 
systematic manner and effects of different parameters such as agitation 
time, adsorbent size, and adsorbent dosage, initial concentration of dye   
 in aqueous solution, volume of the aqueous sol ution and pH of the aqueous solution on the 
removal of dye are determined. From  these investigations,  40 mg  of ‗activated  carbon  from  
fire  stick  wood‘ of  240µm size is found to remove 96.76% when 25 mg/lit of RY -dye from 
50ml of aqueous solution in  110 mins, the  results indicate that adsorption of RY -dye is 
increased with increase in adsorbent dosage and decrease in adsorbent size, initial 
concentration and volume of the solution. A significant increase in percentage removal of 
RY-dye is observed as  pH value is increased form 3 -5.The percentage removal of dye 
decreases as pH value is increased beyond 6.  Hence, based on the results obtained activated 
carbon from fire stick wood is found to be effective in RY -dye removal and can be 
appreciably consider ed as most versatile economical and feasible adsorbent for reclamation 
of dye from aqueous solutions.  
 
KEYWORDS:  Reactive yellow 145, adsorbent, fir e stick wood, textile industry.  
 
 World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
SJIF Impact Factor 5.045  
Volume  4, Issue 3, 387-401.                     Review  Article                       ISSN 2277– 7105
  
Article Received on  
03 Jan 2015,  
 
Revised on 28 Jan 2015,  
Accepted on 21 Feb 2015  
 
*Correspondence For 
Author  
Dr. L.Nageswara Rao  
Caledonian College of 
Engineering, Sultanate of 
Oman .  
,  www.wjpr.net                                   Vol 4, Issue 3, 2015.   
388 Nageswara  et al.                                                   World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
INTRODUCTION  
Due to rapid industrialization and very little attention paid  to the treatment of industrial 
effluents, industrial  pollution has been and continuous  to be a major factor causing the 
degradation  of the environment around us. Advance in science and technology have bought 
progress and developments in many spheres of so ciety, but in the process, also contributed 
and are contributing to the degradation of environment Affecting  the water we use, the  air we 
breat he and the soil we live on. Man in his quest towards the development got addicted to 
various luxuries and comfort s which have resulted in continuously  increasing adverse impact 
on the environment adding to the already existing complexities of the nature. The  efforts of 
removing pollutants from the natural environment have been unable to keep pace with the 
increasing amount of waste material and a growing population is further aggravating the 
situation. Due  to this, our  ecological system is affected  by significant discharge of liquid, 
solid and gaseous pollutants.  Pollution, whatever  may be the form, leads to several h ealth 
hazards.  
 
Water is the most essential requirement in daily life that has been contaminated by the 
disposal of domestic, municipal and industrial wastes. Anything, which is not needed, find its 
way to the nearest water course or land, which further po llutes the ground water.Though,80% 
of the earth‘s surface is covered by water, but only small part is available for drinking, 
agriculture, domestic and industrial purposes. So, there is need to utilize the available 
resources effectively without polluting the water.  
 
The discharge of color into water is a major concern because, it effect s living organisms , 
causing various diseases and disorders there by interfering with the designated best use of 
water. It is well perceived that there is permissible limit of each dye, above which they are 
generally toxic and some forms are even fatal to human and animal beings. Keeping  in view 
of these problems, strict environmental regulations on the discharge of color have been lead 
by pollution control board through poll ution control act in 1990.  
 
A dye is generally a substance that bears an affinity to the substrate to which it is being 
applied. It is often applied in aqueous solution. It requires a mordant to improve its binding 
with the fabrics. It appears to be colore d because they absorb some wavelengths of light in 
particular than other. Various industries discharge wastewaters like chemical, refineries, 
textile, plastic and food processing plants. These wastewaters include dyes as residues which 
cause many hazards. Such residual dyes are non -biodegradable due to their complex www.wjpr.net                                   Vol 4, Issue 3, 2015.   
389 Nageswara  et al.                                                   World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
molecular structures making them more stable and hard to biodegrade. They cause water 
pollution and also pose a serious threat to environment. These colored stuffs along with being 
aesthetically  displeasing also inhibit sunlight penetration into water bodies and thus affect 
aquatic ecosystem. Many of them are also toxic in nature and can cause direct destruction or 
can affect catalytic capabilities of various microorganisms.  
 
The main source of discharge of dyes is textile industries where they are used to color 
products. Today there are over 1, 00,000 dyes for commercial use and around 700 tons of 
dyestuffs are produced annually. The types of dyes are mainly basic dyes, acid dyes, and 
direct  dyes, reactive dyes, mordant dyes, az o dyes, disperse dyes and sulfu r dyes. Most of the 
dyes are toxic and have carcinogenic properties so they make water bodies inhibitory to 
aquatic systems.  Due to the low cost  and rapid usage of cellulosic fiber,  now a day ‘s reactive 
dyes are mostly used in the industries. They don‘t fade by water or sunlight and owing to 
their complexity in structures; they can‘t be adequately treated in conventional treatment 
plants for waste waters.  
 
1.1. General information for dye  
A dye is  defined as a colored substance which is applicable to a substrate in order to acquire  a 
colored appearance in aqueous solution or in non -aqueous solution or in aqueous  dispersion. 
Almost, all the dye compounds applied for textile dyeing have some  common p roperties. 
First, they are able to absorb strongly of the visible Spectrum wavelength. Second, they are 
composed of unsaturated carbon double bond Structure so that they can absorb light energy to 
cause resonance and emit the some visible  wavelength. These  unsaturated double is  called 
chromospheres. Besides , they are composed of water solubilising group such as amino, 
hydroxyl, sulphonic groups for water soluble, except for disperse dyes, vat dyes and 
pigments. Moreover, they can promote affinity to the fib er by means of vandarwaals force, or 
ionic bonds, or covalent bond, or aggregation into fiber, which can provide color fastness. In 
this study , the focus is put on the reactive dye since it is one of the largest textile dye class on 
the monetary basis, whi ch is applicable in cellulosic, protein and acrylic fiber.  
 
1.2 Effluents  of dyes  
In textile dyeing, reactive dye is one the world‘s widely used dyestuff and it is mostly applied 
on cotton dyeing. For dyeing one kilogram cotton, it is required to consume 70-150 L water, 
0.6 to 0.8 kg NaCl and 30 to 90 g reactive dyes. In each year, more than four hundred 
thousand tons of reactive dyes are consumed. Thus, the effluents from cotton dyeing with www.wjpr.net                                   Vol 4, Issue 3, 2015.   
390 Nageswara  et al.                                                   World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
reactive dyes are tremendous and are a crucial topic for the envi ronmental aspects. In  a 
conventional dyeing, when the dyeing is completed, the various treatment baths are drained 
out, which may contain dyestuff, high salt concentration and some organic auxiliaries.  
Reactive red 195azodye is the adsorbate, its color is brown. It gives pinkish red colored 
solution in aqueous phase.  
 
This is caused by  
 Hydrolyzed reactive dyes without fixation on the substrate, normally 20 –30% of the 
reactive dyes applied. This residual amount of the dyes means the hydrolyzed dyes cannot 
dye on the fiber  substrate and are responsible for the effluent.  
 Organic auxiliaries are non -recyclable and contribute to high BOD/COD content to the 
effluent.  
 Tremendous amount of electrolyte (sodium chloride and sodium carbonate) is used for 
neutralized th e zeta potential on the substrate.  
 
Therefore, there is increasing need for deal with reactive dye effluent in terms of economic 
scale and environmental aspects . 
 
1.3 Effects of Reactive dyes on e cosystem  
There are innumerous harmful effects of reactive dyes o n ecosystem such as:  
a. They pose acute as well as chronic effects on most of the exposed organisms. These 
effects vary depending on the time of exposure and the concentration of dyes.  
b. They can absorb or reflect sunlight which enters the water bodies and thu s affect the 
growth of bacteria and cause an imbalance in their biological activities.  
c. They are highly visible and even a minor amount may cause abnormal coloration of water 
bodies which appears displeasing to eyes.  
d. They have complex molecular structures which makes them difficult to treat with 
common municipal treatment operations.  
e. Consume dissolved oxygen and affect aquatic ecosystem.  
f. Sequester metal ions which produce micro toxicity to aquatic lives.  
There are various ways to remove dyes from wastewater  discharges like coagulation, 
electrochemical process, membrane separation process, chemical oxidation, reverse 
osmosis and aerobic and anaerobic microbial degradation. Many of these processes are 
not so popular due to their economic disadvantages and inef ficiency. Coagulations and 
chemical and electrochemical oxidations have low feasi bility on large scale plants. www.wjpr.net                                   Vol 4, Issue 3, 2015.   
391 Nageswara  et al.                                                   World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
Among  these technologies, adsorption has been preferred to other technologies for 
removal of dyes from aqueous solutions due to simplicity of the  method and ease of 
manipulation.  
 
2.0. Industrial Adsorbent s 
Solids having tendency to adsorb fluid medium onto their surface are called adsorbent. 
However, only some solid materials have the sel ective adsorption capacity to absorb  
molecules. The adsorba te may be organic compound, color, odor, moisture, etc., during the 
last 15 years new classes of solid adsorbents have been developed. The most  four common 
adsorbents along with their characteristics, applications and disadvantages are compiled 
below.  
 
Table1:  Adsorbents used in I ndustries  
Type  Characteristics  Merits  De-merits  
Activated 
carbon  Hydrophobic, favors 
organics over water  Removal of organic 
pollutants  Difficult to regenerate  
Zeolites  Hydrophilic, polar, regular 
channels  Air separation , dehydra tion Total capacity is low  
Silica gel  High capacity, hydrophilic  Drying of gases, refrigerants, 
organic solvents, dew point 
control of natural gas  Removal of traces not 
effective  
Activated 
alumina  High capacity, hydrophilic  Drying of gases, organic 
solve nts, transformer oils, 
Removal  of HCL from 
hydrogen  Removal of traces not 
effective  
 
Various kinds of natural and synthetic adsorbents have been proposed, but adsorption onto 
activated carbon has gained wide acceptance due to its relatively high capacity and 
efficiency. Nevertheless, its use is limited due to its high cost and because complete color 
removal has rarely been achieved with it. Here, activated carbon prepared from fire stick 
plant wood is used as adsorbent . 
 
2.1. Activated carbon  
Activated ca rbon is a porou s form of  7 carbons  which is manufactures from various 
carbonaceous raw materials like pine, wood, Coconut shell, Coal, Eucalyptus, peat, Saw  dust, 
Rice husk, Lignite etc.  It is prepared through carbonization and activation of organic 
substa nce. During carbonization most of the non -carbon elements like hydrogen, oxygen are 
first removed in gaseous form and it develops the internal pores and then after it is activated 
through chemical activation or stream activation. In activation process, it increases the www.wjpr.net                                   Vol 4, Issue 3, 2015.   
392 Nageswara  et al.                                                   World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
numbers and dimensions of pores and hence it has large internal surface area. Due to well -
developed pore structure and huge internal surface area, activated carbon has an excellent 
adsorbent capacity in both form powder activated carbon and g ranular activated carbon.  
 
2.2. Activation processes  
2.2.1 Steam Activation  
Steam activation is the most widely used process to activate carbonaceous materials. Steam 
activated carbons are produced in a two -stage process. In first stage , the raw material i n the 
form of lumps, pre -sized material, briquettes or extradites  is carbonized by heating in low  
oxygen atmosphere so that dehydration and de -volatilization of the raw material occurs. 
Carbonization reduces the volatile content of the source material to u nder 20%. A coke or 
charc oal is produced which has pores that are small. The  second stage, which can take place 
later in the same kiln, is  activation which enlarges the pore structure, increases the internal 
surface area and makes it more accessible. The c arbonized product is activated with steam at 
very high temperatures. The chemical reaction between the carbon and steam takes place at 
the internal surface of the carbon, removing carbon from the pore walls and thereby  enlarging 
the pores.  
 
The steam activ ation process allows the pore size to be readily altered and carbons can be 
produced to suit specific end uses. The pore structure has to be opened up more for the 
adsorption of small molecules from a solution, as in water purification, than for the 
adsorp tion of large color molecules in sugar de -colorization. Gas phase activated carbons are 
more difficult and expensive to produce than liquid phase carbon since they require a longer 
time inside the activation furnace .  
 
2.2.2 Chemical Activation  
Chemical ac tivation is generally used for the production of activated carbon from sawdust, 
wood or peat. The process involves mixing an organic chemical compound with the 
carbonaceous raw material, usually wood, and carbonizing the resultant mixture. The raw 
material  is mixed with an activating agent, usually phosphoric acid, to swell the wood and 
open up the cellulose structure. The paste of raw material and phosphoric acid is dried and 
then carbonized, usually in a rotary kiln, at a relatively low temperature of 400  to 500 oC. On 
carbonization, the chemical acts as a support and does not allow the charcoal produced to 
shrink. It dehydrates the raw material, resulting in the charring and amortization of the 
carbon, thereby creating a porous structure and an extended s urface area. Activated  carbons www.wjpr.net                                   Vol 4, Issue 3, 2015.   
393 Nageswara  et al.                                                   World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
produced by this method have a suitable pore distribution to be used as an adsorbent without 
further treatment. The process used means that the activated carbons are acid washed carbons 
although they have a lower purity than specifically acid washed steam activated carbons. This 
chemical activation process normally yields a powdered activated carbon. If granular material 
is required, granular raw materials are impregnated with the activating agent and the same 
method is used. Granular activated carbons produced have a low mechanical strength, and are 
not suitable for many gas phase uses.  
 
2.2.3 Detection and study  
Study of adsorption particularly in the monolayer regime, is difficult because of the small 
number of molecules in volved. For 1cm2 of surface area, the number of surface atoms or 
absorbed molecules in a monolayer is of the order of 1015, which only approximately 10-9 
mole. Often, however, adsorbents have surface areas of hundreds of sq.cm/gm, and 
adsorption can be qua ntified simply by measuring the change in pressure or concentration of 
bulk phase. Adsorption can also be quantified simply by measuring the change in mass of the 
adsorbent and by monitoring changes in the properties of the surface of the adsorbent such as  
surface tension and surface potential. By determining the number of molecules in an adsorbed 
monolayer, constructing an isotherm and knowing the size of the adsorbed molecule, the area 
of the surface can be determined.  
 
3.0 Materials and Methods  
The prese nt experimentation is carried out batch -wise, on adsorption of R Y dye from aqueous 
solution by an adsorbent -Activated carbon from fire stick wood. The  experimental procedure 
consists of the following steps  
a. Preparation of adsorbent,  
b. Preparation of the 1000m g/L of R Y dye stock solution and  
c. Studies on various parameters effecting  adsorption process.  
 
3.1 Preparation of activated carbon adsorbent  
Preparation of activated carbon is done from fire stick plant wood. First , Raw material (fire 
stick plant wood) was washed 2 to 3 times with general pipe water for removal of mud, dust 
and unwanted external materials. Use single distilled water for second time washing purpose, 
then cut the material into 2 -3 cm size and dried the mater ial under sunlight for 24 hrs. The 
dried material was soaked in 35% phosphoric acid for 1 hour and kept at room temperature 
for 24 hrs. The wood material was then separated, air dried and carbonized in muffle furnace www.wjpr.net                                   Vol 4, Issue 3, 2015.   
394 Nageswara  et al.                                                   World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
at 550oC for 1 ½ hr.  After pre -carbonization of material, crushed into powd er or granular 
form. The resulting powder is activated at 800oC  for 10 min.Then resulting chemically 
activated Carbon was again washed with single distilled water continuously up to a constant 
pH reached. Then dried the sample under sunlight and we sized it with the help of sieving 
technique by taking different size of sieve and choose the 30 BSS sieve which was 120 -300 
micron size as our particle size.  
  
3.2. Preparation of RY dye stock solution  
The stock solution is prepared by dissolving 1gm of reactive  red 195 dye in 1000 mL of 
distilled water. The dyes were used such as without further purification. All the other 
chemicals used in this investigation are analytical reagent (AR) grade category. Synthetic 
samples of different concentrations of dye solutio n are prepared from this stock solution. The 
pH of aqueous solution is adjusted to the desired value by addition of 0.1 N H 2SO 4 or 0.1 N 
NaOH. The concentration of dye solution is determined by using UV spectrophotometer at 
respective wavelength.  
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS  
The present study investigates the potential of activated carbon prepared from fire stick plant 
wood as an adsorbent on R Y dye present in aqueous solution. The effects of various 
parameters on adsorption of R Y dye by adsorbent are studied.  The measured data consists of 
initial and final concentrations of R Y dye in the aqueous solution, agitation time, adsorbent 
size, adsorbent dosage, volume of the aqueous solution and pH of the aqueous solution. The 
experimental data for the adsorption pro cess are obtained by conducting experiments in batch 
process.  
 
4.1 Effect of agitation time  
100 ml of aqueous solution is taken in a 250 ml conical flask and 0.1gmof adsorbent having a 
size of 240 µm is added. This sample is shaken on an orbital shaker at 160 rpm at room 
temperature for 10 min. Similarly 9 more samples are prepared in conical flasks adding 
0.1gm of adsorbent and expo sed to varying agitation time 30, 50,  70, 90,110,130,150 and 170 
min these samples are filtered separately with filter papers and the filtrates are analyzed in 
UV- spectrophotometer to obtain final concentrations of RR dye. The percentage removal of 
RR dye is calculated as (C 0-Ct) x 100/C 0. Where, C 0= Initial concentration of dye in aqueous 
solution (mg/L),  Ci= Final concentratio n of dye in the aqueous solution (mg/L). The optimum 
agitation time is determined by plotting the % removal of RR dye  against agitation time in www.wjpr.net                                   Vol 4, Issue 3, 2015.   
395 Nageswara  et al.                                                   World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
Figure 1 for dosage of 0.1 gm  at the interaction time intervals of 10 min to 170 min , the % 
adsorption is found t o increase i nto 110 min and thereafter, negligible increase in % 
Adsorption is noticed with agitation time. Duration of adsorption equilibrium is defined , as 
the time required for R Y dye concentration to reach a constant value during adsorption. It is 
noticed that the rate of adsorption is fast in the initial stages because adequate surface area of 
the adsorbent is availab le for the adsorption of R Y dye. As time i ncreases, more amount of 
dye gets adsorbed onto the surface of the adsorbent and surface area a vailable decreases. The 
adsorb ate, normally , forms a thin one molecule thick layer over the surface. When this 
monomolecular layer covers the surface, the capacity of the adsorbent is exhausted. The 
maximu m % adsorption is attained at 110  min of agi tation.  The % removal of R Y dye 
becomes almost constant after 110 min; all other experiments are conducted at this optimum 
agitation time.  
 
 
Fig 1: Effect  of contact time on % removal of R Y dye 
 
4.2. Effect  of adsorbent dosage  
100 ml of aqueous solution is taken  in a 250 ml conical flask and 0.1 gm of adsorbent having 
a size of 240  µm is added. This sample is shaken on an orbital shaker room temperat ure for 
optimal agitation time 110 min. The same experimental procedure is repeate d with other 
adsorbent dosages 0. 2, 0.3 and 0.4 gm  these samples are filtered separately with Whatman 
filter papers and the filtrates are analyzed in UV - spectrophotometer to obtain final 
concentrations of R Y dye. A graph is plotted between the adsorbent dosage and % removal of 
RY dye to identify the optimum adsorbent dosage. The  percentage removal of R Y dye is 
drawn a gainst adsorbent dosage for adsorbent size of 240 µm in Figure 2 . It is evident from www.wjpr.net                                   Vol 4, Issue 3, 2015.   
396 Nageswara  et al.                                                   World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
the plots that the percentage removal of R Y dye from the aqueous phase increases with 
increase in the adsorb ent dosage. Percentage  removal of R Y dye from the aqueous solution 
increases from 40% to 90.32%, for the adsorbent size 240  µm, as dosage is increased from 
0.1 to 0.4 gm. Such behavior is obvious because the number of active sites availa ble for R Y 
dye removal would be more as the amount of the adsorbent increases. Th e change in % 
removal of R Y dye is marginal when adsorbent dosage is beyond 0.4 gm. So, all the 
exper iments are conducted at dosage 0.4 gm.  
 
 
Fig 2: Effect of adsorbent dosa ge on %removal of R Y dye 
 
4.3. Effect of adsorbent size  
100 ml of aqueous solution is taken in a 250 ml conical flask and 0.1 gm of adsorbent having 
a size of 150µm is added. This sample is shaken on an orbital shaker at 160 rpm at room 
temperature for opt imal agitation time 110 min. The same experimental procedure is repea ted 
with other adsorbent sizes 170, 200 and 240 µm these samples are filtered separately with 
filter papers and the filtrates are analyzed in UV - spectrophotometer to obtain final 
concent rations of R Y dye. A graph is plotted between the adsorbent size and % removal of 
RY dye to identify the optimum adsorbent size. The  variations in % removal of R Y dye from 
the aqueous solution with particle size 150, 170, 200 and 240µm are obtained at  adsorbent 
dosage of 0.1 gm at the optimum agitation time. The results are drawn in Figure 3 with % 
removal of R Y dye as a function of adsorbent size. The % removal of R Y dye is increased as 
the adsorbent particle size decreases from 150 to 240µm. T his phenomeno n is expected, as 
the size of the particle decreases, surface area of the adsorbent increases, thereby the number 
of active sites on the adsorbent are better exposed to the adsorbate.  www.wjpr.net                                   Vol 4, Issue 3, 2015.   
397 Nageswara  et al.                                                   World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
 
Fig 3: Effect of adsorbent size on % removal of R Y dye 
 
4.4. Effect o f Initial concentration  of RR dye  
100ml of aqueous solution containing 25mg/L  RY dye is taken in a 250 ml conical flask and 
0.4gm of 240µm size adsorbent is added. The sample is kept in continuous cont act for 
optimum agitation time 110 min  by shaking on an  orbital shaker at room temperature. The 
sample is allowed to settle and then filtered. The final R Y dye concentration of the filtrate is 
determined by using UV - spectrophotometer. The same procedure is repeated for other initial 
concentrations of R Y dye i n aqueous solution (50, 75and 100 mg/L. A graph is plotted 
between the i nitial concentration of R Y dye and % removal of R Y dye to identify the 
optimum initial concentration of R Y dye. The  effect of  initial concentration of R Y dye in the 
aqueous solution on the percentage removal of R Y dye is shown in Figure 4 . The % removal 
of RY dye is decreased from 93.28 % to 63.7% by increasing the i nitial concentration of R Y 
dye in the aqueous solution from 25 mg/L to 100 mg/L. Such behavior can be a ttributed to 
the incr ease in the amount of adsorbate to the unchanging number of available  active sites on 
the adsorbent since the amoun t of adsorbent is kept constant . 
 
 
Fig 4: Effect of initial concentration on % removal of R Y dye www.wjpr.net                                   Vol 4, Issue 3, 2015.   
398 Nageswara  et al.                                                   World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
4.5. Effect of Volume of dye solution  
50 ml  of aqueous solution containing 25 mg/L  RY dye is taken in a 250 ml conical flask and 
0.4gm of 240µm size adsorbent is added. The sample is kept in continuous cont act for 
optimum agitation time 110 min  by shaking on an orbital shaker at room temperature. T he 
sample is settled and filtered. The final R Y dye concentration of the filtrate is determined by 
using UV spectrophotometer. The same procedure is repeated for other volumes of the 
aqueous solution 100, 150 and 200 ml. A graph is plotted between the volu me of aqueous 
solution and % removal of R Y dye to identify the optimum volume of aqueous solution.  
Change in % removal of R Y dye with variation in volume of the aqueous solution fro m 50 to 
200 mL is shown in Figure 5  for an adsorbent dosage of 0.4 gm of 24 0 µm size for an 
optimum agitation time of 110 min. From these plots, it is clear that %  removal of RR dye is  
gradually decreased with an increase in the volume of the aqueous solution. The % removal is 
decreased from 93.28% to 50.8 %. As the volume of the  aqueous solution increase, the 
amount of R Y dye present in the solution also increases. This implies that % dye removal by 
unaltered surface area of the adsorbent decreases as the amount of R Y dye in the solution is 
increased.  
 
 
Fig 5: Effect of volume of dye solution on % removal of R Y dye 
 
4.6. Effect of pH  
To study the influence of pH on R Y dye adsorption, 100ml of aqueous solution is taken in 
each of 7 conical flasks. The pH values of the solutions are adjusted to 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9  
in separate flasks by adding required amounts of 0.1N H 2SO 4 and 0.1N NaOH. In these, 0.4 
gm of 240 µm size adsorbent is added separately. The samples are shaken on an orbital 
shaker at room temperature for optimum agitation time. Then samples are allowed to settle www.wjpr.net                                   Vol 4, Issue 3, 2015.   
399 Nageswara  et al.                                                   World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
and are filtered. The final R Y dye concentrations of the filtrates are determined by using UV 
spectrophotometer.  The pH influences  the surface charge of the adsorbent, the degree of 
ionization and the species of adsorbate. So pH is an important  factor control ling the process 
of adsorption. In the present investigation, adsorption data are obtained in th e pH range of 3 
to 9 for R Y dye initial concentration of 25mg/L and 0.4 gm of 240  µm size adsorbent. The 
effect of pH of aqueous solution on % removal of R Y dye is drawn in Figure 6 . The  % 
removal of dye  is increased from 89.12 % to 96.76 % as pH is increased from 3 to 5.  Increase 
in % adsorption is marginal for pH values between 5 to 7 (96.76 % to  95.8 %). This is due to 
partial hydrolysis of dye  ions. The % remova l is decreased for pH value above 5 .  
 
 
Fig 6 Effect of pH on % removal of R Y dye 
 
CONCLUSIONS  
From the results of the study, the following conclusions have been drawn:  
1 In this work, the activated carbon prepared from fire stick wood has been used as a 
potential adsorbent for the removal of reactive azo dye (Reactive yellow 145) from 
aqueous solution.  
2 Adsorption of reactive dye increases with increase in contact time, adsorbent Dosage as 
well as decreases with increase in Initial Concentration, Adsorbent s ize, Volume of 
solution.  
3 Removal of reactive yellow dye is found to be pH dependent and the maximum removal 
occurs in acidic medium 3-6. The pH after 6, % removal of dye decreases.  
4 The optimal parameters obtained in t his study are Agitation time is  110 min s, Adsorbent 
size 240 µm, Adsorbent dosa ge 0.4gms, Initial concentration 25mg/L, Volume of solution 
50 mL and pH value as 6.  www.wjpr.net                                   Vol 4, Issue 3, 2015.   
400 Nageswara  et al.                                                   World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
REFERENCES   
1. S. Ibrahim, I. Fatimah, H. Ang and S.Wang, Adsorption of Anionic Dyes in Aqueous 
Solution Using Chemically Modified Bar ley Straw, Wat er Science and Technology, 
2010; 62(5): 1177 -1182.  
2. Y. S. Al -Degs, M. I. El -Barghouthi, M. A. Khraisheh, M. N. Ahmad an d S. J. Allen, 
Effect of Surface Area, Micropores, Secondary Micropores and Mesopores Volumes of 
Activated Carbons on React ive Dyes Adsorption from Solution,  Separati on Science and 
Technology,  2004 ; 39(1):  97-111.  
3. S. Wang, Y. Boyjoo, A. Choueib and H. Zhu, Removal of Dyes from Solu tion Using Fly 
Ash and Red Mud,  Water Research,  2005 ; 39(1): 129-138.  
4. B. C. Oei, S . Ibrahim, S.  Wang and H. Ang, Surfactant Modified Barley Straw for 
Removal of Acid and React ive Dyes from Aqueous Solution,  Bioresource Technology,  
2009 ; 100(18): 4292 -4295.  
5. N. K. Amin, Removal of Reactive Dye from Aqueous Solutions by Adsorption onto 
Activated Carbo ns Prepar ed from Sugarcane Bagasse Pith,  Desalination,  2008; 223(1): 
152-161.  
6. N. K. Amin, Removal of Direct Blue -106 Dye from Aqueous Solution Using New 
Activated Carbons Developed from Pomegranate Peel: Adsorption Equilibrium an d 
Kinetics,  Journal of Haz ardous Materials, 2009 ; 165(1):  52-62.  
7. Y. C.  Sharma and S. N. U. Upadhyay, Removal of a Cationic Dye from Wastewaters by 
Adsorption on Activated Carbon Developed from Coconut Coir , Energy and Fuel, 2009; 
23(6): 2983 -2988.  
8. P. K. Malik, Use of Activated Ca rbons Prepared from Sawdust and Ricehusk for 
Adsorption of Acid Dyes: A Case Study of Acid Yellow 36,  Dyes and Pigments, 2003 ; 
56(3): 239-249.  
9. N. M. Mahmoodi, B. Hayati and C. Lan, Adsorption of Textile Dyes on Pine Cone from 
Colored Wastewater: Kinetic, Equilib rium and Thermodynamic Studies, Desalination, 
2011; 268(1): 117-125.  
10. Aygun, S. Yenisoy -Karakas and I. Duman, Production of Granular Activated Carbon 
from Fruit Stones and Nutshells and Evaluation of Their Physical, Chem ical and 
Adsorption Propertie s, Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, 2003 ; 66(2): 189-195.  
11. N. Kannan and M. M. Sundaram, Kinetics and Mechanism of Removal of Methylene 
Blue by Adsorption on Vario us Carbons —A Comparative Study,  Dyes and Pigments, 
2001; 51(1): 25-40.  www.wjpr.net                                   Vol 4, Issue 3, 2015.   
401 Nageswara  et al.                                                   World Journal of Pharmaceutical Research  
12. V. K. Gupta, A. Mittal, R. Jain, M. Mathur and S. Sikarwar, Adsorption of Safranin T 
from Wastewater Using Waste Materials -Activated Carbon and Activated Rice Husk, 
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 2006; 303(1): 80-86.  
13. N. Thinakaran, P. Panneerselvam, P. Baskara linga m, D. Elango and S. Sivanesan, 
Equilibrium and Kinetic Studies on the Removal of Acid Red 114 from Aqueous 
Solutions Using Activated Carbons Prepared from Seed Shells, Journal of Hazardous 
Materials, 2008 ; 158(1): 142-150.  
14. P. D. Saha, A. Dey and P. M arik, Batch Removal of Chromium(VI) from Aqueous 
Solutions Using Wheat Shell as Adsorbent: Process Optimization using Response Surface 
Methodology, Desalination Water Treatment, 2012; 39(13): 95-102.  
15. D. Mohan, K. P. Singh, G. Singh and K. Kumar, Removal o f Dyes from Wastewater 
Using Flyash, a LowCost Adsorbent, Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 
2002; 41(15): 3688 -3695.  
16. Y. S. Al -Degs, M. I. El -Barghouthi, A. H. El -Sheikh and G. M. Walker, Effect of 
Solution pH, Ionic Strength, and Temperature on  Adsorption Behavior of Rea ctive Dyes 
on Activated Carbon, Dyes and Pigments, 2008 ; 77(1): 16-23.  
17. Y. S. Al -Degs, M. A. M. Khraisheh, S. J. Allen and M. N. Ahmad, ―Effect of Carbon 
Surface Chemistry on the Removal of Reactive Dyes from Textile Effluent,‖ W ater 
Research, 2000; 34(3); 927-935.  
18. S. Wang and H. T. Li, Dye Adsorption on Unburned Ca rbon: Kinetics and Equilibrium,  
Journal of Hazardous Materials, 2005 ; 126(13): 71-77.  
19. N. K. Amin, Removal of Reactive Dye from Aqueous Solutions by Adsorption onto 
Activated Carbons Prepar ed from Sugarcane Bagasse Pith,  Desalination, 2008 ; 223(13): 
152-161. 
20. S. Senthilkumaar, P. Kalaamani, K. Porkodi, P. R. Va radarajan and C. V. Subburaam, 
Adsorption of Dissolved Reactive Red Dye from Aqueous Phase onto Activated Carbon  
Prepared from Agricultural Waste,  Bioresource Technology, 2006 ; 97(14):  1618 -1625.  
21. D. Chazopoul os, A. Varma and R. L. Irvine, Activated Carbon Adsorption and 
Desorption of  Toluene in the Aqueous Phase, AIChE Journal, 1993; 39(12): 2027 -2041.  
22. S. Rengaraj  and S. H. Moon, Kinetic of Adsorption of Co(II) Removal from Water and 
Wastewater by Ion Exchange Resins, Water Research, 2002; 36(7): 1783 -1793.  
23. K. V. Kumar and K. Porkodi, Mass Transfer, Kinetics and Equilibrium Studies for the 
Biosorption of Methyle ne Blue Using Paspalum Notatum,  Journal of Hazardous 
Materials, 2007; 146(12): 214-226. 