 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unravelling Diatoms’ Potential for the Bioremediation of Oil Hydrocarbons in Marine
Environments
Paniagua-Michel, J., & Banat, I. M. (2024). Unravelling Diatoms’ Potential for the Bioremediation of Oil
Hydrocarbons in Marine Environments. Clean Technologies , 6(1), 93-115. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/cleantechnol6010007
Link to publication record in Ulster University Research Portal
Published in:
Clean Technologies
Publication Status:
Published (in print/issue): 17/01/2024
DOI:
10.3390/cleantechnol6010007
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via Ulster University's Research Portal is retained by the author(s) and / or other copyright
owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these
rights.
Take down policy
The Research Portal is Ulster University's institutional repository that provides access to Ulster's research outputs. Every effort has been
made to ensure that content in the Research Portal does not infringe any person's rights, or applicable UK laws. If you discover content in
the Research Portal that you believe breaches copyright or violates any law, please contact pure-support@ulster.ac.uk.
Download date: 29/08/2024Citation: Paniagua-Michel, J.; Banat,
I.M. Unravelling Diatoms’ Potential
for the Bioremediation of Oil
Hydrocarbons in Marine
Environments. Clean Technol. 2024 ,6,
93–115. https://doi.org/10.3390/
cleantechnol6010007
Academic Editor: Ludovico Pontoni
Received: 27 October 2023
Revised: 15 December 2023
Accepted: 2 January 2024
Published: 17 January 2024
Copyright: ©2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
clean 
technologies 
Review
Unravelling Diatoms’ Potential for the Bioremediation of Oil
Hydrocarbons in Marine Environments
J. Paniagua-Michel1,* and Ibrahim M. Banat2
1Department of Marine Biotechnology, Centro de Investigacion Cientifica y de Educacion Superior de
Ensenada, Ensenada 22860, Baja California, Mexico
2School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Life and Health Sciences, University of Ulster,
Coleraine BT52 1SA, Northern Ireland, UK; im.banat@ulster.ac.uk
*Correspondence: jpaniagu@cicese.mx
Abstract: The search for practical solutions to alleviate the destructive impact of petroleum hydro-
carbons in marine environments is contributing to the implementation of prospecting strategies
for indigenous microorganisms with biodegradative and bioremediation potential. The levels of
petroleum contamination entering the marine environment each year have been estimated at around
1.3 million tonnes, a figure that is expected to increase by 1.9% annually over the next decade. The
recent interest in decarbonizing our energy system and accelerating the clean energy transition
has created a demand for greener technologies and strategies to find innovative, sustainable, and
cost-effective treatments for the marine environment. Diatoms (Bacillariophyta) are one of the most
diverse and successful taxa in coastal–marine environments and are a relatively untapped pool of
biodiversity for biotechnological applications. Recent reports have revealed the significant presence
of diatoms associated with oil spills and petroleum hydrocarbon degradation. Most diatoms can
secrete substantial amounts of exopolysaccharides (EPSs) into their environment, which can act as
biosurfactants that, in addition to oxygen and other enzymes produced by diatoms, create suitable
conditions to enhance hydrocarbon solubility and degradation into less toxic compounds in seawa-
ter. Recent reports on the biodegradation of aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons by diatoms are
indicative of the potential of these taxa to achieve success in the bioremediation of hydrocarbons in
marine environments. This review highlights the main attributes and roles that diatoms could play in
integrated strategies for biodegradation and bioremediation of petroleum hydrocarbon pollutants
and as such represent a green, eco-friendly, and sustainable contribution to mitigate damage to
biodiversity and value chains of marine ecosystems.
Keywords: diatoms; hydrocarbons; bioremediation; biodegradation; marine; oil pollution; oil spill
1. Introduction
In the present era of unsustainable fossil fuel use, lifestyle and society are still reliant
on petroleum and other petrochemicals as energy sources and for other needs. For more
than 100 years, oil has powered global economic growth and prosperity, but has also
negatively impacted and degraded environmental conditions, threatening not only the
biosphere but also humans’ own quality of life.
In general, petroleum hydrocarbons represent 50–98% of crude oil volume in marine
habitats either from oil spills (other than those derived from natural seeps) or other minor
releases. They are mainly classed as alkanes, cycloalkanes, mono-aromatic, and polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons [ 1]. The range concentrations of total petroleum hydrocarbon
concentration are variable and may depend on the source, composition, and season. Hence,
in seawater, the average level of total hydrocarbons has been reported in the range from
2 to 80 mg/L [2]. Petroleum hydrocarbons are highly toxic and dangerous pollutants that
produce carcinogenic, mutagenic, and teratogenic effects in humans and on the biodiversity
Clean Technol. 2024 ,6, 93–115. https://doi.org/10.3390/cleantechnol6010007 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cleantechnolClean Technol. 2024 ,6 94
of marine ecosystems and their soluble fractions can bioaccumulate at different scales in
the marine food web [ 2]. Similarly, pollution by crude oil composed mainly of PAHs affects
coastal resources (seafood, fisheries, and aquaculture) represents a harmful and serious
human health concern and is a major threat to the resilience and sustainability of marine
ecosystems [ 1]. Moreover, a substantial portion of the spilled oil can be long-lasting in
marine environments and negatively impact fragile marine wildlife.
The increasing pollution resulting from oil-related activities in the twentieth century
demands integrated and sustainable solutions for the development of circular bioeconomies,
even if peak oil production has probably already occurred [ 3]. For the last five decades, and
continuing to the present day, the devastating effects of the discharge of large amounts of
petroleum into the marine environment because of spillages represent approximately eight
million tons globally, causing immense damage to the planet that can remain in coastal
marine environments for decades [ 4,5]. Chronic pollution, as well as marine oil spills,
exploration activities, and other large-scale industrial processes such as oil refining, are
considered real and potential sources of environmental pollution in coastal and marine
environments.
It is expected that the burden of these pollutants will increase many folds in the fol-
lowing decade. The recent interest in decarbonizing our energy system and accelerating
the clean energy transition has created a demand for greener technologies and strategies
for finding innovative and sustainable treatments for the marine environment, which is
the largest ecosystem in the world. The paradigm shift toward sustainable growth is a
priority, and biomass may be a prospective solution for resolving the challenges presented
by the implementation of renewable energy [ 6] and pollution mitigation. Thus, the ma-
rine microbiome must play a key role in the bioeconomy. However, among the existing
techniques used for clean-up activities, microbial biodegradation and bioremediation have
gained acceptance because of their low cost, eco-friendly basis, and sustainability. Although
bacteria have been studied for a long time as the main degraders of petroleum hydrocar-
bons in the marine environment, unfortunately, the bacterial biomass thus produced does
not generate additional value-added attributes. In this regard, the bioprospection and
screening of photosynthetic microorganisms for the purposes of potential applications in
the biodegradation and remediation of petroleum hydrocarbons appears promising.
Increasing interest in marine bioremediation technologies based on microalgae and
their derived biomass through phytoremediation may represent a viable shift in solutions
toward several novel innovations related to green biotechnology for a bio-based circular
economy. Due to the immensity of the marine biosphere, and the lack of strategies related to
the capabilities of different species with respect to the biodegradation and bioremediation
of pollutants, most microbiomes remain unexplored. Coastal and marine environments
often experience stress from pollution generated by petroleum, but little is known regarding
the role of phytoplankton, in general, and diatom cells, in particular, on the biodegradation
of petroleum-derived hydrocarbons. Diatoms and their metabolites are a renewable en-
ergy source and are affordable resources for eco-sustainability that may represent novel
hydrocarbon degraders for use in bioremediation initiatives. Diatoms are a dominant
and important group of eukaryotic microalgae, inhabiting all contemporary oceans at the
global scale because of their evolution over the last nearly 200 million years [ 7]. Diatoms
are one-celled or colonial members of microalgae in phytoplankton belonging to the algal
phylum Bacillariophyta, class Bacillariophyceae, which are considered the dominant group
of microalgae in phytoplankton. Conventionally, diatoms have been classified as centric
(Centrales), which are radially symmetric, and ennales, which are bilaterally symmetric
and named pennate diatoms [7,8].
Diatoms are the only organism on the planet to have cell walls composed of trans-
parent, opaline silica consisting of two interlocking symmetrical valves, in addition to its
uniqueness among marine algae in performing C4 photosynthesis. Diatoms, siliceous algae,
are the most dominant and widespread group of eukaryotes on Earth and are responsible
for 20% of carbon fixation through photosynthesis [ 9,10]. They are abundant in oceanic,Clean Technol. 2024 ,6 95
coastal, and freshwater habitats, and occur in terrestrial environments in soils, ice, rocks,
and even in some plants [ 11]. Diatoms are responsible for a large fraction of the organic car-
bon buried in oceans and have been recognized among the microalgae that play a relevant
role in the formation of crude oil deposits in coastal and marine environments [ 10,12,13].
According to a previous study [ 14], petroleum hydrocarbons in crude oil are natural de-
posits derived from aquatic algae, occurring between 180 and 85 million years ago. The
natural presence of petroleum hydrocarbons in marine environments for millions of years
has allowed microorganisms (bacteria, archaea, and fungi) to evolve the capacity to use
hydrocarbons as sources of carbon and energy for growth. In addition, the almost universal
presence of diatoms in oil spills is comparable to the capacity of bacteria to not only survive
but also to use such compounds as an energy source [15].
Diatoms produce large quantities of extracellular polymeric substances (EPSs) in or-
der to build up an environment in which the organisms are embedded in biofilms [ 16].
Such metabolites produced by diatoms have been proposed as effective agents for reduc-
ing the interfacial tension between oil and water (thus enhancing emulsion formation),
which would improve hydrocarbon solubility and bioavailability and may contribute to the
biodegradation processes of hydrocarbon pollutants [ 17,18]. This is particularly significant
considering that the ability of most other microorganisms to degrade carbon, including
short and longer-chain alkanes (<C10 and C20–C40) and some polycyclic aromatic hydro-
carbons (PAHs), is not sufficient to ensure the removal of all oil components from marine
environments [19,20].
Most petroleum hydrocarbons are biodegradable under aerobic conditions, but a
minor component has been considered unbiodegradable to date [ 21]. Recently, Zehnle and
co-workers [ 22] reported that when archaea of the genus Candidatus alkanophaga, isolated
from the Guaymas Basin hydrothermal vent, were grown under anoxic conditions and
enriched with the enzyme alkyl-coenzyme M reductase (Acrs), they exhibited an ability
to degrade mid-chain petroleum n-alkanes (C5-14) at 70◦C using oil-rich deep seafloor
sediments (2000 m) from the Guaymas Basin (Gulf of California, Mexico). In these cultures,
the archaea activate the alkanes harboring Acrs and successfully oxidize the alkyl groups
to CO 2. In diatoms, the biodegradation feasibility of petroleum hydrocarbons can be
attributed, among other factors, to whether the molecule is composed of lower-molecular-
weight hydrocarbons, which undergo more biodegradation than heavy crudes. The aerobic
biodegradation process in the case of treatment of PAHs is reliant on the presence of oxygen
during the insertion of dioxygenase enzymes, which has been reported in diatoms [ 23] and
is considered a good way of achieving successful biodegradation [ 24]. Under anaerobic
conditions, the biodegradation of petroleum hydrocarbons can also proceed, but the process
is much slower [14,24].
Among Eukarya, diatoms have been reported to grow on or transform hydrocar-
bons [ 25]. There is only a limited amount of research available on the biotechnological
potentials of diatoms to perform the biodegradation and bioremediation of petroleum
hydrocarbons in marine environments (Table 1).
Among the studies on the biodegradation and bioremediation of petroleum hydro-
carbons, adsorption, metabolism, transformation, accumulation, and cometabolism have
all been reported to occur in diatoms [ 19,25]. Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge,
the present review is one of the first to analyze some crucial, but often overlooked, factors
influencing the biodegradation and or removal effects of diatoms based on their phenotypic
plasticity, properties, and peculiar metabolism, which give them a promising potential for
the bioremediation of petroleum hydrocarbons in the marine ecosystem.
In this review, the existing literature on the action of diatoms on petroleum hydrocar-
bon bioremediation for a number of aromatic and alkane contaminants and structurally
related chemicals was analyzed. The petroleum hydrocarbon background from diatoms
was highlighted, and their advantages and potentialities, also supporting this premise,
were also emphasized.Clean Technol. 2024 ,6 96
Table 1. Eukaryotic microalgae that degrade petroleum hydrocarbons (modified from Prince [25]).
Genera Substrata References
Phylum Chlorophyta
Chlamydomonas reinhardii Phenanthrene [26]
Chlorella vulgaris Naphthalene [27]
Nonadecane [28]
Ankistrodesmus capricornutum Benzo(a)pyrene [29]
Prototheca zopfii n-alkanes and PAHs [30]
Dunaliella salina Naphthalene [31]
Scenedesmus acutus Benzo(a)pyrene [29]
Phylum Heterokontophyta
Class Bacillariophyta
Navicula sp. Naphthalene [32]
Achnanthes minutissima Alkanes [33]
Cyclotella caspia Fluoranthene [34]
Cylindrotheca sp. Naphthalene [35]
Synedra sp.,Amphora sp. Naphthalene [32]
Skeletonema costatum Fluoranthene [36]
Nitzschia sp. Phenanthrene
Nitzschia sp.,Navicula sp. Naphthenic acid [37]
Diatom BD1IITG Phenol [38]
Thalassiosira sp. Phenol [39]
Nitzchia sp. and Bacteria Benzo(a)pyrene [40]
Genera Marivita ,Erythrobacter , Fluoranthene
Alcaligenes
Cylindrotheca sp.,Amphora sp. Naphthalene [35]
Navicula sp.,Nitzschia sp., Naphthalene [32]
Most of the existing reviews on the microbial biodegradation and bioremediation of
petroleum hydrocarbons have focused on bacteria, fungi, cyanobacteria, and eukaryotic
microalgae in soil and marine environments. Compared with bacteria and other eukaryotic
microalgae, diatoms offer advantages over eukaryotic microalgae for the biodegradation
of petroleum hydrocarbons, based mainly on their intrinsic evolution associated with
petroleum hydrocarbons in the marine environment. In addition, diatoms’ wide applica-
tions in oil exploration and use as bioindicators of water quality, their ubiquitous presence
in all marine photic zones contaminated by petroleum hydrocarbons, and their recog-
nized ability to produce and metabolize some petroleum hydrocarbons make them ideal
candidates for petroleum bioremediation investigation in coastal and marine environments.
In this review, we used the Web of Science database to search for keywords including
petroleum hydrocarbons, diatoms, marine environments, biodegradation, bioremediation,
oil contamination, treatments, oil pollution, and oil spills to screen and collect publications
from the past 20 years related to this topic.
2. Diatom Microalgae: Attributes and Potential for the Biodegradation and
Bioremediation of Petroleum Hydrocarbons
Although hydrocarbon-degrading microorganisms, mainly bacteria, are ubiquitous in
marine ecosystems [ 41,42], the biodegrading role of autochthonous microbial communities
has been considered the ultimate destination of most of the petroleum hydrocarbons
that enter the marine environment [ 14,25,42]. Bioremediation using bacteria has been an
effective treatment of oil hydrocarbons; however, the biomass produced by this process
lacks any significant profitable value. Moreover, several studies have demonstrated the
potential of select microalgae and diatom species in the removal of petroleum hydrocarbons,
which can be optimized by the potential action of algal–bacterial consortia [ 43]. In this
case, diatom characteristics have been envisaged as a potential biofuel feedstock that can
be combined for emulsified oil bioremediation [ 44], which can represent renewable energy
production using bioremediation. Over the last few decades’ investigations have shownClean Technol. 2024 ,6 97
that in situ and ex situ oil biodegradation and remediation initiatives can be successful
when algal enhancement and development conditions are provided. Firstly, to achieve
efficient bioremediation, once the oil separates from the seawater surface, microorganisms
act on the emulsified fractions, which are more difficult to remove and pose a significant
threat to the marine environment. Therefore, diatoms and their possible combination
with hydrocarbonoclastic bacteria could play an important role in the biodegradation and
bioremediation of the components of petroleum hydrocarbons in the marine environment.
Diatoms are a major group of eukaryotic microalgae that have been reported to be
associated with oil in the sea [ 18,19] as well as other representative groups of dinoflagel-
lates and cyanobacteria. More recently, the sequenced genomes of Cyclotella cryptica have
provided valuable information on their metabolism and elevated lipid productivity, while
inSeminavis robusta , remarkable insights into its evolutionary and ecological success in
heterogeneous environments have been revealed [ 45]. Both these observations support
their contributions to biogeochemical oil accumulation. Diatom genomes encode all the
conventional enzymes of the Calvin–Benson cycle, which is responsible for carbon fixa-
tion [ 45], primary productivity, and ecosystem stability, as well as the complex evolution of
their plastids.
It is generally known that algae can eliminate organic pollutants through two natural
processes related to the species itself, viz., bioaccumulation, in which certain organic and
inorganic substances are taken up and/or stored inside the cells. Biodegradation is the
other process, in which organic material is transformed and decomposed into simpler
substances such as carbon dioxide and water. This mechanism is carried out mainly via
enzymes that are produced by living algae cells in the presence of a carbon source.
Traditionally, bacteria have been regarded as efficient bioremediators of petroleum
hydrocarbons, and recently, microalgae have emerged as a promising alternative because
of a bacterial impediment to breakdown and remove all hydrocarbon pollutants. This
is why diatoms can be considered a major group of microalgae that may be preferred
for that purpose due to bacterial constraints such as the release of carbon dioxide into
the atmosphere and their increasing metabolic waste material, which increases costs, in
addition to other limitations.
Among the biodegradable structural group, n-alkanes are the most susceptible to
biodegradation, except for C20–C40, which are hydrophobic solids and are not easily
degraded [ 46]. Another major group of petroleum hydrocarbons are polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs), which are partially recalcitrant to biodegradation.
Contrary to the widely accepted use of bacteria for the biodegradation of petroleum
hydrocarbons, in certain cases where bacteria are not able to biodegrade oil hydrocarbons,
some eukaryotic microalgae and diatoms can use these hydrocarbons as the carbon and
source of energy in their metabolism [ 47]. Similarly, the challenges and opportunities of
algal-based biodegradation and bioremediation initiatives for petroleum hydrocarbons
indicate several advantages, including being simple, effective, non-invasive, less disruptive,
cost-effective, safer, and eco-friendly, compared with other technologies [ 43,48]. Typical
remediation technologies are costly, generate secondary pollution, and are not recom-
mended for natural systems because they damage native biodiversity [ 48,49]. Therefore,
contrary to these unsustainable technologies, carrying out more eco-sustainable methods
is essential [ 49]. Moreover, bioremediation by microalgae (diatoms) is currently widely
accepted due to the ability of algae to grow at a faster rate than terrestrial plants using solar
energy. The possibility of their cultivation on nonarable lands and in marine environments
or seawater media has the advantage of lower requirements for freshwater and land and
offers the possibility to carry out large-scale cultivation using indigenous diatom species in
situ and ex situ conditions (in photobioreactors) with limited impact on the environment.
Bioremediation is therefore considered an accessible and effective technology to elimi-
nate oil pollution from contaminated environments and mitigate the damage caused by oil
spills, in addition to the possible use of wastewater for its different modes of nutrition and
fertilization [ 50,51]. For instance, Navicula accomoda ,Navicula synedra , and Nitzschia paleaClean Technol. 2024 ,6 98
have been reported to be good indicators or biomarkers of heavily polluted zones and for
the recovery of resilience where other species cannot occur [52].
These phototrophic indigenous microorganisms have been underused thus far in the
bioremediation of hydrocarbon-contaminated sites. Such applications are beginning to be
considered, although other microorganisms, such as bacteria [ 53], have been unsuccessful
in the biodegradation and bioremediation of all hydrocarbons. Despite the importance of
diatoms, studies examining their role in hydrocarbon biodegradation are limited [ 54]. The
degradation of various aromatic compounds in impacted marine environments is of great
interest and is actually part of a worldwide initiative that includes the sustainability goal
agenda of the United Nations Organization [ 55–57]. Hence, the search for efficient and ap-
plicable systems requires prospecting, isolation, and the characterization of autochthonous
microorganisms with potential for bioremediation [58].
Other attributes of diatoms to be considered include their availability to mass cul-
ture and omics data, genetic manipulation techniques, and concomitant production of
value-added products [ 59,60]. Moreover, the limitations regarding the effectiveness of
bacteria in certain specific hydrocarbon components and environments have led to new
taxa and species being explored with the capabilities to perform oil biodegradation and
bioremediation. Among Eukaryotic microalgae, therefore, diatoms have characteristics
that allow them to be considered potential microorganisms for such purposes, an idea that
remains only sparsely studied (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Attributes of diatoms for the biodegradation and bioremediation of petroleum hydrocarbons
in the marine environment.
3. Diatom Exopolysaccharides—Role as Biosurfactants and Biodegraders of Oil
Marine ecosystems represent the largest aquatic ecosystems in which marine micro-
biomes thrive and flourish. In addition to the characteristics required for marine microor-
ganisms to succeed in challenging environmental conditions, such as at extremes of salinity,
temperature, pH, nutrient fluctuations, increased pressure, and UV exposure [ 61,62], they
are also characterized by exopolysaccharide production under such conditions.
Marine microorganisms have been characterized as producing polysaccharides, which
are the most abundant carbohydrates in nature, with high molecular weight biopolymers
(10 to 1000 kDa) exhibiting diverse structures in addition to many physico-chemical proper-
ties [ 63]. These molecules are preferred because of their biodegradability and low toxicity,
acting as surface-active compounds called biosurfactants (BSs), which are among the am-
phiphilic biomolecules that possess both hydrophilic and hydrophobic moieties. TheseClean Technol. 2024 ,6 99
natural surfactant-like polysaccharides are promising for use in remediation technolo-
gies as an alternative to synthetic surfactants [ 64,65]. Among the polyanionic functional
groups forming the structural backbone of EPSs, the interface solubilization of hydrocar-
bons is included. Because of their singular structural and functional characteristics, EPSs
are anticipated to be applicable in the remediation of hydrocarbons from contaminated
wastewater, metals, crude oil, and hydrocarbons from polluted waters, mines, and oil
spills [ 66]. Polysaccharides from microalgae can be categorized as intracellular, structural,
and extracellular glycans [ 63]. Recently, due to the production and renewable charac-
teristics of these metabolites, they have been regarded as strong candidates to replace
the synthetic surfactants widely used in oil spills, which are unsustainable because they
produce secondary pollution and toxic effects, along with their resistance to biodegrada-
tion [ 61]. Biosurfactants (BSs) are preferable metabolites because of their environmental
compatibility and wide acceptance due to their low toxicity and surface functionality, and
mainly because of their high biodegradability and ease of production using renewable and
low-cost substrate [67–69].
In eukaryotic microalgae (diatoms), EPSs are secreted through diatom frustule, viz.,
raphe (in pennate diatoms), axillary pores, or fissures (in centric diatoms) to the environ-
ment where EPSs continue through a self-building process [ 70–72]. Diatoms play a key role
in the marine carbon cycle, accounting for approximately 40% of photosynthetic inorganic
carbon fixation in oceans [ 18,73], thus leading to high productivity. This process is con-
sidered the main contribution to carbon in marine environments, while at the same time,
diatoms secrete an abundance of organic carbon in the form of exudates such as EPSs [ 74]
and transparent exopolymeric particles into the ocean [ 75] in order to meet their inherent
basic functional needs. EPSs in Bacillariophyta are 95% polysaccharides and may consist of
neutral sugars, uronic acids, sulfonated sugars, or ketal-linked pyruvate groups [16,76].
Although exopolysaccharide-producing diatoms are a neglected resource, several
authors have reported that EPS production by diatoms is a phenomenon that is based strictly
on oxygenic photosynthesis and on atmospheric CO 2fixation, which is dependent on light
and nutrient availability [ 77]. According to [ 78], EPS production in diatoms is achieved
with light in active photosynthetic conditions, combined with low nutrient stress situations.
Diatoms, which are part of the phytoplankton responsible for about 40% of marine primary
productivity, also contribute to the ocean biological carbon pump, exhibiting EPS exudates,
which are partially constituted of transparent exopolymeric particles [ 79,80]. EPS exudates,
when mixed with debris, cells, microorganisms, and organic materials, form marine snow,
which is considered ubiquitous throughout the marine environment and is mostly involved
in the transport of carbon to the seafloor [80–82].
The role of EPSs in the natural degradation and attenuation of crude oil in the sea
was evidenced after the catastrophe of the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill in the Gulf of
Mexico and the Macondo Prospect 2010 spill. The spilled oil was combined with marine oil
snow harboring abundant EPSs and diatoms, which, after sedimentation and flocculent
accumulation, contributed to the sinking of oil [ 18]. During this process, most of the
hydrocarbons were consumed by the indigenous microbiome, and diatoms exerted an
important role as degraders and consumers around the oil fractions of the marine oil snow
during its transport to the seafloor. This process represented about 14% of the degradation
of the total oil released in the Gulf of Mexico by the DWH [80,83].
This scenario represents a way of bioremediation in which diatoms and other microor-
ganism producers and degraders of extracellular polymeric substances associated with
marine oil snow [ 84] played a significant role in bioremediation. Passow and Stout [ 85]
reported that levels of degraded oil in marine oil snow were observed when analyzing a
sediment trap after the MC-252 well was caped. The result evidenced a highly degraded
oil at residual concentrations of 1.45 mg fresh oil/m2/d, which represented a median
percentage degradation of 85% in the marine oil snow constituted of diatoms, EPS, fecal
pellets, minerals, and organic matter.Clean Technol. 2024 ,6 100
Recently, studies on the biosynthesis of carbohydrates in Phaedactylum tricornutum
by Yang et al. [ 86] corroborated the notion that Chrysolaminarin, formed mainly of
β-1,3-glucan with β-1,6-branched chains (molecular weight at 10 kDa), is the main form
of polysaccharide reserve in this diatom, emphasizing the role of the PtTGS1 gene in the
Chrysolaminarin synthesis and carbon deviation pathways. Kamalanathan et al. [ 87] re-
ported the effective role of Chrysolaminarin as a carbon reserve and, consequently, in the
growth and survival of Thalassiosira pseudonana in the presence of oil.
Currently, with advancements in metagenomics, new genes involved in the secretion
of biosurfactants [88,89] have been discovered. A deep and concise analysis is required to
better characterize and unravel the metabolic pathways and different nodes involved in
sugar carbon shunt contributing to extracellular polysaccharides’ biosynthetic pathway
from central metabolism [88].
4. Diatoms—Origin and Producers of Isoprenoids, Alkanes, and Alkenes
Historically, geologists have often claimed that an important fraction of crude oil
may have originated from diatoms, a claim that could be supported by the proven ability
of diatoms to make oil [ 13]. Although most hydrocarbons found in the environment
occur in crude oil, many oil hydrocarbons may have originated from algae in ancient
oceans [ 90]. This claim remains controversial because explorations have mainly been
undertaken in the land and coastal–marine areas of the world, not in deep sea areas.
Moreover, evidence from many oil basins around the world suggests that they can be
attributed to diatomaceous deposits [ 10]. Although the sources of organic compounds such
as highly branched isoprenoid (HBI) alkenes were initially hypothesized to originate from
diatoms, Rowland and Robson 1990 [ 91], and more recent studies, recognized diatoms as
an important source of many classes of hydrocarbons, including alkanes and alkenes [ 92].
Alkanes constitute up to 35% of crude oil petroleum and its derivatives. Usually, straight-
chain alkanes are typically the most abundant and do not contain ring structures, which is
why they are the more readily degraded.
n-Alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons, i.e., formed of hydrogen and carbon with single
covalent bonds between both atoms, while alkenes are hydrocarbons with at least a double
bond. Short-chain alkanes are aliphatic hydrocarbons and are the most easily degraded,
followed by alkanes with side chains or branched alkanes and then aromatic hydrocarbons
with stable ring structures. Although alkanes have been reported in groundwater, rivers,
lakes, oceans, and soil [ 46], they may also occur in aquatic organisms and sediments (estu-
arine, marine, and riverine). Alkanes with chains of up to 44 carbon atoms are susceptible
to microbial degradation; however, only a limited number of species can use Cl–C4 and
C5–C9 alkanes because of their toxicity [ 93,94]. Alkane and alkene hydrocarbons of various
chain lengths are biotechnologically important because they are major components of diesel
(C12–C20), jet fuels (C5–C16), and gasoline (C5–C9) [95].
In marine environments, diatoms are the main sources of sterols, mainly C28 sterols,
and are less abundant in C27–C29 sterols [ 10]. The presence of highly branched isoprenoids
(HBIs) in diatoms has been used as an effective environmental biological marker, for
example, alkenes can be considered a useful indicator of petroleum deposits [ 10,92]. For
instance, the ratio of steranes (28 and 29 carbon atoms) [ 96], 24-norcholestanes [ 97], and the
highly branched isoprenoid (HBI) alkenes [ 98] detected in diatoms are also found in many
oil fields around the world [99].
The diatom genera Rhizosolenia ,Haslea ,Navicula , and Pleurosigma and their ancestors
are thought to be the major sources of a group of C25 highly branched isoprenoid (HBI)
alkanes and thiophenes [ 98,100]. It was later recognized that different growth conditions
determine the amount and type of HBI produced in diatoms. Studies on microalgae
alkane and alkene biosynthesis in eukaryotic algae are scarce. In the 1970s, Lee et al.
and Lee and Loeblich [ 101,102] reported the presence of a very long-chain alkene, a C21
hexaene in certain species of diatoms and other algal species. The diatom Synedra acus subs.
radians evidenced the accumulation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) duringClean Technol. 2024 ,6 101
its cultivation with crude oil hydrocarbons [ 103]. The results corroborated the role of this
diatom in the accumulation of PAHs in lipid bodies when cultivated in the presence of
crude oil or light oil, exerting a selective accumulation of C12–C18 alkanes. In principle, the
transmembrane transport of PAHs in this diatom is induced by the insertion of n-alkanes
into the membrane lipid bilayer. This process of bioaccumulation may contribute to the
mitigation and removal of hydrophobic petroleum hydrocarbons from aquatic systems.
Diatoms and microalgae exhibit remarkably promising feedstock to replace non-
renewable sources of biofuel production and energy. This fact is based on the high lipid
content of algae, which is considered a major feedstock of petroleum, where lipids have
remained stable over millennia [104,105].
Under special culture conditions, mainly when exposed to nutrient deprivation, di-
atoms can accumulate and store high amounts of triacylglycerols, as evidenced by the
substantial portion of the cells’ volume often occupied by spherical organelles, called oil
bodies, or lipid droplets. The diameter ranges of these lipid oils observed near the chloro-
plast is 100–200 µm [106], suggesting that they are synthesized within the chloroplasts in
some diatoms [ 13,106]. This particularity has attracted significant attention because of the
unique combination of genes involved and the evolutionary history involving secondary
endosymbiosis. One evidence of the biosynthesis and production of alkanes and alkenes
by chlorophyte microalgae, including diatoms, was corroborated by Sorigue et al. [ 95]. In
principle, microalgae synthesize hydrocarbons from long-chain fatty acids induced by a
light-dependent pathway. In Chlamydomonas reinhardtii , the loss of the carboxyl group of
a C18 monounsaturated fatty acid gives rise to the alkene heptadecene (7-heptadecene)
as C17-heptadecene. It was suggested that this isomer was formed by decarboxylation
of cis-vaccenic acid as a product of the deuterated palmitic acid that yielded stearic acid
(D31-18:0), oleic and cis-vaccenic (D29-18:1) acids, and D29-heptadecene. In essence, the
amount of 7-heptadecene is dependent on the growth phase of the algae and temperature,
and it rigorously depends on light and not on photosynthesis since photosystem II was
not blocked by the assayed inhibitor [ 95]. In other chlorophytes, viz., Chlorella variabilis
NC64A and Nannochloropsis species, and in the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum , around
80% alkenes were detected. This diatom accumulated C21 hexaene. Thus, a new light-
dependent pathway was evidenced across the algal ability to transform C16 and C18 fatty
acids into alkanes and alkenes [95].
The interaction between oil bodies and associated organelles (chloroplast, mitochon-
dria, and endoplasmic reticulum) during biogenesis and degradation suggests their dy-
namic response to environmental changes [ 107]. Similarly, the presence of lipid droplets
in diatoms represents a vestigial reminiscence of an ancient organelle conserved among
all eukaryotes [ 13,108], which have been optimized by certain diatoms during their evo-
lution. All these oily backgrounds indicate diatoms’ inherent properties as biochemical
synthesizers of oils, a mechanism considered regarding the ability of diatoms to remove oil
derivatives such as petroleum hydrocarbons [ 13,109]. Studies on the pennate genome re-
vealed that there have been many lateral gene transfers from bacteria into the diatoms [ 109].
In addition, it is recognized that several classes of hydrocarbons including alkanes and
alkenes are synthesized by diatoms [ 92]. Cerniglia and co-workers [ 17,32] reported that
some marine microalgae, including diatoms, can produce enzymes that degrade harm-
ful organic compounds from petroleum hydrocarbons into less toxic compounds, thus
contributing to the removal oil hydrocarbons. This ability to synthesize hydrocarbons
was recently reported by Harada et al. [ 110] in the microalga Dicrateria rotunda from the
western Arctic Ocean, which was able to biosynthesize a group of saturated hydrocarbons
(n-alkanes) from C10H22 to C38H78. These compounds were grouped as petrol (C10–C15),
diesel oils (C16–C20), and fuel oils (C21–C38).
The feasibility of using diatoms, a fatty acid-rich species, to promote the synthesis
of alkanes and alkenes hydrocarbons from fatty acids precursors is particularly attrac-
tive because it combines a high biomass yield and a robust capability to biosynthesize
and accumulate fatty acids, which may lead to hydrocarbon biosynthesis that may rep-Clean Technol. 2024 ,6 102
resent a hydrocarbon removal strategy. Hence, it makes sense that certain diatoms may
contain the biochemical mechanisms and strategies, as well as the metabolic pathways,
involved in petroleum breakdown, in addition to their exopolysaccharides, oxygen, and
degradative enzymes.
5. Marine Diatoms—Sustainable and Renewable Remediation of Polycyclic Aromatic
Hydrocarbons (PAHs)
PAHs are highly recalcitrant, carcinogenic, and a mutagenic class of organic com-
pounds that can be persistent in some coastal and marine environments, and their hy-
drophobicity and low water solubility are a challenge for their sustainable biodegradation
and mitigation [ 5]. PAHs are ubiquitous in the environment, and they typically originate
from biogenic and geochemical as well as anthropogenic sources. The last-mentioned
source contributes to the incomplete combustion of organic constituents (coal, wood, diesel)
and represents an important origin of environmental pollution [ 111]. PAHs are acutely toxic
and suspected carcinogens to human health due to their conformational structures [ 112].
Their genotoxicity, which depends on activation by mammalian enzymes [ 111], and envi-
ronmental persistence exhibit a direct increase in their molecular structure and size, which
consists of two or more fused benzene rings that can expand to four or five. The available
studies on the potential of diatoms for the bioremediation of PAHs (Table 2) have been
carried out mainly on anthracene, benzo(a)pyrene, fluoranthene, phenanthrene, and pyrene.
These pollutants are considered in the US EPA’s list of 16 PAHs as priority pollutants and
in the EU’s 15 + 1 list, which are mainly based on toxicity, abundance, lethality to life, and
environmental quality.
Table 2. Main remarks reported in studies on the role of diatoms in the bioremediation of
petroleum hydrocarbons.
Diatoms Remarks References
Navicula sp.,Nitzschia sp.
Synedra sp.Oxidation with 6–9 mg/L of naphthalene at 6 and
12◦C[35]
Cylindrotheca sp.,
Amphora sp.Oxidation of 78 µM naphthalene at 30◦C [32]
Nitzschia sp.Absorption and metabolic degradation of
phenanthrene (53%)[36]
Skeletonema costatumAbsorption and metabolic degradation of
phenanthrene (16%)
Navicula sp. 1 and 2,
Nitzschia sp.Naphthenic acids cis-and trans isomers , uptake and
degradation at 5.5 mg/L[37]
Thalassiosira sp.Growth and degradation in 0.25 mM phenol and
1 mM benzoate[39]
Achnanthes minutissima n-Alkanes and isoprenoids biodegradation [33]
Diatom BD1IITGPhenol degradation in the range 50–100 mg/L in
refinery waste-water. Highest degradation rate
and production of biosurfactant with emulsifying
activity at 100 mg/L[38]
Cyclotella caspia Biodegradation of fluoranthene (86%) [34]
Nitzchia sp. and Bacteria Genera
Marivita ,Erythrobacter AlcaligenesBiodegradation of benzo(a)pyrene (79%) and
fluoranthene (82%) by co-metabolic synergy[40]
Among the main pollutants released from oil spills, PAHs represent one of the major
components [ 113,114]. Ben-Othman et al. [ 114] reported that the common representative of
these highly toxic PAHs is naphthalene and its alkylated derivates (89% of the total PAH
concentrations), which are commonly found in the oil water-soluble fraction.
Biological transformation remains a prevalent and sustainable alternative to decrease
the amount of PAH in the environment. In general, PAHs are weakly biodegradable
by bacteria, which is why the expected potential of algae and diatoms remains to be
more extensively studied. Recently, diatoms have been attracting attention since they
are considered to be one of the most important entry points of contaminants in marine
food webs as well as for their association and evolution with oil hydrocarbons. TheClean Technol. 2024 ,6 103
main factors involved in the bioremediation of PAHs are temperature, oxygen, and pH.
Temperature plays an important role in the solubility of PAHs, a condition that increases the
bioavailability of PAH molecules for biodegradation [ 115]. Several authors have indicated
that aerobic hydrocarbon biodegradation is most likely the main mechanism of attenuation
of crude oil in the marine environment, in which diatoms participate mainly in zones of
high hydrocarbon-degrading activity [1,32].
Under such a scenario, diatoms can contribute to the solubilization and enhanced
biodegradation of short- and longer-chain alkanes and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs). Thus, oxygen is the most important element in the biodegradation of hydrocarbon.
In principle, the oxygenase content of photoautotrophic microalgae enables the biodegra-
dation of hydrocarbons into metabolites, which can then be metabolized [5,116,117].
In microorganisms, monoxygenases and dioxygenases incorporate two oxygen atoms
in the substrate to form diodioxithanes, which are then oxidized into cisdihydrodiols
and then into dihydroxy products. When diatoms and microorganisms take up PAHs,
aerobic metabolism is switched on by the insertion of two oxygen atoms to produce either
cisdihydrodiols or phenols [118,119].
The combined effect of reduced temperature and elevated salinity was observed
to result in an increase in EPS mannose and fucose production in the sea ice diatom
Fragilariopsis cylindrus , which, in principle, is a strategy for helping polar ice diatoms to
overcome the cold saline conditions prevailing in sea ice [ 120]. For example, under high-
salinity conditions, Nitzschia frustulum increases its gel thickness while also increasing its
production of rhamnose and xylose sugars [ 121]. The transcriptomic analysis carried out by
Liang et al. [ 71] indicated that differentially expressed genes could suggest an increase in
the budget of the photosynthate and chemical constitution of aggregates of Odontella aurita
related to exudates as a response to oil exposure.
Cerniglia et al. [ 17,32] reported that Navicula sp.,Nitzschia sp., and Synedra sp. from
the Kachmark Bay region of Alaska were able to metabolize the aromatic hydrocarbon
naphthalene at 6–12◦C, oxidizing naphthalene to ethyl acetate-soluble and water metabo-
lites. The amount of naphthalene oxidized to recoverable products ranged from 0.7 to
1.4%. The data suggested that cold-adapted microalgae may prove to be more metabolically
active, although this may have been due to their slow growth rates [ 122]. In experiments
at the scale of microcosms at 5◦C, the dominant Arctic diatom Fragilariopsis cylindrus and
its associated microbiome may play a relevant function in the formation of oil-related
aggregates [ 122]. A role was observed for this diatom in the biodegradation of naphthalene,
and the corresponding oil accumulation in the aggregates was observed mainly in the
presence of this diatom, which supports its consideration in biodegradation and bioreme-
diation initiatives as an alternative to other unsustainable approaches prohibited by the
laws stipulated in the Arctic treaty [ 43,122]. This information is also valuable because of
the availability of hydrocarbon pollutants in cold environments and the fact that harsh
conditions are more persistent than in temperate regions [ 43]. Moreover, according to these
results, as well as other findings by Steele and coworkers [ 77], marked differences can be
observed in exopolysaccharide production depending on the taxon and strain, as well as
environmental conditions, in the production of tensio active molecules with the aim of
degrading petroleum pollutants.
Cerniglia and Heitkamp [ 123] reported that the initial ring oxidation plays an im-
portant role as the rate-limiting step in the biodegradation of PAHs. Diatoms and some
eukaryotic algae have the enzymatic ability to oxidize PAHs ranging from naphthalene to
benzo(a)pyrene [124]. In the case of Selanestrum capricornutum , benzo(a)pyrene is incorpo-
rated via the dioxygenase pathway; similarly, diatoms can metabolize naphthene via the
dioxygenase pathway [ 34]. Studies by [ 125] indicated that the metabolism of phenanthrene
and pyrene in diatoms was carried out mainly by the enzyme-oxidation process converting
PAHs to less or non-toxic forms of compounds. The complementary biotransformation
of organic pollutants, such as 2,4-dichlorophenol by the diatom Skeletonema costatum , was
confirmed by Yang et al. [86], which was effective for the mitigation of this pollutant.Clean Technol. 2024 ,6 104
Headley et al. [ 37] also reported the successful role of diatoms in the degradation
of petroleum naphthenic acid, in which the diatoms Navicula1 ,Navicula2 , and Nitzschia
sp. were effective in the uptake of naphthenic acid, which was assumed to mainly be
degraded by Navicula2 at a level of 5.5 mg/L over a period of two weeks. The authors
assigned differences in the phytodegradation of naphthalenic acid by transport mechanisms
in diatoms and the structure of naphthenic acids. It is accepted that bacteria cannot
biodegrade naphthenic acid, thus raising expectations regarding the potential of algae with
diatoms as a sustainable source of renewable biomass for the degradation of this organic
molecule. Ben Othman et al. [ 114] studied PAH toxicity and phylogenetic phytoplankton
group distribution, mainly between Chlorophyceae and diatoms regardless of the PAH
compound. Their correlation analysis of the harmful concentration to 5% of the tested
species was 1.21 and 39.7 µg/L for chlorophyceae and diatoms, respectively. In their study,
although diatoms proved to be more tolerant than chlorophytes, it was concluded that
the comparative survey of PAHs must be further extended by testing other species’ taxa
sensitivity to PAHs in order to draw any conclusive results.
DNA microarray-based transcriptomics was also applied to investigate the effect of
sub-lethal concentrations of the PAH benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) on T. pseudonana [126], and
the results indicated that genes involved in lipid biosynthesis and catabolism were up-
and down-regulated, respectively. These results suggest the activation of the membrane
repair mechanism to restore the membrane organization affected by the incorporation of
hydrophobic BaP [ 126]. It would be highly interesting in future works to assess the effect,
tolerance, and optimal environmental conditions for the removal or mitigation of specific
PAHs in diatom species to obtain information on the possible roles of this type of pollutant
in coastal and marine environments.
The effect of the PAH benzo(a)pyrene on T. pseudonana was corroborated using DNA-
based transcriptomics, in which gene regulation associated with BaP degradation was
related to the cell cycle and putative enzymes [ 127]. Studies on the pennate genome revealed
that there have been many lateral gene transfers from bacteria into the diatoms [ 109].
Thus, it makes sense that Bacillariophyta may contain metabolic pathways involved in
petroleum breakdown, in addition to their exopolysaccharides, oxygen, and degradative
enzymes. Moreover, the process of exopolysaccharide production occurs under aerobic
conditions and thus requires oxygen for successful completion. This relationship gives a
clue as to the association between exopolysaccharides and the degradation of hydrocarbons.
Previous applications of diatoms in biosynthesis, biodegradation, and biomineralization
are gathered in Figure 2. Moreover, reports published recently [ 23] have also shown that the
marine diatom Thalassiosira sp. OUC2 can produce enzymes and oxygenases that degrade
harmful organic compounds from petroleum hydrocarbons into less toxic compounds,
indicating that this diatom may thus be suitable for the remediation of marine environments
contaminated by p-xylene.
Previously, Cerniglia et al. [ 17,34] revealed the ability of diatoms to carry out naph-
thalene oxidation under photoautotrophic conditions (Table 1), but more studies in this
field are needed in order to diversify the limited number of PAHs that can be biodegraded
by diatoms and expand our knowledge in this area. Despite the toxicity of PAHs, some
marine diatoms, such as Skeletonema costatum and Nitzschia sp. have shown the ability to
degrade phenanthrene (PHE) and fluoranthene (FLA), as reported by [ 19,20,128], who indi-
cated that Skeletonema costatum can stimulate the mineralization rates of PAHs by passively
concentrating these pollutants in the marine water column, as was observed in members of
Nitzschia sp., which are highly efficient degraders of phenanthrene (PHE) and fluoranthene
(FLA) [17,32].Clean Technol. 2024 ,6 105
Figure 2. Schematic representation of the role of diatoms in the main mechanisms and processes
involved in petroleum biodegradation and bioremediation.
Hong et al. [ 36] also studied the accumulation and biodegradation of two polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), phenanthrene (PHE) and fluoranthene (FLA), by the diatom
species Skeletonema costatum and Nitzschia sp., isolated from a mangrove estuary ecosystem.
The results obtained indicated that S. costatum possessed greater accumulation and degra-
dation abilities and tolerances to PHE and FLA than those of Nitzschia sp. However, both
diatom species exhibited slower degradation of FLA, which may indicate that it is a more
toxic and recalcitrant aromatic compound than PHE. However, for the practical purposes
of bioremediation, both species demonstrated higher removal efficiency of the mixture of
both aromatics compared with the efficiency for PHE and FLA individually, suggesting a
synergistic effect when using the two diatoms, where the presence of one PAH stimulated
the degradation effect of the other. Genzer et al. [ 18] pointed out that PAH toxicity in algae
is primarily dependent on the species under study, the dose, and the exposure time, as
was exemplified when authors discussed the 2010 Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill in the Gulf
of Mexico, in which the huge oil volumes also impacted the phytoplankton community.
The released oil was reported to be associated with large phytoplankton aggregates mainly
dominated by chain-forming diatoms [ 71,83,85]. Among the diatom species reported in
the vicinity of the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill (station 29.10◦N, 87.88◦W), in August
2010, were the following dominant eukaryotic members: Thalassionema nitzschioides (90%),
Pseudo-Nitzschia sp., (4%), Dactyliosolen fragilissimus (3%), Leptocylindrus danicus (2%), and
Cyclotella sp. (1%). An analysis performed at the station located at 28.64◦N, 87.88◦W, on the
8th of September 2010, reported that Pseudo-nitzschia sp. (50%) was the dominant species,
followed by Thalassionema nitzschioides ,Leptocylindrus minimus ,Dactyliosolen fragilissimus ,
Chaetoceros spp., and Eucampia spp., which were all about 7% [18,87].Clean Technol. 2024 ,6 106
Although some phytoplankton exhibit resilience when exposed to oil, diatoms have
generally been reported as being more resilient than green algae [ 18,129]. In particular,
diatoms are more sensitive to low concentrations of PAHs (<8 ppb) [ 130]. A remarkable fea-
ture is an increase in the numbers of four taxa ( Pseudo-nitzschia ,Amphidinium ,Amphidinium ,
Thalassiosira , and Chaetoceros ) in the presence of crude oil Corexit solutions, supporting the
notion that Pseudo-nitzschia spp. may become more abundant during oil spills [18].
The conceptual diagram for the role of diatoms and the main mechanisms and factors
involved in the biodegradation and bioremediation of petroleum hydrocarbons in the
marine environment is exemplified in Figure 2.
6. Diatom–Bacterial Synergy in the Removal of Petroleum Hydrocarbons
Bacteria and eukaryotic phytoplankton such as diatoms have coexisted for a long
time. Hydrocarbon-degrader bacteria have been demonstrated to co-occur with phyto-
plankton [ 131,132]. In fact, the association between phytoplankton dominated by diatoms
and bacteria is the most common interaction occurring in oil spills. During the interactive
process, oxygen released by algal photosynthesis is likely to be very important in activating
hydrocarbon degradation and acting as an electron acceptor in aerobic respiration [ 118,131].
The identification and isolation of different hydrocarbonoclastic bacteria from diverse
algal cultures [ 132,133] supports the conclusion of [ 134] that phytoplankton cells represent
a “biotope” for hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria. This could explain the capacity of cer-
tain species of phytoplankton, viz., diatoms, to adsorb and produce hydrocarbons [ 89],
which may be indicative of the presence of hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria on diatom
cells [ 134]. Specifically, stimulations upon exposure to oil have been observed in cultures of
the diatom Skeletonema , in which the oil-stimulating effect induced changes in the bacterial
community [ 89] commonly associated with phytoplankton and dominated by hydrocar-
bon degraders such as Piscirickettsiaceae (including Methylophaga ) followed by Arenibacter ,
Marinobacter , and Polycyclovorans algicola [134].
Diatoms have also previously been shown to secrete C8 and C11 hydrocarbons as
pheromones [ 135], which might explain the presence of associated Alcanivorax members.
It is expected that a well-designed microbial consortium with hydrocarbonoclastic bacte-
ria and complementary catabolic pathways of functional diatoms may contribute to the
degradation and bioremediation of hydrocarbons in polluted coastal marine environments.
Gutierrez et al. [ 19] attributed the biodegradation of petroleum hydrocarbon functions
by bacteria and diatoms to the ability of each taxon to contribute to the shared functions
of bioremediation. In the case of diatoms associated with oiled tidal biofilms, aerobic
hydrocarbon biodegradation has been reported to be the most likely primary mechanism
of attenuation of crude oil in the early weeks of an oil spill [ 134]. At the end of the process,
theNitzschia strain PLAT907 (EU346643) provides photosynthetically derived oxygen [ 119]
and terminal electron acceptors for alkane degradation. This process is enhanced by the
increase in CO 2concentration produced by the heterotrophs.
Recently, co-metabolism has been suggested and, in some cases, validated in order to
harness the simultaneous capabilities of microorganisms to achieve successful biodegrada-
tion, mainly of recalcitrant high-molecular-weight PAHs [ 136]. For instance, bacteria carry
out the oxidation of aromatic hydrocarbons via the incorporation of dioxygenases into the
substrate, initially leading to cis-dihydrodiols [ 124,137]. Therefore, two oxygen atoms are
directed to the aromatic nucleus [ 136,138], and catechols are formed via the oxidation of
cis-dihydrodiols [ 14]. Aromatic rings are cleaved by other dioxygenases, and subsequently,
fumaric, pyruvic, and acetic acids and aldehydes are formed [ 139]. Therefore, co-oxidation
and co-metabolism are effective and feasible processes for achieving the biodegradation
of petroleum hydrocarbons, which can be enhanced by the action of surface-active com-
pounds (surfactants) produced by exopolysaccharides of diatom cells in environments
containing petroleum hydrocarbons. This process makes hydrocarbons more water soluble
and available for degradation by cells.Clean Technol. 2024 ,6 107
Diatoms are known to produce exopolymeric substances, which are enhanced by
bacterial action [ 87] in the surrounding seawater. Diatoms’ significant production of
polysaccharides can provide a favorable organic carbon source for bacteria. Increased
production of EPS was observed following the 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill, which
initially impacted the phytoplankton community in the Gulf of Mexico. Polysaccharides
make up a major fraction of the EPSs, with Chrysolaminarin acting as a carbon source
reported to contribute to the recovery of T. pseudonana in the presence of oil [ 87]. Hence,
the synthesis of chrysolaminarin plays a relevant function in the growth and survival of
T. pseudonana in the presence of oil, and its inhibition can influence the composition and
activity of the surrounding bacterial community [87].
During the process of biodegradation at the oil–water interface, exopolysaccharides
released by the diatoms act as an emulsifier, breaking the oil into several small fractions
that are subsequently attacked by heterotrophs [ 140]. Therefore, the degradation of com-
plex organic molecules by consortia of algae containing diatoms and other biodegrading
microbes is more effective in the removal of hydrocarbons than algal systems alone [ 141].
Bacillariophyta, for example, may provide dissolved oxygen to bacteria, which in turn can
supply CO 2, vitamins, nutrients, enzymes, and iron to diatoms via hydrocarbons [ 1,130], in-
dicating mutualistic interactions between both taxa for the degradation of oil hydrocarbons
(Figure 3).
Figure 3. Diagrammatic representation of the synergy between diatoms and bacteria during the
biodegradation of petroleum hydrocarbon emulsions (adapted from [142]).
In diatoms, EPSs may contribute to hydrocarbon degradation by emulsifying hy-
drocarbons [ 1,143]. Moreover, high concentrations of hydrocarbons such as PAHs may
contribute to the enhancement of the association between microalgae and bacteria. For
instance, the Navicula phyllepta -bound EPS has a predominant role during the first stages
of biofilm development [ 143]. The diatoms S. costatum and Nitzschia sp. can accumulate
and decompose two polycyclic hydrocarbons simultaneously [ 144]. Diatoms also play anClean Technol. 2024 ,6 108
important role in supplying organic carbon for bacteria during the production process of
polysaccharides. This was evidenced by an analysis of the impact of the 2010 Deepwater
Horizon Oil Spill in the Gulf of Mexico, in which the enormous amounts of oil seriously
impacted the phytoplankton community through the production of polysaccharides via
exopolymeric substances [87].
Modern omics approaches may contribute to an increased understanding of biodegra-
dation and bioremediation initiatives that are based on the ability of diatom genes and
their respective repertoires of biochemical pathways, in addition to their environmental
and sustainability advantages. The pyrosequencing analysis and qPCR reported by [ 134]
revealed a marked transition in the diatom-associated bacterial community.
This possibility cannot be ruled out, although more studies are needed on the effects
of the ecology and interrelationships between specific groups of phytoplankton, diatoms,
and bacteria on hydrocarbon genesis and the biodegradation of petroleum in oceans and
marine environments.
7. Environmental Conditions Affecting Diatoms’ Petroleum Hydrocarbon
Biodegradation and Bioremediation Activities
Unlike laboratory research, no field trial has been carried out to test the effectiveness
of specific diatoms in the biodegradation and bioremediation of petroleum hydrocarbons
in the field, including polyaromatic hydrocarbons. This is largely because such trials are
difficult, expensive, and unpredictable. This is partially due to the logistical difficulties
involved in conducting controlled open-sea trials [ 145]. Despite their important role and
the need for such field trials, the only evidence from such studies is recorded after an oil
spill in relatively different time periods. This is the case of oceanographic research cruises
that have reported diatoms associated with oil spills and as biomarkers of petroleum
hydrocarbon reserves. However, the results of experiments with diatoms exposed to pol-
yaromatic hydrocarbons under controlled conditions using, in some cases, seawater from
oil hydrocarbon-contaminated seas [ 19,36–38,40] have conclusively shown that diatoms’
presence enhances the biodegradation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in contami-
nated shorelines and seas. Nevertheless, most of the environmental factors that influence
microorganisms, mainly eukaryotic microalgae in the sea, also influence the effectiveness
of diatoms’ biodegradation and bioremediation rate of polyaromatic hydrocarbons in the
laboratory, except sea and shoreline energy, such as currents and waves, and seawater
pressure [ 145,146]. Among the environmental parameters, nutrient silicates, nitrogen,
phosphorous, and potassium are important for the successful thriving of diatoms in the
sea. Other equally important parameters are the level of dissolved oxygen, temperature,
exposure to sunlight (photo-oxidation), salinity, and the species of diatom (size, pennate,
or centric), sole or in consortium inhabiting the marine habitat as well as the type and
concentration of aromatic hydrocarbon present.
8. Future Perspectives
Future research is needed to derive an effective petroleum hydrocarbon bioremediation
strategy that integrates indigenous diatoms into the process to confirm their effectiveness
under field conditions, preferably directly after an oil spill. The possibility of the assess-
ment of nutrient concentrations, mainly silicates, before and after an oil spill may also be
considered to expand our knowledge on this topic. The type of diatom species, oil com-
position and concentration, exposure time to oil components, and environmental status,
as well as the prevailing environmental conditions, must be considered for the optimum
degradation of such petroleum hydrocarbons by diatoms. Although our knowledge of
diatom biosynthesis and hydrocarbon degradation pathways remains patchy with some
gaps, their elucidation may further improve our understanding of species-specific capabili-
ties. Advances in the diversity of genomic and metabolic features within different diatom
species, particularly, the most performing strains, may suggest multiple possibilities for the
manipulation of their enzymes and pathways to redirect and enhance selected processesClean Technol. 2024 ,6 109
toward the optimization of petroleum hydrocarbon degradation pathways. Hence, green
and sustainable processes that can contribute to the bioremediation of petroleum hydrocar-
bons in marine environments may be coupled with the co-production of green bioenergy
from renewable diatom biomass. Such a perspective represents a significant interest in
industrial applications and can be a useful part of the bioenergy value chain to achieve
circular economic concepts that contribute to resolving a problem of worldwide interest
9. Conclusions
Bioremediation is a highly effective, low-cost, environmentally safe, versatile, and
attractive greenway to mitigate and remove petroleum hydrocarbon pollution from ter-
restrial and marine environments. There are many microorganisms, including eukaryotic
microalgae, which show the ability to degrade and metabolize petroleum hydrocarbons,
although the results so far remain controversial as there are many gaps that require elu-
cidation. Diatoms may be a unique substitute for existing conventional biological and
microalgal methods and open new avenues for the biodegradation and bioremediation of
petroleum hydrocarbons for biodiversity-rich environments, accomplishing processes that
specific bacteria cannot carry out during the degradation of petroleum hydrocarbons since
no single bacterial strain has the metabolic capacity to degrade all the compounds present
in crude oil.
For a long time, the evolution of diatoms has been closely associated with the origin
of petroleum hydrocarbons in addition to producing hydrocarbons themselves and accu-
mulating intracellular lipid oil bodies and some oils. Diatoms have also been associated
with major and minor oil spills in the marine environment. The dominant omnipresence of
diatoms in oil-polluted marine environments, and the available early and recent literature
on the tolerance and ability to biodegrade petroleum hydrocarbons, are indicative of their
degradation potential, support this premise, and place diatoms as unique compared with
other microorganisms and eukaryotic microalgae. This fact is comparable to the capacity of
bacteria to survive and use such compounds as a strategic and important energy source for
growth. Therefore, diatom efficiency can be optimized by the association with hydrocarbon-
oclastic bacteria, which can complement each other in a consortium through co-metabolic
interactions. This synergic collaboration may lead to more effective degradation and biore-
mediation processes. Diatoms also are rich producers of functional exopolysaccharides and
enzymes (oxygenases) capable of dissolving and degrading hydrocarbons as a response to
damage through the liberation of free radicals.
Author Contributions: The original idea was conceptualized by J.P .-M., writing and draft preparation
by I.M.B. who reviewed and edited the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was financially funded by Centro de Investigaci ón Cient ífica y de Educaci ón Su-
perior de Ensenada BC, M éxico, Project number 682101: Bioprospection and screening of metabolites
and environmental processes.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. McGenity, T.J.; Folwell, B.D.; McKew, B.A.; Sanni, G.O. Marine crude-oil biodegradation: A central role for interspecies interaction.
Aquat. Biosyst. 2012 ,8, 10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Setta, S.; Liang, Y.; Brown, C.M.; Xuc, C.; Sweet, J.; Passowd, U.; Finkel, Z.B.; Irwin, A.J.; Santschi, P .H.; Quigg, A. Response
of natural phytoplankton communities exposed to crude oil and chemical dispersants during a mesocosm experiment. Aquat.
Toxicol. 2019 ,206, 43–53. [CrossRef]
3. Kerr, R.A.; Service, R.F. What can replace cheap oil and when. Science 2005 ,309, 1. [CrossRef]
4. Ławniczak, Ł.; Wo´ zniak-Karczewska, M.; Loibner, A.P .; Heipieper, H.J.; Chrzanowski, Ł. Microbial degradation of hydrocarbons:
Basic principles for bioremediation: A review. Molecules 2020 ,25, 856. [CrossRef]
5. Kanwal, M.; Ullah, H.; Gulzar, A.; Sadiq, T.; Ullah, M.; Sarfraz, M.; Gul, Z.; Aslam, M.W.; Khan, N.N.; Batool, T.; et al.
Biodegradation of petroleum hydrocarbons and the factors effecting rate of biodegradation. Am. J. Biomed. Sci. Res. 2022 ,16, 6.
[CrossRef]Clean Technol. 2024 ,6 110
6. Casau, M.; Dias, M.F.; Matias, J.C.O.; Nunes, L.J.R. Residual Biomass: A comprehensive review on the importance, uses and
potential in a circular bioeconomy Approach. Resources 2022 ,11, 35. [CrossRef]
7. Stonik, V .; Stonik, I. Low-molecular-weight metabolites from diatoms: Structures, biological roles and biosynthesis. Mar. Drugs
2015 ,13, 3672–3709. [CrossRef]
8. Round, F.E.; Crawford, D.G.; Mann, D.G. The Diatoms: Biology and Morphology of the Genera ; Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge, UK, 1990; pp. 3–123.
9. Falkowski, P .G.; Barber, R.T.; Smetacek, V . Biogeochemical Controls and Feedbacks on Ocean Primary Production. Science 1998 ,
281, 200–206. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Shukla, S.K.; Mohan, R.R. The contribution of diatoms to worldwide crude deposits. In The Science of Algal Fuels, Cellular Origin,
Life in Extreme Habitats and Astrobiology ; Gordon, R., Seckbach, J., Eds.; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2012; pp. 357–382.
[CrossRef]
11. Mann, D.G.; Droop, S.J.M. Biodiversity, biogeography and conservation of diatoms. Hydrobiologia 1996 ,336, 19–32. [CrossRef]
12. Vinayak, V .; Manoylov, K.M.; Gateau, H.; Blanckaert, V .; H érault, J.; Pencr éac’h, G.; Marchand, J.; Gordon, R.; Schoefs, B. Diatom
Milking: A Review and New Approaches. Mar. Drugs 2015 ,13, 2629–2665. [CrossRef]
13. Ramachandra, T.V .; Mahapatra, D.M.; Karthick, B.; Gordon, R. Milking Diatoms for Sustainable Energy: Biochemical Engineering
versus Gasoline-Secreting Diatom Solar Panels. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2009 ,48, 8769–8788. [CrossRef]
14. Atlas, R.M.; Hazen, T.C. Oil biodegradation and bioremediation: A tale of the two worst spills in U.S. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011 ,
45, 6709–6715. [CrossRef]
15. Domde, P .; Kapley, A.; Purohit, H.J. Impact of Bioaugmentation with a consortium of bacteria on the remediation of wastewater-
containing hydrocarbons. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 2007 ,14, 7–11.
16. Stal, L.J.; de Brouwer, J.F.C. Biofilm formation by benthic diatoms and their influence on the stabilization of intertidal mudflats.
Berichte–Forschungszentrum Terramare 2003 ,12, 109–111.
17. Cerniglia, C.E. Biodegradation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Biodegradation 1992 ,3, 351–368. [CrossRef]
18. Genzer, J.L.; Kamalanathan, M.; Bretherton, L.; Hillhouse, J.; Xu, C.; Santschi, P .H.; Quigg, A. Diatom aggregation when exposed
to crude oil and chemical dispersant: Potential impacts of ocean acidification. PLoS ONE 2020 ,15, e0235473. [CrossRef]
19. Gutierrez, T.; Rhodes, G.; Mishamandani, S.; William, D.B.; Whitman, B.; Nichols, P .D.; Semple, K.T.; Aitkena, M.D. Polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbon degradation of phytoplankton associated Arenibacter spp. and description of Arenibacter algicola sp. nov.,
an aromatic hydrocarbon-degrading bacterium. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2014 ,80, 618–628. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Chekroun, K.B.; S ánchez, E.; Baghour, M. The role of algae in bioremediation of organic pollutants. Int. Res. J. Public Environ.
Health 2014 ,1, 19–32.
21. Thavasi, R.; Banat, I.M. Biosurfactants and Bioemulsifiers from Marine Sources. Chapter 5. In Biosurfactants Research Trends and
Applications ; Mulligan, C.N., Sharma, S.K., Mudhoo, A., Eds.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2014; pp. 125–146.
22. Zehnle, H.; Laso-P érez, R.; Lipp, J.; Riedel, D.; Merino, D.B.; Teske, A.; Wegener, G. Candidatus Alkanophaga archaea from
Guaymas Basin hydrothermal vent sediment oxidize petroleum alkanes. Nat. Microbiol. 2023 ,8, 1199–1212. [CrossRef]
23. Duan, W.; Du, S.; Meng, F.; Peng, X.; Peng, L.; Lin, Y.; Wang, G.; Wu, J. The pathway by which the marine diatom Thalassiosira sp.
OUC2 biodegrades p-xilene, combined with a mechanistic analysis at the proteomic level. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2020 ,198,
110687. [CrossRef]
24. Tremblay, J.; Yergeau, E.; Fortin, N.; Cobanli, S.; Elias, M.; King, T.L.; Lee, K.; Greer, C.W. Chemical dispersants enhance the
activity of oil and gas condensate degrading marine bacteria. ISME J. 2018 ,11, 2793–2808. [CrossRef]
25. Prince, R.C. Bioremediation of marine oil spills. In Handbook of Hydrocarbon and Lipid Microbiology ; Timmis, K.N., Ed.; Springer:
Berlin, Germany, 2010; pp. 2618–2626.
26. Liebe, B.; Fock, H.P . Growth and adaptation of the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardii diesel exhaust particle extracts. J. Gen.
Microbiol. 1992 ,138, 973–978. [CrossRef]
27. Todd, S.J.; Cain, R.B.; Schmid, S. Biotransformation of naphthalene and diaryl ethers by green microalgae. Biodegradation 2002 ,13,
229–238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28. Kalhor, A.X.; Movafeghi, A.; Mohammadi-Nassab, A.D.; Abedi, E.; Bahrami, A. Potential of the Green Alga Chlorella Vulgaris for
Biodegradation of Crude Oil Hydrocarbons. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 2017 ,123, 286–290. [CrossRef]
29. Warshawsky, D.; Cody, T.; Radike, M.; Reilman, R.; Schumann, B.; LaDow, K.; Schneider, J. Biotransformation of benzo[a]pyrene
and other polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and heterocyclic analogs by several green algae and other algal species under gold
and white light. Chem.-Biol. Interact. 1995 ,97, 131–148. [CrossRef]
30. Walker, J.D.; Colwell, R.R.; Petrakis, L. Degradation of petroleum by an alga, Prototheca zopfii. Appl. Microbiol. 1975 ,30, 79–81.
[CrossRef]
31. Mueller, J.G.; Cerniglia, C.E.; Pritchard, P .H. Bioremediation of environments contaminated by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.
InBioremediation: Principles and Applications ; Crawford, R.L., Crawford, D.L., Eds.; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK,
1996; pp. 125–194.
32. Cerniglia, C.E.; Gibson, D.T.; Van Baalen, C. Naphthalene metabolism by diatoms isolated from the Kachemak Bay region of
Alaska. J. Gen. Microbiol. 1982 ,128, 987–990. [CrossRef]
33. Antic, M.; Jovancicevic, B.; Vivic, M.M.; Schwarzbauer, J. Petroleum pollutant degradation by surface water microorganisms.
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2006 ,13, 320–327. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Clean Technol. 2024 ,6 111
34. Cerniglia, C.E.; Gibson, D.T. Fungal oxidation of benzo (a)pyrene and (+)-trans-7,8-dihydroxy-7,8-dihydrobenzo(a) pyrene:
Evidence for the formation of a benzo(a)pyrene 7,8-diol-9,10-epoxide. J. Biol. Chem. 1980 ,255, 5159–5163. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Liu, Y.; Luan, T.G.; Lu, N.N.; Lan, C.Y. Toxicity of Fluoranthene and Its Biodegradation by Cyclotella caspia Alga. J. Integr. Plant
Biol. 2006 ,48, 169–180. [CrossRef]
36. Hong, Y.W.; Yuan, D.X.; Lin, Q.M.; Yang, T.L. Accumulation and biodegradation of phenanthrene and fluoranthene by the algae
enriched from a mangrove aquatic ecosystem. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 2008 ,56, 1400–1405. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Headley, J.V .; Du, J.L.; Peru, K.M.; Gurprasad, N.; McMartin, D.W. Evaluation of algal phytodegradation of petroleum naphthenic
acids. J. Environ. Sci. Health Part A 2008 ,43, 227–232. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Das, B.B.; Mandal, T.K.; Patra, S. Biodegradation of phenol by a novel diatom BD1IITG-kinetics and biochemical studies. Int. J.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2016 ,13, 529–542.
39. Lovell, C.R.; Eriksen, N.T.; Lewitus, A.J.; Chen, W.P . Resistance of the marine diatom Thalassiosira sp. To toxicity of phenolic
compounds. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 2002 ,229, 11–18. [CrossRef]
40. Kahla, O.; Ben Garali, S.M.; Karray, F.; Ben Abdallah, M.; Kallel, N.; Mhiri, N.; Zaghden, H.; Barhoumi, B.; Pringault, O.;
Quéméneur, M.; et al. Efficiency of benthic diatom-associated bacteria in the removal of benzo(a)pyrene and fluoranthene. Sci.
Total Environ. 2021 ,751, 141399. [PubMed]
41. Yakimov, M.M.; Timmis, K.N.; Golyshin, P .N. Obligate oil-degrading marine bacteria. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2007 ,18, 257–266.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Kostka, J.E.; Teske, A.P .; Joye, S.B.; Head, I.M. The metabolic pathways and environmental controls of hydrocarbon biodegradation
in marine ecosystems. Front. Microbiol. 2014 ,5, 471. [CrossRef]
43. Kumar, L.; Bharadvaja, N. Enzymatic bioremediation: A smart tool to fight environmental pollutants. In Smart Bioremediation
Technologies ; Bhatt, P ., Ed.; Academic Press: London, UK, 2019; pp. 98–118. [CrossRef]
44. Kuttiyathil, M.S.; Mohamed, M.M.; Al-Zuhair, S. Using microalgae for remediation of crude petroleum oil-water emulsion.
Biotechnol. Prog. 2020 ,37, e3098. [CrossRef]
45. Osuna-Cruz, C.M.; Bilcke, G.; Vancaester, E.; De Decker, S.; Bones, A.M.; Winge, P .; Poulsen, N.; Bulankova, P .; Verhelst, B.;
Audoor, S.; et al. The Seminavis robusta genome provides insights into the evolutionary adaptations of benthic diatoms. Nat.
Commun. 2020 ,11, 3320. [CrossRef]
46. Wang, J.; Zhang, Y.; Liu, Y.; Xie, Z.; Cao, J.; Zhang, H.; Liu, J.; Bao, T.; Sun, C.; Liu, B.; et al. The phylogeny and metabolic
potentials of an n-alkane-degrading Venatorbacter bacterium isolated from deep-sea sediment of the Mariana Trench. Front.
Microbiol. 2023 ,14, 1108651. [CrossRef]
47. Baghour, M. Algal degradation of organic pollutants. In Handbook of Ecomaterials ; Martinez, L.M.T., Kharissova, L.O., Kharisov, B.,
Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2019; pp. 565–586.
48. Paniagua Michel, J.J.; Fathepure, B.Z. Microbial Consortia and Biodegradation of Petroleum Hydrocarbons in Marine Environ-
ments. In Microbial Action on Hydrocarbons ; Kumar, V ., Kumar, P ., Prasad, R., Eds.; Springer: Singapore, 2018; pp. 1–20.
49. Blanco-Vieites, M.; Su árez-Montes, D.; Delgado, F.; Álvarez-Gil, M.; Hern ández Battez, A.; Rodr íguez, E. Removal of heavy
metals and hydrocarbons by microalgae from wastewater in the steel industry. Algal Res. 2022 ,64, 102700. [CrossRef]
50. Brown, A.E.; Finnerty, G.L.; Camargo-Valero, M.A.; Ross, A.B. Valorisation of macroalgae via the integration of hydrothermal
carbonization and anaerobic digestion. Bioresour. Technol. 2020 ,312, 123539. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51. Torres, M.D.; Kraan, S.; Dom ínguez, H. Seaweed biorefinery. Rev. Environ. Sci. Bio/Technol. 2019 ,18, 335–388.
52. Sen, B.; Mehmet, A.; Feray, S.; Mehmet, K.; Ozgur, C. Relationship of algae to water pollution and waste water treatment. Water
Treat. 2013 ,14, 335–354. [CrossRef]
53. Barrera-D íaz, C.E.; Lugo-Lugo, V .; Bilyeu, B. A review of chemical, electrochemical and biological methods for aqueous Cr(VI)
reduction. J. Hazard. Mater. 2012 ,223, 1–12. [CrossRef]
54. Olajire, A.A.; Essien, J. Aerobic Degradation of Petroleum Components by Microbial Consortia. J. Pet. Environ. Biotechnol. 2014 ,5,
1000195. [CrossRef]
55. Ghosal, D.; Ghosh, S.; Dutta, T.K.; Ahn, Y. Current state of knowledge in microbial degradation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocar-
bons (PAHs): A review. Front. Microbiol. 2016 ,7, 1369. [CrossRef]
56. Coulon, F.; McKew, B.A.; Osborn, A.M.; McGenity, T.J.; Timmis, K.N. Effects of temperature and biostimulation on oil-degrading
microbial communities in temperate estuarine waters. Environ. Microbiol. 2007 ,9, 177–186. [CrossRef]
57. Cui, Z.; Lai, Q.; Dong, C.; Shao, Z. Biodiversity of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria from deep sea sediments
of the Middle Atlantic Ring. Environ. Microbiol. 2008 ,10, 2138–2149. [CrossRef]
58. Pereira, E.; Napp, A.P .; Allebrandt, S.; Barbosa, R.; Reuwsaat, J.; Lopes, W.; Kmetzsch, L.; Staats, C.C.; Schrank, A.; Dallegrave,
A.; et al. Biodegradation of aliphatic and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in seawater by autochthonous microorganisms. Int.
Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 2019 ,145, 104789. [CrossRef]
59. Maeda, Y.; Nojima, D.; Yoshino, T.; Tanaka, T. Structure and properties of oil bodies in diatoms. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 2017 ,372,
20160408. [CrossRef]
60. Hildebrand, M.; Davis, A.K.; Smith, S.R.; Traller, J.C.; Abbriano, R. The place of diatoms in the biofuels industry. Biofuels 2012 ,3,
221–240. [CrossRef]
61. Silva, E.J.; Correa, P .F.; Almeida, D.G.; Luna, J.M.; Rufino, R.D.; Sarubbo, L.A. Recovery of contaminated marine environments by
biosurfactant-enhanced bioremediation. Colloids Surf. B Interfaces 2018 ,172, 127–135. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Clean Technol. 2024 ,6 112
62. Naughton, P .J.; Marchant, R.; Naughton, V .; Banat, I.M. Microbial biosurfactants: Current trends and applications in agricultural
and biomedical industries. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2019 ,127, 12–28. [CrossRef]
63. Pierre, G.; Delattre, C.; Dubessay, P .; Jubeau, S.; Vialleix, C.; Cadoret, J.P .; Probert, I.; Michaud, P . What Is in Store for EPS
Microalgae in the Next Decade? Molecules 2019 ,24, 4296. [CrossRef]
64. Antoniou, E.; Fodelianakis, S.; Korkakaki, E.; Kalogerakis, N. Biosurfactant production from marine hydrocarbon-degrading
consortia and pure bacterial strains using crude oil as carbon source. Front. Microbiol. 2015 ,6, 274. [CrossRef]
65. Nguyen, T.T.; Youssef, N.H.; McInerney, M.J.; Sabatini, D.A. Rhamnolipid biosurfactant mixtures for environmental remediation.
Water Res. 2008 ,42, 1735–1743. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. Banerjee, A.; Sarkar, S.; Govil, T.; Gonz ález-Faune, P .; Cabrera-Barajas, G.; Bandopadhyay, R.; Salem, D.R.; Sani, R.K. Extremophilic
Exopolysaccharides: Biotechnologies and Wastewater Remediation. Front. Microbiol. 2021 ,12, 721365. [CrossRef]
67. Manga, E.B.; Celik, P .A.; Cabuk, A.; Banat, I.M. Biosurfactants: Opportunities for the development of a sustainable future. Curr.
Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 2021 ,56, 101514. [CrossRef]
68. Karamchandani, B.M.; Pawar, A.A.; Pawar, S.S.; Syed, S.; Mone, N.S.; Dalvi, S.G.; Rahman, P .K.S.M.; Banat, I.M.; Satpute, S.K.
Biosurfactants’ multifarious functional potential for sustainable agricultural practices. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2022 ,10, 1047279.
[CrossRef]
69. Sharma, D.; Singh, D.; Sukhbir-Singh, G.M.; Karamchandani, B.M.; Aseri, G.K.; Banat, I.M.; Satpute, S.K. Biosurfactants:
Forthcomings and Regulatory Affairs in Food-Based Industries. Molecules 2023 ,28, 2823. [CrossRef]
70. Shniukova, E.I.; Zolotareva, E.K. Diatom Exopolysaccharides: A Review. Int. J. Algae 2015 ,17, 50–67. [CrossRef]
71. Liang, Y.; Bretherton, L.; Brown, C.M.; Passow, U.; Quigg, A.S.; Irwin, A.J.; Finkel, Z.V . Transcriptome-wide responses of
aggregates of the diatom Odontella aurita to oil. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 2021 ,671, 67–79. [CrossRef]
72. Hoagland, K.D.; Rosowsky, J.R.; Gretz, M.R.; Roemer, S.C. Diatom extracellular polymeric substances: Function, fine structure,
chemistry, and physiology. J. Phycol. 1993 ,29, 537–566. [CrossRef]
73. Wu, Y.; Campbell, D.A.; Irwin, A.J.; Suggett, D.J.; Finkel, Z.V . Ocean acidification enhances the growth rate of larger diatoms.
Limnol. Oceanogr. 2014 ,59, 1027–1034. [CrossRef]
74. Haug, A.; Myklestad, S. Polysaccharides of Marine Diatoms with Special Reference to Chaetoceros Species. Mar. Biol. 1976 ,34,
217–222. [CrossRef]
75. Thornton, D.C. Dissolved organic matter (DOM) release by phytoplankton in the contemporary and future ocean. Eur. J. Phycol.
2014 ,49, 20–46. [CrossRef]
76. Sutherland, I.W. Biofilm exopolysaccharides. In Microbial Extracellular Polymeric Substances ; Wingender, J., Neu, T.R., Flemming,
H.C., Eds.; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 1999; pp. 73–92.
77. Steele, D.J.; Franklin, D.J.; Underwood, G.J.C. Protection of cells from salinity stress by extracellular polymeric substances in
diatom biofilms. Biofouling 2014 ,30, 987–998. [CrossRef]
78. Staats, N.; de Winder, B.; Stal, L.; Mur, L.R. Isolation and characterization of extracellular polysaccharides from the epipelic
diatoms Cylindrotheca closterium and Navicula salinarum. Eur. J. Phycol. 1999 ,34, 61–169. [CrossRef]
79. Quigg, A.; Passow, U.; Chin, W.-C.; Xu, C.; Doyle, S.; Bretherton, L.; Kamalanathan, M.; Williams, A.K.; Sylvan, J.B.; Finkel, Z.V .;
et al. The role of microbial exopolymers in determining the fate of oil and chemical dispersants in the ocean. Limnol. Oceanogr.
Lett. 2016 ,1, 3–26. [CrossRef]
80. Quigg, A.; Passow, U.; Daly, K.L.; Burd, A.; Hollander, D.J.; Schwing, P .T.; Lee, K. Marine Oil Snow Sedimentation and Flocculent
Accumulation (MOSSFA) events: Learning from the past to predict the future. In Deep Oil Spills–Facts, Fate and Effects ; Murawski,
S.A., Ainsworth, C., Gilbert, S., Hollander, D., Paris, C.B., Schluter, M., Wetzel, D., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2020; pp.
199–224.
81. Passou, U.; Carlson, C.A. The biological pump in a high CO 2world. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 2012 ,470, 249–271. [CrossRef]
82. Basu, S.; Mackey, K.R.M. Phytoplankton as key mediators of the biological carbon pump: Their responses to a changing climate.
Sustainability 2018 ,10, 869. [CrossRef]
83. Daly, K.L.; Passow, U.; Chanton, J.; Hollander, D. Assessing the impacts of oil-associated marine snow formation and sedimenta-
tion during and after the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. Anthropocene 2016 ,13, 18–33. [CrossRef]
84. Gregson, B.H.; McKew, B.A.; Holland, R.D.; Nedwed, T.J.; Prince, R.C.; McGenity, T.J. Marine oil snow, a microbial perspective.
Front. Mar. Sci. 2020 ,8, 619484. [CrossRef]
85. Passow, U.; Stout, S.A. Character and sedimentation of “lingering” Macondo oil to the deep-sea after the Deepwater Horizon oil
spill. Mar. Chem. 2020 ,218, 103733. [CrossRef]
86. Yang, R.; Wei, D.; Pohnert, G. Nitrogen utilization analysis reveals the synergetic effect of arginine and urea in promoting
fucoxanthin biosynthesis in the mixotrophic marine diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Front. Mar. Sci. 2022 ,9, 947726.
[CrossRef]
87. Kamalanathan, M.; Meng-Hsuen, C.; Bacosa, H.; Schwehr, K.; Shih-Ming, T.; Doyle, S.; Yard, A.; Mapes, S.; Vasequez, C.;
Bretherton, L.; et al. Role of Polysaccharides in diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana and its associated bacteria in hydrocarbon presence.
Plant Physiol. 2019 ,180, 1898–1911. [CrossRef]
88. Waghmode, S.; Suryavanshi, M.; Dama, L.; Kansara, S.; Ghattargi, V .; Das, P .; Banpurkar, A.; Satpute, S.K. Genomic insights of
halophilic Planococcus maritimus SAMP MCC 3013 and detail investigation of its biosurfactant production. Front. Microbiol. 2019 ,
10, 235. [CrossRef]Clean Technol. 2024 ,6 113
89. Araújo, W.J.; Oliveira, J.S.; Ara újo, S.C.S.; Minnicelli, C.F.; Silva-Portela, R.C.B.; Da Fonseca, M.M.B.; Freitas, J.F.; Silva-Barbalho,
K.K.; Napp, A.P .; Pereira, J.E.S.; et al. Microbial Culture in Minimal Medium with Oil Favors Enrichment of Biosurfactant
Producing Genes. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2020 ,11, 962. [CrossRef]
90. Cane, R.F. Coorongite and the genesis of oil shale. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 1969 ,33, 257–265. [CrossRef]
91. Rowland, S.J.; Robson, J.N. The widespread occurrence of highly branched acyclic C20, C25 and C30 hydrocarbons in recent
sediments and biota—A review. Mar. Environ. Res. 1990 ,30, 191–216. [CrossRef]
92. Damste, J.; Baas, M.; Geenevasen, J.A.; Kenig, F. Structural identification of sedimentary C21 and C22 highly branched isoprenoid
alkanes. Org. Geochem. 2005 ,36, 511–517. [CrossRef]
93. Sakari, M.; Zakaria, M.P .; Lajis, N.H.; Mohamed, C.; Bahry, P .S.; Anita, S.; Chandru, K. Characterization, distribution, sources and
origins of aliphatic hydrocarbons from surface sediment of Prai Strait, Penang, Malaysia: A widespread anthropogenic input.
Environ. Asia 2008 ,2, 1–14.
94. Speight, J.G.; Arjoon, K.K. Bioremediation of Petroleum and Petroleum Products ; John Wiley & Sons. Inc.: Hoboken, NJ, USA;
Scrivener Publishing LLC: Salem, MA, USA, 2018.
95. Sorigu é, D.; L égeret, B.; Cuin é, B.; Morales, P .; Mirabella, B.; Gu édeney, M.; Li-Beisson, Y.; Jetter, R.; Peltier, G.; Beisson, F.
Microalgae Synthesize Hydrocarbons from Long-Chain Fatty Acids via a Light-Dependent Pathway. Plant Physiol. 2016 ,171,
2393–2405. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96. Katz, M.E.; Finkel, Z.V .; Grzebyk, D.; Knoll, A.H.; Falkowski, P .G. Evolutionary trajectories and biogeochemical impacts of marine
eukaryotic phytoplankton. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst. 2004 ,35, 523–556. [CrossRef]
97. Holba, A.G.; Tegelaar, E.W.; Huizinga, B.J.; Moldowan, J.M.; Singletary, M.S.; McCaffrey, M.A.; Dzou, L.I.P . 24-norcholestanes as
age-sensitive molecular fossils. Geology 1998 ,26, 783–786. [CrossRef]
98. Volkman, J.K.; Barrett, S.M.; Dunstan, G.A. Sterol biomarkers for microalgae from the green algal class Prasinophyceae. Org.
Geochem. 1994 ,21, 1211–1218. [CrossRef]
99. Levitan, O.; Dinamarca, J.; Hochman, G.; Falkowski, P .G. Diatoms: A fossil fuel of the future. Trends Biotechnol. 2014 ,32, 117–124.
[CrossRef]
100. Grossi, V .; Beker, B.; Geenevasen, J.A.J.; Schouten, S.; Raphel, D.; Fontaine, M.F.; Damste, J.S.S. C25 highly branched isoprenoid
alkenes from the marine benthic diatom Pleurosigma strigosum. Phytochemistry 2004 ,65, 3049–3055. [CrossRef]
101. Lee, R.F.; Nevenzel, J.C.; Paffenhofer, G.A.; Benson, A.A.; Patton, S.; Kavanagh, T.E. A unique hexaene hydrocarbon from a
diatom ( Skeletonema costatum ).Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1970 ,202, 386. [CrossRef]
102. Lee, R.F.; Loeblich III, A.R. Distribution of 21:6 hydrocarbon and its relationship to 22:6 fatty acid in algae. Phytochemistry 1971 ,10,
593–602. [CrossRef]
103. Shishlyannikov, S.; Alyona, A.; Nikonova, A.A.; Klimenkov, I.V .; Gorshkov, A.G. Accumulation of petroleum hydrocarbons
in intracellular lipid bodies of the freshwater diatom Synedra acus subsp. radians. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2016 ,24, 275–283.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Sharma, N.; Simon, D.P .; Diaz-Garza, A.M.; Fantino, E.; Messaabi, A.; Meddeb-Mouelhi, F.; Germain, H.; Desgagn é-Penix, I.
Diatoms Biotechnology: Various Industrial Applications for a Greener Tomorrow. Front. Mar. Sci. 2021 ,8, 636613. [CrossRef]
105. Brocks, J.J.; Summons, R.E. Sedimentary Hydrocarbons, Biomarkers for Early Life. Tratise Geochem. 2023 ,8, 63–115. [CrossRef]
106. Leterme, S.C. The Oil Production Capacity of Diatoms. Ann. Aquac. Res. 2015 ,2, 1007.
107. Novak, M.; Gostinˇ car, C.; Gunde-Cimerman, N. Microorganisms populating the water-related indoor biome. Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 2020 ,104, 6443–6462. [CrossRef]
108. Leyland, B.; Boussiba, S.; Khozin-Goldberg, I. A review of diatom lipid droplets. Biology 2020 ,21, 38. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
109. Medlin, K.L.; Williams, D.M.; Sims, P .A. The evolution of the diatoms (Bacillariophyta). I. Origin of the group and assessment of
the monophyly of its major divisions. Eur. J. Phycol. 1993 ,28, 261–275. [CrossRef]
110. Harada, N.; Hirose, Y.; Chihong, S.; Kurita, H.; Sato, M.; Onodera, J.; Kazuyoshi, M.; Ito, F. A novel characteristic of a
phytoplankton as a potential source of straight-chain alkanes. Sci. Rep. 2021 ,11, 14190. [CrossRef]
111. Bamforth, S.M.; Singleton, I. Bioremediation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 2005 ,80, 723–736.
[CrossRef]
112. Mersch-Sundermann, V .; Mochayedi, S.; Kevekordes, S. Genotoxicity of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in Escherichia coli PQ37.
Mutat. Res. 1992 ,278, 1–9. [CrossRef]
113. Yamada, I.; Takada, H.; Toyoda, K.; Yoshida, A.; Shibata, A.; Nomura, H.; Wada, M.; Nishimura, M.; Okamoto, K.; Ohwada, K.
Study on the fate of petroleum-derived polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and the effect of chemical dispersant using an
enclosed ecosystem, mesocosm. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 2003 ,47, 105–113. [CrossRef]
114. Ben Othman, H.; Pick, F.R.; Hlailia, A.S. Leboulanger CH. Effects of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons on marine and freshwater
microalgae—A review. J. Hazard. Mater. 2023 ,441, 29869. [CrossRef]
115. Margesin, R.; Schinner, F. Biodegradation and bioremediation of hydrocarbons in extreme environments. Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 2001 ,56, 650–663. [CrossRef]
116. Cerniglia, C.E.; Gibson, D.T.; Van Baalen, C. Algal oxidation of aromatic hydrocarbons: Formation of l-naphthol from naphthalene
byAgmenellum quadruplicatum , strain PR-6. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1979 ,88, 50–58. [CrossRef]
117. Haritash, A.K.; Kaushik, C.P . Biodegradation aspects of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs): A review. J. Hazard. Mater.
2009 ,169, 1–15. [CrossRef]Clean Technol. 2024 ,6 114
118. Muñoz, R.; Rolvering, C.; Guieysse, B.; Mattiasson, B. Aerobic phenanthrene biodegradation in a two-phase partitioning
bioreac-tor. Water Sci. Technol. 2005 ,52, 265–271. [CrossRef]
119. Al-Turki, A.I. Microbial polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons degradation in soil. Res. J. Environ. Toxicol. 2009 ,3, 1–8. [CrossRef]
120. Aslam, S.N.; Strauss, J.; Thomas, D.N.; Mock, T.; Underwood, G.C. Identifying metabolic pathways for production of extracellular
polymeric substances by the diatom Fragilariopsis cylindrus inhabiting sea ice. ISME J. 2018 ,12, 1237–1251. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
121. Allan, G.G.; Lewin, J.; Johnson, P .G. Marine polymers. IV Diatom polysaccharides. Bot. Mar. 1972 ,15, 102–108. [CrossRef]
122. Netzer, R.; Henry, I.A.; Ribicic, D.; Wibberg, D.; Brönner, U.; Brakstada, U.G. Petroleum hydrocarbon and microbial community
structure successions in marine oil-related aggregates associated with diatoms relevant for Arctic conditions. Marine Pollution
Bulletin 2018 ,135, 759–768. [CrossRef]
123. Cerniglia, C.E.; Heitkamp, M.A. Microbial degradation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) in the aquatic environment.
InMetabolism of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in the Aquatic Environment ; Varanasi, U., Ed.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA,
1989; pp. 41–68.
124. Cerniglia, C.E. Microbial metabolism of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Adv. Appl. Microbiol. 1984 ,30, 31–71. [PubMed]
125. Wang, X.C.; Zhao, H.M. Uptake and Biodegradation of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons by Marine Seaweed. J. Coast. Res.
2007 ,50, 1056–1061.
126. Carvalho, R.N.; Burchardt, A.D.; Sena, F.; Mariani, G.; Mueller, A.; Bopp, S.K.; Umlauf, G.; Lettieri, T. Gene biomarkers in diatom
Thalassiosira pseudonana exposed to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from contaminated marine surface sediments. Aquat. Toxicol.
2011 ,101, 244–253. [CrossRef]
127. Obata, T.; Fernie, A.R.; Nunes-Nesi, A. The central carbon and energy metabolism of marine diatoms. Metabolites 2013 ,3, 325–346.
[CrossRef]
128. Gutierrez, T.; Banat, I.M. Isolation of glycoprotein bioemulsifiers produced by marine bacteria. In Hydrocarbon and Lipid
Microbiology Protocols ; McGenity, T., Timmis, K., Nogales, B., Eds.; Springer protocols handbooks; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2014.
[CrossRef]
129. Ozhan, K.; Parson, M.L.; Bargu, S. How were phytoplankton affected by the deepwater horizon oil spill? Bioscience 2014 ,64,
829–836. [CrossRef]
130. Ozhan, K.; Bargu, S. Distinct responses of Gulf of Mexico Phytoplankton communities to crude oil and the dispersant corexit
EC9500A under nutrient regimes. Ecotoxicology 2014 ,23, 370–384. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
131. Coulon, F.; Chronopoulou, P .M.; Païss é, A.F.; Goñi-Urriza, M.; Peperzak, L.; Acuña-Alvarez, L.; McKew, B.A.; Brussaard, C.P .D.;
Underwood, G.J.C.; Timmis, K.N.; et al. Central role of dynamic tidal biofilms dominated by aerobic hydrocarbonoclastic bacteria
and diatoms in the biodegradation of hydrocarbons in coastal mudflats. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2012 ,78, 3638–3648. [CrossRef]
132. Gutierrez, T.; Green, D.H.; Nichols, P .D.; Whitman, W.B.; Semple, K.T.; Aitken, M.D. Algiphilus aromaticivorans gen. nov., sp. nov.,
an aromatic hydrocarbon-degrading bacterium isolated from a culture of the marine dinoflagellate Lingulodinium polyedrum , and
proposal of Algiphilaceae fam. nov. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 2012 ,62, 2743–2749. [CrossRef]
133. Gutierrez, T.; Green, D.H.; Whitman, W.B.; Nichols, P .D.; Semple, K.T.; Aitken, M.D. Polycyclovorans algicola gen. nov. sp. nov., an
aromatic hydrocarbon-degrading marine bacterium found associated with laboratory cultures of marine phytoplankton. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 2013 ,79, 205–214. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Mishamandani, S.; Gutierrez, T.; Berry, D.; Aitken, M.D. Response of the bacterial community associated with a cosmopolitan
marine diatom to crude oil shows a preference for the biodegradation of aromatic hydrocarbons. Environ. Microbiol. 2016 ,18,
1817–1833. [CrossRef]
135. Amin, S.A.; Parker, M.S.; Armbrust, E.V . Interactions between diatoms and bacteria. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 2012 ,76, 667–684.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
136. Juhasz, A.L.; Naidu, R. Bioremediation of high molecular weight polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons: A review of the microbial
degradation of benzo[a]pyrene. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 2000 ,45, 57–88. [CrossRef]
137. Kelley, I.; Freeman, J.P .; Evans, F.E.; Cerniglia, E.E. Identification of a carboxylic acid metabolite from the catabolism of fluoranthene
by a Mycobacterium sp.Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1991 ,57, 636–641. [CrossRef]
138. Albaiges, J.; Frei, R.W.; Merian, E. Chemistry and Analysis of Hydrocarbons in the Environment ; Science Publishers: New York, NY,
USA, 1983.
139. Wilson, S.C.; Jones, K.C. Bioremediation of soil contaminated with polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs): A review. Environ.
Pollut. 1993 ,81, 229–249. [CrossRef]
140. Cohen, Y. Bioremediation of oil by marine microbial mats. Int. Microbiol. 2002 ,5, 189–193. [CrossRef]
141. Meulenberg, R.; Rijnaarts, H.H.M.; Doddema, H.J.; Field, J.A. Partially oxidized polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons show an
increased bioavailability and biodegradability. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 1997 ,15, 45–49. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Mathew, B.B.; Singh, H.; Biju, V .G.; Krishnamurthy, N.B. Classification, source, and effect of environmental pollutants and their
biodegradation. J. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. Oncol. 2017 ,36, 55–71. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
143. Doghri, I.; Lavaud, J.; Dufour, A.; Bazire, A.; Lanneluc, I.; Sabl é, S. Cell-bound exopolysaccharides from an axenic culture of the
intertidal mudflat Navicula phyllepta diatom affect biofilm formation by benthic bacteria. J. Appl. Phycol. 2017 ,29, 165–177.
[CrossRef]Clean Technol. 2024 ,6 115
144. Sondes Melliti, B.G.; Sahraoui, I.; Ben Othman, H.; Abdessalem, K.; de la Iglesia, P .; Diog ène, J.; Lafabrie, C.; Andree, K.B.;
Fernández-Tejedor, M.; Mejri, K.; et al. Capacity of the potentially toxic diatoms Pseudo-nitzschia mannii and Pseudo-nitzschia
hasleana to tolerate polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2021 ,214, 112082. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
145. Swannell, R.F.; Lee, K.; McDonagh, M. Field evaluations of marine spill bioremediation. Microbiol. Rev. 1996 ,60, 342–365.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
146. Bacosa, H.P .; Ancla, S.M.B.; Arcadio, C.G.L.A.; Dalogdog, J.R.A.; Ellos, D.M.C.; Hayag, H.D.A.; Jarabe, J.G.P .; Karim, A.J.T.;
Navarro, C.K.P .; Palma, M.P .I.; et al. From Surface Water to the Deep Sea: A Review on Factors Affecting the Biodegradation of
Spilled Oil in Marine Environment. J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2022 ,10, 426. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.