International Journal of Engineering and Advanced  Technology (IJEAT)  
ISSN: 2249 -8958  (Online) , Volume -4 Issue -4, April  2015 
32 Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligenc e Engineering  
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP )  
© Copyright: All rights reserved.  Retrieval Number  D3833044415 /15©BE IESP 
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org  Assessment of Decentralized Wastewater Treatment 
Systems for Sanitation of Small Communities using 
A Qualitative Approach Methodology: A Case Study 
from Northern India  
Pankaj Banyal, N Singh, A.A Kazmi  
Abstract -To date different technologies based wastewater 
treatments have been actualized at full scale level over the 
world; however the integral elements for the determination of 
most suitable treatment framework are still obscure. The present 
study is fervent to the investigation of 11 decentralized sewage 
treatment plants in Northern India using a qualitative approach 
methodology in which distinctive focus was paid to economic 
indicator of the se plants. A total of eight technologies i.e. 
Package type (including Anaerobic , Anaerobic +Aerobic 
treatment and Anaerobic +Aerobic treatment ), and cluster type, 
i.e. Extended Aeration (EA), Moving bed Bio -film Reactor 
(MBBR), Sequencing Batch reactor ( SBR), Membrane Bio 
reactor (MBR),Rotational Biological Contractor (RBC) were 
counted in this field review. As a component of the qualitative 
evaluation of these plants, land requirement, capital 
investments, operation and maintenance (O&M) costs and 
treatm ent efficiencies (in terms of BOD, COD, TSS removal) 
were selected as determining broader indicator in the cull of the 
felicitous wastewater treatment system in developing countries 
like India. An intensive field campaign was run and data 
obtained by conve ntional field visits + preset questionnaire 
format for analyzing results to gain insight into available 
technologies as per capacity wise classification of small scale 
plants. The study analyzed approximate cost of treatment in the 
range of 4.4 to 6.8 Rs/m 3 (±15%) for On -site Package treatment 
plant and Rs (₹) 3.0 to 10.1 (±15 -20%) for Cluster Type (< 5.0 
MLD) as per design flow, Land usage for package type @ 4.0 to 
40 m2 (±20%), 220.0 to 7630.3 m2 (±20%) for cluster type, 
Capital investment @ ₹ 82.5 to 83 3.3 (±20%) Lacs/MLD for 
Package type and for cluster type @ 80.4 to 528.6 (±20%) 
Lacs/MLD; Specific power consumption @ < 0.7 (±10%) KW -
h/m3 for design flow and 0.15 to 1.76 (±10%) KW -h/m3 for 
Actual Flow, technical performance was pragmatic with % BOD 
removal @ 65 to 98%, % COD removal 66 to 98 % and % TSS 
removal 65 to 97 % .These results give a test and an opportunity 
for the research community and market leader to choose a 
suitable option of similar regions. The results of this study allow 
users and eng ineer to choose the treatment system according to 
their resources available viz. –a- viz. requirement.  
 Keywords: Decentralized sewage treatment plants; Specific 
power consumption; Operation and maintenance; Economic 
analysis  
 
Manuscript published on 30 April  2015. 
* Corresp ondence Author  (s) 
  Pankaj Banyal,  Post Graduate Scholar, Environment Engineering 
Group, Dept. of Civil Engineering, Indian Institu te of Technology, 
Roorkee, India.  
  N Singh, Research Scholar,  Environment Engineering Group, Dept. 
of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, India.  
  A.A Kazmi, Professor,  Environment Engineering Group, Dept. of 
Civil Engineering, Ind ian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, India.  
 
© The Authors. Published by Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering and 
Sciences Publication (BEIE SP). This is an open access  article under the 
CC-BY-NC-ND license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by -nc-
nd/4.0/  
 I. INTRODUCTION  
Expeditious advancement in masses, urbanization, 
industrial development, and exuberance of essentials in  
developing countries has drawn attention + responsiveness 
of various scholar towards the design of the suitable 
wastewater + treatment system.  Ecological experts are 
furthermore highlighting now on suitable wast ewater 
treatment systems to preserve the water environment and 
fresh water resources for certification the ingenuousness of 
imbibing water in little and prevalent manner [1] [2] [3].  
In the most recent two decades, decentralized 
wastewater treatment framew orks (DEWATS) have been 
accounted for more proper answer for sanitation in creating 
nations[4] [5] [6]. Also a paramount part of the 
environmental engineer accept that DEWATS can be a 
perpetual answer for the wastewater administration in 
provincial and urb an territories of developing countries [3].  
The literature survey revealed that, to date a variety of 
technology options are available in the literature, including 
aerobic, anaerobic, natural and hybrid treatment systems, 
but selection of an appropriate wa stewater treatment 
alternative in a decentralized context of developing 
countries is still a challenge for environmental engineer. A 
details collection of these systems has been polished 
recently by [4]. Previous studies suggested that the 
treatment effici ency of DEWATS plays major role in the 
selection of the appropriate treatment system, especially in 
developed countries, but surprisingly this is not true always 
as other constraints, such as land requirement, capital 
investment and operation & maintenance  (O & M) cost 
limits the feasibility. Contrarily, in developing countries, 
selection was found to be more biased towards economic 
aspects and power consumption rather than their 
performance [7]. To best of the author's knowledge till 
date, In India, there is certainly not sufficient published 
work to assess the technical as well as economic efficiency 
of decentralized STPs based on all leading technologies of 
the market which could portray the actual status of the 
DEWATS. So it is extraordinarily anticipate d from 
environmentalist that they should system monetarily and 
ecologically conceivable structures to propose a proper 
framework taking into account genuine practices either for 
traditional reasons or water need.  
 
 
 
 Assessment of Decentralized Wastewater Treatment Systems for Sanitation of Small Communities using 
A Qualitative Approach Methodology: A Case Study from Northern India  
33 Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligenc e Engineering  
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP )  
© Copyright: All rights reserved.  Retrieval Number  D3833044415 /15©BE IESP 
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org  Bearing this in mind, an intensive study wa s carried 
out in Northern India to assess the technical as well as 
economic efficiency of full scale DEWATS. The prime 
objectives of this study are as follows:  
(i) To launch a ‘hand to hand’ on the selected plants to 
address a more incorporated assessment of the general 
maintainability of wastewater + treatment alternatives.  
(ii) Qualitative, technical and socioeconomic evaluation of 
existing DEWATS (capacity <5 MLD) across Northern 
India.  
(iii) Consolidation of technical and economic data 
(colle cted via field visits, personal  communication, and 
formal meetings with the working force) to contribute to 
the existing research/knowledge and to derive a 
comparative account based on economic parameter , 
discerning their efficiency.  
(iv)  Brings out key e ccentricities at execution level, 
specific necessities for region, imperativeness and capital, 
O&M, and regular perspectives . 
The upshots from this study can be time -honored as an 
issue for the general expense correlations of proposed 
treatment choices and  will be helpful in arranging the imminent DEWATS in developing countries  (like India) . 
This study can also reference for different situations in this 
field.  
II. MATERIAL AND METHODS  
A series of athletic field visits was conducted from May 
2014 to Mar 2015 an d still on its approach, as an issue's 
task in ecological frameworks to unde rstand economics  & 
the subjective examination of DEWATS for review  of 
planning, cost, condition, operation and upkeep of actually 
functional plants in Northern India.  
2. 1. Description of study area  
The DEWATS have been chosen with a varying capacity 
from 0.0006 MLD to up to 4.54  MLD by keep ing in mind 
the capacity trend and of their adaptability. A total of 11 
DEWATS was evaluated in this study, which was classified 
into two categories, i.e. package type and cluster type.  
Table 1 lists the description of each plant.  Schematic layout 
of all p lants is presented in figure 1  A & B .
Table 1  Description of DEWATS evaluated across Northern India  
 
* Installation of each plant was underground.  
Assessment of Decentralized Wastewater Treatment Systems for Sanitation of Small Communities using 
A Qualitative Approach Methodology: A Case Study from Northern India  
34 Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligenc e Engineering  
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP )  
© Copyright: All rights reserved.  Retrieval Number  D3833044415 /15©BE IESP 
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org   
Fig. 1A  Actual schematic layouts of plants visited during this study  
Fig. 1B  Actual schematic layouts of plants visited during this study  
2. 2. Assessment methodology  
Three most common approaches for evaluation of 
wastewater treatment plants are known as expressive, 
instructive and investigative  [8] [9]. Among these, the most 
reliable investigative methodology was utilized in this 
study, which can lead research community to assess the 
suitability and feasibility of a treatment system. For the 
purpose of field review, author fused a motivational study 
by a  questionnaire (not  with-standing specific paramete r 
check) under five arrangements of physical  inspection, grab 
sampling, on -site technical check, interaction with bodies, 
economic aspects and problems  related to water treatment  respectively.  Some inputs are best appreciated/evaluated 
and further calculated as per factual prerequisite and 
constraints which necessitate to formalize these hypothesis. 
The autho r have also used multiple sources of data along 
with extensive field visits to complement the study with a 
broader perspective . Moreover, work force comments from 
respective plants were also taken into consideration before 
making any conclusive remarks.  
 
 
 
 
 
Assessment of Decentralized Wastewater Treatment Systems for Sanitation of Small Communities using 
A Qualitative Approach Methodology: A Case Study from Northern India  
35 Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligenc e Engineering  
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP )  
© Copyright: All rights reserved.  Retrieval Number  D3833044415 /15©BE IESP 
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org  2.3. Assortment of relevant data  
2.3.1 Land usage  
As one of the significant obstacles in the establishment of 
the sewage treatment plants in Indian urban areas, the Land 
data were measured and calculated (i.e. along the 
perimeter) and total area used for the STPs was generated.  
2.3.2 Capital Investment and O & M cost  
The capital investment (as per  year of installation) and 
O&M Cost are two main paramete r that need to be taken 
into account in economic examination of treatment plants. 
The collected data was analyzed and evaluated to draw a 
correlation between different capacities and re -occurring 
cost was explored in depth for establishing facts and figure.  
2.3.3 Energy usage  
Energy consumption data were compiled and evaluated 
based on data available from field records / working load / 
equipment inventories /monthly electricity bills / 
interaction wit h operato r to analyze and formulate 
estimation for determine the working load  and hou r of run 
of the plants.  
2.4 Environmental sample collection and analysis of 
performance paramete r 
Additional investigation of the major performance 
paramete r like biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), 
chemical oxygen demand (COD) and total suspended solids 
(TSS) was furthermore directed for expected visits. The 
overall treatment efficiency of all plants was evaluated by 
analysis of influent and effluent samples of each plant.  All 
samples had been stored in a deep freezer at the 
temperature of 40C and experiments have been carried out 
within two days of sample collection. All analysis was 
performed as per the method prescribed in standard 
methods  [10]. 
 
III. RESULTS AND D ISCUSSION  
3.1 Performance assessment of DEWATS  
Figure 2 shows the results of BOD, COD and TSS removal 
efficiencies, according to their classification heads. Among 
the three evaluated package plants, P3 showed much higher 
treatment efficiency in terms of BOD, COD and TSS (86 - 
90 %) as compared to P1 (6 5 - 66 %)and P2 (75 -81%) as 
shown in figure 2.This can be attributed for P3 to anaerobic 
+ aerobic nature of treatment + additional tertiary treatment 
unit, while P1 was completely anaerobic. Results of 
treatment performance of cluster type plants are also  
presented in figure 2. The removal e ﬃciencies for BOD, 
COD and TSS of each plant in this category were observed 
above 90 % and gets matched with  each other  (±10%). This 
indicated that the treatment potential of these technologies  
based treatment system no t much different with each other. 
Use of pre and post -treatment also made it possible so 
much higher efficiencies as shown in figure 1. These 
results proved that actual treatment practice (with 
incorporation of additional tertiary unit) may differ than reported ones. These differences can be attributed to the O 
& M practice of each plant which was also evidenced by 
personal  visits and communication. From the field review it 
was seen that P11 technology reflects the removal 
efficiency up to 98 % which was bes t among the selected 
plants. On the other side P4, P5 and P8 ( up to 97 %) 
presented the bit lower performance than P11 based STP.  
The efficiency of all other plants can also be increased by 
adding an efficient tertiary treatment unit with the present 
treatment technology as evident from the plants like P3,  P4, 
and P5 as shown in fig 2.  The group of plants P6, P7, P9, 
and P10 has shown efficiencies of 90%, which is attributed 
to good skilled management.  
P1P2P3020406080100
BODCODTSS
 Removal (%)
Plant code(a)
 
P4P5P6P7P8P9P10P11020406080100
BODCODTSS
 Removal (%)
Plant code
Fig. 2 Treatment efficiency of selected (a) onsite package and 
(b) cluster type DEWATS  
 Assessment of Decentralized Wastewater Treatment Systems for Sanitation of Small Communities using 
A Qualitative Approach Methodology: A Case Study from Northern India  
36 Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligenc e Engineering  
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP )  
© Copyright: All rights reserved.  Retrieval Number  D3833044415 /15©BE IESP 
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org  This exercise clearly indicates that selected plants in this 
field review are well enough to achieve significant 
treatment efficiency and final selection may be independent 
from performance if one is not much concerned about 
performance i.e. below treatment efficiency less than 90 %.  
3.2 Land usage &capital investment  
Land availability and initial capital investment for a given 
size/capacity are two of the most important limitations, 
shaping the choice of DEWATS and future expansion for 
next coming generations may be taken into account for 
expansion of existing ones, ideally at many locations it was 
lacking. In general, the land required for a plant 
establis hment generally relies upon the adopted technology, 
its treatment capacity and type of locality (rural, urban or 
peri-urban). In the last two decades, although the footprint 
required was same for a capacity, but increased cost of land 
again limiting the ad aptability of that technology. While on 
the other side, due to technological advancement + 
variances of technologies, capital investment for a 
particular size of the plant has been with competitive rates 
and thus resulted in fluctuation of rates. Having th ese 
considerations in mind, the Land area & Capital Cost 
requirement has been appreciated based on field data 
collection for all selected plants.  It is important to mention 
here that estimated land area was inclusive of minimum 
extra assets which are requi red to be constructed along with 
the treatment units.  
Figure 3  shows the land usage and capital investment 
required for on -site package and cluster type treatment 
systems. The Capital costs reported in this study  are the 
original values to the year of erection of  the plant. These 
values can be further utilized for an y project with a 
variation of (±10 -15%) depending on the type of terrain, 
classification of the area and to which mass of the populace 
being subjected to. The approximate  rough  present cost 
effectiveness per MLD can be calculated based on the NPV 
valve (6% ) compounding from the year of construction of 
the plant keeping in mind the particular technology has not 
gone obsolete and lost its credibility in the market. 
P1 P2 P3010203040
Plant code Land usage (m2)
 Capital cost (Lacs)a
P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10 P110130026003900520065007800
Plant code Land usage (m2)
 Capital cost (Lacs)bFig. 3  Actual land usage and capital investment for selected 
DEWATS a) onsite package plants b) cluster type  
Results of field campaigning suggests that, however capital 
investment and land requirement for on -site type DEWATS 
are dependent on field capacity but their relative 
contribution is c onstant and follow a linear relation with 
respect to capacity of plants. These results further suggest 
that if one has limitation of land availability, then capital 
investment supposed to be increased. It is important to 
mention here that the relative cont ribution of land and 
capital investment was found to be dependent of type of 
technology.   On the other side, for cluster type plants, 
capital investment was found to be not following any 
significant relation with respect to capacity, except for P11 . 
Also, for P11 these  results suggest that capital investment 
was much higher as compared to other plants of this 
category. However the land requirement followed a 
decreasing trend. It was also observed that increasing the 
capacity of plants in the range of 0.4  - 4.54 MLD, land area 
requirement was related to capacity  following a relation as 
shown in figure 4 for cluster type . Moreover, the relative 
contribution of land and capital investment  (as per year of 
commissioning)  for the plants in this category, followed a 
correlation same as for on -site package plants . Recent year 
correlation can be developed using above NPV as 
mentioned above.  Overall field gathering and discussion 
show that increasing the capacity of on -site plants 
decreases the land requirement significantly as compared to 
capital investment while in cluster type plants, capital 
investment was found to be almost same for P4, P5, P6, P7 
and P8  (±10 -20%) capacity plants. P9 and P10  showed the 
maximum footprint, but economical in terms of capital cost 
from year of establishment. Overall, as compared to other 
plants of cluster types, P11 was found to be more capital -
intensive, but requires much less land even with increased 
capacity.  Assessment of Decentralized Wastewater Treatment Systems for Sanitation of Small Communities using 
A Qualitative Approach Methodology: A Case Study from Northern India  
37 Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligenc e Engineering  
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP )  
© Copyright: All rights reserved.  Retrieval Number  D3833044415 /15©BE IESP 
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org   
 
Fig. 4 Suitable fit for a) land requirement, and b) relative 
contribution (Land usage × Capital investment  {as per year of 
commissioning} ) with respect to capacity for cluster type 
plants  
3.3 Cost of treatment  
Reoccurring cost was considered as part of the qualitative 
assessment to draw sound results which are reassuring to 
improve a structure for assessment. Cost of treatment for 
each plant considered in this study was observed to be 
dependent on the O & M cost  and was calculated on the 
basis of designed and actual flow. Field visit revealed that 
lack of skilled personal for operation resulted in variation 
of O&M cost which affected the cost of treatment 
significantly.  During field visits it was observed that it  is 
possible to have a lower value for O&M irrespective of 
having a higher value for all the above inputs. F urther 
under mentioned values can be used further with a margin 
of (±15 -20%) as per the geographical location and the 
economic growth of undeveloped  lands. The cost of extra 
paraphernalia (i.e. for the substructure, office block, and 
site upkeep, organizational inputs) are excluded as these 
expenses will escalate the overall O&M Cost viz .- a wise 
cost of treatment and thus no relation could be justifi ed. 
The results  of this exercise revealed that the cost of 
treatment  for onsite  plants decreases with respect to their 
capacity. A similar pattern was observed for cluster type plants except for P11 as shown in figure 5. Cost of 
treatment for on -site packa ge plants was observed as ₹ 6.80 
– 4.40 per cubic meter of treated wastewater. Cost of 
treatment for cluster type plants was observed in the range 
of ₹ 10.10 –3.30 and ₹ 10.60 to ₹ 4.40 at designed and 
actual flow while for P11  plant were ₹ 6.40 and 28.90 at 
designed and actual flow. The cost of replacement of 
membrane for P11 plant not included in for reoccurring 
cost as it will form part of extra construction cost. This 
doesn’t ma tch the capacity trend line with treatment cost as 
₹ 6.40 being highly mechanized plant. Thus, one line 
statement can be drawn these plants are for functional 
aspects, but not for study purpose as one cannot correlate 
many aspects and varies from plant to plant.   
P1 P2 P34567Rs/m3 of WW treated
Plant code Designed flow
 Actual flowa
 y = 920.3x1.1567
R² = 0.6493
02000400060008000
0 2 4 6Land Usage (m2)
Capacity (MLD)a
y = 167059x1.998
R² = 0.5996
02000000400000060000008000000
0 2 4 6(Land usage  ×Capital cost)
Capacity (MLD)bAssessment of Decentralized Wastewater Treatment Systems for Sanitation of Small Communities using 
A Qualitative Approach Methodology: A Case Study from Northern India  
38 Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligenc e Engineering  
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP )  
© Copyright: All rights reserved.  Retrieval Number  D3833044415 /15©BE IESP 
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org  
P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10 P11 --0102030Rs/m3 of WW treated
Plant code Designed flow
 Actual flowb 
Overall no standardization could be established between 
the plants regarding fixed inputs, except but surely the 
decreasing trend line for the cost of treatment is observed 
in both categories with the increase in plant capacity and 
being independent of tec hnologies except P11 being 
exceptional as it is fully atomized and gives the highest 
removal efficiency.  In addition to the cost of treatment 
another techno -economic parameter, i.e. cost/Kg of BOD 
removed was assessed for all plants and was assessed three 
to five times the cost of treatment. These values for  on-site 
package types  were observed in the range of ₹ 17.50 to 
22.10 (Figure 5c & d). Similarly for cluster type plants 
these values were found to be  ₹ 33.90 -11.0 and ₹ 35.40 -
16.50 (with  P11 exceptiona lly higher ₹ 96.0 as plant may 
run with actual flow by year 2018) at design and actual 
flow,  respectively.  
P1 P2 P3182022Rs/Kg BOD removed
Plant code Design flow
 Actual flowc
 
P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10 P11 --0336699Rs/Kg BOD removed
Plant code Design flow
 Actual flowdFig. 5 Cost of treatment for a) onsite package plants and b) 
cluster category plants; ₹/Kg of BOD removed for c) onsite 
package plants and d) cluster type plants  
3.4 Power consumption  
Power consumption is one of the most important 
contribut or to the operational cost of wastewater treatment 
plants and generally presented as specific power 
consumption (SPC) i.e. power consumed for unit 
wastewater treatment. The SPC can vary wrt to many 
factors i.e. Drive make & classification, energy efficient 
drives and other integral electrical factors which can effect 
efficiency to the tune of 20 to 25% and overall effecting the 
reoccurring cost by additional 10 -20%. The SPC for on -site 
package plants varied in the range of 0 - 0.22 kWh/m3 of 
WW treated, where as for P1 it is 0.0 as being anaerobic 
treatment. Figure 6 shows SPC 0. 6 - 0.3 for design flow 
with P8 the least SPC as integrated power management 
software ensures the correct functioning of this plant, also 
SPC for actual flow was  0.52 to 0.70 and P11 pl ant being 
exceptional higher with 1.76 as the plant is p resently 
running under -utilized.   P11 being accredited to more 
highly programmed treatment system and multifarious 
processes that necessitate extensive larger power inputs has 
shown good results as wi th the actual  flow scenario also  
and can be further used with ± 10% variation based on 
design flow paramete r. These results  broadly fits in the 
values as mentioned in the various reported literature  [11].  
P1 P2 P30.00.10.2Kw-h/m3 of WW treated
Plant code Designed flow
 Actual flowa
 
 Assessment of Decentralized Wastewater Treatment Systems for Sanitation of Small Communities using 
A Qualitative Approach Methodology: A Case Study from Northern India  
39 Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligenc e Engineering  
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP )  
© Copyright: All rights reserved.  Retrieval Number  D3833044415 /15©BE IESP 
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org  
P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10 P11 --0.40.81.21.6KW-h/m3 of WW treated
Plant code Designed flow
 Actual flowb
P1 P2 P30.00.40.81.21.6KW-h/Kg BOD removed
Plant code Designed flow
 Actual flowc
P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10 P11 --1.32.63.95.2KW-h/Kg BOD removed
Plant code Designed flow
 Actual flowdFig. 6 Specific power consumption and power required for 
unit Kg BOD removed for onsite package and cluster type 
plants a) SPC for onsite b) SPC for cluster type c) power 
consumption for BOD removal of onsite package type d) 
power consumption for BOD removal of cluster type  
IV. CONCLUSIONS  
Following upshots were drawn from this field campaign:  
• This study has brought distinctive paramete r for the use r 
to assess the techno - economic indicato r based 
predominantly on Land, Capital, Operative cost as per 
prerequisite and after that suitable technology can be 
chosen wi thin a suitable range of (±10 - 20%)  (Depending on the type of region classification) for 
developing countries like India. The financial criteria 
and confined communications had settled on a choice 
making prototypical for selecting the suitable little scale 
STPs elective. The broader in formation assimilated 
from field work narrowed to more or less realistic future 
useable values.  
• Land usage was highest for an on -site package system  
which suggests that these systems are not suitable for 
plant having capacity more than 1 MLD with referenc e 
to planning for underground installation. Socio -
economic evaluation of cluster type plants revealed that 
Land usage does changes much on increasing treatment 
capacity (0.76  - 4.44 MLD) while capital investment  
followed decreasing trend with increasing ca pacity for 
this technology types plants. The land requirement 
decreased as the capacity of the plants was in increasing 
order except for those plants installed in hilly terrains.  
• As far as cost of treatment is concerned, it was found to 
be dependent on th e capacity of STPs. Increasing the 
treatment capacity from 0.0006 to 4.54 MLD, the 
treatment cost varied in the range of ₹ 10.10 - 3.30 and 
₹ 10.60 – 4.40 for designed and actual flow respectively 
with P11 plant was observed ₹ 28.90 (as ultimate 
constant utilization by 2021 ). The overall assessment 
based on study shows that the cost of treatment 
generally decreases with the increase in the capacity.  
The range of cost of treatment gives a broader 
perspective of the treatment cost for that capacity.  
• As far as  treatment efficiency is concerned, the 
performance potential of all plants having capacity in 
the range of 0.4 to 4.54 MLD was almost same and 
varied between 90% (±10 %) for BOD, COD and TSS. 
Among these P11 based STP presented the best 
effluent quality system. Examination of on -site 
package system revealed that on -site contact aeration 
treatment systems are more efficient (up to 90% with 
tertiary unit) than on -site septic anaerobic filter 
package systems wit h removal efficiency ranging up to  
66 %.  
• All the plants selected in this study showed that power 
consumption was not so much different with each 
other except for P11 category. Specific power 
consumption as per design flow was averaged < 0.7 
(±10%) kWh/m3 of treated wastewater with least of 
0.15 KWh/m3 for P2 package type plant and 0. 3 
kWh/m3 for P8 cluster type. Overall power 
consumption was found to be inve rsely proportional to 
size of plants.  
• The plant performance and further usability of values 
will be assessed based on design flow paramete r as 
actual flow is of temporary nature and shows plants 
installation viz –a viz location being adequately 
assessed for taking load variations for yea rs to come. 
Also, the selection of a process requires analysi s of all 
facto rs, not just technical performance. The othe r 
qualitative economic parameter needs to be 
incorporated to reach a final recommendation.  
 
 
 
 
 Assessment of Decentralized Wastewater Treatment Systems for Sanitation of Small Communities using 
A Qualitative Approach Methodology: A Case Study from Northern India  
40 Published By:  
Blue Eyes Intelligenc e Engineering  
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP )  
© Copyright: All rights reserved.  Retrieval Number  D3833044415 /15©BE IESP 
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org  • Closing remarks for this study was to look beyond the 
perspective of the performance evaluation and 
introspection the modalities which can be used in 
policy making pronouncements in emerging nation 
state like India. The author strongly likes to submit that  
results can vary according from place to place due to 
the actual working conditions, terrain implications  and 
skilled/ unskilled manpower available  for that area and   
it is hoped that this will facilitate policy make rs/ 
officials,  users,  development/research  organizations, 
government; local level partne r make better 
investments in water management as per their 
constraints.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
The autho r wish to thank the Dept. of Civil Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee,  India for 
providing the financial assistance and technical assistance 
for this project.  
REFERENCES  
[1] Massoud, M. A., Tarhini, A. & Nasr, J. A. 2009. Decentralized 
approaches to wastewater treatment and management: Applicability in 
developing countries. Journal of Environmental Management 90, 
652–659. 
[2] Chong, M. N., Sharma, A. K., Burn, S. & Saint, C. P. 2012. Feasibility 
study on the application of advanced oxidation technologies for 
decentralized wastewater treatment. Journal of Cleaner Production 35 , 
230–238. 
[3] Ho, G. 2005. Technology for sustainability: the role of onsite, small 
and community scale technology. Water Science &Technology 51 
(10), 15 –20. 
[4] Singh, N.K., Kazmi, A.A., &Starkl, M. 2014. A review on full -scale 
decentralized wastewater t reatment systems: techno -economical 
approach. Water Science &Technology. doi:10.2166/wst.2014.413.  
[5] Wang, S. 2014. Values of decentralized systems that avoid  
investments in idle capacity within the wastewater sector: A  
theoretical justification. Journal of Environmental  Management 136 
(1), 68 –75. 
 [6] Starkl, M., Parkinson, J., Narayanan, D. & Flamand, P. 2012. Small is 
beautiful but is large more economical? F resh views on decentralized 
Vs centralized wastewater management. Water21, June 2012 45 –47. 
[7] Singh, M. & Srivastava, R. K. 2011. Sequencing batch reactor 
technology for biological wastewater treatment: a review. Asia -Pacific 
Journal of Chemical Engineer ing. 6, 3 –13. 
[8] Merriam, S. B. 1998. Qualitative research and case study applications 
in education. San Francisco: Jossey -Bass.  
[9] Brown, P.A. 2008. A review of the literature on case study research. 
Chandian Journal for new scholar in education. Vol. 1 (1)  
[10] Apha, Awwa. “WEF, 2005.” Standard methods for the examination 
of water and wastewater 21 (1999); 258 -259. 
[11] Igor Bodik, 2013 . “Environment  protection Engineering, 2013 . 
Energy and sustainability of operation of wastewater treatment plant. 
Vol 39 No 2.  
 